43
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Thursday, May 7, 2015/Vaisakha 17, 1937 (Saka)
————
(Ministries : Prime Minister; Atomic Energy; Development of North Eastern
Region; Earth Sciences; Environment, Forests and Climate Change; External
Affairs; Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises; Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation; Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; Overseas Indian
Affairs; Parliamentary Affairs; Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions; Planning; Science and Technology; Skill Development
and Entrepreneurship; Social Justice and Empowerment;
Space; Statistics and Programme Implementation;
Urban Development; Women and
Child Development)
Total number of questions — 15
Global Gender Gap  Report
*121. SHRIMATI KANIMOZHI:
Will the Minister of WOMEN AND
CHILD DEVELOPMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether it is a fact that World
Economic Forum has placed India at 114th
rank, 13 points below last year's ranking
in its Global Gender Gap Report; and
(b) whether Government has analysed
the reasons for India's poor  performance
on the Index this year, if so, the details
thereof?
Review of sick and loss making
CPSEs
*122. SHRI TAPAN KUMAR SEN:
Will the Minister of HEA VY INDUSTRIES
AND PUBLIC ENTERPRISES be pleased
to state:
(a) the number of Central Public Sector
Enterprises (CPSEs) under various
Ministries/Departments  of Government
functioning at present in the country, State/
Union Territory-wise including West
Bengal;
(b) the total investment made in them,
State/Union Territory-wise;
(c) the details of the profit/loss incurred
by CPSEs during  each of the last three
years and the current year, CPSE-wise; and

44
(d) the details of the efforts made by
Government to review sick and loss making
CPSEs in West Bengal?
Smart Cities in Andhra Pradesh
*123. DR. K.V.P. RAMACHANDRA
RAO: Will the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the details of Smart City concept,
and in what way it is different from existing
programmes for urban renewal;
(b) whether any criteria has been laid
down for selecting towns for development
as Smart Cities; and
(c) whether there is any proposal to
develop towns in Andhra Pradesh like
Vizag, Eluru, Guntur and Nellore as Smart
Cities?
Reservation of land for Economically
weaker sections and lower income
groups
*124. SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Will
the Minister of HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION be pleased to
state:
(a) whether a certain percentage of land
is to be reserved by the States/private
developers for Economically Weaker
Sections (EWSs) and Lower Income
Groups (LIGs), if so, the details thereof;
and
(b) whether Government has issued any
advice to the States/private developers in
this regard and if so, the details thereof?
Global Age Watch Index for elderly
people
*125. SHRI TIRUCHI SIV A: Will the
Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government recognises the
fact that Global Age Watch Index which
measures the wellbeing of elderly people,
ranks India at a lowly 73rd position  among
91 countries; and
(b) whether it is a fact that India's dismal
performance shows that despite having a
large  elderly population, we lack
mechanisms in place to ensure them healthy
ageing, if so, the details thereof and if not,
the reasons therefor?
Revisiting the system of categorizing
industries
*126. SHRI P AUL MANOJ
PANDIAN: Will the Minister of
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND
CLIMATE CHANGE be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
is considering to revisit  the system of
categorizing industries that seek permission
to set up and operate units and if so, the
details thereof; and
(b) whether it is a fact that Government
propose to give higher consideration to
industries which are producing
environment related products and if so, the
details thereof?
National Air Quality  Index
*127. SHRI RANJIB BISWAL: Will
the Minister of ENVIRONMENT,
FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE be
pleased to state:
(a) whether the Prime Minister launched

45
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
the National Air Quality Index  in the recent
past, if so, the details thereof along with its
aims and objectives;
(b) the manner in which air quality
would be monitored;
(c) the details of cities of which air
quality would  be monitored; and
(d) the details of funds allocated for the
same during the current financial year?
Satellite based  weather  forecasting
for fishermen
*128. SHRI PANKAJ BORA: Will the
Minister of EARTH SCIENCES be pleased
to state:
(a) whether Government proposes
satellite based application for advanced and
accurate weather forecasting for  the benefit
of the fishermen of the country, if so, the
details thereof; and
(b) what are the details of the planning
of Government towards development of
the fishing technology therefor?
Child abuse in orphanages
*129. SHRI RAJEEV
CHANDRASEKHAR: Will the Minister
of WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the details of instances of child sexual
abuse reported from orphanages in India
over the last three years;
(b) the number of arrests made in cases
of sexual abuse reported from orphanages
in India over the last three years; and
(c) the steps taken by the Ministry to
effectively  monitor the safety and well-
being of children residing in orphanages?
Safe City Project in Kolkata
*130. SHRI DEREK O BRIEN: Will
the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the status  of the Safe City Project
for the Kolkata Metropolitan Area; and
(b) the funds allocated to the project
under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewable Mission (JNNURM) and the
status of release of the funds allocated?
Financial autonomy to municipalities
†*131. SHRI HARIV ANSH: Will the
Minister of URBAN DEVELOPMENT
be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry is considering
to extend financial assistance to provide
financial autonomy to the municipalities,
as Indian municipalities are lagging much
behind the other countries of the world in
respect of access to the resources, capacity
to increase revenue and financial autonomy;
(b) whether it is a fact that a major
portion of the earnings of municipality is
spent upon salaries, if so, the efforts being
made by Government to tackle this for
development works; and
(c) whether Government  is ready to
give share in GST, if so, the details thereof?
Sewage drainage system in Uttar
Pradesh
†*132. DR. SANJAY SINH: Will the
Minister of URBAN DEVELOPMENT
be pleased to state:
(a) the plan for  development of sewage
drainage  system by Government in urban
areas of the country;

46
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF,
The 30th April, 2015 Secretary-General.
V aisakha 10, 1937 (Saka)
(b) the number of towns in the country
where the sewer system and sewage
treatment plants are available  and the
number of towns where they are proposed
in the current financial year and the  details
thereof, State-wise;
(c) whether any proposal for setting up
sewer system and sewage treatment plant
in Sultanpur district of Uttar Pradesh, is
pending; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and the action
being taken on the proposal?
E-surveillance of tiger population
*133. SHRI A.U. SINGH DEO: Will
the Minister of ENVIRONMENT,
FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE be
pleased to state:
(a) whether any meeting of Chief
Wildlife Wardens  of Tiger Range States
and Field Directors of Tiger Reserves was
held in the recent past, if so, the details of
issues discussed during the said meeting;
(b) whether there is a need for a
systematic  approach to preserve  60 per
cent of the total global tiger population
which is living in India;
(c) if so,  whether any e-surveillance by
drone to preserve  the wild species is
finalised by Government in the recent past,
if so, the details thereof and salient features
thereof ; and
(d) the manner in which such
surveillance would be effective and the
details of steps being taken in this regard?
Prime Minister's visit to France,
Germany and Canada
*134. DR. PRADEEP KUMAR
BALMUCHU: Will the Minister of
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the Hon'ble Prime
Minister's recent visit to France, Germany
and Canada; and
(b) the details of Bilateral discussions
took place and the incentives to be offered
to foreign investors  as a part of Make in
India programme  to attract investment in
India?
Cases of child trafficking
†*135. SHRI NARESH AGRAWAL:
Will the Minister of WOMEN AND
CHILD DEVELOPMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether the child trafficking has
increased  in comparison  to that in the
past;
(b) if so, the steps being taken by
Government to check it; and
(c) the number of cases of child
trafficking  which have come to the notice
during the last two years and the number
of cases out of them which have been
disposed of and the details thereof?

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Prime Minister : —
Atomic Energy : —
Development of North Eastern Region : —
Earth Sciences : 128,
Environment, Forests and Climate Change : 126, 127, 133,
External Affairs : 134,
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises : 122,
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation : 124,
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises : —
Overseas Indian Affairs : —
Parliamentary Affairs : —
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions : —
Planning : —
Science and Technology : —
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship : —
Social Justice and Empowerment : 125,
Space : —
Statistics and Programme Implementation : —
Urban Development : 123, 130, 131, 132,
Women and Child Development : 121, 129, 135.
GMGIPMRND—670RS(S3)—-30-04-2015
47