77
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Thursday, December 11, 2014/Agrahayana 20, 1936 (Saka)
————
(Ministries : Prime Minister; Atomic Energy; Development of North Eastern
Region; Earth Sciences; Environment, Forests and Climate Change; External
Affairs; Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises; Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation; Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; Overseas Indian Affairs;
Parliamentary Affairs; Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions;
Planning; Science and Technology; Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship; Social Justice and Empowerment;
Space; Statistics and Programme Implementation;
Urban Development; Women and
Child Development)
Total number of questions—15
Latest stand by USA and China on
climate change
*246. DR. E.M. SUDARSANA
NATCHIAPPAN: Will the Minister of
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND
CLIMA TE CHANGE be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of the
USA and China's latest stand on climate
change and new road map laid in the meeting
of Heads of State; and
(b) if so, the stand of Government and
the plan of action to face the situation to
protect the interest of the country?
Action on cases referred by Madhya
Pradesh
†*247. SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:
Will the Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE
AND EMPOWERMENT be pleased to
state the total number of cases wherein
action has been taken by Government out
of the total fourteen cases referred to the
Ministry by the State Government of
Madhya Pradesh during the year 2013-14?
Air pollution level in Delhi
*248. SHRI SALIM ANSARI: Will the
Minister of ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS
AND CLIMATE CHANGE be pleased to
state:
(a) whether US Embassy's Pollution
Monitor at Chanakyapuri, New Delhi
shows very unhealthy pollution levels in
Delhi, if so, the details in this regard; and
(b) the steps that Government
proposes to take to check air pollution level
in Delhi, especially during and after Diwali?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

78
Damage to environment by plastic waste
*249. SHRI SANJAY RAUT: Will the
Minister of ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS
AND CLIMATE CHANGE be pleased to
state:
(a) whether Government has assessed
the extent of damage caused to environment
by plastic waste in the country, if so, the
outcome thereof;
(b) whether Government is seriously
considering enforcing a ban on the
manufacture and use of plastic bags in the
country; and
(c) if so, by when it would be
implemented in the country and if not, the
reasons therefor?
‘Prior informed consent' of gram sabhas
*250. PROF. M.V . RAJEEV GOWDA:
Will the Minister of ENVIRONMENT,
FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE be
pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is
contemplating amending certain provision
in the Forest Rights Act, 2006 that requires
the ‘prior informed consent’ of gram sabhas
before their forests are cleared for industrial
activity, if  so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Government is trying to
bypass the established role of gram sabhas
that certify that the rights of indigenous
tribes over forest land are not violated by
an upcoming project; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not,
the reasons therefor?
Problem of salary for Indian workers
in Gulf countries
*251. SHRI A.W. RABI BERNARD:
Will the Minister of OVERSEAS INDIAN
AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) whether over five million Indian
nationals employed in the rich oil exporting
States of the Gulf are in dangerous jobs
from construction to the oil industry,
transport and services;
(b) whether workers are promised one
salary when they sign up here and then
forced to renegotiate lower wages when
they arrive in the Gulf, if so, the details
thereof; and
(c) whether India is pressing the Gulf
countries to raise the wages of Indians
working there since inflation, the value of
Indian currency and a rise in the cost of
living in the Gulf affect these workers, if
so, the details thereof?
Chennai Metro Rail Project
*252. SHRIMATI SASIKALA
PUSHPA: Will the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has decided to
introduce Metro Rail in some of the major
cities in the country, if so, the details
thereof, including the Metro Rail Project in
Chennai;
(b) the present status of the Chennai
Metro Rail Project and the details of the
corridors selected for implementation; and
(c) the date by which it is likely  to be
completed, along with the details of the
total funds needed, the fund allocated this
year, sanctioned and spent?
Disability Rehabilitation Centre in
every district
*253. SHRI PARIMAL NATHWANI:
Will the Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE
AND EMPOWERMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) the total number of District
Disability Rehabilitation Centres

79
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
functioning in the country at present, State-
wise along with locations thereof;
(b) whether each district in the country
has a Disability Rehabilitation Centre, if
so, the details thereof;
(c) if not, the steps taken by
Government to set up one such centre in
each district of the country; and
(d) the total amount sanctioned and
spent for the District Disability
Rehabilitation Centre (DDRC) during the
last three years, State-wise?
Beggars in Delhi Metro
†*254. SHRI MOTILAL VORA: Will
the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that passengers
are distressed due to beggars and
pickpockets, in Delhi Metro which is
assumed as the safest mode of
transportation, particularly at Huda City
Centre, Jahangirpuri, Dwarka, Kashmiri
Gate, Rajeev Chowk, Noida and Anand
Vihar; and
(b) if so, the steps taken by Government
to provide metro commuters safe and secure
ambience and if not, the reasons therefor?
Norms for allotting land in Delhi at
discount rates
*255. SHRI GULAM RASOOL
BALY AWI: Will the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the norms for allotting land in Delhi
for educational, medical, charitable and
other social purposes;
(b) whether the land for these purposes
is allotted at discount rate, if so, the details
in this regard; and
(c) the names of organizations and the
area of land allotted to them along with the
details of purposes and the rates during the
last year and the current year so far in Delhi?
Committee on funding to MSME sector
*256. SHRI HUSAIN DALWAI: Will
the Minister of MICRO, SMALL AND
MEDIUM ENTERPRISES be pleased to
state:
(a) whether Government has appointed
a Committee to give concrete suggestions
regarding financing the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises sector, if so, the details
thereof;
(b) whether the Committee has
submitted its report to Government; and
(c) if so, the details of the suggestions/
recommendations made by the Committee?
Development of smart cities in
Bihar
†*257. SHRI RAM NATH THAKUR:
Will the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has formulated
any scheme to develop small cities in the
country, if so, the details thereof; and
(b) the names of the cities in Bihar
planned to be made a smart city?
Toilets in Anganwadi Centres
*258. SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE:
Will the Minister of WOMEN AND
CHILD DEVELOPMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether it is a fact that a large number
of Anganwadi Centres do not have toilets,
if so, the reasons therefor; and

80
(b) the details of Anganwadi Centres
without toilets, State-wise?
Quality Control Laboratories for
ICDS Scheme
*259. SHRI AMBETH RAJAN: Will
the Minister of WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposed to
set up any Quality Control Laboratories
to analyse the samples of various
supplementary nutrition foods provided
under the Integrated Child Development
Services (ICDS) Scheme, besides the
existing ones at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata
and Chennai during the Twelfth Five Year
Plan; and
(b) if so, the details thereof and funds,
if any, earmarked for this, and if not, the
reasons therefor?
National level survey on
drug abuse
*260. SHRI MAHENDRA SINGH
MAHRA: Will the Minister of SOCIAL
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that for the last
many years, the World Drug Report has
been reporting the same figures for
prevalence of drug abuse in India;
(b) whether Government agrees that the
prevalence of drug abuse has remained same
in India for the last ten years, if so, whether
Government has reliable and credible
statistics for the same; and
(c) if so, whether Government is serious
about conducting a national level survey
which could generate the realistic picture
of drug use scenario in India?
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF,
The 5th December, 2014 Secretary-General.
Agrahayana 14, 1936 (Saka)

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Prime Minister :—
Atomic Energy :—
Development of North Eastern Region :—
Earth Sciences :—
Environment, Forests and Climate Change : 246, 248, 249, 250,
External Affairs :—
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises :—
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation :—
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises : 256,
Overseas Indian Affairs : 251,
Parliamentary Affairs :—
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions :—
Planning :—
Science and Technology :—
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship :—
Social Justice and Empowerment : 247, 253, 260,
Space :—
Statistics and Programme Implementation :—
Urban Development : 252, 254, 255, 257,
Women and Child Development : 258, 259.
GMGIPMRND—3219RS(S3)—05-12-2014.
81