26
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Thursday, March 3, 2016/Phalguna 13, 1937 (Saka)
————
(Ministries : Prime Minister; Atomic Energy; Development of North Eastern
Region; Earth Sciences; External Affairs; Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises; Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation; Human Resource
Development; Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; Parliamentary
Affairs; Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; Science and
Technology; Skill Development and Entrepreneurship; Social
Justice and Empowerment; Space; Statistics and
Programme Implementation; Urban
Development; Women and
Child Development)
Total number of questions — 15
Poor quality of primary and
secondary education
*76. SHRI K.C. TYAGI: Will the
Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government's attention has
been drawn towards poor quality of
primary and secondary education in the
country; and
(b) if so, whether Government plans to
reform primary and secondary education
syllabus and evaluation system and if so,
the details thereof?
Reservation for OBCs in private sector
*77. SHRI D. RAJA: Will the Minister
of SOCIAL JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether the National Commission
for Backward Classes (NCBC) has
recommended the Government to enact a
legislation to make it mandatory for private
sector entities to reserve 27 per cent of all
hiring for people from the Other Backward
Classes (OBCs) due to the dwindling job
opportunities in Government and public
sector enterprises; and
(b) if so, the details thereof and
Government's reaction thereto?
CCTV cameras in schools
*78. SHRI RAJKUMAR DHOOT:
Will the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Bombay
High Court has recently directed the State

27
Government of Maharashtra to install
CCTV cameras in all Government schools
of the State, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Government proposes to
install CCTV cameras in all the schools
throughout the country, if so, the details
thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; and
(c) whether Government proposes to
provide Central grants to Maharashtra for
the purpose, if not, the reasons therefor?
Low literacy rate in Telangana
*79. DR. K.V .P . RAMACHANDRA
RAO: Will the Minister of HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether the literacy rate is dismal in
the newly carved State of Telangana,
particularly in Karimnagar district, if so,
the reasons therefor;
(b) whether Government would
consider launching a special literacy mission
to change the scenario, if so, the details
thereof; and
(c) if not, whether Government would
provide a special package to Telangana to
overcome its low literacy level vis-a-vis
Andhra Pradesh?
Violation of GFR under MPLAD
Scheme
*80. SHRI PAUL MANOJ
PANDIAN: Will the Minister of
STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTA TION be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that there have
been instances of blatant violation of
General Financial Rules (GFR) under
Members of Parliament Local Area
Development Scheme (MPLADS);
(b) whether it is also a fact that some
district authorities reported inflated
expenditure figures and showed released
money as utilized under the scheme; and
(c) whether it is also a fact that 12 district
authorities of six States inflated the figures
of expenditure by ` 35 crores by showing
the entire advance of ` 100.17 crores
released to the implementing authorities as
utilized, and if so, the details thereof?
Occurrence of dyslexia among
children
*81. SHRI TARUN VIJAY: Will the
Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether the occurrence of dyslexia
among children is a cause of concern;
(b) if so, whether Government is seized
of this issue and whether any mapping has
been done of dyslexic children; and
(c) whether there are any plans of
providing assistance and help to such
children and whether the parents too get
any assistance to rear dyslexic children in a
proper way?
Discrimination in selection of smart
cities
*82. DR. PRADEEP KUMAR
BALMUCHU: Will the Minister of
URBAN DEVELOPMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether Government is aware that
non-transparent methods, discrimination
and political consideration are being
adopted in the selection of areas for
development as smart cities, if so, the
details thereof;

28
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
(b) the reasons for not selecting any
cities in some States, particularly in States
ruled by opposition parties; and
(c) the tangible initiations being taken
by Government in defence of its
proclamation of list of smart cities?
Achievements in employment
generation
†*83. DR. SATYANARAYAN
JATIYA: Will the Minister of SKILL
DEVELOPMENT AND
ENTREPRENEURSHIP be pleased to
state:
(a) what have been the remarkable
achievements made in the field of skill
development and entrepreneurship, year-
wise, during the last three years;
(b) what are the details as to generation
of employment opportunities annually in
relation to each of the fields as referred to
in part (a) above; and
(c) what are the details of the
participation for attaining the targets set
under the 'Make in India' Programme in
relation to parts (a) and (b) above?
Conviction rate under POCSO Act
*84. SHRI RAJEEV
CHANDRASEKHAR: Will the Minister
of WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the conviction
rates under the Protection of Child from
Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012 for
the year 2014-15 was a dismal one per cent
of the total 9000 cases reported;
(b) whether Government has recorded
or plans to conduct a review of the reasons
for such low conviction rates under the
POCSO Act;
(c) whether Government intends to
conduct a comprehensive review of the
effectiveness of the POCSO Act, 2012, in
the light of the above data; and
(d) if so, by when and if not, the reasons
therefor?
Improving process for first time
passport applicants
*85. DR. K.P . RAMALINGAM: Will
the Minister of EXTERNAL AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
has announced two major changes that
would fast track the process for first time
passport applicants as well as make it more
convenient to secure an appointment at the
local passport seva kendra, if so, the details
thereof; and
(b) whether it is also a fact that citizens
would be granted a fresh passport under
the normal category within a week if their
applications are accompanied by three
documents, if so, the details thereof?
Persons from Kerala detained in jails
of Western Africa
†*86. SHRI MOTILAL VORA: Will
the Minister of EXTERNAL AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that
four persons of Kerala are detained in the
jails of Western African country, Togo due
to non-possession of job visa/work permit;
(b) whether any request from Kerala
Government has been received for the
release of the above persons; and

29
(c) if so, the steps taken by Government
for the release of the above four persons?
Age waiver for widows in exams
*87. SHRI MAJEED MEMON: Will
the Minister of WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry has sought
age waiver for widows allowing them to sit
for competitive exams for Government and
PSU jobs and tax rebates for single married
women who are separated, divorced or
widowed having children; and
(b) Government's decision, if any, taken
in the matter?
Educational institutions under Andhra
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
*88. DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY:
Will the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the educational institutions
proposed and established, separately, under
the provisions of Andhra Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2014 in the States of
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana;
(b) the measures taken to establish all
these institutions;
(c) the progress of establishing these
institutions and the present status; and
(d) whether any time schedule has been
drawn up for establishing all these
institutions and the budget provisions made
or proposed to be made?
Passing of Women Reservation Bill
*89. SHRI SANJAY RAUT: Will the
Minister of WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government plans to get
the pending Women Reservation Bill
passed;
(b) if so, time-frame and if not, the
reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government has any plan
to provide 50 per cent reservations for
women in urban-local bodies; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not,
the reasons therefor?
Establishment of new Central
Universities
†*90. SHRI RAM NATH THAKUR:
Will the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is planning to
establish new Central Universities in the
country to provide facilities of higher
education to all, if so, the details thereof;
and
(b) if not, how does Government
propose to enhance the access to higher
education in the country and the details
thereof?
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF,
The 26th February, 2016 Secretary-General.
Phalguna, 7, 1937 (Saka)
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Prime Minister :—
Atomic Energy :—
Development of North Eastern Region :—
Earth Sciences :—
External Affairs : 85, 86,
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises :—
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation :—
Human Resource Development : 76, 78, 79, 88, 90,
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises :—
Parliamentary Affairs :—
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions :—
Science and Technology :—
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship : 83,
Social Justice and Empowerment : 77, 81,
Space :—
Statistics and Programme Implementation : 80,
Urban Development : 82,
Women and Child Development : 84, 87, 89.
GMGIPMRND—4260RS(S3)—-26-02-2016
30