16
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL  ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Thursday, December 3, 2015/Agrahayana 12, 1937 (Saka)
————
(Ministries : Prime Minister; Atomic Energy; Development of North Eastern
Region; Earth Sciences; External Affairs; Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises; Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation; Human
 Resource Development; Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises;
 Overseas Indian Affairs; Parliamentary Affairs;
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions;
Science and Technology; Skill Development
and Entrepreneurship; Social Justice and
Empowerment; Space; Statistics and
Programme Implementation; Urban
Development; Women and
Child Development)
Total number of questions — 15
MoU signed by BHEL
*46. SHRI TAPAN KUMAR SEN:
Will the Minister of HEAVY
INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES be pleased to state:
(a) the details of MoU signed by
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL)
in the last three years; and
(b) whether Government is taking
initiatives to increase order to BHEL, if
so, the details thereof?
World ranking of Indian universities
†*47. DR. SANJAY SINH: Will the
Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the whole
world recognizes the talent of India, Indians
and we are playing a leading role in every
developed and developing country;
(b) if so, the status of higher education
in the country which is young and talented
in comparison to the global scenario;
(c) whether Government has any data
about the world ranking of our universities
compared to the global scenario of higher
education; and
(d) whether Government plans to
improve the education level of the country
and to bring it at par with the international
standards, if so, the details thereof?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

17
Technical education in Jharkhand
*48. SHRI SANJIV KUMAR: Will the
Minister of SKILL DEVELOPMENT
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP be pleased
to state:
(a) what thrust is being given by the
Central Government to bolster technical
education in Jharkhand; and
(b) whether there are any plans to set
up ITIs in Jharkhand in general and in
Santhal Parganas in particular, if not,
reasons therefor?
Education to poor children in Uttar
Pradesh
†*49. SHRI JUGUL KISHORE: Will
the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has
implemented any new scheme for fulfilling
the various requirements for imparting
primary and secondary level education to
poor children of the backward areas of
Uttar Pradesh, if so, the details thereof;
and
(b) the number of such children
studying in Government aided schools of
Uttar Pradesh whose poor parents are
unable to educate their children/send their
children to schools?
Assistance to manual scavengers
*50. SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Will the
Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether according to the socio-
economic caste census data for 2011, there
are still 90 lakh households that are engaged
in manual scavenging, and the Skill India
initiative had initially listed scavenger as a
job profile;
(b) if so, whether the Ministry is
undertaking any measures to move people
out of this profession, if so, the details
thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
and
(c) whether any assistance is being
provided to the family members of manual
scavengers and if so, the details thereof
and if not, the reasons therefor?
Cleaning projects under Swachh
Bharat Abhiyan
*51. SHRIMATI NAZNIN
FARUQUE : Will the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has called off
the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan as there is no
visibility of cleaning wastage accumulated
throughout the country;
(b) if not, the action being taken to pace
up the cleaning project under Swachh
Bharat Abhiyan; and
(c) the amount of money that has been
spent so far?
Dam on Brahmaputra by China
*52. SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR: Will
the Minister of EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
be pleased to state:
(a) whether China has operationalised
the biggest dam on Brahmaputra recently
in October, 2015, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Chief Minister of Assam
has expressed concern over the Chinese
dam on Brahmaputra, if so, the details
thereof and the details of steps taken in
this regard;
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

18
(c) whether China has started building
ten such other dams on Brahmaputra, if
so, the details thereof and the reaction and
response of Government thereto; and
(d) whether Government has taken up
the matter with Chinese authorities, if so,
the details thereof?
NCERT books carrying pictures of
Asaram Bapu
*53. SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Will
the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether a National Council of
Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) book for class-III students
continues to carry picture and write up
about the self-styled Godman Asaram
Bapu in the same category as Guru Nanak,
Lord Mahavira, Gautam Buddha, Swami
Vivekananda, Ram Krishna Paramahans
and Mother Teresa; and
(b) the reason for not making the
corrections/removing his photo and
references after his imprisonment ever
since the registration of rape cases against
him?
Allotment of land for schools in Aali
village by DDA
*54. SHRI PARVEZ HASHMI: Will
the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether any proposal has been sent
to Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
for allotment of land for Girls Senior
Secondary School by Delhi Government
in  Aali village of Okhla Assembly segment
under Adarsh Gram Yojana;
(b) whether DM South East has given
his report that the said school is very
essential for the village; and
(c) if so, when would DDA allot the
land for construction of the said school
under Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Scheme
and Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana?
Promoting R&D in States
*55. SHRI S. THANGAVELU: Will
the Minister of SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is considering
to set up  science centres and zonal
systems to support research in all States,
if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether it is a fact that Government
has received requests from many State
Governments to promote research and
development works in their States; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and the
steps taken by Government in this regard?
Skill development through
universities and colleges
*56. SHRI A.W. RABI BERNARD:
Will the Minister of HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Ministry
has failed to meet its skill development
targets in 2014-15, as the higher education
department achieved just 24.67 per cent
of the skill training target and in 2013-14,
it had a meagre success rate of 17 per cent
as per official data, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Government decided to
rope in universities across the country to
help implement Government's skill
development mission, if so, the details
thereof; and
(c) whether the University Grants
Commission (UGC) has asked over 700
universities and 35,000 colleges to join the
mission, if so, the details thereof?

19
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
Delay in issuance of certificate by
ITIs
*57. SHRI AMBETH RAJAN: Will
the Minister of SKILL DEVELOPMENT
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP be pleased
to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that there is
inordinate delay on the part of National
Council of V ocational Training (NCVT)
to issue certificate to those who have
completed training from various Industrial
Training Institutes (ITIs); and
(b) if so, the reasons for inordinate
delay in issuing certificates, and the steps
taken by Government to ensure timely
distribution of certificates to students/
trainees?
Ban on migration of women
to Gulf
*58. DR. K.V .P. RAMACHANDRA
RAO : Will the Minister of OVERSEAS
INDIAN AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Union Government is
considering to ban migration of women
from Andhra Pradesh and Telangana to the
Gulf countries to work as house maids, if
so, the details thereof; and
(b) whether Government is aware that
such ban would create a spurt in return
migration besides swelling the ranks of
jobless people in the two States?
Creches under Rajiv Gandhi Creche
Scheme
†*59. SHRI RAMDAS ATHAWALE:
Will the Minister of WOMEN AND
CHILD DEVELOPMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) the number of new creches opened
during the last three years under the Rajiv
Gandhi Creche Scheme, State-wise and
city-wise;
(b) whether there are still no creches in
the Ministries/Departments of the Central
Government, PSEs and the autonomous
organisations situated in Delhi; and
(c) if so, whether Government has
issued necessary guidelines to such Central
Government Organisations for opened
creches for their women employees?
Role of civil bodies under Swachh
Bharat Mission
*60. SHRI PALV AI GOV ARDHAN
REDDY: Will the Minister of URBAN
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether as per one online survey,
71 per cent of more than two lakh netizens
from all over the country feel that there is
not much change in one year even after
Swachh Bharat Mission;
(b) if so, what is the response of the
Ministry; and
(c) to what extent Ministry has been
able to rope in civic bodies and address
their capacity gaps in achieving the targets
set under Swachh Bharat Mission?
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF,
The 27th November, 2015 Secretary-General.
Agrahayana, 6, 1937 (Saka)

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Prime Minister :—
Atomic Energy :—
Development of North Eastern Region :—
Earth Sciences :—
External Affairs : 52,
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises : 46,
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation :—
Human Resource Development : 47, 49, 53, 56,
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises :—
Overseas Indian Affairs : 58,
Parliamentary Affairs :—
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions :—
Science and Technology : 55,
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship : 48, 57,
Social Justice and Empowerment : 50,
Space :—
Statistics and Programme Implementation :—
Urban Development : 51, 54, 60,
Women and Child Development : 59.
20
GMGIPMRND—2895 RS—27-11-2015.