14
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Monday, December 9, 2013/Agrahayana 18, 1935 (Saka)
————
(Ministries : Coal; Corporate Affairs; Drinking Water and Sanitation; Earth
Sciences; Human Resource Development; Mines; Minority Affairs; New and
Renewable Energy; Rural Development; Science and Technology;
Water Resources; Women and Child Development)
Total number of questions — 20
Ragging in Pondicherry University
*41. SHRI C.P. NARAYANAN: Will
the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has received
any complaint from a girl student of
Pondicherry University about her ragging
by male students and others;
(b) if so, Government's reaction thereto;
(c) whether Government is aware that
the girl was suspended along with the
culprits by the University authorities;
(d) whether this goes against the
vigilance, the authorities should have shown
in such matters after Parliament has enacted
a law making action against gender abuse
more stringent; and
(e) whether, since Central Universities
are to be a model for others, Government
would view the issue seriously and see that
instances of dealing complainants and
culprits alike are not repeated?
Server1\E\session NOV-DEC 2013\RSQ.List\3349RS\3349RS
New schemes for welfare of
minorities
*42. SHRI K.C. TYAGI: Will the
Minister of MINORITY  AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has announced
any new schemes for the welfare of
minorities in the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) new features in these schemes which
separate them from the earlier schemes; and
(d) the details and objectives of the new
schemes/programmes?
Availability and supply of potable
water
*43. DR. V . MAITREYAN: Will the
Minister of DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION be pleased to state:
(a) whether per-capita availability and
supply of potable water in the country is

15
Server1\E\session NOV-DEC 2013\RSQ.List\3349RS\3349RS
at par with life standards set by the World
Health Organization and water org.;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the
remedial steps taken by the Central
Government to help people of the lower
riparian States like Tamil Nadu to get
adequate supply of potable water;
(c) whether the Central Government has
allocated any funds to the Tamil Nadu
Government to generate drinking water from
sea water; and
(d) if so, the details of the funds
allocated to the State for the desalination
projects during the last three years?
Cancellation of coal blocks
*44. SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR
ROY: Will the Minister of COAL be pleased
to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Utkal B-1
coal block in Odisha, which was allocated
to M/s Talchar Mines Limited, was
cancelled, if so, the reasons therefor;
(b) whether, consequent upon the
cancellation, any other company was
allocated this block, if so, the details thereof;
(c) if allocated to a new company,
whether the said company has started
production; and
(d) if not, the details of action taken
against the company?
Preservation of languages
*45. SHRI VIJAY JAWAHARLAL
DARDA: Will the Minister of HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT be pleased
to state:
(a) the measures being adopted to
preserve around 800 languages spoken or
und erstood throughout the country,
including Andaman and Nicobar and
Lakshadweep Islands, as the country is a
repository of ancient and medieval culture
in all aspects;
(b) whether there is a dedicated or
designated cell or department in each
university or similar institutes of learning
performing this task and whether separate
budgetary allocations are made for their
functioning; and
(c) the details of the languages spoken
now in Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
where sects like Jarawas, Onge, etc. are
still maintaining their original identity and
also similar sects in the North-East
contiguous to Chinese or Burmese borders?
Deaths due to malnutrition
*46. SHRI P. RAJEEVE: Will the
Minister of WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the number of deaths due to
malnutrition reported in the country during
the last three years, State-wise; and
(b) whether Government has taken any
steps to address this issue and if so, the
details thereof?
Benefits intended for minorities
*47. SHRIMA TI KUSUM RAI: Will
the Minister of MINORITY AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether, as per the recent report of
Social Development Council, most of the
benefits intended for minorities are being
cornered by either the majority population
or non-Muslim minorities;

16
Server1\E\session NOV-DEC 2013\RSQ.List\3349RS\3349RS
(b) if so, the details thereof and the
reasons therefor;
(c) whether, as per the report, the
Multi-sectoral Development Programme
(MsDP) for minorities has also failed
drastically and benefits of the scheme have
reached only 30 per cent of the Muslim
population in targeted areas; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and the
reasons therefor?
Penalty for non-implementation of
land law
*48. SHRI S. THANGA VELU: Will the
Minister of RURAL DEVELOPMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
is considering to impose penalty on the
States if land law is not implemented and if
so, the details thereof; and
(b) whether Government has come
across any such instances of non-
implementation of the land law by any State
Government and if so, the details thereof?
Amendments to National Mineral
Policy
*49. SHRIMA TI T. RA TNA BAI: Will
the Minister of MINES be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has made any
amendments to the National Mineral Policy
to prevent its misuse by incorporating the
provisions of Forest and Environment
Protection Act to make it more holistic and
comprehensive;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the views
of each State and local people in this regard;
and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Supply of piped drinking water
*50. SHRIMA TI JA YA BACHCHAN:
Will the Minister of DRINKING WATER
AND SANITATION be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken note
of supply of poor quality drinking water
in rural households resulting in increase in
water-borne diseases;
(b) whether Government has taken any
initiative to provide clean piped drinking
water in rural households of the country;
(c) if so, the details of the targets,
achievements and budget allocations for the
initiative during the last five years, State-
wise; and
(d) if not, the reasons therefor?
Problem of drinking water in
Karnataka
*51. SHRI BASA W ARAJ PA TIL: Will
the Minister of DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION be pleased to state:
(a) which are the more problematic five
districts in Karnataka suffering from
drinking water problem;
(b) what are the measures taken by the
Central Government to overcome this
problem; and
(c) the number of villages and blocks in
the State with 100 per cent sanitation,
district-wise?
Coverage of NBA in Tamil Nadu
*52. DR. R. LAKSHMANAN: Will the
Minister of DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposes to
increase the number of districts to be

17
Server1\E\session NOV-DEC 2013\RSQ.List\3349RS\3349RS
covered under the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
(NBA) in Tamil Nadu from current 29
during the current financial year; and
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not,
the reasons therefor?
Percentage of ST students enrolled
for higher studies
*53. SHRI BHUPENDER YADA V:
Will the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the measures
undertaken by Government to reduce the
gap in enrolment between primary and
secondary schools in the States with
significant tribal population;
(b) what percentage of school pass-outs
and graduate students from the Scheduled
Tribes are enrolled for higher studies;
and
(c) the number of graduates who have
taken the benefit of the schemes such as
the Post-Matric Scholarship and the Rajiv
Gandhi National Fellowships?
Quality of groundwater
*54. SHRI AAYANUR
MANJUNA THA: Will the Minister of
WATER RESOURCES be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that groundwater
is unfit for human use and also for drinking
purposes in some States;
(b) if so, the details thereof for each
State including Karnataka; and
(c) the steps being taken to correct t he
situation in future?
IITs in world university rankings
*55. DR. JANARDHAN
WAGHMARE: Will the Minister of
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
be pleased to state:
(a) whether, according to the recent
world university rankings, the IITs in the
country have slipped their positions in
2012;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether students, teachers and
experts have expressed concern over this
ranking and urged the Government to find
new ways for improvements; and
(d) if so, Government's reaction on such
ranking of Indian institutions and the steps
taken to improve their position in the
world?
Expert Committee on MDMS
*56. SHRI T.M. SELV AGANAPA THI:
Will the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
has constituted an Expert Committee to
review, monitor and improve the Mid Day
Meal Scheme (MDMS) which caters to
more than 120 million children across the
country; if so, the composition thereof;
(b) whether it is also a fact that
Government is considering to bring
improvement in MDMS; and
(c) whether Government has asked all
the States to ensure quality, safety and
hygiene under MDMS and has reminded
them to create safer kit chen and storage
areas as well as ensure prior testing of meals
by teachers, conduct social audits, etc.?

18
Server1\E\session NOV-DEC 2013\RSQ.List\3349RS\3349RS
Disaster management training in
schools
*57. SHRI BAISHNAB PARIDA: Will
the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that school
children are being imparted disaster
management lessons, both in Government
and private schools in Delhi, to meet any
kind of eventuality during such disasters,
if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether such a training is also being
imparted to students of other States of the
country, if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether such students would be
provided with certain gadgets for use during
such eventualities, if so, the details thereof?
Denial of scholarships to students of
Jammu and Kashmir
*58. SHRI G .N. RA TANPURI: Will the
Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the number of students who have
applied under the Prime Minister's Special
Scholarship Scheme (PMSSS) from Jammu
and Kashmir but denied the scholarships
along with the reasons therefor;
(b) whether certain NGOs have misled
and duped such students, if so, the steps
taken to ensure transparent, hassle-free and
timely distribution of scholarships under
PMSSS; and
(c) the number of students forced to
leave study midway and return home due
to denial of scholarships?
Release of Central share for
assistance and support to
rape victims in Odisha
*59. SHRI RABINARAYAN
MOHAPATRA: Will the Minister of
WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government would release
the Central share to Odisha Government
during 2013-14 for the new scheme
introduced for financial assistance and
support to victims of rape; and
(b) if so, the details of achievements
expected as a result thereof?
Progress for Gender Budgeting
*60. DR. GYAN PRAKASH
PILANIA: Will the Minister of WOMEN
AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) the number and percentage of males
and females out of total population of the
country;
(b) whether Government has adopted
Gender Budgeting as a tool for gender
mainstreaming at all levels and stages of
budgetary process;
(c) whether percentage of Gender
Budget to women to Total Budget during
2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12,
2012-13 was 3.68, 5.57, 6.11, 6.22, 5.91
per cent respectively; and
(d) whether above statistics show that
justice has not been done to the concept of
Gender Budgeting for welfare of women?
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF ,
The 3rd December, 2013 Secretary-General.
Agrahayana 12, 1935 (Saka)

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Coal : 44,
Corporate Affairs : —
Drinking Water and Sanitation : 43, 50, 51, 52,
Earth Sciences : —
Human Resource Development : 41, 45, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58,
Mines : 49,
Minority Affairs : 42, 47,
New and Renewable Energy : —
Rural Development : 48,
Science and Technology : —
Water Resources : 54,
Women and Child Development : 46, 59, 60.
19
GMGIPMRND—3349RS—03-12-2013.