87
RAJYA  SABHA
List of Questions for ORAL ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Monday, December 15, 2014/Agrahayana 24, 1936 (Saka)
(Ministries :  Coal;  Drinking  Water  and  Sanitation;  Human  Resource
Development; New and Renewable Energy; Panchayati Raj; Power; Road
Transport and Highways; Rural Development; Shipping; Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation)
Total number of questions —15
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
Penalty for using coal and carbon rich
fuels for power generation
*276. DR. V . MAITREYAN: Will the
Minister of POWER be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is paying
penalty or fees to any international agency
for generating power by utilising coal and
carbon rich fuels thereby releasing huge
carbon contents to pollute global
environment;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the
amount paid by Government or power
plants to any such international agency
during the last five years, year-wise;
(c) the manner in which the amount is
calculated; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to
gradually reduce and restrict generation of
power by utilising coal and other carbon
rich fuels and to develop alternate methods
to replace such power projects by 2020?
Targetting latrine use
*277. SHRI T. RATHINA VEL: Will the
Minister of DRINKING WA TER AND
SANITATION be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that according to
many experts Government must target
latrine use and not latrine coverage;
(b) whether it is also a fact that many
experts had opined that the sanitation
programme should be combined with other
environmental health schemes, including
safe drinking water and hand washing that
would limit other forms of exposure; and
(c) if so, the steps taken by Government
in this regard?
Proposed thermal power plants
†*278. SHRI MAHENDRA SINGH
MAHRA: Will the Minister of POWER
be pleased to state:
(a) the number of thermal power plants

88
(TPPs) proposed to be established, State-
wise and location-wise;
(b) whether those TPPs could not be
established due to  non-allotment of land
by the States;
(c) if not, the reasons for the delay in
establishing those TPPs; and
(d) by when the approved/proposed
TPPs would be established?
State irrigation Ministers’ meeting on
inter linking of rivers
*279. SHRI DEVENDER GOUD T.:
Will the Minister of W ATER
RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT
AND GANGA REJUVENATION be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that a meeting of
the State Irrigation Ministers was held
recently to discuss various issues relating
to the project on the inter linking of rivers;
(b) if so,the details of outcome of the
meeting;
(c) whether it is also a fact that on the
basis of the outcome of the above meeting,
it is proposed to conduct a Jal Manthan to
thrash out various issues, if so, the details
thereof; and
(d) how much time it would take to link
all the rivers in the country?
Popularising Thirukkural’s messages
*280. SHRI TARUN VIJAY: Will the
Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that
the messages of Thiruvalluvar have shaped
Indian minds for the last many centuries
but still his teachings through the great
work of Thirukkural do not find any
presence in the North India; and
(b) Government’s view to popularise
Thirukkural’s messages in North India for
greater cultural integration of the country
benefiting the society?
Wages under MGNREGA
*281. SHRI D. RAJA: Will the
Minister of RURAL DEVELOPMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether a panel constituted by the
Central Government has recommended that
the wages under the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA) should be equal to or higher
than the minimum wages in the States and
the wages should be revised every year on
the basis of Consumer Price Index (Rural);
and
(b) if so, the details thereof and
Government’s decision thereon?
Budget for salary of teachers under
SSA
†*282. DR. BHUSHAN LAL
JANGDE: Will the Minister of HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that salary of
36,025 teachers working under the Sarva
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) in Chhattisgarh has
been cut from the budget;
(b) whether an outstanding amount of
` 533.41 crore due to the State Government
for the salary of 30,409 panchayat teachers
would be released soon by the Central
Government; and
(c) by when the payment of ` 230.61
crore would be made by the Central
Government to the State Government for
the completed construction work of
compounds in schools under SSA?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

89
Construction of roads under PMGSY
*283.  SHRIMATI MOHSIN
KIDWAI: Will the Minister of RURAL
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether adequate progress has been
made in the construction of roads under
the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY), if so, the details thereof during
the last three years and the current year;
(b) the details of the Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs) received from various
State Governments for approval under
PMGSY-II, State/Union Territory-wise;
(c) the projects sanctioned indicating
the length of roads including the funds
allocated, State/Union Territory-wise;
(d) whether allocation under PMGSY
has been reduced drastically this year; and
(e) the details of projects pending from
Chhattisgarh?
Fuel supply agreements
*284. SHRI S. THANGA VELU: Will
the Minister of COAL be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Coal
India Limited (CIL) has agreed to a staggered
level of penalty ranging from 1.5 per cent
to 40 per cent for failure to meet supply
commitments to power companies in its
recent board meeting;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether it is also a fact that CIL has
also concurred to amend the “April 16
model” for fuel supply agreements; and
(d) whether CIL has consented for
importing coal for attaining a trigger level
of 80 per cent of the contracted quantity, if
so, the details thereof?
Introduction of pre-primary sections
in schools
*285. SHRIMATI JHARNA DAS
BAIDYA: Will the Minister of HUMAN
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any plan
to introduce pre-primary sections in all
primary schools in the country;
(b) whether Government is going to
include the education of age group 4-6 years
within the purview of the right of children
to free and compulsory Education (RTE)
Act, if so, the details thereof; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
RTE provisions in SSA
†*286. DR. CHANDAN MITRA: Will
the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Right of children to free
and compulsory Education (RTE) Act has
provisions to the effect that in un-aided
private schools, admissions to at least 25
per cent seats would be given free of cost
to the children belonging to deprived and
weaker sections and their fees would be
reimbursed by Government;
(b) if so, the reasons for such provisions
not being made in the framework of the
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA); and
(c) the steps taken by the Central
Government to reimburse the expenditure
being incurred by the State Governments
on the admission of such children in private
schools under the RTE Act?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

90
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit
Programme funds
*287. SHRI PARIMAL NATHWANI:
Will the Minister of W ATER
RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT
AND GANGA REJUVENATION be
pleased to state:
(a) whether any guidelines have been
issued by Government for grant of funds
under the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit
Programme (AIBP), if so, the details
thereof;
(b) whether there are any discrepancies
in allocating/sanctioning funds to different
State Governments;
(c) if so, the details thereof and the
reasons therefor; and
(d) the remedial action taken by
Government in this regard?
Irrigation projects of West Bengal
*288. DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH:
Will the Minister of W ATER
RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT
AND GANGA REJUVENATION be
pleased to state:
(a) the detail of the spill over irrigation
projects of West Bengal, Five Year
Plan-wise and project-wise;
(b) the details of cost overrun of each
project; and
(c) what action Government has taken
or proposes to take to ensure timely
completion of these projects?
New Technologies for coal
*289. SHRI P. BHATTACHARYA:
Will the Minister of COAL be pleased to
state:
(a) what steps Government proposes
to take to augment the production and
productivity of coal to meet the
requirement of the power sector;
(b) whether Government is planning to
import coal in case of shortage of coal
production in the country; and
(c) the steps being taken to encourage
private investments for coal development
particularly for acquiring new technologies?
Assistance to Gujarat for Narmada
Sarovar Project
*290. SHRI PRA VEEN RASHTRA-
PAL: Will the Minister of W ATER
RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT
AND GANGA REJUVENATION be
pleased to state:
(a) the assistance provided by the
Central Government to Gujarat for the
Narmada Sarovar Project;
(b) the details of the present status of
the project; and
(c) whether it is a fact that farmers are
not getting the facility for agriculture, etc.
from the said project as on date?
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF,
The 9th December, 2014 Secretary-General.
Agrahayana 18, 1936 (Saka)

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Coal : 284, 289,
Drinking Water and Sanitation : 277,
Human Resource Development : 280, 282, 285, 286,
New and Renewable Energy :—
Panchayati Raj :—
Power : 276, 278,
Road Transport and Highways :—
Rural Development : 281, 283,
Shipping :—
Water Resources, River Development
and Ganga Rejuvenation : 279, 287, 288, 290.
GMGIPMRND—3351RS(S3)—09-12-2014.
91