68
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL  ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Thursday, August 3, 2017/Shravana 12, 1939 (Saka)
————
(Ministries:  Prime Minister; Atomic Energy; Development of  North Eastern
Region; External Affairs; Housing and Urban Affairs; Human Resource
Development; Information and Broadcasting; Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pensions; Planning; Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship; Social Justice and Empowerment;
Space; Statistics and Programme Implementation;
Women and Child Development)
Total number of questions — 15
Inclusion of National Law
Universities in the list of Institutes of
National Importance
*196. SHRI NARAY AN LAL
PANCHARIYA: W ill the Minister of
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOP-
MENT be peased to state:
(a) whether any steps have been taken
by the Ministry to include all the National
Law Universities in the list of Institutes of
National Importance, if so, the details
thereof; and
(b) whether Government is planning to
form a committee under the Ministry to
conduct a single entrance examination and
supervise the affairs of all the National
Law Universities and if so, the details
thereof?
Release of Indian fishermen arrested
by Sri Lankan Navy
*197. SHRI D. RAJA: Will the
Minister of EXTERNAL AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Sri Lankan
Navy continues to arrest Indian fishermen
and they have lately arrested seven
fishermen from Mandapam and confiscated
their two trawlers on charges of engaging in
bottom trawling, if so, the details thereof;
and
(b) what is the number of fishermen and
trawlers in their custody, at present, and
what measures are being taken to get them
released?
Inclusion of Ayurveda in Civil Services
Examination
*198. DR. SUBRAMANIAN
SWAMY: Will the PRIME MINISTER be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that numerous
representations have been received to
include Ayurveda as an optional subject for
the Civil Services Examination; and
(b) whether it is also a fact that the
Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga and

69
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH) too has raised
this issue with the Department of Personnel,
the Ministry of Home Affairs and Union
Public Service Commission (UPSC) and if
so, what is Government's response to this
demand?
Finalisation of complaint redressal
mechanism
*199. SHRIMATI AMBIKA SONI :
Will the Min ister of INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING be pleased to
state:
(a) whether the number of complaints
from public against TV channels and radio
stations regarding alleged objectionable
contents are increasing and if so, the details
thereof;
(b) whether Government has finalized
the complaint redressal mechanism, as
advised by the Supreme Court and if so,
the details thereof;
(c) whether the period of limitation,
within which a complaint could be filed,
has also been defined in details; and
(d) whether the media representatives
and experts on social issues would be
included in the redressal committee?
Budgetary allocation for Scheduled
Castes
*200. SHRI HUSAIN DALWAI: Will
the Minister of SOCIAL  JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the details of budgetary allocations
made for Schedule Castes since 2014, year-
wise;
(b) the details of allocations and
expenditures on all the schemes operational
for their welfare since then, year-wise and
scheme-wise;
(c) whether Government takes into
account the proportion of Scheduled Castes
in the population of the country while
allocating resources for their welfare and if
so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons
therefor; and
(d) whether there have been delays in
disbursing funds for welfare schemes like
scholarship for Scheduled Caste students
and if so, the details thereof, year-wise and
scheme-wise and the reasons therefor?
ICPS for children in difficult
circumstances
*201. SHRI RAJKUMAR DHOOT:
Will the Minister of WOMEN AND
CHILD DEVELOPMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether Government is
implementing the Integrated Child
Protection Scheme (ICPS) for improving
the well being of children in difficult
circumstances, if so, the salient features of
the scheme; and
(b) whether Government has provided
financial assistance to Maharashtra for
implementing the scheme and if so, the
details thereof during the last three years,
year-wise and if not, the reasons therefor?
Faculty positions in Central
institutions
*202. SHRI P.L. PUNIA: Will the
Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the total strength of faculty vis-a-
vis vacant faculty positions in Central
universities, IITs, IIMs and NITs till date,
category-wise for SC, ST, OBC and others,
university and institute-wise; and
(b) the total recruitment held for the
vacant positions during the last three years

70
till date, category-wise for SC, ST, OBC
and others, university and institute-wise?
Telecast of fake news
†*203.SHRIMATI CHHAY A VERMA:
Will the Min ister of INFORMATION
AND BROADCASTING be pleased to
state whether it is a fact that fake news on
a large scale are being telecast through
various media in the country and such news
sometimes lead to serious consequences and
if so, the steps taken by the Ministry to
curb fake news?
Modernisation of Prasar Bharti
*204. SHRIMATI JAY A
BACHCHAN: Will the Minister of
INFORMATION AND BROAD-
CASTING be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken note
of the poor condition of Prasar Bharti and
also of the recommendations made by the
expert panel on its modernisation, if so,
the status of implementation of those
recommendations; and
(b) the steps Government proposes to
take to modernise it?
Advisory Committee under the
Ministry
*205. SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Will
the Minister of WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state
whether the Ministry has any Advisory
Committee under its ambit, if so, the details
of its composition, the nomination criteria
and the positions filled up/vacant, so far,
along with the details of members and their
tenure and if not, the reasons therefor?
Standards of school education
*206. SHRIMATI RAJANI PATIL:
Will the Minister of HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the percentage of Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) presently being spent on
education in the country and plans drawn
by Government to improve the same;
(b) whether Government is aware that
the standard of school education in the
country is low as compared to global
standards and if so, the details thereof and
the reasons therefor; and
(c) the corrective steps taken/proposed
to be taken by Government in this regard?
Restricting private media channels
from doing one-sided publicity
*207. SHRI HARIV ANSH: Will the
Minister of INFORMATION AND
BROADCASTING be pleased to state
whether Government has any plan to
restrict private media channels from doing
one-sided publicity of a particular party
during elections and if so, what are the
details in this regard?
Construction of housing units in
Chhattisgarh under PMAY
†*208.SHRI RAM VICHAR NETAM:
Will the Minister of HOUSING AND
URBAN AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) the details of targets set by
Government for construction of housing
units in Chhattisgarh under the Pradhan
Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) during the
last three years;
(b) the details of housing units
constructed in the State during the said
period; and
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

71
(c) the details of funds allocated therefor
during those years?
Infrastructure projects in Manipur
*209. SHRI K. BHABANANDA
SINGH: Will the Minister of
DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH
EASTERN REGION be pleased to state:
(a) the details of infrastructure projects
under the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources (NLCPR) completed in Manipur
along with the total expenditure incurred
thereon during the last three years;
(b) the details of such on-going projects
along with the time-frame for their
completion and the allocations made for
each of them; and
(c) the details of NLCPR projects
proposed to be executed in the State and
the details of funding thereof?
Child Care Centres/Institutions
*210. SHRIMATI RENUKA
CHOWDHURY: W ill the Minister of
WOMEN AND CHILD
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of registered Child
Care Centres/Institutions in the country,
State-wise;
(b) whether Government has any
information regarding the addresses of these
Centres/Institutions and the number of
children residing therein;
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not,
the reasons therefor; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to
have a database of all children in need of
care and protection in the country at the
earliest and for its regular updation?
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF,
The 28th July, 2017 Secretary-General.
Shravana 6, 1939 ( Saka)

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Prime Minister : —
Atomic Energy : —
Development of North Eastern Region : 209,
External Affairs : 197,
Housing and Urban Affairs : 208,
Human Resource Development : 196, 202, 206,
Information and Broadcasting : 199, 203, 204, 207,
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions : 198,
Planning : —
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship : —
Social Justice and Empowerment : 200,
Space : —
Statistics and Programme Implementation : —
Women and Child Development : 201, 205, 210.
GMGIPMRND—1431RS—28-07-2017.
72