78
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL  ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Friday, March 16, 2018/Phalguna 25, 1939 (Saka)
————
(Ministries: Agriculture and Farmers Welfare; Chemicals and Fertilizers;
Coal; Communications; Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution;
Electronics and Information Technology; Food Processing Industries;
Law and Justice; Parliamentary Affairs; Railways)
Total number of questions — 15
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
Suicides by farmers
†*226. SHRI SANJAY RAUT: Will the
Minister of AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to
state:
(a) whether the incidents of farmers'
suicides are continuing unabatedly in the
country, including Maharashtra;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the
reasons therefor;
(c) the steps taken by Government to
prevent farmers' suicides;
(d) whether Government has provided
financial assistance/funds to the States for
the solution of farmers' problems;
(e) if so, the details thereof, State-wise;
and
(f) if not, the reasons therefor?
Increasing storage capacity of
godowns in Maharashtra
*227. SHRI RAJKUMAR DHOOT:
Will the Minister of CONSUMER
AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC
DISTRIBUTION be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposes to
construct new godowns for foodgrains and
other agricultural produces at different
locations in Maharashtra to help farmers
and strengthen Public Distribution System
(PDS) in the State;
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not,
the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government also proposes
to increase the storage capacity of the
existing godowns in the State; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Reduction in milk procurement prices
*228. SHRI DILIP KUMAR TIRKEY:
Will the Minister of  AGRICULTURE  AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that despite record
milk production, small dairy farmers are
facing hardships because of reduction in milk
procurement prices by some co-operatives
in different parts of the country; and

79
(b) if so, the details thereof and the steps
taken by Government to help small dairy
farmers in the country?
Enquiry into contract for National
Internet Backbone and AMC
*229. SHRI JA VED ALI KHAN: Will
the Minister of COMMUNICATIONS be
pleased to refer to answers to Starred
Question 107, Unstarred Question 3424
and Starred Question 138 given in the Rajya
Sabha on 25 November, 2016, 16 December,
2016 and 28 July, 2017 respectively and
state:
(a) whether advice sought from Central
Vigilance Commission (CVC) regarding
` 300 crore scam in BSNL in award of
contract for expansion of  National Internet
Backbone and in annual maintenance
contract (AMC) along with purchase of
new hardware, has been received;
(b) if so, the details thereof along with
the date of receipt and legal/penal action
taken against the culprits; and
(c) if not, the reasons for delay in taking
action against the culprits by Government?
Model railway stations under Ratlam
railway division
†*230. DR. SATY ANARAY AN
JATIYA: Will the Minister of  RAILWAYS
be pleased to state:
(a) the names of the stations which are
to be transformed into Model railway
stations under Ratlam railway division of
Western Railway and the time bound action
plan for providing modern passenger
amenities; and
(b) the details of  the works to be carried
out for renovation and expansion of  Indore,
Ujjain, Nagda, Ratlam, Mandsaur and
Nimach railway stations in the year 2018-
19 with reference to 'a' above?
Execution of railway projects in
Odisha by RVNL
*231. SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR
SWAIN: Will the Minister of  RAILWAYS
be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Rail Vikas Nigam
Limited (RVNL), which has been entrusted
with the execution of  two railway projects,
i.e., Haridaspur-Paradip and Angul-Sukinda
in Odisha, is unwilling to take up
construction work of these projects due to
conflict of interest; and
(b) by when Railways are going to fix
up a new agency for early completion of
the above projects, which have been
targeted for their completion in March,
2018 and June, 2018, respectively ?
Restructuring the FCI
*232. SHRIMATI RAJANI PATIL:
Will the Minister of CONSUMER
AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC
DISTRIBUTION be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is planning for
restructuring of  the Food Corporation of
India (FCI);
(b) if so, the details thereof including
the major steps being taken by Government
therefor;
(c) whether Government proposes to
dissolve or dilute the responsibilities of  the
FCI, including that of  procuring foodgrains
from the farmers, if so, the details thereof;
(d) whether Government has received
any complaints regarding the dissolution or
reducing the responsibilities of the FCI; and
(e) if so, the reaction of Government
thereto?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

80
Gramin Dak Sevaks
*233. PROF. M.V . RAJEEV GOWDA:
Will the Minister of COMMUNI-
CATIONS be pleased to state:
(a) the number of new Gramin Dak
Sevaks employed since 2010, year-wise and
State-wise;
(b) the total nubmer of Gramin Dak
Sevaks in the country, State-wise;
(c) whether Government intends to
regularise the jobs of Dak Sevaks as
demanded by their union bodies;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
FPIs in Karnataka
*234. SHRI D. KUPENDRA REDDY:
Will the Minister of  FOOD PROCESSING
INDUSTRIES be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Karnataka is
one of the States which has got the
maximum invested captial in the Food
Processing Industries (FPIs);
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the details of names/locations of  the
FPIs that have been set up in Karnataka
during the last three years?
Procurement of farmers’ crops
*235. SHRI NARESH GUJRAL: Will
the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) the details of crops that will be
covered by the new formula for MSP
announced by the Minister of Finance in
the Budget; and
(b) the steps that are being taken by
Government to ensure that all the produces
of farmers, which are covered by MSP, are
procured by the procurement agencies?
Reforms in the Ministry
*236. DR. VINAY P. SAHASRA-
BUDDHE: Will the Minister of
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION be pleased to
state:
(a) whether the Ministry has
implemented any key administrative
reforms pertaining particularly to the
functioning of departments under it during
the last three years, if so, the details thereof;
and
(b) whether the Ministry had received
any suggestions from public or Members
of Parliament pertaining to key reforms
during the last three years, if so, the details
thereof alongwith the number of such
suggestions accepted and implemented ?
Provision of food security allowances
*237. SHRI B.K. HARIPRASAD: Will
the Minister of CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of complaints
received by Government regarding lack of
ration depots within mandated distance,
rotten/poor quality foodgrains, insufficient/
unavailability of  foodgrains, along with
the steps taken to address each of these
issues during the last five years;
(b) whether Government has the
provision for giving Food Security
Allowance in case of non-supply of entitled
foodgrains; and
(c) if so, the details thereof along with
the list of  beneficiaries?
Infrastructure in Agriculture sector
*238. SHRI RAM KUMAR
KASHYAP: W ill the Minister of
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS
WELFARE be pleased to state:

81
(a) whether the income of farmers has
not increased to the expected level due to
absence of proper and developed
infrastructural facilities in Agriculture
sector of the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has introduced
various new schemes and incurred heavy
public expenditure on development of
proper infrastructural facilities in
Agriculture sector of the country; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Use of drone cameras
*239. SHRI KAPIL SIBAL: Will the
Minister of RAILW AYS be pleased to
state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Ministry
has given green signal for the use of  ‘drone’
cameras (UA V/NETRA), if so, the details
thereof;
(b) whether any survey has been
conducted on the use of drones, if so, the
details of  the research conducted along with
the results thereof; and
(c) the details regarding the additional
financial burden, which the Ministry will
have to bear, on the use of this technology
on monthly/yearly/Zone/division-wise
basis ?
Checking the spread of BG-III cotton
cultivation
*240. SHRI T.G. VENKATESH: Will
the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that
unauthorised cultivation of herbicide-
tolerant cotton seed, popularly known as
BG-III cotton, is spreading across the
country, which is harmful to the bio-
diversity;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether any State Government has
complained to the Central Government to
check the spread of BG-III cotton, if so,
the details thereof;
(d) whether any action has been taken
by Government in this regard, the details
thereof; and
(e)  the steps being taken by
Government to check the spread of BG-III
cotton cultivation ?
NEW DELHI; DESH DEEPAK VERMA,
The 10th March, 2018 Secretary-General.
Phalguna 19, 1939 (Saka)

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare : 226, 228, 235, 238, 240,
Chemicals and Fertilizers :—
Coal :—
Communications : 229, 233,
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution : 227, 232, 236, 237,
Electronics and Information Technology :—
Food Processing Industries : 234,
Law and Justice :—
Parliamentary Affairs :—
Railways : 230, 231, 239.
MGIPMRND—4496RS—10-03-2018.
82