6
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Friday, February 3, 2017/Magha 14, 1938 (Saka)
————
(Ministries: Agriculture and Farmers Welfare; Chemicals and Fertilizers;
Communications; Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution;
Electronics and Information Technology; Food Processing
Industries; Law and Justice; Parliamentary Affairs;
Railways; Textiles)
Total number of questions — 15
Online ticketing facility for railway
pass holders
*16. SHRI VIVEK GUPTA: Will the
Minister of RAILW AYS be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that railway pass
holders do not have the facility to book
tickets online through any portal;
(b) the details of money spent by
Government per ticket on booking at the
counter and online respectively;
(c) whether Government is planning to
link Aadhaar to avail railway passes
henceforth, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the details of all sections of
Government employees eligible for railway
passes along with the number thereof in
each case?
Sale of Government stake in BCPL
and HAL
*17. SHRI D. RAJA: Will the Minister
of CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
has decided to sell Government's majority
stake in Bengal Chemicals and
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (BCPL) and
Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. (HAL), if so,
the details thereof; and
(b) the steps being taken in this regard?
Sale of land of ailing State-owned
pharma PSUs
*18. SHRI  ANUBHAV MOHANTY:
Will the Minister of CHEMICALS AND
FERTILIZERS be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the surplus
land of ailing State-owned pharmaceutical
companies like the Indian Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Rajasthan Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., and Bengal Chemicals
and Pharmaceuticals Ltd., has been cleared
for sale to pay off their existing liabilities;
(b) whether these companies will be
closed after their liabilities are settled from
the sale of their surplus land;

7
(c) if so, how Government proposes to
rehabilitate the workers of these companies;
and
(d) whether Government proposes to
provide VRS to the employees of these
companies, if so, the details thereof?
Shortage of skilled manpower in IT
sector
*19. DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY:
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be
pleased to state:
(a) whether there is considerable
shortage of skilled manpower in the
Information Technology (IT) sector;
(b) if so, the percentage thereof and the
steps taken by Government to bridge the
gap;
(c) whether Government has made any
assessment and planning for immediate
requirement of manpower in the IT sector
due to Digital India Programme and online
transactions and advent of more software-
related programmes; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and the skill
development training proposed to be given
to the educated youth in the country?
Installation of escalators and lifts at
railway stations
†*20. DR. SATY ANARAY AN
JATIYA: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS
be pleased to state:
(a) the planning and action plan to
install escalators and lifts for smooth access
to platforms of major railway stations,
including Ujjain, Ratlam, Indore, Bhopal
(Main), Itarsi, Nagpur, Jaipur and Kota;
and
(b) the details of measures taken
towards relieving the pressure of constantly
growing passenger volume at aforesaid
railway stations and the details of efforts
being continuously made to increase
cleanliness and passenger facilities at the
said stations?
Better internet service to the
household consumers
*21. SHRI SAMBHAJI
CHHATRAPATI: Will the Minister of
COMMUNICA TIONS be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the BSNL/
MTNL broadband internet connection,
availed by household consumers, works at
a very slow speed and remains erratic with
the result that people have no choice but to
opt for private internet connection;
(b) the major reasons for this state of
affairs when the country is so capable in
satellite technology; and
(c) whether Government has any
concrete plan to make BSNL/MTNL
internet services efficient and faster?
Conversion of agricultural land for
other purposes
*22. SHRI TIRUCHI SIV A: Will the
Minister of AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of the
problems being faced due to the conversion
and diversion of agricultural land towards
non-agricultural uses, which has led to a
shrinkage in the agricultural output;
(b) the details of agricultural land that
has been converted for non-agricultural uses
in the country in the last two years and the
current year; and
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

8
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
(c) whether any policy/law has been
implemented by Government to contain
such conversion of agricultural land, if so,
the details thereof?
Productive and non-productive cows
and bullocks in the country
*23. DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH:
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that 99.19 per
cent of cows and 99 per cent of bullocks in
the country are productive;
(b) if so, the average value of production
from them and expenditure thereon;
(c) the agency that collected this data
and when was this done; and
(d) the basis of categorisation of
productive and non-productive cows and
bullocks?
Supply of fertilizers to Chhattisgarh
†*24. SHRI RAM VICHAR NETAM:
Will the Minister of CHEMICALS AND
FERTILIZERS be pleased to state:
(a) whether any steps have been taken
by Government to meet the demand of
fertilizers in naxal-affected areas of
Chhattisgarh, if so, the details thereof; and
(b) whether Government has
established any competent, responsible and
accountable mechanism in this regard, if
so, the details thereof?
Coach Mid-life Rehabilitation
workshop at Kurnool
*25. SHRI T.G . VENKATESH: Will the
Minister of RAILW AYS be pleased to
state:
(a) whether Railways have sanctioned
Coach Mid-life Rehabilitation (CMLR)
workshop at Kurnool under South Central
Railway (SCR) in the year 2013-14;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the
progress of the workshop as on date;
(c) whether any funds have been
allocated to this workshop since its
inception, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the reasons for inordinate delay in
taking up the execution of the project?
Rejuvenation of closed jute mills
*26. SHRIMATI JHARNA DAS
BAIDYA: Will the Minister of TEXTILES
be pleased to state:
(a) the number of jute mills closed in
the country during the last three years,
State-wise; and
(b) the action taken by Government for
rejuvenation of the closed mills?
Second version of model APMC Act
*27. SHRI A.K. SELV ARAJ: Will the
Minister of AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
is considering to come out with second
version of model Agricultural Produce
Market Committee (APMC) Act, if so, the
details thereof; and
(b) whether it is also a fact that the
APMC Act is aiming to increase farmers'
income by measures like taking contract
farming out of the law, if so, the details
thereof?

9
Reasons behind recent train
accidents
†*28. SHRI VISHAMBHAR
PRASAD NISHAD: Will the Minister of
RAILWAYS be pleased to state:
(a) the reasons behind continuous train
accidents that occurred between Lucknow-
Kanpur-New Delhi-Delhi; and
(b) whether any terrorist connection is
also coming to light during investigations
of the series of train accidents, the details
thereof?
Agrarian crisis in the country
*29. SHRIMATI RAJANI PATIL: Will
the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has conducted
any study on the regions facing agrarian
crisis in the country;
(b) if so, the details and the outcome
thereof; and
(c) the steps taken/being taken by
Government to encourage the use of modern
agricultural techniques to sustain growth
of agriculture to solve the problem of
agrarian crisis in the country?
Derecognition of political parties
*30. SHRI HARIVANSH: Will the
Minister of LAW AND JUSTICE be
pleased to state:
(a) whether any measures are being
taken to derecognise those political parties
which are inactive and are suspected to be
indulging in money laundering; and
(b) if so, the details thereof?
NEW DELHI; SHUMSHER K. SHERIFF,
The 28th  January, 2017 Secretary-General.
Magha 8, 1938 (Saka)
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare : 22, 23, 27, 29,
Chemicals and Fertilizers : 17, 18, 24,
Communications : 21,
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution :—
Electronics and Information Technology : 19,
Food Processing Industries: —
Law and Justice : 30,
Parliamentary Affairs :—
Railways : 16, 20, 25, 28,
Textiles : 26.
GMGIPMRND—4229RS—28-01-2017.
10