81
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL  ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Wednesday, December 11, 2019/Agrahayana 20, 1941 (Saka)
————
(Ministries: Civil Aviation; Home Affairs; Housing and Urban Affairs;
Labour and Employment; Petroleum and Natural Gas;
Social Justice and Empowerment; Steel)
Total number of questions — 15
CSR expenditure of PSUs and private
sector steel companies
*241. DR. SASMIT PATRA: Will the
Minister of STEEL be pleased to state:
(a) the total Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) expenditure of all
Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and
private sector steel companies in India
during the last three years, the expenditure
year-wise against respective PSUs and
private sector steel companies; and
(b) the activities undertaken by these
PSUs and private sector companies from
the CSR fund expenditures undertaken in
respect of (a) above?
Contribution collected by ESIS
*242. SHRI KUMAR KETKAR: Will
the Minister of LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the amount collected by Government
during last three years on account of ESIS,
year-wise and State-wise along with
employees and employer contribution;
(b) the number of covered employees
and number of hospitals, exclusively for
ESIS covered employees for last three years,
year-wise and State-wise;
(c) the details of new hospitals opened
exclusively for ESIS covered employees in
last three years, State-wise and year-wise;
(d) the details of funds allocated by
Government to strengthen these hospitals
apart from contribution collected through
ESIS in last three years, year-wise and State-
wise; and
(e) the number of patients treated in
last three years?
Elimination of begging in the country
*243. SHRI D. KUPENDRA REDDY:
Will the Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE
AND EMPOWERMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the number
of beggars are increasing every year due to
various reasons;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has made or
plans to make assessment of the number of

82
beggars, if so, the details thereof, State-
wise; and
(d) the concrete steps taken/being taken
by Government for rehabilitation of the
existing beggars and for elimination of
beggary in the country?
Resale of houses provided under
PMAY(U)
*244. SHRI ANIL DESAI: Will the
Minister of HOUSING AND URBAN
AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of houses
constructed by Government under Pradhan
Mantri Awas Yojana [PMAY(U)] during
the last three years, State/UT-wise;
(b) the number of houses constructed
in each State/UT during this period and the
number of houses handed over/occupied
by the beneficiaries till now; and
(c) whether the houses handed over can
be sold for financial gain of the allottee,
what are the regulations about its misuse,
the details thereof?
Revision of SC list in Uttar Pradesh
†*245. SHRI VISHAMBHAR
PRASAD NISHAD: Will the Minister of
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government would
consider defining synonymous sub-castes
of Bind with Beldar at Serial No. 18,
Gauriya, Kahar, Kashyap, Batham with
Gaud, Gond at Serial No. 36, Mallah,
Kewat, Manjhi, Nishad, Machua with
Majhwar at Serial No. 53, Tarmali, Bhar,
Rajbhar with Pasi at Serial No. 59, Kumhar,
Prajapati with Shilpkar at Serial No. 65,
Turha, Turaha, Dheemar with Turaiha at
Serial No. 66, and these sub-castes, being
Backward Castes such as Kahar, Prajapati,
Dheevar, Bind, Bhar, Rajbhar, Dheemar,
Batham, Turha, Gauriya, Manjhi and
Machhua as Scheduled Castes in the list of
Scheduled Caste of Uttar Pradesh; and
(b) details of said castes, State and
category-wise?
Rumours of child lifting
*246. SHRI RAJKUMAR DHOOT:
Will the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that rumour
mongering of child lifting has recently
claimed several human lives in Uttar
Pradesh and other parts of the country due
to severe beating of victims by mobs;
(b) if so, the details thereof, State-wise
and UT-wise; and
(c) what action Government has taken
thereon?
New mini gurukul schools in
Telangana
*247. SHRI B. LINGAIAH YADA V:
Will the Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE
AND EMPOWERMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether Government of Telangana
proposes for 66 new mini gurukul schools
for SC/ST students from 1st standard to
5th standard to provide quality education,
if so, action taken thereon;
(b) details of financial assistance sought
by State from Union Government with
regard to Post Matric scholarships, under
Special Central Assistance, training to be
given under Scheduled Caste Corporation,
employment opportunities for SC and ST,
Assistance to Disabled Persons for
purchasing of appliances (ADIP) scheme,
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

83
construction of welfare hostels for SC/ST
in Telangana State and action taken thereon;
and
(c) funds allocated/spent so far during
last three years in Telangana?
Publishing of data under
NCRB
*248. SHRI NARESH GUJRAL: Will
the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) the details of 25 categories of crime
on which data have been withheld from
being published under the 2017 National
Crime Reports Bureau published on
21st October, 2019;
(b) whether Government intends to
release the data under these categories in
the subsequent years, if so, the details
thereof; and
(c) the steps being taken by
Government to ensure more reliable data
under the aforesaid categories to avoid the
delay in publication of reports?
Atrocities on Scheduled Caste
people
†*249. SHRI LAL SINH V ADODIA:
Will the Minister of SOCIAL JUSTICE
AND EMPOWERMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) the number of cases related to
atrocities on Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes people that have been
registered by police during the year
2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 in the country;
(b) the year-wise number of culprits
arrested; and
(c) the number of culprits punished in
this regard year-wise?
Regularisation of colonies inhabited
by affluent section
*250. SHRI NARAIN DASS GUPTA:
Will the Minister of HOUSING AND
URBAN AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that 69 colonies
in Delhi, inhabited by the affluent sections
of the society, are left out for regularisation;
(b) if so, the reasons therefor; and
(c) whether Government has any plan
to regularise these colonies in the future?
Development of airports under RCS
*251. SHRI DHARMAPURI
SRINIV AS: Will the Minister of CIVIL
A VIATION be pleased to state:
(a) whether the attention of
Government has been drawn to the matter
of development of airports under Regional
Connectivity Scheme (RCS);
(b) the details of the airports being
established under RCS;
(c) the quantum of funds allocated and
released so far; and
(d) the progress made and present
status of those airports, as on date?
Complaints on poor hygiene/services
at airports
*252. SHRI RANJIB BISWAL: Will
the Minister of CIVIL AVIATION be
pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has received
complaints from passengers and
representatives of the people regarding
poor hygiene/deficient service/negligence of
duties at various airports of the country
during the last three years and the current
year, if so, the details thereof, airport-wise;
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

84
(b) the mechanism put in place by
Government to monitor standards of
hygiene/services at airports and to resolve
such complaints;
(c) whether such deficiency in services
has been reported in the Airport Service
Quality (ASQ) survey and Customer
Satisfaction Index survey during said period,
if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the corrective steps taken by
Government in this regard?
Shelter homes to urban homeless
*253. PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA:
Will the Minister of HOUSING AND
URBAN AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) the reasons for delay and denial of
shelter homes to the urban homeless;
(b) the State-wise details of shelters for
the homeless functional in the country;
(c) the city-wise details of shelter homes
constructed by Government during last
three years;
(d) the initiatives taken by Government
to ensure access to basic services,
specifically for the urban homeless;
(e) whether there is a special provision
for special shelters for marginal categories
of homeless people like children, mentally
ill and drug-addicts; and
(f) if so, the State-wise details thereof?
Eradication of child labour
†*254. SHRIMATI KANTA
KARDAM: Will the Minister of
LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT be
pleased to state:
(a) whether the practice of child labour
still exists in the country despite stringent
laws and if so, the reasons therefor;
(b) the region-wise details of child
labourers reported in various sectors,
during the last three years;
(c) whether Government intends to
review the policy for protecting child rights
and to eradicate the problem of child labour
from the country; and
(d) whether Government has decided
to constitute a Committee for studying the
causes of increasing child labour and to give
suggestions for its  eradication, if so, the
details thereof?
PM's interaction with delegation of
European Parliamentarians
*255. SHRI BINOY VISWAM: Will
the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Prime
Minister had talked about the development
priorities and his vision of new Kashmir in
an interaction with a delegation of European
Parliamentarians who visited Kashmir
recently;
(b) if so, what are these development
priorities and his vision of new Kashmir;
(c) whether Government has any
proposal for a real political dialogue with
various political leaders in Kashmir in this
regard; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
NEW DELHI; DESH DEEPAK VERMA,
The 5th December, 2019 Secretary-General.
Agrahayana 14, 1941 (Saka)

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Civil Aviation : 251, 252,
Home Affairs : 246, 248, 255,
Housing and Urban Affairs : 244, 250, 253,
Labour and Employment : 242, 254,
Petroleum and Natural Gas : —
Social Justice and Empowerment : 243, 245, 247, 249,
Steel : 241.
MGIPMRND—3968RS—05-12-2019.
85