PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
SUPPLEMENTARY ERRATA 
 to the list of Questions for WRITTEN ANSWERS for 
      Wednesday, July 27, 2022/Sravana 5, 1944 (Saka) 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Q. No.  Corrections 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
1184 May be treated as cancelled.  
1255 May be treated as cancelled.  
• In the index, Question No. 1184 be deleted from the Ministry of Home
Affairs.
 In the index, Question No. 1255 may be deleted from the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment.
New Delhi,   
July 27, 2022. 
Copy to:- 
1. Ministry of Home Affairs
2. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
3. Translation Section, Rajya Sabha Sectt.
4. E.O.D., Rajya Sabha Sectt.
5. Table Office (2 spare copies)
6. Sansad TV

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
ERRATA 
 to the list of Questions for WRITTEN ANSWERS for 
      Wednesday, July 27, 2022/Sravana 5, 1944 (Saka) 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Q. No.  Corrections 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
1134 May be treated as cancelled. 
1138 May be treated as cancelled. 
1140 May be treated as cancelled. 
1145 May be treated as cancelled. 
1146 May be treated as cancelled. 
1161 May be treated as cancelled.  
1165 May be treated as cancelled. 
1166 May be treated as cancelled. 
1170 May be treated as cancelled. 
1173 May be treated as cancelled. 
1185 May be treated as cancelled. 
1186 May be treated as cancelled. 
1190 May be treated as cancelled. 
1191 May be treated as cancelled. 
1204 May be treated as cancelled. 
1206 May be treated as cancelled. 
1222 May be treated as cancelled. 
1233 May be treated as cancelled. 
1246 May be treated as cancelled. 
1249 May be treated as cancelled. 
1252 May be treated as cancelled. 
1258 May be treated as cancelled. 

1266 May be treated as cancelled. 
1279 May be treated as cancelled. 
1280 May be treated as cancelled. 
 In the index, Question Nos. 1134, 1138, 1140, 1145, 1146, 1161, 1165 and
1166 be deleted from the Ministry of Education.
 In the index, Question Nos. 1170, 1173, 1185, 1186, 1190 and 1191 be
deleted from the Ministry of Home Affairs.
 In the index, Question No s. 1204 and 1206 be deleted from the Ministry of
Minority Affairs.
 In the index, Question No. 1233 be deleted from the Ministry of Panchayati
Raj.
 In the index, Question No. 1222  be deleted from the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways.
 In the index, Question No s. 1246 and 1249 be deleted from the Ministry of
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.
 In the index, Question No s. 1252 and 1258 be deleted from the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment.
 In the index, Question No. 1266  be deleted from the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs.
 In the index, Question No s. 1279 and 1280  be deleted from the Ministry of
Women and Child Development.
New Delhi,   
July 26, 2022. 
Copy to:- 
1. Ministry of  Education.
2. Ministry of Home Affairs
3. Ministry of Minority Affairs
4. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
5. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
6. Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
7. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
8. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
9. Ministry of Women and Child Development.
10. Translation Section, Rajya Sabha Sectt.
11. E.O.D., Rajya Sabha Sectt.
12. Table Office (2 spare copies).
13. Questions Branch (25 spare copies).
14. Sansad TV (RS)
15. Distribution Branch

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
ERRATA 
to the list of Questions for  WRITTEN ANSWERS for 
Wednesday, July 27, 2022/ Sravana 5, 1944 (Saka) 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Q. No.  Correction 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
1239. In the introductory part, for ‘Minister of Rural Development’ read ‘Minister 
of Panchayati Raj’ 
 
 In the index, Question No. 1239 be read against Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
instead of Ministry of Rural Development. 
 
 
 
New Delhi. 
July 22, 2022.  
 
Copy to:- 
1. Ministry of Rural Development. 
2. Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
3. Translation Section, Rajya Sabha Sectt. 
4. E.O.D., Rajya Sabha Sectt. 
5. Printing Section (2 spare copies). 
6. Table Office (2 spare copies). 
7. Question Branch (25 spare copies). 
8. Sansad TV (RS). 
9. Distribution Branch. 
 

Rajya Sabha
List of Questions for WRITTEN ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Wednesday, July 27, 2022/ Sravana 5, 1944 (Saka)
(Ministries : Cooperation; Education; Home Affairs; Minority Affairs; Panchayati Raj;
Road Transport and Highways; Rural Development; Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship; Social Justice and Empowerment; Tribal Affairs; Women and
Child Development)
Total number of questions -- 160
Contribution of Co-operative Societies in rural economy
1121 # Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Co-operative sector is being used to strengthen the rural economy;
(b) if so, whether any financial assistance has been provided to Co-operative Societies in
the rural areas;
(c) if so, the total funds allotted to Co-operative Societies in the country during last two
years, the details thereof; and
(d) whether any policy has been made to provide employment in the rural areas through
cooperatives, the details thereof?
Digitalization of Co-operatives
1122 Shri Naresh Bansal:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) the number of cooperatives in the country which are yet to be digitized, State-wise and
sector-wise;
(b) by when Government plans to digitalize all the cooperatives of country including
Uttarakhand, details thereof;
(c) the amount of fund that has been allocated till date and that has been utilized for the
digitization of the cooperatives during the last five years, year-wise and sector-wise; and
(d) what changes the cooperatives has shown after digitalization, specially in Uttarakhand?
Capacity expansion of Co-operative Societies
1123 # Shri Narhari Amin:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that there are about 80,000 Cooperative Societies in Gujarat;
(b) if so, the details of the steps taken by Government for development and capacity
expansion of these societies; and
(c) whether financial assistance is being provided by Government for capacity expansion of
276

these societies after the formation of a separate Ministry, if so, the details thereof?
Expenditure on education
1124 Shri Jawhar Sircar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) what is the Central Government spend on the education sector as a whole as a
percentage of GDP;
(b) whether the Centre has increased its funding after announcing its National Education
Policy (NEP);
(c) what is the total expenditure by the States put together on education as percentage of
the GDP;
(d) what amount and what percentage of the total Central funding in education is allocated
to IITs, NITs, IIMs, Central Universities in the last three years; and
(e) what amount and what percentage of Central funding has gone to States and their
educational institutions in the last three years?
Covid and school dropouts
1125 Shri Jawhar Sircar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether World Bank’s Global Director for Education has stated that the COVID-19
pandemic has caused learning loss in India to increase from 54 per cent to 70 per cent;
(b) what is the annual dropout rates of secondary school students in the last two years;
(c) whether the data of the Unified District Information System for Education Plus (UDISE+)
is reliable; and
(d) whether this high dropout has impacted girls more and what Government is planning to
do in this regard?
Making future of youth through education
1126 # Shri Hardwar Dubey:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the efforts being made by the Ministry for developing the new future of youth through
intellectual capabilities, innovations and concrete policies;
(b) the efforts being made by the Ministry for making country particularly, Uttar Pradesh
self- reliant in the field of higher education in ensuing years; and
(c) the efforts being made by the Ministry to transform the scenario of the country from
brain drain to brain reservoir and make country a storehouse of knowledge?
Low levels of education in weaker sections
1127 # Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether the weaker sections are the most disadvantaged sections of the society with
extremely low levels of education;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the response of Government thereto;
(c) the details of the initiatives taken by Government for the upliftment of weaker sections
of the society along with the success achieved in this regard during last three years; and
(d) whether Government is adopting any special measures to prevent the exclusion of
SC/ST/other weaker sections from distance education/online classes, if so, the State-wise
277


details thereof?
Gross Enrolment Ratio
1128 Dr. Prashanta Nanda:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) what is the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) of SC, ST, OBC, and UR sections at school
level, undergraduate level and postgraduate level pre and post pandemic;
(b) the reasons behind the variations in the educational statistics of these communities; and
(c) whether the pandemic too impacted the different communities differentially, the reasons
therefor?
Approval of Institutions of Excellence by Empowered Expert Committee
1129 Dr. Prashanta Nanda:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Ministry has decided to confer institutions of excellence tag to 20 institutions;
(b) which are the institutions among these 20 institutions which have submitted readiness
report after three years of issuance of letter of intent to them;
(c) which are institutions whose readiness report have been approved by Empowered
Expert Committee (EEC); and
(d) which are the institutions whose readiness report has been rejected by EEC?
Progress of books published in Indian languages for engineering
1130 Shri Prakash Javadekar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) what is the progress of books to be published in Indian languages for engineering, the
details thereof; and
(b) how Government proposes to make more and more study material in Indian languages
to the students, who opt for it?
Educationally backward districts in Andhra Pradesh identified by UGC
1131 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that seven districts in Andhra Pradesh have been identified as
educationally backward by UGC;
(b) if so, the details of each of seven districts and criteria being followed for identification of
the same;
(c) the details of measures taken by UGC and the Ministry to improve educational
standards in the above-identified districts; and
(d) the details of improvements made since the implementation of various measures in the
above districts?
Setting up of KVs in Uttar Pradesh
1132 # Smt. Seema Dwivedi:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs), which have been set up by Government
across the country during last five years, the State-wise details thereof; and
278


(b) the total number of Kendriya Vidyalayas, which have been set up by Government in
Uttar Pradesh, the district-wise details thereof and the funds allocated in this regard?
Mission to draw foreign students for studying in India
1133 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is working on an ambitious mission to draw foreign students to
study in Indian institutions under ‘Study in India’ mission;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has targeted the countries for sending students to India for higher
studies; and
(d) how Government is planning to promote brand India worldwide?
Establishment of PM Shri schools 
*1134 Shri M. Shanmugam:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry is in the process of establishing PM Shri schools in order to
prepare students for future;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) at what class, screening will be done to select students for the scheme;
(d) whether such facility and funding would be extended to the State Governments so that
the States can also select students from the respective Government schools for intensive
teaching with boarding; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Schemes for gifted and talented children
1135 Shri Anil Desai:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government maintains any record of children/students who are considered to
be gifted and talented from the average children of their age;
(b) the efforts made by State/Central Government or institutions to recognise their talent, if
so, the details thereof, State-wise;
(c) whether Government is taking note of the information/programme telecast on electronic
media by any channel; and
(b) whether at present there is any programme or scheme for these students to recognise
or encourage their full potential and if so, the details thereof?
Proportion of GDP spent on education sector
1136 Shri Niranjan Bishi:
Dr. Prashanta Nanda:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) what proportion of the GDP will be spent on education sector this year;
(b) whether it is in line with the provisions of National Education Policy (NEP);
(c) if not, the reasons therefor; and
(d) by when Government is planning to bring this proportion to the level as prescribed in
NEP?
279


Vacancies in Central Government schools
1137 Shri Neeraj Shekhar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of number of sanctioned posts of teaching and non-teaching staffs in various
primary and secondary schools of Central Government;
(b) the details of vacancies of teaching and non-teaching staffs as on 30th June, 2022 in
various primary and secondary schools of Central Government; and
(c) the details of vacancies of teaching and non-teaching staffs in various schools,
advertised and filled up during 2020, 2021 and 2022, year-wise?
Making online learning accessible for the marginalised 
*1138 Shri N.R. Elango:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it has come to the notice of Government that online learning is a challenge for
the marginalised; and
(b) if so, the steps that have been taken/being taken by Government keeping in mind that it
is necessary to find ways to make it more accessible to those who need it the most?
Development of Kannada Language
1139 Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the steps being taken by Government for the development and advancement of Indian
languages, especially regional languages;
(b) the details of measures taken for the promotion of Indian languages across the country
and globally;
(c) the details of the schemes and projects undertaken by the Central Institute of Indian
Languages (CIIL) for all the languages, including those listed in the Eighth Schedule of the
Constitution; and
(d) whether Government would consider a proposal for creating a separate institution for
development and promotion of Kannada language and if so, the details thereof?
Completion of infrastructure in educational institutions 
*1140 Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has emphasised the need to complete infrastructure works under
various programmes in the States in schools and in colleges/universities, if so, the details
thereof;
(b) whether Government has held review meetings with States on the education sector as a
follow up and in consonance with that of National Education Policy (NEP) ; and
(c) if so, the details thereof?
Ranking of Universities
1141 Shri K.C. Venugopal:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that the Quacquarelli Symonds (QS) ranking of world
Universities for the year 2023 has been released;
280


(b) whether no Indian institution has been able to make a place amongst the global top 100;
(c) if so, the reasons therefor;
(d) whether amongst the global top 200, only three Indian institutions could find a place;
and
(e) whether the Indian higher education sector is struggling to provide adequate teaching
capacity and if so, the steps taken by Government to facilitate further expansion of
provision, both within universities and across the sector as a whole?
Multilingual and multicultural environment for children
1142 Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is planning to introduce children to a multilingual and multicultural
environment;
(b) if so, what initiative(s) are proposed to be taken by Government keeping in view the
fact that a new language not only broadens their horizons but also lends a renewed outlook
and mindset; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Violations of UGC norms in appointments
1143 Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether any appointment has been done in the Universities of Kerala violating the
University Grant Commission (UGC) norms;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether the UGC grants to such Universities would be suspended?
Construction of buildings for KVs in Andhra Pradesh
1144 Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that there are six Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs) running from temporary
buildings in Andhra Pradesh;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the efforts being made by the Ministry to construct new buildings for above KVs?
PhD students enrolled in Central Universities 
*1145 Shri Sandosh Kumar P:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of PhD students enrolled in the Central Universities in the country since
2019, university-wise and year-wise;
(b) the number of students eligible for fellowships; and
(c) the total fund spent for PhD fellowship in Central Universities since 2019?
Implementation status of NEP
*1146 Shri Sandosh Kumar P:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the latest status of the implementation of National Education Policy (NEP) in the
281


country;
(b) whether the policy is mandatory for the State Governments to adhere to; and
(c) whether Government has initiated any steps to revise curriculum and syllabus on the
basis of the recommendations of NEP?
Review/assessment regarding education of children with disabilities
1147 Shri S. Selvaganabathy:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has conducted any review/assessment regarding education of
children with disabilities;
(b) if so, the percentage of such children who are studying at present, State-wise/UT-wise;
and
(c) the steps being taken by Government to provide maximum opportunity for education to
the children with disabilities?
Primary education in rural areas
1148 Shri S. Selvaganabathy:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposes to implement the principle of equity in primary education
in rural areas;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government proposes to prepare an action plan to strengthen the
infrastructure and quality of primary education in rural areas;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Promotion of technical education
1149 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar:
Lt.Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.):
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether special emphasis is given by Government on promotion of technical education
across the country for the purpose of ‘Technology Development Mission’;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Implementation of Technology Development Mission
1150 Smt. Vandana Chavan:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of works done under the Technology Development Mission scheme, State-
wise for the last five years;
(b) the details of the funds allocated, released and spent for Technology Development
Mission for last five years, State wise;
(c) whether there has been any delay in release of the allocated funds, if so, the reasons
therefor;
(d) the details of implementation of the Technology Development Mission in the State of
Maharashtra; and
(e) whether Government proposes to increase the allocation for the State of Maharashtra
282


under Technology Development Mission and if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons
therefor?
Online education to students of lower strata
1151 Dr. C.M. Ramesh:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is contemplating online education to students of lower strata of the
society for their proper development, if so, the details thereof; and
(b) whether proper infrastructure is in place and how to ensure that students are actually
going to be benefitted by such education, the details thereof?
Funds allocation for education by UGC for backward districts
1152 Dr. C.M. Ramesh:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether University Grants Commission (UGC) has identified educationally backward
districts in different States of the country, the details thereof, State-wise; and
(b) the steps taken by Government to bring these educationally backward districts on par
with educationally advanced districts and the funds allocated for the purpose, the details
thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Digital literacy
1153 Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has observed and reported the status of digital literacy amongst
students in primary and secondary educational institutions after easing of COVID-19
related lockdowns in the North-Eastern region;
(b) if so, the details thereof State-wise and if not, the reasons therefor; and
(c) whether Government was able to provide support and assistance to schools in
transitioning to the digital medium of education effectively, if so, the details thereof?
PM-POSHAN scheme
1154 # Shri Rajmani Patel:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of kitchens engaged in cooking food under the Pradhan Mantri Poshan
Shakti Nirman (PM-POSHAN) scheme;
(b) the amount of honorarium remitted to these kitchens every month;
(c) whether the honorarium to be paid to these kitchens would be increased by Government
or whether there is any provision to do the same; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Establishment of KVs in Bihar
1155 # Shri Ram Nath Thakur:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the location-wise details of the newly established/proposed to be established Kendriya
Vidyalayas (KVs) in the country during the last five years;
(b) the locations in Bihar at which Government proposes to establish Kendriya Vidyalayas;
283


and
(c) whether Government would consider opening a Kendriya Vidyalaya at Samastipur in
Bihar, keeping in view the interest of the students?
New India Literacy Programme
1156 Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has announced the New India Literacy Programme and if so, the
details thereof alongwith the aims and objective thereof;
(b) the steps taken for effective implementation of the programme in all the States;
(c) whether extensive publicity of Adult Literacy Programme has been carried out across all
rural areas and if so, the details thereof;
(d) the details of the funds allocated/utilized for the said scheme during the last three years
and the current year, year-wise and State-wise; and
(e) the steps being taken to encourage adults to join the literacy campaign?
Dropout rate amongst students at the Secondary level in J&K
1157 Shri Syed Nasir Hussain:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Jammu and Kashmir had a nearly 17 per cent dropout rate amongst students
at the secondary level;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the reasons therefor;
(c) whether any step has been taken by Government to ensure accessibility to digital
education in the region during the pandemic;
(d) if so, the details thereof;
(e) if not, the reasons therefor; and
(f) whether the dropout rates of girl students in secondary and elementary education levels
in the region have risen to 16.6 per cent and 3.7 per cent in 2019-20, from 1.6 per cent and
2.5 per cent respectively in 2017-19?
English medium only in Andhra Pradesh
1158 Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken note of the fact that Government of Andhra Pradesh is
implementing only English medium instruction in Primary and High school in the State;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has given any instruction to the State Government in this regard
pointing out certain features contained in the National Education Policy (NEP);
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Digital education tools
1159 Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) what is the level of penetration of digital tools like DIKSHA, SWAYAM, e-PATHSHALA,
NROER, etc. of the Ministry, particularly in rural areas;
(b) to what extent learning programmes started offline on DD channels, radio, community
284


radio, CBSE podcasts, toll free numbers, etc., helps in providing education to poor students
in rural areas;
(c) whether any assessment/survey has been made to find out the reach of above tools
during pandemic, if so, the details thereof, State-wise and district-wise; and
(d) whether any effort has been made to ensure that the disabled community can access
such platforms?
Conservation of Indian languages
1160 Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the number of endangered languages in the country;
(b) what steps are being undertaken by Government for protection and preservation of
endangered Indian languages;
(c) how many languages are currently covered under 'Scheme for Protection and
Preservation of Endangered Languages (SPPEL) of India;
(d) the details of languages covered under any such schemes from the State of Andhra
Pradesh; and
(e)the details of funds allocated and utilised in this regard under various different schemes
in the last five years?
Detailed list of all ed-tech companies and their activities 
*1161 Smt. Shanta Chhetri:
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the list of all ed-tech companies that are currently receiving public funds from the
Ministry through any financial Memorandum of Undertaking (MoU);
(b) the details of these engagements;
(c) the details of developed/implemented data protection rules to safeguard the children in
schools across the country;
(d) whether steps have been taken by Government to ensure compliance with the data
protection regulations by companies producing proprietary software; and
(e) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Separate toilets for girls and boys
1162 Smt. Phulo Devi Netam:
Shri Muzibulla Khan:
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details regarding the percentage of schools with separate toilets for girls and boys
during the last five years, year-wise;
(b) whether it is a fact that Government recently claimed that 97 per cent Government
schools have separate toilets for girls;
(c) if so, the details thereof;
(d) whether it is a fact that Government claimed that 100 per cent Government schools had
separate toilets for boys and girls in 2015;
(e) if so, whether the present claim of Government is false; and
(f) if so, the reasons for difference in the data?
285


Admission under EWS category
1163 Smt. Phulo Devi Netam:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether in the last two years, around 18,000 children under the Economically Weaker
Section (EWS) category have not been provided admission in private schools in Delhi;
(b) if so, the reasons therefor; and
(c) the details of children under the EWS category studying in private schools across the
country, State-wise?
Opening of Kendriya Vidyalaya in Nawada, Bihar
1164 # Shri Vivek Thakur:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether approval was given to open a Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) in Nawada district of
Bihar;
(b) if so, the details thereof ; and
(c) the steps being taken by Government to open a Kendriya Vidyalaya in the above said
district of Bihar?
Aims and objectives of establishing National Testing Agency (NTA) 
*1165 Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the aims and objectives of establishing National Testing Agency (NTA) and the list of
qualifying exams conducted by NTA using computer-based system since its inception to till
date;
(b) whether NTA has established test practice centres in educational institutions across the
country to serve the requirement of rural students;
(c) if so, the details thereof;
(d) whether NTA has any plans to introduce 'mobile app' and if so, details thereof along with
the other steps taken by NTA to conduct the examinations in a transparent and efficient
manner; and
(e) fee structure fixed by Government for conducting the qualifying exams by NTA
nationwide?
Providing free books and uniforms to students 
*1166 Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that some State Governments are providing free books
and uniforms to the school students in the country and if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Central Government has considered providing free books and uniforms to
students in schools run by institutions under its purview; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
National Means cum Merit Scholarship Scheme (NMMSS)
1167 Shri Jose K. Mani:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has the data regarding the total number of scholarships granted
286


under the National Means cum Merit Scholarship Scheme (NMMSS) over the last five
years;
(b) if so, the State-wise details thereof;
(c) whether Government has any plan to allow another chance to apply for NMMSS for
those students who were unable to apply for the NMMSS in the year 2018-19 and 2019-20
as many of them are unaware of the procedures to submit applications in the National
Scholarship Portal; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Amendment in RTE Act 2009
1168 Dr. Fauzia Khan:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether children’s participation in pre-school and early primary grades is unstable which
doesn’t necessarily follow the linear age-based trajectory prescribed by the RTE Act, 2009
and National Early Childhood Care and Education Policy, 2013 and how does NEP 2020
plan to solve this problem;
(b) whether 80 per cent of human intellectual development takes place at this age;
(c) how Government is planning to ensure the required expertise in educators at pre-
primary level; and
(d) whether RTE Act, 2009 can be amended to include pre-primary education under ambit
of school education and make education from 3-6 years free and compulsory?
Akhil Bharatiya Shiksha Samagam at Varanasi
1169 # Shri Brijlal:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has recently organized a three-day Akhil Bharatiya Shiksha
Samagam at Kashi (Varanasi), if so, the details thereof;
(b) the major issues related to education which were disused in this event; and
(c) whether Government has issued any Varanasi Manifesto as the outcome of this event, if
so, the salient features of this manifesto?
Cases against journalists 
*1170 Dr. Santanu Sen:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that there has been an increase in the number of cases
registered by various State Governments against journalists critical of Government's
performance;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the details of the number of cases registered against journalists in the last five years,
year-wise and State-wise;
(d) whether Government is aware that such cases and arrests of journalists under
draconian laws like UAPA, NSA etc. while performing their basic journalistic work dents the
country's image and puts the country’s press freedom in a bad light; and
(e) if so, corrective measures being taken by Government?
287


Delimitation of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir
1171 Shri John Brittas:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is widespread resentment regarding the report of the delimitation of
assembly constituencies in Jammu & Kashmir;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the criteria applied for the delimitation exercise; and
(d) the number of seats present and proposed in Jammu and Kashmir regions respectively?
Fraudulent sale and purchase of enemy properties
1172 # Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether any action has been taken against the persons who are involved in fraudulent
sale and purchase of enemy properties;
(b) if so, the number of persons against whom action has been taken during the last two
years, the details thereof; and
(c) the number of properties which have been freed from possession in the State of Uttar
Pradesh and the number of persons against whom action has been taken, the details
thereof?
Increasing atrocities on Dalits 
*1173 Shri M. Shanmugam:
Shri Vaiko:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of incidents of atrocities and attacks on Dalits in the country, in the last four
years;
(b) how many FIR cases were filed and ended in conviction during the corresponding
period, year-wise;
(c) whether there is any mechanism to monitor these type of incidents and its logical
conclusion;
(d) whether recently in Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, Dalit
youths were harassed and atrocities were committed after they raised objection for ill-
treating them; and
(e) if so, the details thereof and the action taken thereon?
Modernization of police
1174 Shri Raghav Chadha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the present status of Government’s efforts towards police force modernisation as
recommended by many Commissions and the Supreme Court;
(b) the steps being taken by Government to equip the police force with up-to-date digital
and investigative expertise;
(c) whether the present Police Training Colleges are now equipped to train cadets with
advanced techniques of investigation of economic and cyber crimes; and
(d) the States/UTs which have not complied with the guidelines laid down by UPSC and
Supreme Court Judgement of Prakash Singh v. Union of India related to appointment of
police personnel?
288


Confiscation of drugs
1175 Shri Raghav Chadha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the quantity of drugs seized as well as destroyed by State police for different kinds of
drugs, State-wise, month-wise details thereof;
(b) the total quantity of drugs stored in different State police godowns State-wise/drug-
wise details thereof;
(c) number of incidents of pilferage, theft, and recirculation of drugs stored in State police
godowns during last five years;
(d) whether any action has been taken on such reports, if so, details thereof; and
(e) quantity of drugs with medicinal value seized by State police and sent to pharmaceutical
companies manufacturing alkaloids or other substances since 2019 along with details of
companies that received such drugs, State-wise/month-wise?
Death of pilgrims during Amarnath Yatra
1176 Shri Neeraj Shekhar:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of pilgrims who lost their lives due to flashflood during sacred Amarnath
yatra in July 2022;
(b) whether a number of pilgrims are reported to be missing;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the details of measures taken to rescue and provide relief to pilgrims of Amarnath
yatra?
IPS Cadre in Odisha
1177 Dr. Amar Patnaik:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is considering allocating more number of IPS probationers to the
State of Odisha in the next 7 to 8 years than the allocation made in previous years,
considering the severe shortage of IPS officers in Odisha Cadre under the promotion quota
and direct recruitment quota;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Modernisation of Police Forces (MPF) scheme in Odisha
1178 Dr. Amar Patnaik:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Odisha is getting less allocation under the Modernisation of Police Forces
(MPF) scheme as compared to other developed States, if so, the details thereof; and
(b) whether Government is considering making special allocation under the MPF scheme
for Odisha in view of the substantial expansion of the State Police due to rapid urbanisation
and industrialisation in the State, if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Proposed changes in three-tier Panchayati Raj system
1179 Shri Jose K. Mani:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
289


(a) whether Government is in receipt of any study report warranting the changes in
Panchayati Raj system, if so, the details of the study report;
(b) whether Government has any plan to bring changes in the present three-tier Panchayati
Raj system, if so, the reasons therefor; and
(c) whether Government has taken any step to have grassroot level planning involving
Panchayats, if so, the details of the the action taken in this regard?
Strengthening of NCB
1180 # Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the efforts made by Government to strengthen the Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB);
(b) whether any efforts have been made by Government to improve the technical and
monitoring capability of NCB personnel; and
(c) if so, the details thereof?
Cyber crimes in the country
1181 Shri Abdul Wahab:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that there have been increase in the cyber crimes in the country in
the recent past;
(b) the details of cases reported related to Hacking, Denial of Service (DoS), Virus
dissemination, credit card fraud, phishing, cyber stalking in the last five years, year-wise;
and
(c) what measures have been taken by Government to prevent cyber crime/attacks in the
country?
Arrest of journalists in Jammu and Kashmir
1182 Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that since the revocation of Articles 370 and 35-A, Jammu and
Kashmir has seen an increase in detention of journalists and local media organizations and
an increase in the number of internet shutdowns by authorities in the region;
(b) whether Government maintains any data regarding the same; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Reservation in CPMFs
1183 Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether women in the Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs) are not even 5-6 per cent
of total of each force;
(b) whether Ministry has decided to reserve 33 per cent posts at Constable level for
women;
(c) if so, efforts being made and by when the target of 33 per cent filling up of posts with
women is going to be achieved in CPMFs;
(d) whether Government has decided to provide 10 per cent reservation for Agniveers in
CPMFs; and
(e) if so, how can this be provided in view of 50 per cent ceiling kept by the Supreme
290


Court?
Deaths due to lightning 
*1184 # Shri Sanjay Singh:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it a fact that 96 per cent of the deaths due to lightning occur in rural areas and
out of these 77 per cent are farmers;
(b) if so, the reasons therefor, the preventive and rescue measures being taken by
Government in this regard;
(c) whether financial assistance in the form of a certain amount is provided by Government
to the family of the deceased on compassionate grounds; and
(d) if so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor?
Terrorist attacks in the country 
*
1185 Dr. V. Sivadasan:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of terrorist attacks in the country in the last five years, State-wise details
thereof; and
(b) the number of civilians and security personnel who have lost their lives in such terrorist
attacks, year-wise details thereof?
Transportation in Lakshadweep
*1186 Dr. V. Sivadasan:
Will the Minister of Ho me Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken cognizance of the extreme hardships faced by the
people of Lakshadweep in terms of lack of transport facilities between the islands and from
the islands to the mainland;
(b) the number of ships which are owned by Department of Port, Shipping and waterways
and private companies, but are not conducting regular services now, details thereof;
(c) the last date by when each ship has conducted service, the details thereof; and
(d) number of commuters who have travelled to and fro from the island in the last five
years, details thereof, year-wise?
Progress report of the SVAMITVA Scheme
1187 Dr. Fauzia Khan:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) whether the SVAMITVA Yojana was started in the country on 24.04.2021 to provide
drone surveyed property ownership documents of the land to all the houses in the villages;
(b) whether this work has not been completed even after one year;
(c) whether the progress of implementation of this work is very slow in all the districts of
Maharashtra;
(d) if so, the reasons for it and details thereof; and
(e) by when the work would be completed and reasons for the delay in the completion of
the work if any?
291


Reservation for Agniveers in CAPFs
1188 # Shri Sushil Kumar Modi:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the percentage of reservation decided to be earmarked by Government for Agniveers
to be appointed in the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs), CAPFs-wise;
(b) the minimum height criteria for the recruitment in central CAPF and recruitment of
Agniveers respectively;
(c) whether Government proposes to give some relaxation in the minimum height criteria to
Agniveers during recruitment in CAPFs; and
(d) whether Government proposes to relax the provisions of reservation in the recruitment
of Agniveers in CAPFs?
Bringing transparency in NDMC Navyug schools
1189 Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the teachers and other staff members working in New Delhi
Municipal Council (NDMC) Navyug Schools are not getting GPF statement, pay slip, etc.
and there is no transparency;
(b) if so, whether there is a proposal to bring Public Financial Management System (PFMS)
for the teachers and other staff members working in NDMC Navyug schools for efficiency,
effectiveness, transparency and accountability in Government system like Central
Government departments; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Hiring of retired policemen by Delhi Police 
*1190 Shri A. A. Rahim:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Delhi Police has a policy of hiring retired policemen as contract employees;
(b) if so, the rules and process by which such persons are hired, details thereof;
(c) their role within the police force; and
(d) the number of such retired persons hired as contract employees, the details thereof?
Rise in trafficking of new synthetic drugs 
*1191 Shri A. A. Rahim:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry has taken stock of the rise in trafficking of new synthetic drugs in
the country, if so, details thereof;
(b) whether the Ministry has data on the sale and usage of these drugs if so, details
thereof; and
(c) whether the Ministry has taken measures to combat usage, especially by the youth, of
these new harmful addictive substances, if so, details thereof?
Special remission to prisoners
1192 Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government has decided to grant special remission to prisoners
292


as part of celebrations of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government is also arranging counseling session for prisoners and their kins to
rehabilitate in society; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Effect of online gaming on children and youth
1193 # Shri Rajendra Gehlot:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is cognizant of the fact that gambling and criminal tendencies are
increasing among the children and youth of the country due to online games and as a result
thereof they are committing serious crimes like murder;
(b) if so, whether Government proposes to enact any legislation to prohibit online games in
the country, if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether any steps are also going to be taken by Government to stop advertisements
promoting online games on TV and social media, if so, the details thereof?
Dispute Resolution Committee between Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
1194 Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the Terms of Reference of the Dispute Resolution Committee set up by the Ministry to
resolve disputes and pending matters between Andhra Pradesh and Telangana;
(b) the dates of meetings held so far, physical and virtual mode-wise;
(c) progress made with regard to resolve pending issues and stand taken by the two
States with regard to each of the disputed issues;
(d) Ministry's plan to resolve each of the pending issues and time-frame in which pending
issues will be resolved; and
(e) alternate mechanisms, if any suggested in case of non-agreement over some issues by
the two States?
Assembly constituencies in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
1195 Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) provision of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 with regard to increase in the
number of assembly constituencies of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, the details thereof;
(b) whether action has been initiated by Government to increase the number of assembly
constituencies in Andhra Pradesh to 225 and in Telangana to 153;
(c) if so, details of actions taken and the time-frame for implementation;
(d) if not, reasons therefor; and
(e) whether there is any justification to link routine delimitation exercise planned after 2026
in other States with Andhra Pradesh and Telangana as Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act
has special provisions for it in Section 26?
Statehood to Jammu and Kashmir
1196 Shri Elamaram Kareem:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Minister of Home Affairs had stated in Parliament that the
293


Statehood to the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir would be restored, if so, by when,
and if not, the reasons therefor;
(b) whether the Delimitation Commission’s recommendations in respect of Union Territory
has been notified, if not, by when the same will be notified; and
(c) by when the Assembly elections in J&K will be conducted?
Deaths due to natural calamities
1197 Shri Sanjay Raut:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that there has been an increase in number of deaths due to snowfall,
lightning and avalanches in the country during the last three years;
(b) if so, the details thereof during the last three years;
(c) whether Government is working on any technology for accurate avalanche predictions
and to safeguard the lives; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Deaths during Amarnath Yatra
1198 Shri Sanjay Raut:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) how many persons died and missing during the pilgrimage of Amarnath yatra since last
three years;
(b) the details thereof and the reasons therefor; and
(c) the details of steps taken or proposed to be taken by Government to protect the
precious lives of pilgrims in future?
Safety and security of Government employees in J&K and Ladakh
1199 Shri Vivek K. Tankha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of employees, including Kashmiri Pandits, of the State and the Central
Governments in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh who lost their lives in terrorism-
related incidents since the abrogation of Article 370 on 5th August, 2019, the details
thereof;
(b) whether Government is considering transfer of Kashmiri Pandit employees to safe
havens outside Kashmir valley; and
(c) if so, what measures have been taken so far?
Complaints against Delhi Police
1200 Shri Vivek K. Tankha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Commissioner of Police, Delhi has received complaints against Delhi Police
for misbehaviour and abuse of power by Mahila Congress members since January, 2022;
(b) if so, what actions have been taken in pursuance of the complaints, if not, the reasons
therefor; and
(c) the total number of applications received for peaceful protest by Delhi Police during last
five years and subsequently how many were approved, year-wise details thereof?
294


Rohingya immigrants
1201 Dr. Anil Agrawal:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that a large number of illegal Rohingya immigrants are residing in
various States in the country which has harmful effect on country’s national security and
communal harmony;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has made any assessment in this regard; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and the action taken by Government to deport them to their
country?
Integrated Check Posts at international land borders
1202 # Shri Rakesh Sinha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) have been set up by Government on the
international land borders of the country in order to facilitate movement of passengers and
goods;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the outcomes thereof?
Deaths of Kashmiri Pandits
1203 Shri Javed Ali Khan:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of Kashmiri Pandits killed by militants in Jammu & Kashmir during years
2020, 2021 and 2022 till date, year-wise and district-wise;
(b) the number of Kashmiri Pandits who were residing in Kashmir valley as on year 2019,
district-wise; and
(c) the details of Kashmiri Pandits who have left Kashmir valley during year 2022, till date
and the number of Kashmiri Pandits who are still residing in valley, district-wise?
Low fund allocation for Maulana Azad National Fellowship 
*1204 Dr. Santanu Sen:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) total budgetary allocation and funds utilized under Maulana Azad National Fellowship
scheme since 2017 year-wise, State-wise details thereof;
(b) whether it is a fact that fund allocation for Maulana Azad National Fellowship is reduced
by more than 90 per cent in the 2022-23 budget compared to 2021-22, if so, the reasons
therefor;
(c) whether Government is taking steps and initiatives to increase minority community
participation in administration and governance, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) if not, the reasons therefor?
Increase in attack against minority communities
1205 Shri Abdul Wahab:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs  be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the attack against the minority communities have increased in
295


the recent past;
(b) if so, what measures have been taken by Government to ensure the protection of
minority communities;
(c) whether Government has any data on the attack against institutions that belong to
minority communities; and
(d) the details thereof?
PMJVK in Tamil Nadu 
*1206 Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of community infrastructure development projects developed under the
Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK) scheme in the State of Tamil Nadu since
the year 2019 and details thereof, year-wise;
(b) whether Central Government has done a study about the improvement in the socio-
economic condition of the minority communities in the country due to PMJVK scheme;
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; and
(d) the amount of funds allocated, disbursed, and utilized for Minority Concentration Areas
(MCAs) in Tamil Nadu under the scheme since 2019, year-wise?
Performance of States under major programmes of the Ministry
1207 Dr. Sasmit Patra:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the performance of States with reference to the work done in the major
programmes of the Ministry;
(b) the factors attributable for the satisfactory performance of some States, if any;
(c) the reasons for the unsatisfactory performance of some States, if any; and
(d) the steps being undertaken to improve the performance of the States with reference to
these major programmes of the Ministry?
Implementation of the PESA
1208 Shri Derek O' Brien:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) how many States have implemented the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas)
Act (PESA) so far, the details thereof;
(b) whether any State is facing problem in the implementation of the Act;
(c) whether the Ministry has taken cognizance of the same, the details thereof; and
(d) the measures undertaken to ensure that the provisions of the Act are adopted by the
States to check the exploitation of the tribals, the details thereof?
Access to e-Gram Swaraj portal
1209 Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry has been able to track the status of access to the e-Gram Swaraj
Portal to village panchayats, if so, details thereof;
(b) the total number of villages having completed, partial and no access to the portal,
specifically in the State of Meghalaya;
(c) the details of steps taken by Government to enhance access to the portal for
296


panchayats;
(d) the total number of panchayats who have uploaded their plans on the portal in the last
year; and
(e) the details of Government’s efforts to promote good governance of panchayats?
Schemes of higher education conforming to global standards
1210 Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the existing policies and schemes in the higher education sector
is of global standards and it matches the same;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government conducted any appraisal/study in this regard and found any lacuna
leading to the conclusion that the policies/schemes in the higher education sector is not
equivalent to the global standards for higher education;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Disabled Friendly Buses
1211 Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that even after the amendment in the Central Motor Vehicles Rules,
1989, most of the buses do not have any facility for boarding and deboarding of persons
with disabilities;
(b) if so, the details of the initiatives taken by Government in this regard;
(c) whether Government has set up any monitoring authority to ensure that the buses are
disabled friendly;
(d) if so, the details thereof;
(e) whether Government has fixed any time limit for making all the buses disabled friendly
during boarding and deboarding; and
(f) the present State-wise details of disabled friendly buses?
Provision of road safety
1212 # Shri Hardwar Dubey:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is any other provision to award severe punishment by Government to
those who drink and drive and perform stunts on the road apart from the punishment
prescribed in the law;
(b) the initiatives taken by Government to bring road safety awareness among the youth
and whether these initiatives are successful; and
(c) the number of new highways built in Uttar Pradesh during last five years?
Construction of National Highway No. 37
1213 Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether any progress has been made by Government to speed up the construction of
National Highway No. 37 which is severely non operational most of the part;
(b) whether there is any specific reason, for the slow progress of construction of four lane;
297


and
(c) whether Government has fixed a time period to complete the construction?
Replacement of old petrol vehicles with electric vehicles
1214 Shri Anil Desai:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether following direction of National Green Tribunal, Government has made all the 15
years old vehicles as invalid in the National Capital;
(b) if so, whether Government has plans to provide electric vehicles in exchange of old
vehicles;
(c) in order to boost the eco friendly environment in the country, whether there is a policy of
easy terms of subsidy / loan and the final cost of such vehicles, the details thereof; and
(d) what are the safety measures against fire etc.?
Road Accidents
1215 Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of road accidents along with the resultant deaths and injuries in the
country during each of the last three years and the current year, State-wise including
Karnataka;
(b) whether Government has achieved its target of fifty percent reduction in road accidents
in the country during the said period;
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the steps being taken by Government in this regard;
and
(d) the funds allocated for road safety for the State of Karnataka during the said period?
Road accidents on NH in Tamil Nadu
1216 Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Central Government has collected data on total number of accidents and
deaths that had happened in the last five years on the National Highways in Tamil Nadu;
(b) if so, the district-wise details thereof;
(c) whether Central Government has taken any comprehensive measures and steps to
prevent, reduce and stop these accidents and deaths; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Construction of NH in Tamil Nadu
1217 Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Central Government has data with regard to the total investments made for the
construction of all the National Highways in the State of Tamil Nadu, especially the toll
roads;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the details as to how many more vehicles should pass the gate to realise the project
cost so that the road gets converted into non-toll road; and
(d) the details thereof?
298


Construction of highways
1218 Shri Parimal Nathwani:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether the pandemic delayed and slowed down the speed of construction of
highways;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the details of the target dates of highways construction, percentage achievements and
yearly average kilometer construction against the targets during last five years; and
(d) the details of measures taken by Government to make up the loss and regain the lost
speed in highways construction?
Monetization of Highway Stretches
1219 Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has decided to monetize highway stretches in order to raise ₹
20,000 crore;
(b) if so, complete details thereof; and
(c) the details of highway stretches in the State of Gujarat which will be monetized through
Toll-Operate-Transfer (TOT) modes?
Monthly Passes for Toll Plazas at National Highways
1220 # Shri Samir Oraon:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether it has been decided to issue monthly passes for toll plazas on National
Highways;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether monthly passes would be issued to the people residing in the villages around
toll plazas on National Highways; and
(d) if so, the distance from the toll plazas upto which the villages would be covered under
the monthly pass scheme?
Six laning of Sambalpur-Ranchi Expressway
1221 # Shri Samir Oraon:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is proposed to convert the Sambalpur-Ranchi Expressway from four lane to
six lane;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the amount to be spent on the said project;
(d) whether any time limit has been set for completion of this project; and
(e) if so, the details thereof?
Implementation of NCAP
*1222 Shri R. Girirajan:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Governm ent has plans to implement New Car Assess ment Programmes  
(NCAP) for new cars based on Global NCAP programme and the details thereof; and
299


(b) if not, the reasons therefor?
Time-bound filing of responses by Government/NHAI in High Courts
1223 Dr. Ashok Bajpai:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) number of cases pending in various High Courts against Government/NHAI with their
particulars and the details of the cases wherein no response could be filed so far by
Government/NHAI;
(b) details of the initiatives taken,if any,for time-bound filing of responses on behalf of
Government/NHAI in the matters pending before the High Courts;
(c) whether any responsibility has been fixed on the officers of Government/NHAI to file
responses in the pending cases before the High Courts within the fixed timeline; and
(d) if so, details of such instructions/Office Memorandums and the method of monitoring
filing of responses in the High Courts?
Compensation for land acquisition through arbitration
1224 Dr. Ashok Bajpai:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that the land owners are not satisfied with the procedure
as laid down in the National Highways Act, 1956 for determination of compensation;
(b) whether Government has appointed Government officers as Arbitrators for the
determination of compensation for acquired lands;
(c) whether Government has any proposal to address the issue of delay in making decision
of arbitration proceedings regarding compensation of land acquisition and also the absence
of regular first appeal against the award of the Arbitrators; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Status of NH and Tunnel between Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh
1225 # Ms. Indu Bala Goswami:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the funds sanctioned for four laning work of Uttarakhand's capital Dehradun (Ballupur)
to Paonta Sahib of district Sirmaur (Himachal Pradesh) road;
(b) the estimated funds to be spent on land acquisition;
(c) whether there is any proposal to build a tunnel at Nahan located on Shimla-Dehradun
road, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) by when the said project would be started?
Central financial assistance to Tamil Nadu
1226 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether the NHAI, under Ministry has received any proposal from the State of Tamil
Nadu seeking central financial assistance to convert 2 lane roads to 4 lane roads;
(b) if so, how many kilometers of roads have been sanctioned to convert into 4 ways; and
(c) what is the quantum of funds allocated for those projects and by when the funds will be
released to the State of Tamil Nadu?
300


National Highway 16 in Andhra Pradesh
1227 Shri Masthan Rao Beeda:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry has received a letter highlighting the need for 6-laning of
Anakapalle-Annavaram-Diwancheruvu sections of NH-16 in Andhra Pradesh; and
(b) whether Government is considering this crucial need for extension of NH-16 from 4
lanes to 6 lanes, if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor?
Details of NSAP and IGNOAPS
1228 Shri P. Wilson:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) State-wise breakup of beneficiaries and funds allocated for National Social Assistance
Programme (NSAP);
(b) whether the Ministry is contemplating an increase in its contribution i.e. ₹ 200 to ₹ 500
under Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS); and
(c) whether the Ministry will provide the reasons for using BPL list of census data of 2002
for identifying new beneficiaries for the NSAP and whether it is contemplating using the
census data of 2011 or 2021?
Allocation of funds under MGNREGS
1229 Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a)allocation of funds to MGNREGS during the year 2021-22,2020-21 and 2019-20, 2018-
19, State-wise;
(b) whether it is a fact that MGNREGS allocation for the year 2021-22, 2020-21 has been
reduced; and
(c) if so, reasons therefor and also the negative balances of the funds from 2018 to till
date, State-wise?
Pending funds under MGNREGS
1230 Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the States under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS) to which Central Government owes funds; and
(b) the State-wise data on work demanded and availed by households in the years 2019-
20, 2020-2021 and 2021-2022?
MGNREGA App
1231 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the effects MGNREGA apps will have on workers and their productivity;
(b) what steps have been taken to provide a stable network in Rural India;
(c) whether it is mandatory for MGNREGA workers to have smartphones which secludes a
huge section of the society; and
(d) whether steps have been taken to fix the improper working of the application as there is
a lack of physical records?
301


Development of rural roads
1232 Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposes to develop rural roads to boost rural economy;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has prepared any plan for the same and taken any decision on
funding pattern; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Continuation of RGSA 
*1233 Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has approved the proposal to continue the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Abhiyan (RGSA), a scheme for improving the governance capabilities of Panchayati Raj
institutions, till 2025-26 to help more than 2.78 lakh rural local bodies to develop
governance capabilities to deliver on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through
inclusive local governance with a focus on optimum utilisation of available resources; and
(b) if so, the details thereof?
Performance of States relating to the major programmes
1234 Dr. Sasmit Patra:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the performance of States with reference to the work done in the major
programmes of the Ministry;
(b) the factors attributable for the satisfactory performance of some States, if any;
(c) the reasons for the unsatisfactory performance of some States, if any; and
(d) the steps being undertaken to improve the performance of the States with reference to
these major programmes of the Ministry?
Work demanded by household under MGNREGS
1235 Shri K.C. Venugopal:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether the number of households demanding work under the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) has shot up to 3.07 crore, the
highest since inception of the scheme in May, 2022;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether work demanded by households in May, 2022 was 43 percent higher than the
five-year average during the pre-pandemic years (2015-2019);
(d) if so, the reasons therefor; and
(e) the steps taken by Government to create employment in rural areas in the last three
years?
302


Progress under ULPIN Scheme
1236 Shri Rajmani Patel:
Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah:
Smt. Phulo Devi Netam:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the progress made under the Unique Land Parcel Identification Number
(ULPIN) scheme since inception in 2021;
(b) the number of States that have been covered under the scheme since 2021;
(c) the State-wise data regarding the extent of land holdings identified and linked under the
scheme from 2021 onwards; and
(d) tentative deadline for the completion of the scheme across the country?
Pending dues under MNREGA
1237 Shri Binoy Viswam:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken note of the inordinate delay in payment of wages under
MNREGA, if so, reasons for the same;
(b) the total number of beneficiaries whose dues are still pending for more than three
months, details thereof, State-wise;
(c) the total pending dues under MNREGA to be given by Central Government to the State
Governments details thereof, State-wise; and
(d) the total number of supervisors under MNREGA that have pending dues for more than
three months, details thereof, State-wise?
Change of mode of attendance of MGNREGA workers
1238 Shri Binoy Viswam:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) on what basis the Ministry has decided to discontinue manual attendance for
MGNREGA work sites with more than 20 workers;
(b) whether Ministry has accounted for the lack of technological and social access amongst
beneficiaries of the scheme;
(c) whether the Ministry has accounted for any period of transition and training to workers
for the application of these rules;
(d) whether the Ministry has considered the adverse impact on women workers, especially
those becoming supervisors under the scheme and if so, what steps have been taken to
address the same; and
(e) what is the language of the attendance recording app?
Panchayats under RGSA
1239 Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh:
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the panchayat-wise, district-wise and State-wise expenditure for the
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA) for last five years;
(b) the details of the projects launched during the last five years;
(c) whether any new panchayat has been formed under this scheme; and
(d) if so, total number of panchayats before and after this scheme and details of the
303


functioning of the new panchayats?
Saansad Adarsh ​​Gram Yojana
1240 # Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the State-wise number of villages adopted under the Saansad Adarsh ​​Gram Yojana
(SAGY);
(b) the number of villages where this scheme has been completed during the last three
years; and
(c) the reasons due to which this scheme is incomplete in other villages?
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushal Yojana
1241 # Ms. Indu Bala Goswami:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is any provision to provide assistance even after bagging employment
under 'Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grammen Kaushal Yojana';
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the State-wise number of training centres opened under the said scheme including
Himachal Pradesh;
(d) whether any decline has been observed in the number of people trained and
appointments given under this scheme; and
(e) if so, the details thereof?
Pending dues of Tamil Nadu under MGNREGA
1242 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry of Rural Development is providing financial assistance to the
States under MGNREGA scheme;
(b) if so, whether there is any pending amount that has to be disbursed to the State of
Tamil Nadu during last three years; and
(c) if so, by when these amount will be disbursed?
Progress under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)
1243 Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the progress of implementation of rural roads under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) in Karnataka, district-wise from 2018 to till date and details of the funds
allocated; and
(b) whether after inter-linking of the villages of the country, Government proposes to
construct link routes between the rural institutions in the third phase of Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), if so, the details thereof and the progress made thereon?
Convergence of Government schemes
1244 Shri Harnath Singh Yadav:
Lt.Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.):
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
304


(a) whether Government aims to achieve the convergence of Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas
Yojana (PMKVY) with other schemes such as National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme
(NAPS), Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS), Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs), etc.;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has undertaken any study to find out whether the youth trained
under PMKVY 1.0 and PMKVY 2.0 have been able to find gainful employment; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Trainers registered with NSDC under PMKVY
1245 # Smt. Kanta Kardam:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the State-wise/UT-wise details of training providers registered with the National Skill
Development Corporation (NSDC) under the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana
(PMKVY), and the process prescribed for the registration thereof, since the year 2020; and
(b) the number of the beneficiaries getting employment or still unemployed, respectively, out
of the beneficiaries trained under PMKVY till date?
Effect of COVID-19 on entrepreneurial activities
*1246 Smt. Mausam Noor:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether the COVID-19 pandemic has taken its toll on the entrepreneurial activities in
the country with the total early-stage entrepreneurial activity, if so, the details thereof;
(b) ​the details of the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) India Survey conducted by
Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India; and
(c) the setbacks in this regard caused by the pandemic and the surveys conducted and
reports prepared/action taken thereon?
Skill development projects in Rajasthan
1247 # Shri Neeraj Dangi:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the number of skill development projects currently underway in Rajasthan for the last
three years;
(b) the funds spent on these projects during the said period;
(c) the number of institutions working under these projects; and
(d) the number of youths trained under the said skill development projects, and the details
of the companies where employment has been provided to them?
Skill development in Haryana
1248 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the number of students being imparted skill development training by various Ministries
and the Skill Development Ministry in Haryana;
(b) the number of trainees who have got employment;
(c) whether Government is imparting training to the students of Haryana in the field of
agriculture as per the needs of the State; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
305


Schemes for skill development in the country
*1249 Shri R. Girirajan:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the schemes announced by Central Government for skill development in the country and
the details thereof; and
(b) the amount of funds allocated, disbursed and utilised for the same?
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan
1250 # Shri Kailash Soni:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether the objective of the Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan (Accessible India Campaign) is to
provide equal opportunities and self-reliant life to the disabled persons to ensure their
participation in all spheres of life;
(b) the number of proposals received under Accessible India Campaign from Madhya
Pradesh;
(c) the number of proposals which have been approved or are pending; and
(d) the date by which the approval will be given to the pending proposals?
National Overseas Scholarship
1251 Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether the National Overseas Scholarship is provided to students opting for research
in Indian culture, history and heritage and if not, the reasons therefor;
(b) the number of students availing the National Overseas Scholarship annually for the past
five years; and
(c) the rationale behind imposing an income limit of ₹ 8 lakh per annum as an eligibility
criteria to avail the scholarship?
Implementation of PM-DAKSH Yojana
*1252 Smt. Mausam Noor:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) ​whether Government has implemented Pradhan Mantri Dakshta Aur Kushalta Sampann
Hitgarhi (PM-DAKSH) Yojana in the country;
(b)​ if so, the details thereof along with its aims and objectives;
(c)​ the amount of funds earmarked under the said yojana;
(d)​ whether Government has recently launched PM-DAKSH portal and PM-DAKSH mobile
app, if so, the details thereof; and
(e)​ the number of candidates benefitted from the said yojana and got placement, State/UT-
wise?
Withdrawal of National Overseas Scholarship
1253 Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government had carried out any public consultation before withdrawing the
National Overseas Scholarship to pursue courses related to Indian culture, heritage, history
or society in foreign universities for marginalized students;
306


(b) if not, what was the rationale behind it;
(c) whether Government has considered its adverse impact on the career prospects of
marginalized students; and
(d) what alternative Government is planning for giving it to the students?
Education of children with disabilities
1254 # Shri Neeraj Dangi:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has conducted any assessment regarding the education of
children with disabilities, if so, the State-wise/UT-wise details of such children who are
currently studying;
(b) whether Government has adequate number of trained teachers to provide education to
children with disabilities or children with special needs; and
(c) whether Government is providing any satellite based education for these children, if so,
the details thereof?
Status of rag-pickers in the country
*1255 # Shri Sanjay Singh:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether the data of rag-pickers is available with Government;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether it is fact that almost 70 percent of the rag-pickers belong to the socially
backward communities and more than 60 percent of them have no formal education;
(d) whether Government is working for the socio-economic upliftment of rag-pickers; and
(e) if so, the details thereof?
Underfunding of post-matric scholarships
1256 Smt. Vandana Chavan:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) the reasons for reducing funds allocated to scholarships for students pursuing post
matric studies belonging to the SC category over the past three years;
(b) the State-wise data of Demand for Grants made for post matric scholarships and the
budget allocated for the past three years;
(c) whether Government plans to increase the budget allocated to the said scholarship
scheme; and
(d) whether any plan is under consideration to modify the present scholarship scheme?
Entrepreneurship and Innovation schemes for SC and ST
1257 Shri Syed Nasir Hussain:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) the details of schemes that promoted entrepreneurship and innovation amongst
Schedule Castes(SCs) and Scheduled Tribes(STs);
(b) the details and total number of SCs and STs who have availed these scheme as on
date;
(c) whether Government has any plan to organise Social Innovation Hub to facilitate
business ventures and Start-ups by SC and ST community;
(d) if so, the details thereof;
307


(e) if not, the reasons therefor; and
(f) the steps being taken by Government to promote entrepreneurship and innovation
amongst SC and ST communities?
Sub-classification of SC reservation
*1258 Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is considering any proposal for sub-classification of SC
reservation;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has received any recommendation from any organisation or
Member of Parliament about it; and
(d) if so, the details of action taken thereon?
Placement facilities for PVTGs
1259 # Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of training centres with placement facility functioning specially for Tribes
including Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) in Rajasthan;
(b) the number of persons from PVTG and other Tribal communities who have benefitted
from State Vocational Training Centres;
(c) whether it is proposed to setup new training centres in Rajasthan; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Deletion of clause in Forest Conservation Rules, 2022
1260 Shri Narain Dass Gupta:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Forest Conservation Rules 2022 include clause of securing permission of forest
dwellers before a project is sanctioned;
(b) whether clause asking for Gram Sabha permission before forest diversion has been
deleted, if not, which are the sections that guarantee the provision;
(c) whether Forest Conservation Rules 2022 ensures the requirement of permission from
Gram Sabha only at the end and after Central Government has already sanctioned a
project; and
(d) whether the new rules were made after consultation with Parliamentary Standing
Committee looking after the Tribal Affairs?
Scholarship for students from ST community
1261 Shri Niranjan Bishi:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of students from Scheduled Tribes (ST) community that were enrolled in
each scholarship scheme in the latest academic year (2021-2022) against the number of
enrolments in the previous academic year (2020-2021); and
(b) the details of students belonging to the State of Odisha enrolled in each scholarship in
the latest academic year (2021-2022) against the number of enrolments in the previous
academic year (2020-2021)?
308


Scheme for ST dominated areas
1262 # Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the schemes being run by Government for education, health, economic
empowerment and rehabilitation in the Scheduled Tribe dominated areas of the country;
(b) whether any proposal related to education, health, scholarship, establishment of hostels
and schools is under consideration with Government; and
(c) if so, the details thereof?
Welfare of tribal areas of Madhya Pradesh
1263 # Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the quantum of funds spent by Government for the welfare of the tribal
areas of Madhya Pradesh during the last five years, year-wise;
(b) whether Government proposes to organize employment generation programmes for the
youth of tribal areas;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) if not, the future plans for the youth belonging to the tribal community?
Economic upliftment of tribals
1264 Shri Naresh Bansal:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has many schemes and programmes for the tribal people of the
country in different States, and whether it has helped in economic upliftment of tribals, if so,
details thereof;
(b) what changes the different schemes and programmes for economic upliftment of the
tribal people has brought; and
(c) the number of tribal people, both men and women, who are getting benefits from these
schemes and programmes State-wise, details thereof?
Problems and challenges under the FRA
1265 Shri Derek O' Brien:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether there are undue interferences by the forest department in the Gram Sabhas in
the implementation of the Forest Rights Act (FRA);
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether any measures have been taken by the Ministry to address this issue, the
details thereof;
(d) what challenges are being faced in recognising the forest rights of various communities
under this Act, the details thereof; and
(e) steps that have been taken to address the same?
Funds for STDCC and TRIFED
*1266 Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the funds allocated and disbursed to State Tribal Development
309


Cooperative Corporation (STDCCs) and TRIFED in Tamil Nadu from the year 2019;
(b) whether the Ministry has taken any market intervention, training, and skill up-gradation
measures under the Institutional Support for Development and Marketing of Tribal
Products/Produce scheme in Tamil Nadu for the year 2021-22; and
(c) if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor?
Schemes for digital connectivity in tribal community
1267 Shri Tiruchi Siva:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the schemes in place to enhance digital connectivity in tribal communities;
(b) whether there has been an impact analysis of the schemes in place;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the details of the upcoming schemes and/or upcoming developments in the existing
schemes that the Ministry is planning?
Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao (BBBP) scheme
1268 Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the 'Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao' (BBBP) scheme has failed to
show the desired results as per the report of the Committee on Empowerment of Women;
(b) if so, the main constraints in the scheme;
(c) whether it is a fact that more than 75 per cent of plan funds were spent on media
advocacy only instead of the planned expenditure allocation for sectoral interventions in
education and health; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Anganwadi centres and mini Anganwadi centres operational in Jharkhand
1269 Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of Anganwadi centres and mini Anganwadi centres operational in
Jharkhand as on date, block-wise details thereof;
(b) the details of the funds released and utilised on these centres during the last three
years and the current year, year-wise/block-wise details thereof;
(c) whether any request has been received by Central Government for setting up of
additional Anganwadi centres from State Government; and
(d) if so, the action taken thereon?
Details of Draft National Policy for Women
1270 Shri P. Wilson:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether in 2016 a Draft National Policy for women was tabled by the Ministry and in
2019 it was reported that the draft policy was prepared but no steps have been taken to
adopt it, if so, reasons for the same and when the Ministry is going to adopt it;
(b) while addressing the issue of violence against women, the draft policy does not provide
for a victim support system, whether Ministry is willing to provide a victim support system;
and
(c) whether the policy emphasises on functioning of Anganwadi centres and whether the
310


Ministry is increasing honorarium given to Anganwadi caregivers?
Initiatives for women empowerment
1271 Shri Prakash Javadekar:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) what are the new initiatives taken up in last five years by Government for women
empowerment;
(b) the details thereof;
(c) how it has impacted the society; and
(d) whether Government has done impact assessment?
Malnutrition free by 2022
1272 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of targeted interventions that the Ministry has undertaken to address
malnutrition in the country;
(b) whether it is a fact that the Ministry has set a target of making India malnutrition-free by
2022;
(c) if so, the details thereof;
(d) whether any assessment has been made about the number of malnourished children
under six years of age, adolescent girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers;
(e) if so, the details thereof, State-wise; and
(f) to what extent POSHAN 2.0 announced is helping to address the above issues?
Acute level of severe malnutrition in districts of the country
1273 Shri Muzibulla Khan:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether an analysis of district-level data titled ‘Acute level of severe malnutrition in
Indian districts’ shows a steep rise in severe wasting in almost half of Indian districts
between 2016 and 2021, severe wasting or severe acute malnutrition (SAM) in pre-school
children i.e. aged 0-59 months increased in 341 districts out of 707 across 36 States and
Union Territories;
(b) if so, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether in 2015-2016, the level of SAM was 7.5 per cent, which increased to 7.7 per
cent in 2019-2021; and
(d) the steps taken by Government in the last three years to ensure food security?
Scheme for overall development of rural women and children in Uttar Pradesh
1274 # Smt. Kanta Kardam:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has launched any new scheme with a special focus on the overall
development of rural women and children in the country, especially in Uttar Pradesh during
the last three years;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the district-wise financial allocation to Uttar Pradesh under this new scheme?
311


IEG report on the impact of scholarship on reducing child marriage
1275 Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah:
Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar:
Smt. Phulo Devi Netam:
Shri Neeraj Dangi:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details on the incidence of child marriage since the inception of the scholarship,
State-wise and year-wise for the last five years;
(b) the details of how the impact of the scholarship on reducing child marriage is analysed;
(c) whether Government intends to act on the recommendations of the Institute of
Economic Growth (IEG) to scrap the scheme;
(d) whether Government intends to reform the scheme in line with concerns on its
implementation and scholarship amount;
(e) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; and
(f) the reasons why the IEG report and methodology are not publicly available?
Target for National Nutrition Mission
1276 # Shri Deepak Prakash:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the progress and achievements made under the National Nutrition Mission
(NNM) in light of the targets set; and
(b) the targets set for the State of Jharkhand with reference to the National Nutrition
Mission and the achieved benefits of the scheme?
Investment in Anganwadis
1277 Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government agrees with the view that we need to invest more significantly in
Anganwadis and roll out proven innovative interventions; and
(b) if so, what steps have been taken/being taken by Government in this regard?
Status of creches
1278 # Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the current status of Government and non-Government creches shut down during the
COVID-19 pandemic in the country;
(b) whether there is any plan to re-open the closed creches and provide another
opportunity to those who were providing their services in the past;
(c) whether any assistance was provided to those who were serving in these Government
and non-Government creches which were shut down;
(d) whether there are any standard guidelines for setting up of creches on the same lines
as of old age homes of voluntary organizations; and
(e) the details thereof?
312


Status of crime against women in West Bengal 
*1279 Smt. Shanta Chhetri:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the measures taken by the Ministry to check cases of crime against women, especially
in West Bengal;
(b) if so, the steps taken by Government to prevent such crimes against women;
(c) whether instant services/facilities being provided by Government to those suffering due
to dowry harassment and domestic violence; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Mental health assistance in shelter homes 
*1280 Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the number of shelter homes for women and children which currently offer mental
health counselling in the country, State-wise;
(b) whether there exists any monitoring protocol to ensure mental health counselling is
provided in all shelter homes;
(c) if so, the details thereof;
(d) if not, the reasons therefor; and
(e) whether Government plans to offer mental health counselling in all shelter homes, if so,
the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
New Delhi 
The 20th July, 2022
29 Ashadha, 1944 (Saka)
P. C. Mody,
Secretary-General.
# Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
313
* MAY BE TREATED AS CANCELLED.

INDEX
(Ministry-Wise)
Cooperation : 1121, 1122, 1123
Education :
1124, 1125, 1126, 1127, 1128, 1129, 1130,
1131, 1132, 1133, 1134, 1135, 1136, 1137,
1138, 1139, 1140, 1141, 1142, 1143, 1144,
1145, 1146, 1147, 1148, 1149, 1150, 1151,
1152, 1153, 1154, 1155, 1156, 1157, 1158,
1159, 1160, 1161, 1162, 1163, 1164, 1165,
1166, 1167, 1168, 1169, 1210
Home Affairs :
1170, 1171, 1172, 1173, 1174, 1175, 1176,
1177, 1178, 1180, 1181, 1182, 1183, 1184,
1185, 1186, 1188, 1189, 1190, 1191, 1192,
1193, 1194, 1195, 1196, 1197, 1198, 1199,
1200, 1201, 1202, 1203
Minority Affairs : 1204, 1205, 1206
Panchayati Raj : 1179, 1187, 1207, 1208, 1209, 1233
Road Transport and Highways :
1211, 1212, 1213, 1214, 1215, 1216, 1217,
1218, 1219, 1220, 1221, 1222, 1223, 1224,
1225, 1226, 1227
Rural Development :
1228, 1229, 1230, 1231, 1232, 1234, 1235,
1236, 1237, 1238, 1239, 1240, 1241, 1242,
1243
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship : 1244, 1245, 1246, 1247, 1248, 1249
Social Justice and Empowerment : 1250, 1251, 1252, 1253, 1254, 1255, 1256,
1257, 1258
Tribal Affairs : 1259, 1260, 1261, 1262, 1263, 1264, 1265,
1266, 1267
Women and Child Development : 1268, 1269, 1270, 1271, 1272, 1273, 1274,
1275, 1276, 1277, 1278, 1279, 1280
314