61
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL  ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Wednesday, March 11, 2020/Phalguna 21, 1941 (Saka)
————
(Ministries: Civil Aviation; Home Affairs; Housing and Urban Affairs;
Labour and Employment; Petroleum and Natural Gas;
Social Justice and Empowerment; Steel)
Total number of questions — 15
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
Documents legally valid for proving
citizenship
†*181. CH. SUKHRAM SINGH
Y ADAV: Will the Minister of HOME
AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the documents which
Government considers to be legally valid
for proving one's citizenship;
(b) the details of States where
Government consider to implement NRC
in addition to Assam;
(c) the number of people in Assam who
have failed to prove their citizenship; and
(d)  the number of people having been
kept in detention centres in Assam?
ATF under the ambit of GST
†*182. SHRI REWA TI RAMAN
SINGH: Will the Minister of CIVIL
A VIA TION be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
is planning to bring Air Turbine Fuel (ATF)
under the ambit of the GST;
(b) whether there is any possibility that
air fares would be reduced after bringing
A TF under the GST; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not
the reasons therefor?
Probation time of IPS officers
†*183. SHRI P.L. PUNIA: Will the
Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be pleased
to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that many States
have not sent the reports on probation time
of IPS officers to the Ministry of Home
Affairs, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether it is also a fact that neither
the induction training has been organised
timely for the promotee IPS officers nor
the assessment of their works has been
carried out, if so, the State-wise details
thereof; and
(c) whether Government is considering
upon revoking the promotion of such
promotee IPS officers who have undergone
neither the induction course, nor the
assessment process, if so, the details
thereof?

62
Naxal attacks
*184. SHRI K.C. RAMAMURTHY:
Will the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) the details of Naxal attacks taken
place and casualties of security forces
during last three years and current year,
State-wise, with a particular reference to
Naxal-affected districts;
(b) if so, what specialized training,
equipment are given to security forces and
amount being spent on same during the last
three years, year-wise and State-wise; and
(c) what sort of assistance, financial
technical, etc., that States got from
Government during the last three years and
the current year, year-wise and State-wise?
Educated unemployment scenario in
the country
*185. DR. L. HANUMANTHAIAH:
Will the Minister of LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that
educated unemployment is a widespread
problem in the country; and
(b) if so, whether Government has taken
note that there is an increase in the enrolment
in education and on the other hand
unemployment is also on the rise, if so, the
details thereof?
Basic facilities to casual labourers
*186. SHRI RAJMANI PATEL: Will
the Minister of LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is
implementing various Acts and Schemes to
provide social security and welfare benefits
to casual workers both in the organised and
unorganised sector;
(b) the details of the sectors where the
casual labourers are reportedly deprived
from their due social status and if so, the
steps taken by Government to extend all
basic facilities to the casual labourers in the
country; and
(c) the details of number of casual/
contract labourers engaged during each of
the last three years and the current year in
organised and unorganised sector?
Direct Benefit Transfers (DBTs) under
various schemes of Ministry
*187. SHRI JOSE K. MANI: Will the
Minister of LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether schemes like National Child
Labour Project (NCLP), Directorate
General of Employment—Coaching-cum
Guidance Centre (DGE-CGS), DGE-
V ocational Rehabilitation Centre (DGE-
VRC), Directorate General Labour Welfare-
Scholarship (DGLW) have seen a large
number of failed Direct Benefit Transfers
(DBT) during the last two years;
(b) if so, the reasons for failures;
(c) the value of failed DBT transactions
made under above four schemes during
financial years 2018 and 2019;
(d) whether reports of DBT
transactions not reaching beneficiaries in a
time bound manner have been received; and
(e) the efforts made by Government to
identify the cause of the failures and address
it?
Blacklisting of passenger by airlines
*188. SHRI M.P. VEERENDRA
KUMAR: Will the Minister of CIVIL
A VIA TION be pleased to state:
(a) whether the concerned authorities
have received a complaint from an affected

63
person recently against blacklisting him by
airlines on filmsy grounds;
(b) the action taken by Government on
the complaint;
(c) whether Government has permitted
the airlines to carry a policy of blacklisting
passengers who are alleged to have
misbehaved in the aircraft; and
(d) if so, the details thereof including
the number of persons blacklisted during
the last three years and the current year?
Manual scavenging under Swachh
Bharat Mission
*189. SHRI MANISH GUPTA: Will
the Minister of  SOCIAL JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Swachh Bharat Mission
has addressed the issue of toilet technology
or manual scavenging, if so, the details
thereof;
(b) whether in the last three years a
large number of toilets with septic tanks
have been built;
(c) if so, whether the situation of manual
scavengers worsened with more septic
tanks to clean, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) whether the proliferation of septic
tanks will work against the law preventing
people from being employed in manual
scavenging, which is illegal?
Non-registration of birth of children
*190. DR. BANDA PRAKASH: Will
the Minister of  HOME AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether according to recently
released data in National Family Health
Survey (NFHS-4), three out of five children
under the age of five had their births
registered and possessed birth certificates
in 2017-18 and if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether according to United Nations
International Children's Emergency Fund
(UNICEF) 2019 report, India is among the
five countries with others being Ethiopia,
Nigeria, Congo and Pakistan, that are home
to half of the world's 166 million children
whose births have not been registered; and
(c) if so, the reaction of Government
thereto?
Warrant of precedence
*191. SHRI A. VIJAY AKUMAR: Will
the Minister of  HOME AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) the details of the existing warrant of
precedence;
(b) whether there is any proposal to
revise warrant of precedence;
(c) if so, the details thereof;
(d) whether there is confusion prevailing
regarding revision in warrant of precedence;
and
(e) if so, the action taken to remove the
confusion?
Stagnation in real estate sector
*192. SHRI RAKESH SINHA: Will the
Minister of  HOUSING AND URBAN
AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) the number of real estate projects in
Delhi, Mumbai which are in a stagnant stage
since the last three years?
(b) the number of people who have been
affected due to non-completion or non-
allotment of their flats, homes booked by
them;
(c) what are the reasons for non-
completion or non-allotments of flats; and

64
NEW DELHI; DESH DEEPAK VERMA,
The 5th March, 2020 Secretary-General.
Phalguna 15, 1941 (Saka)
(d) the steps taken by Government to
provided relief to such people?
Encroachment of footpaths in cities
*193. DR. PRABHAKAR KORE: Will
the Minister of  HOUSING AND URBAN
AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that footpaths
meant for pedestrians in cities across the
country are disappearing due to
encroachments by hawkers, shopkeepers
and even by residents in front of their
houses;
(b) whether incorporating maintenance
of footpaths as an integral part of town
planning is essential to ensure pedestrian-
friendly cities; and
(c) whether Government in consultation
with State Governments proposes any
policy to save footpaths from
encroachments in cities across the country,
if so, the details thereof?
Timeline for completing Census-2021
and NPR
†*194. SHRI PRABHA T JHA: Will the
Minister of  HOME AFFAIRS be pleased
to state:
(a) whether the updation process for
Census-2021 and National Population
Register (NPR) has been started;
(b) if so, the number of phases in which
these processes would be completed and
the timeline fixed for it;
(c) whether the National Population
Register was prepared first time in the year
2010 and was updated in 2015;
(d) whether objections have been raised
by several political parties and States
concerning the updation process of existing
population register; and
(e) if so, the details thereof?
Implementation of labour laws
*195. LT. GEN. (DR.) D.P. V A TS
(RETD.): Will the Minister of  LABOUR
AND EMPLOYMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether Central Government has
taken several steps during the last three
years to provide job security, minimum
wage protection and social security to
workers of unorganised sector and also to
bring transparency and accountability in
getting labour laws implemented and
improving the quality of employment;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether required support is being
received from States to ensure transparency
and accountability in the implementation
of labour laws; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Civil Aviation : 182, 188,
Home Affairs : 181, 183, 184, 190, 191, 194,
Housing and Urban Affairs : 192, 193,
Labour and Employment : 185, 186, 187, 195,
Petroleum and Natural Gas : —
Social Justice and Empowerment : 189.
Steel : —
MGIPMRND—5568RS—05-03-2020.
65