31
RAJYA  SABHA
————
List of Questions for ORAL  ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Wednesday, November 27, 2019/Agrahayana 6, 1941 (Saka)
————
(Ministries: Civil Aviation; Home Affairs; Housing and Urban Affairs;
Labour and Employment; Petroleum and Natural Gas;
Social Justice and Empowerment; Steel)
Total number of questions — 15
RCS-UDAN in Odisha
*91. SHRI AMAR PATNAIK: Will the
Minister of CIVIL A VIATION be pleased
to state:
(a) the present status of implementation
of the RCS-UDAN routes connecting
Jeypore, Utkela, Rourkela and Jharsuguda
airports in Odisha;
(b) whether Government has identified
the causes for lack of valid bids for regional
airports under this scheme;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to
improve the commercial viability of routes
among the regional airports in Odisha?
Guidelines for air cargo service
*92. SHRI A. VIJAYAKUMAR: Will
the Minister of CIVIL AVIATION be
pleased to state:
(a) whether there is any proposal to
bring the rate of air cargo service lower in
the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether it is a fact that booking and
collection of air cargo is more tedious and a
common man can not avail the service due
to high rate and tedious process; and
(d) if so, whether there is any proposal
to amend guidelines for booking/delivery
of air cargo?
General strike on January 8, 2020
*93. SHRI ELAMARAM KAREEM:
Will the Minister of LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that
the major national trade unions of the
country have announced general strike on
January 8, 2020, if so, the main demands
of the trade unions;
(b) what are the major issues that have
led to the announcement of such a strike
and what are Government's comments on
those issues;
(c) whether Government is planning to
call meeting of the trade unions to address
these issues; and
(d) in what way Government is
planning to prevent the move for a general
strike by trade unions?

32
Steel industry under debt burden
*94. SHRI MANISH GUPTA: Will the
Minister of STEEL be pleased to state:
(a) whether the steel industry in the
country is heavily debt burdened, if so, the
details thereof;
(b) whether rising raw material costs,
power costs and global competition is
slowing production and demand, if so, the
measures being initiated by Government
to obviate these difficulties;
(c) whether the targets for achieving a
higher steel production capacity of around
300 million tonnes by 2030-31 is making
progress, as the present capacity is less
than 100 million tonnes; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Lack of basic facilities in slums
*95. SHRI RAJMANI PATEL: Will
the Minister of HOUSING AND URBAN
AFFAIRS be pleased to state:
(a) whether a large percentage of slum
population in the country still lives without
any basic facilities/amenities including
access to clean drinking water and sewage
disposal as per the latest census;
(b) if so, the details thereof indicating
slum population and number of households
living in slums without basic facilities and
the number of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes therein, State/UT-wise;
(c) the details of schemes/programmes
run by Government to provide basic
facilities/amenities to slum dwellers; and
(d) the details of funds allocated for the
purpose and targets fixed and achieved
during each of the last three years?
Utilisation of non-used airports
*96. SHRI JOSE K. MANI: Will the
Minister of CIVIL A VIATION be pleased
to state:
(a) whether India has 32 training
institutes that produce about 300 pilots
every year against the requirement of 800 a
year with Indian carriers forced to hire expat
pilots presently;
(b) whether a Committee headed by a
ex-IAF Chief Fali H. Major is working on a
proposal to utilise a large number of non-
operational or sparingly used airports to
set up for pilot training; and
(c) whether pilot training in the country
is more expensive than many other
countries because of taxation and fuel  for
the trainer aircraft and if so, whether
Government would consider subsidising
trainee pilots on merit basis?
Steel Scrap Policy
*97. SHRI AMAR SHANKAR
SABLE: Will the Minister of STEEL be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
is planning to introduce Steel Scrap Policy
in the country, if so, the details thereof
alongwith the date of its introduction;
(b) the salient features of the Policy
and which items are going to be included in
the policy, item-wise details thereof;
(c) whether Government has fixed any
scrap centres in the country, if so, the details
thereof, if not, the reasons therefor; and
(d) whether Government has fixed any
incentive on the sale of scrap, if so, the details
thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?

33
Privatisation of major airports in the
country
†*98. DR. KIRODI LAL MEENA:
Will the Minister of CIVIL A VIATION be
pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government
has approved the proposal of privatisation
of some major airports in the country, if
so, the details thereof;
(b) whether people of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes would continue to get
reservation in the private/to be privatised
airports, if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether profitability of the Airports
Authority of India was affected by
privatisation of airports of Delhi and
Mumbai earlier, if so, the details thereof?
Registration of migrated labourers
*99. SHRI DHIRAJ PRASAD SAHU:
Will the Minister of LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken any
initiative to develop a mechanism for the
registration of migrated labourers at source
and destination location to prepare a data
bank and if so, the details thereof; and
(b) whether Government is considering
to take any steps to ensure the transfer of
documents such as ration card and BPL
cards from one State to another so that the
migrated labourers could  avail the benefits
of these services at their destination places
and if so, the details thereof?
Exploitation of home garment
workers
*100. SHRI SANJAY SINGH: Will the
Minister of LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT be pleased to state:
(a) the details of exploitation of home
garment workers by subcontractors and
fashion brands; and
(b) the steps taken by the Ministry to
remedy and prevent such exploitation?
Assessment of requirement of skilled
labour force
*101. SHRI KAMAKHYA PRASAD
TASA: Will the Minister of LABOUR
AND EMPLOYMENT be pleased to
state:
(a) whether a large number of people
are unemployed in the country;
(b) if so, the number of registered
unemployed people, State/UT-wise;
(c) the details of employment
opportunities created in the last three years
and the current year, State/UT-wise;
(d) whether Government has carried out
any assessment with regard to requirement
of skilled labour force for different activities;
and
(e) if so, the various steps taken by
Government to provide the necessary skills
to the unemployed youths along with the
number of such youths benefited through
the said schemes during the last three years
and the current year, year-wise?
Non-registration of FIRs for snatching
in Delhi
*102. SHRI RAJKUMAR DHOOT:
Will the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be
pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that
Delhi Police does not register FIRs of
snatching cases committed in National
Capital and where registered, theft is
registered  instead of snatching case;
(b) if so, details thereof and reasons
behind doing so;
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

34
NEW DELHI; DESH DEEPAK VERMA,
The 21st November, 2019 Secretary-General.
Kartika 30, 1941 (Saka)
(c) whether it is a fact that when a victim
goes to police station or police post the
policemen misbehave and abuse victims
instead of registering FIRs; and
(d) what action Government has taken
or proposes to take to deal with such cases
and action proposed to be taken against
abusive police personnel and those who do
not register FIRs?
Lack of facilities in detention centres
*103. DR. SANTANU SEN: Will the
Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be pleased
to state:
(a) the total number of people currently
living in detention camps in the State of
Assam;
(b) the total number of people who have
died in the detention camps due to medical
or any other conditions;
(c) whether it is a fact that the detention
camps in Assam lack even the most basic
facilities and medical care; and
(d) the details of the facilities provided?
Production and demand of natural gas
†*104. MS. SAROJ
PANDEY: Will the Minister of
PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS be
pleased to state:
(a) the total production of natural gas
per annum in the country at present and
whether this is sufficient in view of the
domestic demand;
(b) the steps taken by Government to
increase this production and to open new
natural gas reserves; and
(c) the estimated increase in production
of natural gas per year till 2022 in the
country?
Status of the projects under Smart
Cities Mission
*105. DR. PRABHAKAR KORE:
Will the Minister of HOUSING
AND URBAN AFFAIRS be pleased to
state:
(a) whether it is a fact that, a recent
report brought out by the 'Smart Cities
Council India' on the project across the
country claims that the projects are
progressing at a very good pace;
(b) if so, the status of the projects under
the Smart Cities Mission, State-wise; and
(c) the detailed status of all the works
of Belagavi Smart City Project in
Karnataka?
†Original notice of the question received in Hindi.

I N D E X
(Ministry-wise)
Civil Aviation : 91, 92, 96, 98,
Home Affairs : 102, 103,
Housing and Urban Affairs : 95, 105,
Labour and Employment : 93, 99, 100, 101,
Petroleum and Natural Gas : 104,
Social Justice and Empowerment :—
Steel : 94, 97.
MGIPMRND—3396RS—21-11-2019.
35