PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
ERRATA 
to the list of Questions for WRITTEN ANSWERS for 
                          Wednesday, December 20, 2023/ 29 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Q. No.  Corrections 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
1929.  May be treated as cancelled.   
1938.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1942.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1943  May be treated as cancelled 
1946.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1954.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1956  May be treated as cancelled 
1957.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1963.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1970.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1972.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1978.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1980.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1985.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1988.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1994.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1996.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1997  May be treated as cancelled 
2000.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2004.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2006.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2009.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2013.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2016.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2020.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2023.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2024.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2025.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2029.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2031.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2032.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2035.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2037.  May be treated as cancelled. 

2039.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2041.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2043.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2048.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2052.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2067.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2068.  May be treated as cancelled. 
2078.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1931.  The name of the Second Questioner, i.e. Dr. Amee Yajnik, be deleted. 
1941.  The name of the Second Questioner, i.e. Shri M. Shanmugam, be deleted. 
 
  In the Index, Question No. 1929 be deleted from Ministry of Cooperation. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1938, 1942, 1943, 1946, 1954, 1956 and 1957 be 
deleted from Ministry of Education. 
 In the Index, Question Nos 1970, 1972, 1978, 1963 and 2023 be deleted from 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 In the Index, Question No. 1980 be deleted from Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1985 and 1988 be deleted from Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1994, 1996, 1997, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2009 and 2013 
be deleted from Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 2016, 2020, 2024, 2025, 2029, 2031, 2032, 2035, 
2037,  be deleted from Ministry of Rural Development. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 2039, 2041, 2043 be deleted from Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship.  
 In the Index, Question Nos.1963, 2048, 2052 be deleted from Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment.  
 In the Index, Question Nos. 2067 be deleted from Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 In the Index, Question Nos. 2068 and 2078 be deleted from Ministry of Women 
and Child Development.  
 
  
New Delhi, 
December 19, 2023. 
Copy to:- 
1. Ministry of Cooperation. 
2. Ministry of Education. 
3. Ministry of Home Affairs. 
4. Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
5. Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
6. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
7. Ministry of Rural Development. 

8. Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. 
9. Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
10. Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
11. Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
12. E.O.D.  Rajya Sabha Secretariat. 
13. Translation Section, Rajya Sabha Sectt. 
14. Table Office (2 spare copies). 
15. Sansad TV, Rajya Sabha 
16. Distribution Branch ( 2 spare copies) 
17. Question Branch (2 spare copies) 

Rajya Sabha
List of Questions for WRITTEN ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Wednesday, December 20, 2023/ 29 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
(Ministries : Cooperation; Education; Home Affairs; Minority Affairs; Panchayati Raj;
Road Transport and Highways; Rural Development; Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship; Social Justice and Empowerment; Tribal Affairs; Women and
Child Development)
Total number of questions -- 160
PACS as Common Service Centres (CSCS)
1921 # Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken steps to enable PACS to function as Common Service
Centres (CSCS);
(b) the manner in which G2C services could be provided in rural areas through this initiative;
(c) the manner in which the benefits likely to reach common citizens by providing these
services through PACS;
(d) whether PACS is capable of functioning as PMKSK;
(e) if so, the number of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) brought under the
ambit of PMKSK;
(f) the benefits likely to be availed by the farmers therefrom; and
(g) the manner in which the income of PACS would increase therefrom?
Functioning of Boards of Multi-State Co-operative societies
1922 # Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) the details of provisions made to increase the representation of Scheduled
Castes/Tribes in the boards of Multi-State Co-operative societies;
(b) the steps taken to make the board more professional; and
(c) the provisions made to increase participation of board members in board meetings?
Nandini Sahakar Yojana
1923 # Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) the objective of the Nandini Sahakar Yojana being run by the National Cooperative
Development Corporation (NCDC);
(b) the details of State-wise assistance approved and distributed during the last three
years under the scheme; and
(c) the details of benefits derived by the women's Co-operative societies from this scheme?
457

Amul's competition with Aavin of TN
1924 Shri P. Wilson:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) the details of steps taken by ministry on Amul's competition with Aavin of TN, Co-
operation Milk producers federation; and
(b) whether the spirit of Operation White Flood 1970, which transformed India from Milk
deficient nation to Biggest producers, is to let other Co-operatives thrive without infringing
each other's milk shed area, if so, the details of steps taken by Government?
Primary fisheries Co-operative societies
1925 # Shri Baburam Nishad:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) whether steps are being taken by Government for setting up of new primary fisheries
Co-operative societies;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the manner in which it will help in increasing the income of marginal fishermen engaged
in fish production?
NCDC and FPO
1926 Smt. Darshana Singh:
Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) the steps taken by Government to promote Farmer Producer Organisations;
(b) the number of Farmer Producer Organisations set up in the country, State-wise;
(c) the objectives of the National Co-operative Development Corporation (NCDC); and
(d) the details of different schemes sponsored by the NCDC?
Rupay Kisan Credit Card (KCC)
1927 # Shri Biplab Kumar Deb:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) whether Ministry has started any pilot project to provide Rupay Kisan Credit Card
(KCC) to the members of Co-operative societies;
(b) if so, the States where it is being implemented;
(c) the number of Rupay Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) distributed so far; and
(d) the manner in which it will benefit the farmers?
Misuse of Minority Scholarships
1928 Dr. Anil Jain:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs  be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware about reports of fake beneficiaries at the State level
under the Minority Scholarships ; and
(b) the State which has the highest percentage of misuse of minority scholarship ?
Formation of Workers Co-operatives
1929 Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) whether any industry exists in the country, which is run on the basis of worker’s Co-
operatives, where the workers collectively own the Industry, if so, the details thereof;
458


(b) whether Government is contemplating to take initiative to form workers Co-operatives
where each worker working in the Industry/establishment participates in the day to day
running of the organization as equal partner, without the existence of Employer-Employee
relationship; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Women empowerment through Co-operative institutions
1930 Smt. Sangeeta Yadav:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) the efforts made by Government to enhance the role played by Co-operative societies
in creating opportunities for income generation of underprivileged sections especially
women;
(b) whether there are any scheme run by Government for the empowerment of rural
women, if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government is imparting skill development of women through Co-operative
institutions, if so the details thereof; and
(d) if not, whether Government will consider to do so in future?
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) by Primary Agricultural Credit Societies
(PACS)
1931 Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu:
Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Will the Minister of Cooperation be pleased to state:
(a) the details of progress made in formation of 1100 new FPOs proposed by PACS,
including list of FPOs established so far and timeline for achieving the remaining targets;
(b) how ₹6,900 crore allocated and utilized to achieve the target of setting up 10,000 FPOs
by 2027; and
(c) the measures taken to strengthen agriculture, animal husbandry and fisheries through
Co-operatives on employment generation and GDP growth?
Change in curriculum
1932 # Shri Samir Oraon:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether the curriculum/syllabus of science, humanities and technical subjects in Indian
Universities happen to be equivalent/similar to the Universities of European and Western
countries;
(b) whether necessary changes have been made in various courses in the light of latest
scientific research, discoveries and technological developments in Indian Universities; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Objections on material prepared by NCERT on Chandrayan 3
1933 Shri A. D. Singh:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether the NCERT has prepared material on Chandrayan 3 for reading of school
children for creating awareness;
(b) whether there are objections to this module which tends to mix science with mythology;
and
(c) if so, the details and portions objected upon, and the response of Government thereto?
459


Functional Kendriya Vidayalas
1934 Shri Sujeet Kumar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of Kendriya Vidayalas (KVs) established in the last five years in the country,
State-wise/UTs-wise;
(b) the total number of Kendriya Vidayalas functional in the country, State-wise/UTs-wise;
(c) whether Government is planning to establish more KVs in the State of Odisha; and
(d) if so, the details thereof, including the stipulated timeline?
Caste discrimination in CEI
1935 Shri P. Wilson:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether more than 60 suicide of students from SC/ST has been reported in central
education institutes (CEI) and more than 25,000 students from SC/ST, OBC have dropped
out of CEI in the last five years, if so, the details of suicide in each institution for the past
five years and reasons therefor;
(b) whether any committee report/study has been conducted to identify the reasons for
increase in caste discrimination in CEI, if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether Government has considered framing a policy to ensure representation of
members from oppressed communities of all committees of CEI and if so, the details
thereof?
Electoral literacy in classrooms
1936 # Shri Surendra Singh Nagar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of MoU signed between the Election Commission of India and the Ministry
for Electoral Literacy in classrooms;
(b) whether this initiative is aimed at increasing the voter participation and electoral turnout;
(c) whether it will also encourage first-time voters to participate in elections; and
(d) the details of course designed for this initiative?
School education in rural India and urban India
1937 # Dr. Sonal Mansingh:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is a wide gap between the school education in rural India and urban India
in terms of equality and quality of educational opportunities;
(b) whether several suggestions have been made in the National Education Policy 2020 to
bridge this gap, if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the policy related steps taken by Government vis-a-vis those suggestions?
Teacher pupil ratio and vacancies of teachers
1938 Shri Javed Ali Khan:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of teacher pupil ratio prescribed under NEP 2020 along with details of
vacancies of teachers in the country as on date at primary and secondary school levels,
State-wise;
(b) the details of vacancies of general, SC, ST, OBC and EWS category out of the above,
State-wise; and
(c) the details of vacancies filled up since January, 2023 to till date, State-wise and
460


category-wise?
Admission of students into private universities
1939 Dr. M. Thambidurai:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the deemed Universities and private universities admit students
more than the intake approved by the regulatory bodies;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government is aware that some Universities run courses even without the
permission of the regulatory bodies;
(d) if so, the details thereof and the reasons therefor; and
(e) the details of action taken by the University Grants Commission (UGC) against such
Universities which have been found to violate the norms stipulated by the regulatory
bodies?
Deemed and private Universities
1940 Dr. M. Thambidurai:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that deemed and private Universities have mushroomed over the
years;
(b) if so, the details of such Universities, during the last five years, year-wise, location-wise;
(c) whether such Universities have to follow the guidelines issued by the statutory bodies
like AICTE, National Medical Council, Dental Council of India, etc.;
(d) the details of such guidelines issued by various statutory bodies;
(e) whether any violation of the norms have come to the notice of Government; and
(f) if so, the details thereof and the action taken by the University Grants Commission
(UGC) against such institutions found to violate the guidelines?
Vacancies in CUs/IITs
1941 Shri Vaiko:
Shri M. Shanmugam:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that only a few faculty members were recruited in the Central
Universities while more than 6000 teaching posts are vacant in the Central Universities
(CUs);
(b) whether Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) has recruited only 20 per cent faculty
members against vacancies;
(c) if so, the reasons for the shortfall in respect of recruitment of general candidates, OBC,
SC and ST candidates; and
(d) whether Government has taken serious efforts along with institutions to fill all the vacant
posts, including the reserved category, if so, the time frame for recruitment and if not, the
reasons therefor?
Student Suicides in KVS & Navodaya Schools
1942 Dr. V. Sivadasan:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of students of Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Schools and other schools
under the control of the Union Government, who have committed suicide, year-wise,
institution-wise, social category-wise data during the last five years;
(b) the number of students of Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Schools and other schools
461


under the control of the Union Government, who have attempted suicide, year-wise,
institution-wise, social category-wise data during the last five years; and
(c) the measures taken by Government to address the problem of student suicides?
Institution of Eminence (IOE) Scheme
1943 Dr. Santanu Sen:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of total funds allocated, disbursed, and utilized for the Institution of Eminence
(IOE) Scheme;
(b) the number of Institutions eligible and the eligible institutions yet to be included under the
scheme, the details thereof, and the reasons therefor; and
(c) whether any measure is being taken to provide adequate support to private IOEs, the
details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor?
CIET Educational e-content
1944 Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Central Institute of Education Technology (CIET), a unit of
NCERT develops educational e-content and disseminates them through PM e-VIDYA,
DIKSHA, e-PATHSALA, SWAYAM, RADIO etc.;
(b) if so, how CIET produce these e-contents for telecast/broadcast and Annual Budget for
production of these contents in the current financial year; and
(c) whether the e-content is outsourced or developed by individuals/film-makers etc., if so,
the details thereof?
Changes in the syllabus of Indian history
1945 # Shri Digvijaya Singh:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has made any changes in the syllabus of Indian History being
taught in school and college classes, if so, the details of classes for which changes have
been made or likely to be made in the history syllabus along with the details thereof; and
(b) whether any committee has been constituted for the changes made or to be made, if
so, the name of its members?
Assistance provided to Indian students during the war
1946 # Shri Neeraj Dangi:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of Indian students studying in Israeli Institutions and Universities who have
been safely brought back to the country during the recent Israel-Hamas civil war, State-
wise;
(b) the details of the students brought to India therefrom, institution-wise and course-wise;
(c) the manner in which the problems faced by Indian students regarding courses and
degrees offered by Israeli institutions and Universities are being resolved by Government;
and
(d) the details of the assistance provided by Government to Indian students in such a
situation?
462


Mental health issues among students
1947 Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government subscribes to the view that the country needs to shift from a
piecemeal approach-unsystematic partial measures, to a long-term comprehensive
approach wherein mental health is integrated in educational services in order to combat
mental health issues effectively among students;
(b) if so, the details of the steps taken by Government in this regard; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Agriculture as a subject in School Education
1948 Smt. Mamata Mohanta:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government agrees with the view that for integrating education with rural
development, agriculture should be a subject in primary schools in both rural and urban
areas;
(b) if so, the steps taken/proposed to be taken by Government in this regard;
(c) whether it is a fact that the school education should be adopted in such a manner where
agriculture and related sciences are included in the school curriculum for introducing
agricultural courses as a preferred option for the students under the New Education Policy
(NEP); and
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
New India Literacy Programme (NILP)
1949 Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of funds allocated/sanctioned/released by Department of School Education
and Literacy under Centrally Sponsored Schemes viz. Samagra Shiksha, PM Poshan, and
New India Literacy Programme (NILP) during the last five years including the current
financial year; and
(b) the prescribed time limit to release such funds to various States?
Achievements of New Education Policy
1950 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the details of achievements made under the New Education Policy since its launch;
(b) the details of work done on Incorporating Indian Knowledge System in Higher Education
curricula; and
(c) the details of work done on the credit framework for education programs?
Suicides in higher education institutes
1951 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of students who have committed suicides in higher education institutes of
IIT, IIM, NIT, AIIMS & Central Universities during last five years;
(b) the number of SC, ST, OBC students committed suicide in the above institutes;
(c) the number of suicides which are ragging related during last five years, State-wise;
(d) the number of help calls received on 24x7 anti ragging helpline for students in last five
years;
463


(e) the number of students who died in Kota due to suicide in last five years; and
(f) the steps taken by Government to check rising suicide death in educational institutions?
PM Shri Vidyalaya
1952 # Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is any plan to establish PM Shri Vidyalaya in Nimar region of Madhya
Pradesh;
(b) if so, the number of schools proposed to be opened by Government; and
(c) the criteria prescribed for opening these schools?
Measures to prevent suicide by students
1953 Shri R. Dharmar:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is an increase in cases of suicide by students in educational institutions
like IITs including IIT- Chennai/Mumbai, NITs, IIMs, Central/State Universities and AIIMS
especially among students from SC, ST and OBC Communities;
(b) if so, details thereof along with number of students who committed suicide during last
five years and current year, State/year-wise including Tamil Nadu;
(c) whether the cases of suicide are proportionately higher in students pursuing higher
education, details thereof;
(d) whether Government has given any directives to State Governments in this regard; and
(e) steps taken or proposed to be taken by Government to prevent suicides?
Progress of NIPUN Bharat Mission
1954 Shri Derek O' Brien:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the progress of NIPUN Bharat FLN Mission (Foundational Literacy and Foundational
Numeracy Mission);
(b) the reasons for pushing back the target date to 2026-27; and
(c) whether the scheme aims on keeping specially abled children in separate institutions or
to have them home schooled, if so, the details thereof?
Economic development of the Union Territory areas
1955 Shri Pabitra Margherita:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the steps taken by Government for the economic development of the Union Territory
areas; and
(b) the details of steps taken by Government to promote fisheries and blue economy in the
Island Union Territory areas?
Rationalization exercise carried out by NCERT
1956 Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the specific chapters, paragraphs, and sentences that were removed from the political
science textbooks during the recent rationalization exercise by NCERT, the element-wise
reasons therefor;
(b) the process followed in determining the acceptability or desirability of sections and
chapters in the political science textbooks, details thereof;
464


(c) the mechanisms in place to ensure that the revisions made to the political science
textbooks align with the principles of academic integrity, historical accuracy, comprehensive
coverage of diverse perspectives and ideologies, details thereof; and
(d) whether Government has involved stakeholders in the evaluation process of the revision
of political science textbooks, details thereof?
Reserved posts in Delhi University
1957 Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that large number of teachers working for longer period against
posts of all categories in the grade of assistant professors have been displaced;
(b) if so, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether it is a fact that many departments of Delhi University have decided NFS on
reserve posts;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) the details of total numbers of displaced assistant professors in all categories who were
teaching in Delhi University for more than five years?
Assistance to the students applying for foreign scholarship
1958 Shri Harbhajan Singh:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any scheme to provide assistance to the students applying for
foreign scholarship and higher education so as to provide equal opportunities to each
student in getting foreign scholarship;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has set up any centres in the States to provide assistance to such
students applying for foreign scholarship;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) the funds allocated for the purpose during the last three years and the current year,
State-wise including Punjab?
Functioning of Institution of Eminence Scheme
1959 Ms. Dola Sen:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has analysed why there has been a delay in the Institution of
Eminence (IOE) scheme, specifically pertaining to the inactive Empowered Expert
Committee (EEC);
(b) if so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government has taken any step to reconstitute the EEC, given that the last
committee, completed its term on February 20, 2021, and no new members have been
appointed or the term extended; and
(d) if so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor?
Tuition fee for non-professional courses
1960 Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government realises the need for formulation of a separate policy for fixing the
tuition fee for non-professional courses in degree colleges;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) if not, the reasons therefor; and
465


(d) the details of measures taken in this regard?
Professor of Practice
1961 # Shri Deepak Prakash:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of experts who have registered themselves online under the "Professor of
Practice" policy of University Grants Commission (UGC) so far; and
(b) the number of such registered experts who have got the opportunity to work with HEI
through the portal on subjects like social science, and political science?
Affordable and high quality education for Indian students
1962 # Smt. Kanta Kardam:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has received proposals from foreign Universities for setting up
campuses in the country;
(b) if so, the details of these proposals and the criteria for guaranteeing affordable and high
quality education to Indian students; and
(c) the action taken by Government to assess these proposals received from foreign
Universities?
Reservation in Private Sector
1963 Shri Kumar Ketkar:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is planning to introduce reservation policy in private sector, if not,
reasons therefor;
(b) if so, by when, the details thereof; and
(c) the reasons for not continuing the reservation policy in companies which were public
sector and now demonetized and became private sector?
Promotion of Swadeshi and Khadi products in CAPFs
1964 # Shri Samir Oraon:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether any step has been taken by Government to promote Swadeshi and Khadi
products in the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs);
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Crime Rate
1965 Shri Sanjeev Arora:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) how the crime rate has varied in the country in the year 2022, as per the latest records
of NCRB; and
(b) the State-wise, category-wise details thereof?
Cyber crimes awareness in rural areas
1966 # Smt. Darshana Singh:
Shri Pabitra Margherita:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
466


(a) the measures taken by Government during the year 2023 to prevent cyber crimes;
(b) if no measures are taken, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government has taken any measure to create awareness to prevent cyber
crimes in rural areas; and
(d) if so, the details of such activities/ programmes, if not, the reasons therefor?
Vibrant Village Programme (VVP) in Arunachal Pradesh
1967 Shri Nabam Rebia:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of villages selected under the Vibrant Village Programme (VVP) in
Arunachal Pradesh in first phase, the details thereof;
(b) the number of villages which are unconnected and steps initiated to connect them, the
details thereof;
(c) whether all the villages under VVP are located on Indo-China/ Indo-Myanmar/ Indo-
Bhutan border in Arunachal Pradesh; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
High Security Registration Plate (HSRP)
1968 Shri Vivek K. Tankha:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the rationale and reasons for implementing High Security Registration Plate (HSRP)
number plates;
(b) how price of HSRP is determined;
(c) the measures that Government has taken to regulate the price of HSRP;
(d) the total number of HSRP issued by Government till date and the total revenue
generated from it since its inception, year-wise and State-wise details; and
(e) whether Government intends to decentralize the manufacture and supply of HSRP to
involve MSMEs?
Service conditions for Employees of J&K
1969 Shri Vivek K. Tankha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Central Government rules related to service conditions, as applicable to
Central Governmentt employees including CGHS, LTC, 7th CPC TA-DA rules etc, are
applicable at par to employees of UT of Jammu and Kashmir post repeal of Article 370, if
so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor;
(b) whether Government intends to bring parity to employees of J&K with other Central
Government employees who are working in tough conditions and situation; and
(c) if so, timeline thereof?
Training to police officials on Cyber Crimes
1970 Dr. Santanu Sen:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of cases related to cyber crimes registered and solved in the last three
years, State-wise/UT-wise data thereof;
(b) the details of training programs conducted for police officers across India to deal with
cyber crimes in the last five years;
(c) the number and percentage of police officers who have received such training and
capacity-building programs; and
(d) the steps taken or proposed by Government to enhance the skills and knowledge of
467


police officers in handling cyber crimes in the last five years?
Standardization of Paying Guest Houses
1971 # Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the number of paying guest houses or hostels being run for students in the State of
Delhi and whether all of them are registered with Government;
(b) the number of guest houses or hostels registered with Government and under which law
or Rules are they registered; and
(c) whether Government has enacted any law or Rules to standardize the facilities,
security, quality of food, availability of library, registration and verification of students and
fees charged at these places of residence, if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons
therefor?
Schemes for economically disadvantaged individuals in jails
1972 Shri K.C. Venugopal:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the current status and effectiveness of Government scheme aimed at providing financial
support to economically disadvantaged individuals in jails;
(b) whether there have been any recent modifications or improvements to the scheme
based on feedback or observations from its implementation;
(c) how Government is ensuring transparency in the implementation of the scheme;
(d) the details of total amount of funds released to various states under the specified
scheme; and
(e) the number of jail inmates who benefited from this scheme, so far?
Welfare of the CAPF Personnel
1973 Shri Deepender Singh Hooda:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the Disability Pension entitlement in the CAPF, along with its criterion, as
percentage of the total emoluments; and
(b) the details of the financial assistance to the dependants of Martyrs and other
entitlements in the CAPF along with its criterion?
Medals for excellent work in civil defence services
1974 # Shri Satish Chandra Dubey:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether persons excelling in nursing service, home guards, and civil defence services
could be encouraged by means of awarding medals to them; and
(b) if so, the number of personnel given medals during the last five years, the year-wise
details thereof?
Investigation by National Investigation Agency (NIA)
1975 # Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel:
Shri Deepak Prakash:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of cases handed over by the Central Government to the National
Investigation Agency (NIA) during the last five years;
(b) the number of cases in which court verdicts have been delivered during the said period,
468


the year-wise details thereof; and
(c) the number of cases in which the accused has been convicted, the year-wise details
thereof?
Bharat ke Veer and Central Armed Police Forces
1976 Shri Rakesh Sinha:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) by when the 'Bharat ke Veer' portal and 'Bharat ke Veer' Trust would be established;
(b) the details of benefits accorded to the dependents of martyrs of Central Armed Police
Forces (CAPFs) employees;
(c) whether the parents of martyrs of CAPFs employees will also benefit under the ambit of
'Bharat ke Veer'; and
(d) the number of dependents of martyrs of CAPFs employees who have been provided
beneficial assistance, so far?
Online fraud cases
1977 Shri Tiruchi Siva:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether cases of frauds/cheating being committed via e-Mail and SMS have increased
across the country during last five years;
(b) if so, measures that taken by Government to curb such cases;
(c) whether any study has been conducted to understand the spike in such online fraud
cases after demonitisation, COVID Pandemic, and the spread of online services; and
(d) the number of such cases registered during this period, State-wise/UT-wise, along with
the losses incurred to the users of mobile phone/internet?
Incidents against SC/ST and OBC categories
1978 # Shri Rajmani Patel:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that violent incidents and heinous crimes like rape, murder and
assault are being committed against SC/ST and OBC in the State of Uttarakhand;
(b) if so, what action has been taken so far by State Government on racist incidents
against SC/ST and OBC categories, the number of cases where criminals have been
punished; and
(c) the details of incidents that happened to SC/ST and OBC women in the State, details
therefor, year-wise?
Cyber forensic training laboratory
1979 Dr. Fauzia Khan:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the number of total personnel, prosecutors and judicial officers trained till 2023 in the
cyber forensic training laboratory;
(b) the change in numbers, year-wise, since 2020, if any, in the detection and resolution of
cases of cyber crimes in India after the launch of training laboratories;
(c) the number of cases registered till 2023 on the cyber-crime prevention against women
portal and the data of the content blocked against the number of requests made; and
(d) the measures adopted to induct more trained prosecutors and judicial officers in the
cyber training laboratory?
469


Conditions of minority women
1980 Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs  be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of the condition of minority women in the country and the
problems generally encountered by them, especially in the rural areas;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the steps taken by Government in this regard; and
(c) whether Government has prepared/proposes to prepare any action plan for
empowerment of women belonging to the minority communities and if so, the details
thereof?
Implementation of Minority welfare schemes
1981 Shri Sanjay Raut:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs  be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the minority welfare schemes implemented, particularly in Maharashtra
State along with the funds sanctioned and spent during the last three years;
(b) whether Government has stopped the allocation of funds for pre-matric and post-matric
scholarship to the minority students, if so, the reasons therefor; and
(c) whether Government have received complaints about misappropriation of funds, meant
for minority development schemes;
(d) if so, details thereof and Government's reaction thereto?
Program and initiatives by Ministry
1982 Shri Neeraj Shekhar:
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs  be pleased to state:
(a) the details of key programs and initiatives introduced by the Ministry to assist minority
communities; and
(b) the manner in which these initiatives have effected the lives of the minorities?
Merit-cum-Means Scholarship
1983 Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs  be pleased to state:
(a) the details of Merit-cum-Means Scholarship for Technical and Professional Courses that
have been awarded to students/children belonging to minority communities in the State of
Andhra Pradesh during the last four years;
(b) the details of girl students for whom the merit-cum-means scholarship for Technical and
Professional Courses have been awarded;
(c) the details of funds that have been allocated for this purpose;
(d) whether Government has undertaken any survey/third party audit to assess the drop
rates among the minority community students during the last 4 years; and
(e) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Minority Welfare Schemes
1984 Shri Sadanand Shet Tanawde:
Will the Minister of Minority Affairs  be pleased to state:
(a) the steps taken by Government to comply with the 15-point programme for the welfare
of minority communities;
(b) whether any other step has been taken by Government for minority welfare; and
(c) if so, the details thereof?
470


Funds to the Local Self Governments
1985 Dr. V. Sivadasan:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) the funds provided to the Local Self Governments (LSGs) by the Union Government and
State Governments under various schemes, State-wise details for the last 5 years; and
(b) whether there is any plan to address the loss of revenue faced by the LSGs due to
implementation of GST?
Empowering Panchayats
1986 # Smt. Seema Dwivedi:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) the significant policies and accomplishments of the Ministry;
(b) the details of measures that Government has implemented or is currently implementing
to empower Panchayats; and
(c) the details of strategies that Government has implemented to increase the participation
of women and marginalized groups in Panchayats?
Basic infrastructure in Panchayats
1987 Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that 1893 Gram Panchayats (GPs) in Andhra Pradesh
does not have its own office and nearly 4,000 GPs do not have a computer; and
(b) the details of efforts being made by Government to provide permanent office and
computers to the above Panchayats in AP?
Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan
1988 Shri Sandosh Kumar P:
Will the Minister of Panchayati Raj be pleased to state:
(a) the details of total fund allotted to the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan (RGSA);
(b) the details of major activities conducted under the scheme and the total amount spent
thereon so far; and
(c) the allocation of funds under the Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan and the activities
conducted by each State under the scheme since inception, State-wise?
Safety measures in under-construction tunnels
1989 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government guidelines recommend emergency exits for tunnels
longer than 1.5 Kilometer, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether emergency exits were provided in the recently collapsed Silkyara Tunnel in
Uttarakhand, if so, the details thereof and if not the reasons therefor;
(c) the details of ongoing tunnel projects in the country especially in the Himalayan region
and the details of safety measures being employed in such projects including emergency
exits; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to rehabilitate and support workers who got stuck in the
tunnel collapse?
471


Geological Report of the Silkyara-Barkot tunnel
1990 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the Geological Report submitted to Government before the
commencement of the Silkyara-Barkot tunnel;
(b) whether if is a fact that the report showed that the proposed tunnel could encounter
weak rocks;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the details of safety measures and steps taken to overcome the problem of weak rocks
in the construction of the said tunnel including providing extra support to the identified loose
part of the mountain?
Increase in the fatalities in road accidents
1991 Shri A. D. Singh:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is a 9.4 per cent increase in the fatalities in road accidents in the country
in 2022;
(b) whether there is an 11.9 per cent increase in accidents during the same period;
(c) if no, the reasons for increase in fatalities and accidents on roads even when the laws
are stringent now;
(d) whether the safety and fitness of vehicles is one of the major causes for fatalities and
accidents as it is not checked periodically; and
(e) if not, how Government intends to address the issue?
Projects under Bharatmala Pariyojana
1992 Dr. Sikander Kumar:
Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the targets and the total number of projects proposed in the country under the
Bharatmala Pariyojana; and
(b) the details of developmental works executed under the said Pariyojana and the funds
spent thereon so far?
NHAI projects in Punjab
1993 Shri Vikramjit Singh Sahney:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of status and targeted dates of completion of works taken up by the National
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) in the State of Punjab, project-wise;
(b) the details of total works taken up by NHAI, State-wise, for the last five years, including
Punjab;
(c) the details of amount borne by various State Governments for the works taken up by
NHAI during the last five years; and
(d) the details of length of road NHAI has completed during the last five years, State-wise
details thereof, project-wise for Punjab?
National Highways in Tamil Nadu
1994 Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of increase in the total length of the National Highways in the country in the
472


last five years;
(b) the details of ongoing National Highway (NH) projects including their present status/
expenditure incurred in the State of Tamil Nadu as on date; and
(c) the details of funds allocated, sanctioned and status of implementation of each project
as on date?
Spending on Teacher Training
1995 Shri S Niranjan Reddy:
Will the Minister of Education be pleased to state:
(a) the steps taken by Government to improve teachers training and education;
(b) the funds spent on teachers training and education by Government in the last five years;
(c) whether Government is using AI to improve the quality and quantity of training imparted
to teachers;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Strategy for easing traffic on NHs
1996 Shri R. Girirajan:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has adopted any comprehensive and innovative strategy to solve
various problems including frequent fatal accidents occurring on National Highways;
(b) if so, the details thereof, and safety and security gadgets and technological innovations
implemented on NHs;
(c) the total expenditure incurred in the last three years, year-wise, State-wise;
(d) whether Government has developed New Express Highways and elevated corridors for
easing the traffic in major, strategically important cities in the country, State-wise; and
(e) if so, the details thereof and the list of such special projects initiated in the last 3 years
with their budget and current status of construction, State-wise?
Damaged Bridges in Gujarat
1997 Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that road condition between Vadodara and Alirajpur is very bad and
need to be repaired/re-carpeted;
(b) whether it is also fact that several small and medium size bridges have either collapsed
or damaged and these are required to be re-built;
(c) if so, the reasons for not undertaking this project even after the financial approval from
the Central Government; and
(d) the details of the sanctioned amount for the project and by when it is likely to be
completed?
Paradip-Barbil 8 Lane Highway
1998 Dr. Prashanta Nanda:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the present status of construction of Paradip-Barbil 8 lane highway;
(b) the details of land acquired and compensation paid by NHAI;
(c) whether forest clearance of this project is still pending; and
(d) if so, Government's action in this regard?
473


Bhoomi Rashi Portal
1999 Dr. Anil Jain:
Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the objectives and details of the Bhoomi Rashi Portal; and
(b) the details of the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) projects brought under the
Bhoomi Rashi Portal?
Char Dham all-weather accessibility project
2000 Shri Shaktisinh Gohil:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Char Dham all-weather project got split into 53 works contorts; and
(b) if so, whether it was due to omit the mandatory Environment Impact Reports and
mandatory laws, if so the details thereof?
Penalties on FASTag users
2001 Shri Jayant Chaudhary:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of absolute number and percentage of total highway users/registered
vehicles with FASTags in India currently;
(b) whether directions were issued to collect double toll as penalty in case of no FASTag or
inoperable FASTag or deficient balance in account linked to FASTag;
(c) if so, details of the amount of toll collected since the penalty was imposed, including
details of penalty amount & number of transactions and users who were penalised in the
last 12 months; and
(d) whether Government intends to continue with this double toll collection and if so, the
rationale of this penalty imposed?
Rail and road network
2002 Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Shri Mithlesh Kumar:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is actively addressing the challenges country may encounter in
maintaining and expanding its extensive road and rail networks;
(b) whether Government has identified it vital for the continuous enhancement of country's
transportation infrastructure;
(c) whether the world’s first prototype of the BS 6 Stage II’ Electrified Flex Fuel Vehicle’
(FFV) aligns with country's transportation goals; and
(d) if so, details of the impact might it have on the country’s transportation landscape?
Road projects under the Bharatmala Pariyojana
2003 Shri Lahar Singh Siroya:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the ongoing and pending projects, targets fixed for Karnataka, under the
Bharatmala Pariyojana; and
(b) the details of targets achieved (in Kms) so far and the funds spent thereon in
Karnataka?
474


Progress of Char Dham Yatra Road project
2004 Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the cost estimated for realising the Char Dham Yatra All Weather Road project at the
beginning;
(b) the spending made so far for the Char Dham project, year-wise details for last five
years;
(c) the details of the targeted timeline for the completion of the project;
(d) the reasons in detail for extending the deadline for completion of construction; and
(e) whether the project cost escalated due to extension of deadline if so, the details
thereof?
Expansion of National Highways in Odisha
2005 Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the total length of highways in kilometers constructed in the country, year-wise and
State-wise, over the last five years; and
(b) the length of highways in kilometers constructed in the State of Odisha over the past
five years?
Expenses of State Governments in construction of National Highways
2006 Dr. John Brittas:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the National Highways in which State Governments have given or
committed portion of the expenditure till date, State-wise;
(b) the details of total amount paid and to be paid by States as on date so far, State-wise;
(c) whether Government of Kerala has requested the Union Government to exonerate it
from bearing portion of cost for certain roads;
(d) if so, the details of such roads and the status thereof; and
(e) the total number, value and details of roads for development of which Government of
Kerala has agreed to share portion of cost and the amount so far deposited?
National Highways in Haryana
2007 Shri Kartikeya Sharma:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the total length of National Highways in the state of Haryana;
(b) the total length of National Highways constructed in the State of Haryana during the last
five years; and
(c) the total length of National Highways and road infrastructure projects underway and
proposed in the State of Haryana?
State's share in land acquisition of NH
2008 Shri Elamaram Kareem:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of amount spent by State Governments and NHAI for land acquisition and
related activities for the development of National Highways for last five years, State-wise
details;
(b) whether there are States that have spent 25 per cent or more share for land acquisition
for NH development; and
475


(c) whether Government will assist the States to reduce the financial burden connected with
the NH development, if so, the details thereof?
Nagaon-Dibrugarh National Highway Project
2009 Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether the four-lane work of the 380-km Nagaon-Dibrugarh National Highway is still to
be completed;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the reasons for its delay;
(c) the reasons for delay from the original schedule of completion and the additional cost
due to time overrun;
(d) the number of projects under the Central Government schemes in the North Eastern
Region which are running behind schedule;
(e) whether PIB/CCEA while revising the cost analyses the reasons for the delay; and
(f) if so, the details thereof?
Construction of Under Passes and Flyovers in Andhra Pradesh
2010 Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is any proposal for construction of two Vehicular Under Passes and two
Flyovers, including one at Golagamudi junction, Chintareddypalem junction and at Bujabuja
in Nellore district of Andhra Pradesh by NHAI in 2019;
(b) if so, the reasons for delay in completing the survey by NHAI on the above projects; and
(c) the details of anticipated date by which survey would be completed and by when NHAI
would start DPR and finally complete the above under passes and flyovers in Nellore, AP?
Ropeway Projects in Karnataka
2011 Shri Narayana Koragappa:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government of Karnataka had sent proposals to take up 14
ropeways under Parvatmala Programme;
(b) if so, the details thereof, district-wise;
(c) the details of codes/specifications/standards prescribed for starting ropeways; and
(d) by when the above ropeways are going to be approved and start functioning?
Corpus Fund for maintenance of National Highways
2012 # Dr. Kalpana Saini:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is any provision to compensate NHAI (National Highways Authority of
India) for damage caused to National Highways owing to vehicular accidents like insurance
claims to accident affected individuals in the case of human life/vehicular damage;
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, whether Government proposes to implement
mandatory provisions in the vehicle insurance sector to create a Corpus Fund for ensuring
the maintenance of damaged National Highways owing to accidents; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Road accidents on National Highways
2013 Shri Jose K. Mani:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
476


(a) whether Government has the details of the number of pothole-related accidents and
deaths that have occured in National Highways over the last three years;
(b) if so, State-wise details thereof;
(c) the quantum of funds provided as compensation to victims of road accidents over the
last three years;
(d) whether Government is incorporating any new advanced technology features in the
under construction/development of National Highways in the country to prevent accidents;
and
(e) if so, the details thereof?
Repair of Kullu-Manali NH
2014 # Ms. Indu Bala Goswami:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether the geologists have found in the survey pertaining to Kullu-Manali NH damaged
by the disaster, that only those roads have collapsed where the construction work using
concrete was not done;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether any plan has been made to construct roads using concrete only after the
survey report of geologists; and
(d) the estimated cost of the repair work of the said NH?
Pace of construction of NHs in the country
2015 # Shri Harnath Singh Yadav:
Will the Minister of Road Transport and Highways be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the pace of construction of National Highways during the last
five years has increased furthermore than the pace which was there before 2014;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has earmarked any action plan to connect every district
headquarters of the country with national highways; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
MGNREGS in Tamil Nadu
2016 Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Union Government has conducted a thorough scrutiny of
implementation of MGNREGS in Tamil Nadu;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether it is a fact that the delay in the release of funds is due to the sanctioning of
non-permissible works & non-compliance of guidelines, if so, the details thereof?
MoU with SIDBI for DAY-NRLM Scheme
2017 # Shri Surendra Singh Nagar:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry and Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) have
signed a landmark Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to strengthen women-led
enterprises under the DAY-NRLM Scheme;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether the said project will help senior members of Self-Help Groups; and
(d) whether the said initiative will also be extended to women entrepreneurs in Uttar
Pradesh and if so, the details thereof?
477


Watershed Projects in Tamil Nadu
2018 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the salient features of Watershed Projects;
(b) the details of the Watershed Projects sanctioned and completed under the Drought
Prone Area Programme in the districts of Tamil Nadu during the last five years, year-wise;
(c) the number and location of Watershed Projects sanctioned and completed in the State
of Tamil Nadu; and
(d) the details of the targets and achievements of these projects towards resolving drinking
water shortage in Tamil Nadu?
Targets fixed for WDC-PMKSY
2019 Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government has decided to develop 4.95 million hectares of
rainfed and degraded lands under WDC-PMKSY 2.0 by the year 2025-26; and
(b) if so, the details of amount spent achievement made under this scheme so far, year-
wise and district-wise; and
(c) the details of the steps being taken/planned to achieve targets fixed for WDC-PMKSY
2.0 within the target year of 2025-26?
Budget allocation for PMGSY
2020 Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of budget allocation made to States in the second phase of the Pradhan
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and the total length of roads in kilometers to be
constructed;
(b) the details of length of roads, in kilometers, constructed under the above scheme in
Tamil Nadu and the expenditure made thereon;
(c) the status of progress of other roads proposed under the scheme in Tamil Nadu and the
details of the proposed pending roads; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Funds allocated under Rural Livelihood Mission
2021 Dr. C.M. Ramesh:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government have introduced new schemes under the Rural Livelihood Mission
in different States, the details thereof;
(b) the details of funds allocated to different States under the programmes, State-wise;
and
(c) the number of States which have utilised the allocated funds under the Scheme and
details of States where funds remained unutilised?
Effective participation of women in MGNREGS
2022 Dr. C.M. Ramesh:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the steps Government have taken to involve more women and their effective
participation in MGNREGS; and
478


(b) the details of women participation in MGNREGS during the last three years, State-
wise?
Cyclonic storm Biparjoy in the Arabian Sea
2023 # Shri Shaktisinh Gohil:
Will the Minister of Home Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the quantum of damage farmers in Kutch, Saurashtra and North Gujarat suffered due to
cyclonic storm Biparjoy in the Arabian Sea which hit the coast of Gujarat;
(b) whether Government has estimated the loss incurred by the farmers in these regions, if
so, the details thereof;
(c) the quantum of relief given to the farmers; and
(d) the amount Government of Gujarat sought from the Center?
Delay in social audit under MGNREGS
2024 Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that only a few States have conducted social audit of the
work done under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS);
(b) if so, the details of social audit conducted by Gram Panchayat under MNREGS and
reasons for delay, State-wise;
(c) the steps taken by Government to accelerate social audit in all States;
(d) whether Government is aware that several States have complained about delay in
release of funds to social audit units; and
(e) if so, the reasons for delay in release of funds to social audit units?
Evaluation of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
2025 Smt. Vandana Chavan:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the last quality evaluation done for the roads that have met their targets;
(b) if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government has evaluated the financial cost of the targets which have not been
completed in the Road Connectivity Project on Left Wing Extremism Areas (RCPLWEA)
and the details thereof; and
(d) if not, the details therefor?
Construction of Amrit Sarovars
2026 # Shri Ram Shakal:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has constructed rural roads and Amrit Sarovars; and
(b) if so, the details thereof?
PMGSY in Andhra Pradesh
2027 Shri Beedha Masthan Rao Yadav:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of funds sanctioned and allocated for the construction of roads in Andhra
Pradesh during the last three years, district-wise;
(b) the details of works undertaken and undergoing under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) in the State; and
479


(c) by when the construction of the said roads are likely to be completed?
PMGSY in Chhattisgarh
2028 Shri Rajeev Shukla:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the total budgetary allocation and expenditure made under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY) in the State of Chhattisgarh in the last five years, year-wise and district-
wise;
(b) the total length of roads constructed in the State of Chhattisgarh under the same in the
last five years, year-wise and district-wise;
(c) whether Government is taking measures to provide for acceleration of the said scheme
in the State of Chhattisgarh;
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; and
(e) the proposed measures taken to strengthen the same?
Demand for job under MGNREGS
2029 Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether there has been an increase in demand for jobs under the MGNREGS in the last
two years;
(b) if so, the details of job demanded in the last two years, month-wise, State-wise;
(c) whether it is a fact that Government had exhausted almost all its outlay for the scheme
in October 2023, if not, the percentage of the outlay utilized in comparison with the total
outlay presented in the Union Budget 2023-24; and
(d) the alternate plans for providing employment to the people in rural areas despite
reducing the allocation for MGNREGS in the last Union Budget?
National Social Assistance Programme
2030 Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government plan to ensure that the National Social Assistance Programme
(NSAP) remains responsive to the changing socio-economic landscape, with mechanisms in
place for periodic reviews and updates to align with evolving needs, if so, the details
thereof; and
(b) the details of strategies in place to effectively target and reach marginalized and
vulnerable populations, ensuring that the benefits of the National Social Assistance
Programme (NSAP) are equitably distributed across diverse socio-economic groups?
ABPS in MGNREGS
2031 Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that nearly 40 per cent of MGNREGS workers do not pose Aadhar
linked bank accounts to enable ABPS, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Government has notified cases of misdirected/ diverted payments, if so, the
details thereof;
(c) whether Government has notified cases of mass job card deletions due to non-
compliance of ABPS requirements, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to ensure better network coverage and technical
training before adopting such complex interventions?
480


Wages and funds under MGNREGS
2032 Shri Binoy Viswam:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of wages being given under the MGNREGS, State-wise;
(b) the details of increase in MGNREGS wages since 2019, State-wise;
(c) the details of pending claims of States currently for which the Union Government is yet
to release funds; and
(d) the demands for funds made by the State Government of Kerala and the amounts
released since 2019, including the current pendency?
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana in Rajasthan
2033 # Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the number of houses sanctioned and outstanding for the State of Rajasthan under the
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, so far;
(b) whether it is a fact that eligible beneficiaries of all Gram Panchayats have been
connected with this scheme so far;
(c) if so, the details of the Gram Panchayats connected with this scheme and Gram
Panchayats which are yet to be connected, along with reasons; and
(d) the status of payment of the first installment and the second installment to the
beneficiaries of the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana?
Construction of bridges under PMGSY in Uttarakhand
2034 Shri Naresh Bansal:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the number of bridges sanctioned and completed under the Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) during the last three years and the current year in the State of
Uttarakhand;
(b) whether any proposal have been received from the State Government for construction
of more bridges in the State; and
(c) if so, the details thereof?
Construction of PMGSY roads with the help of NABARD
2035 # Smt. Mahua Maji:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether a loan has been provided by NABARD for the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Pariyojana in Jharkhand, if so, the details thereof;
(b) the length of rural roads sanctioned by NABARD for loan under this project;
(c) the proposals received from the State of Jharkhand and the proposal sanctioned under
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana; and
(d) the number of proposals received for Ranchi district under this project, the details
thereof?
Development of villages of Punjab near the border
2036 Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) the special schemes run by Government for the development of villages of Punjab and
other States near the border of Pakistan, if not, the reasons therefor;
(b) the details of special package given to Punjab for the development of such villages; and
481


(c) the funds released each year in the last 5 years by Government to each State/UT for
rural development, scheme-wise details thereof?
Employment under MGNREGS
Employment under MGNREGS
2037 # Shri Ram Nath Thakur:
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the unemployed are not getting adequate employment under
MGNREGS;
(b) if so, the details of employment provided to labourers in place of labourers enrolled in
MGNREGS during January 2022 to October 2023;
(c) the State-wise details of funds released to States under MGNREGS during the last
three years including the State of Bihar; and
(d) whether Government proposes to increase the number of working days under
MGNREGS in view of increasing unemployment in villages so that migration from villages to
cities can be stopped, if so, the details thereof?
Skill Development Centres in Punjab
2038 Shri Vikramjit Singh Sahney:
Shri Harbhajan Singh:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the number of Skill Development Centres (SDCs) currently functioning in Punjab with
Government support;
(b) the number of SDCs got shut down in Punjab in last five years;
(c) the details of fund allocated and fund released under various schemes of the Ministry in
last three years, year-wise, scheme-wise, State-wise and district-wise for Punjab;
(d) the number of people who got employed through different courses of PMKVY from
Punjab in last five years, year-wise, course-wise, district-wise; and
(e) the details of targets given, fund allocated and released to Punjab Skill Development
mission in the last three years, year-wise?
Requirement of skilled persons
2039 Shri R. Girirajan:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any data on the requirement of skilled persons in various
fields in the next five years and if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Government has any advanced skill training programme to cater the needs of
the industries in the next five years and if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has allocated adequate funds to create infrastructure facilities to
impart skill training and entrepreneurship development and if so, the details thereof; and
(d) whether it is a fact that country requires 10 crore skilled persons to cater services
sector and if so, the details thereof?
Scheme under PMKVY
2040 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the names of the schemes being implemented under the Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas
Yojana (PMKVY), State-wise;
(b) the States where said schemes are being implemented, scheme-wise;
(c) the number of persons likely to be provided employment as a result thereof; and
(d) whether it is a fact that the PMKVY scheme run by Government has extended benefit to
482


crores of youth across the country and if so, the State-wise details thereof, and if not, the
reasons therefor?
Industrial Training Institutes
2041 Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government maintains information on employment outcomes of all Industrial
Training Institutes (ITI) graduates and if so, the details thereof;
(b) the steps taken by Government to identify and address the reasons for low enrollment
rates in ITIs; and
(c) what measures have been taken by Government to meet the increasing demand for
Craft Instructor Training Scheme (CITS) trained instructors in ITIs?
Increasing employability through skill development
2042 Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the steps taken by Government to improve employability of youth through skill
development; and
(b) the steps taken by Government to cater to new age job roles?
Skilled Labour
2043 Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is on track to increase the proportion of India’s formally skilled
labour to at least 15% by 2022, as per the NITI Aayog’s Strategy for New India @ 75
Report 2019;
(b) if so, the details of progress made as on date, and if not, the reasons therefor, including
whether a revised target and/ or deadline has been set; and
(c) the details of growth of the formally skilled labour force during the last five years, year-
wise?
Skill development at global level
2044 # Shri Kailash Soni:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry is working for skill development in the country;
(b) the factors that have led to India's growing recognition in the global skills landscape;
and
(c) whether country can sustain this progress and further enhance its competitiveness, if
so, the details thereof?
Setting up of Skill Development Centres
2045 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of the need to set up more Skill Development Centres
(SDCs) in various States to give training and to make persons self-oriented for their
livelihood and to tap their talent;
(b) if so, the details of steps taken by Government in this direction to update technology,
and funds sanctioned/spent therefor, year-wise; and
(c) the details of steps being taken by Government in providing skill development,
483


especially to women in the country, till now?
Achievements in skill development of youth
2046 # Shri Aditya Prasad:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) the details of achievements in skill development of youth across the country through
training and entrepreneurship development under the Skill Development Scheme, State-
wise;
(b) whether sector based features are included in the courses of training imparted to small
and micro-scale entrepreneurs by the Ministry;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) if not, the reasons therefor?
Skill programmes for small business
2047 Shri Jaggesh:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact Government has turned its focus on enhancing skill programmes for
small business;
(b) whether these programmes include incentivizing skills training for micro, small and
medium enterprises (MSMEs);
(c) whether Government has taken steps to provide tailor-made courses to meet the
demand for skilled workers from small enterprises; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
PM-AJAY for upliftment of SC community
2048 Shri Pramod Tiwari:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is working on its objective to reduce poverty in the SC
Communities under Pradhan Mantri-Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana (PM-AJAY) and if so,
the details thereof;
(b) if so, the number of infrastructural development and skill development initiatives for SC
Communities taken by Government under the Scheme, the State-wise and year-wise
details thereof;
(c) the details of the additional employment opportunities being generated for the SC
Communities under the scheme; and
(d) the details of funds allocated and utilised for the development of SC dominated villages
into an “Adarsh Gram’?
Social discrimination
2049 Shri Parimal Nathwani:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) the number of cases of Social discrimination, untouchability, and caste-based
segregation of houses registered in the last three years;
State-wise; and
(b) the details of concrete measures taken by Government to remove these barriers and
the outcome thereof?
484


Social welfare schemes for deprived classes
2050 Shri S. Selvaganabathy:
Shri Lahar Singh Siroya:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) the details of social welfare schemes implemented in States/UTs along with the names
of such schemes, specially for Puducherry and Karnataka, district-wise;
(b) whether there is any specific scheme for economically poor people particularly for
women belonging to the weaker sections; and
(c) if so, the details of these schemes along with the allocations made for such schemes?
National Fellowship for OBC Students
2051 Dr. K. Laxman:
Shri Kailash Soni:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) the aim of the National Fellowship for OBC Students;
(b) the details of intake of Junior Research Fellows under the scheme for last five years,
year-wise; and
(c) whether there has been an enhancement in fellowship rates under the scheme since its
inception, if so, the details thereof?
National Action for Mechanised Sanitation Ecosystem (NAMASTE)
2052 Shri Imran Pratapgarhi:
Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) the number of identified Sewer/Septic Tank Workers (SSWs) and their families covered
under the Ayushman Bharat-Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) through the
NAMASTE scheme, State-wise details;
(b) the number of SSWs trained and the quantity of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Kits distributed, State-wise details; and
(c) the details of financial allocations from existing schemes, including Self Employment
Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS), Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM),
Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Urban Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NULM), and
NSKFDC being leveraged for a focused approach under NAMASTE?
Essential services for senior citizens
2053 # Shri Mithlesh Kumar:
Smt. Kanta Kardam:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government ensures that senior citizens have access to essential services,
financial support and safety measures;
(b) the manner in which Government perceives the unique challenges and needs of the
aging population; and
(c) the details thereof?
Drug abuse awareness
2054 Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi:
Will the Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any data regarding the prevalence of drug addiction among
485


youth (18-30 years) in the country, if so, the detailsthereon;
(b) the amount granted under the National Action Plan for Drug Demand Reduction to assist
voluntary organizations for prevention of alcoholism and drug abuse till now;
(c) the initiatives taken by Government to create drug abuse awareness among youth in the
country; and
(d) whether Government has any data regarding the number of rehabilitation centers for
drug abuse in the country run by both Government and private entities in the country, if so,
the details thereof, State-wise?
Vocational training Initiatives for tribal youth
2055 Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya:
Shri Biplab Kumar Deb:
Shri Kailash Soni:
Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki:
Smt. Seema Dwivedi:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether there are any initiatives by Government for bridging the skill gap and enhancing
the employability prospects of tribal youth through vocational training initiatives;
(b) whether Government has taken steps to address the educational disparities faced by
tribal students to ensure their equitable access to quality education; and
(c) if so, the details of such initiatives, their outcome and financial outlay state-wise
including the State of Tripura?
Mungekar Committee Report
2056 Shri Sujeet Kumar:
Smt. Sulata Deo:
Shri Niranjan Bishi:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken cognizance of the need for distinct policy prescriptions
and separate strategies under each sector for Scheduled Areas, as highlighted in the
Mungekar Committee Report; and
(b) if so, the details of the policy measures taken;
if not, the reasons therefor?
Entrepreneurship within the tribal communities
2057 # Shri Biplab Kumar Deb:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether any specific initiative has been taken by Government with the objective to
promote entrepreneurship within the tribal communities;
(b) if so, the details of some specific success stories and case studies of tribal
entrepreneurs who benefited from Government support; and
(c) the steps taken in this regard in the State of Tripura?
EMRS’s in Odisha
2058 Dr. Prashanta Nanda:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of Eklavya Model Residential Schools sanctioned and functioning in Odisha;
(b) the details of students admitted in different EMRS’s in Odisha (School wise & year wise
last 3 years);
486


(c) whether Parents of Eklavya School in Odisha’s Nuapada have flagged the issue of poor
basic facilities;
(d) if so, the details of complaints received by Government from Odisha in last five years
regarding it; and
(e) the details of steps taken in this regard by the Government?
Scholarship for tribal students
2059 Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
the number of students who have availed fellowship and scholarship in the last five years,
State-wise details thereof?
PVTG Development Mission
2060 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Pradhan Mantri Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Mission aims to improve socio-economic conditions of the particularly vulnerable tribal
groups (PVTGs) in the country;
(b) if so, the details of tribal groups whose socio-economic conditions have improved under
this mission from north-eastern region;
(c) the budgetary expenditure made under the ‘Pradhan Mantri Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Groups (PVTG) Development Mission’ during the 2023-24 particularly for North-Eastern
Region;
(d) whether Government has any plan to accommodate the findings of the field visits in the
Development Mission envisioned for PVTG; and
(e)if so, the details thereof?
Tribal Status to 11 left out Communities in Sikkim
2061 Shri Hishey Lachungpa:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has received proposals to grant Tribal Status to 11 left out
Communities in Sikkim if so, the details thereof;
(b) what is the present status of the proposal; and
(c) by when Government would grant Tribal Status to the proposed 11+1 (12) left out
Communities?
Priority cases from Odisha for inclusion in the ST list
2062 Smt. Sulata Deo:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether proposal from Odisha were identified as priority cases for inclusion in the ST
list as recommended by the Ministry's Task force in 2014; and
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons for delay?
Schemes meant for Tribals in Rajasthan
2063 # Shri Rajendra Gehlot:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the schemes being run for tribals in Rajasthan;
(b) the plan and year-wise details of the amount spent by Government for these schemes;
and
487


(c) whether there is any proposal to set up schools for tribals in the State of Rajasthan, if
so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor?
Infrastructure in EMRS Schools
2064 Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has enhanced the infrastructure in EMRS schools to create a
conducive learning environment for tribal students, is so, the details thereof; and
(b) the details of EMRS schools created in different states and the details of funds spent?
Development of Tribals in Odisha
2065 Dr. Amar Patnaik:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has the details of funds utilization and expenditure incurred under
the PM PVTG Development Mission 2023;
(b) if so, State-wise and expenditure category-wise details thereof, if not, the reasons
therefor;
(c) whether Government plans to collect and maintain central data for PVTGs for more
targetted implementation of schemes for tribals, if not, reasons therefor; and
(d) the details of measures taken by Government for the socio-economic development of
PVTGs of Odisha?
Pradhan Mantri Matri Vandana Yojana
2066 # Shri Ajay Pratap Singh:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Pradhan Mantri Matri Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) covers second stage of
pregnancy period;
(b) if so, the details of funds provided to States/UTs to it; and
(c) whether there is any provision under the said scheme for widowed/divorced/separated
pregnant women and lactating mothers;
if so the details thereof?
Deteriorating Health Indicators amongst STs
2067 Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan:
Shri Kapil Sibal:
Will the Minister of Tribal Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of performance of STs under various health indicators in NFHS-5 such as
mortality rates, maternal and child care, disease treatment, vaccinations, since 2019 State-
wise; and
(b) the measures Government has taken to enhance the health condition of the poor &
marginalised tribes?
Maternal Healthcare in Rural Areas
2068 Smt. Rajani Ashokrao Patil:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the number of women receiving benefits under the Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana
Yojana (PMMVY) scheme, during last five years, State-wise;
(b) the details of progress made under the various schemes during last five years,
specifically in terms of various health indicators among rural women;
488


(c) the details of steps taken to address the need for reproductive rights, especially access
to abortions among rural women; and
(d) the measures taken by Government to address gaps in maternal and child healthcare
and specifically the rural-urban gap in infant and child mortality?
Under 5 Mortality Rate
2069 Shri Sanjeev Arora:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of under-5 mortality rate (U5MR) in the country State/UT-wise for last five
years;
(b) whether Government has any plan to incorporate Artificial Intelligence (AI) as a decision
support system by physicians and care-givers to help in early identification of high-risk
births thereby reducing infant mortalities; and
(c) if so, the steps taken by Government to reduce these numbers?
Nari Adalat
2070 Shri S Niranjan Reddy:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the National Commission for Women (NCW) used to provide
financial assistance to NGOs for organising Parivarik Mahila Lok Adalats (PMLAs) till the
year 2014-2015;
(b) if so, the steps taken by Government to provide alternate Grievance Redressal
Mechanism to women for the issues faced by them at local level during last five years;
(c) the status along with the details of the funds spent and utilised on the scheme; and
(d) the district-wise details of the scheme being implemented on pilot basis?
Diversion of funds under Beti Bachao Beti Padhao scheme
2071 Shri Niranjan Bishi:
Dr. Amar Patnaik:
Smt. Sulata Deo:
Shri Sujeet Kumar:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the quantum of funds utilized under each vertical in Beti Bachao Beti Padhao scheme
during last five years;
(b) whether Government is aware that there has been an unequal distribution and
diversification of funds under the scheme as observed by the Standing Committee on
Empowerment of Women (2021);
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to redistribute the allocation of funds and ensure
efficient utilization of funds?
Mahila Police Volunteers (MPVs)
2072 Shri Niranjan Bishi:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the number of States where presenlty Mahila Police Volunteers (MPVs) scheme is
operational;
(b) whether Government plans to increase the application of the scheme across all states
of the country; and
(c) if so, the details thereof?
489


One Stop Centers in Odisha
2073 Dr. Sasmit Patra:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of One Stop Centers (OSCs) targeted, established, and functional as on
date, State-wise and district-wise for the State of Odisha;
(b) the details of OSCs integrated with the women helpline, State-wise and district-wise for
the State of Odisha; and
(c) the details of the progress made towards achieving the scheme's objective of providing
a range of services to women affected by violence, including medical, legal, and
psychological support?
Data on Orphan Children
2074 Shri Jawhar Sircar:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government collates data on orphan children in the country;
(b) if so, the number of orphan children, State-wise;
(c) the details of estimated expenditure on the welfare of orphan children and under what
schemes; and
(d) the reasons for delay in approving adoption of orphan children?
Assessment of Welfare schemes
2075 Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any mechanism to assess the impact of its welfare schemes
and various policies on the beneficiaries;
(b) whether officials have been deputed from time to time for this purpose to know the real
impact on the life of beneficiaries; and
(c) if so, the details thereof?
Promoting women’s empowerment
2076 Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) India’s achievements in pilot representation, STEM education, and financial inclusion
contributed to its recognition as a global leader in gender equality; and
(b) the details of specific initiatives and programs that have been instrumental in driving
India’s positive trajectory in promoting women’s empowerment?
Digital skills to rural youth
2077 Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav:
Will the Minister of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has signed agreements and made partnership to take digital skills
to the grassroots, thus building talent pool capacities and seamlessly connecting students,
youth and micro-entrepreneurs across the country;
(b) whether the partnership will help in training of 500,000 budding and existing
entrepreneurs in digital marketing skills by Meta platforms like Facebook, WhatsApp and
Instagram in seven regional languages; and
(c) if so, the details thereof/present status thereof and funds sanctioned/spent till now-
language wise?
490


Health Care of Children
2078 Shri A. A. Rahim:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the infant mortality rate in the country, State-wise;
(b) the details of the rate of anaemia among children below the age of 14 in the country;
State-wise;
(c) the details of States in the country where nutritious meal programmes are properly
implemented; and
(d) the quantum of funds allotted under the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
programme to each state in the last four years?
Mission SAKSHAM
2079 # Shri Narhari Amin:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) the objective of the Mission Saksham initiated by Government;
(b) whether this mission is being implemented in all the States of the country, if so, the
details thereof; and
(c) if not, details of Government's plan to implement the mission uniformly across the
country?
Malnutrition in Children
2080 Shri C. Ve. Shanmugam:
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that a large number of children in the country are suffering from
malnutrition;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the details of the initiatives taken by Government to tackle malnutrition; and
(d) whether Government proposes to organize any programme to sensitize people about
malnutrition and the ways to tackle malnutrition, if so, the details thereof?
New Delhi 
The 13th December, 2023
22 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
P. C. Mody,
Secretary-General.
# Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
491

INDEX
(Ministry-Wise)
Cooperation : 1921, 1922, 1923, 1924, 1925, 1926, 1927,
1929, 1930, 1931
Education :
1932, 1933, 1934, 1935, 1936, 1937, 1938,
1939, 1940, 1941, 1942, 1943, 1944, 1945,
1946, 1947, 1948, 1949, 1950, 1951, 1952,
1953, 1954, 1956, 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960,
1961, 1962, 1971, 1995
Home Affairs :
1955, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1969, 1970,
1972, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1978,
1979, 2023
Minority Affairs : 1928, 1980, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984
Panchayati Raj : 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988
Road Transport and Highways :
1968, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994,
1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002,
2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009,
2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015
Rural Development :
2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022,
2024, 2025, 2026, 2027, 2028, 2029, 2030,
2031, 2032, 2033, 2034, 2035, 2036, 2037
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship : 2038, 2039, 2040, 2041, 2042, 2043, 2044,
2045, 2046, 2047, 2077
Social Justice and Empowerment : 1963, 2048, 2049, 2050, 2051, 2052, 2053,
2054
Tribal Affairs : 2055, 2056, 2057, 2058, 2059, 2060, 2061,
2062, 2063, 2064, 2065, 2067
Women and Child Development : 2066, 2068, 2069, 2070, 2071, 2072, 2073,
2074, 2075, 2076, 2078, 2079, 2080
492