PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY ERRATA 
to the list of Questions for WRITTEN ANSWERS for 
                          Tuesday, December 19, 2023/ 28 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Q. No.  Corrections 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
1765.  May be treated as cancelled.   
1772.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1775.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1781.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1784.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1786.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1789.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1790.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1802.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1812.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1815.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1816.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1817.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1818.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1821.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1824.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1829.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1832.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1835.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1838.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1839.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1840.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1848.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1851.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1854.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1855.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1860.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1876.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1879.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1881.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1885.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1886.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1893.  May be treated as cancelled. 

1895.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1898.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1907.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1909.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1914.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1917.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1918.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1920.  May be treated as cancelled. 
1797.  The name of the Second Questioner, i.e. Dr. Amee Yajnik, be deleted. 
1844.  The name of the Second Questioner, i.e. Dr. Amee Yajnik, be deleted. 
1889.  The name of the Second Questioner, i.e. Shri M. Shanmugam, be deleted. 
1916. The name of the Second and Third Questioners, i.e. Shri Pramod Tiwari and 
Dr. Amee Yajnik, respectively, be deleted. 
 
 
  In the Index, Question Nos. 1765 and 1772 be deleted from Ministry of Ayush. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1775, 1781, 1784, 1786, 1789 and 1790 be deleted 
from Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 In the Index, Question No 1802 be deleted from Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1812, 1815, 1816, 1817, 1818, 1821, 1824, 1829, 
1832, 1835, 1838, 1839 and 1840 be deleted from Ministry of Finance. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1848, 1851, 1854, 1855, 1860, 1876, 1879, 1881, 1885 
and 1886 be deleted from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1893, 1895 and 1898 be deleted from Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy. 
 In the Index, Question Nos. 1907, 1909, 1914, 1917, 1918 and 1920 be deleted 
from Ministry of Power. 
  
New Delhi, 
December 18, 2023. 
Copy to:- 
1. Ministry of Ayush. 
2. Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
3. Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
4. Ministry of Finance. 
5. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
6. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
7. Ministry of Power. 
8. E.O.D.  Rajya Sabha Secretariat. 
9. Translation Section, Rajya Sabha Sectt. 
10. Table Office (2 spare copies). 
11. Sansad TV, Rajya Sabha 
12. Distribution Branch ( 2 spare copies) 
13. Question Branch (2 spare copies) 

Rajya Sabha
List of Questions for WRITTEN ANSWERS
to be asked at a sitting of the Rajya Sabha to be held on
Tuesday, December 19, 2023/ 28 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
(Ministries : Ayush; Chemicals and Fertilizers; Corporate Affairs; Finance; Health
and Family Welfare; New and Renewable Energy; Ports, Shipping and Waterways;
Power)
Total number of questions -- 160
Implementation of National AYUSH Mission in Tamil Nadu
1761 Shri R. Dharmar:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the salient features of National AYUSH Mission;
(b) the details of funds sanctioned, allocated and utilized under this mission in Tamil Nadu
during the last three years and the current year;
(c) the details of the targets set and the achievements made under this mission so far;
(d) whether Government is working on a global strategy on traditional medicine under this
mission;
(e) if so, the details thereof; and
(f) the steps taken by Government in this regard so far?
Status of National AYUSH Mission
1762 # Shri Narhari Amin:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the main objective of the National AYUSH Mission scheme launched by Government;
(b) the major works done by Government under this scheme so far;
(c) the total amount spent so far under this scheme across the country; and
(d) the details of the amount allocated to the State of Gujarat and the expenditure incurred
therein under this scheme?
Qualitative production and distribution of AYUSH medicines
1763 # Shri Naresh Bansal:
Shri Kailash Soni:
Shri Ajay Pratap Singh:
Shri Neeraj Shekhar:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the steps taken by Government for qualitative production and distribution of AYUSH
drugs; and
(b) the steps to be proposed by Government to broaden and intensify the research in
AYUSH medicines?
420

Establishment of AYUSH medical colleges
1764 Shri C. Ve. Shanmugam:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the number of AYUSH medical colleges and institutes set up in the country,
during the last five years, year-wise and State-wise;
(b) the number of such medical colleges proposed to be established in the immediate
future, State-wise;
(c) the funds allocated for the said purpose, State-wise;
(d) the time by which such medical colleges are likely to be made functional;
(e) the details of the contribution of AYUSH to medical tourism in the country; and
(f) the steps taken/proposed to be taken by Government to strengthen AYUSH healthcare
services at district levels in the country, State-wise?
Popularity of AYUSH medicines
1765 # Shri Neeraj Dangi:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the steps Government has taken to increase the popularity of AYUSH medicines in the
country;
(b) the details of locations at which indigenous and traditional medicines are available in the
country; and
(c) whether Government has entered into any agreement with other countries for the
research and development of pharmaceutical drugs and to make them popular, if so, the
details thereof?
Regarding promotion of yoga and naturopathy in tribal areas of Jharkhand
1766 # Shri Aditya Prasad:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the contribution of the National Institute of Naturopathy by the Ministry in promoting
yoga and naturopathy in the tribal areas of the State of Jharkhand;
(b) the details thereof; and
(c) the State-wise details of the number of naturopathy institutes in the country?
Increase in the number of AYUSH Colleges in Madhya Pradesh
1767 Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is any increase in the number of Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani Colleges in
Madhya Pradesh in the last three years; and
(b) if so, the details thereof?
Budget for NAM
1768 Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Shri Rakesh Sinha:
Shri Samir Oraon:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) whether the budget for the National Ayush Mission (NAM) has changed over time;
(b) the key achievements of the National Ayush Mission in 2022-2023;
(c) whether the Ministry has entered into an agreement with the WHO to advance
traditional, complementary and integrative medicines; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
421


Intellectual property rights under NMPB scheme
1769 # Shri Neeraj Shekhar:
Shri Kailash Soni:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the number of patents applied under the R&D component of National Medicinal Plants
Board (NMPB) till date; and
(b) the number of sanctioned projects under the R&D component of NMPB till date since its
inception?
Increase in AYUSH market size
1770 Lt.Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.):
Shri Mithlesh Kumar:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is an increase in the Ayush market size from 2014-15 to 2022-2023;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether the budget for the National Ayush mission has changed over time; and
(d) the key achievements of the National Ayush Mission in 2022-2023?
Establishment of AYUSH hospitals with ayurveda and homeopathy treatment
facilities
1771 # Shri Rajendra Gehlot:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposes to implement any special scheme for setting up AYUSH
hospitals/centres exclusively having ayurveda and homeopathy treatment facilities in the
rural areas of the country;
(b) if so, whether any proposals have been received for setting up AYUSH hospitals/centres
in Rajasthan, the State/UT-wise details thereof including Rajasthan; and
(c) the details of the action taken/to be taken and the progress made so far in this regard
and the process of setting up AYUSH hospitals/centres in Rajasthan?
Health and wellness centres in Bihar
1772 Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) the details of total number of AYUSH health and wellness centres in the State of Bihar,
district-wise;
(b) the total number of operational and non-operational centres in Bihar; and
(c) the total number of personnels employed in those centres?
Financial and technical assistance to Ayurvedic pharmaceutical factories and
manufacturers
1773 Dr. M. Thambidurai:
Will the Minister of Ayush be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government provides financial and technical assistance to
Ayurvedic pharmaceutical factories and manufacturers;
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government has taken any steps to encourage entrepreneurs to establish such
factories and if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the details of the guidelines in place to ensure the quality of ayurvedic medicines?
422


Generic medicines
1774 # Shri Narhari Amin:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether any special scheme is being run by Government to provide generic medicines
at cheaper prices;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether distribution centers are being set up to ensure the availability of medicines at
cheaper rates;
(d) if so, the number of such distribution centers set up in the country so far; and
(e) the details of distribution centers set up in Gujarat so far?
Fake fertilizer in Gujarat
1775 # Shri Shaktisinh Gohil:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that fake fertilizers are being sold to farmers in Gujarat, the details
of failed samples of fertilizers that were found fake in Gujarat during the last three years;
and
(b) the number of persons found guilty and the details of action taken against them?
Action plan related to IFFCO Nano D.A.P.
1776 # Shri Ram Shakal:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has prepared an action plan related to IFFCO Nano D.A.P. under
Sarkar se Samridhi, Atamanirbhar Bharat, Atamanirbhar Krishi; and
(b) if so, the details thereof?
Drones in the fertilizer sector
1777 # Smt. Kanta Kardam:
Shri Narhari Amin:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposes to procure 500 drones for spraying bottled liquid nano-
urea and diammonium phosphate (DAP) in the farmlands and train the youth to operate
them, and if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Government has signed any agreement with the drone manufacturing
companies for this and if so, the details thereof and by when the procurement is likely to be
completed; and
(c) the details of the expected benefits to farmers from the use of drone technology?
Production, demand and supply of fertilizers
1778 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has allocated sufficient fertilizers to the State of Assam for the
current season as per the demands/requests of the State Government;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government proposes to increase the allocation of fertilizers to the State; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
423


Organic cultivation
1779 Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is providing subsidy to farmers for taking up organic cultivation in
the country;
(b) if so, the details of subsidy provided to farmers in Andhra Pradesh for taking up organic
farming during the last five years and the current year, year-wise and district-wise, with a
particular reference to Nellore district;
(c) the details of marketing assistance that Government provided to organic farmers under
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana in Andhra Pradesh in the last five years and the current
year, year-wise and district-wise; and
(d) the details of training programme provided to farmers in organic farming in Andhra
Pradesh, district-wise, so far?
Adequate availability of fertilizers
1780 # Shri Mithlesh Kumar:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has ensured adequate availability of fertilizers to the farmers in
the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether the requirement of fertilizers in the country is completely met by indigenous
production; and
(d) if not, the efforts made by Government to bridge the gap?
Manufacturing of drugs in the country
1781 Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan:
Smt. Rajani Ashokrao Patil:
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the progress that Government has made towards the new export policy for domestically
manufactured drugs;
(b) the steps taken by Government to reduce dependence on raw material imports for the
manufacture of drugs;
(c) the measures taken by Government to ensure the quality, safety and efficacy of drugs
being exported to other countries; and
(d) the incidents of adulteration of drugs for profiteering in the last few years and specifics
of action taken thereon?
PLI scheme for pharmaceutical industry
1782 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the progress of the Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for the
pharmaceutical sector, including the achievements and challenges faced in reducing import
dependency;
(b) whether Government has taken steps to address and reduce dependency on imports of
critical raw materials, especially APIs, for high-selling drugs, if so, the details of steps
taken thereon;
(c) whether Government has identified regions for creation of bulk drug parks for promotion
of domestic medicinal drugs; and
(d) if so, the details of the regions along with the strategy to attract investment from private
424


entities for the same and if not, the reasons therefor?
Status of PMBJP
1783 Dr. Sasmit Patra:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the number of functioning Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP)
kendras, year-wise since 2016-17 and State-wise;
(b) the number of functioning PMBJP kendras, year-wise since 2016-17 and district-wise in
Odisha;
(c) the details of employment opportunities created and the beneficiaries under the
scheme; and
(d) the measures taken by Government to ensure the reach of the scheme?
Agrochemicals production
1784 Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that almost 55% of the imports are readymade formulations
imported by MNCs and merchandising traders, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether Government is planning to include agrochemicals which is a major input in
agriculture, under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme, if so, the details thereof with
timeline;
(c) if not, the reasons therefor; and
(d) the details of steps taken by Government to boost domestic agrochemicals production
in the last five years, year-wise, State-wise?
Sustainability of chemical and fertilizer industry
1785 Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the manner in which Government has promoted environmental sustainability in the
chemical and fertilizer industry; and
(b) the measures taken to ensure the availability of affordable fertilizers to farmers?
One Nation One Fertilizer
1786 Shri Pramod Tiwari:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the progress made by Government on One Nation One Fertilizer under
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janurvarak Pariyojna Scheme;
(b) whether Government is taking any cognizance of the quality of the fertilizers being
produced and if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has issued any guideline or regulation to companies manufacturing
fertilizers over prices and supply chain in the market and if so, the details thereof; and
(d) how a large group of farmers can be benefited under this scheme, the details thereof?
Subsidy provided on fertilizers
1787 # Shri Deepak Prakash:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether farmers are getting the desired benefits of subsidy given on fertilizers due to
neem coating of urea, if so, the details thereof; and
(b) the steps taken by Government to ensure maximum benefit of fertilizer subsidy to the
425


poor and marginal farmers?
Production capacity of major chemicals
1788 Shri Rakesh Sinha:
Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the details of expansion in the production capacity of the major chemical industry;
(b) the current production levels for major chemicals in the country;
(c) whether Government recognises the importance of advanced technologies such as
Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain etc., which can play a major role in boosting our
pharmaceutical sector; and
(d) if so, the steps taken, or proposed to be taken by Government to leverage these
technological developments to the sector’s advantage?
Evaluation of the chemical promotion development scheme
1789 Dr. Santanu Sen:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any data or estimate on the number of knowledge products
which have been created or disseminated under the Chemical Promotion Development
Scheme (CPDS);
(b) if so, the details thereof and how such data or estimate is collected and verified;
(c) whether Government has any data or estimate of the number of excellence awards
given or received under the CPDS;
(d) if so, the details thereof and how such data/estimate is collected and verified; and
(e) whether Government has any mechanism or criteria to ensure that the knowledge
products and excellence awards are relevant,quality, and useful for the chemicals and
petrochemicals industry?
Increasing use of key fertilisers
1790 Smt. Mausam Noor:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry acknowledges the reported 57 per cent increase in sales of key
fertilizers, namely urea, DAP and complex fertilizers, during August, despite a 36 per cent
deficiency in monsoon across the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether the Ministry can provide details of steps taken to address the increased sales
of chemical fertilizers, considering the impact on subsidy expenditure;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) whether the Ministry has monitored the implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
against the diversion of agriculture-grade urea to industries and can provide details on the
action plan in place to crack down on such diversions?
Utility of nano urea for farmers
1791 # Shri Harnath Singh Yadav:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether the use of nano urea liquid fertilizer would lead to a reduction in farmers'
agricultural costs and an increase in yields, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether the nano urea liquid fertilizer would enhance the soil fertility of fields, if so, the
details thereof; and
426


(c) whether Government has devised any action plan to ensure the timely availability of
nano urea to common farmers, if so, the details thereof?
Programmes for farmer education on fertilizer use and sustainability
1792 Dr. Fauzia Khan:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken initiatives for educating farmers about the risks
associated with fertilizer overuse and promoting sustainable and responsible fertilizer usage
in agriculture, in the light of findings from the All India Coordinated Research Project on
'Long Term Fertilizer Experiments' highlighting the deleterious effects of continuous
nitrogenous fertilizer use on soil health and crop productivity;
(b) if so, the State-wise details and statistics or outcomes associated with these initiatives;
(c) whether financial allocation has been made for these programs in each of the States;
(d) if so, the details thereof; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Promotion of alternative fertilizers
1793 # Shri Kailash Soni:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has launched the PM-Pranam scheme to promote alternative
fertilizers;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether the scheme is likely to help in reducing the consumption of chemical fertilizers;
and
(d) whether the States/UTs would be made part of this scheme?
Implementation of PMKSK
1794 # Shri Ajay Pratap Singh:
Shri Kailash Soni:
Shri Narhari Amin:
Shri Baburam Nishad:
Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the salient features of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samridhi Kendra (PMKSK);
(b) the details of funds sanctioned, allocated and utilized for setting up such centres across
the country;
(c) the details of the number of States in which such centres have been set up; and
(d) the details of facilities being provided to farmers by such centres?
Cheap medicines under PMBJP
1795 Shri Pabitra Margherita:
Will the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers be pleased to state:
(a) the number of people who have received cheap medicines under the Pradhan Mantri
Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP);
(b) the number of hospital beds available in Government hospitals in 2013 as compared to
2022; and
(c) the recent initiatives taken by Government to improve the quality of Government
hospitals and medical colleges in the Northeast?
427


Status of C-PACE
1796 Shri S Niranjan Reddy:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Centre for Processing Accelerated Corporate Exit (C-PACE) has been set-
up;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the number of cases solved as part of the C-PACE since its inception; and
(d) the details of ways in which artificial intelligence and machine learning are being
incorporated in registration, compliance and other regulatory action by Government?
Regulation of startups
1797 Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu:
Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Shri Digvijaya Singh:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the progress made by the Company Law Committee towards examining new regulatory
measures for startups;
(b) whether Government plans to set up a state-backed mechanism to monitor funds
received by startups from private investors; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Losses to PSUs
1798 Shri C. Ve. Shanmugam:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that a large number of Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) are
incurring losses in the country;
(b) if so, the details of the Public Sector Undertakings which have been running into losses
since last one decade, along with the reasons for their losses; and
(c) the measures taken/being taken by Government to assist in reducing the losses of the
said establishments?
Direct listing on foreign exchanges
1799 Shri Rajeev Shukla:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the recent Government order that permitted certain Indian companies to
directly list on select foreign stock exchanges, which will allow these companies to access
global capital and boost capital outflows;
(b) the benefits expected due to the same;
(c) the potential challenges arising from the same in terms of instability; and
(d) the measures to be taken to address such challenges thereof?
Incorporation of companies and LLPs
1800 Shri Biplab Kumar Deb:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the number of companies and Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) firms
which have been incorporated in the current financial year till now;
(b) the number of companies and LLP firms which have been incorporated in the year
2013-14;
(c) the percentage increase in the incorporation filings in comparison to data during 2022-
428


23;
(d) the steps taken by the Ministry to ease the process of corporate filings and remove the
duplicate and multiple user IDs of professionals; and
(e) the number of companies and LLP firms which have been incorporated in the State of
Tripura during the last five years?
Transparency and accountability in corporate sector
1801 Shri Satish Chandra Dubey:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) the manner in which Government has promoted transparency and accountability in the
corporate sector; and
(b) the steps taken to strengthen corporate governance in the country?
Backlog in tribunal cases
1802 Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Shri Digvijaya Singh:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of the significant backlog in cases before the National
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and if so, the reasons for the pending cases;
(b) the number of cases pending before the above forum to which the State is party;
(c) the average number of days for which the said cases are pending; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to mitigate this issue and reduce the burden of
caseload?
Prevailing rules for startups to list their securities
1803 Shri S. Selvaganabathy:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government had notified the rules to permit companies, especially Start-ups to
allow them to directly list their securities on foreign stock exchanges; and
(b) if so, the total number of domestic companies/Startups that have raised finance by
listing their securities on foreign stock exchanges since the laws were amended and the
sectors thereof?
CSR expenditure
1804 Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla:
Will the Minister of Corporate Affairs be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) expenditure under corporate affairs
align with broader corporate strategies and if so, the details thereof;
(b) the details of mechanism that are in place to ensure that CSR initiatives are integrated
seamlessly into the overall corporate vision; and
(c) whether it is also a fact that in a single year, CSR spending rose by 50.4 per cent in the
healthcare sector and allocation towards other preferred sectors for CSR spending went
down, if so, the steps taken by Government to ensure equitable spending on all
development sectors?
Atal Pension Yojana in Goa
1805 Shri Sadanand Shet Tanawde:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any details about the total number of pensioners enrolled
429


under the Atal Pension Yojana since 2018 in Goa; and
(b) if so, the details thereof along with the details of the pension amount paid to them
annually?
Erroneous transfer of funds in UCO Bank
1806 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that erroneous transfer of ₹820 crore to various account holders,
under the IMPS facility took place in UCO Bank;
(b) the amount of money recovered and the number of accounts from which recovery has
been made, the details thereof and the steps taken to curb such financial fraud;
(c) the number of financial fraud/cyber crime in banks in last three years, and the amount
involved, year-wise; and
(d) the amount of defrauded money saved and number of victims benefitted by
disconnecting mobile connections involved in cyber crime?
Utilization of funds under PMMY
1807 Ms. Dola Sen:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has planned any measures to ensure the effective utilization of
funds disbursed under Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY);
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government has implemented an evaluation mechanism for the loans disbursed
under the Scheme to enterprises;
(d) if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor;
(e) whether Government has planned a mechanism to recover loans that have turned bad
under the Scheme since its inception; and
(f) if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor?
Implementation of Atal Pension Yojana
1808 Ms. Dola Sen:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has taken steps to increase the coverage and awareness of the
Atal Pension Yojana (APY) among workers of unorganized sector, including those in rural
and remote areas;
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government plans to address the issue of low pension amounts provided under
the Scheme to align them with the cost of living and inflation; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Sovereign guarantee for bank deposits
1809 Shri Anil Desai:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government has extended its guaranty for refund of public
money kept in the Fixed deposit accounts of a bank only upto ₹5 lakh;
(b) if so, the basis of such limitation of ₹ 5 lakh only;
(c) whether it means that people are being discouraged to keep more than ₹ 5 lakh in
banks; and
(d) whether this limitation is confined to Government controlled banks or there is another
rule for banks other than Government banks, if so, the details thereof?
430


Digital tools for online payments
1810 Shri Anil Desai:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the various digital payment tools like UPI etc. available for making online payments;
(b) the number of transactions that took place since its introduction in the country, year-
wise; and
(c) the efforts made by Government to make such online payments user friendly?
Growth in gross total income of individuals across different income groups
1811 Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is a robust growth in the gross total income of individuals across different
income groups since 2018 onwards, if so, the details thereof, year-wise; and
(b) whether this has been reflected in the increase in Net Direct tax collections since 2018,
if so, the details thereof, year-wise; and
(c) how Government is using such tax collection and for what purpose particularly in the
interests of the general public and its related projects?
Measures to ease and simplify lending process
1812 Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the data on rural and urban credit granted, the details thereof over the last five years;
(b) whether Government will take necessary steps to decrease the exorbitant processing
fee imposed on borrowers, especially farmers and personal loanees, by the banks as part
of reducing the cost of borrowing, if so, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government will take necessary action to ease and simplify the lending
process, including that of farmers and personal loanees, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) whether Government will take stringent measures to ensure a stipulated timeline for the
issuance of loans, if so, the details thereof?
Action plan to make the country third largest economy
1813 # Shri Ram Shakal:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has prepared an action plan to make the country the third largest
economy by the year 2027; and
(b) if so, the details thereof?
Untraceable and inoperative PMJDY accounts
1814 Shri Jayant Chaudhary:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the reports of over 10 crores of the 50 crores plus PM Jan
Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) accounts are currently missing or untraceable;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) if so, whether this means that ₹40,000 crores or more of this Scheme is locked up in
banks without any use to poor beneficiaries;
(d) whether 14 per cent of the total number of PMJDY accounts continue to be inoperative
as accepted by the Ministry in August 2021; and
(e) the details of the current number of inoperative accounts under the Scheme and
431


whether the majority of them continue to be accounts of women?
Stock market manipulations
1815 Shri Binoy Viswam:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the number of instances of stock market manipulation that SEBI has identified, since
2019;
(b) the estimated quantum of money involved in transactions which are suspected or
determined to be stock market manipulations;
(c) the details of entities debarred from trading by SEBI for stock market manipulation
since 2019, the details thereof along with action-taken thereon;
(d) whether SEBI has registered FIRs against offenders, if so, the details thereof; and
(e) the details of stock market manipulations being currently investigated by SEBI or the
Ministry?
Funds allotted under NABARD
1816 Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government is sanctioning funds through the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) for various schemes;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) how many schemes have been selected for funding and how much amount has been
sanctioned in Assam, the details thereof, district-wise and scheme-wise?
Transaction charges on savings bank account
1817 # Shri Ram Nath Thakur:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the type of charges currently levied on savings bank account holders by various banks
in the country;
(b) the amount of transaction charges collected from savings bank account holders in the
last three years;
(c) the details of the increased transaction charges on savings bank account holders in the
last three years; and
(d) whether it is a fact that transaction charges are also being levied on students, widows,
handicapped and Jan Dhan Savings Bank account holders?
Assessment of Income of LIC
1818 # Shri Ram Nath Thakur:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether the profit received through premium of Life Insurance Company of India (LIC)
has decreased during the last five years;
(b) the details of profit earned by LIC during the last five years, year-wise; and
(c) whether any assessment has been done about the reasons of decline in LIC's income?
Grants to States
1819 Shri Elamaram Kareem:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) how much is the total grants to be given to each State according to the Fifteenth
Finance Commission recommendations;
432


(b) whether Government has disbursed all these amounts to the States;
(c) the details on pending amounts to be disbursed to States, State-wise and by when the
same will be cleared;
(d) whether the States have requested for more Central assistance considering the acute
financial crisis; and
(e) the manner in which Government is planning to help the States to overcome the revenue
loss?
Digital online frauds
1820 Shri Sanjay Raut:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the cases of digital frauds committed using cards and internet-
based payment methods have nearly been doubled as fraudsters are using new techniques
to cheat customers;
(b) if so, the details thereof and Government's reaction thereto;
(c) whether the present banking system is unable to identify the fraudsters and retrieve the
money; and
(d) if so, the details of steps taken or proposed to be taken by Government to protect the
public money?
Transfer of revenue from Centre to States
1821 Dr. John Brittas:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether structural vertical imbalance in transfer of revenues by Centre to States, as
evident from the example of Kerala’s tax share from Centre, decreasing from 3.875 per
cent during Tenth Finance Commission, when Kerala’s share of India’s population as per the
1971 Census was 3.89 per cent, to around 1.925 per cent now, which is lower than State’s
population share of 2.75 percent as per 2011 Census;
(b) details thereof and response of Government thereto;
(c) details of States whose inter-State tax shares from overall tax devolution have
decreased upon implementation of Fifteenth Finance Commission report; and
(d) details thereof and reasons therefor?
Financial assistance to rural artisans through NABARD
1822 Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) has
formulated or proposes to formulate any scheme to provide financial assistance to rural
artisans of the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof, State/UT-wise including Tamil Nadu;
(c) the details of the financial assistance provided by NABARD in this regard during the last
five years and the current year, scheme-wise and State-wise; and
(d) the number of artisans benefitted through various schemes funded by NABARD during
the said period, State/UT-wise?
Health tax on tobacco products
1823 Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has introduced a Health tax on tobacco products as
recommended by the Parliamentary Committee on Health & Family Welfare; and
433


(b) if so, by when Government will start the Health tax collection for allocation to
NCD/Cancer Care Fund, the details thereof?
Formation of Eighth Pay Commission
1824 Shri Javed Ali Khan:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the reasons recorded on files for not considering and according approval to Para 1.22
of Seventh Central Pay Commission (CPC) by Government;
(b) whether no proposal for setting up Eighth Central Pay Commission is under
consideration due to the fact that Government is not in a position to bear the burden of pay
commission;
(c) if so, the details thereof and the reasons for such situation; and
(d) if not, the reasons as to why Government is not setting up Eighth Central Pay
Commission and revising pay of Central Government employees, who are facing
unprecedented inflation in the last thirty years?
Steps to reduce interaction between taxpayer and Income Tax Department
1825 Dr. K. Laxman:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether any steps have been taken to reduce interaction between a taxpayer and
Income Tax Department while making tax assessment, if so, the details thereof;
(b) the steps taken to utilise technology to reduce the problems faced by taxpayers;
(c) how the hardships faced by taxpayers due to long pending litigation can be reduced;
(d) whether any steps have been taken to reduce the interaction between the taxpayers
and appellate officers while disposing of such pending appeals, if so, the details thereof;
(e) whether Government has provided any tax incentives to promote cooperatives; and
(f) if so, the details thereof?
Non-Performing Assets under PMEGP
1826 Dr. Amar Patnaik:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the data for the Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) in banks, including those associated
with Prime Minister Employment Generation Programme (PMEGP), year-wise for last five
years;
(b) whether Government has taken up any study on NPA accounts to understand the
reasons behind the high incidence of NPA;
(c) if so, the details of the findings and if not, whether Government plans to take up such a
study; and
(d) the measures taken by Government to bring down the level of NPAs in the economy?
Limiting the financial borrowing of Kerala
1827 Shri Abdul Wahab:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the Government of Kerala is eligible for the financial borrowing
upto ₹ 32,442 crore, which is the 3 per cent of its GSDP;
(b) if not, the reason therefor;
(c) whether it is also a fact that Government has significantly slashed the financial
borrowing limit of the Government of Kerala to ₹ 15,390 crore;
(d) if so, the reason therefor;
(e) if not, the details of financial borrowing limit of Kerala at present; and
434


(f) whether Government will consider to increase the borrowing limit of the Kerala,
considering its severe financial crisis condition that is affecting welfare of people?
Pradhan Mantri Mudra yojana in Karnataka
1828 Shri Lahar Singh Siroya:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the number of women beneficiaries in Karnataka under the Pradhan Mantri Mudra
Yojana (PMMY) till today;
(b) the details of the amount of loan facility provided to women of the State since the launch
of the Yojana, year-wise; and
(c) the details of any study or survey, on social and economic improvement of women in the
State of Karnataka, who have benefitted from the PMMY?
Roadmap for US $ 5 trillion economy
1829 Shri M. Shanmugam:
Shri Vaiko:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether India has the potential to grow at 6 to 7 per cent and becoming a USD 5 trillion
economy by 2025-26, as claimed by some economists;
(b) if so, whether any roadmap has been prepared to make it, in the light of global
economic and geopolitical circumstances;
(c) the estimated economy predicted for the year 2024-25; and
(d) the details of measures taken to control the inflationary trend in the interest of
labourers, fixed wage earners etc.?
Non-issuance of EoI for disinvestment in RINL
1830 Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the different stages of disinvestment process adopted by the Ministry;
(b) whether inviting Expression of Interest (EoI) is the first stage of disinvestment process;
(c) when the decision was made by Government for disinvestment of RINL;
(d) whether it is a fact that EoI has not been issued for RINL so far;
(e) the reasons for the delay in issuing EoI;
(f) whether strike and non-cooperation from employee unions is one of the reasons for the
delay in issuing EoI; and
(g) the list of PSUs approved for disinvestment where EoI has not been issued?
Availing bank loans by Andhra Pradesh
1831 Dr. C.M. Ramesh:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether the State Government of Andhra Pradesh have availed bank loans by
mortgaging valuable future assets and by showing future revenue from the liquor sales, if
so, the details thereof; and
(b) whether any other State Governments in the country have availed such bank loans, if
so, the details thereof?
Centrally sponsored schemes in Kerala
1832 Shri K.C. Venugopal:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
435


(a) the list of Centrally sponsored schemes funded by Government in the State of Kerala;
(b) the amount of money allocated and disbursed by Government to the State of Kerala for
these schemes during the last five years;
(c) whether Kerala has sent proposals for additional financial assistance;
(d) if so, the details of the proposal sent by Kerala and the actions taken by the Central
Government along with its timeline;
(e) if not, whether the Central Government is considering providing a special financial
package for Kerala taking into account its high debt situation; and
(f) if so, the details thereof?
Implementation of various schemes in Kerala
1833 # Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the number of people availing benefits of various schemes i.e. Mudra Yojana, Stand-up
India scheme, district-wise in Kerala along with the details of the financial assistance
provided to them and the amount of average financial assistance provided per person; and
(b) the kind of positive results emerged out of the development of Kerala from these
schemes?
Unclaimed deposits in banks
1834 Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the details of unclaimed money/deposits with the Private and Public Sector Banks in the
country for the last three years;
(b) the details of the norms laid down by Government to deal with such unclaimed
money/deposits;
(c) the action taken by Government to identify deceased account holders whose
money/deposits are lying with PSBs;
(d) whether campaign of Government to trace and settle the top 100 unclaimed deposits of
every bank, has yielded any result and if so, the details thereof; and
(e) the other steps taken by Government to reduce the quantum of unclaimed deposits in
the banking system?
Efficiency in tax administration
1835 Smt. Rajani Ashokrao Patil:
Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan:
Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) the details of amount collected through Direct and Indirect tax since 2018;
(b) whether Government is aware that inefficiencies in tax administration have led to
changes in tax avoidance behavior among consumers and producers;
(c) if so, the steps taken to improve efficiency in the last five years and the progress made
so far and if not, the reasons therefor; and
(d) whether Government is considering any policy reforms to bring efficiency in the
changing tax policies in the country?
Issue of large-scale ponzi scams
1836 Shri Sujeet Kumar:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
436


(a) whether Government is aware of the proliferation of Ponzi apps and their unfettered
promotion by financial influencers on social media platforms;
(b) if so, the details of the action plan devised by Government to regulate these
applications; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Digital lending apps scam
1837 Shri Derek O' Brien:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has maintained State-wise data on the number of financial scams
conducted over digital lending applications in Financial Year 2022-23;
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether Government has formulated updated guidelines for lending applications
considering the rising prevalence of these scams; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Fiscal assistance to Kerala
1838 Shri Sandosh Kumar P:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Union Government has released the pending capital expenditure aid for
Central schemes to the State of Kerala;
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) the criterion for sharing tax revenue with States, as per the recommendations of the
Finance Commission; and
(d) the share of Kerala from the divisible pool of tax revenue?
Income generated through direct and indirect taxes and cess
1839 Shri R. Girirajan:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has the Sate-wise data on income generated through direct and
indirect taxes and cess, and if so the details thereof;
(b) the details of total internal and external debts as on date and the interests paid thereon;
(c) whether Government has issued several types of Bonds, like Gold Bonds, Oil Bonds,
Recapitalization Bonds etc., and if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the steps taken by Government to increase the GDP and per capita income in the
coming years?
Income Tax notice to Fintech companies
1840 Shri Naranbhai J. Rathwa:
Will the Minister of Finance be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Income Tax Department is probing Indian units of Apple, Google
and Amazon over non-payment of taxes to the tune of approximately over ₹ 5000 crore;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether these fintech companies are under lens by the GST Department also for
evading GST, if so, the details thereof?
Control of tobacco consumption
1841 Shri G.K. Vasan:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
437


(a) the amount of money spent on treatment of tobacco consumption related diseases in
the past three years;
(b) the steps taken to reduce smoking in public places to save children and non-smokers
from hazards of second-hand smoking;
(c) the legislative measures proposed to prohibit advertisement and regulate trade,
commerce, production, supply and distribution of tobacco products; and
(d) the other specific initiatives to discourage use of tobacco products by the youth
population of the country?
Ban on e-cigarettes
1842 Shri Sushil Kumar Modi:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government has banned sale of electronic cigarettes in the
country;
(b) whether it is also a fact that inspite of ban, advertisement and sale of electronic
cigarettes are taking place on social media/ websites platforms; and
(c) the action Government has taken to monitor and enforce the ban effectively?
Setting up of new medical colleges
1843 Shri R. Dharmar:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is proposing to set up new medical colleges across the country
under the centrally sponsored scheme with preference to underserved areas and
aspirational districts;
(b) if so, the details thereof including Tamil Nadu;
(c) whether Government has approved medical colleges in Tamil Nadu during the last three
years;
(d) if so, the details thereof;
(e) whether Government has sanctioned any funds for these hospitals in Tamil Nadu;
(f) if so, the details thereof; and
(g) whether Government has fixed any target in this regard, the details thereof?
Health care of the elderly
1844 Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu:
Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the manner in which Government plans to address the rural-urban gap in health care
and nutrition needs among the elderly population in the country;
(b) the steps taken by Government to reduce the increasing burden of non-communicable
diseases among the elderly; and
(c) the manner in which Government will improve geriatric care support, training for
specialized care and help to increase access to health infrastructure for the elderly?
Establishment of BSL 3 and 4 laboratories
1845 # Shri Naresh Bansal:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government proposed to establish the BSL 3 and the B.S.L. 4 laboratories;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the total number of metropolitan monitoring units proposed under the Pradhan Mantri-
Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM)?
438


Rise of MDR TB cases
1846 Shri Tiruchi Siva:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether there has been a rise in Multi-Drug Resistant (MDR) TB cases in the country, if
so, the details thereof, State-wise;
(b) whether Government is cognizant of shortages of medicines such as Linezolid,
Clofazimine, and Cycloserine since June 2023 to treat TB, if so, the details thereof;
(c) the reasons as to why Government department responsible for ensuring adequate
procurement of drugs to cure TB has failed in its task; and
(d) the measures taken by Government for preventing drug-resistant TB through timely
intervention and awareness building?
Family planning
1847 Shri Tiruchi Siva:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the details of male participation in family planning, as per the latest round of NFHS;
State-wise;
(b) the details of the schemes being implemented presently to improve family planning in
the country, especially in districts with low literacy rate;
(c) the details of schemes being implemented for better accessibility and availability of
sexual and reproductive health, especially among SC/ST women; and
(d) whether Government is considering new proposals for sexual and reproductive health of
women and expanding the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, if so, the details thereof?
Allocation of fund in Karnataka under NHM
1848 Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the details of funds Karnataka has received under National Health Mission (NHM) in the
last five years;
(b) the detail of funds allocated and spent in Karnataka, district-wise under NHM;
(c) whether NHM fund spending has undergone an audit;
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
(e) the details of the Community Health Centres (CHCs) and Publich Health Centres (PHCs)
established in Karnataka under NHM; and
(f) the details of steps Government has taken to evaluate NHM implementation and
progress, along with the current status?
Implementation of National Rural Health Mission
1849 Shri Masthan Rao Beeda:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the salient features of National Rural Health Mission (NRHM);
(b) the details of targets set and achieved under NRHM in the last three years;
(c) the details of funds extended to States/UTs for enhancing the healthcare system under
NRHM;
(d) whether Government has reviewed the progress and implementation of schemes under
NRHM; and
(e) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
439


Vaccination against cancer
1850 Shri Masthan Rao Beeda:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the percentage of the population, that has been vaccinated to prevent cervical and
vulvar cancer as compared to the total target population, State-wise;
(b) the steps being taken by Government to promote such vaccinations; and
(c) the quantum of funds Government has allocated to the same for the State of Andhra
Pradesh?
Personal data of Aadhar registered users
1851 Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of the fact that a United States-based cyber security firm
Resecurity, in a report, claimed that personal data of around 81.5 crore Indians had been
leaked to the dark web, which includes names, phone numbers, addresses, aadhar and
passport details of aadhar registered users, which were available for sale online;
(b) if so, whether Government has instituted any inquiry to ascertain the veracity of the said
report;
(c) if so, the outcome of any inquiry;
(d) if not, the reasons therefor; and
(e) the specific measures Government adopted to protect the personal data of aadhar
registered users?
Increasing burden of health expenses
1852 Shri Harbhajan Singh:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of increasing burden of health expenses over the period
of time;
(b) if so, whether Government has taken or is considering any measure to increase public
investment in health sector so that individual burdens are reduced;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) if not the reasons therefor?
Blood banks in the country
1853 Shri Harbhajan Singh:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of blood banks in the country;
(b) whether Government is aware of shortage of blood, particularly belonging to rare blood
groups, in several blood banks;
(c) if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the steps taken, if any, to address this issue?
Academic mobility programme for Ukraine returned medical students
1854 Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether the web portal giving the details of the foreign universities, where Ukraine-
returned medical students could complete their courses as per Government's academic
mobility programme, has been launched as the Supreme Court suggested, if so, the details
thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
440


(b) the measures taken to aid and assist Ukraine returned medical students to complete
their courses under the academic mobility programme approved by the National Medical
Commission (NMC), if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the details of the number of students who have been offered assistance to complete
their courses under the academic mobility programme approved by the NMC, State-wise?
Excessive increase in deaths from heart attacks after corona
1855 # Shri Shaktisinh Gohil:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that there has been a significant increase in deaths due to heart
attacks in our country after COVID and some people associated with the medical field say
that more people who have taken the Corona vaccine are dying from heart attacks;
(b) whether Government has conducted any survey or investigations or has obtained a
report from a medical committee regarding this; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor and if so, the details thereof?
Sports medicine Department attached to RIMS, Imphal
1856 Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether the five years project of sports medicine department attached to Regional
Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), Imphal has been concluded on the 14th Nov. 2023
and whether Government is contemplating to continue the project;
(b) whether there is any plan to convert it into a full fledged department under sports
improvement programme; and
(c) the status of the fate of the Doctors and other employees if the project is discontinued?
Health care system in Andhra Pradesh under NHM
1857 Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of health care systems that have been set up in the State of Andhra
Pradesh under National Health Mission (NHM) since June, 2019;
(b) the details of funds allocated to the State of Andhra Pradesh under NHM since June,
2019;
(c) whether Government has received any complaints of corruption under National Health
Mission (NHM) from the State since June, 2019 till date; and
(d) if so, the details thereof?
Processed and unhealthy foods in the country
1858 Shri Jayant Chaudhary:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has plans to introduce a comprehensive definition of 'healthy
foods' for the country so that companies do not have to resort to using their own definitions;
(b) if so, the details thereof, including possible guidelines, separate taxes on unhealthy
foods especially those catered towards children, etc.; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Implementation of PM-ABHIM
1859 Smt. Kanta Kardam:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
441


(a) whether Government provide data on the number of new healthcare centers and
hospitals established in the State of Uttar Pradesh as a part of Pradhan Mantri Ayushman
Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM), and their current operational status;
(b) the information on the specific healthcare services and specialities that have been
prioritized under PM-ABHIM in the State of Uttar Pradesh;
(c) the strategies in place to involve the private sector in the expansion of healthcare
infrastructure under PM-ABHIM; and
(d) the current status of implementation of PM-ABHIM in each State/UT?
Status of ASHA workers
1860 Shri Binoy Viswam:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the number of Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) in the country,
State-wise;
(b) the details of the renumeration being currently provided and increase since 2019 to
ASHA workers, State-wise;
(c) the details of the ratio of ASHA workers per 1000 of population, State-wise; and
(d) the details of the other benefits Government is providing to ASHA workers?
Upgradation of HSC into HWC
1861 Shri Parimal Nathwani:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is in the process of upgrading Health Sub-Centres (HSC) into
Health and Wellness Centres (HWC), if so, the number of such HSCs upgraded in HWCs till
date, State/UT-wise;
(b) the human resources proposed at each HWC along with the number of human
resources posted at such HWCs, State/UT-wise; and
(c) whether there are any gaps in the human resources proposed at HWC and actual
availability, if so, the details thereof and reasons therefor along with the initiatives taken by
Government in this regard?
New AIIMS projects
1862 Shri Deepender Singh Hooda:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the details of new AIIMS being established by Government along with the funds
sanctioned, released and utilized, State-wise;
(b) the details of the new AIIMS projects which are approved by Government but are
delayed as the tendering process could not be completed, and the reason for such delays;
(c) the detailed status of work on AIIMS project in the State of Haryana; and
(d) the complete detail thereof?
Expansion of AIIMS Bhadsa, Haryana
1863 Shri Deepender Singh Hooda:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the budget sanctioned and utilized for the AIIMS extension campus at
Bhadsa, Haryana in each of the last five financial years including financial year 2023-24;
(b) the status of work on 10 super- speciality institutes like the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) which were planned to be established in the AIIMS extension campus at Bhadsa,
Haryana;
(c) the future expansion plans for the AIIMS extension campus at Bhadsa, Haryana; and
442


(d) the complete details thereof?
Rising load of diabetes in the country
1864 Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has made any assessment regarding the prevalence of diabetes
in the country, if so, the details thereof, age-wise;
(b) the steps taken by Government to control diabetes in the country;
(c) whether Government has any specific schemes to help families of Below Poverty Line
(BPL) suffering from diabetes related diseases, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) whether Government has any road map to reduce the prevalence of diabetes among
the Indian population, if so, the details thereof?
Deaths due to water pollution
1865 Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any data regarding the number of deaths in the country due to
water pollution in the last five years, if so, the details thereof, year-wise;
(b) whether Government has any specific plans to eliminate deaths due to water pollution in
the country, if so, the details thereof; and
(c) whether Government had provided any compensation to the families of those deceased
persons who died due to water pollution, if so, the details thereof?
Anaemia Mukt Bharat
1866 Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has advised the State Governments on using digital invasive
hemoglobinometer and point-of-care treatment in health care facilities to tackle the health
issue of anaemia;
(b) if so, the details on the number of health facilities using digital invasive
hemoglobinometer and point-of-care treatment in the health facilities;
(c) whether Government is monitoring State-level initiatives aimed at addressing non-
nutritional factors contributing to anaemia in remote and rural areas, particularly on
diseases like malaria, and fluorosis; and
(d) if so, the details of the performance for the last three years, State-wise, if not, the
reasons therefor?
Fight against Tuberculosis
1867 # Shri Samir Oraon:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government's fight against tuberculosis has received
international recognition; and
(b) the steps taken by Government to fight against tuberculosis during the last five years,
the details thereof?
Implantation of sub-standard pacemakers
1868 Shri Sanjay Raut:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government's attention has been drawn towards the report about a
443


cardiologist from a Government hospital in Uttar Pradesh, who allegedly implanted sub-
standard pacemakers in his patients, while charging as much as nine times the cost of a
standard one;
(b) if so, the details thereof and Government's reaction thereto;
(c) whether Government has received similar cases in the country during the last three
years, if so, the details thereof; and
(d) the details of steps taken or proposed to be taken by Government in this regard,
particularly against the manufacturers of sub-standard and fake pacemakers in the
country?
India-Israel joint trial on Covid 19 patients
1869 Shri Saket Gokhale:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Health Ministry’s Screening Committee (HMSC) provided expedited
approval to a joint trial conducted by Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO) and Israel’s Directorate of Defense Research and Development (DRDD) on Indian
patients that included an audio test, a breath test, thermal testing, and a polyamino test to
isolate proteins related to COVID-19 in the year 2020;
(b) whether consent was obtained from the relevant patients whose samples were obtained
through the aforementioned test; and
(c) whether Government sought details from Israel on how the data collected from this test
was to be used, if so, the details thereof?
Inspections of manufacturing sites of Indian pharma companies
1870 Shri Saket Gokhale:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is conducting risk-based inspections through CDSCO of
shortlisted "risky manufacturing sites" of Indian pharmaceutical companies, if so, the total
number of shortlisted companies and grounds on which these companies have been
shortlisted;
(b) the current results and findings of these inspections, the number of shortlisted
companies found to be deficient or have high rates of manufacturing Non-Standard Quality
(NSQ) products; and
(c) the number of Indian pharmaceutical companies found to be manufacturing non-
standard or substandard quality products and the number of such companies shut down or
blacklisted between the year 2016 till date?
Promotion of menstrual hygiene among adolescent girls and women in rural areas
1871 Smt. Sangeeta Yadav:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any scheme to promote menstrual hygiene among rural
adolescent girls and women;
(b) if so, the details thereof and budgetary allocation and expenditure in the last three
years, year-wise and State-wise;
(c) the percentage of adolescent girls and women with access to and use of hygienic
methods such as sanitary napkins;
(d) the steps taken to ensure the availability and affordability of sanitary napkins to rural
adolescent girls and women, especially in the State of Uttar Pradesh; and
(e) the measures taken by Government to create awareness in rural adolescent girls on
(e) the measures taken by Government to create awareness in rural adolescent girls on
menstrual health and to break stigma and taboo associated with menstruation?
444


Status of implementation of the HIV and AIDS (Prevention & Control) Act, 2017
1872 Smt. Sangeeta Yadav:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government has implemented the HIV and AIDS (Prevention &
Control) Act, 2017;
(b) if so, the details thereof and the progress made in its enforcement and monitoring;
(c) the measures taken by Government to provide care, support and treatment to HIV
affected women patients and children of affected parents in terms of nutrition, education,
and social protection; and
(d) the budgetary allocation and expenditure for the National AIDS Control Programme
(NACP) and the various schemes and interventions under it for the welfare of HIV affected
women and children in the last five years, year-wise and State-wise?
Reimbursement to private hospitals under Ayushman Bharat
1873 Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj:
Dr. Amar Patnaik:
Dr. Sasmit Patra:
Shri Sujeet Kumar:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the data on the amount of money reimbursed to private hospitals empanelled in
Ayushman Bharat every year over the past five years, year-wise and State-wise;
(b) the data on the amount of money spent under Ayushman Bharat in the country, from
inception for treatment purposes over the past five years, year-wise and State-wise; and
(c) the data on the trends in the share of out-of-pocket expenditure on health in the country
in the last five years?
Elimination of tuberculosis
1874 Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the prevalence of tuberculosis(TB) in the country and details of Government’s plan to
eliminate it;
(b) whether Government has any plans to provide financial incentives, grants and/or
subsidies to alleviate the financial burden associated with acquiring the required equipment
and also to make quality TB diagnosis accessible all over the country; and
(c) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons thereon?
Targets for Tuberculosis
1875 Smt. Sulata Deo:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware that India still accounts for the highest TB burden in the
world;
(b) if so, the details of the measures taken thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;
(c) whether according to the WHO TB report, India fell significantly short of its target with
insufficient success, if so, the steps Government has taken or plans to take to enhance
India's situation; and
(d) the catastrophic health expenditure for TB exceeding 20 per cent in the country, the
details of the measures Government is taking to enhance the affordability of healthcare for
TB patients nationwide?
445


Shortage of beds in the hospitals
1876 Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether there is acute shortage of beds in the hospitals to accommodate patients
across the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof during the last five years, hospital and State/UT-wise; and
(c) the steps taken by Government to increase the number of beds along with the funds
allocated/utilised for the purpose, State/UT-wise?
Patient’s treatment in golden hour
1877 Shri Sanjeev Arora:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that only around 20 per cent of heart patients get treatment in so so-
called golden hour; and
(b) the steps Government is taking to increase this number and make life saving clot buster
drugs cheap?
Action against e-pharmacies
1878 Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is planning to take stringent action against e-pharmacies, including
banning them completely, following concerns over data privacy, malpractices in the e-
pharmaceutical sector and irrational sale of drugs;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Assistance to patients suffering from rare diseases
1879 Shri Jose K. Mani:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has the details of the financial assistance provided to patients who
are suffering from rare diseases in the country over the last three years; (b) if so, the
details thereof, State-wise;
(c) the details of additional support and facilities provided by Government to patients who
are suffering from rare diseases;
(d) whether Government has any plans to increase the quantum of financial assistance
provided to patients who are suffering from rare diseases in the country; and
(e) if so, the details thereof?
Fund under National Health Mission (NHM) for Punjab
1880 Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the reasons for holding 621 crores of Punjab under National Health Mission (NHM) and
by when this fund will be released;
(b) when State Government’s mandatory contribution is 40 per cent in PM-JAY, how the
term, ‘Pradhan Mantri’ which represents only Central Government is used in the name of
the scheme and the reason as to why the contribution and share of the State Government
not allowed to be reflected in the name of the scheme and for hiding the contribution of the
State Government in this scheme; and
(c) the reasons as to why the States are not involved in deciding the name of the scheme
446


which requires mandatory contribution of the State Government?
Medical data breach
1881 Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that data with the ICMR of 81.5 crore citizens were sold on the dark
web on 31 October, 2023, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether the breached data was entrusted with Government or with private entities;
(c) whether Government has identified the epicenter of the leakage;
(d) whether Government has taken any steps to address the issue of compromise in
privacy, if so, the details thereof; and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Faculties in Central Government hospitals
1882 Shri Mallikarjun Kharge:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the total number of faculty and non-faculty posts including reserved posts (SCs, STs,
and OBCs), sanctioned, in-position and vacant in Central Government Hospitals for the last
five years, category-wise, group-wise, institute-wise, and year-wise;
(b) the total number of doctors, nurses and paramedical staff including reserved posts
(SCs, STs, and OBCs), sanctioned, in-position and vacant in Central Government Hospitals
for the last five years, category-wise, position-wise, institute-wise, and year-wise; and
(c) the number and details of sanctioned beds and MBBS seats in Central Government
Hospitals for the last five years, institute-wise and year-wise?
Diseases due to tobacco
1883 Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Tobacco is a known risk factor for cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and
Chronic-Obstructive Pulmonary Disease as well as for infectious respiratory diseases;
(b) if so, State Programme Implementation Plan Approvals and Expenditure under National
Tobacco Control Programme, State/UT-wise from Financial Year 2018-19 to 2022-23;
(c) whether Government proposes to strengthen Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products
Act, 2003 to control tobacco consumption and if so, details thereof;
(d) steps taken by Government to protect school going children against harmful effects of
tobacco products; and
(e) whether Government has created awareness campaigns on harmful effects of tobacco
use, particularly amongst youth and if so, details thereof?
Extending Ayushman Bharat scheme to emergency and trauma care
1884 Shri Jaggesh:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the worst affected age group in road accidents is 18-45 years,
who are often the sole bread-earners and inflicts high out-of-pocket-expenditure;
(b) whether Government proposes world class emergency services to prevent large
number of deaths from road accidents and provide trauma care in other emergencies,
including disasters;
(c) whether the emergency and trauma care system will be woven into the Ayushman
Bharat Scheme to expand its outreach to people at the lowest levels and reduce cost of
emergency services; and
447


(d) if so, the details thereof and how soon these emergency services will be implemented?
Blood lead levels in children
1885 Shri Syed Nasir Hussain:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any policies, schemes or other measures to address elevated
blood lead levels among children;
(b) the steps taken by the Drugs and Food Quality Control (DFQC) division and Food
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to screen for and prevent adulteration of
turmeric; and
(c) whether Government has conducted any studies to ascertain the contribution of various
sources of lead contamination and if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor?
Health and welfare of SCs and STs
1886 Shri A. A. Rahim:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the details of special schemes for the health and welfare of SC/ST Communities;
(b) the details of funds allotted to each State in this regard; and
(c) the infant mortality rate among SC/ST population, State-wise?
Affordable high-quality cancer care
1887 Ms. Kavita Patidar:
Shri Jaggesh:
Shri Ajay Pratap Singh:
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee:
Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde:
Ms. Indu Bala Goswami:
Dr. Anil Jain:
Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government is implementing specific measures to ensure that
patients receive high-quality cancer care at a cost that is affordable;
(b) the information on the specific research outputs introduced in the field of cancer care
over the past four years; and
(c) the information on the manner in which the National Cancer Grid is involved in cancer
care, along with a list of centres, research institutes, State-wise, that are part of its
network?
Janani Suraksha Yojana
1888 Shri Niranjan Bishi:
Smt. Sulata Deo:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government maintains any data regarding the number of institutional deliveries
under the Janani Suraksha Yojana; and
(b) if so, the details thereof, State-wise, and if not, the reasons therefor?
448


Implementation of National Dental Commission Act
1889 Shri Vaiko:
Shri M. Shanmugam:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the status and steps taken for implementation of National Dental Commission Act;
(b) when Dental Council of India is replaced by National Dental Commission and why the
powers are still exercised by Dental Council of India;
(c) the steps taken by Government to expeditiously investigate corruption charges, by way
of giving recognition to Dental colleges, periodic inspections etc., against the office bearers
of Dental Council of India, including its President; and
(d) the details of measures proposed to bring transparency in the functioning of National
Dental Commission and its activities?
Plan for enhancement of medical education
1890 Smt. Seema Dwivedi:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) the details of Government’s strategies to enhance and fortify medical education
institutions nationwide; and
(b) the schemes and intended outcomes and their realized accomplishments?
Separate law for medical devices
1891 Shri A. D. Singh:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether the medical devices are covered under the definition of drugs in the country
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, if so, the details thereof;
(b) whether there is consistent demand by the industry to frame separate law for medical
devices; and
(c) if so, the response of Government?
Milk adulteration
1892 # Dr. Kalpana Saini:
Will the Minister of Health and Family Welfare be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has any data about milk adulteration or it calls for reports from all
State Governments in this regard;
(b) if so, the specific State-wise updated status of the number of cases of milk adulteration
filed in the Country and the punitive action taken thereon during the last three years; and
(c) if not, the reasons therefor and whether Government will regularly seek such reports
along with action taken thereon from all State Governments to protect the health of the
common man?
Power generation from renewable energy
1893 Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) the details of targets set and achievements made in power generation from renewable
energy sources in the country, State-wise and source-wise, especially in Karnataka; and
(b) whether schemes for development of renewable energy sources have been successful
in various States, if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor?
449


Solar street lights under AJAY
1894 Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is aware of the fact that less lights were installed against actual
sanction in Phase-I and Phase-II of the Atal Jyoti Yojana (AJAY);
(b) if so, the reasons for incomplete installation of targeted solar street lights in both the
phases of AJAY;
(c) whether Government proposes to launch Phase-III of AJAY;
(d) if so, the details thereof along with the likely date of launch and target set thereunder;
and
(e) if not, the reasons therefor?
Implementation of solar energy in North Eastern Region
1895 Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) the achievement in exploring the potential of non-conventional energy sources in Assam
including solar energy;
(b) the measures initiated for utilizing the full potential of solar energy available in the North
Eastern Region (NER);
(c) whether Government proposes to exploit the full potential of solar energy in the region;
and
(d) if so, the details thereof and the special incentives being granted to ensure the highest
level of achievements in this field towards such projects in NER?
Growth of renewable energy in the country
1896 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju:
Shri Rajendra Gehlot:
Dr. Kalpana Saini:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) the trajectory of the country's installed capacity of renewable energy over the last
decade; and
(b) the factors that have driven the significant growth in the country’s installed capacity of
renewable energy in recent years?
FDI in renewable energy sector
1897 Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has drawn any special plan to attract Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) in the renewable energy sector;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the total FDI which has come into the renewable energy in the last three years?
Power from renewable sources
1898 Dr. V. Sivadasan:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) the total power produced in the country from renewable sources, source-wise since
2018;
(b) the percentage of the total power consumption which comes from the renewable
sources;
450


(c) the average cost of production of a unit of renewable energy, source-wise; and
(d) the amount of subsidy provided by Government for production of renewable energy,
since 2018?
Rooftop wind energy generation
1899 # Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government has planned any roadmap for the installation of rooftop wind
turbine for the generation of energy;
(b) if so, the funds allocated for the same; and
(c) how Government plans to make it easy and affordable for the household?
Incentives for renewable energy
1900 # Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari:
Will the Minister of New and Renewable Energy be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that Government has made effective efforts towards increasing new
and renewable energy production and its sources;
(b) if so, the efforts made and the schemes started by Government during the last three
years, the details thereof;
(c) whether Government has also given any subsidy to encourage new and renewable
energy production; and
(d) if so, the State-wise details of the last three years?
Developing Nicobar Islands as an international shipping hub
1901 # Shri Samir Oraon:
Dr. Anil Jain:
Will the Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government agrees with the significant potential of the Nicobar Islands in
promoting India's international trade;
(b)if so, whether Government is taking any steps to develop Nicobar Islands as an
international shipping hub; and
(c) the details of such steps taken/proposed to be taken by Government?
Cargo movement through river system
1902 Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta:
Will the Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways be pleased to state:
(a) Whether Government has drawn any plan for increasing cargo movement through river
systems by collaborating with the private sector;
(b) the steps being taken to make our river system sustainable and economical mode of
transport; and
(c) the present status of enabling more and more containerized cargo movement and
building a network to use inland waterways for cargo shipment?
Implementation of Sagarmala pariyojana in Karnataka
1903 Shri Narayana Koragappa:
Will the Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry has identified three ports to develop in Karnataka under the
Sagarmala pariyojana;
(b) if so, the details of ports that have been identified and projects that are taken up for
451


upgradation of identified ports;
(c) the details of funds sanctioned, approved, released and spent so far; and
(d) the expected date of upgradation of the above ports?
Sagarmala project in Punjab
1904 Shri Vikramjit Singh Sahney:
Will the Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways be pleased to state:
(a) the details of projects sanctioned under Sagarmala project to connect Punjab with
several ports of the Country;
(b) the fund allocated and released to these projects in the last five years and status about
the completion of projects;
(c) whether Government proposes more projects under Sagarmala for port connectivity of
the State of Punjab; and
(d) if so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor?
Developing new national waterways
1905 # Shri Baburam Nishad:
Will the Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways be pleased to state:
(a) whether Government is contemplating to develop new national waterways; and
(b) if so, the details thereof?
Modern and smart power transmission system
1906 Shri S Niranjan Reddy:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) the steps taken by Government to implement the recommendations of recent Task
Force Report on modern and smart power transmission system;
(b) whether there is a proposed timeline for implementation of short-term to medium-term
recommendations (1-3 years) and long-term interventions (3-5 years);
(c) steps taken by Government to establish fully automated, digitally controlled, fast
responsive grid, resilient to cyber attacks and natural disasters;
(d) whether, predictive maintenance technique, using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
Learning (ML) is being currently used in the transmission system to strengthen the grid; and
(e) if so, number of substations that currently use AI/ML systems in the country?
Electrification in Jharkhand under Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana
1907 # Smt. Mahua Maji:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that many small villages in Jharkhand have not been electrified under
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana-Saubhagya Yojana;
(b) whether a provision of ₹ 22,500 per house for electrification and ₹ 11,500 per house for
partial electricity toll has been made in those small villages where the number of houses is
more than 10 under the said scheme; and
(c) whether Government is considering the request of Government of Jharkhand to
implement the provision made under special status for electrification of these small
villages?
Losses to DISCOMs
1908 Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
452


(a) whether the aggregate losses of 68 DISCOMs increased 66 per cent to ₹ 50,281 crore
in 2020-21, rendering them incapable of running day-to-day operations without a capital
dump by the States and servicing their debt has become a “far-fetched idea” and if so, the
details thereof and losses to each DISCOM State-wise along with the reasons therefor;
and
(b) the corrective steps being taken, State-wise along with reforms introduced till now?
Supply of coal to power plants
1909 # Shri Neeraj Dangi:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) whether the SHAKTI scheme launched by Government to provide continuous coal
supply to power plants has eased the pressure on power plants;
(b) if so, the details thereof;
(c) the constraints still being faced by Government in providing continuous coal supply to
the plants; and
(d) the details thereof and the remedial measures being taken by Government to control
the same?
Coal imported by power generation companies in Andhra Pradesh
1910 Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) the details of the number of power generation company located in the State of Andhra
Pradesh;
(b) the details of coal imported by these power generation companies in the State of
Andhra Pradesh since May, 2019;
(c) whether any violation of rules/norms in import of coal by these companies have been
reported; and
(d) if so, the details thereof and the action taken against those violating companies?
Status of power generation and demand supply in the country
1911 Shri Parimal Nathwani:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) the status of power generation and demand supply in the country and the details of the
sources and their capacity in total power production in the country at present; and
(b) the sources from which carbon-free power would be generated in the next ten years
and the quantum of power production fixed for these sources and the details of measures
taken in this regard?
Action plan to reduce prices of quality power
1912 Shri Ravichandra Vaddiraju:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) whether, in view of the increasing power utilities in some States, Government is gearing
up to implement a three-pronged strategy of enhancement of power generation capacity,
providing quality power at affordable price and reducing transmission and distribution
losses;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the progress made in this regard?
453


Promotion of electricity-based cooking
1913 Shri Iranna Kadadi:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) the details of electricity-based cooking penetration which helps in reduction in energy
import dependency thereby achieving the goal of Atmanirbhar Bharat;
(b) the penetration of electricity-based cooking in urban and rural areas; and
(c) the details of city/town/village having the highest penetration of electricity-based cooking
in the country including the State of Karnataka?
Delays and impediments in Subansiri hydroelectric project
1914 Shri Kumar Ketkar:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Ministry is aware of the situation causing delays and impediments in
Subansiri hydroelectric Project (2000 MW), if so, the action being taken;
(b) whether it is a fact that the management of NHPC Ltd., is not serious on this and is not
coming up with a firm plan and time line for commissioning of the project; and
(c) the expert views on the stability of Dam and its sustainability and commensurate
remedial action being taken by the Ministry or NHPC Ltd, the details thereof?
Meeting peak power demand
1915 Dr. Anil Jain:
Ms. Indu Bala Goswami:
Shri Baburam Nishad:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that the country met its highest ever peak power demand this year;
(b) the steps taken by Government to increase generation capacity between 2014-15 to
2023-24; and
(c) the capacity of total power generation in 2013?
Power crisis in Jammu & Kashmir
1916 Shri Digvijaya Singh:
Shri Pramod Tiwari:
Dr. Amee Yajnik:
Shri Dhiraj Prasad Sahu:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) the details of power plant projects launched, along with costs and progress made in the
Union Territory of Kashmir, since 2019;
(b) the year-wise amount of electricity generated by the Union Territory of Kashmir, since
2018;
(c) the quantum of electricity required by the State and supplied by Government during the
last five years;
(d) the details of power cuts in hours per day during the last 12 months, month-wise in
Kashmir; and
(e) the steps taken by Government to increase power production and supply in Kashmir
during the last five years?
Pending payment against work completed under IPDS
1917 # Shri Rajmani Patel:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
454


(a) whether it is a fact that as on 20/09/2022, claims amounting to ₹ 93 lakh are pending
with Government against works completed under IPDS in Madhya Pradesh; and
(b) if so, the reasons as to why payment has not yet been made?
Ceasing of thermal power plants
1918 Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) the date when Government is expected to cease polluting thermal power plants and the
details thereof; and
(b) whether the Ministry is aware of the plans of the New and Renewable Energy Ministry
to cease the operations of thermal power plants and the details of the steps taken in this
regard?
Thana palon hydro power project
1919 # Ms. Indu Bala Goswami:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) whether the Thana palon hydro power project has got approval from the Forest
Department;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and
(c) the area of land to be acquired under the said project?
Shutting down of old polluting coal based power plants
1920 Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde:
Will the Minister of Power be pleased to state:
(a) the details, along with dates of shutting down of old polluting coal based power plants;
(b) the details of location and developer-information of coal based power plants granted
Environmental clearance by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
(MOEFCC) during the last three years;
(c) the details of coal based power plants shut down during the last three years due to
environmental issues; and
(d) the details of power plants penalized or shut down for non-compliance with timeline for
reducing pollution under MoEFCC notification dated December 7, 2015?
New Delhi 
The 12th December, 2023
21 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
P. C. Mody,
Secretary-General.
# Original notice of the question received in Hindi.
455

INDEX
(Ministry-Wise)
Ayush : 1761, 1762, 1763, 1764, 1765, 1766, 1767,
1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772, 1773
Chemicals and Fertilizers : 1774, 1775, 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780,
1781, 1782, 1783, 1784, 1785, 1786, 1787,
1788, 1789, 1790, 1791, 1792, 1793, 1794,
1795
Corporate Affairs : 1796, 1797, 1798, 1799, 1800, 1801, 1802,
1803, 1804
Finance : 1805, 1806, 1807, 1808, 1809, 1810, 1811,
1812, 1813, 1814, 1815, 1816, 1817, 1818,
1819, 1820, 1821, 1822, 1823, 1824, 1825,
1826, 1827, 1828, 1829, 1830, 1831, 1832,
1833, 1834, 1835, 1836, 1837, 1838, 1839,
1840
Health and Family Welfare : 1841, 1842, 1843, 1844, 1845, 1846, 1847,
1848, 1849, 1850, 1851, 1852, 1853, 1854,
1855, 1856, 1857, 1858, 1859, 1860, 1861,
1862, 1863, 1864, 1865, 1866, 1867, 1868,
1869, 1870, 1871, 1872, 1873, 1874, 1875,
1876, 1877, 1878, 1879, 1880, 1881, 1882,
1883, 1884, 1885, 1886, 1887, 1888, 1889,
1890, 1891, 1892
New and Renewable Energy : 1893, 1894, 1895, 1896, 1897, 1898, 1899,
1900
Ports, Shipping and Waterways : 1901, 1902, 1903, 1904, 1905
Power : 1906, 1907, 1908, 1909, 1910, 1911, 1912,
1913, 1914, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919,
1920
456