Need to constitute a Tribunal to resolve the likely problems of Tamil Nadu due to proposed construction of Mekedatu dam on river Cauvery by Karnataka-Laid

DR. T. SUMATHY ALIAS THAMIZHACHI THANGAPANDIAN (CHENNAI SOUTH): I urge the Union Government to immediately constitute a dedicated tribunal to resolve the dispute and ensure the lease of Tamil Nadu's rightful-share of Cauvery Water and direct the Government of Karnataka to stop the dam construction activities at Mekedatu. The Mekedatu Dam issue is a long-standing inter-state water dispute between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. It is really unfortunate and insensitive that the Government of Karnataka is adamant to proceed with the ₹9,000-crore Mekedatu Reservoir Project near the confluence of the Cauvery and Arkavathi rivers at the cost of life and nature of millions of farmers in Tamil Nadu. Tamil Nadu, the lower riparian state, strongly opposes the project, fearing it will severely restrict downstream water flow and impact the livelihoods of delta farmers. The proposed dam at Mekedatu violates the 2007 Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal final order and 2018 Supreme Court verdict, and that no new structures can be built without the consent of all basin states. The Tamil Nadu State Assembly passed a unanimous resolution demanding the Centre to withhold all environmental and technical approvals. Our Party lead proposed an amendment resolution demanding a tribunal for the Mekedatu issue. The DMK, led by Hon'ble former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, vehemently opposes Karnataka's proposed Mekedatu Dam Project. Under able leadership of former Chief Minister, our party request the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Cauvery Water Management Authority (CWMA) to reject and return Karnataka's Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the dam. At this juncture, I urge the Union Government to immediately constitute a dedicated tribunal to resolve the dispute and ensure the release of Tamil Nadu's rightful share of Cauvery water and direct Government of Karnataka to stop any construction activities at Mekedatu.