Vol. 259             Tuesday , 
No. 12    14 th March, 2023 
23 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Felicitations by the Chair (pages 1 - 17) 
  
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 17 - 22) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing - Laid on the Table (page 23) 
 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment - Laid on the Table (pages 23 - 24) 
 
Motion for Election to the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research 
(PGIMER), Chandigarh - Adopted (page 24) 
 
         Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee (pages 24 - 25) 
 
 
 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 


Regarding notices received under Rule 267 and various other matters (pages 25 - 28) 
 
Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2022-23 - Laid on the Table (page 29) 
 
Supplementary Demands for Grants of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2022-
23 - Laid on the Table (page 29) 
 
Budget of Union territory of Jammu and Ka shmir, 2023-2024 - Laid on the Table 
(page 29) 
 
Regarding Privilege notice and various other issues (pages 30 - 34) 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise
] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
                       http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
E-mail  : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 14th March, 2023 / 23 Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
FELICITATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the 95 th Academy Award function at Los Angeles 
was a moment of glory for us. ‘The Elephant Whisperers’, Ms. Kartiki Gonsalves’s 
debut film, won the  Best Document ary Short Film Oscar and the song “ Naatu 
Naatu”, composed by Shri M.M. Keeravaani with the lyrics by Shri Chandrabose from 
Shri S.S. Rajamouli’s film ‘RRR’ won the Oscar Best Original Song. 
Hon. Members, the wins for ‘The Elep hant Whisperers’ and ‘RRR’ mark a new 
recognition of full spectrum of cinema that  India produces.  This will further the 
internationalisation of India’s film industry.   These achievements also reflect global 
appreciation of vast talent, immense crea tivity and committed dedication of Indian 
artists, indeed another facet of our global rise and recognition.   
On my own behalf and on behalf of this august House, I congratulate the entire 
team of artists, everyone associated with this positive venture, ‘The Elephant 
Whisperers’ and the movie ‘RRR’ for the well- earned recognition.  Now, the  Leader 
of the House. 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka): No, Sir. …(Interruptions).. 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL (Gujarat):  No, Sir.…(Interruptions).. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will allow you too. 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) : Mr. Chairman, Sir, it is also 
very interesting …(Interruptions)..  
MR. CHAIRMAN: One second.  …(Interruptions).. 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  Only on this point, Sir. …(Interruptions).. On the award, 
Sir…(Interruptions)..   

MR. CHAIRMAN : One second. ..(Interruptions)…Shaktisinhji, your smile is full of 
shakti, captivating.    
 Hon. Members, there are some occasions  when we must be only in one mode 
and that is the mode of happiness and appr eciation.  It is an occasion where I would 
plead with the hon. Members, I will give yo u some time to reflect.  Please confine 
yourselves only to paying our tribute on these great achievements.  Do not digress.    
Now, the Leader of the House.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, what I was trying to do, I wanted to share with the House 
that this 'The Elephant Whisperers' has been made by two women of eminence.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay. It is significant.  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  It is about gender.  It is a respect for our women of India that 
both ladies associated with 'The Elephant Whisperers' are eminent women, and it is a 
great mark of recognition for India's wome n that 'The Elephant Whisperers' has got. 
.…(Interruptions)...  
 One more thing. It is about sustainab ility, and it also shows that the world 
today is recognizing that sustainability has become core to our philosophy. 
.…(Interruptions)...   
 And, finally, Sir, 'RRR', the script-wri ter, is an hon. Member of Parliament, 
Mr. V.V. Prasad. I think, we all owe a de bt of gratitude to acknowledge Mr. V.V. 
Prasad's contribution. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One second. .…(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, I am so happy 
that Leader of the House ha s confined only to the issue.  I will now call upon the 
Leader of the Opposition, and, Khargeji, I am told by the Leader of the House that the 
script-writer is our Member. .…(Interruptions)... We need to congratulate him.  He is 
a Member of the House of Elders, the Upper House.  Hon. Leader of the Opposition.  
 
SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA (Chhattisgarh):  Sir, is he here? .…(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Rajeevji, 'presence' is always impactful.  Sometimes, 'absence' is 
equally impactful.  Hon. Leader of the Opposition.  
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE) : Sir, I also join 
to congratulate both the awardees. Particular ly, first time, such an award is given to 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

'Naatu Naatu' and also to 'The Elephant Whisperers.'  Both of them come from South 
India.  It is a great pride for us. We are very proud and whatever you have told, we are 
with you.  But my only request is that the Ruling Party should not take credit that 'we 
have directed it, we have written the poem.' .…(Interruptions)... 'Modiji has directed 
this film; they should not say that.'  .…(Interruptions)... That is my only request. 
.…(Interruptions)... It is the contribution of the country. .…(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, please don't expunge his remarks. .…(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Well, I have had the occasion, hon. Members, this morning to read 
several newspapers, and there is extensive co verage.  It was very enlightening and it 
is a shift; it is a recognition, we must all take pride.  After all, we are proud Indians, 
take pride ... .…(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, in 1984, we won an Oscar... .…(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, in 1984, it was not an ... .…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One second.  .…(Interruptions)... One second. .…(Interruptions)... 
Let Mr. Jairam Ramesh speak. .…(Interruptions)... One second. .…(Interruptions)... 
Mr. Jairam Ramesh, confine to this issue and say a few words. .…(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI P. BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal):  Sir, this is not a subject of debate.  Make 
it very clear. .…(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Jairamji, what do you want to say?  .…(Interruptions)...  Have you 
to say anything on this point? .…(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH :  Sir, this is an occasion for collective celebration, not for 
narrow partisan points scoring like th e Leader of the House is doing. 
.…(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You are being unfair. He was no t partisan. And th e Leader of the 
Opposition had elevated it to a very high leve l.  We all must enjoy it, relish it.  Would 
any other Member of the Hous e like to reflect before I give the floor to Dr. Amar 
Patnaik? .…(Interruptions)...  
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
3

Ǜी राजीव शुक्ला : सर, जया बच्चन जी को बोलना है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, Madam. And mind you, hon.  Members, we have one of the 
greatest artists as Member of the Upper Ho use and a global authority who can reflect 
on our great achievement.  She herself has to  her credit inspirational contributions.  
Madam Jaya Bachchan, on this.   
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN (Uttar Pradesh) :  Sir, I am so happy and I am so glad 
that we are discussing the most important ambassadors of this country, the film folks.  
It does not matter whether they are from the North, East, South or West.  They are 
Indians.  I am so happy that while thanking the President, I did mention this point in 
my speech and I feel vindicated today.  I st and here with pride and with dignity for my 
film fraternity who have represented this  country a number of times and have won a 
number of awards, starting from Shri Satyajit Ray and others.  I also want to 
contribute and say that I know Mr. Rajamouli very well.  नीरज जी, आप क्यȗ बीच-बीच मȂ 
इतना जोर-जोर से बोलते हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, Ma'am.  
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN :  The writer is not only th e script writer but the story 
writer as well.  He is a Me mber of this House and it is  a great honour.  There have 
been many, many such people from the cr eative world who have been Nominated to 
this House, पहल े भी और आज भी। ...(Ëयव
 धान)... सर, यह कर्ॉिनक िडज़ीज़ होता जा रहा है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह देिखए! ...(Ëयवधान)... आवाज़ हमारे पास भी है, हम भी बोल सकते हȅ, मगर 
जब कोई सÆयता की बात होती है, तो असÆय Ëयवहार मत किरए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मै डम, आपकी आवाज़ नहीं है, बुलंद आवाज़ है। You have the distinction of
  
belonging to a family that has a terrific DNA for creativity in the film industry. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN:  Sir, I thank you for your kind words.  
मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूँ िक यह शुरुआत  है। मȅ भारत देश की जनता को धन्यवाद देना 
चाहती हूँ िक उनकी खाितर िवदेश क े लोग आज हमारी जनता को िरक
 ोग्नाइज़ कर रहे हȅ। The 
market of cinema is here. It is not in America. Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr.  Amar Patnaik. 
 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

DR. AMAR PATNAIK (Odisha) :  Sir, while I join the Ho use in complimenting this 
tremendous achievement that both the film s have achieved, there are a couple of 
things which come out and which have to be noted.  In 'The Elephant Whisperers' the 
kind of relationship that human beings have  with nature, with the animal world, has 
been depicted very beautifully.  I think that is a part of the Indian ethos, Indian culture 
and that is what we have communicated to the world.  I think we must appreciate this 
particular fact.  The second thing is that this movie came from the OTT platform.  That 
basically means that the way we are going ahead, India is going ahead, in 
digitalization, in using digital platforms in creativity, is something that needs to be 
commended and noticed as well.  As I read in the newspapers, the two characters in 
that movie still do not know the entire ramification of the fact that they won the Oscar.  
They have been given a new orphaned elepha nt to rear up.  They have left the two 
that are already there.   
Sir, this is a tremendous achievement and this is a cel ebration of the fact that 
we Indians can show to the wo rld the sustainable way of livin g in this world.  As for 
the song, I think it has caught the imaginatio n of all sections of the society.  As 
Madam Jaya Bachchanji said, this is creativity at its peak, being recognized globally, 
and I think we must all be very happy about it.  We must celebrate it and we must 
compliment all the people involved and also those who are probably lurking 
somewhere, whom we must promote, so th at we occupy the central place in the 
comity of nations. Thank you, Sir. 
         
MR. CHAIRMAN:  We have another distinguished artist, Dr. Sonal Mansingh. 
 
डा. सोनल मानिंसह (नाम-िनदȃिशत) : धन्यवाद, सर। मȅ दो बातȂ कहना चाहती हूँ।  
 पहली बात, सबके  साथ, सबकी आवाज़ȗ क े साथ मेरी भी आवाज़ आज क े परफॉिमȊग 
जगत से, नृत्य, संगीत क े जगत से जा रही है - बहुत अिभनंदन, बहुत बधाई और धन्यवाद क े 
साथ। मुझे इस बात को कहते हुए भी आनन्द है िक जो 'नाटू-नाटू' शÅद है, उसके  बारे मȂ यह चचार् 
चली िक यह शÅद कहाँ से आया, तो कहते हȅ िक यह शÅद 'नट' से आया, नटराज नृत्य से आया 
और यह नृत्य सबने देखा।  अब पूरी दुिनया इस पर नाच रही है, यह हमारे िलए बहुत ही हषर् की 
बात है। 
 सर, दूसरी बात यह है िक 'िद एिलफȂ ट िËहÎपसर्' डॉक्यूमȂटरी को भी अवॉडर् िमला है।  मȅ 
कहना चाहती हूँ िक गणेश जी हमारे आराध्य देव हȅ, Ģथमेश हȅ और हमारे िलए हाथी, हÎती 
अत्यंत पूजनीय है, तो एक तरीके  से उनको भी आदर िदया गया है, सÇमान िदया गय
ा है।  हम 
सबको इसके  बारे मȂ भी बहुत हषर् होना चािहए िक हमारे दोनȗ जो परम पूजनीय नटराज जी और 
गणेश जी हȅ, उनका भी इसमȂ िजकर् है और इस बात को हम याद रखȂ।  एक बार िफर से बधाई!  
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
5

MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Prashanta Nanda, another hon. Member from the industry. 
 
DR. PRASHANTA NANDA (Odisha) :  Mr. Chairman, Sir, it is a great moment and a 
proud moment for our country.  I am feeling so happy that I cannot express it.  I have 
spent all my life making films.  For sixty year s, I have been making films.  I have also 
got national and international awards, but this Oscar Award for a film on OTT platform 
is beyond my imagination.  I hope that all In dians should feel proud.   This is our day.  
Thank you very much.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members .…(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜीमती जया बƳन : सर, अगर ऑÎकर कभी परफॉमȄस की िरकोिग्नशन को िमलेगा तो वह 
पािर्लयामȂट क े िकसी मेÇबर को िमलेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I feel the absence of legal giants who perform in 
Court. I wish they were also here to share our joy today.  They are the members of my 
fraternity and the senior advocates.  Now Dr. Santanu Sen; he is elegantly dressed. 
 
DR. SANTANU SEN (West Bengal): Sir, I sincerely congratulate them.  Definitely, it is 
a matter of great pride.  It is an honour fo r the entire country.  I sincerely endorse the 
statement made by our learned Member, Shri mati Jaya Bachchan that it is not the 
north or west or south or east, it is an  achievement of our co untry at large. Thank 
you. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Sir, it is a matter of great pride that we have won the 
Oscar. Many hon. Members were commentin g about the OTT revolution that is 
h
appening in this country. It is a platform fo r national integration.  Whenever we go to 
any place, people talk about Malayalam mo vies, Tamil movies or Telugu movies.  
There is another aspect which I would exp ect the Government to consider.  Despite 
the fact that there is a lot of talk an d discussion about the Indian movies, the 
contribution of media and entertainment industry to the GDP is less than one per cent 
as compared to other nations where it is more than four per cent. Also, there is a 
growing concern that a lot of  offended people are growing in the country and a lot of 
censor cuts are happening to the movies. I would ensure that th e House should be 
obviously together to .…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay, John Brittasji; it is a moment of joy. .…(Interruptions)...  
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO (Uttar Pradesh) : Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir, for 
the opportunity.  It is truly a moment of glory for the Indian cinema.  The Director of 
this movie, Shri Rajamouli, is also a Di rector of Bahubali movie, which is another 
international success.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad, a Nominated Member of this 
House, is also the story writer for Bahubali, apart from this movie.  So, this is not a 
lone success.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad, wh o is not here in the House now, is also a 
story writer of another successful movie 'Bajrangi Bhaijaan' and several other major 
hits.  'RRR' is a patriotic film; it is a film against colonialism and it also truly celebrates 
India's struggle for Independence.  Apart from being an Indian, I think, it is a great 
moment of pride for all Telugus because th e original film is Telugu and the song 
'Naatu Naatu'  is a Telugu song. So, I would like to add that additional moment of 
glory to this occasion.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा: सर, सबसे पहले मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं िक आपने एक नई तरह की 
परÇपरा शुरू  की है। मुझे लगता है िक इस तरह की उपलिÅधयȗ को सदन मȂ िडÎकस कर
 के  उन 
कलाकारȗ को बधाई देना एक नया कायर् है और इसकी िजतनी सराहना की जाए, उतनी कम है। 
जैसा िक जया जी ने कहा, मȅ इस बात से पूरी तरह सहमत हूं िक भारतीय िसनेमा जगत दिक्षण से 
लेकर उǄर तक, िजस तरह से िवÌ
व मȂ बढ़ रहा है, वह िदन दूर नहीं है, जब भारतीय िसनेमा 
हॉलीवुड को पीछे  छोड़  देगा।   इसिलए  इन  सबको  बधाई  देते हुए मȅ इस सदन  क े  माध्यम से 
यह अपील करना चाहता हूं िक िजस िदन ऑÎ कर अवाडर् की ज्यूरी मȂ भारतीय कलाकार और 
भारतीय लेखक हȗगे, उस िदन शायद हमȂ सबसे ज्यादा Ģसन्नता होगी।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Prakash Javadekar.  We will have three more speakers 
on this point and then come to the Agenda. 
 
SHRI PRAKASH JAVADEKAR (Maharashtra):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, the whole House is 
very happy and the whole country is happy for both the reasons.  I will first talk about 
the documentary, 'The Elephant Whisperers'.  This elephant, as Sonal ji said, is our 
deity also. And, more importantly, we have more than 30,000 elephants in our country 
and we are, probably, the only country which worships trees, animals and nature.  
So, these are the ethos of our country - living in harmony with nature. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Great.  Thank you.  Now, Mr. Vaiko. 
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, this is the happiest occasion.  After a 
long time, we all join together in complim enting the composer and the singer of RRR 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
7

film.  But, previously also, Mr. A.R. Rahm an got the same award for his composition 
'Vande Mataram' 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It was 'Jai Ho'. 
 
SHRI VAIKO:  Yes, 'Jai Ho'.  So, we are proud as this is the second time for music for 
Tamil Nadu.  Therefore, I also wanted to recall what Music Director Mr. A.R. Rahman 
established and achieved.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी सभापित : यिद  मȅ वकील नहीं बनता, तो कहीं न कहीं एिंक्टग ज़रूर  करताI Now, Dr. M. 
Thambidurai.  
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक
 (राजÎथान): यिद आप यहां न होते तो हो सकता है िक जो 
भावनाएं आज हम यहां Ëयƪ कर रहे हȅ, आपके  Ģित भी इसी तरह की भावनाएं हम Ëयƪ कर रहे 
होते। 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I also join all my colleagues 
in appreciating and congratulating the awar dees who got the Oscars.  I would like to 
specially mention that the award-winning documentary 'The Elephant Whisperers' 
has been produced and shot in Tamil Nadu, in Ooty area.  I am very proud of that.  
There is so much nature that we have in Tamil Nadu. This documentary has shown 
the Nilgiri Hills.  Apart from that, the so ng from the movie RRR is a good song.  We 
appreciate that and it is a credit given to our country.   
 I would like to say that the great l eaders from our AIADMK Party, MGR and 
Jayalalithaaji, were also film actors.  You know it very well.  They are very popular.  
This movie talks about Dravidian movement. .…(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, hon. Member. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu):  Therefore,
 we are very thankful for giving us an 
opportunity to appreciate this achievement.  Thank you, Sir.  
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY (West Bengal):  Sir, thank you for excluding me.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No, Sukhendu ji, I can't exclude you. अपना िरÌता  बहुत पुराना और 
गहरा है। Please take the floor.  .…(Interruptions)...   I would request Shri Sukhendu 
Sekhar Ray to take the floor.   
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY:  Sorry, Sir, I cannot speak.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please take the floor.  
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY:  I cannot speak.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Sukhendu ji, we are discussing a very pleasant subject.  What 
happened was that just when I took your  name, I had indicated Dr. Sen, your 
colleague. I thought I must yield in favour of the black as compared to white at the 
moment. So, I am sure, you will take note  of my special request and make your 
contribution. You come from a State that ha s a rich culture and has made significant 
contribution in the field.  सुखेन्दु जी, आप मȂ और हममȂ नाराज़गी का िरÌता नहीं हो सकता है। 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY : Sir, I would just like to remind you that as per the 
normal procedure of the House, firstly, the Leader of the House, then the Leader of 
the Opposition, then the lead ers of the various political parties -- and, as it is a 
special occasion, then, obviously, the Members of the Parliament who are, by 
profession, performing artists -- should get the chance to speak.  Anyway, it was not 
maintained.  With this rider, I would like to submit before you that whatever has been 
stated by my hon. colleagues, I share thei r views, but, through you, I would like to 
request Shri Bhupender Yadav, the hon. Mini ster of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change for organizing special film shows, pa rticularly of the Elephant Whisperers, for 
the children, for the school-going boys an d girls because day in and day out, the 
elephants are being killed by speedy trains  and poachers. If we organize these 
shows, it will have a positive thought in the minds of our children. Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is a very constructive suggestion.  Shri C.M. Ramesh. 
 
DR. C.M. RAMESH (Andhra Pradesh) : Sir, as it mainly con cerns the Telugu film 
industry, kindly allow me to speak in Telugu. 
* "Sir, the Telugu film industry has won 
an Oscar Award and is now winning accolades from the entire world. I congratulate 
music composer, Shri Keeravani, lyricist, Shri Chandrabose, director, Shri Rajamouli, 
actors, Shri Jr. N. T. Rama Rao & Shri  Ram Charan and also the entire team 
associated with the song. If the House permit s, I request your good self to permit this 
august House to felicitate the entire team after they return to India.  Shri V. Vijayendra 
                                         
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
9

Prasad is a Nominated Member of this augu st House. I thank the hon. Prime Minister 
for his foresight in recommending such em inent people to the Nominated Members 
list. Sir, Telugu people are feeling proud and elated with this success. Thank You."   
            
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन ( छǄीसगढ़) : सभापित महोदय, मȅ सबसे पहले आपके  माध्यम से िफÊम 
इंडÎटर्ी को धन्यवाद देना चाहती हूं, िजसके  कारण आज पूरे सदन मȂ मुÎकराहट फ ैली है, जो 
बहुत कम देखने को िमलती है।  यहां बहुत सारी बातȂ की गई हȅ और मुझे लगता है िक दो बातȂ अभी 
कहनी बाकी हȅ।  'आरआरआर' और 'िद एिलफȅ ट िËहÎपरसर्' मȂ दो चीज़Ȃ, मां की ममता और हमारे 
कÊचर की िसिÇÃलिसटी  बहुत अहम थी।  उसमȂ जो डांस था, वह हमारे कÊचर का, हमारी 
िसिÇÃलिसटी का और मÎत होकर जो इंिडया क े लोग डांस करते हȅ, उसका Ģतीक हैI  हमने अपने 
कÊचर का सÇमान िकया, तभ
ी आज अंतरराÍटर्ीय Îतर पर सÇमान हुआ है।  मुझे यह लगता है िक 
हम लोगȗ क े िलए एक बहुत बड़ा लैसन है।  सर, जो मां होती है - चाहे मनुÍय का बच्चा हो, 
जानवर का बच्चा हो या पंछी का हो - मां तो मां होती है और उसका Ãयार सबके  िलए एक जैसा 
होता है। हम सबके  िलए यह बहुत बड़ा लैसन है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से उनको बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद 
देती हूं।   
 
Ǜीमती िĢय
ंका चतुवȃदी (महाराÍटर्) : सर, जैसे हमारे पािर्लयामȂटेिरयन्स ने बधाई दी, उसी तरह 
से मȅ भी बधाई देना चाहत
ी हूं।  मȅ एक चीज़ और मेन्शन करना चाहूंगी िक वहां पर एक और 
इितहास रचा गया है।  वहां पर एक इंिडयन एक्टर्ेस दीिपका पादुकोण ने ' नाटू नाटू' गाने को 
इंटर्ोǹूस िकया था, उन्हȗने भी Åलैक डर्ेस पह नी हुई  थी, तो  मȅ उनको भी बधाई देना चाहूंगी।  
सर, दीिपका पादुकोण से याद आया, मȅ एक  चीज़  और कहना चाहूंगी िक यह जो बॉयकॉट 
कÊचर है, अगर ऑÎकर जीतने क े बाद सोशल मीिडया ÃलैटफॉÇसर् पर बॉयकॉट कÊचर को खत्म 
करने का का
म होगा, तो यह हमारे िलए सौभाग्य की बात होगीI  And, Sir, because I am 
wearing black, I yield the space to Mahua Maji ji, who has been wanting to speak.  
Thank you so much. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The only culture I know is 'agriculture'.   
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Of course, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And, let us believe in that.  Now, Shri Binoy Viswam. 
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM (Kerala) : Sir, I add my humble voice to the emotionally-
packed words of Shrimati Ja ya Bachchan.  She mentioned the feelings of this House 
in very beautiful words.  This is the moment  when we all join together to uphold our 
culture, its diversity, its richness and its aesthet ics.  It is no more a narrow one; it is a 
wide one, and that wideness is to be  celebrated now. Sir, the tribes, the 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

underprivileged and their love for the nature is beautifully shown in the film called   
'The Elephant Whisperers'. That film show s how great this country is.  In the same 
way, the dance of 'Naatu Naatu' will always remain in our memory, and I believe that 
this country will celebrate that dance also.  This is the moment that this country thinks 
about diversity and oneness.  Our diversity is the cause of the onene ss.  It is not that 
one language is the answer for it.  In severa l languages, North or South, India is one.  
Telugu or Hindi, India is one.  Malayalam or  Hindi, India is one.  But that idea is not 
taken seriously by certain quarters.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.   
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM:  This is the reminder for most of them.   
 
Ǜी सभापित :  सबको 'हाथी मेरे साथी' की याद आ गई है।  Now, Dr. Fauzia Khan.  Briefly, 
Madam.   
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra) :  Sir, a great Indian poet has said that if music be 
the food of joy, sharing makes it paradise.  We are spreading the joy of creativity and 
we are sharing the glory of India here, across ideologies, across regions, across 
geographical boundaries.  So, let's celebra te our diversity; let's celebrate our 
creativity.  It is a proud moment for us.  And let's celebrate our gender 
empowerment.   
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana) :  Sir, I don’t want to be  parochial, but I feel so 
happy when all of you say such words of praise , because the film is from my State.  It 
is not of my State only; it is a universal f ilm.  But you have not taken one name.  I am 
thankful to Dr. Ramesh.  It is Keeravani who got the award.  His name should be 
taken.  He is the composer.  The award is given in the category of 'Original Song'.  
There are many songs for which the Oscar is  given, but there is one category known 
as 'Original Song', which takes the entire universe into itself.  As you might have seen 
yesterday, all the other joined the dais.  I also especially congratulate Mr. Prasad.  He 
is not here.  He is not directly associated with  it, but he is associated with it in writing 
along with Mr. Rajamouli. Rajamouli is the writer and his son. Rajamouli and 
Keeravani along with the actors, whose na mes Mr Ramesh mentioned, are all from 
my State.  But they are not from my State only; they belong to this country, although 
they are certainly from the southern region. Thank you very much. 
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
11

Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार) :  सर, मȅ अपने दल और अपने तमाम सािथयȗ की ओर से आपकी 
और सदन की भावनाओं क े साथ अपने आपको एसोिसएट करता हूं।  सर, यह सचमुच गवर् का 
क्षण है, लेिकन गवर् क े ऐसे क्षण आने क े िलए आवÌयक है - आप िजस राज्य से आए हȅ, वहां कई 
वषर् रहे - टैगोर साहब कहते थे, 'where the mind i
s without fear and the head is held 
high'. आटर् और कÊचर को बंिदश-मुƪ करना होगा और आजादख्याली को Ģमोट करना होगा, 
तब हमारे पास ऐसे सैकड़ȗ ऑÎकर आएंगे।  जय िंह द! 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी (उǄर Ģदेश):  सभापित महोदय, मȅ बहुत धन्यवाद देना चाहती हूं िक आज 
आपने सदन को एक साथ करके  इतना अच्छा माहौल बनाया है। अभी हमारे सभी सÇमािनत 
सदÎयȗ ने अपनी तरफ से बधाई दी है और मȅ भी सभी क े साथ Îवयं को संबǉ करते हुए बधाई 
देना चाहती हूं।   
 महोदय, मȅ एक बात कहना चाहती हूं िक क्या पूरब क्या पिÌचम, क्या उǄर क्या दिक्षण, 
यह सारा िंह
दुÎतान ही अपना है और आज सारा िंहदुÎतान खुश है।   मह ोदय, मȅ आज यह कह 
सकती हूं िक एक 56 इंच क े सीने क े नाते आज देश क े सभी िंहदुÎतािनयȗ का सीना 56 इंच का हो 
गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, मȅ बधाई देना चाहती हूं और िजन दो मिह लाओं को अवाडर् िमला 
है, उनके  िलए मȅ िवशेष बधाई देना चाहती हूं।   
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS; THE MINISTER OF COAL; AND THE 
MINISTER OF MINES (SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI) : Sir, I also associate with all the 
Members who have expressed their deep ha ppiness regarding two Oscars at a time 
for India.  It is really a very happy moment fo r all of us.  One of the script writers is Mr. 
Vijayendra Prasad, who has been Nominated by  the hon. President. It is also a very 
important thing to note how the hon. Pres ident is now Nominati ng Members who are 
illustrious in their own fields. That is a very important thing.  I would like to 
congratulate him also.  .…(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, there have been.…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Jairam ji. 
 
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI : I am only appreciating Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad.  
.…(Interruptions)... Why Jairam ji is so agitated, I am not really able to understand.  
.…(Interruptions)..  Also there is 'The Elephant Wh isperers'.  Both the producers are 
women.  This shows the Nari Shakti of our country.  I congratulat e both of t hem. I 
also express my happiness and I congratulate them.      
                                                                                                     
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, congratulations to the winners of Oscars.  We 
are proud Indians.  I would like to requ est the Central Government and the State 
Governments that in hilly terrains where schools are there, 'The Elephant Whisperers' 
should be screened, so that  the students are aware of the nature and the silent 
intelligence of the elephants which is a must.  I request the Central and State 
Governments to consider this screening for the students in hilly areas.     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, before I call three or four Members to contribute 
significant points to it, I have to inform you that this morning I got good input from 
very senior people in the film  industry and in the field of culture. They said that the 
Upper House must help develop an ecosystem , so that exploitation of such talent 
takes place, so that everyone can totally us e talent and potential, and wherever there 
are handicaps, wherever there are hiccups, wherever there are problems, we need to 
overcome them.  I am sure we will have so me kind of a discussion during the Session 
so that we can wholesomely motivate such kind of emergence of an ecosystem. 
 Shrimati Mahua Maji. 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी (झारखंड) : धन्यवाद, माननीय सभापित महोदय। सबसे पहले तो मȅ ऑÎकर 
अवाडर् लाकर हमारे पूरे देश को गौरवािन्वत करने वाली पूरी टीम को धन्
यवाद  देती हूं, उनको 
हािर्दक बधाई देती हूं। मȅ एक अहम मुǈे की तरफ भी ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहती हूं िक अभी दो-
तीन िदन पहले ही सािहत्य अकादमी अवाडर् िदया जा रहा था, उसमȂ 24 Îटेट्स क े कलाकार 
सािहत्यकारȗ मȂ से चुनकर आये हȅ, लेिकन उनकी एक समÎया यह है िक उनके  िल ए सरकार 
कोई ऐसी पॉिलसी नहीं लाई है ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ बताना चाहती हूं िक उनको ģी मेिडकल की 
सुिवधा होनी चािहए। महोदय,  आज क े िदन िजनके  कारण हम गौरवािन् वत  हो रहे हȅ, उनकी होल 
लाइफ क े िलए ģी मेिडकल की सुिवधा होनी चािहए, क्यȗिक उनके  पास पैसे नहीं होते हȅ, वे बहुत 
ही आिर्थक कमी से जूझ रहे हȅ, इसिलए इस तरफ मȅ आपका ध्यान िदलाना चाहती हूं, धन्यव ाद।   
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I congratulate the awardees who 
have won Oscars.  I am really happy to say that the film was shot in Ooty which is the 
Queen of Hills and where elephants are protected. In fact, we have an elephant 
corridor there.  Our Chief Minister, Mr. M.K. Stalin, is taking all the steps to protect 
the elephants, so that they can freely move and they are not disturbed.  The whole of 
India takes pride in this movie.  In 1960s, our then Chief Minister, Dr. Kalaignar, wrote 
script for Parasakthi in Tamil. That film ran for one year and Sivaji Ganesan became 
popular because of that film. We Indians have talent, and we should be proud that the 
whole world knows about our talent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir. 
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
13

MR. CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Minister, Shri Anurag Singh Thakur.  
 
सूचना और Ģसारण मंतर्ी; और युवक कायर्कर्म और खेल मंतर्ी ( Ǜी अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र): 
चेयरमैन सर, सबसे पहले तो मȅ आपका आभारी हूँ िक आपने मुझे अपनी बात कहने का अवसर 
िदया।  भारतीय िफÊम जगत की देश और दुिनया भर मȂ जो धूम मची है, 'आरआरआर' क े 'नाटू- 
नाटू' ने न क ेवल देश, बिÊक दुिनया का िदल जीतने का का
म िकया है।  यह भारत क े िलए गौरव 
की बात है िक ऑÎकर-95 मȂ भारतीय िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी ने एक नहीं, बिÊक दो-दो अवाड्सर् पाने का 
काम िकया है।  सर, िफÊम की धूम तो यहाँ पर थी ही, लेिकन इंिडयन िफÊम क ं टȂट को आज 
दुिनया ने सराहा है, और मȅ कहूँ िक Brand In
dia has arrived, and it is just a beginning.  
India has the potential to become the content hub of the world.  Let us work together 
to make India the content hub of the world.   Nothing is regional today. The Prime 
Minister says 'local to global'.  Our region al has become international.  That is a big 
achievement for India.  सर, इसमȂ बड़ी बात यह है िक 'नाटू नाटू' तेलुगू भाषा मȂ गाया गया था, 
यह बहुत सारी भाषाओं मȂ डब हुआ, लेिकन मȅ कह सकता हूँ िक 30 क्या, आज दुिनया क े करोड़ȗ 
लोगȗ क े िदलȗ मȂ 'नाटू नाटू' बज रहा है, तो भारत क े संगीत की धुन आज दुिनया भर मȂ बज रही 
है।   
सर, तिमल भाषा मȂ िफÊम बनी - ' िद एिलफȅ ट िËहÎपरसर्'।  यह छोटी बात नहीं है।  यह 
छोटे बजट क े साथ बनी, यह एक Îमॉ
ल डाक्युमȂटरी थी, लेिकन आज उसको भी जो मुकाम 
हािसल हुआ है, उसके  िलए मȅ अपनी ओर से उन्हȂ बधाई देता हूँ।  चूँिक यह िजÇमेदारी मोदी जी 
की सरकार मȂ मुझे िमली है, हम कह सकते हȅ िक हमने लग ातार इसके  िलए Ģयास िकया। जब 
टोरȗटो िफÊम फ ेिÎटवल हुआ, तब राजामौली जी और उनकी पूरी टीम ने उस समय वहाँ पर वÊडर् 
Ģीिमयर करने का काम िकया, हमने भारतीय िफÊमȗ को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए मंच िदया। कान 
िफÊम फ ेिÎट
वल मȂ भी जब भारत और ģांस ने अपने िडÃलोमैिटक टाइज़ की 75वीं वषर्गाँठ मनाई, 
तो जब पहली बार िकसी देश को क ंटर्ी ऑफ ऑनर िमला, वह िपछले वषर् यहाँ भारत को िमला।  
सर, एक क े बाद दूसरा वह क्षेतर् है, जहाँ पर भारत ने िफÊमȗ क े क्षेतर् मȂ अच्छा काम िक या है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र : सर, मȅ बस दो िमनट मȂ अपनी बात खत्म कर रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : एक िमनट। 
 
Ǜी अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र : सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ अपनी बात खत्म कर दूँगा।   
सर, अभी िप
छले साल सȂटर्ल एिशया का युवाओं का डेिलगेशन आया था।  मुझे इस पूरे 
सदन क े सामने यह कहते हुए Ģसन्नता होती है िक जब शाम को भोजन का समय था, तो उन्हȗने 
कहा िक हम क ु छ कÊचरल Ģोगर्ाम कर
ना चाहते हȅ।  मुझे लगा िक वे अपने देश क े गाने बजाएँगे।  
सर, भारतीय िफÊमȗ की धुन और उनको गाने का काम उन सȂटर्ल एिशया क े युवाओं ने िकया।  
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

और बात भी कब की!  राज कपूर जी की िफÊमȗ क े गाने गाए गए।  िमथुन चकर्वतीर् का गाना - 
'िजÇमी, िजÇमी, िजÇमी, आ जा, आ जा, आ जा', उस पर आज क े युवा डांस कर रहे हȅ।  That is 
the impact of the film industry.  यह मȅ इसिलए कह रहा हूँ िक आज 'आरआरआर' ने जो काम 
िकया है, उसके  पीछे Îटोरी िलखने वाले, पटक
था िलखने वाले िवजयेन्दर् Ģसाद जी इस सदन क े 
सदÎय भी हȅ।  यह हमारे िलए सबसे बड़े सौभाग्य की बात है िक उन्हȗने क ेवल Îटोरी ही नहीं 
िलखी, वे एक अच्छे Ëयिƪ भी हȅ।  एक अच्छे Ëयिƪ को चुन कर इस सदन का िहÎसा बनने का 
अवसर िदया गया, उस
के  िलए भी मȅ बहुत आभार Ģकट करता हूँ।  हम सबकी ओर से 
'आरआरआर' और ' िद एिलफȅ ट िËहÎपरसर्' क े सभी लोगȗ को बहुत-बहुत बधाई और 
शुभकामनाएँ! 
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ǜी अÅदुल वहाब।  
 
SHRI ABD
UL WAHAB (Kerala): Sir, I congratulate all the artists and even the हाथी मेरा 
साथी, वह रोज हमारे घर मȂ आता है। Sir, I have a special request to you.  Why can't we, 
MPs, have Naatu Naatu in front of Rashtrapati Bhavan?  उन्हȗने यूकर् े न क े ĢेिसडȂट हाउस 
क े सामने यह िकया है, तो हम हमारी दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी क े िनव ास क े सामने नाटू नाटू करȂगे।  Thank 
you, Sir.  
 
SHRI RAVICHANDRA VADDIRAJU (Telangana) : Sir, I would like to associate myself 
with this issue of Oscar Awards. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Jaggesh. I am sure that he is from the industry.  I had an 
interaction with him; it was an extremely lively interaction.  Please go ahead.  
 
SHRI JAGGESH (Karnataka): Sir, I thank you for giving me an opportunity.  I would 
like to reintroduce myself and my career.  I st arted my cinema career  in 1980.  I have 
done about 150 movies in Kannada as a hero.  We were very unlucky in those days. 
When we acted, even the next State co uld not watch it because there was no 
internet, media, etc.  Only print media was th ere. Today's generation is very lucky.  If 
you do anything, immediately, it can be wa tched by many people, even in overseas 
places.  That is the time which has been creat ed in modern India. So, in this period, I 
would thank our M.P., who is also one of the best writers. We have stepped into 
Oscar Awards. This is a dream for every cine ma artist to get an award in Oscars.  I 
am very grateful because Modiji used to tell one word that all the Indian languages are 
atma of Bharat.  He used to say that like that, we Indians have started taking awards 
outside.  This is the stepping stone of su ccess which we have started now.  In future 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
15

days, I think, we Indians would rock everywhere , in every field.  That is my feeling.  I 
once again congratulate my dear friend.  Thank you for giving me time.   
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा) : सर, आज एक कलाकार क े नाते मुझे बहुत गवर् महसूस हो रहा है 
िक हमारा देश दो-दो ऑÎकर जीत कर आया है। मȅ सदन क े सभी सदÎयȗ की बात से सहमत हूं 
और सारे देश को िफर से बधाई देना चाहता हूं, बहुत-बहुत धन्
यवाद। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy and, then, I would take up the next Agenda.   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh):  S i r ,  o n e  i s s u e ,  w h i c h  w e  h a v e  
conveniently forgotten, is when a cinema or  documentary of artistic nature of such a 
magnitude is produced, it is not because of one person or two persons but it is 
because of the hard work that has been  put in by hundreds of people, be it 
technicians, artists etc..   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes.   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Therefore, the appreciation, that is being offered or 
conferred on this, should go to everyone  who has worked for the film or the 
documentary, as the case may be.  Further , irrespective of the language, irrespective 
of the religion, caste, creed, there are ar tists everywhere and, therefore, these 
regional feelings or sub-regional feelings or linguistic feelings should not be there 
while appreciating this.  Thank you very much, Sir.         
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी ( उǄर Ģदेश) : सर, आज जब कला की इस अ
िभËयिƪ क े संदभर् मȂ सुन्दर 
समन्वय िदखा, तो मेरे मन मȂ एक तथ्य आया और मȅने सोचा िक उसे सदन क े पटल पर रख दूं।  
जैसा माननीय सदÎया, डा. सोनल मानिंसह जी ने कहा िक 'नाटू' शÅद की उत्पिǄ 'नट' 
से हुई है और भारतीय संÎकृ ित मȂ जो सबसे बड़ा गर्ंथ है, वह भरत मुिन का नाǷशाÎतर् ही है, 
िजसमȂ नौ रस हȅ। एक शांत रस का Ģयोग इसि
लए नहीं िकया जाता, क्यȗिक नाǷ  मȂ उसकी 
अिभËयिƪ सÇभव नहीं है, इसिलए आठ रस ही Ģयोग िकए जाते हȅ। यह दिक्षण भा रत की दो 
िफÊमȗ से गौरव का अवसर है। तिमल संÎकृ ित मȂ नाǷ  क े िलए एक तोÊकािÃपयç गर्ंथ है,  जो  
उसी क े समकक्ष है। उसमȂ भी ठीक वैसे ही नौ रस बताए गए हȅ एवं उस मȂ भी शांत रस की ही 
अिभËयिƪ नहीं होती है। इसके  साथ उसमȂ भी आठ रस ठीक उसी सीक्वȂस मȂ हȅ, जैसे भरत मुिन 
क े नाǷशाÎतर् मȂ हȅ। इसिलए मुझे लगता है िक इस 'नाटू' शÅद की शाÎतर्ीय उत्पिǄ िजस शÅद से 
है, उसमȂ दिक्षण से उǄर का एक सुन्दर समन्
वय िदखता है, जो अमृत काल क े िलए बहुत 
सकारात्मक संदेश है।  
 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, before I call for Papers to be Laid on Table, I have 
felt the sense of the House. The hon. Minister, who is present here, and we gave him 
the floor also, would organize for the Me mbers of Parliament and their families 
screening of these two movies by getting in  touch with the Leader of the House and 
the Leader of the Opposition. That would be  a good step. I am sure the hon. Minister 
would do it after consulting both of them in a time-bound manner and effectively.    
 
Ǜी अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र : सर, मȅ मानता हूं िक हम लोगȗ क े िलए इससे बड़ा सौभाग्य और क्या हो 
सकता है।  
सर, मȅ माननीय खरगे जी एवं माननीय पीयूष जी क े साथ िनमन्तर्ण लेकर आपके  पा
स  
आने ही वाला हूं। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Papers to be Laid on Table.   
 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of IICA, Gurugram and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS (RAO 
INDERJIT SINGH) :  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the 
following papers:— 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indi an Institute of Corporate Affairs 
(IICA), Gurugram, Haryana, for the year 2021-22, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9076/17/23] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of  Power 
 
िवǏुत मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी क ृ Íण पाल) : महोदय, मȅ िवǏुत अिधिनयम, 2003 की धारा 
179 क े अधीन क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏुत Ģािधकरण (कोयला आधािरत ताप िवǏुत उत्पादन इकाइयȗ का 
लचीला संचालन) िविनयम, 2023 को Ģकािशत करने वाली िवǏुत मंतर्ालय की अिधसूचना सं. 
सी.ई.ए.-टी.एच. 17-13/4/2022 टी.ई.टी.डी. Ģभाग, िदनांक 30 जनवरी, 2023 की एक Ģित 
(अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9499/17/23] 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
17

Notifications of the Ministry of Finance 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE  (DR. BHAGWAT 
KISHANRAO KARAD): Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
 
(i) A copy  each (in English and Hindi)  of the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Econom ic Affairs), under Section 12 of the 
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 and Section 4 of the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956:- 
(1) No. 329/IFSCA/Bullion MIIs/2021-22,  dated the 9th December, 2022, 
granting the renewal of recognition to the India International Bullion 
Exchange IFSC Limited, Gujarat for on e year, in respect of bullion spot 
delivery contract and bullion deposito ry receipt with underlying bullion, 
subject to conditions specified by IFSCA from time to time. 
(2) No. IFSCA/2020-21/India  INX/120, dated the 23rd December, 2022, 
granting the renewal of recognition to the India International Bullion 
Exchange (IFSC) Limited, Gandhina gar for one year, in respect of 
contracts in securities, subject to cond itions specified by IFSCA from time 
to time. 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) Notification No. IFSC A/2020-21/India ICC/126, dated the 23 rd 
December, 2022, under Section 12 of the In ternational Financial Services Centres 
Authority Act, 2019 and sub-section (4) of Section 8A of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956, granting the renewa l of recognition to the India International 
Clearing Corporation (IFSC) Limited, Gand hinagar for one year, in respect of 
contracts in securities, subject to conditions specified by IFSCA from time to time.  
 
(iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Econ omic Affairs), under Section 29 of the 
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019:- 
(1) No. IFSCA/2022-23/GN/REG028, da ted the 13th January, 2023, 
publishing the International Fina ncial Services Centres Authority 
(Appointed Actuary) Regulations, 2022. 
(2) No. IFSCA/2022-23/GN/REG029, da ted the 13th January, 2023, 
publishing the International Financial Services Centres Authority (Insurance 
Products and Pricing) Regulations, 2022. 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

(3) No. IFSCA/2022-23/GN/REG030, da ted the 13th January, 2023, 
publishing the International Fina ncial Services Centres Authority 
(Investment by International Financia l Service Centre Insurance Office) 
Regulations, 2022. 
(4) No. IFSCA/2022-23/GN/REG031, dated the 13th January, 2023, 
publishing the International Fina ncial Services Centres Authority 
(Maintenance of Insurance Record s and Submission of Requisite 
Information for Investigation and Inspection) Regulations, 2022. 
(5) No. IFSCA/2022-23/GN/REG032, da ted the 13th January, 2023, 
publishing the International Financial Services Centres Authority (Manner 
of Payment and Receipt of Premium) Regulations, 2022. 
(6) No. IFSCA/2022-23/GN/REG033, dated the 13th January, 2023, 
publishing the International Fina ncial Services Centres Authority 
(Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements of International 
Financial Service Centre Insurance Offices) Regulations, 2022. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) to (iii)See No.L.T.9082/17/23] 
 
(iv) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Econom ic Affairs), under Section 3A of the 
Government Savings Promotion Act, 1873:- 
(1) G.S.R. 52 (E), dated the 27th Ja nuary, 2023, publishing the Kisan 
Vikas Patra (Amendment) Scheme, 2023. 
(2) G.S.R. 53 (E), dated the 27th January, 2023, publishing the National 
Savings Time Deposit (Amendment) Scheme, 2023. 
(3) G.S.R. 54 (E), dated the 27th January, 2023, publishing the National 
Savings Certificates (VIII Issue) (Amendment) Scheme, 2023. 
(4) G.S.R. 55 (E), dated the 27th January, 2023, publishing the National 
Savings (Monthly Income Account) (Amendment) Scheme, 2023. 
(5) G.S.R. 56 (E), dated the 27th Ja nuary, 2023, publishing the Senior 
Citizens' Savings (Amendment) Scheme, 2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9022/17/23] 
 
(v) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) Notification No. SE BI/LAD-NRO/GN/2022/111, dated the 2nd 
January, 2023, publishing the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Employees' 
Service) (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2022, under Section 31 of the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9081/17/23] 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
19

Report and Accounts (2021-22) of SECI, New Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI V. 
MURALEEDHARAN):  Sir, on behalf of my colleague, Shri Bhagwanth Khuba, I  lay 
on the Table:-  
(1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:— 
(a) Eleventh Annual  Report and Accounts of the Solar Energy Corporation 
of India  Ltd. (SECI), New Delhi, for the year  2021-22, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India thereon. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
 
(2)  Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (1) 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9167/17/23] 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Finance 
II.Reports and Accounts (2021-2022) of IFCI  Limited, New Delhi and IRDAI, 
Hyderabad and related papers  
 
DR. BHAGWAT KISHANRAO KARAD :  Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
 
 I. (i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) Notification No . IRDAI/RI/1/189/2023, dated the 31 st January, 
2023, regarding Obligatory Cession for the Financial Year 2023-24, under sub-
section (6) of Section 101A of the Insurance Act, 1938. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9099/17/23] 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) Notification No. G.S.R. 79 (E), dated the 1 st February, 2023, 
publishing the Debts Recovery Tribunals and Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunals 
Electronic Filing (Amendment) Rules, 2023, under sub-section (3) of Section 36 of 
the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9098/17/23] 
 
II. (A) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:— 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the IFCI Limited, New Delhi,  for the year 
2021-22, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Report on the performance of th e above Corporation, for the year 2021-
22. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving  reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9097/17/23] 
 
(B)  A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Annual Statement of Accounts of the 
Insurance Regulatory and De velopment Authority of India (IRDAI), Hyderabad, for 
the year 2021-22, and the Audit Report thereon, under sub-section (4) of Section 17 
of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9100/17/23] 
 
Reports and  Accounts (2021-2022) of NIMHANS, Bengaluru; CNCI, Kolkata; and 
LGBRIMH, Tezpur and related papers  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
(DR. BHARATI PRAVIN PAWAR): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English 
and Hindi) of the following papers:— 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Mental Health 
and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru, for the year 2021-22, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9202/17/23] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report of the Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute (CNCI), 
Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2021-22. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, (CNCI), 
Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2021-22, and the Audit Report 
thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
21

(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9203/17/23] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi 
Regional  Institute of Mental Health  (LGBRIMH), Tezpur, Assam, for the 
year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9201/17/23] 
 
Reports and Accounts (2021-2022) of NPCC, New Delhi and WAPCOS Limited, New 
Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI ( SHRI BISHWESWAR 
TUDU): Sir, I lay on the Table a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following 
papers under sub-section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:— 
 
(i) (a) Sixty-fifth Annual Report an d Accounts of the National Projects 
Construction Corporation Limited (NPCC), New Delhi, for the year 2021-
22, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9066/17/23] 
 
(ii) (a) Fifty-third Annual Report and Accounts of the WAPCOS Limited, New 
Delhi, for the year 2021-22, together  with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts and the comments of the Co mptroller and Auditor General of 
India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
 
(iii)  Statements giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at (1) 
(i)(a) and (ii) (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9065/17/23] 
 
 
 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING 
  
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्) : महोदय, मȅ िवभाग संबंिधत क ृिष, पशुपालन और खाǏ 
ĢसंÎकरण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2022-23) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं: - 
 
 
(i) Fifty-first Report on Demands for Gr ants (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (D epartment of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare);  
(ii) Fifty-second Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers We lfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education); 
(iii) Fifty-third Report on Demands for Gran ts (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries); 
(iv) Fifty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husban dry and Dairying (Departm ent of Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying); 
(v)  Fifty-fifth Report on Demands for Gran ts (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries; and 
(vi)  Fifty-sixth Report on Demands for Gran ts (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Cooperation. 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (मध्य Ģदेश) : महोदय, मȅ जनजातीय कायर् मंतर्ालय की अनुदान मांगȗ 
2023-24 क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग संबंिधत सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी 
सिमित क े चवालीसवȂ Ģितवेदन की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूं। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Motion for election to the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical 
Education and Research, Chandigarh. .…(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI NARANBHAI J. RATHWA (Gujarat) : Sir, Report
s of the Department-Related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj!   
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
23

MR. CHAIRMAN: It will come. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar to move a motion for election 
of one member to the Post-Graduate Inst itute of Medical Education and Research, 
Chandigarh. Yes, please.  
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL 
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(DR. BHARATI PRAVIN PAWAR): Sir, I move the following Motion:— 
 
"That in pursuance of clause (g) of Se ction 5, read with sub-section (1) of 
Section 6 of the Post-Graduate Institut e of Medical Education and Research, 
Chandigarh, Act, 1966 (No. 51 of 1966), th is House do proceed to elect, in the 
manner as directed by the Chairman, one Member from among the Members of the 
House, to be a member of the Post-Gra duate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh." 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have to inform Members that the Business Advisory Committee in 
its meeting held on the 13 th of March, 2023, has allo tted time for Government 
Business as follows:– 
1. Time allotment for discussion on the working of each of the following 
Ministries during the second part of the Budget (259th) Session:––                  
 
 (i) Skill Development an d Entrepreneurship;  
 
 
 
Four Hours 
each  
 (ii) Rural Development; 
 (iii) New and Renewable Energy; 
 (iv) Cooperation; 
 (v) Textiles; 
 (vi) Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying; and 
 (vii) Railways 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

2. Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bill 
relating to second and final Batch of Supplementary 
Demands for Grants for 2022-23, after it is passed by 
Lok Sabha. 
 
 
 
Six Hours 
(to be 
discussed 
together) 
3. General Discussion on the Budget for the Union 
Territory of Jammu & Kashmir for the year 2023-24. 
4. Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bills 
relating to the following Demands, after they are 
passed by Lok Sabha:- 
Supplementary Demands for Grants for the Union 
Territory of Jammu & Kashmir for the financial year 
2022-23 from the 1
st April, 2022 to 31st March, 2023. 
Demands for Grants for the Union Territory of Jammu 
& Kashmir for the financial year 2023-24 from the 1
st 
April, 2023 to 31st March, 2024. 
5. Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bill 
relating to Demands for Grants for 2023-24, after it is 
passed by Lok Sabha. 
  Four Hours 
6. Consideration and return of the Finance Bill, 2023,  
after it is passed by Lok Sabha. 
 
2. The Committee also considered the issue of inviting Leaders of Parties, which 
are not represented at the moment in th e Business Advisory Committee, as Special 
Invitees to its meetings.  This issue was brought to my notice by several Members.  
The Committee, after discussion and deliberat ion, authorized the Chairman to take a 
decision in the matter.  That shall be conveyed.  
 
 
REGARDING NOTICES RECEIVED UNDER RULE 267 AND VARIOUS 
 OTHER MATTERS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Selected notices have been received to be raised during Zero Hour.  
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham. .…(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala): Sir, ... .…(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
25

सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी पीयूष गोयल) : सर, आज पूरी दुिनया देख रही है िक इस बहुत ही शमर्नाक 
घटना क े िलए भारत क ै से रेÎपाँड करेगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह बहुत दुभार्ग्यपूणर् िÎथित है िक 
इतने गÇभीर िवषय को कांगर्ेस पाटीर् और बाकी िवपक्ष नज़रअंदाज़ कर रहा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आिखर यह पािर्लयामȂट का अपमान है, िकसी Ëयिƪ का अपमान नहीं है। ...( Ëयवधा
न)... यह 
उच्च सदन का अपमान है। ...(Ëयवधान)... दोनȗ सदनȗ को िमला कर पािर्लयामȂट माना जाता है।  
...(Ëयवधान)... िकसी दूसरे देश मȂ जाकर ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ple
ase. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL (Gujarat): Sir, my notice. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक) : सर, शिƪिंसह जी का नोिटस है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One second. ...(Interruptions.)...  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : सर, शिƪिंसह जी का नोिटस है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, please take your seat.  Hon. Members, to err is 
human.  Am I right? And sometimes it does  take place. We had such a seamless 
session because there was recognition to us  all through great feats at Oscars.  I 
thought this will be a day when notices may not be taken up, but now that I ha
 ve been 
reminded--to err is human. .…(Interruptions)...  Wait! .…(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil has given notice. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  I  h a v e  r e c e i v e d  notices under Rule 267.  Shri 
Pramod Tiwari has given notice and ther e are similar notices by his colleagues ... 
(Interruptions)...  
 
PROF. MANOJ  KUMAR JHA (Bihar): Sir, what is the subject? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I would read the subject.  I will tell you, I will read the subject 
because one of the very senior  Members of Parliament indi cated to me that whatever 
view you take on a particular notice, it is imperative that through the Chair, the House 
and the people should come to know what  issue the Member seeks to raise.  But 
since Shri Pramod Tiwari is in sound company of other six-seven Members, who have 
raised the same issue, I am giving out their names and then I will read the subject. 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

12.00 Noon 
 
Shri Pramod Tiwari, Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh, Shri Syed Nasir Hussain, Shri K.C. 
Venugopal, Shri Kumar Ketkar, Shrimati Je bi Mather Hisham, Dr. Amee Yajnik, Shri 
Neeraj Dangi; they all have raised an i ssue to discuss the Government's failure to 
constitute a Joint Parliamentary Committee to investigate the charges of fraud, 
corruption and financial mismanagement done by Adani Company of Group. 
.…(Interruptions)...  
The issue has been raised also by Dr . K. Keshava Rao - 'demand to discuss 
Hindenburg Report on M/s. Adani Enterp rises and other companies of the group', 
and this has also been raised by Shri Sanj ay Singh.  Shri P. Wilson has raised the 
issue to discuss 'return of Tamil Nadu Pr ohibition of Online Gambling and Regulation 
of Online Games Bill, 2022 by the Governor of Tamil Nadu'. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
एक माननीय सदÎय : सर, यह इÇपॉटȄट है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : यह इÇपॉटȄट है!  Gentlemen, I can tell you. .…(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह 
(राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): सर, मेरा सÅजेक्ट नहीं बताया गया। 
....(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  You have the same subject as Dr. K. Keshava Rao, I said.  
.…(Interruptions)... Mr. Sanjay Singh, your subject is  the same as that of Dr. K. 
Keshava Rao and it is not coincidence. .…(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सर, अब आप इस पर िडÎकशन एलाउ कर दीिजए।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Shri Binoy Viswam has raised an  issue to discuss the post-poll 
violence in Tripura, the one wh ich has also been sought to be raised by Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P.  Hon. Members, the issues you have raised are the ones that can be 
agitated upon by other means.  That bein g the situation, I am unable to persuade 
myself to accede to the same.  .…(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, please. 
.…(Interruptions)... Please take your seats. .…(Interruptions)... Take your seats. 
.…(Interruptions)... The Leader of the House wants to say something. 
.…(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
27

Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, कल मȅने बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय उठाया था, जो देश की अिÎमता क े साथ 
जुड़ा हुआ है और खास तौर पर पािर्लयामȂट तथा हम सभी क े Îवािभमान क े साथ जुड़ा हुआ है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... िजस Ģकार से िवदेशी धर ती पर जाकर भारत का अपमान िकया गया, भारत क े 
सब संÎथानȗ का अपमान िकया गया और िवशेष कर पािर्लयामȂट का अपमान िकया 
गया,...(Ëयवधान)...  सर, पािर्लयामȂट यानी लोक सभा और राज्य सभा, दोनȗ सदन िमल कर 
पािर्लयामȂट है। ...( Ëयवधान)... पािर्लयामȂट का िहÎसा देश की महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी भी 
हȅ।...(Ëयवध
ान)... मुझे लगता है िक शायद यह पहली बार हुआ है िक पािर्लयामȂट यानी दोनȗ 
सदन, महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी - इन सबके  ऊपर इस Ģकार क े आरोप लगाए गए, इस Ģकार क े 
िनराध
ार शÅद इÎतेमाल िकए गए।...(Ëयवधान)... बहुत अपमानजनक शÅद इÎतेमाल िकए 
गए।...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सभापित जी, आपने भी इस बात की िनन्दा की।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, take your seats.  .…(Interruptions)... And, I can 
tell you Members, Shaktisinhji is not hard of hearing.  .…(Interruptions)... Shaktisinhji 
is not hard of hearing.  Very frequently, Shaktisinhji recollects his role as the Leader of 
the Opposition.   I would persuade him to forget that.  .…(Interruptions)... Take your 
seats. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल : आपने भी इस बात की िंनदा की है और आपने भी कहा िक ऐसे िवषय पर आप 
भी क्वाइट नहीं रह सकते हȅ, साइलȂट नहीं रह सकते हȅ। ...(Ëयव
धान)... खास तौर पर, जब एक 
माननीय सदÎय देश क े बाहर जाकर, अपनी पािर्लयामȂट क े बारे मȂ ऐसे उÊटे-सीधे बयान करȂ, 
शायद मोिट
वेटेड है, यह भी एक शंका आती है। ...(Ëयवधान)... कॉिन्ÎटǷूशनल Ģोिवज़ंस भी 
कहते हȅ िक हम सबको इस बात की िंनदा भी करनी पड़ेगी और उन्हȂ यहाँ पर आकर माफी भी 
माँगनी पड़ेगी, क्यȗिक पािर्लयामȂट मȂ कभी-भी माइक्स को ऑफ नहीं िकया गया। ...(Ëय वधान)... 
माननीय Îपीकर साहब ने, चेयरमैन होने क े नाते आपने और माननीय िडÃटी चेयरमैन ने भी अपने 
वƪËय मȂ इस बात की पुिÍट की है िक इनके  नौ वषर् क े पािर्लयामȂट क े किरयर मȂ कभ ी यह काम 
नहीं हुआ। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ तो बाकी पाटीर्ज़ क े नेताओं को लेकर हैरान हूँ 
िक क ै से वे ऐसे काम क े ऊपर, ऐसे वƪËय क े ऊपर उनका साथ दे रहे हȅ! ...(Ëय वधान)... कई 
िवपक्षी पािर्टयȗ क े नेताओं ǎारा ऐसे िवषय पर अपनी िंचता न Ëयƪ करना, यह वाÎतव मȂ खतरे का 
िवषय है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ तो सभी पाटीर्ज़ से अपील करू ँगा िक वे इस बात की िंनदा करȂ िक एक 
सीिनयर मेÇबर ऑफ पािर्लयामȂट ने पािर्लयामȂट की अवहेलना की है। ...(Ëय
वधान)... िवदेशी धरती 
पर जाकर पािर्लयामȂट को बदनाम करने की कोिशश की है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. today. 
 
The House then adjourned at seven minutes past twelve of the clock. 
 
  
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DEMANDS FOR GRANTS, 2022-23 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2022-23, Shri Pankaj 
Chaudhary. 
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी) : महोदय, मȅ अनुपूरक अनुदान मांगȂ, 2022-23 को 
दशार्ने वाला िववरण (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI K. C. VENUGOPAL (Rajasthan):  Sir, what happened to our motion? 
…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary Demands for Grants  of Union Territory of Jammu 
And Kashmir, 2022-23. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU 
AND KASHMIR, 2022-23 
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी) : महोदय, मȅ वषर् 2022-23 क े िलए जÇमू और 
कÌमीर संघ राज्यक्षेतर् (िवधान मंडल सिहत) की अनुपूरक अनुदान मांगȗ को दशार्ने वाला िववरण 
(अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   The Budget of Union Territory of Jammu And Kashmir, 2023-2024.  
Shri Pankaj Chaudhary. 
 
 
BUDGET OF UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 2023-2024 
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी) : महोदय, मȅ जÇमू और कÌमीर संघ राज्यक्षेतर् 
(िवधान मंडल सिहत) की अनुमािनत ĢािÃतयȗ और Ëयय (2023-24) को दशार्ने वाला िववरण 
(अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। 
 
 
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
29

REGARDING PRIVILEDGE NOTICE AND VARIOUS OTHER ISSUES 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL (Gujarat):  Sir, my privilege notice is pending. 
.…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   The Leader of the House. 
 
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी पीयूष गोयल) :  ऑनरेबल चेयरमैन सर, मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह बहुत गंभीर 
िवषय है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसके  ऊपर पूरा देश बहुत आकर्ोश मȂ है, माननीय सदÎय भी आकर्ोश 
मȂ हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... पािर्लयामȂट की जो अवमानना की गई है, िजस Ģकार से देश की अिÎमता 
को आहत पहुँचाई गई है, मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह बहुत ही गंभी
र िवषय है।...(Ëयवधान)... िजन 
नेताओं ने भार त  की छिव खराब करने का काम िकया, िजन लोगȗ ने भारत क े बाहर िवदेशी भूिम मȂ 
भारत क े ऊपर आकर्मण िकया, भारत की पािर्लयामȂट क े ऊपर, भारत क े सदन, पािर्लयामȂट क े 
बारे मȂ जो गलतफहिमयाँ बनाई हȅ, बहुत ही ओछे तर ीक े  से हमारे सदन क े बारे मȂ, Îपीकर और 
चेयरमैन क े बारे मȂ और एक Ģकार से भारत क े लोकतंतर् क े बारे मȂ िजस Ģकार से एक नेता ने 
हÎतक्षेप िकए हȅ, यह बहुत ही गंभीर िवषय है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... इस पर उनको भारत क े सदन मȂ 
आकर माफी माँगनी चा
िहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI K. C. VENUGOPAL (Rajasthan):  Sir, Shri Gohil has given a privilege notice. 
.…(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल : माननीय सभापित जी, एक तरफ पूरी दुिनया इस देश का गुणगान कर रही है, 
दूसरी तरफ जी20 होने जा रहा है, िजसमȂ हमारी ĢेिसडȂसी है। ...(Ëयवध
 ान)...  आज पूरे िवÌव 
को अलग-अलग गंभीर समÎयाओं की िंचता है और पूरा िवÌव भारत की तरफ देख रहा है िक 
भारत उनसे िनपटने मȂ उनका नेतृत्व करे। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज पूरे िवÌव क े देशȗ क े नेताओं की 
आशाएँ Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े ऊपर िट
की हुई हȅ, क्यȗिक वे िवÌव की समÎयाओं का 
समाधान करने मȂ जुटे हुए हȅ। ...(Ëय वधान) ... वे पूरे िवÌव क े िलए एक Ģकार से रोल मॉडल हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... यहाँ तक िक इटली की Ģधान मंतर्ी भी कहती हȅ िक िवÌव क े सबसे लोकिĢय 
नेता, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी हȅ। ...(Ëय वधान )... आज अगर कोई भी िवदेश मȂ जाए, 
तो वह देखेगा िक वहाँ भारत का िकतना मान है। ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसे मȂ, अगर एक विरÍठ नेता 
िवदेश जाकर भारत, भारत क े सदन, भारत की पािर्लयामȂट, भारत की सभी संÎथाओं, चाहे वह 
इलेक्शन कमीशन हो या हमारे न्यायालय, ज्यूिडिशयरी हो, हरेक क े बारे मȂ इस Ģकार से वƪ
Ëय 
दे, इस Ģकार क े ĢेजȂटेशंस दे, तो मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह देश क े िलए बहुत दुभार्ग्यपूणर् िÎथित है। 
...(Ëयवधा
न)...सर, उन्हȂ माफी मांगनी चािहए, सदन क े अंदर आकर देशवािसयȗ से माफी 
मांगनी चािहए, चेयर से माफी मांगनी चािहए और हम सब मेÇबसर् का अिधकार है, हम सबका भी 
िĢिवलेज है िक भारत की पािर्लयामȂट की िरÎपेक्ट की जाए। मȅ आपसे अनुरोध करूं गा िक आप 
चेयर से डायरेक्ट करȂ िक उन्हȂ सदन मȂ आकर माफी मांगनी चािहए।  
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सभापित महोदय, मुझे िसफर् यह कहना है िक हमारे साथी का 
िĢिवलेज नोिटस अपनी जगह है, पर अगर ये लोग चचार् करना चाहते हȅ तो * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Shaktisinh Gohil seeks to raise a point of order. 
.…(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल : सर, रूल  238ए ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ िĢिवलेज पर बोल रहा हूं। Rule 238A 
clearly says, ‘No allegation of a defamatory or incriminatory nature shall be made by a 
member against any other member or a member of the House...’ यहां क े लीडर ऑफ िद 
हाउस जो कह रहे हȅ, वह लोक सभा क े मेÇबर को कह रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅने िĢिवलेज 
नोिटस िदया है। मेरे िĢिवलेज नोिटस क े अंदर मȅने पुराने िकÎसȗ को क्वोट िकया  है िक यिद  
मेÇबर का नाम नहीं भी िलया हो ...(Ëयव
धान)... पर   जनरल   नेचर   मȂ  लोक  सभा  क े   मेÇबर   
का   यहां  िज़कर्   नहीं   हो   सकता है। अगर इसी बात को लेना है तो  * ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You made your point. .…(Interruptions)...  You made your point. 
.…(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल :  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You made your point. .…(Interruptions)...  You made your point. 
.…(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल : सर, माइक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the Leader of th e Opposition yesterday raised a 
point of order. I am seized of the matter. I have indicated that I will give my ruling 
today. I have had the benefit of  interaction with the Leader of the Opposition today.  I 
have also had the benefit of interacting wi th senior Members of the main opposition 
party and also the Treasury Benches. In this connection, we are also having a 
meeting at 2.30 p.m.  I have indicated to the hon. Members who interacted with me 
that this is a very critical issue.  We are required to give a final view to this, because 
this will define what we can debate and wh at we cannot debate.  The issue has been 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
 
 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
31

agitated by the Leader of the Opposition wi th clarity and it has been pointed out what 
the Leader of the House has said... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh): With clarity. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: ...with clarity.  The Leader of th e House has been very focussed on 
what he said. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, it is repetition. 
 
Ǜी सभापित: िदिग्वजय िंसह जी, वकील की हैिसयत से मȅने भी कई बार रेिपिटशन िकया है। 
रेिपिटशन नहीं होना चािहए, पर सभी ने कभी न कभी रेिपिटशन ज़रूर  िकया होगा।   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : He is repeating the same subject and same thing every 
time. .…(Interruptions)... He is repeating the same  thing morning, afternoon, 
morning, afternoon, Sir. .…(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Digvijaya Sin
ghji, you can be charged for repeating as Chief Minster 
for a second term. .…(Interruptions)... सर, रेिपिटशन तो होता है। Meaning thereby, 
repetition is healthy for democracy. .…(Interruptions)... Am I right?  
.…(Interruptions)... No; no, repetition .…(Interruptions)...  Digvijaya  Singhji is right 
.…(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL: Our rules do not permit for repetition.  .…(Interruptions)... 
Our rules say that repetition is  not permitted in the House.  .…(Interruptions)...  This 
is what our rules say.  .…(Interruptions)... रूÊस क े अंतगर्त रेिपिटशन पिर्मिसबल नहीं 
है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Just one second.  Hon. Members, Shaktisinh Gohilji has sent a 
communication to me.  Communication of every Member of Parliament is attended by 
me with expedition.  I have gone through hi s communication.  It is very well-worded.  
We have sought an input from him.  An d, we have requested him -- he must be 
getting a communication, if not already got it  -- to make it available at the earliest.  
While the communication was very well premised, the factual part of it was not 
indicated there. So, we have requested him to give that.  He will get a communication 
to this effect.  I am seized of the matter.  I can assure you, any issue raised by any 
Member, in any capacity whatsoever, will engage me with full involvement.  And, I will 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

certainly take a call on it. I have devote d a major part, today and yesterday, in 
interacting with hon. Members.  We will examine the situation -- the constitutional 
provisions, the rules we have framed, the dir ectives that have been directed by earlier 
Chairmen, the directives that have been impa rted in the Lok Sabha, the situation that 
is obtaining anywhere in the globe -- and,  then, we will take a view.  Suppose we 
hold today that even if the entire House is of one voice, but the rule comes in between 
for discussion, we will have to deal with that.  So, we are meet ing the floor leaders 
today at 2.30 p.m.  And, I am sure, you will get my ruling at the earliest, maybe, 
during the course of the day or tomorrow b ecause this is subject to interaction and 
being enlightened.  I, on my own, cannot have  a point of view.  I will have a point of 
view after having collated all other points of view.  And, then, I will take a call.  I am 
seized of your matter.  You have raised it  very carefully, except on one point that you 
did not provide me the factual premise on wh ich you seek intervention.  You think, it 
is a part of proceedings. I have indicated in  my response to you to please spell it out 
so that I have, before me, a factual matr ix and, then, take a call.  Now, Mr. 
Bhupender Yadav.   
 
पयार्वरण, वन और जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ी; तथा Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ी ( Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव) :  
चेयरमैन सर, संिवधान क े आिर्टकल 79 मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Bhupenderji, please speak on this point only.  No transgression 
from this side or that side.   .… (Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI BHUPENDER YADAV: Sure, Sir.  I will speak only on this point and nothing else.   
 सर, संिवधान क े आिर्टकल 79 मȂ ' पािर्लयामȂट' शÅद का उपयोग िकया गया है।  
पािर्लयामȂट मȂ राज्य सभा और लोक सभा दोनȗ आते हȅ।  मȅ आपके  सामने इस हाउस क े दो 
इंिसडȂट्स क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहता हूं।...(Ëयवधान)... वषर् 1957 मȂ राज्य सभा की रूल  बुक मȂ िलखा 
गया है - उस समय लो
क सभा क े एक सदÎय एन. सी. चटजीर् होते थे, उन्हȗने चेन्नई मȂ जाकर 
हाउस क े िखलाफ, हाउस क े इनए
क्शन क े िखलाफ बोला। उनका राज्य सभा क े अंतगर्त संज्ञान 
िलया गया और संज्ञान लेकर यह कहा गया, चूंिक यह हाउस की Ģोिसिंडग्स क े िखलाफ बोला 
गया है, may be दूसरे हाउस का मेÇबर हो।...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसे ही सेम 1987  मȂ उनके  बेटे 
सोमनाथ चटजीर् जी ने उस समय क े तत्कालीन रक्षा राज्य मंतर्ी Ǜी अरुण  िंसह, चूंिक वे राज्य 
सभा क े सदÎय थे और िĢिवलेज लोक सभा का था, उसके  िलए भी क्वेÌचन रेज़ िक या।  मेरा यह 
कहना है िक जो िवषय * ने कहा है, वह लंदन मȂ जाकर पािर्लयामȂट क े िलए कहा है।...(Ëयवधान)...  
पािर्लयामȂट मȂ दोनȗ हाउस आते हȅ, इसिलए यिद कोई भी Ëयिƪ जानबूझकर पािर्लयामȂट की 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
[ 14 March, 2023 ]
33

Ģोिसिंडग्स को रोकने का, पािर्लयामȂट की Ģोिसिंडग्स को अपमािनत करने का, पािर्लयामȂट की 
Ģोिसिंडग्स मȂ िकसी िवदेशी शिƪ क े हÎतक्षेप करने की बात कहता है, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से हमारे 
लीडर पीयूष जी ने जो िवषय उठाया, वह एकदम सही उठाया है।  वह अवमानना का िवषय है और 
उनको देश से माफी मांगनी चा
िहए।...(Ëयवधान)...   
              
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Raghav Chadha.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा (पंजाब) :  सर, मȅ आपका ध्यान रूल  नÇबर 238ए की तरफ आकिर्षत करना 
चाहता हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, रूल  नÇबर 240 ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to me et at 1100 hours on Wednesday, 
the 15
th March, 2023.  …(Interruptions).. 
 
The House then adjourned at fifteen minutes past two of the clock till  
eleven of the clock on Wednesday, the 15th March, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 