Vol. 259 Friday, 
No. 19 24 th March, 2023 
3 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 11) 
 
Messages from Lok Sabha -Reported 
The Appropriation Bill, 2023 (page 12) 
The Finance Bill, 2023 (page 19-20) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Commerce-Presented (pages 12 - 13) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture -Presented (page 13) 
 
Statements of the Committee on Public Undertakings- Laid on the Table   
(pages 13 - 14)  
 
Report of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution-Laid on the Table (page 14) 
 
     [P.T.O 
 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
Reports of the Committee on the Welfare of  Scheduled Castes an d Scheduled Tribes 
-Laid on the Table (pages 14 - 15) 
 
Statement by Minister - 
Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources-
Laid on the Table (page 15) 
 
Statement regarding Government Business (pages 16 - 18) 
 
Private Members’ Resolution-Negatived/Lapsed 
Need to implement the recommendations of Sachar Committee report and other 
reports for improving educational and social backwardness of Muslims  
(page 19 and pages 20 - 23) 
 
Observation by the Chair (pages 23 -24) 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part-I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha website 
under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise
] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
      http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 24th March, 2023/3 Chaitra, 1945 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of NIFTEM-T, Thanjavur and related papers 
खाǏ ĢसंÎकरण उǏोग मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ģहलाद िंसह पटेल): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Food Technology
Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM-T), Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu,
for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9260/17/23] 
Report and Accounts (2021-22
) of  BIS, New Delhi and related papers 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी अिǚनी क ुमार 
चौबे): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following papers under Section 23
of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016:— 
(a) Annual  Report  and  Account s  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,
(BIS), New Delhi, for the year 2021 -22, together with the Auditor's
Report on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Bureau.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the

 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9394/17/23] 
 
I. Report and Accounts (2021-22) of BPCL, Naini, Allahabad and related papers 
II. Report and Accounts (2019-20 ) of HECL, Ranchi and related papers 
 
भारी उǏोग मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी क ृÍण पाल): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूं:- 
 
             I. (1)  A copy each (in En glish and Hindi) of the fo llowing papers under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: — 
 
 (a) Fifty-second Annual Report an d Accounts of the Bharat Pumps & 
Compressors Ltd. (BPCL), Naini, Allahabad, for the year 2021-22, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9001/17/23] 
 
II. (a) Annual Report and Accounts of Heavy Engineering Corporation Limited 
(HECL), Ranchi, Jharkhand, for the year 2019-20, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 
(2)  Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (ii) (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9212/17/23] 
 
I.  Notification of the Ministry of Railways 
II. Reports and Accounts (2021-22)  of NHSRCL, New Delhi ; NRTU and related 
papers 
III. MoUs between the Government of India and various Corporations 
 
रेल मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
I.  A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Railways Notification No. 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
G.S.R. 83 (E), dated the 7 th February, 2023, publishing the Railways Red Tariff 
(Amendment) Rules, 2023, under Section 199 of the Railways Act, 1989. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9271/17/23] 
 
II. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013 
 
(i) (a) Sixth Annual Report and Accoun ts of the National High Speed Rail 
Corporation Limited (NHSRCL), New Delhi, for the year 2021-22, 
together with Auditors’ Report on  the Accounts and comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9273/17/23] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the NRTU Foundation (NRTU), for the 
year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Foundation. 
 
(2)     Statements (in English and Hindi)  giving reasons for the delay in laying 
the papers mentioned at (1) (i) (a) and (ii) (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9274/17/23] 
 
III.       A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 
 (i) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the IRCON International Limited, for the year 
2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9264/17/23] 
 
 (ii) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Konkan Railway Corporation Limited 
(KRCL), for the year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9266/17/23] 
 
 (iii) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Indian Railway Finance Corporation 
Limited (IRFCL), for the year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9261/17/23] 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
3

 
 (iv) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL), for the 
year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9265/17/23] 
 
 (v) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation Limited 
(MRVCL), for the year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9262/17/23] 
 
 (vi) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Brai thwaite & Company Limited, for the 
year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9268/17/23] 
 
 (vii) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the RailTel Corporation of India Limited, for the 
year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9263/17/23] 
 
 (viii) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the RITES Limited, for the year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9270/17/23] 
 
 (ix) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Cont ainer Corporation of India Limited 
(CONCOR), for the year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9269/17/23] 
 
 (x) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Indi an Railway Catering and Tourism 
Corporation Limited (IRCTCL), for the year 2022-2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9267/17/23] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 
मत्Îयपालन, पशुपालन और डेयरी मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( डा. संजीव क ुमार बािलयान): 
महोदय, मȅ पशुओं क े Ģित कर्ूरता का िनवारण अिधिनयम, 1960 की धारा 38क क े अधीन मत्Îय 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
पालन, पशु पालन और डेयरी मंतर्ालय (पशु पालन और दुग्ध उत्पादन िवभाग) की िनÇनिलिखत 
अिधसूचनाओं की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
 (1) G.S.R. 82 (E), dated the 6 th February, 2023, publishing the 
Administrative (Committee for Control and Supervision of Experiments on 
Animals) Rules, 2023. 
 (2) G.S.R. 139 (E), dated the 28 th February, 2023, publishing the Prevention 
of Cruelty to Animals (Egg Laying Hens) Rules, 2023. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No.L.T.9355/17/23] 
 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of  Pharmexcil, Hyderabad and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL):  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following papers:— 
 
 (a) Eighteenth Annual Report and A ccounts of the Pharmaceuticals Export  
Promotion Council of India, (Pharmexcil), Hyderabad, for the year 2021-
22, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9399/17/23] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI V. 
MURALEEDHARAN): Sir, on behalf of my colleague, Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, I lay 
on the Table a copy each (in English and Hi ndi) of the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, under Section 55 of the Aadhaar 
(Targeted Delivery of Financ ial and Other Subsidies Benefits and Services) Act, 
2016:— 
 
 (1) No. HQ-13011/2/2021-
AUTH-II, dated the 27 th February, 2023, 
publishing the Aadhaar (Authenticatio n and Offline Verification) (Second 
Amendment) Regulations, 2023. 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
5

 
 (2) No. HQ-13062/4/2021- AUTH-II, dated the 27 th February, 2023, 
publishing the Aadhaar (Pricing of  Aadhaar Authentication Services) 
(First Amendment) Regulations, 2023. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No.L.T.9250/17/23] 
 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of  NIPHM, Hyderabad and related papers 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
 
 (a) 
Annual Report of the National Instit ute of Plant Health Management, 
(NIPHM), Hyderabad, for the year 2021-22. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the National Instit ute of Plant Health Management, 
(NIPHM), Hyderabad, for the year 2021-22, and the Audit Report 
thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9562/17/23] 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh. Not present. 
 
Reports and Accounts (2020-21 and 2021-22) of  various NIDs and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (SHRI 
SOM PARKASH): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and Hindi) of the 
following papers:— 
 
(i) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Design (NID), 
Haryana, for the year 2020-21, together  with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts.     
 (b) Statement giving reasons for delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9409/17/23] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Design (NID), 
Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2020-21, together with the Auditor's Report 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement giving reasons for delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Design (NID), 
Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement giving reasons for delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. For (ii) and (iii) See No.L.T.9410/17/23] 
 
(iv) (a) Sixty-first Annual Report and Acco unts of the National Institute of Design 
(NID), Ahmedabad, for the year 2021 -22, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Statement giving reasons for delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9408/17/23] 
 
I.  Notification of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
II.  Report (2022-23) of  ICAR, New Delhi and related papers 
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी: महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
I.   A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) Notification No. G.S.R. 140 
(E), dated the 28 th February, 2023, publishing the Insecticides (First Amendment) 
Rules, 2023, under sub-section (3) of Section 36 of the Insecticides Act, 1968. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9364/17/23] 
 
II.    A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:— 
 
 (a) 
Annual Report of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), 
New Delhi, for the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9365/17/23] 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
7

 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of  IPPB, New Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  (SHRI 
DEVUSINH CHAUHAN): Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
 
(1)   A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:— 
 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the In dia Post Payments Bank (IPPB), 
New Delhi, for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
 
(2)    Statement (in Englis h and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9568/17/23] 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am requesting the Leader of the House to ensu re that when issue 
arises of laying Papers on the Table of the House or attending parliamentary 
proceedings, the presence of those concerned must be in variably secured and, if 
there is any variation, the change be indicated. 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH GOY AL): Sir, I deeply regret that. We 
will make sure it is followed. Sir, the hon. Minister has come.  
 
I.  Report and Accounts (2021-22) of   JCI, Kolkata and related papers 
II.  Reports and Accounts (2021-22) of  various Associations and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF TEXTILES (SHRIMATI DARSHANA 
VIKRAM JARDOSH): Sir, I lay on the Table– 
 
I. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:— 
 
 (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Jute  Corporation of India Limited, 
(JCI), Kolkata, for the year 2021-22, together with  the Auditor's Report 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
on the Accounts and the comments of Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
 
(2)    Statement (in Englis h and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9403/17/23] 
 
II.     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:— 
 
(i) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Bombay Textile Research Association 
(BTRA), Mumbai, for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9563/17/23] 
 
(ii) (a) Forty-second Annual Report an d Accounts of the  Man-Made Textiles 
Research Association (MANTRA), Sura t, Gujarat, for the year 2021-22, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by the Government  on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9564/17/23] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Northern India Textile Research 
Association (NITRA), Ghaziabad, U ttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9565/17/23] 
 
(iv) (a) Seventy-second Annual Report and Accounts of the Synthetic and Art 
Silk Mills’ Research Association ( SASMIRA), Mumbai, for the year 2021-
22, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
9

 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9402/17/23] 
 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Jute Industries’ Research 
Association (IJIRA), Kolkata, for th e year 2021-22, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9566/17/23] 
 
(vi) (a) Fifty-seventh Annual Report and Accounts of the Wool Research 
Association (WRA), Thane, Maharashtr a, for the year 2021-22, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No.L.T.9567/17/23] 
   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let me tell you, hon. Memb ers; whenever I have sought briefing 
from a Minister and got inputs from the hon. Members, Darshanaji has always been, 
absolutely, very well involved.  I know you are taking... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, you should not be briefed by them. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I remember an anecdote; when a judge got tired of the long-winded 
submissions of a lawyer, he asked the lawyer, “Can’t you argue in brief?”  
…(Interruptions)…  The lawyer went out …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL): Sir, we have apologised. I 
also express my regret, and she also said sorry.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I know, I know. 
 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: But, sadly, they don’t have a big heart. What can we do about 
it? 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, you should not be briefed by them; you should direct 
them.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Where is that humour, where is that wit, where is that sarcasm 
which we don’t share? …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, very much, we want to share that, but you are directing 
us; you are not being briefed by them or by anyone.  
 
Ǜी सभापित: देरेक साहब...  
 
"ताकत अपने लĽज़ȗ मȂ डालो, आवाज़ मȂ नहीं, 
      क्यȗिक फसल बािरश से उगती है, बाढ़ से नहीं।" 
 
I will translate for you later.    
    
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सभापित जी, यह तो ठीक है। आप कह रहे हȅ िक हम हंस 
नहीं रहे हȅ, लेिकन जब डर्ाउट होता है, तो हंसने का सवाल ही नहीं आता है। 
  
Ǜी सभापित: खरगे जी, क्य
ा होता है? 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, जब सूखा पड़ता है, तो कौ
 न हंसता है? पूरे हाउस मȂ सूखा पड़ा हुआ 
है और कोई बात करने क े िलए तैयार नहीं है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, सूखा पड़े या बाढ़ आए, वह तो िवधाता क े हाथ मȂ है, हमारे हाथ मȂ नहीं है। 
जब हमारे हाथ मȂ क ु छ चीज़Ȃ होती हȅ, तो कम-से-कम उनमȂ हम सूखा न पड़ने दȂ, उनमȂ तो बािरश 
आए। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय सदÎ
यगण, ऐसा नहीं है िक मȅ कोई शायर हूं, लेिक न  
 
"इतना मत बोलो िक लोग चुप होने का इंतज़ार करȂ, 
इतना बोलकर चुप हो जाओ िक लोग दोबारा बोलने का इंतज़ार करȂ।" 
 
 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
11

 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Message from Lok Sabha, Secretary-General.  
 
The Appropriation Bill, 2023 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, I have to report to the House the following message 
received from the Lok Sabha, signed by the Secretary-General of the Lok Sabha: 
“In accordance with the provisions of rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha, I am directed to enclose the Appropriation Bill, 2023, as 
passed by Lok Sabha at its sitting held on the 23rd March, 2023. 
 
The Speaker has certified that this Bill is a Money Bill within the meaning of article 110 
of the Constitution of India.” 
 
Sir, I lay a copy of the Bill on the Table. 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE 
 
SHRI DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK (Maharas htra): Sir, I present the following 
Reports (in English and Hindi) of the De partment Related Parl iamentary Standing 
Committee on Commerce:-  
 
(i) 176
th Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations of th e Committee contained in its One 
Hundred and Seventy Second Report on  'Promotion and Regulation of E-
Commerce in India'; 
(ii) 177th Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations of th e Committee contained in its One 
Hundred and Seventy First Report on 'Issues Affecting the Indian Tea 
Industry especially in  Darjeeling Region'; 
(iii) 178th Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations of th e Committee contained in its One 
Hundred and Seventieth Report on 'Imp lementation of Districts as Export 
Hubs (DEHs) including One District One Product (ODOP) Initiatives'; 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(iv) 179th Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) (Demand No. 10) of 
Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry; and  
(v) 180th Report on Demands for Grants  (2023-24) (Demand No. 11) of 
Department for Promotion of Indust ry and Internal Trade, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry.  
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
Ǜी जुगलिंसह लोखंडवाला ( गुजरात): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग संबंिधत पिरवहन, पयर्टन और 
संÎकृ ित संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदन (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) ĢÎतुत 
करता हूं:- 
 
(i) Three Hundred Forty Fourth Report on  action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Thirteenth Report on ‘Promoti on of Indian Tourism in Overseas 
Markets – Role of Overseas Tourist Offices and Indian Embassies; 
(ii) Three Hundred Forty Fifth Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Nineteenth Report on ‘Progress made in implementation of 
Sagarmala Projects’; 
(iii) Three Hundred Forty Sixth Report on action taken by Governm ent on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty Third Report on ‘Commission of Railway Safety’; and 
(iv) Three Hundred Forty Seventh Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Twenty Sixth Report on ‘Role of Indian Missions Globally for the 
growth of Tourism in India’. 
 
 
STATEMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
डा. अिनल जैन (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ सरकारी उपकर्मȗ संबंधी सिमित क े िनÇनिलिखत की 
गई कारर्वाई संबंधी Ģितवेदनȗ मȂ अंतिर्वÍट समुिƪयȗ/िसफािरशȗ पर सरकार ǎारा की गई कारर्वाई 
को दशार्ने वाले िववरणȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
13

 
(i) 10th  Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 1 st Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Airports Authority of India (AAI)’; 
(ii) 11th  Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 2nd Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Central Coalfields Limited (CCL)’; 
(iii) 12th  Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 3rd Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Food Corporation of India (FCI)’; 
(iv) 13th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 8 th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) Limited’;  
(v) 14th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  action taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 4th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL)’; and 
(vi) 15th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in its 5 th Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘NBCC (India) Limited’. 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण 
मंतर्ालय ( खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण िवभाग) की " गुणवǄा िनयंतर्ण ĢकोÍठ ( क्यूसीसी)" 
िवषय पर सिमित क े बीसवȂ Ģितवेदन (सतर्हवीं लोक सभा) मȂ अंतिर्वÍट समुिƪयȗ/िसफािरशȗ पर 
सरकार ǎारा की गई कारर्वाई क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग संबंिधत उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक 
िवतरण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2022-23) क े छÅबीसवȂ Ģितवेदन की एक Ģि
त (अंगर्ेज़ी 
तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE WELFARE OF SCHEDULED CASTES 
AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
Ǜी कामाख्या Ģसाद तासा (असम): महोदय, मȅ अनुसूिचत जाितयȗ और अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ 
क े कÊयाण संबंधी सिमित (2022-23) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक- एक एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी 
तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(i) Twenty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on "Examination of Annual Reports 
of National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) presented under 
Article 338(5)(d) of the Constitution of  India and the measures that should 
be taken by the Union Government in respect of matters within the purview 
of the Government"; 
(ii) Twenty-third  Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on "Review of Functioning of 
National Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation 
(NSFDC)"; and 
(iii) Twenty Fourth Report (Sevent eenth Lok Sabha) on action taken by 
Government on the recommendations co ntained in the Seventeenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on "Role of autonomous 
bodies/educational Institutions including Central Universities, Engineering 
Colleges, IIMs, IITs, Medical Institutes etc. in socio-economic development 
of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tr ibes with special reference to pre-
matric/post-matric scholarshi ps in Navodaya Vidyalayas/ 
Kendriya Vidyalayas." 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER  
 
Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee On Water Resources 
 
 THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI BISHWESWAR 
TUDU): Sir, I lay a Statement regarding Status of implementation of 
recommendations contained in the Twelft h Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
"Flood Management in the country including International Water Treaties in the field of 
Water Resource management wi th particular reference to Treaty/Agreement entered 
into with China, Pakistan and Bhutan", pertaining to the Ministry of Jal Shakti.  
 
 
 
 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
15

 
STATEMENT REGARDING GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI 
V. MURALEEDHARAN):  With your permission, Sir, I rise to announce that 
Government Business for the remaining part of the 259 th Session of Rajya Sabha will 
consist of: 
 
1. Consideration of any item of Governme nt Business carried over from today's 
Order Paper:- [it contains - (i) Further  discussion on the working of the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrep reneurship; (ii) Discussion on the 
working of the Ministry of Textiles; (iii) Discussion on the working of the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying; (iv) Discussion on the 
working of the Ministry of Rural Development; (v) Discussion on the working of 
the Ministry of Cooperation; and (vi) Di scussion on the working of the Ministry 
of Railways.] 
 
2. Discussion on the working of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
 
3. General Discussion on the Budget of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir for 
2023-24. 
 
4. Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bills relating to following 
Demands, as passed by Lok Sabha:- 
(i) Demands for Grants for the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir for 
the financial year 2023-24 from 1
st April, 2023 to 31st March, 2024; and 
(ii) Supplementary Demands for Grants for the Union Territory of Jammu & 
Kashmir for the financial year 2022-23 from 1
st April, 2022 to 31 st March, 
2023. 
 
5. Consideration and return of the Appropri ation Bill relating to Second and Final 
Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2022-23, as passed by Lok 
Sabha. 
 
6. Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bill, 2023, as passed by Lok 
Sabha. 
 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
7. Consideration and return of the Finance Bill, 2023, after it is passed by Lok 
Sabha. 
 
8. Consideration and passing of the following Bills, as passed by Lok Sabha:- 
(i) The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Third Amendment) Bill, 2022; and 
(ii) The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Fifth Amendment) Bill, 2022. 
 
9. Consideration and passing of the following Bills, after they are passed by Lok 
Sabha:- 
(i) The Repealing and Amending Bill, 2022;  
(ii) The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2022; and 
(iii) The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2022. 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have received 14 notices under Rule 267 for 
suspension of rules. Shri Kumar Ketkar an d Shri Syed Nasir Hussa in seek to discuss 
the need to constitute a JPC to investigat e the charges of corporate fraud, political 
corruption, stock market manipulation an d financial mismanagement against Adani 
Group.  Shri Pramod Tiwari seeks to discus s the Government's failure to constitute a 
JPC to investigate the charges of corporate fraud, political corruption, stock market 
manipulation, financial mismanagement and allegations made by Hindenburg Report 
against Adani Group. Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan  and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham seek 
to discuss the Government's role in promoting business interest of Adani Group, 
including through inaction on serious charges of corporate fraud, political corruption, 
stock market manipulation, financial mism anagement, illegal coal mine allocation, 
amending rules and regulations to allow bidding of six airports. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
seeks to discuss the silence of the Government on the serious charges including 
fraud, stock market manipulation and corruption levelled against the Adani Group, 
further promoting business interest of th e Adani Group through negotiation with 
foreign countries from big budget proj ects and more. Dr. Amee Yajnik seeks to 
discuss the Government's failure in constitu ting a JPC to investigate serious charges 
of corporate fraud, political corruption, stock market manipulation, financial 
mismanagement against Adani Group, and Government's questionable role in 
promoting business. Similar notice has been given by Shri Neeraj Dangi also. Shri 
Abdul Wahab seeks to discuss the issue of Adani Group corruption, stock market 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
17

 
manipulation and financial mismanagement. Shri Sanjay Singh seeks to discuss the 
allotment of coal mines to Adani Group in violation of the Supreme Court orders and 
rules of Government of India wh ich has resulted in loss of lakhs of crores of rupees to 
the revenue and the fraud committed through shell companies opened in Mauritius. 
Shri Raghav Chadha seeks to discuss the wi thdrawal of red corner notice issued by 
Interpol in the name of fugitive economic offender, Mehul Choksi, who is involved in a 
fraud of Rs.13,500 crores on account of In dian Government's failure to put a strong 
case before Interpol and inability of Government in extraditing Mehul Choksi.  
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab): Sir, you can start a new precedent by allowing 
me. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You already occupy enough space in social media. This may be a 
day of silence for you.   
 Shri Elamaram Kareem demands to su spend Rules 23, 24 and 38 to discuss 
the allegations levelled by Hindenburg Research against Adani Gr oup and the need to 
constitute a JPC to investigate the same. Shri Binoy Viswam seeks to discuss Adani-
related scam and the necessity to entrust a JPC to make a probe in  order to alleviate 
the clouds that have loomed over the po litics and economics of the country. Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P seeks to discuss the failure  of the Government to constitute a JPC 
to probe into allegations of stock market manipulation and accounting fraud against 
Adani Group as revealed by Hindenburg Research Report. Hon. Members, I had 
indicated on the last occasion also. There has been part compliance of Rule 267. I 
can assure you that as and when there will be notice fully compliant with the 
requirement of Rule 267, it will, for sure , receive my earnest consideration and a 
deliberated response. In this situation,  I am helpless and cannot accede to the 
request. ...(Interruptions)... The House is in disorder. ...(Interruptions)... The 
House is in disorder on both sides.  ...(Interruptions)... The House stands adjourned 
to meet at 2.30 p.m. today. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
The House then adjourned at twenty minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at thirty minutes past two of the clock, 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ RESOLUTION 
 
Need to implement the recommendations of Sachar Committee report and other 
reports and take various measures to remove social and educational backwardness 
of Muslims - Contd. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Further discussion on the Resolution regarding need to 
implement the recommendations of the Sachar Committee, help Madrasas to 
modernize, and enact legislation for Preventi on of Atrocities Act against Minorities 
moved by Shri Abdul Wahab on 10 th February. माननीय ए.ए. रहीम। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
माननीय ए.ए. रहीम। ...(Ëयवधान)... Hon. Members, please allow the discussion to 
continue.  ...(Interruptions)...  Since the House is in di sorder, the House stands 
adjourned till 3.30 p.m. today.   
 
The House then adjourned at thirty-one minutes past two of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at thirty minutes past three of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA - Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Message from the Lok Sabha. 
 
The Finance Bill, 2023 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, I have to report to the House the following message 
received from the Lok Sabha, signed by the Secretary-General of the Lok Sabha:- 
 "In accordance with the provisions of rule  96 of   the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, I am directed to enclose the Finance Bill, 2023, as 
passed by Lok Sabha at its sitting held on the 24
th March, 2023. 
   
                   
 Further discussion on the Resolution moved on 10.02.2023 continued. 
[ 24 March, 2023]
19

 
 2. The Speaker has certified that this B ill is a Money Bill within the meaning of 
article 110 of the Constitution of India." 
   
 Sir, I lay a copy of the Bill on the Table. 
 
 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ RESOLUTION - Contd. 
 
Need to implement the recommendations of Sachar Committee report and other 
reports and take various measures to remove social and educational backwardness 
of Muslims 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Private Members' Resoluti on No.1. Further Discussion on the 
Resolution regarding need to implemen t the recommendation of Sachar Committee 
Report, help Madarsas to modernize and enact a legislation for prevention of 
atrocities against minorities moved by Shri Abdul Wahab on the 10 th February, 2023. 
Shri A.A. Rahim. He is not present. Shri Ajay Pratap Singh. 
 
Ǜी अजय Ģताप िंसह ( मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय सभापित महोदय, यह जो Ģाइवेट मेÇबसर् िबल 
माननीय Ǜी अÅदुल वहाब जी ने ĢÎतुत िकया है, यह सच्चर किमटी और रंगनाथ िमǛ किमटी क े 
संदभर् मȂ है और मȅ इस िबल क े िवरोध मȂ हूं। मेरे इस िबल क े िवरोध मȂ होने क े कई का
 रण हȅ, िजनमȂ 
से क ु छ कारणȗ का मȅ िजकर् करना चाहता हूं।  
महोदय, सच्चर किमटी का जो गठन है, सवर्Ģथम उस गठन को ही न्यायालय मȂ चैलȂज 
िकया गय
ा है। िजस किमटी की वैधािनकता पर ही ĢÌनिचÏन लगा हुआ है, उस किमटी की िरपोटर् 
को लागू करना िकसी भी दृिÍट से न्यायोिचत नहीं है। सच्चर किमटी ने अपनी िरपोटर् मȂ जो बातȂ 
कही हȅ, जो िसफािरशȂ दी हȅ, वह बहुत पुराना एजȂडा है। अपनी िरपोटर् मȂ जो बातȂ उन्हȗने कही हȅ, 
वे इसिलए भी मानने योग्य नहीं हȅ, चूंिक हमारे यहां एक कहावत है, 'दूध का जला छाछ भी फ ूँ क-
फ ूँ क कर पीता है' । िहन्दुÎतान जला हुआ है।  
सच्चर किम
टी ने िजन बातȗ की िसफािरशȂ की हȅ, उन्हीं िवषयȗ को लेकर 1947 मȂ 
िहन्दुÎतान का िवभाजन हुआ था, इसिलए सच्चर किमटी की िरपोटर् मȂ जो िसफािरशȂ हȅ, वे 
िबÊकु ल भी मानने योग्य नहीं हȅ। उन्हȗने मुसलमानȗ क े शैक्षिणक आधार पर िपछड़े वगर् का मुǈा 
उठाया है, साथ ही उच्च िशक्षा और माध्यिमक िशक्षा मȂ उन
की जो उपिÎथित है, उस उपिÎथित 
की कमी की ओर भी इशारा िकया है। मिहलाओं क े संदभर् मȂ भी उन्हȗने क ु छ बातȂ कही हȅ। वे सारी 
बातȂ ऐसी हȅ, िजनके  िलए िजस सरकार ने इस किमटी का गठन िकया था, वह सरकार ही दोषी 
है। क ेवल मुसलमानȗ क े संदभर् मȂ उनकी हमेशा से जो वोट बȅक बनाने की पॉिलसी रही है, उसी 
                   
 Further discussion on the Resolution moved on 10.02.2023 continued. 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
पॉिलसी क े अंतगर्त इस काम को भी िकया गया था। ईमानदारी से न तो वे मुसलमानȗ का िवकास 
करना चाहते हȅ और न ही कÊयाण चाहते हȅ, इसिलए यह जो िबल आया है, मȅ इसका िवरोध 
करता हूं और अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूं, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr.
 Amee Yajnik. She is not present. The Minister may now make 
her intervention. 
   
THE MINISTER OF MINORITY AFFAIR S (SHRIMATI SMRITI ZUBIN IRANI):  Sir, I 
stand today to speak on a Resolution that seeks to cast aspersions on citizens and 
the Constitution alike. Through this Resolu tion, an aspersion has been cast on one of 
the holiest of books for us as citizens, not just as Members of both Houses of 
Parliament, that our nation at large seeks to  divide people on the basis of religion and 
deny access to a better life in the present an d in the future to those who belong to the 
minority community. 
Sir, for me this Resolution, which casts an aspersion of inequality, which casts 
an aspersion and, in fact, reduces it to a sl ur on the basis of religion, is a Resolution, 
which, I hope, this House unanimously rejects.   
 Sir, the Resolution says that women in the Muslim community are not given an 
equal opportunity to get educated. Sir, through your kind self, I would like to highlight 
here that after three decades, India now has a new National Education Policy. I had 
the greatest of privileges to help brin g about the foundational document of the 
National Education Policy. Through this House, I wish to give my gratitude to the hon. 
Prime Minister of India, who then directed that let not a policy be written, which will 
determine the future of India, by only a fe w in the corridor of power in the national 
capital. For the first time, Sir, to ensure that the National Education Policy comes to 
life, the Government of India went to eve ry Village Education Council in our country. 
The Government of India reached out to every district and to every educational 
institution which included districts, bloc ks, village panchayats which comprised our 
minority community. Through that resolution and their inputs in the National Education 
Policy, for the first time, comes the gend er inclusion fund which looks at the 
possibility of enhancing infrastructure fo r women and their acad emic needs. Sir, 
today, I can say that the new National Education Policy looks after the needs of 
academics and women, academic s and young children. The fact is that this 
Government institutionalized the first ev er Ministry of Skill Development. This 
Government also addresses the needs for ski lling for a new India.  A new India that is 
envisaged cannot be broken down on the ba sis of religion. And that is why, Sir, 
through you, I would request the entire Hous e to unanimously reject this Resolution 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
21

 
so that we, who build the new India under th e leadership of the hon. Prime Minister 
with the support of every citizen, can build it on issues of inclusion, on issues of equity 
and equality. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Abdul Wahab to reply to the discussion; not present. I 
shall now put the Resolution to vote.   
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived.  
       
MR. CHAIRMAN: Private Members' Resolution No.2. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil to move a 
Resolution, urging the Government to pr ovide all amenities for our soldiers and 
resolves to stand shoulder to shoulder wi th the soldiers of our country against the 
enemies of our country. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil;  not present. Resolution is not moved; 
Resolution lapses. Private Members' Resolution No.3.  Shri Vivek K. Tankha to move 
a Resolution, urging the Government, inter alia , to make suitable changes in the 
relevant rules for employees of Central Government/PSUs/Autonomous 
Bodies/Constitutional Bodies to avail 'Entrepreneurship leave' in order to pursue their 
entrepreneurial idea, for granting seed f und, incubation and other resources to the 
start-ups initiated by its employees and to make provisions for the parent organisation 
of the employee to hold equity in the start-up ventured by the employee. Shri Vivek K. 
Tankha; not present.  Resolution is not moved; Resolution lapses.  
Private Members' Resolution No. 4. Shri A.A. Rahim to move a Resolution 
urging the Government inter-alia to bring a legislation for setting up an Urban 
Employment Guarantee Scheme to cover all ci ties, to address the issue of migration, 
expand the public education, public heal thcare, Public Distribution System and 
housing facilities, to ensure decent living conditions to migrants. Shri A.A. Rahim, not 
present. Resolution is not moved, Resolution lapses.   
 Private Members' Resolution No. 5. Dr. V. Sivadasan to move a Resolution 
urging the Government inter-alia to initiate steps to ensure that appropriate 
monitoring mechanisms are in place to protect the IT and ITeS employees by proper 
implementation of labour laws, establish in stitutional mechanisms to ensure strict 
monitoring of the observance of labour la ws and take immediate steps to assist 
workers who are fighting for their legitimate  rights. Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present. 
Resolution is not moved, Resolution lapses.   
 Private Members' Resolution No. 6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi to move a 
Resolution urging the Government inter-alia to formulate a national menstrual leave 
policy for women and girls in educational in stitutions and workplaces, to encourage a 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
flexible working environment, generate se nsitization towards menstruation, ensure 
access of women and girls to menstrual health products at their working space and to 
coordinate with the State Governments in this regard. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi, not 
present. Resolution is not moved, Resolution lapses.          
 
 
OBSERVATION BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it is unwhole some state of affairs that we, in this 
temple of democracy, are facing a situat ion where dialogue, debate, discussion and 
deliberation is not taking place. It was grea t pain for me when there was the debate 
on the Address of the hon. President.  In the Business Advisory Committee, the 
Members of the Committee persuaded me to earmark twelve hours. We could not 
utilize that. That was a valuable occasion fo r every section of the House to ventilate 
issues that are germane to public interest . Howsoever severe may be the differences, 
howsoever divisive may be the approach, howsoever conflicting points of view may 
be there, this House is called upon to rationalize them. This House is meant to ensure 
that on issues of national import, howsoever critical they may be, shorn of tempers, a 
resolution takes place here. The country is watching us. The world that is 
appreciating Indian democracy as never before is also looking at us. I would expect 
hon. Members of the House to introspect, reflect and as a way forward instance take 
this theatre as the main determining place for course of events. 
Emotive outburst is a political weapon on which I have nothing to say. But, this 
is a place where in sobriety, in composed at mosphere, we have seen evolution of our 
Constitution. I reminded the hon. Members earlier th at for three years, the 
Constituent Assembly Members met. They faced severe issues, contentious issues 
and divisive issues but there was never an occasion for them to generate disturbance 
in the House, disorder in the House, not to  speak of ever going to the Well, shouting 
slogans or using placards. This place is not m eant for political theatrics. That may be 
outside. This place is meant for resolution in larger public interest of the issues that 
face the nation because it is  here that a Member has a ri ght, not available to more 
than 130 crore people. Right of Expression here has an immunity cover from any civil 
and criminal prosecution. One cannot have a greater right to say anywhere else other 
than the Parliament where you are, of co urse, accountable, but you can make your 
point. If we do not use parliamentary thea tres to voice public interest issues, the 
vacuum may be filled otherwise and that does not augur well for democracy. I am 
sure; there will be thinking people in the country who will generate a climate and 
[ 24 March, 2023 ]
23

 
ecosystem, to persuade our Members of Par liament that they must take their job 
seriously in national public interest and participate in the proceedings. I am sure; 
there will be deep-thinking by everyone including Members of the House.  
 Hon. Members, in a helpless conditio n, when Friday's List of Business 
provides time to Private Members' Resolution from 2.30 p.m. onwards up to 5.00 
p.m. that could not be taken up. I ha ve seen hon. Members being extremely 
concerned with Private Members' day. They l ook forward to it. It allows them a rare 
platform to put across their points of view on which a debate takes place in a 
structured manner and the Government is called upon to respond. That being the 
situation, the House stands adjourned to meet on Monday, at 11.00 a.m., March 27, 
2023.   
 
The House then adjourned at forty-nine minutes past three of the clock till eleven of 
the clock on Monday, the 27
th March, 2023. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 