 
Vol. 265 Wednesday,  
No. 8 31 st  July, 2024  
                         9 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA  
OFFICIAL REPORT (ENGLISH VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Papers Laid on the Table  (page 1) 
 
Statement by Minister- 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 342nd Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Commi ttee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture - Laid on the Table  (page 10) 
 
Motion for Election to the Committee on Official Language - Adopted (page 10) 
 
Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee (page 11) 
 
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons (page 11) 
 
Announcements by the Chair (page 12) 
 
Regarding various matters raised in the House (page 12) 
 
 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Matters raised with permission - 
Demand to increase the compensation amount for the victims affected by natural 
disaster (page 16) 
Demand for the provision of separate baby berth in every train in the country  
(page 17) 
Demand for new railway line between Manamadurai to Vilathikulam in Tamil Nadu 
(page 18) 
Demand to convert Yavatmal-Murtizapur-Achalpur rail way line in Maharashtra into 
a broad gauge (page 19) 
Demand to start a superfast train from Manikpur Jun ction in Uttar Pradesh to Delhi 
(page 20) 
Demand to extend the benefit of the Ayushman Bharat  Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (Ayushman Card) to the people Below the Poverty Line (page 21) 
Demand for conservation, propagation and restoratio n of Sanskrit language in the 
country (page 22) 
Concern over rising cases of suicides among students (page 23) 
Demand to elevate Udaipur Passport Seva Kendra to R egional Passport Office 
status (page 24) 
Concern over the financial crisis of the All India Fair Price Shop dealers (page 25) 
Demand to enhance the availability of sports infrastructure in the country (page 26) 
Demand to provide hostel and canteen facilities to the students in Delhi (page 27) 
Concern over increasing incidents of train accidents in the country (page 28) 
Demand to introduce a scheme for the welfare of Him alayan forest dwellers  
(page 29) 
Demand to provide free education to the children of  widows across the country 
(page 30) 
Yamuna flood water in parts of Rajasthan (page 31) 
Concern over the attempt to challenge the Writ of t he Parliament by executive 
authority (page 32) 
 
Oral Answers to Questions (page 33) 
[Written Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions are available as Part -I to this 
Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha  website under the link  
https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials  ] 
 
Observation by the Chair (page 48) 
 

Calling Attention to Matter of Urgent Public Importance - 
The situation arising out of devastating landslide in Wayanad district in the State of 
Kerala (page 62) 
 
Special Mentions- 
Demand to declare extreme heat as a natural disaster (page 84) 
Concern over Ayushman Bharat Scheme (page 85) 
Inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ (Non-Violence) in the Preambl e of the Indian Constitution 
(page 86) 
Demand for establishment of CGHS Wellness Centre in  Kangra, Himachal Pradesh 
(page 87) 
Concern over development work in Punjab (page 87) 
Demand to establish full-fledged AIIMS in Koraput, Sambalpur and Balasore 
 (page 88) 
Demand to start Maharishi Valmiki Scholarship (page 89) 
Need for more doppler weather radars in Bihar (page 90) 
Demand for inclusion of Gojri language in the 8th S chedule of the Constitution 
(page 91) 
Demand for setting up a Government Industrial Park in Chandauli District (page 91) 
Request to resolve issues related to Jal Jeevan Mission in Odisha (page 92) 
Demand for direct train services from Pune to Nashik (page 92) 
Demand to increase supply of Fertilizers to Odisha (page 93)  
Concern over increase in Anti-microbial resistance in India (page 94 ) 
Demand for implemention of Vajjar model across the country (page 95) 
Demand for 2 
nd  Central University at Puri in Odisha (page 95) 
Need to allocate funds to various Labour Welfare Bo ards whose funding was 
stopped due to repeal of various labour laws (page 96) 
Demand for establishment of virtual High Court Benc h in Udaipur Division  
(page 97) 
Demand to convert Salem to Chengapalli NH-544 from 4 lanes to 6 lanes in Tamil 
Nadu (page 98) 
Concern over wrong prescriptions being issued to patients (page 98) 
Request for starting a Sainik School in Puducherry (page 99) 
Concern over flood affected people in Kirandul of Dantewada (page 99) 
Demand to increase the bed strength at ESIC Medical  College and PGIMSR, K.K. 
Nagar, Chennai to 1,200 (page 100) 
Demand for proposed Military Academy at Sri Anandpur Sahib (page 101) 

Demand to complete approval process of Bongaigaon R efinery (BGR), project 
expansion in Assam (page 102) 
Demand to abolish GST on Assistive Products for per sons with disabilities and 
ensuring adequate budgetary support (page 103) 
Concern over aviation safety incident at Chhatrapat i Shivaji Maharaj International 
Airport (CSMI Airport) Mumbai (page 103) 
Request for establishment of Industrial Model Towns hip (IMT) in Ambala 
 (page 104) 
Demand to teach traffic rules subject in country fr om primary level in schools  
(page 105) 
Concern over critical railways safety staffing issu es amidst tragic mishaps  
(page 106) 
Demand for Mailani-Farrukhabad new railway line project (page 180) 
Demand for directions for mandatory display of the Preamble of Constitution of 
India in all the Government institutions (page 181) 
Demand for direct train services from Lucknow to va rious other railway stations 
(page 181) 
Demand for further improvement of facilities of Bha rat Sanchar Nigam (BSNL) in 
Uttarakhand (page 182) 
Demand for Giving ST Status to 11 left out castes o f Gorkha Community and giving 
exemption to Gorkha brothers of the whole country i n paramilitary forces  
(page 183)  
Concern over water scarcity in Marathwada region (page 183) 
 
General Discussion - Concluded  
The Union Budget, 2024-25 (page 106) 
The Budget of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, 2024-25 (page 107) 
 
Motion for Suspension of Rule 272 -Adopted  (page 140) 
 
Resignation by Member -Accepted  (page 141) 
 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of Housin g and Urban Affairs - Not 
concluded (Page 140, 141) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Website: 
http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
http://parliamentofindia.nic.in  
E-mail : rs-engdebate@sansad.nic.in  

 
RAJYA SABHA 
Wednesday, the 31 st  July, 2024 / 9 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair  
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Papers to be laid on the Table.   
 
Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of the Samagra Shiks ha Programmes in Haryana, 
Madhya Pradesh and Punjab and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION (SHRI JAYANT 
CHAUDHARY):  Sir, I lay on the Table a copy each (in English and  Hindi) of the 
following papers:  
 
(i)  (a)  Annual Rep ort and Accounts of the Samagra Shiksha Programme, 
Haryana, for the year 2022-23, together with the Au ditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
 (b)  Review by Government on the working of the above Programme.  
 (c)  Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 431/18/24] 
 
(ii)  (a)  Annual Report of the Samagra Shiksha Programme, Madhya Pradesh, 
for the year 2022-23. 
 (b)  Review by Government on the working of the above Programme.  
 (c)  Statem ent giving reasons for the delay in laying the pape rs mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 435/18/24] 
 
(i ii)  (a)  Annual Report of the Samagra Shiksha Programme, Pun jab, for the 
year 2022-23. 
 (b)  Review by Government on the working o f the above Programme.  
 (c)  Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying th e papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 

 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 432/18/24] 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Home Affairs II.     Annual Assessment Report (2022-23) of the Department of Official Language  THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI NITYANAND RAI): Sir, I lay on the Table the following papers:-   I.  (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of Home Affairs, under sub-section (3) of Section 156 of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992:-  (1) G.S.R. 136(E)., dated the 26th February, 2024, publishing the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Armourer Cadre (Group 'A' posts) Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 2024. (2) G.S.R. 137(E)., dated 26th February, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Deputy Commandant (Official Language) and Assistant Commandant (Official Language), Group 'A'  Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. (3) G.S.R. 284(E)., dated the 20th May, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Judge Attorney General (Deputy Inspector General) and Deputy Judge Attorney General (Deputy Commandant) Group 'A'  Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024.  (4) G.S.R. 288(E)., dated the 22nd May, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, General Duty Cadre (Group 'B' Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2024.  (5) G.S.R. 318(E)., dated the 10th June, 2024, publishing the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Combatant Ministerial and Combatant Stenographer Cadre (Group 'B' Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2024. (6) G.S.R. 319(E)., dated the 10th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Education and Stress Counsellor Cadre, Inspector (Education and Stress Counsellor) and Sub-Inspector (Education and Stress Counsellor), Group 'B' Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (6) See No. L. T. 515/18/24] 
 (ii)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
[RAJYA SABHA]
2

 
Report and Accounts (2022- 2023 and 2023-2024) of v arious Institutes, Societies, 
Institution, Organizations, Associations, Council and Centres and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUS TICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (SHRI B.L. VERMA):  Sir, I lay on the Table a copy each (in English 
and Hindi) of the following papers:-  
Home Affairs, framed under Article 309 of the Constitution: - 
(1) G.S.R. 41., dated the 6th April, 2024, publishi ng the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Stenographer  Grade I (Group 'B' 
Post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(2) G.S.R. 43., in the Weekly Gazette dated the Apr il 7 – April 13, 2024, 
publishing the National Fire Service College, Nagpu r, Multi Tasking Staff 
Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(3) G.S.R. 44., dated the 6th April, 2024, publishi ng the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Low er Division Clerk, (Group 
'C' post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(4) G.S.R. 48., in the Weekly Gazette dated the Apr il 21 – April 27,  2024, 
publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, National F ire Service College, 
Nagpur, Radio Mechanic (Group 'C' Post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(5) G.S.R. 86., dated the 29th June, 2024, publishi ng the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Ele ctrician, (Group ‘C’ Post) 
Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(6) G.S.R. 87., dated the 29th June, 2024, publishi ng the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Lea ding Fireman, (Group 'C' 
Post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(7) G.S.R. 88., dated the 29th June, 2024, publishi ng the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Low er Division Clerk, (Group 
'C' Post) Recruitment (amendment) Rules, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (7) See  No. L. T. 514/18/24] 
 
II. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Fifty-four th Annual Assessment Report of the 
Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home A ffairs, regarding Programme for 
accelerating the spread and development of Hindi an d its progressive use for various 
official purposes of the Union and its implementation, for the year 2022-23. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 308/18/24] 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
3

 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Siri Institute for the Mentally 
   Handicapped Kakinada, East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh, for the 
  year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.  
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 313/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Spurthy Welfare Society, Prakasam  
  District, Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, together with the   
  Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Society. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at  
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 314/18/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Al Shifa Minority Institutions for  
  Mentally Retarded and Old Aged, Kadapa District, Andhra Pradesh, for  
  the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institution. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at  
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 315/18/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the J&J Karunodaya Institute for  
  Mentally Handicapped, Eluru, Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2022-23,  
  together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.  
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at  
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 316/18/24] 
 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the North Bengal Handicapped  
  Rehabilitation Society, Siliguri, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24,  
  together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Society. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 317/18/24] 
[RAJYA SABHA]
4

 
(vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Social a nd Health Development  
  Organization, Imphal, Manipur, for the year 2023- 24, together with the  
  Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the abo ve Organization. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 318/18/24] 
 
(vii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Surya K iran Parents Association for  
  the Welfare of Mentally Handicapped Children, Gun tur, Andhra  
  Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on  
  the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the abo ve Association. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 319/18/24] 
 
(viii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Sneha Society for Rural  
  Reconstruction, Nizamabad, Telangana, for the yea r 2023-24, together  
  with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the abo ve Society. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 320/18/24] 
 
(ix) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of Council for Development of Poor and  
  Labourers, Imphal West, Manipur, for the year 202 3-24, together with  
  the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the abo ve Council. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 321/18/24] 
 
(x) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Kachajuli  Physically Handicapped  
  (Deaf & Dumb) School & Training Centre, Lakhimpur , Assam, for the  
  year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the abo ve Centre. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 322/18/24] 
 
(xi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Pragathi  Charities, Nellore, Andhra  
  Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on  
  the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the abo ve Organization. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 323/18/24] 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
5

 
(xii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Friends of Handicapped-India  
  Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's  
  Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Organization . 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 324/18/24] 
 
(xiii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for Disabled Children,  
  Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the  
  Auditor's Report on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 325/18/24] 
 
(xiv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the PAWMENCAP (Parents Association  
  for the Welfare of Mentally Handicapped Persons), Telangana, for the  
  year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 326/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of National Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat and related papers  THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI BANDI SANJAY KUMAR): Sir, I lay on the Table a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-section (4) of Section 36 and sub-section (3) of Section 38 of the National Forensic Sciences University Act, 2020:-    (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.      (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University.  (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 328/18/24] 
 I. Notification of the  Ministry of Education II. Report and accounts (2022-23) of SLBSNSU, New Delhi and related papers III. Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of various institutes and related papers IV.Report and Accounts (2022-23) of AMU, Aligarh and related papers 
[RAJYA SABHA]
6

 
V.  Report  and Accounts (2021 -22) of the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION  (SHRI SUKANTA 
MAJUMDAR):  Sir, I lay on the Table—  
 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of  Education (Department of Higher 
Education) Notification No. G.S.R. 324(E)., dated t he 14 th  June, 2024, publishing 
the Ministry of Education, Auroville Foundation, Deputy Secretary, Recruitment Rules, 
2024, under Section 33 of the Auroville Foundation Act, 1988. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 264/18/24] 
 
II.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the foll owing papers, under sub -section (3) 
of Sections 31 and sub-section (4) of Section 32 of  the Central Sanskrit Universities 
Act, 2020:- 
 (a)  Annual Report of the Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Natio nal Sanskrit 
University (SLBSNSU), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23. 
 (b)  Annual Accounts of the Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Nat ional Sanskrit 
University (SLBSNSU), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23,  
 (c)  Review by Government on the working of the above University.  
 (d)  Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying th e papers mentioned at 
(a)and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 266/18/24] 
 
III. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the foll owing papers, under sub -section (4) 
of Section 22 of the National Institute of Technolo gy, Science Education & Research 
Act, 2007:- 
(i)  (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institut e of  Technology 
(NIT) Mizoram, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report 
on the Account. 
 (b)  Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.  
 
 
 (c)  Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying th e papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 625/18/24] 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
7

 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology (NIT) Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account.  (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.  (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) above. [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 268/18/24] 
 (iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology (NIT) Manipur, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account.  (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.  (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 270/18/24] 
 (iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Technology (NIT) Rourkela, Odisha, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account.  (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.  (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 269/18/24] 
 (v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Malaviya National Institute of Technology (MNIT) Jaipur, Rajasthan, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account.  (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.  (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 267/18/24] 
 (vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology (VNIT) Nagpur, Maharashtra, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account.  (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.  (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
[RAJYA SABHA]
8

 
(a) above.  
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 271/18/24] 
 
IV. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub -section (3) 
of Section 34 and sub-section (4) of Section 35 of the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 
1920:- 
 
 (a)  Annual Report of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU ), Aligarh, for the 
year 2022-23. 
 (b)  Annual Accounts of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh, for the 
year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c)  Review by Government on the working of the above University.  
 (d)  Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying th e papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 484/18/24] 
 
V.  A co py each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub -section (3) 
of Section 29 and sub-section (4) of Section 30 of the Babasaheb Bhimrao 
Ambedkar University Act, 1994:- 
 
 (a)  Annual Report of the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar Uni versity, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22. 
 (b)  Annual Accounts of the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar U niversity, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22, and t he Audit Report 
thereon. 
 (c)  Review by Government on the working of the above University.  
 (d)  Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying th e papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See  No. L. T. 483/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of NHAI, New Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANS PORT AND 
HIGHWAYS (SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA): Sir, I lay on the T able a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following papers under Se ction 24 of the National Highways 
Authority of India Act, 1988:-  
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
9

 
   STATEMENT BY MINISTER  Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 342nd Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture  THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS (SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA): Sir, I lay a statement regarding Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 342nd Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture on Demands for Grants 2023-24 pertaining to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 204/18/24] 
  MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE COMMITTEE ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGE  MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Nityanand Rai to move a motion for election of six Members to the Committee on Official Languages. 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI NITYANAND RAI): Sir, I move the following motion:—   “That in pursuance of Section (2) of Section 4 of the Official Languages Act, 1963 (19 of 1963), this House do proceed to elect, in the manner as directed by the Chairman, six Members from amongst the Members of the House, to be members of the Committee on Official Language to fill the six vacancies created due to the retirement of Members from the membership of the Rajya Sabha." 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.  (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Authority.  (c) Statements giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) above. [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 626/18/24] 
[RAJYA SABHA]
10

 
The question was put and the motion was adopted.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I have to inform hon. Members that the Business Ad visory Committee 
in its meeting held on 30th July, 2024 recommended the following Ministries for 
discussion on their working along with the parties that will initiate the discussion during 
the current Session :  
 
1. Housing and Urban Affairs -- Bhartiya Janata Party  
2. Agriculture and Farmers Welfare -- Indian National Congress  
 
              Further the Committee recommended tha t two more Ministries, to be taken up 
for discussion during the Session, may be finalized  by the Chairman after having 
consultations in due course.  It was also recommend ed that All India Trinamool 
Congress and DMK may initiate the discussion on the remaining Ministries.  
 The Committee has also recommended that each Minis try will be allocated a 
discussion time of four hours.  The Committee furth er recommended that four hours 
may be allotted for the discussion on consideration  and passing of the Bhartiya 
Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024, after it is introduced, considered and passed by Lok Sabha.  
 
  
PANEL OF VICE-CHAIRPERSONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I have to inform Members that Panel o f Vice-
Chairpersons has been reconstituted with the following Members : 
1. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
2. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
5. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
7. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
8. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
11

 
 Hon. Members, we continue to maintain gender parity in the matter of 
Chairpersons.  
  ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE CHAIR  MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, if the House so agrees, the lunch hour may be dispensed with to take up the permitted Special Mentions and the House may also sit late today to complete the listed Business in today's List of Business.  Do I have the leave of the House to dispense with the lunch hour and sit late today as indicated accordingly?  HON. MEMBERS: Yes.  MR. CHAIRMAN: I am indeed grateful to the hon. Members for this extension because this enables a large number of Members to utilise the time and I have developed the practice if any Member seeks some time more, I am enabling it.    Hon. Members, a large number of Members of the House from both sides, including the hon. Minister, have expressed their deep concern over the unfortunate event, a massive landslide and loss of lives in Wayanad district of Kerala during the early hours of July 30, 2024.  Precious lives have been lost and the number is still being counted.  All agencies have converged to render assistance. I deem it appropriate taking into consideration the sentiments of the House to have a Calling Attention Motion on this under Rule 180 and the same shall be today at 1.00 p.m. as there will be no lunch recess hour.   
  REGARDING VARIOUS MATTERS RAISED IN THE HOUSE  MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, is not here.  I have received one notice under Rule 267 from Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy.  Surprisingly, in spite of my directive, the notice was given yesterday while the House was in Session.  All of you are aware, if the House is in Session, the matter can be raised during the House.  This kind of disregard of the rules is wholly unacceptable.  The notice was given at 3.16 p.m. yesterday.  This indicates in what manner we are taking employment of this rule.  This requires a little more attention and consideration as indicated by me earlier. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
12

 
 I am constrained that I cannot accord my acceptance  when the irregularities 
are so severe.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seat.  I will go as per the list.  
...(Interruptions)...  I know ...(Interruptions)...  And, she is very experienced and 
she is not the only one doing it.  She has done it very decorously.  She has abided by 
the Chair and she has great experience, unlike some  Members who engage into 
disturbance.   
Now, we will take up the matters to be raised with the permission of the Chair.  
Shri Mahendra Bhatt to speak on demand for increasi ng the compensation amount 
for victims affected from natural disaster. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Shri Mahendra Bhatt (Uttarakhand): Sir, through you , I would like to draw the 
Government's attention towards  enhancing the neces sary compensation under the 
National Disaster Management Authority for the loss es caused by floods, landslides, 
and earthquakes as well as for the damages to build ings and agricultural land due to 
landslides and floods . ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir,...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Member, one minute ...(Interruptions)... please sit down . 
Listen to me. I pray to you with folded hands that you raise your hand, but from 
behind, there is a chorus, I don’t appreciate it.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : Sir, I look at you too and I look at myself as well. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Would you please hear me?  You sit down once.  I had called the 
hon. Member.  I have, having respect for you, asked  the hon. Member to take seat, 
but I will appeal to you that when the Leader of the Opposition raises hand, it is bound 
to have my utmost consideration.  Why should your M embers be in chorus?  Sir, I 
plead with you.  Whenever you raise hand ...(Interruptions)... We will not have 
dialogue.  Whenever you raise your hand, it will re ceive my highest consideration.  I 
only look the other way round when they engage into  a chorus.  Kindly have some 
kind of direction for them.  Now, the hon. Leader o f the Opposition.  Please state the 
issue that you wish to raise.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE :  Sir, the issue is that Yesterday, I was not here before 
the house adjourned at the last moment. At that tim e, a honorable member, Mr. 
Ghanshyam Tiwari, raised an issue in this House. Pe rhaps I know what was on his 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
13

 
mind. I am a first-generation politician. I joined politics at my own; my parents were 
not involved in politics because they had passed away. After my mother's demise, 
only my father was with me.  My father raised and nurtured me... (Interruptions)... 
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please lend your ears to the hon. Leader of the Opposition.   And, I 
will not bear this from either side.  Hon. Leader of the House, please keep them under 
control.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE :  I have reached this position with his blessings. He 
had passed away at the age of 85.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir, I wish you to live beyond the age of 95. 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE :  I don't want to live any longer in this environment. I 
don't want to stay any more days in this environment. I felt bad whenTiwari ji said that 
Kharge ji's name is Mallikarjun. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is this? 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : Sir, my name is Mallikarjuna, a name of Lord Shiva. 
My name was given after one of the twelve Jyotirlingas of Lord Shiva. My father chose 
my name with the intention of having his son bear the name of one of the twelve 
Jyotirlingas. Sir, I was the only one in my family to join politics:  I began my through 
the student movement, the labor movement, and then, at the age of 25, I became the 
block president of the Congress party. 
 I want to ask what their problem is that they said about me that their name is 
Mallikarjun and it is also the name of Lord Shiva. It was commented that my entire 
family is involved in politics. They made comments about nepotism. If I start talking 
about nepotism, I will point out how many people here are involved in nepotism and I 
will name all of them....(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Honorable Kharge ji, Honorable Kharge ji... 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE :  It is in front of my eyes, beside me, behind me, 
everywhere...(Interruptions)...Sir, I request you that it should be expunged. 
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
14

 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Honorable Members, every member of this House is re spected 
member and Honorable Kharge ji  has been a public figure for nearly six decades. I  
have said this on several occasions in this House, and there are many other 
respected members here as well. Any words that offe nd Honorable Kharge ji  will not 
be part of the official proceedings.  I would like to  mention one thing: I was in office at 
the time. I will discuss this with you. Honorable G hanshyam Tiwari also has a long 
public life.  He has been in politics and the parliamentary syste m for nearly four 
decades, and I don't believe he would make any rema rks which is substandard.  
Nevertheless, I will examine this closely and inves tigate any such matters. However, I 
want to assure you of one thing that I was in the C hair when it was said in the House, 
so I didn't feel any disrespectful remarks were mad e about you. Nevertheless, I will 
look into it 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH :  Sir, ...( Interruptions )... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Jairam ji , ...( Interruptions )... Kharge ji , Members from your side 
disturb us while sitting in their chairs. This is s uch a serious matter that if something 
said in the house has affected Kharge ji , I would not be able to study it in detail if this  
disturbance goes on. I will try to, because this Ho use is not a battleground. We are 
not enemies of each other. We are not opponents. Th ere is a ruling party and an 
opposition party in the House and there is no short age of experienced people. I know 
personally and and in my conversations, the leader of the House, Honorable Mr. 
Nadda ji , has also said many things about you. It's your li fe, I've said this many times. 
Where did your legal career begin? The gentleman I personally discussed this with 
became a Supreme Court judge. When I went to Karnat aka, they said that you've 
practiced law before him. You've practiced in the R ajasthan High Court and the 
Supreme Court as well. . Mallikarjun Kharge, who ha s served in the Rajya Sabha and 
the Lok Sabha, was fortunate to have served as my s tarting point for a while. 
 I do not 
think any member intended to hurt you. I too felt p ain seeing certain matters. 
Honorable H.D. Deve Gowda Ji  never said anything on such matters, but when things 
were said about him as well, I was distressed. I di d not speak at that time because 
the House was agitated. Honorable H.D. Deve Gowda Ji , former Prime Minister, and  
you are among those who adorn this House, among those who are the sources of our 
inspiration.  I will look into it seriously, and I am saying this  more because I had the 
privilege of being a Member of the Legislative Asse mbly with the Honourable 
Ghanshyam Tiwari from 1993 to 1998 . This type of thought cannot possibly have 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
15

 
occurred to him,  I am saying it but I will still look into it closely.  Now, Shri Mahendra 
Bhatt.  …(Interruptions)… 
  
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION 
 
Demand to increase the compensation amount for the victims affected by natural disaster 
 
SHRI MAHENDRA BHATT (Uttarakhand): Sir, through you I would like to draw the attention of the Government towards enhansing the compensation for losses caused due to floods, landslides and earthquakes under the National Disaster Management Authority and...(Interruptions)...  MR. CHAIRMAN:  If you show off paper, I will not allow it.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MAHENDRA BHATT:  I want to urge the Government to enhance the compensation provided for damage to buildings and agricultural land caused by landslides and floods. Sir, Disaster Management Authorities have been established at the state and districts lelvels, but it is the states that have to provide compensation  as per the guidelines of the Central National Management Authority.  Sir, I represent the state of Uttarakhand, where due to frequent occurrence of natural calamities, it is a challenge for us to rehabilitate displaced people, while the rate of compensation in case of disaster is so low that the affected people are not able to get adequate financial relief. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair) 
 
 Sir, there are houses built in a hilly style with soil and stones in the mountains which are not considered permanent houses and as a result these families are often deprived of faur compensation. Sir, some houses in landslide-prone areas do not 
completely collapse yet living in them becomesextremely dangerous. As per thedisaster relief standard ,until a house is completely demolished, it is not  fall under 
the compensation category, which deprives such families of the compensation they rightfully deserve.   Sir, there are small land holding farms in Uttarakhand and these farms get completely damaged due to floods and landslides, but the compensation given to these farms as per disaster standards is so minimal that it is not possible for them to 
[RAJYA SABHA]
16

 
make their farms cultivable again and alongwith thi s  productive farms become 
barren. 
 Therefore, I draw the attention of the Government to this matter of public 
importance and demand that the amount of compensati on for the disaster affected 
area under the National Disaster Management Authori ty be enhanced and the State 
Governments be given the right to amend the standar ds keeping in mind the 
geographical conditions. 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves wi th 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Mahendra  Bhatt : Shri Madan Rathore 
(Rajasthan), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Guja rat), Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
(West Bengal), Shri Subhash Barala (Haryana), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), 
Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati S angeeta Yadav (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Dr. Kal pana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Sanje ev Arora (Punjab), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr . Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu (Tamil Nadu).  
    
 
Demand for the provision of separate baby berth in every train in the country 
 
MS. KAVITA PATIDAR (MADHYA PRADESH) : Thank you very much, Honorable 
Deputy Chairman Sir. Through you, I would like to d raw the  attention of the house to 
a very important issue. Today, millions of people i n our country travel by train and 
some of our lactating mothers are among them. It is  often observed that they face 
difficulties in putting their babies to sleep and feeding them during the journey. 
 Honorable Deputy Chairman sir, today under the lea dership of the Honorable 
Prime Minister, Indian Railways is achieving new  milestones. These records are being 
established through continuous new experiments and innovations. As part of this 
progress, the Honourable Railway Minister launched a Baby Berth on Mother's Day in 
selected trains, providing mothers with an addition al foldable berth for their children. 
It is used when needed and folded away when not in use. Our Rajya Sabha MP, Dr. 
Sumer Singh Solanki had also requested this from the Railway Minister. I would like to 
appeal to you that we should start this baby berth in all trains and make provisions for 
it. Along with this, an important issue is that when a train is running, all the coaches of  
all trains are interconnected, there should be a de dicated place or compartment for 
mother and child where the mother can have privacy to feed her baby. Sir, this is my 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
17

 
emotional issue and I think this will enhance the facilities of Indian trains. Thank you 
very much. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh): Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati 
Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Dr. Kalpana 
Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Dr. Radha 
Mohan Das Agrawal (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri Banshilal Gurjar (Madhya 
Pradesh), Ms. Indu Bala Goswami (Himachal Pradesh), Dr. Sikander Kumar 
(Himachal Pradesh), Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Maharashtra), Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri 
Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), Shri Krishan Lal Panwar (Haryana), Shri 
Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), 
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu (Tamil 
Nadu).                             
 
Demand for new railway line between Manamadurai to Vilathikulam in Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI R. DHARMAR (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, the distance of the existing railway line from 
Chennai to Thoothukudi via Trichy, Madurai, Kovilpatti is 652 km, and the distance of 
the new railway project to be laid from Aruppukkottai Vilathikulam to Thoothukudi is 
660 km.  Both these routes pass through the busy Madurai and Trichy junctions and 
the distance is not short.   But instead of going through Madurai Junction, an 
alternative railway line can be made from Chennai to Tuticorin which is very much less 
than 587 km, i.e. 65 km less.  For this, a new railway line of only 83 km from 
Manamadurai to Vilathikulam via Pasumbon, Kamudi, Perunali is enough.   The new 
Thoothukudi-Aruppukkottai link up to Vilathikulam is nearing completion.  Apart from 
Manamadurai Junction, Karaikudi Junction will also be connected to this route, so 
there will be another connection from Chennai to Thoothukudi via Pattukottai, 
Trivarur. So, if a small new railway line of 83 kilometres is built, Chennai to Tuticorin 
can get two more rail links apart from the existing Madurai-Kovilpatti route -- one via 
[RAJYA SABHA]
18

 
Trichy-Pudukkottai-Manamadurai-Kamudi-Vilathikulam and one via Viluppuram-
Tiruvarur-Pattukkottai-Karaikudi-Manamadurai.  You can also get Pondicherry link. 
The benefits of this programme are numerous.  This route will become an alternative 
to the costly East Coast route due to the availabil ity of a railway connecting the 
districts along the East Coast. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves wi th 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri R. Dharm ar: Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri S. Selvaganabathy (Puducherry), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Sa smit Patra (Odisha) and  
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand to convert Yavatmal-Murtizapur-Achalpur railway line in Maharashtra  
into a broad gauge 
 
DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE  (Maharashtra): Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir, thank 
you very much. I rise during zero hour with regard to the much-awaited conversion of 
the Yavatmal-Murtijapur-Achalpur narrow gauge Shakuntala Express to broad gauge. 
 Sir, Vidarbha is famous for its cotton since the t ime of independence. Cotton 
from Vidarbha was exported to the textile industry of Manchester. At that time 
Yavatmal-Murtijapur-Achalpur narrow gauge Shakuntal a Express was started to 
facilitate the transport of cotton. This train was operating according to the agreement 
of the U.K.'s Kelik Nexon Company. In 1952, all rai lways systems were nationalized. 
This nationalization, however, did not include the above-mentioned rail route and the 
Shakuntala Express Railway. Ten years ago, after th e expiry of  the contract,  the 
company stopped operating this narrow-gauge railway . Mr. Deputy Chairman,Sir 
I 
have enjoyed traveling on such a chhuk-chhuk narrow -gauge railway. When the 
operation of this train was discontinued, the entir e Vidarbha was saddened and the 
demand for its revival is coming from all over Vida rbha. Shakuntala Railway 
Development Committee and many railway organization s are agitating for this; 
therefore it is necessary for railway ministry to c onvert this narrow gauge railway route 
into broad gauge." 
 Sir, converting this narrow-gauge railway, which c onnects important traders 
and rural areas of Yavatmal, Akola, and Amravati di stricts, into broad gauge is 
important from the perspective of overall development of the region. Once these three 
                                        
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Marathi . 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
19

 
districts are connected by railway, industrial development and the transportation of 
agricultural produce will become easier. Achalpur tribal belt Melghat and Yavatmal are 
not yet connected with railways. After this it will again be directly connected to 
Mumbai and Delhi. Sir, despite many efforts and public demand, it was ignored 
during the Congress rule. There is no need for land acquisition to convert this narrow 
gauge into broad gauge, because sufficient land is available along the route itself. 
There were some legal problems in this, but now they have been resolved, hence, 
through you I make a humble request to the Railway Minister to start the conversion of 
the much awaited Yavatmal-Murtijapur-Achalpur narrow gauge Shakuntala Express 
into broad gauge at a fast pace.  The commencement of Shakuntala Express, which 
is the pride of West Vidarbha, will be an important event for the development of 
Magas division. Sir, I hope that the Government will take this step, thank you very 
much.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde : Shri Dhananjay 
Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha).  
   
Demand to start a superfast train from Manikpur Junction in Uttar Pradesh to Delhi 
 
SHRI BABURAM NISHAD (Uttar Pradesh) : Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, thank 
you very much. I would like to place a demand before the House to introduce a new 
train from Chitrakoot Dham in Bundelkhand as millions of people travel there regularly 
and  yet there is no direct train from Chitrakoot. Sir,through you I would like to request 
that a daily superfast train  be started from Manikpur Junction to New Delhi via 
Chitrakoot, Banda, Khairada Junction, Sumerpur, Hamirpur Road, Ghatampur, 
Bhimsen, and Kanpur Central. 
Honorable Deputy Chairman, I am a resident of Hamirpur, a backward district 
in Bundelkhand, Uttar Pradesh. The district of Hamirpur has completed 200 years of 
its establishment, but even today it is plagued by numerous problems related to 
railway transportation. The only railway track in Hamirpur district is located between 
Manikpur Junction and Kanpur Central. There is very limited operation of trains on this 
route. Not only that, there is no train available from the only railway track originating  
from Hamirpur district going to New Delhi via Khairada Junction, Sumerpur, Hamirpur 
Road, Ghatampur, Bhimsen, and Kanpur Central.  
[RAJYA SABHA]
20

 
 The holy land of Saint Tulsidas Ji , Chitrakoot Dham, is a symbol of faith in 
Sanatan Dharma and it is a religious site. Millions  of devotees from across the country 
visit here to have darshan of Lord Kamtanath ji . The introduction of a daily superfast 
train on this route would relieve devotees of trans portation difficulties. Therefore, 
through this house, I earnestly request the Honorab le Railway Minister to  kindly 
introduce a new superfast train on this route. Thank you very much. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves wi th 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Baburam Nishad:   Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao 
Bonde (Maharashtra), Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (N agaland), Shri Banshilal 
Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarak hand), Shri Naresh Bansal 
(Uttarakhand), Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha ( Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati 
Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Seema Dwiv edi (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Brij Lal (Utt ar Pradesh), Shri Aditya Prasad 
(Jharkhand), Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai (Gujara t), Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
(Haryana), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh ), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri S. Selvaganabathy (Pudu cherry), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha),  Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel (Bihar) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
Hon. Shri Mithlesh Kumar ji.  'Demand for extending the benefit of Ayushman 
Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (Ayushman Card) to people Below Poverty 
Line.'    
 
Demand to extend the benefit of the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (Ayushman Card) to the people Below the Poverty Line 
 
SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, through the House, I wish to draw the 
attention of the Government towards Ayushman Bharat  - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (Ayushman Card). Under this scheme   familie s having less than six 
members, i.e. such as those with only four members in a family, are not getting the 
benefit of Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Aro gya Yojana. In such a situation, 
poor families and widowed women are being deprived of the Central Government's 
ambitious scheme, which provides free healthcare up  to five lakh rupees. The 
Honorable Prime Minister launched the Ayushman Bhar at – Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana in 2018 to provide free healthcare to  every poor person, covering 
families living below the poverty line. It was also  directed that only those families 
whose names were included in the 2011 census as liv ing below the poverty line would 
be eligible for the benefits of the scheme. Due to this guideline issued by the 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
21

 
government, millions of families in the country were deprived of the benefits of the 
scheme. In view of this, the new Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana 2 has been implemented once again. To implement this scheme, the 
Government is making  extensive efforts to issue Ayushman cards to as many people 
as possible but those with fewer than six family members are facing problems. 
Therefore, through the House, I would like to urge the Honorable Health Minister that, 
in the public interest, the benefits of Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana, should be extended to all eligible families living below the poverty line. Thank 
you very much. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Mithlesh Kumar :   Shri Sanjeev Arora 
(Punjab), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 Hon. Dr. Dinesh Sharma, 'Demand for conservation, propagation and 
restoration of Sanskrit language in the country.'    
 
Demand for conservation, propagation and restoration of Sanskrit language in  
the country 
 
DR. DINESH SHARMA (Uttar Pradesh): Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, I express 
my gratitude to you for allowing me to raise the issue concerning the conservation, 
propagation and restoration  and making Sanskrit a compulsory subject. I would like 
to draw the attention of the House to an important matter. Considering the 
significance of the Sanskrit language and its present condition, I want to emphasize 
the urgent need for the revival of this language. The Sanskrit language is our cultural 
heritage and a unique resource. The literature of the Sanskrit language is extremely 
rich and diverse. Numerous texts such as the Vedas, Upanishads, Mahabharata, 
Ramayana, Yogashastra, Ayurveda, Vastu Shastra, Astronomy, Mathematics, etc., 
were written in Sanskrit, and their study remains scientifically significant even today. 
All these scriptures are important sources of our ancient knowledge and science, and 
the wisdom contained in them is still relevant today. Since ancient times, Sanskrit has 
been the spoken language in India. Many languages have evolved from the Sanskrit 
language. Sanskrit is considered the mother of numerous languages and forms the  
backbone of Indian languages. In the present time, the neglect of Sanskrit in some 
regions is very concerning. Due to the modern education system and Western 
[RAJYA SABHA]
22

 
influence, the study of Sanskrit is gradually decli ning day by day. Currently, the new 
education policy has emerged as a milestone, bringi ng a ray of hope before us. 
Interest in Sanskrit in schools and universities is  declining, resulting in our younger 
generation being deprived of their ancient knowledg e. It is a matter of pleasure that 
our new education policy mentions the promotion of the Sanskrit language. To 
address the growing neglect of the Sanskrit languag e, I would like to present some 
suggestions to you. Sanskrit should be included as a compulsory subject in primary 
and secondary education levels. Sanskrit courses sh ould be promoted in universities, 
and special grants should be provided for research.  Sanskrit secondary schools 
should be established across the country, where San skrit may be taught alongside 
other subjects. This will increase students' intere st in Sanskrit and enable them to 
gain a comprehensive knowledge of the language. San skrit literature should be 
translated and disseminated digitally to make it ea sily accessible. Online courses and 
webinars on Sanskrit texts should also be organized . Plays, poetry, and music 
programs should be organized in Sanskrit to foster a love and respect for 
Sanskrit....( Time-bells rings.)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, Honorable Dinesh ji, now your statement is 
not going on record. There is only three minutes for this.  
The following hon. Members associated themselves wi th the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Dr. Dinesh Sharma : Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), 
Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Ram Chander J angra (Haryana), Shrimati 
Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Mah araja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
(Manipur), Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), Shrimati  Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), and Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand).  
Now Shrimati Mausam Noor ; concern over rising cases of suicides among 
students.  
 
Concern over rising cases of suicides among students 
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR (West Bengal) : Sir, I thank you for giving me an 
opportunity to raise such an important issue. Accor ding to the latest data from 
NCRB, students account for 8 per cent of the total suicide victims equating to more 
than 13,000 lives lost in a year. This is a crisis that needs immediate attention and 
action. 35 per cent of all suicides are committed b y those within the age group of 18 
to 30 years of age. The failure of our examination and admission system is starkly 
evident.  1,123 children under 18 ended their lives  due to exam failure in 2022, while 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
23

 
1,445 young adults took their lives over unemployment. The recent figures highlight 
the brutal competition students endure. This year, over 23 lakh candidates appeared 
for NEET (UG), but only 1.8 lakh MBBS seats were available. Similarly, 12.3 lakh 
students appeared for JEE-Mains, vying for a mere 39,767 seats. The disparity is 
crushing. Sir, students' worth is wrongly  tied to exam results. The intense media 
hype, societal shame, lack of adequate academic counselling and unemployment are 
pushing them to the edge. The future of lakhs of students, who prepared for NEET, 
UGC-NET, CSIR NET and NEET PG this year, hangs in the balance. The state of 
education in our country has reached a critical stage. Each student suicide is a 
national tragedy starkly reflecting the Government's failure to support its youth.  
Therefore, the Government must urgently undertake concrete measures to reform the 
country's education and examination system.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Mausam Noor:   Prof. Manoj Kumar 
Jha (Bihar), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West 
Bengal), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab),  Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala),Shri Haris  Beeran  (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati 
Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri Samirul Islam 
(West Bengal), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose 
(West Bengal), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi  (Odisha), 
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Imran 
Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),  Shri Jawhar Sircar (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Ajit 
Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu (Tamil 
Nadu). 
 Now, Shri Chunnilal Garasiya; demand to elevate Udaipur Passport Seva 
Kendra to Regional Passport Office status. 
 
Demand to elevate Udaipur Passport Seva Kendra to Regional Passport Office status 
 
SHRI CHUNNILAL GARASIYA (Rajsthan):  Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, the 
Udaipur division of Rajasthan is a tribal-dominated division. It has been designated as 
a trival sub plan (TSP) area under Schedule V of the Government of India. To 
falicitate easy access to passports services for residents, a Passport Seva Kendra 
was opened here in 2017. The then-Minister of External Affairs, the late, respected 
[RAJYA SABHA]
24

 
Smt. Sushma Swaraj, had assured the public that the  Udaipur Passport Seva Kendra 
would be upgraded to a Regional Passport Office wit hin five years, but even today, 
almost seven years later, it has not been upgraded.   Currently, approximately 300 to 
350 passport applications are being processed daily  at the Udaipur Service Center. 
Similarly, about 50 to 60 thousand applications are being processed annually. 
 Therefore, through you I request the Government of India to undertake the 
effort of converting the Udaipur Passport Service C enter into a Regional Passport 
Office, so that the residents of the tribal-dominated districts of Dungarpur, Banswara, 
Pratapgarh, Chittorgarh, Bhilwara, Rajsamand, Pali, and Sirohi in the Udaipur division 
can benefit. Thank you. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves wi th 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Chunnila l Garasiya:  Shri Kesridevsinh 
Jhala (Gujarat), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri  Devendra Pratap Singh 
(Chhattisgarh). 
 Thank you, Honorable Chunnilal ji . Now, Dr. K. Laxman; 'Concern over the 
financial crisis of the All India Fair Price Shop dealers'. 
 
Concern over the financial crisis of the All India Fair Price Shop dealers 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN (Uttar Pradesh) :  Sir, this is an issue related to fair price shop 
dealers throughout the country, wherein lakhs of pe ople are relied on it. So, the PDS 
and supply of essential commodities through fair pr ice shops is the only time-tested 
network to arrest the spiralling open market prices  and ensure relief to consumers. 
The financial viability of operating these fair pri ce shops is a concern of nearly 5.50 
lakh fair price shop dealers.  Many fair price shop  dealers suffer from inadequate 
infrastructure, including poor storage facilities, which leads to spoilage and wastage 
of stocks. And, also they are being put to loss bec ause of this weight loss during 
transportation. To ensure viability of this fair pr ice shop dealers, I suggest that the 
Bharat Brand commodity supplied by the Government o f India may be directly 
supplied to these ration shops, wherein 81 crore pe ople, who are getting free ration 
by virtue of Modi ji 's decision, these 81 crore people are being benefi ted.  So, even 
instead of supplying these commodities through plas tic bags, let it be ensured to be 
supplied through jute bags so that these FPS dealer s can even sell through jute bags.  
And, during COVID-19, we have witnessed how migrant  labourers have suffered for 
want of ration. So, our Prime Minister Modi ji  has introduced this 'One Nation, one 
Ration'.  Now, lakhs of migrant labourers are being  benefited.  They are getting ration 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
25

 
at their respective working places.  Now, finally, I also suggest, let there be 'one 
nation, one ration and one commission'. Let there not be any difference in the 
commission.  Let them not depend on the State Governments.  So, even that weight 
loss during transportation also be cut down.  I request the Government to look into 
this seriously and help wherein 5.50 lakhs FPC dealers are suffering from it.  Thank 
you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. K. Laxman: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh).  
 Thank You Dr. K. Laxman.  Now, Shri Sanjay Yadav; 'Demand to enhance the 
availability of sports infrastructure in the country'. 
 
Demand to enhance the availability of sports infrastructure in the country 
 
SHRI SANJAY YADAV (BIHAR) :  Sir, sports infrastructure is the backbone of our 
performance and excellence at global level and in the Olympics.  Sir, when our 
winning athletes go to the podium to receive their medals with the tricolor  in their 
hands, and the national anthem plays in the background, we all feel proud, but 
despite being the second most populous country in the world, unfortunately, we win 
very few medals. We need to understand the causes of under-development of sports 
in the country and lack of sports facilities for the sportsmen and need to count the 
reasons for absence of proper sports infrastructure and facilities in the country.  So, 
Sir, I demand to increase the Budget allocation for sports and sports infrastructure in 
the country.  Thank you, Sir.     
                                                                                        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sanjay Yadav: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), 
Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shri Saket 
Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West 
Bengal), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Dr. John Brittas 
[RAJYA SABHA]
26

 
(Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Anil  Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), Shri Ashok 
Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala) a nd Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu 
(Tamil Nadu). 
      Thank you Sanjay ji .  Now, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi, 'Demand to provide hostel 
and canteen facilities to the students in Delhi'.  
 
Demand to provide hostel and canteen facilities to the students in Delhi 
 
SHRIMATI SEEMA DWIVEDI (Uttar Pradesh): Honorable D eputy Chairman Sir, I 
would like to draw the attention of the House to a very pressing issue related to 
students. India is a country of youth. Our Government is committed to and concerned 
about the future of the youth.  I  urge the governm ent to consider setting up hostels 
and canteens,on the lines of state guesthouses buil t by the states to provide 
accommodation. for children from villages, rural ar eas, and underprivileged 
backgrounds who come from different states of the c ountry to study and prepare in 
the national capital, Delhi. Further, I urge the ce ntral and state governments to 
consider setting up such facilities in Delhi and in  the capitals of all states, allotting 
them to students at minimal government rates, so th at millions of young people get 
the opportunity to progress and at the same time, t heir talents can be better 
showcased.  
 Sir, an incident has just occurred in Delhi, which you all must have seen. I 
would like to request the government that children who want to study and have talent, 
but whose parents are not financially well-off and therefore cannot support them 
adequately, should be encouraged by the Government.  I believe that if the 
government takes steps in this regard, it will grea tly enhance the talent of the youth 
and improve their future. I would like to make this request to the Government. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves wi th 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Seem a Dwivedi :   Shri Ramji (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Kha n (Maharashtra), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) , Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punj ab) and Shrimati Maya Naroliya 
(Madhya Pradesh).                                                                           
 Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury; Concern over increasing incidents of train 
accidents in the country. 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
27

 
 
Concern over increasing incidents of train accidents in the country 
 
SHRIMATI  RENUKA CHOWDHURY (Telangana) : Sir, at the very outset, when we 
are talking about train accidents, let us please pass a condolence motion for the 
people who have died in the unfortunate accident where eighteen coaches of 
Howrah-CSMT Express derailed at Jharkhand. I think the House should take 
cognizance of that. It is a terrible tragedy where citizens have passed away and it is in 
the right sense that we take up the issue while dealing with this.  
Now, the other issue is that a number of train accidents is rising across the 
country. If you go to see in the last ten years, there has been a surfeit of these 
accidents that have taken place whether it is technical or human; we have got to look 
at it. Sir, Indian Railways is the fourth largest in the world. And it is incredible that 
lakhs of passengers have confidence in Indian Railways. Their bookings would be 
done, they would go to the Railway Station; given the kind of population that we 
have, they would have their seats reserved and they could travel safely, the key word 
being 'safety'.  
In such a situation, in the last ten years, we have seen an extreme decline in 
the safety measures and the so-called kavach which was propagated and applied has 
not happened. The corruption has come about in the Railways' safety and in the 
products that are being used. I have first-hand knowledge if the Minister so wants. I 
can sit with him and give him access to all this information. Even if you conduct an 
inquiry today, you will get a sample which will pass the test, but, the actual reality of 
what is being supplied is completely mala fide and it is distressing because today I am 
a person, whether I am a Member of Parliament or not, I love travelling by train. I do 
believe that India is reflected in her train journeys, her people, her cultures and the 
various Railway Stations we pass through. But, today, do we have the concept of 
safety? Are we not afraid to board a train? Are we sure that we are going to reach the 
destination? And what are the facilities we have? What is the train passengers' 
insurance? Is there anything to protect a traveller? So, why the decline in train safety 
happened? It has shaken the confidence of lakhs of Indians because today you get 
scared, you get terrified to board a train because you do not know if you will reach 
your destination or not.  
The Sealdah-bound Kanchanjunga Express collided with a goods train in June 
and Chandigarh-Dibrugarh Express also derailed near Gonda district in Uttar Pradesh 
in July. These derailments have occurred with such frequency. ...(Time Bell rings)... 
We must as people's representatives take cognizance of this.        
[RAJYA SABHA]
28

 
                                
MR.   DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury:   Shri Anil Kumar 
Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Ramji (Uttar Prades h), Shri Neeraj Dangi 
(Rajasthan), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jhakhand), Shri P rakash Chik Baraik (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Ms.  Sushmita Dev (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Mausam Noor (West Bengal), Ms. Do la Sen (West Bengal), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Samirul Islam (We st Bengal), Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri M uzibulla Khan (Odisha), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha) , Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Mahara shtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) , Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu 
(Tamil Nadu). 
 Shri Ghulam Ali; Demand to introduce scheme for th e welfare of Himalayan 
forest dwellers.  
 
Demand to introduce a scheme for the welfare of Himalayan forest dwellers 
 
SHRI GHULAM ALI (Nominated): Deputy Chairman Sir, Y ou have given me the 
opportunity to raise a very serious issue. The Prim e Minister of India, Shri Narendra 
Modi ji , has launched several iitiatives for the country and for forests, greenery and for 
the melting glaciers. These initiatives have also c ontributed to increasing our green 
cover. Along with this, there is straw, fallen leaves of plants, grass in the forest and all 
these are dry. We have the world's fastest machine,  which produces natural manure. 
It's a moving machine, and it's been around for cen turies. Those machines are cows, 
buffaloes, goats, sheep, and other animals, animals  we've researched, and science 
has recently conducted new research on them. 
 Sir, those leaves can either turn into natural manu re or become a source of 
forest fire. We spend crores of rupees on fire gaps . Forest dwellers are vital to forests 
because their animals provide natural manure. In th e past when Rajasthan was a 
desert, previous Governments used helicopters to dr op seeds there but the animals 
we have are a natural treasure because they transpo rt seeds.  Today, unfortunately, 
 
when a natural calamity occurs, the sheep, goats, c ows, and buffaloes of forest 
dwellers die. There is no insurance for them, and n o one takes care of them. In our 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
29

 
Himalayan states, these tribes go up for three months, stay there for three months, 
then come down for three months, and remain in the plains for three months.  Sir, if 
we discuss transportation for this while sitting in an air-conditioned room, it is very 
unfortunate that it costs us so much money.  Animals that live in 45-degree 
conditions, if we take them to a place with 5-degree conditions and leave them there, 
it will not be good for nature. We cannot tamper with nature.  
Sir, as far as tourism is concerned, NHAI, BRO, or PMGSY should build 
infrastructure for forest dwellers, create footpaths in the forest, because they walk on 
foot in the forest. We should not interfere with their nature. Animals are essential for 
the forest; otherwise we would have to resort to straw picking under MNREGA, even 
though currently we don't have enough MNREGA laborers. Therefore, through you, I 
would like to suggest Government that our tribal... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Gulam Ali : Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
(Haryana) and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra). Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mamata Mohanta (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) 
and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                                                                  
 
Demand to provide free education to the children of widows across the country 
 
SHRI AMAR PAL MAURYA (Uttar Pradesh): Honourable Deputy Chairman Sir, 
through you, I would like to draw the government's attention towards providing 
completely free education to the children of widowed women across the country.  
 Sir, there are mothers and sisters across the country whose lives are 
devastated by events that are impossible to compensate. Difficult phase start for a 
mother or sister when their husbands suddenly pass away, sometimes due to illness, 
sometimes due to an accident, or sometimes due to a natural death.  Sir, what must 
that family be going through?  This leaves their young children and elderly parents in a 
state of darkness. Various facilities, such as a certain amount under pension schemes 
or accident insurance in case of death due to an accident, are provided at multiple 
levels by the government, whether by the central government or state governments.. 
However, the lives of their children cannot be safeguarded with these facilities, and  
their lives remain uncertain. Those children also have a strong desire to nurture  
dreams in their lives. When they are under the protection of their father, they dream, 
[RAJYA SABHA]
30

 
build aspirations in their minds, have the confiden ce to achieve those heights, and 
strive to accomplish them. 
Sir, I request the government that children from su ch families should definitely 
be provided with free education. No matter which ed ucational institution it is in the 
country, whether it is higher education or primary education, IIT, medical college, or 
triple IT, I demand that arrangements may be made t o grant free admission to 
children from these families in any institution pro viding education, according to their 
eligibility. Certainly, the participation of these children in the future of a developed 
India will only be possible if our governments pay properattention to this system. 
Many people in society have said many things for fa ther. I would like to conclude  my 
speech with a few lines: 
 
" Kabhi abhimaan hai to kabhi svaabhimaan hai pita, 
Kabhi dharati to kabhi aasamaan hai pita,  
Janm diya hai agar maan ne jaanega jag jise,  
Vah pahachaan hai pita, 
Kabhi kandhe par bithaakar mela dikhaata hai pita,  
Kabhi banakar ghoda ghumaata hai pita.. 
 
If a mother teaches how to walk on feet, a father t eaches how to stand on them. Sir, I 
request you to ensure that the government arranges free education for such children. 
                       
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following Members associated themselves with th e 
Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Am ar Pal Maurya: Shri Dhananjay 
Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Mah arashtra), Shri Banshilal 
Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopcha de (Maharashtra), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri mati Mamata Mohanta (Odisha), 
Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Ramji (Uttar Prades h), Dr. Sasmita Patra (Odisha), 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab).        
                                                   
Yamuna flood water in parts of Rajasthan 
 
SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI (Rajsthan): Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, I would like 
to request you that in 1994 an agreement was reache d regarding the distribution of 
Yamuna water among 5 States and from 1994 until now , it has remained unresolved 
for the last 30 years. During my previous term in R ajya Sabha, the honorable 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
31

 
Chairman gave me the opportunity to raise this issue twice; I thank him for that and I 
would also like to thank the then Minister of Water Resources, Mr. Gajendra Singh 
Shekhawat. Haryana, Rajasthan, and the Government of India jointly facilitated this 
agreement. As per the agreement the surplus flood water of the Yamuna which 
consistently flows to Haryana, is not in question here,but the flood water should be 
shared with the states.  Under this agreement an agreement was reached between 
the two states, according to which Rajasthan will receive 1917 cusecs of flood water 
for four months: July, August, September, and October. I am pleased that the 
Rajasthan government has allocated ₹60 crore in its budget for the development of a 
new DPR, and the Haryana government has also announced this in its budget. There 
will be four lines, three of which will go to Rajasthan, which will supply water to four 
districts of Rajasthan: Sikar, Jhunjhunu, Churu, and Neem. With a flow of 1917 
cusecs of water, this is five times the amount of water that is available from the Banas 
River dam in Rajasthan, which is the largest dam built at Bisalpur for drinking water. 
The entire Shekhawati, which is the land of heroes, about which I had once said that- 
 
"Shekha ji ki shekhaavaati, teeba doongar baloo maati, 
Janmen jaat, jangala jaantee, buddhi ri  dhool baaniya baanti. 
 
 This will be a boon for Shekhawati. Both governments have reached an 
agreement for this and the Government of India has agreed to provide 80 percent of 
the funding for it. This is why Honorable Modi ji and Honorable Amit Shah ji 
intervened. It is because of them that the agreement between the three parties, which 
had been pending for 30 years, was reached. I would like to make this request 
through you....(Time-bell rings.)...             
                                                
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   The hon. Member, Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), associated himself with the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. 
Member, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari.                 
  Thank you, Ghanshyam Tiwariji / Honorable Shri Samik Bhattacharya.  
 
Concern over the attempt to challenge the Writ of the Parliament by executive 
authority 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal) :  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I am 
grateful to you for giving me this opportunity to speak here.   
[RAJYA SABHA]
32

 
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 Sir, having passed by both the Houses of Parliamen t and signed by the hon. 
President of India, three new criminal laws, namely , the Bharatiya Nayaya Sanhita, 
the Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, and the Bhara tiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, what is 
happening in West Bengal?  After being passed by bo th the Houses, and after the 
President's signature, the West Bengal Government c ompletely challenged this 
procedure. The government claims that the way these  three bills were passed in 
Parliament is unconstitutional. And, they have form ed a seven-member Committee, 
headed by a retired Chief Justice. Sir, the entire House ...( Interrutpions )... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, an issue can be raised p rovided it lies in the domain 
of the Rajya Sabha. Please. Nothing is going on rec ord. Now, Question Hour.  
…(Interruptions)…       
 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
Excise duty shared with rural local bodies 
 
*91.  SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI : Will the Minister of PANCHAYATI RAJ be 
pleased to state : 
 
(a) whether any share of Excise Duty received by Go vernment is also shared with 
the rural local bodies; 
(b) if so, the details thereof, State-Wise; and 
(c) if not, the reasons therefor? 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI  RAJ (PROF. S. P. 
SINGH 
 BAGHEL): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement  
  
(a) to (c) Sir, the Finance Commission has the mand ate under article 280 (3) (bb), 
of the Constitution of India, to recommend “the measures needed to augment the 
Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats. ” 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
33

 
      As per recommendations of Central Finance Commission, the Union Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj recommends to the Union Finance Ministry for release of grants to 
Rural Local Bodies of various States. These recommendations are based on eligibility 
conditions fixed by the current Finance Commission and are placed as Annexure A.       
  The State-wise allocation of the Fifteenth Finance Commission grants (2021-
26) to Rural Local Bodies is at Annexure B. 
  The Central Finance Commission is constituted by the Union Finance Ministry 
and its recommendations are also made to the Finance Ministry. The Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj receives recommendations with regard to funds allocated for Rural 
Local Bodies.    
 
Annexure-A 
 
Eligibility criteria for release of Fifteenth Central Finance Commission Grants to Rural 
Local Bodies by Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
The following conditions have been stipulated in the guidelines for the release of 
installments of Basic (Untied) grants for FY 2024-25. 
i. RLBs shall be deemed to be eligible for the grants, if they are duly constituted 
i.e if duly elected bodies are in place except for States/ Areas where Part IX of 
the Constitution does not apply. In case, all the bodies are not duly 
constituted grants shall be released to the State on actual allocation / pro-
rata basis for duly constituted only. 
ii.  Uploading of GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDPs of the RLBs in  eGramSwaraj 
iii.  RLBs have to mandatorily onboard on eGramSwaraj – PFMS for XV FC 
Grants’ transactions. 
iv.  RLBs to mandatorily prepare and make available online both provisional 
account of previous year and audited accounts of year before previous year to 
avail the grants 
v.  Unspent Balance of XIV FC Grants with the State should not be more than 10 
% of the instalment under consideration. 
vi.  At least 50 % of the Untied grants released during the previous year have 
been utilized (valid only for release of 2nd installment of the FY). 
vii. All states which have not done so, must constitute State Finance Commission 
(SFC), act upon their recommendations and lay the explanatory 
memorandum as to the action taken thereon before the State legislature on or 
before March 2024. After March 2024, no grants shall be released to State 
[RAJYA SABHA]
34

 
that has not complied with the Constitutional provi sions in respect of the SFC 
and these conditions. 
  
Annexure-B 
 
The State-wise allocation of the Fifteenth Finance Commission grants (2020-21 to 
2025-26) to Rural Local Bodies 
Sr. No  States  Allocation (2020 -21 to 2025 -26)* 
(Rs. in Cr) 
1.   Andhra Pradesh  12856  
2.   Arunachal Pradesh  1131  
3.   Assam  7857  
4.   Bihar  24579  
5.   Chhattisgarh  7123  
6.   Goa  368  
7.   Guj arat  15650  
8.   Haryana  6193  
9.   Himachal Pradesh  2102  
10.   Jharkhand  8274  
11.   Karnataka  15756  
12.   Kerala  7972  
13.   Madhya Pradesh  19511  
14.   Maharashtra  28540  
15.   Manipur  867  
16.   Meghalaya  893  
17.   Mizoram  455  
18.   Nagaland  611  
19.   Odisha  11058  
20.   Punjab  6798  
21.   Rajasthan  18915  
22.   Sikkim  207  
23.   Tamil Nadu  17666  
24.   Telangana  9048  
25.   Tripura  937  
26.   Uttar Pradesh  47764  
27.   Uttarakhand  2813  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
35

 
28.   West Bengal 21611   Total 297555 
* Note: This includes the grant of Rs.60750 Crore for the interim award period of 2020-21.   SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI: Mr. Chairman Sir, thanks to the Honorable Minister for his detailed answer, but he clearly did not answer my question about the share of the Central Excise  collection is allocated to rural bodies. He has mentioned the grants given to each state as recommended by the Finance Commission, but he did not provide details of Central Excise Duty....(Interrutpions)...  MR. CHAIRMAN: Put your supplementary.   SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI: Sir, I am asking the first supplementary. There has been no mention regrading  what portion is allocated to the local rural body. If the data is available, it should be placed on the Table, and if it is not available, kindly provide it....(Interrutpions)...   PROF. S. P. SINGH BAGHEL: Sir, although this question is entirely related to the Finance Department, we have nevertheless taken it up, and I will make every effort to answer it to the satisfaction of honorable member....(Interruptions)...  MR. CHAIRMAN: Honorable Minister, please bring the microphone a little closer to  you and speak little louder.  PROF. S. P. SINGH BAGHEL: Sir, specific supplementary, which is related to excise duty...(Interruptions)...  MR. CHAIRMAN: Minister ji, please keep the microphone a little closer, so that voice can be heard clearly.  PROF. S. P. SINGH BAGHEL: So the components of the department, different types of taxes i.e. - Corporation tax, income tax, property tax, customs duty, central excise duty, service tax, goods tax, taxes of union territories, but as far as the specific question about central excise duty is concerned, in 2023-24, 13 percent was allocated to rural local bodies.  MR. CHAIRMAN:  Second supplementary, Shri Imran Pratapgarhi. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
36

 
 
SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI : Sir, the Centre allocates funds to local bodies, s o on 
what kinds of works are the local bodies spending i t? 
 That's the first point. Second, 
what mechanism does the Ministry have for monitorin g it, because which are the 
states that have properly and fully  utilized the a llocated funds and which are the 
states where reports of scams or irregularties have  been reported because various 
Central Government schemes like the PM Awas Yojana...( Interruptions )...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You have put your question. Hon. Minister. 
 
SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI : Sir, let me complete the question. There are complaints 
of widespread corruption in Anganwadis. Does the Mi nistry have any mechanism to 
monitor these matters?....( Interruptions )...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Honorable member, you have asked your question. 
 
SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI : Sir, please let me complete the question. After sev eral 
months, a question hour comes, so please allow me to ask it full. 
 
THE MINISTER OF PANCHAYATI RAJ (SHRI RAJIV RANJAN A LIAS LALAN SINGH ): 
Mr. Chairman Sir, the Honorable Member stated that the recommendations we 
receive from the Finance Commission for Panchayats are released to the Panchayats 
state-wise. There are established criteria based on  which we allocate funds to the 
states. Apart from this, we also transfer funds dir ectly to local bodies. There is also a 
set of guidelines determining which states the fund s should be allocated and on what 
basis it should  be spent. If the states fail to ad here to it, the next installment is not  
released to them. All the guidelines are available.  The honorable members will find 
that the guidelines are very extensive . If the hon orable members so desire, I can read 
and explain each guideline one by one but the most important thing is that the 
government lead by Shri Narendra Modi has increased  the recommendations of the 
Finance Commission's allocation every year because it is the resolve of  Government 
under Modi ji   that the country will not make progress develop u ntil the villages 
progress . I want to inform you that during Modi Ji 's tenure, the allocation to 
panchayats has increased from 54 rupees to 674 rupe es per person this time. This is 
our cooperation to Gram Panchayats, and we work based on this resolution.. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Third supplementary; Shri Kartikeya Sharma.  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
37

 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA :  Hon. Chairman, Sir, I would like to thank the 
Government for releasing more than Rs. 6,000 crores for the Rural Local Bodies in 
Haryana.  But my question is this. I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether any 
flexibility in use and d ovetailing of different funds is allowed to RLBs to achieve higher 
efficiency and utilization percentage. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
PROF. S. P. SINGH  BAGHEL: Sir, there's no such target. Modi ji's work is fair  and 
impartial. Whether it's BJP-ruled states, NDA-ruled states, or non-BJP-ruled states,  
funds are allocated according to the rules. There's a rule that sets a threshold of 90 
percent population and 10 percent area. The State Finance Commission makes a 
request to the Central Finance Commission accordingly. We send the Central Finance 
Commission's recommendations to the Finance Ministry, and the funds are allocated 
accordingly. 
 
SHRI RAJIV RANJAN ALIAS LALAN SINGH:  Mr. Chairman Sir, I would like to add 
one more point to this. Regarding what he said about the flexibility of spending funds, 
out of the funds we release to the panchayats, 30 percent is spent on drinking water 
and we allow the panchayats to spend 30 percent on rainwater conservation and 
water recycling. In addition, we have allowed the panchayats to spend 30 percent on 
waste management and cleaning work as per the guidelines. Therefore, we spend 30 
percent each on these. Apart from this, there is no flexibility, as the honorable 
member has stated; according to the guidelines of the Government of India, the 
panchayats have to spend the amount as per those guidelines. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fourth supplementary; Shrimati Seema Dwivedi. 
 
SHRIMATI SEEMA DWIVEDI:  Mr. Chairman Sir, the Honorable Minister, in his written 
reply, has outlined the state-wise allocations to rural local bodies from the 15th 
Finance Commission for the years 2020-21 to 2025-26. Uttar Pradesh has been 
allocated ₹47,764 crore. Sir, for this I would like to congratulate the Government of 
India for allocating such a huze funds to our Uttar Pradesh. Sir, my mere curiosity is 
about whether the money that goes to the states is distributed equally among all the 
districts of a state, or whether it is given to the district that spends andsent utilization  
[RAJYA SABHA]
38

 
report. I would like to know from the government wh at the criteria are for allocating it 
to the districts. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Honorable Minister, this is a question concerning your province. 
 
PROF. S. P. SINGH 
 BAGHEL :  Honorable Chairman Sir, I would like to point out that 
Uttar Pradesh is the largest state in the country i n terms of population, so it is natural 
that it will receive more funds. In terms of area a s well, it is smaller than some states, 
but it is still larger. The money that we send from  here now goes directly to the state 
account, from there to the district account and fro m the district account it is sent 
directly to the rural local bodies. It depends on t he population of that panchayat. You 
must have noticed that some village panchayats have  a population of a thousand 
people, some have 8 thousand, and some even 10 thou sand. So, this is given 
according to the population and area in a 90 to 10 ratio. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Supplementary No. 5; Shri M. Shanmugam.  
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM : Sir, I want to ask a supplementary question throug h you. 
What measures are taken by the Ministry of Panchaya ti Raj to ensure transparency 
and accountability in Panchayati Raj Institutions?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister. 
 
PROF. S. P. SINGH 
 BAGHEL :  Honorable Chairman Sir, the measures being taken i n 
this regard are as follows: Firstly, for the previo us year, which is the final year of the 
14th Finance Commission, there should not be more t han 10 percent of unutilized 
budget and the the second installment will be relea sed after the utilization of 50 
percent of the first installment.  There is an audit for this as well. After that, whe n the 
utilization report is sent online to their portal, we release the money accordingly. 
 
 SHRI RAJIV RANJAN ALIAS LALAN SINGH: Mr. Chairman Sir, I would like to add a 
point in response to the Honorable Minister. One of  the most important criteria criteria 
for transparency is that the accounting of the prev ious financial year of the Panchayat 
should be complete before the current financial yea r - for example, if this is the 
financial year 2024-25, then the accounting for the  financial year 2023-24 of that 
Panchayat should be complete. And the audited accou nts of the previous financial 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
39

 
year should be uploaded on the e-Gram Swaraj portal. Only after that do we release 
the next installment to them based on transparency. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question no. 92. 
 
Poor handling of entrance exams by NTA 
 
*92. SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI : Will the Minister of EDUCATION be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a) the action taken against NTA for its poor handling of recent entrance exams 
including NEET-UG 2024 and UGC-NET; 
(b) whether NTA was set up, without the approval of Parliament of India, under 
the Societies Registration Act only by a decision of Cabinet, if so, the reasons 
therefor; and 
(c) the steps taken to make NTA accountable and answerable to the Parliament 
for its work? 
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN) : (a) to (c)  
A Statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) After the conduct of NEET(UG) 2024 Examination by the National Testing 
Agency (NTA) on 5 th May, 2024, certain cases of alleged irregularities/cheating/ 
malpractices were reported. The Ministry of Education asked the Central Bureau of 
Investigation to conduct a comprehensive investigation into the entire gamut of 
alleged irregularities including conspiracy, cheating, breach of trust etc. w.r.t. the 
NEET (UG) 2024 Examination. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in WP(Civil) 335/2024 
and connected matters vide Order dated 23 rd July, 2024 said that “At the present 
stage, there is an absence of material on the record to lead  to the conclusion that the 
entire result of the examination stands vitiated or  that there was a systemic breach in 
the sanctity of the examination. ”  Further, in compliance of the aforementioned order, 
the revised result of NEET (UG) 2024 Examination has been declared on 26th July, 
2024. 
The matter relating to UGC NET June 2024 examination, which was cancelled 
on receipt of inputs on the integrity of the examination, had also been entrusted to 
[RAJYA SABHA]
40

 
CBI for thorough investigation on 19th June, 2024, in order to ensure the highest level 
of transparency and sanctity of the examination process. 
 Further, in order to suggest effective measures fo r transparent, smooth and 
fair conduct of examinations by NTA, the Ministry o f Education has constituted a 
High-Level Committee of Experts on 22.06.2024 for m aking recommendations on 
Reforms in mechanism of examination process, Improv ement in Data Security 
protocols and Structure and functioning of National  Testing Agency. The Committee 
comprises of the following experts: 
 
1 Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Former Chairman, ISRO and 
Chairman BoG, IIT Kanpur. 
Chairman  
2 Dr. Randeep Gule ria, Former Director, AIIMS Delhi.  Member  
3 Prof. B J Rao, Vice Chancellor, Central University of 
Hyderabad. 
Member  
4 Prof. Ramamurthy K, Professor Emeritus, Department 
of Civil Engineering,  IIT Madras. 
Member  
5 Shri Pankaj Bansal, Co -Founder, People S trong and 
Board Member- Karmayogi Bharat. 
Member  
6 Prof. Aditya Mittal, Dean Student Affairs, IIT Delhi  Member  
7 Shri Govind Jaiswal , Joint Secretary, Ministry of 
Education, Govt. of  India 
Member Secretary  
 
The Committee has also co-opted two more members i. e., Prof. Amey 
Karkare, Professor of Computer Science and Engineer ing, IIT Kanpur and Dr. 
Debapriya Roy, Assistant Professor, IIT Kanpur. The  Terms of Reference of the 
Committee is attached as Annexure . The Hon’ble Supreme Court in WPC 335/2024 
and connected matters, Order dated July 23rd, 2024,  para 23, has said that “the 
committee will abide by such further directions as may be issued by this Court in its 
final judgement and order in regard to areas which should be enquired into by it so as 
to ensure that (i) the process of conducting NEET(U G) and other examinations 
falling within the remit of NTA is duly strengthene d; and (ii) the instances which came 
to light during the course of present year are not repeated in future. ”  
With prior approval of Union Cabinet dated 10 th  November, 2017, NTA was set 
up as an Autonomous Body of Government of India und er the aegis of the then 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (which has b een renamed later as Ministry 
of Education). NTA has been registered on 15 May 20 18 as a Society under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 as a legal entity.  The Central Government has 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
41

 
enacted the Public Examination (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act 2024. Stringent 
provisions have been made in this Act to address unfair means practices in conduct 
of public examinations. It is pertinent to mention that NTA is a Public Examination 
Authority as specified in the Schedule of the said Act, thereby bringing any 
examination conducted by it under the purview of the Act. 
 
Annexure 
 
Terms of Reference of the High Level Committee of Experts 
 
(i) Reform in mechanism of examination process 
 
(a) To analyse the end-to-end examination process and suggest measures to 
improve efficiency of the system and to forestall any possible breach. 
(b) To conduct a thorough review of the Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs)/Protocols of the NTA, and suggest measures to strengthen these 
procedures/protocols along with monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance 
at every level. 
 
(ii) Improvement in Data Security protocols 
 
(a) To evaluate the existing data security processes and protocols of NTA and 
recommend measures for its improvement.  
(b) To examine existing security protocols related to the paper-setting and other 
processes for different examinations and make recommendations to enhance 
robustness of system. 
 
(iii) Structure & Functioning of National Testing Agency 
 
(a) To make recommendations on the organizational structure and functioning of 
the National Testing Agency (NTA) for implementation of recommendations 
given under point 3(i) and 3(ii) and clearly defining the roles and 
responsibilities of functionaries at every level. 
(b)  Assess the current Grievance Redressal Mechanism of the NTA, identify areas 
of improvement and make recommendations for enhancing its efficiency. 
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
42

 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI : Sir, my question was regarding the 
accountability and NTA being answerable to the Parl iament of India.  I haven't got the 
answer but the question that I want to ask as my fi rst supplementary is this.  The 
NEP-2020 specifies the NTA will work to offer a hig h-quality common aptitude test 
which shall aim to eliminate the need for taking co aching for these exams.  Is the 
Government aware that the Common University Entranc e Test, as designed in 
consonance with NEP, has led to the cropping of mor e coaching centres all over the 
country?  What measures are being taken against suc h coaching centres which 
contradict the aim of the exam? 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN :  Mr. Chairman sir, the honorable member has 
raised a fundamental question,  as to whether the N TA is accountable to Parliament 
or not. Mr. Chairman Sir, you have allowed the hon' ble member to ask the question 
and I am answering it; this is parliamentary accoun tability. Similarly, the NTA is also 
accountable to Parliament at various levels.  
 Sir, the second point is that it was suggested in the NEP that it should 
gradually introduce various types of examinations i n the country for students to 
improve exams and enhance its quality.  Based on th is  recommendation, NTA was 
set up in 2017 and took shape in 2018. In the past almost six years, more than 5 crore 
students have appeared successfully in various exam inations and they have passed 
and secured admissions in various institutions as w ell. Sir, up to 250 examinations 
have been conducted so far. With your permission, S ir, I would like to  submit before 
the House that today, nearly 25 crore youth, especi ally those in the aspirational 
society, the neo-middle class are rising above the poverty line. This is a priority in 
everyone's mind and education is the vehicle for progress.  
 Sir, with your kind permission, I would like to gi ve just one example. When 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi took charge of office,  the number of medical seats in 
the country was 50,000-51,000, but in the last ten years, we have increased it to 
1,10,000. Sir, coaching centres are our commitment to address the competition 
among students and youth to do well. There should n ot be government-run coaching 
centers. I have no hesitation in saying that this r equires everyone's support and 
assistance. The quality of education should be so h igh that government schools 
become the main focus. Today our Central Schools an d Navodaya Vidyalayas are 
examples of this. In many States, including your St ate, good education is provided. 
Recently, there was a debate in the House about why  Sikar performed well. Mr. 
Chairman Sir, I subsequently went to Sikar and spok e with eminent figures. You 
 
probably know more about Sikar than I do, that Sika r has been a center of education 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
43

 
since ancient times. Similarly, there are many centers based on state boards where 
education is given high priority. We will have to gradually bring the students of the 
country out of the world of coaching centers while building consensus among 
everyone. We will have to bring them out through legal and social means and for this, 
we need everyone's cooperation. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I think that Priyanka ji asked a very good supplementary question, 
which resulted in such a detailed answer. Priyanka ji, please ask your second 
supplementary question. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI : But I am not satisfied with the answer that he 
has given. Very nice that he mentioned accountability is being  ensured, and that's 
why  he is responding in Parliament. I hope that whoever becomes NTA Chairperson 
in the future will appear before  the Parliamentary Standing Committee and answer all 
these questions in detail.  
Now, I come to my second supplementarySir, does the Government have any data 
which shows that the students are  moving abroad to pursue medical degrees due to 
irregularities in NEET testing, usage of unfair means in examination and low number of 
seats in the Government medical colleges?  What measure has the Government taken 
to avoid this ‘brain drain’? 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Hon'ble Chairman Sir, I have already informed 
respected Priyanka ji that both the NTA and any instrument of the government is 
accountable- incluidng CAG audits, both inside and outside the Parliament. This 
Government has nothing to hide. We rely on this zero theory... Friends who have 
served in previous Governments have tried to bring CAG audits to zero. Sir, we are 
not in that league. We answer with all kinds of accountability and commitment. I have 
just answered their first supplementary that in 2014, there were 51,000 seats in 
medical education in the country. Today, the number of seats is 1,10,000. Our 
Government is committed to open a medical college gradually in each district of the 
country. Therefore, this is an unfounded accusation against us. It is true that the 
number of seats should match the number of aspirig students then ideally it should 
match with the number of aspiring students. Regarding this matter, if my government 
is being told that we have squeezed or reduced the seats, I have already provided the 
explanation. I have presented the facts to you. Mr. Chairman Sir, everyone should 
accept the facts.  
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
44

 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Supplementary no.3 - Shri Manoj Kumar Jha.  
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA:  Honorable Chairman sir, my question is simple and 
straightforward. I have also been associatied with a university. In my department as 
well, admissions are done through CUET. Sir, is the re any mechanism for NTA's 
evaluation? Departments have a specific character, courses have a specific 
character,  whereas the NTA's question papers are entirely objective, lacking subject-
specific inclinations. Is there a consistent system  for monitoring NTA modules in this 
regard? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Honorable Minister, Manoj Jha has asked a supplementary question 
with folded hands.  
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Mr. Chairman, Mr. Manoj Jha is a highly respected 
and learned member of this House. He is also a prof essor himself. Through you, I 
would like to assure him that the NTA is a system t hat conducts examinations, but he 
has raised a good point. The question that arises c omes in the nature of an objective 
question, so whether it can capture the totality of  the subject is their question. I 
accept this but the person who frames the question is also a learned professor like 
Mr. Manoj Jha. Sir, the approach to exams including the pattern, is dynamic in nature  
is in an  evolutation process. The questions are se t in consultation with Manoj Jha Ji 's 
 
team, and will continue to be set in this manner. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : So, Professor, NTA is not an NPA.  It is very much  functional. Now, 
supplementary No. 4 - Shri P. Wilson.  
 
SHRI P. WILSON : Sir, they are against Emergency. Prior to the 42 
nd  Constitution 
Amendment, ‘Education’ was in List-II.  Why don’t y ou think of restoring ‘Education’ 
to List-II, as the State will take localised, contextual, responsible, educational policies 
that cater to diverse needs of our country, includi ng conducting exams for its 
students?  Education should be about nurturing mind s, fostering creativity and 
promoting critical thinking, not about surviving a barrage of exams.  
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN :  Hon. Chairman, Sir, when you respectfully called 
the name of Shri P. Wilson, I was expecting exactly this question from him.   
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
45

 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I thought only our Meteorological Department was very accurate in 
anticipation!  There must be some very good equation between two of you.  
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : He is a good friend of mine.  He has raised a very 
pertinent question.  There are two parts of this question.  One is  political  because  it  
is  the  political  will  and authority which created this arrangement whether this will be 
put in the State List or not, whether this should go to the Concurrent List and what 
should be the responsibility of which Government. 
 Part two of the question is about the quality of the examination and standard of 
the students.  Are they competitive enough to appear in all India tests?  I will answer 
part two of the question first.  He has a point but it is a fact that now-a-days, the way 
examination is conducted, this Government is very much careful about the standards 
and capacity of State Boards.  We respect, we believe that the State Boards have 
their own competency and they are qualitative.  Last year only, a girl student from the 
hon. Member's State, from the rural area, stood first in the NEET All-India Entrance 
Examination.  This shows that in the entire country, students have accepted a model 
which has been practiced by last seven decades.   Part one of the question is, when it 
did come to the Concurrent List.  Mr. Wilson, you are a seasoned politician.  Your 
Party, DMK was part of the ruling alliance for decades in the Centre.  Why didn't you 
correct it, which, according to you, is an anomaly?  According to me, it is a good 
practice. Education should be in the Concurrent list and both the Governments 
should be answerable and accountable to students of the country and both have 
respective roles.The leadership, at one stage, did this. I think, Madam Indira Gandhi, 
when she was the Prime Minister, started this practice. The then Government 
amended the law and put it in the Concurrent List.   It is a good practice till date.  Due 
to this practice, the nature of education is of all India level and there is compatibility in 
the entire country.  Who stopped you not to pursue this with the Congress 
Government to go back to the old system when you were in power during 2004-
2014?  Why are you raising this question now in front of us? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary number 5.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman. 
 
SHRI RAMJI LAL SUMAN : Mr. Chairman, the NEET exam was recently held. It was 
conducted by the NTA....(Interruptions)...  
 
                                        
 Not recorded  
[RAJYA SABHA]
46

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Member...  ...(Interruptions)... No, no.   
 
SHRI RAMJI LAL SUMAN: Sir, ...( Interruptions )... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Member, you have to put your supplementary.  
...(Interruptions)... You have no basis for...  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI RAMJI LAL SUMAN: 
*...( Interruptions )...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Nothing will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 Hon. Member,  I have asserted in the House that the organization has 
unimpeachable credentials.  ...(Interruptions)...  We cannot go in a manner... 
...(Interruptions)...  I take exception to it.  It will not go on record.  
...(Interruptions)... I have said so on the floor of the House.  ...(Interruptions)... We 
cannot go in a manner to make it political.  Please  put your pointed supplementary.  
...(Interruptions)...  Nothing else will go on record.    ...(Interruptions)...   Priyanka 
ji. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record.   Please put your supplementary.   
 
SHRI RAMJI LAL SUMAN: Sir, I am asking ...( Interruptions )... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :    Take your seat ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : Sir, I have great respect for you, because you are the 
guardian of this House, but when a member is speaki ng as per the law, as per the 
rules, unless he violates the rules, it is not right to tell them 'do not say this' or 'do not 
talk about that.'  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Your point is taken. 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : Whatever he is saying, is true ...( Interruptions )...  
When he speaks  the truth, ...( Interruptions )...  When he speaks the truth,, 
...( Interruptions )...  He is telling the truth, he will answer that. ...( Interruptions )...  No,  it 
is not good ...( Interruptions )...    
 
                                        
* Not recorded. 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
47

 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Sir, please take your seat.  You have made your point.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: They are misusing you....(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have made your point.  Please  …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : This is not good. ...( Interruptions)... This is not 
good. ...(Interruptions)... Whatever he is saying is true and there is nothing wrong in 
it. ...(Interruptions)... 
  OBSERVATION BY THE CHAIR  MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, take your seat.  …(Interruptions)… He has raised an issue.  Allow me to speak. …(Interruptions)… What is this?  …(Interruptions)… Take your seat.  Hon. Members, the Leader of the Opposition, …(Interruptions)…   Allow the Chair to speak.    He has raised the point related to me.  The Leader of the Opposition has, in a sense, indicated to the Chair that I have transgressed the rules by objecting to the Member.  I am, therefore, obliged to respond to it.  …(Interruptions)…  Take your seat.  Hon. Leader of the Opposition says that I can intervene when there is transgression of rules, but if a Member is speaking within the rules, I should not intervene.  I agree with that.  But here, the Member was not transgressing the rules.  He was trampling the Constitution of India.  I say it, for this reason. …(Interruptions)…  An organisation, I have said, is fully entitled. …(Interruptions)…  RSS is an organisation which is a global think tank of the highest order.  …(Interruptions)… I will not permit hon. Member to single out an organisation which is doing national service.  I will not countenance it.  …(Interruptions)… No, hon. Members.  …(Interruptions)… This is violation of the Constitution.  We have to believe in the Constitution.  Every organisation has a right to it.  Under our Fundamental Rights, under Part III of the Constitution, organisations have rights.  …(Interruptions)… No.  Nothing will go on record.  …(Interruptions)… I declare here that the hon. Member raised the issue which is not only against the rules, but which is also against the Constitution of India.  Hon. Member may confine to the rules.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  This will not happen.  …(Interruptions)… Nothing will go on record.  You may make it a political issue.  Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, I object.  It is expunged.  Under Part III of the Constitution, this 
[RAJYA SABHA]
48

 
organisation, RSS, has all the rights to contribute  for national growth, for national 
development. …(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
Hon. Members, I had the occasion from this Chair …(Interruptions)…   Either 
take your seat or take recourse.  Hon. Members, I h ereby rule that RSS is an 
organisation that has full constitutional rights to participate in the development journey 
of this nation.  This organisation bears unimpeacha ble credentials, comprises of 
people who are deeply committed to serving the nati on selflessly. To take exception 
that a member of this organisation cannot participa te in the development journey of 
the nation is not only unconstitutional but also beyond the rules.  Our rules prescribe a 
methodology.  I, therefore, do not allow the hon. M ember to raise this issue.  The 
hon. Member has chosen not to ask further supplementary.   
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI :  Sir,...( Interruptions )..  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Member, take your seat.  I don't want to nam e you.  Take 
your seat.  I have said this and this is not for th e first time.  I am only reiterating this.  
The nation needs to get benefit ...(Interruptions)...   Would you take your seat?  Or 
should I name you?  ...(Interruptions)...   Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi.  Hon. 
Members, 1.4 billion people have to make contributi on for the growth of this nation.  
Every organisation associated with the development of the nation should come 
forward.  It is soothing to note, it is wholesome t o note that the RSS as an 
organisation has been contributing for national wel fare and our culture.  Everyone 
should, as a matter of fact, take pride in any orga nisation which is acting in this 
manner.  Now, Question No.93.  But before that, let me tell you, hon. Members, if we 
take exception like this, it is indicative of undem ocratic situations.  It is antithetical to 
the Preamble of our Constitution.  We are doing gre at disservice to the nation and the 
Constitution by taking such divisive stance.  I fin d that people are increasingly 
engaging in divisive activities.  This is a pernicious design, a sinister mechanism to run 
down the growth of the country.  I have reflected o n several occasions that attempts 
are being made within the country and outside to ta int, tarnish and demean our 
institutions, constitutional institutions.  It need s to be deprecated by all of us.  If we 
fail to do it, our silence on this occasion will re sonate in our ears in years to come.  
After thoughtfully taking into consideration consti tutional essence, constitutional spirit 
and rules of the House, I rule that any such observ ation is not only offensive to the 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
49

 
Constitution but offensive to the growth trajectory of the nation.  Any organisation, 
including the RSS, is duly entitled to contribute to the journey of this nation.  
Now, Question No.93.  Shri Samik Bhattacharya. 
  Progress of expressways in West Bengal   *93.  SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: Will the Minister of ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS be pleased to state:  (a) the current status of the Kharagpur-Burdwan-Moregram Expressway, Gorakhpur-Siliguri Expressway, Varanasi-Kolkata Expressway and Raxual-Haldia Expressway passing through West Bengal; (b) whether the land acquisition process has been completed for the West Bengal stretch of these expressways; (c) the percentage of work completed for each of these four expressways in West Bengal; and (d) whether there are any other expressways planned for development in West Bengal?   THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS (SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House.    Statement  (a) to (c) DPRs for Kharagpur – Burdwan - Moregram, Gorakhpur - Siliguri, Varanasi - Kolkata  and Raxaul - Haldia High Speed Corridors have been awarded. The award of civil work can be after the completion of DPR, statutory clearances and pre-construction activities depending upon projected traffic, techno - economic viability, availability of funds and inter-se-priority.   (d) Development of National Highways is a continuous process. Ministry keeps on receiving proposals from various State Governments including West Bengal for declaration/upgradation/development of NHs/Expressways. Decisions are taken based on the fulfilment of the criteria, requirement of connectivity, inter-se priority and availability of funds and synergy with PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan.   
[RAJYA SABHA]
50

 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA :  Sir, through you, I want to know this from the 
Minister.  My question is regarding progress of fou r proposed expressways in West 
Bengal.  Can the Ministry provide projected timelin es for the completion of the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR), statutory clearances  and pre-construction activities 
for the four expressways in West Bengal?  And are t here any land acquisition 
challenges related to their construction?   
 
SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA: Hon’ble Chairman sir, the answ er has already been 
provided. These four national highways are currently in the DPR stage. It takes time to 
finalize alignments and obtain some clearances from  the state government. The DPR 
work is also underway. Detailed projections will be  provided to you once the DPR is 
complete. 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA :  Sir, the Varanasi-Kolkata Expressway currently 
terminates at Uluberia in Howrah district.   Whethe r the government has made any 
efforts to extend this route not only to Howrah but  also to Kolkata? Along with this, I 
would also like to know the extent of cooperation b eing provided from by the  
government of West Bengal? What is the role of the West Bengal government in these 
four proposed expressways in West Bengal? Especiall y, what is the role of the West 
Bengal government in the Varanasi to Kolkata expres sway? There is a major problem 
regarding land acquisition in West Bengal.The West Bengal Government is not ready 
to acquire land. ...(Interruptions)...    So, I want to know: What is the actual reality o f 
this project?  
 
SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA: Hon’ble Chairman sir, the work  for the Varanasi-Kolkata 
National Highway, covering the stretch from Varanas i to Bokaro in Jharkhand, has 
already been award because the clearances from the state were received in time. It is 
scheduled to be extended further to Kolkata but alignment approval was delayed, and 
now it has been finalized. It is currently in the DPR stage, and work will begin once the 
necessary government approvals are received. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Supplementary no.3; Ms. Dola Sen.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Chairman Sir, we would like to clarif y at the outset that there is no 
problem regarding land acquisition in West Bengal. ...(Interruptions )...    
  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
51

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Member is asking a 
supplementary. Please listen to her.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Our leader Mamata Banerjee ji had also carried out a fasting 
movement for 26 days regarding land acquisition. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Madam, please ask your supplementary.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN: twice in this Parliament....(Interruptions)...    MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, she is asking her supplementary.   MS. DOLA SEN: Due to this, the colonial Land Acquisition Act was amended twice. We are grateful to her.  Sir, through you, I want to ask the Minister: Is the Central Government following and obeying federal structure in coordination with the State Government, especially regarding land acquisition process over there?  I also want to know whether the unorganised workers under these projects are getting minimum Central wage according to the law of the land.   SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA:  Honorable Chairman sir, land acquisition is carried out under the National Highways Act. The central government has established an online portal, named"Bhoomi Rashi," which has made the process of land acquisition easier and this job is the  part of Central Government. While the CALAs are appointed by the Central Government, they are state officials, and therefore, the state officials are responsible for the rest of the process. Therefore, the State Government is responsible for the greater part of of land acquisition process. Yes, after launching the "Bhoomi Rashi" portal, we've been able to expedite the central government's role in land acquisition. Previously, land acquisition took about a year and a half, but now, thanks to the "Bhoomi Rashi" portal, it takes much less time. From Section 3A to the disbursement of the amount, we handle it through the 'Bhoomi Rashi' portal. The majority of this is handled by the State Government. All workers are provided minimum wages as per the State labour laws.    MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary no.4; Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha.   SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA: Honorable Chairman sir, there is an important expressway that runs from Gorakhpur to Sitamarhi, Madhubani, Patna, Kishanganj, 
[RAJYA SABHA]
52

 
and all the way to Siliguri. A letter issued by the  department on May 31 refered to this 
as a high-speed corridor. I would like to ask the M inister through you that when the 
DPR for this project will be prepared and by when t he construction will be completed. 
It was also mentioned in that letter that a nodal o fficer will be appointed by the 
department for this work. Therefore, Honorable Mini ster, kindly shed some light on 
this matter.   
 
SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA : Hon’ble  Chairman Sir , I will provide detailed information to 
the hon’ble member. By the way, the DPR for this ha s just started. DPR is the first 
stage, followed by alignment and then land acquisit ion, so the further information will 
be provided after this stage.  
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Fifth supplementary, Shrimati Sulata Deo. 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO: Thank you, sir. Sir, the quest ion asked is about West 
Bengal, but I would like to ask you about Odisha th rough you that there has been a 
long-pending demand for our Cuttack-Angul National Highway-55. Why has it not 
been completed? It has become a death trap. Almost all our MPs from Odisha have 
raised this question, when will National Highway-55  be completed? When will people 
 
be freed from this death trap? 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister. 
 
SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA : Hon’ble Chairman Sir, this is not within the purvi ew of 
today's question, I will provide detailed information about this to the Hon’ble Member. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Q.No.94, Dr. John Brittas.  
 
“Professors of Practice ” in higher educational institutions 
 
*94. DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Will the Minister of EDUCATION be pleased to state : 
 
(a) whether reservation policy is applicable for en gagements as “Professors of 
Practice ” in the higher educational institutions recently in troduced by UGC as 
per National Education Policy 2020; 
(b) if not, the reasons therefor; 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
53

 
(c) the number of persons belonging to SC, ST and OBC categories engaged as 
“Professors of Practice ” till date or still being engaged in various higher 
educational institutions; and 
(d) the State-wise details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN) : (a) to (d)  
A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) The National Education Policy 2020 seeks to transform higher education by 
focusing on skill-based education to meet the needs of the industry and the 
economy. Further, the NEP also recommends integrating vocational education with 
general education and strengthening industry-academia collaboration in Higher 
Education Institutes (HEIs).   Towards this end, the University Grants Commission 
(UGC) has taken a new initiative to bring the industry and other professional expertise 
into the academic institutions through “Professor of Practice ”. UGC has framed 
Guidelines for engaging Professor of Practice in Universities and Colleges on 
30.09.2022. 
 The post of Professor of Practice is a temporary post, exclusive of sanctioned 
post. Further, candidates who have proven expertise in their specific profession or 
role with at least 15 years of service /experience, preferably at a senior level, are 
eligible for Professor of Practice. For engaging industry experts and professionals, 
HEIs may collaborate with the industries to support these positions. It also provides 
an opportunity, to those in leadership positions in different fields, to come on 
honorary basis as Professor of Practice so as to give back to the society and 
contribute towards nation building.  
 In order to bring in distinguished experts from various fields of engineering, 
science, technology, entrepreneurship etc. and to develop courses and curriculum to 
meet the industry and societal needs and to enable the HEIs to work with industry 
experts on joint research project, concept of Professor of Practice has been adopted, 
and thereby provide exposure and mentorship to students by domain experts. 
 The maximum duration of service of Professor of Practice at a given institution 
should not exceed three years and is extendable by one year in exceptional cases and 
the total service should not exceed four years under any circumstances. 
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
54

 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Sir, this is a very important question.  We all k now the hon. 
Minister.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  A Professor is sitting next to you.   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Yes, Sir.  I am influenced and inspired by him.  We all know 
that Dharmendra ji  is very intelligent, sensible and also part of the  global think tank.  
But I do not know why he is so evasive towards my q uestion.  My question has been 
very simple.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Would you ask your supplementary?    
  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  This is just to formulate it.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  No, please ask supplementary.   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  It is of interest to you also.  UGC has started " Professors of 
Practice". 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Member! 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : My question was that there should be social inclus ivity, social 
orientation for the academics.  Is it a fact that w hen you are reserving ten per cent of 
the academic posts for "Professors of Practice", wi ll you not bring in the content of 
reservation for SC/ST and OBC? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Dr. John Brittas.  
  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Sir,that is the question.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Yes, good.  Hon. Minister, he paid a compliment a nd then partly 
withdrew it.  Now, see that it is restored.   
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Sir, this is a democracy, and the opposition has 
certain rights. It is natural that they will not ag ree on all subjects, they have a specific 
way of raising their issues. We have no objection i f members of the opposition raise 
any matter, we would like to answer in accordance with the parliamentary practice. 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
55

 
 Hon’ble Chairman Sir, "Professors of Practice" is a major recommendation of 
the National Education Policy. In our country today, there is a consensus that we 
need to give importance to competency along with degrees. Prime Minister Narendra 
Modi says that for us, competency is just as important as a degree. Taking education 
towards employability, towards entrepreneurship, therefore there is a fundamental 
foundational requirement for a strong relationship and a strong network between 
industry and academia in our country. "Professors of Practice" is not a permanent 
post, it is a tenure-based post, and there is no 10 percent reservation. An individual 
who is need-based—like Mr. John Brittas, who is an authority in Mass 
Communication, has scholarship, came to the House here, and has made his own 
way to present his views, which influences everyone. Would any university in Kerala or 
any other university in the country want John Brittas to come here, earn 6 credit 
points on the credit rating system, and teach for three months a year? Sir, shouldn't 
those students benefit from John Brittas's scholarship and experience? This is the 
basic concept of "Professors of Practice." It does not involve any permanent 
posting, it is tenure-based . Sir, recently there were discussions about who has been 
appointed as "Professors of Practice." Sir, I have some information. A university in 
Odisha appointed ten tribal individuals and all these tribal people are experienced and 
have 15, 20, and 25 years of experience of social work, as Professors of Practice. To 
take our country a little forward, even if my sister Priyanka laughs at my scholarship 
and I become the subject of her laughter, let us all come together on this matter, 
Priyanka ji, you ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon’ble Minister ji..., 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: I would like to be the subject of your laughter, but in 
this country, there needs to be a consensus on quality so that everyone in the house 
make arrangements for studying public policy at their universities or colleges. My 
friend Sasmit Patra doesn't even greet me these days. He is a professor. I repeatedly 
explain to him … (Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have changed the weather. 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Sir, I repeatedly request them to go and teach. 
Share the scholarship of this Rajya Sabha with any university. Members of their party, 
like Sujit Kumar, teach, he is a Professor of Practice. When Shri John Brittas 
mentioned reservations, we often read in newspapers, including the Indian Express, 
[RAJYA SABHA]
56

 
that there are no reservations in the CPI(M) Politb uro either. Mr. John Brittas, 
reservations don't seem to apply to everything. 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Second supplementary; Dr. John Brittas. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, he has made some political statements. I do no t know 
because, he is a very honourable... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I urge you to ask your supplementary so that we 
can ...(Interruptions)... Go ahead. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, he has made a political statement. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Priyanka ji , my problem is that the hon. Minister, instead of looking 
at the Chair, was looking at you.   I am the person  who should be taking exception. 
...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. Dr. John Brittas, ask y our 
supplementary. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, Priyanka ji  is coming between hon. Minister and myself, that 
is very unfortunate.  Sir, my second supplementary is this. Hon. Minister should 
understand that even as per the scheme of UGC, ther e is a provision for bringing 
expertise to the campus. There are visiting faculti es.  You can bring the experts for 
lectures. Even earlier, UGC used to fund such thing s. So I would say, There is no 
shortage for that. Now the point is that almost 26 per cent of the academic posts are 
vacant and 46 per cent of other posts are vacant no w.  Now you are reserving 
another ten per cent.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : What is your supplementary? 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, my supplementary is: When there is unemploymen t 
amongst the educated youth and vacancies still exis t, don't you think that it is going 
to create a havoc?  Second thing is that there are provisions for internships in 
industry. 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Sir, Mr. John Britas's statement that someone is 
occupying existing posts is not correct. It is actu ally about accommodating 
experience. As far as filling vacancies is concerne d, that is a separate matter, but 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
57

 
with your permission, I would like to say in one word that this is a continuous process. 
The Indian Government has filled approximately 40,000 vacant positions in the 
education department over the past four to five years. Bringing experienced 
individuals to IITs and higher research institutions has been a tradition in the country. 
This Professor of Practice is a humble effort to further expand this process. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Supplementary No. 3. Shri Sanjeev Arora; not present. 
Supplementary No. 4; Dr. Fauzia Khan. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN :  Sir, as the hon. Minister has said that these professors of 
practice bring valuable expertise from relevant industries into the classroom, I agree 
with that.  But, I would like to ask how many women professors of practice are 
currently employed across Government educational institutions compared to their 
male counterparts.  What mechanisms are in place to ensure that more women are 
inducted into these positions, particularly, in STEM education sectors, and 
additionally, are there any guidelines or initiatives in place to encourage the 
recruitment of professors of practice to fill existing vacancies? 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN :  Sir, to fill up the vacancies through Professor of 
Practice as you have appreciated, to bring expertise all together, bring experience, 
bring new ideas, we have to go by the Professor of Practice route.  Regarding 
quantum of women, I have an information of 10 personalities, 10 Professor of Practice 
that out of the 10, 5 are from women category.  So, this is up to the need of that 
particular institution, seeing the aptitude and capacity of the person.  The 
Government has no interference, whether there should be any quantum of any 
gender.  It is open.  This is a policy guidance given by UGC.  The local universities are 
competent enough to do that. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary; Shri Jawhar Sircar. 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR :  Sir, through you, I would like to ask the Minister, a  very 
pertinent question relating to education.  As you know, the UGC rules have been 
made to apply to every organisation that is deemed to be a university.  The problem 
arises when we get non-academic universities like those teaching theatres, those 
teaching dances and other forms. What happens in it, there are people who are 
specialized in say, electric lighting, in various trades, who are absolutely less 
qualified.  But, throughout the lives, they will  be  treated  in  a  demeaning  manner. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
58

 
Can they avail of this opportunity to be upgraded a nd deserve the respect of a 
Professor of Practice? Those technician who have mo re virtue and more experience 
in dealing with cultural subjects, can they please be accommodated under such 
scheme?  They should be respected. 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Hon’ble  Chairman Sir, I express my gratitude to 
the respected member of this House, Jawahar Sircar,  who, in his suggestion and 
through a supplementary question, reiterated the de finition of Professor of Practice, 
this is the objective. In various types of studies in social life, there is the applied part, 
the practical part, about which I said in the begin ning that our country's education 
system has become degree-centric, not competency-ba sed. He asked, "Would you 
give social dignity to those competent people as well?" Exactly, Mr. Sircar, this is our 
objective. We should lead all such experienced peop le towards a social dignity. That 
is also a major objective in the objective of Professor of Practice. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Now, Question No. 95. 
 
Capacity building and training of investigators 
 
†*95. SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR : Will the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be pleased to 
state :  
 
(a) whether there is any provision for capacity bui lding and training of 
investigators and prosecutors handling cases of sex ual assault against 
women and children under the Women Safety Schemes; 
(b) if so, the details of the number of investigato rs and prosecutors trained 
therefore; and 
(c) the category of persons who would be trained under this provision? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAI RS (SHRI BANDI 
SANJAY KUMAR) : (a) to (c) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
                                        
† Original notice of the question was received in Hindi.  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
59

 
(a) to (c) Yes sir. In order to address the necessity for capacity building of 
manpower in forensic sciences, MHA is undertaking training for Investigating Officers, 
Prosecutors, and Medical Officers from States/UTs in collection, storage and 
handling of DNA evidence and use of Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits. So far 
32,177 Investigating Officers, Prosecutors and Medical Officers have been trained by 
the Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) and the LNJN National 
Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sciences (now Delhi campus of the National 
Forensic Sciences University). The Ministry of Home Affairs has also distributed 18020 
Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits to the States/UTs as part of this training. 
 
SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR : Hon’ble Chairman Sir, through you I would like to know 
from the Honourable Minister the total outlay of all the schemes currently being run for 
the Women Safety Division? 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon’ble Minister.  
 
SHRI BANDI SANJAY KUMAR:  Hon’ble Chairman Sir, I would like to point out that 
women's safety is a very important issue. Therefore, as directed by our Honourable 
Prime Minister, the Ministry of Home Affairs, under the leadership of our Hon’ble 
Home Minister, has granted  a total outlay of  rupees 13,412 crore to implement all the 
schemes and projects of the Women's Safety Division. Hon’ble Chairman Sir, the 
details are as follow- rupees 3,375 crore for the interoperable criminal justice system 
and rupees 531.24 crore for the emergency response support system. Rupees 2,080 
crore for Scheme for modernisation of Forensics, 950 crore for modernisation of 
prisons, rupees 106.75 crore for strengthening of State Forensics Science 
Laboratories, rupees 354.25 crore for upgradation of Central Forensic Science 
laboratories and forensic data centres including six national cyber forensics 
laboratories and residential buildings, rupees 2,840 crore for safe city project, 76.5 
crore for training and capacity building, rupees 60 crore for Scheme for poor 
prisoners, 113.76 crore for Anti-human trafficking unit, rupees 164.2 crore for women 
help desk, 42.84 crore for Establishment of DNA labs in Chandigarh, rupees 224.76 
crore for Cyber Crime Prevention against Women and Children (CCPWC), rupees 
200 crore for central victim compensation fund, rupees 38.80 crore for Delhi police 
scheme for providing facility of social workers, counsellors, new building with 
women-centric facilities, special unit for women and children, rupees 2,254 crore for 
the national forensic infrastructure investment scheme... (Interruptions).   
ONE HON’BLE MEMBER: You listen... (Interruptions)... you will have to answer this. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
60

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please, please, observe order. 
 
SHRI BANDI SANJAY KUMAR : Hon’ble  Chairman Sir, th us, with the approval of the 
Home Minister, the Ministry of Home Affiairs has al located funds of Rs. 13,412 crore 
for  various schemes for the safety of our mothers, sisters and daughters. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Neeraj Shekhar, you ask your supplementary question. 
 
SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR : Hon’ble Chairman Sir, I would like to express my gratitude 
to the Hon’ble Minister for giving us such a detailed answer.  
           Sir, my second question is, what major d evelopments have taken place in the 
Department of Forensic Science regarding women's safety over the past ten years?  
SHRI BANDI SANJAY KUMAR:  Hon’ble Chairman Sir, under the leadership of the 
Honourable Prime Minister, the Government has made significant developments in 
the Department of Forensic Science for women's safe ty in the last ten years. Details 
are as follows: 617 mobile forensic units, 32 State  FSLs, and 97 regional forensic 
science laboratories. Sir, three CFSLs have been es tablished in Pune, Bhopal, and 
Assam. The Chandigarh, Kolkata, and Hyderabad CFSLs  have been upgraded. The 
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2018 makes it mandatory  to complete the investigation 
and file a charge sheet in rape cases within two mo nths. 827 anti-human trafficking 
units have been established, under training and cap acity building, 32,177 
Investigation officers, prosecution officers, medic al officers have been trained. 
National Forensic Science Universities have been es tablished in Gandhi Nagar, Delhi 
and 5 new campuses in Goa, Tripura, Dharwad, Guwaha ti and Bhopal. 1 crore 
fingerprints have been collected under the National  Automated fingerprint 
identification system. Women help desks have been e stablished in 13,939 police 
stations. Hon’ble Chairman Sir, with the establishm ent of women help desks, police 
stations have become more women-friendly. Now this is the first and single point of 
contact for any woman visiting the police station. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : He is giving information. 
 
SHRI BANDI SANJAY KUMAR: 13,939 women help desks in  police stations. 
(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI RANJEET RANJAN: Hon’ble Chairman Sir, ...(Interruptions)...  
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
61

 
MR. CHAIRMAN  : You sit. Hon’ble Minister, you speak. 
 
 SHRI BANDI SANJAY KUMAR : Sir, investigation is assisted by law enforcement 
agencies, police, IB, NIA, ED etc. 
         Sexual assault evidence collection kits are being used to gather evidence in 
sexual crimes. An inter-operable criminal justice system has been established, 
connecting the police, courts, jails, forensic labs, and prosecution, and all these 
departments share data with each other. Since August 2022... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question Hour is over. ...(Interruptions)... 
  1.00 P.M.  CALLING ATTENTION TO MATTER OF URGENT PUBLIC IMPORTANCE  The situation arising out of devastating landslide in Wayanad district in the  State of Kerala  MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, now, we will take up the Calling Attention to Matter of Urgent Public Importance.  Shri Arun Singh and Dr. John Brittas to call the attention of the Minister of Home Affairs to the situation arising out of devastating landslide in Wayanad district in the State of Kerala. Shri Arun Singh.  SHRI ARUN SINGH (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, I would like to draw the attention of the Minister of Home Affairs to the situation arising out of the devastating landslide in Wayanad district of Kerala State.  
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Arun Singhji, as per practice and rules, first, you only have to draw the attention of the hon. Minister. You have drawn that attention.  Hon. Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Shri Nityanand Rai, to make the statement.  
[RAJYA SABHA]
62
https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
 [Written answers  to Starred and Un-starred Questions are available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha website under the link ] 

 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAI RS (SHRI NITYANAND 
RAI) :  Hon’ble Chairman Sir, many honourable members have requested you to 
express their views, after listening to their views I will tell you in this regard. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I will, now, call upon the Members to make their c ontributions.  Shri 
Arun Singh may continue now. 
 
SHRI ARUN SINGH : Sir, four villages in Kerala's Wayanad district ha ve been 
completely swept away by a landslide. This is a hea rtbreaking incident. We express 
our condolences to those who died and pray for the speedy recovery of those injured. 
Sir, this incident occurred between 2 AM and 6 AM, early in the morning, on Tuesday. 
As soon as this incident of landslide came to light , the Honourable Prime Minister 
immediately spoke with the Chief Minister of Kerala , Mr. Pinarayi Vijayan. He assured 
him that the central Government would provide all p ossible assistance. The 
Honourable Prime Minister has announced a grant of 200,000 rupees for those who 
died. Sir, a grant of 200,000 rupees has been annou nced for those who died, and a 
grant of 50,000 rupees has also been announced for those who were injured. In 
addition, the NDRF team is also involved in the res cue operations, and the army 
helicopters are also deployed. Army personnel are a lso involved in this work. Sir, the 
Prime Minister's PMO office is continuously monitor ing this situation, and the 
Honourable Minister of Home Affairs is constantly i n touch with the rescue team for 
 
this task and also continuously communicating with the state Government about  
saving the lives of the stranded people. Sir, I wou ld like to inform that this incident, 
which occurred suddenly early in the morning and th e rescue team operations began 
immediately .  More than 400 people have been rescu ed, and the rescue operation is 
still going on. A short while ago, I spoke with our  party's Kerala president, who 
informed me that the Honourable Prime Minister had sent our minister, Kurien, there. 
Our party's state unit president, K. Surendran, is also contributing in this work. Along 
with him, many volunteers are also engaged in this work. Members of Seva Bharati 
are also involved. Sir, I would like to point out t hat states have adequate SDRF funds. 
The SDRF fund from 2005-06 to 2013-14 was rupees 35 ,858 crore, meant to deal with 
such disasters. In comparison, if we look at the ni ne-year tenure, from 2014-15 to 
2022-23, the SDRF has increased threefold, to ₹ 1,04,704 crore, under the leadership 
of the Hon’ble Prime Minister. 
 If we look at the last nine years regarding the NDR F, from 2005-06 to 2014-15, 
only rupees 25,036 crore was allocated to the NDRF.  Under the leadership of the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister, rupees 77,731 crore were an nounced for this fund, meaning 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
63

 
three times more funding was announced, so that the maximum number of people 
could be provided relief. On July 12, 2023, the central Government announced and 
released rupees 7,532 crore for the SDRF, so that in the event of such a disaster, the 
state could take immediate action and rescue people. A large amount has also been 
announced for Kerala. Even the 15th Finance Commission has said that more money 
is needed to prevent such incidents, hence the Central Government will sanction 
rupees 1 lakh 28 thousand crore from 2021-22 to 2025-26, so that more and more 
people can be saved in this way. 
 Sir, I would like to point out that the Honourable Prime Minister announced the 
National Disaster Management Plan in June 2016 and established the NDMA within 
the National Disaster Management Plan. Its objective is to integrate all agencies, 
whether central or state, to work together during such times. Additionally, on June 
13, 2023, our Home Minister convened a meeting on state and union territory disaster 
management. ...( Time bell rings )... An announcement of rupees 8,000 crore was 
made. Furthermore, the Honourable Prime Minister and the Central Government have 
made  several announcements to tackle such situations. This is what I would like to 
present before the House. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Next, Dr. John Brittas.  You have three minutes.  But, I give you 
five minutes. Go ahead!   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) :  Sir, I express my profound gratitude for allowing this 
Calling Attention Motion. With profound grief, I am participating in this discussion.  
Given the magnitude of the disaster, which Wayanad has witnessed, it is necessary to 
declare this tragedy as a ‘national disaster’.   
 Sir, the other day, I listened to the response of the hon. Minister.  And, the 
response is that there is no provision to declare it as a ‘national disaster’.  I would 
plead with the hon. Home Minister to please understand the extent of this tragedy.  It 
is the worst landslide that has occurred in Kerala. The Kerala Government , with the 
cooperation of the agencies of the Union Government , is doing everything possible to 
give relief to the people. As you would appreciate, there are three stages – rescue, 
relief, and rehabilitation.  Now, the focus is on ‘rescue’.  The death toll has gone up 
to 157.  And, we fear more deaths.  There are many people who have gone missing.  I 
would submit that some of the dead bodies were found in neighbouring district. So, 
the radius of this tragedy is huge.  So, we have to deploy all sorts of devices to 
ensure that the rescue operation has got a magnitude of covering areas, which are 
beyond this district.  Sir, we have been pleading with the Government of India to 
[RAJYA SABHA]
64

 
provide relief to the State of Kerala.  For the inf ormation of the House, during the last 
seven years, 3,782 landslides occurred in the count ry. And, out of that, 2,239 were in 
Kerala alone.  
 About 60 per cent of the landslides happened in Ker ala. That is why, when I 
was participating in the Budget discussion, I had e xpressed my reservation to the 
propositions of the Finance Minister when she menti oned only a few names of the 
States.   I would urge upon the hon. Home Minister to see that there is ample 
assistance provided at this need of hour. We have o pened up 45 relief camps in 
Wayanad.  There are around 4,000 people in the camp s. Various agencies, I would 
say, the people, cutting across all the political a ffiliations, are extending their support 
to give relief to the people.  Two temporary hospit als have been set up in Wayanad 
alone.  Forces including fire force, the NDRF and p olice are working together in 
tandem.  I would also compliment and also express m y gratitude to the Central 
Government for providing the help of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, which are 
being utilized for these rescue operations.   About  163 people have been officially 
declared as dead.  But, as I told you in the beginn ing, we feel that the number will go 
up.  Almost 250 people are still missing.  It is ve ry difficult to take out the bodies 
because of the debris that has heaped on these plac es.  Sir, I have a request to you.  
Last time, in 2018, we had a flood, very bad flood,  the worst flood in this Century.  At 
that time, the Union Government had provided relief  but even for the relief, the Union 
Government had charged Kerala State the money which  was spent by the Air Force 
and also the money which was provided for rice, wer e demanded from Kerala 
Government .  I would urge upon the hon. Home Minis ter that such things should not 
happen.  Please consider this is the disaster of th is nation.  Please extend your 
helping hand. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Thank you, hon. Member. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I now call upon the Members whose names have been r eceived for 
seeking their intervention.   Members may restrict their speech to three minutes each 
while raising the situation.   Now, Shrimati Jebi M ather Hisham, you have three 
minutes. 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala) : Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir, for giving 
me an opportunity to speak on the catastrophic Wayanad landslide.  As I stepped into 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
65

 
the Parliament now, I received a phone call.  All I could hear was the cries and 
screams and the tears of Shobhna Soman.  She lost her mother, her brother, 
Sudevan, brother’s wife and their two children.   Five members from one family, the 
home and the hopes and  everything has swept away. The magnitude of this 
catastrophe is again, I reiterate, beyond measurable.  I implore the Government to 
declare this as a national disaster.  Why do I say so?  That is because this is 
something which has affected the villages, the bridges, the roads, the houses and the 
families. They have to start their lives from zero.  Earlier, we have had instances 
where Sikkim earthquake and Ladakh floods have all been under national disaster. 
Also, we have to have a mapping of that. It is also important that we prevent such 
instances from happening by having early warning system, early alerting system and 
mapping of such areas.  The compensation of Rupees two lakhs, which has been 
provided, is very less. We should provide a compensation of Rs. 25 lakhs.  I 
appreciate all the efforts of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and all other authorities 
who are working there tirelessly, doing everything possible, whatever it takes, to bring 
back Wayanad to normalcy and save people.  But, it is also important to say: Do we 
have a warning system? Do we have an alert system? Do we have a system of 
coordinated efforts?  The fact is, we do not have a warning system.   We are living in 
the age of NASA – the IPCC Report – we are living in the age of Artificial Intelligence, 
but when such heavy rains happen, the mud becomes weak.  Do we have a system?  
The Opposition, one-and-a-half years ago, brought a Resolution in Kerala Assembly 
demanding all this.   But, unfortunately, we have not learnt from the Ockhi, we have 
not learnt from Tsunami and we have not learnt from floods. 
 The fact is, we have to have coordinated efforts to have alarm system, the 
warning signals and coordinated efforts of all Departments.  ...(Time-bell rings)...  
But from the bottom of my heart, I again say, please declare this as a national disaster 
and provide adequate compensation to the families who have lost everything. Thank 
you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Raghav Chadha; three minutes.  
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab): Sir, I stand before you today with a heavy heart to 
mourn the tragic loss of lives due to the catastrophic landslide in Wayanad.  
Yesterday, nature unleashed its fury, and, in an instant, several families were torn 
apart. The serene hills of Wayanad which once brought joy and peace now echo with 
the cries of those who have lost their loved ones. To the people of Wayanad, I, on 
behalf of my party, offer our deepest condolences. Your pain is immeasurable and 
[RAJYA SABHA]
66

 
your loss is shared by every citizen of this nation . As we grapple with the enormity of 
this disaster, let us stand in unwavering solidarit y with the affected families. Let us 
assure them that they are not alone in this grief a nd we are with them and we will 
support them through this darkest hour.   
 Sir, it is imperative that we respond to this disa ster with the urgency and the 
compassion it demands.  I call the attention of the  hon. Minister towards the 
desperate need to allocate an appropriate relief pa ckage to the State of Kerala. This 
package should not only provide immediate financial  assistance to the affected 
families but also support the long-term rehabilitat ion and reconstruction efforts.  We 
must ensure that the survivors have access to safe housing, medical care and 
psychological support to help them rebuild their lives.  
 Sir, I also seek the attention of the Government t owards some suggestions to 
prepare ourselves for such unfortunate incidents in  the future. First, strengthen early 
warning systems; second, improve infrastructure res ilience; third, conduct 
community training; fourth, enhance inter-agency co ordination; and fifth, provide 
comprehensive rehabilitation.  
 Sir, I feel that this is certainly not the time fo r political differences or regional 
biases.  This is a moment for unity, for coming tog ether as one nation to protect and 
support our citizens.  We owe it to those who have perished and to those who have 
lost their homes and loved ones to create a system that minimizes the impact of such 
disasters in future.  
 And lastly, Sir, let us honour the memory of those  who lost in Wayanad by 
committing ourselves to building a safer and a more  resilient India. Let their sacrifice 
not go in vain and let it be a catalyst for change. Thank you.        
                                                                     
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Saket Gokhale.  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal) : Sir, I first wish to thank you for constructively 
taking the suggestion of the Opposition and allowin g this Calling Attention Motion. 
This week we have had one Calling Attention, we hav e had one Short Duration 
Discussion and I fervently hope that this positive trend continues in the weeks to 
come.  
 Sir, first, I would like to start by paying my con dolences to the families of all 
those who have been affected by this horrible disaster in Wayanad and prayers for the 
ones who are still trapped, who are still being res cued.  I also wish to extend my 
prayers to our brave security forces who are workin g in extremely difficult conditions 
and trying to save lives.  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
67

 
 Sir, I have three very specific questions for the hon. Home Minister to respond 
to in the context of this horrendous natural disaster which has happened in Kerala, 
which we have also seen happening in other States in the past.  Sir, for the State 
Disaster Relief Fund, the SDRF, the quota of allocation is that 25 per cent of the funds 
are contributed by the State Government . However, unfortunately, the State 
Government has discretion on spending only 10 per cent of those funds if the Ministry 
of Home Affairs has not declared it as a natural disaster.  
Sir, my specific question is: Will the Government consider and approve a 
proposal for allowing States, at least, 25 per cent of discretion on the SDRF funds? 
They are contributing 25 per cent. It is the money of the people of the State. Can the 
State use it for the State itself?  That should be allowed. That is question number 
one. Question No. 2, in this Union Budget, we saw the Finance Minister talk about 
five States in terms of flood relief.  West Bengal, my State, was very specifically 
excluded from that despite the fact that we have had devastating floods in West 
Bengal. But nothing was given to West Bengal.  Sir, this disaster has now happened 
in Kerala which, as a lot of hon. Members have said before me, should be considered 
a natural disaster. Since the Union Budget is still under consideration right now, my 
specific question is: Will the Union Government , at least, now think about adding 
West Bengal and Kerala to the list of States that should be getting flood relief?  
 My third point is that in the last several years we have stopped seeing the 
Prime Minister doing aerial surveys.  He used to do that once upon a time.  He 
doesn't do it anymore, be it Assam, Bengal or Kerala.  When the Prime Minister does 
an aerial survey, it sends a lot of confidence to the people and it makes them feel that 
they are being cared about. Will the Prime Minister, at least, now stop posing for 
happy photos and actually come out and go to the disaster area and do an aerial 
survey there in Kerala?     
 
SHRI MUZIBULLA KHAN (ODISHA) :  Sir, we are deeply saddened and express our 
condolences for the people who lost their lives in the incident that occurred in 
Wayanad yesterday. Among them, our two doctors from Odisha are also missing and 
are being searched for. Disasters frequently occur in Odisha, such as storms and 
floods. The plans and programs initiated by the then Chief Minister, Naveen Patnaik, 
for disaster management in Odisha were long-term programmes. Because of this, 
there was significant protection of lives and property in Odisha. If the Central 
Government had also followed the way Naveen Patnaik managed disaster 
management, I believe many lives could have been saved.  
[RAJYA SABHA]
68

 
               Sir, such incidents are occuring repeatedly. Today it happened in Kerala, but 
it is also happening in our various states like Ass am and Uttarakhand.There are 
incidents of mudslides due to rain. A film was even  made about it, showing how the 
water came and swept away a number of people. The C entral Government needs to 
think seriously about this. Sir, the Minister of Ho me Affairs is present here today. I 
hope that this should be declared a national disast er immediately, as more than 100 
people have lost their lives there. To prevent such  incidents from occuring again and 
again, I would like to know from the central Govern ment how much funds have been 
allocated specifically for this. Some special funds should also be allocated for disaster 
management. I expect the central Government to prov ide more assistance, no matter 
which state the incident occurs in. Sir, today it h appened in Kerala, tomorrow it will 
happen in Assam, the day after tomorrow it will hap pen in Uttarakhand, such 
incidents will continue to occur somewhere or the other. ...(Time bell rings)...  
         Therefore, I would like to once again request the C entral Government to take 
appropriate steps and ensure funding for disaster m anagement. Thank you very 
much. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, we are at loss of words to express our grief.  
Everyone in this world plans to live long, but such  things happen suddenly and takes 
away the precious lives of human beings.  They migh t have had too many 
responsibilities; they might have had dreams but al l could have shattered and sunk in 
the soil.  I thank you for admitting this Calling A ttention.  What should be done in 
future is the question now before us.  Some said th at it was a cloud burst, but the 
Kerala Meteorological Department has said that it i s not so.  Whenever we come 
across organisations who are indulged in maintainin g global warming, I have been 
repeatedly telling them in many of our meetings to tackle and combat global warming.  
Afforestation is one of the things but, before that , deforestation should be stopped. 
 The main reason for landslides and such flash floo ds is deforestation.  Many 
areas are suffering.  Those hill stations, which us ed to attract us because of their 
greenery, now appear tonsured.  This should not hap pen.  We came to know that 
one environment scientist, Mr. Madhav Gadgil, had g iven a warning a few months 
before to take precautionary measures expecting tha t such things might happen in 
the very near future.  Anybody cannot say these thi ngs.  Only those who have very 
good research can predict these, and they give very  good suggestions also, but they 
are all ignored as if they are nobody.  So, I would urge the Government to take note of 
all these things.  Scientists and so many people ha ve advised on how to address the 
issue of global warming.  We come across many such suggestions, but how far are 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
69

 
these implemented?  Only the Government can do this.  Had Mr. Madhav Gadgil’s 
suggestion been taken seriously, this tragedy could have been avoided.   
 So, I would urge the Government again to avoid such happenings in future, like 
flash floods or cloudbursts.  Even then, these can occur because it is part of the 
nature, but we have to take some precautionary measures.  Deforestation should be 
stopped at any cost, and, at the same time, release the disaster relief funds at the 
right time and to the needed level of those people and the State Government s.  
Thank you, Sir.            
                                                                         
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar) :   Thank you, hon. Chairman, Sir, for having this 
Calling Attention on this issue.  Last time we heard that the death toll has arisen to 
163.  Dr. John Brittas told me about this.  First of all, our condolences to those 
families who have lost their near and dear ones, as also our all kind of solidarity to the 
Central Government and the State Government. Everybody is vulnerable in such 
disasters.  But, the people and communities on the margins are more vulnerable than 
others.  In this case, if you look at the locale, they are the locale occupied by 
vulnerable people and communities.  I think that should be first priority.  With so much 
of technology at our command, can we broadbase our disaster preparedness, 
disaster prevention, disaster signals and disaster mitigation?  I come from a State 
which is prone to such disasters, whether it is flood or even landslides in some areas.  
Finally, I would reiterate that such massive tragedies must unite us.  It should not be 
seen through the prism of who is governing Kerala and who is governing Delhi.  Thank 
you very much, Sir.              
                               
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) :  Sir, the Wayanad District of Kerala has suffered 
devastating landslide which has wiped out villages and habitations.  The very painful 
incident has happened and there is massive destruction and many people have lost 
their lives.  The exact number of deaths is not yet known.  This is not a time to score 
political points.  This is the time for rescue and rehabilitation.  So, together, we 
should work for rehabilitation and rescue activities.  The Government of Kerala is 
trying to co-ordinate with all the agencies for rescue and rehabilitation.  I have some 
reservations about the statement of one of the Members in this House, which was, I 
think, for scoring political gain.  The entire nation should work together.  If a person, 
or a political party, is trying to make some political gain in such a situation, that means 
they don’t have any idea of politics of humanity.   
 This disaster has caused huge loss to the economy of the State and there is a 
need to give special assistance to the State Government .  Wayanad District in Kerala 
[RAJYA SABHA]
70

 
State needs huge support from the Union Government .  So, the Union Government 
should provide a special package to the State Gover nment .  The affected people of 
Wayanad District are requesting for help from the e ntire nation.  The landslide in 
Mundakkai village, Chooralmala and other areas is one of the biggest calamities in the 
State of Kerala.  So, I request the Government that it should be declared as a national 
calamity and my humble request to the Union Governm ent is to take a special step to 
address this kind of climate change.                                                                 
 It is the climate change which is resulting in incr ease in landslides and other 
calamities.  Sir, your intervention is also very necessary in this matter.  Thank you.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Thank you.  Now, Shri Iranna Kadadi.  
 
SHRI IRANNA KADADI (Karnataka) : 
*"Mr. Chairman Sir, due to the devastating 
landslide incident in the Wayanad region of Kerala,  hundreds of people have lost their 
lives. I express my deepest condolences and I sympa thize with the bereaved families 
who have lost their near and dear ones.  
Sir, due to heavy rainfall in the Western Ghats reg ion, some parts of Karnataka 
have also been grappling with a similar situation. In Karnataka, five people have lost 
their lives. I would like to express my deepest con dolences. Due to the record high 
rainfall, the rivers Krishna and Ghataprabha are fl owing with 3 lakh cusecs of excess 
water.  As a result, 232 villages have been inundat ed and 44 bridges have been 
submerged, resulting in severely damaged transport and communication facilities. 
Sir, more than 800 families have been affected and more than 4000 affected people 
are taking shelter in the rehabilitation facilities .  Hundreds of cattle are also dead. 
More than 46,700 hectares of agricultural land has been submerged and the crops 
have been destroyed; roads and bridges have been da maged.  Due to the inundation 
caused by the rivers, crocodiles, snakes, fish and other aquatic creatures have swum 
out and have entered the villages. People are frigh tened there. Drinking water has 
been  contaminated due to the floods, causing its acute s hortage. Sir, there is a 
possibility of widespread water-borne diseases amon g the people after the flood 
water recedes. There is a looming possibility of ma ny other related calamities as well.  
The difficulties and hardships faced by the people living in the river basin have been a 
common affair every year during the monsoon season.  However, the Karnataka 
Government has opened only a few porridge centers. The State Government is 
shirking off its responsibilities. So, I would like  to draw your kind attention to this 
                                        
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Kannada.  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
71

 
problem of natural calamities being faced by the people of Karnataka, and request the 
Central Government to help the people of Karnataka by taking appropriate measures 
under the National Disaster Management Authority.”        
                                                                                 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri A.A. Rahim. 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala): Sir, first of all, I would request the hon. Home Minister to 
declare this incident as a national disaster.  Sir, so many friends of mine have spoken 
here regarding the forecasting system with regard to the calamities.  It is said, 
prevention is better than cure.  I would like to bring forward an important point in this 
august House.  Sir, Kerala does not have a properly functioning advanced radar-
based weather forecasting system.  
Sir, cyclone Ockhi hit us in 2017.  There were floods in 2019.  Comrade Dr. 
Brittas has already mentioned it here.  Kerala has been demanding a modern Doppler 
Radar since 2013.  What is the position there?  In Kochi, there is radar system but it is 
not properly functioning most of the times and it is an old system which does not 
provide data in digital format to be used for decision making and the support system.  
The radar at Thiruvananthapuram is under ISRO and cannot be used all the time for 
this purpose. 
 In northern Kerala -- Wayanad is a part of the northern Kerala -- I would like to 
say here that there is not even a single radar in northern Kerala.  Sir, Kerala has been 
demanding modern Doppler radars since 2013.  I would like to bring to your attention 
that I raised this matter in this august House as a Special Mention, but unfortunately, 
the Union Government has neglected that.  Sir, please listen to us.  (Time-bell rings.) 
Prevention is better than cure.  Kindly ensure that a proper weather forecasting 
system is placed in Kerala without further delay.  This is my prayer.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Surendra Singh Nagar.  
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR (Uttar Pradesh): Hon’ble Chairman Sir, I express 
my condolences for the tragic landslide in Wayanad, Kerala. Following this incident, 
the Prime Minister of the country, Shri Narendra Modi, has been continuously in touch 
with the Chief Minister of the state, and the Home Minister of the country has been in 
constant touch with the State Government , ensuring that whatever assistance can be 
provided by the central Government  is continuously being made available.     
[RAJYA SABHA]
72

 
              Hon’ble Chairman Sir, it was just sai d in this House that if there have been 
the highest number of landslides anywhere, more tha n 50% have occurred in Kerala. 
Hon’ble Chairman, Sir, it was just said in this Hou se that if there have been the 
highest number of landslides anywhere, more than 50 % have occurred in Kerala. If 
so many incidents have occurred in Kerala, has the state Government thought about 
preventing such incidents? Has it considered the re ason why so many incidents are 
occurring in Kerala and why such incidents occurred  in Wayanad? There is a major 
reason for this. I don't want to get into politics,  but I want to say one more thing: 
excessive rainfall is a major cause. In addition, o ur Honourable Member Tiruchi Siva 
said that deforestation is a major reason, but if t imely action would have been taken 
against the illegal occupation and encroachment in that area, if the state Government 
had acted on it, this incident could have been prev ented. Just now, one of our 
colleagues ...(Interruptions)… …  I did not disturb you. ... (Interruptions)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN :  John, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Let us converge on something 
positive.   
 
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR : I am coming back to the point that so many lives 
could have been saved. Along with this, one of our colleagues just spoke about radar 
and other matters. Hon’ble Chairman Sir, there is a  system in the country. A member 
of parliament is elected from each Lok Sabha consti tuency. In the last five years, 
because Mr. Rahim mentioned the incident as an old one.  Wayanad also elected its 
MP for five consecutive years. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM NARESH: Sir, what are you saying? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN :  I allowed everyone to say. …( Interruptions )… 
 
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR 
: Sir, I haven't mentioned anyone's name. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  One minute.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR :  I am not naming anyone.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please take your seat.  Hon. Members, suggestions have been 
made from every side.  The hon. Member, Shri Rahim,  made very important 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
73

 
suggestions.  All these suggestions are indicative so that such kind of situations do 
not arise.  So, if the hon. Member is saying something, he is entitled to say so.  
Please go ahead.  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  He is making a political statement, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Sir, again you are sitting and talking.  Sorry, I take serious note of 
it. Please, hon. Member, go ahead. 
 
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR : Hon’ble Chairman Sir, being a Member of 
Parliament, who has represented Wayanad, although he ...(Interruptions)... when 
the people of Wayanad ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: * 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM:  * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Will you take your seat?  Nothing will go on record.  Hon. Member, 
continue.    
 
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR : It would have been better if, during those 5 years 
as a Member of Parliament, when there were problems in Wayanad, he would have 
raised them in the House, if he had addressed the problems of the people of 
Wayanad in Parliament and met the Prime Minister, these 143 lives could have been 
saved, instead, he  traveled across the country talking about other matters. 
...(Interruptions)... Unfortunately, the people of Wayanad had elected a Member of 
Parliament with great trust, expecting that they would stand with us in our joys and 
sorrows and be present when any incident occurred. Instead, they resigned and ran 
away; even at this tragic time, three days after the incident, he still has not visited the 
people of Wayanad. Sir, he still has not gone there. Today he is showing interest in 
other matters but has not been able to go to the people of Wayanad and share their 
grief.  
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
                                        
* Not recorded. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
74

 
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR : Sir, I would like to say through you that it should 
also be investigated what caused this incident. 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Now, Shri Ramji .  ...(Interruptions)...   Please take your seat.  
...(Interruptions)...      Nothing is going on record.  ...( Interruptions )..  I will reflect 
on this.  Tiruchi ji , I will reflect on this. ...(Interruptions )...   The Member has started 
speaking. ...(Interruptions)...  I take note of your voice.  Don't bother.  
...(Interruptions)...   Yes, Shri Ramji.   
 
SHRI RAMJI (Uttar Pradesh) :  Hon’ble Chairman Sir,  thank you very much for giving 
me the opportunity to speak here. Sir, my party and  I express our deepest 
condolences to the families of those who died in th e landslide in Wayanad. We also 
pray to God for the speedy recovery of those injure d. Sir, science has already 
identified a particular area in the country that is  prone to landslides. These include 
Kerala, Goa, Maharashtra, as well as the northeaste rn area adjoining Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand, and the Araku area in Andh ra Pradesh, which has already 
been defined as a landslide-prone zone. We should d iscuss the reasons for this and 
how to move forward on this serious issue, how to p revent it – because it happens 
every year. Last year, on July 22, 2023, in Ishalwa di, Maharashtra, the entire village 
was buried in a landslide, resulting in the death o f 30 to 40 people. Earlier, in 1998, in 
Malpa, Uttarakhand, 380 people lost their lives. We  must seriously consider how 
these incidents can be prevented.  
             Sir, I would like to give some suggest ions to the Government through you. 
There are two aspects in this. One is a natural rea son, and the other is a man-made 
reason. Sir, we cannot stop natural reasons. We can not stop volcanoes, we cannot 
stop heavy rainfall, we cannot stop these things, b ut we can prevent the man-made 
causes. Sir, the mining work being carried out at a  high level, the excavation work, 
needs to be stopped. The work that is contributing to climate change should be 
stopped. You have seen how intense the heat has bee n, and the recent incident in 
Wayanad, according to science, occurred due to sudd en warming of the Arabian Sea 
causing heavy rainfall. Sir, this is climate change , and in this incident, climate change 
seems to be a major reason.We should be cautious ab out the future in this regard. 
..(Interruptions)... Sir, I am just concluding. Sir, in the name of deve lopment, trees 
are being cut, large forests are being destroyed, h ighways are being built, to protect 
these trees, we need to make a provision that for e very forest or tree cut in the name 
of development, an equal number of trees should be planted there, so that we can  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
75

 
fight such natural disasters in a better way. Sir, this is what I want to tell you. ..(Time 
bell rings)..  
             Sir, please give me just 20 seconds. I also want to request the Government 
that just giving 2 lakh rupees won't suffice, because the damage has been enormou s. 
Entire homes have been destroyed, entire families have been wiped out. There are so 
many injured people there that 2 lakh rupees won't even cover the cost of medicine. I 
would like to request that this amount be increased ...(Interruptions)...to at least 25 
to 50 lakh rupees. Sir, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to express 
my views here. 
SHRI LAHAR SINGH SIROYA (Karnataka) : Hon’ble Chairman Sir, thank you very 
much for giving me the opportunity to speak on this very sensitive issue. We have 
been deeply saddened since yesterday. Since Kerala is our neighbouring state, I 
express condolences on behalf of the people of Karnataka to those families who have 
lost their loved ones. At the same time, I also thank the Hon’ble Prime Minister, 
Hon’ble Minister of Home Affairs, and Minister of Defence that as soon as we learned 
from the newspapers yesterday, relief arrangements had already reached there, and 
relief operations had begun. I would like to thank them. 
 Hon’ble Chairman Sir, I believe that this is a natural disaster, but at the same 
time, it is also man-made. As our Hon’ble Member just mentioned, Gadgil's report 
was ignored and not implemented. It clearly stated that this is a very sensitive zone. 
There were only tea gardens in that sensitive zone. Resorts were built there, several 
false lakes were created, and in this way, this led to deforestation of hills. I believe 
that cutting down the hills and obstructing the paths of rivers has been a major 
reason. I do not want to blame any Government for this, but the governments that 
were in place continuously neglected this issue and systematic work has not been 
carried out there. The development work carried out there, was done in a manner that 
caused significant environmental damage. ...(Time bell rings)...  Hon’ble Chairman 
Sir, I also don't want to get involved in politics, but had Rahul Gandhi seen the 
encroachments during his padayatra, and the devastation being done to those 
mountains, this situation would not have arisen today. When we lose hundreds of 
brothers in such situations, we wake up only after that, whether it's due to  
illicitliquor. So, I have another request: the Rajya Sabha should consider taking timely 
action and follow the plans implemented by the Central Government . 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala) : Sir, I pay homage to all the victims who have lost 
their lives in this horrendous tragedy in Wayanad. My party leader, Shri Abdul Wahab, 
[RAJYA SABHA]
76

 
is already there in Wayanad and trying to coordinat e efforts for rescue and 
rehabilitation. This is the monsoon season in Keral a. It has been raining in Kerala for 
quite some time. Now, when it rains over there, the  soil gets weak. That is a natural 
phenomenon. But if there is a cloudburst kind of a situation -- like, 200 mm of rain 
happened on two consecutive days, which is, 400 mm of rain happened over there – 
then, the soil gets completely weak and this leads to the collapse of the mountain 
itself.  The whole of the mountain has collapsed. T herefore, there has to be a system 
that pre-warns you about this particular kind of a disaster and catastrophe. I would 
suggest that this particular kind of pre-warning sy stem should be installed in the 
entire West Ghats, which is an ecologically fragile  area.  We need specialised system 
for these vulnerable areas.  A whole task force whi ch includes meteorological, 
oceanographic, geological and hydrological teams sh ould be constituted and then 
this should be given to a specialised institute lik e Indian Institute of Technology. You 
should have a system comprising of all these four d epartments. Only then you can 
pre-warn this kind of cloudburst or you can pre-war n this kind of massive landslide 
which can happen.  Landslide happened at 2 in the m orning but it was not very grave 
but the gravest happened at 4  o'clock which shook all the villagers. Three villages are 
still under the debris. We do not know the number o f people who are there under the 
debris. So, the magnitude of this is unimaginable. Secondly, this has to be treated as 
a national calamity, as my friends suggested over h ere. Thirdly, there has to be a 
special financial package for Kerala for this Wayan ad disaster.  Lastly, Kerala was 
excluded in the Union Budget from the Disaster Mana gement Fund. Through this 
platform, I appeal to the Government to reconsider the decision. Thank you.       
                                                   
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, a very unfortunate incident happened in Kerala. 
With great sorrow, all of us join with the bereaved  families for their rehabilitation in 
future. We all know that the Prime Minister's Offic e has immediately sent the Minister 
there as a representative and the people, who lost utensils, cattle, etc. have been 
given immediate relief; an amount of Rs.2 lakh for the kin of the deceased and 
Rs.50,000 to the injured which has given a little h ope. At the same time, the Home 
Minister and his Ministry is proactive there 24X7 w ith NDRF, and all other help is still 
going on in Wayanad region of Kerala.  No doubt, it  is a natural disaster; at the same 
time, we have to ponder over certain safeguards for  this. First, proper safety 
measures should be taken on mountain and hilly areas.   
 Be it any Government, CPM is there; it may be Congress, it may be BJP or any 
other Government .  I would only insist here that t he local representatives, who have 
been elected by the people from the panchayat level , from the legislative level, from 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
77

 
the Parliament level, should be more responsible to see that encroachments are not 
there in the hilly areas.  The Government should take more concern of this so that we 
can save more lives in these kinds of disasters. 
 To conclude, I would like to say that the Central Government has given 
immediate assistance, help and hope to the disturbed people there.  At the same 
time, the Central Government would be with the rehabilitation measures, with the 
people of Wayanad, Kerala. Thank you, Sir.     
                                                                                       
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :  Hon. Chairman, Sir, yesterday, you were kind 
enough to bring this to the notice of the House.  You yourself voluntarily told as to 
what happened and what steps the Government has taken.  On behalf of 
A.I.A.D.M.K. Party, I pay my condolences to the affected people of Wayanad.  
Landslides have affected most of the Wayanad District in Kerala State.  Many hon. 
Members had requested and, yesterday also, MoS in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
came and gave the statement from the side of the Home Ministry about what actions 
the Government is taking.  As you also told, the Central Government and the State 
Government, both are taking action.  At the same time, we request to provide 
rehabilitation programme for the people of Wayanad immediately. Also, it has to be 
declared -- as other Members are also asking -- as a national disaster.  A special 
package must also be given to the affected people in Wayanad.  All Kerala MPs, like 
Dr. Brittas, have raised this issue.  Therefore, I also join them on behalf of my Party. 
The Home Minister is here.  All requests have been made by the Kerala MPs and we 
also request to see to it that a special package is given, and it is declared as a 
national calamity, which we are expecting.  Thank you very much, Sir.   
          
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL (Maharashtra):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, with a heavy heart, all of us 
have mourned and condoled the loss of lives in this horrible tragedy in Waynad.  I 
associate with all my colleagues and I also wish that the Government of India and the 
Government of Kerala, both work hand-in-hand to help the bereaved families to 
resettle and start a life afresh again.  It is also worth noting that the hon. Prime 
Minister, the hon. Home Minister and also the Chief Minister of Kerala, all have been 
seized of this very tragic moment and have done everything possible to bring relief 
and succour to the people in this hour of grief.  It is also important to note that the 
Armed Forces -- the Army, Navy, Air Force and including all other paramilitary forces 
-- have also joined in the rescue and relief efforts in this very difficult terrain and the 
conditions prevailing as of now.  It is also important that many social organizations, 
political parties also, so also my political Party in Kerala, all are associated in 
[RAJYA SABHA]
78

 
whichever way they can to help the people in this h our of need.  I also feel that it is a 
very big tragedy.  Therefore, even if it is a deman d that it should be a national 
disaster, it should be helped in that fashion.  I w ould also like to associate that this 
tragedy may be considered a national tragedy.  Fina lly, as we all now, this is not the 
first, but we do not want that it should ever happe n again in any part of the country.  
Natural disasters are prone to happen, especially, in eco-sensitive zones like the 
entire Western Ghats also. Right from Kerala up to Maharashtra, including the 
Konkan region, we have the Western Ghats.  We have sometimes even some such 
tragedies, hopefully ever not of the scale which ha s happened in Wayanad, in our 
Konkan region also in Maharashtra. 
 Therefore, I would urge upon the Government and the  hon. Minister--because 
the technologies are much better than in the past--to try to get some kind of mapping 
of the entire ecologically sensitive zones, especia lly, where there is so much heavy 
rainfall,--Western Ghats receive the highest rainfa ll probably in the country--even in 
the hills like Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and ma ny other parts of the country 
where we have heavy rains.  At one time, you will h ave to balance the needs of 
humanity, growing needs of aspirational nation and the developmental needs. 
Everybody talks about trying to protect nature. Yes , the nature has to be protected, 
but we will also have to balance the needs of devel opment and growth. For that, I 
think, proper approach, a humane approach and a pra ctical approach will have to be 
adopted.            
                                                                 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now the hon. Home Minister. 
 
THE MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI AMIT SHAH):  Hon’ble Chairman Sir, the 
statement of the Government of India will be given by Mr. Nityanand Rai, but I stand 
before this House with your permission to clarify a  few things. First of all, I want to 
express my condolences to the families of all those  who were killed or injured in this 
incident, and it is with deep sorrow that I stand i n this House today with immense 
sympathy for them. As I have said earlier, the resp onse from the Government will be 
given by Mr. Nityanand Rai. When a one-hour discuss ion was approved here, I had 
thought that today would perhaps transcend politics , and there would be no political 
comments on this. Well, some comments were made eit her intentionally or due to a 
lack of information, and the entire country watches  the House, so to prevent any 
misunderstanding before the nation, I have stood up  to provide clarity.  Whether they 
were blaming or due to lack of information, I don't  know, but Hon’ble Sir, I would like 
to clarify, through you to this House and through t his House to the entire nation, that 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
79

 
people here kept saying "early warning," "early warning," using all the serious words 
in English in their speeches. I want to clarify before the House that the Government of 
India issued an early warning to the Government of Kerala on July 23rd. There were 
seven days, then it was issued on the 24th, then again on the 25th. Sir, on the 26th, it 
was said that there would be more than 20 centimeters of rainfall, heavy rainfall, there 
is a possibility of landslides, mud could also rush in, and people could get trapped 
and die. Sir, I did not want to say anything, but questions were raised about the 
Indian Government's early warning system, so I am saying, "Please listen to us," 
don't shout "Please listen to us," "Please read it." Please read the warning that was 
sent. In this country, there are several state Government s that have used such 
warnings to achieve zero-casualty disaster management. I also would like to say this 
for the state Government of Odisha; at that time, our Government was not in power, it 
was Naveen Babu's Government . We sent the cyclone alert 7 days in advance, and 
only one person died, and that too accidentally. Sir, we sent a cyclone alert to the 
Gujarat Government 3 days ago, not a single animal died. However, I would like to 
say with great humility that the worn-out words you have brought here and are 
repeatedly making demands about are the early warning system. The Government of 
India has spent 2,000 crore rupees on the early warning system since 2014. Sir, this 
information is shared. Information is sent to every state seven days in advance, and 
that information is available on the site for everyone, including Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament. 
 
2.00 P.M 
 
But some people don't even open local websites; they only open foreign ones. Now, 
this early warning system won't be available on foreign sites; you'll have to check our 
site for that. ...(Interruptions)... Since I have listened to you carefully, you also listen. 
...(Interruptions)... It won't work this way. This is the House. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Brittas, please.  I will not allow.  Facts, figures and details 
are being imparted.  Hon. Minister, please continue. 
 
SHRI AMIT SHAH: Sir, I am saying this with the sole purpose that all states should be 
on alert after hearing this, and should be on early alert. I do not mean to taunt 
anyone. 
          The early warning system is for rain, for heat waves, for storms, for cyclones, 
and even for lightning. The early warning system informs the collector exactly where 
[RAJYA SABHA]
80

 
the lightning will strike 10 minutes in advance wit h latitude and longitude. But they are 
not mentioning any of this. I believe it must be du e to a lack of information. Even if  
there is a lack of information, it is not acceptabl e, and if it is politics, then it is very 
disappointing.  
          Sir, many states have used this and it ha s yielded results. I want to inform the 
House today that under this early warning system, n ine NDRF teams left for Kerala on 
the 23rd, with my approval, knowing that a landslid e was possible there. The 
Government of India sent nine NDRF teams there by p lane. Sir, everyone asks me 
this, but can I ask what the Kerala Government did?  Unauthorized people were living 
there, or not, but the vulnerable situation was the re. Have they been relocated? Why 
weren't they relocated? Who was stopping them? If t hey were relocated, how did 
they die? (Interruptions)...  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  They have been shifted ...(Interruptions)...   
SHRI AMIT SHAH: They were not shifted earlier; they  were shifted later on ... 
(Interruptions)...  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  No, no. … (Interruptions)...    
 
SHRI AMIT SHAH: The more you speak, the more harm i t will 
cause ...(Interruptions)...I  don't want to speak, but when you talk in an accus atory 
manner, I have not come here to sit quietly and listen ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  
There is no allegation...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Take your seat, Dr. John Brittas.  Why are you in terrupting? You 
have raised your points. Please. 
 
SHRI AMIT SHAH : Sir, I would like to say through y ou that Narendra Modi became 
Prime Minister in 2014, and the Early Warning Syste m project started  in 2016. By 
2023, the world's most advanced Early Warning Syste m is in India.  Only four 
countries can provide seven-day forecasts in advance, India being one of them, but it 
requires to be read. Just demanding it does not help. 
 Sir, he said that the state does not have the auth ority to release disaster funds. 
That is wrong, Sir. I would like to clarify this as  well, because the record of the House 
should be clear. Any state Government can issue 10 percent of the SDRF funds as per 
its own guidelines, and 100 percent can be spent wi thout the permission of the 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
81

 
Government of India, as per the guidelines issued by the Government of India. No 
permission from the Government of India is required for this, only the guidelines need 
to be followed. However, disaster funds cannot be spent under any other head, we 
must maintain certain checks and balances. Yet, no one questions you about 
spending 10 percent of the funds in the name of disaster relief. You are not required to 
take permission from the Government of India to spend 90 percent of the funds for 
disaster relief, as per the guidelines. 
 Sir, Nityanand ji will read the detailed statement. I'm not giving a structured 
statement, I'm just clarifying. West Bengal was also mentioned. We approved  rupees 
6,244 crore for West Bengal from 2014 to 2024, and the amount is released on the 
basis of expenditure. We have reimbursed rupees 4,619 crore of that amount. 
However, there's  some problem in giving an account of the expenses. Now, I can't 
do that properly, the West Bengal Government will have to do it. Accounts of the 
expenses have to be given because this is the Government, not a political party. The 
Government has certain rules and regulations, an accounting system, and the AG 
audits. If we don't follow any of them, it will be a little difficult. But gradually we're 
getting used to it, and there's improvement. Therefore, rupees 4,619 crore out of the 
rupees 6,244 crore has been released. 
 Sir, I would like to emphasize that early warning was given, and that's why we 
sent nine NDRF battalions there on the 23rd and three more yesterday. If they had 
been informed about the arrival of the NDRF battalions, much could have been 
avoided, but I don't want to blame anyone. This is the time to stand with the 
Government of Kerala, the people of Kerala, and those who have suffered losses. 
         I would like to assure the House that irrespective of party politics, the Narendra 
Modi Government will stand like a rock with both the people of Kerala and the 
Government of Kerala, no one should have any doubt about this. 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Shri 
Nityanand Rai, may now reply. 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI NITYANAND 
RAI) : Hon’ble Chairman Sir, as I mentioned in my statement in the House yesterday, 
there was an unfortunate landslide incident in the early hours yesterday morning in 
Wayanad district of Kerala. As soon as the Hon’ble Prime Minister and the Hon’ble 
Home Minister received information about this incident, both of them immediately 
contacted the state Governments, and the central Government provided all possible 
assistance. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
82

 
          Sir, I regret to inform you that, accordi ng to the latest information, 133 bodies 
have been recovered by rescue workers. Sir, the number of deceased may 
increase. We provide figures based on the data provided to us  by the state 
Government. The Hon’ble Prime Minister is closely m onitoring the situation. On his 
orders, the Minister of State George Kurian reached  the affected area last night to 
assess the situation. Given the current circumstanc es, reaching there seemed 
difficult, yet he reached and kept in touch with th e Home Minister, regularly updating 
him on the situation. The Hon’ble Prime Minister also received updates from him. 
   The Hon’ble Home Minister also spoke with the Ho n’ble Chief Minister of 
Kerala yesterday. He was also assured by the Hon’bl e Prime Minister that all possible 
assistance would be provided by the Government of I ndia, and is being provided. 
Immediately after the incident, teams from the NDRF , Air Force, Indian Army, Navy, 
and Coast Guard joined the search and rescue operat ion and are working diligently. 
Columns from the Madras Engineering Group of the Ar my have been deployed to 
construct three Bailey bridges. Nearly 1,200 rescue rs from four NDRF teams, four 
Army columns, one Navy team, three Coast Guard unit s, the State Government 's 
Fire Service, Civil Defence, Police, and the local Emergency Response Team are 
working round the clock in the rescue and relief operations. 
           A dog squad has also been deployed there  for the search and rescue 
operation. Two units of the Army's DSC centre, Kann ur, have also been deployed 
there. Two units of the 91 Infantry Brigade, Trivan drum, have been sent there. Two 
helicopters of the Indian Army and one Navy helicop ter are specifically engaged in the 
rescue operation. Army medical teams are providing medical care to the injured. To 
ensure workers can move through the land route, the  Indian Navy ship INS Zamorin 
has been deployed on the other side of the damaged bridge to build a way and assist 
in rescue operations. 
 Additional resources are being sent based on requir ements. The central 
Government is monitoring the situation at the highe st level. Both control rooms of the 
Home Ministry, one for disaster management of the NDRF and the other for the Home 
Ministry, both come under the Home Ministry.  They are monitoring the situation 24x7 
and providing all possible assistance to the state.  Today, a sum of 1,450 million 
rupees has been provided to the state Government fr om the State Disaster Response 
Fund. Sir, there was already a balance amount of 3, 940 million rupees under SDRF – 
the Hon’ble Home Minister has clearly informed on a ll matters, but I would like to 
mention that previously a Super Cyclone occurred, i n which nearly 10,000 people 
died, and today we have reached a zero death count.  This work for disaster 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
83

 
management is being carried out under the inspirational leadership of the Prime 
Minister, with increasing use of technology, increased amount of fund for disaster 
management, and under the guidance of the Honourable Home Minister, various 
aspects are being addressed. Speaking of the environment - the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, many people of the Government of India, and many institutions inspired by the 
Government of India have been involved in planting trees, and under the able 
guidance of the Hon’ble Home Minister, the paramilitary forces have also carried out 
tree planting on a record level. Sir, technology is being fully utilized. Today, disaster 
management in India is such that both the country and foreign countries have trust in 
it. In many countries during disasters, whether it is an earthquake or any other 
calamity, India has actively stepped forward to assist them. There are several 
examples of this. I would like to say that the Honourable Prime Minister is 
continuously monitoring with promptness. Sir, it would not be an exaggeration to say 
that under the leadership of the Honourable Prime Minister, our Home Minister is 
continuously assisting the states day and night, also overseeing rescue and relief 
operations. The Central Government is providing assistance to the states as per the 
requirement. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, we will take up Special Mentions.  Shri Sanjay Seth. 
 
  SPECIAL MENTIONS  Demand to declare extreme heat as a natural disaster  SHRI SANJAY SETH (Uttar Pradesh):  Sir, this year, India has recorded the longest period of extreme heat, with 536 heat-wave days in the country, the highest in 14 years. This year, extreme heat has caused over 100 deaths in India, and over 40,000 suspected cases of heat stroke have been reported, which is a concerning figure. The United Nations has also taken cognizance of the damage caused by extreme heat and has declared it a pandemic, resulting in the death of over 500,000 people worldwide each year, a figure higher than the number of deaths from natural disasters like floods and storms. The UN Secretary-General has also urged all countries to act with awareness. According to the RBI, Global warming and extreme heat are estimated to cause a loss of up to 2.8 percent of the country's GDP. India has the Disaster 
[RAJYA SABHA]
84

 
Management Act to control natural disasters, but ex treme heat or heat-waves have 
not yet been declared a natural disaster under this law. 
 
(Mr. Deputy Chairman in the Chair. ) 
  
I request the Government that in view of the increa sing cases of extreme heat, it 
should be declared a natural disaster, so that the Government can work better in 
managing the damage caused by extreme heat. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves w ith 
the Spetial Mention raised by hon. Member, Shri San jay Seth: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri R. Gir irajan (Tamil Nadu), Prof. Manoj 
Kumar Jha (Bihar) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).                                                                            
            
 
Concern over Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
 
DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL (Punjab): Sir, the Ayushman Bharat scheme by the 
Government is the most important scheme in the heal th sector. Under the Ayushman 
Bharat scheme, so far 55 crore citizens and 12.34 c rore families have been provided 
health insurance worth rupees five  lakh,through th is scheme, families below the 
poverty line are provided with insurance facilities . Cancer cases are increasing in our 
country, and it is estimated that by 2025, there wi ll be 16 lakh cancer cases each year 
in India. The economic survey has stated that India 's out-of-pocket expenses on 
healthcare are over 50 percent of the total health expenses, which is a matter of 
concern because whether it is cancer, heart disease , road accidents, or lifestyle 
diseases, the treatment cost for all these is very high, which cannot be covered within 
the amount of 5 lakh rupees. Considering today's in flation and the cost of treatment, 
it is extremely important to change the one-size-fi ts-all approach. The elderly or 
senior citizens in our country still do not receive  any form of insurance or social 
security. Insurance companies also refuse to provid e insurance to senior citizens. My 
demand is that the Government should first make the  insurance provided under 
Ayushman Bharat disease-specific, increase the insu rance amount, and additionally 
include senior citizens under Ayushman Bharat, brin ging them under the social 
security net. 
                                             
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
85

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   The following hon.  associated themselves with the 
Special Mention raised by the hon. Member,  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal: Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha),  Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr.  Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri R.  Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), and Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal).    
 
Inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ (Non-Violence) in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I rise to seek the inclusion 
of ‘Ahimsa’ (non-violence) in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.  Former hon. 
Chief Minister of Odisha, in May 2018, during the first meeting of the National 
Committee for 150 th Birth Anniversary Celebrations of Mahatma Gandhi, had 
requested for inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.  He had 
again, in December 2019, reiterated this demand in second meeting of the National 
Committee for celebrations of 150 th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.  On 23 rd 
March, 2021, Odisha Vidhan Sabha passed a unanimous resolution for inclusion of 
‘Ahimsa’ in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.  On the same day, the Odisha 
Assembly also had a three-hour special discussion on Gandhi ji’s visit to Odisha 
exactly 100 years back on 23 rd March, 1921.  Apart from hon. Chief Minister of 
Odisha’s iteration and Odisha Vidhan Sabha’s resolution, signature campaign across 
the State for inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ in the Preamble of the Constitution of India also 
took place. On the occasion of 75 years of India’s Independence, hon. former Chief 
Minister of Odisha also flagged off the Ahimsa Rath , whose sole objective was to 
spread the Gandhian doctrine of ‘Ahimsa’ (non-violence)across the cross-sections 
of the people and commemorating Gandhi ji’s special relation with Odisha.  Placing 
these initiatives on record, I reiterate the request that the Government of India may 
kindly initiate steps to ensure that ‘Ahimsa’ (non-violence)is included in the Preamble 
of the Indian Constitution, as requested by former hon. Chief Minister of Odisha, and 
passed through a unanimous resolution by Odisha Vidhan Sabha.       
      
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. associated themselves with the Special 
Mention raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu),  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo  (Odisha), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Prof. 
Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
[RAJYA SABHA]
86

 
(Karnataka), Shri Subhasish Khuntia (Odisha),   Shr i Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), 
and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).       
                                                                             
Demand for establishment of CGHS Wellness Centre in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh 
 
MS. INDU BALA GOSWAMI  (Himachal Pradesh):   Sir, through you I would like to 
draw the attention of the Hon'ble Health Minister t owards the need of CGHS Wellness 
Centre in District Kangra, Himachal Pradesh. 
 
[THE VICE- CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the chair. ] 
 
 People seeking treatment under CGHS in Kangra, Ham irpur, and Chamba 
have to travel to Chandigarh and Shimla, and being a hilly area, the journey takes a 
significant amount of time. Children, women, and el derly patients must arrange for 
accommodation with an attendant for treatment, whic h is also expensive. Hamirpur is 
90 kilometers from Kangra and 120 kilometers from C hamba,so people can only 
commute there and back in one day.  
 In the Kangra district, there are more than 20 cen tral Government offices in 
Dharamshala and the surrounding areas, where more t han ten thousand central 
Government CGHS beneficiary employees  are working.  Additionally, there are army 
personnel and members of other paramilitary forces serving there, along with their 
family members, including a significant number of e lderly people, women, and 
children. In these districts, almost every househol d has a member serving in the army 
or paramilitary forces, so there is a critical need  for a CGHS centre there. Therefore, I 
respectfully request the Hon’ble Minister to kindly instruct  the department to establish 
a CGHS Wellness Centre in Kangra. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by the hon. Member, Shrimati 
Indu Bala Goswami:  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil N adu) and Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
Shri Raghav Chadha. 
 
Concern over development work in Punjab 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab) : Thank you, Sir, for permitting me to speak on the 
Special Mention on a subject that concerns my State . The topic is, concern over 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
87

 
development works in Punjab. Sir, today, as a representative of Punjab, I rise to 
speak for the rights of my state, Punjab. Punjab is the state that has made the 
greatest sacrifices for the country. Punjab gave the country the Green Revolution and 
fed the country during difficult times. From the independence of the country till today, 
Punjab and Punjabis have done a lot for the nation. Punjab is called the breadbasket 
of India, and our farmers, who have given everything in the name of the country, 
today I stand here as the voice of those farmers. 
            Currently, various schemes in Punjab are awaiting the release of thousands of 
crores of rupees from the Central Government. The pending funds include 5,600 crore 
rupees for the Rural Development Fund, 1,100 crore rupees for the Mandi 
Development Fund, 1,100 crore rupees for the National Health Mission, 180 crore 
rupees for the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, and 1,800 crore rupees for Special 
Assistance for Capital Creation. We have consistently requested the disbursement of 
these funds. Today, on behalf of 3 crore residents of Punjab, I once more urge the 
Central Government to release our funds so that development projects in Punjab can 
be completed. Thank you. 
                                                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention Made by the hon. Member, 
Shri Raghav Chadha:  Shri Jaggesh (Karnataka), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal),  Dr. 
Ashok Kumar Mittal (Punjab),  Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab).                                                                     
Now, Shri Muzibulla Khan. 
 
Demand to establish full-fledged AIIMS in Koraput, Sambalpur and Balasore 
 
SHRI MUZIBULLA KHAN  (Odisha): Sir, there is a pressing need to establish 
dedicated AIIMS (All India Institutes of Medical Sciences) in Koraput, Sambalpur, 
and Balasore. The aim of this initiative is to expand and improve the state's healthcare 
infrastructure, making it more accessible and effective for the residents of Odisha. 
Odisha has made remarkable progress in healthcare, particularly through the Biju 
Swasthya Kalyan Yojana (BSKY), which has received national recognition for its 
excellence. BSKY has set new standards in providing comprehensive healthcare 
coverage and improving health outcomes across the state. 
 This state-led initiative demonstrates Odisha's strong commitment to equitable 
healthcare delivery and robust health infrastructure. Establishing full-fledged AIIMS 
[RAJYA SABHA]
88

 
facilities in Koraput, Sambalpur, and Balasore will  be a significant step towards 
enhancing Odisha's healthcare capabilities. These i nstitutions will provide specialized 
medical services, advanced research facilities, and  training for healthcare 
professionals, thus more effectively addressing the healthcare needs of these regions. 
Given the success of AIIMS in Bhubaneswar, expandin g this model to Koraput, 
Sambalpur, and Balasore will ensure that the benefi ts of advanced medical care are 
distributed equitably across the state. Sir, this e xpansion is crucial to bridge the 
existing healthcare gap and promote equitable development in health infrastructure.  
                                 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you ve ry much. The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with the Special  Mention raised by the hon. 
Member, Shri Muzibulla Khan:  Shrimati Sulata Deo ( Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Shri Subhasish Khuntia (Odisha), Shri A.A . Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala) and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).  
 Shrimati Sumitra Balmik, you speak.  
 
Demand to start Maharishi Valmiki Scholarship 
 
SHRIMATI SUMITRA BALMIK (Madhya Pradesh): Hon’ble D eputy Chairman Sir, 
thank you very much. I wish to draw the government’ s attention, through you, to the 
fact that the life of Valmiki Ji  inspires us to remain steadfast even in difficult 
circumstances and to work for the welfare of societ y. 
 He is a perfect example of how 
even an ordinary person can achieve greatness throu gh their actions and knowledge. 
His thoughts and teachings are still relevant today , especially when we talk about 
equality and justice in society. Today, students co ming from backward communities 
are  bringing glory to India all over the world. De spite many adverse circumstances, 
they are studying and achieving milestones that wer e previously considered 
unattainable. I request the Government to encourage  these students and alleviate the 
financial burden of education by introducing the Ma harishi Valmiki Scholarship of 
rupees 10,000 per year for students from class 5 to  class 12 studying in private 
schools. Along with this, online coaching should al so be provided for entrance exams 
for medical and engineering colleges. 
 The main objective of this scholarship is to empow er students through higher 
education and bring positive change in society. We believe that through this 
scholarship, many students will achieve success in their lives by following the ideals of 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
89

 
Maharishi Valmiki and will establish a better future in society. Sir, I request the 
Government to consider this. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you so much. The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention raised by the hon. 
Member, Shrimati Sumitra Balmik:  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha).  
 Shri Manoj Kumar Jha, you speak.  
 
Need for more doppler weather radars in Bihar 
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar): Hon’ble Vice Chairman Sir, thank you very much. 
I come from a disaster prone area. In Bihar, disasters occur in some part or the other 
during certain months of the year and this is my special mention in that context. 
           Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I rise today to address a critical issue affecting the 
State of Bihar, which have borne testament since years on and will bear the same 
especially as we move on to this monsoon season as well. 
It is the issue of floods in the State. Despite the Ministry of Finance 
acknowledging the State's vulnerability to floods in its recent Budget Speech, there 
remains an acute shortage of Doppler radar installations in Bihar. Currently, there is 
only one operational Doppler radar in the entire State, which is grossly insufficient to 
provide accurate and timely weather forecasts and warnings. 
Bihar's geographical location allows for rivers like Kosi, Bagmati, and Gandak 
to flow through it, making it particularly susceptible to severe flooding. As such, 73.63 
per cent of the geographical area of North Bihar is considered to be prone to floods. 
 Out of 38 districts, 28 districts get flooded, of which 15 are worst affected, 
causing huge loss of property, lives, farmlands and infrastructure. The inadequacy of 
Doppler radar installations significantly hampers the state's ability to predict and 
manage flood situations effectively.  Accurate weather forecasting is crucial for timely 
evacuation, disaster preparedness, and reducing the impact of floods on the 
population. The existing Doppler radar system alone cannot cover the vast and 
diverse topography of Bihar.  This insufficiency leads to delayed and sometimes 
inaccurate weather predictions, putting millions of lives at risk. Therefore, I urge the 
Government to prioritise the installation of additional Doppler radar system in Bihar. 
Thank you so much. Jai Hind! 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Prof. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
90

 
Manoj Kumar Jha:  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shr imati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Si vadasan (Kerala), Shri 
Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala) , Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Ms. 
Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala).        
  Shri Abdul Wahab; not present. Shri Gulam Ali. 
 
Demand for inclusion of Gojri language in the 8 
th  Schedule of the Constitution . 
 
SHRI GULAM ALI (Nominated) :  Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, as per Article s 
344 and 351, the Eighth Schedule was intended to pr omote the progressive use of 
Hindi and for the enrichment and promotion of other  languages. Initially, 14 languages 
were added and later on in 1967, 1992 and 2004, few  other comparatively lesser 
spoken languages were added. And as on today, there are 22 languages in the Eighth 
Schedule of the Constitution of India. The inclusio n of the languages in the Eighth 
Schedule has not been on the basis of them being wi dely spoken. Even Sindhi, which 
is spoken by only 0.003 per cent of people is inclu ded in a Eighth Schedule and so is 
Manipuri, Bodo, and Nepali. However, the Gojri lang uage, which is spoken by more 
than 3 per cent of Indians, is not included in Eigh th Schedule, even though spoken 
across all the northern States of India. This has r esulted in deep-seated resentment 
and discontentment among the Gujjars residing in Ra jasthan, Punjab, Haryana,  
Delhi, UP, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Jam mu & Kashmir. Although 
through various committees, criteria was tried to b e fixed for inclusion of the 
languages in the Eighth Schedule, but no uniform cr iteria could be agreed upon. The 
only one criterion which should prevail in inclusio n of a language in Eighth Schedule 
should be its widespread use like the Gojri which i s spoken in almost half of India in 
the northern States and even Arab, Europe, Afghanis tan and Pakistan and such. I 
demand that Gojri should be included in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of 
India. Thank you.    
                                                       
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by the hon. Member, Shri 
Gulam Ali:  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),and Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha).        
                               
Demand for setting up a Government Industrial Park in Chandauli District 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
91

 
SHRIMATI DARSHANA SINGH (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, I would like to bring to the 
attention of the Hon’ble Minister of Industry through you that my home district, 
Chandauli, has been identified by the Central Government as an 'Aspirational 
District,' whose development is crucial. Chandauli district is connected to the entire 
country by both road and rail, therefore, establishing a large Government industrial 
park in Chandauli would help in the development of the district and would also benefit 
other districts in Purvanchal. 
 The establishment of a Government industrial park in Chandauli district will not 
only generate employment opportunities for the common citizens of Chandauli but will 
also benefit many industrialists who currently go to other states due to the 
unavailability of a Government industrial park. Therefore, Hon’ble Minister, we request 
you to consider establishing a large Government industrial park in Chandauli district, 
keeping in mind the demands of the public and for employment generation. 
 
Request to resolve issues related to Jal Jeevan Mission in Odisha 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha) :  Sir, a recent study in Odisha revealed that 40.55 
per cent of the surveyed households lack access to safe drinking water.  This poses 
serious health risks and causes waterborne diseases due to contamination.  Despite 
the State Government 's BASUDHA Scheme, which aims to provide clean water to 
both rural and urban areas, there remains a pressing need for increased Central 
Assistance.  The challenges faced by Odisha in implementing the Jal Jeevan Mission 
deserve compassionate attention and collaborative solutions for the well-being of its 
residents.  The Central Government must investigate and address the challenges 
hindering the Jal Jeevan Mission in Odisha.  Collaboratively, the Union and State 
Government s can identify areas lacking safe water access and implement tailored 
schemes.  Sir, through you, I urge the Central Government to promptly resolve these 
issues. Thank you.  Jai Jagannath. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by Shrimati Sulata Deo:  Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Subhasish 
Khuntia (Odisha) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).      
 
Demand for direct train services from Pune to Nashik 
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
92

 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI (Maharashtra) :  Sir, I rise today to draw the 
attention of this august House to the urgent need f or a direct train service between 
Pune Junction and Nashik, primarily to facilitate t he travel of devotees visiting the 
Kalamandir, a revered temple of Lord Ram in Nashik. 
Nashik holds profound significance in Hindu mytholo gy as the place where 
Lord Ram had spent part of his exile.  The Kalamand ir attracts thousands of devotees 
from across India.  However, the absence of a direc t train link from Pune, a major 
urban center, poses significant inconvenience.  Cur rently, travellers from Pune must 
either change trains at Manmad or rely on bus servi ces to reach Nashik.  This indirect 
route not only extends the journey time but also in creases costs and discomfort, 
especially for elderly devotees and economically weaker sections. 
Introducing direct train service between Pune and N ashik would significantly 
improve access to the Kalamandir, thereby boosting religious tourism in the region.  
This initiative would reflect the Government's comm itment to preserving and 
promoting India's rich cultural heritage. 
Furthermore, establishing this train route would cr eate employment 
opportunities and spur economic development in the local areas.  It would also stand 
as a testament to the Government's dedication to fa cilitating the spiritual and cultural 
journeys of its citizens. 
Therefore, I urge hon. Railway Minister to consider  the immediate initiation of 
direct train services from Pune Junction to Nashik.   This move would not only meet 
the needs of the devotees but also underscore the G overnment 's commitment to 
upholding cultural values and ensuring public welfare.  Thank you, Sir.      
      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by Dr. Medha Vishram 
Kulkarni:  Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).   
  
Demand to increase the supply of Fertilizers to Odisha 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha) :  Sir, fertilizers are integral to sustaining agric ultural 
productivity by supplying essential nutrients cruci al for crop growth. Timely availability 
is imperative for successful agricultural practices as it directly impacts crop quality. 
 Last year, hon. former Chief Minister of Odisha, Sh ri Naveen Patnaik ji , 
formally communicated with the Union Minister of Ch emicals and Fertilizers, 
emphasizing the fertilizer shortage and requested f or a larger allocation of Di-
ammonium Phosphate (DAP) and Muriate of Potash (MOP). 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
93

 
In response to the fertilizer scarcity, the then Odisha Government led by our 
former Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik ji, implemented measures such as the 
Krushak Assistance of Livelihood and Income Augmentation (KALIA) and BALARAM 
Scheme, etc., to support the farming community of Odisha.  Despite these efforts, 
the persistent unavailability of fertilizers poses a significant challenge to crop 
production quality.  It is crucial for the Central Government to intervene promptly in 
addressing this issue. Therefore, Sir, through you, I respectfully request the Central 
Government to take requisite measures expeditiously to supply fertilizers to Odisha. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following Members associated 
themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Niranjan Bishi: 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha) and Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
(Odisha).  
 
Concern over increase in Anti-microbial resistance in India 
 
SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : Sir, the  Antimicrobial Resistance 
(AMR) is a growing problem in India with an increase of 5 to 10 percent in resistance 
levels for broad-spectrum antibiotics.   Factors such as indiscriminate use of 
antibiotics, easy over-the-counter availability and the misuse of strong antibiotic-
based treatment for common infections are exacerbating the AMR crisis. Treatment of 
infectious diseases like E.Coli and K.pneumonia has become exceptionally 
challenging due to the resistance to antibiotics like Imipenem.  According to a WHO 
report, India ranks high in multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) and drug-
resistant typhoid cases, posing immense difficulties in effective treatment due to the 
emergence of AMR.  The ICMR Report also flags this as a major concern. 
The new Action Plan 2.0 for AMR is pending finalisation and may have to be 
unveiled expeditiously to tackle this problem. Prominent medical professionals have 
warned that AMR in India has the potential to trigger the next epidemic.  Failure to 
address this issue urgently will result in severe consequences, including prolonged 
hospital stays, escalated treatment expenses, heightened post-treatment healthcare 
costs, and, most importantly, a grave threat to human life. Thus, I request the Central 
Government to swiftly prioritize and implement decisive measures to combat AMR 
with utmost urgency.           
                                                   
[RAJYA SABHA]
94

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following Members associated 
themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Me mber, Shri S. Niranjan Reddy: 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (W est Bengal), Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. V. Siva dasan (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr.  Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu).        
                          
                   Demand for implemention of Vajjar model across the country 
 
DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE (Maharashtra): Hon’ble  V ice-Chairman Sir, 
throughout India, children and youth with mental and physical disabilities are raised by 
their parents. The parents of these children with d isabilities are solely responsible for 
their care. Nonetheless, a sizable portion of the p opulation live without guardians, 
including those who are homeless, orphaned or menta lly and physically challenged 
children. These naturally disabled children have to  struggle against antisocial 
elements. 
             In order to nurture and rehabilitate s uch children, Shankar Baba Pundlikrao 
Papalkar has established a system for their upbring ing and rehabilitation in Vajhar 
village of Amravati district, Maharashtra, on the b asis of public funding. For his work, 
he was honoured this year with the Padma Shri award  by the Hon’ble President, 
Draupadi Murmu. Respected Shankar Baba Pundlikrao P apalkar has given life to 
these mentally and physically challenged youths. Th erefore, I request that the 
Secretary of the Department of Empowerment of peopl e with disabilites be invited to 
observe the Vajhar model for the rehabilitation of the mentally challenged, physically 
challenged, helpless, and the homeless. 
 Shankarbaba, who is 82 years old, has a heartfelt w ish, and I humbly request 
you that along with visiting the ashram, there shou ld be an adequate rehabilitation 
plan implemented by the Centre and the State Government for mentally and physically 
challenged individuals even after the age of 18. Pl ease issue a request to the relevant 
 
departments as soon as possible. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The hon. Member, Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) associated himself with the Sp ecial Mention made by hon. 
Member, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde.                    
 
Demand for 2 nd  Central University at Puri in Odisha 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
95

 
SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA (Odisha): Sir, I would like to thank you for giving me the 
opportunity to draw the attention of the Government to establish a new Central 
University in Puri, Odisha. Sir, there is only one Central University in Odisha out of 56 
Central Universities in India. Students from Odisha desiring quality education and 
research opportunities go to other States for higher education. Most of the gifted 
students, deprived of getting opportunity in Central University, Koraput, are forced to 
choose other universities outside Odisha. Many meritorious students dare not pursue 
higher studies outside the State due to their poor socio-economic conditions. The 
important reason for demanding another Central University in Puri, Odisha is the 
demographic picture that we have. Sir, Odisha has a youth population of over 1.7 
crore people, aged from 14 to 34 years in 2020, which is about 35 per cent of the 
State's population. Dreams of students will come true with a low-budget quality 
higher education with the establishment of second Central University in Puri, Odisha. 
Therefore, Puri is the best place to establish the 2 nd Central University because of its 
geographical location, the cultural, historical and spiritual significance of the abode of 
Lord Shree Jagannath and an international tourist place. I, on behalf of the people of 
Odisha, through you, Sir, urge upon the Minister of Education, who is also from 
Odisha, to consider and establish the 2 nd Central University at Puri, Odisha, and the 
long-cherished desire of the people of Odisha will be fulfilled.  Thank you.          
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri 
Subhasish Khuntia : Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala).         
                                                                              
Need to allocate funds to various Labour Welfare Boards whose funding was stopped 
due to repeal of various labour laws 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, there were various Labour Welfare Acts 
through which excise duties were collected, like Limestone, Dolomite Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund, Cine Workers Welfare Fund, etc., and the funds were being transferred 
to various Labour Boards. After the introduction of the GST regime, these Acts were 
repealed and the collection of excise was stopped. Similarly, after passing legislations 
on the four Labour Codes, certain labour welfare Acts relating to collection of cess 
like Iron, Manganese, Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, Beedi Workers 
Welfare Cess Act, Tea Cess, Salt Cess Act were repealed. So, here also, collection 
[RAJYA SABHA]
96

 
of cess, which used to be transferred to the respec tive Labour Welfare Boards, was 
stopped. As mentioned, Labour Welfare Boards like M ines Labour Welfare Board, 
Beedi Workers Welfare Board were spending money on the welfare of workers and 
their families relating to health, education, mater nity benefits, hospital treatment, 
group insurance, housing assistance, death-cum-reti rement benefits, etc. Now, 
these Welfare Boards do not have funds to carry out  their activities for the welfare of 
workers, and the workers are suffering. I would, th erefore, demand that the Ministry 
of Labour should recommend to the Ministry of Finan ce to take necessary action to 
allocate funds for various Labour Welfare Boards fo r continuing the activities of these 
Labour Welfare Boards, for the welfare of workers.  Thank you.       
                                                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by hon. Member, Shri M. 
Shanmugam: Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shr i M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Haris  Beeran (Kerala), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Ms. D ola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal).             
                                                               
Demand for establishment of virtual High Court Bench in Udaipur division 
 
SHRI CHUNNILAL GARASIYA (Rajasthan): Sir, Udaipur d ivision of Rajasthan is a 
tribal-dominated area and has been declared a T.S.P . area in Schedule V of the 
Government of India. I would like to bring to the a ttention of the Hon’ble Minister of  
Law and Justice that there has been a longstanding demand for establishing a bench 
of the Rajasthan High Court at the Udaipur Division al Headquarters. This demand has 
been continuously raised for nearly 37 years by the  general public of Udaipur division 
and the Bar Council. Currently, the people of Udaip ur division have to go to Jodhpur 
High Court for justice, which is quite distant. For  the tribal community, traveling there 
is very expensive and time-consuming. 
 Therefore, through you, I would like to request th e Minister of Law and Justice 
regarding this issue and put forward my demand that  in the changing digital era, a 
Virtual High Court Bench should be immediately esta blished at the Udaipur Division 
Headquarters, so that the general public of Udaipur Division can get the 
 benefit in fast 
track manner and their time and expenses can be sav ed in obtaining justice and 
rights. Thank you. 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
97

 
Demand to convert Salem to Chengapalli NH-544 from 4 lanes to 6 lanes in Tamil 
Nadu 
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, I bring to your kind notice that the 
Salem-Chengapalli stretch (103 km) is part of the Salem-Kochi Highway (NH 544) in 
South India. It connects Salem (Tamil Nadu) to Kochi (Kerala) and major hubs like 
Coimbatore, Erode and Namakkal. It's an essential route for domestic agricultural and 
poultry exports. Over 20,000 commercial vehicles and many domestic vehicles use 
this route daily. The highway also serves 15-plus academic institutions, which operate 
their own transport vehicles. 
 Sir, in light of this, I raised a question regarding the same to the Minister of 
Road Transport and Highways for which I received a reply that the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) has been awarded.  I submit that this project is feasible.  Traffic in this 
route needs to be managed.  On a day-to-day basis, traffic on this route is increasing 
and vehicle jam has become more frequent due to various reasons including minor 
and major accidents. On an average, every vehicle additionally spends minimum 30 
minutes to 45 minutes daily to reach the destination, spending 3-5 litres of additional 
fuel per trip and polluting the environment. 
 Therefore, I humbly request the Minister of Road Transport and Highways via 
this august House to convert the 103 km stretch of NH - 544 from 4 lanes to 6 lanes 
considering the needs and necessity. This initiative not only reduces the pollution, but 
also saves approximately one lakh litres of fuel wasted by the vehicles stuck in traffic. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri  
K.R.N. Rajeshkumar: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu).   
                                  
Concern over wrong prescriptions being issued to patients 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal) :  Sir, I would like to express the concern of 
citizens to the fact that several doctors are reported to be giving wrong prescriptions. 
 In fact, one of the nation’s highest medical bodies, the Indian Council of 
Medical Research (ICMR), has published the report of its study at 13 medical 
institutions including AIIMS and Safdarjung, and stated that around 45 per cent of the 
doctors are writing incomplete prescriptions. This report has also stated that ten per 
[RAJYA SABHA]
98

 
cent of prescriptions had 'unacceptable deviations'  like inappropriate prescription of 
medications or more than one diagnosis. There are s everal other worrisome findings 
that require to be addressed. Through this Council,  I would request the Health 
Minister to kindly elucidate what are the steps tha t the Government is taking on this 
report not only in the hospitals where the ICMR stu dy was conducted but elsewhere 
across other hospitals as well. Thank you.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by the hon. Member, Shri 
Jawhar Sircar: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Si vadasan (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri N iranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri 
Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Ta mil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and S hri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
(Assam).    
 
                     Request for starting a Sainik School in Puducherry 
 
SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY (Kerala) : Sir, Sainik Schools are a system of public 
school in India established and managed by the Sain ik School Society under the 
Ministry of Defence. The primary objective of Saini k Schools is to prepare students 
academically, mentally and physically for entry int o the National Defence Academy 
(NDA), the Indian Naval Academy (INA) and the Air F orce Academy. There are 33 
Sainik Schools in the country and the Ministry of D efence has proposed to establish 
100 more boarding Sainik Schools with the help of p ublic private partnership (PPP) 
mode. Puducherry, being a Union Territory, has a ri ch population of young children. 
But nowadays, they are diverted from disciplined li fe towards narcotics. It is now 
imperative that they should be brought back to make  them better citizens of India. If a 
residential Sainik School is established in Puduche rry, it would be a great opportunity 
to contribute to national defence also. The Puduche rry Government will come forward 
to provide facilities like land, infrastructure, et c., for running the school. With the 
opening of the Sainik School, it would also uphold the reservation policy which mainly 
caters to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribe s, residents of Puducherry and 
the wards of Armed Forces employees and ex-servicem en, who had served this 
country. Therefore, I urge the Central Government t o start one residential Sainik 
School in the interests of the people of Puducherry. Thank you.                                                   
                                                              
Concern over flood affected people in Kirandul of Dantewada 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
99

 
 
SHRIMATI PHULO DEVI NETAM (Chhattisgarh): Sir, the National Mineral 
Development Corporation (NMDC), a Navratna public sector enterprise under the 
Ministry of Steel, is the largest producer of iron ore in India. In Dantewada, 
Chhattisgarh, massive water inflow from NMDC's mine on the Bailadila hills has 
wreaked havoc in the town of Kirandul. The lifelong savings of poor tribals have been 
washed away, hundreds of people have been injured, several have been disabled, 
houses and shops have collapsed, and roads and vehicles have been swept away. 
The state Government has mentioned that the wall of a check dam broke and has 
provided the victims with only 20,000 rupees as financial assistance. 
 Sir, NMDC has built 11 temporary check dams over several acres on the hill. 
They do not have any strong permanent walls. During heavy rainfall, NMDC removed 
the earthen embankment, which caused flooding in Kirandul town. 
           Therefore, through you, I request that a high-level investigation be conducted 
into this matter. 
 
3.00 P.M. 
  
 NMDC should fully compensate the victims for their losses. The injured should 
be given jobs, and the temporary check dam should be repaired to prevent future 
accidents. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam:  Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri A. A. 
Rahim (Kerala).  
             
Demand to increase the bed strength at ESIC Medical College and PGIMSR,  
K.K. Nagar, Chennai to 1,200 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, the ESIC Medical College & 
PGIMSR, Kalaignar Karunanidhi Nagar, Chennai is one of the most important centres 
for health care services especially to lakhs of people in Chennai.  This hospital was 
initially commissioned as a 250 bedded hospital in the year 1979 and was under the 
control of Tamil Nadu State Government till 1991.  To open a Zonal Occupational 
Diseases Centre in South India, the hospital was taken over and is being run by the 
[RAJYA SABHA]
100

 
ESI Corporation, New Delhi from 1991.  Presently, t his hospital is functioning as a 
Model Hospital with multi-specialty treatment facil ity and Occupational Diseases 
Centre. The Hospital is catering to referral cases from 15 ESI dispensaries and other 
hospitals in Chennai covering an insured population  of over 5 Lakhs.  There are 
several lakh employees in and around Chennai needin g quality medical care. 
Providing social security to insured workers, bring ing more workers from unorganised 
sector under the ambit of ESI Scheme, service deliv ery augmentation is the need of 
the hour service. For this the current strength of specialist doctors needs to be 
increased adequately. There are several issues pertaining to the medical, paramedical 
and non medical staff in this hospital which needs to be addressed immediately.   
I urge the union Government to increase the bed str ength at ESIC Medical 
College & PGIMSR, K.K. Nagar, Chennai to 1,200 and to develop a state-of-the-art 
cath lab and a separate oncology block to cater the  needs of millions of workers 
population in Greater Chennai Region.  Thank you.       
                                                          
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by the hon. Member, Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu:  Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shr i M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri K.R.N. Ra jeshkumar (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu).    
 Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu, to speak in Punjabi. 
 
Demand for proposed Military Academy at Sri Anandpur Sahib 
 
SHRI SATNAM SINGH SANDHU (NOMINATED) : Sir, the cit y of Sri Anandpur Sahib 
holds historical significance for the Punjabi commu nity and the Sikh community. This 
'Holy City of Bliss' is one of the holiest places f or Sikhs, after Amritsar. It is closely 
linked to the religious traditions and history of S ikhism and is one of the five most 
important religious places for Sikhs. 
 
 It is also the birthplace of the Khalsa Panth. It was here that Guru Gobind 
Singh founded the Khalsa Panth on Baisakhi Day in 1 699. Every year, millions of 
devotees from around the world visit Sri Keshgarh S ahib to pay homage. The Hola 
Mohalla festival in Sri Anandpur Sahib is also famo us all over the world. In 1999, the 
300th birthday celebrations of Sri Khalsa were cele brated throughout India and the 
world. During the celebrations, the then Prime Mini ster, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, 
inaugurated the celebrations in Anandpur Sahib on A pril 8, 1999, and gifted a military 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
101

 
academy to the holy city. However, the issue later cooled down, and the 
establishment of the military academy is still pending. 
 As we all know, this Government works on the motto of 'Nation First', 
therefore, in this regard, I request the Government to kindly look into this matter and 
consider granting the right to establish a military academy in Shri Anandpur Sahib. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Satnam Singh Sandhu:  Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
(Punjab).    
                               
Demand to complete approval process of Bongaigaon Refinery (BGR), project 
expansion in Assam 
 
SHRI RWNGWRA NARZARY (Assam) : Sir, Bongaigaon Refinery (BGR) located in 
the district of Chirang, Bodoland Territorial Region has tirelessly served this nation 
since 1974 and has been fuelling the growth engine of the province of Assam and 
state of India.  Under the Hydro carbon Vision 2030 then MoS for the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas announced Government of India's decision to finance and 
support BGR expansion from 2.7 MMTPA to 5 MMTPA on 17 th November, 2021 at 
BGR auditorium during the celebration of Azadi Ki Amrit Mahotsav.  
 This declaration was well-received and was applauded by the people of Assam. 
Accordingly, we were hopeful that the process of approval of the BGR expansion 
project would be completed without delay and the foundation laying ceremony for 
BGR also would be done along with the foundation of Digboi Refinery on the last 9 th 
March, 2024.  So, BTC Government expedited land allotment process and allotment 
letter issued to IOCL for 532 bigha land and propose to offer additional 300 bigha land 
and requested IOCL for consent.  But it is a matter of concern that till now the 
approval process after MoS statement has not completed. BGR’s sustainability will 
depend on the timely intervention by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. As 
the financial year, 2023-24, was fixed as outlook for completion of expansion of BGR, 
I request the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas to intervene immediately on 
approval process and save a famous and legacy refinery from ending for the interest 
of the people of Assam. 
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
102

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), associated himself with the Special Menti on made by the hon. Member, 
Shri Rwngwra Narzary.                     
 
Demand to abolish GST on Assistive Products for persons with disabilities and 
ensuring adequate budgetary support 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Sir, there is an urgent need to address the proble ms 
endured by millions of persons with disabilities. I mposition of 5 per cent GST on 
essential aids like prosthetic limbs, wheelchairs, braillers, etc. is a financial burden. 
These devices are not luxury items; they are essent ial lifelines enabling their 
independence, mobility, education, and employment. 2011 Census reported 
approximately 2.68 crore individuals with disabilit ies, a number that is likely to have 
increased significantly since then. The Artificial Limb Manufacturing Corporation of 
India, the premier Government agency supplying assi stive living equipments 
nationwide, has been of great assistance. Neverthel ess, its budgetary allocation has 
been significantly reduced over the years, compound ing the challenges.  I urge the 
Government to initiate immediate discussions with G ST Council to abolish GST on 
assistive products for persons with disabilities an d to allocate increased budgetary 
support for their well being.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by the hon. Member, Dr. John 
Brittas: Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Niranjan B ishi (Odisha), Shri Anil Kumar 
Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala ),  Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Sh ri Jawhar Sircar (West 
Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).          
                                                     
Concern over aviation safety incident at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International 
Airport (CSMI Airport) Mumbai 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA (Maharashtra) : Sir, on June 8 
th , an IndiGo aircraft 
touched down at Mumbai’s Chhatrapati Shiva ji  Maharaj International Airport merely 
seconds after an Air India aircraft took off. At th e time, the distance between the two 
aircrafts was barely 2,000 feet. This was one of th e closest and scariest air traffic 
incidents in recent history. In response to my lett er, the DGCA assured an 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
103

 
investigation and corrective action for the incident.  Mumbai’s airport is one of the 
world’s busiest single-runway airports, handling nearly 1,000 flights daily, with up to 
46 arrivals and departures per hour. Last year, the airport handled almost 4.4 crore 
passengers with flight operations rising from 1,86,000 in the financial year, 2022 to 
2,90,000 in the financial year 2023.  Despite the Civil Aviation Ministry’s 14 th February, 
2024, directive to reduce flight numbers, the summer schedule saw an 8 per cent 
increase in weekly flight movement, clearly indicating the need for a permanent 
solution to decongest CSMIA.  The only long-term solution is the timely completion of 
the Navi Mumbai International Airport in Ulwe. I urge upon the Government at both the 
Centre and in Maharashtra for accelerating its development and targeting commercial 
operations by 31st March, 2025 and ensuring that every effort be made to prevent any 
further delays in its operationalization.  Additionally, I urge upon the Civil Aviation 
Ministry to invest in developing indigenous AI technology to assist ATC towers in 
managing traffic more efficiently. Embracing innovative technology will not only 
enhance safety, but also position us as leaders in aviation management.           
                                                         
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Milind Murli Deora : Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala).                                        
 Now Shri Kartikeya Sharma. 
 
  Request for establishment of Industrial Model Township (IMT) in Ambala 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA (Haryana) : Sir, the establishment of an Industrial Model 
Township (IMT) in Ambala has been a public demand for the past 14-15 years, driven 
by the region's economic potential and the need to strengthen its industrial 
infrastructure. Located at the national highway network, Ambala enjoys excellent 
connectivity to major cities like Delhi and Chandigarh. However, Ambala's current 
industrial setup is still underdeveloped, which hampers the region's economic growth 
and limits employment opportunities. 
 Sir, the establishment of IMT in Ambala will not only reduce the unemployment 
rate there but also strengthen the economic stability of the area. The development of 
infrastructure associated with IMT, including better roads, civic amenities, and 
logistics facilities, will enhance connectivity and quality of living, benefiting not only 
industrial operations but also the daily lives of residents. Similarly, the closure of the 
HMT factory in Kalka has had a significant impact on the industries in and around the 
[RAJYA SABHA]
104

 
Ambala parliamentary constituency. Although the rea son was the lack of basic 
development, road connectivity, etc., in the city, it has slowed the overall 
development of the Ambala parliamentary constituenc y. Therefore, I request the 
Government of India to establish a suitable industr y in Kalka as soon as possible to 
promote its development. 
 Sir, the establishment of IMT in Ambala will ensur e the development of not only 
Ambala but also the entire Haryana and surrounding areas. 
 
Demand to teach traffic rules subject in the country from primary level in schools 
 
SHRI AMAR PAL MAURYA (Uttar Pradesh):  Sir, when a person performs a task 
considering it as their duty, it becomes an integra l part of her/his life. When a child is 
small, their parents tell them that this is the mot her, this is the brother, and this is the 
sister. They make the child aware of this, and when  they grow up, they learn their 
duties towards their parents. As the child grows, t hey become aware of this and 
subsequently fulfill their responsibilities throughout their life. 
 Sir, traffic rules also need to be learned from su ch spirit. Today, people wear 
helmets out of fear of being fined, and they also w ear seat belts in cars for the same 
reason. Such sentiments need to change. Traffic pol ice also issue challans to collect 
revenue, and there is also a system in the Governme nt that requires issuing a certain 
number of challans in a year. 
            Sir, today there is a pressing need to improve both these systems so that both 
human lives and public funds can be saved. Therefor e, my appeal to the Government 
is that whether at the school level or in colleges,  in all types of institutions in our lives 
and in all organizations where people work, the study of traffic rules and their practical 
implementation on the road should be taken up as a duty, not done out of fear. This is 
the need of the hour. 
 Sir,thank you very much for giving me the opportun ity to express my views 
here. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made  by the hon. Member, Shri 
Amar Pal Maurya: Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), Sh ri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai 
Nayak (Gujarat), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and  Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
(Uttarakhand). 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
105

 
Concern over critical railways safety staffing issues amidst tragic mishaps 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN (KARNATAKA) :  Sir, I bring to the House’s attention a 
critical issue affecting the safety of the Indian Railways. As of March 2024, over 1.5 
lakh safety positions remain vacant, constituting more than 15% of sanctioned roles. 
This shortage is especially severe in crucial positions like train drivers and inspectors.  
Recent train mishaps highlight the urgent need for action.  Since the tragic Odisha rail 
accident last year, which claimed over 290 lives, India has witnessed numerous 
derailments.         
                
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 Notably, in the past six weeks alone, three passenger train accidents have 
resulted in 17 deaths and over 100 injuries. The most recent incident near 
Barabamboo in Jharkhand, where 18 coaches of the Howrah-Mumbai Mail derailed, 
has already claimed two lives and injured over 20 passengers. 
It is reported that 14,429 loco pilot posts are vacant out of 70,093, and 4,337 
assistant driver positions are unfilled out of 57,551 posts. Immediate action is 
required. I urge the hon. Minister of Railways to prioritize filling these safety-critical 
positions to ensure the safety of millions who depend on our Railways daily.        
                   
MR. CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with the 
Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain:   Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu). 
 Rest of the Special Mentions will be taken up later in the day. 
  GENERAL DISCUSSION  The Union Budget, 2024-25  and  
                                        
 Further general discussion continued from 30.07.2024. 
 Discussed together. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
106

 
*The Budget of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  All the Members who had given their names to part icipate in the 
General Discussion on the Union Budget 2024-25 and the Budget of Union Territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir 2024-25 have already participated . Now, the hon. Minister of 
Finance will reply to the discussion; hon. Minister of Finance. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPOR ATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN) : Thank you very much, hon. Chairman Sir. 
There has been a very robust discussion on the Budg et. I understand 83 speakers 
have participated in the discussion that actually shows the interest that hon. Members 
have taken on the topic. After a brief introduction  which I would like to begin with, I 
would go by issues clubbing several Members who hav e spoken on a particular issue 
and so on for various different issues. I will also  try to refer to the names of the hon. 
Members who have raised these issues while answering.  
Sir, this Budget of 2024-25, is actually a continua tion of the Interim Budget. 
So, the features, the critical aspects of the Inter im Budget are naturally subsumed 
into this regular Budget. Since, 2014, the principl e which has guided us is the 'Sabka 
Sath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas and Sabka Prayas' which continues in this Budget 
as well and hopefully will guide for the next five years, this set of five years being very 
critical in taking the first steps towards building  a 'Viksit Bharat' by 2047. This Budget 
strikes a fine balance amongst several overriding p riorities; growth, employment, 
welfare spending, capital investments and fiscal co nsolidation are all equally given a 
place and we have tried balancing all of them.  
Sir, I had promised in this House in 2021-22, the Government would endeavour 
to attain a fiscal deficit to the GDP level below 4 .5 per cent by the year 2025-26. We 
had reached an unprecedented high number of 9.2 per  cent in the year 2020-21 and 
we are well on track to attain that target. 
According to the IMF, India's share in the global g rowth is 16 per cent and it is 
also rising. While this Budget seeks to consolidate  our earlier accomplishments, I 
have announced a slew of measures aimed at providin g renewed impetus to the 
manufacturing sector.  
 I would just like to take a few minutes on expandin g on this. The aim is to 
boost domestic employment, create employment opport unities and ensure high and 
sustained increase in India’s share in the global G DP over the next five years.  Several 
measures have been taken.  In this Budget, in parti cular, we had mentioned about 
the Basic Customs Duty which has been reduced on sp ecific items.  Together with 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
107

 
the Production Linked Incentives given for mobiles, India, now, already produces 97 
per cent of all total mobile phones in demand in the country.  And, 30 per cent of total 
production in India, in the year 2024, has gone for exports, exclusively. So, India’s 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme stands out as a successful scheme. Taking this 
one example, and in the other thirteen sectors also, – there are fourteen altogether – 
we see a lot of interest in investing and producing, so that India becomes a 
manufacturing hub.  The PLI Scheme which was brought in because we wanted to 
attract a lot of investment into India is seeing a lot of interest and continues to see a 
lot of interest in investors. 
 Further, in this Budget, we have also set up a critical mineral mission for 
domestic production and for recycling of critical minerals.  We are also envisaging 
overseas acquisitions of critical mineral assets.  Further, we fully exempted the 
Customs Duty on 25 critical minerals and reduced the Basic Customs Duty on two of 
them.  The two were differentiated from the rest for particular reasons.  So, there is 
reduction in two and full exemption for 25 other critical minerals. 
 I have also announced the development of investment ready plug-and-play 
industrial parks in and around 100 cities of India. That would immediately be a big 
attraction for people to come and set up businesses. Being closer to cities, it will 
enable them to have good skilled workforce to be employed.  We are working 
towards establishing three Centres of Excellence in top educational institutions for 
realising the vision of ‘Make AI in India and Make AI work for India.’ That was 
mentioned in the Budget 2022-23.  We are further strengthening the AI Excellence 
Centres being built in top educational institutions. 
Sir, in March, 2024, the Government approved e-Vehicle Policy to promote 
India as a manufacturing destination, so that e-vehicles, with the latest technology, 
can be manufactured in our country.  
Furthermore, I go back to the point I had made in 2021 Budget about the new 
Public Sector Enterprises Policy which clearly opened up all sectors in India for private 
participation also.  Public sector will continue in critical core sector and strategically 
important sectors. But, private sector has now been allowed into every sector; none 
of which is reserved for public sector alone.  I take the example of space sector here.  
Opening up of this sector has helped and, today, space sector StartUps are receiving 
funds and India is now becoming a big hub for space sector innovation and space 
sector StartUps. The recent newspaper announcements have clearly been stating the 
kind of investment interest being generated. The figures are not readily available with 
me. But, I know that US$ 126 million funding was received by StartUps in 2023.  But, 
the flow continues.  Further, both in the last year’s Budget and this year, we have 
[RAJYA SABHA]
108

 
allocated resources for the National Research Found ation under the National 
Research Foundation Act, 2023. 
 This time also, the Anusandhan Research Foundation has had allocation we 
made.  Last year itself, we declared Rs. 50,000 crores for over five years for research, 
along with private sector. So, in these ways, we ha ve tried making India an attractive 
manufacturing destination and given good incentives  and impetus for manufacturing 
to set up business in India.  
 Now, a brief look at some highlights of the number s that I want to speak 
about.  The total expenditure in the Union Governme nt ’s Budget Statement 2024-25 
is Rs. 48.21 lakh crores.  The total expenditure in  the regular Budget, 2024-25, is Rs. 
54,744 crores more than that of the Interim Budget,  which was presented in 
February, this year. The highlight, which I would l ike to draw the attention of the hon. 
Members, is that the capital expenditure is pegged at Rs. 11 lakh crores.  And, this is 
one of the biggest-ever allocation made for capital  expenditure.  And, this shows a 17 
per cent increase over the provisional actuals of F inancial Year 2023-24.  Seventeen 
per cent increase over the last year! But, in this context, I would like to highlight one 
important fact about the capital expenditure, which  happened during the UPA era.  
The CapEx allocation was Rs. 13.19 lakh crores from  2004-05 to 2013-14.  The ten 
years of UPA saw Rs. 13.19 lakh crores; whereas, during our tenure, ending 2024, the 
allocation for capital expenditure is Rs. 43.82 lak h crores.  So, the emphasis that we 
have given, particularly after COVID, is that the c apital expenditure, being one of the 
very important routes through which the economic re vival can be planned, has 
actually shown results, but the actual numbers are these.   
There is also interest among Members to know if the  transfer to the States has 
been proper and as has been recommended by the Fina nce Commissions. I would 
like to underline an unflinching commitment to coop erative federalism.  The total 
resources proposed to be transferred to the States this year, that is, 2024-25 is 
estimated to be Rs. 22.91 lakh crores.  This actual ly entails an increase of about Rs. 
2.49 lakh crores over 2023-24.  Even compared to la st year, it is an increase of about 
Rs. 2.49 lakh crores. Similarly, the outlays for all Union Territories have also increased 
from Rs. 61,118 crores in 2023-24 to Rs. 68,660 cro res in 2024-25.  So, the States 
and the Union Territories are clearly getting, and getting in time, the resources which 
are expected to be released for them.   
Although the Budget documents have details of diffe rent schemes, yet I am 
moving over to this point about sectoral allocation s.  So, there is this interest to know 
if the allocations for certain particular sectors h ave increased or decreased, I would 
like to just give a comparative picture.  Agricultu ral and allied sectors, in 2024-25, 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
109

 
received Rs. 1.52 lakh crores, which is Rs. 8,000 crores more than the last year; there 
is no reduction.  Just for comparison, in 2013-14, when the UPA term was over, they 
had given only Rs. 30,000 crores; Rs. 30,000 crores then and Rs. 1.52 lakh crores 
now!                                                              
 Sir, in the 2024-25 Budget, the allocation for education, employment and 
skilling is Rs.1.48 lakh crores; it is Rs.28,000 crores more than the last year whereas, 
again, in 2013-14, it was only Rs.85,000 crores.  For women and girls,  the allocation 
in the current Budget is Rs.3.27 lakh crores, which is 41 per cent, that is, Rs.96,000 
crores more allocation compared to the previous year.   It was Rs.96,000 crores  in 
2013-14. Similarly, for rural development, in 2024-25, the current Budget gives 
Rs.2.66 lakh crores, Rs.28,000 crores more as compared to last year and it was just 
Rs.87,000 crores in 2013-14. For urban development, the allocation is Rs.83,000 
crores.  It is Rs.7,000 crores more than the last year.  It was Rs.12,000 crores in 
2013-14.  For health and social welfare, the allocation is Rs.1.46 lakh crores.  
Compared to last year, it is Rs.3,000 crores more than the last year and it is 
Rs.72,000 crores more than 2013-14. I have already mentioned about the fiscal 
deficit.  I just want to highlight that we had projected 5.1 per cent of the GDP as the 
fiscal deficit in the Interim Budget, whereas now, when we have presented the regular 
Budget for this year, it has been brought down further to 4.9 per cent and we aim to 
reach the deficit below 4.5 per cent next year, sticking to the glide path given in 2020-
21.   It was also said in the Budget speech that from 2026-27 onwards, our endeavour 
will be to adhere to a path that ensures that the Central Government ’s debt, as a 
percentage of GDP, is on the declining trend.  Our focus will be on that.   
 Sir, I would like to mention in this august House that the weighted average 
yield, which is broadly the one which corresponds to the average cost of borrowing of 
the Central Government ’s securities issued during the ten years  period of 2014-15 to 
2023-24, is lower by about 60 basis points than the period between 2004-05 to 2013-
14.  I am giving a very notional idea but it helps to put all  things in perspective.  If the  
borrowings in UPA-I and UPA-II were near  the rates obtained by us, -- I know it is 
determined  by so many other factors, market and so on - which could have been 
possible if they had our policies and our kind of credibility, it would have resulted in 
notional interest savings of approximately Rs.35,000 crores for the Government .  
Just to bring in the perspective, -- you can always be questioned saying, oh! how 
can you bring a notional -- this points to recognition of this Government ’s fiscal 
management.  And, this observation, the Government’s fiscal management prowess, 
is an observation of global observers, domain experts and, of course, dispassionate 
economists that the fiscal management of this Government , which is a typical good 
[RAJYA SABHA]
110

 
feature, which the then hon. CM of Gujarat  and now  the PM of country has always 
maintained, namely, fiscal prudence, is one of the very important governance 
principles.   Hon. Members would, therefore, be ple ased to know that with all these 
macro-economic stability related features, the IMF has recently  upgraded India’s  
gross domestic product growth in the year 2024-25 t o seven per cent.  So, from an 
exceptionally low hit GDP growth  during Covid, wit hin a few years to rise to be the 
fastest growing economy in the world, I think could  not have been possible without 
the hard work and toil of all Indians…. -- irrespec tive of the sectors in which they are, 
whether farmers, workers, informal sector workers, construction workers, the 
entrepreneurs, the MSMEs and so on -- and the visio nary leadership, which has a 
futuristic vision, because from the front, the Prim e Minister leads the economy, and 
we are able to achieve this. 
Sir, I also presented the Budget for the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. 
I just want to highlight a few important features b efore I move on to responding to 
hon. Members' issues which they had raised on the B udget. I am happy to inform 
about the concrete steps that have been taken by th e Union Territory Administration 
to free itself from the legacy fiscal distress-rela ted issues which they had inherited 
from the erstwhile State, and this has borne good r esults. With substantial financial 
support given by the Government of India, Rs. 17,00 0 crores have been provided as 
support in the Union Budget of UT this year. The fi scal deficit to GSTP ratio of the 
Union Territory of J&K is estimated at 3 per cent f or the Financial Year, 2024-25. 
There is clearly a sign that public finances of UT of Jammu and Kashmir is now back 
on the rails. The Government has worked very hard, unhindered, towards fulfilling the 
development aspirations of the people of Jammu and Kashmir with great sense of 
fiscal responsibility. Because I am dealing with Ja mmu and Kashmir Budget now and 
later I go to the General Budget, there are issues which have been raised about J&K 
Budget which has been tabled in this House, both in side and outside of this august 
House.  
Now, I take this opportunity with your permission, Sir, to address issues which 
have been raised in this House and equally because of importance given of those 
issues which have been raised outside as well. Sir,  the first issue is, borrowings have 
risen from Rs. 12,000 crores to Rs. 24,000 crores i n the last two years and it is 
unprecedented, and it shows fiscal mismanagement. This is an allegation. I would like 
to respond, Sir. Unlike other States and Union terr itories, J&K has been plagued 
with pressures from externally-sponsored terrorism.  This is not a secret. All of us 
know it. In addition, historical legacy of poor gov ernance -- and I reiterate this point, 
Sir, historical legacy of poor governance -- and lo w-revenue base had created a 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
111

 
situation of near-perpetual distress and dependence on the Union Government , just 
no way in which the State could have run without the Union helping them, and that is 
how the main feature of J&K's State's Budget was and also the economy was.  
Given this kind of a legacy, inheritance that we have got, as part of the efforts to 
correct lingering fiscal distortions and for enabling transparent disclosure of the fiscal 
situation, the Union Territory Administration has brought off-budget borrowings onto 
its books. This has been done within the borrowing ceiling allowed to the Union 
Territory in each of the years which have gone by. So this is something which I have 
to state with conviction that the UT was permitted to undertake additional borrowings 
against unutilized borrowing space from the previous years to take off-budget 
borrowings on the Budget and finance its expenditure commitments.  
Sir, the questions also, or the allegations also, were that fiscal deficit was 
pegged at 1.6 per cent and it has turned to 5.36 in FY '24, more than three times the 
original estimate, and also that the Capex has been slashed by 10 per cent.  The 
question, therefore was, will the Central Government take blame for fiscal profligacy 
at the State level? I would like to dispel any confusion in the minds of people. Along 
with the special support of Rs. 17,000 crore which has been announced in this Budget 
from the Union Government , several other things are happening along with the efforts 
in recent past would reduce the fiscal deficit, and I hope it will reduce the fiscal deficit 
to 3.3 per cent actually in 2024-25. 
 So, it is not just the Rs.17,000 crores that has been given as a special support, 
but also because of the efforts which have been put in the last few years.   I think 
fiscal deficit will be back at 3 per cent.  While tax revenue has seen impressive 
growth, efforts on metering has improved building and collection efficiency in the 
power sector and that has also resulted in non-tax revenues increasing from Rs.5,148 
crores in 2022-23 to Rs.6,500 crores in 2023-24. It is a big reform step that has been 
taken, well received by the people, and as a result of which we are able to have 
collection efficiency in the power sector and I appreciate the J&K Administration for 
having taken this effort which is showing results for its own benefit. The Union 
Territory has other very important points -- this is a point which I submit to your 
consideration and for the august House to recognise -- that it discontinued the earlier 
practices of running Hundis and overdrafts from J&K Bank for its day-to-day cash 
management. This was a feature. Every year, this would literally be a burden on J&K 
Bank, and equally, a lazy comfort for the administration, that they could do this 
operation with the J&K Bank and get away with being transparent in the way in 
which they handled their accounts. I am glad that this practice has been 
discontinued. During the last four years, the J&K Bank has made a remarkable 
[RAJYA SABHA]
112

 
turnaround.  From a loss-making bank of Rs.1,139 cr ores of rupees in 2019-20, the 
bank has now made a profit of Rs.1,700 crores in th e year 2023-24.  So, that is the 
kind of turnaround and that is the kind of efficien cy with which the bank is now 
performing, being run professionally since after 20 19. Capital expenditure for the 
Union Territory has also increased from Rs.10,634 c rore rupees in 2022- 23, to 
Rs.12,101 crore in 2023-24, recording a 13.8% growt h.  So, J&K, Union territory 
and their situation is in a healthy fiscal situatio n being able to meet the development 
aspirations of the State.  One other point of criti cism, if I may say so, has been that 
the State's tax to GDP ratio increased from 5 per c ent to 8 per cent in three years. 
Does this mean the people of J&K are subject to hea vy taxation without any 
corresponding increase in their welfare? This is on e of the questions asked. I like to 
highlight that J&K's higher tax to GDP ratio is due  to better compliance and effective 
monitoring of the taxation system. I would  like to mention that with the introduction of 
GST, the tax rate across the country is the same on  all GST products. The rate of 
taxation on non-GST items are either at par with ot her States or only lower and not 
higher in J&K. Revenues from GST, motor spirit tax,  excise, stamp duties were 
Rs.9,467 crores in 2019-20.  It has increased to Rs.13,903 crores in the year 2023-24. 
So the administration is showing efficiency in coll ecting from non-GST tax also. And 
as a result, the fiscal health of the State is also  improving. So the UT has also given 
care to expand the dealer registrations, improved G ST return compliances, initiated a 
lot of e-stamping systems and conducted transparent  excise auctions, very 
important, Sir, transparent excise auctions.            
 So, that itself gives a lot of confidence about the  way in which J&K 
Administration is moving.  On the employment rates,  for 15 to 59 year olds, the 
unemployment rate has come down from 6.4 per cent in 2020-21, gradually to 5.7 per 
cent in 2021-22, and to 4.4 per cent in 2022-23.  T his has become possible because 
of substantial public investments that have led to creation of avenues of employment 
opportunities.  
I would like the hon. Members and yourself, the hon. Chairman, Sir, to listen to 
the next issue, for which I will give my response.  But I am a bit concerned about the 
way this kind of a charge has been made on the Unio n Government .  The allegation 
is, and I read it, “Perhaps the most worrying development is the FM's a nnouncement 
that the Union Government has agreed to take the en tire burden of the budget of 
police in J&K by spending Rs.12,000 crores.  It fur ther goes to say, “This was earlier 
being done by the Union Government as part of the s ecurity reimbursement 
expenditure.  Why has that been repackaged from a r eimbursement situation? ” That 
is the question.  Further, “Has the police salary liability been taken over by the Union 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
113

 
Government in perpetuity is also a question. ” To add to it, and this is the most 
interesting part, “Does it reflect the Government's intention to rule the State from 
Delhi in perpetuity by retaining Home Affairs of J&K with the Union Government ?  
Will the FM commit in the House that taking over police salary liability is not a Trojan 
horse?”  I would like to respond to this. 
 The scheme on reimbursement of security-related expenditure continues even 
today. So it has not been discontinued.  Had it been discontinued, you will have the 
suspicion.  But when it has not been, why would you have the suspicion in the first 
place?  Or, is it being not cared for, or if you want to put it in the side and still 
generate a conversation based on just your apprehensions, I am not sure if it is a 
responsible way to approach this issue.  Second, I am saying this with a bit of a 
hesitation, but I want to say this.  If at all there was a Trojan horse as regards J&K, it 
is Article 35A and Article 370, which were the real Trojan horse, because it was not 
even made as a part of the Constitution Amendment.  It was just put in the Appendix, 
as though that is also part of the Constitution, but it was not duly brought as a 
Constitution Amendment.  But, for those who are carrying that Constitution 
nowadays and showing it, they should explain to us whether that was not a deceit.  
And, is that not a Trojan horse to keep J&K not integrated with India?  With that 
done, with that kind of a Trojan horse approach, you are asking us that whether we 
take the burden of J&K Police expenditure, so that the J&K Administration will have 
more money to do developmental activity and the Centre can take the salary of the 
J&K Police to insinuate that this is being done with an intention of perpetuity, I am 
sorry, this entire approach is making me wonder if this is being done deliberately so 
that there can be a kind of a atmosphere of doubt created about India, about India’s 
governance and about India’s federal structure.  This approach, I am sorry to say, is 
not healthy.  And, you just put it out to say this is how we perceive it.  You have been 
in governance for more than 70 years, not 70, but 50 or 40 years.  I am sure you 
understand the significance of what is going on and the way in which that State is 
being restored back to be a part of India.  We belong to a Party which firmly believed 
from the beginning, from 1947, "Ek desh, ek nishan, ek vidhan"unlike the Congress 
Party.                              
 Sir, I am afraid to say, separatists, who are self-proclaimed, are coming into 
the Congress Party with red carpets thrown for them to come in.  They are the 
separatists, who were the ones, who caused permanent and perpetual problem 
there.  Now, post-2019, we are, at least, being able to develop the State even as we 
are containing terrorism whereas now, like earlier, terrorists, self-proclaimed 
terrorists, are also being welcomed in the Congress Party, Sir. ...(Interruptions)... 
[RAJYA SABHA]
114

 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA (Rajasthan) : Sir, I would like to say something. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : She is not yielding.  ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Randeep Surjewala, 
she is not yielding.   ...(Interruptions)...  Please go ahead.  ...(Interruptions)...  Let 
us not make it a practice.  ...(Interruptions)...   This side also.  ...(Interruptions)...  
Please go ahead, hon. Minister.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Threat to cooperative federalism is a topic on 
which there has been a lot of discussion and it was  based only on the fact that the 
Budget speech mentioned only two States and it did not mention the others.   
 Yesterday, in the Lok Sabha too, I addressed this matter.  I wanted to highlight 
the fact that total resources allocated to 'Transfe r to the States' in BE 2024-25 is Rs. 
22,91,182 crore, and, it is an increase of Rs. 4,93 ,645 crores over the last year.   So, 
'Transfer to the States' are going unhindered as pe r the recommendation of the 
Finance Commission and I will further elaborate on that when I come to some of the 
members who have raised question in particular on t hat topic.  The threat to 
cooperative federalism issue has been raised by sev eral hon. members, inclusive of 
former Finance Minister Shri P. Chidambaram, Shri J awhar Sircar, Shri N.R. Elango, 
Shri Shanmugam, Shri C.Ve. Shanmugam and also Shri Mohamed Abdulla.  So, 
there are many Members who have raised this.  If th e inference is that I have spoken 
about only two States and left the others out, moni es are not even going to those 
States is the immediate propaganda after the Budget  was presented in the House, 
which was taken up in a big way by the INDI Allianc es. ...(Interruptions)... It can't be 
INDIA alliance. It is INDI alliance. ...(Interruptions)...  I.N.D.I. Alliance.  
...(Interruptions)... What is the last 'A' for? How can it be INDIA alliance?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Mr. Chidambaram, not while sitting.  ...(Interruptions)... Please.  
You are a very senior Member.  Please maintain orde r. She is not yielding. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, if only two States were named and others 
were not, I just want to highlight what happened in  the earlier Budgets which were 
presented by Congress-led UPA. Sir, in the Interim Budget of 2009-10, only Bihar and 
Uttar Pradesh were mentioned.  All right.  They cam e back to power in 2009-10.  Did 
they increase it? Yes, they increased it. To how ma ny? To eight. Rest twenty States 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
115

 
were not even mentioned. Are they clearly going to admit now that they did not send 
any money to 20 States because they didn't mention it in the speech? I went back to 
reading every one of them. 2004-05, only 11 States were mentioned, 17 were not; 10 
were mentioned in the next one, 18 were not.  So, like that, I can go on.  Does that 
mean during their time, for those States, which they did not mention, they didn't send 
anything? No, even that was not true. They sent money to all States, but only chose 
to speak about some States.                                 
 That is true for them, but it can’t be true for me, is it? Protest outside the 
Parliament saying other States are being ignored. What a deliberate attempt to 
mislead people! And I condemn that. I will just highlight this point on agriculture 
allocations.  ‘Agriculture allocation has come down’, was the allegation, and also a 
statement was made. Several Members have spoken on that -- Randeep Surjewala 
ji, Raghav Chadha ji, Rajani Patil ji, Sanjay Yadav ji and Manoj Kumar Jha ji. I want to 
highlight that the Budget allocation in 2013-14 for agriculture and farmers welfare was 
only Rs. 21,934 crores, whereas in 2024-25, it has increased to Rs. 1. 23 lakh crores, 
over 5.5 times in a decade. In P.M. Kisan, about which I will also mention a bit later, 
more than Rs. 3.24 lakh crores has been disbursed to over 11 crore farmers. 
Institutional credit, as a target for agriculture, has increased more than 2.5 times 
since 2014-15 from Rs. 8 lakh crores to Rs. 20 lakh crores.  Interest subsidy, which is 
given to farmers through Kisan Credit Card, has increased 2.4 times since 2014-15, 
from Rs. 6,000 crores to Rs. 14,252 crores. KCC now covers animal husbandry and 
fisheries also. In case of small and marginal farmers, the number of accounts which 
are opened for them, and they avail agricultural loan, has grown from 57 per cent in 
2014-15 to 76 per cent in 2023-24. Sir, Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana was 
launched in 2016 to provide crop insurance coverage to farmers and an amount of 
more than Rs. 1.5 lakh crores has been disbursed till today to the farmers.  Agri-Infra 
Fund was launched under Aatmanirbhar Bharat package to address existing 
infrastructure gaps and mobilize investments. More than Rs. 35,200 crores have been 
sanctioned for 48,000 projects under the Agri-Infra Fund. So, the money collected, 
although as a cess, much against the allegation which is levied on us, saying cess 
money you retain, it is getting spent, here in this case, for agriculture infrastructure 
creation.  More than 23 crore soil health cards have been distributed to farmers which 
provide farmers with a nutrient status of their soil and its composition. Around 1.8 
crore farmers and 2.53 lakh traders have been registered on the E-NAM portal, which 
is a national agriculture marketing place. In the last 10 years, more than Rs. 11 lakh 
crore have been spent to provide fertilizers to farmers at affordable prices. 
Government has also formulated agricultural export policy in 2018 in the country for 
[RAJYA SABHA]
116

 
the first time. This has led to agricultural export s reaching up to four lakh crores of 
rupees. A separate Department of Fisheries has been set up in 2019, assisting farmers 
with schemes worth more than Rs. 38,000 crores whic h have been implemented in 
the fisheries sector due to which fish production h as increased from 95 lakh metric 
tons to 175 lakh metric tons, almost double in the last 10 years. Sir, this is where this 
insurance-related point, which I said earlier, I ha ve to repeat. In its 2004 election 
manifesto, the Congress Party promised to implement  a comprehensive crop 
insurance scheme. 
 
4:00 P.M. 
 
However, it was not till the NDA came to power unde r Prime Minister Modi that Fasal 
Bima Yojana  was implemented. They could have done it during th eir time.  But no, it 
waited for a manifesto. But that was the manifesto of 2004, and they had ten years 
after that. They did not do anything on that. The C ongress said it would examine the 
feasibility of direct income support to farmers.  H owever, it was not till 2019 when 
Prime Minister Modi gave PM- Kisan Samman Nidhi .  They state things in their 
manifesto.  It lies in their manifesto.   But they don't implement that when they come 
to power.   It is the failure of their flagship sch eme which is the loan waiver scheme of 
2008.   I have mentioned this several times.  I am not taking time of the august House.  
The loan waiver scheme was not even fully implement ed. In fact, many farmers were 
not given certificate stating that they have cleare d their dues and everything, so that 
after that they can go and procure loan from the ba nks.  Because without the 
certificates, bank wouldn't give it.  Thirty-eight per cent farmers hadn't been given 
the certificate, and they are sitting.  Loan waiver gaya; loan naheen mila abhi .  That is 
the halaat , careless and laid back fashion with which a sensi tive subject like loan 
waiver had been handled by the Congress Party.  
 Sir, on health and education, hon. Members Shri Sa njeev Arora, Shri Sujeet 
Kumar and Shrimati Sagarika Ghose had raised questi on saying that the National 
Health Policy of the NDA targeted only 2.5 per cent  of the GDP on health sector.  
Total allocation under health increased from Rs.88,000 crore in  2023-24 to Rs.89,287 
crore in 2024-25. Under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana , 15 new All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences have been appro ved.  Out of that, nine projects 
have been completed starting from 2014. In ten year s, nine new All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences have been completed while a total of 15 have been given sanction. 
Similarly, 17 Government medical colleges/institute s have been approved.  Out of 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
117

 
that, 10 projects have been completed. This is the attention given to health in different 
forms.  This is what I want to place before you for the consideration of the House.  
 Sir, under Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana , 34.28 crore Ayushman Bharat 
Cards were issued and Rs.94,225 crore have been authorized for hospital 
admissions. So the out-of-pocket expense of patients is being brought down 
because of the various measures which have been taken.  
 Under Mission Indradhanush, cumulative total number of children vaccinated is 
5.42 crores and cumulative total number of pregnant women vaccinated is 1.31 crore. 
Pradhan Mantri National Dialysis Programme has been implemented in 748 districts at 
1,485 centres and it deploys 10,077 hemodialysis machines. A total of 23.33 lakh 
patients have availed of this facility of dialysis and  2.7 crore hemodialysis sessions 
have been held as of 30 th April 2024.  Sir, 10,000 PM Jan Aushadhi Kendras have 
been opened and they provide 30-80 per cent cheaper medicines and medical 
equipment are also being made available. 
 Sir, on unemployment, several hon. Members have spoken.  They are: 
Randeep Singh Surjewala ji, Raghav Chadha ji, Sanjay Yadav ji, P. Chidambaram ji, 
Jawhar Sircar ji, Sujeet Kumar ji and Sagarika Ghose ji.  First of all, I would like to 
present before you that our policy is to make youth competent, saksham.  For that, 
we also have brought in this time a package of five schemes providing employment in 
three and one for skilling and one for internship. 
 We hope that with this package, together with 48 crore Mudra loans worth  
Rs. 29 lakh crore which have been disbursed, where we now want to increase the 
limit of Rs.10 lakh to Rs.20 lakh for tarun category, and all these put together, there 
will be a big difference in skilling, internship and job creation.  But the UPA era jobless 
growth is something which we cannot forget.  It hurt India's youth the most because 
RBI's KLEMS data showed that total employment declined from 47.2 crore in 2012-13 
to 47 crore in 2013-14.  And that remains to be the only period of decline recorded 
since 1981-82. So, when it declined there, to recover from there, even during the 
period, not much was done. Formal employment was also badly hit during UPA, 
especially in the formal manufacturing sector.  The Annual Survey of Industries which 
is issued by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation showed a 
sharper percentage decline than ever seen during the worst of covid pandemic. So, 
even during covid pandemic, it was not the kind of decline as was seen during UPA's 
time. So, on employment, our facts, which are given by Periodic Labour Force 
Survey, PLFS, show that the labour market indicators for persons of age 15 years and 
above have steadily improved from 2017-18 to 2022-23. Labour force participation 
has also increased from 49.8 per cent in 2017-18 to 57.9 per cent in 2022-23.  
[RAJYA SABHA]
118

 
Women's labour force participation has risen to 37 per cent in 2022-23 from 23.3 per 
cent in 2017-18.  The unemployment rate has decline d from six per cent in 2017-18 to 
a low of 3.2 per cent in 2022-23.  Youth unemployme nt, that is, the age between 15-
29 years, has declined sharply from 17.8 per cent i n 2017-18 to 10 per cent in 2022-
23.  ...(Interruptions)...   This is the Annual Periodic Labour Force Survey r eport 
which has given this.  Further to reinforce the fac t, the SBI research report released in 
July, 2024, says that India created 12.5 crore jobs  during 2014-2023 compared to 2.9 
crore created between 2004 and 2014. So, the distin ct increase in the jobs created 
during the ten years under Prime Minister Modi's le adership has to be highlighted. In 
the last decade, the employability of Indian youth has increased sharply, rising from 
less than 34 per cent in 2014 to over 51 per cent i n 2024, and we will further improve it 
through the PM's package on employment and skilling.  
 Sir, now, I come to inflation.  There has been a l ot of discussion on that. I 
would like to give the data and also differentiate between the inflation which was 
present during UPA and our approach towards dealing  with inflation now so that we 
can see how inflation has been handled both under U PA and NDA.  We saw double 
digit high inflation period under UPA because policies were reckless and inappropriate 
policies were taken on the one hand, and inept meas ures were taken to control 
inflation on the other.  Domestic inflation -- this  is a very important statement -- used 
to be higher than the global average.  That is very  significant to be noticed.  Post the 
global financial crisis of 2008, UPA Government too k stimulus measures to boost the 
economy.  
 The problem arose and I am sorry I have to say this .  When economists, who 
are repeatedly quoted to us saying "Reputed economi sts; you are not that.", when 
leaders of that stature did not know when and how t o withdraw the stimulus -- the 
stimulus which was brought in after the global fina ncial crisis -- it led to a high double 
digit inflation between 2009 and 2013, high fiscal deficit as a result and debt, as a 
result, crowding out private investment.  Between J anuary, 2012 and April, 2014, 
retail inflation was more than 9 per cent in 22 out  of the 28 months.  So, let us 
understand the gravity of this inflation which we h ave noticed during that time.  No 
supply side measures were effectively taken in thos e days.  As a result, relief, even 
partial relief, was not available for the consumers . UPA inherited a very stable 
macroeconomic environment.  Atal ji, when his term was over in 2004, had left behind 
a very strong Indian economy.  Inflation was only a t 3.8 per cent from 1999 to 2000 
and to 2003-04.  Comparatively, average annual inflation rose to 8.1 per cent between 
2004-05 and 2013-14.  Where is 3.8 per cent and whe re is 8.1 per cent?  That is their 
record on inflation handling - high fiscal deficit,  decreased prioritization of Capital 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
119

 
Expenditure. That contributed to sustained high inflation averaging double digits.  
Take for example, India's inflation averaged at 10.1 per cent January to April, 2013 
compared to the average of 3.9 per cent across all the emerging markets.  If 
emerging markets are countries where we can compare ourselves, they were only at 
3.9 per cent where as you had UPA keeping our inflation at 10.1 per cent.  Whereas to 
contrast this with our period over the last decade, India's average inflation was only 
5.1 per cent lower than the 5.8 per cent average among the emerging economies.  
So, we are close to it and even lesser than the average of the emerging economies' 
inflation.  That is the difference between UPA's handling of inflation and NDA's 
handling of inflation.  Sir, Congress means mehangai is something the common man 
knows as well because the common man's slogan used to be and continues to be: 
"congress ayi , mehangai layi".  …(Interruptions)…  This has been the parlance of the 
normal people.  …(Interruptions)…  So, congress means inflation  …(Interruptions)…  
Sir, I want to..…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir, 
...(Interruptions)... what do you want to say, what is your achievement, what is your 
physical achievement, what is your financial achievement, how much progress have 
you made, speak on this...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  …(Interruptions)… Please. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. 
Finance Minister.  …(Interruptions)…    
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  When it came to themselves, Congress did this.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Finance Minister, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition.  …(Interruptions)… No, no please. …(Interruptions)… 
…(Interruptions)…  She is not yielding.  …(Interruptions)…  
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Okay, I yield.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Okay, she has yielded. …(Interruptions)…Yes. …(Interruptions)…  
Please stop, I hope that there will be peace, calm and camaraderie in the House. 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA) :  Hon’ble Chairman 
Sir, just now the LOP raised the point that you should speak regarding your own 
[RAJYA SABHA]
120

 
issues and not talk about the Congress era. Wheneve r there is a discussion on the 
budget, it is always in comparative terms. ... (Interruptions) ...  we always have to 
explain ...  (Interruptions) ...  
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please. ...(Interruptions)... No.  You had all the right to say so. 
...(Interruptions)... You had all the right...  ...(Interruptions)... Please.  
...(Interruptions)... No, I do not appreciate it.  ...(Interruptions)... Sorry, I don't 
appreciate. ...(Interruptions)... What is this?  ...(Interruptions)... Forget about it. 
Nothing is going on record; why are you saying so? 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA :  The Congress Party should also think about the 
people who come to the Rajya Sabha -how to maintain  the dignity of the debate and 
how to take it forward. I would like to reiterate w hat the Honourable Finance Minister, 
Mrs. Nirmala Sitharaman, said: "The budget is prese nted in relative and comparative 
terms." If we are to describe progress, we must exp lain where we started and where 
we have reached. We also need to explain the pace a t which we have progressed, 
and we must also demonstrate that we have taken a q uantum leap. When we talk 
about taking this quantum leap, we are moving from darkness to light. When we look 
for synonyms, we see darkness before 2014, and light after 2014. …(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister, no ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on record.   
...(Interruptions)...  Not, you. I am asking another Minister. Please take  your seat. 
...(Interruptions)...  Only Finance Minister will address.  Please. ...(Interruptions)... I 
cannot open the debate. The debate is over. No, Sir . ...(Interruptions)...  Only the 
hon. Finance Minister will speak.  We have to maint ain some decorum in the House, 
and I am glad, we are improving a lot.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Thank you very much, Sir. I do take what the 
hon. Leader of Opposition suggested. What we do tod ay is what I am highlighting 
and, therefore, also saying, something similar of t his kind did not happen then. He 
may refute it, but it is a matter of fact and I am grateful for the intervention of the 
Leader of the House to state it in his nice Hindi w hich I cannot speak as well, to say 
what exactly it was, getting out of andhakaar  to go into good lighting, and that is what 
is happening now. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Finance Minister, but your Hindi is not bad. Please go ahead. 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
121

 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Thank you, Sir. Sir, it is not just me who is 
talking about what had not happened then and it is not just me who is talking about 
what kind of things that happened then.  I am saying what not happened then and 
what kind of things happened then based on eminent people and their words. Take 
for example, what one former Governor of Reserve Bank had to say.  I am quoting, I 
am not taking his name. I do not know if it is permitted because I think people who are 
not Members of this House, we should not name and so on. So I will just say, 'the 
former Governor of Reserve Bank'. In his book, he says and I quote, "The Finance 
Ministry used to pressurize the RBI to soften the interest rates and present a rosier 
picture of the growth to shore up sentiments." You were not able to perform in the 
economy, managing the inflation, giving stimulus to growth and leading the country to 
have better growth, but you are asking the RBI to give a rosy picture so that the 
sentiments don't get affected because that sentiment and the kind of impact it was 
having on the economy, is where we went to being fragile five. And fragile five 
economy is a fact which is before then. But they could not act on it, instead they put 
pressure on Reserve Bank.                                               
 So, what you need to do constructively, you don't do; on the contrary, you do 
such things.  And I am not saying it, but a reputed, respected, former bureaucrat who 
was also the Governor of the Reserve Bank has written it.  So, I want to just highlight, 
Sir, what kind of efforts we have made to keep inflation under control.  This is 
something which I want to say now, for Members who have been very keen to know 
what is happening today.  I am telling you what is happening today.  Please make a 
note of it.  Sir, we implemented measures leading to a reduced average inflation of 
4.5 per cent in 2014-15 to 2018-19, well within the RBI's target range of 2 to 6 per 
cent.  Moreover, India's inflation between 2020 and 2023 was much lower than the 
global average.  So, I want to highlight, why it was so, because competent and 
proactive measures were undertaken by the Government to control inflation.  And, we 
managed to contain inflation at 5.7 per cent from 2019-20 to 2023-24 despite 
challenges which were unforeseen, and the size and the magnitude of COVID was 
something which all over the world, even today, has tarnished the economies and 
they are not able to come out of it, whereas we have managed to be closer to the 
tolerance brand given by RBI.  Many countries faced three-to-four-decade-high 
double digit inflation after the COVID pandemic.  So, I just want to list out the five-
year terms and the inflation rates which have prevailed.  These are numbers which are 
already in public domain.  But it is useful for us to compare so that we know what our 
policy induced internal factors is which drove UPA's inflation, as different from NDA's 
inflation, which is largely driven by a pandemic and because of the global disruptions.  
[RAJYA SABHA]
122

 
So, the difference between the inflation then and t he inflation now, are very clearly 
before us.  NDA's period, five years between 1999 a nd 2004, the retail inflation was 
only 3.8 per cent.  UPA-I, five years, it was 6 per cent;  UPA-II, 10.2 per cent.  So, if 
you were to take 10 years of UPA-I and UPA-II, it w as 8.1 per cent.  NDA-I, between 
2014 and 2019, 4.5 per cent and NDA-II, 5.7 per cen t.  NDA-I and II put together, in 
10 years, 5.1 percent inflation.  Where is 5.1 and where is 8.1, of the 10 years then and 
10 years now?  So, we need to understand that even when very important steps were 
taken like cutting down on the excise duty of petro l and diesel by the hon. Prime 
Minister twice, once in November and once in June o f 2023, November of 2022.  
Every State tried to reduce.  But for political scoring of a point, Congress-ruled States 
did not even then and now, and the inflation in tho se States, even if the change of the 
Government has happened, continues to be higher, an d efforts to contain them are 
being taken now also.  They just didn't want to cut  down.  On the contrary, if I 
remember correctly, -- our party president and the Leader of the House here, is from 
Himachal Pradesh -- the first thing the Government did there, after being elected, 
was to increase the price of petrol and diesel.  Now, the cry for inflation in this House, 
questions on what action you are taking to contain inflation. Congress Government in 
Himachal Pradesh, a small State, increases the pric e.  And, here, the lecture is about 
contain the prices and bring it down!  Congress can  do that.  Was it in Karnataka!  
So, on inflation and containment measures, there may be questions on us and we are 
willing to answer.  But, what about those States wh ich are being governed by 
Congress?  The steps that we have taken to control inflation, the strategic policies for 
targeting inflation have been taken.  PM Garib Kaly an Anna Yojana is to make sure 
that the bottom most layer poorest people get their  grains, at least, so that they can 
have some kind of an assurance that they have something to feed their family with.                
 The Government continuously offloads wheat and rice  from the central pool 
under the Open Market Sale Scheme (OMSS) to increas e availability in the market. 
These are the steps that we are taking. To prevent hoarding and unscrupulous 
speculations, traders and wholesalers, big chain re tailers and processors were 
required to disclose their stock positions of wheat  and rice. We follow them; we 
pursue with them and then ensure that stocks are coming into the market.  
Under the price stabilisation funds, Sir, a dynamic  buffer stock of pulses is 
maintained and calibrated release of stocks contain  the price and we keep procuring 
to increase the buffer stock. The basic duty on crude palm oil, crude soyabean oil and 
crude sunflower oil was cut from 2.5 per cent to ni l so that edible crude oil can come 
into India and that can be refined creating jobs at  the same time making edible oil 
available in the country. The agri-cess on oils was  reduced from 20 per cent to 5 per 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
123

 
cent. So, we are reducing the revenues that we are earning, but making sure that 
people get affordable price on commodities which are important. This duty structure 
has been extended from January 15 th, 2024 to 31 st March, 2025 so that the edible oils 
can be distributed with affordable prices.  
We have also taken measures to make sure basic items like atta, rice, chana 
dal and moong dal are distributed as brand Bharat Atta, Bharat Rice and Bharat 
Chana Dal and Moong Dal so that they can be sold at affordable prices. Sir, per kg 
cost of atta is Rs. 27.50, per kg cost of rice is Rs. 27.50, per kg cost of chana dal is 
Rs. 60 and per kg cost of moong dal is Rs. 107 and Rs. 93 for sabut moong dal. 
These are been sold; 14.7 lakh tonnes of atta, 13.98 lakh tonnes of rice, 11.52 lakh 
tonnes of chana dal and 2984.37 tonnes of moong dal, both put together, sabut and 
dhula, are sold. It means people are benefitting from the wholesale distribution under 
the brand 'Bharat'. Therefore, Sir, I want to make sure that the efforts taken by the 
Government to contain inflation are informed to the hon. Members and they know that 
we are taking the necessary steps.  
Sir, quickly on POSHAN Abhiyan and Saksham Anganwadi, the question about 
which Sujeet Kumarji from BJD had asked. The allocation for POSHAN and Saksham 
Anganwadi's have only increased and not come down. It was Rs. 20,554 crores in 
2023-24 to Rs.21,200 crores in 2024-25.  
One RJD MP Shri Sanjay Yadav asked about the per capita income. Sir, per 
capita income at constant prices grew at an average rate of four per cent during 2012-
13 to 2013-14. Subsequent to those two years, except in 2019-20 and 2020-21 which 
were the pandemic years, the growth in per capita income at constant prices was 
higher than 2012-13 and 2013-14. I can just read it out at constant prices. In 2012-13, 
it was 3.3 per cent, in 2013-14, it was 4.6 per cent and so on except when in 2020-21, 
it was minus 8.9; it has recovered to be 5.7 per cent now. So, per capita income 
issue is also something which I wanted to address.  
 Sir, this is a very important issue which has been raised that arbitrarily we have 
been cutting the borrowing ceilings of non-BJP states. Sir, I want to completely 
dispel this baseless argument.  The Central Government follows the recommendation 
of the Fifteenth Finance Commission for issuing borrowing consent, financial year-
wise, uniformly, to all States.  Net borrowing ceilings of 3 per cent GSDP have been 
fixed for the financial year 2024-25.  Borrowing consent is issued to all States by 
adopting uniform parameters as per borrowing guidelines. There is no difference 
here.  All of them are treated the same.  Moreover, the Fifteenth Finance Commission 
has also recommended performance-based additional borrowing space of 0.5 per 
cent of GSDP. This is linked to the performance in power sector reforms. I would like 
[RAJYA SABHA]
124

 
to present before you the list of States which have  fulfilled the requisite criteria related 
to power sector reforms and availed additional borr owing space of 0.5 per cent of 
GSDP.   
 Sir, I will give example of 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2 023-24.  For example, West 
Bengal got Rs. 6,911 crores for 2021-22. These are additional borrowing – over and 
above 3 per cent given unconditionally. Sir, it was Rs. 8,352 crores for 2022-23. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Is it in crores? Are these figures in crores? 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : It is in crores. Thank you, Sir.  And, Rs. 7,276 
crores for 2023-24.  This is relating to West Bengal. 
 I come to Tamil Nadu.  Sir, for 2021-22, it is Rs.  7,054 crores; Rs. 5,775 crores 
in 2022-23 and Rs. 9,656 crores in 2023-24 are addi tional borrowings allowed each 
year, because of power sector reforms. This is abou t Tamil Nadu.  I come to Kerala 
now.  It is Rs. 4,060 crores for 2021-22; Rs. 4,263  crores for 2022-23 and Rs. 4,866 
crores in 2023-24.  These are additional borrowing permission, and they have availed 
these amounts are on record. The Government in Hima chal Pradesh is formed just 
now.  So, I cannot give the figures straightaway. S ir, Rs. 251 crores was allowed in 
2021-22.  But, we have not had any claim after that .  I can read that for other States 
as well. So, there is no arbitrariness here.   
 I come to the issue relating to Kerala.  I cannot find hon. Member, Dr. John 
Brittas, because he did raise this issue in between  when I was speaking.  He is not 
here.  But, never mind, I will reply to that.  Hon.  Supreme Court has also mentioned 
to the State to resolve the matter amicably with th e Centre.  It implicitly supported the 
stand of the Centre. It did not say that the Centre is wrong.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS :  Madam, he has come.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Thank you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Take your seat, Dr. John Brittas.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) :  Sir, I am here. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You are here; but not to interrupt. ...(Interruptions)... You listen. 
...(Interruptions)... Sit down. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
125

 
 DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, since hon. Minister referred my name, it is my right to reply. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No.  Your name was referred because you were absent.  Now that 
you are present, you will follow the decorous conduct, please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, the point is... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no.  It is not done. You are an experienced Member.  Please sit 
down.  Hon. Minister, a word of suggestion.  Next time, be careful while naming Dr. 
John Brittas, because if you name him, he claims a right. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Oh! Right, Sir. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Hon. Minister has already named, Sir. I have a right. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, I don’t want to name anyone. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : So, on the Kerala issue, hon. Supreme Court 
has, actually, mentioned that the State should amicably settle the matter as regards 
borrowing.  The Supreme Court did not imply that there is a wrong doing or mala fide.  
If I can infer it, Sir, it implicitly supported the stand of the Centre.  I will quote just one 
small paragraph.  It said, "The Plaintiff State - Kerala - has failed to establish the 
three prongs of proving prima facie  case - balance of convenience and irreparable 
injury.  The State of Kerala is not entitled to the interim injunction, as prayed." 
 So, the subject of Article 293, whether the Centre should do it, should take an 
oversight mechanism, all this may... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No; no.  Please maintain decorum.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please 
take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Finance Minister, please continue.  
...(Interruptions)... Dr. John Brittas, don’t make it a habit.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I want to just pick on the words he uttered. I 
wanted to refer to Hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas, because he was not here.  You are 
gracious enough to say, "Oh! He has come, you talk about it."  Then, there is a little 
banter.  I don’t know whether he gets a right to it.  I have not mentioned anything 
about him till now. But, he would, in the interest of his State, want to speak 
[RAJYA SABHA]
126

 
something.  But to imply that I am picking and choo sing to my convenience is 
because he has not heard what I said earlier, or, n ot even was here to hear what 
additional borrowing over and above the three per c ent, which is given 
unconditionally, has been given to Kerala over the three years. He was not even here 
to hear it.  And, then, it is not fair to say, "she  is picking and choosing".  No, I have 
given a comprehensive picture of what the additiona l borrowing is, which is a 
conditional borrowing.  Earlier, the three per cent  was completely given was all said.  
But, unfortunately, hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas, was not here.  Now, he says that 
I am picking and choosing.  I have given the whole story and I am picking and 
choosing one line, which is important for establish ing Centre’s credibility.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  One minute, hon. Finance Minister.  What I find is Dr. John Brittas 
makes impact when he is absent; he makes impact whe n he is present.  Hon. 
Finance Minister, please continue. ...(Interruptions)... No; no.  It is never done; you 
know it more than I do.  ...(Interruptions)... Please go ahead, hon. Finance Minister.  
...(Interruptions)... I can’t restart the debate.  ...(Interruptions)... Okay! Normally 
when I ask the speaker to look at me, I think, it i s best to have eye contact also. 
...(Interruptions)... Please go ahead, hon. Finance Minister. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : I am following the rules, Sir.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Leader of the Opposition has appreciated you.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Thank you, Sir. Based on the constitutional 
provisions, the Government of India adopts a rule-b ased system.  This ensures 
fairness to all States.  And, no deviation is enter tained because of presumed 
entitlements or presumed prejudices that may prevai l.  No, we follow as per the 
Finance Commission’s recommendations.   
Sir, related somewhat to this was the question on tax devolution to States, that 
it is less than what is recommended by the Finance Commission, a point that Shri 
N.R. Elango from DMK had raised. He is present here.  We also have senior Member, 
Shri Tiruchi Siva. I want to take a minute on this point. We have heard Members 
raising this voice that Centre does not actually de volve 42 per cent or the 41 per cent, 
post J&K becoming a Union Territory.  I want to cla rify on this point.  The Finance 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
127

 
Commission recommends devolution of taxes as a percentage of net proceeds, as 
defined in Article 279 of the Constitution. ‘Net proceeds’ is calculated after deducting 
cesses, surcharges, and cost of collection from the Gross Tax Receipts (GTR).  So, 
the first matter is the Gross Tax Receipts.  From there, you remove cesses, 
surcharges, and the cost of collection. And, then, you arrive at net proceeds.  And, it 
is from the net proceeds the devolution of 41 per cent or 42 per cent is.  It is wrong to 
calculate devolution, based on Gross Tax Receipts and, then, claim that the Centre is 
devolving less to the States than what is suggested by the Finance Commission 
because the mandated amount, which is 41 per cent, is based on net proceeds, and 
not the Gross Tax Receipts.  So, it should be noted, the devolution is not the 
percentage of GTR, but it is a percentage of the net proceeds.                                                                     
 So, it should be noted that devolution is not the percentage of GTR but it is a 
percentage of the net proceeds. The Centre has always given the percentage from 
the net proceeds without fail to the States.  And, who arrives at the net proceeds?  
Does the Centre decide the amount? No.  The net proceeds are certified by the CAG.  
It is that amount, which the CAG gives you. The CAG gives that that net proceeds is 
this much, and, on this, you will devolve 41 per cent to the States.  So, I cannot 
choose saying net proceeds is only this much and not another; that is done by the 
CAG. Every year, it does. It is not as if it is done one year.   Net proceeds is decided 
by the CAG every year.  I also want to highlight this point because I want to elaborate 
on that for one minute.  This is decided by the CAG every year.   If there are any dues 
pending to the States,  it is also immediately released.    
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Now, having said that, I want to highlight and draw your attention to this fact, 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir.  I want to inform the Members that our Government has 
devolved Rs.82,000 crores as a part of the tax devolution after obtaining the CAG’s 
certificate in March 2022.  So, what is special about it?  I am claiming that every year, 
I am giving it in time.   So, why am I mentioning only this Rs.82,000 crores?   Sir, from 
1996-97 to 2014 when Prime Minister Modi comes in, between 1996 and 2014, there 
was an accumulated due of Rs.82,000 crores on tax devolution; this was not 
devolved, and no Government in between had taken a call on it.  We cleared it after 
the CAG gave the certificate in March, 2022-23.  Rs.82,000 crores  had been pending 
since 1996. ...(Interruptions)...  No;  you are not giving me 42 per cent; you go on a 
wrong calculation, not on net proceeds but on GTR, and also not recognize the fact 
that We are also clearing the pending dues from 1996 in 2022. Modi ji doesn't 
[RAJYA SABHA]
128

 
differentiate among states, because he has also bee n Chief Minister and understands 
their problems. We are disbursing every penny on ti me. We have also cleared the 
82,000 crore rupees that was pending since 1996. 
Sir, I am almost, at the end.  The former Finance M inister, probably, in the 
concluding stage of his speech, -- I was also here hearing him – had said,  “I have 
got five questions for which I want the Finance Min ister to answer. ”   Those five 
questions pertained to minimum wages, legal guarant ee, education loan waiver, 
abolition of Agniveer and scrapping of NEET.  I just want to give a very quick response 
to each one of these points.  Minimum wages of Rs.400/- a day - I am referring to the 
hon. former Finance Minister who had raised five questions and wanted us to answer.    
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair .) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The best that has happened is, the hon. Finance Mi nister has not 
taken the ... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI RAMDAS ATHAWALE  (Maharashtra):  Sir, one mimute. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no; the hon. Minister is also a p oet, but not on this occasion. 
...( Interruptions )...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, can I? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Yes; that was not to you; there is another hon. Mi nister behind you.   
My problem is, I will have to find some mechanism w here when there are two hon. 
Ministers and the second one rises, then, when I te ll one, the other one 
misunderstands it. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Minister, please. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Yes, Sir, I am just responding. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, I am not addressing the hon. Fi nance Minister. 
...(Interruptions)... Mr. Athawale, please. ...(Interruptions)... Well, at least you had 
a discussion that included a bit of humor. Otherwis e, you are very serious when you 
make an observation. ...(Interruptions)... Please, hon. Minister. ...(Interruptions)... 
No, I will not allow. ...(Interruptions)... If I had to allow, I would have allowed the 
Leader of Opposition. I will not allow anyone. 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
129

 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, he had raised five questions on which he 
said, why can't 400 rupees be declared as the minimum wages per day.  Sir, I think 
he is talking about MNREGA Act, and, through which, to declare a minimum wage of 
Rs. 400. I just want to highlight the MNREGA Act of 2005 on that presumption. 
Section 6(1) of the Act says, ‘Notwithstanding anything contained in the Minimum 
Wages Act 1948, the Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate 
for the purposes of the Act.’ It says that. And it further says in the proviso, ‘Provided 
that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas.’ I also think probably 
because it was mentioned in the Congress Manifesto. I am a bit hazy on it, but his 
demand was when it is 400 rupees per day minimum wage, why we do not want to 
declare it. So I want to highlight, Sir, that the Rural Development Ministry which deals 
with MNREGA since UPA time has been declaring the minimum wage, and these are 
decided based on changes in the CPI-AL, that is, Consumer Price Index Agricultural 
Labour, which reflects inflation in rural areas. It is based on that, that every year, 
some kind of a notification comes. This has been the practice since 2005 to 2014. Our 
Government has also followed the same principle. I don't know if I can use this saying 
in the English language. ‘What is sauce for goose is the sauce for gander as well.’ 
One is therefore tempted, Sir, to ask the former FM, what prevented the UPA from 
notifying a uniform wage rate under the MNREGA when it was in power? They didn't 
do it then. But now if he is quoting the MNREGA Act and demanding that Government 
of India declare 400 rupees as minimum wage, I would want to also highlight, and I 
am sure being a legal mind he would be aware of this nuance, that the Minimum 
Wages Act of 1948 also empowers the States to fix minimum wages with respect to 
categories, various categories of employment, unskilled employment, and so on. So, 
in the States, minimum wages are again fixed differently for different States. So, 
minimum wages are fixed by States for different kinds of employment, just as 
Government of India also fixes minimum wages for railways or the mines or many 
other things which come under its subject. For example -- I am taking the example of 
Karnataka – the State Government notifies four different zones to fix minimum wages 
for unskilled workers. Zone one is for Bengaluru city and the City Corporation area. 
Zone two is for district headquarters and there are various districts, and so on. 
 I would like to draw your attention that in the State of Himachal Pradesh, as 
per the latest notification, latest in this subject, which was issued in May, 2023, which 
was issued by the State Government , unskilled wage earners will get Rs.375 
minimum wage.  
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
130

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Just a minute. I must appreciate your fairness.  You touch the State 
of the Leader of the Opposition and next you are to uching the State of the Leader of 
the House. So, that even balancing has taken place and I am privileged to be 
Chairman at a time when this House has presidents o f the two leading parties in the 
country, the largest democracy. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : So, if wages are to be fixed by different States a t 
different levels and, even within a State, for diff erent zones, it is difficult to think of 
how the Central Government can fix a wage of Rs.400  and also say, therefore, you 
know, it should be done for the entire country.  Al so, it might have been a slip of the 
tongue. I don't want to pick on it, but I am very t empted. In his speech, I think, he 
claimed that he travels 500,000 kilometers by road every month.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : We can overlook it. This does happen sometimes. I t ell you. The 
Leader of the House made a mention of seven crore a nd he quickly corrected that it 
was seven lakhs.  So, we can ignore it.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  So, education loans, he had a question to ask 
on education loans. So, we have already announced m easures for education loans in 
this Budget for helping our youth who have not been  eligible for any benefit under 
Government schemes or policies. We have announced a  financial support of Rs.10 
lakh for higher education within the country.  E-vouchers for this purpose will be given 
directly to one lakh students every year for an ann ual interest subvention of 3 per cent 
of the loan amounts.  He also asked a question abou t Agniveer Scheme.  I wanted to 
highlight that the former Finance Minister has also  served as the Home Minister. I am 
sure he understands the nuance involved in national  security. Agniveer is a very 
reformative step to enhance the capabilities and ba ttle readiness of our Armed 
Forces. It ensures actually that we have fit soldie rs who are on the front line.  So, one 
of the expected outcomes of the Scheme is that Arme d Forces will have much 
younger force by recruiting those in the age group of 17.5 years to 21 years and 
retaining only 25 per cent, thus reducing the avera ge age of the Indian soldier. Why 
should we do it?  In countries like the US and the UK, soldiers are required to render 
only two of six years in service because they want to keep the young, fit and agile 
person at the borders. I hope on matters related to  the fitness and battle readiness of 
the Indian Army or the Armed Forces, we don't do po litics because it is something 
which is going to be critical for this country.  We  need young, fit and battle-ready 
young people who are going to be trained. In fact, I was going to bring in here one of 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
131

 
the news items which had come in the recent last two days about how in terms of 
fitness and in terms of skills acquired, which are so required at the borders, Agniveer 
people have come out with flying colours. Studies have proved it. So, this is a 
scheme which is very important, and we need to have greater sense of looking at the 
national interest, rather than just take policies on some other consideration. 
 Sir, I would like to remind that in 2014, the hon. Prime Minister Modi reviewed 
the situation.  I got into Defence only later, in 2017, and, therefore, with some 
interest, I went back to look at the earlier periods also.  In 2014, the Indian Armed 
Forces, particularly the Army, did not even have the bulletproof vests.  We had to 
panic-buy and give them.  And in that, there was the role of Manohar Parikar ji and 
Arun Jaitleyji, to make quick procurements, and we had to procure it from elsewhere.  
But today, in our country, we produce bulletproof vests, which are good enough for 
our Army, and they feel that it has given them the sense of security.  Not just the 
bulletproof vests, it is also a truth that in India, at that time, for 10 years, major 
defence procurements did not happen.  And, this is not a fiction that I am telling you.  
In the House, the Defence Minister then had said, “We cannot procure it because we 
don't have the money. ”  So, Agniveer is a scheme which we brought in with a great 
sense of commitment to keep our Armed Forces battle ready and to see that young 
and fit people get into the Army.  I do not think there is a need for us to unnecessarily 
worry that this is causing some kind of a distortion; not at all.  It is with the 
acceptance of the Armed Forces that it has been brought in. ...(Interruptions)... I 
think I have addressed the four issues that he had raised. The fifth one is about NEET.  
The hon. former Minister is a lawyer.  Probably, he spoke one day before the final 
judgment came from the Supreme Court on the NEET exam, and, therefore, the 
verdict which was given by the Supreme Court, he probably would not have been 
aware.  The Supreme Court did not scrap the NEET exam.  It observed that there is 
no material at the present stage to indicate any systemic leak.  That is about the 
NEET exam leakages. But, abolition of NEET, I am afraid to say, was triggered even 
before the leak issue came up.  So, I want to highlight some of the features.  When 
was the NEET exam notified?  For the benefit of all our hon. Members, I would like to 
inform that NEET was notified in December 2010, with its implementation.  Who was 
leading the implementation at that time? It was led by the then DMK Minister 
Gandhiselvan, who served as the MoS for Health and Family Welfare, as part of the 
Congress-led UPA-II Government.  So, it was brought at that time. 
...(Interruptions)... The Supreme Court, while talking about the NEET, didn't take 
care of it. ...(Interruptions)... Thank you, Mr. Wilson. ...(Interruptions)... And, that 
is why it is running even now with a stay. ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, I want him to not 
[RAJYA SABHA]
132

 
interrupt me and misunderstand. This is not done.  In 2012, the UPA-2.0 introduced 
NEET Undergraduate Examination for medical admissio ns.  And in 2013, the first 
exam took place.  All this happened during the UPA.   In 2013, the exam took place.  
When the Gazette notification of 20 th  December, 2010, was challenged in the 
Supreme Court, both the lawyers of the Medical Council of India and UPA's Additional 
Solicitor General of India defended NEET.  December  '20 was the time when Gazette 
notification was issued, and that Gazette was chall enged in the Supreme Court.  At 
that time, both the lawyers of the Medical Council of India and the ASG of the UPA 
Government defended NEET, saying this was an effort  to streamline the admission 
process. ...(Interruptions)... Sir, the ASG then stated that the earlier system of  
multiple examinations was neither in the national i nterest, nor in the interest of 
maintaining the standards of medical education, nor  did it serve the interest of the 
poor middle-class students who had to buy and fill forms of several examinations and 
travel across the country to appear in the examinations. 
 
5:00 P.M. 
  
They had to take multiple examinations. NEET does n ot cause disadvantage to 
anyone. Sir, NEET does not cause disadvantage to an yone. It expands opportunities. 
Tamil Nadu students secure 85 per cent of the seats  with 69 per cent reservation, 
which is upheld in Tamil Nadu.  With that reservati on intact and with this process of 
NEET, with 85 per cent of the seats within Tamil Na du and 15 per cent of all seats 
from all States put together, they can go for the 1 5 per cent seats to any State that 
they want. So, Tamil students benefit from all-Indi a quota in other States also.  The 
former Finance Minister talked about NEET. I also w ant to underline this fact that in 
2011, when the DMK rule concluded, Tamil Nadu had j ust 1,945 medical seats. 
Presently, there are 10,425 medical seats, a remark able surge of 8,480 seats in the 
past 11 years. 
Sir, NEET has ensured cost-effective medical educat ion for families. Certainly, 
it has hurt some vested interests, particularly tho se in the medical education field 
because, no longer, selling of medical seats is pos sible. And, therefore, it has hurt a 
lot of people. That is why, a particular lobby was actively against NEET even before 
this NEET leak issue has come up. Sir, in the year 2022-23, 12,997 Tamil Nadu 
Government school students wrote the NEET exam, and , of them 3,982 students 
passed it. It is noteworthy that the pass percentag e has increased from 27 per cent in 
the last year to 31 per cent. So, I want to say, be fore NEET came in, only a few 
students from few schools in selected regions of Ta mil Nadu could get medical seats.  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
133

 
Now, it is across the board.  I don't know if you will permit me, I want to mention 
names of a few Government school students from Tamil Nadu, belonging to very 
humble backgrounds and rural areas, who have passed the NEET examination over 
the last few years.  Please allow me to mention the names.   
Young girl, Kanimozhi from Needur, Mayiladuthurai got in 2023.  She is the 
daughter of a labourer, kuli thozhilali, who is a temporary taxi driver.  He also works 
as a temporary taxi driver.  Annapoorani from a place called Singampunari, Sivaganga 
District, the District from where our former Finance Minister hails.  That girl has also 
managed to get in.  She is the daughter of a construction worker.  It was again in 
2023.  Next is Arivunithi.  Viralimalai is the place from where he qualified.  It is in 
Pudukkottai District.  He is son of a labourer, who is also a kooli thozhilali.  He also 
got in 2023.   Divyabarathi got in from a place called Thalavadi in Erode District.  She 
is daughter of a labourer, again, a kooli thozhilali .  Again, it was in 2023.  Next is 
Kaviarasan from Karambakkudi in Pudukkottai District.  He is the son of a farm 
labourer.  Jeevith Kumar from Periyakulam, Theni, and, he is the son of a goat rearer, 
shepherd.  He got in 2020.  Next is Kavipriya from Cheyyar.  Daughter of a farmer, 
she got in 2022.  Santhanam from Dharmapuri.  Son of a farm labourer, he got in 
2022.  Ramya from Karamadai in Coimbatore.  She is a Scheduled Tribe.  A particular 
tribe which is very disadvantaged in Tamil Nadu is called Irular. She is an Irular 
candidate and daughter of a labourer. …(Interruptions)… Yes, it is on the Budget.  
Because the former Finance Minister asked about it, I am duty bound to answer it. 
 I may get the name wrong of the last candidate who I want to name here.  She 
is from Karamadai, Coimbatore.  Pirusica, I may be wrong with the name.  She is the 
daughter of a tailor.  Now, are these not success stories of NEET? Are these not 
students from rural areas?  Are these not students who belong to the lowest strata? 
Construction workers, coolie workers, farmers, taxi drivers, their children are coming 
through NEET.   
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN:* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Nothing will go on record, Mr. Vasan.  You are a very senior 
Member. …(Interruptions)… No, nothing will go on record. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I come to the last point and I will conclude.  
…(Interruptions) 
                                        
* Not recorded. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
134

 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :
 
  
SHRI N.R. ELANGO : 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Please take your seat.  
…(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, I 
am extremely indulgent when you speak.  But when Fi nance Minister speaks, 
…(Interruptions)…  No, she is not yielding. …(Interruptions)…  No, no; please take your 
seat.  …(Interruptions)…  Mr. Tiruchi Siva has done the right thing.  Please  take your 
seat.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, the debate has happened.  All Members 
have spoken.  Whoever was allowed by the Chair, spo ke. Five questions were asked 
specifically by the former Finance Minister. I am g iving him answers.  I wish, with your 
support, all Members can, at least, listen to the answers that I want to give. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please, Madam. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, the last point.  The former Finance Minister 
asked a couple of questions.  Again, most Members a re saying: What has this got to 
do with the Budget?  Why do you want to answer on t his? Why do you want to 
answer on that?  But these were the questions raised.  I don’t know if they are related 
to Budget, but because these were raised during the Budget debate, I am answering.  
Questions were raised, and I am quoting the former Finance Minister from the 
YouTube.  I quote, “I ask : Why does the UPSC have to play a role in the appoi ntment 
of the DGP of a State?  Why should a State Governme nt not appoint the Vice-
Chancellor of State Universities? ” Of course, people can say why you are answering 
these questions; these are not on Budget.  But beca use he was asking, I am 
answering them here.  Sir, I am indeed appalled tha t a very respected senior 
advocate, I am not an advocate, but with due respect... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  All senior advocates are respectable.  
 
                                        
 Not recorded  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
135

 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Yes, Sir.  So, he has raised a question  
saying ... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  And you may not be aware, hon. Finance Minister, I am a senior 
advocate under suspension.  …(Interruptions)…  No, no; Mr. Praful Patel, I am a 
senior advocate, and Mr. Bhupendra Yadav knows, under suspension, because if 
you hold an office like this, your sanad is suspended during that period.  So, I 
suffered, I would tell the Leader of the Opposition, two things in 2019.  When 
President issued warrant -- imagine warrant to a senior advocate -- appointing me as 
Governor, this lead to suspension of my sanad also.  So, you have respect, I am 
sure, for all senior advocates, whether under suspension like me, and not otherwise.  
Please, go ahead.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  This is the reason you suspended us! …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I am actually appalled because... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  But the hon. former Finance Minister had raised two very valid 
questions.  One, why should, in the appointment of DGP, the UPSC come into 
picture?  And the same he said about Vice-Chancellors.  You say that you want to 
respond.  
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: I would want to respond, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please go ahead. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, hon. former Finance Minister has used this 
platform of vibrant democracy.  I think he has misrepresented the situation to an 
extent that it goes to contradict the judicial verdict of the Supreme Court itself.  On 
both counts, the guidelines, which have emanated from the hon. Supreme Court, are 
very clear. On this issue of appointment of DGP, as to why the UPSC has to play a 
role, I just want to highlight that it was in this case of Prakash Singh and Others 
versus the Union of India, 2006. 
 This case was decided by the Supreme Court on 22 nd September 2006 and it 
directed in the following words.  "The Director General of Police of the State shall be 
selected by the State Government from amongst the three senior-most officers of the 
Department who have been empanelled for promotion to that rank by the Union 
[RAJYA SABHA]
136

 
Public Service Commission."  The State fixes up on three candidates and sends the 
panel.  It is the UPSC which decides that.  This is  the verdict of the Supreme Court in 
Police reform related case in which policeman Prakash Singh and others have gone to 
the Supreme Court.  And in that, it clearly says that it is the UPSC.  This is one.   
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA :  Sir, I have a point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  What is your point of order?  Come to the point o f order.  Don't 
make a speech. 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA :  Sir, if the Supreme Court decided that 
yardstick is the criterion, why has the Government not followed it in the case of 
Election Commission of India when there was a clear-cut directive?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Everything you say Mr. Randeep Singh Surjewala is irrelevant. 
Everyone is aware of the judgment.  ...(Interruptions)...   No; not like this.  He had to 
speak.  ...(Interruptions)...   Look here, I take it as a very serious situation.   Has the 
former Finance Minister while asserting, 'Why are y ou having role of UPSC in the 
appointment of DGP' misrepresented the situation?  According to the present 
Finance Minister, the former Finance Minister total ly misrepresented it.  But there is a 
categorical judgment of the Supreme Court in the ca se of Prakash Singh and the 
directive is categorical. The State Government will  select the DGP only out of a panel 
that is approved by the UPSC.  This is a settled issue.  Everyone knows about it.  I am 
sure as and when former Finance Minister will be th ere ...(Interruptions)...   I take a 
very serious view of it.  ...(Interruptions)...   No.  ...(Interruptions)...   Hon. 
Members, I take a very serious view of it, because I have indicated that this House 
cannot be used to emanate information by way of mis representation, particularly a 
Supreme Court judgment which is known to one and all by and large and that too by a 
senior advocate.  I take note of it.  You kindly pu t the judgment on the Table of the 
House.  ...(Interruptions)...   Nothing is going on record, Digvijaya Singh ji .  
...(Interruptions)...   She is not yielding.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, honorable Mr. Chidambara m is also a highly esteemed 
lawyer. He has also served as the Minister of Home Affairs. So, when he is present 
here, will you provide him an opportunity to give his explanation? 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
137

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Absolutely correct. Honorable members, Mr. Digvijaya Singh has 
made a very important point. It is a charge that the former Finance Minister has stated 
before the House in a significant manner that the authority to appoint the DGP rests 
solely with the state governments and why are you involving the Union Public Service 
Commission? His direction is clear that you are doing this because you want to 
control the States. That is the imputation. The present Finance Minister says that this 
is being done not by any executive order.  This is emanating from a judgment of the 
Supreme Court that was imparted in 2006 and the judgment is categorical.  I am sure 
every lawyer knows it that appointment can take place only out of a panel approved 
by the UPSC.   
 I agree to your suggestion, and we will put it to former Finance Minister in what 
circumstances, while being Senior Advocate, he could misrepresent the situation so 
gravely to misinform the nation at large.  We will put it to him.  I agree to your 
suggestion.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, just to be sure, I want to re-read the verdict 
of the court. On 22 nd September, 2006, the Supreme Court directs thus, and I quote, 
"The Director-General of Police of the State shall be selected by the State 
Government from amongst the three senior-most officers of the Department who 
have been empanelled for promotion to that rank by the Union Public Service 
Commission."  Sir, that is about DGP. Now, I come to the issue of Vice-Chancellors 
of State Universities.  The Supreme Court of India again in a judgment in State of 
West Bengal versus Anindya Sundar Das and others in 2022, asserted and I quote, 
"Regulation 7.3 of UGC (Minimum Qualifications for appointment of Teachers and Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations 2018...  MR. CHAIRMAN: Is it UGC or UPSC?   SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, it is UGC, University Grants Commission. ...(Interruptions)... Regulation 7.3 of UGC (Minimum Qualifications for appointment of Teachers and Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations 2018 provides for the minimum qualifications of a VC, selection procedure and the appointment procedure. In case of a conflict between the State legislation and the Central legislation, Central legislation shall prevail by applying the rule/principle of repugnancy as enunciated in Article 254 of the Constitution. ...(Interruptions)...   Sir, you are a senior advocate. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
138

 
...(Interruptions)...    Even though I am not an advocate, I am sure you are going to 
be conscious of what I am talking of. ...(Interruptions)...    It is very well for the 
Members to be conscious of, but don't they have tru st in you? ...(Interruptions)...    
You are the Chairman of the House. ...(Interruptions)...    More importantly, you are 
a senior advocate of the Supreme Court who is also the Chairman of the House. I 
wish the Members give you that much of trust and fa ith in what they are saying. 
...(Interruptions)...   Therefore, any appointment as a Vice-Chancellor contrary to the 
provisions of the UGC Regulations can be said to be  in violation of the statutory 
provisions, warranting a writ of quo warranto . ...(Interruptions)...    Sir, how do we, 
therefore, countenance a former Finance Minister co ming to the people at large and 
talking about dilution of federalism when it is cle ar that when there is a conflict 
between the two, the Central legislation is the one  which is going to prevail under 
Article 254?  Therefore, I just want to highlight a  field which is occupied by the 
judgment of the Supreme Court in these matters to w hich, by virtue of being a Senior 
Advocate, the hon. former Finance Minister should b e more aligned with the 
judgment. I wish to indicate to the House that thes e judgments and the spirit which is 
caught in these judgments are very important. There fore, when he is referring as to 
why the DGP should be appointed by UPSC, why the Vi ce-Chancellor should be 
appointed by the UGC and so on, so much of legal ma terial is available.  Even if the 
hon. Members are suggesting that contradictory judg ments are there or Judges are 
reconsidering it, all that apart, when even those a re taken on board, when it is sub 
judice  before a different bench, when it is so clearly be ing legally scrutinised, how can 
we come here and say no, it has to be done and why should the State not do it?  No, 
Sir.                                                                       
 These are matters being taken up as the hon. Member , Wilson is highlighting.  
…(Interruptions)…    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I appreciate. …(Interruptions)…   Yes, hon. Finance Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…    
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Yes, these are being taken up by the courts.  
But, here to come and assert a final word is amazing.  Thank you very much, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Now, Dr. L. Murugan.  …(Interruptions)…   Nothing is going on 
record.  …(Interruptions)…    
 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
139

 
MOTION FOR SUSPENSION OF RULE 272 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. L. Murugan to move the following motion: 
 
"That the Rule 272 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  Business in the 
Council of States in its application to consideration of the Demands for Grants 
of the related Ministries/Departments for the year 2024-25 by Department 
Related Standing Committees during the current Session of Rajya Sabha, be 
suspended." 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN):  Sir, I move: 
"That the Rule 272 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the 
Council of States in its application to consideration of the Demands for Grants 
of the related Ministries/Departments fo  the year 2024-25 by Department 
Related Standing Committees during the current Session of Rajya Sabha, be 
suspended." 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
  DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS  SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka):  Sir, why are you moving this?  …(Interruptions)…      SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal):  Sir, I have a point of clarification.  …(Interruptions)…    MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, 'Discussion on the working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.'  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari to raise a discussion.  …(Interruptions)…    SHRI SAKET GOKHALE:   Sir, she did not answer. …(Interruptions)…  A white paper on West Bengal..…(Interruptions)…    
[RAJYA SABHA]
140

 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Mr. Saket, take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…   One minute.  
…(Interruptions)…   If the hon. Minister has not responded to somethi ng which you 
specifically argued, there is a mechanism.  …(Interruptions)…   Come to my Chamber, 
I will tell you the mechanism but for the last time .  …(Interruptions)…   Now, Shri 
Ghanshyam Tiwari.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record except what Mr. 
Tiwari says.  …(Interruptions)…   Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari to raise a discussion on th e 
working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.   
 
SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI : Honorable Chairman sir, I am... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Ghanshyam ji, one minute.  …(Interruptions)…   Mr. Tiruchi Siva.  
…(Interruptions 
)…   Hon. Members, I have to make an announcement.     
 
 
RESIGNATION BY MEMBER 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  I have to inform Members that I have received a le tter today, the 
31 
st  of July, 2024, from Shrimati Mamata Mohanta, Member, representing the State of 
Odisha, resigning her seat in the Rajya Sabha.   Ho n. Members, she has resigned her 
seat by writing to the Chairman under her hand and handed personally to me.  The 
same I find to be constitutionally in order.  I hav e accepted the resignation of Shrimati 
Mamata Mohanta, Member representing the State of Odisha with immediate effect. 
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN 
AFFAIRS - Contd.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari to start.   
 
SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI (Rajasthan): Honorable Chairm an Sir, we are beginning 
discussion on matters related to housing and urban affairs in the Union Budget for the 
financial year 2024-25. 
 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN  in the chair ) 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
141

 
  Honorable Deputy Chairman, I would like to submit that the Government of 
India has given considerable attention to urban development and housing in this 
year's budget, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  Please maintain silence in the 
House. 
 
SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI : Such a description had not been made before. This 
budget is for 'Viksit Bharat, 2047,' and its lifeline passes through the heart of Indian 
cities. If we want to transform India into Viksit Bharat by 2047, we must also build developed cities for a Viksit Bharat, because, Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, we are observing that at the time of independence ...(Interruptions)...  MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honorable Members, please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  Be silent, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Honorable Tiwari ji.         SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI : Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, if we consider the year 2047 for Viksit Bharat, the development of cities becomes a primary necessity. Sir, after the budget was presented, a meeting of the NITI Aayog was held, during which it was decided that if India aims to achieve the status of a developed nation by 2047, attain 30 trillion USD economy, and reach at the level of per capita income of 18,000 to 20,000 USD, world-class infrastructure and facilities must be developed in urban areas. This government, which has initiated its work ...(Interruptions)...Sir, House is not in order.   MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)...Please make your point.  SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI : Honourable Deputy Chairman Sir, when Government of India and NITI Aayog decided that for Viksit Bharat, it is necessary for the cities of India to develop, then the provisions made by the Government in the Budget 2024-25 are in the same vein.  Sir, we observe that at the time of India's independence, 80 percent of the population resided in rural areas, while 20 percent lived in cities. Today, the situation is such that more than 35 percent, and in some states even over 40 percent, of the population resides in urban areas. Furthermore, in certain cities, considering the continuous influx of people from outside, numerous problems have arisen in urban regions. There are housing problems in cities; people cannot afford to 
[RAJYA SABHA]
142

 
build and live in houses by purchasing such expensi ve land. Cities face transportation 
issues, problems related to drinking water, and eme rging parking challenges. Along 
with commuting, significant issues are arising rela ted to public transportation as well. 
Until all these problems are resolved, the cities w ill not develop, and they will not 
become the lifeline of India's development. Keeping  these issues in mind, the budget 
presented by Government of India has given special focus on planned urban 
development as its first initiative . The developme nt of cities should be done in a 
planned manner, and for this planned urban developm ent, the Government of India 
has made provision of allocating Rs 82,576.57 crore  in this year's budget, whereas it 
was Rs 1,468.20 crore in 2013-14, which is 55 percent more than that investment. The 
Government of India has undertaken measures for urb an housing development in its 
budget, under which plans will be formulated to ens ure the systematic development 
of cities. At present, the cities are being developed in a disorderly manner. The way in 
which cities are developing is such that instead of  forming a single city, multiple sub-
cities are emerging within the city. Cities are not  being developed in the desired 
manner; therefore, the Government of India has decided to allocate ₹82,576 crore this 
year to ensure the proper development of 14 major c ities with populations exceeding 
30 lakh, as well as 100 other cities. Provisions ha ve been made to facilitate it. Another 
significant initiative undertaken is that special a ttention has been given to the urban 
transportation system and the scale of its developm ent. Today, the biggest problem 
in cities is transportation.  All the buses that op erate are extremely crowded; during 
the morning office commute, one faces numerous chal lenges, including the 
unavailability of seats. Similarly, in cities that have metro rail, the same situation 
prevails within those metros. Likewise, the people coming from nearby villages or 
smaller towns to larger cities, face the same kind of problems. To address this, the 
Government of India has decided to launch transit-f ree and transhipment-free 
development schemes in 14 cities with populations e xceeding 30 lakh. A provision of 
INR 1300 crore has been made for e-buses, under whi ch the Government of India will 
supply 1,300 e-buses across these cities. Similarly , for the metro, the previous 
allocation of ₹20,950 crore has been increased to ₹21,247.94 crore. This means that 
the Government of India intends for urban developme nt to proceed in such a manner 
that development is properly facilitated through th e transit system.  The development 
of the metro, as well as the expansion of transport ation, should not  cause pollution; 
hence, attention has been given to electric buses. For electric buses, the Government 
of India has made provision of ₹1,300 crore under the Prime Minister's Electric Bus  
Scheme, and by doing so, they have allocated ₹21,247.94 crore for the metro instead 
of ₹20,950 crore. 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
143

 
Sir, along with this, to make the development of urban life more comfortable 
and to make it accessible for more people, the government has introduced three 
schemes. Firstly, rental—buildings of this type should be constructed and 
encouraged so that those who cannot afford to buy a house or pay high rent should 
be able to obtain a home under the rental scheme established by the government and 
live in it.  For the first time, the Government of India has launched a rental hospitality 
scheme. I welcome this initiative. Similarly, two more measures have been 
undertaken, including the implementation of weekly markets. You cannot bring or 
transport goods from such a distant area. To provide this convenience, the 
government has started organising weekly markets, and there will be such market 
programs in a hundred cities, allowing people to access this facility at one location. 
The third point is that the people who conduct business on the streets, such as street 
vendors, should be provided with the facility to conduct their trade conveniently. We 
observe, in various locations, including Connaught Place and across all cities, how 
chaat stalls, kachori stalls, and fruit carts are set up. The aim is to ensure that all such 
vendors can engage in trade comfortably on the streets so that the common person 
can earn a livelihood in the city with minimal investment, and city residents can 
access goods affordably and conveniently on the streets. To achieve this, the 
Government of India has launched this third scheme and has allocated three thousand 
crore rupees for its implementation.  Under the Amrut Scheme for Urban Rejuvenation 
and Sustainable Development, it has been decided to increase the allocation from 
₹5,200 crore to ₹8,000 crore. Thus, the funding is consistently rising, and this 
increase is being made with careful consideration of the current situation in cities, 
particularly regarding housing and development.  
Sir, I would like to submit that the government has planned to arrange housing 
for two types of people, targeting 1 crore individuals. Out of this, 3 thousand crore 
rupees have been allocated to provide affordable housing for the economically weaker 
sections, and 1 thousand crore have been set aside to facilitate housing for the 
middle-class population. Consequently, three housing schemes have been started. 
The first is rental scheme,  where the government will provide assistance and promote 
those who build houses to rent out. It will ensure that these houses are rented out at a 
predetermined rate and provide space for the same, so this scheme is aimed at low-
income individuals who come to the city to earn their livelihood and contribute to GDP 
growth, enabling them to work here.  
 Secondly, acquiring a house in large cities is extremely difficult for the common 
man, for the middle class, and for the low-income group. Therefore, the government 
has allocated two schemes: one worth 3 thousand crore and the other 1 thousand 
[RAJYA SABHA]
144

 
crore, for the purpose of providing one crore house s. I believe that, for the first time, 
the Government of India has taken such a significan t step. For this, I would like to 
thank the honorable Minister, as well as our Finance Minister and our esteemed Prime 
Minister, under whose leadership the work is progre ssing. I extend my heartfelt 
gratitude to them all. 
 Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, regarding urban rej uvenation and sustainable 
development – cities face sewage problems , and pro blems related to water supply, 
drainage, drinking water, and electricity connectio ns. To address these issues, the 
government has initiated the AMRUT scheme.  We are in the Amrit Kaal, and for this 
Amrut scheme as well, the government has made such a significant provision so that 
ordinary essential items consumed by the common peo ple do not fall short of supply, 
arrangements have been made to ensure ease of living and that their life proceeds in a 
comfortable and pleasant manner. 
 Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir, when the Prime Minister t ook the oath, he 
subsequently launched the Swachh Bharat Mission.  T oday, we can see the 
difference.   Earlier, when we used to travel by tr ain and the train would pass through 
cities or villages early in the morning, people could be seen sitting on both sides of the 
railway tracks. Now, however, when we travel, such people are no longer visible. 
When we used to go to the streets, many people coul d be seen standing with their 
vehicles parked by the roadside, but now they are n o longer visible. Now, people 
have been istilled with a value system, a certain s entiment has developed, and an 
inspiration has also taken root. Accordingly, the g overnment has initiated such work 
in the cities, through which they can avail the ben efits of the Amrut scheme. Mr. 
Deputy Chairman Sir, an allocation of ₹5,000 crore has been made for this purpose. 
This represents a 95 percent increase compared to t he revised estimate of ₹555 crore 
for the financial year 2023-24. The government has done a significant amount of work 
in this regard. Similarly, a significant effort has  been made to create livelihoods 
opportunities for the urban poor. Approximately, ₹300 crore have been allocated for 
this purpose. Through the establishment of self-hel p groups, 78 lakh urban poor 
families have been economically empowered. Over 38 lakh livelihoods opportunities 
have been created through skill training and entrep reneurship. Additionally, 2,000 
permanent shelters have been constructed in urban a reas. The Modi government 
assures that it will continuously work to ensure th e highest level of financial and social 
inclusion for the urban poor under this scheme. The  government has decided that for 
those who do not have a house to live in, 2,000 she lters will be constructed where 
people can stay. People will not need to sleep on t he tracks, on railway platforms, or 
under a tree by roadside anymore.  The Government o f India will establish shelters in 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
145

 
cities so that you can work; you can take bath there in the morning, proceed to work, 
and then return to stay at these shelters. This arrangement has been made by the 
Government of India. It is a unique arrangement. No government had ever thought of 
making such arrangements before. Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir, therefore I would like to 
say that progress cannot be made without urban development. The biggest problem 
in cities is the land-related disputes.  
Whether one has built the house with zero setbacks or with setbacks, whether 
one has encroached or not, whether one has obtained permission from the Municipal 
Corporation, Municipal Council, or Development Authorities or not, whether one’s 
house is leased or occupied, and whether the measurements are correct or not—
these are all significant issues.  To address these issues, the government has decided 
to formulate a policy under urban land. Under this policy, the government will create a 
map by digitizing houses and lands through a GPS system, measure them, and 
determine their ownership. It will all be digital, and the person will soon receive the 
information regarding the type of the house. 
Sir, the government has taken this step to address all the issues related to 
demolition activities as a result of recurring issues of encroachment in cities.  Mr. 
Deputy Chairman Sir, I would like to request you to note that for the first time the 
government has thought of something and then acted upon it. 
Sir, we all know what kinds of problems are arising in cities today. We also 
know that Delhi has problem of  pollution; we know about other cities that there is a 
sewage problem; we know there is a transport problem; we know that affordable 
transport is not available; we know that for people who come to the city to work, 
there is a problem of unavailability of toilets, and they face a problem of drinking 
water. Sir, no poor person can afford to buy a house; therefore, if the government's 
vision is to develop India by 2047, it is necessary to create developed cities for this 
purpose. Although the entire responsibility for the development of cities lies with the 
state governments, the Government of India took the initiative and, through a decision 
by the NITI Aayog, stated that if we are to build a Viksit Bharat by 2047, the lifeline of 
Viksit Bharat will run through its developed cities. Therefore, strengthen this lifeline, 
make it reliable, make it tax-generating, and make it a source of employment so that 
people can live their lives comfortably with ease of doing. Establish such a system 
that allows individuals to earn a livelihood. 
Sir, careful consideration has been given to the fact that the population in cities 
will increase. Therefore, it is essential to determine the manner in which cities will 
expand, how transportation within cities will function, the type of housing available to 
people, and how employment opportunities will be provided. Keeping all these 
[RAJYA SABHA]
146

 
aspects in mind, the Government of India has alloca ted provisions for urban housing 
and development in the 2024-25 budget. Certain poin ts and issues have been 
identified with the objective of addressing the dif ficulties faced by the public, thereby 
ensuring comprehensive urban development. 
Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, the government's app roach is not of a single 
kind, but comprehensive. It has been stated, and th e NITI Aayog has affirmed, that 
while the development of rural areas is important, it is also necessary to ensure the 
overall, proper, and balanced development of urban areas alongside rural areas. They 
have determined all the requirements necessary for the balanced, proper, and 
comprehensive development of those cities, and in t he 2024-25 budget, the Ministry 
of Urban Affairs of the Government of India has set  the criteria for them and also 
determined the method for undertaking the same work. In this way, a lifeline has been 
provided for the cities. The challenges and difficu lties present in urban life have been 
addressed, offering a relief so that people coming there can find employment. Sir, no 
one would have imagined that a small task, such as the work of a vendor standing on 
the street selling fruits, fruit chaat, kachori, sa mosas, and chaat with chutney, could 
be carried out properly while earning a livelihood, feeding one’s family, and being able 
to stay at the rest houses provided by the governme nt at night – this is also a very 
significant matter. He should be able to bathe in t he morning, steps out with dignity, 
and goes about his work. 
  This is a method of contemplation. It is a way fr om Antyodaya  to Abhyudaya . 
The goal is the progress of the last person coming to the city for any purpose. . For 
this, I would like to thank Mr. Manohar Lal, as he is the Minister of Urban 
Development. He has donated the house he had in his  native village. He has now 
moved to the city. In any case, he was already resi ding in the city, even before 
becoming the Chief Minister. The Government of Indi a has provided for an urban 
development plan with an eight-pronged program aime d at transforming the 
difficulties and dilemmas faced by city dwellers in to conveniences.  This provision is 
for small towns and cities with a population exceed ing thirty lakh. It will be expanded 
thereafter.   
Mr. Deputy Chairman, I would like to make a request  to the Honorable 
Minister. He has extensive experience. He served as the Chief Minister for ten years—
well, let's say nine and a quarter years. Prior to that, he has also served as a 
Sangathan Mantri , so he is well aware of all matters. Until the mun icipalities, 
municipal councils, and development authorities ame nd their laws for this purpose, 
and until there is coordination between the state g overnments and the Government of 
India, it will be difficult to properly utilize all  this money for development under the 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
147

 
Amrut Plan by 2047. I would like to request the Honorable Minister to kindly convene a 
meeting of all the ministers responsible for urban development, which in various cities 
are referred to as local bodies or by other names, so that we can discuss and ensure 
the proper utilization and development with the substantial amount of 86,000 crore 
rupees that we are allocating. 
I would like to mention another point that land acquisition in cities is a very 
challenging task. The cooperative societies are jointly creating problems by dividing 
the land of those farmers who reside on the outskirts of cities, cutting leases, 
constructing small lanes, and building houses on it. They do not have a proper 
drainage system. They lack an adequate drainage system. Currently, if we observe, 
the rainfall is below average, yet on television, virtually every day, a city is shown 
where roads get flooded within fifteen minutes of rain. There should be arrangements 
for water drainage and a proper drainage system in place. 
Thirdly, these large cities are becoming more sprawling; they are not 
developing in a structured manner. Until a city develops in an organized and 
structured way, its cohesion as a city will not increase, and instead, it will extend into 
the suburbs. Due to the suburbs, the proper development of urban areas will not be 
possible; therefore, I would like to request the Honorable Minister to discuss it with 
the state governments. Until we initiate a comprehensive action plan to implement this 
entire scheme, this work will not be feasible. I am hopeful, as the Honorable Minister 
is highly experienced. He will make efforts in this direction. Considering the amount of 
money he has received, I believe that hardly any urban affairs minister has ever 
received such a large amount of funds. Therefore, due to receiving such a substantial 
amount, he will advance this work. Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, look at the vision 
of the Government of India. They present the budget one day, and two days later 
there is a meeting of the NITI Aayog. After the NITI Aayog meeting, all tasks are 
determined. Such meetings, which will develop India over 25 years and lead it 
towards prosperity, and which aim to guide the nation towards greatness, I 
unfortunately have to say, have also been boycotted by members of our opposition. 
This is a matter of great concern. They are unable to accept defeat, they cannot 
digest the defeat. Defeat has to be accepted. Honorable Jairam Ji, until one comes 
to terms with defeat, one will continue to be restless. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH : Who has been defeated? The defeat is of the target of more 
than 400 seats. 
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
148

 
SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI :  Those who could not presen t the Budget here are 
defeated.Those who intrrupt the Prime Minister whil e he is speaking, are defeated. 
Those who walk out of the House during the Prime Mi nister’s speech are 
defeated.Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, they are defeated. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN  :  Please speak on the topic. 
 
SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI  :  Therefore, maintain a certain balance. Victory and 
defeat are two sides of the same coin in a democrac y. Hence, do not create such 
obstacles in urban development and in the working o f NITI Aayog, and try to facilitate 
government cooperation in this regard.  Honorable P rime Minister has repeatedly 
stated that we are no longer for a party, but for the nation. When the Honorable Prime 
Minister is repeatedly appealing to you that we are for the country, not for a party, rise 
above the mire and blossom like a lotus.  If you fl ourish, the cities of India will also 
flourish, and when the cities of India flourish, th e lifeline of India's development will 
also flourish. When the lifeline flourishes, the ci ties of India will progress, and as the 
cities of India progress, India's development will accelerate. As India's development 
accelerates, the world will take notice, and India' s GDP will continue to grow.  
Through the lifelines of cities by 2047, we will le ad India towards a developed and 
prosperous India. Our cities will contribute to thi s. Accordingly, provisions have been 
made in this budget. With this, I thank the Honorab le Minister for it and conclude my 
speech. Thank you. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you, Honorable Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari Ji . 
Honorable Shri Ajay Makan Ji . 
 
SHRI AJAY MAKAN (Karnataka) :  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir. I have had a 
long-standing association with the Ministry of Urban Affairs. During UPA 1, I served as 
Minister of State for the initial three years and a s a Cabinet Minister for the last two 
years. I will try to provide some constructive sugg estions and critical analysis based 
on the facts that I have learned over five years. M y sole effort will be to rise above 
political lines and share some thoughts on how the proper development of cities can 
be achieved. 
 Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir, urbanization is taking pl ace in our country at a very 
rapid pace. When we say rapidly urbanizing, it mean s that the number of small towns 
is increasing, and the population within large citi es is growing swiftly.  Both of these 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
149

 
phenomena are occurring simultaneously. When we say that the number of smaller 
cities is increasing, in 2001, our country had 5,161 cities, and according to the 2011 
census, this number rose to 7,939 cities. This means that, according to the census, 
in ten years, 4,000 new cities have emerged in our country. While new cities are 
developing, the population in existing cities like Delhi, Mumbai, and other large Tier-1 
and Tier-2 cities is also increasing. However, as we undergo rapid urbanization, 
managing these cities presents the greatest challenges.  When the challenges are 
greatest, we need to understand for whom we need to work and for whom should 
work. This is the first thing we need to comprehend, which I wish to convey to the 
Honorable Minister. Many times, we forget these matters, and often these issues 
become blurred before us. 
 Honorable Deputy Chairman Sir, if we look at it in the true sense, the soul of 
our city is made up of those who are the builders of the city, the labours of the city, 
the people who work in the city, the people who work in factories. They leave home 
for work in the morning and whatever they earn, they eat in the evening. They are the 
ones who build our city.  These are the people who are impoverished in the city. They 
live in slums, unauthorized colonies within urban areas. In a village, the poor might 
face hardships occasionally, but in the city, these poor individuals experience daily 
struggles. Why do they suffer daily? Because, they witness the stark reality of their 
poverty while being surrounded by the wealthiest individuals in the city.  When they 
compare themselves to the wealthiest people living in the city, the poor and lower-
class individuals in the city experience death in one way or another every day. This is 
what we believe, and therefore, it is imperative for us to understand this most 
profoundly. 
 Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir, I had the opportunity to observe the census operations as the MoS for Home Affairs in 2009. After those census operations were over, when I returned to the Housing Ministry, the house listing and housing census were brought to my attention. When the Registrar General informed about this, he stated that there are different types of cities within our country. We asked what is meant by different types of cities. We inquired whether these are based on population. He replied that they are not based on population; these are census towns, statutory towns, urban agglomerations, and urban extensions.  These are four different types of towns. I asked how these four different types of towns came to be. I asked, you are saying that there are a total of 7,939 cities in our country, so how did these become different?  He said that out of these 7,939 towns, only 4,000 are statutory towns. That is, out of the 7,939 towns, only 4,000 have urban local bodies, while the rest do not have urban local bodies and they have gram panchayats. We 
[RAJYA SABHA]
150

 
asked what is the purpose of these gram panchayats.  We spoke with the officials of 
the Housing Ministry to understand the purpose of t hese Gram Panchayats, the role 
of urban local bodies, and the function of municipa lities, because there are several 
cities with populations of 500,000 each, yet there is no municipality there; instead, 
there is a Gram Panchayat.  It was discovered that,  somewhere in a certain city, it 
does not suit them to shift into urban local bodies , because once they come under 
urban local bodies, they will be liable to pay prop erty tax, will need to construct their 
houses in a planned manner in accordance with build ing byelaws, and may also have 
to pay for water supply.  The most significant issu e is that once a city comes under 
urban local bodies, the grants from the Centre and the State are drastically reduced, 
and no funds are received. It is surprising to me t hat in our country, the areas, where 
funds are most needed, do not receive any financial  support.   When we formed the 
Empowered Committee in 2011-12, it stated that by 2 021-22, cities in our country 
would require 38 lakh crore, and to meet this requi rement of 38 lakh crore, we would 
need to allocate 1.1 percent of the GDP for cities.  At that time, in 2011-12, it was 0.7 
percent. Today it has certainly increased, as menti oned just now, but it is still at 0.7 
percent. GDP has grown, so it has increased accordi ng to the 0.7 percent, but until it 
rises from 0.7 percent to 1.1 percent, we will not invest more funds, our cities will not 
be able to develop more rapidly. 
 Now the question arises as to why, for our city, I  believe, our vision becomes 
blurred. We all will agree that the biggest problem  within our cities is housing. How 
the impoverished people live here is the most signi ficant issue.  After that, there are 
issues related to transport, sanitation, and sewage ; there are problems concerning 
everything. However, I consider housing to be the m ost important. When the 
Registrar General was giving a presentation, he sta ted that there are 11 crore census 
houses in urban areas across our entire country.  O ut of 11 crore census houses, 1.11 
crore, that is 111 lakh houses, are vacant in urban  areas, and there are 1.37 crore 
slums in our country. I fail to understand that wit hin our urban areas, 1.11 crore 
houses are vacant while 1.37 crore slums exist in t he same locations. What does this 
imply? It implies that the priorities of our governments are not aligned correctly. 
 
6:00 P.M. 
 
This means that here - this is not a matter of the present, it has been ongoing 
continuously. Therefore, we believe that our govern ments - whether state 
governments or the central government - will need t o prioritize how our resources are 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
151

 
being utilized correctly and whether the lands we are allocating, Is it Are they going 
into the pockets of builders and whether it is are they being used to prevent slums? 
This needs to be looked into. 
Hon‘ble Deputy Chairman, Sir, I would like to discuss the ‘Pradhan Mantri 
Awas Yojana’ (Prime Minister Housing Scheme) which was launched here almost 10 
years ago and how it could have been improved. During my tenure, I had prepared a 
complete draft of the Rajiv Awas Yojana (Rajiv Housing Scheme). They have made 
some changes mends to it,. I would like to explain how the poor in the city have 
suffered as a result of it.  
 Hon'ble Deputy Chairman, Sir, the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana has four 
verticals. The first vertical is the most important: in-situ slum rehabilitation. This 
means it should be built where slums exist. We believe that we had 13.7-3.8 million 
slums in the 2011 census, it is now estimated that they may have increased to 18.8 
million. Therefore, this is the most important vertical. The scheme implemented for in-
situ slum rehabilitation provides a central grant of only ₹1 lakh per centre. The second 
vertical is a credit-linked subsidy scheme. This is a bank loan subsidy, which is 
provided given with on interest. The third is affordable housing in partnership, in 
which private players, builders, are directly given ₹1.5 lakh. The fourth is beneficiary-
led construction, in which ₹1.5 lakh is given to the beneficiary. 
 Hon‘ble Deputy Chairman, Sir, when we implemented the ‘Rajiv Housing 
Scheme’, we spoke with all stakeholders. The first thing they asked was, "What's the 
use of the 1 lakh rupees you give? Who can build a house in the city with the 1 lakh 
rupees you're giving? One lakh rupees aren’t enough even to lay the floor of a room. 
In a way, it's a joke." Our plan at that time was, "whole slum, whole city." This 
meant we would take on the entire slum, the entire city. First, a slum-free city plan 
would be formulated, approved, and then work would be done to improve the entire 
slum.  We had allocated a minimum of 2.5 lakh rupees in central assistance for each 
individual in big cities, 3 lakh rupees in smaller cities, and at least 4 lakh rupees in the 
Northeast and hilly areas. I'm talking about this in the year 2013. Earlier, this was our 
vision and initiative to help the poor. Unfortunately, instead of increasing, it has now 
been decreased. The ₹2.5 lakh to ₹4 lakh rupees allocated under the Rajiv Awas 
Yojana has now been reduced to 1 to 1.5 lakh rupees. I would like to request the 
Minister to look into this. If you truly want to help the poor and think that giving 1 lakh 
rupees is enough to build a house, then this amount is not enough even to repair a 
house, forget about building a new one. So, this should help the poor and slum 
dwellers.  
[RAJYA SABHA]
152

 
 The second difference is that during our tenure, w e used to decide the 
minimum percentage of funds to be given to State Go vernments and urban local 
bodies. We used to decide 25 percent to be given to  State Governments and 10 
percent to urban local bodies. Unfortunately, all those conditions have been removed. 
This means that only the fund that comes from the c enter goes to them; they don't 
receive any other fund. So, while we claim that our houses are being built on paper, in 
reality, they aren't being built. I'll tell you how I say this, and I'd like to explain it based 
on their responses to questions. 
 They claim that approximately 1 crore 18 lakhs hou ses have been sanctioned, 
of which approximately 83 or 85 lakh housess have b een built. Of those 83 or 85 
lakhs, only 1.63 lakhs houses have been allocated t o slums under in-situ slum 
rehabilitation which is less than two percent, bare ly one and a half percent, has been 
allocated to slums.  The Ministry stated aid a para graph before the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee, which I would like to read out- “In written 
reply submitted to the Committee about the housing shortage, the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs has stated that the housing short age estimated by the Technical 
Group is 1.88 crore over a period of 2012-2017.  It  had further submitted that in India, 
slum decadal growth rate is 34 per cent. ”  Ministry itself is stating this.  Slums are 
increasing by 34 percent every 10 years, but here o nly 1.63 percent of the total has 
been spent on in-situ slum rehabilitation, which is  wrong. Further they stated, “Also, 
two million non-slum urban poor households are prop osed to be covered under this 
Mission.  Hence, the total housing shortage, envisa ged to be addressed through the 
new Mission, is 20 million. ” I mentioned this to the Department-Related Parliam entary 
Standing Committee at that time. I asked that 1.63 percent of the total is allocated for 
in-situ slum rehabilitation, so where is the money going? To whom? 60 percent is 
going to the Beneficiary-Led Construction(BLC) vert ical. The most important 
condition to be fulfilled in Beneficiary-Led Constr uction is that the land must be 
owned. Now tell me, how did someone who owns land in the city become poor? How 
did someone who owns land in the city become urban poor, and how is 60 percent 
going to them? On the other hand, someone who doesn 't own land in the city is 
forcibly occupying Government land and living in a slum by covering it with plastic 
sheets. If they aren't getting the benefits, how ca n anyone else? This is the biggest 
question that arises today. So, I want to say that you are spending money, but first of 
all, you are spending less money per unit and it is  not being monitored, due to which 
it is not reaching the beneficiaries in the right w ay. The second biggest most vital 
shortcoming in this is that the money is not reachi ng the real beneficiaries, who are 
actually in the slums. 60 percent of the beneficiar ies are those who own land. If 60 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
153

 
percent of such beneficiaries get the money, then you can understand how these 
Tier-I, Tier-II, Tier-III cities, where maximum slums are located, will benefit from it? 
The money is not reaching there at all.  
   Additionally, 30% of beneficiaries are beneficiaries under the Credit-Linked 
Incentive Scheme, but they too receive interest subsidy on bank loans. They don't 
receive it for building their own house; rather, they receive the bank loan subsidy 
when they obtain a bank loan. They will only receive a bank loan if they own land. 
They will only receive a bank loan if they purchase from a private builder. The fourth 
category within this is AHP. This is the Housing in Partnership Scheme, where the 
remaining 8-9% goes to private builders. The Government directly funds private 
builders, who build houses, and the beneficiaries then purchase from them. This is 
benefiting either private builders or those in the MIG category or above. According to 
the census, houses are being built for those whose 1 crore 11 lakhs houses already lie 
vacant. So the real urban poor, the ones those who should be targeted, those who 
are the soul of the city, as I said earlier, the onesthose who should really get help, are 
not getting any help and are not benefiting from it.  
 Now, I would like to say one thing in this context regarding the Delhi issue. I 
have reviewed the entire list. As I mentioned, approximately 1 crore 8 lakhs houses 
have been sanctioned under this scheme, and approximately 83 lakhs or 85 lakhs out 
of them have been built. However, in the last 10 years, Delhi has received only 29,000 
houses. It could be that for some reason, they didn't provide themit, or that the 
people of Delhi simply didn't ask for it. When Shri Khattar answers this, I'd like him to 
explain whether the people of Delhi didn't ask for themit, or whether they didn't 
provide them, and they did ask for themit, yet they didn't receive themget the same? 
  Hon‘ble Deputy Chairman, Sir, I would now like to address the most 
important segment of the urban poor: the street vendors. This is very important. I 
would like to inform you that I drafted the Street Vendors' Livelihood Protection Act 
and got it passed it through the Cabinet, which is now being implemented across the 
country. The sad thing is that while street vendors are being given money under the 
Pradhan Mantri Svanidhi SVANidhi Yojana, those who received loans under the 
Pradhan Mantri SVANSvanidhi Yojana are being evicted. Even more saddening is that 
I have the entire list, they are being removed from the Prime Minister's constituency. 
Varanasi, Ram Nagar, Sheetla Ghat, Lanka, Sarnath, and Bhikharipur in Varanasi are 
the five markets where funds were given under the Pradhan Mantri SVANSvanidhi 
Yojana. It is the Prime Minister's constituency, and they're being removed right there 
after receiving money, even though Section 3, Sub-section 3 under Section 3, of the 
Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Act  
[RAJYA SABHA]
154

 
Street Vendors Protection of Livelihoods Act states  that no one can be removed 
unless after they have got a Certificate of Vending . How were these people removed 
from the Prime Minister's constituency when they re ceived their Certificates of 
Vending? I hope Shri Khattar will shed light on thi s, as it's matter related to Prime 
Minister, which I'm raising here. 
In Delhi, I'm naming taking the names of places lik e Dakshinpuri Water 
TankPani Ki Tanki, Peepal Chowk, Virat Chowk, Pushp  Vihar, Madangir, where 
people received loans and cCertificates of Vvending  under the "Pradhan Mantri 
Svanidhi SVANidhi Yojana," yet they are still being evicted from there. People are also 
being evicted from Dabri Road Market, Mangalapuri M arket, Karol Bagh, Ajmal Khan 
Road, and Lajpat Nagar. In Kolkata, Bertram Street,  Behala Technopolis, Sector 3 
New Town, and Salt Lake; in Bhopal, Misrod Estate, Barkheda, and Pathani Bazaar; 
in Uttarakhand, Gandhi Park, Bus Adda Market, Samos a Market, Niranjanpur Mandi, 
Clement Town, and Bhandari Bagh. I'm taking the nam es of naming these because 
this is happening across the country. I started col lecting the names of all these 
markets yesterday. Across the country, people are s aying, "We don't want money, 
we want the protection that our laws provide to street vendors."   
Hon‘ble  Deputy Chairman, Sir, I want to say throug h you that the police 
charge the street vendor on a daily basis, the loca l body charges them, the person in 
chargeowner of the place takes the money, and the h ead of the market takes the 
money. If, even after wearing the "Pradhan Mantri Svanidhi Yojana" badge, he has to 
pay, or else he will be removed, then it's there is  nothing more  more than that. 
Today, these people are asking for security. They d on't need much money. They 
received a loan of 10,000 rupees, fine, but if the money they pay to four agencies daily 
was stopped, their families would be happier and th ey would be more satisfied. 
Instead of them receiving the money on loan and the n returningrepaying it to the 
Government. Therefore, regarding the Street Vendors ' Livelihood Protection Act, 
which we introduced, I would like to request Shri K hattar to call all the State Ministers 
from the States and ensure its implementation. If i t is implemented, the poor in our 
country will be able to properly benefit from it. T hank you very much. My time is 
running out. I want to be punctual remain stuck to time. Thank you very much.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It's 1 minute, 22 seconds are remaining, you can speak.  
 
                                        
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
155

 
SHRI AJAY MAKAN: Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I just spoke about the Street 
Vendors' Livelihood Protection Act. This law is not being properly enforced in our 
country. We have included provisions for the formation of a Town Vending 
Committee. The Town Vending Committee will hold regular meetings, and the Town 
Vending Committee will conduct the surveys. 
 Sadly, urban local bodies and State Governments across the country are not 
complying, and the Government is showing little interest in monitoring it. The BJP 
spokesperson speaker who spoke earlier tobefore me also said that State Ministers 
from States should be called to discuss this issue and the issue of Town Vending 
Committee. The Government should also discuss its priorities: slum dwellers and 
poor people living in cities, who need more attention. Our main focus should be how 
we can help those who are looking at us and our Governments. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Honourable Ajay Makan ji. Honourable 
Members, two Honourable Members have requested that they have to go out on 
urgent business. If you permit, I would like to give them the opportunity to speak first.  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal): Sir, it is our time.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Yes, It is your time. Therefore, I am seeking the House's 
consent. If you permit, I can request them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I would request the honourable speakers to express their 
views bein  very concise and brief and in less time their views. Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha.  
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA (Uttar Pradesh): Hon. Deputy 
Chairman, Sir, I am very grateful to you for allowing me to express my views before 
the House on this important issue. 
Sir, according to a United Nations report, by 2050, half of India's population 
will reside in metropolitan cities and towns. Along with rural areas, we need numerous 
reforms in urban areas to fulfill our vision resolve of a developed India Viksit Bharat by 
2047. This budget has allocated ₹1,77,000 crore with 12% increase for the 
development of the country's urban areas. I express my deep gratitude to the 
Honorable Prime Minister for this. Sir, to provide housing to the poor and middle-
[RAJYA SABHA]
156

 
class living in urban areas, a target of building 1 0 million new houses has been set 
under the 'Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban'. In this budget, the Government has 
announced a special plan for the development of 14 major cities with a population of 
more than 3 million. Arrangements are also being ma de to create 'Haat Bazaars' for 
street vendors living in urban areas. A provision o f approximately ₹25,000 crore has 
been made in the budget to ensure metro connectivity in the cities.  
Sir, today I want to tell you one thing: when I lef t my house for the House, I 
saw a poster put up by the Congress Party on the ro adside, which said that women's 
reservation should be implemented immediately and d emanded 33 percent 
reservation for OBC women in women's reservation. I  want to ask the Congress that 
out of the 19 Finance Ministers from Shri R.K. Chetty to Shri P. Chidambaram, did the 
Congress not consider any woman worthy of being a F inance Minister in the country 
during its entire tenure? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : You should speak on the subject. Speak on the subj ect of 
urban development. 
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : Sir, I am spea king on the topic only. 
During the Congress regime, Indira Gandhi held this  portfolio solely when she was 
Prime Minister. Today, I am proud that under the le adership of the Honorable Prime 
Minister and in accordance with the policies of the  Bharatiya Janata Party, this 
portfolio was given to Nirmala Sitharaman ji  for the first time. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Nothing else will is going on the record. 
...(Interruptions)...  Please speak on the subject. 
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA: When you speak, we listen. Therefore, 
you must have the capacity to listen. 
Sir, this Ministry has been given to Hon’ble Nirmal a Sitharaman ji on a full-time basis. 
I would like to place a few figures before the House. During Pandit Nehru ji ’s first three 
terms, there was one woman Minister in 1947, two in  1952, and one in 1957. I would 
like to ask the Congress Party….. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Honorable Member, the subject is urban development. 
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA: Women in this c ountry played a 
decisive role in the freedom movement. Did you not consider women worthy of a role 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
157

 
in forming the Government? I say this because I was listening. These people do not 
speak on the subject. For so long I...(interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the topic.   
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : I want to say one more thing, the 
way...(interruptions)...I'm going to say this because I'm hurt. There was a big poster 
in front of my house. When I saw it, I felt very bad. ...(interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  This is the topic here. 
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : I understand the pain of the Congress 
party and through a few lines I want to tell how a tribal woman has the crown of 
President on her head and how the whole country is proud of a woman Finance 
Minister and how today women are in the Parliament today...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, please. Speak on the topic. 
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : Sir, I'm coming to the point. 
Approximately 78 percent of the OBC population in the country lives in rural areas, 
who were not capable, could not afford urban living. …(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You should remember that you have to speak in less time.  
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : There are many 
such...(iInterruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Madam, please.   
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : Due to such social reasons... (time- 
bell rings)... tThe backward classes are not able to reside in the cities of the country . 
...(iInterruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Madam, please. One minute, one minute, please. I 
requested that you speak in a short time and that you speak on the topic. Your time 
will be up shortly, so please speak quickly.  
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
158

 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : Sir, this was a housing issue.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Conclude your speech by speaking on the topic of 
housing.   
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : How people migrating from villages to 
cities lacked the financial capacity to build homes  and had to somehow survive by 
renting living as tenant somewhere. The work our Go vernment, under the leadership 
of the respected Prime Minister, has done to provid e housing to such people is a 
commendable step. You can certainly see that SC, ST , and OBC people, who were 
unable to enjoy the amenities of cities due to thes e reasons, are now happy to live in 
cities, thanks to the respected Prime Minister and the respected Minister, and how 
our Prime Minister has cared for us. Sir, I would l ike to add one more thing. A few 
days ago, Member of Parliament, Shri Sanjay Singh, raised a topic here. He said that 
in Uttar Pradesh, name plates should be placed on s hops along the Kanwar 
route ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  You have to speak on the subject. 
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : I would say ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please conclude.   
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA  : I would like to say that when on 
economic grounds, Halal certification is forced on items of common use and in 
Bareilly in Uttar Pradesh, an attempt is made to co nvert Hindus and conduct their 
mass marriages ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please speak on the subject. Your time is up. 
 
SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA : I want to say that they should think 
about this. I agree that you have a strong attachme nt to one caste... (Time bell 
rings) ... But you shouldn't attack the faith of Hindus either. ...(interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please speak on the subject...Shrimati Sumitra Bal mik. 
Please speak within five minutes and speak on the s ubject. Only if you speak on the 
subject, it will go on record.  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
159

 
 
SHRIMATI SUMITRA BALMIK (Madhya Pradesh): Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, you 
have given me the opportunity to speak on this historic budget...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not a budget, this is a discussion on the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs.   
 
SHRIMATI SUMITRA BALMIK:  I thank you from the bottom of my heart for giving me 
this opportunity to speak on urban development. Sir, another proud chapter has been 
added to the 2024 and 2025 budgets, which is full of features and relief for every 
section. This budget specifically emphasizes the development of urban character 
through the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY). Sir, with a massive amount of 
₹79,000 crore, this initiative provides safe and affordable housing to millions of 
people. We are talking about building 30 million additional houses, of which 10 million 
will be in urban areas. Imagine that more than 10 million families will finally have a 
place where they will truly feel like they have found a place shelter to live 
 in the city. 
 Sir, since 2015, the PMAY has been more than just a housing scheme or 
project. It's about providing essential amenities to households, such as household 
toilets, LPG connections, electricity, and clean water. It's also a crucial women-
empowerment scheme, empowering women as owners and co-owners. Given the 
current urban landscape, people who previously lived in slums in cities often found 
themselves without shelter when they migrated from villages to cities. They would live 
in a place, covered with plastic sheets, only to have the city corporation come and 
tear down uproot the plastic sheets from their slums and evict them from their huts. I 
would like to thank the Honorable Prime Minister for recognizing the plight of the poor 
in cities after 2014. Keeping in mind the development of cities, he provided the poor 
with the facility of living in concrete houses and also built toilets in them. The biggest 
problem faced by women was that despite living in the city, they had to go to 
defecate in the open. If we look at the Madhya Pradesh before 2004, even the city 
dwellers used to go to defecate sitting on the side of the railway tracks; this was the 
condition of the cities. Our previous Chief Ministers had created this plight. After 
2004, our Government came and developed the cities. Today you will see that 
Madhya Pradesh is progressing.  
 Sir, I would like to point out that given the growing urban population, we have 
addressed their needs by providing affordable rental housing. This includes 
[RAJYA SABHA]
160

 
dormitory-type housing for industrial workers. This  scheme not only supports our 
work but also encourages fair and transparent rental markets.  
 Sir, we're also wittnessing our Prime Minister's s ignificant contribution to 
developing cities as centers of economic growth. By  working with states on transit 
planning and systematic development of peri-urban a reas, he's ensuring our cities 
grow sustainably and efficiently.  
 Sir, the Transit Oriented Development (TRAD) plan in 14 major cities will make 
urban life more convenient. Water supply and sanita tion are also receiving significant 
attention. There are plans to improve services in 1 00 major cities. Sir, this project will 
not only improve living conditions but also provide  permanent arrangement of water 
for filling local tanks and irrigation, encouraging  residents to live in the cities. 
Furthermore, I would like to mention that for the n ext five years, the development of 
100 weekly haats, or street food hubs, has been ini tiated in each city each year. 
Street vendors boost the local economy. For those w ho doubt these initiatives, I 
would like to remind them that this Government has always placed the common man 
at the center. Its commitment demonstrates its desi re to improve cities and towns, 
providing better conditions for those who live and work in them.  
 Sir, the PM SVANidhi scheme initially offers affor dable working capital loans of 
up to ₹10,000. Considering the need for larger loans, a se cond loan of up to ₹20,000 
is available from 9.4.2021, and a third loan of up to ₹50,000 is available from 1.6.2022.           
   Sir, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs l aunched the "Prime Minister 
Street Vendors' Self-Reliant Fund," or PM SVANidhi,  on June 1, 2020. The objective 
of this scheme is to provide street vendors with wo rking capital loans without 
collateral to restart their businesses severely imp acted by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
For the first time, the Government has provided loa ns for the employment of street 
vendors and hawkers. Sir, approximately 40 lakhs be neficiaries have been benefited 
under this scheme so far. I would also like to than k Modi ji  and the Finance Minister 
for implementing this scheme with a view to ensurin g equality across India. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please finishconclude.  
 
SHRIMATI SUMITRA BALMIK:  Sir, I would like to point out that benefits have b een 
extended to 40 lakh beneficiaries, totaling ₹4,000 crore. Sir, I would also like to 
highlight the eligibility for the PM Svanidhi Yojan a. For example, we used to call them 
barbers, but the Honorable Prime Minister has amended it to call them ‘kesh shilpikar’ 
(hair stylists). Sir, the Honorable Prime Minister has given them so much respect. 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
161

 
How they were called before and now you will see how much respect is given to them 
the kesh shilpikars. 
 Sir, one more thing is that I would like to thank my Government, my Prime 
Minister, and my Finance Minister for the ideas I have presented to you today under 
the Urban Housing Scheme for shoe shiners and paan betel shop owners. Hon. 
Deputy Chairman, Sir, I would also like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to 
speak here. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Thank you very much. Shri Jawhar Sircar, please You 
speak.  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal) :  Sir, I have listened to you.  We have 
permitted them.  I will make one special request to you because  while the hon. 
Finance Minister was there, we raised a point.  The point is very simple, it should be 
noted. * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  
…(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Sir, please let me speak for a minute...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  No, no.  …(Interruptions)…  You have to speak on the 
subject please.  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR:  Okay, Sir.  But this was our request and we will have to put 
it in some other manner.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject.  Only that will go on record.   
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR :  Okay.  Now, we start on Urban Development.  I still call it 
Urban Development because 'Affairs' sounds a little odd.  The immediate picture that 
comes to our mind is that this monsoon has been disastrous where constructions are 
concerned.  Roofs have collapsed in seven airports. That is not their responsibility. 
There have been leakages everywhere. But, what is their responsibility is unnatural 
flooding of Delhi and that has happened.  Thanks to their intervention, I am not 
                                        
* Not recorded. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
162

 
referring to the present Minister, he is a very wel l-experienced person, I  am  referring 
to the past incidents.  In trying to enforce a new plan on Delhi; I would give one 
example of Pragati Maidan tunnel.  I am sure it has hit the water table.  Under the city, 
as you know, there are water channels, water tables  and others and we need to go in 
for hydrographic studies before we enforce our will  through, before we put our 
egotistical schemes through, and the flooding of th e Pragati Maidan tunnel would 
continue.  It would continue and you cannot stop it  like that.  The flooding of Rajpath; 
-- I do not know what name they have given, this wa s completely unrequired -- Rs. 
670 crores spent on Rajpath for a few bulbs and lig hts and all you get is perennial 
flooding because you have tampered with the water s ystem.  Now, two days ago, an 
hon. Member asked this question about what is your role, to which the Urban Affairs 
Minister's reply was:  "Urban local bodies are resp onsibility of the State 
Government."              
 That way, we cannot wash our hands away from this p roblem; otherwise, we 
need to scrap the Ministry. It has a centralizing r ole, we have accepted it. It has to 
use its integrative power, its guidelines. They hav e mentioned that they have PFI 
guidelines, SOP for urban floods. The CPWD code; th ere has to be some amount of 
stringent standards on which buildings are made.  S ir, as you know,   in one State, 
known to you, nine bridges have collapsed. This can not go on with public funds. The 
second part of their reply goes into saying that ur ban planning is river-centric. That 
we are sure about it. I do not know whether you hav e seen the video by Deshbhakt  
Akash Banerjee, where he has compared Delhi with Ve nice. As I said, all of it, much 
of it is due to the rather ego-pushed plan of the Central Vista.  
We have to tackle the hydrographic imbalance that w e have created in this. 
When we talk of the Central Vista, I come to two po ints. With your indulgence, I will 
mention both the points. One relates to this Parlia ment building about which, I will not 
get into any unnecessary criticism because it is al l a matter of taste, whether 
something is nouveau riche, something is classical,  these are defined. I would like to 
raise on behalf of all the Members that the two mai n Members' gates, Makar Dwar  
and Shardul Dwar , have no protection. They are exposed to the eleme nts, they are 
exposed to the rain, whereas, the three gates of th e three VIPs, have what you call 
porticos. This is completely unfair because we are all exposed, even their Members 
are exposed to the rain, heat and this blazing sun.   We have to do, redesign the 
building in such a manner that it is covered. There  are other things within it, but I will 
not take time in this debate to mention about these  flaws. Then the galleries; I would 
submit, Sir, it was the plan in the last regime; the galleries are the most useless things 
we have seen. Those spaces could be fruitfully util ized. As a net result of the 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
163

 
disturbance in Delhi,--I am concentrating on Delhi because that is your direct charge, 
the rest, you can say, the States look after,-- we had 207 hotspots in water-logging. 
This year alone, we have added 101. So it makes 308 hotspots as they call it, for 
water-logging. Different names have come up for them, they call them Modi talab, 
Modi fuwarah , all sorts of names; the speaker before me had mentioned. Now 
coming to the schemes of the Ministry, this year, I believe the allocation is Rs.86,000 
crores, which is an improvement over last year. But then, this same Budget was over 
Rs.1 lakh crores three or four years ago. There is a constant slide down of the money 
allotted to the scheme.  
But let us come to some of the more factual issues, some of the more glaring 
shortfalls, glaring failures. The PMAY, Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana,  takes one-third 
of the Budget and all the States are forced to put the word 'PM' before the name, 
though the contribution of the Centre is only 60 per cent. We may like to seek 
permission whether we can put '60 per cent PM Awas Yojana' ; whether you can 
qualify the words '60 per cent' to make it very clear.  The implementation has been 
extremely slow and components like the credit-linked subsidy have taken it into deep, 
deep complications. The Ministry is aware of it. Most of the houses that are built for 
the poor are in the peripheral areas of the town from which transport becomes a 
problem. So before we impose the top-down scheme of the poor people of India, we 
need to rethink. The in-situ slum scheme has been mentioned by Mr. Maken, though, 
I think, he had come over and made some remarks on WB, which we consider 
unnecessary, about some issues, say, the hawker  scheme and all. When it comes to 
Awas Yojana, we are reminded of the Gramin Awas Yojana,  where Bengal has been 
completely deprived.  
 We have sent eleven lakhs thirty-six thousand proposals to the Centre.  And, 
God knows, what is going to happen!  Maybe the minister will be able to explain.  
Eleven lakhs thirty-six thousand proposals for housing lying here in the Centre!  And, 
where the second part of the Ministry's main expenditure goes into is metro rail, but 
we will not comment about it because our metro was by slaughtering the city of 
Kolkata. The metro here runs underground here and doesn't disturb anyone. No 
problem, there are some supplements that have to be done for the Calcutta Metro. 
The next big failure, I would like to point out is AMRUT. That was supposed to 
give tap water, gardens to end pollution control. Even now, most of India is still 
without tap water, whatever be the statements we make from this side or from, har 
ghar jal, and all that.  And, pollution was an integral part of the scheme.  But, two 
days ago, the Health Ministry replied to my question, which the Lancet, the world's 
[RAJYA SABHA]
164

 
most famous medical body, says that seven percent o f the deaths and maybe more 
per centage happens because of urban pollution.  They have completely denied it.  
 The Ministry or the Government has completely deni ed it and said very 
ludicrously that it depends on your food habits.  I  mean, I have it and this would be 
one of the biggest jokes.  Now, there again if you go in, you will find that they have 
achieved like 15 lakh taps, 37 lakh sewers.  But, i t covers practically nothing, it is just 
tokenism.  Compared to the size of the problem, 31 per cent of the urban population 
has no pipe water even now.  Sixty-seven per cent h as no sewerage arrangement as 
of now.  But, we go in for all sorts of statements.   Now, having said this, I will come 
to the last one, which is a demand of our State Gov ernment, aid  memoir , if I may put 
it, on the pending dues that pertained to Mr. Manoh ar Lal ji 's Ministry.  Million Plus 
cities, we have Fifteenth Finance Commission grants of Rs.1,445 crores, just held up.  
I would ask the hon. Minister to take a look at it.   We are being deprived of the rural 
development side; kindly do not slaughter us on the  urban development side now.  
We have what is called the Shelter for Urban Homele ss under the NULM Scheme, 
which is 60:40. Again, the O&M cost is not being gi ven.  I would like to raise this 
issue to him.  
The last point I will make is on Smart City. The Sm art City scheme is one of the 
most classic failures of the last 10 years. You can  take measurements by whichever 
method you feel.  You are supposed to create hundre ds of Smart Cities; there are 
about 50 going around, and, maybe Madurai is the on ly one that has done 
something.  And, our new town of Kolkata has done s omething about it.  But as a 
scheme, as a hype, as a fund allocation, it is one of the most classic cases of mal-
administration, top-down administration.  Right now , the Secretary of the 
Department made a submission before the Parliamenta ry Committee, almost 
admitting that we are winding up the scheme; we gav e upconceded.I do not know 
how much of it is true. The Minister can ascertain it.  I can give him the details.  But, 
you need to focus on schemes that are oriented to t he people who will actually use 
them.  This top-down method, of de-linking yourself  to the people and their direct 
needs, needs to go away. Urban development or Housi ng and Urban Affairs is a very 
important Ministry that can actually go a long way to alleviate the problems of the city 
in terms of housing, in terms of water supply, in t erms of sewerage, in terms of 
amenities.  The way, it has been dealt in the past,  Sir, I would beseech upon you to 
take a fresh look at it because you have a wealth o f experience.  It has been badly 
dealt with and badly executed in the past.  Thank you.     
                                             
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
165

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Thank you, Jawhar Sircar ji.  Now, Shri Meda 
Raghunadha Reddy. 
 
SHRI MEDA RAGHUNADHA REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : The Union Budget for the 
year 2024-25 has allocated a total of Rs. 82,576 crores to the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs. This marks an increase of approximately eight per cent from the 
previous year's allocation of Rs. 76,431 crores. 
 
[THE VICE CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the Chair.] 
 
In this discussion pertaining to the working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, I rise to highlight the following issues:  Sir, there is drainage issue.  In every 
monsoon, we see widespread waterlogging and flooding due to the collapse of 
drainage system across the country. This occurs due to construction of buildings and 
planning of cities, not considering flood prevention, illegal dumping of waste into 
drainage system which has reduced their effectiveness. Drainage systems are not 
built to handle the increasing volume and the changing patterns of rainfall. I appeal, 
through you, Sir, that because there is drainage problem in all metropolitan cities, I 
request the Central Government to work with the States to resolve all these issues.  
Sir, steps which can be taken to resolve these issues are pending drainage 
projects. It must be expedited to prevent water-logging, establishing a routine 
maintenance schedule for drains and storm water systems, integrated urban 
planning- a comprehensive approach to urban planning that includes flood risk 
assessments and sustainable drainage solution is essential for long-term resilience 
against flooding. 
There are some concerns regarding the PM Awas Yojana. Sir, PM Awas Yojana 
had promised homes for 1.18 crore families by December, 2024, but, met just 67.4 
per cent of its target so far. An overwhelming majority of homes, about 83 per cent 
that are to be constructed under the PM Awas Yojana,  do not target the landless 
urban poor at all. A majority of the homes about 83 per cent constructed under the 
PM Awas Yojana are for families that have access to capital or land. I appeal to the 
Government to look into the allocations and ensure that they are given to the most 
marginalized and needy.  
About Smart Cities Mission- Sir, there is Smart Cities Mission in Andhra 
Pradesh. I appreciate the Government for introducing the Smart Cities Mission aimed 
to promote sustainable cities that provide core infrastructure and give a decent quality 
of life to their citizens. However, data furnished by the Ministry has shown that 59 
[RAJYA SABHA]
166

 
projects amounting to Rs. 2000 crores in expenditur e are pending from the 
Government side. I urge the Ministry to expedite th e completion of the four smart 
cities selected in Andhra Pradesh and to deliver ur banization of the people of the 
State. Thank you, Sir.  
           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Now, Shri R. Girirajan. 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu) : Thank you, hon. Vice Chairman, Sir. I express my 
thanks for allowing me to speak. Sir, the Budget al location for the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs in this year's Budget, 2024-25, t he Revenue Expenditure stands at 
Rs. 59,948 crores, Capital Expenditure stands at Rs . 28,628 crores, total allocation is 
Rs. 82,576 crores. Out of which, Rs. 24,931 crores are allotted for MRTS and metro 
projects across the country. But it seems the Union  Government does not treat Tamil 
Nadu as one of the States in India. The interest of  people of Tamil Nadu is totally 
neglected by the Union Government. This is unconstitutional and undemocratic.  
I would like to bring to the notice of the august H ouse that Rs. 63,246 crores 
worth of Chennai Metro Rail Phase II project is cur rently under progress. The 
Government of India has permitted the Government of Tamil Nadu to proceed with the 
project. Since then, the Government of Tamil Nadu h as been funding the project 
expecting that the Centre would release their share  of funds. So far, the Union 
Government did not release the share of Tamil Nadu.  Now, Tamil Nadu has spent 
over Rs. 30,000 crores, but, no funds has been rele ased till now by the Union 
Government to Chennai Metro Phase II project.                                                                     
 The Government of Tamil Nadu is executing the proje ct in spite of not receiving 
any funds from the Union Government as promised.  T his has caused a heavy 
financial burden on the Government of Tamil Nadu.  This step-motherly treatment by 
the Union Government is really unjustifiable and gr oss injustice to the people of Tamil 
Nadu. 
 Sir, Chennai Metro Rail Phase-II project is a very  important infrastructure 
project envisaged to build three corridors with a l ength of 118.9 kms entails building of 
128 stations throughout the length and breadth of C hennai to ease traffic.  In spite of 
the Union Government not providing its share of fun ds, the project is ongoing due to 
the efforts of the Government of Tamil Nadu. But, i t may hit a roadblock if the Union 
Government continues to fail to release its share o f funds and also loan assistance 
from bilateral and multilateral agencies on time.  Sir, there is apprehension in the 
minds of the people of Tamil Nadu that the Union Government is purposefully delaying 
release of its share of funds for the execution of a very important Chennai Metro Rail 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
167

 
Phase-II project.  With Rs. 63,246 crores, it was announced as a Union Government 
scheme. 
 Sir, the hon. Prime Minister, in his speech at Chennai, on 14th February, 2021, 
said that his Government has sanctioned Rs. 63,000 crores for the Chennai Metro Rail 
Phase-II project.  I ask: Can the hon.  Finance Minister deny it?  The foundation-
stone for the project was laid by the hon. Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah.  Will the 
hon. Finance Minister deny it?  Then, why even in July, 2024, the Government has 
not released even a single rupee for execution of Chennai Metro Rail Phase-II 
project?  We, the people of Tamil Nadu, demand an answer from the hon. Finance 
Minister. Sir, our hon. Chief Minister, Thalapathy M.K. Stalin, has asked the 
Government to initiate Metro Rail Project in Coimbatore and Madurai.  But, the 
Government is silent on this.  While the Union Government is keen only in collecting 
maximum GST and other taxes from Tamil Nadu to fill its coffers, they do not have the 
courtesy to repay the people of Tamil Nadu what they actually deserve.  Sir, in this 
scenario, I urge the Union Government to release our share of funds immediately and 
expedite the disbursement of loan assistance from JICA and ADB on time for smooth 
progress of Chennai Metro Rail Project Phase-II.  
 Sir, under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(Urban), the total amount allotted is Rs. 30,170 crores.  Of this, States and UTs 
component accounts to Rs. 23,712 crores.  The Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme-I for 
the economically weaker section and the lower income group stands at Rs. 3,000 
cores and for middle income group it is Rs. 1,000 crores.  At this snail’s pace, the 
housing for all cannot be achieved even by 2047.  The Government of India has to 
allocate more funds for the scheme. 
 Sir, the Union Government has allotted Rs. 10,400 crores for the Urban 
Rejuvenation Mission – AMRUT – and the Smart Cities Mission. This is not adequate 
and cannot cater the needs of the people of this country.  For the National Urban 
Digital Mission, a meagre sum of Rs. 1,150 crores is only allotted. This is absolutely 
not enough considering the vast urban areas to be covered in this country.  Under the 
Swachh Bharat Mission, Rs. 5,000 crores only has been allotted and, again, it is 
inadequate. With a goal to ameliorate the living conditions of urban slums within a 
timeframe to provide affordable housing for them and improve the living standards, 
Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board was established by our leader, Dr. Kalaignar 
Karunanidhi in 1970 – 54 years ago.  As the primary role of this organisation is to 
improve urban slums and to make them habitable, the hon. Chief Minister changed 
the name of Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board to Tamil Nadu Urban Habitat 
Development Board w.e.f. 01-09-2021. 
[RAJYA SABHA]
168

 
 Sir, at present, in Tamil Nadu almost 50 per cent of its total population lives in 
urban areas.  At the current pace, by 2030, Tamil N adu will be the most urbanized 
State in India with almost 67 per cent of its total population living in urban areas. 
 Sir, as the guideline value of land in urban areas in Tamil Nadu is high, the cost 
incurred for the land provided by the Government of  Tamil Nadu for the construction 
of the houses under PMAY - Urban is the major expen diture.  But, the Union 
Government, per house, is providing a sum of Rs. 1. 5 lakh only; whereas, the 
Government of Tamil Nadu is spending around Rs. 7.5  to Rs. 13 lakhs per house.  
Our hon. Chief Minister Thalapathy, M.K. Stalin, ha s requested the Union 
Government to increase its funding for construction  of houses under the PMAY - 
Urban Scheme.  But, the Union Government has not in creased its share of funds for 
the construction of houses under the PMAY – Urban S cheme.  The World Bank has 
provided financial assistance of Rs. 3,038 crore to  the Government of Tamil Nadu to 
strengthen the housing sector through policy reform s enabling private sector 
participation in affordable urban housing projects.  
 The Tamil Nadu Infrastructure and Fund Management Corporation Limited to 
provide industrial housing and working women hostel s for low income and migrant 
workers and to create 500 beds for working women an d 5,000 beds for industrial 
workers through PPP mode under the Tamil Nadu Shelt er Fund. Sir, to ensure 
balanced and equitable development of Chennai city,  a new programme, namely, 
Vada Chennai Valarchi Thittam , North Chennai Welfare Scheme, at a cost of Rs. 
4,000 crore, programmed for implementation over the  next three years has been 
announced by the Government of Tamil Nadu.  Under t his scheme, infrastructure 
deficit and gaps in development will be identified and schemes will be implemented to 
fulfil gaps.  Besides, Tamil Nadu Urban Habitat Dev elopment Board proposed to 
reconstruct 1,336 dilapidated tenements in North Ch ennai at a cost of Rs. 215 crore 
during the period 2024-26.  There is one more schem e, 'Iyothee Thass Pandithar 
habitation development scheme'.  The Tamil Nadu Urb an Habitation Development 
Board has been implementing the infrastructure deve lopment, like, roads, bore wells, 
water supply lines, river basement of tenement bloc ks, conveniences, improvement 
of sewer network, etc. at a cost of Rs. 50 crores.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :   Hon. Member, please conclude.  
   
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN :  Thirty-two tenement schemes in Chennai and in other  towns 
comprising 12,465 tenements.  Sir, the productive s kill training is imparted in various 
trades in coordination with Tamil Nadu Skill Develo pment Corporation, Tamil Nadu 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
169

 
Urban Livelihood Mission, Tamil Nadu Adi Dravidar Housing Development Corporation 
through empanelled training providers and NGOs.   To attain slum-free Tamil Nadu, 
the housing & infrastructure will be provided to all the remaining slum families before 
2030.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Hon. Member, please conclude.   
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN:   Livelihood activities will be increased and their living standards 
will be raised to realise the dream of Dravidian model of Government ; as the Tamil 
saying goes, "we shall see God in the smile of the poor. " Thank you, Sir.      
                                             
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY (Punjab) :  Mr. Vice-Chairman Sir, at the outset, I 
congratulate the hon. Minister Shri Manoharlal Khattar  on taking over as the Minister 
of Housing and Urban Affairs. People of this country have great expectations from 
you.  I have no doubt that you will deliver beyond their expectations, being risen from 
grassroot worker and having spearheaded as the head of a State.   
 We are witnessing rapid urbanisation with the massive increase in urban 
mobility in India.  The Finance Minister has announced PM Awas Yojana too in the 
Budget, under which one crore houses will be constructed with an investment of Rs. 
10 lakh crores.  The slum households are projected to go up to 18 million and 2 million 
non-slum urban poor households.  Total housing shortage envisaged is 20 million. 
Respected Minister, I would like to draw your attention towards Punjab which is one 
among the unique States where urban poverty is higher than the rural poverty.  As 
informal sector is rapidly expanding, as a source of employment in cities, like 
Ludhiana, Jalandhar, Amritsar, Firozpur, which are witnessing rapid increase in 
informal settlement.Therefore, housing arrangements will have to be made for lakhs of 
workers living in these cities, who have come to the cities for employment. 
Sir, as far as the country's capital, Delhi, is concerned, Delhi needed 48 lakh 
houses by 2022, but even today, after two years later, we are significantly far from 
that target. 
 
7:00 P.M 
 
Sir, you will be surprised to know that Delhi, which is the capital of India, has 32 percent of its population living in one-room houses, which includes 700 slums, 1,800 unauthorised colonies etc. So I would say:  
[RAJYA SABHA]
170

 
"Dar-b-dar thokarein khaai to yah maloom hua, 
Ghar kise kehate hain aur kya chiz hai beghar hona." 
  
Hon. Minister sir, more than 2 lakh people are home less in Delhi and we have 
only 200 night shelters, where only 17,000 people c an stay, the remaining more than 1 
lakh people live under the open sky in the scorchin g heat and harsh cold, hence the 
Government is requested to provide space on war-foo ting for building shelter homes, 
because the land is a Centre subject. I would like to reiterate what our colleagues, the 
Hon. MPs have said, such as water logging in Delhi,  302 hot-spots, new 
underground passes being flooded with the water, wh ich speaks high volumes,  I do 
not want to repeat, but I would like to flag these issues. Since Delhi is our capital, our 
crown, we should work together to decorate and beautify it. 
As fas as migration is concerned, 60 crores Indians   almost migrate within the 
country annually in order to release pressure on th e existing mega cities.  I think we 
will have to create more amenities in Tier-II and I II cities of the country.  The 
Government had announced that 100 smart cities woul d be built, but as discussed in 
the House, progress over the last 10 years has been  very minuscule. Now, it's being 
reported that the project may be discontinued. 32 s mart cities have completed the 
projects but remaining 68 smart cities  have not ac hieved their targets.  I request the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development that it s hould rigorously pursue the 
completion of at least the 100 Smart Cities announc ed. I was just reading that this 
year's budget, which was 8,000 crore rupees, has be en cut by 70 percent to 2,700 
crore rupees, so this is a matter of concern. I hop e the Finance Minister will pay 
attention to this and this will be completed in the supplementary grant.  
Sir, if we talk about Punjab, where I come from, th ere were only 72 work 
orders and 5 projects were done there. The Smart Ci ty Mission requires special 
attention, and I would request the Minister to pers onally visit Amritsar, Jalandhar, and 
Ludhiana, as these were included in the 100 cities.  It seems they are not even 
remotely smart cities.  
Now if we talk about Metro, there is Metro map in 2 7 cities and 830 kilometres 
has also become operational, but unfortunately, in a big city like Chandigarh, which is 
closely connected with Mohali and Panchkula, there is very heavy traffic.   It is both an 
industrial city and a capital, but there is no metr o project there. Regarding Ludhiana, 
which is known as the Manchester of India, through Hon. Chairman I would like to 
request the Minister, and this Ministry to consider  and provide budgetary provision 
and support for metro connectivity in Chandigarh an d Ludhiana. On property , i n the 
proposal for a heritage city, HRIDAY, Amritsar is a  heritage city, where Darbar Sahib, 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
171

 
Sri Amritsar Sahib, is located. Millions of devotees bow down there. I would request urge the Minister that you will receive abundant blessings from Akal Purakh Waheguru Sangat, because when we go to Darbar Sahib, where Khattar Sahib must have visited many times, the corridor that has been made free there is very congested. The approach is very congested. Plans for an underground multi-level parking have been underway there for the last 10-12 years; it should definitely be implemented this year. The Minister and the Minister of State are sitting here. I request them with folded hands that a multi-level underground parking and its multi-level tunnel should be built at Darbar Sahib Amritsar, where the whole world comes to bow downpay obeisance, which is the place abode of God.    Now, let’s talk about the "Swachh Bharat Abhiyan," it doesn't have any physical or financial targets. Just like other missions of the Ministry like AMRUT, Smart City, or the PM Awas Yojana have targets, the "Swachh Bharat Abhiyan" should also have deliverables. Today I read that it's a 5-year scheme, but there are no deliverables, so you should draw them up. If we talk about Punjab, cities like Amritsar, Ludhiana, and Jalandhar are big metro cities. You should go and see if there is any cleanliness there? If we don't implement the "Swachh Bharat Abhiyan" in big cities like these with targets and deliverables, then this scheme, which was launched by the Prime Minister himself, will be of no use. I was also its brand ambassador, a part of it, but somewhere it is getting diluted now.   Finally, I draw your attention to a very important and sensitive issue. Everyone in this House knows about the massacre genocide of innocent Sikhs in Delhi in 1984, and the atrocities they sufferedwere subjected to. I, in this august House, first condemn that incident in the strongest terms, and I want to say that no compensation, house, or flat can fully heal their wounds. In 1985, the Delhi Urban Shelter Board, which was part of the Central Government, gave flats to Sikh genocidemassacre victims valued at ₹₹27,000. They paid ₹₹3,000, and they were charged interest upon interest, compound interest, on the remaining installments. Those poor people are living in Tilak Vihar and Mangolpuri. Through you, I request the Minister and the Ministry with folded hands to waive their loan and hand it over to the Delhi Government - because now the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board is under the Delhi Government from the Central Government and you know that Delhi is not a complete statehood, so work can be done only through co-operation. Do not involve these poor people in this matter. Now they are the third generation of 1984 riot victims. Till date, these flats have not been transferred into their names. I went to Tilak Vihar on November 1st, and I started happned to crying. Five members of our family were also martyred. Their flats should be registered, they should be given houses and 
[RAJYA SABHA]
172

 
their interest should be waived. I request you to m ake appropriate budgetary 
provision in this matter. With these words, I conclude my speech. Jai Hind! 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. Now Shri Muzibulla Khan.  
 
SHRI MUZIBULLA KHAN (Odisha): Hon. Vice Chairman, S ir, I would like to express 
my views on the ongoing discussion regarding the Mi nistry of Urban Development. 
During Naveen Babu's Government in Odisha, Bhubanes war, Cuttack, Rourkela, 
Sambalpur, and Brahmapur were selected for Smart Ci ty development, and work 
progressed accordingly. Those who have seen Bhubane swar early, they can 
compare present day’s After seeing the Bhubaneswar , people saw many years ago 
and today’s Bhubaneswar, anyone can telland say  wh at a smart city Bhubaneswar 
has become! For this reason, the Central Government 's Urban Department has 
recognized and awarded Bhubaneswar several times as  a smart city. The approach 
to urban development depends on its working style. Sports have also been developed 
alongside this, with Odisha hosting the Hockey Worl d Cup. When Odisha hosted the 
Hockey World Cup for the second time, a stadium nam ed after Birsa Munda was built 
in Rourkela, which was completed in a very short ti me—less than a year and a half—
and it went on to hosted the World Cup. This approa ch to developing the urban 
sector and cities has been demonstrated by our lead er, Shri Naveen Patnaik, during 
his tenure as Chief Minister. Connectivity is the most important factor in developing an 
urban sector – roads must be good, allowing so that  people to travel comfortably 
and reach their destinations confortably. This is w hy the State Government funded a 
metro project, the foundation stone of which was laid by Naveen Babu in April 2023. 
   The metro was granted to connect Bhubaneswar, Pur i, and Cuttack. The 
reason for this was that Puri houses has the Lord J agannath temple, and thousands 
of devotees visit Puri daily to visit the for darsh an of the Lorddeity. During the Rath 
Yatra, people face extreme inconvenience and it get s extremely crowded. This is why 
it's crucial to have a metro project extending to P uri, Bhubaneswar, and Cuttack to 
facilitate commuting. Sir, the mMembers were just d iscussing what kind of housing 
should be developed in the city and how to help peo ple. Our State Government, the 
then Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik, announced the " Jaga Mission." This meant 
giving slum dwellers ownership and leasehold rights . This mission was launched 
precisely for this purpose. Along with that, provid eing them with permanent homes, 
building homes for them. You can go and see that th e State Government has built 
permanent homes houses for slum dwellers. But durin g discussions about the 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY), it was heard tha t the funding for the Pradhan 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
173

 
Mantri Awas Yojana in the city is only a lakh or lakh and a half lakh rupees. A house 
can't be built for a lakh and a half. How can a house be built? The Government will 
definitely have to consider this, as a house can't be built for in such a small meager  
amount. If they think that a house can be built for such a small amount, then I urge 
them to build the houses for the slum dwellers so that they don't face any 
inconvenience. Now, they have their Government in Odisha, and I believe there won't 
be any inconvenience, because we always hear that if there is a double-engine 
Government, we will do everything. So, that's a good thing. Now that we have a 
double-engine Government, we hope everything will be done. Poor people who 
migrate from villages to cities for work or to educate their children gradually try to live 
in slums, and this creates congestion. The Government must address this and make 
arrangements for their housing. Funding for the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana must be 
increased, so that people can access all the amenities. Finally, I want to mention 
speak on the drainage system. Bhubaneswar also faces drainage problems, because 
when it rains or storms, water accumulates, causing immense hardship to people. It's 
not just Bhubaneswar, but in major cities across the country, be it Chennai, Delhi, or 
Mumbai, when you watch TV during the rainy season, you see people unable to leave 
their homes, drowning, and cars being swept away. This means that the proper 
development in the urban sector hasn't happened yet. I urge the Government, and 
this is my request, to address all these issues. Otherwise, the incidents that occur, 
including the loss of lives and the deaths of students, like the one in Delhi just two or 
three days ago, were a very tragic incident. To prevent all this, the facilities for water 
flow from natural sources, which existed long ago, were blocked in many places, and 
houses were forcibly built on top of them. This must be removed and cleared. Until 
water flow is restored, the problem of waterlogging in the country will not end. You all 
need to pay attention to this. I hope that at least the Government makes 
arrangements for clearing of water in every major city.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, please conclude.  
 
SHRI MUZIBULLA KHAN: So that our dream of building a smart city can be realized. 
With this hope, I would once again request that you keep this in mind and that the 1.5 
lakh rupees given to people under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana be increased.        
                                     
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai.  
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
174

 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :   Sir, on behalf of the AIADMK Party, and also 
my leader, Edappadi K. Palaniswami, I am participat ing in the discussion on the 
Working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affair s.  I am very happy to see that our 
Minister, who has come from Haryana, has done a lot  of work there as the Chief 
Minister.  Now, he has come here. I hope that under  his leadership, most of these 
problems of urban development can be solved. 
Sir, just now, my colleague from Tamil Nadu spoke.  They want a lot of money 
for development of Tamil Nadu cities.  First of all , Tamil Nadu is one of the most 
urbanised States in the country.  Many problems, su ch as lack of drinking water and 
lack of sanitation facilities, are being faced ther e. The residents of Chennai and other 
cities face innumerable issues on a daily basis, ri ght from bad roads, poor quality of 
water, power cuts, safety and connectivity.    
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN  in the Chair. ) 
 
The present Government of Tamil Nadu is paying very  scant attention to these 
issues, even though it is collecting a lot of money  by way of increasing property tax 
and increase in bus fare.  It is collecting revenue  in whichever way it is possible, but 
the Government is not providing any amenities to th e public.  The Government of 
Tamil Nadu did not learn from the past mistakes and  added to the woes of the people 
of Tamil Nadu.  Then, he mentioned about the Metro project.  Metro project was 
initiated at the time when our Amma was the Chief M inister of Tamil Nadu.  Edappadi 
K. Palaniswami, as the Chief Minister, also took a lot of efforts to see that Metro 
project came to Tamil Nadu.  The present DMK Government keeps on boasting about 
itself that they are bringing these kinds of projec ts, but, at the same time, they keep 
on telling that the Central Government is not givin g funds.  But whatever funds are 
given, they are not properly utilized.  There are a  lot of accusations in this regard.  
Whatever budget is given, that is misused by the DM K Government, but they always 
put the blame on the Central Government. That is th e main problem.  Even on small 
houses, the property tax has been increased. Our AI ADMK Party leader, Edappadi K. 
Palaniswami, staged a lot of agitation. We have dem onstrated that DMK Government 
is not at all caring about the urban cities. The pr ojects are not being properly 
completed.   
Regarding smart city, I would request the hon. Mini ster, through you, Sir, 
especially about Hosur, which is the industrial cor ridor. Our leader, Edappadi K. 
Palaniswami, declared a corporation of that area.  We need to see that this city can 
be declared as a smart city.   I was a Member of Lo k Sabha from Karur.  Karur is also 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
175

 
a textile city.  The city is exporting a lot of garments throughout the world and getting 
a lot of foreign exchange for our country.  But, the DMK Government is not paying 
any attention to these kinds of cities to be developed as smart cities. Therefore, I 
request the hon. Minister that Karur and Hosur must be developed because I belong 
to this area.  I have represented Karur Lok Sabha constituency many times.  And 
Hosur is also my native place, which is in Krishnagiri district of Tamil Nadu. Therefore, 
I request the hon. Minister to give a lot of money to declare these cities as smart 
cities.  The DMK Government has requested for a lot of money, but I want to see 
whether they are properly utilizing that money or not.  Once they said they would 
spend Rs.4,000 crores, but when the flood came in Madras city, it became clear that 
they had not at all spent the money.   They only keep on boasting about themselves.  
They are spending that, but a lot of corruption is taking place.  That is what Tamil 
Nadu people are facing.  That is why, I request the Central Government to interfere in 
this matter to take necessary action.  The corruption is taking place.  Especially the 
DMK Government is not for the people.  They are only for the families they are 
running.  Therefore, it is high time to take necessary action.  I request, through you, 
Sir, and also thank you very much for giving me time.  You are a senior Member 
sitting there. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I am not senior to you.  You are very senior Dr. M. Thambidurai.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, you are an excellent lawyer.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: When I was a new Member of Parliament... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Sir, you are a senior lawyer.   You are defender of this 
country.  You are defending our rights.  You are sitting in a high place.  Therefore, I 
request, through you, to the Minister to take necessary action.  The DMK government 
is misusing the funds as they are not at all spending the same for the urban 
development, due to which poor people are facing a lot of problems.  Thank you very 
much.  
                                    
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Now, Shri Mithlesh Kumar.  You have ten minutes. 
 
SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR (Uttar Pradesh):  Hon. Chairman sir, I am very grateful to 
you for giving me the opportunity to participate in the discussion today on the 
functioning of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. I rise to speak on the 
[RAJYA SABHA]
176

 
functioning of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs in support of the first budget 
of the Hon. Prime Minister, the Hon. Narendra Modi ji , in his third consecutive term, 
and once again I thank you very much. 
Sir, this budget aims to create substantial opportu nities within the economy by 
focusing on nine priorities to advance take ahead t he vision of a developed India as 
set out by the Hon. Prime Minister. I am pleased to  inform you that under the NDA 
Government, continuous efforts are being made to de velop India across various 
sectors. These efforts include increasing productiv ity, creating jobs, boosting 
manufacturing, promoting social justice, advancing urban development, ensuring 
energy security, expanding infrastructure, promotin g innovation, and implementing 
meaningful reforms. Each of these priorities reflec ts our commitment to building a 
stronger, more prosperous nation for all. The budge t announced by our Honourable 
Finance Minister aims to increase revenue generation. 
Sir, the long-term capital gains tax has been incre ased from 10% to 12.5% in 
the Budget for 2024-25. Sir, this year the Governme nt has focused on job creation, 
especially in the manufacturing sector. The NDA Government is committed to creating 
significant employment opportunities for both emplo yers and the 30 lakh youth 
entering the workforce over a period of 5 years.  
Sir, this is being achieved by providing targeted i ncentives for contributions to 
the Employees' Provident Fund Organisation, which also reflects a strategic approach 
to meet the employment needs of our rapidly growing economy.  
Sir, the Budget proposes transit-oriented developme nt plans for 14 big cities 
with populations exceeding 30 lakhs. This Budget em phasizes that the Government 
will work with the States to develop these cities a s development centers. These 
economic and transit planning and town planning str ategies will be utilized to achieve 
systematic development of peri-urban areas. The Hon . Minister stated in his her 
Budget speech that transit-oriented development pla ns will be developed for 14 large 
cities with populations exceeding 30 lakh. Implementation and financing strategies will 
also be developed. 
Sir, the Budget has announced 'PM Awas Yojana- Urba n 2.0' to meet the 
housing needs of 1 crore urban poor and middle clas s families for the next five years, 
which includes central assistance of Rs 2.2 lakh cr ore over five years for construction 
of 1 crore additional houses.  
Sir, I want to tell you that the Honorable Prime Mi nister's vision is to focus not 
only on villages but also on cities. Since our Government came to power, housing has 
been built for the poor and middle class in cities.  I congratulate the Honorable 
Minister for his investment of ₹10 lakh crore under the 'PM Awas Yojana-Urban 2.0  
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
177

 
 
Housing Scheme Urban 2.0' to build 1 crore homes, which will meet the 
housing needs of 10 lakh urban poor and middle-class families.        
This will include central assistance of ₹2.2 lakh crore over the next five years. 
Interest subsidies have also been provided to facilitate loans at affordable rates. 
Furthermore, enabling policies and regulations will be implemented to ensure efficient 
and transparent rental housing markets, with greater availability. The Honorable 
Finance Minister has proposed a scheme to support the development of 100 weekly 
haats or street food hubs in selected cities. The Honorable Minister stated that rental 
housing, including dormitory-type accommodation for industrial workers, will be 
facilitated on a public-private partnership (PP) mode with BGF support and 
commitment from major industries. Since people who travel to cities by ship air to 
work find housing very expensive to rent, enabling policies and regulations will be 
implemented to improve and create efficient and transparent rental housing markets. 
The massive allocation of ₹10 lakh crore under the PMJAY urban scheme in the 
Budget, which aims to build 3 crore houses, as well as the approval of 12 industrial 
parks, demonstrates the Government's commitment to urban development. Sir, 
currently, metro rail is operational or under construction in 27 cities across the 
country. With the inauguration of the first modern metro line in Delhi in 2002, today 
approximately 945 km of rail lines are operational in 21 different cities, including Delhi 
and seven NCR cities – beside Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Kolkata, and the 34 km 
Delhi-Meerut RRTS, Chennai, Jaipur, Kochi, Lucknow, Agra, Mumbai, Ahmedabad, 
Nagpur, Kanpur, and Pune. These lines carry approximately 1 crore passengers daily.  
Before 2014, only five cities had a metro network had a with 248-kilometer track  
metro network. In the last ten years, approximately 700 kilometers of metro lines have 
been operational. Additionally, approximately 939 kilometers of metro rail projects are 
under construction in various cities across the country, including Delhi, Gurgaon, 
Bengaluru, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi, Mumbai, Nagpur, Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, 
Pune, and Kanpur. Agra, Bhopal, Indore, Patna, Surat, and Meerut—Sir, I would like 
to inform you that the 82-kilometer journey between Delhi and Meerut previously took 
two and a half to three hours, but the Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) project 
was approved in 2019 by our illustrious Prime Minister, the Honorable Shri Narendra 
Modi, at a cost of 30,274 crore. The priority section between Sahibabad and Duhai 
was inaugurated in 2023. A section between Duhai and Modinagar North was 
inaugurated in March 2024. Currently, 34 km of RRTS network is operational. 320 
green mobility projects have been completed to promote environment friendly 
transport and infrastructure, compared to 352 projects physically launched. To 
[RAJYA SABHA]
178

 
promote energy conservation, 99 lakh out of 101 lak h identified conventional 
streetlights have been replaced with energy-efficie nt LEDs, resulting in estimated 
energy savings of 665.84 crore units per year and r eduction in carbon dioxide 
emissions by 45.94 lakh tonnes per year. Credit rat ing has been completed for 468 
cities to generate credit for cities. 
 162 cities have received Investible Grade Rating, IGR. This includes 34 cities 
rated 'A' or above. Ahmedabad, Amravati, Bhopal, Gh aziabad, Hyderabad, Indore, 
Lucknow, Pune, Surat, Vadodara, Visakhapatnam and P impri- Chinchwad ...(time 
Time-bell rings)...  ₹ 4,684 crore has have been raised through municipal  bonds. ₹Rs 
315.83 crore has have been released as incentive fo r bond issuance. 3,599 cities 
including 449 AMRUT cities have been launched to fa cilitate online issuance of 
construction permits ...(tTime- bell rings)...  Sir, I will finish in a minute. Online billing 
permission system has been launchedhas become operational.    
Regarding water supply and sanitation, the Hon'ble Finance Minister has 
announced that services in water supply, sewage, tr eatment and solid waste 
management projects have been enhanced in 100 large  cities through bankable 
projects in partnership with the Central, State Gov ernments and dDevelopment 
banks.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN  : Thank you, Mithlesh ji. 
 
SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR:  Sir, please give me just one more minute. Why is urban 
development important? Sir, I'll finish in just hal f a minute. We live in small towns in 
municipal corporations, so when children there need  to pursue schooling, whether 
it's engineering, medical, or management, they have  to look towards larger cities. 
When they go to get a job, they're told they have c ome from a small town, and then 
the engineers are put made to sit at the back. Ther efore, I request the Honorable 
Minister to promote cities, and Shahjahanpur, where  I come from, has become a 
municipal corporation. If possible, please make som e municipal arrangements for 
there. Thank you very much. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, if the House agrees, the remaining discussion on 
the working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs will be resumed at 1.00 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS :  Yes, Sir. 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
179

 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, we had taken up permitted Special Mentions 
earlier in the day.  All Members up to Sl.No. 31, except the hon. Member at Sl. No. 9 
who was absent, had made their respective Special Mentions.  I will now call the 
remaining Members starting with serial number 32.  Shri Mithlesh Kumar.   
  SPECIAL MENTIONS - Contd.  Demand for Mailani-Farrukhabad new railway line project  SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR (Uttar Pradesh):  Hon. Chairman sir, I would like to draw the Government's attention through the House to the Mailani-Farrukhabad new railway line project. The survey for laying the new Mailani-Farrukhabad railway line has been completed, but work on the project has not yet begun.   
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair)   After completion of this approximately 150 km long rail project, it will prove to be a boon for lakhs of people living in this area and will create new business and employment opportunities in this backward region and will increase the income revenue of the Railways.    This new railway line will not only establish new dimensions of development but will also be useful from a strategic perspective. Due to the military cantonments, strategic security centers like Shahjahanpur and Fatehgarh will be directly connected to the cantonments located in Mathura, Agra, Gwalior, Jhansi, and Tanakpur, strengthening the sensitive northern border.   Therefore, I would like to request the Honorable Railway Minister through the House, to kindly release funds in the current budget and commence work on this public welfare project, the Mailani-Farrukhabad new railway line, as soon as possible. After completion, this will not only develop the region but also provide strategic strength to the country.  MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honorable Shri Sanjay Raut, is not present. Honorable Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal, is not present. Honorable Shri Neeraj Dangi is not present.  
[RAJYA SABHA]
180

 
Demand for directions for mandatory display of the Preamble of Constitution of India 
in all the Government institutions 
 
SHRI NEERAJ DANGI (Rajasthan) : Sir, the Government of India has mandated the 
display of Mahatma Gandhi's portrait in all Governm ent offices, public institutions and 
courts, as a mark of respect and to inspire citizen s. All Government institutions have 
been directed to display Dr. Ambedkar's portrait also, recognizing his contributions to 
social justice, equality and the Constitution of In dia. This mandate is based on 
Supreme Court directives and various Government not ifications and circulars from 
2013 to 2019. Compulsory displaying these portraits  serves as a reminder of their 
contributions to India's freedom, social justice and constitutional values.  
In year 2019, the Supreme Court directed all educat ional institutions to display 
the Preamble of the Constitution of India in their premises. Displaying the Preamble 
acknowledges its significance as an integral part o f the Constitution and India's 
governance framework. Like all schools and educatio nal institutions, all Government 
institutions should also display the Preamble promi nently, fostering a sense of 
national unity, values and constitutional responsib ility. The display of Preamble of the 
Constitution of India in all Government institution s will: firstly, promote national 
integration, reflecting the country's commitment to sovereignty, socialism, secularism 
and democracy; secondly, embody the fundamental val ues and principles enshrined 
in the Constitution, serving as a reminder to publi c servants; thirdly, inspire and 
educate citizens about India's constitutional herit age and core values; fourthly, 
symbolize the national pride and identity, reflecti ng the country's history, philosophy 
and aspirations. 
Therefore, Sir, I urge the Government of India to i ssue appropriate direction to 
all Government institutions for mandatory displayin g the Preamble of the Constitution 
of India in their premises. Thank you.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves wi th 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri N eeraj Dangi: Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala).     
      Shri Sanjay Singh; not present. Now, Dr. Dine sh Sharma.  Respected Dinesh ji , 
you can read only the approved text. 
 
Demand for direct train services from Lucknow to various other railway stations 
 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
181

 
DR. DINESH SHARMA  (Uttar Pradesh) : Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I am very 
grateful to you for allowing me to raise this important demand of the people of 
Lucknow. 
 Lucknow, the capital of Uttar Pradesh, is renowned for its cultural and religious 
significance. Its citizens strongly desire the establishment ofwant that direct train 
services from Lucknow to Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Temple (Katra), Shri Khatu Shyam 
Temple (Ringas Railway Station, Sikar, Rajasthan), Shri Mahakaleshwar Temple 
(Ujjain), and Shirdi Sai Temple (Maharashtra) should be started. These sites are 
major Hindu pilgrimage sites. Millions Lakhs of devotees travel to these sites from 
Lucknow. Due to the lack of direct train services, passengers have to change trains 
several times, making travel difficult and time-consuming. Direct train services will  
make travel easier and more convenient. Direct train services will boost tourism.     
 More pilgrims and tourists will travel through Lucknow, bringing economic 
benefits to the city's hotel and tourism industry and creating new employment 
opportunities. Currently, to reach these destinations from Lucknow, travelers have to 
travel in multiple stages, wasting time and energy. Direct train services will save time 
and make travel comfortable. Starting Introducing direct train services from Lucknow 
to these destinations will be an important step in this initiative by the Railways. 
 Hon'ble Deputy Chairman, sSir, through you, I would like to request the 
Honorable Railway Minister that, considering this issue of public importance, direct 
trains should be started from Lucknow to these major pilgrimage sites.                        
                
Demand for further improvement of facilities of Bharat Sanchar Nigam (BSNL) in 
Uttarakhand 
 
SHRI MAHENDRA BHATT (Uttarakhand): Sir, through you I want to draw the 
attention of the Government towards further improvement in the mobile and internet 
facilities provided by Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited in Uttarakhand. 
   Sir, being a hilly state, with the aim of connecting remote villages with today's 
communication revolution, it was decided to connect 6,000 additional villages of the 
state with communication facilities, but as per my information, till now only about 
2,000 villages have been connected with this facility. 
  BSNL is yet to achieve its target of installing 1,206 new towers and the towers 
already installed in remote areas are not providing smooth seamless mobile 
connectivity.  
  Sir, in today's communication era, education, health, and transportation have 
become increasingly dependent on telecommunications and internet networking. In 
[RAJYA SABHA]
182

 
my state, while State Bank of India ATMs rely on BS NL connectivity to operate, the 
ITBP deployed on the border also requires internet and phone access. Therefore, I 
draw the Government's attention to this matter of public importance and demand that 
BSNL mobile services be improved in remote villages  of Uttarakhand and that 
consumers be given the benefit of 4G connectivity. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Hon. Mahendra Bhatt . Hon. Shri Sanjeev 
Arora, absent. Hon. Dr. K. Laxman, absent. Hon. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik. 
 
Demand for giving ST Status to 11 left out castes of Gorkha Community and giving 
exemption to Gorkha brothers of the whole country in paramilitary forces 
 
SHRI PRAKASH CHIK BARAIK (West Bengal):  Sir, today  I would like to draw 
attention to a long-standing issue relating to the 11 left-out sub-groups of the Gorkha 
community.  
 Despite having a significant population of 12.5 cr ore Gorkhas across the country, 
they are denied Scheduled Tribe status and its bene fits. We are aware of the Gorkha 
community's rich cultural heritage and their contri butions to our nation.  I urge the 
Government to take necessary steps to grant ST stat us to these 11 excluded sub-
groups, namely Rai, Limbu, Tamang, Gurung, Mangar, Sunuwar, Thami, Bhujel, 
Newar, Jogi, and Dewan. Furthermore, I urge you to take appropriate steps, like the 
Gorkhaland Territorial Administration (GTA), to gra nt height relaxation to Gorkhas 
living across India in recruitment to the paramilitary forces. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you, Hon. Shri Prakash Chik Baraik ji. Hon. Dr. 
Bhagwat Karad ji . 
 
Concern over water scarcity in Marathwada Region 
 
DR. BHAGWAT KARAD (Maharashtra) :  Sir, in my constituency of Maharashtra, the 
Marathwada region is a drought prone area of the St ate, facing a problem of water 
scarcity each year.  The Marathwada region has only  1,688 Cubic Meter of water per 
Hectare, which is much more below the normal value of 3,000 Cubic Meter per 
Hectare. This necessitates the transfer of nearly 2 60 TMC of water resource from 
other regions to Marathwada.  The Water Resources D epartment (WRD) of 
Government of Maharashtra has decided by resolution  dated 19.9.2019 to transfer of 
155 TMC (168.75 TMC) water to Marathwada region.  H owever, no action has been 
[ 31 JULY, 2024]
183

 
initiated on this resolution in the last 5 years.   In addition, the water of about 51 TMC 
will have to be transferred from Krishna basin.  Similarly, the water of 34 TMC is to be 
diverted from new scheme planned from the Wainganga-Nalganga dam by pipeline, 
to meet the shortage of Yeldari and Penganga dam of Marathwada.  As such the 
overall deficit of 260 TMC of water for Marathwada can be met with by transfer of 
(155+51+34) 240 TMC of water from various regions at the first stage. 
 It is thereby requested that the Central Government take initiatives and include 
the said schemes in River Link Project by providing necessary budgetary provision to 
overcome the water deficit of Marathwada region.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan; not present. Dr. M. Thambidurai; 
not present.   
Hon. Members, the House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m., on 
Thursday, the 1st August, 2024. 
 
The House then adjourned at forty-five minutes past seven of the clock  
till eleven of the clock on Thursday, the 1st August, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[RAJYA SABHA]
184

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 
