Vol. 263       Monday,  
No. 4 5th February, 2024  
                         16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Birthday Greetings (pages 1 - 2) 
 
Obituary Reference (pages 2 - 3) 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 3 - 7) 
 
Report of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs-Laid on the Table (page 8) 
 
Statement by Minister-   
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 19
th Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Housing and 
Urban Affairs-Laid on the Table (page 8) 
 
Matters raised with Permission- 
Demand to lay a railway line from Lohard aga to Gumla to Korba till Jashpur in 
Chhattisgarh (pages 8 - 9) 
Need to release national disaster relie f fund to Tamil Nadu without delay  
(pages 9 - 10) 
 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Need to make Dash Cams mandatory for reducing hit-and-run cases in India 
(pages 10 - 11) 
Unconstitutional action taken by DDA to remove encroachment in Delhi  
(pages 11 - 12) 
Demand to withdraw the draft De-Res ervation Policy proposed by UGC  
(pages 12 - 13) 
Demand to include Kol tribe in Particul arly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG) 
(pages 13 - 14) 
Demand to increase the supply of Fertilizers to Odisha (pages 14 - 15) 
Rising cases of online banking fraud in the country (pages 15 - 17) 
Demand to increase in MNREGA wage rate for the State of Punjab (page 17) 
Demand for repealing the Places of Wors hip Act, 1991 to maintain social and 
communal harmony (pages 18- 19) 
Need for India’s effective engagement in the Arctic Region (page 19) 
Need to increase minimum wages in the Country (pages 20 - 21) 
Demand for developing Sikh Circuit across India (pages 21 - 22) 
Need to release funds under NFSA owed to Bengal (pages 22 - 23) 
Demand for classical language status for Bengali language (pages 23 - 24) 
State of tourism in Uttar Pradesh follo wing the consecration of Ramlala in 
Ayodhya (pages 24 - 25) 
Importance of menstrual hygiene among young girls and women in the country 
(pages 25 - 26) 
 
Welcome to the Parliamentary delegation from Suriname (page 20) 
 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 26 - 58) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published el ectronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
  ] 
 
Motion of Thanks on the President's Address (pages 58 - 64, pages 65 - 78 and 
pages 79- 167) 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
  
 http://parliamentofindia.nic.in  
          E-mail   : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in   

Government Bill - Introduced 
The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (page 64 ) 
The Constitution (Scheduled Cast es and Scheduled Tribes) Orders 
(Amendment) Bill, 2024 (pages 64 - 65) 
The Water (Prevention and Control of  Pollution) Amendment Bill, 2024  
(page 65) 
 
Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2023-24- Laid on the Table (pages 78 - 79) 
 
Supplementary Demands for Grants of Un ion Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2023-
24- Laid on the Table (page 79) 
 
The Interim Budget of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25 - Laid on the 
Table (page 79) 
 
Special Mentions - Laid on the Table 
Demand to start Instrument Landing System at MBB Airport, Agartala  
(page 167) 
Demand for the establishment of a large scale industrial silk spinning unit in 
Odisha under Silk Samagra-2 (pages  167 - 168) 
Demand for amendment in Table of Precedence (page 168) 
Need for giving priority to the production  of Graphene and its derivatives in India 
(page 169) 
Need for introduction of separate pay scale and other service benefits to ASHA 
workers (pages 169 -170) 
Demand to declare those people who were  in jail during the Emergency in the 
country as Democracy Fighters and be provided facilities like freedom fighters 
(page 170) 
Demand for arranging drinking water in Coal mines area (pages 170-171) 
Concern over failure of Hybrid Bt -cotton (commercialised GM-crop)  
(page 171) 
Need to increase public funding on healthcare (page 172) 
Demand to decrease the age for contes ting Lok Sabha and Assembly Election 
(page 172 -173) 
Demand for restoration of license of Delhi Milk Scheme (page 173) 
Concern over dumping of Fabrics at unfair prices in Indian market  
(pages 173 -174) 

Demand for mandatory BLS technique training in academic institutions to reduce 
sudden cardiac arrest death rate (page 175) 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 5th February, 2024/16 Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am please d to extend greetings to hon. Members 
of Parliament, Shri K. C. Venugopal, Shri mati Kanta Kardam, Shri Neeraj Dangi and 
Shri Samir Oraon whose birthdays were yesterday, on 4 th February, and also to 
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak on her birthday today. 
Shri K. C. Venugopal, whose birthday was on 4 th February, has been a 
Member of this august House since June, 2 020 and serving his first term. Shri K. C. 
Venugopal had been a Member of Kerala Legislative Assembly for three terms, 
namely, 1996-2001, 2 001-2006 and 2006-2009, and al so had been the Cabinet 
Minister in the Government of Kerala fo r one term. He has served as Member, Lok 
Sabha for two terms and has been a Union Mini ster of State, Government of India for 
two terms. Hon. Member had also served as Deputy Chief in Lok Sabha.   
Shri K. C. Venugopal is a political and social worker by profession and is 
married to Dr. Asha K. and blessed with son Gokul and daughter Parvathy. He has 
chosen the names very carefully - Gokul and Parvathy. 
Shrimati Kanta Kardam has been a Member  of this august House since April, 
2018 and serving her first term. She has play ed an important role in various social, 
cultural activities and several issues concerning awareness of human rights of 
downtrodden, deprived sections of the society and has been vocal for their upliftment 
and rights.   
Shrimati Kanta Kardam is an agriculturis t, social worker by profession and is 
married to Shri Veer Singh Kardam. She is blessed with sons Neeraj and Ashish, and 
daughters Upasna and Swati. 
Shri Neeraj Dangi has been a Member of  this august House since June, 2020 
and serving his first term. It is noteworthy  that hon. Shri Neeraj Dangi had made 
remarkable efforts in supporting the Tsunami  victims' families and post-Tsunami relief 
work at Andaman and Nicobar Islands in February, 2005, which was monitored by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of In dia. He is a Member  of Committee on the 
Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 

 
H o n .  M e m b e r  i s  t h e  s o n  o f  l a t e  S h r i Dinesh Dangi, a popular leader of 
Rajasthan who had served as Minister in th e Government of Rajasthan. Shri Neeraj 
Dangi is an engineer, political and social wo rker by profession and is married to Dr. 
Preeti Soni. He is blessed with one son Yuvan and daughter Katyayani. I had the 
good fortune to be in the Assembly along with his father. 
   Shri Samir Oraon has been a Member of this august House since May, 2018 
and serving his first term. He was a Member of Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand for 
one term. As a Member of the Committee on  the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, he is enlightening the Committee through his vast experience in the 
field of upliftment of SCs and STs. 
Shri Samir Oraon is an agriculturist and farmer by profession and is married to 
Shrimati Sushila Oraon. 
    Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak has been  a Member of this august House since 
April, 2022 and serving her first term. Hon. Members, I would like to share that 
through her untiring efforts, she has been in strumental in admitting a large number of 
children aged between 6 and 14 years who we re dropouts or never enrolled to school 
into formal     schooling in Mon Educat ional Block Resource Centre, EBRC and Aboi 
EBRC which covers 37 villages. Her active role in the implementation of ‘Targeted 
Intervention Project’ at Aboi for injecting drug users, other vulnerable population and 
being a part of implementation of ‘Link Workers Scheme’ in Mon district for the 
prevention of HIV/AIDS is truly commendable.  
  She also played an important role in initiation of the process of documenting 
Konyak Cultural heritage. 
  Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak is a Social Worker by profession. 
Hon. Members, on your and my behalf, I wish them a long, healthy and happy 
life and extend greetings to their family members. 
 
 
OBITUARY REFERENCE 
 
Mr. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have to inform the House of the sad demise of the 
President of the Republic of Namibia, Hi s Excellency Dr. Hage G Geingob. He was a 
freedom fighter, statesman, Chairman of the Constituent Assembly that formulated 
the Namibian Constitution, the first Prime Minister of independent Namibia and the 
third President of the country. He dedicated his entire life to the welfare of his people 
and development of his country. President Ge ingob was a friend of  India. President 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Geingob’s role in facilitating relocation of eight Namibian Cheetahs to India in 
September 2022 is greatly admired. 
  O n  b e h a l f  o f  t h i s  H o u s e ,  w e  e xpress our deepest condolences to the 
Government and the people of Namibia. We  share our sympathies with his family, 
friends and admirers.  
We deeply mourn the passing away of  His Excellency Dr.Hage G Geingob. I 
request Members to rise in their places and observe silence as a mark of respect to 
the memory of the departed. 
 
(Hon. Members then stood in silence for one minute.) 
 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of AI Ai rport Services Limited, New Delhi; 
Commission of Railway Safety, Lucknow; and Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation 
University, Amethi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF CIVIL AVIATION (GENERAL 
(RETD.) V. K. SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
 (i)   
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
 (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the AI Airport Services Limited, New Delhi, for 
the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the pape rs mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11308/17/24] 
 
 (ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following papers, under Section 
10 of the Indian Railways Act, 1989 and S ection 12 of the Metro Railways (Operation 
and Maintenance) Act. 2002: - 
 (a) 
Annual Report of the Commission of Railway Safety, Lucknow, for the year 
2022-23. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
3

 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the pape rs mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11307/17/24] 
 
 (iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 30 and under sub-section (4) of Section 31 of the Rajiv Gandhi 
National Aviation University Act, 2013: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Rajiv Ga ndhi National Aviation University, 
Amethi, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the pape rs mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11309/17/24] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Finance  
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ:- 
 
(i) 
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
Notification G.S.R. 39(E), dated the 15 th January, 2024, amending the Second 
Schedule to Customs Tariff Act, 1975, is sued under sub-section (1) of Section 8 
of the said Act, along with Explanatory Memorandum. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11165/17/24] 
 
(ii) 
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
Notification G.S.R. 40(E), dated the 15 th January, 2024, amending Principal 
Notifications bearing Nos. G.S.R. 733( E). and G.S.R. 734(E)., both dated the 
13th October, 2021, under Section 159 of the Customs Act, 1962, along with 
Explanatory Memoranda. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11421/17/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of SPM-NIWAS and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI RAJEEV 
CHANDRASEKHAR): Sir, I lay on the Table a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
following papers: — 
 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Dr.Syama Prasad Mookerjee National 
Institute of Water and Sanitation (SPM-NIWAS), for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the pape rs mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11422/17/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of BPRL, Mumbai and related papers 
 
पेटर्ोिलयम और Ģाकृ ितक गैस मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी रामेǚर तेली):  महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ :- 
 
 
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:— 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Bhar at Petro Resources Limited (BPRL), 
Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comme nts of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the pape rs mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11317/17/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of RSC, New Delhi and related papers 
 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी कौशल िकशोर): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ :- 
 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Rajghat Samadhi Committee (RSC), 
New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Committee. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11319/17/24] 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
5

 
I. Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of IOL, D ehradun; MIL, Pune; YIL, Maharashtra 
and MIDHANI, Hyderabad and related papers 
II. Reports and Accounts of Centre for Land Warfare Studies, New Delhi for various 
years and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI V. 
MURALEEDHARAN):  Sir, on behalf of Shri Ajay Bhatt, I lay on the Table— 
 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1) 
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) Second Annual Report and Account s of the India Optel Limited (IOL), 
Dehradun, Uttarakhand, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
(ii) (a) Second Annual Report and Accounts of the Munitions India Limited 
(MIL), Pune, Maharashtra, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
(iii) (a) Second Annual Report and Accounts of the Yantra India Limited (YIL), 
Nagpur, Maharashtra, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) to (iii) See No. L.T. 11020/17/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited, 
(MIDHANI) Hyderabad, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the Company.     
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11423/17/24] 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for Land Warfare Studies, New 
Delhi, for the year 2020-21, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for Land Warfare Studies, New 
Delhi for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for Land Warfare Studies, New 
Delhi for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) to (iii) See No. L.T. 11021/17/24] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Finance  
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ क Ȃदर्ीय उत्पाद शुÊक अिधिनयम, 
1944 की धारा 38 की  उप-धारा (2) क े अधीन पेटर्ोिलयम कर्ूड क े उत्पादन पर िवशेष अितिरƪ 
उत्पाद शुÊक को 1700/एमटी से बढ़ाकर 3200/एमटी करने क े िलए अिधसूचना संख्या 18/2022 
- क Ȃदर्ीय उत्
पाद शुÊक, िदनांक 19 जुलाई, 2022 का संशोधन करने वाली िवǄ मंतर्ालय (राजÎव 
िवभाग) की अिधसूचना संख्या 05/2024 - क Ȃदर्ीय उत्पाद शुÊक, िदनांक 2 फरवरी, 2024 तथा  
Ëयाख्यात्मक ज्ञापन की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ।  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11424/17/24] 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We have Shri K.C. Venugopal here. I tried contacting you yesterday 
also. You were in the flight. I was telling the House, you chose the names of your 
children very carefully – Gokul and Parvathi. Now, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal. 
 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
7

 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL (Punjab): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and 
Hindi) of the Twenty Eighth Report of  the Department-Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on External Affairs (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Countering 
Global Terrorism at Regional and International Levels’.                                                       
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 19th  Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
THE MINSTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS; AND THE MINSTER OF 
HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (SHRI HARDEEP  SINGH PURI): Sir, I lay the Half 
Yearly Statement regarding status of implementation of the recommendations 
contained in the 19 th Report of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs on Demands for Grants (2023-24), 
pertaining to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have received one notice under Rule 267. The 
notice does not merit admittance. Now, Matters raised with Permission. Shri Samir 
Oraon. 
 
Demand to lay a railway line from Lohardaga to Gumla to Korba till Jashpur in 
Chhattisgarh 
 
Ǜी समीर उरांव ( झारखंड): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इस सदन मȂ एक 
बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् िवषय को रखना चाहता हूँ। आज़ादी क े 75 वषर् हो गए हȅ, लेिकन गुमला िजले 
मȂ आज तक रेल लाइन नहीं पहुँची है। मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से लोहरदगा से लेकर कोरबा तक की 
रेल लाइन क े िलए बार-बार आगर्ह कर रहा हूँ। वहाँ धरमजयगढ़ से कोरबा तक की र
ेल लाइन 
Ģारंभ हो गई है, जबिक धरमजयगढ़ से लोहरदगा 291 िकलोमीटर है। उसका कई बार सवȃ हुआ 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
है, लेिकन उसका िनमार्ण कायर् आगे नहीं बढ़ पा रहा है, जबिक गुमला-जशपुर एक जनजातीय-
बहुल क्षेतर् है और  वहाँ क े कई सैिनक हमारे देश की सेवा कर रहे हȅ।   
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननी य रेल मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करना चाहता हूँ िक सवȃ होने 
क े बाद यथाशीघर् यह रेल लाइन बने, िजससे गुमला से जशपुर एवं धरमजयगढ़ से कोरबा और 
जशपुर-गुमला से राँची तक वहाँ क े सैिनकȗ को आने-जाने क े िलए रेल की सुिवधा हो सके  है। इस 
लाइन क
े  बन जाने क े बाद वहाँ क े िकसान फल एवं सÅजी क े िलए आगे जा सकते हȅ।   
इसके  साथ-साथ, वहाँ माइिंनग एिरया भी है और अगर वहाँ र ेल की सुिवधा िमल जाती है 
तो इससे वहाँ क े लोग आगे बढ़ सकते हȅ। इसिलए मȅ बार-बार यह आगर्ह करता हूँ िक माननीय 
रेल मंतर्ी जी उसके  िनमार्ण कायर् को यथाशीघर् आगे बढ़ाएँ, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour submission made by the ho n.
 Member, Shri Samir Oraon: Dr. Santanu 
Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (O disha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala). 
 
Need to release national disaster relief fund to Tamil Nadu without delay 
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu): Hon. Deputy Ch airman, Sir, the recent heavy rains and 
floods due to Cyclone Michaung devastating five districts of Tamil Nadu, namely 
Chennai, Thiruvallur, Kanchipuram and Chengalpattu caused loss of life and damages 
to vast public and private property. Fo llowed by this, unprecedented heavy rains, 
water-logging and floods in five districts, namely, Tirunelveli, Thoothukudi, 
Kanyakumari, Chengalpattu and Thiruvallu r resulted in destruction of public 
infrastructure and made lakhs of people homeless. 
I have requested the hon. Prime Minister  and hon. Home Minister, through my 
letter, dated 19
th December 2023, to send a Central Team to visit disaster-hit areas for 
release of financial assistance. Our hon. Ch ief Minister, Thalapathy Stalin, has also 
requested for release of rupees thirty-seven thousand crores for providing relief to the 
disaster-affected people and to improve th e public infrastructure which has been 
damaged. We also demanded that the recent disaster, o ccurred to Tamil Nadu, be 
declared as a ‘National Disaster’ and adequate relief fund may be released 
immediately.   
 In this connection, a high-level delega tion of MPs from Tamil Nadu, in which I 
was also present, had also met the hon. Home Minister in Delhi on 13 th January 2024 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
9

 
for expeditious release of funds. In that meeting, the hon. Home Minister had assured 
that all formalities will be completed an d adequate funds will be released soon. 
However, nothing has happened so far, de spite the report being presented by the 
Central Team to the Home Minister. This is a step-motherly treatment meted out to 
the State of Tamil Nadu.  I would, therefor e, demand that the disaster-relief amount, 
as demanded by the Government of Tamil Nadu, may be released immediately to the 
State, as people are still suffering from di saster.  A lot of relief and reconstruction 
works are waiting for the funds.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Memb er, Shri Vaiko: Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shrimati Vandana Chavan (Maharas htra), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P. (Kerala), Shri M. Sh anmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Santanu Sen 
(West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sh ri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shrimati 
Jebi Mather (Kerala).   
 
Need to make Dash Cams mandatory for reducing hit-and-run cases in India 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Hon. De puty Chairman, Sir,  the amendment to 
Section 106 of the Bharatiya Nayaya Samh ita, replacing Section 304A of the IPC, 
brings about significant changes in addressing road safety and traffic violations.   
 Sections 279, 304A, and 338 of the IPC apply in hit-and-run incidents.  In 
extreme cases, the police may book a hit-and-run case under Section 302 -- धारा 
302 खून करने पर लगती है। यिद कोई डर्ाइवर सेक्शन 302 मȂ बुक हो गया, तो उसको सज़ा-ए-
मौत हो सकती है या उĦ क ै द हो सकती है। क ु छ िदन पहले इन Ģोिवज़ंस क े िवरोध मȂ बहुत भारी 
संख्या मȂ डर्ाइवसर् एसोिसएशन ने राÎ
तȗ पर आकर ĢोटेÎट भी िकया था। सर, िकसी भी इंसीडȂट, 
एक्सीडȂट की सूरत मȂ सबूत की बड़ी आवÌयकता होती है। अगर सज़ा इतनी भारी हो, तो सबूत 
की ÎपÍटता भी आवÌयक होनी चािहए। One key aspect that dese rves att
ention, in the 
wake of these stringent measuers, is the pr omotion of dash cams.  Dash cams have 
emerged as a valuable tool that can provid e concrete evidence in the event of a road 
accident. Most of the countries in the wo rld have adopted dash cams on a large 
scale. Providing dash cams mandatorily  by the manufacturers would serve the 
objective of collecting reliable evidence, ensuring transparency, and would facilitate  a 
fair legal process.   
 Sir, today, seat belts, plastic bumpers, and so on have been made mandatory 
for manufacturers. In the same way, dash  cams may also be made mandatory. The 
significance of dash cams becomes more pronounced considering the prevalent issue 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
of tampering with evidence and corruption with in the authorities. In advocating for the 
wide-spread adoption of dash cams, it is cr ucial to highlight their role in not only 
protecting law-abiding citizens but it wo uld act as a deterrent against corrupt 
practices by law enforcement agencies. Thes e devices serve as an impartial witness, 
recording events accurately, and discouraging  unethical behaviour. As India grapples 
with the challenges posed by strict traffic regulations, the incorporation of dash cams 
emerges as a practical and effective solu tion to address concerns related to 
accidents, evidence-tampering, and promot e responsible driving practices.  Thank 
you very much.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Me mber, Dr. Fauzia Khan: Shri Neeraj Dangi 
(Rajasthan), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala),   Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala),  Shri Saket 
Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Sujeet Kuma r (Odisha),  Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Sh rimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shrimati 
Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Amar Patnaik 
(Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P. (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sanjeev Arora (P unjab), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala).   
  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi – Concern ov er unconstitutional action taken by DDA 
to remove encroachments in Delhi. 
 
Unconstitutional action taken by DDA to remove encroachment in Delhi 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी (महाराÍटर्): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ डीडीए ǎारा उजाड़ी जा रही िदÊली 
की दाÎतान और क ु छ ऐितहािसक इमारतȗ की चीखȂ लेकर आपके  सामने खड़ा हूं।   
 
"एक-दो जख्म नहीं, सारा बदन है छलनी, 
ददर् बेचारा परेशां है कहां से उठे।" 
 
 महोदय, इसी 26 जनवरी  को भारत क े मेहमान ģांस क े राÍटर्पित इमैनुएल मैकर्ȗ को 
रूहानी  िदÊली का दीदार कराने क
े  िलए हमारी सरकार िनजामुǈीन औिलया की दरगाह पर 
लेकर गई थी।  म
ेरी आंखȗ मȂ एक तरफ यह तÎवीर है और दूसरी तरफ इसी सरकार क े इशारे पर 
रात क े अंधेरे मȂ सैकड़ȗ साल पुरानी मामा-भांजा, मंडी हाउस और काका नगर की छोटी-छोटी 
मज़ारȂ ज़मींदोज़ कर दी गईं, जो पूछ रही हȅ िक हमȂ तोड़ा क्यȗ गया? महोदय
, अबू धाबी जाकर 
शेख जायद गर्ȅड मिÎजद मȂ मुÎकु राते हुए सेÊफी लेने वाले Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को महरौली की 700 
साल पुरानी अखूंजी मिÎजद क
े  ट ूटने की चीखȂ क्यȗ सुनाई नहीं पड़ती हȅ? डीडीए क े अिधकारी 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
11

 
सुबह पांच बजे अंधेरे मȂ महरौली मȂ एक मिÎजद, बच्चȗ क े पढ़ने का मदरसा और एक मंिदर को 
ज़मींदोज़ कर देते हȅ। जो डीडीए 1957 मȂ गिठत हुआ, वह अपनी पैदाइश से कई सौ साल पहले 
पुरानी महरौली मिÎजद को अितकर्मण बताता है। क्या िवकास Ģािधकरण  संसद क े बनाए हुए 
1991 विर्शप एक्ट को नहीं मानता? संसद से चार कदम पर की दूरी पर मौजूद सुनहरी बाग  
मिÎजद, िजसका सैकड़ȗ साल पुराना इितहास है, िजसके  सेहन मȂ कभी संिवधान सभा क े सदÎय, 
‘इंकलाब िंजदाबाद’ का नारा देने वाले मौलाना हसरत मोहानी बैठा करते थे, आज वह 
एनडीएमसी को अितकर्मण नज़र आता है। िजस मिÎजद को लुिटयन्स बसाने वाले अंगर्ेजȗ ने नहीं 
ढहाया, उसे एनडीएमसी और डीडीए उजाड़ना चाहती ह ै।  आिखर यह िसलिसला कब रुके गा?  
 
"तुझको िकतनȗ का लहू चािहए ऐ अजȃ वतन, 
िकतनी आहȗ से कलेजा तेरा ठंडा होगा।" 
 
 महोदय, दूर कहीं अशफ़ाक़ु Êलाह खाँ, वीर अÅदुल हमीद, िĤगेिडयर उÎमान की रूह Ȃ क्या 
सोचती हȗगी। जामा-मिÎजद की वे सीिढ़यां क्या सोचती हȗगी, जहां खडे़ होकर कभी मौलाना 
आजाद ने लोगȗ को अपनेपन का यकीन िदलाया था। गैजेट, हैिरटेज, सैकड़ȗ साल का वजूद क्या 
हमारी संÎथाओं क े िलए कोई मायने नहीं रखते हȅ? म
ȅ आपके  माध्यम से इस सदन और सरकार से 
पूछना चाहता हूं िक सरकार द
ेश को बताए िक वह 700 साल  पुरानी इमारत को गैर-कानूनी 
तरीके  से ज़मींदोज़ करने वाले डीडीए क े अिधकािरयȗ क े िखलाफ क्या कारर्वाई करेगी? वह देश 
को यह िवÌवास िदलाए िक Îवतंतर्ता आ
ंदोलन से लेकर इस नए भारत क े िनमार्ण तक सैकड़ȗ 
कहािनयȗ की गवाह सुनहरी बाग मिÎजद को सुरिक्षत रखा जाएगा। िवरासतȗ को सहेजा जाता है, 
उनसे नफरत नहीं की जाती,  उन्हȂ उजाड़ा नहीं जाता, धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shri Imran Pratapgarhi: Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
(Karnataka), Shrimati Vandana Chavan  (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West
 Bengal), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal ),  Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala),  Dr. Santanu Sen (W est Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) 
and Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan). 
Now, Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy - Demand to withdraw the draft de-reservation 
policy proposed by UGC. 
 
Demand to withdraw the draft De-Reservation Policy proposed by UGC 
  
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, as per the 
data submitted to the Lok Sabha in the mo nth of August, 2023, four per cent of the 
Professors and six per cent of the Assistant Professors working in Central Universities 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
belong to OBC. This number stands at 7 per cent in the case of SCs and a mere 1.5 
per cent in the case of STs. Quite surprisi ngly, the University Grants Commission has 
recently issued draft guidelines de-rese rving the vacancies meant for SC, ST and 
OBC candidates in higher educational instit utions and opening up  them for General 
Category.  This is very much unconstitutio nal and unwarranted. The guidelines clearly 
state that the ban on de-rese rvation of reserved vacancies in direct recruitment might 
be lifted in exceptional cases. I really do  not understand what exceptional cases are 
prevailing now for the UGC to take such an unconstitutional step.    
 Sir, I draw your kind attention to  the Central Educational Institutions 
(Reservation Teachers’ Cadre) Act, 2019, which clearly prohibits de-reservation. The 
general procedure that is being followed th roughout India not only in respect of 
educational institutions but even in resp ect of other Government bodies and non-
Government bodies is that if unfilled quota positions in the case of SCs, STs and 
OBCs are not filled or are unfilled, they are re-advertised and then special recruitment 
drives are carried out till the suitable candidates are identifi ed and, when the suitable 
candidates are identified, these vacancies will be filled. Th is procedure will go on and 
there is no occasion and there is no reason why this should be de-reserved.  
Sir, my sincere appeal to the Go vernment is to prevent UGC from 
implementing such draft guidelines that erode the constitutional rights and protections 
which have been conferred on SCs, STs and OBCs in the case of reservation.  
 I urge the Government to ensure that  the vacant positions reserved for the 
OBCs, SCs and STs are expeditiously filled and concerted effort be made in this 
regard. Thank you very much, Sir.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy:  Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri Ram Chander Jang ra (Haryana), Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra), Dr. Santanu Sen 
(West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha) and Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal).  
Now Shri Ajay Pratap Singh, ‘Demand to include Kol Tribe in Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG).’  
 
Demand to include Kol tribe in Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG) 
 
Ǜी अजय Ģताप िंसह (मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन का 
और सरकार का ध्यान कोल जनजाित की तरफ आकिर्ष
त करना चाहता हूं। यह सवर्िविदत तथ्य है 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
13

 
िक मध्य Ģदेश मȂ सवार्िधक जनजाित की आबादी िनवास करती है। मध्य Ģदेश की आबादी की 
लगभग 21 Ģितशत आबादी जनजाित भाइयȗ की है। इन जनजाित भाइयȗ क े बीच मȂ लगभग 7.68 
Ģितशत आबादी कोल जनजाित की है और यह मध्य Ģदेश की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी जनजाित है। 
इसका उद्गम Îथल रीवा िजले क े फरेन्दा गांव, क ुराली गांव मȂ है। यह कोल जनजाित है, इसके  
श
ैक्षिणक, सामािजक और आिर्थक िपछड़ेपन क े िलए मध्य Ģदेश सरकार ने एक सिमित का गठन 
िकया था। उस सिमित ने सतना िजले क े पांच गांवȗ का सैÇपल क े तौर पर चयन करके  उनका जो 
अध्ययन िकया ह
ै, उसके  िनÍकषर् से मȅ सदन को अवगत कराना चाहता हूं। उसके  िनÍकषर् क े 
अनुसार कोल जनजाित क े मध्य सतना िजले मȂ जो िशक्षा का Ģितशत है, वह लगभग 32 Ģितशत 
है। सतना िजले की आबादी लगभग 22 लाख है, उस 22 लाख मȂ से कोल जनजाित 2.68 लाख है, 
और इस 2.68 लाख क े बीच मȂ चंद सैकड़ा लोग ही Îनातक हȅ, क ु छ लोगȗ ने ही 12वीं की कक्षा 
पास की हुई है। कोल जनजाित क े लोगȗ क े पास आजीिवका का कोई साधन नहीं है, ये सामान्यतः 
मजदूरी करते हȅ, खेितहर मजदूर हȅ, बड़े शहरȗ
 मȂ िरक्शा चलाते हȅ, इनके  पास आवास क े िलए 
भी कोई अपनी ज़मीन नहीं है। य े अन्य जाित क े िकसानȗ की ज़मीन पर बसे हुए हȅ अथवा सरकारी 
भूिम पर बसे हुए हȅ। इस कोल जनजाित की जो समÎयाएं हȅ, इनको हल करने क े िलए मेरा 
सरकार से आगर्ह है िक अभी Ģधान मंतर्ी जनमन योजना लागू की गई है पीवीजीटी टर्ाइÅस क े 
िलए, उसके  तहत या तो कोल जनजाित को पीवीजीटी टर्ाइÅस क े अंतगर्त शािमल िकया जाए 
अथवा Ģधानमंतर्ी जनमन योजना का िवÎतार कोल जनजाित तक िकया जाए, िजससे उनका जो 
आिर्थक, शैक्षिणक और सामािजक िपछड़ापन है, वह दूर हो सके  और वे िवकास की मुख्य धारा मȂ 
सÇमिलत हो सकȂ तथा उनका भी उत्थान हो सके , बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: The following hon. Members associ
ated themselves with the Zero 
Hour mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri Ajay Pratap Si ngh: Shri Deepak 
Prakash (Jharkhand), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal) and Dr. Amar Patnaik 
(Odisha).  
Now Shri Iranna Kadadi, “Need for Amendment in MPLADS guidelines. ” Shri 
Iranna Kadadi; not present. Then, Shri Muzibulla Khan, “Demand to Increase the 
supply of fertilizers to Odisha.” 
 
Demand to increase the supply of Fertilizers to Odisha 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): उपसभापित महोदय, आज आपने मुझे बोलने का मौका िदया, 
इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभारी हूं। सर, ओिडशा मȂ िकसानȗ क े िलए फिर्टलाइजर की बहुत कमी है। 
इसी क े कारण हमारे मानन
ीय मुख्य मंतर्ी Ǜी नवीन पटनायक जी कई बार क ृिष मंतर्ी जी को िचƻी 
िलख
 चुक े हȅ, बोल चुक े  हȅ और उन्हȗने क Ȃ दर् सरकार से आगर्ह िकया है िक ओिडशा मȂ जो 
फिर्टलाइजर की कमी हो रही है, उसको फ ुलिफल िकया जाए।  
 सर, अगर नेशनल लेवल का एवरेज देखा जाए , तो  Ģित हैक्टेयर एक िंक्वटल 37 क ेजी 
क े िहसाब से खचार् होता है या क ेन्दर् सरकार देती है, लेिकन ओिडशा मȂ 66 िकलो ही फिर्टलाइजर 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
िदया जाता है, इसका मतलब है िक करीब-करीब िफÄटी परसȂट कम फिर्टलाइजर िदया जाता है। 
सर, इसीिलए हमारी िडमांड है िक इसको बढ़ाया जाए, क्यȗिक ओिडशा मȂ एगर्ीकÊचर सैक्टर मȂ 
76 परसȂट लोग इन्वॉÊËड हȅ। 87 लाख, 46 हज़ार  हैक्टेयर मȂ फसलȂ होती हȅ, उसमȂ से 18 लाख, 
79 हज़ार हैक्टेयर इिरगेिटड लȅड है। महोदय, इतनी िडमांड करने क े बावजूद भी पता नहीं क्यȗ 
हमारे यहाँ पर फिर्टलाइज़र की शॉटȃज हो रही है और क Ȃ दर् सरकार क्यȗ नहीं सुन रही है, यह भी 
मुझे पता नहीं ह
ै - मȅ इस बात को आपके  माध्यम से बोलना चाहता हूं।  
उपसभापित जी, हमारे ओिडशा मȂ एगर्ीकÊचर फामर्सर् बहुत अच्छी फसल उगा रहे हȅ। इसी 
क े कारण क Ȃ दर् सरकार की ओर से जो क ृिष कमर्ण अवाडर् िदया जाता है, वह ओिडशा सरकार को 
पाँच बार से ज्यादा बार िदया जा चुका है। इसका मतलब है िक ओिडशा क े िकसान बहुत ही अच्छी 
फसल उगा रहे हȅ।  
सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह बताना चाहता हूं िक क ु छ साल पहले ऐसा माहौल था िक 
लोगȗ को खाने क े िलए अनाज भी नहीं िमलता था। छोटे-छोटे बच्चȗ क
े  पेट मȂ अनाज डालने क े 
िलए उनके  पिरवार मȂ जो िपता होता था या जो बड़ा होता था, वह चोरी करके  अपने बच्चȗ को 
अनाज लाकर देता था। खेत से अनाज चोरी
 हो जाएगा, इस डर से बहुत से िकसान रात को खेत 
मȂ जाकर सोते थे, खेत मȂ रात भर जगते थे, लेिकन आज ऐसी िÎथित है िक कोई खेत मȂ सोता 
नहीं है, कोई खेत मȂ जागत
ा नहीं है, क्यȗिक सभी क े घर मȂ अनाज है। महोदय, इसका मुख्य 
कारण है िक ओिडशा की सरकार, ओिडशा क े मुख्य मंतर्ी ने िकसानȗ क े िलए जो योजना बनाई ह ै, 
वह उनको लाभ दे रही है और िकसान बहुत सुिवधा क े साथ अपने पिरवार का पालन-पोषण कर 
पा रहे हȅ। इसमȂ सबसे महत्वपूणर् एक योजना है, िजसका नाम 'कािलया योजना' है। इस योजना क े 
तहत िकसानȗ को 5 हज़ार रुपय े सालाना िदए जाते ह
ȅ और 50 हज़ार रुपय े तक िबना इंटरेÎट से 
लोन िदया जाता है। इसी क े कारण आज ओिडशा मȂ िकसान खुशहाल हȅ। यह जो फिर्टलाज़र की 
शॉटȃज हो रही है, इसका फ ुलिफलमȂट क ै से िकया जाए, इसके  िलए म ȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना 
चाहता हूं और क Ȃ दर् सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूं िक ओिडशा क े िकसानȗ क े िलए फिर्टलाइज़र की 
शॉटȃज की समÎया को दूर िकया जाए।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri Muzibulla Khan: Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. 
Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Shri M. Shan mugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala) and Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal).  
Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki -- 'Concern over ri sing cases of online banking fraud 
in the country'.  
 
Rising cases of online banking fraud in the country 
 
डा. सुमेर िंसह सोलंकी (मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद, 
नमर्दे हर। 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
15

 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार एवं सदन का ध्यान एक महत्वपूणर् 
िवषय की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं। मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी का ǭदय की गहराइयȗ से धन्यवाद करता हूं िक आज हर भारतीय ऐप, यूपीआई, 
इंटरनेट बȅिंकग या अन्य िडिजटल सा
धनȗ क े माध्यमȗ से अपने लेन-देन की दैिनक िकर्या को िबना 
समय गँवाए आसानी से पूरा कर रहा है। महोदय, यह िडिजटल युग का कमाल है।  
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी कनकमेदला रवींदर् क ुमार) पीठासीन हुए।] 
 
कोरोना महामारी क े काल को माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े क ुशल नेतृत्व ने आपदा को 
अवसर मȂ बदलकर रख िदया है, िजसका पिरणाम अब हम सबके  सामने है। दुिनया मȂ सबसे 
ज्यादा िडिजटल लेन-द ेन हमारे देश मȂ हो रहा है - यह हम सबके  िलए गौरव का िवषय है। 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, जैसे-जैसे तकनीक का िवकास हो रहा है, वैसे-वैसे उसके  साथ बहुत 
बड़ी चुनौितयाँ भी आती जा रही हȅ। इसी कर्म म Ȃ िडिजटल युग मȂ िडिजटल लेन-देन क े माध्यम से 
क ु छ लोग ģॉड, ठगी या धोखाधड़ी कर रहे हȅ, िजसकी संख्या िदन-ब-िदन बढ़ती जा रही है, जो 
हमारे िलए िंचता का िवषय भी है। हमारी सरकार इस Ģकार का ģॉड करने वाले लोगȗ क े िलए 
कई Ģकार क
े  कानून लेकर आई है। िपछले क ु छ वषș मȂ ऑनलाइन क े माध्यम से ģॉड या ठगी 
करने वाले मामलȗ की संख्या मȂ तेजी से इज़ाफ़ा हुआ है। आरबीआई की एक िरपोटर् क े अनुसार 
िपछले िवǄीय वषर् मȂ ब
ȅिंकग क्षेतर् मȂ लगभग 13 हज़ार , 500 ऑनलाइन  धोखाधड़ी क े मामले दज़र् 
हुए हȅ। इसमȂ ध्यान देने वाली बात यह है िक सबसे ज्यादा बȅिंकग और धोखाधड़ी क े  मामले िनजी 
बȅिंकग क्षेतर् मȂ हुए हȅ। िरज़वर् बȅक क े आंकड़ȗ क े अनुसार भारत को िपछले सात सालȗ मȂ हर रोज 
औसतन करीब 100 करोड़ रुपय े का नुकसान िसफर् बȅक ģॉड या Îकै Çस क े ज़िरए हुआ है।  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मेरा आपके  माध्यम से सरकार, िनजी एवं सरकारी
 बȅक क े 
अिधकािरयȗ से यह सवाल भी है िक यिद हमारे देश क े सभी बȅक खाते आधार से जुड़े हुए हȅ और 
आधार काडर् पहले से ही तकनीकी रूप  से सत्यािपत हो चुक े हȅ,  ऐस े मȂ जब िकसी भी Ëयिƪ क े 
साथ कोई ģॉड या ठगी होती ह
ै, तो हमारे िसÎटम मȂ ऐसी क्या खामी है िक हम ģॉड करने वाले 
लोगȗ क े खातȗ को टर्ेस नहीं कर पा रहे हȅ या पकड़ नहीं पा रहे हȅ? यिद इस Ģकार की कोई खामी 
ह
ै, तो उसे दुरुÎत िकया जाना चािहए और दोिषयȗ क े िखलाफ कड़ी कानूनी कायर्वाही की जानी 
चािहए। ऐसे असंख्य क े सेज़ हȅ, जो िलिखत मȂ नहीं आते हȅ। मȅ भी दूर-दराज क े आिदवासी क्षेतर् से 
आता हूँ। यह पीड़ा मेरे क्षेतर् क े लोगȗ की भी है। एक कॉल या एक मैसेज मȂ आए िंलक को खोलने 
मातर् से उस गरीब की मेहनत शून्य हो जाती है। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मेरा आपके  
माध्यम से िनजी क्षेतर् क े बȅक अिधकािरयȗ से िवशेष आगर्ह है िक वे अपने िवǄीय लेनदेन क े िसÎटम 
को इतना मजबूत बनाएं िक िकसी गरीब क े िलए यह बȅिंकग धोखाधड़ी...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI KA
NAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR): Dr. Solanki, 
your time is over. 
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki:  Shri Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Dr. Sikander Kumar (Himachal Pradesh), Shri Naresh 
Bansal (Uttarakhand), Shrimati Ramilaben B echarbhai Bara (Gujarat), Shri Rambhai 
Harjibhai Mokariya (Gujarat), Shri Ma haraja Sanajaoba Leishemba (Manipur), 
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland) , Shri Pabitra Margherita (Assam), Shri 
Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Kanakamedala 
Ravindra Kumar (Andhra Pradesh), Shrimati  Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Sanjeev Arora (P unjab) and Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(Maharashtra). 
 
Demand to increase in MNREGA wage rate for the State of Punjab 
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA (Punjab): Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, for allowing 
me to take up this important issue.  This  is mainly regarding the State of Punjab. I 
would like to draw the attention of the Government, through you, to a significant issue 
concerning the wage rate notified under MNREGA for the State of Punjab. The rate 
finalised for the State of P unjab is Rs.303 per day compar ed to higher rates in the 
neighbouring States, especially Haryana wh ere it is Rs.357 per day. The minimum 
wage which the Government of Punjab has set is Rs.413 per day.  My request is that 
not only in Punjab but also in the whol e nation, MNREGA wages should match the 
minimum wages finalised by the State if it is higher. Otherwise, people would not like 
t o  w o r k  u n d e r  M N R E G A  s c h e m e s .   T wo things have happened, that is, 
unemployment is there and the schemes are not be implemented.  Even the total fund 
allocation on this account to the State of P unjab is going down as per official data 
from the previous years. In the light of  these disparities, I humbly request the 
Government, through you, to intervene to re-evaluate the current wage rate under 
MNREGA for Punjab.  It is imperative that th e wage rate is increased to bring it at par 
with either the neighbouring States or th e minimum wage, as set by the Government 
of Punjab.  Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR): The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with  the matter raised by the hon. Member, 
Dr.Sanjeev Arora: Shri Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. John Britta s (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) 
and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala). 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
17

 
Demand for repealing the Places of Worship Act, 1991 to maintain social and 
communal harmony 
 
Ǜी हरनाथ िंसह यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन और 
सरकार का ध्यान भारत सरकार क े उपासना Îथल अिधिनयम, 1991 क े मनमाने और 
असंवैधािनक Ģावधानȗ की ओर आकिर्षत करता हूँ। महोदय, उपासना Îथल अिधिनयम, 1991 मȂ 
कहा गया है िक पूजा Îथलȗ की जो िÎथित 15 अगÎत, 1947 को थी, उसमȂ कोई बद लाव नहीं 
िकया जाएगा। इस कानून मȂ Ǜी राम जन्मभूिम को अलग रखा गया है। मान्यवर, यह कानून 
संिवधान मȂ विर्णत समानता और धमर्िनरपेक्षता क े िसǉांतȗ का उÊलंघन करता है, जो संिवधान की 
ĢÎतावना और मूल संरचना का एक अिभन्न अंग है। महोदय, इस कानून मȂ Ģावधान है िक Ǜी राम 
जन्मभूिम मुकदमे क े अितिरƪ, अदालतȗ मȂ लंिबत ऐसे सभी मुकदमे समाÃत माने जाएंगे और यिद 
कोई Ëयिƪ इस कानून का उÊलंघन करता है, तो उसे एक साल से लेकर तीन साल तक की सजा 
और जुमार्ना हो सकता है। महोदय, उपासना Îथल अिधिनयम, 1991 न्याियक समीक्षा पर रोक 
लगाता है, जो संिवधान की बुिनयादी िवशेषता है। यह कानून एक मनमानी और तकर्हीन कट-
ऑफ ितिथ भी लागू करता है, जो िहन्दू-िसख, जैन-िसख और बौǉ धमर् क े अनुयािययȗ क े धािर्मक 
अिधकारȗ को कम करता है।  
मान्यवर, मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का अिभनंदन करता हूँ। उन्हȗने कहा िक 
आजादी क े बाद जो लोग लंबे समय तक सǄा मȂ रहे, वे पूजा Îथलȗ की महǄा को नहीं समझ सके  
और उन्हȗने राजनैितक फायदȗ क े िलए अपनी संÎकृ ित पर शिमȊदगी होने की ĢवृिǄ Îथािपत की। 
उन्हȗने कहा िक कोई भी देश अपने अतीत को भूलकर एवं िमटाकर और अपनी जड़ȗ को काटकर 
Ģगित नहीं कर सकता है। महोदय, इस कानून का ÎपÍट अथर् यह है िक िवदेशी आकर्ांताओं ǎारा 
तलवार की नोक पर ज्ञानवापी और भगवान Ǜी क ृÍण की जन्मभूिम सिहत अन्य पूजा Îथलȗ पर जो 
बलात कÅजा िकया गया था, उसे िवगत सरकार ǎारा कानूनी रूप  से सही ठहरा
 िदया गया है। 
मान्यवर, यह कानून मयार्दा पुरुषोǄम राम और भगवान Ǜी क ृÍण क े मध्य भेदभाव पैदा करता है, 
जबिक दोनȗ ही भगवान िवÍणु क े अवतार हȅ। महोदय, यह Îथािपत तथ्य ह
ै िक समान क ृत्यȗ और 
समान पिरिÎथितयȗ क े िलए दो कानून नहीं हो सकते हȅ। दूसरी बात, कोई भी सरकार िकसी भी 
नागिरक क े िलए न्यायालय क े दरवाजे ब
ंद नहीं कर सकती है।  
महोदय, यह उपासना Îथल कानून पूणर्तया अतािर्कक, असंवैधािनक है और िहन्दू, िसख, 
जैन और बौǉȗ को संिवधान मȂ ĢाÃत धािर्मक अिधकारȗ का हनन करता है, जो देश क े सांĢदाियक 
सǌाव को तोड़ रहा है।  अत: मȅ आपके  और सदन क े माध्यम से देश िहत मȂ इस कानून को 
अिवलंब समाÃत करने की मांग करता हूं।  धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR): The following 
hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by Shri Harnath Singh 
Yadav:  Dr. Ashok Bajpai (Uttar Prades h), Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Brijlal (Uttar Pradesh), Shri  Kamakhya Pras
ad Tasa (Assam), Shri 
Mithlesh Kumar (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Pabitra Margherita (Assam), Shri Rambhai 
Harjibhai Mokariya (Gujarat), Shri Deep ak Prakash (Jharkhand), Shrimati Kanta 
Kardam (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha) and Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
(Haryana). 
 
Need for India’s effective engagement in the Arctic Region 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Sir, India fulf illed a long-standing need and signalled its 
rising interest and stakes in the Arctic with the release of th e Arctic Policy on 17 th 
March, 2022.  The study of the Arctic is criti cal to the Indian scientists as it influences 
our monsoon which directly impacts agricultural sector on which almost 60 per cent of 
India's population is dependent. The rising sea levels due to the Arctic ice melt also 
threaten India's 1,300 island territories and the welfare of 1.4 billion Indians. The Arctic 
meltdown also helps Indian scientists be tter understand the glacier melt-down in the 
Himalayas, the largest source of fresh water outside the Poles and home to almost all 
the Indian perennial rivers. It  is for this reason that In dia is the only developing 
country, apart from China, to have a Perman ent Research Station in the Arctic since 
2008 and has undertaken 13 scientific expeditions to the region.   
 The Arctic, therefore, presents India with  a complex set of opportunities as well 
as challenges to secure its increasing nati onal interest. Firstly, India should seek a 
more inclusive and equitable Arctic Council with a greater say for the Observer States 
in the decision making process and more freedom in pursuance of their research 
objectives in the Arctic Region.   
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 Secondly, India should also fine-tune its own internal mechanism to impart a 
greater impetus to its Arctic endeavours with a more singular, co-ordinated and 
cohesive approach by appointing an Arctic Co-ordinator. I urge upon the Government 
to co-ordinate its efforts in playing a pivotal role in the Arctic Region.  Thank you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by Shri A.D. Singh: Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shrimati 
Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Dr. Santanu Sen (West 
Bengal), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shri 
Sujeet Kumar (Odisha). 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
19

 
WELCOME TO THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION FROM SURINAME 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have to  make an announcem ent on my own and 
your behalf. I have great pleasure in welc oming Shri Marinus B ee, Chairman of the 
National Assembly of the Republic Surina me, and the accompanying Members of the 
Parliamentary delegation of Suriname, who are on a visit to India as our honoured 
guests.   
 The Parliamentary delegation from Suri name arrived in India on Sunday, the 4 th 
February, 2024, and now is seated in the Sp ecial Box. Besides Delhi, they will visit 
Agra before their final departure from India. We wish them a happy and fruitful stay in 
our country. Through them, we convey ou r greetings and best wishes to the 
Members of Parliament of Suriname, the Government and the friendly people of 
Suriname.   
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION - Contd. 
 
Need to increase minimum wages in the Country 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Sir, there is  an urgent I mean, a critical need to 
increase the minimum wages of workers in the country. Minimum wage is a concept 
which is universally accepted for combating poverty and stabilising the economy. But, 
unfortunately, in our country, the National Mi nimum Wage is shockingly low, that is, 
just Rs.178 for eight hours. So, the Central trade unions and the Samyukta Kisan 
Morcha are demanding an increase in this and, at least, Rs. 26,000 per month must 
be provided for the workers in our country.  
As you all know, 90 per cent of the work force is in the informal sector and they 
do not have any social security or security of their jobs.  The working conditions are 
very miserable, and, in fact, there is no job contract as such.  
 
 [THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI SEEMA DWIVEDI) in the Chair.] 
 
Amongst the States also, there is huge disp arity. For example, in Kerala, it is 
Rs. 837 for eight hours whereas in Gujarat it is Rs. 296 and in Tripura, it is Rs. 250. 
This shows that there is hug e disparity amongst the States  as well and we need to 
enhance the minimum wages.  In the y ear 2019, the Anoop Satpathy Committee 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
recommended that Rs. 375 must be the minimum wage but that recommendation has 
not been accepted.  It was last revised in the year 2017. 
 Madam, through you, I urge the Gove rnment to increase the minimum wages 
given to the workers who are actually the backbone of our economy.  In the 
Government sector and corporate sector, there is a system to increase the salary 
through the Dearness Allowance, while du e to lack of any such system in the 
unorganized sector, the workers, whose ba rgaining power is very less, are left 
without any social security. 
 Once again, I take the opportunity to urge the Government to take necessary 
steps to enhance the minimum wages for the poor workers. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S EEMA DWIVEDI): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P:  Shri R. Girirajan (Tam il Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri  Kanakamedala Ravi ndra Kumar (Andhra 
Pradesh), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri  Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shrimati 
Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Ajit 
Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Shri Javed Ali Kh an (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Elamaram 
Kareem (Kerala), Shrimati Vandana Chav an (Maharashtra), Shri Abdul Wahab 
(Kerala), Shri Binoy Viswam (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Santanu Sen 
(West Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha). 
माननीय सदÎय, डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल।   
 
Demand for developing Sikh Circuit across India 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आज मȅ इस सदन क े सामने दुिनया 
भर क े 3 करोड़ िसख व करोड़ȗ अन्य Ǜǉालुओं की भावनाओं से जुड़े एक मुǈे पर सरकार का 
ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहूँगा। भारत सरकार ट
ूिरज्म Ģमोशन क े िलए बहुत सारी योजनाएँ बनाती 
है, िजनमȂ एक योजना है - Îवदेश दशर्न, िजसमȂ 5,200 करोड़ की कीमत से 76 Ģोजेक्ट्स श ुरू  
िकए जा चुक े हȅ।  इस योजना मȂ पूरे देश मȂ Ģभु Ǜी राम, भगवान Ǜीकृ Íण, भगवान गौतम बुǉ और 
भगवान महावीर से संबंिधत धािर्मक Îथलȗ को आइडȂिटफाई करके  सिर्कट क े माध्यम से अलग-
अलग राज्यȗ मȂ िवकिसत िकया जा रहा है। माननीय Ģधान म
ंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने कल ही 
गुवाहाटी मȂ शिƪपीठ कामाख्या देवी जी क े मंिदर क े डेवलपमȂट क े िलए भी 500 करोड़ रुपए  की 
लागत से बनने वाले कायर् का िशलान्यास रखा, िजसके  िलए भारत सरकार बधाई की पातर् है।  
  
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
21

 
 मȅ पंजाब से आता हूँ, जो Ǜी गुरु  नानक देव जी, Ǜी गुरु  गोिबन्द िंसह जी और हमारे अन्य 
िसख गुरुओं की पिवतर् धरती है। इन सभी गुरुओं ने दुिनया को मानवता, धमर्िनरपेक्षता और एक 
ओंकार का पाठ पढ़ाया है। हमारा महान Ǜी गुरु  गर्ंथ सािहब लोगȗ को िन:Îवाथर् सेवा करना 
िसखाता है, समाज से जुड़ना िसखाता है और उन सबको बराबर का सÇमान देना िसखाता है। 
िसख धमर् क
े  पांच तख्त हȅ - Ǜी अकाल सािहब, अमृतसर; Ǜी क ेसगढ़ सािहब, आनंदपुर सािहब; 
Ǜी दमदमा सािहब, तलवंडी साबो; Ǜी पटना सािहब, पटना और Ǜी हजूर सािहब, म
हाराÍटर् क े 
नांदेड़ मȂ िÎथत हȅ।  इसके  अलावा पूरे देश मȂ िसख धमर् से जुड़े हुए बहुत सारे ऐितहािस क गुरुǎारे 
हȅ, जैसे गुरुǎारा Ǜी हेमकुं ड सािहब, उǄराखंड; गुरुǎारा Ǜी पȗटा सािहब और गुरुǎारा Ǜी 
मिणकणर् सािहब, िहमाचल Ģदेश; गुरुǎारा Ǜी फतेहगढ़ सािहब, पंजाब।  इन सभी धािर्मक Îथलȗ 
की आÎथा और मान्यता को देखते हुए पूरे िवÌव से हर वषर् क रोड़ȗ की संख्या मȂ Ǜǉालु आते हȅ।  मȅ 
सरकार को बधाई दूँगा िक उन्हȗने िसख सिर्कट क े िलए एक टर्ेन भी शुरू  कर दी है।   
 मेरी माँग है िक Îवदेश दशर्न योजना क े माध्यम  से िसख सिर्कट भी शुरू  िकया जाए, 
िजसमȂ हर राज्य मȂ िसख धािर्मक Îथलȗ का िवकास करके  भƪȗ और Ǜǉालुओं क े िलए बेहतर 
सुिवधाओं का िनमार्ण हो, तािक इन सभी धािर्मक Îथलȗ क े बीच बेहतर कनेिक्टिवटी दी जाए।  इन 
सभी Îथलȗ को आपस मȂ मेटर्ो िसटीज़ से रेल, रोड और एयर क े माध्यम से जोड़ा जाए, तािक सभी 
Ǜǉालुओं को, जो पूरे देश और दुिनया से आते हȅ, इन धािर्मक Îथलȗ की यातर्ा करने का लाभ 
िमल सके ,  
धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S EEMA DWIVEDI): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the issue raised by the hon. Member, Dr. 
Ashok Kumar Mittal:  Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shrimati Jaya Bachchan (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Santanu 
Sen (West Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil  Nadu) and Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu). 
धन्यवाद।  माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी मोहÇमद नदीमुल हक। 
 
Need to release funds under NFSA owed to Bengal 
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal): Madam, the Union 
Government has withheld the release of Rs. 7,000 crores to our State of West Bengal 
to procure paddy under the National Food Security Act. The State Government has 
successfully acquired 8.52 lakh tons of paddy for the central pool this fiscal year. The 
State aims to achieve 80 per cent of its annu al procurement target during the ongoing 
kharif season, which extends until the end of Fe bruary. So, timely release of funds is 
crucial.  Otherwise, the entire procurem ent process may be affected. The halt of 
funds to West Bengal stems from the need  for NFSA logos and the Prime Minister’s 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
pictures to be put up across all ration shops in the State. Madam, it is ridiculous that 
the Union Government is willing to jeopardise an entire State’s food  security over the 
delay in plastering the Prime Minister’s imag e which is a time-taking task. This is the 
Union’s rationale to withhold the funds.  Madam, let me read ou t a quote from Prime 
Minister Modi in 2018, and I quote, “Federalism is no longer the faultline of Centre-
State relations but the definition of  a new partnership of Team India. ” However, since 
the current Government has come into power, there has been a systematic 
deprivation of States, pushing people into distress in regions where they are 
incapable of winning elections democratically. Madam, the Union Government has 
blatantly carried out anti-federal policies and engaged in fiscal federal terrorism, 
denying West Bengal funds worth rupees one lakh crores under  several schemes. 
Despite pleas from our Chief Minister, part y leaders and beneficiaries, the Union has 
chosen to remain indifferent. This goes against the very spirit of th e Constitution. This 
goes against the people of West Bengal. I challenge you to fight us democratically, 
fight us in elections, but do not make cr ores of people suffer for your political 
vendetta. I urge this Government to im mediately reimburse Rs. 7,000 crores for 
procuring paddy under the National Food Security Act. Thank you, Madam.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S EEMA DWIVEDI): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. 
Member, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque : Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Shri 
Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri Sukh endu Sekhar Ray (West Bengal), Shri 
Samirul Islam (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala),  Shri Saket Gokhale   (West 
Bengal),   Dr. John Brittas  (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand for classical language status for Bengali language 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal): Ma dam, we had requested the Government 
of India to change the name of the State of West Bengal to Bangla. This has been 
pending since 2016. The West Bengal Legi slative Assembly has taken a unanimous 
Resolution that if, say, the name of Orissa can be changed to Odisha, we are ...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी): आप सÅजेक्ट पर बोिलए। आपका सÅजेक्ट यह नहीं है।   
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
23

 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Simultaneously, we have been agitating for inclusion of 
Bangla as a classical language. We have taken a Resolution on this score and we 
have submitted a four-volume research pape r to the Government of India on this 
subject. We ask for consideration of the de tails submitted thereon to establish the 
antiquity of the language of Bangla in synt ax, in grammar and largely in alphabet from 
the 4th century B.C. It is our humble submission  that our case to include Bangla as a 
classical language be considered positively.   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S EEMA DWIVEDI): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. 
Member, Shri Jawhar Sircar:  Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal),  Dr. 
Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivada san (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) 
and Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu). 
माननीय Ǜी एस. सेÊवागनबेथी। अनुपिÎथत। Ǜी बृज लाल।  
 
State of tourism in Uttar Pradesh following the consecration of Ramlala in Ayodhya 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ भगवान राम क े मिन्दर की 
Ģाण-ĢितÍठा हो चुकी है।  वहाँ पर शुरुआत  मȂ काफी restriction क े बाद footfall 5 lakh per day 
थी।  वहाँ पर average fo
otfall 3 लाख हो रही है। यह जो फ ुटफॉल है, यह न क ेवल अयोध्या मȂ है, 
बिÊक काशी, मथुरा मȂ भी है। इन सब जगहȗ पर बहुत फ ुटफॉल हो रही है, इसके  कारण पयर्टन 
को बहुत बड़ा बूÎट िमला है। हम जो 5 िटर्िलयन डॉलर इकोनॉमी की बात करते ह
ȅ, उसमȂ 1 
िटर्िलयन डॉलर का योगदान उǄर Ģदेश का ही होगा और उसमȂ सबसे बड़ा योगदान धािर्मक 
पयर्टन का होगा। अयोध्या क े िवकिसत होने से पूवीर् उǄर Ģदेश, जहाँ का मȅ भी रहने वाला हूँ, वहाँ 
क
े  लोग िवकिसत हȗगे। काशी मȂ काफी फ ुटफॉल हो रही है। जब से वहाँ पर Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने 
काशी िवÌवनाथ कॉिरडोर बनाया है और उसको Åयूटीफाई िकया है, तब से हमारे पयर्टन पर 
इसका बहुत बड़ा Ģभाव पड़ा है। 
 महोदया, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ एक बुिǉÎट सिर्कट है, इसके  चा
र मुख्य Îथान हȅ - सारनाथ, 
क ुशीनगर, ǛावÎती और हमारा िजला िसǉाथर् नगर है, जहाँ पर किपलवÎतु है। यह उनका जन्म 
Îथान है। 1972 मȂ किपलवÎतु मȂ खुदाई हुई, उसके  पहले अंगर्ेज भी वहाँ पर खुदाई करा चुक े थे। 
वहाँ पर Îतूप िमले और भगवान गौतम बुǉ महाराज क े िपता शुǉोधन महाराज जी का वह महल 
िमला। क
े िमकल ऐनािलिसस स
े यह पर्ूव हो चुका है िक यह उनकी जन्मÎथली है और वहाँ पर 
उनकी अिÎथ भी िमली थी, जो िदÊली मȂ रखी हुई है।  
 हमारा यह अनुरोध है िक भारत सरकार को इस बुिǉÎट सिर्कट क े िवकास पर िवशेष 
ध्यान देना चािहए। मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को इसके  िलए साधुवाद देता हूँ िक उन्हȗने क ुशीनगर मȂ 
इंटरनेशनल एयरपोटर् की Îथापना की। अयोध्या मȂ इ
ंटरनेशनल एयरपोटर् बन चुका है। बुिǉÎट 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
सिर्कट की ये जो जगहȂ हȅ, ये अयोध्या और काशी क े आस-पास ही हȅ। मȅ खास कर किपलवÎतु क े 
बारे मȂ कहूँगा िक हम लोग उसको उतना क ै श नहीं कर पाए। अभी वहाँ पर पयार्Ãत ËयवÎथा नहीं 
है, होटÊस नहीं हȅ, रुकन े क े अच्छ े Îथान नहीं हȅ और वहाँ पर पहुँचने का राÎता क ेवल गोरखपुर 
से है तथा टर्ेन की ËयवÎथा है। बÎती से वहाँ तक बहुत अच्छी सड़क बन चुकी है। मेरा भारत 
सरकार से यह अनुरोध है िक जो बुिǉÎट सिर्कट है, उसको सुदृढ़ िकया जाए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी): माननीय सदÎया, संगीता यादव जी । 
 
Importance of menstrual hygiene among young girls and women in the country 
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने मुझे भारत मȂ िकशोर 
लड़िकयȗ और मिहलाओं क े मािसक धमर् Îवा Îथ्यता संबंधी ' राइट ट ू हाइजीन' पर बोलने का 
अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभार Ģकट करती हूँ। यह एक ऐसा िवषय है, जो देश की 
50 परसȂट आबादी से जुड़ा हुआ है। 2017 से लेकर 2022 तक जब मȅ एमएलए  थी, तो मȅ लगातार 
सभी बड़े Îकू लȗ मȂ िजतनी बड़ी बिच्चयाँ थीं, जो 11 साल से ऊपर की थीं, उन सभी Îकू लȗ मȂ तथा 
जो सेÊफ हेÊप गर्ुप की मिहलाएँ थीं, उनमȂ मȅने हमेशा ģी नैपिकन्स बाँटने का काम िकया और 
इसके  िलए जागरूकता  अिभयान भी चलाया। इसमȂ गाँव क े Ģध
ान, पूवर् Ģधान और जो Ģशासिनक 
अिधकारी थे, हमȂ उन सबका सहयोग िमला। पहली बार गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ यह चचार् का िवषय बना। 
इससे पहले यह िवषय हमेशा बंिदशȗ मȂ ही रहता था। 
 महोदया, हम लोगȗ ने हजारȗ मिहलाओं और बिच्चयȗ को गभार्शय स
े जुड़ी हुई अनेक 
बीमािरयȗ से बचाया। मȅ इस संबंध मȂ जीरो ऑवर क े माध्यम से क ु छ अपील करना चाहती हूँ।      
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 महोदय, माननीय मोदी जी ने भी ' लाल िकले' से इस मुǈे पर चचार् की है और जब से 
'पैडमैन' मूवी आई, तब से यह और ज्यादा िवÎतृत तौर पर चचार् का िवषय बना। लेिकन आज भी 
'
पाँचवȂ राÍटर्ीय पिरवार ÎवाÎथ्य सवȃक्षण' क े अनुसार क ेवल 36 परसȂट मिहलाएँ ही सैिनटरी 
नैपिकन्स का उपयोग करती ह
ȅ, बाकी मिहलाएँ आज भी अज्ञानतावश अÎवच्छ सामगर्ी का ही 
उपयोग करती हȅ। इसके  कारण बिच्चयȗ और मिहलाओं मȂ बहुत ज्यादा गंभीर बीमािरयाँ फ ै ल रही 
हȅ। सरकार इसमȂ अच्छा काम कर रही है, हमारे Ģाथिमक ÎवाÎ
थ्य क Ȃ दर् भी इससे जुड़े हुए हȅ, 
लेिकन इसको िमशन मोड मȂ करने की आवÌयकता है। इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िसफर् इतनी 
ही अपील करती ह
ूँ िक इसको िमशन मोड मȂ िकया जाए, क्यȗिक देश की आजादी क े इतने वषș 
बाद भी 'राइट ट ू हाइजीन'  आज भी समÎया बना हुआ है।  
 महोदय, यूटर्स क ȅसर एक ऐसा क ȅसर है, जो ज्यादातर फोथर् Îटेज मȂ ही मालूम पड़ता है 
और यह इसी से ज
ुड़ा हुआ है। इसके  साथ ही बांझपन की समÎया, संकर्मण की समÎया, आिद हȅ। 
सवार्इकल क ȅसर, िजसके  बारे मȂ अभी बजट मȂ भी माननीय मोदी जी ने रखा है। हमने उस पर चचार् 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
25

 
की है। अगर हमने इस पर काम िकया, तो हम अपनी 50 Ģितशत आबादी को बहुत-सी बीमािरयȗ 
से बचा पाएँगे। 
 महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से दो और अपील करू ँगी। पहली तो यह है िक सरकार इस पर 
अभी जो िमशन मोड मȂ काम कर रही है, उस काम म Ȃ हमारे जो लोकल जनĢितिनिध हȅ, उनको 
शािमल िकया जाए। इसके  साथ ही इसमȂ लोकल एनजोओज़ को भी शािमल िकया जाए, धन्यवाद।     
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav:  Dr. 
Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra) and Shrimati Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra). 
 
 
12.00 NOON 
ORAL ANSWERES TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Question Hour. 
  
Price and supply of CNG 
 
*16.  SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN : Will the Minister of PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the price of CNG has doub led in the last 18 months from ₹ 43 per Kg 
to ₹ 86 per kg and if so, the details thereof and the reasons therefor; 
(b) the steps taken to reduce the price of  CNG and to increase the supply of CNG 
in retail outlets; 
(c) whether Government expects the price to rise further due to the status of 
OPEC under the prevailing Russia-Ukrain e war crisis and if so, the details 
thereof; and 
(d) Government’s stand on this issue whic h affects directly or indirectly every 
individual in the country? 
 
THE MINISTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (SHRI HARDEEP SINGH 
PURI): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) No. Over the last 18 months, the price of Compressed Natural Gas 
(CNG) in the representative market of Delhi is as under: 
Month Price of CNG (Rs./kg) 
June 2022 75.61 
January 2024 76.59 
Percentage (increase/decrease) Increased by 1.30% 
Price trend of international LNG and domestic  g a s  d u r i n g  t h e  l a s t  1 8  m o n t h s  i s  a s  
under: 
Gas Index Japan Korea 
Marker (JKM) 
West India 
marker (DES-
WIM) 
Domestic 
Gas 
Domestic 
Gas Price 
Lower by 
JKM  
Highest Price 
during the last 
18 months 
($/MMBTU) 
53.51 49.53 9.16 83% 
Average Price 
($/MMBTU) 
during the last 
18 months 
22.79 21.24 7.05 69% 
 
 In order to protect the consumers from  high volatility of international gas 
prices, major reforms were undertaken by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
in domestic gas pricing vide revised guidelines issued on 7 April 2023. 
The reforms aimed at rationalising the earlier applicable international gas hub 
based pricing. Prior to this, the pricin g was based on weighted average of 4 
international indices (namely US-Henry Hu b, Canadian Alberta Hub, UK NBP and 
Russian Gas Market). 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
27

 
The revised guidelines are applicable  to domestic gas produced from 
nomination fields of ONGC/OIL, New Expl oration Licensing Policy (NELP) blocks 
and pre-NELP blocks, where the Production  Sharing Contract (PSC) provides for 
Government's approval of prices. The revi sed guidelines provid e the price of such 
natural gas to be 10% of the monthly averag e of Indian Crude Basket, to be notified 
on monthly basis. For the gas produced by ONGC & OIL from their nomination 
blocks, the price has been made subject to a floor and a ceiling of $ 4.0/MMBTU & 
$ 6.5/MMBTU respectively. 
Due to this decision, the domestic  APM gas price for CNG (T)/PNG (D) 
segment has remained constant at $6.5/M MBTU since April 2023, which has led to 
significant decrease in prices of Pipe d Natural Gas (PNG) for households and 
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) for transport. The prices of CNG in Delhi decreased 
from Rs. 79.56/kg in March 2023 to Rs. 73.59/kg in April 2023. 
Government has taken various steps, including, increasing domestic gas 
allocation for CNG (T)/PNG (D) by about 2 50% from 8.32 MMSCMD in first half of 
2013-14 to 21.143 MMSCMD for July-Sep tember 2023-24, diverting domestic gas 
from power and other non-prio rity sectors to meet the requirement for CNG (T) and 
PNG (D) segments, declaring th ese as the first priority for allocation of domestic 
natural gas, etc. Allocation of domestic gas to CNG (T)/PNG (D) has been kept in 
no-cut category. Government has also notified that gas produced from discoveries in 
Deepwater, Ultra Deepwater and High Pressure-High Temperature areas, in any 
situation which may require proportionate di stribution of the gas offered under the 
bidding process, the contractor shall offer gas to bidders belonging to CNG 
(T)/PNG(D) sector on priority. 
Growth in Natural Gas infrastructure in the country since 2014 is as under: 
 
S. 
No. 
Natural Gas Infrastructure Status in 
2014 
Current Status 
2023 
Growth % 
1 DPNG Connections 25.4 lakh 1.20 Crore 372 
2 CNG Stations 738 6,159 735 
3 Area covered by CGD (%) 5.47 88 1,508 
4 Population Covered by CGD 
(%) 
12.81 98 665 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
5 Authorized Geographical Areas 37 300 710 
6 Districts covered by CGD 66 630 855 
7 Natural Gas Pipeline Authorized 
(Kms) 
22,403 33,622 50 
8 Operational Natural Gas pipeline 
(Kms) 
15,340 24,623 61 
9 LNG re-gasification terminals 
capacity (MMTPA) 
22 47.7 117 
 
Government has also launched “Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable 
Transportation (SATAT)” initiative on 1stOctober 2018, with the aim of establishing an 
ecosystem for production of Compressed Bi o Gas (CBG), which can replace natural 
gas, from variouswaste/biomass sources and for promoting its use along with Natural 
Gas. So far, 55 CBG plants have been commissioned. 
 
(c) and (d) The price of natu ral gas in international mark et is based on the demand 
supply scenario, geo-political issues and various other market conditions. It is difficult 
to make predictions about these prices especially amid ongoing volatility. 
Government of India is closely monitoring global energy markets as well as potential 
energy supply disruptions as a fall-out of the evolving geopolitical situation. 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, in his answer, the hon. Minister has said that the price of 
CNG at Delhi has increased by just 1.30 per cent.  In 2020-21, the price of CNG was 
increased four times.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please put your question, Mr. R. Girirajan.   
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Yes, Sir. That is why I am asking this. On February 8, 2021, the 
price of CNG was increased from Rs.49.19  to Rs.49.40 per kg. The highest CNG 
price was recorded in Nagpur.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr. R. Girirajan, please put your question.  
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
29

 
S H R I  R .  G I R I R A J A N :  I t  w a s  r a i s e d  t o  R s . 1 1 5 .  S i r ,  m y  q u e s t i o n  i s  t h i s .  C N G  i s  
considered to be an eco-friendly and cost -effective fuel component to diesel and 
petrol. The very purpose of encouraging the use of CNG is to reduce pollution and it is 
much cheaper than diesel.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr. R. Girirajan, your question has not come till now.   
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: My question is this . Has the Government taken steps to bring 
back the prices of CNG to Rs.50 per kg? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Please be brief in your question. माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी, आप जवाब भी Ĥीफ ही दȂ। 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PU RI: Sir, I am entirely in ag reement with the hon. Member 
that the Government should encourage more consumption of Compressed Natural 
Gas because it is relatively a cleaner fuel although ther e is a debate in the West 
whether even that is an entirely  green fuel or not but I would not get into that.  It is for 
that reason that the Govern ment has ensured -- the refere nce period in the question 
was the last 18 months -- this whilst global prices were witnessing turbulence, that is, 
massive increase, and shortfall. Hon. Me mber, just now, in  his supplementary 
referred to an earlier period than the 18 months. There was a lockdown and lockdown 
prices don't reflect reality prices. For inst ance, during the lockdown, the crude price 
came down to 19.56 dollars a barrel. Then, it shot up to 128 and 130. We were able to 
do this for two reasons. We rationalized ou r system of calculating  cost in April. The 
global prices were 53.51 dollars in the Japan-Korea. I am citing Japan-Korea 
because those are two large co nsuming markets and China is also part of that. One 
market to the East of India is Japan, Kor ea and China. The other is the Western India 
marker which is West of India towards the Middle East. Both those prices were very 
high, 53.51 dollars per Million Metric British Thermal Unit. The domestic gas price was 
much lower. It was 83 per cent lower. The average price also was 69 per cent lower. 
Yes, it is our constant effort to provid e more gas available for domestic cooking 
purposes and for the transp ort sector and we are committed to make the green 
transition. In fact, our trilemma is to ensure availability, affordab ility and sustainability; 
and, the increased gas, whic h is being provided, we rais ed the gas available to the 
CGD sector and transportation sector by tw o-and-a-half times, that is, 250 per cent. 
So, I am in agreement. We are making that and we are ensuring that the Indian gas 
prices are way below the global market prices. 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  Now, second supplementary. Please be brief. 
   
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, this is my second supplementary question. I would like to 
know from the hon. Minister: Has the Government initiated any drive for increasing 
the use of CNG vehicles in the country and to provide any incentive, concession and 
subsidy to encourage people to switch over to CNG vehicles from diesel? Let me 
know the total number of CNG vehicles in the country as of now and the number of 
CNG vehicles expected to hit the roads before 2030. Thank you, Sir.     
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, there is an autonomous process of transition 
taking place. If you look at the number of CNG vehicles, at the time when the 
international CNG prices went up, there was an apprehension that the people would 
stop buying CNG vehicles. That did not ha ppen and the very fact that we can make 
natural gas available for the transportation s ector at reasonable prices not linked to 
global market prices, that itself acts as an incentive. The same is happening also with 
the electric vehicles. But, the issue of giving incentives, I think, the most important 
incentive you can give is to make the energy, which these vehicles consume, available 
in plenty and we are taking our overall use of gas in our energy matrix from six per 
cent to fifteen per cent. So, we are going along in that. Giving specific incentives, 
etc., I think, those are the subjects of other Ministries but I am sure, the hon. Member 
is aware that that does not pertain to my Ministry.   
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: Sir, with your permission, I would like to know from the hon. 
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas whet her there is any mech anism to decide the 
CNG prices. If yes, then, what is that? How are the CNG prices determined? 
Secondly, what initiative has the Government  taken from time to time in order to 
stabilize the CNG prices? 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎय, please, आपको एक ही सवाल पूछना था। 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I am quite happy to answer both because they are 
interlinked. The position prior to April, ' 23 was that Indian gas prices were based on 
four hubs, namely, US-Henry Hub, Canadian Alberta Hub, UK NBP and Russian Gas 
Market, and the prices used to be fixed ov er a one year reference period every six 
months. Now, the difficulty with it was that these were not aligned to the Indian 
condition. Out of these four hubs, two of them, the UK NBP and the Russian Gas 
Market stopped operating; one, after the Ukraine-Russia War and the other one 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
31

 
because of the North Sea oil difficulties. We took very far-reaching decisions, 
reforms. In the month of April, 23, we d ecided to de-link the In dian gas price from 
these four hubs and we aligned them to the Indian crude basket, in other words, ten 
per cent of the Indian crude bask et.  As a result of this, we  were also able to fix the 
prices every month, and the price of gas has now a floor and a ceiling. The floor is 
$4.0/MMBTU and the ceiling is $6.5/MMBTU.  This immediately resulted in prices in 
the month of March, and fr om March to the April price, because we took these 
decisions in April, coming down drastica lly. We are doing many other things. For 
instance, the number of CNG Stations has increased from 738 in 2014 to 6,159, which 
is a growth of 735 per cent. The area cove red by CGD, which is the domestic gas 
availability, has gone up from 5.47 per cent of the Indian national territory to 88 per 
cent which is an increase of 1,508 per cent.  The Population Covered by CGD in 2014 
was only 12.81 per cent. It is now 98 per cen t and this is a growth of 665 per cent.  
Sir, whichever way you look at it, the gas infrastructure, the pipelines we have laid 
and the amount available, all that is on the increase.  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Sir, I would like to ask the hon. Minter as to how much 
disturbances are there on the Red Sea.... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: His mike is working. माइक पहले से काम कर रहा है। Ãलीज़, 
माननीय सदÎय को सवाल पूछने दȂ। 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Sir, I would like to ask the hon. Minster as to how much the 
disturbances on the Red Sea route, the Houthis, and the other attacks on the Red 
Sea route, are affecting the West India Mark er of gas and crude petroleum, since he 
has raised the issue of 19 dollars per barrel, both of them. 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I mentione d the figure of 19 dollars, 56 cents; I 
should have added per barrel as the lowest point during the economic lockdown. I am 
talking about the period of 2020, I think, March, 2020 to 2021-22. The global situation 
because of the pandemic was in a situatio n of chaos. There wa s no consumption. 
So, the price came down to 19 dollars. In so  far as the developments in the Red Sea 
area are concerned, I have been asked this question ou tside this august House and 
my answer has always been that yes, we have a certain degree of anxiety, because 
these are non-state actors affecting supply  lines, if those supply lines would be 
disrupted totally. Just now, there is some re-routing taking place on account of that 
uncertainty and that re-routing results in higher freig
ht cost and higher insurance 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
cost. But as it is, I say with my fingers cr ossed that we are reas onably confident that 
given the goodwill around, these factors a ccounting for anxiety will be contained and 
that we do not have an all out escalation. No w, even if all out escalation of hostilities 
takes place and there is a total supply line disruption,--I do not want to name the 
areas, it is very clear--then, of course, ther e would be a cause for concern. But, so 
far, the international community, the geopolitical equations and the market place have 
adjusted.  When I last looked at the price of oil, it had come down. I think, yesterday, 
when I enquired, it was about 77 dollars a barrel.  My own feeling is that if the 
uncertainty in the Red Sea area, particularly, the attacks by the non-state actors were 
not to recur or not in that frequency or, most  importantly, if they were not to escalate 
and exacerbate, then, I think, this is a manageable situation. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Mr. Deputy Chairman, Si r, the Minister in his reply regarding 
the natural gas infrastructure said that they are going to increase the natural gas 
pipeline operation. There is an apprehensi on among the Tamil Nadu farmers and they 
are opposing putting these kinds of gas lin es in their agricultural land. A lot of 
agitation is taking place. Is the Minister aw are of that?  Will he come forward to solve 
the Tamil Nadu agriculture farm ers' problem that they will not be affected by putting 
these kinds of gas lines through their land ? Instead of that, they should lay the 
pipeline along the national highways. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Dr. M. Thambidurai. You have put your 
question. 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I am grateful  to the hon. Member for having raised 
this issue. Of course, he wants to enquire whether I am familiar with it. Sir, I am not 
only familiar with it, but I spend a large part of my waking day to resolve these 
problems. I will just give him one example. I wrote a letter to the hon. Chief Minister 
on the 2
nd October, 2021 and this is not just one letter that I have written to the Tamil 
Nadu Chief Minister.  Since you have asked the question on Tamil Nadu, I referred to 
Tamil Nadu and I said that the Kochi-Ko ttanad-Bangalore-Mangalore Gas Pipeline, 
KKBMPL project was conceptualised as a pa rt of the ambitious National Gas Grid. 
This pipeline was planned to evacuate the re gasified LNG from Kochi LNG terminal to 
transport to various consumers in the Stat es of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. 
GAIL has been entrusted to implement this. Bu t, the fact that arises is that the same 
pipeline, when it went through Kerala, 514 kilometres has been completed; when it 
goes through Karnataka, 58 kilometres has been completed; and in Tamil Nadu, 309 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
33

 
kilometres is not completed. Now, whenev er the State Government is unable to 
implement a project in terms of the obligation it has, we have been in constant touch 
with them. We receive periodi cally assurances that they ar e attending to it. But, as I 
said, all the other States, Kerala, done; Karnataka, done and in Tamil Nadu, it is still 
under implementation and we would ...(Interruptions)... I am coming to that. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now Q. No. 17.  
 
MSME contribution to GDP 
 
*17. SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA: Will  the  Mi nister  of  MICRO,  SMALL  AND  
MEDIUM  ENTERPRISES  be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the details of MSME Gro ss Value Added in the country's GDP over the last 
three years;  
(b) whether a declining trend has been observed over the last three years;  
(c) whether there has been a reduction in the share of MSME products in the 
country’s total exports; and 
(d) if so, reasons therefor and the measures taken by Government to incentivise 
MSMEs?  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES (SHRI BHANU PRATAP SINGH VERMA): (a) to (d) A statement is 
laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b)  As per the latest information received from the Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation, share of MSME  Gross Value Added (GVA) in all India 
GDP during the last 3 years is as follows: 
 
Year  Share of MSME GVA in All India GDP (in %) 
2019-20 30.5% 
2020-21 27.2% 
2021-22 29.1% 
 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
The share of MSME GVA in all India GD P increased from 27.2% in 2020-21 to 
29.1% in 2021-22.  
 
(c) As per the information culled out fr om the Data Dissemination Portal of 
Directorate General of Commercial Intelligen ce and Statistics (DGCIS), the share of 
export of MSME specified products in all India exports for the year 2022-23 was 
43.59% and this share has increased to 45.83% in 2023-24 (up to Nov.2023). 
 
(d) To increase the contribution of MSMEs in exports and enhance their 
competitiveness, Government has taken various initiatives under Make in India 
Programme, Promotion of Ease of Doing Business, and improved availability of credit.  
Moreover, this Ministry is implementi ng the International Cooperation (IC) 
Scheme, which facilitates the participation of MSMEs in international exhibitions, 
trade fairs and buyer-seller meets in foreign countries by reimbursing cost incurred on 
airfare, stall charges, advertisement,  publicity etc. The scheme provides 
opportunities to MSMEs to continuously up date themselves to meet the challenges 
emerging out of changes in technology , changes in demand, emergence of new 
markets etc.  
Further, under the new component of IC Sc heme namely Capacity Building of First 
Time Exporters (CBFTE) launched in June 2022, reimbursement is provided to the 
first time Micro & Small exporters on exports shipments, whose IEC 
code/registration is not more than 3 years for costs incurred on Registration-cum-
Membership Certification (RCMC) with EPCs, Export Insurance Premium and Testing 
& Quality Certification for ex ports. These interventions und er IC Scheme assist the 
exporters in MSME sector to increase their access in international markets. 
The Ministry of MSME has established 59 Export Facilitation Centers (EFCs) 
across the country with an aim to provide requisite mentoring and handholding 
support to Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs).  
The Ministry is also engaged in regula r inter-ministerial collaborations for 
strengthening and facilitating the MSMEs at the grass root level to make them more 
competitive and accelerate their growth in the global markets.  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: उपसभापित महोदय, मेरा पहला सवाल भारत देश क े एमएसएमई सेक्टर मȂ जो 
sickness है, उससे संबंिधत है। मेरा सवाल बड़ा सरल है। िवǄीय वषर् 2022-23 मȂ लगभग 13,000 
एमएसएमईज़ ब
ंद हुईं, जो िपछले चार िवǄीय वषș मȂ सबसे अिधक हȅ। अगर हम यह अनुमान 
लगाएं िक 50 लोग एक एमएसएमई मȂ भतीर् होकर काम करते हȅ, रोजगार लेते हȅ, तो अगर 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
35

 
13,000 यूिनट्स बंद होती हȅ, तो लगभग साढ़े छह लाख लोगȗ की नौकरी चली जाती है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप अपना सवाल पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: एक फ ैक्ट और देकर मȅ अपना सवाल पूछ रहा हूं। िवǄीय वषर् 2017-18, 2018-19 
और 2019-20 मȂ भारत देश क े िजतने एक्सपोट्सर् होते थे, उनका 50 Ģितशत िहÎसा एमएसएमई 
सेक्टर से आता था। आज वह 50 Ģितशत से घटकर 44 Ģितशत हो
 गया है। यानी एमएसएमई क े 
एक्सपोट्सर् भी िगरते जा रहे हȅ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप सवाल पूिछए।  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, मेरा सवाल माननीय म
 ंतर्ी जी से यह है िक MSME सै क्टर की गर्ोथ तो 
छोिड़ए, उसमȂ जो िगरावट देखी जा रही है, उसके  क्या कारण हȅ और खासकर उसका रोजगार 
पर क्या Ģभाव पड़ा है?  
 
सूÑम, लघु और मध्यम उǏम मंतर्ी ( Ǜी नारायण राणे): मान
 नीय उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय 
सदÎय ने पूछा है िक MSME सै क्टर क े अंदर 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22 और 2022-23 मȂ 
जीडीपी मȂ िगरावट आई है, ऐसा उनका कहना है, उन्हȗने वैसा ही एक्सपोटर् क े बारे मȂ भी कहा है। 
सर, एक्सपोटर् दो साल मȂ कोरोना क े  कायर्काल मȂ और जीडीपी भी कोरोना क े कायर्काल मȂ ट ू 
परसȂट से िगरा, यह बात सही है,  मगर  2021-22 मȂ िफर 29.1 परसȂट वापस इन्कर्ीज़ हुआ और 
2022-23 मȂ तो above 30 परसȂट हो ही गया होगा। कोरोना क े कायर्काल मȂ िगरावट हुई, यह मȅ 
मानता हूं, एक्सपोटर् भी कम हुआ, यह भी मȅ मानता हूं, मगर अभी एक्सपोटर् भी 45.83 परसȂट हो 
गया है, तो वह भी इन्कर्ीज़ हो रहा है। कोरोना क
े  कायर्काल मȂ देश क े पंत Ģधान माननीय नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी ने उस वƪ जो योजना बनाई, उन्हȗने जो कर् ेिडट गारंटी योजना चालू की, उसके  अ
ंदर 
MSME मȂ कम से कम 2 लाख 41 हजार MSMEs बंद हुई थीं, उनको वापस चालू करने क े िलए 
लोन दे िदया गया, िजसके  कारण अब ये 45.83 हो गया है। मȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूं िक हमारा 
जीएसटी जो 2019-20 मȂ पांच लाख करोड़ था, वह 2020-21 मȂ 4.7 लाख करोड़ हुआ था, जो 
थोड़ा कम हुआ और अभी 2021-22 म
Ȃ बढ़कर 5.3 लाख करोड़ रुपए  हो गया है। अब यह ट ू परसȂट 
एĨी ईयर बढ़ता ही जा रहा ह
ै। आपने कहा िक कोरोना क े कारण िगरावट हुई थी, मगर अब 
MSME मȂ अलग-अलग योजना देकर, जो उǏोग बंद थे, वे चालू हो गए हȅ और वे अच्छा उत्पादन 
कर रहे हȅ। उसकी िफगसर् मȅने जीएसटी क े आधार पर कही हȅ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: राघव चǀा जी, संक्ष
ेप मȂ पूिछएगा। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने जो फ ैक्ट बोला है, वह गलत बोला है।  
 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी उपसभापित: राघव चǀा जी, उसके  िलए दूसरे राÎते हȅ। आप सवाल पूिछए।  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से एक सवाल और पूछना चाहूंगा। जहां तक एनपीए और 
लोन िडफॉÊट की बात है, इस MSME क े सैक्टर मȂ यह देखा गया है िक बहुत बड़ी तादाद मȂ जो 
लोन्स िलए गए, चाहे सरकार की िकसी योजना क े तहत िलए गए या बȅकȗ से िलए गए, वे लोन 
िडफॉÊट हो गए, क्यȗिक वह सैक्टर पूरे तरीके  से िपछले तीन-चार िवǄीय वषर् से िगरता जा रहा 
है। खास तौर पर भारत सरकार एक Îकीम लाई थी, िजसका नाम इमरजȂसी कर्
े िडट लाइन गारंटी 
Îकीम था...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: राघव चǀा जी, आप सवाल पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, इसमȂ सरकार की अपनी िरपोटर् बताती है िक अिधकांश िहÎसा जो लोन
  क े 
माध्यम से MSME को िदया गया था, वह एनपीए हो गया है, वह िडफॉÊट हो गया है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपका सवाल क्या है? 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहता हूं िक इस सैक्टर को पुनजीर्िवत करने 
क े िलए, जो भारत
 की अथर्ËयवÎथा की रीढ़ की हƿी है, उसके  िलए क्या कदम उठाए जा रहे हȅ?  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय मंतर्ी जी। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़।  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: और खास तौर पर एनपीए को डील करने क े िलए क्या कदम उठाए जा रहे हȅ?  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  
 
Ǜी नारायण राणे: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, म
ȅने पहले ही कहा है िक कोरोना क े कायर्काल मȂ 
कई उǏोग बंद हुए थे, कामगार भी चले गए थे, उस वƪ जीडीपी मȂ जरूर  िगरावट थी। उस समय 
लोगȗ ने लोन का भी िरपेमȂट नहीं िकया, बहुत सारे अकाउंट्स एनपीए हो गए। इसिल
ए 5 लाख 
करोड़ की इमरजȂसी कर् ेिडट लाइन गारंटी योजना इस देश क े पंत Ģधान जी ने इस िडपाटर्मȂट क े 
िलए दी। उसमȂ से  2  लाख, 41 
हजार करोड़ उǏोगȗ क े िलए िदए और िजनका एनपीए हुआ, 
उनको भी वापस लोन देने क े िलए, उसकी जो एक करोड़ रुपए  की िलिमट थी, उसको पांच 
करोड़ रुपए  तक लेकर गए। सरकार ने उन्हȂ पुनजीर्िवत करने का काम िकया, इसिलए िफर से 
उत्पादन बढ़ा ह
ै। मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक इसमȂ पहले िजतना उत्पादन बढ़ा है, क ु छ घाटा 
नहीं हुआ है और मȅ समझता हूं िक वे सभी इंटÎटर्ीज़ िफर से चालू हो गई हȅ।  
 
SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY: Si r, a survey has been conduc ted recently with inputs 
from 2,600 formal MSMEs of five States and the Union Territory of Puducherry. One of
 
the two surveyed MSMEs want an instant line of credit, but, the non-availability of the 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
37

 
short-term credit is the biggest hindrance for the MSMEs. So, I would like to request 
our hon. Minister to look into the demands and requests of the MSMEs.  
 
Ǜी नारायण राणे: उपसभापित महोदय, जो उǏम बंद हुए हȅ, उनके  िलए कर् ेिडट गारंटी योजना 
क े माध्यम से लोन की ËयवÎथा और मदद की गई है। मȅ समझता हूं िक कहीं ओर, जहाँ कहीं भी 
िकसी उǏमी को िदक्कत है, उनकी हैÊप करने क े िलए पीएमईजीपी से लेकर, अलग-अलग 
आठ-दस योजनाएं हȅ, िजनके  माध्यम से हम मदद करȂगे। हमारी इ
ंडÎटर्ीज़ देश का एक्सपोटर् 
बढ़ाती हȅ, जीडीपी बढ़ाती हȅ, इसिलए मȅ समझता हूं िक ' आत्मिनभर्र भारत' बनाने क े िलए, 
इ
ंडÎटर्ी क े िलए जो भी करना है, वह करने क े िलए हम तैयार हȅ। इसिलए मȅ यह भी कहता हूं िक 
इस िडपाटर्मȂट क े िलए, इंडÎटर्ी क े िलए 5 लाख करोड़ रुपय े िदए गए हȅ और हमारे माननीय 
सदÎय ने जो कहा है, मȅ उनसे भी यह कहना चाहता ह
ूं िक हम उनकी मदद करȂगे। 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ आपके  ज़िरये 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी से ĢÌन जानना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक जो written answer िदया है, उसमȂ कहा 
गया है, MSME Gross Value Added, GVA, in all India GDP और जो आंकड़े िदए हȅ,  उसमȂ 
यह 2019-20 मȂ 30.
05 Ģितशत था, 2020-21 मȂ 27.03 Ģितशत  था, 2021-22 मȂ 29.01 Ģितशत 
था। It means िक अगर मंतर्ी जी कह रहे हȅ िक यह कोरोना की वजह से हुआ है, तो कोरोना का 
सबसे ज्यादा इÇपैक्ट 2019-20 मȂ होना चािहए था
, लेिकन तब तो यह 30.05 Ģितशत था। क्योिक 
कोरोना का इÇपैक्ट उसके  बाद 2021-22 मȂ नहीं हो सकता है, तब वह कम क्यȗ हुआ? माननीय 
मंतर्ी महोदय, यिद आप िसफर् बड़े उǏोगȗ की िंचता करȂगे, तो लघु उǏोगȗ का क्या होगा?  
…(Ëयवधान)...
 
 
Ǜी नारायण राणे: उपसभापित महोदय, लघु उǏोग िजतनी  संख्या मȂ  बंद हुए, वे सभी िफर से 
चालू हो गए, इसिलए इसमȂ िकसी भी Ģकार की िंचता की बात नहीं है। वे सभी िफर से चालू हो गए 
हȅ, इसिलए उत्पादन क े संदभर् मȂ मȅने जीएसटी क े बारे मȂ आपको जो पढ़कर बताया है, वह आज 
भी  Rs. 5.3 lakh crores है। महोदय, यह कम नहीं हुआ है। पहले, 2019-20 मȂ जो 5 लाख करोड़ 
रुपय े था, वह अभी बढ़ गया है। मȅ इसमȂ यह भी कहता हूं िक 2020-21 मȂ जो 27.03 Ģितशत रहा 
है, वह कोरोना का कायर्काल था। इसमȂ कामगार फ ैक्टरी छोड़कर चले गए थे, लेिकन अब 
फ ैक्टरीज़ चालू होने क े बाद 2021
-22 मȂ जीडीपी का वह पिरमाण बढ़ गया है और इसके  बढ़ने क े 
कारण देश मȂ एमएसएमई की पूवर् पिरिÎथित का िनमार्ण भी हुआ है।   
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA: Sir,
 through you,  I would like to ask the hon. Minister 
about the labour welfare and employees' wellness in the MSME sector. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय कािर्तके य शमार् जी, अपना सवाल िफर से पूिछए।  
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA: Sir, I would like to  ask the hon. Minister about the steps 
taken to ensure labour welfare and employees' wellness in the MSME sector. 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
Ǜी नारायण राणे: उपसभापित महोदय, काफी कदम उठाकर इन इंडÎटर्ीज़ को िफर से चालू 
करने की कोिशश हुई है। यिद आपकी अनुमित हो, तो मȅ इनके  बारे मȂ सारा पढ़कर बता देता हूं।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप Ĥीफ़ली बता दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी नारायण राणे: िनयार्त मȂ एमएसएमई की िहÎसेदारी को बढ़ावा द
ेने क े िलए ĢितÎपधार् को 
बढ़ाने क े िलए सरकार ने मेक इन इंिडया कायर्कर्म क े तहत, Ëयवसाय की सुगमता, संवधर्न और 
कर् ेिडट की उपलÅधता मȂ िविभन्न पहल की हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय म
ंतर्ी जी... ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़ आपस मȂ 
बात न करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय मंतर्ी जी, सवाल यह है िक वकर् सर् क े वेलनेस और वेलफे यर 
क े िलए क्या काम हो रहा है? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी नारायण राणे: क्या सवाल है? ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: वकर् सर् क
े  वेलनेस और वेलफे यर क े िलए क्या काम हो रहा है? ...( Ëयवधान)... 
माननीय सदÎयगण, Ãलीज़ बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी नारायण राणे: नहीं, नहीं ...(Ëयवधान)...  आप सुिनए, आप सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅ यह 
पढ़कर बता रहा हूँ िक उǏम चालू होने से वकर् सर् की ĢॉÅलम हल होगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसा नहीं ह
ै 
िक फ ैक्टर्ी बंद रहेगी, तो हल होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह एक ĢॉÅलम है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: वकर् सर् क े वेलनेस और वेलफे यर क े िलए क्या काम हो
  रहा है, यह आप माननीय 
सदÎय को बुलाकर बता दीिजएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़ आप बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Q. No.19.  
 
Damage of diaphragm wall in Polavaram Irrigation Project 
 
* 1 9 .    S H R I KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Will the Minister of JAL SHAKTI 
be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether Government is aware of the fact that the diaphragm wall constructed 
under Polavaram Irrigation Project was damaged significantly which causes 
serious doubt on the quality of construc tion of Polavaram Irrigation Project 
(PIP); 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
39

 
(b) If so, the details thereof; 
(c) whether Government has taken any st eps to repair the damaged diaphragm 
wall of the Polavaram Irrigation Project as the State Government is reluctant 
and not coming forward to repair the same; 
(d) If so, the details thereof; and 
(e) If not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAWAT): (a) to (e) 
A statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Polavaram irrigation project (PIP ) was declared as a National project by 
the Andhra Pradesh Re-organisation Act, 2014. As per Ministry of Finance approval of 
2016, Government of India is to provide 100%  of the remaining cost of the irrigation 
component only of the project for the period starting from 1.4.2014, to extent of the 
cost of the irrigation component on that  date. However, Government of Andhra 
Pradesh is implementing the project on behalf of Government of India.  
Construction of diaphragm wall (D-wall)  was taken up acro ss the gap II of the 
main dam of Polavaram irrigation project (PIP) by the implementing agency, i.e., 
Government of Andhra Pradesh. However, due to high floods in the monsoon of the 
year 2020, floods passed through the then pa rtially built upstream cofferdam, causing 
damage to the D-wall.  
 
 
(c) to (e) NHPC has undertaken detailed technical assessment of the damage to the 
D-wall. Government of Andhra Pradesh and Go vernment of India are accordingly 
evaluating the various options for its rest oration. Consultation with international 
design agencies having relevant experience is  also proposed in this regard. Based on 
the same, restoration of D-wall shall be implemented by Government of Andhra 
Pradesh, as per designs approved by Central Water Commission.  
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: As per A.P. Reorganisation Act, 2014... 
..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is question No.19. ..(Interruptions).. Let him put his 
question. Don’t interrupt, Mr. Gokhale.  ..(Interruptions).. Please take your seat. 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
..(Interruptions).. I will come to that. ..(Interruptions).. I will come back to it. 
..(Interruptions).. Please. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Sir, as per Section 19 of A.P. 
Reorganisation Act, 2014, Polavaram Irri gation Project was declared a National 
Project. ..(Interruptions)..  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will come to Question No.18. ..(Interruptions).. After 
this, I will come to Question No.18. ..(Interruptions)..  
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Si r, from 2020 till today, no progress 
has taken place with regard to Polavaram Project. How much time will it take to 
complete the project? ..(Interruptions)..  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  
 
Ǜी गजेन्दर् िंसह शेखावत: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, जैसा िक माननीय सदÎय ने कहा है िक 
भारत सरकार ने पोलावरम Ģोजेक्ट को बनाने की िजÇमेदारी आंधर् Ģदेश रीऑगȃनाइजेशन एक्ट क े 
तहत ली थी, लेिकन मȅ माननीय सदÎय और सदन क े संज्ञान क े िलए िनवेदन करना चाहता
 हूँ िक 
इसके  िनमार्ण की िजÇमेदारी आंधर् Ģदेश की सरकार क े पास है। िनमार्ण का काम करना, उस पर 
पहले खचर् करना, यह सारी  िजÇमेदारी आंधर् Ģदेश सरकार की है। भारत सरकार उसे मातर् िवǄीय 
सहायता और संसाधन उपलÅध कराती है, तािक कायर् Ģगित पर रहे। मȅ माननीय सदÎय की 
जानकारी क े िलए बताना चाहता हूँ िक जो इसके  different आठ तरह क े components हȅ, उनमȂ 
अब तक जो काम हुआ है, उन सबकी जानकारी मȅ माननीय सदÎय को Ëयिƪ
गत रूप  से उपलÅध 
करा दूँगा। 
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we will take Question No.18.  ..(Interruptions).. It 
is not an occasion to be agitated.  ..(Interruptions).. Sometimes it is a human error. 
..(Interruptions).. Question No.19, second supplementary. ..(Interruptions).. I will 
come to Question No.18. ..(Interruptions)..  
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Why is this Question being skipped, Sir? ..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Would you please take your seat? ..(Interruptions).. Would you 
please take your seat now? ..(Interruptions).. It is a very good point that a question 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
41

 
should not be skipped. Is there anyone in the House who has not erred once? We are 
here to make immediate rectifications. Q. No . 18 will be taken up for sure. Let us first 
go through Question No. 19. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN: Sir, just tell us why? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is a human error. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN: We are just asking... ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I was in the Chair.  It just slipped through the computer 
and it went ahead. I corrected it and said that  I will come to Question No. 18 later. I 
have already spoken about it, Madam. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN:   
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This will not go on record. Madam, your observations will not go on 
record. I am so sorry. These are intemp erate observations. Absolutely, no... 
...(Interruptions)...  Second Supplementary, Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Sir,  the hon. Minister has stated that 
some progress is going on. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN: Sir,... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will come to that, Madam. ... (Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on 
record. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Bu t, Sir, how much progress till today 
has taken place? ... (Interruptions)...  How much amount has been spent for that 
purpose till today? ...(Interruptions)... Madam, please, there should be no cross 
talks.  ...(Interruptions)...  No, no; please... ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on 
record.  Hon. Minister, please continue. Only  what the hon. Minister says will go on 
record. 
 
                   
* Not recorded 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी गजेन्दर् िंसह शेखावत:  सभापित महोदय ,जैसा माननीय सदÎय ने जानना चाहा है और मȅने 
पहले सिÃलमȂटरी क े Ģत्युǄर मȂ भी िनवेदन िकया था िक पहले खचर् करने की िजÇमेदारी 
...(Ëयवधान)... The onus or responsibility to make expenditure is on the State 
Government and, after spending money on different components of the construction, 
the State Government raises bill with PPA (Polavaram Proj ect Authority) and then it 
comes to the Government of India.  But, to answer the question asked by the hon. 
Member, I wish to submit that in 2021, Rs . 2,234 crores have been released to the 
PPA.  The same amount has been released to the Government of Andhra Pradesh as 
reimbursement by the PPA.  In 2021-22, Rs . 751 crores and Rs, 1,147 crores have 
been released. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: सर, इसको रोिकए ...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Shaktisinh Gohil, take your seat.   
 
Ǜी दीपेन्दर् िंसह हुƿा: सर, जया जी बहुत बड़ी सदÎया हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Deepender Hooda, yo u are getting used to creating chaos 
unnecessarily. 
 
SHRI GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAWAT: And in 2022-23, Rs. 1,671.23 crores have 
been released to PPA and th e PPA, in turn, has released  the same amount to the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh. In the current  financial year, that is, 2023-24, so far, 
Rs. 727 crores have been released by th e Government of India to the Polavaram 
Project Authority and a similar amount ha s been transferred by Polavaram Project 
Authority to Government of Andhra Pradesh. ...(Interruptions)...  
    
Ǜी दीपेन्दर् िंसह हुƿा:  
* )...Ëयवधान...(  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Take your seats. What wo rds are you using? I am surprised, you 
are using these kind of words in this  House. These are expunged. Sorry.  
...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seats. I will come back to you after this 
question is over. Take your seat.  ... (Interruptions)... Nothing will go on record. You 
are not her spokesperson. She herself is a very senior Member. 
 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
43

 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: सर, आप हमारे संरक्षक हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no; you don't have to  support her. She is a very senior 
Member.  Sorry. Hon. Minister, please continue.  ... (Interruptions)... Take your 
seats. Would you take your seat?  ... (Interruptions)...   S h o u l d  I  n a m e  y o u ?  M r .  
Deepender Hooda, I will name you. ... (Interruptions)... Please take your seat.  
...(Interruptions)...  What do you mean by it? ... ... (Interruptions)... Okay, please 
sit down. Please take your seat. I have alr eady indicated that after I am through with 
Q. No. 19, I will take up this issue.  When we would take up this issue, we will take up 
in a composed manner and try to find a way out. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan is a very 
senior Member. If she has a sentiment, that is bound to be very serious with me. Let 
me go through Question No. 19, and then I will come to Question No. 18 and the 
concerns that are being raised.  
Dr. C.M. Ramesh. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. C.M. RAMESH: Sir, I have gone throug h the reply given by the hon. Minister. 
...(Interruptions)... The diaphragm wall wa s damaged in 2020. ...(Interruptions)...  
Now, we are in 2024. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What are you saying? ...(Interruptions)...Have you not understood 
me? ...(Interruptions)... I cannot help you. ...(Interruptions)... Sorry. 
...(Interruptions)...  Please continue. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. C.M. RAMESH: This project is very impo rtant for Andhra Pradesh. I would like to 
k n o w  f r o m  t h e  h o n .  M i n i s t e r  w h e n  P o l a v a r a m  i s  g o i n g  t o  b e  c o m p l e t e d .   
...(Interruptions)... When will the details of diaphragm wall come? 
...(Interruptions)... Sir, diaphragm wall was damaged four years ago. The project is 
stalled during the last four years! ...(Interruptions)... When is the project going to be 
completed?  About the details of diaphragm wall damage, when will these be given 
by national agencies or international agencies? 
 
Ǜी गजेन्दर् िंसह शेखावत: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जैसा कहा है िक 
डायģाम वॉल 2020 की बाढ़ क
े  समय डैमेज हुई थी, लेिकन जब इस पर काम करना ĢारÇभ 
िकया गया और यह िवषय संज्ञान मȂ आया, उसके  बाद भारत सरकार क े नेशनल हाइडर्ोइलेिक्टर्क 
पावर कारपोरेशन क े िव
शेषज्ञȗ ने वहाँ जाकर इस िवषय पर पूरा अध्ययन िकया और उसने अपनी 
िरपोटर् सिÅमट की है।  उसमȂ दो तरह क े ऑÊटरनेिटËस िदए गए थे। एक तो यह िक जो एिग्ज़िंÎटग 
वॉल है, उसी को िरपेयर िकया जाए और दूसरा, नई डायģ ाम वॉल बनाई जाए, क्यȗिक डायģाम 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
वॉल िकसी भी बाँध की Îपाइन या रीढ़ की हƿी िजतनी इÇपॉटȄट होती है। चूँिक इस िवषय मȂ आन्धर् 
Ģदेश सरकार ने ऑलरेडी िलख कर िदया है िक जो क ं सेशनेयर है, जो क ंÎटर्क्शन करने वाली 
क ंपनी है, they are not confident िक अगर इसको िरपेयर  िकया जाए, तो यह बाँध क े भिवÍय 
को लेकर उिचत होगा या नहीं, हमने इंटरनेशनल एजȂसीज़ को हायर िकया है और उसकी 
Ģिकर्या ĢारÇभ की है। उसकी िरपोटर् आने क े साथ ही इस िदशा मȂ काम िकया जाएगा, क्यȗिक यह 
अत्यंत महत्वपूण
र् घटक है और इसमȂ िकसी भी तरह की जÊदबाजी बाँध क े भिवÍय को लेकर एक 
समÎया हो सकती है। इसिलए हम उस िदशा मȂ काम कर रहे हȅ और शीघर् ही उस िदशा मȂ आगे 
बढ़Ȃगे। 
 
DR.
 FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, is it true that the World Bank has come with a Report wherein 
it indicated that by 2030 per capita water availability in India will shrink to half and push 
the country into ‘water-scarce’ category from the existing ‘water-stress’ category.  
Marathwada region of Maharashtra is a water-scarce area. What measures are 
proposed to augment the regulation and storage capacity of  Jayakwadi Dam to 
alleviate water scarcity in the Marathwada region and bridge its divide with North 
Maharashtra? 
 
Ǜी गजेन्दर् िंसह शेखावत: माननीय सभापित महोदय, हालाँिक मूल ĢÌन पोलावरम से संबंिधत है, 
लेिकन िफर भी मȅ माननीय सदÎया की जानकारी क े िलए िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक आजादी क े 
समय िजतनी पर क
ै िपटा वाटर एवेलेिबिलटी थी, यह उससे घट कर िनिÌचत रूप  से कम हुई है 
और उसके  अनेक कारण हȅ। माननीय सदÎया ने वÊडर् बȅक की िजस िरपोटर् का उÊलेख िकया है, 
उसमȂ िकतना तथ्य है और उसने िकन िवषयȗ क े आधार पर या िकस अध्ययन क े आधार पर वह 
िरपोटर् ĢÎतुत की है, मȅ उसके  िवषय म
Ȃ िवÎतार से नहीं जाना चाहता, लेिकन इतना अवÌय 
िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक माननीय सदÎया ने वÊडर् बȅक की िरपोटर् क े आधार पर 2030 तक या 
2050 तक भी िजस तरह की िंचता
जनक िÎथित की कÊपना की है, वैसी िÎथित नहीं है। माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस दृिÍटकोण से िक देश की आवÌयकताओं की आपूिर्त क े िलए हम पानी की 
उपलÅधता को सुिनिÌचत कर सकȂ और आने वाले समय मȂ भारत िजस तरह से 2047 तक 
िवकिसत होने की िदशा म
Ȃ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ आगे बढ़ रहा है, उसमȂ पानी 
की आपूिर्त कहीं बाधा न बने, इस दृिÍटकोण से पानी का िवषय, िजसके  िलए अलग-अलग 
मंतर्ालयȗ मȂ अलग-अलग िवभागȗ म
Ȃ िनणर्य िकया जाता था, उसके  िलए एक अलग मंतर्ालय 
बनाया गया। पानी क े पिरĢेÑय मȂ िजतने तरह क े क ंपोनȂट्स हȅ, उन सब पर भारत सरकार अलग-
अलग जगह पर अलग-अलग िदशा मȂ काम कर रही है।  उसमȂ अनेक उÊलेखनीय
 सफलताएँ 
ĢाÃत हुई हȅ। धरातल पर पानी रोकने क े दृिÍटकोण से भी Ģधान मंतर्ी क ृिष िंसचाई योजना क े 
अंतगर्त हमने उÊलेखनीय सफलता ĢाÃत की है। िवÌव मȂ भ ूगभर् क े जल पर सबसे ज्यादा िनभर्रता 
भारत की है। मȅ माननीय सदÎया और सदन की जानकारी क े िलए यह िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ 
िक िपछले 10 साल मȂ इस पर काफी एफट्सर् िकए गए, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ बार-
बार इस िवषय पर चचार् की गई, उससे द
ेश मȂ इस तरह का जो वायुमंडल बना, पानी क े रीचाजर् 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
45

 
को लेकर जो वायुमंडल बना, उसके  चलते मȅ Ģसन्नता क े साथ कह सकता हूँ िक देश मȂ जो भूगभर् 
क े जल का Îतर िनरंतर िगर रहा था, हमने हर साल का अध्ययन करना ĢारÇभ िकया है, िपछले 4 
साल से पहले वह िÎथर हुआ था और अब अपवडर् टर्Ȃड शुरू  हुआ है। जहाँ हर साल पानी की कमी 
हो रही थी, वहाँ अंडरगर्ाउंड वाटर िरसॉसȃज़ मȂ आिखरी िरपोटर् आने तक िपछले साल की िरपोटर् 
मȂ भी और इस वषर् की िरपोटर् मȂ भी अपवडर् मूवमȂट हुई है। हमारे सेफर Åलॉक्स और ओसीएस 
क
ै टेगरी क े िजतने Åलॉक्स थे, उन सब मȂ इÇपर्ूवमȂट हुई है और 10 Ģितशत से ज्यादा Åलॉक्स हमारी 
ओसीएस क ै टेगरी से बाहर िनकल कर सेफर जȗस मȂ आये ह ȅ। मȅ यह नहीं कहता िक यह सÇपूणर् 
सफलता है, लेिकन िजस िदशा मȂ हमने Ģयत्न िकये हȅ, मȅ माननीय सदÎया की जानकारी क े िलए 
बताना चाहता हूँ िक उसके  पिरणामÎवरूप भूगभर् क े जल की उपलÅधता की िदशा मȂ हम 
सकारात्मक दृिÍटकोण से आगे बढ़ पाये हȅ और माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमने िजस 
तरह से सÃलाई साइड मैनेजमȂट क े साथ-साथ िडमांड साइड मैनेजमȂट पर पहली बार " अटल 
भूजल योजन
ा" क े तहत काम करना ĢारÇभ िकया है, उसके  पिरणाम भी अब िदखाई देने लगे हȅ।  
लेिकन िनिÌचत रूप  से, चूँिक यह संिवधान की ËयवÎथा क े अनुरूप  राज्य सरकारȗ का िवषय है, 
राज्य सरकारȗ को इस पर और अिधक गÇभीरता और Ģाथिमकता क े साथ काम करना पड़ेगा। 
पानी की उपलÅधता सुिनिÌचत
 हो, उसके  िलए सबसे बड़े उपभोगकतार् क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ हम पानी क े 
उपभोग को िकस तरह से कम कर सकते हȅ, इस पर राज्य सरकारȗ को समिन्वत दृिÍट कोण से 
Ģयास करना पड़ेगा। 
 
S H R I  G . V . L .  N A R A S I M H A  R A O :   T h a n k  y o u ,  M r .  C h a i r m a n ,  S i r .   T h i s  q u e s t i o n  
relates to the Polavaram Irrigation Project in Andhra Pradesh. A number of irrigation 
projects in Andhra Pradesh have been languishing. And, the projects, which the State 
Government was required to undertake, have  not been undertaken for sixty years. I 
would like to congratulate and compliment the Government and the hon. Prime 
Minister, Modi ji, for sanctioning huge amount of f unds for the Polavaram Irrigation 
Project, as a national project. I would like to ask the hon. Minister the about amount 
of money, which has so far been released fo r the Polavaram Irrigation Project.  And, I 
had requested in the past also to name it as the Pradhan Mantri Narendra Modi 
Polavaram Irrigation Project because every rupee on this pr oject is being spent by the 
Central Government. So, I would like the hon.  Minister to respond to my appeal to 
name it as Pradhan Mantri Polavaram Irri gation Project. Will the Central Government 
take over the construction of the Project because the State Government has not been 
moving fast enough to complete the project?  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी गजेन्दर् िंसह शेखावत: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जो ĢÌन पूछा है िक अब 
तक भारत सरकार ने इस पर िकतना खचर् िकया है, तो म
 ȅ माननीय सदÎय की जानकारी क े िलए 
बताना चाहता हूँ िक भारत सरकार ने जब 2014-15 मȂ इसे नेशनल Ģोजेक्ट क े रूप  मȂ मान्यता दी 
थी, तब से लेकर अब तक 15,146 करोड़ रुपय े का िवǄीय एलोके शन भारत सरकार इस Ģोजेक्ट 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
को पूरा करने की िदशा मȂ दे चुकी है, जो आंधर् Ģदेश सरकार को भारत सरकार की तरफ से िदया 
गया है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I will now take up Question No. 18, which could not 
be taken up on account of certain technical situations. But, I would like to reassert 
that we have, in Shri Harivanshji, a man of impeccable credentials and a man of great 
integrity. Human failure is something which is associated with all of us. If it has hurt 
someone, I take the responsibilit y. But, I will indicate to all of you to think within. We 
could not have had a Deputy Chairperson with more sterling qualities, independence 
more than I have, and respect for all the Members. It was slightly hurtful for me that 
some reflections came to be made about such a person. If there are some hard 
feelings, we need to forget about it.   
 Now, Question No. 18, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde.  ...(Interruptions)...  Just 
one second. I will give floor to Shrimati Jaya Bachhan.  ...(Interruptions)...  Jaya ji, 
one second. You are a very senior Member. Ev en otherwise, in the country, whatever 
you say is looked up to and is rega rded. So, you will cheer all of us.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜीमती जया बƳन: सर, आप मुझे बोलने तो दीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)..
 . मȅ खड़ी हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And, I am sure, a great actor like you must have taken many 
retakes also, many retakes. 
   
Ǜीमती जया बƳन: सर, डेÃयुटी चेयरपरसन क े िलए बहुत िरगाडर् है। आज से नहीं, वषș से मȅ 
उनकी बहुत इज्जत करती हूँ।  उनके  बारे मȂ हमने क ु छ नहीं कहा। यह मेरी आपसे िरक्वेÎट है िक 
आप कहȂगे, तो हम बैठ जाएँगे, िडÃटी चेयरमैन कहȂगे, तो हम बैठ जाएँगे, मगर कोई और सदÎय 
हाथ िहला कर हमȂ बोले, तो हम नहीं मानȂगे। To question is our right. You tell us िक यह 
सवाल नहीं ले सकते; there are problems; we will take it up later. We understand; we
 
are not school children; but, treat us respectfully. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The point is made. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN: Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member
s, I think no one will disagree with the sentiment. The 
House is under the control of rules and the person presiding, and I am sure everyone 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
47

 
will follow. This is a good manner. This si de or that side, the Members must not 
exchange inter se.  Everything has to be through the Chair.  
Q. No. 18; Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde. The questioner is not present. Are 
there any supplementaries?   
 
*Q. No. 18. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Funds alloted to Maharashtra under various schemes 
 
*18.    DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE: Will the Minister of CIVIL AVIATION be 
pleased to state:- 
 
(a) whether the funds allotted to the Stat e of Maharashtra under various schemes 
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation duri ng the period 2021-2024 is higher as 
compared to recent past; and 
(b) if so, the allotment of funds thereof annually from 2021-2024? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF CIVIL AVIATION (GENERAL 
(RETD.) V. K. SINGH): (a) and (b) A Statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Ministry of Civil Aviation la unched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) 
- Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik (UDAN) on 21 .10.2016 to stimulate regional air 
connectivity and make air travel affordab le for the masses. UDAN scheme envisages 
providing connectivity to unserved and under served airports of the country through 
revival of the existing airstrips and airports.  
In the State of Maharashtra, 09 (nine) airports, namely, Kolhapur, 
Jalgaon,Solapur, Amravati, Nanded, Nasik,  Ratnagiri, Gondia and Sindhudurg have 
been identified for revival and  operation of  flights under th e UDAN scheme and Rs. 
561.20 crores has been sanctioned for development of  these airports in the State. 
The details of funds allocated and expend iture incurred to develop the identified 
airports in Maharashtra under RCS as on 31.12.2023 is placed at Annexure-A and 
year wise expenditure at Annexure-B. 
 
 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Annexure-A 
 
Budget Details - Maharashtra 
 
S. No. Airports  RCS BUDGET- 
(Rs in Cr.) 
Total Expenditure till 31.12.2023 
1. Kolhapur 305.93 296.59 
2. Jalgaon 22.11 21.53 
3. Solapur 80.31 15.31 
4. Amravati 100.00 65.71 
5. Nanded 0.20 0.20 
6. Nasik 18.00 2.50 
7. Ratnagiri - - 
8. Gondia 34.65 27.00 
9. Sindhudurg - - 
 Total 561.20 428.84 
 
Annexure - B 
 
Year wise expenditure in the State of Maharashtra 
(Rs. In Crores) 
Airport Heliport/WA/Airpo
rt 
FY: 
2017
-
2018 
FY: 
2018
-
2019 
FY: 
2019
-
2020 
FY: 
2020
-
2021 
FY: 
2021-
2022 
FY 
2022
-
2023 
FY 2023-
2024 (till 
31.12.2023
) 
Total 
Amravati A 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 53.84 0.00 11.87 65.71 
Gondia A 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 8.74 18.23 27.00 
Jalgaon A 2.51 0.09 5.42 7.02 3.93 2.39 0.16 21.53 
Kolhapur A 12.96 26.6
7 
42.8
9 
88.2
2 59.96 33.3
6 32.54 296.5
9 
Nanded A 0.02 0.00 0.00 0. 00 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.20 
Nasik A 0.00 0.76 0.00 0. 00 0.00 1.75 0.00 2.50 
Ratnagiri A 0.00 0.00 0.00 0. 00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sholapur A 8.69 0.40 3.78 2. 22 0.01 0.23 0.00 15.31 
Sindhudur
g A 0.00 0.00 0.00 0. 00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total 24.1
8 
27.9
1 
52.0
9 
97.4
6 
117.7
7 
46.6
4 62.80 428.8
4 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, in the Interim Budget, 2024 that was presented by the 
hon. Finance Minister, allocation for the UDAN Scheme has been slashed by 60 per 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
49

 
cent. Of that, 1,300 valid routes allotted under UDAN 5.O, 501 routes have been 
cancelled already. So, my question is: Wh y has the Budget for UDAN been reduced 
by 60 per cent, from Rs.1,244/- crores to just Rs.850/- crores? Number two, what 
steps are being taken to revive the 501 can celled routes which were allocated under 
UDAN 5.O? 
 
GENERAL (RETD.) V.K. SINGH: Sir, the question is on Budget, but let me clarify. As 
far as the UDAN Scheme is concerned, 529 routes are already operational. No route 
has been cancelled. There is a system in place by which the routes are allocated, and 
the system is as follows. There is a valid bidding that is done. Airlines are called to bid 
for a particular route. If an ai rline bids for a particular route, that route is allocated to 
it. Based on this, an under-served or un served airport is made up in terms of 
whatever facilities are required by the AAI so that flights can take place from that 
particular airport. Now, if that airline walks away from that route, the bidding takes 
place again in the next round of bidding. So, there is no ro ute which has been 
allocated, no route which has been cancelle d. It all depends on bidding and... 
…(Interruptions)..  Would you please allow? ….(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, please. Let the Minister complete. What is this? 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Gokhale, one minute. Is it according to rules? You do not hear 
the Minister out. …(Interruptions)..Please, you must maintain some decorum. Let the 
Minister complete. If you still have an issu e, rules provide for a mechanism. Now, the 
hon. Minister. 
 
GENERAL (RETD.) V.K. SINGH: Sir, there is  no pre-allotment of routes anywhere. I 
would like to underline that aspect. If the air lines walk away from a particular route, 
after a particular period of time, that route is bid again. An airline has two years to 
start a particular route. If it does not st art a route, it goes into the next bidding. 
Therefore, that route remains unutilized till the time next bidding takes place.  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: I did not ask for…(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Vandana Chavan.  
 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I have to ask another question. You have permitted me, 
Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Vandana Chavan.  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, you have permitted me. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Vandana Chavan. …(Interruptions)..Would you first take 
your seat?..(Interruptions)..   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, you have allowed me.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No; I am saying, take your seat. ...(Interruptions).. First, you take 
your seat.   Is it the way to conduct the proceedings?  …(Interruptions)..  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, you have allowed me.   …(Interruptions)..  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sit down first. …(Interruptions).. Sit down first and listen to me. If a 
Minister responses to a question and if an hon. Member for one re ason or the other is 
not satisfied, that could be on severa l grounds. One, not understanding the 
perception of the Minister or the Minister  not responding adequately. In both the 
situations, it is not the mech anism to jump on the chair. …(Interruptions)..  One 
minute. Sit down. ..(Interruptions)..   You still do not understand. I am sure senior 
leaders of your party will persuade  you to maintain decorum.   …(Interruptions)..  
Shrimati Vandana Chavan. 
 
SHRIMATI VANDANA CHAVAN: Sir, every airport is supposed to have proper 
maintenance and service delivery for its comm uters. I would like to raise the question 
particularly in the case of Pune Airport which I have raised several times in this House. 
Sir, the Pune Airport has been seeing de teriorating quality and the rank has been 
slipping down lower and lower. Now, it is at 70
th position in a survey conducted by the 
Airport Council International.  
 Sir, I would like to ask the hon. Minister what steps are being taken for such 
slipping down ranking of airports and partic ularly for the Pune Airport which is still to 
see the light of the day actually.  We are still using the air force airport. 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
51

 
GENERAL (RETD.) V.K. SINGH: Sir, the overall question does not pertain to 
maintenance of airports and all other things . Nevertheless, I have noted this point, 
and I will convey to the Member as to what action has been taken.  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा: सभापित जी,  महाराÍटर् राज्य मȂ िशरडी नामक एक बहुत Ģिसǉ धािर्मक Îथल 
है, जहाँ बहुत से लोग जाते हȅ और वे लोग उसी क े पास िÎथत शिन िंशगणापुर क े िलए भी जाते हȅ। 
वहाँ पहुँचने क े िलए पहले एयरलाइंस की सुिवधा नहीं थी, लेिकन एयरपोटर् बनने क
 े  बाद अब 
बहुत ही कम Äलाइट्स की सुिवधा है, जबिक वहाँ उǄर भारत से लाखȗ लोग जाते हȅ। मȅ माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहूँगा िक वे िशरडी क े  िलए क्या सुिवधाएँ Ģदान कर रहे हȅ? वे क ृपया यह 
बताने का कÍट करȂ। 
 
जनरल (सेवािनवृǄ) वी.क े. िंसह: चेयरमैन सर, िशरडी का एयरपोटर् महाराÍटर् सरकार क े अधीन 
है, वह एयरपोटर् अथॉिरटी ऑफ इंिडया क े अधीन नहीं है। िकसी भी एयरपोटर् क े िलए या एक 
जगह से दूसरी जगह पर जाने क े िलए िजतनी भी Äलाइट्स बनती हȅ, वह एयरलाइंस क े ऊपर 
िनभर्र करता है।  एयरलाइंस अपने रूट्स, अपने हवाई जहाज एवं अपने खचȃ को देखते हुए उन 
Äलाइट्स को कहाँ से कहाँ पर ले जाना चाहती हȅ, यह उनके  ऊपर िन
भर्र करता है। जैसा िक 
माननीय सदÎय ने कहा है, इसके  िलए अलग-अलग एयरलाइंस को बोला जाएगा। अगर वे इसके  
अंदर Äलाइट्स की संख्या मȂ इजाफा करना चाहते हȅ, तो यह उनको बता िदया जाएगा। 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका
 चतुवȃदी: सर, मेरा सवाल पुणे से जुड़ा हुआ है और िशरडी से भी जुड़ा हुआ है।  
पुणे क े ओÊड एयरपोटर् पर पाँच महीने से नया टिर्मनल तैयार है, पर उसका उǇाटन नहीं हुआ है, 
तो इसमȂ यह िडले क्यȗ हो रहा है? दूसरी बात, जब हमारी सरकार थी तब हमने एक नई िबिंÊडग 
Ģपोज की थी, िजसको इन्हȗने Îकर्ै प कर िदया। सर, चूं
िक यह महाराÍटर् का ही सवाल ह ै, इसिलए 
मȅ इसको महाराÍटर् तक ही सीिमत रख रही हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your supplementary?  
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी: सर, अभी कहा गया िक िशरडी राज्य सरकार क े अधीन है, तो क्या राज्य 
सरकार की कोई िजÇमेदारी नहीं है, क्या िसिवल एिवए
 शन उनसे सवाल नहीं पूछ सकता है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your supplementary?  
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Sir, my  supplementary is this. Why is the new 
airport terminal not being inaugurated?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Alright. Hon. Minister.  
 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Why is it  waiting for its inauguration for five 
months?  
 
जनरल ( सेवािनवृǄ) वी.क े. िंसह: पुणे मȂ inauguration क े िलए पाँच महीने का इंतजार नहीं हो 
रहा है, बिÊक वहाँ पर काम चल रहा है और काम अभी तक पूरा नहीं हुआ है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Q.No. 20. 
 
Promotion of MSMEs in Odisha 
 
*20.  SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Will the Minister of MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the details of the steps taken by Gove rnment to promote MSMEs in the State 
of Odisha, under Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan (ABA); 
(b) whether any scheme is being implemen ted by Government to promote small 
scale industries in tribal areas of Od
isha; 
(c) if so, the details thereof including the due date for its implementation; and 
(d) the number of places where small scale industry project centres are running in 
the State   of Odisha, district-wise details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES (SHRI BHANU PRATAP SINGH VERMA): (a) to (d) A statement is 
laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c)  The Government has taken a nu mber of recent steps to promote Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), in  the country includin g tribal areas of 
Odisha under Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan. These include: 
 New revised criteria for defining MSMEs. 
 “Udyam Registration” for MSMEs, for Ease of Doing Business w.e.f. 1.7.2020. 
 Rs. 50,000 crore equity infusion through Self Reliant India Fund. 
 Rs. 5 lakh crore Emergency Credit Li ne Guarantee Scheme, for businesses, 
including MSMEs.    The scheme was operational till 31.03.2023 
 No global tenders for procurement up to Rs. 200 crores. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
53

 
 Launching of an  online Portal “Champions” in June, 2020 to cover many 
aspects of e- governance including gr ievance redress and handholding of 
MSMEs. 
 Inclusion of Retail and Wholesale traders as MSMEs w.e.f. 2.7.2021. 
 Non-tax benefits extended for 3 years in case of an upward change in status of 
MSMEs. 
 Launch of Udyam Assist platform (UAP) on 11.01.2023 to bring Informal Micro 
Enterprises (IMEs) under the formal ambit for availing the benefit under Priority 
Sector Landing. 
The Ministry of MSME implements various schemes/ programmes for the 
promotion and development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
sector across the country, including in the tribal areas of Odisha State which inter alia 
include Raising and Accelerating Performance (RAMP), PM Vishwakarma Scheme, 
Entrepreneurship Skill Development Programme (ESDP), Procurement and 
Marketing Support Scheme (PMSS), Mi cro and Small Enterprises-Cluster 
Development Programme (MSE-CDP), MS ME Champions Scheme and Credit 
Guarantee Scheme for Micro and Small Enterprises. 
  
(d) Additionally, to promote the small scale industry in the country including the State 
of Odisha, Prime Minister’s Employment  Generation Programme (PMEGP) extends 
Margin Money support to Micro Enterprises.  The district-wise details of micro units 
set up, margin money disbursed and empl oyment generated under PMEGP in the 
State of Odisha, are given at Annexure-I.   
 
Annexure-I 
 
Detail for project assisted under Prime Minister’s Employment Generation 
Programme during  current Financial Year-2023-24 in the State of Odisha 
 (District –wise) 
(Project & Employment: in numbers, Margin Money: Rs. In lakhs 
Sr. No. State/ District  
2023-24 (as on 30.01.2024) 
No. of Projects 
 
M.M (Rs. In 
lakhs) 
Employment  
1 Angul 71 286.89 568 
2 Baleswar 133 465.34 1,064 
3 Bargarh 82 250.15 656 
4 Bhadrak 86 260.08 688 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
5 Balangir 82 252.96 656 
6 Boudh 10 23.59 80 
7 Cuttack 165 513.99 1320 
8 Deogarh 29 67.05 232 
9 Dhenkanal 73 279.43 584 
10 Gajapati 18 45.28 144 
11 Ganjam 170 681.72 1360 
12 Jagatsinghpur 54 151.85 432 
13 Jajpur 80 211.80 640 
14 Jharsuguda 37 93.45 296 
15 Kalahandi 51 147.79 408 
16 Kandhamal 16 31.58 128 
17 Kendrapara 101 297.29 808 
18 Keonjhar 54 158.62 432 
19 Khurdha 203 688.77 1624 
20 Koraput 30 97.48 240 
21 Malkangiri 24 51.04 192 
22 Mayurbhanj 134 416.34 1072 
23 Nabarangpur 26 45.47 208 
24 Nayagarh 75 220.40 600 
25 Nuapada 15 46.00 120 
26 Puri 176 554.92 1408 
27 Rayagada 49 154.46 392 
28 Sambalpur 31 95.15 248 
29 Sonepur 54 174.36 432 
30 Sundargarh 59 172.73 472 
  Total 2,188 6,935.98 17,504 
Source: Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) 
 
Ǜी सुजीत क ुमार: सर, एमएसएमई िमिनÎटर्ी ने टर्ाइफे ड क े साथ collaboration मȂ Tech for 
Tribal नामक एक बहुत ही सुन्दर इिनिशएिटव शुरू  िकया था। इस इिनिशएिटव को tribal 
entrepreneurs क े आईटी िÎकल, िबज़नेस िÎकल और सॉÄटवेयर िÎकल को बढ़ाने क े िलए शुरू  
िकया गया था। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी स े यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक इस इिनिशएिटव की क्या Ģोगर्ेस 
हुई है, इससे िकतने tribal entrepreneurs लाभ उठा चुक े हȅ और इसको आगे िकतने सालȗ तक 
चलाया जाएगा? 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
55

 
Ǜी भानु Ģताप िंसह वमार्: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने िवशेष रूप  से एसटीज़ क े 
संबंध मȂ बात की है। एमएसएमई मंतर्ालय ǎारा िजतनी भी योजनाएँ चलाई जा रही हȅ, वे पूरे देश 
क े िलए चलाई जा रही हȅ। िवशेष रूप  से, पीएमईजीपी योजना क े माध्यम से हम लोग छोटे-छोटे 
लोगȗ की मदद करते हȅ। अगर इस योजना को देखा जाए तो पता चलेगा िक हमने इसके  माध्यम 
से प
ूरे देश मȂ गरीबȗ को जो सिÅसडी दी है, वह 2.4 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े है। इसमȂ करीब 65,000 
योजनाएँ ह
ȅ, िजनमȂ हमने मदद की है। उसी तरीके  से 5,52,000 लोगȗ को रोज़गार िदया गया है।   
सर, िवशेष रूप  से जो पीएमईजीपी योजना है, इसमȂ गर्ामीण और शहरी लोगȗ क े िलए 
सिÅसडी का अलग-अलग Ģावधान िकया गया ह ै। अगर कोई शहरी एिरया है, जहाँ जनरल लोग 
हȅ, तो उनको 15 परस Ȃट की सिÅसडी दी जाती है और यिद वे गर्ामीण एिरयाज़ मȂ हȅ तो उन्हȂ 25 
परसȂट की सिÅसडी दी जाती है।  यिद कोई एससी-एसटी शहर मȂ रहता है तो उसे 25 परसȂट की 
सिÅसडी दी जाती है और यिद वह गर्ामीण क्ष
ेतर् मȂ रहता है तो उसे 35 परसȂट की सिÅसडी दी जाती 
है। इस तरह से पूरे देश मȂ इस योजना का िकर्यान्वयन िकया जा रहा है। माननीय सदÎय ने िवशेष 
रूप  से जो पूछा है, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक आज हमने ओिडशा को करीब 69 करोड़  रुपय े की 
सिÅसडी दी ह
ै। हम लोगȗ ने करीब 2,188 पिरयोजनाओं को िकर्यािन्वत िकया है और इससे करीब 
17,504 लोगȗ को रोज़गार िमला है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second suppl
ementary; Shri Sujeet Kumar. 
 
Ǜी सुजीत क ुमार: सर, मȅने Tech for Tribals scheme क े बारे मȂ सवाल पूछा था। PMEGP क े  
बारे मȂ नहीं पूछा था, लेिकन मȅ उनसे बाद मȂ इसका उǄर ले लूंगा।  
सर, वषर् 2022 मȂ Standing Committee on Finance की एक िरपोटर् आई थी, उस िरपोटर् 
मȂ दशार्या गया है िक जो MSMEs ह
ȅ, उनका कर् ेिडट गैप 20 से  25 लाख करोड़ रुपय े है। यह 
जनरल MSMEs क े िलए है, tribal-led MSMEs or tribal-led entrepreneurs का कर् ेिडट गैप 
close to 90 per cent है। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूं िक जो tribal entrepreneurs 
हȅ, उनको credit facilities avail करने क े िलए क्या-क्या ÎकीÇस हȅ? 
 
Ǜी भानु Ģता
प िंसह वमार्: सभापित महोदय, िवशेष रूप  से टर्ाइबÊस की मदद क े िलए पूरे देश मȂ 
MSMEs की योजनाएं चलाई जा रही हȅ। िवशेष रूप  से हम देखȂ तो आज हम लोग देश भर मȂ 
टेिक्नकल सȂटसर् बना रहे हȅ, करीब 53 टेिक्नकल सȂटसर् हȅ और 20 नए बना रहे हȅ। वे 125 करोड़ 
रुपय े की लागत से देश भर मȂ बनाए जा रहे हȅ। उसी तरह से हम 100 एक्सटȂशन सȂटसर् बना रहे 
हȅ, जो करीब 10 करोड़  रुपय े की लागत से बना रहे हȅ। इसके  िलए हम लोगȗ ने 6 हज़ार करोड़ 
रुपय े का बजट रखा है। िवशेष रूप  से मȅ कह सकता हूं िक देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 17 िसतÇबर 
को िवÌवकम
ार् योजना लागू की है, वह उन गरीबȗ क े िलए है, जो छोटे-छोटे लोग हȅ, जो घर बैठे 
18 Ģकार क े टर्ेड मȂ काम करते हȅ। उनके  िलए करीब 13 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावध ान िकया 
गया है, उसमȂ करीब 88 लाख लोगȗ का रिजÎटर्ेशन हो चुका है और आगे भी तेज़ी क े साथ 
रिजÎटर्ेशन बढ़ रहा है। आज मȅ कह सकता हूं िक हमारी िजतनी भी योजनाएं हȅ - PMEGP 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
योजना, Îफू िर्त योजना, एससी/एसटी हब आिद गरीबȗ क े िलए योजनाएं हȅ, उनके  िलए हम काम 
कर रहे हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Santanu Sen. 
 
DR. SANTANU SEN: Mr. Chairman, Sir, thro ugh you, my supplementary question on 
MSMEs to the hon. Minister is this: As per national records, West Bengal ranks 
second in MSMEs, where we have got n early 90 lakh MSMEs an d we have created 
nearly 136 lakh  jobs  through  them. Now, instead of getting proper cooperation, why 
are non-BJP States being shown a step-motherly attitude? 
 
Ǜी भानु Ģताप िंसह वमार्: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय सदÎय को ÎपÍट कर देना 
चाहता हूं िक िकसी क े साथ कोई सौतेला Ëयवहार नहीं िकया जा रहा ह
 ै। ये योजनाएं पूरे देश मȂ 
चलाई जा रही हȅ, चाहे Ģधानमंतर्ी रोज़गार सृजन कायर्कर्म हो, Ģधानमंतर्ी िवÌवकमार् योजना हो 
और िजतनी भी योजनाएं हȅ, उन सभी योजनाओं का िकर्यान्वयन बड़ी तेजी क े साथ िकया जा रहा 
है। इन्हȗने पिÌचमी बंगाल की बात की है, वहां लोगȗ को सभी योजनाओं का लाभ िमल रहा है। मȅ 
कह सकता हूं िक आज की िÎथित मȂ पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ PMEGP क े अंतगर्त भी लोगȗ को लाभ 
िमल रहा है।  
 
सूÑम, लघु और मध्यम उǏम मंतर्ी ( Ǜी नारायण राणे): माननीय सभापित
 महोदय, यह ĢÌन 
ओिडशा से संबंिधत है। माननीय सदÎय ने ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ MSMEs से  संबंिधत अलग-अलग 
ÎकीÇस की िडटेल मांगी है। पिÌचमी बंगाल क े िलए वे अलग से ĢÌन पूछȂगे, तो हम िडटेल मȂ उǄर 
दȂगे। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Fauzia Khan. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, given the initial ch allenges faced by M
SMEs in setting up 
digital assets and ensuring cyber security , it is essential for them to enhance 
understanding and integration of cyber secu rity measures. MSMEs are facing capital 
constraints. They are struggling with shak y technology base hindering growth and 
recognition. In addressing these issues, what measures does the Ministry propose to 
make MSMEs more reliant on technology, overcome growth bottlenecks and add to 
the economy in full potential? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question Hour is over. 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
57

 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published el ectronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials  ] 
 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
†MOTION OF THANKS ON THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, further discussion on the Motion moved by Ms. Kavita Patidar 
on the 2nd February, 2024 and the Amendmen ts moved thereto. The next speaker is 
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray. 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY (West Bengal): Sir, at the outset, I would like to 
respectfully submit that in the Address to bo th the Houses of Parliament by the hon. 
President of India, I have found after ' एक भारत ǛेÍठ भारत' and 'आत्मिनभर्र भारत' some 
new coins like ' िवकिसत भारत', which is used, at least, for six times, and ' अमृत', 
expressed for about ten times, such as ' आजादी का अमृत काल', अमृत काल of our 
Independence, 'अमृत कलश', 'अमृत सरोवर', अमृत महोत्सव twice, अमृत वािटका, 'अमृत 
भारत Îटेशन्स ', 'अम ृत भारत टर्ेन' and ' अमृत जनरेशन'। So, चारȗ ओर िसफर् अमृत ही अमृत 
ह
ै।  जो लोग ये अमृत पी रहे हȅ, उनकी बात छोड़ दीिजए। जो लोग हलाहल पी रहे हȅ, यानी जो 
लोग जहर पी रहे हȅ, उनके  िलए यह सोचने की बात है िक य े अमृत लोक मȂ बात कर रहे हȅ, ये 
अमृत लोक मȂ जीिवत हȅ या दूसरे लोक मȂ तो नहीं चले गए हȅ। अमृत लोक सुनते-सुनते उनको 
परलोक की याद आ रही है। It is a make-belief situation. How it has been coined like 
Amrit Kaal i
n every sphere of life of the society,  I do not understand it. Anyway, it is a 
prerogative of the Government. At page No.3 of the booklet, it is said, "Last year, my 
Government has given Government jobs to la khs of youth in mission mode." It is not 
in the distant past that we heard about that two crores of jobs per year will be given to 
the jobless.  By this time, the number ought to have been twenty crores because this 
Government has already spent ten years in power.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. AMEE YAJNIK) in the Chair.] 
 
When it is said 'lakhs of jobs', the natural question comes 'How many lakhs?'  
There is no mention about this. How many  jobless are there and out of them how 
                   
† Further discussion continued on a motion moved on the 2nd February, 2024. 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
many jobless are given jobs and how many  are remaining? These are the pertinent 
questions which have not been addressed by  the hon. President in her Speech which 
has been prepared by this Government. Should we take it as another jumla? 
At page 4 of the Speech, it is stated that the Government enacted important 
legislations with the co-operation of all th e parliamentarians, including that draconian 
law, Nyaya Sanhita, which, according to me, is 'Anyaya Sanhita'. Anyway, this claim 
that all the parliamentarians supported th e Bills, when these were introduced and 
discussed, is not true.  This is incorrect information.   
 As a keen reader of history, it remind s me of a situation in the year 1933 when 
Hitler in Germany brought one Enabling Act which enabled his Cabinet to legislate 
instead of the Parliament and for which no  presidential assent was required. What 
happened then? The law was passed. It was called the Enabling Act. It was passed in 
Hitler's regime in Germany in 1933 afte r sending 106 parliamentarians to the 
concentration camp, and thereafter the Bill was passed. Here, we  have seen that 
after the suspension of 146 parliamentarians, these Bills were passed.   This number, 
that is, the suspension of 146 parliamentaria ns in Indian Parliament, is the highest in 
the history of parliamentary democracies ar ound the world so far. Therefore, the 
statement made in the hon. President's Speech , I should not say that it is far from 
truth, but it is incorrect and purposefully given by the Government to create a 
confusion in the minds of the people.   
 At page 6, paragraph 9 of the Speech, it is stated that NITI Aayog claimed that 
about 25 crore countrymen have been lifted out of poverty in the last one decade, that 
is, during this Amrit Kaal. My question is that out of how many poverty-ridden people, 
these 25 crore people have been lifted out of  poverty as claimed by the NITI Aayog. 
What was the exact number of poverty-ridd en people when they  came to power in 
2014, and out of them, when they say that they have lifted 25 crore countrymen out of 
poverty, how many still remain poverty-ridden? These questions have not been 
addressed. Therefore, all these are half-truth s. I am sorry to say that in this way, a 
series of lofty claims have been made in this report card of the Government to carry 
out disinformation campaign on the eve of the Lok Sabha elections.  The reality is 
altogether different.   
 I would like to refer to Article 39(b) of th e Constitution.  It is under the Directive 
Principles of State Policy.  It states categorically, "The State shall, in particular, direct 
its policy towards securing-- (b) that the ownership and control of the material 
resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common 
good." Then, Article 39(c) states further,  -- you are very much aware, Madam -- 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
59

 
"(c) that the operation of the economic sy stem does not result in the concentration 
of wealth and means of production to the common detriment."   
 Now, what is happening? What is the scenario of the Indian economy? 
Inequality has gone to what extent? I may kind ly be permitted to refer to a few points 
from the Oxfam Report 2023, which was released on 15 th January this year. The 
Government does not accept that Report but we very much put reliance on this report 
because of the practical situation in the country.   
 Number one, the richest on e per cent in India own more than 40 per cent of the 
country's total wealth. Number two, the bottom half of the population share just three 
per cent of the national wealth. Number th ree, the Indian Government recently cut 
taxes on corporate sector while introducin g the centralised tax system, that is, GST 
which led to increase in indirect taxation on household.   
 A one-time two per cent tax on billionaires' entire wealth would support 
Rupees 40,423 crore for malnourished individuals for the next three years and you are 
giving concessions to the corporates. The female workers earned only 63 paisa for 
one rupee earned by male worker. Sche duled Caste and rural workers earned 
significantly less than socially advantageous  groups. Madam, the point I am going to 
make is very much pertinent.  Billionaires  in India witnessed 121 per cent surge in 
wealth since the pandemic began. Until November, 2022, the surge in their wealth 
goes on. During the pandemic, it was 121 per cent surge.  
 One particular Indian billionaire whose portfolio includes energy companies has 
seen his wealth soar by 46 per cent in 2022.  Sixty-four per cent of the total GST 
came from the bottom 50 per cent of the country's population in 2021-22. The total 
number of billionaires in India went up fr om 102 in 2020 to 166 in 2022.  India's 
hundred richest persons' combined wealth  reached US $ 660 billion, which is Rs. 
54.12 lakh crore as per Indian currency. It is economic inequality, which must be 
resisted as per the directive of the Constitution enshrined in Article 39 B and C.   
 In India, 72 TV channels having a reach over 800 million pe ople are owned by 
one particular billionaire. In India, a one-off tax on unrealized gains from 2017-2021 on 
just one billionaire could have raised US$ 21.95 billion, enough to employ more than 
five million Indian primary school teachers for a year. Such a huge economic inequality 
and we are chanting the mantra of amrit kaal, amrit mahotsav, amrit, amrit, amrit! 
 Forget about Oxfam Report because the Government does not believe in that 
report.  Let me mention what the UNDP Report says. It is the Asia Pacific Human 
Development Report of 2024 released on 15
th of January this year. Let me mention 
three, four bullet points. In India, income distribution has become more skewed with 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
top ten per cent of the population getting 57  per cent of national income. This is the 
UNDP Report. 
 Top one per cent get 22 per cent of the national income indicating one of the 
most unequal income distribution. Top ten per cent of the population control 65 per 
cent of the nation's total wealth highlighting significant wealth inequality. There is a 
growing evidence of a strong ri se in wealth inequality, particularly, in the post-Covid 
period.  Another point in the UNDP report is that women constitute only 23 per cent of 
the labour force and certain groups like info rmal workers and inter-State migrants are 
at greater risk of falling back into poverty.  My submission is that unless this huge 
inequality is removed on war footing, one cannot rule out the possibility of social 
unrest or upheaval.   
I will now talk about rural wage rates and inequality. In case of agriculture 
labour, real wage rate increased by 4. 6 per cent. The real wage rates of non-
agriculture and construction workers lowere d at the end of the period from 2014 to 
2022. Non-agriculture workers form the ma jority; they are 68.9 per cent among the 
employed in rural India. Real wages have  not grown of approximately 35 per cent of 
India’s workforce since 2014. For long 10 years, in Amrit Kaal , there has been no rise 
in the real wages of 35 per cent of India’ s workforce. Even in sectors which have 
increase in real wage rates, the growth rate is overshadowed by the overall per capita 
income growth. So, this mismatch must be looked into by the Government. There is 
no murmur, no whisper about how this proble m will be solved by the Government in 
the hon. President’s speech.   
Now, after the UNDP Report, I will talk about the Labour Bureau Report. What 
is the Labour Bureau Report? In fact, since I have already talked about the workforce, 
I am not going to repeat the issue of Labour Bureau Report now.   
I will now come to the question of federalism. When this Government came to 
power, everybody listened again and again, repeatedly, that this Government believes 
in cooperative federalism. No w, it is not being mentioned because it has already 
become non-cooperative federalism. The glar ing example of federalism is that every 
State which is ruled by the opposition part ies, their leaders are being hounded by the 
Central agencies. Never in the history of India has this happened. We require the 
double engine Government! Therefore, this  opposition-ruled Government are to be 
dislodged by hook or crook. This is going on every day. Even a dalit  Chief Minister 
has not been spared.  From where does th e ‘One Nation One Election’ call come? Is 
it there in our Constitution? Has it b een recommended by the Election Commission? 
Surprisingly, the retired President of Indi a has been appointed to head a Committee 
and that Committee has now started discussi ng on war footing that it is to be 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
61

 
implemented as soon as possible. Our Ch ief Minister, Ms. Mamata Banerjee, has 
already written to the Committee -- she is also coming to attend the meeting 
tomorrow -- that nothing will be accepted by our State at least on  this issue.  I 
sincerely believe that the other opposition-ruled States will also not accept it because 
there will be serious ramifications, seriou s consequences. This is draconian. Our 
constitutional scheme is altogether differen t.  We are a parliamentary democracy, not 
a Presidential form of Government, like the USA.  But this will op en the door for the 
Presidential form of Government, I apprehend. That is why I totally oppose this idea of 
‘One Nation One Election’.     
There is a consistent tendency to er ode the fiscal and economic policy space 
of State Governments. Resources transfe rred to States have been subject to 
regressive conditions and a significan t portion is kept out of the Finance 
Commission's ambit allowing Central control over their issues. Why is this 
Government not following the recommendations of the Sarkaria Commission? And 
what about the second Commission, the Punchhi Commission on Centre-State 
relations? In 2010, Justice Punchhi Commi ssion submitted its recommendations to 
the then Government. We are in 2024. Fourteen years elapsed. No murmur about 
those recommendations. Are fourteen years not enough to finalise the 
recommendations on the Centre-State relations recommended by the Punchhi 
Commission? Why is the Government avoiding that? It is because when it comes to 
the constitutional heads of States, the heads will roll if the Commission's 
recommendations are given effect to. Th e Punchhi Commission has categorically 
stated that while appointing Governors, the State Governments must be consulted 
and their concurrence is must. They must not act as agents of the Central 
Government as it is happening now.   
 Madam, I have already mentioned ab out the rampant misuse of Central 
agencies.  Now I am driving points relating to my State and how this federalism is 
being respected.  Only one or two points. Th e Centre has resorted to fiscal terrorism 
in Bengal. Fiscal terrorism is going on in our State by the Centre.  How many Central 
teams were sent to Bengal? More than hun dred. Some 150-160 teams were sent to 
Bengal to look into the implementation  of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes. 
Wherever deficiencies or defects were fo und, each and every deficiency and defects 
were removed and intimated. In the entire country, West Bengal has been singled out 
and all the dues, to the exte nt of Rs.1,16,000 crore, the Central Government has 
stopped. It is an economic blockade.     They  want to kill the poor people. It is fiscal 
terrorism. They thought that by suspending the release of  funds, it will have good 
effect for them in the ensuing election. No. People have understood what is what. 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
The other day, on 3 rd February, our hon. Chief Mini ster announced that the State 
Government from its own funds will give th e dues of the 21 lakh workers who could 
not get the wages. They will be paid out of the State funds. We are not depending 
upon the Central Funds. We will definitely ta ke the issue to the people and the people 
of Bengal will give a befitting reply for su ch fiscal anarchy. There are other points 
about MGNREGA, but my time is limited.  I have almost two minutes now.   
 While concluding, I would like to respond in reference to paragraph 37 of the 
President's speech. I don't like to mention, due to paucity of time, what is said there.  
But everybody knows it because  that is the concluding paragraph. I would like to 
quote a few lines from a Bengali poem of Rabindranath Tagore.  It was written 123 
years back.  The name of the poem is Deeno Daan. Deeno means 'poor'. Daan 
means 'gift'.   
 ' T h ere i s  n o  g o d  i n  t hat  t em p l e' ,  s ai d  t h e Sai n t .  T h e K i n g  w as  enrag ed .  ' No  
God? Oh Saint, aren’t you speaking like an atheist? On the throne studded with 
priceless gems, beams the golden idol. And yet, you proclaim that’s empty?' 
 
"It's not empty; 
It’s rather full of the Royal pride. 
You have bestowed yourself, 
oh King, not the God of this world, remarked the saint." 
 
And it continued: 
"In the very year in which, 
twenty million of your subjects were struck by a terrible drought; 
The desperate masses without any food or shelter, 
came begging at your door crying for help, only to be turned away, 
they were forced to take refuge in forests, caves, camping under roadside foliages, 
derelict old temples; 
and in that very year 
when you spent two million gold coins to build that grand temple of yours, 
that is the day God left that Temple of yours. 
And joined the poor. 
Your mundane temple is hollow. 
It is just a bubble of wealth and pride. 
The enraged King howled, 
Oh you sham cretin of a person, 
Leave my kingdom this instant. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
63

 
The Saint replied calmly, 
To the very place to which you have exiled the Divine, 
banish now the devout too." 
 
Thank you, Madam. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. AMEE YAJNIK):  Before we go to the next speaker, 
hon. Members, the discussion on Motion of Thanks on the Pr esident's Address will 
continue after the introduction of the Bills.   
 We now take the Constitution (Sched uled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 
2024.  Shri Arjun Munda to move for leave to introduce the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2024.  
 
 
GOVERNMENT BILLS  
 
The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
 
जनजातीय कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी (Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा): महोदया, मȅ ĢÎताव 
करता हूँ: 
 " िक आन्धर् Ģदेश राज्य क े संबंध मȂ संिवधान ( अनुसूिचत जनजाित) आदेश ( संशोधन) 
िवधेयक, 2024 को पुर:Îथािपत करने की अनुमित दी जाए।" 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
Ǜी अजुर्न म
ुंडा: महोदया, मȅ िवधेयक को पुर:Îथािपत करता हूँ। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. AMEE YAJNIK): We now take the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2024.  Shri 
Arjun Munda to move for leave to introdu ce the Constitution (Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2024. 
 
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Orders  
(Amendment) Bill, 2024 
 
जनजातीय कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी (Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा): महोदया, मȅ ĢÎताव  
 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
करता हूँ: 
 " िक ओिडशा राज्य क े संबंध मȂ संिवधान ( अनुसूिचत जाित और अनुसूिचत जनजाित) 
आदेश (संशोधन) िवधेयक, 2024 को पुर:Îथािपत करने की  अनुमित दी जाए।" 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा: महोदया, मȅ िवधेयक को पुर:Îथािपत करता हूँ। 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. AMEE YAJNIK):  Another Bill for introduction. Shri 
Ashwini Kumar Choubey to move for lea
ve to introduce the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Amendment Bill, 2024.   
 
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Bill, 2024 
 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा पयार्वरण, वन और 
जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ालय मȂ  राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी अिǚनी क ुमार चौबे): महोदया, मȅ ĢÎताव करता 
हूँ: 
"िक जल (Ģदूषण िनवारण तथा िनयंतर्ण) अिधिनयम, 1974 का और संशोधन करने क े 
िलए एक िवधेयक को पुर:
Îथािपत करने की अनुमित दी जाए।" 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. AMEE YAJNIK): I did hear the Ayes. 
...(Interruptions)... I request the hon. Minister to introduce the Bill.  
 
Ǜी अिǚनी क ुमार चौबे: महोदया, मȅ िवधेयक को पुर:Îथािपत करता हूँ। 
 
 
MOTION OF THANKS ON THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS - Contd. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. AMEE YAJNIK): Hon. Members, we now resume 
the discussion on the Motion of Thanks on the President's Address.  Now, Shri 
Tiruchi Siva.  I think, you have twenty-nine minutes to speak.  
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
65

 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Madam, Vice-Chairperson, at the outset, I would 
first thank the hon. President for having pl eased to deliver her Address to both the 
Houses of Parliament and also for having  read that document of the Government 
without fracturing it , unlike some of those appointed by her in various States. This 
Government is anti-federal, anti-secular,  anti-poor, pro-rich, anti-women, anti-
MSME, anti-CPSUs, pro-corporates, anti-farmers, anti-labour, pro-centre and anti-
regional. Why I am telling all these things! It is not an evasive accusation against the 
Government or alleging them without an y base. In the recent days, after this 
Government has taken over power, there are some blatant attempts to undermine the 
regional parties and the local issues. Ther e is a step-motherly attitude, we witness 
and we experience. Take, for example, the devolution of revenue shares. The 14 th 
Finance Commission recommended 42 per cen t whereas what we are getting is not 
that much. It was 34 per cen t, then 31.3 per cent and, now, merely 25 per cent. It 
was in 2021-22, Rs. 1.70 lakh crore and ne xt year, it came down to Rs. 1.40 lakh 
crore and, now, it is Rs. 1.24 lakh crore. Tamil Nadu is the largest contributor of 
direct taxes to this country whereas for 1 rupee, we pay to the Union Government, the 
Tamil Nadu Government is getting 29 paise. Whereas, U.P., if they pay one rupee, 
they get 2.73 rupees, 2 rupees  and 73 paise. What is this  disparity? Why is this 
discrimination?  You say that the country is one. You say that all are equal but why is 
this sort of treatment? By way of this GST regime, the Tamil Nadu Government has 
losses estimated to be around Rs. 20 ,000 crore rupees. It was a hasty 
implementation of GST.  We have experienced a lot.   
And there are other problems. Legislatio ns passed by Assemblies are not able 
to be carried over. The elected Government , which is in the Assembly, do know the 
needs of the people and they legislate laws. But, the Raj Bhawan stands as a 
stumbling block and many of the Bills that  have been passed in the Assembly have 
not been accorded sanction or assent fr om the Governors and, because of that, 
many State Governments are limping, especi ally, the Opposition ruling parties. The 
Opposition ruling parties wherever and in wh ichever States they are ruling, they are 
being treated in a manner that the Centra l agencies enter in and arm-twist that 
Government as well as the functioning of the Governments. Moreover, very 
importantly, recently, there was a very bad flood in Tamil Nadu. There were torrential 
rains and before that there was a cyclon e. Chennai and southern districts were 
affected too much. We demanded immediatel y, towards relief, Rs. 5,000 crores and 
we were given only Rs. 450 crores, which is  not even ten per cent.  Later, for the 
overall estimate, the Defence Minister came to  the spot and he had an overall view of 
what happened there.   
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
The Prime Minister was met by the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu and he gave an 
estimate of Rs.37,000 crores demanding as immediate relief; nothing happened. 
Then a delegation of all party Member s of Parliament came and met the Home 
Minister and to the delegation, the Home Minister assured that it will be done. But 
nothing has been done. So even at the time of distress, they just witness as to how 
the States which are being ruled by the opposition parties are suffering. This is not the 
way a Union Government has to treat a St ate Government under a federal system. 
That is why I say, it is anti-federal. It is  not just alleging an accusation against them, 
but it is a fact because of that. Take, fo r example, my neighbouring State, Andhra 
Pradesh. I have been hearing them for th e past ten years, cutting across the party 
lines, after the Andhra Pradesh Reorganizati on Act in 2014, they are demanding for 
special status to Andhra Pradesh. Polavaram project is very  acquainted to us. 
Nothing has been taken care of because it is not ruled by the BJP. Ten years have 
passed by. They have asked for the special status and they are still demanding it, 
which has not been acceded to. So, this is the way the States are being treated by 
the Union Government. We say, it is not fair. Why? I say it is unsecular. I would like to 
remind about the Citizenship Amendment Act. That Act was brought. Of course, 
apparently, it seemed that India is very genuine and very generous in accommodating 
those who have been religiously persecuted in the neighbouring countries, to be given 
citizenship. But that Bill which later on b ecame an Act, very clearly said that three 
countries are selected—Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan; and from there, only 
selectively five religions,—Hindus, Christ ians, Parsis, Sikhs and Buddhists—will be 
accorded citizenship who have registered be fore 2014. Our question is: While you are 
so generous of giving citizenship to people who have been persecuted, why have 
Muslims been deleted from the list? When you have taken three countries, why have 
you not taken another country which is a neighbouring country, Sri Lanka?  From Sri 
Lanka, 1.5 lakh Tamils are in India without citizenship. The torture they are undergoing 
because of lack of citizenship cannot be described and we have  represented many a 
time but it has not been taken care of. So, when I gave an amendment that there 
should be religious as well as ethnic persecuti on also to be included for people from 
Sri Lanka, to include the Muslim community ; that amendment was defeated by this 
Government. So also is the issue of triple talaq. When triple talaq was brought, they 
said that it is in favour of the Muslim women. Everyone said, "Oh, it could be." But 
actually, it is to victimize Muslim men. It is the protective approach that a Government 
should take and not a punitive approach. And why I am telling this is that I brought a 
Private Members Resolution to legislate fo r the welfare of the widows. Madam, 4.5 
crore widows are in India and, in Vrinda van alone, 1.5 lakh widows are there and 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
67

 
those are of 20 to 60 years of age. Nobo dy takes care of th em. They are there 
begging, they are there pulling rickshaws, they are being exploi ted by some other 
people. Some NGOs are taking care of th em. I brought a Resolution. We need a 
legislation because the Government of Ta mil Nadu has given so  many schemes for 
widows. For your kind information, I woul d like to remind the House also that the 
Resolution was defeated. When you say that  you are fighting for women's cause, you 
say that triple talaq is brought for the Muslim women, but in actuality, it is not so. The 
undercurrent is to punish the Muslim men;  had you been with the same intent, you 
would have supported the widows' welfare re solution also. So, they take a double 
standard. So is the Women's Reservation B ill. They say that they have fulfilled the 
long wish of political empowerment to women. When? After census, after 
delimitation! It is far-fetched. It is like ex tending a carrot before a horse and making it 
run. They give an impression to the women that the Government has passed the 
Women's Reservation Bill, but it is not so. I suggest to the Government, if at all you 
want to empower women, don't go for that.  
Again, I would like to cite my State as an example. We are giving 40 per cent 
reservation to women in employment. Why don't you give that? My Private Member 
Bill for that also is pending, which has not been taken into consideration. So, it is 
anti-women, it is anti-secular, it is partisan towards some religious people. See, 
everyone should feel secured in this count ry. I have repeatedly said, when India's 
partition took place, Muhammad Ali Jinnah said, 'All the Muslims come to my country 
Pakistan, which will be for Muslims'. The Islamists in this country said, 'Yes, we are 
Muslims, but India is our country', and they stayed here and they sacrificed for the 
country. So many of them are in the milit ary. Take for example, Dr. Abdul Kalam. 
How many have done that? But why you sh ould treat them in this manner is our 
simple question. Everyone should feel secu red, but it is not so. We have to think 
about all these things. So, when I say you ar e anti-secular, it is all with base and 
reasons. When I say anti-women, it is also based on what ha s happened to women 
community by way of this Government's appr oach.  Again, I said it is anti-poor. My 
colleague, Mr. Sukhendu, quoted many things . The per capita income in India for a 
person, compared to China, is one-fourth of it whereas in population, China and India 
are one and the same. I would like to say an other thing, which is very shocking. I am 
very unhappy to say about my country's situation here in the Parliament, which will go 
across the world, but the Government's handling of situations is not in the right 
manner. I have to tell that. It is our re sponsibility as a citizen, as a Member of 
Parliament, and, of course, in the interest of the country. India ranks 139
th place in the 
Hunger Index in the world. And, in the G-20 countries, you are so proud that you 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
have been successful in conducting G-20.  The lowest per capita income among the 
G-20 countries is of India's. But you are climbing high that yo u have conducted the 
G-20 summit very successfully! Twenty-two cr ore people are suffering from poverty. 
That also was mentioned. Even  the President's Address said, Garibi Hatao was once 
a slogan, but now we have uplifted 25 crore of  poor people from poverty. Where from 
has it come? Twenty-two crore people are still under below poverty line. And what is 
the index? What is the parameter of 'bel ow poverty line'? For a rural person, for a 
rural family, it is twenty-sev en rupees per day, eight h undred and sixteen rupees per 
month. For one who is in the urban area, it  is thirty-three rupe es, thousand rupees 
per month. One can imagine how a family can  survive with thousand rupees or eight 
hundred rupees. But on beha lf of the Government, the President's Address says, 
'Oh, we have uplifted the people from pove rty, and India ranks fifth in the global 
economic power and soon, we will be in  the third place'. All because of the 
corporates! You are anti-poor and you are pro-corporates. That is what we are 
telling. Ten per cent of our population gets  57 per cent of the nation's income. Ten 
per cent of the population enjoys 65 per cen t of nation's wealth whereas only three 
per cent of the nation's wealth is possessed by 50 percent of the population. Let them 
please explain to us how you have uplifted people from poverty line. This is the 
condition of the poor. Under the MGNREGA,  earlier the number of people who are 
benefited was 4.14 crore. Now, it has in creased to 6.16 crore. After the COVID 
impact, how many things were affected? Have they been restored? Has it been 
brought to the position? No. The Government  was concentrating on other things the 
oligopolistic conglomerates; some have a control over al l the substantial parts of 
economy and even on policy matters. I don't want to tell who it is. Everyone knows 
when Parliament's whole Session was take n away by that. Some people, who own 
everything, control the entire economy of the country; it is all private business people. 
The MSME is a very important sector. A qu estion was raised in the morning. It 
provides employment to 20 crore people. Sir, next to agricultural sector, MSME is the 
only sector which provides more employment . Its contribution to GDP is 29 per cent. 
In the exports, its part is 45 per cent.  I am the Chairman of the Committee on 
Industry. I know very well as to how we are patronising it. Madam, you also know it 
very well, being a part of it. So, MSME sector is not patronised to the extent it has to 
be. A number of units fell sick and went ou t of it. A number of people came to the 
streets. One MSME unit gives employment to five persons. But, it is not being taken 
care of.  
Madam, let me tell the House that the loan default of only 2300 individual 
enterprise companies is to the tune of Rs . 2 lakh crores; 2300 bu siness people's loan 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
69

 
amounts to Rs. 2 lakh crores and Indian Bank s have written off Rs. 5.3 lakh crores to 
corporates only. I said 2300 equal to 2 lakh  crores, these numbers are very big. The 
total number of MSME units in our country is about 6 crores. Whereas the NPA of 
about 18.65 lakh units or maybe 19 lakh unit s is just Rs. 16,340 crores. Madam, these 
18 or 19 lakh units employ about 1 crore people and their loans to the bank's NPA that 
has not been repaid is only about Rs. 16,000 crores and whereas 2300 business 
people have got Rs. 2 lakh crores and not repaid. Also, their loans of about Rs. 5.3 
l a k h  c r o r e s  h a v e  b e e n  w a i v e d  o f f .  T h i s  is all alarming. What is happening? This 
Government says 'Maximum Governance  Minimum Government. But, minimum 
achievement more trumpeting. They have spent Rs. 4,880 crore towards 
advertisement, that is, public exchequer's money. But, what about the agricultural 
sector? Madam, all my colleagues in the Ho use can recall as to how the farm Bills 
were passed in the House. You can be proud to say that we have passed so many 
legislations. But, as many other Members have pointed out, the Members of the 
Opposition parties, who raised voice ag ainst the Government or pointed out the 
errors of the Government were all suspende d and sent out, and you have passed the 
legislations. The scrutiny of the Bills are al so not like that. In 2014, what they often 
pointed out is about the UPA Government. Duri ng that period, 71 per cent of the Bills 
were referred to the Parliamentary Committees for scrutiny. But, now it is only 17 per 
cent. Why? Initially, it was 71 per cent and now it is 17 per cent which means they are 
not dependent on the scrutiny of the Bills. In  the House, the discussion will be of one 
hour or two hours or three hours. The time allotted for a Member will be two or three 
minutes whereas in the Committee, it will be  an elaborate debate. The stakeholders 
can appear; the Government is bound to come and reply and make alterations and 
their recommendations will be consider ed seriously, whereas now, all the 
Parliamentary Committees have become insign ificant. This is th e way they are doing 
it.  
Madam, Budget for agriculture is going down year by year and the budget for 
other things is increasing like for Departme nt of Home Affairs and Defence. That is 
okay, but, why is the budget for agriculture going down? Madam, agriculture is spinal 
cord of India. Again, one can recall th e 2008 economic recession, when the whole 
world was suffering under it. It emerged fr om Europe and affected the whole of the 
world, but, not India only because of the public sector units and the agricultural 
sector. But you are killing both of them. The farm Bills were brought with what intent! 
It was to encourage some corporates. And it was passed when the House was not in 
order. When the farmers from all over the country came to roads and agitated, it was 
taken back. The budget for agriculture is  coming down and the exports of farm 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
produce is banned; wheat was banned in May 2022, broken rice was banned in 
September, 2022 and onion was banned in  December, 2022. The farmers are not 
encouraged, their produce is not allowed to export, they are not patronised. The 
prices of fertilisers are going on increasing and input costs are also increasing 
whereas the price of the agricultural produce is not proportionate to the expenses.  
The Government promised that they will double the income of farmers, nothing 
has happened. Again, we would like to say how you said two crore employments will 
be generated and so far only seven lakh employments have been generated. But the 
need is of seven crores. You said that 'fif teen thousand' rupees will be deposited in 
everybody's account. ..(Interruptions).. Yes, fifteen lakhs, sorry. ..(Interruptions).. 
Fifteen lakh rupees will be deposited in  everybody's account after unearthing the 
black money.  Someone said, "No, no, we di d not say like this. If at all we unearth 
the black money, that will be equivalent to fifteen lakh rupees in everybody's 
account." Have you unearthed? Have you deposited? No. So, all are election  
jumlas,
 as they themselves have said. So, the farm Bill was brought in that manner; 
abrogation of Article 370 happened in a di sorderly manner; busi nesses are not being 
conducted in the manner as it should be. So, many were in silence when Manipur 
problem was there. Everybody knows it, wh en you say about the North East States 
that you are taking too much of care. Wh at happened in Manipur, the whole world 
was watching the clashes that happened be tween two groups. It totally stagnated  
everything in the country. How women we re treated, everybody knew. What we 
demanded - just an explanation from the Go vernment. What for is the Parliament? It 
is a debating forum. We have to debate; we  have to deliberate; we have to decide. 
The Government is accountable to the Parl iament; the Parliament is accountable to 
the people. When the Members of Parliame nt come to the House and demand an 
explanation from the Government, there is only silence. When there was No 
Confidence Motion in the Lok Sabha, even  then, explanation was not given. So, 
about Manipur, nothing has been resolved so  far and no explanation from the side of 
the Government. Two persons intruded into the Parliament despite the security we 
have here. We were not allowed to discu ss about it and no explanation from the 
Government. We asked nothing out of the way. What is happening in the country, we 
want to know and the Government is accoun table to the Parliament.  You come here 
and explain to Parliament which will be told to  the people.  But it is not so.  So, I am 
restrained because of my time and I have to give way to my colleague, my sister, 
some areas for her to deal with because th is Government has spoiled this country in 
many areas, but something has to be left for her. Very importantly, I have to tell, as I 
said, the Finance Minister has come, kind ly take care of the States, about the 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
71

 
devolution of funds which are reducing year by year whic h we are very much 
concerned about. So also take care of the Tamil Nadu Government's demand for 
flood relief and cyclone fund for which we  have been asking but have not been 
accorded so far. The right thing is she has come, take care of the States which are 
being ruled by opposition parties also.  Ma d a m ,  i n  c o n c l u s i o n , I  h a v e  t o  s a y  t h a t  
Mahatma Gandhi envisaged a village India; Pt. Nehru built a modern India; Lal 
Bahadur Shastri aspired for a kisan India; V. P. Singh created a social justice India; 
Manmohan Singh, a globalised India; hon. Narendra Modiji is taking de-federalized 
India. We are very sorry for all these things . Ten years have been given to you. In 
these ten years, what is the net result? The progress report shows more poverty, 
more poor people, and more unemploymen t. Small scale industries are being 
crushed. Many corporates are having thei r hands upon them. MSME has to be taken 
care of. All these things when we say, we can just remind them one thing, remind 
them of the ICC World Cup Series which happened. Ten matches the Indian cricket 
team won like anything and much hype was made for the final match. Even the Prime 
Minister went; everyone was there.  The whole nation was prou d and nobody looked 
after any other thing. The team which won ten matches lost miserably in the final. So, 
also you might have secured two Lok Sabh a elections; two Lok Sabha elections you 
have won, you would have won the by-elections, but 2024 election like the 'IPC' 
World Cup Series for the Indian cricket team, this will turn out to  be for the present 
Government.   
Again, I say, we are here and they are there and not able to tolerate someone 
who is in power. We have witnessed, we have experienced and we have suffered. We 
h a v e  t o  u p h o l d  f e d e r a l i s m .  W e  h a v e  t o  b e  a  s e c u l a r i s t  c o u n t r y ,  S t a t e s  h a v e  t o  b e  
protected and the youth have to be taken care of. Labour has to be taken care of. We 
should be in India, in its own form. Since you have not done it, in the 2024 elections, 
the INDIA Alliance will win and bring back India to its original place. Thank you.   
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक ( पंजाब): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आज मुझे महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी क े 
अिभभाषण मȂ धन्यवाद ĢÎताव पर बोलने का मौका िमला है, उसके  िल
 ए मȅ भाग्यशाली हूं। आप 
सबका धन्यवाद, मेरी पाटीर् की तरफ से भी और उन सभी जनȗ का, िजनका मेरे ऊपर आशीवार्द 
है।  
मैडम, आप अगर अिभभाषण को पढ़Ȃगी, तो पहले पन्ने क े पहले पैरागर्ाफ मȂ ही तीन 
महत्वपूणर् बातȂ सामने आती ह
ȅ। सबसे पहली  है - एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत, उसके  बाद िलखा गया 
है- अमृत काल, और िफर तीसरा जो important point है, वह यह है िक believers of 
democratic principles and practices. मȅ इन तीनȗ बातȗ को आधार बनाकर अपनी बात को 
आपके  सामने और देश क े सामने रखना चाहूंगा।   
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
मैडम, हम सब राजनीित मȂ देश को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए और इस देश को ǛेÍठ बनाने क े 
उǈेÌय से ही आए हȅ। हम सब अपने-अपने  जीवन मȂ अलग-अलग क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ थे। हमारा जीवन मȂ सब 
क ु छ छोड़कर राजनीित मȂ आने का कारण यही था िक हम इस राÍटर् को ǛेÍठ भारत बनाना चाहते 
हȅ।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 मुझे नहीं लगता िक इस सदन मȂ बैठे हुए िकसी भी Ëयिƪ या िकसी भी सदÎय या पूरे देश 
मȂ िकसी भी Ëयिƪ क े मन मȂ संदेह होगा िक इस देश को कोई ǛेÍठ बनाना नहीं चाहता है। ĢÌन यह 
है िक एक भारत और ǛेÍठ भारत का मतलब क्या है, इसका उǈेÌय क्या है ? एक भारत और ǛेÍठ 
भारत का मतलब है िक इस द
ेश मȂ रहने वाले हर एक Ëयिƪ मȂ समानता हो। भारत ऐसा बने िक 
पूरी दुिनया मȂ गौरवािन्वत हो, ǛेÍठ बने। यह ĢÌन नहीं है िक हम इसको मानते हȅ या नहीं मानते, 
हम सब मानते हȅ, इसीिलए हम सब क ु छ छोड़क
र राजनीित मȂ आए हȅ। ĢÌन यह है िक क्या इस 
देश को एक  और ǛेÍठ बनाने क े िलए हम पयार्Ãत काम कर रहे हȅ?   
 दूसरा, अमृत काल की संभावनाओं क े बारे मȂ भी िकसी को कोई संद ेह नहीं है। इस पूरे देश 
क े हर Ëयिƪ, हर नागिरक को – िजस Ģकार से आज इन्फॉमȃशन टेक्नोलॉजी उपलÅध है, िजस 
Ģकार की ËयवÎथाएं पूरे देश मȂ हȅ, यह सब क ु छ संभावनाओं को दिर्शत करता है इसिलए अमृत 
काल की संभावनाए
ं अपार हȅ। िजस तरीके  से हमारे पास संभावनाएं as an Opposition Party, as 
a Member, as a member of this country हȅ, उसी Ģकार से सरकार क े पास भी संभावनाएं हȅ 
िक वह अमृत काल की संभावनाओं को क ै से इस राÍटर् क े, इस द ेश क े पिरĢेÑय मȂ उके रती है। ĢÌन 
यह नहीं है िक अमृत काल अभी है या नहीं है, ĢÌन यह है िक क्या अमृत काल की संभावनाओं को 
हम वाÎतिवकता मȂ बदलने क े िलए पयार्Ãत काम कर रहे हȅ ?  
 माननीय सभापित जी, एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत तो तभी होगा, जब इस देश मȂ रहने वाले 
हर एक Ëयिƪ को एक
 समान और ǛेÍठ िशक्षा िमले, एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत तो तभी होगा, जब 
इस देश मȂ रहने वाले हर एक Ëयिƪ को एक समान और ǛेÍठ ÎवाÎथ्य सुिवधा िमले, एक भारत, 
Ǜ
ेÍठ भारत तो तभी होगा, जब इस देश मȂ रहने वाले हर एक Ëयिƪ को एक समान न्याय िमलेगा, 
एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत तो तभी होगा, जब इस देश मȂ रहने वाले हर एक Ëयिƪ को बराबर की 
सुरक्षा
, रोजगार, पारदशीर् गवनȄस, राजनीितक िÎथरता और नैितक दाियत्वȗ का िनवर्हन होगा। 
एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत तो तभी बनेगा, जब देश क े हर एक Ëयिƪ को समानता हो और उसको 
ǛेÍठ बनाने की, उसके  आगे बढ़ने की सभी ËयवÎथाएं पूरी हȗ।  
 सभापित महोदय, म
ȅ एक-एक करके  क ु छ िंबदु आपके  सामने रखना चाहता हूं। मȅ  
institutional stability and institutional reforms का पक्षधर हूं। सारी चीज़ȗ को देखते हुए मुझे 
यह लगता है िक िपछले 10 साल मȂ हमारी सरकार ने, भारत की सरकार ने Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने 
िजस तरीके  स
े काम िकया है, यह पूरा काम एक पैच वकर् का काम िदखता है, कहीं भी मुझे एक भी 
जगह पर कोई इंÎटीǷूशन नहीं िद खता है, िजस इंÎटीǷूशन को उठाकर पूरा फोकस उस 
इंÎटीǷूशन को इंपर्ूव करने मȂ लगाया हो। ऐसा लगता है िक सारा का सारा एक पैच वकर् है और 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
73

 
पैच वकर् मȂ थोड़ा सा पैसा इसमȂ डाल दो, थोड़ा सा पैसा उसमȂ डाल दो, आज अगर यह हो गया तो 
इसमȂ पैसा डाल दो।  
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
थोड़ा उसमȂ डाल दो, आज अगर यह हो गया है, तो इसमȂ पैसा डाल दो, थोड़ा इधर, थोड़ा उधर। 
मुझे लगता है िक सब क ु छ करने क े चक्कर मȂ जो कÇĢोमाइज़ हो रहा है, वह इंÎटीǷूशन्स क े 
साथ हो रहा है। अगर इंÎटीǷूशन्स क े साथ कÇĢोमाइज़ हुआ, तो देश का िवकिसत होना बहुत 
दूर की बात ह
ै।  
 ऑनरेबल चेयरमैन सर, अगर मȅ अथर्ËयवÎथा की बात करूं , तो इसके  तीन आधारभूत 
पिरĢेÑय हȅ, िजनको हमȂ िडÎकस
 करना चािहए। आंकड़Ȃ तो बहुत सारे हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन सबसे 
इÇपॉटȄट चीज़ यह है िक एक Ëयिƪ की कमाई िकतनी है? क्या उसकी कमा ई मȂ बढ़ोतरी हुई?  
महोदय, दूसरी चीज़ यह होती है िक उस Ëयिƪ को अपना जीवन सÇमानपूवर्क जीने क े 
िलए िकतना खचर् करना पड़ता है? क्या उस महंगाई मȂ कोई बढ़ोतरी हुई है?  
तीसरा िंबदु, जो इन सबके  बाद है, वह यह है िक वह बचत िकतनी कर पा रहा ह
ै? उसकी 
इन्कम िकतनी है, खचर् िकतना करता है और सेिंवग िकतनी हो रही है? अगर हम इन तीन बातȗ 
को ही हर Ëयिƪ क े जीवन मȂ देख लȂ, तो मोटा-मोटा पता चल जाएगा िक अथर्ËयवÎथा की 
ओवरऑल िÎथित क्या है। आज अगर हम हर Ëयिƪ की कमाई को देख
Ȃ, तो यह जी20 और िĤक्स 
देशȗ मȂ सबसे नीचे है। हम Ǜीलंका और बंगलादेश जैसे देशȗ से भी नीचे हȅ। अगर आप द ेखȂ िक 
िपछले दशक मȂ Ģित Ëयिƪ आय मȂ जो बढ़ोतरी 145 परसȂट क े आस-पास थी, वह इस दशक मȂ, 
अभी की जो मोदी जी  सरकार है, उसमȂ लगभग 67 Ģितशत है। मȅ यह नहीं कहता िक बढ़ोतरी 
नहीं ह
ुई है, बढ़ोतरी हुई है, लेिकन आप यह नहीं कह सकते हȅ िक िपछले साल इतनी थी, इस 
बार इतनी है। आपको इस बढ़ोतरी को पूरे ग्लोबल पिरĢेÑय मȂ रखकर देखना पड़ेगा िक िकतनी 
बढ़ोतरी हुई है। अगर िपछले दशक को इस दशक से क ं पेयर करȂ, तो जो बढ़ोतरी हुई है, वह 50 
Ģितशत कम हुई है।  
 दूसरा, अगर एक्सपȂिडचर को देख
Ȃ, तो जब महंगाई इतनी ज्यादा है, तो 'एक भारत-ǛेÍठ 
भारत' क ै से होगा? क्या हर Ëयिƪ की थाली मȂ सेम सामान, सभी अन्न और खाǏान्न आ सकते 
हȅ? क्या हर Ëयिƪ उसी Ģकार स
े बराबर खा सकता है? आज की पिरिÎथित मȂ तो नहीं खा रहा 
है। िजस िदन इस देश का हर Ëयिƪ समान भोजन करने की िÎथित मȂ पहुं चेगा, उसी िदन यह देश 
ǛेÍठ भारत बनेगा और एक भारत बनेगा।  
 महोदय, अगर महंगाई को देखȂ, तो फ ू ़ड इन्Äलेशन 9 से 10 परसȂट क े आस-पास रहा है। 
आप वेिजटेबल मȂ देखȂगे िक इसमȂ 30 परसȂट का इन्कर्ीज़ रहा है, दाल क े भाव 20 परसȂट बढ़ गए, 
अनाज क
े  भाव 10 परसȂट बढ़ गए, तेल क े भाव का कहूं तो  िरफाइंड ऑयल, जो 2014 मȂ 70 रुपय े 
लीटर हुआ करता था, वह अब लगभग 200 रुपय े क े आस-पास पहुं
च गया है। एलपीजी (िलिक्वड 
पेटर्ोिलयम गैस), जो खाना बनाने की गैस होती है, उसके  भाव भी 3 गुना बढ़ गए हȅ। उसका 
िसलȂडर पहले 400 रुपय े पर िमलता था,  ले िकन अब 1,200 का होने लगा है। ऐसे बहुत सारे 
आ
ंकड़े हȅ। मȅ िसफर् मूलभूत बात यह रखना चाहता हूं िक जब तक इन चीज़ȗ को ËयवÎथागत तरीके  
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
से एडर्ेस नहीं िकया जाएगा, तब तक यह महंगाई दूर होने वाली नहीं है। आपकी कमाई तो थोड़ी 
बढ़ी, लेिकन महंगाई बहुत ज्यादा बढ़ गई। आप ओवरऑल यह देिखए िक िपछले दशक मȂ एक 
Ëयिƪ िकतनी बचत करता था और इस दशक मȂ िकतनी बचत कर रहा है। यही एक  मूलभूत और 
बड़ा िसÇपल तरीका है, यह देखने का िक क्या हमारे देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा बढ़ी है और क्या 
जनमानस का जीवन Îतर ऊपर उठा है।  
महोदय, और भी बहुत सारे आंकड़़े हȅ, लेिकन अगर मȅ इनके  अलावा इंÎटीǷूशन्स पर 
बात करूं , तो आप ब
ȅिंकग सैक्टर ले लीिजए, हम  इसमȂ 10.50 लाख करोड़ का राइट ऑफ कर 
रहे हȅ। आप कहते हȅ  ' एक भारत-ǛेÍठ भारत', लेिकन इस तरह से यह एक भारत क ै से बनेगा? 
अगर एक गरीब आदमी 1 लाख रुपय े या 50 हज़ार रुपय े का लोन ल
ेता है, तो उसके  घर बȅक क े 
अिधकारी पहुंच जाते हȅ और कॉलर पकड़कर उससे बȅक का लोन वापस लेते हȅ, जबिक दूसरी 
तरफ ऐसा होता है िक अगर कोई 5 हज़ार करोड़, 10 
हज़ार करोड़ का लोन लेता है, तो उसका 
हाथ पकड़कर िवदेशȗ मȂ भेज िदया जाता है। यह क ैसा देश है िक अगर कोई गरीब लोन लेता है, 
तो उसके  िलए दूसरे िनयम ह ȅ, लेिकन अगर कोई अमीर लोन लेता है, तो उसके  िलए दूसरे िनयम 
हȅ। इस तरह से तो मुझे भी यह लगता है िक 1-2 लाख रुपय े का लोन न लेकर 1-2 लाख करोड़ 
का लोन ले लो, िफर उसमȂ चुकाने की भी जरूरत  नहीं पड़ेगी और सरकार भी हाथ पकड़कर 
बाहर ल
ेकर जाएगी। इस तरह से हम क ै से 'एक भारत-ǛेÍठ भारत' बना पाएंगे? 
 महोदय, अगर मȅ कजर् की बात कहूं, तो िपछले 14 Ģधान मंतर्ी हुए हȅ और िपछले 67 साल 
क े कायर्काल मȂ 55 लाख करोड़ का कजर् िलया गया। िपछले नौ सालȗ मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने 
लगभम 100 लाख करोड़, यानी 3 गु ना ज्यादा का कजर् िलया हुआ है। हमने कजर् का हाल देख 
िलया, बȅिंकग का भी देख िलया िक ब
ȅिंकग सैक्टर की हालत खराब है। िवदेशȗ मȂ लोगȗ की हमारे 
Ģित क्या भावना है, अगर यह देखना है, तो उसका सबसे सही आंकड़ा यह होता है िक एफडीआई 
िकतना हुआ है? वह बढ़ रहा है या घट रहा है? यह बढ़-घट रहा है - ऐसा िपछले साल, इस साल 
या िपछले हÄते से नहीं, बिÊक ग्लोबल पिरĢेÑय मȂ िरलेिटËली हमारे िकतने बढ़े हȅ, िकतने घटे हȅ - 
यह देखना पड़ेगा।, क्यȗिक आज हम अपने आपसे क ंपीटीशन नहीं कर रहे हȅ, बिÊक दुिनया मȂ 
बहुत सारे ऐसे देश हȅ, हमȂ िजन्हȂ पछाड़ना है, उन्हȂ पीछे करके  खुद को आगे ल
ेकर जाना है, हमȂ 
ǛेÍठ बनना है, लेिकन ग्लोबल एफडीआई इनÄलो का जो शेयर है, वह िडक्लाइन हुआ है।  
महोदय, एक सॉवरेन कर् ेिडट रेिंटग होती है। जैसे, अगर गाँव मȂ आप जाओगे, तो िकसी 
को उधार देने से पहले कहते हȅ िक इसको उधार मत देना, क्यȗिक यह तो वापस ही नहीं करता  
है। इसको उधार मत देना, इसके  पÊले चार पैसे नहीं है। एक आदमी ऐसा होता है, िजसके  िलए 
कहते हȅ िक इसे उधार दे दीिजए, यह आपको वापस करेगा। यह एक कर् ेिडट रेिंटग होती है। 
आपके  कर् ेिडट काडर् की भी रेिंटग होती ह
ै, देश की भी कर् ेिडट रेिंटग होती है। िजस तरीके  से 
िपछले दशक से कर् ेिडट रेिंटग stagnant है, यह ÎपÍट दशार् रहा है िक हम पाँचवीं इकोनॉमी बन 
जाएं, तीसरी इकोनॉमी बन जाएं, पर िवदेशȗ म
Ȃ हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा क े Ģित लोगȗ मȂ बहुत ज्यादा 
उत्सुकता नहीं िदखाई दे रही है। अगर आप depreciation देखȂ, तो मोदी जी क े आने से पहले एक 
डॉलर 54-58 रुपय े क े आसपास हुआ करता था और आज यह 80 रुपय े पार कर गया है। हम 
बार-बार कहते हȅ िक िवदेशȗ मȂ हमारा मान बढ़ा ह
ै। िवदेशȗ मȂ मान क ै से बढ़ता है - िवदेशȗ मȂ मान 
दो ही तरीकȗ से बढ़ता है, िजनमȂ एक हमारे संÎकार और हमारी स ंÎकृ ित है, जो हमारे कलेिक्टव 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
75

 
Ëयवहार क े कारण िवदेशȗ मȂ पिरलिक्षत होती है और दूसरा होता है – पैसा। आपके  पास िकतना 
पैसा है, आप उन्हȂ िकतने िबजनेस करा सकते हȅ, वे आपको आपके  पैसे से ही रेट करȂगे। अगर 
डॉलर क े िहसाब से रुपया िगरता है - Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी ने एक बार कहा था िक जब िवदेश मȂ 
रुपय े का वजन िगरता है, तब देश का मान िगरता है, मȅ उनसे सहमत हूँ - िनिÌचत रूप  से, देश 
का मान िगरा है। झÃपी डालने से, गले लगाने से मूमȂटरी बेिनिफट िदखता है दो बार गले लगा 
िलया, तीन बार गले लगा िलया, यह अच्छी बात है, होना चािहए, ल
ेिकन वे इस बात को 
फ ंडामȂटली नकारते नहीं हȅ िक आपकी अथर्ËयवÎथा सुदृढ़ नहीं है।  
 सर, पहले सीएजी की िरपोट्सर् पर बहुत बात होती थी। आपको याद होगा िक सीएजी की 
िरपोटर् पर सरकारȂ िगर जाया करती थीं। सीएजी कहता है िक सरकार डेटा conceal कर रही है। 
अगर आप 2021-22 की सीएजी िरपोटर् देखȂगे, तो बहुत सारे डेटा को conceal करने की बातȂ आई 
हȅ। अगर मȅ रोजगार क े पक्ष मȂ बात करू ँ, तो मोदी जी ने कहा था िक दो करोड़ क े आसपास 
रोजगार दȂगे, वह रोजगार कहाँ गया? आज 45 साल  मȂ सबसे ज्यादा अनइÇÃलॉयमȂट है। रूरल  
अनइÇÃलॉयमȂट सबसे ज्यादा ह
ै। रूरल अनइÇÃलॉयमȂट ज्यादा क्यȗ है? एक मनरेगा Îकीम होती 
थी, मनरेगा क े पैसे होते थे, आपने मनरेगा मȂ पैसे घटा िदए और रूरल  अनइÇÃलॉयमȂट बढ़ गया, 
शूट अप कर गया, तो यह पैच अप वकर् नहीं करेगा। हमȂ फ ंडामȂटली इंÎटीǷूशनल इÇपर्ूवमȂट पर 
फोकस करना पड़ेगा। मȅने इसी सदन से ĢÌन पूछे थे िक सरकार ने िपछले दस सालȗ मȂ िकतनी 
सरकारी नौकिरयाँ दी हȅ। इसका उǄर आया िक यह सतत Ģिकर्या है, िमशन मोड मȂ काम कर रहे 
ह
ȅ। मȅने पूछा िक जो साढ़े नौ लाख क े आसपास खाली पद हȅ, उन्हȂ कब तक भरने का Ãलान है, 
इसका उǄर आया िक यह सतत Ģिकर्या है, िमशन मोड मȂ काम कर रहे ह ȅ। क ु छ भी ĢÌन पूछ 
लीिजए, आपका उǄर यही होता है िक सतत Ģिकर्या है, िमशन मोड मȂ काम चल रहा है। मȅ 
सरकार को criticise नहीं करना चाहता हूँ, बिÊक आपके  समक्ष यह रखना चाहता हूँ िक या तो 
सरकार क े पास इसका उǄर नहीं है या उǄर है, तो सरकार उसे छ ुपाना चाहती है। ऐसे मȂ, हम 
क ै से ǛेÍठ बनȂगे? जब उǄर छ ुपाने लगȂगे, तो ǛेÍठ क ै से बनȂगे? अमृत काल की संभावनाओं का 
क्या होगा? इस पैच अप वकर् से काम नहीं चलेगा। अभी हिरयाणा से क ु छ लोगȗ को इजरायल मȂ 
नौकरी क े िलए भेजा गया। वहाँ क े मुख्य मंतर्ी और वहाँ की जो भारतीय जनता पाटीर् है, वह छाती 
ठोककर कह रही है िक हमने इजरायल भेज िदया है। इजरायल मȂ लड़ाई चल रही है। क्या आप 
अपने ब
ेटे को इजरायल भेजोगे, अपने बेटे को नौकरी करने क े िलए भेजोगे? वह इजरायल नौकरी 
करने जा रहा है, क्यȗिक उसके  देश मȂ उसके  पास पयार्Ãत ËयवÎथा नहीं है। वह खुशी से नहीं जा 
रहा है, तो इस पर हमȂ खुश होने की आवÌयकता नहीं है। हम ǛेÍठ भारत क ै से बनाएंगे? सर, 
ĥÍटाचार की तो बात ही छोड़ दीिजए
। मȅ एक  ही शÅद मȂ यही कहना चाहूँगा िक काला धन लाने 
की जो बात कही गई थी, उस पर क ु छ नहीं हुआ, लेिकन वह जुमला था, यह हमȂ बता िदया गया 
है, हमने उसे accept कर िलया है। एक Corruption Perception Index होता  है, इसमȂ जो 
टर्ांसपेरȂसी इंटरनेशनल है, उसने हमȂ 93वां नंबर िदया है। Out of 180 countries, we have been 
ranked 93rd.  Bhutan has been ranked 26 th, way above than us. आप भूटान को तो छोड़ 
ही दीिजए, हम Ƿूिनिशया , रवांडा  और घाना जैसा देशȗ से भी नीचे हȅ। हम क ै से ǛेÍठ बनȂगे? यह 
िसफर् Îलोगन न बनकर रह जाए। हमȂ ǛेÍठ बनना है, हम सबको िमलकर काम करना है, पर ऐसे 
क ै से ǛेÍठ बनȂगे, क ै से अमृत काल की संभावनाओं को Ģखर करȂगे?  
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 सर, रेलवे की बातȂ होती हȅ। रेलवे एक बहुत बड़ा िडपाटर्मȂट है। जब िकसी बच्चे से Îकू ल मȂ 
गिणत नहीं हो पाता है, तो वह मÇमी से कहता है िक मÇमी, मुझे गिणत नहीं पढ़ना है, गिणत मȂ 
िसफर् पािंसग माक्सर् लाने हȅ, मȅ दूसरे िवषय पढ़ू ँगा। कोई भी िडपाटर्म
Ȃट, जो complicated है, बड़ा 
है, उसे िरफॉमर् करना किठन हो रहा है, तो इस सरकार की यह िनयित बन गई है, आदत सी बन 
गई है िक इसको िरफॉमर् मत किरए, इसे पीछे रिखए और चार-पाँच नई चीज़Ȃ शोके स म Ȃ ले आइए। 
आप रेलवे को िरफॉमर् करने की बजाय फलाना-िढकाना नई रेल ले आए। बाकी बातȂ भी ठीक हȅ, 
यह सब बनना चािहए, Îपीड होनी चािहए, लेिकन not at the cost of entire Railway 
Department. आपने िपछले क
ु छ सालȗ मȂ उस इंÎटीǷूशन को कचरे का िडÅबा बना िदया है और 
आप चार जगहȗ पर टर्ेन को Äलैग ऑफ कर रहे हȅ। मȅ जानना चाहता हूँ िक रेलवे इंÎटीǷूशन का 
क्या हुआ? िपछले नौ साल मȂ 11 बड़े टर्ेन एक्सीडȂट्स हुए - 2014, 2016, 2017, 2020, 2022, 
2023 - 2023 मȂ  तो चार एक्सीडȂट्स हुए। यह क ैसा देश है?  हमारी टर्ेन्स कोई 500 िकलोमीटर 
Ģित घंटे की Îपीड से नहीं चल रही हȅ, वे मुिÌकल से 100 िकलोमीटर Ģित घंटे की Îपीड टच कर 
रही हȅ, तो उसमȂ िडरेल हो रहा है। अगर आप िडरेलमȂट पर सीएजी की िरपोटर् देखȂगे, तो वह 
िरपोटर् कहती है िक जो रेल की पटिरयां हȅ, वे पुरानी हो गई हȅ और उनको बदलना पड़ेगा।  रेल 
की पटिरयां पुरानी हो गई हȅ, उनको बदल नहीं रहे हȅ।  र
ेल टर्ैक मȂ जो मेन्टेनȂस होनी चािहए, वह 
नहीं हो रही है।  ...(समय की घंटी)... Sir, I will take some more time.  63 परसȂट िरपोट्सर् 
टेबल ही नहीं होती हȅ।   
 ऑनरेबल चेयरमैन सर, जब हम िवमेन क े बारे मȂ बात करते हȅ, तो हमारा देश िवमेन और 
माताओं क े सÇमान क े िलए अगर्णी रहा है, यह माना जाता है।   
 
"यतर् नायर्Îतु पूज्यन्ते रमन्ते ततर् देवता:
। 
यतर्ैताÎतु न पूज्यन्ते सवार्Îततर्ाफला: िकर्या:
।।" 
 
 अगर हम मिहलाओं, नािरओं का सÇमान नहीं करȂगे, तो सारे िकए गए अच्छे कायș का 
बेड़ा गकर् हो जाएगा।  यहां पर हमारी रेसलर बहनȂ ĢोटेÎट कर रही हȅ। जब वे Ģधान मंतर्ी क े पास 
जीत कर जाते हȅ, तो उन
को सुनने क े िलए उनके  पास समय है, लेिकन जब वे समÎया मȂ हȅ, जब 
दुख मȂ हȅ, तो उनके  पास जाकर..., मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूं िक यह िकसकी गलती है।  ...(समय की 
घं
टी)... यह कोटर् तय करेगा।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your allotted time is over.  
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: सर, मȅ क्लोज़ कर रहा हूं।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Mr. Pathak.  
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PAHTAK: Hon. Chai rman, Sir, thank you very much for 
giving some time. आप एजुक ेशन सेक्टर ले लो, आप हेÊथ ... 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
77

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. If there had been  a request from the Party for extension 
of time, I would have given that.  
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: Sir, just give me two minutes. I will just close. Just 
two minutes.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. 
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: Thank you, Sir. देश को ǛेÍठ बनाने क े िलए मुझे लगता 
है िक हमȂ राम राज्य की पिरकÊपना को धारण करना पडे़गा।  राम राज्य क े बारे मȂ गोÎवामी 
तुलसीदास जी और महाकिव वाÊमीिक जी ने भी िलखा है िक 
"दैिहक दैिवक भौितक तापा। राम राज निंह काहुिह Åयापा 
सब नर करिंह परÎपर Ģीती। चलिंह Îवधमर् िनरत शर्ु
ित नीती।" 
 
 ऐसा देश बनाना है, जहां हर Ëयिƪ सुखी हो, हर Ëयिƪ संपन्न हो, िकसी क े िहÎसे मȂ कोई 
दुख न हो, पर राम राज्य की पिरकÊपना िसफर् िक ताबȗ मȂ रह गई है।  िदÊली की सरकार इस पर 
काम कर रही है।  यहां इंिÎटǷूशनल िरफॉÇसर् बहुत जरूरी  हȅ।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Mr. Pathak. 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: नेहरू  जी ने टेक्नोलॉिजकल इंिÎटǷूशनल िरफॉÇसर् िकए, यह बहुत 
अच्छी बात थी।  अटल िबहारी जी ने इस देश को ethically, politically institutionalize िकया, 
ethics को बड़ा करके  अटल जी ने िदया।  मेरे नेता अरिंवद क ेजरीवाल जी ने काम की राजनीित 
को, Îकू ल और अÎपताल को राजनीित म
Ȃ लाकर इंिÎटǷूशन िकया। मोदी जी क्या कर रहे हȅ? 
मोदी जी क े पास सब क ु छ करने की अपॉचुर्िनटी है। उनके  पास इतना ब
र्ूट बहुमत है िक वे सारा 
क ु छ कर सकते हȅ। अमृत काल की संभावनाओं का उपयोग किरए। ǛेÍठ भारत बनाने मȂ सबको 
िमलकर काम करना पड़ेगा, कोई अके ला नहीं कर सकता है। सर, इतना समय देने क े िलए 
आपका बहुत धन्यवाद।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, Mr. Pathak.  
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DEMANDS FOR GRANTS, 2023-24 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Supplementary Dema nds for Grants, 2023-24; Shrimati 
Nirmala Sitharaman. 
 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I la y on the Table, a statement (in English 
and Hindi) showing the Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2023-24. 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF UNION TERRITORY OF  
JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 2023-24 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary Demands for Grants of Union Territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir, 2023-24; Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I la y on the Table, a statement (in English 
and Hindi) showing the Supplementary Dema nds for Grants in respect of Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir (with Legislature) for the year 2023-24. 
 
 
THE INTERIM BUDGET OF UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR,  
2024-25 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Interim Budget of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 
2024-25; Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I lay on the Table:—  
(i)  Statements (in English and Hindi) of the estimated receipts and expenditure 
(2024-25) of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir (with Legislature).  
(ii) Statement under Fiscal Responsibilit y and Budget Management Act, 2006 (in 
English and Hindi). 
 
 
MOTION OF THANKS ON THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS - Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Dr. Prashanta Nanda. 
 
डा. Ģशांत नन्दा (ओिडशा): सभापित महोदय, इस सभागृह मȂ उपिÎथत सभी सभासदȗ को मेरा 
नमÎकार। जय जगन्नाथ!   
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
79

 
 31 जनवरी को सुबह 11 बज े सारे देश मȂ सभी लोग उत्सुकता क े साथ राÍटर्पित जी क े 
अिभभाषण को सुनने क े िलए इंतजार कर रहे थे। उत्सुकता इसिलए थी िक कोरोना क े जो दो 
साल गुजर गए, उसमȂ लोगȗ को यह लगता था िक हमारी पोिज़शन क्या है, हमको दो साल तो 
कोरोना ने पीछे की ओर धके ल िदया और अब उसके  दो साल क े बाद हमारी पोिज़शन क्या है, हम 
कहां और िकस िÎथित मȂ ह
ȅ? और राÍटर्पित जी ने इसके  बारे मȂ सुना िदया, िजसमȂ वे इंģाÎटर्क्चर 
क े बारे मȂ बोलीं; िरजवȃशन क े बारे मȂ बोलीं; िडिजटल इंिडया क े बारे मȂ बोलीं; 4 िपलसर् क े बारे मȂ 
बोलीं; youth power, women power, farmers' power and poor क े बारे म
Ȃ बोलीं; उसके  बाद 
expediting of work under Jal Jeevan Mission; artificial intelligence, green energy, सब 
क े ऊपर सारा क ु छ बोल िदया। सारा िहन्दुÎतान बड़ा ख ुश हुआ होगा। खुद को अच्छा लगता होगा 
िक चलो, इंिडया आगे बढ़ रहा है। यह भावना सबके  मन मȂ आती है। इसिलए मȅ पहले राÍटर्पित जी 
को धन्यवाद अपर्ण करता हूँ।   
 सर, मȅ इस संबंध मȂ यह भी कहना चाहता ह ूँ िक इसने सारे देश को दो साल पीछे धके ल 
िदया।  हर Îटेट, हर यूिनयन टेिरटरी और सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट, सभी ने कोिशश की िक हम उन दो 
सालȗ को भूल जाएँ और आगे बढ़ जाएँ। 
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
इन सभी Îटेट्स और यूिनयन टेिरटरीज़ मȂ अभी जब इनका बजट सेशन होगा, तो उस 
समय गवनर्र इसके  बारे मȂ बोलȂगे।  इसिल
ए राÍटर्पित जी क े मुँह से हर Îटेट, हर यूिनयन टेिरटरी 
को शाबाशी देना इनका एक हक बनता है, पहले म
ȅ यही बात रखना चाहता हूँ। 
 अब मȅ पूरे िडटेल क े ऊपर आता हूँ।  पहले हम भगवान से Îटाटर् करȂ! सालȗ-साल 
भारतवासी सोचते थ
े िक कब रामलला की ĢितÍठा होगी और 22 तारीख  को वह सपना पूरा हो 
गया। सपना पूरा होने क े बाद सबके  मन मȂ जो खुशी थी, उसी को हमने राÍटर्पित जी क े मुँह से सुन 
िलया। राÍटर्पित जी ओिडशा से आती ह
ȅ। उनके  मुँह से हमारी यह सुनने की इच्छा थी िक जो उनके  
क ुलदेवता हȅ, जगन्नाथ जी, उनका भी जो पिरकर्मा Ģोजेक्ट है, उस पिरकर्मा Ģोजेक्ट का 17 
तारीख को उǇाटन हुआ।  पुरी का जो 1.5 हजार साल का ढाँचा था, उसको तोड़ कर एक सुंदर 
जगन्नाथ मंिदर बनाने क े िलए उनके  परम भƪ, नवीन पटनायक जी ने जो वादा िकया था, वह 
क
ै सा है, कम से कम हमारे माननीय मंतर्ी, रुपाला  जी यह देख कर आए हȅ िक जगन्नाथ मंिदर 
िकतना बिढ़या बना है। यह भी बात है िक इसमȂ एक पैसा भी डोनेशन क े रूप  मȂ नहीं िलया गया, 
क्यȗिक जगन्नाथ जी कहते हȅ िक देने वाला तो मȅ हूँ, तू मुझे क्या देगा! इसी तरह से 26 तारीख को 
पिÌचम ओिडशा मȂ जो समलेÌवरी
 मंिदर है, उसके  पिरकर्मा Ģोजेक्ट का भी उǇाटन िकया गया।  
राम मंिदर क े रूप  मȂ जो टȂपल ट ूिरज्म को बढ़ावा िदया गया है, उसी Ģकार से हर Îटेट इस पर 
काम कर रहा ह
ै। आप बालाजी को देिखए, क ेरल क े कािर्तके यन को देिखए, इधर िहमाचल Ģदेश 
को देिखए, इधर उǄराखंड को देिखए, सब आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ।  इसिलए मȅ यह सोचता था िक हमारी 
राÍटर्पित जी क े मुँह से अगर जगन्नाथ जी क े बारे मȂ ये दो-चार शÅद बोल देते, तो ओिडशावासी 
बड़े खुश होते।  अगर उन्हȗने नहीं बोला है, तो
 कोई बात नहीं, वे जरूर  िदल से बोलते हȗगे।  उनके  
िदल को सलाम करके  मȅ आगे बढ़ता हूँ। 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 उन्हȗने िभिǄ भूिम क े िवकास क े बारे मȂ कहा। बहुत बिढ़या, बहुत इंģाÎटर्क्चर का काम 
हुआ है, लेिकन िवमान सेवा कहाँ है, आप देिखए! पहले जो 74 एयरपोट्सर् थे, वे कहाँ तक आकर 
पहुँचे - 149.  बहुत बिढ़या हुआ, पर राÍटर्पित जी क े अपने िजले मȂ रसगोिंवदपुर एक एयरिÎटर्प 
है, जो सेक ं ड वÊडर् वार क े समय स
े है, अगर ये उसको शुरू  कर लेते, तो यह 150 हो जाता। वह 
नहीं हो पाया।         
मȅ रेल क े बारे मȂ क्या कहूँ । रेल मंतर्ी जी ने 25,000 िकलोमीटर रेल लाइन बना दी और 39 
वन्दे भारत टर्ेनȂ चला दीं। बहुत बड़ा काम हुआ। सुनने मȂ अच्छा लगता है। हम आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ, इसमȂ 
कोई शक नहीं है। लेिकन वहीं राÍटर्पित जी क े अपने िजले क े रायरंगपुर से भुवनेÌवर आने क े िलए 
अभी तक एक भी टर्ेन नहीं है। तो यह भी बोलना जरूरी है िक बढ़Ȃ, तो सबको साथ लेकर बढ़Ȃ। 
सबको साथ लेकर बढ़ने से सबको अच्छा लगेगा और ऐसा माहौल होना चािहए। इसीिलए मȅ 
बोलता हूँ िक इसको भी ध्यान मȂ रख लीिजएगा। बाकी आपके  उन्हीं िजलȗ मȂ और क्या-क्या है, मȅ 
बोलता हूँ। उसी मयूरभंज िजले मȂ, राÍटर्पित जी क े िजले मȂ, भारत सरकार ने 15 साल  पहले 
रुपसा -बंगरीपोसी रेल पथ का गेज पिरवतर्न िक
या था, उसको broad guage बनाया था। 2011 से 
रुपसा -बंगरीपोसी रेलवे लाइन मȂ बुड़ामारा से खड़गपुर-टाटानगर मेन लाइन तक, चाकु िलया 
तक 55 िकलोमीटर लÇबा नया रेल पथ जोड़ने क े िलए ĢÎताव है। ĢकÊप िनमार्ण मȂ 700 कोिट की 
जरूरत है, जबिक Ģित साल एक-एक हजार रुपय े उसको िमलते हȅ। तो
 उसको कÇÃलीट करने मȂ 
िकतने साल लगȂगे! ठीक है, िभिǄ भूिम क े िवकास की बात है, वह बढ़ रहा ह ै, अच्छा लग रहा है। 
 उन्हȗने एक बहुत बिढ़या बात बोली, जो राÍटर्पित जी को बहुत अच्छी लगी। हम एिशयन 
गेÇस मȂ 100 मेडÊस ले आये। पूरा सȂचुरी करा िदये।  बहुत बिढ़या बात है। इसके  िलए शाबाशी देनी 
चािहए।  एक शाबाशी इधर भी आनी चािहए, िजस मुख्य मंतर्ी ने अपने राज्य मȂ हॉकी िवÌव कप 
िकया, उनका भी हक उसमȂ बनता है। एक बार नहीं, दो-दो बार उन्हȗने इधर िकया। इस कारण 
उसमȂ उनका भी हक बनता ह
ै। मेरे कहने का मतलब यह है िक अब तो राÍटर्पित महोदया 
...(समय की घंटी)... *"My greetings to all the dignitar ies present in the House, Jai 
Jagannath! 
Madam President, It is a welcome step  that the Government has provided 
pucca houses to four crore nine lakh poor families of the country at a cost of six lakh 
crore rupees. I will talk about the state of  Odisha. The State Government has been 
repeatedly demanding that eligible beneficiaries from Western and Southern Odisha 
be provided houses under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana. If the Government has 
been able to provide houses to more than four crore people in the country, then, what 
is the problem in giving another seven lakh houses to the poor people of Odisha?"  
 इसीिलए मȅ बोल रहा हूँ िक अगर देना है, तो पूरा दीिजए।  यह फ ेडरल Îटेट है, आप 
सबको दीिजए।  हम आगे बढ़Ȃगे।  अके ले िसफर् सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट ही नहीं आगे बढ़ेगी। सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट 
पूरे भारत क े भूखंड को लेकर आगे बढ़ेगी। अगर यह पूरे भारत क े भूखंड को लेकर आगे बढ़ेगी, तो 
                   
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
81

 
भारत क े भूखंड की हर जगह को लेकर आगे बढ़ना चािहए। मुझे और भी बहुत सी बातȂ कहनी थीं, 
लेिकन समय नहीं है।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद। 
 
डा. Ģशांत नन्दा: िफर भी मȅ आपको धन्यवाद दे रहा हूँ िक आपने मुझे बोलने का मौका िदया। मȅ 
हमारी आदरणीया और माननीया राÍटर्पित जी को भी अपना धन्
यवाद ज्ञािपत करता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय Ģशांत नन्दा जी। Now, Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, on behalf 
of my Party, the YSR Congress Party, an d our beloved Party Leader, Shri Y.S. 
Jaganmohan Reddy, I thank the hon. President for addressing the Parliament. 
 Sir, this year the Address made by th e hon. President of India is very, very 
significant because the immense progress th at India has achieved after 2014 till now 
has been compared with that of the misrul e of the Congress Party prior to that, till 
2014, that is, the dark rule of Congress from  2004 to 2014. Sir, I am referring to this 
because the Congress Party has done irreparable damage to Andhra Pradesh, which 
I would like to draw attention to in my next few paragraphs. The Congress Party may 
try to whitewash the past history and make their decades of misrule look positive, but 
the people of this country will never forgiv e the Indian National Congress, its misrule 
and its dirty tactics and politics. 
Andhra Pradesh is the biggest victim of the misrule of the Congress Party. 
They have subjected Andhra Pradesh to th e violent and unscientific bifurcation that 
has ruined socio-economic fabric of the State, which can never be forgotten and 
which can never be forgiven.  The people of Andhra Pradesh will never forgive the 
Congress Party.   The Congress Party has gone into the history book and it will never 
be able to come back to power in Andhra  Pradesh. I would like to make a mention 
how Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act came  i n t
 o  p o w e r .  M y  f r i e n d ,  S h r i  J a i r a m  
Ramesh is not here now, but he is suppose d to be the author of the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act. The Andhra Prad esh Reorganisation Bill was listed for 
consideration and passing in Lok Sabha on 18th February, 2014. Please note down the 
dates. During the course of the discu ssion in Lok Sabha, many Members of 
Parliament from Andhra Pradesh, includin g the Congress MPs, raised the voices of 
concern on four major issues: water sharing,  electricity sharing, revenue distribution 
and the capital of the State. These four issues had never been addressed by the 
Congress Party and the Bill was passed amid di n.  Instead of giving a concrete reply 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
on the discussion, the Congress steam rolled the Bill.  In fact, they brushed aside 
everything and even the concerns raised  by the Congress MPs were brushed aside 
and, unfortunately, it has gone into the annals  of the history that during the Congress 
rule, all the doors of the Lok Sabha had b een closed, live telecast was cut off, the 
House was sealed and the Bill was passed am id din.  This is how they ruled the 
country and this is how the Bill was passed du ring 2004 to 2014, which can never be 
forgotten and it is there in the history.  In the course of discussion, numerous 
demands for division were raised and many Members of the Congress Party asked for 
division, but that had not been accepted by  the then Speaker. The Bill was passed in 
just one-and-half hours. Such an important Bill, which decided the fate of Andhra 
Pradesh, had been passed amid din in just one-and-half hours! That is the debate 
that had taken place in Lok Sabha. After Lok Sabha had passed the Bill, it reached 
Rajya Sabha.  On 20
th February, 2014, various dema nds were made for granting 
Andhra Pradesh a Special Category Status . Many Members in this august House 
raised the demand for Special Category St atus, including the fo rmer Vice-President 
of India when he was the leader in the opposition at that point of time and he also 
demanded Special Category Status for a period  of ten years for the residual State of 
Andhra Pradesh to boost the development in the region. In response to this demand, 
the then hon. Prime Minister of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh, of the Congress Party 
categorically and unequivocally promised -- I am emphasising the words 
'unequivocally and categorically promised' -- Special Category Status for the residual 
State of Andhra Pradesh. 
Sir, I would like to bring to your kind notice the verbatim of  the speech of the 
then hon. Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh. It states, "I would like to make a few 
further announcements in this regard.  Firs t, for the purpose of Central assistance, 
the Special Category Status will be exte nded to the successo r State of Andhra 
Pradesh comprising of 13 districts, includ ing four districts of Rayalaseema and three 
districts of North Coastal Andhra Pradesh, for a period of five years. This will put the 
State finance on a firm footing." This is th e promise that the then hon. Prime Minister 
had made in this august House.   
 My question to the Congress Party is th at it could have amended the Bill. This 
provision was not there in the Bill. It was a promise that had been made by the then 
hon. Prime Minister on the floor of this august House. Why did the Congress Party fail 
to amend the Bill? They could have sent back the Bill to the Lok Sabha, got it 
amended and could have given a legal sanctity  to the promise made by the then hon. 
Prime Minister. Why did they not do it? They are now rather blaming the present 
ruling dispensation and also the YSR Congress Party. Some of their Members, 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
83

 
including Shri Manikchand Thakur, some Member from Lok Sabha from Tamil Nadu, 
who is the in-charge of Congress Party, keep on talking  everyday; day in and day 
out. When they failed to grant the Special Category Status for the residual State of 
Andhra Pradesh, where is the necessity  for the Congress Party to blame other 
political parties, including the YSR Congress Party? ...(Interruptions)... This is 
because the promise that had been made by the then Prime Minister of this country 
on the floor of this august House was a mere eyewash. I have no hesitation to say that 
the promise was a mere eyewash.  The Co ngress Party deliberately failed to include 
the Special Category Stat us in the Re-organization Bill. If it was done, it could have 
been legally binding on the successive BJP Government to implement the same. It is 
their failure and because of their non-impl ementation, Andhra Pradesh is suffering 
now.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Madam, 30 minutes...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please address the Chair. क ृपया चेयर पर बैठकर न बोलȂ।  No 
comments. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: I am not yielding.  ...(Interruptions)...  You have spoiled 
Andhra Pradesh and your misrule can never be forgotten. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr. Vijayasai Reddy, please speak to the Chair. 
...(Interruptions)...   क ृपया बैठकर न बोलȂ। 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: The Congress Pa rty was insensitive to the needs and 
aspirations of the people of Andhra Prades h. The INC could have easily enforced the 
Special Category Status by in corporating the same in the Re-organization Bill, but 
they failed to do so. When they failed to do  so, they can't blame others for that now. 
After the Re-organization B ill was assented to by the then hon. President on 1
st 
March, 2014, the Congress Party had three fu ll months, three entire months, to pass 
the Union Cabinet's Resolution for granting the Special Category Status to Andhra 
Pradesh. In fact, the Cabinet had passed a Resolution, but then what happened? 
The Cabinet's Resolution was sent to the Planning Commission. Where was the 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
necessity to do so?  In the past, when other States were bifurcated and were granted 
Special Category Status, the Congress Party had never sent their proposals to the 
Planning Commission. This was the first time when it was done. It means the 
Congress Party had no real intention to grant the Special Category Status to the State 
of Andhra Pradesh. It was only a part of the delaying tactics. They failed to do so 
because for the Congress Party, granting of Special Category Status was just an 
electoral issue. They thought that by offering the Special Category Status, this Bill 
would be passed smoothly and they would co me to power in Telangana. That was 
what they had expected, but the people of  Telangana taught a lesson to them. The 
Congress Party did not come to power in Telangana even after bifurcation of the 
State.  ...(Interruptions)...  They have suffered for their acts. Now, after ten years, 
t h e y  h a v e  t o l d  s o  m a n y 
 and that is how they have come to power in Telangana . 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: It is only a matter of time that the Government is going to 
fall.  ...(Interruptions)...   Your Government in Telangana is going to fall. It is only a 
matter of time.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Vijayasai Reddy ji, please address the Chair.   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: It is the hypocrisy and it is the hypocritical attitude of the 
Congress Party and Congress politicians. I am  particularly referring to Manickam 
Tagore, who is from Tamil Nadu , I think. Every day, he cl aims to be in charge of 
Andhra Pradesh... ...(Interruptions)...  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will see the records. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: I can confidently say.  ...(Interruptions)...  Let 
Manickam Tagore come on the people platform... ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We will examine it.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
85

 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: About Andhra Pr adesh, I can tell you more than what 
Manickam Tagore can. ...(Interruptions)...  With the support of other political State 
leaders of the Congress Party, Manickam  Tagore is blaming the YSRCP for not 
demanding the Special Category Status from the BJP, which is factually not correct 
and I will come to that point. This is the hypocrisy of the Congress Party.   
Sir, I have no hesitation to say that the Congress Party is the real culprit when it 
comes to damaging the interests of the pe ople of the Andhra Pradesh. Sir, mere 
pointing fingers will not change the reality and this is what they have to realise.   
 Sir, the YSRCP has always been at the forefront for de manding the Special 
Category Status. After the BJP has come to power, our hon. Chief Minister, Shri 
Jaganmohan Reddy Garu, has met hon. Prime Minister more than eight times and 
hon. Home Minister more than twelve times and asked for the Special Category 
Status.  ...(Interruptions)...  I will tell you about that. I will address that issue. When 
you had the opportunity to grant the Special  Category Status, you failed to do so. If 
you have not done that, then, when BJP got 303 seats in 2019 elections, where was 
the necessity for them to do so! Eventually, who is at loss? It is the State of Andhra 
Pradesh, it is the people of Andhra Pradesh whose interests have been damaged. Sir, 
I am telling you on this platform.  In the 2019 elections, BJP got 300-odd seats and 
now psephologists are saying that BJP is going to get more than 350 seats.  Where is 
the Congress Party? BJP will ne ver pay heed to any other po litical party if they get 
350 seats in the ensuing elections. Congress is going to get less than forty seats. 
Their own alliance partner is saying that they will get less than 40 seats. It is not me, it 
is they who are saying it. It is on record.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Vijayasai Reddy ji, please address the Chair. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Not only our Chief Minister has met the hon. Prime 
Minister and the Home Minister but the Memb ers of Parliament of our Party, YSRCP, 
including me, have also raised the issue a number of times on the floor of this House 
as well as Lok Sabha but we could not do anything. BJP has not paid heed to our 
request. We have agitated, we have requested them, we have begged them, we have 
pleaded with them but nothing happened. There was no use. When the Congress did 
not do when they had the opportunity, BJP also is not doing when they are in a 
position to do it.  Eventually, the people of Andhra Pradesh are suffering.  By making 
hollow promises in the Parliament, Congre ss has made mockery of our Parliamentary 
democracy. It is the conclusion. Let me ma ke some more points. I think, I have 
another 15 minutes' time. 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, you have the time. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: So, I have opportunity to criticize them for another fifteen 
minutes.  If you see the time of bifurcat ion, the Congress Government had been in 
power for ten years, that is, from 2004-2014 and they did the damage. In fact, I would 
like to draw your kind attention to the ma nifesto of the Congress Party, which they 
released in 2004.  In their manifesto of 200 4, they promised a separate Telangana. 
They promised a separate Telangana in  2004 in their election manifesto.  
..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, please.    
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: So, it was the Congress manifesto which stated a 
separate Telangana.  Sir, they had full ten years, a whole decade to create Telangana 
in a rational way.  They could have done it  in a more rational and scientific manner. 
But they did not do that.  Why did they not do that? They wanted to take only 
electoral benefits. Their real intention was not to benefit the people of Andhra Pradesh 
or the people of Telangana. It was only for their electoral benefits that they did it, and 
they are now suffering, Sir. They coul d have constituted the second States 
Reorganisation Committee for this purpose.  They did not do that to ensure that 
bifurcation was done in a more planned manner.  The Congress party was sleeping 
for one decade, for full ten years.  Why did Congress party choose a shortcut method 
for bifurcation? For everything, they wanted a shortcut method. Just ten days before 
the notification of 2014 elections, they t ook the shortcut method and completed the 
process. This is what the Congress party is.  Sir, it is because of Congress that the 
bifurcation was never about the welfare of the two succe ssor States. The welfare of 
the people was not their concern.  What  Congress Party did was sheer electoral 
opportunism.  There was nothing else.  Sir, please go back to the electoral records of 
the composite Andhra Pradesh during 2004 an d also prior to 2014 elections.  During 
UPA-I and UPA-II, the composite Andhra Pradesh contributed maximum number of 
MPs. It is because of contribution from composite Andhra Pradesh that they came to 
power at the Centre.  In other States, they got nothing. Out of 42, they got about 37 
from the composite Andhra Pradesh.  Duri ng UPA-I, they got 37 and during UPA-II, 
they got 33. That is the contribution of the composite Andhra Pradesh.  Because of 
the composite Andhra Pradesh, they came to power and formed UPA-I and UPA-II.  
However, in 2014, they knew that they ha d completely misruled the composite State 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
87

 
of Andhra Pradesh and they ha d realised that they were not going to come to power.  
They thought that by bifurcating the State,  they could come to power at least in 
Telangana, leaving behind Andhra Pradesh. It was their idea.  And the bifurcation of 
the State was done only to get favourable electoral results in Telangana.  The people 
of Telangana also taught a lesson to them, that is a different issue. Sir, the Congress 
was the main villain in this entire epis ode of Special Category status and also 
bifurcation. They bifurcated the State an d the people merely to serve their own 
political motives, merely to serve their own ul terior motives, only with the ambition to 
come to power in Telangana.  Sir, I would like to say one more thing. Whenever the 
non-Congress Governments created new States, like Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, 
Uttarakhand, all these States were bifurc ated and carved out in the most peaceful 
and scientific manner. But the Congress Go vernment could not do it. Why? It was 
because of their ulterior motives, their ev il intentions to stay back in power by 
whatever means.                                                                       
Sir, the Congress Party has failed in two aspects. They failed to arrive at a 
consensus for the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act at the State level.  They were 
in power. They were ruling the State. The Congress Party was ruling Andhra Pradesh.  
They failed to create a consensus. Your own Government and your Chief Minister 
...(Interruptions)... The then Chief Minister , Mr. Kiran Kumar Reddy 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Digvijaya Singh ji, please take your seat. Let him 
speak.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: You failed to arrive at a consensus.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, address the Chair. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: You failed to create a consensus within the State.  
...(Interruptions)...  They failed to get their own pa rty people unanimously agree to 
the Bill.   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया सीट पर बैठकर न बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir, in fact , their own Congress Members opposed the 
Bill.  It is shameful to the Congress Party. Their own Members on the floor of this 
House as well as in the Lok Sabha oppose d the Bill tooth and nail. They failed to 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
arrive at a consensus. They failed to br ing a consensus among the Members to agree 
to the Bill.  Sir, these points are very im portant. The last point about the Congress 
Party is this. I pray to God that the Congre ss Party should be punished for the misrule 
and injustice that they have done to the State of Andhra Pradesh.   
 Sir, in the light of all these betrayals by the Congress Party, the people of 
Andhra Pradesh have now learned never to trust the spineless Congress Party. I have 
no hesitation in calling them the spineless Congress Party. I will put a step forward 
and, if you permit me, I will call them as  party. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I would permit  within parliame ntary words.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: You are playing politics.  . ..(Interruptions)..  Family 
politics.  ...(Interruptions)...  Don't bring family issues in political arena.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Vija yasai Reddy, address the Chair.  
...(Interruptions)...   क ृपया सीट पर बैठकर न बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Th at is the reason why your dirty tactics and dirty 
planning...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Vijayasa i Reddy, keep in mi nd parliamentary 
words.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Intervening in family affairs; that is the reason why people 
taught you a lesson.  ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, it is important.    
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया सीट पर बैठकर न बोलȂ। आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। िसफर् 
िवजयसाई रेƿी जी की बात िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। ...(
 Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: I am not yielding . This is the reason the vote share of * 
party in Andhra Pradesh in 2019 elections was less than NOTA.     
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप पािर्लयामȂटरी वड्सर् इÎतेमाल करȂ। 
 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
89

 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: See what percenta ge they have got in Andhra Pradesh.  
...(Interruptions)...  Percentage of votes polled to the Congress Party in 2019 
elections in Andhra Pradesh was less than  NOTA votes. The Congress Party, which 
ruled the country for so many decades, got votes less than NOTA votes.  Leave 
Andhra Pradesh.  It is only one State. I w ill come to national level. At the national 
level, the downfall of Congress Party is very clea r.  It is very visible.  In 2014 elections, 
the Congress Party won 44 seats with a vote  share of 19.31 per cent.  They won 44 
seats.  This is the worst ever performance of the Congress Party, the  party, in 
general elections.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: 
* और ये सारे शÅद पािर्लयामȂटरी हȅ या नहीं, it will be examined.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir, four more minutes are there. In 2019 elections, the 
Congress Party won 52 seats. From 44, they ha ve slightly gone up to 52 with a vote 
share of 19.46 per cent.  …(Interruptions)…  19.46 per cent!  Even their own allies, 
they call it I.N.D.I.A.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak to the Chair.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Even their own allies, allies of the Congress Party, are 
saying that Congress would not even get 40 seats in 2024, the next elections which 
are going to be held in April, 2024.  Last year,.. …(Interruptions)…  I t  i s  t h e  
psephologists.  I am not an astrologer.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mananiya V. Vijayasai Reddyji, please.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Last time, their beloved leader, Rahul Gandhi ji lost in 
Amethi. This time, he would lose from wherever he contests.  Wherever Rahul 
Gandhiji contests, he would be losing.  He woul d not win.  He would not be able to 
become a parliamentarian.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please come to the subject. …(Interruptions)…   
 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Whether it is Andhra Pradesh, Kerala or anywhere in the 
country, let him contest. He would not be able to win. But in 2029.. …(Interruptions)…  
Madam, please. …(Interruptions)…  It is very important for you. …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You address the Chair. …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: It is very important. In 2029, India would be Congress-
mukt Bharat.  The status of the Congre ss Party would change from the grand old 
party to the grand extinct party!  …(Interruptions)…  The grand old party would 
become the grand extinct party and the Cong ress Party would not be there.  In 2029 
also, I would be here.  I would be here  and I would see the Congress Party's 
extinction.  …(Interruptions)…   
 Sir, I am concluding. Two more minut es are there. In these 77 years of 
Independence, Congress has been in power for more than 50 years. Out of 77 years, 
it is more than 50 years. India has grown only in the remaining 27 years and not in the 
50 years.  It is only in the remaining 27 years, has India grown.  The development, 
which we are able to see, which we are able to achieve, is not during their 50 years of 
rule; it is only in the remaining 27 years of rule. India's growth  has not been because 
of the Congress Party but despite it.  …(Interruptions)…  It is very important, Madam.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Whenever Congre ss Party has been in power, India had 
prolonged period of backwardness. During these 50 years, whenever they were in 
power, we have seen prolonged backwardness. …(Interruptions)… This is very 
important. This slogan has to be remembered  by the Congress Party.  They have to 
put it on the walls of the Party. There is no doubt in anyone's mind that India grows 
only when Congress sleeps. I am repeatin g it. India grows on ly when Congress 
sleeps. The people of Andhra Pradesh, once  again I am telling, will never forgive the 
Congress Party. The Congress Party has gone into the history in Andhra Pradesh. 
Thank you very much, Sir.   
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी क े 
इस अिभभाषण पर जब हम इसका समथर्न करने क े िलए खड़े ह
 ुए हȅ, तो एक अभूतपूवर् और अलग 
अनुभूित होती है। क्यȗिक यह इस नए संसद भवन मȂ राÍटर्पित का पहला अिभभाषण है, Îवतंतर्ता 
का अमृत महोत्सव पूणर् होने क े बाद राÍटर्पित का पहला अिभभाषण  है, गणतंतर् का अमृत महोत्सव 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
91

 
Ģारंभ होने क े बाद का पहला अिभभाषण है और इससे भी अिधक सुखद संयोग यह है िक यह उस 
संसद भवन क े नए पिरसर मȂ हो रहा है, िजसका Ǜीगणेश गणेश चतुथीर् को हुआ था और िजसमȂ 
पहला िबल  ' नारी शिƪ वंदन अिधिनयम, 2023' पािरत हुआ था। इसके  साथ ही वहाँ पर 
अनुस
ूिचत जनजाित वगर् से आने वाली देश की पहली मिहला महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी क े ǎारा इस 
अिभभाषण को ĢÎतुत करना और भी सुंदर और सुखद संयोग बना था।  
यह संयोग और बेहतर इसिलए हो जाता है, क्यȗिक जब यह संसद भवन मȂ Ģारंभ हुआ, 
उससे पहले भारत चाँद क े अछू ते कोने को छू ने वाला दुिनया का पहला द
ेश भी बन गया था और 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने उस Ãवाइंट का नाम िशव शिƪ Ãवाइंट रख िदया था, अथार्Þ Îतर्ी शिƪ 
का उǌव। भारत मȂ वनवासी क्षेतर्ȗ से लेकर, िवधान सभा और संसद से लेकर चंदर्मा की ऊ ँचाइयȗ 
तक पहुँचाने का यह सुखद संयोग बना, जो मोदी जी क े न ेतृत्व मȂ अमृत काल मȂ भारत की उभरती 
हुई और आकाश छू ती हुई एक नई शिƪ का Ģतीक है। यह अमृत काल आया है, तो यह आत्म 
सÇमान का एक नया Îवरूप भी लाया है। अब िंकग जॉजर् की जगह इंिडया गेट क े सिर्कल पर नेता 
जी सुभाष चन्दर् बोस की मूिर्त है। एक नहीं, बिÊक सभी Ģधान मंितर्यȗ का संगर्हालय है। 
सािहबजादȗ की Îमृित मȂ, िजसका उÊलेख महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी ने िकया है, वीर बाल िदवस भी 
है, िबरसा मुंडा जी क े जन्मिदन क े ऊपर जनजातीय गौरव िदवस भी हुआ है, संिवधान िदवस भी 
है, िवभाजन िवभीिषका Îमृित िदवस भी है, अथार्Þ भारत की समÎत Ģेरणाओं को संवैधािनक 
िÎथित देकर यह सुखद संयोग आया है। देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा आज तेजी से बढ़ रही है। हम जी20 
मȂ सबसे तेजी से बढ़ती हुई अथर्ËयवÎथा हȅ। हम 5G roll-out करन े मȂ पहले देश बन गए हȅ और 
िĤिटश काल का Kingsway काँगर्ेस क े शासन काल मȂ राजपथ से होते हुए, अब कतर्Ëय पथ हो 
गया है। अब रेस कोसर् रोड लोक कÊयाण मागर् है। The Indian Penal Code भारतीय न्याय संिहता 
हो गई है और मुगल गाडर्न भी अब अमृत उǏान हो गया है। इस बात की Îवीकारोिƪ िसफर् भारत  
ही नहीं, बिÊक पूरी दुिनया कर रही है। World Economic Forum क े Chief Borge Brende ने 
कहा है िक  "India is going towards the exponentia l growth with peace and no conflict.  
Investment in R&D and infrastructure is goi ng in such a way th at can make India a 
$10 trillion economy in a decade." यह वÊडर् इकोनॉमी फोरम क े चीफ कहते हȅ। िबल गेट्स ने 
यह कहा है िक इंिडया ने जो िडिजटल िसÎटम Îथािपत िकया है, वह पूरी दुिनया क े िलए 
अनुकरणीय है। Chatham House Think Tank ने एक
 आिर्टकल मȂ कहा है िक "G-20 
showcases the power of new emerging India." और तो और, हमारे सबसे बड़े Ģितǎंǎी, 
ĢितÎपधीर् माने जाने वाले देश, चाइना क े ग्लोबल टाइÇस ने भी आिखर मȂ मान िलया, दो जनवरी, 
2024 को अपने आिर्टकल मȂ यह Îवीकार कर िलया िक मोदी जी क े आने क े बाद भारत मȂ 
अथर्ËयवÎथा और िवकास बहुत तेजी से आगे बढ़ा है। िजतनी भी रेिंटग वाली एजȂसीज़ ह ȅ, Fitch, 
Moody’s, IMF, World Bank and Standard and Poor's, ये सब भारत क े गर्ोथ रेट को 6.7 से 
लेकर 7.8 Ģितशत तक बढ़ता हुआ िदखा रही हȅ। इन सबके  अनुसार भारत इस समय वÊडर् की 
सबसे बड़ी Ģमुख इकोनॉमीज़ मȂ सबसे तेजी से आगे बढ़ रहा है। महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहूँगा िक अब 
तो इस नए संसद भवन क े ऊपर जो भारतीय राजकीय िचÏन क े श
ेर हȅ, वे भी नई आभा से िदखाई 
पड़ने लगे हȅ। हमारे बहुत से िवरोधी कोटर् चले गए थे िक शेर क ु छ ज्यादा आकर्ामक िदख रहे हȅ, 
क्यȗिक इन्हȂ शेर भी िबÊली जैसे चािहए थ
े, परंतु अब संसद भवन मȂ ऐसा शेर बैठा है, िजसकी 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
वजह से िकसी की भारत की तरफ आँख उठाने की िहÇमत नहीं है। जो इस भाव मȂ िवÌवास करते 
हȅ –  
 
"नािभषेको न संÎकार: िंसहÎय िकर्यते मृगै:। 
िवकर्मािर्जतराज्यÎय Îवयमेव मृगȂदर्ता।।" 
 
 भारत की जो मृगȂदर्ता है, वह उठकर सामने आ रही है। महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहूँगा िक 
इसकी शुरुआत  कहाँ से हुई। 16 मई, 2014 क े िदन इस देश मȂ सरकार बदली, उस िदन मोदी जी 
क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमȂ जो जनादेश िमला, वह िसफर् सरकार बदलने क े िलए ही नहीं था, बिÊक िवचार 
बदलने क े िलए था, ËयवÎथा बदलने क
े  िलए था। इसके  िलए मȅ लंदन क े अखबार  The Sunday 
Guardian को क्वोट करना चाहूँगा। िजन्हȗने हम पर हुक ूमत की थी, मȅ उनके  अखबार को क्वोट 
करता हूँ। वह अपने editorial मȂ 18 मई , 2014 को िलखता है - "India's second tryst with 
destiny." वह आगे िलखता है, 16th of May, 2014, यानी  वह िदन
, िजस िदन हमȂ मोदी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ ÎपÍट बहुमत िमला s h o u l d  b e  k n o w n  i n  I n d i a n  h i s t o r y  a s  t h e  d a y  o n  w h i c h  
Britishers finally left India. वह आगे िलखता है िक इसका कारण यह है िक आजादी क े बाद 
लंबे समय तक उन िवचारȗ का शासन रहा, िजनके  ऊपर िĤिटश उपिनवेशवादी मानिसकता
 की 
िवरासत का Ģभाव था, परंतु पहली बार एक ऐसे िवचार क े हाथ मȂ पूणर् सǄा आई है, अटल जी क े 
जमाने मȂ हमारे हाथ मȂ पूणर् सǄा नहीं थी, जो अपने  inception और  inspiration, दोनȗ म Ȃ पूणर्त: 
भारतीय है और British colonial legacy से उसका कोई मतलब नहीं है।  
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
यह बदलाव वहां पर िदखा, जब नीित आयोग बना। 1 जनवरी, 2015 को नीित आयोग ने जो अपनी 
पहली बैठक की, उसमȂ कहा िक बहुत िदन भारत िवदेश से आयाितत आिर्थक िवक
 ास क े मॉडÊस 
को लेता रहा। कभी हम रूस  की कॉपी बनते रहे Nehruvian socialism model मȂ, तो कभी 
अमेिरका की कॉपी बने, पर पहली बार नीित आयोग ने अपने Resolution मȂ कहा िक "Now we 
will not be borrowing upon any model from outside. We will sear ch from original 
Bharatiya model."  आपन े देखा उसके  बाद उसकी शुरुआत  इस देश मȂ िकस Ģकार से हुई। 
सबसे पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने क्या सोचा? वे अंत्योदय क े िवचार स
े Ģेिरत थे। उपसभापित 
महोदय, जब हम लोग सǄा मȂ नहीं थे, तो हम लोग कहते थे-  
 
"उगा सूयर् क ैसा कहो मुिƪ का ये 
उजाला करोड़ȗ घरȗ मȂ न पहुंचा, 
खुला िंपजरा है मगर रƪ अब भी 
थके  पंिछयȗ क े परȗ मȂ न पहुंचा।" 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
93

 
 Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने जनधन योजना लाकर सबसे पहले यह एनÌयोर िकया िक गरीबȗ क े 
पास अकाउंट होने चािहए और आज 54 करोड़  अकाउंट हȅ, तो थके  पंिछयȗ क े परȗ मȂ सीधा वह 
रƪ पहुंचे, िजसमȂ न कोई कट हो, न िकसी अन्य Ģकार की बाधा हो, िफर चाहे 11 करोड़  लोगȗ 
को शौचालय
 देना हो या 4 करोड़ गरीब लोगȗ को आवास देना हो।  हमारे कई िवरोधी कहते हȅ िक 
रोजगार और Ëयवसाय मȂ िÎथित ठीक नहीं है, तो मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक 2014 मȂ EPFO, 
Employees' Provident Fund Organisation - यानी कमर्चा
री भिवÍय िनिध खाता, कोई अगर 
कमर्चारी बनेगा तभी अपना भिवÍय िनिध खाता बनवाएगा, िजसमȂ वह भी पैसा डालेगा और उसका 
employer भी पैसा डालेगा - 2014 मȂ 11 करोड़ थे और आज 27 करोड़ हȅ। इसका मतलब यह है 
िक 16 करोड़  लोग ऐसे हुए, िजनके  खाते इस दरिमयान बने। उसमȂ employer भी है और 
employee भी ह
ै। इसका मतलब रोजगार क े सृजन की िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् िÎथित आई है। 
हमारे ितरुची  िशवा जी कई बार debt क े बारे मȂ कह रहे थे। मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक भ ारत दुिनया 
की अनेक अथर्ËयवÎथाओं मȂ debt to GDP रेÌयो मȂ सबसे बेहतर िÎथित मȂ है। आप चाइना, 
अमेिरका, जापान, ģांस, जमर्नी िकसी से भी तुलना कर लीिजए, हम debt to GDP रेÌयो मȂ 
सबसे बेहतर िÎथित मȂ हȅ। हम personal debt मȂ सबसे बेहतर िÎथित मȂ हȅ। भारत मȂ 73 Ģितशत 
लोग ऐसे हȅ, िजन्हȗने कोई personal debt नहीं ले रखा है। इसीिलए IMF न
े हमारी अथर्ËयÎथा की 
बहुत तारीफ भी की है, परंतु यह सारा आिर्थक िवकास तब तक बेमानी होता है, जब तक उस 
िवकास क े साथ राÍटर् क े आत्म गौरव का भाव भी उसमȂ न हो, क्यȗिक आप िवकिसत होकर भी 
िवÌव क े सामने अपनी क्या तÎवीर रखȂगे, तो मȅ कहना चाहूंगा िक महामिहम राÍटर्पित महोदया 
का अिभभाष
ण एक और दृिÍट से महत्वपूणर् था। यह पांच साल क े बाद आने वाली सरकार का, जो 
दोबारा भी आने वाली है, िसफर् पांच साल क े बाद आने वाली सरकार का अिभभाषण नहीं था, उस 
कालखंड का अिभभाषण नहीं था, बिÊक पांच सौ साल क े बाद आने वाले भगवान राम क े आगमन 
क े उस अलौिकक अनुभूित क े कालखंड का भी था।  इस देश मȂ भगवान राम, उनके  जीवन ने इस 
राÍटर् और समाज को जो Ģ
ेिरत िकया, वह राम मंिदर क े समय मȂ िकस रूप  मȂ हुआ, यह मȅ बताना 
चाहता हूं। अगर भगवान राम का जन्म क ेवल इसिलए हुआ था िक उनको रावण का वध करना था, 
तो वे अयोध्या
 क े राजा क े रूप  मȂ अयोध्या की सेना लेकर जाते और रावण को मार देते, परंतु 
उससे धमर् Îथािपत नहीं होता। इसिलए पहले राजा राम को वनवासी राम बनना था। उसके  बा
द 
िनषादराज का सÇमान, उसके  बाद माता शबरी का सÇमान, उसके  बाद सुगर्ीव का राज्यािभषेक, 
िफर वानर, रीछ, भालू अथार्Þ समाज क े उन दूर क े कोनȗ मȂ खड़े ह ुए लोग, जहां तक िकसी की 
दृिÍट भी नहीं जाती थी, सबको संगिठत िकया और संगिठत करके  उस समय िवÌव की सबसे बड़ी 
शिƪ को उन्हȗने पराÎत िकया, अथार्Þ समाज क े हर वगर् को सÇमान, Îथान देकर राम का 
राज्यािभषेक हुआ था।  आज आप देिखए, चाहे 4 करोड़ गरीबȗ को आवास िमला है, 11 करोड़ 
लोगȗ को शौचालय िमला है, 54 करोड़ लोगȗ को जनधन अकाउंट िमले हȅ और 50 करोड़  लोगȗ 
को आयुÍमान भारत मȂ कवर िमला है -  यह तो है ही, परंतु यह भी एक सुखद संयोग देिखए िक मȅ 
यह याद िद
लाना चाहता हूं िक Ǜीराम जन्मभूिम का िशलान्यास जो 9 नवÇबर, 1989 को हुआ था, 
जो पूरे शाÎतर्ीय िवधान से हुआ था, िजसको समरांगण-सूतर्धार कहते हȅ, उस गर्ंथ क े अनुसार, 
उसकी पहली ईंट िबहार क े कामेÌवर चौपाल ने रखी थी, जो आप लोगȗ क े अनुसार so-called 
lower caste मȂ आते ह
ȅ। हम िकसी को higher or lower caste नहीं मानते हȅ। िफर संयोग देिखए, 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
जब 2019 मȂ जजमȂट आता है, तो उस समय हमारे महामिहम राÍटर्पित Ǜी राम नाथ कोिंवद थे, 
जो अनुसूिचत जाित समाज से आते हȅ। 
आज जब राम मंिदर का उǇाटन होता है, तो इस समय हमारी राÍटर्पित, दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी 
हȅ, जो अनुसूिचत जनजाित से आती हȅ और उस Ģाण ĢितÍठा क े मुख्य यजमान हमारे Ģधान म ंतर्ी, 
Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी थे, जो िपछड़े वगर् से आते हȅ। मुझे लगता है िक जो राम क े काल मȂ हुआ था, -- 
सबको सÇमान, सबको Îथान, सबको सǄा म
Ȃ Îथान -- वही राम मंिदर क े काल मȂ भी हो रहा है। 
परन्तु मȅ यहाँ पर एक और फ ैक्ट कहना चाहता हूँ। उस समय हम लोग छातर् जीवन मȂ थे। कई बार 
यह कहा जाता था िक मंडल क े जवाब मȂ कमंडल आया था। म ȅ यह ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूँ िक यह 
पूरी तरह से एक ĥांित है।  उस समय की वी.पी. िंसह जी की सरकार मंडल लेकर आई थी, 
उसका हमसे कोई लेना-देना नहीं था। हमारा आंदोल न 1984 से चल रहा था, 1986 मȂ ताला खुल 
गया था और 9 नवंबर, 1989 को िशलान्यास हो गया था। आज मȅ सारे Ģबुǉ लोगȗ से कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक मंडल कमीशन िकस िदन लागू हुआ - 7 अगÎत, 1990. िसफर् 8 िदन बाद 15 अगÎत 
था। इतना बड़ा िनणर्य, जो उस सरकार ने आकर 8 महीने तक नहीं िलया, जो 8 घंटे मȂ होने वाला 
िनणर्य था, वह क्यȗ 15 अगÎत को नहीं हो सकता था? मȅ बहुत ÎपÍट रूप  से उसका कारण बताता 
हूँ। क े. राजा करुÃपुÎवामी की िकताब म Ȃ Îवगीर्य शरद यादव जी ने िलखा िक वी.पी. िंसह जी से 
उनकी बात हुई और वी.पी. िंसह जी ने कहा िक मȅ इसको 15 अगÎत को ऐितहािसक रूप  से 
एनाउंस करना चाहता हूँ, मगर क्या करू ँ, 9 अगÎत को देवी लाल जी की रैली थी और उन्हȂ इस 
बात का डर था िक देवी लाल जी की रैली क े बाद जनता दल मȂ िवभाजन न हो जाए, बहुत से नेता 
न चले जाएँ, उन्हȂ इस बात का डर था िक शरद यादव जी भी चले जाएँग
े। उस समय क ृषक वगर् मȂ 
बहुत सी ऐसी जाितयाँ थीं, जो आज ओबीसी मȂ हȅ, उस समय ओबीसी मȂ नहीं थीं, तो देवी लाल 
जी की रैली 9 अगÎत को थी, इसिलए 7 अगÎत को लागू करना पड़ा, अथार्Þ
 उनका मूल उǈेÌय 
सामािजक न्याय, समाज क
े  वगș क े िलए उत्थान नहीं था, बिÊक अपनी पाटीर् क े अंदरूनी  
समीकरण और उस राजनीित को साधना था। चूँिक उǈेÌय पिवतर् नहीं था, इसिलए न वह पाटीर् 
बची, न उन नेता को सÇमान िमला। जबिक इसके  ठीक िवपरीत अगर देखȂ, तो हमने ईमानदारी से 
उस वगर् क े सभी नेताओं को सÇमान िदया। जैसे Ǜी कÊयाण िंसह जी, उमा भारती जी, िवनय 
किटयार जी, नरेन्दर्
 मोदी जी, ये सब तो मंडल से पहले क े दौर मȂ ही आ गए थे।  उसके  बाद अगर 
हम आज देखȂ, जो लोग आज हमसे िपछड़े वगर् की बात कहते हȅ, तो मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक िहन्दी 
पƺी मȂ हमने 5 मुख्य मंतर्ी बनाए। उǄर Ģदेश मȂ कÊयाण िंसह जी, मध्य Ģदेश मȂ उमा भारत
ी जी, 
बाबूलाल गौर जी, िशवराज िंसह चौ
हान जी और मोहन यादव जी। हमने 8 िडÃटी सीएम बनाए। 
उǄर Ģदेश मȂ क ेशव Ģसाद मौयर् जी, िबहार मȂ सुशील क ुमार मोदी जी यहाँ सदन मȂ हȅ, तारके Ìवर 
जी, रेणुका देवी जी, अभी छǄीसगढ़ म Ȃ अरुण  साव जी और िबहार मȂ सĦाट चौधरी जी।  8 और 5, 
13 और यिद Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को िमला लȂ, तो हमने उस वगर् क े 14 लोग PM, CM या Deputy CM 
बनाए, िजनमȂ 11 लोग अलग-अलग जाितयȗ क े हȅ। यह होता है - "सबका साथ, सबका िवकास"। 
आज जो लोग सामािजक न्याय की बात करते हȅ, अपने पिरवार क े अलावा उन्हȂ एक योग्य Ëयिƪ 
नहीं िमलता है। िजस िदन सǄा देने की बात आती है, तो वगर् तो छोिड़ए, अपनी जाित मȂ भी एक 
योग्य Ëयिƪ नहीं िमलता है, क ेवल अपने पिरवार को सब क ु छ चािहए, यानी जाित का चूरण देना 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
95

 
है, पिरवार को सǄा संपूरण देना है - यह उनका उǈेÌय है। हमारी सोच इस मामले मȂ िबÊकु ल 
अलग रहती थी।   
 अब मȅ यहाँ एक और बात कहना चाहता हूँ। राम मंिदर क े उǇाटन क े समय एक और बात 
कही गई। हमारे बहुत से लोग कहते हȅ िक इसमȂ सीता जी का नाम नहीं िलया गया। मȅ बताना 
चाहता हूँ िक आप लोग थोड़ा सी सहज बुिǉ का Ģयोग किरए। यह तो राम जन्मभूिम ह
ै, ये तो राम 
लला हȅ, वहाँ िवराजमान भी 5 वषर् क े ह ȅ। जहाँ राजा राम हȗगे, तो वहाँ सीता भी आएँगी। अभी तो 
राम लला ही हȅ, तो जय Ǜी राम ही होगा। दूसरा, मȅ यह भी कहना चाहता हूँ, मुझे बड़ी Ģसन्नता 
भी होती है, जब वे यह बात कहते हȅ िक सीता जी का नाम होना चािहए, तो मुझे ध्यान आता है िक 
दुिनया मȂ कोई दूसरी स
ंÎकृ ित नहीं है, जो ईÌवर मȂ Îतर्ी तत्व को Îथान देती हो, िसफर् हमारी 
संÎकृ ित है। हम सीताराम भी कहते हȅ, राधेÌयाम भी कहते ह ȅ, लÑमीनारायण भी कहते हȅ, 
गौरीशंकर भी कहते हȅ। जब राम मंिदर आंदोलन चल रहा था, तो हम दोनȗ को याद करते थे। 
उपसभापित जी, मȅ उस रैली मȂ बालक क े रूप  मȂ गया था, मुझे आज तक याद है, हम कहते थे िक  
 
"
जन-जन क े मन मȂ राम रमे और Ģाण-Ģाण मȂ सीता है, 
हर ǭदय की धड़कन रामायण, पग-पग पर बनी पुनीता है, 
यिद राम नहीं है साँसȗ मȂ, तो Ģाणȗ का घट रीता है," -- 
 
िफर हम कहते थ
े िक इसिलए -- 
 
"नर-नाहर Ǜी पुरुषोǄम का, हम मंिदर भËय बनाएँगे, 
सौगंध राम की खाते हȅ, हम मंिदर वहीं बनाएँगे।" 
 
आज आप देिखए िक वह सौगंध पूणर् हुई। उसकी शुरुआत  माननीय आडवाणी जी क े समय मȂ ह
 ुई 
थी और मोदी जी ने उसे संपूणर् करने का कायर् िकया है। महोदय, अब मȅ इस िवषय क े ऊपर एक 
और बात कहना चाहता हूँ। माननीय खरगे जी ने कल एक िवषय कहा था िक साइंिटिफक होने की 
बात करनी चािहए।  जब हम साइंिटिफक होने की बात करते हȅ, तो मȅ याद िदलाना चाहता हूँ िक 
Ǜी राम जन्मभूिम का जो मिन्दर बना है, उसमȂ एक
 बड़ा scientific angle आया है। वह क्या है - 
वह यह है िक रामनवमी क े िदन राम लला क े मÎतक क
े  ऊपर सूयर्-ितलक होगा। अब इसके  िलए 
सबसे पहले िकस चीज़ की जरूरत  है - जो planetary position थी, सूयर् क े साथ earth का जो 
angle होगा, उस particular िदन क ै से होगा, तो इसमȂ तीन इंÎटीǷूट्स ने काम िकया ह ै।  Indian 
Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru ने उस पूरे astronomical calculation को सटीक ढंग से 
िकया है। दूसरा Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee है, िजसने उसकी ËयवÎथा 
बनाने का काम िकया है और तीसरी एक Ģाइवेट कÇपनी है, िजसने convex lenses क े through 
क ै से वह Ģकाश अन्दर आएगा और ठीक उसी िबन्दु क े ऊपर उस िदन  क ेिन्दर्त होगा, यह ËयवÎथा 
की है।  मगर मȅ अपने िवरोिधयȗ को बताना चाहता हूँ िक आज तो Astrophysics का इंÎटीǷूट है, 
आज तो हमारे पास इतनी technology है, मगर यही Ģकाश तो कोणाकर् क े सूयर् मिन्दर मȂ भी था। 
इसी तरह से अगर आप देखȂ, तो आंधर् Ģदेश मȂ वेदनारायण मिन्द
र है, उसमȂ भगवान क े चरणȗ क े 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
ऊपर लाइट पड़ती है। महाराÍटर् क े कोÊहापुर मȂ महालÑमी का मिन्दर है, उसमȂ तीन िदन क े िलए 
equinoxes आते हȅ, तो देवी क े मÎतक से लेकर चरणȗ तक सूयर् देव चले जाते हȅ। कणार्टक क े 
Ǜृंगेरी मȂ जो मिन्दर है, उसमȂ बारहȗ महीनȗ मȂ सूयर् की अलग-अलग गित पड़ती है। सर, आप 
पूिछए िक अगर हमारे पास िवज्ञान नहीं था, तो उस जमाने मȂ इतना सटी
क calculation क ै से 
हुआ, जो आज इतने बड़े-बड़े सैटेलाइट्स क े मौजूद क े बाद ही संभव होने की बात आई है। 
इसिलए मȅ कह सकता हूँ िक इसके  िलए हमȂ इस िवचार पर धमर् और संÎकृ ित क े साथ Ģाचीन 
िवज्ञान पर भी गवर् करना चािहए।   
 वैस
े मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूँ िक इसमȂ िवज्ञान की एक और गहरी बात है। आप 
सबको ध्यान होगा िक उस समय 84 सेक ं ड का मुहूतर् था। वह शुरू  कहाँ से होता है? अगर आपने 
कभी भी उसको पूजा मȂ सुना हो, तो पंिडत क्या कहते हȅ - " ĤǨा आयु िǎतीय पराधȃ" । ĤǨा की 
आयु िǎतीय पराधर्, यानी 155 Trillion years है। वैसे Big Bang Theory कहती है िक 14 billion 
years पहले दुिनया बनी।  मȅ बता देना चाहता हूँ िक James Webb Space Telescope ने जो 
नयी findings की हȅ, उनमȂ बहुत सी galaxies ऐसी आयी हȅ, जो 14 billion years से आगे की ह ȅ। 
So, now, that theory has become debatable. िफर  वहाँ से "Ìवेतवराह कÊपे" मȂ आते हȅ, 
यानी 1.97 billion years.  िफर "वैवÎवत मन्वन्तरे' मȂ आते हȅ और उसके  बाद "कलयुग" मȂ आते 
हȅ, यानी 5,125 years. इसके  बाद 'िवकर्म सÇवÞ' मȂ आते हȅ, यानी 2,081 साल, उसके  बाद वषर् मȂ 
आते हȅ, वषर् क े भाग मȂ, उǄरायण सूयर् मȂ और उसके  बाद महीने मȂ आते हȅ और उसके  बाद वार, 
नक्षतर् होते हुए 84 सेक ं ड तक आते हȅ।  मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक यह भारत की सनातन का ल यातर्ा 
है, जो 155 trillion years से लेकर 84 सेक ं ड तक का सटीक calculation करती है। मुझे लगता है 
िक दुिनया मȂ कोई धमर्-संÎकृ ित ऐसी नहीं होगी, जो इस Ģकार का सटीक calculation करने की 
क्षमता रखती हो।  वह िसफर् हमारे यहाँ ह
ै।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, उसके  बाद मȅ यह कहना चाहूँगा िक इस बारे मȂ दुिनया क े सबके  बड़े 
cosmologist Carl Sagan हुए, िजन्हȗने first man-made object, 'Voyager' जो solar 
system क े बाहर गया है, उसका message compose िकया है, उसमȂ यह िलखा है, उसका 
वीिडयो कोई जाकर चेक कर सकता है - "Now only the ancient calculation of Hindus 
matches to the modern cosmological calculation." मगर मȅ यहाँ पर एक
 राजनीितक बात 
भी कहना चाहता हूँ।  मान्यवर, क ु छ लोग कहते थे िक Ǜी राम जन्मभूिम की Ģाण-ĢितÍठा का 
मुहूतर् ठीक नहीं है। मगर मȅ कहना चाहूँगा िक उन सारे लोगȗ को द ेख लेना चािहए िक राहुल गांधी 
जी ने जो यातर्ा शुरू  की है, उसका मुहूतर् क ैसा था, ज़रा इस पर िवचार कर लेना चािहए,  क्यȗिक 
वे जहाँ से चले हȅ - पहले वे असम से चले, तो देवड़ा साहब मुÇबई मȂ अलग  हो गए, जब वे बंगाल 
की तरफ उठे, तो ममता दीदी ने अलग Îटȅड ले िलया, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ मायावती जी ने अलग Îटȅड 
ले िलया, पंजाब मȂ आम आदमी पाटीर् अलग हो गई,  
िबहार पहुँचे तो गठबंधन ही पलट गया।  
आज वे राँची मȂ है। वहाँ सरकार तो बच गई, मगर वहाँ भी मुख्य मंतर्ी चला गया। तो उन लोगȗ को 
ज़रा िवचार करना चािहए िक उन्हȗने यह काम कौन स े मुहूतर् मȂ शुरू  िकया है। परन्तु उसके  
उपरान्त िजस ढंग से इंिडया गठबंधन की राहुल गांधी जी की यातर्ा चल रही है, उसके  िलए, जो 
हकीकत से मुँह मोड़े हुए है, उनके  िलए मȅ यह कहना चाहूँगा िक : 
"आँख मूँद लेने से यह खतरा न टल जाएगा, 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
97

 
वह देखना पड़ेगा, जो देखा न जाएगा।। 
िशजरा िबखरने को है, इस मुहÅबत की दुकान का, 
झूठी तसिƥयȗ से अब सÇभाला न जाएगा ।" 
 
 महोदय, यह भी एक संयोग देिखए िक कल माननीय खरगे जी क े मुँह से िनकल गया था - 
"400 पार" और शाम को ममता दीदी ने कह िदया िक "कांगर्ेस को तो 40 की दरकार।" आप यह 
सोिचए िक यहाँ पर िवषय आया 400
 पार, वहाँ आया 40 की दरकार और गठबंधन मȂ मची हुई है 
ऐसी मारामार िक ....(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, ....(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय Ģमोद जी, Ãलीज़, स
ैयद नािसर हुसैन जी, Ãलीज़।....(Ëयवधान)...  
जब आपका मौका आएगा, तब आप बोिलएगा।....(Ëयवधान)... आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा 
रही है।....(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सैयद नािसर हुसैन: 
* 
  
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: सर, आज गठबंधन क े अंदर िजस Ģकार की मारामार है, उससे मुझे लगता है 
िक इंडी गठबंधन क े लोगȗ क े िदल मȂ तो यह िवचार आ रहा होगा िक ये रÌक-ए-जन्नत मुझे रास 
आती नहीं, ....(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपकी बात िरक
ॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है।....(Ëयवधान)... जब आपका मौका 
आएगा, तब आप बोिलएगा।....(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: अच्छा चिलए, ममता दीदी ने तो कहा न िक 40 की  दरकार। इसमȂ तो कोई 
िंकतु-परंतु की गुंजाइश नहीं है िक 40 भी नहीं िमलȂगी।  
 महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहता ह
ूँ िक आज गठबंधन मȂ िजस ढंग से मारामार हो रही है, उससे 
मुझे लगता है िक शायद उस गठबंधन क े सदÎय लोग कह रहे हȗगे : 
 
"ये रÌक-ए-जƐत मुझे अब रास आती नहीं, 
मȅ तो जहƐुम मȂ ही खुश था ऐ मेरे परवरिदगार।" 
 
 महोदय, मȅ एक िबन्दु और कहना चाह
ता हूँ। आज हमारे िवपक्ष क े लोग एससी, एसटी और 
ओबीसी क े आरक्षण को लेकर बहुत गंभीरता से कहते हȅ। वे उनकी जनगणना को लेकर बहुत 
क ंसन्डर् हȅ। इसको लेकर उनके  मन मȂ बड़ी वेदना है। मȅ पूछना चाहता हूँ िक उस आरक्षण क े िलए 
                   
* Not recorded 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
उनकी जो इतनी वेदना है, क्या यह वाÎतव मȂ वेदना है या वोट क े तराजू पर तौलकर, िसयासत 
क े माहौल को खोल कर, तब देखा जाता है िक िकस आरक्षण का कब इÎतेमाल करना है? अगर 
यह सच था, तो क्या यह सच नहीं है िक इन्हीं लोगȗ क े शासन काल मȂ अलीगढ़ मुिÎलम 
यूिनविर्सटी से एससी, एसटी और ओबीसी का आरक्षण समाÃत हो गय
ा? कोटर् ने उसको क्वैश कर 
िदया। 1981 मȂ िफर इिन्दरा जी की सरकार उसको लाई। इलाहाबाद हाई कोटर् ने िफर क्वैश कर 
िदया। 2006 मȂ मनमोहन िंसह जी की सरकार िफर लेकर आई।....(Ëयवधान)...  कहाँ चला 
गया? इसिलए िक वोट ब
ȅक पर तौला जाता है िक कौन सा तगड़ा वाला वोट बȅक है, िफर उसके  
िलए बोला जाता है। जािमया मȂ आरक्षण खत्म हो गया। जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ एससी, एसटी, ओबीसी 
का आरक्षण नहीं था। क्यȗ नहीं? आज जो लोग समाज क े उन वगș क े िलए कहते हȅ, मȅ उनको 
बताना चाहता ह
ूँ िक जÇमू-कÌमीर इस देश का एक ऐसा इकलौता राज्य था, जहाँ वाÊमीिक 
समाज क े Ģितभाशाली बच्चे, चाहे वे िकतना भी पढ़ जाएँ, व े िसफर् सफाई कमर्चारी बन सकते थे। 
जब से अनुच्छेद 370 हटा  है, उसके  बाद उनको वह बराबरी िमली है। आप इस सीमा तक दबा 
कर रखते थे और हमने महिर्ष वाÊमीिक इंटरनेशनल एयरपोटर् बनाया है। यह दशार्ता है िक मोदी 
जी की सोच और आपकी सोच मȂ िक
तना बड़ा अंतर है।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इतना ही नहीं है, बाकी तो छोड़ दीिजए, इनके  नेता क े घर 
पर भी अटैक हो जाए और लगे िक वह दूसरा वाला वोट बȅक ज्यादा तगड़ा है, तो ये लोग चुÃपी 
साध लेते हȅ। कणार्टक मȂ कांगर्ेस क े एक एमएलए थे, अखंड Ǜीिनवास मूिर्त। शायद यह 2018 या 
2020 की बात है। वे अनुसूिचत जाित क े थे। उनके  घर पर अटैक हो गया और अटैक करने वाले 
लोग घर जला कर फ ूँ
क गए। उसके  बाद ये लोग शांत रहे। उन लोगȗ को बेल भी िमल गई। वे बेचारे 
बेल क्वैश कराने सुĢीम कोटर् गए। अब तो खैर वे पाटीर् भी छोड़ कर चले गए। ये तो वे हȅ, जो वोट 
बȅक की िसयासत क े िलए अगर घर फ ूँ क तमाशा भी देखना हो, तो वह भी देखने क े िलए तैयार 
रहते हȅ। इनको उसमȂ भी िकसी भी Ģकार की िदक्कत नहीं ह ै। ....(Ëयवधान)... मȅ एक और बात 
पूछना चाहता हूँ।....(Ëयवधान)...  आप यह बताइए िक इस देश क े िकस Ģधान मंतर्ी 
ने....(Ëयवधान)... 
   
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है।....(Ëयवधान)... क ृपया आप लोग 
बैठ कर न बोलȂ।....(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़।....(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सैयद नािसर हुसैन: * 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: उपसभापित जी,  मȅ पूछना चाहता हूँ िक इस देश मȂ िकस Ģधान मंतर्ी ने कहा 
था, 'Muslims should have the first right over the national resources of India.' आपने तो 
नहीं कहा िक एससी, एसटी, ओबीसी और गरीब का होना चािहए, लेिकन हमारे मोदी जी ने कहा 
िक गरीब का पहला हक है, वंिचत का पहला हक है, िकसान का पहला हक है, मिहला का पहला 
हक है। यह िदखाता है िक आपकी हकीकत क्या थी, िदल मȂ क्या है और सामने क्या है। िफर मȅ 
                   
* Not recorded 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
99

 
यह भी बताना चाहता हूँ िक यह हकीकत, जो मनमोहन िंसह जी ने बोली थी, यह ऐसे नहीं थी। 
कणार्टक की सरकार ने एक आदेश िनकाला है। िजस समय चुनाव हुए थे, तो कहा था िक हम 
इस-इस Ģकार सबको दो हजार, तीन हजार रुपए  की छू ट दȂगे। चुनाव मȂ आ गए। िफर आदेश 
िनकाला िक माइनॉिरटी कÇयुिनटी क े जो लोग फोर Ëहीलर खरीदना चाहȂगे, उसको सरकार 50 
परसȂट पे करेगी, यानी अगर वह चार लाख
 रुपए का होगा, तो सरकार दो लाख रुपए पे करेगी 
और अगर वह 6 लाख रुपए  का होगा, तो सरकार तीन लाख रुपए  पे करेगी। यह है असिलयत
- 
एक वोट बȅक क े िलए दो या तीन हजार रुपए  और दूसरे क े िलए तीन लाख 
रुपए। ....(Ëयवधान)...     
मान्यवर, इसिलए जो पहले था, वही आज भी है। मȅ और बताना चाहता 
ह
ूँ।....(Ëयवधान)... 
     
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आप लोग आपस मȂ बात न करȂ।....(Ëयवधान)... इसको चेयर तय 
करेगी।....(Ëयवधान)...      
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: उपसभापित जी, अभी िपछड़ा वगर् आयोग ने पिÌचमी बंगाल की सरकार को 
तलब िकया है। िकस बात क े िलए तलब िकया
 है? क्यȗिक उन्हȗने 81 जाितयȗ को ओबीसी मȂ 
जोड़ा, िजनमȂ से 73 मुिÎलÇस थीं।  िपछड़ा वगर् आयोग ने पूछा, यह क ै से हुआ?  साहब अभी तक 
उसका सही जवाब नहीं दे पाए हȅ।  मोÎट बैकवडर् क े िलए उन्हȗने 87 जाितयȗ की िरकमȂडेशन की, 
िजनमȂ 80 मुिÎलÇस थीं।  िपछड़
ा वगर् आयोग ने पूछा है और मेरी जानकारी क े अनुसार, 8 फरवरी 
को वैÎट बंगाल क े चीफ सेकर् ेटरी को बुलाया है। यह मȅ देश क े सामने रखना चाहता हूँ, यह ह ै 
असली हकीकत!  ऊपर से खाने क े दांत और हȅ और िदखाने क े दांत और हȅ।  हम ईमानदारी क े 
साथ, पूरी संवेदना क े साथ समाज क े सभी वगș मȂ िकसी भी Ģकार का भेदभाव िकए बगैर उनके  
िलए सब क ु छ करने को तैयार रहते हȅ।   हमारे िमतर् लोग इसको अन्यथा न लȂ। माननीय 
उपसभापित महोदय, उनकी यह आदत प
ुरानी है।  अगर इन लोगȗ को कोई आपिǄ हो तो मȅ 
कहना चाहता हूं िक डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने 27 अक्टूबर, 1951 को जालंधर मȂ अपने भाषण 
मȂ यह कहा था। यिद िकसी को समÎया हो, तो वे Dr. Ambedkar's writings and speeches 
published by the Ministry of Social Justice in
 2014 क े Volume 17, Part 3 मȂ इसको देख 
सकते हȅ, िजसमȂ उनका यह पूरा भाषण है। उसमȂ व े बड़े दु:ख क े साथ कहते हȅ िक नेहरू  जी को 
माइनॉिरटी कÇयुिनटी क े Ģित बहुत ज्यादा लगाव है, इसिलए वे दिलतȗ क े िहतȗ की अनदेखी कर 
देते हȅ। उन्हȗने कहा िक मȅ इस बात क े िवरोध मȂ नहीं हूँ िक म ुिÎलमȗ को नहीं िमलना चािहए, परंतु 
दिलतȗ की कीमत पर िमले, मुझे इस बात का बहुत दु:ख है।  सर, मȅ यहां पर उनके  वड्सर् क्वोट 
करना चाहता हूँ।  उन्हȗने कहा िक नेहरू  जी िपछले 20 साल से इस देश क े सबसे बड़े नेताओं मȂ से 
एक हȅ। उन्हȗने 2,000 से अिधक भाषण िदए हȗगे और उनमȂ उन्हȗ
ने अनेक बार मुिÎलम समाज क े 
िलए बहुत सारी बातȂ कही हȅ, मगर दिलतȗ क े िलए उनको वह देखने को नहीं िमलता।  ये उनके  
वड्सर् हȅ िक मुिÎलमȗ की उपेक्षा नहीं होनी चािहए, यह मेरा िवचार है, परंत
ु मुिÎलमȗ को दिलतȗ 
की कीमत क े ऊपर आनंद करवाया जाए, यह मȅ उिचत नहीं मानता, क्यȗिक दिलतȗ को अि धक 
सुरक्षा की आवÌयकता है। यह डा. अÇबेडकर की Îपीचेज़ मȂ िलखा हुआ है।   
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
मान्यवर, मȅ एक और बात बताता हूँ िक आज ये लोग अपने िहसाब से क ै से बदलाव करते 
हȅ।  मȅ देश क े समक्ष यह कहना चाहूंगा िक जब जाितगत आइडȂिटटी की बात आती है तो इस देश 
मȂ एक ही नेता है, िजसकी जाित, उपजाित और गोतर्  भी Ģेस कॉन्ģȂ स मȂ बताया गया, क्यȗिक तब 
उनको लगता था िक उसका फायदा हो सकता है। इतना ही नहीं, Ģेस कॉन्ģȂ स मȂ जनेऊ भी 
िदखाया गया।  यानी, तब यह लगा िक शायद इसका फायदा हो सकता है, मगर िफर जब लगा 
िक क ु छ और होना चािहए तो य
े िसफर् पांच साल क े अंदर बदल गए।   
मान्यवर, मȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूँ िक जब ये लोग जाितगत िवषय की बात करते हȅ तो 
यह भी एक संयोग है, इसको अन्यथा न लȂ। मȅ on the lighter note यह कहता हूँ िक इस देश मȂ 
एक ही Ģधान मंतर्ी हुए, िजन्हȗने अपनी जाितवाचक संज्ञा अपने नाम क े आगे लगाई।  हमने कभी 
पंिडत अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी नहीं कहा था, मगर भारत
 की राजनीित मȂ एक ही पंिडत जी हुए हȅ। 
यानी, तब उसका फायदा था तो उस चीज़ को आगे करना ह
ै, आज दूसरा फायदा लगे तो दूसरे 
को आगे करना है,  इसिलए  पिरिÎथितयȗ क े अनुसार इनका सामािजक न्याय का समीकरण 
बदलता रहता है, यह मȅ देश को बताना चाहता हूँ, जबिक हमारी सोच िपछ
ले 70 सालȗ मȂ कभी भी 
िकसी भी Ģकार से बदली नहीं है।  
 मȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूँ िक इनके  एक नेता थे। कल माननीय खरगे जी ने  एक िवषय 
की बात कही।  उन्हȗने िजस िवषय क
े  ट्वीट की बात कही, वह ट्वीट िडलीट भी कर िदया गया 
था और यह भी बता िदया गया था िक वह गलत टर्ांसलेशन था, मगर शायद उनको िरसचर् देने 
वाली टीम ने ध्यान नहीं िदया िक वे िजस सीएम क े बारे मȂ बता रहे थे, क्या आप जानते हȅ वे 
िकसका ट्वीट िलख रहे थे? वे उसी राज्य क
े  पहले सीएम गोपीनाथ बोरदोलोई जी ǎारा 
टर्ांसलेटेड लाइंस िलख रहे थे और उसका टर्ांसलेशन गलत हो गया था।  मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आ 
रहा िक आप इस सीएम की बात कर रहे थे या उस सीएम की बात कर रहे थे।  इसिलए कई बार 
ऐसा हो जाता है िक उस िवषय की जानकारी आधी-अधूरी होने क
े  कारण यह समÎया आती है।   
मान्यवर, मȅ यह भी याद िदलाना चाहता ह
ूँ िक इसी कांगर्ेस पाटीर् क े एक नेता थे।  अगर 
आवÌयकता होगी तो मȅ जगह का नाम भी बता दूँगा। मȅ वषर् तो बता ही देता हूँ िक यह 2018 क े 
िवधान सभा चुनावȗ की बात है।  सोशल मीिडया पर इसकी न्यूज़ भी अवेलेबल है और वीिडयो भी 
अवेलेबल है।  मोदी जी का नाम लेकर, िंहदू धमर् क े बारे मȂ कहते हȅ िक ये! इनकी जाित क्या है, 
पता है आपको? इनको िहन्दू धमर् क े बारे मȂ पता है! िफर, उमा भारती जी का नाम लेते हȅ तथा 
हमारे और ओबीसी नेताओं का नाम ल
ेते हȅ और िफर कहते हȅ िक इनको क ु छ पता होता है! िफर 
अपनी जाित का नाम लेते हȅ और कहते हȅ िक यह िसफर् हमको पता होता है। मान्यवर, मȅ दावे क े 
साथ कहता हूँ िक इस ढंग की बात अगर भाजपा क े िकसी नेता ने बोल दी होती, तो जैसे वह एक 
गाना था, "आरा िहले, छपरा िहले....," इससे िदÊली-मुÇबई ही नहीं, लंदन-न्यूयाकर् भी िहल गए 
होते। दुिनया क े समुंदरȗ मȂ सुनामी आ गई होती, पर आपने उनको िवधान सभा का अध्यक्ष बन
ा 
िदया। यह मȅ िसफर् इसिलए बताना चाहता हूं िक बहुत स े ऐसे चेहरे हȅ, जो मौके  पर पिरिÎथित क े 
अनुसार बदलते रहते हȅ, अगर आवÌयकता हो तो यह चीज़ वैिरफाई की जा सकती है।  
मȅ यहां एक और बात कहना चाहता हूं िक कांगर्ेस पाटीर् का आज जो िवचार है, यह हमेशा 
से था। िकतने संयोग की बात थी िक जब Ǜी राम जन्मभूिम का िशलान्यास हो रहा था, आपको 
ध्यान है, शायद हमारे बहुत से लोगȗ को ध्यान न हो, तो मȅ उन्हȂ बता दूं िक 22-23 िदसÇबर, 1949 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
101

 
की रात को जब Ǜी राम लला Ģकट हुए थे, तब उसकी सबसे पहली गवाही िकसने दी थी? यानी 
जो लाइट िदखी थी, वह यूपी पुिलस क े एक िसपाही अÅदुल बरकत ने बतायी थी। अÅदुल बरकत 
ने यह गवाही दी थी िक उसे िदËय रोशनी िदखाई पड़ी और उसके  बाद जब वह िदËय रोशनी हटी, 
तो वहां Ǜी राम लला िवराजमान थ
े और जो इकबाल अंसारी बाबरी पक्ष का पैरोकार था, उसको 
भी इनवाइट िकया गया और वह आ भी गया। अÅदुल बरकत को रोशनी िदख गई, मगर इनको 
रोशनी अभी तक नहीं िदखी। इकबाल अंसारी जो था, वह राम लला की Ģाण ĢितÍठा मȂ आ गया, 
उसका तो इकबाल बुलंद हो गया, लेिकन इनका इकबाल बुलंद नहीं हो पाया, ज़मींदोज़ रह गया। 
मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आता है िक ये िकस आधार क
े  ऊपर िनणर्य लेते हȅ! वैसे इसमȂ भी कोई नई बात 
नहीं है। मान्यवर, यह इनकी पुरानी सम
Îया है। 24 अĢैल, 1951 को पंिडत नेहरू  जी ने जाम साहब 
िदिग्वजय िंसह, जो सौराÍटर् क े राज्य Ģमुख थे, like Chief Minister of today, उनको सोमनाथ 
मंिदर क े उǇाटन पर लैटर िलखा था  िक मȅ बहुत ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूं िक मȅ इससे सहमत नहीं 
हूं, मुझे इस बात का बहुत कÍट है िक हमारे क ु छ मंितर्मंडल क े सहयोगी जा रहे हȅ और उन्हȗने 
कहा िक I am troubled by this revivalism. यह word है, यानी म
ȅ इस पुनरुत्थान से बहुत दुखी 
और समÎया मȂ हूं। मगर महोदय, 'होइिह सोइ जो राम रिच राखा।' जो होना था, वह हो गया, 
मगर यह दशार्ता है िक जो आज की ĢवृिǄ है, यह ĢवृिǄ गांधी जी की नहीं थी। गांधी जी इस देश 
क े धमर् और संÎकृ ित को मानते थे। नेहरू  जी की सोच अलग थी, तो मȅ कह सकता हूं िक आज की 
कांगर्ेस गांधी जी की सोच से ज्यादा नेहरू  जी की सोच पर चलती है, इस कारण यह समÎया 
आती है।  
मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं, एक उदाहरण और क्वोट करना चाहता हूं। मान्यवर, 
यह भी Selected Works of Jawharlal Nehru, Series-II, Volume-17 मȂ है। उन्हȗने वषर् 1959 म
Ȃ 
कहा, मȅ क्वोट कर रहा हूं, िकसी को समÎया हो, तो मȅ reference क े साथ बोल रहा हूं। वे लिलत 
कला अकादमी मȂ भाषण देते हुए कहते हȅ, 'Mr. Humayun referred to the great temples of
 
South and Taj Mahal...But, whenever I go to temples of South, despite their beauty, I 
cannot stand, I feel suppressed.' दूसरी तरफ कहते हȅ, जब मȅ ताजमहल देखता हूं, तब मुझे 
बहुत खुशी िमलती है। ऑल इंिडया रेिडयो क े टेÃस जो नेहरू  मेमोिरयल लाइĤेरी मȂ अवेलेबल हȅ, 
उसमȂ भी 1959 क े उन टेÃस मȂ अवेलेबल है। यह मȅने बताने का Ģयास िकया िक यह सोच इस 
Ģकार की थी, जो भारत की वाÎतिव
क शिƪ और सǄा को न उभरने देने क े िलए थी। इस कारण 
से इनकी सोच ऐसी रही। हमारी सोच क्या थी! मȅ एक छोटी सी बात बताता हूं। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
उन सारे Ǜिमकȗ का सÇमान िकया, उन पर पुÍप वषार् की। ताजमहल क े बारे म
Ȃ कहानी है िक 
Ǜिमकȗ क े हाथ कटवा िद ए गए थे। मुझे आÌचयर् है िक जो लोग सवर्हारा क े िसǉांत की बात करते 
हȅ, वे उस कहानी को eulogize करते थे। आप सोिचए िक हमारे िदमागȗ मȂ क ै से बैठा िदया गया िक 
हमȂ सही लगने लगा िक वह एक अच्छी बात थी। यानी एक Ģध ान मंतर्ी मंिदर िनमार्ण मȂ जुड़े हुए 
Ǜिमकȗ पर पुÍप बरसा रहा था, वह गलत था और हाथ कटवाना सही था! मुझे लगता है िक क्या 
वह मिहमामंडन करने लायक था, उसे देखने मȂ आनन्द की अनुभूित होती। मुझे लगता है िक इस 
समÎया पर िवचार करना चािहए।  
 मान्यवर, अ
ंत मȂ मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं। ये लोग कहते हȅ िक जाितगत 
जनगणना कराइए, िबÊकु ल अच्छी बात है, पर पहले यह तो बताइए िक जाितगत जनगणना रोकी 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
िकसने थी, यह िकसका िनणर्य था? यह 1951 मȂ नेहरू  जी का िनणर्य था, उस समय तो 
constituent assembly थी, क्यȗिक चुनाव 1952 मȂ हुए थे। हमने बचपन मȂ सुना था, इंिदरा जी क े 
ज़माने मȂ कांगर्ेस की क्या सोच थी, 'जात पर न पात पर, इंिदरा जी का बात पर, मुहर लगेगी हाथ 
पर'।   
राजीव गांधी जी क े जमाने मȂ क्या था? 6 िदसंबर, 1990 मȂ इसी सदन मȂ मंडल कमीशन 
का िवरोध करते हुए राजीव गांधी जी ने कहा था िक कांगर्ेस पाटीर् जात-पात मȂ िवÌवास नहीं 
करती है। हमारा नारा है - 'न जात पर - न पात पर, मुहर लगेगी हाथ पर।' मȅ यह पूछना चाहता हूं 
िक नेहरू  जी सही थे या इंिदरा जी सही थीं या राजीव जी सही थे या  आज क े आपके  क ुलगौरव 
सही हȅ या दोनȗ सही थे? जैसे मौका िमल जाए, वैसे सही थे।  मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगा िक एक जमाने 
मȂ पाटीर् जो कहती थी िक 'न जात पर - न पात पर, इंिदरा जी की बात पर, मुहर लगेगी हाथ पर, 
वे अपने पुरखȗ की बात को धर क े लात पर, पाटीर् को ले आए फ ु टपाथ पर।'   
मान्यवर, मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं
। माननीय खरगे जी ने एक और िवषय क े बारे 
मȂ कहा था िक 1951 मȂ देश की साक्षरता दर 18 परसȂट थी और इंकलाब आएगा। मȅ अपने िवपक्षी 
सािथयȗ से कहना चाहता हूं िक इंकलाब आएगा नहीं, इंकलाब आ च
ुका है। ज्यȗ-ज्यȗ साक्षरता दर 
बढ़ती चली गई, भारतीय जनता पाटीर् का Ģभाव बढ़ता चला गया। मȅ आपके  स ुलभ संज्ञान क े िलए 
बताना चाहता हूं िक 1991 मȂ भारत की साक्षरता दर 50 परस Ȃट कर्ॉस हुई।  हम  मुख्य िवपक्षी दल 
बन गए। इंिडया की पोिलिटक्स यूिनपोलर से बाईपोलर हो गई। 2001 मȂ साक्षरता दर 60 परस Ȃट 
कर्ॉस हुई।  हमारे नेतृत्व मȂ गठबंधन की सरकार आ गई।  2011 मȂ 70 परसȂट कर्ॉस िकया, मोदी जी 
क
े  नेतृत्व मȂ ÎपÍट बहुमत की सरकार आ गई, 2024 मȂ 80 परसȂट कर्ॉस करȂगे, 400 क े बहुमत की 
सरकार आएगी। क्यȗ? ज्यȗ-ज्यȗ समाज िशिक्षत हो रहा है, सत्य का साक्षात्कार हो रहा ह
ै। बाबा 
साहेब अÇबेडकर ने कहा था िक िशक्षा शेरनी का दूध है, जो पी लेगा, उसके  मन मȂ कोई 
कन्फयूजन या संशय नहीं रहेगा और भारत की युवा पीढ़ी उसको देखकर पूरे तरीके  से आगे 
बढ़ती
 चली जा रही है। अब यहां पर मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहूंगा।  एक और आरोप लगाया 
जाता है िक ईडी और सीबीआई का बड़ा उपयोग हो रहा है। मȅ याद िदलाना चाहता हूं िक आज 
हम लोग 2024 मȂ बैठे हȅ। आज दो दलȗ - झारखंड म
ुिƪ मोचार् और राÍटर्ीय जनता दल का नाम 
सबसे ज्यादा आता है।  मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक हम लोग बचपन मȂ देखते थे िक िफÊमȗ का एक 
बड़ा फ ेमस डायलॉग होता था िक बीस बरस पहले की बात है। आज मȅ कहना चाहता ह
ूं िक तीस 
बरस पहले की बात है। मȅ िसफर् वे उदाहरण दे रहा हूं, जो कोटर् से अपर्ूव हो चुक े हȅ। एकमातर् क े स, 
िजसमȂ स
ुĢीम कोटर् से यह पर्ूव हो गया िक िरÌवत लेकर सरकार बचाई गई। वह झारखंड मुिƪ 
मोचार् िरÌवत कांड, 1994 है। िजस समय जेएमएम क े सांसदȗ ने नरिसÇहा राव की कांगर्ेस सरकार 
बचाई। तब क्या मोदी जी थे, अिमत शा
ह जी थे या भाजपा थी? आप तो उस जमाने से ऐसे चलते 
आ रहे हȅ। आज खामखा हम पर आरोप लगा रहे हȅ। 1997 मȂ लालू Ģसाद यादव जी जेल चले गए। 
लालू जी को जेल से अंदर-बाहर देखते हुए हम लोग युवावÎथा से Ģौढ़ावÎथा म
Ȃ आ गए और आज 
कहते हȅ िक वह तो 2014 क े बाद की ĢॉÅलम है।  मȅ तो कह रहा हूं िक 1994 मȂ भी ये जेएमएम वाले 
साथ-साथ थे और आज भी साथ-साथ हȅ। B u t
,  o n  a  l i g h t e r  n o t e  मȅ कहना चाहूंगा िक एक 
पुराना गीत था, तो उसको थोड़ा पिरविर्तत कर दȂ। शायद ये दोनȗ दल एक-दूसरे से कह रहे हȅ 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
103

 
 िक 
"तीस साल पहले मुझे तुमसे Ãयार था, 
िजया बेकरार था, 
यही ĥǝाचार था, 
आज भी है और कल भी रहेगा।" 
 
 इसिलए आज आप िजस Ģकार का िवभाजन... मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं िक अगर 
हमारे िवरोिधयȗ को कोई आपिǄ है, तो मȅ िवनĦता से कहता हूं िक 1990 क े बाद की एक लोक 
सभा बता दीिजए, िजसमȂ इन दलȗ ने, इन दलȗ क े नेताओं ने ĥÍटाचार क े आरोप मȂ कोटर्-कचहरी 
और जांच एजȂसी क े चक्कर न काटे हȗ। Ǜी पी.वी. नरिसÇहा राव जी क
े  जमाने से ल ेकर मनमोहन 
िंसह जी की दोनȗ सरकारȗ क े जमाने तक। आपका ĥÍटाचार से याराना बहुत पुराना है और इसके  
िलए मोदी जी  पर इÊजाम लगाना है, तो मȅ यह बात सही नहीं मानता हूं। यह यथाथर् है। मगर मȅ 
यह भी कहना चाहता हूं िक जब ĥÍटाचार को कवरअप करना होता है, तो क ै से कवर िकया जाता 
है। मȅ एक बात कहना चाहता ह
ूं िक करÃशन को एक 'सी' से नहीं, कई 'सी' से कवर िकया जाता 
है। उसमȂ casteism भी लाना ह
ै, उसमȂ communalism भी लाना है और उसमȂ criminalism  भी  
लाना है।  इस ढंग से करÃशन क े िलए कवरअप िकया जाता है। जब जरूरत होती है, तो देश क े 
अंदर िवभाजन की बात करो, तािक मुǈे से ध्यान हट जाए, करÃशन स े बात हट जाए, तो कोई क्षेतर् 
की बात करेगा, कोई वगर् की बात करेगा और कोई जाित की बात करेगा। इन्हȗने िजस Ģकार क े 
िडवीजन की बात कही, तो मȅ एक पंिƪ मȂ कहना चाहता हूं िक  
 
'अंगर्ेजो ने हमȂ बांटा, िफर भी अपने देश की खाितर 
इन्हȗने हर पिरवेश को बांटा, क ुसीर् क े उǈेÌय की खाितर।' 
 
 आज हमारी सोच और इनकी सोच मȂ क्या अ
ंतर है, जो माननीय राÍटर्पित जी क े 
अिभभाषण से ÎपÍट हुई है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा है िक अब अमृत काल आ गया है और हमȂ इस 
Ģकार क
े  सभी Ģभावȗ से अपने को मुƪ करना है और उस Ģभाव से मुƪ होकर हमȂ एक नई िदशा 
मȂ आगे बढ़ना है। हमȂ इस Ģकार क
े  सभी Ģभावȗ से अपने को मुƪ करना है और उस Ģभाव से मुƪ 
होकर हमȂ एक नई िदशा मȂ आगे बढ़ना है। यहां पर एक और बात कही थी, हमारे िवपक्षी दलȗ क े 
लोगȗ ने - वे कहते हȅ िक हम तो बहुजन की बात करते हȅ। मान्यवर, ये वाÎतिवकता म
Ȃ कहते तो 
बहुजन की बात हȅ,  पर करते िसफर् पिरवारजन की बात हȅ। ये बहुजन िहताय, बहुजन सुखाय पर 
नहीं चलते, पिरजन िहताय, पिरजन सुखाय  पर चलते हȅ। मगर इनकी सोच मȂ और हम
ारी सोच मȂ 
अंतर यह है िक मोदी जी कहते हȅ यिद आप बहुजन की बात करȂगे तो भी क ु छ जन तो छू ट जाएंगे, 
तो मोदी जी उसी िवचार से Ģेिरत हȅ,  जो कहता है -  
 
“सवȃ भवन्तु सुिखनः सवȃ सन्तु िनरामयाः । 
सवȃ भदर्ािण पÌयन्तु मा किǙǈुःखभाग्भवेÞ।।” 
  
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
  सबको िमलेगा, जो इस सरकार की नीितयां हȗगी, इस सरकार क े लाभ हȗगे, वे सबको 
िमलȂगे।  इसमȂ िकसी भी Ģकार का भेदभाव हमारी तरफ से नहीं िकया जाता है। मȅ यह भी बताना 
चाहता हूं िक एक और आरोप लगाया गया था िक िवपक्ष क े नेताओं का सÇमान नहीं होता है।  
माननीय खरगे जी ने एक उदाहरण िदया था, वह उदाहरण अटल जी क े Ģधान मंतर्ी का नहीं था, 
जब वे िवदेश मंतर्ी बने थे, तो िवदेश मंतर्ालय मȂ जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी की फोटो लगी थी, वह 
हटा दी गई, तो उन्हȗने कहा िक नहीं, जो देश क े Ģथम Ģधान मंतर्ी थे, वह जहां जैसे हȅ, वैसे ही 
रहने चािहए। यह हमारा संÎकार है। मोदी जी ने उसको िकतना आगे बढ़ाया है, सरदार पटेल की 
मूिर्त दुिनया की सबसे ऊ ंची मूिर्त बना दी।  हमने इस बात की िंचता नहीं की िक उनके  कालखंड मȂ 
संघ पर Ģितबंध लगा था, मगर अफसोस की बात यह िक कोई भी आज तक वहां गया नहीं है । 
आप यह बताइए िक भारत रत्न, मदन मोहन मालवीय तो कांगर्ेस क े अध्यक्ष थे, क्या उनको भारत 
रत्न िमला ? Ģणब मुखजीर् जी कांगर्ेस क े नेता थे, उन्हȂ भी भारत रत्न िमला। क्या पǍ अवाडर् तरुण  
गोगोई जी को नहीं िमला, क्या एस.सी. ज़मीर जी को नहीं िमला? अभी आदरणीय कपूर्री ठाकु र 
जी को भारत रत्न अवाडर् िमला है।  यह हमारी सरकार की ईमानदारी है िक समाज क े िजस-िजस 
Ëयिƪ ने, िजस-िजस महापुरुष ने जो-जो योगदान िदया है, हमने उसका सÇमान ईमानदारी से 
िकया है।  
मान्यवर, ये सÇमान क े बात करते हȅ, इनके  यहां पर ऐसा था -  इस देश मȂ दो ही Ģधान 
मंतर्ी हुए, िजन्हȗने अपनी सरकार मȂ, अपने अंदर गिठत कमेटी क े ǎारा, अपने को भारत रत्न 
अिर्पत िकया, एक पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  और एक Ǜीमती इंिदरा गांधी जी हȅ। इन्हȗने अपने 
नेताओं को नहीं िदया, हमने सबको  िदया, यही मोदी जी की िवराट सोच है। इन चीजȗ क े बारे मȂ 
हमारा जो नज़िरया है, यह उसको दशार्ता है । मȅ यह भी कहना चाहता हूं िक यह उदारता मोदी 
जी कब िदखाते हȅ, जब उनके  िलए क्या-क्या शÅद नहीं बोले जाते हȅ, मतलब मृत्यु, मृत्यु क े Ģकार 
से लेकर अनेक Ģकार की बातȂ, कĤ खुदेगी वगैरह जाने क्या-क्या चीज़Ȃ हȅ, मगर उससे 
अिवचिलत रहते हुए मोदी जी ने एक बार कहा था, जब लोगȗ ने उनसे पूछा िक आप तो छ ुƺी भी 
नहीं लेते, इतनी ऊजार् कहां से पाते हȅ,  तो उन्हȗने कहा था िक रोज़ एक से दो िकलो गाली खाता 
हूं और उसके  बाद उसी से ऊजार् पाकर पुनः आपकी सेवा मȂ लग जाता हूं। आप सोिचए, आज 
िडिजटल डेटा का ज़माना है, िजतने अब शÅदȗ का Ģयोग माननीय मोदी जी क े िलए िकया गया 
होगा,  इतना कभी िकसी क े िलए नहीं िकया गया होगा,  इसके  बावजूद िवपक्ष क े िजतने नेताओं 
को सÇमान िदया गया है, इतना भारतीय इितहास मȂ कभी िकसी को नहीं िदया गया होगा। 
इसिलए वे वह ऊजार् पाते हȅ, जो समाज क े बदलाव करने मȂ एक महती भूिमका िनभाती है और 
एक नई सोच क े साथ हम आगे बढ़ते हȅ।  
अब अंत मȂ एक िवषय मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगा िक हमारी नई सोच क्या थी, उसका एक 
उदाहरण देना चाहूंगा। जब हमारी सरकार आई तो इस देश क े दो िहÎसȗ मȂ बहुत बड़ी समÎया 
थी। जो देश का पूवीर् िहÎसा है, वहां पर पानी बहुत िगरता है, बाढ़ की समÎया रहती है, िबहार से 
लेकर ओिडशा, पिÌचमी बंगाल, असम मȂ, जो पिÌचमी िहÎसा राजÎथान और गुजरात का है, वहां 
पर पानी बहुत कम िगरता है, इसिलए सूखे की समÎया रहती थी। अब मोदी जी की सरकार आने 
क े बाद उन्हȗने एक नई सोच क े साथ सोचा, तो जहां पर पानी कम है, वहां पर सौर ऊजार् की 
अिधकता है, तो सोलर एनजीर् पर शोध शुरू  िकया गया और जहां पर जहां पर पानी की अिधकता 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
105

 
है,  वहां निदयȗ क े पाटर् को डर्ेिंजग करके  और गहरा िकया गया और इंलȅड वाटरवेज़ की शुरुआत  
की गई, यानी जो समÎया है उसके  अंदर से क ै से एक नया राÎता िनकाला जा सकता है, उसको 
देखा और सोलर एनजीर् मȂ हम वहां पर पहुंचे िक आज दुिनया मȂ हम सोलर एनजीर् मȂ िफÄथ Îथान 
पर हȅ। हमने 25 गुना अिधक छलांग मारी है और क्लीन एनजीर् क े इंÎटॉलेशन का हमारा टारगेट 
2030 तक था, लेिकन उसे  हमने 2022 मȂ अचीव कर िलया है। अब हम दुिनया मȂ चौथे नÇबर क े 
देश हȅ, जो इंÎटॉÊड क ै पेिसटी मȂ क्लीन एनजीर् की फीÊड मȂ खड़े हुए हȅ। हम चौथे बड़े Îटॉक 
एक्सचȂज भी हȅ। हम तीसरे बड़े ऑटोमोबाइल मैन्युफ ैक्चरसर् बने हȅ। हम दूसरे बड़े मोबाइल हȅडसेट 
क े मैन्युफ ैक्चरसर् बने हȅ और िडिजटल टर्ांजेक्शन मȂ हम दुिनया मȂ नंबर वन हȅ, इंģाÎटर्क्चर मȂ हम 
दुिनया मȂ नंबर वन हȅ।  उपसभापित महोदय,  दुिनया का 46 परसȂट िडिजटल  टर्ांजेक्शन भारत मȂ 
हुआ है। जो इसके  बाद क े चारȗ देशȗ से िमलाकर भी उससे ज्यादा था। अथार्Þ एक नई सोच, 
सोलर एनजीर्, इनलȅड वॉटरवेज़ और िडिजटल टर्ांसफॉमȃशन भारत को एक नई िदशा मȂ ले जाने 
मȂ सफल रहे हȅ। मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगा िक हमȂ इस नई सोच क े साथ इस अमृतकाल मȂ आगे बढ़ना 
चािहए और ईमानदारी से यथाथर् को Îवीकार करना चािहए।  
महोदय, क्या हमारे देश मȂ कोई ऐसी घटना हुई, जैसे अमरीका मȂ िसिलकॉन वैली  बȅक 
और न्यूयॉकर् िसग्नेचर बȅक ड ू ब गया, क्या हमारे यहाँ कोई बȅक ड ूबा? चाइना की सबसे बड़ी रीयल 
एÎटेट की क ंपनी एवरगर्ांड ड ू ब गई, क्या हमारे यहाँ कोई बड़ी क ंपनी ड ूबी? चाइना क े सबसे बड़े 
उǏोगपित जैक मा अघोिषत रूप  से गायब से हो गए। वहाँ क े सबसे बड़े बȅकर बाओ फान भी एक 
साल से लगभग गायब ह
ȅ। अगल-बगल क्या हो रहा है, पािकÎतान और Ǜीलंका मȂ क्या हो रहा है, 
आप वह छोड़ दीिजए, इसके  बावजूद भी मोदी जी ने िजस ढंग से इन पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ से देश को 
िनकाला है, उसके  िलए मȅ कहना चाहूंगा िक आपको उनका साथ देना चािहए
, उनको सहयोग 
करना चािहए, क्यȗिक यह काम इतना आसान नहीं था और आज िÎथित िसफर् इतनी ही नहीं बनी 
है, बिÊक आज हम दुिनया क े इकलौते देश हȅ, िजसे दो परÎपर िवरोधी देश समान रूप  से सÇमान 
देत
े हȅ। अमरीका कहता है िक 'India is our strategic partner.' और रिशया कहता है िक  'India 
is our traditional partner.'  यह िÎथित, जो मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ आई है, यह दुिनया मȂ िकसी 
दूसरे देश क े पास नहीं है, इसिलए मȅ आप लोगȗ से मोदी जी की तरफ से कहना चाहता हूं िक : 
 
       'पत्थर को यूँ िपघलाने का हुनर मुझे आता है, 
     मȅ वो कतरा हूं िक समंदर मेरे घर आता है।' 
 
  मȅ अंत मȂ यह भी कहना चाहता हूं िक आज भारत एक
 नए Îवरूप की तरफ आगे बढ़ रहा 
है। 
 महोदय, मȅ बस एक और िंबदु कह देता हूं, उसके  बाद समाÃत करता हूं िक आज हम िजस 
रÄतार से आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ, दुिनया मȂ हमȂ जैसा कोऑपरेशन िमल रहा है और भारत की तरफ िजस 
ढंग से आशा भरी िनगाहȗ से देखा जा रहा है, ऐसा पहले कभी देखने को नहीं िमला। 
 माननीय उपसभापित महोद
य, मुझे याद है, जब हम लोग बच्चे थे, तब राम मंिदर 
आंदोलन क े समय यह कहा जाता था िक िजस िदन राम मंिदर बनेगा, उस िदन
 िमिडल ईÎट क े 
लोग पेटर्ोल देना बंद कर दȂगे, लेिकन आज हकीकत क्या है! आज भारत-िमिडल ईÎट और यूरोप 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
का कॉिरडोर बन रहा है। महोदय, राम मंिदर भी बन रहा है और कॉिरडोर भी बन रहा है। जी20 
समाÃत हुआ, तो सऊदी अरब क े कर्ाउन िंĢस मोहÇमद िबन सलमान भारत मȂ Ëयापार पर बात 
करने क े िलए एक िदन एकÎटर्ा रुके । आज हमारा सऊदी अरब क े साथ Ëयापार हो या और कोई 
भी ËयवÎथा हो, वह बहुत तेजी से आगे बढ़ रही है। वैसे भी जो लोग साइंस, टेक्नोलॉजी मȂ रुिच  
रखते हȅ, उन्हȂ पता होगा िक अब तेल की टेक्नोलॉजी का समय क ेवल 20-25 साल का ही रह गया 
है, क्यȗिक वह भी खत्म होने वाला है। इसिलए आप देखȂ िक अगर कोई दृढ़ता क े साथ काम करे, 
तो
 क्या क ु छ िकया जा सकता है। हमारी सरकार ने िवÌव मȂ िवǏमान इन िवपरीत पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ 
जो िकया है, उसके  िलए मȅ कह सकता हूं िक यह इतना आसान काम नहीं था, यह काम क ु छ वैसा 
काम था िक जैसे ट ू टे हुए तार से कोई संगीत बजाना हो या पत्थर पर कोई पौधा उगाना हो। मगर 
मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व  मȂ हम लोगȗ ने वह भी करके  िदखाया ह
ै और अब इस अमृतकाल क े उषा काल 
मȂ एक नई Îवणर् रेखा भारत क े िलए िदख रही है। मȅ अटल जी की इस पंिƪ क े साथ अपना वƪËय 
समाÃत करता ह
ूं, जो मोदी जी क े एफट्सर् क े िलए एकदम सटीक उतरती है िक: 
 
'ट ू टे हुए तारȗ से फ ू टे वासंती Îवर 
पत्थर की छाती मȂ उग आया नव अंक ुर। 
झरे सब पीले पात, कोयल की क ु हुक रात 
Ģाची मȂ अरुिणमा  की रेख देख पाता हूँ। 
  
अरुिणमा  मतलब..a golden line in the sky. 
 
झरे सब पीले पात, कोयल की क ु ह
ुक रात 
Ģाची मȂ अरुिणमा  की रेख देख पाता हूँ 
गीत नया गाता हूँ, गीत नया गाता हूँ।' 
 
 महोदय, मेरा मानना है िक आप चुनाव मȂ खूब लिड़ए, ऊ ं चे Îवर मȂ हमारा िवरोध कीिजए, 
पर भारत क
े  िवकास क े इस गीत तो आप भी Îवर दीिजए। मȅ इसी अनुरोध क े साथ अपना िनवेदन 
समाÃत करते हुए राÍटर्पित महोदया क े अिभभाषण  का समथर्न करता हूं, आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय Ģमोद जी, एक िमनट रुिकए।  माननीय डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी जी, पाटीर् ने 
आपको बीस िमनट का समय िदया था, लेिकन आपने अितिरƪ लगभग 30 िमनट, 22 सैक ं ड्स 
बोला है, जो पाटीर् ने पहले से सूिचत िकया था, इसिलए पाटीर् क े समय से यह समय घट जाएगा। 
...(Ëयवधान)...एक िमनट
, मȅ उसी पर आ रहा हूं। जो सूची पहले से थी, उस सूची मȂ एक पिरवतर्न 
था िक Ǜी िव. िवजयसाई र
ेƿी जी क े बाद डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी जी का नाम था, िफर माननीय 
िदिग्वजय िंसह जी का नाम था। मȅ आपसे बोलने क े िलए आगर्ह करू ँ, इससे पहले Ģमोद जी 
Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र पर क ु छ कहना चाहते हȅ। यह Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र क्या है और िकस रूल  क े 
तहत है? 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
107

 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी ( राजÎथान): आप रूल  238 देख लीिजए। आपको तो सब याद रहता है, तो 
मुझसे क्यȗ पूछते हȅ!  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: नहीं, आप बताइए।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: आपको तो याद रहता है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप बताइए।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: मान्यवर, सदन मȂ जो क ु छ बोला जाए, वह सत्य पर आधािरत होना चािहए। 
अगर सत्य पर आधािरत नहीं है, तो जो सदन की कारर्वाई है, उसे तो
ड़-मरोड़कर नहीं रखा 
जाएगा। नेता िवरोधी दल ने शुकर्वार को बोलते हुए कहा था िक नारा तो लग रहा है 400 सीटȗ 
का, पर सौ भी नहीं आएंगी। अब कहा जा रहा है िक िसफर् 400 सीट, वह बात िक सौ भी नहीं 
आएंगी, रह गया। यह तथ्य गलत क्वोट हो रहा है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय Ģमोद जी, धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ित
वारी: अभी इकƻे धन्यवाद दे दीिजएगा। मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: नहीं, नहीं। …(Ëयवधान)… धन्यवाद हो गया है। यह Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र नहीं है। 
…(Ëयवधान)… Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़ …(Ëयवधान
)…  आपने ÎपÍट कर िदया है। …(Ëयवधान)…  माननीय 
िदिग्वजय िंसह जी …( Ëयवधान)… नो Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र …( Ëयवधान )…  आपने बता िदया ह ै। 
…(Ëयवधान)… Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह जी। 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह ( मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, अभी हमारे िवǎान, सुधांशु 
ितर्वेदी जी ने जो भाषण िदया, वह मूल रूप  से उसी िवचारधारा पर क Ȃिदर्त था, िजस िवचारधारा से 
व
े आते हȅ। अंगर्ेज़ȗ ने फ ू ट डालो और राज करो की नीित अपनाकर इस देश पर राज िकया और 
उन्हीं से Ģेरणा लेकर आज भारतीय जनता पाटीर् और राÍटर्ीय Îवयंसेवक संघ इस देश मȂ िजस 
Ģकार से फ ू ट डालो और राज करो की बात कर रहे हȅ, उसी पर उनका पूरा भाषण क Ȃिदर्त था। मȅ 
तो उनसे इतना ही कहना चाहता हूँ। उन्हȗने 500 वषș बाद भगवान राम को Îथान िदलवाया। 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी इतने महान हȅ िक वे 500 वषș बाद भगवान राम को मंिदर मȂ ले आए, लेिकन ये 
लोग लाखȗ-करोड़ रुपय े लेकर भागे हुए नीरव मोदी जैसे लोगȗ को वापस नहीं ला पाए। वे लोग 
कहाँ पर हȅ? आपने वादा िकया था िक काला धन वापस लाएंगे, भगोड़ȗ को वापस लाएंगे, वे कहाँ 
पर हȅ? …(Ëयवधान)… बात वही है। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़ शांत रिहए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: इन्हȗने पहले िहन्दू-मुसलमान को बांटा, अब भगवान राम क े भƪȗ को बांट रहे 
हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़ सीट पर बैठकर न बोिलए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मंिदर वहीं बनाएंगे, पर जहाँ पर बाबरी 
मिÎजद तोड़ी, मंिदर वहाँ नहीं बनाया
, बिÊक जहाँ पर काँगर्ेस पाटीर् ने भूिम अिधगृहीत की थी और 
िशलान्यास कराया था, वहाँ मंिदर का िनमार्ण कराया है। इनका मंिदर वहीं बनाएंगे का कारण यह 
था िक जब तक मिÎजद नहीं ट ू टेगी, तब तक इनका उǈेÌय पूरा नहीं होगा। भारत जोड़ो यातर्ा मȂ 
नफरत छोड़ो, भारत जोड़ो का स
ंदेश लेकर राहुल गाँधी जी आज यातर्ा कर रहे हȅ। महोदय, 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी हमेशा कहते हȅ – सबका साथ, सबका िवकास।  इसमȂ बाद मȂ सबका िवÌवास 
जोड़ा गया और अब कह रहे हȅ - सबका Ģयास। मȅ तो आपसे अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ िक मोदी जी 
हर पहलू पर िवफल हुए हȅ। हाँ, इन्हȗने बहुत सारी सफलताओं का उÊलेख िकया है, लेिकन ये 
सारी योजनाएं, िजन पर ये सफलता का Ǜेय ले रहे हȅ, काँगर्ेस पाटीर् क े ǎारा Ģारंभ की गई 
योजनाएं थीं, िजन्हȂ अलग-अलग नाम दे िदया गया। जन-धन की बात की गई, तो जन-धन का भी 
नाम बदला गया। छोटे-छोटे खातेदारȗ का खाता खुलवाने की शुरुआत  काँगर्ेस पाटीर् ने ही की थी। 
मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक ये सबका साथ, सबका िवकास की बात करते ह
ȅ, लेिकन ये क ु छ का 
साथ, क ु छ का िवकास और क ु छ का िवÌ
वास, इससे ज्यादा नहीं बढ़ पाए हȅ। ये बड़े नतीजȗ की 
बात करते हȅ, 200 पार, 300  पार की बात करते हȅ, लेिकन वोट Ģितशत 40 Ģितशत से कम आता 
है, तो सबका साथ, सबका िवकास कहाँ से कह िदया! महोदय, िवÌवास तब होगा, जब ये इस 
देश क े हर वगर्, हर धमर् क े पालन करने वाले लोगȗ का िवÌवास अिर्जत करȂगे।  
इन्हȗने डा. मनमोहन िंसह जी क
े  बारे मȂ एक िबलकु ल असत्य बयान िदया है। उन्हȗने वह 
कभी नहीं कहा, िजसके  बारे मȂ इन्हȗने उÊलेख िकया ह
ै।  मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी क े तीन ĤǨ अÎतर् हȅ, तीन हिथयार हȅ। पहला अÎतर् है, ईवीएम, दूसरा हिथयार है 
धमार्ंधता और तीसरा हिथयार है - ईडी, आईटी, सीबीआई, एनआईए। भारत िवÌव का सबसे बड़ा 
लोकतंतर् है और इसे मदर ऑफ ड
ेमोकर्े सी भी कहा जाता है, लेिकन एक सफल लोकतंतर् क े िलए 
िनÍपक्ष माननीय चुनाव आयोग आवÌयक है। आज मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक लोगȗ क े मन मȂ 
एक ईवीएम क े बारे म
Ȃ िवÌवास कम होता जा रहा है और Ģदशर्न हो रहे हȅ। 28 पोिलिटकल पाटीर्ज़ 
ने क ु छ ĢÌन चुनाव आयोग क े सामने रखे।  हमारे नरिंसहा जी बैठे हुए हȅ, इन्हȗने खुद िकताब 
िलख डाली थी।  मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक क्या आज चुना
व आयोग का Ëयवहार िनÍपक्ष है? 
28 राजनैितक दलȗ ने उनसे िमलने का समय मांगा। 6 महीने मȂ माननीय चुनाव आयोग को 28 
पोिलिटकल पाटीर्ज़ से िमलने का समय तक नहीं िमला! हम ऐसे चुनाव आयोग पर क ै से भरोसा 
करȂगे? मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक उच्चतम न्यायालय न
े अपना सुझाव भेजा िक चुनाव आयोग 
क े सदÎयȗ क े चयन क े िलए गिठत सिमित का सदÎय उच्चतम न्यायालय क े माननीय  मुख्य 
न्यायाधीश को भी बनाया जाए, लेिकन Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को यह रास नहीं आया और उन्हȗने यहां से 
वह िबल उस वƪ पास करा िलया, जब सारे िवपक्ष क े संसद सदÎयȗ को िनÍकािसत कर िदया 
गया था।  उसमȂ यह ËयवÎथा की गई है िक उस सिमित मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े अलावा Ģधान म ंतर्ी जी 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
109

 
ǎारा मनोनीत मंतर्ी भी उसका सदÎय होगा।  इसका मतलब यह है िक उन तीन सदÎयȗ मȂ से एक 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी हȗगे और दूसरा उनके  ǎारा मनोनीत मंतर्ी हȗगे, तो उनसे क्या उÇमीद की जाए?   
यही नहीं, आज यह बात भी साफ हो गई है िक बीईएल क े अंदर चार इंिडपȂटȂड 
डायरेक्टसर् मȂ िकनकी िनयुिƪ हुई है? भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े लोगȗ की। महोदय, हमारी मांग 
क्या है? आज कÇÃयूटर साइंस इतना आगे बढ़ चुका है िक वोट डालने का जो हमारा मकसद है, 
क्या उसका िनणर्य हमको िमलता है? आज सॉÄटवेयर िनणर्य करता है िक आपको मशीन क्या 
नतीजा देती है? हमारी मांग क्या है? हमारी मांग यह है िक माननीय चुनाव आयोग को वह 
सॉÄटवेयर पिÅलक डोमेन मȂ लाना चािहए। एक वोटर क े नाते यह मेरा अिधकार है िक मȅ िजसे 
चाहूं उसे वोट पड़े, िदखे नहीं, बिÊक वह मेरे हाथ मȂ िमले, तािक मȅ जाकर एक मतपतर् पेटी म
Ȃ 
वोट डालूं। बात वही िक इस पूरे िवÌव मȂ आज क ेवल पांच ऐसे देशȗ मȂ जहां ईवीएम क े  माध्यम से 
चुनाव हो रहा है, उसमȂ से ऑÎटर्ेिलया मȂ जो सॉÄटवेयर डाला जाता है, वह पिÅलक डोमेन मȂ है। मȅ 
आपके  माध्यम से पूछना चाहता हूं Ģधान म ंतर्ी जी और पूरे मंितर्मंडल से िक क्या कारण है िक वे 
सॉÄटवेयर बताने मȂ इतना परहेज करते हȅ? उन लोगȗ को क्या डर है? आज जब चारȗ तरफ से 
जनमानस मȂ मांग उठ रही है िक हमȂ ईवीएम नहीं चािहए, उस समय पूरे देश मȂ ईवीएम का Ģचार 
करने क े िलए चुनाव आयोग Ģदशर्न कर रहा है! हमȂ Ģदशर्न करने की आवÌयकता नहीं ह
ै। आप 
हमारी इतनी सी बात मान लीिजए िक आप बैलेट पेपर से चुनाव कराइए। 2018 मȂ कांगर्ेस पाटीर् ने 
जो एआईसीसी रेजोÊयूशन मȂ अपना मत रखा था, उस हम आज भी कायम हȅ और यिद आपको 
ईवीएम से इतना ही Ģेम है, तो आप हमारे हाथ मȂ वीवीपैट िÎलप जब नीचे िगरती है, तो  उसको 
हमारे हाथ मȂ दे दीिजए और हम जाकर मत पेटी मȂ डाल दȂगे। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, 
इसमȂ क्या एतराज होगा?   
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपसे इतना अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ िक इनका दूसरा हिथयार 
धमार्ंधता का है। धमर् से इनका कोई नाता नहीं है। िहन्दुत्व एक
 आइडȂिटटी थी। सावरकर जी ने यह 
नाम िदया था और उन्हȗने खुद कहा था िक इससे धमर् का कोई लेना-देना नहीं है, लेिकन 
राजनीित मȂ िबना धमर् का उपयोग िकए भारतीय जनता
 पाटीर् जनता क े बीच चुनाव मȂ नहीं जा 
सकती। यहाँ तक िक कणार्टक क े चुनाव मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने खुद वहाँ पर आम सभा मȂ कहा िक 
बजरंग बली का नाम लो और कमल क े फ ू ल पर बटन दबाओ। माननीय उपसभापित  महोदय, मेरी 
आपिǄ इस बात पर है िक अगर िकसी अन्य दल का कोई Ëयिƪ छोटी-मोटी बात भी कर देता है, 
तो उसको नोिटस िमल जाता है, लेिकन खुले रूप  से नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िरĢेजȂटेशन ऑफ पीपल 
एक्ट क े स
ेक्शन 123 3ए  का उÊलंघन िकया, लेिकन उस पर चुनाव आयोग ने संज्ञान क्यȗ नहीं 
िलया?  आज भी पूरे देश मȂ धमर् क े नाम पर ये Ëयवसाय कर रहे हȅ। नरिंसहा राव जी ने राम मंिदर 
का िनमार्ण रामालय टर्Îट को सȚपा था।  उन्हȗने चारȗ शंकराचायर् और Îवामी रामभदर्ाचायर् जी, 5 
लोगȗ का रामालय टर्Îट बनाया। यह उसके  हाथ म
Ȃ क्यȗ नहीं िदया, यह िकसको िदया? इसको 
िवÌव िहन्दू पिरषद क े हाथ मȂ िदया और िवÌव िहन्दू पिरषद क े हाथ मȂ देकर िनमȘही अखाड़ा, जो 
पूरे तरीके  से ...(समय की घंटी)... सर, म
ेरा समय 15 िमनट था। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: नहीं, नहीं, आपके  पास 10 िमनट का समय था, 5 िमनट अितिरƪ हो गए। हमारे 
पास जो सूचना थी, वह 10 िमनट की थी। 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: सर, देिखए, आप मुझे 5 िमनट का समय और दीिजए, मुझे और दो बातȂ 
कहनी हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपको 5 िमनट का समय िदया गया था, ऑलरेडी 10 िमनट हो गए हȅ। माननीय 
िदिग्वजय िंसह जी, आपके  िलए 5 िमनट समय तय था, आप कन्क्लूड किरए। अब आपके  पास 
कोई समय ही नहीं है।     
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह:
 देिखए, बात यह है, हमारे लीडर ऑफ अपोिज़शन का समय हमारे समय मȂ 
नहीं रखा जाना चािहए, क्यȗिक यह उनका अिधकार है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अभी जो िनयम तय है, हम उसी क े अनुसार चलȂगे। Ãलीज़, आप कन्क्लूड करȂ। 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: मȅ आपसे यह कहना चाहता ह
ूँ िक िरĢेजȂटेशन ऑफ पीपल एक्ट का 
वॉयलेशन हो रहा है, लेिकन उसको संज्ञान मȂ नहीं िलया जा रहा है।   
 मȅ आपसे इतना कहना चाहता ह
ूँ िक इनका तीसरा हिथयार है - ईडी, आईटी, सीबीआई 
और एनआईए। मोदी जी कहते हȅ - मेरी गारंटी, मोदी गारंटी। मȅ आपको मोदी गारंटी का एक 
उदाहरण देना चाहता हूँ। उन्हȗने भोपाल मȂ भाषण मȂ कहा िक मेरी मोदी गारंटी। महाराÍटर् क े नेता, 
उन पर 70 हजार करोड़़ रुपए  का घोटाला है, मȅ उनको जेल भेजूँगा। ...(समय की घं
टी)... लेिकन 
उपसभापित महोदय, 3 िदन बाद क्या हुआ? जेल भेजने क े बजाय उनको उप-मुख्यमंतर्ी बना 
िदया गया। देवेन्दर् फडणवीस जी कह
ते थे िक दादा चक्की पीिंसग, पीिंसग, पीिंसग, लेिकन आज 
दादा जेल मȂ नहीं, महाराÍटर् क े मंतर्ालय मȂ बैठ कर मोदी जी की गारंटी पर पीिंसग, पीिंसग, 
पीिंसग कर रहे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय िदिग्वजय िंसह
 जी, आप कन्क्लूड करȂ। Thank you.   
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक भारतीय जनता पाटीर् पूरी तरह से एंटी-पुअर 
है, शुरू  से रही है, कोई नई बात नहीं है, यह पूरे कॉरपोरेट क े पक्ष मȂ रही है। इसीिलए हमारे 
डायरेिक्टव िंĢिसपल मȂ जो असमानता द
ूर करने का िनणर्य था, उससे अलग अमीर और गरीब क े 
बीच असमानता बढ़ती चली जा रही है। ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय िद
 िग्वजय िंसह जी। 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ। बहुत सारी बातȂ हȅ। इसी क े साथ-साथ हमारे पूरे 
देश मȂ जनर्िलÎट्स, एिक्टिवÎट्स, ...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.   
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
111

 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: ये जो लोग हȅ, उनको जेल भेजा गया।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अब मȅ दूसरे Îपीकर को बुलाऊँ गा। 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: I will take two more minutes.    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Please give me two more minutes. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have already given you 12 minutes.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, only two minutes, please. I am  saying this with folded 
hands.  ..(Interruptions)..  Sir, I have spoken to the hon. Chairman.   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅ उसके  तहत ही आपको समय दे रहा हूँ।  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Only two minutes, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please.  Please conclude.     
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Only two minutes, Sir.  I am concluding. 
 सर, पूर
े देश मȂ एिक्टिवÎट्स, जनर्िलÎट्स, Îटू डȂट्स, इनके  ऊपर धारा लगा कर बेल नहीं 
दी गई। चाहे भीमा कोरेगाँव क े हȗ, सीएए-एनआरसी क े हȗ, जेएनयू क े हȗ, इन सबके  िखलाफ 
कारर्वाई की गई।   
 अंत मȂ मȅ आपसे एक ही बात कहना चाहता हूँ। इस देश मȂ एनडीए क े एला यंस पाटर्नसर्, 
बीजेपी क े जो एलायंस पाटर्नसर् हȅ, उनके  िलए मȅ एक किवता, जो 1940-41 मȂ िलखी गई थी, 
...(समय की घंटी)... वह मȅ पढ़ कर सुनाना चाहता हूँ। सर, मȅ खत्म कर रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप खत्म करȂ। 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह:
 सर, यह किवता मािर्टन नीमोलर ने िलखी थी। 
 “First they came for the socialists, and I did not speak out because I was not a 
socialist. 
Then they came for the communists, and I did not speak out because I was not 
a communist. 
Then they came for Jews, and I did not speak out because I was not a Jew. 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
But when they came for me, there was not one left to speak for me.” 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  ..(Interruptions)..  I will now call Shri K. 
Suresh Reddy. ..(Interruptions)..  क े. सुरेश रेƿी जी, अब आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर जाएगी। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: 
* 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क े. सुरेश रेƿी जी, अब आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। 
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY (Telangana): Sir, out of respect for the senior Member, I 
have had to wait.  On behalf of the BRS Party and on my own behalf, I thank you, Sir, 
for giving me an opportunity to express my  gratitude to the hon. President for her 
Address to the Joint Session of Parliament and to express my views on the Motion of 
Thanks.   
 The President's Address started with  new Parliament Building and its 
magnificence and ended with the hope th at Parliament would strengthen the 
aspirations of creating a new and healthy India.  I would like to dwe ll on this particular 
subject as Parliament is the fulcrum of our democracy. This being the 75
th year of our 
Republic and with you being in the Chair,  i t  i n s p i r e s  m e  m o r e  t o  s p e a k  o n  i t s  
functioning.   
 Sir, as the most acceptable form fo r a diverse and aspiring new nation, 
Parliament was formed in the summer of 1 952 and the journey began. When we look 
back to what our founding fathers conceive d for our nation and Parliament, it does 
not really augur well for us today. The ho n. President's advice to create a new and 
healthy tradition says it all. The statistics confirm our concerns and bestow upon us to 
work and to stop the deterioration. I wo uld like to quote Babasaheb Ambedkar. He 
said, "Unless we, in Parliament, realise our responsibilities and shoulder the task of 
looking after the welfare and good of the pe ople, I have not the slightest doubt that 
this Parliament will be treated by the public outside with utter contempt."   
 Sadly, Sir, the functioning and the statisti cs are literally getting us there. If we 
look at the functioning of Parliament, in the first five years, we worked for 133 days. In 
the second five years, it was 115 days. The Bills passed in the first ten years made into 
                   
* Not recorded 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
113

 
laws were almost 700. In 2023,  we had the shortest Budget Session since 1952.  Bills 
referred to Parliamentary Committees were on ly 13 per cent since 2019. If you look at 
the Budget Session of 2023, 75 per cent of the Budget Session passed without 
discussion. And if you look at the Mons oon Session of 2023, 43 per cent of the 
Scheduled time was utilised.   
 Sir, while speaking, I am stressing more on this subject because from this very 
Chair, I have seen the then hon. Chairman, Shri M. Venk aiah Naidu Garu expressing 
his anguish. We saw him breaking down. We  saw anguish in his tears. Our present 
Chairman has also been inspiring and guiding us. If I may quote our present 
Chairman, he said, "The legislature is the most impactful platform for reflection of all 
shades of opinions. Therefore, there is a need to be receptive to the other points of 
view." Consideration of the points of difference is essential. This is how our Chairman 
had been guiding us. "The temples of de mocracy meant for dialogue, deliberations, 
debate and discussions are these days' hotb eds of disturbance and disruptions. As a 
consequence, Parliament and legislatures are fast surging into irrelevance."   
 This is an anguish expressed not only  here. Sir, you have been the Deputy 
Chairman. We have seen the Presiding Officers' Conference happening every year. 
The Presiding Officers of various State As semblies have been expressing similar 
sentiment.  The hon. Speaker, Lok Sabha, has very explicitly said that the matter 
cannot be left only for a discussion there; action should be taken. So, it is time for 
legislative reforms and parliamentary reforms and more so in the 75
th year of our 
Republic.  When these reforms would come, I would treat that as India's Republic 
moment.  It is because this House has to stay alive to the needs and aspirations of 
our people. So, I have a few suggestions in  this regard. Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, 
the suggestions are as follows: 
 यहाँ पर बहुत गमीर् होती है क्यȗिक वĩत कम रहता है। हर िकसी की यह िशकायत रहती 
है िक मेरा वĩत कम है। So, why don't we increase th e number of days, the working 
days of Parliament, the working days of Legislatures? Let it be increased क्यȗिक 
diversity है।  More and more regional parties are coming in. So, for them to reflect - 
they reflect their ideas - the number of working days should be increased.   
I was told that in some mature Parliaments, the opposition decides the agenda 
for a day. उनको आप वह भी मौका दीिजये। Let the opposition come and set the agenda 
for a day. That would be something innovative, creative and also the responsibility lies 
even on that side equally to ensure that the conduct of the Business for the day would 
be completed. …(Interrupted)…  Coming to the Private Members' Bill, Private 
Members' Bill is not just laid so easily. Ther e is a lot of work wh
ich the MP's office 
goes through. सांसद लोग बहुत तकलीफ से constituency मȂ घूमते हȅ, देश मȂ घूमते हȅ, when 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
they acquire all this information, which is not there, which would be good for the 
country, they come in the form of Private Members' Bills. Earlier, there were instances 
of Private Members' Bills being accepted. There were instances. I would not like to 
quote all but there are instances. So, I woul d suggest that the Private Members' Bills 
may be taken seriously.  Let them be de bated. Let the Ruling Party not stand on 
prestige. If something good is coming from  this side, kindly accept it. A mature 
democracy like the U.K., I was told that they have what they call it 'free voting' on a 
Bill. This was suggested by one of our former Chairman, Ansari Saheb. He said that 
other than Money Bills, other than Bills relating to toppling the Government, let there 
be a free will as it is happening in the U.K. where there is no whip issued. The 
Members can debate on the Bill. The Ruling Party Member s should be free enough, 
without a whip, to express thei r opinion against the Bill give n by the Minister. So, this 
way, the bureaucratic dependence of th e Government would start reducing. The 
realistic approaches and the real needs of the people could be reflected through the 
Bills in the Parliament. If this is accepted, this could be a very good norm for 
discussion.   
Then, we look at the Committees. जब  कमेटी बाहर जाती है, तो everybody says 
that these are mini parliaments. I wo uld say they are major parliaments. क्यȗिक वहां 
क ु छ dissidence नहीं रहता, there is a very good consensus. There is a free flow of 
opinion where the subject is the criteria. No w, this is where the Committees help the 
Parliament and through Parliament help the Government. But, unfortunately, the 
statistics speak otherwise. The statistics say that in the 17 th Lok Sabha, only 14 Bills 
have been referred for further examination, that is, till the Budget Session of 2023.  As 
little as 25 per cent of the Bills introduced  were referred to the Committees in the 16 th 
Lok Sabha when you compare to 71 per cent and 60 per cent referred by the 15 th and 
the 14 th Lok Sabha, respectively. Now, this in dicates a declining trend of national 
legislations being subjected to expert scrutiny. So, I would advise that the 
Committees, which are our core strength, may be utilized much more.  
On Bills passed and the rules not being framed, आप इतना गरमा-गमीर् मȂ िबÊस 
पास करवाते हȅ, लेिकन उसके  रूÊस ģ े म नहीं होते हȅ। सबॉिर्डनेट लेिजÎलेशन सिमित क े सामने 
बहुत बार यह बात आती है िक rules not framed. So, this is something which the 
Government needs to seriously look at. I mean, Bills are sacrosanct. अभी िवजयसाई 
रेƿी साहब was talking about the A.P. Reorganization Bill. Yes, the A.P. 
Reorganization Bill has been passed ten years ago. It was passed not merely as a Bill. 
It was passed due to the pressure of the struggle, due to sacrifice of the people of 
Telangana who had been fighting for a separate statehood. Many people have 
sacrificed their lives. A lot of employees have lost their jobs. People have le
 ft different 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
115

 
countries, the good opportunities, to come and fight for the cause of Telangana 
which was led by our leader KCR.  
Now, वह िबल पास हुए 10 साल  हो गए, लेिकन आज भी लोक सभा और राज्य सभा मȂ 
Questions come as to what are the assurances and what are the promises as they are 
not fulfilled. They are referr ed to the Assurances Committee. The other day, Dr. K. 
Keshava Rao Saheb and myself, with such a heavy heart, had to look into the review 
of the Bills passed but not implemented in the tenth year, that is, the final year. आप  
कोई न कोई एक sunset clause लगाइए और यिद 10 साल मȂ खत्म करना है तो उसे खत्म कर 
दीिजए।  अगर उसे खत्म नहीं करना है, come back to the House.  If there is a problem, 
come back to the House. So, this is ho w the effectiveness of any Bill, of any 
legislation would help the sanctity of this House and also the people of the country at 
large. Of course, we have seen,
 for example, the Farm Bills being withdrawn. अगर 
आप फामर्सर् िबल किमटी को िभजवाते तो you know, things would have been different. 
But, you learnt it the bitter way.  लोग sacrifice हुए, you have to come down on your 
prestige and eventually, apologize and say 'that I am taking back the Bills. That would 
not have happened if the Pa rliament had functioned to its full set principles. 
Unfortunately, that did not happen. Another ma jor aspect which is troubling us is the 
anti-defection. Now, anti defection मȂ, for the last many years, how anti-defection is 
being evaded. Now, I would not like to bl ame any institute or any person but the 
system itself has got that lacuna which has to be cleared up.  We have seen as to 
how anti-defection is evolving to get over  the Tenth Schedule and to get over the 
problem of anti-defection, how parties ar e acting in that way. Now, apart from 
individual shifting parties, we have to look  at this aspect wher e alliances are formed 
for elections, alliances fight the elections and after the elections, alliances break up. 
Wouldn't that reflect as a defection? Woul dn't that go as against the spirit of the 
persons who have elected them? It is because जब दो पािर्टयाँ िमलकर चुनाव लड़ती हȅ 
और चुनाव क े बाद अलग-अलग हो जाती हȅ तो, definitely, this also attracts anti-d
 efection, 
in my view.  आज हम ये मुǈे कोटर् मȂ लेकर जा रहे हȅ। Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, when we 
go to the court, we have seen how over-bur dened they are. We have seen instances 
of the Chief Justice of India breaking down. He says 'that I don't have the 
infrastructure to tackle so many cases." When they are so over-burdened, why do 
you send it? आप क्यȗ नहीं एक किमटी constitute करते हȅ, which keeps looking into it. 
Why a new Committee and why not a Committee on Law & Justice? Why can't they 
keep saying? You kindly give the mandate to them.  आप देिखए, anti-defection क ै से 
evolve हो रहा है और उसके  िलए क्या-क्या अमȂडमȂट्स लाने चािहए। They will keep working 
on it. We have very eminent people he re.  They are seni or lawyers and well-
experienced in public l
ife and who better than  them to help us and guide us. So, this 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
is the area where, in my opinion, we should see. The other aspect of utilizing the 
platform is this. For example, Manipur. Now, Manipur has been in news, national 
news, local news and international news, demands from this side and demands from 
that side. There is a solution for this. We have the hon. President. Why not utilize the 
Office of the President? Wh y not the President address th e Assembly of Manipur? If 
she addresses the Manipur Assembly, that wo uld give a healing touch.  She will be 
the catalyst of bringing all the forces. Sh e will give a leverage and she can create a 
platform on which the Government can progr ess further on that. But, we are losing 
this opportunity. I have seen Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam addressing various Assemblies. 
I have seen him addressing my Assembly in Andhra Pradesh. He just didn't come and 
speak but he came with a ten charter development plan and the plan was given to the 
Government. The Government said that they will fulfill it and the Speaker said 'that we 
will refer it to the Assurance Committee, if you don't fulfill it .' That is the strength of 
legislation which, unfortunately, हम बहुत दूर से डरते-डरते लेिजÎलेशन क े बारे मȂ बात 
करते हȅ, बिÊक होना यह चािहए िक जब हमारे पास इतनी ताकत है, तो इसका इÎतेमाल 
कीिजए। So, that is about, in the 75 th year of Republic, the legislation. Then comes a 
diverse country like India. It needs planning , and planning doesn't mean just one plan 
but Planning keeping the diversity of our country. So, now, we have that NITI Aayog 
doing this for us. It is because what is planning. It is a kind of a thing which 
strengthens the federal structure of our country. Every State has got different views, 
different needs. That can be done only th rough planning. In my humble submission, I 
would say that you need to strengthen the planning.  
I have seen earlier that when the Planning Commission was there, Chief 
Ministers used to come to Delhi, sit before the Planning Commission and express 
their views. The Planning Commission used to advise them that आपके  यहां यह कमी है, 
वह कमी है। I have seen the then Chief Minister, Chenna Reddy Garu coming here. 
After explaining it to the Planning Commissio n that he is from a naxal-affected area 
and needs special funds, that naxalism cannot be treated as a law and order problem 
and that it has to be treated as a soci o-economic problem, Planning Commission 
was impressed. Over and above the plan, they allocated funds which they could 
utilize in the naxal-affected areas to bring in development. So, today, after Telangana 
Government discussed with the NITI Aayog,  the NITI Aayog approved and said, "Let 
them give Rs.5,000 crores for Mission Bhagiratha and also funds for other 
development programmes." But, unfortunate ly, the suggestions from NITI Aayog 
were not honoured. So, where is NITI Aa yog now? The Government did not honour 
it. You made it a toothless organization which does not augur well for us. With the 
diversity which this country has, the planning that is required is,--it is not just NITI 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
117

 
Aayog or Planning Commission--you need planning boards at the district-level. हर 
िजले की एक ताकत है, उसकी मज़बूती क्या है! वह अगर िजला बोडर् मȂ आप रखȂगे, िजला बोडर्-
Îटेट बोडर्, Îटेट बोडर्-नीित आयोग, you link it up and that is  when the development will 
come in. नहीं तो आज देिखए, कई िरकॉड्सर् बताए गए about the inequality.  वषर् 1990 से 
आज देखȂ, तो what is shocking is, 50 per cent of Indians who had almost 11 per cent of 
wealth in 1990, जो bottom of the pyramid 
है, जो गरीब से गरीब है, they controlled 11 per 
cent of wealth and in 2020, th eir wealth dwindled to 6 pe r cent. While you are talking 
about the fifth largest economy, it is fine but where is it going? Why are the majority of 
the Indians getting poorer and poor ? It is because of the planning. िजला Ãलािंनग बोडर् 
से आप शुरू  कीिजए, िफर आप नीित आयोग क े बारे मȂ बात कीिजए। रूरल -अबर्न मȂ income 
disparities आिद सब हो रहा है। Finally, the farming. One major thing for the farming is 
this. आज जब farmer का एक इÌयु आता है,  तो वह इÌयु 5 मंतर्ालयȗ मȂ जाता है—Fi nance 
Ministry for credit loans, Commerce Ministry for other permissions, WTO, etc. Then 
you have the Food Ministry for the FCI co ntrol; the GMO, the Environment Ministry 
and the Government of India keeps cont rol of the Essential Commodities Act. एक 
िकसान की समÎया क े िलए 5-6 िमिनÎटर्ीज़ हȅ, कभी-कभी टȂडम मȂ काम नहीं होता है, 
कोऑिर्डनेशन नहीं होता है। So, my suggestion is—in the 75 th year of India's republic, for 
the farmer, who constitutes th e majority—create the post of  a Deputy Prime Minister 
taking care of farming because he will have the teeth. Let all the Ministries which are 
dealing with farming be constituted with the farmer and that would be the India's 
moment, जब िकसान गवर् से कह सके  है िक मेरा काम दो िमनट मȂ होता है, नहीं तो Commerce 
Minister बोलते हȅ िक खरीफ मȂ आप धान मत डािलए, िफर रबी मȂ होता है िक मुझे धान चािहए, 
धान डािलए। सर, यह कोई िÎवगी सिर्वस नहीं ह ै िक जब चाहे खाना लाए, जब चाहे धान दे, यह 
नहीं चलता है। And this is not what you call as Chandrayaan science. This is 
Chandrashekar's formula. Our Chief Minist er, K.C.R. has done this. Bundelkhand, 
Rayalaseema, parts of Odisha, parts of Raja sthan, were all declared and designated 
as drought-prone areas. It is only Telang ana in 2020, which stoo d out. It stood out 
not only out of drought-prone, but b ecame the number one State in the country 
earning the highest per-capita income. ...(Time-bell rings.)...  So, keeping this in 
view, I would only make ju st a couple of two furthe r demands with your kind 
permission. There is a request that a Bench of the Supr eme Court may be 
constituted. So, why not in the South India? So, kindly consider Hyderabad. मȅ िंहदी मȂ 
कहना चाह रहा हूं िक िंहदी को ज़बरदÎती मत डािलए। अगर मन से िंहदी बोलना चाह रहे हȅ, 
अगर िदल स
े बात करना चाह रहे हȅ, तो बात करने दीिजए, मगर ज़बरदÎती हो िक आप िंहदी मȂ 
ही पिढ़ए, िंहदी मȂ ही कानून की बात कीिजए, यह बहुत तकलीफदेह बात है। With these words, 
Sir, I thank you for the opportunity.                
 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri A.D. Singh. 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Thank you, Mr. De puty Chairman, Sir, for allowing me to 
speak on this important Motion of Thanks on the hon. President's Address. The hon. 
President in the beginning of her Address,  which is actually the document of the 
Government of the day, has enumerated a lot of achievements and development work 
which have taken place in the country in the la st decade. On listening to it, it appears 
that the whole of India is on a developmental path and there is prosperity everywhere.  
But, let us take the situation in Bihar. Bihar is also a part of India and there is hardly 
any development in the life of the common man. The Government of Bihar was asking 
for a Special Category Status which is yet to be given to them. And, secondly, the 
hon. President has definitely talked about India but what about Bharat where we are 
feeding 80 crore people and we can understan d the kind of lowering of the dignity 
and, उनको हम लोगȗ ने याचक बना िदया है। जहां तक माननीय राÍटर्पित महोदया ने बताया है 
िक हर चीज़ ठीक हो गई है, ऐसा नहीं है। अगर हम िबहार की नई सरकार को देखȂ, तो हमारे 
respected म
ुख्य मंतर्ी जी, for many years has turned a blind eye to the concept of 
prohibition where we are losing because th ey have created a liquor mafia where, at 
least, the State is losing Rs.15,000 to Rs.20,000 crores. And, also the sand mafia is 
there. अगर हमȂ Special Category नहीं िमल रही है, तो क Ȃदर्ीय सरकार उनको pressure देकर 
realities of life बताए , तो वह पैसा हमारे State coffers मȂ आएगा और िफर हमȂ special 
category क े पैसे की जरूरत नहीं पड़ेगी, because I feel that we  are losing, at least, 
Rs.40,000 crores by creating sand mafia and liquor mafia in the State. चूंिक  अब hon. 
Prime Minister पूर
े िंहदुÎतान को देख रहे हȅ। हमारी Federal Government नहीं है, वह Unitary 
Government है, तो एक committee constitute हो और वह जाकर देखे िक वहां पर सचमुच 
prohibition है या घर-घर available है made to order with any brand.  
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र (िबहार): सर, ये बार-बार एक ही बात बोल रहे हȅ।   
 
Ǜी ए.डी. िंसह: जहां तक 25 करोड़ लोगȗ को बताया गया है िक वे poverty level स
े ऊपर हो गए 
हȅ, तब भी हमȂ 80 करोड़  लोगȗ को feed क्यȗ करना पड़ रहा है? दूसरी बात there is not a 
single word about Manipur in the Address. There is no respite from violence in the 
State for ten months. It appears that the Central Government does not care about the 
fate of Manipur, especially, the hill trib es who are having desperate times in the 
difficult conditions for the past eight months. एक Armed privileged group है, जो shots 
carry on कर रहा है। जब सरकार उसको देख रही ह
ै under Article 355, then, it is all the 
responsibility of the Central Government to come to terms, to bring peace there. The 
Kuki MLAs are not attending Assembly Session as they fear for their life. There is no 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
119

 
democracy in Manipur. Now, the Home Mini ster wants to fence the 1,643 kilometre 
border with Myanmar and the free movement regime which allows the citizen of 
bordering States of India and Myanmar to tr avel up to 16 kilometres on each other's 
territory without visas will be reconsidered.  This move is against the interests of 
Mizoram and Nagaland who have opposed it. It  is high time that these issues in the 
State are resolved. The new policy also ha s foreign policy implications and will end 
PM's 'Act East Policy' and Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) integration . Now, coming to India's relation with 
the neighbouring countries. Hon. Jaishankar ji told recently that every country has 
problems in its neighbourhood. At the end of the day, neighbours need each other. 
Currently, India's relationship with its neig hbour is very worrisome; that we have seen 
in Maldives. We also already have strained relationship with Pakistan and Taliban in 
Afghanistan. India was having a very cordial relationship with Nepal and Bhutan about 
two years back.  China had attacked Doklam in Bhutan.   
After a couple of small fights, India b acked off to some extent. At the same 
time, Bhutanese King requested India to stay  away from Bhutan and started a fairly 
good relationship with China. The ongoing  border negotiation between Bhutan and 
China has led to a new dimension of In do-Bhutan relationsh ip. The Chinese are 
pressurising them that the Indian Army co ntingent which is based there should be 
called back to India. Occasionally, China is grabbing small land portions in Bhutan 
and India is not able to intervene to prev ent China's violation of Bhutanese territory. 
There are reports that China has their infl uence in Doklam area and it acquires a 
strategic position there. It will be very wo rrisome for India, so far as the Chicken's 
Neck is concerned because that will stall our movement to North East. Through its 
money and economic power, China is influenc ing Sri Lanka by gifting soft loans. At 
present, out of total debt of Sri Lanka, it was 52 per cent to China. In Nepal also, 
China is exerting pressures in many wa ys. With Bangladesh, the Chinese exports 
have multiplied sixteen time s in the last two decades. Today, China is the largest 
trading partner of Bangladesh. Myanmar is also under the influence of China. China 
has renewed its interest in Chinese-Myanmar Economic Corridor which will 
undermine India's advantage in the region. The inability of the Government to manage 
Manipur crisis and the decisi on to fence the boundary with Myanmar along with the 
free movement regime will further stress the Indo-Myanmar relations.  
Sir, about Cyber crime, in para 14 of th e Address, it has been maintained that 
'Digital India' has made the life and business easier in India. Today, 46 per cent of the 
world's total real-time digital transactions ta ke place in India. But, at the same time, 
there is a quantum jump of 55 per cent in cyber crime re lated to cheating cases as 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
compared to last year. Maxi mum cases are related to job frauds followed by online 
purchase frauds.  
 
[THE VICE CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI SEEMA DWIVEDI) in the Chair.] 
 
Cases are also increasing in other categ ories of cyber crime. Innocent people 
are losing crores of rupees to the cyber crime frauds. The police do not seem to be 
well-equipped to deal with these crimes and detection or the conviction rate is very 
poor. So, something has to be done urgently. RBI has taken action against Paytm, 
but, there is a need to look what value many of these digital middlemen are adding. 
Why can the Government not promote its own UPI backbone and BHIM Application 
besides PSU bank application? We do not need middlemen.  
Madam, petrol prices have increased 45 per cent and diesel prices have 
increased 70 per cent since 2014. Increased fu el prices are affecting the lives of the 
citizens. The fuel prices were last revised in April, 2022 when th e price of crude oil 
was 114 dollars per barrel. Since then, there is no change in the fuel prices. In the 
current financial year, the average crud e price was between 93 to 77 dollars per 
barrel, the average being 78.19 dollars pe r barrel. Now, the crude oil price is 80 
dollars per barrel. The oil companies are ea rning a lot of profit. The Government is 
earning through taxes. Why not this profit be passed on to the citizens in India by 
reducing the fuel prices? What has happene d to the market-linked pricing policy in 
petroleum sector? Prices are not allowe d to increase before election, but, 
interestingly are also not allowed to fall to give relief to the people.  
Now, cost overruns of the infrastructu r e  p r o j e c t s .  M a d a m ,  p a r a  1 5  o f  t h e  
Address talks about the record investments in physical infrastructures during the last 
ten years in various areas. The report of the Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has pointed out that out of the 1820 infrastructural projects worth Rs. 
150 crores and above, 431 were report ed cost overrun and 848 projects were 
delayed. Madam, 431 cost overrun projects amounted to Rs. 4.84 lakh crores. Out of 
this, 848 delayed projects, 202 have overall delays in the range of one to 12 months; 
200 have been delayed for 13 to 24 mo nths; 323 have been delayed for 25 to 60 
months; and 123 projects have been delaye d for more than 60 months. The average 
time overrun of 848 projects stood at 36.5 months. Does it reflect upon the good 
governance and efficiency of the Government in taking up the country to the path of 
development? We are back to square one. O f  c o u r s e ,  w e  h a v e  t o  b e l i e v e  t h a t  t h e  
corruption in contracting has ended - राम राज है।  
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
121

 
Regarding empowering of Panchayats, I would say that over 65 per cent of 
country's population lives in rural areas . The performance of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions is, therefore, critical fo r achieving the development goals of any 
Government. There are more than 2.5 lakh Panchayats in the country. However, the 
financial constraints have not allowed the Pa nchayati Raj Institutions to realize their 
potential. The Institutions have very limited financial powers and are almost fully 
dependent on Government support.  They generate very less revenue from the local 
taxes and fees. The reluctance of State Governments in providing financial support is 
affecting the performance of the local bodies. It is a well accepted fact that the 
decentralization leads to better outcomes. The leaders and officials at local level are in 
a better position to design and execute projects based on local needs. A mechanism 
needs to be developed to give local bodi es a presentable and meaningful flow of 
revenue. This will help them to plan and execute programmes effectively. Regarding 
education, I would say that the education is the most important thing for the 
development of any country. Para 32 of the Address mentions about the 
implementation of the New Education Policy and it also says that to improve the 
quality of education, the Government is running PM Shri Vidayala yas. There are 14.9 
lakh schools, 75 lakh teachers and 26.5 cr ore students in the co untry. According to 
the National Achievement Survey, 2021, the learning levels of the students have 
shown a gradual decline over  the years. The Nationalis t Annual Status Education 
Report 2022 by Pratham Foundation provides  records of children's schooling and 
learning throughout India. In many States, the students in higher classes like third, 
fifth and eighth classes are unable to read te xt and perform arithmetic taught in class 
two. The understanding of arithmetic in higher class eight students is quite low. 
Around 35 per cent of the class eight studen ts were unable to perform division or 
subtraction meant for class two. There is an urgent need to look at the standard of 
education in the country. मȅ अपना भाषण समाÃत करने क े िलए अटल िबहारी जी की एक 
किवता पढ़ता हूं, 
"जो कल थे, वो आज नहीं हȅ, 
जो आज हȅ, वो कल नहीं हȗगे, 
होने न होने का कर्म इसी तरह चलता रहेगा, 
हम हȅ, हम रहȂगे, ये ĥम भी सदा पलता रहेगा।" 
 
महोदय, आपने मुझे यहाँ पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है ,इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी): माननीय जाँन िĤटास। 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Thank you, Madam. I am a little sad that hon. 
Rashtrapatiji has been made to read out th e election manifesto of  BJP. As expected, 
there has been a mention about Ayodhy a thrice. In all th e speeches, without 
Ayodhya, without Prime Minister, no speech is complete from the Treasury Benches. 
Sudhanshu Trivediji spoke about astrophysics, Vedas, science and everything. 
Sudhanshuji-- where has he gone? After all, he is only a 'Trivedi', there is a 
'Chaturvedi' sitting here. She should be mo re in authority on such Vedic sciences. 
Madam, we are passing throug h a very difficult time. Th e astrologers will teach you 
science. The Government will teach you technology. हेगडे जी, ठीक है न? Government 
will teach you technology. अिमत शाह और आिरफ मोहÇमद खान together will teach you 
harmony between States and the Centre. ..(Interruptions).. Sir, all of a sudden, the 
BJP has become law-abiding. िजतनी बार बोल रहे हȅ सुĢीम कोटर् क े बारे मȂ, even during 
the Pranpratistha, there was a reference to the Supreme Court. Are they inflicted with 
selected amnesia? They are indeed. What did the Supreme Court say in its verdict? 
An hon. Judge who presided over the Bench is a Member of this House. I rarely see 
him. Today I saw him for two minutes, but he disappeared. I wanted to speak about 
that. Is it not a fact that the same Suprem e Court said that there was a conspiracy, a 
calculated act and an egregious violation? It  further said that desecration in 1949, 
leading to the ouster of Muslims and its eventual destruction on December, 
constituted a serious violation of the rule of law. यह  िकसने िकया, राजीव साहब, आप 
लोगȗ ने िकया। All of a sudden, they forget abou t it. They forg
et about the Supreme 
Court's verdict.  See the sad predicament of this country. I will come to you, Rajeev 
Chandrasekharji. I will come to you. His colleague who is supposed to be a candidate 
in a constituency is busy crowning Mary Madha in Thrissur. Amarji, I will tell you.  
...(Interruptions)...  Amarji's problem is that he is part of a bipolar political party. 
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK (Odisha): I object.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): You object! Please object. I have spoken to Mr. 
Pandian. That is why I am telling you. They all speak about Ram. राम हमारे भी हȅ, आप 
ही क े थोड़े ही हȅ। Ram belongs to us also. My Ra m is Mahatma Gandhi's Ram of 
compassion, of harmony and love. You also ha ve a Ram, but there is a prefix to that. 
You know what is the prefix?  Th eir Ram is Nathuram. That is the farak. That is the 
difference between our Ram and your Ram. Nowadays, we cannot distinguish 
between the Prime Minister and the high priest. I don't know whether our Prime 
Minister is the high priest or the high priest  is the Prime Minister. If there is a political 
programme, it will be turned into a religious programme. If it is a religious programme, 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
123

 
it will be turned into a political programme. They all accused us of  staying away from 
Ayodhya Pran Pratishta. Arrey!  What did the Sankaracharyas do? Will you send ED 
and CBI after Sankaracharyas? All of them stayed away because they did not want to 
be a part of this political drama which you are trying to whip up in Ayodhya. Madam, 
let me just say one thing. Mahatma Gandhiji  in 'Harijan' precisely wrote about them. 
To repeat Rama nama and to follow the way of Ravana  is the actual practice worse 
than useless. It is sheer hypocrisy. One might deceive oneself fo r the world, but one 
cannot deceive the almighty. You cannot deceive Lord Rama because though you are 
harping on Rama, your only intention is to reap political benefits, nothing else. 
Madam, the situation in this country is viti ated. You will be surprised that a Professor 
in an organsiation, in an institute, posted  in her social media account that she is 
proud of Godse for saving India. This is because you are inspiring the academics to 
say that. Can you ever think about such a situation, say five years back in this 
country? This is where the country has been.  Madam, today is 5
th and yesterday was 
4th. There is a significance for 4 th. Do you know what is th e significance of February 
4th? That was the day -- Mr. Rajeev Chandrasekhar, our hero, your hero -- when 
Sardar Patel banned RSS. Yes, on the eve of this day. You understand that. One 
more thing is, I was so sad to see our hon. Rashtrapathi being paraded behind a 
Sengol. Is it a democratic country, Madam? Is it not a fact that Sardar Patel would be 
turning in his grave because he  was instrumental in dumping Sengol, Simhasan 
crown to redeem this country from all this  monarchy? You want to take back this 
country to the monarchy era. Shortly, Mr. G.C., Naseer Bhai, you will see a simhasan 
here. The Parliament would be  turned into it. I am always afraid when the Prime 
Minister prostrates in front of an organisation or an institution.   
Shri Narendra Modi, when he took char ge as the Prime Minister, he came and 
prostrated on the steps of Parliament! खत्म कर िदया पािर्लयामȂट को, wherever he 
prostrates, खत्म कर रहे हȅ। If he calls िमतर्ो, there is going to be misery for the people.  
You know what had happened during demone tization. So, you are doing injustice to 
Mr. Sardar Patel by bringing back Sengol and Simhasans. And, of course, clowns will 
also be back, because palace clowns were there. When monarchy comes, naturally, 
Nasir Sahab, palace clowns will also come b ack. It is an insult to the Republic, of 
course. Javadekarji, Rajeev Chan drasekharji is very active. It is said that he is going 
to contest from Kerala. Thank you, Sir.  Welcome. ...(Interruptions)... We are very 
h ap p y t h at h e s h o u ld co m e.  H e s h o u ld  l i s ten to the music of the people of Kerala. 
T h a t  i s  w h a t  w e  w a n t  h i m  t o  l i s t e n .  Instead of leaving everything to Mr. 
Muraleedharan, you should also come th ere. Madam, the point is very simple.  सबका  
साथ, सबका िवकास, यह सुनते-सुनते तंग हो गए हȅ। आप लोग िकसके  साथ हȅ? 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
...(Ëयवधान)...  आप मेरे साथ हȅ न? आपने Ģाण ĢितÍठा की, I don’t want to dispute with 
Prana Prathishta, because these are times when human  beings will have to give pran 
to Gods. That is it. But the primary responsib ility of the hon. Prime Minister is to give 
pran to the citizens, not the Gods. He should, obviously, stick to his duties. He 
should go to Manipur and conduct Prana prathishta for the citizens. That should be 
done first. Instead of that, don’t create polit ical drama to just get some votes. Biplab 
Babu, I know you are nodding your head. You are in agreement with me. You cannot 
dispute with me. I know that. Madam, now, the past time of the BJP and RSS is 
dismantling of institutions. Institution after institution is being dismantled. सुरेश रेƿी जी 
ने पािर्लयामȂट क े बारे मȂ कहा। अभी क्या िडबेट चल रही है? िकसी िबल पर क्या perusal हो रहा 
है, क्या due-diligence है, what happened to the Standing Committees? िĢयंका म ैडम, 
क्या क ु छ हो रहा है? She has not even attended a Parliamentary Committee meeting for 
2-3 months! कोई कमेटी नहीं है, perusal नहीं है, कमेटी को िबल नहीं भेज रहे हȅ। अब तो दो 
िमनट मȂ डोसा बनने की तरह तो िबल बन रहा है, लॉ बन रहा है। यह क्या हाल है, आप लोगȗ ने 
क्या माहौल बनाया है?  You are digging. You are diggi ng every religious institution 
further and further. H
ow far are you going to dig? How far? ... (Time-bell rings)... 
Madam, I have two more minutes. My party has seven minutes. I will take two more 
minutes from there. How far are you going to dig?   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी):  आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है। 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Once you dig further, you will find Budha Vihars and Jain Vihars. 
If you dig further, you will have to go to the Middle-East.  If you dig further, you will go 
to Africa where your ancesto rs came from. So, what is th e utility or purpose of this 
digging?   
 Madam, now, I come to selective statis tics. What is happening in this country? 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी): माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है।    
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: The country has been  taken to a different level. यह 56 
इंच है, 
US$ 5 trillion economy! क्या-क्या बोल रहे हȅ? ...(Time-bell rings.)... I need two more 
minutes, because my colleague has time. I will take two more minutes from him. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी): अब आपकी बात िरकॉडर् मȂ नहीं जाएगी। आपका समय 
समाÃत हो गया है।   
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
125

 
S H R I  T I R U C H I  S I V A :  M a d a m ,  h e  i s  t a k i n g  t i m e  f r o m  h i s  c o l l e a g u e .  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी) : ठीक है।     
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, look at statisti cs. You cannot defeat those statistics. 
But, when you pick-up selective statistics, that is where you are.  Sir, a lot of 
statistics have been doled out by my leader, Tiruchi Sivaji. What was the GDP during 
the UPA? It was 6.8 per cent. आपके  10 साल मȂ िकतना है? It is 5.9 per cent now! You 
talk about what – redeeming 25 crore people from poverty?  That is because of the 
extrapolation of data by the NITI Aayog. You have dispensed with Census! You don’t 
have the headcount ratio.  You add those thin gs. Had it been a real picture, it would 
have been reflected in the Global Hunger Index. Where are you in the Global Hunger 
Index? Now, again, you go to any Inde x – Human Developmen t Index or Press 
Freedom Index. Press Freedom Index मȂ क्या हो रहा है?    
अभी देिखए, आपने वॉवेल बदल िदया। यह क्या वॉवेल है? पहले मीिडया मȂ 'ई' था, आपने 
'ई' को िनकाल िदया
, उसकी जगह 'ओ' रखा है। आपने मीिडया को 'मोिडया' बनाया है। The 
media has been converted into ‘Modia’ . You own your media house, Rajiv ji. That’s 
why I am telling you. All other media organi zations have also been turned like your 
media organization.  All the States are protesting for their rights. Even, Sir, your rights 
have been taken away by this Government. That is the plight. For the first time, all the 
MLAs and MPs from Kerala and Karnataka are going to camp in Delhi to protest 
against their unitary tendencies – starving the States; fleecing the States. At the 
same time, I would thank the hon. Minister.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY) in the Chair.] 
 
Let me conclude my speech by thanking the hon. Minister for deploying CRPF for the 
Raj Pramukh,  Raj Bhawan, thereby protecting the people of Kerala from Governor.  
The CRPF will protect the Kerala because the CRPF has been gi ven to Shri Arif 
Mohammed Khan.  That is the situation in the country. So, I would only say that when 
you talk about " सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका Ģयास", your intention is only to 
segregate, create polarization, divide th is country, and take this country to the 
medieval era. We will not allow this.  An d, 2024 elections would be a Waterloo for 
you.  
 Thank you very much.        
 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam): Thank you, Vice-Chairman, Sir, for 
giving me this opportunity to speak on the Motion of Thanks. 
 On behalf of my party president, Shri At ul Bora, and on behalf of my party, the 
Assam Gana Parishad, I rise to support the Motion of Thanks to the Address given by 
Her Excellency the President of India.  
 This was the first Address by the hon.  President of our country in this new 
building when our country is observing 75
th year of adoption of our Constitution.   
 Sir, I am not having much time at my disposal. I have very small time to speak 
here.  So, within this limited time, I would like to highlight the major achievements of 
our Government.    
 Today, all the countries are passing through critical time. Today, all economies 
are passing through very critical time. Leading countries like China, Germany, France, 
the United States of America, etc., are f acing trouble in economic growth. But, even 
during this critical time, the economy of India is doing beautifully fantastic. And, it is 
not my version.  It is recognized by the International Monetary Fund.  It is recognized 
by the United Nations Organization. It is re flected by the Motion of the World Bank. In 
this critical time when even the countries like, America, China, Germany, France, 
etc., are facing problems, our economic growth is more than 7.5 per cent. This is the 
achievement. This is the wonderful achievement of our hon. Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modiji.  Under his stewardship, the economy of India is flourishing.  
Sir, I am going to speak about our Exte rnal Affairs policy.  India's External 
Affairs Policy is being well r ecognized by the world today. It is being supported by all 
leading nations. It is a proud moment for ev ery Indian. Being an Indian, I feel proud at 
the successful conclusion of the G-20 Summit under the leadership of Prime Minister, 
Narendra Modiji and under the l eadership of India. This pr opelled India to a very high 
position in the world. 
 Sir, we have very good relations wi th Africa. The Father of the Nation, 
Mahatma Gandhi, began his struggle from Sout h Africa. Under the leadership of Shri 
Narendra Modi, under the chairmanship of In dia, African countries participated in the 
G-20 Summit. This has become possible under the great leadership of our country 
and this shows our great relations with the African countries. 
 Sir, I come from the North Eastern Re gion. Many people have spoken about 
Manipur. Without going to Manipur, it is very easy to criticize the situation there, but 
this is the only Government where the ho n. Home Minister, Sh ri Amit Shah, camped 
in Manipur for three days. In the past, no Home Minister visited North-East for more 
than one day, but our Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah, visited and camped in Manipur 
for three days.  Please try to understand the situation in Manipur.  Don't do politics 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
127

 
over Manipur.  It is the duty of every political party and every Indian citizen to sincerely 
think of a permanent solution to the problem of Manipur in stead of doing politics over 
it. 
 Sir, I have already spoken about the country's economic situation. Last year, 
we spent more than Rs. 12,0 00 crore on infrastructure development. In the recent 
interim Budget, the hon. Finance Minister proposed Rs. 1,100 crores for infrastructure 
development. It is known to everybody that India is now one of the leading mobile 
manufacturing hubs of the world. This is an achievement that we must recognize 
instead of criticizing all the time.  
 Sir, the beauty of the North-Eastern Re gion is God-gifted. The beauty of the 
North-Eastern Region was not created by Shri Narendra Modi or the NDA 
Government.  Even when the UPA was in power, the beauty of the North-Eastern 
Region and Assam was there, but if you look at the data, they have failed. The 
number of domestic and international touris ts visiting the North-Eastern Region has 
risen very high; the percentage is increasing like anything.  This is due to the peaceful 
situation prevailing in the North-Eastern Re gion. I am very proud that I am from the 
North-Eastern Region and I can say very pr oudly that the North-Eastern Region is 
also a part of our country, with the most peaceful citizens in the country. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Please conclude. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: It has become possible due to the peaceful 
situation and infrastructure development there. Can anybody imagine that 20 years 
back there was just one flight from Guwahati to Delhi? There was no direct flight from 
Guwahati to Delhi. There was just one flig ht that flew from Guwahati to Patna and 
then from Patna to Delhi. Now there are 22  regular flights from Guwahati to other 
parts of the country. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Please conclude. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: Sir, this is an achievement. Due to the peaceful 
situation, due to the improvement in infrastructure, a large number of tourists are 
visiting there and tourism is flourishing. Sir, I am an Indian. Every Indian should feel 
proud because my Bharat, India, is the only country of the world which hoisted the 
National Flag on the south pole of the moon.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Please conclude. 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: I salute  our scientists. We must salute our 
scientists and equally we must give compliment to our Government for this 
achievement.  I will be happy if I am given one more minute.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Okay.   
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: This is the scenario. We are speaking about the 
sports development in our country. This year, in Asian Games in China, Indian 
athletes have won more than one hundred medals for the first time. Our para-athletes 
have won more than one hundred medals. This  is due to the facility provided by our 
Government for infrastructure developmen t and sports development in our country. 
We speak about Manipur; we speak about the north-eastern region. Again, I must 
compliment hon. Prime Minister of th e country because the NDA Government, 
Narendra Modi Government, under his leadership has established the first sports 
university of the country in Manipur. This is  the best recognition to the north-eastern 
region; this is the best recognition to Manipur. We are speaking about Manipur but, in 
reality, Modiji is working for the betterment of Manipur. I am equally very happy to see 
the medal tally of our athletes. ...(Interruptions)... Madam, I am speaking about the 
north-eastern region, please allow me. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Please conclude 
your speech. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: If you s ee the medal tally of Asian Games and if 
you see the medal tally of para Asian Games, you will be delighted and happy 
because many medals have been won by athletes from the north-eastern region, 
athletes from Manipur and athletes from Assam. ( Time-bell rings. ) This is the 
commitment of Narendra Modi Government because for this region the Government 
has established the first Sports University in  Manipur. With this I request everybody to 
try to understand the situation in Manipur from their hearts. I request everybody not to 
do politics about Manipur. We have to rise above the political line because we have to 
work to resolve the issue of Manipur. Thank you, very much.   
  
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Sir, you also have to give us more time. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR RE DDY VEMIREDDY): I will give you.  
Don't worry.  The next speaker is Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque.   
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
129

 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal): Sir, thank you for allowing me 
to speak on the Motion of Thanks to the President. The hon. President in her Address 
mentioned Amrit Kaal thrice and Viksit Bharat seven times. These phrases make good 
media bites.  But I would like to know fr om the Union Government, since it is the 
Government which has written the Speech, what exactly do these terms means.  Are 
there any concrete definitions?  In the f ace of these vague terms, let me give you 
some hard facts.  The President said in her Speech, "Now, for the first time in our 
lives, we are witnessing eradication of poverty on a massive scale." 
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
What about the 15 crore people in India who are still poor? And, this number is based 
on their report.  I can speak for ten mi nutes on why the methodology adopted for 
calculating this number is wrong.  The actual number is much higher, but let us go 
with it.  If 15 crore people are poor, then  why does the Government keep on harping 
o n  t h e  f a c t  a s  t o  h o w  i t  i s  g i v i n g  f r e e  r a t i o n  t o  8 0  c r o r e  p o o r  p e o p l e .   I s  t h i s  Amrit 
Kaal? And, for the poorest of the poor, you further push them into poverty for political 
vendetta. In the States,  where you can't win democratically, you deliberately starve 
them of funds. This is fiscal federal terrorism .  Sir, 21 lakh poor MNREGA workers 
have not been paid for two years. An amo unt of Rs.6,900 crores is due to Bengal 
under MNREGA alone. Another amount of  Rs.9,300 crores is due under Awas 
Yojana, and Rs.7,000 crores is due for pa ddy procurement. Over all dues worth over 
Rs.1 lakh crores are there. I was listening to my colleague here and I was seeing that 
the Treasury Benches were laughing. They sh ould hear to the vo ice of the people. I 
would like to say: 
 
"कहकहȗ मȂ नहीं, आँसुओं मȂ पलते हȅ, 
वह इन्कलाब जो जमाने का रुख  बदलते हȅ।" 
zﮨﻴﮟ، ﭘﻠﺘﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓﻧﺴﺆﻭں ﻧﮩﻴﮟ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﻗﮩﻘﮩﻮں
† 
ﻭﻩ ﺍﻧﻘﻼﺏ ﺟﻮ ﺯﻣﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﺭُﺥ  ﺑﺪﻟﺘﮯ ۔ﮨﻴﮟ  
 
They want to deprive Bengal, but ev en then, our Government under Ms. 
Mamata Banerjee will keep working for the people. The Bengal Government will 
release all the MNREGA dues to 21 lakh people from our own State funds. Please 
learn from Bengal.  Bengal is better than the BJP-rules States in the matter of poverty 
alleviation. The Multi-Dimensional Poverty Inde x in Gujarat is 9 per cent. In Assam, it 
                   
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
is 14.5 per cent. In Uttar Pradesh, it is 15 per cent.  In Madhya Pradesh, it is 21 per 
cent.  In Bengal, it is just 8 per cent.  Where are the two crore jobs that they had 
promised?  Two out of five graduates do not have jobs. Almost half of the youths are 
unemployed in this country. Is this 'Viksit Bharat' ? What does the Government have 
to say about almost 10 per cent food inflation? Look at the prices of essential 
commodities as compared to 2014. The pr ice of rice has gone up by 56 per cent, 
wheat by 59 per cent, milk by  61 per cent and tur dal has gon e up by 120 per cent.  Is 
this 'Amrit Kaal'?   
 The hon. President mentioned the word 'farmer' 11 times in her Speech. Let 
me give two data points. According to the NCRB's latest data, 30 farmers commit 
suicide every day. Sir, 700 farmers reported ly lost their lives during the farm law 
protests. Why did this happen ? It happened because the opposition to the draconian 
farm laws was bulldozed in Parliament. Eventually, they had to repeal them.   
 The hon. President mentioned the word 'double' in her Speech nine times, but 
did not talk about doubling farmers' income. How many times was this promised? 
Please learn from Bengal. Farmers' income ha s not only doubled in Bengal, but it has 
tripled - from Rs.91,000 to Rs.2.9 lakh. They have been in Government for ten years 
now. We did this in 2018, in just nine years.   
 Now, let me come to the issue of heal th services. A CAG Report revealed that 
more than 7.5 lakh beneficiaries of th e Government's prized Ayushman Bharat 
Scheme were invalid. In Madhya Pradesh, over Rs.1.1 crore was paid to about 400 
patients who were declared dead in the data  base. In this also, the cost is shared 
between the Union and the State Governme nts. In Bengal, the Swasthya Sathi 
Scheme covers 2.4 crore fam ilies. The entire cost is bo rne by the State. It is 
completely cashless and pape r l e s s .  I t  p r o v i d e s  f r e e  tests and treatment in all 
Government hospitals. So, please learn from Bengal.   
 Now, let us talk about minority welfare. The hon. President mentioned the 
word 'minorities' only once in her Speech , that too about providing citizenship to 
minorities from other countries, but what about the welfare of minorities living in 
India? In 2023-24, the Ministry of Minority Affairs saw a 38 per cent slashing of funds 
receiving one of the lowest budgetary allo cations in terms of key social welfare 
Ministries.   
The Maulana Azad Foundation saw a deduction of 99 per cent funds. Schemes 
that support minority students in clear ing public service exams got nothing. The 
BJP's governance model operates as a bulldozer raj demolishing minority 
establishments, altering names, er asing people and rewriting history . Today, our 
children navigate a divided India where sections of the society live in uncertainty. They 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
131

 
watch Members of Parliament use communal sledge in Parliament without facing any 
consequences. They face cult ural vilification, political persecution and economic 
boycotts. अमृत काल से देश मȂ क्या बदलाव आया है! Nothing except that patriotism is 
now defined by the colour of the dress, th e food that we eat and the names we are 
born with.  Sir, we talk about amrit kaal but the last Assembly Elections in Jammu and 
Kashmir were held ten years ago.  The J&K Reorganisation Bill which stripped J&K 
of its Statehood was passed in 2019.  Th e Supplementary List of Business reached 
the Members at 11.18 a.m. while the Bill was introduced at 11.07 a.m. It was 
discussed and passed the very same day. The Government promised that black 
money will be recovered from tax havens abroad. In Panama, Paradise and Pandora 
Papers leaks, names of thousands of rich  Indians were revealed who had parked 
black money in different tax havens. Sir, I demand a white paper from the 
Government on this issue. No more empt y promises; let the people know it. The 
Bharatiya Janata Party is destroying instit utions. I have enough data to prove this. 
Great institutions like Parliament, Electio n Commission, CAG, CBI, ED, RBI are all 
being destroyed. Even the majestic Suprem e Court has not been spared. It is now 
being called the 'subservient court'. There is disturbing talk about bench fixing 
industry. The Parliament cannot look away.   
Let me put some questions to the Government. Why has the Indian Prime 
Minister not held a single Press Conference? 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Please conclude.  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE: Why did the Lok Sabha not have Deputy 
Speaker in the last five years? Why has the Committee on Security in Parliament 
Complex not been reconstituted in the last  five years? Why has not a single BJP 
Member of Parliament been suspended in the last nine years where as 146 Members 
of Parliament were suspended in the last Winter Session of Parliament for demanding 
a discussion on the security breach in Parliament. (Time-bell rings.)  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Please conclude 
your speech.   
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE: I am concluding, Sir.   
 Sir, para 29 of the President's Addre ss talks about India's global ranking in 
various sectors. Let me add something to that.  India ranks 93
rd in the Global 
Corruption Index, 111 th in the Global Hunger Index, 117 in the Inclusiveness Index, 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
126th in the Global Peace Index, 127 th in the Global Gender Gap, and, 150 th in the 
Press Freedom Index. Is this Viksit Bharat? Sir, I end with one couplet - 
 
"बहुत बबार्द हȅ लेिकन सदा-ए-इंक़लाब आए, 
वहीं से वो पुकार उठेगा जो ज़रार् जहां होगा। 
इंक़लाब आएगा रĽतार से मायूस न हो, 
बहुत आिहÎता नहीं है जो बहुत तेज़ नहीं।।" 
ﺍٓﺋﮯ،  ﺍﻧﻘﻼﺏ  ﺻﺪﺍﺋﮯ  ﻟﻴﮑﻦ  ﮨﻴﮟ  ﺑﺮﺑﺎﺩ  †ﺑﮩﺖ 
ﮨﻮﮔﺎ۔ ﺟﮩﺎں ﺫﺭّﻩ  ﺟﻮ ﮔﺎ ﺍﭨﻬﮯ ﭘﮑﺎﺭ ﻭﻩ ﺳﮯ ﻭﮨﻴﮟ 
ﮨﻮ،  ﻧہ  ﻣﺎﻳﻮﺱ  ﺳﮯ  ﺭﻓﺘﺎﺭ  ﮔﺎ  ﺍٓﺋﮯ  ﺍﻧﻘﻼﺏ 
ﻧﮩﻴﮟ۔  ﺗﻴﺰ   ﺑﮩﺖ   ﺟﻮ  ﮨﮯ  ﻧﮩﻴﮟ  ﺍٓﮨﺴﺘہ  ﺑﮩﺖ 
 
Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR RE DDY VEMIREDDY): Thank you. Now, 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu. 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu): Mr . Vice-Chairman, Sir, I thank you for 
giving me the opportunity to speak on th e Motion of Thanks on the President's 
Address.   
 Sir, the performance of the Government is like a coin with two sides, obverse 
and reverse. The performance of the Gove rnment has got two sides, positive and 
negative, but the President's Address sums up  only the positive sides of the last ten 
years comfortably forgetting the negative sides, which have been there in the last ten 
years. 
 Sir, I am exclaimed to find the phrases like 'in the last ten years' or 'a decade 
ago' found a mention for 32 times while narrating the achievements of this 
Government in the last ten years. The nation  wants to know the reverse side which is 
terrible. It is quite understandable that the President's Address on the election year 
would sound like that and it is more of a t easer of a film just before the Lok Sabha 
elections. Sir, not only the positivity should  be spoken but the ne gativity of the whole 
country also needs to be mentioned.   
 Sir, in this august House, I would like to put on record what really matters and 
what is really missing. The hon. President' s Address has failed to  mention the blatant 
failures of the Government. 
                   
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
133

 
Sir, does anyone sitting in this august  House know what is exactly happening 
in Manipur? If this is the condition for Members of this Parliament, what about the 
ordinary citizens of the country? The President’s Address fails to mention what is 
happening in Manipur, whether any appr opriate steps are being taken by the 
Government to stop the ethnic violence in Manipur and to restore peace and normalcy 
in the State of Manipur.   
 Sir the hon. President has failed to me ntion about the 75 foreign trips made by 
the hon. Prime Minister in the last 10 years, visiting around 70 countries. If not for the 
Covid, he would have visited 100 countries ; he would have made a century on it! But 
they have failed to mention in the Address the inputs of those vi sits, the investment 
brought by the Prime Minister of India to  our country, the growth of the country by 
visiting so many countries. There is nothin g about these things. It was a very, very 
unspiced speech by the hon. President.     
Sir, I will not talk about the suicides by  the farmers and the fa rm workers. It is 
very unfortunate that the incidence of suicid es by the farmers and the farm workers is 
on the rise. More than one lakh farmers ha ve committed suicide in the last 10 years. 
According to the Report of the National Crime Records Bureau, 30 farmers die every 
day by committing suicide in spite of the ta ll claims of farm loan disposals by the 
Government. A country cannot be considered a developed one when the sons of the 
soil, the farmers, live in utter distress and penury. The Government which boasts that 
it provides free ration to 81  crore people below poverty line for the next five years is 
indeed indebted to those poor farmers wh o produce such humon gous quantities of 
food grains, toiling in hot sun and brav ing hostile socio-economic and climatic 
conditions.   
 Sir, overall unemployment rate in India as of now has gone beyond 10 per cent. 
In 2014, the unemployment rate was 5.4 per cent and as of now it is 10.03 per cent. 
The unemployment rate among the age grou p of 25 to 35 years has touched 30 per 
cent.  This shows that 40 per cent of our youth population is unemployed. Another 30 
per cent of the population is underemployed . Only 30 per cent people are fortunate 
enough to get a regular job either in the G o v e r n m e n t  o r  i n  t h e  P S U  o r  i n  p r i v a t e  
entities. Sir, we should not forget that in  their manifesto, they had mentioned about 
getting jobs for every Indian in this country. Let us make a note of it. 
 Sir, violence and crimes against the wo men and children in India, like physical 
or sexual violence committed against women ty pically by a man is on the rise. There 
are other forms of violence against women which includes acts such as domestic 
abuse, sexual assault, murder, dowry deat hs, honour killings, female infanticide, 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
sexual crimes like rape, modesty- related violence, human trafficking, forced 
prostitution, domestic violence, acid throwing and many more.   
 According to the National Crime Reco rds Bureau, in 2021 , there was a sharp 
increase of 87 per cent in reported incidents of crimes against women in comparison 
to 2011. According to the 2021 Annual Report  of the National Crime Records Bureau, 
31,677 rape cases were registered across the country, that is, an average of 86 cases 
per day. We have passed the Women Reservation  Bill in such kind of a scenario in 
this country which is still a far dream for all the women of the country. Sir, in this 
situation, in Tamil Nadu, under the leadersh ip of Shri M.K. Stalin, has given 40 per 
cent reservation to women in Government jobs. They have launched various schemes 
like the Moovalur Ramamirtham Ammaiyar Higher Education Assurance Scheme of 
Rs. 1,000 until the girl child is able to complete her higher education and the Kalaignar 
Mahalir Urimai Thittam scheme under wh ich an amout of Rs. 1,000 is given as 
financial support to the women. 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Dr. Kanimozhi, 
Please conclude your speech.   
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU: Sir, I will now ta lk about atrocities against the SC, ST 
and the oppressed communities. As per the Report of the National Crime Records 
Bureau, the Ministry of Home Affairs, more  than 5 lakh atrocity cases have been 
registered in the last 10 years under th e Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. On an average, more than 50,000 cases were 
registered under this Act. It is really unf ortunate to see a count ry which proclaims as 
the third largest economy in the world, also faces such social st igma and shame. The 
attack and atrocities against the SC, ST and oppressed communities is on the rise 
since 2014. There are thousands of such incidents that happened but not reported or 
registered, which shows the dark and the ugly  side of the society we are living in.  
Ironically, the immediate past President,  Shri Ram Nath Kovind and the present 
President, hon. Droupadi Murmu are also from these communities. There is an urgent 
need for a comprehensive law to provide socio-economic and political security and 
safety for the people belonging to th e SC, ST as well as other vulnerable 
communities.   
 Sir, there is an increase  in the drop-out of students belonging to the SC, ST 
and OBC communities from IITs, IIMs, NITs  and Central Universities and students 
committing suicides. It is shocking to kn ow that the maximum number of dropouts 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
135

 
occur among students belonging to the SC, ST, OBC and minority communities from 
PG and Ph.D. Programmes across the country in IITs. 
 In the last ten years, more than 8,00 0 students belonging to these communities 
and minority communities have dropped out from IITs, IIMSs, IIITs, NITs, IISERs and 
50 students died by suicide inside the campuses across the country.  There is no 
mention of this in the President's Address. 
 There is an unprecedented increase in  cyber crimes and cyber fraud in the 
country. The number of reported cybercrime s in India has increased by more than 
ten-fold in the last ten years. The num ber of unreported cases would have been 
manifold.  Even the websites of vital an d crucial Government Departments are being 
hacked.   
 The menace of crimes and frauds through social media networks is increasing 
alarmingly. Even the social media hand les of Ministries and Ministers are 
compromised.  What is the guarantee fo r the common people then? We need to 
enact strict laws and take stringent actio n to curb and stop the menace of cyber 
crimes and cyber frauds in the coming years. Otherwise, the people of the country will 
be swallowed by the criminals of cyber world.   
 Sir, next is lynching and killing of peop le from minority communities. Lynching 
is an act of killing someone or a group withou t a legal trial.  In other words, it is a 
planned extra-judicial killing via a group.  Hon. Supreme Court observed that these 
extra-judicial attempts of killing under the guise of the protectors of the law have to be 
nipped in the bud. Otherwise, it would lead to anarchy which would plague and 
destroy the nation like an epidemic.  In the last ten years, India has seen an outbreak 
of religious crimes.   
 The President's Address is silent on th is very dangerous issue, which may ruin 
the life and nature of our future generations.  It is a wake-up call for all of us. If we 
don't act judiciously now, the future will witness tumultuous scenes and reactions 
very frequently.  
 Sir, killing of Defence personnel posted at  hostile locations is on the rise in the 
last ten years.   
 Sir, on value of rupee vs dollar, it is unfortunate that  the value of Indian rupee 
against US dollar has been falling continuously in the last ten years and dropped to an 
unprecedented low of 83 now. The value of Indian rupee against the US dollar was 
Rs.53 per US Dollar in 2013 and now it is Rs.83 per US Dollar. India is predominantly 
an importing nation which depends on impo rt of crude oil, fertilizers, etc.  ( Time-bell 
rings.)  
  
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Dr. Kanimozhi, 
please conclude your speech.   
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU: Sir, just two more minutes. 
 Sir, I would like to talk about the Nation al Education Policy. It has set the target 
of reaching 50 per cent GER in  2035. Tamil Nadu reached th is milestone way back in 
2020.  This was possible because of one man. He's Thanthai Periyar. He propounded 
the Dravidian code and propelled the people  of Tamil Nadu with equality, social 
justice and brotherhood. Perarignar Anna, the founder of Dravida Munnetra 
Kazhagam, and Muthamil Arignar Dr. Kalaignar followed the principle of Onre kulam 
oruvane devan and kadamai, kanniyam, kattuppadu . With their superlative 
enlightening speeches, they energized the h eart and soul of Tamil people and paved 
the way for the equitable growth which is now spearheaded by our leader M.K. Stalin.   
 Sir, before I conclude my speech, I would like to quote our leader Arignar 
Anna, who spoke 62 years back on the Motion  of Thanks on the President's Address 
in this august House.  I quote what Arignar Anna said. 
 "I regret very much that the Presiden t has not stated anything about the neo-
nationalism that is surging up in the South. Sir, I have stated that there are three 
tenets: democracy, socialism and nationa lism. I would conclude by saying that 
democracy is distorted, socialism is emaciated and nationalism is misinterpreted. I 
think in the coming years, there will be a new sense of appreciation and the needs 
and philosophy of the South will be be tter understood and self-determination 
accorded to Tamil Nadu from where I have the honour to come." 
 When we look at the happenings aro und us, his maiden speech has relevance 
even today.   Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): Shri Vikramjit 
Singh Sahney.   
 
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY (Punjab): Si r, I thank you for giving me this 
opportunity to speak on the Motion of Th anks on the President's Address. After a 
lapse of one year and a half, I am able to  give my maiden speech only today. My 
request is that you please correct the time and add ten more minutes. I hope you will 
be considerate. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKAR REDDY VEMIREDDY): You have 15 
minutes anyway. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
137

 
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY: Sir, you gave four minutes to the North-East. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRABHAKA R REDDY VEMIREDDY): Okay. You 
continue your speech. 
 
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY: Hon. Pr esident Madam has laid down the key 
achievements of the Government in the past  y e a r  a n d  a l s o  l a i d  d o w n  s o m e  o f  t h e  
steps.  I rise to appreciate some of the important things and make a note of a few 
observations and things that this Government  can do, or let me say together we can 
do, that matter to the populace or common man of this country. 
 Sir, the President's Address said that our inflation was over eight per cent in 
the ten years before 2014 and now it is five per cent. I really appreciate that India have 
considerably done a decent job in balancing the inflationary pressure with huge social 
spending despite the Covid pandemic, Russi an-Ukraine war and other disruptions.  
However, we must acknowledge and learn th at if we compare India with the world 
economies, we would find that India has always a very high inflation than rest of world 
especially -- I am laying th e data -- with respect to European Union. I would like to 
mention that household essential commodities have witnessed record price rise in the 
last seven-eight years. Today morning, I did some survey. क ु छ गृिहिणयȗ से हमने दाल, 
आटा, चावल, एिडबल ऑयल क े Ģाइिसस िलए, I am laying it on the Table of the House.  
इसके  िहसाब से अब वनÎपित ऑयल 118 Ģितशत बढ़ गया है। Mustard oil - समझ नहीं आ रहा 
सरसȗ का तेल 92 per cent, आटा 43 per cent, gram dal, urad  dal, 60 per cent, milk  - 
जैसा म
ेरे और colleagues ने  कहा। Meanwhile, the irony is that the farmers who produce 
these products, their income did not increase ev en half of this price.  Also, the prices 
of petrol and diesel have  gone exorbitantly high. और जैसे अभी बताया गया about the 
international price, we have an  administered price clause.  Ģाइस जब ऊपर जाता है, तो 
पेटर्ोल, डीज़ल का भार consumer पर बढ़ता है, लेिकन अब कम हो गया है, तो वह benefit oil 
companies ही ले रही हȅ, वह benefit consumers को क्यȗ नहीं िदया जा रहा ह ै? It should be 
escalation-de-escalation.    
दूसरा, National Statistical Office ने भी यही िरपोटर् दी है िक food inflation िदसंबर मȂ 
9.53 per cent रहा and it is a huge hike than the pr evious. We should meet on some 
permanent solutions which act as a shield for the Indian economy from global 
uncertainty.   
अब poverty की बात करते हȅ। I.L.O. ने एक declaration िदया िक poverty anywhere 
is a threat to prosperity everywhere. बहुत अच्छी बात है िक राÍटर्पित जी ने कहा है िक 25 
crore लोग poverty line से ऊपर आ गए हȅ, लेिकन मȅ अभी दोपहर मȂ ही सुन रहा था, हमारे 
colleague िशवा
 जी कह रहे थे and I hope he was right िक इसका जो threshold है, वह  
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Rs.27 per day income गाँव मȂ होनी चािहए और  Rs.33 per day income शहर मȂ होनी 
चािहए। आप poverty line क े नीचे हȅ या ऊपर हȅ? आप भी सोच लीिजए िक 27 रुपय े और 33 
रुपय े! मȅ इस threshold क े िलए भी माननीय फाइनȅस िमिनÎटर से कहूंगा िक let us be honest 
to ourselves. इसको ठीक िकया जाए। इसमȂ एक और डेटा आया है, जो global Multinational 
Poverty Index, यानी MPI 
क े िहसाब से around 415 million people exited poverty within a 
span of 15 years, 2005 से 2021. Poverty का क ु छ alleviation हुआ है, लेिकन हम िफर भी 80 
crore लोगȗ को राशन दे रहे हȅ। अभी भी एक बात कही जा रही थी िक कोई Census नहीं हुआ 
और 2011 से Government has not declared its poverty figures. एक N.S.S.O., जो 
statistical wing है, उसने 2017-18 मȂ अपनी एक statistical report बनाई थी, पर वह publi
sh 
नहीं की गई। Global Hunger Index मȂ सारी दुिनया मȂ  इंिडया का 125 मȂ से 111 वाँ rank है। हमȂ 
अभी बहुत सफर तय करना है। We have to travel a lo t. Per capita income - मȅ कल ही पढ़ 
रहा था - बंगलादेश, भूटान और मालदीव से भी हमारी पर क ैिपटा इन्कम कम है। ये छोटे देश हȅ, 
ज्यादा अमीर भी नहीं हȅ, आप इन्हȂ developing क ंटर्ीज़ समझ लीिजए, पर हमारी per capita 
income हमारे अड़ोस-पड़ोस वाले देशȗ स
े भी कम है। कहीं न कहीं हमȂ इसे देखना है।            
हमȂ इस inequality को खत्म करना है। Oxfam की एक और िरपोटर् आई है। जो 10 per 
cent of the population है, 72 per cent of India's wealth own करती है। यह भी एक आंकड़ा 
है िक wea
lth of 16 people of India is equal to the wealth of 60 crore people which is 
almost half of India's population. महोदय, अमीर और गरीब मȂ जो खाई बढ़ती जा रही है, हमȂ 
इसे कहीं न कहीं कम करना पड़ेगा। ऐसा लग रहा है िक जैसे खरगोश और कछु ए की कहानी थी, 
वैसे ही अमीर भी खरगोश की तरह आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ। यह अच्छी बात है, ल
ेिकन गरीबȗ को भी उसी 
िहसाब से ही बढ़ना चािहए और उनका Îतर ऊपर होना चािहए। 
महोदय, अब इंडÎटर्ी की बात करते ह
ȅ। डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी ने कहा, "In short, 
industrialization of India is the soundest  remedy of all the problems, even the 
agricultural problems of India..." अब President's Address मȂ Startups, mobile 
manufacturing, MSMEs, productivity-linked incentive scheme की बात की गई है, which 
is very good. हमारे िमतर्, राजीव चन्दर्शेखर जी भी बैठे हुए हȅ। मोबाइल फȗस क े components 
की ǹूटी  भी कम की गई है। अब आपको पता है िक कोिवड मȂ सेमीकं डक्टसर्, माइकर्ोिचÃस, 
ऑटोमोबाइÊस, आईटी मȂ हमारी Ģोडक्शन न
े िकतना सफर िकया। ताइवान, चाइना और यूएसए 
से सÃलाई चेन का बहुत िडसरÃशन हुआ। इंिडया का जो trade deficit है, वह 1980 से ही बढ़ा है, 
पर अभी अक्टूबर, 2023 मȂ, अगर म
ेरे आंकड़े सही हȅ, तो India had a highest trade deficit. It 
hit a record of 32 billion dollars. उसके  िलए भी हमȂ िनरंतर काम करना होगा। मȅ समझता हूँ 
िक जो लȅड-लॉक्ड सूबे हȅ, पंजाब जैसी बॉडर्र Îटेट्स हȅ, वहाँ पर 12-15 साल पहले भिंठडा 
िरफाइनरी का कोई Ģोजेक्ट आया था। PM-MITRA textile park wa s not granted to Punjab 
even on an alternative location
. Simila rly, industries like software parks and 
semiconductor hubs have not been given to Punjab despite Punjab having these 
capabilities. जी20 की बहुत बात की गई। उससे भारत की छिव बढ़ी है। हमने लगभग 400 करोड़ 
खचर् भी िकए, लेिकन जैसे िक मेरे बाकी कलीग्स  कह रहे थे, we have to see the actual 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
139

 
deliverables for the benefit of India. Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इंिडया-िमडल ईÎट यूरोप इकोनॉिमक 
कॉिरडोर की एनाउंसमȂट की, पर मȅ समझता हूँ िक हम िĤक्स क े भी मेÇबर हȅ, हम अभी QUAD क े 
भी मेÇबर हȅ, हम ASEAN क े साथ भी काम कर रहे हȅ, हमȂ सीआईएस क ंटर्ीज़ मȂ Îपाइस रूट , 
िसÊक रूट  भी िरवाइव करना है। कहीं-न-कहीं, यूरोप तो खुद ही अभी recession मȂ है, तो अच्छी 
बात है, लेिकन हमȂ दूसरे इकोनॉिम
क कॉिरडोसर् भी खोलने पड़Ȃगे। मȅ आपका ध्यान एगर्ीकÊचर 
और फ ू ड की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ। डा. एम.एस. Îवामीनाथन से ज्यादा िवख्यात 
शिख्सयत नहीं हो सकती
 है। उन्हȗने कहा था िक "If agriculture goes wrong, nothing else 
will have a chance to go right." जो हमारे भाई हȅ, वे एगर्ीकÊचर पर िनभर्र हȅ। I t  i s  a n  
agrarian economy, ले िकन अब एगर्ीकÊचर का बजट एलोके शन कम होता जा रहा है। अगर 
पंजाब की बात करȂ, तो पंजाब फ ू ड िसक्योिरटी का िबगेÎट क ंटर्ीÅयूटर है, लेिकन एमएसपी की 
किमटी मȂ और सीएसीपी की किमटी मȂ पंजाब से कोई भी िरĢेजȂटेिटव नहीं है। मȅ इसके  िलए भी 
आगर्ह करू ँगा िक इनमȂ उन्हȂ भी लेना चािहए। सर, एमएसपी Ëहीट और राइस पर ही िमलता है 
और बाकी एमएसपी पेपर पर है। आप मक्का ही देख लीिजए, एमएसपी तो 2,090 रुपय े है, पर 
मंडी मȂ मक्का कर्ॉप 700 से  1,000 रुपय े मȂ िबक रही है। हमȂ फामर्सर् को कर्ॉप रोटेशन करानी 
पड़ेगी। वे कब तक राइस-Ëहीट पर ही रहȂग
े। अब िमलेट्स का जमाना है। यह बहुत सराहनीय Îटेप 
है, लेिकन हमȂ फामर्सर् को भी िमलेट्स की तरफ, कर्ॉप रोटेशन की तरफ अवगत कराना पड़ेगा। 
पीएम-िकसान Îकीम, जो एनुअली 6,000 रुपय े देती है, उसकी साइट क े अनुसार, उसमे पहले 
11.84 करोड़ beneficiaries थ
े, अब यह िफगर 3.87 करोड़ रह गई है, तो हमȂ इसकी भी 
investigation करनी होगी। 
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
सर, आप तो खुद िकसान हȅ और बहुत अच्छे समय सदारत करने आए हȅ। मȅ कह रहा था िक... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मȅ िकसान नहीं, िकसान पुतर् हूं। 
 
Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी: जी सर, आप िकसान पुतर् हȅ, िकसान दाता हȅ, हमारे अन्न् ा दाता हȅ।  
आपकी मसीर् पर हम हȅ। एमपी बनने क े डेढ़ साल बाद आज आपने मेडन Îपीच देने का अवसर 
िदया, उसके  िलए आपका बहुत शुिकर्या। म
ȅ यह कह रहा था िक पहले यह छह हजार रुपया 11.84 
करोड़ िकसानȗ को िमलता था और अब 3.87 करोड़ िकसानȗ को िमलता है। मȅ तोमर साहब से 
िरक्वेÎट करूं गा िक इसको investigate करके  ठीक िकया जाना चािहए। Subsidy on 
agriculture inputs 
30 Ģितशत अƪू बर और िदसÇबर मȂ कम हुई और आगे भी कम हो रही है। मȅ 
आदरणीय िवǄ मंतर्ी सािहबा से िरक्वेÎट करूं गा िक Red Sea conflict है , freight बहुत बढ़ रहे 
हȅ, इसिलए यह सिÅसडी कम न की जाए। आपने कहा िक आप िकसान पुतर् हȅ। आपको पता ही 
होगा, आप तो मुझसे ज्या
दा गुणवान हȅ, knowledgeable हȅ और यह जानकर मȅ भी चȚक गय ा िक 
भारत मȂ एक िदन मȂ 145 िकसान आत्महत्या करते हȅ।  
 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
"आत्महत्या की िचता पर देख मुÊक क े िकसान को 
नींद क ै से आ सकती है हम देश क े इंसान को।" 
 
सर, यह डेटा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ पहले ही कह चुका हूं िक हमȂ िमल कर काम करना 
है। यह सभी की िजÇमेदारी है।  मȅ President's Address क े बारे मȂ भी कहूंगा िक इसमȂ कोई भी 
बात कही जाती ह
ै, तो उसे हमȂ criticism की तरह नहीं, बिÊक positive रूप  मȂ लेना चािहए।  मȅ 
कह रहा हूं िक हमȂ िमलकर यह देश बनाना है। यहां कभी तो संवाद होना चािहए। अगर ह ेÊथ की 
बात करȂ, तो Winston Churchill ने कहा है िक healthy population is the greatest asset any 
nation can have. 'आयुÍमान भारत' एक बहुत अच्छी Îकीम है, पहले भी इस पर बात हुई है। मेरे 
कई सािथयȗ ने डेटा मȂ कहा िक dead लोगȗ को भी िमल रहा ह ै। अभी जो िरपोटर् आई है, उसमȂ 
कहा गया है िक लगभग 9.85 lakh Ayushman Bharat be neficiaries same mobile number 
पर registered हȅ। ये RTI मȂ तर्ुिटयां हȅ। RTI क े िहसाब से 15 लाख बेनेिफÌयरीज़ हȅ और 
पािर्लयामȂट क े िहसाब से 1.63 करोड़ हȅ, तो कहीं न कहीं we have to sync hronize the data.  
लेिकन मुख्य बात यह है िक आयुÍमान भारत Îकीम मȂ कोिवड जैसी बीमािरयां कवर नहीं है, 
िजससे बहुत लोगȗ को उस पर out of the pocket देना पड़ा और उसमȂ क ेवल तीन Ģितशत 
Ģाइवेट अÎपताल ही आ रहे हȅ। 
सर, अब एजुक ेशन की बात करते हȅ। हमने AIIMS, IITs, IIMs आिद बनाए। देश
 मȂ 
primary education क े हालात ठीक नहीं हȅ।  अभी आपने भी दस िदन पहले एक इंिग्लश डेली मȂ 
पढ़ा होगा िक ASER की एक िरपोटर् ने बताया िक 14 से 18 साल की आयु मȂ जो बच्चे थे, उनमȂ 25 
Ģितशत second level मȂ अपनी regional language का text भी नहीं पढ़ पाए। 43.3 per cent 14 
स
े 18 साल मȂ ही second class की मैथ्स नहीं कर पाए। हमȂ rural education मȂ, क्यȗिक वहीं से 
हमारी नींव बनती है, हम भी टÃपर वाले Îकू ल मȂ पढ़े, तो हर सूबे को एजुक ेशन मȂ मेहनत करनी 
चािहए। हमारा जो education outlay भी कम है, वह 2.9 per cent है। यह भूटान मȂ 8 Ģितश
त है, 
Ĥाजील बहुत बड़ा मुÊक है, वहां पर भी 6 Ģितशत है, मालदीव मȂ लगभग 4 Ģितशत है, इसी 
Ģकार मॉिरशस मȂ भी है।  ...(समय की घंटी)... हमȂ इसको कहीं न कहीं 5-10 
परसȂट लाना होगा 
और िशक्षा पर िमिनमम 10 Ģितशत करना चािहए।   
सर, मेरी maiden speech है, तो आप consider करȂगे। मȅ पांच-सात िमनट मȂ conclude 
कर दूंगा।  अब मȅ Labour and skilling क े बारे म Ȃ क ु छ कहना चाहता हूं। राजीव चन्दर्शेखर जी बैठे 
हȅ, ये िÎकिंलग क े in-charge, अन्नदाता हȅ, बहुत अच्छा काम कर रहे हȅ। अब िदक्कत यह है िक 
इतने लाख-करोड़, क्यȗिक एक तो यहां िफगसर् भी लाखȗ-करोड़ȗ मȂ चलती हȅ, यह बहुत अच्छी 
बात है, ल
ेिकन last mile delivery होनी चािहए। अब PMKVY, PMKK आिद ÎकीÇस हȅ, मȅ भी 
NSDC का Board Member सात साल रहा हूं, इनके  सौजन्य से, लेिकन ĢॉÅलम यह है िक skill 
करना एक अलग बात है, अब President और उनके  Address मȂ िलखा है िक इतने skilled हो 
गए और job लायक बना िदए। जॉब
 लायक नहीं, उनको तो नौकरी चािहए। यह हम सबकी 
िजÇमेवारी है। हमȂ उनको नौकरी देनी पड़ेगी। मȅ भी खुद एनजीओ चलाता हूं। हमने पांच हज़ार 
यूथ्स को िपछले दो सालȗ मȂ नौकिरयां दीं। हमने 20 हजार रूरल सȂटसर् को एÇपावर िकया। अभी 
29.7 per cent of India's youth is unemployed, यह डाटा है। हमारे पास skilled workforce 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
141

 
4.69 per cent है, जबिक आपको पता है िक दुिनया मȂ यह 50 per cent या 68 per cent है। अब 
िÎकल इंिडया िमशन का बजट भी कम हो रहा है। इसिलए हम फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर सािहबा से ही 
दरख्वाÎत करȂगे िक िÎकल डेवलपमȂट िमिनÎटर्ी क े धमȄदर् Ģधान जी ...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. 
 
Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी: जी हाँ। State o
f Punjab मȂ, the Ministry have reduced the fund 
allocation just by 92 per cent, ज्यादा नहीं, 92 Ģितशत कट गया है। अब मȅ जॉÅस की तरफ 
आपका ध्यान िदलाना चाहता हूँ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. Last 30 seconds are left to speak. 
 
Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी: सर, जब आप नहीं थे, तो नॉथर्-ईÎट को 4 िमनट-5 िमनट िदए गए। 
मȅ तो पंजाब से हूँ और मेरी मेडेन Îपीच है। सर, आप मुझे 5 िमनट दीिजए। यह मेरी मेडेन Îपीच है, 
आप म
ुझे बोलने तो दीिजए। मȅ तो सुझाव ही दे रहा हूँ।   
 अब, एक और बात है िक आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिलजȂस आ रही है, िडिजटलाइजेशन आ रहा 
है, तो राजीव चन्दर्शेखर जी, इससे जॉÅस और जाएँगी। इसि
लए हम लोगȗ को क ु छ आउट ऑफ 
बॉक्स सोचना है, क्यȗिक मेक ेनाइजेशन से मजदूर और कम हȗगे।   
 राÍटर्पित जी ने एनजीर् मȂ क्लीन एनजीर्, सोलर क ै पेिसटी, पावर िगर्ड, उज्ज्वला, 
इलेिक्टर्क Ëहीकल, बहुत ही बिढ़या-बिढ़या बात की। हम ग्लासगो भी गए, हम सोलर एलायंस म
Ȃ 
भी गए, सारा क ु छ िकया।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  
 
Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी: जी हाँ।  एथेनॉल, जो एनजीर् मȂ ... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. 
 
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY: Si
r, be fair please. मेरी मेडेन Îपीच है, मुझे बोलने तो 
दीिजए। ठीक है, मȅ नहीं बोलता हूँ, मȅ बैठ जाता हूँ।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: देिखए, Sahney sahab, you have made good points . It is over 17 minutes 
now.   
 
Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी: सर, पर मेरी मेडेन Îपीच है। 17 
 िमनट तो हमारा टाइम था। अच्छा, 
मुझे दो िमनट दे दीिजए, why to waste time. मȅ कन्क्लूड कर रहा हूँ, Ãलीज़। I have high 
regards.  
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी सभापित: Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़। 
 
Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी: सर, हर 10 सेक ं ड मȂ आप कहȂगे, तो मȅ क ै से अपनी बात कहूँगा?   
 सर, एथेनॉल शुगरके न और राइस से बनता है और वाटर इंटȂिसव है। हमȂ अब देखना होगा 
िक crop residue and stubble can be converte d into fuel for thermal plants and for 
farmers.  आपने द
ेखा िक िदÊली मȂ धुआँ छा जाता है, इससे क्लीनर एनवायनर्मȂट का भी इलाज 
होगा। पुणे क े िरसचर्सर् ने िदखाया है िक इलेिक्टर्क ËहीकÊस क े िलए एगर्ी वेÎट से हाइडर्ोजन 
Ģोǹूस िकया जा सकता है।  इंदौर मȂ ÃलािÎटक व ेÎट से डीजल बन रहा है and CNG out of 
liquid waste बन रहा है।  इसिलए हमȂ एनजीर् िरन्यूएबल मȂ नई चीजȗ पर ध्यान देना होगा।   
 सर, िडफȂ स को लेकर उन्हȗने िडफȂ स मैन्यूफ ैक्चिंरग क े बारे मȂ बहुत अच्छी बात की।  
India is the world's largest importer of  arms
, spend almost Rs.40,000 crores. मेरा 
मानना यह है िक हमारी जो ऑफसेट पॉिलसी थी िक हमȂ जो िडफȂ स इिक्वपमȂट बेच रहा है, हम 
उस पर ऑिÅलगेशन लगाते हȅ िक आप इसका 30-40 परसȂट टेक्नोलॉजी टर्ांसफर करो या 
एक्सपोटर् करो। वह उतनी सक्सेसफु ल नहीं हुई।  हमȂ उस पर ध्यान देना है। कानपुर से लेकर 
हमारे इतने ऑडर्नȂस फ ैक्टरी बोड्सर् हȅ, उनको व
े इिक्वपमȂट्स बनाने चािहए, जो हम इÇपोटर् कर 
रहे हȅ, जैसे बुलेटपर्ूफ जैक े ट है, आमर्डर् Ëहीकल है। इंģाÎटर्क्चर बहुत बना, पर अब इंģाÎटर् क्चर 
पर भी पुश करने की जरूरत है, जैसे नेशनल इंģाÎटर्क्चर पाइपलाइन है। हमारे पंजाब, हिरयाणा 
जैसे जो सूबे हȅ, इनमȂ जब तक डर्ाई पोट्सर् और मÊटी-मॉडल टर्ांसपोटर् नहीं बनेगा, ये क ंपीट नहीं 
कर पाएँगे।  ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
Lastly, the Soul of India lies in her villages. …(Time-bell rings.)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Amar Patnaik.  …(Interruptions)… 
  
Ǜी िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी: सर, मȅ खत्म कर रहा हूँ। 100 Îमाटर् िसटीज़ पेपर पर हȅ, एक्चुअल 
नहीं बनी हȅ।   
 सर, आिखर मȂ मȅ यही कहना चाहूँगा िक महात्मा गाँधी जी ने कहा - 
 
"रघुपित राघव राजा राम, 
ईǚर, अƥाह तेरो नाम
, 
सबको सन्मित दे भगवान।" 
 
 Let us ensure social fibre of Secularism and Equality … 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Amar Patnaik. Nothing will go on record. 
 
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY:  
*              
                   
* Not recorded. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
143

 
                   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Only Dr. Amar Patnaik now. …( Interruptions)… Now, Dr. Amar 
Patnaik; you have seven minutes to speak and you know how to monetize time.    
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK (Odisha): Thank you hon.  Chairman, Sir. As I stand here on 
behalf of my Party, the Biju Janata Dal an d my leader, Shri Naveen Patnaik, the hon. 
Chief Minister of Odisha in support of the Motion of Thanks  on the President's 
Address, I am filled with pride on several counts. First, for being an Odia, as the hon. 
President is the first Odia to  occupy this highest constitu tional office of our country. 
She is also the first tribal President of In dia and only the second woman President of 
India. I salute the visionary leadership of  my leader, Shri Nave en Patnaik, who as 
undisputed leader of 4.5 crore Odias for ab out a quarter of a ce ntury now, was the 
first to support her candidacy to this august office.  
Sir, the Arthashastra mentions three im portant principles of good governance: 
'Sarva Loka Kalyankari Karma'  meaning universal welfare, ' Sarva Loka 
Sangrahamevapi' meaning maintaining and protecting each and everyone in the 
creation and 'Sarva Hitey Ratah' meaning securing universal care for everyone.  
Hon. Chairman, Sir, the President's Addr ess highlighted that the grand edifice 
of a " Viksit Bharat " will be erected on four pilla rs- women power, youth power, 
farmers and the poor. Our hon. Chief Mini ster, Shri Naveen Patnaik's governance 
model has always centred aro und bringing happiness to th ese sections of the society 
adopting the unique 5T model of implem entation which includes: Transparency, 
Technology, Teamwork, Time and Transformation. 
In the words of our hon. Chief Minsiter, who has been a flag  bearer of women 
empowerment in our country, "women empo werment is not a slogan, but, a non-
negotiable code for us". Since, 1992, when Odisha pioneered the women's political 
reservation under the legendary leadership of  Shri Biju Patnaik by providing 33 per 
cent reservation for women in local bodies , the BJD had persistently advocated for 
this right. Women-led development has been the mantra of development and 
governance of hon. Chief Minister, Shri Na veen Patnaik ever since he assumed the 
reigns of the State in 2000. Hon. Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik was the first and 
the only Chief Minister in the country to nominate women to a third of BJD's Lok 
Sabha candidates in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Therefore, passing of the 
Women's Reservation Bill in 2023 which the hon. President alluded to in her speech 
fills us with great satisfaction. I would like to exhort the Union Government to consider 
conferring the Bharat Ratna on this legend ary leader, Biju Patnai k, which has been a 
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
demand not just from BJD but also from so me other parties who had the privilege of 
knowing and working with him.  
On the economic empowerment front, our Mission Shakti Programme, started 
by hon. Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Pa tnaik in 2001, has succe ssfully transformed 
about six lakh women SHGs, comprising about 70 lakh women, into vibrant hubs of 
economic activity across different sectors. The Union Government's effort to follow 
the same path is praiseworthy. 
Speaking of the youth power, Sir, the Union Government's progressive 
investment in new-age technology, such as , through Artificial Intelligence Mission, is 
a great step towards making India a leading digital economy. This comes as an 
encouraging support to Odisha Government's recent measures in this field-the 
Odisha for Artificial Intelligence and Artifici al Intelligence for Youth initiatives launched 
in 2023. Further, hon. President had rightl y focussed on the significance of the sports 
economy, which is a great source of meet ing the aspirations of our youth and 
providing opportunities to them. Our hon. Ch ief Minister believes that investment in 
sports is an investment in youth. Investment  in youth is an investment in the future. 
From building the largest hockey stadium in  the world and supporting the National 
Hockey Teams (both women and men), to creating state-of-the-art infrastructure for 
promoting all sports amongst all sections , especially women and tribals, such 
measures have enabled Odisha to move cl oser to the vision of becoming India's 
sports capital. This unique sports model of  Odisha built around partnerships of 
sporting excellence, competition, coaching,  infrastructure and welfare schemes for 
meritorious athletes can be a blueprint for the Centre and the other State 
Governments. 
Hon. Chairman, Sir, farmers are the backbone of our nation. Former American 
President John F Kennedy once said, "The fa rmer is the only man in our economy 
who has to buy everything, he buys at reta il-sell everything, he sells at wholesale- 
and pays the freight both ways"  
Thanks to the leadership of our hon. Chie f Minister, Odisha is the only State in 
the country to double the farmers' income. This achievement has been made possible 
through systematic interventions and income  support to all farmers, including the 
landless labourers and tenant farmers thro ugh the Krushak Assistance for Livelihood 
and Income Augmentation (KALIA) Scheme. Th rough this House, I wish to fervently 
implore the Union Government to emulate the same model and expand the reach of 
the PM Kisan Samman Nidhi Scheme to en compass tenant and landless farmers and 
implement the MS Swaminathan Committee Report  in true spirit while calculating the 
MSP for procurement of farmers' produce. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
145

 
I also suggest introducing a composite/blended insurance scheme customised 
for farmers' various needs. This inclusive pl an could cover crops, agricultural tools as 
well as personal insurance such as health and accident coverage. This would save 
time and money for farmers and ensure co mprehensive protection. Speaking of the 
poor, Sir, the upliftment of 25 crore people from multi-dimensional poverty is certainly 
a considerable feat. Our leader, Shri Naveen Patnaik believes that a healthy 
population with the right education and skill is always the prime driving force for a 
prosperous nation. Odisha experienced the most notable reduction in the count of 
multi-dimensional poor, dropping from 29.34 per cent in 2015-16 to 15.68 per cent in 
2019-2021. It has also achieved the fastest decrease in poverty in rural areas from 
32.59 per cent to 19.28 per cent. (Time-bell rings.) This underlines the significance of 
a well-functioning social sector which is acce ssible and affordable till the last mile in 
the State. I also want to highlight the impo rtance of social mobility. In 2019 survey by 
the World Economic Forum spanning 27 nati ons, India emerged as the leader in 
residents' confidence regarding upward social mobility. This underscores the 
widespread belief among Indians that with humble beginnings and hard work, 
prosperity and success is an achievable and prevalent journey. However, social 
mobility is elusive in a society like ours pl agued by inequality of all kinds, some of 
which are historically inherited.  It is imperative that we a ddress this inequality in all its 
forms. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK: I am reminded of th e lines of Santa Bh ima Bhoi, who was 
topmost Odia poet-saint of Mahima Dharma, which means to say, "Let my soul be 
condemned to hell but let the universe be re deemed." Lastly, I would be remiss if I 
did not mention that the vision of Viksit Bharat would not be possible without Viksit 
States. Therefore, it is imperative to uphold the principles of federalism outlined in our 
Constitution, particularly in the devolution of fiscal resources to the States and, in 
particular, to States with historic backwardness and who regularly face the scourge of 
natural disaster like Odisha.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Dr. Amar Patnaik.  
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK: Anyway, thank you so  much, Sir, for giving me this 
opportunity.  
 
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. K. Keshava Rao. 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana): Sir, I said that I will speak tomorrow, if you 
excuse me.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha - not present. Shri A. A. Rahim.  
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala): Mr. Chairman, Sir, this is my maiden speech.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have seven minutes.  
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: This is my maiden speech. I will make it 15 minutes. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ten minutes are good enough, please continue. Mr. Rahim, Please 
continue.  I will know your talent.  
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: Thank you, Sir. This is my maiden speech.  So, I would like to 
start my speech with the historical words of Sree Narayana Guru and I do believe that 
this is the befitting mantra for the presen t era.  That this is a model place where 
everyone lives together with human-hood re gardless of caste and religion. Sir, these 
are the words inscribed under the Shiva Pratishta done by real Vishwa Guru, Sree 
Narayana Guru, the social reformer who walk ed in the front with renaissance value. 
Sir, there is reason behind me quoting Sr ee Narayana Guru's words at the time of 
Shiva Pratishta, in the beginning. The hon. President in her Address was very 
eloquent about the Pranapratishta in Ayod hya. It was pointed out as the biggest 
achievement of this Government. I woul d like to read the Preamble of our 
Constitution. "We the people of India having solemnly resolved to constitute India in a 
sovereign, socialist, secular and democratic  Republic.." Sir, I would like to remind 
you again and again that India is a secular democratic Republic. How can a 
Government portrait Ram's temple as their biggest achievement in a secular country 
like India? In this particular context, I would like to remind you of the Shiva Pratishta 
done by Sree Narayana Guru in my home di strict, Trivandrum in 1888. After the Shiva 
Pratishta, Sree Naryana Guru inscribed the message of secularism and humanhood 
under it. At the same time of Prana Pratisht a, three Christian churches were attacked 
in Madhya Pradesh.  
What is the message given by this attack? This Government has been trying to 
divide the people. Stop divisive politics an d start talking about the distress of the 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
147

 
common people. Come and talk about the inflation! Come and talk about the 
unemployment, the elephant in the room. The hon. President's speech has turned 
out to be nothing more than a speech filled with empty claims and inflated figures and 
that have no connection with the soci al reality of our country. The policy 
announcement was expected to describe where our country is today and how the 
Government should formulate policies fo r the future. But th e President's speech 
turned out to be a hollow echo devoid of substance and direction. Throughout her 31-
page Address, the hon. President neve r used the word "u nemployment", the 
elephant in the room. What is the present condition of our country? The 
unemployment rate has risen to 10.09 per cent in the last October, according to the 
data of the Centre for Monitoring of Indi an Economy.  The educated youth labour 
force is begging in the 'market' for jobs . The Government claims 'Last year, the 
Government has given Government jobs to lakhs of youth in mission mode.' I hope 
that it was about Rozgar Melas. Didn't th e Government itself admit that the Rozgar 
Melas were a strategy to put dust in the eyes of the people? I would like to mention 
my own experience. When I asked a questi on about Rozgar Melas in this august 
House, the Minister in-charge of the Prime Minister's office, Dr. Jitendra Singh has 
given the written answer in its 260
th Session of Rajya Sabha that not a single new post 
was created through Rozgar Melas and only  appointments were made to existing 
vacancies. This is the reality. Lakhs of post s are lying vacant in in stitutions under the 
Union Government. Unemployment, under-employment and contractualisation of 
labour are the three major evils that are fa ced by the Indian youth. Agnipath Scheme 
is a tremendous example of contractualisat ion of the Indian job sector.  Even the 
recruitment of Army is becoming contract ual.  Instead of pe rmanent appointments, 
the Government is recruiting contract la bourers in the banking sector, insurance 
sector, and even in the Railways and the PSUs. The Narendra Modi Government is 
not creating new jobs and also has no inte ntion of filling up the permanent vacancies. 
This is not 'Amrit Kaal' for Indian youth, th is is Mrit Kaal. I urge the Government to 
stop contractualisaiton and ensure permanent jobs for the youth. Now I come to gig 
economy. A large number of India's educated youth, who are gasping with 
unemployment, are part of the gig economy. The well educated youth are working in 
companies like Swiggy, Zomato, Uber and other unorganized sectors for cheap 
wages. They are working from street to street irrespective of rain, summer and winter. 
There is not a single mention of such gig workers in the address. There are no specific 
plans or schemes for their welfare. This is not an Amrit Kaal.  This is Mrit Kaal for 
Indian youth.  Inflation is increasing exponentially in the country. Retail inflation in India 
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
has increased to 5.69 per cent, according to NSO data. Moreover, inflation is higher 
in rural areas than in cities. This has led to an increase in prices of commodities, 
including vegetables and food items. The Union Government has completely failed to 
control the price hike of essential commodi ties. The poor are becoming the poorest. 
Very shamefully I would like to say that the Government claims this is an 'Amrit Kaal' 
at a time when the country ranks 111
th on the Global Hunger Index!  While talking 
about the price hike, what is the price of petrol and gas? The petrol costs about Rs. 
97 per litre today. I would like to recollect to you the time when under the leadership 
of the Congress, the UPA Government, dere gulated the price-fixing mechanism of 
petrol. During that time, the BJP organized unprecedented protests against that 
deregulation policy. Now I recollect a viral visual, a Member and Minister of State, Shri 
V. Muraleedharan in this au gust House representing Maha rashtra, organized even a 
bullock cart protest in the capital of Kerala.   
Sir, when they came to power, they even deregulated the price fixing 
mechanism of diesel!  Even on this Budget day, the price of commercial gas cylinder 
increased by Rs. 15! Does th e Government have the courage to say how many times 
the price of petrol, diesel and gas cylinder increased during their Amrit Kaal,  since 
2014 and at what percentage? Sir, since 2014, the living expenditure of the common 
people is skyrocketing day-by-day. This is not Amrit Kaal for common people, this is 
Mrita Kaal. 
 Now, I am coming to airfare. Like pe trol and diesel, this 56-inch Government 
does not have any control over airfare. The Indian private carriers are looting domestic 
travellers and Non-Resident Indians. This 56-inch Government is laughing at common 
people while watching this. The Government does not have any control over the price 
of petrol. They don’t have any control over the price of diesel. They don’t have control 
over airfare. They don’t have control over an ything that is directly affecting livelihood 
of the common people. In short, they are re-writing the mantra of Indian democracy 
‘of the people, by the people, for the people ’ as ‘of the corporate, by the corporate, 
for the corporate.’   
 Sir, the Union Government is implem enting unproclaimed financial emergency 
upon opposition-led States. They are fiscally  handcuffing them for political motives.  
...(Time-bell rings.)...  
Now, I am coming to Nari Shakti. What is  the real picture of Nari Shakti? Sir, 
according to the NCRB data, 51 women are physically or mentally being abused every 
hour in our country. Women were paraded naked in Manipur. The Government was 
silent. We have seen what happened in B ilkis Bano’s case. The hon. Supreme Court 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
149

 
of India quashed the Gujarat Government’s decision to grant remission to 11 convicts 
in the case of Bano’s gang rape and murder  of seven of her family members during 
the 2002 Gujarat riots. 
 Sir, I started my speech by expressing my concerns over the changing nature 
of the secular fabric of my country. Secu larism and pluralism are the soul of our 
country.  Don’t bulldoze it. Why has India not become a religious State? The only 
reason for that is the secu lar essence of the Indian freedom movement. Sir, I am 
representing Kerala, which is the land of great freedom fighter and martyr Vakkom 
Abdul Khader.  He is popularly known as INA hero. He entered the Indian freedom 
fight under the leadership of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. He was a great 
revolutionary and freedom fighter who got arrested along with other 3 INA soldiers... 
...(Interruptions)... namely, Fauja Singh, Satyan Bardan and Anandan Nair. Sir, on 
10
th September, 1943, those four brave sold iers were hanged. Madras St. George 
Fort had witnessed an interesting incident just before they got hanged. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Sir, just one minute. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have given you more time than you expected. Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
...(Interruptions)... Okay. I will give you half-a-minute. You conclude now. 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Sir, you give me a minute. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You take half-a-minute. Please conclude. 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Sir, only two persons can  be hanged at a time in Madras Central 
Jail.  British officials had decided to ha ng Vakkom Abdul Khader with Fauja Singh 
together and Anandan Nair and Bardan. Th e brave Vakkom Abdul Khader demanded 
the British to hang him with Anandan Nair.  British officials asked, ‘Why?’ The 26-year 
old brave son of India said, ‘I belong to a Muslim family and my comrade...
 * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai.  Please, nothing will go on record now. 
 
                   
* Not recorded. 
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
6.00 P.M. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir. I rise to 
participate and put forth my views on the A ddress of the hon. President of India on 
behalf AIADMK party and on behalf of my party leader, Shri Edappadi K. 
Palaniswami.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Just a minute, Dr. Thambidurai. Hon. Members, it is already 6.00 
P.M. If the House agrees, we may take up the Business till 7 P.M. today.  
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir.   
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, as it is custom ary, the hon. President highlighted the 
achievements of the Government during th e last ten years and outlined the policy 
priorities of the Government to make India a Developed Nation by 2047.   
The hon. President has stated that In dia has emerged as the fastest growing 
major economy and it maintained a growth ra te of over 7.5 per cent for consecutive 
quarters. In her Address, the hon. Presiden t also mentioned that eighty crore people 
were being given free ration, which has been  extended for five more years. I would 
like to mention here that our former Chief Minister, Amma Jayalalitha, had introduced 
a scheme whereby free rice was being gi ven to all the cardholders. This was a 
phenomenon that we had devised for th e poor people. I request the Central 
Government to kindly consider not to limit it  only eighty crore people, but free ration 
should be given to all the cardholders of this country.    
Many hon. Members have raised thei r concern about the GST. Our hon. 
Member from DMK, Mr. Tiruchi Siva, spoke here that they could not get sufficient 
funds for the Government of Tamil Nadu. Even though we were facing financial 
problems, with great difficulties, our fo rmer Chief Minister, Shri Edappadi K. 
Palaniswami, was able to get funds from  the Central Government and implemented 
so many schemes for farmers and others . But, the present DMK Government has 
increased the property tax;  has increased duty on diesel and other petroleum 
products; and has also increased the duty on  liquor.  They are not able to reduce 
them. In fact, the DMK Government has in creased the prices of all the essential 
commodities. But, they are blaming the Central Government for not providing funds. 
Now, the present Chief Minister of Tamil Na du has gone abroad to raise funds in the 
form of investments. I fail to understand when he could not get funds from the Central 
Government, how he is going to get funds from other countries.  ...(Interruptions)...  
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
151

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)... You 
continue, Dr. Thambidurai.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, when our leader, Shri Edappadi K. Palaniswami, was the 
Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, he had also visited a lot of countries and was able to 
raise investments. Why I am telling this is because at that time we had levied only 
reasonable taxes. If you are not able to do that, the problem is bound to arise.   
 My next point pertains to the issue of fishermen. We have raised the issue of 
Kachchatheevuin Parliament many a time. But, the Government has not been able to 
solve this problem. Kachchat heevuwas a part of India. But, it was unceremoniously 
given to the Government of Sri Lanka during 1974-1976 period. As a result, the 
fishermen of Tamil Nadu are suffering a lot.  Had Kachchatheevubeen a part of Indian 
Territory, this would not have happened. The transferring of Kachchatheevuto the 
Government of Sri Lanka was not approved by  the Parliament. If any territory has to 
be given to any other country, it must be a pproved by the Parliament. It has till date 
not been approved by the Parliament. Therefore, the Government must look into this 
issue.   
 Then, many a time, our fishermen are arre sted by the authorities of Sri Lanka.  
The State Government of Tam il Nadu has many times wri tten letters to the Central 
Government to help our fishermen. Recentl y also, many fishermen were arrested. I 
request the Central Government to see that they are released at the earliest.   
 Then, our hon. President also spoke about empowerment of women. I am very 
happy that Women Reservation Bill has been  passed by the Parliament. When I was 
the Law Minister in 1998 in the Vajpayee Government, I had introduced the Bill for 
Women Reservation. But my concern is, when this Bill is going to be implemented. 
That spirit of giving empowerment to women must continue. 
 Sir, please allow me to continue for two minutes more. These are the things 
that I request you to implement sooner. Talking about medical colleges, I am happy 
that the Government has announced more medical colleges. Even the Tamil Nadu 
Government has been requesting opening of more medical colleges. That request 
must be considered. During Shri Edappadi Palanisamy's time, historically, 23 medical 
colleges were established within a period of four years. But in the present DMK's rule, 
three years have gone by, but I am not su re how many medical colleges would be 
opened.  They need to explain. ...(Interruptions)... Similarly, talking about farmers' 
problems, when Shri Edappadi Palanisamy was in power, he gave a lot of help to the 
farmers and Rs. 2,500 was given to all rati on card holders as Pongal gift. But the 
present DMK Government is paying just Rs . 1,000 and that too wa s done hesitantly.  
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Why could they not have paid Rs. 2,500  to the people, which Shri Edappadi 
Palanisamy implemented during his time? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, I am about to co nclude. I would take one or two minutes 
more. ...(Time-bell rings.)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, please; take 30 seconds.   
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, allow me just one minute.  I would conclude. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No. Please conclude. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, the Cauvery issu e is a burning problem. The Mekedatu 
Dam must not be constructed.  Shri Edappa di Palanisamy has raised this issue many 
times. I request the Central Government to ask the Karnataka Government not to 
construct the Mekedatu Dam.  It would affect the farmers of Tamil Nadu. 
 Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Sushil Kumar Modi; twenty minutes. 
 
Ǜी सुशील क ुमार मोदी (िबहार): सभापित महोदय, मȅ सबसे पहले देश की राÍटर्पित और भारत 
क े Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी  जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगा िक उन्हȗने Îवगीर्य कपूर्री ठाकु र जी 
और Ǜी लाल क ृÍण आडवाणी जी को देश का सवȘच्च सÇमान 'भारत रत्न' देने का ऐलान िकया है। 
जहां एक ओर कपूर्री ठाकु र सामािजक न्याय क
े  योǉा थे, वहीं दूसरी ओर अयोध्या क े अंदर राम 
जन्म भूिम मंिदर मȂ 22 जनवरी को Ģाण ĢितÍठा ह
ुई और उसके  11 िदन क े बाद उस राम जन्म भूिम 
आंदोलन क े जो Ģणेता हȅ, महानायक हȅ, उनको 'भारत रत्न' देकर देश क े करोड़ȗ राम भƪȗ का 
सÇमान िकया है। 
 Sir, India is on the threshold of beco ming economic superpower of the world. 
 
2014 मȂ जब नरेन्दर् मोदी जी भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बने, उस समय भारत दुिनया की 10वीं सबसे 
बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा थी और जब 2019 मȂ दूसरी बार Ģधान मंतर्ी बने, तो 2023 मȂ आज भारत दुिनया 
की पांचवीं सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा है। महोदय, यह यातर्ा इतनी आसान नहीं थी। 2014 से 2023 क े  
बीच India's GDP grew by 85 per cent यानी 2014 से 2023 क े बीच मȂ इंिडया का जो जीडीपी 
था, that grew by 85 per cent, UK का 3 परसȂट, ģांस का 2 परसȂट, रूस  का 1 परसȂट, इटली 
का जीरो परसȂट और Ĥाजील का -15 परसȂट था। क्यȗिक इस दौरान भारत का जीडीपी 85 परसȂट 
grow िकया, इसी का पिरणाम था िक भारत 2023 मȂ यू.क े., ģांस, Ĥाजील, कनाडा, इटली और 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
153

 
रूस  को पीछे छोड़कर दुिनया की पांचवीं सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन सका है। सभापित महोदय, 
2024 मȂ, जब Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी तीसरी बार देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बनȂगे, तो 2027 मȂ जमर्नी और 
जापान को पीछे छोड़कर भारत दुिनया की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा  बन जाएगा।  
सभापित
 महोदय, 2027-28 मȂ हम क ेवल दुिनया की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा ही 
नहीं बनȂगे, बिÊक हम 5 िटर्िलयन डॉलर की इकोनॉमी, यानी 413 लाख करोड़ की इकोनॉमी बन 
जाएंगे। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का संकÊप है िक 2047 तक भारत को एक िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाना है। 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने भारत को एक िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाने का संकÊप
 िलया है।   
सभापित महोदय, आज भारत क ेवल दुिनया की पाँचवीं सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा नहीं है, 
बिÊक वह दुिनया का चौथा सबसे बड़ा श ेयर बाज़ार भी है। अमरीका, चाइना और जापान क े बाद 
India is the fourth largest equity market of the world. एक साल पहले हाँग काँग हमसे ऊपर 
था, हम पाँचवȂ नंबर पर थे, लेिकन एक साल मȂ हाँग काँग को पीछे छोड़कर आज इंिडया की जो 
इिक्वटी माकȃ ट है, वह द
ुिनया मȂ चौथे नंबर पर है।  
सभापित महोदय, उसी Ģकार से आज भारत पूरी दुिनया मȂ सबसे तेज िवकास दर वाला 
देश है। अभी International Monetary Fund ने World Economic Outlook जनवरी, 2024 मȂ 
Ģकािशत िकया है। इसके  अनुसार पूरी दुिनया की िवकास दर 3.1 परसȂट रहेगी। यूएस की 2.5 
परसȂट, जमर्नी 0.5 
परसȂट, ģांस 1 परसȂट, इटली 0.7 परस Ȃट, जापान 0.9 परस Ȃट, यूक े 0.6 
परसȂट, चाइना 4.6 और भारत 6.5 परसȂट िवकास दर क े साथ दुिनया क े अंदर सबसे तेज गित से 
िवकास हािसल करने वाला देश
 होगा।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ सदन को बताना चाहूंगा िक India is the world's largest producer 
of milk, largest producer of pulses, largest producer of jute, largest producer of sugar 
and India has the largest number of real-time digital payments. सभापित महोदय, India 
is the second largest producer.. हम नंबर दो िकन चीज़ȗ मȂ हȅ? Rice, wheat, sugarcane, 
groundnut, vegetables, fruits, cotton and aqua culture. इन चीज़ȗ मȂ आज भारत पूरी 
दुिनया क े अंदर दूसरे नंबर पर है। इसके  साथ ही साथ मोबाइल फोन क े उत्पादन मȂ भी आज प ूरी 
दुिनया मȂ दूसरे नÇबर पर है,  India is the second largest manufacturer of mobile phones 
in this world. Crude steel, coal, aluminium मȂ भी हम पूरी दुिनया क े अंदर दूसरे नंबर पर हȅ।  
सभापित महोदय, जहाँ तक तीसरे नंबर की बात ह
ै, तो automobile industry, 
pharmaceutical, power production, forest gain area मȂ भी हम पूरी दुिनया मȂ तीसरे नंबर 
पर हȅ। Wind-power capacity, solar-po wer capacity, renewal energy की installed 
capacity मȂ भारत चौथे नंबर पर है। हम यूँ ही अचानक पाँचवȂ नंबर पर नहीं पहुंच गए हȅ, बिÊक 
इसके  िलए इतनी मेहनत और इतना Ģयास करना पड़ा है।  
सभापित
 महोदय, हम बचपन मȂ सुनते थे - ' गरीबी हटाओ।' मȅ दसवीं कक्षा मȂ पढ़ता था, 
इंिदरा जी कहती थीं - वे कहते हȅ 'इंिदरा हटाओ' और मȅ कहती हूँ 'गरीबी हटाओ ।' आज 50 साल 
से ज्यादा हो गए हȅ, लेिकन गरीबी हट नहीं पाई है। आपको मालूम है िक नीित आयोग ने multi-
dimensional poverty का  आंकड़ा Ģकािशत िकया है िक भारत मȂ िपछले 10 वषș क े अंदर 25 
करोड़ लोग गरीबी की जंजीर से मुƪ हो चुक े हȅ। सभापित महोदय, 2013-14 मȂ जहाँ 29.17 
परसȂट लोग  multi-dimensional poverty मȂ थे, वहाँ 2022-23 मȂ घटकर 11.28 Ģितशत बचे हȅ।  
154
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
मȅ यूपी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा, जहाँ छ: करोड़ लोग गरीबी से मुƪ हुए हȅ। मȅ िबहार क े 
मुख्य मंतर्ी, Ǜी नीतीश क ुमार जी को भी धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा, जहाँ 3.77 करोड़ लोग गरीबी से 
मुƪ हुए हȅ। सभापित महोदय, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े पहले पाँच सालȗ म Ȃ साढ़े 13 करोड़ लोग गरीबी 
से बाहर िनकले थे और अब दस वषș मȂ 25 करोड़ लोग new middle class मȂ Ģवेश कर चुक े हȅ। 
जब कोई गरीबी से बाहर िनकलता है, तो वह िमडल क्लास मȂ Ģवेश करता है। सभापित महोदय, 
average real income of people have increased by 50 per cent. आम आदमी की औसत 
आय मȂ 50 Ģितशत की वृिǉ हो चुकी है। People are living better, earning better with better 
expectations for their future. महोदय, अगर 25 
करोड़ लोग गरीबी से बाहर िनकले हȅ, तो 
इसमȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का Ģयास है। 4 करोड़ 10 लाख गरीबȗ को पक्का मकान, िजस पर छ: लाख 
करोड़ खचर् हुए हȅ, 11 करोड़ घरȗ मȂ पाइÃड वाटर सÃलाई, िजस पर चार लाख करोड़ खचर् ह
ुए हȅ, 
दस करोड़ उज्ज्वला गैस कनेक्शन, िजसमȂ ढाई लाख करोड़ खचर् हुए हȅ और अगर 80 करोड़  
गरीबȗ को अगले पाँच साल तक और मुÄत राशन िदया जाना है, तो इसमȂ 11 लाख करोड़ 
अितिरƪ Ëयय हȗगे। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का एक
 ही सूतर् है – सैचुरेशन। हर Îकीम क े अंदर कोई 
आदमी न बचे, हर आदमी को संतृÃत कर दो, सैचुरेट कर दो, चाहे वह बैकवडर् हो, या फॉरवडर् 
हो। महोदय, मȅ सदन को यह भी बताना चाहूँगा िक हमने गरीबी से लोगȗ को मुƪ ही नहीं िकया है, 
बिÊक 2022-23 मȂ इस देश क े अंदर 1,70,000 लोग करोड़पित हȅ तो हमने करोड़पितयȗ की 
संख्या मȂ भी इजाफा िकया है। जहाँ 2021-22 मȂ देश क े अंदर इनकम टैक्स Ĥैक े ट मȂ िजनकी एक 
करोड़ की आय थी, उनकी संख्या 1,14,000 थी, वह 2022-23 मȂ बढ़कर 1,70,000 हो गई है। 
जहाँ दस साल पहले Ģित वषर् 94,000 क ंपनीज़ रिजÎटडर् होती थीं, अब यह संख्या बढ़कर 
1,60,000 हो गई है। जहाँ 3.25 करोड़  लोग इनकम टैक्स िरटनर् फाइल करते थे, वह संख्या 
बढ़कर 8.25  करोड़ हो गई है। 2014 से पहले दस साल 13 करोड़ वाहनȗ की िबकर्ी हुई, जबिक 
िपछले दस सालȗ मȂ 21 करोड़  वाहनȗ की िबकर्ी हुई है। महोदय, 2014-15 मȂ 2,000 इलेिक्टर्क 
ËहीकÊस िबके  और 2023-24 मȂ िदसंबर तक 12 लाख इलेिक्टर्क ËहीकÊस की िबकर्ी हो चुकी है। 
महोदय, हम िडिजटल गवनȄस मȂ ग्लोबल लीडर हȅ, पूरे िवÌव क े नेता हȅ। अगर आज दुिनया का 
46 परसȂट िरअल-टाइम िडिजटल टर्ांजैक्शन हो रहा है, तो वह भारत क े अंदर हो रहा है। 
िडिजटल इंिडया ने लोगȗ की िंजदगी और Ëयापार को आसान बना िदया है। दुिनया क े िवकिसत 
देशȗ मȂ भी इस Ģकार का िडिजटल िसÎटम नहीं है। िडिजटल पिÅलक इन्ģाÎटर्क्चर का अध्ययन 
करने क े िलए पूरी दुिनया से लोग भारत आ रहे हȅ। हमने िडिजटल इन्फाÎटर्क्चर मȂ Aadhaar, 
UPI, Co-WIN, API Setu, DigiLocker, Aa rogya Setu, Government E-Marketplace,
 
UMANG, DIKSHA, eSanjeevani, E-Hospital , E-Office, E-Court , POSHAN Tracker, 
Ayushman Bharat Health Account, यानी आज पूरे देश मȂ िडिजटल इन्फाÎटर्क्चर का ऐसा 
ढांचा खड़ा िकया है िक वह पूरी दुिनया क े िलए मागर्दशर्क का काम कर रहा है। महोदय, मȅ िजओ 
क ंपनी को धन्यवाद द
ेना चाहूँगा, िजसने इंटरनेट और Ĥॉडबȅड को गाँव-गाँव तक पहुँचा िदया। 
जहाँ आज से क ु छ साल पहले भारत मȂ Ģित Ëयिƪ Ģित माह 62 मेगाबाइट मोबाइल डेटा इÎतेमाल 
करता था, वहीं आज Ģित Ëयिƪ Ģित माह 18 गीगाबाइट मोबाइल डेटा इÎतेमाल कर रहा ह
ै। 
पहले एक जीबी की कीमत 200 
रुपए  थी, आज 10 रुपए  मȂ एक जीबी डेटा उपलÅध है। We are 
also the second-largest manufacturers of mobile sets in the world.  2014-15 मȂ जहां 6 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
155

 
करोड़ मोबाइल फोन बने थे, वहां 2021-22 मȂ इनकी संख्या बढ़कर 32 करोड़ हो गई है। हमने 
2014-15 मȂ मोबाइल फोन का 1,566 करोड़ का एक्सपोटर् िकया। That has increased to Rs. 
90,000 crore in 2022-23. 
 सभापित महोदय, हमने दुिनया को Direct Benefit Transfer िदया है जो Jan Dhan, 
Aadhaar और Mobile की trinity है। 34 लाख करोड़ 300 योजनाओं क े अंदर DBT क े माध्यम से 
टर्ांसफर हुआ है। उसका पिरणाम है िक 4 
करोड़ फजीर् राशन काडर् रǈ हो गए, 4 करोड़ 10 लाख 
एलपीजी कनेक्शन्स रǈ हो गए और इससे 2 लाख 75 हजार करोड़ रुपए  की बचत हुई है, जो 
पैसा गलत हाथȗ मȂ जा सकता था, उसको गलत हाथȗ मȂ जाने स े बचा िलया।  
सभापित महोदय, इतना ही नहीं, एलईडी बÊब Îकीम क े कारण इलेिक्टर्िसटी िबल मȂ 20 
हज़ार करोड़ की बचत हुई है। जीवन ज्योित बीमा और सुरक्षा बीमा योजना क े कारण गरीबȗ को 16 
हज़ार करोड़ रुपए  का क्लेम िमला है। जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् क े कारण 28 हज़ार करोड़ की दवा खरीद 
मȂ बचत हुई है और subsidized राशन पर 20 लाख करोड़ रुपए  खचर् हो चुक े हȅ। सभापित 
महोदय, आयुÍमान भारत क े कारण साढ़े तीन लाख करोड़ की बचत नागिरकȗ को हुई ह
ै। लोगȗ 
को fertilizers affordable price पर िमल सके , इसके  िलए नरेन्दर्
 मोदी जी की सरकार 11 लाख 
करोड़ रुपया अितिरƪ खचर् करेगी। जो income tax मȂ reforms हुए हȅ, उनके  कारण टैक्सपेयसर् 
को 10 साल मȂ  ढाई लाख करोड़ रुपए  की बचत हुई है। 
सभापित महोदय, हम पर आए िदन आरोप लगता है िक िवपक्षी दल क े नेताओं को फ ंसाया 
जा रहा है, बदले की भावना से कारर्वाई हो रही है। म
ȅ सदन को बताना चाहूंगा िक देश क े 14 
राजनैितक दल Congress, DMK, RJD, BRS, AAP, NCP, Shiv Sena, JMM, CPM, CPI  - 
ये सारे दल Supreme Court गए  थे और इन्हȗने एक पीआईएल दािखल िकया था। उस 
पीआईएल मȂ इन लोगȗ ने यह कहा िक िवपक्षी दल क े लोगȗ को जानबूझकर तंग िकया जा रहा ह
ै, 
परेशान िकया जा रहा है। सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से बताना चाहता हूं िक स ुĢीम कोटर् 
क े Justice D.Y. Chandrachud और Justice J.B. Pardiwala ने क्या कहा, "Opposition's 
remedy is in political space, not in court"  said the Supreme Co urt while dismissing 
the plea against alleged misuses of ED and CBI. तो जो लोग रोज आरोप लगाते हȅ िक ईडी 
और सीबीआई का दुरुपयोग  हो रहा है, आप तो एक साल पहले सुĢीम कोटर् गए थे और सुĢीम 
कोटर् ने आपकी पीआईएल को खािरज कर िदया और कहा, "Ultimately, the politicians are 
also citizens. As citizens, they are amenab le to the same laws." Hon. Chief Justice
 
said, "Politicians have no rights higher than that of other citizens." आप उसके  बाद 
न्यायालय क्यȗ नहीं गए? आप specific मामलȗ को लेकर जाते।  
सभापित महोदय, अगर टीएमसी नेता पाथर् चटजीर् क े घर पर और उनकी दोÎत अिर्पता 
चटजीर् क े घर पर 28 करोड़ रुपया नगद िमलता है, पांच िकलो सोना िमलता है, तो क्या सीबीआई 
और ईडी को चुप बैठ जाना चािहए? ज्योितिĢय मिÊ
लक जो राशन घोटाले क े अिभयुƪ हȅ, वे मंतर्ी 
थे, उनको िगरÄतार करके  जेल भेजा गया। जब उनके  ऊपर इतने गंभीर आरोप हȅ, तो क्या 
सीबीआई और ईडी को कोई कारर्वाई नहीं करनी चािहए!  
सभापित
 महोदय, धीरज साहू से, एमपी क े घर मȂ अगर 350 करोड़ रुपए  नगद पाए जाते 
हȅ, तो क्या सीबीआई को कारर्वाई नहीं करनी चािहए? महाराÍटर् मȂ अिनल देशमुख, नवाब मिलक 
156
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
को क्यȗ िगरÄतार करना पड़ा? ये ही लोग थे जो राफे ल- राफे ल िचÊलाते थे, पेगासस िचÊलाते 
थे, चौकीदार  िचÊलाते थे और अडाणी-अडाणी क े नाम पर लोक सभा का एक पूरा सतर् इन्हȗने 
पानी मȂ बहा िदया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... लेिकन आज इन्हȗने अडाणी का नाम लेना क्यȗ बंद कर िदया? 
उसके  बाद मȅने एक बार भी अडाणी का नाम नहीं सुना। 
सभापित महोदय, आज हेमंत सोरेन वोट ऑफ कॉिन्फडȂस मȂ कह रहे ह
ȅ िक मȅ चुनौती देता 
हूँ िक कोई Ģमािणत कर दे। हेमंत सोरेन जी, आप तो सुĢीम कोटर् गए थे, सुĢीम कोटर् ने आपको 
बेल क्यȗ नहीं दी, उसने क्यȗ सुनने स
े इनकार कर िदया? सत्यȂदर् जैन मेिडकल गर्ाउंड पर बेल पर 
हȅ। संजय  िंसह 6 महीने से जेल मȂ हȅ, उनको कोटर् ने क्यȗ नहीं बेल दी? अगर वे िनदȘष थे, उनको 
जान-बूझ कर फ ँसाया गया, तो िफर उनको ब
ेल क्यȗ नहीं िमली? मनीष िससोिदया एक साल से 
जेल मȂ हȅ।  सभापित महोदय, एक साल हो गया, लेिकन इस देश क े िकसी कोटर् ने मनीष 
िससोिदया को बेल नहीं दी।   
सभापित महोदय, िबहार मȂ लालू Ģसाद यादव, जो चार
 मामलȗ मȂ सजायाÄता हȅ, वे 
हमको ईमानदारी का Ģवचन दे रहे हȅ! रेलवे मȂ नौकरी क े बदले जमीन घोटाले का जो मामला है, 
...(समय की घंटी)... उसके  इतने पुख्ता Ģमाण हȅ िक इन लोगȗ को कोई बचा नहीं सकता  है। 
आज देश का Ģधान मंतर्ी एक ऐसा Ëयिƪ है, िजसके  पास लाइफ इंÌयोरȂस की पॉिलसी नहीं है, 
जो सैलरी नहीं लेते हȅ, अपनी सारी तनख्वाह की रािश दान कर देते हȅ।  उनके  ऊपर कोई कजर् 
नहीं है, उनके  पास कोई Ëहीकल नहीं है, कोई लȅड का एसेट नहीं है। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का बȅक 
बैलȂस क ेवल 574 रुपए  है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  
 
Ǜी सुशील क
ु मार मोदी: सर, मेरा  आगर्ह है िक मुझे पाँच िमनट का समय और िदया जाए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your Party has to take a call. ठीक है। 
 
Ǜी सुशील क ुमार मोदी: सभापित महोदय, अभी राम जन्मभूिम का जो अनुÍठान हुआ, क्या दुिनया 
मȂ ऐसा कोई नेता है, जो 11 िदनȗ तक क ेवल नािरयल का पानी पीकर रह सके ? देश का जो Ģधान 
मंतर्ी क ंबल िबछाकर जमीन पर सोता है, 11 िदन
 का अनुÍठान करता है, अपने सारे कतर्Ëयȗ का 
िनवर्हन करते हुए यह काम कोई ऋिषतुÊय योगी ही कर सकता है, दूसरा कोई नहीं कर सकता 
है।   
सभापित महोदय, वह दौर था 1989 से 2014 तक इस देश मȂ िकसी दल को बहुमत नहीं 
िमला। अÊपमत की सरकार, िमली-जुली सरकार, Åलैकमेल, सौदेबाजी, खरीद-फरोख्त, 
कमजोर सरकारȂ, समथर्न वापसी का दौर, क्या देश िफर इसी Ģकार की सरकार चाहता है? 
अटल जी की सरकार 13 िदनȗ तक चली, एक
 वोट से हार गई। चौधरी चरण िंसह को 23 िदन मȂ 
इÎतीफा देना पड़ा, वे संसद का मुँह तक नहीं देख पाए। चन्दर्शेखर जी क ेवल 7 माह Ģधान म ंतर्ी 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
157

 
रहे, वी.पी. िंसह 11 महीने, एच.डी. देवगौड़ा 11 महीने, इन्दर् क ुमार गुजराल 13 महीने, अटल जी 
1998 मȂ क ेवल 13 महीन े Ģधान मंतर्ी रहे। क्या यह देश िफर इसी Ģकार की कमजोर सरकार 
देखना चाहेगा? अब देश इस Ģकार की िमली-जुली सरकार, देवगौड़ा और गुजराल क े दौर मȂ 
लौट कर नहीं जाना चाहता ह
ै।  
सभापित महोदय, 'मॉिनȊग क ंसÊट' नामक अमेिरका की एक क ंसÊटȂट क ंपनी है, िजसने 
िदसंबर, 2023 मȂ एक सवȃ िकया है, िजसमȂ उसने बताया है िक िवÌव क े सबसे लोकिĢय राजनेता 
कौन है, तो उनका उनका नाम नरेन्दर् दामोदरदास मोदी है। महोदय, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी कहते हȅ िक 
जो रुक  जाता है, उसका भाग्य भी रुक  जाता है, लेिकन जो चलता रहता है, उसी का भा
ग्य आगे 
बढ़ता ह
ै, बुलंिदयȗ को छू ता है।  इसिलए चलते रहो, चलते रहो, चरैवेित, चरैवेित, चरैवेित!   
अंत मȂ मȅ यही कहना चाहता हूँ िक यह अमृत काल का आÏवान है: 
 
"मुƪ मातृभूिम को नवीन मान चािहए, 
नवीन पवर् क े िलए नवीन Ģा
ण चािहए। 
मुƪ गीत हो रहा, नवीन राग चािहए, 
नवीन पवर् क े िलए नवीन Ģाण चािहए। " 
 
सभापित महोदय, मुझे पूरा िवÌवास है िक 2024 मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी एक बार िफर से, 
तीसरी बार देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बनȂगे और 2047 तक भारत को िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाने का संकÊप 
पूरा करȂगे। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Amee Yajnik. The time is two minutes. I make it five minutes.   
 
DR. AMEE YAJNIK (Gujarat): Thank you,  hon. Chairman, for giving me this 
opportunity
 to speak on the Motion of Thanks on the President's Address.   
 Sir, the Address shows as if nothing had happened before  2014. The earlier 
Governments post-1947 starting from Jawaha rlal Nehru's vision of putting strong 
foundation and thereafter progressive laws  for a decade, Five-Year Plans and the 
vision of Rajiv Gandhi ji to usher in the computer age much before it was required 
here, all this has added to what the present Address said about economy that 
happened from 2014 till the present time.   
 Sir, Nari Shakti was the highlight. But I was disappointed that the hon. 
President did not talk about the reality on the ground. A young girl is running away 
from a rapist on a public road and she wa nts a piece of cloth to wrap around her. 
That she does not have that piece of cl oth speaks volumes about the police system, 
the public space, the societal mindset and the laws which cannot protect her. Despite 
this Nari Shakti, I am very happy that women are empowered today. But what about 
the young girls, small children in the remand homes? They shiver when they look at 
158
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
the rector.  Where are the laws that are protecting them? 51 FIRs every day. The 
NCRB record shows this. When there is no protection, no safety for women, how can 
we talk about a progressive country? How can we say that we are the fifth largest 
economy? Yes, with 80 crore people being given free food, free ration, we are a 
larger economy. But what ab out that ration food? Are you giving nutritious food? 
What about anaemia? What about malnutri tion? What about malnourishment? What 
about wasting of children? What about th e children not getting enough food? What 
about female mortality? What about child mortality? This was not addressed by the 
hon. President in her Address.   
 Coming to the main thing, a developed country or a country can call itself an 
advanced economy only if your children ar e educated. There was no mention of rural 
infrastructure for education. Sir, if you l ook at the dropout rate, it is embarrassing. 
The children are not getting enough ti me, enough opportunity and enough 
infrastructure to go to school. The dropout rate is very high. We talk about digital 
India. But what about the basic infrastructure that is required?   
 We have not talked about the absence of  healthcare facilities in rural areas. All 
these were absent in the hon. President' s Address. The most important was mention 
of new laws. There was no mention of backl og of more than five crores of cases.  
People of this country want justice. The Prea mble of the Constitution talks of justice. 
If that justice is not accessed, then what is the use of going to a system where you 
cannot get justice but you get languished in  jails? You wait for your matters. A child 
from four years becomes a major and his cu stody matter goes on and on in the court 
system. I think the President's Address sh ould have addressed what is going to 
happen to the physical infrastructure, the judicial infrastructure an d the justice system 
where people of this country are waiting for justice.   
 The last point is this. We talk about di gital India. The President's Address talks 
about digital India and several schemes th at have been renamed, newly named and 
all kinds of schemes. But where are the sy stems that would deal with cyber frauds? 
Young children, who are taking school lessons online, get pop-up messages of 
pornography.  Where is cyber security? What kind of generation are we giving in the 
next decade or the decade ther eafter? We are continuously praising one particular 
kind of a governance model which is not sp eaking of a robust governance model, not 
speaking of strong institutions which were already placed by earlier Governments. I 
think this Address lacks in some of these basic and very important factors which 
should have been brought out to show where this economy, this democracy is 
heading. The institutions ha ve been weakened. The young er generation is waiting 
listlessly for employment. There are no openings and not to mention about the people 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
159

 
who have gone away to far away countries . These high net worth individuals have 
gone away abroad, settled elsewhere and we are talking about the wealth drain and 
the brain drain but none of these issues were there in the hon. President's Address. 
 Sir, there is one last point. When we talk about our younger generation, should 
there not be job satisfaction or job creatio n in the country itself ? Why should these 
youngsters be going to far away countries an d why should not we keep some kind of 
a system so that we retain our young brains , we retain our young doctors, we retain 
our young engineers and computer scientis ts within the country and create a robust 
mechanism so that the democr acy can be said to be a robust democracy? We can 
then boast of an economy which is somewhere in the hierarchy. Thank you, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Sulata Deo, five minutes.   
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव (ओिडशा): जय जगन्नाथ! चेयरमैन सर, आपने मुझे मेरी mother-tongue, 
ओिड़या मȂ बोलने की अनुमित दी, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देती हूँ।   
*"Hon. President of India made her ma iden address in the New Parliament 
Building and I express my gratitude for the o pportunity to speak on the Motion of   
Thanks to the hon. Presiden t’s Address. The hon. Pres ident is the daughter of 
Odisha. I feel proud when sh e starts her speech from the lines of Utkalmani Pandit 
Gopabandhu Das or Kuntala Kuma ri Sabat. Let me begin with a word of thanks and, 
on behalf of my party president, Biju Jana ta Dal and my leader, hon. Chief Minister, 
Shri Naveen Patnaik, I wish to express my gratitude and thanks to the hon. President 
for her Address. I would like to quote here a verse of Sant Kavi (saint poet) Bhima 
Bhoi in which he said :  
"Witnessing the plethora of plights on earth, how one could bear with; let the 
world get redeemed at my cost".  
He also spoke about how we have to cat er to the different needs of a human 
being and even though he wa s blind, he could understand  the pain of the people. I 
will now talk about health sector and I wo uld like to quote our hon. Chief Minister 
wherein he says, "Every life is precious to me." In her Address, the President spoke 
of various initiatives taken in health sector  and praised it. At the same time, I would 
like to mention the good work done by my ho n. Chief Minister Shri Naveen Patnaik in 
the health sector. Our Chief Minister dr ew the nation's attention when Odisha 
supplied life-saving oxygen to 17 states during the COVID-19 pandemic and saved 
many lives. Our Chief Minister is committe d as to how everyone's health will be 
                   
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
160
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
protected and through the Biju  Swasthya Kalyan Yojana (BSKY NABIN Card), he is 
serving this purpose. Even now, you see,  three days ago, driven by the motto “Every 
life is precious” , our Chief Minister dedicated new dialysis centers at different 
community health centres (CHC). When he says  that every life is precious, he is not 
only talking about the 4.5 crore Odias. His heart opens up and accommodates all. 
When there was a rail accident in Bahanga, the Chief Minister immediately sent 
a team of about ninety ambulances through the Green Passage to Bahanga at night 
and rescued hundreds of injured and dead. He  did not think of finding fault, either 
with the Central Government or the railway  department etc., rather he was focussed 
on the rescue mission at hand. He is always driven by the motto “Every life is 
precious”. These are the characteristics of our Chief Minister.  
We are all happy that our President was talking about Ayodhya Ram Mandir. 
The Ram temple was consecrated on the 22 nd but the 'Srimandir  Parikrama' at 
Jagannath temple was inaugurated on the 17 th and the SAMALEI Project for 
Samaleswari temple was inaugurated on the 27th. This project is so beautiful that it will 
be nice to see it and lakhs of devotees are going there. Be it Jagannath Temple, 
Samaleswari Temple or Taratarini Temple, he has unwavering faith and belief in all the 
deities in his heart. Under the “ Ama Odisha, Nabin Odisha ” programme, each 
panchayat is entitled to get ₹50 lakh for every institution, be it temple, mosque, 
gurudwara or church. 
Our hon. Chief Minister's vision is to ensure development for all. There was talk 
of bank connectivity and I know that the Prime Minister has a vision of making 
everything cashless. Still, many panchayats in Odisha, even today, are deprived of 
banking facilities. I would request that banking facilities be made available everywhere 
but even then …(Time bell rings. )… Sir, how much time do I have? Just give me 
another minute. All works are getting done through the “AMA Bank” scheme which 
has been created by allocating Rs. 2000 crores. I thank Shri Sushil Modi ji who was 
talking about conferring Bharat Ratna on Shri Karpoori Thakur and Shri LK Advani. 
We are happy that they are getting it but at a time when we are talking about repealing 
Article 370  from J&K and about creation of in dependent Bangladesh, nobody can 
deny the contributions made by Shri Biju  Patnaik. I would request you to confer 
Bharat Ratna on late Shri Biju Patnaik too who was a freedom fighter in the true 
sense, an accomplished pilot and the pride of  Odisha. It is my sincere prayer and 
request to the hon. President that as th e first citizen of the country, she should 
recommend to the Government to confer Bhar at Ratna on late Shri Biju Patnaik. I, 
whole heartedly, support the Address of the hon. President. Jai Jagannath, Bande 
Utkala Janani". 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
161

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Vaiko; not pres ent. Dr. K. Keshava Rao waited for his 
turn.  Hon. Members, mark my words, Dr. K. Keshava Rao waited for his turn, made 
a request he will avail the opportunity tomo rrow and then left. Those of the Members 
who are not present, normally forfeit their ri ght to participate in the debate and I am 
sure, this is a healthy practice. We, in this House, have to wait for our turn and we are 
here not only to address the House but also  listen to other Members. That being so, 
those who have not been able to avail the opportunity, it w ill be difficult to make that 
opportunity available to them for this part icular work. Now, Shrimati S. Phangnon 
Konyak, ten minutes. 
 
SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK (Nagaland): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I express my 
gratitude for this opportunity to participate in the Motion of Thanks on the President's 
Address. Her Address has clearly outlined the trajectory of Bharat's Amrit Kaal  and 
the Government, under her, has identified the four pillars for Viksit Bharat :- Youth 
Power, Women Power, Farmers and the Po or. In the last decade, our country has 
seen un-precedented growth, progress and de velopment. It has been a decade of 
transformational change in which the motto of Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas  has been 
the guiding light of the Governme nt. In the endeavour to take Bharat truly forward, 
Prime Minister Modi has made women empowe rment his priority which is reflected on 
the ground today. Since day one of assumi ng office, Prime Minister Modi has made 
women the focal point of his development. In charting new India's growth story, 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi emphasized that India is transitioning from women's 
development to women-led development. In  this grand vision, women are being re-
imagined as architects of India's progress and development rather than being passive 
recipients of the fruits of de velopment. Schemes are not just narebaaji, but have 
made an impact.  PM Ujjwala Yojana has ten crore beneficiaries. Ten crore women 
are involved in self-help groups. Rupees eight lakh crores through bank loans and 
Rs.40,000 crores through financial assistance has been provided to self-help groups. 
There are plans for two crore Lakhpati Didi s and 15,000 'Namo Drone Didis'. Imagine 
what it does to the confidence of a lady when she handles the drone and is 
considered to be the most t ech-savvy lady in the village. Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao  
has led to improve sex ratio of 1,020 fe males for every 1,000 males as per NHFS-5 
and maternity leave for working women has b een increased from 12 to 26 weeks. At 
no point in independent India, has women been given so much recognition and her 
contribution for nation building elicited  as much as now.  Our Republic Day 
celebrations this year showed nari shakti in all its glory and ho nour.  What could be 
more better personification of nari shakti than our very own hon. Rashtapati, Shrimati 
162
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Droupadi Murmu, the Suprem e Commander of our Armed Forces leading a nation of 
140 crore people. Hon. President has also praised the passage of Nari Shakti Vandan 
Adhiniyam after a 30-year wait. In her words, "My Government has enlarged the role 
of daughters everywhere— in water, land , sky and space." Chairman, Sir, the Modi 
Government continues to push forward it s inclusive developmental agenda with 
women at the forefront. The Government has come up with many welfare programs 
and schemes to facilitate th e further empowerment of nari shakti. In her speech, our 
President has clearly mentioned the importan ce of Bharat's youth and the initiatives 
taken by the Government. Youth constitute the most dynamic and important segment 
of our population. Our country is one of the youngest countries in the world with a 
median age of 28.5. More than 50 percent of our country's population is below the 
rank of 25, which bodes well  for our future. It is indeed heartening to note that since 
assuming office, honourable Prime Minister Modi has accorded top priority to 'Amrit 
Peedhi'. Let us not forget that our yuva are one of the four pillars of viksit Bharat as 
envisioned by our Prime Minister Modi. Th e new National Education Policy, which is 
aimed at promoting fairness in educational opportunities for all students focuses on 
mother tongue and other Indian languages. It also promotes vocational education and 
offers a comprehensive and inter-disciplina ry education with modern future-oriented 
objectives. 14,000 free vidyalayas are being planned, 6,000 are operational, further 
improving access to education. Dropou t rates among SCs, STs and OBCs, 
particularly, among girl students have declined. Sixteen new AIIMS, 315 new medical 
colleges have been established and 1,500 ne w nursing colleges have been approved. 
In the ten years of Modi Government, Bharat has seen a major cultural shift in the 
sporting landscape. What Prime Minister Modi has done is, provide an outlet for a 
youth to realize their untapped potential. Sp orts can be a great unifier and under his 
leadership, the country has seen a surge in our youth wholly embracing the sporting 
culture with open arms. In the process, many barriers have been broken and a new 
national consciousness has been evolved. Na tional unity is rapidly being established 
through sports. It is difficult to imag ine how for a country of 1.4 billion people 
producing world-class athletes and sports  persons was almost an impossible task, 
cricket aside. For too long, a fringe part icipant in international sporting events, 
winning even a medal was considered to be quite the achievement. In the 2013-14 
Budget, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports was allocated Rs.1,219 crores 
contrast that to the viksit Bharat Budget this year which has allocated Rs.3,442.32 
crores to the same. There is a sea of diffe rence in the way things are now done under 
the Government. Our country's impressive performance of late in international 
sporting events can be attributed to a lot of things initiated by the Modi Government. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
163

 
So far, five editions of Khelo India School and Youth Games, three editions of Khelo 
India University Games, three editions of Khelo India Winter Games and one edition of 
Khelo India Para Games have been hosted.  
Upcoming Annual Khelo India Games are the Fourth Edition of Khelo India 
University Games in Assam this month, and Khelo India Winter Games in Jammu and 
Kashmir and Ladakh. A total of  308 new sports infrastructure  have been approved in 
32 States and Union Territories, 1,072 Khelo India Centers have been notified across 
the country and there are 32 Khelo India Stat e Centers of Excellence across 31 States 
and Union Territories. The country's first Nation al Sports University is operational in 
Manipur, currently functioning from a te mporary campus at Khuman Lampak Sports 
Complex.  This inclusive development of th e Government for all has been reaffirmed 
by our hon. President Shrimati Droupadi Murmu ji, as she highlighted the several 
initiatives aimed at creating fair opportunities  for all sections of the society. For the 
first time, the Government has extended reservation benefits to economically weaker 
sections within the General Category recognizing the needs of disadvantaged groups. 
A 27 per cent reservation quota for OBCs has been introduced in the Central 
Government-funded medical colleges wh ich will improve access to medical 
healthcare education. The National Commi ssion for Backward Classes has been 
conferred constitutional status which will further strengthen its role. Panch Teerths, 
five places associated with Dr. B. R. Ambe dkar are developed as national pilgrimage 
sites and 10 museums dedicated to tribal  freedom fighters are being established 
across the country. For the first time, in inde pendent India, the contributions of tribals 
are being recognized begi nning with notifying 15 th November, the birth anniversary of 
Birsa Munda as 'Janjatiya Gaurav Divas' . Seven hundred and forty Eklavya Model 
Schools, which is a 400 per cent increas e in the number of schools, are being 
sanctioned since 2014. The Budget for tribal development has increased to 
Rs.1,20,000 crore from Rs.24,000 crore in 2014.  Prime Minister's JANMAN Yojana 
has been launched with an outlay of Rs.24, 000 crore for vulnerable tribal groups to 
screen sickle cell anemia and 1,40,00,000 pe rsons have been screened till now. With 
an approved outlay of Rs.6,600 crore, PM-DevINE Scheme is funding infrastructure 
and livelihood for youth and women in the North-East. With significant reduction in 
the incidence of separatism, North-East In dia is now truly experiencing growth and 
development. A Rs.10,000 crore, North-East Venture Fund, the first and only 
dedicated venture fund for the region has been set up to promote growth of business, 
ventures and skill development in the No rth-East. One of the most significant 
developments in the North-East Region ha s been the improvement of connectivity.  
The completion of long-pending infrastructure projects like the Bogibeel Bridge and 
164
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
the Dhola Sadiya Bridge over the Brahmaputra, the ongoing construction of the 
world's tallest Girder Rail Bridge on the Im phal-Jiribam Line, the record length of 
roads constructed and the resurgence of waterways, transport have all boosted 
economic and business potential in the Region , making it a testimony of revolutionary 
connectivity that was long aspired by the people. Additionally, several new airports 
have been constructed in the region. A total of eight airports have been added to the 
region in the last nine years, taking the total number of airports to 17. The 
improvement of connectivity has also helped  in providing quality healthcare services 
to the remotest parts of the region. Polic y initiatives and healthcare schemes have 
brought about a significant change in the healthcare s cenario of the Region. The 
Government's commitment to the North-East Region has been lauded by people from 
all corners of the Region. I thank the hon.  President of India,  Shrimati Droupadi 
Murmuji for moving ahead inclusively with the guarantee of fulfilling the dreams of 140 
crore countrymen. Thank you, sir. Jai Hind! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have take n exactly your time, 10 mi nutes, not a second more.  
Now, Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah; the time left is two minutes, but I will make it five 
minutes. 
 
DR. L. HANUMANTHAIAH (Karnataka): Th ank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir. Hon. 
President of India has spoken on many issu es, but my concentration is on the social 
justice and equal status for workers. Sir, in the last nine years, MGNREGA workers 
have been paid less than the minimum wage. Workers accept these meagre earnings 
due to unemployment fears. Sir, if 100 people got the work, only 23 were from 
Scheduled Castes. Now, if hundred households get the work, only 19 Scheduled 
Castes were there in the job. I would like to ask the Government, is it the social 
justice? Why can the people from these communities not get work under MGNREGA; 
what are the reasons; why are they not ge tting it? Is any accountability there in the 
Government? Sir, in nine years, job cards of  about 16 crore 20 lakh people have been 
deleted, and 1 crore 70 lakh people have been excluded from ABPS- Aadhar Based 
Payment System. It is appalling to see th at the Government which guarantees to 
provide 18 crore jobs in ni ne years has made 18 crore people unemployed within the 
MGNREGA itself. Sir, the UPA Government brought the Scheme to provide social 
justice to the poor. But, this Government  has denied the poor the rights and the 
Congress Party will never endorse this act. We  will stand by the poor until justice is 
delivered to those sections. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
165

 
 Sir, another important aspect which we always speak about and hon. 
President has also spoken about is 'Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas'. Sir, there is misuse of 
agencies like ED, CBI, and IT. I want to gi ve one small example. This Government is 
misusing ED, CBI, and IT to suppress the opposition leaders to destabilise elected 
Governments. Sir, BJP had tried to topple several State Governments by misusing 
the Central agencies, but, has not been successf ul in fourteen States so far. Sir, in 
the last ten years, 411 MLAs have been ho rse-traded, but, BJP has not been able to 
gain power through the back door. Sir, now the tyranny of ED is even being faced by 
common people. We recently saw how summons were issued to tw o dalit farmers in 
Tamil Nadu. One is Kannaiyan, aged 72 y ears and Krishnan, aged 67 years who own 
6.5 acres of agriculture land, were issued summons by the ED. Sir, these summons 
were issued because they were engaged in  a land dispute with a local BJP leader. 
The local BJP leader was accused of land grabbing. They had just Rs. 450 in their 
bank account and they were dependent on old-age pension for their livelihood. Sir, 
the mention of their caste in their offi cial documents exposes the deep-seeded 
discrimination among Government agen cies. This incident highlights this 
Government's failure to protect margina lised communities and its complicity in 
perpetuating caste-based injustices.  
Sir, there are vacancies in the Governme nt jobs. An alarming 31.8 per cent of 
teaching positions remained unfilled in Centra l universities. Sir, the vacancy stood at 
38.6 per cent for SCs, 45.5 per cent for ST s, 44.5 per cent for OBCs and 71.5 per 
cent for EWS. Sir, the figures are still alar ming. If the vacancy rates for Associate 
Professor and Professor positions ...(Time Bell rings. )... reach as high as 85 per 
cent.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. 
 
DR. L. HANUMANTHAIAH: Sir, the shortage  of experienced facu lty especially in 
senior positions is impacting students' lear ning outcomes serving as a testament to 
the Government's denial of equal opportunity to its youth. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
DR. L. HANUMANTHAIAH: Sir, this is my last sentence. In th e health sector, the 
Government talks about setting up new AIIMS. But, the reality is different. Over five 
years, the 495 positions of new doctors are vacant. 
 
166
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you gentleman; thank you. Hon. Members, Special Mentions 
from Serial No. 1 to 15 will be taken as laid on the Table of the House.  
 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS * 
 
Demand to start Instrument Landing System at MBB Airport, Agartala 
 
Ǜी िबơब क ुमार देब (ितर्पुरा): महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃदर्ीय नागिरक उƿयन मंतर्ालय को 
अवगत कराना चाहता हूं िक एम.बी.बी. हवाई अƿा, अगरतला एक आई.एफ.आर (Instrument 
flight rules) हवाई अƿा है, जहां िवमान क े पहुंचने, उतरने और उड़ान भरने को नेिवगेशनल, 
दृÌय सहायता और उपकरण लȅिंडग सहायता क े माध्यम से िनदȃिशत िकया जाता है। In
strument 
Landing System (ILS) का उपयोग accurate landing सहायता क े रूप  मȂ िकया जाता है, जो 
सामान्य और सही मौसम की िÎथित मȂ रनवे पर उतरने क े िलए िवमान का मागर्दशर्न करता है।   
 एम.बी.बी. हवाई अƿा अगरतला म
Ȃ पुराने ILS System को नई Ģणाली से बदल िदया गया 
है। नया ILS System installation का काम पूरा हो चुका है।  Airport Authority of India क े 
िवमान ǎारा गर्ाउंड क ैिलĤेशन और एयर क ैिलĤेशन 27 नवंबर, 2023 को प ूरा हो चुका है।   
 अगले फ े ज़ मȂ क ैिलĤेशन िरपोटर् क े आधार पर उपकरण Ģिकर्याएं िवकिसत की जाएंगी 
और इसे अनुमित क े िलए DGCA को  भेजा जाएगा।  DGCA की मंजूरी क े बाद इस िसÎटम को 
चालू कर िदया जाएगा।   
महोदय, मेरी
 जानकारी क े अनुसार िदसंबर, 2023 मȂ 4 departure और 14 arrival flights 
cancel हुईं और 1 से 14 जनवरी, 2024 क े बीच 15 departure व 14 arrival flights cancel हुई हȅ।  
इससे passengers को परेशानी का सामना करना पड़ता है और उन्हȂ आिर्थक बोझ भी उठाना 
पड़ता है।   
 अत: मेरा क Ȃदर्ीय नागि रक उƿयन मंतर्ालय से अनुरोध है िक इस िदशा मȂ DGCA की 
मंजूरी शीघर्ता से Ģदान की जाए, िजससे ILS system को MBB  Airport, अगरतला मȂ शुरू  
िकया जा सके ।  
 
Demand for the establishment of a large scale industrial silk spinning unit in  
Odisha under Silk Samagra-2 
 
डा. अमर पटनायक (ओिडशा): महोदय, रेशम कीट-पालन को एक उǏोग क े रूप  मȂ Ǜेणीबǉ 
िकया गया है, लेिकन तब भी िसÊक समगर्
-2 योजना का वतर्मान Ģावधान समुिचत उत्पाद 
आवÌयकताओं को पूरा करने क े िलए औǏोिगक िसÊक-िÎपिंनग सुिवधाओं क े िवकास को 
Ģोत्सािहत नहीं करता है। वतर्मान मȂ क Ȃदर्ीय क्षेतर्-योजना क ेवल 80.00 लाख रुपय े क े एक छोटे से 
                   
* Laid on the Table 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
167

 
सेरी-िसÊक िÎपिंनग-Ãलांट क े िनमार्ण की अनुमित देती है। यह अपयार्Ãत सािबत होता है, क्यȗिक 
इससे अंतरराÍटर्ीय मानकȗ को पूरा करने क े िलए बड़े पैमाने क े साथ उच्च गुणवǄा की िसÊक-
यानर् उत्पन्न करना तकनीकी रूप  से संभावनाशील नहीं है। यह िंचता का िवषय बन जाता है, 
क्यȗिक ओिडशा, देश क े सबसे बड़े तसर उत्पन्न क्षेतर्ȗ म
Ȃ से एक है। राज्य सरकार ने तसर िसÊक 
कला गितिविधयȗ क े माध्यम से वन िनवािसयȗ को आजीिवका Ģदान करने क े िलए 'वन्य िसÊक' 
कायर्कर्म को लागू करने का िनणर्य िलया है, परंतु क्षेतर् क े िवकास क े िलए और संसाधनȗ की 
आवÌयकता है। 
 भारत सरकार को Ëयिƪगत लाभाथीर् ओिरएंटेड िसÊक समगर्-2 घटकȗ क े िलए 50 परसȂट 
िवǄ Ģदान करने की आवÌयकता है और इस Ģिकर्या का नेतृत्व करने मȂ उनका योगदान 
महत्वपूणर् है। महोदय, िसÊक समगर्/िसÊक समगर्-2 क े तहत बजटीय आवंटन 2020-21 मȂ 
202.13 करोड़ रुपय े से बढ़कर 2022-23 मȂ 382.
22 करोड़ रुपय े तक हो गया है। क Ȃ दर् सरकार को 
इसे अनुसंधान और िवकास क े िलए उपयोग करना चािहए, जो योजना क े तहत एक घटक है। 
इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूं िक वह ओिडशा म
Ȃ एक बड़ी Îके ल 
की औǏोिगक िसÊक िÎपिंनग इकाई की Îथापना को Ģाथिमकता दे, तािक राज्य मȂ हज़ारȗ िसÊक 
ह
ȅडलूम वीवसर् की आवÌयकता पूरी हो। 
 
Demand for amendment in Table of Precedence 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब): महोदय, भारत सरकार ǎारा table of precedence बनाया 
गया है, जो एक Ģोटोकॉल सूची है, िजसमȂ भारत सरकार क े पदािधकािरयȗ और अिधकािरयȗ को 
रȅक और कायार्लय ǎारा स ूचीबǉ िकया जाता है। वतर्मान मȂ संसद सदÎयȗ को वरीयता 
(Ranking) तािलका मȂ 21 वȂ नंबर पर रखा गया है, जो Chairman, Central Administrative 
Tribunal and Chairman, Minorities Commission जैसे statutory पद से भी नीचे है। 
Statutory post वालȗ क े कायर् कानून ǎारा िनधार्िरत हȅ, जो सांसदȗ ǎारा ही बनाए गए हȅ। एक 
सांसद को multiple functions discharge करने की िजÇमेदारी दी गई है, िजसमȂ राज्य और द
ेश 
का Ģितिनिधत्व करने का िजÇमा भी शािमल है। राÍटर्पित क े चुनाव क े electoral collage मȂ 
सांसदȗ क े 50 Ģितशत वोट होते हȅ और उप-राÍटर्पित का चुनाव तो िसफर् सांसदȗ ǎारा ही  िकया 
जाता है। संिवधान क े आिर्टकल 75(3) क े अंतगर्त Ģधान मंतर्ी का चुनाव लोक सभा क े सांसदȗ 
ǎारा िकया जाता है। यह एक बहुत बड़ी िजÇमेदारी है, क्यȗिक हम जनता क े सेवक और उनकी 
आवाज बन कर इस सदन मȂ आते हȅ। इतने बहुमुखी और महत्वपूणर् कायș
 की िजÇमेदारी का 
िनवर्हन करने वाले सांसद को 21 वȂ नंबर पर रखना उनके  कद और ĢितÍठा क े साथ न्याय नहीं 
करता है। इसे भारत जैसे लोकतंतर् मȂ बदलने की जरूरत  है, जहाँ ये सांसद जनता की आवाज बन 
कर आते हȅ और मूलभूत सुिवधाएं, िवकास से ल
ेकर अपने क्षेतर्वािसयȗ क े सुख-दुख मȂ भी शािमल 
होते हȅ। 
 महोदय, मȅ सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूँ िक व
रीयता तािलका को संशोिधत िकया जाना 
चािहए और एक उच्च कर्म-संख्या 11 संसद सदÎयȗ को दी जानी चािहए। 
 
168
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Need for giving priority to the production of Graphene and its derivatives in India 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Graphene is the world's thinnest, strongest and most 
conductive material of both electricity an d heat. It conducts electricity better than 
copper. It is 200 times stronger than steel but six times lighter. It has the potential to 
revolutionise electricity, conductivity, energy generation, batteries and sensors. 
 Further, when Graphene is added in sm all quantities to other materials, it 
produces composite materials with dramatically transformed qu alities. Graphene 
composites are very durable and are us ed in aerospace, au tomotive, sports 
equipment, construction, high-perform ance batteries, super-capacitors, etc.  
Graphene is important for defence and aer ospace as well as in civil and commercial 
applications. Besides, Graphene-based materials can also protect us against 
chemical and biological attacks.  It is getting popular in use as over 300 companies in 
the world are producing Graphene and its de rivatives. Among the leading countries in 
Graphene research are China, US, UK, Japa n and Korea. China and Brazil are global 
leaders in commercial production. 
 In India, a company and some start- up companies are producing Graphene 
and mixing it with plastic which is an innovation. Some IITs have also made progress 
in the production of Graphene derivatives.  Keeping in view its importance in various 
sectors, I request the Government to give  special priority to the research and 
commercial production of Gr aphene and make it a national mission so that the 
country does not lose the advantage of this super product. 
 
Need for introduction of separate pay scale and other service benefits to ASHA 
workers 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala): ASHA workers who are the backbone of 
rural health infrastructure have been tirele ssly striving to bridge the gap between the 
communities and the healthcare system. ‘A Million Champions of Health and Hope’, 
is how our hon. Health Minister had descri bed them when they were honoured with 
Global Health Leaders Award by the WHO in May, 2022. However, their crucial role is 
often undervalued with meagre remuneration , lack of benefits and challenging work 
conditions. Their work is conveniently brought under the umbrella of social or 
voluntary service and they are paid with  scanty honorariums and incentives. ASHA 
workers are currently paid fixed honorarium s, often amounting to just Rs. 6,000 per 
month. This is highly inadequate as far as their extensive workload and responsibilities 
are concerned.  There is no social security and lack of EPF, healthcare and pensions 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
169

 
leaves them financially vulnerable. Immedi ate measures should be taken to clearly 
define their work and accordingly introdu ce a separate pay scal e and other service 
benefits.  
 Investing in the welfare of ASHA workers is an investment in  public health and 
social well-being. Ensuring a fair pay stru cture will definitely boost the morale of 
ASHA workers and encourage them to stay  in the programme leading to greater 
continuity and effectiveness of healthcare se rvices. In this context, I urge upon the 
Central Government to appoint a high-level  Commission to study the factual position 
and to make necessary recommendations for the betterment of ASHA workers. 
 
Demand to declare those people who were in jail during the Emergency in the country 
as Democracy Fighters and be provided facilities like freedom fighters 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड): महोदय, गुजरात क े छातर्ȗ ने 1974 मȂ महँगाई को लेकर मुख्य मंतर्ी 
क े िवरुǉ आंदोलन का िबगुल फ ूँका था। इस आंदोलन का नेतृत्व जय Ģक
 ाश नारायण ने िकया। 
आंदोलन से सरकार िगर गई। 25 जून, 1975 को इमरजȂसी लागू कर सरकार ने जय Ģकाश 
नारायण को जेल भेज िदया, िजससे देश क े तमाम संगठन एक साथ खड़े हुए। हजारȗ लोग जेल मȂ 
बंद कर िदए गए। इन सेनािनयȗ क े बिलदान को भुलाया नहीं जा सकता। देश मȂ 25 जून, 1975 से 
21 माचर्, 1977 तक आपातकाल लगाया गया। इस
के  िखलाफ आवाज उठाने वाले हजारȗ लोगȗ को 
मीसा व डीआईआर क े तहत जेल मȂ बंद कर िदया गया था। देश मȂ इमरजȂसी क े दौरान जेल मȂ बंद 
रहे लोगȗ को लोकतंतर् रक्षक सेनानी/लोकतंतर् सेनानी घोिषत िकया जाए। देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान 
मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े क ुशल नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार " सबका साथ, सबका िवकास और 
सबका िवÌव
ास" क े मूल मंतर् पर काम कर रही है, िजसमȂ हम लोग अंितम पंिƪ क े अंितम Ëयिƪ 
क े बारे मȂ सोचते हȅ। लोकतंतर् सेनािनयȗ ने अपना सवर्Îव न्योछावर कर Îवतंतर्त ा और लोकतंतर् को 
बचाने मȂ पूरी ताकत झȗक दी। ऐसे योǉाओं का मान Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार 
कभी कम नहीं होने देगी।  
 मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार से िनवेदन करता हूँ िक लोकतंतर् सेनानी पिरषद गिठत 
हो और उन्हȂ उǄराखंड, उǄर Ģदेश तथा मध्य Ģदेश की तज़र् पर सÇमान पतर् िमले। इसके  साथ 
ही, लोकतंतर् सेनािनयȗ को Îवतंतर्ता संगर्ाम सेनािन
यȗ की भाँित सुिवधाएँ उपलÅध कराई जाएँ और 
पȂशन दी जाए। 
 
Demand for arranging drinking water in Coal mines area 
 
Ǜी खीरू महतो (िबहार): महोदय, कोल इंिडया ने कोयला खनन क्षेतर् मȂ लाखȗ एकड़ जमीन का 
अिधगर्हण िकया है और बड़े-बड़े ओपन काÎट Ģोजेक्ट्स खो
ले हȅ। इन Ģोजेक्ट्स की गहराई 100-
200 मीटर है। क ु छ मȂ काम चल रहा है, तो क ु छ मȂ पानी भर ा हुआ है। सैकड़ȗ गाँव िवÎथािपत क्षेतर् 
मȂ पड़ते हȅ। वहाँ पेयजल की काफी िकÊलत है। इन पानी से भरे कोयला खदानȗ से गाँवȗ मȂ 
170
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
पेयजलापूिर्त की जाए, तािक भू-िवÎथािपत पिरवारȗ की पेयजल की समÎया दूर हो सके , क्यȗिक 
खदान चलने क े कारण वहाँ पानी का लेवल घट गया है, गाँवȗ मȂ पानी क े क ु एँ सूख गए हȅ और 
चापाकलȗ से पानी नहीं िमलता है। द ूसरी तरफ पत्थर क े बड़े-बड़े डÇÃस हȅ, िजनमȂ से कई डÇपȗ मȂ 
आग लगी हुई है, िजससे इस क्षेतर् क े लोग वायु Ģदूषण से भी तर्Îत रहते हȅ। इन डÇपȗ को गाँवȗ क े 
बीच पहाड़ जैसा छोड़ा गया है। क ेन्दर् सरकार पुनवार्स की ËयवÎथा नहीं कर पाती है, िजससे यह 
परेशानी गाँववािसयȗ को होती
 है। 
 अत: मȅ कोल इंिडया, भारत सरकार से माँग करता हूँ िक िजस तरह गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ नल 
ǎारा जल िदया जाता है, उसी तरह कोयला खान क े बन्द पड़े खदानȗ स
े पेयजलापूिर्त भू-
िवÎथािपतȗ/गर्ामीणȗ क े गाँवȗ मȂ की जाए। कोयला क्षेतर् मȂ राज्य सरकारȂ नल ǎारा जल आपूिर्त नहीं 
करती और यह कहती हȅ िक वहाँ जलापूिर्त करने की जवाबदेही कोल इ ंिडया की है। मȅ माननीय 
कोयला मंतर्ी, भारत सरकार से इस पर ध्यान देने तथा वहाँ पेयजलापूिर्त करने की माँग करता हूँ। 
 
Concern over failure of Hybrid Bt-cotton (commercialised GM-crop) 
 
SHRI ANEEL PRASAD HEGDE (Bihar): Hybrid Bt. Cotton, which has no trait for yield 
enhancement, the only commercialized GM crop, has failed conclusively.   
 The Government submitted in its affidavit in the Delhi High Court that Bt. 
Cotton seeds are now unaffordable to farm ers due to high royalties charged by 
Mahyco Monsanto Biotech Ltd. which has a near monopoly on Bt. Cotton seeds and 
that this has led to a market failure. 
 Contamination by GMOs of non-GM O crops/natural environment is our 
outstanding concern. India is one of the 17  listed international hotspots of diversity 
(includes mustard/brinjal/rice). India is th e world's centre of brinjal diversity with 
2,500+ varieties/wild species. In rapeseed  mustard, India has over 9,000+
 varieties 
in our gene bank. With a commercialized GM crop, contamination is certain. The 
precautionary principle must apply. 
 There is no coexistence between GMO/ Non-GMO farming. Organic farming is 
India's competitive strength. We are wo rld leaders in organic exports. With 
contamination, we will lose our non-GMO export markets of thousands of crores. 
India is the world's largest producer of milk, pulses and millets and the second-
largest of rice/wheat/sugarcane/groundnuts and vegetables, all non-GMO. Only 
India can certify its non-GMO-soy with confidence, because we are not GMO-
growing country. 
 Unequivocal failure of Hybrid Bt. Cotton, highlighted in Government's 
admission of market failure/concerns over contamination, underscores banning GM 
crops in order to safeguard biodiversity and our competitive strengths in non-GMO 
agriculture. I urge the Government to look into it. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
171

 
Need to increase public funding on healthcare 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Sir, affordable health care is a distant dream for 
many people in the country. Every year, healthcare expenses are increasing at a 
speedy rate.  At the same time, the healthcare spending of the Government is only 2.1 
per cent of the GDP. This is an alarming situation. In India, the public sector 
contributes only one-third of the total spen ding whereas it is 83 per cent in the U.K., 
56 per cent in China, 48 per cent in the U.S.A., 46 per cent in Brazil and 39 per cent 
in Indonesia. After the pandemic attack, we do feel that health is a critical political and 
policy issue. The emergence of corporate interest in healthcare has further eroded our 
public health system. This lobby includes  pharmaceutical companies, big corporate 
hospital groups, technical equipment companie s, etc. Therefore, there is an urgent 
need to strengthen our pub lic healthcare infrastructure to ensure widespread access 
to quality medical services and address th e evolving healthcare needs of the nation. 
The path towards ensuring the right to heal th for all will be meaningful only if the 
Central Government guarantees essential pr imary, secondary and tertiary healthcare 
services to all citizens.  Besides, the Govern ment should ensure the availability of free 
essential medicines to all people by increasing public spending on drug procurement. 
The modernization, diversification and ex pansion of medical institutions largely 
depends on public funding fo r healthcare. The increased in vestment in public health 
will certainly enhance the over all capacity, infrastructure, an d service quality of public 
health care facilities. I urge the Government to look into it. Thank you, Sir. 
 
Demand to decrease the age for contesting Lok Sabha and Assembly Election 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा (पंजाब): महोदय, आज आपने मुझे ऐसे मुǈे पर बोलने का मौका िदया, जो मेरे 
िदल क े बहुत करीब है। यह मुǈा राजनीित मȂ युवाओं की भागादारी का है। भारत दुिनया क े सबसे 
युवा देशȗ मȂ से एक है। हमारे देश की औसत उĦ 29 साल है और हमारे संसद की औसत उĦ 54 
साल है। कहते हȅ िक देश तभी तरक्की करता ह
ै जब देश का युवा बुजुगș क े अनुभव की छाया मȂ 
रहते हुए देश क े िवकास क े िलए काम करता है। मȅ इस संसद का सबसे युवा सदÎय हूँ, लेिकन मȅ 
भी इस देश की औसत आयु से ऊपर हूँ। देश की राजनीित मȂ युवाओं का Ģवेश बहुत मुिÌकल है। 
राजनीित को देश मȂ एक खराब Ģोफे शन की तरह देखा जाता है और यह कहा जाता है िक 
politics is for the unemployed and unemployable. जहा ँ समाज क े िपछड़े वगș, मिहलाओं 
की स
ंसद मȂ भागीदारी बढ़ाना जरूरी  है, वहीं साथ ही यह भी सुिनिÌचत करना होगा िक युवा भी 
राजनीित मȂ आने क े िलए Ģेिरत हȗ तािक अपनी उĦ की बात वह इस महान पटल पर रख पाएं।  
 म
ȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करता हूँ िक देश मȂ चुनाव लड़ने की आयु को 25 साल से कम करके  
21 साल करने पर िवचार िकया जाए, क्यȗिक 21 साल की उĦ पर एक युवा अपनी िशक्षा समाÃत 
172
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
करता है। यिद इस उĦ मȂ युवाओं को राजनीित मȂ आने का Ģोत्साहन िमलेगा, तो वे आगे आएँगे 
और इस संसद की ऊजार् को 100 गुना बढ़ाएँगे। नए भारत की नींव रखने क े िलए हमȂ युवा 
भारतीयȗ की भागीदारी चािहए।  मȅ सरकार से यह माँग करता हूँ िक वह इस तरफ ध्यान दे।  
 
Demand for restoration of license of Delhi Milk Scheme 
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र ( िबहार): महोदय, िदÊली दुग्ध योजना ( डीएमएस) क े दूध मȂ कािÎटक 
सोडा िमलने क े बाद भारतीय खाǏ संरक्षा एवं मानक Ģािधकरण ǎारा इसका लाइसȂस 13 
अक्टूबर, 2023 को िनलंिबत कर िदया गया, िज
सके  कारण डीएमएस दूध का उत्पादन और 
सÃलाई बंद है।  डीएमएस दूध की सÃलाई बंद होने से डा. राम मनोहर लोिहया, एÇस, 
सफदरजंग, लेडी हािडȊग सिहत कई अÎपतालȗ क े मरीजȗ को कई िदनȗ तक दूध की आपूिर्त नहीं 
हुई, मजबूरन क ु छ िदनȗ क े उपरांत मरीजȗ हेत
ु िनजी क ंपिनयȗ क े दूध की आपूिर्त कराई गई।   
इस संयंतर् मȂ खािमयȗ को दूर कर अभी तक लाइसȂस बहाल नहीं िकया गया ह ै, िजसके  
कारण दूध का उत्पादन और आपूिर्त बहाल नहीं हो पाई है। कभी डीएमएस दूध हेतु सुबह 4 बजे से 
लाइन लगती थी, पर धीरे-धीरे उसकी गुणवǄा खराब हुई और अंततः अब उसका लाइसȂस 
िनलंिबत है। डीएमएस दूध का उत्पादन बंद होने से पहले उसके  एक लाख लीटर से अिधक दूध 
की खपत थी।  दूध की सÃलाई बंद होने से आज हजारȗ डीएम
एस बूथ संचालक आिर्थक दबाव मȂ 
हȅ और बूथ से उनकी मजदूरी नहीं िनकल पा रही है। यिद बूथ पर दूध की सÃलाई ही नहीं होगी तो 
कोई भी डीएमएस बूथ पर नहीं आएगा। ऐसे मȂ बूथ संचालकȗ क े समक्ष रोजी-रोटी की समÎया 
उत्पन्न हो गई है। 
अत
: सरकार से मेरी मांग है िक वह डीएमएस क े िनलंिबत लाइसȂस की औपचािरकताएं 
अिवलÇब पूण
र् कराकर उपभोƪाओं हेतु डीएमएस का दूध उपलÅध कराए।  
 
Concern over dumping of Fabrics at unfair prices in Indian market 
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA (Punjab): Hon. Chairm an, Sir, I stand before you today to 
raise a critical issue gripping the Indian  textile industry--the unfair dumping of 
synthetic knitted fabrics in our market. Th is practice has created immense pressure 
on domestic players, jeopardizing jobs, re venue, and the very core  of our production 
capacity.   
 The polyester industry, currently op erating at 70 per cent, faces an 
unprecedented threat due to unfairly priced  imports from China for the past year. 
Unless immediate action is taken, this threat has the potential to cripple our industry, 
reducing capacity to less than 50 per cen t and causing widespread job and revenue 
losses. 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
173

 
 The import prices of knitted fabrics fr om China are even lower than our yarn 
export prices. This blatant pricing disparit y highlights the unfair advantage enjoyed by 
Chinese manufacturers, putting our domestic industry at a severe disadvantage. 
 Steps may be taken to restrict the impo rt of fabrics from China and protect our 
vital industry.  We need concrete measur es to create a level-playing field and 
safeguard the livelihoods of millions of our citizens.   
 The Government may consider aligning  the import customs duty on knitted 
fabrics with that of woven fabrics. This move would help to rectify the existing 
imbalance and provide much-needed support to our domestic producers. 
 I urge the Government to take imme diate action, implement effective trade-
protection measures, and ensure a fair and sustainable environment for our domestic 
textile industry.   
 
Demand for development of cruise tourism in Chennai 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu): Sir, cruise tourism is emerging as one of the rapid 
growing segments of the leisure industry globally. The Indian tourism sector is 
providing major contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Foreign 
Exchange Earnings (FEE), as well as for pr oviding employment. Chennai Port is one 
of the oldest ports in the country in the sout hern part of India from the time of East 
India Company. During the British peri od, passenger services were operating 
regularly from Chennai to Malaysia, Burma and Andaman. 
 India's first international cruise was fl agged off from Chennai to Sri Lanka in 
June, 2023. The MV Empress with 750 passenge rs on a five-day s ea cruise will cross 
three ports. Cruise tourism holds huge oppo rtunity for our maritime sector and this 
cruise will further boost tourism and ge nerate employment and strengthen the 
economy. The cruise was launched from Chenna i's International Cruise Terminal built 
at a cost of INR 17.21 crore.  The main aim of the Govern ment is to develop Chennai 
as a cruise tourism hub. This initiative has the potential to greatly contribute to the 
economic development and tourism growth in India. 
 By 2024, the Government plans to build  three new international cruise ports 
with additional ferry routes through India, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Myanmar. At the 
moment, there are only ferrie s plied by private companie s and the cost is on the 
higher side. Therefore, I urge the Government of India to ply Government-sponsored 
ferries at an affordable cost so that more  and more tourists will experience cruise 
tourism in Chennai. 
 
174
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Demand for mandatory BLS technique training in academic institutions to reduce 
sudden cardiac arrest death rate 
 
SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH (Punjab): Sir, I wo uld like to bring to the attention of the 
House through you that according to a stud y, the death rate in the country is one 
crore annually, which means that every year one crore people die in one form or the 
other. A tenth of this means that one million deaths are due to sudden cardiac arrest 
alone.  According to a cardio logist, the first 3 to 10 minutes are very critical for the 
patient at the time of sudden cardiac arrest. According to doctors, 3.5 lakh out of 10 
lakh deaths could be saved if the bystande rs pumped the victim's chest with both 
hands in a specific manner within these firs t three minutes. This technique is called 
BLS, that is, Basic Life Support. According to a survey, only less than 0.1 per cent of 
people know about this technique whereas  every citizen of the country should be 
aware of it and be trained in it.  So, if the training of this technique is made 
co m p u l s o ry i n  s ch o o l s,  t h en  m any p eo p l e' s  l i ves  can  b e s aved .  I  d em an d  fro m  t h e 
Government that training in this BLS tec hnique should be made mandatory in schools 
across the country and this training should be made a part of education so that 
precious lives of people can be saved. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the House st ands adjourned to meet at 11 a.m. on 
Tuesday, the 6
th February, 2024.  
 
 
The House then adjourned at seven of the clock till eleven of the clock on Tuesday, 
the 6th February, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 5 February, 2024 ]
175

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 