Vol. 268     Thursday, 
No. 21                  21 August, 2025 
             30 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION)
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Message from Lok Sabha —  
Reported and Government Bill la
id on the Table - The Promotion and Regulation of 
Online Gaming Bill, 2025, — (pages 1) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 3) 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  Chemicals 
and Fertilizers— Laid on the Table (page 3 ) 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Labour, 
Textiles and Skill Development— Laid on the Table (pages 3 - 4) 
Reports of the Department-related Par liamentary Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment— Laid on the Table (page 4) 
Statements by Ministers— 
Statements regarding withdrawal from Contingency Fund of India— Laid on the 
Table (page 5) 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Thirty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution— Laid on 
the Table (page 5) 
Announcement by the Chair (pages 5 - 6 ) 
Motion for Nomination to the Joint Committee on the Constitution (One Hundred and  
    Thirtieth Amendment) Bill, 2025; the Government of Union Territories 
(Amendment) Bill, 2025 and the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation     
(Amendment) Bill, 2025— Adopted (pages 6 - 7) 
Government Bill— 
The Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming Bill, 2025 - Passed (pages 7 - 10) 
Amendments for reference of the Promot ion and Regulation of Online Gaming 
Bill, 2025, as passed by Lok Sabha, to a Select Committee of the Rajya 
Sabha— Negatived (pages 10 - 18) 
Valedictory Remarks (pages 18 -19) 
National Song (page 19) 
 [Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
Website :  http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
     https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:  rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Thursday, the 21st August, 2025/30 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Message from Lok Sabha, Secretary-General.   
MESSAGE FROM LOK SABHA 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission,  I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha at its sitting held on the 20th  August, 2025, passed the  Promotion and 
Regulation of Online Gaming Bill, 2025. 
 I lay a copy of the said Bill on the Table. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Papers to be laid on the Table. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
I. Heritage Bye-laws of t
he Ministry of Culture for various monuments
II. Report and Accounts  (2023-24) of the Tibet House, New Delhi and other
related papers
THE MINISTER OF CULTURE (SHRI GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAWAT):  Sir, I lay on 
the Table—  
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Heritage Bye-laws of the
Ministry of Culture, under sub-section (6) of Section 20E of the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 for: -
(1)
Tomb of Mohammed Ghaus, Tomb of Tansen; and two mosques situated
in plot No. 200 together with all the land comprised in plot nos. 199 and
200 and enclosed by a compound wall, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3080/18/25] 

(2)
Dargah of Zafar Khan Ghazi, Tribeni, DistrictHooghly, West Bengal.
(3) Rudernath Temple together with adjacent land comprised in Survey Plot
Nos. 161 and 163 & A trident of iron wi th a shaft, 16 high with one ancient
and three modern inscriptions, situat ed in the compound of a fine old
temple which was repaired by Amar Sinha Thapa, Gopeshwar, District-
Chamoli, Uttarakhand.
(4) Three temples of the Indo- Aryan Sikhra type known as Lakshmi Narayan,
Rakhshas Deval and Satya Narayan, Taili Hat, Garur Tehsil, Bageshwar
District, Uttarakhand.
[Placed in Library. For (2) to (4), see No.L.T.3080/18/25] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Tibet House, New Delhi, for the year
2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b)
Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 4034/18/25] 
I. Notifications of t he Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
II.
Reports and Accounts  (2021-22 and 2022 -23) of SACON, Coimbatore, Tamil
Nadu and other related papers
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH):  Sir, I lay on the Table— 
I . A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change Notifi
cation No. S.O. 3401(E)., dated the 24 th July, 2025, publishing
the Environment Protection (Management of Contaminated Sites)  Rules, 2025,under
Section 26 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5000/18/25] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Salim Ali Centre for
Ornithology and Natural History (SACON), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, for 
theyear 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.   
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLI
AMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह (िबहार):  महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत रसायन और उवर्रक संबंधी 
संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा 
िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(i) Fourteenth Report of the Committee on ‘Price Rise of medicines in the
Pharmaceutical Sector imp acting the lives of ordina ry citizens adversely - A
Review’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals); and
(ii) Fifteenth Report of the Committee on  ‘Self-Sufficiency in Production of
Fertilizers with a view to curb import of fertilizers – Review of constraints
thereof’pertaining to the Ministry of Ch emicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers).
REPORTS OF THE  DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLI
AMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
Ǜी राजेन्दर् गहलोत (राजÎथान):  महोदय, मȅ िवभाग संबंिधत Ǜम, वÎतर् और कौशल िवकास 
संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी 
मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Salim Ali Centre for
Ornithology and Natural History (SACON), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, for 
the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. For (i)  and (ii), See No.L.T.4073/18/25] 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
3

(i) Eleventh Report o n Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fifty-
fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sa bha) on ‘Schemes/Programmes of
Central Silk Board for Development and Pr omotion of Silk Industry’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Textiles;
(ii) Twelfth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fifty-fifth
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Development of Cotton Sector’
pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles;
(iii)
Thirteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its First
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’
pertaining to the Ministry of Labour and Employment; and
(iv) Fourteenth Report on Action  taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Second
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-
25)’pertaining to the Ministry of Textiles.
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLI
AMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and 
Hindi) of the following Reports of the De partment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (2024-25):- 
(i) Twelfth Report on the Action Taken by  the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its First Report (Eighteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment (D epartment of Social Justice and
Empowerment); and
(ii)
Thirteenth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of th e Committee contained in its Sixth
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’
pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities).
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 
Statements regarding withdrawal from Contingency Fund of India  
TH E    M I N I S T E R    O F    S T A T E    I N    THE    MINISTRY  OF  COMMUNICATIONS 
(DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI) :  Sir, I lay the following statements (in 
English and Hindi) regarding:— 
(a) Withdrawal of funds made  from Contingency Fund of India for expenditure in
respect of SATCOM Monitoring Facilit y (SMF) Project by the Ministry of
Communications, Department of Telecommunications (DoT).
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2912/18/25] 
(b) Withdrawal of funds made from Contin gency Fund of India by the Ministry of
Communications, Department of Tel ecommunications (DoT)to provide loan
to Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) for servicing of the
Sovereign Guarantee Bonds (SGBs) of Series VII-C, VII-D and VIII-B.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2911/18/25] 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the  
Thirty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  
on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवत रण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜीमती िनमुबेन 
जयंतीभाई बांभिणया):  महोदय, मȅ उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय 
(खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण िवभाग) से संबंिधत ' भांडागारण िवकास और िविनयामक 
Ģािधकरण (डÅÊयूडीआरए) का कायर्करण' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ 
और सावर्जिनक िवतरण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित ( सतर्हव
ीं लोक सभा) क े अड़तीसवȂ 
Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ/समुिƪयȗ क े कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ वƪËय सभा 
पटल रखती हूं। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 4090/18/25]
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, a request has been received from the 
Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to take up the  Promotion and Regulation of Online 
Gaming Bill, 2025. If the House agrees , the Government Bill listed in the 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
5

Supplementary List of Business will be taken up immediately after the Motion 
regarding the Joint Committee and two hours may be allotted for the discussion. The 
Private Members’ Resolutions may be taken up after the disposal of the Bill.  
  The copies of the Bill were circulated yesterday evening around 6.00 p.m. 
through Members’ Portal. The Members who desire to give notices of Amendments to 
the said Bill may do so now, till 12.00 noon, so as to enable the Secretariat to process 
and circulate the List of Amendments. Notices received after 12.00 noon will, 
however, not be processed. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, 18 notices have 
been received  today on four different subjects under Rule 267. …(Interruptions)… 
Since none of these notices received today are in adherence to the requirement of the 
rules, I am not admitting any of the notices. …(Interruptions)… No; please . 
…(Interruptions)… आप ज़ीरो ऑवर नहीं चलाना चाहते! ...(Ëयवधान)... The House is 
adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
 
The House then adjourned at six minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
Motion for Nomination to the Joint Committee on the Constitution (One Hundred and 
    Thirtieth Amendment) Bill, 2025; the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) 
Bill, 2025 and the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Motion for reference of Bills to Joint Committee.  
…(Interruptions)… S h r i  A m i t  S h a h  t o  m o v e  t h e  M o t i o n  t o  c o n c u r  f o r  
referring the  Constitution (One Hundred and Thirtieth Amendment) Bill, 2025; the 
Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Bill, 2025  and the Jammu and 
Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2025 to the Joint Committee of both the 
Houses.  
 
गृह मंतर्ी (Ǜी अिमत शाह) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत ĢÎताव करता हूँ :- 
          "िक यह सदन लोक सभा की इस िसफािरश से सहमत है िक भारत क े संिवधान का और 
संशोधन करने वाले िव
ध ेयक; संघ राज्यक्षेतर् शासन अिधिनयम, 1963 का और संशोधन करने वाले 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

िवधेयक तथा जÇमू-कÌमीर पुनगर्ठन अिधिनयम, 2019 का और संशोधन करने वाले िवधेयक से 
संबंिधत सदनȗ की संयुƪ सिमित मȂ यह सदन शािमल हो और यह सदन संकÊप उपिÎथत करता 
है िक इस सदन क े दस सदÎयȗ को उपसभापित ǎारा उƪ संयुƪ सिमित मȂ कायर् करने क े िलए 
नािमत िकया जाएI" 
             Th
e question was put and the motion was adopted.        
             
MR.  DEPUTY  CHAIRMAN :   Please!   हाथ  मȂ  इस  तरह  का  poster  लेकर  Well मȂ 
आना गलत है। ...(Ëयवधान)... Please go back to your seats. …(Interruptions)…  Now, 
Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw to move a motion for consideration of the Promotion and 
Regulation of Onlin e Gaming Bill, 2025.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
 
The Promotion and Re gulation of Online Gaming Bill, 2025 
 
THE  MINISTER   OF   ELECTRONICS   AND   INFORMATION   TECHNOLOGY   
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW): Sir, I move: 
 
             “That  the  Bill  to  promote and regu late the online gaming sector including 
e-sports, educational games and social ga ming; to provide for the appointment of 
an Authority for coordinated policy suppor t, strategic developm ent and regulatory 
oversight of the sector; to prohibit the offering, operation, facilitation, 
advertisement, promotion and participat ion in online mone y games through any 
computer resource, mobi le device or the inte rnet, particularly where such activities 
operate across State borders or from foreig n jurisdictions; to protect individuals, 
especially youth and vulner able populations, from th e adverse social, economic, 
psychological and privacy-relat ed impacts of such games; to ensure the responsible 
use of digital technologies; to maintain public order and protect public health; to 
safeguard the integrity of fi nancial systems and the security and sovereignty of the 
State; to establish a uniform, national-level  legal framework in the public interest; 
and for matters connected therewith or incide ntal thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, 
be taken into consideration. ” 
…(Interruptions)… 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, समाज मȂ समय-समय पर कई क ुरीितयाँ आती हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसी पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ सरकार की और संसद की िजÇमेदारी बनती है िक वह इन 
क ुरीितयȗ पर कठोर कारर्वाई करे, इस तरह क े समाधान लाए, इस तरह क े कानून लाए, िजससे 
िक समाज मȂ आने वाली इन क ुरीितयȗ पर अंक ु श लग सके ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... हम सब जानते हȅ 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
7

िक पहले एक िचट फ ं ड होता था और जो िचट फ ं ड वाले थे, आज वैल मȂ खड़े हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... एक िचट फ ं ड क े कारण जो कई पिरवार नÍट हो रहे थे, उस पर मोदी जी की 
सरकार ने कानून लाकर उस समÎया को समाÃत िकया, क ंटर्ोल िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... िबÊडसर् 
हमारे मध्यम
वगीर्य पिरवारȗ को एक तरीके  से परेशान कर रहे थे।  उस िबÊडसर् वगर् से होने वाली 
समÎया का भी मोदी जी की सरकार ने कानून लाकर समाधान िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)...  माननीय 
उपसभापित महोदय, मध्यमवगीर्य पिरवारȗ पर टैक्स का बोझ घटे, इसिलए मोदी जी की सरकार 
ने 12 लाख  रुपय े तक की आय पर इनकम टैक्स मȂ छू ट दी। ...( Ëयवधान)..
. माननीय 
उपसभापित महोदय, इलेक्टर्ॉिनक िसगरेट से ÎवाÎथ्य को हािन हो रही थी।  ऐसे मȂ भी मोदी जी 
की सरकार ने कानून लाकर उस समÎया का समाधान िक
या। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
उपसभापित महोदय, मध्यमवगर् और नौजवानȗ क े िहत की जब भी बात होती है, तो मोदी 
जी ने रेवेन्यू और अथर्ËयवÎथा को एक तरफ रख कर, उससे ऊपर उठ कर हमेशा मध्यमवगर् और 
युवाओं क े िह
त की बात को चुना है। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज भी ऐसा ही एक िवषय इस महान सदन 
क े सामने है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस िवषय पर अगर िवपक्ष आज 
काम करता, चचार् मȂ भाग लेता, तो हमȂ भी समझ मȂ आता िक वह भी मध्यमवगर् और युवाओं क े िहत 
की बात करता है। ...( Ëयवधान)... लेिकन उन्हȂ इस िहत की कोई िचन्ता नहीं है।  
...(Ëयवधान)... वे क ेवल और क ेवल अपने राजनीितक उǈेÌय क े िलए ही काम करते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, online gaming एक बहुत important िवषय है, 
जो िडिजटल दुिनया मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् सेक्टर बन कर उभरा है। ...( Ëयवधान)... उपसभापित 
महोदय, इसके  तीन segments हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... पहला segment है – e-sports, िजसम Ȃ 
लोग एक टीम बनाकर खेलते हȅ, coordination सीखत े हȅ और strategic thinking होती है।  
...(Ëयवधान)... हमारे players ने भी कई medals जीते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... इस िबल क े माध्यम 
से e-sports को  Ģमोट िकया जाएगा, इसके  िलए एक authority बनायी जाएगी और इसको एक 
legal recognition िमल ेगी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, दूसरा सेगमȂट है ऑनलाइन सोशल गेÇस। 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह हम सबके  जीवन मȂ है, Solitaire है, Chess है, Sudoku है। यह recreation 
क े िलए खेला जाता है, एजुक ेशन क े िलए खेला जाता है, memory training क े िलए खेला जाता 
है। ...( Ëयवधान)...  इस िबल मȂ author
ity बना कर ऑनलाइन सोशल गेÇस को Ģमोट िकया 
जाएगा, encourage िकया जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...     
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस िबल मȂ पूरी दुिनया क े ऑनलाइन गेिंमग की दो-ितहाई 
सेगमȂट को Ģमोट िकया जा रहा है, लेिकन एक ऐसा सेगमȂट है, तीसरा सेगमȂट है, वह ऑनलाइन 
मनी गेÇस है, जो समाज मȂ और िवशेष कर मध्यम वगीर्य युवाओं मȂ बड़ी समÎया बन कर उभरी है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  इसका addiction हो जाता है, िजसके  कारण पिरव
ार की बचत इसमȂ चली 
जाती है।  एक अनुमान है िक करीब-करीब 45 करोड़ लोग इसकी चपेट मȂ आ चुक े हȅ और इसमȂ 
हमारे मध्यम वगीर्य पिरव
ारȗ की 20 हजार  करोड़ रुपए  से ज्यादा की मेहनत की कमाई नÍट हो 
गई है। ...(Ëयवधान)...   और तो और वÊडर् हेÊथ ऑगȃनाइज़ेशन ने International Classification 
of Diseases (ICD)-11 क े माध्यम से इस
को gaming disorder declare िकया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, ऑनलाइन मनी गेिंमग आज एक पिÅलक हेÊथ िरÎक बन 
चुका है।  इससे psychological disorders, compulsive behavior, withdrawal symptoms, 
violent behavior जैसी समÎयाएँ उत्पन्न हो रही हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)...  कई पिरवार ऑनलाइन 
गेिंमग से नÍट हो चुक े हȅ।  मȅ क ु छ headlines पढ़ना चाहूँगा;  9 th October, 2024, Times of 
India - ‘Tragic Suicide of 20-Year-Old from Gaming A ddiction spark concerns.’ 
…(Interruptions)…  19th May, 2025, Economic Times  - ‘Won Rs. 2 lakh, then fell into a 
Rs. 9 lakh debt trap.’  “Young online gamer who nearly lost her life shares advice that 
could save yours. ” …( Interruptions)… Siliguri Times - ‘Youth commits suicide in 
Siliguri due to debt.’  Telangana News - ‘Three of family die by suicide after son 
incurs Rupees 30 lakh bet in online gambling.’ …(Interruptions)… NewsMeter - ‘Online 
betting: 24 people die by suicide in Telangana.’ “ Actors, social influencers fuel the 
crisis.”  India Today - ‘Sikkim man dies by suic ide in Gyalshing.’ Suicide note points 
to …(Interruptions)…  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस संबंध मȂ लगातार एक क े बाद एक 
न्यूज़ मȂ छपा है।  NDTV, 21 st December, 2024 — ‘Man loses mother’s cancer treatment 
fund to online games and dies by suicide.’ …( Interruptions)… माननीय उपसभापित 
महोदय, एक तरीके  से यह एक बहुत बड़ी समÎया बन चुकी है। ...( Ëयवधान)... इसका एक 
दूसरा बड़ा पहलू money laundering और terror support है।  टेरर एिक्टिवटीज़ मȂ भी मनी 
गेिंमग का एक बड़ा Ģभाव देखा गया है।  इस समÎया को रोकने क े Ģयास भी हुए, self-regulati on 
का भी Ģयास िकया गया, परंतु यह समÎया बढ़ती गई।  करीब 45 करोड़ Ëयिƪ 20 हजार करोड़ 
रुपए  से अिधक की रािश इस ऑनलाइन मनी गेिंमग मȂ गँवा चुक े हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  आज यह 
समÎया डर्ग्स की समÎया क े समान बन चुकी है, इसीिलए यह कठोर कदम उठाने का िनणर्य 
िलया गया है। ...( Ëयवधान)... माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, ऑनला
इन मनी गेÇस क े पीछे 
ताकतवर लोग हȅ। वे कोटर् मȂ भी चैलȂज करȂगे, मीिडया और सोशल मीिडया क े माध्यम से क ȅ पेन भी 
करȂगे, लेिकन जब हमारे युवाओं और मध्यम वगीर्य पिरवारȗ को बचाने का िवषय आता है, तो मो
दी 
जी क े िलए Ģाथिमकता क ेवल और क ेवल मध्यम वगीर्य पिरवार और युवा हȅ, नौजवान हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सारे देश को, Ģबुǉ वगर् को, 
िवपक्ष क े इन मान्यवर सांसदȗ, जो आज वैल क े अंदर क ू दे हȅ, उनको भी और मीिडया  को भी 
आÏवान करता हूँ िक वे समाज मȂ तेजी से बढ़ रही इस क ुरीित को समाÃत करने मȂ मदद करȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  हमारे युवा
ओं को, छातर्ȗ को इस नशे से मुƪ कराएँ, हमारे मध्यम वगीर्य 
पिरवारȗ को बचाएँ, धन्यवाद। ...(Ëयवधान)…                                      
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Motion moved.  …( Interruptions)… Now, there is one 
Amendment by Dr. John Brittas for referen ce of the Promotion and Regulation of 
Online Gaming Bill, 2025, to a Sele ct Committee of the Rajya Sabha. 
…(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, Sub-Rule 2 of Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) stipulates that no 
member shall be appointed to  a Select Committee if he is  not willing to serve on the 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
9

Committee and that the mover of the motion to refer the Bill to the Select Committee 
shall ascertain whether a member proposed to be named by  him is willing to serve on 
the Committee. …(Interruptions )… I presume that the hon. Member has, while 
submitting his notice for referring the Bill to a Select Committee, complied with the 
requirements of Rule 72 (2). …(Interruptions)… Member may move the Amendment at 
this stage without any speech. …(Interruptions)… Dr. John Brittas, are you moving the 
Amendment? …(Interruptions)…                                      
 
DR.  JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala):   Yes, of course, Sir, I am moving.  
 
Amendments for reference of the Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming  
Bill, 2025, as passed by Lok Sabha, to a Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha 
 
DR.  JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala):   Yes, of course, Sir, I am moving. I move: 
 
“That the Bill to promote and regulate the online gaming sector including  
e- sports, educational games and social gaming; to provide for the appointment of an 
Authority for coordinated policy support , strategic development and regulatory 
oversight of the sector; to prohibit the offe ring, operation, facilitation, advertisement, 
promotion and participation in online mone y games through any computer resource, 
mobile device or the internet, particularly  where such activities operate across State 
borders or from foreign jurisdictions; to protect individuals, especially youth and 
vulnerable populations, from the adverse social, eco nomic, psychological and 
privacy-related impacts of such games; to  ensure the responsible use of digital 
technologies; to maintain public order an d protect public health; to safeguard the 
integrity of financial systems and the secu rity and sovereignty of the State; to 
establish a uniform, national-level legal framework in the public interest; and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental  thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be 
referred to a Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha, consisting of the following 
Members:-    
1. Dr. John Brittas 
2. Shri Manoj Kumar Jha  
3. Shri A.A. Rahim 
4. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya 
5. Dr. V. Sivadasan 
6. Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
7. Shri P.P. Suneer 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

8. Shri Jose K. Mani 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10.      Shri Abdul Wahab 
11.      Shri Haris Beeran 
 
with instructions to report by the last da y of the first week of the next Session (269 th) 
of the Rajya Sabha”.   
…(Interruptions)… 
 
    The questions were proposed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   You have to only move it.  No thing else will go on record.  
...(Interruptions)... I t  i s  m o v e d .   ...(Interruptions)...  Dr. John Brittas has moved 
the Amendment. ...(Interruptions)... Motion for consideration of the Bill and the 
Amendment moved thereto are now open for discussion.  I shall now call upon the 
hon. Members whose names have been recei ved for participation in the discussion. 
...(Interruptions)... But, before that, hon. Leader of the Opposition wants to speak.  
...(Interruptions)...  Please take your respective seats.  ...(Interruptions)... माननीय 
एलओपी, िवषय यह है - Promotion and Regulation of the Online Gaming Bill.  आप इस 
पर बोलȂगे, तो वह िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा।  आप रूÊस जानते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैठकर बात नहीं 
कीिजए। ...( Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, आप शांत रिहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय एलओपी, आप बोिलए। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे):  
* 
 
 Ǜी उपसभापित : नहीं, मȅ िनयम का अनुरोध कर रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... जो लोग वैल मȂ Ãलेकाडर् 
लेकर खड़े थे, वे गलत कर रहे थे। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मȅ आपसे िवनती करता हूँ िक आप सबको सुिनए।  आप हमारे 
Ãवाइंट्स को िडसिमस कीिजए, we do
n’t bother * ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप इस िबल पर बोलना चाहȂगे, तो मȅ Îवागत करू ँगा।  उसके  अलावा कोई 
और चीज़ िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: * 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
11

 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  माननीय एलओपी, इसके  अलावा ...(Ëयवधान)...  Nothing is going on 
record.  ...(Interruptions)... माननीय िकरेन िरिजजु जी। 
 
संसदीय कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा अÊपसंख्यक कायर् मंतर्ी (Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु):  सर, माननीय लीडर ऑफ 
अपोिजशन खरगे जी ने अभी जो बात कही और सीधे-सीधे चेयर क े ऊपर जो ĢÌन उठाया, यह 
गलत बात है। ...(Ëयवधान)... चेयर हमेशा बोलने क े िलए मौका देती है। ...(Ëयव धान)... वे सÅजेक्ट 
पर नहीं बोलते हȅ, िफर आप पर इÊजाम लगाते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... चेयर पर इस तरह से इÊजाम 
लगाना ठीक बात नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... लीडर ऑफ अपोिजशन खरगे जी, यह बहुत गलत बात 
है। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... मȅ आपको िफर से कहता हूँ िक आप िवषय पर बोिलए, नहीं तो वह क ै से िरकॉडर् 
पर जाएगा? ...(Ëयवधान)... जब से सदन चला है, इस पूरे मॉनसून सतर् मȂ आप लोगȗ ने चेयर को 
कोऑपरेट नहीं िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... िबल पर चचार् क े िलए समय िदया, िबज़नेस एडवाइज़री 
कमेटी मȂ टाइम सेट िकया, लेिकन आप बोलते नहीं हȅ। ...(Ëयव
धान)... िफर, अंत मȂ आज आप 
इÊजाम लगा रहे हȅ िक बोलने क े िलए मौका नहीं देते हȅ! ...(Ëयव धान )... यह गलत बात है, मȅ 
इसका खंडन करता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Showing placards in the House is against the convention.  
...(Interruptions)... N o w ,  w e  g o  b a c k  t o  t h e  d i s c u s s i o n . ...(Interruptions)... 
Shrimati Maya Naroliya.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया (मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपको धन्यवाद ज्ञािपत 
करती हूँ िक आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िबल पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह 
िवधेयक हमारे देश क े युवाओं ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: एक िमनट।  माननीय िरिजजु जी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, वे पािर्टिसपेट नहीं कर रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... इस शोरगुल मȂ कोई बोल 
नहीं सकता और कोई सुनने वाला नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... चूंिक वे िडÎटबर् कर रहे हȅ, इसिलए हम 
आपसे इस िबल को पािरत करने का अनुरोध करते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान). .. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: जो माननीय सदÎय बोलने वाले हȅ, अगर वे नहीं बोलना चाहते, तो मȅ िबल पास 
करने की ओर आगे बढ़ रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Shri Ashwani Vaishnav to reply to the 
discussion.  ...(Interruptions)...  
रेल मंतर्ी; तथा इलेक्टर्ॉिनकी और सूचना ĢौǏोिगकी मंतर्ी ( Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव):  माननीय 
उपसभापित महोदय, इस िवषय पर िडटेल मȂ चचार् हो गई है।  ...(Ëयवध ान)... मȅ आपसे िनवेदन 
करू ँगा िक अब इस िबल को पास िकया जाए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I shall now put the Amendment moved by Dr. John Brittas 
to vote. ...(Interruptions)...  Dr. John Brittas, I am bringing your Amendment… 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Yes, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs.  …(Interruptions)... 
 
 Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु:  सर, अपोिज़शन क े हंगामȂ की वजह से चचार् पूरी नहीं हो पा रही है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... हम युवाओं क े िलए और समाज क े िलए इतना important Bill बना रहे हȅ, िफर भी 
उन लोगȗ ने साथ नहीं िदया, ...(Ëयवधान)... तो हमारे जो माननीय सदÎय िब ल क े सपोटर् मȂ अपनी 
बात रखना चाहते हȅ, आप उन्हȂ बोलने क े िलए अनुमित दे दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Dr. John Brittas, please. …(Interruptions)… Dr. John 
Brittas’s  Amendment.  
  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Ãलीज़, आप इस तरह से खड़े होकर ऐसा नहीं कर सकते। 
...(Ëयवधान)... I have already given you the opportunity. 
  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, mike is not on. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mike is  on. …(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, *  …(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No; no, please speak to me.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please 
speak to me.  Nothing else is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)... I shall now put 
the Amendment moved by Dr. John Britta s for reference of the Promotion and 
Regulation of Onlin e Gaming Bill, 2025  to a Select Committee of the Rajya Sabha to 
vote. 
The motion was negatived. 
 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I shall now put the motion moved  by Shri Ashwini 
Vaishnaw to vote.  The question is: 
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
13

“That the Bill to promote and regulate  the online gaming sector including  
e-sports, educational games and social ga ming; to provide for the appointment of 
an Authority for coordinated policy suppor t, strategic developm ent and regulatory 
oversight of the sector; to prohibit the offering, operation, facilitation, 
advertisement, promotion and participat ion in online mone y games through any 
computer  resource, mo bile device or the internet, part icularly where such activities 
operate across State borders or from foreig n jurisdictions; to protect individuals, 
especially youth and vulner able populations, from th e adverse social, economic, 
psychological and privacy-relat ed impacts of such games; to ensure the responsible 
use of digital technologies; to maintain public order and protect public health; to 
safeguard the integrity of fi nancial systems and the security and sovereignty of the 
State; to establish a uniform, national-level  legal framework in the public interest; 
and for matters connected therewith or inci dental thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha 
be taken into consideration. 
The motion was adopted. 
 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill.    
Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : In Clause 3, there is one Amendment (No.15)  by Dr. V. 
Sivadasan. Are you moving the amendment? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN  (Kerala): Sir, my amendment is very important to protect the 
nation. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you please move. …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: So, we should discuss the Amendment properly. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You move your Amendment, please. 
  
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, my request is that proper discussion… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you moving the Amendment or not? …(Interruptions)… 
‘Yes’ or ‘No’? …(Interruptions)…  Are you moving or not? 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

DR. V. SIVADASAN: * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no.  It is not going on record.   … (Interruptions)…  So, 
you are not moving the Amendment.  Amendment not moved. 
                            
Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 4 and 5 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 6, there is one Amendment (No. 1) by Dr. John 
Brittas. Are you moving the Amendment? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)...  You are 
not moving it! ...(Interruptions)...  Amendment not moved. 
  
Clause 6 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : In Clause 7, there are two Amendments; Amendment 
(No. 2) by Dr. John Brittas and Amendment (No. 16) by Dr. V. Sivadasan. 
...(Interruptions)... Dr. John Brittas, are you moving the Amendment?  Say, ‘Yes’ or 
‘No’?  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:   Mike, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Yes, mike is already on. ‘Yes’ or ‘No’? 
...(Interruptions)...   You are not moving it! ...(Interruptions)... Amendment not 
m o v e d .  I  a m  n o w  m o v i n g  t o  A m e n d m e n t  ( N o .  1 6 )  b y  D r .  V .  S i v a d a s a n .    A r e  y o u  
moving it or not? ...(Interruptions)...  ‘Yes’ or ‘No’?  ...(Interruptions)... Only that 
will go on record. ...(Interruptions)... You are not moving it! ...(Interruptions)... 
You have to say only ‘Yes’ or ‘No’.  ...(Interruptions)...  Amendment not moved.  
 
Clause 7 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : In Clause 8, there are six Amendments; Amendments 
(Nos. 3 to 6) by Dr. John Brittas and Amendments (Nos. 17 & 18) by Dr. V. 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
15

Sivadasan. ...(Interruptions)... Dr. John Brittas, are you moving your Amendments? 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Mike, Sir. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mike is on. Are you moving it or not? ...(Interruptions)... 
‘Yes’ or ‘No’? ...(Interruptions)...  You are not moving it. ...(Interruptions)... 
Amendments not moved. ...(Interruptions)... I shall now take up Amendments (Nos. 
17 & 18) by Dr. V. Sivada san. Are you moving it?  ...(Interruptions)... You are not 
moving it. ...(Interruptions)...  Amendments not moved.  
 
Clause 8 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 9 to 11 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 12, there is one Amendment (No.7) by Dr. John 
Brittas.  Are you moving the Amendment? ‘Yes’ or ‘No’?  ...(Interruptions)... Dr. 
John Brittas, you are not in your place. ...(Interruptions)...  Amendment not moved.  
 
Clause 12 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 13, there is one Amendment (No.8) by Dr. John 
Brittas. Are you moving it? ...(Interruptions)... You are not in your place.  
...(Interruptions)... Dr. John Brittas, you are not in your place. ...(Interruptions)... 
Amendment not moved.  
Clause 13 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 14 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : In Clause 15, there are two Amendments; Amendment 
(No. 9) by Dr. John Brittas and Amendment (No. 19) by Dr. V. Sivadasan. 
...(Interruptions)... Dr. John Brittas, are you moving it? ...(Interruptions)... 
Amendment not moved. I shall now go to Am endment (No. 19) by Dr. V. Sivadasan. 
Are you moving it? ...(Interruptions)... ‘Yes’ or ‘No’? ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is 
going on record. ...(Interruptions)...   Say ‘Yes’ or ‘No. ...(Interruptions)... You are 
not moving it. ...(Interruptions)...  Amendment not moved.  
 
Clause 15 was added to the Bill. 
 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 16, there are two Amendments (Nos. 10 & 11) 
by Dr. John Brittas.  Are you moving it? ...(Interruptions)... You are not in your 
place. ...(Interruptions)...  Amendments not moved.  
 
Clause 16 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  In Clause 17, there are two Amendments (Nos. 12 and 
13) by Dr. V. Sivadasan.  Dr. Sivada san, are you moving the Amendments? 
…(Interruptions)… Not at your place!  Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 17 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  In Clause 18, there is one Amendment (No. 20) by Dr. V. 
Sivadasan.  Dr. Sivadasan, are you moving the Amendment? …(Interruptions)… The 
mike and camera are on. Please speak. …(Interruptions)… You are not moving! 
…(Interruptions)… You are not interested in moving the Amendment. 
…(Interruptions)…  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 18 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  In Clause 19, there is one Amendment (No. 21) by Dr. V. 
Sivadasan.  Dr. Sivadasan, are you moving the Amendment? …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   Please say ‘yes’ or ‘no’. …( Interruptions)… You are not 
interested in moving the Amendment. …(Interruptions)…  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 19 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  For insertion of new Clauses 19A and 19B, there is one 
Amendment (No. 22) by Dr. V. Sivadasan.   Dr. Sivadasan, are you moving the 
Amendment? …(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record. You have to say ‘yes’ or 
‘no’. That is all. …(Interruptions)…  
 
Clause 20 was added to the Bill. 
The Preamble was added to the Bill. 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
17

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   In Clause 1, there is on e Amendment (No. 14) by Dr. V. 
Sivadasan.  Dr. Sivadasan, are you moving the Amendment? …(Interruptions)… 
Please, please. …(Interruptions)… You are not interested in moving the Amendment. 
…(Interruptions)… You have to say ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ only. …( Interruptions)… Amendment 
not moved. 
Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 
The Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw to move that the Bill be passed. 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW:   M r. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I move: 
“That the Bill be passed.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The House is adjourned for ten minutes. 
The House then adjourned at twenty-eight minutes past two of the clock. 
The House reassembled at thirty-eight minutes past two of the clock, 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair 
VALEDICTORY REMARKS 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we  have come to the conclusion of the 
268th  Session of the Rajya Sabha. Despite th e best efforts of the Chair to facilitate 
meaningful and disruption-free discussions on the listed Business, this Session was 
regrettably marred by repeated disruption s, leading to frequent adjournments. 
...(Interruptions)... This not only resulted in the lo ss of precious pa rliamentary time 
but also deprived us of the opportunity to  deliberate upon several matters of public 
importance. ...(Interruptions)...  
Overall, the House functioned for on ly 41 hours and 15 minutes. The 
productivity of this Session stood at a disappointing  38.88 per cent, something that 
calls for serious introspection. ...(Interruptions)... Members had the opportunity to 
raise 285 Questions, 285 Zero Hour submissions, and 285 Special Mentions. 
However, only 14 Questions, 7 Zero Hour submissions and 61 Special Mentions could 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

actually be taken up. While these contributi ons are of value, th ey represent only a 
fraction of what this august House is capable of achieving when it functions to its full 
potential. ...(Interruptions)...   
During the Session, as many as 15 Gove rnment Bills were passed or returned. 
The House also held a special discussion on India’s strong, successful and 
decisive Operation Sindoor, undertaken in resp onse to the terrorist attack in 
Pahalgam, a matter of great national importance. The discussion saw the 
participation of 64 Members over two days an d was replied to by the hon. Minister of 
Home Affairs. ...(Interruptions)...  
The House also benefited from a suo motu statement by the hon. Minister of 
Commerce and Industry on India-US Bilateral Trade, which provided valuable insights 
into India’s expanding economic engagement. ...( Interruptions)... In addition, the 
House was duly apprised of the vacancy in  the Office of the hon. Vice-President of 
India.  We also bade farewell to six ho n. Members from Tamil Nadu, who completed 
their term on  24th July, 2025. ...( Interruptions)... I hope the lessons of this Session 
will guide us towards more constructive an d purposeful deliberations in the future. 
...(Interruptions)... 
Before we conclude, I wish to place on record my sincere appreciation for the 
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons for their co-operation and readiness to assist the Chair, 
and for the Secretary-General and the entire  team of officers for their exemplary 
service, dedicated efforts and meticulous planning, which have ensured the smooth 
conduct of the proceedings and activities of this House. ...(Interruptions)... 
Finally, I extend my warm greetings an d best wishes to all the hon. Members 
on the forthcoming festivals - Ganesh Chaturthi, Milad-un-Nabi, Onam, Durga Puja, 
Dussehra, Diwali and others.  May thes e occasions bring peace, harmony, and 
prosperity to all!  ...(Interruptions)... Jai Hind! 
NATIONAL SONG 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, the National Song, ‘Vande Mataram’. 
(The National Song, “Vande Mataram”, was then played.) 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The House stands adjourned sine die. 
The House then adjourned sine die at forty-t
hree minutes past two of the clock. 
[ 21 August, 2025 ]
19

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 