Vol. 268                 Thursday, 
No. 04 24 July, 2025, 
             2 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Oath or Affi
rmation (page 1) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 3) 
Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation- Presented (page 3) 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology- Laid on the Table (pages 3 - 4) 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj- Laid on the Table (page 4) 
Statements by Ministers- Laid on the Table  
Status of implementation of the Recomme ndations/Observations contained in the 
Three Hundred and Eighty Eighth ,Thr ee Hundred and Eighty Ninth, Three 
Hundred and ninetieth and Three Hundred and Ninety Third  Reports of the 
Department-related Parliamentary St anding Committee on Science and 
Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change (pages 4 - 5) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two 
Hundred and Fifty Third Report of th e Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs (pages 5 - 6) 
 
Regarding Notices received under Rule 267 (page  6) 
 
Farewell to the Retiring Members- (pages 7 - 28) 
 
Government Bill-Under Consideration 
    The Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2025 (pages 29 - 35) 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
                                     https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:       rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Thursday, the 24th July, 2025/2 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
OATH OR AFFIRMATION 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, Oath or Affirmation is a constitutional 
requirement under Arti
cle 99 of the Constitution and solemn occasion. Deviation from 
the chosen format has potential to invalid ate the oath. I urge the hon. Member to 
conform to the chosen format.   
SECRETARY-GENERAL:  Shri Ujjwal Deorao Nikam, Nominated. 
Shri Ujjwal Deorao Nikam (Nominated).  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
Reports and Accounts (2023-24)  of CIHTS, Sarnath, Varanasi, Ut tar Pradesh; NNN, 
Nalanda, Bihar; SZCC, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu and related papers; 
THE MINISTER OF CULTURE; AND THE MINISTER OF TOURISM (SHRI  GAJENDRA  
SINGH SHEKHAWAT): Sir, I lay on the Table,  a copy each (in English and Hindi) of 
the following papers:- 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Central Institute of Higher Tibetan
Studies (CIHTS), Sarnath, Varanasi , Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2023-
24, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account. 
(b)
Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2798/18/25] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report of the Nava Naland a Mahavihara (NNM), Nalanda,
Bihar, for the year 2023-24. 

(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
(c)
Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2796/18/25] 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the South Zone Cultural Centre
(SZCC), Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2797/18/25] 
Notifications of the  Ministry of Communications 
THE   MINISTER   OF   ST ATE   IN   THE   MINISTRY    OF   COMMUN ICATIONS 
(DR. CHANDRA  SEKHAR PEMMASANI): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
(i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Communications
(Department of Telecommunications) Noti fication No. G.S.R. 31
5(E)., dated the 
16th May, 2025, publishing the Telecommunications (Framework to Notify Standards, 
Conformity Assessment and Certification) Rules, 2025, under sub-section (3) of 
Section 56 of the Telecommunications Act, 2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2771/18/25] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Communications
(Department of Telecommunications) Noti fication No. G.S.R. 423(E)., dated the 
27th June, 2025, publishing the Telecom Re gulatory Authority of India (Salary, 
Allowances and other conditions of Service of the officers and employees) 
Amendment Rules, 2025, under Section 37 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India Act, 1997. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2770/18/25] 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Communications
(Department of Telecommunications) Noti fication No. S.O. 2962(
E)., dated the 2 nd 
July, 2025, publishing the Telecommunications  (Removal of Diffi culties) Amendment 
Order, 2025, under sub-section (2) of S ection 58 of the Telecommunications Act, 
2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2772/18/25] 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

       REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA (MAHARASHTRA): Sir , I present the Two Hundred Fifty 
Fifth Report (in English and Hindi) of the Committ ee on Subordinate Legislation on 
the Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 
and the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024. 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARYSTANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Sir, I lay on  the Table, a copy each (in English and 
Hindi) of the following Reports of the De partment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Communications and Information Technology (2024-25):- 
Reports and Accounts (2023-24)  of V.V. Giri National Labour  Institute, Noida, Uttar 
Pradesh; DTNBWED, New Delhi and related papers  
सूÑम, लघु और मध्यम उǏम मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य 
मंतर्ी (सुǛी शोभा कारान्दलाजे):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी  तथा 
िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूं :- 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of V.V. Gi ri National Labour Institute,
Noida, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor’s 
Report on the Account. 
(b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2845/18/25] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Dattopant Thengadi National Board
for Workers Education and Development (DTNBWED), New Delhi, for 
the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor’s Report of Account. 
(b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the paper mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2846/18/25] 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
3

(i) Twelfth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Second Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts); 
(ii) Thirteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Third 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; 
(iii) Fourteenth Report on Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology; and 
(iv) Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fifth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी (कणार्टक): महोदय, मȅ पंचायती राज मंतर्ालय की ' अनुदान मांगȗ | 
(2024-25)' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत गर्ामीण िवकास और पंचायती राज संबंधी संसदीय 
Îथायी सिमित (2024-25) क े तीसरे Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ पर सरकार ǎारा की गई 
कारर्वाई संबंधी सिमित क े तेरहवȂ Ģितवेदन की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूं। 
 
STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 
 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations/Observations contained in  
the Three Hundred and Eighty Eighth ,Three Hundred and Eighty Ninth, Three 
Hundred and Ninetieth and Three Hundred  and Ninety Third Reports on the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science  
and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY; 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES; THE MINISTER 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

OF STATE IN THE PRIME MINISTER'S O FFICE; THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE 
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC  GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS; THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMEN T OF SPACE (DR. JITENDRA SINGH): 
Sir, I  lay  the following statements regarding:— 
(a) Status of implementation of the Recommendations/ Observations contained in
the 388th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environmen t, Forests and Climate Change on
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Department of Biotechnology.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2766/18/25] 
(b) Status of implementati on of the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the 389th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environmen t, Forests and Climate Change on
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the De partment of Scientific & Industrial
Research.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2767/18/25] 
(c) Status of implementation of the R ecommendations/Observations contained in
the 390th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environmen t, Forests and Climate Change on
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Department of Science and Technology.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2768/18/25] 
(d) Status of implementati on of the Recommendations/Observations contained in
the 393rd Report of the Department-related  Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environmen t, Forests and Climate Change on
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2769/18/25] 
Status of implementation of Reco
mmendations/Observations contained in the Two 
Hundred and Fifty Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION; AND  THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN 
REGION (SHRI SUKANTA MAJUMDAR): Sir, I lay a statement regarding Status of 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
5

implementation of Recommendations /Observations contained in the 253 rd Report 
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Mi nistry of Development of North Eastern 
Region. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2914/18/25] 
 
 
                                                                                                    
REGARDING NOTICES RECEIVED UNDER RULE 267 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, 30 notices have been received under 
Rule 267.  The notices of Sh ri Samirul Islam, Ms. Dola Sen, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar 
Ray, Shri Ritabrata Banerjee and Shri mati Mausam B. Noor have demanded 
discussion over ‘alleged discrimination against Bengali migrant workers in other 
States’. The notices of Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, 
Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil, Shrimati  Ranjeet Ranjan, Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham, Shri Rajeev Shukla, Shri Neeraj Dang i, Shri Akhilesh Pras ad Singh, Shri A. 
A. Rahim,  Shri  Sanjay  Singh,  Shrima ti  Mahua  Maji,  Dr .  Syed Nassir Hussain, 
Shri Prakash Chik Baraik, Shri Ashok Singh, Shri Tiruchi Siva, Shri Saket Gokhale, 
Shri Ramji Lal Suman, Dr. John Brittas, Sh ri Sandosh Kumar P, Ms. Sushmita Dev, 
Shri. Manoj Kumar Jha and Dr. V. Sivadasa n have demanded discussion over the 
‘concern arising out of Special Intensive Revi sion of electoral rolls undertaken by the 
Election Commission in Bihar’.  The notice of Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak has 
demanded discussion over ‘concern arising out of increasing cases  of cyber fraud in 
the country’.  The notice of Shri Abdul Wa hab has demanded discussion over ‘the 
unprecedented and unexpected resignation of the hon. Chairman, Rajya Sabha’.  The 
notice of Shri Haris Beeran has demanded discussion over the incidents of human-
animal conflict in Kerala.   
Hon. Members may recall the detailed rulings on Rule 267 imparted by the 
Chair on 8
th December, 2022, and 19 th December, 2022.  The same have been 
reiterated a number of times.  Since these notices do not conform to the directives 
imparted by the Chair, the same are declined.  ...( Interruptions)... We would now 
have the farewell address to the retiring Members.  I would request Members, please 
have patience. 
 
  
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

FAREWELL TO THE RETIRING MEMBERS 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, si x of our colleagues, Shri M. M ohamed 
Abdulla, Shri N. Chandrasegharan, Dr. An bumani Ramadoss, Shri M. Shanmugam, 
Shri Vaiko and Shri P. Wilson, representing the State of Tamil Nadu are retiring  today, 
the 24th of July, 2025, on completi on of their term of office.  Shri P. Wilson has been 
declared re-elected and hi s second term will commence  tomorrow.  Each one of 
these Members has contributed meaningfully  to the deliberations of this House, 
bringing with them diverse experiences , perspectives and a deep sense of 
commitment to the public service and democratic values. 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  was elected in a bye-election with effect from 6 th 
September, 2021.  During his tenure, the hon. Member has made focused 
interventions on issues relating to youth welfare and education, reflecting his 
engagement with the concerns of the yo unger generation and the socio-economic 
development of his State. 
Shri N. Chandrasegharan enriched the Ho use with his keen insights into rural 
and agrarian issues.  His calm and sincere participation in debates added substance 
to our discussions, particularly on matters impacting the farming community. 
Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss,  a former Union Minister  and a public health 
advocate, will be completing his second term in this august House  today. His earlier 
term was from 2004 to 2010.  The hon. Memb er brought to the House his expertise in 
healthcare and environmental issues.  His ar ticulate interventions often emphasized 
the need for long-term planning in the domains of health infrastructure and 
sustainable development. 
Shri M. Shanmugam,  a veteran trade union leader, strongly voiced the rights 
and welfare of workers.  His interventions consistently highlighted the challenges 
faced by the labour sector, making the House more aware of grassroots realities. 
Shri Vaiko, a seasoned parliamentarian renowned for his fiery oratory and 
passionate advocacy, made significant contributions to parliamentary debates on 
federalism, linguistic rights and social justice.  His unwavering commitment to 
democratic values and regional aspirations earned him respect across party lines.  He 
served three consecutive terms in the Ra jya Sabha from 1978 to 1996, and was 
elected for his fourth term from 2019 to 2025.  I am conf ident that a leader, who has 
devoted his entire life to the service of his people, will not remain idle, but will 
continue to work tirelessly for their upliftment. 
Shri P. Wilson,  a distinguished lawyer and arti culate speaker, brought legal 
acumen and constitutional clarity to our di scussions.  His contributions in matters 
related  to  judicial  reforms,  governance  and  civil  liberties  have  been insightful and  
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
7

 
thought-provoking.  And, I am glad, we will continue to benefit from his contributions 
as he has also been re-elected to this august House. 
As these Members demit office, we ac knowledge, with deep appreciation, 
their valuable contributions to parlia mentary discourse.  Their presence and 
participation have enriched the democratic f unctioning of this House.  On behalf of 
the entire House, and on my own behalf, I place on record our h eartfelt gratitude to 
the retiring Members for their service to the nation and this august institution.  We 
wish them good health, happiness and continue d success in their future endeavours.  
We hope they will continue to serve the people in various capacities and inspire future 
generations to uphold the ideals of our democratic polity.  I now invite the retiring 
Members to speak briefly.   Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla. 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu):  Thank you, hon. Deputy Chairman, 
S i r .   K i n d l y  p e r m i t  m e  t o  s p e a k  i n  m y  m o t h e r  t o n g u e ,  T a m i l .  " Hon’ble Deputy 
Chairman Sir and hon. colleagues, I stand be fore you all today with a profound sense 
of gratitude. When I speak of gratitude, it is foremost towards the hon. Chief Minister 
of Tamil Nadu, who honored me with the opportunity to represent my State, that is, 
Tamil Nadu in this august House. 
Though my tenure here has been brief,  the experiences and opportunities I 
have gained have been invaluable. I have been deeply touched by the warmth and 
affection extended to me by many hon. Members across party lines, both from the 
Treasury and the Opposition. This kindness will remain etched in my memory. 
Hailing from a remote village in Tamil Nadu, I have seen the dignitaries from far 
away distance. This House has given me the unique privilege to interact with them 
closely and has broadened my perspective,  enabling me to approach political and 
governmental issues from a national viewpoint. 
Today, in my farewell addre ss, I wish to put forth a singular request on behalf 
of the people of my State. There is a village called Kanagampatti in the Dindigul 
district of Tamil Nadu, situated along th e railway line between Dindigul and Palani. 
This village is renowned for the temple dedicated to Saint Palanisamy, who lived there 
some time ago. Every year, lakhs of devotees visit this temple to seek his blessings. 
Establishing a railway station in Kanagampatti would greatly facilitate the travel 
of these devotees and would also be financ ially viable. This request has been brought 
to me by several devotees, and I urge this House to consider it favorably for the 
benefit of both the people and the railways. 
                                                            
 English translation of original speech delivered in Tamil. 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

As I retire from this august House, I a ssure you that my voice will continue to 
resonate in support of social justice and the ideals of the Dravidian Movement—
principles that I hold dear and will always  uphold. Once again, I express my sincere 
thanks for this opportunity to serve. Thank you." 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  Now, Shri N. Chandrasegharan. 
 
SHRI N. CHANDRASEGHARAN (Tamil Nadu) :  Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, and 
respected Members of Parliament, today, as  I stand before you in this magnificent 
new Parliament building, I feel a sense of pr ofound gratitude and reflection.  It seems 
like only yesterday, yet a lifetime ago, when  I took oath in the old Parliament building 
in July, 2019.  Today, on 24 th July, 2025, when my tenure as Member of Parliament 
ends, I am deeply honored to address this  august assembly one last time.  My 
journey of the past six years has been extr aordinary.  Representing the people of 
Tamil Nadu, I have strived to be their voice, advocate and servant.  
I have witnessed the power of democrac y, the passion of public service and 
the unwavering spirit of our nation.  The old Parliament building, with its rich history 
and timeless architecture, witnessed countless debates, decisions and moments that 
shaped our country.  Transitioning to this new building symbolizes our nation’s 
forward momentum, a testament to our progr ess and aspirations. This new edifice, 
with its modern infrastructure and techno logical advancements, embodies the India 
we are building for future generations.  I am grateful to my party, AIADMK, and its 
General Secretary, hon. Shri Edappadi K. Palaniswami, for giving me the opportunity 
to serve.  I have worked alongside dedicated and brilliant minds and learned from 
their wisdom and experience.  I recall sign ificant moments, including the passing of 
many Bills and working on constituency i ssues.  These experien ces have shaped me 
and made me a better representative.  
 I thank the Chairman, parliamentary staff and everyone who supported me 
throughout my tenure.  To my constituents , I express my deepest gratitude for their 
trust and support.  I hope I have served up to their expectations.  As I step down, I 
carry with me a wealth of memories and ex periences.  I am confident that this new 
Parliament building will be the stage for ma ny more historic moments, and our nation 
will continue to prosper.  I wish all my  colleagues the very best in their future 
endeavours.  
 " Hon’ble Chairman Sir, I want to quote a Tamil poem.  
                                                            
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
9

 
With the moon and with the bright sun, 
With the sky and the stars, 
With the clouds and the sea, and 
With the Tamil language that was born, 
We were born. 
Such is the antiquity of our language that 
None can predict its real age. 
We thump our chest and shoulders 
To proudly say we are Tamils 
 
Sir, it is a pride to be called a Tamilian and I am honoured to be a Tamilian. If I 
have a rebirth, I wish to be born  in Tamil Nadu again and again. 
I pay tribute to the founder of my Party, Puratchithalaivar MGR and Leader 
Puratchithalaivi Amma. I thank you for giving me this opportunity".   
                       
MR.  DEPUTY  CHAIRMAN :  T h a n k  y o u .   D r .   A n b u m ani Ramadoss; not present.  
Shri M. Shanmugam.   
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu): Thank you, Sir, for giving me an opportunity to 
say a few words on the occasion of farewell to the retiring Members of Parliament.  
Sir, since my childhood, I have been fascinated by the Self Respect Movement.  I 
started my life with the admiration of Thanth ai Periyar and I used to meet him during 
my school days. After completing my high school, I joined the Indian Army and served 
during the Chinese aggression and Pakistan wa r.  I started my political career, social 
service and trade union activitie s after a short service in Army .  For the last 45 years, 
I have been serving in a regional trade union called Labour Progressive Federation, 
labour wing of the DMK Party.  With all ef forts of our colleagues and past Presidents 
and General Secretary, it was enlarged into  central trade union.  Now, we have many 
trade union offices in 19 States.   
 As a Member of the Standing Committ ee on Labour, I wanted to make more 
contribution and to make the Committee mo re purposeful and powerful watchdog.  
However, due to time constraint and lim ited interaction and discussions, the 
Committee could not deliver much, though the Members wished.  
 I thank our leader, Thiru M.K. Stalin, hon. Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, and 
the Deputy Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Shri Udhayanidhi Stalin, who gave me an 
opportunity to represent Tamil Nadu in this august House.  Under the guidance of our 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

friend and floor leader, my well-wisher, Thiru Tiruchi Siva, and other colleagues, I 
could function effectively and espoused th e cause of labourers and workers on many 
occasions and drew the attention of the House to the need to enhance their job 
security, social security and to increase the minimum pension under EPF-95 scheme.  
Though India is a Member of the ILO, it has not yet ratified the Convention for right to 
form association and collective bargaining as a basic right of workers.  I am proud to 
say that I had the privilege of making speech es, raising important issues in this hon. 
House where our great Dravidian leader, Perarignar Annadurai made roaring 
speeches on the State autonomy, federal principles, social justice, etc.    
I would like to thank my colleagues for extending their cooperation to me in 
discharging the onerous responsibility of ra ising people’s burning issues, protecting 
the rights of the oppressed and the suppre ssed and raising issues of social justice 
and workers’ demands.  I would also lik e to thank hon. Deputy Chairman, Shri 
Harivansh, and all the Members on the Pa nel of Vice-Chairmen.  I also thank the 
Secretary-General and his wh ole team for extending help and cooperation.  Thank 
you very much, Sir. 
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu):  Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I thank you very much for 
giving me this opportunity and I also thank all the leaders of political parties here for 
enabling me to express my fa rewell to this august House and all the colleagues of 
mine here.   I thank, from the core of my  heart, the former Chairman, Shri Jagdeep 
Dhankhar, who had always shown affection and regards to me.  I wish him a long and 
healthy life.  I extend my gratitude to th e memory of Muthamizh Arignar Dr. Kalaignar 
Karunanidhi for having sent me to this august House in 1978, 1984 and 1990.  I 
express my gratitude to the hon. Chief Mini ster of Tamil Nadu, Mr. M.K. Stalin, who 
is running the Dravidian Model Government, for sending me to this Upper House in 
2019.  I was moulded by the then leader of  DMK Parliamentary Party, Shri Murasoli 
Maran.  
Sir, with all humbleness, I would submit that I was instrumental in unveiling the 
portrait of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar in the Central Hall of Parliament by the then hon. 
Prime Minister, Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh.   I initiated the Calling Attention Motion 
13 times on the tragedy of Tamils an d the genocide committed by the demonic 
Sinhalese Government.  I was the only Member of Par liament, in the whole of India, 
who suffered detention under POTA for 19 months.  I also suffered detention under 
MISA for 12 months.  On the whole, I have suffered detention for five and a half years 
in prison.  Under POTA, I wrote my emotio ns and the happenings in the form of a 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
11

book titled From the portals of a Prison  which was released by the then hon. Prime 
Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, on 3rd September, 2004 in Chennai.  
Sir, parting is always sorrowful, painfu l and also memorable. In this great 
Chamber, I got the privilege of listenin g to the memorable speeches made by the 
Leader of the Opposition, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, Shri Derek O' Brien, Shri Jairam 
Ramesh, Shri P. Chidambaram, Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav,  Shrimati Sonia Gandhi, 
Shri Digvijaya Singh, Shri Tiruchi Siva, Shri P. Wilson, Shri N.R. Elango, Shrimati Jaya 
Amitabh  Bachchan,   Dr.   John Brittas, Shri Manoj Kumar Jha, Shri Sanjay Singh, 
Dr. M. Thambidurai, Shri Sanjay Raut, Sh ri H.D. Devegowda, Shri Sharad Pawar, 
Shrimati  Nirmala  Sitharaman,   Shri Ha rdeep Singh Puri, Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw,  
Shri Sandosh Kumar P, Shri Jose K. Mani , Dr. Fauzia Khan and Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi.   
Sir, I can never forget the love and affection showered on me by Dr. John 
Brittas and Shri Manoj Kumar Jha.  These two and I were called Three Musketeers of 
the House.   I will miss all the colleagues of mine in this House. 
When Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee was th e Prime Minister, the Union Government 
was determined to undertake disinvestment of  stocks of Neyveli Lignite Corporation, 
which is one of the gems of India and a pr ofitable public sector undertaking.  I met 
hon. Prime Minister Vajpayee at his re sidence and pleaded with him, giving 
representation of 25 trade unions.  I told him, “NLC is in my Tamil Nadu State.  
Twenty-five thousand workers have shed thei r sweat on the land of Tamil Nadu. This 
should not be privatised. ”  He told me that the Cabinet had already decided and that 
in two or three days it was going to be privatised.  I said, “ You have told people in 
Madhya Pradesh that Vaiko is like my adopted son.  Is it the way to treat me and my 
State?”  I pleaded with him, with all humblen ess, and asked him to  kindly withdraw 
the decision. As usual, he closed his eyes for two minutes and thought for a while and 
said, “I agree with you that NLC will not be privatised.” 
I informed the newspaper ‘The Hindu’ f r o m  P M ' s  r e s i d e n c e .  T h a t  w a s  
published on the front page of ‘The Hindu’ next morning.  
In 1967, when Perarignar Anna was Chief Mi nister of Tamil Nadu, he declared, on the 
floor of Assembly, that we would not accept Three-Language Formula, and only 
Tamil and English will be ou r two-language policy. Today, I am happy to say that the 
Government of Karnataka, the Government of Maharashtra and the Government of 
West Bengal have followed Tamil Nadu's language policy. I can never forget my 
sister, Ms. Mamata Banerjee. One day, she was about to speak in the afternoon; she 
rushed towards me, snatched my black shaw l and said that she had to fight many 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MPs that day and this shawl will give he r courage and boldness. Two days back, 
Sister Mamata Banerjee said that imposition of Hindi is linguistic terrorism.  
Sir, I would like to thank the Secretar y-General and his whole team for the 
cooperation extended to me. I will tell the young Members of this House, quoting the 
poem of Longfellow:  “ The heights by great men reached  and kept were not attained 
by sudden flight; but they, while their companions slept, were toiling in the night.” So, 
you have to burn your midnight oil and do your home work perfectly well. I would be 
very pertinent to quote the gr eat Tamil leader Perarignar Anna, who made his maiden 
speech in April, 1963.  In his maiden speech, he said, “I belong to the Dravidian stock 
and that is only because I consider that the Dravidians have got  something concrete, 
something distinct and something different to of fer to the nation at large. Therefore, it 
is that we want self-determination.”  He further says, “I think, in the coming years, 
there will be a new sense of appreciation, and the needs and philosophy of the South 
will be better understood and self-determination accorded to Dravida Nadu from 
where I have the honour to come. ” In our human life, we can face defeat, 
disappointment and betrayals but we need not worry about that. I do submit the 
memorable quotation of Maharana Pratap afte r the defeat of Haldighati war in 1576. I 
quote, “Till such time, breads of dry grass are available; till such time, water in 
streams is available; till su ch time, I breathe the air of  atmosphere, I will raise my 
sword for my homeland.”  Now, I do say that I will never yield or I will never 
compromise with my convictions.   Once again, I thank you one and all. Vanakkam! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri P. Wilson. 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I thank you. Since I am 
going to come back to this House once again,  I will be brief in my speech today. Sir, 
first of all, I thank my leader Thalapathy Avargal, who sent me to this very important 
part and a very important organ of democrac y, namely, the Upper House. I thank Mr. 
Udhayanidhi Stalin for supporting me and sending me here again.  
Sir, I come from the land of Periyar; I come from the land of Perarignar Anna 
and Kalaignar. Now, it has been guarded by our leader, Mr. M.  K. Stalin. When I 
entered this House, we wanted to protect the dignity and importance of this House. In 
fact, we had been fighting for the downtrodden and the marginalized people with a 
fond hope that the marginalized people will be  given their due and rightful share. It is 
our vision. That is why, I myself have brought forward nearly seventeen Private 
Member Bills, especially relating to th e Other Backward Classes, the Scheduled 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
13

Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. I hope on e day they will get ju stice from our House 
because they are still being neglected and not being taken into consideration at all.  
Sir, there is no doubt that the Consti tution provides for three independent 
organs, namely, Judiciary, Legislature an d Executive. There is no doubt that one 
should not encroach into the area of other. But I would say that we should redeem the 
encroached area. When I spoke in this Hous e in 2019, when Shri Venkaiah Naidu was 
the Chairman of the House, my first speec h was that we should redeem the space 
which has been encroached upon by the othe r organs. That is how we have to assert 
to the people that this House will rise for the common man, this House is there for the 
downtrodden and for the marginalized society and that is what I expect. I thank every 
one of them, especially, I thank all my goo d friends even from the Treasury benches 
and from the Opposition who used to encourage me.  Whenever I spoke something or 
when I brought any Bill into this House,  they supported me, appreciated me and 
stood with me.  I am thankful and grateful  once again to my leader, Mr. M.K. Stalin, 
for sending me back here again.  We woul d, certainly, work for the downtrodden and 
for the marginalized. There is only one thing I wanted to say that our State has been 
neglected. Our State has been discriminate d against. We are not receiving enough 
funds from the Union Government.  On the last day, the last time and the last minute, 
I have an opportunity to appeal to all my  good friends -- Madam is also there – to 
kindly provide the necessary funds to our State. Our students are struggling. We are 
not getting Samagra Shiksha fu nds. We are driven to the courts every time even to 
assert our right.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  You would get opportunity to speak on all these issues.  
Please conclude.    
  
SHRI P. WILSON:  Even Kerala also, as my learned good friend.…(Interruptions)…     
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please do not deviate from the issue.  
  
SHRI P. WILSON:  Therefore, I would only request,  treat our State on par with other 
States even though it is ruled by a different Government. Thank you very much, Sir.                            
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  माननीय लीडर ऑफ अपोिजशन सदन मȂ नहीं हȅ, अभी माननीय लीडर ऑफ िद 
हाउस बोलȂगे।  
 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): उपसभापित जी, आज हमारे छह साथी हम सभी से िवदा ले 
रहे हȅ, िजनमȂ से पी. िवÊसन जी िफर से वापस आ रहे हȅ, उनका Îवागत है। आज हमारे िजन 
सािथयȗ क े िवदाई भाषण हुए हȅ, मȅ उन्हȂ अपनी ओर से, अपनी पाटीर् की ओर से बहुत-बहुत 
शुभकामनाएं देता हूं। हम जानते हȅ िक यह हाउस क ं टीन्युटी मȂ चलता है,  इसिलए  समय-समय 
पर नए सदÎय आते ह
ȅ और समयाविध पूरी होने पर जब उनका काल पूरा होता है, तो वे जाते भी 
हȅ। Ģजातंतर् मȂ चचार् होना, वाद-िववाद होना Îवाभािवक बात है और हम यह भी जानते हȅ िक 
डेमोकर्े सी की Åयूटी यह है िक we agree to disagree.  हम disagree करते हȅ, इसको हम agree 
करते हȅ, इसिलए नीित
यȗ मȂ, पॉिलसीज़ क े साथ हुई चचार्ओं मȂ हमारे छह सािथयȗ ने िजस तरीके  
से पािर्टिसपेट िकया है, उससे हाउस बहुत enrich हुआ  है। यह हाउस उनका यह क ंटर्ीÅयूशन 
सदा याद रखेगा। उन्हȗने िनिÌचत रूप  से समसामियक िवषयȗ  पर चचार् की है, लेबर इÌयूज़ पर 
चचार् की है और लीगल इÌयूज़ पर भी बहुत चचार् की है। उन्हȗने जो सामािजक िवषय उठाए हȅ, 
उससे हाउस बहुत enrich हुआ है और उनके  क ंिटर्Åयूशन से िडबेट को एक Îतर िमला है। मȅ उन्हȂ 
इसके  िलए बहुत-बहुत बधाई
 और शुभकामनाएं देता हूं।  
 महोदय, कालाविध पूरी होने से काम करने की कोई अविध पूरी नहीं हो जाती है। हम सभी 
को अनेक ÃलेटफॉÇसर् पर काम करने का मौक
ा िमलता है। आज हम हमारे बीच वाइको जी को 
िवदाई दे रहे हȅ। उनके  जीवन और उनके  क ंिटर्Åयूशन को -- within the House and outside the 
House --  देश हमेशा याद रखेगा। वे इस सदन क े चार बार सदÎय रहे हȅ, दो बार लोक सभा क े 
सदÎय रहे हȅ। उन्हȗने कई पुÎतकȂ भी िलखीं हȅ। आज हम सबको यह भी पता चला िक उनका पाँच 
साल से ज्यादा का जीवन जेल मȂ गुज़रा। वे समाज क े िलए, अपने िसिटज़न्स क े िलए लड़ाई लड़ते 
रहे। वे कल भी सदन मȂ बहुत ज़ोर-ज़ोर से िफशर
मैन का िवषय उठा रहे थे और अभी भी उन्हȗने 
िजस अंदाज़ मȂ अपनी फ ेयरवेल Îपीच दी है, उससे मुझे कहीं नहीं लगा िक उनके  मन मȂ फ ेयरवेल 
का कोई अंदाज़ आया ह
ै। Nobody can dampen his spir it. He has kept his spirit. मȅ उन्हȂ 
और हमारे सभी पाँचȗ सािथयȗ को शुभकामनाएं देता हूँ। ईÌवर से कामना करता हूँ िक उनकी 
दीघार्यु हो और वे समाज की अच्छे तरीके  से सेवा करते रहȂ। इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े  साथ, बहुत-बहुत 
शुभकामनाएं। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, I am giving the floor to the leaders of DMK and 
AIADMK parties whose Members are retiring to speak briefly. Mananiya Tiruchi Siva.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Normally, the retirement, when it happens, hon. 
Members are from all the States.  But, to day, hon. Members are only from Tamil 
Nadu. So, you are giving the floor to us, but I wish that the other party leaders could 
also be given the floor as the contribution s of those Members are very remarkable. It 
is just my request.   
Sir, being a Member of this House is re ally a prestige. It is an honour. Not 
everyone gets that.  So many people, who have worked very hard in this nation for 
the people, would not get an opportunity to enter into this noble temple of 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
15

democracy. But, having been a Member and retiring, as my brother, Vaiko ji told, it is 
painful.  But, I consider this is not partin g. The echo of their voice in this hall just 
ceases. But, their voices will be echoed in eve ry part of this nation for the welfare of 
the people. This is not the end of the road. This is only a bend. This is not a farewell. 
It is an honour to their contribution, by way of deliberation, to this august House. 
Everyone!  
Vaikoji is my senior brother and our fore runner in the students’ organization. 
When I was student in college, he was my Joint Secretary at  the State level. And, all 
of us spoke in a meeting and went to MISA detention the next day. From then on, we 
have been together and everyone here kn ows very well about his articulation. He has 
been in the Parliament for more than thr ee decades. And, of course, all his speeches 
are remarkable, inside and outside.  
Sir, I wish to mention very much here , particularly, about Mr. Shanmugam, a 
great trade union leader, who has done a lot to the trade union community, not only in 
Tamil Nadu, but also the whole of India.  Through his deliberations, he eased my 
burden in this House.  Wh enever any labour issue came,  I was least worried because 
my party will be represented by Mr. Shan mugam.  I will miss him terribly.  His 
presence was so much of help to me.   
My brother Abdulla ji, who has also been here for a little time, has also 
contributed.  Wilson ji is coming back.  Shri N. Chandrasegharan may belong to 
another party, but he is also our dear co lleague. He quoted Bharathidasan, and he 
spoke with great pride that he belongs to  Tamil Nadu, the Tamil language, its glory 
and the ancientness.   I appreciate him.   
Again, I say, Sir, it is not farewell. We cannot part. Love is something different 
and that too the bondage we have developed here in this House by way of our 
performance outside the hall, in the Central Hall there and in the canteen here, are all 
unforgettable. These Members leave this Hous e not only with memories to cherish, 
but also the respect we all showed to them.  It is an honour to them.  We bid farewell 
and we wish a great future to them and good health. Thank you very much.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai. …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Deputy Chairman Sir, on behalf of AIADMK 
party, my leader, Shri Edappa di K. Palaniswami, I join th e entire House in felicitating 
six hon. Members from Tamil Nadu who are retiring  from the service of this House.  It 
may be temporary. As Siva ji told,  there is no farewell. They will have the opportunity 
once again to come to this House.  It is democracy.  They will have their opportunity 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

once again. I hope that they are not retiri ng.  Democracy will give  a chance for them 
to once again come to either Lok Sabha or this Rajya Sabha. Therefore, it is  not a 
farewell party. 
Sir, I want to say about my colleague, Shri Chandrasegharan. He is a true 
follower of MGR, Dr. Puratchi Thalaivi Amma, and also had the blessings of former 
Chief Minister, Edappadi Palaniswami, to come  over to this House.  For six years, he 
tried and raised many issues. He comes fr om a humble family. From a humble family, 
he has come out to this Upper House an d expressed so many issues about Tamil 
Nadu, Tamil language.  And finally, he sp oke about the glories of the Tamil culture 
and Tamil language.  That shows his efforts to  the social society, especially, to uplift 
the Tamil Nadu people and the whole India.   Particularly, his Tamil speech finally 
touched every one of us. Regarding othe r Members, even though Dr. Anbumani 
Ramadoss is not present here today, he may come back also. There is a chance. 
This is the way because this is democracy.   He served as a Health Minister and 
contributed a lot for that department, especially, with regard to ambulances and other 
things, which were introduced throughout In dia. He is the root cause for that.  For 
tobacco ban, he took a lot of efforts as a Health Minister.  Our present Health Minister 
is also present here. At that time, when Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss was the Health 
Minister, he took a lot of efforts; I appreci ate him.  We remember his contribution for 
the society. I do not want to say more abou t my leader, Mr. Vaiko. He is my leader. 
H e  i s  m y  b r o t h e r .  H e  i s  m y  e l d e r  b r o ther. We always get inspiration in our 
movements, from DMK onwards and now AI ADMK on so many issues. He also 
started his own party. He also joined our party as allied party when Ms. Jayalalithaa 
was the Chief Minister. He joined the allian ce at that time, the a lliance with BJP. At 
that time, he joined us.  With AIADMK and BJP alliance, he was elected first time as 
the Lok Sabha Member.  Then afterwards, s econd time also, even though not with 
us, with DMK and BJP alliance, he once again became a Lok Sabha Member. He 
served more in the Rajya Sabha.  He is a stalwart. He is a leader of the army.   He has 
contributed with a lot of efforts in his wh ole life. As our floor leader said, he was 
imprisoned for nearly five years.  All his speeches were fiery speeches.  Whenever he 
used to speak in Tamil in Tamil Nadu, ever ybody used to assemble there. As Anna 
attracted all through his speeches, in the same way, as a brother of Anna, Vaiko 
attracted most of the Tamil people through his speeches that we cannot even 
imagine.  We are still having a leader.  He just raised so many issues about Tamil 
Nadu, the fishermen issues, etc. As our floor leader said, he is always a fighter for the 
cause. He never ambitioned to become any Mi nister. That is his view. He would have 
got many times. My party leader, Dr. Puratchi Thalaivi Amma , at that time in 1988 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
17

requested him to become a Minister in the Cabinet in the Vajpayee Government, but 
he refused. He was offered ne xt time also, but he gave to others. He never aspired 
for the post of a minister.  Politicians, ever yone who come in politics, they want to 
become minister.  That is their ambition, but he gave it to his followers. He never 
aspired for that. That shows his sacrifice for the party and how he served.  He worked 
only for the cause and not for the post . He had this kind of view . Therefore, we will 
miss him. I hope that he will come back on ce again. A chance is there, there is an 
opportunity.  As Mr. Siva said, in politics, th ere is no farewell. This is not a farewell. 
This is only felicitation for what they have contributed.  That way, I hope for that.  
Mr. Shanmugam is a trade union leader.  He is an elderly man. He is always 
guiding us. I also started my movement from DMK onwards from a student-wing. 
Afterwards, when MGR started, I joined that  movement. That is a different matter.  
From that day onwards, I have  remained continuously in the same party. I have never 
changed my party.  That is why I say this about Shri Shanmugam as well—throughout 
his career, he remained loyal to his party.  He never switched.  He always obeyed his 
leadership.  Even though he contributed to the trade union movement for a long time, 
this time only, he got the opportunity to come  to this House, that is, the Parliament.  
Therefore, he has always been a champion for labour, and that was clearly reflected 
in his speech.  In many of the debates he participated in, he spoke primarily on labour 
issues.  That is his route.  But, whenev er he speaks, he speaks not only about 
labour, but all kinds of labour.  For that, he is always there.   
Now, I speak about Shri M. Mohamed Abdu lla.  He is a very nice man.  Even 
though he joined us midterm, we always hoped that he would come back.  I still think, 
and sincerely hope, that he will come back  once again.  There is a good chance, and 
I believe, he will return to this House.  He served as a Member alongside me.  I am the 
Chairman of the Committee on Government Assurances and he contributed a lot in 
that Committee.  His friendship and dedication were evident.  As he himself 
mentioned, he learned a lot of things.  But I too learned many things from him in that 
Committee, as the Chairman.   I fondly remember those things, Sir.   
Then, I speak about Mr. Wilson, who is going to continue in this House.  I do 
mention that he is a good lawyer.  He has contributed a lot.  Whenever there are legal 
matters discussed here, his voice is alwa ys heard.  He never misses anything, 
especially Zero Hour or Special Mention.  That is his way of participation.  Even 
though he is a well-known Supreme Court la wyer, he is deeply committed to his role 
-- what to do in the Parliament.  He is always  sincere in fulfilling his duties.  He is also 
in the panel of Vice-Chairpersons.  You have given him the opportunity to serve in 
that capacity.  At that time, we faced certain things.  When I started, he was 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

presiding the House.   I was raising an issue.  The matter discussed then was a recent 
issue which might have embarrassed him.  Bu t, let me say this clearly, there is no 
embarrassment when one is presiding the House because the Chair is above party 
politics.  And, he conducted himself in that spirit.  He allowed me to speak, 
regardless of his party liking it  or not.  I represent my pa rty and I have every right to 
express my views.  He gave me that oppo rtunity, and I also thank him for that.  We 
will continue once again.  Si r, the Leader of the House fe licitated them, Shri Tiruchi 
Siva also felicitated them and I am grateful  to you for having given me an opportunity 
to felicitate all my friends and brothers wh o have come from Tamil Nadu.  I believe, 
they will come back on ce again.  That is our hope and our belief.  I am confident that 
they will come back and continue their contributions, just as  they have done so far.  
Their contributions will never be forgotten.  It is now part of the proceedings.   During 
the proceedings, he quoted Anna’s sp eeches from 1960.  Those speeches were 
quoted.  Those speeches are still great and they inspired us.  It is a part of the Rajya 
Sabha proceedings.  Sir, Vajpayee ji and even Nehruji appreciated Anna’s speeches.  
Vaikoji has also quoted him today.  That is always remembered.   Those sentiments 
remain with us.  Once again, I thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to 
felicitate our colleagues and brothers.  We sincerely hope they will return to this 
House and contribute to this House.  Thank you very much, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  Now, Shri Derek O' Brien. 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN (West Bengal): 
Hon'ble Deputy Chairman Sir, I will not 
deliver a long speech now. Six of the ho n. Members from this august House are 
retiring this month and one of them is bein g re-elected to this House. On behalf of 
AITC Party, I extend my best wishes and good health to all of them. Thank You, Sir.                           
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद।  Ǜी संजय िंसह जी। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): उपसभापित महोदय, सािथयȗ को िवदा करना 
हमेशा बड़ा सुखद अनुभव नहीं होता, तकलीफ होती है अगर अपने साथी इस हाउस से िवदा 
होकर जाते हȅ।  इसिलए मȅ अपने उन पाँच सािथयȗ - वाइको साहब, अÅदुÊला जी, चन्
 दर्शेखरन 
जी, अंबुमिण जी और शनमुगम जी - जो आज िरटायर हो रहे हȅ, उनके  उज्ज्वल भिवÍय की 
शुभकामना करता हूँ।  िवÊसन साहब दोबारा इस सदन मȂ आ गए हȅ, तो इनको बहुत-बहुत बधाई।  
मान्यवर, हमारा इनसे भाषा का िरÌत
ा नहीं है।  इनकी भाषा अलग है, लेिकन इनसे हमारा िदल 
                                                            
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali.  
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
19

का िरÌता है, जज्बात का िरÌता है, ददर् का िरÌता है, िवपक्ष मȂ होने क े नाते नारȗ का िरÌता है और 
वह िरÌता कायम रहेगा।   
महोदय, हम लोग वाइको साहब से बड़ी Ģेरणा लेते हȅ।  इस उĦ मȂ भी वे िजस जज्बात क े 
साथ और िजस हौसले क े साथ बोलते हȅ, यह हम सब लोगȗ क े िलए बड़ा Ģेरणादायी है िक जब 
आप िवपक्ष मȂ हȗ, आपको अपनी बात कहनी हो, तो आप अपनी आवाज क ै से सǄा पक्ष तक पहुँचा 
सकते हȅ।  यह सदन सǄा पक्ष और िव पक्ष से िमल कर बना है।   
महोदय, आज एक बात सुन कर बड़ी खुशी हुई, क्यȗिक िहन्दुÎतान का यही दशर्न है, 
यही िहन्दुÎतान है और इस सदन को अÅदुÊला जी की भावना का सÇमान करना चािहए िक आज 
अपनी अिन्
तम Îपीच मȂ वे यह कह रहे थे िक हमारे इलाके  मȂ एक मिन्दर है, वहाँ पर रेलवे Îटेशन 
होना चािहए।   मȅ समझता हूँ िक हम सब लोग और यह सदन उनकी इस भावना का सÇमान 
करेगा।  यह िहन्दुÎतान है और यही िहन् दुÎतान का सेक्युलिरज्म है और यही हमारा भाईचारा है।   
मान्यवर, तिमलनाडु से आने वाले इन सब भाइयȗ को, जो आज िवदा हो रहे हȅ, उनको मȅ 
िदल की गहराइयȗ से उनके  उज्ज्वल भिवÍय की शुभकामनाएँ देता हूँ।  आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : माननीय Ģमोद ितवारी जी। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी ( राजÎथान):  माननीय उपसभापित जी, हमारे जो पाँच साथी आज िवदा ले रहे 
हȅ, उनका कायर्काल समाÃत हुआ है, मȅ उनके  उज्ज्वल भिवÍय की कामना करता हूँ।  वे यहाँ से 
िवदा हो रहे हȅ, परन्तु वे सावर्जिनक जीवन मȂ दूसरे ÃलेटफॉÇसर् पर िकर्याशील रहȂ, कतर्Ëय
शील रहȂ 
और हमेशा देश क े िलए, देश की आवाज को उठाते रहȂ।  मȅ कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की ओर से इन सभी 
सािथयȗ को शुभकामनाएँ देता हूँ, बधाई देता हूँ और इस बात क े िलए सराहना करता हूँ िक 
उन्हȗने अपने कायर्काल क े दौरान जनता की आवाज, ददर्, दु:ख और सारी पीड़ा Ëयƪ की है तथा 
मजबूती से उठाया है।  मȅ उनके  उज्ज्वल भिवÍय की कामना करता हूँ, धन्
यवाद।  
                                                                      
Ǜी उपसभापित : बहुत धन्यवाद, माननीय Ģमोद जी।  Now, Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli.  
 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI (Andhra Pradesh): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, 
with your permission, I would like to speak in Telugu.  
 “Sir, it is a commendable 
tradition that through this House, we hono r the retiring Members for their dedicated 
service to the people of our country. Wh enever the Members of  this august House 
retire, we should always remember them  with kind words and acknowledge their 
valuable contributions.  Their work in this  august House and for the nation serves as 
an inspiration for future generations.  
                                                            
  English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

I have not seen this tradition in the St ate Assembly . I had been a  member of 
Legislative Assembly for three terms, but this tradition was not in practice there.  
  Sir, I would like to express my special  thanks to those who have introduced 
this tradition in the Parliament. I would al so like to express my gratitude to you for 
giving me this opportunity.”     
                                                          
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, on behalf of my party and 
my leader, Shri Naveen Patnaik, I take this  occasion to wish all the six Members, our 
colleagues, who are today retiring—one of them is coming back—the very best. It 
has been truly amazing experience learning  from each one of them as they went 
forward in their contributions to this House,  especially Dr. Vaiko. I personally have 
been touched by his charisma and his l eadership, and many a time I feel that, 
probably, the energy that he possesses, I need to step up to him in order to come up 
to his level of energy and motivation.  
In terms of Shanmugamji, his leadersh ip in the trade union has been truly 
inspiring. So also have been many colle agues who are here. I just want to be 
reminded, at this time, of the words of Robert Frost: "The woods are lovely, dark and 
deep, but I have promises to keep and mi les to go before I sleep, and miles to go 
before I sleep." They have miles to go, m iles to contribute, miles to achieve, and for 
all of us to be more proud of them going forward. Thank you, Sir.                                                          
 
12.00 Noon  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  मȅ अगले वƪा को बुलाऊँ , इससे पहले यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक 12.00 बज चुक े 
हȅ, यह Question Hour का समय है, इसिलए अगर आपकी अनुमित हो, तो हम लोग सदन मȂ  
farewell
 speeches को continue रखȂ। 
  
ALL HON. MEMBERS:  Yes, Sir. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  माननीय Ǜी Ģेम चंद गुÃता। 
 
Ǜी Ģेम चंद गुǔा (िबहार): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ अपनी पाटीर् क े behalf पर, पाटीर् लीडरिशप 
क े behalf पर आज िवदा हो रहे सािथयȗ को बहुत शुभकामन
 ाएँ देता हूँ और  इनके  उज्ज्वल 
भिवÍय की Ģाथर्ना करता हूँ। 
 Ǜीमाâ, इनके  साथ इतने सालȗ से सहयोग क े साथ चलने से हमȂ बहुत अच्छा लगा।  हमȂ 
इन लोगȗ से बहुत क ु छ सीखने को िमला।  इंसान की कभी िरटायरमȂट नहीं होती है।  जो कमर्योगी 
होते हȅ, उन
के  काम का कभी अंत नहीं होता है, बिÊक वे आगे चल कर और काम करते हȅ।  ये लोग 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
21

पिÅलक सेवा मȂ अपना समय लगाएँगे।  मȅ इनके  अच्छे ÎवाÎथ्य की मनोकामना करता हूँ और 
भगवान से Ģाथर्ना करता हूँ िक ये भिवÍय मȂ अपने काम मȂ जुटे रहȂ।  यह भी कामना करता हूँ िक 
इनका ÎवाÎथ्य ठीक रहे और ये खुश रहȂ, धन्यव ाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  Now, Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy. 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY (Telangana):  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for 
having given me the opportunity to speak.   As we bid farewell to the retiring 
M e m b e r s ,  o n  b e h a l f  o f  m y  B R S  P a r t y ,   I  w i s h  t h e m  w e l l .   T h e y  h a v e  b e e n  a  g r e a t  
source of inspiration, especially, for us.   BRS being a regional party coming from 
South, our struggle for upholding the federa l spirit was very much inspired through 
our senior Members who kept advising us.  While I look at Vaiko, he is such a 
contradictory to the numbers which matter in  parliamentary democracy but he proved 
it otherwise.  He stood alone like a rock but never deviated from the cause. So, I wish 
them well on behalf of my party.  I, once again, congratulate Wilson ji, who has made 
a comeback, and I am sure his contributions will keep guiding us in this august 
House.   Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR.  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  Now, Dr. John Brittas. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Thank you, Sir, for having  given me the opportunity. 
Sir, Vaikoji described me as one of the three musketeers and said that I need to speak 
my heart out.    Please bear with me  for two minutes extra.   Sir, Vaiko ji is a 
phenomenon and I hugely benefitted sitting beside him.  I was inspired by his 
presence and I moved out couple of days ago to this seat precisely to  express my 
solidarity with Vaikoji.  Since he is retiring, I  do not want to be  there at all.   Sir, we 
are short of adjectives when we speak about Vaikoji.    We can speak about him being 
resilient, tenacious and having an indomitabl e spirit.  The one person who has fire in 
the belly in this House is Vaiko ji.    He stepped in this House half a century back, 
almost 47 years back.  And, me having an opportunity to sit beside him, I cannot 
forget about, Sir.   The meaning of being firebrand wa s explained by Madam Nirmala 
Sitharaman yesterday.  Yesterday, when the House was adjourned, we were having 
an informal chat.   The sum and substance of what she spoke was this.  When Vaiko ji 
spoke in Tamil Nadu at that time, people could not take out a piece of paper as it 
would have caught fire.  That was how he spoke in Tamil Nadu.   Sir,  with my 
journalistic insight and memory, I clearly re member his voyage through the dangerous 
seas dodging Indian Navy and Sri Lankan Navy,  to go to Jaffna to meet Prabhakaran, 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

the LTTE Supremo.  It was controversial; it was headline.   But that journey is part of 
the Tamil political law.   And, one more,  if you ask me  who the real tiger was, I would 
say, it was not Prabhakaran, it was Vaiko.   He was the real tiger. 
Sir, last month, hon. Chairman convened  the leaders’ meeting, floor leaders’ 
meeting, and he was quoting a ruling by late Vice-President, Shri Venkataraman, 
wherein late Venkataramanji, had ruled agai nst people displaying badges and some 
other display items. He said, “The ruling came as part of a submission made by one 
Member, Shri V. Gopalsamy. ” Then I told hon. Chairman, “Sir, ‘this Vaiko’ is the V. 
Gopalsamy.” And Vaikoji came out and asked me, “ Am I the Gopalsamy? ”  He has 
even forgotten the past wherein he was inst rumental for many Tamil test events in 
Indian history. Sir, the way he fought  for the Tamil-Dravidian cause -- even 
yesterday, he spoke about th e Tamil fisherman -- I feel that at 81, he is still the 
youngest in this House, and the Tamil Nadu politics is ripe for an angry-firebrand 
person like Vaikoji. तंबीदुरै जी, ये आग लगा दȂगे। Beware of Vaikoji when he comes back 
to Tamil Nadu.   
Sir, Shanmugamji, I need to speak abou t him, because I come from a working 
class political party; and he is one of very  few trade union leaders in this House. He 
was almost a leader for me and my party. Si r, at a time when labour is looked down, 
when Labour Minister doesn't have time to interact with the labour trade unions, at a 
time when Labour Codes are being rewritten to deny the rights of the workers, at a 
time when  media has dispensed with labour beat, there is a man, like a sanyasi, who 
fought for the rights of the workers.  His absence, we all would miss in a big way. 
 Sir, Abdullaji is my cherished friend and he was one person who came to this 
House at 11 o'clock, left the House only afte r it was adjourned.  This is the extent of 
hard work and homework he did. When  I heard the news of him not being 
renominated, there was a pang of little de spair; and I called up some of my DMK 
friends. They said, “Don't worry.  He is being groomed for a larger role. ” So, I feel 
that. Thambiduraiji, he doesn't need to come  here.  I am waiting for the day when I 
can travel with him in a beacon-clad flashlight vehicle in Tamil Nadu.   
Sir, Chandrasegharanji and Dr. Anbuma ni Ramadoss,  I haven't interacted 
much with them, but I am sure that they have contributed richly. Anbumaniji has got 
so many battles in his hand; even a battle ag ainst his father also. So, I feel that they 
have so much in their hands to fight in Tamil Nadu.   
And my dear friend, Wilsonji -- he is a legal luminary.  As our Chairman has 
resigned, and we would miss a legal luminary,  I am sure that Wilsonji will fill that void
  
here.  Since he has come back, I will not sa y much about him.  But I wish all these 
Members best wishes.   
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
23

Sir, retiring means nothing for a politician. It is for another cause; and they are 
going to continue to serve the society and th is nation. I wish them all the best. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा (िबहार): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ अपनी पाटीर् जनता दल यूनाइटेड और 
नीतीश क ुमार जी की तरफ से िरटायर होने वाले हमारे छः मȂ से पाँच साथी, िजनमȂ से एक Ǜी पी. 
िवÊसन जी वापस आए हȅ, इन सभी को शुभकामनाएँ देता हूँ।  
मेरा अÅदुÊला जी से थोड़ा इंटरैक्शन है, क्यȗिक हम लोगȗ ने एक साथ कमेटी मȂ काम 
िकया है।  अभी जॉन िĤटास जी सही बोल रहे थे िक ये पैशन क े साथ काम करते हȅ।  इनका कमेटी 
मȂ टाइम पर आना, क्वेÌचंस रेज करना, इÌयूज को उठाना, ये सारी चीजȂ मȅने देखी हȅ, क्यȗिक 
इनसे मेरा ज्यादा इंटरैक्शन रहा है।  हमारे साथी, वाइको जी भी िरटायर हो रहे हȅ।  इन्हȗने सारे 
िवषयȗ पर अपनी बातȗ को जोरदार ढंग से यहाँ रखा है।  इनका Îटर्गल भी काफी रहा है, ये 5 
साल जेल मȂ रहे हȅ।  ये जब यहाँ अपनी बात रख रहे थे, तो हम इनको सुन रहे थे।  जब हम लोग 
बाहर भी थे, तब इनकी बात सुनते थे।  इन्हȗने तिमल कॉज़ क े िलए या िफशरमेन क े कॉज़ क े िलए 
हमेशा अपनी बातȂ यहाँ उठाईं।  हम न्यूज़पेपसर् मȂ देखते थे िक Ǜीलंका मȂ जब िफशरमेन कभी 
अरेÎट हो जाते थे, तब उस इÌयू को वाइको साहब सदन मȂ Îटर्ांगली रखते थे। हमȂ उनसे बहुत 
क ु छ सीखने को िमला है। मȅ अपनी तरफ से और अपनी पाटीर् की तरफ से इन सबको शुभकामनाएं 
देता हूं। 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार): उपसभापित महोदय, यहां लीडसर् बोल चुक े हȅ। सर, जैसे संजय 
भाई ने कहा, यह क्षण मेरे िलए िवÌविवǏालय मȂ भी उिचत नहीं हुआ करता था। िकसी का 
फ ेयरवेल होता था, तो कई सारी चीज़Ȃ िदमाग मȂ आने लगती थीं, जैसे अब इस सीट पर कल से 
कोई और बैठेगा। हम us
ed to हो जाएंगे, लेिकन वह दूसरा Ëयिƪ वाइको नहीं होगा।  
 अÅदुÊला जी की िजतनी तारीफ करूं , उतनी कम है। मȅ लेबर किमटी मȂ शनमुगम जी क े 
साथ रहा। मȅ समझता हूं िक यह Ëयिƪ highly emo
tional Ëयिƪ है, िजसने labour cause को हर 
मीिंटग मȂ उसके  central rostrum मȂ लाया। चंदर्शेखर जी से भी इंटरेक्शन रहा, रामादॉस जी से 
उतना नहीं रहा, लेिकन जब वाइको साहब ने कहा, three musketeers – हम तीन यहां थे। 
िĤटास जी का Ģमोशन हो गया है, वे आगे चले गए हȅ। यहां हम तीन बैठते थे और संसदीय 
लोकतंतर् मȂ वे क्षण, जब हम सब across the aisle बात कर सकते हȅ, संवाद कर सक
ते हȅ। वे 
चीज़Ȃ मȅने इन तमाम सदÎयȗ क े मध्य देखी हȅ और उनसे बहुत क ु छ सीखा है।  
 अंत मȂ, मȅ एक िटÃपणी करूं गा। हम सब अलग-अलग िवचारधारा क े लोग हȅ, लेिकन क ु छ 
चीज़Ȃ हमȂ जोड़ती हȅ। डीएमके  क े जो साथी िरटायर हो रहे हȅ या वा इको िरटायर हो रहे हȅ, इन्हȂ 
social justice वाट्सऐप फॉरवडर् से नहीं आया है। ये Periyar क े tradition क े लोग हȅ और पेिरयार 
क े टर्ेिडशन क े लोग आत्मसात करके  आते हȅ। मȅने इनसे बहुत क ु छ सीखा है, हमारा एक िरÌ ता 
रहा है। मȅ भी तमाम सदÎयȗ की तरह यह मानता हूं िक यहां से िरटायरमȂट कोई बहुत बड़ी चीज़ 
नहीं है। आप सावर्जिनक जीवन को उसी तरह से ऊजार्वान बनाए रखȂगे। महोदय, हम ारे संसदीय 
लोकतंतर् की सबसे बड़ी खूबी यह है िक पक्ष और िवपक्ष को िमलाकर संसद बनती है। िवपक्ष और 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

पक्ष मȂ शतर्ुता का भाव नहीं होना चािहए। आज जब वाइको जी बोल रहे थे, तब रȗगटे खड़े हो रहे 
थे। उन्हȗने एक-एक Ëयिƪ का नाम िलया, अटल जी का नाम िलया, डा. मनमोहन िंसह जी का 
नाम िलया, उन्हȗने दल का दायरा नहीं देखा। इसी का नाम लोकतंतर् है। यही उǄर-दिक्षण और 
पूरब-पिÌचम को एक करता है। भाषाओं की दीवार वे खड़ी कर
ते हȅ, िजनको भाषा का भाव नहीं 
पता है। भाव मुहÅबत का है, भाव Îनेह का है और भाव इस देश की तर क्की का है। मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से इन सबको शुभकामनाएं देता हूं।  
  
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL (MAHARASHTRA) :  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I join all my 
colleagues in bidding a farewell and a futu re full of promise to all our retiring 
colleagues and also in welcoming back our co lleague, Shri P. Wilson.  Sir, I have had 
the pleasure of knowing most of these peop le for many years, especially brother 
Vaiko, whom I have known since when he was a Member of the Lok Sabha, and both 
of us were colleagues in the Lok Sabha.  Af ter that too, for many years, when I was a 
Minister in the Government, I used to  always get his love, affection and 
encouragement in whatever task we were embarking on.  He has been, as all other 
colleagues have said, a voice for the people, a voice for the downtrodden and a voice 
for the Tamil language and Tamil culture. 
And, I think, not only him, but even when we look at Shanmugam ji, he has 
been a veteran in the trade union politics. Bu t, in this House, he has been very calm, 
has a soothing voice and is a fatherly figu re who has been very affectionate towards 
all his colleagues and also contributed very meaningfully to many debates in this 
House. Anbumani Ramadossji was a colleague of mine in the Government when he 
was Health Minister and I have had a chance  to know him very closely. And the other 
colleagues, Abdulla ji and Chandrasegharan ji have made meaningful contributors to 
this House and, I would say, to the overall, progress and welfare of the nation. I, on 
my behalf and on behalf of my Party, would like to bid ‘farewell’.  At the same time, as 
many have said, I would say, in public life,  you do not retire. In public life, once you 
have embarked on this journey, you carry  o n  f o r  l i f e .  I  a m  s u r e ,  i n  m a n y  o t h e r  
capacities, all our colleagues, who are retiring, will, certainly, be contributing 
meaningfully, not only for the welfare of Ta mil Nadu, but also fo r our great nation.  
Once again, on my behalf and my Party, I wish them all the best for their future 
endeavours. Thank you.   
                         
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) : Respected
  Sir, today, we heard the fiery speech of 
respected Vaiko. I am able to say proudly that I am also colleague of Vaiko ji.  His 
interaction, his speeches, his issues and all things are highly close to the issues of the 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
25

people. Today, I believe, in the future, Vaikoji will contribute a lot of things not only to 
Tamil politics but also to national politics.   
Our leader, the trade union leader, Shanmugam ji — as Brittasji  has already 
mentioned — is not only lead er of the DMK, but also leader of the entire working-
class community in our nation. Not only in la bour issues, but also in social issues and 
everywhere else, Shanmugam ji has taken up the issues. As a leader of the trade 
union, he has given a lot of inputs for our parliamentary activities.   
Our dear friend Abdulla ji has spoken in Tamil an d, in that speech, he 
mentioned a lot of issues. In the same manner, in his speeches, questions and all 
things, he raised a lot of i ssues for the people.   Abdulla ji worked here in this House 
for the people. I believe, tomorro w, in Tamil politics, Abdulla ji will play a big role for 
the people.   
Chandrasegharanji from Tamil Nadu is a very cl ose friend of mine. He has 
contributed a lot in this House. I salute Chandrasegharan ji, Anbumani Ramadoss ji 
and my dear friend, Wilson ji, a legal luminary. He will cont inue here in this House.  
These old friends have contributed a lot of th ings in the House. I salute them, wishing 
all the success for these colleagues. Thank you. 
                                                                                                       
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित महोदय, आज जो हमारे छ: साथी िरटायर हो 
रहे हȅ, उनमȂ से एक िवÊसन साहब वािपस आ रहे हȅ।  उनका अपने पूरे कायर्काल मȂ संसदी य कायर् 
Ģणाली मȂ बड़ा योगदान रहा है।  वैसे जो भी सदन मȂ चुनकर आता है, चाहे वह िकसी भी दल का 
हो, उस सदÎय का यह धमर् होता है िक वह अपने क्षेतर् की, अपने राज्य की समÎयाओं को उठाए 
और लोगȗ क े कÊयाण क े िलए जो भी बात कह सकता हो, कहे।  इस अवसर पर यूं तो एम. 
शनमुगम साहब टर्ेड यूिनयन लीडर थे, हȅ  और रहȂगे। उनका बहुत बड़ा योगदान रहा है।  मȅ सभी 
लोगȗ को शुभकामनाएँ देते हुए यह अव
Ìय कहना चाहूंगा िक इस सदन मȂ वाइको साहब की बुलंद 
आवाज़ है और लोग उस आवाज़ को हमेशा याद रखȂगे।  We will miss him very much.  मȅ उन 
सभी सदÎयȗ को, जो आज िरटायर हो रहे हȅ, उनके  ÎवÎथ रह
ने, दीघार्यु रहने और सिकर्य रहने 
की कामना करता हूं।  
महोदय, राजनीित मȂ कोई िरटायर नहीं होता है, अगर लोग उनके  पास आते रहȂगे, तो वे 
सिकर्य रहȂगे। िजस िदन लोगȗ का आन
ा बंद हो जाएगा, तो चाहे िजतना बड़ा लीडर क्यȗ न हो, वह 
अपने आप िरटायर हो जाएगा। जनता क े बीच, जनता से जुड़े रहने वाले ये ऐसे लोग हȅ जो जनता 
क े बीच ही रहȂगे, इसिलए उनके  िरटायरमȂट का कोई सवाल ही नहीं है। मȅ यह कामना करता हूं 
िक इनका नेतृत्व इन्हȂ िफ
र से इस िजÇमेदारी क े िलए यहाँ भेजे। उपसभापित महोदय, इस अवसर 
पर मुझे अपनी भावनाएं Ëयƪ करने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवरा (महाराÍटर्):  उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ 
अपनी पाटीर् की ओर से और पूरे मह
ाराÍटर् की ओर से हमारे माननीय सािथयȗ को बहुत-बहुत 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

शुभकामनाएं देना चाहता हूं। इसके  साथ-साथ मȅ उनका आभार भी Ëयƪ करना चाहूंगा for their 
valuable contributions.  Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu have much in common.  We 
both are extremely passionate about our cu lture, language, music and theatre, and, 
therefore, I understand the sentiments of a ll the six MPs who have fought to preserve 
and strengthen Tamil culture.  On behalf of  Maharashtra, I wish them the very best, 
and besides the commonality of passion for our cultures, we are also respectful of 
other cultures.  That is the sentiment the city that I belong to, Mumbai, has.  We 
welcome other cultures, but we ask the ot her cultures also to respect our own 
culture.   
 I always find the word ‘goodbye’ a ve ry strong word because many people, I 
am sure, will be back.  Mr. Wilson, my friend and colleague, is already back.  I 
congratulate him.  So, instead of ‘goodbye’, on behalf of my party and my State, I 
would like to use the word ‘farewell’.  Thank you, Sir.  
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB (Kerala) : Sir, I also extend my be st wishes to my colleagues 
who are retiring today. I have completed si xteen years in this Ho use and will be here 
for two more years.  So, I have to see so me more farewells.  But, I have only one 
thing against Mr. Vaiko.  Everybody was ta lking about Mr. Vaiko. He also mentioned 
all other names, but he did not mention my name. 
 
MR. VAIKO:  I am sorry. 
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:   Then, it is okay.  To Mr. Vaiko and all other hon. Members 
from Tamil Nadu, who are retiring today, I wish all the best on my behalf, and on 
behalf of my party and my leader, Sayyid Sadiq Ali Shihab Thangal.  Thank you, Sir.                           
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala):  Sir, on behalf of my party, CPI, and on behalf 
of my State, Kerala, I wish all the retiring Me mbers all the best in life.  As we all know, 
a true politician never retires, and I hope all of them will co ntinue their fight for social 
justice and communal harmony.  At this cr ucial juncture, their retirement will be 
actually detrimental to the interest of our movement.  Becoming a Member of 
Parliament is just one part of public life.   We are all fortunate to have become the 
Members of Parliament, but it should not be th e
  ultimate aim.  It is just one part of 
social life.  So, it comes and goes.  We should  take everything in that way.  It is the 
ideology that matters; it is the commitment that matters.  For that matter, Shri Vaiko 
and Shri M. Shanmugam are the two legendary parliamentarians.  I came to know 
about Shri Vaiko during my school days.  In fact, he is a very popular politician even in 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
27

Kerala.  Everyone in Kerala knows him as a firebrand politician.  And, I am very happy 
that I became his colleague in this august  House.  Then, Shanmugam Sir is a very 
close associate of our trade union leader s, especially AITUC, CITU and INTUC 
leaders.  I do not want to take much of your time.  Their commitment is known to 
everybody.  And, of course, our young ch aps, Mr. Abdulla and other Members, have 
a very bright future in the coming days.  I take this opportunity once again to wish 
them a bright future.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी रामदास अठावले): िडÃटी चेयरमैन 
सर, हमारे छ: सािथयȗ मȂ से पाँच साथी हमȂ छोड़कर जा रहे हȅ और उनमȂ से एक साथी वापस भी 
आ रहे हȅ। इन छ: सािथ
 यȗ मȂ से एक साथी, अंबुमिण रामादॉस जी से मेरे बहुत अच्छे संबंध थे। मेरा 
भी नाम रामदास है, उनका भी नाम रामादॉस है। जब मȅ काँगर्ेस पाटीर् क े साथ था, तब अटल 
िबहारी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार थी और एनडीए की उस सर कार मȂ अंबुमिण रामादॉस जी थे। 
उस समय डीएमके  भी हमारे साथ थी, लेिकन  आज हमारे साथ नहीं है। कौन कब, कहाँ आएगा-
जाएगा, यह मालूम नहीं है। हमारे डीएमके  क े सदÎय हमȂ यहाँ से छोड़कर जा रहे हȅ। हमा रे 
माननीय सदÎय, वाइको जी भी हȅ।  
“मȅ वाइको जी पर बहुत ही हूँ िफदा, 
मȅ नहीं लेना  चाहता उनसे िवदा।” 
लेिकन, वाइको जी आ सकते हȅ। अगर वाइको जी हमारे साथ आएंगे, तो वे दोबारा आ 
सकते हȅ। वाइको जी का बहुत बड़
ा योगदान रहा है। तिमलनाडु मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान रहा है। जब 
वे 1998 मȂ पहली बार लोकसभा मȂ चुनकर आए थे, तब मȅ भी लोकसभा मȂ चुनकर आया था। 
वाइक
ो जी क े साथ मेरे बहुत अच्छे संबंध थे। जब वे ितरुन ेलवेली िजले मȂ जाते थे, तब कभी-कभी 
मȅ भी वहाँ जाता था। वाइको जी क े साथ मेरे बहुत अच्छे संबंध थे। डीएमके  क े सािथयȗ क े साथ मेरे 
बहुत अच्छे संबंध थे। आप मȂ से क ु छ लोग जा रहे हȅ, क ु छ लोग वापस आ रहे हȅ। आना-जाना लगा 
रहता है। कौन आएगा, यह नहीं मालूम, लेिकन जाना िकसे है, यह जरूर  मालूम होता है। 
िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, मȅ ज्यादा वƪ नहीं लेना चाहता हूँ। इन सभी सािथयȗ का बहुत बड़ा 
योगदान रहा है और इन्हȗने अपने इस हाउस मȂ बहुत ही अच्छे िवषय रखे हȅ। अपने राज्य क े िलए 
सवाल उठाए, समाज क े िलए सवाल उठाए, सामािजक न्य
ाय क े िलए सवाल उठाए, आिर्थक 
उन्नित क े िलए सवाल उठाए। इसके  िलए मȅ इन्हȂ हािर्दक बधाई देता हूँ। आप अपने राज्य मȂ जाकर 
भी आवाज उठा
ते रहȂ - यही अपेक्षा Ëयƪ करता हूँ। जय भीम, जय भारत! 
 
 (MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Question No.46. … (Interruptions)… आपने अभी बहुत 
अच्छी तरह से चचार् की। ...(Ëयवधान)... राज्य सभा िकस तरह काम करती है, यह अभी लोगȗ ने 
देखा। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप लोगȗ ने बहुत अच्छी तरह चचार् की, बात की। ...(Ëय वधान)... Please 
go back to your seats. … ( Interruptions)…  Question Hour.  …(Interruptions )… It is the 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Members’ Hour.  …( Interruptions)…  Nothing will go on record except what the Chair 
permits.  …( Interruptions)…  Question Hour.  Question No. 46, Dr. Syed Naseer 
Hussain.  … ( Interruptions)…   Please go back to your seats.  …( Interruptions)… 
Please go back to your seats.  … ( Interruptions)… Question Hour. …( Interruptions)… 
यह क्वेÌचन आवर है। ...(Ëयवधान)... Please allow the Question Hour.  …(Interruptions)… It 
is the Members’ Hour.  … ( Interruptions)… Please.  The House stands adjourned to 
meet at 2.00 p.m. 
 
The House then adjourned at twenty-nine minutes past twelve of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) in the Chair. 
 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
 
$The Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2025 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : Hon. Members, we are 
taking up the Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2025.  ...(Interruptions)... Yesterday, the 
Minister moved it, and the speech of Dr. M. Thambidurai was unfinished.  You can 
now begin, Dr. Thambidurai.   ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, yesterday, you gave me the chance to 
speak on the Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2025.  ...(Interruptions)... The Bill 
establishes the responsibilities, liabilities,  rights and immunities in case of goods 
carried from any port in India to any other port in the world.  ...(Interruptions)...  
Having said this, I would like to point out some issues concerning maritime threats 
and security.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHR I BHUBANESWAR KALITA):  Let him finish.   
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  India has a huge coastline of approximately 9,500 
kilometres.  
...(Interruptions)... Sir, I want to make a very important point.  Since 1993 
                                                            
$ Further consideration continued on a motion moved on the 23rd of July, 2025. 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
29

Mumbai blasts, a huge cache of RDX and arms and ammunition… ..(Interruptions)..  
We have also witnessed that drugs are being smuggled into several States of India, 
including Tamil Nadu.  ...(Interruptions)...  Huge cache of drugs was confiscated in 
several parts of India.  ...(Interruptions)... The present DMK Government in Tamil 
Nadu is unable to stop smuggling of drugs into the State.  It is also unable to stop 
abuse of drugs.  
...(Interruptions)... Drugs are freely available in Tamil Nadu near 
schools and colleges.  ...(Interruptions)...  The students, who are the future of India, 
are being brought under drug net. ...(Interruptions)... The DMK Government in Tamil 
Nadu is incapable of running the State.  ...(Interruptions)... Due to the failure of the 
present Government in Tamil Nadu, people are going to throw the DMK out of power 
in the next year’s Assembly elections.  ...(Interruptions)...  And AIADMK, under the 
leadership of Thiru Edappadi Palaniswami, is going to win with thumping majority and 
form the Government.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : G o  t o  y o u r  s e a t s .   
...(Interruptions)...  Don’t do that.  …(Interruptions)… Please go to your seats.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  I want to add that India has a huge coastline of 
approximately 9,500 kilometres. Securi ng the entire coastline of India 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : Mr.  Abdulla, go to your 
seat.  .
..(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  Maritime security has a huge security threat since time 
immemorial.  ...(Interruptions)... The challenges of the co astline security are very 
complex.  ...(Interruptions)... The porous nature of the vast coastline in many States 
makes coastal areas susceptible to illegal sm uggling of arms and explosives by the 
terror groups and drug syndicates. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA):  Mr.  Abdulla, don’t do this.  
...(Interruptions)... Go one step up.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  Since all the States manage th eir borders very well, there is 
an increased infiltration and smuggling of  arms and ammunition and drugs through 
the sea route. 
...(Interruptions)... Special mention should  be made about the 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

smuggling of drugs and contraband throug h the sea route.  This has its adverse 
impact on our economy and social fabric.  More than this, there is a nexus between 
the organised smuggling gangs and terror outfits.  ...(Interruptions)... This poses a 
serious challenge to our internal security.  ...(Interruptions)... Many terror outfits use 
such channels to raise funds, which are fu rther used in their terror activities.  
...(Interruptions)... Sir, you know very well what happened in Mumbai.  
...(Interruptions)... That is why I am requesting our ho n. Minister to look into this 
matter and see how the goods are being transported throughout the country, 
especially through the sea route.  ...(Interruptions)... It is high time that the Central 
Government must come forward and take necessary action.  ...(Interruptions)... Sir, in 
Tamil Nadu, we are facing a lot of proble ms.  I have already mentioned what is 
happening with regard to drugs.  ...(Interruptions)... Therefore, I request the Central 
Government to interfere.  ...(Interruptions)...  I also served as the Minister.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA):  Let him finish.  
  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:   I appreciate Modi ji’s Government.  This Government has 
taken a lot of steps to see th at new rules are brought.  ..(Interruptions).. Because of 
trade, India is going to become the third- largest economy in the world in due course 
of time.  …(Interruptions)…  As Narendra Modi ji said, India is going to be the third 
largest economy in the world.  …(Interruptions)…  It means that trade is very 
important.  …(Interruptions)…  For trade, hon. Minister has brought some rules and 
regulations.  …(Interruptions)…  I think this is a great opportunity. …(Interruptions)…  
Sea routes are dangerous.  …(Interruptions)…  Many times, our Indian ships are 
caught by pirates in many places.  …(Interruptions)…  At that time, the Central 
Government has to take a firm step to release the ship.  …(Interruptions)…  The 
Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill is very impo rtant. In the name of some other goods, 
smugglers are bringing narcotics.  …(Interruptions)… This is a dangerous thing.  I 
request hon. Minister to take necessary action.  …(Interruptions)…  On behalf of the 
AIADMK Party and my leader, Shri Edappadi Palaniswami, I support this Bill.  This Bill 
will give some kind of relief to our Tamil Nadu people also. …(Interruptions)…  
Stringent action has to be taken.  Smuggling of drugs in Tamil Nadu is growing.   
…(Interruptions)…  It is high time we took necessary action.   …(Interruptions)…  Thank 
you very much, Sir. 
 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
31

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KA LITA):  The next speaker is Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla. …(Interruptions)…  Please go to your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  
If you have to speak, you have to go to your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  Otherwise, I will 
call the next speaker. …(Interruptions)… You cannot give an alternative.  
…(Interruptions)… If you have to speak, please go  to your seat and speak.  
…(Interruptions)…  If you do not want to  speak, just tell us.  …(Interruptions)…  Are 
you speaking, Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla?  …(Interruptions)…  You are not speaking!  
…(Interruptions)… The next speaker will be Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhra Pradesh):  Sir, I thank you for this 
opportunity to speak on this important Bill.  …(Interruptions)… The Carriage of Goods 
by Sea Bill, 2024 is a landmark piece of le gislation that holds immense potential to 
transform the maritime trade framework of our country. …(Interruptions)…  
    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA):   Please don’t disturb him. 
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA :  As representatives from Andhra Pradesh, a 
state with a proud maritime legacy and a po rt-based economic activity, we recognize 
the importance of this Bill.  …(Interruptions)…  The Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 
1925, was a progressive law fo r its time, bringing clarity to the responsibilities and 
liabilities of carriers in maritime trade. …(Interruptions)…  It was based on the Hague 
Rules and later influenced by  the Visby Rules, which inte grated India into global 
maritime practices. However, over near ly a century, the shipping industry has 
undergone profound changes. …(Interruptions)…  Advancements in technology, shifts 
in global trade routes, and the evolution of international conventions now demand that 
we modernize our laws. The introduction of  the Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2024, 
which repeals the 1925 Act, reflects this need for modernization and adaptability. 
…(Interruptions)…  This Bill proposes several significant changes.  Outdated terms are 
replaced with simpler, clearer language to en sure that the law is easier to interpret.  
…(Interruptions)… The Bill empowers the Central Government to amend its provisions 
to align with evolving international conventions, ensuring our le gal framework remains 
with current situations…  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) :  Hon. Members, don’t 
disturb the speaker.    Let him speak.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA :  By removing redundant and transitional 
clauses, the Bill streamlines processes an d enhances the overall effectiveness of 
maritime governance.  …(Interruptions)…  There are a lot of positive things in this Bill. 
This Bill has a wide geographical and operational reach, applying to goods 
transported from Indian ports to destinat ions both domestic and international. 
…(Interruptions)… For Andhra Pradesh, its key maritime infrastructure, like 
Visakhapatnam Port, which is vital for inte rnational trade, ensures that the State's 
interests are well represen ted and safeguarded in th e broader framework. 
…(Interruptions)…  It also simplifies legal language.  …(Interruptions)…   
It makes it easier to understand for sh ipping companies, traders and legal 
professionals.  Sir, by carefully balancing the protection of carriers with accountability 
through specific exceptions like acts of God or  quarantine restrictions, the Bill creates 
a comprehensive and fair framework for liability. 
...(Interruptions)... Also, it brings a lot 
of economic and strategic benefits. ...(Interruptions)...  For Andhra Pradesh, this Bill 
represents a transformative opportunity. ...(Interruptions)... The YSR Congress 
Government, under Mr. Jaga n Mohan Reddy, at that ti me, had revitalised four 
greenfield ports at Ramayapatnam, Machilip atnam, Mulapeta and Kakinada with a 
total investment of Rs. 20,000 crore, whic h adds a capacity of 110 million tonnes per 
annum by 2025-26 and genera tes employment opportunities for around 75,000 
people. ...(Interruptions)... This Bill will further comp lement these efforts. 
...(Interruptions)... Sir, I have some suggestions. ...(Interruptions)... There are 
technological and digital considerations. ...(Interruptions)... While the Bill represents a 
significant step forward, we believe there is room for further integration of 
technological considerations. 
...(Interruptions)... The global maritime industry is 
rapidly digitizing and our legislation must keep pace with it. ...(Interruptions)... Also, 
State-level consultation mechanism need to be brought in.  ...(Interruptions)... We 
have to establish a consultation process wi th coastal States fo r future amendments. 
...(Interruptions)... States like Andhra Pradesh, with extensive maritime infrastructure, 
can provide invaluable insights. ...(Interruptions)... There is also environmental and 
sustainability perspective that we need to bring in. ...(Interruptions)... We also need to 
bring in incentive for modernisatio n of ports and shipping practices. 
...(Interruptions)... Also, we need to provide pe riodic review mechanism. 
...(Interruptions)... A clause mandating a periodic review of the Act's provisions would 
ensure that the legislation remains up-to-date over time. ...(Interruptions)... This 
mechanism would prevent the need for freque nt repeals and re-enactments, allowing 
the law to adapt smoothly to changing circumstances. ...(Interruptions)... Also, 
enhanced protections for small and medi um traders need to be brought in. 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
33

...(Interruptions)... Sir, the Carriage of Goods by S ea Bill, 2025 is a forward-looking 
Bill and this legislation addresses the need  for modernization in India's maritime 
sector. ...(Interruptions)... It also reflects our commitment to evolving governance and 
staying relevant in a rapidly changing world. ...(Interruptions)...  O n  b e h a l f  o f  Y S R  
Congress Party and our leader, Mr. Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, I extend our support 
for the passage of this Bill. ...(Interruptions)... At the same time, I urge the Central 
Government to consider the su ggestions made today to ensure that the legislation is 
comprehensive and inclusive. Thank you. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): थȅक यू।  ...(Ëयवधान)... डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी जी।  
 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, माननीय सदÎय आपकी अनुमित से 
बोल रहे हȅ, लेिकन उनके  बोलने क े समय क ु छ माननीय सदÎय उनकी सीट पर जाकर उनको 
obstruct कर रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)..
. रूल  नÇबर 235. ...( Ëयवधान)... आप क ृपा करके  रूल  
नÇबर 235(2) देख लीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आपकी अनुमित से माननीय सदÎय बोल रहे हȅ 
और ये वहाँ जाकर उनको बािधत कर रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): ठीक है।  ...(Ëयव
 धान)...  माननीय बाजपेयी जी, 
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय बाजपेयी जी, आपने अपना Ãवाइंट बोल िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी:  रूल  235 क े तहत ...(Ëयवधान)... आप देिखए, वे बराबर उनकी 
सीट पर जाकर, उनके  माइक पर हÊला कर रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सदÎ य आपकी 
अनुमित से बोल रहे हȅ और उसके  बावजूद उनको बािधत िकया जा रहा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
इसमȂ रूल  235 पूरे  तरीके  से आकिर्षत होता है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ उनके  िखलाफ कारर्वाई 
करने का भी िनवेदन करता हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ित
वारी:  सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी जी, आप कौन से रूल  क े तहत बोल रहे 
हȅ?  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी:  रूल  235. ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता): रूल  235 बड़ा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... उसका कौन सा 
Clause है? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान):  रूल  235. ...(Ëयवधान)... एक टर्ेिडशन यह है िक आपकी पीठ 
से माननीय सभापित जी क े कई बार िनदȃश हȅ िक जब सभा क े नेता या िवपक्ष क े नेता बोलने क े 
िलए खड़े हȗगे, तो सवȘच्च Ģाथिमकता उनको दी जाएगी।  ...( Ëयवधान)... माननीय िवपक्ष क े 
नेता इतनी बार से खड़े हो रहे हȅ और आप मुझे आÌवासन भी दे रहे हȅ, परन्तु उन्हȂ बोलने का 
अवसर नहीं दे रहे हȅ।   ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ इस पर आपकी ËयवÎथा चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी भुबनेǚर कािलता) : िबल  पर िडÎकशन शुरू  हो गया है।   ...(Ëयवध
ान)... इस 
पर िडÎकशन शुरू  हो गया है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... अगर िवपक्ष क े नेता इस िबल पर बोलना चाहȂगे, 
तो उनको जरूर  मौका िदया जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, 
the 25th July, 2025. 
The House then adjourned at fifteen minutes past two of the clock till eleven of the 
clock on Friday, the 25 th July, 2025. 
[ 24 July, 2025 ]
35

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 