 
©


Website :  http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
                 http://parliamentofindia.nic.in  
 
 E-mails : rsedit-e@rss.sansad.in (Floor Version Section) 
                rs-engdebate@rss.sansad.in (English Version Section) 
       rsedit-h@rss.sansad.in (Hindi Version Section) 

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO STARRED QUESTIONS 
  

 
 
O.I.H. 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. 211 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
EXPANSION OF RAILWAY NETWORK 
*211 # DR. SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a)  whether Government is formulating any new master plan to expand the railway network 
over the next five years, if so, the details thereof; 
(b)  the current status of the construction of new railway lines and doubling projects in the 
country along with the details of the projects  that are experiencing delays and the reasons 
therefor; and 
(c) whether Government is planning to upgrade stations under the Station Redevelopment 
Project, if so, the district-wise details thereof? 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2                                                      

 
 
STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PARTS (a) TO (c) OF STARRED 
QUESTION NO. 211 BY DR. SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK ANSWERED IN RAJYA 
SABHA ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING EXPANSION OF RAILWAY NETWORK  
(a) to (c) To increase capacity, expansion of existing rail network has been taken up in a big way. 
As on 01.04.2025, across Indian Railways, 431 Railway infrastructure projects (154 New line, 
33 Gauge Conversion and 244 Doubling) of total length 35,966 Km, costing approx . ₹6.75 lakh 
crore are sanctioned. The summary is as under:- 
Category No. of 
Projects 
Total Length 
NL/GC/DL (km) 
Length 
Commissioned till 
Mar’25 (km) 
Total Exp. upto 
Mar’25 (₹ in Cr) 
New lines 154 16,142 3,036 1,45,318 
Gauge 
Conversion 
33 4,180 2,997 22,753 
Doubling/ 
Multitracking 
244 15,644 6,736 1,22,858 
Total 431 35,966 12,769 2,90,929 
Zone-wise/year-wise details of all Railway projects are made available in public domain on 
Indian Railway’s website. 
The details of commissioning/laying of new tracks across Indian Railways is given below: 
Period New Track Commissioned Average Commissioning of New Tracks 
2009-14 7,599 Km 4.2 Km/day 
2014-25 34,428 Km 8.57 Km/day (more than 2 times) 
 
Details of some of the recently completed important projects in the country are as under: 
 
S.N. Name of Project Cost  
(₹ in crore) 
1 Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramula new line (272 km) 42,278 
2 Bairabi-Sairang new line (51 km) 8,601 
3 Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (1,856 km) 51,219 
4 Araria-Galgalia new line  (111 Km) 4,415 
5 Bogibeel Bridge across River Brahmaputra with link lines (92 km) 5,820 
6 Madurai- Maniyachi-Tuticorin Doubling (160 km) 1,891 
3                                                      

 
 
S.N. Name of Project Cost  
(₹ in crore) 
7 Manmadurai-Rameshwaram-Reconstruction of Pamban bridge (2 km) 705 
8 Koderma - Ranchi new line (202 km) 3,800 
9 Pune-Miraj-Londa Doubling (467 km) 4,670 
10 Palanpur-Samakhayali Doubling (247 km) 2,538 
11 Jharsuguda - Sardega new line   (53 Km) 1,598 
12 Haridaspur-Paradeep new line (82 Km) 2,397 
13 Angul-Sukinda new line (104 Km) 2,834 
14 Nandyal-Yerraguntla  new line (126 km) 1,050 
15 Jaggayyapeta-Mellacheruvu-Janpahad  new line (48 km) 737 
16 Obulavaripalle-Krishnapattnam  new line (113 km) 2,300 
17 Agartala - Sabroom new line (112 Km) 3,170 
18 Agartala - Akhaura new line (5 Km) 865 
19 Kharsia-Dharamjaigarh new line (100 Km) 3,438 
20 Jind-Sonepat new line (89 Km) 800 
21 Rohtak-Mehem-Hansi  new line (64 Km) 889 
22 Kottur-Harihar new line (65 km) 468 
23 Hassan-Bangalore new line (167 km) 1,290 
24 Bidar-Gulbarga new line (110 km) 1,543 
25 Guna-Etawah new line (348 Km)  683 
26 Giridih - Koderma new line  (111 Km)  404 
27 Peddapalli - Nizamabad new line (178 Km) 926 
28 Akkanapet - Medak new line (17 Km) 205 
29 Bhadrachalam Road - Sattupalli new line (56 Km) 990 
30 Maharajganj - Masrakh new line (35 Km) 412 
31 Rajgir -Tilaiya & Natesar-Islampur new line (67 km) 726 
32 Ganga Bridge at Patna (40 Km) 3,555 
33 Ganga Bridge at Munger (14 Km) 3,040 
34 
Ghazipur city-Tarighat new line including Rail-cum Road Bridge over 
Ganga (17 Km) 1,766 
35 Etawah-Mainpuri new line (58 Km) 313 
36 Agra-Etawah new line (110 Km) 427 
37 Rampurhat-Mandarhill new line Rampurhat-Murarai 3rd line (159 Km) 1,500 
 
4                                                      

 
 
Many of above projects were sanctioned long back but they picked up pace after 2014 and could 
be completed. This was possible due to increased Budget grant and adoption of modern 
technology, reforms etc which include the following: 
 Gati Shakti Directorate/Units: The PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan (NMP) was 
launched in October 21 to bring a transformative change in the approach towards planning 
and execution of infrastructural projects pertaining to the transportation sector. 
 
Indian Railways immediately imbibed the principles of Gati Shakti in its project planning 
process. Drawing upon existing resources, a multi -disciplinary Gati Shakti Directorate has 
been created in Indian Railways. Similarly, Gati Shakti Units have been created in Zonal 
railways. The Project DPRs are made after consultation with all stakeholders and other 
infrastructure ministries/departments. 
 
This above initiatives have expedited the appraisal/sanction process and execution o f 
Projects. 
 
 Enhanced power of sanction of Projects to GMs and DRMs: The power of sanction for 
various projects have been enhanced for GMs and DRMs for faster execution of projects. 
 
 Contracts finalisation and management: Full powers have been delegated to  General 
Managers for finalisation of the tenders. Further, Works Contract Management System 
(IRWCMS) and Contractor's e -MB have been implemented for transparent & quick/fast 
contract management and contractor's billing. 
 
 Development of new method of tunne ling i.e. Himalayan Tunneling Method to undertake 
tunneling in the soft Himalayan geology. 
 
 Adoption of high capacity cranes, Cable crane etc. for construction of bridges. 
 
The details of some of the projects completed in difficult terrain are as under: 
 
Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla Rail Link (USBRL) (272 Km)  project was commissioned in 
June' 2025. The USBRL project is one of the most challenging new railway line projects 
undertaken in the country post -independence. The terrain passes through young Himalaya s, 
which are full of geological surprises and numerous challenges. To overcome the challenges, 
various novel solutions were introduced such  as a new method of tunnelling i. e. Himalayan 
tunnelling method was formulated to undertake tunnelling in the soft Hi malayan geology. This 
5                                                      

 
 
method involved several indigenous innovations. Similarly, to cross deep gorges, world's highest 
railway arch bridge Chenab bridge and Indian Railways first cable stayed railway bridge - Anji 
bridge were constructed. Another important facet of the USBRL Project is socio -economic 
benefits to adjacent areas. This project involved construction of over 215 km of approach roads. 
This road network has helped the local population in improvement of their connectivity with 
other areas and also improvement in socio-economic status. 
Most of the activities of this project such as construction of bridges, tunnel, etc gathered 
momentum only after 2014. This was due to ensured availability of adequate funds for this 
important project and adoption of above measures. 
Bairabi Sairang (51.38 Km.)  new line Project: To provide capital connectivity to Border State 
of Mizoram, this new line project has been completed and commissioned recently in September 
2025. With the completion of this project, Aizawl become s the fourth North -Eastern state 
capital, after Guwahati, Naharlagun (for Itanagar) and Agartala, to be connected to the Indian 
Railways network. The Project passes through difficult hilly terrain full of tunnels and bridges. 
New Pamban Bridge:  This bridge  has been constructed in difficult corrosive marine  
environment. The bridge linking Rameswaram to the mainland, stands as a remarkable 
achievement of Indian Engineering on the global stage featuring India's first vertical lift span 
that rises upto a height  of 17 metre, facilitating smooth movement of ships while ensuring 
seamless train operations. 
Details of some of the ongoing important projects in the country are as under: 
 
S.N. Project Name Cost   
(₹ in Crore) 
1 Jalna-Jalgaon New line (174 Km) 5,804 
2 Indore-Manmad New line (360 Km) 18,529 
3 Son Nagar – Andal 3rd and 4th Line (749 Km) 12,334 
4 Dimapur-Kohima New line (82 Km) 15,230 
5 Jiribam-Imphal New line (111 Km) 21,886 
6 Sivok-Rangpo New line (44 Km) 11,973 
7 Rishikesh-Karnaprayag New line (125 km) 38,953 
8 Bhanupalli-Bilaspur-Beri New line(63 Km) 6,753 
6                                                      

 
 
S.N. Project Name Cost   
(₹ in Crore) 
9 Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (1506 Km) 72,785 
10 
Lalitpur-Satna, Rewa-Singrauli & Mahoba-Khajuraho New line (541 
Km) 
8,914 
11 Jhansi-Khairar-Manikpur & Khirar-Bhimsen Doubling (431 Km) 4,330 
12 Trivandrum- Kanyakumari Doubling (87 Km) 3,785 
13 Vizianagram-Titlagarh 3rd line (265 Km) 6,996 
 
 
Punjab 
Budget allocation for Infrastructure projects and safety works, falling fully/partly in the State of 
Punjab is as under: 
 
Period Outlay 
2009-14 ₹225 crore/year 
2025-26 ₹ 5,421 Cr. (More than 24 times) 
 
As on 01.04.2025, 09 projects (04 New line and 05 Doubling) of total length 714 Km, costing ₹ 
21,926 crore, falling fully/partly in the State of Punjab are in different stages of 
planning/sanctioning/execution, out of which 115 Km length has been commissioned and an 
expenditure of ₹ 8,079 crore has been incurred upto March’ 2025. The summary is as under:- 
 
Category No. of 
projects 
Total 
Length  
 
Length 
Commissioned  
Expenditure upto March 
2025 
(₹ in Crore) 
New line 04 252 Km 64 Km 7,359 
Doubling 
/multitracking 
05 462 Km 51 Km 720 
Total 09 714 Km 115 Km 8,079 
 
Details of some of the recently completed projects falling fully/partly in the State of Punjab are 
as under: 
7                                                      

 
 
 
Some of the projects falling fully/partly in the State of Punjab which have been taken up are as 
under: 
 
S.N. Project Cost 
(₹ in Cr.) 
1 Nangal Dam-Talwara - Mukerian New line (143 Km) 2,018 
2 Bhanupalli-Bilaspur-Beri New line(63 Km) 6,753 
3 Qadian-Beas New line(40 km) 842 
4 Ferozpur-Patti New line (26 Km) 300 
5 Rama Mandi( Raman) -Maur Mandi(Maur) via Talwandi 
Sabo ( 29 km) New line  
154 
6 Ludhiana-Kila Raipur Doubling (19 Km)  238 
7 Ludhiana-Mullanpur Doubling (21 Km) 235 
8 Rajpura-Mohali New line (18 km) 443 
 
S. N. Project 
Cost 
(₹ in Cr.) 
1 Chakki Bank-Bharoli Doubling (3 Km) 15 
2 Jakhal- Mansa Doubling (45 Km) 163 
3 Mirthal-Bhangala Beas River Doubling (2.5 Km) 74 
4 Ambala-Dhapper-chandigarh Doubling (45 Km) 339 
5 Mansa – Bhatinda Doubling (49 Km) 216 
6 Amritsar - Chheharta Doubling (7 Km) 31 
7 Jallandhar-Pathankot-Jammu Tawi Doubling (209 km) 850 
8 Kathua-Madhopur Punjab - Doubling including Bridge on Ravi (2.5 Km) 257 
9 Rajpura-Bhatinda Doubling (173 Km) 2,459 
8                                                      

 
 
Government of India is geared up to execute pro jects, however success depends upon the 
support of Government of Punjab. For  instance, details of some major projects which are 
delayed due to land acquisition are as under: - 
 
S.N. Name of the project 
Total land 
required 
(in Ha) 
Land 
acquired 
(in Ha) 
Balance Land to be 
acquired 
(in Ha) 
1 Firozpur-Patti New line 166 0 166 
2 Alal-Himmatana Chord line 20 0 20 
3 Qadian-Beas New line 151 0 151 
4 
Rama Mandi( Raman)- Talwandi 
Sabo New line 
85 0 85 
 
Issues pending with State Government: 
Firozpur-Patti New line (26 km) situated fully in Punjab is an important project near the 
international border. Land for project was to be handed over free of cost for this project by State 
Govt. of Punjab. Total 166 Ha land is to be acquired in the districts of Firozpur  and Tarn Taran. 
Award for entire land has been published in Mar ’ 23. However, disbursement of award has not 
been done by state govt. considering delay in execution of this important border area project, 
Ministry of Railways has decided to take up Firozpur -Patti New line (26 km) through its own 
funding. 
 
Similarly, Qadian-Beas new line was sanctioned at a cost of ₹205 crore. However, the project 
could not progress due to lack of co -operation from State Governmen t in land acquisition. 
Accordingly, the project was kept on hold in 2019. However, on public demand and considering 
importance of this project, it has now been decided to take the project forward. 
Co-operation of State Government is critical to execute above important infrastructure projects. 
In last three years i.e. 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and current financial year 2025-26, 22 surveys 
(09 New line, 12 Doubling and 01 Gauge Conversion) covering a total length of 2,101 Km have 
been taken up falling partly/fully in the State of Punjab. 
Sanction of any railway project depend upon many parameters/factors which include the 
following: 
 
9                                                      

 
 
 Anticipated traffic projections and Remunerativeness of the proposed route 
 First and last mile connectivity provided by the project 
 Connection of missing links and providing additional route 
 Augmentation of congested/saturated lines 
 Demands raised by State Governments/Central Ministries/Public representatives, 
 Railway’s operational requirements 
 Socio-economic considerations 
 Overall availability of funds 
 
Completion of Railway project/s depends on various factors which include the following: 
 Land acquisition by State Government 
 Forest clearance  
 Shifting of infringing utilities 
 Statutory clearances from various authorities  
 Geological and topographical conditions of area 
 Law and order situation in the area of project site 
 Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc. 
 
All these factors affect the completion time and cost of the project/s. 
 
Various steps taken by the Government for effective and speedy implementation of rail projects 
include: 
 
 Substantial increase in allocation of funds. 
 Delegation of powers at field level. 
 Close monitoring of progress of project at various levels. 
 Regular follow up with State Governments and concerned authorities for expeditious land 
acquisition, forestry  and Wildlife clearances and for resolving other issues pertaining to 
projects. 
 
Station Redevelopment 
Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme  for redevelopment of stations 
with a long-term approach. 
10                                                      

 
 
The scheme involves preparation of master plans and the  implementation in phases to improve 
the stations. The master planning includes: 
 
 Improvement of access to station and circulating areas 
 Integration of station with both sides of city 
 Improvement of station building 
 Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths 
 Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger traffic 
 Provision of lift/escalators/ramp 
 Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms 
 Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One Product’ 
 Parking areas, Multimodal integration 
 Amenities for Divyangjans 
 Better passenger information systems 
 Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business  meetings, landscaping, etc. 
keeping in view the necessity at each station 
 
The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly  solutions, provision of 
ballastless tracks etc. as pe r necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre at the 
station in the long term. 
 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified for development under this  scheme. Development 
works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme have been taken up at a good pace. 
Till now, works of 160 stations has been completed.  
Names of these stations are as following: 
Alnavar. Amb Andaura. Ambikapur, Amgaon, Anandpur Sahib, Anara, Ayodhya Dham, Badami, 
Bagalkot, Baijnath Paprola, Balrampur, Bantaw ala, Barabhum, Baramati, Bareilly City, 
Baripada, Barmer, Barpali, Begumpet, Beohari, Bhanupratappur, Bhilai, Bijnor, Bimalgarh. 
Bommidi, Bu ndi, Chanda Fort. Changanassery,  Chidambaram, Chinchpokli, Chinna Salem, 
Chirayinkeezh, Cuttack, Dakor, Derol, De shnoke, Devlali, Dharwad, Dhule,  Dongargarh, 
Fatehabad, Fatehpur, Fatehpur Shekhawati, Gadag, Godda, Gogameri, Gokak Road, Gola 
Gokarnath, Gomti Nagar, Govardhan, Govind Garh, Govindpuri, Govindpur Road, Haibargaon, 
Haldia, Hapa, Harpalpur, Hathras City, Hoda l, Idgah Agra Jn., Izzatnagar, Jaisalmer, Jam 
Jodhpur, Jam Wanthali, Joychandi Pahar, Kakinada Town, Kalyani Ghoshpara, Kamakhyaguri, 
11                                                      

 
 
Kanalus Jn., Karaikkudi Jn., Karamsad, Karimnagar, Katni South, Kedgaon, Khairthal, Koppal, 
Kosamba Jn., Kulitturai, Kutti puram, Lasalgaon, Limbdi, Lohardaga, Lonand Jn., Mahe, 
Mahuva, Mailani, Mandal Garh, Mandawar  Mahwa Road, Madhupur, Manaparai, Mandi 
Dabwali, Mangalagiri, Mannargudi, Matunga, M.C.S. Chhatarpur, Mithapur, Morappur, Morbi, 
Muktsar, Munirabad, Murtizapur Jn. . Nainpur Jn., Nandura, Narmadapuram (Hoshangabad), 
Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Itwari Junction, Okha, Orchha, Palitana, Panagarh, Panki Dham, 
Parel, Parlakhemundi, Pirpainti, Piska, Pokhrayan, Pollachi Jn., Polur, Porbandar, Rajgarh, 
Rajmahal, Rajula Jn.. Ramghat Halt, Rayanpadu, Saharanpur Jn., Sahibzada Ajit Singh Mohali, 
Sahebgunj, Samakhiyali, Samaipatti, Sankarpur, Savda, Seoni, Shahad, Shajapur, Sholavandan, 
Shoranur Jn., Shridham, Siddharth Nagar, Sihor Jn., Siuri,  Sri Bala Brahmeswara  Jogulamba, 
Srirangam, Srivilliputtur, St. Thomas Mount, Sullurpeta, Suraimanpur, Swaminarayan Chappia, 
Talcher, Tamluk, Thawe, Thiruvarur Jn.. Tiruvannamalai, Tuni, Ujhani, Urkura, Utran, 
Vadakara, Vadala Road, Vriddhachalam Jn., Wadakancheri, Warangal. 
 
The works at o ther stations have also been taken up at good pace and progress of some of 
the stations is as given below: 
 
Tirupati station: The structural framework of new main entry station building on South 
side and 2 nos. air concourses have been completed. The finishing works of new main entry 
station building on South side and air concourses, structural work of station building on 
North side, platform shelter works, lift, escalators etc. have been taken up. 
 
Nellore station:  The structural frameworks, brickwork and plastering of station buildings 
on both East and West sides and structural work of air concourse have been completed. The 
finishing works of station building on both East and West side and air concourse, extension 
work of subway, water tanks and sewage treatment plant have been taken up. 
 
Yesvantpur station: The structural works of East side station building, civil works of East 
side sub-station, East side elevated road and Multi Level Car parking have been complete d. 
The finishing works of East side station building, East side elevated road and Multi Level 
Car parking, sewage treatment plant, structural work of West side station building and air 
concourse have been taken up. 
 
Bangalore Cantt. station : The works of 2 4 m wide diversion road on the South side, 
training centre, hostel on North side and structural work of South side station building have 
been completed. The finishing work South side station building, structural work of North 
side station building and Foot Over Bridge have been taken up. 
12                                                      

 
 
 
Rameswaram station : The structural works of East/North terminal building, departure 
forecourt, arrival forecourt, residential tower, sub -station building, desalination plant and 
sewage treatment plant have been completed. ⁠The masonry works of East terminal building, 
finishing works of North terminal building, departure forecourt, arrival forecourt, 
residential tower, platform upgradation including platform shelter and revamping of 
existing waiting hall have been taken up. 
 
Safdarjung station : The work of signal building, station building, plumbing and 
firefighting, structural work of operational building up to terrace floor slab, air concourse 
foundation and pedestals have been completed. The station building electrical and  low 
voltage work, platform refurbishing work, finishing work of operational building, overhead 
tank and air concourse have been taken up. 
 
Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations on Indian 
Railways is a continuous an d ongoing process and works in this regard are undertaken as 
per requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. The priority for 
development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations is accorded to 
higher category of s tation over lower category of station while sanctioning and executing 
the works. 
 
Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety of 
passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, 
heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due to 
brownfield related challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, 
optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements,  operation of 
trains without hindering passenger movement, speed restrictions due to works carried out in 
close proximity of tracks and high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors affect the 
completion time.  
 
Development / Upgradation / Modernisation  of stations including under Amrit Bharat 
Station Scheme is generally funded under Plan Head -53 ‘Customer Amenities’. The details 
of allocation and expenditure under Plan Head -53 are maintained Zonal Railway -wise and 
not work-wise or station wise or state -wise. The fund allocation of ₹ 12,118 crore has been 
made for the financial year 2025 -26 under Plan Head –53 and expenditure (up to October, 
2025) of ₹ 7,253 crore has been incurred so far. 
***** 
13                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO-212 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ADDITIONAL COVERAGE UNDER PRADHAN MANTRI FASAL BIMA YOJANA 
 
*212 SHRI IRANNA KADADI: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the new guidelines under the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) includes 
coverage for losses due to wild animal attacks, if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons for the 
same; 
(b) the States and districts where this additional coverage has been implemented; 
(c) mechanism developed for real-time claim registration through the crop insurance mobile app; and 
(d) the extent of compensation disbursed and number of farmers benefitted, particularly in forest-fringe 
areas where such damage is recurrent, reflecting Government’s commitment to comprehensive crop 
protection? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHAUHAN) 
 
 
(a) to (d) : A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
  
14                                                      

STATEMENT REFERRED TO PART (a) TO (d) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED QUESTION NO. 
212 FOR 19/12/2025  REGARDING ADDITIONAL COVERAGE UNDER PRADHAN MANTRI 
FASAL BIMA YOJANA  
 
(a) & (b) :  The Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) is voluntary for the States as well as 
farmers.  The scheme provides for comprehensive risk insurance against crop damage due to non-
preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post-harvest for the crops/areas notified by the concerned 
State Government.   The losses to crops due to wild animals, being preventable in nature, were not 
covered earlier.  However, at the request of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and 
State Governments, States have been allowed to notify the losses by wild animals on individual 
assessment as add on cover where the risk is perceived to be sustainable and is identifiable.  Detailed 
protocol for such coverage has been given in the Operational Guidelines of the scheme.    As per 
provisions in guidelines, the add-on coverage is optional for farmers and applicable premium is 
required to be borne by farmers.  However, State Government may consider providing subsidy on 
coverage wherever notified.   So far, no State Government has notified the crop loss by wild animals 
under the scheme. 
 
(c) :  To ensure timely reporting and transparent loss assessment, the Government has developed a 
real-time claim registration mechanism through the Crop Insurance Mobile App and the Krishi 
Rakshak Portal & Helpline (14447) for localized claims.  Farmers are required to intimate crop loss 
within 72 hours using the mobile app or the authorised channels (bank branches, CSCs, insurance 
intermediaries). The system captures geo-tagged photographs, GPS coordinates, timestamps, and 
farmer details, enabling immediate digital transmission of loss reports to insurers and district 
authorities. The loss assessor is required to be appointed within 48 hours, and the joint assessment is 
conducted using the Crop Loss Assessment App, ensuring real-time data upload onto the National Crop 
Insurance Portal (NCIP), which serves as the single source of truth for claim settlement. 
(d) :  All farmers including sharecroppers and tenant farmers growing the notified crops in the 
notified areas are eligible for coverage under PMFBY.  However, farmers should have insurable 
interest on the insured crops and lands. Such farmers are required to submit necessary documentary 
evidence of land records prevailing in the State {Records of Right (RoR)}, Land Possession Certificate 
(LPC) etc.) and/or applicable contract/ agreement details/ other documents notified/ permitted by 
concerned State Governments/UT Administrations pertaining to sharecroppers/tenant farmers and the 
same should be defined by the respective States/UTs in the notification itself. However, Tribal farmers 
and forest dwellers having cultivation in forest land under Forest Right Act (FRA) are also allowed to 
be insured under the scheme.  The farmers cultivating community owned land are also allowed to be 
covered under the scheme with certification from village head or revenue authorities.   Special drive 
for enrollment of these farmers on National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) is made in every season.    
All such farmers are also required to essentially submit Aadhaar Number and declaration about the 
crop sown/ crops intended to be sown. 
13.35 lakh farmer applications covering 3.06 lakh ha. area notified  as forest land under FRA 
by the States has been insured under PMFBY and claims of Rs. 85.50 crore have been paid to 1.26  
lakh farmer  applications during 2023-24 and 2024-25. 
     
 
****** 
15                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. 213 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
PROMOTION OF MILLETS 
 
*213. DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government is taking steps to promote millets in the country; 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 
(c) whether Government is encouraging production of quality seeds for millet; 
(d) if so, the details thereof; and 
(e) the details of research and extension activities undertaken by Government during the last 
three years for promotion of millets in the country? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 (SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN) 
 
(a) to (e): A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
  
16                                                      

STATEMENT IN RESPECT OF PARTS (a) TO (e) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO.213 TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 REGARDING 
“PROMOTION OF MILLETS” 
 
(a) & (b):  The Government has taken various initiatives to promote millet cultivation, 
processing and consumption across the country alongwith incentivizing food processing units, 
start-ups, and exporters engaged in millet-based products. In 2023, the International Year of 
Millets (IYM) was celebrated and it successfully raised awareness about the nutritional and 
health benefits of millet consumption and facilitated discourse on important issues related to 
millets which included its production, value chain development, market linkages and research. 
To increase the production and productivity of millets (Shree Anna), the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is implementing a Sub Mission on Nutri-Cereals under the 
National Food Security & Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) in the country and various interventions 
benefitting the farmers and the millet sector are implemented through the scheme.  
In addition, the Government of India also assists States to promote millets under the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) component of the Pradhan Mantri - Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (PM RKVY) according to their own needs and priorities.  
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) is implementing the Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme for Millet-Based Products (PLISMBP) to promote the use of millets 
in food products and encourage value addition. To facilitate the export of millets and millet-
based products, the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
(APEDA) has undertaken several initiatives, including capacity-building programmes, virtual 
buyer-seller meets, global marketing campaigns, e-catalogues and establishment of an Export 
Promotion Forum (EPF) to strengthen the export ecosystem for millets. In addition, assistance 
is being extended to start-ups engaged in the development of value-added millet products, 
particularly in the Ready-to-Cook (RTC) and Ready-to-Eat (RTE) segments. Millets have also 
been integrated in major national nutrition and welfare programmes.  
 
(c) to (e): The DA&FW advises the States and seed producing agencies from time to time to 
place the breeder seeds indents of newly released High Yielding Varieties (HYVs) of different 
crops including millets for further multiplication into foundation and certified seeds, so as to 
make available required seeds of these crop varieties to the farmers in the Country. A total of 
2588 Qtl. of Breeder seeds of various millets have been produced during last 3 years (2022-25) 
against the indent of 1290 quintals for further seed multiplication, as reported by ICAR.  
Further, as reported by the States, sufficient certified/quality seeds of millets were 
available in the country during last two years and the current year availability of millet seeds 
is 6.65 lakh quintals.  
17                                                      

The Government of India has recognized the ICAR-Indian Institute of Millets Research 
(IIMR), Hyderabad as “Global Centre of Excellence on Millets”. To strengthen the research 
collaboration and public awareness of millets globally, a new initiative viz., “Millets And 
otHer Ancient GRains International ReSearcH Initiative (MAHARISHI) has been adopted 
since the G20 Presidency.  
In recent years, 110 Millets varieties have been released by the ICAR for cultivation in 
different agro-ecologies of country. Forty millet varieties have been developed and released 
during 2014-25 for cultivation on farmer’s field under drought/moisture stress tolerant/water 
stress/low rainfall areas. In addition to developing high yielding climate resilient varieties of 
millets, the ICAR-Indian Institute of Millets Research (IIMR), Hyderabad is extending support 
as a knowledge partner with various State Millet Mission/Agriculture departments intended to 
increase public awareness on the health benefits of millets and their suitability for cultivation 
under tough conditions marked by climate change. 
Under the National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM), the financial 
assistance is available/provided for different seed related activities, so that sufficient seeds 
could be made available to the farmers. 
***** 
18                                                      

 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO-*214 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
DECLINE IN TEXTILE AND APPAREL EXPORTS 
 
*214. SMT. RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL: 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) decline recorded in textile and apparel exports in 2025;  
 
(b) factors responsible therefor;  
 
(c) the States most affected;  
 
(d) impact on small textile units; and  
 
(e) steps taken to revive export competitiveness? 
 
 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF TEXTILES  
(SHRI GIRIRAJ SINGH) 
 
(a) to (e):  A statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
 
  
19                                                      

 
 
STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO THE RAJYA SABHA STARRED QUESTION 
NO.*214 FOR 19.12.2025 REGARDING DECLINE IN TEXTILE AND APPAREL EXPORTS 
ASKED BY SMT. RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL. 
 
(a) to (d): India’s exports of textiles and apparel stood at US$ 32,560.04 million  during January–
November 2025, registering a marginal growth of 0.26% compared to US$ 32,474.88 million recorded 
during the corresponding period of the previous year.  (Source: Quick estimates of November 2025 -
DGCIS/Department of Commerce).  Exports are a function of demand and supply and depend on factors 
such as global demand conditions/slowdown, order flows, logistics, and tariff and trade policies 
prevailing in international markets.  
(e): The Government is implementing various schemes/initiatives to boost the Indian textile and 
apparel sector and enhance its competitiveness.  The major schemes/initiatives include PM Mega 
Integrated Textile Regions and Apparel (PM MITR A) Parks Scheme to create a modern, integrated, 
world class textile infrastructure; Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme focusing on MMF Fabric, 
MMF Apparel and Technical Textiles to boost large scale manufacturing and enhancing competitiveness; 
National Technical Textiles Mission focusing on Research Innovation & Development, Promotion and 
Market Development; SAMARTH – Scheme for Capacity Building in Textile Sector with the objective 
providing demand driven, placement oriented, skilling program; Silk S amagra-2 for comprehensive 
development of sericulture value chain; National Handloom Development Program for end to end support 
for handloom sector. Ministry of Textiles is also implementing National Handicrafts Development 
Programme and Comprehensive Handicrafts Cluster Development Scheme for promotion of handicrafts.   
The Government aims for promotion of Export Diversification through identification of 40 focus 
countries in the textiles and apparel sector. It has also signed 15 Free Trade Agreements (FTA s) and 6 
Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) with its trading partners.   Export competitiveness is further 
supported through Schemes such as  Rebate of State and Central Taxes and Levies 
(RoSCTL) and Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDT EP) schemes.  In addition, 
the government has approved the Export Promotion Mission implemented through NIRYAT 
PROTSAHAN and NIRYAT DISHA for trade finance, market access, branding and compliance and 
Credit Guarantee Scheme for Exporters (CGSE)  providing 100% credit guarantee particularly benefitting 
MSMEs. 
**** 
 
 
 
  
  
 
20                                                      

  
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. *215 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
  
BOOSTING EXPORTS FROM ODISHA 
  
*215.  SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA 
  
Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be pleased to state :- 
  
(a) whether Government proposes to expand export infrastructure at Paradeep and Dhamra; 
(b) the major export items from the State of Odisha under One District One Product 
(ODOP) Scheme; 
(c) assistance provided to MSME exporters from districts like Puri, Cuttack, Bhubaneswar 
and Balasore; 
(d) status of GI-tag promotion of Odisha's unique products; and 
(e) steps taken to include more districts of Odisha in District Export Hub initiative? 
  
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
  
  
(a) to (e) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
  
****** 
  
  
  
  
21                                                      

STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PART (a) TO (e) OF RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO.215 FOR 19.12.2025 ASKED BY SHRI SUBHASISH 
KHUNTIA REGARDING “BOOSTING EXPORTS FROM ODISHA” 
  
(a) The Paradip Port is the Major Port in the State of Odisha. The Paradip  Port Authority has 
indicated that the port capacity has already been increased to the tune of 55 MTPA (Million 
Tonnes Per Annum) in the last 5 years and now stands at 289 MTPA and that development of 
a new dock complex, viz. Western Dock, with 25 MTPA capacity is under implementation and 
due for completion by 2028. It has also been indicated that based on the upcoming planned 
projects, capacity of the port will enhance to 350+ MTPA by 2030.   Ports other than Major 
Ports (Non-Major Ports) are under the administrative control of the State Government. Dhamra 
is an operational Non-Major Port in the State of Odisha.  
  
(b) ‘One District One Product’ (ODOP) is an initiative by the Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) with the aim to sel ect, brand, and promote at least one 
product from each district of the country for enabling holistic growth across all regions. The 
State of Odisha has identified 56 products from the 30 districts of the State.  These 56 products 
fall under seven different sectors, viz., Agriculture (23); Food Processing (1); Handicraft (17); 
Handloom (5); Manufacturing (3); Marine (6) and Textile (1).   The State of Odisha has 
informed that Marine products, Handloom & Cotton products, Handicraft products, Rice, 
Granite products, Aluminium ingot, and Cashew as being the major exportable items under 
ODOP from Odisha. 
  
(c) The Government of India has taken many measures for MSME exporters across the country 
including districts like Puri, Cuttack, Bhubaneswar and Balasore. The details of the wide 
spectrum of support provided by the Government to MSME exporters are at Annexure-I. 
  
(d) The registration and approval of Geographical Indications (GI) products are governed by 
the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Pr otection) Act, 1999 and the Rules 
framed thereunder. The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) 
promotes Geographical Indications (GI) as a whole at national and international level and not 
state-wise. The Government is taking several initiatives to enhance the international visibility 
of Indian GI products. GI protection and recognition provisions are being included in ongoing 
trade negotiations, and GI producers are being supported to participate in international trade 
fairs such as Autumn Fair Birmingham and Bazar Berlin. Short promotional films have been 
created and disseminated through several media platforms for increased consumer awareness 
and brand building. GI products are also showcased in forums such as the GRATK Diplomatic 
Conference, and digital catalogue of 419 GIs has been disseminated to Indian Missions abroad. 
The total number of registered GI-Tag Products from the State of Odisha is 26, details of which 
are at Annexure–II. 
APEDA (Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority) has taken 
steps for promotion of export of APEDA scheduled GI-tag products from Odisha. Fifteen (15) 
Export-Oriented Capacity Development Programmes were conducted during 2025 -26 (till 
date) encouraging exporters to explore array of products including GI products for promotion 
22                                                      

in the global market place. Further, for promotion of GI-Tagged product, APEDA has recently 
facilitated the export of GI-tagged Nayagarh Kanteimundi Brinjal and Odisha Khajuri Guda to 
UAE. 
  
(e) Under the Districts as Export Hubs (DEH) initiative, the Directorate General of Foreign 
Trade, Department of Commerce, aims at export promotion, manufacturing and employment 
generation at the grassroots level by involving States and Districts as meaningful stakeholders, 
in line with the AtmaNirbhar Bharat Mission, Make in India for the world, and Vocal for Local. 
DEH was launched in August 2019 and has been notified under Chapter 3 of Foreign Trade 
Policy (FTP) 2023. The initiative seeks to channelize the potential and diverse identity of each 
district to promote exports of identified goods and services through institutional mechanisms 
such as State Export Promotion Committees (SEPC) and District Export Promotion 
Committees (DEPC), which support export promotion and address bottlenecks for balanced 
regional development across the country. Under DEH, the following have been undertaken: (i) 
Products/ Services with export potential have been identified in 734 districts across the country 
(the p roducts/services identified under DEH in the State of Odisha are enumerated at  
Annexure-III); (ii) SEPC and DEPC have been constituted in all the 36 States/ UTs; (iii) State 
Export Strategy has been prepared in 28 States/UTs; (iv) DEPC meetings have been conducted 
in 701 Districts; (v) District Export Action Plans have been prepared for 590 districts out of 
which 249 are formally notified by DEPCs. These plans include a broad strategy for promotion 
of exports from districts. 
  
***** 
  
  
  
  
23                                                      

ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PART (c) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO.215 FOR 19.12.2025 ASKED BY SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA 
REGARDING ‘BOOSTING EXPORTS FROM ODISHA’ 
  
Annexure I 
Details of the support provided by the Government to MSME exporters 
  
(1)  The Central Government has introduced the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Exporters 
(CGSE) for providing 100% credit guarantee coverage by National Credit Guarantee Trustee 
Company Limited (NCGTC) to Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) for extending additional 
credit facilities upto Rs.20,000 crore to eligible exporters, including MSMEs. It will strengthen 
liquidity, ensure smooth business operations, reinforce India’s progress towards Aatmanirbhar 
Bharat. 
  
(2)       The Central Government has also approv ed Export Promotion Mission (EPM) — a 
flagship initiative announced in the Union Budget 2025 –26 to strengthen India’s export 
competitiveness, particularly for MSMEs, first -time exporters, and labour -intensive sectors. 
The Mission will provide a comprehensive, flexible, and digitally driven framework for export 
promotion, with a total outlay of Rs.25,060 crore for FY 2025–26 to FY 2030–31. EPM marks 
a strategic shift from multiple fragmented schemes to a single, outcome -based, and adaptive 
mechanism that can respond swiftly to global trade challenges and evolving exporter needs. 
  
(3)       Under the International Cooperation Scheme being implemented by the Ministry of 
Micro Small and Medium Enterprises, financial assistance is provided on reimbursement basis 
to the eligible Central/State Government organizations and Industry Associations to facilitate 
visits/participation of MSMEs in international exhibitions/fairs/buyer-seller meets held abroad 
and for organising international conferences/seminar/workshops i n India with the aim of 
technology upgradation, modernization, joint venture etc. Further, reimbursement is provided 
to the first -time Micro & Small Exporters on export shipments for costs incurred on 
Registration-cum-Membership Certification (RCMC) with E xport Promotion Councils 
(EPCs), Export Insurance Premium and Testing & Quality Certification for export.  The 
Ministry of MSME has signed MoUs with 21 EPCs, Export Credit Guarantee Corporation Ltd. 
(ECGC) and National Small Industries Corporation Ltd. (NSIC) as implementing agencies for 
reimbursement of these interventions. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
has developed a dedicated support system for export promotion in MSME Sector by 
establishing 65 Export Facilitation Centres (EFCs) in its field organizations namely MSME -
Development and Facilitation Offices, MSME Technology Centres and MSME Testing 
Centres. 
  
In Odisha, two EFCs at MSME -DFO, Cuttack and  Central Tool Room & Training Centre 
(CTTC), Bhubaneswar have been established through  which a total of 253 MSMEs have 
availed services during 2019 -20 to 2024-25. 
(4)       Under the National Industrial Corridor Development Programme (NICDP), 
implemented by the DPIIT, the state SPVs allot land as per land allotment policy by following 
conducive fiscal and policy measures being extended to investors including MSMEs. Several 
relaxations are also offered to potential investors (including MSMEs) by SPVs, including 
discount to anchor/early -bird investors; lease premium payment flexibility; optio n for 
Differential Lease period, etc. 
24                                                      

  
(5) The Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) supports MSME exporters 
through Technology Development for Specific Value -added Marine Products (TDSVMP) 
scheme to assist investment in seafood value addit ion infrastructure which provides financial 
assistance with priority to MSME units. This promotes inclusive growth, strengthens the 
seafood processing ecosystem and encourages the export of value-added marine products from 
India. 
  
(6)       Bharat Trade N et (BTN), announced in the Union Budget 2025, is a flagship digital 
public infrastructure by DGFT under the Ministry of Commerce & Industry. It seeks to digitise 
trade documents, improve access to export finance, and integrate India’s trade ecosystem with 
global standards. The initiative enhances MSME competitiveness by enabling simpler, 
paperless documentation, reducing compliance burdens, and facilitating faster, secure trade 
transactions recognised globally. This provides easier access to export finance and helps 
MSMEs overcome trade barriers more efficiently. 
  
(7)       The introduction of grassroots programs such as Districts as Export Hubs (DEHs) and 
E-Commerce Export Hubs (ECEHs) enables MSMEs, start -ups, and artisans to access 
international markets at lower costs and with simplified export processes. 
  
(8)       Strengthening infrastructure through the National Logistics Policy and PM Gati Shakti 
enhances multimodal connectivity and reduces logistics costs, directly benefiting MSME 
exporters by easing supply chain bottlenecks. 
  
(9)       Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India (ECGC), the Export Credit Agency under 
Department of Commerce provides credit insurance covers to exporters against non -payment 
risks by the overseas buyers due to Commerc ial and Political reasons, empowering Indian 
exporters, particularly MSMEs, to venture into global markets with confidence. ECGC also 
provides Export Credit Insurance for Banks (ECIB) against risks in export credit lending to the 
exporter-borrowers. The EC IB covers facilitate the availability of affordable and adequate 
credit to the exporters.  The Company is headquartered in Mumbai with four regional offices 
and 46 branch offices pan India, including one at Bhubaneshwar which serves as local point of 
contact for exporters and banks in Odisha. In order to safeguard India’s export momentum and 
support Indian exporters, particularly MSMEs, ECGC has taken a range of initiatives.   
  
(10)      Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) is implementing a centrally sponsored 
"PM Formalisation of Micro food processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme" for providing 
financial, technical and business support for setting up of new/ upgradation of micro food 
processing enterprises in the country. The scheme is operational from 2020-21 to 2025-26 with 
an outlay of Rs. 10,000 Crore. The PMFME scheme is designed to address the challenges faced 
by the micro enterprises. The scheme aims to enhance the competitiveness of micro-enterprises 
in the unorganized segment of the food p rocessing industry and promote formalization of the 
sector. The scheme provides support of credit-linked grant of 35% of the eligible project cost, 
seed capital of up to Rs. 40,000, capacity building for beneficiaries, and handholding support 
for the formalization of units. 2726 loans have been sanctioned for micro food processing units 
for the State of Odisha including 309 loans in Puri, 246 loans in Cuttack, 258 loans in 
Bhubaneswar, and 160 loans in Balasore. 
  
  
25                                                      

ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PART (d)  OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO.215 FOR 19.12.2025 ASKED BY SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA 
REGARDING ‘BOOSTING EXPORTS FROM ODISHA’ 
Annexure-II 
Details of registered GI-Tag Products from the State of Odisha 
SL 
No. Geographical Indications Goods Geographical 
Area 
1 Kotpad Handloom Fabric Handicraft Odisha 
2 Orissa Ikat Handicraft Odisha 
3 Pipli Applique Work  Handicraft Odisha 
4 Konark Stone Carving (logo) Handicraft Odisha 
5 Orissa Pattachitra Handicraft Odisha 
6 Khandua Saree And Fabrics  Handicraft Odisha 
7 Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics Handicraft Odisha 
8 Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics  Handicraft Odisha 
9 Sambalpuri Bandha Saree & Fabrics  Handicraft Odisha 
10 Bomkai Saree & Fabrics  Handicraft Odisha 
11 Habaspuri Saree & Fabrics  Handicraft Odisha 
12 Berhampur Patta (Phoda Kumbha) Saree & Joda Handicraft Odisha 
13 Ganjam Kewda Rooh Manufactured Odisha 
14 Ganjam Kewda Flower Agricultural Odisha 
15  Orissa Pattachitra (Logo) Handicraft Odisha 
16 Kandhamal Haladi Agricultural Odisha 
17 Odisha Rasagola Food Stuff Odisha 
18 Odisha Khajuri Guda Food Stuff Odisha 
19 Dhenkanal Magji Food Stuff Odisha 
20 Similipal Kai Chutney of Odisha  Food Stuff Odisha 
21 Nayagarh Kanteimundi Brinjal Agricultural Odisha 
22 Cuttack Rupa Tarakasi (Silver Filigree)  Handicraft Odisha 
23 Kapadaganda: Dungaria Kondh Embroidery 
Shawl  Handicraft Odisha 
24 Kendrapara Rasabali Food Stuff Odisha 
25 Koraput Kalajeera Rice  Agricultural Odisha 
26 Painting of Lanjia Saura (IDITAL), Odisha  Handicraft Odisha 
  
 
  
26                                                      

ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PART (e) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO.215 FOR 19.12.2025 ASKED BY SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA 
REGARDING ‘BOOSTING EXPORTS FROM ODISHA’ 
Annexure-III 
Details of the products/services identified under the District Export Hub initiative 
(DEH) in the State Odisha 
  
Sl. 
No. 
District of Odisha Products/Services identified under DEH 
1.   Angul Aluminium Ingot, SteeI ingots 
2.   Balangir Cotton, Onion 
3.   Balasore Tyres, Paper & Corrugated Boxes 
4.   Bargarh Handloom 
5.   Bhadrak Rice, Fish 
6.   Boudh Handloom Patta Saree 
7.   Cuttack Silver Filigree goods, Handloom of Maniabandha 
8.   Deogarh Watermelon, Orange, Litchi 
9.   Dhenkanal Handicraft,Cashew 
10.   Gajapati Rice, Cashew kernel, Granite Slab, Turmeric oil 
11.   Ganjam Ganjam Kewda Rooh, Ganjam Kewda Flower, 
Handloom, Cashew, Granite Slab 
12.   Jajpur Stonecarving/Handicraft 
13.   Jagatsinghapur Plastic Products 
14.   Jharsuguda Aluminium Ingot, Chilli & Ginger 
15.   Kalahandi Handicraft (WoodCarving) 
16.   Kandhamal Kandhamal Turmeric, Turmeric 
17.   Kendrapara Golden grass product 
18.   Kendujhar Minerals 
19.   Khordha(Bhubaneswar) Marine products 
20.   Koraput Cashew 
21.   Malkangiri Granite Slab, Turmeric, Millets, Processed Fish 
22.   Mayurbhanj Rice 
23.   Nabarangpur Maize 
24.   Nayagarh Brass & Bell Metal 
25.   Nuapada Cotton, Onion 
26.   Puri (Pipili) Pipli Applique Work, Handicraft (Pattachitra) & Marine 
Products 
27.   Rayagada Cotton Tamarind 
28.   Sambalpur Sambalpuri Bandha Saree & Fabrics 
Aluminium Ingot & Chilli 
29.   Subarnapur Bomkei Saree & Fabrics (GI Tag) 
30.   Sundargarh(Rourkela) Refractory Cement 
 
***** 
27                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO.216 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
CHANGES IN FREIGHT STRUCTURE FOR BULK TRANSPORTATION OF CEMENT 
 
*216. DR. SUMER SINGH SOLANKI: 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) the changes in the freight structure for bulk cement transportation through containers; 
(b) the broad features of the revised rate system; 
(c) whether any measures have been introduced to promote the use of tank containers and bulk 
cement terminals; and 
(d) if so, the expected impact of these initiatives on transportation costs, logistics efficiency and 
environmental sustainability in bulk cement movement? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
(a) to (d): A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
28                                                      

STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PARTS (a) TO (d) OF STARRED QUESTION 
NO. 216 BY DR. SUMER SINGH SOLANKI ANSWERED IN RAJYA SABHA ON 19.12.2025 
REGARDING CHANGES IN FREIGHT STRUCTURE FOR BULK TRANSPORTATION OF 
CEMENT 
(a) to (d) With a focus on the housing requirements of the poor and middle-income families, 
Indian Railways has undertaken rationalisation of  the freight structure for bulk cement 
transportation in tank containers. The new policy is expected to facilitate increase in rail modal 
share, improve logistics efficiency and promote sustainable transportation. The freight charges for 
transportation of commodities in containers are determined by Container Train Operators (CTOs) 
based on market conditions. Indian Railways levies only the haulage charges for movement of the 
Container trains. 
The new policy which intends to reform the cement transportation and its logistics has the 
following broad features:-  
1. A specially designed tank containers developed as a ‘Make in India’ product has been 
introduced for transportation of bulk cement from the production centres to consumption 
hubs across the country covering larger distances. This enables low cost transportation of 
cement to major cities, towns and rural blocks.  
2. Transportation of bulk cement on tank container ensures the ready availability of cement at 
construction site/ Ready Mix Concrete plants. The cement transported in bulk can also be 
bagged for further distribution to other interior locations.   
3. This reform aims at a shift from the traditional movement of cement in bags to a container 
based rail logistic providing end-to-end pollution free handling, eliminating dust 
emissions, damages and spillages associated with bagged cement. Tank containers ensures 
mechanised loading and unloading of cement eliminating material losses, packaging 
wastes and reducing carbon footprints.  
4. The new bulk cement policy supports long distance transportation by introducing a Gross 
Tonne Kilometer (GTKM) based flat rate removing various distance and weight slabs and 
enabling charging on actual booked distance. This enables efficient multi modal logistics 
and planning of handling terminals at appropriate locations. 
 
Through this policy, Indian Railways intends to promote innovation in the container sector for 
transportation of commodities, with Indian Railways emerging as a cleaner, safer, cost effective 
and more sustainable logistics provider in India.  
***** 
29                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. 217 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
SUPPORT FOR DOMESTIC BATTERY MANUFACTURING AND RECYCLING 
CAPACITY 
 
217. SHRI SANJAY SETH: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the progress achieved under the FAME-II and PM EV Acceleration Scheme, details thereof; 
 
(b) whether Indian joint ventures are contributing to EV adoption and technology transfer, if  so, 
details thereof and if not, the reasons for the same; 
 
(c) the support being given for domestic battery manufacturing and recycling capacity,  details 
thereof; and 
 
(d) the manner in which Government plans to balance EV imports with localisation targets  to 
boost ‘Make in India’, details thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SH. H.D. KUMARASWAMY) 
 
(a) to (d): A Statement is laid on the table of the House.  
30                                                      

 
 
STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PARTS (a) TO (d) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO. 217 FOR 19.12.2025 ASKED BY SHRI SANJAY SETH REGARDING 
“SUPPORT FOR DOMESTIC BATTERY MANUFACTURING AND RECYCLING 
CAPACITY” 
(a): The FAME-II scheme was implemented from 01/04/2019 to 31/03/2024.  Under the FAME -II 
scheme, a total of 16,71,606  EVs were sold including  14,69,343 e -2Ws, 1,78,952 e-3Ws and 23,311 e -
4Ws.  A total of 6,862 e -buses have been sanctioned under the scheme.  The scheme also supports EV 
charging infrastructure under which 9,332 Charging Stations have been sanctioned. 
 
There is no scheme by the name of “PM EV Acceleration Scheme”. 
 
(b): Yes. Under the PLI Scheme for Automobile and Auto component industry there are fifteen joint 
venture companies which are approved applicants.  The list of these joint venture companies is at tached 
at Annexure. 
 
(c): MHI is implementing the Production Linked Incentive Scheme “National Programme on 
Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery Storage” (PLI-ACC) with a budgetary outlay of Rs.18,100 crore 
to establish domestic manufacturing ecosystem for 50 GWh of ACC batteries. 
 
Ministry of Mines has notified a Rs.1,500 crore Incentive Scheme for promotion of Critical Mineral 
Recycling.  The incentive scheme is a key component of the National Critical Mineral Mission and is 
aimed at developing the recycling capacity in the country for separation and production of critical minerals 
from secondary sources.  Eligible feedstock source is e-waste, spent Lithium-ion Batteries (LiB), and other 
scrap material. 
 
(d): The Ministry promotes localisation through requirements of domestic value addition and phased 
manufacturing programme in its schemes.  Under the PLI Scheme for Automobile and Auto compo nent 
industry localisation is supported through the mandatory requirement of  domestic value addition (DVA). 
To avail incentives under the scheme, applicants are required to achieve a minimum DVA of 50%. 
 
The PM E -DRIVE scheme mandates localisation through  Phased Manufacturing Programme 
(PMP) thereby promoting “Make in India” initiative of Government of India.  
 
****** 
  
31                                                      

 
 
ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PART (b) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO. 217  FOR 19.12.2025 ASKED BY SHRI SANJAY SETH REGARDING 
“SUPPORT FOR DOMESTIC BATTERY MANUFACTURING AND RECYCLING CAPACITY” 
 
List of Joint Venture Companies which are approved applicants under PLI Automobile and Auto 
Component Scheme 
  
S. 
No. 
Name of Applicant 
Company 
Category Proposed Products 
1 Asahi India Glass Ltd Component Champion Dark green UV Cut Glass (DGG) up to 
3.2 mm, IR Cut Windshield (PVB+ 
Glass) 
2 Automotive Axles Limited Component Champion Traction motor, E-Axle 
3 Dana Anand  India Private 
Limited 
Component Champion E-axle, E-differential assembly, Trans 
axle for EV, Telematics, etc. 
4 Delphi-TVS Technologies 
Limited 
Component Champion Pump for CRDI with operating 1800 
bar and above, Traction motor 
controllers (including inve rtor 
assembly with convertor), etc. 
5 Denso Ten Minda India 
Private Limited 
Component Champion Infotainment ECU 
6 Mahle Anand Thermal 
Systems Private Limited 
Component Champion Electric compressor (Air & 
Refrigerant) 
7 HL Mando Anand  India 
Private Limited (Formerly, 
Mando Automotive India 
Private Limited) 
Component Champion ADAS, ECUs, etc. 
8 Motherson Sumi Systems 
Limited 
Component Champion High voltage harness, high voltage 
connectors, etc. 
9 Napino Auto And Electronics 
Limited 
Component Champion Traction motor controller, DC DC 
convertor 
10 Neolite ZKW Lightings 
Private Limited 
Component Champion Telematics, Electronics Stability 
Program (ESP), etc. 
11 Pinnacle Mobility Solutions 
Private Limited 
Champion OEM e-buses, e-3W L5, etc. 
12 Tata Cummins Private 
Limited 
Component Champion BS6 compliant Flex Fuel Engine 
13 Tata Ficosa Automotive 
Systems Private Limited 
Component Champion Power Distribution Unit, DC -DC 
convertor, etc. 
14 Toyota Industries Engine 
India Private Limited 
Component Champion BS6 compliant Flex Fuel Engine 
15 Toyota Kirloskar Auto Parts 
Private Limited 
Component Champion Trans axle for EV, E-axle 
****** 
 
32                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. *218 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
SCHEMES TO TRAIN YOUTH IN FIELD OF AI 
 
*218. #  SHRI GOVINDBHAI LALJIBHAI DHOLAKIA: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the number of jobs available as of date in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI);  
(b) the number of trained youth required in this sector by 2030;  
(c) the details of Government's plan to fulfill this requirement;  
(d) the actions taken or schemes being implemented in this area by various Ministries and 
Department of Government; and  
(e) the details of Government's response to coordinate with various Ministries in this area, so that 
this challenge can be addressed collectively? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI ASHWINI V AISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (e): A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
  
33                                                      

STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN THE REPLY TO RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO. *218 FOR 19.12.2025 REGARDING “SCHEMES TO TRAIN YOUTH IN 
FIELD OF AI” 
******* 
 
(a) to (e): India's Artificial Intelligence (AI) strategy is based on the Hon'ble Prime Minister's 
vision of democratizing technology. It aims to address India -centric challenges and create 
opportunities & jobs in AI. 
 
India’s growing AI talent base 
AI-specific jobs span multiple sectors such as IT, manufacturing, agriculture, healthcare, 
governance, etc. As AI adoption deepens across these sectors, the demand for skilled professionals 
is also rising.   
 
Government of India recognises this and has aligned its AI initiatives in this direction. This is also 
reflected in global assessments about India’s AI workforce.  
As per the Stanford AI Index Report 2025, India: 
 
• Leads the world in AI talent acquisition, with an annual hiring rate of about 33% 
• Ranks among the top countries globally in AI skill penetration 
• Has seen AI talent concentration grow more than threefold since 2016 
 
India ranks among the top three countries in Stanford University’s Global AI Vibrancy Tool, 
reflecting its growing strength in AI talent and infrastructure. 
 
According to industry estimates, India’s AI talent base is expected to more than double by 2027, 
growing at a compound annual growth rate of around 15%. 
 
India’s growing AI talent base is also reflected in global developer participation. As per global 
data on GitHub AI projects by geographic distribution, India was the second -largest contributor 
worldwide in 2024, accounting for 19.9% of all AI projects.  
 
This underscores the depth of India’s AI developer ecosystem. It also validates the Government’s 
focus on large-scale AI skilling, research and innovation under the IndiaAI Mission. 
 
Various initiatives of Government of India supporting the development of AI talent pipeline are as 
follows:  
 
1. IndiaAI FutureSkills 
It is one of the pillars of IndiaAI mission where focus is on developing AI talent and research 
pipeline 
• Government is supporting 500 PhD scholars, 5,000 postgraduates and 8,000 
undergraduates for AI related work 
• 27 IndiaAl Data and AI Labs are established in Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities through NIELIT to 
conduct coursework in AI, data curation, annotation, cleaning and applied data science 
34                                                      

• 174 lTIs and Polytechnics across 27 States/UTs have been approved to set up additional 
IndiaAl Data and AI Labs 
 
2. FutureSkills PRIME 
• Government in collaboration with NASSCOM is equipping learners with cutting -edge 
skills essential in today's rapidly evolving digital landscape including AI, Big data and 
Cloud computing 
• Courses are aligned with National Occupational Standards (NOS) and National Skills 
Qualification Framework (NSQF) 
• Over 500+ courses & 2000+ digital fluency pathways are offered on the platform. So far, 
16.29 lakh+ candidates have enrolled/trained in various courses. 
 
3. iGOT Karmayogi Bharat Platform: 
• It is launched under Mission Karmayogi as a digital learning platform for capacity building 
of government officials  
• Online courses and certifications are offered in emerging areas such as AI, data analytics 
and digital transformation 
 
4. National Career Service (NCS): 
• It is a one-stop digital platform operated by the Ministry of Labour and Employment which 
provides job opportunities/matching service for public and private sectors.  
• Career counselling, information on job fairs, skill development programmes and vocational 
guidance are also offered on the platform.  
• The portal is accessible at www.ncs.gov.in. 
 
In addition, a free national-level foundational course “YUVA AI for ALL” has been launched to 
create mass awareness and basic AI literacy. 
 
As per NASSCOM’s report, India possesses the world’s largest digitally skilled talent pool and 
has the capacity to reskill and develop 8-10 million professionals in AI-related services by 2030.  
 
The Government is adopting a whole -of-government approach to AI skilling and workforce 
development. Through the IndiaAI Mission and related platforms, it is working with Ministries, 
State Governments, educational institutions and industry to build AI skills. 
 
 *****  
  
35                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO-219 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ASSESSMENT OF PM FASAL BIMA YOJANA 
 
*219.  DR. SASMIT PATRA: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the year-wise total premium collected from farmers, States and the Centre under PM Fasal 
Bima Yojana (PMFBY) during the last three years; 
(b) the total claim payouts made by private insurance companies against this premium and the 
year-wise profit margins retained by insurers; 
(c) the number of districts where claim settlement ratios remain abnormally low despite large 
premium collections; and 
(d) whether Government has assessed if PMFBY has structurally shifted risk away from farmers 
to insurance companies or has instead become a high-profit, low-liability model for insurers? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHAUHAN) 
 
(a) to (d) : A Statement is laid on the Table of House.  
36                                                      

STATEMENT REFERRED TO PART (a) TO (d) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED QUESTION 
NO. 219 FOR 19/12/2025  REGARDING ASSESSMENT OF PM FASAL BIMA YOJANA  
 
(a) to (d) : The actuarial/bidded/tendered  premium rates are charged by implementing agencies under 
PMFBY.  However, extremely low premium rate across the country for the season is charged from 
the famers, which is maximum 2% of sum insured for Kharif crops, maximum 1.5% of sum insured 
for Rabi crops and maximum 5% of sum insured for commercial/horticultural crops.     Remaining 
part of actuarial premium is shared by the Central and State Government on 50:50 basis except North 
Eastern States (from Kharif 2020) and Himalayan States (from Kharif 2023) where it is shared in the 
ratio of 90:10.    Further, Operational guidelines of the scheme, effective from Kharif 2023, also 
provides for 3 Alternate Risk Transfer models other than standard PMFBY namely, cup and cap 
model (80:110), cup and cap model (60:130) and profit and loss sharing model under which in case 
of claims below certain threshold, portion of the premium paid by the Government as subsidy will go 
back to the State treasury or Consolidated Fund of Inda, as the case may be.   Further,  in case of 
claims above certain threshold, Centre and State are required to pay claims. 
Total liability of State and Central Government is dependent on the total claims generated in 
different clusters of a State and the ARTM model adopted by the State based on which excess 
premium becomes recoverable or claim liability becomes due. 
Year-wise details of total premium collected from farmers and claims paid by private 
insurance companies during last three years i.e. 2022-23 to 2024-25 is given below : 
Year 
Premium collected 
from Farmers  Paid Claims 
(Rs. In Crore) 
2022-23       2,097.34         9,684.40  
2023-24       1,654.01         9,788.88  
2024-25       1,616.37         5,385.36  
Total       5,367.72       24,858.64  
 
Under PMFBY, all the general insurance companies are doing different types of general 
insurance businesses/policies.  Thus overall profit/loss or premium retained by these companies is 
due to profit/loss in overall underwriting business of the company.  Insurers save premium in good 
seasons/years and pay high claims, if any, in bad years from the savings made in the good years.          
Further, crop insurance is a major risk mitigation tool for the benefit of farmers in the event of non-
preventable natural calamities. It may be noted that insurance is not an investment. Insurance is all 
about spreading the risk spatially & temporally. As per provisions of the PMFBY/RWBCIS, premium 
from farmers alongwith Central and State Government share in premium subsidy is paid to the 
concerned insurance company for acceptance of risk and payment of claims.   
Out of the total crop insurance business as per premium collected under the scheme during 
2024-25 about 43% is collectively shared by the 5 Public Sector insurance companies only, including 
Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd.   Further, difference between premium collected and 
claims paid may not be the margin/profit for the insurance companies as there is a cost of reinsurance 
and administrative cost which generally range between 10% to 12% of gross premium.  This cost  
also has to be borne by the Insurance Companies.    The Operational guidelines of the scheme further 
provide for 3 Alternate Risk Transfer models other than standard PMFBY, namely cup and cap model 
(80:110), cup and cap model (60:130) and profit and loss sharing model, under which in case of 
claims below certain threshold, portion of the premium paid by the Government as subsidy will go 
37                                                      

back to the State treasury.  States have been given the flexibility to choose  any one of these models. 
Due to adoption of these models, the premium rates have significantly reduced thereby reducing the 
outgo of Government of India and State and result in recovery of excess premium in case of low 
claims. 
There are many incidences during implementation of the scheme when insurance companies 
have paid claims less than the premium collected as well as in excess of 100% of premium received 
in case of natural calamities during different seasons.   Season-wise and State-wise details of very 
less claims than premium collected (below 30% of premium collected) and  more than 100% of 
premium by the insurance companies implementing PMFBY during 2021-22 to 2023-24 are given in 
Annexure. 
Further, the review/revisions / rationalization / improvements in the crop insurance schemes 
is a continuous process and decision on suggestion/ representations/ recommendations of the 
stakeholders/studies are taken from time to time.   Based on the experience gained, views of various 
stakeholders and with a view to ensure better transparency, accountability, timely payment of claims 
to the farmers and to make the scheme more farmer friendly, Government has periodically revised 
the Operational Guidelines of the PMFBY comprehensively to ensure that the eligible benefits under 
the scheme reach the farmers timely and transparently.    
 
38                                                      

Annexure 
PMFBY & RWBCIS: State season-wise Loss Ratio below 30% and above 100% during 2021-
22 to 2023-24 (as on 31st October, 2025) 
Year - Season State/UT Name Gross Premium Paid Claims Loss Ratio 
% (Rs. In Crore) 
Claim Ratio below 30% of Premium 
2021-22 RABI Jammu & Kashmir 16.30 1.98 12% 
2021-22 RABI Tamil Nadu 2,833.62 793.00 28% 
2021-22 RABI Uttar Pradesh 736.57 179.01 24% 
2022 KHARIF Assam 69.47 8.50 12% 
2022 KHARIF Chhattisgarh 1,404.82 276.78 20% 
2022 KHARIF Jammu & Kashmir 23.61 3.83 17% 
2022 KHARIF Madhya Pradesh 2,710.85 739.99 28% 
2022 KHARIF Tripura 9.46 0.61 7% 
2022-23 RABI Andhra Pradesh 1,090.75 41.89 10% 
2022-23 RABI Assam 81.81 11.54 15% 
2022-23 RABI Jammu & Kashmir 17.29 2.51 15% 
2022-23 RABI Madhya Pradesh 1,134.86 309.98 27% 
2022-23 RABI Puducherry 6.00 - 3% 
2022-23 RABI Uttar Pradesh 739.02 210.92 30% 
2023 Kharif Chhattisgarh 1,367.93 197.82 14% 
2023 Kharif Odisha 1,447.06 228.56 16% 
2023 Kharif Tripura 13.76 1.88 14% 
2023-24 Rabi Assam 104.80 20.91 21% 
2023-24 Rabi Jammu & Kashmir 24.72 2.37 10% 
2023-24 Rabi Madhya Pradesh 943.12 191.14 21% 
2023-24 Rabi Odisha 47.52 4.06 9% 
Claim Ratio above 100% of premium 
2021 Kharif Assam 71.50 85.63 120% 
2021 Kharif Haryana 870.01 1,382.95 159% 
2021 Kharif Jammu & Kashmir 23.73 50.73 214% 
2021 Kharif Rajasthan 3,564.19 3,889.50 109% 
2021-22 Rabi Assam 74.14 170.79 230% 
2021-22 Rabi Chhattisgarh 203.67 402.13 197% 
2021-22 Rabi Kerala 58.12 64.19 110% 
2022 Kharif Haryana 956.98 2,011.17 210% 
2022 Kharif Kerala 64.59 99.78 154% 
2022-23 Rabi Haryana 350.37 514.83 147% 
2022-23 Rabi Kerala 73.36 80.55 110% 
2022-23 Rabi Maharashtra 1,098.18 1,346.37 123% 
2022-23 Rabi Odisha 9.97 11.66 117% 
2022-23 Rabi Rajasthan 2,607.05 2,671.30 102% 
2023 Kharif Himachal Pradesh 18.98 27.61 146% 
2023 Kharif Karnataka 2,512.08 3,108.25 124% 
2023 Kharif Kerala 53.97 76.04 141% 
2023 Kharif Maharashtra 7,815.17 7,942.79 102% 
2023 Kharif Meghalaya 10.59 14.47 137% 
2023-24 Rabi Chhattisgarh 279.83 390.55 140% 
2023-24 Rabi Kerala 52.42 88.77 169% 
2023-24 Rabi Uttarakhand 181.43 264.64 146% 
****** 
39                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
STARRED QUESTION NO. 220 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
WOMEN LED FPOs 
 
*220. SMT. REKHA SHARMA: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) progress in promoting 10,000 Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs); 
 
(b) number of women-led FPOs supported; and 
 
(c) whether more women-led FPOs will be linked with e-NAM and export channels? 
 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN) 
 
(a) to (c):  A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
40                                                      

STATEMENT IN RESPECT OF PARTS (a) TO (c) OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. 220 FOR 19/12/2025 REGARDING ‘WOMEN LED FPOs’ 
 
(a): The Government is implementing the Central Sector Scheme for “Formation and Promotion 
of 10,000 Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs)” since 2020. 10,000 FPOs have been 
registered under the Scheme with 55.22 lakh farmer shareholders as on 30.11.2025. 
 
As on date, 6,241 FPOs have obtained seed licences, 5,953 FPOs have obtained fertilizer 
licences and 4,455 FPOs have obtained pesticide licences. 
 
Under the Scheme, 6,402 FPOs have availed at least one instalment of equity grant, 
while 853 FPOs have availed the full equity support of ₹15 lakh each. A total of 3,610 credit 
guarantee covers worth ₹662.7 crore were issued to 2,616 FPOs. 
 
As on date, 4,610 FPOs have been registered on the e-NAM platform for sale of aggregated 
produce, while 5,650 FPOs from the scheme have been onboarded Open Network for Digital 
Commerce (ONDC). 
 
The cumulative turnover of the FPO reported till date is ₹19,736.68 crore.  
 
(b): The Board of Directors (BoDs) of each FPO has at least one woman member. As on 
30.11.2025, under the 10,000 FPOs Scheme, 1170 women-led FPOs with 100% women farmer 
shareholders and 2272 women-led FPOs with more than 50% women farmer shareholders have 
been formed. There are 55.22 lakh shareholders in the FPOs, out of which 21.45 lakh are women 
shareholders (39%). 
 
(c):  As on 30.11.2025, 4,610 FPOs were onboarded on the e-NAM platform, out of which 843 
FPOs are those with 100% women member farmers. 978 FPOs have obtained the Agricultural and 
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) Registration-cum-Membership 
Certificate (RCMC) for export, out of which 43 FPOs are 100% women. 
 
***** 
41                                                      

Page 1 of 3 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. 221 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
GUARANTEED EMPLOYMENT UNDER MGNREGA 
 
221  Shri S. Selvaganabathy: 
 
 Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether mandays of atleast 100 days guaranteed wage employment is offered to every 
rural household in the country under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA); 
(b)  if so, number of mandays of work offered in each State/UTs during the last year; 
(c)  whether the mandays of work performed is in consonance with the scheme, if not, the 
action taken to monitor the work; and 
(d)  the number of ponds developed in the Union Territory of Puducherry under MGNREGA 
during the last three years to ensure water recharge in the region? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN)  
 
(a) to (d): A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
42                                                      

Page 2 of 3 
 
Statement referred to in reply to Parts (a) to (d) of Rajya Sabha Starred Question No. 221 for 
19.12.2025 regarding “GUARANTEED EMPLOYMENT UNDER MGNREGA”. 
  
(a) & (b): It is stated that Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) guarantees up to one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment 
in every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled 
manual work. It is a fall back option when no better employment opportunity is available.  
During the financial year 2024-25, 99.83% of rural households demanding work have been 
offered employment. 
  
  State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of households demanded employment, households 
offered employment and Persondays generated under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during the last 
financial year, 2024-25, are given at Annexure. 
  
(c):   The Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS in States/UTs through various fora viz., Mid-Term Review, Labour Budget meetings, 
Labour Budget Revision meetings, Programme Review meetings. Central Employment 
Guarantee Council and State Employment Guarantee Councils periodically monitor 
implementation of the programme. State Technical Cell are constituted at various level in the 
States to regularly monitor the progress of works.  
  
(d):   The details of water harvesting pond, fishery ponds and renovation of ponds completed and 
total expenditure made on ponds in the Union Territory of Puducherry under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS are as under: 
Number of works completed  Total Expenditure (Rs. in lakh) 
2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 
495 520 501 2,671.44 3,908.00 1,444.32 
***** 
  
43                                                      

Page 3 of 3 
 
Annexure 
Annexure referred to in reply to parts (a) & (b) of Rajya Sabha Starred Question No. 221 dated 
19.12.2025. 
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of households demanded employment, households offered 
employment and Persondays generated under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during last financial year 2024-
25. (Figure in lakh) 
SI. 
No. State/UTs Employment demanded 
Household 
Employment offered 
Household 
 Persondays 
Generated 
1 Andhra Pradesh 51.22  51.19 2422.82 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 3.11  3.11 204.35 
3 Assam 20.46  20.44 710.70 
4 Bihar 58.75  58.67 2498.52 
5 Chhattisgarh 28.45  28.44 1323.54 
6 Goa 0.03  0.03 0.76 
7 Gujarat 10.30  10.27 431.27 
8 Haryana 3.93  3.93 117.92 
9 Himachal Pradesh 7.54  7.54 395.31 
10 Jammu And Kashmir 7.70  7.68 409.34 
11 Jharkhand 23.78  23.76 1009.40 
12 Karnataka 31.95  31.50 1311.64 
13 Kerala 14.19  14.19 907.54 
14 Ladakh 0.34  0.34 22.19 
15 Madhya Pradesh 44.80  44.62 1896.93 
16 Maharashtra 33.16  33.07 1621.22 
17 Manipur 5.40  5.40 244.62 
18 Meghalaya 4.79  4.79 320.99 
19 Mizoram 2.11  2.10 197.75 
20 Nagaland 2.57  2.55 93.81 
21 Odisha 26.42  26.39 1192.99 
22 Punjab 9.61  9.60 314.01 
23 Rajasthan 62.74  62.72 3166.13 
24 Sikkim 0.63  0.63 33.85 
25 Tamil Nadu 67.68  67.68 3061.10 
26 Telangana 28.80  28.79 1222.87 
27 Tripura 6.05  6.05 353.37 
28 Uttar Pradesh 70.92  70.91 3364.12 
29 Uttarakhand 4.63  4.62 189.99 
30 West Bengal 0.00  0.00 0.00 
31 Andaman And Nicobar 0.04  0.04 0.88 
32 Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman and Diu 0.05  0.05 2.99 
33 Lakshadweep 0.00  0.00 0.00 
34 Puducherry 0.52  0.52 10.78 
  Total 632.66 631.62 29053.68 
(As per NREGASoft) 
Note: While the work demanded closely matches the work offered, the difference of work 
availed with the former is on account of lack of utilisation of such offering by workers. This 
could be on account of better employment opportunities elsewhere, illness or any other relevant 
factor. 
***** 
44                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. 222 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
NEW RAILWAY PROJECTS IN MAHARASHTRA 
 
*222 SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) details of new railway projects that were announced for Maharashtra during the last three 
years; 
 
(b) details of the number of projects, out of these, commissioned so far and the budgetary 
allocations made for the  same; 
 
(c) the status of those projects which have not been commissioned and the time by which 
these would be commissioned; 
 
(d) whether  Government is aware that a large area in Maharashtra is still deprived of rail 
 
(e) if so, the details thereof, along with the time by which the works on these projects is 
likely to be started? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
 
(a) to (e): A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
  
connectivity; and 
45                                                      

STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PARTS (a) TO (e) OF STARRED QUESTION 
NO. 222 BY SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH ANSWERED IN RAJYA SABHA ON 19.12.2025 
REGARDING NEW RAILWAY PROJECTS IN MAHARASHTRA. 
 
(a) to (e): Budget allocation during the last five years has increased significantly. Budget 
allocation for infrastructure projects and safety works, falling fully/partly in the State of 
Maharashtra is as under: 
 
The details of commissioning/laying of new track falling fully/partly in the State of Maharashtra 
during 2009-14 and 2014-25 is as under: 
 
Period New track Commissioned Average commissioning of new tracks 
2009-14 292 Km 58.4 Km/year 
2014-25 2,292 Km 208.36 Km/year (More than 3 times) 
 
Capacity Augmentation works for Mumbai Suburban area 
Presently, about 120 originating Mail/Express trains and about 3200 sub urban trains are handled 
daily in Mumbai area. To increase capacity and improve safety, several steps have been taken by 
Indian Railways as under: 
 
To increase train handling capacity at various stations in Mumbai area, following works have 
been completed/taken up/planned at various stations: 
 
SN Location Details 
1 Bandra Terminus 3 Pit Lines have been completed 
2 Mumbai Central Platform extension for 24 LHB coaches 
3 Jogeshwari  2 additional platforms 
4 Dadar 1 additional platform 
5 Vasai road 6 platforms, 3 pit lines and 5 stabling lines 
6 Panvel-Kalamboli  5 platforms , 4 pit lines and 2 sick lines 
 
Contd….2/- 
Period Outlay 
2009-14 ₹1,171 crore/year 
2025-26 ₹23,778 crore (More than 20 times) 
46                                                      

-:2:- 
7 Kalyan 6 platforms and 4 pit lines 
8 LTT 4 platforms and 2 pit lines 
9 Parel 6 platforms, 5 pit lines, 6 stabling lines 
10 Virar 25 stabling lines 
11 Dahanu road 11 stabling lines 
12 Mira road 25 stabling lines 
 
In addition to above, Platform extension work at 34 stations to accommodate 15 car EMUs have 
been taken up. 
 
To improve the capacity of rail network in Mumbai suburban area, Mumbai Urban Transport 
Project (MUTP)-II costing ₹8,087 crore, MUTP-III costing ₹10,947 crore and MUTP-IIIA 
costing ₹33,690 crore have been sanctioned. These projects include following works in Mumbai 
Suburban Area: 
 
SN Name of Project Cost  
(in Cr.) 
1 CSMT-Kurla 5th & 6th Line (MUTP-II) (17.5 km) 891 
2 Mumbai Central-Borivali 6th Line (MUTP-II) (30 km) 919 
3 Extension of Harbour Line from Goregaon-Borivali (MUTP-IIIA) (7 km) 826 
4 Borivali-Virar 5th & 6th Line (MUTP-IIIA) (26 km) 2,184 
5 Virar-Dahanu Road 3rd & 4th Line (MUTP-III) (64 km) 3,587 
6 Panvel-Karjat Suburban Corridor (MUTP-III) (29.6 km) 2,782 
7 Airoli-Kalwa (elevated) Suburban Corridor link (MUTP-III) (3.3 km) 476 
8 Kalyan-Asangaon 4thLine (MUTP-IIIA) (32 km) 1,759 
9 Kalyan-Badlapur 3rd& 4th line (MUTP-IIIA) (14 km) 1,510 
10 Kalyan-Kasara 3rd Line (67 km) 793 
11 Naigaon-Juichandra double chord Line (6 km) 176 
12 Nilaje-Kopar double chord Line (5 km) 338 
13 Kalyan Yard remodeling work 866 
 
To enhance passenger carrying capacity, 238 rakes of 12 cars each with doors have been 
sanctioned under MUTP-III & IIIA at a cost of ₹19,293 crore. The process for procurement of 
these rakes has been taken up. 
Contd….3/- 
47                                                      

-:3:- 
As on 01.04.2025, 38 projects (11 New Lines, 02 Gauge Conversion and 25 Doubling), of a total 
length of 5,098 Km, costing ₹89,780 crore, falling fully/partly in Maharashtra, are sanctioned. 
The summary is as under:-  
 
Category No. of 
sanctioned 
Projects 
Total 
Length 
(in Km) 
Length 
Commissioned 
Upto Mar'25 (Km) 
Exp. 
upto Mar'25 
(₹ in Cr.) 
New Line 11 1,355 234 10,504 
Gauge Conversion 02 609 334 4,286 
Doubling/ 
Multitracking 
25 3,134 1,792 24,617 
Total 38 5,098 2,360 39,407 
Details of some of the recently completed projects falling fully/partly in Maharashtra are as under: 
S.No. Project Cost 
(₹ in crore) 
1 Pune-Miraj-Londa Doubling  (467 Km) 4,670 
2 Manmad-Jalgaon 3rd line (160 Km) 2,574 
3 Jabalpur-Gondia Gauge Conversion (300 Km) 2,005 
4 Chhindwara-Nagpur Gauge Conversion (150 Km) 1,512 
5 Panvel-Pen Doubling (35 Km) 263 
6 Pen-Roha Doubling (40 Km) 330 
7 Udhna-Jalgaon Doubling (307 Km) 2,448 
8 Mudkhed-Parbhani Doubling (81 Km) 673 
9 Bhusawal-Jalgaon 3rd line (24 Km) 325 
10 Jalgaon-Bhusawal 4th line (24 Km) 261 
11 Daund-Gulbarga Doubling (225 Km) 3,182 
 
 
Contd….4/- 
48                                                      

-:4:- 
Some of the main projects falling fully/partly in the Maharashtra which have been taken up are 
as under: 
 
S.No. Name of the project Cost (₹ In 
crore) 
1 Gondia-Ballarshah (Chanda Fort) doubling (240 Km)  4,373  
2 Hotgi Byepass line (6 Km) 177  
3 Panvel-Chouk  doubling section (17 Km) 491  
4 Panvel-Somtane Chord line and Panvel-Chikhli Chord line (8 Km) 445 
5 Miraj  Chord line (2 Km) 129  
6 Wardha-Balharshah quadrupling (135 Km) 2,226  
7 Puntamba-Sainagar Shirdi doubling (17 Km) 227  
8 Itarsi-Nagpur 4 th line (297 Km) 5,010  
9  Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar-Parbhani doubling (177 Km) 2,006  
10 Gondia-Dongargarh 4th line (84 Km) 1,985  
11 Wardha-Bhusawal 3rd & 4th  line (314 Km) 8,199  
12 Jalgaon-Bhadli 5th line (9 Km) 114  
13 Gondia bypass line (19 Km)  354  
14 Jalgaon-Manmad 4th line (160 km) 2,574  
15 Bhusawal-Khandwa 3rd & 4th line (131 Km) 3,285  
16  Mudkhed-Medchal & Mahbubnagar-Dhone doubling (417 Km) 4,686 
17 Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar-Ankai doubling (98 Km) 961  
18  Nilaje and Kopar double chord Line (5 Km) 338  
19  Mudkhed junction bypass line (3 Km) 62  
20 Purna bypass line (3 Km)  72  
21 Ankai bypass Line (2 Km) 29  
 
Contd….5/- 
49                                                      

-:5:- 
22 Parbhani-Parli Vaijanath doubling (65 Km) 770  
23 Latur Road Station bypass line (2 Km) 47  
24 Parli-Vaijanath Station bypass line (2 Km) 56  
25 Pachora-Jamner gauge conversion with extension upto Malkapur (84 Km) 955 
26 Vadhavan Port-New Palghar doubling (22 Km) 1,423  
27 Ahilyanagar-Beed-Parli Vaijnath new line (261 Km) 4,957  
28 Baramati-Lonand new line (64 Km) 1,844  
29 Wardha-Nanded new line (284 Km) 3,445  
30 Indore-Manmad new line (360 Km) 18,529  
31 Wadsa-Gadchiroli new line  (52 Km) 1,886  
32 Jalna-Jalgaon new line (174 Km) 5,804  
33 Daund-Manmad doubling (236 Km) 3,037  
34  Kalyan-Kasara 3rd line (68 Km) 1,433  
35 Wardha-Nagpur 3rd line (76 Km) 698  
36 Wardha-Ballarshah 3rd line (132 Km) 1,385  
37 Itarsi-Nagpur 3rd line (280 Km) 2,450  
38 Rajnandgaon-Nagpur 3rd line (228 Km) 3,545  
39 Wardha-Nagpur 4th line (79 Km) 1,137  
 
Further, construction works on the flagship High speed bullet train project have gathered 
momentum in Maharashtra. Now 100% land acquisition has been completed. Works of bridges, 
aqueducts etc. have been taken up.  
 
Western DFC also passes through Maharashtra. About 178 route Km of western DFC is situated 
in Maharashtra which is about 12% of overall route length of western DFC. 76 Km of this 
project from New Gholvad to New Vaitarna in Maharashtra has already been commissioned. 
Balance works have been taken up. Connectivity of WDFC to JNPT will boost the capacity to 
handle cargo and container traffic from port to Delhi NCR. 
 
During the last three years i.e. 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and the current financial year 2025-
26, 98 surveys (29 New Line, 2 Gauge Conversion and 67 Doubling) of total length 8,603 Km 
falling fully/ partly in the State of Maharashtra,  have been sanctioned. 
Contd….6/- 
50                                                      

-:6:- 
Railway projects are sanctioned Zonal Railway-wise and not State-wise or Region-wise as Indian 
Railways’ projects may span across State boundaries. 
 
Railway infrastructure projects falling fully/partly in the State of Maharashtra are covered under 
Central Railway, South Central Railway, South East Central Railway, South Western Railway 
and Western Railway Zones of Indian Railways. Zonal Railway wise details of Railway projects 
are made available in public domain on Indian Railway’s website. 
 
Sanction of any railway project depends upon many parameters/factors which include the 
following:  
 
 Anticipated traffic projections and remunerativeness of the proposed route  
 First and last mile connectivity provided by the project  
 Connection of missing links and providing additional route  
 Augmentation of congested/saturated lines  
 Demands raised by State Governments/Central Ministries/Public representatives,  
 Railway’s operational requirements  
 Socio-economic considerations  
 Overall availability of funds    
Completion of Railway project/s depends on various factors which include the following:  
 Land acquisition  
 Forest clearance  
 Shifting of infringing utilities  
 Statutory clearances from various authorities  
 Geological and topographical conditions of area  
 Law and order situation in the area of project site  
 Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc.  
 
***** 
  
 
 
 
51                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO.  223 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
 SALTWATER INTRUSION ON AGRICULTURAL LAND 
 
 *223. SHRI SANA SATHISH BABU: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
 (a) Whether Government has recognised the issue of saltwater intrusion affecting agricultural land 
in coastal and deltaic districts of the country, including the State of Andhra Pradesh; 
(b) If so, the schemes and types of assistance available to support the affected farmers; 
(c) the details of any assessments or surveys conducted to identify salt-affected areas; 
(d) Whether Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) or other agencies have carried out 
research on restoring productivity in such lands; and 
(e) Whether Government proposes any special package for farmers whose paddy and coconut land 
has become unproductive due to salinity? 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI  SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN) 
 
(a) to (e):  A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
 
 
  
52                                                      

STATEMENT IN RESPECT OF PARTS (a) to (e) OF RAJYA SABHA STARRED 
QUESTION NO. 223 TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 REGARDING 
“SALTWATER INTRUSION ON AGRICULTURAL LAND” 
 
(a) & (b):  Government has recognised the issue of saltwater intrusion affecting agricultural 
land in coastal and deltaic districts of the country, including the State of Andhra Pradesh. Various 
interventions are being implemented through crop- and region-specific schemes to mitigate soil and 
water-related stresses and to support affected farmers. Coconut Development Board (CDB) under 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has been implementing several programmes across 
the country, including Andhra Pradesh, to address productivity constraints, soil and water stress, 
and livelihood challenges faced by farmers. The Schemes and types of assistance available for the 
affected farmers is given at Annexure. These schemes are implemented both directly by the Board 
and through the concerned State Governments based on identified thrust areas. During the last five 
years, the CDB utilised a total amount of ₹39,410.82 lakh for various field-oriented schemes 
throughout India, of which ₹5,820.35 lakh (14.76%) was utilised in Andhra Pradesh. 
 
(c): Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has assessed the total coastal salt affected 
area in the country to the extent of 12.9 lakh ha. In Andhra Pradesh nearly 1.06 lakh ha area is 
affected by salt. For restoration of salt affected soils in  coastal areas, technologies viz. land shaping 
models (farm pond, paddy-cum-fish with/without brackish water aquaculture, deep furrow and high 
ridge, shallow furrow and medium ridge), integrated nutrient management, micro-irrigation 
systems, designing of river embankment to arrest ingress of saline water in agricultural land,  
agronomic practices, suitable crops and their varieties, conservation tillage practices, agroforestry 
system, integrated farming system, etc. have been suggested to alleviate soil salinity and improve 
agricultural productivity. Salt tolerant varieties of rice (Goa Dhan 3 and Goa Dhan 4), wheat 
(KRL210 and KRL 283) and use of bio formulations (Goa Bio-1 and Goa Bio-2) are also suggested 
for improved productivity of crops in these areas. 
 
(d): ICAR has been undertaking basic, strategic and applied research across diverse agro-
climatic situations, including salt-affected lands, to address issues related to food security and 
restoration of agricultural productivity. The focus of these research programmes is on the 
development of crop varieties and hybrids tolerant to biotic and abiotic stresses, including salinity 
stress, with improved yield and quality traits. ICAR also recommends location-specific high-
yielding varieties and appropriate crop management technologies and practices for salt-affected 
areas for adoption by farmers. During the period 2014–25, ICAR released 80 salinity-tolerant crop 
varieties, including 40 of rice, 2 of wheat, 4 of barley, 6 of Indian mustard, 4 of lentil, 2 of mung 
bean, 1 each of pearl millet, urad bean, fodder crop Sesbania and forage oats, and 18 varieties of 
sugarcane. 
 
(e): For the year 2025–26, an amount of ₹23500.00 lakh has been proposed for implementation 
of various schemes of the Coconut Development Board across the country. Of this, an amount of 
₹3,070.67 lakh has been earmarked for the State of Andhra Pradesh. The key interventions include 
replanting and rejuvenation of coconut gardens, integrated farming and nutrient management, 
establishment of demonstration-cum-seed production farms, expansion of area under coconut 
cultivation, and capacity-building and awareness programmes, aimed at enhancing coverage and 
improving productivity. 
 
 
 
53                                                      

ANNEXURE 
SCHEMES OF COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
1. Production of Quality Planting Material: 
 Demonstration cum Seed Production (DSP) Farms- Setting up of new and maintenance 
of existing DSP Farms: The Coconut Development Board has established 11 DSP Farms 
across various. Each new farm is allocated ₹30 lakh for the initial two years for development. 
From the third year onwards, till the farm reaches yield stability, maintenance support of ₹1 
lakh per hectare per year is provided.  
 Assistance for Quality Planting Material production in Public Sector Nurseries: For 
enhancing the production and availability of quality coconut seedlings, 50% of the seedling 
production cost @ ₹20 per seedling is provided to public sector nurseries. 
 Establishment of Nucleus Coconut Seed Gardens: The scheme provides financial 
assistance of 50% of the project cost, amounting to ₹3.60 lakh per hectare (against a total 
cost of ₹7.20 lakh per hectare), for a maximum area of 4 hectares per unit. The assistance is 
released in three instalments in the ratio of 50:25:25 on a project basis. 
 Establishment of Small Coconut Nurseries: The scheme offers assistance up to ₹90 per 
seedling, covering 100% of the cost for public sector and 50% for private sector nurseries 
in two equal installments. 
 Accreditation and Rating of Coconut Nurseries: Financial assistance of up to ₹1.50 lakh 
is provided for nurseries producing a minimum of 20,000 seedlings annually. 
2. Expansion of Area under Coconut Cultivation:  
For new coconut plantation, assistance is provided @ ₹56,000 per hectare in two equal 
annual installments for a minimum of 0.08 ha and a maximum of 2 ha per beneficiary. 
3. Comprehensive Programmes for Sustainable Productivity Improvement in Existing 
Coconut Holdings 
 Productivity Improvement through Coconut-Based Cropping Systems – PICCS: To 
enhance the productivity and income of coconut farmers through an integrated farming 
approach 100% financial assistance up to ₹42,000 per hectare, limited to 2 hectares per 
beneficiary is provided in two equal annual installments.  
 Creation of Water Resources in Coconut Gardens (i) by individual farmer and (ii) On 
community basis : The scheme implemented as per National Horticulture Mission norms  
 Adoption of Organic Farming in Coconut: The scheme is as per Paramparagat Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (PKVY) norms. 
 Organic certification of coconut garden : The scheme is as per PKVY norms. 
 Farm Mechanisation in Coconut Plantation : The scheme implemented as per the Sub-
Mission on Agricultural Mechanization norms.  
4. Technology Demonstration/Quality Testing lab :  
The Coconut Development Board Institute of Technology (CIT), Aluva plays a key role 
in developing and transferring technologies for value-added coconut products, conducting 
NABL-accredited quality testing, and organising short-term, hands-on training programmes 
in coconut processing and value addition. 
5. Market Intelligence& Research, Product and Brand Promotion and Export services :  
The scheme is for market promotion, expansion of market access, improvement in product 
quality, and creation of new opportunities for farmers, processors, entrepreneurs, and 
exporters. The major activities undertaken include market promotional initiatives for both 
domestic and export markets. 
6. Capacity Building, Training and Awareness Programmes and Information Technolgy:  
The scheme covers awareness creation, publicity, skill development, livelihood support, 
training and strategic collaborations to ensure that coconut farmers, entrepreneurs, processors, 
artisans, and other stakeholders to better equipped to face emerging challenges and seize new 
opportunities. 
7. The Technology Mission on Coconut (TMOC) :  
Projects on processing and product diversification, development and demonstration are funded 
up to ₹100 lakh to Public institutions. The adoption projects is incentivized through back-ended 
capital subsidies of 25% in general areas and 50% in high-cost areas, with a maximum cap of 
54                                                      

Rs.500 lakhs. Financial assistance is also extended for projects on development and 
demonstration of technologies for Pest and Disease Management. Public institutions 
conducting R&D or demonstrations in pest/disease control are eligible for 100% funding up to 
₹500 lakh, while adoption of such technologies is subsidized at 25% of the project cost. 
8. Replanting and Rejuvenation of Coconut Gardens:  
The scheme has three components, with a total financial assistance limit of ₹54,000 per hectare 
over two years. For Cutting and Removal of Senile/Diseased Palms Rs.1000 per palm, subject 
to a maximum of Rs.32000/ha (32 palms per hectare), Rejuvenation of Existing Palms Rs 
17500/- per ha in two annual installments of Rs.8750/- each and Replanting @ 50% cost subject 
to a maximum of Rs 4,500/- ha (Rs.45/- per seedling) is extended.  
9. Coconut Palm Insurance Schemes :  
Scheme to safeguard both coconut palms and the workers engaged in coconut sector activities, 
thereby ensuring comprehensive risk coverage for the crop as well as the livelihood of workers.. 
10. Kerasuraksha Insurance Scheme  
A comprehensive group personal accident insurance Scheme for safeguarding the livelihoods 
of workers engaged in the coconut sector. Annual premium is Rs 956/- and is shared between 
Board and the beneficiary in the ratio of 85:15. Premium share to be borne by the applicant is 
Rs 143/-.  
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
55                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. *224 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
STATUS OF THE TIDE 2.0 SCHEME 
 
*224.   SHRI SANJAY SINGH: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the drop-out rate of Startups under TIDE 2.0;  
(b) the Startups that begin but leave the incubator before scaling, the reasons for the same;  
(c) number of incubated Startups that filed for IP/patents and whether the scheme encourages or 
supports IPR protection;  
(d) the manner in which incubator centres themselves are expected to sustain after the five year 
scheme period;  
(e) whether the centres will be financially independent or rely on follow -up funding/incubating 
companies; and  
(f) any Mechanism to help TIDE-supported Startups go global such as overseas partnerships? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI ASHWINI V AISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (f):   A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
  
56                                                      

 
STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO RAJYA SABHA STARRED  
QUESTION NO. *224 FOR 19-12-2025 STATUS OF THE TIDE 2.0 SCHEME 
***** 
 
(a) to (f): The Government of India follows a lifecycle -based approach to support the startup ecosystem. The 
startups are supported across the entire journey - from idea and proof of concept to prototype development, 
product development and testing. 
 
TIDE 2.0 
As part of this approach, Government of India started the “Technology Incubation and Development of 
Entrepreneurs 2.0 (TIDE 2.0)” Scheme in the year 2019. It promotes technology -based entrepreneurship by 
providing financial & technical support to incubators.  
 
Startups are supported through 51 selected incubators located in the Institutes of Higher Learning and premier 
R&D organizations across the country. A total outlay of Rs. 264.62 crore is approved over a period of 5 years, 
to support approximately 2000 tech start-ups. 
 
These incubators provide startups with requisite expertise, industry linkages and ecosystem partnerships etc. 
Under the scheme, 1,706 startups have been supported till now, and these startups continue to progress well.  
 
As startups eventually operate in a competitive market, their engagement with incubators also evolve based on 
business realities. These include, inter alia, achieving product -market fit, specialised laboratory requirements, 
technological challenges, fundraising needs, strategic pivots by founders, and overall financial sustainability. 
 
In many cases, incubators have facilitated quick idea validation and effective pivoting for the startups, helping 
entrepreneurs shift to more viable ideas.  
The overall performance of the supported startups remains encouraging, with many startups demonstrating 
revenue growth, increased valuations, raised external funding and IP filings.  
 
Further, a total of 1672 IP/patents have been filed by 638 startups. 
 
Centre of Excellence in Intellectual Property Rights (CoE-IP) 
Under TIDE 2.0, Centres of Excellence in Intellectual Property Rights (CoE -IP) are also established to 
encourage or support Startups/SMEs/academia/inventors in Electronics and IT domain. These CoE provide 
various IP related services, awareness creation and training. 
 
TIDE 2.0 centres adopt multiple revenue models including equity exits to enhance long -term sustainability. 
Further, TIDE 2.0 centres have helped more than 150 incubated startups go global for scaling their business. 
 
Overall, TIDE 2.0 complements other Government initiatives such as GENESIS, SAMRIDH, Startup India and 
sector-specific innovation programmes. Together, these initiatives reflect a whole -of-the government effort to 
build a strong startup ecosystem in the country. 
 
***** 
57                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
STARRED QUESTION NO. 225 
 ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
DEFICIENCIES IN VANDE BHARAT SLEEPER TRAINS 
 
 * 225 DR. JOHN BRITTAS: 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) whether it is a fact that the Vande Bharat Sleeper trains are facing delays due to certain design 
deficiencies; 
(b) if so, the details of these deficiencies and the reasons therefor; and 
(c) timelines proposed for rectifying these deficiencies and ensuring timely commissioning of the 
Vande Bharat Sleeper trains? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c): A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
***** 
 
  
58                                                      

STATEMENT REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PARTS (a) TO (c) OF STARRED QUESTION 
NO. 225 BY DR. JOHN BRITTAS ANSWERED IN RAJYA SABHA ON 19.12.2025 
REGARDING DEFICIENCIES IN VANDE BHARAT SLEEPER TRAINS 
(a) to (c)  To cater to long distance travel, the sleeper variant of Vande Bharat Express has been 
indigenously designed and developed. Two such trains have already been manufactured and are 
presently under extensive trials/commissioning.  
The process of development of new rolling stocks including Vande Sleeper necessitates a holistic 
approach, combining technological innovation, strategic planning and manufacturing to ensure a 
safe, reliable and comfortable travel. This involves development of prototype followed by extensive 
testing and trials which takes time. 
With a view to improve travel experience of the passengers, these train sets have been provided with 
modern coaches having advanced safety features and passenger amenities like:  
 Fitted with KAVACH. 
 Higher acceleration with design/operating speed of 180/160 KMPH. 
 Crashworthy and Jerk-Free Semi permanent couplers and Anti Climbers.  
 Crashworthy Design of Car body complying with EN standards. 
 EN-45545 HL3 fire safety standards.  
 Fire barrier doors at the end of each coach. 
 Improved fire safety – Aerosol based fire detection and suppression system in electrical 
cabinets and lavatories. 
 Regenerative braking system for energy efficiency. 
 Air conditioning units provided with indigenously developed UV-C lamp based disinfection 
system. 
 Centrally controlled Automatic Plug Doors and Fully Sealed wider gangways. 
 CCTVs in all coaches. 
 Emergency talk-back unit for communication between Passenger and Train Manager/Loco 
Pilot in case of emergency. 
 For Divyangjan passengers special lavatory in the driving coaches on each end. 
 Centralized Coach Monitoring System for better condition monitoring of passenger amenities 
such as Air conditioning, Saloon Lighting etc.  
 Ergonomically designed ladder for ease of climbing on to upper berths. 
***** 
59                                                      

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO UNSTARRED QUESTIONS 
  
60                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYASABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO.2241 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
FARMER SUICIDES AND COMPENSATION TO AFFECTED FAMILIES 
 
2241  DR. SASMIT PATRA: 
SMT. MAUSAM B NOOR: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the State-wise and year-wise number of reported farmer suicides during the last five years, along with the 
officially recorded causes such as crop failure, debt burden, market price crash and input cost stress; 
(b) the proportion of deceased farmers who were tenant cultivators, sharecroppers, marginal farmers and those 
without formal institutional credit access; 
(c) the compensation, debt relief and rehabilitation measures extended to affected families and the gaps observed 
in coverage and timeliness; and 
(d) the structural policy failures identified by Government that continue to push vulnerable farmers into chronic 
distress despite multiple support schemes? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (d): The National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) under the Ministry of Home Affairs compiles and 
disseminates information on suicides in its publication titled ‘Accidental Deaths and Suicides in India’ (ADSI). 
The report till 2023 is available on NCRB website (https://ncrb.gov.in). The ADSI Report does not specify 
separate reasons for farmers suicide. Reasons for suicides are wide ranging. Ex gratia or relief is provided by 
State Governments as per their respective provisions and rules. 
 
Agriculture is a State Subject. Government of India supports the States through appropriate policy 
measures and budgetary allocation for schemes for farmers welfare. Schemes/ programmes of Government of 
India aim to increase production, provide remunerative returns and income support to farmers. The Government 
has substantially enhanced the budget allocation of Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) 
from Rs. 21,933.50 crore BE during 2013-14 to Rs. 1,27,290.16 crore BE during 2025-26. Major schemes/ 
programmes initiated by DA&FW to enhance overall income of farmers and remunerative returns in the 
agriculture sector are Annexed. 
 
The government is implementing Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) to provide loan on 
concessional  interest rate through Kisan Credit Card (KCC). Farmers receive KCC loans at a subsidized interest 
rate of 7%. To facilitate this, an upfront interest subvention of 1.5% is provided to financial institutions. 
Additionally, farmers who repay their loans promptly receive a 3% Prompt Repayment Incentive, effectively 
reducing the interest rate to 4% per annum. These benefits are available for loan limits up to Rs. 3 lakhs. 
 
As per the National Policy on Disaster Management (NPDM), the State Government is primarily 
responsible for providing necessary relief measures on ground level in the wake of notified calamities. The State 
Governments undertake relief measures in the wake of natural calamities form funds available in the form of the 
State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) in accordance with the Government of India approved Items and Norms. 
Additional financial assistance, over and above SDRF, is considered from the National Disaster Response Fund 
(NDRF) for natural calamities of ‘severe nature’ and is   approved on the basis of a Memorandum received from 
the State Government, in accordance with established procedures. The financial assistance provided under SDRF 
and NDRF is by way of relief and not for compensation. 
  
61                                                      

R.S. U.S.Q. No. 2241  for 19/12/2025 
 
Annexure 
 
Schemes/programmes of Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
 
1. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) 
2. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM-KMY) 
3. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)/ Restructured Weather Based Crop  Insurance 
Scheme (RWBCIS) 
4. Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) 
5. Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) 
6. Formation and Promotion of 10,000 new Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) 
7. National Bee Keeping and Honey Mission (NBHM) 
8. Namo Drone Didi 
9. National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) 
10. Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA) 
11. Agri Fund for Start-Ups & Rural Enterprises’ (AgriSURE) 
12. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
13. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM) 
14. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
15. Soil Health & Fertility (SH&F) 
16. Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
17. Agroforestry 
18. Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) 
19. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) 
20. Sub-Mission on Seed and Planting Material (SMSP) 
21. National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) 
22. Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM)  
23. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
24. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm 
25. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oilseeds 
26. Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
27. Digital Agriculture Mission  
28. National Bamboo Mission 
 
 
***** 
62                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
                                               UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2242 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATION OF PROF. M.S. SWAMINATHAN 
 
              2242.   DR. SASMIT PATRA: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government accepts that the comprehensive C2 cost formula recommended 
by late Prof. M. S. Swaminathan includes paid-out costs, family labour, land rent and 
capital interest as the true measure of farm cost;  
(b) the crop-wise comparison between Minimum Support Price(MSP) calculated on A2+FL 
and MSP that would prevail if fixed at C2 plus 50 per cent during the last five years;  
(c) the estimated income loss to farmers due to the non-implementation of full C2-based MSP; and  
(d) the policy, fiscal and market-related constraints preventing the legal and universal 
implementation of MSP at C2 plus 50 per cent? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
(SHRI RAM NATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (d): Every year, Government fixes Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for 22 mandated 
agricultural crops based on the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs & Prices 
(CACP), after considering the views of the State Governments and Central Ministries/Departments 
concerned.      
National Commission on Farmers (NCF), constituted under the Chairmanship of Prof. M.S. 
Swaminathan in 2004, inter alia, recommended that Minimum Support Price (MSPs) should be at 
least 50 percent more than the weighted average cost of production. To give effect to this 
recommendation, Government, in its Union Budget for 2018-19, had made an announcement to keep 
MSP at a level of minimum one and half times of the cost of production as a pre-determined 
principle. Accordingly, MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and other commercial crops have been 
fixed with a margin of at least 50 percent over weighted average cost of production.     
While recommending MSP, CACP considers important factors like cost of production, 
overall demand-supply conditions, domestic and international prices, inter-crop price parity, terms of 
trade between agricultural and non-agricultural sectors, the likely effect on the rest of the economy, 
besides ensuring rational utilization of land, water and other production resources and a minimum of 
50 percent as the margin over cost of production.  The crops wise details of cost of production, 
Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) and the rate of return over cost of production  during last 5 years is 
given in the Annexure.  
 
Increased MSP has benefited farmers of the country which are evident from data of 
procurement and MSP amount paid to the farmers. The details of procurement and MSP amount paid 
to farmers from the year 2014-15 to 2025-26 (upto October, 2025) are given as under: 
Procurement  MSP Value   
117 crore 32 lakh metric tonne 24 lakh 49 thousand crore rupees    
 
63                                                      

Annexure 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (a) to (d) of Rajya Sabha Un-Starred Question No. 2242 due for reply on 19/12/2025 
The crops wise details of Cost of Production, Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) and Rate of return during last five years    
(Rs. per quintal) 
Sl. 
No. 
Commodity KMS 2021-22 KMS 2022-23 KMS 2023-24 KMS 2024-25 KMS 2025-26 
KHARIF  CROPS Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
1  PADDY(Common) 1293 1940 50 1360  2040 50 1455 2183 50 1533  2300 50 1579  2369 50 
               (Grade A)    1960     2060   - 2203     2320     2389   
2  JOWAR (Hybrid) 1825 2738 50 1977  2970 50 2120 3180 50 2247  3371 50 2466  3699 50 
             (Maldandi)    2758     2990   0 3225     3421     3749   
3 BAJRA 1213  2250 85 1268  2350 85 1371 2500 82 1485  2625 77 1703  2775 63 
4 RAGI 2251  3377 50 2385  3578 50 2564 3846 50 2860  4290 50 3257  4886 50 
5 MAIZE 1246  1870 50 1308  1962 50 1394 2090 50 1447  2225 54 1508  2400 59 
6 ARHAR(Tur) 3886  6300 62 4131  6600 60 4444 7000 58 4761  7550 59 5038  8000 59 
7 MOONG 4850  7275 50 5167  7755 50 5705 8558 50 5788  8682 50 5845  8768 50 
8 URAD 3816  6300 65 4155  6600 59 4592 6950 51 4883  7400 52 5114  7800 53 
 
9 
  
COTTON (Medium 
Staple)   3817  
 
5726 50 4053  6080 50 4411 6620 50 4747  7121 50 5140  7710 50 
                (Long Staple)    6025     6380   0 7020     7521     8110   
10 GROUNDNUT  3699  5550 50 3873  5850 51 4251 6377 50 4522  6783 50 4842  7263 50 
11 SUNFLOWER SEED 4010 6015 50 4113  6400 56 4505 6760 50 4853  7280 50 5147  7721 50 
12 SOYABEAN  2633  3950 50 2805  4300 53 3029 4600 52 3261  4892 50 3552  5328 50 
13 SESAMUM 4871  7307 50 5220  7830 50 5755 8635 50 6178  9267 50 6564  9846 50 
14 NIGERSEED 4620  6930 50 4858  7287 50 5156 7734 50 5811  8717 50 6358  9537 50 
Note: KMS- Kharif Marketing Season  
 
(Continued…) 
64                                                      

 
Annexure Continued… 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (a) to (d) of Rajya Sabha Un-Starred Question No. 2242 due for reply on 19/12/2025 
The crops wise details of Cost of Production, Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) and Rate of return during last five years 
(Rs. per quintal) 
    RMS 2022-23 RMS 2023-24 RMS 2024-25 RMS 2025-26 RMS 2026-27 
  RABI CROPS Cost  MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
Cost MSP 
% 
Return 
over 
Cost 
1 WHEAT 1008  2015 100 1065  2125 100 1128 2275 102 1182  2425 105 1239  2585 109 
2 BARLEY 1019  1635 60 1082  1735 60 1158 1850 60 1239  1980 60 1361  2150 58 
3 GRAM 3004  5230 74 3206  5335 66 3400 5440 60 3527  5650 60 3699  5875 59 
4 MASUR (LENTIL) 3079  5500 79 3239  6000 85 3405 6425 89 3537  6700 89 3705  7000 89 
5 RAPESEED/MUSTARD 2523 5050 100 2670  5450 104 2855 5650 98 3011  5950 98 3210  6200 93 
6 SAFFLOWER 3627  5441 50 3765  5650 50 3807 5800 52 3960  5940 50 4360  6540 50 
  OTHER CROPS                               
    2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 
1 COPRA (Milling) 6805  10335 52 6974  10590 52 7153 10860  52 7350  11160 52 7721  11582 50 
               (Ball)^   10600      11000      11750  64   12000      12100    
    2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
2 JUTE 2832  4500 59 2959  4750 61 3095 5050 63 3237  5335 65 3387  5650 67 
Note: RMS- Rabi Marketing Season  
 
********* 
65                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2243 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
POLICY INTERVENTION TO ADDRESS FRAGMENTED LANDHOLDINGS 
 
2243. SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the available literature on the state of agriculture in India has pointed to the fact that 
the average landholding size in India is small and fragmented, which limits economies of scale 
and efficient farming practices; 
(b) if so, the policy intervention that exists to address this concern, the details thereof; and 
(c) if not, whether the Ministry would explore the possibility of devising such policy interventions? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (c): As per latest Agriculture Census (2015-16) conducted by the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare, the average size of operational holdings is 1.08 hectares. 
 
Land and agriculture are the state subjects, as per the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution 
of India, land comes under the purview of State Governments. Further, Government of India 
implements various Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes to support states for 
development of agriculture sector as well as for promoting interest of farmers, including small and 
marginal farmers. The list of schemes of Department Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) 
is given at Annexure. 
 
 The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is conducting research programme to 
develop location specific varieties and technologies for enhancing the production and 
productivity of farm holdings. Further, the ICAR, through its research Institutions undertakes 
research for developing technologies accessible to marginal and small farmers. Government 
promotes high-value crops and animal husbandry, which generate more returns, compared to 
staple food crops. 
 Agrarian reforms like Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) can enable small farmers to 
pool resources, reduce the inefficiencies of small plot farming, and increase productivity. Further, 
collectivization and consolidation of land could be targeted by encouraging voluntary 
consolidation of lands and fragmented plots, thereby FPOs as a farmer institution would have 
more economically viable landholdings for their operation.  
 
These initiatives demonstrate government’s commitment towards addressing the issue of 
average landholding size in India is small and fragmented (includes small and marginal farmers), 
and to achieve economies of scale and efficient farming practices. 
 
 
66                                                      

Annexure  
Annexure referred to in reply to part (a) to (c) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 
2243 regarding “Policy intervention to address fragmented landholdings” due for 
19/12/2025 
Major schemes implemented by the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare are as below: 
 
1. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) 
2. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM-KMY) 
3. Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA) 
4. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)/ Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) 5. Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) 
6. Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) 
7. Formation and Promotion of 10,000 new Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) 
8. National Bee Keeping and Honey Mission (NBHM) 
9. Namo Drone Didi 
10. Agri Fund for Start-Ups & Rural Enterprises’ (AgriSURE) 
11. National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) 
12. Rastriya Krishi Vikas Yojana- Detailed Project Report (RKVY-DPR) 
13. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
14. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM) 
15. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
16. Soil Health & Fertility (SH&F) 
17. Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
18. Agroforestry 
19. Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) 
20. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) 
21. National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) 
22. Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM) 
23. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
24. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm 
25. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oilseeds 
26. Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
27. Digital Agriculture Mission 
28. National Bamboo Mission 
 
***** 
67                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2244 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ESCROW ACCOUNTS FOR PMFBY 
 
2244  SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether all the States and Union Territories have created an escrow account to ensure the 
timely disbursal of the amount owed under the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bhima Yojana (PMFBY); 
(b) if so, details of the date of creation, name of entity managing the escrow account and amount 
held within the account for each State/UT; 
(c) if not, names of the States/UT which are yet to create an account and reasons for the delay; and 
(d) whether Government has conducted an analysis to monitor if the creation of such an account 
has reduced delays in payments of claims, if so, details thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI  RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a): As per the relevant provisions of revised Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 
Operational Guidelines, 2023 which provides for mechanism of Escrow Account wherein states/UTs 
are required to commit their liabilities in advance by releasing their share of premium subsidy in 
advance, an Escrow Account shall be maintained by State/UTs for their share in premium subsidy, 
and such other purposes as may be notified by DA&FW, Gol from time to time 
 
The State/UTs shall commit their liabilities for each season in advance through release of 50% 
advance premium subsidy based on the corresponding previous seasons premium subsidy for each 
Insurance Company in the respective Escrow Account and release subsequent instalments following 
the seasonality discipline provided in the operational Guidelines.  
The concerned lnsurance Company shall confirm the deposit of the advance upfront premium by the 
concerned State/UT government to the escrow account on the Subsidy Module of National Crop 
Insurance Portal (NCIP). NCIP would only be opened for enrolment upon receipt of such 
confirmation. 
As of now, 20 of the 24 PMFBY-implementing States have already opened the escrow account and 
utilising the same for deposit and disbursement of State/UT share in premium subsidy since Kharif 
2025. 
(b): The respective nodal State Departments i.e., Agriculture Department and Horticulture 
Departments manages the Escrow Account. The Escrow Accounts are opened in a Scheduled 
Commercial Banks or Cooperative Banks as per States own prerogative. The State Departments enter 
into a multi-party agreement with the respective Banks and implementing Insurance Companies. 
(c): The UT/States of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim are yet to open 
Escrow Accounts under the PMFBY. 
 
(d): Since the Escrow Account mechanism has been operationalized recently from Kharif 2025 
season, the possibility of impact analysis of the said mechanism does not arise. 
 
***** 
 
 
68                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2245 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF 100 DISTRICTS UNDER PMDDKY 
 
2245. SHRI DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the criteria adopted for selecting 100 districts under the Pradhan Mantri Dhan Dhaan Krishi 
Yojana (PMDDKY); 
(b)  whether any districts from Maharashtra have been included in the initial phase, along with the 
components and nature of projects proposed in each district; 
(c)  whether the Yojana includes targeted interventions to help farmers shift from water intensive 
or low-yield crops to sustainable, high-value crops in Maharashtra, if so, the details thereof; 
(d)  plans to establish cold storage, warehouses, or irrigation systems in drought-prone areas like 
Marathwada and Vidarbha; and 
(e)  steps to ensure participation of FPOs, women farmers, and Self-Help Groups in Maharashtra? 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a):  Under the Prime Minister Dhan Dhaanya Krishi Yojana (PMDDKY), 100 districts have been 
identified based on three criteria of lower crop productivity, lower cropping intensity and lesser short 
term credit disbursement. 
 
(b):  Nine districts from Maharashtra (Palghar, Yavatmal, Gadchiroli, Dhule, Raigad, Chandrapur, 
Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar, Nanded and Beed) have been selected under DDKY. 
 
(c) to (e):  The scheme aims to enhance agricultural productivity, increase adoption of crop 
diversification and sustainable agricultural practices, augment post-harvest storage at the panchayat 
and block levels, improve irrigation facilities and facilitate availability of long-term and short-term 
credit. 
69                                                      

District Action Plan is envisioned by the District Dhan Dhaanya Samiti in consultation with 
stakeholders, including farmers and panchayat functionaries. To improve irrigation facilities 
measures such as construction of farm ponds, water harvesting structures, micro-irrigation and 
training of farmers for water-use efficiency have been included in the District Action Plans, 
including in districts of Maharashtra. Creation of infrastructure (storage, value addition & processing 
units) are outcome indicators for tracking scheme progress. Similarly, increased reach of Farmer 
Producer Organisations (FPOs) and availing of equity forms part of Output indicators of DDKY, to 
ensure participations of FPOs and Farmer Interest Group (FIG) or Self-Help Groups (SHG) therein. 
To augment cold storage and warehouses, District Action Plans include construction of 
godowns, cold storage and pack houses through Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture 
(MIDH) and state schemes. Further, the district plans include setting up of godowns and primary 
processing units via FPOs/SHGs and training of FPOs on market linkages & digital platforms in 
districts identified under PMDDKY in the State of Maharashtra. 
***** 
70                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2246 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR EXPORT AND IMPORT OF AGRICULTURAL 
COMMODITIES  
 
2246. SHRI BABUBHAI JESANGBHAI DESAI: 
SHRI MEDA RAGHUNADHA REDDY: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether Government proposes to formulate a comprehensive policy on the export and import 
of agricultural commodities to ensure stability and predictability for farmers and traders; 
(b)  if so, the details thereof; 
(c)  whether Government plans to introduce a compensatory mechanism for farmers adversely 
impacted by sudden export bans, particularly in the case of onions, rice and other essential crops; 
(d) if so, the details thereof; 
(e)  whether Government intends to establish mechanisms to link farmers to global markets to 
enhance their income; and 
(f)  if so, the steps taken in this regard? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (d):  The Government maintains continuous oversight over the country’s import and export 
activities and revises trade policies as necessary to safeguard domestic interests. For essential 
agricultural commodities, there is an Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) including Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare as a member, which keeps a close and regular watch on essential 
agricultural commodities, analyzing factors that affect their availability and market conditions. It also 
monitors any rise in imports to quickly identify trends that may influence domestic production, trade, 
or food security. To protect the interests of farmers and reduce unnecessary imports, the Department 
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) reviews the import of agricultural commodities and, 
when required, recommends measures such as import duties or port restrictions to the concerned 
71                                                      

Ministry/Department. Further, Government supports farmers through several ongoing schemes and 
interventions, including: 
 Market intervention through procurement under Minimum Support Price (MSP) mechanism 
for notified crops; 
 Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF) operations for essential commodities such as onions to manage 
volatility; 
 Market intelligence and buffer stocking operations by Central agencies; and 
 Input and income support schemes, such as PM-KISAN, to cushion income fluctuations. 
These measures collectively aim to mitigate adverse impacts on farmers arising from market 
disruptions. 
 
(e) & (f): Department of Commerce through the Agricultural and Processed food products 
Export Development Authority (APEDA) provides financial assistance to its member exporters 
including, Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and Farmer Producer Companies (FPCs) from 
across the country under financial Assistance Scheme (FAS).  
 
Specifically with respect to linking farmers to global markets, APEDA provides financial 
assistance for implementation and certification of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) through its 
registered exporters to enable them to meet the requirements of the importing countries with respect 
to the quality standards designated by them. 
 
In addition to this, around 1080 of capacity building/training programs have been carried out 
during 2025-26, across India, in association with the concerned State government agencies, with a 
specific focus for exporters including FPOs/FPCs/SHGs in order to provide linkage of the farmer 
groups to export supply chain and to promote the entrepreneurs for becoming prospective exporters. 
 
Finally, APEDA organized participation of its member exporters including FPO’s and FPC’s 
in major international food exhibitions and buyer seller meets held abroad and in India like World 
Food India, Indus Food, AAHAR in India and Gulf Food etc. 
***** 
72                                                      

O.I.H. 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2247 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
PROMOTION OF FOOD GRAINS 
 
2247. SHRI RAMESWAR TELI: 
SHRI MADAN RATHORE: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government is taking steps to promote food grains in the country; 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 
(c) whether Government is encouraging production of quality seed for millet; 
(d) if so, the details thereof; and 
(e) the details of research and extension activities undertaken by Government in the last three 
years for promotion of food grains in the country? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
(a) & (b): The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is implementing the National Food 
Security & Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) in the country with the objective to increase production of 
foodgrains such as Rice, Wheat, Coarse Cereals (Maize & Barley) and Nutri-Cereals (Shree Anna) 
through area expansion and productivity enhancement.  
Under NFSNM, assistance is being provided to the farmers, through the States/UTs, for 
demonstration on crop production & protection technologies, for distribution of certified seeds, for 
production of certified seeds (nutri-cereals), for Integrated Nutrient and Pest Management measures, 
for capacity building of farmers through cropping system-based trainings etc.; and seed minikits of 
newly released varieties/hybrids (nutri-cereals), are also distributed through the states by agencies. 
The mission also provides support to Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) & State 
Agricultural Universities (SAUs)/Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) for technology back stopping and 
transfer of technology to the farmer under supervision of Subject Matter Specialists/Scientists. 
In addition, the Government of India also assists States for interventions under the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) component of the Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (PM RKVY) 
according to their own needs and priorities.  
 
(c) to (e): The DA&FW advises the States and seed producing agencies from time to time to 
place the breeder seeds indents of newly released High Yielding Varieties (HYVs) of different crops 
including millets for further multiplication into foundation and certified seeds, so as to make 
73                                                      

available required seeds of these crops varieties to the farmers in the Country. A total of 2588 Qtl. of 
Breeder seeds of various millets have been produced during last 3 year (2022-25) against the indent 
of 1290 quintals for further seed multiplication, as reported by ICAR. 
Further, as reported by the States, sufficient certified/quality seeds of millets were available 
in the country during last two and current year. The details of millets seeds are as under: 
Qty. of Seeds (in lakh quintals) 
S.No. Year Requirement Availability 
1. 2023-24 5.22 6.20 
2. 2024-25 5.55 6.64 
3.   2025-26 5.24 6.65 
 
Under the National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM), the financial assistance is 
available/ provided for different seed related activities viz., for purchase of breeder seeds, distribution 
(50% seed cost) and seed production incentives @₹1000 per Qtl. for various crops (including millets) 
under the component Boosting Seed Production of Traditional varieties (including millets), so that 
sufficient seeds could be made available to farmers. 
During 2014-2025, a total of 2065 high yielding climate resilient varieties of various food 
grain crop varieties have been released and notified. In recent years, 110 Millets varieties have been 
released by Central Varietal Release Committee (CVRC) comprising 34 of Sorghum, 24 of Pearl 
Millet; 10 of Little Millet, 6 of Proso Millet, 5 of Barnyard Millet, 4 of Kodo Millet, 8 of Foxtail 
Millet, 17 of Finger Millet and 2 of Brown Top Millet for cultivation in different agro-ecologies of 
country. Various production and protection technologies have been developed to address the 
challenges of various biotic and abiotic stresses. These include development of high yielding climate 
resilient varieties, cost effective and efficient pre & post-harvest technologies, etc. A total of 40 millet 
varieties comprising 9 of Sorghum, 13 of Pearl Millet, 3 of Little Millet, 5 of Kodo Millet, 1 of 
Barnyard Millet, 1 of Foxtail Millet and 8 of Finger Millet have been developed and released during 
2014-25 for cultivation on farmer’s field under drought/moisture stress tolerant/water stress/ low 
rainfall areas. In addition to developing high yielding climate resilient varieties of millets, the ICAR-
Indian Institute of Millets Research (IIMR), Hyderabad is extending support as a knowledge partner 
with various State Millet Mission/Agriculture departments intended to increase public awareness on 
the health benefits of millets and their suitability for cultivation under tough conditions marked by 
climate change. 
In order to develop awareness about agricultural innovations and technologies among the 
farmers, a large number of extension activities are taken up by the KVKs. The technologies are 
transferred to the farmers in several ways: mainly through organizing Frontline Demonstrations 
(FLDs), field/site visits, Kisan Melas, Farmers days, Seed days, training programmes, etc.  
****** 
74                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2248 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
INTRODUCTION OF NEW SCHEMES TO INCREASE FARMERS INCOME 
 
2248.  DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether Government plans to increase farmers income; 
 
(b)  if so, the details thereof; 
 
(c)  whether Government proposes to introduce new schemes to increase farmers income; and 
 
(d)  if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (d): Government of India follows the following integrated strategy to support States & 
UTs for increasing of farmer incomes and comprehensive growth of agriculture sector:- 
(i) Increase crop production/ productivity   
(ii) Reduce cost of production  
(iii) Remunerative returns of farmers’ produce to enhance their incomes.  
(iv) Agricultural diversification  
(v) Developing post harvest value addition 
(vi)  Adaptation to climate change for sustainable agriculture and mitigate against crop 
losses.  
 
Agriculture is a State Subject. Government of India supports the States through appropriate 
policy measures and budgetary allocation for schemes for farmers welfare. Schemes/ programmes of 
Government of India aim to increase production, provide remunerative returns and income support to 
farmers. The Government has substantially enhanced the budget allocation of Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) from Rs. 21,933.50 crore BE during 2013-14 to  
Rs. 1,27,290.16 crore BE during 2025-26.  
75                                                      

 
Major schemes of DA&FW to increase the income of farmers and for the development of 
agriculture Sector in India are as under:  
 
1. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) 
2. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM-KMY) 
3. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)/ Restructured Weather Based Crop  
Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) 
4. Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) 
5. Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) 
6. Formation and Promotion of 10,000 new Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) 
7. National Bee Keeping and Honey Mission (NBHM) 
8. Namo Drone Didi 
9. National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) 
10. Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA) 
11. Agri Fund for Start-Ups & Rural Enterprises’ (AgriSURE) 
12. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
13. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM) 
14. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
15. Soil Health & Fertility (SH&F) 
16. Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
17. Agroforestry 
18. Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) 
19. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) 
20. Sub-Mission on Seed and Planting Material (SMSP) 
21. National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) 
22. Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM)  
23. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
24. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm 
25. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oilseeds 
26. Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
27. Digital Agriculture Mission  
28. National Bamboo Mission 
 
***** 
76                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2249 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
PROPOSAL FOR GIS-BASED MARKET INTELLIGENCE PLATFORMS IN ODISHA 
2249. SMT. SULATA DEO: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a)  whether there is any proposal to set up Geographical Information System (GIS)-based market 
intelligence platforms in Odisha for farmers to track prices, demand and supply chain logistics; and 
(b)  if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH TAKUR) 
(a):  At present, no proposal to set up Geographical Information System (GIS)-based market 
intelligence platforms in Odisha for farmers to track prices, demand and supply chain logistics is 
under consideration. 
(b):  Government has been implementing Marketing Research and Information Network 
(MRIN) sub-scheme under Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) since 
2000. Under the MRIN sub-scheme, Agricultural Marketing Information Network 
(AGMARKNET) portal was launched to link important agricultural produce markets spread all 
over the country and the State Agriculture Marketing Boards and Directorates. The objective of 
AGMARKNET portal is to establish a nation-wide information network for speedy collection and 
dissemination of market information and data for its efficient and timely utilization. 
National Agriculture Market (e-NAM) is a pan-India e-trading facility which networks the 
existing physical Agricultural Produce Marketing Committees (APMCs) through a virtual platform 
to enable online trading of agricultural commodities. The portal provides a single window for all 
APMC-related information and services, including commodity arrivals, quality, and prices, purchase 
and sale offers, provision for responding to trade offers, and other services such as electronic 
payment settlement directly into farmers' accounts. 
National Agriculture Market (e-NAM) mobile app is being used in Odisha presently. This 
app is GPS based and helps farmers to track prices and is useful to manage demand and supply 
logistics. 
***** 
77                                                      

 
 
O.I.H. 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2250 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
INCENTIVES TO FARMERS FOR PRODUCTION OF COMMERCIAL CROPS 
 
2250.  SMT. MAYA NAROLIYA: 
 SHRI HARSH MAHAJAN: 
 SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH: 
 DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI: 
 SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR: 
 SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: 
 DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE: 
 SHRI SUBHASH BARALA: 
 SMT. KIRAN CHOUDHRY: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a)  whether Government is providing any incentives to farmers for growing commercial crops across 
the country, including Madhya Pradesh; 
(b)  if so, the details of those schemes, programs and incentives; 
(c)  State-wise details of the production and productivity of major commercial crops (such as 
soybean, cotton, sugarcane, groundnut, maize etc.) during the last three years and the position of 
Madhya Pradesh in this regard; 
(d) whether Government is taking any steps to promote new technologies especially in cotton and 
sugarcane crops; and 
(e) if so, details of new technologies, research, projects and training or incentives for farmers? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) & (b): Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is implementing a scheme on commercial 
crops viz., cotton, jute & allied fibres and sugarcane in all major cultivating states including Madhya 
Pradesh under National Food Security & Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) [erstwhile National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM)] from 2014-15. Under this scheme, thrust has been given on transfer of 
technology through demonstrations and training in order to extend benefits to the farmers. 
78                                                      

Government fixes Minimum Support Price (MSP) of cotton & jute and Fair & Remunerative Price 
(FRP) of sugarcane every year to encourage farmers for cultivation and ensure remunerative price.  
 
(c): The production and productivity of soybean, cotton, sugarcane, groundnut and maize during the 
last three years is Annexed.  
 
(d) & (e):  A Special Project on Cotton titled ‘Targeting technologies to agro-ecological zones-large 
scale demonstrations of best practices to enhance cotton productivity’ of ICAR-Central Institute for 
Cotton Research (CICR), Nagpur is being implemented under NFSNM from 2023-24 to enhance 
productivity of cotton through dissemination of technologies such as High Density Planting System 
(HDPS) & Closer Spacing and farmers training on best practices. 
A project titled ‘Insecticide Resistance Management (IRM): Dissemination of Pink Bollworm 
Management Strategies’ is being implemented by ICAR- Central Institute for Cotton Research 
(CICR), Nagpur since 2018-19 under National Food Security & Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) 
(erstwhile NFSM) with an objective to disseminate Pink Bollworm Management Strategies. 
ICAR-Central Institute for Cotton Research (CICR), Nagpur is implementing the 
collaborative projects related to satellite based monitoring or precision agriculture with Indian Space 
Research Organisation-National Remote Sensing Centre (ISRO-NRSC) in cotton.  
To promote new technologies such as genome editing, Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) has initiated genome editing project in 2023. The project on ‘Enhancing Climate 
Resilience and Ensuring Food Security with Genome Editing Tools’ is focusing on 24 field crops 
including cotton and sugarcane in different ICAR research institutions. During the period of 2014-
2025, a total of 131 varieties of Cotton, 218 varieties of Bt Cotton and 36 varieties of sugarcane has 
been developed under the aegis of ICAR. 
 ICAR-Indian Sugarcane Research Institute (ISRI), Lucknow and ICAR-Sugarcane Breeding 
Institute, Coimbatore are conducting research in areas such as genome editing, precision agriculture 
and smart irrigation in sugarcane. ICAR-ISRI has unveiled a model called IKSHU Cane (Integrated 
Knowledge System for Sugarcane Harvest Output) to predict sugarcane growth and yield, assess soil 
and climatic factors, and simulate sugar yield for diverse varieties in tropical/subtropical zones. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
79                                                      

 
 
 
Annexure 
 
State-wise Production & Productivity of Soybean, Cotton, Sugarcane, Groundnut and Maize 
 
 
Soybean                                                            (Production in lakh tonnes & Productivity in kg/ha) 
 
S.No. 
 
State 
Production Productivity 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 Andhra Pradesh 0.28 0.13 0.08 1838 1364 1321 
2 Gujarat 3.73 3.68 4.58 1682 1386 1523 
3 Karnataka 5.45 4.13 4.83 1184 1062 1294 
4 Madhya Pradesh 57.89 54.72 53.85 969 903 917 
5 Maharashtra 66.16 52.58 73.70 1343 1028 1453 
6 Rajasthan 12.07 11.70 11.75 1023 1038 1089 
7 Telangana 3.26 2.70 2.91 1612 1483 1884 
 All India 149.85 130.62 152.68 1145 985 1179 
 
 
 
 
Cotton                                 (Production in lakh bales of 170 kg each & Productivity in kg lint/ha) 
 
S.No. 
 
State 
Production Productivity 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 Andhra Pradesh 15.41 7.37 11.31 372 297 476 
2 Gujarat 87.95 90.57 71.57 602 574 513 
3 Haryana 10.00 15.09 11.77 296 444 502 
4 Karnataka 25.68 20.59 22.73 460 471 570 
5 Madhya Pradesh 14.33 18.01 15.35 410 486 486 
6 Maharashtra 83.16 80.45 73.73 338 323 304 
7 Odisha 7.05 7.05 8.23 554 554 586 
8 Punjab 4.44 6.29 4.14 303 500 439 
9 Rajasthan 27.74 26.22 17.86 579 444 484 
10 Tamil Nadu 3.19 2.52 2.11 313 330 350 
11 Telangana 57.45 50.80 57.89 495 475 543 
 All India 336.60 325.22 297.24 443 436 440 
 
 
  
80                                                      

 
 
 
 
Sugarcane                                                 (Production in lakh tonnes & Productivity in tonnes/ha) 
 
S.No. 
 
State 
Production Productivity 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 Andhra Pradesh 29.56 22.14 19.85 73.89 80.53 90.24 
2 Assam 12.64 13.80 12.38 43.59 47.23 42.34 
3 Bihar 127.43 120.84 121.49 60.63 59.78 63.09 
4 Chhattisgarh 23.88 20.41 18.66 56.89 57.16 55.93 
5 Gujarat 134.61 144.80 137.14 74.34 71.62 72.65 
6 Haryana 88.60 73.74 58.30 82.23 83.58 81.38 
7 Karnataka 593.46 418.11 480.60 90.00 77.00 89.00 
8 Madhya Pradesh 64.44 75.90 61.09 70.04 66.00 57.09 
9 Maharashtra 1239.68 1120.88 1099.70 91.20 78.00 94.23 
10 Odisha 3.94 4.12 6.81 53.78 57.40 51.34 
11 Punjab 75.06 75.10 72.79 83.12 83.25 82.05 
12 Rajasthan 3.10 3.45 4.65 87.96 82.98 79.98 
13 Tamil Nadu 176.58 159.27 133.51 111.08 105.00 102.00 
14 Telangana 29.43 24.33 19.16 105.10 90.12 93.06 
15 Uttar Pradesh 2242.46 2158.11 2208.01 80.24 81.35 81.17 
16 Uttarakhand 37.60 77.76 76.50 80.00 82.65 84.66 
17 West Bengal 14.43 11.04 8.79 78.20 66.58 66.58 
  All India 4905.33 4531.58 4546.11 83.35 78.95 83.42 
 
 
 
Groundnut                                                       (Production in lakh tonnes & Productivity in kg/ha) 
 
S.No. 
 
State 
Production Productivity 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 Gujarat 45.31 46.44 52.21 2570 2739 2657 
2 Karnataka 5.80 2.42 3.81 1248 648 961 
3 Madhya Pradesh 7.44 9.82 15.51 1912 2051 2207 
4 Maharashtra 2.67 2.85 3.62 1278 1257 1448 
5 Rajasthan 19.32 20.27 21.36 2400 2276 2024 
6 Tamil Nadu 9.12 8.78 7.69 2598 2694 2439 
7 Telangana 2.52 2.25 2.20 2448 2450 2106 
  All India 102.97 101.80 119.42 2075 2163 2073 
 
  
81                                                      

 
 
 
 
Maize                                                               (Production in lakh tonnes & Productivity in kg/ha) 
 
S.No. 
 
State 
Production Productivity 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 Andhra Pradesh 27.55 18.19 21.48 7138 6225 6510 
2 Bihar 43.80 57.09 54.68 5854 5975 6101 
3 Gujarat 8.57 9.09 7.95 2140 2244 1858 
4 Jharkhand 4.58 5.65 6.98 1910 2098 2418 
5 Karnataka 59.11 56.29 61.90 3092 2855 3234 
6 Madhya Pradesh 46.21 43.39 66.42 3191 2812 2884 
7 Maharashtra 39.19 24.50 47.49 2913 1847 2922 
8 Rajasthan 21.79 21.70 26.78 2277 2464 2658 
9 Tamil Nadu 29.90 28.39 26.63 7007 6239 5487 
10 Telangana 28.62 27.79 33.92 5557 5671 5860 
11 Uttar Pradesh 19.52 26.68 19.61 2191 2417 2880 
12 West Bengal 22.76 26.04 28.36 6285 6633 6999 
  All India 380.85 376.65 434.09 3545 3351 3590 
Source: UPAg Portal 
****** 
 
82                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2251 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
EXPANSION OF FPO NETWORKS IN TRIBAL AND LWE-AFFECTED DISTRICTS OF 
ODISHA  
 
2251. SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a)   whether there is a proposal to expand Farmers Producer Organisation (FPO) 
networks in tribal and Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected districts of Odisha to strengthen 
market access; and 
 
(b)  if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
(a) & (b):  Under the Central Sector Scheme for “Formation and Promotion of 10,000 
Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs)”, 10,000 FPOs have been formed.  This   includes 
471 FPOs formed in State of Odisha including tribal-dominated and Left Wing Extremism 
(LWE) affected districts. 
 District-wise list of FPOs formed in Odisha is enclosed as Annexure.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83                                                      

 
 
Annexure 
 
District-wise List of FPOs Formed under the Central Sector Scheme for 
“Formation and Promotion of 10,000 FPOs” in Odisha 
 
Sl. No. District Number of FPOs 
1 Angul 14 
2 Balangir 18 
3 Baleshwar 14 
4 Bargarh 21 
5 Bhadrak 10 
6 Boudh 3 
7 Cuttack 19 
8 Deogarh 4 
9 Dhenkanal 19 
10 Gajapati 10 
11 Ganjam 28 
12 Jagatsinghpur 10 
13 Jajpur 13 
14 Jharsuguda 8 
15 Kalahandi 22 
16 Kandhamal 19 
17 Kendrapara 14 
18 Keonjhar 20 
19 Khordha 17 
20 Koraput 21 
21 Malkangiri 9 
22 Mayurbhanj 34 
23 Nabarangpur 15 
24 Nayagarh 12 
25 Nuapada 6 
26 Puri 24 
27 Rayagada 14 
28 Sambalpur 21 
29 Subarnapur 8 
30 Sundargarh 24 
Total 471 
 
 
***** 
84                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2252 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
PROMOTING NATURAL FARMING PRACTICES AND EXTENSION SERVICES IN 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 
2252.  DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a)  whether Government will consider a climate smart incentive for natural cereal growers in 
hills, recognising ecosystem services they provide and channel additional funds accordingly, if so, 
the details thereof; 
(b)  whether Government has created a national-level Natural Farming Market Access portal that 
links Himachal’s natural cereal producers directly with buyers across the country reducing marketing 
costs and improving price realisation; and 
(c)  the measures taken to strengthen extension services in Himachal so that agronomy experts 
can regularly advise farmers on best natural farming practices for cereals and help to meet 
certification standards? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a): The Government is implementing Centrally Sponsored Scheme-National Mission on Natural 
Farming (NMNF) from 25.11.2024 to promote Natural Farming in the country including the State of 
Himachal Pradesh. Natural Farming is a chemical free farming, involving livestock integrated natural 
farming methods and diversified crop systems rooted in the Indian traditional knowledge. Natural 
farming improves soil health, restores ecosystems and reduces input cost to the farmer to achieve 
greater climate resilience. Natural farming recognises the interdependence of the natural ecosystem 
amongst soil, water, microbiome, plants, animals, climate and human requirements. Under the 
scheme, an output based incentive of ₹4000/- per acre per year per farmer for 2 years (up to 1 acre 
per farmer) is provided to the farmers to practice natural farming, training, upkeep of livestock / 
preparation of natural farming inputs including purchase of mixing & storage containers, purchase of 
natural farming inputs from Bio-input Resource Centers etc.  
 
(b): No Natural Farming Market Access portal has been created by the Department. 
  
85                                                      

(c): The State Government of Himachal Pradesh has also launched the Rajiv Gandhi Prakritik 
Kheti Khushhal Kisan Yojana (RGPKKKY) which is State level scheme to promote natural farming. 
The scheme is being implemented in convergence mode with other Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
including NMNF. NMNF is implemented in cluster mode. Each cluster consist of 50 Ha of farms and 
approximately 125 farmers residing in close proximity who are engaged in natural farming. In 
Himachal Pradesh, there are 435 clusters. The clusters are attached to State Agriculture Universities 
(SAUs)/ Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) which provide training and guidance to farmers. At present 
there are 22 SAUs/ KVKs that supervise the scheme implementation in the clusters. Community 
Resource Persons are deployed to guide the farmers on natural farming clusters.  Also, the clusters 
are assisted by Farmers Master Trainers, Scientist and Officials on the natural farming practices. 
 
The Government has launched a portal for natural farming certification for all produces of 
natural farming in accordance with the natural farming standards. The natural farming certification 
namely “PGS-INDIA NATURAL” is completely an online certification system. Certification enables 
the natural farming practicing farmers to get premium price for natural products. For the State of 
Himachal Pradesh the registered number of active farmers is 907 covering area of 613.66 Ha and 148 
certificates have been issued. 
 
***** 
86                                                      

1 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2253 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
STRENGTHENING RESEARCH INITIATIVES OF ICAR 
 
2253.  DR. AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the steps taken by Government to constitute a high -power Committee of 
distinguished agricultural technocrats to revamp and strengthen Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) research initiatives; 
 
(b) whether ICAR has sought written feedback from State Government s regarding the 
difficulties faced by farming communities;  
 
(c) the manner in which ICAR plans to conduct research customized to the local climatic, 
soil and geophysical conditions of each State to enhance agricultural productivity and 
sustainability; and 
 
(d) reasons for not considering a legislation to make ICAR’s research activities legally 
accountable, ensuring transparency, effectiveness and responsiveness to the needs of 
farmers? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI BHAGIRATH CHOUDHARY) 
 
(a): Government, from time to time, constitutes high -power committees comprising 
distinguished agricultural technocrats and other experts to review the research programmes 
and initiatives of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and to suggest ways  
for enhancing research output of the ICAR. Notable among these are: Dr G.V.K. Rao 
Committee (1988) on strengthening inter-institutional linkages; Dr Johl Committee (1995), 
to provide functional autonomy in research -related matters; and the Mashelkar Commi ttee 
(2005), aimed at improving the research base and strengthening the ICAR –industry 
interface. Last such committee was constituted in 2017 under the chairmanship of Dr 
Deepak Pental to undertake an outcome -based review of various ICAR schemes 
implemented during the XII Five-Year Plan period. 
 
(b): ICAR has eight regional committees to take the stock of various researchable issue. 
Since agriculture is the State Subject, ICAR supports State Governments in the development 
and demonstration of location specific and improved agricultural technologies thr ough its 
institutes, Agricultural Technology Applications Research Institutes (ATARIs), Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), and State Agriculture Universities (SAUs).   
87                                                      

2 
 
   
 
 
(c): ICAR conducts research specific to the local climatic and geophysical conditions for 
suitability of technologies in various agro -ecological zones, soil types, climatic type, and 
crop suitability, allowing for region -specific research and technology develop ment. ICAR 
collaborates with SAUs through All India Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) for 
addressing localized researchable issues.                         
 
 ICAR also promotes climate -resilient agriculture through development of drought -
resistant crop varieties, efficient water management practices, and sustainable farming 
techniques suitable to local climatic stresses. At district -level, KVKs provide training , 
frontline demonstrations, on-farm trials and technological backstopping. 
 
(d): ICAR a nearly century -old institution, has evolved into one of the world’s largest 
networks of agricultural research, education and extension. Since independence, ICAR has 
played a pivotal role in ensuring national food security through scientific and technological 
advancements, and has significantly contributed to positioning India as a net exporter of 
agricultural commodities. The Council has established a mechanism of scientific audit 
protocol for research activities, wherein the research programs/ activities of all ICAR 
institutes undergo annual monitoring by the Research Advisory Council (RAC) and a 
comprehensive evaluation every five years by the Quinquennial Review Team (QRT). 
These committees, assess institutional progress and provide guidance o n future research 
directions. Besides, the Institute Research Committee (IRC), oversees the planning, 
execution, and periodic review of in -house research projects. All these evaluations are for 
assessing the scientific output, institutional governance, and  financial efficiency. In 
addition, the Government, from time to time, undertakes external evaluations of ICAR’s 
schemes/ programs to assess the impact of its research programmes and to recommend 
measures for improving research efficiency, effectiveness and responsiveness to the need of 
farmers. The recent such evaluation was undertaken during 2020 –21, covering ICAR 
schemes implemented during the period of 2017–2020.  
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2254  
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
FARMERS BENEFITED BY ORGANIC/NATURAL FARMING PROMOTION PROGRAMMES 
 
2254.  SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: 
 
Will the minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) the year-wise number of orders placed by customers on the Jaivik Kheti platform for last 5 years;  
(b) the total value of transactions processed on the platform, year-wise; 
(c) the number of farmers who have benefited from Jaivik Kheti platform since its inception, 
State/UT-wise;  
(d) the steps taken by Government to strengthen, upgrade or relaunch the portal, as 
committed in the 2020 Budget speech; and 
(e) the total funds allocated, sanctioned, released and utilized under organic farming related 
schemes during the last five years, with details of scheme-wise and State/UT-wise distribution? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (d):  The Jaivik Kheti Portal has been developed as a platform to provide information to 
farmers and to facilitate marketing of organic produces.   The portal serviced 180 orders since its 
launch in 2018 and the transaction value was Rs 5.52 lakhs.  The number of farmers registered on the 
Jaivik Kheti portal since its launch are 6.23 lakhs.  To promote marketing for organic produce, the 
Government has launched PGS-India organic certification programme through Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare which enables farmers to get premium price for organic produce. 
Also, National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) under Agricultural and Processed Food 
Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) promote third party certification for organic 
produce for export market.  
 
Additional 185 Natural Farming Farmers Producer Organisations (FPOs) have been registered 
under central sector Scheme “Formation & Promotion of 10,000 FPOs”. Of these, 76 FPOs are on 
Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC) for e-commerce. 
 
 
(e):  Organic farming is being promoted through Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in all 
the States/UTs except North Eastern States and Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North 
Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) for the North Eastern States since 2015-16.  State-wise Allocation, 
release and Expenditure under PKVY and MOVCDNER Scheme from 2020-21 to 2024-25 is as per 
Annexure-I. 
  
89                                                      

 
Annexure-I. 
State-wise Allocation, Release and Expenditure under PKVY 
 
(Rs. In lakh) 
Year from 2020-21 to 2024-25 
Name of the State / UTS Allocation Release Expenditure 
Andhra Pradesh 17460.65 13774.83 11780.68 
Bihar 9083.25 3605.31 2979.29 
Chhattisgarh 15203.79 8003.61 7581.46 
Gujarat 1372.21 488.10 378.10 
Goa 2703.40 500.00 142.00 
Haryana 1209.75 5.05 0.00 
Jharkhand 6076.63 2398.86 2189.86 
Karnataka 6849.42 5275.65 1077.90 
Kerala 7656.82 4373.30 4023.71 
Madhya Pradesh 23074.51 2111.04 764.00 
Maharashtra 7408.27 4663.37 3460.25 
Odisha 5426.03 3671.71 3612.24 
Punjab 3349.06 2082.29 224.00 
Rajasthan 19074.63 7781.58 7431.42 
Tamil Nadu 4440.28 3623.98 3502.46 
Telangana 2369.70 227.15 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh 33792.45 21268.05 17881.05 
West Bengal 4052.19 3393.14 2546.19 
Himachal Pradesh 3932.50 2036.97 2034.24 
Uttarakhand 27525.50 21079.27 20085.22 
All NER  1052.87 781.37 7.57 
All UTs  6828.49 1268.10 1035.90 
Total  209942.42 112412.67 92737.50 
 
State-wise Allocation, Release and Expenditure under MOVCDNER 
(Rs. In lakh) 
Year from 2020-21 to 2024-25 
Name of the State  Allocation Released Expenditure 
Arunachal Pradesh 16667.79 11506.95 11502.04 
Assam 16242.56 7275.06 6143.61 
Manipur 22344.23 20031.96 18062.26 
Meghalaya 12035.31 6237.06 4792.06 
Nagaland 14176.09 10907.79 10907.79 
Mizoram 11599.01 7918.2 6906.2 
Sikkim 13502.57 8512.11 7808.81 
Tripura 16602.69 9879.31 9303.49 
Total  123170.25 82268.45 75426.27 
 
***** 
90                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2255 
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
RISING FERTILISER PRICES AND ITS IMPACT ON FARMERS 
 
2255. SHRI A. A. RAHIM: 
  
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether the Ministry has assessed the increase in prices of key fertilizers over the last two 
years, if so, the factors identified; 
(b) whether Government is considering any revision in subsidy or support schemes for fertilizers 
to cushion the impact on small and marginal farmers; 
(c) the steps being taken to ensure supply of affordable fertilizers and prevent distress among 
farming communities; and 
(d) whether there is a plan to promote alternative fertilizer usage or soil health practices to reduce 
dependence on imported or high-cost fertilizers? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) & (b): The maximum retail price (MRP) of urea is constant since 2018. Similarly, MRP of 
DAP is constant for the last three years since 2023-24 to 2025-26. In order to keep the price constant, 
Government of India is bearing the subsidy on both the urea and Phosphatic & Potassic (P&K) 
fertilizers. The actual expenditure on urea varies with fluctuation in price of natural gas and other 
raw material used for urea production and international import prices of Urea. Under P&K scheme, a 
fixed amount of subsidy is decided on annual/bi-annual basis and provided on notified P & K 
fertilizers. 
 
(c): In order to ensure the availability of fertilizer, before the commencement of each cropping 
season, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), in consultation with all the 
State Governments, assesses the state-wise & month-wise requirement of fertilizers. On the basis of 
requirement projected by DA&FW, Department of Fertilizers supplies adequate quantities of 
91                                                      

fertilizers to States. The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is monitored throughout the 
country by an on-line web-based monitoring system called integrated Fertilizer Management 
System (iFMS). Weekly review meeting with states is undertaken to ensure smooth availability of 
fertilizers. The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate with manufacturers and 
importers for streamlining the supplies through timely placement of indents. 
 
(d): The Government of India has notified alternative fertilizers namely, Organic Fertilizers, Bio-
fertilizers, De-oiled cakes, Organic Carbon Enhancers and Nano Fertilizers in The Fertilizer Control 
Order, 1985 to ensure supply and quality of such fertilizers.  
 
Organic farming is promoted through Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in all the 
States/UTs except North Eastern States and Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North 
Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) in the North Eastern States.  Under PKVY assistance of Rs. 31,500 
per hectare in 3 years is provided for promotion of organic farming. Out of this, assistance of Rs. 
15,000 per has is provided to farmers through Direct Benefit Transfer for on-farm/off-farm organic 
inputs including organic compost. Under MOVCDNER, assistance of Rs. 46,500 per hectare in 3 
years is provided for creation of Farmers Producer Organization, support to farmers for Organic 
inputs tec. Out of this, assistance @ Rs. 32500 per hectare is provided to farmers for off-farm/on-
farm organic inputs under the scheme including Rs. 15,000 as Direct Benefit Transfer to the 
farmers.  
 
Government promotes judicious use of fertilizer through Soil Health & Fertility scheme. The 
scheme is implemented since 2014-15 to provide Soil Health Cards (SHCs) for all farm holdings, to 
promote balanced and integrated nutrient management for improving productivity and soil 
fertility.The diagnostic soil health assessment of farmer fields is taken up periodically so as to issue 
SHCs at least once in 3 years. Since 2014-15, 25.61 crore Soil Health Cards have been generated/ 
distributed as on date across the country. Under the scheme as on date, Rs. 1970 Crore has been 
released so far since inception. 93781 farmer’s trainings, 6.80 lakh demonstrations, 7425 farmer’s 
melas/ campaigns on SHC have been organized across the country.  
***** 
92                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2256 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
RELIEF MEASURES FOR ONION FARMERS IN MAHARASHTRA 
2256. DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether unseasonal rains in Maharashtra have caused extensive damage to onion crops, 
thereby creating severe hardship for thousands of farmers; 
(b) if so, the details of the crop losses assessed and the immediate relief or assistance measures 
extended by Government to the affected farmers; 
(c) whether Government proposes to strengthen the existing crop insurance schemes and relief 
mechanisms to safeguard farmers against such calamities; and 
(d) if so, the steps being taken to expedite crop loss assessment, ensure timely disbursal of 
compensation and implement long-term mitigation strategies for the sustained welfare of 
farmers? 
ANSWER  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR)  
(a) to (d): As per the National Policy on Disaster Management (NPDM), the State Government 
is primarily responsible for providing necessary relief measures on ground level in the wake of 
notified calamities. The State Governments undertake relief measures in the wake of natural 
calamities from funds available in the form of the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) in 
accordance with the Government of India approved items and norms. The State Government 
concerned is to provide necessary relief to affected people in the event of a natural disaster 
from SDRF already placed at its disposal, through their established channel of district 
administrative machineries. Additional financial assistance, over and above SDRF, is 
considered from the National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), as per laid down procedure, in 
case of disaster of ‘severe nature’, which includes an assessment based on the visit of an Inter-
Ministerial Central Team (IMCT). The financial assistance provided under SDRF and NDRF 
is by way of relief and not for compensation of losses suffered/ claimed.   
93                                                      

 
The State Government of Maharashtra is allocated an amount of Rs.4176.80 crore 
(Rs.3132.80 crore Central share + Rs.1044.00 crore State share) for the financial year 2025-
2026 under SDRF, of which the first and second Installments of Rs.1566.40 crore each, as 
Central share is released to the State.   
As informed by the State Government of Maharashtra, during the period, February to 
October 2025, due to heavy rains, unseasonal rains and floods, onion crops were affected in 
2.99 lakh hectares. An amount of Rs.809.19 crore has been provided as relief and assistance to 
the farmers for the 2.99 Lakh hectare affected.  
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna (PMFBY) along with Restructured Weather Based 
Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) was introduced in the country from Kharif 2016 season.   
This scheme is mainly implemented on ‘Area Approach’ basis and comprehensive risk 
coverage for crops of farmers against all non-preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post-
harvest stages of the crops at very minimum premium for the farmers is provided under the 
scheme.  Admissible claims are worked out and paid directly to the insured farmer’s account 
by the insurance companies through DigiClaim module on National Crop Insurance Portal 
(NCIP), based on the yield data per unit area furnished to the insurance company by the 
concerned State Government and claim calculation formula envisaged in the Operational 
Guidelines of the scheme upon receipt of Centre and State Government’s requisite share in 
premium subsidy.   This scheme is voluntary for States and farmers as well and Govt. of 
Maharashtra has been implementing this scheme since its inception. 
 Under the scheme, actuarial/ bidded premium is charged by the insurance companies 
but farmer has to pay lower premium of maximum 2% of sum insured for Kharif season and 
1.5% of sum insured for Rabi season for food and oilseed crops and 5% of sum insured for 
commercial/horticultural crops.  The remaining of actuarial/bidded premium is shared equally 
by the Central and State Governments except North Eastern States, where it is shared in the 
ratio of 90 : 10 between Centre and State and provided to the insurance companies directly by 
the Government through fund routing agency i.e. Agriculture Insurance Company of India Ltd. 
The claims are paid only to the insured farmers under the scheme.  There is no provision to 
allocate the state wise fund. 
 The losses due to localized risks of hailstorm, landslide, inundation, cloud burst & 
natural fire and post-harvest losses due to cyclone, cyclonic/unseasonal rains & hailstorms are 
calculated on individual insured farm basis.  Farmers required to intimate the loss to the 
concerned insurance company, State Government, financial institutions/banks, online on 
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) or PMFBY app etc.     
94                                                      

The review/revisions / rationalization / improvements in the crop insurance schemes is 
a continuous process and decision on suggestion/ representations/ recommendations of the 
stakeholders/studies are taken from time to time.   Based on the experience gained, views of 
various stakeholders and with a view to ensure better transparency, accountability, timely 
payment of claims to the farmers and to make the scheme more farmer friendly, Government 
has periodically revised the Operational Guidelines of the PMFBY comprehensively to ensure 
that the eligible benefits under the scheme may reach to the farmers timely and transparently.    
    Government has taken various steps to strengthen implementation of this scheme, for timely 
settlement of claims:  
 Government has undertaken development of National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) as 
a single source of data ensuring subsidy payment, co-ordination, transparency, 
dissemination of information and delivery of services including direct online enrollment of 
farmers, uploading/obtaining individual insured famer’s details for better monitoring and 
to ensure transfer of claim amount electronically to the individual farmer’s Bank Account.   
 In order to rigorously monitor claim disbursal process, a dedicated module namely 
‘Digiclaim Module’ has been operationalized for payment of claims from Kharif 2022 
onwards.  It involves integration of National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) with Public 
Finance Management System (PFMS) and accounting system of Insurance Companies to 
provide timely & transparent processing of all claims w.e.f. Kharif 2024, in case payment 
is not made timely by Insurance Company, penalty of 12% is auto-calculated and levied 
through NCIP.    
 Delinking of Central Government share of premium subsidy from that of State 
Governments has been implemented so that farmers can get proportionate claims relating 
to the Central Government share.  
 Opening of ESCROW Account by the State Government concerned for deposit of their 
premium share in advance as per provisions of the scheme has been made mandatory w.e.f. 
Kharif 2025 season.   
 Also, towards leveraging technology in implementation of the scheme, various steps like 
capturing of yield data/Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) data through CCE-Agri App & 
uploading it on the NCIP, allowing insurance companies to witness the conduct of CCEs, 
integration of State land records with NCIP etc. have already been taken to improve timely 
settlement of the claims to farmers.   
 
***** 
95                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2257 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
COLD STORAGE CAPACITY EXPANSION 
 
2257. MS. SWATI MALIWAL: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the number of functional cold storage units in each State, along with their total 
storage capacity and current utilisation levels; 
(b) the number of new cold storage facilities established in the last five years and the 
funds allocated, released and utilised for them, State-wise; 
(c) the estimated post-harvest losses due to shortage of cold storage during the last five 
years, both in quantity and monetary value State-wise and year-wise; and 
(d) whether additional capacity expansion has been planned in States with the highest 
recorded losses, if so, the details thereof? 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a): As per available information, currently, there are 8815 cold storages in the country with 
the capacity of 402.18 lakh MT. The State/UT-wise details of Cold Storages are at               
Annexure – I.  
 
(b): Under the Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), the Ministry 
provides financial assistance on a demand-driven basis for creation of post-harvest 
management infrastructure, including cold storage facilities. Funds are allocated to 
States/UTs annually based on their proposals, Annual Action Plans, past utilisation and 
overall scheme guidelines. Release and utilisation of funds are subject to submission of 
eligible proposals, fulfilment of prescribed conditions and utilisation certificates by the 
States. 
 
However, the details of State-wise numbers of Cold Storage sanctioned in the country during 
last five years are at Annexure-II.  
96                                                      

 
 
(c): The details on State-wise and year-wise estimates of post-harvest losses attributable 
specifically to shortage of cold storage, both in quantitative and monetary terms, is not 
maintained centrally. The Post-harvest losses depends upon multiple factors such as 
harvesting, collection, grading/sorting, winnowing/cleaning, drying, packaging, 
transportation, storage at farm level and at consumption level/godowns, wholesalers, 
retailers, processing unit, transport at market level and therefore cannot be attributed solely to 
cold storage shortages. 
 
   However, as per the study commissioned by Ministry of Food Processing Industries and 
carried out by NABARD Consultancy Services (NABCONS) published in 2022, the quantum 
of quantitative harvest and post-harvest losses in selected crops were observed to be in the 
range of 3.89% to 5.92% (cereals), 5.65% to 6.74% (pulses), 2.87% to 7.51% (oil seeds), 
6.02% to 15.05% (fruits) and 4.87% to 11.61% (vegetables). The crop wise details are at 
Annexure-III. 
  
(d): The Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare is implementing the Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), under which capital assistance is provided 
for various horticulture activities, including construction/expansion/modernization of cold 
storage facilities of up to 5,000 MT capacity, across the country. Assistance under MIDH is 
provided on the basis of Annual Action Plans (AAPs) received from the States/UTs. The 
AAPs are prepared by the States/UTs in accordance with their assessed requirements, 
existing infrastructure, priority areas and availability of resources. The component of Cold 
Storage is demand/entrepreneur driven for which Government assistance in the form of credit 
linked back ended subsidy is available at the rate of 35% of the eligible project cost in 
general areas and 50% of the eligible project cost in case of NE & Himalayan States, 
Scheduled areas, vibrant villages, Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands through 
respective State Horticulture Missions.  
 
    Besides, National Horticulture Board (NHB) is implementing a scheme namely “Capital 
Investment Subsidy for Construction/Expansion /Modernization of Cold Storages and 
Storages for Horticulture Products”. Under the scheme, credit linked back-ended subsidy at 
the rate of 35% of the capital cost of the project in general areas and 50% in case of North 
East, hilly & scheduled areas for construction/expansion/modernization of cold storage and 
Controlled Atmosphere (CA) storage of capacity above 5000 MT and up to 20000 MT is 
available. 
 
     As regards additional capacity expansion in States with higher post-harvest losses, no 
separate State-specific allocation is made; however, such States are encouraged to prioritise 
cold storage and allied post-harvest infrastructure in their Annual Action Plans under MIDH. 
Proposals received from these States are considered and supported as per scheme guidelines, 
eligibility criteria and availability of funds, with a view to augmenting storage capacity and 
reducing post-harvest losses. 
 
 
97                                                      

 
Annexure – I 
Annexure-I referred in reply to part (a) of the Lok Sabha Unstrarred Question No. 2257 
for Answer on 19.12.2025 regarding “Cold Storage Capacity Expansion” 
 
State wise distribution of Cold Storages as on 30.11.2025 in the Country 
 
S. No. Name of the State No. Capacity (MT) 
    
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands (UT) 4  2210 
2 Andhra Pradesh & Telangana 480  1996340 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 2  6000 
4 Assam 45  212662 
5 Bihar 316  1490200 
6 Chandigarh (UT) 7  12462 
7 Chhattisgarh 132  586863 
8 Delhi 97  129857 
9 Goa 29  7705 
10 Gujarat 1023  4042770 
11 Haryana 387  886656 
12 Himachal Pradesh 89  181318 
13 Jammu & Kashmir 96  382564 
14 Jharkhand 60  250077 
15 Karnataka 271  930379 
16 Kerala 202  96655 
17 Lakshadweep (UT) 1  15 
18 Madhya Pradesh 341  1498651 
19 Maharashtra 672  1259932 
20 Manipur 2  4500 
21 Meghalaya 4  8200 
22 Mizoram 3  4071 
23 Nagaland 5  8150 
24 Orissa 182  579321 
25 Pondicherry (UT) 4  185 
26 Punjab 780  2642715 
27 Rajasthan 192  661876 
28 Sikkim 2  2100 
29 Tamil Nadu 188  399690 
30 Telangana 117  627131 
31 Tripura 14  46354 
32 Uttar Pradesh 2489  15101408 
33 Uttrakhand 62  206848 
34 West Bengal 517  5952997 
8815 40218862 
(Source: Directorate of Marketing and Inspection (DMI) upto 2009, National Horticulture 
Board (NHB), National Horticulture Mission (NHM), Horticulture Mission for North East & 
Himalayan States (HMNEH)) and MoFPI 
 
98                                                      

Annexure-II 
Annexure-II referred in reply to part (b) of the Lok Sabha Unstrarred Question No. 
2257 for Answer on 19.12.2025 regarding “Cold Storage Capacity Expansion” 
 
Details of Cold Storages built under Mission for Integrated Development 
of Horticulture (MIDH) during last five year (2020-21 to 2024-25) 
(Rs. in lakh) 
S. 
No. 
State No. of 
Project 
Finance Assistance Capacity (MT) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 51  9381.99 378019 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0  0.00 0 
3 Assam 3  665.64 18646 
4 Bihar 4  397.90 14533 
5 Chandigarh 0  0.00 0 
6 Chhattisgarh 25  2168.80 77401 
7 Delhi 0  0.00 0 
8 Goa 0  0.00 0 
9 Gujarat 47  6034.10 210465 
10 Haryana                   11  1597.48 40179 
11 Himachal Pradesh 9  1100.99 20374 
12 Jammu & Kashmir 31  14954.33 150874 
13 Jharkhand 1  227.04 5975 
14 Karnataka 39  5822.29 223726 
15 Kerala 1  7.00 250 
16 Madhya Pradesh 10  1331.19 60295 
17 Maharashtra 42  5503.52 206109 
18 Manipur 0 0.00 0 
19 Meghalaya 0  0.00 0 
20 Mizoram 0  0.00 0 
21 Nagaland 0  0.00 0 
22 Odisha 0 0.00 0 
23 Punjab                     63  5783.88 214976 
24 Rajasthan 7  1130.97 45744 
25 Sikkim 0 0.00 0 
26 Tamil Nadu 2  242.87 9136 
27 Telangana 27  4133.54 165460 
28 Tripura 0  0.00 0 
29 Uttar Pradesh 77  9081.65 357266 
30 Uttrakhand 1  5970.00 227 
31 West Bengal 2  131.06 4681 
  Total 453  75666.24 2204336 
 
NHB - National Horticulture Board  NHM - National Horticulture Mission 
99                                                      

Annexure-III 
Annexure-III referred in reply to part (d) of the Lok Sabha Unstrarred Question No. 
2257 for Answer on 19.12.2025 regarding “Cold Storage Capacity Expansion” 
 
Harvest and post-harvest losses of major agricultural crops and commodities 
 
Sr. No Name of Crops/ commodities % average loss 
 Cereals  
1.  Paddy 4.77 
2.  Wheat 4.17 
3.  Maize 3.89 
4.  Bajra 4.37 
5.  Sorghum 5.92 
 Pulses  
6.  Pigeon Pea 5.65 
7.  Chick Pea 6.74 
8.  Black Gram 5.83 
9.  Green Gram 6.19 
 Oilseed  
10.  Mustard 4.46 
11.  Cottonseed 2.87 
12.  Soybean 7.51 
13.  Safflower 3.06 
14.  Sunflower 4.38 
15.  Groundnut 5.73 
 Fruits  
16.  Apple 9.51 
17.  Banana 7.57 
18.  Citrus 7.71 
19.  Grapes 7.15 
20.  Guava 15.05 
21.  Mango 8.53 
22.  Papaya 6.59 
23.  Sapota 9.53 
24.  Pineapple 6.02 
25.  Pomegranate 6.82 
26.  Muskmelon 6.83 
 Vegetables  
27.  Cabbage 8.15 
28.  Cauliflower 7.89 
29.  Green Pea 6.43 
30.  Mushroom 7.20 
31.  Onion 7.26 
32.  Potato 5.96 
100                                                      

 
33.  Tomato 11.61 
34.  Tapioca 4.87 
35.  Bottle gourd 7.01 
36.  Brinjal 7.41 
37.  Beans 7.11 
38.  Radish 6.46 
39.  Capsicum 5.15 
40.  Okra 6.01 
 Livestock Produce  
41.  Egg 6.03 
42.  Inland Fish 4.86 
43.  Marine Fish 8.76 
44.  Meat 2.34 
45.  Poultry Meat 5.63 
46.  Milk 0.87 
 Plantation Crops and Spices  
47.  Arecanut 4.41 
48.  Cashew nut 3.72 
49.  Coconut 3.86 
50.  Sugarcane 7.33 
51.  Black Pepper 1.29 
52.  Chilli 6.11 
53.  Coriander 5.32 
54.  Turmeric 5.36 
Source: Study to Determine Post-harvest Losses of Agri. Produces in India conducted by 
MoFPI carried out by NABCONS (2022). 
 
 
***** 
 
101                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2258 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
PROBLEM FACING BY BANANA FARMERS IN ANDHRA PRADESH 
2258. SHRI YERRAM VENKATA SUBBA REDDY: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether serious problems are being faced by banana farmers in Kadapa, Anantapur districts of 
Andhra Pradesh due to steep fall in banana prices; 
 
(b) whether Governemnt is aware that unscheduled heavy rains, hailstorm, gusty winds in March and 
April, 2025, destroyed banana crop in thousands of acres in above districts; 
 
(c) whether Ministry is also aware that banana crop is going to ripe and cutting will takes place in 
December, 2025; and 
 
(d) steps taken by Government so far to protect banana farmers of Andhra Pradesh in general and 
Kadapa and Anantapur in particular and ensure MSP for banana? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH TAKUR) 
(a):  The prices of horticulture commodities including banana are influenced by factors of supply and 
demand, perishability, timely marketability etc. The average wholesale mandi prices (in Rs/Quintal) 
of banana in Andhra Pradesh for recent months are given below. 
Jan-
2025 
Feb-
2025 
Mar-
2025 
Apr-
2025 
May-
2025 
Jun-
2025 
Jul-
2025 
Aug-
2025 
Sep-
2025 
Oct-
2025 
2709 3128 3291 3533 3652 3585 3022 3293 2873 2966 
Source: Agmarknet 
(b): As per the information received from the Department of Horticulture, Government of Andhra 
Pradesh, 4639.80 acres of banana crop has been damaged due to heavy rains, winds and hailstorms 
in March and April 2025.  
(c): Banana is generally harvested round the year in Andhra Pradesh.  
(d): Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), a Centrally Sponsored Scheme is 
being implemented for holistic growth of the horticulture sector including banana. Under MIDH, for 
area expansion of Banana (sucker), assistance is provided @ 40% of the maximum cost of Rs. 1.10 
lakh/ha., for meeting the expenditure on planting material and pest management. Further support is 
provided for creation of post-harvest management (PHM) infrastructure, which includes packhouses, 
cold rooms, pre-cooling units, controlled-atmosphere (CA) storages, ripening chambers and reefer 
transport.  
102                                                      

Government has introduced yield based Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) and 
weather index based Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) from Kharif 
2016 to provide financial support to farmers suffering crop loss/damage arising out of natural 
calamities, adverse weather incidence and to stabilize the income of farmers etc. Comprehensive risk 
insurance is provided under the scheme from pre-sowing to post-harvest losses. The Pradhan Mantri 
Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) is voluntary for the States as well as for farmers.  
Banana is not covered under Minimum Support Prices (MSP). Government implements 
Market Intervention Scheme (MIS), a component under PM-AASHA, for procurement of 
agricultural and horticultural commodities including banana, which are perishable in nature and are 
not covered under the Price Support Scheme (PSS). The objective of intervention is to protect the 
growers of these commodities from making distress sale in the event of a bumper crop during the 
peak arrival period when the prices tend to fall below economic levels and the cost of production. 
  The State Government has reported that they are actively pursuing present situation and 
taking the following immediate measures to ensure remunerative price to the banana farmers. 
    (i) State Government has conducted multiple meetings with district administration, local 
traders and exporters to ensure the procurement of both mother and ratoon crops at 
reasonable prices. 
    (ii) The state has organized Buyers and Sellers Meets in North Indian markets, including APMC, 
Azadpur, Delhi, and interacted with major aggregators/ traders in Haryana to secure market access 
for AP bananas. As a result, North Indian aggregators have started sourcing the material from 
Andhra Pradesh. 
    (iii) The state has informed that, more than 4,000 MTs of Bananas per day are purchased by 
Traders and Exporters and sent to North Indian markets and Middle East Countries from 
Kadapa and Ananthapuramu districts. This action has already led to a gradual increase in 
prices, with prices rising by Rs.4,000/- to Rs.6,000/- per MT in the past week and the 
price is expected to increase further from the 15th of December onwards with the 
availability of the high-quality Mother crop. 
    (iv) Further, the state is educating farmers on cultural practices to be adopted for maintaining 
the quality of the fruit and providing incentives on Fruit care activities, Good Agriculture 
Practices (GAP) certification etc. 
***** 
103                                                      

1 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2259 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
TECHNOLOGIES AND PRACTICES TO INCREASE AGRICULTURAL 
PRODUCTION 
 
2259.  DR. DHARMASTHALA VEERENDRA HEGGADE: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) latest technologies and practices being promoted by Government to increase agricultural 
production and productivity in various States of the country; 
 
(b) whether Government is taking any step to encourage diversification in agriculture 
particularly to promote less water intensive crops and horticulture;  
 
(c) if so, the details thereof for Karnataka; and 
 
(d) the details of plans to promote organic farming in Karnataka? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI BHAGIRATH CHOUDHARY) 
 
(a): The Government is promoting various modern technologies and good agricultural practices 
to enhance agricultural production and productivity across States. These include development 
and dissemination of improved, high -yielding, climate-resilient and pest -tolerant crop varieties 
by ICAR and State Agricultural Universities. Promotion of precision and resource -efficient 
farming technologies such as site -specific nutrient management, laser land levelling, use of 
sensors, drones and decision -support systems is being supported under schemes including the 
Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation, National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture, 
Digital Agriculture initiatives, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana and the Soil Health Card Scheme. 
In addition, the Governm ent has approved ‘Namo Drone Didi’ to promote the use of advanced 
technologies in agriculture for improving efficiency, enhancing crop productivity and reducing 
the cost of operations, while also empowering Self Help Groups (SHGs) to function as drone 
service providers, thereby increasing their income and providing sustainable livelihood 
opportunities; adoption of efficient water management practices including micro -irrigation, 
watershed development and water -saving agronomic practices under the Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana. 
104                                                      

2 
 
 
 
 
 During 2014-25 a total of 3236 field crop varieties have been developed under the aegis of 
ICAR of which a total of 341 are drought tolerant / less water requiring Varieties, out of which 
200 are of Cereals, 25 are of Oilseeds, 43 are of Pulses, 18 are of Fibre, 16 are of Forage, 36 are 
of Sugarcane and 3 are of other crops.  
 
 Further, a total of 749 high-yielding varieties of horticultural crops, of which a total of 51 
are of Perennial Spices, 44 are of Seed Spices, 75 are of Potato & Tropical Tuber Crops, 21 are 
of Plantation Crops, 110 are of Fruit Crops, 393 are of Vegetable Crops, 38 are of Flower & other 
ornament plants, 17 are of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, were developed and notified for 
commercial cultivation.   
 
 The latest technologies that are being promoted to increase agricultural production and 
productivity in various states and technologies for management and restoration of natural 
resource base are attached as Annexure-I & II. 
 
 Promoting low -cost feeding technologies like hydroponics, silage formulations, area 
specific mineral mixtures, different feeding modules for improvement of nutrient utilization, 
reducing enteric methane emission (for example Harit dhara) and thereby impro ving livestock 
productivity in terms of meat and milk. 
 
(b): Yes, the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing the 
Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) under the Pradhan Mantri - Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (PM-RKVY) in the Original Green Revolution States viz; Haryana, Punjab and western  
Uttar Pradesh to divert the area of water intensive paddy crop to alternative crops like pulses, 
oilseeds, coarse cereals, nutri -cereals (shree anna) etc. Under the CDP, assistance is given for 
alternative crops demonstration, farm mechanization and value addition, site-specific activities, 
awareness, farmers training etc. 
 
 ICAR is promoting less water intensive agri -horti crops for crop diversification and also 
developed drought-tolerant varieties for commercial cultivation.  
 
(c): In Karnataka, the Government is promoting agricultural diversification through a 
combination of centrally sponsored schemes. These include promotion of millets, pulses, oilseeds 
and other less water-intensive crops under the National Food Security Mission  (NFSM) and the 
National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP/National Mission on Edible Oils –Oil 
Palm). The State is also encouraging expansion of horticulture crops such as fruits, vegetables, 
spices and plantation crops under the Mission for Inte grated Development of Horticulture 
(MIDH). To improve water-use efficiency, support is being provided for micro-irrigation systems 
under the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY). 
 
 The less water intensive horticultural crops like custard apple, jamun, aonla, dragon fruit, 
jackfruit and vegetables like drumstick, legumes viz. cluster bean, cowpea and dolichos bean are 
being popularized through various government schemes in the State of Karnataka. Similarly, for 
area expansion of cashew in Karnataka, financial assistance was provided by RKVY-RAFTAAR, 
Govt. of Karnataka and DCCD, Kochi. 
 
 
 
105                                                      

3 
 
 
 
 
 Two prototype Integrated Farming Systems models developed for Karnataka having 
components of diversified cropping systems, fruits, dairy, goat, poultry and boundary plantations 
and are being popularized among farmers through State and Central schemes. Farm er 
participatory farming systems with agricultural diversification concept also developed for Uttara 
Kannada, Dharwad, Gadag and Chikkaballapura districts of Karnataka. Under Pilot Project for 
Crop diversification, 4 districts of Karnataka namely Belagavi,  Uttar Kannada, Kalaburagi and 
Vijayapura have been covered in which rice is diversified with maize, blackgram, redgram and 
pigeonpea. In each of the district, 100 ha demonstrations have been made to sensitize the farmers 
and extension officers. In additio n, 16 trainings on crop diversification also conducted in these 
districts for farmers and extension officials. 
 
(d): During 2014-25 a total of 713 varieties have been released for Karnataka, out of which 78 
are Drought tolerant / less water consuming comprising 37 cereals, oil seed (4), pulses (6), Fiber 
(9), Sugarcane (17) and other crop (1). 
 
 All India Network Programme on Natural Farming (previously AINP-Organic Farming) is 
having one centre at Dharwad working on organic and natural farming in major crops and 
cropping systems. The centre has developed organic farming packages for soybean -wheat, 
groundnut-sorghum, chilli -cotton relay intercropping systems suitable for Karnataka. Suitable 
varieties for organic farming also identified. Need based capacity building programmes are also 
organized for various stakeholders such as farmers, extension agents and entrepreneurs. 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106                                                      

4 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
[Part (a) of Rajya Sabha USQ No. 2259 dated 19/12/2025] 
 
Latest Technologies that are being Promoted to increase Agricultural Production and 
Productivity in various States 
 
1. Tractor operated drip lateral and plastic mulch layer cum-planter 
2. Tractor drawn garlic dibbler for raised beds 
3. Tractor Operated Garlic Harvester for Raised Beds 
4. Image Based Variable Rate Fertilizer Applicator 
5. Tractor operated Drum Type Pneumatic Planter 
6. Side dispensing type Farmyard Manure (FYM) Applicator for Grapes Orchard 
7. SPAD Meter 2.0 
8. Hand held device for soybean disease identification 
9. Abiotic stress detection device 
10. Bunch field crop harvester 
11. Tractor-drawn coulter-based six-row liquid fertilizer applicator 
12. Small tractor operated boom sprayer suitable for field and orchard crops 
13. Unmanned track type vehicle for small farms (UMTV) with compatible multiple attachment 
      Rotary tiller, Multi-row planter, Weeder and Air-assisted sprayer 
14. Banana Pseudo stem injector 
15. Tractor operated raised bed former cum onion bulb planter for multiplier onion 
16. Tractor operated cassava harvester cum lifter 
17. Tractor operated two row sugarcane settling transplanter for portray seedlings 
18. Small tractor operated EPN applicator for sugarcane white grub management 
19. 3 IN 1 cashew nut separator, pulp extractor and fibrous material separating machine 
20. Continuous feed banana fibre extraction equipment 
21. Power operated chaff cutter 
22. Bullock drawn Jyoti multi-crop planter 
23. Naveen sickle 
24. Tubular maize sheller 
25. Power operated groundnut decorticator 
26. Naveen dibbler 
27. Peg type dry land weeder 
28. Animal drawn multi-purpose tool frame 
29. Tractor front mounted vertical conveyor reaper windrower 
30. Tractor operated vertical conveyor reaper windrower 
31. High-capacity multi-crop thresher 
32. PAU, Ludhiana wheel hand hoe 
33. Manual groundnut decorticator 
34. Tractor drawn ridge planter for winter maize 
35. Manual twin wheel hoe 
36. Tractor drawn multi-crop planter 
37. Tractor drawn broad bed former cum seeder 
38. Power tiller operated seed cum fertilizer drill 
39. Self-propelled reaper 
40. Multi-crop thresher (3.75 kW) 
41. Tractor mounted inclined plate planter 
107                                                      

5 
 
 
 
42. Manual seed treating drum 
43. Power tiller drawn Jyoti multi-crop planter 
44. Tractor front mounted forage harvester 
45. Tractor operated pneumatic planter 
46. Mat type nursery sowing technique for paddy transplanting 
47. IISR tractor operated ridger type sugarcane cutter planter 
48. Power weeder 
49. Power operated groundnut pod stripper 
50. Ridger type sugarcane cutter planter 
51. Tractor drawn Jyoti multi-crop planter 
52. Groundnut thresher 
53. Power operated hold on type paddy thresher 
54. Power tiller operated auger digger 
55. Tractor mounted rotary weeder 
56. Tractor operated multi-purpose sugarcane planter 
57. Power operated maize dehusker cum sheller 
58. Paddy straw chopper cum spreader 
59. Coconut tree climber 
60. Tractor operated garlic planter 
61. Air sleeve boom sprayer 
62. Tractor mounted root crop harvester 
63. Thresher for seed spices 
64. Seven row tractor operated seed spices planter 
65. SRI paddy weeder 
66. Tractor operated garlic harvester 
67. Tractor operated sugarcane trencher 
68. Tractor operated sugarcane trench planter 
69. Tractor operated multi-crop planter 
70. Tractor operated disc type sugarcane ratoon management device 
71. Self-propelled combine harvester for groundnut 
72. Tractor operated small seed planter 
73. Tractor operated deep furrow sugarcane cutter planter 
74. Tractor drawn turmeric rhizome planter 
75. Tractor operated check basin former 
76. Tractor operated sugarcane cum potato planter 
77. Tractor operated auger plough for green manuring and straw incorporation 
78. Low hp tractor operated intra row cum inter row weeder for orchards 
79. Tractor operated groundnut combine 
80. A self-propelled corn cob harvester 
81. Tractor operated paddy straw bale shredder cum mulcher 
82. Tractor operated hydro-mechanically controlled m.b. plough for orchards 
83. Mini groundnut combine 
84. Tractor operated automatic reversible mechanical two bottom mould board plough 
85. Garlic raised bed weeder 
86. Garlic clove planter for raised bed 
87. Smart Seeder (strip-Till seeder) 
88. Self-propelled mini maize harvester 
89. Tractor operated seeder for mat type paddy nursery 
90. Tractor operated turbo bund former for mulched fields 
108                                                      

6 
 
 
 
91. Tractor operated potato digger-cum-collector 
92. Tractor operated sugarcane leaf shredder 
93. Tractor operated two row forward – reverse rotavator for sugarcane crop 
94. Tractor operated small groundnut combine 
95. Hand tool for okra (bhindi) harvesting 
96. Collection mechanism for tractor drawn potato digger 
97. Non-invasive type Respiration Rate Monitor 
98. Sensor based mechanized washing system for cattle before milking 
99. Batch type Cattle Washing Unit 
100. Cattle Grooming Unit 
101. Bullock drawn Multi-crop Precision Dibble Seeder 
102. Bullock Drawn Multi-crop Planter cum Slurry Applicator 
103. Bullock-drawn Biogas Slurry Applicator 
104. Battery Powered Two-Row Root Wash Manual Transplanter 
105. Remote Controlled Paddy Seeder 
106. Light Weight Multi-crop Thresher 
107. Finger Millet Thresher cum Pearler 
108. Manual Nursery Cutter for mat type paddy nursery 
109. Solar refrigerator with ice bank thermal storage 
110. Solar dryer with thermal storage 
111. Pilot Scale Torrefaction Unit 
112. Fast Decomposition Methodology for Biogas Generation from Paddy Straw 
113. Tubular condenser integrated biooil unit 
114. Power cum Manual Operated Fruit and Vegetable Grader 
115. Automatic Fruit Grader  
116. Technology for production of chemical free grape raisins 
117. Abrasive peeling machine for medicinal tuber crops 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109                                                      

7 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
[Part (a) of Rajya Sabha USQ No. 2259 dated 19/12/2025] 
 
The Latest Technologies and Practices 
 
ICAR develop and disseminate the technologies for management and restoration of natural 
resource base  i.e. soil, water, climate and biodiversity through 16 institutes. The latest and 
important technologies are as under: - 
 
1. Integrated Farming Systems (IFS):  80 IFS models developed across 26 States/UTs to 
enhance the sustainability in agriculture production; 38 were bankable projects financed 
by NABARD. 
2. Organic Farming: 80 organic farming packages developed and disseminated; 100+ crop 
varieties identified; updated PGS protocol. 
3. Natural Farming Initiatives:  Research initiated in 20 centres in 16 states, potential 
domains identified NF, Developed generic protocol, delineated and field manual for NF, 
Launched model farm at 200 location; and CRG under NMNF. 
4. Validation of Natural Farming Practices: Validation and refinement of Natural farming 
package of practices in 8 major cropping systems besides characterization of inputs such 
as Jeevamrit, Ghanjeevamrit, Beejamrit, Neemaster, Agniaster etc. 
5. Climate Risk and Vulnerability Assessment:  Assessed risk and vulnerability of 
predominantly agricultural districts to climatic hazards as per Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) protocols in which 109 districts are categorized as ‘very highly’ 
and 201 districts as ‘highly’ vulnerable. 
6. Agricultural Contingency Planning:  Prepared district level Agricultural Contingent 
Plans for 651 districts and shared with the states/ vulnerable districts besides other 
stakeholders to cope up with any climatic adversities. 
7. Climate-Resilient Technology Demonstrations:  Demonstrated climate resilient 
technologies in 151 most vulnerable districts covering 448 villages to cope with various 
climatic aberrations and enhance farmers income, benefiting 8.5 lakh farmers across crops, 
livestock, and fisheries. This is being repl icated in 10000 villages by DAF&W and 5000 
village in POCRA project Maharashtra. 
8. In-situ Moisture Conservation:  In-situ moisture conservation through BBF, ridge and 
furrow planter. More than 25000 BBF planters sold during the last 5 years in six states. 
9. Climate Change Vulnerability Atlas:  Atlas on vulnerability of Indian agriculture to 
climate change and prioritization of rainfed areas in the country. Providing micro -level 
agromet advisory services. 
10. Soil Geo-portal Development: Developed Soil Geo-portal ‘BHOOMI’ to host all the data 
related to soil and water management. 
11. Strengthening Soil Diagnostics: Strengthened soil diagnostics through the National Soil 
Spectral Library (>40,000 spectra), improving farmer nutrient decisions. 
12. Portable Soil Testing Technology:  Developed a portable soil test kit/mini lab (Mrida 
parikshak) to supplement soil testing service and which was used for analyzing and 
distributing 30 million soil health cards in the country. 
13. Soil Fertility and Degradation Mapping: Prepared geo-referenced soil fertility maps for 
20 states & ready reckoners for soil test -based fertilizer recommendations. 
Prepared/updated Soil erosion maps, Ravine area map, Coastal erosion map, SLTL maps, 
Soil erosion control priority maps, Rainwater harvesting potential map (30 m resolution) 
for 15 states. 
110                                                      

8 
 
 
 
14. Resource Conservation Technologies: Standardized resource conservation technologies 
(DSR, zero tillage, laser levelling, bed planting, SRI, LCC etc.) to save water, nutrient, 
labor and energy. 
15. Agroforestry Development:  80+ agroforestry models developed; Mapped area under 
different AF over 28.4 million ha. 
16. Agroforestry Policy Support:  National Agroforestry and state agroforestry policy 
documents prepared. Accreditation of nursery for quality planting material. 
17. Soil and Water Conservation Technologies:  Developed/standardized soil  and water 
conservation technologies delivering 30–50% reduction in runoff and soil erosion, 20–45% 
higher groundwater recharge, 20 –60% yield increase, and 25 –100% farm income 
improvement, significantly reducing land degradation. 
18. Multipurpose Rubber Dam Technology: Developed multipurpose rubber dam for water 
storage, to reduce soil erosion, enhance ground water recharge and safe disposal of 
sediments. Which was successfully operationalized in 33 locations spread over 8 States in 
the Country. 
19. Drip-Fertigation Scheduling: Standardized drip-fertigation schedules for 34 crops which 
showed promising outcomes with 9-80% higher yield, 11-71% irrigation water saving, 18-
25% fertilizer saving and 10-200% higher income from various crops grown under varying 
soil textural classes across the country. 
20. Alternate Wetting and Drying (AWD) Technology: Standardized Alternate Wetting and 
Drying (AWD) for rice saving 17% irrigation water, and drip fertigation for 34 crops 
boosting yields by 9–80%, FUE by 12–23%, and saving 11–71% water. 
21. Technologies for Problem Soils:  Developed cost -effective liming technology for 
amelioration of acid soils, reclamation technology for salt affected soils and sub -surface 
drainage technology for waterlogged saline soils. 
22. Reclamation of Salt -Affected Soils: Soil reclamation technology developed by ICAR -
CSSRI Karnal reclaimed 1.45 mha salt affected soils in 8 states contributing 22 lakh ton 
food grains to national food busket.  
23. Soil Productivity Improvement in sodic and acidic: Enhanced productivity of sodic and 
acid soils (15 –35% yield gains) across 25 million ha using gypsum and liming, and 
developed microbial inoculants, fertilizer prescriptions for 31 crops, Nano Rock 
Phosphate, and organo -mineral fertilizers to improve nutr ient-use efficiency and reduce 
dependence on mineral fertilizers. 
24. Sub-surface Drainage Adoption:  Cost effective sub -surface drainage technology for 
waterlogged saline soils has been widely adopted in Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka. More than 1,10,000 ha 
waterlogged saline soils have been reclaimed so far. 
25. Salt-Tolerant Crop Varieties: Developed salt tolerant varieties of rice (CSR 46), wheat 
(KRL-283), mustard capable of producing about 25% higher seed yield and 29% higher 
oil yield over national checks. Annually, around 6.5 t breeder seeds of these varieties are 
being produced to cover 6.45 lakh ha area in nine salt affected states. 
26. CSR-BIO Bio -Growth Enhancer:  Developed CSR -BIO: A potential bio -growth 
enhancer for higher and sustainable crop productivity of salt affected soils. A cost effective 
bio-growth enhancer CSR-BIO in both liquid and solid forms comprising of two promising 
compatible bacterial strains CS R-B-2 (Bacillus pumilus), CSR -B-3 (Bacillus 
thuringenesis) and one fungal strain CSR -T-1 (Trichoderma harzianum). It acts as soil 
conditioner and bio-catalyst. 
 
 
111                                                      

9 
 
 
 
27. Rapo-Compost Technology:  Rapo-compost technique - The technology has been 
developed by ICAR-IISS in collaboration with ICAR -CIAE and ICAR -NBAIM, Mau to 
decompose kitchen waste and vegetable wastes. Using consortium of Ligno -cellulolytic 
thermophilic organisms, decomposition period has been considerably reduced to 45 days. 
28. Alternative Cropping Systems:  Efficient alternative cropping systems with agronomic 
management practices have been identified, documented and recommended for different 
agro-climatic zones having potential productivity ranging from 16 to 35.2 t ha -1 year-1. 
These alternative systems along with production packages have been included in the Crop 
Production Guide /package of practices of 19 states. 
29. Land Resource Inventory (LRI):  Completed Land Resource Inventory (LRI) for >100 
lakh ha, enabling micro-level land-use planning that can raise productivity by 10–25% and 
reduce soil degradation by 20–40% under sustainable management practices. 
30. Watershed Management Models: Developed 75 model watersheds with location specific 
soil and water conservation measures. 
31. JholaKundi Water Harvesting: JholaKundi: A low cost water harvesting technique for 
augmenting production of Jhola lands in Eastern Ghats High Land Region of Odisha. 
32. Soil Resource Mapping: Prepared soil resource maps of the country (1:1 million scale), 
states (1:250,000 scale) and 55 districts (1:50,000 scale); soil degradation map of the 
country (1:4.4 million scale) & state soil erosion maps (1:250,000 scale), Soil resource 
maps on 1:10,0 00 scale of selected watersheds (267), villages (173) and research farms 
(106). 
33. Agro-Ecological Regionalization:  Twenty agro -ecological regions and sixty agro -
ecological sub-regions of the country have been delineated and mapped on 1:4.4 million 
scale. 
34. Agri-Voltaic Systems: Developed Agri-voltaic system to enhance crop production and 
electricity generation from a single land use system. 
35. Desertification Assessment:  The desertification status map of Rajasthan state was 
prepared. The most significant process of desertification in the state is wind erosion. 
36. Wind Erosion and Desertification Control:  Developed sand dune stabilization and 
shelterbelt plantation technologies to check wind erosion & desertification. 
37. Improved Ber Propagation: Developed improved Budding technique of ber. The institute 
sold more than 1.2 lakh elite saplings of ber using this technology. 
38. Gum Exudation Technology:  Gum exudation technology from Acacia Senegal. 
Technology has been widely adopted in 45 villages in Jodhpur, Barmer, Bikaner, and 
Nagaur districts of Rajasthan benefiting 5080 farmers. 
39. Solar-Based Farm Technologies:  A total of nine units three each of animal feed solar 
cooker, inclined solar dryer and solar PV duster were got fabricated and procured for 
installation in selected villages of Jodhpur and Pali district. 
40. Technologies for North East Region: Fifty seven crop varieties including rice (34), pulses 
(7), oilseeds (2), tuber drops (2), tomato (6), brinjal (2), turmeric (1), papaya (1), pineapple 
(1) and Jatropha (1) had been released by the institute for the North East region. Developed 
32 locatio n specific IFS models. Developed technology for utilization of Rice fallow. 
Developed technology rehabilitation of Jhum land. 
41. Weed Atlas and Management Practices:  Weed- Atlas of weed flora of major cropping 
system, PoP for 7 major weeds developed. 
42. Precision Planter cum Herbicide Applicator:  A precision planter cum herbicide 
applicator: The applicator was designed and developed to sow the seed and fertilizer 
precisely along with application of pre -emergence herbicide. The alternator is backed by 
the tractor battery power. 
112                                                      

10 
 
 
 
43. Integrated Weed Management Modules:  Integrated weed management modules 
developed and disseminated to 23 states for adoption. 
44. Biological Weed Control and Bioremediation:  Provided technology backstopping for 
biological control of Parthenium, water hycynth. Developed Weed Typha sp. - a good 
candidate for bioremediation of pollutants from drain water. 
45. Vegetable and Pulse Varieties Development for eastern region:  Total 55 
varieties/hybrids of Brinjal, tmato, cucumber, cowpea, bottle gourd, bitter gourd, ridge 
gourd, sponge gourd, pumpkin, chilli, French bean, pea, faba bean, pointed gourd, 
limabean, soybean, capsicum, snow pea, delicious bean, etc. have been devel oped by the 
institute for the cultivation in rainfed and Hill & Plateau region. 
46. Integrated Aquaculture Systems: Developed and standerdized integrated Fish-Makhana-
Water chestnut production. 
47. Coastal Agriculture Research and Varieties:  ICAR-CCARI, Goa focusing research 
exclusively on coastal agriculture and allied sectors covering both east and west coastal 
regions of the country. New varieties of Cashew (Goa Cashew - 2, Goa Cashew - 3 and 
Goa Cashew - 4) of rice (Goa Dhan - 1 and Goa Dhan - 2), Goa cowpea -3 were released. 
48. Sugarcane Ratoon Management Technology:  Multipurpose SORF machine developed 
by NIASM for sugarcane ratoon and demonstrated successfully in farmer field and has 
potential in 2.5 million ha. 
49. Introduction of Dragon Fruit:  Demonstrated Dragon Fruit as a new fruit crop. It has 
potential in 1 lakh ha less fertile barren and rocky lands. 
****** 
 
 
113                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2260 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
PRODUCTION OF MILLETS THROUGH SHREE ANNA YOJANA 
 
2260. SHRI GOLLA BABURAO: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government is giving much emphasis on Millets through Shree Anna and other 
schemes and programmes; 
(b) constraints in setting up National Millet Board in the country to provide support, 
marketing, processing etc; 
(c) status of implementation of Shree Anna Yojana since its implementation; 
(d) steps being taken to push production and export of millets in the country, with a 
particular reference to Andhra Pradesh; and 
(e) the steps being taken by Government to make India a global leader in millets production 
and export? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
(a) to (e): The Government of India has taken several initiatives for promotion of millets (Shree 
Anna). The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare intensively promotes and supports 
millet farmers through its programmes like the National Food Security and Nutrition Mission 
(NFSNM) for enhancing the production and productivity in the country.  
 
To increase the cultivation and productivity of millets (Shree Anna), the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is implementing a Sub Mission on Nutri-Cereals under the 
National Food Security & Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) in the 28 States including Andhra 
Pradesh and 2 Union Territories (UTs). 
  
114                                                      

Under NFSNM-Nutri-cereals (Shree anna), assistance is being provided to the farmers, 
through the States/UTs, for demonstration on crop production & protection technologies, for 
distribution of certified seeds, for production of certified seeds, for Integrated Nutrient and Pest 
Management measures, for capacity building of farmers through cropping system-based 
trainings etc.; and seed minikits of newly released varieties/hybrids, are also distributed 
through the states by agencies. The mission also provides support to Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) & State Agricultural Universities (SAUs)/Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) for technology back stopping and transfer of technology to the farmer under 
supervision of Subject Matter Specialists/Scientists.  
 
Flexibility has been given to States / UTs to identify districts for implementation of 
different components of the Mission, subject to inter alia conditions that prioritize districts with 
low productivity but high potential. 
 
To promote the use of millets in food products and encourage value addition, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) is implementing the Production Linked 
Incentive Scheme for Millet-Based Products (PLISMBP). In addition, the Agricultural and 
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) has undertaken several 
initiatives, including capacity-building programmes, virtual buyer-seller meets, global 
marketing campaigns, e-catalogues and establishment of an Export Promotion Forum (EPF) to 
strengthen the export ecosystem for millets. Further, assistance is being extended to start-ups 
engaged in the development of value-added millet products, particularly in the Ready-to-Cook 
(RTC) and Ready-to-Eat (RTE) segments. Millets have also been integrated in major national 
nutrition and welfare programmes.  
 
The "International Nutri-Cereals Convention 6.0 (INCC6.0)" was organized by ICAR-
Indian Institute of Millet Research in Hyderabad on October 18th & 19th, 2024 themed "Status, 
Issues, and Strategies on Mainstreaming Millets as the Commodity of the Decade," the event 
provided a platform for expert insights, policy discussions, and showcased start-up success 
stories. By bringing together key stakeholders, the convention aimed to foster collaboration, 
promote millets as sustainable and healthy alternatives, and guide the development of a robust 
millet value chain for global mainstreaming. APEDA showcased value-added millet products 
during the convention. 
  
115                                                      

In association with ICAR-IIMR, Hyderabad and Nutrihub, APEDA organized 
orientation programmes and webinars on export licensing for millet-based startups and FPOs, 
enabling better awareness of export procedures and regulatory requirements among 
participants from multiple states. 
 
APEDA collaborated with institutions such as National Academy of Agricultural 
Research Management (NAARM), National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management 
(MANAGE), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), National 
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED), National Seeds 
Corporation Ltd. (NSC), Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), Plant 
Quarantine authorities etc. to undertake capacity-building initiatives for FPOs, startups, women 
entrepreneurs and food processors  and to address key interventions for agricultural 
development and export enhancement in Andhra Pradesh. 
 
To strengthen the research collaboration and public awareness of millets globally, a 
new initiative viz., “Millets And otHer Ancient GRains International ReSearcH Initiative 
(MAHARISHI) has been adopted since the G20 Presidency. This initiative aims to create a 
global ecosystem for research collaboration, germplasm exchange, and technology transfer, 
with India serving as the hub. By setting global benchmarks in research and leading the 
development of international standards for millet products, India is effectively establishing 
itself as the "Global Hub for Millets," driving leadership in both production technologies and 
export capabilities. 
****** 
 
116                                                      

 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2261 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT OF FARMERS 
 
2261. SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) specific steps being taken by Government to modernize agriculture and make farmers 
more economically empowered, especially in terms of technology, education and access to 
modern farming techniques; 
(b) whether there are any skill development programs, training sessions, or subsidies 
available to help farmers adopt advanced farming practices, improve yields, and access global 
markets; and 
(c) the manner in which Government is encouraging the use of alternative income sources 
or non-farm-based activities to improve the economic condition of farmers? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
 (SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a): A Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Support to State Extension Programs for Extension 
Reforms” (ATMA) is being implemented in 734 districts of 28 states & 5 UTs for promoting 
decentralized and farmer-friendly extension system in the country since 2005-06. The 
objective of the Scheme is to support State Government’s efforts and to make available latest 
agricultural technologies and good agricultural practices in different thematic areas of 
agriculture and allied areas to farmers to modernize agriculture through different extension 
activities viz; Farmers Training, Skill Training of Rural Youth, Demonstrations, Exposure 
Visits, Kisan Mela, Mobilization of Farmers Groups and organizing Farm Schools etc.  
 
(b): In order to improve skills of Rural Youth in different thematic areas of Agriculture a 
skill development program namely Skill Training of Rural Youth (STRY) is under 
implementation since 2015-16. STRY is implemented by National Institute of Extension 
Management (MANAGE) with the support of State Agricultural Management and Extension 
Training Institutes (SAMETIs) and Agriculture Technology Management Agency (ATMA). 
Skill Training of Rural Youth (STRY) aims at providing short duration skill-based training 
programs to rural youth including farmers on agri-based vocational areas. More than 86,000 
rural youth including farmers have been trained so far under the scheme since 2015-16. 
 
 
 
 
117                                                      

  
 
    Under Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation (SMAM), in order to make farm 
machinery more accessible and affordable to farmers, financial assistance @ 40-50% of the 
cost of machinery depending on the category of farmers is provided for purchase of 
agricultural machines. 
 
(c):  Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) 
has been strengthening non-farm specific livelihoods by empowering the women and their 
family members to promote/strengthen their units under different sub-components of Start-up 
Village Entrepreneurship Programme (SVEP) umbrella. SVEP creates an enabling rural 
business development ecosystem which supports the Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and their 
family members to set-up small enterprises in the non-farm livelihoods sector.  It is 
implemented in 31 States and Union Territories. 
  
DAY-NRLM also focuses on strengthening market access, brand visibility, and 
income generation opportunities for SHG women. The efforts were directed towards 
developing a structured and sustainable marketing ecosystem encompassing institutional 
strengthening, brand development, digital enablement, and market convergence. The 
overarching objective was to empower SHG entrepreneurs by integrating them into 
mainstream markets through physical and digital platforms. Special Trademarks as brands 
registered by the Ministry of Rural Development at National Level such as “Saras”, “Saras 
Aajeevika” and “Aajeevika” for promotion of SHG products at National, Regional, State and 
District are expanded.  
 
 
***** 
118                                                      

O.I.H. 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION No. 2262 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
FARMERS BENEFITED UNDER AGRICULTURE INFRASTRUCTURE FUND 
 
2262.     SHRI MAHENDRA BHATT:  
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) the categories of farmers selected under the Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF); 
(b) the number of farmers benefited under this scheme; and 
(c) the number of farmers in Uttarakhand benefited under this scheme? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 (SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a):  The Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) scheme is available to  all farmers and also a 
range of entities such as Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Primary Agricultural Credit 
Societies (PACS), marketing/multipurpose cooperative societies, Self Help Groups (SHGs), 
Joint Liability Groups (JLGs), Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC),agri-
entrepreneurs, start-ups, and Central/State agencies. 
 
(b) & (c):  Since the inception of the Scheme in July 2020 and up to 25.11.2025, the AIF 
Scheme has been availed by 67,007 individual farmers including 307 from Uttarakhand. 
Beside, overall 1,39,837 cases have been sanctioned, including 680 in Uttarakhand. The entities 
like FPOs, PACs etc have many member farmers, exact number of which are not maintained 
centrally.  
 
***** 
119                                                      

 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 UNSTARRED QUESTION NO: 2263 
 ANSWERED ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2025 
  
MEGA FOOD PARKS AND AGRO-PROCESSING CLUSTERS IN KARNATAKA 
 
2263. SHRI G.C. CHANDRASHEKHAR: 
 
Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the number of mega food parks and integrated agro -processing clusters sanctioned in 
Karnataka; 
(b)  the funds released and utilised under the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY); and 
(c)  whether new proposals from drought-affected districts have been approved recently? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH) 
 
(a): The Ministry has approved two Mega Food Parks (MFP) and three Agro Processing Clusters 
(APC) projects in the State of Karnataka. 
 
(b) to (c):  All component schemes under the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
are demand driven, and proposals for setting up food processing units are invited from across the 
country through the Expression of Interest process. Ministry has approved a total of 98 projects  
under PMKSY in the State of Karnataka, with grants -in-aid amounting to ₹403.83 crore, out of 
which ₹309.48 crore has been released. Details of district wise projects approved under PMKSY in 
the state of Karnataka are at Annexure.  
 
 
***** 
  
120                                                      

ANNEXURE  
 
REFERRED TO PART (b) TO (c) OF RAJYA SABHA UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2263 
REGARDING OF MEGA FOOD PARKS AND AGRO -PROCESSING CLUSTERS IN 
KARNATAKA ANSWERED ON  19.12.2025 
Districts wise projects approved under PMKSY in the state of Karnataka 
Sr. 
No. Name of the Schemes under PMKSY Project Name District 
1 Mega Food Park Scheme (MFP) Integrated Food Park Ltd Tumkur 
2 Mega Food Park Scheme (MFP) Favorich Infra Pvt Ltd Mandya 
3 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Atharvass Traders Pvt Ltd. 
Hassan, 
Belgam, 
Bangalore 
4 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Innova Agri Bio Park Ltd Kolar 
5 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Vijaykant Dairy & Food Products Ltd Belgaum 
6 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Basweshwar Industry Belgaum 
7 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) 
Namdhari Animal Genetics Private 
Limited Tumkur 
8 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Dairy Classic Ice Creams Pvt Ltd Ramnagara 
9 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Srikrishna Milks Private Limited Uttar Kannada 
10 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) 
Malpefresh Marine Exports Private 
Limited. Udipi 
11 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Hitech Food Process (SC) Bijapur 
12 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Ideal Icecream Dakshin 
Kannada 
13 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Yashaswi Fish Meal & Oil Company Dakshin 
Kannada 
14 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) BAMUL Ramnagara 
15 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Agro Tech (ST) Belgaum 
16 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Square Meal Private Limited Bangalore 
17 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Golden Hatcheries Haveri 
18 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) PROVIT FOODS PVT LTD Dakshin 
Kannada 
19 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) Navya Industry Vijayapura 
20 Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) 
Microtrol Sterillisation Services 
Pvt.Ltd Tumkur 
121                                                      

21 Infrastructure for Agro -Processing 
Clusters Scheme (APC) M/s GEM Food Park LLP Devanagere 
22 Infrastructure for Agro -Processing 
Clusters Scheme (APC) M/s Udupi Food Park Udupi 
23 Infrastructure for Agro -Processing 
Clusters Scheme (APC) 
M/s Sri Lakshmibalaji Agro Park 
Private Ltd Koppal 
24 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s. Hain Future Natural Products 
Pvt Ltd Tumkur 
25 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Petunt Food Processors Pvt Ltd Tumkur 
26 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Ella Foods Kolar 
27 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Ramkrishna Industries Bagalkot 
28 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Sproutlife Foods Pvt. Limited Tumkur 
29 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Sankraman Organic Foods Pvt 
Ltd Mandya 
30 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s R G Kasat Industries Pvt. Ltd Bagalkot 
31 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Ashwarooda Enrich Foods Mandya 
32 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Sri Venkateshwara Industries Mysuru 
33 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
Sri Balaji Industries Mysuru 
34 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Avantnature Foods Private 
Limited Tumkur 
35 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Maxvita Foods (India) Private 
Limited Mandya 
36 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Trubare Fresh Foods Pvt. Ltd. Tumakuru 
122                                                      

37 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s GroFresh Agrofoods Pvt Ltd Tumkur 
38 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s VB Foods Bengaluru 
Urban 
39 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Elveety Products Private Limited Dharwad 
40 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Tenguraja Coco Products Udupi 
41 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Jubliant Food Works Limited Bangalore 
Rural 
42 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Sridevi General Engineering Bengalore 
Rural 
43 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Kanishka  Beverages India Pvt. 
Ltd 
Bengalore 
Rural 
44 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Sri Lakshmibalaji Agro Park Pvt. 
Ltd Unit- 1 Koppal 
45 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Sri Lakshmibalaji Agro Park Pvt. 
Ltd (Unit- 2) Koppal 
46 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Allen Cashew Industries Udupi 
47 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Parishudh Industries Udupi 
48 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing 
& Preservation Capacities Scheme 
(CEFPPC) 
M/s Sri Lakshmibalaji Agro Park Pvt. 
Ltd Unit-III Koppal 
49 Scheme for Creation of Backward and 
Forward Linkages M/s Basweshwar Industry Belgaum 
50 Scheme for Creation of Backward and 
Forward Linkages Gem Sales Bijapur 
51 Scheme for Creation of Backward and 
Forward Linkages M/s F3 Marine Foods Worlwide Udupi 
52 Operation Greens (OG) Karavan Chikkaballapur 
53 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure Bangalore Test House Bangalore 
123                                                      

54 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure 
University of Agricultural Sciences, 
Raichur Raichur 
55 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure 
Bangalore Analytical Research 
Center Pvt. Ltd. Bangalore 
56 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure Shiva Analytical Pvt. Ltd. Bangalore 
57 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure TUV India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore 
58 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure 
Eurofins Analytical Services India 
Pvt. Ltd. Bangalore 
59 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure 
Shriram Institute for Industrial 
Research, Bengaluru Bangalore 
60 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure Eureka Analytical, Bangalore Bengaluru 
Urban 
61 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure 
University of Agricultural Sciences, 
Raichur- Raichur 
62 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure ALS Testing Services India Pvt Ltd Bangalore 
Rural 
63 Food Safety & Quality Assurance 
Infrastructure Banjara Lambani Samaj Bangalore 
64 Research & Development 
Development of bio -fumigation 
system for safe storage of food 
commodities against stored product 
insect pests (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
65 Research & Development 
Development of an Antimicrobial 
Protein/Peptide for Food Industries  
(CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
66 Research & Development 
Development of an edible coating 
containing bioactives from mulberry 
leaves for the management of bell 
pepper anthracnose (CFTRL, 
Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
67 Research & Development 
Technology development for 
micronutrient fortification of 
semolina, dalia, bansi rava and its 
utilization in traditional and pasta 
products (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
68 Research & Development 
Design, development and application 
of novel functional naonfiltration 
membranes for the processing of 
vegetable oils (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
69 Research & Development 
Development of millet based gluten -
free breads (CSIR -CFTRI, Mysuru, 
Karnataka) 
Mysuru 
124                                                      

70 Research & Development 
Development of value added products 
from coffee leaves (CSIR -CFTRI, 
Mysuru, Karnataka) 
Mysuru 
71 Research & Development 
Design and Development of 
Continuous Rice Cooking Machine 
(CSIR-CFTRI, Mysuru, Karnataka) 
Mysuru 
72 Research & Development 
Process technology for instant mixes 
for varieties of payasam, Kheer and 
Phirni using Dry Crystallisation 
Approach (NDRI, Southern Regional 
station Bangaluru, Karnataka) 
Bengaluru 
73 Research & Development 
Monascus Purpureus CFR 410 -11 
fermented cowpea Tofu as functional 
food (Central Food Technological 
Research Institute, Mysore) 
Mysore 
74 Research & Development 
A process for enhancing production 
of edible eicosapentaenoic acid and 
docosahexaenoic acid enriched oil 
from fish industrial discard (CSIR - 
Central Food technological Research 
Institute, Mysore- 570020, Karnataka 
) 
Mysore 
75 Research & Development 
Processing of millets and 
pseudocereals for preparation of 
nutritionally enriched products 
(CSIR- Central Food technological 
Research Institute, Mysore - 570021, 
Karnataka ) 
Mysore 
76 Research & Development 
Development of a bioactive 
encapsulated functional food product 
fordiabetics that can modulate PPARγ 
(CSIR- Central Food technological 
Research Institute, Mysore - 570022, 
Karnataka) 
Mysore 
77 Research & Development 
Development of an Industrial scale 
cold plasma unit for decontamination 
of fruits and vegetables (CFTRI, 
Mysuru, Karnataka) 
Mysuru 
78 Research & Development Development of Health Foods based 
on Rice Bran (CFTRI, Mysuru) Mysuru 
79 Research & Development 
Value added and Healthful 
Texturized egg product (CFTRI, 
Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
80 Research & Development 
Production of n -3 Polyunsaturated 
Fatty Acids Concentrate from Sardine 
Oil (NIT, Mangalore) 
Dakshina 
Kannada 
125                                                      

81 Research & Development 
Nutritionally Enriched Innovative 
Convenience Foods Suitable for 
Industrial Production from 
Underutilized Grains (CFTRI, 
Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
82 Research & Development 
Comparative Evaluation of 
Enzymatic and Fermentative methods 
for Preparation of Chicken liver  
Hydrolystates: Recovery, 
Biofunctional Characterization and 
Application (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
83 Research & Development 
Development of Process for 
nanoencapsulation of polyphenols for 
food supplement applications 
(CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
84 Research & Development 
Biotechnological approaches to 
regulate fermentation and drying 
process of cocoa. (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
85 Research & Development 
Biotechnological Production of 
Bioactive Metabolites from 
Therapeutic Fungal Biofactory 
Ganoderma sp. for Pharmaceutical 
Applications (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
86 Research & Development 
Reverse Micellar Extraction of 
Lactoferrin from Whey: Continuous 
Process (NIT, Mangalore) 
Dakshina 
Kannada 
87 Research & Development 
Scale up of chitosan based coating 
formulation for preservation of 
selected fruits (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
88 Research & Development 
Red Sorghum flakes based snack bar 
for health and nutritional security 
(University of Agricultural Sciences, 
Dharwad) 
Dharwad 
89 Research & Development 
Developing Inexpensive, Disposable 
and Biodegradable Food Containers 
Using Agricultural Wastes 9Jain 
University, Bangalore) 
Jayanagar, 
Bangalore 
90 Research & Development 
Scale–Up and Down Stream 
Processing of Stable Pigment & Key 
Metabolites from Morus A lba 
(CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
91 Research & Development 
Isolation and screening for native 
wine yeast cultures for the production 
of Indian Wine (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
92 Research & Development Edible Confectionery Chews and 
Functional Beverage Mix for Mysuru 
126                                                      

Increased/Sustanance of Energy 
Levels in Sports Personnel (CFTRI, 
Mysuru) 
93 Research & Development 
Development of technology for 
production of multigrain semolina 
mixes and its food application 
(CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
94 Research & Development 
Identification and characterisation of 
bioactive metabolites from the fruits 
of under -utilized plants: Malpighia 
glabra and Ixora coccinea their post -
harvest processing for value addition 
(CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
95 Research & Development 
Development of equ ipment for 
grating cum seed separation of Amla 
and a process for production of green 
Amla powder (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
96 Research & Development 
Development of technologies for 
value addition to under utilized 
rhizomes (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
97 Research & Development 
Technologies for Development of 
Value Added Products from Green 
Coffee (CFTRI, Mysuru) 
Mysuru 
98 Research & Development 
Process optimization, scale -up and 
product standardization of Indian 
traditional fermented beverages 
(Kaanji, Ambli, Sol  Kadhi) for large 
scale production 
Mysuru 
 
***** 
127                                                      

O.I.H 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO.  2264 
ANSWERED ON. 19/12/2025 
PROGRESS OF NMEO-OP IN UTTAR PRADESH 
2264. SMT. DARSHANA SINGH: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state:- 
(a) whether oil palm area expansion, sapling distribution and training programmes are being 
implemented under National Mission on Edible Oils-Oil Palm (NMEO-OP) in Uttar Pradesh; 
(b) the number of farmers provided with seedlings, drip irrigation and input support since 
2021-22; 
(c) whether an oil palm processing unit has been established in the State, if so, the location 
thereof; and 
(d) the total expenditure incurred on NMEO-OP so far in the State of Uttar Pradesh? 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (d): No, Madam. The National Mission on Edible Oils–Oil Palm (NMEO-OP) is 
implemented in 15 states. NMEO-OP is not implemented in Uttar Pradesh.  
     However, the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is implementing the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) since 2015 across the country, including Uttar 
Pradesh, with the objective of promoting efficient water use through drip and sprinkler irrigation 
systems, under which 2,33,350 farmers in the state have been covered since 2021-22, so far.  
 
***** 
 
128                                                      

O.I.H 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION No. 2265 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ALIGNMENT OF MISS WITH AGRICULTURAL POLICY OBJECTIVES 
 
2265. SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI: 
          DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) The details of the total interest subvention provided through the Kisan Credit Card 
(KCC) since the commencement of the scheme, particularly during the last five years; 
(b) The manner in which this scheme aligns with Government’s comprehensive 
agricultural policy objectives, and the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) adopted for 
its successful implementation; and  
(c) The major steps taken by the Government to increase the agricultural credit flow 
during the last five years? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
 
 (SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
(a): The government is implementing a 100% centrally funded Central Sector 
Scheme known as the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) across various 
States and UTs in pan India. This scheme aims to make agriculture credit affordable 
by providing Interest Subvention (IS) and Prompt Repayment Incentive (PRI) on 
short-term agricultural loans obtained by farmers through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) 
for their working capital requirements. 
 
Total interest subvention, including Interest Subvention (IS) and Prompt 
Repayment Incentive (PRI) provided through KCC since its commencement in 
2006–07 till date amounts to ₹2,01,925.63 crore, of which ₹89,328.18 crore has 
been provided during the last five years (2020-21 to 2024-25). The details are 
placed at Annexure-I. 
  
129                                                      

 
(b) & (c): The MISS implemented through KCC is closely aligned with the 
Government’s comprehensive agricultural policy objectives of ensuring timely and 
affordable credit to farmers, enhancing agricultural productivity, promoting financial 
inclusion, and reducing farmers’ dependence on non-institutional sources of credit. 
By providing interest subvention on short-term crop loans and additional incentives 
for prompt repayment, the scheme lowers the cost of credit, improves liquidity at the 
farm level, and supports investment in agricultural and allied activities, thereby 
contributing to income enhancement and overall rural development. 
The following steps have been taken to increase the agricultural credit flow during 
the last five years: 
 
i. As per priority Sector Landing (PSL) regulation government has mandated 
that banks will provide 18% of their total loans to agriculture and allied 
sector. Since 2016 a sub limit has been fixed for small and marginal farmers 
which at present is 10%.  
ii. It has been constant endeavour of the Government to boost agriculture 
sector through effective and hassle-free credit, for which the Government 
sets Ground Level Credit (GLC) Target for agriculture sector. The average 
achievement under agriculture credit during the last 5 years (2020-21 to 
2024-25) has been nearly 113% of the target.  
 
iii. RBI has increased collateral free loan limit in KCC for existing Rs 1.6 lakh 
to Rs 2 lakh w.e.f., 01.01.2025. This move enhances credit accessibility, 
particularly for small and marginal farmers, who benefit from reduced 
borrowing costs and the removal of collateral requirements.  
iv. To ensure transparency and efficiency in administering MISS, the Kisan Rin 
Portal (KRP), launched in September 2023, integrates 30 Scheduled 
Commercial Banks (SCBs), 42 Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), 20 State 
Cooperative Banks (StCBs), and 356 District Central Cooperative Banks 
(DCCBs). The portal facilitates the prompt settlement of claims related to 
MISS and helps simplify and speed up the disbursement of claims. All 
beneficiaries are authenticated and verified based on Aadhaar to prevent 
misuse. Besides this, banks have internal mechanisms such as physical 
verification and audits to ensure that the loans/benefits are used in the 
prescribed manner. 
130                                                      

 
v. Government have been taking multiple initiative to make this accessible to 
farmers through regular IEC campaigns organized by banks, State Government/ 
Central Government, RBI, NABARD, etc, besides, technology intervention like 
Kisan Rin Portal (KRP).  
 
    These measures has also made an impact on improvement in Institutional credit 
which has also increased from 64% (as per NSS 70th round, 2013 report) to 75.5% 
(as per NAFIS 2021-22 report). 
     Similarly, the total credit flow to the agriculture sector has grown from ₹15.75 
lakh crore in 2020–21 to ₹28.67 lakh crore in 2024–25. Out of which, Credit 
disbursed to Small and Marginal Farmers (SMFs) has grown from Rs. 8.71 lakh 
crore to Rs. 14.77 lakh crore during this period. 
     Due to KCC-MISS scheme access to easy and affordable credit has increased 
significantly to farmers to meet their operational needs. The number of operative 
KCC accounts has reached to 7.72 crore in 2024–25, which has contributed to an 
increase in credit extended amount from ₹7.53 lakh crore in 2020-21 to ₹10.20 
lakh crore in 2024–25.  
 
    During  the last five years (2020-21 to 2024-25), farmers has availed ₹89,328.18 
crore as interest subvention on loans through KCC-MISS. 
  
131                                                      

Annexure I 
Annexure for Rajya Sabha Unstarred Q.No. 2265 answer to be on 19.12.2025. 
Total Interest Subvention provided through the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) since the commencement 
of the scheme: 
SN Financial Year Interest Subvention ( in Rs. Crore) 
1. 2006-07 NA  
2. 2007-08 1,700.00  
3. 2008-09 2,600.00  
4. 2009-10 2,011.00  
5. 2010-11 3,531.19  
6. 2011-12 3,282.70  
7. 2012-13 5,400.00  
8. 2013-14 6,000.00 
9. 2014-15 6,000.00 
10. 2015-16 13,000.00 
11. 2016-17 13,397.13  
12. 2017-18 13,045.72  
13. 2018-19 11,495.67  
14. 2019-20 16,218.75  
15. 2020-21 17,789.72  
16.           2021-22 21,476.93  
17.           2022-23 17,997.88  
18.           2023-24 14,251.93  
19.           2024-25 17,811.72  
20.           2025-26* 14,915.29  
Total 2,01,925.63  
*till date 
Data source: DFS/ DA&FW 
 
 
***** 
132                                                      

 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2266 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
CROPS INCLUDED IN GENOME EDITING PROJECT 
 
2266.  DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE: 
 SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) number of crops which are included in the genome editing project being implemented by 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR); 
(b) whether any other R&D institutes are also doing research on genome editing on different 
crops;  
(c) if so, the details thereof;  
(d) status of product development through genome editing in different crops in the country; and 
(e) details of Intellectual Property Rights, (IPR) issues in the use of genome editing technology 
and the manner in which Government is addressing them? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI BHAGIRATH CHOUDHARY) 
 
(a): Genome editing research has been initiated in Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) on 24 field crops and 17 horticultural crops. 
 
(b) & (c): Yes. Besides ICAR,  Department of Biotechnology Institutes (National Institute of 
Plant Genome Research, New Delhi; Biotechnology Research and  Innovation Council - National 
Agri-Food Biomanufacturing Institute, Mohali; International Centre for Genetic Engi neering and 
Biotechnology, New Delhi); Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR) Institutes (CSIR - 
Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow; CSIR - Institute of Himalayan 
Bioresource Technology, Palampur; CSIR - National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow) are 
also doing genome editing research in 10 crops. 
 
(d): Two genome edited varieties of rice have been developed by ICAR. Biotechnology Research 
and Innovation Council - National Institute of Plant Genome Research, New Delhi has developed 
low glucosinolate genome edited line in mustard. 
 
(e): The Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) issues are addressed as per the Freedom to Operate 
(FTO) provisions for inventors in using genome editing technology for research purpose. 
******* 
133                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2267 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
RELIEF AND REHABILITATION MEASURES FOR FLOOD AFFECTED 
FARMERS IN PUNJAB 
2267. SHRI RAJINDER GUPTA: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government has assessed the total agricultural and livestock losses suffered by 
farmers in Punjab due to the recent floods; 
(b) if so, the details thereof along with the quantum of central assistance released or proposed 
for crop compensation, livestock support and rehabilitation of affected villages; 
(c) whether any special financial relief or loan waiver scheme is being considered for flood-
affected farmers facing insolvency; and 
(d) whether Government plans to collaborate with the State Government to strengthen 
embankments, canal networks and climate-resilient agricultural infrastructure to mitigate the 
impact of such incidents in future? 
ANSWER  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR)  
(a) & (b): As per the National Policy on Disaster Management (NPDM), the primary 
responsibility for disaster management, including disbursal of relief assistance on ground level, 
rests with the State Governments concerned. The State Governments undertake relief measures 
in the wake of natural calamities including floods and landslide, from the State Disaster 
Response Fund (SDRF) already placed at their disposal, in accordance with Government of 
India approved items and norms. The Central Government supplements the efforts of the State 
Governments and provide requisite logistics and financial support. Additional financial 
assistance is provided from the National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), as per laid down 
procedure, in case of 'severe nature', which includes an assessment based on the visit of an 
Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT).  
  
134                                                      

 
The details of the fund allocated and released under SDRF/NDRF to the States are available 
on Disaster Management, MHA's website i.e. ndmindia.mha.gov.in.  
     As per information received from Ministry of Home Affairs, the details of damages due to 
hydro-metrological disasters during 2025 in Punjab is as under (as on 27.11.2025):  
Human lives Cattle Houses Crop area 
(in lakh hectares) 
40 7161 14065 1.93 
 
    The State Government of Punjab is allocated an amount of Rs.642.40 crore (Rs.481.60 crore 
Central share + Rs.160.80 crore State share) for the financial year 2025-2026 under SDRF, of 
which the first and second Installments of Rs.240.80 crore each, as Central share is released to 
the State. 
As per provisions under Section 3(4) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), the Central Government provides up to an additional 50 days of 
unskilled manual work in a financial year, over and above the 100 days assured to job card 
holders in such rural areas where drought or any natural calamity (as per Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Government of India) has been notified. The notification to provide up to additional 
50 days of unskilled manual work, over and above 100 days in drought or natural calamity 
notified rural areas, is issued by the Ministry of Rural Development as recommended by 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW).  
 
DA&FW has recommended for providing additional 50 days wage employment over 
and above 100 days per household under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA in the flood and natural 
calamity affected areas of the State of Punjab for Financial Year 2025-26.  
 
DA&FW has approved an additional project cost of Rs.74.00 crore (central share 
Rs.44.40 crore) to the State of Punjab for distribution of wheat seed to flood affected farmers 
under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). Under Mission for Integrated Development of 
Horticulture (MIDH), an additional allocation of Rs.10.00 crore (GoI share) has been 
earmarked to Government of Punjab during 2025-26, for carrying out the activity of cultivation 
of hybrid vegetables for the flood affected areas of Punjab.   
  
135                                                      

(c):  Besides department is also implementing a 100% centrally funded Central Sector Scheme 
known as the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) across various States and UTs pan 
India. This scheme aims to provide concessional interest rates on short-term agricultural loans 
obtained by farmers through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) for their working capital requirements.  
 
(d): The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) implements the project National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). The project conducts studies on the 
impact of climate change on agriculture including crops, livestock, horticulture and fisheries 
and also develops and promotes climate resilient technologies in agriculture for vulnerable 
areas of the country. The outputs of the project help the regions to cope with extreme weather 
conditions like droughts, floods, frost, heat waves, etc. During last 10 years (2014-2024), a 
total of 2593 varieties have been released by ICAR, out of these 2177 varieties have been found 
tolerant to one or more biotic and/or abiotic stresses. Risk and vulnerability assessment of 
agriculture to climate change has been carried out at district-level for 651 predominantly 
agricultural districts as per Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) protocols. Out 
of 310 districts identified as vulnerable, 109 districts have been categorized as 'very high' and 
201 districts as 'highly vulnerable. District Agriculture Contingency Plans (DACPs) for these 
651 districts have also been prepared to address weather aberrations and recommending 
location specific climate resilient crops and varieties and management practices for use by the 
State Departments of Agriculture. For enhancing the resilience and adaptive capacity of 
farmers to climate variability, the Concept of "Climate Resilient Villages" (CRVs) has been 
initiated under NICRA. Location-specific climate resilient technologies have been 
demonstrated in 448 CRVs of 151 climatically vulnerable districts covering 28 states/UTs for 
adoption by farmers. ICAR through its NICRA project, creates awareness about impact of 
climate change in agriculture among farmers. Capacity building programmes are being 
conducted to educate the farmers on various aspects of climate change for wider adoption of 
climate resilient technologies. 
 
***** 
 
136                                                      

O.I.H 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. -2268 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
DRONE SAKHIS SELECTED UNDER NAMO DRONE DIDI SCHEME 
 
2268. MS. INDU BALA GOSWAMI: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the number of Drone Sakhi selected across the country so far, the State-wise 
details thereof including the State of Himachal Pradesh; 
(b) the quantum of budget allocated under the Namo Drone Didi scheme for the 
financial year 2023-24; and 
(c) whether the Ministry has set any target to train women under the Namo Drone 
Didi Scheme and if so, the details thereof 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (c):  The Government approved Central Sector Scheme 'Namo Drone Didi' with 
an outlay of  Rs. 1261 Crores for the period from 2023-24 to 2025-26 for providing 
drones to the Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) with a view to provide sustainable 
business and livelihood support to them.  
 
1094 drone have been distributed to drone didis of SHGs by Lead Fertilizer 
Companies (LFCs) in 2023-24 using their internal resources. The State-wise 
distribution of 1094 drones is attached at Annexure -I. Out of these 1094 drone 
distributed to drone didis, 500 drones have been distributed under the Namo Drone Didi 
Scheme.  
 
The drones are supplied, as a package, which also includes mandatory drone 
pilot training and additional training for agriculture purpose for nutrient and pesticide 
application for one of the members of these women SHGs. Provisions are also available 
to train other member / family member of the SHGs as drone assistant.  
 
  
137                                                      

Annexure-I 
State-wise number of drones distributed to SHGs by the LFCs in 2023-24 and the 
members of SHGs given drone pilot training 
S. No  State Name  No. of Drones 
distributed  
No. of members of SHGs 
given drone pilot training  
1.  Andhra Pradesh  108  108  
2.  Assam  28  28  
3.  Bihar  32  32  
4.  Chhattisgarh  15  15  
5.  Goa  1  1  
6.  Gujarat  58  58  
7.  Haryana  102  102  
8.  Himachal Pradesh  4  4  
9.  J&K  2  2  
10.  Jharkhand  15  15  
11.  Karnataka  145  145  
12.  Kerala  51  51  
13.  Madhya Pradesh  89  89  
14.  Maharashtra  60  60  
15.  Odisha  16  16  
16.  Punjab  57  57  
17.  Rajasthan  40  40  
18  Tamil Nadu  44  44  
19.  Telangana  81  81  
20.  Uttar Pradesh  128  128  
21.  Uttarakhand  3  3  
22.  West Bengal  15  15  
Total  1094  1094 
 
***** 
138                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2269 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
NORMS FOR COMPENSATION TO FARMERS AFFECTED BY NATURAL 
CALAMITIES 
2269. SHRI PARIMAL NATHWANI: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government proposes to revise the norms for compensation to farmers affected by natural 
calamities such as floods, unseasonal rains etc; 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 
(c) whether any special relief measures have been extended to small and marginal farmers in such 
cases; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof? 
ANSWER  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR)  
(a) to (d):  As per the National Policy on Disaster Management (NPDM), the State Government is 
primarily responsible for providing necessary relief measures on ground level in the wake of notified 
calamities. The State Governments undertake relief measures in the wake of natural calamities from 
funds available in the form of the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) in accordance with the 
Government of India approved items and norms. The State Government concerned is to provide 
necessary relief to affected people in the event of a natural disaster from SDRF already placed at its 
disposal, through their established channel of district administrative machineries. Additional 
financial assistance, over and above SDRF, is considered from the National Disaster Response Fund 
(NDRF), as per laid down procedure, in case of disaster of ‘severe nature’, which includes an 
assessment based on the visit of an Inter-Ministerial Central Team (IMCT).  
The financial assistance provided under SDRF and NDRF is by way of relief and not for 
compensation of losses suffered/ claimed.   
The details of the fund allocated and released under SDRF/NDRF to the States are available on 
Disaster Management, MHA's website i.e. ndmindia.mha.gov.in.  
A comprehensive review and revision of the items & norms of assistance after Award of the 
Finance Commission is done by the Government (Ministry of Home Affairs). In pursuance of the 
recommendations of 15th FC on financing of disaster risk management, comprehensive revision was 
made by the Central Government and revised items & norms were issued on 10th October 2022. The 
items & norms were further revised in July 2023. 
 
139                                                      

 
As per Revised Items & Norms of assistance from SDRF and NDRF, issued by Ministry of 
Home Affairs, letter No.33-03/2020-NDM-I dated 11.07.2023, input subsidy (where crop loss is 33% 
and above) for agriculture crops, horticulture crops and annual plantation crops to affected farmers 
(up-to 2 hectare) due to notified calamities are given as under: 
(i) Rs.8500/- per ha in rainfed areas (which is subject to a minimum assistance of not less than Rs. 
1000/- per farmer and restricted to sown areas).  
(ii) Rs. 17000/- per ha. in assured irrigated areas (which is subject to a minimum assistance of not 
less than Rs.2000/- per farmer and restricted to sown areas).  
(iii) Rs.22500/- per hectare for all types of perennial crops/trees including agro forestry (plantation 
in own farmland) and restricted to sown areas. 
 
***** 
140                                                      

                                                          GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
                                               UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2270 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
LEGAL GUARANTEE FOR MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE (MSP) 
 
              2270.   SHRI I.S. INBADURAI 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government has considered providing a legal guarantee for the Minimum Support 
 Price (MSP) for all crops, as recommended by the parliamentary panel inDecember 2024 and 
 suggested in the Minimum Support Price Guarantee Bill, 2022; if so, the details thereof; 
 
(b) if not, whether such legal guarantee is being considered, the details thereof;  
 
(c) the steps being taken to ensure that farmers continue to receive fair and remunerative 
prices for their produce under the current MSP system; and  
 
(d) any roadmap or timeline proposed by Government to address the concerns of farmers 
regarding MSP and financial security? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
(SHRI RAM NATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) to (d): Every year, Government fixes Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for 22 mandated 
agricultural crops based on the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs & 
Prices (CACP), after considering the views of the State Governments and Central 
Ministries/Departments concerned.    
  The Union Budget for 2018-19 had announced the pre-determined principle to keep 
MSPs at levels of at least one and half times of the cost of production. Accordingly, 
Government had increased MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and other Commercial crops 
with a minimum return of 50 percent over all India weighted average cost of production from 
year 2018-19 onwards.  
 
  To realize the objectives of MSP Policy, after announcement of MSP, Government 
procures cereals and coarse cereals through Food Corporation of India (FCI) and other 
designated State Agencies to provide price support to the farmers. Procurement of pulses, 
oilseeds and copra is done under Price Support Scheme under Umbrella Scheme of Pradhan 
Mantri Annadata Aay Sanrakshan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA), in consultation with the concerned 
State Government as and when market price of these produce fall below the MSP. 
Procurement agencies under PM-AASHA Scheme are National Agricultural Cooperative 
Marketing Federation of India Ltd (NAFED) and National Co-operative Consumers' 
Federation of India Ltd. (NCCF). Cotton and Jute are also procured by Government at MSP 
through Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) and Jute Corporation of India (JCI), respectively. 
   
141                                                      

         Government offers to procure agricultural crops through designated procurement 
agencies and farmers have the option to sell their produce to the government agencies or in 
the open market whichever is advantageous to them.  
  Increased MSP has benefited farmers of the country which are evident from data of 
procurement and MSP amount paid to the farmers. The details of procurement and MSP 
amount paid to farmers from the year 2014-15 to 2025-26 (upto October, 2025) are given as 
under: 
Procurement  MSP Value   
117 crore 32 lakh metric tonne 24 lakh 49 thousand crore rupees    
  
   To reduce financial stress of farmers various direct cash benefit, crop insurance and 
subsidy/ grant-based schemes are operational in this department, which includes PM Kisan, 
PMFBY, Krishonnati Yojna, RKVY etc. Government is also implementing a 100% centrally 
funded Central Sector Scheme known as the Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) 
across various States and UTs pan India. This scheme aims to provide concessional interest 
rates on short-term agricultural loans obtained by farmers through Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) 
for their working capital requirements. Financial benefits provided to farmers in recent years 
are given below. 
Name of the Scheme Financial benefits 
Interest subvention / Prompt repayment Incentive 
(PRI) under Modified Interest Subvention Scheme 
on KCC Loan 
Rs 1.77 lakh Cr 
(Since 2014-15 to till date) 
DBT under PM Kisan Rs. 4.09 lakh Cr 
(Since 2019 in 21 instalments) 
Insurance Claim under PMFBY Rs. 1.90 lakh Cr 
(since 2016 to till  30.10.2025) 
 
********* 
142                                                      

  GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2271 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
EXPANSION OF AMBIT OF PMFBY 
 
2271  Shri Ashokrao Shankarrao Chavan: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether many States/UTs are still out of the ambit of Pradhanmantri Fasal Bima Yojna (PMFBY); 
 
(b) if so, the details thereof and reasons therefor; 
 
(c) whether Government has held any meeting/deliberations with States/UTs which have not adopted 
PMFBY; 
 
(d) if so, the details thereof and outcome of the said deliberations; 
 
(e) whether Government has conducted any survey to find the lacunae in PMFBY and if so, the details 
thereof; and 
 
(f) the details of changes incorporated by Government to increase the ambit of the scheme along with 
the funds sanctioned for the said scheme during the present financial year? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI  RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) & (b): The Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was introduced in the country from 
Kharif 2016 season. The scheme is voluntary for the States and farmers.  Since inception of the 
scheme in 2016, 27 States/Union Territories implemented the PMFBY in one or more seasons.  At 
present, 24 States/UTs are implementing the scheme.  
 
(c) & (d): Department is regularly conducting weekly video conferences of all stakeholders, one to 
one meetings as well as National Review Conferences with all State/UTs, including non-
implementing State/UTs in order to encourage non-implementing States/UTs adopt PMFBY. 
Recently the Hon’ble Agriculture & Farmers Welfare Minister has written demi-official letters to the 
Hon’ble Chief Ministers  of the non-implementing states to encourage their participation in the 
scheme. Due to the efforts of the Ministry, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram and Jharkhand have rejoined 
the scheme recently. 
 
(e): The review/revisions / rationalization / improvements in the crop insurance schemes is a 
continuous process and decision on suggestion/ representations/ recommendations of the 
stakeholders/studies are taken from time to time.  Based on the experience gained, views of various 
stakeholders and with a view to ensure better transparency, accountability, timely payment of claims 
to the farmers and to make the scheme more farmer friendly, Government has periodically revised 
the Operational Guidelines of the PMFBY in 2018, 2020 and 2023 comprehensively to ensure that 
the eligible benefits under the scheme reach the farmers timely and transparently.   
 
(f): The Government has taken following initiatives to increase the ambit of the scheme: 
 
 
143                                                      

 Government has undertaken development of National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) as 
a single source of data ensuring subsidy payment, co-ordination, transparency, 
dissemination of information and delivery of services including direct online enrollment of 
farmers, uploading/obtaining individual insured famer’s details for better monitoring and 
to ensure transfer of claim amount electronically to the individual farmer’s Bank Account.   
 In order to rigorously monitor claim disbursal process, a dedicated module namely 
‘Digiclaim Module’ has been operationalized for payment of claims from Kharif 2022 
onwards.  It involves integration of National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) with Public 
Finance Management System (PFMS) and accounting system of Insurance Companies to 
provide timely & transparent processing of all claims.  
 Also, towards leveraging technology in implementation of the scheme, various steps like 
capturing of yield data/Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) data through CCE-Agri App & 
uploading it on the NCIP, allowing insurance companies to witness the conduct of CCEs, 
integration of State land records with NCIP etc. have already been taken to improve timely 
settlement of the claims to farmers.   
 The Government has actively supported the awareness activities being carried out by the 
States, implementing Insurance Companies, financial institutions, and Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) network to disseminate key features of PMFBY amongst farmers and 
members of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). 
 Structured awareness campaign ‘Crop Insurance Week/Fasal Bima Saptah’ has been 
initiated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare since Kharif 2021 season 
onwards to increase the awareness about benefits of the scheme, sensitize the stakeholders 
and to increase overall enrolment of farmers, with special focus on identified 
aspirational/tribal districts.  Along with this, ‘Fasal Bima Pathshalas’ are also being 
organized at village/GP level for knowledge building of farmers on various aspects of 
scheme implementation.  
 Government had also organized a nationwide Doorstep Crop Insurance Policy/receipt 
Distribution mega drive – ‘Meri Policy Mere Haath’. Hard copies of crop insurance 
policy receipts are distributed to farmers enrolled under PMFBY through special camps at 
gram Panchayat/village level.   
 
 Apart from this, other activities for awareness generation involve the publicity of key features 
and benefits of the scheme through advertisements in leading National and local newspapers, airing 
of audio-visual spots on regional / local channels, distribution of IEC material in local languages, 
dissemination of SMS through Kisan / National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) portal and organisation 
of online workshops of all stakeholders including farmers, Panchayat Members, and other key 
stakeholders.  
 
Further, for FY 2025-26, an amount of Rs. 12242.27 Crore (BE) has been allocated for 
PMFBY, out of which, so far actual expenditure of Rs. 9210 Crore  has been incurred (as on 
30.11.2025).  
***** 
 
 
 
144                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2272  
TO BE  ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
REMUNERATIVE PRICE FOR POTATO AND ONION 
2272. SHRI JAVED ALI KHAN: 
Will the minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) the details of schemes being run by Government to provide remunerative prices to potato and 
onion growing farmers of the country who are selling their onion and potato at the price lower 
than the cost of production, scheme-wise; 
(b) the details of funds allocated, released and utilized during 2024-25 and 2025-26 against the 
above said schemes, year-wise and State-wise; and; 
(c) the details of funds allocated, released and utilized during 2024-25 and 2025-26 against the 
above said schemes in the State of Uttar Pradesh along with the number of farmers benefitted 
therefrom, year-wise and district-wise? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a): To provide remunerative price to the farmers for agricultural and horticultural 
commodities including potato and onion which are perishable in nature and are not covered 
under the Minimum Support Price regime, Government implements Market Intervention 
Scheme (MIS), a component under PM-AASHA, across the country. The objective is to protect 
the farmers from distress sale in the event of a bumper crop during the peak arrival, when the 
prices tend to fall below economic levels and the cost of production. There should be at least a 
10% decrease in the ruling market prices over the previous normal year. The scheme is 
implemented at the request of a State/UT government, which is ready to bear 50 % of the 
loss (25% in case of North-Eastern States), if any, incurred on its implementation. The 
maximum quantity of procurement is allowed upto 25% of estimated production of the state 
for particular crop and for particular season. Total amount of loss is shared on a 50:50 basis 
between the Central Government and the State Government (75:25 for North East States) 
restricted upto 25 % of the total procurement value, including cost of the commodity procured 
and permitted overhead expenses.   
 
 
145                                                      

New components of Price Differential Payment (PDP) with an option to make direct 
payment of the price difference between the Market Intervention Price (MIP) and the selling 
price to the farmers for the crops traded in the APMC mandis has been added. Additionally,  
reimbursement for transportation and storage cost of TOP crops (Tomato, Onion and Potato) 
to central nodal agencies & State designated agencies for storing and transporting them from 
producing state to consuming state are allowed. 
(b):    Under MIS, Funds are not allocated to States. After the issue of sanction, MIS is 
implemented by State in the case of price deficiency payment (PDP) or through designated 
agencies in the case of physical procurement and reimbursement of Transportation and storage 
of Tomato, Onion and Potato (TOP) crops. After the implementation of the scheme, the state 
is required to send the audited accounts for reimbursement of losses incurred in the MIS 
operation. The details of sanction accorded under MIS since 2024-25 is at Annexure-I. 
During year 2024-25, Rs. 75.13 crore were allocated for MIS. Out of which, Rs. 22.59 
crore were released to NAFED towards the Central Share of Losses in the implementation of 
MIS for Apple procurement in Jammu & Kashmir during 2019. Since MIS became one of the 
components of PM-AASHA in September 2024, common budget heads of PM-AASHA have 
been introduced from 2025-26. The total budget allocated under PM-AASHA during 2025-26 
is Rs.6,941.36 crore.  
(c):     No proposal under MIS has been received from Government of Uttar Pradesh during the 
year 2024-25 and till date during 2025-26. 
 
  
146                                                      

Annexure 1 
 
Details of Sanction accorded under MIS from 2024-25 to 2025-26 for Physical 
procurement  
S.N. Year Commodity State 
Market 
Intervention 
Price (MIP)  
(Rs. Per 
MTs.) 
Sanctioned 
Qty 
(in MTs.) 
1 2024-25 C-grade Apple Himachal 
Pradesh 12,960 116,571 
2 2024-25 Grapes Mizoram 50,000 3,460 
3 2024-25 Ginger Karnataka 24,450.00 59,948 
4 2025-26 Ginger Mizoram 27,800.00 15,058 
 
 
 
Details of Sanction accorded under MIS from 2024-25 to 2025-26 for Price Difference 
Payment 
S.N. Year Commodity State 
Market 
Intervention 
Price (MIP)  
(Rs. Per 
MTs.) 
Sanctioned 
Qty 
(in MTs.) 
1 2024-25 Red Chillies Andhra 
Pradesh 117,812.50 258,238 
2 2025-26 Red chillies(season 
2024-25)  Karnataka 105,892.00 73,732 
3 2025-26 Red chillies(season 
2024-25) Telangana  103,740.00 172,135 
4 2025-26 Mango(season 
2025-26)  Karnataka 16,160.00 250,000 
5 2025-26 
Totapuri 
Mango(season 
2025-26)  
Andhra 
Pradesh 14,907.30 162,500 
   6 2025-26 Onion (Kharif 
season 2025-26)  
Andhra 
Pradesh 10,000.00 97,887 
147                                                      

 
Sanctions accorded for reimbursement of Transportation for Tomatoes under MIS 
S.N. F. Year Commodity  Producing 
State Consuming State Implementing 
Agency 
1 2024-25 Tomato Madhya 
Pradesh 
Delhi, Uttar 
Pradesh, 
Rajasthan and 
other states where 
tomatoes prices 
are high 
NCCF 
2 2024-25 Tomato Chhatisgarh & 
Odisha 
Delhi, Bihar and 
other potential 
states where 
tomatoes prices 
are high 
NCCF 
3 2024-25 Tomato Andhra 
Pradesh 
Telangana, Tamil 
Nadu, Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra and 
other potential 
states where 
tomatoes prices 
are high 
NAFED 
 
***** 
148                                                      

  
 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2273  
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
AVERAGE INCOME OF AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLDS  
 
2273. SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK: 
        
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) the number of agricultural households in the country and the average annual income of 
these households, State-wise since 2014; 
(b) whether it is a fact more than 50 percent of income of agricultural households is from 
wages and animal husbandry; and 
(c) if so, the details thereof and steps-taken by the Government to improve agricultural 
productivity and enhance the income of agricultural household? 
ANSWER  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
(a) & (b):  As per the latest NSS 77th Round Survey (January, 2019 – December, 2019),  
with reference to the agricultural year July, 2018- June, 2019 in the rural areas of the country,  
the number of agricultural households (as defined by National Statistical Office)  in the country 
is estimated at 9.3 crores, with an average monthly income per agricultural household from 
various sources estimated at Rs. 10, 218/-. The income of agricultural households is derived from 
multiple sources, including net receipt from crop production (Rs. 3, 798/-), net receipt from 
farming of animals (Rs. 1, 582/-), income from wages (Rs. 4, 063/-), net receipt from non-farm 
business ( Rs. 641/-) , and leasing out of land (Rs. 134/-) . The contribution of these sources 
varies across States depending on local agro-climatic conditions, farm size, and cropping 
patterns. The State‑wise average monthly income per agricultural household from different 
sources during July 2018–June 2019 is given at Annexure I. 
 
 
(c):  Agriculture being a State Subject, the State Government take appropriate measures for 
development of agriculture and welfare of farmers in the States. However, Government of India 
is committed to enhance the welfare of farmers and making agriculture more remunerative. 
Government of India supplements the efforts of States through appropriate policy measures and 
budgetary support and various schemes/ programmes. The Government of India has identified 
the following Seven sources for enhancing growth of farmers: 
  
149                                                      

 
 
i.  Increase in crop productivity 
ii.Increase in livestock productivity 
iii.Resource use efficiency – reduction in cost of production 
iv.Increase in cropping intensity 
v.Diversification to high value agriculture 
vi.Remunerative prices on farmers’ produce 
vii. Shift of surplus manpower from farm to non-farm occupations. 
   To achieve the above seven objectives, the Government has substantially enhanced the 
budget allocation of Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) from Rs. 21933.50 
crore BE during 2013-14 to Rs. 1,27,290.16 crore BE during 2025-26.  The various schemes/ 
programmes of the Government of India are meant for the welfare of farmers by increasing 
production, remunerative returns and income support to farmers. These schemes encompass 
entire spectrum of agriculture including credit, insurance, income support, infrastructure, crops 
including horticulture, seeds, mechanization, marketing, organic and natural farming, farmer 
collectives, irrigation, extension, procurement of crops from farmers at minimum support prices, 
digital agriculture etc. Additionally, Government had increased MSPs for all mandated Kharif, 
Rabi and other Commercial crops with a minimum return of 50 percent over all India weighted 
average cost of production from 2018-19 onwards. List of Central Sector and Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes being implemented by Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(DA&FW) is given in Annexure-II.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150                                                      

 
ANNEXURE-I 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
STATE/UT - WISE AVERAGE MONTHLY INCOME FROM DIFFERENT 
SOURCES PER AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLD DURING AGRICULTURAL 
YEAR JULY 2018- JUNE 2019. 
 
Sl. No. State/ Group of NE States/ Group of UTs Income (Rs.) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 10,480
2 Arunachal Pradesh 19,225
3 Assam 10,675
4 Bihar 7,542
5 Chhattisgarh 9,677
6 Gujarat 12,631
7 Haryana 22,841
8 Himachal Pradesh 12,153
9 Jammu & Kashmir 18,918
10 Jharkhand 4,895
11 Karnataka 13,441
12 Kerala 17,915
13 Madhya Pradesh 8,339
14 Maharashtra 11,492
15 Manipur 11,227
16 Meghalaya 29,348
17 Mizoram 17,964
18 Nagaland 9,877
19 Odisha 5,112
20 Punjab 26,701
21 Rajasthan 12,520
22 Sikkim 12,447
23 Tamil Nadu 11,924
24 Telangana 9,403
25 Tripura 9,918
26 Uttarakhand 13,552
27 Uttar Pradesh 8,061
28 West Bengal 6,762
Group of N E States 16,863
 Group of UTs 18,511
 All India 10,218
 
Source: NSS Report No. 587: Situation Assessment of Agricultural Households and Land and 
Livestock Holdings of Households in Rural India, 2019. 
 
 
  
151                                                      

ANNEXURE-II 
 
MAJOR SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES MEANT FOR THE WELFARE OF FARMERS 
BY INCREASING PRODUCTION, REMUNERATIVE RETURNS AND INCOME 
SUPPORT TO THE FARMERS: 
 
1. National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) 
2. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm 
3. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oilseeds 
4. National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) 
5. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
6. Soil Health & Fertility (SH&F) 
7. Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
8. Agroforestry 
9. Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) 
10. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) 
11. Sub-Mission on Seed and Planting Material (SMSP) 
12. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
13. National Bamboo Mission 
14. National Bee Keeping and Honey Mission (NBHM) 
15. Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
16. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
17. Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM) 
18. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) 
19. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM-KMY) 
20. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)/ Restructured Weather Based Crop 
Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) 
21. Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA) 
22. Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) 
23. Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) 
24. Formation and Promotion of 10,000 new Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) 
25. Namo Drone Didi 
26. Agri Fund for Start-Ups & Rural Enterprises (AgriSURE) 
27. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM) 
28. Digital Agriculture Mission 
 
***** 
152                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2274  
TO BE ANSWERED ON THE 19/12/2025 
 
ESTIMATION OF PER CAPITA INCOME OF FARMERS FROM AGRICULTURE  
2274. SHRI RAMJI LAL SUMAN: 
           
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government has any data regarding per capita income of farmers from 
agriculture during 2024-25 and 2025-26, so far; 
(b) if so, the details thereof, State-wise; 
(c) if not, whether Government would conduct any survey in mission mode to ascertain the 
average per capita per day income of farmers from agriculture during 2025-26 to have updated 
idea about their plights and to frame policies accordingly; 
(d) if so, the details thereof; and 
(e) if not, the reasons for using stale data and 65 percent of population committing suicide? 
 
ANSWER  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI RAMNATH THAKUR) 
 
(a) & (b):  The Government does not centrally maintain data on per capita income of farmers. 
However, the average monthly income of agricultural households (as defined by National Statistics 
Office) in the country is periodically estimated through the “Situation Assessment Survey (SAS) 
of Agricultural Households”, conducted by the National Statistics Office (NSO), Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI). As per the latest NSS 77th round of the Survey 
(January, 2019 – December, 2019) with reference to the agricultural year July, 2018- June, 2019 
in the rural areas of the country, the average monthly income per agricultural household from 
various sources is estimated at Rs. 10, 218/- per month. The State‑wise average monthly income 
per agricultural household for the agricultural years July 2018–June 2019 is given at Annexure I.  
 
(c) to (e):  Government of India is committed to enhance the welfare of farmers and making 
agriculture more remunerative and supplements the efforts of States through appropriate policy 
measures and budgetary support and various schemes/ programmes. As per the NSO survey on 
Household Consumption Expenditure (2023-24), the all-India average Monthly Per Capita 
Consumption Expenditure (MPCE) has increased substantially compared to the 2011-12 (68th 
Round) estimates. The table below provides a comparison of MPCE across rural and urban sectors, 
highlighting the increase in expenditure levels and the corresponding growth percentages over the 
period.  
  
153                                                      

 
 
Sector Average MPCE (Rs.) over different period Growth 
(%) 2011-12 NSS 
(68th Round) 
2023-24 
Rural 1, 430 4, 122 188.2 
Urban 2, 630 6, 996 166.1 
 
               Government has adopted and implemented several policies, reforms, developmental 
programmes and schemes for achieving higher incomes for the farmers directly or indirectly and 
making it a profitable business. The Government has substantially enhanced the budget allocation 
of Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) from Rs. 21933.50 crore BE during 
2013-14 to Rs. 1,27,290.16 crore BE during 2025-26.  These schemes encompass entire spectrum 
of agriculture including credit, insurance, income support, infrastructure, crops including 
horticulture, seeds, mechanization, marketing, organic and natural farming, farmer collectives, 
irrigation, extension, procurement of crops from farmers at minimum support prices, digital 
agriculture etc. Further, Government had increased MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and other 
Commercial crops with a minimum return of 50 percent over all India weighted average cost of 
production from 2018-19 onwards. List of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes being 
implemented by Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is given in Annexure 
-II.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
154                                                      

 
ANNEXURE-I 
  
STATE/UT - WISE AVERAGE MONTHLY INCOME FROM DIFFERENT SOURCES 
PER AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLD DURING AGRICULTURAL YEAR JULY 2018- 
JUNE 2019. 
 
Sl. No. State/ Group of NE States/ Group of UTs Income (Rs.) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 10,480 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 19,225 
3 Assam 10,675 
4 Bihar 7,542 
5 Chhattisgarh 9,677 
6 Gujarat 12,631 
7 Haryana 22,841 
8 Himachal Pradesh 12,153 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 18,918 
10 Jharkhand 4,895 
11 Karnataka 13,441 
12 Kerala 17,915 
13 Madhya Pradesh 8,339 
14 Maharashtra 11,492 
15 Manipur 11,227 
16 Meghalaya 29,348 
17 Mizoram 17,964 
18 Nagaland 9,877 
19 Odisha 5,112 
20 Punjab 26,701 
21 Rajasthan 12,520 
22 Sikkim 12,447 
23 Tamil Nadu 11,924 
24 Telangana 9,403 
25 Tripura 9,918 
26 Uttarakhand 13,552 
27 Uttar Pradesh 8,061 
28 West Bengal 6,762 
Group of N E States 16,863 
 Group of UTs 18,511 
 All India 10,218 
 
Source: NSS Report No. 587: Situation Assessment of Agricultural Households and Land and Livestock 
Holdings of Households in Rural India, 2019. 
 
 
  
155                                                      

 
ANNEXURE- II 
 
MAJOR SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES MEANT FOR THE WELFARE OF FARMERS 
BY INCREASING PRODUCTION, REMUNERATIVE RETURNS AND INCOME 
SUPPORT TO THE FARMERS: 
 
1. National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) 
2. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm 
3. National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oilseeds 
4. National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) 
5. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
6. Soil Health & Fertility (SH&F) 
7. Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
8. Agroforestry 
9. Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) 
10. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) 
11. Sub-Mission on Seed and Planting Material (SMSP) 
12. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
13. National Bamboo Mission 
14. National Bee Keeping and Honey Mission (NBHM) 
15. Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
16. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
17. Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM) 
18. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) 
19. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM-KMY) 
20. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)/ Restructured Weather Based Crop 
Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) 
21. Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA) 
22. Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) 
23. Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) 
24. Formation and Promotion of 10,000 new Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) 
25. Namo Drone Didi 
26. Agri Fund for Start-Ups & Rural Enterprises (AgriSURE) 
27. Sub-Mission on Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM) 
28. Digital Agriculture Mission 
 
***** 
156                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS’ WELFARE  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO.  2275 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/ 2025 
 
SUPPORT TO LEMON FARMERS 
 
 2275. SHRI MEDA RAGHUNADHA REDDY: 
 
Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS’ WELFARE  be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government is aware of the sharp decline in lemon yields in Andhra Pradesh 
due to extreme heat, especially in Rayalaseema region, despite strong demand and prices, 
  
(b) whether measures are being taken to support affected farmers; 
  
(c) whether steps are being considered to stabilize supply chains and ensure fair returns; 
and 
  
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(SHRI  RAMNATH THAKUR) 
(a) to (d):   As reported by State Government,  in State of Andhra Pradesh acid lime is 
grown.  The area covered under acid lime is about 0.45 lakh hectares in the State with 
total production of around 9.07 lakh metric tonnes. Major acid lime growing districts include 
Eluru, East Godavari, Nellore, YSR Kadapa and Tirupati,. The price of acid lime in the 
State is influenced by various factors, such as, expansion of  acid lime cultivation area in 
Rayalaseema due to farmers shifting away from the less profitable sweet orange crop, 
higher production during the current season owing to favourable climatic conditions and 
improved groundwater availability, lower demand from North Indian markets due to 
availability of alternative fruits for juice processing, and increased arrivals in major markets, 
including Gudur, from areas such as Kadapa, Chitvel and Rajampet.   
To support acid lime growing farmers, District Administration has conducted 
Buyers–Sellers Meets for lemon to facilitate direct linkage between farmers and traders  to 
improve price discovery. Farmers have also been educated on quality enhancement 
measures and staggered harvesting practices to avoid market glut and ensure better 
returns.  
                                                  ******** 
157                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2276 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
  
INDIA–UK TRADE AGREEMENT COMMITMENTS 
  
2276.  SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: 
             
       Will the Minister of COMMERCE & INDUSTRY be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government has published a consolidated list of tariff-cut schedules, negative 
lists and phased schedules agreed under the India–UK trade agreement, if so, the details 
thereof; 
(b) the timelines for notification /implementation of these schedules and any 
safeguard/Rules of Origin in international trade (ROO) clauses to protect vulnerable 
sectors; and 
(c) the details of the expected gains and identified adjustment costs by sector (e.g., spirits, 
cosmetics, medical devices, IT mobility) and the basis of these estimates? 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL)  
(a) The entire text, including the tariff schedules, of India -UK Comprehensive Economic 
and Trade Agreement (India -UK CETA) has been published on the website of 
Department of Commerce. 
(b) The India-UK CETA comes into force after ratification by both the countries. It has 
been approved by the Cabinet in India. The rules of origin under the India -UK CETA 
are simple and transparent and ensure  adequate processing or manufacturing. The 
authentication and verification procedures are robust with a view to ensuring 
appropriate enforcement. 
(c) India-UK CETA provides duty-free access to almost 99 per cent of India’s exports  to 
the UK, covering nearly 100% of the trade value. It covers sectors such as agricultural 
and processed food sector, textiles, leather, marine products, gems and jewellery, toys, 
engineering goods, chemicals, and auto components.  Under India-UK CETA, UK has 
committed to provide duty free access to medical devices such as surgical instruments, 
diagnostic equipment, ECG machines, X-Ray systems and to cosmetics. UK's expertise 
in terms of spirits/wine making is likely to benefit India's spirit industry. The agreement 
provides greater market access in IT and IT -enabled services, financial and legal 
services, professional and educational services, and digital trade. Indian professionals, 
including those deployed by companies to work in UK across all service sectors and 
professionals depl oyed on contracts such as architects, engineers, chefs, yoga 
instructors, and musicians, will benefit from simplified visa procedures and liberalized 
entry categories, making it easier to work in the UK. Both sides have also reached an 
understanding on the  Double Contributions Convention. This will exempt Indian 
professionals and their employers from social security payments in the UK for up to 
three years. 
***** 
158                                                      

1 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2277 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
  
ONGOING FTA NEGOTIATIONS 
  
2277.  SMT. REKHA SHARMA: 
           
Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be pleased to state: 
  
(a) progress in ongoing Free Trade Agreement (FTA) negotiations; 
(b) safeguards for domestic industries; and 
(c) benefits expected for agriculture and textile producers in Haryana? 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL)  
  
(a) The progress of ongoing Free Trade Agreement (FTA) negotiations is as below: 
(i) India – Australia Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA):  The 
first round of negotiations on India-Australia CECA was held in February, 2023. 11 
rounds have been held so far.  
(ii) India – European Union (EU) FTA: Since launch of India – EU FTA negotiating in 
June 2022, 14 rounds of negotiations have been completed. Both sides are 
constructively engaged to conclude a balanced and mutually beneficial FTA.  
(iii) India – Sri Lanka Economic and Technology Cooperation Agreement (ETCA): 14 
rounds of negotiations have been held. 
(iv) India – Peru FTA:  Negotiations commenced in 2017. Till date, 9 rounds have been 
held.  
(v) India-Chile CEPA: CEPA negotiations with Chile were launched on 01st April 2025. 
4 rounds of negotiations have been held.  
(vi) India – New Zealand FTA: Negotiations were launched in May, 2025. 4 rounds of 
negotiations have been held.  It is at an advanced stage of finalisation. 
(vii) India – USA Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA): The negotiations were launched in 
March 2025. 06 rounds of negotiations have been held till date 
(viii) India – Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) FTA: 01st round of negotiations was held 
in November, 2025.  
(ix)     ASEAN –India Trade in Goods Agreement (AITIGA) Review ongoing. 
(x)     India – Korea CEPA - Upgraded Negotiations. 
159                                                      

2 
 
(b) For safeguarding the interests of the domestic industries, FTAs provide for maintaining 
sensitive, negative or exclusion lists of items on which limited or no tariff concessions are 
granted. In case of surge in imports and injury to the domestic industry, a country is allowed to 
take recourse to trade remedial measures such as anti -dumping and safeguards on imports 
within the period as mutually agreed to by the parties under the FTAs.  
 
(c) FTAs are entered into with the concerned trading partner countries primarily with the 
aim to increase the bilateral trade by enlarging the scope of market access and build on the 
trade complementarities for increasing trade and investment, thereby providing enhanced 
export potential, generating benefits for industry, farm ers, MSMEs and creating job 
opportunities across the country.  
 
***** 
  
 
160                                                      

1 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2278 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
DEVELOPING INDIA AS A GLOBAL GOLD HUB 
 
2278. SHRI GOVINDBHAI LALJIBHAI DHOLAKIA 
 
 Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be pleased to state :- 
 
(a) whether Government is aware of the fact that NITI Aayog has submitted a report to 
 develop India as a global gold hub; 
(b) whether Ministry of Commerce and Industry intends to formulate a policy framework 
 in coordination with the Bureau of Indian Standards, Ministry of Finance and other 
 stakeholders to develop India as a gold trading and refining hub; and 
(c) the steps taken to strengthen gold refinery, hallmarking and export infrastructure to 
 enhance India's global competitiveness? 
 
 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
  
(a)  NITI Aayog has submitted a report titled “Transforming India’s Gold Market”. 
 
(b) and (c) Following steps have been taken to strengthen gold refinery, hallmarking and export 
infrastructure to enhance India's global competitiveness and develop India as a gold trading 
and refining hub: 
i. Bureau of Indian Standards  (BIS) started the certification o f gold refineries/mint as a 
part of Gold Monetization Scheme (GMS) of Government of India in October 2015. 
ii. BIS has formulated an Indian Standard on Good Delivery Bars viz. IS 17278:2019 
‘Refined gold and silver bars for good delivery’ that prescribes the t echnical 
requirements, such as fineness, shape, size of the refined gold and silver bars for good 
delivery by the refiners. The good delivery gold bars are primarily used in large -scale 
financial and trading markets. Many jewellers, jewellery exporters and  bullion dealers 
also prefer good delivery bars for manufacturing jewellery. 
iii. The hallmarking of gold jewellery/artefacts was made mandatory from June 2021. 
iv. For the purpose of hallmarking gold jewellery and artefacts, the Hallmarking Unique 
Identification (HUID), a six -digit unique alphanumeric code, is laser -marked on each 
gold article in addition to the BIS logo and the declared purity/grade. The HUID is 
unique to every individual gold article. 
v. There are 420 units of the Gems & Jewellery (G&J) sector operating in various Special 
Economic Zones (SEZs) of the country. 
161                                                      

2 
 
vi. The India International Bullion Exchange ( IIBX), an SEZ Unit, operating 
in International Financial Services Centre (IFSC), Gujarat International Finance Tec 
(GIFT) SEZ, Gandhinagar, provides a gateway to import bullion into India and offers 
a bullion exchange ecosystem to promote bullion trading, investment in bullion 
financial products and vaulting facilities in IFSCs. 
vii. Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has enabled investments in gold  and 
gold related instruments through various SEBI regulated gold products. These are 
exchange traded commodity derivative contracts (ETCDs) and Electronic Gold 
Receipts (EGRs) tradeable on stock exchanges. Investments in these SEBI regulated 
gold products can be made through SEBI registered intermediaries and are governed by 
the regulatory framework prescribed by SEBI. 
viii. The SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996 specifies the regulatory framework for 
gold ETF schemes in India. Gold ETFs are offered by Mutual  Funds registered with 
SEBI and such schemes can invest in physical gold and exchange traded gold 
derivatives. The gold ETFs offers a low-cost investment option to investors without the 
requirement of holding physical gold. 
  
***** 
 
162                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT FOR PROMOTION OF INDUSTRY AND INTERNAL TRADE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2279. 
TO BE ANSWERED ON FRIDAY, THE 19TH DECEMBER, 2025. 
 
EXAMINATION OF INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT PROPOSALS RECEIVED 
FROM TAMIL NADU 
 
2279.  DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU: 
 
Will the Minister of Commerce and Industry be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether any industrial investment proposals submitted by Government of Tamil Nadu 
are currently under consideration with the Ministry, if so, the sector-wise details of such 
proposals; 
 
(b)  the factors involved in the examination and processing of these proposals, including 
administrative, regulatory or technical requirements; and 
 
(c)  the expected timeframe within which the Ministry plans to complete the examination 
and disposal of such proposals? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
 
(a) to (c):  There is no industrial investment proposal received from the Government of 
Tamil Nadu pending for consideration in the Ministry. 
 
 
 
****** 
 
163                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT FOR PROMOTION OF INDUSTRY AND INTERNAL TRADE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2280. 
TO BE ANSWERED ON FRIDAY, THE 19TH DECEMBER, 2025. 
 
PERFORMANCE OF MANUFACTURING SECTOR UNDER 'MAKE IN 
INDIA' INITIATIVE 
 
2280.  SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA: 
 
Will the Minister of Commerce and Industry be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether Government is aware that manufacturing continues to contribute less than 17 
per cent to India’s GDP, despite the stated goal of reaching 25 per cent under the 'Make 
in India' initiative; 
 
(b)  the major reasons identified by Government for under performance in labour-intensive 
manufacturing sectors such as textiles, electronics and toys; 
 
(c)  whether Government has taken specific steps to address high logistics costs, land  
acquisition hurdles and regulatory compliance burdens faced by manufacturing units; 
and 
 
(d)  the details of progress made under the 'Make in India' initiative, including investment 
inflows, job creation and sector-wise growth over the last five years? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
 
(a): Manufacturing sector in the country has experienced growth in the last decade. As per 
the National Accounts Statistics released by Ministry of Statistics and Program 
Implementation (MoSPI), manufacturing sector’s Gross Value Added (GVA)  at 
constant prices increased from ₹15.60 lakh crore in FY 2013-14 to ₹28.25 lakh 
crore in FY 2023-24. Further, the share of the manufacturing sector as a percentage of 
total GVA at constant prices increased from 17.2% in 2013 -14 to 17.5% in 2023 -24. 
(Source: National Accounts Statistics 2025) 
(b) to (d): Government of Indi a has taken several measures to promote the growth of 
manufacturing sector and create more employment opportunities, and taken various 
initiatives to boost domestic and foreign investments in India. ‘Make in India’ initiative 
was launched on 25th September 2014 to facilitate Investment, foster Innovation, build 
best in class Infrastructure, and make India a hub for manufacturing, design, and 
innovation. Presently, Make in India 2.0 focuses on 27 sectors including 15 
manufacturing sectors, implemented across  various Ministries and Departments and 
State Governments. The list of sectors under Make in India  2.0 is enclosed at 
Annexure-I. 
164                                                      

To further the Make in India init iative, Government of India has announced the 
National Manufacturing Mission (NMM) in the Union Budget 2025-26 with an outlay 
of ₹ 100 crore. The Mission will lay emphasis on five focal areas i.e. ease and cost of 
doing bus iness; future ready workforce for in demand jobs; a vibrant and dynamic 
MSME sector; availability of technology; and quality products. 
 
Various steps taken up under the “Make in India” initiative include Production 
Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes, Start-up India, National Single Window System, GIS 
enabled Land Bank, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy reforms, PM Gati Shakti 
National Master Plan for integrated planning of multi modal infrastructure, Project 
Monitoring Group to remove bottlenecks in setting up of major infrastructure projects, 
setting up of industrial parks, interventions to improve ease of doing business, measures 
for reduction in compliance burden, rationalization of labour laws, introduction of 
Goods and Services Tax, reduction in the corporate tax rate, policy measures to boost 
domestic manufacturing through public procurement orders, Phased Manufacturing 
Programme (PMP) and Quality Control Orders (QCOs). 
Further, keeping in view India’s vision of  becoming ‘Aatmanirbhar’ and to enhance 
India’s manufacturing capabilities and exports,  Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
schemes have been launched for 14 key sectors with an outlay of Rs. 1.97 lakh crore. 
These schemes have the potential of significantly  boosting production, increasing 
manufacturing output and contributing to faster economic growth in future.  The 
purpose of the PLI Schemes is to attract investments in key sectors and cutting-edge 
technology; ensure efficiency and bring economies of size and scale  in the 
manufacturing sector and make Indian companies and manufacturers globally 
competitive. These PLI schemes have the potential of significantly  boosting 
production, employment and economic growth over the next five years or so. PLI 
Schemes ha ve resulted in an employment generation of over 12 lakhs (direct and 
indirect). Actual investment of over Rs. 2 lakh crore and actual production/sales of over 
of Rs.18.7 lakh crore have been reported across these  PLI Schemes upto September, 
2025. 
To address challenges in the logistics sector, Government has launched the National 
Logistics Policy (NLP), whose one of the primary objectives is to reduce logistics costs 
in India to levels comparable with global benchmarks by 2030. In addition, the National 
Industrial Corridor Development Programme is an major infrastructure programme 
aimed at developing futuristic industrial cities in India aimed to create employment 
opportunities and improve economic growth leading to overall socio -economic 
development. Under the National Industrial Corridor Development Corporation 
(NICDC), 20 plug -and-play industrial parks are in various stages of development. 
These ready -to-use parks reduce entry barriers for industries and helps investors to 
commence production early. 
With a view to develop integrated large scale and modern industrial infrastructure 
facility for entire value chain of the textile industry, the Government has finalized 
setting up of PM Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks 
at 7 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana (Warangal), Gujarat (Navasari), 
165                                                      

Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow), Madhya Pradesh (Dhar), and 
Maharashtra (Amravati) with an outlay of Rs. 4445 crores for a period of seven years 
upto 2027-28. PM MITRA Park oﬀers the opportunity to create an Integrated Textile 
Value Chain right from spinning, weaving, processing and printing to garment 
manufacturing, accessories makers at one location reducing logistics and transactional 
cost. In addition, PM MITRA Parks oﬀer world class infrastructure at affordable cost 
and attractive water and power charges.  
 
The Industrial Park Rating System (IPRS) 3.0 developed by DPIIT adds transparency 
and accountability to India’s industrial infrastructure. It evaluates industrial parks 
across various performance indicators and grade them which gives investors reliable 
information to guide decisions, while motivating States and Union Territories to 
upgrade their facilities and attract more investments. The India Industrial Land Bank 
(IILB) complements this by providing a GIS-based, centralized repository of detailed 
information on industrial land and infrastructure to facilitate investment planning. 
 
The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) plays a crucial 
role in enhancing the business environment and Ease of doing business  in India 
through various initiatives aimed at simplifying and streamlining business regulations 
including the Business Reform Action Plan (BRAP), the B -Ready assessment, Jan 
Vishwas, National Single Window System, India Industrial Land Bank, Ease of doing 
business initiatives, Business Reform Action Plan (BRAP) and Reducing Compliance 
Burden on Businesses and Citizens and measurement of Cost of Regulation. These 
initiatives are designed to improve India's business climate, attract investments, and 
foster economic growth by reducing compliance hurdles and making the regulatory 
environment more business-friendly. 
National Single Window System (NSWS) facilitates a single interface for investors to 
apply for approvals, track applications, access regulatory information, and fulfil 
compliance obligations. The portal integrates key modules such as Single Sign -On, 
Know Your Approval (KYA), Common Application Form (CAF), Unified Payment 
Gateway, Inspection Management, Dashboard, Grievance Redressal,  and Incentive 
Tracking. The Reducing Compliance Burden (RCB) initiative was launched in 2020 
to make governance simpler and more business -friendly. This exercise mandates 
Ministries, Departments, and States/UTs to review their Acts, rules, and processes to 
eliminate unnecessary compliances through simplification, rationalization, digitization, 
and decriminalization of minor offences. 
With the initiatives taken up by the Government under the “Ma ke in India” initiative, 
total employment in manufacturing sector has increased from 57 million in FY  2017-
18 (Economic Survey 2020-21) to 64.4 million in FY 2022-23 (Economic Survey 
2023-24). 
 
 
******** 
166                                                      

 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PARTS (b) to (d) OF THE RAJYA  
SABHAUNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2280 FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025. 
 
Manufacturing Sectors 
 
i. Aerospace and Defence 
ii. Automotive and Auto Components 
iii. Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices 
iv. Bio-Technology 
v. Capital Goods 
vi. Textile and Apparels 
vii. Chemicals and Petro chemicals 
viii. Electronics System Design and Manufacturing (ESDM) 
ix. Leather & Footwear 
x. Food Processing 
xi. Gems and Jewellery 
xii. Shipping 
xiii. Railways 
xiv. Construction 
xv. New and Renewable Energy 
 
Service Sectors 
 
i. Information Technology & Information Technology enabled Services (IT & ITeS) 
ii. Tourism and Hospitality Services 
iii. Medical Value Travel 
iv. Transport and Logistics Services 
v. Accounting and Finance Services 
vi. Audio Visual Services 
vii. Legal Services 
viii. Communication Services 
ix. Construction and Related Engineering Services 
x. Environmental Services 
xi. Financial Services 
xii. Education Services 
 
 
******* 
 
 
167                                                      

1 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2281 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
  
ENHANCEMENT OF SERVICES EXPORTS THROUGH FTAs 
 
2281. SHRI MADAN RATHORE 
 SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA 
 SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
 
 Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be pleased to state :- 
 
(a) current status and timeline for concluding Foreign Trade Agreements (FTAs) with 
 UK and EU and the manner in which these agreements enhance India’s services 
 exports; 
(b) manner in which the Ministry is promoting and tracking Rupee trade settlement 
 mechanism with RBI and steps being taken to encourage more partner countries to 
 open Special Rupee Vostro Accounts (SRVAs); 
(c) strategies being used to grow services exports in sectors like FinTech, Geospatial 
 services and AVGC and the targets for 2026; and 
(d) progress made in using Trade Connect e-Platform to provide exporters with real-time 
 data on tariff concessions and Rules of Origin under various FTAs? 
 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
  
(a) India and United Kingdom (UK) have signed the Comprehensive Economic  and Trade 
Agreement (CETA) on 24th July, 2025. After entry into force, the India-UK CETA will provide 
predictable, open and favourable market access across wide range of services sectors such 
as IT/ITES, business services, professional services, education, and healthcare. It also creates 
a structured framework for the temporary movement of service providers. Business visitors, 
contractual service suppliers, and independent professionals will be able to access the UK 
under clear and predictable temporary entry and stay rules. The Double Cont ribution 
Convention which will enter into force along with the FTA will provide a mechanism to avoid 
double payment of social security contributions. Additionally, up to 1,800 Indian chefs, yoga 
instructors, and classical musicians will be able to work in the UK every year under these 
provisions. After formal relaunch of India -EU Free Trade Agreement (FTA) negotiations in 
June 2022, fourteen rounds of negotiations have been concluded by October 2025. In the 
meetings held at various levels from 3 -9 December 2025, both sides took note of the steady 
progress achieved across various negotiating tracks, including Services and agreed to sustain 
the momentum.  
(b) To promote growth of global trade with emphasis on exports from India and to support the 
increasing interest of global trading community in Indian Rupees (INR), an additional 
168                                                      

2 
 
arrangement for invoicing, payment, and settlement of exports / imports in INR w as put in 
place vide Authorised Persons (Directions / Dealer Information/ Reporting) Series (A.P. (DIR 
Series)) Circular No. 10 dated July 11, 2022, on International Trade Settlement in Indian 
Rupees. Additionally, in terms Reserve Bank of India’s A.P. (DI R Series) Circular No. 08 
dated August 05, 2025, Authorized Dealer banks are now allowed to open Special Rupee 
Vostro Accounts (SRVAs) of overseas correspondent banks without referring to the Reserve 
Bank for approval. Further, in terms of A.P. (DIR Series ) Circular No. 14 dated October 03, 
2025, on International Trade Settlement in Indian Rupees (INR), SRVA balances can now also 
be invested in non -convertible debentures/bonds and commercial papers issued by an Indian 
company. 
(c) Services exports including financial services is a key component in bilateral engagements 
and FTAs. The National Geospatial Policy (NGP), 2022 envisages the growth of Geospatial 
services, including their contribution to India’s overall digital services exports. The Policy aims 
to b uild a globally competitive Geospatial ecosystem through an enabling framework for 
innovation, improved data availability, private-sector participation, and capacity development. 
As per the NGP 2022, there are milestones laid out up to 2025 and 2030 for es tablishing the 
foundational infrastructure, data frameworks, and institutional mechanisms required for 
expanding Geospatial services and their export potential. Further, Government is taking several 
steps for growth in Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming, and Comics (AVGC) Services exports. 
The AVGC Promotion Task Force was set up by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
in April 2022 after the Union Budget announcement. It brought together industry and 
Government to outline how India could scale skill s, jobs and investment in animation, VFX, 
gaming and comics; and position the country as a global hub. The Task Force submitted its 
report in December 2022, recommending a National AVGC Mission, Centres of Excellence, 
stronger infrastructure and dedicated support for Indian Intellectual Property and 
exports. Indian Institute of Creative Technologies (IICT) Mumbai has been established and is 
being developed as a specialized Centre of Excellence to strengthen high -end training and 
research. With a focus on ex panding high-quality production capacity, developing talent and 
improving access to international markets, World Audio Visual & Entertainment Summit 
(WAVES) 2025 was held in May 2025 as a global platform for the entire Media & 
Entertainment sector.  
(d) Tariff Explorer service on Trade Connect ePlatform provides information on tariff 
concessions available to eligible Indian exports under various Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) 
and Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs). It also provides details on Rules of Origi n to be 
complied with, in order to access the said tariff concessions. The information is available on a 
searchable basis with exporters having option of searching by the Harmonised System (HS) 
code assigned to the product by the destination country or by product description. The exporters 
may select the nearest matches to their products based on the search and understand the tariff 
and rules of origin information.  Updates to the repository are undertaken as and when new 
information is received from authorised sources. 
 
  
***** 
  
  
 
 
169                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT FOR PROMOTION OF INDUSTRY AND INTERNAL TRADE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2282. 
TO BE ANSWERED ON FRIDAY, THE 19TH DECEMBER, 2025. 
 
OPEN NETWORK FOR DIGITAL COMMERCE 
 
2282.   SHRI MAYANKKUMAR NAYAK: 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI: 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: 
 
Will the Minister of Commerce and Industry be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  manner in which Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC) is democratizing 
ecommerce by helping more than 5,000 plus MSMEs reach nationwide customers and 
break free from platform-centric monopolies; 
 
(b)  ONDC’s biggest achievement in expanding its reach, especially in non -mobility 
segments like food, grocery and fashion; 
 
(c)  whether ONDC’s interoperable QR code system is effectively giving local artisans and 
kirana stores an easy digital presence connected to multiple buyer apps; and 
 
(d)  manner in which ONDC is attracting major financial institutions to join the network 
and offer MSMEs working capital and credit based on their digital transaction histories? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
 
(a): Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC), unlike traditional e -commerce 
platforms that operate in silos, creates an open ecosystem where sellers can reach 
customers across multiple platforms without being restricted by platform - specific 
terms and conditions. ONDC plays a big part in ensuring that MSMEs are not digitally 
excluded by providing a fair, transparent, and non-discriminatory discovery within the 
emerging e -commerce environments through open protocols that make all sellers 
equally visible across network regardless of size, scale or digital sophistication. Seller-
side apps make their full catalogues discoverable to all buyer -side apps, while buyer -
side apps discloses key parameters used for sorting or listing search results, enabling 
sellers to understand and improve their ranking. Common open specifications adopted 
by all network participants further enhance transparency and prevent opaque or biased 
listing practices. 
 
 
170                                                      

Further, Ministry of MSME’s Trade Enablement and Marketing (TEAM) scheme 
promote adoption of digital commerce by SMEs, small sellers including Self Help 
Groups (SHGs), Farmer Producer Organisation (FPOs), artisans, rural entrepreneurs 
and local retailers t hrough the ONDC. Under this scheme, these small sellers are 
provided support in digital literacy, awareness, cataloguing, and onboarding, with a 
focus on inclusivity by targeting 50% of beneficiaries as women-led SMEs. 
(b): As of 09 December 2025, the network has around 1.16 lakh+ sellers coming from 630 
cities and towns, transacting across multiple buyer applications across India. This 
includes sellers across categories such as restaurants, grocery, fashion, electronics, and 
other retail categories. ONDC h as also seen strong ecosystem participation, with over 
85 organisations joining as Buyer Network Participants and more than 187 
organisations joining as Seller Network Participants in the retail categories. 
As a result, the network has facilitated over 2.5  million retail orders in the month  of 
November 2025. This expansion demonstrates the viability of an open, interoperable 
model for digital commerce and showcases the network’s ability to scale diverse non -
mobility categories nationwide. 
(c): ONDC’s interoperable QR code system provides a simple and low-cost digital identity 
for local retailers, artisans, MSMEs, and kirana stores by enabling them to be 
discovered across all ONDC-compatible buyer apps. This lowers the barriers for small 
businesses and allows them to access a wider consumer base, thereby facilitating greater 
participation in digital commerce. 
(d): ONDC engages with major banks and financial institutions to leverage the network’s 
open protocols for delivering financial services in an interoperable manner. At present, 
personal loans (unsecured term loans) and gold loans have been enabled on the network, 
with more than 10 lenders and over 10 loan service providers. These entities are oﬀering 
inclusive and digitally accessible credit products to consumers. 
 
 
******* 
 
 
171                                                      

1 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2283 
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
IMPORT OF TEA 
  
2283.   SHRI PRAKASH CHIK BARAIK 
             
Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the country-wise and year-wise details of total amount of tea (in kg) imported since 2020; 
(b) whether India imports duty-free tea from any country, if so, the details thereof; 
(c) the details of import duty imposed by the countries on tea that is imported from India; 
(d) whether it is a fact that import of tea is permitted only for the purpose of re-export; and 
(e) whether Government has any data on imported tea being mixed with domestic produce? 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
  
(a) The country-wise and year-wise details of tea imported since 2020 is attached as Annexure-I. 
  
(b) to (d) Teas imported in India attract basic import duty of 100%. Import duty is not incurred on 
teas imported by Export Oriented Units (E OU) and Special Economic Zone (SEZ) units for the 
purpose of re -exports. The import duties applied by the tea importing countries may vary from 
country to country and also depend inter alia on the presence of trade agreements or preferential 
rates. 
  
(e) Data on imported tea being mixed with domestic produce is not captured. However, Tea Board 
has taken several measures in respect of teas imported into the country, which include as below: 
 
o A Notification dated 11.11.2021 was issued with a directive stating  that imported 
tea must not be blended with GI teas, and if blending is done, the end product must 
not be claimed as GI tea. 
o Directives were issued to packers, requiring them to clearly indicate on the 
packaging that the blended tea contains imported ingredients. 
o Importers and exporters have been directed to mandatorily obtain clearance 
certificates from the Board’s Tea Council portal before importing or exporting tea, 
172                                                      

2 
 
and the origin of the tea must be clearly mentioned on the tea packages. 
o The importers should notify, to the Board, the place of storage of the imported teas 
within 24 hours of import. The importers shall ensure that origin of the imported 
teas is mentioned in all sale invoices. 
o The tea consignments are tested for compliance to parameters laid down by FSSAI 
at the time of import in India. Tea Board also collects random samples from the tea 
imported and tests them for compliance with the FSSAI parameters. 
o Process of conducting joint training sessions among between Tea Board, Customs 
and FSSAI were initiated to strengthen food import clearance procedures. 
  
  
  
173                                                      

3 
 
Annexure-1 
  
  
Annexure referred to in reply to Part (a) of  Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2283 for 
answer on 19.12.2025. 
 
 
Countries 
Quantity of tea imported into India (million Kg) 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 (Apr-
Oct) 
Argentina 1.25 1.07 0.66 0.90 1.14 1.15 
Australia 0.08 0.14 0.05 0.03 0.00 0.00 
Bangladesh  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.17 0.00 
Belgium 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 
Brazil 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 
Burundi 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Canada 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 
Chile 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
China 0.63 0.64 0.69 0.51 1.11 0.61 
Cyprus 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 
Czech 
Republic 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 
Djibouti 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 
Ecuador 0.19 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 
Egypt 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 
Ethiopia 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.12 
Finland 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 
France 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Georgia 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Germany 0.05 0.01 0.18 0.10 0.11 0.02 
Indonesia 1.36 1.03 1.09 0.13 0.20 0.17 
Iran 2.11 3.12 0.19 1.47 2.80 0.98 
Italy 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.02 
Japan 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.05 
Kenya 12.57 7.80 5.13 5.78 19.03 7.87 
Korea 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 
Libya 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 
Malawi 0.23 0.28 0.33 0.19 0.26 0.20 
Malaysia 0.03 0.04 0.12 0.08 0.20 0.03 
Mexico 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 
Morocco 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
174                                                      

4 
 
Mozambique 0.75 0.14 0.03 0.05 0.09 0.00 
Myanmar 0.02 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nepal 12.57 10.72 16.53 12.94 16.11 6.21 
Netherland 0.00 0.08 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.16 
Oman 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.01 
Philippines 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Poland 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.03 
Qatar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 
Russia 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rwanda 0.10 0.13 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 
Saudi Arab 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Singapore 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 
South Africa 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sri Lanka 0.61 0.37 0.31 0.28 0.30 0.15 
Sudan 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 
Switzerland 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.02 
Taiwan 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.02 0.01 
Tanzania  0.28 0.13 0.27 0.15 0.44 0.09 
Thailand 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 
Turkey 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.09 0.02 
UAE 0.06 0.09 0.05 0.09 2.70 0.53 
UK 0.49 0.33 0.42 0.18 1.30 1.57 
USA 0.28 0.10 0.08 0.08 0.13 0.05 
Uganda 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.00 
Unspecified 0.02 0.25 0.03 0.07 0.17 0.00 
Vietnam  4.45 3.28 3.14 1.86 3.38 2.33 
Zimbabwe 0.29 0.39 0.41 0.07 0.05 0.05 
   Source: Tea Board 
 
 
***** 
175                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT FOR PROMOTION OF INDUSTRY AND INTERNAL TRADE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2284. 
TO BE ANSWERED ON FRIDAY, THE 19TH DECEMBER, 2025. 
 
DOMESTIC CONSUMPTION AND FORMAL MARKET INTEGRATION 
 
2284.  SHRI IRANNA KADADI: 
 
Will the Minister of Commerce and Industry be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether rising middle income consumption is contributing to India’s domestic market 
resilience, if so, the details thereof; 
 
(b)  the policies implemented to support retail demand through local manufacturing, digital 
commerce, and rural market access; 
 
(c)  in what manner these efforts are generating employment and improving consumer  
choice across income groups; and 
 
(d)  the steps taken to ensure that small businesses and self-employed retailers benefit from 
increased domestic consumption and formal market integration? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
 
(a) to (d): The National Statistics Office (NSO) conducts survey on Household Consumption 
Expenditure at regular interval. As per the Household Consumption Expenditure 
Survey 2023-24, the estimated average monthly per capita consumption expenditure at 
current prices for rural areas have increased from ₹ 3773 in 2022-23 to ₹ 4122 in 2023-
24, whereas in urban areas have increased from ₹ 6,459 in 2022-23 to ₹ 6,996 in 2023-
24 (without taking into account the values of items received free of cost by the 
households through various social welfare programmes). This rising middle income 
consumption contributes to the country’s domestic market resilience. 
The Government has taken various initiatives for supporting retail demand, stimulating 
overall economic growth, improving ease of doing business, enabling an ecosystem for 
skill development and  job creation and promoting infrastructure and urban 
development. Some of the steps are given below: 
i. Make in India, Start -up India, PM GatiShakti, National Industrial Corridor 
Programme, P roduction Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme, promoting Ease of 
Doing Business (EoDB) and reducing compliance burden, Business Reform 
Action Plan (BRAP), National Single Window System (NSWS), India Industrial 
Land Bank, Project Monitoring Group (PMG), liberaliz ation of FDI policy, 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Schemes, Indian Footwear and Leather 
Development Programme (IFLDP) Schemes are some of the major initiatives 
that have been undertaken to boost local manufacturing in the country. 
176                                                      

ii. GST 2.0 has simplifie d and rationalised the rate structure. The reduction in  tax 
burden on essential goods, services and emerging sectors is expected to lower the 
cost of living, improve aﬀordability, and stimulate household consumption 
demand. Lowering of GST rates on basic c onsumer items and certain specified 
services is expected to enhance trade competitiveness and support domestic 
industry. At the same time, a simplified two -rate structure is expected to reduce 
transaction costs, ease compliance burden, and encourage small businesses to 
enter the formal sector, thereby supporting greater formalisation, and widening 
the tax base. These measures  collectively are likely to boost GDP growth by 
stimulating consumption, encouraging investment, and promoting job creation. 
iii. Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC), unlike traditional e -commerce 
platforms that operate in silos, creates an open ecosystem where sellers can reach 
customers across multiple platforms without being restricted by platform-specific 
terms and condition s. ONDC supports small businesses, local traders, and 
MSMEs by providing a fair, transparent, and non - discriminatory discovery 
within emerging e-commerce environments through open protocols that make all 
sellers equally visible across network regardless o f size, scale or digital 
sophistication. Common open specifications adopted by all network participants 
further enhance transparency and prevent opaque or biased listing practices. 
iv. Ministry of MSME’s Trade Enablement and Marketing (TEAM) scheme has been 
launched to strengthen the digital capabilities of small sellers including Self Help 
Groups (SHGs), Farmer Producer Organisation (FPOs), artisans, rural 
entrepreneurs, and local retailers by providing support in digital literacy, 
awareness, cataloguing, and onboarding, with a focus on inclusivity by 
targeting 50% of beneficiaries as women-led SMEs. 
v. Ministry of Rural Development under Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana -National 
Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY -NRLM) has undertaken tie -ups with                      
e-Commerce Players for promotion of Self Help Groups (SHGs) products. In 
collaboration with Government e - marketplace (GeM) a "Saras Collection"  has 
been created as a Store Front in GeM for marketing of SHG products. 
vi. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology's network of Common 
Services Centers (CSCs) is being utilised to connect every village in India to the 
national digital market through ONDC. With their network of 4  Lakh+ Village 
Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) - CSC through ONDC is unlocking Assisted                
e-Commerce across rural India. This integration allows rural citizens to access a 
vast e-commerce network, thereby boosting entrepreneurship opportunities and 
incomes for VLEs. 
vii. The Ministry of Agriculture is supporting Farmers Producers Organisation 
(FPOs) and making it easier for them to access markets nationwide through 
ONDC. More than 7000 FPOs have already been onboarded to ONDC- compliant 
applications, enab ling them to sell their produce in 160+ cities across India 
supported with innovative joint digital demand generation initiatives. 
 
These measures have broadened demand, integrated rural and urban markets, and have 
contributed in the resilience of India’s retail and domestic consumption ecosystem. 
 
******** 
 
 
177                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2285  
ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
  
TAKING OVER OF TEA GARDENS IN DOOARS REGION 
 
2285. SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE 
 
  Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be pleased to state :- 
 
(a) Whether it is a fact that Government decided to take over seven tea gardens in the  Dooars 
  region of the State of West Bengal way back in 2016; 
(b) whether the decision has been implemented; 
(c) if so, the details thereof; and 
(d) if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
 
(a) to (d) Government had vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 260(E) dated 28 January, 2016 under 
Section 16E of the Tea Act, 1953 authorized Tea Board to take steps to take over the management 
control of seven tea gardens viz. Birpara Tea Estate, Garganda Tea Estate,  Lankapara Tea Estate, 
Tulsipara Tea Estate, Hantapara Tea Estate and Dumchipara Tea Estate owned by M/s Duncans 
Industries Ltd. and Demdima Tea Estate owned by M/s Santipara Tea Company Private Ltd., a sister 
concern of M/s Duncans Industries Ltd. The Tea Board, accordingly, invited Expression of Interest 
from interested tea companies for handing over the management control of the seven tea gardens. 
Immediately thereafter, M/s Duncans Industries Ltd. and M/s Santipara Tea Company Private Ltd. 
petitioned the High Court challenging the notification, which was followed by an appeal to the said 
High Court by the two companies. 
  
The Court in its Order dated 20th September, 2016 had directed, as an interim arrangement, that the 
management of the tea gardens shou ld be taken over by the two companies. Subsequently, the 
companies had made arrangements for managing of the tea gardens viz. Birpara, Garganda, 
Lankapara, Tulsipara, Hantapara, Dumchipara with M/s Merico Agro Industries Pvt. Ltd. and 
Demdima Tea Estate with Demdima Tea Company Pvt. Ltd. These tea gardens, except Lankapara, 
were reopened during 2016-2018. 
  
Insolvency Resolution Proceedings were initiated against M/s Duncans Industries Limited vide 
National Company Law T ribunal’s Order dated 5.3.2020. The c ontrol of M/s Duncans Industries 
Ltd. has been with the Insolvency Resolution Professional appointed by the NCLT as part of the 
Insolvency Proceedings. 
  
***** 
178                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2286 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
PROPOSAL FOR LAUNCH OF ISM 2.0 
 
2286. # DR. KALPANA SAINI:  
   SHRI MAYANKKUMAR NAYAK:  
   SHRI AMAR PAL MAURYA:  
   SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA:  
   SHRI NARAYANA KORAGAPPA:  
   SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) achievements especially in fabrication, assembly and packaging under India Semiconductor 
Mission (ISM) 1.0 since inception;  
(b) whether Government proposes to launch ISM 2.0, if so, expected timeline for its announcement 
and implementation;  
(c) estimated financial allocation and strategic priorities being considered under ISM 2.0 to 
strengthen India’s position in global semiconductor value chain;  
(d) whether Government has any plan to attract companies to invent and engage in advanced 
lithography, semiconductor equipment manufacturing and allied technology ecosystems to set up 
operations in the country; and  
(e) if so, the details thereof along with long-term goal of semiconductor self-reliance in India? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
(a) to (e): The semiconductor development strategy is inspired by Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision 
of Atmanirbhar Bharat and Make in India, Make for the World.  
As a part of this strategy and given the foundational nature of semiconductor industry, Government 
is developing a complete ecosystem covering talentpool, design, fabrication, assembly, testing and 
packaging. 
‘Semicon India Programme’ has been launched as part of this strategy. 
In less than 3 years, ten units (2 fabs and 8 ATMP/OSATs) have been approved with cumulative 
investment of 1.6 Lakh Cr. These units include silicon fab, Silicon Carbide fab, advanced 
packaging, memory packaging, etc.  
179                                                      

These will cater to chip requirements of sectors such as consumer appliances, industrial 
electronics, automobiles, telecommunications, aerospace, and power electronics etc.  
Pilot facilities of 3 units approved under the Semicon India Programme are already operational. 
Further, under DLI, 24 chip design projects are supported through startups, representing Rs 920 
crore in project value. 94 companies have been provided free access to EDA tools for designing 
the chips enabling over 47 lakh hours of design tool usage.  
In addition to the above, Government has also launched Chips to Start -ups program (C2S) 
programme with the objective to develop 85 thousand skilled manpower in the semiconductor 
sector.  
The ChipIN Centre has been established at C -DAC Bangalore as a centralized national facility 
providing comprehensive chip-design and fabrication resources under the Design Linked Incentive 
(DLI) Scheme and Chips to Start-up (C2S) Programme. 
Approximately, 1 lakh students from 300 organizations have been enrolled and 255 training 
sessions on design flow have been conducted in partnership with leading companies.  
The entire ecosystem is being developed in India due to the Government policies. Companies 
involved in specialised gases, materials, components, warehousing, etc. are scaling up their 
operations in India. Companies involved in making tools for electronics and semiconductor 
manufacturing have also expanded their operations. 
The Government of India continuously engages with all stakeholders, including industry, academia 
and other governments, to understand requirements and take further action as necessary. 
 
***** 
180                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2287 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
DILUTION OF PROVISION OF RTI ACT VIDE SECTION 44(3) 
OF DIGITAL PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION ACT, 2023 
 
2287.  SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the amendment to Section 8(1)(j) of the RTI Act through Section 44(3) of the Digital 
Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 undermines transparency and public interest under the guise of 
privacy;  
(b) the details of the categories of information that are considered to be ‘personal information’ in this 
regard; and  
(c) the steps proposed to ensure that the DPDP Act does not dilute the RTI regime’s original intent to 
enable democratic oversight and prevent arbitrary denial of information?  
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (c): The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (“DPDP Act”) provides for the processing 
of digital personal data in a manner that recognises both the rights of citizens to protect their personal 
data and the need to process such personal data for lawful purposes. 
 
The DPDP Act traces its origin to the Supreme Court’s 2017 Puttaswamy judgment, which mandated 
a statutory framework for data protection in India. It was subsequently developed through successive 
draft Bills, culminating in its enactment.  
 
The DPDP Act was enacted after extensive consultation with civil society and widely debated in 
various parliamentary forums including committees. The Government had examined over 22,600 
suggestions. 
 
As per the Act, personal information means any data about an individual who is identifiable by or in 
relation to such data. 
 
The objectives of the Right to Information Act (“RTI Act”) remain strong because section 8(2) 
continues to allow the disclosure of personal information in public interest. Section 8(2) of RTI Act 
reads as follows: 
 
181                                                      

“Notwithstanding anything in the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923) nor any of the exemptions 
permissible in accordance with sub-section (1), a public authority may allow access to information, if 
public interest in disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected interests.” 
 
The amendment in section 8(1)(j) of the RTI Act aligns with the Puttaswamy judgement without 
compromising public interest. Public interest remains protected through section 8(2) of RTI Act. 
Thus, the amendment merely codifies and reinforces the judicial principles. It ensures that personal 
information is disclosed in accordance with law. 
****** 
 
182                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2288 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
STRENGTHENING OF CYBERSECURITY 
 
2288.  SMT. REKHA SHARMA: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) steps taken to strengthen India’s cybersecurity;  
(b) CERT-In’s key interventions; and  
(c) whether cybersecurity capacity-building is being done in Haryana? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (c): The policies of Government of India aim to ensure an open, safe, trusted, and accountable 
Internet for all users. The Government has undertaken several initiatives to strengthen 
cybersecurity in the country, which inter alia includes:   
 
1. The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) is designated as the national 
agency for responding to cyber security incidents under the provisions of section 70B of 
the Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000. 
2. National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC), implemented by CERT -In, examines 
cyberspace to detect cyber security threats. It shares the information with concerned 
organizations, state governments and stakeholder agencies for taking action. 
3. Cyber Swachhta Kendra (CSK) 
• A citizen-centric service provided by CERT-In, which extends the vision of Swachh 
Bharat to the Cyber Space. 
• It is the Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre and helps to detect malicious 
programs and provides free tools to remove the same. 
• It also provides cyber security tips and best practices for citizens and organisations. 
4. National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) is established for 
protection of critical information infrastructure in the country under the provisions of 
section 70A of the IT Act, 2000. 
5. Computer Security Incident Response Team in Finance sector (CSIRT-Fin) under CERT-In 
is operational since May 2020 to coordinate cyber incident response in the banking and 
financial sector. 
6. CSIRT-Power is operational since 23 September 2024 as an extended arm of CERT -In to 
coordinate cyber security issues within the power sector entities. 
183                                                      

7. Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has established Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre 
(I4C) to deal with cybercrimes in a coordinated and effective manner 
8. Cyber security mock drills are conducted regularly to enable assessment of cyber security 
posture and preparedness of various organisations. 
9. CERT-In has empanelled 231 security auditing organizations to support and audit 
implementation of Information Security Best Practices. 
10. CERT-In issues alerts and advisories regarding latest cyber threats/vulnerabilities including 
malicious attacks using Artificial Intelligence and countermeasures to protect computers, 
networks and data on an ongoing basis. 
11. CERT-In has operationalised a Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure and Coordination 
Program for collection, analysis, mitigation and coordination with 
researchers/finders/vendors for fixing vulnerabilities in software/ devices. 
12. CERT-In has issued a cyber security baseline document, in September 2025, which 
provides a minimum set of security controls recommended for Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs). This helps MSMEs to implement essential measures for 
strengthening their cyber security posture. 
13. CERT-In has issued updated technical guidelines in July 2025 for Bill of Materials (BOM) 
for software, hardware, Artificial Intelligence, Quantum Computing & Cryptography 
requirements. 
a. These guidelines are aimed to enhance the security and transparency of supply chains 
for software, hardware & emerging technologies. 
 
14. Information Security Education & Awareness (ISEA) Workshops 
• ISEA is an initiative for building human resources in Information Security and to spread 
cyber hygiene awareness among citizens.  
• So far, 4,125 workshops have been conducted, reaching over 9.25 lakh+ participants, 
including academia, law enforcement, government personnel, & general public. 
 
63 workshops in Haryana covering more than 9,500 participants have been organized. Over 
2,800 students/professionals have been trained in Haryana through National Institute of 
Technology Kurukshetra. 
 
105 Government officials have been trained in Haryana in various short -term training 
programs by Centre for Development of Advanced Computing Mohali. 
 
15. Training programs by CERT-In 
CERT-In conducts cyber security training programs in collaboration with Industry partners to 
upskill the cyber security workforce in Government, public and private organizations.  
23 and 30 training programs were conducted covering 12014 and 19915 participants during 
2024 and 2025 (up to November), including 394 and 1002 participants from Haryana 
respectively. 
 
16.    National Cyber Security Awareness Activities 
The Government organises events and activities for citizens as well as the technical cyber 
community across the country. Some of these include: 
 
184                                                      

• National Cyber Security Awareness Month (NCSAM) in October every year 
• Safer Internet Day on the first Tuesday of February 
• Swachhta Pakhwada (1st –15th  February), and 
• Cyber Jagrookta Diwas (CJD) on the first Wednesday of every month 
  
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
185                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA   
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2289 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
MIGRATION OF GOVERNMENT EMAIL ACCOUNTS TO ZOHO 
 
2289.  SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the number of central Government email accounts and productivity suite licenses migrated from National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) to Zoho Corporation platforms;  
(b) the total financial commitment made towards this project by Government and the date and duration of the 
contract; and  
(c) the details of the security audits conducted, including details of entities who conducted these audits, the dates 
and findings, prior to migration of these accounts to Zoho? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
  
(a) to (c): The Government recognises the critical importance of having a robust, sovereign and secure official email 
system for its Ministries and Departments.  
 
Accordingly, the Government mandates that only email services provided by the National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
shall be used for official communication. 
 
To ensure this, the government through NIC has selected a Master System Integrator (MSI) – M/s Zoho in the month 
of March 2024 for the period of seven years for a robust cloud -based email solution capable of supporting all 
Government users. 
 
The number of accounts migrated to Zoho platform is around 12.68 Lakhs.  
 
Payments are made based on the actual number of email accounts migrated to the Zoho platform. The monthly 
pricing for email accounts is Rs. 200 and Rs. 300 for 30 GB and 100GB mailbox size respectively. For the financial 
year 2024 –25, the total expenditure  incurred was ₹41.33 Crs, and for the current financial year 2025 –26, the 
expenditure incurred so far is  ₹120 Crs. 
The selection of the service provider was carried out through an open tender process, which included a Proof of 
Concept (PoC) with shortlisted bidders and designated groups of government users. 
 
The project emphasises “Make in India” compliance and ensures that the Government retains full ownership of all 
data and intellectual property generated under the contract. 
 
After the email service went live on the new Zoho platform, online feedback was collected from users across various 
Ministries and Departments. The Service Provider – M/s Zoho is a registered Indian entity subject to Indian laws 
and jurisdiction. 
 
186                                                      

The contract with the service provider ensures strict adherence to data sovereignty. Robust security evaluations have 
been undertaken to ensure safe migration and deployment: 
• Comprehensive security audit by Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification (STQC), MeitY in May 
2024 
• Second full security audit by Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), MeitY in August 
2025 
The cloud-based solution, including Primary and Disaster Recovery data centers, are physically located within India, 
and no data can be shared or replicated outside the country. 
******* 
 
187                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2290 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
MODERNISATION PLAN OF SCL, MOHALI 
 
2290.  DR. VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that Government had announced in February 2024 that a modernisation plan 
of ₹10,000 crore for Semi Conductor Lab (SCL), Mohali was ready and proposal of the same has 
been sent to the cabinet;  
(b) if so, the details of complete plan;  
(c) whether the plan has been discussed in the cabinet;  
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;  
(e) whether there is any timeline set for the modernisation of the SCL Mohali; and  
(f) if so details thereof and if not reasons therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
  
(a) to (f): The semiconductor development strategy is guided by the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s 
vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat and Make in India, Make for the World. Government is developing 
a complete ecosystem covering talentpool, design, fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging. 
 
The modernisation of the Semi-Conductor Laboratory (SCL), Mohali is part of this strategy. The 
goal is to strengthen India’s strategic needs in sectors such as space, defence and railways by 
improving production capacity and efficiency.  
 
The upgraded facility will also support students, researchers and start-ups by helping them convert 
their chip designs into actual silicon chips.  
 
Semi-Conductor Laboratory (SCL), Mohali 
SCL, Mohali provides end -to-end solutions for Application Specific Integrated Circuits, opto -
electronics and Micro Electro -Mechanical System (MEMS) Devices encompassing Design, 
Fabrication, Assembly, Packaging, Testing and Reliability Assurance.  
 
Over the last 40 years, SCL has developed more than 400 chip variants, including around 80 
products. These include products mainly for India’s space and other strategic sectors. 
 
188                                                      

SCL has end -to-end capability to design, manufacture, test and package semiconductor chips - 
from laboratory research to full-scale production. Its key facilities include: 
1. Chip Design 
• SCL designs different types of chips used in electronics, such as analog, digital, memory, 
radio-frequency and imaging chips.  
• These include custom chips (ASICs), system-on-chips and test chips.  
• Many of these designs have already been successfully manufactured and certified for use 
in space and other high-reliability applications. 
2. Chip Manufacturing (CMOS Fab) 
• SCL operates an 8-inch wafer manufacturing facility using 180-nanometre technology.  
• It produces analog, digital and mixed-signal chips in highly controlled cleanroom 
environments that meet international standards. 
3. MEMS Manufacturing 
• SCL also manufactures MEMS devices (tiny sensors and micro-devices) using a 6-inch 
wafer line.  
• Advanced inspection and testing tools are used at every stage to ensure accuracy and 
quality. 
4. Assembly and Packaging 
• After manufacturing, chips are cut, assembled and sealed into protective ceramic 
packages.  
• These processes are carried out in cleanrooms using specialised machines to ensure 
durability and long-term reliability. 
5. Quality and Reliability Testing 
• All chips undergo strict testing to ensure they meet global quality and performance 
standards.  
• Products are carefully screened, tested and analysed so that only defect-free and reliable 
chips are supplied, especially for strategic sectors. 
6. Supporting Infrastructure 
• SCL has robust systems for power supply, ultra-pure water, clean air and specialised 
gases required for chip manufacturing.  
• These facilities operate at international quality levels to support safe and stable 
semiconductor production. 
 
Modernisation of SCL Mohali 
SCL, Mohali is being upgraded on the modern lines and government will invest Rs 4500 crore. 
This will include a large-scale increase in production capacity, targeting 100 times production of 
wafers from current levels. 
 
As part of its modernisation, SCL had invited proposals to upgrade its chip manufacturing 
facilities.  
 
The Scope of work  of the proposal includes expanding the existing 8-inch chip fabrication 
facility (8” CMOS Wafer Fab), adopting new technologies for advanced chips (Technology IP 
for RF-CMOS, CMOS Image Sensor and CMOS HV LDMOS), and installing modern software 
and automation systems to improve efficiency and quality. 
 
189                                                      

The Technical evaluation and financial evaluations of the bids received have been completed, 
and the results have been published on the SCL website. 
  
***** 
  
190                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2291 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
IMPORT OF DATA CENTER SERVERS AND HARDWARE 
 
2291. #  DR. DINESH SHARMA: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) details of the value and quantity of servers imported during last five financial years, year-wise 
and major source country-wise;  
(b) ratio of domestic production to imports for hardware required for data centers, and manner in 
which this ratio has changed over the last five years;  
(c) steps further to be taken under current or proposed schemes to promote domestic manufacturing 
of high-capacity servers and related components;  
(d) whether Government has conducted any assessment of the impact of import dependence on the 
security of the national digital infrastructure; if so, details thereof; and  
(e) details of proposed special incentives, tariffs, or policy interventions in this regard?  
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (e): The Government is fully conscious of the security, strategic and economic implications of 
importing servers and IT hardware. With India’s push to democratise AI and expand compute capacity, 
demand for servers and other data centre related equipments is growing rapidly. 
 
India’s approach is to progressively develop the manufacturing supply chain for servers and related 
equipment & components within the country. 
 
As part of this strategy, the ecosystem in India is expanding rapidly through initiatives such as the 
Electronics Components Manufacturing Scheme (ECMS), Semicon India Programme, PLI for Large Scale 
Electronics Manufacturing, PLI for IT Hardware, SPECS, and Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC/ 
EMC 2.0). 
 
The relevant policies of government of India in this regard are: 
 
PLI Scheme for IT Hardware 
The scheme promotes the domestic production of Servers, Laptops, Tablets, All -in-One (AIO) PCs and 
Ultra Small Form Factor (USFF) devices.  
191                                                      

 
Electronics Components Manufacturing Scheme (ECMS) 
ECMS covers optical transceivers and passive components used in servers, routers and networking 
systems. The Government has received encouraging responses from the industry for manufacturing these.  
 
 
DoT PLI Scheme for Telecom Equipment 
PLI scheme for telecom equipment, incentivising the local production of routers, switches and other 
networking gear, which form an essential part of data-centre and server infrastructure 
 
Design Linked Incentive (DLI)  
Government has launched DLI Scheme to leverage India’s strength in chip design. Support has been 
provided for 24 chips and System on Chips (SoCs) for various products including servers, AI devices, 
telecom equipment, smart metres, etc.  
 
CERT-In has also issued updated technical guidelines in July 2025 for Bill of Materials (BOM) for 
software, hardware including servers, Artificial Intelligence, Quantum Computing & Cryptography 
requirements.  
 
These guidelines are aimed to enhance the security and transparency of supply chains for software, 
hardware & emerging technologies. 
 
Growth of Electronics Manufacturing in India 
As a result of these Government policies and initiatives, electronic production has increased six-fold from 
~₹1.9 lakh crore (FY 2014-15) to ~ ₹11.3 lakh crore in FY 2024 -25. Exports have also grown eight-fold 
from ~₹0.38 lakh crore to ~ ₹ 3.3 lakh crore during the same period. 
 
The global and domestic firms are now investing in India. There has been an increase in the capacity and 
capability of domestic companies to design and manufacture servers, networking devices and equipment 
that go in the manufacturing of these.  
 
Indian companies are now manufacturing servers for global OEMs as well as domestic brands. 
 
****** 
 
 
  
192                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2292 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
ECMS AND SEMICONDUCTOR INNOV ATION 
 
2292.  SHRI KANAD PURKAYASTHA: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the approvals granted under the second tranche of the Electronics Components Manufacturing 
Scheme (ECMS), including the total proposed investment and projected production values;  
(b) the States in which the newly approved units are located and the extent to which the scheme 
supports balanced regional growth and high-skill employment generation;  
(c) the categories of electronic components and sub-assemblies covered under the latest approvals 
and the key sectors expected to be served by these projects; and  
(d) the details of the launch of India’s first generation energy -efficient edge silicon chip ARKA-
GKT1? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
 (a) to (d): The policies of Government of India are driven by Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision of 
Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat. It aims building a complete ecosystem for electronics 
sector. 
 
We started our electronics journey with manufacturing finished products in the country and then 
started to focus on developing modules. The focus is now on developing the sub -modules/ 
components and further raw materials, tools and machineries that go into manufacturing it. 
 
Electronics manufacturing in India has expanded significantly in the last 11 years. Value addition 
by the electronics manufacturing units in India has also increased considerably in recent years.  It 
can be seen from the following statistics:  
                                                                                                                                    Rs. in Cr. 
# 2014-15 2024-25 Remarks 
Production of electronics goods (₹) ~1.9 Lakh Cr ~11.3 Lakh Cr Increased 6 times 
Export of electronics goods (₹) ~0.38 Lakh Cr ~3.3 Lakh Cr Increased 8 times 
Production of mobile phones (₹) ~0.18 Lakh Cr ~5.5 Lakh Cr Increased 28 times 
Export of mobile phones (₹) ~0.01 Lakh Cr ~ 2 Lakh Cr Increased 127 times 
193                                                      

 
Electronic products ranks among the top three exported goods from India. 
 
This transformation was made possible by the Government's electronics manufacturing strategy. 
Many initiatives have been undertaken in last 11 years. These include: 
• Production linked incentives (PLI) for large scale electronics manufacturing. 
• Production linked incentives (PLI) for IT hardware. 
• Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronic Components and Semiconductors 
(SPECS) 
• Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC and EMC 2.0) Scheme 
• Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order 2017 to prioritize domestically 
manufactured products in public procurement 
• Reforms in taxation including rationalization of tariff structure, exemption on basic custom 
duty on capital goods, etc. 
• Allowing 100% FDI in electronics manufacturing, subject to applicable laws / regulations 
 
Electronics Component Manufacturing Scheme (ECMS) 
To further deepen electronics manufacturing, Government launched the Electronics Components 
Manufacturing Scheme (ECMS). It promotes manufacturing of components such as resistors, 
capacitors, inductors, printed circuit boards, sub-assemblies, electro-mechanicals etc. 
 
The scheme has received unprecedented response from the industry so far. Applications for 
projects having investment value of ₹ 1.15 lakh crores against the target investment of ₹ 59,350 
crores have been received. 
 
Government has approved 24 applications so far under this scheme, out of which 17 applications 
have been approved in  2nd tranche. 
 
These 17 applications have projected investment of ₹ 7,172 crores, production of ₹ 65,111 crores 
and generate 11,808 direct employment. 
 
The manufacturing units of these 17 applications are located across 9 States which highlights wide 
and diverse participation of States across the country in electronic components manufacturing. 
 
These approved applicants would manufacture a wide spectrum of electronic components such as 
multi-layer PCB, camera module, connectors, oscillators, optical transceivers and enclosures for 
mobile, IT hardware products and related devices.  
 
These are expected to be used across various sectors like consumer electronics, telecom, auto 
electronics and IT hardware etc. 
 
The ARKA GKT-1 is a System -on-Chip (SoC) jointly developed by M/s Cyient Semiconductor 
and M/s Azimuth AI. This SoC supports advanced edge -compute features with potential 
applications in smart electricity meters enabling smart grids, precision metering and IoT (Internet 
of Things) infrastructure. 
 
194                                                      

The development of this SoC showcases the maturing of India’s industry and shift towards a 
product-driven and high-performance semiconductor ecosystem. 
   
***** 
  
195                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2293 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
AI IMPACT SUMMIT 2026 
 
2293.  SHRI SATNAM SINGH SANDHU: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the countries, global tech corporations, and international organizations which have confirmed 
participation in upcoming India AI Impact Summit 2026;  
(b) major outcomes or collaborative agreements that are expected from this event, particularly in areas 
like AI governance, innovation, and skill development; and  
(c) whether Government has planned sessions involving State participation, including from Punjab, to 
showcase regional AI initiatives and attract global partnerships in research and entrepreneurship?  
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (c): In line with Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi's vision, the Government is 
democratising the development and usage of technology. The focus is using Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
for solving real-world problems and ultimately improving lives across various sectors. 
 
Recognising its importance, the Government of India is working closely with international partners, 
industry, academia and States to promote responsible and inclusive use of AI. 
 
India - AI Impact Summit 2026 
India is hosting the IndiaAI Impact Summit 2026 from 15-20 February 2026 at New Delhi. For the first 
time, the global AI summit series will take place in the Global South. The shift signals a broader move 
toward a more inclusive global AI dialogue. 
 
Seven ‘Chakras’ 
The thematic priorities of the Summit, referred to as the seven ‘Chakras’, underline its key objectives.  
These include Human Capital, Inclusion, Safe & Trusted AI, Resilience, Innovation and Efficiency, 
Democratizing AI Resources, and AI for Economic Development and Social Good. 
These thematic areas encompass issues such as AI governance, transparency, human -centred 
development, skill development, innovation and resilience. These discussions are aligned to drive the 
strategic direction of the Summit’s events and deliberations. 
 
196                                                      

The Summit features a multi-day program designed to enable strategic dialogue, knowledge exchange 
and stakeholder engagement. The program includes AI Expo, Research Symposium as well as various 
roundtables, keynotes panel discussions, among others to showcase regional and global Al initiatives. 
Governments officials of various countries, Global and Indian technology companies, Academic 
institutions & think tanks and AI experts & researchers will be taking part in the summit. 
In the lead up to the Summit, various Pre-Summit events have been organized in various parts of India, 
including Punjab, as well as around the world. 
******* 
 
197                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2294 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
INDIGENOUS AI MODELS 
 
2294.  DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the steps being taken to promote open -source Artificial Intelligence (AI) research and AI 
innovation ecosystems in the country;  
(b) the measures being taken to promote development of large -scale foundational AI models in 
India, given the absence of indigenous large -scale AI models that leaves India dependent on 
Western AI technologies;  
(c) the steps being taken to address the major challenges faced by AI Startups in India; and  
(d) whether the Ministry has partnered with private firms and international organisations/agencies 
for promoting AI research and development, if so, the details thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (d): India's AI strategy is based on the Hon'ble Prime Minister's vision of democratizing 
technology. It aims to address India centric challenges and create opportunities. 
 
IndiaAI Mission 
It is a strategic initiative to establish a robust and inclusive Al ecosystem aligned with India's 
development goals through the seven pillars. The details of IndiaAI mission available at 
www.https://indiaai.gov.in/. 
 
Development of Indigenous Foundational Model 
Under the IndiaAI Foundation Models pillar, the Government of India is supporting Indian 
startups, consortia and institutions to develop large language models, multimodal models and 
domain-specific small language models.  
• Twelve organisations and consortia, including startups, industry players and academic 
institutions, have been selected for developing Large and Small Language Models. 
• The models are developed based on Indian datasets spanning all 22 scheduled Indian 
languages 
• The selected projects cover multilingual foundational models, speech and voice models, 
multimodal AI, scientific models, healthcare reasoning systems, and agentic AI platforms 
 
198                                                      

The resulting AI models are expected to contribute to the open-source ecosystem by making them 
available through AIKosh platform for other startups and researchers. This will fuel innovation 
across India’s startup and research community. 
 
Development of Indian Datasets (AIKosh) 
• AIKosh is a unified national platform that integrates datasets from Government and non -
Government sources to support AI research and innovation 
• It also provides seamless access to AI models, tools, and other compute resources for 
researchers, startups and academia. 
• Indigenous AI models developed under the IndiaAI Mission will be made available through 
AIKosh to strengthen the open-source AI ecosystem 
• These shared resources enable developers to focus on core AI innovation instead of 
recreating basic components 
 
Affordable Compute Capacity for AI Development 
Under IndiaAI Compute Pillar, a national AI compute capacity has been operationalized through 
empaneled AI service providers offering GPU access on cloud at subsidized rates to eligible users. 
• As on date, 38,231 GPUs have been onboarded from 14 empaneled service providers under 
the IndiaAI Compute Capacity framework 
• The average rate is approximately Rs 65 per GPU per hour, except for select high -end 
GPUs 
• Empanelled providers are also delivering storage, networking, AI platforms and other 
supporting services necessary for AI model development and deployment 
 
IndiaAI Application Development Initiative 
• Government of India is also supporting startups for developing AI applications for India 
specific challenges in sectors such as climate change & disaster management, healthcare, 
agriculture, governance, and assistive technologies for learning disabilities. 
• As on date, 30 (thirty) applications have been approved. List is mentioned in Annexure-1. 
 
Empowering Indian AI Startups for Global Expansion 
IndiaAI Startups Global program was launched in March 2025 in collaboration with Station F 
(Paris) and HEC Paris. 10 Indian AI startups are being helped in expanding into the European 
market. 
 
Shaping global debate on AI 
India is actively participating in shaping global debate on development, usage and safety of AI. 
India was the founder chair of Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI). India was able 
to carve out consensus on AI during the G20 communique. 
 
India is hosting the global AI Impact Summit during 15-20 February 2026. The Summit will focus 
on people, planet and progress. More than 200 pre-summit events have been organized so far with 
more than 1.15 Lakh participants from around the world. 
 
Strengthening AI research ecosystem in India 
199                                                      

Under the IndiaAI FutureSkills  pillar, the Government is developing an extensive AI talent and 
research pipeline by supporting 500 PhD fellows, 5,000 postgraduates and 8,000 undergraduates. 
 
• 27 IndiaAI Data and AI Labs have been established in Tier -2 and Tier -3 cities through 
NIELIT to conduct coursework in AI, data curation, annotation, cleaning and applied data 
science. 
• 174 ITIs and Polytechnics across 27 States/UTs have been approved to set up additional 
IndiaAI Data and AI Labs 
FutureSkills PRIME 
• Government in collaboration with NASSCOM has launched courses for cutting-edge skills 
in areas such as AI, Big data and Cloud computing 
• Over 500+ courses & 2000+ digital fluency pathways are offered on the platform. So far, 
16.29 lakh+ candidates have enrolled/trained in various courses. 
******* 
ANNEXURE-1 
 
Details of IndiaAI Innovation Challenge: Shortlisted Solutions 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Solution Solution Description Theme 
1 Promoting regenerative 
agriculture practices for a 
sustainable future using AI 
Measurement, Reporting, and 
Verification technology designed to 
ensure the integrity and quality of 
generated carbon credits.  
Agriculture 
2 Krishi Sah‘AI’yak - 
Farming Co-pilot 
AI-powered conversational co -pilot to 
provide personalized advisory to farmers 
in Indic languages. 
Agriculture 
3 Kadalcompass - We 
Amplify the voice of water 
using Hydro-AI,Underwater 
com,IoUT with Sensor 
Network 
5G-enabled device that transforms 
fishing practices using AI, IoUT, and 
advanced communication technologies. 
Agriculture 
4 KissanCopilot Multilingual 
Multimodal personalized AI 
Assistant for small holder 
farmers 
Powered by Dhenu's vertical LLM for 
agriculture, provides personalized 
agricultural advisory services to 
smallholder farmers. 
Agriculture 
5 Rapid, chemical -free soil 
testing solution using NIR 
Spectroscopy & AI/ML 
models 
End-to-end soil testing approach 
leverages an offline app, AI -powered 
spectral device, and ML models to 
deliver timely, chemical -free soil 
analysis.  
Agriculture 
6 AI deep-tech driven quality 
assessment of Maize 
SAAS platform to provide objective 
quality assessment of maize including 
price estimation & sales pipelining. 
Agriculture 
200                                                      

7 AI-Driven Live Fish 
Logistics and Mortality 
Reduction in Aquaculture 
AI-driven solution that optimizes 
aquaculture operations. 
Agriculture 
8 QScan AI-powered IoT solution that captures 
critical data throughout the fresh produce 
lifecycle, providing real-time analysis of 
food quality and actionable insights to 
sellers. 
Agriculture 
9 Heatwave Resilience: 
Integrating AI -based 
Advanced Forecasting for 
Extreme Heat Events 
Integrates AI -based climate forecasting 
with health data to develop a targeted risk 
classification system for heat -health 
impacts. 
Climate 
10 Multi-Hazard Susceptibility 
Mapping 
Hazard management system to predict 
Landslides, Debris Flows and Flash 
Floods. 
Climate 
11 DeepFlood: Rapid flood 
inundation mapping using 
Vision Transformers and 
Satellite Data 
Advanced flood inundation mapping tool 
using SAR data and deep learning models 
for real-time, automated flood detection. 
Climate 
12 ⁠Moskeet: Climate impact on 
mosquito-borne diseases 
AI-powered platform integrates real-time 
climate data with mosquito tracking to 
predict and prevent disease outbreaks. 
Climate 
13 End to End AI Cloud 
Platform for Radiology 
Diagnosis 
AI cloud platform for radiology 
diagnosis, integrating innovative 
technologies such as CV , GenAI, NLP, 
Dicom, mobile, and cloud computing. 
Healthcare 
14 NIDAAN (iNtegrated lung 
health screening & 
tuberculosIs Detection 
through Ai At National 
scale) 
qXR, an advanced AI tool for interpreting 
chest X-rays (CXR), detects & localizes 
30+ findings. 
Healthcare 
15 Impactful AI solution, 
preventing preventable 
blindness, for socio -
economic transformation. 
Early detection of vision threatening 
retinal abnormalities. 
Healthcare 
16 AI Powered Wearable 
Technology for Detection & 
Diagnosis of 
Musculoskeletal Joint 
Health Pain. 
AI Enabled Hardware Platform for Joint 
Pain Diagnostics and Rehabilitation 
Segments of Healthcare. 
Healthcare 
17 V oxelBox Neuro-informatics platform that allows 
to map the functional maps / 
connectomics of the human brain. 
Healthcare 
201                                                      

18 Development of Ocellux: 
An AI -Based Solution for 
Enhanced Early Diabetic 
Eye Screening in INDIA. 
Portable, affordable and highly 
accessible retina imaging device powered 
by AI for early detection of eye diseases 
like Diabetic Retinopathy, AMD & 
Glaucoma. 
Healthcare 
19 Revolutionizing healthcare 
using doctor-led AI 
AI-powered personal doctor available 
24x7 and free of cost, designed to assist 
people when they are sick, monitor their 
health through wearables, and act as a 
health coach to prevent diseases. 
Healthcare 
20 AI/ML enabled MafPro 
device platform for cancer 
staging, localization, and 
margins. 
MafPro handheld detector provides a 
radiation-free, non -invasive, safe and 
cost-effective solution that can reliably 
detect and adequately evaluate 
metastases in lymph nodes using AI/ML 
based algorithms.   
Healthcare 
21 Readabled (Online Dyslexia 
Training) 
Web-based application designed to help 
children with dyslexia improve phonetic 
awareness through interactive exercises. 
Learning 
disabilities 
22 V oice fusion AI AI application to provide assistive 
support to individuals with SLDs in 
multiple Indian languages. 
Learning 
disabilities 
23 ScreenPlay - a digital game 
based screening tool for 
autism and related disorders. 
Digital, game -based screening tool 
designed to identify children aged 3 to 6 
who may be at risk for autism or related 
developmental conditions. 
Learning 
disabilities 
24 Jiveesha AI-powered diagnostic platform for early 
detection of SLDs. 
Learning 
disabilities 
25 Adaptive Learning and 
Detection for SLDs 
Advanced AI techniques to detect SLDs 
such as dyslexia, dysgraphia, and 
dyscalculia. 
Learning 
disabilities 
26 Special Educator AI AI-driven system designed to address 
India’s shortage of special educators and 
support children with SLDs. 
Learning 
disabilities 
27 ConvoZen.AI by NoBroker 
Technologies 
AI-powered conversational platform that 
automates customer engagement across 
channels like chat, voice, email, and 
social media, offering fast, personalized, 
and multilingual support. 
Governance 
202                                                      

28 AI contact center AI-powered technologies like machine 
translation, NLP, ASR and TTS, and 
multilingual voice recognition to enhance 
governance by improving 
communication and accessibility across 
India’s linguistic diversity. 
Governance 
29 Adalat AI: AI solutions for 
Courts 
AI-powered platform provides real -time 
multilingual transcription, translation, 
live case flow management, and 
WhatsApp chatbots to streamline 
courtroom operations. 
Governance 
30 Gov.Civis.V ote AI-powered Digital Public Infrastructure 
designed to transform public 
consultations in India by making citizen 
engagement more inclusive, scalable, and 
comprehensive. 
Governance 
  
******* 
 
 
 
 
  
203                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2295 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
AI GOVERNANCE AND CITIZENS’ RIGHTS 
 
2295.  SMT. PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the India AI Governance Guidelines, 2025 permit the deployment of high-risk artificial 
intelligence systems without establishing binding safeguards to prevent violations of citizens’ 
fundamental rights, including the right to privacy, equality, and due process;  
(b) the reasons for not providing statutory rights protection mechanisms, such as independent 
audits, appeal systems, or oversight bodies, before allowing AI systems to be adopted in areas that 
directly affect citizens’ lives; and  
(c) whether any assessment has been carried out regarding the risk of AI systems leading to 
discrimination, wrongful denial of entitlements, or intrusive surveillance, if so, the details? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (c): In line with Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi's vision, the Government is 
democratising the development and usage of technology. The focus is using Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) for solving real-world problems and ultimately improving lives across various sectors. 
 
Government of India has taken a balanced and pragmatic techno -legal approach towards its 
regulation. India’s AI strategy has been formed after studying legal frameworks around the world 
and extensive consultation with stakeholders. 
 
India combines legal safeguards with technological solutions, rather than relying only on laws or 
market forces. The Government is funding R&D projects at premier institutions such as IITs to 
develop AI tools for deepfake detection, privacy protection and cybersecurity. 
 
This approach reflects India’s belief that effective AI governance must be supported by practical 
technical interventions. This will ensure that innovation continues without compromising the 
safety, trust and rights of citizens. 
 
India AI Governance Guidelines 
The India AI Governance Guidelines were released on 5 November 2025. It provides a 
comprehensive national framework to ensure the safe, responsible, and inclusive development of 
Artificial Intelligence in the country. 
204                                                      

 
The Guidelines recognise that AI is a major driver of economic growth and social change. At the 
same time, it can also pose risks to individuals and society. Some of these include bias, 
discrimination, unfair outcomes, exclusion, and lack of transparency. 
 
The Guidelines do not allow unrestricted deployment of high -risk AI systems. It adopts a risk -
based, evidence-led and proportional governance approach.  
 
Safeguards are outlined to address risks to individuals and society. The Guidelines state that 
sectoral regulators will remain responsible for enforcement and oversight within their legal 
mandate. 
 
The Guidelines are designed to be agile and flexible. They are principle-based and not prescriptive. 
Their purpose is to support responsible AI adoption without stifling innovation.  
 
They do not introduce new statutory mechanisms such as independent audits, appeals, or new 
oversight bodies. Instead, the Guidelines rely on existing laws. These include the Information 
Technology Act, the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, and sector-specific regulations.  
 
The Guidelines state that a new horizontal AI law is not required at this stage, in line with the 
overall approach of Government.  
  
 
*******  
205                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2296 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
ELECTRONICS MANUFACTURING CLUSTER IN ODISHA 
 
2296.  SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government proposes to establish an electronics manufacturing cluster in 
Bhubaneswar;  
(b) details of investments in IT/ITES attracted by Odisha in the last five years;  
(c) steps taken to strengthen cyber security in the State;  
(d) whether new digital skilling centres are being set up in tribal districts; and  
(e) support extended to Odisha startups working on AI and digital technologies? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (e): The policies of Government of India are driven by the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision 
of Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat.  
 
It focuses on building the complete electronics manufacturing ecosystem and an enabling 
environment for the industry to compete globally.  
 
Modified Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC 2.0) 
As part of this vision, Government of India notified the Modified Electronics Manufacturing 
Clusters (EMC 2.0) Scheme in April 2020.  
 
The scheme supports the creation of world -class electronics manufacturing infrastructure by 
funding dedicated clusters with common facilities. This includes shared facilities and amenities 
such as ready industrial plots with Ready Built Factory (RBF) sheds/Plug & Play facilities. 
 
Under this scheme, one Greenfield EMC has been approved at Infovalley , Bhubaneswar with a 
project cost of ₹200.76 crore. The project covers an area of 203.37 acres with central finance 
assistance of ₹93.09 crore.  
 
The project has projected investment of ₹1,530 crore and expected to create 3000 jobs.  
 
Further, two (2) semiconductor units under the Semicon India Program are also approved in the 
state of Odisha with total investment of ₹ 4,003 Crore.  
206                                                      

 
These units will work in the field of advanced packaging, embedded glass substrate manufacturing, 
Silicon Carbide fab etc. The chip produced in these plants will be used in automobiles, aerospace, 
defence, wireless devices, electric vehicles, data centres, consumer electronics appliances etc. 
National Institute of Electronics and IT (NIELIT) has also setup two centres at Bhuvneshwar and 
Balasore (tribal district) and 35 accredited centres in the State of Odisha. These centres have 
trained approximately 25,000 candidates.  
 
List of these centres including tribal districts of Odisha are at Annexure-I. 
 
Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) has also established the following centers of excellence 
in Odisha for promotion of IT/ITES investments: 
 
I. Electropreneur Park has been developed in collaboration with Government of Odisha, IIIT 
Bhubaneswar and India Electronics & Semiconductor Association to promote electronics 
system design and manufacturing. So far, 37 startups have been onboarded. 
II. Center of Excellence for Virtual and Augmented Reality has been developed in collaboration 
with Government of Odisha for promoting startup ecosystem in the field of creative 
technologies. So far, 25 startups have been onboarded. 
III. EmTek Center of Excellence has been developed in collaboration with Government of 
Odisha, Biju Patnaik University, Odisha, Rourkela Steel Plant, NALCO and IIIT 
Bhubaneswar. So far, 29 startups have been onboarded. 
     Under STPI’s Next Generation Incubation Scheme (NGIS), 112 startups from Odisha have 
been onboarded.  
     Further, to strengthen cyber security in the state of Odisha, 134 Information Security 
Education & Awareness (ISEA) workshops were conducted for cyber hygiene awareness 
among citizens. More than 4200 candidates have been trained/under -going training courses 
on information security in Odisha. 
 
 
******** 
 
  
207                                                      

Annexure-I 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
NIELIT Own Centres 
S. No. Name and Address of the Centre 
1 NIELIT Centre, Bhubaneswar 
2 NIELIT Centre, Balasore 
NIELIT Accredited Centres 
1 Computer Hut, Cuttack 
2 Exel Micro Systems, Sambalpur 
3 Orissa Computer Academy, Berhampur 
4 Orissa Computer Application Centre,  Bhubaneswar 
5 Pentasys Computers, Cuttack 
6 Professional Academy of Computer Education, Balasore 
7 Reinz Informatics, Bhawanipatna 
8 Eastern Software Solutions, Padampur 
9 Jasoda Institute of Technology And Management Science (JITMS), Berhampur 
10 Online Computer Academy, Bhadrak 
11 NIAT Computer Education, Bhubaneswar  
12 K.G.N.T. Mahasangh (Know Hot To Grass-Root New Technology), Naupada 
13 Centre For IT & Interactive Learning (CIIL), Sundergarh 
14 Orissa Computer Academy, Balasore 
15 NIELIT, Bhubaneswar 
16 Computer Application Centre, Bhubaneswar 
17 M/S Shamsoft Computer Education, Puri  
18 Advance Computer Training Institute, Berhampur 
19 Nilachala Institute of Computer Technology [NICT], Baripada 
20 Council For Computer Literacy And Awareness In Secondary School, Bargarh 
21 Achuta Institute of Information & Technology, Berhampur 
22 Prafulla Chandra Institute of Technology, Bhadrak 
23 Ananya Academy of Software Solution & E-Technology (Aasset), Angul 
24 Class Orissa, Attabira 
25 Gayatri Educational Trust, Baripada 
26 Netaji Institute of Information Technology (NIIT), Padampur 
27 Nice National Institute of Computer Education Pvt Ltd, Bhubaneswar  
28 Gyanodaya Academy, Balangir 
29 Innovative Classes, Berhampur 
30 M/S Institute of Computer Application (ICA), Jagatsinghpurpin  
31 National Computer Academy, Digapahadi S.O.  
32 Shikhya Learning System, Kabisuryanagar S.O 
33 Nielit Baleswar Extension Centre, Baleswar 
34 Biju Pattnaik Computer Centre, Soro 
208                                                      

35 Kalinga Computer Education, Athagarh H.O 
  
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
209                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2297 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
DIGITAL PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE AND CYBER INCIDENT TRENDS 
 
2297.  SHRI RA VI CHANDRA V ADDIRAJU: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the year-wise data on cyber incidents reported to CERT-In since 2022;  
(b) the number of entities onboarded to key Digital Public Infrastructure platforms such as 
Aadhaar, DigiLocker and UMANG;  
(c) the funds allocated and utilised for cybersecurity capacity-building; and  
(d) the steps taken to strengthen early-warning systems for large-scale cyber threats? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
  
(a) to (d): The policies of the Government of India aim to ensure a safe, trusted, and accountable 
cyberspace. It remains vigilant and fully conscious of the cyber threat to India’s digital 
infrastructure.  
 
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) and National Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) work continuously to safeguard digital services, 
including the critical sectors. 
 
The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) is designated as the national agency 
for responding to cyber security incidents under the provisions of section 70B of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000.  
 
Total number of cyber security incidents reported to CERT-In since 2022 are given below: 
 
 
Year Number 
2022 13,91,457 
2023 15,92,917 
2024 20,41,360 
2025*  25,80,655 
                                                  *(Upto Oct) 
 
210                                                      

There are various entities onboarded on Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) platforms, namely 
Aadhaar, DigiLocker, and UMANG, is as follows: 
 
• Aadhaar: A total of 652 entities have been onboarded to the Unique Identification Authority 
of India (UIDAI) Aadhaar authentication ecosystem 
• DigiLocker: The platform has onboarded 2,310 issuers and 3,031 requestors 
• UMANG: 240 government entities (Central:80 and State:160) have been onboarded to the 
UMANG platform, providing 2384 services. 
 
Government of India is implementing a project on Information Security Education and 
Awareness (ISEA) with the budget allocation of Rs. 332.74 crores for five years since 2023. 
The Government has undertaken several steps to strengthen early-warning systems for large-scale 
cyber threats, which inter alia, includes: 
 
1. National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC), implemented by CERT -In, examines 
cyberspace to detect cyber security threats.  
2. It shares the information with concerned organizations, state governments and stakeholder 
agencies for taking action. 
3. CERT-In operates an automated cyber threat intelligence exchange platform for sharing 
tailored alerts with organisations across sectors for proactive threat mitigation. 
4. CERT-In issues alerts and advisories regarding latest cyber threats/vulnerabilities and 
countermeasures to protect computers, networks and data on an ongoing basis. 
5. Cyber Swachhta Kendra (CSK) 
 
• A citizen-centric service provided by CERT -In, which extends the vision of Swachh 
Bharat to the Cyber Space. 
• It is the Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre and helps to detect malicious 
programs and provides free tools to remove the same. 
• It also provides cyber security tips and best practices for citizens and organisations. 
 
6. CERT-In has empanelled 231 security auditing organisations to support and audit 
implementation of Information Security Best Practices. 
7. CERT-In has formulated a Cyber Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) for countering cyber-
attacks and cyber terrorism for implementation by all government organizations and in 
critical sectors. 
8. Cyber security mock drills are conducted regularly by CERT-In, to enable assessment of 
cyber security posture and preparedness of various organisations. 
9. Certified Security Professional in Artificial Intelligence (CSPAI) program launched by 
CERT-In in September 2024 equips cybersecurity professionals with the skills to secure 
AI systems.  
a. It helps in addressing AI-related threats, and ultimately ensure trustworthy AI deployment 
in business environments. 
  
****** 
 
 
211                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2298 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
CYBERSECURITY IN BANKING SECTOR 
 
2298.  SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADA V BEEDHA: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether cyberattacks are increasingly targeting the banking sector in India;  
(b) if so, the details of such cyberattacks reported so far; and  
(c) the measures taken or proposed by Government to strengthen cybersecurity in the banking 
sector? 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (c): The policies of the Government of India aim to ensure a safe, trusted, & accountable 
cyberspace. It remains vigilant & fully conscious of the cyber threat to India’s digital 
infrastructure. Banking sector forms an integral part of the government’s strategy. 
 
The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) is designated as the national agency 
for responding to cyber security incidents under the provisions of section 70B of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000.  
 
Banking and financial services also form part of the Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) 
National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC), designated under Section 
70A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, plays a key role in protecting such critical systems. 
 
NCIIPC works closely with CERT-In, RBI, CERT-Fin and banking institutions to protect systems 
critical to the banking sector. It regularly conducts the risk assessment, issuance of sector-specific 
advisories and implementation of protective measures. 
 
Computer Security Incident Response Team - Finance (CSIRT-Fin) regularly responds to the cyber 
security incidents reported from the financial sector under the umbrella and guidance of CERT-In. 
 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has issued a comprehensive circular on the Cyber Security 
Framework for banks, which sets standards and guidelines for implementing robust cyber security 
controls. 
 
Several other initiatives to strengthen cyber security in the country, including the banking sector 
as follows: 
212                                                      

 
1. National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC), implemented by CERT -In, examines the 
cyberspace to detect cyber security threats. It shares the information with concerned 
organizations, state governments and stakeholder agencies for taking action. 
 
2. Cyber Swachhta Kendra (CSK) 
• A citizen-centric service provided by CERT -In, which extends the vision of Swachh 
Bharat to the Cyber Space. 
• It is the Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre and helps to detect malicious 
programs and provides free tools to remove the same. 
• It also provides cyber security tips and best practices for citizens and organisations. 
3. CERT-In has empanelled 231 security auditing organisations to support and audit 
implementation of Information Security Best Practices. 
4. Cyber Crisis Management Plan formulated by CERT -In for countering cyber -attacks and 
cyber terrorism for implementation by all Ministries/Departments. 
5. Cyber security mock drills by CERT -In for assessment of cyber security posture and 
preparedness of organisations in Government and critical sectors including banking sector. 
6. Advisory by CERT-In to all authorised entities/banks issuing Prepaid Payment Instruments 
(PPI) in the country to carry out special audit by empanelled auditors of CERT -In on a 
priority basis. 
a. Immediate steps are taken to ensure compliance with the findings and ensure 
implementation of security best practices. 
7. RBI’s Public awareness campaign called ‘RBI Kehta Hai’ informs people about digital 
payment options and how to use them safely, securely, and conveniently. 
 
  
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
  
213                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2299 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
SLOW PROGRESS IN AI RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION 
 
2299.  SHRI ABDUL WAHAB: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government acknowledges that India is lagging behind global leaders in artificial 
intelligence research and innovation;  
(b) the reasons for India’s slow progress in AI despite its large talent pool;  
(c) the comparative position of India in global AI innovation indices during the last five years; and  
(d) the steps proposed by Government to bridge this technological gap? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (d): India has made significant progress in AI research, innovation, and adoption over the 
past few years. It is supported by a strong digital public infrastructure, a vibrant startup landscape, 
and an expanding pool of skilled professionals. 
 
India ranks among the top three countries in Stanford University’s Global AI Vibrancy Tool. This 
reflects India's strong performance in the Innovation Index. It is also reflection of a thriving startup 
ecosystem and government’s strong focus on developing AI ecosystem.  
 
Global assessments highlight India’s strength in AI talent too. As per the Stanford AI Index Report 
2025, India leads the world in AI talent acquisition, with an annual hiring rate of about 33%.  
 
It ranks among the top countries globally in AI skill penetration, and has witnessed more than a 
threefold increase in AI talent concentration since 2016.  
 
Industry estimates further suggest that India’s AI talent base is expected to more than double by 
2027, growing at a compound annual growth rate of around 15%. 
 
India’s expanding AI capability is further reflected in global developer participation. 
 
According to worldwide data on GitHub AI projects by geographic distribution, India was the 
second-largest contributor globally in 2024, accounting for 19.9% of all AI projects. This 
underscores the depth and scale of India’s AI developer ecosystem. 
 
214                                                      

IndiaAI Mission 
Through initiatives like IndiaAI Mission, the Government is accelerating the momentum with 
targeted investments and public-private partnerships. These efforts aim to strengthen India’s global 
position and ensure responsible and inclusive leadership in AI. 
 
The Mission is structured around seven foundational pillars: 
 
• IndiaAI Compute Capacity: Providing affordable access to high -end computing 
resources, including GPUs, for startups, MSMEs and researchers 
• IndiaAI Foundation Models: Developing indigenous large multimodal and language 
models trained on Indian datasets and languages to ensure sovereign capability in 
generative AI 
• AIKosh: Creating a unified platform of high -quality datasets from government and non -
government sources for AI model development 
• IndiaAI Application Development Initiative: Supporting AI solutions for India-specific 
challenges in sectors such as healthcare, agriculture, climate resilience, governance and 
assistive technologies 
• IndiaAI FutureSkills:  Expanding India’s AI talent pipeline through increased 
undergraduate, postgraduate and PhD programmes, along with Data and AI Labs in Tier-2 
and Tier-3 cities 
• IndiaAI Startup Financing: Providing financial support to AI startups 
• Safe & Trusted AI: Supporting 13 projects focused on reducing bias, protecting privacy, 
improving transparency and managing AI-related risks while enabling innovation 
 
Developing AI talent in India 
Under the IndiaAI FutureSkills pillar, the Government is developing an extensive AI talent and 
research pipeline by supporting 500 PhD fellows, 5,000 postgraduates and 8,000 undergraduates. 
 
27 IndiaAI Data and AI Labs have been established in Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities through NIELIT to 
conduct coursework in AI, data curation, annotation, cleaning and applied data science. 
 
174 ITIs and Polytechnics across 27 States/UTs have been approved to set up additional IndiaAI 
Data and AI Labs 
 
FutureSkills PRIME 
Government in collaboration with NASSCOM has also launched courses for cutting-edge skills in 
areas such as AI, Big data and Cloud computing.  
 
Over 500+ courses & 2000+ digital fluency pathways are offered on the platform. So far, 16.29 
lakh+ candidates have enrolled/trained in various courses. 
 
Shaping global debate on AI 
India is also actively contributing to global discussions on AI governance and responsible use. 
India played a constructive role in shaping AI consensus during India’s G20 Presidency. It also 
chaired the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) in 2023.  
 
215                                                      

India will now host the AI Impact Summit in February 2026, bringing together governments, 
international organisations, startups, industry and academia on a common platform. 
  
 
***** 
 
 
 
216                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2300 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 19.12.2025 
 
INDIA BPO PROMOTION SCHEME (IBPS) AND NORTHEAST 
BPO PROMOTION SCHEME (NEBPS) 
 
2300.  SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the latest status of seat allocation and operationalisation under the India BPO Promotion Scheme 
(IBPS) and the Northeast BPO Promotion Scheme (NEBPS), including the number of seats 
successfully established and functional against the approved targets;  
(b) the total Viability Gap Funding (VGF) disbursed till date under both schemes, State/UT -wise and 
beneficiary-wise;  
(c) employment generated so far through BPO/ITeS units established under IBPS and NEBPS, 
particularly in Tier-II and Tier-III cities;  
(d) whether Ministry has undertaken a review of challenges faced by companies in setting up and 
sustaining BPO/ITeS operations under these schemes; and  
(e) if so, the key findings thereof? 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a) to (e): The Government launched two BPO promotion schemes, namely the India BPO Promotion 
Scheme (IBPS) and the North East BPO Promotion Scheme (NEBPS) under the Digital India 
Programme – “IT for Jobs” pillar.  
 
The objective of these schemes was to promote investment in the IT/ITeS sector. These schemes 
created employment by incentivising the setting up of BPO/ITeS operations in non -metro locations, 
particularly Tier-II and Tier-III cities and small towns. 
 
Both schemes provided Viability Gap Funding (VGF) of up to ₹1 lakh per seat. The duration of IBPS 
and NEBPS has since been completed. 
 
Under these schemes, 246 units have set up 45,543 seats BPO/ITeS operations across 27 States/UTs 
of the country. These are distributed across 104 small towns/cities, providing direct employment to 
over 53,000 persons in tier 2/3 cities.  
 
Financial support under IBPS and NEBPS was provided on a reimbursement basis, directly linked to 
employment generation by the units. Accordingly, 188 units claimed Viability Gap Funding and 
approximately ₹134 crore was disbursed to eligible units. 
 
During the implementation of the schemes, the Ministry undertook regular consultations and reviews 
with stakeholders to address operational challenges faced by companies in setting up and sustaining 
BPO/ITeS operations.  
 
Based on these reviews, several course corrections and relaxations were introduced, including: 
• Reduction in the minimum number of seats required at a location 
• Relaxation of minimum employment targets with pro-rata release of incentives 
• Provision of advance payments upon commencement of operations 
These measures helped improve participation, viability and employment outcomes under the schemes, 
while remaining aligned with their original intent of promoting inclusive growth and job creation in 
Tier-II and Tier-III cities. 
 
******* 
217                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2301 
ANSWERED ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2025 
  
SETTING UP OF NEW FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES AT DISTRICT LEVEL 
2301. SHRI C. VE. SHANMUGAM: 
Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
(a)  whether Government has any proposal to set up new Food Processing Industries at the 
district level across the country; 
(b)  if so, the details thereof, State-wise including Tamil Nadu; 
(c)  details of the role being played by Government in the development of food processing 
parks being set up in the State of Tamil Nadu; and 
(d)  the financial assistance provided to the private entrepreneurs for setting up such units? 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH) 
 
(a) & (b):  The Ministry of Food Processing industries (MoFPI) does not setup any food 
processing industries on its own. However, it incentivizes setting up of such industries through 
its Central Sector Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) Scheme, Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) and a Centrally sponsored 
scheme PM Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) scheme across the 
country including Tamil N adu. These schemes are not region or state specific but demand 
driven. The details of food processing projects sanctioned by MoFPI under the said three 
schemes across the country including Tamil Nadu is given at Annexure.  
(c) & (d): Mega Food Parks (MFP) Scheme, a component of PMKSY, is aimed at development 
of food processing industries in clusters. One Mega Food Park is approved at Tirunelveli, Tamil 
Nadu with project cost of Rs. 77.02 crore and grants -in-aid of Rs. 23.64 crore and the 
responsibility of e xecution, ownership and management of the MFP vests with the 
Implementing Agency (IA) i.e. Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Marketing Board (TNSAMB). 
The MFP Scheme has been discontinued by the Ministry since 01.04.2021  with provision for 
committed liabilities.  
MoFPI is implementing a component scheme under PMKSY namely Creation of 
Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters (APC), which is similar to the Mega Food Park 
scheme with a reduced requirement of 10 acres of land. Under APC Scheme, grants -in-aid 
@35% of eligible project cost in General Area and grants-in-aid @50% of eligible project for 
projects in Difficult Areas as well as SC/ST, FPOs, SHGs, subject to max. of Rs. 10 crore per 
project is provided to eligible entrepreneurs. Under APC, 12 projects ar e approved in Tamil 
Nadu with project cost of Rs. 333.63 crore and grants-in-aid of Rs. 81.07 crore. 
 
*****  
 
218                                                      

ANNEXURE 
ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY TO PART (a) & (b) OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2301 FOR ANSWER ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2025 
REGARDING “SETTING UP OF NEW FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES AT 
DISTRICT LEVEL” 
Number of projects approved under PMKSY, PLISFPI and PMFME schemes of 
MoFPI since inception of the scheme 
  
S. 
No. 
  
State/UT 
No. of 
approved 
projects under 
PMKSY 
No. of approved 
Micro Food 
Processing 
Enterprises under 
PMFME 
No. of approved 
applications at 
different locations 
under PLISFPI  
  
1.   Andaman & 
Nicobar 
2 18 0 
2.   Andhra Pradesh 76 8087 38 
3.   Arunachal Pradesh 12 136 0 
4.   Assam 102 4600 4 
5.   Bihar 15 27723 7 
6.   Chandigarh 0 5 0 
7.   Chhattisgarh 10 1280 1 
8.   Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli and Daman 
& Diu 
1 
12 
0 
9.   Delhi 22 363 0 
10.   Goa 2 137 1 
11.   Gujarat 109 1010 32 
12.   Haryana 99 1633 9 
13.   Himachal Pradesh 44 2537 4 
14.   Jammu & Kashmir 41 1938 2 
15.   Jharkhand 2 4250 2 
16.   Karnataka 98 7724 21 
17.   Kerala 54 7937 10 
18.   Ladakh 0 90 0 
19.   Lakshadweep 0 0 0 
20.   Madhya Pradesh 51 11944 10 
21.   Maharashtra 244 26172 41 
22.   Manipur 8 308 0 
23.   Meghalaya 10 227 0 
24.   Mizoram 4 56 0 
25.   Nagaland 4 429 0 
26.   Odisha 30 2732 5 
27.   Puduchery 2 192 0 
28.   Punjab 76 3021 9 
29.   Rajasthan 55 1351 6 
30.   Sikkim 1 65 0 
31.   Tamil Nadu 156 17210 20 
32.   Telangana 67 7266 13 
33.   Tripura 9 248 0 
34.   Uttar Pradesh 99 20575 27 
35.   Uttarakhand 59 1037 7 
36.   West Bengal 55 431 9 
  
***** 
219                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2302 
ANSWERED ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2025 
 
MEGA FOOD PARKS & AGRO-PROCESSING CLUSTERS 
 
2302. SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH: 
SHRI NARHARI AMIN: 
DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH: 
DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE: 
SMT. MAYA NAROLIYA: 
SMT. KIRAN CHOUDHRY: 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA: 
SHRI MAYANKKUMAR NAYAK: 
 
Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the current status of Mega Food Parks, Agro Processing Clusters and Food Testing Labs 
operational and under construction in the country; 
(b)  the reasons for delay in the under construction projects, if any, the details thereof; 
(c)  the measures taken to improve last mile connectivity, logistics support and availability of raw 
materials for units in food parks; and 
(d)  the extent to which these projects contributed in increasing farmers' income, reducing wastage 
and promoting local agricultural value chains? 
 
ANSWER   
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH) 
 
(a): The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing a central sector 
umbrella scheme called “Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)” since 2017-18 across the 
country. The basic objective of the scheme is to ensure overall development of food processing sector 
in the country. The scheme aims to achieve the objective by providing incentives for creation of food 
processing & preservation infrastructure  in the country. The PMKSY has 6 on-going component 
schemes and 2 discontinued component schemes (w.e.f. 01.04.2021) with committed liability. Under 
Agro Processing Clusters  which is on -going component scheme of PMKSY , 67 number of project s 
have been approved, out o f which 22 projects are operational. Under the Food Testing Labs scheme, 
which is also on -going component scheme of PMKSY, 205 number of projects  have been approved, 
out of which 172 projects are completed . Further, under Mega Food Parks  scheme, which is a 
discontinued component of PMKSY w.e.f. 01.04.2021, 41 number of projects have been approved, out 
of which 25 projects are operational. 
 
(b): Delay in project implementation, if any, is mainly due to factors, such as delay in receipt of 
statutory clearances from the respective Agencies (including the Revenue Authority, Town Planning, 
Electricity Authority, Water Authority, Pollution Control Board, Licensing Authority etc.), delay in 
Term Loan Sanctions and disbursements, financial constraints faced by applicants. 
 
220                                                      

(c): PMKSY is a central sector umbrella scheme under which financial assistance is provided to 
entrepreneurs for creation of modern infrastructure with efficient supply chain management from farm 
gate to retail outlet thereby giving a boost to the growth of f ood processing sector in the country. The 
MFP Scheme functions on a cluster -based, hub-and-spoke model by establishing Mega Food Parks 
with the aim to facilitate the establishment of a strong food processing industry backed by an efficient 
supply chain which includes creation of infrastructure for primary processing and storage near the farm 
in the form of Primary Processing Centres (PPCs) and Collection Centres (CCs). 
 
(d): Creation of post -harvest infrastructure and processing facilities under the above component 
schemes leads to reduction in post -harvest losses. The se component schemes provide financial 
assistance in the form of grants -in-aid to entrepreneurs for setting up of food processing/preservation 
infrastructure which, inter -alia, includes processing units, cold storages and refrigerated vehicles to 
minimize post-harvest losses. This provide s a boost to the growth of food processing sector in the 
country and improves the capacity of food processing unit s, which help in providing better returns to 
farmers, especially in the rural areas, reducing wastage of agricultural produce, increasing the 
processing levels and enhancing exports of the processed foods. 
 
With creation of food processing infrastructure, the demand of farm produce which is raw 
material for food processing units increases leading to better prices to farmers and increasing farm gate 
profitability. Under the component schemes Mega Food Park and Agro Processing Cluster of PMKSY, 
till October 2025, 141577 farmers have been benefitted and 36.22 LMT/Annum of preservation and 
processing capacity has been created, promoting the local agricultural value chain.  
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
221                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION No. 2303 
ANSWERED ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2025 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PMFME SCHEME 
2303. SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR: 
SHRI AMAR PAL MAURYA: 
Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the current status of implementation of PM Formalisation of Micro Food Processing 
Enterprises (PMFME) scheme; 
(b)  the number of beneficiaries supported under the One District One Product (ODOP) 
approach and the types of units that have been supported; 
(c)  the details of credit-linked subsidy sanctioned and disbursed during the year 2024 -25 and 
the current financial year; 
(d)  the steps taken to strengthen State-wise capacity building, branding and marketing support; 
and 
(e)  the manner in which Ministry is assessing the economic impact on employment generation, 
formalisation and value addition through this scheme? 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH) 
 
(a): Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) is implementing a centrally sponsored 
"PM Formalisation of Micro food processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme" for providing 
financial, technical and business support for setting up of new/ upgradation of micro food 
processing enterprises in the country. The duration of the scheme 2020-21 to 2024-25 which has 
been extended for the period of one year till March, 2026.  
The status of implementation of PM Formalisation of Micro food processing Enterprises 
(PMFME) Scheme, as on 31.10.2025, is as under: 
i. Centre Share  of Rs. 4,306.40 Crores. has been  released for implementation of various 
components of the Scheme. 
ii. 1,62,744 loans have been sanctioned including Credit Linked Subsidy of Rs. 4,684.65 cr. 
iii. Seed capital assistance has been approved to 3,65,935 Self Help Group (SHG) members 
for Rs. 1,244.96 crore 
iv. 76 incubation centres have been approved.  
v. Under Capacity Building, 1,26,353 beneficiaries have been trained. 
(b): 22,524 loans have been sanctioned for setting up/upgradation of One District One Products 
(ODOP) based micro food processing units.  137 unique ODOP have been notified across 726 
districts in 35 States/UTs.  
(c): The details of loans sanctions and disbursed are as under: 
Financial Year No. of Loans Sanctioned No. of Loans Disbursed 
2024-25 50,873 42,982 
2025-26 (As on 31.10.2025) 25,567 24,127 
222                                                      

(d): The Scheme provides Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) training for 
individual and group applicants and Self Help Group (SHG) seed capital beneficiaries engaged in 
micro food processing through Master Trainers and Districts Level Trainers. At the State level, 
training programmes are organised and coordinated by State Level Technical Institutions (SLTIs), 
while monitoring of training delivery is undertaken by district-level officers appointed by the State 
Nodal Agency (SNA). This includes verification of training conduct and internal assessment of 
beneficiaries to assess learning outcomes and training effectiveness. In addition to the two 
National Level Technical Institutions, namely NIFTEM -Kundli and NIFTEM-Thanjavur, a total 
of 43 SLTIs have been identified at the State level, based on recommendations of the respective 
SNAs and approval of the Ministry, to support effective implem entation and monitoring of the 
capacity-building component under the PMFME Scheme. The State-wise beneficiary trained is at 
Annexure-I. 
Under the Branding & Marketing component of PMFME Scheme, grant of upto 50% of 
the eligible project cost is provided to groups of  Farmer Producer Organisation ( FPOs), 
cooperatives, SHGs and State or regional Special Purpose Vehicle ( SPVs) of micro food  
processing enterprises to develop a common umbrella brand at the State or regional level. The 
component provides support for packaging & branding, quality control, tie -ups with retail and e-
commerce platforms, product standardization and food safety adherence for consumer retail sales. 
The State-wise projects approved in Branding & Marketing are at Annexure-II. 
(e): Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has got conducted a third-party mid-term 
impact evaluation of the PMFME scheme to assess the impact of the scheme. The study has 
highlighted that the integration of technology and financial support through PMFME has he lped 
entrepreneurs by increasing their production capacity, turn over and business growth, leading to 
income generation, market access/linkages and promotion of vocal for local.  Based on the 
information captured in the PMFME MIS portal, 8,54,167 direct and  indirect employment ha s 
been generated and 56,168 micro food processing units have been formalized as on 31.10.2025. 
 
 
***** 
  
223                                                      

ANNEXURE-I 
 
ANNEXURE REFERRED IN REPLY TO PART ( d) OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTIO N NO. 2303 FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“IMPLEMENTATION OF PMFME SCHEME” 
 
State-wise number of beneficiaries trained: 
 
State/ UT Wise Beneficiaries trained as on 31.10.2025 
S. No. States/ UTs Total Beneficiaries Trained 
1 Andaman And Nicobar 
Islands 62 
2 Andhra Pradesh 7534 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 1344 
4 Assam 15408 
5 Bihar 514 
6 Chandigarh 21 
7 Chhattisgarh 4931 
8 Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman and Diu 0 
9 Delhi 786 
10 Goa 999 
11 Gujarat 68 
12 Haryana 671 
13 Himachal Pradesh 7366 
14 Jammu And Kashmir 65 
15 Jharkhand 595 
16 Karnataka 1511 
17 Kerala 1240 
18 Ladakh 15 
19 Lakshadweep 0 
20 Madhya Pradesh 6007 
21 Maharashtra 35996 
22 Manipur 456 
23 Meghalaya 2083 
24 Mizoram 47 
25 Nagaland 2683 
26 Odisha 10465 
27 Puducherry 857 
28 Punjab 671 
29 Rajasthan 811 
30 Sikkim 956 
31 Tamil Nadu 6874 
32 Telangana 11298 
33 Tripura 2638 
34 Uttar Pradesh 1381 
35 Uttarakhand 0 
36 West Bengal 0 
  Grand Total 126353 
 
***** 
224                                                      

ANNEXURE-II 
 
ANNEXURE REFERRED IN REPLY TO PART ( d) OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2303 FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“IMPLEMENTATION OF PMFME SCHEME” 
 
State-wise number of marketing and branding projects approved  
 
Sl. No State/UT Number of projects approved 
1 Andhra Pradesh 2 
2 Bihar 1 
3 Goa 1 
4 Haryana 1 
5 Jharkhand 3 
6 Karnataka 5 
7 Ladakh 2 
8 Maharashtra 4 
9 Puducherry 1 
10 Punjab 2 
11 Sikkim 2 
12 Tamil Nadu 1 
 
***** 
225                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION No. 2304 
ANSWERED ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2025 
IMPLEMENTATION OF ODOP UNDER PMFME IN ANDHRA PRADESH. 
2304. SHRI SANA SATHISH BABU: 
Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
(a)  impact of One District One Product (ODOP) on employment and income generation, 
district-wise, especially in Kakinada; 
(b)  details of skill development, capacity building, financial and technical support provided 
under the scheme; 
(c)  list of products identified under ODOP under PMFME in Andhra Pradesh, district-wise, 
including Kakinada; 
(d)  market linkages and export measures created, along with district -wise revenue 
generated in the past five years; and 
(e)   measures taken to ease credit facilities for entrepreneurs involved in ODOP products,     
with district-wise details? 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH) 
(a): Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) is implementing a centrally sponsored 
"PM Formalisation of Micro food processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme" for providing 
financial, technical and business support for setting up of new/ upgradation of micro food 
processing enterprises in the country. The Scheme adopts One District One Product (ODOP) 
approach to reap the benefit of scale in terms of procurement of inputs, availing common 
services and marketing of products. It provides the framework for value chain development 
and alignment of support inf rastructure. Under the Scheme, preference is given to ODOP 
products. Till date 31 st October, 2025, ODOP has been notified for the 726 districts for 35 
States/ UTs. Fish & Shrimp based products have been identified as ODOP for the Kakinada 
district.  Overall, 8,54,167 direct and indirect employment has been generated including 909 in 
Kakinada district. 
The technology and financial support through PMFME  Scheme has helped 
entrepreneurs by increasing their production capacity, turn over and business growth, leading 
to income generation, market access/linkages and promotion of vocal for local.  
 
(b): The details of assistance available to Micro Food Processing Enterprises under PMFME 
Scheme are at Annexure I. 
 
(c): ODOP has been approved for all the 26 districts for the State of Andhra Pradesh. The 
district-wise ODOP list is at Annexure II.  
 
(d): Under the Branding & Marketing component of PMFME Scheme, grant of upto 50% 
of the eligible project cost is provided to g roups of FPOs, cooperatives, SHGs and State or 
regional SPVs of micro food processing enterprises to develop a common umbrella brand at 
the State or regional level. The component provides support for packaging & branding, quality 
control, tie-ups with retail and e-commerce platforms, product standardization and food safety 
226                                                      

adherence for consumer retail sales. The data related to district-wise revenue generation is not 
maintained by the Ministry.  
 
(e): Under the scheme 35% credit linked subsidy is provided on the credit loan from banks. 
A total of 12 nationalized, 20 private and 165 other banks are partnering in the implementation 
of scheme to ensure the credit access to entrepreneurs. Regular review meetings are held with 
State / UT Governments and particip ating Banks to monitor the loan sanction. Further , 
handhold support is provided through District Resource Persons for preparation of Detailed 
Project Report (DPR), filing of application, facilitation of sanction and disbursement of loan 
as well as formalisation of micro food processing units. 8101 loans have been sanctioned and 
Rs. 96.4 crore subsidy has been released for the State of Andhra Pradesh. The district-wise loan 
sanctioned for the State of Andhra Pradesh is at Annexure III.  
 
Further, seed capital support of upto Rs. 40,000 per SHG member is provided for the 
purchase of small equipment and tools and working capital. SHG members engaged in food 
processing are mobilized through State Rural Livelihood Mission (SRLM) for rural area s and 
State Urban Livelihood Mission (SULM) for urban areas.   For the State of Andhra Pradesh, 
seed capital amount of Rs. 139.88 crore has been sanctioned for 36926 SHG members. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
  
227                                                      

ANNEXURE I 
ANNEXURE REFERRED IN REPLY TO PART ( b) OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTIO N NO. 2304 FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“IMPLEMENTATION OF ODOP UNDER PMFME IN ANDHRA PRADESH” 
 
 
The details of financial assistance available under Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of 
Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme are as under:  
 
(i). Support to Individual / Group Category Micro Enterprises:  Credit-linked capital 
subsidy @35% of the eligible project cost, maximum ceiling Rs.10 lakh per unit; 
 
(ii). Support to SHGs for seed capital: Seed capital @ Rs. 40,000/- per member of SHG 
engaged in food processing for working capital and purchase of small tools subject to 
maximum of Rs. 4 lakh per SHG Federation.  
 
(iii). Support for Common Infrastructure: Credit linked capital subsidy @35% subject 
to maximum of Rs. 3 crore to support FPOs, SHGs, Cooperatives and any Government 
agency for setting up of common infrastructure. The common infrastructu re will also 
be available for other units and public to utilize on hiring basis for substantial part of 
the capacity.  
 
(iv). Branding and Marketing Support: Grant upto 50% for Branding and Marketing to 
groups of FPOs/ SHGs/ Cooperatives or an SPV of micro food processing enterprises.  
 
(v). Capacity Building:  The scheme envisages training for Entrepreneurship 
Development Program (EDP) modified to meet the requirement of food processing 
industry and product specific skilling. 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
228                                                      

ANNEXURE II 
 
ANNEXURE REFERRED IN REPLY TO PART ( c) OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTIO N NO. 2304 FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“IMPLEMENTATION OF ODOP UNDER PMFME IN ANDHRA PRADESH” 
 
 
District-wise list of ODOP for the State of Andhra Pradesh 
Sl. No. District ODOP 
1 Ananthapur Groundnut Products 
2 Chittoor Tomato based Products 
3 East Godavari Banana 
4 Guntur Spices (Chilli and Turmeric) 
5 Kadapa Banana based Products 
6 Krishna Fish & Shrimp based products 
7 Kurnool Pulses based Products 
8 Nellore Rice based products (eg. flaked & puffed) 
9 Prakasam Pulses based products 
10 Srikakulam Cashewnut based Products 
11 Vishakhapatnam RTE & RTC (eg. Traditional Local Snacks) 
12 Vizianagaram Millets (eg. ragi and korra) 
13 West Godavari Fish & Marine based products 
14 Parvathipuram 
Manyam Minor Forest Produce ( eg. tamarind and amla) 
15 Alluri Sitharama 
Raju Coffee 
16 Anakapalli 
Sugarcane ( eg. Jaggery cubes, powder and liquid 
jaggery) 
17 Kakinada Fish & Shrimp based products 
18 Konaseema Coconut 
19 Eluru Pulses ( eg. Black gram and green gram) 
20 NTR RTC & RTE ( eg. Ulavacharu) 
21 Palnadu Pulses (eg. Vinukonda Red gram) 
22 Bapatla Spices (eg. Chillies & turmeric) 
23 Nandyal Millets based products 
24 Sri Sathya Sai Groundnut 
25 Tirupati RTC & RTE ( eg.bengal gram muruku) 
26 Annamayya Tamarind 
 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
  
229                                                      

ANNEXURE III 
ANNEXURE REFERRED IN REPLY TO PART ( e) OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTIO N NO. 2304 FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“IMPLEMENTATION OF ODOP UNDER PMFME IN ANDHRA PRADESH” 
 
District-wise loan sanction for the State of Andhra Pradesh  
S.No Districts Number of Loan 
Sanctioned 
1 Alluri Sitharama Raju 1100 
2 Anakapalli 370 
3 Anantapur 246 
4 Annamayya 105 
5 Bapatla 246 
6 Chittoor 355 
7 East Godavari 465 
8 Eluru 308 
9 Guntur 228 
10 Kakinada 303 
11 Konaseema 422 
12 Krishna 194 
13 Kurnool 393 
14 Nandyal 145 
15 NTR 178 
16 Palnadu 121 
17 Parvathipuram Manyam 249 
18 Prakasam 250 
19 Spsr Nellore 328 
20 Sri Sathya Sai 147 
21 Srikakulam 670 
22 Tirupati 308 
23 Visakhapatanam 146 
24 Vizianagaram 467 
25 West Godavari 245 
26 Y.S.R. 112 
 Total  8101 
 
***** 
 
230                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO.  2305 
ANSWERED ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2025 
 
FOOD TESTING LABS 
2305. SHRI SANJAY SETH: 
 
 Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
   
(a)  the number of food testing labs out of total 100 that have received formal approval, how 
many are under construction and by when the Ministry realistically expect s all to be 
operational; 
 
(b)  whether there is a risk that labs could be concentrated in more developed or urban 
regions, neglecting rural, remote, or food -producing regions that actually need better 
food safety infrastructure; 
 
(c)  the manner in which the Ministry plans to fund the sustained operati ons staff, testing 
reagents, maintenance of these labs once built; and 
 
(d)  whether there will be recurring budget allocations or are they expected to become self-
sustaining through user charges? 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH) 
   
(a): The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has  issued an Expression of 
Interest (EOI) on 2 0.11.2025 inviting proposals for setting up of Food Testing Laboratories 
with National Accreditation Board for testing and calibration Laboratories ( NABL) 
accreditation under the scheme of Food Safety & Quality Assurance Infrastructure (FSQAI) of 
“Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)”. The EoI is open till 20.01.2026. Till date 
no proposal has been received against the EoI dated 20.11.2025. As per the Scheme Guidelines 
dated 12.11.2025, food testing laboratories in general areas are to become operational within 
24 months, and the laboratories in difficult areas within 30 months from the date of approval 
of their respective proposals. 
  
(b): The Food Safety & Quality Assurance Infrastructure (FSQAI) Scheme operates on a 
demand-driven basis. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) provides financial 
assistance for setting up Food Testing Laboratories thro ugh proposals invited nationwide via 
Expressions of Interest (EOI) issued from time to time . Funds are allocated to proposals 
selected on merit, in accordance with the scheme guidelines. To promote wider distribution of 
the labs , additional weightage is accorded to proposals originating from districts without 
existing NABL-accredited food testing laboratories in evaluation criteria. Also, the proposals 
from North-Eastern Regions/ Difficult Areas / Integrated Tribal Development Project (ITDP) 
areas are eligible for grant/ subsidy at 70% of eligible equipment cost as compared with 50 % 
for general areas and relaxations in eligibility requirements. 
  
(c) &(d):   Under the FSQAI Scheme, the Ministry provides capital assistance only  as per 
existing scheme guidelines. There is no provision for funding sustained operations or any 
recurring budget allocation. However, MoFPI has allowed one-time procurement of Certified 
Reference Material ( CRMs) required for NABL accreditation and Laboratory Information 
Management System (LIMS) software under the scheme. 
 
***** 
231                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION No. 2306 
ANSWERED ON 19TH DECEMBER, 2025  
  
INCENTIVES FOR STEAM STERILIZATION IN SPICE INDUSTRY 
  
2306. SHRI HARIS BEERAN: 
  
Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
  
(a)     whether Government acknowledges that the surge in EU rejections of Indian spices is 
driven by industry reliance on Ethylene Oxide (EtO), a direct consequence of the 
prohibitive capital costs of Steam Sterilization; 
  
(b)      whether the Ministry has formulated a targeted "Technology Upgradation Mission" —
distinct from general Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY) grants to 
specifically subsidize the transition from EtO to Steam Sterilization for MSMEs; 
  
(c)        if so, the quantum of funds earmarked for this transition in 2025-26; and 
  
(d)        if not, the reasons for failing to incentivize this critical safety compliance to prevent the 
loss of global market share? 
  
ANSWER 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH) 
  
(a):   The subject matter of the question administratively pertains to Department of Commerce 
(DoC) under Ministry of Commerce and Industry.  Accordingly, based on the inputs furnished 
by DoC, the Spice Board, has been undertaking quality evaluation of export consignments of 
select spices to select destinations based on regulations of the importing cou ntries.  Under the 
Board’s quality evaluation system for export of spices, the export consignments are subjected 
to mandatory pre -shipment sampling, testing and clearance for food safety and quality 
parameters, including effective check on use of Ethylene Oxide for export consignments to the 
European Union.  In line with relevant guidelines, exporters of spices are encouraged to use 
alternate methods of sterilization namely Steam Sterilization, Irradiation (except for organic 
products under NPOP) and method s approved by FSSAI. In the year 2025, around 99.5% of 
consignments of spices and spice products exported from India to EU were accepted.     
(b) to (d):  No sir.      
However, assistance for modernization, technology up gradation and adoption of hygienic 
processing practices, including steam sterilization equipment, is available under the schemes 
of Ministry of Food Processing Industries such as the Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA 
Yojana (PMKSY) and Prime Minister Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterp rises 
(PMFME) Scheme. The Government ensures food safety and export compliance through 
regulatory oversight, testing infrastructure, capacity building and adoption of good 
manufacturing practices.   
  
 
***** 
 
232                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2307 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
EV CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE UNDER PRADHAN MANTRI E-DRIVE 
SCHEME 
 
2307. SHRI PRADIP KUMAR VARMA: 
SHRI MAHENDRA BHATT: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the institutional framework for setting up, managing and maintaining EV charging stations; 
 
(b) the total investment approved for this infrastructure, the financial assistance and the summary 
of applicable provisions; 
 
(c) the priorities and criteria adopted for expanding the EV charging network in metros,  smart 
cities and major cities; and 
 
(d) the details of the mechanisms and measures in place to ensure effective operation and  
continuous monitoring of charging stations? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
 
(a) & (b): An allocation of Rs.2,000 crore has been done under the PM Electric Drive 
Revolution in Innovative Vehicle Enhancement (PM E-DRIVE) scheme for deployment of public 
EV charging infrastructure (including EV PCS, Battery Swapping Stations, and Battery Charging 
Stations) on pan India basis including metros, smart cities and major cities.   Under the PM E -
DRIVE scheme, Government of  India (GOI) Ministries/Departments, Central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs), States/Union Territories and their PSUs are eligible to submit proposals for 
installation of Electric Vehicle Public Charging Stations (EV PCS).  Proposals are to be submitted 
through the nodal agency(ies) designated by the concerned Ministry or State/UT, which aggregate 
demand for EV PCS.  The implementation may be undertaken directly by the concerned entities 
or through engagement of Charge Point Operators (CPOs). 
 
The scheme provides capital subsidies for upstream infrastructure and EVSE (charger) and 
the subsidy is up to 100% based on the location category. 
 
(c) & (d): The Operational Guidelines for deployment of EV Charging Infrastructure under 
the PM E -DRIVE scheme have bee n issued on 26.09.2025 outlining the priorities and criteria 
adopted for expanding the EV charging network in metros and smart cities etc.  The guidelines 
also outline mechanisms and measures in place to ensure effective operation and continuous 
monitoring of charging stations. 
******* 
 
233                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2308 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
DISCONTINUATION OF GST CONCESSION CERTIFICATE FOR PERSONS WITH 
LOCOMOTOR DISABILITIES 
 
2308. SMT. RANJEET RANJAN: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the reasons for discontinuing the GST concession for persons with locomotor disabilities on 
the purchase of vehicles; 
 
(b) whether the Ministry is aware that this decision violates the provisi ons contained in the  
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 and India’s commitment under the UN Convention 
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, if so, the manner in which the Ministry  intends to 
address the issue; and 
 
(c) whether Government has estimated the fiscal impact or additional revenue expected from the 
withdrawal of the concessional GST rate, if so, the projected revenue gain for the financial years 
2025–26 and 2026–27? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
 
(a)  & (b): The Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) earlier issued GST concession 
certificates for small cars to eligible persons with orthopaedic disabilities, as per the Department 
of Revenue’s Notification dated 30.09.2019.   As per inputs received from the Department of 
Revenue, GST rates are notified based on the recommendations of the GST Council, a 
constitutional body comprising representatives of the Union and State Governments.  In its 56th  
GST Council Meeting held on 03.09.2025, the Council recommended rationalisation of the 
existing four-tier GST rate structure into a citizen-friendly “Simple Tax” two-rate structure.  The 
Council did not recommend any change in the GST rate applicable to small petrol/diesel-driven 
motor vehicles for persons with orthopaedic physical disability, which continued to attract 18% 
GST. Further, the Council also recommended rationalisation of the GST rate on small 
petrol/diesel-driven motor vehicles from 28% to 18%. 
 
Subsequently, the Ministry of H eavy Industries (MHI) on 08.10. 2025 notified that, in 
view of the rationalisation of GST rates by the Ministry of Finance, the uniform GST rate of 
18% on small cars is applicable to all persons, including orthopedically disabled persons. 
 
Accordingly, there is no requirement for issuance of a GST concession certificate for 
orthopedically disabled persons under the GST Exemption Certificate Scheme. 
 
(c): No such study has been carried out by MHI. 
******* 
 
234                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2309 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
ACHIEVEMENT OF LOCAISATION COMMITMENTS UNDER PLI SCHEME FOR 
AUTOMOBILE AND AUTO COMPONENTS 
 
2309. SMT. GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the extent to which beneficiaries under the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme  for 
automobile and auto components have met localisation and value -addition commitments,  
including components with persistent import dependence; 
 
(b) whether any independent or third -party audits have been conducted to verify investment  
claims, production-linked achievements and localisation data submitted by beneficiaries; and 
 
(c) whether the Ministry propose s dedicated support for MSMEs within the auto -component 
supply chain to upgrade machinery, enhance testing capability and achieve PLI -aligned 
standards? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
 
(a): To facilitate deep localization, PLI -Auto scheme incentivizes Advanced Automotive 
Technology (AAT) products for which prescribed Domestic Value Addition (DVA) is achieved.  As on 
15.12.2025, 18 applicants have received DVA certificates for 131 products/var iants under PLI-Auto 
scheme.  
 
(b) & (c): As per scheme guidelines, Statutory Auditor (SA) for the applicant is entrusted to do 
audit and validate incentive claims, investment & eligible sales data.   PLI-Auto Scheme has an outlay 
of ₹25,938 cr . to develop the domestic supply chain of AAT products. The scheme is promoting 
investment in the automobile sector which is leading to overall increased manufacturing activity 
downstream with establishment of supply chain where Small and Medium -sized Enterprises (SMEs) 
may participate and benefit from the ecosystem.  
 
******* 
 
 
235                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2310 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PM E-BUS SEWA–(PSM) SCHEME, 
 
2310. DR. KAVITA PATIDAR: 
SHRI KANAD PURKAYASTHA: 
DR. DINESH SHARMA: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current status of implementation of the PM e -Bus Sewa –Payment Security Mechanism 
(PSM) Scheme, including the number of electric buses deployed or  operationalised so far under 
the Scheme; 
 
(b) the total number of payment security support claims processed to date, the quantum of  funds 
released from PSM; 
 
(c) whether any instances of Public Transport Authorities (PTAs) payment defaults have  been 
recorded; 
 
(d) if so, the corrective measures undertaken thereof; 
 
(e) whether the Ministry has undertaken any assessment of the operational performance, utilisation 
rates or service outcomes of electric buses supported under the Scheme; and 
 
(f) if so, the key findings? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
 
(a): The PM e -Bus Sewa-Payment Security Mechanism (PSM) Scheme, with total outlay of 
Rs.3,435.33 crore was notified on 28thOctober, 2024.  This scheme aims to support deployment of 
more than 38,000 electric buses.  As on 15 thDecember, 2025, 13 States/UTs have submitted the 
Direct Debit Mandate (DDM) to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which is an essential 
requirement to be eligible under the scheme. 
 
Further, CESL invited tenders for 6,198 electric  buses which were concluded under the 
PM e-Bus Sewa scheme of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.  As on date, Letter of 
Award (LoAs) for 4,472 e-buses have been issued by the Public Transport Authorities (PTAs).  
 
Further, technical bids for tenders invited by CESL from e-bus operators for the operation 
and maintenance of 10,900 e-buses under the PM E-DRIVE Scheme have been opened. 
 
(b) & (c): No defaults have been reported and No Claims have been received under the scheme. 
 
(d): Question does not arise in view of reply to Part (b) & (c) above. 
 
(e) & (f): No such assessment of the operational performance, utilisation rates or service 
outcomes of electric buses supported under the Scheme has been done by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries.   
*******  
236                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2311 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
EV INFRASTRUCTURE UNDER THE PM E-DRIVE SCHEME 
 
2311. SHRI NEERAJ DANGI: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the number of public EV charging stations that have been established so far under the  PM 
e-DRIVE Scheme and the number of States in which this work is pending; 
 
(b) the actual progress as compared to the target set under the first phase of this scheme,  the 
details thereof; 
 
(c) the special strategy devised to provide EV infrastructure in tribal and backward areas; and 
 
(d) the incentives (subsidy/tax benefits/land availability) that are being provided by  
Government to the private sector for setting up charging infrastructure, the details thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
 
(a) to (c):  The PM E-DRIVE scheme has an allocation of Rs.2,000 crore for deployment 
of public EV charging infrastructure on pan India basis including tribal and backward areas. 
MHI has issued operational guidelines for “deployment of EV public charging stations 
(EVPCS) under PM E-DRIVE on 26.09.2025. 
 
No charging stations have been installed so far under the PM E-DRIVE scheme. 
 
(d): Under the PM E -DRIVE scheme, Government of India Ministries/Departments, 
Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs), States/Union Territories and their PSUs are eligible 
to submit proposals for installation of Electric Vehicle Public Charging Stations  (EV PCS). 
Proposals are to be submitted through the nodal agency(ies) designated by the concerned 
Ministry or State/UT, which aggregate demand for EV PCS. The implementation may be 
undertaken directly by the concerned entities or through engagement of Charge Point Operators 
(CPOs).   Release of subsidy, wherever applicable, is made to the nodal agency (ies) in tranches, 
as per the scheme guidelines.  Setting up of a charging station is an unlicensed activity and 
private players can install EVCS as per Ministry of Power (MoP) Guidelines of September 17, 
2024. 
 
The scheme provides capital subsidies for upstream infrastructure and EVSE (charger) 
and the subsidy is up to 100% based on the location category. The costs for upstream 
infrastructure and EVSE are as per Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) benchmark costs. 
 
******* 
 
237                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2312 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
NEW PRODUCTION CAPACITY FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND BATTERY 
MANUFACTURING UNDER FAME PHASE-II SCHEME 
 
2312. SHRI TEJVEER SINGH: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the progress made in setting up new production capacity for electric vehicles and  battery 
manufacturing under the recently revised FAME Phase -II Scheme and the upcoming  EV 
policy; 
 
(b) whether Government is considering to provide special incentives to MSMEs for adopting  
advanced robotics and green technologies in the automobile and machinery sectors, if so,  the 
details thereof; and 
 
(c) whether the Ministry is formulating any new national plan to establish integrated “Future  
Mobility Parks” to make India a global auto hub, if so the details thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
 
(a): The FAME Phase-II Scheme, concluded on 31.03.2024, had no provision of setting up 
new production capacity for electric vehicles or battery manufacturing.   However, the 
Government on 09.06.2021 notified the   Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme “National 
Programme on Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery Storage”  in the country with a 
budgetary outlay of Rs.18,100 crore.  This scheme aims to establish a competitive domestic 
manufacturing ecosystem for 50 GWh of ACC batteries.  Under this Scheme, so far, one 
beneficiary firm has established a giga -scale AC C manufacturing plant with an installed 
capacity of 1 GWh.  It has commenced pilot production.  
 
(b): The Ministry of MSME is implementing "MSE -Green Investments and Financing for 
Transformation Scheme (MSE-GIFT Scheme)" through SIDBI (Implementing Agency ). The 
overall objective of the MSME GIFT Scheme is to provide support to the MSEs in accessing 
institutional finance at a concessional rate for adopting clean / green technologies including 
technologies of Automobile Sector and Electric Vehicles and its Charging Infrastructure and 
help them to transform into green and sustainable business operations.  The Scheme is valid 
till 2025-26. 
 
(c): No such proposal is presently under consideration with the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries.  
****** 
 
238                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES   
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2313 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF DOMESTIC BATTERY MANUFACTURING ECOSYSTEM 
TO REDUCE DEPENDENCE ON IMPORTS 
 
2313. DR. LAXMIKANT BAJPAYEE: 
 
Will the Minister of Heavy Industries be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether one of the major challenges for adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) in the  country 
includes supply chain and manufacturing dependence as India relies heavily on imports for key 
battery components like lithium and cobalt; 
 
(b) if so, the measures taken by Government to improve this situation in view of lack of a robust 
domestic battery manufacturing ecosystem which makes supply chain vulnerable  and affects 
overall cost and availability of EVs; and 
 
(c) the status and outcome of research being done on different type of batteries including  
Lithium, Aluminium and Sodium Cell technologies etc? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
(SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
 
(a) & (b): The Ministry of Heavy Industries is administering the Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme namely “National Programme on Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC) 
Battery Storage,” approved in May 2021 with a total outlay of ₹18,100 crore to establish 50 
GWh of domestic Advanced Chemistry Cell manufacturing capacity. 
 
Further, as per the information received from M/o Mines, M/o Mines has taken several 
steps to secure critical mineral supply chains, including battery minerals like lithium, nickel, 
cobalt etc. which inter-alia include:  
 
i.) The Union Cabinet approved the establishment of National Critical Minerals Mission 
(NCMM) on 29th January, 2025, with a financial outlay of ₹16,300 crore from FY 2024 –
25 to 2030 –31.  The NCMM aims to secure India's critical mineral sup ply chain and to 
strengthen all stages of the value chain, including mineral exploration, mining, 
beneficiation, processing, and recovery from end -of-life products. M/o Mines has 
recognized 9 institutes – 4 IITs, 1 IISc and 4 R&D Labs – as Centres of Excellence (CoE) 
under NCMM. 
ii.) Geological Survey of India (GSI) intensified exploration of critical and strategic minerals. 
GSI took up 195 critical mineral exploration projects in 2024 –25, and 230 projects in 
2025–26 across the country.  Additionally, National Mineral Exploration and 
Development Trust (NMEDT) has sanctioned 62 projects for exploration of critical 
minerals during 2024-25 and 36 projects during 2025-26. 
iii.) M/o Mines has successfully auctioned 34 blocks of critical minerals. 
 
 
239                                                      

-2- 
 
iv.) M/o Mines has successfully auctioned 7 blocks of Exploration License, out of which, three 
are of critical minerals.  
v.) The Union Cabinet approved a ₹1,500 crore Incentive Scheme to develop recycling 
capacity for the separation and production of critical minerals from secondary  sources. 
The Scheme Guidelines have been issued by the M/o Mines on 02.10.2025. 
vi.) Guidelines for funding Pilot Projects for Recovery of Critical Minerals from overburden/ 
tailings/fly ash/ Red mud etc. have been issued on 14.11.2025.  
vii.) Khanij Bidesh India Limited (KABIL), a Joint Venture Company under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Mines, has acquired five lithium brine blocks in the Catamarca province of 
Argentina for exploration and development. 
 
(c): The PLI ACC scheme is technologically agnostic, w hich ensures that superior 
technologies receive higher incentives. The scheme is designed to attract substantial 
investments, promote research and development, and reduce dependency on imports for ACCs. 
Further, under the scheme, expenditures incurred by b eneficiary firms on Research and 
Development (R&D) are permitted to meet investment criteria, allowing them to integrate the 
latest technology in the implementation of their projects. 
 
As per the information received from M/o Mines, M/o Mines provides financial support 
under the R&D component and S&T-PRISM (Promotion of Research & Innovation in Startups 
and MSMEs) component of the Science and Technology Programme for undertaking R&D 
projects in mining, mineral processing, metallurgical technologies, mineral  beneficiation 
techniques, and recycling sector.  The funding is extended to academic institutions, 
universities, R&D institutions recognized by the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research, start -ups and MSMEs. Since 2018 -19, under the R&D compone nt, 11 projects 
amounting to ₹5.76 crore have been sanctioned related to batteries including Lithium, 
Aluminium and Sodium Cell technologies etc.  Under the S&T-PRISM component (since its 
inception in Nov., 2023), 4 projects with a total funding of ₹9.30 c rore have been sanctioned, 
for start-ups and MSMEs related to batteries including Lithium, Aluminium and Sodium Cell 
technologies etc. 
 
As per the information received from M/o New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), 
MNRE is implementing a “Renewable Energy Resea rch and Technology Development 
Programme (RE -RTD)” through various research institutions and industry to develop 
indigenous technologies and manufacturing for widespread applications of new and renewable 
energy including energy storage technologies in effi cient and cost -effective manner in the 
country. Under the RE -RTD programme, MNRE provides up to 100% f inancial support to 
Government/Non-Profit research organizations and upto 70% to Industry, Start -Ups, Private 
Institutes, Entrepreneurs, and Manufacturing units. The continuous R&D efforts in the area of 
renewable energy have resulted in enhancement of overall efficiency, cost reduction, and better 
reliability of renewable energy systems/ projects/ storage technologies being deployed in the 
country. 
 
As per  the information received from D/o Science and Technology, Anusandhan 
National Research Foundation (ANRF) has sanctioned 236 projects under different type of 
batteries including Lithium, Aluminium and Sodium Cell Technologies etc. 
 
***** 
 
240                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2314 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
REGULATION OF CONTENT ON OTT PLATFORMS 
2314  SHRI A. D. SINGH: 
Will the Minister of INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING be pleased to state; 
(a) whether Government proposes to bring OTT platforms under stricter content regulation; 
(b) the number of complaints received regarding objectionable content on such platforms; and 
(c) the measures taken to ensure compliance with the IT (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
241                                                      

 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING; AND 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
(DR. L. MURUGAN) 
(a) to (c): Government has notified the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media, Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 on 25.02.2021 under IT Act, 2000. 
Part-III of the rules provides for a Code of Ethics for digital news publishers and publishers of 
online curated content (OTT platforms). As per the Code of Ethics, OTT platforms are under 
obligation to not transmit any content which is prohibited by law for the time being in force.  
The platforms are required to undertake age -based classification of conte nt and restrict age -
inappropriate content for children using adequate access control measures.  
The rules further provide a three-tier grievance redressal mechanism as follows: 
 Level I: Self-regulation by the publishers 
 Level II: Self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies of the publishers 
 Level III - Oversight mechanism by the Central Government 
The Ministry share the grievances received, with concerned OTT platforms for resolution at 
Level-I of the grievance redressal mechanism. 
Section 79(3)(b) of IT Act, 2000 provides for notification to the intermediaries for 
removing/disabling access to unlawful content.  
The Government has disabled 43 OTT platforms for public access in India for displaying 
obscene content.  
**** 
 
242                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2315 
(TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025) 
REVIEW OF REGIONAL LANGUAGE CONTENT ON DOORDARSHAN AND AIR 
2315 SMT. GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA: 
Will the Minister of Information and Broadcasting be pleased to state: 
(a) whether the Ministry has undertaken a review of regional language content 
availability on Doordarshan and All India Radio, including new programme additions 
in the past two years; 
(b) whether regional b roadcasting centres have reported constraints relating to 
staffing, production equipment or digital -broadcasting infrastructure and the findings 
of such assessments; and 
(c) whether the Ministry proposes expanding community level media literacy, content-
creation hubs or regional production facilities for underserved linguistic groups? 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING AND 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
(DR. L. MURUGAN) 
(a) to (c): Doordarshan Network has 28 regional/state channels, which telecast 
programmes in their respective regional languages/dialects. Akashvani broadcasts 
programmes in 23 major languages and 182  dialects over its 112 Regional channels 
across the Nation. 
New programmes in regional languages are added on a continuous bas is in line with 
audience needs and public service objectives. 
243                                                      

Modernisation and upgradation of Prasar Bharati are being undertaken under the 
Central Sector Scheme Broadcasting Infrastructure and Network Development (BIND) 
(2021–26), with a total outlay of ₹2,539.61 crore.  
The scheme focuses on upgrading production equipment, studio facilities, 
transmitters, and digital broadcasting infrastructure across Doordarshan and 
Akashvani. 
In the wake of technological advancements in the broadcasting sector, the cha nging 
requirement of the manpower is met by way of hiring as per Contractual Engagement 
Policy of Prasar Bharati. This is done as per the functional requirement projected by 
the kendras. 
Doordarshan has 65 Programme Production Centres and AIR has 230 stati ons with 
studio facilities for creating programmes. This enables the creation of local/regional 
language content using artists, creators and talent from the regions/local stations. 
****** 
244                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION No. 2316 
TO BE ANSWERED ON   19.12.2025 
DAVP- EMPANELLED NEWSPAPERS AND MAGAZINES IN J&K 
2316. SHRI GULAM ALI 
Will the Minister of INFORMATION & BROADCASTING be pleased to state: 
(a)  the total number of DAVP-empanelled newspapers and magazines in Jammu & 
Kashmir, classified as daily, weekly, fortnightly and monthly being published in Sixth 
and Eighth Schedule languages; 
(b) the advertisements issued to each of these publications during the last five years, along 
with the expenditure incurred on each; and  
(c)  the daily broadcast time on All India Radio/Doordarshan allocated to programmes in 
Sixth Schedule and Eighth Schedule languages; and the duration thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION & BROADCASTING; AND 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
(DR. L. MURUGAN) 
(a) to (c): The details of total number of CBC (earlier DAVP) empanelled newspapers and 
magazines in Jammu & Kashmir (as per the classification sought), are available on the website 
of CBC i.e. www.davp.nic.in. 
Information on advertisements issued to these publications and the expenditure incurred during 
the last five years is also available on the same website. 
The Doordarshan Network serves diverse linguistic and cultural communities through telecast 
of programmes in regional languages and dialects on its seven National Channels and twenty-
eight Regional/State Channels.  
Dedicated channels or channels having Eighth Schedule languages as their main language exist 
for Hindi, Bengali, Telugu, Marathi, Tamil, Urdu, Gujarati, Kannada, Odia, Malayalam, 
Punjabi, Assamese, Kashmiri, Konkani and Manipuri.  
245                                                      

Further, Programmes in Sanskrit, Sindhi, Nepali, Bodo, Dogri, Maithili and Santhali are also 
telecast through various Regional/State Doordarshan channels.  
In the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, programmes are telecast through DD Kashir and 
Prasar Bharati Field Generating Station (PGF) Jammu.  
Doordarshan channels operating in Sixth Schedule areas telecast programmes in the respective 
regional and tribal languages and dialects. The duration of such telecasts varies as per the 
approved programme schedules. 
Akashvani, in accordance with its Language and Dialect Policy, broadcasts programmes and 
regional news in all the twenty-two languages included in the Eighth Schedule of the 
Constitution. It also does so in local tribal languages and dialects in areas covered under the 
Sixth Schedule, through stations located in the respective regions.  
The daily broadcast time is as per the approved broadcast schedules of the channels and stations. 
******** 
 
 
246                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2317 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
FUNCTIONING OF FACT-CHECKING MECHANISM 
 
2317. SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: 
 
 
Will the Minister of INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current status of establishment and functioning of the Fact Check Unit (FCU) under 
the Press Information Bureau ; 
(b) the mechanism adopted by the Ministry to identify, verify and act against online 
misinformation and fake news; 
(c) whether standard operating procedures or guidelines have been issued for coordination 
between Government Fact-Checking Units and social media intermediaries; 
(d) if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor; and 
(e) whether Government has taken measures to monitor and counter misinformation and 
hostile narratives, such as anti-India narratives, on online and social media platforms, if 
so, the details thereof?   
 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING AND 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
(DR. L. MURUGAN) 
 
(a) to (e) A Fact Check Unit (FCU) has been set up under Press Information Bureau, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting in November, 2019 with the objective to counter dissemination of 
fake news & misinformation pertaining to the Government of India. 
 
247                                                      

Any complaints/fact check requests regarding news/information items circulating on matters 
pertaining to the Government of India can be sent to the WhatsApp Hotline- +918799711259, 
Email ID-  factcheck@pib.gov.in and the website of PIB Fact Check Unit - 
https://factcheck.pib.gov.in.  
 
The Fact Check Unit of PIB verifies the reported news/ content, as under: 
 PIB Fact Check Unit takes suo-moto cognizance on fact checking as well as receives 
complaints on its website or WhatsApp Hotline.  
 The Unit segregates the received information after ascertaining whether it falls within 
the ambit of the Fact Check Unit. 
 After verifying  the authenticity of the received information from authorized sources, 
the Fact Check Unit utilizes the Information, Education & Communication (IEC) 
strategy to create awareness through creative content fit for dissemination on social 
media platforms. 
 FCU posts the fact checked and correct information on its social media handles.  
 
The PIB Fact Check Unit (FCU) plays a key role in monitoring online content relating to the 
Government of India.  During Operation Sindoor, the PIB Fact Check Unit actively countered 
misinformation and hostile narratives circulating online by promptly fact-checking false claims, 
providing authentic information, and ensuring accurate public communication, thereby helping 
prevent the spread of misleading and anti-India narratives. 
 
***** 
 
 
248                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2318 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
CERTIFICATION OF BENGALI AND OTHER REGIONAL FILMS BY CBFC 
2318. SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: 
Will the Minister of Information and Broadcasting be pleased to state: 
(a) the total number of full length Bengali films certified by the Central Board of Film 
Certification (CBFC) in the last five years, year-wise; 
(b) the comparative data of full length films certified in other major Indian languages 
such as Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Kannada and Marathi during the same period; 
and 
(c) whether the number of films certified in these languages has shown an increasing 
or decreasing trend during the last five years, if so, the reasons for such trend? 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING AND 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
(DR. L. MURUGAN) 
(a) to (c): The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) certifies films for public 
exhibition in the country under the provisions of the Cinematograph  Act, 1952 and 
the rules made thereunder.  
The number of films certified in different languages varies due to various factors such 
as the varied scale of film production in regional industries, disruptions such as 
COVID-19 period etc. It is also influenced  by audience preferences, market 
conditions, and the increasing role of digital and OTT platforms, among other factors. 
*********** 
249                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION No. 2319 
(TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025) 
 
EXPANSION OF COMMUNITY RADIO STATIONS IN SIKKIM: 
2319 SHRI DORJEE TSHERING LEPCHA: 
Will the Minister of INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING be pleased to state: 
(a) Whether any Community Radio initiatives from the State of Sikkim have applied for or 
availed benefits under these schemes in the last five years; 
(b) if so, the details thereof, including the number of applications received, sanctioned, and 
pending from Sikkim;  
(c) whether Government proposes to expand or facilitate the setting up of additional 
Community Radio Stations in small and hilly States like Sikkim; and 
(d) if so, the details of steps being taken or proposed to improve outreach, capacity 
building, and technical support for Community Radio in the State? 
 
 
ANSWER 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING AND 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
(Dr. L. MURUGAN) 
(a) to (d): Government supports Co mmunity Radio Stations through financial assistance to 
establish, repair, and maintain community radio stations. It implements a scheme called 
‘Supporting Community Radio Movement in India’ to strengthen existing and new Community 
Radio Stations.  
250                                                      

The main features of the scheme are as follows: 
1. Financial assistance to newly established CRSs after they have been operational for 
three months 
2. Stations operating for over five years receive support for renewing or replacing old 
equipment. 
3. Training and awareness through workshops, webinars, and sammelans. 
4. Stakeholder Engagement through regional and national events to enable peer learning 
among CR stakeholders 
In the last five years, the Ministry has received one application from the state of  Sikkim for 
availing benefits under the scheme “Supporting Community Radio Movement in India”, which 
was sanctioned as per the prescribed guidelines of the scheme. 
In order to expand and facilitate the setting up of additional Community Radio Stations (CRS) 
and for capacity building, technical support of CRS, the Government organizes a number of 
workshops and regional sammelans in various parts of the country.  
One workshop was held in Gangtok, Sikkim in November 2024 and one regional sammelan 
was organized at Guwahati, Assam in December 2025 for the East Zone states. 
*** 
 
251                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2320 
(TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025) 
 
REGULAR AND BACKLOG V ACANCIES OF SC, ST AND OBC CATEGORIES. 
2320.  SMT. PHULO DEVI NETAM: 
Will the Minister of Information and Broadcasting be pleased to state: 
categories in Ministry; 
smoothly; and 
employees during the last three years?  
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING & 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS  
(DR. L. MURUGAN) 
(a) to (d):  The sanctioned strength and vacancy position in the Ministry are reviewed 
periodically as per administrative and functional requirement.  
The backlog vacancies, including those pertaining to SC, ST and OBC categories, are identified 
from time to time. Action is taken to fill up backlog as well as regular vacancies in accordance 
with the extant guidelines/Recruitment Rules and reservation policies from time to time. 
***** 
 
(a) the details of staff employed in Group A, B and C posts and the vacancies in different 
(b) the details of backlog vacancies in SC, ST and OBC categories; 
(c) the details of the action plan to fill up backlog and regular vacancies to run schemes 
(d) the details of the number of employees retired and the number of newly recruited 
252                                                      

 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2321 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
  
GROWTH OF ANIMATION AND EXTENDED REALITY SECTOR 
 
2321:   DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH 
 SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA 
  
Will the Minister of INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING be pleased to state: 
is helping bridge the skill gap in Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), 
and 3D modeling through specialised training and Research and Development; 
global films and boosted the creation of Indian cultural intellectual properties (IPs); 
national certifications is effectively building a strong talent pipeline; and 
investment and collaborating with global studios to promote “Create in India” and 
“Brand India”? 
  
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN); 
 
(a)  to (d): The National Centre of Excellence (NCoE) for AVGC-XR has been operationalised 
as the Indian Institute of Creative Technologies (IICT). It is the premier institution for creative 
technologies, located in Mumbai. 
IICT is being developed with a total allocation of ₹391.15 crore and is modelled on the lines 
of IITs and IIMs for the creative technologies (including AVGC-XR). It has started operating 
from the NFDC campus in Mumbai. 
It follows an industry-oriented curriculum aligned with global best practices and functions on 
a Public–Private Partnership (PPP) model as the national hub under a hub-and-spoke 
framework 
IICT is addressing the skill gaps in Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality and 3D modelling 
through specialised training programmes, industry aligned curricula and applied Research and 
Development.  
(a) the manner in which the new National Centre of Excellence (NCoE) for AVGC-XR 
(b) policy measures that have driven growth in AVGC exports such as VFX work for 
(c) whether integrating AVGC-XR courses into higher education and introducing 
(d) the manner in which the Ministry is supporting AVGC Startups in securing foreign 
253                                                      

The institute has launched 17 specialised academic programmes across gaming, post-
production, animation, comics and XR. More details can be accessed from 
https://iict.org/academics/programs. 
It has partnerships with leading global companies such as Google, Meta, NVIDIA, Microsoft, 
Apple, Adobe and WPP for curriculum co-development, access to advanced tools, mentorship 
and industry collaboration.  
IICT also supports startup incubation and IP creation, helping creative technology startups of 
India connect with global studios, investors and markets, thereby advancing the objectives of 
Create in India and Brand India   
Government has taken various steps for growth in creative technologies, including AVGC 
exports such as: 
 The AVGC Promotion Task Force was set up by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting in April 2022 after the Union Budget announcement. It brought together 
industry and government to outline how India could scale skills, jobs and investment in 
animation, VFX, gaming and comics; and position the country as a global hub for M&E 
industry.  
Task Force submitted its report in December 2022, recommending a National AVGC Mission, 
Centres of Excellence, stronger infrastructure and dedicated support for Indian IP and exports.  
 IICT Mumbai has been established and is being developed as a specialised Centre of 
Excellence to strengthen high-end training and research. 
 With a focus on expanding high-quality production capacity, developing talent and 
improving access to international markets, WAVES 2025 was held in May 2025 as a 
global platform for the entire Media & Entertainment sector. 
Further, the WAVES supports the AVGC sector and startups through the following three 
verticals: 
1. WAVES Bazaar: A year-round hybrid global marketplace for India’s media and 
entertainment sector. It facilitates structured B2B meetings, co-production opportunities and 
showcases Indian films, animation, gaming, VFX and XR content to international buyers. 
2. WAVEX: It is a dedicated startup accelerator and incubator for AVGC-XR and 
emerging media technologies. It provides mentorship, access to advanced production and 
immersive-tech infrastructure, and curated investor linkages.  
At WAVES Summit 2025, it enabled pitching by 30 startups to investors such as Microsoft 
and Unicorn India Ventures, and provided exhibition space to over 100 startups.  
 
Through partnerships with T-Hub and IICT, WAVEX supports incubation, government pilots, 
innovation challenges like Bhashasetu, and global exposure through platforms such as IFFI, 
helping startups secure foreign investment and validate Indian IPs internationally. 
 
3. Creatosphere: A Create in India talent-discovery initiative that conducts 30–35 
national competitions annually across animation, gaming, webtoons and digital storytelling. It 
nurtures new creators by linking them with mentorship, incubation and industry opportunities. 
***** 
 
254                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2322 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
MANDATORY PRE-CERTIFICATION CHECKS ON OTT PLATFORM CONTENT 
2322 SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY: 
Will the Minister of INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING be pleased to state; 
(a) whether Government is aware that weak regulatory checks on OTT platform content make minors 
vulnerable to harmful content; 
(b) whether Government plans to include mandatory pre -certification checks on OTT content similar to 
films under the Cinematograph Act; and 
(c) if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
255                                                      

 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING; AND PARLIAMENTARY 
AFFAIRS 
(DR. L. MURUGAN) 
(a) to (c): Government has notified the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media, Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 on 25.02.2021 under IT Act, 2000 in order to put in place an institutional 
mechanism for publishers of news & current affairs on digital media and publishers of online curated 
content (OTT Platforms). 
Part-III of the rules provides for a Code of Ethics for digital news publishers and publishers of online 
curated content (OTT platforms). As per the Code of Ethics, OTT platforms are under obligation to not 
transmit any content which is prohibited by law for the time being in force.  
The platforms are required to undertake age -based classification of content and restric t age-inappropriate 
content for children using adequate access control measures.  
The rules further provide a three-tier grievance redressal mechanism as follows: 
 Level I: Self-regulation by the publishers 
 Level II: Self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies of the publishers 
 Level III - Oversight mechanism by the Central Government 
Complaints relating to the violation of the Code of Ethics are addressed under the provisions of the three -
tier grievance redressal mechanism and complaints received by the M inistry are forwarded to the 
concerned OTT platforms for resolution as per IT Rules, 2021. 
Section 79(3)(b) of IT Act, 2000 provides for notification to the intermediaries for removing/disabling 
access to unlawful content.  
The Government has disabled 43 OTT platforms for public access in India for displaying obscene content.  
***** 
 
256                                                      

O.I.H 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2323 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
PROGRESS OF INSTALLATION OF KAVACH IN INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
2323 #  SHRI BABURAM NISHAD: 
 SHRI MADAN RATHORE: 
 SMT. KIRAN CHOUDHRY:  
 SHRI BRIJ LAL:  
 SMT. MAYA NAROLIYA:  
 DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH:                                         
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) the current status of installation of the Kavach Automatic Train Protection System, 
including the total route in kilometers covered till date along with the zone-wise details 
thereof; 
(b) the number of stations currently operating with electronic interlocking systems and the 
extent of increase achieved in the last two years; 
(c) the total route in kilometers brought under automatic block signaling during the last two 
financial years along with the targets set for the year 2025-26; and 
(d) the details of the signaling modernisation, including Kavach electronic interlocking and 
automatic signaling systems during the last two years and the funds allocated and 
utilised therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (d):  1. Kavach is an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system. 
Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety certification of 
highest order (SIL-4). 
 
2. Kavach aids the Loco Pilot in running of trains within specified speed limits by 
automatic application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps the trains 
to run safely during inclement weather. 
--2/- 
257                                                      

-2- 
3. The first field trials on the passenger trains were started in February 2016. Based on the 
experience gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the system by Independent 
Safety Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 2018-19, for supply of Kavach Ver 
3.2. 
4. Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July 2020. 
5. Implementation of Kavach System involves following Key Activities: 
i. Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station, block section. 
ii. Installation of RFID Tags throughout the track length. 
iii. Installation of telecom Towers throughout the section. 
iv. Laying of Optical Fibre Cable along the track. 
v. Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian 
Railways.  
6. Based on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on 1465 RKm on South Central Railway 
and experience gained, further improvements were made. Finally, Kavach specification 
version 4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. 
7. Kavach version 4.0 covers all the major features required for the diverse railway 
network. This is a significant milestone in safety for Indian Railways. Within a short 
period, IR has developed, tested and started deploying Automatic Train Protection 
System. 
8. Major improvement in Version 4.0 includes increased Location Accuracy, Improved 
Information of Signal Aspects in bigger yards, Station to Station Kavach interface on 
OFC and Direct Interface to existing Electronic Interlocking System. With these 
improvements, Kavach Ver.4.0. is planned for large scale deployment over Indian 
Railways.  
9. After extensive and elaborate trials, Kavach Version 4.0 has been successfully 
commissioned on 738 Route km on  Palwal – Mathura- Nagda section (633 Rkm) on 
Delhi – Mumbai route and Howrah–Bardhaman section (105  Rkm) Delhi – Howrah 
route. Kavach implementation has been taken up in balance sections of Delhi – Mumbai 
& Delhi – Howrah corridors.   
10. Progress of key items of Kavach on High density routes including Delhi– Mumbai & 
Delhi– Howrah corridors are as under: 
--3/- 
 
258                                                      

 
-3- 
 
SN Item Progress  
i Laying of Optical Fibre Cable 7129 Km 
ii Installation of Telecom Towers 860 nos 
iii Station Data Centre 767 Stns 
iv Installation of Track side equipment 5672 RKm 
v Provision of Kavach on Locos 4,154 
 
11.  Further, track side Kavach implementation work has been taken up on 15,512 RKm 
covering all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
12.  Bids have been invited for equipping another 9,069 locomotives with Kavach version 
4.0. Kavach is being provided progressively in a phased manner in locomotives.    
13.  Specialized training programmes on Kavach are being conducted at centralized training 
institutes of Indian Railways to impart training to all concerned officials. By now more 
than 40,000 technicians, operators and engineers have been trained on Kavach 
technology. This includes 33,000 Loco Pilots & Assistant Loco Pilots. Courses have 
been designed in collaboration with IRISET. 
14. The funds utilized on Kavach works so far up to Oct'25 is ₹2,354.36 Crores. The 
allocation of funds during the year 2025-26 is ₹1673.19 Crores. Requisite funds are 
made available as per the progress of works. 
15. Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points and signals in place 
of old mechanical signalling have been provided at 3830 stations as on 30.11.2025. This 
includes commissioning of Electronic Interlocking at 817 stations during last two years. 
16. Automatic Block Signalling (ABS) that enhances line capacity within existing track 
infrastructure has been provided at 6559 Route km upto 30.11.2025. This includes 
commissioning of 1959 Rkm of Automatic Block Signalling during last two years. 
17. During the year 2025-26, ₹6800 crore have been allocated for Signalling & Telecom  
related works, out of which ₹4050.62 crore spent till Nov.’2025. 
***** 
259                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2324 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
MODERNISATION OF JAMMU TAWI RAILWAY STATION UNDER ABSS 
 
2324    SHRI SAT PAUL SHARMA:     
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current status of the development and modernization works for Jammu Tawi Railway 
Station under AMRIT Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS), along with the expected timelines for 
completion of the project; 
(b) the steps being taken to enhance the station's amenities and infrastructure, including the 
provision of escalators, lifts and Wi-Fi facilities; and 
(c) the plans to improve connectivity and increase the frequency of trains from Jammu Tawi 
Railway Station to major cities, including the introduction of new trains and routes? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
(a)  to (c): Jammu Tawi railway station falling in Jammu and Kashmir has been identified for 
redevelopment under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme.  
The works for redevelopment of Jammu Tawi station have been taken up at good pace. The 
works of station building at second entry, Government Railway Police building and 12 m Foot 
Over Bridge at Katra end have been completed. The works of platform no. 4/5 and 6/7, 72 m air 
concourse, development towards second entry and 12 m Foot Over Bridge at Delhi end have 
been taken up. 
The Amrit Bharat Station scheme envisages development of stations on a continuous basis with 
a long-term approach. The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in phases to improve the stations. The master planning, keeping in view the 
260                                                      

necessity at each station, includes:   Improvement of access to station and circulating areas  Integration of station with both sides of city  Improvement of station building  Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths   Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger traffic  Provision of lift/escalators/ramp  Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms  Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One Product’  Parking areas, Multimodal integration  Amenities for Divyangjans  Better passenger information systems  Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping, etc.  The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre at the station in the long term. 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme. Out of these, 04 
stations including Jammu Tawi, Budgam, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra and Martyr Captain 
Tushar Mahajan railway station located in Jammu and Kashmir. 
Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Jammu and 
Kashmir have been taken up at a good pace. The progress of some of the stations is as given 
below:  
 Budgam station: The works of improvement of circulating area, parking and approach 
roads have been completed. The works of porch, platform surfacing, platform shelter, 
waiting room, toilet, booking office, Passenger Reservation System office, executive 
lounge, retiring rooms, lifts and 12 m Foot Over Bridge have been taken up. 
261                                                      

 Martyr Captain Tushar Mahajan station: The works of improvement of station 
building, porch, waiting room, toilet, circulating area, parking, approach roads, lighting 
and signage have been completed. The works of entry/exit gates, platform shelter and 
platform surfacing at platform no. 4/5, lifts, escalators and 6 m Foot Over Bridge have 
been taken up. 
Development/upgradation of stations on Indian Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and 
works in this regard are undertaken as per requirement, subject to inter-se priority and availability 
of funds. The priority for development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations is accorded to higher category of station over lower category of station while sanctioning and executing the works.  
Further, development/redevelopment/upgradation of Railway Stations is complex in nature 
involving safety of passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire 
clearance, heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due to brown 
field related challenges such as shifting of utilities, (involving water/sewage lines, optical fiber 
cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables etc.) infringements, operation of trains without 
hindering passenger movement, speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of 
high voltage power lines etc. and these factors affect the completion time.  
Almost all railway stations across Indian Railways have 4G/5G coverage provided by the 
Telecom Services Providers. These networks are being utilized by passengers for data 
connectivity resulting in enhanced passenger experience. In addition to this, free Wi-Fi services 
have been provided at 6117 Railway Stations across Indian Railways including Jammu Tawi 
Railway Station. 
Jammu Tawi is served by 110 train services (listed below) providing connectivity to important 
destinations like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Patna etc.  
 
Train serving  Jammu Tawi-Delhi sector: 
SN Train no. and name 
1 16317/16318 Kanniyakumari-Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express 
2 16787/16788 Tirunelveli – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express 
262                                                      

3 11449/11450 Jabalpur – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express 
4 19803/19804 Kota – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express 
5 16031/16032 MGR Chennai Central – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra  Andaman 
Express 
6 22461/22462 New Delhi-Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Shri Shakti Express 
7 20847/20848 Durg – Martyr Captain Tushar Mahajan Express 
8 12549/12550 Durg – Martyr Captain Tushar Mahajan Express 
9 22705/22706 Tirupati – Jammu Tawi Humsafar Express 
10 12751/12752 Hazur Sahib Nanded – Jammu Tawi  Express 
11 22477/22478 New Delhi – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra  Vande Bharat Express 
12 12919/12920 Dr Ambedkar Nagar (Indore) – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra  Malwa 
Express 
13 12471/12472 Bandra (T) – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra  Swaraj Express 
14 12473/12474 Gandhidham – Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Sarvodaya Express 
15 12477/12478 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – Jamnagar Express 
16 12475/12476 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – Hapa Sarvodaya Express 
17 22941/22942 Martyr Captain Tushar Mahajan – Indore Express 
18 18101/18102 Jammu Tawi – Tatanagar Express 
19 18309/18310 Jammu Tawi – Sambalpur Express 
20 22439/22440 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – New Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
21 20433/20434 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – Subedarganj Jammu Mail 
22 12413/12414 Jammu Tawi – Ajmer Express 
263                                                      

23 12265/12266 Jammu Tawi – Delhi Sarai Rohilla Duronto Express 
24 22401/22402 Martyr Captain Tushar Mahajan – Delhi Sarai Rohilla Express 
25 20985/20986 Martyr Captain Tushar Mahajan – Kota Express 
26 12425/12426 Jammu Tawi – New Delhi Rajdhani Express 
27 12445/12446 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – New Delhi Uttar Sampark Kranti 
Express 
28 14661/14662 Jammu Tawi – Barmer Shalimar Malani Express 
29 11077/11078 Jammu Tawi – Pune Jhelum Express 
 
Trains serving Jammu Tawi-Kolkata sector: 
SN Train no. and name 
1 22317/22318 Sealdah - Jammu Tawi Humsafar Express 
2 13151/13152 Kolkata - Jammu Tawi Express 
3 12331/12332 Howrah-Jammu Tawi Himgiri Express 
 
 
Trains serving Jammu Tawi-Mumbai sector: 
SN Train no. and name 
1 19027/19028 Bandra (T)- Jammu Tawi Vivek Express 
2 12471/12472 Bandra (T)-Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Swaraj Express 
 
Trains serving Jammu Tawi-Chennai sector: 
SN Train no. and name 
1 16031/16032 MGR Chennai Central-Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Andaman 
Express 
264                                                      

 
Trains serving  Jammu Tawi-Ahmedabad sector: 
 
SN Train no. and name 
1 19027/19028 Jammu Tawi – Bandra (T) Jammu Tawi Express 
2 19223/19224 Jammu Tawi – Sabarmati Express 
3 12477/12478 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – Jamnagar Express 
4 12473/12474 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – Gandhidham Sarvodaya Express 
5 12475/12476 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – Hapa Sarvodaya Express 
6 19415/19416 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra – Sabarmati Express 
 
Besides, introduction of new train services, which is an on-going process, depends on various 
factors which include: 
• Capacity of that section 
• Availability of path 
• Availability of required rolling stock 
• Availability of matching infrastructure for rolling stock 
• Maintenance requirement of railway tracks and other assets 
***** 
 
265                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2325 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
   UPGRADATION OF JAMMU RAILWAY STATION 
 
2325 SHRI SAT PAUL SHARMA : 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) the present status of the upgradation of Jammu Railway Station, including the details of 
components approved under the project;  
(b) whether Railways have initiated or completed the processes related to planning, tendering and 
execution of works for upgradation, if so, the details thereof; 
(c) whether any railway land in or around Jammu Railway Station has been encroached upon; 
(d) if so, the total extent of such land, the number of individuals or entities involved, and the action 
taken or proposed by the Railways for removal of encroachments; and 
(e) whether such encroachments are causing delays in the upgradation, if so, the details thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
 ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (e):  Jammu Tawi railway station falling in Jammu and Kashmir has been identified for 
redevelopment under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme.  
 
…2/- 
266                                                      

-2- 
The works for redevelopment of Jammu Tawi station have been taken up at good pace. The 
works of station building at second entry, Government Railway Police building and 12 m Foot 
Over Bridge at Katra end have been completed. The works of platform no.  4/5 and 6/7, 72 m air 
concourse, development towards second entry and 12 m Foot Over Bri dge at Delhi end have been 
taken up. 
 
The Amrit Bharat Station scheme envisages development of stations on a continuous basis with a 
long-term approach . The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their 
implementation in phases to improve the stati ons. The master planning, keeping in view the 
necessity at each station, includes: 
 
 Improvement of access to station and circulating areas 
 Integration of station with both sides of city 
 Improvement of station building 
 Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths  
 Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger 
traffic 
 Provision of lift/escalators/ramp 
 Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms 
 Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One 
Product’ 
 Parking areas, Multimodal integration 
 Amenities for Divyangjans 
 Better passenger information systems 
 Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping, 
etc. 
 
The sche me also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of 
ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre at the 
station in the long term. 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified under A mrit Bharat Station Scheme. Out of these, 04 
stations including Jammu Tawi, Budgam, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra and Martyr Captain 
Tushar Mahajan railway station located in Jammu and Kashmir. 
…3/- 
267                                                      

-3- 
Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Jammu and Kashmir 
have been taken up at a good pace. The progress of some of the stations is as given below:  
 Budgam station: The works of improvement of circulating area, parking and approach 
roads have been completed. The works of porch, platform surfacing, platform shelter, 
waiting room, toilet, booking office, Passenger Reservation System office, executive 
lounge, retiring rooms, lifts and 12 m Foot Over Bridge have been taken up. 
 Martyr Captain Tushar Mahajan station: The works o f improvement of station 
building, porch, waiting room, toilet, circulating area, parking, approach roads, lighting and 
signage have been completed. The works of entry/exit gates, platform shelter and platform 
surfacing at platform no. 4/5, lifts, escalato rs and 6 m Foot Over Bridge have been taken 
up. 
  
Development/upgradation of stations on Indian Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and 
works in this regard are undertaken as per requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of 
funds. The priority for development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations is 
accorded to higher category of station over lower category of station while sanctioning and 
executing the works. 
 
Further, development/redevelopment/upgradation of Railway Stations is complex in nature 
involving saf ety of passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire 
clearance, heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due to brown 
field related challenges such as shifting of utilities, (involving wate r/sewage lines, optical fiber 
cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables etc.) infringements, operation of trains without hindering 
passenger movement, speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of high voltage 
power lines etc. and these factors affect the completion time. 
 
There is encroachment on about 2 Ha land in and around Jammu Tawi Railway Station for quite a 
long period. Railway has taken action for eviction of the unauthorized occupants on railway land. 
Presently, all the cases  are either under PPE Act or in Civil Court.  However, redevelopment of 
Jammu Tawi Railway Station is not affected by these encroachments. 
***** 
268                                                      

 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2326 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
OVERCHARGING BY RAILWAY CATERING STAFF 
2326. Dr. K. Laxman : 
  
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
  
(a) whether complaints have been received regarding overcharging by catering staff on trains, 
including cases of non-adherence to approved prices for food and beverages such as bottled water;  
(b) if so, the number of complaints registered during the last three years, year-wise;  
(c) the action taken against defaulting vendors, including fines, suspensions, or blacklisting; and 
(d) the steps taken by the Ministry and IRCTC  to ensure compliance with approved rates and protect 
passengers from overcharging? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (d): Indian Railways serve about 58 cr meal s every year on average. O nly about 0.0008% 
complaints are received on average. Based on inquiry on these compla ints during the last three years, 
a fine of Rs 2.6 cr has been imposed.  
 
In order to take passenger feedback, the complaint management system over Indian Railways has 
been strengthened, simplified and made more accessible over the last few years through the 
introduction of RailMadad Portal. With the launch of RailMadad Portal, Indian Railways provided 
passengers a single window system to register complaints and suggestions.  
…2/- 
 
269                                                      

-2- 
Indian Railways continuously endeavour to make available food items to the travelling passengers as 
per the prescribed rates. Necessary steps are accordingly taken by Indian Railways from time to time 
to ensure the same. Following steps have been taken by Railways to curb overcharging in trains :  
 
1. SMS is sent to passengers with a link of menu and tariff to make them aware of rates. 
2. Installation of Point of Sale (POS) machines for billing and cashless payments. 
3. Conducting awareness campaigns to promote billing and curb overcharging. 
4. Rates stickers on Packaged Drinking Water (PDW) Buckets and Tea/Coffee urns. 
5. Introduction of e -pantry service in Mail/E xpress trains to facilitate passengers to book meals 
through an online module. 
6. Implementation of QR code enabled Identity Cards to onboard catering staff. 
7. Distribution of pamphlets to create awareness regarding the rate of catering items and Packaged 
Drinking Water bottles.  
8. Special Inspection Drives to check overcharging and billing issues. 
9. Imposition of suitable penalty in cases of overcharging, if any. 
******* 
 
270                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2327 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF STATION UNDER ABSS IN MAHARASHTRA  
 
2327. SHRI DHANANJAY BHIMRAO MAHADIK : 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) objectives and scope of Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS) and manner in which it 
differs from other station redevelopment initiatives;  
 
(b) the total number of railway stations in Maharashtra identified under ABSS and the 
Station Redevelopment Programme, along with their names;  
 
(c) current status of redevelopment work at these stations, including project cost, 
contractors/agencies and expected timelines;  
 
(d) passenger amenities and infrastructure improvements being provided, such as roof plazas, 
waiting lounges, lifts, escalators and digital displays;  
 
(e) funds allocated, released and utilized over last three years; and  
 
(f) measures taken to address any delays, like land acquisition issues or coordination 
challenges? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORM ATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
 (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW)  
 
(a) to ( f) Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for 
redevelopment of stations with a long -term approach.  
271                                                      

 
The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in phases to 
improve the stations. The master planning includes:  
 Improvement of access to station and circulating areas  
 Integration of station with both sides of city  
 Improvement of station building  
 Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths  
 Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger 
traffic  
 Provision of lift/escalators/ramp  
 Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over plat forms 
 Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One 
Product’  
 Parking areas, Multimodal integration  
 Amenities for Divyangjans  
 Better passenger information systems  
 Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business m eetings, 
landscaping, etc. keeping in view the necessity at each station.  
 
The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of 
ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre 
at the station in the long term.  
 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified for development under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme, out of which 132 stations are located in Maharashtra. The names of stations 
identified for development under Amrit Bharat Statio n Scheme in Maharashtra are as 
following:  
 
State No. of Amrit 
Stations  
Names of Amrit Stations  
Maharashtra 132 Ahmednagar, Ajni (Nagpur), Akalkot Road, Akola, 
Akurdi, Amalner, Amgaon, Amravati, Andheri, Badnera, 
Balharshah, Bandra Terminus, Baramati, Belapur, 
Bhandara Road, Bhokar, Bhusawal, Borivali, Byculla, 
Chalisgaon, Chanda Fort, Chandrapur, Charni Road, 
Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus, Chinchpokli, Chinchwad, Dadar (CR), Dadar 
(WR), Dahisar, Daund, Dehu Road, Devlali, 
Dhamangaon, Dharangaon, Dharashiv, Dharmabad , 
272                                                      

State No. of Amrit 
Stations  
Names of Amrit Stations  
Dhule, Diva, Dudhani, Gangakher, Godhani, Gondia, 
Grant Road, Ha dapsar, Hatkanangale, Hazur Sahib 
Nanded, Himayatnagar, Hinganghat, Hingoli Deccan, 
Igatpuri, Jalgaon, Jalna, Jeur, Jogeshwari, Kalyan Jn, 
Kamptee, Kandivali, Kanjur Marg, Karad, Katol, 
Kedgaon, Kinwat, Kopargaon, Kurduwadi Jn, Kurla Jn, 
Lasalgaon, Latur, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Lonand Jn, 
Lonavla, Lower Parel, Malad, Malkapur, Manmad Jn, 
Manwath Road , Marine Lines, Matunga, Miraj Jn, 
Mudkhed Jn, Mumbai Central, Mumbra, Murtizapur Jn, 
Nagarsol, Nagpur Jn, Nandgaon, Nandura, Nandurbar, 
Narkher Jn, Nashik R oad, Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose 
Itwari Junction, Pachora Jn, Palghar, Pandharpur, Panvel 
Jn, Parbhani Jn, Parel, Parli Vaijnath, Partur , Phaltan, 
Prabhadevi, Pulgaon Jn, Pune Jn, Purna Jn, Raver, 
Rotegaon , Sainagar Shirdi, Sandhurst Road, Sangli, 
Satara, Savda, Selu, Sewagram, Shahad, Shegaon, Shivaji 
Nagar Pune, Shri Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj Terminus 
Kolhapur, Solapur, Talegaon, Thakurli, Thane, Titvala, 
Tumsar Road, Umri, Uruli, Vadala Road, Vidyavihar, 
Vikhroli, Wadsa, Wardha, Washim, Wathar  
 
Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in 
Maharashtra has been taken up at a good pace. Till now, works of 17 stations ( Amgaon, 
Baramati, Chanda Fort, Chinchpokli, Devlali, Dhule, Kedgaon, Lasalgaon, Lonand Jn, 
Matunga, Mur tizapur Jn, Nandura, Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Itwari Junction, Parel, 
Savda, Shahad,  Vadala Road ) in Maharashtra have been completed under this scheme. 
The works at other stations have also been taken up at good pace and progress of some 
of above statio ns is as given below:  
 Wathar station:  The works of new portico, improvement of station building, water 
booth, new main entry gate, parking area, circulating area, improvement of entrance 
lobby, compound wall of parking area, platform shelter at platform no . 1, platform 
surfacing, improvement of waiting room, signages and station illumination have 
been completed. The finishing works have been taken up.  
 
 Nandgaon station:  The works of entrance and exit gate, platform surfacing, 
273                                                      

platform shelter, improvement o f station building, booking office, Foot Over 
Bridge, boundary wall, circulating area, parking area, signage and lighting have 
been completed. The finishing works have been taken up.  
 
 Diva station:  The works of redevelopment of circulating area and parking  on East 
side, improvement to station building on East side, new entry gate, improvement to 
Foot Over Bridge at East side, construction of new staircase for Foot Over Bridge at 
East side, platform shelter of platform no. 7/8, platform raising and flooring of 
platform no. 5/6 and 7/8, new toilet block and sewage treatment plant on West side 
and new toilet block of platform no. 7/8 have been completed. The work new 6 m 
Foot Over Bridge at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus end have been taken up.  
 
 Mumbra st ation:  The works of platform flooring of platform no. 4, improvement 
of seating arrangement of platform no. 1 and 4, flooring of Foot Over Bridge, new 
toilet block, sewage treatment plant, development of circulating area, improvement 
of ticket booking offi ce have been completed. The work of escalators on platform 
no. 1 has been taken up.  
 
 Titwala station:  The works of two wheeler parking and approach road on East and 
West side, new entrance gate, improvement of ticket booking office, new toilet 
block, sewage treatment plant, platform surfacing of platform no. 3 and new station 
building have been completed.  The works of new 6 m Foot Over Bridge have been 
taken up.  
Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations on 
Indian Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and works in this regard are 
undertaken as per requirement, sub ject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. The 
priority for development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations is 
accorded to higher category of station over lower category of station while sanctioning 
and executing the works.  
 
Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety of 
passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, 
heritage, tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due  to 
brownfield related challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, 
optical fibre cables, gas pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements, operation 
of trains without hindering passenger movement, speed restrictions due  to works carried 
out in close proximity of tracks and high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors 
affect the completion time. Therefore, no time frame can be indicated at this stage.  
 
274                                                      

Development / upgradation / modernisation of stations including un der Amrit Bharat 
Station Scheme is generally funded under Plan Head -53 ‘Customer Amenities’. The 
details of allocation and expenditure under Plan Head -53 are maintained Zonal 
Railway -wise and not work -wise, or station -wise or state -wise.Maharashtrais cover ed 
under the jurisdiction of four railway zones, namely, Central Railway, South Central 
Railway, South East Central Railway and Western Railway. For the last three years and 
the current year, ₹ 11,190 crore has been allocated while an expenditure of ₹ 9,19 8 crore has 
been incurred during the last three years and current year (up to October, 2025).  
 
Indian Railways has a well established mechanism to monitor implementation of projects 
including their reviews, inspection, check for quality of works and audits . Works are carried 
out adhering to the standards and specifications laid down in various codes and manuals. 
Inspections/audits/checks are carried out from time to time by various 
agencies/officials/multi-disciplinary teams as per laid down instructions an d actions for 
correction are taken immediately. This is a continuous and ongoing process.  
 
*****  
 
275                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2328 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
KAVACH AUTOMATIC TRAIN PROTECTION SYSTEM 
 
2328 SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR:  
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) the current progress of the Kavach Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system across Indian 
Railways, detailing the total route in kilometres covered and the firm timelines for its pan-
India deployment; 
(b) the specifics of other technological interventions, such as Ultra Sonic Flaw Detection 
(USFD), Real-Time Train Information System (RTIS) and Machine Vision Based 
Inspection System (MVIS), currently deployed or planned to enhance railway safety, along 
with their operational status and extent of implementation; and     
(c) the tangible impact these systems have on reducing accidents and improving overall safety 
on the network? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
 
(a) to (c): Safety is accorded the highest priority on Indian Railways. As a consequence of 
various safety measures taken over the years, there has been a steep decline in the number 
of accidents.  
Number of Consequential Train Accidents has reduced as shown in the table below:- 
 
Year Consequential Accidents 
2014-15 135 
2025-26 (till date) 11 (90% lesser) 
 
--2/- 
276                                                      

-2- 
 
Another important index showing improvement in safety in train operations is Consequential 
Accidents Index, the details of which are as under:- 
Consequential Accident Index: 
Year Accident Index 
2014-15 0.11 
2024-25 0.03 (73% lesser) 
 
This index measures number of consequential accidents as a ratio of total running Kilometers of 
all trains.  
  
                No. of consequential accidents 
Accident Index  =   
               No. of trains X million kilometers run 
 
  
The various safety measures taken to enhance safety in train operations are as under:- 
1. On Indian Railways, the expenditure on Safety related activities has increased over the 
years as under:- 
 
Expenditure/Budget on Safety related activities (Rs. in Cr.) 
2013-14 
(Act.) 
2022-23 
 (Act.) 
2023-24 
(Act.) 
2024-25 2025-26 
39,463 87,327 1,01,651 1,14,022 1,16,470 
--3/- 
2341651355531112005-06 2009-10 2014-15 2019-20 2024-25 2025-26                             (till date)
No. of Consequential Train Accidents
277                                                      

-3- 
 
2. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points and signals 
have been provided at 6,657 stations up to 30.11.2025 to reduce accidents due to human 
failure. 
3. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) Gates has been provided at 10,100 Level Crossing Gates 
up to 30.11.2025 for enhancing safety at LC Gates. 
4. Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety by verification of track occupancy 
by electrical means has been provided at 6,663 stations up to 30.11.2025. 
5. Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety certification of 
highest order. Kavach was adopted as a National ATP system in July 2020. Kavach is 
provided progressively in phased manner. Initially, Kavach Version 3.2 was deployed on 
1465 RKm of South Central Railway and 80 RKm of North Central Railway. Kavach 
specification Version 4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. After extensive and 
elaborate trials, Kavach Version 4.0 has been successfully commissioned on Palwal-
Mathura-Kota- Nagda section ( 633Rkm) on Delhi- Mumbai route and on Howrah-
Bardhaman section ( 105RKm) on Delhi-Howrah route. Kavach implementation has been 
taken up in balance sections of Delhi-Mumbai and Delhi-Howrah route. Further, Kavach 
implementation has been taken up on 15,512 RKm covering all GQ, GD, HDN and 
identified sections of Indian Railways. 
6. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Signalling, e.g. mandatory 
correspondence check, alteration work protocol, preparation of completion drawing, etc. 
have been issued. 
7. System of disconnection and reconnection for S&T equipment as per protocol has been re-
emphasized. 
8. All locomotives are equipped with Vigilance Control Devices (VCD) to improve alertness of 
Loco Pilots. 
9. Retro-reflective sigma boards are provided on the mast which is located two OHE masts 
prior to the signals in electrified territories to alert the crew about the signal ahead when 
visibility is low due to foggy weather. 
10. A GPS based Fog Safety Device (FSD) is provided to loco pilots in fog affected areas which 
enables loco pilots to know the distance of the approaching landmarks like signals, level 
crossing gates, etc. 
11. Modern track structure consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) rails, 
Prestressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC) Normal/Wide base sleepers with elastic fastening, fan 
shaped layout turnout on PSC sleepers, Steel Channel/H-beam Sleepers on girder bridges is  
--4/- 
278                                                      

-4- 
 
used while carrying out primary track renewals. 
12. Mechanisation of track laying activity through use of track machines like PQRS, TRT, T-28 
etc. to reduce human errors. 
13. Maximizing supply of 130m/260m long rail panels for increasing progress of rail renewal 
and avoiding welding of joints, thereby improving safety. 
14. Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) testing of rails to detect flaws and timely removal of 
defective rails. 
15. Laying of longer rails, minimizing the use of Alumino Thermic Welding and adoption of 
better welding technology for rails i.e., Flash Butt Welding. 
16. Monitoring of track geometry by OMS (Oscillation Monitoring System) and TRC (Track 
Recording Cars). 
17. Patrolling of railway tracks to look out for weld/rail fractures. 
18. The use of Thick Web Switches and Weldable CMS Crossing in turnout renewal works. 
19. Inspections at regular intervals are carried out to monitor and educate staff for observance of 
safe practices. 
20. Web based online monitoring system of track assets viz. Track database and decision 
support system has been adopted to decide rationalized maintenance requirement and 
optimize inputs.  
21. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Track, e.g. integrated block, corridor 
block, worksite safety, monsoon precautions, etc. have been issued. 
22. Preventive maintenance of railway assets (Coaches & Wagons) is undertaken to ensure safe 
train operations. 
23. Replacement of conventional ICF design coaches with LHB design coaches is being done. 
24. All unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on Broad Gauge (BG) route have been eliminated 
by January 2019. 
25. Safety of Railway Bridges is ensured through regular inspection of Bridges. The 
requirement of repair/rehabilitation of Bridges is taken up based upon the conditions 
assessed during these inspections. 
26. Indian Railways has displayed Statutory “Fire Notices” for widespread passenger 
information in all coaches. Fire posters are provided in every coach so as to educate and 
alert passengers regarding various Do’s and Don’ts to prevent fire. These include messages 
regarding not carrying any inflammable material, explosives, prohibition of smoking inside 
the coaches, penalties etc. 
--5/- 
279                                                      

-5- 
 
27. Production Units are providing Fire detection and suppression system in newly 
manufactured Power Cars and Pantry Cars, Fire and Smoke detection system in newly 
manufactured coaches. Progressive fitment of the same in existing coaches is also underway 
by Zonal Railways in a phased manner. 
28. Regular counseling and training of staff is undertaken.  
29. Concept of Rolling Block introduced in Indian Railways (Open Lines) General Rules vide 
Gazette notification dated 30.11.2023, wherein work of integrated maintenance/ 
repair/replacement of assets is planned up to 52 weeks in advance on rolling basis and 
executed as per plan. 
 
The details of the Safety related works related to better maintenance practices, 
Technological improvements, better infrastructure and rolling stock etc. undertaken by Railways 
are tabulated below:- 
 
S. No. Item 2004-05 to 
2013-14 
 
2014-15 to 
2024-25 
 
2014-25 Vs. 
2004-14 
 Technological Improvements 
1. Use of high-quality rails 
(60 Kg) (Km) 
57,450 Km 1.43 Lakh Km More than 2 
times 
2. Longer Rail Panels 
(260m) (Km) 
9,917 Km 77,522 Km Nearly 8 times 
3. Electronic Interlocking 
(Stations) 
837 Stations 3,691 Stations More than 4 
times 
4. Fog Pass Safety Devices 
(Nos.) 
As on 
31.03.14:  
90 Nos. 
As on 31.03.25: 
25,939 Nos. 
288 times 
5. Thick Web Switches 
(Nos.) 
Nil 28,301 Nos.  
 Better Maintenance Practices 
1. Primary Rail Renewal 
(Track Km) 
32,260 Km 49,941 Km 1.5 times 
2. USFD (Ultra Sonic Flaw 
detection) Testing of 
Welds (Nos.) 
79.43 Lakh 2 Crore More than 2 
times 
3. Weld failures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
3699 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
370 Nos. 
90 % reduction 
4. Rail fractures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
2548 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
289 Nos. 
More than 88% 
reduction 
280                                                      

 
Implementation of Kavach 
 
1. Kavach is an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system. Kavach is a 
highly technology intensive system, which requires safety certification of highest order (SIL-
4). 
2. Kavach aids the Loco Pilot in running of trains within specified speed limits by automatic 
application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps the trains to run safely 
during inclement weather. 
3. The first field trials on the passenger trains were started in February 2016. Based on the 
experience gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the system by Independent Safety 
Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 2018-19, for supply of Kavach Ver 3.2. 
4. Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July 2020. 
5. Implementation of Kavach System involves following Key Activities: 
i. Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station, block section. 
ii. Installation of RFID Tags throughout the track length. 
iii. Installation of telecom Towers throughout the section. 
iv. Laying of Optical Fibre Cable along the track. 
v. Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian Railways.  
6. Based on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on 1465 RKm on South Central Railway and 
experience gained, further improvements were made. Finally, Kavach specification version 
4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. 
--7/- 
 
 Better Infrastructure and Rolling Stock 
1. New Track KM added 
(Track Km) 
14,985 Km 34,428 Km More than 2 
times 
2. Flyovers 
(RoBs)/Underpasses 
(RUBs) (Nos.) 
4,148 Nos. 13,808 Nos. More than 3 
times 
3. Unmanned Level 
crossings  
(Nos.) on BG 
As on 
31.03.14:  
8,948 
As on 31.03.24:Nil 
(All eliminated by 
31.01.19) 
Removed 
4. Manufacture of LHB 
Coaches (Nos.) 
2,337 Nos. 42,677 More than 18 
times 
281                                                      

-7- 
7. Kavach version 4.0 covers all the major features required for the diverse railway network. 
This is a significant milestone in safety for Indian Railways. Within a short period, IR has 
developed, tested and started deploying Automatic Train Protection System. 
8. Major improvement in Version 4.0 includes increased Location Accuracy, Improved 
Information of Signal Aspects in bigger yards, Station to Station Kavach interface on OFC 
and Direct Interface to existing Electronic Interlocking System. With these improvements, 
Kavach Ver.4.0. is planned for large scale deployment over Indian Railways.  
9. After extensive and elaborate trials, Kavach Version 4.0 has been successfully commissioned 
on 738 Route km on  Palwal – Mathura- Nagda section (633 Rkm) on Delhi – Mumbai route 
and Howrah–Bardhaman section (105  Rkm) Delhi – Howrah route. Kavach implementation 
has been taken up in balance sections of Delhi – Mumbai & Delhi – Howrah corridors.  
10.  Progress of key items of Kavach on High density routes including Delhi– Mumbai & Delhi– 
Howrah corridors are as under: 
SN Item Progress  
i Laying of Optical Fibre Cable 7129 Km 
ii Installation of Telecom Towers 860 nos 
iii Station Data Centre 767 Stns 
iv Installation of Track side equipment 5672 RKm 
v Provision of Kavach on Locos 4,154 
 
11. Further, track side Kavach implementation work has been taken up on 15,512 RKm covering 
all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
12. Bids have been invited for equipping another 9,069 locomotives with Kavach version 4.0. 
Kavach is being provided progressively in a phased manner in locomotives.    
13. Specialized training programmes on Kavach are being conducted at centralized training 
institutes of Indian Railways to impart training to all concerned officials. By now more than 
40,000 technicians, operators and engineers have been trained on Kavach technology. This 
includes 33,000 Loco Pilots & Assistant Loco Pilots. Courses have been designed in 
--8/- 
282                                                      

-8- 
collaboration with IRISET. 
14. The funds utilized on Kavach works so far up to Oct'25 is Rs. 2,354.36 Crores. The 
allocation of funds during the year 2025-26 is Rs. 1673.19 Crores. Requisite funds are made 
available as per the progress of works. 
Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD): 
Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) testing of rail/weld is a non-destructive testing method to 
detect internal defects or flaws in rails/welds. USFD testing of rail/weld is being carried out at 
the prescribed frequency all across Indian Railway. Timely testing by USFD is helping in early 
detection of vulnerable points and initiating necessary remedial measures to reduce the 
probability of accidents.  
Real Time Train Information System (RTIS): 
Real Time Train Information System (RTIS) is a Made in India, edge processing, IoT based 
system that utilizes ISRO's Satcom & Satnav technologies for automatic train tracking. RTIS 
devices are installed in nearly 10,500 rolling stock (10310 electric locos, 140 EMU/EMU motor 
cars and 50 Vande Bharat driving cabs). The RTIS device generates station events 
(Arrival/Departure/Run through) along with train location updates at 30 second periodicity to 
RTIS central location server. These updates are utilized as real time information to passengers 
through National Train Enquiry System (NTES).   
Machine Vision Based Inspection System (MVIS): 
Machine Vision Based Inspection System (MVIS) is an Integrated Track monitoring System 
(ITMS) deployed for track recording. Three nos. of such systems have been deployed on Indian 
Railways. Additional seven numbers Integrated Track monitoring System are in various stages of 
deployment. The output of the machine are being used for planning of track maintenance at 
ground level.   
A Memorandum of Understanding has been signed between IR and Dedicated Freight Corridor 
Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL) in July 2025 for induction of wayside Machine Vision 
based Inspection System (MVIS). This is an AI/ML driven system for detecting hanging parts or 
missing components in moving trains.  
***** 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
283                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2329 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
HIGH-SPEED AND SEMI-HIGH-SPEED RAIL PROJECTS 
 
2329 SHRI A. D. SINGH: 
 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) current status of the Mumbai –Ahmedabad High -Speed Rail Project and expected completion 
timeline; 
 
(b) details of the new semi-high-speed corridors approved or under consideration; and 
 
(c) whether Government has any plan to expand such corridors to connect major metros and 
industrial hubs?  
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY   
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c):  The Mumbai-Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project (508 km) is the only HSR 
Project under execution with technical and financial assistance from Government of Japan. The 
Project is passing through the States of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Union Territory of Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli with 12 stations planned at Mumbai, Thane, Virar, Boisar, Vapi, Billimora, Surat, 
Bharuch, Vadodara, Anand, Ahmedabad and Sabarmati. 
 
Entire land (1389.5 Ha.) for MAHSR project has been acquired. All Statutory Clearances have been 
obtained. All the civil contracts of the project have been awarded. Out of total 28 tender packages, 
25 tender packages have been awarded. All 1651 utilities have been shifted. 
 
The progress of various major items so far is as under: 
 
Item  Progress 
Gujarat Maharashtra Total 
Foundation  351 kms. 65 kms. 416 kms. 
Piers 351 kms. 58 kms. 409 kms. 
Girder Casting 339 kms. 6 kms. 345 kms. 
Girder Launching 330 kms. 2 kms. 332 kms. 
Track Bed Construction 132 kms. - 132 kms. 
OHE Masts Erection 88 kms. - 88 kms. 
 
Cont…2/- 
 
284                                                      

 
-:2:- 
 
Out of total 12 stations, foundation works has been completed at 8 stations (Vapi, Bilimora, Surat, 
Bharuch, Anand, Vadodara, Ahmedabad, and Sabarmati). In Maharashtra section, foundation work 
is in progress at 3 stations (Thane, Virar, Boisar) and excava tion work at BKC station is near 
completion and Casting of base slab started.   
 
17 river bridges have been completed. Work is in advance stage for 4 major river bridges 
(Narmada, Mahi, Tapti and Sabarmati) in Gujarat & in progress in 4 river bridges in Ma harashtra. 
Work on Depots (Thane, Surat and Sabarmati) is in full swing. 
 
Work of the only tunnel in Gujarat has been completed. The work of the under -sea tunnel (21Km 
approx.) has started. Out of which, 4.8 km tunnel between Ghansoli and Shilphata in Maha rashtra 
has been completed. 
 
Bullet train project is a very complex and technology intensive Project. Exact timelines and cost for 
the completion of the project can be reasonably ascertained after the completion of all associated 
works of Civil Structures,  Track, Electrical, Signaling & Telecommunication and supply of 
Trainsets. 
 
***** 
285                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2330 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
  IMPACT OF RAIL TRACK DEFECTS ON TRAIN OPERATIONS 
 
2330. SMT. RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL:  
 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) number of rail track defects detected in 2024–25; 
(b) regions reporting highest defects; 
(c) impact on train operations; 
(d) adequacy of maintenance staff; and 
(e) steps taken to improve track safety? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (e) Several measures have been taken by Indian Railway to upgrade and modernize the tracks. 
These include:  
i. Modern track structure consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) rails, Wider 
and heavier Pre-stressed Concrete Sleepers (PSC) with elastic fastening, fan-shaped layout 
turnout on PSC sleepers and Steel Channel/H-beam Sleepers on girder bridges are being used 
while carrying out primary track renewals.  
ii. The Thick Web Switches and Weldable CMS Crossings are being used in turnout renewal 
works.  
iii. Supply of 130m/260m long rail panels have been increased to avoid welding of joints, thereby 
improving safety.  
iv. Thick Web Switch Expansion Joints are being used in place of earlier Conventional/Improved 
SEJs. 
286                                                      

v. Adoption of better welding technology for rails i.e. Flash Butt Welding.  
vi. Adoption of mechanized system for track maintenance using high output plain tampers and 
points & crossing tampers for improved maintainability & reliability of track.   
vii. Deployment of state-of-the-art modern machines including Rail Grinding Machines to further 
improve asset reliability. 
viii. Mechanisation of track laying activities through use of track machines like PQRS, TRT, T-28 
etc. 
ix. Use of advanced Phased Array technology of testing of rail and welds. 
x. Deployment of Integrated Track Monitoring Systems (ITMS) and Oscillation Monitoring 
System (OMS) for comprehensive health assessment to ascertain optimal maintenance 
requirements. 
xi. Using web enabled Track Management System (TMS) for integration and data analytics of 
the track inspection records received through various sources to enable precise maintenance 
inputs. 
As a result of above measures, there has been significant reduction in major track defects (rail 
fracture and weld fracture) on Indian Railways during 2024-25 vis-a-vis 2013-14. The details are as 
under: 
Track defect 2013-14 2024-25 2024-25 vs 2013-14 
Rail fracture 2548 Nos. 289 Nos. 88% reduction 
Weld fracture 3699 Nos. 370 Nos. 90% reduction 
 
 
Safety in train operations 
 
As a consequence of various safety measures taken over the years, there has been a steep decline in 
the number of accidents.  
Number of Consequential Train Accidents has reduced as shown in the table below:- 
 
Year Consequential Accidents 
2014-15 135 
2025-26 (Till date) 11 (90% lesser) 
 
Another important index showing improvement in safety in train operations is Consequential 
Accidents Index, the details of which are as under:- 
287                                                      

 
Consequential Accident Index:- 
Year Accident Index 
2014-15 0.11 
2024-25 0.03 (73% lesser) 
 
This index measures number of consequential accidents as a ratio of total running Kilometers of all 
trains. 
  
 
Accident Index = 
 
 
   
Safety is accorded the highest priority on Indian Railways. The various safety measures taken to 
enhance safety in train operations are as under:- 
 
1. On Indian Railways, the expenditure on Safety related activities has increased over the years 
as under:- 
Expenditure/Budget on Safety related activities (Rs. in Cr.) 
2013-14 
(Act.) 
2022-23 
(Act.) 
2023-24 
(Act.) 
2024-25 2025-26 
39,463 87,327 1,01,651 1,14,022 1,16,470 
 
2341651355531112005-06 2009-10 2014-15 2019-20 2024-25 2025-26                             (till date)
No. of Consequential Train Accidents
No. of consequential accidents 
No. of trains X million kilometers run 
288                                                      

2. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points and signals have 
been provided at 6,656 stations up to 31.10.2025 to reduce accidents due to human failure. 
3. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) Gates has been provided at 10,098 Level Crossing Gates up 
to 31.10.2025 for enhancing safety at LC Gates. 
4. Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety by verification of track occupancy by 
electrical means has been provided at 6,661 stations up to 31.10.2025.  
5. Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety certification of highest 
order. Kavach was adopted as a National ATP system in July 2020. Kavach is provided 
progressively in phased manner. Initially, Kavach Version 3.2 was deployed on 1465 RKm of 
South Central Railway and 80 RKm of North Central Railway. Kavach specification Version 
4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024.  
 After extensive and elaborate trials, Kavach Version 4.0 has been successfully 
commissioned on Palwal-Mathura-Kota- Nagda section ( 633 Rkm) on Delhi- Mumbai route 
and  on Howrah-Bardhaman section ( 105RKm) on Delhi-Howrah route. Kavach 
implementation has been taken up in balance sections of Delhi-Mumbai and Delhi-Howrah 
route.  
 Further, Kavach implementation has been taken up on 15,512 RKm covering all GQ, GD, 
HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
6. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Signalling, e.g. mandatory correspondence 
check, alteration work protocol, preparation of completion drawing, etc. have been issued. 
7. System of disconnection and reconnection for S&T equipment as per protocol has been re-
emphasized. 
8. All locomotives are equipped with Vigilance Control Devices (VCD) to improve alertness of 
Loco Pilots. 
9. Retro-reflective sigma boards are provided on the mast which is located two OHE masts prior 
to the signals in electrified territories to alert the crew about the signal ahead when visibility is 
low due to foggy weather. 
10. A GPS based Fog Safety Device (FSD) is provided to loco pilots in fog affected areas which 
enables loco pilots to know the distance of the approaching landmarks like signals, level 
crossing gates, etc. 
11. Modern track structure consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) rails, 
Prestressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC) Normal/Wide base sleepers with elastic fastening, fan 
shaped layout turnout on PSC sleepers, Steel Channel/H-beam Sleepers on girder bridges is 
used while carrying out primary track renewals. 
289                                                      

12. Mechanisation of track laying activity through use of track machines like PQRS, TRT, T-28 
etc. to reduce human errors. 
13. Maximizing supply of 130m/260m long rail panels for increasing progress of rail renewal and 
avoiding welding of joints, thereby improving safety. 
14. Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) testing of rails to detect flaws and timely removal of 
defective rails. 
15. Laying of longer rails, minimizing the use of Alumino Thermic Welding and adoption of better 
welding technology for rails i.e., Flash Butt Welding. 
16. Monitoring of track geometry by OMS (Oscillation Monitoring System) and TRC (Track 
Recording Cars). 
17. Patrolling of railway tracks to look out for weld/rail fractures. 
18. The use of Thick Web Switches and Weldable CMS Crossing in turnout renewal works. 
19. Inspections at regular intervals are carried out to monitor and educate staff for observance of 
safe practices. 
20. Web based online monitoring system of track assets viz. Track database and decision support 
system has been adopted to decide rationalized maintenance requirement and optimize inputs.  
21. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Track, e.g. integrated block, corridor 
block, worksite safety, monsoon precautions, etc. have been issued. 
22. Preventive maintenance of railway assets (Coaches & Wagons) is undertaken to ensure safe 
train operations. 
23. Replacement of conventional ICF design coaches with LHB design coaches is being done. 
24. All unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on Broad Gauge (BG) route have been eliminated by 
January 2019. 
25. Safety of Railway Bridges is ensured through regular inspection of Bridges. The requirement of 
repair/rehabilitation of Bridges is taken up based upon the conditions assessed during these 
inspections. 
26. Indian Railways has displayed Statutory “Fire Notices” for widespread passenger information 
in all coaches. Fire posters are provided in every coach so as to educate and alert passengers 
regarding various Do’s and Don’ts to prevent fire. These include messages regarding not 
carrying any inflammable material, explosives, prohibition of smoking inside the coaches, 
penalties etc. 
27. Production Units are providing Fire detection and suppression system in newly manufactured 
Power Cars and Pantry Cars, Fire and Smoke detection system in newly manufactured coaches. 
Progressive fitment of the same in existing coaches is also underway by Zonal Railways in a 
phased manner. 
290                                                      

28. Regular counselling and training of staff is undertaken.  
29. Concept of Rolling Block introduced in Indian Railways (Open Lines) General Rules vide 
Gazette notification dated 30.11.2023, wherein work of integrated maintenance/ 
repair/replacement of assets is planned up to 52 weeks in advance on rolling basis and executed 
as per plan. 
 
The details of the Safety related works related to better maintenance practices, Technological 
improvements, better infrastructure and rolling stock etc. undertaken by Railways are tabulated 
below:- 
 
 
***** 
 
S.N. Item 2004-05 to 
2013-14 
2014-15 to 2024-25 
 
2014-25 Vs. 
2004-14 
 Technological Improvements 
1. Use of high-quality rails 
(60 Kg) (Km) 
57,450 Km 1.43 Lakh Km More than 2 times 
2. Longer Rail Panels 
(260m) (Km) 
9,917 Km 77,522 Km Nearly 8 times 
3. Electronic Interlocking 
(Stations) 
837 Stations 3,691 Stations More than 4 times 
4. Fog Pass Safety Devices 
(Nos.) 
As on 
31.03.14:  
90 Nos. 
As on 31.03.25: 
25,939 Nos. 
288 times 
5. Thick Web Switches (Nos.) Nil 28,301 Nos.  
 Better Maintenance Practices 
1. Primary Rail Renewal (Track 
Km) 
32,260 Km 49,941 Km 1.5 times 
2. USFD (Ultra Sonic Flaw 
detection) Testing of Welds 
(Nos.) 
79.43 Lakh 2 Crore More than 2 times 
3. Weld failures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
3699 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
370 Nos. 
90 % reduction 
4. Rail fractures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
2548 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
289 Nos. 
More than 88% 
reduction 
 Better Infrastructure and Rolling Stock 
1. New Track KM added (Track 
Km) 
14,985 Km 34,428 Km More than 2 times 
2. Flyovers (RoBs)/Underpasses 
(RUBs) (Nos.) 
4,148 Nos. 13,808 Nos. More than 3 times 
3. Unmanned Level crossings  
(Nos.) on BG 
As on 
31.03.14:  
8,948 
As on 31.03.24:Nil 
(All eliminated by 
31.01.19) 
Removed 
4. Manufacture of LHB Coaches 
(Nos.) 
2,337 Nos. 42,677 More than 18 
times 
291                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2331 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
HIGH SPEED RAILWAY CONSULTANCY SERVICES 
 
2331 SHRI BABUBHAI JESANGBHAI DESAI:  
         DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI: 
 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government has taken steps to commission high -speed railway consultancy services 
in the country to strengthen expertise, planning and decision-making capacity in this sector; 
 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 
 
(c) whether Government is promoting domestic manufacturing of high-speed railway components, 
signalling systems and power equipment to reduce dependence on imports; and 
 
(d) if so, the measures undertaken to support indigenous industries under the ‘Make in India’ and  
‘Aatmanirbhar Bharat’ initiatives? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY   
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (d): For development of High Speed Railway network in India, the Ministry of Railways is 
currently executing the Mumbai -Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project (508 km) with 
technical and financial assistance from Government of Japan.  
 
The experience and technical capabilities being developed through the MAHSR project, 
particularly in tr ack construction, advanced signalling, rolling -stock manufacturing & 
maintenance, project management etc. are expected to provide a strong foundation for future high-
speed rail corridors in the country. With gain of such expertise, India will strengthen it s position 
for planning and decision making in HSR Sector.   
 
Cont…2/- 
 
 
292                                                      

 
 
-:2:- 
 
In line with the Make in India and Aatmanirbhar  Bharat initiatives, Indian Railways is promoting 
indigenous manufacturing of high -speed rail systems and components to reduce import 
dependence.  
 
Building on the success of Vande Bharat, Integral Coach Factory (ICF) in collaboration with M/s 
Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) is designing and manufacturing high -speed train sets with 
a design speed of 280 kmph. Alongside high-speed systems, Indian Railways already possesses 
strong indigenous manufacturing capabilities, with Electric and Diesel locomotives being 
produced by its Production Units, namely Chittaranjan Locomotive Works (CLW), Chittaranjan; 
Banaras Loc omotive Works (BLW), Varanasi; and Patiala Locomotive Works (PLW), Patiala 
which strengthen India’s self-reliance in advanced rail technologies. 
 
Production of Locomotives and safer LHB coaches by Production  Units have significantly 
increased during last 11 years as under:- 
Year 2004-14 2014-25 
LHB Coaches 2,337 42,675 
Locomotives 4,695 10,849 
 
****** 
 
293                                                      

 1 of 4 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2332 
 ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
STOPPAGE OF TRAIN AT ACHARAPAKKAM RAILWAY STATION 
2332 SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN:  
     Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the Ministry has received any request for the stoppage of trains at Acharapakkam 
Railway Station in Tamil Nadu, if so, the details thereof;  
 
(b) whether Government has taken any affirmative decision to provide stoppages of more trains 
at Acharapakkam Railway Station, if so, the details thereof and, if not, the reasons therefor; and  
 
(c) whether Government has taken any steps to develop Acharapakkam Railway Station under 
Amrit Bharat Railway Station Development Scheme, if so, the details thereof and if not, the 
reasons therefor?  
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
  
(a) to (c) Acharapakkam station is presently being served by following 4 train services which 
provide connectivity inter alia to cities like Villupuram and Chennai. 
Sl. Train No. and Name 
1. 66045 Tambaram - Villupuram Passenger 
2. 66046 Villupuram - Chennai Beach Passenger 
3. 66055 Tambaram - Villupuram Passenger  
4. 66056 Villupuram - Tambaram Passenger 
 
 
 
Besides, provision of stoppages of train services depends on the traffic justification, 
operational feasibility including availability of extra time on the section & availability of 
matching infrastructure such as Platform length etc. 
Further, Proposals/ requests/ suggestions/ representations, both formal and informal inter 
alia for provision of stoppage of train services are received from Members of Parliament, 
elected representatives, organizations/rail users etc. at various levels including Railway Board, 
Zonal Railways, Divisional Office etc. As receipt of such proposals/ requests/ suggestions is a 
continuous and dynamic process, centralized compendium of such requests is not maintained. 
However, these are examined and action as found feasible and justified is taken from time to 
time.  
294                                                      

 2 of 4 
 
Redevelopment of stations 
At Acharapakkam station high level platforms, platform shelter, waiting hall, drinking water 
taps, urinals, lavatories, seating arrangement and Foot Over Bridge amenities are available. The 
works of improvement of station building, lighting and Divyangjan facilities have been 
completed in recent years. 
Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations on Indian 
Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and works in this regard are undertaken as per 
requirement, subject to inter-se priority and availability of funds. The priority for development 
/ redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations is accorded to higher category of 
station over lower category of station while sanctioning and executing the works.  
Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for redevelopment of stations 
with a long-term approach. 
The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in phases to improve 
the stations. The master planning includes: 
 
·       Improvement of access to station and circulating areas 
·       Integration of station with both sides of city 
·       Improvement of station building 
·       Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths 
·      Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger traffic 
·       Provision of lift/escalators/ramp 
·       Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms 
·      Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One Product’ 
·       Parking areas, Multimodal integration 
·       Amenities for Divyangjans 
·       Better passenger information systems 
·       Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping, 
etc. keeping in view the necessity at each station. 
 
The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of 
ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre at the 
station in the long term. 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified for development under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, 
out of which 77 stations are located in Tamil Nadu. The names of stations identified for 
development under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Tamil Nadu are as following: 
 
 
295                                                      

 3 of 4 
 
State No. of Amrit 
Stations 
Names of Amrit Stations 
Tamil 
Nadu 
77 Ambasamudram, Ambattur, Arakkonam Jn, Ariyalur, 
Avadi, Bommidi, Chengalpattu Jn, Chennai Beach, Chennai 
Egmore, Chennai Park, Chidambaram, Chinna Salem, 
Chrompet, Coimbatore Jn, Coimbatore North, Coonoor, 
Dharmapuri, Dindigul, Erode Jn., Guduvancheri, Guindy, 
Gummidipundi, Hosur, Jolarpettai Jn, Kanniyakumari 
Terminus, Karaikkudi Jn, Karur Jn, Katpadi Jn, Kovilpatti, 
Kulitturai, Kumbakonam, Lalgudi, Madurai Jn, Mambalam, 
Manaparai, Mannargudi, Mayiladuturai Jn, Mettupalayam, 
Morappur, Nagercoil Jn, Namakkal, Palani, Paramakkudi, 
Perambur, Podanur Jn., Pollachi Jn, Polur, Pudukkottai, 
Puratchi Thalaivar Dr. M.G. Ramachandran Central, 
Rajapalayam, Ramanathapuram, Rameswaram, Salem, 
Samalpatti, Sholavandan, Srirangam, Srivilliputtur, 
St.Thomas Mount, Tambaram, Tenkasi, Thanjavur Jn, 
Thiruvarur Jn., Tiruchendur, Tirunelveli Jn, 
Tirupadripulyur, Tirupattur, Tiruppur, Tirusulam, Tiruttani, 
Tiruvallur, Tiruvannamalai, Tuticorin, Udagamandalam, 
Vellore Cantt., Villupuram Jn., Virudhunagar, 
Vriddhachalam Jn. 
Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Tamil Nadu have 
been taken up at a good pace. Till now, works of 18 stations (Bommidi, Chidambaram, Chinna 
Salem, Karaikkudi Jn, Kulitturai, Manaparai, Mannargudi, Morappur, Pollachi Jn, Polur, 
Samalpatti, Sholavandan, Srirangam, Srivilliputtur, St.Thomas Mount, Thiruvarur Jn., 
Tiruvannamalai, Vriddhachalam Jn.) in Tamil Nadu have been completed under this scheme. 
The works at other stations have also been taken up at good pace and progress of some of the 
above stations is as given below: 
 
·    Tirupadripulyur station: The works of parking area and signages have been completed. 
The works of entrance arch, portico, improvement to waiting hall, platform surface, 
platform shelter, toilet, train indication board, approach road and parking area have been 
taken up. 
 
·       Vellore Cantt. station: The works for improvement of circulating area, booking office, 
new platform shelter, improvement to terminal building, platform surfacing, waiting 
 
296                                                      

 4 of 4 
 
hall, toilet, new compound wall, signages, coach indication board, standard ramp, 
Divyangjan parking, low height ticket booth, Divyangjan friendly toilets, tactile 
pathway, accessible path, improvement of landscape and station illumination have been 
completed. The finishing works have been taken up. 
 ·  Ariyalur station: The works for improvement of terminal building with porch, concourse, 
booking office, waiting lobby, improvement to circulating area, platform surfacing, 
improvement to waiting hall, new toilet, standard ramp, coach indication boards, 
Divyangjan parking, low height ticket booth, Divyangjan friendly toilets, tactile 
pathway, accessible path, lighting, improvement of existing Foot Over Bridge, new 
platform shelter and coach indication boards have been completed. The work for 
construction of new 6 m Foot Over Bridge has been taken up. 
 ·      Rameswaram station: The structural works of East/North terminal building, departure 
forecourt, arrival forecourt, residential tower, sub-station building, desalination plant 
and sewage treatment plant have been completed. ⁠The masonry works of East terminal 
building, finishing works of North terminal building, departure forecourt, arrival 
forecourt, residential tower, platform upgradation including platform shelter and 
revamping of existing waiting hall have been taken up. 
Development / upgradation / modernisation of stations including under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme is generally funded under Plan Head-53 ‘Customer Amenities’. The details of 
allocation and expenditure under Plan Head-53 are maintained Zonal Railway-wise and not 
work-wise, or station-wise or state-wise. Tamil Nadu is covered under the jurisdiction of two 
railway zones, namely, Southern Railway and South Western Railway. For these zones, an 
allocation of ₹ 1,571 crore has been made for the financial year 2025-26, out of which an 
expenditure of ₹ 1,011 crore (up to October, 2025) has been incurred so far. 
Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety of 
passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, heritage, 
tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due to brownfield related 
challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, optical fibre cables, gas 
pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements, operation of trains without hindering 
passenger movement, speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of tracks 
and high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors affect the completion time.   
*****     
 
 
297                                                      

1 of 3 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2333 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
STOPPAGE OF TRAINS AT KOTKAPURA JUNCTION 
 
2333 DR. VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government is aware that despite the ongoing upgradation of Kotkapura Railway 
Station under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, Kotkapura (Faridkot) do not have the stoppage 
of key trains; 
(b) whether the Ministry will consider approving stoppage of trains numbers 19415/19416, 
19107/19108, 20497/20498 and the upcoming Firozpur –Delhi Vande Bharat at Kotkapura 
Junction; 
(c) if so, the proposed timeline for granting these stoppages, if not, the reasons therefor; 
(d) whether the Ministry is planning to operate new trains in Punjab; and 
(e) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (e) Kotkapura  station is presently being served by 18 pairs of train services (as listed 
below) which are providing connectivity to major cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Jammu Tawi, 
Agartala, Ahmedabad, Ajmer, Haridwar, Hazur Sahib Nanded, Amritsar etc.  
S.N. Train no. and name 
1 12137/38 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T)-Firozpur Punjab Mail 
2 14027/28 Jind-Firozpur Express 
3 14507/08 Delhi-Fazilka Express 
4 14619/20 Agartala-Firozpur Cantt. Express 
5 14621/22 Hazur Sahib Nanded-Firozpur Express 
298                                                      

2 of 3 
6 14625/26 Haridwar-Firozpur Express 
7 14729/30 Rewari-Fazilka Express 
8 14803/04 Bhagat Ki Kothi-Jammu Tawi Express 
9 19223/24 Sabarmati-Jammu Tawi Express 
10 19611/12 Ajmer-Amritsar Express 
11 20423/24 Seoni-Firozpur Cantt. Patalkot Express 
12 54561/62 Bathinda-Firozpur Passenger 
13 54563/64 Bathinda-Firozpur Passenger 
14 54641/42 Bathinda-Firozpur Passenger 
15 74981/82 Kot Kapura - Fazilka DEMU 
16 74983/84 Kot Kapura-Fazilka DEMU 
17 74985/86 Bathinda-Fazilka DEMU 
18 74987/88 Bathinda-Fazilka DEMU 
 
19415/16 Sabarmati - Sri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express, 19107/08 Bhavnagar(T) -Martyr 
Captain Tushar Mahajan (Udhampur) Express, 20497/98 Rameswaram -Firozpur Express and 
26461/62 Firozpur -Delhi Vande Bharat Express have scheduled stoppage at 
Bathinda/Faridkot/Firozpur near Kotkapura. 
Besides, provision of stoppages of train services depends on the traffic justification, operational 
feasibility including availability of extra time on the section & availability of matching 
infrastructure such as Platform length etc. 
Further, as the railway network straddles across State boundaries, trains are introduced, as per 
network requirement, across such boundaries. However, during 2025 -26 (upto 15th December, 
2025) Indian Railways have introduced the following 07 pair s of train services (on 
orignating/terminating basis), including 2 pairs of Vande Bharat services which cater the needs 
of the stations located in the State of Punjab: 
SN Train no. and name 
1 26461/26462 Delhi - Firozpur Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
2 15135/15136 Chhapra-Amritsar Express 
3 20989/20990 Udaipur City - Chandigarh Express 
4 14627/14628 Saharsa - Chheharta (Amritsar) Amrit Bharat Express 
299                                                      

3 of 3 
5 26405/26406 Amritsar - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Vande Bharat Express 
6 14625/14626 Haridwar - Firozpur Cantt. Express 
7 14621/14622 Hazur Sahib Nanded - Firozpur Cantt. Express 
 
Besides, introduction of new train services, which is an on-going process, depends on various 
factors which include: 
• Capacity of that section 
• Availability of path 
• Availability of required rolling stock 
• Availability of matching infrastructure for rolling stock 
• Maintenance requirement of railway tracks and other assets 
***** 
300                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2334 
 ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
DEDICATED PARCEL TRAINS FOR E-COMMERCE  
AND PERISHABLE GOODS 
 
 
2334.  SMT. SULATA DEO: 
 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the Ministry will consider introducing dedicated parcel trains for e-commerce 
and perishable goods to improve logistics efficiency in Odisha; and 
 
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
 
(a) and (b): Indian Railways has a dedicated system for carrying parcels across the 
country in coaches designed for the purpose – such as Parcel Vans (VPs/VPUs/VPHs), 
Brake Vans (SLRs), general coaches (GS), modified general coaches 
(NMG/NMGH/NMGHS) and Assistant Guard’s Cabin (AGC), and Parcel Express Trains 
(scheduled services, leased services and on demand services) etc.  IR offers parcel 
services for the transportation of various types of goods, including e-commerce items, 
perishables, general merchandise, industrial raw materials, machinery, consumer     
goods, and more.  
 
Under the Joint Parcel Product-Rapid Cargo Service (JPP-RCS) policy, 08 pairs of 
scheduled (time tabled) services are operating between specific locations which have 
been planned on the basis of market demand and operational feasibility.  Under the 
scheme empanelled parcel aggregators book full parcel vans through a well established 
online ‘Virtual Aggregation Platform’ (VAP) developed by IR.   
             
           ..2/- 
       
301                                                      

-2- 
 
In order to popularize these services, the scheme has been liberalized.  The financial 
eligibility criteria for registration as Aggregator has been withdrawn and the 
empanelment fee has been revised to Rs 10,000/- .  
 
Besides, the financial eligibility criteria for participation in e-auction of leased parcel 
space (SLR, VP) and for tender of leased parcel train has been removed.   
 
Full parcel trains are planned on specific routes taking into consideration, the demand 
received from the stakeholders and the operational feasibility.  Introduction of dedicated 
parcel trains for e-commerce and perishable goods in Odisha shall be considered when 
such a demand is projected.  
***** 
 
302                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2335 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
INSTALLATION OF KAVACH 
 
2335 SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR:  
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) the details of percentage of railways system/trains in the country which are equipped 
with Anti Collision Device, Kavach; 
(b) the details of railways system/trains which are likely to be equipped with Kavach 
during the current year and next year; and 
(c) the details of steps taken by Government to expedite the installation of Kavach on 
entire Indian Railways along with the target thereof? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c):  1. Kavach is an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system. 
Kavach is a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety certification of 
highest order (SIL-4). 
2. Kavach aids the Loco Pilot in running of trains within specified speed limits by 
automatic application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps the trains 
to run safely during inclement weather. 
--2/- 
303                                                      

-2- 
3. The first field trials on the passenger trains were started in February 2016. Based on the 
experience gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the system by Independent 
Safety Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 2018-19, for supply of Kavach Ver 
3.2. 
4. Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July 2020. 
5. Implementation of Kavach System involves following Key Activities: 
i. Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station, block section. 
ii. Installation of RFID Tags throughout the track length. 
iii. Installation of telecom Towers throughout the section. 
iv. Laying of Optical Fibre Cable along the track. 
v. Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian 
Railways.  
6. Based on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on 1465 RKm on South Central Railway 
and experience gained, further improvements were made. Finally, Kavach specification 
version 4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. 
7. Kavach version 4.0 covers all the major features required for the diverse railway 
network. This is a significant milestone in safety for Indian Railways. Within a short 
period, IR has developed, tested and started deploying Automatic Train Protection 
System. 
8. Major improvement in Version 4.0 includes increased Location Accuracy, Improved 
Information of Signal Aspects in bigger yards, Station to Station Kavach interface on 
OFC and Direct Interface to existing Electronic Interlocking System. With these 
improvements, Kavach Ver.4.0. is planned for large scale deployment over Indian 
Railways.  
9. After extensive and elaborate trials, Kavach Version 4.0 has been successfully 
commissioned on 738 Route km on  Palwal – Mathura- Nagda section (633 Rkm) on 
Delhi – Mumbai route and Howrah–Bardhaman section (105  Rkm) Delhi – Howrah 
route. Kavach implementation has been taken up in balance sections of Delhi – Mumbai 
& Delhi – Howrah corridors.   
10.  Progress of key items of Kavach on High density routes including Delhi– Mumbai & 
Delhi– Howrah corridors are as under: 
--3/- 
304                                                      

-3- 
 
SN Item Progress  
i Laying of Optical Fibre Cable 7129 Km 
ii Installation of Telecom Towers 860 nos 
iii Station Data Centre 767 Stns 
iv Installation of Track side equipment 5672 RKm 
v Provision of Kavach on Locos 4,154 
 
11.  Further, track side Kavach implementation work has been taken up on 15,512 RKm 
covering all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
12.  Bids have been invited for equipping another 9,069 locomotives with Kavach version 
4.0. Kavach is being provided progressively in a phased manner in locomotives.    
13.  Specialized training programmes on Kavach are being conducted at centralized training 
institutes of Indian Railways to impart training to all concerned officials. By now more 
than 40,000 technicians, operators and engineers have been trained on Kavach 
technology. This includes 33,000 Loco Pilots & Assistant Loco Pilots. Courses have 
been designed in collaboration with IRISET. 
14. The funds utilized on Kavach works so far up to Oct'25 is Rs. 2,354.36 Crores. The 
allocation of funds during the year 2025-26 is Rs. 1673.19 Crores. Requisite funds are 
made available as per the progress of works. 
***** 
 
305                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2336 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
COMPREHENSIVE ACTION PLAN TO REPLACE SIGNAL ASSETS 
 
2336  SHRI  NEERAJ SHEKHAR:  
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Railways has implemented comprehensive action plan to replace signal assets 
that have exceeded their recommended operational lifespan; 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 
(c) the details of progress made in replacing signalling system in Indian Railways, zone-
wise; and 
(d) the details of funds allocated, released and utilised for the same during current financial 
year till date; zone-wise? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (d): Indian Railway has established procedures & practices for inspection & 
maintenance of various signalling assets for their safe & reliable operation. Replacement 
of signal assets is a continuous & ongoing process and carried out on age cum condition 
basis as per codal provisions. The status / progress of various Signalling works is as 
under:  
1. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points and 
signals in place of old mechanical signalling have been provided at 6657 stations as on 
30.11.2025.  
--2/- 
306                                                      

-2- 
 
2. Interlocking of Level Crossing Gates (LC) has been provided at 10100 Level Crossing 
Gates upto 30.11.2025 for enhancing safety at LC Gate.  
3. Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety for verification of track 
occupancy by electrical means has been provided at 6663 stations up to 30.11.2025. 
4. Axle counters for automatic clearance of Block Section, BPAC (Block Proving Axle 
Counter) are provided to ensure complete arrival of train without manual intervention 
before granting line clear to receive next train and to reduce human element. These 
systems have been provided on 6144 Block Sections up to 30.11.2025. 
5. Automatic Block Signalling (ABS) that enhances line capacity within existing track 
infrastructure has been provided at 6559 Route km upto 30.11.2025.  
6. Indian Railways has also gone for implementation of advance technology system 
“Kavach” as an Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system. Kavach is indigenously 
developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system, which required safety certification 
of highest order. Kavach has also been adopted as a National ATP system in July 2020. 
7. Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points and signals in place 
of old mechanical signalling have been provided at 3830 stations as on 30.11.2025. This 
includes commissioning of Electronic Interlocking at 817 stations during last two years. 
8. During the year 2025-26, ₹6800 crore have been allocated for Signalling & Telecom  
related works, out of which ₹4050.62 crore spent till Nov.’2025. 
***** 
 
307                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2337 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
SUPPORT FOR MODERNIZING SMALLER STATIONS IN TRIBAL AND 
BACKWARD DISTRICTS 
  
2337 SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI: 
 
  Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Ministry will provide financial and technical support for modernizing smaller stations in 
tribal and backward districts with digital ticketing, solar panels and green initiatives; and 
 
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) & (b) Digital ticketing services are available to passengers throughout the country, including 
tribal and backward areas, through the RailOne App, which integrates multiple passenger-facing 
services such as reserved and unreserved ticketing, platform ticketing, train and PNR enquiry, 
Railmadad, etc., on a single platform with single sign-on access. In addition, Indian Railway 
Catering and Tourism Corporation(IRCTC) website, Rail Connect App for reserved tickets and the 
UTS on Mobile Application for unreserved tickets are also available. These applications can be 
downloaded and used from anywhere in India including tribal and backward areas, with a user-
friendly registration process, effectively bringing these services to passengers' palm. 
The mobile Apps operate on Application Programme Interface (API)-based technology, 
which requires only minimal text-based exchange between the users' device and the servers. This 
ensures efficient performance for ticket booking anywhere in India. 
Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) have been provided at stations for booking 
unreserved tickets and are available in Hindi, English and the region-specific vernacular languages. 
These machines facilitate the issue of journey tickets for suburban and non- suburban sections, 
308                                                      

platform tickets, as well as renewal of season tickets. Facilitators have also been engaged at stations 
to educate and assist passengers in using these digital facilities. Digital payment through QR code 
scanning has been enabled at ATVMs and also at Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) counters and 
Passenger Reservation System (PRS) counters. 
Indian Railways is undertaking modernization of the Passenger Reservation System (PRS), 
which includes upgradation and replacement of hardware, software, network equipment, security 
infrastructure and system functionalities on new technology. While the existing PRS can handle 
about 25,000 tickets per minute, the upgraded system is being designed to handle more than four 
times this capacity. 
Modernization of ticketing facilities, system improvements and technological upgradation 
are continuous processes in Indian Railways and are undertaken subject to technical feasibility and 
availability of resources. 
Further, under green initiatives, Indian Railways are setting up solar systems at Railway 
stations based on technical feasibility and availability of funds. As a part of this, till 30.11.2025, 
about 269 Mega Watt (MW) of solar systems have been commissioned over buildings which 
include more than 2600 Railways Stations. 
***** 
 
309                                                      

Page 1 of 2 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2338 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
FARES RECOVERED AGAINST OPERATING COST 
2338 DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL: 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) details of the number of passenger journeys undertaken in non AC general and 
sleeper classes and percentage of fares recovered against operating costs since 
2020, the State-wise and year-wise; 
(b) details of reported passenger complaints or incidents related to overcrowding, 
dirty or non functional toilets and water shortages in general and sleeper coaches 
since 2020, the State-wise and year-wise; 
(c) the details on comparative expenditure per passenger kilometer on coach 
maintenance, cleaning and sanitation since 2020, State-wise and year-wise; and 
(d) whether Government is considering accelerating non-fare revenue efforts to fund 
service improvements and reduce dependency on passenger fare hikes? 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
(a) to (d): The details of passengers travelled on Indian Railways, the passenger kilometers 
and expenditure on coach maintenance etc. are available in Annual Statistical Statements and 
Detailed Demand for grants (Demand No. 85) of Indian Railways which are available on 
website of Indian Railways (https://indianrailways.gov.in).  
Indian Railways strives to provide affordable services to all strata of the society and 
gave subsidy of ₹60,466 crore on passenger tickets in 2023-24. This amounts to concession 
of 45% on average, to every person, travelling on Railways. In other words, if the cost of 
providing service is ₹100, then the price of ticket is ₹55 only. This subsidy is continuing for 
all passengers. 
310                                                      

Page 2 of 2 
 
RailMadad is Indian Railways grievance redressal mechanism that provides passengers an 
integrated platform for grievances, assistance and inquiry. In RailMadad, passengers can seek 
redressal through multiple channels such as Helpline number-139, RailMadad Web, App and 
SMS. RailMadad also allows passengers to share feedback on the resolution of their 
grievances. Railways serves about 2 crore passengers per day on average. About 0.008% 
complaints per passenger are received on average in respect of unauthorized passenger, dirty 
toilets and coach water availability in sleeper & unreserved coaches on RailMadad. 
Several steps have been taken by Indian Railways to increase Non Fare Revenue through 
advertisement and other innovative ideas like: 
 Advertisement through Rail Display Network (RDN) at stations. 
 Advertisement through Out of Home (OOH). 
 Advertisement on Mobile Assets like coaches and inside train. 
 Innovative solutions to enhance passengers satisfactions like Provision for sleeping 
pods, Single Brand Premium Outlet, Kiosk for providing facility for booking auto & 
taxis, providing E-Wheel chair facility on payment basis, Health Kiosk, Medical store 
to sell Generic medicines. 
 Licence fee from Parking contracts. 
 Land Monetisation. 
***** 
311                                                      

 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2339 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
CHENNAI TO CUDDALORE RAIL PROJECT 
 
2339   DR. M. DHANAPAL: 
 
Will the Minister of  RAILWAYS  be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether Government is aware that the project of Chennai to Cuddalore via East Coast 
Road Railway line in the State of Tamil Nadu is still pending, despite land acquisition 
and preliminary work completed in 2013; and 
 
(b) if so, whether the Ministry has prepared any revised timeline or any action plan for 
expediting the said project? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
 
(a) and (b):  Chennai - Cuddalore via Mamallapuram, MaraKanam, Puducherry  (179 Km) new 
line project was included in Budget 2008-09. Government of Puducherry had requested for 
change in alignment towards Northern and Southern side of Villupuram - Puducherry existing 
line as well as doubling of track between Puducherry and Cuddalore. State Government was 
requested to bear additional Cost due to above revision in alignment and doubling of tracks. 
However, the State Govt. has shown their inability to bear additional cost of the project.  
 
…2/- 
 
 
312                                                      

 
-2- 
 
Tamil Nadu 
 
Budget allocation in the recent years has increased significantly. Budget allocation for 
infrastructure projects and safety works, falling fully/partly in the State of Tamil Nadu is as 
under: 
Period Outlay 
2009-14 ₹879 crore/year 
2025-26 ₹ 6,626 crore (more than 7.5 times) 
 
As on 01.04.2025, 15 projects (9 new line, 03 gauge conversion and 03 doubling) of 1,700 km 
length, costing ₹22,808 Crore, falling fully/partly in the State of Tamil Nadu, are sanctioned.  
The summary is as under:- 
 
Category No. of 
sanctioned  
projects 
Total Length  
(in km) 
Length 
Commissioned 
upto Mar’25 
(in km) 
Expenditure  
upto Mar’ 25 
(₹ in Cr.) 
New Line 9 812 24 1,337 
Gauge Conversion 3 748 604 3,471 
Doubling /Multitracking 3 140 37 2,783 
Total 15 1,700 665 7,591 
 
Details of some of the recently completed projects falling fully/partly in Tamil Nadu are as 
under: 
S.N
. Project Cost 
(₹in Crores) 
1 Dindigal-Palani-Pollachi gauge conversion (121 km) 610 
2 Pollachi-Palghat gauge conversion (56 km) 350 
3 Pollachi-Podhanur gauge conversion (40 km) 400 
4 Quilon-Tirunelveli-Tiruchendur gauge conversion (357 km) 1,122 
5 Mayiladuturai-Thiruvarur-Karaikkudi gauge conversion (187 km) 1,338 
6 Madurai-Bodiyakannur gauge conversion (90 km) 593 
7 Chengalpattu-Villupuram doubling (102 km) 670 
8 Tiruvallur-Arakkonam 4th line (27 km) 83 
9 Chennai Central-Basin Bridge doubling (2 km) 31 
10 Thanjavur-Ponmalai doubling (48 km)  370 
11 Villupuram-Dindigul doubling (273 km) 2,000 
12 Chennai Beach-Korukkupet 3rd line (5 km) 168 
 
…3/- 
313                                                      

 
-3- 
 
 
13 Chennai Beach-Attipattu 4th line (22 km) 293 
14 Omalur-Metturdam Patch doubling (29 km) 327 
15 Chengalpattu-Villupuram and Tambaram-Chengalpattu-3rd line (133 km) 1,122 
16 Salem-Magnesite Junction-Omalur doubling (11 km) 115 
17 Madurai- Maniyachi-Tuticorin doubling (160 km) 1,891 
18 Maniyachi-Nagercoil doubling (102 km) 1,752 
19 Chennai Beach-Chennai Egmore doubling (4 km) 272 
20 Karaikal-Peralam new line (23 km) 373 
21 Northern End Port connectivity to Karaikal Port (1 km) 18 
 
Some of the projects falling fully/partly in the State of Tamil Nadu which have been taken up are as 
under : 
 
S.N Project Cost 
(₹ in Crores) 
1 Tindivanam-Nagari new line  (184 km) 3,631 
2 Morappur-Dharmapuri new line (36 km) 359 
3 Nagapattinam-Tiruturaipundi new line (43 km) 742 
4 Trivandrum-Kanyakumari doubling (87 km) 3,785 
5 Arakkonam yard 3rd & 4th line (6 km) 98 
 
In last three years i.e. 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and current financial year 2025-26, 28 surveys 
(05 new line and 23 doubling) covering a total length of 2,493 km has been sanctioned falling 
fully/partly in the State of Tamil Nadu.  
 
Execution of important infrastructure projects falling fully/partly in the State of Tamil Nadu are  
held  up  due  to  delay in  land acquisition. Status of land acquisition in Tamil Nadu is as under: 
 
Total Land required for Projects in Tamil Nadu 4,326 ha 
Land Acquired 1,052 ha (24%) 
Balance Land to be acquired 3,274 ha (76%) 
 
Support of the Government of Tamil Nadu is needed to expedite the land acquisition. 
 
Details of some major projects which are delayed due to land acquisition are as under:- 
 
 
…4/- 
314                                                      

 
-4- 
 
SN Name of the project Total  land 
required 
(in ha) 
Land 
acquired 
(in ha) 
Balance 
Land to be 
acquired 
(in ha) 
1. Tindivanam-Tiruvannamalai new line               
(71 km) 
276 33 243 
2. Attiputtu-Puttur new line (88 km) 189 0 189 
3. Morappur-Dharmapuri new line (36 km) 92 45 47 
4. Mannargudi-Pattukkottai new line (41 km) 196 0 196 
5. Thanjavur-Pattukottai new line (52 km) 152 0 152 
 
Further, Rameshwaram – Dhanushkodi new line (18 km) was sanctioned at a cost of  ₹734 Cr. 
The Foundation Stone of the project was laid on 01.03.2019. However, the project could not be 
started because the land acquisition has not been undertaken by the State Govt. of Tamil Nadu. 
 
Government of India is geared up to execute projects, however success depends upon the support 
of Government of Tamil Nadu. 
 
Sanction of any railway project depend upon many parameters/factors which include the 
following: 
 Anticipated traffic projections and remunerativeness of the proposed route 
 First and last mile connectivity provided by the project 
 Connection of missing links and providing additional route 
 Augmentation of congested/saturated lines 
 Demands raised by State Governments/Central Ministries/Public representatives, 
 Railway’s operational requirements 
 Socio-economic considerations 
 Overall availability of funds 
Completion of Railway project/s depends on various factors which include the following: 
 Land acquisition by State Government 
 Forest clearance  
 Shifting of infringing utilities 
 Statutory clearances from various authorities  
…5/- 
315                                                      

 
-5- 
 
 Geological and topographical conditions of area 
 Law and order situation in the area of project site 
 Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc. 
 All these factors affect the completion time and cost of the project/s.   
 
***** 
316                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2340 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
HIGH SPEED RAIL PROJECTS IN HYDERABAD 
 
2340 SHRI ANIL KUMAR YADAV MANDADI: 
 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government has undertaken/initiated action regarding survey and alignment 
proposals of the Hyderabad -Chennai and Hyderabad -Bengaluru high -speed rail projects from 
Future City in line with the greenfield highway proposals; 
 
(b) if so, the details thereof; and 
 
(c) if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY   
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c): Presently, Mumbai -Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project(508 Kms) is the 
only sanctioned project of High Speed Rail in India under execution with technical and financial 
assistance from Government of Japan. 
 
HSR project are highly capital intensive and any decision for taking up new project is based on 
many factors such as tech nical feasibility, financial & economic viability, traffic demand and 
availability of funds & financing options etc.  
 
***** 
317                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2341 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
OPTIONAL TRAVEL INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR RAILWAY PASSENGERS 
 
2341.  SHRI NARAYANA KORAGAPPA : 
     
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact  that optional travel insurance coverage (OTIC) is provided only to passengers 
purchasing IRCTC tickets online with "CNF"/ "RAC" status and being Indian citizens; 
(b) if so, the details thereof;  
(c) whether IRCTC tickets booked online with waitlisted status do not have OTIC facility; 
(d) if so, details thereof; 
(e) whether "waitlisted" IRCTC tickets upon updation to CNF or RAC status do not have OTIC facility; 
(f) if so, details thereof; and 
(g) details of OTIC facility for offline booked train tickets?  
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND   
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
(a) to (g): All reserved passengers can book tickets through online mode or at reservation counters. An 
Optional Travel Insurance Scheme (OTIS) is available as an option for the Confirmed/RAC passengers 
who book an online e -ticket through the official website of Indian Railway Catering & Tourism 
Corporation (IRCTC). This scheme is not available to waitlisted e-tickets. Any passenger who wishes to 
avail insurance benefit can opt for this scheme at the time of booking the ticket at his/her own 
discretion. The scheme is available to the passengers who book e -tickets through IRCTC and it provides 
additional insurance cover to those who have opted for it and paid the premium. 
The passenger opts for the insurance scheme at the time of booking ticket and pays the 
prevailing premium along with fare. The passenger receives the policy informatio n through SMS and on 
their registered email IDs directly from Insurance Company along with the link for filing nomination 
details. The insurance company is directly responsible for policy issuance and claims settlement. The 
claim liability is between the insured and insurance company.  
Passenger files the claim directly with the insurance company as per the documents received 
through e-mail from the insurance company.   
***** 
318                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2342 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
REVENUE GENERATED BY INDIAN RAILWAYS  
 
2342. SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) the total revenue generated by  Indian Railways during 2024-2025; 
(b) the revenue generated by  Indian Railways from ticket fares during 2024-25;  
(c) whether the Ministry is planning to reinstate the concessions given to senior citizens and 
women passengers in the coming year;   
(d) if so, the tentative date by which the Ministry is planning to reinstate the concessions; and 
(e) if not, the reasons therefor? 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
(a) to (e): The total revenue of Indian Railways and revenue from passenger for FY 2023-24 
and 2024-25 is given below: 
                                                                                                 (₹ In crore) 
 2023-24 2024-25 
Total revenue 2,56,094 2,65,678 
Passenger revenue 70,693 75,368 
Indian Railways strives to provide affordable services to all strata of the society and gave 
subsidy of ₹60,466 crore on passenger tickets in 2023-24. This amounts to concession of 
45% on an average, to every person, travelling on Railways. In other words, if the cost of 
providing service is ₹100, then the price of ticket is ₹55 only. This subsidy is continuing for 
all passengers. Further, concessions beyond this subsidy amount are continuing for many 
categories like 4 categories of Persons with disabilities (Divyangjans), 11 categories of 
patients and 8 categories of students. 
***** 
319                                                      

1 of 8 
O.I.H 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2343 
ANSWERED ON  19.12.2025 
 
STATUS OF VANDE BHARAT, AMRIT BHARAT AND HIGH-SPEED RAIL 
PROJECTS 
 
2343 # DR. SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current status of the Vande Bharat, Amrit Bharat and High-Speed Rail projects, along 
with the number of trains that have commenced their operations so far and the number of new 
trains likely to be launched in the coming years, the details thereof; 
 
(b) whether Railways is working on expanding the Dedicated Freight Corridor to enhance 
freight capacity, along with the new projects proposed or sanctioned in this regard, the details 
thereof; and 
 
(c) the estimated timelines, budget allocations and achievements made so far under these 
projects, the details thereof? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c) Indian Railways, with a view to improve travel experience of the passengers, Indian 
Railways has introduced indigenously designed and manufactured Vande Bharat trains with 
modern coaches, advanced safety features and passenger amenities. These new Vande Bharat 
Trains have following features: 
1. Fitted with KAVACH. 
2. Jerk Free Semi-Permanent couplers. 
3. Centrally controlled Automatic Plug Doors and Fully Sealed wider gangways. 
4. Emergency Alarm Push buttons and Talk Back Units on all Coaches. 
5. Improved fire safety – Aerosol based fire detection and suppression system in 
electrical cabinets and lavatories. 
6.  Higher acceleration with design/operating speed of 180/160 KMPH. 
7. Driver-Guard communication with voice recording facility & Crash hardened memory. 
320                                                      

2 of 8 
8. Air conditioning units with indigenously developed UV-C lamp based disinfection 
system. 
9. Better Ride Comfort. 
10. CCTVs in all Coaches. 
11.  For Divyangjan passengers special lavatory in the driving coaches on each end. 
12. Coach condition monitoring System (CCMS) display with remote monitoring. 
 
Presently, 164  Vande Bharat train services are operational on the various sectors of the Broad 
Gauge (B.G.) electrified network of Indian Railways(IR), as listed below: 
S.N. Train Number and Name 
1 22435/22436 New Delhi - Varanasi Vande Bharat Express 
2 22439/22440 New Delhi - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Vande Bharat Express 
3 20901/20902 Mumbai Central - Gandhinagar Capital Vande Bharat Express 
4 22447/22448 New Delhi - Amb Andaura Vande Bharat Express 
5 20607/20608 MGR Chennai Central - Mysuru Vande Bharat Express 
6 20825/20826 Bilaspur - Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
7 22301/22302 Howrah - New Jalpaiguri Vande Bharat Express 
8 20833/20834 Visakhapatnam - Secunderabad Vande Bharat Express 
9 
22223/22224 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Sai Nagar Shirdi Vande Bharat 
Express 
10 22225/22226 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Solapur jn. Vande Bharat Express 
11 20171/20172 Hazrat Nizamuddin - Rani Kamlapati Vande Bharat Express 
12 20977/20978 Ajmer - Chandigarh Vande Bharat Express 
13 20643/20644 Chennai Central - Coimbatore Vande Bharat Express 
14 20633/20634 Kasargod - Thiruvananthpuram Central Vande Bharat Express 
15 20701/20702 Secunderabad - Tirupati Vande Bharat Express 
16 22895/22896 Howrah - Puri Vande Bharat Express 
17 22457/22458 Anand vihar - Dehradun Vande Bharat Express 
18 22227/22228 New Jalpaiguri - Guwahati Vande Bharat Express 
19 20911/20912 Indore - Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
20 20173/20174 Rani Kamlapati - Rewa Vande Bharat Express 
321                                                      

3 of 8 
21 20661/20662 KSR Bengaluru - Dharwad Vande Bharat Express 
22 22349/22350 Patna - Ranchi Vande Bharat Express 
23 22229/22230 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
24 12461/12462 Jodhpur - Sabarmati Vande Bharat Express 
25 22549/22550 Gorakhpur - Prayagraj Vande Bharat Express 
26 20835/20836 Rourkela - Puri Vande Bharat Express 
27 20665/20666 Chennai Egmore - Triunelveli Vande Bharat Express 
28 20631/20632 Mangaluru - Thiruvananthpuram Vande Bharat Express 
29 20677/20678 MGR Chennai - Vijayawada jn. Vande Bharat Express 
30 20979/20980 Udaipur - Jaipur Vande Bharat Express 
31 20703/20704 Kacheguda - Yesvantpur Vande Bharat Express 
32 20897/20898 Howrah - Ranchi Vande Bharat Express 
33 22347/22348 Howrah - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
34 22487/22488 Amritsar jn. - Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
35 20646/20645 Mangalore central - Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
36 20705/20706 Huzur Sahib Nanded - Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) Vande Bharat 
Express 
37 20642/20641 Coimbatore Jn. - Bengaluru Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
38 22426/22425 Anand Vihar(T) - Ayodhya Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
39 22415/22416 Varanasi - New Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
40 22477/22478 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - New Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
41 22961/22962 Ahmedabad - Mumbai Central Vande Bharat Express 
42 20707/20708 Secunderabad - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
43 20663/20664 Mysuru - MGR Chennai Vande Bharat Express 
44 22345/22346 Patna - Gomtinagar Vande Bharat Express 
45 22233/22234 New Jalpaiguri - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
46 20841/20842 Bhubaneshwar - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
47 22545/22546 Lucknow - Dehradun Vande Bharat Express 
322                                                      

4 of 8 
48 22231/22232 Kalaburagi - SMVT Bengaluru Vande Bharat Express 
49 22470/22469 Hazrat Nizamuddin - Khajuraho Vande Bharat Express 
50 20887/20888 Ranchi - Varanasi Vande Bharat Express 
51 22925/22926 Ahmedabad - Okha Vande Bharat Express 
52 20627/20628 Chennai Egmore - Nagercoil jn. Vande Bharat Express 
53 20671/20672 Madurai - Bengaluru Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
54 22489/22490 Varanasi - Meerut City Vande Bharat Express 
55 20101/20102 Nagpur - Secunderabad Vande Bharat Express 
56 22499/22500 Varanasi - Deoghar Vande Bharat Express 
57 20893/20894 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
58 22303/22304 Howrah - Gaya Vande Bharat Express 
59 21893/21894 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
60 21895/21896 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
61 20981/20982 Udaipur City - Agra cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
62 20891/20892 Tatanagar - Brahmapur Vande Bharat Express 
63 20871/20872 Howrah - Rourkela Vande Bharat Express 
64 20829/20830 Durg - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
65 20175/20176 Banaras - Agra Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
66 20669/20670 Hubballi - Pune jn. Vande Bharat Express 
67 20673/20674 Kolhapur SCSM Terminus - Pune jn. Vande Bharat Express 
68 22309/22310 Howrah - Jamalpur Vande Bharat Express 
69 26901/26902 Sabarmati - Veraval Vande Bharat Express 
70 26401/26402 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - Srinagar Vande Bharat Express 
71 26403/26404 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - Srinagar Vande Bharat Express 
72 26501/26502 Gorakhpur - Patliputra Vande Bharat Express 
73 26101/26102 Pune - Ajni (Nagpur) Vande Bharat Express 
74 26751/26752 Belagavi - Bengaluru Vande Bharat Express 
75 26405/26406 Amritsar - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Vande Bharat Express 
323                                                      

5 of 8 
76 26301/26302 Jogbani - Danapur Vande Bharat Express 
77 26503/26504 Saharanpur - Gomtinagar Vande Bharat Express 
78 26481/26482 Jodhpur - Delhi Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
79 26471/26472 Bikaner - Delhi Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
80 26651/26652 Bengaluru - Ernakulam Vande Bharat Express 
81 26461/26462 Delhi - Firozpur cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
82 26506 / 26505 Banaras - Khajuraho Vande Bharat Express 
 
Railways have developed fully non-AC modern train named as Amrit Bharat express. Already 
30 services are in operation. Presently, these modern trains comprise of 11 General Class 
coaches, 8 Sleeper Class coaches, 01 Pantry car and 02 Luggage cum Divyangjan coaches. 
These trains have following enhanced features and amenities: 
1. Better aesthetics of seat and berths with enhanced look & feel on the lines of Vande 
Bharat Sleeper. 
2. Jerk Free Semi-Automatic Couplers. 
3. Improved Crashworthiness in coaches by provision of crash tube. 
4. Provision of CCTV system in all coaches and Luggage room. 
5. Improved designs of toilets. 
6. Improved design of Ladder for ease of climbing on to the berth. 
7. Improved LED Light fitting & Charging Sockets. 
8. Provision of EP assisted braking system. 
9.  Aerosol based fire suppression system in toilets and electrical cubicles. 
10.  USB Type-A and Type-C mobile charging sockets. 
11. Emergency Talk Back system for two-way communication between Passenger and  
Guard/Train Manager. 
12. Non-AC pantry with enhanced heating capacity. 
13. Fully sealed gangways with quick release mechanism for easy attachment and 
detachment. 
 
Presently, 30 Amrit Bharat train services are operational on the Indian Railways network, as 
listed below: 
S.N. Train Number and Name 
1 15133/15134 Chhapra - Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
324                                                      

6 of 8 
2 15293/15294 Muzaffarpur - Charlapalli Amrit Bharat Express 
3 19021/19022 Udhna - Brahmapur Amrit Bharat Express 
4  19623/19624 Madar Jn (Ajmer) - Darbhanga Amrit Bharat Express 
5 14628/14627 Chheharta (Amritsar) - Saharsa Amrit Bharat Express 
6 16601/16602 Erode jn. - Jogbani Amrit Bharat Express 
7 13697/13698 Gaya - Delhi Amrit Bharat Express 
8  14048/14047 Delhi - Sitamarhi Amrit Bharat Express 
9 22361/22362 Rajendra Nagar (T)  - New Delhi Amrit Bharat Express 
10  15567/15568 Bapudham Motihari - Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
11 15561/15562 Darbhanga - Gomti Nagar Amrit Bharat Express 
12 13435/13436 Malda Town - Gomti Nagar Amrit Bharat Express 
13 11015/11016 Lokmanya Tilak(T) - Saharsa Amrit Bharat Express 
14 13434/13433 Malda town - SMVT Bengaluru Amrit Bharat Express 
15 15557/15558 Darbhanga Jn. - Anand Vihar(T) Amrit Bharat Express 
 
Namo Bharat Rapid Rail has been introduced to enhance the travelling experience of 
suburban and regional commuters for inter-city short distance movement by harnessing the 
features of Vande Bharat Trains. Presently, 4 Namo Bharat Rapid Rail services are in 
operation on the Indian Railway network. The prominent features of Namo Bharat Rapid Rail 
are as follows: 
1.  Centrally controlled Double Leaf Automatic Sliding Doors. 
2.  CCTVs for safety and passenger surveillance. 
3. Modular interior with Cushioned Seats and Sealed Flexible Gangway. 
4. Emergency Talk System. 
5. Continuous LED lighting with Energy Efficient Lighting system. 
6.  FRP Modular Toilets with vacuum evacuation. 
7.  Fully Air-Conditioned trains with Driver cab AC. 
 At present, the following 4 Namo Bharat Rapid Rail services are in operation: 
S.N. Train Number and Name 
1 94801/94802 Ahmedabad-Bhuj Namo Bharat Rapid Rail 
2 94803/94804 Jaynagar-Patna Namo Bharat Rapid Rail 
325                                                      

7 of 8 
Mumbai-Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project: 
● The Mumbai-Ahmedabad High Speed Rail (MAHSR) Project (508 km) is the only 
HSR Project under execution with technical and financial assistance from 
Government of Japan. The Project is passing through the States of Gujarat, 
Maharashtra and Union Territory of Dadra & Nagar Haveli with 12 stations planned 
at Mumbai, Thane, Virar, Boisar, Vapi, Billimora, Surat, Bharuch, Vadodara, Anand, 
Ahmedabad and Sabarmati. 
● Entire land (1389.5 Ha.) for MAHSR project has been acquired. All Statutory 
Clearances have been obtained. All the civil contracts of the project have been 
awarded. Out of total 28 tender packages, 25 tender packages have been awarded. All 
1651 utilities have been shifted. 
● The progress of various major items so far is as under: 
Item Progress 
Gujarat Maharashtra Total 
Foundation 351 kms. 65 kms. 416 kms. 
Piers 351 kms. 58 kms. 409 kms. 
Girder Casting 339 kms. 6 kms. 345 kms. 
Girder Launching 330 kms. 2 kms. 332 kms. 
Track Bed 
Construction 
132 kms. - 132 kms. 
OHE Masts Erection 88 kms. - 88 kms. 
 
● Out of total 12 stations, foundation works has been completed at 8 stations (Vapi, 
Bilimora, Surat, Bharuch, Anand, Vadodara, Ahmedabad, and Sabarmati). In 
Maharashtra section, foundation work is in progress at 3 stations (Thane, Virar, 
Boisar) and excavation work at BKC station is near completion and Casting of base 
slab started.  
● 17 river bridges have been completed. Work is in advance stage for 4 major river 
bridges (Narmada, Mahi, Tapti and Sabarmati) in Gujarat & in progress in 4 river 
bridges in Maharashtra. Work on Depots (Thane, Surat and Sabarmati) is in full 
swing. 
● Work of the only tunnel in Gujarat has been completed. The work of the under-sea 
tunnel (21Km approx.) has started. Out of which, 4.8 km tunnel between Ghansoli 
and Shilphata in Maharashtra has been completed. 
● Bullet train project is a very complex and technology intensive Project. Exact 
timelines and cost for the completion of the project can be reasonably ascertained 
326                                                      

8 of 8 
after the completion of all associated works of Civil Structures, Track, Electrical, 
Signaling & Telecommunication and supply of Trainsets. 
 
Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs) 
 
Ministry of Railways is constructing two Dedicated Freight Corridors (DFCs) viz. Eastern 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) from Ludhiana to Sonnagar (1337 Km) and Western 
Dedicated Freight Corridor (WDFC) from Jawaharlal Nehru Port Terminal (JNPT) to Dadri 
(1506 Km). Eastern corridor is fully commissioned. Western Dedicated Freight Corridor is 
93% completed, remaining portion will be completed by March 2026. As such, out of total 
2843 kms, 2741 route kms (96.4%) has been commissioned and operational. 
Cargo Terminals 
 
To facilitate construction of new cargo terminals on Indian Railways network, which will 
bring additional cargo business to Railways, Gati-Shakti Multi Modal Cargo Terminal (GCT) 
policy was introduced in December, 2021. 
 
So far, 120 GCTs locations have been commissioned and further 133 more locations under 
various stages of construction (where Engineering scale plan approved) over Indian Railways. 
Out of these, 5 GCTs locations have been commissioned over DFC line and further 4 more 
GCTs locations have been taken  up on  DFC line. 
 
***** 
327                                                      

 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2344 
  ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 SEVERE SHORTAGE OF INTER-CITY TRAINS AND PASSENGER DISTRESS 
 2344 SHRI SANJAY RAUT: 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 (a)  whether  Government  is  aware  that  Maharashtra  faces  an  acute  shortage  of  inter-city 
 trains  on  routes  like  Mumbai–Pune,  Mumbai–Nagpur,  Mumbai–  Goa,  Nagpur–Nanded  and 
 Pune-Solapur  forcing  thousands  of  commuters  to  wait  for  months,  travel  in  overcrowded 
 coaches and face daily hardships; 
 (b)  the  reasons  for  the  slow  expansion  of  Vande  Bharat,  Amrit  Bharat  and  MEMU  services 
 despite clear demand; 
 (c) whether additional trains and coaches are being planned on high-traffic routes; 
 (d) the funds and timeline allocated to bridge this demand-supply mismatch; and 
 (e)  the  steps  being  taken  to  ensure  safety,  punctuality  and  passenger  comfort  across  these 
 routes? 
 ANSWER 
 MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
 ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 (a)  to  (e)  As  the  railway  network  straddles  across  State  boundaries,  trains  are  introduced,  as 
 per  network  requirement,  across  such  boundaries.  However,  Indian  Railways  consistently 
 endeavours to improve connectivity to cater to the needs of passengers. 
 At  present,  Mumbai-Pune  sector  is  served  by  71  pairs  of  train  services  (listed 
 below)  including  22225/22226  Chhatrapati  Shivaji  Maharaj(T)  -  Solapur  vande  Bharat 
 Express: 
 Trains serving Mumbai-Pune Sector  : 
 SN  Train No. & Name 
 1  11005/11006 Dadar – Puducherry Express 
 2  11007/11008 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Pune Deccan Express 
 3  11009/11010 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Pune Sinhagad Express 
 4  11013/11014 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Coimbatore Express 
 5  11017/11018 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Karaikal Express 
 1  of 18 
328                                                      

 6  11019/11020 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Bhubaneswar New Konark Express 
 7  11021/11022 Dadar – Tirunelveli Express 
 8  11027/11028 Dadar – Satara Express 
 9  11029/11030 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Kolhapur Koyna Express 
 10  11035/11036 Dadar – Mysuru Sharavathi Express 
 11  11041/11042 Dadar – Sainagar Shirdi Express 
 12  11049/11050 Ahmedabad – Kolhapur Express 
 13  11087/11088 Veraval – Pune Express 
 14  11089/11090 Bhagat Ki Kothi – Pune Express 
 15  11091/11092 Bhuj – Pune Express 
 16  11139/11040 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Hosapete Express 
 17  11301/11302 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – KSR Bengaluru Udyan Express 
 18  12115/12116 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Solapur Siddheshwar Express 
 19  12123/12124 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Pune Express 
 20  12125/12126 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Pune Pragati Express 
 21  12127/12128 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Pune Express 
 22  12163/12164 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Chennai Central Express 
 23  12219/12220 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Secunderabad Duronto Express 
 24  12263/12264  Pune - Hazrat Nizamuddin Duronto Express 
 25  12297/12298 Ahmedabad – Pune Duronto Express 
 26  12493/12494 Miraj - Hazrat Nizamuddin Darshan Express 
 27  12701/12702 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Hyderabad Hussainsagar Express 
 28  12755/12756 Bhavnagar (T) – Kakinada Port Express 
 29  12939/12940 Jaipur – Pune Express 
 30  14805/14806 Barmer – Yesvantpur Express 
 31  16209/16210 Ajmer – Mysuru Express 
 32  16331/16332  Chhatrapati  Shivaji  Maharaj  (T)  –  Thiruvananthapuram  Central 
 (Trivandrum) Express 
 33  16339/16340 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Nagarcoil Express 
 34  16351/16952 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Nagarcoil Express 
 35  16505/16506 Gandhidham – KSR Bengaluru Express 
 36  16507/16508 Jodhpur – KSR Bengaluru Express 
 37  16531/16532 Ajmer – KSR Bengaluru Garib Nawaz Express 
 38  16533/16534 Bhagat Ki Kothi – KSR Bengaluru Express 
 2  of 18 
329                                                      

 39  16587/16588 Bikaner – Yesvantpur Express 
 40  16613/16614 Rajkot – Coimbatore Express 
 41  17221/17222 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Kakinada Port Express 
 42  17317/17318 Dadar – Hubballi Express 
 43  17411/17412  Chhatrapati  Shivaji  Maharaj  (T)  -  SCSM  Kolhapur  Mahalaxmi 
 Express 
 44  17613/17614 Panvel – H.S. Nanded Express 
 45  18519/18520 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Visakhapatnam Express 
 46  19567/19568 Okha – Tuticorin Vivek Express 
 47  19667/19668 Udaipur City – Mysuru Humsafar Express 
 48  20475/20476 Bikaner – Miraj Express 
 49  20495/20496 Jodhpur – Hadapsar Express 
 50  20667/20668 Jaipur – Yesvantpur Express 
 51  20821/20822 Santragachi – Pune Humsafar Express 
 52  20915/20916 Indore – Lingampalli Humsafar Express 
 53  20919/20920 Ekta Nagar – Chennai Central Express 
 54  20953/20954 Ahmedabad – Chennai Express 
 55  20967/20968 Porbandar – Secunderabad Express 
 56  22101/22102 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Madurai Express 
 57  22105/22106 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Pune Indrayani Express 
 58  22107/22108 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Latur Express 
 59  22143/22144 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Bidar Express 
 60  22149/22150 Ernakulam – Pune Express 
 61  22157/22158 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Chennai Egmore Express 
 62  22159/22160 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Chennai Central Express 
 63  22179/22180 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Chennai Central Express 
 64  22185/22186 Ahmedabad – Pune Ahimsa Express 
 65  22193/22194 Gwalior – Daund Express 
 66  22225/22226 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Solapur Vande Bharat Express 
 67  22497/22498 Shri Ganganagar – Tiruchchirappalli Humsafar Express 
 68  22717/22718 Rajkot – Secunderabad Express 
 69  22731/22732 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Hyderabad Express 
 70  22919/22920 Ahmedabad – Chennai Central Humsafar Express 
 71  22943/22944 Indore – Daund Express 
 3  of 18 
330                                                      

 Similarly,  Mumbai-Nagpur  sector  by  18  pairs  of  train  services  and  Mumbai-Madgaon 
 sector  by  39  pairs  of  train  services  including  22229/22230  Chhatrapati  Shivaji  Maharaj(T)  - 
 Madgaon  Vande  Bharat  Express,  Pune-Solapur  sector  by  39  pairs  of  train  services  including 
 22225/22226  Chhatrapati  Shivaji  Maharaj(T)  -  Solapur  vande  Bharat  Express  and  Nagpur-H.  S. 
 Nanded sector by 03 pairs of train services. These are listed below: 
 Trains serving Mumbai-Nagpur sector: 
 SN  Train No. & Name 
 1  12101/12102 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Shalimar Jnaneswari Express 
 2  12105/12106 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Gondia Vidarbha Express 
 3  12139/12140 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Nagpur Sewagram Express 
 4  12145/12146 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Puri Express 
 5  12151/12152 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Shalimar Samarsata Express 
 6  12261/12262 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Howrah Duronto Express 
 7  12289/12290 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Nagpur Duronto Express 
 8  12809/12810 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Howrah Express 
 9  12811/12812 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Hatia Express 
 10  12859/12860 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Howrah Gitanjali Express 
 11  12869/12870 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Howrah Express 
 12  12879/12880 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Bhubaneswar Express 
 13  18029/18030 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Shalimar Express 
 14  20821/20822 Pune – Santragachi Humsafar Express 
 15  22357/22358 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Gaya Express 
 16  22511/22512 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Kamakhya Karmabhoomi Express 
 17  22847/22848 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Visakhapatnam Express 
 18  22865/22866 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Puri Express 
 Trains serving Mumbai-Madgaon sector: 
 SN  Train No & Name 
 1  10103/10104 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Madgaon Mandovi Express 
 2  10115/10116 Bandra (T) – Madgaon Express 
 3  11099/11100 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Madgaon Express 
 4  12051/12052 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) – Madgaon Janshatabdi Express 
 5  12133/12134 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) –  Mangaluru Express 
 6  12201/12202 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Thiruvananthapuram North Garib Rath Express 
 4  of 18 
331                                                      

 7  12217/12218 Chandigarh - Thiruvananthapuram North Kerala Sampark Kranti Express 
 8  12223/12224 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Ernakulam Duronto Express 
 9  12283/12284 Hazrat Nizamuddin – Ernakulam Duronto Express 
 10  12431/12432 Hazrat Nizamuddin – Thiruvananthapuram Central Rajdhani Express 
 11  12449/12450 Chandigarh - Madgaon Goa Sampark Kranti Express 
 12  12483/12484 Amritsar – Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
 13  12617/12618 Hazrat Nizamuddin – Ernakulam Mangala Lakshadweep Express 
 14  12619/12620 Lokmanya Tilak (T) – Mangalore Central Matsyagandha Express 
 15  12741/12742 Patna – Vasco-da-Gama Express 
 16  12977/12978 Ajmer - Ernakulam Junction Maru Sagar Express 
 17  16311/16312 Shri Ganganagar – Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
 18  16333/16334 Veraval – Thiruvananthapuram Central Express 
 19  16335/16336 Gandhidham – Nagercoil Express 
 20  16337/16338 Okha – Ernakulam Express 
 21  16345/16346 Lokmanya Tilak (T) - Thiruvananthapuram Central Netravati Express 
 22  19259/19260 Bhavnagar - Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
 23  19577/19578 Jamnagar – Tirunelveli Express 
 24  20111/20112 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Madgaon Konkan Kanya Express 
 25  20909/20910 Porbandar – Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
 26  20923/20924 Gandhidham – Tirunelveli Humsafar Express 
 27  20931/20932 Indore – Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
 28  22113/22114 Lokmanya Tilak (T) - Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
 29  22119/22120 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Madgaon Tejas Express 
 30  22149/22150 Pune–Ernakulam Express 
 31  22229/22230 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
 32  22413/22414 Hazrat Nizamuddin – Madgaon Rajdhani Express 
 33  22475/22476 Hisar – Coimbatore Express 
 34  22629/22630 Dadar – Tirunelveli Express 
 35  22633/22634 Hazrat Nizamuddin – Thiruvananthapuram Central Express 
 36  22653/22654 Hazrat Nizamuddin – Thiruvananthapuram Central Express 
 37  22655/22656 Hazrat Nizamuddin – Ernakulam Express 
 38  22659/22660 Yog Nagari Rishikesh – Thiruvananthapuram North Express 
 39  22907/22908 Hapa – Madgaon Express 
 5  of 18 
332                                                      

 Trains serving Pune-Solapur sector: 
 SN  Train No & Name 
 1  11013/11014 Lokmanya Tilak (T) - Coimbatore Express 
 2  11017/11018 Lokmanya Tilak (T) - Karaikal  Express 
 3  11019/11020 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T)  - Bhubaneswar Konark Express 
 4  11139/11140 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T)  - Hospet Express 
 5  11301/11302 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T)  - KSR Bengaluru City Udyan Express 
 6  11417/11418 Pune - Solapur Express 
 7  11421/11422 Hadapsar - Solapur Express 
 8  12025/12026 Pune - Hyderabad Shatabdi Express 
 9  12115/12116 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T)  - Solapur Siddheswar Express 
 10  12157/12158 Pune - Solapur Hutatma Express 
 11  12163/12164 Lokmanya Tilak (T)  - MGR Chennai Central  Express 
 12  12169/12170 Pune - Solapur  Express 
 13  12219/12220 Lokmanya Tilak (T)  - Secunderabad  Duronto Express 
 14  12701/12702 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T)  - Hyderabad Express 
 15  12755/12756 Kakinada Port - Bhavnagar (T) Express 
 16  14805/14806 Yesvantpur -Barmer Express 
 17  16331/16332 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Thiruvananthapuram Central Express 
 18  16339/16340 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Nagercoil  Express 
 19  16351/16352 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Nagercoil Express 
 20  16381/16382 Pune - Kanyakumari Express 
 21  16587/16588  Yesvantpur - Bikaner Express 
 22  16613/16614 Rajkot - Coimbatore Express 
 23  17221/17222 Kakinada Port - Lokmanya Tilak (T)Express 
 24  18519/18520  Visakhapatnam - Lokmanya Tilak (T)Express 
 25  19567/19568 Tuticorin - Okha Vivek Express 
 26  20667/20668 Yesvantpur - Jaipur Express 
 27  20915/20916 Lingampalli - Indore Humsafar Express 
 28  20919/20920 M.G.R Chennai Central - Eknathnagar Express 
 29  20953/20954 M.G.R Chennai Central  - Ahmedabad  Express 
 30  20967/20968 Secunderabad - Porbandar Express 
 31  22101/22102 Lokmanya Tilak (T) - Madurai Express 
 32  22157/22158 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) -  Chennai Egmore Express 
 6  of 18 
333                                                      

 33  22159/22160 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - MGR Chennai Central  Express 
 34  22179/22180 Lokmanya Tilak (T) - MGR Chennai Central  Express 
 35  22225/22226 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Solapur Vande Bharat Express 
 36  22717/22718 Rajkot - Secunderabad Express 
 37  22731/22732 Hyderabad - Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) Express 
 38  22881/22882 Pune - Bhubaneswar Express 
 39  22919/22920 MGR Chennai Central - Ahmedabad Humsafar Express 
 Trains serving Nagpur-H. S. Nanded sector: 
 SN  Train No. & Name 
 1  17609/17610 Patna - Purna Express 
 2  11045/11046 Kolhapur SCSM (T) - Dhanbad Deekshabhoomi Express 
 3  12767/12768 Hazur Sahib Nanded - Santragachi   Express 
 Indian  Railways  is  focussed  on  providing  affordable,  good  quality  services  to  all  sections  of 
 society. Railways has developed the following trains: 
 1.  Vande Bharat service: 
 Indian  Railways  have  introduced  Vande  Bharat  services  which  are  semi-high  speed  trains  and  are 
 aimed  to  provide  better  travel  experience  and  improved  safety  to  the  passengers.  These  services 
 are equipped with enhanced safety features and modern passenger amenities like- 
 I.  KAVACH system 
 II.  Faster acceleration 
 III.  Fully Sealed Gangway 
 IV.  Automatic Plug Doors 
 V.  Better Ride Comfort 
 VI.  Mini Pantry with provision of Hot Case 
 VII.  Bottle Cooler 
 VIII.  Deep freezer & Hot water Boiler 
 IX.  Reclining Ergonomic Seats 
 X.  Comfortable Seating with revolving seats in executive class 
 XI.  Mobile charging sockets for every seat 
 XII.  Special lavatory for Divyangjan passengers in Driving Trailer Car(DTC), 
 XIII.  CCTVs, etc. 
 Presently,  164  Vande  Bharat  train  services  are  operational  on  the  various  sectors  of  the  Broad 
 Gauge  (B.G.)  electrified  network  of  Indian  Railways(IR),  of  which  the  following  (on 
 7  of 18 
334                                                      

 originating/terminating  basis)  cater  to  the  needs  of  various  stations  located  in  the  State  of 
 Maharashtra : 
 SN  Train No. & Name 
 1  26101/26102 Pune-Ajni Vande Bharat Express 
 2  20101/20102 Nagpur-Secunderabad Vande Bharat Express 
 3  20669/20670 Hubballi-Pune Vande Bharat Express 
 4  20673/20674 SCSM(T) Kolhapur-Pune Vande Bharat Express 
 5  22961/22962 Mumbai Central-Ahmedabad Vande Bharat Express 
 6  20705/20706 H. S. Nanded-Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj(T) Vande Bharat Express 
 7  22229/22230 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj(T)-Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
 8  20911/20912 Indore-Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
 9  22223/22224  Chhatrapati  Shivaji  Maharaj(T)-Sainagar  Shirdi  Vande  Bharat 
 Express 
 10  22225/22226 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj(T)-Solapur Vande Bharat Express 
 11  20825/20826 Bilaspur-Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
 12  20901/20902 Mumbai Central-Gandhinagar Capital Vande Bharat Express 
 2.  Amrit Bharat service: 
 To  provide  affordable  means  of  transportation  to  the  low  and  middle  income  families,  Indian 
 Railways  have  introduced  Amrit  Bharat  services  that  are  fully  non-AC  modern  trains.The 
 present  composition  of  Amrit  Bharat  consists  of  11  General  Class  coaches,  8  Sleeper  Class 
 coaches, 01 Pantry car and 02 Luggage cum Divyangjan coaches. 
 High  Speed  and  enhanced  Safety  standards  are  the  hallmarks  of  these  trains  with  following 
 enhanced features and amenities: 
 i.  Better  aesthetics  of  seat  and  berths  with  enhanced  look  &  feel  on  the  lines  of  Vande 
 Bharat Sleeper. 
 ii.  Jerk Free Semi-Automatic Couplers. 
 iii.  Improved Crashworthiness in coaches by provision of crash tube. 
 iv.  Provision of CCTV system in all coaches and Luggage room. 
 v.  Improved designs of toilets. 
 vi.  Improved design of Ladder for ease of climbing on to the berth. 
 vii.  Improved LED Light fitting & Charging Sockets. 
 viii.  Provision of EP assisted braking system. 
 ix.  Aerosol based fire suppression system in toilets and electrical cubicles. 
 x.  USB Type-A and Type-C mobile charging sockets. 
 8  of 18 
335                                                      

 xi.  Emergency  Talk  Back  system  for  two-way  communication  between  Passenger  and 
 Guard/Train Manager. 
 xii.  Non-AC pantry with enhanced heating capacity. 
 xiii.  Fully  sealed  gangways  with  quick  release  mechanism  for  easy  attachment  and 
 detachment. 
 Presently,  30  Amrit  Bharat  train  services  are  operational  on  the  Indian  Railways 
 network,  including  11015/11016  Lokmanya  Tilak(T)  -  Saharsa  Amrit  Bharat  Express 
 catering to the needs of various stations located in the State of Maharashtra. 
 Besides,  introduction  of  new  train  services  on  any  route/section  depends  on  various  factors 
 which include: 
 • Capacity of that section 
 • Availability of path 
 • Availability of required rolling stock 
 • Availability of matching infrastructure for rolling stock 
 • Maintenance requirement of railway tracks and other assets 
 Production of Vande Bharat and Amrit Bharat 
 The  pace  of  production  and  induction  of  Vande  Bharat  and  Amrit  Bharat  Express  services 
 have  been  very  good.  Till  November  2025  Indian  Railways  production  units  have 
 manufactured  94  Vande  Bharat  Chair  Car  Rakes.  Further  to  cater  to  long  and  medium  distance 
 overnight  travel,  the  Sleeper  variant  of  Vande  Bharat  train  has  been  indigenously  designed. 
 Two  such  rakes  have  been  manufactured  and  are  under  trial/commissioning.  Indian  Railways 
 has also manufactured 26 rakes of Amrit Bharat train till November 2025. 
 During  2025-26,  allocation  of  ₹2,52,200  Cr  (Budgetary  Support)  has  been  made,  which 
 includes expenditure on production of Rolling stock. 
 Additional accommodation and Coaches: 
 With  a  view  to  meet  the  demand  of  passengers  travelling  in  unreserved  coaches,  Railways 
 have  significantly  increased  the  facilities  for  passengers  demanding  general  class  travel. 
 During  the  last  financial  year  2024-25  alone,  1250  general  coaches  have  been  utilised  in 
 various  long-distance  trains.To  cater  to  the  travel  demand  of  the  low  and  middle  income 
 families,  Indian  Railways  have  taken  up  17,000  non-AC  coaches  (general/sleeper).  On  IR,  the 
 percentage of non-AC coaches, is about 70% as indicated below: 
 9  of 18 
336                                                      

 Table 1: Distribution of coaches  : 
 Non-AC coaches (general and sleeper)  ~57,200  ~70% 
 AC coaches  ~25,000  ~30% 
 Total coaches  ~82,200  100% 
 Due  to  higher  availability  of  general  coaches,  the  number  of  passengers  traveling  in  general/ 
 unreserved coaches has shown an increasing trend as shown below: 
 Table 2: Passengers in general/unreserved coaches: 
 Year  No. of Passengers 
 2020-21  99 Cr (Covid year) 
 2021-22  275 Cr (Covid year) 
 2022-23  553 Cr 
 2023-24  609 Cr 
 2024-25  651 Cr 
 The  number  of  seats  available  for  non-AC  passengers  has  also  increased.  The  current 
 composition is as follows: 
 Table 3: Distribution of seats: 
 Non-AC seats  ~ 54 lakhs  ~ 78% 
 AC seats  ~ 15 lakhs  ~ 22% 
 Total  ~ 69 lakhs  100% 
 To  provide  greater  accommodation  for  the  passengers  using  General  and  non-AC  Sleeper 
 Coaches,  the  extant  policy  regarding  composition  of  Mail/Express  trains  provides  for  12 
 (Twelve)  General  class  &  Sleeper  class  non-  AC  coaches  and  08  (eight)  AC-Coaches,  in  a 
 train  of  22  coaches,  thereby  providing  greater  accommodation  for  the  passengers  using 
 General and non-AC Sleeper Coaches. 
 Besides,  in  its  constant  endeavour  to  provide  additional  accommodation  to  travelling 
 passengers,  Indian  Railways  (IR),  operates  Special  train  services  during  festivals,  holidays, 
 etc.  to  cater  to  the  extra  needs  of  passengers  and  supplement  the  accommodation  available  by 
 regular  services.  In  addition  to  the  above,  the  load  of  trains  are  also  augmented,  both  on  a 
 permanent  and  temporary  basis,  to  generate  additional  accommodation  for  different  segments 
 of passengers. 
 10  of 18 
337                                                      

 Accordingly,  on  the  Indian  Railways(IR)  network,  during  Year  2025-26  (till  November,  2025), 
 about  60,000  special  trains  have  been  operated  and  more  than  700  coaches  have  been  utilized 
 for augmentation of train services on a permanent  basis. 
 08  train  services  catering  to  the  Mumbai-Pune  sector  have  been  augmented  by  utilising 
 12  Coaches.  Similarly,  02  services  serving  the  Pune-Solapur  sector  has  been  augmented 
 utisiling 03 Coaches. 
 Capacity Augmentation works for Mumbai Sub-urban area: 
 Presently,  about  120  originating  Mail/Express  trains  and  about  3200  sub  urban  trains  are 
 handled  daily  in  Mumbai  area.  To  increase  capacity  and  improve  safety,  several  steps  have 
 been taken by Indian Railways as under: 
 To  increase  train  handling  capacity  at  various  stations  in  Mumbai  area,  following  works  have 
 been completed/taken up/planned at various stations: 
 SN  Location  Details 
 1  Bandra Terminus  3 Pit Lines have been completed 
 2  Mumbai Central  Platform extension for 24 LHB coaches 
 3  Jogeshwari  2 additional Platforms 
 4  Dadar  1 additional platform 
 5  Vasai road  6 Platforms, 3 pit lines and 5 stabling lines 
 6  Panvel-Kalamboli  5 platforms , 4 pit lines and 2 sick lines 
 7  Kalyan  6 platforms and 4 pit lines 
 8  Lokmanya Tilak (T)  4 platforms and 2 pit lines 
 9  Parel  6 platforms, 5 pit lines, 6 stabling lines 
 10  Virar  25 stabling lines 
 11  Dahanu road  11 stabling lines 
 12  Mira road  25 stabling lines 
 In  addition  to  above,  Platform  extension  work  at  34  stations  to  accommodate  15  car  EMUs 
 have been taken up. 
 To  improve  the  capacity  of  rail  network  in  Mumbai  suburban  area,  Mumbai  Urban  Transport 
 Project  (MUTP)-II  costing  ₹8,087  crore,  MUTP-III  costing  ₹10,947  crore  and  MUTP-IIIA 
 costing  ₹33,690  crore  have  been  sanctioned.  These  projects  include  following  works  in 
 Mumbai Suburban Area: 
 SN  Name of Project  Cost 
 (in Cr.) 
 1  CSMT-Kurla 5  th  & 6  th  Line (MUTP-II) ( 17.5 km)  891 
 11  of 18 
338                                                      

 2  Mumbai Central-Borivali 6  th  Line (MUTP-II) ( 30 km)  919 
 3  Extension of Harbour Line from Goregaon-Borivali (MUTP-IIIA) (7 km)  826 
 4  Borivali-Virar 5  th  & 6  th  Line (MUTP-IIIA) ( 26 km)  2,184 
 5  Virar-Dahanu Road 3  rd  & 4  th  Line (MUTP-III) ( 64 km)  3,587 
 6  Panvel-Karjat Suburban Corridor (MUTP-III) ( 29.6 km)  2,782 
 7  Airoli-Kalwa (elevated) Suburban Corridor link (MUTP-III) ( 3.3 km)  476 
 8  Kalyan-Asangaon 4  th  Line (MUTP-IIIA) ( 32 km)  1,759 
 9  Kalyan-Badlapur 3  rd  & 4  th  line (MUTP-IIIA) ( 14 km)  1,510 
 10  Kalyan-Kasara 3  rd  Line ( 67 km)  793 
 11  Naigaon-Juichandra double chord Line (6 km)  176 
 12  Nilaje-Kopar double chord Line ( 5 km)  338 
 13  Kalyan Yard remodeling work  866 
 To  enhance  passenger  carrying  capacity,  238  rakes  of  12  cars  eachwith  doors  have  been 
 sanctioned  under  MUTP-III  &  IIIA  at  a  cost  of  ₹19,293  crore.  The  process  for  procurement  of 
 these rakes has been taken up. 
 Punctuality: 
 Indian  Railways  makes  all  possible  efforts  to  run  trains  on  time.  Several  factors  affect 
 punctual  running  of  trains  which  include  foggy  weather,  path  constraints,  asset  maintenance, 
 alarm chain pulling, agitations, cattle run over and other unforeseen circumstances. 
 Based  on  assessments  of  factors  affecting  the  punctual  running  of  trains,  remedial 
 measures,  both  short  term  and  long  term,  are  taken  which  includes  capacity  augmentation  of  rail 
 network,  upgradation  of  track  and  signalling  system,  removing  operational  bottlenecks,  yard 
 remodelilng etc. 
 Overall  punctuality  of  Mail/Express  trains  on  Indian  Railways  during  2024-25  was 
 77.12% and that during 2025-26 (April-November) was 79.25%. 
 Kavach -  Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system 
 1.  Kavach  is  an  indigenously  developed  Automatic  Train  Protection  (ATP)  system.  Kavach  is  a 
 highly  technology  intensive  system,  which  requires  safety  certification  of  highest  order 
 (SIL-4). 
 2.  Kavach  aids  the  Loco  Pilot  in  running  of  trains  within  specified  speed  limits  by  automatic 
 application  of  brakes  in  case  Loco  Pilot  fails  to  do  so  and  also  helps  the  trains  to  run  safely 
 during inclement weather. 
 12  of 18 
339                                                      

 3.  The  first  field  trials  on  the  passenger  trains  were  started  in  February  2016.  Based  on  the 
 experience  gained  and  Independent  Safety  Assessment  of  the  system  by  Independent  Safety 
 Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 2018-19, for supply of Kavach Ver. 3.2. 
 4.   Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July 2020. 
 5.   Implementation of Kavach System involves following Key Activities: 
 i.    Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station, block section. 
 ii.   Installation of RFID Tags throughout the track length. 
 iii.  Installation of telecom Towers throughout the section. 
 iv.  Laying of Optical Fibre Cable along the track. 
 v.    Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian 
 Railways. 
 6.  Based  on  deployment  of  Kavach  version  3.2  on  1465  RKm  on  South  Central  Railway  and 
 experience  gained,  further  improvements  were  made.  Finally,  Kavach  specification  version 
 4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. 
 7.  Kavach  version  4.0  covers  all  the  major  features  required  for  the  diverse  railway  network. 
 This  is  a  significant  milestone  in  safety  for  Indian  Railways.  Within  a  short  period,  IR  has 
 developed, tested and started deploying Automatic Train Protection System. 
 8.  Major  improvement  in  Version  4.0  includes  increased  Location  Accuracy,  Improved 
 Information  of  Signal  Aspects  in  bigger  yards,  Station  to  Station  Kavach  interface  on  OFC 
 and  Direct  Interface  to  existing  Electronic  Interlocking  System.  With  these  improvements, 
 Kavach Ver.4.0. is planned for large scale deployment over Indian Railways. 
 9.  After  extensive  and  elaborate  trials,  Kavach  Version  4.0  has  been  successfully  commissioned 
 on  738  Route  km  on  Palwal  –  Mathura-  Nagda  section  (633  Rkm)  on  Delhi  –  Mumbai 
 route  and  Howrah–Bardhaman  section  (105  Rkm)  Delhi  –  Howrah  route.  Kavach 
 implementation  has  been  taken  up  in  balance  sections  of  Delhi  –  Mumbai  &  Delhi  – 
 Howrah corridors. 
 10.  Progress  of  key  items  of  Kavach  on  High  density  routes  including  Delhi–  Mumbai  & 
 Delhi– Howrah corridors are as under: 
 SN  Item  Progress 
 i  Laying of Optical Fibre Cable  7129 Km 
 ii  Installation of Telecom Towers  860 nos 
 iii  Station Data Centre  767 Stns 
 iv  Installation of Track side equipment  5672 RKm 
 v  Provision of Kavach on Locos  4,154 
 11.  Further,  track  side  Kavach  implementation  work  has  been  taken  up  on  15,512  RKm  covering 
 all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
 13  of 18 
340                                                      

 12.  Bids  have  been  invited  for  equipping  another  9,069  locomotives  with  Kavach  version  4.0. 
 Kavach is being provided progressively in a phased manner in locomotives. 
 13.  Specialized  training  programmes  on  Kavach  are  being  conducted  at  centralized  training 
 institutes  of  Indian  Railways  to  impart  training  to  all  concerned  officials.  By  now  more  than 
 40,000  technicians,  operators  and  engineers  have  been  trained  on  Kavach  technology.  This 
 includes  33,000  Loco  Pilots  &  Assistant  Loco  Pilots.  Courses  have  been  designed  in 
 collaboration with IRISET. 
 14.  The  funds  utilized  on  Kavach  works  so  far  up  to  Oct'25  is  Rs.  2,354.36  Crores.  The 
 allocation  of  funds  during  the  year  2025-26  is  Rs.  1673.19  Crores.  Requisite  funds  are  made 
 available as per the progress of works. 
 Safety measures 
 As  a  consequence  of  various  safety  measures  taken  over  the  years,  there  has  been  a 
 steep decline in the number of accidents. 
 Number  of  Consequential  Train  Accidents  has  reduced  as  shown  in  the  table 
 below:- 
 Year  Consequential Accidents 
 2014-15  135 
 2025-26 (Till date)  11 (90% lesser) 
 Another  important  index  showing  improvement  in  safety  in  train  operations  is 
 Consequential Accidents Index, the details of which are as under:- 
 Consequential Accident Index  :- 
 Year  Accident Index 
 2014-15  0.11 
 2024-25  0.03 (73% lesser) 
 This  index  measures  number  of  consequential  accidents  as  a  ratio  of  total  running 
 Kilometers of all trains. 
 Accident Index  =  No. of consequential accidents 
 No. of trains X million kilometers run 
 14  of 18 
341                                                      

 Safety  is  accorded  the  highest  priority  on  Indian  Railways.  The  various  safety  measures  taken 
 to enhance safety in train operations are as under:- 
 1.  On  Indian  Railways,  the  expenditure  on  Safety  related  activities  has  increased  over  the 
 years as under:- 
 Expenditure/Budget on Safety related activities (Rs. in Cr.) 
 2013-14 (Act.)  2022-23 (Act.)  2023-24 (Act.)  2024-25  2025-26 
 39,463  87,327  1,01,651  1,14,022  1,16,470 
 2.  Electrical/Electronic  Interlocking  Systems  with  centralized  operation  of  points  and 
 signals  have  been  provided  at  6,656  stations  up  to  31.10.2025  to  reduce  accidents  due  to 
 human failure. 
 3.  Interlocking  of  Level  Crossing  (LC)  Gates  has  been  provided  at  10,098  Level  Crossing 
 Gates up to 31.10.2025 for enhancing safety at LC Gates. 
 4.  Complete  Track  Circuiting  of  stations  to  enhance  safety  by  verification  of  track 
 occupancy by electrical means has been provided at 6,661 stations up to 31.10.2025. 
 5.  Kavach  is  a  highly  technology  intensive  system,  which  requires  safety  certification  of 
 highest  order.  Kavach  was  adopted  as  a  National  ATP  system  in  July  2020.  Kavach  is 
 provided  progressively  in  phased  manner.  Initially,  Kavach  Version  3.2  was  deployed 
 on  1465  RKm  of  South  Central  Railway  and  80  RKm  of  North  Central  Railway. 
 Kavach specification Version 4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. 
 After  extensive  and  elaborate  trials,  Kavach  Version  4.0  has  been  successfully 
 commissioned  on  Palwal-Mathura-Kota-Nagda  section  (633  Rkm)  on  Delhi-  Mumbai 
 route  and  on  Howrah-Bardhaman  section  (105  RKm)  on  Delhi-Howrah  route.  Kavach 
 implementation  has  been  taken  up  in  balance  sections  of  Delhi-Mumbai  and 
 Delhi-Howrah route. 
 Further,  Kavach  implementation  has  been  taken  up  on  15,512  RKm  covering  all 
 GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
 6.  Detailed  instructions  on  issues  related  with  safety  of  Signalling,  e.g.  mandatory 
 correspondence  check,  alteration  work  protocol,  preparation  of  completion  drawing,  etc. 
 have been issued. 
 7.  System  of  disconnection  and  reconnection  for  S&T  equipment  as  per  protocol  has  been 
 re-emphasized. 
 8.  All  locomotives  are  equipped  with  Vigilance  Control  Devices  (VCD)  to  improve 
 alertness of Loco Pilots. 
 15  of 18 
342                                                      

 9.  Retro-reflective  sigma  boards  are  provided  on  the  mast  which  is  located  two  OHE  masts 
 prior  to  the  signals  in  electrified  territories  to  alert  the  crew  about  the  signal  ahead  when 
 visibility is low due to foggy weather. 
 10.  A  GPS  based  Fog  Safety  Device  (FSD)  is  provided  to  loco  pilots  in  fog  affected  areas 
 which  enables  loco  pilots  to  know  the  distance  of  the  approaching  landmarks  like 
 signals, level crossing gates, etc. 
 11.  Modern  track  structure  consisting  of  60kg,  90  Ultimate  Tensile  Strength  (UTS)  rails, 
 Prestressed  Concrete  Sleeper  (PSC)  Normal/Wide  base  sleepers  with  elastic  fastening, 
 fan  shaped  layout  turnout  on  PSC  sleepers,  Steel  Channel/H-beam  Sleepers  on  girder 
 bridges is used while carrying out primary track renewals. 
 12.  Mechanisation  of  track  laying  activity  through  use  of  track  machines  like  PQRS,  TRT, 
 T-28 etc. to reduce human errors. 
 13.  Maximizing  supply  of  130m/260m  long  rail  panels  for  increasing  progress  of  rail 
 renewal and avoiding welding of joints, thereby improving safety. 
 14.  Ultrasonic  Flaw  Detection  (USFD)  testing  of  rails  to  detect  flaws  and  timely  removal  of 
 defective rails. 
 15.  Laying  of  longer  rails,  minimizing  the  use  of  Alumino  Thermic  Welding  and  adoption 
 of better welding technology for rails i.e., Flash Butt Welding. 
 16.  Monitoring  of  track  geometry  by  OMS  (Oscillation  Monitoring  System)  and  TRC 
 (Track Recording Cars). 
 17.  Patrolling of railway tracks to look out for weld/rail fractures. 
 18.  The use of Thick Web Switches and Weldable CMS Crossing in turnout renewal works. 
 19.  Inspections  at  regular  intervals  are  carried  out  to  monitor  and  educate  staff  for 
 observance of safe practices. 
 20.  Web  based  online  monitoring  system  of  track  assets  viz.  Track  database  and  decision 
 support  system  has  been  adopted  to  decide  rationalized  maintenance  requirement  and 
 optimize inputs. 
 21.  Detailed  instructions  on  issues  related  with  safety  of  Track,  e.g.  integrated  block, 
 corridor block, worksite safety, monsoon precautions, etc. have been issued. 
 22.  Preventive  maintenance  of  railway  assets  (Coaches  &  Wagons)  is  undertaken  to  ensure 
 safe train operations. 
 23.  Replacement  of  conventional  ICF  design  coaches  with  LHB  design  coaches  is  being 
 done. 
 24.  All  unmanned  level  crossings  (UMLCs)  on  Broad  Gauge  (BG)  route  have  been 
 eliminated by January 2019. 
 16  of 18 
343                                                      

 25.  Safety  of  Railway  Bridges  is  ensured  through  regular  inspection  of  Bridges.  The 
 requirement  of  repair/rehabilitation  of  Bridges  is  taken  up  based  upon  the  conditions 
 assessed during these inspections. 
 26.  Indian  Railways  has  displayed  Statutory  “Fire  Notices”  for  widespread  passenger 
 information  in  all  coaches.  Fire  posters  are  provided  in  every  coach  so  as  to  educate  and 
 alert  passengers  regarding  various  Do’s  and  Don’ts  to  prevent  fire.  These  include 
 messages  regarding  not  carrying  any  inflammable  material,  explosives,  prohibition  of 
 smoking inside the coaches, penalties etc. 
 27.  Production  Units  are  providing  Fire  detection  and  suppression  system  in  newly 
 manufactured  Power  Cars  and  Pantry  Cars,  Fire  and  Smoke  detection  system  in  newly 
 manufactured  coaches.  Progressive  fitment  of  the  same  in  existing  coaches  is  also 
 underway by Zonal Railways in a phased manner. 
 28.  Regular counselling and training of staff is undertaken. 
 29.  Concept  of  Rolling  Block  introduced  in  Indian  Railways  (Open  Lines)  General  Rules 
 vide  Gazette  notification  dated  30.11.2023,  wherein  work  of  integrated 
 maintenance/repair/replacement  of  assets  is  planned  up  to  52  weeks  in  advance  on 
 rolling basis and executed as per plan. 
 The  details  of  the  Safety  related  works  related  to  better  maintenance  practices,  Technological 
 improvements,  better  infrastructure  and  rolling  stock  etc.  undertaken  by  Railways  are  tabulated 
 below:- 
 SN  Item  2004-05 to 
 2013-14 
 2014-15 to 2024-25  2014-25 Vs. 
 2004-14 
 Technological Improvements 
 1.  Use of high-quality rails 
 (60 Kg) (Km) 
 57,450 Km  1.43 Lakh Km  More than 2 
 times 
 2.  Longer Rail Panels 
 (260m) (Km) 
 9,917 Km  77,522 Km  Nearly 8 times 
 3.  Electronic  Interlocking 
 (Stations) 
 837 Stations  3,691 Stations  More than 4 
 times 
 4.  Fog  Pass  Safety  Devices 
 (Nos.) 
 As on 31.03.14: 
 90 Nos. 
 As on 31.03.25: 25,939 
 Nos. 
 288 times 
 5.  Thick Web Switches (Nos.)  Nil  28,301 Nos. 
 Better Maintenance Practices 
 1.  Primary Rail Renewal (Track 
 Km) 
 32,260 Km  49,941 Km  1.5 times 
 2.  USFD  (Ultra  Sonic  Flaw 
 detection)  Testing  of 
 Welds (Nos.) 
 79.43 Lakh  2 Crore  More than 2 
 times 
 3.  Weld failures (Nos.)  In 2013-14: 
 3699 Nos. 
 In 2024-25: 
 370 Nos. 
 90 % 
 reduction 
 17  of 18 
344                                                      

 4.  Rail fractures (Nos.)  In 2013-14: 
 2548 Nos. 
 In 2024-25: 
 289 Nos. 
 More than 
 88% reduction 
 Better Infrastructure and Rolling Stock 
 1.  New  Track  KM  added 
 (Track Km) 
 14,985 Km  34,428 Km  More than 2 
 times 
 2.  Flyovers  (RoBs)  / 
 Underpasses  (RUBs) 
 (Nos.) 
 4,148 Nos.  13,808 Nos.  More than 3 
 times 
 3.  Unmanned  Level 
 crossings (Nos.) on BG 
 As on 
 31.03.14: 
 8,948 
 As on 31.03.24:Nil 
 (All eliminated by 
 31.01.19) 
 Removed 
 4.  Manufacture  of  LHB 
 Coaches (Nos.) 
 2,337 Nos.  42,677  More than 
 18 times 
 ***** 
 18  of 18 
345                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2345 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
GLOBAL PARTNERSHIPS FOR IMPROVEMENTS IN RAILWAYS 
 
2345  SMT. SANGEETA YADAV: 
 
                                Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the Ministry has engaged with foreign Governments or industry 
representatives to explore international partnerships in railway infrastructure, 
technology and logistics, if so, the details thereof; 
 
(b) the reforms undertaken to modernise India’s railway legislation, services and 
sectoral governance;  
 
(c) whether the Ministry has considered technological or operational improvements t o 
strengthen railway activities, if so, the details thereof; and 
 
(d) the steps taken to strengthen digitalisation, green mobility and innovation across 
the railway network? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (d) :  Ministry of Railways has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
Switzerland, Germany, Russia, Spain etc. The MoU has been signed for cooperation in the 
following areas: - 
 Freight operations (including automotive transport and logistics, and multimodal logistic 
hubs/parks) 
 Passenger operations (including high-speed) Multimodal transport.  
 High-Speed rail development: collaboration in setting specifications, standards, safety 
standards, safety for planning, design, construction, and operation of high -speed rail 
corridors.  
 Development of a modern, competitive railway organization (including the improvement 
of organizational structures and railway reformation).  
Cont....2/- 
346                                                      

-:2:- 
 Best practices for railway maintenance of fixed infrastructure, safety during construction, 
operational safety, operational planning etc. 
 IT solutions for railway operations, marketing and sales, as well as administrative 
purposes.  
 Predictive Maintenance of Assets. 
Several reforms have been taken by Indian Railways during last few years to adopt modern 
technology, improve safety, progress and efficiency of the system.   These include following: 
 Gati Shakti Directorate/Units: The PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan (N MP) was 
launched in October 21 to bring a transformative change in the approach towards 
planning and execution of infrastructural projects pertaining to the transportation sector.   
Indian Railways has immediately imbibed the principles of Gati Shakti in i ts project 
planning process. Drawing upon existing resources, a multi -disciplinary Gati Shakti 
Directorate has been created in Indian Railways. Similarly Gati Shakti Units have been 
created in Zonal railways. The Project DPRs are made after consultation wi th all 
stakeholders and other infrastructure ministries/departments. This above initiativ es have 
expedited the appraisal/sanction process and execution of Projects. 
 Enhanced power of sanction of Projects to GMs and DRMs: The power of sanction for 
various projects have been enhanced for GMs and DRMs for faster execution of projects.  
 Contracts finalisation and management: Full powers have been  
delegated to General Managers for finalisation of the tenders. Further, Works Contract 
Management System (IRWCMS) an d Contractor's e -MB have been implemented for 
transparent & quick/fast contract management and contractor's billing. 
 Development and implementation of Kavach: To improve safety in train operations, 
Kavach has been developed as National Automatic Train Prot ection (ATP) system on 
Indian Railways. The work of implementation of Kavach has been taken up in mission 
mode on Indian Railways.  
 
 Elimination of level crossings: To improve safety of train operations and road users, all 
unmanned level crossings on Broad  gauge has been eliminated. Further, it has also been 
decided to replace all manned level crossings in a phased manner by construction of 
RoBs/RUBs.  
 Adoption of a mechanized system for track laying activities through use of track 
machines  like  PQRS,  TRT,  T-28  etc,  and  track  maintenance using high-output plain  
Cont....3/- 
347                                                      

-:3:- 
tampers and points & crossing tampers for improved maintainability & reliability of 
track. Deployment of state -of-the-art modern machines, including Rail Grinding 
Machines, to further improve asset reliability. Deployment of Integrated Track 
Monitoring Systems (ITMS) and Oscillation Monitoring System (OMS) for 
comprehensive health assessment to ascertain optimal maintenance requirements. 
 Station Redevelopment: The I ndian Railway has launched the Amrit Bharat Station 
scheme aimed at providing world class amenities to passengers and improving efficiency 
in train operations at Railway stations. So far, 1,337 stations have been taken up for 
redevelopment in the Amrit Bha rat Station Scheme, out of which work on 160 stations 
have been completed. 
 Introduction of Modern trains: To enhance passenger experience and provide 
comfortable journey, State of the Art Vande Bharat trains, Amrit Bharat Trains and 
Namo Bharat Rapid Rail with modern features have been introduced on Indian Railways. 
Presently, 164 number Vande Bharat services, 30 number Amrit Bharat services & 4 
number Namo Bharat Rapid Rail services are in operation. 
 Bharat Gaurav Trains: Indian Railways have launched them e based Tourist Circuit trains 
named as Bharat Gaurav Trains (BGT) with an objective to showcase India's rich cultural 
heritage and magnificent historical places to the people of India and the world through 
professionals of the tourism sector and other potential service providers 
 Promoting Digital Transactions at Stations & Trains: Digital payment facility at various 
customer interface points such as Ticketing facility, Catering units etc.  
 Freight transportation: With the view of increasing freight, Indian  Railways has carried 
out major reforms in the form of many liberalized incentives in form of freight rebates, 
discounts on assured businesses, concessions on short leads, mini rake loadings, goods 
shed development, General Purpose Wagon Investment Scheme (GPWIS), Business 
Development Portal etc.   
 Gati Shakti Cargo Terminals: Gati Shakti Cargo Terminal initiative has been launched to 
fast track the approvals and ease of establishing Cargo Terminals to increase the freight 
loading share of IR. So far, 120 GCTs have been commissioned.  
 Railway- India Post Integration to develop "Joint Parcel Product": As a joint 
collaborative initiative between two Government Departments to carry out business,   
complete solution of parcel delivery has been started in which First-mile-last-mile  
Cont....4/- 
348                                                      

-:4:- 
connectivity by Department of Posts and Intermediate connectivity from station to 
station has been provided through Railways.  
 Coal Chain Coordination Group: Large number of stakeholders involved in coal chain, 
viz. coal companies, captive and commercial mines, ports, power houses, industries and 
Indian Railways. To co -ordinate with all the stakeholders it has been planned to setup 
Coal Chain Coordination Group in Ministry of Railways. 
 Annual Recruitment Calendar: Indi an Railways has issued an annual calendar for 
recruitments which will not only reduce the uncertainty and waiting period for 
candidates but also enables the railways to fill vacancies in a timely manner.  
 Railway land policy: To streamline and simplify Railway's land lease policy to enable 
faster integrated planning and development of infrastructure across the country under the 
PM Gati Shakti framework, the long-term land leasing policy has been issued.  
 
 Introduction of Rolling blocks: Concept of Rolling Blocks have been introduced on 
Indian Railways in 2023 by Gazette notification wherein work of integrated/ 
maintenance/repair/replacement of assets is planned upto 52 weeks in advance on  
rolling basis and executed as per plan by the Divisions. 
 
 The details of the various modernization/upgradation/Safety related works related to 
better maintenance practices, Technological improvements, better infrastructure and 
rolling stock etc. undertaken by Railways are tabulated below:- 
 
Cont....5/- 
S.N. Item 2004-05 to 
2013-14 
2014-15 to 2024-
25 
2014-25 Vs. 
2004-14 
 Technological Improvements 
1. Use of high-quality rails 
(60 Kg) (Km) 
57,450 Km 1.43 Lakh Km More than 2 
times 
2. Longer Rail Panels 
(260m) (Km) 
9,917 Km 77,522 Km Nearly 8 times 
3. Electronic Interlocking 
(Stations) 
837 Stations 3,691 Stations More than 4 
times 
4. Fog Pass Safety Devices 
(Nos.) 
As on 31.03.14: 
90 Nos. 
As on 31.03.25: 
25,939 Nos. 
288 times 
5. Thick Web Switches (Nos.) Nil 28,301 Nos.  
 Better Maintenance Practices 
1. Primary Rail Renewal (Track 
Km) 
32,260 Km 49,941 Km 1.5 times 
2. USFD (Ultra Sonic Flaw 
detection) Testing of Welds 
(Nos.) 
79.43 Lakh 2 Crore More than 2 
times 
349                                                      

-:5:- 
 
Green Mobility & Innovations 
 Indian Railways has envisioned to become net -zero carbon emitter through off -setting 
carbon emissions with the usage of power through non -fossil sources, saving in diesel 
consumption by electrification of  railway tracks, consistent efforts directed towards 
modal shifting of cargo and passenger from road to rail, harnessing hydrogen gas to drive 
train sets etc. 
 
 Indian Railways has planned to progressively meet its power requirements through 
renewable sources with combination of solar, wind and other renewable sources based on 
strategic power procurement planning. By November, 2025 about 898 Mega Watt (MW) 
of solar plants (both on Rooftops and on land) and about 103 MW of wind power plants 
have been com missioned. Further, 100 MW RE power under Round the Clock (RE -
RTC) mode tied up from Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) has also started 
flowing. In addition to this, 1500 MW capacity of renewable Round The Clock (RE -
RTC) has been tied up. This is hy brid solution consisting of solar, wind and storage 
component. 
 Electrification of railway network on Indian Railways has been taken up in mission 
mode. So far, about 99.2% of Broad Gauge (BG) network has been electrified. The 
electrification in remaining network has been taken up.  
 Head on Generation (HOG) scheme has been implemented in passenger locomotives for 
feeding electric supply to coaches for train lighting and air conditioning thereby reducing 
carbon emissions, noise and consumption of diesel. 
Cont....6/- 
3. Weld failures (Nos.) In 2013 -14: 
3699 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
370 Nos. 
90 % reduction 
4. Rail fractures (Nos.) In 2013 -14: 
2548 Nos. 
In 2024-25:  
289 Nos. 
More than 88% 
reduction 
 Better Infrastructure and Rolling Stock 
1. New Track KM added (Track 
Km) 
14,985 Km 34,428 Km More than 2 
times 
2. Flyovers (RoBs) / 
Underpasses (RUBs) (Nos.) 
4,148 Nos. 13,808 Nos. More than 3 
times 
3. Unmanned Level crossings  
(Nos.) on BG 
As on 
31.03.14:  
8,948 
As on 31.03.24: 
 Nil 
(All eliminated by 
31.01.19) 
Removed 
4. Manufacture of LHB Coaches  
(Nos.) 
2,337 Nos. 42,677 More than 18 
times 
350                                                      

-:6:- 
 Indian Railways has taken up a state -of-the-art project for running of its first hydrogen 
train, on pilot basis, as per specifications framed by the Research, Design & Standards 
Organization (RDSO) to demonstrate the use of hydrogen powered train technology in 
Railways. 
 The project establishes the commitment of Indian Railways towards advancements in 
alternative energy-powered train travel thereby ensuring a cleaner and greener future for 
the country's transportation sector. 
***** 
 
351                                                      

1 of 6 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2346 
ANSWERED ON  19.12.2025 
 
EXPRESS TRAIN LINKAGE FROM KUSHINAGAR DISTRICT TO MAJOR 
ECONOMIC HUBS 
 
2346 SHRI RATANJIT PRATAP NARAIN SINGH: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
 
(a) the status of the proposal for providing a new express train linkage from Kushinagar district 
to major economic hubs; 
 
(b) the plan for increasing the frequency and number of stoppages of existing long distance trains 
at local stations; 
 
(c) the steps taken to address the reported overcrowding and cleanliness issues in trains passing 
through the region; 
 
(d) the funds allocated for upgrading the railway track capacity in the Kushinagar section; and 
 
(e) the measures to ensure punctuality of passenger train services? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
 
 
(a) to (e) As the railway network straddles across District boundaries, trains are introduced, 
as per network requirement, across such boundaries. Further, on Indian Railways, the occupancy 
pattern of trains is not uniform throughout the year and it varies over lean and peak periods. 
During peak rush periods, the occupancy of the trains especially on popular routes remains full 
whereas during lean periods and on less popular routes, there is sub-optimal utilization.  
Kaptanganj station, which falls under the jurisdiction of Kushinagar district, is presently 
being served by 32 pairs of tra in services (listed below) which connect it to major cities like 
Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Amritsar, Jammu Tawi, Prayagraj, etc. 
SN Train no. and name 
1 55098/55097 Gorakhpur Cantt–Narkatiaganj Passenger 
2 55047/55048 Narkatiaganj–Gorakhpur Cantt. Passenger 
3 55096/55095 Gorakhpur Cantt–Narkatiaganj Passenger 
352                                                      

2 of 6 
4 55036/55035 Gorakhpur Cantt–Siwan Passenger 
5 55040/55039 Barhni–Narkatiaganj Passenger 
6 55115/55116 Thawe–Kaptanganj Passenger 
7 55107/55108 Thawe–Kaptanganj Passenger 
8 75105/75106 Thawe–Nakaha Jungle DEMU 
9 14111/14112 Muzaffarpur–Prayagraj Bapudham Express 
10 14011/14012 Radhikapur–Anand Vihar (T) Express 
11 14009/14010 Bapudham Motihari–Anand Vihar (T) Champaran Satyagraha Express 
12 14047/14048 Sitamarhi–Delhi Amrit Bharat Express 
13 15529/15530 Saharsa–Anand Vihar (T) Jansadharan Express 
14 15211/15212 Darbhanga–Amritsar Jannayak Express 
15 15133/15134 Chhapra–Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
16 14627/14628 Saharsa–Chheharta (Chandigarh) Amrit Bharat Express 
17 19409/19410 Sabarmati–Thawe Express 
18 12557/12558 Muzaffarpur–Anand Vihar (T) Saptkranti Express 
19 15001/15002 Muzaffarpur–Dehradun Rapti Sagar Express 
20 15051/15052 Kolkata–Gorakhpur Purvanchal Express 
21 15079/15080 Patliputra–Gorakhpur Express 
22 15273/15274 Raxaul–Anand Vihar (T) Satyagraha Express 
23 15135/15136 Chhapra–Amritsar Express 
24 15113/15114 Gomtinagar–Chhapra Express 
25 15655/15656 Kamakhya–Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express 
26 15653/15654 Guwahati - Jammu Tawi Amarnath Express 
27 15557/15558 Darbhanga–Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
28 15567/15568 Bapudham Motihari–Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
29 15561/15562 Darbhanga–Gomtinagar Amrit Bharat Express 
30 19623/19624 Madar Jn.–Darbhanga Amrit Bharat Express 
31 26501/26502 Patliputra–Gorakhpur Vande Bharat Express 
353                                                      

3 of 6 
32 19037/19038 Bandra (T)–Barauni Avadh Express 
 
 
Padrauna station which also falls under the jurisdiction of Kushinagar  district, is presently being 
served by 09 pairs of train services (listed below) which connect it to major cities like Delhi, 
Ahmedabad, Amritsar, Chhapra etc. 
SN Train no. and name 
1 15133/15134 Chhapra - Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
2 19409/19410 Sabarmati - Thawe Express 
3 15113/15114 Gomti Nagar - Chhapra Express 
4 15079/15080 Patliputra - Gorakhpur Express 
5 55115/55116 Thawe - Kaptanganj Passenger 
6 55035/55036 Siwan - Gorakhpur Cantt. Passenger 
7 75105/75106 Thawe - Nakaha Jungle DEMU 
8 55107/55108 Thawe - Kaptanganj Passenger 
9 15135/15136 Chhapra - Amritsar Express 
 
 
Besides, introduction of new train services, which is an on -going process, depends on various 
factors which include: 
• Capacity of that section 
• Availability of path 
• Availability of required rolling stock 
• Availability of matching infrastructure for rolling stock 
• Maintenance requirement of railway tracks and other assets 
Similarly, provision of stoppages of train services depends on the traffi c justification, operational 
feasibility including availability of extra time on the section &  availability of matching 
infrastructure such as Platform length etc. 
To improve rail connectivity in Kushinagar region, the following works have been taken up:- 
SN Project Cost ( in Cr.) 
1. Gorakhpur-Valmikinagar doubling (96 km) 1,121 
2. Chhitauni-Tamkuhi Road new line (63 km) 1,731 
 
 
Additional accommodation and Coaches: 
 
354                                                      

4 of 6 
With a view to meet the demand of passengers travelling in unreserved coaches, Railways have 
significantly increased the facilities for passengers demanding general class travel. During the last 
financial year 2024 -25 alone, 1250 general coaches have been utilised in various long -distance 
trains. 
 
To cater to the travel demand of the low and middle income families, Indian Railways have taken 
up 17,000 non -AC coaches (general/sleeper). On IR, the percentage of non -AC coaches, is about 
70% as indicated below: 
 
Table 1: Distribution of coaches: 
Non-AC coaches (general and sleeper) ~57,200 ~70%  
AC coaches ~25,000 ~30%  
Total coaches ~82,200 100% 
 
The number of seats available for non -AC passengers has also increased. The current composition 
is as follows: 
 
Table 2: Distribution of seats: 
Non-AC seats ~ 54 lakhs ~ 78% 
AC seats ~ 15 lakhs ~ 22% 
Total ~ 69 lakhs 100% 
 
To provide greater accommodation for the passengers using General and non -AC Sleeper Coaches, 
the extant policy regarding composition of Mail/Express trains provides for 12 (Twelve) General  
class & Sleeper class non- AC coaches and 08 (eight) AC-Coaches, in a train of 22 coaches, thereby 
providing greater accommodation for the passengers  using General and non-AC Sleeper Coaches.  
 
Besides, in its constant endeavour to provide additional accommodation to travelling passengers, 
Indian Railways (IR), operate s Special train services during festivals, holidays, etc. to cater to the 
extra needs of passengers and supplement the accommodation available by regular services. In 
addition to the above, the load of trains are also augmented, both on a permanent and tem porary 
basis, to generate additional accommodation for different segments of passengers.  
Accordingly, on the Indian Railways(IR) network, during Year 2025 -26 (till November, 2025), 
about 60,000 special trains have been operated and more than 700 coaches h ave been utilized for 
augmentation of train services on a permanent  basis. 
 
355                                                      

5 of 6 
To provide affordable means of transportation to the low and middle income families, Indian 
Railways  have introduced Amrit  Bharat services that are fully non -AC modern trains. The present  
composition of Amrit Bharat consists of 11 General Class coaches, 8 Sleeper Class coaches, 01 
Pantry car and 02 Luggage cum Divyangjan coaches. Presently, 30  Amrit Bharat services are 
already in operation, which include the following  14 Amrit Bharat services  catering to the needs of 
Kaptanganj station:  
SN Train no. and name 
1 15557/15558 Darbhanga–Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
2 15567/15568 Bapudham Motihari–Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
3 15561/15562 Darbhanga–Gomtinagar Amrit Bharat Express 
4 15133/15134 Chhapra–Anand Vihar (T) Amrit Bharat Express 
5 14627/14628 Saharsa–Chandigarh Amrit Bharat Express 
6 14047/14048 Sitamarhi–Delhi Amrit Bharat Express 
7 19623/19624 Madar Jn.–Darbhanga Amrit Bharat Express 
 
Punctuality: 
 
Indian Railways makes all possible efforts to run trains on time.  Several factors affect punctual 
running of trains which include foggy weather, path constraints, asset maintenance, alarm chain 
pulling, agitations, cattle run over and other unforeseen circumstances. 
Based on assessments of factors affecting the punctual running of trains, remedial measures, both 
short term and long term, are taken which includes capacity augmentation of rail network, 
upgradation of track and signalling system, removing operational bottlenecks, yard remodelilng etc.   
 
Overall punctuality of Mail/Express trains on Indian Railways during 2024 -25 was 77.12% and that 
during 2025-26 (April-November) was 79.25%. 
 
 
 
Cleanliness: 
 
Cleanliness is a continuous process and every endeavour is made to keep the trains, including those 
passing through Kushinagar district region, in properly maintained and clean condition. Some of the 
major steps taken, in this regard, are as under:- 
1) Installation of bio -toilets in all passenger coaches to eliminate direct discharge of human 
waste on Railway tracks. 
2) Mechanized cleaning of coaches including toilets of trains. 
356                                                      

6 of 6 
3) Provision of On Board Housekeeping Service (OBHS) in identified long distance 
Mail/Express trains for cleaning of coach toilets, doorways, aisles and passenger compartments 
during the run of the trains. OBHS is presently provided in 1350 pair of trains. 
4) Provision of Clean Train Station (CTS) scheme for limited mechanized cleaning attention to 
identified trains en-route. 
5) Regular pest and rodent control of coaches and station areas. 
6) Provision of dustbins in AC and non-AC Coaches. 
7) Regular monitoring through Rail Madad portal which has been developed to enable 
passengers to highlight their needs and seek assistance for cleanliness related issues. 
 
 
***** 
357                                                      

 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2347 
 ANSWERED ON  19.12.2025 
 REOPERATIONALISATION OF KALKA AMRITSAR TRAIN SERVICE 
 2347 SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA: 
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 (a)  whether  the  Kalka–Amritsar  train  service,  which  earlier  operated  for  the  convenience  of  residents 
 of Kalka, Panchkula and adjoining areas, has been discontinued; 
 (b)  if  so,  the  reasons  for  and  whether  any  review  has  been  undertaken  regarding  the  inconvenience 
 caused to daily commuters, elderly citizens and Sikh pilgrims who frequently travel to Amritsar; 
 (c)  whether  Government  proposes  to  restore  or  introduce  a  new  direct  train  service  between  Kalka 
 and  Amritsar  to  reduce  travel  time  and  avoid  the  need  for  passengers  to  first  reach  Chandigarh 
 railway station; and 
 (d) if so, the details thereof and the expected timeline for re-operationalising the service? 
 ANSWER 
 MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
 ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 (a)  to  (d)  At  present,  Kalka  is  served  by  08  pairs  of  trains,  as  listed  below,  which  are  providing 
 connectivity to destinations like Delhi, Kolkata, Sai Nagar Shirdi, Bhopal, Ambala, Chandigarh etc. 
 SN  Train no. and name 
 1  12311/12 Howrah-Kalka Netaji Express 
 2  14503/04 Kalka - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express 
 3  12005/06 New Delhi - Kalka Shatabdi Express 
 4  14331/32 Delhi - Kalka Express 
 5  14795/96 Bhiwani-Kalka Ekta Express 
 6  12011/12 New Delhi - Kalka Shatabdi Express 
 1  of 2 
358                                                      

 7  22455/56 Sainagar Shirdi - Kalka SF Express 
 8  54531/32 Ambala Cantt - Kalka Passenger 
 Further,  Chandigarh,  near  Kalka,  is  well  connected  to  Amritsar  by  08  pairs  of  train  services  as  listed 
 below: 
 SN  Train no. and name 
 1  14631/32 Dehradun - Amritsar Express 
 2  18101/02 Tatanagar - Jammu Tawi Express 
 3  18309/10 Sambalpur - Jammu Tawi Express 
 4  12411/12 Chandigarh - Amritsar Express 
 5  15531/32 Saharsa - Amritsar Jan Sadharan Express 
 6  14615/16 Lalkuan - Amritsar Weekly Express (via Kashipur) 
 7  12925/26 Bandra(T)-Amritsar Paschim Express 
 8  14541/42 Chandigarh - Amritsar Express 
 Besides,  introduction  of  new  train  services,  which  is  an  on-going  process,  depends  on  various 
 factors which include- 
 • Capacity of that section 
 • Availability of path 
 • Availability of required rolling stock 
 • Availability of matching infrastructure for rolling stock 
 • Maintenance requirement of railway tracks and other assets 
 ***** 
 2  of 2 
359                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2348 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
CRIMES REPORTED IN RAILWAYS 
 
2348 DR. V. SIVADASAN: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state:   
 
(a) the State-wise, year-wise number of crimes reported on railway premises and onboard trains 
during the last five years, including theft, robbery, assault, sexual offences, vandalism and 
other offences recorded by RPF/GRP;  
(b) the number of persons injured or affected in these incidents, year-wise; and 
(c) the total amount of compensation provided to victims during this period year -wise and State -
wise? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c) : ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India and, therefore, State Governments are responsible for prevention, detection, 
registration and investigation of crime and maintena nce of law and order on Railways through their 
law enforcement agencies viz. Government Railway Police (GRP)/District Police. Railway Protection 
Force (RPF) supplements the efforts of GRP/District Police to provide better protection and security to 
railway property, passenger area and passengers and for matters connected therewith.  
 
The numbers of incidents reported of crime against passengers in Railways are published state-wise by 
National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). 
--2/- 
360                                                      

-2- 
Accident victims are paid ex-gratia relief soon after an accident or untoward incident. Total amount of 
ex-gratia paid by the Railways to the next of kin of deceased and injured individuals in incidents of 
attack on passengers during the period 2020-21 to 2025-26 (till Nov. 2025) is Rs. 38.79 Lakhs. 
Compensation for death and injury of railway passengers in train accidents and untoward incidents, as 
defined under Section 124 and Section 124 -A (read with Section 123, of the Railways Act, 1989), is 
decided by Railway Claims Tribunal ( RCT) on the basis of a claim application filed by the 
victims/their dependents before RCT and it disposes off the cases after following the due judicial 
process. Railway Administration pays compensation when a decree is awarded by Hon’ble RCT in 
favour of the claimant and Railways decide to implement the decree. Compensation amount is over 
and above the ex-gratia amount. 
 
Total amount of compensation paid by the Railways to the next of kin of deceased and injured 
individuals in incidents of attack on passen gers during the period 2020 -21 to 2025-26 (till Nov. 2025) 
is Rs. 52.23 Lakhs. The amount of compensation paid in a year need not necessarily relate to the 
accidents/casualties in that year alone. The amount paid in a year depends on the number of cases 
finalised by Railway Claims Tribunals (RCTs) or other Courts of Law in a particular year irrespective 
of the year(s) in which the accidents/untoward incidents they pertain to, have occurred.  
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
361                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2349 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
EXPANSION OF RAIL CONNECTIVITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE IN ODISHA 
 
2349  SMT. MAMATA MOHANTA: 
 
            Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the present status of ongoing railway projects in the State of Odisha, including new lines, 
doubling, electrification and station redevelopment, along with the progress achieved during the 
last five years; 
 
(b) the total funds allocated and utilised for these projects in Odisha during the last five years, 
year-wise; 
 
(c) whether timelines have been fixed for completing delayed or slow-moving railway sections in 
tribal districts, including Mayurbhanj, if so, the details thereof; and 
 
(d) the steps taken during the last five years to enhance freight-loading efficiency and passenger 
amenities across major stations and freight corridors in Odisha? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (d): Budget allocation in the recent years has increased significantly. Budget allocation for 
infrastructure projects and safety works, falling fully/partly in the State of Odisha is as under: 
 
Period Outlay 
2009-14 ₹ 838 Cr./year 
2025-26 ₹ 10,599 Cr. (Nearly 13 times) 
 
The details of commissioning/laying of new track falling fully/partly in the State of Odisha 
during 2009-14 and 2014-25 is as under: 
 
Contd…2/- 
 
362                                                      

-2- 
Period New Track Commissioned Average Commissioning of new tracks 
per year 
2009-14 267 Km 53.4 Km 
2014-25 2,150 Km 195.45 Km 
(More than 3.5 times) 
 
As on 01.04.2025, 49 projects (19 New Lines and 30 Doubling), of a total length of 4,010 Km, 
costing ₹ 67,496 crore, falling fully/partly in Odisha, are sanctioned. The summary is as under:- 
 
Category 
No of 
sanctioned 
Projects 
Total Length 
NL/GC/DL 
(in Km) 
Length 
Commissioned till 
Mar'25 
(in Km) 
Total Exp upto 
Mar'25 
(₹ in Cr) 
New Lines 19 1,544 256 6,270 
Doubling/Multi-
tracking 30 2,466 1,173 21,773 
Total 49 4,010 1,429 28,043 
 
Details of some of the recently completed projects falling fully/partly in Odisha are as under: 
 
S.No. Name of Project Cost 
(In Crores of ₹) 
1 Daitari-Banspani New Line and Jakhapura-Haridaspur 3rd  
Line (179 Km) 1,317 
2 MCL siding from Jharsuguda - Sardega New Line       (53 
Km) 1,598 
3 Haridaspur-Paradeep New Line (82 Km) 2,397 
4 Angul-Sukinda New Line (104 Km) 2,834 
5 Champa-Jharsuguda 3rd Line (152 Km) 1,227 
6 Sambalpur-Titlagarh Doubling (182 Km) 2,262 
7 Rourkela-Jharsuguda 3rd  Line (101 Km) 1,313 
8 Banspani-Daitari-Tomka-Jakhapura Doubling (164 Km) 1,827 
9 Sambalpur-Talcher Doubling (174 Km)  1,539 
10 Raipur - Titlagarh Doubling (203 Km) 1,171 
11 Jharsuguda-Sardega Doubling (50 Km) 3,200 
 
To improve connectivity in Mayurbhanj District following projects have been taken up: 
 
S. No. Name of Project Total Cost  
(In Crores of ₹) 
1 Bangriposi-Gorumahisani New Line (86 Km) 2,269 
2 Badampahar-Kendujhargarh New Line (82 Km) 1,876 
3 Buramara-Chakulia New Line (60 Km) 1,459 
 
Further, some of the other main projects falling fully/partly in Odisha which have been taken up 
are as under: 
Contd…3/- 
 
363                                                      

-3- 
S.N Name of Project Total Cost  
(In Crores of ₹) 
1 Junagarh-Nabarangpur New Line (116 Km) 2,865 
2 Nabarangpur-Jeypore New Line (41 Km) 748 
3 Jeypore-Malkangiri New Line (130 Km) 2,344 
4 Malkangiri – Pandurangapuram New Line (174 Km) 3,592 
5 Gunupur-Therubali New Line (74 Km) 1,166 
6 Puri - Konark New Line (32 Km) 492 
7 Bargarh Road-Nawapara Road New Line (138 Km) 2,622 
8 Vizianagram-Titlagarh 3rd Line (265 Km) 6,996 
9 Jarapada- Budhapank 3rd & 4 th Line with flyover at Talcher     
(101 Km) 
810 
10 Budhapank- Salegaon via Rajatgarh 3rd & 4th Line (170 Km) 2,023 
11 Nergundi - Vizianagaram 3rd Line (385 Km) 4,963 
12 Kottavalasa-Koraput Doubling (189 Km) 2,500 
13 Koraput-Singapur Road Doubling (165 Km) 2,362 
14 Jagdalpur-Koraput Doubling (107 Km) 1,547 
15 Jharsuguda-Bilaspur 4th line (206 Km) 2,596 
16 Bondamunda-Ranchi Doubling (159 Km) 3,029 
17 Narayangarh-Bhadrak 3rd line (153 Km) 2,136 
18 Bhadrak-Nergundi 3rd Line (92 Km) 1,284 
 
During last three years i.e. 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 and current Financial Year i.e. 2025-26, 
total 76 Nos. of Surveys (30 New Line, 46 Doubling) falling fully/partly in the State of Odisha 
having a total length of 4,843 Km have been sanctioned.  
 
Sanction of any railway project depends upon many parameters/factors which include the 
following:  
 Anticipated traffic projections and Remunerativeness of the proposed route  
 First and last mile connectivity provided by the project  
 Connection of missing links and providing additional route  
 Augmentation of congested/saturated lines  
 Demands raised by State Governments/Central Ministries/Public representatives,  
 Railway’s operational requirements  
 Socio-economic considerations  
 Overall availability of funds  
 
Completion of Railway project/s depends on various factors which include the following: 
 Land acquisition 
 Forest clearance 
Contd…4/- 
364                                                      

-4- 
 Shifting of infringing utilities 
 Statutory clearances from various authorities 
 Geological and topographical conditions of area 
 Law and order situation in the area of project site 
 Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc. 
 
All these factors affect the completion time and cost of the project/s. 
 
RAILWAY ELECTRIFICATION: 
 
Electrification of railway network on Indian Railways has been taken up in mission mode. So 
far, about 99.2% of Broad Gauge (BG) network has been electrified. The electrification in 
remaining network has been taken up. Electrification carried out during 2014-25 and before 2014 
is as under: 
 
Period Route Kilometer 
Before 2014 (about 60 years) 21,801 
2014-25 46,900 
 
In Odisha, entire existing BG network has been electrified. Further, all new line / multi-tracking 
projects are being sanctioned and constructed with electrification. 
 
GATI-SHAKTI MULTI MODAL CARGO TERMINAL (GCT):  
 
To facilitate construction of new cargo terminals on Indian Railways network, which will bring 
additional cargo business to Railways, Gati-Shakti Multi Modal Cargo Terminal (GCT) policy 
was introduced in December' 2021.  
 
So far, 120 GCTs locations have been commissioned and further 133 more locations are under 
various stages of construction (where Engineering scale plan approved) over Indian Railways. 
Out of these, 10 GCTs locations have been commissioned in Odisha and further 7 more locations 
in Odisha have been taken up. 
 
STATION REDEVELOPMENT:  
Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for redevelopment of stations with a long-term approach.  The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in phases to improve the stations. The master planning includes: Contd…5/- 
365                                                      

-5-  Improvement of access to station and circulating areas  Integration of station with both sides of city  Improvement of station building  Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths   Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger traffic  Provision of lift/escalators/ramp  Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms  Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One Product’  Parking areas, Multimodal integration  Amenities for Divyangjans  Better passenger information systems  Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping, etc. keeping in view the necessity at each station.  The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre at the station in the long term. 
 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified for development under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, out of which 59 stations are located in Odisha. The names of stations identified for development under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Odisha are as following: State No. of Amrit Stations Names of Amrit Stations 
Odisha 59 Angul, Badampahar, Balangir, Balasore, Balugaon, Barbil, Bargarh Road, Baripada, Barpali, Belpahar, Betnoti, Bhadrak, Bhawanipatna, Bhubaneswar, Bimlagarh, Brahmapur, Brajrajnagar, Chatrapur, Cuttack, Damanjodi, Dhenkanal, Gunupur, Harishanker Road, Himgir, Hirakud, Jajpur-Keonjhar road, Jaleswar, Jaroli, Jeypore, Jharsuguda, Jharsuguda Road, Kantabanji, Kendujhargarh, Kesinga, Khariar Road, Khurda road, Koraput, Lingaraj Temple Road, Mancheswar, Meramandali, Muniguda, New Bhubaneswar, Panposh, Paradeep, Parlakhemundi, Puri, Raghunathpur, Rairakhol, Rairangpur, Rajgangpur, Rayagada, Rourkela, Sakhi Gopal, Sambalpur, Sambalpur City, Soro, Talcher, Talcher Road, Titlagarh Jn. Contd…6/-  
366                                                      

-6- Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Odisha have been taken up at a good pace. Till now, works of 06 stations (Baripada, Barpali, Bimalgarh, 
Cuttack (Second Entry), Parlakhemundi, Talcher) have been completed. The works at other 
stations have also been taken up at good pace. 
 Jaleswar station: The work of modern toilet has been completed. The works of 
improvement of station building, waiting hall, platform shelter, platform surfacing, circulating 
area, parking area, lighting, signage and 12 m Foot Over Bridge have been taken up. 
 Betnoti station: The works of platform shelter and platform surfacing have been 
completed. The works of extension of station building, waiting hall, circulating area, parking 
area, subway have been taken up.  
 Baleshwar station: The works of main station building and office complex have been 
taken up.  
 
Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations on Indian 
Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and works in this regard are undertaken as per 
requirement, subject to inter-se priority and availability of funds. The priority for development / 
redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations is accorded to higher category of station 
over lower category of station while sanctioning and executing the works. 
 
Development / upgradation / modernisation of stations including under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme is generally funded under Plan Head-53 ‘Customer Amenities’. The details of allocation 
and expenditure under Plan Head-53 are maintained Zonal Railway-wise and not work-wise, or 
station-wise or state-wise. Odisha is covered under the jurisdiction of three railway zones, 
namely, South Eastern Railway, South East Central Railway, and East Coast Railway. For these zones, an allocation of ₹1,287 crore has been made for the financial year 2025-26, out of which an expenditure of ₹913 crore (up to October, 2025) has been incurred so far. 
 
Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety of 
passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, heritage, tree 
cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due to brownfield related 
challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, optical fibre cables, gas 
pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements, operation of trains without hindering 
passenger movement, speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of tracks and 
high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors affect the completion time. Therefore, no time 
frame can be indicated at this stage. 
***** 
367                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS   
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2350 
  ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
PRESENT STATUS OF RAILWAYS IN HIMACHAL PRADESH 
 
2350 SHRI HARSH MAHAJAN: 
   
 Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the present status of all ongoing and proposed railway projects in the State of Himachal 
Pradesh; 
 
(b) the details of physical progress, financial allocation and expenditure incurred on each 
project during the last three years; 
 
(c) the target year or timeline set for the completion of these projects; and 
  
(d) whether Government has formulated any comprehensive plan to strengthen railway 
connectivity in the State and to improve passenger amenities, station infrastructure and 
freight facilities, if so, the details thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (d): Railway projects are surveyed/ sanctioned/executed Zonal Railway wise and not 
State-wise as the Railways’ projects may span across State boundaries. 
 
Railway infrastructure projects falling fully/partly in the State of Himachal Pradesh are 
covered under Northern Railway zone of Indian Railways. 
 
Budget allocation for Infrastructure projects and safety works, falling fully/ partly in the state 
of Himachal Pradesh is as under: 
Period Outlay 
              2009-14 ₹108 crore/year 
2025-26 ₹ 2,716 Cr. (More than 25 times) 
 
 
--2/- 
368                                                      

 
-2- 
 
As on 01.04.2025, 03 new line of total length 214 km, costing ₹17,622 crore, falling 
fully/partly in the state of Himachal Pradesh are in construction stage, out of which, 64 km 
length has been commissioned and an expenditure of ₹8,280 crore has been incurred upto 
March, 2025. The status of work is summarized as under:- 
Category No. of 
projects 
Total 
Length  
 (in Km) 
Length 
Commissioned  (in 
Km) 
Expenditure upto March 
2025 
(₹in Cr) 
New Lines 3 214 64 8,280 
 
To improve connectivity in Himachal Pradesh following projects have been taken up:  
 Nangal Dam-Talwara-Mukerian new line (123 km) 
Nangal Dam-Talwara-Mukerian new line has been taken up at a cost of Rs. 2,018 
crore. Nangal Dam - Una - Andaura - Daulatpur Chowk (60 km) section of this 
project has been commissioned. Work of Daulatpur Chowk - Kartoli Punjab - Talwara 
(52 km) section has been taken up.   
 
 Chandigarh-Baddi new line (28 km) 
Chandigarh – Baddi new line has been taken up at a cost of Rs. 1,540 crore. 
 
 Bhanupalli-Bilaspur-Beri new line (63 km) 
Bhanupalli-Bilaspur-Beri new rail line project has been sanctioned on cost sharing 
basis having 25% share of State Government of Himachal Pradesh and 75 % share of 
Central Government. Further, full cost of land beyond Rs. 70 crore is to be borne by 
Government of Himachal Pradesh. Detailed Estimate of the project was sanctioned at 
a cost of Rs.6,753 crore including land cost of Rs. 1,617 crore. 
 
In Himachal Pradesh, 124 Ha of land is required for the execution of the project. 
Against this requirement, only 82 Ha have been provided by State Government of 
Himachal Pradesh. Work has been taken up on the available land. Land beyond 
Bilaspur to Beri is yet to be handed over by Government of Himachal Pradesh. Non-
availability of land is adversely affecting the project. 
 
--3/- 
 
 
369                                                      

 
-3- 
The total expenditure incurred on the project so far is Rs.5,252 crore. As per cost 
sharing arrangements Rs. 2,711 crore was to be given by Government of Himachal 
Pradesh. However, they have deposited only Rs. 847 crore as their share of cost. Thus, 
Rs.1,863 crore is balance with State Government of Himachal Pradesh. Non 
deposition of their share of cost is adversely affecting the progress of project. 
 
The progress of this project is affected due to non fulfillment of their commitments by 
State Govt. The support of State Govt is required to expedite the Project.  
 
The Government of India is geared up to execute projects, however success depends 
upon the support of Government of Himachal Pradesh. 
 
Sanction of any railway project depend upon many parameters/factors which include the 
following: 
 Anticipated traffic projections and Remunerativeness of the proposed route 
 First and last mile connectivity provided by the project 
 Connection of missing links and providing additional route 
 Augmentation of congested/saturated lines 
 Demands raised by State Governments/Central Ministries/Public representatives, 
 Railway’s own operational requirements 
 Socio-economic considerations 
 Overall availability of funds 
 
Completion of Railway project/s depends on various factors which include the following: 
 Land acquisition by State Government 
 Forest clearance  
 Shifting of infringing utilities 
 Statutory clearances from various authorities  
 Geological and topographical conditions of area 
 Law and order situation in the area of project site 
 Number of working months in a year for particular project site etc. 
All these factors affect the completion time and cost of the project/s. 
 
 
--4/- 
 
 
370                                                      

 
-4- 
 
Station Redevelopment 
 
Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for redevelopment of 
stations with a long-term approach. 
 
The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in phases to 
improve the stations. The master planning includes: 
 
• Improvement of access to station and circulating areas 
• Integration of station with both sides of city 
• Improvement of station building 
• Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths  
• Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger 
traffic 
• Provision of lift/escalators/ramp 
• Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms 
• Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One 
Product’ 
• Parking areas, Multimodal integration 
• Amenities for Divyangjans 
• Better passenger information systems 
• Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping, 
etc. keeping in view the necessity at each station 
 
The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of 
ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre at the 
station in the long term. 
 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified for development under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme, out of which Amb Andaura, Baijnath Paprola, Palampur, and Shimla stations are 
located in Himachal Pradesh.  
 
Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Himachal Pradesh have been taken up at a good pace. Till now, works of 02 stations (Amb Andaura, Baijnath Paprola) in Himachal Pradesh have been completed. Palampur 
Himachal and Shimla stations are under master planning. 
--5/- 
371                                                      

 
-5- 
 
Master Planning is an iterative process requiring optimization and the time frame and other 
details for such optimization cannot be indicated at this stage. 
 
Further, development / redevelopment of stations on Indian Railways is a continuous and 
ongoing process and works in this regard are undertaken as per requirement, subject to inter-
se priority and availability of funds. The priority for development / redevelopment / 
upgradation / modernisation of stations is accorded to higher category of station over lower 
category of station while sanctioning and executing the works. 
 
Development / upgradation / modernisation of stations including under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme is generally funded under Plan Head-53 ‘Customer Amenities’. The details of 
allocation and expenditure under Plan Head-53 are maintained Zonal Railway-wise and not 
work-wise, or station-wise or state-wise. Himachal Pradesh is covered under the jurisdiction 
of Northern Railway. For this zone, allocation of ₹ 5,834 crore has been made for the last 
three financial year under Plan Head-53 and expenditure of ₹ 3,890 crore (up to October, 
2025) has been incurred so far. 
 
 
***** 
372                                                      

1 of 7 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2351 
ANSWERED ON  19.12.2025 
 
DELAY IN ROLLOUT OF VANDE BHARAT TRAINS AND PROGRESS OF KAVACH 
SYSTEM 
 
2351 SHRI KAPIL SIBAL: 
         
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether several Vande Bharat trains scheduled for inauguration in 2025 have been delayed; 
 
(b) if so, the reasons therefor and the revised timelines for rollout of the remaining 100 Vande 
Bharat trains announced earlier; and 
 
(c) the total amount spent on the Kavach anti-collision system till October 2025 and the length 
of railway network on which Kavach has been commissioned so far ? 
 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
trains and are aimed to provide better travel experience and improved safety to the passengers. 
These services are equipped with enhanced safety features and modern passenger amenities 
like-  
● KAVACH system 
● Faster acceleration 
● Fully Sealed Gangway 
● Automatic Plug Doors 
● Better Ride Comfort 
● Mini Pantry with provision of Hot Case 
● Bottle Cooler 
● Deep freezer & Hot water Boiler 
● Reclining Ergonomic Seats 
● Comfortable Seating with revolving seats in executive class 
(a) to (c) :  Indian Railways have introduced Vande Bharat services which are semi-high speed 
373                                                      

2 of 7 
● Mobile charging sockets for every seat 
● Special lavatory for Divyangjan passengers in Driving Trailer Car (DTC),  
● CCTVs, etc. 
Presently, 164  Vande Bharat train services (listed below) are operational on the various sectors 
of the Broad Gauge (B.G.) electrified network of Indian Railways (IR). Of these 132 Vande 
Bharat services have been introduced during the last 3 years i.e. 2022-23 to 2024-25 while 28 
Vande Bharat services  have been introduced during 2025-26 (upto 15th December, 2025): 
S.No. Train Number and Name 
1 22435/22436 New Delhi - Varanasi Vande Bharat Express 
2 22439/22440 New Delhi - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Vande Bharat Express 
3 20901/20902 Mumbai Central - Gandhinagar Capital Vande Bharat Express 
4 22447/22448 New Delhi - Amb Andaura Vande Bharat Express 
5 20607/20608 MGR Chennai Central - Mysuru Vande Bharat Express 
6 20825/20826 Bilaspur - Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
7 22301/22302 Howrah - New Jalpaiguri Vande Bharat Express 
8 20833/20834 Visakhapatnam - Secunderabad Vande Bharat Express 
9 
22223/22224 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Sai Nagar Shirdi Vande Bharat 
Express 
10 22225/22226 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Solapur jn. Vande Bharat Express 
11 20171/20172 Hazrat Nizamuddin - Rani Kamlapati Vande Bharat Express 
12 20977/20978 Ajmer - Chandigarh Vande Bharat Express 
13 20643/20644 Chennai Central - Coimbatore Vande Bharat Express 
14 20633/20634 Kasargod - Thiruvananthpuram Central Vande Bharat Express 
15 20701/20702 Secunderabad - Tirupati Vande Bharat Express 
16 22895/22896 Howrah - Puri Vande Bharat Express 
17 22457/22458 Anand vihar - Dehradun Vande Bharat Express 
18 22227/22228 New Jalpaiguri - Guwahati Vande Bharat Express 
19 20911/20912 Indore - Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
20 20173/20174 Rani Kamlapati - Rewa Vande Bharat Express 
374                                                      

3 of 7 
21 20661/20662 KSR Bengaluru - Dharwad Vande Bharat Express 
22 22349/22350 Patna - Ranchi Vande Bharat Express 
23 22229/22230 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
24 12461/12462 Jodhpur - Sabarmati Vande Bharat Express 
25 22549/22550 Gorakhpur - Prayagraj Vande Bharat Express 
26 20835/20836 Rourkela - Puri Vande Bharat Express 
27 20665/20666 Chennai Egmore - Triunelveli Vande Bharat Express 
28 20631/20632 Mangaluru - Thiruvananthpuram Vande Bharat Express 
29 20677/20678 MGR Chennai - Vijayawada jn. Vande Bharat Express 
30 20979/20980 Udaipur - Jaipur Vande Bharat Express 
31 20703/20704 Kacheguda - Yesvantpur Vande Bharat Express 
32 20897/20898 Howrah - Ranchi Vande Bharat Express 
33 22347/22348 Howrah - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
34 22487/22488 Amritsar jn. - Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
35 20646/20645 Mangalore central - Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
36 20705/20706 Huzur Sahib Nanded - Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) Vande Bharat 
Express 
37 20642/20641 Coimbatore Jn. - Bengaluru Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
38 22426/22425 Anand Vihar(T) - Ayodhya Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
39 22415/22416 Varanasi - New Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
40 22477/22478 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - New Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
41 22961/22962 Ahmedabad - Mumbai Central Vande Bharat Express 
42 20707/20708 Secunderabad - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
43 20663/20664 Mysuru - MGR Chennai Vande Bharat Express 
44 22345/22346 Patna - Gomtinagar Vande Bharat Express 
45 22233/22234 New Jalpaiguri - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
46 20841/20842 Bhubaneshwar - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
47 22545/22546 Lucknow - Dehradun Vande Bharat Express 
375                                                      

4 of 7 
48 22231/22232 Kalaburagi - SMVT Bengaluru Vande Bharat Express 
49 22470/22469 Hazrat Nizamuddin - Khajuraho Vande Bharat Express 
50 20887/20888 Ranchi - Varanasi Vande Bharat Express 
51 22925/22926 Ahmedabad - Okha Vande Bharat Express 
52 20627/20628 Chennai Egmore - Nagercoil jn. Vande Bharat Express 
53 20671/20672 Madurai - Bengaluru Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
54 22489/22490 Varanasi - Meerut City Vande Bharat Express 
55 20101/20102 Nagpur - Secunderabad Vande Bharat Express 
56 22499/22500 Varanasi - Deoghar Vande Bharat Express 
57 20893/20894 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
58 22303/22304 Howrah - Gaya Vande Bharat Express 
59 21893/21894 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
60 21895/21896 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
61 20981/20982 Udaipur City - Agra cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
62 20891/20892 Tatanagar - Brahmapur Vande Bharat Express 
63 20871/20872 Howrah - Rourkela Vande Bharat Express 
64 20829/20830 Durg - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
65 20175/20176 Banaras - Agra Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
66 20669/20670 Hubballi - Pune jn. Vande Bharat Express 
67 20673/20674 Kolhapur SCSM Terminus - Pune jn. Vande Bharat Express 
68 22309/22310 Howrah - Jamalpur Vande Bharat Express 
69 26901/26902 Sabarmati - Veraval Vande Bharat Express 
70 26401/26402 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - Srinagar Vande Bharat Express 
71 26403/26404 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - Srinagar Vande Bharat Express 
72 26501/26502 Gorakhpur - Patliputra Vande Bharat Express 
73 26101/26102 Pune - Ajni (Nagpur) Vande Bharat Express 
74 26751/26752 Belagavi - Bengaluru Vande Bharat Express 
 
376                                                      

5 of 7 
75 26405/26406 Amritsar - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Vande Bharat Express 
76 26301/26302 Jogbani - Danapur Vande Bharat Express 
77 26503/26504 Saharanpur - Gomtinagar Vande Bharat Express 
78 26481/26482 Jodhpur - Delhi Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
79 26471/26472 Bikaner - Delhi Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
80 26651/26652 Bengaluru - Ernakulam Vande Bharat Express 
81 26461/26462 Delhi - Firozpur cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
82 26506 / 26505 Banaras - Khajuraho Vande Bharat Express 
 
Indian Railways production units have manufactured 94 Vande Bharat Chair Car Rakes till 
November, 2025. Further to cater to long and medium distance overnight travel, the Sleeper 
variant of Vande Bharat train has been indigenously designed. Two such rakes have been 
manufactured and are under trial/ commissioning. 
 
Besides, introduction of new train services, which is an on-going process, depends on various 
factors which include- 
• Capacity of that section 
• Availability of path 
• Availability of required rolling stock 
• Availability of matching infrastructure for rolling stock 
• Maintenance requirement of railway tracks and other assets 
 
 
Kavach -  Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system 
 
1.    Kavach is an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system. Kavach is 
a highly technology intensive system, which requires safety certification of highest order 
(SIL-4). 
2.   Kavach aids the Loco Pilot in running of trains within specified speed limits by automatic 
application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps the trains to run safely 
during inclement weather. 
3.  The first field trials on the passenger trains were started in February 2016. Based on the 
experience gained and Independent Safety Assessment of the system by Independent Safety 
Assessor (ISA), three firms were approved in 2018-19, for supply of Kavach Ver. 3.2. 
4.    Kavach was adopted as National ATP system in July 2020. 
5.    Implementation of Kavach System involves following Key Activities: 
377                                                      

6 of 7 
i.    Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station, block section. 
ii.   Installation of RFID Tags throughout the track length. 
iii.  Installation of telecom Towers throughout the section. 
iv.  Laying of Optical Fibre Cable along the track. 
v.   Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian 
Railways. 
6.  Based on deployment of Kavach version 3.2 on 1465 RKm on South Central Railway and 
experience gained, further improvements were made. Finally, Kavach specification version 
4.0 was approved by RDSO on 16.07.2024. 
7.   Kavach version 4.0 covers all the major features required for the diverse railway network. 
This is a significant milestone in safety for Indian Railways. Within a short period, IR has 
developed, tested and started deploying Automatic Train Protection System. 
8.  Major improvement in Version 4.0 includes increased Location Accuracy, Improved 
Information of Signal Aspects in bigger yards, Station to Station Kavach interface on OFC 
and Direct Interface to existing Electronic Interlocking System. With these improvements, 
Kavach Ver.4.0. is planned for large scale deployment over Indian Railways. 
9.  After extensive and elaborate trials, Kavach Version 4.0 has been successfully 
commissioned on 738 Route km on  Palwal – Mathura- Nagda section (633 Rkm) on Delhi 
– Mumbai route and Howrah–Bardhaman section (105  Rkm) Delhi – Howrah route. 
Kavach implementation has been taken up in balance sections of Delhi – Mumbai & Delhi 
– Howrah corridors.  
10.  Progress of key items of Kavach on High density routes including Delhi– Mumbai & 
Delhi– Howrah corridors are as under: 
SN Item Progress 
i Laying of Optical Fibre Cable 7129 Km 
ii Installation of Telecom Towers 860 nos 
iii Station Data Centre 767 Stns 
iv Installation of Track side equipment 5672 RKm 
v Provision of Kavach on Locos 4,154 
  
11. Further, track side Kavach implementation work has been taken up on 15,512 RKm 
covering all GQ, GD, HDN and identified sections of Indian Railways. 
12. Bids have been invited for equipping another 9,069 locomotives with Kavach version 4.0. 
Kavach is being provided progressively in a phased manner in locomotives.   
378                                                      

7 of 7 
13.   Specialized training programmes on Kavach are being conducted at centralized training 
institutes of Indian Railways to impart training to all concerned officials. By now more 
than 40,000 technicians, operators and engineers have been trained on Kavach technology. 
This includes 33,000 Loco Pilots & Assistant Loco Pilots. Courses have been designed in 
collaboration with IRISET. 
14.  The funds utilized on Kavach works so far up to Oct' 25 is Rs. 2,354.36 Crores. The 
allocation of funds during the year 2025-26 is Rs. 1673.19 Crores. Requisite funds are 
made available as per the progress of works. 
***** 
379                                                      

O.I.H.         
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2352 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
DYNAMIC FARE SYSTEM IN PREMIUM TRAINS 
 
2352 # SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI: 
      Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state:  
(a) the duration for which it has been decided to continue the dynamic pricing or flexi-fare system 
which is implemented in premium trains; 
 
(b) the total financial benefit that Indian Railways has accrued from this system till date; and 
 
(c) whether Government is considering any amendment in or review of the fare policy? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
 (a) to (c):   Railways are running different types of services with different fare structures. The 
concept of flexi fare has been introduced only in limited number of trains viz. Rajdhani, Shatabdi 
& Duronto trains for better demand management. Moreover, alternative train services on normal 
fare structure are available over Indian Railways on the routes of Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto 
trains.  
Revenue earned by Railways on account of flexi fare during 2024-25 is only about 1.80% 
of total revenue earned from passenger services. 
Indian Railways strives to provide affordable services to all strata of the society and gave 
subsidy of Rs. 60,466 cr on passenger tickets in 2023-24. This amounts to concession of 45% on 
an average, to every person, travelling on Railways. In other words, if the cost of providing 
service is Rs. 100, then the price of ticket is Rs. 55 only. This subsidy is continuing for all 
passengers. 
***** 
380                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2353 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
REDEVELOPMENT OF STATIONS UNDER AMRIT BHARAT STATION SCHEME 
(ABSS) 
 
2353. SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE: 
 SHRI BRIJ LAL: 
 SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI: 
 SMT. KIRAN CHOUDHRY: 
 SHRI AMAR PAL MAURYA: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the latest number of stations approved under the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS) as 
on date, State-wise details; 
 
(b) the total expenditure incurred so  far under ABSS and the projected budget requirement 
for completion of all sanctioned stations; 
 
(c) the details of master plans prepared for these stations, for Financial Year 2024–25; 
 
(d) the number of stations where physical works have commenced, those  completed and 
those at pre-construction stage; 
 
(e) whether the redevelopment under ABSS is expected to increase passenger handling 
capacity, commercial revenue and local employment; and 
 
(f) if so, the expected quantified outcomes? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (f ) : Ministry of Railways has launched Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for 
redevelopment of stations with a long-term approach. 
381                                                      

 
The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in phases to 
improve the stations. The master planning includes: 
 Improvement of access to station and circulating areas 
 Integration of station with both sides of city 
 Improvement of station building 
 Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths  
 Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger 
traffic 
 Provision of lift/escalators/ramp 
 Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms 
 Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One 
Product’ 
 Parking areas, Multimodal integration 
 Amenities for Divyangjans 
 Better passenger information systems 
 Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business m eetings, 
landscaping, etc. keeping in view the necessity at each station 
 
The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of 
ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre 
at the station in the long term. Development of stations into city centres envisages enhanced 
economic activities at and around the stations apart from improved travel experience. 
 
So far, 1,337 stations have been identified for development under the Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme. Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme have 
been taken up at a good pace. Till now, w orks have been completed at 160 stations. Names 
of stations completed so far are as following: 
Alnavar, Amb Andaura, Ambikapur, Amgaon, Anandpur Sahib, Anara, Ayodhya Dham, 
Badami, Bagalkot, Baijnath Paprola, Balrampur, Bantawala, Barabhum, Baramati, 
Bareilly City, Baripada, Barmer, Barpali, Begumpet, Beohari, Bhanupratappur, Bhilai, 
Bijnor, Bimalgarh, Bommidi, Bundi, Chanda Fort, Changanassery, Chidambaram, 
Chinchpokli, Chinna Salem, Chirayinkeezh, Cuttack, Dakor, Derol, Deshnoke, Devlali, 
Dharwad, Dhule,  Dongargarh, Fatehabad, Fatehpur, Fatehpur Shekhawati, Gadag, 
Godda, Gogameri, Gokak Road, Gola Gokarnath, Gomti Na gar, Govardhan, Govind 
Garh, Govindpuri, Govindpur Road, Haibargaon, Haldia, Hapa, Harpalpur, Hathras City, 
Hodal, Idgah Agra Jn., Izzatnagar, Jaisalmer, Jam Jodhpur, Jam Wanthali, Joychandi 
Pahar, Kakinada Town, Kalyani Ghoshpara, Kamakhyaguri, Kanalus Jn ., Karaikkudi Jn., 
382                                                      

Karamsad, Karimnagar, Katni South, Kedgaon, Khairthal, Koppal, Kosamba Jn., 
Kulitturai, Kuttipuram, Lasalgaon, Limbdi, Lohardaga, Lonand Jn., Mahe, Mahuva, 
Mailani, Mandal Garh, Mandawar Mahwa Road, Madhupur, Manaparai, Mandi Dabwali, 
Mangalagiri, Mannargudi, Matunga, M.C.S. Chhatarpur, Mithapur, Morappur, Morbi, 
Muktsar, Munirabad, Murtizapur Jn., Nainpur Jn., Nandura, Narmadapuram 
(Hoshangabad), Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Itwari Junction, Okha, Orchha, Palitana, 
Panagarh, Panki Dham, P arel, Parlakhemundi, Pirpainti, Piska, Pokhrayan, Pollachi Jn., 
Polur, Porbandar, Rajgarh, Rajmahal, Rajula Jn., Ramghat Halt, Rayanpadu, Saharanpur 
Jn., Sahibzada Ajit Singh Mohali, Sahebgunj, Samakhiyali, Samalpatti, Sankarpur, 
Savda, Seoni, Shahad, Shajapur, Sholavandan, Shoranur Jn., Shridham, Siddharth Nagar, 
Sihor Jn., Siuri, Sri Bala Brahmeswara Jogulamba, Srirangam, Srivilliputtur, St.Thomas 
Mount, Sullurpeta, Suraimanpur, Swaminarayan Chappia, Talcher, Tamluk, Thawe, 
Thiruvarur Jn., Tiruvannamalai,  Tuni, Ujhani, Urkura, Utran, Vadakara, Vadala Road, 
Vriddhachalam Jn., Wadakancheri, Warangal. 
 
Good progress has been achieved at the stations where works have been taken up and 
progress of some of these stations is given below: 
 Tirupati station: The str uctural framework of new main entry station building on 
South side and 2 nos. air concourses have been completed. The finishing works of 
new main entry station building on South side and air concourses, structural work of 
station building on North side, pl atform shelter works, lift, escalators etc. have been 
taken up. 
 
 Nellore station: The structural frameworks, brickwork and plastering of station 
buildings on both East and West sides and structural work of air concourse have been 
completed. The finishing works of station building on both East and West side and air 
concourse, extension work of subway, water tanks and sewage treatment plant have 
been taken up. 
 
 Yesvantpur station: The structural works of East side station building, civil works of 
East side sub-station, East side elevated road and Multi Level Car parking have been 
completed. The finishing works of East side station building, East side elevated road 
and Multi Level Car parking, sewage treatment plant, structural work of West side 
station building and air concourse have been taken up. 
 
 Bangalore Cantt. station: The works of 24 m wide diversion road on the South 
side, training centre, hostel on North side and structural work of South side station 
building have been completed.  The finishing work South side station building, 
structural work of North side station building and Foot Over Bridge have been 
taken up. 
383                                                      

 
 Rameswaram station: The structural works of East/North terminal building, 
departure forecourt, arrival forecourt, residential tower, sub -station building, 
desalination plant and sewage treatment plant have been completed. ⁠The masonry 
works of East terminal building, finishing works of North terminal building, 
departure forecourt, arrival forecourt, residential tower, platform upgradation 
including platform shelter and revamping of existing waiting hall have been taken 
up. 
 
 Safdarjung station: The work of signal building, station building, plumbing and fire 
fighting, structural work of operational building up to terrace floor slab, air concou rse 
foundation and pedestals have been completed. The station building electrical and low 
voltage work, platform refurbishing work, finishing work of operational building, 
overhead tank and air concourse have been taken up. 
 
Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations on Indian 
Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and works in this regard are undertaken as 
per requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. The priority for 
development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations is accorded to 
higher category of station over lower category of station while sanctioning and executing 
the works. 
 
Further, development / upgradation / modernization of stations including Amrit Bh arat 
Station Scheme is generally funded under Plan Head –53 ‘Customer Amenities’. The details 
of allocation and expenditure under Plan Head –53 are maintained Zonal Railway -wise and 
not work-wise or station-wise or state-wise. The fund allocation of ₹ 12,118 crore has been 
made for the financial year 2025-26 under Plan Head–53 and expenditure (up to October, 
2025) of ₹ 7,253 crore has been incurred so far. 
 
Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety of 
passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, heritage, 
tree cutting, airport clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due to brownfield related 
challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, optical f ibre cables, gas 
pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements, operation of trains without hindering 
passenger movement, speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of tracks 
and high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors affect the completion time. 
 
***** 
 
384                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2354  
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
PROGRESS OF THE ‘ONE STATION ONE PRODUCT’ INITIATIVE 
 
2354. DR. SUMER SINGH SOLANKI: 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI: 
DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH: 
SHRI ADITYA PRASAD: 
SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR:  
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) the progress of the 'One Station One Product' (OSOP) initiative in Indian railways and the 
impact it has on local artisans and small-scale industries; 
(b) the measures taken to promote and market the unique products associated with each railway 
station under the OSOP scheme; and  
(c) the average monthly income of OSOP outlets? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c): The ‘One Station One Product’ scheme of Indian Railways aims to provide enhanced 
opportunities to local artisans, potters, weavers, craftsmen etc ., for sh owcasing and selling 
indigenous/ local products through provision of sales outlets by Railways at Railway Stations 
across the country. 
 
Salient features of the scheme are as under: 
1. Indian Railways provides uniquely designed sales outlets for showcasing, selling and giving 
high visibility to indigenous/ local products. 
2. The product categories are indigenous/ local to that place and include artefacts; handicrafts; 
textiles and handlooms; toys; leather products; traditional appliances /instruments; garments; 
gems and jewellery; processed, semi processed and other food products indigenously made/  
…2/- 
385                                                      

-2- 
      grown in the area. 
3. Individuals at the bottom of the pyramid/  marginalised and weaker sections, self help 
groups, etc are encouraged. 
4. There is a nominal registration fee for participation in the scheme.  
5. There is no financial eligibility. Allotment is done to all applicants, who meet objectives of 
the scheme, on rotation basis. 
 
Various public outreach measures, including advertising in newspapers, social media, public 
announcements, press notifications, etc., have been undertaken by Railway Authorities to promote 
the scheme.  
 
As on 30.11.2025, a total of 232 5 OSOP outlets were operational at 2002 stations and a total of 
69,205 direct beneficiaries have availed the opportunities under this scheme. It is the continuous 
endeavour of Indian Railways to further proliferate the scheme.  
 
Total sales of ₹ 135.31 cro res have been registered over OSOP outlets across the period 
25.03.2022 to 30.11.2025. The  monthly average sale for the period January -November, 2025 is ₹ 
15,053 per outlet. 
***** 
386                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2355 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
REVENUE FROM TRAIN TICKET SALES 
 
2355 DR. JOHN BRITTAS: 
      Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state:  
(a) details of specific quantum of revenue in absolute numbers earned by Railways on account of 
flexi fare, tatkal, premium tatkal and cancellation of tickets during last five years till 31. 03. 2025 
and for first two quarters of 2025-26, year-wise and category-wise details thereof; and 
 
(b) the details of specific quantum of revenue in absolute numbers accounted under miscellaneous 
coaching receipts during last five years, year-wise and category-wise details thereof? 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
 (a) & (b): Revenue earned by Railways on account of flexi fare, tatkal and premium tatkal during 
2020-21 to 2024-25 is approximately 6% of total revenue earned from passenger services. 
Moreover, amount credited on account of cancellation of tickets by passengers is not maintained 
separately. 
Category-wise details are not accounted separately under Miscellaneous Coaching Receipts. Total 
amount of revenue accounted under Miscellaneous Coaching Receipts during 2020-21 to 2024-25 
is ₹ 9550.19 crore. 
Indian Railways strives to provide affordable services to all strata of the society and gave subsidy 
of Rs. 60,466 cr on passenger tickets in 2023-24. This amounts to concession of 45% on an 
average, to every person, travelling on Railways. In other words, if the cost of providing service is 
Rs. 100, then the price of ticket is Rs. 55 only. This subsidy is continuing for all passengers. 
***** 
387                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2356 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
ATTACK ON RAILWAY PASSENGERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
2356 SMT. JEBI MATHER HISHAM: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state:   
 
(a) State/UT-wise data for the last five years regarding attacks on railway employees, including 
women officers deployed onboard;  
(b) State/UT-wise details of attacks on passengers —especially women —including injuries and 
fatalities reported over the last five years;  
(c) State/UT-wise data on cases registered for such attacks in the last five years and their 
conviction rates; 
(d) State/UT-wise details of compensation given to injured and victims and families of the 
deceased, along with pending claims and timelines for their settlement; and  
(e) whether the effectiveness of the ‘Meri Saheli’ initiative in enhancing women’s safety has been 
evaluated, if so, details thereof? 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (e) : ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India and, therefore, State Governments are responsible for prevention, detection, 
registration and investigation of crime and maintenance of law and order on Railways through their 
law enforcement agencies viz. Government Railway Police (GRP)/District Police. Railway Protection 
Force (RPF) supplements the efforts of GRP/District Police to provide better protection and security to  
railway  property,  passenger  area  and  passengers  and  for  matters  connected  therewith.  
 
 
--2/- 
388                                                      

-2- 
All cases of crime against railway personnel (including women personnel) are reported to and 
registered by GRP or District police as per their jurisdiction followed by investigation and further legal 
course of action. The cases of crime against passengers which includes crime against railway 
personnel is published by National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). However, the data of crime 
against railway personnel is not published separately. 
Accident victims are paid ex-gratia relief soon after an accident or untoward incident. Total amount of 
ex-gratia paid by the Railways to the next of kin of deceased and injured individuals in incidents of 
attack on passengers during the period 2020-21 to 2025-26 (till Nov. 2025) is Rs. 38.79 Lakhs. 
Compensation for death and injury of railway passengers in train accidents and untoward incidents, as 
defined under Section 124 and Section 124 -A (read with Section 123, o f the Railways Act, 1989), is 
decided by Railway Claims Tribunal (RCT) on the basis of a claim application filed by the 
victims/their dependents before RCT and it disposes of the cases after following the due judicial 
process. Railway Administration pays c ompensation when a decree is awarded by Hon’ble RCT in 
favour of the claimant and Railways decide to implement the decree. Compensation amount is over 
and above the ex-gratia amount. 
Total amount of compensation paid by the Railways to the next of kin of d eceased and injured 
individuals in incidents of attack on passengers during the period 2020 -21 to 2025-26 (till Nov. 2025) 
is Rs. 52.23 Lakhs. The amount of compensation paid in a year need not necessarily relate to the 
accidents/casualties in that year al one. The amount paid in a year depends on the number of cases 
finalised by Railway Claims Tribunals (RCTs) or other Courts of Law in a particular year irrespective 
of the year(s) in which the accidents/untoward incidents they pertain to, have occurred.  
During the last five years, an amount of Rs. 25 lakh each, totalling Rs. 50 lakh, has already been 
provided by the concerned Zonal Railways to the family/dependents of the deceased railway 
employees in Uttar Pradesh and Kerala and no claim is pending. 
‘Meri Saheli’ initiative has been launched with an objective to provide enhanced safety and security to 
lady passengers travelling alone in long distance trains for their entire journey i.e. from the originating 
station to destination station. Dedicated teams of lady RPF personnel have been formed for its 
implementation. Presently, approximately 250 RPF teams are being deployed for this purpose covering 
approximately 500 trains on an average daily over the Indian Railways network. During the year 2023   
&   2024,   on   an  average   13,000  such  passengers  were   covered   under  this   initiative   daily.  
--3/- 
389                                                      

-3- 
These teams brief the woman passengers travelling alone about the security measures to be adopted 
during the journey and the details of the channels available for seeking the help in distress. The RPF 
posts falling enroute are also informed well in advance about the movement of lady passengers 
travelling alone and are kept on high alert to respond to any situation without any loss of time. 
Feedback from the lady passengers are also taken to analyse the achievements & shortcomings of this 
initiative with an aim to improve it further. 
 
***** 
  
 
 
 
 
390                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2357 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
STEPS TO BOOST NON-FARE REVENUE 
 
2357. SHRI JAGGESH:  
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Indian Railways is taking new steps to boost non-fare revenue, including leasing 
guest house space and selling waste materials; 
(b) whether railway divisions have monetized wagon-cleaning contracts by allowing sale of 
leftover coal or cement; 
(c) whether Government has assessed current Non-Fare Revenue (NFR) earnings and the 
untapped potential compared to developed countries;   
(d) whether Indian Railways plans to auction station space for premium branded food outlets 
to increase non-fare revenue; and 
(e) if so, the details thereof ? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (e): Several measures have been taken by Indian Railways to increase Non-fare 
Revenue, which includes the following: 
1. Advertisement through Rail Display Network (RDN) at stations. 
2. Advertisement through Out of Home (OOH) Policy. 
3. Advertisement on Mobile Assets like coaches and inside/exterior surfaces of trains 
and locomotives. 
…2/- 
391                                                      

 
-2- 
4. Innovative solutions to enhance passengers’ satisfaction, like Provision for sleeping 
pods, single-brand premium Outlet, Kiosk for providing facility for booking auto & 
Taxis, providing E-Wheel chair facility on a payment basis, Health Kiosk, and 
medical store to sell Generic medicines. 
In 2024-25, the total Sundry Non-fare revenue (Sundry Earnings) of Indian Railways 
was Rs. 11586 cr. which was about 4.36% of Railways’ total receipts. 
Some Divisions have also taken up wagon-cleaning contracts by allowing the sale of 
leftover coal or cement. 
1308 hectares of vacant land (not immediately required by Railways for operational 
needs) have been entrusted to the Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) for 
commercial development to generate non-fare revenue.  
Further, Guidelines have been issued for the allotment of ‘Premium Branded Catering 
Outlet’ at stations to allow Zonal Railways to operate premium branded catering outlets, 
if there is demand and justification. 
***** 
392                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2358 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
BHARAT GAURAV TOURISTS TRAINS 
 
2358  SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  details about objectives and destinations of Bharat Gaurav Tourist Train “Shri Jagannath 
Yatra,” and how does this initiative contribute to promotion of tourism and cultural 
development in India;  
(b)   amenities on Bharat Gaurav Deluxe AC Tourist Train for passengers’ comfort and safety; 
(c)   manner in which the launch of the Bharat Gaurav Tourist Train aligns with “Dekho Apna 
Desh” initiative of the Government of India, and the role this train plays in promoting 
domestic tourism within country; 
(d) how “ Shri Ram-Janaki Yatra: Ayodhya to Janakpur” initiative promotes bilateral 
relations between India and Nepal; and 
(e)     how “Garvi Gujarat” tour through Bharat Gaurav Train helps in promoting India’s 
cultural heritage? 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (e) : Indian Railways have issued ‘Bharat Gaurav Trains’ policy in November’ 2021, 
under which theme based tourist circuit trains are being run with the objective to showcase 
India’s rich cultural heritage and magnificent historical places to the people of India and world. 
Contd…./2-                     
393                                                      

-2- 
As per this policy, service providers have full flexibility to decide the themes/itineraries for 
operation of Bharat Gaurav tourist circuit trains, which may include tourist circuits of any part 
of India, based on market demand, commercial viability etc. 
Bharat Gaurav Tourist train, “Shri Jagannath Yatra” Circuit includes Jagannath Puri, 
Bhubaneswar, Konark, Baidyanath, Gaya and Varanasi. Upto 30.11.2025, 40 Bharat Gaurav 
Trains facilitating 24,463 tourists on the Shri Jagannath Yatra Circuit have been operated. 
“Shri Ram -Janki Yatra” covers pilgrimage destinations associated with the life of Lord Ram, 
including Janakpur, which is located in Nepal. The tour itinerary includes Ayodhya, Nandigram, 
Sitamarhi, Janakpur (Nepal), Varanasi and Prayagraj. This initi ative has popularized Janakpur 
and has placed it as an important pilgrimage in the minds of Indians. This interconnection 
exemplifies the shared cultural and spiritual heritage of India and Nepal, highlighting the 
profound civilizational ties that unite th e two nations. Such initiatives enhance people -to-people 
connectivity and serve to further strengthen cultural exchanges. 
The Bharat Gaurav Deluxe AC tourist train provides comfortable and modern passenger 
amenities during travel, which include a dining ca r, shower cubicle, onboard announcement 
facilities, mini library, digital lockers, foot massagers, CCTV cameras in common areas, fire 
alarms etc. 
As on 30.11.2025, 3 trips of the "Garvi Gujarat" tour have been operated through Bharat Gaurav 
Train covering various cultural and historical destinations, like Champaner, Pavagadh, Sabarmati 
Ashram, Modhera Sun Temple, Rani Ki Vav (Patan), Dwarkadhish, Somnath temple, Nageshwar 
Jyotirlinga  and modern marvels like the Statue of Unity at Kevadia and Dandi Kutir 
(Ahmedabad). 
 
 
* * * * * 
 
394                                                      

1 of 8 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2359 
ANSWERED ON  19.12.2025 
 
STATUS OF OPERATING VANDE BHARAT TRAINS 
 
2359 SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the list of vande bharat express running in the country; 
 
(b) the number of places in the country where the Vande bharat express trains are manufactured; 
 
(c) whether Government would consider to offer reservation to the locals in all technical 
recruitments in Railways where the coaches are being manufactured; and 
 
(d) whether Government will furnish the details of staff recruited both regular as well as on 
contract basis in the Southern railway during the last three years? 
 
 
 
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
trains and are aimed to provide better travel experience and improved safety to the passengers. 
These services are equipped with enhanced safety features and modern passenger amenities like-  
 
● KAVACH system 
● Faster acceleration 
● Fully Sealed Gangway 
● Automatic Plug Doors 
● Better Ride Comfort 
● Mini Pantry with provision of Hot Case 
● Bottle Cooler 
● Deep freezer & Hot water Boiler 
● Reclining Ergonomic Seats 
● Comfortable Seating with revolving seats in executive class 
● Mobile charging sockets for every seat 
● Special lavatory for Divyangjan passengers in Driving Trailer Car(DTC),  
● CCTVs, etc. 
 
(a) to (d) : Indian Railways have introduced Vande Bharat services which are semi-high speed 
395                                                      

2 of 8 
Presently, 164  Vande Bharat train services are operational on the various sectors of the 
Broad Gauge (B.G.) electrified network of Indian Railways (IR), as listed below: 
S.No. Train Number and Name 
1 22435/22436 New Delhi - Varanasi Vande Bharat Express 
2 22439/22440 New Delhi - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Vande Bharat Express 
3 20901/20902 Mumbai Central - Gandhinagar Capital Vande Bharat Express 
4 22447/22448 New Delhi - Amb Andaura Vande Bharat Express 
5 20607/20608 MGR Chennai Central - Mysuru Vande Bharat Express 
6 20825/20826 Bilaspur - Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
7 22301/22302 Howrah - New Jalpaiguri Vande Bharat Express 
8 20833/20834 Visakhapatnam - Secunderabad Vande Bharat Express 
9 22223/22224 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Sai Nagar Shirdi Vande Bharat 
Express 
10 22225/22226 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Solapur jn. Vande Bharat Express 
11 20171/20172 Hazrat Nizamuddin - Rani Kamlapati Vande Bharat Express 
12 20977/20978 Ajmer - Chandigarh Vande Bharat Express 
13 20643/20644 Chennai Central - Coimbatore Vande Bharat Express 
14 20633/20634 Kasargod - Thiruvananthpuram Central Vande Bharat Express 
15 20701/20702 Secunderabad - Tirupati Vande Bharat Express 
16 22895/22896 Howrah - Puri Vande Bharat Express 
17 22457/22458 Anand vihar - Dehradun Vande Bharat Express 
18 22227/22228 New Jalpaiguri - Guwahati Vande Bharat Express 
19 20911/20912 Indore - Nagpur Vande Bharat Express 
20 20173/20174 Rani Kamlapati - Rewa Vande Bharat Express 
21 20661/20662 KSR Bengaluru - Dharwad Vande Bharat Express 
22 22349/22350 Patna - Ranchi Vande Bharat Express 
23 22229/22230 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
24 12461/12462 Jodhpur - Sabarmati Vande Bharat Express 
25 22549/22550 Gorakhpur - Prayagraj Vande Bharat Express 
396                                                      

3 of 8 
26 20835/20836 Rourkela - Puri Vande Bharat Express 
27 20665/20666 Chennai Egmore - Triunelveli Vande Bharat Express 
28 20631/20632 Mangaluru - Thiruvananthpuram Vande Bharat Express 
29 20677/20678 MGR Chennai - Vijayawada jn. Vande Bharat Express 
30 20979/20980 Udaipur - Jaipur Vande Bharat Express 
31 20703/20704 Kacheguda - Yesvantpur Vande Bharat Express 
32 20897/20898 Howrah - Ranchi Vande Bharat Express 
33 22347/22348 Howrah - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
34 22487/22488 Amritsar jn. - Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
35 20646/20645 Mangalore central - Madgaon Vande Bharat Express 
36 20705/20706 Huzur Sahib Nanded - Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) Vande Bharat 
Express 
37 20642/20641 Coimbatore Jn. - Bengaluru Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
38 22426/22425 Anand Vihar(T) - Ayodhya Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
39 22415/22416 Varanasi - New Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
40 22477/22478 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - New Delhi Vande Bharat Express 
41 22961/22962 Ahmedabad - Mumbai Central Vande Bharat Express 
42 20707/20708 Secunderabad - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
43 20663/20664 Mysuru - MGR Chennai Vande Bharat Express 
44 22345/22346 Patna - Gomtinagar Vande Bharat Express 
45 22233/22234 New Jalpaiguri - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
46 20841/20842 Bhubaneshwar - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
47 22545/22546 Lucknow - Dehradun Vande Bharat Express 
48 22231/22232 Kalaburagi - SMVT Bengaluru Vande Bharat Express 
49 22470/22469 Hazrat Nizamuddin - Khajuraho Vande Bharat Express 
50 20887/20888 Ranchi - Varanasi Vande Bharat Express 
51 22925/22926 Ahmedabad - Okha Vande Bharat Express 
52 20627/20628 Chennai Egmore - Nagercoil jn. Vande Bharat Express 
 
397                                                      

4 of 8 
53 20671/20672 Madurai - Bengaluru Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
54 22489/22490 Varanasi - Meerut City Vande Bharat Express 
55 20101/20102 Nagpur - Secunderabad Vande Bharat Express 
56 22499/22500 Varanasi - Deoghar Vande Bharat Express 
57 20893/20894 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
58 22303/22304 Howrah - Gaya Vande Bharat Express 
59 21893/21894 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
60 21895/21896 Tatanagar - Patna Vande Bharat Express 
61 20981/20982 Udaipur City - Agra cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
62 20891/20892 Tatanagar - Brahmapur Vande Bharat Express 
63 20871/20872 Howrah - Rourkela Vande Bharat Express 
64 20829/20830 Durg - Visakhapatnam Vande Bharat Express 
65 20175/20176 Banaras - Agra Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
66 20669/20670 Hubballi - Pune jn. Vande Bharat Express 
67 20673/20674 Kolhapur SCSM Terminus - Pune jn. Vande Bharat Express 
68 22309/22310 Howrah - Jamalpur Vande Bharat Express 
69 26901/26902 Sabarmati - Veraval Vande Bharat Express 
70 26401/26402 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - Srinagar Vande Bharat Express 
71 26403/26404 Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - Srinagar Vande Bharat Express 
72 26501/26502 Gorakhpur - Patliputra Vande Bharat Express 
73 26101/26102 Pune - Ajni (Nagpur) Vande Bharat Express 
74 26751/26752 Belagavi - Bengaluru Vande Bharat Express 
75 26405/26406 Amritsar - Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Vande Bharat Express 
76 26301/26302 Jogbani - Danapur Vande Bharat Express 
77 26503/26504 Saharanpur - Gomtinagar Vande Bharat Express 
78 26481/26482 Jodhpur - Delhi Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
79 26471/26472 Bikaner - Delhi Cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
80 26651/26652 Bengaluru - Ernakulam Vande Bharat Express 
398                                                      

5 of 8 
81 26461/26462 Delhi - Firozpur cantt. Vande Bharat Express 
82 26506 / 26505 Banaras - Khajuraho Vande Bharat Express 
 
The Vande Bharat trains are manufactured at the following Indian Railways production units: 
(i) Integral Coach Factory (ICF), Chennai 
(ii) Rail Coach Factory (RCF), Kapurthala 
(iii) Modern Coach Factory (MCF), Raebareli 
 
Indian Railways is also manufacturing these train sets in collaboration with BEML and other 
technology partners. 
 
Recruitment  
Railways, being Central Government organization conduct recruitment on all India basis. 
This is in line with Constitutional provision of right to equality in matters of public 
employment. Every candidate irrespective of gender, language, place of birth, region etc. 
fulfilling eligibility criteria is free to apply. All those who apply in response to Centralised 
Employment Notifications (CENs), including local candidates are considered for recruitment 
on the Railways, on equal footing. No preference is given to candidates belonging to any 
State or Region nor is the recruitment restricted to any State or Region. 
 
Occurrence and filling up of vacancies are continuous processes on Indian Railways 
considering its size, spatial distribution and criticality of operation. Adequate and suitable 
manpower is provided to cater to the regular operations, changes in technology, 
mechanisations and innovative practices. The vacancies are filled up primarily by placement 
of indents by Railways with Recruitment agencies as per operational and technological 
requirements. 
As per Annual Calendar 2024 and 2025, recruitment of 1,20,579 vacancies has been taken up 
on Indian Railways including Zonal Railways and Production Units. 
During January to December 2024, ten Centralized Employment Notifications (CENs) for 
92,116 vacancies were notified for filling up of posts of Assistant Loco Pilots (ALPs), 
Technicians including Technician Grade-I Signal, Sub-Inspectors, Constables in Railway 
Protection Force (RPF), Junior Engineers (JEs)/ Depot Material Superintendent (DMS)/ 
Chemical & Metallurgical Assistant (CMA), Paramedical Categories, Non-Technical Popular 
Categories (Graduate-including Station Master), Non-Technical Popular Categories (Under-
Graduate), Ministerial & Isolated Categories and Level-1 categories such as Assistants, Track 
Maintainers and Pointsman. 
 
399                                                      

6 of 8 
First stage/Single stage Computer Based Tests (CBTs) for 59,678 posts has been completed.  
Details are as under:- 
Exam Candidates Cities Languages 
1st Stage CBT for the post of ALP (18,799 
vacancies) 
18,40,347 156 15 
CBT for the post of Technician (14,298 vacancies 
- including Technician Grade-I Signal) 
26,99,892 139 15 
1st Stage CBT for the post of JE/DMS/CMA 
(7,951 vacancies) 
11,01,266 146 15 
CBT for the post of RPF-SI (452 vacancies) 15,35,635 143 15 
CBT for the post of RPF-Constable (4,208 
vacancies) 
45,30,288 147 15 
 CBT for Paramedical Categories (1,376 
vacancies) 
7,08,321 143 15 
 1st Stage CBT for Non-Technical Popular 
Categories (Graduate- including Station Master) 
(8,113 vacancies) 
58,41,774 141 15 
1st Stage CBT for Non-Technical Popular 
Categories (Under Graduate) (3,445 vacancies) 
63,27,473 157 15 
CBT for Ministerial & Isolated categories 
 (1,036 vacancies) 
4,46,013 139 15 
Total Candidates 2,50,31,009     
  
2nd stage CBTs for the posts of ALP, JE/DMS/CMA and Non-Technical Popular Categories 
(Graduate) have also been completed.  Details are as under: - 
Exam Candidates Cities Languages 
2nd Stage CBT for the post of ALP 
(18,799 vacancies) 
2,66,363 112 15 
2nd Stage CBT for the post of 
JE/DMS/CMA (7,951 vacancies) 
1,17,339 118 15 
2nd Stage CBT for Non-Technical 
Popular Categories (Graduate) (8,113 
vacancies) 
1,21,931 129 15 
Total Candidates 5,05,633     
400                                                      

7 of 8 
 
Computer Based Aptitude Test (CBAT) for the post of ALP has also been completed. Details 
are as under:- 
Exam Candidates Cities Languages 
CBAT for the post of ALP (18,799 
vacancies) 
1,32,044 84 2 
CBT for 32,438 vacancies for level -1 categories has commenced from 27.11.2025 in 140 
cities in 15 languages. Physical Efficiency Test (PET) for 4,208 vacancies of Constable 
(RPF) has been completed on 06.12.2025. 
Panels for more than 23,000 candidates for various posts including the posts of Technicians, 
Junior Engineers, Paramedical Categories, Sub-Inspectors (RPF) and Assistant Loco Pilots 
have been finalized.  Majority of them are in safety categories.                                                                                                                                                                                 
In addition, as per Annual Calendar for the year 2025, seven Centralized Employment 
Notifications (CENs) for 28,463 vacancies have also been issued. Details are as under:- 
S. No. CEN No. Post Name No. of Vacancies 
notified 
Month  of 
Notification 
1 01/2025 Assistant Loco Pilots 9,970 March 2025 
2 02/2025 Technicians (including 
Technician Grade-I Signal) 
6,238 June 2025 
3 03/2025 Para-Medical Categories 434 July 2025 
4 04/2025 Section Controllers 368 August 2025 
5 05/2025 Junior Engineers / Depot 
Material Superintendent 
2,585 October 2025 
6 06/2025 Non-Technical Popular 
Categories (Graduate - 
including Station Master) 
5,810 October 2025 
7 07/2025 Non-Technical Popular 
Categories (Under-Graduate) 
3,058 October 2025 
The RRB examinations are quite technical in nature entailing large scale mobilization of men 
and resources and training of manpower. Railway overcame all these challenges and 
successfully conducted the recruitment in a transparent manner following all laid down 
guidelines. No instance of paper leakage or similar malpractice has occurred during the entire 
process. 
401                                                      

8 of 8 
 
Recruitment done in Indian Railways during 2004-2005 to 2013-2014 vis-à-vis during 2014-
2015 to 2024-2025 is given as under:- 
Period Recruitments 
2004-2005 to 2013-2014 4.11 lakh 
2014-2015 to 2024-2025 5.08 lakh 
Further, as system improvement, the Ministry of Railways has introduced a system of 
publishing the annual calendar from 2024 for recruitment to various categories of Group ‘C’ 
posts. The introduction of the annual calendar is benefitting the aspirants in the following 
manner: 
 • More opportunities for candidates; 
• Opportunities to those becoming eligible every year; 
• Certainty of exams; 
• Faster Recruitment process, Training and Appointments 
In exigencies of work, contractual engagement is resorted to as a stop-gap arrangement till 
regular incumbents join the posts. Such contractual engagement is purely temporary and 
time-bound, and is undertaken only to ensure smooth functioning of Railway operations until 
posts are filled through regular selection as per extant rules and procedures.  
***** 
402                                                      

Page 1 of 2 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2360 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
COMPLAINTS ON QUALITY OF FOOD ON INDIAN RAILWAYS 
 
2360 SMT. SAGARIKA GHOSE: 
       SMT. MAUSAM B NOOR: 
                      
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) number of complaints on food quality received in 2024-2025; 
(b) zone-wise number of such complaints received from 2021-22 to 2024-25; 
(c) the number of cases in which fines were imposed or contracts terminated, with the total value (in ₹) of 
fines collected; 
(d) whether such vendors had their contracts renewed at a later point of time, if so, details thereof; 
(e) total value (in ₹) of refunds issued and compensation provided to passengers in the same period; and 
(f) the top vendors by number of complaints and steps taken in each case? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
(SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (f): Railways serves about 58 cr meals every year on average. About only 0.0008% complaints are 
received on average. Based on inquiry on these complaints, a fine of Rs 2.8 cr was imposed over the last 
four years. 
It is the continuous endeavour of Indian Railways (IR) to provide good quality and hygienic food 
to travelling passengers. Necessary steps are accordingly taken by Indian Railways from time to time to 
improve quality of food and services to passengers.The following measures ha ve been taken to improve 
quality, hygiene, and food safety: 
●  Supply of meals from designated Base Kitchens. 
403                                                      

Page 2 of 2 
 
●  Commissioning of modern Base Kitchens at identified locations. 
●  Installation of CCTV Cameras in Base Kitchens for better monitoring of food preparation. 
●  Shortlisting and use of popular and branded raw materials, like cooking oil, atta, rice, 
pulses, masala items, paneer, dairy products etc. for food production. 
●  Deployment of Food Safety Supervisors at Base Kitchens to monitor food safety  and 
hygienic practices. 
●  Deployment of on-board IRCTC supervisors on trains. 
●  Introduction of QR codes on food packets, enabling display of details like name of kitchen, 
date of packaging etc. 
●  Regular deep cleaning and periodical pest control in Base Kitchens and Pantry Cars. 
●  In order to ensure compliance with Food Safety Norms, Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India (FSSAI) certification from designated Food Safety Officers of each 
catering unit has been made mandatory. 
●  Regular food sam pling as a part of the inspection and monitoring mechanism to ensure 
quality of food on trains. 
●  Third Party Audit is done to examine hygiene and quality of food in Pantry Cars and Base 
Kitchens. Customer satisfaction survey is also conducted. 
●  Regular and surprise inspections by Railway/ IRCTC officials, including Food Safety 
Officers. 
●  Regular training is conducted by IRCTC to enhance the skills of catering staff, focusing on 
customer service areas i.e., communication, courteous behaviour, service s tandards, 
personal grooming, and hygiene. 
In order to take passenger feedback, complaint management system over Indian Railways has 
been strengthened, simplified and made more accessible over the last few years through introduction of 
RailMadad Portal. Wit h the launch of RailMadad Portal, Indian Railways provided passengers a single 
window system to register complaints and suggestions.  
 In case any passenger complaint related to food quality in trains is reported, prompt and 
appropriate punitive action is taken against the service providers for deficiency in service.  
***** 
404                                                      

O.I.H 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2361 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI JANAUSHADHI KENDRA AT RAILWAY STATIONS 
 
  2361 # SHRI AMAR PAL MAURYA: 
  
       Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the Government has taken any steps to ensure the health, welfare, and availability of 
affordable medicines and consumer goods for rail passengers and the general public visiting railway 
stations;  
 
(b) whether Government has undertaken any initiative to expand the Pradhan Mantari Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Kendra (PMBJK) scheme to reach a larger number of passengers and the general public; 
 
(c) if so, the State-wise details of the PMBJKs;  
 
(d) whether any minimum reserve price has been fixed for the allocation of contracts for PMBJKs; and 
 
(e) whether any license fee is charged for the operation of these Kendras?  
 
 
  ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND 
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI ASHWINI V AISHNAW) 
 
 
(a) to (e): The need and extent of providing medical facilities at railway stations and in trains was 
examined by Hon ’ble Supreme Court. In compliance of the orders, a committee of experts was 
constituted at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS),  New Delhi.  As recommended by 
Committee of experts, instructions have been issued  to provide a Medical Box containing life saving 
medicines, equipments, oxygen cylinder etc. at all Railway stations and passenger carrying trains.  
 
               Over the Counter (OTC) medicines and non-pharmacy items like dry/spray milk powder, etc, 
are available to passengers through Multi Purpose Stalls (MPS) at railway stations. 
 
               Further instruction has also been issued to establish Pradhan Mantari Bhart iya Janaushadhi 
Kendras (PMBJKs) in circulating areas and concourses of railway stations for enhancing wellness and 
welfare of passengers. At present 117 PMBJKs are operational all over Indian Railways.  Reserve price 
for establishing PMBJKs is nil. Only security deposit is required for establishing the same.   
 
           The license to operate PMBJK is awarded through e-auction, and the price quoted by the highest 
bidder is charged as the license fee for operation of PMBJK. 
***** 
405                                                      

Page 1 of 3 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2362 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER MISSION AMRIT SAROVAR 
 
2362 Dr. K. Laxman: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the achievements under Mission Amrit Sarovar, including the total number of water 
bodies rejuvenated, restored, or newly created, State-wise; 
(b)  the extent to which the mission has contributed to groundwater recharge, improved 
irrigation potential, and enhanced water availability for rural communities; 
(c)  the role of community participation, convergence with MGNREGA and other schemes, 
and involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions; and 
(d)  whether the Ministry has conducted any evaluation to assess the mission’s impact on 
climate resilience and long-term rural water security? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
 
(a): State/Union Territory (UT)-wise number of Amrit Sarovars constructed/ rejuvenated as 
on 15.12.2025 under Mission Amrit Sarovar phase-I is given at Annexure. 
  
(b) & (d): Mission Amrit Sarovar has made a significant contribution to groundwater 
recharge, improvement of irrigation potential and enhancement of water availability in rural 
areas. The following two impact assessment studies of Mission Amrit Sarovar have been 
conducted:  
1. In the impact assessment of phase I of Mission Amrit Sarovar conducted by  IIT-Delhi, it 
has been reported that there has been  16.3% increase in water body surface area and 42% 
decrease in dry water bodies across the country, highlighting the mission's role in water 
conservation and climate change mitigation. 
2. Further, GIZ India study has reported significant improvements in groundwater levels, 
agriculture, biodiversity, and livelihoods due to Mission Amrit Sarovar. 
  
(c):     Jan Bhagidaari (People’s Participation) is considered key to the entire initiative, aiming to 
evoke the collective spirit of the community and have participated at all levels of execution of 
the Mission including foundation stone laying ceremonies, commemorative plantations, and flag 
hoisting on Republic Day and Independence Day led by distinguished community members such 
as a freedom fighter, a family member of a post-independence martyr, or a local Padma awardee, 
or, if unavailable, by the eldest citizen of the local Gram Panchayat. Community members are 
encouraged to participate by donating construction materials and benches, or through Shram 
Daan (volunteer labour).  
406                                                      

Page 2 of 3 
 
Amrit Sarovar sites are to be developed as vibrant Community Hubs to promote unity and 
a sense of belonging. These sites should serve as focal points for a variety of activities, including 
national festivals, social initiatives such as Swachchata Rallies and Jal Shapath (water 
conservation pledges), school events, religious celebrations, morning walks, yoga sessions, 
school games, and other recreational activities. By hosting these diverse activities, Amrit 
Sarovars will enhance community engagement and foster a stronger, more connected 
community. 
Mission Amrit Sarovar is implemented through a whole-of-government approach. 
 wherein multiple Ministries/Departments and organisations work in convergence to achieve the 
objectives of the Mission. Resources for the construction/rejuvenation of Amrit Sarovar (ponds) 
under Mission Amrit Sarovar  is available from Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, XV Finance 
Commission Grants (both tied and untied), watershed Development component of Pradhan 
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojna (PMKSY-WDC), Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojna – Har 
Khet Ko Pani-Repair, Renovation and Restoration (PMKSY-HKKP-RRR) or similar schemes 
from the State/ Central Govt., either individually or in combination, may be accessed for this 
purpose. Public contribution (crowdfunding/CSR) for the work is also allowed.  
***** 
  
407                                                      

Page 3 of 3 
 
Annexure 
 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (a) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2362 dated 
19.12.2025. 
  
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise number of Amrit Sarovars constructed/ rejuvenated as on 
15.12.2025 under Mission Amrit Sarovar phase-I  
Sr. No. State / UT Amrit Sarovars constructed/ rejuvenated 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 227  
2 Andhra Pradesh 2154  
3 Arunachal Pradesh 778  
4 Assam 2963  
5 Bihar 2613  
6 Chhattisgarh 2902  
7 Goa 159  
8 Gujarat 2652  
9 Haryana 2087  
10 Himachal Pradesh 1690  
11 Jammu And Kashmir 1056  
12 Jharkhand 2047  
13 Karnataka 4054  
14 Kerala 865  
15 Ladakh 100  
16 Madhya Pradesh 5825  
17 Maharashtra 3055  
18 Manipur 1226  
19 Meghalaya 705  
20 Mizoram 1029  
21 Nagaland 255  
22 Odisha 2367  
23 Puducherry 156  
24 Punjab 1453  
25 Rajasthan 3139  
26 Sikkim 199  
27 Tamil Nadu 2484  
28 Telangana 1871  
29 Dadra Nagar And Haveli, Daman And Diu 57 
30 Tripura 682  
31 Uttarakhand 1319  
32 Uttar Pradesh 16632  
33 West Bengal 26  
  Total 68,827 
Source: Mission Amrit Sarovar portal 
  
***** 
 
 
 
408                                                      

Page 1 of 3 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2363 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
EMPLOYMENT GENERATED UNDER MGNREGS 
 
2363 Shri C. Ve. Shanmugam: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the total person-days of employment generated under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) in the country during each of the last five 
years, year-wise; 
(b)  whether the digital monitoring systems have been issued to prevent corruption in the 
implementation of MGNREGS; 
(c)  if so, the details thereof; and 
(d)  the steps taken by Government to improve MGNREGS including wage rate revisions, 
increased workdays or skill-based employment? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a):     Year-wise details of persondays generated under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) during the last five financial years 
are given below: 
  
SI. No. Persondays generated (in crore) 
1 2020-21 388.67 
2 2021-22 363.09 
3 2022-23 295.51 
4 2023-24 312.16 
5 2024-25 290.60 
 (As per NREGASoft) 
  
  
(b) & (c): Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is implemented on an end-to-end integrated 
transaction-based Management Information System (MIS) platform called NREGASoft. 
Through this, all aspects relating to planning, administrative and technical approval of the 
scheme, issue of job cards, acceptance of demand, issue of muster roll, measurement of work, 
approval of payment and finally payment to the beneficiary through a Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT)-Public Financial Management System (PFMS) platform are monitored. 
  
Transparency and accountability are the prime focus of the scheme. Ministry of Rural 
Development has adopted robust process for ensuring transparency and accountability in the 
implementation of the scheme across the States/UTs. A brief note on the various monitoring and 
409                                                      

Page 2 of 3 
 
evaluation arrangements, including technological interventions made for ensuring proper 
utilization of the funds released under the scheme is given at Annexure. 
(d):    As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may by notification specify the 
wage rate for unskilled work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Ministry of Rural 
Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for every financial year for 
States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry 
of Rural Development revises the wage rate every year based on change in Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labour(CPI-AL). The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of each 
financial year. 
  
  Using the present methodology of wage rate calculation, the central government has 
notified the wage rate and it has increased by around 5% (average) over the last year and around 
29% (average) in the previous 5 years. However, State Governments can provide wages over and 
above the wage rate notified by the Central Government from its own sources.  
  
With regard to increasing the number of working days, it is submitted that the Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, is an Act 
to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the 
country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every 
financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
        
The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of wage employment 
(beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest area, provided 
that these households have no other private property except for the land rights provided under the 
Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
  
In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an additional 50 days of wage 
employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity-affected notified rural areas. Further, 
as per Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may make provision for providing 
additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the Act from their own 
funds.  
  
With regard to skill-based employment, it is submitted that the project “UNNATI” 
intends to upgrade the skill-base of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS workers, and thereby improve 
their livelihoods, so that they can move from the current partial employment to full employment. 
This project was launched in the FY 2019-20 and aims to enhance the skill base of  2 lakh 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS beneficiaries  in five years i.e., upto March, 2025. The total 
achievement till 31stMarch 2025 is 90,894 candidates. The project has been further extended for 
a period of 01 year, till 31st March 2026. 
  
***** 
  
410                                                      

Page 3 of 3 
 
Annexure 
Annexure referred to in the reply to parts (b) & (c) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2363 
dated 19.12.2025.  
i. Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT): Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system in wage payment 
has been adopted under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS). The payment of wages to the bank/ post office accounts of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS workers is made through National Electronic Fund Management System 
(NeFMS)/Electronic Fund Management System (eFMS). 
ii. National Mobile Monitoring Service (NMMS): It enables capturing of attendance of 
workers at Mahatma Gandhi NREGA worksites (except for individual beneficiary works) 
along with geo-tagged photographs twice in a day. This app aids in increasing citizen 
oversight of the programme. This is one more step towards transparency and 
accountability. 
iii. Area Officer Monitoring Visit Application:  This App facilitates the officials of the 
State/UT to record their field visit findings online. The App also allows the officials to 
record time-stamped and geotagged photographs for all the schemes launched by the 
Department of Rural Development. Also, this App helps in developing hassle-free 
reporting of the field visits. This app records the field visit findings and views the field 
visit outcome report by the senior officials. 
iv. GIS based plan– Use of Space Technology: GIS based GP level plan (ridge to valley 
approach) preparation using Remote Sensing technology in a saturation mode for all the 
GPs of the country. 
v. Yuktdhara :  GIS based planning tool – To simplify the GIS based planning at GP 
level under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA “ Yuktdhara” a Geospatial planning portal is 
developed in collaboration with ISRO-NRSC. 
vi. SECURE – Software for Estimate Calculation for using Rural Rates for 
Employment :- Application is being used to  estimate the  cost of works to be undertaken 
under the scheme.  
vii. GeoNREGA: the app has been developed by using Space Technology to track the 
creation of assets by geotagging it, at “Before”, “During” and “After” stages of the asset 
creation.  
viii. JALDOOT App: JALDOOT app has been developed to enable monitoring of ground 
water tables across the country. The Jaldoot app enables Gram Rojgar Sahayak (GRS) to 
measure the water level of selected wells twice a year (pre-monsoonand post-monsoon). 
ix. JANMANREGA app: this app helps in proactive disclosure of information to its 
citizens in reference to the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. Citizen 
awareness is a key to efficient, effective, and transparent execution of the scheme.  
x. Ombudsperson App- An Ombudsperson App has been developed for smooth reporting 
and categorization of grievances received from various sources viz. physical, digital and 
mass media related to the implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, easy tracking 
and timely passing of awards on each case as per the guidelines and easy uploading of 
quarterly and annual report on the website. 
xi. Social Audit: As per the mandate of the Act, the Ministry has laid emphasis on the 
setting up of an institutional structure at the States/UTs level for facilitating social audits 
of all the Gram Panchayats at least twice a year. With the consistent efforts by Ministry, a 
total of 27 States and 1 UT have established Independent Social Audit Units. 
  
Further, monitoring by National level monitors, regular and special monitoring, monitoring 
by team of central government officers, monitoring visits by Common review Mission teams, 
monitoring through use of Area Officers app is being conducted for better implementation of the 
programme. State/UT specific reviews are also undertaken from time to time. 
***** 
411                                                      

Page 1 of 3 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2364 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
PENDING PAYMENT UNDER MGNREGS 
 
2364 Smt. Rajani Ashokrao Patil: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  number of wage payments pending under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); 
(b)  states with highest pendency under MGNREGS; 
(c)  reasons for delays; 
(d)  steps to ensure timely fund release; and 
(e)  measures for transparency in payment systems? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a) to (c):  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS) is a demand-driven wage employment scheme.  
  Under the Scheme, the Wage payments are directly credited by the Central Government to 
the accounts of the beneficiaries through Direct Benefit Transfer protocol. Sanctions for Wage 
payments are issued daily by the Ministry through the Public Finance Management System 
(PFMS) based on fund transfer orders received from the States/ UTs  after following  due 
procedures. At the beginning of each financial year, admissible pending liabilities of the previous 
years, if any, are duly reimbursed by the Government of India. Accordingly, all due and 
admissible  pending wage liabilities upto FY 2024-25 have already been cleared (except in case 
of State of West Bengal). 
  
  With regard to Material and Admin components, States/UTs are required to furnish fund 
release proposals to the Government of India. The Central Government releases funds 
periodically in two tranches with each tranche consisting of one or more installments, keeping in 
view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, pace of utilization of 
funds, pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to submission of relevant documents 
by the States/UTs. 
  
  Under the Scheme, in the current financial year 2025-26 (as on 14.12.2025), an amount of 
Rs. 71,140.75 crore has been released to the States/Union Territories, which includes 
Rs.59,983.78 crore  for Wage component and an amount of Rs.11,156.96 crore for  Material and 
Admin Components. As Sanction for payment of Wages are issued by Ministry on a daily basis 
through PFMS (Public Finance Management System), after receipt of funds transfer orders from 
States/UTs  after following the due procedures, the fund release status keeps updating on a daily 
basis.  
412                                                      

Page 2 of 3 
 
  
  The pending liabilities for the wage component under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, as on 
15.12.2025, are Rs. 1,766.35 crore. 
  
  State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of pending liabilities for Wage under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS as on 15.12.2025 are  given at Annexure. 
  
(d) & (e):        To ensure timely release of funds and transparency in payment system under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, the Ministry has undertaken several measures as detailed below: 
1. Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT): Under the Scheme, wage payments are directly credited 
by the Ministry into the bank accounts of workers through the Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) protocol. In respect of Material and Admin components, funds are released to 
States/UTs through the SNA-SPARSH system. 
2. Public Financial Management System (PFMS): This Ministry is using the PFMS platform 
to monitor and ensure the efficient and timely transfer of funds to the States & UTs. This 
system helps in real time tracking of the fund flow and its utilization. 
3. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Wage Payments: as per the provisions of the 
Act, beneficiaries are entitled to receive wage payments within 15 days of work 
completion. In order to ensure timely payment, the Government of India has issued a 
comprehensive Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to all States/UTs, which defines 
fixed timelines for each stage of the wage payment process from muster roll uploading to 
FTO approval. The Ministry along with the States/UTs has been making concerted efforts 
for improving the timely payment of wages. States/UTs have been advised to generate 
pay orders in time.  
4. Regular Monitoring and Reviews: The Ministry conducts continuous monitoring through 
regular review meetings with States/UTs and relevant stakeholders including banks, 
PFMS, and NIC-DRD to identify bottlenecks and facilitate timely transfer of funds. 
5. Strengthening Transparency and Accountability: Several technology-driven initiatives 
have been implemented, including Geo-tagging of assets, National electronic Fund 
Management System (Ne-FMS), National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS), Aadhar 
Payment Bridge System (APBS), and the Software for Estimate Calculation using Rural 
rates for Employment (SECURE). Further, National Level Monitors (NLMs) and regular 
Social Audits also enhance transparency. 
6. Social Audits: As per Section 17(2) of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA Act, 2005, Gram 
Sabhas are mandated to conduct regular Social Audits of works executed under the 
Scheme. The Ministry has emphasized establishing institutional structures at the State/UT 
level for facilitating social audits in all Gram Panchayats at least twice a year. As a result, 
27 States and 1 UT have established Independent Social Audit Units. 
***** 
  
  
  
413                                                      

Page 3 of 3 
 
Annexure 
Annexure referred to in reply to parts (a) to (c) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2364 
dated 19.12.2025. 
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of pending liabilities for Wage under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS 
as on 15.12.2025. (Rs. in crore) 
Sl. No. State/Union Territory (UT) Pending Wages 
1.   Andhra Pradesh  425.23 
2.   Arunachal Pradesh  5.26 
3.   Assam  5.31 
4.   Bihar  18.80 
5.   Chhattisgarh  8.31 
6.   Goa  0.00 
7.   Gujarat  82.85 
8.   Haryana  0.87 
9.   Himachal Pradesh  2.15 
10.   Jammu And Kashmir  70.38 
11.   Jharkhand  16.93 
12.   Karnataka  10.50 
13.   Kerala  419.32 
14.   Ladakh  1.03 
15.   Madhya Pradesh  207.56 
16.   Maharashtra  14.55 
17.   Manipur  12.56 
18.   Meghalaya  4.25 
19.   Mizoram  5.91 
20.   Nagaland  24.79 
21.   Odisha  20.78 
22.   Punjab  1.69 
23.   Rajasthan  10.26 
24.   Sikkim  0.22 
25.   Tamil Nadu  365.72 
26.   Telangana  1.16 
27.   Tripura  1.80 
28.   Uttar Pradesh  24.13 
29.   Uttarakhand  1.75 
30.   West Bengal**  ** 
31.   Andaman And Nicobar  0.00 
32.   Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu  2.27 
33.   Lakshadweep  0.00 
34.   Puducherry  0.00 
  Total 1766.35 
Note: There is no pendency for the previous years under Wage Components. 
**The proposal for upward revision of the Labour Budget for FY 2021-22 for the State of West Bengal 
was not approved by the Empowered Committee of the Department of Rural Development due to non-
compliance with the directives issued by this Department. Subsequently, the release of funds to the State 
of West Bengal under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) was also stopped with effect from 09.03.2022 by invoking the provisions of Section 27 
of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, owing to continued non-
compliance with the directives of the Central Government by the State. Therefore, as per NREGASoft, 
the pending liability pertaining to the State of West Bengal (as on 08.03.2022) stands at ₹1457.22 crore 
under the wage component. The admissibility of this liability is subject to verification by the Central 
Government. 
***** 
414                                                      

Page 1 of 3 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2365 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF ROADS BUILT UNDER PMGSY 
 
2365 Shri Jose K. Mani: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether Government has conducted any quality assessment of roads built under Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), if so, percentage of roads found to be 
substandard; 
(b)  whether any cases of corruption or contractor negligence have been identified in the 
construction of PMGSY roads, if so, the action taken in such cases; 
(c)  whether there is a mechanism to ensure that contractors comply with technical and safety 
standards in road construction, if so, the details thereof; and 
(d)  the steps being taken to ensure that roads under PMGSY have a longer lifespan and are 
resilient to extreme weather conditions? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN)  
(a) to (c): ‘Rural Roads’ is a State subject. As per the guidelines of Pradhan Mantri Gramin 
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), the execution of the sanctioned projects is the responsibility of the 
respective State Governments implementing the programme.  
PMGSY has a three-tiered Quality Control mechanism for ensuring construction of 
quality road works and durability of road assets under PMGSY. Under the first tier, the 
Programme Implementation Units (PIUs) are required to ensure process control through 
mandatory tests on material and workmanship at the field laboratory. The second tier is a 
structured independent quality monitoring at the State level through State Quality Monitors 
(SQMs) to ensure that every work is inspected at initial stage, intermediate stage and final stage 
of the construction. Under the third tier, which is at the national level, independent National 
Quality Monitors (NQMs) are deployed for random inspection of road works to monitor quality 
and also to provide guidance of senior professionals to the field functionaries. Based on the 
periodic monitoring of quality of roads under the 3-tier mechanism, corrective measures, 
wherever necessary, are taken by the State Governments. Guidelines/Instructions to regulate the 
quality control process have been issued to States/UTs from time to time. 
To strengthen the quality check mechanism, the establishment of a geo-tagged field Lab 
has been made compulsory. Also, a new version of the Quality Monitoring System App has been 
developed to include e-forms and other initiatives that have strengthened quality monitoring 
systems. Consequent upon the introduction of e-MARG i.e. software module for maintenance 
payments to the contractor during the defect liability period, such payments have been made 
415                                                      

Page 2 of 3 
 
commensurate with the quality of roads through a performance-based contract management 
system. To ensure that people engaged in quality checks are adequately proficient and well 
trained, National Rural Infrastructure Development Agency (NRIDA), a technical arm of the 
Ministry of Rural Development, has been conducting mandatory proficiency tests of NQMs and 
SQMs. The skills of NQMs, SQMs and PIUs are also being developed through training 
programmes, etc.  
Further, to ensure that quality monitoring is being done properly on the ground, it has 
been made mandatory to set up a Quality Monitoring Cell under each State Rural Road 
Development Agency (SRRDA) and State Quality Coordinators (SQCs) have been entrusted 
with the task of scrutinizing all reports of SQMs and give a certificate to this effect to the 
Ministry. Concerned CEOs have also been asked to scrutinize the quality control registers 
periodically and submit a certificate to this effect to the Ministry while submitting proposals for 
fund release. The ATRs on observations by the NQMs are reviewed with the States for 
compliance. Performance of the NQMs as well as SQMs are also reviewed and such NQMs/ 
SQMs are de-empaneled whose performance is not found satisfactory. The quality of PMGSY 
works is also reviewed regularly by the Ministry in various review meetings like the 
Performance Review Committee, Regional Review Meetings, and Empowered Committee. The 
Ministry has also strengthened the IT module for monitoring of quality of PMGSY works. In 
brief, the Ministry has taken several steps for monitoring and regulating the quality of PMGSY 
roads. 
Under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, the works which are ongoing, completed 
and are having structural deficiencies are graded as "Unsatisfactory" by the Quality Monitors 
during inspections. Whenever NQMs report a work "unsatisfactory", the contractor is duty bound 
to rectify the error through replacement of defective material, rectifies the defective 
workmanship or re-constructs the particular stage of work which is identified unsatisfactory, as 
the case requires. Thereafter, the ATR is verified on site by SQMs. The SQC then, examines the 
ATR and furnishes the compliance report. The monitoring of ATR is done by NRIDA. 
The punitive action taken against the contractors and field officials is done as per the 
policy of respective States/UTs. However, the conditions prescribed in this regard are provided 
by National Rural Infrastructure development Agency (NRIDA) in the bid documents. To ensure 
transparency and accountability, and strengthening of the monitoring mechanism, the NQMs 
who are assigned the investigations/inspections are directed to share their detailed plan of visit to 
Hon'ble MP/MLA in order to enable them to be present during inspection. 
The details of inspections conducted by National Quality Monitors (NQMs) and 
unsatisfactory quality grading reported during the last three years and current year is given 
below:  
Completed works Ongoing works 
Total inspections Unsatisfactory % Total inspections Unsatisfactory % 
3,987 12.82 9,214 8.50 
  
 
416                                                      

Page 3 of 3 
 
 
(d): The road works under PMGSY are as per the technical specifications and geometric 
design standards given in the Ministry of Rural Development Specifications for Rural Roads, 
Rural Roads Manual of the Indian Road Congress (IRC) (IRC: SP:20) and also, where required, 
the Hill Road Manual (IRC: SP:48) and other IRC Codes/ Guidelines which take into account 
different geographical conditions. The planning and auditing is verified using the PM Gati Shakti 
portal using satellite imagery and Digital Elevation Model (DEM) to ensure field-based planning 
and objectivity. The disaster prone zones, the roads with probable increase in quantum of traffic, 
roads passing through proposed industrial corridor and such details are taken during the planning 
stage itself for the PMGSY IV proposals. Further, to enhance durability and cost efficiency, 
PMGSY encourages the use of approved green and alternative technologies, including cold mix, 
waste-plastic mixes, fly ash, cement-stabilized bases, and locally available materials in hilly and 
remote areas. These technologies reduce energy consumption, improve performance in difficult 
terrains, and lower lifecycle costs. 
 ***** 
 
 
 
 
417                                                      

Page 1 of 4 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2366 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
REVISION OF WAGES UNDER MGNREGS 
 
2366  Shri Jose K. Mani: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether Government plans to revise the wage rates and employment days under rural 
employment schemes; and 
(b)  measures in place to promote rural infrastructure through convergence with other central 
schemes? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a):  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment Scheme.  It provides livelihood security, i.e. fall 
back options for livelihood for the rural households, when no better employment opportunity is 
available.   
  
  As per Section 6 (1) of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, the Central Government may, by notification, specify the 
wage rate for unskilled work for its beneficiaries. Accordingly, the Ministry of Rural 
Development notifies Mahatma Gandhi NREGA wage rate for every financial year for 
States/UTs. To compensate the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA workers against inflation, the Ministry 
of Rural Development revises the Wage rate every year based on change in Consumer Price 
Index for Agricultural Labour (CPI-AL). The wage rate is made applicable from 1st April of each 
financial year. 
  
  With regard to increase in workdays, it is submitted that the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), 2005, is an Act to provide for 
the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country by 
providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to 
every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
        
  The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of wage employment (beyond 
the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest area, provided that these 
households have no other private property except for the land rights provided under the Forest 
Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
  
  In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an additional 50 days of wage 
employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity-affected notified rural areas. Further, 
as per Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may make provision for providing 
418                                                      

Page 2 of 4 
 
additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the Act from their own 
funds.  
  
(b): There are immense possibilities of convergence both at State and District level with 
Departments/schemes like Agriculture, Forest, Horticulture, Fisheries, Sericulture, Animal 
husbandry, Fourteenth Finance Commission, State Finance Commission grants to Panchayat, 
irrigation, minerals, National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM), Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana 
- Gramin (PMAY-G), Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme, Railways, 
Drinking Water & Sanitation, School Education etc. 
  As per relevant provisions and guidelines under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGA, States/UTs 
Governments converge with various line Departments for execution of permissible works. The 
Ministry has converged with Department/Ministry’s schemes at National level is given at 
Annexure. 
***** 
  
  
419                                                      

Page 3 of 4 
 
Annexure 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (b) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2366 dated 
19.12.2025.  
1. Ministry of Women and Child Development (MoWCD) for construction of Anganwadi 
Centres (AWCs): Expenditure up to Rs.8.00 lakh under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is 
allowed and the balance cost as per the State specific estimate may be mobilised from the 
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) schemes of the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development, GoI and other schemes for construction of AWC. The revised 
guideline issued on 30th January 2023. 
2. Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)-MoRD for rural connectivity: The 
guideline for providing single all weather road to non –PMGSY habitations in 
convergence with Mahatma Gandhi NREGS between Mahatma Gandhi NREGS & 
PMGSY have been issued on 17th November 2016 for taking up unconnected rural 
habitation. 
3. Ministry of Textile for sericulture: The ‘Guidelines for taking up of host plants of 
silkworms through convergence of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS and Scheme of Catalytic 
Development Programme (CDP)’ have been issued on 08.10. 2013. 
4. Ministry of Railways: The guidelines have been issued on 06.04.2018 for convergence 
with Railways for construction and maintenance of approach roads for level crossings & 
for railway stations, developing and clearing silted waterway trenches and drains along 
the track, repairs and widening of existing railway embankment with cleaning of 
vegetation growth, plantation of tress at extreme boundary of railway land and protection 
of existing railway embankments/cuttings/bridges. 
5. Rubber Board for rubber plantation: Rubber plantation can be taken up in convergence of 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA and schemes of Central/ State Governments. Plantation works 
may be funded from Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. Converging partner(s) can provide 
handholding support to cultivators during the initial years of rubber plantation & 
development, build their capacity for taking up harvest and post-harvest activities, 
facilitate value addition (forward linkage) and provide a strong marketing network. The 
convergence guidelines has been issued on 02.08.2013. 
6. Coconut Development Board / Other Central initiative for coconut plantation: In 
convergence works, all the labour intensive works relating to Coconut Plantation can be 
taken up under Mahatma   Gandhi NREGS, during the initial 2 years. Activities, 
including supply of material and technical support, may be covered under the schemes of 
Coconut Development Board or other Central/State initiatives. Remaining activities may 
be carried out by the beneficiary as beneficiary contribution. The convergence guidelines 
has been issued on 20.02.2015.  
7. Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries (MoA&FW) for aquaculture: 
For promotion of aquaculture Mahatma Gandhi NREGS ponds can be adopted for 
synergizing their use in fisheries development in the Blue Revolution. The joint 
guidelines with Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, MoA&FW 
(now Department of Fisheries under Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying) were issued on 9th November 2017. 
8. NRLM – MoRD for Nutri-Garden: Guidelines have been issued on 04.05.2020 for 
promoting nutri-garden for individual beneficiaries and community in convergence with 
State Scheme and NRLM. Permissible activities promoting nutri -garden like land 
leveling, well, plantation activities, soak pit, recharge pit, cattle shelter, goat shelter, 
piggery shelter, poultry shelter, infrastructure for azolla cultivation, composting 
infrastructures, horticulture trees, fishery pond. These activities can be taken in rural 
areas while dovetailing with related Departments for supports like seeds etc. 
420                                                      

Page 4 of 4 
 
9. Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD) for promotion of fodder farms 
and animal husbandry and dairying activities: Joint Guidelines have been issued on 
26.06.2020 for convergence with Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying (DAHD) 
to promote fodder (Development of Silvi pasture grass land) farms and animal husbandry 
and dairying activities. 
10. Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation (DoDWS) for Community Sanitary 
Complexes (CSCs): Joint guidelines have been issued on 06.07.2020 for construction of 
community sanitary complexes (CSCs) for strengthening community infrastructure. The 
unskilled      component up to 230 persondays will be covered under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA. 
11. Ministry of Panchayati Raj (MoPR) for Gram Panchayat Bhawans: Joint guidelines by 
MoPR and MoRD have been issued on 10.06.2020 to permit utilization of 14th Finance 
Commission (FC) grants available with GPs as well as ensuing 15th FC untied grants 
during 2020-21 towards construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans. 
12. National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB), Ministry of Ayush: Joint Guidelines with 
NMPB have been issued on 11.08.2020 to promote medicinal plants under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGA. 
13. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DoAC&FW): Joint 
Guidelines with Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare 
(DoAC&FW) have been issued on 14.01.2021 to promote horticulture. 
14. Swachh Bharat Mission(Department of Sanitation & Drinking Water): Revised guideline 
on Construction of Individual House Hold Latrine (IHHL) dated 25th November 2014 
super seeding the guidelines issued  on 11.09.2012, 13.06.2013, 19.08.2013 and 
06.01.2014  for construction of IHHL under mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
15. Ministry of Defence: Amendment made in the Schedule for construction of roads in 
border areas 3rd November 2021. 
16. Department of Sanitation & Drinking Water: Construction of Liquid waste Chamber for 
individual to convert single toilet pit to twin pit vide letter dated 19th January 2023. 
17. Ministry of Agriculture: Convergence with the programmes of Ministry of Agriculture 
for promotion of Vermi compost, NADEP, cattle shelter, liquid bio manure,, Azola, fish 
pond for community etc. vide letter dated 13th june 2013. 
18. Department of land resource: Joint guideline issued on 20th may 2009, 12th april 2013, 
11th May 2015, 21st September 2022, for taking up the watershed related works in 
convergence with both the departments. 
19. JSA-CTR-Ministry of Jal Shakti: The KPIs for convergence with Ministry of Jal Shakti 
under JSA-CTR are Water Conservation and Rain Water Harvesting, Renovation of 
traditional and other water bodies/tank, Reuse and Recharge structures, Watershed 
Development, Intensive afforestation Contribution of Mahatma Gandhi NREGA. 
20. Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate change(MoEF & CC): Guideline issued for 
19th January 2009 and 3rd March 2015 for improvement of livelihood through plantation. 
21. MISHTI-MoEF & CC: To augment India’s efforts in afforestation, the Union budget 
2023-24 announced ‘Mangrove Initiative for Shoreline Habitats & Tangible Incomes 
(MISHTI)’ programme. The aim of the MISTHI Scheme is to protect and revive 
mangrove ecosystems on the Indian coast while enhancing the socio-economic status of 
coastal communities. Joint guideline approved and to be released in October 2024. 
22. Department of Land Resource: Joint advisory on repair & maintenance of  the NRM 
works created under DoLR issued on 27th May 2025 for taking up the works of PMKSY. 
23. Ministry of Defence: Amendment made in the Schedule for “ maintenance of bridges and 
tunnels constructed by Border Road Organisation” 7th July 2022. 
***** 
421                                                      

Page 1 of 7 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2367 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ACHIEVEMENTS OF RSETIS 
 
2367  Dr. Kavita Patidar: 
Shri Brij Lal: 
Shri Madan Rathore: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the number of Rural Self-Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) currently operational 
in the country; 
(b)  whether Government has achieved the objective for which RSETIs were launched; 
(c)  if so, the details thereof; 
(d)  the total number of youth trained and settled (self-employment or wage employment) 
during the last five years and the current year; 
(e)  whether any recent evaluation or review has been undertaken to identify challenges 
related to training quality, credit linkage, or post-training handholding; 
(f)  if so, the major findings and corrective measures initiated; and 
(g)  the details of major revisions introduced under RSETI 2.0 compared to RSETI 1.0? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 (SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a): As of now, a total of 625 RSETI centres are actively functioning across 612 districts in 
33 States and Union Territories. These institutes are supported and sponsored by 25 financial 
institutions, including public sector banks, private sector banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), 
and state cooperative banks. The number of Rural Self-Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) 
currently operational in the country (States/UTs) wise is enclosed as Annexure-I. 
  
(b) to (d): Yes, the Government has achieved its core objective of RSETIs and the details on 
training and settlement, self-employment, Wage employment in the country, during the last five 
years and the current year are given as under: 
  
Financial Year Total Out of settled 
Trained settled Self-Employment Wage Employment 
2020-21 255141 185234 178038 7196 
2021-22 314114 256429 249904 6525 
2022-23 409802 325880 319546 6334 
2023-24 451419 350272 344646 5626 
2024-25 621210 467259 460577 6682 
2025-26  
(till 31-10-2025) 308575 201108 198673 2435 
  
  
422                                                      

Page 2 of 7 
 
(e) to (g): Yes, an Evaluation/Impact Study of the Rural Self Employment Training 
Institutes (RSETIs) has been conducted by the National Academy of RUDSETI (NAR) in 
agreement with the Academy of Management Studies (AMS), Lucknow. Report of Evaluation/ 
Impact Study of RSETI may be accessed through link " 
https://kaushal.rural.gov.in/assets/files/Evaluation-Impact-Study-of-Rural-Self-Employment-
Training-Institutes.pdf". 
Some of the key positive observations from the study are as follows: 
a. RSETIs are present in nearly every district of the country. They have a wide reach 
and are having a considerable impact on the employment prospects of rural poor 
youth by kindling an entrepreneurial spirit and teaching them technical skills.  
b. RSETIs are operating based on a set of SOPs. Overall performance of RSETIs are 
good and meeting the objectives of scheme.  
c. 94% of trainees were satisfied with the Faculty. 
d. A large majority (95%) were also satisfied with the course curriculum that was 
followed. 
e. Majority of the trainees enrolled into RSETI in order to establish an enterprise 
and become self-employed. 
f. Only 2% of trainees did not receive their final certificate either because they did 
not collect it or because they dropped out of the course. Majority (95%) received 
their certificates with the first two months of training completion which was a 
positive indicator as it allowed trainees to pursue loan applications and 
employment without a long gap. 
g. 86% of trainees that were followed-up felt that the follow-up period was 
adequate. This was highest in the Hilly States at 95% and lowest in the Southern 
States at 85%. 
 Further, the study also recommended: 
i. To improve the availability and quality of infrastructure: 
a. Mandating a reasonable time span for RSETIs to develop a permanent campus 
after their establishment to ensure that RSETI Institutes have the mandated 
facilities required to deliver quality training. 
b. Conducting off-campus trainings only be allowed after ensuring availability of 
quality equipment and infrastructure. 
ii. To improve processes involved in trainee enrollment and organizing the training 
programme: 
a. Enrollment targets for selection of beneficiaries be reduced. This could ensure 
that only those candidates with a sincere interest towards self-employment are 
vetted and enrolled. This would improve the efficiency of the enrollment process, 
help in achieving better settlement rates, making the approach of training more 
qualitative and in-depth. 
b. A majority, 80% of the trainees were women as opposed to 20% men. Since most 
women preferred to be self-employed, enroll in Product and Process related 
courses, and engage in activities that allowed them to work from home, it is 
423                                                      

Page 3 of 7 
 
recommended that the offering of relevant courses be also tailored to meet this 
demand. 
c. A means of verifying that practical is conducted and completed as part of the 
Institute monitoring could be established to ensure that this critical component is 
being covered. 
d. EDP components of skill-training courses received the lowest ratings by trainees. 
Since the objective of RSETIs is to not only teach trainees technical skills but also 
empower them to run enterprises, it is recommended that this gap be addressed by 
improving the EDP components of skill training courses 
e. Extending the duration of training is recommended by adding the practical and 
entrepreneurial components of skill courses. 
iii. To address the issue of quality Faculty for training: 
a. It is recommended that certain programs be made mandatory for both Directors 
and Faculty to undergo so that they are better able to perform their roles. 
Avoiding frequent change of Directors would also work to ensure that the RSETIs 
function in a non-disruptive manner. 
b. It is recommended that either expanding the staff by creating separate wings for 
pre- and post-training facilitation, or having higher remuneration would allow and 
motivate them to perform better, while also making them coveted positions to be 
sought. 
iv. To improve the effectiveness of post training follow-up and tracking system: 
a. In order to make the process of follow-up more efficient, it is recommended that 
trainees be followed-up through telephone calls until they are settled. Once 
settled, self-employed trainees can be followed-up though personal visits which 
would allow the staff to see how the trainee is running the enterprise and provide 
guidance if required. Trainees that have not been able to get settled six months 
after training can be invited to group meetings on campus which can be held 
quarterly or bi-yearly, so that their grievances are addressed and they are guided 
to start their enterprises. 
b. It is recommended that ASARE (the alumni association of RUDSETI) be made a 
trainee-run forum whereby successful trainees who are closely associated with the 
Institute be identified in each district and entrusted with the responsibility of 
conducting quarterly ASARE meetings under the guidance of the Director and 
Faculty. 
c. Facilitation of credit linkage by RSETIs needs to be improved. 
d. Additionally, application of loans through the Jan Samarth Portal can be 
encouraged across all RSETIs, which would fast-track the process of application 
and increase the rate of approval of loans.  
  
Based on the above recommendations, the following corrective measures have been initiated: 
a. The infrastructure assistance grant for RSETIs has been increased from ₹1 crore to ₹2 
crore. 
424                                                      

Page 4 of 7 
 
b. Stakeholder banks have been instructed to ensure the construction of boundary walls at 
all RSETIs to enhance the safety of trainees. 
c. To meet the diverse training needs of candidates, the range of training courses offered by 
RSETIs has been expanded. 
d. A unified, integrated portal has been developed to enable real-time monitoring of the 
scheme. 
e. All RSETIs have been directed to install IP-enabled CCTV cameras for live monitoring 
of training programmes. 
f. To improve quality of the faculties, Refresher Trainings and Training of Trainers (ToT) 
programmes are being conducted. 
g. Credit linkage support to trainees has been enhanced from 30% to 50% of trained 
candidates, strengthening post-training follow-up. 
   The detail of the key amendments made under RSETI 2.0 as compared to RSETI 1.0 is 
enclosed as Annexure-II. These amendments introduced, will enhance training effectiveness and 
improve employment outcomes for youth across the country, including those in the Jalgaon Lok 
Sabha Constituency. RSETI 2.0 Guidelines may be accessed through link " 
https://kaushal.rural.gov.in/assets/files/Guidelines-and-SOP-for-RSET-2.0-Phase-II-
%20reg.pdf".  
  A separate study conducted by NITI Aayog has also examined the programme’s 
performance and identified key constraints. Report of Evaluation Study of NITI Aayog may be 
accessed through link " https://kaushal.rural.gov.in/assets/files/Evaluation-of-Centrally-
Sponsored-Schemes-in-Package-5-Rural-Development-Sector.pdf".   
*****  
  
  
  
425                                                      

Page 5 of 7 
 
Annexure-I 
Annexure referred to in reply of part (a) of Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2367 due 
for reply on 19.12.2025 
State-wise list of functional RSETIs in the country: 
Sl. No. Name of the State/ Union Territory No. of Functional RSETIs 
1 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1 
2 Andhra Pradesh 21 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 2 
4 Assam 27 
5 Bihar 38 
6 Chattisgarh 27 
7 D & N Haveli 1 
8 Gujarat 28 
9 Haryana 21 
10 Himachal Pradesh 10 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 20 
12 Jharkhand 25 
13 Karnataka 32 
14 Kerala 14 
15 Lakshadweep 1 
16 Madhya Pradesh 53 
17 Maharashtra 36 
18 Manipur 4 
19 Meghalaya 5 
20 Mizoram 3 
21 Nagaland 1 
22 Odisha 30 
23 Pondicherry 1 
24 Punjab 18 
25 Rajasthan 35 
26 Sikkim 1 
27 Tamil Nadu 37 
28 Telangana 16 
29 Tripura 5 
30 UT Ladakh 2 
31 Uttar Pradesh 78 
32 Uttarakhand 13 
33 West Bengal 19 
Total  625 
  
  
  
  
  
426                                                      

Page 6 of 7 
 
Annexure-II 
  
Annexure referred to in reply of parts (e) to (g) of Lok Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2367 
due for reply on 19.12.2025 
  
The key amendments made under RSETI 2.0 as compared to RSETI 1.0 are as under: 
  
Sr. 
No. 
Major Thematic 
Area 
Under RSETI 1.0 Under RSETI 2.0 
1. Identification & 
Mobilization of 
Suitable Trainees 
Mobilized by 
RSETI staff with 
support from SRLM 
Mobilized by Community Cadres of 
SRLMs, RSETI staff and in digital 
mode (by QR based form) 
2. Mapping of 
candidate aptitude 
with suitable training 
course 
Personal Interaction Aptitude test and Personal Interaction 
  
3. Better Convergence 
with NRLM 
Limited 
convergence 
  
Extensive engagement of community 
resources in mobilization, post 
training handholding, utilization of 
field level Community Managed 
Training Centers (CMTCs), specific 
courses as per the demand of the 
SRLM (local community), etc. 
e.g. Mission One GP One BC Sakhi, 
FLCRP etc. 
4.  Enlarging the basket 
of training courses 
Total 64 courses 
  
To be enlarged (with multi-skilling 
courses) 
5. Proportion of short 
and long duration 
courses 
Higher no. of short 
duration courses 
  
Right mix of short and long duration 
courses 
6. Form of training 
delivery 
Only class room 
trainings 
Blended form of training delivery 
7. e-learning No contents Development of e-learning contents 
8. Training and 
Certification of 
Trainers 
At fixed intervals Regular Trainers’ Training and 
Certification 
9. Skill Up gradation No such courses Courses on Skill Up gradation 
Program  
10. Leadership in 
Entrepreneurship 
training 
RSETI one among 
other training 
Institutes 
RSETI to be in focus 
11. Off-campus training 
programs 
Ceilings on number 
of off- campus 
training programs 
Off-campus programs with check list 
to ensure quality of training 
12. Internal Mechanism 
of Quality Assurance 
Not available 
  
Being suggested 
  
13. Industry partnership 
and collaboration 
NIL 
  
MoUs with industries suggested 
  
14. Enterprise Funding 
(Credit Linkage) 
At Banks discretion 
  
Specific code in CBS, target to Banks 
for funding RSETI trainees 
427                                                      

Page 7 of 7 
 
15. Post Training Follow 
up 
Done by RSETIs 
alone 
Introducing other resources (Enablers) 
like Trainers, Assessors, Community 
Resource Persons (CRPs) to handhold 
RSETI trained candidates. Enablers to 
get financial incentives. 
16. Admin cost to States NIL Provision of admin cost to States 
17. National Mission 
Management Unit 
(NMMU) 
Being managed by 
1-2 Human 
Resources 
Establishment of NMMU at Ministry 
 for effective implementation 
18. Literacy of trainees Able to read and 
write are allowed 
Provisions to accommodate illiterate 
& semi-literate 
19. Age limit of RSETI 
trainees 
18-45 years 
  
Certain courses up to 50 Years to 
accommodate SHG members 
20. IEC and Branding of 
RSETIs 
No exclusive 
branding manual or 
policy 
Developing a Branding manual 
  
21. Opening of New 
RSETIs 
One District One 
RSETI 
New RSETIs based on feasibility 
report in change with blanket 
permission of One District One 
RSETI (ODOR) 
22. No. of candidates 
trained per RSETI 
750 per year per 
RSETI 
  
Increasing target of 750 trainee  per 
year on pilot basis 
23. Training 
infrastructures and 
resources 
Defined with 2 class 
rooms a nd 
workshop 
Expansion of RSETI capacity to 
accommodate higher number 
24. Developing Model 
RSETIs 
No such concept 
  
Sector/Job role specific Developing of 
Model RSETIs 
25. Model HR policy Old policy of 2015 Updated market driven uniform HR 
policy 
26. RSETIs Within India Exploring expansion of RSETI model 
of training to other developing 
countries 
27. Marketing support Limited Sustainable marketing through 
Aggregation/online 
  
 Note – Hon'ble Minister of Rural Development has approved the Guideline on 08.10.2023. and 
notified by Ministry dated on 10th July 2025.  And the RSETI 2.0 SOP has been finalized, and is 
effective from April 2025. 
***** 
       
  
  
 
 
 
 
428                                                      

Page 1 of 2 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2368 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT IN JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
 
2368 Shri Gulam Ali: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the Panchayat-wise number of beneficiaries with names covered under National Social 
Assistance Programme (NSAP) and Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) 
in Jammu & Kashmir (J&K), details thereof; and 
(b)  the district-wise details of PMGSY road projects sanctioned, executed and completed in 
J&K during the last five years including road length, scope, commencement dates and 
approved timelines, in case of delays, the name of roads and causes of delays, details 
thereof? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
  
(a): National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) is a social security programme for the 
most vulnerable persons of society living below poverty line, both in rural and urban areas. 
Under the programme, the old aged, widows, and divyangjans belonging to Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) and fulfilling eligibility criteria prescribed in the NSAP guidelines, are provided financial 
assistance, in the form of pension, ranging from Rs.200/- to Rs.500/- p.m. and in the case of 
death of the breadwinner of such family, a lump sum assistance of Rs.20,000/- is given to the 
bereaved family. NSAP caters to 3.09 crore BPL beneficiaries with a scheme-wise ceiling/ cap 
for each State/UT on the number of beneficiaries. The number of beneficiaries as per ceiling/cap 
under NSAP in the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir is 1,50,937. Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD) releases funds under NSAP  to UT of J&K on the basis of number of 
eligible beneficiaries whose database has been digitized  on NSAP-PPS (National Social 
Assistance Programme - Pension Payment System) portal or State cap of number of 
beneficiaries, whichever is less. Thereafter, pensions are disbursed to beneficiaries at 
district/panchayat level by the UT.  
  
In order to achieve the objective of "Housing for All" in rural areas, MoRD  is 
implementing Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana- Gramin (PMAY-G) with effect from 1st April 
2016 to provide assistance to 4.95 crore eligible rural households with basic amenities by March 
2029. The Central targets under PMAY-G are directly allocated to the State/UT considering the 
State/UT as a unit. Further, allocation of these targets to district, block and Gram panchayat is 
done by the respective State/UT Governments. Sanction of houses to the beneficiaries is also to 
be done by the States for which the Ministry regularly follows up with them. Under PMAY-G, 
429                                                      

Page 2 of 2 
 
AwaasSoft, has been developed for tracking performance of States/UTs till Gram Panchayat 
level under the scheme. The district/block/Gram Panchayat level data related to houses allocated, 
sanctioned and completed and funds transferred to beneficiaries can be seen at the programme 
website at pmayg.dord.gov.in>AwaasSoft---->Reports---->Houses progress against the target 
financial year.  
  
The Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir has been allocated a target of 3,36,498 houses 
against which the UT has sanctioned  3,34,706 houses and completed 3,20,417 houses .   
  
(b): During the last five years i.e from FY 2020-21 to 2024-25, a total of 223 roads (1752.118 
km) and 66 bridges have been sanctioned while 1474 roads (8640 km) and 140 bridges have 
been completed under various verticals of PMGSY in the UT of J&K. 
  
The timeline for completion of PMGSY-I (except Chhattisgarh) has ended on March 2025. 
The timeline for completion of pending works of PMGSY-I (Chhattisgarh only), PMGSY- II, 
RCPLWEA and PMGSY-III has been extended upto March 2026. As reported by the UT of 
J&K, the works which have gone beyond stipulated time of completion are primarily due to the 
following reasons:  
  
 Land disputes and land acquisition issues. 
 Court cases. 
 Forest clearance requirements 
 Structure compensation matters 
 Utility shifting 
 Limited working season in snow-bound areas of Jammu & Kashmir. 
 Delays due to non-completion of Stage-I Roads and LSBs aﬀecting Stage II construction. 
 Contractual issues. 
  
The district-wise, road-wise details of works sanctioned to the UT of J&K during the last five 
years under various interventions/verticals of PMGSY can be accessed at pmgsy.dord.gov.in -
>Proposals->Statewise List of Roads. 
  
***** 
  
 
 
 
 
430                                                      

Page 1 of 2 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2369 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
DIGITAL PAYMENT UNDER MGNREGS 
2369 Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  average number of days of wage delay under MGNREGS in Financial Year 2025-26, 
details thereof; 
(b)  whether Aadhaar-based payment systems have led to transaction failures for rural 
workers, if so, details thereof and if not, reasons for the same; 
(c)  steps being taken to address exclusion of non-verified beneficiaries, details thereof; and 
(d)  whether the Ministry plans an independent review of the digital payment architecture to 
ensure timely and fair disbursement of wages, if so, the details thereof and if not, reasons 
for the same? 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a) to (d): To ensure timely payment of wages to the beneficiaries under Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) and to address the 
issues arising due to frequent changes in bank account numbers of the beneficiaries and 
subsequent non-updation, it was decided to implement Aadhar Payment Bridge System (APBS). 
This has been made mandatory with effect from 1st January 2024.   
  APBS helps in improving the transparency and accountability of Wage distribution under 
the scheme and ensure faster crediting of wages in the account of beneficiaries. Aadhar 
Authentication also reduces leakage and corruption and ensures that only legitimate beneficiaries 
with verified identities receive wages.  In case of failure in payment through APBS, an 
alternative route to make payment is available through account-based payment that is National 
Automated Clearing House. Currently, against total of 12.15 crore active workers  Aadhaar 
seeding  of 99.67% have already been completed. State/UTs are continuously being monitored 
by the Central Government for achieving 100% Aadhaar Seeding and APBS conversion in 
NREGASoft. As and when any issue is flagged by the State/UT or any other stakeholders, the 
same is resolved on priority basis. 
  Monitoring and evaluation is a continuous process under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. The 
Ministry regularly reviews the performance of the States/UTs, including digital payment, 
through various mechanisms such as Mid-Term Review, Common Review Mission, Labour 
Budget meetings, National Level monitoring, virtual conference meetings and field visits. 
Depending on the need and requirements for effective implementation of the Scheme, review and 
course correction are taken up.   
State/Union Territories-wise percentage of Fund Transfer Orders (FTOs) generated within T+8 
days of muster roll closure under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during current financial year 
2025-26 (as on 16.12.2025) is given at Annexure. 
***** 
431                                                      

Page 2 of 2 
 
 Annexure 
Annexure referred to in reply to parts (a) to (d) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 
2369 dated 19.12.2025. 
  
State/Union Territories wise percentage of Fund Transfer Orders (FTOs) generated within 
T+8 days of muster roll closure under the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during current financial 
year 2025-26 (as on 16.12.2025). 
SI. 
No. State/Union Territories Timely FTO Generation within 
T+8 days % For FY 2025-26 
1 Andaman and Nicobar 8.35 
2 Andhra Pradesh 99.97 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 64.33 
4 Assam 96.67 
5 Bihar 94.33 
6 Chhattisgarh 98.45 
7 Dn Haveli And Dd 27.35 
8 Goa 61.44 
9 Gujarat 98.42 
10 Haryana 80.53 
11 Himachal Pradesh 96.81 
12 Jammu And Kashmir 91.61 
13 Jharkhand 99.97 
14 Karnataka 96.49 
15 Kerala 97.89 
16 Ladakh 68.1 
17 Lakshadweep 0 
18 Madhya Pradesh 97.18 
19 Maharashtra 79.9 
20 Manipur 26.14 
21 Meghalaya 77.47 
22 Mizoram 88.56 
23 Nagaland 53.88 
24 Odisha 98.37 
25 Puducherry 31.33 
26 Punjab 79.66 
27 Rajasthan 97.78 
28 Sikkim 89.46 
29 Tamil Nadu 99.98 
30 Telangana 99.38 
31 Tripura 97.23 
32 Uttar Pradesh 96.53 
33 Uttarakhand 99.95 
34 West Bengal 0 
  Total 95.15 
(As per NREGASoft) 
***** 
432                                                      

Page 1 of 4 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2370 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
NATIONAL RURAL LIVELIHOOD MISSION IN ASSAM 
 
2370  Ms. Sushmita Dev: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the details of the funds allocated, released and expended by Assam under the Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojana-National Rural Livelihood Mission (DAY-NRLM) during the last five 
years; 
(b)  the number of Institutions of the Poor (IoP) recognised in Assam under the DAY-NRLM, 
district-wise; 
(c)  the details and the number of IoPs that specifically cater to female tribal population in 
Assam, year-wise; and 
(d)  the number of individuals who have been trained under the DAY-NRLM’s Aajeevika 
Skills Development Programme in Assam during the said period? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI) 
  
(a): Details of the funds allocated, released and expended by Assam under the Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojana- National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) during last five years are 
given at Annexure-I. 
(b): Under the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Rural Livelihood Mission (DAY 
NRLM), Institutions of the Poor (IoP) are formed which are called as Self-Help Groups (SHGs). 
District-wise number of SHGs promoted in Assam under the DAY-NRLM is given at 
Annexure-II. 
(c): Details of number of SHGs promoted under DAY-NRLM belonging to Scheduled Tribes 
(STs) in Assam are given at Annexure-III. 
(d): There are two sub-schemes under DAY-NRLM—namely Deen Dayal Upadhyaya 
Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY) and Rural Self Employment Training Institutes 
(RSETI) that focus on the skill development of rural poor youth to provide gainful employment 
and eradicate poverty in the country. During the last five years, a total of 33,897 number of 
individuals have been trained under DDU-GKY and  a total of 75,782 individuals have been 
trained under RSETI in the State of Assam.  
***** 
  
 
433                                                      

Page 2 of 4 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY OF PART (a) OF RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2370 ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“National Rural Livelihood Mission in Assam”. 
  
Details of allocation, release and expenditure under NRLM during last 5 years (Rs in Lakhs) 
  
S.No FY Central Allocation Central Release *Expenditure 
1 2020-21 21,687.67 26,004.66 26,634.03 
2 2021-22 34,298.66 34,298.66 28,967.68 
3 2022-23 38,136.28 38,136.28 45,630.45 
4 2023-24 39,843.04 39,843.04 46,863.45 
5 2024-25 40,687.87 37,626.48 48,504.63 
  TOTAL 2,04,500.91 1,75,671.99 1,91,516.91 
*Note-Expenditure against the total available funds which includes (Opening Balance + Central 
Share + State Share+Other receipts) 
  
  
434                                                      

Page 3 of 4 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY OF PART (b) OF RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2370 ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“National Rural Livelihood Mission in Assam”. 
  
 District-wise number of SHGs promoted in Assam under the NRLM 
S.No. District Total SHGs 
1 Bajali 4195 
2 Baksa 8597 
3 Barpeta 16298 
4 Biswanath 10366 
5 Bongaigaon 8745 
6 Cachar 12335 
7 Charaideo 6066 
8 Chirang 5910 
9 Darrang 14248 
10 Dhemaji 10751 
11 Dhubri 20648 
12 Dibrugarh 11815 
13 Dima Hasao North Cachar Hills  2152 
14 Goalpara 12210 
15 Golaghat 14141 
16 Hailakandi 6193 
17 Hojai 9241 
18 Jorhat 10218 
19 Kamrup 20302 
20 Kamrup-metro 3118 
21 Karbi anglong 8284 
22 Karimganj 8120 
23 Kokrajhar 11404 
24 Lakhimpur 14763 
25 Majuli 3332 
26 Morigaon 11171 
27 Nagaon 24556 
28 Nalbari 11687 
29 Sivasagar 9184 
30 Sonitpur 14726 
31 South Salmara-Mankachar 4898 
32 Tamulpur 6541 
33 Tinsukia 10534 
34 Udalguri 11196 
35 West Karbi Anglong 4000 
  
 
435                                                      

Page 4 of 4 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
ANNEXURE REFERRED TO IN REPLY OF PART (c) OF RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2370 ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 REGARDING 
“National Rural Livelihood Mission in Assam”. 
  
The district-wise details of number of SHGs of Scheduled Tribes (STs) in Assam 
S.No. District No. of ST SHGs 
1 Bajali 222 
2 Baksa 3824 
3 Barpeta 165 
4 Biswanath 2031 
5 Bongaigaon 209 
6 Cachar 323 
7 Charaideo 246 
8 Chirang 2641 
9 Darrang 611 
10 Dhemaji 5774 
11 Dhubri 684 
12 Dibrugarh 1569 
13 Dima Hasao North Cachar Hills  1899 
14 Goalpara 2807 
15 Golaghat 1755 
16 Hailakandi 144 
17 Hojai 709 
18 Jorhat 835 
19 Kamrup 2520 
20 Kamrup-metro 772 
21 Karbi anglong 5937 
22 Karimganj 155 
23 Kokrajhar 3918 
24 Lakhimpur 4157 
25 Majuli 1629 
26 Morigaon 2027 
27 Nagaon 2022 
28 Nalbari 410 
29 Sivasagar 650 
30 Sonitpur 1822 
31 South Salmara-Mankachar 57 
32 Tamulpur 2575 
33 Tinsukia 1305 
34 Udalguri 4507 
35 West Karbi Anglong 3010 
***** 
436                                                      

Page 1 of 5 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2371 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
DELETION OF MGNREGS JOB CARDS 
 
2371  Shri Tiruchi Siva: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  details of number of deletions in MGNREGs job cards in last five years, State-wise; 
(b)  whether it is a fact that 27 lakh workers have recently been deleted from MGNREGS 
database and if so, reasons and details thereof State-wise; 
(c)  reason for increase in number of deletions; 
(d)  number of complaints received from workers under grievance redressal mechanism, 
status of such complaints, with duration of pendency, State-wise; 
(e)  whether it is a fact that 50 per cent of lodged complaints are currently pending, if so, 
reasons for delay; and 
(f)  whether any steps are being taken to ease e-KYC process for workers, especially women? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a) to (c): Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a demand-driven wage employment scheme and the 
responsibility of implementation of the Scheme is vested with the Government of concerned 
States/UTs. Updation/deletion of Job Cards is a regular exercise conducted by the States/UTs. 
Job cards have been deleted mainly for the reasons such as fake/duplicate/incorrect job 
cards, family shifted from Gram Panchayat permanently, Gram Panchayat classified as Urban 
and there was only one member in the job card and he/she has expired etc. However, while 
deleting/ removing workers/Job cards, States/UTs have to ensure compliance with provisions of 
the Act and the Standard Operating Procedure issued by the Ministry to ensure that no job card 
of deserving or eligible household is deleted/cancelled.  
  To streamline the process of deletion of Job cards, Ministry of Rural Development had 
issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) vide letter dated 25.01.2025 to all States/Union 
Territories, with clear guidelines for deletion and restoration of job cards. The SOP ensures 
compliance with the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS guidelines, promotes transparency, protects the 
rights of workers by defining conditions for deletion, setting up a grievance redressal 
mechanism, and ensure the settlement of pending liabilities if any before deletion/cancellation. 
      The SOP emphasizes the importance of due process, including the publication of draft lists of 
job cards marked for deletion, verification at Gram Sabhas, and the right of appeal for affected 
workers. It also mandates the linking of job cards with Aadhaar to eliminate duplicate and 
fraudulent entries. These measures are aimed at preventing misuse of job cards while ensuring 
that genuine beneficiaries are not excluded. The Ministry is committed to maintaining the 
integrity of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS and ensuring that the benefits of the scheme reaches the 
eligible rural households. 
437                                                      

Page 2 of 5 
 
  
  State/Union Territory (UT)-wise  number of Job card included and number of Job card 
deleted under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from the financial years 2020-21 to 2024-25 are given 
at Annexure-I.  
  
  States/UTs-wise number of workers included and number of workers deleted under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during the current financial year 2025-26 (as on 15.12.2025) are given 
at Annexure-II.  
  
(d) & (e):   States/UTs-wise details of the total number of grievances received from the public, 
disposed of and pending, along with the duration of pendency for the period from 1st April, 2025 
to 15th December, 2025, relating to Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, as maintained on the Centralised 
Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) are given in at Annexure-III. 
  
(f):     Job card verification is a continuous process, as job card renewal is required to be done 
once in 5 years under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. To simplify and support these statutory 
processes, States/UTs have been requested to utilize the e-KYC feature already available in the 
NMMS app (National Mobile Monitoring System) for job card verification and subsequent 
renewal after following extant processes. This is intended to assist States/UTs in carrying out 
job card verification in a timely, transparent, and efficient manner. As 99.67% active workers’ 
Aadhaar have already been seeded, e-KYC feature could be used as a simple, reliable, accurate 
and efficient way of verification of job cards. States have been advised to take necessary 
measures to make the process as smooth as possible by resolving issues like network 
connectivity etc. e-KYC can be done anywhere as decided by the State such as- at worksite, 
special camps organised by the Gram Panchayat etc. This is a progressive step aimed at 
strengthening transparency, efficiency, and ease of service delivery under the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS. The ground level functionaries have been adequately oriented, sensitized and 
trained through various fora to make the verification process as smooth as possible. Verification 
of job cards using e-KYC started from 01.09.2025 and it is still going on. So far  e-KYC of 
65.05% of Active workers have been completed as on 11.12.2025.  
 
***** 
 
  
  
  
438                                                      

Page 3 of 5 
 
Annexure-I 
Annexure referred to in reply to parts (a) to (c) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2371 
dated 19.12.2025. 
State/UT-wise number of Job card included and number of Job card deleted under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from the 
financial years 2020-21 to 2024-25. 
SI. 
No
. 
States/UT
s 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
include
d 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
include
d 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
include
d 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
include
d 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcar
d 
include
d 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 3426 599015 185079 306594 2882724 194462 370326 271443 148478 312851 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 6151 25738 9596 30951 8875 24736 12869 26745 15651 29200 
3 Assam 96586 632012 76244 584021 157138 652147 282142 114642 576220 316338 
4 Bihar 182407 2385607 1273514 2668027 5870225 1099870 2112092 1000169 981284 8073882 
5 Chhattisgar
h 170304 400812 139660 116761 264839 84719 294544 112761 399026 278219 
6 Goa 8 907 11 530 21 645 24 369 53 441 
7 Gujarat 131080 519313 40289 188843 146141 142085 338533 94251 53616 622668 
8 Haryana 15413 174585 8531 73698 11028 38389 8834 69744 6237 103364 
9 Himachal 
Pradesh 8000 87479 10351 87572 18119 35869 15543 36674 4559 46205 
10 Jammu and 
Kashmir 94078 122785 37635 78390 38388 41100 73015 23502 30123 95742 
11 Jharkhand 89427 1469967 228674 392043 954252 457800 324524 823815 176956 533061 
12 Karnataka 7197 737197 41843 501722 203185 448664 96036 216248 27286 180488 
13 Kerala 23773 270804 27340 222602 110722 110922 218752 84672 89300 92186 
14 Ladakh 1336 1927 889 1034 1421 1008 897 652 452 789 
15 Madhya 
Pradesh 1062861 1578165 1100109 636396 366349 537388 695278 486788 51890 588872 
16 Maharashtra 48460 952951 28201 2197774 72863 454016 37625 707659 26449 597993 
17 Manipur 11126 22242 4449 11513 3153 5806 5778 14623 6395 21704 
18 Meghalaya 8119 32181 5449 24233 3832 22702 15375 23206 13181 42502 
19 Mizoram 9896 15782 8580 8610 4149 7891 4902 7314 9988 11061 
20 Nagaland 1136 11853 1797 10191 2528 10811 3759 7995 8999 22596 
21 Odisha 313621 895680 793292 397130 2370031 352401 523622 340742 286009 880997 
22 Punjab 14330 222876 65858 67912 340659 85269 69225 81560 20981 167969 
23 Rajasthan 117660 1017378 129285 424459 634800 245390 393797 259829 55563 479493 
24 Sikkim 784 3204 1343 1745 1409 1779 2133 2159 1969 1701 
25 Tamil Nadu 126017 532951 155065 337432 315049 249091 653677 289063 633820 168580 
26 Telangana 5282 349201 15976 133727 510683 64611 84744 105652 80166 84168 
27 Tripura 8684 17387 5951 19332 5938 18757 20798 15578 8742 27075 
28 Uttar 
Pradesh 201871 4213497 582074 1674445 4858064 756055 3315158 491733 91568 1510546 
29 Uttarakhand 16508 115838 26004 30541 148098 24081 44229 27515 45150 31360 
30 West 
Bengal 19374 1682297 27741 825225 2177536 213838 169691 1726 9026 4581 
31 
Andaman 
And 
Nicobar 
1528 1241 448 222 143 446 70 616 308 428 
32 Dn Haveli 
And Dd 0 126 0 6667 0 89 2 186 14 1184 
33 Lakshadwee
p 1 13 8 112 18 76 52 165 37 36 
34 Puducherry 245 3760 258 1556 4394 1284 606 4691 480 2043 
  Total 2796689 19096771 5031544 12062010 22486774 6384197 10188652 5744487 3859976 15330323 
  
  
   
439                                                      

Page 4 of 5 
 
Annexure-II 
Annexure referred to in reply to parts (a) to (c) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2371 
dated 19.12.2025. 
States/UTs-wise number of workers included and number of workers deleted under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS during the current financial year 2025-26 (as on 15.12.2025) 
SI. No. States/UTs 
FY 2025-26(As on 15.12.2025) 
No. of deleted workers No. of Included 
workers 
1 Andhra Pradesh 1834938 473548 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 31810 27354 
3 Assam 112157 1121556 
4 Bihar 125707 1807842 
5 Chhattisgarh 512336 505920 
6 Goa 12 1002 
7 Gujarat 70650 178840 
8 Haryana 10848 196253 
9 Himachal Pradesh 69614 35653 
10 Jammu And Kashmir 251213 101682 
11 Jharkhand 57462 391302 
12 Karnataka 627806 346255 
13 Kerala 81581 145800 
14 Ladakh 3430 2166 
15 Madhya Pradesh 78769 648755 
16 Maharashtra 282855 3668064 
17 Manipur 41239 53591 
18 Meghalaya 16666 45892 
19 Mizoram 21822 20614 
20 Nagaland 225614 63472 
21 Odisha 358684 451645 
22 Punjab 65472 113045 
23 Rajasthan 192842 394691 
24 Sikkim 4871 2990 
25 Tamil Nadu 151259 111167 
26 Telangana 501608 57904 
27 Tripura 64197 37931 
28 Uttar Pradesh 73984 1317011 
29 Uttarakhand 64156 30950 
30 West Bengal 106 11886 
31 Andaman And Nicobar 1276 901 
32 Dn Haveli And Dd 186 5130 
33 Lakshadweep 345 89 
34 Puducherry 568 2134 
  Total 5936083 12373035 
440                                                      

Page 5 of 5 
 
   
 Annexure-III 
Annexure referred to in reply to parts (d) & (e) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2371 
dated 19.12.2025 
SI 
No. 
State/UTs Total 
Grievances 
Received 
Disposed 
during 
Total 
Pending As 
On 15th 
December 
2025 
0-10 
Days 
11-21 
Days 
22-30 
Days 
31-45 
Days 
46-60 
Days 
61-90 
Days 
91-
180 
Days 
1 
 Andaman and 
Nicobar Island 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 
 Andhra 
Pradesh  97 91 6 2 1 3 0 0 0 0 
3 
 Arunachal 
Pradesh  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
4  Assam  35 32 3 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 
5  Bihar  525 468 57 16 6 1 6 12 16 0 
6  Chhattisgarh  72 62 10 1 4 1 1 1 0 2 
7  Gujarat  66 59 7 2 1 2 0 1 1 0 
8  Haryana  36 30 6 0 0 0 2 4 0 0 
9 
 Himachal 
Pradesh  28 28 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10  Jharkhand  189 159 30 2 5 13 8 1 1 0 
11  Karnataka  90 80 10 7 3 0 0 0 0 0 
12  Kerala  6 5 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13  Lakshadweep  1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
14  Maharashtra  37 37 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15  Manipur  12 11 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 
16  Meghalaya  1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 
17  Mizoram  4 3 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
18  Nagaland  3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19  Odisha  103 92 11 5 4 1 1 0 0 0 
20  Puducherry  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
21  Punjab  75 67 8 1 2 1 0 1 3 0 
22  Rajasthan  222 192 30 9 9 1 5 5 1 0 
23  Sikkim  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24  Tamil Nadu  198 189 9 7 1 1 0 0 0 0 
25  Telangana  10 9 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
26  Tripura  5 4 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
27  Uttar Pradesh  643 580 63 28 18 8 9 0 0 0 
28  West Bengal  24 19 5 1 1 1 2 0 0 0 
29 Goa 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
30 
Jammu and 
Kashmir  79 72 7 4 1 0 2 0 0 0 
31 Ladakh 0                   
32 
Madhya 
Pradesh 145 126 19 2 3 2 4 4 4 0 
33 Uttarakhand 43 33 10 1 0 1 7 0 1 0 
  Total 2749 2452 297 90 62 36 50 30 27 2 
***** 
 
441                                                      

Page 1 of 4 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2372 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF MGNREGA IN RAIGAD DISTRICT 
 
2372  Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether Government maintains detailed data on Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) implementation in Raigad, including job-
cards issued, households employed, employment days, wage rates and expenditure; 
(b)  the latest district-wise statistics on job-cards, households availing work, average 
employment days, wages and funds released/utilised; 
(c)  the effectiveness of the scheme for tribal and remote households, along with measures 
ensuring 100 days of work and timely payment of wages; and 
(d)  steps taken to improve access, transparency, social audits and public reporting of district-
level data? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a): The Government maintains comprehensive and real-time data on the implementation of the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) 
through Management Information System (MIS) called as NREGASoft. 
As per NREGASoft, details of  job cards issued, employment pro  vided to households, 
persondays generated, notified wage rates and expenditure incurred in Raigad district of 
Maharashtra during the financial year 2025-26 as on 13.12.2025 is given below: 
District of 
Maharashtra 
Jobcards 
Issued  
Employment Availed 
Household 
Person days 
Generated 
Notified   
Wage Rates  
(In Rs.) 
Expenditure 
(Rs. in 
lakh) 
Raigad 209601 21586 673822 312 3353.57 
(As per NREGASoft) 
  
  
  
(b):    District - wise registered workers/ Job cards can be accessed via report number R1.1.1 of 
NREGASoft at the following link, which is available in public domain:  
https://nreganarep.nic.in/netnrega/app_issue.aspx?lflag=eng&fin_year=2025-
2026&source=national&labels=labels&Digest=0a5fZ+hdCIswROP5LqpxKg 
District - wise employment provided to households and average days of employment provided 
per households can be accessed via report number R7.1.2 of NREGASoft at the following link, 
which is available in public domain:  
442                                                      

Page 2 of 4 
 
https://mnregaweb4.nic.in/netnrega/state_html/outlayvscomest.aspx?lflag=eng&fin_year=2
025-2026&source=national&labels=labels&Digest=0a5fZ+hdCIswROP5LqpxKg 
District - wise financial statement can be accessed via report number R7.1.1 of NREGASoft at 
the following link, which is available in public domain:  
https://mnregaweb4.nic.in/netnrega/Citizen_html/financialstatement.aspx?lflag=eng&fin_y
ear=2025-2026&source=national&labels=labels&Digest=0a5fZ+hdCIswROP5LqpxKg 
Here, it is stated that while wage payments are directly credited by Central Government 
to the account of beneficiaries through the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) protocol,  for material 
component, funds are released to the State Government, which in turn releases the funds to 
Districts through SNA SPARSH module.  
  
(c): The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA), 2005, is an Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the 
households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed 
wage employment in every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to 
do unskilled manual work. 
        
The Ministry mandates the provision of an additional 50 days of wage employment 
(beyond the stipulated 100 days) to every Scheduled Tribe Household in a forest area, provided 
that these households have no other private property except for the land rights provided under the 
Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006. 
  
In addition to this, there is a provision for providing up to an additional 50 days of wage 
employment in a financial year in drought/natural calamity-affected notified rural areas. Further, 
as per Section 3(4) of the Act, the State Governments may make provision for providing 
additional days of employment beyond the period guaranteed under the Act from their own 
funds.  
In order to generate awareness about the provisions of the Scheme and to provide 
adequate employment opportunities to rural households under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, all 
States/UTs carry out appropriate Information Education and Communication (IEC) campaigns 
including wall paintings for wide dissemination of the provisions of the Act, expand scope and 
coverage of demand registration system to ensure that demand for work under Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA does not go unregistered, prepare plans in a participatory mode and approve them in the 
Gram Sabha and ensure Organization of ‘Rozgar Diwas’. 
  
Further, it is also stated that the households can register themselves under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS and seek employment at multiple fora including the Gram Panchayats. The field 
authorities have been instructed to organize Rojgar Diwas at least once every month for covering 
willing unskilled labours.  
  
With regard to timely payment of wages, it is stated that as per the provisions of the Act, 
beneficiaries are entitled to receive wage payments within 15 days of work completion. In order 
to ensure timely payment, the Government of India has issued a comprehensive Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) to all States/UTs, which defines fixed timelines for each stage of the 
wage payment process from muster roll uploading to FTO approval. The Ministry along with the 
443                                                      

Page 3 of 4 
 
States/UTs has been making concerted efforts for improving the timely payment of wages. 
States/UTs have been advised to generate pay orders in time. 
The Ministry has taken various steps to ensure timely payment of wages to workers under the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS). 
These include:  
 Improvement of National Electronic Fund Management System (Ne-FMS) 
 Intensive consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders for ensuring timely 
payment of wages, verification of pending and delay compensation claims etc. 
 Formulation of Standard Operating Procedure for monitoring of timely payment and 
payment of delay compensation. 
 Reviewing the status of timely payment and payment of delay compensation with the 
States/ UTs during periodic meetings, Performance Review Committee meetings, Mid-
term Reviews etc.  
Further, continued efforts have been undertaken by the Ministry through various 
technological interventions for ensuring timely payments of wages. Some of the key 
interventions include:  
 Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT): Wages are transferred directly from the central account 
to workers’ bank accounts, minimizing the role of intermediaries and reducing fund 
misappropriation. This has proven to be effective in enhancing transparency and 
preventing leakages. Almost 100% of the funds are managed electronically with the wage 
payment made entirely through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) protocol. 
 Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS): APBS conversion is a major reform process 
where benefits are credited directly into the bank accounts based on the Aadhaar of the 
workers under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, preferably Aadhaar Based Payments, cutting 
several layers in the delivery process. APBS helps in better targeting, increasing the 
efficiency of the system and reducing the delays in payments, ensuring greater inclusion 
by curbing leakages thereby promoting greater accountability and transparency. 
 National Mobile Monitoring System (NMMS): Real-time attendance capture through 
geo-tagged photographs at the worksite ensures accurate and timely recording of 
attendance, which helps in timely payment of wages.  
(d):    The Scheme is implemented on an end-to-end integrated transaction-based Management 
Information System (MIS) platform called NREGASoft. Through this, all aspects relating to 
planning, administrative and technical approval of the scheme, issue of job cards, acceptance of 
demand, issue of muster roll, measurement of work, approval of payment and finally payment to 
the beneficiary through a Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT)-Public Financial Management System 
(PFMS) platform are monitored. 
Through various technological interventions, the Ministry of Rural Development has 
adopted a robust process for ensuring transparency and accountability in the implementation of 
the scheme across the States/UTs. A brief note regarding the various technological interventions 
done for monitoring and evaluation for ensuring the proper implementation the scheme is given 
at the Annexure. 
***** 
  
  
444                                                      

Page 4 of 4 
 
Annexure 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (d) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2372 dated 
19.12.2025. 
i. Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT): Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system in wage payment 
has been adopted under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS). The payment of wages to the bank/ post office accounts of Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS workers is through National Electronic Fund Management System 
(NeFMS)/Electronic Fund Management System (eFMS). 
ii. National Mobile Monitoring Service (NMMS): It enables capturing of attendance of 
workers at Mahatma Gandhi NREGA worksites (except for individual beneficiary works) 
along with geo-tagged photograph twice in a day. This app aids in increasing citizen 
oversight of the programme. This is one more step towards transparency and 
accountability. 
iii. Area Officer Monitoring Visit Application:  This App facilitates the officials of the 
State/UT to record their field visit findings online. The App also allows the officials to 
record time stamped and geotagged photograph for all the schemes launched by 
Department of Rural Development. Also, this App helps in developing hassle-free 
reporting of the field visits. This app records the field visit findings and views the field 
visit outcome report by the senior officials. 
iv. GIS based plan– Use of Space Technology: GIS based GP level plan (ridge to valley 
approach) preparation using Remote Sensing technology in a saturation mode for all the 
GPs of the country. 
v. Yuktdhara :  GIS based planning tool – To simplify the GIS based planning at GP 
level under Mahatma Gandhi NREGA “ Yuktdhara” a Geospatial planning portal has 
been developed in collaboration with ISRO-NRSC. 
vi. SECURE – Software for Estimate Calculation for using Rural Rates for 
Employment :- Application is being used to  estimate the  cost of works to be undertaken 
under the scheme.  
vii. GeoNREGA: the app has been developed by using Space Technology to track the 
creation of assets by geotagging it, at “Before”, “During” and “After” stages of the asset 
creation.  
viii. JALDOOT App: JALDOOT app has been developed to enable monitoring of ground 
water tables across the country. The Jaldoot app enables Gram Rojgar Sahayak (GRS) to 
measure the water level of selected wells twice a year (pre-monsoon and post-monsoon). 
ix. JANMANREGA App: This app helps in proactive disclosure of information to its 
citizens in reference to the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS. Citizen 
awareness is a key to efficient, effective, and transparent execution of the scheme.  
x. Ombudsperson App- An Ombudsperson App has been developed for smooth reporting 
and categorization of grievances received from various sources viz. physical, digital and 
mass media related to the implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS, easy tracking 
and timely passing of awards on each case as per the guidelines and easy uploading of 
quarterly and annual report on the website. 
xi. Social Audit: As per the mandate of the Act, the Ministry has laid emphasis on the 
setting up of an institutional structure at the States/UTs level for facilitating social audits 
of all the Gram Panchayats at least twice a year. With the consistent efforts by Ministry, a 
total of 27 States and 1 UT have established Independent Social Audit Units. Through 
use of Panchayat NIRNAY app developed by Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Social Audit 
has further been strengthened as it increases  community involvement and transparency. 
Through this App schedule, agenda, decisions taken during the social audit gram sabha 
can be viewed.  
***** 
445                                                      

Page 1 of 2 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2373 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
RURAL ROAD CONNECTIVITY UNDER PMGSY - IV 
 
2373  Shri Narhari Amin: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the progress made under PMGSY-IV during the financial year 2025, including State wise 
and UT-wise details of habitations covered and road length sanctioned and constructed; 
(b)  the number of all-weather rural roads and bridges constructed in Gujarat during the 
financial year 2025 under PMGSY-I, II, III and IV, particularly in rural and remote 
districts; and 
(c)  whether the newly constructed roads under PMGSY-IV have improved inter-village 
connectivity, access to markets, health and education services and overall mobility for 
rural communities in Gujarat? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a): The State wise and UT wise details (till 14.12.2025) of road length and habitations 
sanctioned during the Financial Year 2025 under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana-IV 
(PMGSY-IV) are as given below: 
  
 State No of roads 
sanctioned 
Length sanctioned (in km) Habitations sanctioned 
Jammu & Kashmir 316 1781.33 429 
Chhattisgarh 774 2426.87 780 
Uttarakhand  184 1288.198 309 
  
 All works are newly sanctioned and at different stages of progress.  
  
(b) & (c): There is no fresh sanction given for any works in this financial year 2025-26 to 
Gujarat state. All works sanctioned under PMGSY-I and PMGSY-II have already been 
completed by the State of Gujarat by March 2025. Details may be accessed on programme 
website-> https://pmgsy.dord.gov.in ->Progress Monitoring ->Financial Year-wise 
Achievement. During the current Financial Year 2025-26, 9 roads of 27.66 km length and 12 
bridges have been constructed under PMGSY-III. 
  
 
 
446                                                      

Page 2 of 2 
 
District-wise details thereof are given below: 
  
Sr. 
No. 
District Name No. of Roads 
Completed 
No. of Bridges 
Completed 
Road Length Completed 
(km) 
1 Banaskantha 1 0 4.530 
2 Bharuch 2 0 0.000 
3 Bhavnagar 0 2 0.000 
4 Jamnagar 2 0 1.390 
5 Junagadh 2 0 1.876 
6 Navsari 0 3 0.000 
7 Patan 0 0 12.225 
8 Surendranagar 0 3 0.000 
9 Devbhumi Dwarka 2 0 7.640 
10 Arvalli 0 4 0.000 
Total 9 12 27.661  
  
  The PMGSY-IV has been launched in 2024 for construction of 62,500 km of all-weather 
roads (single lane) to provide connectivity to about 25,000 unconnected habitations of 
population size 500+ in plains, 250+ in NE & Hill states/UTs, special category areas (Tribal 
Schedule V, Aspirational Districts/ Blocks, Desert areas) and 100+ in LWE affected districts, as 
per Census 2011. The implementation period of the scheme is from the Financial Year 2024-25 
to 2028-29. The survey work to identify eligible habitations has been completed in Gujarat. No 
proposals under PMGSY-IV have been received from the State so far. 
  
***** 
  
 
 
 
 
447                                                      

O.I.H. 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2374 
ANSWERED ON 19.12.2025 
 
REDEVELOPMENT OF NIRA RAILWAY STATION UNDER AMRIT BHARAT 
STATION SCHEME 
 
2374 # SMT. SUNETRA AJIT PAWAR: 
 
Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Nira Railway Station in Pune Division in Maharashtra has been included for 
redevelopment under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme (ABSS); 
 
(b) if so, the total amount allocated for the project and the major works (such as  
lifts/escalators, FOB extension, upgradation of waiting room) included in it; and 
 
(c) the current physical progress of redevelopment work of the said station and by when it  is 
targeted to be completed, so that lakhs of passengers from neighbouring areas like  Baramati 
and Phaltan can get world class facilities? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF RAILWAYS, INFORMATION & BROADCASTING AND  
ELECTRONICS & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) 
 
(a) to (c) :  At Nira station of Pune division, located in Maharashtra, high level platform no. 1, 
platform shelter, waiting hall, drinking water taps, lavatories and Foot Over Bridge amenities 
are available. Recently, the work of new station building has been completed  and the works 
448                                                      

of new platform no. 2/3 and Foot Over Bridge have been taken up. 
 
Further, development / redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of stations on Indian 
Railways is a continuous and ongoing process and works in this regard are undertaken a s per 
requirement, subject to inter -se priority and availability of funds. Development / 
redevelopment / upgradation / modernisation of a station is carried out based on category of 
station/condition/traffic handled etc.  
 
Ministry of Railways has launched  Amrit Bharat Station Scheme for redevelopment of 
stations with a long-term approach. 
 
The scheme involves preparation of master plans and their implementation in phases to 
improve the stations. The master planning includes: 
 Improvement of access to station and circulating areas 
 Integration of station with both sides of city 
 Improvement of station building 
 Improvement of waiting halls, toilets, sitting arrangement, water booths  
 Provision of wider foot over bridge/air concourse commensurate with passenger traffic 
 Provision of lift/escalators/ramp 
 Improvement /Provision of platform surface and cover over platforms 
 Provision of kiosks for local products through schemes like ‘One Station One Product’ 
 Parking areas, Multimodal integration 
 Amenities for Divyangjans 
 Better passenger information systems 
 Provision of executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, landscaping,etc. 
keeping in view the necessity at each station. 
 
The scheme also envisages sustainable and environment friendly solutions,  provision of 
ballastless tracks etc. as per necessity, phasing and feasibility and creation of city centre at the 
station in the long term. 
 
So far, 1337 stations have been identified for development under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme, out of which 132 stations are located in Maharashtra. The names of stations 
identified for development under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in Maharashtra are as 
following: 
 
449                                                      

State 
No. of Amrit 
Stations 
Names of Amrit Stations 
Maharashtra 132 Ahmednagar, Ajni (Nagpur), Akalkot Road, Akola, 
Akurdi, Amalner, Amgaon, Amravati, Andheri, Badnera, 
Balharshah, Bandra Terminus, Baramati, Belapur, 
Bhandara Road, Bhokar, Bhusawal, Borivali, Byculla, 
Chalisgaon, Chanda Fort, Chandrapur, Charni Road, 
Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus, Chinchpokli, Chinchwad, Dadar (CR), Dadar 
(WR), Dahisar, Daund, Dehu Road, Devlali, 
Dhamangaon, Dharangaon, Dharashiv, Dharmabad , 
Dhule, Diva, Dudhani, Gangakher, Godhani, Gondia, 
Grant Road, Hadapsar, Hatkanangale, Hazur  Sahib 
Nanded, Himayatnagar, Hinganghat, Hingoli Deccan, 
Igatpuri, Jalgaon, Jalna, Jeur, Jogeshwari, Kalyan Jn, 
Kamptee, Kandivali, Kanjur Marg, Karad, Katol, 
Kedgaon, Kinwat, Kopargaon, Kurduwadi Jn, Kurla Jn, 
Lasalgaon, Latur, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Lo nand Jn, 
Lonavla, Lower Parel, Malad, Malkapur, Manmad Jn, 
Manwath Road , Marine Lines, Matunga, Miraj Jn, 
Mudkhed Jn, Mumbai Central, Mumbra, Murtizapur Jn, 
Nagarsol, Nagpur Jn, Nandgaon, Nandura, Nandurbar, 
Narkher Jn, Nashik Road, Netaji Subhash Chandra  Bose 
Itwari Junction, Pachora Jn, Palghar, Pandharpur, Panvel 
Jn, Parbhani Jn, Parel, Parli Vaijnath, Partur , Phaltan, 
Prabhadevi, Pulgaon Jn, Pune Jn, Purna Jn, Raver, 
Rotegaon , Sainagar Shirdi, Sandhurst Road, Sangli, 
Satara, Savda, Selu, Sewagram, Shahad, Shegaon, Shivaji 
Nagar Pune, Shri Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj Terminus 
Kolhapur, Solapur, Talegaon, Thakurli, Thane, Titvala, 
Tumsar Road, Umri, Uruli, Vadala Road, Vidyavihar, 
Vikhroli, Wadsa, Wardha, Washim, Wathar 
 
450                                                      

Development works at railway stations under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme in 
Maharashtra has been taken up at a good pace. Till now, works of 17 stations 
(Amgaon,Baramati, Chanda Fort, Chinchpokli, Devlali, Dhule, Kedgaon, Lasalgaon, 
Lonand Jn, Matunga, Murtizapur Jn, Nandura, Netaji Su bhash Chandra Bose Itwari 
Junction, Parel, Savda, Shahad,Vadala Road ) in Maharashtra have been completed under 
this scheme. The works at other stations have also been taken up at good pace and 
progress of some of above stations is as given below: 
 
 Phaltan station:The works of platform shelter,improvement of platform surface, 
entrance ramp, Divyangjan facilities and seating arrangement have been completed.  
 
 Wathar station: The works of new portico, improvement of station building, water 
booth, new main entry gate, parking area, circulating area, improvement of entrance 
lobby, compound wall of parking area, platform shelter at platform no. 1, platform 
surfacing, improvement of waiting room, signages and station illumination have 
been completed. The finishing works have been taken up. 
 
 Nandgaon station:  The works of entrance and exit gate, platform surfacing, 
platform shelter, improvement of station building, booking office, Foot Over 
Bridge, boundary wall, circulating area, parking area, signage and lighting h ave 
been completed. The finishing works have been taken up. 
 
 Diva station: The works of redevelopment of circulating area and parking on East 
side, improvement to station building on East side, new entry gate, improvement to 
Foot Over Bridge at East side, construction of new staircase for Foot Over Bridge at 
East side, platform shelter of platform no. 7/8, platform raising and flooring of 
platform no. 5/6 and 7/8, new toilet block and sewage treatment plant on West side 
and new toilet block of platform no. 7/8 have been completed. The work new 6 m 
Foot Over Bridge at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus end have been taken up. 
 
 Mumbra station: The works of platform flooring of platform no. 4, improvement 
of seating arrangement of platform no. 1 and 4, flooring of Foot Over Bridge, new 
toilet block, sewage treatment plant, developm ent of circulating area, improvement 
of ticket booking office have been completed. The work of escalators on platform 
no. 1 has been taken up. 
 
451                                                      

 Titwala station: The works of two wheeler parking and approach road on East and 
West side, new entrance gate, im provement of ticket booking office, new toilet 
block, sewage treatment plant, platform surfacing of platform no. 3 and new station 
building have been completed. The works of new 6 m Foot Over Bridge have been 
taken up. 
Development / upgradation / modernisa tion of stations including under Amrit Bharat Station 
Scheme is generally funded under Plan Head -53 ‘Customer Amenities’. The details of 
allocation and expenditure under Plan Head -53 are maintained Zonal Railway -wise and not 
work-wise, or station-wise or s tate-wise.Maharashtrais covered under the jurisdiction of four 
railway zones, namely, Central Railway, South Central Railway, South East Central Railway 
and Western Railway. For the current year 2025-26, ₹ 3,751 crore has been allocated while an 
expenditure of ₹ 2,342 crore has been incurred (up to October, 2025). 
 
Development / Upgradation of railway stations is complex in nature involving safety of 
passengers & trains and requires various statutory clearances such as fire clearance, heritage, 
tree cutting, air-port clearance etc. The progress also gets affected due to brownfield related 
challenges such as shifting of utilities (involving water/sewage lines, optical fibre cables, gas 
pipe lines, power/signal cables, etc.), infringements, operation of trains  without hindering 
passenger movement, speed restrictions due to works carried out in close proximity of tracks 
and high voltage power lines, etc. and these factors affect the completion time. 
***** 
452                                                      

Page 1 of 2 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2375 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
ROADS CONSTRUCTION UNDER PMGSY IN TAMIL NADU 
 
2375  Shri R. Dharmar: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the number of roads constructed and projects completed under the Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) in Tamil Nadu, along with the total financial allocation and 
expenditure incurred for these projects so far; 
(b)  steps taken to address challenges in rural road construction, such as delays in 
implementation, budget constraints and land acquisition issues, particularly in remote 
areas of Tamil Nadu; and 
(c)  the timeline by which Government plans to achieve full rural road connectivity in Tamil 
Nadu under the PMGSY and the steps being taken to accelerate progress in 
underdeveloped regions? 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN)  
(a): A total of 10,368 roads of 26,647 km road length have been sanctioned under 
various interventions/verticals of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) in the State of 
Tamil Nadu. Out of these, a total of 10,250 roads of 26,120 km road length have been completed, 
while 118 roads of 342 km road length are at various stages of execution. The State has already 
completed all the sanctioned projects under PMGSY-I and PMGSY-II. 
  
The details of sanctioned, completed and balance road projects under various 
interventions/verticals of PMGSY in the State of Tamil Nadu till 13.12.2025 are as below:  
  
Name of 
intervention/ 
vertical 
Sanctioned 
  
Completed 
  
Balance* 
No. of 
Roads  
Road length 
(km) 
No. of 
Roads  
Road length 
(km) 
No. of 
Roads  
Road length 
(km) 
PMGSY-I 7,678  16,319.53 7,678 
   16,168.39 0 - 
PMGSY-II 860 
   2,940.41 860 
   2,936.46 0 - 
PMGSY-III 1,826 
   7,377.06 1,712 
   7,015.64 114  331.41 
PM-
JANMAN 
4 
   10.96 - - 4   
10.96 
Total: 10,368  26,647.97  10,250  26,120.50 118 342.37 
*Balance road length is less than the difference of sanctioned and completed length due to the 
reasons that some projects were completed with less than the sanctioned length due to reduction 
in road length, change in alignment, construction of part length by other agencies, etc. 
453                                                      

Page 2 of 2 
 
  
The allocation of funds to the State for implementation of PMGSY depends, inter-alia, 
on works in hand, execution capacity of the State and unspent balance of previous year(s) 
available with the State.  Since inception, a total of Rs. 7126.53 Crore of central share has been 
released to the State government of Tamil Nadu and the State has incurred expenditure of Rs.  
10,189  Crore (including State share) towards implementation of the programme.    
(b) & (c): Rural roads being a State subject, the Ministry provides regular and adequate 
budgetary support to the States, including Tamil Nadu, for implementation of works under the 
PMGSY. The responsibility for execution and timely completion of works rests with the 
respective State Governments. The implementation of rural road projects under PMGSY is 
closely monitored through the Online Management,  Monitoring and Accounting System 
(OMMAS) and reviewed in various forums, including Regional Review Meetings (RRMs), 
Performance Review Committee (PRC) meetings, Pre-Empowered/Empowered Committee 
meetings, monthly or periodic review meetings with the States, and special review meetings held 
by the Secretary, Additional Secretary, and Joint Secretary of the Ministry with Chief Secretaries 
and Principal Secretaries of the States, as and when required. 
  
To address challenges relating to delays, capacity constraints, land availability and 
quality of work, the Ministry has taken several measures. The States are required to ensure 
availability of encumbrance-free land prior to sanction work. Adequate funds are released to the 
States in a timely manner based on physical and financial progress of works, subject to 
fulfillment of programme guidelines. Bidding document provisions have been rationalized to 
facilitate wider participation and timely award of works. Further, training programmes are 
imparted to field engineers, contractors, and their staff to strengthen technical and managerial 
capacities. 
  
Additionally, independent quality monitoring is carried out through State Quality 
Monitors and National Quality Monitors to ensure adherence to prescribed standards and timely 
completion of work.  
  
In the State of Tamil Nadu, all projects sanctioned under PMGSY-I and PMGSY-II have 
already been completed. Works under PMGSY-III and PM-JANMAN are ongoing at various 
stages of execution. The extended timeline for the completion of the ongoing PMGSY-III works 
is March, 2026 and of PM-JANMAN is March 2028. 
Under PMGSY IV programme (2024-2029), the States have conducted survey using 
Gram Sadak Survey application and uploaded the details of 40,547 habitations (8 habitations in 
Tamil Nadu) as unconnected habitations.  The timeline for completion of works under PMGSY-
IV is March, 2029.    
***** 
 
 
 
454                                                      

Page 1 of 2 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2376 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
FUNDS OWED TO STATES UNDER MGNREGS 
 
2376  Shri Derek O' Brien: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the amount of funds (in ₹) owed to States under the heads of ‘wages’ and ‘material and 
admin’ under MGNREGS Scheme component-wise and State-wise details; and 
(b)  the amount of funds (in ₹) given to West Bengal in the last four years, year-wise details? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
   
(a): Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS) is a demand-driven wage employment scheme. Fund release is a continuous process 
and Central Government is committed to making funds available to the States/UTs as per 
demand for work on the ground. State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of pending liabilities 
for Wage, Material and Admin component under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS as on 15.12.2025 are 
given at Annexure.   
(b): During the Financial Years 2021–22 and 2022–23, amounts of Rs.7,507.80 crore and Rs. 
1.33 crore, respectively, were released to the Government of West Bengal.  
Further, the proposal for upward revision of the Labour Budget for FY 2021-22 for the 
State of West Bengal was not approved by the Empowered Committee, National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS), Department of Rural Development 
due to non-compliance with the directives issued by this Department. Subsequently, the release 
of funds to the State of West Bengal under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) was stopped with effect from 09.03.2022 by 
invoking the provisions of Section 27 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act, 2005, owing to continued non-compliance with the directives of the Central 
Government by the State. 
This Department has issued orders dated 06.12.2025 for the resumption of the 
implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the State of West Bengal which is subject to 
mandatory compliance with the special conditions, so as to facilitate the effective and lawful 
implementation of the Scheme in the State and to ensure that past instances of misappropriation 
and irregularities are not repeated. The State Government has been requested to submit the 
Labour Budget proposal for the current Financial Year 2025-26 for consideration of the 
Empowered Committee, Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.   
*****  
455                                                      

Page 2 of 2 
 
  Annexure 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (a) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2376 
dated 19.12.2025.  
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of pending liabilities for Wage, Material and Admin component under 
Mahatma Gandhi NREGS  as on 15.12.2025   (Rs. in crores) 
States/UTs Admin Material Wages 
Andhra Pradesh 80.54  583.73 425.23 
Arunachal Pradesh 0.92  49.16 5.26 
Assam 28.03  410.07 5.31 
Bihar 15.13  416.52 18.80 
Chhattisgarh 9.81  106.75 8.31 
Goa 0.02  0.43 0.00 
Gujarat 12.66  23.64 82.85 
Haryana 0.43  41.59 0.87 
Himachal Pradesh 5.74  72.03 2.15 
Jammu And Kashmir 18.16  198.34 70.38 
Jharkhand 5.51  299.59 16.93 
Karnataka 39.35  578.06 10.50 
Kerala 52.53  192.61 419.32 
Ladakh 0.39  3.77 1.03 
Madhya Pradesh 98.81  629.21 207.56 
Maharashtra 34.41  701.34 14.55 
Manipur 4.30  156.38 12.56 
Meghalaya 1.22  65.46 4.25 
Mizoram 1.02  0.25 5.91 
Nagaland 2.30  76.14 24.79 
Odisha 2.66  238.09 20.78 
Punjab 1.83  116.44 1.69 
Rajasthan 9.91  838.04 10.26 
Sikkim 0.04  2.48 0.22 
Tamil Nadu 35.41  594.80 365.72 
Telangana 12.48  212.85 1.16 
Tripura 26.11  139.63 1.80 
Uttar Pradesh 103.94  1086.81 24.13 
Uttarakhand 3.93  55.72 1.75 
West Bengal** **  ** ** 
Andaman and Nicobar 0.00  0.03 0.00 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu  0.00  0.01 2.27 
Lakshadweep 0.00  0.00 0.00 
Puducherry 0.47  0.00 0.00 
Note: The pending liability of Material Component includes- the pending liability of FY 2025-26 (as per 
NREGASoft) and for FY 2024-25 (actual). There is no pendency for the previous year under Wage & Admin 
Components. 
**The proposal for upward revision of the Labour Budget for FY 2021-22 for the State of West Bengal was not 
approved by the Empowered Committee of the Department of Rural Development due to non-compliance with the 
directives issued by this Department. Subsequently, the release of funds to the State of West Bengal under the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi NREGS) was also stopped 
with effect from 09.03.2022 by invoking the provisions of Section 27 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, owing to continued non-compliance with the directives of the Central 
Government by the State. Therefore, as per NREGASoft, the pending liability pertaining to the State of West Bengal 
(as on 08.03.2022) stands at ₹3082.52 crore, comprising ₹1457.22 crore under the wage component, ₹1607.68 crore 
under the material component, and ₹17.62 crore under the administrative component. The admissibility of this 
liability is subject to verification by the Central Government. 
***** 
456                                                      

Page 1 of 12 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2377 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
PENDING LIABILITIES UNDER MGNREGA 
 
2377  Shri Sanjay Singh: 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  details of State-wise and year-wise funds allocated, released, utilised under Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) from 2020-21 to 2024-
25, with separate details for Wage, Material and Administrative components; 
(b)  pending wages, material dues and administrative payments—State-wise and year-wise 
since 2020-21; 
(c)  details of the number of workers who did not receive wages within the mandated 15 days 
and total compensation payable and actually paid for delayed wages for the last five 
years, State-wise; and 
(d)  number of job cards issued, deleted and verified during the last five years and details of 
audits conducted to detect duplicate, inactive or fraudulent job cards, State-wise? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a): Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGS) is a demand driven wage employment scheme. There is no State/UT-wise allocation of 
funds under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS.  
  
The details of funds allocation at Budget Estimate stage, Revised Estimate stage, final allocation 
and fund released under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS in the last five financial years are given 
below: 
  
 (Rs. in crore) 
Financial Year Budget Estimate Revised Estimate  Final allocation Actual release 
2020-21 61500.00 111500.00 111500.00 111171.00 
2021-22 73000.00 98000.00 99118.00 98468.00 
2022-23 73000.00 89400.00 90956.00 90810.00 
2023-24 60000.00 86000.00 89363.00 89268.00 
2024-25 86000.00 86000.00 86000.00 85839.00 
  
  State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of funds released for Wage, Material and 
Administrative components under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25 are given 
at Annexure-I. 
  
(b):    Under the Scheme, the wage payments are directly credited by the Central Government to 
the accounts of the beneficiaries through Direct Benefit Transfer protocol. Sanctions for wage 
payments are issued daily by the Ministry through the Public Finance Management System 
457                                                      

Page 2 of 12 
 
(PFMS) based on fund transfer orders received from the States/ UTs  after following  due 
procedures. At the beginning of each financial year, admissible pending liabilities of the previous 
years, if any, are duly reimbursed by the Government of India. Accordingly, all due and 
admissible  pending wage liabilities upto FY 2024-25 have already been cleared (except in case 
of State of West Bengal). 
  
  With regard to Material and Admin components, States/UTs are required to furnish fund 
release proposals to the Government of India. The Central Government releases funds 
periodically in two tranches with each tranche consisting of one or more installments, keeping in 
view the “agreed to” Labour Budget, demand for works, opening balance, pace of utilization of 
funds, pending liabilities, overall performance and subject to submission of relevant documents 
by the States/UTs. 
  
  Under the Scheme, in the current financial year 2025-26 (as on 14.12.2025), an amount of 
Rs. 71,140.75 crore has been released to the States/Union Territories, which includes 
Rs.59,983.78 crore  for wage component and an amount of Rs.11,156.96 crore for  Material and 
Admin. As Sanction for payment of wages are issued by Ministry on a daily basis through PFMS 
(Public Finance Management System), after receipt of funds transfer orders from States/UTs  
after following the due procedures, the fund release status keeps updating on a daily basis. 
  
  State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of pending liabilities for Wage, Material and 
Admin component under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS as on 15.12.2025  are given at Annexure-II. 
  
(c): Under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS during the last five years, more than 96% of Funds 
Transfer Orders (FTOs) have consistently been generated within 15 days of closure of muster 
roll. Under the scheme, 100% of wage payments are made by the Central Government directly to 
the accounts of beneficiaries through the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) protocol. As sanctions 
for payment of wages are issued by Ministry on a daily basis through PFMS (Public Finance 
Management System), after receipt of funds transfer orders from States after following the due 
procedures, the fund release status keeps updating on a daily basis. At the beginning of each 
financial year, admissible pending liabilities of the previous year, if any, are duly reimbursed by 
the Government of India. Accordingly all pending wage liabilities of FY 2024-25 have already 
been released. 
  
  Here, it also stated that as per the provisions mentioned in Schedule-II of the Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (Mahatma Gandhi NREGA), wage 
seekers shall be entitled to receive payment of compensation for the delay, at the rate of 0.05% 
of the unpaid wages per day of delay beyond the sixteenth day of closure of muster roll. Delay 
compensation rules are notified by the State Government concerned. The amount due for 
compensation is duly verified and approved, and then paid by the State Government. 
  
  States/UTs-wise details of the delay compensation payable and delay compensation paid 
under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS (as per information available on NREGASoft) from 2020-21 to 
2024-25 is given at Annexure-III. 
  
  
(d):    Mahatma Gandhi NREGS is a demand-driven wage employment scheme and the 
responsibility of implementation of the Scheme is vested with the Government of concerned 
States/UTs. Updation/deletion of Job Cards is a regular exercise conducted by the States/UTs. 
458                                                      

Page 3 of 12 
 
Job cards have been deleted mainly for the reasons such as fake/duplicate/incorrect job 
cards, family shifted from Gram Panchayat permanently, Gram Panchayat classified as Urban 
and there was only one member in the job card and he/she has expired etc. However, while 
deleting/ removing workers/Job cards, States/UTs have to ensure compliance with provisions of 
the Act and the Standard Operating Procedure issued by the Ministry to ensure that no job card 
of deserving or eligible household is deleted/cancelled.  
  To streamline the process of deletion of Job cards, Ministry of Rural Development had 
issued a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) vide letter dated 25.01.2025 to all States/Union 
Territories, with clear guidelines for deletion and restoration of job cards. The SOP ensures 
compliance with the Mahatma Gandhi NREGS guidelines, promotes transparency, protects the 
rights of workers by defining conditions for deletion, setting up a grievance redressal 
mechanism, and ensure the settlement of pending liabilities if any before deletion/cancellation. 
      The SOP emphasizes the importance of due process, including the publication of draft lists of 
job cards marked for deletion, verification at Gram Sabhas, and the right of appeal for affected 
workers. It also mandates the linking of job cards with Aadhaar to eliminate duplicate and 
fraudulent entries. These measures are aimed at preventing misuse of job cards while ensuring 
that genuine beneficiaries are not excluded. The Ministry is committed to maintaining the 
integrity of Mahatma Gandhi NREGS and ensuring that the benefits of the scheme reaches the 
eligible rural households. 
  State/Union Territory (UT)-wise number of Jobcard included and number of Jobcard 
deleted under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from the financial years 2020-21 to 2024-25 are given 
at Annexure-IV.  
***** 
  
  
  
459                                                      

Page 4 of 12 
 
Annexure-I 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (a) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2377 to 
be answered on 19.12.2025 
 
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of funds released for Wage, Material and Administrative 
components under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25 (Rs. in Crores) 
SI. No.  States/UTs 2020-21 
Wages Material & Admin Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 6273.13 4031.97 10305.10 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 224.89 115.39 340.28 
3 Assam  2154.95 447.38 2602.33 
4 Bihar  4756.87 2527.36 7284.24 
5 Chhattisgarh 3362.94 580.54 3943.48 
6 Goa 0.00 3.57 3.57 
7 Gujarat 1066.02 412.10 1478.12 
8 Haryana  600.89 162.67 763.56 
9 Himachal Pradesh  736.75 211.58 948.33 
10 Jammu & Kashmir  810.49 341.83 1152.32 
11 Jharkhand  2399.42 1024.67 3424.08 
12 Karnataka 4251.44 1249.55 5500.99 
13 Kerala 3356.22 930.55 4286.78 
14 Madhya Pradesh  6419.71 2667.01 9086.73 
15 Maharashtra 1351.62 248.63 1600.26 
16 Manipur 0.00 1306.74 1306.74 
17 Meghalaya  974.97 309.20 1284.17 
18 Mizoram 501.75 88.70 590.45 
19 Nagaland 0.00 483.82 483.82 
20 Odisha 4219.20 996.09 5215.29 
21 Punjab  1021.25 217.89 1239.14 
22 Rajasthan 8097.76 823.00 8920.76 
23 Sikkim 80.75 29.42 110.17 
24 Tamil Nadu 6958.79 1830.02 8788.82 
25 Telangana 2634.34 1476.87 4111.21 
26 Tripura 904.40 290.58 1194.99 
27 Uttar Pradesh 7817.58 4196.52 12014.10 
28 Uttarakhand  713.17 173.09 886.27 
29 West Bengal  9397.68 2056.37 11454.05 
30 Andaman & Nicobar 0.00 4.86 4.86 
31 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.00 0.00 0.00 
32 Daman & Diu  0.00 0.00 0.00 
33 Lakshadweep 0.00 0.00 0.00 
34 Puducherry  24.44 2.40 26.84 
35 Ladakh 22.49 0.00 22.49 
Total  81133.93 29240.38 1,10,374.31 
  
  
  
  
460                                                      

Page 5 of 12 
 
 
 
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of funds released for Wage, Material and Administrative 
components under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25 (Rs. in Crores) 
Sl. No.  States/UTs 2021-22  
Wages Material & Admin Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 5238.79  1943.88 7182.67 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 323.55  130.19 453.74 
3 Assam  1963.42  256.84 2220.26 
4 Bihar  3507.37  1900.00 5407.37 
5 Chhattisgarh 2837.20  1057.14 3894.34 
6 Goa 0.04  0.00 0.04 
7 Gujarat 1159.56  455.69 1615.24 
8 Haryana  457.10  265.58 722.68 
9 Himachal Pradesh  734.44  241.31 975.75 
10 Jammu & Kashmir  854.89  95.24 950.14 
11 Jharkhand  2225.92  837.91 3063.83 
12 Karnataka 4644.87  1383.21 6028.08 
13 Kerala 3112.95  438.98 3551.93 
14 Madhya Pradesh  5548.84  2930.25 8479.09 
15 Maharashtra 1651.39  405.07 2056.46 
16 Manipur 0.00  563.11 563.11 
17 Meghalaya  881.77  239.89 1121.66 
18 Mizoram 462.84  86.08 548.92 
19 Nagaland 305.70  263.75 569.46 
20 Odisha 4288.73  1391.42 5680.15 
21 Punjab  899.21  358.38 1257.59 
22 Rajasthan 7774.48  2093.27 9867.75 
23 Sikkim 74.13  38.29 112.42 
24 Tamil Nadu 7354.81  2283.32 9638.13 
25 Telangana 2547.34  1557.86 4105.20 
26 Tripura 814.60  174.28 988.88 
27 Uttar Pradesh 6602.67  1906.89 8509.57 
28 Uttarakhand  499.35  142.68 642.03 
29 West Bengal  5607.80  1900.00 7507.80 
30 Andaman & Nicobar 0.00  7.63 7.63 
31 Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu 0.00 0.00 0.00 
32 Lakshadweep 0.00  0.30 0.30 
33 Puducherry  13.07  0.00 13.07 
34 Ladakh 42.47  16.57 59.04 
Total  72429.31 25365.02 97794.33 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
461                                                      

Page 6 of 12 
 
  
  
 
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of funds released for Wage, Material and Administrative 
components under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25 (Rs. in Crores) 
Sl. No.  States/UTs 2022-23  
Wages Material & Admin Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 5118.93  2870.16 7989.09 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 352.14  225.44 577.58 
3 Assam  1831.40  222.16 2052.35 
4 Bihar  5024.83  1369.62 6395.29 
5 Chhattisgarh 2381.67  1025.34 3383.55 
6 Goa 3.75  1.29 5.12 
7 Gujarat 1011.03  683.57 1692.07 
8 Haryana  306.35  67.63 373.99 
9 Himachal Pradesh  656.13  503.37 1157.48 
10 Jammu & Kashmir  704.37  346.25 1050.61 
11 Jharkhand  2196.30  518.46 2708.64 
12 Karnataka 3793.51  2417.52 6225.28 
13 Kerala 2935.75  881.21 3818.43 
14 Madhya Pradesh  4541.45  1156.39 5702.13 
15 Maharashtra 1744.29  799.32 2549.73 
16 Manipur 0.00  1086.63 1086.63 
17 Meghalaya  670.25  446.68 1116.92 
18 Mizoram 420.13  118.59 538.72 
19 Nagaland 573.06  264.39 897.45 
20 Odisha 3743.86  956.29 4638.36 
21 Punjab  883.11  299.03 1182.13 
22 Rajasthan 6757.26  2891.39 9662.99 
23 Sikkim 70.46  22.09 92.55 
24 Tamil Nadu 7469.90  2238.92 9706.62 
25 Telangana 2027.44  954.34 2988.68 
26 Tripura 672.17  250.60 922.03 
27 Uttar Pradesh 6551.57  4075.85 10629.01 
28 Uttarakhand  433.61  357.17 792.84 
29 West Bengal  0.00  0.00 0.00 
30 Andaman & Nicobar 0.00  9.60 9.60 
31 Lakshadweep 0.00  0.00 0.00 
32 Puducherry  20.65  4.30 24.95 
33 Ladakh 42.30  26.70 68.93 
34 Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu 0.00 1.62 1.62 
Total  62937.68 27091.92 90041.39 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
462                                                      

Page 7 of 12 
 
  
   
  
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of funds released for Wage, Material and Administrative 
components under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25 (Rs. in Crores) 
Sl. No.  States/UTs 2023-24  
Wages Material & Admin Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 5629.31  1703.32 7332.63 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 283.19  142.91 426.10 
3 Assam  1943.17  278.22 2221.38 
4 Bihar  4284.17  1915.87 6200.03 
5 Chhattisgarh 2088.35  800.20 2888.56 
6 Goa 0.88  0.00 0.88 
7 Gujarat 1000.81  800.81 1801.62 
8 Haryana  357.77  118.95 476.71 
9 Himachal Pradesh  597.66  399.47 997.13 
10 Jammu & Kashmir  725.61  194.83 920.44 
11 Jharkhand  2249.64  667.12 2916.76 
12 Karnataka 3794.71  1621.03 5415.74 
13 Kerala 2953.63  559.85 3513.48 
14 Madhya Pradesh  3640.64  2230.51 5871.14 
15 Maharashtra 1947.47  1086.97 3034.44 
16 Manipur 0.00  0.00 0.00 
17 Meghalaya  577.41  334.92 912.33 
18 Mizoram 447.58  58.48 506.06 
19 Nagaland 422.93  215.03 637.96 
20 Odisha 3930.67  961.22 4891.89 
21 Punjab  928.24  238.31 1166.55 
22 Rajasthan 6490.07  2181.55 8671.62 
23 Sikkim 75.70  36.26 111.95 
24 Tamil Nadu 10191.64  2411.72 12603.36 
25 Telangana 1785.29  1723.30 3508.59 
26 Tripura 724.30  319.29 1043.59 
27 Uttar Pradesh 7176.97  2631.58 9808.55 
28 Uttarakhand  384.98  166.67 551.66 
29 West Bengal  0.00  0.00 0.00 
30 Andaman & Nicobar 0.00  0.00 0.00 
31 Lakshadweep 0.00  0.00 0.00 
32 Puducherry  50.39  8.38 58.77 
33 Ladakh 44.66  17.98 62.64 
34 Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu 0.00 2.21 2.21 
  Total 64727.83 23826.93 88554.76 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
463                                                      

Page 8 of 12 
 
  
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of funds released for Wage, Material and Administrative 
components under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25 (Rs. in Crores) 
SI. No.  States/UTs 
2024-25  
Wages Material & Admin Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 6033.82 1654.46 7688.29 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 400.68 157.73 558.42 
3 Assam  1556.59 366.82 1923.41 
4 Bihar  4796.51 1911.97 6708.48 
5 Chhattisgarh 2559.62 778.93 3338.56 
6 Goa 2.3 1.4 3.7 
7 Gujarat 1101.01 437.77 1538.79 
8 Haryana  395.17 192.59 587.75 
9 Himachal Pradesh  789.34 408.71 1198.06 
10 Jammu & Kashmir  901.72 248.17 1149.89 
11 Jharkhand  2411.13 280.64 2691.77 
12 Karnataka 4194.51 1500.21 5694.73 
13 Kerala 2450.67 673.62 3124.29 
14 Madhya Pradesh  4264.64 1953.23 6217.87 
15 Maharashtra 3172.01 1233.67 4405.68 
16 Manipur 540.21 39.7 579.91 
17 Meghalaya  749.99 401.7 1151.69 
18 Mizoram 582.61 25.65 608.26 
19 Nagaland 137.5 147.75 285.25 
20 Odisha 2651.55 1093.09 3744.64 
21 Punjab  934.99 393.42 1328.41 
22 Rajasthan 6211.1 1361.39 7572.48 
23 Sikkim 74.49 21.78 96.26 
24 Tamil Nadu 5984.03 1568.77 7552.8 
25 Telangana 2782.79 1024.67 3807.46 
26 Tripura 717.53 321.34 1038.87 
27 Uttar Pradesh 6544.99 3154.49 9699.48 
28 Uttarakhand  431.72 191.74 623.47 
29 West Bengal  0 0 0 
30 Puducherry  38.79 1.77 40.56 
31 Ladakh 62.96 23.02 85.98 
32 Andaman & Nicobar 3.11 1.33 4.44 
33 Lakshadweep 0.32 0 0.32 
34 Dadra & Nagar Haveli & Daman & Diu 8.66 0.36 9.02 
  Total 63487.1 21571.89 85058.99 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
464                                                      

Page 9 of 12 
 
Annexure-II 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (b) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2377 to 
be answered on 19.12.2025 
  
State/Union Territory (UT)-wise details of pending liabilities for Wage, Material and Admin component under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS  as on 15.12.2025  (Rs. in crores) 
State/Union Territory (UT) Admin Material Wages 
Andhra Pradesh 80.54  583.73 425.23 
Arunachal Pradesh 0.92  49.16 5.26 
Assam 28.03  410.07 5.31 
Bihar 15.13  416.52 18.80 
Chhattisgarh 9.81  106.75 8.31 
Goa 0.02  0.43 0.00 
Gujarat 12.66  23.64 82.85 
Haryana 0.43  41.59 0.87 
Himachal Pradesh 5.74  72.03 2.15 
Jammu And Kashmir 18.16  198.34 70.38 
Jharkhand 5.51  299.59 16.93 
Karnataka 39.35  578.06 10.50 
Kerala 52.53  192.61 419.32 
Ladakh 0.39  3.77 1.03 
Madhya Pradesh 98.81  629.21 207.56 
Maharashtra 34.41  701.34 14.55 
Manipur 4.30  156.38 12.56 
Meghalaya 1.22  65.46 4.25 
Mizoram 1.02  0.25 5.91 
Nagaland 2.30  76.14 24.79 
Odisha 2.66  238.09 20.78 
Punjab 1.83  116.44 1.69 
Rajasthan 9.91  838.04 10.26 
Sikkim 0.04  2.48 0.22 
Tamil Nadu 35.41  594.80 365.72 
Telangana 12.48  212.85 1.16 
Tripura 26.11  139.63 1.80 
Uttar Pradesh 103.94  1086.81 24.13 
Uttarakhand 3.93  55.72 1.75 
West Bengal** **  ** ** 
Andaman and Nicobar 0.00  0.03 0.00 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 0.00  0.01 2.27 
Lakshadweep 0.00  0.00 0.00 
Puducherry 0.47  0.00 0.00 
Total 608.07  7889.94* 1766.35 
* The pending liability of Material Component includes- the pending liability of FY 2025-26 (as per 
NREGASoft) and for FY 2024-25 (actual). There is no pendency for the previous year under Wage & 
Admin Components. 
**The proposal for upward revision of the Labour Budget for FY 2021-22 for the State of West Bengal 
was not approved by the Empowered Committee of the Department of Rural Development due to non-
compliance with the directives issued by this Department. Subsequently, the release of funds to the State 
of West Bengal under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS) was also stopped with effect from 09.03.2022 by invoking the provisions of Section 27 
of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, owing to continued non-
compliance with the directives of the Central Government by the State. Therefore, as per NREGASoft, 
the pending liability pertaining to the State of West Bengal (as on 08.03.2022) stands at ₹3082.52 crore, 
comprising ₹1457.22 crore under the wage component, ₹1607.68 crore under the material component, 
and ₹17.62 crore under the administrative component. The admissibility of this liability is subject to 
verification by the Central Government.  
  
465                                                      

Page 10 of 12 
 
 Annexure-III 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (c) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2377 dated 19.12.2025. 
States/UTs-wise details of the delay compensation payable and delay compensation paid under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25. (In Rs.) 
Sl. 
No States/UTs 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Delay 
compensation 
payable 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid  
Delay 
compensation 
payable 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid  
Delay 
compensation 
payable 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid  
1 Andaman and 
Nicobar 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 1604407 1544890 258097 224114 32806 32006 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 954492 204998 528799 0 178220 0 
4 Assam 26842  14322 1071368 44633 1062210 2188 
5 Bihar 2140375  2069054 424060 302252 96591 14008 
6 Chhattisgarh 729  0 29551 1676 6194 5650 
7 
Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and 
Daman and Diu 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 Goa 461432  67536 378322 3281 51945 0 
9 Gujarat 22358  21855 14583 2043 145016 0 
10 Haryana 17295  17291 1146 1146 53610 48957 
11 Himachal 
Pradesh 89666 89206 80178 80050 135763 135362 
12 Jammu And 
Kashmir 146375 54 150742 5020 707345 6411 
13 Jharkhand 82  67 42442 38700 70055 63340 
14 Karnataka 216503  136846 146319 71210 161570 21650 
15 Kerala 140082  140073 6254 6254 35145 35141 
16 Ladakh 18156  0 46792 0 44278 181 
17 Lakshadweep 0  0 0 0 0 0 
18 Madhya Pradesh 912716 750193 826760 510589 116402 458 
19 Maharashtra 2760752  2578004 12637776 12449837 5348653 5282093 
20 Manipur 0  0 0 0 210 0 
21 Meghalaya 11  11 3 0 0 0 
22 Mizoram 0  0 0 0 9598 0 
23 Nagaland 5544  0 0 0 0 0 
24 Odisha 32626  31896 6139 6139 2122 1450 
25 Puducherry 0  0 0 0 0 0 
26 Punjab 176929  78914 208499 16283 272483 193 
27 Rajasthan 238976  238568 35801 35299 128166 103932 
28 Sikkim 1911  1907 843 843 0 0 
29 Tamil Nadu 1  1 720 720 16338 16338 
30 Telangana 0  0 6012 4560 3009 1255 
31 Tripura 7136  6877 2677 2677 190 40 
32 Uttar Pradesh 347176  150572 544039 324999 456298 328630 
33 Uttarakhand 27337  25934 2065 1504 2573 2209 
34 West Bengal 3624613  3322367 477281 358178 315425 121505 
  Total 13974522 11491436 17927268 14492007 9452215 6222997 
(As per NREGASoft) 
 
466                                                      

Page 11 of 12 
 
  
States/UTs-wise details of the delay compensation payable and delay compensation paid under Mahatma 
Gandhi NREGS from 2020-21 to 2024-25.(In Rs.) 
  
SI. 
No. 
  
States/UTs 
2023-24 2024-25 
Delay 
compensation 
payable 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid  
Delay 
compensation 
payable 
Delayed 
compensation 
Paid  
1 Andaman and Nicobar 0  0 0 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 624  624 32 32 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 362011  0 105502 0 
4 Assam 575522  3114 62344 29185 
5 Bihar 132532  34981 122358 53641 
6 Chhattisgarh 97  97 7 0 
7 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and Daman and Diu 0 0 0 0 
8 Goa 263563  0 149242 0 
9 Gujarat 1798  0 616 0 
10 Haryana 80809  73019 53610 44208 
11 Himachal Pradesh 233717  233596 23226 22159 
12 Jammu And Kashmir 937498  201819 1128792 357687 
13 Jharkhand 105922  105047 112678 112039 
14 Karnataka 30267  6874 25609 8763 
15 Kerala 8671  8555 80922 79527 
16 Ladakh 15105  0 173 0 
17 Lakshadweep 0  0 0 0 
18 Madhya Pradesh 303524  7 68025 0 
19 Maharashtra 1085230  183926 4890897 1814541 
20 Manipur 219039  0 693591 0 
21 Meghalaya 270  0 10 0 
22 Mizoram 0  0 5579 0 
23 Nagaland 0  0 99 0 
24 Odisha 97928  96550 319 257 
25 Puducherry 0  0 0 0 
26 Punjab 396450  388 338150 0 
27 Rajasthan 12635  3222 3967 0 
28 Sikkim 0  0 105 0 
29 Tamil Nadu 15  15 267 267 
30 Telangana 417  134 209 112 
31 Tripura 26  10 30 30 
32 Uttar Pradesh 770631  717614 1214430 1114912 
33 Uttarakhand 2415  0 1018 0 
34 West Bengal 1201  0 0 0 
  Total 5637917 1669592 9081807 3637360 
(As per NREGASoft) 
 
467                                                      

Page 12 of 12 
 
 Annexure-IV 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (d) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2377 dated 
19.12.2025. 
State/UT-wise number of Jobcard included and number of Jobcard deleted under Mahatma Gandhi NREGS from the 
financial years 2020-21 to 2024-25. 
SI. 
No. States/UTs 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
No. of 
Jobcard 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcard 
included 
No. of 
Jobcard 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcard 
included 
No. of 
Jobcard 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcard 
included 
No. of 
Jobcard 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcard 
included 
No. of 
Jobcard 
deleted 
No. of 
Jobcard 
included 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 3426 599015 185079 306594 2882724 194462 370326 271443 148478 312851 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 6151 25738 9596 30951 8875 24736 12869 26745 15651 29200 
3 Assam 96586  632012 76244 584021 157138 652147 282142 114642 576220 316338 
4 Bihar 182407  2385607 1273514 2668027 5870225 1099870 2112092 1000169 981284 8073882 
5 Chhattisgarh 170304 400812 139660 116761 264839 84719 294544 112761 399026 278219 
6 Goa 8  907 11 530 21 645 24 369 53 441 
7 Gujarat 131080  519313 40289 188843 146141 142085 338533 94251 53616 622668 
8 Haryana 15413  174585 8531 73698 11028 38389 8834 69744 6237 103364 
9 Himachal 
Pradesh 8000 87479 10351 87572 18119 35869 15543 36674 4559 46205 
10 Jammu and 
Kashmir 94078 122785 37635 78390 38388 41100 73015 23502 30123 95742 
11 Jharkhand 89427 1469967 228674 392043 954252 457800 324524 823815 176956 533061 
12 Karnataka 7197  737197 41843 501722 203185 448664 96036 216248 27286 180488 
13 Kerala 23773  270804 27340 222602 110722 110922 218752 84672 89300 92186 
14 Ladakh 1336  1927 889 1034 1421 1008 897 652 452 789 
15 Madhya 
Pradesh 1062861 1578165 1100109 636396 366349 537388 695278 486788 51890 588872 
16 Maharashtra 48460 952951 28201 2197774 72863 454016 37625 707659 26449 597993 
17 Manipur 11126  22242 4449 11513 3153 5806 5778 14623 6395 21704 
18 Meghalaya 8119  32181 5449 24233 3832 22702 15375 23206 13181 42502 
19 Mizoram 9896  15782 8580 8610 4149 7891 4902 7314 9988 11061 
20 Nagaland 1136  11853 1797 10191 2528 10811 3759 7995 8999 22596 
21 Odisha 313621  895680 793292 397130 2370031 352401 523622 340742 286009 880997 
22 Punjab 14330  222876 65858 67912 340659 85269 69225 81560 20981 167969 
23 Rajasthan 117660 1017378 129285 424459 634800 245390 393797 259829 55563 479493 
24 Sikkim 784  3204 1343 1745 1409 1779 2133 2159 1969 1701 
25 Tamil Nadu 126017 532951 155065 337432 315049 249091 653677 289063 633820 168580 
26 Telangana 5282  349201 15976 133727 510683 64611 84744 105652 80166 84168 
27 Tripura 8684  17387 5951 19332 5938 18757 20798 15578 8742 27075 
28 Uttar Pradesh 201871 4213497 582074 1674445 4858064 756055 3315158 491733 91568 1510546 
29 Uttarakhand 16508 115838 26004 30541 148098 24081 44229 27515 45150 31360 
30 West Bengal 19374 1682297 27741 825225 2177536 213838 169691 1726 9026 4581 
31 Andaman 
And Nicobar 1528 1241 448 222 143 446 70 616 308 428 
32 
Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 
and Daman 
and Diu 
0 126 0 6667 0 89 2 186 14 1184 
33 Lakshadweep 1 13 8 112 18 76 52 165 37 36 
34 Puducherry 245  3760 258 1556 4394 1284 606 4691 480 2043 
  Total 2796689 19096771 5031544 12062010 22486774 6384197 10188652 5744487 3859976 15330323 
  
***** 
 
468                                                      

Page 1 of 4 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2378 
TO BE ANSWERED ON 19/12/2025 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PRADHAN MANTRI GRAM SADAK YOJANA -IV 
 
2378  Smt. Rajathi : 
 
Will the Minister of Rural Development be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the number of unconnected habitations to be covered under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana -IV (PMGSY-IV) State-wise including the State of Tamil Nadu; 
(b)  details of the funds allocated and released under PMGSY State-wise for the last five 
years, including under phase- IV for the State of Tamil Nadu; 
(c)  the date on which Government has revised the guidelines to restrict funding for 
upgradation, renewal and maintenance of existing roads; and 
(d)  whether Government is planning to introduce a component or provide flexibility under 
PMGSY for upgradation, renewal or maintenance of existing rural roads in such States? 
 
ANSWER 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
(SHRI KAMLESH PASWAN) 
  
(a): Under PMGSY IV programme (2024-2029), 40,547 habitations have been surveyed by 
States/UTs as unconnected habitations. The State-wise list of habitations surveyed as per 
PMGSY-IV guidelines including the State of Tamil Nadu is given in Annexure-I.  
(b): The allocation of funds to the State for implementation of PMGSY depends, inter-alia, on 
works in hand, execution capacity of the State and unspent balance of previous year (s) available 
with the State. State-wise details of Central Share released during the last five years and current 
year including PMGSY-IV is given in Annexure-II.  The Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for 
the eligible habitations are awaited from the State. The fund under PMGSY-IV will be released 
to the State of Tamil Nadu by following due procedure after the submission of DPRs by the State 
Government. 
(c): As per the PMGSY guidelines, the funding for upgradation, renewal and maintenance of 
existing roads is to be done by the State Governments. The monitoring of the maintenance of the 
roads and road structures built under PMGSY, which are in the DLP (Defect Liability Period) of 
5 years from the completion of construction is done by the Ministry following the processes in 
the guidelines. On expiry of 5 year post construction maintenance, PMGSY roads are required to 
be placed under Zonal maintenance contracts consisting of 5 year maintenance including renewal 
as per maintenance cycle, from time to time, to be funded by the State Governments.  
  
(d): The objective of PMGSY III programme from 2019 to 2025, extended till March 2026, 
was up-gradation of roads. Under PMGSY III the sanctions were given for 1,22,388km out of the 
469                                                      

Page 2 of 4 
 
target 1,25,000km. The PMGSY IV program launched in September 2024, is the latest vertical 
under implementation. The objective is to cover the unconnected habitations surveyed by the 
State governments as per the guidelines. Under PMGSY IV the funding for up-gradation, 
renewal and maintenance of existing roads is to be done by the State Governments.  All road 
works sanctioned under the scheme are covered by initial five year maintenance contracts to be 
entered into along with the construction contract, with the same contractor, as per the Standard 
Bidding Document. Maintenance funds to service the contract are required to be budgeted by the 
State Governments and placed at the disposal of the State Rural Roads Development Agencies 
(SRRDAs) in a separate maintenance account. States have to enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding with the Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, before launching 
of the scheme in the concerned State. As per this MoU, the States have to inter-alia provide 
adequate funds for the maintenance of roads constructed/upgraded under PMGSY for initial five 
years routine maintenance, and for further five year routine maintenance including periodic 
renewal as per requirement. Release of maintenance funds is required to be certified by the State, 
as per PMGSY guidelines, while submitting fund release proposals to the Central 
Government. Electronic Maintenance of PMGSY roads (eMARG), an online platform, has been 
implemented in all the States to monitor maintenance of PMGSY works for five years from the 
date of completion (i.e. under Defect Liability Period-DLP).  
***** 
  
470                                                      

Page 3 of 4 
 
Annexure-I 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (a) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2378 for 
answer on 19.12.2025 regarding “Unconnected Habitations surveyed by the State 
Governments under PMGSY IV”  
Sr. 
No 
 State/UT  Habitations surveyed in GSS application as per PMGSY-IV eligibility 
criteria by the State Governments 
1 Andhra Pradesh 413 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
194 
3 Assam 4670 
4 Bihar 103 
5 Chhattisgarh 2692 
6 Gujarat 2443 
7 Himachal 
Pradesh 
1021 
8 Jammu And 
Kashmir 
2262 
9 Jharkhand 2787 
10 Karnataka 76 
11 Kerala 2335 
12 Ladakh 31 
13 Madhya Pradesh 9246 
14 Maharashtra 196 
15 Manipur 303 
16 Meghalaya 377 
17 Mizoram 63 
18 Nagaland 224 
19 Odisha 2679 
20 Punjab 1 
21 Rajasthan 1740 
22 Sikkim 283 
23 Tamil Nadu 5 
24 Telangana 173 
25 Tripura 435 
26 Uttar Pradesh 2174 
27 Uttarakhand 873 
28 West Bengal 2748 
  Total 40547 
  
471                                                      

Page 4 of 4 
 
Annexure-II 
Annexure referred to in reply to part (b) of Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question No. 2378 for 
answer on 19.12.2025 
State-wise details of Central Share released during last five years and current year 
(Rs. In Crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
States/UTs 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 (as on 
15.12.2025) 
1 Andaman 
& Nicobar 0 9.22 12.22 12.22 0.05 0.00 
2 Andhra Pradesh 53.2  50 644.13 140.64 507.32 0.00 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 952.31 1090.6 1018.74 339.9 609 184.47 
4 Assam  2516.62  1591.5 664.91 391.29 79.24 101.72 
5 Bihar   49.13  375 1443.23 963.37 1195.44 0.00 
6 Chhattisgarh 924.48  394.41 995.87 401.77 325.24 203.46 
7 Goa  0  0 0 0 0 0.00 
8 Gujarat 79.08  195.5 266.63 298.41 220.65 0.00 
9 Haryana 0  353.23 168.25 74.01 27.38 0.00 
10 Himachal  Pradesh 745.24 517.45 624.76 617.56 634.82 393.83 
11 Jammu & Kashmir   1727.3 1328.34 717 1304.17 1028.25 30.60 
12 Jharkhand 293.5  0 332.63 752.8 961.77 0.00 
13 Karnataka  49.29  704.25 720.47 72.25 100.58 3.66 
14 Kerala 89.97  0 106.76 54.25 122.27 45.67 
15 Madhya Pradesh 1099.54 1392.25 1557.47 599.42 703.29 29.43 
16 Maharashtra  0  0 743 1110.8 854.93 71.70 
17 Manipur 420.66  742 744.98 161.29 2.81 0.32 
18 Meghalaya 355.29  483.92 405.89 122.59 219.62 134.78 
19 Mizoram 1.59  74.34 584.2 141.37 87.5 28.52 
20 Nagaland  72.89  145.31 183.15 161.29 2.25 3.12 
21 Odisha 774.29  404.12 1235.88 1262.55 712.39 78.12 
22 Puducherry 0  11.66 24.72 0.27 25 0.00 
23 Punjab 0  68.59 231.06 265.1 319.87 43.34 
24 Rajasthan 237.15  917.51 199.9 404.79 450.46 155.81 
25 Sikkim 195.5  107.28 263.33 94.37 70 33.08 
26 Tamil Nadu 265.38 440 613.7 411.36 638.66 189.91 
27 Telangana 0  86.38 321.43 296.9625 132.57 6.54 
28 Tripura 69.57  73.88 267.59 185.03 172.75 17.43 
29 Uttar Pradesh  123.9  1418.55 2068.57 2679.63 1968.6 0.00 
30 Uttarakhand 1536.27  787 1297.16 551.05 815.5 114.96 
31 West Bengal  969.31  49.94 381.03 99.275 225 126.79 
32 Ladakh 50  140.79 109.97 37.5 113.81 59.57 
Total 13651.46 13952.99 18948.61 14007.29 13327.03 2056.83 
 
***** 
 
 
472                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2379 
FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025   
 
 
IMPORT AND EXPORT OF STEEL 
 
2379.  SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: 
 
 
Will the Minister of STEEL be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the total value of imports as well as exports of steel in India between 2019 to 2024, 
annually; 
(b) whether India is currently a net importer of steel; 
(c) average price of domestically manufactured as well as imported hot rolled coils (HR 
coils) of steel in India between 2019 to 2025, annually; 
(d) whether cheap imports of steel are having a negative effect on domestic steel 
production in India; and 
(e) if so, the steps taken by the Ministry to prevent dumping of cheap foreign steel in 
India by other countries? 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE          (SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
(a)&(b):  The details of total value of import and export of steel by India from 
Financial Year 2019-2020 to Financial Year 2024-25 is given below:-  
 
Finished Steel Trade 
Value (in Rs. Crores) 
Year Import Export 
2019-20 44,683 36,727 
2020-21 32,154 47,170 
2021-22 46,298 99,452 
2022-23 64,455 55,829 
2023-24 68,193 59,157 
2024-25 80,737 40,585 
Source: Joint Plant Committee (JPC) 
 
Currently, India is a net importer of Finished Steel. During April-November, 2025 
Import of finished steel was 4.19 MnT whereas export was 4.18 MnT.  
 
Contd….2/- 
473                                                      

: 2 : 
 
(c)to(e):  Steel is a deregulated sector and steel prices are determined by demand 
supply dynamics of market forces, global market conditions, trends in price of raw 
materials, logistics cost, power and fuel cost, etc. The Government acts as a facilitator 
by creating a conducive policy environment for the development of steel sector in the 
country.  
 
The details of crude steel production and domestic price of HR Coil in the country 
during the period Financial Year 2019-20 to Financial Year 2025-26 are as under:- 
 
 
Year 2019-20  2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
 2025-26 
(Apr-
Nov)* 
Crude Steel  
Production (Mt) 109.1 103.5 120.3 127.2 144.3 152.2 109.5 
Domestic Price of 
H. R. COILS 2 MM# 
(Rs/t) 
40064 45552 67775 62404 57860 52326 51720 
Source: Joint Plant Committee (JPC); Mt : million tonnes; *provisional; 
# Prices are exclusive of GST and are average of 2nd fortnightly price released by JPC 
for the four metros i.e., Kolkata, Delhi, Chennai and Mumbai. 
 
To address concerns regarding increased dumping of steel from other countries 
in India, Anti-Dumping Duty (ADD) measures pertaining to some steel products like 
seamless tubes, pipes and hollow profiles of iron, alloy, or non-alloy steel (other than 
cast iron and stainless steel) (from China PR), electro-galvanized steel (from Korea RP, 
Japan, Singapore), stainless-steel seamless tubes and pipes (from China PR), welded 
stainless steel pipes and tubes (from Vietnam and Thailand), Hot rolled flat products of 
alloy or non-alloy steel (from Vietnam) are currently in place. 
 
***** 
474                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2380 
FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025   
 
 
STEEL CAPACITY IN ODISHA 
 
2380.  SHRI DEBASHISH SAMANTARAY: 
 
 
Will the Minister of STEEL be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether steel production in Odisha has increased in the current fiscal year; 
(b) steps taken to promote green steel technologies in the State; 
(c) whether the Ministry plans to expand capacity at Rourkela Steel Plant; 
(d) measures to ensure availability of iron ore to MSME steel units; and 
(e) details of foreign investment in Odisha’s steel sector? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE          (SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
(a)  During the period from April, 2025 to October, 2025 , crude steel production in 
Odisha was 18.07 million tonnes which is an increase of 18.8% over the corresponding 
period of the previous year. 
 
(b)  Government has taken several measures for green-steel production in India 
including Odisha: the release of taxonomy for Green Steel to provide standards for 
defining and categorizing the low emission steel; awarding of pilot projects for use of 
hydrogen in steel sector under National Green Hydrogen Mission launched by Ministry 
of New & Renewable Energy; launch of National Solar Mission by Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy in January, 2010 to promote the use of solar energy; introduction of 
the Environment Protection (End-of-Life Vehicles) Rules, 2025, requiring vehicle 
producers to meet annual scrapping targets based on the type of vehicle and materials 
recovered; notification of Steel Scrap Recycling Policy in 2019. 
 
sector through relevant policies. Decisions such as production, expansion, investment, 
modernization, employment etc. are dependent on the market conditions and techno-
commercial analysis of individual companies. Government has taken steps to ensure the 
availability of iron ore to MSME steel units which include mining and mineral policy 
reforms, early operationalization of forfeited and non-working mines, ramping up 
production and capacity utilization by CPSE iron ore producers. 
 
***** 
(c) to (e):   Steel is a deregulated sector and Government supports the development of 
475                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2381 
FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025   
 
 
STEEL INDUSTRY EXPANSION AND ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE IN 
KARNATAKA 
 
 
2381.  SHRI G.C. CHANDRASHEKHAR: 
 
 
Will the Minister of STEEL be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current steel production capacity of Karnataka and its share in India’s total output; 
 
(b) the details of capacity expansion projects underway in Ballari and Vijayanagar steel 
clusters and the amount of central funding sanctioned for such projects; and 
 
(c) the environmental safeguards adopted to ensure sustainable mining and green-steel 
production? 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE          (SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
(a)  Karnataka has a crude steel capacity of 20.9 million tonnes which contributes to 
9.6% of India’s crude steel capacity. 
 
sector through relevant policies. Investment is made by companies based on techno-
commercial considerations.  
 
 
***** 
(b) & (c):     Steel is a deregulated sector and Government supports the development of 
476                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2382 
FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025   
 
 
PROMOTION OF GREEN AND LOW CARBON STEEL TECHNOLOGY IN ODISHA 
 
2382.  SHRI MANAS RANJAN MANGARAJ: 
 
 
Will the Minister of STEEL be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether steel plants in Odisha are complying with environmental norms related to 
air, water and land pollution; 
(b) the number of violations reported in the last three years; and 
(c) the steps taken to promote green and low-carbon steel technology in the State? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE          (SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
(a) State Pollution Control Board, Odisha has prescribed environmental standards 
for discharge and emission for operation of Steel Plants in Odisha. The Board monitors 
the emission and effluent quality using online monitoring system and through physical 
inspection and monitoring system. Appropriate actions under Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 
are taken in violation cases. 
 
(b)  The list of violations reported during last 3 years i.e., 2023-24, 2024-25 & 2025-26 
is as under:- 
 
Year Show cause notice & direction issued 
for non-compliance to consent 
conditions 
Closure 
direction 
issued  
2023-24 50 00 
2024-25 59 05 
2025-26 (as on date) 16 09 
Total 125 14 
Source: State Pollution Control Board, Odisha 
 
(c)  The details of steps taken by the Government for promotion of green and low-carbon 
steel technology in the country including the state of Odisha are as under: - 
 
i. Ministry of Steel has released the Taxonomy for Green Steel to provide standards 
for defining and categorizing the low emission steel. 
 
Contd…..2/- 
477                                                      

: 2 : 
 
ii.  Ministry of Steel has released a report titled "Greening the Steel Sector in India: 
Roadmap and Action Plan" in alignment with the recommendations of the 14 Task 
Forces constituted by this Ministry for this purpose which provides the future 
roadmap for green steel and sustainability, towards net-zero target by 2070. The 
report is available on Ministry of Steel's website. 
 
iii.  Four pilot projects have been awarded for implementation of pilot projects for use 
of hydrogen in steel sector under National Green Hydrogen Mission launched by 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy.  
 
iv.  National Solar Mission launched by Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in 
January, 2010 promotes the use of solar energy and also helps to reduce the 
emission of steel industry. 
 
 
***** 
478                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2383 
FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025   
 
 
STEEL SCRAP RECYCLING 
 
2383.  SHRI SUBHASH BARALA: 
SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR: 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE: 
 
 
Will the Minister of STEEL be pleased to state: 
 
 
(a) the initiatives being taken to formalize the scrap collection market and organize scrap 
dealers into cooperative societies to ensure a stable supply of EAF (Electric Arc 
Furnace) scrap; 
(b) the steps that have been taken by Government to establish registered Vehicle 
Scrapping Facilities and promote organized ELV (End-of-Life Vehicle) scrap supply; and 
(c) the impact of scrap-based steelmaking (EAF/IF) on energy use and resource 
efficiency, and the extent to which it is more efficient in comparison to blast furnace-
based production? 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE          (SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
(a)&(b): The measures taken by the Government to facilitate and promote scrap 
collection and promote establishment of Registered Vehicle Scrapping Facilities 
(RVSFs), in India are as under: - 
 
i. The Steel Scrap Recycling Policy, 2019 provides a coordination framework with 
various Ministries to facilitate and promote recycling of ferrous scrap generated 
from various sources. 
 
ii. Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change has introduced the 
Environment Protection (End-of-Life Vehicles) Rules, 2025, which establishes a 
framework for managing End-of-Life Vehicles (ELVs) in an environmentally 
sound manner and mandates Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR), requiring 
vehicle producers to meet annual scrapping targets based on the type of vehicle 
and materials recovered. 
 
iii. Recycling of Ships Act, 2019 has been notified by Ministry of Shipping, Ports and 
Waterways with aims to regulate and promote the safe and environmentally 
sound recycling of ships. 
 
Contd….2/- 
479                                                      

: 2 : 
 
iv. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) has formulated the 
Voluntary Vehicle Fleet Modernization Program (V-VMP) or Vehicle Scrapping 
Policy for creation of an ecosystem to phase out unfit and polluting vehicles in an 
environment friendly manner. 
 
   Under the policy, the MoRTH has notified GSR 653 (E) dated 23.09.2021 which 
provides for the Motor Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping 
Facility) Rules, 2021 for establishment Registered Vehicles Scrapping Facility (RVSF). 
These rules have been further amended vide GSR 695(E) dated 13.09.2022, GSR 
212(E) dated 15.03.2024 and GSR 700(E) dated 19.09.2025. 
 
   To promote setting up of RVSFs, The Government under the Scheme for Special 
Assistance to States for Capital Investment 2025-26, provides financial incentives to 
States/UTs for setting up RVSFs and scrapping vehicles in these facilities. 
 
(c)    Steelmaking through scrap depends on availability and cost economics is more 
energy and resource-efficient through the Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) and Induction 
Furnace (IF) routes. The use of scrap saves iron ore, part of coking coal, and limestone 
depending on its concentration and quality. Scrap based steel making makes blast 
furnace also energy & resource efficient, however, the input mix of scrap in BF-BOF is 
limited to 10-15%. 
 
 
***** 
480                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2384 
FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025   
 
 
RISING STEEL IMPORTS 
 
2384.  SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA: 
 
 
Will the Minister of STEEL be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether the surge in steel imports during 2024–25, especially from China, Korea and 
Vietnam, has depressed domestic prices and reduced capacity utilisation; 
(b) the product-wise and country-wise data for HR/CR coils, coated steel, stainless steel 
and alloyed/boron-added steel for 2023–24 and 2024–25; 
(c) whether instances of under-invoicing, duty-circumvention and FTA linked diversion 
have been recorded; and 
(d) the measures taken to safeguard domestic producers, including Directorate General 
of Trade Remedies (DGTR) investigations, stricter BIS checks, and review of FTA duty 
structures that disadvantage Indian steelmakers? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE          (SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
(a)&(b):  Steel is a deregulated sector and the Government acts as a facilitator by 
creating a conducive policy environment for the development of steel sector in the 
country. The data on import of finished steel from Korea, China and Vietnam for 
financial year 2024-25 is given below:- 
 
Finished Steel Import – 2024-25 
COUNTRY Quantity 
(in Mt) 
% Change over last 
financial year 
KOREA 2.81 5.3 
CHINA 2.53 -5.8 
VIETNAM 0.70 -5.4 
Source: Joint Plant Committee; Mt= million tonnes 
 
The details of country-wise import of HR/CR coils, coated steel, stainless steel 
and alloyed/boron-added steel for 2023-24 and 2024-25 is at Annexure-I.  
 
(c)  The details of instances of under-invoicing, duty circumvention, and Free trade 
Agreement (FTA)  linked  diversion  in  respect of  Steel  imports  for  the  financial  years  
 
 
Contd….2/- 
481                                                      

: 2 : 
 
2023–24 to 2025–26  (up to 30.11.2025) are as follows:- 
 
Financial Year 
 
No. of instances/detection of 
under-invoicing, duty-
circumvention and FTA-linked 
diversion w.r.t. steel import, 
including cases booked 
Duty 
evaded 
(in Cr.) 
Duty 
recovered 
(in Cr.) 
2023-24 34 66.52 5.08 
2024-25 44 478.51 15.13 
2025-26 
(Upto  
30.11.2025) 
20 31.67 10.44 
Source: Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC), Department of Revenue 
 
(d)  Government has taken following steps to safeguard domestic producers: -  
 
i. Implementation of Domestically Manufactured Iron & Steel Products (DMI&SP) 
Policy for promoting ‘Made in India’ steel for Government procurement. 
 
ii. Launch of Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Specialty Steel to promote 
the manufacturing of 'Specialty Steel' within the country and reduce imports by 
attracting capital investments. 
iii. Introduction of Steel Quality Control Order thereby banning sub-standard/ defective 
steel products in domestic market as well as imports to ensure the availability of 
quality steel to the industry, users and public at large. 
iv. In the Union Budget 2024-25, following measures were taken to support domestic 
manufacturers and boost domestic steel manufacturing: - 
a. Basic Customs Duty (BCD) has been reduced from 2.5% to Nil on Ferro-Nickel 
and Molybdenum ores and concentrates which are raw materials for steel 
industry. 
b. BCD exemption on Ferrous Scrap has been continued upto 31.03.2026. 
c. The exemption on specified raw material for manufacture of Cold Rolled Grain 
Oriented (CRGO) steel has been continued up to 31.3.2026. Further, the 
exemption has also been extended to such specified raw materials for 
manufacture of CRGO Steel falling under tariff item 7226 11.00. 
v. Anti-Dumping Duty (ADD) measures pertaining to some steel products like 
seamless tubes, pipes and hollow profiles of iron, alloy, or non-alloy steel (other 
than cast iron and stainless steel) (from China PR), electro-galvanized steel (from 
Korea RP, Japan, Singapore), stainless-steel seamless tubes and pipes (from 
China PR), welded stainless steel pipes and tubes (from Vietnam and Thailand), 
Hot rolled flat products of alloy or non-alloy steel (from Vietnam) are currently in 
place. 
vi. Countervailing Duty (CVD) is in place for Welded Stainless Steel Pipes and Tubes 
from China and Vietnam. 
***** 
  
482                                                      

 
Annexure-I 
IMPORT OF SELECT CATEGORY/QUALITY OF FINISHED STEEL 
  
Financial Year 2023-24 
Quantity : '000 tonnes 
  NON ALLOY 
Alloy Steel Stainless Steel COUNTRY HR Coils* CR 
Coils** Coated Steel# 
CHINA 914.39 17.33 352.91 285.19 591.36 
JAPAN 713.7 35.83 215.14 126.85 55.78 
KOREA 1,308.69 238.21 479.33 525.19 86.13 
VIETNAM 577.97 0.16 100.7 0.3 57.33 
Others 158.22 37.99 142.39 278.97 117.09 
Grand Total 3,672.97 329.52 1,290.47 1,216.50 907.69 
Financial Year 2024-25 
Qty : '000 tonnes 
  NON ALLOY 
Alloy Steel Stainless Steel COUNTRY HR Coils* CR 
Coils** Coated Steel# 
CHINA 712 63.08 369.5 355.82 518.69 
FRANCE 75.1 0.26 13.39 33.02 2.79 
JAPAN 1,336.46 33.39 270.05 144.51 76.23 
KOREA 1,467.79 177.64 491.81 528.47 105.62 
VIETNAM 447.47 0.03 65.31 0.38 172.42 
Others 97.50 41.35 145.52 305.48 365.98 
Grand Total 4,136.32 315.75 1,355.58 1,367.68 1,241.73 
Source: Joint Plant Committee; 
*HR Coil includes HR Coils, HR Strips, HR Sheet, Plates; 
**CR Coils includes CR Coils and CR Strips; 
 #Coated Steel includes GP/GC Coated, Color coated;   
 
 
 
 
 
483                                                      

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2385 
FOR ANSWER ON 19.12.2025   
 
 
SALEM STEEL PLANT 
 
2385.  SHRI S.R. SIVALINGAM: 
 
 
Will the Minister of STEEL be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government proposes to provide targeted investment in Salem Steel Plant 
(SSP) for upgrading to speciality and stainless-steel products, improve technological 
efficiency, enhance product diversification and strengthen long-term competitiveness; 
 
(b) if so, the details of steps that are proposed to be taken by Government in this regard; 
and 
 
(c) whether Government has formulated or plans to formulate a revival roadmap for SSP 
addressing financial restructuring, market expansion and operational reforms, and if so, 
the details of such a roadmap proposed by Government? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE          (SHRI BHUPATHIRAJU SRINIVASA VARMA) 
MINISTRY OF STEEL 
(a)to(c): Several measures have been undertaken at Salem Steel Plant (SSP), a 
unit of Steel Authority of India Limited(SAIL) aimed at improving operational efficiency 
and long-term sustainability which includes improving capacity utilization, enhancing 
operational efficiency, optimizing raw material and power consumption, and rationalizing 
the product mix with emphasis on value-added stainless steel products. 
 
  
***** 
484                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
DEPARTMENT FOR PROMOTION OF INDUSTRY AND INTERNAL TRADE 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 2386. 
TO BE ANSWERED ON FRIDAY, THE 19TH DECEMBER, 2025. 
 
LEATHER SECTOR WORKFORCE TRAINING OUTCOMES 
 
2386.  SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE: 
 
Will the Minister of Commerce and Industry be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether a centralized portal for real -time tracking of workforce training, worker  
retention, feedback, and outcomes has been developed for the leather secto r as  
recommended; 
 
(b)  if so, the number of workers upskilled, retention figures, and the number of trainees  
employed within six months of completing the training since 2022; and 
 
(c)  if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY 
(SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) 
(a) to (c): Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is implementing its 
flagship scheme Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), since 2015, for 
imparting skill development training through Short -Term Trai ning (STT) and up -
skilling and re -skilling through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) to youth across 
the country with aim to enhance the employability of the youth to access employment 
opportunities by equipping them with industry relevant skills across various sectors 
including Leather Sector. 
2. After completion of three versions of PMKVY, the fourth version viz. PMKVY 4.0 is 
currently under progress since FY 2022-23. 
3. Job role wise details of candidates trained and certified under PMKVY 4.0 in Leather 
Sector till 31.10.2025 is as under: 
S. No. Job Role Name Trained / Oriented    Certified 
1 Cutter- Footwear 2,774 2,377 
2 Cutter-Goods & Garments 214 182 
3 Footwear and Fashion Accessories Retail 
Associate 
135 92 
4 Helper Upper Making 79 54 
5 Lasting Operator 1,891 1,544 
6 Pre Assembly Operator Footwear 1,924 1,417 
7 Quality Control Inspector (Footwear) 445 329 
8 Sample Maker - Footwear 30 0 
9 Skiving Operator - Footwear 179 178 
10 Sticher Goods & Garments 7,360 5,927 
11 Stitching Operator(Footwear) 6,650 5,380 
Total 21,681 17,480 
485                                                      

 
 
 
4. Placements were tracked in the Short-Term Training (STT) component of the first three 
versions of the PMKVY Scheme, i.e., PMKVY 1.0, PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0, 
implemented from FY 2015 –16 to FY 2021 –22. Under PMKVY 4.0,  the focus is to 
empower trained candidates to choose varied career paths, and  they are suitably 
oriented through industry -relevant skill courses embedded with O n-the-Job Training 
(OJT) 
5. The entire training lifecycle of candidates trained under the scheme is managed through 
the Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) portal. The portal maintains details of trained 
candidates, which are available for linkage with potential employers. Accordingly, 
through SIDH, candidates have access to various employment and apprenticeship 
opportunities. 
 
 
 
******** 
 
486                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2387 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
TIMELY ALLOCATION OF FUNDS TO PM MITRA PARKS 
 
2387. SHRI BRIJ LAL:  
          SMT. MAYA NAROLIYA:  
          SHRI MITHLESH KUMAR:  
          SHRI MADAN RATHORE:  
          SHRI NARAYANA KORAGAPPA: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the number of textile parks established in the country in the last five years;  
 
(b) the measures being taken by Government to ensure timely allocation of funds and resources for  
establishment of state-of-the-art infrastructure, including Common Facility Centers, under the Pradhan   
Mantri Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) scheme; and  
 
(c) the steps that have been taken to promote private sector participation, skill development, and particularly 
employment generation among women and marginalized communities in rural areas through the PM MITRA 
scheme?  
   
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a): With a view to develop integrated large scale and modern industrial infrastructure facility for 
entire value chain of the textile industry, the Government has finalized setting up of PM Mega Integrated 
Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks at 7 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana 
(Warangal), Gujarat (Navasari), Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow), Madhya Pradesh 
(Dhar), and Maharashtra (Amravati) with an outla y of Rs. 4445 cr for a period of seven years upto 2027 -
28. 
 
(b): The scheme envisages a Development Capital Support (DCS) of 30% of total project cost upto Rs. 
500 crore for Greenfield Parks and Rs. 200 crore for Brownfield Parks subject to scheme guidelines. Till 
date, a total of Rs 160 cr has been released to PM MITRA Parks in Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu  
Maharashtra and Telangana .   
 
(c): In order to effectively implement the PM MITRA Scheme, MoUs as well as JV agreements have 
been signed between the Government of India and PM MITRA States. Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) 
have been incorporated in all Greenfield PM MITRA Parks with State Go vernments holding 51% stake in 
the SPV and remaining 49% being held by the Government of India. To encourage private sector 
participation in the scheme, a Master Developer (MD) led model for developing PM MITRA Park on a 
Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer (DBFOT) basis has been envisaged in addition to other models of 
development. Thes e efforts will generate employment across various elements of textiles value chain 
benefitting all segments of the population including women and marginalized communities.  
**** 
487                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2388 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
COMPETITIVENESS OF INDIA’S TEXTILES SECTOR 
 
2388. SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether it is a fact that India’s textiles industry faces stiff competition from certain South Asian and South 
East Asian countries; and  
 
(b) if so, the major policy interventions undertaken by the Ministry to strengthen the competitiveness of  
India’s textiles industry in view of aforementioned extreme competition that the industry faces?  
   
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a) & (b): Some countries in South Asia and South -East Asia export readymade garments with 
preferential market access to some markets while depending on imported raw materials. The Indian textile 
sector is integrated, with a strong domestic raw -material base and manu facturing capability across the entire 
value chain. India’s export of textiles & apparel (including handicrafts) was US$ 37,755.0 Mn in FY 2024 –25 
exhibiting a growth of 5.2% compared to the previous year. 
 
The Government is implementing various schemes/in itiatives to boost the Indian textile and apparel 
sector and enhance its competitiveness.  The major schemes/initiatives include PM Mega Integrated Textile 
Regions and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme to create a modern, integrated, world class textile 
infrastructure; Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme focusing on MMF Fabric, MMF Apparel and 
Technical Textiles to boost large scale manufacturing and enhancing competitiveness; National Technical 
Textiles Mission focusing on Research Innovation & Developme nt, Promotion and Market Development; 
SAMARTH – Scheme for Capacity Building in Textile Sector with the objective providing demand driven, 
placement oriented, skilling program; Silk Samagra -2 for comprehensive development of sericulture value 
chain; Nation al Handloom Development Program for end to end support for handloom sector. Ministry of 
Textiles is also implementing National Handicrafts Development Programme and Comprehensive Handicrafts 
Cluster Development Scheme for promotion of handicrafts.  The Gove rnment is also administering the two 
remission schemes of Rebate of State and Central Taxes and Levies (RoSCTL) for Apparel/Garments and 
Made- ups and the Remissions of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) Scheme for other 
textiles products. 
 
The Government has  also taken several measures recently   to strengthen the textile sector, including 
extension of the Export Obligation period under the Advance Authorisation Scheme   in respect 
of  exemption  from mandatory compliance of Quality Control Orde r (QCO) related cases   under Textile 
Sector, revision of the PLI Scheme for MMF Apparel, MMF Fabrics and Technical Textiles to ease entry and 
investment norms, exemption of import duty on cotton up to 31.12.2025, rational isation of GST rates across 
the value chain.   
488                                                      

 
The Government aims for promotion of Export Diversification with identification of 40 focus markets 
for the textiles sector. It has also signed 15 Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) and 6 Preferential Trade 
Agreements (PTAs) with its trading partners.  In addition, the government has approved the Export Promotion 
Mission being implemented through NIRYAT PROTSAHAN and NIRYAT DISHA for trade finance, market 
access, branding and compliance and Credit Guarantee Scheme for Exporters providing 100% credit 
guarantee particularly benefitting MSMEs.  
 All these measures are boosting the competitiveness of Indian Textile Industry. 
**** 
 
489                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2389 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
TRAINEES UNDER SAMARTH SCHEME 
 
2389. SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  
          SMT. RANJEET RANJAN: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) State-wise and year-wise data on the number of youth trained under Samarth since 2021 onwards,  
broken-down by sectors identified under the scheme;  
 
(b) State-wise data on the number of dalit, adivasi and women trained under the scheme;  
 
(c) State-wise data on the number of trainees under the scheme working in the organized sector and  
unorganised sector; and  
 
(d) whether the Ministry has taken steps to ensure that the training provided under the scheme aligns with  
current industry requirements, if so, the details thereof?  
   
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a) & (b): Samarth (Scheme for Capacity Building in Textiles Sector) of Ministry of Textiles provides 
demand driven, placement-oriented skilling programmes to supplement the efforts of the industry in creating 
jobs in the organized textile and related sectors, covering the entire value chain of textiles, excluding 
Spinning and Weaving in organized sector, on pan India basis. Under the Sche me, A total of 5.26 lakh 
beneficiaries which include for, 4,67,596 women, 1,44,708 SCs and 68,621 STs beneficiaries have been 
trained (pass) since (FY 2021 -22) till 11.12.2025. State/UTs -wise, Sector -wise and year -wise number of 
beneficiaries passed which include women, SCs, STs as on 11.12.2025 under Samarth Scheme are given in  
Annexure I. 
 
(c): State/UTs-wise number of beneficiaries placed under Samarth scheme (which include both organized 
and traditional sector) (as on 11.12.2025) is given in Annexure II. 
 
(d): The Ministry of Textiles has taken several steps to ensure that the training under Samarth scheme is 
aligned with the current requirements of the textile sector. 
i. All training courses are aligned with National Skill Qualifications Framework (NSQF) a nd these 
courses are periodically reviewed and updated every 3 years in consultation with industry 
stakeholders. 
ii. Periodic reviews and feedback are obtained from industry partners and stakeholders on the content 
and effectiveness of training modules, ensuring their relevance and continuous improvement. 
 
490                                                      

Annexure I 
The details of beneficiaries passed (as on 11.12.2025) under Samarth Scheme in the State/UTs -wise and 
Year-wise are given hereunder: 
Sr 
No. 
State/UT Sector No of beneficiaries Trained (pass) 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
1 ANDAMAN AND 
NICOBAR Handicrafts & Carpet 21 20 47 0 0 
2 ANDHRA PRADESH 
Garment 1,123 1,212 2,377 2,171 2,913 
Handicrafts & Carpet 308 241 55 60 29 
Silk 0 0 57 99 299 
Textiles & Handloom 733 182 346 156 73 
3 ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 
Handicrafts & Carpet 0 57 30 0 0 
Silk 0 0 0 0 25 
4 ASSAM 
Garment 20 0 159 0 20 
Handicrafts & Carpet 82 0 58 0 0 
Silk 63 27 493 520 1,532 
Textiles & Handloom 1,279 2,615 2,441 2,522 1,973 
5 BIHAR 
Garment 276 1,002 3,805 1,211 6,826 
Handicrafts & Carpet 190 336 584 2,036 1,401 
Silk 0 55 381 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 203 159 473 93 76 
6 CHANDIGARH Handicrafts & Carpet 58 29 0 0 0 
7 CHHATTISGARH 
Garment 324 351 395 337 363 
Handicrafts & Carpet 53 100 23 0 23 
Silk 72 49 215 111 68 
Textiles & Handloom 363 72 295 194 458 
8 DELHI 
Garment 758 1,042 2,110 1,827 2,309 
Handicrafts & Carpet 146 282 27 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 107 166 0 0 0 
9 GOA Handicrafts & Carpet 29 0 54 23 0 
10 GUJARAT 
Garment 2,002 1,600 2,337 2,227 2,795 
Handicrafts & Carpet 209 258 108 29 0 
Jute 0 27 0 0 0 
Processing 299 146 150 23 16 
Silk 0 291 105 125 59 
Textiles & Handloom 496 93 262 210 88 
11 HARYANA 
Garment 3,250 3,937 5,446 6,395 7,591 
Handicrafts & Carpet 55 55 59 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 68 0 117 95 50 
12 HIMACHAL PRADESH 
Garment 0 0 177 339 120 
Handicrafts & Carpet 0 175 29 0 31 
Processing   60 81 28 0 
Silk 0 0 0 0 160 
Textiles & Handloom 0 0 204 117 65 
13 JAMMU AND KASHMIR 
Garment 0 12 24 0 0 
Handicrafts & Carpet 296 689 135 0 18 
Silk 0 20 0 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 460 124 190 252 157 
14 JHARKHAND Garment 226 284 491 745 229 
Handicrafts & Carpet 153 180 57 20 42 
491                                                      

Silk 0 0 102 81 140 
Textiles & Handloom 155 93 426 131 64 
15 KARNATAKA 
Garment 8,037 18,907 35,439 18,850 28,830 
Handicrafts & Carpet 564 620 822 728 829 
Processing 0 47 25 0 0 
Silk 0 309 1,124 168 179 
Textiles & Handloom 617 84 291 181 225 
16 KERALA 
Garment 0 19 67 14 14 
Handicrafts & Carpet 201 168 55 50 40 
Textiles & Handloom 557 447 467 155 132 
17 LADAKH Handicrafts & Carpet 0 0 26 0 0 
18 MADHYA PRADESH 
Garment 564 948 3,008 5,856 6,085 
Handicrafts & Carpet 283 311 76 0 89 
Processing 0 82 18 50 230 
Textiles & Handloom 502 199 390 209 181 
19 MAHARASHTRA 
Garment 1,912 2,101 2,697 2,989 2,732 
Handicrafts & Carpet 492 484 103 75 22 
Silk 0 0 0 0 137 
Technical Textiles 0 0 0 0 74 
Textiles & Handloom 615 250 525 391 362 
20 MANIPUR 
Garment 0 0 0 0 140 
Handicrafts & Carpet 57 50 27 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 620 188 198 208 110 
21 MEGHALAYA Handicrafts & Carpet 86 24 29 49 26 
Silk 0 0 0 0 47 
22 MIZORAM Handicrafts & Carpet 59 30 39 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 194 28 260 227 178 
23 NAGALAND 
Garment 0 0 0 0 0 
Handicrafts & Carpet 0 26 29 0 0 
Silk 19 83 39 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 125 446 239 159 176 
24 ODISHA 
Garment 464 2,275 2,442 508 297 
Handicrafts & Carpet 83 81 79 29 48 
Silk 0 30 226 279 214 
Textiles & Handloom 293 372 349 455 163 
25 PUDUCHERRY Garment 0 48 57 24 138 
Handicrafts & Carpet 145 56 30 0 0 
26 PUNJAB 
Garment 232 154 77 188 206 
Handicrafts & Carpet 28 29 27 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 69 55 40 16 42 
27 RAJASTHAN 
Garment 278 2,495 7,139 8,195 8,730 
Handicrafts & Carpet 202 481 81 16 426 
Knitting 134 135 192 102 266 
Processing 726 502 672 548 450 
Textiles & Handloom 147 183 165 144 138 
28 SIKKIM Handicrafts & Carpet 44 22 0 0 0 
29 TAMIL NADU 
Garment 11,010 16,767 23,921 11,987 20,892 
Handicrafts & Carpet 501 1,348 2,113 1,088 1,423 
Knitting 0 8 0 21 25 
Processing 30 77 62 53 5 
Silk 0 19 312 936 286 
492                                                      

Textiles & Handloom 866 359 856 498 513 
30 TELANGANA 
Garment 1,163 1,964 1,833 1,181 2,763 
Handicrafts & Carpet 98 97 398 116 0 
Silk 0 22 260 51 136 
Textiles & Handloom 916 196 584 179 129 
31 
THE DADRA AND 
NAGAR HAVELI AND 
DAMAN AND DIU 
Garment 608 499 620 305 178 
32 TRIPURA 
Garment 0 15 114 43 26 
Handicrafts & Carpet 77 187 152 40 56 
Textiles & Handloom 339 232 165 128 117 
33 UTTAR PRADESH 
Garment 3,536 6,833 10,475 12,461 22,069 
Handicrafts & Carpet 1,906 3,702 6,433 11,093 18,625 
Jute 0 43 0 0 0 
Silk 0 40 744 234 608 
Textiles & Handloom 2,039 382 895 308 178 
34 UTTARAKHAND 
Garment 0 0 0 0 80 
Handicrafts & Carpet 135 103 56 29 65 
Silk 0 0 45 18 54 
Textiles & Handloom 142 25 140 126 41 
35 WEST BENGAL 
Garment 0 110 189 10 27 
Handicrafts & Carpet 165 147 84 0 29 
Jute 252 192 51 20 1 
Silk 0 19 43 0 0 
Textiles & Handloom 378 66 364 210 142 
 
  
493                                                      

Annexure II 
The details of beneficiaries placed under Samarth scheme in the State/UTs-wise, in organized sector and 
unorganized sector are as given as below: 
Sr. No. State/UT No. of beneficiaries placed 
1 Andaman and Nicobar 67 
2 Andhra Pradesh 10,338 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 30 
4 Assam 8,593 
5 Bihar 13,216 
6 Chandigarh 72 
7 Chhattisgarh 3,528 
8 Delhi 6,159 
9 Goa 83 
10 Gujarat 10,990 
11 Haryana 20,729 
12 Himachal Pradesh 1,111 
13 Jammu and Kashmir 1,537 
14 Jharkhand 2,681 
15 Karnataka 96,000 
16 Kerala 2,208 
17 Ladakh 26 
18 Madhya Pradesh 16,307 
19 Maharashtra 12,480 
20 Manipur 1,235 
21 Meghalaya 186 
22 Mizoram 500 
23 Nagaland 1,157 
24 Odisha 7,534 
25 Puducherry 389 
26 Punjab 854 
27 Rajasthan 24,960 
28 Tamil Nadu 83,467 
29 Telangana 10,011 
30 The Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman and Diu 2,179 
31 Tripura 1,281 
32 Uttar Pradesh 76,588 
33 Uttarakhand 926 
34 West Bengal 1,370 
**** 
 
494                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2390 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
TEXTILE GROWTH IN ODISHA 
 
2390. SHRI DEBASHISH SAMANTARAY: 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the status of Pradhan Mantri Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) textile parks  
proposed in the State of Odisha;  
 
(b) support extended to handloom clusters in Cuttack, Sambalpur and Bargarh;  
 
(c) steps taken to strengthen the marketing of Ikat from Odisha;  
 
(d) whether new design and incubation centres are being set up; and  
 
(e) the assistance provided to women weavers and Self-Help Groups (SHGs) in the State?    
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a): With a view to develop integrated large scale and modern industrial infrastructure facility for 
entire value chain of the textile industry, the Government has finalized setting up of PM Mega Integrated 
Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks at 7 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana 
(Warangal), Gujarat (Navasari), Karnataka (Kalaburagi), Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow), Madhya Pradesh 
(Dhar), and Maharashtra (Amravati) with an outlay of Rs. 4 ,445 cr for a period of seven years upto 2027 -
28.  
(b): Financial assistance of Rs.8.38 crore has been provided for 17 handloom clusters benefitting 6,572 
weavers in Cuttack & Bargarh during 2015-16 to 2025-26 (till Nov.2025). 
 
(c): Ministry of Textiles is also implementing Handloom Marketing Assistance, a component of National 
Handloom Development Programme to develop & promote the marketing channel in national as well as 
international markets so as to benefit all the stakeholders in  a holistic and integrated manner. Ministry of 
Textiles under National Handloom Development Programme (NHDP) also promotes the provision of 
Geographical Indication (GI) of Goods (Registration & Protection) Act 1999, in respect of handloom 
products including Odisha Ikat pan India. 
 
(d): Design Resource Centres (DRCs) have been set up in 16 Weavers' Service Centres  including 
Weavers' Service Centre at Bhubaneswar across the country to preserve traditional handloom designs and to 
build and create design-oriented excellence in the Handloom Sector. 
 
(e): Ministry of Textiles, Office of Development Commissioner for Hand looms has provided skill 
training to 5,856 weavers, organised 69 Marketing events, provided 7,685 mudra loans, enrolled 71,442 
weavers under PMJJBY/PMSBY, provided monthly financial assistance to 56 awardee weavers, formed 9 
Producer Companies to benefit h andloom weavers including women weavers of Odisha during 2014 -15 to 
2025-26 (till Nov.2025). 
**** 
495                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2391 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
 
LIVELIHOOD OF HANDLOOM AND POWER LOOM WORKERS 
 
2391. SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether Government has taken note of the loss of livelihood of handloom and power loom workers and 
the productivity issues during the last five years, if so, details thereof;  
 
(b) whether most weavers want to sell their textile products to Government institutions and seek subsidy for 
procurement of raw materials, if so, the details thereof and assistance given by Government; and  
 
(c) whether textile industry is facing several bottlenecks and slowdown due to the rigid Government norms 
and policies, if so, the details thereof and remedial measures taken during the last five years and till date?  
   
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a): No information on loss of livelihood of handloom and powerloom workers has been received by this 
Ministry.  
(b): Government of India, Ministry of Textiles has taken steps to on -board weavers and artisans on 
Government e -Market place (GeM ) to enable them sell their products directly to various Government 
Departments and organizations. An amendment was introduced in Rule 153 of GFR 2017 on 17.02.2020, 
wherein it was mandated that “Of all items of textiles required by Central Government depa rtments, it shall 
be mandatory to make procurement of at least 20% from amongst items of handloom origin, for exclusive 
purchase from KVIC and/or Handloom Clusters such as Cooperative Societies, Self Help Groups (SHG), 
Federations, Joint Liability Groups ( JLG), Producer Companies (PC), Corporations etc. including weavers 
having Pehchan Cards”.    
Regarding Subsidy for procurement for raw materials is concerned, it is informed that Raw Material 
Supply Scheme (RMSS) is being implemented throughout the country  to make available yarn to handloom 
weavers. Under the Scheme, freight charges are reimbursed for all types of yarn and 15% price subsidy is 
given for cotton hank yarn, domestic silk, wool and linen yarn and blended yarn of natural fibres with 
quantity caps. 
 
(c): The Government is implementing various measures to remove bottlenecks and facilitate the growth 
of the textile industry. The major schemes/initiatives include PM Mega Integrated Textile Regions and 
Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme which seeks to cr eate a modern, integrated large scale, world class 
industrial ecosystem, which will help in attracting investments and boosting employment; Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme focusing on Man Made Fibre & Apparel, and Technical Textiles to boost large  scale 
manufacturing and enhancing competitiveness; National Technical Textiles Mission focusing on Research 
Innovation & Development, Promotion and Market Development, Skilling and Export Promotion; 
SAMARTH – Scheme for Capacity Building in Textile Sector  with the objective of providing demand 
496                                                      

driven, placement oriented, skilling program; Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (ATUFS) to 
incentivize technology upgradation and modernization through capital investment subsidy for eligible 
investment in benchmarked textile machinery; Silk Samagra-2 for comprehensive development of sericulture 
value chain, National Handloom Development Programme and Raw Material Supply Scheme.   
 Additionally, to support exports, the Government is implementing the Rebate of  State and Central 
Taxes and Levies (RoSCTL) scheme for apparel, garments, and made -ups based on the principle of zero -
rated exports, while other textile products are supported under the Remission of Duties and Taxes on 
Exported Products (RoDTEP) scheme. I ndia has also entered into 15 Free Trade Agreements and 6 
Preferential Trade Agreements, enabling preferential market access for a wide range of textile products. 
Further, the Ministry of Textiles has developed a 40 -country market diversification strategy to expand 
India’s textile export footprint, complemented by the Export Promotion Mission approved by the Cabinet, 
which provides a coordinated framework for trade facilitation, market promotion, capacity building, and 
institutional strengthening to drive sustained growth in textile exports. 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
. 
 
497                                                      

 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2392 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
 
CHALLENGES IN UNORGANISED POWERLOOM SECTOR 
 
2392. SMT. KIRAN CHOUDHRY:  
          SHRI NARAYANA KORAGAPPA: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the current status of baseline survey initiated to identify critical gaps in the powerloom sector and key 
findings that have emerged so far;  
 
(b) measures that have been undertaken by Government to address persistent challenges in the unorganised 
powerloom sector, particularly in relation to obsolete technology and limited access to credit and finance; 
and  
 
(c) the latest available data on the number of functioning powerlooms and the workforce engaged in the 
sector, State-wise, as of 2024?  
   
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a): In order to ensure an assessment of technology level, market dynamics and socio economic aspects 
of the workers associated with the powerloom sector, the Textiles Committee under Ministry of Textiles has 
prepared a framework for baseline survey of Powerloo m sector. The terms of reference of the study have 
been finalized and in-principle approval accorded.  
 
(b) & (c): The last baseline survey for powerloom, conducted in 2013, revealed the existence of 
approximately 24 lakh Powerlooms , supporting a workforce of around 44 lakh individuals across the 
country. Based upon the recommendations/findings of this survey, the Government had launched a scheme 
named PowerTex India, with an outlay of Rs. 487 crore for the period from 2017 to 2021. This initiative 
aimed at addressing the needs and challenges identified in the powerloom sector, through a holistic approach 
in order to foster growth, employment and overall development. PowerTex India Scheme has now been 
subsumed under Textile Cluster De velopment Scheme (TCDS) to meet the committed liabilities only. The 
key sub-components of Power Tex India included in TCDS are (i) Group Work Shed Scheme (ii) PM Credit 
Scheme for Powerloom Weavers and (iii) In -situ upgradation of Powerlooms. The State wis e details of the 
number of Powerlooms and manpower as per the last baseline survey is enclosed as Annexure. 
 
 
498                                                      

 
Annexure  
STATEWISE POWERLOOM INDUSTRY AT GLANCE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
**** 
 
STATE 
 
UNITS 
 
TOTALL
OOMS 
TOTAL 
EMPLOYMENT 
SHUTTLELESS 
LOOMS 
UP 59,038 1,90,874 5,77,748 2,690 
RAJASTHAN 945 22,980 54,456 16,434 
HARYANA 1,600 25,510 42,533 1,128 
PUNJAB&HP,J&K 1,162 14,511 25,025 1,251 
MP 8,344 39,979 1,66,147 1,063 
NORTHZONETOTAL 71,089 2,93,854 8,65,909 22,566 
GUJARAT 34,966 5,24,102 6,63,068 34,331 
MAHARASHTRA 1,49,613 9,48,891 15,54,938 35,429 
CHATTISGARH 49 166 324 NA 
WESTZONETOTAL 1,84,628 14,73,159 22,18,330 69,760 
ORISSA 824 1,793 3,792 NA 
WB 3,509 12,690 20,141 25 
BIHAR 3,839 20,511 42,770 12 
ASSAM/NE 30 464 868 NA 
EASTZONETOTAL 8,202 35,458 67,571 37 
TAMILNADU 89,449 5,62,513 10,18,961 8,794 
ANDNRA PRADESH 12,635 48,176 83,850 1,435 
KARNATAKA 18,566 68,795 1,53,045 199 
KERALA 1,027 4,463 7,865 350 
SOUTHZONETOTAL 1,21,677 6,83,947 12,63,721 10,778 
ALLINDIA 3,85,596 24,86,418 44,18,240 1,03,141 
499                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2393 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
 
PROBLEMS OF POWERLOOM SECTOR 
 
2393 SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether powerloom sector is facing a crisis with many looms being dismantled and sold as scrap;  
 
(b) if so, the details thereof including the number of functional powerloom units in the country;  
 
(c) the impact of recently hiked global tariffs on this sector;  
 
(d) whether Government proposes to reduce GST rate on manmade viscose, polyester and synthetic yarn;  
 
(e) if so, the details thereof; and  
 
(f) the steps taken by Government to tackle the infrastructural, economic and technological problems for the 
survival of this sector with reasonable growth and development?   
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a) & (b): The last baseline survey for powerlooms , conducted in 2013, revealed the existence of 
approximately 24 lakh powerlooms, supporting a workforce of around 44 lakh individuals across the 
country. The State wise details of the number of Powerlooms and manpower as per the last baseline survey 
is enclosed as Annexure. In order to ensure an assessment of latest market dynamics, technology levels, and 
socio economic aspects of the workers associated with the powerloom sector, the Textiles Committee under 
Ministry of Textiles has prepared a framework for  baseline survey of Powerloom sector. The terms of 
reference of the study have been finalized and in-principle approval accorded. 
 
(c): A combination of different factors such as product differentiation,  demand, 
quality, contractual arrangements etc. determine the impact of global tariffs on India’s exports of textiles 
sector including powerloom exports. The Government is regularly monitoring India’s exports of Textile  & 
Apparel including powerloom exports and tracking of the impact of tariffs. 
 
(d) & (e): In the 56 th meeting of the GST Council held on 3 rd September, 2025, the Council 
recommended significant rationalisation measures to remove distortions, lower production costs, improve 
global competitiveness and boost demand in the textile sector. The Government has widened the scope of the 
lower tax slab to provide relief to consumers and the industry. Specifically, the GST Council recommended 
increasing the threshold for the 5% GST rate on readymade garments and made-ups from 1,000 per piece 
2500 per piece. Furthermore, to correct the Inverted Duty Structure (IDS) and enhance competitiveness, the 
GST rates on Man-Made Fibres(MMF) and MMF yarns have been reduced from 18% and 12% respectively 
to 5%. This aligns the fibre-yarn-fabric rates, removing long -standing working capital burdens on 
manufacturers.  
 
 
500                                                      

 
(f): For the development of Textile industry particularly small and medium units, clusters as well as the 
decentralized Powerloom  Sector, the Ministry of Textiles through Office of the Textile Commissioner 
facilitates the provision of services such as Testing lab, training, awareness, design development, 
troubleshooting, Powerloom sample Survey through 44 Integrated Textile and Appa rel Development Centre 
(ITADC) in major Powerloom Cluster across the country.  
In addition, in order to enhance the capacities and competitiveness of decentralized powerloom 
sector, PowerTex India Scheme was launched on a Pan India basis for the period 201 7-20, which was 
extended upto 2021. The scheme has now been subsumed under Textile Custer Development Scheme 
(TCDS) and support is extended for completing ongoing projects for meeting committed liabilities 
only.Further, to ensure holistic development of po werloom sector in the country, a number of initiatives ie. 
Amended Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (ATUFS), Group Workshed Scheme, PM Credit Scheme 
for Powerloom Weavers, In -situ Upgradation Fund Scheme and Comprehensive Powerloom Cluster 
Development Scheme (CPCDS) have been taken by the Government of India from time to time.  
 
Annexure  
STATEWISE POWERLOOM INDUSTRY AT GLANCE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
**** 
 
 
STATE 
 
UNITS 
 
TOTALLO
OMS 
TOTAL 
EMPLOYMENT 
SHUTTLELESS 
LOOMS 
UP 59,038 1,90,874 5,77,748 2,690 
RAJASTHAN 945 22,980 54,456 16,434 
HARYANA 1,600 25,510 42,533 1,128 
PUNJAB&HP,J&K 1,162 14,511 25,025 1,251 
MP 8,344 39,979 1,66,147 1,063 
NORTHZONETOTAL 71,089 2,93,854 8,65,909 22,566 
GUJARAT 34,966 5,24,102 6,63,068 34,331 
MAHARASHTRA 1,49,613 9,48,891 15,54,938 35,429 
CHATTISGARH 49 166 324 NA 
WESTZONETOTAL 1,84,628 14,73,159 22,18,330 69,760 
ORISSA 824 1,793 3,792 NA 
WB 3,509 12,690 20,141 25 
BIHAR 3,839 20,511 42,770 12 
ASSAM/NE 30 464 868 NA 
EASTZONETOTAL 8,202 35,458 67,571 37 
TAMILNADU 89,449 5,62,513 10,18,961 8,794 
ANDNRA PRADESH 12,635 48,176 83,850 1,435 
KARNATAKA 18,566 68,795 1,53,045 199 
KERALA 1,027 4,463 7,865 350 
SOUTHZONETOTAL 1,21,677 6,83,947 12,63,721 10,778 
ALLINDIA 3,85,596 24,86,418 44,18,240 1,03,141 
501                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2394 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
 
BOOSTING RESEARCH INNOVATION AND COMPETITIVENESS IN TEXTILE SECTOR 
 
2394. DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether the Ministry has recently approved any scheme to strengthen research, innovation and  
competitiveness in Textiles Sector;  
 
(b) if so, the details thereof;  
 
(c) the manner in which Government ensures that the research component on smart textiles and sustainability 
translates into commercial products; and  
 
(d) whether any mechanisms are being put in place to evaluate the scheme’s impact on India’s global  
competitiveness in the textile sector over the next five years, if so, the efforts taken in this regard?  
 
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a) to (c): The Government of India has approved the Textiles Focused Research, Assessment, 
Monitoring, Planning and Start -up (Tex-RAMPS) Scheme, with an outlay of ₹305 crore over six years (FY 
2025-26 to FY 2030-31).  The five components of the Tex-RAMPS are: 
1. Research & Dissemination – To support targeted research in smart textiles, sustainability, production 
efficiency etc. 
2. Assessment & Evaluation Studies – To undertaking sector diagnostics, trend forecasting, and supply 
chain analysis. 
3. Monitoring & Statistical System – To strengthen data collection and analytics. 
4. Planning & Capacity Development – Supporting national/state-level textile planning and stakeholder 
engagement through events and collaborative platforms. 
5. Start-up & Innovation – Fostering innovation via incubators, hackathons, and academia -industry 
partnerships, with a focus on high-value and export-oriented ventures. 
Further, the Government, with the aim to ensure import substitution as well as for realising the export 
potential of technical textile items and special fibres, National Technical Textiles Mission (NTTM) has bee n 
approved with an outlay of Rs. 1,480 crore; with a four year implementation period from FY 2020 -21 to 
2023-24. The Mission has been further extended up to 31.03.2026 (sunset clause up to 31.03.28). Out of 
total outlay of Rs. 1,480 crore, Rs. 1,000 crore has been allocated for Research and Development only. 
1. Under Component -I of NTTM relating to Research, Innovation & Development, 168 Research 
projects amounting to Rs. 520 crore (approx.) have been awarded to the country's prominent 
institutes. 
502                                                      

 
2. Under the C omponent-I of NTTM relating to the Grant for Research and Entrepreneurship across 
Aspiring Innovators in Technical Textiles (GREAT), a total of 24 start -ups have been approved with 
a total cost of Rs.12.16 crore and GoI share of Rs. 10.79 crore. 
(d): Evaluation study of the schemes’ impacts are carried out as per the instruction of Department of 
Expenditure for continuation of scheme. In this context, NITI Aayog in consultation with Department of 
Expenditure, has developed a Standard Terms of Reference (ToR ) Template for conducting evaluation of 
Central Sector Schemes. 
**** 
  
  
 
503                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2395 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
 
COTTON PRODUCTION, EXPORTS, TARIFFS, AND SUPPORT TO FARMERS 
 
2395. SMT. RENUKA CHOWDHURY: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the details of cotton production in the country during the last five years, State-wise;  
 
(b) the details of cotton exports to the United States from each State during the last five years, along with the 
revenue earned;  
 
(c) the total number of cotton farmers in the country, State-wise;  
 
(d) the steps taken by Government to protect the cotton farmers and exporters, including any relief or support 
package announced for affected States in the wake of US tariffs; and  
 
(e) whether Government has also assessed the impact of scrapping of 11 percent import duty on cotton   
imports into India on domestic cotton farmers?    
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a): State-wise cotton production in the country during the last five years is enclosed at Annexure-I. 
  
(b): Details of cotton exports to the United States from each State, along with its value during the last five 
cotton years (Oct-Sept), are enclosed at Annexure-II. 
(c)  & (d): There are over six million farmers in the country cultivating cotton.   To ensure remunerative 
prices to farmers, Minimum Support Prices (MSP) for the 2025 –26 season have been fixed at ₹7,710 per 
quintal for medium staple cotton and ₹8,110 per quintal for l ong staple cotton, providing a minimum 50% 
return over the cost of production. To prevent distress sales, the Cotton Corporation of India has 
operationalised 570 procurement centres across 11 States and, as on 11.12.2025, procured 31.18 lakh bales 
worth ₹13,492 crore through transparent e-auction mechanisms. 
On the export front, despite global tariff -related challenges, India’s exports during January –October 2025 
stood at USD 31.31 billion, reflecting overall stability. To support exporters and the textile sector, the 
Government has implemented the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Exporters (CGSE), RBI Trade Relief 2025, 
and continued benefits under Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) and Rebate of 
State and Central Taxes and Levies (RoSCT L) for cotton and cotton -based products. These interventions 
provide liquidity, reduce cost burdens, and ensure adequate cotton availability to the textile industry. 
Collectively, these measures protect cotton farmers, support exporters, and maintain the c ompetitiveness and 
resilience of the cotton and textile sector. 
504                                                      

 
(e): As per the Committee on Cotton Production and Consumption (COCPC), domestic cotton 
consumption exceeds production in both 2024 –25 and 2025 –26 seasons, highlighting the need to augment 
availability for the textile sector.   The Government has exempted cotton imports from the 11% import duty 
from 19.08.2025 to 31.12.2025 to ensure adequate supply and support for the Indian Textile Sector. 
Cotton imports are limited and largely confined to s pecialised varieties such as Extra Long Staple, and the 
temporary duty exemption is not expected to adversely impact farmers due to the continued protection of MSP 
operations. Domestic cotton prices have moderated in line with global trends to around ₹51,5 00–₹52,500 per 
candy, balancing affordability for the textile industry while safeguarding farmers’ interests and strengthening 
India’s export competitiveness. 
  
Annexure-I 
State-wise cotton production in the country during the last five years: 
  
  
                                                            (in lakh bales of 170Kg each) 
Sl No. 
State 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25  
1. Punjab 10.23 6.46 4.44 6.29 4.14 
2. Haryana 18.23 13.16 10.01 15.09 11.77 
3. Rajasthan 32.07 24.81 27.74 26.22 17.86 
4. Gujarat 72.18 75.09 87.95 90.57 71.57 
5. Maharashtra 101.05 82.49 83.16 80.45 73.73 
6. Madhya Pradesh 13.38 14.20 14.33 18.01 15.35 
7. Telangana 57.97 48.78 57.45 50.80 57.89 
8. Andhra Pradesh 16.00 17.08 15.41 7.37 11.31 
9. Karnataka 23.20 19.55 25.68 20.59 22.73 
10. Tamil Nadu 2.43 3.02 3.19 2.52 2.11 
11. Orissa 5.51 6.26 7.05 7.05 8.23 
12. Others 0.23 0.27 0.19 0.26 0.55 
                    TOTAL 352.48 311.17 336.60 325.22 297.24 
Source: Committee on Cotton Production and Consumption meeting dated 08.12.2025. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
505                                                      

 
Annexure-II 
  
Details of cotton exports to United States from each State along with its value during the last five cotton 
years (Oct-Sept) 
 
Source: Director General of Commerce Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS), Kolkata 
**** 
 
Sl 
No. State 
2020-2021 2021-2022 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025 
In 
Tonnes 
In Rs. 
Lakh 
In 
Tonnes 
In Rs. 
Lakh 
In 
Tonnes 
In Rs. 
Lakh 
In 
Tonnes 
In Rs. 
Lakh 
In 
Tonnes 
In Rs. 
Lakh 
1. Tamil Nadu 7.49 29.12 8.42 33.89 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.36 1.93 
2. Uttar 
Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.21 0.29 
3. Rajasthan 0.25 0.58 0.05 1.24 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.09 0.78 
4. Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.26 
5. Maharashtra 0.15 0.55 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.12 0.02 0.17 
6. Telangana 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.02 
7. Gujarat 0.14 0.37 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.16 0.15 0.41 0.01 0.17 
8. Bihar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.00 
9. Haryana 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
10. Karnataka 0.00 0.00 0.09 2.03 0.00 0.00 0.09 0.07 0.00 0.08 
11. Kerala 0.90 3.85 0.88 3.82 0.79 3.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
12. Punjab 0.18 0.83 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.40 0.97 0.00 0.00 
13. West Bengal 0.02 0.61 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
TOTAL 9.12 35.92 9.44 41.23 0.80 3.96 0.68 1.76 0.74 3.70 
506                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2396 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PLI SCHEME FOR TEXTILE SECTOR 
 
2396. SHRI CHANDRAKANT DAMODAR HANDORE: 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the steps taken to ensure greater participation of handloom and traditional artisans/craftsmen, which often 
involve individuals from various social backgrounds, including SC communities;  
 
(b) the current status of the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) for textiles, and the number of  companies that 
have met the investment and turnover thresholds in Financial Year 2024- 25; and  
 
(c) the number of Pradhan Mantri Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks that have 
been approved and established, and the projected impact on investment and employment generation in the 
textile sector, the details thereof?  
    
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a): The Government of India, Ministry of Textiles is implementing following schemes to ensure greater 
participation of handloom and traditional artisans/craftsmen:  
1. National Handloom Development Programme; 
2. Raw Material Supply Scheme; 
3. National Handicraft Development Programme; 
4. Comprehensive Handicrafts Cluster Development Scheme; 
Under the above schemes, financial and technical assistance is provided for raw materials, upgraded looms, 
accessories and toolkits, design innovation, product diversification, infrastructure development, marketing of 
handloom and handicraft products in domestic and overseas markets, loans at concessional rates, social 
security etc., which are benefiting to the weavers/artisans across the country including various social 
backgrounds and SC communities. 
 
(b): The current status of the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) for textiles and the number of companies 
that have met the investment and turnover thresholds in Financial Year 2024 -25 (as on 30.09.2025) are as 
under:  
Total investment reported under the Scheme Rs.7,731.00 Cr. 
Total turnover Rs.7,290.00 Cr. (including exports of Rs.733.00 Cr.) 
Number of Companies that have met the thresholds investment in 
FY 2024-25 
22 
Number of Companies that have met the thresholds turnover in 
FY 2024-25 
04 
 
507                                                      

 
(c): With a view to attract investment, boost employment generation and position itself strongly in the 
global market, the Government has approved setting up of 07 (Seven) PM Mega Integrated Textile Region 
and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks in Greenfield/Brownfield sites with world class infrastructure including plug 
and play facility with an outlay of Rs.4,445.00 Cr. for a period of 2021 -22 to 2027 -28. The Government has 
finalized 07 sites viz. Tamil Nadu (Virudhnagar), Telangana (Warangal), Gu jarat (Navsari), Karnataka 
(Kalaburagi), Madhya Pradesh (Dhar), Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow), Maharashtra (Amravati) for setting up of 
PM MITRA Parks. It is envisaged that each park when completed will lead to an investment of Rs.10,000.00 
Cr. and generate about 1 lakh direct and 2 lakh indirect jobs. 
**** 
 
508                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2397 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
 
INCREASE IN USAGE CHARGES ON JUTE BAGS 
 
2397. SHRI SHAMBHU SHARAN PATEL: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the factors responsible for the increase in the usage charges on jute bags from the Kharif Marketing  
Season (KMS) 2025–26;  
 
(b) the manner in which the Committee constituted for the review of these charges assessed cost fluctuations 
and procedural requirements;  
 
(c) the likely impact of the revised charges on State-level procurement operations; and  
 
(d) whether the revised rates have been fixed in accordance with the changes in the cost of new jute bags,  
observed in recent procurement seasons, if so, the details thereof?  
   
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a) to (d): As per the guidelines of usage charges for procurement of paddy, the Committee constituted 
for review of usage charges, took into consideration the suggestions/ recommendations of State 
Governments, and deliberated on the methodologies for fixing usage cha rges for gunny bags by taking into 
consideration the rate of new jute bags, average rate of multiple used gunny bags, average realizable value of 
unserviceable gunny bags.  
The arrangement of bags for the packaging of procured paddy is the responsibility of the concerned 
State Governments and agencies. Following the revision in the usage charge rate, procuring  used bags 
through GeM/ open tender has become easier. 
On 26.08.202 5, the Department of Food and Public Distribution issued revised usage charges for 
used gunny bags, reflecting the increase in the cost of new gunny bags. The usage charges have been fixed at 
Rs.10.22 per used bag or the actual cost incurred by the State Governments, whichever is lower.  
**** 
  
 
509                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2398 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
EMPOWERING HANDLOOM SECTOR OF BIHAR 
 
2398. DR. BHIM SINGH: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the initiatives taken by the Ministry to strengthen the weaver handloom sectors of Bihar through design 
intervention, common facility center, e-market link, financial assistance, skill upgradation and silk  
development programmes; and  
 
(b) whether any target has been set to increase production and exports through the initiatives undertaken?  
 
  
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
(a) & (b): To strengthen the weavers and handloom sector, Ministry of Textiles is implementing 
following schemes/initiatives across the country including Bihar: 
1. National Handloom Development Programme 
2. Raw Material Supply Scheme 
Under the above schemes, financial assistance/concessions are provided for raw materials, upgraded 
looms &  accessories, solar lighting units, construction of workshed, product & design development, 
technical and common infrastructure, marketing support for handloom products in domestic/overseas 
markets, concessional loans under weavers’ MUDRA scheme and social security etc. 
 
For comprehensive development of sericulture value chain, Ministry of Textiles is implementing Silk 
Samagra-2 scheme/initiative across the country including Bihar. 
 
 
In addition, an e -commerce portal (https://www.indiahandmade.com/) has bee n launched to support 
weavers and artisans for online marketing of handloom products. Steps have been taken up to on -board 
weavers and artisans on Government e -Market place (GeM) to enable them sell their products directly to 
various Government Departments and organizations. 
 
 
Besides, skilling and upskilling training is provided to handloom/silk weavers in technical areas i.e. 
weaving, designing, silk reeling etc. under Samarth (Scheme for Capacity Building in Textiles Sectors). 
 
Ministry of Textiles has s anctioned 19 Small Handloom clusters, provided skill training to 1 ,503 
weavers, organised 17 Marketing events, sanctioned 114 weavers mudra Loans, enrolled 873 weavers under 
PMJJBY/PMSBY, monthly financial assistance provided to 62 awardee weavers, formed 5 Producer 
Companies, provided 52 silk weaving & processing specifi c beneficiary components/units including one 
common facility centre to benefit handloom/silk weavers of Bihar during 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 (till 
Nov.2025). 
***** 
510                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2399 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
 
IMPACT OF RECENT TARIFFS IMPOSED BY USA ON TEXTILE EXPORT SECTOR 
 
2399 DR. FAUZIA KHAN: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether Government has assessed the likely impact of the recent 50 percent tariff measures imposed by   
the United States of America (USA) on Indian textile exports, which may affect nearly one-fourth of total 
shipments;  
 
(b) the estimated loss in export value and employment across major textile-exporting States; and  
 
(c) the steps being taken to provide relief to affected exporters and diversify markets to mitigate dependence 
on the US market?    
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a) & (b): The Government is regularly monitoring India’s export of Textile & Apparel including 
Handicrafts to United States and other countries in the world and tracking of the impact of US tariffs on all 
segments of the textile Sector. 
  
India’s exports of textiles and apparel (excluding handicrafts) stood at US$ 32,560.04 million during 
January to November 2025, registering a growth of 0.26% over the corresponding period of the previous 
year. (Source: Quick estimates of November 2025 -DGCIS/Department of Commerce). 
  
The combination of different factors such as product differentiation, demand, quality, contractual 
arrangements etc. would determine the impact of reciprocal tariffs on India’s exports of textiles sector in 
global market. The Ministry is in regular consultation with exporters including MSMEs across different 
States to assess the impact of US tariff on India’s textiles & apparel export and other challenges. The 
Ministry has convened two wide -ranging consultative meetings with large as well as Micro, Small and 
Medium (MSME) textile exporters from across the textile and apparel value chain at various levels. 
(c): The Government continues to work to mitigate the impact of the US tariff measures on Indian  
exports through a comprehensive multi - pronged strategy encompassing intensive engagement with the US 
Government for a mutually beneficial India -US Bilateral Trade Agreement, immediate relief through Trade 
relief measures of RBI, Credit Guarantee Scheme f or Exporters, enhancement of domestic demand through 
next generation GST reforms, Export Promotion measures such as the new Export Promotion Mission which 
provide support and assistance to our exporters, pursuing FTAs with new countries and better utilizat ion of 
existing FTA. Other measures include  extension of the Export Obligation period under the Advance 
Authorisation Scheme, revision in the PLI Scheme for MMF Apparel, MMF Fabrics and Technical Textiles 
to ease entry and investment norms, exemption of im port duty on cotton up to 31.12.2025 to ease of raw 
511                                                      

material availability. The Government is also administering the two remission schemes of Rebate of State 
and Central Taxes and Levies (RoSCTL) for Apparel/Garments and Made- ups and the Remissions of Duties 
and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) Scheme for other textiles products.  Further, the Ministry is in 
regular consultation with exporters, export promotion councils (EPCs) and all other stake holders including 
MSMEs to assess the impact of US tariff on India's textiles & apparel export and other challenges.  
The Government is implementing various schemes/initiatives to boost the Indian textile and apparel 
sector and enhance its competitiveness.  The major schemes/initiatives include PM Mega Integrated T extile 
Regions and Apparel (PM MITRA) Parks Scheme to create a modern, integrated, world class textile 
infrastructure; Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme focusing on MMF Fabric, MMF Apparel and 
Technical Textiles to boost large scale manufacturing an d enhancing competitiveness; National Technical 
Textiles Mission focusing on Research Innovation & Development, Promotion and Market Development; 
SAMARTH – Scheme for Capacity Building in Textile Sector with the objective providing demand driven, 
placement oriented, skilling program; Silk Samagra -2 for comprehensive development of sericulture value 
chain; National Handloom Development Program for end to end support for handloom sector. Ministry of 
Textiles is also implementing National Handicrafts Developme nt Programme and Comprehensive 
Handicrafts Cluster Development Scheme for promotion of handicrafts.  
**** 
 
512                                                      

 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES 
RAJYA SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO-2400 
ANSWERED ON- 19/12/2025 
 
COTTON IMPORT DUTY AND LOW PRICE 
 
2400. SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: 
 
 
 
Will the Minister of TEXTILES be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether Government has taken cognizance that scrapping the 11 per cent import duty on cotton has  
reduced domestic prices, if so, the details thereof;  
 
(b) whether Government has provided assistance to cotton farmers affected by low prices, if so, the details 
thereof;  
 
(c) whether cotton imports from the United States of America (USA) have increased after the duty was  
removed and the details thereof; and  
 
(d) the quantity of cotton purchased by the Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) at MSP over the last five years, 
including Kharif 2025–26, compared with total production in the respective years? 
 
  
  
ANSWER 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TEXTILES  
(SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA) 
 
(a): The Government is aware that the exemption of 11% import duty on cotton has led to a softening of 
domestic prices.  Since the duty exemption, international prices of equivalent S -6 cotton declined from about 
79.15 US cents per pound prior to 19.08.2025 to around 73.95 US cents per pound in December 2025, 
indicating a downward global trend. Domestic cotton prices have softened correspondingly from about 
₹57,000 per candy to around ₹52,500 per candy, broadly in line with international price movements. Domestic 
prices are influenced by global and domestic demand -supply conditions, exchange rate and quality 
considerations, while cotton imports constituted about 13.93% of total domestic consumption during the 
2024–25 season.  Since the exemption, prices have soft ened, currently ranging between ₹51,500 –₹52,500 per 
candy, ensuring affordability for the industry while MSP-based support continues to protect farmers.  
 
(b): The Government supports cotton farmers through the Minimum Support Price (MSP) mechanism, 
which provides a minimum of 50 per cent return over the cost of production. For the 2025 –26 season, MSP 
has been fixed at ₹7,710 per quintal for medium staple and ₹8,110 per quintal for long staple cotton, an 
increase of ₹589 per quintal over 2024 –25.  To prevent distress sales, the Cotton Corporation of India has 
procured about 31.19 lakh bales worth ₹13,492 crore under MSP operations as on 11.12.2025 through 570 
procurement centres across 149 districts in 11 States. 
 
(c): Cotton imports from the United States o f America (USA) have increased to meet the quality and 
supply requirements of the domestic textile industry, which consumes about 94% of India’s cotton. During 
August–September 2025, including the period after the temporary exemption of the 11% import duty , imports 
from the USA aligned with industry needs. Overall, cotton imports in India rose from 15.20 lakh bales in 
2023-24 to 41.40 lakh bales in 2024 -25, helping bridge the demand –supply gap. These imports ensure the 
availability of specialized cotton var ieties and support export -oriented production, thereby enhancing the 
global competitiveness of India’s textile sector. 
513                                                      

 
(d): The Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) procures cotton under MSP to ensure remunerative prices for 
farmers. MSP operations continue to safeguard farmers against price volatility and ensure fair returns. 
Statement showing quantity procured under MSP during the last five years, against the production, is given 
below: 
  
Cotton 
Season 
Production (Lakh 
Bales) 
Quantity Procured under MSP (Lakh 
Bales) 
Qty. procured (% of 
production) 
2025-26 292.15 24.92* 8.53* 
2024-25 297.24 100.16 33.70 
2023-24 325.22 32.84 10.10 
2022-23 336.60 - - 
2021-22 311.17 - - 
2020-21 352.48 99.33 28.18 
Note: In Cotton Season 2021 -22 & 2022-23, cotton prices were ruling above MSP. Hence, no MSP support 
required by farmers.           
            * upto 8.12.2025 
**** 
 
514                                                      

 
WRITTEN ANSWERS TO STARRED QUESTIONS 
तारांिकत ĢƘȗ क े िलिखत उǄर 
  
515                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 211 का उƣर 
 
रेलवे नेटवक[ का ͪवèतार  
*211 डॉ. संदȣप कुमार पाठक:   
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
(क)  Èया सरकार अगले पांच वषɟ मɅ रेलवे नेटवक[ के ͪवèतार के  ͧलए कोई नया माèटर 
Üलान बना रहȣ है, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ख)  देश मɅ नई रेलवे लाइनɉ के Ǔनमा[ण और दोहरȣकरण पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत 
Èया है और ͪवलंब का सामना कर रहȣ पǐरयोजनाओं के Þयौरे सǑहत ͪवलंब के Èया 
कारण हɇ; और 
(ग)  È या सरकार रेलवे èटेशन पुनͪव[कास पǐरयोजना के अंतग[त èटेशनɉ का उÛ नयन करने 
कȧ योजना बना रहȣ है, यǑद हां, तो िजला-वार Þयौरा È या है? 
                                     
                                     उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
                               (Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): ͪववरण सभा पटल पर रख Ǒदया गया है। 
 
***** 
  
516                                                      

रेल नेटवक[ के ͪवèतार के संबंध मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को राÏय सभा मɅ डॉ. संदȣप कुमार 
पाठक के तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 211 के भाग (क) से (ग) के उƣर से संबंͬधत ͪववरण। 
 
(क) से (ग): ¢मता बढ़ाने के ͧलए, मौजूदा रेलवे नेटवक[ का ͪवèतार बड़े पैमाने पर ͩकया गया 
है। Ǒदनांक 01.04.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार, भारतीय रेल मɅ लगभग 6.75 लाख करोड़ ǽपए 
लागत और 35,966 ͩक.मी. कुल लंबाई वालȣ 431 रेल अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाएं (154 नई 
लाइन, 33 आमान पǐरवत[न और 244 दोहरȣकरण) èवीकृत कȧ गई हɇ। इसका सार Ǔनàनानुसार 
है:- 
कोǑट पǐरयोजनाओं 
कȧ संÉया 
कुल लंबाई 
नई लाइन/आमान 
पǐरवत[न/दोहरȣकरण 
(ͩकलोमीटर) 
माच[, 2025 तक 
कमीशन कȧ गई 
लंबाई (ͩकलोमीटर) 
माच[, 2025 
तक कुल 
åयय  
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
नई लाइन 154 16,142 3,036 1,45,318 
आमान 
पǐरवत[न 
33 4,180 2,997 22,753 
दोहरȣकरण/ 
मãटȣĚैͩकंग 
244 15,644 6,736 1,22,858 
कुल 431 35,966 12,769 2,90,929 
 
भारतीय रेल कȧ वेबसाइट पर सभी रेल पǐरयोजनाओं का ¢ेğीय रेलवे-वार/वष[-वार Þयौरा 
साव[जǓनक Ǿप से उपलÞध कराया जाता है। 
 
भारतीय रेल मɅ नए रेलपथ कȧ कमीशǓनंग/ǒबछाने का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है:- 
 
अवͬध कमीशन ͩकए गए नए रेलपथ नए रेलपथɉ कȧ औसत कमीशǓनंग 
2009-14 7,599 ͩकलोमीटर  4.2 ͩकलोमीटर ĤǓतǑदन  
2014-25 34,428 ͩकलोमीटर 8.57 ͩकलोमीटर ĤǓतǑदन  
(2 गुना से अͬधक) 
देशभर मɅ हाल हȣ मɅ पूरȣ कȧ गई कुछ मह×वपूण[ पǐरयोजनाओं का Þयौरा Ǔनàनͧलͨखत है: 
Đ.सं. पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत  
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1 उधमपुर-Įीनगर-बारामूला नई लाइन (272 ͩक.मी.) 42,278 
2 बाइरबी-सैरंग नई लाइन (51 ͩक.मी.) 8,601 
3 पूवȸ समͪप[त माल ढुलाई गͧलयारा (1,856 ͩक.मी.) 51,219 
4 अरǐरया-गलगͧलया नई लाइन (111 ͩक.मी.) 4,415 
517                                                      

Đ.सं. पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत  
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
5 Ħéमपुğ नदȣ पर ͧलंक लाइनɉ के साथ बोगीबील पुल (92 ͩक.मी.) 5,820 
6 मदुरै- मǓनयाची-तूतीकोǐरन दोहरȣकरण (160 ͩक.मी.) 1,891 
7 मनमदुरई-रामेæवरम-पàबन पुल का पुनǓन[मा[ण (2 ͩक.मी.) 705 
8 कोडरमा - रांची नई लाइन (202 ͩक.मी.) 3,800 
9 पुणे-ͧमराज-लɉडा दोहरȣकरण (467 ͩक.मी.) 4,670 
10 पालनपुर-समÉयालȣ दोहरȣकरण (247 ͩक.मी.) 2,538 
11 झारसुगुड़ा - सरडेगा नई लाइन (53 ͩक.मी.) 1,598 
12 हǐरदासपुर-पारादȣप नई लाइन (82 ͩक.मी.) 2,397 
13 अंगुल-सुͩकंडा नई लाइन (104 ͩक.मी.) 2,834 
14 नांदयाल-येरा[गुंटला नई लाइन (126 ͩक.मी.) 1,050 
15 जÊगáयापेटा-मेलचेǽवु-जनपहाड़ नई लाइन (48 ͩक.मी.) 737 
16 ओबुलावǐरपãले-कृçणापɪटनम नई लाइन (113 ͩक.मी.) 2,300 
17 अगरतला - सबǾम नई लाइन (112 ͩक.मी.) 3,170 
18 अगरतला - अखौरा नई लाइन (5 ͩक.मी.) 865 
19 खरͧसया-धरमजयगढ़ नई लाइन (100 ͩक.मी.) 3,438 
20 जींद-सोनीपत नई लाइन (89 ͩकलोमीटर) 800 
21 रोहतक-मेहम-हांसी नई लाइन (64 ͩक.मी.) 889 
22 कोɪटूर-हǐरहर नई लाइन (65 ͩक.मी.) 468 
23 हासन-बɇगलोर नई लाइन (167 ͩक.मी.) 1,290 
24 बीदर-गुलबगा[ नई लाइन (110 ͩक.मी.) 1,543 
25 गुना-इटावा नई लाइन (348 ͩक.मी.) 683 
26 ͬगǐरडीह - कोडरमा नई लाइन (111 ͩक.मी.) 404 
27 पेɬडापãलȣ - Ǔनज़ामाबाद नई लाइन (178 ͩक.मी.) 926 
28 अÈकनापेट - मेडक नई लाइन (17 ͩक.मी.) 205 
29 भġाचलम रोड - सƣुपãलȣ नई लाइन (56 ͩक.मी.) 990 
30 महाराजगंज - मसरख नई लाइन (35 ͩक.मी.) 412 
31 राजगीर-Ǔतलैया और नटेसर-इèलामपुर नई लाइन (67 ͩक.मी.) 726 
32 पटना मɅ गंगा पुल (40 ͩक.मी.) 3,555 
33 मुंगेर मɅ गंगा पुल (14 ͩक.मी.) 3,040 
34 गाज़ीपुर शहर-तारȣघाट नई लाइन िजसमɅ गंगा पर रेल-सह-सड़क पुल 
भी शाͧमल है (17 ͩक.मी.) 1,766 
518                                                      

Đ.सं. पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत  
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
35 इटावा-मैनपुरȣ नई लाइन (58 ͩक.मी.) 313 
36 आगरा-इटावा नई लाइन (110 ͩक.मी.) 427 
37 रामपुरहाट-मंदारǑहल नई लाइन रामपुरहाट-मुरारई तीसरȣ लाइन  
(159 ͩक.मी.) 1,500 
 
उपरोÈत मɅ से कई पǐरयोजनाओं को पहले हȣ मंजूरȣ दȣ जा चुकȧ थी, परÛतु इनमɅ वष[ 2014 के 
बाद तेजी आई और इÛहɅ पूरा ͩकया जा सका। ऐसा बजट आवंटन मɅ वृɮͬध और आधुǓनक 
Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ, सुधारɉ आǑद को अपनाने के कारण संभव हुआ, िजनमɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
• गǓत शिÈत Ǔनदेशालय/इकाइयाँ: पǐरवहन ¢ेğ से संबंͬधत अवसंरचना×मक पǐरयोजनाओं 
कȧ योजना बनाने और Ǔनçपादन के ĤǓत ͸िçटकोण मɅ åयापक पǐरवत[न लाने के ͧलए 
अÈटूबर, 2021 मɅ Ĥधानमंğी गǓत शिÈत नेशनल माèटर Üलान (एनएमपी) शुǾ ͩकया गया 
था।  
 
भारतीय रेल ने अपनी पǐरयोजना Ǔनयोजन ĤͩĐया मɅ गǓत शिÈत के ͧसɮधांतɉ को तुरंत 
आ×मसात कर ͧलया है। मौजूदा संसाधनɉ का उपयोग करते हुए, भारतीय रेल मɅ एक बहु-ͪवषयक 
गǓत शिÈत Ǔनदेशालय बनाया गया है। इसी Ĥकार, ¢ेğीय रेलɉ मɅ गǓत शिÈत इकाइयाँ बनाई गई 
हɇ। सभी Ǒहतधारकɉ और अÛय अवसंरचना मंğालयɉ/ͪवभागɉ से परामश[ के बाद पǐरयोजना कȧ 
ͪवèतृत पǐरयोजना ǐरपोटɏ तैयार कȧ जाती हɇ।  
 
उपरोÈत पहलकदͧमयɉ से पǐरयोजनाओं के मूãयांकन/èवीकृǓत ĤͩĐया और Ǔनçपादन मɅ तेजी 
आई है। 
 
• महाĤबंधकɉ और मंडल रेल Ĥबंधकɉ को पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ èवीकृǓत हेतु संवͬध[त शिÈतयां 
Ĥदान करना: पǐरयोजनाओं के ×वǐरत Ǔनçपादन के ͧलए महाĤबंधकɉ और मंडल रेल 
Ĥबंधकɉ को ͪवͧभÛन पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ èवीकृǓत हेतु शिÈतयां बढ़ा दȣ गई हɇ। 
 
• अनुबंधɉ को अंǓतम Ǿप देना और Ĥबंधन: Ǔनͪवदाओं को अंǓतम Ǿप देने के ͧलए 
महाĤबंधकɉ को पूण[ शिÈतयाँ Ĥदान कȧ गई हɇ। इसके अǓतǐरÈत, पारदशȸ एवं ×वǐरत 
अनुबंध Ĥबंधन और ठेकेदारɉ कȧ ǒबͧलंग के ͧलए काय[ अनुबंध Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ 
(आईआरडÞãयूसीएमएस) और ठेके दारɉ के ͧलए ई-एमबी को लागू ͩकया गया है। 
 
•  नई सुरंग Ǔनमा[ण ͪवͬध अथा[त् Ǒहमालयी सुरंग Ǔनमा[ण ͪवͬध ͪवकͧसत करना, ताͩक 
Ǒहमालयी भूͪव£ान मɅ सुरंग Ǔनमा[ण ͩकया जा सके। 
 
•  पुलɉ के Ǔनमा[ण के ͧलए उÍच ¢मता वालȣ Đेन, केबल Đेन आǑद को अपनाया गया। 
519                                                      

 
कǑठन भूभाग मɅ पूरȣ कȧ गई कुछ पǐरयोजनाओं का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
उधमपुर-Įीनगर-बारामूला रेल ͧलंक (यूएसबीआरएल) (272 ͩक.मी.) पǐरयोजना जून 2025 मɅ 
चालू कȧ गई थी। यूएसबीआरएल पǐरयोजना èवतंğता ĤािÜत के बाद देश मɅ शुǾ कȧ गई सबसे 
चुनौतीपूण[ नई रेलवे लाइन पǐरयोजनाओं मɅ से एक है। यह भूभाग युवा Ǒहमालय से होकर 
गुजरता है, जो भूवै£ाǓनक पǐरिèथǓतयɉ और कई चुनौǓतयɉ से भरा है। चुनौǓतयɉ से Ǔनपटने के  
ͧलए, ͪवͧभÛन नए समाधान पेश ͩकए गए जैसे ͩक सुरंग बनाने कȧ एक नई ͪवͬध अथा[त सॉÝट 
Ǒहमालयी भूͪव£ान मɅ सुरंग बनाने के ͧलए Ǒहमालयी सुरंग बनाने कȧ ͪवͬध तैयार कȧ गई। इस 
पɮधǓत मɅ कई èवदेशी नवाचार शाͧमल थे। इसी तरह, गहरȣ घाǑटयɉ को पार करने के ͧलए, 
दुǓनया का सबसे ऊ ं चा रेलवे आक[ ͬचनाब पुल और भारतीय रेल का पहला केबल èटे रेलवे ǒĦज- 
अंजी ǒĦज का Ǔनमा[ण ͩकया गया था। यूएसबीआरएल पǐरयोजना का एक अÛय मह×वपूण[ पहलू 
आस-पास के ¢ेğɉ के ͧलए सामािजक-आͬथ[क लाभ है। इस पǐरयोजना मɅ 215 ͩकलोमीटर से 
अͬधक पहुंच सड़कɉ का Ǔनमा[ण शाͧमल था। इस सड़क नेटवक[ ने èथानीय आबादȣ को अÛय 
¢ेğɉ के साथ उनकȧ कनेिÈटͪवटȣ मɅ सुधार करने मɅ मदद कȧ है और उनके सामािजक-आͬथ[क 
िèथǓत मɅ भी सुधार ͩकया है। 
 
इस पǐरयोजना कȧ अͬधकांश गǓतͪवͬधयाँ जैसे ͩक पुलɉ, सुरंगɉ आǑद का Ǔनमा[ण केवल 2014 के 
बाद हȣ गǓत ĤाÜत कर सकȧं। इसका कारण इस मह×वपूण[ पǐरयोजना के ͧलए पया[Üत धन कȧ 
सुǓनिæचत उपलÞधता और उपरोÈत उपायɉ को अपनाना था। 
 
 
बाइरबी-सैरांग (51.38 ͩक.मी.) नई लाइन पǐरयोजना: ͧमज़ोरम के सीमा राÏय को राजधानी 
èतर कȧ संपक[ता Ĥदान करने के ͧलए यह नई लाइन पǐरयोजना हाल हȣ मɅ ͧसतंबर 2025 मɅ 
पूरȣ कȧ गई और सɋप दȣ गई है। इस पǐरयोजना के पूरा होने के साथ, गुवाहाटȣ, नाहरलागुन 
(इटानगर के ͧलए) और अगरतला के बाद आइजॉल भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ से जुड़ी चौथी पूवȾƣर 
राÏय कȧ राजधानी बन गया है। यह पǐरयोजना कǑठन पहाड़ी इलाके से होकर गुजरती है, िजसमɅ 
कई सुरंगɅ और पुल शाͧमल हɇ। 
 
नया पांबन पुल: यह पुल कǑठन सं¢ारक सामुǑġक पǐरिèथǓतयɉ मɅ Ǔनͧम[त ͩकया गया है। यह 
पुल, जो रामेæवरम को मुÉय भूͧम से जोड़ता है, वैिæवक मंच पर भारतीय इंजीǓनयǐरंग कȧ एक 
उ×कृçट उपलिÞध है, िजसमɅ भारत का पहला वǑट[कल ͧलÝट èपैन शाͧमल है जो 17 मीटर ऊ ं चा 
उठता है, िजससे जहाजɉ का सहज संचालन सुǓनिæचत होता है और रेलगाड़ी संचालन ǒबना ͩकसी 
åयवधान के संभव होता है। 
 
 
 
520                                                      

देश मɅ चल रहȣ कुछ मह×वपूण[ पǐरयोजनाओं का ͪववरण Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
Đ.सं. पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत  
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1 जालना-जलगाँव नई लाइन (174 ͩक.मी.) 5,804 
2 इंदौर-मनमाड नई लाइन (360 ͩक.मी.) 18,529 
3 सोन नगर – अंडाल तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन (749 ͩक.मी.) 12,334 
4 दȣमापुर-कोǑहमा नई लाइन (82 ͩक.मी.) 15,230 
5 िजरȣबाम-इàफाल नई लाइन (111 ͩक.मी.) 21,886 
6 ͧसवोक-रंगपो नई लाइन (44 ͩक.मी.) 11,973 
7 ऋͪषकेश-कण[Ĥयाग नई लाइन (125 ͩक.मी.) 38,953 
8 भानुपãलȣ-ǒबलासपुर-बेरȣ नई लाइन (63 ͩक.मी.) 6,753 
9 पिæचमी समͪप[त माल ढुलाई गͧलयारा (1506 ͩक.मी.)  72,785 
10 लͧलतपुर-सतना, रȣवा-ͧसंगरौलȣ और महोबा-खजुराहो नई लाइन (541 
ͩक.मी.) 8,914 
11 झांसी-खैरार-माǓनकपुर और ͨखरार-भीमसेन दोहरȣकरण (431 ͩक.मी.) 4,330 
12 Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम-कÛयाकुमारȣ दोहरȣकरण (87 ͩक.मी.) 3,785 
13 ͪविजयनगरम-Ǒटटलागढ़ तीसरȣ लाइन (265 ͩक.मी.)  6,996 
 
पंजाब 
 
पंजाब राÏय मɅ पूण[त:/अंशत: पड़ने वालȣ अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाओं और संर¢ा कायɟ के ͧलए 
ͩकया गया बजट आवंटन Ǔनàनानुसार है:  
 
अवͬध पǐरåयय  
2009-14 225 करोड़ ǽपए/वष[ 
2025-26 5,421 करोड़ ǽपए (24 गुना से अͬधक) 
  
01.04.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार, कुल 714 ͩक.मी. लंबाई कȧ पूण[त:/अंशत: पंजाब राÏय मɅ 
पड़ने वालȣ 09 पǐरयोजनाएँ (04 नई लाइन और 05 दोहरȣकरण) िजनकȧ लागत 21,926 करोड़ 
ǽपए है, योजना/èवीकृǓत/Ǔनçपादन के ͪवͧभÛन चरणɉ मɅ हɇ, िजनमɅ से 115 ͩक.मी. कȧ लंबाई 
को कमीशन ͩकया जा चुका है और माच[ 2025 तक 8,079 करोड़ ǽपए åयय ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। 
सार इस Ĥकार है:- 
521                                                      

कोǑट  पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ संÉया कुल लंबाई 
 
कमीशन कȧ गई 
लंबाई 
माच[-2025 तक खच[ 
(करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
नई लाइन 04 252 ͩक.मी. 64 ͩक.मी. 7359 
दोहरȣकरण/ 
मãटȣ Ěैͩकंग 05 462 ͩक.मी. 51 ͩक.मी. 720 
कुल  09 714 ͩक.मी. 115 ͩक.मी. 8,079  
 
पंजाब राÏय मɅ पूण[त:/अंशत: पड़ने वालȣ हाल हȣ मɅ पूरȣ कȧ गɃ कुछ पǐरयोजनाओं का ͪववरण 
Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
Đ. सं.  पǐरयोजना  लागत  
(करोड़  ǽपए मɅ) 
1 चÈकȧ बɇक-भरौलȣ दोहरȣकरण(3 ͩक.मी.) 15 
2 जाखल-मानसा दोहरȣकरण (45 ͩक.मी.) 163 
3 मीरथल-भंगाला Þयास नदȣ दोहरȣकरण (2.5 ͩक.मी.)  74 
4 अंबाला-धÜपर-चंडीगड़ दोहरȣकरण (45 ͩक.मी.) 339 
5 मानसा – बǑठंडा दोहरȣकरण (49 ͩक.मी.) 216 
6 अमृतसर से छहरटा दोहरȣकरण (7 ͩक.मी.) 31 
7 जालंधर-पठानकोट-जàमू तवी दोहरȣकरण (209 ͩक.मी.) 850 
8 कठुआ-माधोपुर पंजाब - रावी पुल पर दोहरȣकरण (2.5 ͩक.मी.)  257 
9 राजपुरा-बǑठंडा दोहरȣकरण (173 ͩक.मी.) 2459 
 
 पंजाब राÏय मɅ पूण[त:अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ कुछ पǐरयोजनाएं िजÛहɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया हɇ, 
Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
Đ. सं. पǐरयोजना लागत 
(करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
1. नंगल डैम-तलवाड़ा और मुकेǐरयां-तलवाड़ा नई लाइन (143 ͩक.मी.) 2018 
2. भानुपãलȣ-ǒबलासपुर-बेरȣ नई लाइन (63 ͩक.मी.) 6753 
3. काǑदयां-Þयास नई लाइन (40 ͩक.मी.) 842 
4. ͩफरोजपुर-पटȣ नई लाइन (26 ͩक.मी.) 300 
5. रामा मंडी (रमन)-मौर मंडी (मौर) तलवंडी साबो के राèते (29 ͩक.मी.) 
नई लाइन 
154 
6. लुͬधयाना-ͩकला रायपुर दोहरȣकरण (19 ͩक.मी.)  238 
7. लुͬधयाना-मुãलनपुर दोहरȣकरण (21 ͩक.मी.) 235 
8. राजपुरा–मोहालȣ नई लाइन (18 ͩक.मी.)  443 
522                                                      

भारत सरकार पǐरयोजनाओं को पूरा करने के ͧलए तैयार है, हालांͩक इसकȧ सफलता पंजाब 
सरकार के सहयोग पर Ǔनभ[र करती है। उदाहरण के ͧलए, कुछ Ĥमुख पǐरयोजनाएं जो भूͧम 
अͬधĒहण के कारण ͪवलंǒबत हɇ, का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है: - 
 
Đ.सं. पǐरयोजना का नाम कुल अपेͯ¢त 
भूͧम 
(हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
कुल अͬधगृहȣत 
भूͧम 
(हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
अͬधगृहȣत कȧ जाने वालȣ 
शेष भूͧम (हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
1. ͩफरोजपुर पɪटȣ नई 
लाइन  
166 0 166 
2. अलाल-Ǒहàमताना कॉड[ 
लाइन 
20 0 20 
3. काǑदयां-Þयास नई लाइन 151 0 151 
4. रामा मंडी (रमन) - 
तलवंडी साबो नई लाइन 
85 0 85 
 
राÏय सरकार के पास लंǒबत मामले 
  
ͩफरोजपुर-पɪटȣ नई लाइन (26 ͩक.मी.) अंतरा[çĚȣय सीमा के पास एक मह×वपूण[ पǐरयोजना है 
जो पूण[ Ǿप से पंजाब मɅ है। इस पǐरयोजना के ͧलए भूͧम पंजाब राÏय सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनशुãकः 
सɋपी जानी थी। ͩफरोजपुर और तरनतारन िजलɉ मɅ कुल 166 हेÈटेयर भूͧम अͬधगृहȣत कȧ जानी 
है। पूरȣ भूͧम के ͧलए अͬधǓनण[य माच[ 2023 मɅ Ĥकाͧशत ͩकया जा चुका है। बहरहाल 
अͬधǓनͨण[त राͧश का संͪवतरण राÏय सरकार ɮवारा नहȣं ͩकया गया है। इस मह×वपूण[ सीमावतȸ 
¢ेğ  मɅ पǐरयोजना के ͩĐयाÛवयन मɅ देरȣ को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए, रेल मंğालय ने èव ͪवƣीय 
सहायता से ͩफरोजपुर-पɪटȣ नई लाइन (26 ͩक.मी.) को शुǾ करने का Ǔनण[य ͧलया है।  
 
इसी Ĥकार, क़ाǑदयां-Þयास नई लाइन को 205 करोड़ ǽ. कȧ लागत से èवीकृत ͩकया गया 
था। बहरहाल, भूͧम अͬधगृहȣत करने मɅ राÏय सरकार के  सहयोग कȧ कमी के कारण यह 
पǐरयोजना आगे नहȣं बढ़ाई जा सकȧ। तदनुसार, इस पǐरयोजना को वष[ 2019 को रोक Ǒदया 
गया था। हालाँͩक, जनता कȧ मांग और इस पǐरयोजना के मह×व को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए, अब 
इस पǐरयोजना को आगे बढ़ाने का Ǔनण[य ͧलया गया है। 
 
उपरोÈत मह×वपूण[ अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाओं को काया[िÛवत करने के ͧलए राÏय सरकार का 
सहयोग मह×वपूण[ है। 
 
 ͪपछले तीन वषɟ अथा[त 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 और चालू ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 
मɅ, पंजाब राÏय मɅ अंशतः/पूण[तः पड़ने वाले 22 सवȶ¢ण कायɟ (09 नई लाइन, 12 दोहरȣकरण 
और 01 आमान पǐरवत[न) िजनकȧ कुल लंबाई 2,101 ͩक.मी. है, को शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
523                                                      

ͩकसी भी रेल पǐरयोजना कȧ èवीकृǓत कई कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करती है िजनमɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 
शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
 यातायात अनुमानɉ और Ĥèताͪवत माग[ कȧ लाभĤदता  
 पǐरयोजना ɮवारा उपलÞध कराई जाने वालȣ आरंͧभक और अंǓतम गंतåय èथान पहुंच 
संपक[ता  
 अनुपलÞध कͫड़यɉ को जोड़ना और वैकिãपक माग[ उपलÞध कराना  
 संकुͧलत/संतृÜत लाइनɉ का ͪवè तार  
 राÏय सरकारɉ/केÛġȣय मंğालयɉ/जन ĤǓतǓनͬध यɉ ɮवारा कȧ गई मांगɅ 
 रेलवे कȧ अपनी पǐरचालǓनक आवæयकताएं  
 सामािजक-आͬथ[क मह×व 
 Ǔनͬध कȧ समĒ उपलÞधता 
 
रेल पǐरयोजना/ओं का पूरा होना ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है, जो Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
 राÏय सरकार ɮवारा भूͧम अͬधĒहण   
 वन संबंधी मंजूरȣ 
 बाधक जनोपयोगी सेवाओं का èथानांतरण   
 ͪवͧभÛन Ĥाͬधकरणɉ से सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयां  
 ¢ेğ कȧ भू-वै£ाǓनक और èथलाकृǓतक पǐरिèथǓतयां  
 पǐरयोजना èथल के ¢ेğ मɅ कानून एवं åयवèथा कȧ िèथǓत   
 पǐरयोजना èथल ͪवशेष के ͧलए ͩकसी वष[ मɅ काय[ करने के महȣनɉ कȧ संÉया आǑद।  
 
    ये सभी कारक पǐरयोजना/पǐरयोजनाओं के समापन समय और लागत को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ। 
रेल पǐरयोजनाओं के Ĥभावी और तीĭ काया[Ûवयन के  ͧलए सरकार ɮवारा उठाए गए ͪवͧभÛन 
कदमɉ मɅ शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
 Ǔनͬधयɉ के आवंटन मɅ पया[Üत वृɮͬध। 
 ¢ेğीय èतर पर शिÈतयɉ का हèतांतरण। 
 ͪवͧभÛन èतरɉ पर पǐरयोजना कȧ ĤगǓत कȧ गहन Ǔनगरानी। 
 जमीन अͬधĒहण, वाǓनकȧ और वÛयजीव मंजूरȣ को शीēता से सुǓनिæचत करने तथा 
पǐरयोजना से संबंͬधत अÛय मुɮदɉ को हल करने के ͧलए राÏय सरकारɉ और संबंͬधत 
Ĥाͬधकरणɉ के साथ Ǔनयͧमत अनुवतȸ कार[वाई। 
 
èटेशन पुनͪव[कास 
 
रेल मंğालय ने दȣघ[काͧलक ͸िçटकोण के साथ èटेशनɉ के पुनͪव[कास हेतु अमृत भारत èटेशन 
योजना शुǾ कȧ है।  
 
524                                                      

इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ को बेहतर बनाने के  ͧलए माèटर Üलान तैयार करना और चरणɉ 
मɅ उनका काया[Ûवयन करना शाͧमल हɇ। माèटर ÜलाǓनंग मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ:  
 
 èटेशन और पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ तक पहुँच मɅ सुधार 
 èटेशन का शहर के दोनɉ भागɉ के साथ एकȧकरण 
 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार 
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठक åयवèथा, वाटर-बूथɉ मɅ सुधार 
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े ऊपरȣ पैदल पुल/एयर कॉÛकोस[ कȧ åयवèथा 
 ͧलÝट/एèकेलेटर/रɇप कȧ åयवèथा 
 Üलेटफ़ॉम[ कȧ सतह मɅ सुधार/Ǔनमा[ण और Üलेटफ़ॉम[ पर कवर कȧ åयवèथा 
 'एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद' जैसी योजनाओं के माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए ͩकयोèक 
कȧ åयवèथा 
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, यातायात के ͪवͧभÛन साधनɉ का एकȧकरण 
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएँ 
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
 Ĥ×येक èटेशन पर आवæयकता को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए एÈज़ीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, åयावसाǓयक 
बैठकɉ के ͧलए ǓनǑद[çट èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग आǑद कȧ åयवèथा। 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध एवं यथा åयवहाय[ दȣघ[काͧलक और पया[वरण 
अनुकूल समाधान, ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत पटǐरयɉ कȧ åयवèथा आǑद और दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ 
सेÛटरɉ के Ǔनमा[ण कȧ पǐरकãपना भी कȧ गई है।  
 
 अब तक, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त ͪवकास के ͧलए 1337 रेलवे èटेशनɉ 
को ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है। अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के तहत रेलवे èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास काय[ 
अÍछȤ गǓत मɅ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। अभी तक, 160 èटेशनɉ पर Ǔनमा[ण काय[ पूरे हो चुके हɇ।  
 
इन èटेशनɉ के नाम Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
अलनावर, अंब अंदौरा, अंǒबकापुर, आमगांव, आनंदपुर साǑहब, अनारा, अयोÚया धाम, बादामी, 
बागलकोट, बैजनाथ पपरोला, बलरामपुर, बंतावाला, बाराभूम, बारामती, बरेलȣ ͧसटȣ, बारȣपदा, 
बाड़मेर, बरपालȣ, बेगमपेट, Þयोहारȣ, भानुĤतापपुर, ͧभलाई, ǒबजनौर, ǒबमलगढ़, बोिàमडी, बूंदȣ, 
चंदा फोट[, चंगनाèसेरȣ, ͬचदंबरम, ͬचंचपोकलȣ, ͬचÛनसेलम, ͬचरǓयनकȧÃ, कटक, डाकोर, डेरोल, 
देशनोक, देवलालȣ, धारवाड़, धुले, डɉगरगढ़, फतेहाबाद, फतेहपुर, फतेहपुर शेखावाटȣ, गडग, 
गोɬडा, गोगामेरȣ, गोकक रोड, गोला गोकण[नाथ, गोमती नगर, गोवध[न, गोͪवंद गढ़, गोͪवंदपुरȣ, 
गोͪवंदपुर रोड, हैबरगांव, हिãदया, हापा, हरपालपुर, हाथरस ͧसटȣ, होडल, ईदगाह आगरा जंÈशन, 
इÏजतनगर, जैसलमेर, जाम जोधपुर, जाम वनथलȣ, जयचÖडी पहाड़, काकȧनाडा टाउन, कãयाणी 
घोषपारा, कामाÉयागुड़ी, कनालुस जंÈशन, कराईकुडी जंÈशन, करमसद, करȣमनगर, कटनी 
दͯ¢ण, के डगांव, खैरथल, कोÜपल, कोसंबा जंÈशन, कुͧलतुरई, कुɪटȣपुरम, लासलगांव, ͧलàबडी, 
525                                                      

लोहरदगा, लोणंद जंÈशन, माहे, महुवा, मैलानी, मंडल गढ़, मंडावर महवा रोड, मधुपुर, 
मनापराई, मंडी डबवालȣ, मंगलाͬगरȣ, मÛनारगुडी, माटुंगा, एम.सी.एस. छƣरपुर, मीठापुर, 
मोरÜपुर, मोरबी, मुÈतसर, मुǓनराबाद, मुǓत[जापुर जंÈशन, नैनपुर जंÈशन, नंदुरा, नम[दापुरम 
(होशंगाबाद), नेताजी सुभाष चंġ बोस इतवारȣ जंÈशन, ओखा, ओरछा, पालȣताणा, पानागढ़, 
पनकȧ धाम, परेल, परलाखेमुंडी, पीरपɇती, ͪपèका, पुखरायां, पोलाची जंÈशन, पोलूर, पोरबंदर, 
राजगढ़, राजमहल, राजुला जंÈशन, रामघाट हाãट, रायनपाडु, सहारनपुर जंÈशन, साǑहबजादा 
अजीत ͧसंह मोहालȣ, साहेबगंज, समͨखयालȣ, समलपɪटȣ, शंकरपुर, सावदा, ͧसवनी, शहद, 
शाजापुर, शोलावंदन, षोरणूर जंÈशन, Įीधाम, ͧसɮधाथ[ नगर, सीहोर जंÈशन, ͧसउरȣ, Įी बाला 
Ħéमेæवर जोगुलàबा, Įीरंगम, Įीͪविãलपुƣूर, Įीͪविãलपुƣूर, सɅट थॉमस माउंट, सुãलुरपेटा, 
सुरैमंपुर, èवामीनारायण छाͪपया, तालचेर, तामलुक, थावे, ͬथǽवǾर जंÈशन, ǓतǽवÛनामलाई, 
टूǓन, उझानी, उरकुरा, उतरन, वडकरा, वडाला रोड, वृɮधाचलम जंÈशन, वडÈकांचेǐर, वारंगल। 
 
अÛय èटेशनɉ पर भी काय[ तेज़ गǓत से शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ तथा कुछ èटेशनɉ कȧ ĤगǓत 
Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
ǓतǽपǓत èटेशन: दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा कȧ ओर नए मुÉय Ĥवेश èटेशन भवन और 2 एयर कॉÛकोस[ के  
संरचना×मक ढांचे का काय[ पूरा हो चुका है। दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा कȧ ओर नए मुÉय Ĥवेश èटेशन भवन 
का ͩफǓनͧशंग का काय[ और उƣर Ǒदशा कȧ ओर एयर कॉनकोस[, èटेशन भवन का संरचना×मक 
काय[, Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर संबंधी काय[, ͧलÝट, एèके लेटर आǑद का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है।   
 
नेãलोर èटेशन: पूव[ और पिæचम दोनɉ ओर èटेशन भवनɉ के संरचना×मक ढांचे, Ƀटɉ और 
Üलèतर का काय[ और एयर कॉनकोस[ का संरचना×मक काय[ पूरा हो चुका है। पूव[ और पिæचम 
दोनɉ Ǒदशाओं मɅ èटेशन भवन और एयर कॉनकोस[ पाट[ के ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, अंडरपास का 
ͪवèतार काय[, पानी कȧ टंͩकयɉ और सीवेज ĚȣटमɅट Üलांट के काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
यशवंतपुर èटेशन: पूव[ Ǒदशा के èटेशन भवन के  संरचना×मक काय[, पूव[ Ǒदशा के सब-èटेशन के 
ͧसͪवल काय[, पूव[ Ǒदशा पर एͧलवेटेड सड़क और मãटȣ-लेवल कार पाͩकɍग के  काय[ पूरे हो गए 
हɇ। पूव[ Ǒदशा के èटेशन भवन, पूव[ Ǒदशा मɅ एͧलवेटेड सड़क और मãटȣ-लेवल कार पाͩकɍग, 
सीवेज ĚȣटमɅट संयंğ का ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, पिæचम Ǒदशा के èटेशन भवन और एयर कंकॉस[ के 
संरचना×मक काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
बɅगलुǽ कɇट èटेशन: दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा मɅ 24 मीटर चौड़े डायवज[न रोड, Ĥͧश¢ण कɅ ġ, उƣर Ǒदशा मɅ 
छाğावास और दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा कȧ ओर èटेशन भवन कȧ ओर के संरचना×मक काय[ पूरे कर ͧलए 
गए हɇ। दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा के  èटेशन भवन का ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, उƣर Ǒदशा के èटेशन भवन का 
संरचना×मक काय[ और पैदल पार पुल का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
526                                                      

रामेæवरम èटेशन: पूव[/उƣर टͧम[नल भवन, Ĥèथान Ĥांगण, आगमन Ĥांगण, आवासीय टॉवर, 
सब-èटेशन भवन, जल Ǔनçकष[ण संयंğ और सीवेज ĚȣटमɅट संयंğ के संरचना×मक काय[ पूरे हो 
चुके हɇ। पूव[ टͧम[नल भवन के ͬचनाई संबंधी काय[, उƣर टͧम[नल भवन, Ĥèथान Ĥांगण, आगमन 
Ĥांगण, आवासीय टॉवर के ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, Üलेटफाम[ उÛनयन िजसमɅ Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर शाͧमल 
है और मौजूदा Ĥती¢ा क¢ के नवीनीकरण के काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ।  
 
सफदरजंग èटेशन: ͧसगनल भवन, èटेशन भवन, Üलिàबंग और फायर फाइǑटंग, पǐरचालन भवन 
कȧ छत तक संरचना×मक काय[, एयर कॉÛकोस[ कȧ नींव और पेडेèटãस के काय[ पूरे हो चुके हɇ। 
èटेशन भवन मɅ इलेिÈĚकल और लो वोãटेज काय[, Üलेटफाम[ नवीनीकरण काय[, पǐरचालन भवन 
के ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, ओवरहेड टɇक और एयर कॉÛसोस[ के काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
इसके अǓतǐरÈत, भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण सतत् 
और Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस संबंध मɅ कायɟ कȧ पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और 
Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन, आवæयकतानुसार काय[ शुǾ ͩकए जाते हɇ। èटेशनɉ के 
ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण कायɟ को èवीकृǓत देने और Ǔनçपादन के  समय 
Ǔनचलȣ कोǑट के èटेशनɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ उÍचतर कोǑट के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। 
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ 
संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए फायर ÈलȣयरɅस, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन 
संबंधी èवीकृǓत इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती है। इनकȧ 
ĤगǓत जनोपयोगी सेवाओं को èथानांतǐरत करना, (िजनमɅ जल/सीवेज लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर 
केबल, गैस पाइप लाइन, पावर/ͧसगनल केबल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ) अǓतलंघन, याğी संचलन को 
बाͬधत ͩकए ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, रेलपथ एवं उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के नजदȣक 
ͩकए जाने वाले कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद जैसी Ħाउन फȧãड संबंधी चुनौǓतयɉ के 
कारण भी Ĥभाͪवत होती है और ये कारक काय[ को पूरा करने के समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ। 
अत:, इस समय कोई समय-सीमा नहȣं बताई जा सकती है। 
 
अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना सǑहत èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण का ͪवƣपोषण 
सामाÛयतः योजना शीष[-53 'Ēाहक सुͪवधाएँ' के  अंतग[त ͩकया जाता है। योजना शीष[-53 के 
अंतग[त आबंटन और åयय का Þयौरा ¢ेğीय रेल-वार रखा जाता है, न ͩक काय[-वार या èटेशन-
वार या राÏय-वार। ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 के ͧलए योजना शीष[-53 के अंतग[त 12,118 करोड़ ǽपये 
कȧ Ǔनͬध आवंǑटत कȧ गई है और अब तक (अÈटूबर, 2025 तक) 7,253 करोड़ ǽपये का åयय 
उपगत ͩकया गया है।  
***** 
 
527                                                      

     भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
तारांिकत Ůʲ सं. 212 
19 िदसंबर, 2025 को उȅराथŊ 
 
िवषय: Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना क े अंतगŊत अितįरƅ बीमा-आवरण 
212. ŵी ईरǹ कडाडीः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई) क े अंतगŊत नए िदशािनदőशों मŐ जंगली जानवरों क े 
हमलों से होने वाले नुकसान क े िलए बीमा-आवरण है, यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है और यिद नही ं, तो इसक े 
Ɛा कारण हœ; 
(ख) उन राǛों और िजलों का ɯौरा Ɛा है जहां अितįरƅ बीमा-आवरण लागू िकया गया है; 
(ग) फसल बीमा मोबाइल ऐप क े माȯम से वाˑिवक समय मŐ दावा करने हेतु पंजीकरण क े िलए Ɛा तंũ िवकिसत 
िकया गया है; और 
(घ) ʩापक फसल संरƗण क े Ůित सरकार की ŮितबȠता दशाŊते Šए इसक े अंतगŊत िवशेष ŝप से वन सीमांत 
Ɨेũों मŐ, जहां इस तरह की Ɨित बार-बार होती है, िवतįरत िकए गए मुआवजे की रािश और लाभाİɋत िकसानों 
की संƥा िकतनी-िकतनी है? 
 
उȅर 
   क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी (ŵी िशवराज िसंह चौहान) 
 
(क) से (घ):  िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
  
528                                                      

“Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना क े अंतगŊत अितįरƅ बीमा-आवरण” क े संबंध मŐ िदनांक 19.12.2025 
को उȅराथŊ राǛ सभा तारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 212 क े भाग (क) से (घ) क े संबंध मŐ उİʟİखत िववरण 
(क) एवं (ख): Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (PMFBY) राǛों और िकसानों दोनों क े िलए ˢैİǅक है। यह ˋीम 
संबंिधत राǛ सरकार Ȫारा अिधसूिचत फसलों/Ɨेũों क े िलए बुवाई पूवŊ से लेकर फसलोपरांत तक अपįरहायŊ 
Ůाक ृ ितक जोİखमों से फसल नुकसान क े िलए ʩापक जोİखम बीमा Ůदान करती है। जंगली जानवरों क े कारण 
फसलों को होने वाले Ɨित, िजसे रोका जा सकता है, पहले इस ˋीम क े अंतगŊत कवर  नही ं थे। तथािप, पयाŊवरण, 
वन एवं जलवायु पįरवतŊन मंũालय और राǛ सरकारों क े अनुरोध पर, राǛों को ʩİƅगत आकलन क े आधार 
पर जंगली जानवरों से होने वाले नुकसान को ऐड ऑन कवर क े ŝप मŐ अिधसूिचत करने की अनुमित दी गई है, 
जहां जोİखम सतत और पहचान योƶ हो। ˋीम क े Ůचालन िदशािनदőशों मŐ इस Ůकार क े कवर े ज क े िलए िवˑृत 
Ůोटोकॉल िदया गया है। िदशािनदőशों क े अनुसार, ऐड ऑन कवर िकसानों क े िलए वैकİʙक है और ŮयोǛ 
Ůीिमयम िकसानों Ȫारा वहन िकया जाना अपेिƗत है। हालांिक, राǛ सरकार कवर े ज, जहां अिधसूिचत होता है, 
पर सİɵडी Ůदान करने पर िवचार कर सकती है। अब तक, िकसी भी राǛ सरकार ने जंगली जानवरों से होने 
वाले फसल नुकसान को इस ˋीम क े अंतगŊत अिधसूिचत नही ं िकया है।  
(ग): समय पर įरपोिटōग और पारदशŎ नुकसान आकलन सुिनिʮत करने क े िलए, सरकार ने फसल बीमा मोबाइल 
ऐप और क ृ िष रƗक पोटŊल एवं हेʙलाइन (14447) क े माȯम से įरयल टाइम Ƒेम पंजीकरण तंũ िवकिसत 
िकया है तथा ˕ानीय दावों क े िलए जारी िकया है। िकसानों को मोबाइल ऐप या अिधक ृ त चैनलों (बœक शाखाए ं, 
सीएससी, बीमा मȯ˕) का उपयोग करक े 72 घंटों क े भीतर फसल नुकसान की सूचना देना अिनवायŊ है। यह 
Ůणाली िजयो टैग की गई तˢीरŐ, जीपीएस कोडŎनेट्स, टाइमːैɼ और िकसान क े िववरण एकिũत करती है, 
िजससे बीमाकताŊओं और िजला अिधकाįरयों को नुकसान įरपोटŊ का तǽाल िडिजटल Ůसारण संभव हो पाता है। 
नुकसान मूʞांकनकताŊ की िनयुİƅ 48 घंटों क े भीतर अिनवायŊ है, और फसल नुकसान आकलन ऐप का उपयोग 
करक े संयुƅ आकलन िकया जाता है, िजससे राʼŌ ीय फसल बीमा पोटŊल (NCIP) पर įरयल टाइम डेटा अपलोड 
सुिनिʮत होता है, जो दावा िनपटान क े िलए एकमाũ िवʷसनीय ŷोत है।  
(घ): अिधसूिचत Ɨेũों मŐ अिधसूिचत फसलों की खेती करने वाले सभी िकसान, िजनमŐ बटाईदार और काʱकार 
िकसान भी शािमल हœ, PMFBY क े अंतगŊत बीमा क े िलए पाũ हœ। हालांिक, िकसानों का बीिमत फसलों और भूिम 
पर इंʴोर े बल इंटर ेː होना चािहए। ऐसे िकसानों को राǛ मŐ Ůचिलत भूिम अिभलेखों क े दˑावेजी साƙ 
{(अिधकार अिभलेख (RoR)}, भूिम ˢािमȕ Ůमाण पũ (LPC) आिद) और/अथवा संबंिधत राǛ सरकारों/कŐ ū 
शािसत Ůदेशों  Ȫारा बटाईदारों/काʱकार िकसानों से संबंिधत अिधसूिचत/अनुमेय अनुबंध/करार िववरण/अɊ 
दˑावेज Ůˑुत करने होंगे, और उɎŐ संबंिधत राǛों/ कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेशों Ȫारा अिधसूचना मŐ पįरभािषत िकया 
जाना चािहए। हालांिक, वन अिधकार अिधिनयम (FRA) क े अंतगŊत वन भूिम मŐ खेती करने वाले आिदवासी िकसान 
और वनवासी  को भी इस ˋीम क े अंतगŊत बीमा कराने की इजाज़त हœ। सामुदाियक ˢािमȕ वाली भूिम पर खेती 
करने वाले िकसान भी Ťाम Ůधान या राजˢ अिधकाįरयों से Ůमाण पũ क े साथ इस ˋीम क े अंतगŊत शािमल हो 
सकते हœ। इन िकसानों को राʼŌ ीय फसल बीमा पोटŊल (NCIP) पर नामांकन कराने क े िलए Ůȑेक सीजन मŐ िवशेष 
अिभयान चलाया जाता है। ऐसे सभी िकसानों को अिनवायŊ ŝप से आधार नंबर और बोई गई फसल/बोई जाने 
वाली फसलों क े बार े मŐ घोषणा पũ Ůˑुत करना होता है। 
 राǛों Ȫारा क ृ िष अिधकार अिधिनयम (FRA) क े तहत अिधसूिचत 3.06 लाख हेƃेयर वन भूिम को कवर 
करने वाले 13.35 लाख िकसान आवेदनों का PMFBY क े तहत बीमा िकया गया है और वषŊ 2023-24 और 
2024-25 क े दौरान 1.26 लाख िकसान आवेदनों को 85.50 करोड़ Ŝपये क े दावों का भुगतान िकया गया है।     
 
****** 
529                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
तारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 213 
19 िदसɾर, 2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
 
िवषय: ŵीअɄ (िमलेट्स) को बढ़ावा देना 
*213. डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बोंडे: 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सरकार देश मŐ ŵीअɄ (िमलेट्स) (मोटे अनाज) को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए कदम उठा रही है; 
(ख) यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ग) Ɛा सरकार ŵीअɄ (िमलेट्स) क े िलए गुणवȅापूणŊ बीजों क े उȋादन को ŮोȖािहत कर रही 
है; 
(घ) यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है; और 
(ङ) िपछले तीन वषŘ क े दौरान सरकार Ȫारा देश मŐ ŵीअɄ (िमलेट्स) को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए िकए 
गए अनुसंधान और िवˑार संबंधी िŢयाकलापों का ɯौरा Ɛा है? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी (ŵी िशवराज िसंह चौहान)  
 
(क) से (ङ): एक िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है।  
 
530                                                      

 
‘ŵीअɄ (िमलेट्स) को बढ़ावा देना’ िवषय क े संबंध मŐ िदनांक 19.12.2025 को राǛ सभा मŐ 
उȅराथŊ माननीय सांसद डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बोंडे Ȫारा पूछ े गए तारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 213 
क े भाग (क) से (ङ) क े संबंध मŐ उİʟİखत िववरण 
 
(क) और (ख): भारत सरकार ने देशभर मŐ िमलेट्स की खेती, Ůसंˋरण और उपभोग को बढ़ावा 
देने तथा िमलेट-आधाįरत उȋादों से जुड़े खाȨ Ůसंˋरण इकाइयों, ːाटŊ-अɛ और िनयाŊतकों को 
ŮोȖािहत करने क े िलए मूʞ ŵृंखला क े सभी चरणों मŐ कई हˑƗेप िकए हœ। वषŊ 2023 मŐ, 
अंतराŊʼŌीय िमलेट वषŊ (आईवाईएम) मनाया गया और इसक े माȯम से िमलेट उपभोग क े पोषण और 
ˢा˖ संबंधी लाभों क े िवषय मŐ सफलतापूवŊक जागŝकता Ůसार िकया गया तथा इसक े माȯम से 
िमलेट क े उȋादन, मूʞ ŵृंखला िवकास, माकő ट िलंक े ज और अनुसंधान सिहत िमलेट संबंधी 
महȕपूणŊ िवषयों पर िवमशŊ को बल िमला। 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग, िमलेट्स (ŵीअɄ) का उȋादन और उȋादकता बढ़ाने 
क े िलए देश मŐ राʼŌीय खाȨ सुरƗा एवं पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) क े तहत पोषक अनाज 
उप-िमशन कायाŊİɋत कर रहा है और इस योजना क े ज़įरए िकसानों तथा िमलेट्स सेƃर को 
फायदा पŠंचाने वाले कई हˑƗेप लागू िकए जाते हœ। 
इसक े अलावा, भारत सरकार राǛों को उनकी ज़ŝरतों और Ůाथिमकताओं क े अनुसार 
Ůधानमंũी - राʼŌीय क ृ िष िवकास योजना (पीएम-आरक े वीवाई) क े िवˑृत पįरयोजना įरपोटŊ 
(डीपीआर) घटक क े तहत िमलेट्स को बढ़ावा देने मŐ भी मदद करती है। 
खाȨ Ůसंˋरण उȨोग मंũालय (एमओएफपीआई) खाȨ पदाथŘ मŐ िमलेट्स क े उपयोग को 
बढ़ावा देने और मूʞ संवधŊन को ŮोȖािहत करने क े िलए िमलेट-आधाįरत उȋादों क े िलए उȋादन-
िलं̋ड ŮोȖाहन योजना (पीएलआईएसएमबीपी) का कायाŊɋयन कर रहा है। िमलेट्स एवं िमलेट-
आधाįरत उȋादों क े िनयाŊत को सुगम बनाने क े िलए क ृ िष और Ůसंˋृ त खाȨ उȋाद िनयाŊत िवकास 
Ůािधकरण (एपीडा) ने िमलेट्स क े िलए िनयाŊत ईकोिसːम को सु̊ढ़ बनाने क े िलए Ɨमता िनमाŊण 
कायŊŢम, वचुŊअल खरीदार–िवŢे ता बैठकŐ , वैिʷक माकő िटंग अिभयान, ई-क ै टलॉग तथा िनयाŊत 
संवधŊन मंच (एƛपोटŊ Ůमोशन फोरम– ईपीएफ) की ˕ापना सिहत कई महȕपूणŊ पहलŐ की हœ। 
साथ ही, मूʞ विधŊत िमलेट उȋादों क े िवकास से जुड़े ːाटŊ-अɛ को, िवशेष ŝप से रेडी-ट ू-क ु क 
(आरटीसी) और रेडी-ट ू-ईट (आरटीई) ŵेिणयों मŐ, सहायता Ůदान की जा रही है। िमलेट्स को Ůमुख 
राʼŌीय पोषण एवं कʞाण कायŊŢमों मŐ भी सİʃिलत िकया गया है। 
 
(ग) से (ङ): क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग समय-समय पर राǛों एवं बीज उȋादक एजŐिसयों को 
यह परामशŊ देता है िक वे िमलेट्स सिहत िविभɄ फसलों की नई जारी उǄ उपज वाली िक˝ों 
(एचवाईवी) क े Űीडर सीड की मांग (इंडŐट) Ůˑुत करŐ तािक इनका आगे आधारी एवं Ůमािणत बीजों 
मŐ गुणन िकया जा सक े और देश क े िकसानों को आवʴक बीज उपलɩ कराए जा सकŐ । 
आईसीएआर Ȫारा दी गई सूचना क े अनुसार, िपछले तीन वषŘ (2022–25) क े दौरान आगे बीज गुणन 
क े िलए 1,290 िƓं टल की मांग क े सापेƗ िविभɄ िमलेट्स क े क ु ल 2,588 िƓं टल Űीडर सीड का 
उȋादन िकया गया है। 
 इसक े अलावा, राǛों Ȫारा दी गई सूचना क े अनुसार, िपछले दो वषŘ मŐ देश मŐ िमलेट्स क े 
पयाŊɑ Ůमािणत/गुणवȅापूणŊ बीज उपलɩ थे और वतŊमान वषŊ क े दौरान िमलेट्स क े बीजों की 
उपलɩता 6.65 लाख िƓं टल है।             
531                                                      

भारत सरकार ने आईसीएआर-भारतीय ŵीअɄ अनुसंधान सं˕ान (आईआईएमआर), 
हैदराबाद को "ŵीअɄ वैिʷक उǽृ ʼता कŐ ū" क े ŝप मŐ माɊता दी है। वैिʷक ˑर पर िमलेट्स पर 
अनुसंधान सहयोग और जन जागŝकता को मजबूत करने क े िलए जी20 अȯƗता क े बाद से एक 
नई पहल, " िमलेट्स ए ं ड अदर ए ं िशए ं ट ŤेɌ इंटरनेशनल įरसचŊ इिनिशएिटव 
(एम.ए.एच.ए.आर.आई.एस.एच.आई.- महिषŊ)" को आरं भ िकया गया है। 
हाल क े वषŘ मŐ, भारतीय क ृ िष अनुसंधान पįरषद (आईसीएआर) Ȫारा देश क े िविभɄ क ृ िष-
जलवायु Ɨेũों मŐ खेती क े िलए क ु ल 110 िमलेट िक˝Ő जारी की गई हœ। वषŊ 2014–25 क े दौरान, 40 
िमलेट िक˝Ő जो सूखा Ůभािवत Ɨेũ/ कम नमी वाले Ɨेũ/ जल की कमी या अिधकता वाले Ɨेũ/ कम 
वषाŊ वाले Ɨेũ मŐ खेती हेतु िकसानों क े िलए उपयुƅ हœ, को िवकिसत और जारी की गई हœ। अिधक 
उपज देने वाली तथा जलवायु-अनुक ू ल िमलेट िक˝ों क े िवकास करने क े साथ-साथ आईसीएआर–
भारतीय ŵीअɄ अनुसंधान सं˕ान (आईआईएमआर), हैदराबाद नॉलेज पाटŊनर क े ŝप मŐ िविभɄ 
राǛ िमलेट िमशनों/क ृ िष िवभागों को साथ सहयोग कर रहा है, िजसका उȞेʴ िमलेट्स से होने 
ˢा˖ लाभों तथा जलवायु पįरवतŊन से Ůभािवत किठन पįरİ˕ितयों मŐ इनकी अनुक ू ल खेती क े 
Ůित जन-जागŝकता बढ़ाना है। 
राʼŌीय खाȨ सुरƗा एवं पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) क े तहत, बीज से जुड़ी िविभɄ 
गितिविधयों क े िलए िवȅीय सहायता उपलɩ कराई/Ůदान की जाती है तािक िकसानों क े िलए 
पयाŊɑ माũा मŐ बीज उपलɩ हो सकŐ । 
 
***** 
532                                                      

 
 
भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
तारारककत प्रश् न सर. *214 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
वस्‍त र पर धार ान क ि ्नयामत ्गि ्वराव  
 
*214. श्री्ती रजनी अशोकराव धाा  :  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बतानि की क ृ धा करगिवि ककिः 
(क) वर्म 2025 ्गि वस्‍त र  वर धार ान क ि  ्नयामत ्गि ककतनी ्वराव  िजम की वई है; 
(ख) इसक ि  ्   कौन सि कारक ्जम् ्ििार ह ; 
(व) इससि सवाम् क प्रभा्वत राज् य कौन सि ह ; 
(घ) इसका  घु वस्‍त र इकाइयपर धर क् या प्रभाव धा ा है; पर 
(ङ) ्नयामत प्र्तस्‍त ध ाम्‍ ्कता को धुनजी्वमत करनि क ि ्   क् या कि् ाएा  व  ह ?  
 
ा्‍ तर 
वस्‍त र ्ररी  
(श्री ्वारराज ससरह) 
(क) सि (ङ):  क ्ववरण सभा ध   धर रख किया वया है।  
 
 
 
 
 
  
533                                                      

 
वस्‍त र पर धार ान क ि  ्नयामत ्गि ्वराव  क ि  सरबर  ्गि श्री्ती रजनी अशोकराव धाा   द्वारा किनारक 19.12.2025 को 
धूछि जानि वा ि राज् य सभा तारारककत प्रश्न सरख्या *214 क ि  सरिभम ्गि ्ववरण।  
(क) सि (घ): भारत का वस्‍त र पर धार ान का ्नयामत जनवरी-नवरबर, 2025 क ि  िौरान 32,560.04 ््् यन 
अ्िारकी डॉ र था, जो ्धछ ि वर्म की इसी अव्  क ि  िौरान िजम कक  व  32,474.88 ््् यन अ्िारकी डॉ र की 
तु ना ्गि 0.26% की ्ा्ू ी वृ्ि िजम करता है। (स्रोत: नवरबर 2025 का किक  ्स्‍त ्ि -डीजीसीआई स/वा्णज्य 
्वभाव)। ्नयामत ्ारव पर आधू्तम की  क प्रकिया है पर यह अरतरराष्ट्रीय बाजारपर ्गि प्रच् त वै्िक ्ारव की 
्स्‍तथ्त/्रिी, ऑडमर ् ो,  ॉ्ज्स्‍त क पर  ैारफ पर व्याधार नी्तयपर जैसि कारकपर धर ्नभमर करता है। 
 
(ङ): सरकार भारतीय वस्‍त र पर धार ान क्षिर को बढावा ििनि पर इसकी प्र्तस्‍तध ाम को बढानि क ि  ्   ्व्भन्न 
योजनाओं/धह पर को किया्ववत कर रही है। प्र्ुख योजनाओं/धह पर ्गि  क आ ु्नक ,  कीक ृत, ्वि स्‍ततरीय वस्‍त र 
अवसररचना बनानि क ि ्   धी ् ्िवा  कीक ृ त वस्‍त र क्षिर पर अधैर  धाक म  (PM MITRA) योजना; बा ि धै्ानि धर 
्व्न्ामण को बढावा ििनि पर प्र्तस्‍तध ाम बढानि क ि  ्    ् ् फ फ ै ्िक,  ् ् फ अधैर  पर तकनीकी वस्त्रपर 
(Manmade Fabric & Apparel and Technical Textile) धर फोकस करनि वा ी ा्‍धािन सम् ब ि प्रो्‍साहन 
(PLI) योजना; अनुसर ान नवाचार पर ्वका स, सरव मन पर बाजार ्वकास धर फोकस करनि वा ा राष्ट्रीय तकनीकी 
वस्त्र ््शन (NTTM); स्थम (SAMARTH)-्ारव आ ाारत, प् िस्गि  ाव्ुख, कौश  कायमि् प्रिान करनि क ि  ाद्दिश्य सि 
वस्‍त र क्षिर ्गि क्ष्ता ्न्ामण की योजना ; रिश् ा्‍धािन ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा क ि  व्याधक ्वकास क ि  ्   ्सल् क स््र-2 (Silk 
Samagra-2); हथकरघा क्षिर क ि  ्   सरधूणम सहायता हितु राष्ट्रीय हथकरघा ्वकास कायमि् शा््  है। वस्त्र ्ररा य 
हस्‍तत्शल्ध को बढावा ििनि क ि ्   राष्ट्रीय हस्‍तत्शल्ध ्वकास कायमि् पर व्याधक हस्‍तत्शल्ध क् स्‍त र ्वकास योजना 
भी किया्ववत कर रहा है। 
 
सरकार का ाद्दिश्य वस्त्र पर धार ान क्षिर ्गि 40 फोकस ििशपर क ि  ्ाध्य् सि ्नयामत ्गि ्व्व ता को बढावा ििना 
है। सरकार नि अधनि व्याधाारक भावीिारपर क ि साथ 15 ्ुक्त व्याधार स्झौतपर ( FTA) पर 6 अ् ्ावय व्याधार 
स्झौतपर (PTA) धर हस्‍तताक्षर कक  ह । ्नयामत प्र्तस्‍तध ाम को, राज्य पर क गि द्रीय करपर पर  िवी की छू  (RoSCTL- 
Rebate of State and Central Taxes and Levies ) पर ्नयाम ्तत ा्‍धािपर धर शुल्क पर करपर की छू  
(RoDTEP- Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products ) जैसी योजनाओं  क ि ्ाध्य् सि 
सहायता प्रिान की जाती है। इसक ि  अ ावा, सरकार नि ट्रिड फाइनगिस , ्ाक े    क्सिस, िारसडरव पर क र प् ायरस क ि  ्   
NIRYAT PROTSAHAN पर NIRYAT DISHA क ि  ज़ार   ावू कक  व   क्सधो म प्र्ोशन ््शन पर 
 क्सधो मसम क ि  ्   ि ि ्ड  वारर ी स्‍तकी् (CGSE- Credit Guarantee Scheme for Exporters) को ्रज़ूरी िी है, 
जो 100% ि ि ्ड  वारर ी ििती है पर खासकर MSMEs को फायिा धहरचाती है।  
 
**** 
 
534                                                      

भारत सरकार          राÏय सभा 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय                             तारांǑकत Ĥæ न सं. *215   
वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग  
 
Ǒदनांक 19 Ǒदसंबर 2025 को उ× तर Ǒदये जाने के  िलए 
         ओǑडशा से Ǒकए जाने वाले िनया[त को बढ़ावा देना 
 
*215  Įी शुभाशीष खुंǑटया:  
Èया वाǔणÏय और उƭोग मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे Ǒक:  
 
(क) Èया सरकार पारादȣप और धामरा मɅ िनया[त अवसंरचना का ǒवèतार करने का ǒवचार रखती है;  
(ख) एक ǔजला एक उ×पाद (ओडȣओपी) योजना के अंतग[त ओǑडशा राÏय से िनया[त कȧ जाने वाली 
Ĥमुख वèतुएँ कौन-कौन सी हɇ:  
(ग) पुरȣ, कटक, भुवनेƳर और बालासोर जैसे ǔजलɉ क े  सूêम, लघु और मÚयम उƭम (एमएसएमई) 
क े  िनया[तकɉ को Ǒकतनी सहायता Ĥदान कȧ गई है;  
(घ) ओǑडशा क े  ǒविशƴ उ×पादɉ के िलए भौगोिलक संकेतक (जीआई टैग) को बढ़ावा Ǒदए जाने कȧ 
ǔèथित Èया है; और  
(ङ) ओǑडशा क े और अिधक ǔजलɉ को 'िनया[त क ेÛġ के Ǿप मɅ ǔजले' पहल मɅ शािमल करने के  िलए 
Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ?  
 
उƣर 
वाǔणÏ य एवं उƭोग मंğी 
(Įी पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क) से (ड.) : एक ǒववरण सदन के पटल पर रखा गया है। 
 
 
 
****** 
535                                                      

Įी शुभाशीष खुंǑटया Ʈारा  “ओǑडशा से Ǒकए जाने वाले िनया[त को बढ़ावा देना ”  क े  संबंध मɅ पूछे 
गए Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर क े  िलए िनयत राÏय सभा तारांǑकत Ĥư संÉया *215 क े  भाग 
(क) से (ड.) क े  उƣर मɅ उǔãलǔखत ǒववरण: 
 
(क):  पारादȣप बंदरगाह ओǑडशा राÏय का Ĥमुख बंदरगाह है। पारादȣप बंदरगाह Ĥािधकरण ने बताया है 
Ǒक ǒपछले 5 वषɟ मɅ बंदरगाह कȧ ¢मता पहले हȣ 55 िमिलयन टन Ĥित वष[  तक बढ़ा दȣ गई है और अब 
यह ¢मता 289 िमिलयन टन Ĥित वष[ है। साथ हȣ, 25 िमिलयन टन Ĥित वष[ कȧ ¢मता वाले एक नए 
डॉक कॉàÜलेÈस, अथा[त् वेèटन[ डॉक का ǒवकास काय[ चल रहा है और इसके  वष[ 2028 तक पूरा होने कȧ 
उàमीद है। यह भी बताया गया है Ǒक आगामी िनयोǔजत पǐरयोजनाओं के आधार पर, बंदरगाह कȧ 
¢मता वष[ 2030 तक 350 िमिलयन टन Ĥित वष[ से अिधक हो जाएगी। Ĥमुख बंदरगाहɉ के  अलावा अÛय 
बंदरगाह (गैर-Ĥमुख बंदरगाह) राÏय सरकार क े Ĥशासिनक िनयंğण मɅ हɇ। धामरा ओǑडशा राÏय का एक 
काय[रत गैर-Ĥमुख बंदरगाह है। 
 
(ख): ‘एक ǔजला एक उ×पाद’ (ओडȣपीओपी) उƭोग एवं आंतǐरक åयापार संवध[न ǒवभाग 
(डȣपीआईआईटȣ) कȧ एक पहल है ǔजसका उƧेæय देश क े Ĥ×येक ǔजले से कम से कम एक उ×पाद का 
चयन, ĦांǑडंग और उसे बढ़ावा देना है ताǑक सभी ¢ेğɉ मɅ समĒ ǒवकास को बढ़ावा Ǒदया जा सके। 
ओǑडशा राÏय ने राÏय क े 30 ǔजलɉ से 56 उ×पादɉ कȧ पहचान कȧ है। ये 56 उ×पाद सात अलग-अलग 
¢ेğɉ के अंतग[त आते हɇ, जैसे कृǒष (23); खाƭ Ĥसंèकरण (1); हèतिशãप (17); हथकरघा (5); 
ǒविनमा[ण (3); समुġȣ (6) और वƸ (1)। ओǑडशा राÏय ने सूिचत Ǒकया है Ǒक समुġȣ उ×पाद, हथकरघा 
एवं सूती उ×पाद, हèतिशãप उ×पाद, चावल, Ēेनाइट उ×पाद, एãयुमीिनयम इंगोट और काजू ओǑडशा से 
ओडȣपी के अंतग[त Ĥमुख िनया[त योÊय वèतुएं हɇ। 
 
(ग):  भारत सरकार ने देश भर मɅ लघु एवं मÚयम उƭम िनया[तकɉ के  िलए कई कदम उठाए हɇ। ǔजनमɅ 
पुरȣ, कटक, भुवनेƳर और बालासोर जैसे ǔजले शािमल हɇ। सरकार Ʈारा लघु एवं मÚयम उƭम िनया[तकɉ 
को Ĥदान Ǒकए गए åयापक समथ[न का ǒववरण अनुलÊनक-I मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
 
(घ): भौगोिलक संकेत (जीआई) उ×पादɉ का पंजीकरण और अनुमोदन भौगोिलक संकेत वèतु (पंजीकरण 
और संर¢ण) अिधिनयम, 1999 और उसके अंतग[त िनिम[त िनयमɉ Ʈारा िनयंǒğत होता है। उƭोग एवं 
आंतǐरक åयापार संवध[न ǒवभाग (डȣपीआईआईटȣ) भौगोिलक संकेत (जीआई) को राƶीय और अंतरा[ƶीय 
èतर पर समĒ Ǿप से बढ़ावा देता है, न Ǒक राÏय-वार। सरकार भारतीय जीआई उ×पादɉ कȧ अंतरा[ƶीय 
पहचान बढ़ाने के  िलए कई पहल कर रहȣ है। जीआई सुर¢ा एवं माÛयता Ĥावधानɉ को चल रहȣ åयापार 
वाता[ओं मɅ शािमल Ǒकया जा रहा है, और जीआई उ×पादकɉ को बिमɍघम शरद मेला और बिल[न बाजार 
जैसे अंतरा[ƶीय åयापार मेलɉ मɅ भाग लेने क े िलए सहायता दȣ जा रहȣ है। उपभोƠाओं मɅ जागǾकता 
बढ़ाने और Ħांड बनाने के  िलए कई ÜलेटफॉमȾ के  माÚयम से छोटȣ Ĥचारा×मक ǑफãमɅ बनाई गई हɇ और 
Ĥसाǐरत कȧ गई हɇ। जीआई उ×पादɉ को जीआरएटȣक े  राजनियक सàमेलन जैसे मंचɉ पर भी Ĥदिश[त 
Ǒकया जाता है, और 419 जीआई कȧ Ǒडǔजटल सूची ǒवदेशɉ मɅ ǔèथत भारतीय दूतावासɉ को ǒवतǐरत कȧ 
गई है। ओǑडशा राÏय से पंजीकृत जीआई-टैग उ×पादɉ कȧ कुल संÉया 26 है, ǔजसका ǒववरण अनुलÊनक-
II मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
 
एपीईडȣए (कृǒष एवं Ĥसंèकृत खाƭ उ×पाद िनया[त ǒवकास Ĥािधकरण) ने ओǑडशा से एपीईडȣए Ʈारा 
िनधा[ǐरत जीआई-टैग वाले उ×पादɉ क े  िनया[त को बढ़ावा देने के िलए कदम उठाए हɇ।  वष[ 2025-26 क े 
536                                                      

दौरान (अब तक) िनया[तकɉ को वैǔƳक बाजार मɅ जीआई उ×पादɉ सǑहत ǒविभÛन Ĥकार क े  उ×पादɉ को 
बढ़ावा देने के िलए Ĥो×साǑहत करने हेतु पंġह (15) िनया[त-उÛमुख ¢मता ǒवकास काय[Đम आयोǔजत 
Ǒकए गए। इसक े  अलावा, जीआई-टैग वाले उ×पादɉ को बढ़ावा देने क े  िलए, एपीईडȣए ने हाल हȣ मɅ 
जीआई-टैग वाले नयागढ़ कांटेइमुंडȣ बɇगन और ओǑडशा खजूरȣ गुड़ा के यूएई को िनया[त को सुगम बनाया 
है। 
 
(ड.): ǔज़ला िनया[त कɅġ (डȣईएच) पहल क े  तहत, वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग क े  ǒवदेश åयापार महािनदेशालय का 
उƧेæय आ×मिनभ[र भारत िमशन, मेक इन इंǑडया फॉर द वãड[ और वोकल फॉर लोकल क े  अनुǾप, राÏयɉ 
और ǔज़लɉ को मह×वपूण[ Ǒहतधारकɉ के  Ǿप मɅ शािमल करक े  जमीनी èतर पर िनया[त Ĥो×साहन, 
ǒविनमा[ण और रोजगार सृजन करना है। डȣईएच को अगèत 2019 मɅ शुǾ Ǒकया गया था और इसे ǒवदेश 
åयापार नीित (एफटȣपी) 2023 क े  अÚयाय 3 के तहत अिधसूिचत Ǒकया गया है। इस पहल का उƧेæय 
Ĥ×येक ǔज़ले कȧ ¢मता और ǒवǒवधतापूण[ पहचान का उपयोग करक े  संèथागत तंğ जैसे राÏय िनया[त 
संवध[न सिमितयɉ (एसईपीसी) और ǔज़ला िनया[त संवध[न सिमितयɉ (डȣईपीसी) क े  माÚयम से पहचाने 
गए माल और सेवाओं के िनया[त को बढ़ावा देना है, जो िनया[त संवध[न का समथ[न करते हɇ और देश भर 
मɅ संतुिलत ¢ेğीय ǒवकास के िलए बाधाओं को दूर करते हɇ। डȣईएच के तहत, िनàनिलǔखत काय[ Ǒकए 
गए हɇ: (i) देश भर क े  734 ǔजलɉ मɅ िनया[त ¢मता वाले उ×पादɉ/सेवाओं कȧ पहचान कȧ गई है (ओǑडशा 
राÏय मɅ डȣईएच क े  तहत पहचाने गए उ×पादɉ/सेवाओं कȧ सूची अनुलÊनक-III मɅ दȣ गई है); (ii) सभी 
36 राÏयɉ/कɅġ शािसत Ĥदेशɉ मɅ एसईपीसी और डȣईपीसी का गठन Ǒकया जा चुका है; (iii) 28 राÏयɉ/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğɉ  मɅ राÏय िनया[त रणनीित तैयार कȧ गई है; (iv) 701 ǔजलɉ मɅ डȣईपीसी कȧ बैठकɅ आयोǔजत 
कȧ जा चुकȧ हɇ; (v) 590 ǔजलɉ क े िलए ǔजला िनया[त काय[ योजनाएं तैयार कȧ गई हɇ, ǔजनमɅ से 249 
ǔजलɉ को डȣईपीसी Ʈारा औपचाǐरक Ǿप से अिधसूिचत Ǒकया गया है। इन योजनाओं मɅ ǔजलɉ से िनया[त 
को बढ़ावा देने के  िलए एक åयापक रणनीित शािमल है। 
 
******** 
537                                                      

Įी शुभाशीष खुंǑटया Ʈारा  “ओǑडशा से Ǒकए जाने वाले िनया[त को बढ़ावा देना ”  क े  संबंध मɅ पूछे 
गए Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर क े  िलए िनयत राÏय सभा तारांǑकत Ĥư संÉया *215 क े  भाग 
(ग) क े  उƣर मɅ उǔãलǔखत ǒववरण: 
अनुलÊनक-I 
सरकार Ʈारा लघु एवं मÚयम उƭम िनया[तकɉ को Ĥदान कȧ गई सहायता का ǒववरण 
 (1)  कɅ ġ सरकार ने िनया[तकɉ क े िलए ऋण गारंटȣ योजना (सीजीएसई) शुǾ कȧ है। इसके अंतग[त 
नेशनल ĐेǑडट गारंटȣ Ěèटȣ कंपनी िलिमटेड (एनसीजीटȣसी) Ʈारा मɅबर लɅǑडंग इंèटȣÒयूशÛस (एमएलआई) 
को 100% ऋण गारंटȣ कवरेज Ĥदान Ǒकया जाएगा। इससे एमएसएमई सǑहत पाğ िनया[तकɉ को 20,000 
करोड़ ǽपये तक कȧ अितǐरƠ ऋण सुǒवधाएँ Ĥदान कȧ जा सकɅगी। इससे तरलता मɅ वृǒƨ होगी, सुचाǾ 
åयावसाियक संचालन सुिनǔƱत होगा और आ×मिनभ[र भारत कȧ Ǒदशा मɅ भारत कȧ Ĥगित को बल 
िमलेगा। 
 
(2) कɅ ġ सरकार ने िनया[त संवध[न िमशन (ईपीएम) को भी मंज़ूरȣ दे दȣ है—यह एक Ĥमुख पहल 
हɇ ǔजसकȧ घोषणा कɅġȣय बजट 2025-26 मɅ भारत कȧ िनया[त Ĥितèपधा[×मकता को मज़बूत करने के 
िलए कȧ गई थी, ǒवशेष Ǿप से एमएसएमई, Ĥथमागत िनया[तक और Įम-गहन ¢ेğɉ क े  िलए। यह 
िमशन ǒवƣ वष[ 2025-26 से ǒवƣ वष[ 2030-31 तक 25,060 करोड़ ǽपये के कुल पǐरåयय के  साथ 
िनया[त संवध[न के  िलए एक åयापक, लचीला और Ǒडǔजटल Ǿप से संचािलत ĥे मवक[ Ĥदान करेगा। 
ईपीएम कई खंǑडत योजनाओं से एक एकल, पǐरणाम-आधाǐरत और अनुकूली तंğ कȧ ओर एक 
काय[नीितक पǐरवत[न का Ĥतीक है जो वैǔƳक åयापार चुनौितयɉ और िनया[तकɉ कȧ उभरती अपे¢ाओं पर 
शीēतापूण[ ĤितǑĐया दे सकता है। 
 
(3) सूêम, लघु और मÚयम उƭम मंğालय Ʈारा काया[ǔÛवत कȧ जा रहȣ अंतरा[ƶीय सहयोग योजना के 
अंतग[त, ǒवदेशɉ मɅ आयोǔजत अंतरा[ƶीय Ĥदश[िनयɉ/मेलɉ/Đे ता-ǒवĐेता बैठकɉ मɅ एमएसएमई क े 
दौरे/भागीदारȣ को सुǒवधाजनक बनाने और Ĥौƭोिगकȧ उÛनयन, आधुिनकȧकरण, संयुƠ उƭम आǑद क े 
उƧेæय से भारत मɅ अंतरा[ƶीय सàमेलनɉ/सेिमनार/काय[शालाओं के आयोजन के िलए पाğ कɅ ġȣय/राÏय 
सरकार के संगठनɉ और उƭोग संघɉ को Ĥितपूित[ के  आधार पर ǒवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। 
इसके  अलावा, पहली बार सूêम और लघु िनया[तकɉ को िनया[त िशपमɅट पर िनया[त संवध[न पǐरषदɉ 
(ईपीसी) के साथ पंजीकरण-सह-सदèयता Ĥमाणन (आरसीएमसी), िनया[त बीमा Ĥीिमयम और िनया[त क े 
िलए परȣ¢ण और गुणवƣा Ĥमाणन पर हुए लागतɉ कȧ Ĥितपूित[ Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। एमएसएमई मंğालय 
ने इन ǑĐयाकलापɉ कȧ Ĥितपूित[ क े  िलए काया[Ûवयन एजɅिसयɉ के  Ǿप मɅ 21 ईपीसी, िनया[त ऋण गारंटȣ 
िनगम िलिमटेड (ईसीजीसी) और राƶीय लघु उƭोग िनगम िलिमटेड (एनएसआईसी) क े  साथ समझौता 
£ापन पर हèता¢र Ǒकए हɇ। सूêम, लघु और मÚयम उƭम मंğालय ने अपने ¢ेğीय संगठनɉ नामत: 
एमएसएमई-ǒवकास और सुǒवधा काया[लयɉ, एमएसएमई Ĥौƭोिगकȧ कɅ ġɉ और एमएसएमई परȣ¢ण कɅ ġɉ मɅ 
65 िनया[त सुǒवधा कɅġ (ईएफसी) èथाǒपत करके  एमएसएमई ¢ेğ मɅ िनया[त Ĥो×साहन के  िलए एक 
समǒप[त सहायता Ĥणाली ǒवकिसत कȧ है। 
 
ओǑडशा मɅ, कटक ǔèथत एमएसएमई-डȣएफओ और भुवनेƳर ǔèथत सɅĚल टूल Ǿम एंड Ěेिनंग सɅटर 
(सीटȣटȣसी) पर दो ईएफसी èथाǒपत Ǒकए गए हɇ, ǔजनक े  माÚयम से वष[ 2019-20 से 2024-25 क े  दौरान 
कुल 253 एमएसएमई ने सेवाओं का लाभ उठाया है। 
 
538                                                      

(4) डȣपीआईआईटȣ Ʈारा काया[ǔÛवत राƶीय औƭोिगक गिलयारɉ ǒवकास काय[Đम (एनआईसीडȣपी) के 
अंतग[त, राÏय एसपीवी, एमएसएमई सǑहत िनवेशकɉ के िलए अनुकूल राजकोषीय और नीितगत उपायɉ 
का अनुपालन करते हुए, भूिम आवंटन नीित के अनुसार भूिम आवंǑटत करते हɇ। एसपीवी Ʈारा संभाǒवत 
िनवेशकɉ (एमएसएमई सǑहत) को कई छ ू ट भी दȣ जाती हɇ, ǔजनमɅ एंकर/अलȸ-बड[ िनवेशकɉ को छ ू ट; 
लीज़ Ĥीिमयम भुगतान मɅ लचीलापन; ǑडफरɅिशयल लीज़ अविध का ǒवकãप आǑद शािमल हɇ। 
 
(5) समुġȣ उ×पाद िनया[त ǒवकास Ĥािधकरण (एàपीडा) ǒविशƴ मूãयविध[त समुġȣ उ×पादɉ के  िलए 
Ĥौƭोिगकȧ ǒवकास (टȣडȣएसवीएमपी) योजना क े  माÚयम से एमएसएमई िनया[तकɉ को समुġȣ खाƭ 
मूãयवध[न अवसंरचना मɅ िनवेश मɅ सहायता Ĥदान करता है, जो एमएसएमई इकाइयɉ को Ĥाथिमकता के 
साथ ǒवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान करता है। यह समावेशी ǒवकास को बढ़ावा देता है, समुġȣ खाƭ Ĥसंèकरण 
पाǐरǔèथितकȧ तंğ को मजबूत करता है और भारत से मूãयविध[त समुġȣ उ×पादɉ क े  िनया[त को 
Ĥो×साǑहत करता है। 
 
(6) भारत Ěेड नेट (बीटȣएन), ǔजसकȧ घोषणा कɅġȣय बजट 2025 मɅ कȧ गई थी, वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग 
मंğालय के अंतग[त डȣजीएफटȣ Ʈारा एक Ĥमुख Ǒडǔजटल साव[जिनक अवसंरचना है। इसका उƧेæय åयापार 
दèतावेजɉ का Ǒडǔजटलीकरण, िनया[त ǒवƣ तक पहुँच मɅ सुधार और भारत के åयापार पाǐरǔèथितकȧ तंğ 
को वैǔƳक मानकɉ क े  साथ एकȧकृत करना है। यह पहल सरल, कागज़ रǑहत दèतावेज़ीकरण को स¢म 
बनाकर, अनुपालन बोझ को कम करके और वैǔƳक èतर पर माÛयता ĤाƯ तेज़, सुरǔ¢त åयापार लेनदेन 
को सुगम बनाकर एमएसएमई कȧ Ĥितèपधा[×मकता को बढ़ाती है। इससे िनया[त ǒवƣ तक आसान पहुँच 
िमलती है और एमएसएमई को åयापार कȧ बाधाओं को अिधक कुशलता से दूर करने मɅ मदद िमलती है। 
 
(7) ǔजलɉ को िनया[त कɅġ (डȣईएच) और ई-कॉमस[ िनया[त कɅ ġ (ईसीईएच) जैसे जमीनी èतर क े 
काय[Đमɉ कȧ शुǾआत से एमएसएमई, èटाट[-अप और कारȣगरɉ को कम लागत पर और सरल िनया[त 
ĤǑĐयाओं के साथ अंतरा[ƶीय बाजारɉ तक पहुंचने मɅ मदद िमलती है। 
 
(8) राƶीय लॉǔजǔèटÈस नीित और पीएम गित शǒƠ के  माÚयम से अवसंरचना को मजबूत करने से 
मãटȣमॉडल कनेǔÈटǒवटȣ बढ़ती है और लॉǔजǔèटÈस लागत कम होती है, ǔजससे आपूित[ Įृंखला कȧ 
बाधाओं को कम करके एमएसएमई िनया[तकɉ को सीधे लाभ होता है। 
 
(9) वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग के  अधीन भारतीय िनया[त ऋण गारंटȣ िनगम िलिमटेड (ईसीजीसी), जो एक िनया[त 
ऋण एजɅसी है, वाǔणǔÏयक और राजनीितक कारणɉ से ǒवदेशी खरȣदारɉ Ʈारा भुगतान न Ǒकए जाने के 
जोǔखमɉ के  ǒवǾƨ िनया[तकɉ को ऋण बीमा कवर Ĥदान करती है, ǔजससे भारतीय िनया[तकɉ, ǒवशेष Ǿप 
से लघु एवं मÚयम उƭमɉ (एमएसएमई), को वैǔƳक बाजारɉ मɅ आ×मǒवƳास क े  साथ Ĥवेश करने कȧ 
शǒƠ िमलती है। ईसीजीसी िनया[तक-ऋणकता[ओं को िनया[त ऋण देने मɅ जोǔखमɉ के  ǒवǾƨ बɇकɉ क े  िलए 
िनया[त ऋण बीमा (ईसीआईबी) भी Ĥदान करती है। ईसीआईबी िनया[तकɉ को Ǒकफायती और पया[Ư ऋण 
कȧ उपलÞधता को सुगम बनाते हɇ। कंपनी का मुÉयालय मुंबई मɅ है और इसक े  चार ¢ेğीय काया[लय है 
और संपूण[ भारत मɅ 46 शाखा काया[लय हɇ, ǔजनमɅ से एक भुवनेƳर मɅ है जो ओǑडशा मɅ िनया[तकɉ और 
बɇकɉ के  िलए èथानीय संपक[ ǒबंदु के Ǿप मɅ काय[ करता है। भारत कȧ िनया[त गित को बनाए रखने और 
भारतीय िनया[तकɉ, ǒवशेष Ǿप से एमएसएमई, को सहयोग Ĥदान करने क े  िलए, ईसीजीसी ने कई पहलɅ 
कȧ हɇ। 
 
539                                                      

(10) खाƭ Ĥसंèकरण उƭोग मंğालय (एमओएफपीआई) देश मɅ नए सूêम खाƭ Ĥसंèकरण उƭमɉ कȧ 
èथापना/ उÛनयन क े िलए ǒवƣीय, तकनीकȧ और åयावसाियक सहायता Ĥदान करने हेतु एक कɅġ 
Ĥायोǔजत èकȧम " Ĥधानमंğी सूêम खाƭ Ĥसंèकरण उƭम उÛनयन योजना (पीएमएफएमई) योजना" का 
काया[Ûवयन कर रहा है। यह योजना 10,000 करोड़ ǽपये क े  पǐरåयय क े  साथ वष[ 2020-21 से 2025-26 
तक पǐरचािलत है। पीएमएफएमई योजना को सूêम उƭमɉ Ʈारा सामना कȧ जाने वाली चुनौितयɉ का 
समाधान करने क े  िलए Ǒडजाइन Ǒकया गया है। इस योजना का उƧेæय खाƭ Ĥसंèकरण उƭोग क े 
असंगǑठत ¢ेğ मɅ सूêम उƭमɉ कȧ Ĥितèपधा[×मकता को बढ़ाना और इस ¢ेğ के  उÛनयन को Ĥो×साǑहत 
करना है। यह योजना पाğ पǐरयोजना लागत के 35% तक ऋण-िलंÈड अनुदान, 40,000 ǽपये तक कȧ 
Ĥारंिभक पूंजी, लाभािथ[यɉ के  िलए ¢मता िनमा[ण और इकाइयɉ क े  उÛनयन के  िलए हɇडहोǔãडंग सहायता 
Ĥदान करती है। ओǑडशा राÏय मɅ सूêम खाƭ Ĥसंèकरण इकाइयɉ क े  िलए 2726 ऋण èवीकृत Ǒकए गए 
हɇ, ǔजसमɅ पुरȣ मɅ 309, ऋण, कटक मɅ 246 ऋण, भुवनेƳर मɅ 258 ऋण और बालासोर मɅ 160 ऋण 
शािमल हɇ। 
 
**** 
540                                                      

Įी शुभाशीष खुंǑटया Ʈारा  “ओǑडशा से Ǒकए जाने वाले िनया[त को बढ़ावा देना ’’  के संबंध मɅ पूछे गए 
Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर के  िलए िनयत राÏय सभा तारांǑकत Ĥư संÉया *215 क े  भाग (घ) क े  उƣर 
मɅ संदिभ[त अनुलÊनक। 
अनुलÊनक-II  
ओǑडशा राÏय से पंजीकृत जीआई-टैग उ×पादɉ का ǒववरण 
Đ. सं.  भौगोिलक संक े त वèतु भौगोिलक ¢ेğ 
1 कोटपाड़ हथकरघा कपड़ा हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
2 उड़ȣसा इकत  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
3 ǒपपली एǔÜलक वक[  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
4 कोणाक[ प×थर पर नÈकाशी 
(लोगो)  
हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
5 उड़ȣसा पÒटिचğा  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
6 खंडुआ साड़ȣ और कपड़े  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
7 गोपालपुर टसर फ ैǒĦÈस  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
8 धलाप×थर पदा[ और कपड़े  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
9 संबलपुरȣ बंधा साड़ȣ और कपड़े  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
10 बोमकाई साड़ȣ और कपड़े  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
11 हबसपुरȣ साड़ȣ और कपड़े  हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
12 बेरहामपुर पÒटा (फोडा क ुàभा) 
साड़ȣ और जोड़ा 
हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
13 गंजम क े वड़ा Ǿह िनिम[त ओǑडशा 
14 गंजम क े वड़ा फ ू ल कृǒष ओǑडशा 
15 उड़ȣसा पÒटिचğ (लोगो) हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
16 क ं धमाल हãदȣ  कृǒष ओǑडशा 
17 ओǑडशा रसगुãला  खाƭ सामĒी ओǑडशा 
18 ओǑडशा खजूरȣ गुड़  खाƭ सामĒी ओǑडशा 
19 ढɅकनाल मगजी  खाƭ सामĒी ओǑडशा 
20 ओǑडशा कȧ िसिमिलपाल कȧ 
चटनी  
खाƭ सामĒी ओǑडशा 
21 नयागढ़ कांतेइमुंडȣ बɇगन  कृǒष ओǑडशा 
22 कटक Ǿपा तारकासी (चांदȣ कȧ 
महȣन नÈकाशी) 
हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
23 कपाडगंडा : डुंगǐरया कɉध 
कढ़ाई शॉल 
हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
24 कɅ ġपाड़ा रसबली  खाƭ सामĒी ओǑडशा 
25 कोरापुट कलजीरा चावल कृǒष ओǑडशा 
26 लांǔजया कȧ पɅǑटंग सौरा 
(आईडȣआईटȣएएल), ओǑडशा  
हèतिशãप ओǑडशा 
 
**** 
541                                                      

Įी शुभाशीष खुंǑटया Ʈारा  “ओǑडशा से Ǒकए जाने वाले िनया[त को बढ़ावा देना”  के संबंध मɅ पूछे गए 
Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर के  िलए िनयत राÏय सभा तारांǑकत Ĥư संÉया *215 क े  भाग (घ) क े  उƣर 
मɅ संदिभ[त अनुलÊनक। 
                                                                                  अनुलÊनक-III  
ओǑडशा राÏय मɅ ǔजला िनया[त कɅ ġ पहल (डȣईएच) के तहत पहचाने गए उ×पादɉ/सेवाओं का ǒववरण 
 
Đ.सं. ओǑडशा का ǔजला  डȣईएच क े  अंतग[त िचǔÛहंत उ×पाद/सेवाएँ 
1. अंगुल  एãयुिमिनयम इंगोट, èटȣल इंगोटस 
2. बलांगीर  कपास, Üयाज 
3. बालासोर  टायर, पेपर और कोǾगेटेड बÈसे 
4. बारगढ़  हथकरघा 
5. भġक  चावल, मछली 
6. बौध  हथकरघा पÒटा साड़ȣ 
7. कटक  चांदȣ क े  महȣन सामान, मǔणयाबांधा क े  हथकरघा 
8. देवगढ़  तरबूज, संतरा, लीची 
9. ढɅकनाल  हèतिशãप, काजू 
10. गजपित  चावल, काजू कȧ िगरȣ, Ēेनाइट èलैब, हãदȣ का तेल 
11. गंजम  गंजम क े वड़ा Ǿह , गंजम क े वड़ा फू ल, हथकरघा, काजू, 
Ēेनाइट èलैब 
12. जाजपुर  प×थर कȧ नÈकाशी / हèतिशãप 
13. जगǔ×संहपुर  Üलाǔèटक उ×पाद 
14. झारसुगुडा  एãयुिमिनयम इंगोट, िमच[ और अदरक 
15. कालाहांडȣ  हèतिशãप (लकड़ȣ कȧ नÈकाशी) 
16. क ं धमाल  क ं धमाल हãदȣ, हãदȣ 
17. कɅ ġपाड़ा  सुनहरȣ घास उ×पाद 
18. कɅदुझार  खिनज पदाथ[ 
19. खोरधा (भुवनेƳर) समुġȣ उ×पाद 
20. कोरापुट  काजू  
21. मãकानिगरȣ  Ēेनाइट èलैब, हãदȣ, बाजरा, Ĥोसेèड मछली 
22. मयूरभंज  चावल 
23. नबरंगपुर  मÈका 
24. नयागढ़  पीतल और बेल धातु 
25. नुआपाड़ा  कपास, Üयाज 
26. पुरȣ ǒपपली एǔÜलक वक[ , हèतिशãप ( पÒटिचğ ) और समुġȣ 
उ×पाद 
27. रायगढ़  कपास इमली 
28. संबलपुर  संबलपुरȣ बंध साड़ȣ और कपड़े 
एãयुिमिनयम इंगोट और िमच[ 
29. सुबरनपुर  बोàक े ई साड़ȣ और कपड़े ( जीआईटैग ) 
30. सुंदरगढ़ (राउरक े ला) रȣफरैÈĚȣ सीमɅट 
 
 
**** 
542                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 216 का उƣर 
 
थोक मɅ सीमɅट कȧ ढुलाई हेतु मालभाड़े कȧ संरचना मɅ ͩकए गए पǐरवत[न 
 
*216 डॉ. सुमेर ͧसंह सोलंकȧ: 
  
 Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  कंटेनरɉ के माÚयम से थोक मɅ सीमɅट कȧ ढुलाई हेतु मालभाड़े कȧ संरचना मɅ Èया 
पǐरवत[न ͩकए गए हɇ;  
(ख)  संशोͬधत दर Ĥणालȣ कȧ Ĥमुख ͪवशेषताएं Èया हɇ;  
(ग)  Èया टɇक कंटेनरɉ और थोक सीमɅट टͧम[नलɉ के उपयोग को बढ़ावा देने हेतु कोई उपाय 
लागू ͩकए गए हɇ; और 
(घ)  यǑद हां, तो इन पहलɉ का थोक मɅ सीमɅट कȧ ढुलाई कȧ पǐरवहन लागत, संभार तंğ कȧ 
द¢ता तथा पया[वरणीय सतता पर Èया अपेͯ¢त Ĥभाव पड़ा है?                                    
                                     
 
                                    उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
                               (Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): ͪववरण सभा पटल पर रख Ǒदया गया है। 
 
***** 
  
543                                                      

थोक मɅ सीमɅट कȧ ढुलाई हेतु मालभाड़े कȧ संरचना मɅ ͩकए गए पǐरवत[नɉ के संबंध मɅ Ǒदनांक 
19.12.2025 को राÏय सभा मɅ डॉ. सुमेर ͧसंह सोलंकȧ के तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 216 के भाग (क) 
से (घ) के उƣर से संबंͬधत ͪववरण।  
 
(क) से (घ): Ǔनà न और मÚयम आय वग[ के पǐरवारɉ कȧ आवासीय आवæयकताओं पर Úयान 
कɅ Ǒġत करते हुए, भारतीय रेल ने टɇक कंटेनरɉ मɅ थोक मɅ सीमɅट पǐरवहन के ͧलए मालभाड़ा 
संरचना का यौिÈ त कȧकरण ͩकया है। नई नीǓत से रेल मॉडल Ǒहèसेदारȣ बढ़ाने, संभार तंğ कȧ 
द¢ता मɅ सुधार लाने और सतत पǐरवहन को बढ़ावा ͧमलने कȧ संभावना है। कंटेनरɉ मɅ पÖयɉ 
के पǐरवहन के ͧलए मालभाड़ा Ĥभार कंटेनर गाड़ी Ĥचालकɉ (सीटȣओ) ɮवारा बाजार कȧ िèथǓतयɉ 
के आधार पर Ǔनधा[ǐरत ͩकए जाते हɇ। कं टेनर गाͫड़यɉ के संचलन के ͧलए भारतीय रेल केवल 
ढुलाई Ĥभार लगाती है।  
 
  नई नीǓत का उɮदेæय सीमɅट पǐरवहन और इसके संभार तंğ मɅ सुधार लाना है, िजसकȧ 
मुÉ य ͪवशेषताएँ Ǔनà नानुसार हɇ:- 
 
1.  देश भर मɅ लंबी दूरȣ तक फैले उ×पादन कɅ ġɉ से उपभोग कɅ ġɉ तक थोक मɅ सीमɅट 
पǐरवहन के ͧलए ‘मेक इन इंͫडया’ उ×पाद के Ǿप मɅ ͪवशेष Ǿप से ͫडज़ाइन ͩकए गए 
टɇक कंटेनर शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। यह Ĥमुख शहरɉ, कèबɉ और Ēामीण Þ लॉक तक कम 
लागत पर सीमɅट पǐरवहन कȧ सुͪवधा Ĥदान करता है।  
 
2.  टɇक कं टेनर पर थोक मɅ सीमɅट के  पǐरवहन से Ǔनमा[ण èथलɉ/तैयार ͧमĮण कंĐȧट 
संयंğɉ मɅ सीमɅट कȧ त× काल उपलÞधता सुǓनिæचत हुई है। थोक मɅ सीमɅट पǐरवहन से 
इसे अÛय भीतरȣ èथानɉ पर भी आगे ͪवतरण के ͧलए ले जाया जा सकता है।  
  
3.  इससे बोरȣबंद सीमɅट के पारंपǐरक संचलन के  è थान पर कंटेनर आधाǐरत रेल संभार तंğ 
मɅ सुधार हुआ है, जो आɮयोपांत Ĥदूषण मुÈत है, बोरȣबंद सीमɅट से जुड़े धूल उ×सज[न, 
¢Ǔत और फैलाव समाÜत हुआ है। टɇक कंटेनर से सीमɅट कȧ मशीनीकृत ढुलाई और 
उतराई सुǓनिæचत हुई है, सामĒी कȧ ¢Ǔत, पैकेिजंग कचरे कȧ संभावना समाÜ त हुई है 
और काब[न फुटͪĤंट कम हुआ है। 
 
4.  नई थोक सीमɅट नीǓत लंबी दूरȣ के पǐरवहन के अनुǾप है, जो सकल टन ͩकलोमीटर 
(जीटȣकेएम) पर आधाǐरत है, िजसमɅ ͪवͧभÛन दूरȣ और भार èलैब समाÜ त ͩकए गए हɇ 
और वाèतͪवक दूरȣ पर एकसमान Ĥभार लगाए गए हɇ। इससे मãटȣ मॉडल संभार तंğ 
और उपयुÈत èथानɉ पर टͧम[नलɉ के सà हलाई कȧ योजना बनाना संभव हुआ है। 
 
  इस नीǓत के माÚयम से, भारतीय रेल मɅ पÖ यɉ के पǐरवहन के ͧलए कंटेनर ¢ेğ मɅ 
नवोÛ मेष को बढ़ावा देने का Ú यान रखा गया है, फलè वǾप भारतीय रेल, भारत मɅ एक èवÍछ, 
सुरͯ¢त, लागत Ĥभावी और अͬधक संधारणीय संभार तंğ Ĥदाता के Ǿप मɅ उभर रहȣ है। 
 
***** 
544                                                      

भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
ताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍217 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्‍ तर‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत 
 
घर एू‍बैटरी‍वििनर्ााण‍और‍पुनर्ाक्रण‍क्षर्ता‍ि ‍िए ‍सभहायता 
 
217 श्री‍सभांजय‍सभ ठः 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) भारत में इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहनों का तीव्र अं गीकरण और ववननमााण योजना -॥ (फ े म-॥) और 
पीएम इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहन संवर्ान योजना के अंतगात की गई प्रगनत का ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ख) क्या भारतीय संयुक्त उद्यम, इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहन (ईवी) को अपनाने और प्रौद्योगगकी के 
अंतरण में योगदान कर रहे हैं, यदद हां, तो तत्संबंर्ी ब्यौरा क्या है, यदद नहीं, तो इसके क्या 
कारण हैं; 
(ग) बैटरी के घरेलू ववननमााण और पुनर्ाक्रण क्षमता के ललए प्रदान की जा रही सहायता का 
ब्यौरा क्या है; और 
(घ) सरकार 'मेक इन इंडिया ' को बढावा देने हेतु इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहनों के आयात तथा 
स्थानीयकरण लक्ष्यों के मध्य ककस प्रकार संतुलन स्थावपत करने की योजना बना रही है, 
तत्संबंर्ी ब्यौरा क्या है? 
 
उत्‍ तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योग‍र्ांत्री 
(श्री‍ र्.‍डी.‍िुर्ारस्‍िार्ी) 
 
(ि) सभ  (घ):  वववरण सदन के पटल पर रख ददया गया है। 
. 
 
****** 
  
545                                                      

"घर एू‍बैटरी‍वििनर्ााण‍और‍पुनर्ाक्रण‍क्षर्ता‍ि ‍िए ‍सभहायता"‍ि ‍सभांबांध‍र्ें‍श्री‍सभांजय‍सभ ठ‍
द्िारा‍दिनाांि‍ 19.12.2025 ‍िो‍उत्तर‍ि न ‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत‍ राज्य‍सभा ा‍ताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सभां्‍या‍
217 ि ‍ा ाग‍(ि)‍सभ ‍(घ)‍ि ‍उत्तर‍र्ें‍सभांििा ात‍वििरण 
 
(ि):‍फ े म-II स्कीम 01.04.2019 से 31.03.2024 तक कायााक्ट्ववत की गई । फ े म-II स्कीम के 
अंतगात कुल 16,71,606 इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहनों ( ईवी) की बबक्री हुई, क्ट्जसमें 14,69,343 ई-दुपदहया, 
1,78,952 ई-नतपदहया तथा 23,311 ई-र्ौपदहया शालमल हैं। इसके अनतररक्त, इस स्कीम के तहत  
कुल 6,862 ई-बसों को स्वीकृनत प्रदान की गई है। स्कीम के अंतगात ईवी र्ाक्ट्जिंग अवसंरर्ना 
को भी समथान ददया गया है, क्ट्जसके तहत 9,332 र्ाक्ट्जिंग स्टेशनों को स्वीकृनत दी गई है। 
“पीएम ईवी ऐक्सेलरेशन स्कीम” नाम की कोई स्कीम अक्ट्स्तत्व में नहीं है। 
(ख): जी हााँ। ऑटोमोबबल और ऑटो घटक उद्योग हेतु पीएलआई स् कीम के तहत पंद्रह 
संयुक्त उद्यम कंपननयााँ अनुमोददत आवेदक हैं। इन संयुक्त उद्यम कंपननयों की सूर्ी 
अनुएग्नि पर है। 
(ग): भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय  ₹18,100 करोड़ के बजटीय पररव्यय के साथ उत्पादन -संबद्र् 
प्रोत्साहन स्कीम “राष्ट्िीय उवनत रसायन सेल ( एसीसी) बैटरी भंिारण कायाक्रम ” (पीएलआई-
एसीसी) को कायााक्ट्ववत कर रहा है , क्ट्जसका उद्देश्य 50 GWh क्षमता की एसीसी  बैटररयों के 
ललए घरेलू ववननमााण पाररतंत्र की स्थापना करना है। 
खान मंत्रालय ने महत्वपूणा खननजों के पुनर्ाक्रण को बढावा देने के ललए ₹1,500 करोड़ 
की प्रोत्साहन स्कीम को अगर्सूगर्त ककया है। यह प्रोत्साहन स्कीम राष्ट्िीय महत्वपूणा खननज 
लमशन का एक प्रमुख घटक है तथा इसका उद्देश्य द्ववतीयक स्रोतों से महत्वपूणा खननजों के 
पृथक्करण एवं उत्पादन हेतु देश में पुनर्ाक्रण क्षमता का ववकास करना है। इस स्कीम के 
अंतगात योग्य फीिस्टॉक स्रोतों में ई -कर्रा, प्रयुक्त ललगथयम-आयन बैटररयााँ (एलआईबी) तथा 
अवय स्क्रैप सामग्री शालमल हैं। 
(घ): मंत्रालय अपनी स्कीमों में घरेलू मूल्य संवर्ान की आवश्यकताओं तथा र्रणबद्र् 
ववननमााण कायाक्रम  के माध्यम से स्थानीयकरण को प्रोत्सादहत करता है। ऑटोमो बबल एवं 
ऑटो घटक उद्योग के  ललए पीएलआई स्कीम के अंतगात अननवाया घरेलू मूल्य संवर्ान 
(िीवीए) की शता के माध्यम से स्थानीयकरण को समथान ददया जाता है। स्कीम के अंतगात 
प्रोत्साहन प्राप्त करने हेतु आवेदकों को वयूनतम 50% िीवीए  प्राप्त करना आवश्यक है। 
पीएम ई -ड्राइव स्कीम र्रणबद्र् ववननमााण कायाक्रम ( पीएमपी) के माध्यम से 
स्थानीयकरण को अननवाया करती है , क्ट्जससे भारत सरकार की “मेक इन इंडिया ” पहल को 
बढावा लमलता है। 
546                                                      

"घर एू‍बैटरी‍वििनर्ााण‍और‍पुनर्ाक्रण‍क्षर्ता‍ि ‍िए ‍सभहायता"‍ि ‍सभांबांध‍र्ें ‍श्री सभांजय सभ ठ 
द्िारा दिनाांि 19.12.2025 िो राज्य सभा ा र्ें‍उत्तर‍ि न ‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत‍ ताराांकित प्रश्न सभां्‍या 217 
ि  ा ाग (ख) ि  उत्तर र्ें सभांििा ात अनुएग्नि  
पी एआई‍ऑटोर्ोबबए‍और‍ऑटो‍सभांघटि‍स्िीर्‍ि ‍तहत‍अनुर्ोदित‍आि िि‍‍सभांयुक्त‍
उद्यर् िांपिनयों‍िी‍सभूर्ी‍ 
क्र. सभां. आि िि‍िांपनी‍िा‍नार् श्र णी‍ प्रस्तावित‍उत्पाि 
1 असाही इंडिया ग्लास लल.  घटक र्ैंवपयन िाका ग्रीन यूवी कट ग्लास (िीजीजी) 
3.2 एमएम तक, आईआर कट 
ववंिशील्ि (पीवीबी + ग्लास) 
2 ऑटोमोदटव एक्सल्स लल. घटक र्ैंवपयन िैक्शन मोटर, ई-एक्सल 
3 दाना आनंद इंडिया प्राइवेट लल. घटक र्ैंवपयन ई-एक्सल, ई-डिफरेंलशयल असेंबली , 
िांस एक्सल  फॉर ईवी , टेलीमैदटक्स 
इत्यादद । 
4 िेल्फी-टीवीएस टेक्नोलॉजीज लल. घटक र्ैंवपयन 1800 बार और उससे ज़्यादा 
ऑपरेदटंग वाले सीआरिीआई  के ललए 
पंप, िैक्शन मोटर कंिोलर (इववटार 
असेंबली के साथ कववटार) इत्यादद । 
5 िेंसो टेन लमंिा इंडिया प्राइवेट 
लल. 
घटक र्ैंवपयन इवफोटेनमेंट ईसीयू 
6 महले आनंद थमाल लसस्टम्स 
प्राइवेट लल. 
घटक र्ैंवपयन इलेक्ट्क्िक कंप्रेसर (एयर और 
रेकिजरेंट) 
7 एर्एल मंिो आनंद इंडिया 
प्राइवेट लल.  (पूवा में, मांिो 
ऑटोमोदटव इंडिया प्राइवेट लल.) 
घटक र्ैंवपयन एिीएएस, ईसीयू  इत्यादद । 
8 मदरसन सुमी लसस्टम्स लल. घटक र्ैंवपयन हाई वोल्टेज हानेस, हाई वोल्टेज 
कनेक्टर इत्यादद । 
9 नैवपनो ऑटो एंि इलेक्िॉननक्स 
लल. 
घटक र्ैंवपयन िैक्शन मोटर कं िोलर, िीसी िीसी 
कववटार 
10 ननयोलाइट जेिकेिब्ल्यू 
लाइदटंग्स प्राइवेट लल. 
घटक र्ैंवपयन टेलीमैदटक्स, इलेक्िॉननक्स स्टेबबललटी 
प्रोग्राम (ईएसपी) इत्यादद । 
547                                                      

क्र. सभां. आि िि‍िांपनी‍िा‍नार् श्र णी‍ प्रस्तावित‍उत्पाि 
11 वपनेकल मोबबललटी सॉल्यूशंस 
प्राइवेट लल. 
र्ैंवपयन 
ओईएम 
ई-बसें, ई-नतपदहया एल5 इत्यादद । 
12 टाटा कलमंस प्राइवेट लल. घटक र्ैंवपयन बीएस6 अनुरूप फ्लेक्स फ्यूल इंजन 
13 टाटा कफकोसा ऑटोमोदटव 
लसस्टम्स प्राइवेट लल. 
घटक र्ैंवपयन पावर डिस्िीब्यूशन यूननट, िीसी- िीसी 
कववटार इत्यादद । 
14 टोयोटा इंिस्िीज इंजन इंडिया 
प्राइवेट लल. 
घटक र्ैंवपयन बीएस6 अनुरूप फ्लेक्स फ्यूल इंजन 
15 टोयोटा ककलोस्कर ऑटो पार्टास 
प्राइवेट लल. 
घटक र्ैंवपयन िांस एक्सल फॉर ईवी, ई-एक्सल 
****** 
 
548                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
ताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या *218 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
 
एआई‍ि े ‍क्षेत्र‍में‍युवाओां‍िो‍प्रकिक्षण‍प्रदान‍िरने‍हेतु‍योजनाए ां ‍‍ 
 
*218. श्री‍गोकवन्‍ दभाई‍लालजी‍भाई‍धोलकिया‍: 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क)  आि की स्थिनत क े  अिुसार क ृ नत्रम बुस्थिमत् ता (एआई) क े  क्षेत्र में नकतिे रोििार उपलब् ध हैं; 
(ख)  वर्ष 2030 तक इस क्षेत्र में नकतिे प्रनशनक्षत युवाओं की आवश् यकता है;   
(ि)  इस आवश् यकता को पूरा करिे हेतु सरकार की क्‍ या योििा है;  
 
(घ) सरकार क े  नवनभन् ि मंत्रालयों और नवभािों द्वारा इस क्षेत्र में क्‍ या  कारषवाई की िई है या क्‍ या योििाए ं  
नियास्थित की िा रही हैं; और  
 
(ड.) इस क्षेत्र में नवनभन् ि मंत्रालयों क े  साथ सामंिस् य नबठािे हेतु सरकार की क्‍ या प्रनतनिया है, तानक इस 
चुिौती का नमलकर सामिा नकया िा सक े? 
 
 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍‍ ् र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्योकगिी‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍अश्‍‍ वनी‍वैष्‍ णव) 
 
(ि)‍से‍(ड.):‍एक नववरण-पत्र सभा प्ल पर रख निया िया है । 
 
***** 
 
  
549                                                      

‘’एआई‍ि े ‍क्षेत्र‍में‍युवाओां‍िो‍प्रकिक्षण‍प्रदान‍िरने‍हेतु‍योजनाए ां’’‍ि े ‍सांबांध‍में‍कदनाांि‍19.12.2025‍
िो‍राज्यसभा‍में‍पूछ े ‍गए‍ताराांकित‍प्र‍‍ न‍सांख्‍ या‍*218‍ि े ‍उत्तर‍में‍उश्िश्ित‍कववरण‍पत्र 
**** 
 
(ि)‍से‍(ड.): भारत की िनत्रम बुस्थिमत् ता (एआई) रणिीनत माननीय प्रधानमंत्री िी क े  प्रौद्योनिकी को लोकतांनत्रक 
बिािे क े  विज़न पर आधाररत है। इसका उद्देश् य भारत-क ें वित चुनौवतयों का समाधान करना और एआई क े  क्षेत्र में 
अवसर और रोििार सृनित करना है। 
भारत का बढ़ता हुआ‍एआई प्रकतभा‍आधार‍ 
एआई से िुडे रोििार क े  अवसर कई क्षेत्रों जैसे आई्ी, नवनिमाषण, क ृ नर्, स् वास् ् य िेखरेख, शासि वयवस् था आनि 
में उपलब् ध हैं। जैसे-जैसे इन क्षेत्रों में एआई को िहराई से अपनाया जा रहा है, क ु शल पेशेवरों की मांग भी बढ़ रही 
है।   
भारत सरकार इसे स् वीकार करती है और इसने अपनी एआई पहलों को इसी विशा में संरेस्थखत नकया है। यह भारत क े  
एआई कायषबल क े  बारे में वैनिक स् तर पर नकए िए मूल् योकिों में भी विखाई िेता है। 
स्टैनफोर्ड एआई सूचकांक ररपोर्ड 2025 क े  अनुसार, भारत: 
• एआई प्रनतभा अनधग्रहण क े  मामले में यह िुवनया में सबसे आगे है, इसकी सालाना हायररंग िर लगभग 
33% है 
• एआई कौशल पैठ क े  मामले में यह िुवनया भर में शीर्ष िेशों में शानमल है 
• 2016 से एआई प्रनतभा संक ें द्रण क े  मामले में यहां तीन गुना से ज़्यािा की बढ़ोतरी िेखी गई है।  
स्टैनफोर्ड यूवनिवसडर्ी क े  ग्लोबल एआई िाइब्रेंसी र् ू ल में भारत शीर्ष तीन िेशों में शावमल है, जो एआई प्रनतभा और 
अवसंरचिा क े  क्षेत्र में इसकी बढ़ती हुई ताकत को िशाषता है। 
उद्योि िित क े  अनुमान क े  अिुसार, भारत का एआई प्रनतभा आधार 2027 तक िोगुना से ज़्यािा होने की उम्मीि है, 
जो लगभग 15% की नमनित वानर्षक वृस्थि िर से बढ़ रहा है। 
भारत का बढ़ता एआई प्रनतभा आधार वैनिक नवकासकताष भािीिारी में भी विखाई िेता है। भौिोनलक नवतरण  क े  
वहसाब से नि्हब एआई पररयोििाओं पर वैनिक र्ेर्ा क े  अनुसार, 2024 में भारत िुवनया भर में ि ू सरा सबसे बडा 
योििािकताष था, जो सभी एआई पररयोििाओं क े 19.9% क े  बराबर है। 
यह भारत क े  एआई नवकासकताष पाररस्थिनतकी तंत्र की िहराई को िशषता है। इंनडयाएआई वमशन क े  तहत बडे 
पैमाने पर एआई कौशलि, शोध और िवाचार पर सरकार क े  फोकस से भी यह सही सावबत होता है। 
एआई प्रनतभा पाइपलाइन क े  नवकास में मिि करने िाली भारत सरकार की नवनभन् ि पहलें इस प्रकार हैं: 
1. इंडियाएआई फ्यूचरस्किल्स 
यह इंवर्याएआई वमशन क े  स् तम् भों में से एक है, जहां एआई प्रनतभा और शोध पाइपलाइन क े  नवकास पर ध् याि क ें नद्रत 
नकया िाता है। 
• सरकार एआई से जुडे काम क े  वलए 500 पीएचडी नवद्वािों, 5,000 परास् िातकों और 8,000 स् िातकों को 
सहायता प्रिाि कर रही है 
• एआई, र्ेर्ा क्यूरेशन, एनोर्ेशन, क्लीवनंग और एप्लाइर् र्ेर्ा साइंस में कोसडिक ड  करने क े  वलए िाइनल् क े  
माध्यम से वर्यर-2 और वर्यर-3 शहरों में 27 इंवर्याएआई र्ेर्ा और एआई लैब स्थावपत वकए गए हैं। 
• 27 राज यों/संघ राज य क्षेत्रों क े  174 आईर्ीआई और पॉवलर्ेक्निक को अवतररक्त इंवर्याएआई र्ेर्ा और एआई 
लैब्स स्थावपत करने की मंजूरी िी गई है। 
  
550                                                      

2. फ्यूचरस्किल्स प्राइम 
• सरकार, िैसकॉम क े  साथ वमलकर, नवद्यानथषयों को एआई, वबग र्ेर्ा और क्लाउर् क ं प्यूवर्ंग जैसे आज क े  तेज़ी 
से बिलते हुए वर्वजर्ल माहौल क े  वलए ज़रूरी िवीितम कौशल प्रिाि कर रही है। 
• नेशनल ऑक्यूपेशनल स्टैंर्र्डडस (एिओएस) और नेशनल क्निल्स क्वावलवफक े शन फ्र े मिक ड  (एिएसक्‍ यूएफ) क े  
अिुसार पाठ्यिमों का संरेखण नकया िाता है। 
• इस प्लेर्फॉमड पर 500+ पाठ्यिम और 2000+ वर्वजर्ल फ्लूए ं सी पाथिे प्रस् तानवत नकए िाते हैं। अब तक, 
16.29 लाख+ उम् मीिवारों ने नवनभन् ि पाठ्यिमों में िामांकि कराया है/प्रनशक्षण नलया है। 
3. आईगो् कममयोगी भारत प्लेटफॉमम: 
• इसे वमशन कमडयोगी क े  तहत सरकारी अवधकाररयों क े  क्षमता निमाषण क े  वलए एक वर्वजर्ल लवनिंग प्लेर्फॉमड 
क े  तौर पर लॉन्च वकया गया है। 
• एआई, र्ेर्ा एनावलवर्क्स और वर्वजर्ल र् ् ांसफॉमेशन जैसे उभरते हुए क्षेत्रों में ऑनलाइन पाठ्यिम और 
प्रमाणि प्रसताव निए जाते हैं। 
4. राष्ट्रीय कै ररयर सेवा (एनसीएस): 
• यह श्रम और रोजगार मंत्रालय द्वारा चलाया जाने िाला एक िन-स्टॉप वर्वजर्ल प्लेर्फॉमड है जो सावषिनिक और 
नििी क्षेत्र क े  वलए रोििार क े  अवसर/समािांतर सेवा प्रिाि करता है। 
• इस प्लेर्फॉमड पर कररयर काउंसवलंग, रोििार मेलों की जानकारी, कौशल नवकास कायषिम और 
व् यावसानयक मािषिशषि भी निया िाता है। 
• पोर्डल का अनभिम www.ncs.gov.in पर नकया िा सकता है। 
इसक े  अलािा, बडे पैमाने पर जागरूकता पैिा करिे और बुवनयािी एआई साक्षरता बढाने क े  वलए एक नि:शुल् क राष्ट्् ीय 
स्तर का आधारभूत पाठ्यक्रम “सभी क े  नलए युवा एआई” शुरू वकया गया है। 
िैसकॉम की ररपोर्ड क े  अनुसार, भारत क े  पास िुवनया का सबसे बडा वर्वजर्ल क ु शल प्रनतभा पूल है और 2030 तक 
इसक े  पास एआई से जुडी सेवाओं में 8-10 वमवलयन पेशेवरों क े  पुिरकौशलि और नवकास की क्षमता है। 
सरकार एआई कौशलि और कायषबल क े  नवकास क े  वलए समग्र सरकारी नज़ररया अपना रही है। इंनडयाएआई 
वमशन और उससे जुडे प्लेर्फॉमों क े  ज़ररए, यह एआई कौशल तैयार करिे क े  वलए मंत्रालयों, राज्य सरकारों, शैक्षनणक 
संस् थािों और उद्योि िित क े  साथ नमलकर काम कर रही है। 
***** 
 
 
551                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय  
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
तारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 219 
19/12/2025 को उȅराथŊ 
 
िवषय: Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना का आकलन 
*219.  डा. सİ˝त पाũाः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) िपछले तीन वषŘ क े दौरान Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई) क े अंतगŊत िकसानों, 
राǛों और कŐ ū से वषŊ-वार क ु ल िकतना Ůीिमयम संगृहीत िकया गया; 
(ख) इस Ůीिमयम की तुलना मŐ िनजी बीमा क ं पिनयों Ȫारा िकए गए क ु ल दावा भुगतान और बीमाकताŊओं 
Ȫारा अिजŊत लाभ मािजŊन का वषŊ-वार ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ग) ऐसे िकतने िजले हœ जहां उǄ Ůीिमयम संŤहण क े बावजूद दावा िनपटान अनुपात असामाɊ ŝप से 
कम है; और 
(घ) Ɛा सरकार ने इस बात का आकलन िकया है िक Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना ने जोİखम को 
िकसानों से बीमा क ं पिनयों की ओर संरचनाȏक ŝप से ˕ानांतįरत कर िदया है या इसक े बजाय 
बीमाकताŊओं क े िलए यह उǄ लाभ, कम दे यता वाला मॉडल बन गया है? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी (ŵी िशवराज िसंह चौहान) 
(क) से (घ): एक िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
552                                                      

‘Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना का आकलन’ क े संदभŊ मŐ राǛ सभा मŐ िदनांक 19 िदसंबर, 2025 
को उȅराथŊ तारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 219 क े भाग (क) से (घ) तक क े संबंध मŐ उİʟİखत िववरण 
(क) से ( घ): Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (PMFBY) क े अंतगŊत कायाŊİɋत एजŐिसयों Ȫारा 
बीमांिकक/बोली/िनिवदा Ůीिमयम दरŐ वसूल की जाती हœ। हालांिक, िकसानों से द े श भर मŐ सीजन क े िलए 
बŠत ही कम Ůीिमयम दर वसूल की जाती है, जो खरीफ फसलों क े िलए बीिमत रािश का अिधकतम 2%, 
रबी फसलों क े िलए बीिमत रािश का अिधकतम 1.5% और वािणİǛक/बागवानी फसलों क े िलए बीिमत 
रािश का अिधकतम 5% है। बीमांिकक Ůीिमयम का शेष भाग कŐ ū और राǛ सरकार Ȫारा 50:50 क े 
अनुपात मŐ साझा िकया जाता है, पूवŖȅर राǛों (खरीफ 2020 से) और िहमालयी राǛों (खरीफ 2023 से) 
क े अलावा, जहां इसे 90:10 क े अनुपात मŐ साझा िकया जाता है। इसक े अलावा, खरीफ 2023 से Ůभावी 
योजना क े Ůचालन िदशािनदőशों मŐ मानक PMFBY क े अलावा 3 वैकİʙक जोİखम अंतरण मॉडल जैसे 
िक कप और क ै प मॉडल (80:110), कप और क ै प मॉडल (60:130) और लाभ-नुकसान शेयįर ं ग मॉडल 
भी शािमल हœ, िजसक े तहत एक िनिʮत सीमा से कम दावों क े मामले मŐ, सरकार Ȫारा सİɵडी क े ŝप मŐ 
भुगतान िकए गए Ůीिमयम का एक िहˣा राǛ क े राजकोष या भारत की समेिकत िनिध मŐ, जैसा भी 
मामला हो, वापस चला जाएगा। इसक े अलावा, िनिʮत सीमा से अिधक क े दावों क े मामले मŐ, कŐ ū और 
राǛ दोनों को दावों का भुगतान करना अपेिƗत होता है। 
 राǛ और कŐ ū सरकार की क ु ल दे यता राǛ क े िविभɄ Ƒːरों मŐ जैनर े ट क ु ल दावों और राǛ Ȫारा 
अपनाए गए एआरटीएम मॉडल पर िनभŊर करती है, िजसक े आधार पर अिधक Ůीिमयम įरकवरी योƶ हो 
जाता है अथवा दावा दे यता दे य हो जाती है। 
 िवगत तीन वषŘ अथाŊत वषŊ 2022-23 से वषŊ 2024-25 क े दौरान िकसानों से एकũ िकए गए क ु ल 
Ůीिमयम और िनजी बीमा क ं पिनयों Ȫारा भुगतान िकए गए दावों का वषŊ-वार िववरण नीचे िदया गया है: 
 
PMFBY क े तहत, सभी सामाɊ बीमा क ं पिनयां िविभɄ Ůकार क े सामाɊ बीमा िबजनेस/पॉिलसी 
कर रही हœ। अतः, इन क ं पिनयों Ȫारा अिजŊत क ु ल लाभ/नुकसान या Ůीिमयम, क ं पनी क े समŤ 
अंडरराइिटंग िबजनेस मŐ होने वाले लाभ/नुकसान पर िनभŊर करता है। बीमा क ं पिनयां अनुक ू ल मौसमों/वषŘ 
मŐ Ůीिमयम संचय करती हœ और Ůितक ू ल वषŘ मŐ उन अनुक ू ल वषŘ मŐ की गई बचत से ही उǄ दावों, यिद 
कोई हों, का भुगतान करती हœ।  इसक े अलावा, फसल बीमा अपįरहायŊ Ůाक ृ ितक आपदाओं की İ˕ित मŐ 
िकसानों क े िहत क े िलए एक बड़ा जोİखम िनवारण ट ू ल है। यह नोट िकया जा सकता है िक बीमा कोई 
िनवेश नही ं है। बीमा का उȞेʴ जोİखम का ˕ािनक और सामियक Ůबंधन करना है। 
PMFBY/RWBCIS क े Ůावधानों क े अनुसार, िकसानों से Ůाɑ Ůीिमयम, कŐ ū और राǛ सरकार Ȫारा 
Ůीिमयम सİɵडी मŐ िदए गए िहˣे क े साथ-साथ जोİखम को ˢीकार करने और दावों का भुगतान करने 
क े िलए संबंिधत बीमा क ं पनी को भुगतान िकया जाता है। 
वषŊ 2024-25 क े दौरान इस योजना क े तहत संिचत Ůीिमयम क े अनुसार क ु ल फसल बीमा 
िबजनेस मŐ से लगभग 43% िहˣा एŤीक̵चर इंʴोरŐश क ं पनी ऑफ इंिडया िलिमटेड सिहत क े वल 5 
वषŊ िकसानों से एकिũत Ůीिमयम  भुगतान िकए गए दावे 
(Ŝपए करोड़ मŐ) 
2022-23       2,097.34         9,684.40  
2023-24       1,654.01         9,788.88  
2024-25       1,616.37         5,385.36  
क ु ल       5,367.72  24,858.64  
553                                                      

सावŊजिनक Ɨेũ की बीमा क ं पिनयों Ȫारा सामूिहक ŝप से साझा िकया जाता है। इसक े अलावा, संिचत 
Ůीिमयम और भुगतान िकए गए दावों क े बीच का अंतर बीमा क ं पिनयों क े िलए मािजŊन/लाभ नही ं हो 
सकता है Ɛोंिक इसमŐ पुनबŎमा और Ůशासिनक लागत शािमल होती है जो सामाɊतः सकल Ůीिमयम क े 
10% से 12% क े बीच होती है। यह लागत भी बीमा क ं पिनयों को वहन करनी होगी। इस योजना क े 
Ůचालन िदशािनदőशों मŐ मानक PMFBY क े अलावा 3 वैकİʙक जोİखम अंतरण मॉडल भी िदए गए हœ, 
जैसे िक कप ए ं ड क ै प मॉडल (80:110), कप ए ं ड क ै प मॉडल (60:130) और लाभ-नुकसान शेयįर ं ग 
मॉडल, िजसक े तहत िनिʮत सीमा से कम दावों क े मामले मŐ, सरकार Ȫारा सİɵडी क े ŝप मŐ भुगतान 
िकए गए Ůीिमयम का एक िहˣा राǛ क े राजकोष मŐ वापस चला जाएगा। राǛों को इनमŐ से िकसी भी 
मॉडल का चयन करने की छ ू ट दी गई है। इन मॉडलों को अपनाने से Ůीिमयम दरों मŐ काफी कमी आई है, 
िजससे भारत सरकार और राǛ सरकार का ʩय कम Šआ है और कम दावों क े मामले मŐ अितįरƅ 
Ůीिमयम की वसूली संभव Šई है। 
इस योजना क े कायाŊɋयन क े दौरान कई ऐसी घटनाए ं सामने आई हœ जब बीमा क ं पिनयों ने 
एकिũत Ůीिमयम से कम दावों का भुगतान िकया है, साथ ही िविभɄ मौसमों मŐ Ůाक ृ ितक आपदाओं क े 
मामलों मŐ Ůाɑ Ůीिमयम क े 100% से अिधक का भुगतान भी िकया है। वषŊ 2021-22 से वषŊ 2023-24 
क े दौरान PMFBY का कायाŊɋयन करने वाली बीमा क ं पिनयों Ȫारा एकũ िकए गए Ůीिमयम की तुलना मŐ 
बŠत कम दावों (संिचत Ůीिमयम क े 30% से कम) और Ůीिमयम क े 100% से अिधक दावों का सीजन-
वार और राǛ-वार िववरण अनुबंध मŐ िदया गया है। 
इसक े अलावा, फसल बीमा योजनाओं की समीƗा/पुनरीƗण/युİƅकरण/सुधार एक सतत ŮिŢया 
है और ːेकहोʒरों/अȯयनों क े सुझावों/Ůितिनिधयों/िसफाįरशों पर समय-समय पर िनणŊय िलए जाते हœ। 
Ůाɑ अनुभव, िविभɄ ːेकहोʒरों क े अिभमतों और बेहतर पारदिशŊता, जवाबदे ही, िकसानों को दावों का 
समय पर भुगतान सुिनिʮत करने और योजना को अिधक िकसान-िहतैषी बनाने क े उȞेʴ से, सरकार ने 
PMFBY क े Ůचालन िदशािनदőशों को समय-समय पर िवˑृत ŝप से संशोिधत िकया है तािक यह 
सुिनिʮत िकया जा सक े िक इस योजना क े अंतगŊत पाũ लाभ िकसानों तक समय पर और पारदशŎ तरीक े 
से पŠंचŐ। 
554                                                      

अनुबंध 
PMFBY और RWBCIS: वषŊ 2021-22 से वषŊ 2023-24 क े दौरान राǛ-वार नुकसान अनुपात 30% से कम 
और 100% से अिधक (31 अƅूबर, 2025 तक) 
वषŊ - सीजन राǛ/कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेश 
का नाम 
सकल Ůीिमयम भुगतान िकए गए 
दावे 
नुकसानअनुपात 
% 
(Ŝपए करोड़ मŐ) 
Ůीिमयम क े 30% से कम का दावा अनुपात 
2021-22 रबी जʃू-कʳीर 16.30 1.98 12% 
2021-22 रबी तिमलनाड ु 2,833.62 793.00 28% 
2021-22 रबी उȅर Ůद े श 736.57 179.01 24% 
2022 खरीफ असम 69.47 8.50 12% 
2022 खरीफ छȅीसगढ़ 1,404.82 276.78 20% 
2022 खरीफ जʃू-कʳीर 23.61 3.83 17% 
2022 खरीफ  मȯ Ůदे श 2,710.85 739.99 28% 
2022 खरीफ िũपुरा 9.46 0.61 7% 
2022-23 रबी आंŬ Ůदे श 1,090.75 41.89 10% 
2022-23 रबी असम 81.81 11.54 15% 
2022-23 रबी जʃू-कʳीर 17.29 2.51 15% 
2022-23 रबी मȯ Ůदे श 1,134.86 309.98 27% 
2022-23 रबी पुदुचेरी 6.00 - 3% 
2022-23 रबी उȅर Ůद े श 739.02 210.92 30% 
2023 खरीफ छȅीसगढ़ 1,367.93 197.82 14% 
2023 खरीफ ओिडशा 1,447.06 228.56 16% 
2023 खरीफ िũपुरा 13.76 1.88 14% 
2023-24 रबी असम 104.80 20.91 21% 
2023-24 रबी जʃू-कʳीर 24.72 2.37 10% 
2023-24 रबी मȯ Ůदे श 943.12 191.14 21% 
2023-24 रबी ओिडशा 47.52 4.06 9% 
Ůीिमयम क े 100% से अिधक का दावा अनुपात 
2021 खरीफ असम 71.50 85.63 120% 
2021 खरीफ हįरयाणा 870.01 1,382.95 159% 
2021 खरीफ जʃू-कʳीर 23.73 50.73 214% 
2021 खरीफ राज˕ान 3,564.19 3,889.50 109% 
2021-22 रबी असम 74.14 170.79 230% 
2021-22 रबी छȅीसगढ़ 203.67 402.13 197% 
2021-22 रबी क े रल 58.12 64.19 110% 
2022 खरीफ हįरयाणा 956.98 2,011.17 210% 
2022 खरीफ क े रल 64.59 99.78 154% 
2022-23 रबी हįरयाणा 350.37 514.83 147% 
2022-23 रबी क े रल 73.36 80.55 110% 
2022-23 रबी महाराʼŌ 1,098.18 1,346.37 123% 
2022-23 रबी ओिडशा 9.97 11.66 117% 
2022-23 रबी राज˕ान 2,607.05 2,671.30 102% 
2023 खरीफ िहमाचल Ůद े श 18.98 27.61 146% 
2023 खरीफ कनाŊटक 2,512.08 3,108.25 124% 
2023 खरीफ क े रल 53.97 76.04 141% 
2023 खरीफ महाराʼŌ 7,815.17 7,942.79 102% 
2023 खरीफ मेघालय 10.59 14.47 137% 
2023-24 रबी छȅीसगढ़ 279.83 390.55 140% 
2023-24 रबी क े रल 52.42 88.77 169% 
2023-24 रबी उȅराखǷ 181.43 264.64 146% 
****** 
555                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग 
 
राǛ सभा 
तारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 220 
उȅर िदए जाने की ितिथ: 19/12/2025 
मिहला नेतृȕ वाले एफपीओ 
*220.  ŵीमती र े खा शमाŊ: 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िक: 
 
(क) 10,000 िकसान उȋादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) क े संवधŊन मŐ Šई Ůगित; 
 
(ख) समिथŊत मिहला-नेतृȕ वाले एफपीओ की संƥा; और 
 
(ग) Ɛा अिधक मिहला-नेतृȕ वाले एफपीओ को ई-नाम तथा िनयाŊत चैनलों से जोड़ा जाएगा? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी   (ŵी िशवराज िसंह चौहान) 
 
(क) से (ग): िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
 
556                                                      

19 िदसंबर, 2025 को ‘मिहला नेतृȕ वाले एफपीओ’ क े संबंध मŐ राǛ सभा क े तारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 
220 क े भाग (क) से (ग) क े उȅर मŐ िववरण 
(क):  सरकार वषŊ 2020 से “10,000 िकसान उȋादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) क े गठन एवं संवधŊन” की कŐ ūीय 
Ɨेũ योजना को लागू कर रही है। 30.11.2025 तक इस योजना क े अंतगŊत 10,000 एफपीओ पंजीक ृ त िकए जा 
चुक े हœ, िजनमŐ 55.22 लाख िकसान शेयरधारक हœ। 
वतŊमान मŐ, 6,241 एफपीओ ने बीज लाइसŐस, 5,953 एफपीओ ने उवŊरक लाइसŐस तथा 4,455 
एफपीओ ने कीटनाशक लाइसŐस Ůाɑ िकए हœ। 
योजना क े अंतगŊत, 6,402 एफपीओ ने इिƓटी अनुदान की कम से कम एक िकˑ का लाभ उठाया है, 
जबिक 853 एफपीओ ने ₹15 लाख Ůित एफपीओ की पूणŊ इिƓटी सहायता Ůाɑ की है। क ु ल 2,616 एफपीओ 
को ₹662.7 करोड़ मूʞ क े 3,610 Ţे िडट गार ं टी कवर जारी िकए गए हœ। 
वतŊमान मŐ, 4,610 एफपीओ समेिकत उपज की िबŢी क े िलए ई-नाम मंच पर पंजीक ृ त हœ, जबिक 
योजना क े अंतगŊत 5,650 एफपीओ को ओपन नेटवकŊ  फॉर िडिजटल कॉमसŊ (ओएनडीसी) पर ऑनबोडŊ िकया 
गया है। 
अब तक įरपोटŊ िकया गया एफपीओ का संचयी कारोबार ₹19,736.68 करोड़ है। 
(ख): Ůȑेक एफपीओ क े िनदे शक मंडल (BoD) मŐ कम से कम एक मिहला सद˟ होती है। 30.11.2025 
तक, 10,000 एफपीओ योजना क े अंतगŊत 100% मिहला िकसान शेयरधारकों वाले 1,170 मिहला-नेतृȕ 
एफपीओ तथा 50% से अिधक मिहला िकसान शेयरधारकों वाले 2,272 मिहला-नेतृȕ एफपीओ का गठन 
िकया गया है। एफपीओ मŐ क ु ल 55.22 लाख शेयरधारक हœ, िजनमŐ से 21.45 लाख मिहलाए ं हœ (39%)। 
(ग): 30.11.2025 तक, 4,610 एफपीओ ई-नाम मंच पर ऑनबोडŊ िकए गए हœ, िजनमŐ से 843 एफपीओ ऐसे 
हœ िजनक े 100% सद˟ िकसान मिहलाए ं हœ। 978 एफपीओ ने िनयाŊत हेतु क ृ िष एवं Ůसंˋृ त खाȨ उȋाद 
िनयाŊत िवकास Ůािधकरण (APEDA) का पंजीकरण-सह-सद˟ता Ůमाणपũ (RCMC) Ůाɑ िकया है, िजनमŐ 
से 43 एफपीओ 100% मिहला-नेतृȕ वाले हœ। 
***** 
 
557                                                      

 
 
भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 221 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के  ͧलए)  
मनरेगा के  अंतग[त रोजगार कȧ गारंटȣ 
221.  Įी एस. सेãवागनबेथी: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क)  Èया महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (मनरेगा) योजना क े  
अंतग[त देश के Ĥ×येक Ēामीण पǐरवार को कम से कम 100 काय[Ǒदवसɉ के गारंटȣकृत मजदूरȣ 
रोजगार कȧ पेशकश कȧ जाती है; 
(ख)  यǑद हां, तो ͪपछले वष[ के  दौरान Ĥ×येक राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ मɅ ͩकतने-ͩकतने 
काय[Ǒदवसɉ के  रोज़गार कȧ पेशकश कȧ गयी; 
(ग)  Èया ͩकए गए काय[Ǒदवसɉ कȧ संÉया योजना के अनुǾप है, यǑद नहȣं, तो काय[ कȧ 
Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए Èया कार[वाई कȧ गई है; और 
(घ)  ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान पुडुचेरȣ संघ राÏय¢ेğ मɅ मनरेगा के  अंतग[त ¢ेğ मɅ जल 
पुनभ[रण सुǓनिæचत करने के  ͧलए ͩकतने तालाब बनाए गए हɇ?  
उƣर 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी 
(Įी ͧशवराज ͧसंह चौहान) 
  
  
(क) से (घ): ͪववरण सदन क े  पटल पर रख Ǒदया गया है। 
  
   
  
  
558                                                      

 
 
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत राÏय सभा तारांͩकत 
Ĥæन सं. 221 के भाग (क) से (घ) के  उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत ͪववरण  
(क) एवं (ख):   यह सूͬचत ͩकया जाता है ͩक महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ 
योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) क े  अंतग[त Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ मɅ Ĥ×येक ऐसे Ēामीण 
पǐरवार को, िजसके वयèक सदèय अकुशल शारȣǐरक Įम करने के इच्छुक हɉ, को अͬधकतम 
सौ Ǒदनɉ के सुǓनिæचत मजदूरȣ रोजगार कȧ गारंटȣ Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। ͩकसी बेहतर रोजगार 
अवसर अनुपलÞधता कȧ िèथǓत मɅ यह योजना एक वैकिãपक åयवèथा के Ǿप मɅ काय[ करती 
है।  ͪवƣीय वष[ 2024-25 के  दौरान, काय[ कȧ मांग करने वाले 99.83 ĤǓतशत Ēामीण पǐरवारɉ 
को रोजगार का पेशकश ͩकया  गया। 
  महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के अंतग[त ͪपछले ͪवƣीय वष[ 2024-25 के दौरान रोजगार 
कȧ मांग करने वाले पǐरवारɉ, रोजगार उपलÞध कराए गए पǐरवारɉ तथा सृिजत ĮमǑदवसɉ का 
राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार ͪववरण अनुबंध मɅ Ǒदया गया है।  
(ग):    मंğालय ͪवͧभÛन मंचɉ, जैसे-मÚयावͬध समी¢ा, Įम बजट बैठकɉ, Įम बजट संशोधन 
बैठकɉ तथा काय[Đम समी¢ा बैठकɉ के  माÚयम से राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ मɅ महा×मा गांधी 
नरेगा योजना के  काया[Ûवयन के  Ǔनçपादन कȧ Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से समी¢ा करता है। कɅ ġȣय 
रोजगार गारंटȣ पǐरषद तथा राÏय रोजगार गारंटȣ पǐरषदɅ भी समय-समय पर काय[Đम के  
काया[Ûवयन कȧ Ǔनगरानी करती हɇ। राÏयɉ मɅ ͪवͧभÛन èतरɉ पर राÏय तकनीकȧ Ĥकोçठ 
गǑठत ͩकए गए हɇ, जो कायɟ कȧ ĤगǓत कȧ Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से Ǔनगरानी करते हɇ। 
  
(घ):    महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के अंतग[त पुदुचेरȣ संघ राÏय ¢ेğ मɅ जल संचयन 
तालाबɉ, म×èय पालन तालाबɉ तथा तालाबɉ के पूण[ ͩकए गए नवीनीकरण से संबंͬधत ͪववरण 
एवं तालाबɉ पर ͩकए गए कुल åयय का ͪववरण Ǔनàनानुसार है:   
  
पूण[ ͩकए गए कायɟ कȧ संÉया  कुल åयय (लाख ǽपए मɅ)  
2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 2024-25 2023-24 2022-23 
495 520 501 2,671.44 3,908.00 1,444.32 
  
559                                                      

  
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत राÏय सभा तारांͩकत 
Ĥæन सं. 221 के भाग (क) और (ख) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत ͪववरण  
ͪवƣीय वष[ 2024-25 के दौरान महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के अंतग[त रोजगार कȧ मांग करने 
वाले पǐरवारɉ, रोजगार पेशकश  ͩकए गए पǐरवारɉ तथा सृिजत ĮमǑदवसɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय 
¢ेğ-वार ͪववरण (आंकड़े लाख मɅ) 
Đ. 
सं.  राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ काम मांगने वाले 
घरɉ कȧ संÉया  
काम पेशकश ͩकए 
गए पǐरवारɉ  कȧ संÉया  
सृिजत Įम 
Ǒदवस 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 51.22 51.19 2422.82 
2 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 3.11 3.11 204.35 
3 असम 20.46 20.44 710.70 
4 ǒबहार 58.75 58.67 2498.52 
5 छƣीसगढ 28.45 28.44 1323.54 
6 गोवा 0.03 0.03 0.76 
7 गुजरात 10.30 10.27 431.27 
8 हǐरयाणा 3.93 3.93 117.92 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 7.54 7.54 395.31 
10 जàमू और कæमीर 7.70 7.68 409.34 
11 झारखंड 23.78 23.76 1009.40 
12 कना[टक 31.95 31.50 1311.64 
13 केरल 14.19 14.19 907.54 
14 लɮदाख 0.34 0.34 22.19 
15 मÚय Ĥदेश 44.80 44.62 1896.93 
16 महाराçĚ 33.16 33.07 1621.22 
17 मͨणपुर 5.40 5.40 244.62 
18 मेघालय 4.79 4.79 320.99 
19 ͧमजोरम 2.11 2.10 197.75 
20 नागालɇड 2.57 2.55 93.81 
21 ओͫडशा 26.42 26.39 1192.99 
22 पंजाब 9.61 9.60 314.01 
23 राजèथान 62.74 62.72 3166.13 
24 ͧसिÈकम 0.63 0.63 33.85 
25 तͧमलनाडु 67.68 67.68 3061.10 
26 तेलंगाना 28.80 28.79 1222.87 
27 ǒğपुरा 6.05 6.05 353.37 
28 उƣर Ĥदेश 70.92 70.91 3364.12 
29 उƣराखंड 4.63 4.62 189.99 
30 पिæचम बंगाल 0.00 0.00 0.00 
31 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.04 0.04 0.88 
560                                                      

32 दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ 
और दमन और दȣव 0.05 0.05 2.99 
33 ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 0.00 0.00 
34 पुदुचेरȣ 0.52 0.52 10.78 
  कुल 632.66 631.62 29053.68 
(नरेगा सॉÝट के अनुसार) 
नोट: यɮयͪप माँगे गए काय[ और Ĥदƣ काय[ मɅ काफ़ȧ हद तक समानता है, तथाͪप माँगे गए 
काय[ के सापे¢ वाèतव मɅ ĤाÜत ͩकए गए काय[ मɅ अंतर Įͧमकɉ ɮवारा Ĥदƣ काय[ का पूण[ 
उपयोग न ͩकए जाने के कारण है। इसका कारण अÛयğ बेहतर रोजगार के अवसर उपलÞध 
होना, बीमारȣ अथवा कोई अÛय Ĥासंͬगक कारण हो सकता है। 
 
561                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 222 का उƣर 
 
महाराçĚ मɅ नई रेल पǐरयोजनाएं 
 
 
*222. Įी रायगा कृçणैया:  
 
 Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान महाराçĚ के ͧलए घोͪषत कȧ गई नई रेल पǐरयोजनाओं का 
Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ख)  इनमɅ से अब तक चालू कȧ गई पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ संÉया और उनके ͧलए आवंǑटत 
बजटȣय राͧश का Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ग)  अभी तक चालू न कȧ गई पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ िèथǓत È या है और इÛहɅ कब तक चालू 
ͩकया जाएगा;  
(घ)  È या सरकार को इस बात कȧ जानकारȣ है ͩक महाराçĚ का एक बड़ा ¢ेğ अभी भी रेल 
संपक[ से वंͬचत है; और  
(ङ)  यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है और इन पǐरयोजनाओं पर कब तक काम शुǾ ͩकए 
जाने कȧ संभावना है?                                    
                                     
 
                                    उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
                               (Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ङ): ͪववरण सभा पटल पर रख Ǒदया गया है। 
 
***** 
562                                                      

महाराçĚ मɅ नई रेल पǐरयोजनाओं के संबंध मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को राÏय सभा मɅ        
Įी रायगा कृçणैया के तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 222 के भाग (क) से (ङ) के उƣर से संबंͬधत ͪववरण। 
  
(क) से (ङ) ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान बजट आवंटन मɅ उãलेखनीय वृɮͬध कȧ गई है। महाराçĚ 
राÏय मɅ पूण[त:/अंशत: पड़ने वालȣ अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाओं और संर¢ा कायɟ के ͧलए बजट 
आवंटन Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
  
अवͬध पǐरåयय 
2009-14 1,171 करोड़ ǽपए ĤǓतवष[ 
2025-26 23,778 करोड़ ǽपए (20 गुना से अͬधक) 
  
वष[ 2009-14 और वष[ 2014-25 के दौरान महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशत: पड़ने वाले नए 
रेलपथ कȧ कमीशǓनंग/ǒबछाने संबंधी कायɟ का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
  
अवͬध कमीशन ͩकए गए नए रेलपथ नए रेलपथɉ कȧ औसत कमीशǓनंग 
2009-14 292 ͩकलोमीटर 58.4 ͩकलोमीटर ĤǓतवष[ 
2014-25 2,292 ͩकलोमीटर 208.36 ͩकलोमीटर ĤǓतवष[ (3 गुना से अͬधक) 
  
मुंबई उपनगरȣय ¢ेğ के ͧलए ¢मता संवध[न काय[ 
 
वत[मान मɅ, मुंबई ¢ेğ मɅ ĤǓतǑदन लगभग 120 आरंͧभक मेल/एÈसĤेस रेलगाͫड़यां और लगभग 
3200 उपनगरȣय रेलगाͫड़यां पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जाती हɇ। ¢मता संवध[न और संर¢ा मɅ सुधार लाने 
के ͧलए, भारतीय रेल ɮवारा Ǔनàनͧलͨखत कई कदम उठाए गए हɇ: 
 
मुंबई ¢ेğ के ͪवͧभÛन èटेशनɉ पर रेलगाड़ी Ĥबंधन ¢मता बढ़ाने के ͧलए, Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[ पूरे 
ͩकए गए हɇ/शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ/योजना बनाई गई है: 
 
Đ.सं. èथान ͪववरण 
1 बांġा टͧम[नस 3 ͪपट लाइनɉ का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है 
2 मुंबई सɅĚल 24 एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के ͧलए Üलेटफाम[  का ͪवèतार 
3 जोगेæवरȣ 2 अǓतǐरÈत Üलेटफ़ॉम[ 
4 दादर 1 अǓतǐरÈत Üलेटफ़ॉम[ 
5 वसई रोड 6 Üलेटफॉम[, 3 ͪपट लाइनɅ और 5 èटेबͧलंग लाइनɅ 
6 पनवेल-कलàबोलȣ 5 Üलेटफॉम[, 4 ͪपट लाइनɅ और 2 ͧसक लाइनɅ 
563                                                      

7 कãयाण 6 Üलेटफ़ॉम[ और 4 ͪपट लाइनɅ 
8 एलटȣटȣ 4 Üलेटफ़ॉम[ और 2 ͪपट लाइनɅ 
9 परेल 6 Üलेटफ़ॉम[, 5 ͪपट लाइनɅ, 6 èटेबͧलंग लाइनɅ 
10 ͪवरार 25 èटेबͧलंग लाइनɅ 
11 दहाणू रोड 11 èटेबͧलंग लाइनɅ 
12 मीरा रोड 25 èटेबͧलंग लाइनɅ 
 
उपयु[Èत के अǓतǐरÈत, 15 कार वालȣ ईएमयू को समायोिजत करने के ͧलए 34 èटेशनɉ पर 
Üलेटफाम[ ͪवèतार का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
मुंबई उपनगरȣय ¢ेğ मɅ रेल नेटवक[ कȧ ¢मता बढ़ाने के ͧलए, ₹8,087 करोड़ कȧ लागत से 
मुंबई शहरȣ पǐरवहन पǐरयोजना (एमयूटȣपी)-II, ₹10,947 करोड़ कȧ लागत से मुंबई शहरȣ 
पǐरवहन पǐरयोजना (एमयूटȣपी)-III और ₹33,690 करोड़ कȧ लागत से मुंबई शहरȣ पǐरवहन 
पǐरयोजना (एमयूटȣपी)-IIIए को èवीकृǓत दȣ गई है। इन पǐरयोजनाओं मɅ मुंबई उपनगरȣय ¢ेğ मɅ 
Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[ शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
Đ.सं. पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत 
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1 सीएसएमटȣ- कुला[ पांचवीं और छठȤ लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-II) (17.5 ͩक.मी.) 891 
2 मुंबई सɅĚल- बोरȣवलȣ छठȤ लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-II) (30 ͩक.मी.) 919 
3 गोरेगांव-बोरȣवलȣ (एमयूटȣपी-IIIए) से हाब[र लाइन का ͪवèतार (7 ͩक.मी.) 826 
4 बोरȣवलȣ-ͪवरार पांचवीं और छठȤ लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-IIIए) (26 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,184 
5 ͪवरार-दहाणू रोड तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-III) (64 ͩकलोमीटर) 3,587 
6 पनवेल-कज[त उपनगरȣय गͧलयारा (एमयूटȣपी-III) (29.6 ͩक.मी.) 2,782 
7 ऐरोलȣ-कलवा (एͧलवेटेड) उपनगरȣय गͧलयारा ͧलंक (एमयूटȣपी-III)  
(3.3 ͩकलोमीटर) 
476 
8 कãयाण-आसनगांव चौथी लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-IIIए) (32 ͩक.मी.) 1,759 
9 कãयाण-बदलापुर तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-IIIए) (14 ͩक.मी.) 1,510 
10 कãयाण-कसारा तीसरȣ लाइन ( 67 ͩक.मी.) 793 
564                                                      

11 नायगांव-जूचÛ ġ डबल कॉड[ लाइन (6 ͩक.मी.) 176 
12 Ǔनलजे-कोपर डबल कॉड[ लाइन (5 ͩक.मी.) 338 
13 कãयाण याड[ रȣमॉडͧलंग का काय[ 866 
 
याğी वाहक ¢मता बढ़ाने के ͧलए, एमयूटȣपी-III और IIIए के अंतग[त 12 कारɉ वाले 238 रेक   
िजनमɅ Ĥ×येक मɅ दरवाजे हɉगे, èवीकृत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजनकȧ लागत ₹19,293 करोड़ है। इन 
रेकɉ कȧ Ĥापण ĤͩĐया शुǾ कर दȣ गई है। 
 
Ǒदनांक 01.04.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार, महाराçĚ मɅ पूण[तः/अंशत: पड़ने वालȣ 89,780 
करोड़ ǽपए कȧ लागत पर कुल 5,098 ͩकलोमीटर लंबाई कȧ 38 पǐरयोजनाओं (11 नई लाइन, 
02 आमान पǐरवत[न और 25 दोहरȣकरण) को èवीकृत ͩकया गया है। इसका सार Ǔनàनानुसार 
है:- 
  
कोǑट èवीकृत 
पǐरयोजनाओं 
कȧ संÉया 
कुल लंबाई 
(ͩकलोमीटर 
मɅ) 
माच[ 2025 तक 
कमीशन कȧ गई लंबाई 
(ͩकलोमीटर मɅ) 
माच[, 2025 
तक åयय 
(करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
नई लाइन 11 1,355 234 10,504 
आमान पǐरवत[न 2 609 334 4,286 
दोहरȣकरण/मãटȣĚैͩकंग 25 3,134 1,792 24,617 
कुल 38 5,098 2,360 39,407 
 
महाराçĚ मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ तथा हाल हȣ मɅ पूरȣ हुɃ कुछ पǐरयोजनाओं का ͪववरण 
Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
  
Đ. सं. पǐरयोजना लागत 
(करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
1 पुणे-ͧमरज-लɉडा दोहरȣकरण (467 ͩकलोमीटर) 4,670 
2 मनमाड-जलगांव तीसरȣ लाइन (160 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,574 
3 जबलपुर-गɉǑदया आमान पǐरवत[न (300 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,005 
4 Ǔछंदवाड़ा-नागपुर आमान पǐरवत[न (150 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,512 
5 पनवेल-पेन दोहरȣकरण (35 ͩकलोमीटर) 263 
6 पेन-रोहा दोहरȣकरण (40 ͩकलोमीटर) 330 
565                                                      

7 उधना-जलगांव दोहरȣकरण (307 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,448 
8 मुदखेड-परभणी दोहरȣकरण (81 ͩकलोमीटर) 673 
9 भुसावल-जलगांव तीसरȣ लाइन (24 ͩकलोमीटर) 325 
10 जलगांव-भुसावल चौथी लाइन (24 ͩकलोमीटर) 261 
11 दɋड-गुलबगा[ दोहरȣकरण (225 ͩकलोमीटर) 3,182 
  
महाराçĚ मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ कुछ Ĥमुख पǐरयोजनाएं, िजÛहɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया है, का 
ͪववरण Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
  
Đ. 
सं. 
पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत 
(करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
1 गɉǑदया-बãहारशाह (चांदा फोट[) दोहरȣकरण (240 ͩकलोमीटर) 4,373 
2 होटगी बाईपास लाइन (6 ͩकलोमीटर) 177 
3 पनवेल-चौक दोहरȣकरण खंड (17 ͩकलोमीटर) 491 
4 पनवेल-सोमटने कॉड[ लाइन और पनवेल-ͬचखलȣ कॉड[ लाइन  
(8 ͩकलोमीटर) 
445 
5 ͧमरज कॉड[ लाइन (2 ͩकलोमीटर) 129 
6 वधा[-बãहारशाह चौथी लाइन (135 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,226 
7 पुनतांबा-साईनगर ͧशरडी दोहरȣकरण (17 ͩकलोमीटर) 227 
8 इटारसी -नागपुर चौथी लाइन (297 ͩकलोमीटर) 5,010 
9 छğपǓत संभाजीनगर-परभणी दोहरȣकरण (177 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,006 
10 गɉǑदया-डɉगरगढ़ चौथी लाइन (84 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,985 
11 वधा[ -भुसावल तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन (314 ͩकलोमीटर) 8,199 
12 जलगांव-भादलȣ 5वीं लाइन (9 ͩकलोमीटर) 114 
13 गɉǑदया बाईपास लाइन (19 ͩकलोमीटर) 354 
14 जलगांव-मनमाड चौथी लाइन (160 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,574 
15 भुसावल-खंडवा तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन (131 ͩकलोमीटर) 3,285 
16 मुदखेड़-मेडचल और महबूबनगर-डोन दोहरȣकरण  
(417 ͩकलोमीटर) 
4,686 
17 छğपǓत संभाजीनगर-अंकाई दोहरȣकरण (98 ͩकलोमीटर) 961 
18  Ǔनलजे और कोपर डबल कॉड[ लाइन (5 ͩकलोमीटर) 338 
19  मुदखेड़ जंÈशन बाईपास लाइन (3 ͩकलोमीटर) 62 
20 पूणा[ बाईपास लाइन (3 ͩकलोमीटर) 72 
566                                                      

21 अंकाई बाईपास लाइन (2 ͩकलोमीटर) 29 
22 परभणी-परलȣ वैजनाथ दोहरȣकरण (65 ͩकलोमीटर) 770 
23 लातूर रोड èटेशन बाईपास लाइन (2 ͩकलोमीटर) 47 
24 परलȣ-वैजनाथ èटेशन बाईपास लाइन (2 ͩकलोमीटर) 56 
25 मलकापुर तक ͪवèतार सǑहत पचोरा-जामनेर आमान पǐरवत[न 
(84 ͩकलोमीटर) 
955 
26 वधावन पोट[-Ûयू पालघर दोहरȣकरण (22 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,423 
27 अǑहãयानगर-बीड-परलȣ वैजनाथ नई लाइन (261 ͩकलोमीटर) 4,957 
28 बारामती-लोनंद नई लाइन (64 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,844 
29 वधा[-नांदेड़ नई लाइन (284 ͩकलोमीटर) 3,445 
30 इंदौर- मनमाड नई लाइन (360 ͩकलोमीटर) 18,529 
31 वडसा-गडͬचरोलȣ नई लाइन (52 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,886 
32 जालना-जलगाँव नई लाइन (174 ͩकलोमीटर) 5,804 
33 दɋड-मनमाड दोहरȣकरण (236 ͩकलोमीटर) 3,037 
34  कãयाण-कसारा तीसरȣ लाइन (68 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,433 
35 वधा[ -नागपुर तीसरȣ लाइन (76 ͩकलोमीटर) 698 
36 वधा[-बãहारशाह तीसरȣ लाइन (132 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,385 
37 इटारसी -नागपुर तीसरȣ लाइन (280 ͩकलोमीटर) 2,450 
38 राजनांदगांव -नागपुर तीसरȣ लाइन (228 ͩकलोमीटर) 3,545 
39 वधा[ -नागपुर चौथी लाइन (79 ͩकलोमीटर) 1,137 
  
 
इसके अलावा, महाराçĚ मɅ Ýलैगͧशप हाई èपीड बुलेट Ěेन पǐरयोजना के  Ǔनमा[ण काय[ मɅ तेजी 
आई है। अब 100% भूͧम अͬधĒहण काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। पुलɉ, एÈवाडÈट आǑद के  
Ǔनमा[ण काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
  
 
 
 
पिæचमी समͪप[त माल गͧलयारा महाराçĚ से भी होकर गुज़रता है। पिæचमी समͪप[त माल 
गͧलयारा का लगभग 178 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर महाराçĚ मɅ है, जो पिæचमी समͪप[त माल गͧलयारे 
के माग[ कȧ कुल लंबाई का लगभग 12% है। महाराçĚ मɅ Ûयू घोलवड़ से Ûयू वैतरना तक इस 
पǐरयोजना के 76 ͩकलोमीटर को पहले हȣ कमीशन कर Ǒदया गया है। शेष कायɟ को शुǾ कर 
Ǒदया गया है। पिæचम समͪप[त माल गͧलयारा को जवाहरलाल नेहǾ पोट[ Ěèट से जोड़ने से 
बंदरगाह से Ǒदãलȣ एनसीआर तक कागȾ और कंटेनर यातायात संभालने कȧ ¢मता मɅ संवध[न 
होगा। 
567                                                      

ͪपछले तीन वषɟ अथा[त् 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 और वत[मान ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 के 
दौरान महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशत: पड़ने वालȣ 8,603 ͩकलोमीटर कȧ कुल लंबाई वाले 98 
सवȶ¢ण कायɟ (29 नई लाइन, 2 आमान पǐरवत[न और 67 दोहरȣकरण) को èवीकृत ͩकया गया 
है।  
  
रेल पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ èवीकृǓत ¢ेğीय रेलवे-वार कȧ जाती है, न ͩक राÏय-वार या ¢ेğ-वार 
Èयɉͩक रेलवे कȧ पǐरयोजनाएं राÏयɉ कȧ सीमाओं के आर-पार फैलȣ हो सकती हɇ। 
 
महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशत: पड़ने वालȣ रेल अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाएं भारतीय रेल के मÚय 
रेलवे, दͯ¢ण मÚय रेलवे, दͯ¢ण पूव[ मÚय रेलवे, दͯ¢ण पिæचम रेलवे और पिæचम रेलवे के 
अंतग[त आती हɇ। रेल पǐरयोजनाओं का ¢ेğीय रेल-वार Þयौरा भारतीय रेल कȧ वेबसाइट पर 
साव[जǓनक Ǿप से उपलÞध कराया जाता है। 
 
ͩकसी भी रेल पǐरयोजना कȧ èवीकृǓत कई कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करती है िजनमɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 
शाͧमल हɇ: 
 अनुमाǓनत यातायात पूवा[नुमान और Ĥèताͪवत माग[ कȧ लाभĤदता 
 पǐरयोजना ɮवारा उपलÞध कराई जाने वालȣ आरंͧभक और अंǓतम गंतåय èथान पहुंच 
संपक[ता 
 अनुपलÞध कͫड़यɉ को जोड़ना और वैकिãपक माग[ उपलÞध कराना 
 संकुͧलत/संतृÜत लाइनɉ का ͪवè तार  
 राÏय सरकारɉ/केÛġȣय मंğालयɉ/जन ĤǓतǓनͬध यɉ ɮवारा उठाई गई मांगɅ 
 रेलवे कȧ अपनी पǐरचालǓनक आवæयकताएं 
 सामािजक-आͬथ[क मह×व 
 Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ समĒ उपलÞधता 
  
रेल पǐरयोजना/ओं का पूरा होना ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है, जो Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
 भूͧम अͬधĒहण    
 वन संबंधी मंजूरȣ 
 बाधक जनोपयोगी सेवाओं का èथानांतरण  
 ͪवͧभÛन Ĥाͬधकरणɉ से सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयां 
 ¢ेğ कȧ भू-वै£ाǓनक और èथलाकृǓतक पǐरिèथǓतयां 
 पǐरयोजना èथल के ¢ेğ मɅ कानून एवं åयवèथा कȧ िèथǓत 
 पǐरयोजना èथल ͪवशेष के ͧलए ͩकसी वष[ मɅ काय[ करने के महȣनɉ कȧ संÉया आǑद 
 
***** 
568                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
तारांिकत Ůʲ सं. 223
19/12/2025 को उȅराथŊ 
िवषयः - क ृ िष भूिम पर खारे पानी का अितŢमण 
*223. ŵी साना सतीश बाबू:
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः
(क) Ɛा सरकार ने आं Ŭ Ůदेश राǛ सिहत देश क े  तटीय और डेʐाई िजलों म Ő क ृ िष भूिम को Ůभािवत 
करने वाले खारे पानी क े  अितŢमण क े  मुȞे को पहचाना है; 
(ख) यिद हां, तो Ůभािवत िकसानों की मदद करने क े  िलए कौन-कौन सी योजनाए ं  हœ तथा उɎŐ िकस Ůकार 
की सहायता उपलɩ है; 
(ग) नमक Ůभािवत Ɨेũों की पहचान करने क े  िलए िकए गए िकसी आकलन या सवőƗण का ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(घ) Ɛा भारतीय क ृ िष अनुसंधान पį रषद (आईसीएआर) या अ Ɋ अिभकरणों ने ऐसी ज़मीनों की 
उȋादकता को बहाल करने क े  िलए अनुसंधान िकया है; और 
(ङ) Ɛा सरकार का उन िकसानों क े  िलए, िजनकी धान और नाįरयल की खेती की भूिम, खारे पन क े  कारण 
अनुपजाऊ हो गई है, कोई िवशेष पैक े ज लाने का िवचार है? 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी (ŵी िशवराज िसंह चौहान) 
(क) से (ङ) :  िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
569                                                      

‘क ृ िष भूिम पर खार े  पानी का अितŢमण’ क े  संबंध मŐ ŵी साना सतीश बाबू, सांसद Ȫारा पूछ े  गए 
िदनांक 19 िदसंबर, 2025 को राǛ सभा मŐ उȅराथŊ तारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 223 क े  भाग (क) से (ड) 
क े  संबंध मŐ उİʟİखत िववरण 
(क) और (ख)  सरकार ने आंŬ Ůदेश राǛ सिहत देश क े  तटीय और डेʐाई िजलों मŐ क ृ िष भूिम को 
Ůभािवत करने वाले खारे पानी क े  अितŢमण की सम˟ा को समझा है। िमǥी और जल संबंधी सम˟ाओं 
को कम करने और Ůभािवत िकसानों को सहायता Ůदान करने क े  िलए फसल और Ɨेũ-िविशʼ योजनाओं 
क े  माȯम से िविभɄ इंटरवŐशन कायाŊİɋत िकए जा रहे हœ। क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय क े  अधीन 
नाįरयल िवकास बोडŊ (सीडीबी), आंŬ Ůदेश सिहत संपूणŊ देश मŐ िकसानों Ȫारा सामना की जा रही 
उȋादकता संबंधी बाधाओं, िमǥी एवं जल संबंधी सम˟ाओं तथा आजीिवका संबंधी चुनौितयों के  समाधान 
हेतु अनेक कायŊŢम कायाŊİɋत कर रहा है। Ůभािवत िकसानों के  िलए उपलɩ योजनाओं और िविभɄ 
सहायताओं का िववरण अनुबंध मŐ िदया गया है। ये योजनाए ँ  बोडŊ Ȫारा ŮȑƗ ŝप से तथा िचि˥त Ůमुख 
Ɨेũों के  आधार पर संबंिधत राǛ सरकारों के  माȯम से कायाŊİɋत की जाती हœ। िवगत पाँच वषŘ मŐ, सीडीबी 
ने अİखल भारत मŐ िविभɄ Ɨेũोɉुखी योजनाओं क े  िलए क ु ल ₹39,410.82 लाख की रािश का उपयोग 
िकया, िजसमŐ से ₹5,820.35 लाख (14.76%) रािश आंŬ Ůदेश मŐ उपयोग की गई।  
 
(ग)  भारतीय क ृ िष अनुसंधान पįरषद (आईसीएआर) ने देश मŐ 12.9 लाख हेƃेयर क ु ल तटीय लवणीय 
Ůभािवत Ɨेũ का आकलन िकया है। आंŬ Ůदेश मŐ लगभग 1.06 लाख हेƃेयर Ɨेũ लवण Ůभािवत है। तटीय 
Ɨेũों मŐ लवण Ůभािवत िमǥी क े  पुनŜȠार क े  िलए, िविभɄ तकनीकों जैसे लœड शेिपंग मॉडल, (खेत तालाब, 
Űैिकश वॉटर एƓाक̵चर क े  साथ/क े  िबना धान-सह-मछली पालन), डीप फरŖ और हाई įरज, शैलो फरŖ 
और मीिडयम įरज), एकीक ृ त पोषक तȕ Ůबंधन, सूƘ िसंचाई Ůणाली, क ृ िष भूिम मŐ खारे पानी क े  Ůवेश 
को रोकने क े  िलए नदी तटबंध की िडजाइिनंग, एŤोनॉिमक पȠितयाँ, उपयुƅ फसलŐ और उनकी िक˝Ő, 
क ं जवőशन िटलेज पȠितयाँ, क ृ िष वािनकी Ůणाली, समेिकत क ृ िष Ůणाली आिद का सुझाव िदया गया है 
तािक िमǥी की लवणता को कम िकया जा सक े  और क ृ िष की उȋादकता को बढ़ाया जा सक े । इन Ɨेũों मŐ 
फसलों की उȋादकता मŐ वृİȠ करने क े  िलए चावल (गोवा धान 3 और गोवा धान 4), गेšं (क े आरएल 210 
और क े आरएल 283) की नमक सिहˁु िक˝ों और बायो फॉमुŊलेशɌ (गोवा बायो-1 और गोवा बायो-2) क े  
उपयोग का भी सुझाव िदया गया है। 
(घ)  खाȨ सुरƗा और क ृ िष उȋादकता की सम˟ा से संबंिधत मुȞों के  समाधान हेतु, आईसीएआर लवण-
Ůभािवत भूिम सिहत िविभɄ क ृ िष-जलवायु पįरİ˕ितयों मŐ बुिनयादी, कायŊनीितक और अनुŮयुƅ अनुसंधान 
कर रहा है। इन अनुसंधान कायŊŢमों का मुƥ उȞेʴ लवणता सम˟ा (सेिलिनटी ː Ōेस) सिहत जैिवक और 
अजैिवक तनावों के  Ůित टॉलरŐट फसल िक˝ों और हाईिŰडों मŐ बेहतर उपज और Ɠािलटी टŌेट्स का 
िवकास करना है। आईसीएआर लवण-Ůभािवत Ɨेũों के  िकसानों Ȫारा अपनाने हेतु ˕ान-िविशʼ उǄ उपज 
वाली िक˝ों और उपयुƅ फसल Ůबंधन ŮौȨोिगिकयों और पȠितयों की भी अनुशंसा करता है। वषŊ 
2014-25 की अविध के  दौरान, आईसीएआर ने लवणता-सहनशील फसलों की 80 िक˝Ő जारी कीं, िजनमŐ 
चावल की 40, गेšं की 2, जौ की 4, भारतीय सरसों की 6, मसूर की 4, मूंग की 2, बाजरा, उड़द, चारा 
फसल सेसबािनया और चारा जई की 1-1 िक˝ और गɄे की 18 िक˝Ő शािमल हœ। 
(ड.) वषŊ 2025-26 क े  िलए, देश भर मŐ नाįरयल िवकास बोडŊ की िविभɄ योजनाओं के  कायाŊɋयन हेतु 
₹23500.00 लाख की रािश Ůˑािवत की गई है। इसमŐ से ₹3,070.67 लाख की रािश आंŬ Ůदेश राǛ क े  
िलए िनधाŊįरत की गई है। Ůमुख इंटवŒशनों मŐ नाįरयल बागानों का पुनरŖपण और पुनŜȠार, समेिकत क ृ िष 
और पोषक तȕ Ůबंधन, डेमॉɌटŌेशन-सह-बीज उȋादन फामŘ की ˕ापना, नाįरयल की खेती क े  अंतगŊत 
Ɨेũ का िवˑार, और कवरे ज बढ़ाने और उȋादकता मŐ सुधार लाने क े  उȞेʴ से Ɨमता िनमाŊण और 
जागŝकता कायŊŢम शािमल हœ। 
570                                                      

अनुबंध 
नाįरयल िवकास बोडŊ की योजनाए ं 
 
1. गुणवȅापूणŊ पौध सामŤी का उȋादन: 
 डेमॉɌटŌेशन सह बीज उȋादन (डीएसपी) फामŊ - नए डीएसपी फामŘ की ˕ापना और मौजूदा 
फामŘ का रखरखाव: नाįरयल िवकास बोडŊ ने िविभɄ Ɨेũों मŐ 11 डीएसपी फामŊ ˕ािपत िकए हœ। 
Ůȑेक नए फामŊ को िवकास क े  िलए शुŜआती दो वषŘ क े  िलए ₹30 लाख आवंिटत िकए जाते हœ। तीसरे 
वषŊ से लेकर फामŊ मŐ उपज İ˕रता आने तक, Ůित हेƃेयर Ůित वषŊ ₹1 लाख की रखरखाव सहायता 
Ůदान की जाती है। 
 सावŊजिनक Ɨेũ की नसŊįरयों मŐ गुणवȅापूणŊ पौध सामŤी उȋादन क े  िलए सहायता: गुणवȅापूणŊ 
नाįरयल के  पौधों के  उȋादन और उपलɩता को बढ़ाने क े  िलए, ₹20 Ůित पौध की दर से पौध 
उȋादन लागत का 50% सावŊजिनक Ɨेũ की नसŊįरयों को Ůदान िकया जाता है। 
 ɊूİƑयस नाįरयल बीज बागानों की ˕ापना: इस योजना क े  तहत पįरयोजना लागत का 50% 
िवȅीय सहायता Ůदान की जाती है, जो Ůित हेƃेयर 3.60 लाख Ŝपये (क ु ल लागत 7.20 लाख Ŝपये 
Ůित हेƃेयर क े  मुकाबले) है, और Ůित इकाई अिधकतम 4 हेƃेयर Ɨेũ क े  िलए है। यह सहायता 
(50:25:25 क े  अनुपात मŐ )तीन िकˑों मŐ Ůदान  की जाती है। 
 लघु नाįरयल नसŊरी की ˕ापना: इस योजना क े  तहत Ůित पौध 90 Ŝपये तक की सहायता Ůदान की 
जाती है, िजसमŐ सावŊजिनक Ɨेũ की नसŊरी क े  िलए 100% और िनजी Ɨेũ की नसŊरी क े  िलए 50% 
लागत दो समान िकˑों मŐ कवर की जाती है। 
 नाįरयल नसŊरी का Ůȑायन और रेिटंग: Ůित वषŊ कम से कम 20,000 पौध तैयार करने वाली नसŊरी 
को 1.50 लाख Ŝपये तक की िवȅीय सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। 
2. नाįरयल की खेती क े  अंतगŊत Ɨेũ का िवˑार:  
नाįरयल के  नए बागानों क े  िलए, Ůित लाभाथŎ Ɋूनतम 0.08 हेƃेयर और अिधकतम 2 हेƃेयर क े  िलए 
दो समान वािषŊक िकˑों मŐ ₹56,000 Ůित हेƃेयर की सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। 
3. मौजूदा नाįरयल बागानों मŐ सतत उȋादकता सुधार क े  िलए ʩापक कायŊŢम 
 नाįरयल आधाįरत फसल Ůणािलयों के  माȯम से उȋादकता मŐ सुधार – पीआईसीसीएस: 
एकीक ृ त क ृ िष पȠित क े  Ȫारा नाįरयल िकसानों की उȋादकता और आय बढ़ाने क े  िलए, Ůित हेƃेयर 
₹42,000 तक की 100% िवȅीय सहायता, Ůित लाभाथŎ 2 हेƃेयर तक सीिमत, दो समान वािषŊक 
िकˑों मŐ Ůदान की जाती है। 
 नाįरयल बागानों मŐ जल संसाधनों का सृजन (i) िनजी िकसान Ȫारा और (ii) सामुदाियक 
आधार पर: यह ˋीम राʼŌीय बागवानी िमशन के  मानदंडों के  अनुसार कायाŊİɋत की जाती है। 
 नाįरयल मŐ जैिवक खेती को अपनाना: यह योजना परंपरागत क ृ िष िवकास योजना (पीक े वीवाई) क े  
मानदंडों क े  अनुसार है। 
 नाįरयल बागान का जैिवक Ůमाणीकरण: यह ˋीम पीके वीवाई के  मानदंडों के  अनुसार है। 
 नाįरयल बागान मŐ क ृ िष मशीनीकरण: यह ˋीम क ृ िष मशीनीकरण उप-िमशन के  मानदंडों के  
अनुसार कायाŊİɋत की जाती है। 
 
4. ŮौȨोिगकी ŮदशŊन/गुणवȅा परीƗण Ůयोगशाला:  
नाįरयल िवकास बोडŊ ŮौȨोिगकी सं˕ान (सीआईटी), अलुवा, मूʞविधŊत नाįरयल उȋादों के  िलए 
ŮौȨोिगिकयों के  िवकास और अंतरण, एनएबीएल-माɊता Ůाɑ गुणवȅा परीƗण करने और नाįरयल 
Ůसंˋरण और मूʞवधŊन मŐ अʙकािलक, ʩावहाįरक ŮिशƗण कायŊŢमों के  आयोजन मŐ महȕपूणŊ 
भूिमका िनभाता है। 
5. बाजार संबंधी जानकारी एवं अनुसंधान, उȋाद एवं Űांड Ůचार एवं िनयाŊत सेवाए ं : 
यह ˋीम बाजार संवधŊन, बाजार पŠंच िवˑार, उȋाद गुणवȅा सुधार और िकसानों, 
ŮसंˋरणकताŊओं, उȨिमयों और िनयाŊतकों के  िलए नए अवसर सृजन हेतु है। इसके  अंतगŊत घरे लू 
और िनयाŊत बाजारों के  िलए बाजार संवधŊन पहल Ůमुख गितिविधयां हœ। 
 
571                                                      

6. Ɨमता िनमाŊण, ŮिशƗण एवं जागŝकता कायŊŢम और सूचना ŮौȨोिगकी: 
इस योजना मŐ जागŝकता सृजन, Ůचार, कौशल िवकास, आजीिवका सहायता, ŮिशƗण और 
कायŊनीितक सहयोग शािमल हœ तािक नाįरयल िकसानों, उȨिमयों, ŮसंˋरणकताŊओं, कारीगरों और 
अɊ ːेकहोʒसŊ को उभरती चुनौितयों का सामना करने और नए अवसरों का लाभ उठाने के  िलए 
बेहतर ढंग से तैयार िकया जा सक े । 
7. नाįरयल ŮौȨोिगकी िमशन (टीएमओसी): 
सावŊजिनक सं˕ानों को Ůसंˋरण और उȋाद िविवधीकरण, िवकास और ŮदशŊन से संबंिधत 
पįरयोजनाओं के  िलए 100 लाख Ŝपये तक की धनरािश उपलɩ कराई जाती है। सामाɊ Ɨेũों मŐ 
25% और उǄ लागत वाले Ɨेũों मŐ 50% की पूंजीगत सİɵडी क े  माȯम से इन पįरयोजनाओं को 
अपनाने क े  िलए ŮोȖाहन िदया जाता है, िजसकी अिधकतम सीमा 500 लाख Ŝपये है। कीट एवं रोग 
Ůबंधन क े  िलए ŮौȨोिगिकयों के  िवकास और ŮदशŊन से संबंिधत पįरयोजनाओं के  िलए भी िवȅीय 
सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। कीट/रोग िनयंũण मŐ अनुसंधान एवं िवकास या ŮदशŊन करने वाले 
सावŊजिनक सं˕ान 500 लाख Ŝपये तक की 100% धनरािश क े  िलए पाũ हœ, जबिक ऐसी 
ŮौȨोिगिकयों को अपनाने पर पįरयोजना लागत का 25% तक की सİɵडी दी जाती है। 
8. नाįरयल बागानों का पुनरŖपण और जीणŖȠार: 
इस ˋीम क े  तीन घटक हœ, िजसमŐ दो वषŘ मŐ Ůित हेƃेयर ₹54,000 की क ु ल िवȅीय सहायता सीमा है। 
जीणŊ/रोगŤˑ नाįरयल के  पेड़ों की कटाई और पेड़ हटाने के  िलए ₹1000 Ůित पेड़, अिधकतम ₹32000 
Ůित हेƃेयर (Ůित हेƃेयर 32 पेड़) क े  अधीन; मौजूदा नाįरयल के  पेड़ों के  जीणŖȠार क े  िलए ₹17500 
Ůित हेƃेयर, ₹8750 की दो वािषŊक िकˑों मŐ; और पुनरŖपण क े  िलए 50% लागत पर अिधकतम 
₹4,500 Ůित हेƃेयर (Ůित पौधा ₹45) क े  अधीन सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। 
9. नाįरयल पाम बीमा ˋीम: 
नाįरयल पाम और नाįरयल Ɨेũ मŐ कायŊरत ŵिमकों दोनों की सुरƗा क े  िलए यह ˋीम, फसल क े  साथ-
साथ ŵिमकों की आजीिवका के  िलए ʩापक जोİखम कवरेज सुिनिʮत करती है। 
10. क े रासुरƗा बीमा ˋीम: 
यह नाįरयल Ɨेũ मŐ कायŊरत ŵिमकों की आजीिवका की सुरƗा क े  िलए एक ʩापक समूह ʩİƅगत 
दुघŊटना बीमा ˋीम है। वािषŊक Ůीिमयम 956 Ŝपये है और इसे बोडŊ और लाभाथŎ क े  बीच 85:15 क े  
अनुपात मŐ साझा िकया जाता है। आवेदक Ȫारा वहन िकया जाने वाला Ůीिमयम िहˣा 143 Ŝपये है। 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
572                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
ताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या *224 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
 
टीआईडीई‍2.0‍योजना‍िी‍स्थिकत‍‍‍ 
 
*224. श्री‍सांजय‍कसांह: 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क)  प्रौद्योनिकी इिक्‍ यूबेशि और उद्यनमयों का निकास (्ीआईडीई 2.0) योििा क े  तहत स् ्ा्टअप् स क े  बीच 
में ही बंि होिे की िर क्‍ या है; 
(ख)   उि स् ्ा्टअप का ब् यौरा क्‍ या है िो शुरू तो होते हैं लेनकि निस् तार करिे से पहले इिक्‍ यूबे्र छोड़ िेते 
हैं तथा इसक े  क्‍ या कारण हैं;  
(ि)  इिक्‍ यूबे्ेड स् ्ा्टअप् स में से नकतिे बौद्धिक संपिा/पे्ें् क े  नलए फाइल करते हैं और क्‍ या यह योििा 
बौद्धिक संपिा अनिकार (आईपीआर) सुरक्षा को बढािा िेती है या उसका समथटि करती है;    
 
(घ) पांच िर्ट की योििा अिनि क े  बाि इिक्‍ यूबे्र क ें द्र नकस प्रकार स् ियं को िीघटकाल तक बिाए रखते 
हैं;   
 
(ड.) क्‍ या इिक्‍ यूबे्र क ें द्र नित् तीय रूप से आत् मनिभटर होंिे या अिुिती नित् तपोर्ण/इिक्‍ यूबेन्ंि क ं पनियों पर 
निभटर होंिे; और 
 
(च) क्‍ या ्ीआईडीई-समनथटत स् ्ा्टअप् स की नििेशी भािीिारी िैसे रूप में िैनिक स् तर पर पहचाि बिािे 
में सहायता करिे क े  नलए कोई तंत्र है? 
 
 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍‍ ट र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्योकििी‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍अस्थ‍‍ िनी‍िैष्‍ णि) 
 
(ि)‍से‍(च):‍एक नििरण-पत्र सभा प्ल पर रख निया िया है । 
 
***** 
 
  
573                                                      

‘’‍टीआईडीई‍2.0‍योजना‍िी‍स्थिकत’’‍ि े ‍सांबांध‍में‍किनाांि‍19.12.2025‍िो‍राज्यसभा‍में‍पूछ े ‍िए‍
ताराांकित‍प्र‍‍ न‍सांख्‍ या‍*224‍ि े ‍उत्तर‍में‍उस्थिस्थित‍कििरण‍पत्र 
**** 
 
(ि)‍से (च): भारत सरकार स्टार्टअप पाररद्धितकी तंत्र को सहायता प्रिाि करने क े  लिए िीििचक्र आिाररत 
पहल अपनाती है। स्टार्टअप को निचार और संकल् पिा क े  साक्ष् य से िेकर आनिरूप निकास, उत् पाि निकास    
और परीक्षण तक की पूरी यात्रा क े  िौराि सहायता प्रिाि की िाती है। 
टाइड 2.0 
इस पहल क े  भाि क े  तौर पर, भारत सरकार ने िर्ट 2019 में “र्ेक्नोिॉजी इनक्यूबेशन ए ं ड डबलपमें् ऑफ़ 
ए ं र्रप्रेन्योसट 2.0 (्ाइड 2.0)” योििा शुरू की। इसक े  तहत इनक्यूबेर्सट को नित् तीय और तकिीकी सहायता 
प्रिाि कर प्रौद्योनिकी आिाररत उद्यमशीलता को बढावा निया िाता है। 
देश भर क े  उच् चतर अनििम संस् थाि और बडे अिुसंिाि एिं निकास संिठिों में मौजूद 51 चुने हुए इनक्यूबेर्र 
क े  माध् यम से स्टार्टअप को सहायता प्रिाि की िाती है। िगभग 2000 र्ेक स्टार्ट-अप को सहायता प्रिाि करने 
क े  लिए 5 िर्ट क े  समय में क ु ि 264.62 करोड रुपए क े  खचट को मंजूरी दी गई है। 
ये इनक्यूबेर्र स्टार्टअप्स को आिश् यक निशेर्ज्ञता, उद्योि िित क े  साथ संपक ट और पाररद्धितकी तंत्र   में 
भािीिारी आनि क े  नलए सहायता प्रिाि करते हैं। इस योििा क े  तहत अब तक 1,706 स्टार्टअप्स को सहायता 
प्रिाि की िई है और ये स्टार्टअप िगातार अच्छी प्रिनत कर रहे हैं। 
चूंनक स्टार्टअप िस् तुत: प्रनतस् पिी बािार  में अपिा प्रचालि  करते हैं, इसनलए इनक्यूबेर्र क े  साथ उनकी 
सहभानिता भी व् यापाररक यथाथट क े  आधार पर बदिती रहती है। इनमें, अन् य बातों क े  साथ-साथ, उत् पाि-बािार 
की अिुक ू लता हानसल करिा, निशर्ज्ञ प्र योिशाला आिश् यकताए ं, तकिीकी चुनौलतयााँ, िि िु्ािे  की 
आिश् यकताए ं, स् थापकों द्वारा रणिीनतक बदिाव और क ु ि लमिाकर नित् तीय द्धिरता शालमि होती हैं। 
कई मामिों में, इनक्यूबेर्सट ने स्टार्टअप क े  लिए निचार को शीघ्र िैघीक ृ त कराने और असरदार तरीक े  से बदलाि 
करने में मदद की है, लजससे ए ं र्रप्रेन्योसट को तुलिात् मक रूप से अनिक व् यिहायट निचार का रुख करिे में मदद 
लमिी है। 
सहायताप्राप् त स्टार्टअप का समग्र कायटनिष् पािि अच्छा बना हुआ है, लजसमें कई स्टार्टअप ने रािस् ि िृद्धि, बढा 
हुआ मूल् य, बाह्य नििीयि और आईपी फाइलिंग िैसी उपलद्धब््ां िशाटई हैं। 
इसक े  अिावा, 638 स्टार्टअप ने क ु ि 1672 आईपी/पेर्ेंर् फाइि लकए हैं। 
बौद्धिक संपदा अधिकार ं में उत्क ृ ष्टता क ें द्र (सीओई-आईपी) 
्ाइड 2.0 क े  तहत, इिेक्ट् र ॉलनकी और आई्ी डोमेन में स्टार्टअप/ एसएमई/नशक्षा िित /खोिकताटओं को 
बढावा देने या सहायता प्रिाि करने क े  लिए िौद्धिक संपिा अनिकारों में उत् क ृष् ्ता क ें द्र (सीओई-आईपी) भी 
स् थानपत नकए गए हैं। ये सीओई आईपी से जुडी निनभन् ि सेिाए ं, िािरूकता और प्रनशक्षण भी देते हैं। 
्ाइड 2.0 क ें द्र िंबे समय तक चिने वािी द्धिरता को बढािा िेने क े  लिए इलिर्ी एग्जिर् समेत बहुत से रािस् ि 
मॉडि अपनाते हैं। इसक े  अिावा, ्ाइड 2.0 क ें द्रों ने 150 से ज़्यादा इनक्यूबेर्ेड स्टार्टअप को अपना व् यिसाय 
बढाने क े  लिए िैनिक स् तर पर जाने में मदद की है। 
क ु ि लमिाकर, ्ाइड 2.0, िेिेनसस, सम् मृि, स्टार्टअप इंलडया और क्षेत्र-निनशष् ् ििाचार कायटक्रम जैसे द ू सरे 
सरकारी कायटक्रमों क े  पूरक क े  रूप में काम करती है। ये सभी कायटक्रम लमिकर देश में एक मजबूत स्टार्टअप 
पाररद्धितकी तंत्र का निमाटण करिे क े  लिए सरकार की पुरिोर कोलशश को िशाटते हैं। 
**** 
 
574                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 225 का उƣर 
 
वंदे भारत èलȣपर रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ कͧमयां 
 
*225 डॉ. जॉन ǒĦटास:  
 
 Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  Èया यह सच है ͩक वंदे भारत èलȣपर रेलगाͫड़यɉ को ͫडजाइन संबंधी कुछ कͧमयɉ के 
कारण देरȣ का सामना करना पड़ रहा है;  
 
(ख)  यǑद हां, तो इन कͧमयɉ का Þयौरा Èया है और इसके Èया कारण हɇ; और  
 
(ग)  इन कͧमयɉ को दूर करने और वंदे भारत èलȣपर रेलगाͫड़यɉ को समय पर चालू ͩकया 
जाना सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए Ĥèताͪवत समय-सीमा Èया है?                                 
                                     
 
                                    उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
                               (Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
 
(क) से (ग): ͪववरण सभा पटल पर रख Ǒदया गया है। 
 
***** 
  
575                                                      

 
वंदे भारत èलȣपर रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ कͧमयɉ के संबंध मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को राÏय सभा मɅ   
डॉ. जॉन ǒĦटास के तारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 225 के भाग (क) से (ग) के उƣर से संबंͬधत ͪववरण। 
 
(क) से (ग): लंबी दूरȣ कȧ याğाओं के  ͧलए, वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस का èलȣपर वेǐरएंट èवदेशी Ǿप 
से ͫडज़ाइन और ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। ऐसी दो गाͫड़यां पहले हȣ ͪवǓनͧम[त कȧ जा चुकȧ हɇ 
और वत[मान मɅ इनका गहन परȣ¢ण/कमीशǓनंग ͩकया जा रहा है। 
  
वंदे èलȣपर सǑहत नए चल èटॉकɉ के ͪवकास कȧ ĤͩĐया मɅ समĒ ͸िçटकोण आवæयक है, 
िजसमɅ सुरͯ¢त, ͪवæवसनीय और आरामदायक याğा सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय 
नवोÛमेष, सामǐरक योजना और ͪवǓनमा[ण का संयोजन शाͧमल होता है। इसमɅ Ĥोटोटाइप का 
ͪवकास और उसके पæचात åयापक जांच और परȣ¢ण शाͧमल हɇ, िजसमɅ समय लगता है। 
  
याǒğयɉ के याğा अनुभव मɅ सुधार लाने के उɮदेæय से, इन गाड़ी सेटɉ मɅ आधुǓनक सवारȣ ͫडÞबे 
लगाए गए हɇ, िजनमɅ उÛनत संर¢ा संबंधी ͪवशेषताएं और याǒğयɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएँ शाͧमल हɇ, 
जो Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
  
 कवच से सुसिÏजत।  
 180/160 ͩक.मी. ĤǓत घंटे कȧ ͫडजाइन/पǐरचालन गǓत के साथ उÍचतर ×वरण। 
 दुघ[टना-रोधी एवं झटका मुÈ त अध[ èथायी कपलर एवं एंटȣ-Èलाइàबस[। 
 ईएन मानकɉ के अनुǾप कार बॉडी का दुघ[टना-रोधी ͫडज़ाइन। 
 ईएन-45545 एचएल3 अिÊन संर¢ा मानक।  
 Ĥ×येक सवारȣ ͫडÞबे के अंत मɅ अिÊन अवरोधक दरवाजे 
 बेहतर अिÊन संर¢ा - ͪवɮयुत कैǒबनेटɉ और शौचालयɉ मɅ एरोसोल आधाǐरत अिÊन 
पहचान और शमन Ĥणालȣ।  
 ऊजा[ द¢ता के ͧलए ǐरजेनरेǑटव Ħेͩकंग Ĥणालȣ।  
 वातानुकूलन इकाइयɉ मɅ èवदेशी Ǿप से ͪवकͧसत यूवी-सी लɇप आधाǐरत ͪवसंĐमण 
Ĥणालȣ लगाई गई है।  
 कɅ ġȣय Ǿप से Ǔनयंǒğत èवचाͧलत Üलग दरवाजे और पूरȣ तरह से सीलबंद चौड़े गɇगवे। 
 सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ सीसीटȣवी। 
 आपातकालȣन िèथǓत मɅ याğी और गाड़ी Ĥबंधक/लोको पायलट के बीच संĤेषण के ͧलए 
आपातकालȣन टॉक-बैक इकाई। 
 Ǒदåयांग याǒğयɉ के ͧलए Ĝाइͪवंग कोच मɅ दोनɉ तरफ ͪवशेष शौचालय। 
 याğी सुͪवधाओं जैसे वातानुकूलन, सैलून मɅ Ĥकाश åयवèथा आǑद कȧ बेहतर िèथǓत कȧ 
Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए कɅ ġȣकृत कोच मॉǓनटǐरंग Ĥणालȣ।  
 ऊपर कȧ बथ[ पर चढ़ने मɅ आसानी के ͧलए एगȾनॉͧमक Ǿप से ͫडज़ाइन कȧ गई सीढ़ȣ। 
***** 
576                                                      

WRITTEN ANSWERS TO UNSTARRED QUESTIONS 
अतारांिकत ĢƘȗ क े  िलिखत उǄर 
577                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2241 
19 िदसɾर, 2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: िकसानों की आȏहȑाए ं और Ůभािवत पįरवारों को मुआवजा 
2241 डा. सİ˝त पाũाः  
ŵीमती मौसम बी नूरः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) िपछले पांच वषŘ क े दौरान िकसानों Ȫारा आȏहȑा क े राǛ-वार और वषŊ-वार िकतने मामले दजŊ िकए गए हœ और 
फसल खराब होने, ऋण का बोझ, बाजार मूʞ मŐ िगरावट और इनपुट लागत का दबाव जैसे आिधकाįरक ŝप से दजŊ 
कारणों का ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ख) मृतक िकसानों मŐ से बटाईदार, साझे मŐ खेती करने वाले िकसान, सीमांत िकसान और औपचाįरक सं˕ागत ऋण तक 
पŠंच से वंिचत िकसानों का अनुपात िकतना है; 
(ग) Ůभािवत पįरवारों को िदए गए मुआवजे, ऋण राहत और पुनवाŊस उपायों का ɯौरा Ɛा है तथा इसमŐ कवरेज और 
समयबȠता क े संबंध मŐ Ɛा किमयां पाई गई हœ; और 
(घ) सरकार Ȫारा िचि˥त ऐसी संरचनाȏक नीितगत िवफलताओं का ɯौरा Ɛा है जो कई सहायता योजनाओं क े बावजूद 
कमजोर िकसानों को लगातार संकट मŐ धक े ल रही हœ? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
 
(क) से (घ): गृह मंũालय क े अधीन राʼŌीय अपराध įरकॉडŊ ɯूरो (एनसीआरबी) अपनी पिũका 'भारत मŐ आकİ˝क मृȑु 
और आȏहȑाए ं' (एडीएसआई) मŐ आȏहȑाओं से संबंिधत जानकारी संकिलत और Ůसाįरत करता है। 2023 तक की 
įरपोटŊ एनसीआरबी की वेबसाइट (https://ncrb.gov.in) पर उपलɩ है। एडीएसआई įरपोटŊ मŐ िकसानों की आȏहȑा क े 
अलग-अलग कारणों का उʟेख नहीं है। आȏहȑा क े कारण िविवध हœ। राǛ सरकारŐ अपने-अपने Ůावधानों और िनयमों 
क े अनुसार अनुŤह रािश या राहत Ůदान करती हœ। 
 
क ृ िष राǛ का िवषय है। भारत सरकार िकसानों क े कʞाण क े िलए उपयुƅ नीितगत उपायों और बजट आवंटन 
क े माȯम से राǛों को सहायता Ůदान करती है। भारत सरकार की योजनाओं/कायŊŢमों का उȞेʴ उȋादन बढ़ाना, 
िकसानों को उिचत पाįरŵिमक और आय सहायता Ůदान करना है। सरकार ने क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग क े बजट 
आवंटन को 2013-14 क े दौरान 21,933.50 करोड़ Ŝपये से बढ़ाकर 2025-26 क े दौरान 1,27,290.16 करोड़ Ŝपये कर 
िदया है। िकसानों की समŤ आय बढ़ाने और क ृ िष Ɨेũ मŐ उिचत पाįरŵिमक सुिनिʮत करने क े िलए क ृ िष एवं िकसान 
कʞाण िवभाग Ȫारा शुŝ की गई Ůमुख योजनाओं/कायŊŢमों का िववरण संलư है। 
सरकार िकसान Ţे िडट काडŊ (क े सीसी) क े माȯम से įरयायती ɯाज दर पर ऋण उपलɩ कराने क े िलए 
संशोिधत ɯाज सİɵडी योजना (एमआईएसएस) लागू कर रही है। िकसानों को क े सीसी ऋण 7% की įरयायती ɯाज दर 
पर िमलता है। इसे सुगम बनाने क े िलए, िवȅीय सं˕ानों को 1.5% का अिŤम ɯाज अनुदान Ůदान िकया जाता है। इसक े 
अितįरƅ, समय पर ऋण चुकाने वाले िकसानों को 3% का शीť पुनभुŊगतान ŮोȖाहन िमलता है, िजससे ɯाज दर घटकर 
4% Ůित वषŊ हो जाती है। ये लाभ 3 लाख Ŝपये तक की ऋण सीमा क े िलए उपलɩ हœ। 
 
राʼŌीय आपदा Ůबंधन नीित (एनपीडीएम) क े अनुसार, अिधसूिचत आपदाओं की İ˕ित मŐ जमीनी ˑर पर 
आवʴक राहत उपाय Ůदान करने की Ůाथिमक िजʃेदारी राǛ सरकार की होती है। राǛ सरकारŐ भारत सरकार Ȫारा 
अनुमोिदत मदों और मानदंडों क े अनुसार राǛ आपदा मोचन िनिध(एसडीआरएफ) मŐ उपलɩ िनिधयों से Ůाक ृ ितक 
आपदाओं की İ˕ित मŐ राहत उपाय करती हœ। एसडीआरएफ क े अितįरƅ, राʼŌीय आपदा मोचन िनिध (एनडीआरएफ) से 
'गंभीर Ůक ृ ित' की Ůाक ृ ितक आपदाओं क े िलए अितįरƅ िवȅीय सहायता पर िवचार िकया जाता है और राǛ सरकार से 
Ůाɑ ǒापन क े आधार पर ˕ािपत ŮिŢयाओं क े अनुसार इसे अनुमोिदत िकया जाता है। एसडीआरएफ और 
एनडीआरएफ क े तहत Ůदान की जाने वाली िवȅीय सहायता राहत क े ŝप मŐ होती है, न िक मुआवजे क े ŝप मŐ। 
  
578                                                      

रा.स.अ.Ů.सं. 2241   
 
अनुबंध 
 
 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग की योजनाए ँ/कायŊŢम 
 
1. Ůधानमंũी िकसान सʃान िनिध (पीएम-िकसान)  
2. Ůधानमंũी िकसान मान धन योजना (पीएम-क े एमवाई)  
3. Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना ( पीएमएफबीवाई)/पुनगŊिठत मौसम आधाįरत फसल बीमा योजना 
(आरडɲूबीसीआईएस)   
4. संशोिधत ɯाज अनुदान योजना (एमआईएसएस)  
5 एŤीक̵चर इंůाː Ō Ɓर फ ं ड (एआईएफ)  
6. 10,000 नए िकसान उȋादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) का गठन और संवधŊन  
7. राʼŌीय मधुमƀी पालन और शहद िमशन (एनबीएचएम)  
8. नमो डŌ ोन दीदी 
9. राʼŌीय Ůाक ृ ितक क ृ िष िमशन (एनएमएनएफ)  
10. Ůधानमंũी अɄदता आय संरƗण अिभयान (पीएम-आशा)  
11. ːाटŊ-अɛ और Ťामीण उȨमों क े िलए क ृ िष कोष (एŤीʴोर)  
12. Ůित बूंद अिधक फसल (पीडीएमसी)  
13. क ृ िष मशीनीकरण उप-िमशन (एसएमएएम)  
14. परंपरागत क ृ िष िवकास योजना (पीक े वीवाई) 
15.  सॉइल हेʕ ए ं ड फिटŊलटी (एसएचए ं डएफ) 
16.वषाŊ आधाįरत Ɨेũ िवकास (आरएडी) 
17. क ृ िष वािनकी  
18.फसल िविवधीकरण कायŊŢम (सीडीपी) 
19. क ृ िष िवˑार उप-िमशन (एसएमएई)  
20.बीज एवं रोपण सामŤी उप-िमशन (एसएमएसपी) 
21.राʼŌीय खाȨ सुरƗा एवं पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम)  
22. एकीक ृ त क ृ िष िवपणन योजना (आईएसएएम)  
23. समेिकत बागवानी िवकास िमशन (एमआईडीएच) 
24. राʼŌीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ) - ऑइल पाम 
25. राʼŌीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ) - ितलहन 
26. पूवŖȅर Ɨेũ जैिवक मूʞ ŵृंखला िवकास िमशन 
27. िडिजटल एŤीक̵चर िमशन 
28. राʼŌीय बांस िमशन 
 
****** 
579                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2242 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
 
िवषय: Ůोफ े सर एम.एस. ˢामीनाथन की िसफाįरश का कायाŊɋयन 
2242 डा. सİ˝त पाũाः  
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सरकार यह ˢीकार करती है िक ˢगŎय Ůो. एम. एस. ˢामीनाथन Ȫारा अनुशंिसत ʩापक सी2 
लागत सूũ मŐ क ृ िष लागत क े सही कीमत क े ŝप मŐ भुगतान की गई लागत, पाįरवाįरक ŵम, भूिम िकराया 
और पूंजी ɯाज शािमल हœ; 
(ख) िपछले पांच वषŘ क े दौरान ए2+ एफएल पर गणना िकए गए Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) और 
सी2 ɘस 50 Ůितशत पर िनधाŊįरत िकए जाने पर लागू होने वाली एमएसपी की फसल-वार तुलना का ɯौरा 
Ɛा है; 
(ग) पूणŊ सी2 आधाįरत एमएसपी का कायाŊɋयन न होने क े कारण िकसानों को अनुमािनत िकतनी आय की 
हािन Šई है; और 
(घ) सी2 ɘस 50 Ůितशत पर एमएसपी क े कानूनी और सावŊभौिमक कायाŊɋयन को रोकने वाली नीितगत, 
राजकोषीय और बाजार संबंधी बाधाए ं कौन-सी हœ? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र)  
 
 
(क) से (घ): Ůȑेक वषŊ, सरकार क ृ िष लागत एवं मूʞ आयोग (सीएसीपी) की िसफाįरशों क े आधार पर, 
संबंिधत राǛ सरकारों और कŐ ūीय मंũालयों/िवभागों क े सुझावों पर िवचार करने क े बाद, 22 अिधदेिशत 
क ृ िष फसलों क े िलए Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) िनधाŊįरत करती है।  
Ůोफ े सर एम.एस. ˢामीनाथन की अȯƗता मŐ वषŊ 2004 मŐ गिठत राʼŌीय िकसान आयोग 
(एनसीएफ) ने अɊ बातों क े अलावा यह िसफाįरश की थी िक Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) उȋादन की 
भाįरत औसत लागत से कम से कम 50 Ůितशत अिधक होना चािहए। इस िसफाįरश को लागू करने क े िलए, 
सरकार ने अपने वषŊ 2018-19 क े कŐ ūीय बजट मŐ एमएसपी को पूवŊ-िनधाŊįरत िसȠांत क े ŝप मŐ उȋादन 
लागत क े Ɋूनतम डेढ़ गुना क े ˑर पर रखने की घोषणा की थी। तदनुसार, सभी अिनवायŊ खरीफ, रबी और 
अɊ वािणİǛक फसलों क े िलए एमएसपी को उȋादन की भाįरत औसत लागत से कम से कम 50 Ůितशत 
अिधक िनधाŊįरत िकया गया है।  
  एमएसपी की िसफाįरश करते समय, सीएसीपी उȋादन लागत, समŤ मांग-आपूितŊ की İ˕ित, 
घरे लू और अंतरराʼŌीय कीमतŐ, फसलों क े बीच मूʞ समानता, क ृ िष और गैर-क ृ िष Ɨेũों क े बीच ʩापार की 
शतŘ, अथŊʩव˕ा क े शेष भाग पर संभािवत Ůभाव जैसे महȕपूणŊ कारकों पर िवचार करता है, साथ ही भूिम, 
जल और अɊ उȋादन संसाधनों क े तकŊ संगत उपयोग और उȋादन लागत पर Ɋूनतम 50 Ůितशत मािजŊन 
सुिनिʮत करता है।  िपछले 5 वषŘ क े दौरान उȋादन लागत, Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) और उȋादन 
लागत पर Ůितफल की दर का फसलवार िववरण अनुबंध मŐ िदया गया है।  
 
बढ़ी Šई एमएसपी से देश क े िकसानों को लाभ Šआ है, जो खरीद और िकसानों को भुगतान की गई 
एमएसपी रािश क े आंकड़ों से ˙ʼ है। वषŊ 2014-15 से 2025-26 (अƃू बर 2025 तक) की अविध क े िलए िकसानों को 
भुगतान की गई खरीद और एमएसपी रािश का िववरण नीचे िदया गया है: 
खरीद एमएसपी मूʞ 
117 करोड़ 32 लाख मीिटŌक टन 24 लाख 49 हजार करोड़ Ŝपये 
   
580                                                      

अनुबंध  
िदनांक 19.12.2025 को उȅराथŊ रा.स.अ. Ů. सं. 2242 क े भाग (क) से (घ) क े उȅर मŐ उİʟİखत अनुबंध 
िपछले पांच वषŘ क े दौरान फसलों क े अनुसार उȋादन लागत, Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) और Ůितफल दर का िववरण 
(Ŝपये Ůित िƓं टल) 
 
Ţ.सं. 
वˑु क े एमएस 2021-22 क े एमएस 2022-23 क े एमएस 2023-24 क े एमएस 2024-25 क े एमएस 2025-26 
खरीफ फसलŐ लागत एमएसपी 
लागत पर 
% 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत पर 
% 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत पर 
% 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत पर 
% 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत पर 
% 
Ůितफल 
1  
धान (सामाɊ) 1293 1940 50 1360 2040 50 1455 2183 50 1533 2300 50 1579 2369 50 
               
(Ťेड ए)   
1960 
    2060   - 2203     2320     2389   
2  
ǜार (संकर) 1825 2738 50 1977 2970 50 2120 3180 50 2247 3371 50 2466 3699 50 
             
(मालदांडी)   
2758 
    2990   0 3225     3421     3749   
3 बाजरे 1213 2250 85 1268 2350 85 1371 2500 82 1485 2625 77 1703 2775 63 
4 रागी 2251 3377 50 2385 3578 50 2564 3846 50 2860 4290 50 3257 4886 50 
5 मſा 1246 1870 50 1308 1962 50 1394 2090 50 1447 2225 54 1508 2400 59 
6 अरहर(तूर) 3886 6300 62 4131 6600 60 4444 7000 58 4761 7550 59 5038 8000 59 
7 मूंग 4850 7275 50 5167 7755 50 5705 8558 50 5788 8682 50 5845 8768 50 
8 उड़द 3816 6300 65 4155 6600 59 4592 6950 51 4883 7400 52 5114 7800 53 
 
9 
  
कपास (मȯम ːेपल))   3817 
 
5726 50 4053 6080 50 4411 6620 50 4747 7121 50 5140 7710 50 
(लंबे ːेपल वाला)   6025     6380   0 7020     7521     8110   
10 मूंगफली 3699 5550 50 3873 5850 51 4251 6377 50 4522 6783 50 4842 7263 50 
11 सूरजमुखी क े बीज 4010 6015 50 4113 6400 56 4505 6760 50 4853 7280 50 5147 7721 50 
12 सोयाबीन 2633 3950 50 2805 4300 53 3029 4600 52 3261 4892 50 3552 5328 50 
13 ितल 4871 7307 50 5220 7830 50 5755 8635 50 6178 9267 50 6564 9846 50 
14 नाइजर बीज 4620 6930 50 4858 7287 50 5156 7734 50 5811 8717 50 6358 9537 50 
नोट: क े एमएस - खरीफ िवपणन सीजन  
(जारी…) 
 
581                                                      

अनुबंध जारी… 
 
िदनांक 19.12.2025 को उȅराथŊ रा.स.अ. Ů. सं. 2242 क े भाग (क) से (घ) क े उȅर मŐ उİʟİखत अनुबंध 
िपछले पांच वषŘ क े दौरान फसलों क े अनुसार उȋादन लागत, Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) और Ůितफल दर का िववरण 
(Ŝपये Ůित िƓं टल) 
    आरएमएस 2022-23 आरएमएस 2023-24 आरएमएस 2024-25 आरएमएस 2025-26 आरएमएस 2026-27 
  रबी फसलŐ लागत एमएसपी 
लागत 
पर % 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत 
पर % 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत पर 
% 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत 
पर % 
Ůितफल 
लागत एमएसपी 
लागत 
पर % 
Ůितफल 
1 गेšँ 1008 2015 100 1065 2125 100 1128 2275 102 1182 2425 105 1239 2585 109 
2 जौ 1019 1635 60 1082 1735 60 1158 1850 60 1239 1980 60 1361 2150 58 
3 चना 3004 5230 74 3206 5335 66 3400 5440 60 3527 5650 60 3699 5875 59 
4 मसूर 3079 5500 79 3239 6000 85 3405 6425 89 3537 6700 89 3705 7000 89 
5 रेपसीड/सरसों 2523 5050 100 2670 5450 104 2855 5650 98 3011 5950 98 3210 6200 93 
6 क ु सुम 3627 5441 50 3765 5650 50 3807 5800 52 3960 5940 50 4360 6540 50 
  अɊ फसलŐ                               
    2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 
1 
 
कोपरा (िमिलंग) 6805 10335 52 6974 10590 52 7153 10860 52 7350 11160 52 7721 11582 50 
(बॉल)^   10600     11000     11750 64   12000     12100   
    2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
2 जूट 2832 4500 59 2959 4750 61 3095 5050 63 3237 5335 65 3387 5650 67 
नोट: आरएमएस - रबी का िवपणन सीजन 
********* 
582                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2243 
19 िदसɾर, 2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
 
िवषय: खंिडत भूिम जोतों की सम˟ा क े समाधान हेतु नीितगत हˑƗेप 
2243. ŵी संजय क ु मार झाः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा भारत मŐ क ृ िष की İ˕ित पर उपलɩ तȚ इस बात की ओर इशारा करते हœ िक भारत मŐ औसत 
भूिम जोत का आकार छोटा और खंिडत है, िजससे पैमाने की अथŊʩव˕ाए ं और क ु शल क ृ िष पȠितयां 
सीिमत हो जाती हœ; 
(ख) यिद हां, तो इस िचंता को द ू र करने क े िलए मौजूद नीितगत हˑƗेपों का ɯौरा Ɛा है; और 
(ग) यिद नहीं, तो Ɛा मंũालय ऐसे नीितगत हˑƗेपों को िवकिसत करने की संभावना तलाशेगा? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र)  
 
(क) से (ग): क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय Ȫारा आयोिजत क ृ िष गणना (2015-16) क े अनुसार, 
Ůचालन भू-जोतों का औसत आकार 1.08 हेƃेयर है। 
 
भूिम और क ृ िष राǛ क े िवषय हœ, भारत क े संिवधान की सातवीं अनुसूची क े अनुसार, भूिम राǛ 
सरकारों क े अिधकार Ɨेũ मŐ आती है। इसक े अितįरƅ, भारत सरकार क ृ िष Ɨेũ क े िवकास क े साथ-साथ 
लघु एवं सीमांत िकसानों सिहत िकसानों क े िहतों को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए राǛों को सहयोग देने हेतु िविभɄ 
कŐ ūीय Ɨेũ और कŐ ū Ůायोिजत योजनाए ं कायाŊİɋत करती है। क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग की 
योजनाओं की सूची अनुबंध मŐ दी गई है। 
 
भारतीय क ृ िष अनुसंधान पįरषद (आईसीएआर) क ृ िष जोतों की उपज और उȋादकता बढ़ाने क े 
िलए ˕ान-िविशʼ िक˝ों और ŮौȨोिगिकयों को िवकिसत करने हेतु अनुसंधान कायŊŢम चला रही है। 
इसक े अितįरƅ, आईसीएआर अपने अनुसंधान सं˕ानों क े माȯम से सीमांत और लघु िकसानों क े िलए 
सुलभ ŮौȨोिगिकयों को िवकिसत करने हेतु अनुसंधान कायŊ करती है। सरकार उǄ मूʞ वाली फसलों 
और पशुपालन को बढ़ावा देती है, िजनसे मुƥ खाȨ फसलों की तुलना मŐ अिधक लाभ Ůाɑ होता है। 
 
 िकसान उȋादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) जैसे क ृ िष सुधार लघु िकसानों को संसाधनों को एकिũत 
करने, छोटे भूखंडों पर खेती की अƗमताओं को कम करने और उȋादकता को बढ़ाने मŐ सƗम बना सकते 
हœ। इसक े अितįरƅ, िकसान सं˕ा क े ŝप मŐ एफपीओ Ȫारा भूिम और खंिडत भूखंडों क े ˢैİǅक 
समेकन को ŮोȖािहत करक े भूिम क े एकिũकरण और समेकन को लिƗत िकया जा सकता है। 
 
ये पहलŐ भारत मŐ औसत भूिम जोत क े छोटे और खंिडत होने (िजसमŐ छोटे और सीमांत िकसान 
शािमल हœ) की सम˟ा को द ू र करने और पैमाने की अथŊʩव˕ा (इकोनोिमस ऑफ ˋे ल)Ůाɑ करने क े 
Ůित सरकार की ŮितबȠता को दशाŊती हœ। 
 
583                                                      

अनुबंध  
राǛसभा क े अतारांिकत Ůʲ संƥा 2243 क े भाग (क) से (ग) क े उȅर मŐ उİʟİखत अनुलưक, 
जो “खंिडत भूिम जोतों की सम˟ा क े समाधान हेतु नीितगत हˑƗेप” िवषय पर िदनांक 
19.12.2025 को Ůˑुत िकया जाना था। 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग Ȫारा कायाŊİɋत Ůमुख योजनाए ँ िनɻिलİखत हœ: 
1. Ůधानमंũी िकसान सʃान िनिध (पीएम-िकसान) 
2. Ůधानमंũी िकसान मान धन योजना (पीएम-क े एमवाई) 
3. Ůधानमंũी अɄदाता आय संरƗण अिभयान (पीएम-आशा) 
4. Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई)/पुनगŊिठत मौसम आधाįरत फसल बीमा योजना 
(आरडɲूबीसीआईएस) 
5. संशोिधत ɯाज अनुदान योजना (एमआईएसएस) 
6. एŤीक̵चर इ̢ůाː Ō Ɓर फ ं ड (एआईएफ) 
7. 10,000 नए िकसान उȋादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) का गठन और संवधŊन 
8. राʼŌीय मधुमƀी पालन एवं शहद िमशन (एनबीएचएम) 
9. नमो डŌ ोन दीदी 
10. ːाटŊ-अप एवं Ťामीण उȨमों क े िलए क ृ िष फ ं ड (एŤीʴोर) 
11. राʼŌीय Ůाक ृ ितक खेती िमशन (एनएमएनएफ) 
12. राʼŌीय क ृ िष िवकास योजना िवˑृत पįरयोजना įरपोटŊ (आरक े वीवाई-डीपीआर) 
13. Ůित बूंद अिधक फसल (पीडीएमसी) 
14. क ृ िष मशीनीकरण उप िमशन (एसएमएएम) 
15. परɼरागत क ृ िष िवकास योजना (पीक े वीवाई) 
16. सॉइल हेʕ ए ं ड फिटŊिलटी (एसएचए ं डएफ) 
17. वषाŊ िसंिचत Ɨेũ िवकास (आरएडी) 
18. क ृ िष वािनकी 
19. फसल िविवधीकरण कायŊŢम (सीडीपी) 
20. क ृ िष िवˑार उप िमशन (एसएमएई) 
21. राʼŌीय खाȨ सुरƗा एवं पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) 
22. एकीक ृ त क ृ िष िवपणन योजना (आईएसएएम) 
23. समेिकत बागवानी िवकास िमशन (एमआईडीएच) 
24. राʼŌीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ)- ऑयल पाम 
25. राʼŌीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ)- ितलहन 
26. पूवŖȅर Ɨेũ जैिवक मूʞ ŵृंखला िवकास िमशन 
27. िडिजटल एŤीक̵चर िमशन 
28. राʼŌीय बांस िमशन 
 
****** 
584                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2244 
19 िदसɾर, 2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
 
िवषय: पीएमएफबीवाई क े एˌो खाते 
2244 ŵी क े. आर. सुरेश रेǭी 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सभी राǛों और संघ राǛ Ɨेũों ने Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई) क े तहत 
देय रािश क े समय पर िवतरण को सुिनिʮत करने क े िलए एक एˌो खाता बनाया है; 
(ख) यिद हां, तो Ůȑेक राǛ/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ क े िलए खाते क े िनमाŊण की ितिथ, एˌो खाते का Ůबंधन 
करने वाली सं˕ा का नाम और खाते मŐ जमा रािश का ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ग) यिद नहीं, तो उन राǛों/ संघ राǛ Ɨेũों क े नाम और देरी क े कारण Ɛा हœ िजɎोंने अभी तक खाता 
नहीं बनाया है; और  
(घ) Ɛा सरकार ने यह िनगरानी करने क े िलए कोई िवʶेषण िकया है िक Ɛा ऐसे खाते क े िनमाŊण से 
दावों क े भुगतान मŐ देरी कम Šई है, यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
 
(क): एˌो खाते की Ůणाली से संबंिधत Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (PMFBY) क े संशोिधत 
Ůचालन िदशा-िनदőशों, 2023 क े Ůासंिगक Ůावधानों क े अनुसार, राǛों/कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेशों को अपनी 
देयताओं क े Ůित अिŤम ŮितबȠता क े ŝप मŐ Ůीिमयम सİɵडी मŐ अपने िहˣे की रािश अिŤम ŝप 
से जारी करनी होगी; राǛों/कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेशों Ȫारा Ůीिमयम सİɵडी मŐ अपने िहˣे क े िलए तथा 
भारत सरकार क े क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग Ȫारा समय-समय पर अिधसूिचत िकए जाने वाले 
अɊ Ůयोजनों क े िलए एक एˌो खाता मŐटेन िकया जाएगा। 
 
राǛ/कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेश Ůȑेक सीजन क े िलए अपनी देयताओं क े Ůित अिŤम ŮितबȠता क े 
ŝप मŐ संबंिधत बीमा क ं पनी क े िलए िपछले संबंिधत मौसम की Ůीिमयम सİɵडी क े आधार पर 50% 
अिŤम Ůीिमयम सİɵडी संबंिधत एˌो खाते मŐ जारी करŐगे तथा पįरचालन िदशा-िनदőशों मŐ िनिदŊʼ 
सीजन संबंधी अनुदेशों क े अनुसार बाद की िकˑŐ जारी करŐगे। 
 
संबंिधत बीमा क ं पनी, संबंिधत राǛ/कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेश सरकार Ȫारा एˌो खाते मŐ अिŤम 
Ůीिमयम जमा िकए जाने की पुिʼ राʼŌीय फसल बीमा पोटŊल (NCIP) क े सİɵडी मॉǰूल पर करेगी। 
ऐसी पुिʼ Ůाɑ होने क े बाद ही NCIP को नामांकन क े िलए खोला जाएगा। 
 
वतŊमान İ˕ित क े अनुसार, PMFBY कायाŊİɋत करने वाले 24 राǛों मŐ से 20 राǛों ने पहले 
ही एˌो खाता खोल िलया है और खरीफ 2025 से राǛ/कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेश Ůीिमयम सİɵडी मŐ िहˣे 
को जमा करने और िवतरण क े िलए इसका उपयोग कर रहे हœ। 
 
(ख): संबंिधत नोडल राǛ िवभाग अथाŊत क ृ िष िवभाग और बागवानी िवभाग, एˌो खाते का Ůबंधन 
करते हœ। एˌो खाते राǛ की ˢेǅा क े अनुसार शेǰूल वािणİǛक बœकों या सहकारी बœकों मŐ खोले 
जाते हœ। राǛ िवभाग संबंिधत बœकों तथा कायाŊɋयन करने वाली बीमा क ं पिनयों क े साथ बŠपƗीय 
समझौता करते हœ। 
 
(ग): अंडमान एवं िनकोबार Ȫीपसमूह, मिणपुर, िमजोरम और िसİſम कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेशों/राǛों ने 
अब तक PMFBY क े अंतगŊत एˌो खाते नहीं खोले हœ। 
 
(घ): चूँिक एˌो खाता Ůणाली को हाल ही मŐ खरीफ 2025 मौसम से कायाŊİɋत िकया गया है, इसिलए 
उƅ Ůणाली क े Ůभाव िवʶेषण की संभावना िफलहाल नहीं बनती है। 
 
***** 
585                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2245 
19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
 
ͪवषय: पीएमडीडीके वाई के तहत 100 िजलɉ के  चयन के  ͧलए मानदंड 
2245. Įी धनंजय भीमराव महाǑदकः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Ĥधानमंğी धन धान कृͪष योजना (पीएमडीडीकेवाई) के अंतग[त 100 िजलɉ के चयन हेतु 
अपनाए गए मानदंडɉ का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) Èया महाराçĚ के ͩकसी िजले को Ĥारंͧभक चरण मɅ शाͧमल ͩकया गया है और Ĥ×येक िजले मɅ 
Ĥèताͪवत पǐरयोजनाओं के  घटक और ĤकृǓत का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) Èया इस योजना मɅ महाराçĚ क े  ͩकसानɉ को अͬधक जल खपत वालȣ या कम उपज वालȣ 
फसलɉ से Ǒटकाऊ, उÍच मूãय वालȣ फसलɉ कȧ ओर èथानांतǐरत करने मɅ सहायता हेतु लͯ¢त 
हèत¢ेप शाͧमल हɇ, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(घ) मराठवाड़ा और ͪवदभ[ जैसे सूखा Ĥवण ¢ेğɉ मɅ शीतागार, गोदाम या ͧसंचाई Ĥणालȣ èथाͪपत 
करने कȧ Èया योजना है; और 
(ङ) महाराçĚ मɅ एफपीओ, मǑहला ͩकसानɉ और èवयं सहायता समूहɉ कȧ भागीदारȣ सुǓनिæचत करने 
हेतु Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
 
(क): Ĥधानमंğी धन धाÛय कृͪष योजना (पीएम-डीडीके वाई) के अंतग[त, Ǔनàन फसल उ×पादकता, 
Ǔनàन फसल सघनता और Ǔनàन अãपकाͧलक ऋण ͪवतरण के तीन मानदंडɉ क े  आधार पर 100 
िजलɉ कȧ पहचान कȧ गई है। 
 
(ख): महाराçĚ के  नौ िजलɉ (पालघर, यवतमाल, गढ़ͬचरोलȣ, धुले, रायगढ़, चंġपुर, छğपǓत संभाजी 
नगर, नांदेड़ और बीड) को डीडीकेवाई के अंतग[त चुना गया है।  
 
(ग) से (ङ): इस योजना का उɮदेæय कृͪष उ×पादकता बढ़ाना, फसल ͪवͪवधता और सु͸ढ़ कृͪष 
पɮधǓतयɉ को बढ़ावा देना, पंचायत और Þलॉक èतरɉ पर फसलोपरांत भंडारण ¢मता बढ़ाना, ͧसंचाई 
586                                                      

सुͪवधाओं मɅ सुधार करना और दȣघ[काͧलक और अãपकाͧलक ऋण कȧ उपलÞधता को सुगम बनाना 
है। 
ͩकसानɉ और पंचायत पदाͬधकाǐरयɉ सǑहत सभी Ǒहतधारकɉ के  परामश[ से िजला धन-धाÛय 
सͧमǓत ɮवारा िजला काय[ योजना तैयार कȧ जाती है। ͧसंचाई सुͪवधाओं मɅ सुधार के ͧलए, महाराçĚ 
के िजलɉ सǑहत िजला काय[ योजनाओं मɅ कृͪष तालाबɉ का Ǔनमा[ण, जल संचयन संरचनाओं का 
Ǔनमा[ण, सूêम ͧसंचाई एवं जल उपयोग द¢ता के  ͧलए ͩकसानɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण जैसे उपाय शाͧमल 
ͩकए गए हɇ। योजना कȧ ĤगǓत पर नजर रखने के ͧलए इंĥाèĚÈचर (भंडारण, मूãय वध[न एवं 
Ĥसंèकरण इकाईयां) का Ǔनणा[ण पǐरणामी संकेतक है। इसी Ĥकार, ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठनɉ 
(एफपीओ) कȧ पहुंच बढ़ाना तथा इिÈवटȣ का लाभ उठाना डीडीकेवाई के उ×पादन संकेतकɉ का भाग 
है, ताͩक इसमɅ एफपीओ और ͩकसान Ǒहत समूह (एफआईजी) अथवा èवयं सहायता समूह 
(एसएचजी) कȧ ĤǓतभाͬगता सुǓनिæचत कȧ जा सके । 
कोãड èटोरेज और वेयरहाउस के  संवध[न के ͧलए, िजला काय[ योजनाओं मɅ समेͩकत 
बागवानी ͪवकास ͧमशन (एमआईडीएच) और राÏय योजनाओं के माÚयम से गोदामɉ, कोãड èटोरेज 
और पैक हाउसɉ का Ǔनमा[ण शाͧमल है। इसके  अǓतǐरÈत, महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ पीएमडीडीकेवाई के 
तहत ͬचिéनत िजलɉ मɅ ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठनɉ/èवयं सहायता समूहɉ के माÚयम से गोदामɉ और 
Ĥाथͧमक Ĥसंèकरण इकाइयɉ कȧ èथापना और बाजार संपकɟ और ͫडिजटल Üलेटफामɟ पर ͩकसान  
उ×पादक संगठनɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण देने कȧ िजला योजनाएं भी शाͧमल है। 
  
***** 
587                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2246 
19 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
कृͪष उ×पादɉ के  Ǔनया[त और आयात के ͧलए नीǓतगत ढांचा 
2246. Įी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई 
Įी मेदा रघुनाधा रेɬडी 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क)  Èया सरकार ͩकसानɉ और åयापाǐरयɉ के ͧलए िèथरता और पूवा[नुमान सुǓनिæचत करने हेतु 
कृͪष उ×पादɉ के  Ǔनया[त और आयात पर एक åयापक नीǓत बनाने का Ĥèताव करती है; 
(ख)  यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग)  Èया सरकार, ͪवशेष Ǿप से Üयाज, चावल और अÛय आवæयक फसलɉ के  मामले मɅ अचानक 
Ǔनया[त ĤǓतबंधɉ से Ĥभाͪवत ͩकसानɉ के ͧलए ¢ǓतपूǓत[ तंğ शुǾ करने कȧ योजना बना रहȣ है; 
(घ)  यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ङ)  Èया सरकार ͩकसानɉ कȧ आय बढ़ाने के  ͧलए उÛहɅ वैिæवक बाजारɉ से जोड़ने हेतु तंğ 
èथाͪपत करने का ͪवचार रखती है; और 
(च)  यǑद हां, तो इस संबंध मɅ Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
 
(क) से (घ): सरकार देश के आयात और Ǔनया[त गǓतͪवͬधयɉ पर Ǔनरंतर Ǔनगरानी रखती है और 
घरेलू Ǒहतɉ कȧ र¢ा के  ͧलए आवæयकतानुसार åयापार नीǓतयɉ मɅ संशोधन करती है। आवæयक कृͪष 
उ×पादɉ के ͧलए एक अंतर-मंğालयी सͧमǓत (आईएमसी) मौजूद है, िजसमɅ कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण 
ͪवभाग सदèय के  Ǿप मɅ शाͧमल है। जो आवæयक कृͪष उ×पादɉ पर सूêम और Ǔनयͧमत Ǔनगरानी 
रखती है, उनकȧ उपलÞधता और बाजार कȧ िèथǓतयɉ को Ĥभाͪवत करने वाले कारकɉ का ͪवæलेषण 
करती है। यह घरेलू उ×पादन, åयापार या खाɮय सुर¢ा को Ĥभाͪवत करने वाले ǽझानɉ कȧ शीē 
पहचान करने के  ͧलए आयात मɅ ͩकसी भी Ĥकार कȧ वृɮͬध कȧ Ǔनगरानी भी करती है। कृͪष एवं 
ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग (डीएएंड एफडÞãयू) ͩकसानɉ के Ǒहतɉ कȧ र¢ा और अनावæयक आयात को 
कम करने के ͧलए, कृͪष उ×पादɉ के  आयात कȧ समी¢ा करता है और आवæयकता पड़ने पर संबंͬधत 
588                                                      

मंğालय/ͪवभाग से आयात शुãक या बंदरगाह ĤǓतबंध जैसे उपायɉ कȧ संèतुǓत करता है। इसके 
अǓतǐरÈत, सरकार कई चालू योजनाओं और हèत¢ेपɉ के माÚयम से ͩकसानɉ कȧ सहायता करती है, 
िजनमɅ शाͧमल हɇ:  
• अͬधसूͬचत फसलɉ के ͧलए Ûयूनतम समथ[न मूãय (एमएसपी) åयवèथा के तहत खरȣद के 
माÚयम से बाजार मɅ हèत¢ेप; 
• Üयाज जैसी आवæयक वèतुओं के ͧलए मूãय िèथरȣकरण कोष (पीएसएफ) संचालन, ताͩक 
अिèथरता को Ǔनयंǒğत ͩकया जा सके; 
• कɅ ġȣय एजɅͧसयɉ ɮवारा बाजार आसूचना और बफर èटॉक संचालन; तथा 
• आय मɅ उतार-चढ़ाव को कम करने के  ͧलए पीएम-ͩकसान जैसी इनपुट और आय सहायता 
योजनाएं। 
इन उपायɉ का सामूǑहक उɮदेæय बाजार मɅ åयवधान के  कारण ͩकसानɉ पर पड़ने वाले 
ĤǓतकूल Ĥभावɉ को कम करना है। 
 
(ङ) और (च): वाͨणÏय ͪवभाग कृͪष और Ĥसंèकृत खाɮय उ×पाद Ǔनया[त ͪवकास Ĥाͬधकरण 
(एपीईडीए) के  माÚयम से ͪवƣीय सहायता योजना (एफएएस) के अंतग[त अपने सदèय Ǔनया[तकɉ को 
ͪवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान करता है, िजसमɅ देशभर के  ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठन (एफपीओ) और ͩकसान 
उ×पादक कं पǓनयां (एफपीसी) शाͧमल हɇ। 
ͪवशेष Ǿप से ͩकसानɉ को वैिæवक बाजारɉ से जोड़ने के संबंध मɅ, एपीईडीए अपने पंजीकृत 
Ǔनया[तकɉ के माÚयम से कृͪष पɮधǓतयɉ (जीएपी) के काया[Ûवयन और Ĥमाणीकरण के  ͧलए ͪवƣीय 
सहायता Ĥदान करता है, ताͩक वे आयात करने वाले देशɉ ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत गुणवƣा मानकɉ कȧ 
अपे¢ाओं को पूरा कर सकɅ। 
इसके  अǓतǐरÈत, वष[ 2025-26 के  दौरान भारत भर मɅ संबंͬधत राÏय सरकार कȧ एजɅͧसयɉ 
के सहयोग से लगभग 1080 ¢मता Ǔनमा[ण/Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजनमɅ ͪवशेष 
Ǿप से एफपीओ/एफपीसी/एसएचजी सǑहत Ǔनया[तकɉ पर Úयान कɅ Ǒġत ͩकया गया है ताͩक ͩकसान 
समूहɉ को Ǔनया[त आपूǓत[ Įृंखला से जोड़ने और उɮयͧमयɉ को भावी Ǔनया[तक बनने के ͧलए 
Ĥो×साǑहत ͩकया जा सके। 
अंत मɅ, एपीईडीए ने ͪवदेशɉ और भारत मɅ आयोिजत Ĥमुख अंतरा[çĚȣय खाɮय Ĥदश[Ǔनयɉ 
और Đेता-ͪवĐेता बैठकɉ जैसे वãड[ फूड इंͫडया, इंडस फूड, भारत मɅ आहार और गãफ फूड आǑद मɅ 
एफपीओ और एफपीसी सǑहत अपने सदèय Ǔनया[तकɉ कȧ भागीदारȣ सुǓनिæचत कȧ। 
***** 
589                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2247 
19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
 
ͪवषय: खाɮयाÛनɉ को बढ़ावा देना 
2247. Įी रामेæवर तेलȣ: 
Įी मदन राठौड़: 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया सरकार देश मɅ खाɮयाÛन उ×पादन को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए कदम उठा रहȣ है; 
(ख) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) Èया सरकार बाजरे क े ͧलए गुणवƣापूण[ बीज क े  उ×पादन को Ĥो×साǑहत कर रहȣ है; 
(घ) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(ङ) ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान सरकार ɮवारा देश मɅ खाɮयाÛन उ×पादन को बढ़ावा देने क े ͧलए ͩकए गए 
अनुसंधान और ͪवèतार गǓतͪवͬधयɉ का Þयौरा Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर) 
 
(क) और (ख):  कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग ¢ेğ ͪवèतार और उ×पादकता मɅ वृɮͬध के माÚयम से धान, 
गेहूं, मोटे अनाज (मÈका एवं जौ) तथा पोषक अनाज (ĮीअÛन) जैसे खाɮयाÛनɉ क े उ×पादन मɅ वृɮͬध करने 
क े  उɮदेæय से देश मɅ राçĚȣय खाɮय सुर¢ा एवं पोषण ͧमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) का काया[Ûवयन कर रहा है।  
 एनएफएसएनएम के अंतग[त, ͩकसानɉ को राÏयɉ/कɅ ġ शाͧसत Ĥदेशɉ क े  माÚयम से फसल उ×पादन एवं 
संर¢ण तकनीकɉ के डेमॉÛसĚेशन, Ĥमाͨणत बीजɉ के  ͪवतरण, Ĥमाͨणत बीज (पोषक अनाज) के उ×पादन, 
एकȧकृत पोषक त×व एवं कȧट Ĥबंधन उपायɉ, फसल Ĥणालȣ आधाǐरत Ĥͧश¢ण के  माÚयम से ¢मता Ǔनमा[ण 
आǑद के ͧलए सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है; तथा नई जारȣ ͩकèमɉ/हाइǒĦड ͩकèमɉ (पोषक अनाज) के बीज 
ͧमनीͩकट भी राÏयɉ के माÚयम से एजɅͧसयɉ ɮवारा ͪवतǐरत ͩकए जाते हɇ। इस ͧमशन के अंतग[त भारतीय 
कृͪष अनुसंधान पǐरषद (आईसीएआर) तथा राÏय कृͪष ͪवæवͪवɮयालयɉ (एसएयू)/कृͪष ͪव£ान कɅ ġɉ (केवीके) 
को ͪवषय ͪवशेष£ɉ/वै£ाǓनकɉ कȧ Ǔनगरानी मɅ Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ सहयोग एवं ͩकसान तक तकनीक हèतांतरण के 
ͧलए सहायता भी Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। 
इसके अǓतǐरÈत, भारत सरकार राÏयɉ को Ĥधानमंğी राçĚȣय कृͪष ͪवकास योजना (पीएम-
आरकेवीवाई) के ͪवèतृत पǐरयोजना ǐरपोट[ (डीपीआर) घटक क े तहत, उनकȧ आवæयकताओं एवं Ĥाथͧमकताओं 
के अनुसार हèत¢ेपɉ हेतु सहायता Ĥदान करती है। 
 
(ग) से (ङ):  कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग समय-समय पर राÏयɉ एवं बीज उ×पादक एजɅͧसयɉ को यह 
परामश[ देता है ͩक वे ͧमलेɪस सǑहत ͪवͧभÛन फसलɉ कȧ नई जारȣ उÍच उपज वालȣ ͩकèमɉ (एचवाईवी) क े  
Ħीडर सीड कȧ मांग (इंडɅट) Ĥèतुत करɅ ताͩक इनका आगे आधारȣ एवं Ĥमाͨणत बीजɉ मɅ गुणन ͩकया जा सक े 
590                                                      

और देश के ͩकसानɉ को आवæयक बीज उपलÞध कराए जा सकɅ। आईसीएआर ɮवारा दȣ गई सूचना के 
अनुसार, ͪपछले तीन वषɟ (2022–25) के दौरान आगे बीज गुणन के ͧलए 1,290 िÈवंटल कȧ मांग के सापे¢ 
ͪवͧभÛन ͧमलेɪस के कुल 2,588 िÈवंटल Ħीडर सीड का उ×पादन ͩकया गया है। 
इसके अǓतǐरÈत, राÏयɉ ɮवारा दȣ गई जानकारȣ के अनुसार, ͪपछले दो वषɟ तथा वत[मान वष[ क े 
दौरान देश मɅ ͧमलेɪस के पया[Üत Ĥमाͨणत/गुणवƣायुÈत बीज उपलÞध थे। ͧमलेɪस के बीजɉ का ͪववरण 
Ǔनàनानुसार है:  
                        बीजɉ कȧ माğा (लाख िÈवंटल मɅ) 
Đ.सं. वष[ आवæयकता उपलÞधता 
1. 2023-24 5.22 6.20 
2. 2024-25 5.55 6.64 
3. 2025-26 5.24 6.65 
राçĚȣय खाɮय सुर¢ा एवं पोषण ͧमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) क े अंतग[त बीज संबंधी ͪवͧभÛन 
गǓतͪवͬधयɉ जैसे ͩक Ħीडर सीड कȧ खरȣद, ͪवतरण (बीज लागत का 50%) तथा ‘पारंपǐरक ͩकèमɉ (ͧमलेɪस 
सǑहत) के बीज उ×पादन को बढ़ावा देना’ घटक क े अंतग[त ͪवͧभÛन फसलɉ (ͧमलेɪस सǑहत) के ͧलए 1000 
ǽपये ĤǓत िÈवंटल कȧ दर से बीज उ×पादन Ĥो×साहन क े  ͧलए ͪवƣीय सहायता उपलÞध/Ĥदान कȧ जाती है 
ताͩक ͩकसानɉ को पया[Üत माğा मɅ बीज उपलÞध कराए जा सकɅ।  
वष[ 2014 से 2025 क े दौरान, ͪवͧभÛन खाɮयाÛन फसलɉ कȧ कुल 2,065 उÍच उ×पादकता वालȣ 
जलवायु अनुकूल ͩकèमɅ जारȣ एवं अͬधसूͬचत कȧ गई हɇ। हाल के वषɟ मɅ, सɅĚल वैराइटल ǐरलȣज कͧमटȣ 
(सीवीआरसी) ɮवारा देश कȧ ͪवͧभÛन कृͪष-जलवायु पǐरिèथǓतयɉ मɅ खेती के ͧलए कुल 110 ͧमलेट ͩकèमɅ 
जारȣ कȧ गई हɇ, िजनमɅ 34 Ïवार (सोरघम), 24 बाजरा (पल[ ͧमलेट), 10 कुटकȧ (ͧलǑटल ͧमलेट), 06 चीना 
(Ĥोसो ͧमलेट), 05 सांवा (बान[याड[ ͧमलेट), 04 कोदो ͧमलेट, 08 कंगनी (फॉÈसटेल ͧमलेट), 17 रागी (ͩफंगर 
ͧमलेट) तथा 02 Ħाउन टॉप ͧमलेट कȧ ͩकèमɅ शाͧमल हɇ। ͪवͧभÛन जैͪवक और अजैͪवक तनावɉ कȧ चुनौǓतयɉ 
से Ǔनपटने क े ͧलए कई उ×पादन एवं संर¢ण Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ का ͪवकास ͩकया गया है। इनमɅ उÍच उ×पादकता 
वालȣ जलवायु ĤǓतरोधी ͩकèमɉ का ͪवकास तथा लागत-Ĥभावी और कुशल फसल-पूव[ एवं फसलोपरांत 
Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयां आǑद शाͧमल हɇ। वष[ 2014–25 के दौरान सूखा ¢ेğ/नमी वाले ¢ेğ/जल कȧ कमी या अͬधकता 
वाले ¢ेğ/कम वषा[ वाले ¢ेğ मɅ ͩकसानɉ क े  ͧलए कुल 40 ͧमलेट ͩकèमɅ खेती हेतु ͪवकͧसत और जारȣ कȧ गई 
हɇ, िजनमɅ 09 Ïवार, 13 बाजरा, 03 कुटकȧ, 05 कोदो ͧमलेट, 01 सांवा, 01 चीना तथा 08 रागी कȧ ͩकèमɅ 
शाͧमल हɇ। अͬधक उपज देने वालȣ तथा जलवायु-अनुकूल ͧमलेट ͩकèमɉ के ͪवकास के साथ-साथ 
आईसीएआर–भारतीय ĮीअÛन अनुसंधान संèथान (आईआईएमआर), हैदराबाद नॉलेज पाट[नर के Ǿप मɅ 
ͪवͧभÛन राÏय ͧमलेट ͧमशनɉ/कृͪष ͪवभागɉ क े साथ सहयोग कर रहा है, िजसका उɮदेæय ͧमलेɪस से होने 
वाले èवाèØय लाभɉ तथा जलवायु पǐरवत[न से Ĥभाͪवत कǑठन पǐरिèथǓतयɉ मɅ इनकȧ अनुकूल खेती के ĤǓत 
जन-जागǾकता बढ़ाना है।  
क े वीके ɮवारा ͩकसानɉ मɅ कृͪष नवाचारɉ और Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ के बारे मɅ जागǾकता बढ़ाने क े ͧलए बड़ी 
संÉया मɅ Ĥसार गǓतͪवͬधयां आयोिजत कȧ जाती हɇ। ये Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयां ͩकसानɉ को ͪवͧभÛन तरȣकɉ मुÉयतः 
ĥंटलाइन डेमॉÛसĚेशन (एफएलडी), फȧãड/साइट ͪविजट, ͩकसान मेले, ͩकसान Ǒदवस, बीज Ǒदवस, Ĥͧश¢ण 
काय[Đम आǑद क े आयोजन के माÚयम से Ěांसफर कȧ जाती हɇ। 
***** 
591                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2248 
19/12/2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
 
ͪवषय: ͩकसानɉ कȧ आय बढ़ाने के  ͧलए नई योजनाओं कȧ शुǽआत 
2248.  डा. मु.तंबी दुरैः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया सरकार ͩकसानɉ कȧ आय बढ़ाने कȧ योजना बना रहȣ है; 
(ख) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) Èया सरकार ͩकसानɉ कȧ आय बढ़ाने के  ͧलए नई योजनाएं शुǾ करने का ͪवचार रखती है; और 
(घ) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
 
(क) से (घ): भारत सरकार ͩकसानɉ कȧ आय बढ़ाने और कृͪष ¢ेğ के åयापक ͪवकास के ͧलए 
राÏयɉ और कɅ ġ शाͧसत Ĥदेशɉ को सहयोग देने हेतु Ǔनàनͧलͨखत एकȧकृत रणनीǓत अपनाती है:- 
(i) फसल उ×पादन/उ×पादकता बढ़ाना 
(ii) उ×पादन लागत कम करना 
(iii) ͩकसानɉ कȧ उपज से लाभकारȣ ĤǓतफल ĤाÜत करना ताͩक उनकȧ आय मɅ वृɮͬध हो सके। 
(iv) कृͪष ͪवͪवधीकरण 
(v) फसल कटाई के बाद मूãयवध[न करना 
(vi) सतत कृͪष के  ͧलए जलवायु पǐरवत[न का अनुकूलन और फसल हाǓन को कम करना।  
 
कृͪष एक राÏय का ͪवषय है। भारत सरकार ͩकसानɉ के  कãयाण के ͧलए उपयुÈत नीǓतगत 
उपायɉ और बजट आवंटन के माÚयम से राÏयɉ को सहायता Ĥदान करती है। भारत सरकार कȧ 
योजनाओं/काय[Đमɉ का उɮदेæय उ×पादन बढ़ाना, ͩकसानɉ को लाभकारȣ ĤǓतफल और आय सहायता 
Ĥदान करना है। सरकार ने कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग के बजट आवंटन को 2013-14 के 
बजट Ĥावधान के दौरान 21,933.50 करोड़ ǽपये से बढ़ाकर 2025-26 के बजट Ĥावधान के दौरान 
1,27,290.16 करोड़ ǽपये कर Ǒदया है।  
592                                                      

 
भारत मɅ ͩकसानɉ कȧ आय बढ़ाने और कृͪष ¢ेğ के ͪवकास के ͧलए कृͪष एवं ͩकसान 
कãयाण ͪवभाग कȧ Ĥमुख योजनाएँ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत हɇ:  
 
1. Ĥधानमंğी ͩकसान सàमान Ǔनͬध (पीएम-ͩकसान)  
2. Ĥधानमंğी ͩकसान मान धन योजना (पीएम-केएमवाई)  
3. Ĥधानमंğी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई)/पुनग[Ǒठत मौसम आधाǐरत फसल बीमा 
योजना (आरडÞãयूबीसीआईएस)   
4. संशोͬधत Þयाज अनुदान योजना (एमआईएसएस)  
5 एĒीकãचर इंĥाèĚÈचर फंड (एआईएफ)  
6. 10,000 नए ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठनɉ (एफपीओ) का गठन और संवध[न  
7. राçĚȣय मधुमÈखी पालन और शहद ͧमशन (एनबीएचएम)  
8. नमो Ĝोन दȣदȣ 
9. राçĚȣय ĤाकृǓतक कृͪष ͧमशन (एनएमएनएफ)  
10. Ĥधानमंğी अÛनदता आय संर¢ण अͧभयान (पीएम-आशा)  
11. èटाट[-अÜस और Ēामीण उɮयमɉ के ͧलए कृͪष कोष (एĒीæयोर)  
12. ĤǓत बूंद अͬधक फसल (पीडीएमसी)  
13. कृͪष मशीनीकरण उप-ͧमशन (एसएमएएम)  
14. परंपरागत कृͪष ͪवकास योजना (पीकेवीवाई) 
15.  सॉइल हेãथ एंड फǑट[लटȣ (एसएचएंडएफ) 
16. वषा[ ͧसंͬचत ¢ेğ ͪवकास (आरएडी) 
17. कृͪष वाǓनकȧ  
18. फसल ͪवͪवधीकरण काय[Đम (सीडीपी) 
19. कृͪष ͪवèतार उप-ͧमशन (एसएमएई)  
20. बीज एवं रोपण सामĒी उप-ͧमशन (एसएमएसपी) 
21. राçĚȣय खाɮय सुर¢ा एवं पोषण ͧमशन (एनएफएसएनएम)  
22. एकȧकृत कृͪष ͪवपणन योजना (आईएसएएम)  
23. समेͩकत बागवानी ͪवकास ͧमशन (एमआईडीएच) 
24. राçĚȣय खाɮय तेल ͧमशन (एनएमईओ) - ऑइल पाम 
25. राçĚȣय खाɮय तेल ͧमशन (एनएमईओ) - Ǔतलहन 
26. पूवȾƣर ¢ेğ जैͪवक मूãय Įृंखला ͪवकास ͧमशन 
27. ͫडिजटल एĒीकãचर ͧमशन 
28. राçĚȣय बांस ͧमशन 
***** 
593                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2249 
19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
ͪवषय: ओͫडशा मɅ जीआईएस आधाǐरत बाजार सूचना Üलेटफामɟ के  ͧलए Ĥèताव 
2249. Įीमती सुलता देवः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क)  Èया ओͫडशा मɅ ͩकसानɉ क े  ͧलए कȧमतɉ, मांग और आपूǓत[ Įृंखला संबंधी संभार तंğ पर 
नज़र रखने हेतु भौगोͧलक सूचना Ĥणालȣ (जीआईएस) आधाǐरत बाजार सूचना Üलेटफॉम[ èथाͪपत 
करने का कोई Ĥèताव है; और 
(ख)  यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके  Èया कारण हɇ? 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
(क):  वत[मान मɅ, ओͫडशा मɅ ͩकसानɉ के  ͧलए कȧमतɉ, मांग और आपूǓत[ Įृंखला संबंधी संभार 
तंğ पर नजर रखने हेतु भौगोͧलक सूचना Ĥणालȣ (जीआईएस) आधाǐरत बाजार आसूचना Üलेटफॉम[ 
èथाͪपत करने का कोई Ĥèताव ͪवचाराधीन नहȣं है। 
(ख):  सरकार वष[ 2000 से कृͪष ͪवपणन के  ͧलए एकȧकृत योजना (आईएसएएम) के अंतग[त 
ͪवपणन अनुसंधान एवं सूचना नेटवक[ (एमआरआईएन) उप-योजना काया[िÛवत कर रहȣ है। 
एमआरआईएन उप-योजना क े  अंतग[त, कृͪष ͪवपणन सूचना नेटवक[ (एगमाक[नेट) पोट[ल देश भर मɅ 
फै ले मह×वपूण[ कृͪष उपज बाजारɉ और राÏय कृͪष ͪवपणन बोडɟ एवं Ǔनदेशालयɉ को जोड़ने के  ͧलए 
आरंभ ͩकया गया था। एगमाक[नेट पोट[ल का उɮदेæय बाजार कȧ सूचना और डेटा के ×वǐरत संĒहण 
और Ĥसार हेतु एक राçĚåयापी सूचना नेटवक[ èथाͪपत करना है, ताͩक इसका कुशल और समय पर 
उपयोग ͩकया जा सके ।  
राçĚȣय कृͪष बाजार (ई-नाम) एक अͨखल भारतीय ई-åयापार सुͪवधा है जो कृͪष उ×पादɉ के 
ऑनलाइन åयापार को स¢म बनाने के  ͧलए मौजूदा भौǓतक कृͪष उपज ͪवपणन सͧमǓतयɉ 
(एपीएमसी) को एक वचु[अल Üलेटफॉम[ के  माÚयम से जोड़ती है। यह पोट[ल एपीएमसी से संबंͬधत 
सभी सूचनाओं और सेवाओं के ͧलए एक हȣ èथान (ͧसंगल ͪवंडो) Ĥदान करता है, िजसमɅ उ×पादɉ 
कȧ आवक, गुणवƣा और कȧमतɅ, खरȣद-ǒबĐȧ क े   Ĥèताव, åयापार Ĥèतावɉ पर ĤǓतͩĐया देने कȧ 
सुͪवधा और ͩकसानɉ के  खाते मɅ सीधे इलेÈĚॉǓनक भुगतान Ǔनपटान जैसी अÛय सेवाएं शाͧमल हɇ। 
राçĚȣय कृͪष बाजार (ई-नाम) मोबाइल ऐप का उपयोग वत[मान मɅ ओͫडशा मɅ ͩकया जा रहा 
है। यह ऐप जीपीएस आधाǐरत है और ͩकसानɉ को कȧमतɉ पर नज़र रखने मɅ सहायता करता है 
तथा मांग और आपूǓत[ संबंधी संभार तंğ के  Ĥबंधन मɅ उपयोगी है। 
***** 
594                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2250 
19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
 
ͪवषय: åयावसाǓयक फसलɉ क े  उ×पादन हेतु ͩकसानɉ को Ĥो×साहन 
2250. Įीमती माया नारोͧलयाः 
Įी हष[ महाजनः 
Įी रायगा कृçणैयाः 
डा. मेधा ͪवĮाम कुलकणȸ: 
Įी ͧमथलेश कुमारः 
Įी भुबनेæवर काͧलताः 
डा. अǓनल सुखदेवराव बɉडे: 
Įी सुभाष बरालाः 
Įीमती ͩकरण चौधरȣ 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया सरकार मÚय Ĥदेश सǑहत पूरे देश मɅ åयावसाǓयक फसलɉ कȧ खेती के  ͧलए ͩकसानɉ को 
कोई Ĥो×साहन दे रहȣ है; 
(ख) यǑद हां, तो उन योजनाओं, काय[Đमɉ और Ĥो×साहनɉ का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान Ĥमुख åयावसाǓयक फसलɉ (जैसे सोयाबीन, कपास, गÛना, मूंगफलȣ, 
मÈका आǑद) के उ×पादन और उ×पादकता का राÏय-वार Þयौरा Èया है और इस संबंध मɅ मÚय 
Ĥदेश कȧ Èया िèथǓत है; 
(घ) Èया सरकार ͪवशेष Ǿप से कपास और गÛने कȧ फसलɉ मɅ नई तकनीकɉ को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए 
कोई कदम उठा रहȣ है; और 
(ङ) यǑद हां, तो नई Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ, अनुसंधान, पǐरयोजनाओं और ͩकसानɉ के  ͧलए Ĥͧश¢ण या 
Ĥो×साहनɉ का Þयौरा Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
 
(क) और (ख): कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग वष[ 2014-15 से राçĚȣय खाɮय सुर¢ा और पोषण 
ͧमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) [पूव[ मɅ राçĚȣय खाɮय सुर¢ा ͧमशन (एनएफएसएम)] के  तहत मÚय Ĥदेश 
सǑहत सभी Ĥमुख खेती करने वाले राÏयो मɅ  åयावसाǓयक फसलɉ जैसे कपास, जूट एवं संबɮध 
फाइबर और गÛने पर एक योजना काया[िÛवत कर रहा है। इस योजना के तहत, ͩकसानɉ को लाभ 
पहुंचाने के ͧलए डेमॉÛसĚेशन और Ĥͧश¢ण के माÚयम से टेÈनोलॉजी Ěांसफर पर जोर Ǒदया गया 
है। सरकार, Ĥ×येक वष[ ͩकसानɉ को खेती के  ͧलए Ĥो×साǑहत करने और लाभकारȣ कȧमत सुǓनिæचत 
595                                                      

करने क े  ͧलए कपास और जूट का Ûयूनतम समथ[न मूãय (एमएसपी) और गÛने का उͬचत और 
लाभकारȣ मूãय (एफआरपी) तय करती है। 
 
(ग): ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान, Ĥमुख åयावसाǓयक फसलɅ जैसे सोयबीन, कपास, गÛना, मूंगफलȣ 
और मÈका क े  उ×पादन और उ×पादकता का ͪववरण अनुबंध पर है। 
 
 
 
 
(घ) और (ङ): उÍच घन×व रोपण Ĥणालȣ (एचडीपीएस) एवं Èलोजर èपेͧसंग जैसी Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ के 
Ĥसार तथा सवȾƣम पɮधǓतयɉ पर ͩकसानɉ क े  Ĥͧश¢ण के  माÚयम से कपास कȧ उ×पादकता को 
बढ़ाने के  ͧलए वष[ 2023-24 से एनएफएसएनएम के तहत भारतीय कृͪष अनुसंधान पǐरषद 
(आईसीएआर)-कɅ ġȣय कपास अनुसंधान संèथान (सीआईसीआर), नागपुर कȧ कपास पर एक ͪवशेष 
पǐरयोजना नामतः ‘कृͪष-पाǐरिèथǓतक ¢ेğɉ क े  ͧलए लͯ¢त Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयां - कपास उ×पादकता मɅ वृɮͬध हेतु 
सवȾƣम पɮधǓतयɉ का बड़े पैमाने पर डेमॉÛसĚेशन’ का काया[Ûवयन ͩकया जा रहा है। 
आईसीएआर–कɅ ġȣय कपास अनुसंधान संèथान (सीआईसीआर), नागपुर ɮवारा  गुलाबी सुंडी के 
Ĥबंधन काय[नीǓतयɉ के  åयापक Ĥसार के  उɮदेæय के साथ वष[ 2018-19 से राçĚȣय खाɮय सुर¢ा 
और पोषण ͧमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) (पूव[ मɅ राçĚȣय खाɮय सुर¢ा ͧमशन–एनएफएसएम) के अंतग[त  
“कȧटनाशी ĤǓतरोध Ĥबंधन (आईआरएम):  गुलाबी सुंडी Ĥबंधन काय[नीǓतयɉ का Ĥसार” नामक एक 
पǐरयोजना काया[िÛवत कȧ जा रहȣ है।  
आईसीएआर-कɅ ġȣय कपास अनुसंधान संèथान (सीआईसीआर), नागपुर, भारतीय अंतǐर¢ 
अनुसंधान संगठन-राçĚȣय दूरसंवेदȣ कɅ ġ (इसरो-एनआरएससी) के  साथ ͧमलकर कपास मɅ उपĒह-
आधाǐरत Ǔनगरानी या सटȣक कृͪष पर सहयोगा×मक पǐरयोजनाओं को लागू कर रहा है। 
भारतीय कृͪष अनुसंधान पǐरषद (आईसीएआर) ने जीनोम एͫडǑटंग जैसी नई Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ 
को बढ़ावा देने के  ͧलए वष[ 2023 मɅ जीनोम एͫडǑटंग पǐरयोजना आरंभ कȧ है। 'जीनोम एͫडǑटंग 
टूãस के साथ जलवायु ĤǓतरोधी बढ़ाना और खाɮय सुर¢ा सुǓनिæचत करना' नामक यह पǐरयोजना 
आईसीएआर के  ͪवͧभÛन अनुसंधान संèथानɉ मɅ कपास और गÛने सǑहत 24 ¢ेğीय फसलɉ पर 
फोकस कर रहȣ है। वष[ 2014-2025 के  दौरान आईसीएआर कȧ देखरेख मɅ कपास  कȧ कुल 131 
ͩकèमɅ, बी. टȣ. कपास कȧ 218 ͩकèमɅ और गÛने कȧ 36 ͩकèमɅ ͪवकͧसत कȧ गई हɇ। 
 आईसीएआर- भारतीय गÛना अनुसंधान संèथान (आईएसआरआई), लखनऊ और आईसीएआर-
गÛना Ĥजनन संèथान, कोयंबटूर गÛने मɅ जीनोम एͫडǑटंग, सटȣक खेती और èमाट[ ͧसंचाई जैसे 
¢ेğɉ मɅ अनुसंधान कर रहे हɇ। आईसीएआर-आईएसआरआई ने गÛने के ͪवकास और उपज के 
पूवा[नुमान, ͧमɪटȣ और जलवायु कारकɉ का आकलन करने और उçणकǑटबंधीय/उपोçणकǑटबंधीय 
¢ेğɉ मɅ ͪवͧभÛन ͩकèमɉ के ͧलए शक[रा उ×पादन को बढ़ाने के  ͧलए आईकेएसएचयू- केन (इंटȣĒेटेड 
नॉलेज ͧसèटम फॉर शुगरकेन हावȶèट आउटपुट) नामक एक मॉडल का अनावरण ͩकया है। 
   
 
596                                                      

अनुबंध 
Ĥमुख åयावसाǓयक फसलɉ के  उ×पादन एवं उ×पादकता का राÏय-वार ͪववरण 
सोयबीन                             (उ×पादन लाख टन मɅ और उ×पादकता ͩकĒा/हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
 
Đ.सं. 
 
राÏय 
उ×पादन उ×पादकता 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 0.28 0.13 0.08 1838 1364 1321 
2 गुजरात 3.73 3.68 4.58 1682 1386 1523 
3 कना[टक 5.45 4.13 4.83 1184 1062 1294 
4 मÚय Ĥदेश 57.89 54.72 53.85 969 903 917 
5 महाराçĚ 66.16 52.58 73.70 1343 1028 1453 
6 राजèथान 12.07 11.70 11.75 1023 1038 1089 
7 तेलंगाना 3.26 2.70 2.91 1612 1483 1884 
 अͨखल भारत 149.85 130.62 152.68 1145 985 1179 
 
कपास    [उ×पादन लाख गांठɉ मɅ (Ĥ×येक गांठ 170 ͩकĒा) और उ×पादकता ͩकĒा ͧलÛट/हेÈटेयर मɅ] 
 
Đ.सं. 
 
राÏय 
उ×पादन उ×पादकता 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 15.41 7.37 11.31 372 297 476 
2 गुजरात 87.95 90.57 71.57 602 574 513 
3 हǐरयाणा 10.00 15.09 11.77 296 444 502 
4 कना[टक 25.68 20.59 22.73 460 471 570 
5 मÚय Ĥदेश 14.33 18.01 15.35 410 486 486 
6 महाराçĚ 83.16 80.45 73.73 338 323 304 
7 ओͫडशा 7.05 7.05 8.23 554 554 586 
8 पंजाब 4.44 6.29 4.14 303 500 439 
9 राजèथान 27.74 26.22 17.86 579 444 484 
10 तͧमलनाडु 3.19 2.52 2.11 313 330 350 
11 तेलंगाना 57.45 50.80 57.89 495 475 543 
 अͨखल भारत 336.60 325.22 297.24 443 436 440 
 
  
597                                                      

गÛना                              (उ×पादन लाख टन मɅ और उ×पादकता टन/हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
 
Đ.सं. 
 
राÏय 
उ×पादन उ×पादकता 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 29.56 22.14 19.85 73.89 80.53 90.24 
2 असम 12.64 13.80 12.38 43.59 47.23 42.34 
3 ǒबहार 127.43 120.84 121.49 60.63 59.78 63.09 
4 छƣीसगढ़ 23.88 20.41 18.66 56.89 57.16 55.93 
5 गुजरात 134.61 144.80 137.14 74.34 71.62 72.65 
6 हǐरयाणा 88.60 73.74 58.30 82.23 83.58 81.38 
7 कना[टक 593.46 418.11 480.60 90.00 77.00 89.00 
8 मÚय Ĥदेश 64.44 75.90 61.09 70.04 66.00 57.09 
9 महाराçĚ 1239.68 1120.88 1099.70 91.20 78.00 94.23 
10 ओͫडशा 3.94 4.12 6.81 53.78 57.40 51.34 
11 पंजाब 75.06 75.10 72.79 83.12 83.25 82.05 
12 राजèथान 3.10 3.45 4.65 87.96 82.98 79.98 
13 तͧमलनाडु 176.58 159.27 133.51 111.08 105.00 102.00 
14 तेलंगाना 29.43 24.33 19.16 105.10 90.12 93.06 
15 उƣर Ĥदेश 2242.46 2158.11 2208.01 80.24 81.35 81.17 
16 उƣराखंड 37.60 77.76 76.50 80.00 82.65 84.66 
17 पिæचम बंगाल 14.43 11.04 8.79 78.20 66.58 66.58 
  अͨखल भारत 4905.33 4531.58 4546.11 83.35 78.95 83.42 
 
मूंगफलȣ                           (उ×पादन लाख टन मɅ और उ×पादकता ͩकĒा/हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
 
Đ.सं. 
 
राÏय 
उ×पादन उ×पादकता 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 गुजरात 45.31 46.44 52.21 2570 2739 2657 
2 कना[टक 5.80 2.42 3.81 1248 648 961 
3 मÚय Ĥदेश 7.44 9.82 15.51 1912 2051 2207 
4 महाराçĚ 2.67 2.85 3.62 1278 1257 1448 
5 राजèथान 19.32 20.27 21.36 2400 2276 2024 
6 तͧमलनाडु 9.12 8.78 7.69 2598 2694 2439 
7 तेलंगाना 2.52 2.25 2.20 2448 2450 2106 
  अͨखल भारत 102.97 101.80 119.42 2075 2163 2073 
 
  
598                                                      

 
 
मÈका                             (उ×पादन लाख टन मɅ और उ×पादकता ͩकĒा/हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
 
Đ.सं. 
 
राÏय 
उ×पादन उ×पादकता 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 27.55 18.19 21.48 7138 6225 6510 
2 ǒबहार 43.80 57.09 54.68 5854 5975 6101 
3 गुजरात 8.57 9.09 7.95 2140 2244 1858 
4 झारखंड 4.58 5.65 6.98 1910 2098 2418 
5 कना[टक 59.11 56.29 61.90 3092 2855 3234 
6 मÚय Ĥदेश 46.21 43.39 66.42 3191 2812 2884 
7 महाराçĚ 39.19 24.50 47.49 2913 1847 2922 
8 राजèथान 21.79 21.70 26.78 2277 2464 2658 
9 तͧमलनाडु 29.90 28.39 26.63 7007 6239 5487 
10 तेलंगाना 28.62 27.79 33.92 5557 5671 5860 
11 उƣर Ĥदेश 19.52 26.68 19.61 2191 2417 2880 
12 पिæचम बंगाल 22.76 26.04 28.36 6285 6633 6999 
  अͨखल भारत 380.85 376.65 434.09 3545 3351 3590 
İोत: उपज पोट[ल 
****** 
 
599                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2251 
19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
 
ͪवषय: ओͫडशा के आǑदवासी और वामपंथ उĒवाद से Ĥभाͪवत िजलɉ मɅ एफपीओ नेटवक[ का 
ͪवèतार 
 
2251. Įी Ǔनरंजन ǒबशी: 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क)   Èया ओͫडशा के आǑदवासी और वामपंथी उĒवाद (एलडबãयूई) Ĥभाͪवत िजलɉ मɅ बाजार पहुंच 
को मजबूत करने के ͧलए ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठन (एफपीओ) नेटवक[ का ͪवèतार करने का कोई 
Ĥèताव है; और 
(ख)   यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसक े  Èया कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर) 
 
(क) एवं (ख): “10,000 ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठनɉ (एफपीओ) का गठन और संवध[न” के ͧलए कɅ ġȣय 
¢ेğ योजना के तहत, 10,000 एफपीओ का गठन ͩकया गया है। इसमɅ ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ गǑठत 
471 एफपीओ शाͧमल हɇ, िजनमɅ आǑदवासी बहुल और वामपंथी उĒवाद (एलडÞãयूई) Ĥभाͪवत िजले 
भी शाͧमल हɇ।  
 
ओͫडशा मɅ गǑठत एफपीओ कȧ िजला-वार सूची अनुबंध मɅ संलÊन है। 
 
 
600                                                      

अनुबंध 
 
ओͫडशा मɅ “10,000 ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठनɉ (एफपीओ) के गठन और संवध[न” के  ͧलए 
कɅ ġȣय ¢ेğ योजना के  तहत गǑठत एफपीओ कȧ िजला-वार सूची 
 
Đ.सं. िजला एफपीओ कȧ संÉया 
1 अंगुल 14 
2 बलांगीर 18 
3 बालेæवर 14 
4 बरगढ़ 21 
5 भġक 10 
6 बौध 3 
7 कटक 19 
8 देवगढ़ 4 
9 ढɅकनाल 19 
10 गजपǓत 10 
11 गंजम 28 
12 जगतͧसंहपुर 10 
13 जाजपुर 13 
14 झारसुगुड़ा 8 
15 कालाहांडी 22 
16 कंधमाल 19 
17 कɅ ġपाड़ा 14 
18 Èयɉझर 20 
19 खोरधा 17 
20 कोरापुट 21 
21 मलकानͬगरȣ 9 
22 मयूरभंज 34 
23 नबरंगपुर 15 
24 नयागढ़ 12 
25 नुआपाड़ा 6 
26 पुरȣ 24 
27 रायगड़ा 14 
28 संबलपुर 21 
29 सुबण[पुर  8 
30 सुंदरगढ़ 24 
कुल 471 
***** 
601                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2252 
19/12/2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
ͪवषय: Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश मɅ ĤाकृǓतक कृͪष पɮधǓतयɉ और ͪवèतार सेवाओं को बढ़ावा देना 
2252. डा. ͧसकंदर कुमारः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क)  Èया सरकार पहाड़ी ¢ेğɉ मɅ ĤाकृǓतक अनाज उ×पादकɉ के  ͧलए जलवायु-अनुकूल Ĥो×साहन 
योजना पर ͪवचार करेगी, िजसमɅ उनके ɮवारा Ĥदान कȧ जाने वालȣ पाǐरिèथǓतकȧ तंğ सेवाओं को 
माÛयता दȣ जाएगी और तदनुसार अǓतǐरÈत धनराͧश आवंǑटत कȧ जाएगी, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी 
Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख)  Èया सरकार ने राçĚȣय èतर का ĤाकृǓतक कृͪष बाजार पहुंच पोट[ल बनाया है जो Ǒहमाचल 
Ĥदेश के  ĤाकृǓतक अनाज उ×पादकɉ को देश भर के खरȣदारɉ से सीधे जोड़ता है, िजससे ͪवपणन 
लागत कम होती है और बेहतर मूãय ĤाÜत होता है; और 
(ग)  Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश मɅ ͪवèतार सेवाओं को मजबूत करने के ͧलए Èया उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ ताͩक 
कृͪष ͪवशेष£ Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से ͩकसानɉ को अनाज कȧ सवȾƣम ĤाकृǓतक कृͪष पɮधǓतयɉ के बारे मɅ 
सलाह दे सकɅ और Ĥमाणन मानकɉ को पूरा करने मɅ सहायता कर सकɅ? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
 
(क):  सरकार Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सǑहत देश मɅ ĤाकृǓतक खेती को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए Ǒदनांक 
25.11.2024 से कɅ ġ Ĥायोिजत योजना-राçĚȣय ĤाकृǓतक खेती ͧमशन (एनएमएनएफ) का काया[Ûवयन 
कर रहȣ है। ĤाकृǓतक खेती रसायन-मुÈत कृͪष पɮधǓत है, िजसमɅ पशुधन-समेͩकत ĤाकृǓतक कृͪष 
ͪवͬधयां और भारतीय पारंपǐरक जानकारȣ के  आधार पर ͪवͪवध फसल पɮधǓतयां शाͧमल हɇ। 
ĤाकृǓतक खेती से सॉइल हेãथ मɅ सुधार होता है, इकोͧसèटम पुनः èथाͪपत होता है और ͩकसान कȧ 
इनपुट लागत कम होती है, िजससे जलवायु पǐरवत[न अͬधक होता है। ĤाकृǓतक खेती से ͧमɪटȣ, 
जल, सूêमजीवɉ, पौधɅ, जानवरɉ, जलवायु और मानवीय आवæयकताओं के बीच ĤाकृǓतक इकोͧसèटम 
कȧ परèपर Ǔनभ[रता कȧ पहचान होती है। इस योजना के तहत, ĤाकृǓतक खेती करने, Ĥͧश¢ण ĤाÜत 
करने, पशुधन कȧ देखभाल करने/ĤाकृǓतक खेती के ͧलए अपेͯ¢त सामĒी तैयार करने, िजसमɅ 
ͧमĮण और भंडारण कंटेनर कȧ खरȣद करना, जैव-उपकरण संसाधन कɅ ġɉ से ĤाकृǓतक खेती के ͧलए 
अपेͯ¢त सामĒी कȧ खरȣद करना आǑद शाͧमल है, के  ͧलए ͩकसानɉ को 2 वषɟ के ͧलए (ĤǓत 
ͩकसान 1 एकड़ तक) ĤǓत ͩकसान ĤǓत वष[ ĤǓत एकड़ 4000/- ǽपए का उ×पादन आधाǐरत 
Ĥो×साहन Ĥदान ͩकया जाता है। 
602                                                      

(ख):  ĤाकृǓतक खेती के ͧलए कोई भी माकȶट एÈसेस पोट[ल ͪवभाग ɮवारा Ǔनͧम[त नहȣं ͩकया गया 
है। 
(ग):  Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सरकार ने राजीव गांधी ĤाकृǓतक खेती खुशहाल ͩकसान योजना 
(आरजीपीके क ेकेवाई) भी Ĥारंभ कȧ है जो ĤाकृǓतक खेती को बढ़ावा देने के  ͧलए राÏय èतरȣय योजना 
है। इस योजना का काया[Ûवयन अÛय कɅ ġ Ĥायोिजत योजनाओं, िजनमɅ एनएमएनएफ भी शाͧमल है, 
सǑहत समÛवय के माÚयम से ͩकया जा रहा है। एनएमएनएफ का काया[Ûवयन Èलèटर मोड मɅ 
ͩकया गया है। Ĥ×येक Èलèटर मɅ 50 हेÈटेयर के खेत और लगभग 125 ͩकसान शाͧमल होते हɇ जो 
आस-पास हȣ रहते हɇ और ĤाकृǓतक खेती मɅ लगे हुए हɇ। Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश मɅ 435 Èलèटर हɇ। ये 
Èलèटर राÏय कृͪष ͪवæवͪवɮयालयɉ (एसएयू)/कृͪष ͪव£ान कɅ ġɉ (केवीके) से संबɮध हɇ, जो ͩकसानɉ 
को Ĥͧश¢ण और माग[दश[न Ĥदान करते हɇ। वत[मान मɅ, 22 राÏय कृͪष ͪवæवͪवɮयालय/ कृͪष 
ͪव£ान कɅ ġ हɇ जो Èलèटरɉ मɅ योजना क े  काया[Ûवयन का पय[वे¢ण करते हɇ। ĤाकृǓतक कृͪष 
Èलèटरɉ मɅ ͩकसानɉ का माग[दश[न करने के ͧलए सामुदाǓयक संसाधन åयिÈतयɉ कȧ तैनाती कȧ गई 
है। इसके अलावा, ĤाकृǓतक कृͪष पɮधǓतयɉ पर ͩकसान Ĥͧश¢कɉ, वै£ाǓनकɉ और अͬधकाǐरयɉ ɮवारा 
Èलèटरɉ को सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। 
सरकार ने ĤाकृǓतक खेती मानकɉ के अनुǾप ĤाकृǓतक खेती के सभी उ×पादɉ के Ĥमाणन हेतु 
एक पोट[ल Ĥारंभ ͩकया है। “पीजीएस-इंͫडया नैचुरल” नामक ĤाकृǓतक खेती Ĥमाणन Ĥणालȣ पूण[तः 
ऑनलाइन है। यह Ĥमाणन ĤाकृǓतक खेती अपनाने वाले ͩकसानɉ को अपने ĤाकृǓतक उ×पादɉ के 
ͧलए Ĥीͧमयम मूãय ĤाÜत करने मɅ स¢म बनाता है। Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ वत[मान मɅ 907 
सͩĐय ͩकसान पंजीकृत हɇ, जो 613.66 हेÈटेयर ¢ेğ को कवर करते हɇ, तथा अब तक 148 
Ĥमाणपğ जारȣ ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। 
***** 
603                                                      

1 
 
 
भारत सरकार 
कृषि एवं ककसान कल् याण मंत्रालय  
कृषि अनुसंधान एवं शिक्षा षवभाग  
 
राज्‍ य‍सभा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सां.‍2253‍‍ 
 
दिनांक 19/12/2025  
  
आईसीएआर‍िी‍अनुसांधान‍सांबांधी‍पहलों‍िो‍सुदृढ़‍िरना‍ 
 
2253. डा.‍अजित‍माधवराव‍गोपछड़े:‍‍‍ 
  
क् या‍िृ षि‍एवां‍किसान‍िल्‍याण‍मांत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक:  
 
(क) सरकार द्वारा भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (आईसीएआर) की अनुसंधान पहलों को 
पुनर्जीषवत करने और मर्जबूत बनाने के शलए प्रततष्ठित कृषि प्रौद्योगगकीषविों की एक उच् च-
स् तरीय सशमतत गदित करने हेतु क् या किम उिाए गए हैं; 
(ख) क् या आईसीएआर ने कृषि समुिायों द्वारा सामना की र्जा रही कदिनाइयों के संबंध में राज् य 
सरकारों से शलखखत प्रततकिया मांगी है;  
(ग) कृषि उत् पािकता और ष्स्िरता बढाने के शलए आईसीएआर प्रत् ये क राज् य की स् िानीय 
र्जलवायु, मृिा और भूभौततकीय ष्स्िततयों के अनुरूप अनुसंधान करने की ककस प्रकार 
योर्जना बना रहा है; और 
(घ) आईसीएआर की अनुसंधान गततषवगधयों को कानूनी रूप से उत्तरिायी बनाने, पारिशििता, 
प्रभाविीलता और ककसानों की आवश् यकताओं के प्रतत र्जवाबिेही सुतनष्श्चत करने हेतु कानून 
पर षवचार न करने के क् या कारण हैं?   
 
उत्तर 
िृ षि‍एवां‍किसान‍िल्‍याण‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍ 
(श्री‍भागीरथ‍चौधरी) 
 
(ि)‍: सरकार द्वारा ‍ समय-समय पर  भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) के अनुसंधान 
कायििमों और पहल की समीक्षा करने और भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि के अनुसंधान पररणामों 
को बढाने हेतु उपायों का सुझाव िेने के शलए षवशिठ ट कृषि तकनीकीषविों और अन् य षविेिज्ञों को 
िाशमल करके हाई-पॉवर सशमततयां गदित की र्जाती हैं । इनमें प्रमुख हैं : अंतर-संस् िान संपकि को 
मर्जबूती प्रिान करने पर डॉ. र्जी. वी. के. राव सशमतत (1988); अनुसंधान संबंधी मामलों में 
कायििील स् वायत्तता प्रिान करने हेतु डॉ. र्जॉल सशमतत (1995); तिा अनुसंधान आधार में सुधार 
करने और भाकृअनुप-उद्योग इंटरफेस को मर्जबूती प्रिान करने के उद्िेश् य से डॉ. मिेलकर सशमतत 
(2005)। ऐसी अंततम सशमतत का गिन विि 2017 में ककया गया िा, ष्र्जसकी अध्यक्षता डॉ. िीपक 
पेंटल ने की िी। इस सशमतत का उद्िेश्य बारहवीं पंचविीय योर्जना अवगध के िौरान लागू की गई 
षवशभन्न भाकृअनुप योर्जनाओं की पररणाम-आधाररत समीक्षा करना िा। 
    
604                                                      

2 
 
 
(ख)‍ :‍भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) में कुल आि क्षेत्रीय सशमततयााँ कायिरत हैं, र्जो 
षवशभन्न अनुसंधान योग्य मुद्िों की समीक्षा करती हैं। चूाँकक कृषि राज्य का षविय है, इसशलए 
भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) अपने संस्िानों, कृषि प्रौद्योगगकी अनुप्रयोग अनुसंधान 
संस्िानों (ATARIs), कृषि षवज्ञान केंद्रों (KVKs) तिा राज्य कृषि षवश्वषवद्यालयों (SAUs) के 
माध्यम से राज्य सरकारों को स्िान-षवशिठट एवं उन्नत कृषि प्रौद्योगगककयों के षवकास और प्रिििन 
में सहयोग प्रिान करता है।  
 
(ग)‍: भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) षवशभन्न कृषि-पयािवरणीय क्षेत्रों में प्रौद्योगगककयों 
की उपयुक्तता सुतनष्श्चत करने के शलए स्िानीय र्जलवायु एवं भू-भौततक पररष्स्िततयों के अनुरूप 
अनुसंधान करता है। इसमें षवशभन्न मृिा प्रकारों, र्जलवायु पररष्स्िततयों और फसल उपयुक्तता को 
ध्यान में रखते हुए क्षेत्र-षवशिठट अनुसंधान एवं प्रौद्योगगकी षवकास करना िाशमल है। स्िानीय स्तर 
पर अनुसंधान योग्य समस्याओं के समाधान हेतु भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR), अखखल 
भारतीय समष्न्वत अनुसंधान पररयोर्जनाओं (AICRPs) के माध्यम से राज्य कृषि षवश्वषवद्यालयों 
के साि सहयोग करता है।  
 
भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR), सूखा-प्रततरोधी फसल ककस्मों, र्जल के कुिल 
प्रबंधन तरीकों तिा स्िानीय र्जलवायु िबावों के अनुकूल सतत कृषि पद्धततयों का षवकास करके  
र्जलवायु-अनूकूल कृषि को भी प्रोत्सादहत करता है। ष्र्जला स्तर पर कृषि षवज्ञान केंद्र (KVK) 
प्रशिक्षण, अगिम-पंष्क्त प्रिििन, ऑन-फामि परीक्षण तिा तकनीकी मागििििन प्रिान करते हैं। 
  
(घ)‍:‍‍लगभग एक िताब्िी पुरानी संस्िा आईसीएआर कृषि अनुसंधान, शिक्षा और षवस्तार 
के षवश्व के सबसे बडे नेटवकों में से एक के रूप में षवकशसत हुई है। स्वतंत्रता के बाि से, 
आईसीएआर ने वैज्ञातनक और प्रौद्योगगकीय प्रगतत के माध्यम से राठरीय खाद्य सुरक्षा सुतनष्श्चत 
करने में महत्वपूणि भूशमका तनभाई है और भारत को कृषि उत्पािों के िुद्ध तनयाितक के रूप में 
स्िाषपत करने में महत्वपूणि योगिान दिया है। पररिि ने अनुसंधान गततषवगधयों के शलए एक 
वैज्ञातनक लेखापरीक्षा प्रोटोकॉल स्िाषपत ककया है , ष्र्जसके तहत सभी आईसीएआर संस्िानों के 
अनुसंधान कायििमों/गततषवगधयों की वाषििक तनगरानी अनुसंधान सलाहकार पररिि (आरएसी) और 
प्रत्येक पांच विि में पंचवाषििक समीक्षा िल (क्यूआरटी) द्वारा व्यापक मूल्यांकन ककया र्जाता है। ये 
सशमततयां संस्िागत प्रगतत का आकलन करती हैं और भषवठय के अनुसंधान दििाओं पर मागििििन 
प्रिान करती हैं। इसके अलावा , संस्िान अनुसंधान सशमतत (आईआरसी) आंतररक अनुसंधान 
पररयोर्जनाओं की योर्जना , कायािन्वयन और आवगधक समीक्षा की िेखरेख करती है। ये सभी 
मूल्यांकन वैज्ञातनक आउटपुट, संस्िागत तनयंत्रण और षवत्तीय िक्षता का आकलन करने के  शलए 
ककए र्जाते हैं। इसके अततररक्त , सरकार समय-समय पर आईसीएआर की योर्जनाओं/कायििमों का 
बाह्य मूल्यांकन करती है ताकक इसके अनुसंधान कायििमों के प्रभाव का आकलन ककया र्जा सके 
और अनुसंधान की िक्षता, प्रभाविीलता और ककसानों की आवश्यकताओं के प्रतत र्जवाबिेही में 
सुधार के शलए उपाय सुझाए र्जा सकें। ऐसा ही हाशलया मूल्यांकन विि 2020-21 के िौरान ककया 
गया िा , ष्र्जसमें विि 2017-2020 की अवगध के िौरान कायािष्न्वत की गई आईसीएआर की 
योर्जनाओं को िाशमल ककया गया िा।  
******* 
605                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2254 
19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
 
ͪवषय: जैͪवक/ĤाकृǓतक खेती को बढ़ावा देने वाले काय[Đमɉ से लाभािÛवत ͩकसान 
2254. Įी मिãलकाजु[न खरगेः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क)  ͪपछले पाँच वषɟ क े  दौरान जैͪवक खेती Üलेटफॉम[ पर Ēाहकɉ ɮवारा Ǒदए गए ऑड[रɉ कȧ  
वष[-वार संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(ख)  उÈत Üलेटफॉम[ पर ͩकए गए लेन-देन का वष[-वार कुल मूãय ͩकतना है; 
(ग)  जैͪवक खेती Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ èथापना से लेकर अब तक इससे लाभािÛवत होने वाले ͩकसानɉ कȧ 
राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(घ)  2020 क े बजट भाषण मɅ ͩकए गए वादे के अनुसार पोट[ल को सु͸ढ़ करने, उÛनत करने या पुनः 
शुǾ करने क े ͧलए सरकार ɮवारा Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ; और 
(ङ)  ͪपछले पांच वषɟ क े दौरान जैͪवक खेती से संबंͬधत योजनाओं के तहत आवंǑटत, èवीकृत, जारȣ 
और उपयोग कȧ गई कुल धनराͧश का योजना-वार, राÏय / संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार ͪवतरण का Þयौरा Èया 
है? 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
 
(क) से (घ): जैͪवक खेती पोट[ल ͩकसानɉ को जानकारȣ Ĥदान करने और जैͪवक उ×पादɉ कȧ माकȶǑटंग को 
सुगम बनाने के ͧलए एक मंच के Ǿप मɅ ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। पोट[ल ने वष[ 2018 मɅ लॉÛच होने के 
बाद से 180 आड[र सͪव[स ͩकए हɇ तथा इसमɅ लेनदेन का मूãय 5.52 लाख ǽपये था। जैͪवक खेती पोट[ल 
लॉÛच होने क े बाद से पोट[ल पर पंजीकृत ͩकसानɉ कȧ संÉया 6.23 लाख है। जैͪवक उ×पादɉ कȧ माकȶǑटंग 
को बढ़ावा देने क े ͧलए, सरकार ɮवारा कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय क े  माÚयम से पीजीएस-इंͫडया 
जैͪवक Ĥमाणन काय[Đम शुǾ ͩकया गया है, िजससे ͩकसानɉ को जैͪवक उ×पादɉ का Ĥीͧमयम मूãय ĤाÜत 
करने मɅ सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। साथ हȣ, कृͪष एवं Ĥसंèकृत खाɮय उ×पाद Ǔनया[त ͪवकास 
Ĥाͬधकरण (एपीईडीए) क े  अंतग[त राçĚȣय जैͪवक उ×पादन काय[Đम (एनपीओपी) Ǔनया[त बाजार के ͧलए 
जैͪवक उ×पादɉ हेतु तृतीय-प¢ Ĥमाणन को बढ़ावा देता है। 
कɅ ġȣय ¢ेğ कȧ योजना “10,000 ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठनɉ का गठन एवं Ĥो×साहन” के तहत, 
अǓतǐरÈत 185 ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठनɉ (एफपीओ) का पंजीकरण ͩकया गया है। इनमɅ से 76 एफपीओ, 
ई-कॉमस[ क े ͧलए ओपन नेटवक[ फॉर ͫडिजटल कॉमस[ (ओएनडीसी) पर पंजीकृत हɇ। 
(ड.): पूवȾƣर राÏयɉ क े  अǓतǐरÈत, सभी राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ मɅ परंपरागत कृͪष ͪवकास योजना 
(पीकेवीवाई) और पूवȾƣर राÏयɉ क े  ͧलए जैͪवक मूãय Įंखला ͪवकास ͧमशन (एमओवीसीडीएनईआर) के 
माÚयम से वष[ 2015-16 से जैͪवक खेती को बढ़ावा Ǒदया जा रहा है। पीकेवीवाई और 
एमओवीसीडीएनईआर योजना के तहत, वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक राÏय-वार आवंटन, ǐरलȣज और 
åयय का ͪववरण अनुबंध-I मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
606                                                      

अनुबंध-I 
पीकेवीवाई के अंतग[त राÏय-वार आवंǑटत, जारȣ और åयय कȧ गई धनराͧश 
( ǽपये लाख मɅ) 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक 
राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ का नाम आवंटन जारȣ कȧ गई राͧश åयय 
आंĢ Ĥदेश 17460.65 13774.83 11780.68 
ǒबहार 9083.25 3605.31 2979.29 
छƣीसगढ़ 15203.79 8003.61 7581.46 
गुजरात 1372.21 488.10 378.10 
गोवा 2703.40 500.00 142.00 
हǐरयाणा 1209.75 5.05 0.00 
झारखंड 6076.63 2398.86 2189.86 
कना[टक 6849.42 5275.65 1077.90 
क ेरल 7656.82 4373.30 4023.71 
मÚय Ĥदेश 23074.51 2111.04 764.00 
महाराçĚ 7408.27 4663.37 3460.25 
ओͫडशा 5426.03 3671.71 3612.24 
पंजाब 3349.06 2082.29 224.00 
राजèथान 19074.63 7781.58 7431.42 
तͧमलनाडु 4440.28 3623.98 3502.46 
तेलंगाना 2369.70 227.15 0.00 
उƣर Ĥदेश 33792.45 21268.05 17881.05 
पिæचम बंगाल 4052.19 3393.14 2546.19 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 3932.50 2036.97 2034.24 
उƣराखंड 27525.50 21079.27 20085.22 
सभी पूवȾƣर ¢ेğ  1052.87 781.37 7.57 
सभी कɅ ġ शाͧसत Ĥदेश  6828.49 1268.10 1035.90 
कुल 209942.42 112412.67 92737.50 
 
एमओवीसीडीएनईआर के अंतग[त राÏय-वार आवंǑटत, जारȣ और åयय कȧ गई धनराͧश 
(लाख ǽपये मɅ) 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक 
राÏय का नाम आवंटन जारȣ कȧ गई राͧश åयय 
अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 16667.79 11506.95 11502.04 
असम 16242.56 7275.06 6143.61 
मͨणपुर 22344.23 20031.96 18062.26 
मेघालय 12035.31 6237.06 4792.06 
नागालɇड 14176.09 10907.79 10907.79 
ͧमजोरम 11599.01 7918.2 6906.2 
ͧसिÈकम 13502.57 8512.11 7808.81 
ǒğपुरा 16602.69 9879.31 9303.49 
कुल 123170.25 82268.45 75426.27 
***** 
607                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2255 
19/12/2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
 
ͪवषय: उव[रक कȧ बढ़ती कȧमतɅ और ͩकसानɉ पर इसका Ĥभाव 
2255 Įी ए. ए. रहȣमः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया मंğालय ने ͪपछले दो वषɟ के  दौरान Ĥमुख उव[रकɉ कȧ कȧमतɉ मɅ हुई वृɮͬध का आकलन 
ͩकया है, यǑद हां, तो इसके Èया कारक पहचाने गए हɇ; 
(ख) Èया सरकार छोटे और सीमांत ͩकसानɉ पर पड़ने वाले Ĥभाव को कम करने के ͧलए उव[रकɉ पर 
दȣ जाने वालȣ सिÞसडी या सहायता योजनाओं मɅ कोई संशोधन करने पर ͪवचार कर रहȣ है; 
(ग) ͩकफायती उव[रकɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ सुǓनिæचत करने और कृͪष समुदाय मɅ संकट को रोकने के ͧलए 
Èया कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ; और 
(घ) Èया आयाǓतत या महंगे उव[रकɉ पर Ǔनभ[रता कम करने के ͧलए वैकिãपक उव[रक उपयोग या 
मृदा संबंधी èवाèØय Ĥथाओं को बढ़ावा देने कȧ कोई योजना है? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
(क) एवं (ख): वष[ 2018 से यूǐरया का अͬधकतम खुदरा मूãय (एमआरपी) िèथर है। इसी Ĥकार, 
ͪपछले तीन वषɟ (2023-24 से 2025-26) से डीएपी का एमआरपी िèथर है। मूãय को िèथर रखने 
के ͧलए, भारत सरकार यूǐरया और फॉèफ ेǑटक एवं पोटैͧशक (पी एंड के ) दोनɉ उव[रकɉ पर सिÞसडी 
वहन करती है। यूǐरया पर वाèतͪवक åयय ĤाकृǓतक गैस और यूǐरया उ×पादन मɅ ĤयुÈत अÛय 
कÍचे माल कȧ कȧमतɉ मɅ उतार-चढ़ाव तथा यूǐरया के अंतरराçĚȣय आयात मूãयɉ के  साथ बदलता 
रहता है। पी एंड के योजना के तहत, अͬधसूͬचत पी एंड के उव[रकɉ पर वाͪष[क/ɮͪववाͪष[क आधार पर 
सिÞसडी कȧ एक Ǔनिæचत राͧश तय कȧ जाती है। 
(ग): उव[रकɉ कȧ उपलÞधता सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए, Ĥ×येक फसल सीजन के  Ĥारंभ से पहले, कृͪष 
एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग सभी राÏय सरकारɉ के परामश[ से,  उव[रकɉ कȧ आवæयकता का आकलन 
राÏय-वार और माह-वार करता है। कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग ɮवारा अनुमाǓनत आवæयकता 
के आधार पर, उव[रक ͪवभाग, राÏयɉ को पया[Üत माğा मɅ उव[रकɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ करता है। देश मɅ सभी 
608                                                      

Ĥमुख सिÞसडी ĤाÜत उव[रकɉ कȧ आवाजाहȣ कȧ Ǔनगरानी, एकȧकृत उव[रक Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ 
(आईएफएमएस) नामक एक ऑनलाइन वेब-आधाǐरत Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ ɮवारा कȧ जाती है। उव[रकɉ 
कȧ सुचाǾ उपलÞधता सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए राÏयɉ के साथ साÜताǑहक समी¢ा बैठकɅ आयोिजत 
कȧ जाती हɇ। राÏय सरकारɉ को Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से सलाह दȣ जाती है ͩक वे समय पर उव[रकɉ के 
ऑड[र देकर आपूǓत[ को सुåयविèथत रखने हेतु Ǔनमा[ताओं तथा आयातकɉ के  साथ समÛवय करɅ। 
(घ): भारत सरकार ɮवारा उव[रक Ǔनयंğण आदेश, 1985 मɅ जैͪवक उव[रक, जैव उव[रक, तेल रǑहत 
केÈस, जैͪवक काब[न संवध[क तथा नैनो उव[रक जैसे वैकिãपक उव[रकɉ को अͬधसूͬचत ͩकया गया है 
ताͩक ऐसे उव[रकɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ एवं गुणवƣा सुǓनिæचत कȧ जा सके। 
 पूवȾƣर राÏयɉ के  अǓतǐरÈत सभी राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ मɅ परंपरागत कृͪष ͪवकास योजना 
(पीकेवीवाई) और पूवȾƣर राÏयɉ मɅ पूवȾƣर ¢ेğ जैͪवक मूãय Įृंखला ͪवकास ͧमशन 
(एमओवीसीडीएनईआर) के माÚयम से जैͪवक खेती को बढ़ावा Ǒदया जाता है। पीकेवीवाई के तहत, 
जैͪवक खेती को बढ़ावा देने के  ͧलए 3 वषɟ मɅ ĤǓत हेÈटेयर 31,500 ǽपये कȧ सहायता Ĥदान कȧ 
जाती है। इसमɅ से, ͩकसानɉ को Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण क े  माÚयम से ऑन फाम[/ऑफ फाम[ जैͪवक 
इनपुट, िजसमɅ जैͪवक खाद भी शाͧमल है, के  ͧलए 15,000 ǽपये ĤǓत हेÈटेयर कȧ सहायता दȣ जाती 
है। एमओवीसीडीएनईआर के  तहत, ͩकसान उ×पादक संगठन क े  गठन, जैͪवक इनपुट के ͧलए ͩकसानɉ 
को सहायता Ĥदान करने आǑद के  ͧलए 3 वषɟ मɅ ĤǓत हेÈटेयर 46,500 ǽपये कȧ सहायता Ĥदान 
कȧ जाती है। इसमɅ से ͩकसानɉ को ऑन फाम[/ऑफ फाम[ जैͪवक इनपुट के ͧलए 32,500 ǽपये ĤǓत 
हेÈटेयर कȧ सहायता दȣ जाती है, िजसमɅ Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण के  Ǿप मɅ 15,000 ǽपये शाͧमल हɇ। 
 सरकार मृदा èवाèØय एवं उव[रता योजना के माÚयम से उव[रकɉ के  ͪववेकपूण[ उपयोग को 
बढ़ावा देती है। यह योजना वष[ 2014-15 से सभी कृͪष जोतɉ को सॉयल हेãथ काड[ (एसएचसी) 
Ĥदान करने के ͧलए लागू कȧ गई है, ताͩक उ×पादकता और मृदा उव[रता मɅ सुधार के ͧलए संतुͧलत 
एवं एकȧकृत पोषक त×व Ĥबंधन को बढ़ावा Ǒदया जा सके । ͩकसानɉ के  खेतɉ का Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से 
मृदा èवाèØय मूãयांकन ͩकया जाता है ताͩक 3 वष[ मɅ कम से कम एक बार एसएचसी जारȣ ͩकया 
जा सके । वष[ 2014-15 से अब तक, देश भर मɅ 25.61 करोड़ सॉयल हेãथ काड[ जारȣ/ͪवतǐरत ͩकए 
जा चुके हɇ। इस योजना के तहत शुǽआत से अब तक 1970 करोड़ ǽपये जारȣ ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। 
देश मɅ 93781 ͩकसान Ĥͧश¢ण, 6.80 लाख Ĥदश[न और 7425 ͩकसान मेले/अͧभयान आयोिजत 
ͩकए गए हɇ। 
***** 
609                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2256 
19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
ͪवषय: महाराçĚ मɅ Üयाज कȧ खेती करने वाले ͩकसानɉ के ͧलए राहत उपाय 
2256 डा. मेधा ͪवĮाम कुलकणȸ 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया महाराçĚ मɅ बेमौसम बाǐरश से Üयाज कȧ फसलɉ को åयापक नुकसान हुआ है, िजससे हजारɉ 
ͩकसानɉ को भारȣ कǑठनाई का सामना करना पड़ रहा है; 
(ख) यǑद हां, तो फसल के नुकसान का आकलन और सरकार ɮवारा Ĥभाͪवत ͩकसानɉ को दȣ गई 
त×काल राहत या सहायता के उपाय Èया हɇ; 
(ग) Èया सरकार ͩकसानɉ को ऐसी आपदाओं से बचाने के ͧलए मौजूदा फसल बीमा योजनाओं और 
राहत तंğɉ को मजबूत करने का ͪवचार रखती है; और 
(घ) यǑद हां, तो फसल के नुकसान के आकलन मɅ तेजी लाने, मुआवजे का समय पर ͪवतरण सुǓनिæचत 
करने और ͩकसानɉ के सतत कãयाण के ͧलए दȣघ[काͧलक राहत काय[नीǓतयɉ को लागू करने के ͧलए 
Èया कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर)  
(क) से (घ): राçĚȣय आपदा Ĥबंधन नीǓत (एनपीडीएम) के अनुसार, अͬधसूͬचत आपदाओं को Úयान मɅ 
रखते हुए जमीनी èतर पर आवæयक राहत उपाय Ĥदान करने कȧ Ĥाथͧमक िजàमेदारȣ राÏय सरकार 
कȧ है। राÏय सरकारɅ भारत सरकार ɮवारा अनुमोǑदत मदɉ और मानदंडɉ के अनुसार राÏय आपदा 
ĤǓतͩĐया कोष (एसडीआरएफ) के Ǿप मɅ उपलÞध फ ं ड से ĤाकृǓतक आपदाओं के समय राहत उपाय 
करती हɇ। संबंͬधत राÏय सरकार को िजला ĤशासǓनक तंğ के अपने èथाͪपत चैनल के माÚयम से, 
एसडीआरएफ मɅ पहले से उपलÞध फ ंड से ĤाकृǓतक आपदा से Ĥभाͪवत लोगɉ को आवæयक राहत Ĥदान 
करनी होती है। 'गंभीर ĤकृǓत' कȧ आपदा कȧ िèथǓत मɅ एसडीआरएफ के अǓतǐरÈत, राçĚȣय आपदा 
ĤǓतͩĐया कोष (एनडीआरएफ) से अǓतǐरÈत ͪवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान करने पर Ǔनधा[ǐरत ĤͩĐया के 
अनुसार ͪवचार ͩकया जाता है, िजसमɅ अंतर-मंğालयी कɅ ġȣय दल (आईएमसीटȣ) के दौरे पर आधाǐरत 
आकलन शाͧमल है। एसडीआरएफ और एनडीआरएफ के तहत Ĥदान कȧ जाने वालȣ ͪवƣीय सहायता 
वाèतͪवक नुकसान दावा ͩकए गए नुकसान कȧ भरपाई के ͧलए न होकर राहत के Ǿप मɅ उपलÞध 
होती है।   
610                                                      

       महाराçĚ राÏय सरकार को ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-2026 के ͧलए एसडीआरएफ के तहत 4176.80 
करोड़ ǽपये (3132.80 करोड़ ǽपये कɅ ġ सरकार का Ǒहèसा + 1044.00 करोड़ ǽपये राÏय सरकार का 
Ǒहèसा) आवंǑटत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजसमɅ से कɅ ġ सरकार के Ǒहèसे के Ǿप मɅ पहलȣ और दूसरȣ ͩकèत के 
Ǿप मɅ Ĥ×येक ͩकèत मɅ 1566.40 करोड़ ǽपये राÏय सरकार को जारȣ ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। 
     महाराçĚ राÏय सरकार ɮवारा दȣ गई जानकारȣ के अनुसार, फरवरȣ से अÈटूबर 2025 कȧ अवͬध के 
दौरान, भारȣ बाǐरश, बेमौसम बाǐरश और बाढ़ के कारण 2.99 लाख हेÈटेयर ¢ेğ मɅ Üयाज कȧ फसल 
Ĥभाͪवत हुई। Ĥभाͪवत 2.99 लाख हेÈटेयर ¢ेğ के ͩकसानɉ को राहत और सहायता के Ǿप मɅ 809.19 
करोड़ ǽपये कȧ राͧश Ĥदान कȧ गई है। 
         Ĥधानमंğी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई) तथा पुनग[Ǒठत मौसम आधाǐरत फसल बीमा 
योजना (आरडÞãयूबीसीआईएस) को खरȣफ 2016 सीजन से देश मɅ लागू ͩकया गया था। यह योजना, 
मुÉय Ǿप से '¢ेğ आधाǐरत' Ǻिçटकोण पर आधाǐरत है और इसके तहत ͩकसानɉ कȧ फसलɉ को बुआई 
पूव[ से फसलोपरांत तक सभी गैर-Ǔनवाय[ ĤाकृǓतक जोͨखमɉ से सुर¢ा Ĥदान के ͧलए Ûयूनतम Ĥीͧमयम 
पर åयापक जोͨखम कवरेज Ĥदान ͩकया जाता है। èवीकाय[ दावɉ कȧ गणना कȧ जाती है और बीमा 
क ं पǓनयां इन दावɉ को, राçĚȣय फसल बीमा पोट[ल (एनसीआईपी) पर ͫडजीÈलेम मॉɬयूल के माÚयम 
से बीͧमत ͩकसान के खाते मɅ सीधे भुगतान करती हɇ। यह भुगतान संबंͬधत राÏय सरकार ɮवारा बीमा 
क ं पनी को उपलÞध कराए गए ĤǓत इकाई ¢ेğ उपज आंकड़ɉ तथा योजना के Ĥचालन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ मɅ 
Ǔनधा[ǐरत दावा गणना सूğ के आधार पर और कɅ ġ और राÏय सरकार से Ĥीͧमयम सिÞसडी मɅ आवæयक 
Ǒहèसा ĤाÜत होने पर ͩकया जाता है। यह योजना राÏयɉ और ͩकसानɉ दोनɉ के ͧलए èवैिÍछक है और 
महाराçĚ सरकार इसके आरंभ से हȣ इसे काया[िÛवत कर रहȣ है। 
         इस योजना के तहत, बीमा क ं पǓनयां एÈचुअǐरयल/बोलȣ ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत Ĥीͧमयम चाज[ करती हɇ, 
परंतु ͩकसानɉ को खाɮय और Ǔतलहन फसलɉ हेतु खरȣफ सीजन के ͧलए बीमा राͧश का अͬधकतम 
2% और रबी सीजन के ͧलए बीमा राͧश का 1.5% तथा वाͨणिÏयक/बागवानी फसलɉ के ͧलए बीमा 
राͧश का 5% तक का कम Ĥीͧमयम देना होता है। शेष एÈचुअǐरयल/बोलȣ ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत Ĥीͧमयम 
कɅ ġ और राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा समान Ǿप से साझा ͩकया जाता है, परंतु पूवȾƣर राÏयɉ के ͧलए यह 
कɅ ġ और राÏय के बीच 90:10 के अनुपात मɅ साझा ͩकया जाता है और सरकार ɮवारा फ ं ड ͪवतरण 
एजɅसी अथा[त भारतीय कृͪष बीमा क ंपनी ͧलͧमटेड के माÚयम से सीधे बीमा क ं पǓनयɉ को Ĥदान ͩकया 
जाता है। दावɉ का भुगतान केवल योजना के तहत बीͧमत ͩकसानɉ को हȣ ͩकया जाता है। राÏय-वार 
फ ं ड आवंǑटत करने का कोई Ĥावधान नहȣं है। 
        ओलावृिçट, भूèखलन, बाढ़, बादल फटने और ĤाकृǓतक आग जैसे èथानीय जोͨखमɉ से होने वाले 
नुकसान और चĐवात, चĐवाती/बेमौसम बाǐरश और ओलावृिçट के कारण फसल उपरांत नुकसान कȧ 
गणना Ĥ×येक बीͧमत खेत के आधार पर कȧ जाती है। ͩकसानɉ को नुकसान कȧ सूचना संबंͬधत बीमा 
क ं पनी, राÏय सरकार, ͪवƣीय संèथानɉ/बɇकɉ को और राçĚȣय फसल बीमा पोट[ल (एनसीआईपी) या 
पीएमएफबीवाई ऐप आǑद पर ऑनलाइन देनी होती है। 
611                                                      

      फसल बीमा योजनाओं कȧ समी¢ा/संशोधन/युिÈतकरण/सुधार एक सतत ĤͩĐया है और Ǒहतधारकɉ 
/अÚययनɉ के सुझावɉ/अßयावेदनɉ/ͧसफाǐरशɉ पर समय-समय पर Ǔनण[य ͧलए जाते हɇ। पीएमएफबीवाई 
के Ĥचालन ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ को सरकार ɮवारा ĤाÜत अनुभव, ͪवͧभÛन Ǒहतधारकɉ के सुझावɉ और बेहतर 
पारदͧश[ता, जवाबदेहȣ, ͩकसानɉ को दावɉ का समय पर भुगतान सुǓनिæचत करने और योजना को अͬधक 
ͩकसान-Ǒहतैषी बनाने के उɮदेæय से समय-समय पर åयापक Ǿप से संशोͬधत ͩकया गया है िजससे यह 
सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सके ͩक योजना के तहत पाğ लाभ ͩकसानɉ तक समय पर और पारदशȸ तरȣके 
से पहुंचɅ। 
    सरकार ने दावɉ के समय पर Ǔनपटान के ͧलए इस योजना के काया[Ûवयन को सुǺढ़ करने हेतु 
ͪवͧभÛन कदम उठाए हɇ: 
• सरकार राçĚȣय फसल बीमा पोट[ल (एनसीआईपी) को सिÞसडी भुगतान, समÛवय, पारदͧश[ता, सूचना 
Ĥसार और सेवाओं कȧ ͫडलȣवरȣ को सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए एक एकल डेटा İोत के Ǿप मɅ ͪवकͧसत 
कर दȣ है। इसमɅ ͩकसानɉ का सीधा ऑनलाइन नामांकन, बेहतर Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए åयिÈतगत बीͧमत 
ͩकसान के ͪववरण को अपलोड करना/ĤाÜत करना और दावा राͧश को इलेÈĚॉǓनक Ǿप से åयिÈतगत 
ͩकसान के बɇक खाते मɅ अंतǐरत करना शाͧमल है। 
• दावा ͪवतरण ĤͩĐया कȧ कड़ी Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए, खरȣफ 2022 से दावɉ के भुगतान हेतु 'ͫडजीÈलेम 
मॉɬयूल' नामक एक समͪप[त मॉɬयूल को शुǾ ͩकया गया है। इसमɅ राçĚȣय फसल बीमा पोट[ल 
(एनसीआईपी) को साव[जǓनक ͪवƣ Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (पीएफएमएस) और बीमा क ं पǓनयɉ कȧ लेखा Ĥणालȣ 
के साथ एकȧकृत ͩकया गया है, ताͩक खरȣफ 2024 से सभी दावɉ का समय पर और पारदशȸ तरȣके 
से Ǔनपटान ͩकया जा सके। यǑद बीमा कं पनी ɮवारा भुगतान समय पर नहȣं ͩकया जाता है, तो 
एनसीआईपी के माÚयम से 12% का जुमा[ना èवतः गणना करके लगाया जाएगा। 
• ͩकसानɉ को कɅ ġ सरकार के Ǒहèसे से संबंͬधत आनुपाǓतक दावे Ĥदान करने के ͧलए Ĥीͧमयम सिÞसडी 
मɅ कɅ ġ सरकार के Ǒहèसे को राÏय सरकारɉ के Ǒहèसे से अलग कर Ǒदया गया है। 
• योजना के Ĥावधानɉ के अनुसार, खरȣफ 2025 सीजन से संबंͬधत राÏय सरकार ɮवारा अपने Ĥीͧमयम 
Ǒहèसे को अͬĒम जमा करने के ͧलए एèĐो खाता खोलना अǓनवाय[ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
• इसके अǓतǐरÈत, योजना के काया[Ûवयन मɅ Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ का लाभ उठाने कȧ Ǒदशा मɅ, उपज डेटा/फसल 
कटाई Ĥयोग (सीसीई) डेटा को सीसीई-एĒी ऐप के माÚयम से एकğ करना और इसे एनसीआईपी पर 
अपलोड करना, बीमा कंपǓनयɉ को सीसीई के संचालन कȧ Ǔनगरानी करने कȧ अनुमǓत देना, राÏय भूͧम 
अͧभलेखɉ को एनसीआईपी के साथ एकȧकृत करना आǑद जैसे ͪवͧभÛन कदम पहले हȣ उठाए जा चुके 
हɇ, ताͩक ͩकसानɉ के दावɉ का समय पर Ǔनपटान सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सके। 
***** 
612                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2257 
19 िदसɾर, 2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
 
िवषय: शीतागार Ɨमता का िवˑार 
2257 सुŵी ˢाित मािलवालः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
 
(क) Ůȑेक राǛ मŐ संचािलत शीतागार इकाइयों की संƥा, उनकी क ु ल भंडारण Ɨमता और 
वतŊमान उपयोग ˑर का ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ख) िपछले पांच वषŘ मŐ ˕ािपत नई शीतागार सुिवधाओं की संƥा और उनक े िलए आवंिटत, जारी 
और उपयोग की गई धनरािश का राǛ-वार ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ग) िपछले पांच वषŘ क े दौरान शीतागार की कमी क े कारण फसल कटाई क े बाद अनुमािनत 
माũाȏक और मौिūक मूʞ दोनों क े सदभŊ मŐ Šए नुकसान का राǛ-वार और वषŊ-वार ɯौरा Ɛा 
है; और 
(घ) Ɛा सबसे अिधक नुकसान का सामना करने वाले राǛों मŐ अितįरƅ Ɨमता िवˑार की 
योजना बनाई गई है, यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र)  
 
(क): उपलɩ जानकारी क े अनुसार, वतŊमान मŐ देश मŐ 402.18 लाख मीिटŌक टन Ɨमता वाले 
8815 कोʒ ːोरे ज हœ। कोʒ ːोरेज का राǛ/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ-वार िववरण अनुबंध-1 मŐ िदया 
गया है। 
(ख): समेिकत बागवानी िवकास िमशन (एमआईडीएच) क े अंतगŊत, मंũालय कोʒ ːोरेज सुिवधाओं 
सिहत फसल उपरांत Ůबंधन इंůाː Ō Ɓर क े िनमाŊण क े िलए मांग-आधाįरत िवȅीय सहायता Ůदान 
करता है। राǛों/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ को उनक े Ůˑावों, वािषŊक कायŊ योजनाओं, पूवŊ समय मŐ उपयोग 
और समŤ योजना िदशािनदőशों क े आधार पर फ ं ड आवंिटत िकया जाता है। िनिध जारी करना तथा 
उसका उपयोग करना पाũ Ůˑावों की Ůˑुित, िनधाŊįरत शतŘ की पूितŊ और राǛों Ȫारा उपयोिगता 
Ůमाण पũ Ůˑुत करने पर िनभŊर करता है। 
तथािप, देश मŐ िपछले पांच वषŘ क े दौरान ˢीक ृ त कोʒ ːोरेज की राǛ-वार संƥा का िववरण 
अनुबंध-II मŐ िदया गया है। 
  
613                                                      

(ग): कोʒ ːोरे ज की कमी क े कारण फसलोपरांत नुकसान क े राǛ-वार और वषŊ-वार अनुमानों 
का माũाȏक और मौिūक दोनों ही तरह क े िववरण का रख-रखाव कŐ ūीय ˑर पर नहीं िकया 
जाता है। फसलोपरांत नुकसान कई कारकों जैसे कटाई, संŤहण, वगŎकरण/छ ँ टाई, फटकना/सफाई, 
सुखाना, पैक े िजंग, पįरवहन, खेत ˑर पर भंडारण और उपभोग ˑर/गोदामों, थोक िवŢे ताओं, 
खुदरा िवŢे ताओं, Ůोसेिसंग यूिनट, बाजार ˑर पर पįरवहन पर िनभŊर है अत: इसका कारण क े वल 
कोʒ ːोरेज की कमी नहीं माना जा सकता।   
    तथािप, खाȨ Ůसंˋरण उȨोग मंũालय तथा नाबाडŊ क ं सʐŐसी सिवŊसेज (एनएबीकॉɌ) Ȫारा 
संचािलत वषŊ 2022 मŐ Ůकािशत अȯयन क े अनुसार, चयिनत फसलों की कटाई और फसलोपरांत 
नुकसान की माũा अनाज मŐ 3.89% से 5.92%, दालों मŐ 5.65% से 6.74%, ितलहन मŐ 2.87% 
से 7.51%, फलों मŐ 6.02% से 15.05% और सİɥयों मŐ 4.87% से 11.61% क े बीच पाई गई 
है। फसल-वार िववरण अनुबंध-III मŐ िदया गया है। 
(घ): क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग, एकीक ृ त बागवानी िवकास िमशन (एमआईडीएच) का 
कायाŊɋयन कर रहा है, िजसक े अंतगŊत देश भर मŐ 5,000 मीिटŌक टन तक की Ɨमता वाले कोʒ 
ːोरेज सुिवधाओं क े िनमाŊण/िवˑार/आधुिनकीकरण सिहत िविभɄ बागवानी गितिविधयों क े िलए 
पूंजीगत सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। एमआईडीएच क े अंतगŊत राǛों/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ से Ůाɑ वािषŊक 
कायŊ योजनाओं (एएपी) क े आधार पर सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। ये एएपी राǛों/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ 
Ȫारा उनकी मूʞांिकत आवʴकताओं, मौजूदा इंůाː Ō Ɓर, Ůाथिमकता वाले Ɨेũों और संसाधनों 
की उपलɩता क े अनुसार तैयार की जाती हœ। कोʒ ːोरेज घटक, मांग/उȨिमयों Ȫारा संचािलत 
है, िजसक े िलए सामाɊ Ɨेũों मŐ पाũ पįरयोजना लागत क े 35% और पूवŖȅर एवं िहमालयी राǛों, 
अनुसूिचत Ɨेũों, वाईŰŐट िवलेजों, अंडमान एवं िनकोबार एवं लƗȪीप Ȫीपों क े मामले मŐ पाũ 
पįरयोजना लागत क े 50% की दर से ऋण-आधाįरत बैकए ं ड सİɵडी क े ŝप मŐ सरकारी सहायता 
संबंिधत राǛ बागवानी िमशनों क े माȯम से उपलɩ है। 
     इसक े अितįरƅ, राʼŌीय बागवानी बोडŊ (एनएचबी) "कोʒ ːोरेज और बागवानी उȋादों क े 
भंडारण क े िनमाŊण/िवˑार/आधुिनकीकरण क े िलए पूंजी िनवेश सİɵडी" नामक एक योजना 
कायाŊİɋत कर रहा है। इस योजना क े तहत, सामाɊ Ɨेũों मŐ पįरयोजना की पूंजी लागत क े 35% 
की दर से और पूवŖȅर, पहाड़ी और अनुसूिचत Ɨेũों मŐ 50% की दर से ऋण-आधाįरत पूवŊʩापी 
सİɵडी उपलɩ है। यह सİɵडी 5000 मीिटŌक टन से अिधक और 20000 मीिटŌक टन तक की 
Ɨमता वाले कोʒ ːोरे ज और िनयंिũत वातावरण (सीए) ːोरेज क े िनमाŊण/िवˑार/आधुिनकीकरण 
क े िलए उपलɩ है। 
फसलोपरांत अिधक नुकसान का सामना करने वाले राǛों मŐ अितįरƅ Ɨमता िवˑार क े िलए 
कोई अलग राǛ-िविशʼ आवंटन नहीं िकया गया है; तथािप, ऐसे राǛों को एमआईडीएच क े तहत 
अपनी वािषŊक कायŊ योजनाओं मŐ कोʒ ːोरेज और संबंिधत फसलोपरांत इंůाː Ō Ɓर को Ůाथिमकता 
देने क े िलए ŮोȖािहत िकया जाता है। इन राǛों से Ůाɑ Ůˑावों पर योजना क े िदशािनदőशों, 
पाũता मानदंडों और उपलɩ फ ं ड क े अनुसार िवचार िकया जाता है और ːोरेज Ɨमता बढ़ाने 
और फसलोपरांत नुकसान को कम करने क े उȞेʴ से उɎŐ सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। 
614                                                      

अनुबंध–I 
“कोãड èटोरेज ¢मता ͪवèतार” के संबंध मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣराथ[ लोकसभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2257 के भाग (क) से संबंͬधत अनुबंध-I 
 
 
देश मŐ िदनांक 30.11.2025 तक कोʒ ːोरेज का राǛ-वार िवतरण 
 
Ţम संƥा  राǛ का नाम संƥा Ɨमता (एमटी) 
1 अंडमान एवं िनकोबार Ȫीप समूह (संघ राǛ Ɨेũ) 4 2210 
2 आंŬ Ůदेश और तेलंगाना 480 1996340 
3 अŜणाचल Ůदेश 2 6000 
4 असम 45 212662 
5 िबहार 316 1490200 
6 चंडीगढ़ (संघ राǛ Ɨेũ) 7 12462 
7 छȅीसगढ 132 586863 
8 िदʟी 97 129857 
9 गोवा 29 7705 
10 गुजरात 1023 4042770 
11 हįरयाणा 387 886656 
12 िहमाचल Ůदेश 89 181318 
13 जʃू एवं कʳीर 96 382564 
14 झारखंड 60 250077 
15 कनाŊटक 271 930379 
16 क े रल 202 96655 
17 लƗȪीप (संघ राǛ Ɨेũ) 1 15 
18 मȯ Ůदेश 341 1498651 
19 महाराʼŌ 672 1259932 
20 मिणपुर 2 4500 
21 मेघालय 4 8200 
22 िमजोरम 3 4071 
23 नागालœड 5 8150 
24 उड़ीसा 182 579321 
25 पुदुचेरी (संघ राǛ Ɨेũ) 4 185 
26 पंजाब 780 2642715 
27 राज˕ान 192 661876 
28 िसİſम 2 2100 
29 तिमलनाडु 188 399690 
30 तेलंगाना 117 627131 
31 िũपुरा 14 46354 
32 उȅर Ůदेश 2489 15101408 
33 उȅराखंड 62 206848 
34 पिʮम बंगाल 517 5952997 
  8815 40218862 
(ŷोत: िवपणन एवं िनरीƗण िनदेशालय (डीएमआई) 2009 तक , राʼŌीय बागवानी बोडŊ (एनएचबी), राʼŌ ीय बागवानी 
िमशन (एनएचएम), पूवŖȅर एवं िहमालयी राǛों क े िलए बागवानी िमशन (एचएमएनईएच) और खाȨ Ůसंˋरण उȨोग 
मंũालय 
 
615                                                      

अनुबंध- II 
“कोãड èटोरेज ¢मता ͪवèतार” के संबंध मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣराथ[ लोकसभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2257 के भाग (ख) से संबंͬधत अनुबंध-।। 
 
िपछले पांच वषŘ (2020-21 से 2024-25) क े दौरान समेिकत बागवानी िवकास 
िमशन (एमआईडीएच) क े तहत िनिमŊत कोʒ ːोरेज से संबंिधत जानकारी 
 (Ŝपये लाख मŐ) 
Ţ.सं. राǛ पįरयोजनाओं की संƥा िवȅीय सहायता Ɨमता (एमटी) 
1 आंŬ Ůदेश 51 9381.99 378019 
2 अŜणाचल Ůदेश 0 0.00 0 
3 असम 3 665.64 18646 
4 िबहार 4 397.90 14533 
5 चंडीगढ़ 0 0.00 0 
6 छȅीसगढ 25 2168.80 77401 
7 िदʟी 0 0.00 0 
8 गोवा 0 0.00 0 
9 गुजरात 47 6034.10 210465 
10 हįरयाणा 11 1597.48 40179 
11 िहमाचल Ůदेश 9 1100.99 20374 
12 जʃू एवं कʳीर 31 14954.33 150874 
13 झारखंड 1 227.04 5975 
14 कनाŊटक 39 5822.29 223726 
15 क े रल 1 7.00 250 
16 मȯ Ůदेश 10 1331.19 60295 
17 महाराʼŌ 42 5503.52 206109 
18 मिणपुर 0 0.00 0 
19 मेघालय 0 0.00 0 
20 िमजोरम 0 0.00 0 
21 नागालœड 0 0.00 0 
22 ओिडशा 0 0.00 0 
23 पंजाब 63 5783.88 214976 
24 राज˕ान 7 1130.97 45744 
25 िसİſम 0 0.00 0 
26 तिमलनाडु 2 242.87 9136 
27 तेलंगाना 27 4133.54 165460 
28 िũपुरा 0 0.00 0 
29 उȅर Ůदेश 77 9081.65 357266 
30 उȅराखंड 1 5970.00 227 
31 पिʮम बंगाल 2 131.06 4681 
  क ु ल 453 75666.24 2204336 
 
एनएचबी - राʼŌीय बागवानी बोडŊ   एनएचएम - राʼŌीय बागवानी िमशन 
616                                                      

अनुबंध- III 
“कोãड èटोरेज ¢मता ͪवèतार” के संबंध मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣराथ[ लोकसभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2257 के भाग (घ) से संबंͬधत अनुबंध-।।। 
 
मुƥ क ृ िष फसलों और उȋादों की फसल कटाई और तȋʮात होने वाले नुकसान का िववरण 
 
Ţमांक फसलों/वˑुओं का नाम % औसत हािन 
 अनाज  
1.  धान  4.77 
2.  गेšँ 4.17 
3.  मſा 3.89 
4.  बाजरा 4.37 
5.  ǜार 5.92 
 दलहन  
6.  अरहर 5.65 
7.  चना 6.74 
8.  काला चना 5.83 
9.  मूंग 6.19 
 ितलहन  
10.  सरसों 4.46 
11.  कपास 2.87 
12.  सोयाबीन 7.51 
13.  क ु सुम 3.06 
14.  सूरजमुखी 4.38 
15.  मूंगफली 5.73 
 फल  
16.  सेब 9.51 
17.  क े ला 7.57 
18.  साइटŌस 7.71 
19.  अंगूर 7.15 
20.  अमŝद 15.05 
21.  आम 8.53 
22.  पपीता 6.59 
23.  चीक ू 9.53 
24.  अनानास 6.02 
25.  अनार 6.82 
26.  खरबूजा 6.83 
 सİɶयाँ  
27.  पȅा गोभी 8.15 
28.  फ ू लगोभी 7.89 
29.  हरी मटर 6.43 
30.  मशŝम 7.20 
31.  ɗाज 7.26 
32.  आलू 5.96 
  
617                                                      

33.  टमाटर 11.61 
34.  टैिपओका 4.87 
35.  लौकी 7.01 
36.  बœगन 7.41 
37.  फिलयाँ 7.11 
38.  मूली 6.46 
39.  िशमला िमचŊ 5.15 
40.  िभंडी 6.01 
 पशुधन उȋाद  
41.  अंडा 6.03 
42.  इनलŐड िफश 4.86 
43.  मरीन िफश 8.76 
44.  मांस 2.34 
45.  क ुſु ट मांस 5.63 
46.  द ू ध 0.87 
 बागानी फसलŐ और मसाले  
47.  सुपारी 4.41 
48.  काजू 3.72 
49.  नाįरयल 3.86 
50.  गɄा 7.33 
51.  काली िमचŊ 1.29 
52.  िमचŊ 6.11 
53.  धिनया 5.32 
54.  हʗी 5.36 
सोसŊ: भारत मŐ एमओएफपीआई Ȫारा आयोिजत एनएबीसीओएनएस Ȫारा (2022) संचािलत क ृ िष उȋादों क े फसलोपरांत 
होने वाले नुकसान का पता लगाने क े िलए िकया गया अȯयन। 
 
 
***** 
 
 
618                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2258 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: आंŬ Ůदेश मŐ के ले के  िकसानों Ȫारा सामना की जा रही सम˟ा 
2258. ŵी येरŊम वŐकट सुɬा रेǭी: 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा के ले की कीमतों मŐ भारी िगरावट क े  कारण आंŬ Ůदेश के  कडपा और अनंतपुर िजलों मŐ क े ले क े  
िकसानों को गंभीर सम˟ाओं का सामना करना पड़ रहा है; 
(ख) Ɛा सरकार को इस बात की जानकारी है िक माचŊ और अŮैल 2025 मŐ Šई बेमौसमी भारी बाįरश, 
ओलावृिʼ और तेज हवाओं के  कारण उपरोƅ िजलों मŐ हजारों एकड़ मŐ फ ै ली क े ले की फसल नʼ हो गई है; 
(ग) Ɛा मंũालय को इस बात की भी जानकारी है िक क े ले की फसल पकने वाली है और िदसंबर 2025 मŐ 
इसकी कटाई होगी; और 
(घ) Ɛा सामाɊ ŝप से आंŬ Ůदेश के  के ले के  िकसानों तथा िवशेष ŝप से कडपा और अनंतपुर के  िकसानों 
की सुरƗा और क े ले क े  िलए Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) सुिनिʮत करने क े  िलए सरकार ने अब तक 
कोई कदम उठाए हœ? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र)  
 
 (क): क े ले सिहत बागवानी उȋादों की कीमतŐ आपूितŊ और मांग, शीť नʼ होने की Ůवृिȅ, समय पर िवपणन 
आिद कारकों से Ůभािवत होती हœ। आंŬ Ůदेश मŐ हाल क े  माह क े  िलए क े लों का औसत थोक मंडी मूʞ 
(Ŝपए/िƓं टल मŐ) नीचे िदए गए हœ। 
जनवरी-
2025 
फरवरी-
2025 
माचŊ-
2025 
अŮैल-
2025 
मई- 
2025 
जून-
2025 
जुलाई-
2025 
अगˑ-
2025 
िसतɾर-
2025 
अƅूबर-
2025 
2709 3128 3291 3533 3652 3585 3022 3293 2873 2966 
ŷोत: एगमाकŊ नेट  
(ख): आंŬ Ůदेश सरकार क े  बागवानी िवभाग से Ůाɑ जानकारी क े  अनुसार, माचŊ और अŮैल 2025 मŐ भारी 
बाįरश, हवाओं और ओलावृिʼ क े  कारण 4639.80 एकड़ क े ले की फसल ƗितŤˑ Šई।  
(ग): आंŬ Ůदेश मŐ क े ले की फसल सामाɊ ŝप से वषŊ भर उगाई जाती है। 
(घ): एकीक ृ त बागवानी िवकास िमशन (एमआईडीएच), एक कŐ ū Ůायोिजत योजना है  िजसका कायाŊɋयन 
क े ले सिहत बागवानी Ɨेũ क े  समŤ िवकास क े  िलए िकया जा रहा है। एमआईडीएच क े  तहत, क े ले (सकर) क े  
Ɨेũ िवˑार क े  िलए, रोपण सामŤी और कीट Ůबंधन पर होने वाले ʩय को पूरा करने हेतु अिधकतम 1.10 
लाख Ŝपये Ůित हेƃेयर की लागत का 40% तक सहायता Ůदान की जाती है। इसक े  अलावा फसलोपरांत 
Ůबंधन (पीएचएम) क े  आधारभूत संरचना सृजन क े  िलए सहायता Ůदान की जाती है, िजसमŐ पैकहाउस, कोʒ 
ŝम, Ůी-क ू िलंग यूिनट, िनयंिũत-वातावरण (सीए) भंडारण, राइपिनंग चैɾसŊ और रेिůजरेटेड पįरवहन 
शािमल हœ। 
619                                                      

सरकार ने खरीफ 2016 से उपज आधाįरत Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई) और 
मौसम सूचकांक आधाįरत पुनगŊिठत मौसम आधाįरत फसल बीमा योजना (आरडɲूबीसीआईएस) Ůारंभ की 
है तािक Ůाक ृ ितक आपदाओं, Ůितक ू ल मौसमी घटनाओं के  कारण फसल नुकसान/Ɨित से पीिड़त िकसानों 
को िवȅीय सहायता Ůदान की जा सके  और िकसानों की आय को İ˕र िकया जा सक े । इस योजना क े  
अंतगŊत बुआई पूवŊ से लेकर फसलोपरांत होनी वाली Ɨित क े  िलए ʩापक जोİखम बीमा Ůदान िकया जाता है। 
Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई) राǛों के  साथ-साथ िकसानों के  िलए भी ˢैİǅक है। 
क े ला Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) क े  अंतगŊत नहीं आता है। सरकार, पीएम-आशा योजना क े  
अंतगŊत बाजार हˑƗेप योजना (एमआईएस) का कायाŊɋयन करती है, िजसका उपयोग क े ले सिहत उन 
क ृ िष और बागवानी उȋादों की खरीद के  िलए िकया जाता है जो शीť नʼ होने वाली Ůवृिȅ क े  होते हœ और 
मूʞ समथŊन योजना (पीएसएस) क े  अंतगŊत नहीं आते हœ। इस हˑƗेप का उȞेʴ इन वˑुओं क े  उȋादकों 
को उस İ˕ित मŐ संकटŤˑ िबŢी से बचाना है जब फसल की भरपूर पैदावार अविध क े  दौरान कीमतŐ 
आिथŊक ˑर और उȋादन लागत से नीचे िगर जाती हœ। 
राǛ सरकार Ȫारा सूिचत िकया गया है िक वे वतŊमान İ˕ित पर सिŢय ŝप से नज़र रखे Šए हœ 
और क े ला उȋादक िकसानों को लाभकारी मूʞ सुिनिʮत करने क े  िलए िनɻिलİखत तǽाल उपाय कर रही 
हœ। 
     (i) राǛ सरकार Ȫारा मूल और रैटून दोनों फसलों की उिचत कीमतों पर खरीद सुिनिʮत करने ने िजला 
Ůशासन, ˕ानीय ʩापाįरयों और िनयाŊतकों के  साथ कई बैठकŐ  की गई है। 
     (ii) राǛ ने उȅर भारतीय बाजारों मŐ, िजनमŐ एपीएमसी, आज़ादपुर, िदʟी शािमल हœ, के  खरीदारों और 
िवŢे ताओं की बैठकŐ  आयोिजत की हœ और आंŬ Ůदेश के  के लों के  िलए बाजार पŠंच सुिनिʮत करने क े  िलए 
हįरयाणा क े  Ůमुख एŤीगेटरों/ʩापाįरयों के  साथ बातचीत की है। इसके  पįरणामˢŝप, उȅर भारतीय 
एŤीगेटरों ने आंŬ Ůदेश से माल खरीदना Ůारं भ कर िदया है। 
    (iii) राǛ सरकार Ȫारा सूिचत िकया गया है िक Ůितिदन 4,000 मीिटŌक टन से अिधक क े लों की खरीद 
ʩापाįरयों और िनयाŊतकों Ȫारा की जाती है और कडपा और अनंतपुरम िजलों से उȅर भारतीय बाजारों और 
मȯ पूवŊ देशों मŐ भेजे जाते हœ। इस कारŊवाई क े  पįरणामˢŝप कीमतों मŐ धीरे-धीरे  वृİȠ Šई है। िपछले 
सɑाह मŐ कीमतों मŐ 4,000 Ŝपये से 6,000 Ŝपये Ůित मीिटŌक टन की वृİȠ Šई है और उǄ गुणवȅा वाली 
मूल फसल की उपलɩता क े  साथ िदनांक 15 िदसंबर से कीमतों मŐ और अिधक वृİȠ होने की उʃीद है। 
    (iv) इसक े  अितįरƅ, राǛ सरकार िकसानों को फलों की गुणवȅा बनाए रखने क े  िलए अपनाई जाने 
वाली क ृ िष पȠितयों के  बारे मŐ िशिƗत कर रही है और फलों की देखभाल संबंधी गितिविधयों, अǅी क ृ िष 
पȠितयों (जीएपी) Ůमाणन आिद क े  िलए ŮोȖाहन Ůदान कर रही है। 
 
***** 
620                                                      

1 
 
 
भारत सरकार 
कृषि एवं ककसान कल् याण मंत्रालय  
कृषि अनुसंधान एवं शिक्षा षवभाग  
 
राज्‍ य‍सभा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सां.‍2259‍‍ 
 
दिनांक 19/12/2025  
  
िृ षि‍उत्‍पादन‍बढाने‍ि े ‍लिए‍प्रौद्योगिकियाां‍एवां‍पद्धततयाां‍‍ 
 
2259. डा.‍धर्मस्‍ थि‍वीरेंद्र‍हेग्‍ िडे‍:‍‍‍ 
  
क् या‍िृ षि‍एवां‍किसान‍िल्‍याण‍र्ांत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक:  
 
(क) सरकार द्वारा िेि के षवशभन् न राज् यों में कृषि उत् पािन एवं उत् पािकता बढाने हेतु प्रोत् सादहत 
की जा रही नवीनतम प्रौद्योगगककयााँ एवं पद्धततयां कौन-कौन सी हैं; 
(ख) क् या सरकार कृषि में षवषवधता लाने हेतु, षविेिकर कम पानी पर आधाररत फसलों और 
बागवानी को बढावा िेने के शलए कोई किम उठा रही है;  
(ग) यदि हां, तो कनााटक राज् य के शलए तत् संबंधी ब् यौरा क् या है; और 
(घ) कनााटक में जैषवक खेती को बढावा िेने हेतु योजनाओं का ब् यौरा क् या है?    
 
उत्तर 
िृ षि‍एवां‍किसान‍िल्‍याण‍राज्‍ य‍र्ांत्री‍ 
(श्री‍भािीरथ‍चौधरी) 
 
(ि)‍: सरकार द्वारा राज् यों में कृषि उत् पािन और उत् पािकता को बढाने के शलए अनेक आधुतनक 
प्रौद्योगगककयों और बेहतर कृषि पद्धततयों को बढावा दिया जा रहा है। इसमें भारतीय कृषि 
अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) और राज् य कृषि षवश् वषवद्यालयों (SAUs) द्वारा षवकशसत की गईं 
उन् नत, अगधक पैिावार िेने वाली , जलवायु-अनुकूल और नािीजीव सदहष् णु फसल ककस् मों का 
षवकास और प्रसार करना िाशमल है। स् था न-षवशिष् ट पोिक तत् व प्रबंधन, लेजर भूशम लेवशलंग, 
सेंसर, ड्रोन का उपयोग और तनणाय समगथात प्रणाशलयां जैसी प्रेशसजन और संसाधन कुिल कृषि 
प्रौद्योगगककयों के प्रोत् साहन को षवशभन् न योजनाओं के अंतगात सहयोग ककया जा रहा है। इन 
योजनाओं में िाशमल हैं : कृषि यांत्रत्रकीकरण पर उप-शमिन, राष् रीय दटकाऊ कृषि शमिन, डिजजटल 
कृषि पहल, राष् रीय कृषि षवकास योजना और मृिा स् वास् ् य कािा योजना। इसके अततररक्त, सरकार 
ने कृषि में उन्नत प्रौद्योगगककयों के उपयोग को बढावा िेने के शलए ‘नमो ड्रोन िीिी’ को मंजूरी िी 
है, जजससे कायाक्षमता में सुधार, फसल उत्पािकता में वृद्गध और प्रचालन लागत में कमी लाई जा 
सके। इसके साथ ही स्वयं सहायता समूहों (SHGs) को ड्रोन सेवा प्रिाता के रूप में सिक्त बनाया 
621                                                      

2 
 
जा रहा है , जजससे उनकी आय बढेगी और उन्हें दटकाऊ आजीषवका के  अवसर शमलेंगे। साथ ही 
प्रधानमंत्री कृषि शसंचाई योजना के अंतगात सूक्ष्म शसंचाई, वाटरिेि क्षेत्र षवकास तथा जल की बचत 
करने वाली कृषि पद्धततयों सदहत प्रभावी जल प्रबंधन उपायों को अपनाने पर भी जोर दिया गया 
है। 
 
 विा 2014-25 के िौरान भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) के तत् वावधान में खेत 
फसलों की कुल 3236 ककस् में षवकशसत की गई हैं। इनमें से 341 ककस् में  सूखा-सदहष् णु हैं अथवा 
इनमें जल की कम आवश् यकता होती है। इन ककस् मों में अनाज की 200, ततलहन की 25, िलहन 
की 43, रेिा फसलों की 18, चारा फसलों की 16, गन् ने की 36 और अन् य फसलों की 3 ककस् में 
िाशमल हैं।  
 
इसके अलावा, बागवानी फसलों की अगधक पैिावार िेने वाली कुल 749 ककस् मों का षवकास 
ककया गया और इन् हें  व् यावसातयक खेती के शलए अगधसूगचत ककया गया। इनमें िाशमल हैं : 
बारहमासी मसालों की 51, बीजीय मसालों की 44, आलू एवं रॉषपकल कंिीय फसलों की 75, रोपण 
फसलों की 21, फलिार फसलों की 110, सब् जी फसलों की 393, पुष् प एवं अन् य अलंकाररक पौधों 
की 38 तथा औिधीय एवं सगंधीय पौधों की 17 ककस् में।  
  
 कृषि उत्पािन और उत्पािकता को बढाने के शलए षवशभन्न राज्यों में प्रोत्सादहत की जा रही 
नवीनतम प्रौद्योगगककयों तथा प्राकृततक संसाधन आधार के प्रबंधन और पुनस्थाापन से संबंगधत 
प्रौद्योगगककयों का षववरण अनुबांध‍I एवं‍II में संलग्न है। 
 
पोिक तत्वों की उपयोगगता में सुधार करने, आंत्रत्रक मीथेन उत्सजान में कमी लाने (जैसे 
‘हररत धारा’) तथा मांस और िूध के रूप में पिुधन उत्पािकता बढाने के उद्िेश्य से हाइड्रोपोतनक्स, 
साइलेज तनमााण, क्षेत्र-षवशिष्ट खतनज शमश्रण और षवशभन्न आहार प्रबंधन मॉड्यूल जैसी कम लागत 
वाली आहार तकनीकों को बढावा दिया जा रहा है। 
 
(ख)‍:‍ जी, हााँ। कृषि एवं ककसान कल् याण षवभाग (DA&FW) द्वारा मूलरूप से हररत क्राजन्त वाले 
राज् यों यथा हररयाणा, पंजाब और पजश्चमी उत् तर प्रिेि में प्रधान मंत्री राष् रीय कृषि षवकास योजना 
(PM-RKVY) के अंतगात फसल षवषवधीकरण कायाक्रम (CDP) को लागू ककया जा रहा है। इसका 
उद्िेश् य जल सघनीय धान फसल के क्षेत्र को िलहन , ततलहन, मोटे अनाज, न् यूदर-सीररयल् स 
(श्रीअन् न) आदि जैसी वैकजल्पक फसलों में बिलना है। फसल षवषवधीकरण कायाक्रम (CDP) के 
तहत, वैकजल्पक फसल प्रििान , फामा मिीनीकरण एवं मूल् य वधान, स् थान षवशिष् ट गततषवगधयों, 
जागरूकता एवं ककसान प्रशिक्षण आदि के शलए सहयोग ककया जाता है। 
 
भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) द्वारा फसल षवषवधीकरण के  शलए कम जल 
सघनीय कृषि-बागवानी फसलों को बढावा दिया जा रहा है और साथ ही व् यावसातयक खेती के शलए 
सूखा-सदहष् णु ककस् में षवकशसत की गई हैं।  
 
(ि)‍:‍‍कनााटक राज् य में सरकार द्वारा केन् र की प्रायोजजत योजनाओं के संयोजन के माध् यम से 
कृषि षवषवधीकरण को बढावा दिया जा रहा है। इसमें िाशमल हैं : राष् रीय खाद्य सुरक्षा शमिन 
(NFSM) और ततलहन एवं तेल ताड़ पर राष् रीय शमिन (NMOOP/खाद्य तेल-तेल ताड़ पर राष् रीय 
622                                                      

3 
 
शमिन) के अंतगात श्रीअन् न, िलहन, ततलहन और जल की कम आवश् यकता वाली अन् य फसलों को 
प्रोत् साहन। राज् य द्वारा भी एकीकृत बागवानी षवकास शमिन (MIDH) के तहत फलिार , सब् जी, 
मसाले और रोपण फसलों जैसी बागवानी फसलों के षवस् तार को प्रोत् सादहत ककया जा रहा है। जल 
उपयोग प्रभाविीलता में सुधार लाने के शलए प्रधान मंत्री कृषि शसंचाई योजना (PMKSY)के अंतगात 
सूक्ष् म-शसंचाई प्रणाशलयों के शलए सहयोग दिया जा रहा है। 
 
कनााटक राज् य में षवशभन् न सरकारी योजनाओं के माध् यम से जल की कम आवश् यकता वाली 
बागवानी फसलों को लोकषप्रय ककया जा रहा है। इनमें िाशमल हैं : िरीफा , जामुन, आंवला, ड्रैगन 
फ्रूट, कटहल जैसी फलिार फसलें , ड्रमजस्टक तथा  कलस् टरबीन, लोत्रबया और िॉलीकस बीन जैसी 
फलीिार सब् जी फसलें। इसी प्रकार, कनााटक राज् य में काजू के खेती क्षेत्रफल का षवस् तार करने के 
शलए RKVY-RAFTAAR, कनााटक सरकार तथा  DCCD, कोजचच द्वारा षवत् तीय सहायता प्रिान 
की गई। 
 
कनााटक के शलए षवषवधीकृत फसलचक्र प्रणाशलयों, फलोत्पािन, िेयरी, बकरी पालन , कुक्कुट 
पालन तथा मेड़/सीमावती पौधरोपण जैसे घटकों वाले िो प्रोटोटाइप एकीकृत कृषि प्रणाली मॉिल 
षवकशसत ककए गए हैं , जजन्हें राज्य एवं क ें र सरकार की योजनाओं के माध्यम से ककसानों में 
लोकषप्रय बनाया जा रहा है। कृषि षवषवधीकरण की अवधारणा पर आधाररत ककसान भागीिारी कृषि 
प्रणाली मॉिल भी कनााटक के उत्तर कन्नड़ , धारवाड़, गिग और गचक्कबल्लापुर जजलों के शलए 
षवकशसत ककए गए हैं।  फसल षवषवधीकरण पर पायलट पररयोजना के अंतगात कनााटक के चार 
जजलों नामत: बेलगावी, उत्तर कन्नड़, कलबुगी और षवजयपुरा को िाशमल ककया गया है, जहााँ धान के 
स्थान पर मक्का , उड़ि, अरहर और तूअर जैसी फसलों को बढावा दिया गया है। प्रत्येक जजले में 
ककसानों और प्रसार अगधकाररयों को जागरूक करने के शलए 100 हेक्टेयर क्षेत्र में प्रििान लगाये गए 
हैं। इसके अततररक्त, इन जजलों में ककसानों तथा प्रसार अगधकाररयों के शलए फसल षवषवधीकरण पर 
कुल 16 प्रशिक्षण कायाक्रम भी आयोजजत ककए गए हैं।    
 
(घ)‍:‍‍विा‍‍2014-25 के िौरान, कनााटक के शलए कुल 713 ककस् में खेती प्रयोजन हेतु जारी की 
गई हैं जजनमें से 78 ककस् में सूखा सदहष् णु/जल की कम खपत करने वाली हैं। इनमें अनाज की 37, 
ततलहन की 4, िलहन की 6, रेिा फसलों की 9, गन् ने की 17 तथा अन् य फसलों की एक ककस् म 
िाशमल है। 
  
प्राकृततक खेती पर अखखल भारतीय नेटवका कायाक्रम (पूवा में एआईएनपी – जैषवक खेती) के  
तहत धारवाड़ में एक केन् र  है जो कक प्रमुख फसलों और फसलचक्र प्रणाशलयों में जैषवक और 
प्राकृततक खेती पर काया कर रहा है। इस केन् र ने कनााटक राज् य के शलए उपयुक् त सोयाबीन-गेहूं, 
मूंगफली-ज् वार, शमचा-कपास ररले अंतर -फसलचक्र प्रणाशलयों के शलए जैषवक खेती पैकेज षवकशसत 
ककया है। जैषवक खेती के शलए उपयुक् त ककस् मों की भी पहचान की गई है। ककसानों, प्रसार एजेन् टों 
तथा उद्यशमयों जैसे षवशभन् न दहतधारकों के शलए जरूरत आधाररत क्षमता तनमााण कायाक्रम भी 
आयोजजत ककए गए।     
 
******* 
623                                                      

4 
 
अनुबांध‍I 
 
{राज्‍ य‍सभा‍ि े ‍ददनाांि‍19.12.2025‍ि े ‍अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सां.‍2259‍िा‍भाि‍(ि)} 
 
षवलभन्न‍राज्यों‍र्ें‍िृ षि‍उत्पादन‍और‍उत्पादिता‍बढाने‍िे ‍लिए‍प्रोत्‍ सादहत‍िी‍जा‍रही ‍नवीनतर्‍
प्रौद्योगिकियाां। 
 
1.  रैक्टर चाशलत डड्रप लैटरल और प्लाजस्टक मल्च लेयर सह-प्लांटर 
2.  ऊाँ ची क्याररयों के शलए रैक्टर चाशलत लहसुन डिब्बलर 
3.  ऊाँ ची क्याररयों के शलए रैक्टर चाशलत लहसुन कटाई मिीन 
4.  इमेज आधाररत पररवतानीय िर उवारक अनुप्रयोगक 
5.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत ड्रम की तरह का न्यूमेदटक प्लांटर 
6.  अंगूरों के बाग के शलए साइि डिस्पेंशसंग टाइप फामायािा मैन्योर (एफवाईएम) एप्लीकेटर 
7.  एसपीएिी मीटर 2.0 
8.  सोयाबीन में रोग की पहचान के शलए हाथ से पकड़ने वाला उपकरण 
9.  अजैषवक तनाव का पता लगाने वाला उपकरण 
10. गुचछेिार खेततहर की फसल काटने वाली मिीन 
11.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत कल्टर -आधाररत छह -पंजक्त वाला तरल उवारक अनुप्रयोगक 
(एप्लीके टर) 
12.  खेत और बागवानी फसलों के शलए उपयुक्त छोटा रैक्टर चाशलत बूम स्प्रेयर 
13.  छोटे खेतों के शलए मानवरदहत रैक ककस्म का वाहन (UMTV) जजसमें रोटरी दटलर, मल्टी-रो 
प्लांटर, वीिर और एयर-अशसस्टेि स्प्रेयर जैसे कई संगत अटैचमेंट लगे हैं। 
14.  केला (बनाना) स्यूिो स्टेम इंजेक्टर 
15.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत ऊ ाँ ची क्यारी बनाने वाला यंत्र और प्याज के कं ि बोने वाला यंत्र, जो 
कक प्याज की बहुगुणन फसल के शलए उपयुक्त है। 
16.  रैक्टर चाशलत कसावा हावेस्टर (तुड़ाई) सह शलफ्टर 
17.  पोटारे रोपण के शलए रैक्टर से संचाशलत िो पंजक्त वाली गन्ने की रोपाई मिीन 18. गन्ने में 
लगने वाले सफ े ि कीट के  प्रबंधन के शलए रैक्टर चाशलत छोटी ईपीएन 
    एप्लीकेटर       
19.  3 इन 1 काजू की गगरी अलग करने वाला सेप्रेटर, गूिा तनकालने वाली और रेिेिार सामग्री 
को अलग करने वाली मिीन 
20.  तनरंतर फीि केले के रेिे तनकालने का उपकरण 
21. षवद्युत चाशलत भूसा काटने की मिीन 
22.  बैल द्वारा चाशलत ज्योतत बहु-फसल प्लांटर 
23.  नवीन िरांती 
24.  नशलकाकार मक्का छीलने वाली मिीन 
25.  त्रबजली से चलने वाला मूंगफली तछलका उतारने वाला यंत्र 
26.  नवीन डिबलर 
27.  पेग प्रकार का िुष्क भूशम खरपतवारनािक 
624                                                      

5 
 
28.  पिु द्वारा खींचा जाने वाला बहुउद्िेिीय टूल फ्रेम 
29.  रैक्टर के आगे लगा हुआ ऊध्वााधर कन्वेयर रीपर षवंिरोवर 
30.  रैक्टर चाशलत ऊध्वााधर कन्वेयर रीपर षवंिरोवर 
31.  उचच क्षमता वाला बहु-फसल थ्रेिर 
32.  पीएयू, लुगधयाना व्हील हैंि फावड़ा 
33.  मैनुअल मूंगफली िेकोदटाकेटर 
34.  िीतकालीन मक्का के शलए रैक्टर चाशलत ररज प्लांटर 
35.  मैनुअल िो पदहयों वाला फावड़ा 
36.  रैक्टर चाशलत बहु-फसल रोपण यंत्र 
37.  रैक्टर चाशलत चौड़ी क्यारी बनाने वाली मिीन व बीज बोने वाली मिीन 
38.  पावर दटलर द्वारा संचाशलत बीज व उवारक डड्रल 
39.  स्वचाशलत रीपर 
40.  बहुफसल थ्रेिर (3.75 ककलोवाट) 
41.  रैक्टर पर लगा हुआ इंक्लाइि प्लेट प्लांटर 
42.  मैनुअल बीज उपचार ड्रम 
43. ज्योतत मल्टी-क्रॉप प्लांटर जो पावर दटलर चाशलत हो 
44. रैक्टर के आगे लगा चारा काटने वाला यंत्र 
45.  रैक्टर चाशलत न्यूमेदटक प्लांटर 
46.  धान की रोपाई के शलए मैट प्रकार की नसारी बुवाई तकनीक 
47.  आईआईएसआर रैक्टर संचाशलत ररजर प्रकार का गन्ना काटने वाला प्लांटर 
48.  पावर वीिर 
49.  त्रबजली से चलने वाला मूंगफली तछलका छीलने वाला यंत्र 
50.  ररजर प्रकार का गन्ना काटने वाला प्लांटर 
51.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत ज्योतत बहुफसल प्लांटर 
52.  मूंगफली थ्रेसर 
53. षवद्युत चाशलत होल्ि ऑन प्रकार का धान थ्रेिर 
54.  पावर दटलर संचाशलत ऑगर डिगर 
55.  रैक्टर पर लगा रोटरी वीिर 
56. रैक्टर चाशलत बहुउद्िेिीय गन्ना रोपण मिीन 
57.  षवद्युत चाशलत मक्का तछलका उतारने और छीलने की मिीन 
58.  धान के भूसे को काटने और फैलाने वाला यंत्र 
59.  नाररयल के पेड़ पर चढने वाला यंत्र 
60.  रैक्टर चाशलत लहसुन प्लांटर 
61.  एयर स्लीव बूम स्प्रेयर 
62.  रैक्टर पर लगा जड़ फसल काटने की मिीन 
63.  बीज मसालों के शलए थ्रेिर 
64.  सात पंजक्तयों वाला रैक्टर चाशलत बीज मसाला बोने वाला यंत्र 
65.  एसआरआई धान तनराई मिीन 
625                                                      

6 
 
66.  रैक्टर से चलने वाली लहसुन की कटाई मिीन 
67.  रैक्टर चाशलत गन्ना रेंचर 
68.  रैक्टर चाशलत गन्ना रेंच प्लांटर 
69.  रैक्टर चाशलत बहु-फसल प्लांटर 
70.  रैक्टर चाशलत डिस्क प्रकार का गन्ना रैटून प्रबंधन उपकरण 
71.  मूंगफली के शलए स्वचाशलत कंबाइन हावेस्टर 
72.  रैक्टर चाशलत छोटा बीज प्लांटर 
73.  रैक्टर चाशलत गहरी नाली वाली गन्ना काटने का प्लांटर 
74.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत हल्िी प्रकं ि प्लांटर 
75.  रैक्टर संचाशलत चेक बेशसन फामार 
76.  रैक्टर चाशलत गन्ना व आलू प्लांटर 
77.  हरी खाि और पुआल को शमट्टी में शमलाने के शलए रैक्टर से चलने वाला बरमा हल 
78.  फलोद्यानों के शलए कम एचपी वाला रैक्टर संचाशलत इंरा रो कम इंटर रो वीिर 
79.  रैक्टर से चलने वाली मूंगफली कंबाइन 
80.  स्वचाशलत मक्का के भुट्टे काटने के शलए हावेस्टर 
81.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत धान के भूसे की गांठों को काटने और मल्चर करने वाली मिीन 
82.  फलोद्यानों के शलए रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत जल-यांत्रत्रक रूप से तनयंत्रत्रत एम.बी. हल 
83.  शमनी मूंगफली कंबाइन 
84.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत स्वचाशलत प्रततवती यांत्रत्रक िो तली वाले मोल्ि बोिा हल 
85.  लहसुन की ऊाँ ची क्यारी से खरपतवार तनकालने वाला यंत्र 
86.  ऊाँ ची क्यारी के शलए लहसुन की कली लगाने वाला यंत्र 
87.  स्माटा सीिर (जस्रप-दटल सीिर) 
88.  स्वचाशलत शमनी मक्का कटाई मिीन 
89.  मैट प्रकार की धान की नसारी के शलए रैक्टर चाशलत सीिर 
90.  मल्च ककए गए खेतों के शलए रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत टबो बंि बनाने वाला यंत्र 
91.  रैक्टर चाशलत आलू खोिने व एकत्रत्रत करने वाला यंत्र 
92.  रैक्टर से चलने वाला गन्ने के पत्तों को काटने वाला यंत्र 
93.  गन्ने की फसल के शलए रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत िो पंजक्तयों वाला आगे -पीछे घूमने वाला 
रोटावेटर 
94.  रैक्टर से चलने वाली छोटी मूंगफली कंबाइन  
95.  शभंिी की तुड़ाई के शलए हैंि टूल 
96.  रैक्टर द्वारा संचाशलत आलू डिगर के शलए संग्रहण तंत्र 
97.  नान-इनवेशसव प्रकार का श्वसन िर मॉतनटर 
98. िूध िुहने से पहले पिुओं के शलए सेंसर आधाररत यंत्रीकृत धुलाई प्रणाली 
99.  बैच प्रकार की पिु धुलाई इकाई 
100.  पिु संवारने की इकाई 
101.  बैल द्वारा संचाशलत बहु-फसल पररिुद्ध डिबल सीिर 
102.  बैल द्वारा संचाशलत बहु-फसल प्लांटर व स्लरी एप्लीकेटर 
626                                                      

7 
 
103.  बैल द्वारा चाशलत बायोगैस स्लरी एप्लीके टर 
104.  बैटरी चाशलत िो-पंजक्त जड़ धोने वाला मैनुअल रांसप्लांटर 
105.  ररमोट कंरोल से संचाशलत धान की बुवाई मिीन (सीिर) 
106.  हल्का बहु-फसल थ्रेिर 
107.  कफंगर शमलेट थ्रेिर व पलार 
108.  मैट प्रकार की धान की नसारी के शलए मैनुअल नसारी कटर 
109.  आइस बैंक थमाल स्टोरेज वाला सोलर रेकफ्रजरेटर 
110.  थमाल स्टोरेज वाला सोलर ड्रायर 
111.  पायलट स्केल टॉरफेक्िन यूतनट 
112.  धान के भूसे से बायोगैस उत्पािन के शलए तीव्र अपघटन पद्धतत 
113.  ट्यूबलर कंिेंसर एकीकृत बायोऑयल इकाई 
114.  षवद्युत-सह-मैनुअल संचाशलत फल और सब्जी ग्रेिर 
115.  स्वचाशलत फल ग्रेिर 
116.  कैशमकल मुक्त अंगूर के ककिशमि के उत्पािन की प्रौद्योगगकी 
117.  औिधीय कंि फसलों के शलए अपघिाक तछलका उतारने की मिीन 
 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
627                                                      

8 
 
{राज्‍ य‍सभा‍ि े ‍ददनाांि‍19.12.2025‍ि े ‍अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सां.‍2259‍िा‍भाि‍(ि)} 
नवीनतर्‍प्रौद्योगिकियााँ‍और‍पद्धततयाां 
आईसीएआर 16 संस्थानों के माध्यम से प्राकृततक संसाधन आधार, जैसे कक शमट्टी, जल, जलवायु 
और जैव षवषवधता के प्रबंधन और पुनस्थाापन के  शलए प्रौद्योगगककयों का षवकास और प्रसार करता 
है। नवीनतम और महत्वपूणा प्रौद्योगगककयां तनम्नशलखखत हैं: - 
1. एिीिृ त‍िृ षि‍प्रणािी‍(आईएफएस): कृषि उत्पािन में जस्थरता बढाने के  शलए 26 राज्यों/क ें र िाशसत
प्रिेिों में 80 आईएफएस मॉिल षवकशसत ककए गए ; इनमें से 38 बैंकलेवल पररयोजनाएं नाबािा
द्वारा षवत्तपोषित थीं।
2. जैषवि‍ खेती: 80 जैषवक खेती पैकेज षवकशसत और षवतररत ककए गए ; 100 से अगधक फसल
ककस्मों की पहचान की गई; पीजीएस प्रोटोकॉल को अद्यतन ककया गया।
3. प्रािृ तति‍िृ षि‍पहिें: 16 राज्यों के 20 क ें रों में अनुसंधान िुरू ककया गया, प्राकृततक कृषि के शलए
संभाषवत क्षेत्रों की पहचान की गई, सामान्य प्रोटोकॉल षवकशसत ककया गया, प्राकृततक कृषि के शलए
क्षेत्र तनयमावली को पररभाषित और तैयार ककया गया, 200 स्थानों पर मॉिल फामा िुरू ककए गए;
और एनएमएनएफ के अंतगात सीआरजी िुरू ककया गया।
4. प्रािृ तति‍िृ षि‍पद्धततयों‍िा‍सत्यापन: 8 प्रमुख फसल प्रणाशलयों में प्राकृततक कृषि पद्धततयों के
पैकेज का सत्यापन और पररष्करण, साथ ही जीवामृत, घनजीवामृत, बीजामृत, नीमस्टर, अजग्नस्टर
आदि जैसे इनपुट का लक्षण वणान।
5. जिवायु‍ जोखखर्‍ और‍ सांवेदनशीिता‍ िा‍ आििन:  जलवायु पररवतान पर अंतरसरकारी पैनल
(आईपीसीसी) प्रोटोकॉल के अनुसार जलवायु संबंधी खतरों के प्रतत, मुख्य रूप से कृषि प्रधान जजलों
के जोखखम और संवेिनिीलता का आकलन ककया गया , जजसमें 109 जजलों को 'अत्यगधक उचच
संवेिनिील' और 201 जजलों को ‘उचच संवेिनिील’ श्रेणी में रखा गया है।
6.  िृ षि‍ आिस्स्र्ि‍ योजना: 651 जजलों के शलए जजला स्तरीय क ृषि आकजस्मक योजनाएाँ तैयार की
गईं और जलवायु संबंधी ककसी भी प्रततकूलता से तनपटने के शलए राज्यों/संवेिनिील जजलों के साथ-
साथ अन्य दहतधारकों के  साथ इन योजनाओं को  साझा ककया गया।
7.  जिवायु-अनुिू ि‍प्रौद्योगििी‍प्रदशमन: जलवायु पररवतान से तनपटने और ककसानों की आय बढाने के
शलए 151 सबसे संवेिनिील जजलों के 448 गांवों में जलवाय ु-अनुकूल प्रौद्योगगककयों का प्रििान
ककया गया, जजससे फसलों, पिुधन और मत्स्य पालन से ज ुड़े 85 लाख ककसानों को लाभ ह ुआ।
इसे DAF&W द्वारा 10,000 गांवों और महाराष्र में POCRA पररयोजना के तहत 5,000 गांवों
में लागू ककया जा रहा है।
8.  स्व-स्थाने‍ नर्ी‍ िा‍ सांरक्षण: बीबीएफ, ररज और फ्य ूरो प्लांटर के माध्यम से स्व -स्थाने नमी का
संरक्षण। षपछले 5 विों के िौरान छह राज्यों में 25,000 से अगधक बीबीएफ प्लांटर बेचे गए।
9.  जिवायु‍पररवतमन‍सांवेदनशीिता‍एटिस: जलवायु पररवतान के प्रतत भारतीय कृषि की संवेिनिीलता
और िेि में विाा आधाररत क्षेत्रों की प्राथशमकता पर आधाररत एटलस। स ूक्ष्म स्तर पर कृषि मौसम
संबंधी परामिा सेवाएं प्रिान की जाती है।
अनुबंध II
628                                                      

9 
 
 
10. र्ृदा‍भू-पोटमि‍षविास: मृिा और जल प्रबंधन से संबंगधत सभी िेटा को होस्ट करने के शलए 'भूशम' 
नामक मृिा भू-पोटाल षवकशसत ककया गया। 
11. र्ृदा‍नैदातनिता‍िो‍सुदृढ‍बनाना: राष्रीय मृिा स्पेक्रल लाइब्रेरी (>40,000 स्पेक्रा) के माध्यम से 
मृिा तनिान को सुदृढ बनाकर ककसानों के पोिक तत्वों संबंधी तनणायों में सुधार करना। 
12. पोटेबि‍र्ृदा‍परीक्षण‍प्रौद्योगििी: मृिा परीक्षण सेवा के पूरक के रूप में एक पोटेबल मृिा परीक्षण 
ककट/शमनी लैब (मृिा परीक्षण) षवकशसत की गई, जजसका उपयोग िेि में 30 शमशलयन मृिा 
स्वास््य कािों के षवश्लेिण और षवतरण के शलए ककया गया। 
13. र्ृदा‍ उवमरता‍ एवां‍ अवक्रर्ण‍ र्ानगचत्रण: 20 राज्यों के शलए भू-संिशभात मृिा उवारता मानगचत्र और 
मृिा परीक्षण आधाररत उवारक अनुिंसाओं के शलए रेिी रेकनर तैयार ककए गए। 15 राज्यों के शलए 
मृिा अपरिन मानगचत्र, रेवाइन क्षेत्र मानगचत्र, तटीय अपरिन मानगचत्र, एसएलटीएल मानगचत्र, मृिा 
अपरिन तनयंत्रण प्राथशमकता मानगचत्र , विाा जल संचयन क्षमता मानगचत्र (30 एम ररजॉल्यूिन) 
तैयार/अद्यतन ककए गए। 
14. सांसाधन‍ सांरक्षण‍ प्रौद्योगिकियााँ: जल, पोिक तत्व, श्रम और ऊजाा की बचत के शलए संसाधन 
संरक्षण प्रौद्योगगककयों (िीएसआर, िून्य जुताई, लेजर लेवशलंग, बेि प्लांदटंग, एसआरआई, एलसीसी 
आदि) को मानकीकृत ककया गया। 
15. िृ षि‍ वातनिी‍ षविास: 80 से अगधक कृषि वातनकी मॉिल षवकशसत ककए गए; षवशभन्न कृषि 
वातनकी के अंतगात 28.4 शमशलयन हेक्टेयर से अगधक क्षेत्र का मानगचत्रण ककया गया। 
16. िृ षि‍वातनिी‍नीतत‍सहायता: राष्रीय कृषि वातनकी और राज्य कृषि वातनकी नीतत िस्तावेज तैयार 
ककए गए। गुणवत्तापूणा रोपण सामग्री के शलए नसारी का प्रत्यायन। 
17. र्ृदा‍एवां‍जि‍सांरक्षण‍प्रौद्योगिकियााँ: षवकशसत/मानकीकृत मृिा एवं जल संरक्षण प्रौद्योगगककयों से 
अपवाह एवं मृिा अपरिन में 30-50% की कमी, भूजल पुनभारण में 20-45% की वृद्गध, उपज में 
20-60% की वृद्गध और कृषि आय में 25-100% की वृद्गध हुई है, जजससे भूशम अवक्रमण में 
उल्लेखनीय कमी आती है। 
18. बहुउद्देशीय‍रबर‍बाांध‍प्रौद्योगििी: जल भंिारण, मृिा अपरिन को कम करने, भूजल पुनभारण को 
बढावा िेने और तलछट के सुरक्षक्षत तनपटान के शलए बहुउद्िेिीय रबर बांध षवकशसत ककए गए। 
इन्हें िेि के 8 राज्यों में फैले 33 स्थानों पर सफलतापूवाक कायााजन्वत ककया गया है। 
19. ड्रिप-फदटमिेशन‍िायमक्रर्: 34 फसलों के शलए मानकीकृत डड्रप-फदटागेिन कायाक्रम, जजन्होंने िेि भर 
में षवशभन्न मृिा गठन वगों के तहत उगाई जाने वाली षवशभन्न फसलों से 9-80% अगधक उपज, 
11-71% शसंचाई जल की बचत, 18-25% उवारक की बचत और 10 -200% अगधक आय के साथ 
आिाजनक पररणाम दिखाए। 
20. एिान्तर‍ लभिोना‍ और‍ सुखाना‍ (एडब्लल्यूडी)‍ प्रौद्योगििी: चावल के शलए मानकीकृत एकान्तर 
शभगोना और सुखाना (एिब्ल्यूिी) से शसंचाई जल की 17% बचत होती है, और 34 फसलों के शलए 
डड्रप फदटागेिन से पैिावार में 9 -80%, एफयूई में 12-23% की वृद्गध होती है और जल की 11-
71% बचत होती है। 
21. सर्स्याग्रस्त‍ र्ृदाओां‍ िे ‍ लिए‍ प्रौद्योगिकियााँ: अम्लीय मृिा के सुधार के शलए लागत प्रभावी चूना 
(लाइशमंग) तकनीक , लवण प्रभाषवत मृिा के शलए भूशम सुधार तकनीक और जलभराव वाली 
लवणीय मृिा के शलए उप-सतही जल तनकासी तकनीक षवकशसत की गई। 
629                                                      

10 
 
 
22. िवण‍प्रभाषवत‍र्ृदा‍िा‍सुधार: आईसीएआर-सीएसएसआरआई करनाल द्वारा षवकशसत मृिा सुधार 
तकनीक ने 8 राज्यों में 1.45 शमशलयन हेक्टेयर लवण प्रभाषवत मृिा का सुधार ककया, जजससे 
राष्रीय खाद्य भंिार में 22 लाख टन खाद्यान्न का योगिान हुआ। 
23. सोड्रडि‍और‍अम्िीय‍र्ृदा‍र्ें‍उत्पादिता‍सुधार: जजप्सम और चूने का उपयोग करके 25 शमशलयन 
हेक्टेयर क्षेत्र में सोडिक और अम्लीय मृिा की उत्पािकता में वृद्गध (15-35% उपज लाभ) की गई, 
और पोिक तत्वों की उपयोग िक्षता में सुधार करने और खतनज उवारकों पर तनभारता को कम 
करने के शलए 31 फसलों के शलए सूक्ष्मजीव इनोकुलेंट, उवारक नुस्खे, नैनो रॉक फॉस्फ े ट, और 
ऑगेनो-शमनरल उवारक षवकशसत ककए गए। 
24. उपसतही‍जि‍तनिासी‍िो‍अपनाना: जलभराव वाली लवणीय मृिा के शलए लागत प्रभावी उपसतही 
जल तनकासी तकनीक को हररयाणा, राजस्थान, गुजरात, पंजाब, आंध्र प्रिेि, महाराष्र, मध्य प्रिेि 
और कनााटक में व्यापक रूप से अपनाया गया है। अब तक 1,10,000 हेक्टेयर से अगधक क्षेत्र की  
जलभराव वाली लवणीय मृिा को उपजाऊ बनाया जा चुका है। 
25. िवण‍ सदहष्णु‍ फसि‍ किस्र्ें: चावल (सीएसआर 46), गेहूं (केआरएल-283) और सरसों की लवण 
सदहष्णु ककस्में षवकशसत की गई हैं, जो राष्रीय स्तर की ककस्मों की तुलना में लगभग 25% 
अगधक बीज उपज और 29% अगधक तेल उपज िेने में सक्षम हैं। इन ककस्मों के लगभग 6.5 टन 
प्रजनक बीज प्रततविा उत्पादित ककए जा रहे हैं, जजनका उपयोग लवण प्रभाषवत नौ राज्यों में 6.45 
लाख हेक्टेयर क्षेत्र में ककया जा सकता है। 
26. सीएसआर-बायो‍ जैव-षविास‍ सांवधमि: सीएसआर-बायो षवकशसत ककए गए: लवण प्रभाषवत मृिा में 
उचच और दटकाऊ फसल उत्पािकता के शलए एक संभाषवत जैव -षवकास संवधाक। सीएसआर -बायो 
एक ककफायती जैव -षवकास संवधाक है जो तरल और ठोस िोनों रूपों में उपलब्ध है। इसमें िो 
आिाजनक संगत जीवाणु उपभेि सीएसआर-बी-2 (बैशसलस प्यूशमलस), सीएसआर-बी-3 (बैशसलस 
थुररंगेनेशसस) और एक कवक उपभेि सीएसआर-टी-1 (राइकोिमाा हजजायानम) िाशमल हैं। यह मृिा 
संवधाक और जैव-उत्प्रेरक के रूप में काया करता है। 
27. रेपो-िम्पोस्ट‍तिनीि: रसोई के कचरे और सजब्जयों के कचरे को षवघदटत करने के शलए ICAR-
IISS ने ICAR-CIAE और ICAR-NBAIM, मऊ के सहयोग से रेपो -कम्पोस्ट तकनीक षवकशसत 
की है। शलग्नो -सेलुलोलाइदटक थमोकफशलक सूक्ष्मजीवों के समूह का उपयोग करके, षवघटन अवगध 
को काफी कम करके 45 दिन कर दिया गया है।  
28. वैिस्ल्पि‍फसि‍प्रणालियााँ: षवशभन्न कृषि-जलवायु क्षेत्रों के शलए कुिल वैकजल्पक फसल प्रणाशलयों 
की पहचान की गई है , उन्हें कृषि प्रबंधन पद्धततयों के साथ प्रलेखखत ककया गया है और उनकी 
अनुिंसा की गई है, जजनकी संभाषवत उत्पािकता 16 से 35.2 टन प्रतत हेक्टेयर प्रतत विा तक है। 
इन वैकजल्पक प्रणाशलयों को उत्पािन पैकेजों के साथ 19 राज्यों के फसल उत्पािन 
मागािशिाका/प्रथाओं के पैकेज में िाशमल ककया गया है। 
29. भूलर्‍सांसाधन‍सूची‍(एिआरआई): 100 लाख हेक्टेयर से अगधक क्षेत्र के शलए भूशम संसाधन सूची 
(एलआरआई) पूरी की गई, जजससे सूक्ष्म स्तर पर भूशम उपयोग तनयोजन संभव हो सका जो 
दटकाऊ प्रबंधन प्रथाओं के  तहत उत्पािकता को 10-25% तक बढा सकता है और मृिा के क्षरण को 
20-40% तक कम कर सकता है। 
 
630                                                      

11 
 
 
30.  वाटरशेड‍प्रबांधन‍र्ॉडि: स्थान-षवशिष्ट मृिा एवं जल संरक्षण उपायों के साथ 75  मॉिल वाटरिेि 
षवकशसत ककए गए। 
31.  झोिािुां डी‍जि‍सांचयन:‍झोिािुां डी: ओडििा के पूवी घाट के उचचभूशम क्षेत्र में झोला   भूशम की 
उपज बढाने के शलए एक कम लागत वाली जल संचयन तकनीक। 
32. र्ृदा‍सांसाधन‍र्ानगचत्रण: िेि के मृिा संसाधन मानगचत्र तैयार ककए गए (1:1 शमशलयन स्केल): 
राज्य (1:250,000 स्केल); और 55 जजले (1:50,000 स्केल) िेि का मृिा क्षरण मानगचत्र (14.4 
शमशलयन पैमाने पर), राज्य मृिा अपरिन मानगचत्र (1:250,000 स्केल), चयतनत वाटरिेि (267), 
गांवों (173) और अनुसंधान फामों (106) के 1:10,000 स्केल मृिा संसाधन मानगचत्र। 
33. िृ षि-पाररस्स्थततिीय‍ क्षेत्रीयिरण:  िेि के बीस कृषि-पाररजस्थततकीय क्षेत्रों और साठ कृषि-
पाररजस्थततकीय उप-क्षेत्रों का सीमांकन और मानगचत्रण 1:4.4 शमशलयन के पैमाने पर ककया गया 
है। 
34. िृ षि-वोल्टेइि‍ प्रणािी: एकल भूशम उपयोग प्रणाली से फसल उत्पािन और त्रबजली उत्पािन को 
बढाने के शलए कृषि-वोल्टेइक प्रणाली षवकशसत की गई। 
35. र्रुस्थिीिरण‍ आििन: राजस्थान राज्य का मरुस्थलीकरण जस्थतत मानगचत्र तैयार ककया गया। 
राज्य में मरुस्थलीकरण की सबसे महत्वपूणा प्रकक्रया पवन अपरिन है। 
36. पवन‍अपरदन‍और‍र्रुस्थिीिरण‍तनयांत्रण: पवन अपरिन और मरुस्थलीकरण को रोकने के  शलए 
रेत के टीलों के जस्थरीकरण और आश्रय पट्टी वृक्षारोपण प्रौद्योगगककयों का षवकास ककया गया। 
37. बेर‍ ि े ‍ प्रवधमन‍ िी‍उन्नत‍ षवगध: बेर की कशलयों को अंकुररत करने की उन्नत तकनीक षवकशसत 
की गई। इस तकनीक का उपयोग करके संस्थान ने बेर के 1.2 लाख से अगधक उत्कृष्ट पौधे बेचे। 
38. िोंद‍स्राव‍प्रौद्योगििी: राजस्थान के जोधपुर, बाड़मेर, बीकानेर और नागौर जजलों के 45 गांवों में 
अकेशिया सेनेगल तकनीक से गोंि स्राव प्रौद्योगगकी को व्यापक रूप से अपनाया गया है , जजससे 
5080 ककसानों को लाभ हुआ है। 
39. सौर-आधाररत‍िृ षि‍प्रौद्योगिकियााँ: जोधपुर और पाली जजले के चयतनत गांवों में संस्थापन के शलए 
एनीमल फीि सोलर कुकर, झुका हुआ सोलर ड्रायर और सोलर पीवी िस्टर की कुल नौ यूतनअ 
अथाात प्रत्येक की तीन यूतनट तैयार की गईं। 
40. उत्तर‍ पूवी‍ क्षेत्र‍ िे ‍ लिए‍ प्रौद्योगिकियााँ: संस्थान द्वारा उत्तर पूवी क्षेत्र के शलए चावल (34), िालें 
(7), ततलहन (2), कंि (2), टमाटर (6), बैंगन (2), हल्िी (1), पपीता (1), अनानास (1) और 
जटरोफा (1) सदहत 57 फसल ककस्मों को जारी ककया गया था। 32 स्थान -षवशिष्ट IFS मॉिल 
षवकशसत ककए गए। धान की परती भूशम के उपयोग के शलए प्रौद्योगगकी षवकशसत की गई। झूम 
खेती की भूशम के पुनरूद्धार के शलए प्रौद्योगगकी षवकशसत की गई। 
41. खरपतवार‍ एटिस‍ और‍ प्रबांधन‍ पद्धततयााँ:  खरपतवार - प्रमुख फसल प्रणाली के खरपतवार 
वनस्पततयों का वीि एटलस, 7 प्रमुख खरपतवारों के शलए पीओपी षवकशसत ककया गया। 
42. सटीि‍पिाांटर‍सह‍खरपतवारनाशि‍तिड़िाव‍यांत्र: यह उपकरण बीज और उवारक को सटीक रूप से 
बोने के साथ -साथ अंकुरण-पूवा खरपतवारनािक के प्रयोग के शलए डिजाइन और षवकशसत ककया 
गया है। इसका अल्टरनेटर रैक्टर की बैटरी से चलता है। 
43. एिीिृ त‍ खरपतवार‍ प्रबांधन‍ र्ॉड्यूि: एकीकृत खरपतवार प्रबंधन मॉड्यूल षवकशसत ककए गए और 
23 राज्यों में अपनाये जाने के शलए षवतररत ककए गए।  
631                                                      

12 
 
 
44. जैषवि‍ खरपतवार‍ तनयांत्रण‍ और‍ जैव‍ उपचार: पाथेतनयम और जल हाइशसंथ के जैषवक तनयंत्रण के 
शलए तकनीकी सहायता प्रिान की। खरपतवार टाइफा प्रजातत षवकशसत की , जो नाले के पानी से 
प्रिूिकों के जैवउपचार के शलए एक उपयुक्त केंिीिेट है। 
45. पूवी‍ क्षेत्र‍ िे ‍लिए‍सब्लजी‍और‍दिहन‍किस्र्ों‍िा‍षविास: इस संस्थान द्वारा विाा आधाररत और 
पहाड़ी एवं पठारी क्षेत्रों में खेती के शलए बैंगन , टमाटर, खीरा, लोत्रबया, लौकी, करेला, तोरी, स्पोंज 
गािा, कद्िू, शमचा, फ्र ें च बीन, मटर, फबा बीन, परवल, शलमाबीन, सोयाबीन, कैजप्सकम, स्नो पी, 
डिलीशियस बीन आदि ककस्मों की कुल 55 ककस्में/संकर ककस्में षवकशसत की गईं। 
46. एिीिृ त‍ जिीय‍ िृ षि‍ प्रणािी: मत्स्य-मखाना-पानी शसंघाड़ा उत्पािन को एकीकृत रूप से षवकशसत 
और मानकीकृत ककया गया। 
47. तटीय‍ िृ षि‍ अनुसांधान‍ एवां‍ किस्र्ें: आईसीएआर-सीसीएआरआई, गोवा िेि के पूवी और पजश्चमी 
तटीय क्षेत्रों को कवर करते हुए तटीय कृषि और संबद्ध क्षेत्रों पर षविेि रूप से अनुसंधान केंदरत 
कर रहा है। काजू (गोवा काजू - 2, गोवा काजू - 3 और गोवा काजू - 4), चावल (गोवा धान - 1 
और गोवा धान - 2) और गोवा लोत्रबया - 3 की नई ककस्में जारी की गईं। 
48. िन्ना‍ रैटू न‍ प्रबांधन‍ प्रौद्योगििी: गन्ने की रैटून के शलए एनआईएएसएम द्वारा षवकशसत 
बहुउद्िेिीय एसओआरएफ मिीन को ककसान के खेत में सफलतापूवाक प्रिशिात ककया गया है और 
2.5 शमशलयन हेक्टेयर क्षेत्र में इसकी संभाव्यता है। 
49. िैिन‍फ्रू ट‍िो‍िाया‍जाना: ड्रैगन फ्रूट को एक नई फल फसल के रूप में प्रिशिात ककया गया। एक 
लाख हेक्टेयर अल्प उपजाऊ बंजर और पथरीली भूशम में खेती करने की इसमें संभाव्यता है। 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
632                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ůʲ सं. 2260 
19/12/2025 को उȅराथŊ  
िवषय: ŵी अɄ योजना क े माȯम से मोटे अनाज का उȋादन 
2260. ŵी गोला बाबूरावः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सरकार ŵी अɄ और अɊ योजनाओं और कायŊŢमों क े माȯम से मोटे अनाज पर 
बŠत ˷ादा ज़ोर दे रही है; 
(ख) देश मŐ राʼŌीय िमलेट बोडŊ, जो समथŊन, िवपणन, Ůसंˋरण आिद Ůदान करने हेतु आवʴक 
है, की ˕ापना मŐ उȋɄ होने वाली बाधाए ँ Ɛा-Ɛा हœ; 
(ग) 'ŵी अɄ' योजना क े कायाŊɋयन की İ˕ित Ɛा है; 
(घ) देश मŐ, िवशेषकर आंŬ Ůदेश क े संदभŊ मŐ, मोटे अनाज क े उȋादन एवं िनयाŊत को बढ़ावा 
देने क े िलए Ɛा-Ɛा कदम उठाए जा रहे हœ; और 
(ङ) सरकार Ȫारा मोटे अनाज क े उȋादन और िनयाŊत मŐ भारत को वैिʷक नेता बनाने हेतु Ɛा-
Ɛा कदम उठाए जा रहे हœ? 
 
 उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) से (ङ): भारत सरकार ने िमलेट्स (ŵी अɄ) को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए कई पहलŐ की हœ। क ृ िष 
एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग देश मŐ उȋादन और उȋादकता बढ़ाने क े िलए राʼŌीय खाȨ सुरƗा 
और पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) जैसे अपने कायŊŢमों क े माȯम से िमलेट्स की खेती करने 
वाले िकसानों को ʩापक ˑर पर बढ़ावा देता है और उनका सहयोग करता है।  
 
िमलेट (ŵी अɄ) की खेती और उȋादकता बढ़ाने क े िलए, क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण 
िवभाग आंŬ Ůदेश सिहत 28 राǛों और 2 कŐ ū शािसत Ůदेशों (यूटी) मŐ राʼŌीय खाȨ सुरƗा और 
पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) क े तहत पोषक-अनाज उप िमशन कायाŊİɋत कर रहा है। 
633                                                      

एनएफएसएनएम-पोषक-अनाज (ŵी अɄ) क े अंतगŊत राǛों/संघ राǛ Ɨेũों क े माȯम से 
िकसानों को फसल उȋादन और संरƗण ŮौȨोिगिकयों पर ŮदशŊन, Ůमािणत बीजों क े िवतरण, 
Ůमािणत बीजों क े उȋादन, एकीक ृ त पोषक तȕ और कीट Ůबंधन उपायों, फसल Ůणाली 
आधाįरत ŮिशƗण आिद क े माȯम से िकसानों क े Ɨमता िनमाŊण आिद क े िलए सहायता Ůदान 
की जा रही है और नई जारी िक˝ों/संकर िक˝ों क े बीज िमनीिकटों का िवतरण भी एजŐिसयों 
Ȫारा राǛों क े माȯम से िकया जाता है। यह िमशन भारतीय क ृ िष अनुसंधान पįरषद 
(आईसीएआर) और राǛ क ृ िष िवʷिवȨालयों (एसएयू)/क ृ िष िवǒान कŐ ūों (क े वीक े) को िवषय वˑु 
िवशेषǒों/वैǒािनकों की देखरेख मŐ िकसानों को ŮौȨोिगकी बैक ːॉिपंग और ŮौȨोिगकी क े 
हˑांतरण क े िलए भी सहायता Ůदान करता है।  
 
िमशन क े िविभɄ घटकों क े कायाŊɋयन क े िलए िजलों की पहचान करने हेतु राǛों/संघ 
राǛ Ɨेũों को लचीलापन Ůदान िकया जाता है, जो अɊ बातों क े साथ-साथ कम उȋादकता वाले 
लेिकन उǄ Ɨमता वाले िजलों को Ůाथिमकता देने की शतŘ क े अȯधीन है। 
 
खाȨ उȋादों मŐ िमलेट क े उपयोग को बढ़ावा देने और मूʞवधŊन को ŮोȖािहत करने क े 
िलए, खाȨ Ůसंˋरण उȨोग मंũालय (एमओएफपीआई) िमलेट-आधाįरत उȋादों क े िलए उȋादन 
से जुड़ी ŮोȖाहन योजना (पीएलआईएसएमबीपी) कायाŊİɋत कर रहा है। इसक े अितįरƅ, क ृ िष 
और Ůसंˋृ त खाȨ उȋाद िनयाŊत िवकास Ůािधकरण (एपीडा) ने िमलेट क े िलए िनयाŊत 
पाįरİ˕ितकी तंũ को सु̊ढ़ बनाने हेतु Ɨमता िनमाŊण कायŊŢम, वचुŊअल Ţे ता-िवŢे ता बैठकŐ, 
वैिʷक माकő िटंग कœ पेन, ई-क ै टलॉग और िनयाŊत संवधŊन मंच (ईपीएफ) की ˕ापना सिहत कई 
पहल की हœ। इसक े अितįरƅ, िवशेष ŝप से रेडी-ट ू-क ु क (आरटीसी) और रेडी-ट ू-ईट (आरटीई) 
Ɨेũों मŐ मूʞविधŊत िमलेट्स उȋादों क े िवकास से जुड़े ːाटŊ-अɛ को सहायता Ůदान की जा रही 
है। िमलेट्स को Ůमुख राʼŌीय पोषण और कʞाण कायŊŢमों मŐ भी शािमल िकया गया है।  
 
आईसीएआर-भारतीय ŵी अɄ अनुसंधान सं˕ान Ȫारा 18 और 19 अƃू बर, 2024 को 
हैदराबाद मŐ "अंतरराʼŌीय पोषक-अनाज सʃेलन 6.0 (आईएनसीसी6.0)" का आयोजन िकया गया 
था, िजसका िवषय "दशक की वˑु क े ŝप मŐ मोटे अनाज को मुƥधारा मŐ लाने की İ˕ित, मुȞे 
और कायŊनीितयां" था, इस कायŊŢम ने िवशेषǒ जानकारी, नीितगत चचाŊओं और ːाटŊ-अप की 
सफलता की कहािनयों को ŮदिशŊत करने क े िलए एक मंच Ůदान िकया। सʃेलन का उȞेʴ 
Ůमुख िहतधारकों को एक साथ लाकर, सहयोग को बढ़ावा देना, िमलेट को सतत और ˢ˕ 
िवकʙ क े ŝप मŐ बढ़ावा देना और वैिʷक मुƥधारा क े िलए िमलेट की एक सु̊ढ़ मूʞ ŵृंखला 
क े िवकास का मागŊदशŊन करना है। एपीडा ने सʃेलन क े दौरान मूʞ विधŊत िमलेट उȋादों का 
ŮदशŊन िकया। 
634                                                      

आईसीएआर-आईआईएमआर, हैदराबाद और ɊूटŌीहब क े सहयोग से, एपीडा ने िमलेट-
आधाįरत ːाटŊअɛ और एफपीओ क े िलए िनयाŊत लाइसŐिसंग पर ओįरए ं टेशन कायŊŢम और 
वेिबनार आयोिजत िकए, िजससे कई राǛों क े Ůितभािगयों क े बीच िनयाŊत ŮिŢयाओं और 
िनयामक आवʴकताओं क े बारे मŐ बेहतर जागŝकता सृिजत की गई। 
 
एपीडा ने एफपीओ, ːाटŊअɛ, मिहला उȨिमयों और खाȨ Ůोसेसरों और आंŬ Ůदेश मŐ 
क ृ िष िवकास और िनयाŊत वृİȠ क े िलए Ůमुख Ůयासों को बेहतर करने हेतु Ɨमता िनमाŊण पहल 
करने क े िलए राʼŌीय क ृ िष अनुसंधान Ůबंधन अकादमी (एनएएआरएम), राʼŌीय क ृ िष िवˑार 
Ůबंधन सं˕ान (एमएएनएजीई), राʼŌीय क ृ िष और Ťामीण िवकास बœक (नाबाडŊ), भारतीय राʼŌीय 
क ृ िष सहकारी िवपणन संघ िलिमटेड (नेफ े ड), राʼŌीय बीज िनगम िलिमटेड (एनएससी), भारतीय 
खाȨ सुरƗा और मानक Ůािधकरण (एफएसएसएआई), पादप संगरोध Ůािधकरण आिद जैसे 
सं˕ानों क े साथ सहयोग िकया। 
 
िवʷ ˑर पर िमलेट्स क े अनुसंधान सहयोग और जन जागŝकता को सु̊ढ़ बनाने क े 
िलए, जी20 की अȯƗता क े बाद से “िमलेट और अɊ ए ं िशए ं ट अनाज अंतरराʼŌ ीय 
अनुसंधान पहल (महिषŊ)” जैसी एक नई पहल को अपनाया गया है। इस पहल का उȞेʴ 
अनुसंधान सहयोग, जमŊɘाǚ एƛचŐज और ŮौȨोिगकी हˑांतरण क े िलए एक वैिʷक 
पाįरİ˕ितकी तंũ बनाना है, िजसमŐ भारत हब क े ŝप मŐ कायŊ कर रहा है। अनुसंधान मŐ वैिʷक 
मानक ˕ािपत करक े और िमलेट उȋादों क े िलए अंतरराʼŌीय मानकों क े िवकास की अगुवाई 
करक े, भारत Ůभावी ŝप से खुद को " िमलेट्स क े िलए वैिʷक कŐ ū" क े ŝप मŐ ˕ािपत कर 
रहा है, िजससे उȋादन ŮौȨोिगिकयों और िनयाŊत Ɨमताओं दोनों की अगुवाई कर रहा है। 
****** 
 
 
635                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2261 
19/12/2025 को उƣराथ[  
ͪवषय: ͩकसानɉ का आͬथ[क सशिÈतकरण 
2261. Įी संत बलबीर ͧसंहः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) सरकार ɮवारा कृͪष के आधुǓनकȧकरण और ͩकसानɉ को आͬथ[क Ǿप से अͬधक सशÈत बनाने हेतु, 
ͪवशेषकर Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ, ͧश¢ा एवं आधुǓनक कृͪष तकनीकɉ तक पहुँच के संदभ[ मɅ कौन-कौन से ͪवͧशçट 
कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ; 
(ख) Èया ͩकसानɉ को उÛनत कृͪष Ĥथाओं को अपनाने, उपज बढ़ाने और वैिæवक बाजार तक पहुँच 
सुǓनिæचत करने मɅ सहायता देने के ͧलए कोई कौशल ͪवकास काय[Đम, Ĥͧश¢ण सğ या राजसहायता 
उपलÞध हɇ; और 
(ग) सरकार ͩकसानɉ कȧ आͬथ[क िèथǓत सुधारने हेतु आय के वैकिãपक İोतɉ के उपयोग या गैर-कृͪष 
आधाǐरत गǓतͪवͬधयɉ को ͩकस Ĥकार से बढ़ावा दे रहȣ है? 
 
 उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर) 
(क): वष[ 2005-06 से देश मɅ ͪवकेÛġȣकृत और ͩकसान Ǒहतैषी ͪवèतार Ĥणालȣ को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए 
28 राÏयɉ और 5 कɅ ġ शाͧसत Ĥदेशɉ के 734 िजलɉ मɅ एक कɅ ġȣय Ĥायोिजत योजना "ͪवèतार सुधारɉ के 
ͧलए राÏय ͪवèतार काय[Đमɉ को समथ[न" (आ×मा) काया[िÛवत कȧ जा रहȣ है। इस योजना का उɮदेæय 
राÏय सरकार के Ĥयासɉ मɅ सहयोग करना और ͪवͧभÛन ͪवèतार गǓतͪवͬधयɉ जैसे ͩकसानɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण 
देना, Ēामीण युवाओं का कौशल Ĥͧश¢ण, Ĥदश[न, एÈसपोजर ͪविजट, ͩकसान मेला, ͩकसान समूहɉ को 
संगǑठत करना और फाम[ èकूलɉ का आयोजन करना आǑद के माÚयम से कृͪष का आधुǓनकȧकरण करने 
के ͧलए ͩकसानɉ को कृͪष और संबɮध ¢ेğɉ के ͪवͧभÛन ͪवषयगत ¢ेğɉ मɅ नवीनतम कृͪष Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ 
और अÍछȤ कृͪष पɮधǓतयɉ को उपलÞध कराना है।  
 
(ख): कृͪष के ͪवͧभÛन ͪवषयगत ¢ेğɉ मɅ Ēामीण युवाओं के कौशल मɅ सुधार करने के ͧलए वष[ 2015-
16 से Ēामीण युवाओं का कौशल Ĥͧश¢ण (एस.टȣ.आर.वाई.) नामक एक कौशल ͪवकास काय[Đम 
काया[िÛवत ͩकया जा रहा है। एस.टȣ.आर.वाई. का काया[Ûवयन राçĚȣय ͪवèतार Ĥबंधन संèथान (मैनेज) 
ɮवारा राÏय कृͪष Ĥबंधन और ͪवèतार Ĥͧश¢ण संèथानɉ (समेती) तथा कृͪष Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥबंधन एजɅसी 
(आ×मा) के सहयोग से ͩकया जाता है। Ēामीण युवाओं के कौशल Ĥͧश¢ण (एस.टȣ.आर.वाई.) का उɮदेæय 
कृͪष आधाǐरत åयावसाǓयक ¢ेğɉ मɅ ͩकसानɉ सǑहत Ēामीण युवाओं को अãपकाͧलक कौशल आधाǐरत 
Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम Ĥदान करना है। वष[ 2015-16 से अब तक इस योजना के तहत ͩकसानɉ सǑहत 
86,000 से अͬधक Ēामीण युवाओं को Ĥͧशͯ¢त ͩकया जा चुका है। 
636                                                      

  
 
    कृͪष मशीनीकरण उप-ͧमशन (एस.एम.ए.एम.) के तहत, ͩकसानɉ के ͧलए कृͪष मशीनरȣ को अͬधक 
सुलभ और ͩकफायती बनाने के ͧलए, कृͪष मशीनɉ कȧ खरȣद हेतु ͩकसानɉ का Įेणी के आधार पर 
मशीनरȣ कȧ लागत के 40-50% कȧ दर से ͪवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है।  
 
(ग):  दȣनदयाल अं×योदय योजना-राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन (डी.ए.वाई.-एन.आर.एल.एम.) के 
अंतग[त èटाट[-अप Ēाम उɮयͧमता काय[Đम (एस.वी.ई.पी.) अàĦेला के ͪवͧभÛन उप-घटकɉ के तहत अपनी 
इकाइयɉ को बढ़ावा देने/सुǺढ़ बनाने के ͧलए मǑहलाओं और उनके पǐरवार के सदèयɉ को सशÈत बनाकर 
गैर-कृͪष ͪवͧशçट आजीͪवका को सुǺढ़ बनाया जा रहा है। एस.वी.ई.पी. एक स¢म Ēामीण åयवसाय 
ͪवकास पाǐरिèथǓतकȧ तंğ बनाता है जो èवयं सहायता समूहɉ (एस.एच.जी.) और उनके पǐरवार के सदèयɉ 
को गैर-कृͪष आजीͪवका ¢ेğ मɅ छोटे उɮयम èथाͪपत करने मɅ सहायता करता है। इसे 31 राÏयɉ और कɅ ġ 
शाͧसत Ĥदेशɉ मɅ काया[िÛवत ͩकया गया है। 
 
डी.ए.वाई.-एन.आर.एल.एम., एस.एच.जी. मǑहलाओं के ͧलए बाजार पहुंच, Ħांड Ǻæयता और आय 
सृजन के अवसरɉ को सुǺढ़ बनाने पर भी Úयान देता है। संèथागत सुǺढ़ȣकरण, Ħांड ͪवकास, ͫडिजटल 
स¢मता और माकȶट अͧभसरण को शाͧमल करते हुए एक संरͬचत और सतत माकȶǑटंग पाǐरिèथǓतकȧ तंğ 
ͪवकͧसत करने कȧ Ǒदशा मɅ Ĥयास ͩकए गए थे। इसका åयापक उɮदेæय एस.एच.जी. उɮयͧमयɉ को 
ͩफिजकल और ͫडिजटल Üलेटफॉम[ के माÚयम से मेनèĚȣम मɅ एकȧकृत करके उÛहɅ सशÈत बनाना था। 
राçĚȣय, ¢ेğीय, राÏय और िजले मɅ एस.एच.जी. उ×पादɉ को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
ɮवारा राçĚȣय èतर पर पंजीकृत Ħांडɉ जैसे "सरस", "सरस आजीͪवका" और "आजीͪवका" के Ǿप मɅ ͪवशेष 
Ěेडमाक[ का ͪवèतार ͩकया गया है। 
 
 
***** 
637                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2262 
19 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣराथ[  
ͪवषय: कृͪष अवसंरचना कोष के अंतग[त लाभािÛवत हुए ͩकसान 
2262. Įी महɅġ भɪटः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) कृͪष अवसंरचना कोष (एआईएफ) के अंतग[त चयǓनत ͩकसानɉ कȧ Įेͨणयाँ कौन-कौन सी हɇ; 
(ख) इस योजना के अंतग[त ͩकतने ͩकसानɉ को लाभ ĤाÜत हुआ है; और 
(ग) इस योजना के अंतग[त उƣराखंड मɅ ͩकतने ͩकसानɉ को लाभ ĤाÜत हुआ है? 
 
 उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर) 
(क): क ृ िष अवसंरचना कोष (एआईएफ) योजना सभी ͩकसानɉ और साथ हȣ ͩकसान उ×पादक 
संगठनɉ (एफपीओ), Ĥाथͧमक कृͪष ऋण सͧमǓतयɉ (पीएसीएस), माकȶǑटंग/बहुउɮदेशीय सहकारȣ 
सͧमǓतयɉ, èवयं सहायता समूहɉ (एसएचजी), संयुÈत देयता समूहɉ (जेएलजी), कृͪष उपज बाजार 
सͧमǓत (एपीएमसी), कृͪष-उɮयͧमयɉ, èटाट[-अप और कɅ ġȣय/राÏय एजɅͧसयɉ जैसी ͪवͧभÛन 
संèथाओं के ͧलए भी उपलÞध है। 
(ख) और (ग): जुलाई 2020 मɅ èकȧम कȧ शुǽआत से Ǒदनांक 25.11.2025 तक, 67,007 
åयिÈतगत ͩकसानɉ को एआईएफ èकȧम का लाभ ĤाÜत हुआ है िजसमɅ उƣराखंड के  307 
ͩकसान शाͧमल हɇ। इसके अǓतǐरÈत, कुल 1,39,837 मामलɉ को मंजूरȣ दȣ गई है, िजसमɅ 
उƣराखंड के 680 मामले शाͧमल हɇ। एफपीओ, पीएसीएस आǑद जैसी संèथाओं मɅ कई सदèय 
ͩकसान हɇ, िजनकȧ सटȣक संÉया का कɅ ġȣय Ǿप से रख-रखाव नहȣं ͩकया जाता है। 
 
***** 
638                                                      

 
 
 
 
भारत सरकार 
खाद्य प्रसंस्‍ करण उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्‍ न सां. 2263 
19 दिसंबर, 2025 को उत्तर िेने के दलए 
 
िनााटि‍में‍मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाि ा ‍और‍एिीि ृ त‍ि ृ कि-प्रसांस्‍ िरण‍क्‍ लस्‍ टर‍ 
 
 
2263.‍श्री‍जी.सी.‍चन्‍द‍ रशेखर: 
 
क्‍ या खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे दक:  
 
 
(ि) कनााटक‍में‍स्‍ वीक ृ त‍मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाकों‍और‍एकीक ृ त‍क ृ दि-प्रसंस्‍ करण‍कल्‍‍ स्‍ टरों‍की‍संख्‍ या‍दकतनी-दकतनी‍है; 
(ख) प्रधानमंत्री‍दकसान‍सम्‍ पिा‍योजना‍(पीएमक े एसवाई)‍क े ‍अंतगात‍जारी‍और‍प्रयुक्‍ त‍की‍गई‍धनरादि‍दकतनी-
दकतनी‍है;और‍ 
(ग) क्‍ या‍सूखा‍प्रभादवत‍दजलों‍से‍प्राप्‍ त‍नए‍प्रस्‍ तावों‍को‍हाल‍ही‍में‍मंजूरी‍प्रिान‍की‍गई‍है? 
 
उत्तर 
 
 
खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग राज्‍ य मांत्री 
(श्री रवनीत कसांह) 
 
 
(ि):‍मंत्रालय‍ने‍कनााटक‍राज्य‍में‍िो‍मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाक ा ‍(एमएफपी)‍और‍तीन‍ क ृ दि‍प्रसंस्करण‍क्लस्टर‍(एपीसी)‍
पररयोजनाओं‍को‍मंजूरी‍िी‍है। 
 
(ख)‍ से‍ (ग): प्रधानमंत्री‍ दकसान‍ संपिा‍योजना‍(पीएमक े एसवाई)‍ स्कीम‍ क े ‍ अंतगात‍ सभी‍ घटक‍स्कीमें‍ मांग‍
आधाररत‍हैं, और‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍इकाई यां‍लगाने‍क े ‍दलए‍िेि‍भर‍से‍अदभरुदि‍की‍अदभव्यक्ति‍ ‍प्रदिया‍‍क े ‍
जररए‍प्रस्ताव‍‍मंगाए‍जाते‍हैं।‍मंत्रालय‍‍ने‍कनााटक‍राज्य‍में पीएमक े एसवाई क े ‍अंतगात‍क ु ल 98 पररयोजनाओं‍‍को‍
मंजूरी‍िी‍है, दजसमें ₹403.83 करोड़‍की‍अनुिान‍सहायता‍िादमल‍है, दजसमें‍से ₹309.48 करोड़‍जारी‍दकए‍जा‍
िुक े ‍हैं।‍कनााटक‍राज्य‍में पीएमक े एसवाई क े ‍अंतगात‍मंजूर‍पररयोजनाओं‍का‍‍दजले-वार‍दववरण‍अनुबांध‍में‍है। 
 
 
***** 
  
639                                                      

अनुबांध 
 
“िनााटि‍में‍मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाि ा ‍और‍ि ृ कि‍प्रसांस्करण‍क्लस्टर”‍ि े ‍सांबांध‍में‍किनाांि‍‍19.12.2025 िो‍उत्तर‍हेतु‍
राज्य‍सभा‍अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या‍2263‍ि े ‍भाग‍(ख)‍से‍(ग)‍में‍सांिकभात‍अनुबांध 
 
िनााटि‍राज्य‍में‍पीएमि े एसवाई‍ि े ‍अांतगात‍स्वीि ृ त‍कजले-वार‍पररयोजनाएां 
ि े आर. 
सां. पीएमि े एसवाई ि े ‍अांतगात‍स्कीम‍ि े ‍नाम पररयोजना‍िा‍नाम क़िला 
1 मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाि ा‍स्कीम‍(एमएफपी) इंटीग्रेटेड‍फ ू ड‍पाक ा ‍दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
2 मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाि ा‍स्कीम‍(एमएफपी) फ े वोररि‍इंफ्रा‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड मंड्या 
3 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) अथवास‍ट रेडसा‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड हसन, बेलगाम‍, 
बैंगलोर 
4 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) इनोवा‍एग्री‍बायो‍पाक ा ‍दलदमटेड कोलार 
5 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) 
दवजयकांत‍डेयरी‍और‍खाद्य‍उत्पाि‍
दलदमटेड बेलगाम 
6 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) बसवेश्वर‍इंडस्ट र ी बेलगाम 
7 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) 
नामधारी‍एदनमल‍जेनेदटक्स‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
8 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) 
डेयरी‍क्लादसक‍आइसिीम्स‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड रामनगर 
9 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) श्रीक ृ ष्ण‍दमल्‍क्स‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड उत्तर‍कन्नड़ 
10 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) 
मालपेफ्र े ि‍मरीन‍एक्सपोटटास‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड उडीपी 
11 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) हाईटेक‍फू ड‍प्रोसेस‍(एससी) बीजापुर 
12 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) आइदडयल‍आइसिीम िदिण‍कन्नड़ 
13 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) यिस्वी‍दफि‍मील‍ए ं ड‍ऑयल‍क ं पनी िदिण‍कन्नड़ 
14 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) बामुल रामनगर 
15 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) एग्रो‍टेक‍(एसटी) बेलगाम 
16 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) स्क्वायर‍मील‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड बैंगलोर 
17 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) गोल्डन‍हैिरीज हावेरी 
18 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) प्रोदवट‍फ ू डटस‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड िदिण‍कन्नड़ 
19 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) नव्या‍इंडस्ट र ी दवजयपुरा 
20 एिीि ृ त‍शीत‍शांखला‍और‍मूल्य‍सांवधान‍अवसांरचना‍
स्कीम‍‍(शीत‍शांखला) 
माइिोट र ोल‍स्टरलाइजेिन‍सदवासेज‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
21 ि ृ कि-प्रसांस्करण‍क्लस्टर‍ि े ‍कलए‍अवसांरचना‍स्कीम‍
(एपीसी) मेससा‍जेम‍फ ू ड‍पाक ा ‍एलएलपी िेवनागेर े 
22 ि ृ कि-प्रसांस्करण‍क्लस्टर‍ि े ‍कलए‍अवसांरचना‍स्कीम‍
(एपीसी) मेससा‍उड ु पी‍फ ू ड‍पाक ा उड ु पी 
640                                                      

23 ि ृ कि-प्रसांस्करण‍क्लस्टर‍ि े ‍कलए‍अवसांरचना‍स्कीम‍
(एपीसी) 
मेससा‍श्री‍लक्ष्मीबालाजी‍एग्रो‍पाक ा ‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड कोप्पल 
24 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍हेन‍फ्यूिर‍नेिुरल‍प्रोडक्टटस‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
25 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍पेटंट‍फ ू ड‍प्रोसेससा‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
26 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍ला‍फ ू डटस कोलार 
27 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍रामक ृ ष्ण‍इंडस्ट र ीज बागलकोट 
28 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍स्प्राउटलाइफ‍फ ू डटस‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
29 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍संिमन‍ऑगेदनक‍फ ू डटस‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड मंड्या 
30 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍आरजी‍कासट‍इंडस्ट र ीज‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड बागलकोट 
31 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍अश्वरूिा‍एनररि‍फ ू डटस मंड्या 
32 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍श्री‍वेंकटेश्वर‍इंडस्ट र ीज मैसूर 
33 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) श्री‍बालाजी‍इंडस्ट र ीज मैसूर 
34 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍अवंतनेिर‍फ ू डटस‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
35 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍मैक्सदवटा‍फ ू डटस‍(इंदडया) 
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड मंड्या 
36 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍ट्रु बेयर‍फ्रे ि‍फू डटस‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड तुमक ु रु 
37 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍ग्रोफ्र े ि‍एग्रोफ ू डटस‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड तुमक ु र 
38 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍वीबी‍फ ू डटस बेंगलुरु‍िहरी 
39 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍एल्वीटी‍प्रोडक्टटस‍प्राइवेट‍
दलदमटेड धारवाड़ 
40 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍टेंगुराजा‍कोको‍प्रोडक्टटस उड ु पी 
41 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍जुक्तिए ं ट‍फ ू ड‍वक्सा‍दलदमटेड बैंगलोर‍ग्रामीण 
42 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍श्रीिेवी‍जनरल‍इंजीदनयरर ं ग बेंगलोर‍ग्रामीण 
43 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍कदनष्क‍बेवर े जेज‍इंदडया‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड बेंगलोर‍ग्रामीण 
44 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍श्री‍लक्ष्मीबालाजी‍एग्रो‍पाक ा ‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड‍यूदनट- 1 कोप्पल 
45 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍श्री‍लक्ष्मीबालाजी‍एग्रो‍पाक ा ‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड‍(यूदनट- 2) कोप्पल 
46 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍एलन‍काजू‍इंडस्ट र ीज उड ु पी 
47 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) मेससा‍पररिुद्ध‍इंडस्ट र ीज उड ु पी 
48 खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍एवां‍परररक्षण‍क्षमता‍सृजन/कवस्तार‍
स्कीम‍(सीईएफपीपीसी) 
मेससा‍श्री‍लक्ष्मीबालाजी‍एग्रो‍पाक ा ‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड‍यूदनट-III कोप्पल 
49 बैिवडा‍और‍फॉरवडा‍कलांि े ज‍सृजन‍स्कीम मेससा‍बसवेश्वर‍इंडस्ट र ी बेलगाम 
641                                                      

50 बैिवडा‍और‍फॉरवडा‍कलांि े ज‍सृजन‍स्कीम‍ जेम‍सेल्स बीजापुर 
51 बैिवडा‍और‍फॉरवडा‍कलांि े ज‍‍सृजन‍स्कीम मेससा‍एफ3 मरीन‍फ ू डटस‍वल्डावाइड उड ु पी 
52 ऑपर े शन‍ग्रीन्स‍(ओजी) कारवां दिकबल्लापुर 
53 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना बैंगलोर‍टेस्ट‍हाउस बैंगलोर 
54 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना क ृ दि‍दवज्ञान‍दवश्वदवद्यालय, रायिूर रायिूर 
55 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना बैंगलोर‍एनादलदटकल‍ररसिा‍सेंटर बैंगलोर 
56 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना दिव‍एनादलदटकल‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड बैंगलोर 
57 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना टीयूवी‍इंदडया‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड, बैंगलोर 
58 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना यूरोदफन्स‍एनादलदटकल‍सदवासेज‍
इंदडया‍प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड बैंगलोर 
59 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना श्रीराम‍इंस्टीट्यूट‍फॉर‍इंडक्तस्ट र यल‍
ररसिा, बेंगलुरु बैंगलोर 
60 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना यूर े का‍एनादलदटकल, बैंगलोर बेंगलुरु‍िहरी 
61 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना क ृ दि‍दवज्ञान‍दवश्वदवद्यालय, रायिूर‍- रायिूर 
62 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना एएलएस‍टेक्तस्टंग‍सदवासेज‍इंदडया‍
प्राइवेट‍दलदमटेड बैंगलोर‍ग्रामीण 
63 खाद्य‍सुरिा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍आश्वासन‍अवसंरिना बंजारा‍लंबानी‍समाज बैंगलोर 
64 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
स्टोर‍दकए‍गए‍उत्पाि‍कीड़ों‍से‍बिाने‍
क े ‍दलए‍सुरदित‍खाद्य‍पिाथा‍भंडारण‍
क े ‍दलए‍बायो-फ्यूदमगेिन‍दसस्टम‍का‍
दवकास‍(सीएफटीआरआईI, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
65 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
खाद्य‍उद्योगों‍क े ‍दलए‍
ए ं टीमाइिोदबयल‍प्रोटीन/पेप्टाइड‍का‍
दवकास‍(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
66 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
दिमला‍दमिा‍क े ‍एन्थ्रेक्नोज‍क े ‍
मैनेजमेंट‍क े ‍दलए‍िहतूत‍क े ‍पत्तों‍से‍
बायोएक्तक्टव्स‍वाली‍खाने‍लायक‍परत‍
बनाना‍(सीएफटीआरएल, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
67 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
सूजी,‍िदलया‍, बंसी‍रवा‍‍क े ‍
माइिोन्यूदट र ए ं ट‍फोदटादफक े िन‍क े ‍
दलए‍प्रौद्योदगकी‍दवकास‍और‍
पार ं पररक‍और‍पास्ता‍उत्पािों‍में‍
इसका‍उपयोग‍(सीएफटीआरआई, 
मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
68 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
वेदजटेबल‍ऑयल‍की‍प्रोसेदसंग‍क े ‍
दलए‍नए‍फ ं क्शनल‍नैनोदफल्ट् रेिन‍
मेम्ब्रेन‍का‍दडजाइन, डेवलपमेंट‍और‍
एप्लीक े िन‍(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍
) 
मैसूर 
69 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
दमलेट‍आधाररत‍ग्लूटेन-मुि‍ब्रेड‍का‍
दवकास‍(सीएसआईआर-
सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍, कनााटक) 
मैसूर 
70 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
कॉफी‍की‍पदत्तयों‍से‍मूल्य‍वदधात‍
उत्पािों‍‍का‍दवकास‍(सीएसआईआर‍
-सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍, कनााटक) 
मैसूर 
71 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास लगातार‍िावल‍पकाने‍की‍मिीन‍का‍
दडजाइन‍और‍दवकास‍ मैसूर 
642                                                      

(सीएसआईआर-सीएफटीआरआई, 
मैसूर‍, कनााटक) 
72 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
पायसम‍, खीर‍और‍दफरनी‍की‍
वैरायटी‍क े ‍दलए‍ड र ाई‍दिस्टलाइजेिन‍
एप्रोि‍का‍उपयोग‍करते‍हुए‍इंस्टेंट‍
दमक्स‍की‍प्रोसेस‍टेक्नोलॉजी‍
(एनडीआरआईI, सिना‍रीजनल‍
स्टेिन‍बेंगलुरु‍, कनााटक) 
बेंगलुरु 
73 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
मोनास्कस‍परप्यूर े यस सीएफआर 
410-11 फमेंटेड‍लोदबया‍टोफ ू ‍
फ ं क्शनल‍फ ू ड‍क े ‍तौर‍पर‍(सेंट र ल‍
फ ू ड‍टेक्नोलॉदजकल‍ररसिा‍
इंस्टीट्यूट, मैसूर) 
मैसूर 
74 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
मछली‍क े ‍औद्योदगक‍‍किर े ‍से‍खाने‍
लायक‍इकोसापेंटेनोइक‍एदसड‍और‍
डोकोसाहेक्सैनोइक‍एदसड‍वाले‍तेल‍
का‍उत्पािन‍बढाने‍का‍प्रोसेस‍
(सीएसआईआर- सेंटर ल‍फू ड‍
टेक्नोलॉदजकल‍ररसिा‍इंस्टीट्यूट, 
मैसूर- 570020, कनााटक) 
मैसूर 
75 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
पोिक‍तत्ों‍से‍भरपूर‍उत्पाि‍ ‍बनाने‍
क े ‍दलए‍दमलेट‍‍और‍नकली‍अनाज‍
का‍प्रसंस्करण‍(सीएसआईआर - 
सेंटर ल‍फू ड‍टेक्नोलॉदजकल‍ररसिा‍
इंस्टीट्यूट, मैसूर- 570021, 
कनााटक) 
मैसूर 
76 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
मधुमेह‍‍क े ‍मरीजों‍क े ‍दलए‍एक‍
बायोएक्तक्टव‍एनक ै प्सुलेटेड‍फ ं क्शनल‍
फ ू ड‍प्रोडक्ट‍का‍दवकास‍जो‍
पीपीएआरवाई को‍मॉड्यूलेट‍कर‍
सक े ‍(सीएसआईआर - सेंट र ल‍फ ू ड‍
टेक्नोलॉदजकल‍ररसिा‍इंस्टीट्यूट, 
मैसूर- 570022, कनााटक) 
मैसूर 
77 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
फलों‍और‍सक्तियों‍क े ‍संि ू िण‍को‍
ि ू र‍करने‍‍क े ‍दलए‍इंडक्तस्ट र यल‍स्क े ल‍
कोल्ड‍प्लाज़्मा‍यूदनट‍का‍दवकास‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍, कनााटक) 
मैसूर 
78 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
िावल‍की‍भूसी‍पर‍आधाररत‍
स्वास्थ्यवधाक‍खाद्य‍पिाथों‍का‍
दवकास‍(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
79 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
वैल्यू‍एडेड‍और‍हेल्दी‍टेक्सिराइज्ड‍
अंडा‍प्रोडक्ट‍(सीएफटीआरआई, 
मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
80 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
सादडान‍तेल‍से‍n-3 पॉलीअनसेिुर े टेड‍
फ ै टी‍एदसड‍कॉन्संट रेट‍का‍उत्पािन‍
(एनआईटी, मैंगलोर) 
िदिण‍कन्नड़ 
81 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
कम‍इस्तेमाल‍होने‍वाले‍अनाज‍से‍
उपयुि‍औद्योदगक‍उत्पािन‍‍क े ‍दलए‍‍
न्यूदट र िन‍से‍भरपूर‍नए‍और‍
सुदवधाजनक‍खाद्य‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
643                                                      

82 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
दिकन‍दलवर‍हाइड र ोदलसेटटस‍तैयार‍
करने‍क े ‍दलए‍ए ं जाइमेदटक‍और‍
फमेंटेदटव‍तरीकों‍का‍तुलनात्मक‍
मूल्यांकन‍: ररकवरी, बायोफ ं क्शनल‍
क ै र े क्टराइजेिन‍और‍एप्लीक े िन‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
83 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
फ ू ड‍सप्लीमेंट‍एप्लीक े िन‍क े ‍दलए‍
नैनोएनक ै प्सुलेिन‍क े ‍प्रोसेस‍का‍
डेवलपमेंट‍(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍
) 
मैसूर 
84 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
कोकोआ‍क े ‍फमेंटेिन‍और‍ड र ाइंग‍
प्रोसेस‍को‍र े गुलेट‍करने‍क े ‍दलए‍
बायोटेक्नोलॉदजकल‍एप्रोि।‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
85 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
फामाास्युदटकल‍अनुप्रयोगों‍क े ‍दलए‍‍
थेराप्यूदटक‍फ ं गल‍बायोफ ै क्ट र ी‍
गेंनोडेमाा‍एसपी.‍से‍बायोएक्तक्टव‍
मेटाबोलाइटटस‍का‍
बायोटेक्नोलॉदजकल‍उत्पािन 
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
86 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
मट्ठ े ‍से‍लैक्टोफ े ररन‍का‍ररवसा‍
माइसेलर‍एक्सट रैक्शन‍: क ं टीन्यूअस‍
प्रोसेस‍(एनआईटी, मैंगलोर) 
िदिण‍कन्नड़ 
87 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
िुने‍हुए‍फलों‍क े‍परररिणक े ‍दलए‍
दिटोसन‍बेस्ड‍कोदटंग‍फॉमूालेिन‍का‍
स्क े ल‍अप‍(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
88 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
सेहत‍और‍पोिण‍सुरिा‍क े ‍दलए‍लाल‍
ज्वार‍क े ‍फ्लेक्स‍वाला‍स्नैक‍बार‍
(यूदनवदसाटी‍ऑफ‍एग्रीकल्‍िरल‍
साइंसेज, धारवाड़) 
धारवाड़ 
89 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
खेती‍क े ‍किर े ‍का‍इस्तेमाल‍करक े‍
सस्ते,‍दनपटान‍योग्य,‍और‍
बायोदडग्रेडेबल‍फ ू ड‍क ं टेनर‍बनाना‍
(9जैन‍यूदनवदसाटी, बैंगलोर) 
जयनगर‍, 
बैंगलोर 
90 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
मोरस‍अल्बा‍से‍क्तिर‍दपगमेंट‍और‍
प्रमुख‍मेटाबोलाइटटस‍का‍स्क े ल-अप‍
और‍डाउन‍स्ट र ीम‍प्रसंस्करण‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
91 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
इंदडयन‍वाइन‍बनाने‍क े ‍दलए‍िेसी‍
वाइन‍यीस्ट‍कल्‍िर‍को‍अलग‍करना‍
और‍उनकी‍स्क्रीदनंग‍करना‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
92 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
क्तखलादड़यों‍में‍एनजी‍लेवल‍बढाने/ 
बनाए‍रखने‍क े ‍दलए‍एदडबल‍
कन्फ े क्शनरी‍च्यूज‍और‍फ ं क्शनल‍
बेवर े ज‍दमक्स‍(सीएफटीआरआई, 
मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
93 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
बहु-अनाज‍सूजी‍दमक्सेस‍क े ‍उत्पािन‍‍
और‍इसक े ‍फ ू ड‍एप्लीक े िन‍क े ‍दलए‍
टेक्नोलॉजी‍का‍दवकास‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
94 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
कम‍इस्तेमाल‍होने‍वाले‍पौधों‍क े ‍
फलों‍से‍बायोएक्तक्टव‍मेटाबोलाइटटस‍
की‍पहिान‍और‍वगीकरण 
मैसूर 
644                                                      

मालदपदघया‍ग्लबरा‍और‍इक्सोरा‍
कोकीदनया‍का‍मूल्य‍संवधान‍हेतु‍
फसलोत्तर‍प्रसंस्करण‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
95 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
आंवला‍को‍कि ट ि ू कस‍करक े ‍बीज‍
अलग‍करने‍क े ‍दलए‍इदिपमेंट‍का‍
दनमााण‍और‍हर े ‍आंवला‍पाउडर‍
बनाने‍की‍प्रदिया‍(सीएफटीआरआई, 
मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
96 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
कम‍इस्तेमाल‍होने‍वाले‍राइजोम‍में‍
मूल्य‍संवधान‍‍क े ‍दलए‍प्रौद्योदगकी‍‍का‍
दवकास‍(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
97 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
ग्रीन‍कॉफी‍से‍मूल्य‍वदधात‍उत्पािों‍‍‍
के‍दवकास‍क े ‍दलए‍प्रौद्योदगकी‍‍
(सीएफटीआरआई, मैसूर‍) 
मैसूर 
98 अनुसांधान‍एवां‍कविास 
बड़े‍पैमाने‍पर‍उत्पािन‍‍क े ‍दलए‍
भारतीय‍पार ं पररक‍फमेंटेड‍बेवर े दजज‍
(कांजी‍, आंबली‍, सोल‍कढी‍) का‍
प्रोसेस‍ऑदप्टमाइजेिन, स्क े ल-अप‍
और‍प्रोडक्ट‍स्टैंडडााइजेिन 
मैसूर 
 
 
 
645                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2264 
19 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣराथ[  
ͪवषय: उƣर Ĥदेश मɅ एनएमईओ-ओपी कȧ ĤगǓत 
2264. Įीमती दश[ना ͧसंहः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया उƣर Ĥदेश मɅ खाɮय तेलɉ पर राçĚȣय ͧमशन - ताड़ के तेल (एनएमईओ-ओपी) के 
अंतग[त ताड़ के तेल के ¢ेğ ͪवèतार, पौध ͪवतरण और Ĥͧश¢ण हेतु काय[Đम लागू ͩकए जा रहे 
हɇ; 
(ख) वष[ 2021-22 से अब तक ͩकतने ͩकसानɉ को पौध, ͫĜप ͧसंचाई एवं इनपुट सहायता Ĥदान 
कȧ गई है; 
(ग) Èया राÏय मɅ कोई ताड़ के तेल कȧ Ĥसंèकरण इकाई èथाͪपत कȧ गई है, यǑद हां, तो 
उसका èथान कहाँ है; और 
(घ) उƣर Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ एनएमईओ-ओपी पर अब तक कुल ͩकतना åयय हुआ है? 
 
 उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर) 
(क) से (घ): जी नहȣं। राçĚȣय खाɮय तेल ͧमशन – ऑयल पाम (एनएमईओ-ओपी) 15 राÏयɉ  
मɅ काया[िÛवत ͩकया जा रहा है। एनएमईओ-ओपी उƣर Ĥदेश मɅ काया[िÛवत नहȣं ͩकया जा रहा 
है। 
    तथाͪप, कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग, केÛġȣय Ĥायोिजत योजना 'ĤǓत बूंद अͬधक 
फसल' (पीडीएमसी) को वष[ 2015 से उƣर Ĥदेश सǑहत देशभर मɅ काया[िÛवत कर रहा है िजसका 
उɮदेæय ͫĜप और िèĤंकलर ͧसंचाई Ĥणाͧलयɉ के माÚयम से जल के कुशल उपयोग को बढ़ावा 
देना है। इस योजना के तहत राÏय मɅ वष[ 2021-22 से अब तक 2,33,350 ͩकसानɉ को 
शाͧमल ͩकया गया है। 
***** 
646                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2265 
19/12/2025 को उƣराथ[  
ͪवषय: कृͪष नीǓत के उɮदेæयɉ के साथ एमआईएसएस का संरेखण 
2265. Įी घनæयाम Ǔतवारȣ 
डा. अǓनल सुखदेवराव बɉडेः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) योजना Ĥारंभ होने से अब तक, ͪवशेषकर ͪवगत पांच वषɟ मɅ, ͩकसान Đेͫडट काड[ (केसीसी) 
के माÚयम से Ǒदए गए कुल Þयाज सिÞसडी का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) यह योजना सरकार के समĒ कृͪष नीǓत उɮदेæयɉ के साथ ͩकस Ĥकार तालमेल रखती है 
तथा इसके सफल ͩĐयाÛवयन के ͧलए अपनाए गए मुÉय Ĥदश[न संकेतक कौन-कौन से हɇ; और 
(ग) ͪवगत पांच वषɟ मɅ कृͪष ऋण Ĥवाह को बढ़ाने के ͧलए सरकार ɮवारा Èया-Èया Ĥमुख कदम 
उठाए गए हɇ? 
 उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर) 
(क): सरकार अͨखल भारतीय èतर पर ͪवͧभÛन राÏयɉ और केÛġ शाͧसत Ĥदेशɉ मɅ 100% 
केÛġȣय ͪवƣ पोͪषत केÛġȣय ¢ेğ कȧ योजना काया[िÛवत कर रहȣ है िजसे संशोͬधत Þयाज 
अनुदान योजना (एमआईएस) के Ǿप मɅ जाना जाता है। इस योजना का उɮदेæय ͩकसानɉ ɮवारा 
उनकȧ काय[शील पूंजी आवæयकताओं के ͧलए ͩकसान Đेͫडट काड[ (केसीसी) के  माÚयम से ĤाÜत 
अãपकाͧलक कृͪष ऋणɉ पर Þयाज अनुदान (आईएस) और शीē पुनभु[गतान Ĥो×साहन 
(पीआरआई) Ĥदान करके  कृͪष ऋण को ͩकफायती बनाना है। 
 
वष[ 2006-07 मɅ इसकȧ शुǽआत से अब तक केसीसी के माÚयम से Ĥदान ͩकया गया 
Þयाज अनुदान (आईएस) और शीē पुनभु[गतान Ĥो×साहन (पीआरआई) सǑहत कुल Þयाज अनुदान 
2,01,925.63 करोड़ ǽपये है, िजसमɅ से ͪपछले पांच वषɟ (2020-21 से 2024-25) के दौरान 
89,328.18 करोड़ ǽपये Ĥदान ͩकए गए हɇ। ͪववरण अनुबंध-I मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
647                                                      

 
(ख) एवं (ग): के सीसी  के माÚयम से काया[िÛवत कȧ जाने वालȣ एमआईएसएस ͩकसानɉ को 
समय पर और वहनीय ऋण सुǓनिæचत करने, कृͪष उ×पादकता बढ़ाने, ͪवƣीय समावेशन को 
बढ़ावा देने और ऋण के गैर-संèथागत èğोतɉ पर ͩकसानɉ कȧ Ǔनभ[रता को कम करने के सरकार 
कȧ åयापक कृͪष नीǓत के उɮदेæयɉ के साथ Ǔनकटता से जुड़ी हुई है। यह योजना अãपकाͧलक 
फसल ऋणɉ पर Þयाज मɅ अनुदान और शीē पुनभु[गतान के ͧलए अǓतǐरÈत Ĥो×साहन Ĥदान 
करके, ऋण कȧ लागत को कम करती है, खेत èतर पर तरलता मɅ सुधार करती है, और कृͪष 
और संबɮध गǓतͪवͬधयɉ मɅ Ǔनवेश को सहायता Ĥदान करती है, िजससे आय मɅ वृɮͬध और 
समĒ Ēामीण ͪवकास मɅ योगदान ͧमलता है। 
ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान कृͪष ऋण Ĥवाह को बढ़ाने के ͧलए Ǔनàनͧलͨखत कदम उठाए गए हɇ 
- 
i. Ĥाथͧमकता ¢ेğ लɇͫडंग (पीएसएल) ͪवǓनयमन के अनुसार, सरकार ने अǓनवाय[ ͩकया है 
ͩक बɇक अपने कुल ऋण का 18% कृͪष और संबɮध ¢ेğ को Ĥदान करɅगे। वष[ 2016 
से छोटे और सीमांत ͩकसानɉ के ͧलए एक उप-सीमा तय कȧ गई है जो वत[मान मɅ 10 
ĤǓतशत है।  
ii. सरकार का Ǔनरंतर Ĥयास रहा है ͩक Ĥभावी और परेशानी रǑहत ऋण सुͪवधा के  माÚयम 
से कृͪष ¢ेğ को बढ़ावा Ǒदया जाए, िजसके ͧलए सरकार कृͪष ¢ेğ के ͧलए Ēाउंड लेवल 
Đेͫडट (जीएलसी) लêय Ǔनधा[ǐरत करती है। ͪपछले 5 वषɟ (2020-21 से 2024-25) के 
दौरान कृͪष ऋण के तहत औसत उपलिÞध लêय का लगभग 113% रहा है। 
 
iii. आरबीआई ने केसीसी मɅ जमानत-मुÈत ऋण सीमा को मौजूदा 1.6 लाख ǽपये से बढ़ाकर 
2 लाख ǽपये कर Ǒदया है, जो Ǒदनांक 01.01.2025 से Ĥभावी है। यह कदम ͪवशेष Ǿप 
से छोटे और सीमांत ͩकसानɉ के ͧलए ऋण पहुंच को बढ़ाता है, जो कम उधार लेने कȧ 
लागत और ĤǓतभूǓत संबंधी आवæयकताओं को हटाने से लाभािÛवत होते हɇ।  
 
 
  
iv. एमआईएसएस Ĥशासन मɅ पारदͧश[ता और द¢ता सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए, ͧसतंबर 
2023 मɅ लॉÛच ͩकसान ऋण पोट[ल (केआरपी), 30 अनुसूͬचत वाͨणिÏयक बɇकɉ 
(एससीबी), 42 ¢ेğीय Ēामीण बɇकɉ (आरआरबी), 20 राÏय सहकारȣ बɇकɉ (एसटȣसीबी) 
और 356 िजला कɅ ġȣय सहकारȣ बɇकɉ (डीसीसीबी) को एकȧकृत करता है। पोट[ल 
एमआईएसएस से संबंͬधत दावɉ के ×वǐरत Ǔनपटान कȧ सुͪवधा Ĥदान करता है और दावɉ 
के ͪवतरण को सरल और शीē करने मɅ मदद करता है। दुǽपयोग को रोकने के ͧलए 
सभी लाभाͬथ[यɉ को आधार Ĥमाͨणत और स×याͪपत ͩकया जाता है। इसके अǓतǐरÈत, 
बɇकɉ के पास भौǓतक स×यापन और लेखा परȣ¢ा जैसे आंतǐरक तंğ है ताͩक सुǓनिæचत 
ͩकया जा सके ͩक ऋण/लाभɉ का उपयोग Ǔनधा[ǐरत तरȣके से ͩकया जाता है।  
648                                                      

 
v. सरकार ͩकसान ऋण पोट[ल (केआरपी) जैसे Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ हèत¢ेप के अǓतǐरÈत बɇकɉ, 
राÏय सरकार/केÛġ सरकार, आरबीआई, नाबाड[ आǑद ɮवारा आयोिजत Ǔनयͧमत आईईसी 
अͧभयानɉ के माÚयम से इसे ͩकसानɉ के ͧलए सुलभ बनाने हेतु अनेक पहलɅ कर रहȣ है।  
 
   इन उपायɉ ने संèथागत ऋण मɅ सुधार पर भी Ĥभाव डाला है जो 64% (एनएसएस 70वɅ 
दौर, 2013 कȧ ǐरपोट[ के अनुसार) से बढ़कर 75.5% (एनएएफआईएस 2021-22 ǐरपोट[ के 
अनुसार) हो गया है। 
   इसी तरह, कृͪष ¢ेğ मɅ कुल ऋण Ĥवाह वष[ 2020-21 मɅ ₹15.75 लाख करोड़ से बढ़कर 
वष[ 2024-25 मɅ ₹28.67 लाख करोड़ हो गया है। िजसमɅ से, इस अवͬध के दौरान छोटे और 
सीमांत ͩकसानɉ (एसएमएफ) को ͪवतǐरत ऋण 8.71 लाख करोड़ ǽपये से बढ़कर 14.77 लाख 
करोड़ ǽपये हो गया है। 
    केसीसी-एमआईएसएस योजना के कारण ͩकसानɉ को उनकȧ Ĥचालन आवæयकताओं को पूरा 
करने के ͧलए आसान और ͩकफायती ऋण तक पहुंच मɅ काफȧ वृɮͬध हुई है। वष[ 2024-25 मɅ 
सͩĐय केसीसी खातɉ कȧ संÉया 7.72 करोड़ तक पहुंच गई है, िजसने वष[ 2020-21 मɅ 7.53 
लाख करोड़ ǽपये से बढ़कर 2024-25 मɅ 10.20 लाख करोड़ ǽपये तक ऋण ͪवèताǐरत राͧश मɅ 
अंशदान Ǒदया है। 
 
   ͪपछले पांच वषɟ (2020-21 से 2024-25) के दौरान, ͩकसानɉ ने केसीसी-एमआईएसएस के  
माÚयम से ऋण पर Þयाज अनुदान के Ǿप मɅ ₹89,328.18 करोड़ का लाभ उठाया है। 
649                                                      

                                                                      अनुबंध I 
Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣराथ[ राÏय सभा अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2265 के संबंध मɅ अनुबंध  
योजना के Ĥारंभ के बाद से ͩकसान Đेͫडट काड[ (केसीसी) संशोͬधत Þयाज सबवɅशन 
योजना (एमआईएस) के माÚयम से Ĥदान कȧ गई कुल Þयाज सहायता:  
Đ. सं. ͪवƣीय वष[ Þयाज अनुदान (करोड़ ǽपये मɅ) 
1. 2006-07 एनए 
2. 2007-08 1,700.00 
3. 2008-09 2,600.00 
4. 2009-10 2,011.00 
5. 2010-11 3,531.19 
6. 2011-12 3,282.70 
7. 2012-13 5,400.00 
8. 2013-14 6,000.00 
9. 2014-15 6,000.00 
10. 2015-16  13,000.00 
11. 2016-17  13,397.13 
12. 2017-18 13,045.72 
13. 2018-19  11,495.67 
14. 2019-20  16,218.75 
15. 2020-21  17,789.72 
16.      2021-22 21,476.93 
17.      2022-23 17,997.88 
18.      2023-24 14,251.93 
19.      2024-25 17,811.72 
20.      2025-26* 14,915.29 
कुल 2,01,925.63 
*आज तक 
डेटा İोत: डीएफएस/कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग 
***** 
650                                                      

1 
 
 
भारत सरकार 
कृषि एवं ककसान कल् याण मंत्रालय  
कृषि अनुसंधान एवं शिक्षा षवभाग  
 
राज्‍ य‍सभा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सां.‍2266‍‍ 
 
दिनांक 19/12/2025  
  
जीनोम‍सांपादन‍पररयोजना‍में‍शाममल‍फसलें 
 
2266.‍डा.‍अननल‍सुखदेवराव‍बोंडे‍:‍ 
 ‍श्री‍भुबनेश्‍ वर‍िामलता‍:‍‍‍ 
  
क् या‍िृ षि‍एवां‍किसान‍िल्‍ याण‍मांत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक:  
 
(क) भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (आईसीएआर) द्वारा लागू की जा रही जीनोम 
संपािन पररयोजना में िाशमल फसलों की संख् या ककतनी-ककतनी है; 
(ख) क् या कोई अन् य अनुसंधान एवं षवकास संस् थान भी षवशभन् न फसलों पर जीनोम 
संपािन अनुसंधान कर रहे हैं;  
(ग) यदि हााँ, तो तत् संबंधी ब् यौरा क् या है; 
(घ) िेि में षवशभन् न फसलों में जीनोम संपािन के माध् यम से उत् पाि के षवकास 
की स्स्थतत क् या है; और  
() जीनोम संपािन प्रौद्योगगकी के उपयोग में बौद्गधक संपिा अगधकार 
(आईपीआर) से संबंगधत मुद्िों का ब् यौरा क् या है और सरकार उन् हें ककस तरह 
से सुलझा रही है?  
 
उत्तर 
िृ षि‍एवां‍किसान‍िल्‍ याण‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍ 
(श्री‍भागीरथ‍चौधरी) 
 
(ि)‍:‍  भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) ने कुल 24 खेत फसलों और 17 
बागवानी फसलों पर जीनोम एडीद ंग अनुसंधान प्रारंभ ककया है। 
 
651                                                      

2 
 
(ख)‍एवां‍(ग)‍:‍  जी, हााँ।  भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) के अलावा जैव-
प्रौद्योगगकी संस् थानों के षवभाग (राष्‍ट रीय पािप जीनोम अन ुसंधान संस् थान, नई 
दिल् ली; जैव-प्रौद्योगगकी अनुसंधान एवं नवाचार पररिि - राष्‍ट रीय कृषि खाद्य जैव -
षवतनमााण संस् थान, मोहाली; अंतरााष्‍ट रीय आनुवंशिक इंजीतनतय रंग और जैव-प्रौद्योगगकी 
कें द्र, नई दिल् ली); वैज्ञातनक एवं औद्योगगक अन ुसंधान पररिि (CSIR) संस् थानों 
(सीएसआईआर-कें द्रीय औिधीय एवं सगंधीय पािप संस् थान, लखनऊ; सीएसआईआर-
दहमालय जैव-सम् पिा प्रौद्योगगकी संस् थान, पालमपुर; सीएसआईआर-राष्‍ट रीय वनस् पतत 
अनुसंधान संस् थान, लखनऊ) द्वारा भी कुल 10 फसलों में जीनोम एडी द ंग 
अनुसंधान ककया जा रहा है। 
 
(घ)‍ :‍भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान पररिि (ICAR) ने चावल की िो जीनोम एडी द ड 
ककस् में षवकशसत की है। जैव-प्रौद्योगगकी अनुसंधान एवं नवाचार पररिि-राष्‍ट रीय पािप 
जीनोम अनुसंधान संस् थान, नई दिल् ली द्वारा सरसों में ग् लूकोशसनोले  की कम मात्रा 
वाला जीनोम एडीद ड वंिक्रम षवकशसत ककया गया है। 
 
(ङ) ‍:‍ अनुसंधान प्रयोजन के शलए एडीद ग ं  प्रौद्योगगकी का उपयोग करने में 
फ्रीडम  ू ऑपरे  (FTO) प्रावधानों के अनुसार बौद्गधक संपिा अगधकार (IPR) संबंधी 
मुद्िों का समाधान ककया जाता है। 
******* 
652                                                      

भारत सरकार 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण मंğालय 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कã याण ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæ न सं. 2267 
19/12/2025 को उ× तराथ[ 
ͪवषय: पंजाब मɅ बाढ़ Ĥभाͪवत ͩकसानɉ के ͧलए राहत एवं पुनवा[स उपाय 
2267. Įी रािजÛदर गुÜताः 
Èया कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया सरकार ने पंजाब के ͩकसानɉ को हाल हȣ मɅ आई बाढ़ के कारण हुए कृͪष एवं पशुधन 
के कुल नुकसान का आकलन ͩकया है; 
(ख) यǑद हां, तो फसल ¢ǓतपूǓत[, पशुधन सहायता तथा Ĥभाͪवत गाँवɉ के पुनवा[स हेतु जारȣ कȧ 
गई या Ĥèताͪवत कɅ ġȣय सहायता कȧ माğा सǑहत त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) Èया आͬथ[क Ǿप से Ǒदवाͧलयापन कȧ िèथǓत का सामना कर रहे बाढ़ Ĥभाͪवत ͩकसानɉ के 
ͧलए कोई ͪवशेष ͪवƣीय राहत या ऋण माफȧ योजना पर ͪवचार ͩकया जा रहा है; और 
(घ) Èया सरकार भͪवçय मɅ ऐसी घटनाओं के Ĥभाव को कम करने के ͧलए तटबंधɉ, नहर 
नेटवक[ तथा जलवायु-अनुकूल कृͪष अवसंरचना को सुǺढ़ करने हेतु राÏय सरकार के साथ 
ͧमलकर काम करने कȧ योजना बना रहȣ है? 
उƣर 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण राÏय मंğी (Įी रामनाथ ठाकुर) 
(क) एवं (ख): राçĚȣय आपदा Ĥबंधन नीǓत (एनपीडीएम) के अनुसार, जमीनी èतर पर राहत 
सहायता ͪवतरण सǑहत आपदा Ĥबंधन कȧ Ĥाथͧमक िजàमेदारȣ संबंͬधत राÏय सरकारɉ कȧ है। 
राÏय सरकारɅ भारत सरकार ɮवारा अनुमोǑदत मदɉ और मानदंडɉ के अनुसार, उनके पास 
उपलÞध राÏय आपदा ĤǓतͩĐया कोष (एसडीआरएफ) से बाढ़ और भूèखलन सǑहत ĤाकृǓतक 
आपदाओं के मɮदेनजर राहत उपाय करती हɇ। कɅ ġ सरकार राÏय सरकारɉ के Ĥयासɉ मɅ सहयोग 
करती है और आवæयक लॉिजिèटÈस एवं ͪवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान करती है। गंभीर आपदाओं के  
मामले मɅ, राçĚȣय आपदा ĤǓतͩĐया कोष (एनडीआरएफ) से Ǔनधा[ǐरत ĤͩĐया के अनुसार 
अǓतǐरÈत ͪवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है, िजसमɅ अंतर-मंğालयी कɅ ġȣय दल (आईएमसीटȣ) 
के दौरे के आधार पर आकलन शाͧमल होता है। 
653                                                      

 
    एसडीआरएफ/एनडीआरएफ के तहत राÏयɉ को आवंǑटत और जारȣ कȧ गई धनराͧश का 
ͪववरण गृह मंğालय के आपदा Ĥबंधन ͪवभाग कȧ वेबसाइट ndmindia.mha.gov.in पर उपलÞध 
है।  
   गृह मंğालय से ĤाÜत जानकारȣ के अनुसार, वष[ 2025 के दौरान जल-मौसम संबंधी 
आपदाओं के कारण हुए नुकसान का ͪववरण Ǔनàनͧलͨखत है (Ǒदनांक 27.11.2025 तक कȧ 
िèथǓत के अनुसार): 
मानव जीवन मवेशी मकान फसल ¢ेğ 
(लाख हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
40 7161 14065 1.93 
 
पंजाब राÏय सरकार को ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-2026 के ͧलए एसडीआरएफ  के तहत 
642.40 करोड़ ǽपये (कɅ ġ सरकार का Ǒहèसा 481.60 करोड़ ǽपये + राÏय सरकार का Ǒहèसा 
160.80 करोड़ ǽपये) आवंǑटत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजसमɅ से कɅ ġ सरकार के Ǒहèसे के  Ǿप मɅ पहलȣ 
और दूसरȣ ͩकèत के Ǿप मɅ Ĥ×येक ͩकèत मɅ 240.80 करोड़ ǽपये राÏय सरकार को जारȣ ͩकए 
जा चुके हɇ।  
महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (मनरेगा) कȧ धारा 3(4) के  
Ĥावधानɉ के अनुसार, कɅ ġ सरकार एक ͪवƣीय वष[ मɅ रोजगार काड[ धारकɉ को सुǓनिæचत 100 
Ǒदनɉ के अǓतǐरÈत 50 Ǒदनɉ तक का अकुशल शारȣǐरक Įम रोजगार Ĥदान करती है। यह 
Ĥावधान उन Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ लागू होता है जहां सूखा या कोई ĤाकृǓतक आपदा (गृह मंğालय, 
भारत सरकार के अनुसार) अͬधसूͬचत कȧ गई हो। सूखा या ĤाकृǓतक आपदा से Ĥभाͪवत 
अͬधसूͬचत Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ 100 Ǒदनɉ के अǓतǐरÈत 50 Ǒदनɉ तक का अकुशल शारȣǐरक Įम 
रोजगार Ĥदान करने कȧ अͬधसूचना कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग (डीए एंड एफडÞãयू) कȧ 
ͧसफाǐरश पर Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय ɮवारा जारȣ कȧ जाती है। 
कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग ने पंजाब राÏय के बाढ़ और ĤाकृǓतक आपदा Ĥभाͪवत 
¢ेğɉ मɅ ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 के ͧलए महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के तहत ĤǓत पǐरवार 100 Ǒदनɉ के 
अǓतǐरÈत 50 Ǒदनɉ का Įम रोजगार Ĥदान करने कȧ ͧसफाǐरश कȧ है। 
कृͪष एवं पǐरवार कãयाण ͪवभाग (डीए एंड एफडÞãयू) ने राçĚȣय कृͪष ͪवकास योजना 
(आरकेवीवाई) के अंतग[त बाढ़ Ĥभाͪवत ͩकसानɉ को गेहूं के बीज ͪवतǐरत करने के ͧलए पंजाब 
राÏय को 74.00 करोड़ ǽपये (कɅ ġȣय Ǒहèसा 44.40 करोड़ ǽपये) कȧ अǓतǐरÈत पǐरयोजना 
लागत मंजूर कȧ है। समेͩकत बागवानी ͪवकास ͧमशन (एमआईडीएच) के अंतग[त, पंजाब सरकार 
को 2025-26 के दौरान बाढ़ Ĥभाͪवत ¢ेğɉ मɅ संकर सिÞजयɉ कȧ खेती के ͧलए 10.00 करोड़ 
ǽपये (भारत सरकार का Ǒहèसा) का अǓतǐरÈत आवंटन ͩकया गया है। 
 
654                                                      

 
(ग): इसके अलावा, ͪवभाग देश के ͪवͧभÛन राÏयɉ और संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ मɅ संशोͬधत Þयाज 
सिÞसडी योजना (एमआईएसएस) नामक एक पूण[तः कɅ ġ ɮवारा ͪवƣ पोͪषत कɅ ġȣय ¢ेğ योजना 
भी लागू कर रहा है। इस योजना का उɮदेæय ͩकसानɉ ɮवारा ͩकसान Đेͫडट काड[ (केसीसी) के  
माÚयम से काय[शील पूंजी कȧ आवæयकताओं हेतु ͧलए गए अãपकाͧलक कृͪष ऋणɉ पर ǐरयायती 
Þयाज दरɅ Ĥदान करना है। 
(घ): भारतीय कृͪष अनुसंधान पǐरषद (आईसीएआर) राçĚȣय नवाचार जलवायु अनुकूल कृͪष 
(एनआईसीआरए) पǐरयोजना का संचालन करती है। यह पǐरयोजना फसलɉ, पशुधन, बागवानी 
और माि×èयकȧ सǑहत कृͪष पर जलवायु पǐरवत[न के Ĥभाव का अÚययन करती है और देश के 
संवेदनशील ¢ेğɉ के ͧलए कृͪष मɅ जलवायु अनुकूल तकनीकɉ का ͪवकास और Ĥचार करती है। 
पǐरयोजना के पǐरणाम इन ¢ेğɉ को सूखा, बाढ़, पाला, लू आǑद जैसी ͪवकट मौसम िèथǓतयɉ से 
Ǔनपटने मɅ मदद करते हɇ। ͪपछले 10 वषɟ (वष[ 2014-2024) के दौरान, आईसीएआर ɮवारा कुल 
2593 ͩकèमɅ जारȣ कȧ गई हɇ, िजनमɅ से 2177 ͩकèमɅ एक या अͬधक जैͪवक और/या अजैͪवक 
समèयाओं के ĤǓत सहनशील पाई गई हɇ। जलवायु पǐरवत[न पर अंतरसरकारȣ पैनल 
(आईपीसीसी) के Ĥोटोकॉल के अनुसार, 651 Ĥमुख कृͪष Ĥधान िजलɉ मɅ जलवायु पǐरवत[न से 
कृͪष के जोͨखम और संवेदनशीलता का िजला èतर पर आकलन ͩकया गया है। संवेदनशील के 
Ǿप मɅ पहचाने गए 310 िजलɉ मɅ से, 109 िजलɉ को 'अ×यͬधक संवेदनशील' और 201 िजलɉ 
को 'बेहद संवेदनशील' Įेणी मɅ रखा गया है। इन 651 िजलɉ के ͧलए िजला कृͪष आकिèमकता 
योजनाएं (डीएसीपी) भी तैयार कȧ गई हɇ ताͩक मौसम के बदलाव से संबंͬधत ĤǓतकूल िèथǓतयɉ 
से Ǔनपटा जा सके और राÏय कृͪष ͪवभागɉ ɮवारा उपयोग के ͧलए èथान-ͪवͧशçट जलवायु-
ĤǓतरोधी फसलɉ और ͩकèमɉ तथा Ĥबंधन पɮधǓतयɉ कȧ ͧसफाǐरश कȧ जा सके। जलवायु 
पǐरवत[नशीलता के ĤǓत ͩकसानɉ कȧ ĤǓतरोध ¢मता और अनुकूलन ¢मता को बढ़ाने के ͧलए, 
एनआईसीआरए के तहत "जलवायु ĤǓतरोधी गांवɉ" (सीआरवी) कȧ अवधारणा शुǾ कȧ गई है। 
जलवायु पǐरवत[न से Ĥभाͪवत 28 राÏयɉ/कɅ ġ शाͧसत Ĥदेशɉ के 151 िजलɉ मɅ िèथत 448 
सीआरवी मɅ ͩकसानɉ ɮवारा अपनाने हेतु èथान-ͪवͧशçट जलवायु ĤǓतरोधी Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ का 
Ĥदश[न ͩकया गया है। आईसीएआर, अपनी एनआईसीआरए पǐरयोजना के माÚयम से, ͩकसानɉ 
को कृͪष पर जलवायु पǐरवत[न के  Ĥभाव के बारे मɅ जागǾक करता है। जलवायु ĤǓतरोधी 
Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ को åयापक Ǿप से अपनाने के ͧलए ͩकसानɉ को जलवायु पǐरवत[न के ͪवͧभÛन 
पहलुओं पर ͧशͯ¢त करने हेतु ¢मता Ǔनमा[ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए जा रहे हɇ।  
***** 
655                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2268 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: नमो डŌ ोन दीदी योजना क े अंतगŊत चयिनत डŌ ोन सİखयाँ 
2268. सुŵी इंदु बाला गोˢामी 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) अब तक देशभर मŐ िकतनी डŌ ोन सखी चुनी गई हœ तथा िहमाचल Ůदेश सिहत राǛ-वार ɯौरा 
Ɛा है; 
(ख) िवȅीय वषŊ 2023-24 क े िलए नमो डŌ ोन दीदी योजना क े अंतगŊत िकतना बजट आवंिटत िकया 
गया है; और 
(ग) Ɛा मंũालय Ȫारा नमो डŌ ोन दीदी योजना क े अंतगŊत मिहलाओं को ŮिशƗण देने का कोई लƙ 
तय िकया गया है और यिद हाँ, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है? 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) से (ग): सरकार ने मिहला ˢयं सहायता समूहों (एसएचजी) को सतत ʩवसाय और आजीिवका 
सहायता Ůदान करने क े उȞेʴ से उɎŐ डŌ ोन उपलɩ कराने हेतु वषŊ 2023-24 से वषŊ 2025-26 की 
अविध क े िलए 1261 करोड़ Ŝपये क े पįरʩय वाली कŐ ūीय Ɨेũ योजना 'नमो डŌ ोन दीदी' को अनुमोदन 
िदया है। 
 
Ůमुख उवŊरक क ं पिनयों (एलएफसी) ने वषŊ 2023-24 मŐ अपने आंतįरक संसाधनों का उपयोग 
करक े ˢयं सहायता समूहों की डŌ ोन दीिदयों को 1094 डŌ ोन िवतįरत िकए हœ। 1094 डŌ ोनों का 
राǛवार िववरण अनुबंध-I मŐ संलư है। डŌ ोन दीिदयों को इन 1094 डŌ ोनों मŐ से 500 डŌ ोन नमो डŌ ोन 
दीदी योजना क े तहत िवतįरत िकए गए हœ।  
 
डŌ ोन एक पैक े ज क े ŝप मŐ उपलɩ कराए जाते हœ, िजसमŐ अिनवायŊ डŌ ोन पायलट ŮिशƗण 
और इन मिहला ˢयं सहायता समूहों की एक सद˟ क े िलए पोषक तȕों और कीटनाशकों क े Ůयोग 
हेतु क ृ िष संबंधी अितįरƅ ŮिशƗण शािमल है। ˢयं सहायता समूहों क े िकसी अɊ सद˟/पįरवार क े 
सद˟ को डŌ ोन सहायक क े ŝप मŐ ŮिशिƗत करने की ʩव˕ा भी उपलɩ है। 
656                                                      

अनुबंध-I 
वषŊ 2023-24 मŐ एलएफसी Ȫारा ˢयं सहायता समूहों को िवतįरत िकए गए डŌ ोनों की राǛवार संƥा 
और ˢयं सहायता समूहों क े सद˟ों को िदए गए डŌ ोन पायलट ŮिशƗण का िववरण 
Ţ.सं.  राǛ का नाम  िवतįरत िकए 
गए डŌ ोनों की 
संƥा 
ˢयं सहायता समूहों क े सद˟ों की 
संƥा िजɎŐ डŌ ोन पायलट ŮिशƗण 
िदया गया है  
1.  आंŬ Ůदेश  108  108  
2.  असम  28  28  
3.  िबहार  32  32  
4.  छȅीसगढ़  15  15  
5.  गोवा  1  1  
6.  गुजरात  58  58  
7.  हįरयाणा  102  102  
8.  िहमाचल Ůदेश  4  4  
9.  जʃू एवं कʳीर  2  2  
10.  झारखंड  15  15  
11.  कनाŊटक  145  145  
12.  क े रल  51  51  
13.  मȯ Ůदेश  89  89  
14.  महाराʼŌ  60  60  
15.  ओिडशा  16  16  
16.  पंजाब  57  57  
17.  राज˕ान  40  40  
18  तिमलनाडु  44  44  
19.  तेलंगाना  81  81  
20.  उȅर Ůदेश 128  128  
21.  उȅराखंड  3  3  
22.  पिʮम बंगाल 15  15  
क ु ल  1094  1094 
***** 
657                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2269 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: Ůाक ृ ितक आपदाओं से Ůभािवत िकसानों को मुआवजा देने क े मानक 
2269. ŵी पįरमल नथवानी 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सरकार बाढ़, बेमौसम वषाŊ इȑािद जैसी Ůाक ृ ितक आपदाओं से Ůभािवत िकसानों 
को िदए जाने वाले मुआवजे क े मापदंड़ों मŐ संशोधन करने का कोई Ůˑाव रखती है; 
(ख) यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ग) Ɛा ऐसे मामलों मŐ छोटे एवं सीमांत िकसानों को कोई िवशेष राहत उपाय Ůदान िकए 
गए हœ; और 
(घ) यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है? 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) से (घ): राʼŌीय आपदा Ůबंधन नीित (एनपीडीएम) क े अनुसार, अिधसूिचत आपदाओं 
क े मȞेनजर जमीनी ˑर पर आवʴक राहत उपाय Ůदान करने का Ůाथिमक उȅरदाियȕ 
राǛ सरकार का है। राǛ सरकारŐ भारत सरकार Ȫारा अनुमोिदत मदों और मानदंडों क े 
अनुसार राǛ आपदा ŮितिŢया कोष (एसडीआरएफ) क े ŝप मŐ उपलɩ िनिधयों से 
Ůाक ृ ितक आपदाओं को देखते Šए राहत उपाय करती हœ। संबंिधत राǛ सरकार को अपने 
िजला Ůशासिनक तंũ क े माȯम से एसडीआरएफ मŐ पहले से उपलɩ िनिधयों से Ůाक ृ ितक 
आपदा की İ˕ित मŐ Ůभािवत लोगों को आवʴक राहत Ůदान करनी होती है। 'गंभीर 
Ůक ृ ित' की आपदा की İ˕ित मŐ एसडीआरएफ क े अलावा राʼŌीय आपदा ŮितिŢया कोष 
(एनडीआरएफ) से िनधाŊįरत ŮिŢया क े अनुसार अितįरƅ िवȅीय सहायता Ůदान की जाती है 
िजसमŐ अंतर-मंũालयी कŐ ūीय दल (आईएमसीटी) क े दौरे पर आधाįरत मूʞांकन शािमल है। 
एसडीआरएफ और एनडीआरएफ क े तहत दी जाने वाली िवȅीय सहायता हािन/दावे क े 
मुआवजे क े िलए न होकर राहत क े ŝप मŐ होती है। 
एसडीआरएफ/एनडीआरएफ क े तहत राǛों को आवंिटत और जारी की गई िनिध का 
िववरण गृह मंũालय की आपदा Ůबंधन वेबसाइट ndmindia.mha.gov.in पर उपलɩ है। 
िवȅ आयोग Ȫारा िदए गए अनुदान क े बाद सहायता मदों एवं शतŘ की ʩापक 
समीƗा एवं संशोधन सरकार (गृह मंũालय) Ȫारा िकया जाता है। आपदा जोİखम Ůबंधन क े 
िवȅपोषण पर 15वŐ िवȅ आयोग की िसफाįरशों क े अनुसरण मŐ, कŐ ū सरकार Ȫारा ʩापक 
संशोधन िकया गया और 10 अƃू बर 2022 को संशोिधत मदŐ और शतŒ जारी की गईं। 
जुलाई 2023 मŐ इन मदों एवं शतŘ को पुन: संशोिधत िकया गया। 
658                                                      

गृह मंũालय Ȫारा जारी िदनांक 11.07.2023 क े पũ संƥा 33-03/2020-NDM-I 
क े अनुसार, एसडीआरएफ और एनडीआरएफ से सहायता क े संशोिधत मद एवं शतŘ क े 
अनुसार, अिधसूिचत आपदाओं क े कारण Ůभािवत िकसानों (2 हेƃेयर तक) को क ृ िष 
फसलों, बागवानी फसलों और वािषŊक बागान फसलों क े िलए इनपुट सİɵडी (जहां फसल 
हािन 33% या उससे अिधक है) िनɻानुसार दी जाती है:  
(i) वषाŊ िसंिचत Ɨेũों मŐ 8500/- Ŝपये Ůित हेƃेयर (िजसमŐ Ůित िकसान कम से कम 
1000/- Ŝपये की Ɋूनतम सहायता शािमल है और यह क े वल बोए गए Ɨेũों तक सीिमत 
है)। 
(ii) सुिनिʮत िसंिचत Ɨेũों मŐ 17000/- Ŝपये Ůित हेƃेयर (िजसमŐ Ůित िकसान कम से 
कम 2000/- Ŝपये की Ɋूनतम सहायता शािमल है और यह क े वल बोए गए Ɨेũों तक 
सीिमत है)। 
(iii) क ृ िष वािनकी (ˢयं की भूिम मŐ बागान) सिहत सभी Ůकार की बारहमासी 
फसलों/वृƗों क े िलए 22500/- Ŝपये Ůित हेƃेयर और यह क े वल बोए गए Ɨेũों तक 
सीिमत है। 
***** 
 
659                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2270 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) हेतु कानूनी गारंटी 
2270. ŵी आई. एस. इनबादुरईः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सरकार ने िदसंबर, 2024 मŐ संसदीय पैनल Ȫारा की गई िसफाįरश तथा Ɋूनतम 
समथŊन मूʞ गार ं टी िवधेयक, 2022 मŐ िदए गए सुझाव क े अनुसार सभी फसलों क े िलए 
Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) को कानूनी गार ं टी Ůदान करने पर िवचार िकया है, यिद 
हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है; (ख) यिद नही ं, तो Ɛा ऐसी कानूनी गार ं टी पर िवचार 
िकया जा रहा है, यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ग) यह सुिनिʮत करने हेतु Ɛा कदम उठाए जा रहे हœ िक िकसानों को मौजूदा एमएसपी 
Ůणाली क े अंतगŊत उनकी उपज का उिचत एवं पाįरŵिमक मूʞ Ůाɑ होता रहे; और 
(घ) Ɛा सरकार Ȫारा एमएसपी तथा आिथŊक सुरƗा से संबंिधत िकसानों की िचंताओं का 
समाधान करने हेतु Ůˑािवत कोई Ŝपर े खा अथवा समय-सीमा है? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) से (घ): Ůȑेक वषŊ, सरकार राǛ सरकारों और संबंिधत कŐ ūीय मंũालयों/िवभागों क े 
अिभमतों पर िवचार करने क े पʮात क ृ िष लागत और मूʞ आयोग (सीएसीपी) की िसफाįरशों 
क े आधार पर 22 अिधदेिशत क ृ िष फसलों क े िलए Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) िनधाŊįरत 
करती है।   
  वषŊ 2018-19 क े कŐ ūीय बजट मŐ एमएसपी को उȋादन लागत क े कम से कम डेढ़ 
गुना क े ˑर पर रखने क े पूवŊ-िनधाŊįरत िसȠांत की घोषणा की गई थी। तदनुसार, सरकार ने 
वषŊ 2018-19 से सभी अिधदेिशत खरीफ, रबी और अɊ वािणİǛक फसलों क े िलए 
एमएसपी मŐ अİखल भारतीय भाįरत औसत उȋादन लागत पर कम से कम 50 Ůितशत लाभ 
क े साथ वृİȠ की है। 
  एमएसपी नीित क े उȞेʴों को Ůाɑ करने क े िलए, एमएसपी की 
घोषणा क े पʮात, सरकार िकसानों को मूʞ समथŊन Ůदान करने क े िलए भारतीय खाȨ िनगम 
(एफसीआई) और अɊ नािमत राǛ एजŐिसयों क े माȯम से अनाज और मोटे अनाज की खरीद 
करती है। जब दलहन, ितलहन और कोपरा का बाजार मूʞ एमएसपी से कम हो जाता है, 
तब संबंिधत राǛ सरकारों क े परामशŊ से Ůधानमंũी अɄदाता आय संरƗण अिभयान (पीएम-
आशा) की समŤ योजना क े अंतगŊत मूʞ समथŊन योजना क े अंतगŊत इन उȋादों की खरीद की 
जाती है।              
 भारतीय राʼŌ ीय क ृ िष सहकारी िवपणन संघ िलिमटेड (नेफ े ड) और भारतीय राʼŌ ीय 
सहकारी उपभोƅा संघ िलिमटेड (एनसीसीएफ) पीएम-आशा योजना क े तहत खरीद एजŐिसयां 
हœ। सरकार Ȫारा Ţमशः भारतीय कपास िनगम (सीसीआई) और भारतीय पटसन िनगम 
(जेसीआई) क े माȯम से एमएसपी पर कपास और पटसन की खरीद भी की जाती है। 
660                                                      

  सरकार िनिदŊʼ खरीद एजŐिसयों क े माȯम से क ृ िष फसलों की खरीद करने की 
पेशकश करती है और िकसानों क े पास अपनी उपज सरकारी एजŐिसयों को या खुले बाजार मŐ 
जो भी उनक े िलए लाभŮद हो, बेचने का िवकʙ होता है। 
  खरीद क े आंकड़ों और िकसानों को दी गई एमएसपी रािश से ˙ʼ है िक बढ़ी Šई 
एमएसपी से देश क े िकसान लाभाİɋत Šए हœ। वषŊ 2014-15 से 2025-26 (अƃू बर 2025 
तक) क े दौरान िकसानों को खरीद और की गई एमएसपी भुगतान की रािश का िववरण नीचे 
िदया गया है: 
   
खरीद  एमएसपी मूʞ 
117 करोड़ 32 लाख मीिटŌ क टन 24 लाख 49 हजार करोड़ Ŝपये 
 
  िकसानों क े िवȅीय बोझ को कम करने क े िलए इस िवभाग मŐ िविभɄ ŮȑƗ नकद 
लाभ, फसल बीमा और सİɵडी/अनुदान आधाįरत योजनाए ं चल रही हœ, िजनमŐ पीएम िकसान 
योजना, पीएमएफबीवाई, क ृ षोɄित योजना, आरक े वीवाई आिद शािमल हœ। सरकार भारत क े 
िविभɄ राǛों और संघ राǛ Ɨेũों मŐ संशोिधत ɯाज सİɵडी योजना (एमआईएसएस) नामक 
एक 100% कŐ ūीय िवȅ पोिषत कŐ ūीय Ɨेũ योजना भी कायाŊİɋत कर रही है। इस योजना का 
उȞेʴ िकसानों Ȫारा िकसान Ţे िडट काडŊ (क े सीसी) क े माȯम से अपनी कायŊशील पूंजी 
आवʴकताओं क े िलए िदए गए अʙकािलक क ृ िष ऋणों पर įरयायती ɯाज दरŐ Ůदान करना 
है। हाल क े वषŘ मŐ िकसानों को Ůदान िकए गए िवȅीय लाभ नीचे िदए गए हœ। 
योजना का नाम आिथŊक लाभ 
क े सीसी ऋण पर संशोिधत ɯाज सİɵडी योजना क े 
अंतगŊत ɯाज सİɵडी / शीť पुनभुŊगतान ŮोȖाहन 
(पीआरआई) 
1.77 लाख करोड़ Ŝपये 
(2014-15 से अब तक) 
पीएम िकसान योजना क े अंतगŊत डीबीटी 4.09 लाख करोड़ Ŝपये 
(2019 से 21 िकˑों मŐ) 
पीएमएफबीवाई क े अंतगŊत बीमा दावा 1.90 लाख करोड़ Ŝपये 
(2016 से 30.10.2025 तक) 
 
***** 
661                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2271 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
 
िवषय: पीएमएफबीवाई क े दायरे का िवˑार 
2271. ŵी अशोकराव शंकरराव चʬाणः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा अनेक राǛ/संघ राǛƗेũ अब भी Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई) क े दायरे से 
बाहर हœ; 
(ख) यिद हाँ, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा और इसक े कारण Ɛा हœ; 
(ग) Ɛा सरकार ने उन राǛ/संघ राǛƗेũों क े साथ कोई बैठक/िवचार-िवमशŊ आयोिजत िकया है िजɎोंने 
पीएमएफबीवाई को नहीं अपनाया है; 
(घ) यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है तथा उƅ िवचार-िवमशŊ क े पįरणाम Ɛा रहे हœ; 
(ङ) Ɛा सरकार ने पीएमएफबीवाई मŐ किमयों का पता लगाने हेतु कोई सवőƗण करवाया है, यिद हां, तो 
तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है; और 
(च) सरकार Ȫारा योजना का दायरा बढ़ाने क े िलए िकए गए बदलावों का ɯौरा Ɛा है और वतŊमान िवȅ 
वषŊ क े दौरान उƅ योजना क े िलए संˢीक ृ त िनिध िकतनी है? 
 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) और (ख): Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (PMFBY) देश मŐ खरीफ 2016 क े मौसम से Ůारंभ की 
गई थी। यह योजना राǛों और िकसानों क े िलए ˢैİǅक है। 2016 मŐ योजना की शुŜआत से लेकर अब 
तक 27 राǛों/संघ राǛ Ɨेũों ने एक या अिधक मौसमों मŐ PMFBY को कायाŊİɋत िकया है। वतŊमान मŐ, 
24 राǛ/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ इस योजना को कायाŊİɋत कर रहे हœ। 
 
(ग) और (घ): िवभाग सभी िहतधारकों क े साथ िनयिमत ŝप से साɑािहक वीिडयो कॉ̢ů Őस, ʩİƅगत 
बैठकŐ  और सभी राǛों/संघ राǛ Ɨेũों, िजनमŐ योजना कायाŊİɋत न करने वाले राǛ/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ भी 
शािमल हœ, क े साथ राʼŌीय समीƗा सʃेलन आयोिजत कर रहा है तािक योजना कायाŊİɋत न करने वाले 
राǛों/संघ राǛ Ɨेũों को PMFBY अपनाने क े िलए ŮोȖािहत िकया जा सक े । हाल ही मŐ माननीय क ृ िष 
एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी ने योजना कायाŊİɋत न करने वाले राǛों क े माननीय मुƥमंिũयों को अधŊ-
शासकीय पũ िलखकर योजना मŐ भागीदारी करने क े िलए ŮोȖािहत िकया है। मंũालय क े Ůयासों क े 
फलˢŝप आंŬ Ůदेश, िमजोरम और झारखंड हाल ही मŐ इस योजना मŐ पुनः शािमल Šए हœ। 
 
(ङ): फसल बीमा योजनाओं की समीƗा/संशोधन/युİƅकरण/सुधार एक सतत ŮिŢया है और 
िहतधारकों/अȯयनों क े सुझावों/अɷावेदनों/िसफाįरशों पर समय-समय पर िनणŊय िलए जाते हœ। Ůाɑ 
अनुभव, िविभɄ िहतधारकों क े िवचारों और बेहतर पारदिशŊता, जवाबदेही, िकसानों को दावों का समय पर 
भुगतान सुिनिʮत करने और योजना को अिधक िकसान-िहतैषी बनाने क े उȞेʴ से, सरकार ने 2018, 
2020 और 2023 मŐ PMFBY क े Ůचालन िदशािनदőशों को ʩापक ŝप से संशोिधत िकया है तािक यह 
सुिनिʮत िकया जा सक े िक योजना क े तहत पाũ लाभ िकसानों तक समय पर और पारदशŎ तरीक े से 
पŠंचŐ। 
 
 (च): सरकार ने योजना क े दायरे को बढ़ाने क े िलए िनɻिलİखत पहल की है: 
662                                                      

 
 सरकार Ȫारा सİɵडी भुगतान, समɋय, पारदिशŊता, सूचना का Ůसार और िकसानों क े ŮȑƗ 
ऑनलाइन नामांकन सिहत सेवाओं की Ůदायगी देना, बेहतर िनगरानी क े िलए ʩİƅगत 
बीिमत िकसानों क े िववरण अपलोड/Ůाɑ करने और ʩİƅगत िकसान क े बœक खाते मŐ 
इलेƃ Ōॉिनक ŝप से दावा रािश का अंतरण सुिनिʮत करने क े िलए आंकड़ों क े एकल ŷोत क े 
ŝप मŐ राʼŌीय फसल बीमा पोटŊल (NCIP) का िवकास िकया गया है। 
 दावा िवतरण ŮिŢया की कड़ी िनगरानी क े िलए, खरीफ 2022 से दावों क े भुगतान हेतु 
'िडजीƑेम मॉǰूल' नामक एक समिपŊत मॉǰूल को िŢयाİɋत िकया गया है। इसमŐ राʼŌीय 
फसल बीमा पोटŊल (NCIP) को सावŊजिनक िवȅ Ůबंधन Ůणाली (PFMS) और बीमा क ं पिनयों 
की लेखा Ůणाली क े साथ एकीक ृ त िकया गया है तािक सभी दावों का समय पर और पारदशŎ 
तरीक े से िनपटान हो सक े । 
 इसक े अितįरƅ, योजना क े कायाŊɋयन मŐ ŮौȨोिगकी का लाभ उठाने की िदशा मŐ, िकसानों क े 
दावों क े समय पर िनपटान मŐ सुधार लाने क े िलए उपज डेटा/फसल कटाई Ůयोगों (CCE) 
संबंधी डेटा को सीसीई-एŤी ऐप क े माȯम से एकũ करना और इसे NCIP पर अपलोड 
करना, बीमा क ं पिनयों को CCE क े संचालन को देखने की अनुमित देना, राǛ भूिम अिभलेखों 
को NCIP क े साथ एकीक ृ त करना आिद जैसे िविभɄ कदम पहले ही उठाए जा चुक े हœ। 
 सरकार ने िकसानों और पंचायती राज सं˕ाओं (PRI) क े सद˟ों क े बीच PMFBY की Ůमुख 
िवशेषताओं को Ůसाįरत करने क े िलए राǛों, कायाŊİɋत बीमा क ं पिनयों, िवȅीय सं˕ानों और 
कॉमन सिवŊस सŐटसŊ (CSC) क े नेटवकŊ  Ȫारा िकए जा रहे जागŝकता कायŘ मŐ सिŢय ŝप से 
सहयोग िकया है। 
 क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũालय Ȫारा खरीफ 2021 क े मौसम से 'Ţॉप इंʴोरŐस वीक/फसल 
बीमा सɑाह' नामक एक सुिनयोिजत जागŝकता अिभयान शुŝ िकया गया है, िजसका 
उȞेʴ योजना क े लाभों क े बारे मŐ जागŝकता बढ़ाना, िहतधारकों को जागŝक करना और 
िकसानों क े समŤ नामांकन को बढ़ाना है, िजसमŐ िचİɎत आकांƗी/आिदवासी िजलों पर िवशेष 
ȯान िदया गया है। इसक े साथ ही, योजना क े कायाŊɋयन क े िविभɄ पहलुओं पर िकसानों को 
जानकारी Ůदान करने क े िलए Ťाम/Ťाम पंचायत ˑर पर 'फसल बीमा पाठशालाओं' का 
आयोजन भी िकया जा रहा है। 
 सरकार ने 'मेरी पॉिलसी मेरे हाथ' नाम से देशʩापी ˑर पर फसल बीमा पॉिलसी/रसीद 
िवतरण का एक बड़ा अिभयान भी चलाया था। Ťाम पंचायत/Ťाम ˑर पर िवशेष िशिवरों क े 
माȯम से PMFBY क े तहत नामांिकत िकसानों को फसल बीमा पॉिलसी की रसीदों की हाडŊ 
कॉपी िवतįरत की जाती हœ। 
 
 इसक े अितįरƅ, जागŝकता पैदा करने क े िलए अɊ गितिविधयों मŐ Ůमुख राʼŌीय और ˕ानीय 
समाचार पũों मŐ िवǒापनों क े माȯम से योजना की मुƥ िवशेषताओं और लाभों का Ůचार-Ůसार, 
Ɨेũीय/˕ानीय चैनलों पर ऑिडयो-िवजुअल ˙ॉट्स का Ůसारण, ˕ानीय भाषाओं मŐ सूचना, िशƗा एवं 
संचार सामŤी का िवतरण, िकसान/राʼŌीय फसल बीमा पोटŊल (NCIP) क े माȯम से SMS का Ůसार और 
िकसानों, पंचायत सद˟ों और अɊ Ůमुख िहतधारकों सिहत सभी िहतधारकों की ऑनलाइन 
कायŊशालाओं का आयोजन शािमल है। 
 
 इसक े अितįरƅ, िवȅ वषŊ 2025-26 क े िलए PMFBY क े िलए 12242.27 करोड़ Ŝपये (BE)  
की रािश आवंिटत की गई है, िजसमŐ से अब तक 9210 करोड़ Ŝपये का वाˑिवक ʩय िकया जा चुका है 
(30.11.2025 तक िक İ˕ित क े अनुसार)। 
***** 
663                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2272 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: आलू और ɗाज क े िलए लाभकारी मूʞ 
2272. ŵी जावेद अली खानः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) देश क े आलू और ɗाज उȋादक िकसानों, जो अपनी उपज को उȋादन लागत से कम मूʞ पर बेच 
रहे हœ, को लाभकारी मूʞ Ůदान करने क े िलए सरकार Ȫारा चलायी जा रही योजनाओं का योजना-वार 
ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ख) उपयुŊƅ योजनाओं क े अंतगŊत वषŊ 2024-25 और वषŊ 2025-26 क े दौरान आवंिटत, जारी और 
उपयोग की गई धनरािश का वषŊ-वार और राǛ वार ɯौरा Ɛा है; और 
(ग) उȅर Ůदेश राǛ मŐ उपयुŊƅ योजनाओं क े अंतगŊत वषŊ 2024-25 और वषŊ 2025-26 क े दौरान 
आवंिटत, जारी और उपयोग की गई धनरािश का, इनसे वषŊ-वार और िजला-वार लाभाİɋत Šए िकसानों 
की संƥा सिहत, ɯौरा Ɛा है? 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) आलू और ɗाज सिहत क ृ िष एवं बागवानी उȋादों, जो नाशवान Ůक ृ ित क े होते हœ और Ɋूनतम 
समथŊन मूʞ ʩव˕ा क े अंतगŊत नहीं आते, क े िलए िकसानों को लाभकारी मूʞ उपलɩ कराने हेतु 
सरकार पीएम-आशा योजना क े अंतगŊत बाजार हˑƗेप योजना (एमआईएस) को देश भर मŐ कायाŊİɋत 
करती है। इसका उȞेʴ फसल की बंपर पैदावार होने पर अȑिधक आवक क े दौरान, जब कीमतŐ 
िकफायती ˑर और उȋादन लागत से नीचे िगरने लगती हœ, िकसानों को मजबूरी मŐ उȋाद बेचने से 
बचाना है। िपछले सामाɊ वषŊ की तुलना मŐ बाजार मूʞों मŐ कम से कम 10% की िगरावट होनी चािहए। 
यह योजना राǛ/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ सरकार क े अनुरोध पर कायाŊİɋत की जाती है, जो इसक े कायाŊɋयन मŐ 
होने वाले िकसी भी नुकसान का 50% (पूवŖȅर राǛों क े मामले मŐ 25%) वहन करने क े िलए तैयार हो। 
िकसी िवशेष फसल और िवशेष मौसम क े िलए राǛ क े अनुमािनत उȋादन क े 25% तक ही अिधकतम 
खरीद की अनुमित है। क ु ल हािन की रािश कŐ ū सरकार और राǛ सरकार क े बीच 50:50 क े आधार पर 
साझा की जाती है (पूवŖȅर राǛों क े िलए 75:25), जो खरीदी गई वˑु की लागत और अनुमत ओवरहेड 
ʩय सिहत क ु ल खरीद मूʞ क े 25% तक सीिमत है।   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
664                                                      

 मूʞ अंतर भुगतान (पीडीपी) क े नए घटकों को जोड़ा गया है, िजसमŐ एपीएमसी मंिडयों मŐ बेची 
जाने वाली फसलों क े िलए बाजार हˑƗेप मूʞ (एमआईपी) और िवŢय मूʞ क े बीच क े अंतर का 
िकसानों को सीधे भुगतान करने का िवकʙ शािमल है। इसक े अितįरƅ, टीओपी फसलों (टमाटर, ɗाज 
और आलू) क े पįरवहन और भंडारण लागत की ŮितपूितŊ कŐ ūीय नोडल एजŐिसयों और राǛ Ȫारा नािमत 
एजŐिसयों को उȋादक राǛ से उपभोƅा राǛ तक उनक े भंडारण और पįरवहन क े िलए दी जाती है। 
(ख) एमआईएस क े अंतगŊत, राǛों को िनिध आवंिटत नहीं की जाती है। ˢीक ृ ित जारी होने क े बाद, 
एमआईएस को राǛ Ȫारा मूʞ अंतर भुगतान (पीडीपी) क े मामले मŐ या टमाटर, ɗाज और आलू 
(टीओपी फसलों) की वाˑिवक खरीद और पįरवहन और भंडारण की ŮितपूितŊ क े मामले मŐ नािमत 
एजŐिसयों क े माȯम से कायाŊİɋत िकया जाता है। योजना क े कायाŊɋयन क े बाद, राǛ को एमआईएस 
संचालन मŐ Šए नुकसान की ŮितपूितŊ क े िलए लेखापरीिƗत लेखे भेजने होते हœ। वषŊ 2024-25 से 
एमआईएस क े तहत दी गई ˢीक ृ ितयों का िववरण अनुबंध-I पर िदया गया है। 
 वषŊ 2024-25 क े दौरान, एमआईएस क े िलए 75.13 करोड़ Ŝपये आवंिटत िकए गए थे। इसमŐ से 
22.59 करोड़ Ŝपये नेफ े ड को वषŊ 2019 मŐ जʃू और कʳीर मŐ सेब की खरीद क े िलए एमआईएस क े 
कायाŊɋयन मŐ Šए नुकसान क े कŐ ūीय िहˣे क े िलए जारी िकए गए थे। िसतंबर 2024 मŐ एमआईएस क े 
पीएम-आशा क े घटकों मŐ शािमल होने क े बाद, वषŊ 2025-26 से पीएम-आशा क े िलए सामाɊ बजट मदŐ 
शुŝ की गई हœ। वषŊ 2025-26 क े दौरान पीएम-आशा क े अंतगŊत आवंिटत क ु ल बजट 6,941.36 करोड़ 
Ŝपये है। 
(ग) वषŊ 2024-25 क े दौरान और वषŊ 2025-26 मŐ अब तक उȅर Ůदेश सरकार से एमआईएस क े तहत 
कोई Ůˑाव Ůाɑ नहीं Šआ है। 
 
665                                                      

 
अनुबंध 1 
 
वाˑिवक खरीद क े िलए वषŊ 2024-25 से 2025-26 तक एमआईएस क े तहत दी गई 
ˢीक ृ ित का िववरण 
Ţ.सं. वषŊ वˑु राǛ 
बाजार 
हˑƗेप मूʞ 
(एमआईपी) 
(Ŝपये Ůित 
मीिटŌक टन) 
ˢीक ृ त माũा 
(मीिटŌक टन 
मŐ) 
1 2024-25 सी-Ťेड सेब िहमाचल Ůदेश 12,960 116,571 
2 2024-25 अंगूर िमजोरम 50,000 3,460 
3 2024-25 अदरक कनाŊटक 24,450.00 59,948 
4 2025-26 अदरक िमजोरम 27,800.00 15,058 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
वषŊ 2024-25 से 2025-26 तक मूʞ अंतर भुगतान क े िलए एमआईएस क े तहत दी गई  
ˢीक ृ ित का िववरण 
Ţ.सं. वषŊ वˑुए ँ राǛ 
बाजार 
हˑƗेप 
मूʞ 
(एमआईपी) 
(Ŝपये Ůित 
मीिटŌक टन) 
ˢीक ृ त माũा 
(मीिटŌक टन 
मŐ) 
1 2024-25 लाल िमचŊ आंŬ Ůदेश 117,812.50 258,238 
2 2025-26 
लाल िमचŊ (सीजन 
2024-25) 
कनाŊटक 
105,892.00 73,732 
3 2025-26 
लाल िमचŊ (सीजन 
2024-25) 
तेलंगाना  
103,740.00 172,135 
4 2025-26 आम (सीजन 2025-
26) 
कनाŊटक 16,160.00 250,000 
5 2025-26 
तोतापुरी आम (सीजन 
2025-26) 
आंŬ Ůदेश 
14,907.30 162,500 
6 2025-26 ɗाज (खरीफ सीजन 
2025-26) 
आंŬ Ůदेश 10,000.00 97,887 
666                                                      

एमआईएस क े तहत टमाटर क े पįरवहन क े िलए ŮितपूितŊ हेतु ˢीक ृ ितयाँ 
Ţ.सं. िवȅ वषŊ वˑु उȋादक राǛ उपभोƅा राǛ 
कायाŊɋयन 
एजŐसी 
 
1 2024-25 
टमाटर मȯ Ůदेश िदʟी, उȅर Ůदेश, 
राज˕ान और अɊ 
राǛ जहां टमाटर 
की कीमतŐ अिधक 
हœ 
एनसीसीएफ 
2 2024-25 
टमाटर छȅीसगढ़ और 
ओिडशा 
िदʟी, िबहार और 
अɊ संभािवत राǛ 
जहां टमाटर की 
कीमतŐ अिधक हœ 
एनसीसीएफ 
3 2024-25 
टमाटर आंŬ Ůदेश तेलंगाना, 
तिमलनाडु, मȯ 
Ůदेश, महाराʼŌ और 
अɊ संभािवत राǛ 
जहां टमाटर की 
कीमतŐ अिधक हœ 
नेफ े ड 
 
***** 
 
667                                                      

भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2273 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: क ृ िष पįरवारों की औसत आय 
2273. ŵी मुक ु ल बालक ृˁ वासिनकः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) वषŊ 2014 से अब तक देश मŐ राǛ-वार क ृ िष पįरवारों की संƥा तथा इन पįरवारों 
की औसत वािषŊक आय िकतनी है; 
(ख) Ɛा यह सच है िक क ृ िष पįरवारों की आय का 50 Ůितशत से अिधक िहˣा मजद ू री 
और पशुपालन से Ůाɑ होता है; और 
(ग) यिद हाँ, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है और सरकार Ȫारा क ृ िष उȋादकता मŐ सुधार लाने 
और क ृ िष पįरवारों की आय बढ़ाने क े िलए Ɛा कदम उठाए गए हœ? 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) एवं (ख): नवीनतम राʼŌ ीय सांİƥकी सवőƗण (एनएसएस) क े 77वŐ दौर क े सवőƗण 
(जनवरी, 2019 - िदसंबर, 2019) क े अनुसार, जुलाई, 2018 - जून, 2019 क े क ृ िष 
वषŊ क े संदभŊ मŐ, देश क े Ťामीण Ɨेũों मŐ, क ृ िष पįरवारों (राʼŌ ीय सांİƥकी कायाŊलय Ȫारा 
पįरभािषत) की संƥा 9.3 करोड़ अनुमािनत है, िजसमŐ िविभɄ ŷोतों से Ůित क ृ िष पįरवार 
की अनुमािनत औसत मािसक आय 10,218 Ŝपये है। क ृ िष पįरवारों की आय कई ŷोतों से 
Ůाɑ होती है, िजनमŐ फसल उȋादन से िनवल Ůाİɑ (3,798 Ŝपये), पशुपालन से िनवल 
Ůाİɑ (1,582 Ŝपये), मजद ू री से आय (4,063 Ŝपये), गैर-क ृ िष ʩवसाय से िनवल 
Ůाİɑ (641 Ŝपये) और भूिम पǥे पर देने से आय (134 Ŝपये) शािमल हœ। इन ŷोतों का 
योगदान राǛों मŐ ˕ानीय क ृ िष-जलवायु पįरİ˕ितयों, खेतों क े आकार और फसल पैटनŊ क े 
आधार पर िविभɄ होता है। जुलाई 2018 से जून 2019 क े दौरान िविभɄ ŷोतों से Ůित क ृ िष 
पįरवार की राǛवार औसत मािसक आय अनुबंध I मŐ दी गई है। 
(ग): चूंिक, क ृ िष राǛ का िवषय है इसिलए राǛ सरकार राǛों मŐ क ृ िष िवकास और 
िकसान कʞाण क े िलए उिचत उपाय करते हœ। तथािप, भारत सरकार िकसानों क े कʞाण 
को बढ़ाने और क ृ िष को अिधक लाभकारी बनाने क े िलए ŮितबȠ है। भारत सरकार उिचत 
नीितगत उपायों, बजटीय सहायता और िविभɄ योजनाओं/कायŊŢमों क े माȯम से राǛों क े 
Ůयासों मŐ सहयोग करती है। भारत सरकार ने िकसानों क े िवकास क े िलए िनɻिलİखत सात 
ŷोतों की पहचान की है: 
 
 
668                                                      

i. फसल उȋादकता मŐ वृİȠ 
ii. पशुधन उȋादकता मŐ वृİȠ 
iii. संसाधन उपयोग दƗता – उȋादन लागत मŐ कमी 
iv. फसल गहनता मŐ वृİȠ 
v. उǄ मूʞ वाली क ृ िष की ओर िविवधीकरण 
vi. िकसानों की उपज का लाभकारी मूʞ 
vii. अिधशेष जनशİƅ का क ृ िष से गैर-क ृ िष ʩवसायों मŐ अंतरण। 
  उपयुŊƅ सात उȞेʴों की Ůाİɑ हेतु, सरकार ने क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग 
(डीएए ं डएफडɲू) क े बजट आवंटन को वषŊ 2013-14 क े 21933.50 करोड़ Ŝपये क े 
बजट अनुमान से बढ़ाकर वषŊ 2025-26 क े िलए 1,27,290.16 करोड़ Ŝपये कर िदया 
है। भारत सरकार की िविभɄ योजनाओं/कायŊŢमों का उȞेʴ उȋादन मŐ वृİȠ, िकसानों 
क े िलए लाभकारी Ůितफल और आय सहायता Ůदान करक े िकसानों का कʞाण करना है। 
इन योजनाओं मŐ ऋण, बीमा, आय सहायता, इ̢ůाː Ō Ɓर, बागवानी सिहत फसलŐ, 
बीज, मशीनीकरण, माकő िटंग, जैिवक और Ůाक ृ ितक खेती, िकसान समूह, िसंचाई, 
िवˑार, Ɋूनतम समथŊन मूʞ पर िकसानों से फसलों की खरीद, िडिजटल क ृ िष आिद 
सिहत क ृ िष क े संपूणŊ Ɨेũ को शािमल िकया गया है। इसक े अितįरƅ, सरकार ने वषŊ 
2018-19 से अİखल भारतीय भाįरत औसत उȋादन लागत पर कम से कम 50 Ůितशत 
लाभ क े साथ सभी अिधदेिशत खरीफ, रबी और अɊ वािणİǛक फसलों क े िलए Ɋूनतम 
समथŊन मूʞ (एमएसपी) मŐ वृİȠ की थी। क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग Ȫारा 
कायाŊİɋत की जा रही कŐ ūीय Ɨेũ और कŐ ū Ůायोिजत योजनाओं की सूची अनुबंध II मŐ 
दी गई है।  
669                                                      

अनुबंध-I 
 
 क ृ िष वषŊ जुलाई 2018 से जून 2019 क े दौरान िविभɄ ŷोतों से क ृ िष पįरवारों की औसत 
मािसक आय का राǛ/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ-वार िववरण 
Ţ.सं. राǛ/पूवŖȅर राǛों का समूह/ संघ राǛ Ɨेũों का समूह आय (Ŝ.) 
1 आंŬ Ůदे श 10,480
2 अŜणाचल Ůदे श 19,225
3 असम 10,675
4 िबहार 7,542
5 छȅीसगढ़ 9,677
6 गुजरात 12,631
7 हįरयाणा 22,841
8 िहमाचल Ůदे श 12,153
9 जʃू एवं कʳीर 18,918
10 झारखंड 4,895
11 कनाŊटक 13,441
12 क े रल 17,915
13 मȯ Ůदे श 8,339
14 महाराʼŌ 11,492
15 मिणपुर 11,227
16 मेघालय 29,348
17 िमजोरम 17,964
18 नागालœड 9,877
19 ओिडशा 5,112
20 पंजाब 26,701
21 राज˕ान 12,520
22 िसİſम 12,447
23 तिमलनाड ु 11,924
24 तेलंगाना 9,403
25 िũपुरा 9,918
26 उȅराखंड 13,552
27 उȅर Ůदे श 8,061
28 पिʮम बंगाल 6,762
पूवŖȅर राǛों का समूह 16,863
 संघ राǛ Ɨेũों का समूह 18,511
 अİखल भारतीय 10,218
 
ŷोत: एनएसएस įरपोटŊ संƥा 587: Ťामीण भारत मŐ क ृ िष पįरवारों और पįरवारों की भू-धाįरत और पशुधन 
की İ˕ित का आकलन, 2019 
670                                                      

अनुबंध-II 
 
िकसानों क े कʞाण क े िलए उȋादन बढ़ाने, लाभकारी Ůितफल Ůदान करने और आय मŐ 
सहायता उȞेʴाथŊ Ůमुख योजनाए ँ/कायŊŢम: 
 
1. राʼŌ ीय खाȨ सुरƗा एवं पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) 
2. राʼŌ ीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ) – ऑयल पाम 
3. राʼŌ ीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ) - ितलहन 
4. राʼŌ ीय Ůाक ृ ितक क ृ िष िमशन (एनएमएनएफ) 
5. पर ं परागत क ृ िष िवकास योजना (पीक े वीवाई) 
6. सॉइल हेʕ ए ं ड फिटŊिलटी (एसएच ए ं ड एफ) 
7. वषाŊ िसंिचत Ɨेũ िवकास (आरएडी) 
8. क ृ िष वािनकी 
9. फसल िविवधीकरण कायŊŢम (सीडीपी) 
10. क ृ िष िवˑार उप-िमशन (एसएमएई) 
11. बीज एवं रोपण सामŤी उप-िमशन (एसएमएसपी) 
12. समेिकत बागवानी िवकास िमशन (एमआईडीएच) 
13. राʼŌ ीय बांस िमशन 
14. राʼŌ ीय मधुमƀी पालन एवं शहद िमशन (एनबीएचएम) 
15. पूवŖȅर Ɨेũ जैिवक मूʞ ŵृंखला िवकास िमशन 
16. पर डŌ ॉप मोर Ţॉप (पीडीएमसी) 
17. एकीक ृ त क ृ िष िवपणन योजना (आईएसएएम) 
18. Ůधानमंũी िकसान सʃान िनिध (पीएम-िकसान) 
19. Ůधानमंũी िकसान मान धन योजना (पीएम-क े एमवाई) 
20. Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई)/ पुनगŊिठत मौसम आधाįरत फसल बीमा योजना 
(आरडɲूबीसीआईएस) 
21. Ůधानमंũी अɄदाता आय संरƗण अिभयान (पीएम-आशा) 
22. संशोिधत ɯाज सİɵडी योजना (एमआईएसएस) 
23. एŤीक̵चर इ̢ůाː Ō Ɓर फ ं ड (एआईएफ) 
24. 10,000 नए िकसान उȋादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) का गठन और ŮोȖाहन 
25. नमो डŌ ोन दीदी 
26. ːाटŊ-अप एवं Ťामीण उȨमों क े िलए क ृ िष फ ं ड (एŤीʴोर) 
27. क ृ िष मशीनीकरण उप-िमशन (एसएमएएम) 
28. िडिजटल एŤीक̵चर िमशन 
***** 
 
671                                                      

 
 
भारत सरकार 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं. 2274 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: क ृ िष से िकसानों की Ůित ʩİƅ आय का अनुमान 
2274. ŵी रामजी लाल सुमनः 
Ɛा क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की क ृ पा करŐगे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सरकार क े पास वषŊ 2024-25 और वषŊ 2025-26 क े दौरान क ृ िष से िकसानों 
की Ůित ʩİƅ आय क े संबंध मŐ कोई आंकड़ा उपलɩ है; 
(ख) यिद हाँ, तो तȖंबंधी राǛ-वार ɯौरा Ɛा है; 
(ग) यिद नहीं, तो Ɛा सरकार वषŊ 2025-26 क े दौरान िकसानों की क ृ िष से होने वाली 
औसत Ůित ʩİƅ Ůितिदन आय का सटीक अनुमान लगाने हेतु िमशन मोड मŐ कोई सवőƗण 
करवाएगी, तािक उनकी सम˟ाओं क े बारे मŐ अȨतन जानकारी Ůाɑ हो सक े और उसी क े 
अनुŝप नीितयाँ बनाई जा सकŐ; 
(घ) यिद हां, तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है; और 
(ङ) यिद नहीं, तो पुराने और अŮचिलत आंकड़ों का Ůयोग करने और 65 Ůितशत आबादी 
क े आȏहȑा करने क े Ɛा कारण हœ? 
उȅर 
क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाक ु र) 
(क) एवं (ख): सरकार, कŐ ūीय ˑर पर िकसानों की Ůित ʩİƅ आय का कोई डेटा 
संŤिहत नहीं करती है। तथािप, देश मŐ क ृ िष पįरवारों (राʼŌीय सांİƥकी कायाŊलय Ȫारा 
पįरभािषत) की औसत मािसक आय का अनुमान सांİƥकी एवं कायŊŢम कायाŊɋयन मंũालय 
(एमओएसपीआई) क े राʼŌीय सांİƥकी कायाŊलय Ȫारा संचािलत "क ृ िष पįरवारों क े İ˕ित 
आकलन सवőƗण (एसएएस)" क े माȯम से समय-समय पर िकया जाता है। नवीनतम 
एनएसएस सवőƗण क े 77वŐ दौर (जनवरी, 2019 - िदसंबर, 2019) क े अनुसार, क ृ िष वषŊ 
जुलाई, 2018-जून, 2019 क े संदभŊ मŐ, देश क े Ťामीण Ɨेũों मŐ िविभɄ ŷोतों से Ůित क ृ िष 
पįरवार की अनुमािनत औसत मािसक आय 10,218 Ŝपये Ůित माह है। क ृ िष वषŊ जुलाई 
2018-जून, 2019 क े िलए राǛवार Ůित क ृ िष पįरवार की औसत मािसक आय अनुबंध I 
मŐ दी गई है।  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
672                                                      

(ग) से (ङ): भारत सरकार िकसानों क े कʞाण को बढ़ाने और क ृ िष को अिधक 
लाभकारी बनाने क े िलए ŮितबȠ है तथा उिचत नीितगत उपायों, बजटीय सहायता और 
िविभɄ योजनाओं/कायŊŢमों क े माȯम से राǛों क े Ůयासों का समथŊन करती है। पाįरवाįरक 
उपभोग ʩय पर एनएसओ सवőƗण (2023-24) क े अनुसार, अİखल भारतीय औसत 
मािसक Ůित ʩİƅ उपभोग ʩय (एमपीसीई) मŐ 2011-12 (68वŐ दौर) क े अनुमानों की 
तुलना मŐ काफी वृİȠ Šई है। नीचे दी गई तािलका Ťामीण और शहरी Ɨेũों मŐ एमपीसीई की 
तुलना Ůˑुत करती है, िजसमŐ ʩय ˑरों मŐ वृİȠ और इस अविध क े दौरान संबंिधत वृİȠ 
Ůितशत को दशाŊया गया है। 
Ɨेũ 
 
िविभɄ अविधयों मŐ औसत एमपीसीई (Ŝ.) वृİȠ (%) 
2011-12 एनएसएस 
(68वां दौर) 
2023-24 
Ťामीण 1, 430 4, 122 188.2 
शहरी 2, 630 6, 996 166.1 
 
सरकार ने िकसानों की आय बढ़ाने और क ृ िष को लाभŮद ʩवसाय बनाने क े िलए ŮȑƗ या 
अŮȑƗ ŝप से अनेक नीितयां, सुधार, िवकास कायŊŢम और योजनाए ं अपनाई और लागू 
की हœ। सरकार ने क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग क े बजट आवंटन को वषŊ 2013-14 क े 
21933.50 करोड़ Ŝपये से बढ़ाकर वषŊ 2025-26 क े 1,27,290.16 करोड़ Ŝपये कर 
िदया है। इन योजनाओं मŐ क ृ िष क े सभी Ɨेũ, िजनमŐ ऋण, बीमा, आय सहायता, 
इ̢ůाː Ō Ɓर, बागवानी सिहत फसलŐ, बीज, मशीनीकरण, िवपणन, जैिवक और Ůाक ृ ितक 
खेती, िकसान समूह, िसंचाई, क ृ िष िवˑार, िकसानों से कम से कम समथŊन मूʞ पर 
फसलों की खरीद, िडिजटल क ृ िष आिद शािमल हœ। इसक े अितįरƅ, सरकार ने 2018-19 
से अİखल भारतीय भाįरत औसत उȋादन लागत पर कम से कम 50 Ůितशत Ůितलाभ क े 
साथ सभी अिधदेिशत खरीफ, रबी और अɊ वािणİǛक फसलों क े िलए Ɋूनतम समथŊन 
मूʞ (एमएसपी) मŐ वृİȠ की है। क ृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण िवभाग Ȫारा कायाŊİɋत की जा 
रही कŐ ūीय Ɨेũ और कŐ ū Ůायोिजत योजनाओं की सूची अनुबंध II मŐ दी गई है।  
 
673                                                      

अनुबंध-I 
 
 क ृ िष वषŊ जुलाई 2018 से जून 2019 क े दौरान िविभɄ ŷोतों से क ृ िष पįरवारों की औसत 
मािसक आय का राǛ/संघ राǛ Ɨेũ-वार िववरण 
Ţ.सं. राǛ/पूवŖȅर राǛों का समूह/ संघ राǛ Ɨेũों का समूह आय (Ŝ.) 
1 आंŬ Ůदेश 10,480
2 अŜणाचल Ůदेश 19,225
3 असम 10,675
4 िबहार 7,542
5 छȅीसगढ़ 9,677
6 गुजरात 12,631
7 हįरयाणा 22,841
8 िहमाचल Ůदेश 12,153
9 जʃू एवं कʳीर 18,918
10 झारखंड 4,895
11 कनाŊटक 13,441
12 क े रल 17,915
13 मȯ Ůदेश 8,339
14 महाराʼŌ 11,492
15 मिणपुर 11,227
16 मेघालय 29,348
17 िमजोरम 17,964
18 नागालœड 9,877
19 ओिडशा 5,112
20 पंजाब 26,701
21 राज˕ान 12,520
22 िसİſम 12,447
23 तिमलनाडु 11,924
24 तेलंगाना 9,403
25 िũपुरा 9,918
26 उȅराखंड 13,552
27 उȅर Ůदेश 8,061
28 पिʮम बंगाल 6,762
पूवŖȅर राǛों का समूह 16,863
 संघ राǛ Ɨेũों का समूह 18,511
 अİखल भारतीय 10,218
 
ŷोत: एनएसएस įरपोटŊ संƥा 587: Ťामीण भारत मŐ क ृ िष पįरवारों और पįरवारों की भू-धाįरत और पशुधन 
की İ˕ित का आकलन, 2019 
674                                                      

अनुबंध-II 
 
िकसानों क े कʞाण क े िलए उȋादन बढ़ाने, लाभकारी Ůितफल Ůदान करने और आय मŐ 
सहायता उȞेʴाथŊ Ůमुख योजनाए ँ/कायŊŢम: 
 
1. राʼŌीय खाȨ सुरƗा एवं पोषण िमशन (एनएफएसएनएम) 
2. राʼŌीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ) – ऑयल पाम 
3. राʼŌीय खाȨ तेल िमशन (एनएमईओ) - ितलहन 
4. राʼŌीय Ůाक ृ ितक क ृ िष िमशन (एनएमएनएफ) 
5. परं परागत क ृ िष िवकास योजना (पीक े वीवाई) 
6. सॉइल हेʕ ए ं ड फिटŊिलटी (एसएच ए ं ड एफ) 
7. वषाŊ िसंिचत Ɨेũ िवकास (आरएडी) 
8. क ृ िष वािनकी 
9. फसल िविवधीकरण कायŊŢम (सीडीपी) 
10. क ृ िष िवˑार उप-िमशन (एसएमएई) 
11. बीज एवं रोपण सामŤी उप-िमशन (एसएमएसपी) 
12. समेिकत बागवानी िवकास िमशन (एमआईडीएच) 
13. राʼŌीय बांस िमशन 
14. राʼŌीय मधुमƀी पालन एवं शहद िमशन (एनबीएचएम) 
15. पूवŖȅर Ɨेũ जैिवक मूʞ ŵृंखला िवकास िमशन 
16. पर डŌ ॉप मोर Ţॉप (पीडीएमसी) 
17. एकीक ृ त क ृ िष िवपणन योजना (आईएसएएम) 
18. Ůधानमंũी िकसान सʃान िनिध (पीएम-िकसान) 
19. Ůधानमंũी िकसान मान धन योजना (पीएम-क े एमवाई) 
20. Ůधानमंũी फसल बीमा योजना (पीएमएफबीवाई)/ पुनगŊिठत मौसम आधाįरत फसल बीमा योजना 
(आरडɲूबीसीआईएस) 
21. Ůधानमंũी अɄदाता आय संरƗण अिभयान (पीएम-आशा) 
22. संशोिधत ɯाज सİɵडी योजना (एमआईएसएस) 
23. एŤीक̵चर इ̢ůाː Ō Ɓर फ ं ड (एआईएफ) 
24. 10,000 नए िकसान उȋादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) का गठन और ŮोȖाहन 
25. नमो डŌ ोन दीदी 
26. ːाटŊ-अप एवं Ťामीण उȨमों क े िलए क ृ िष फ ं ड (एŤीʴोर) 
27. क ृ िष मशीनीकरण उप-िमशन (एसएमएएम) 
28. िडिजटल एŤीक̵चर िमशन 
***** 
 
 
675                                                      

ं
भारत सरकार 
कृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण मंũालय 
कृ िष एवं िकसान क̵ याण िवभाग 
राǛ सभा 
अतारांिकत Ů̻ न सं . 2275 
19/12/2025 को उ̝ तराथŊ 
िवषय: नी ंबू उȋादक िकसानो ं को सहायता 
2275. ŵी मेदा रघुनाधा रे ǭी 
Ɛा कृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण मंũी यह बताने की कृ पा करŐ गे िकः 
(क) Ɛा सरकार को आं Ŭ Ůदे श मŐ, खासकर रायलसीमा Ɨेũ मŐ, नी ंबू की अȑिधक मांग और ऊं ची 
कीमतो ं के बावजूद भीषण गमŎ के कारण नी ंबू की पैदावार मŐ आई भारी िगरावट की जानकारी है ; 
(ख) Ɛा Ůभािवत िकसानो ं को सहायता दे ने के िलए कोई उपाय िकए जा रहे हœ ; 
(ग) Ɛा आपू ितŊ ŵृंखलाओं को İ˕र करने और िकसानो ं के िलए उिचत लाभ सु िनिʮत करने हेतु िकɎी 
कदमो ं पर िवचार िकया जा रहा है ; और 
(घ) यिद हाँ , तो तȖंबंधी ɯौरा Ɛा है और यिद नही ं, तो इसके कारण Ɛा हœ? 
उȅर 
कृ िष एवं िकसान कʞाण राǛ मंũी (ŵी रामनाथ ठाकु र) 
(क) से (घ) : राǛ सरकार Ȫारा दी गई सूचना के अनुसार, आंŬ Ůदे श राǛ मŐ एिसड लाइम की खेती की 
जाती है। राǛ मŐ एिसड लाइम की खेती लगभग 0.45 लाख हेƃेयर Ɨेũ मŐ होती है , िजसका कु ल उȋादन 
लगभग 9.07 लाख मीिटŌ क टन है। एिसड लाइम की खेती करने वाले Ůमुख िजलो ं मŐ एलुŜ, पूवŎ गोदावरी, 
नेʟोर, वाईएसआर कडपा और ितŜपित शािमल हœ। राǛ मŐ एिसड लाइम की कीमत कई कारको ं से 
Ůभािवत होती है , जैसे िक रायलसीमा मŐ एिसड लाइम की खेती का िवˑार, Ɛो ंिक िकसान कम लाभŮद 
मीठे संतरे  की फसल के बदले एिसड लाइम की खेती कर रहे हœ ; अनुकू ल जलवायु पįरİ˕ितयो ं और 
भूजल की बेहतर उपलɩता के कारण चालू मौसम मŐ अिधक उȋादन; जूस Ůसंˋरण के िलए वैकİʙक 
फलो ं की उपलɩता के कारण उȅर भारतीय बाजारो ं से कम मांग; और कडपा, िचतवेल और राजमपेट 
जैसे Ɨेũो ं से गुडू र सिहत Ůमुख बाजारो ं मŐ आवक मŐ वृ İȠ।   
नी ंबू उगाने वाले िकसानो ं की सहायता करने के िलए, िजला Ůशासन ने नी ंबू के िलए Ţे ता-िवŢे ता 
बैठकŐ आयोिजत की हœ तािक िकसानो ं और ʩापाįरयो ं के बीच सीधा संप कŊ ˕ािपत हो सके और कीमतो ं 
का बेहतर िनधाŊरण हो सके । िकसानो ं को गुणवȅा सुधार के उपायो ं और चरणबȠ कटाई पȠितयो ं के 
संबंध मŐ भी िशिƗत िकया गया है तािक बाजार मŐ बŠलता से बचा जा सके और बेहतर लाभ सु िनिʮत 
िकया जा सके । 
***** 
676                                                      

 
 
भारत सरकार          राÏय सभा 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय                            अतारांǑकत Ĥư सं. 2276   
वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग                          
Ǒदनांक 19  Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के  िलए 
भारत-यूक े  åयापार समझौते कȧ Ĥितबƨताएं 
2276 Įी साके त गोखले:  
Èया वाǔणÏय और उƭोग मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे Ǒक:  
 
(क) Èया सरकार ने भारत-यूक े  åयापार समझौते क े  अंतग[त सहमित ĤाƯ Ĥशुãक कटौती काय[Đमɉ, नकारा×मक 
सूिचयɉ और Đमबƨ काय[Đमɉ कȧ समेǑकत सूची Ĥकािशत कȧ है, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ख) इन काय[Đमɉ क े  अिधसूचना/काया[Ûवयन क े  िलए िनधा[ǐरत समय-सीमा तथा संवेदनशील ¢ेğɉ कȧ सुर¢ा हेतु 
कोई सुर¢ा उपाय/अंतरा[ƶीय åयापार मɅ उ×पǒƣ के  िनयम (आरओओ) Ĥावधान Èया हɇ; और  
(ग) ǒविभÛन ¢ेğɉ (जैसे, ǔèपǐरÒस, Ĥसाधन सामĒी, िचǑक×सा उपकरण, आईटȣ मोǒबिलटȣ) के िलए होने वाले 
संभाǒवत लाभ और पहचान कȧ गई समायोजन लागतɉ का Þयौरा तथा इन अनुमानɉ का आधार Èया है?  
 
उƣर 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğी 
(Įी पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क)  भारत-ǒĦटेन åयापक आिथ[क एवं åयापार समझौते (भारत-ǒĦटेन सीईटȣए) का संपूण[ पाठ, ǔजसमɅ शुãक अनुसूची 
भी शािमल है, वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग कȧ वेबसाइट पर Ĥकािशत कर Ǒदया गया है।  
 
(ख)  भारत-ǒĦटेन åयापक आिथ[क एवं åयापार समझौते दोनɉ देशɉ Ʈारा अनुसमथ[न के  बाद लागू हो गया है। इसे 
भारत मɅ मंǒğमंडल Ʈारा अनुमोǑदत Ǒकया गया है। भारत-ǒĦटेन åयापक आिथ[क एवं åयापार समझौते क े  अंतग[त उ×पǒƣ 
क े  िनयम सरल और पारदशȸ हɇ और उिचत Ĥसंèकरण या ǒविनमा[ण सुिनǔƱत करते हɇ। Ĥमाणीकरण और स×यापन 
ĤǑĐयाएं सुǺढ़ हɇ ताǑक उिचत Ĥवत[न सुिनǔƱत Ǒकया जा सक े ।  
 
(ग)  भारत-ǒĦटेन åयापक आिथ[क एवं åयापार समझौते क े  अंतग[त ǒĦटेन को होने वाले भारत के  लगभग 99 
Ĥितशत िनया[त पर शुãक-मुƠ पहुँच िमलती है, जो åयापार मूãय के  लगभग 100% को कवर करता है। इसमɅ कृǒष और 
Ĥसंèकृत खाƭ ¢ेğ, वƸ, चमड़ा, समुġȣ उ×पाद, रƤ और आभूषण, ǔखलौने, इंजीिनयǐरंग सामान, रसायन और ऑटो घटक 
जैसे ¢ेğ शािमल हɇ। भारत-ǒĦटेन åयापक आिथ[क एवं åयापार समझौते  क े  अंतग[त, ǒĦटेन सǔज[कल इंèǫमɅÒस, 
डायÊनोǔèटक इǔÈवपमɅट, ईसीजी मशीन, एÈस-रे िसèटम जैसे िचǑक×सा उपकरणɉ और सɋदय[ Ĥसाधनɉ पर शुãक मुƠ 
पहुँच Ĥदान करने क े  िलए Ĥितबƨ है। शराब/वाइन बनाने मɅ ǒĦटेन कȧ ǒवशेष£ता से भारत क े  शराब उƭोग को लाभ 
होने कȧ संभावना है। यह समझौता आईटȣ और आईटȣ-आधाǐरत सेवाओं, ǒवƣीय और कानूनी सेवाओं, पेशेवर और शैǔ¢क 
सेवाओं और Ǒडǔजटल åयापार मɅ åयापक बाजार पहुँच Ĥदान करता है। भारतीय पेशेवर, ǔजनमɅ क ं पिनयɉ Ʈारा ǒĦटेन मɅ 
सभी सेवा ¢ेğɉ मɅ काम करने के  िलए िनयुƠ Ǒकए गए पेशेवर और वाèतुकार, इंजीिनयर, शेफ, योग Ĥिश¢क और 
संगीतकार जैसे संǒवदा पर िनयुƠ पेशेवर शािमल हɇ, जो सरलीकृत वीजा ĤǑĐयाओं और उदारȣकृत Ĥवेश Įेǔणयɉ से 
लाभाǔÛवत हɉगे, ǔजससे ǒĦटेन मɅ काम करना आसान हो जाएगा। दोनɉ प¢ɉ ने दोहरे अंशदान सàमेलन पर भी सहमित 
åयƠ कȧ है। यह भारतीय पेशेवरɉ और उनक े  िनयोƠाओं को ǒĦटेन मɅ तीन साल तक सामाǔजक सुर¢ा भुगतानɉ से छूट 
Ĥदान करेगा।  
****** 
677                                                      

1 
 
भारत सरकार          राÏय सभा 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय                        अतारांǑकत Ĥư सं. 2277    
वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग                          
Ǒदनांक 19  Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने क े  िलए 
वत[मान मɅ चल रहȣ एफटȣए (मुƠ åयापार समझौता) वाता[एँ 
 
2277 Įीमती रेखा शमा[:  
Èया वाǔणÏय और उƭोग मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे Ǒकः  
 
(क) वत[मान मɅ चल रहȣ मुƠ åयापार समझौता (एफटȣए) वाता[ओं मɅ Èया Ĥगित हुई है;  
(ख)  घरेलू उƭोगɉ क े  िलए Èया सुर¢ा उपाय Ǒकए गए हɇ; और  
(ग)  हǐरयाणा क े  कृǒष और वƸ उ×पादकɉ क े  िलए Èया लाभ अपेǔ¢त हɇ?  
 
उƣर 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğी 
(Įी पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क):  मुƠ åयापार समझौते (एफटȣए) कȧ चल रहȣ वाता[ओं कȧ Ĥगित िनàनवत है: 
 
(i)   भारत-ऑèĚेिलया åयापक आिथ[क सहयोग समझौता (सीईसीए): भारत-ऑèĚेिलया 
सीईसीए पर वाता[ का पहला दौर फरवरȣ, 2023 मɅ आयोǔजत Ǒकया गया था। अब 
तक 11 दौर आयोǔजत Ǒकए जा चुके हɇ। 
(ii)  भारत-यूरोपीय संघ (ईयू) मुƠ åयापार समझौता: जून 2022 मɅ भारत-यूरोपीय संघ 
मुƠ åयापार समझौते कȧ वाता[ शुǾ होने के  बाद से, वाता[ क े  14 दौर पूरे हो चुक े  हɇ। 
दोनɉ प¢ एक संतुिलत और पारèपǐरक Ǿप से लाभकारȣ मुƠ åयापार समझौते को 
अंितम Ǿप देने क े  िलए रचना×मक Ǿप से Ĥयासरत हɇ। 
(iii)  भारत-Įीलंका आिथ[क एवं Ĥौƭोिगकȧ सहयोग समझौता (ईटȣसीए): वाता[ क े  14 दौर 
आयोǔजत हो चुके हɇ। 
(iv)  भारत-पेǾ मुƠ åयापार समझौता: वाता[ 2017 मɅ शुǾ हुई। अब तक 9 दौर कȧ वाता[ 
हो चुकȧ हɇ। 
(v)  भारत-िचली सीईपीए: िचली क े  साथ सीईपीए वाता[ Ǒदनांक 01 अĤैल 2025 को शुǾ 
हुई। 4 दौर कȧ वाता[ हो चुकȧ है। 
(vi)  भारत-Ûयूजीलɇड मुƠ åयापार समझौता: मई 2025 मɅ वाता[ शुǾ कȧ गई। 4 दौर कȧ 
वाता[ हो चुकȧ हɇ। यह संपÛन होने के अंितम चरण मɅ है। 
678                                                      

2 
 
(vii)  भारत-अमेǐरका ǑƮप¢ीय åयापार समझौता (बीटȣए): वाता[ माच[ 2025 मɅ शुǾ हुई। 
अब तक 6 दौर कȧ वाता[ हो चुकȧ हɇ। 
(viii)  भारत–यूरेिशयन आिथ[क संघ (ईएईयू) मुƠ åयापार समझौता: वाता[ का पहला दौर 
नवंबर, 2025 मɅ आयोǔजत Ǒकया गया था। 
(ix)  आिसयान-भारत åयापार समझौता (एआईटȣआईजीए) कȧ समी¢ा जारȣ है। 
(x)  भारत-कोǐरया सीईपीए - उÛनत वाता[ मɅ है। 
 
(ख):  घरेलू उƭोगɉ क े  Ǒहतɉ कȧ र¢ा क े  िलए, मुƠ åयापार समझौतɉ मɅ उन वèतुओं कȧ 
संवेदनशील, नकारा×मक या अपवज[न सूिचयाँ बनाए रखने का Ĥावधान है ǔजन पर सीिमत 
या कोई शुãक ǐरयायत नहȣं दȣ जाती है। आयात मɅ अचानक वृǒƨ और घरेलू उƭोग को 
नुकसान होने कȧ ǔèथित मɅ, Ǒकसी देश को मुƠ åयापार समझौतɉ क े  तहत दोनɉ प¢ɉ Ʈारा 
पारèपǐरक Ǿप से सहमत अविध क े  भीतर, आयात पर एंटȣ-डंǒपंग और सुर¢ा उपायɉ जैसे 
åयापाǐरक उपचारा×मक उपायɉ का सहारा लेने कȧ अनुमित है। 
 
(ग)  मुƠ åयापार समझौते संबंिधत åयापाǐरक साझेदार देशɉ क े  साथ मुÉय Ǿप से बाजार पहुंच 
क े  दायरे को बढ़ाकर ǑƮप¢ीय åयापार को बढ़ाने और åयापार और िनवेश को बढ़ाने क े  िलए 
åयापाǐरक पूरकताओं पर िनमा[ण करने क े  उƧेæय से Ǒकए जाते हɇ, ǔजससे िनया[त ¢मता मɅ 
वृǒƨ होती है, उƭोग, Ǒकसानɉ, लघु एवं मÚयम उƭमɉ को लाभ होता है और पूरे देश मɅ 
रोजगार क े  अवसर पैदा होते हɇ। 
  
  
***** 
 
679                                                      

1 
 
भारत सरकार          राÏय सभा 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय       अतारांǑकत Ĥư सं. 2278   
वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग  
                                               
Ǒदनांक 19 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने क े  िलए 
भारत को वैǔƳक èवण[ हब के  Ǿप मɅ ǒवकिसत Ǒकया जाना 
 
2278  Įी गोǒवंदभाई लालजी भाई धोलǑकया:   
Èया वाǔणÏय और उƭोग मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे Ǒक:  
 
(क) Èया सरकार को इस बात कȧ जानकारȣ है Ǒक नीित आयोग ने भारत को वैǔƳक èवण[ हब के  Ǿप 
मɅ ǒवकिसत करने क े  िलए एक ǐरपोट[ Ĥèतुत कȧ है;  
(ख) Èया वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय, भारतीय मानक Þयूरो, ǒवƣ मंğालय और अÛय Ǒहतधारकɉ क े 
समÛवय से भारत को èवण[ åयापार और ǐरफाइिनंग हब क े Ǿप मɅ ǒवकिसत करने क े  िलए एक नीितगत 
ढांचा तैयार करने कȧ मंशा रखता है; और  
(ग) भारत कȧ वैǔƳक Ĥितèपधा[×मकता को बढ़ाने क े िलए èवण[ ǐरफाइनरȣ, हॉलमाǑकɍग और िनया[त 
अवसंरचना को मजबूत करने हेतु Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ?  
 
उƣर 
वाǔणÏ य एवं उƭोग मंğी 
(Įी पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क) नीित आयोग ने “भारत क े  èवण[ बाजार का Ǿपांतरण” शीष[क से एक ǐरपोट[ Ĥèतुत कȧ है। 
 
(ख) और (ग): भारत कȧ वैǔƳक Ĥितèपधा[×मकता को बढ़ाने और भारत को èवण[ åयापार और 
ǐरफाइिनंग हब क े  Ǿप मɅ ǒवकिसत करने क े  िलए सोने कȧ ǐरफाइनरȣ, हॉलमाǑकɍग और िनया[त 
अवसंरचना को मजबूत करने क े  िलए िनàनिलǔखत कदम उठाए गए हɇ: 
 
(i)  भारतीय मानक Þयूरो (बीआईएस) ने अÈटूबर 2015 मɅ भारत सरकार कȧ èवण[ 
मुġȣकरण योजना (जीएमएस) क े  भाग क े Ǿप मɅ èवण[ शोधन/टकसाल का 
Ĥमाणीकरण शुǾ Ǒकया। 
(ii)  बीआईएस ने गुड Ǒडलीवरȣ बास[ अथा[त आईएस 17278:2019 'गुड Ǒडलीवरȣ क े  िलए 
पǐरçकृत सोने और चांदȣ क े  बास[' पर एक भारतीय मानक तैयार Ǒकया है, जो 
ǐरफाइनरɉ Ʈारा गुड Ǒडलीवरȣ क े  िलए पǐरçकृत सोने और चांदȣ क े  बास[ कȧ शुƨता, 
आकार और माप जैसी तकनीकȧ आवæयकताओं को िनधा[ǐरत करता है। गुड Ǒडलीवरȣ 
680                                                      

2 
 
गोãड बास[ का उपयोग मुÉय Ǿप से बड़े ǒवƣीय और åयापाǐरक बाजारɉ मɅ Ǒकया 
जाता है। कई Ïवैलस[, आभूषण िनया[तक और बुिलयन डȣलर भी आभूषण िनमा[ण क े  
िलए गुड Ǒडलीवरȣ बास[ को Ĥाथिमकता देते हɇ। 
(iii)  जून 2021 से सोने क े  आभूषणɉ/कलाकृितयɉ पर हॉलमाक[ लगाना अिनवाय[ कर Ǒदया 
  गया था। 
(iv)  सोने क े  आभूषणɉ और कलाकृितयɉ पर हॉलमाǑकɍग करने क े  उƧेæय से, हॉलमाǑकɍग 
यूिनक आइडɅǑटǑफक े शन (एचयूआईडȣ), जो छह अंकɉ का ǒविशƴ अãफ़ाÛयूमेǐरक कोड 
है, उसे बीआईएस लोगो और घोǒषत शुƨता/Ēेड क े  अलावा Ĥ×येक सोने कȧ वèतु पर 
लेज़र Ʈारा अंǑकत Ǒकया जाता है। Ĥ×येक सोने कȧ वèतु क े  िलए एचयूआईडȣ ǒविशƴ 
है। 
(v)  देश क े  ǒविभÛन ǒवशेष आिथ[क ¢ेğɉ (एसईजेड) मɅ रƤ एवं आभूषण (जीएंडजे) ¢ेğ 
कȧ 420 इकाइयाँ काय[ कर रहȣ हɇ। 
(vi)  इंǑडया इंटरनेशनल बुिलयन एÈसचɅज (आईआईबीएÈस) यह एक एसईजेड इकाई है, 
जो इंटरनेशनल फाइनɅिशयल सǒव[सेज सɅटर (आईएफएससी), गुजरात इंटरनेशनल 
फाइनɅस टेक (जीआईएफटȣ) एसईजेड, गांधीनगर मɅ काम करता है। भारत मɅ बुिलयन 
आयात करने क े  िलए एक Ĥवेश Ʈार Ĥदान करती है और बुिलयन åयापार, बुिलयन 
ǒवƣीय उ×पादɉ मɅ िनवेश और आईएफएससी मɅ वॉǔãटंग सुǒवधाओं को बढ़ावा देने के  
िलए एक बुिलयन एÈसचɅज इकोिसèटम Ĥदान करती है। 
(vii)  भारतीय Ĥितभूित और ǒविनमय बोड[ (एसईबीआई) ने ǒविभÛन एसईबीआई 
ǒविनयिमत èवण[ उ×पादɉ क े  माÚयम से सोने और सोने से जुड़े उपकरणɉ मɅ िनवेश 
को संभव बनाया है। ये एÈसचɅज Ěेडेड कमोǑडटȣ डेǐरवेǑटव कॉÛĚैÈÒस (ईटȣसीडȣ) और 
इलेÈĚॉिनक गोãड ǐरसीÒस (ईजीआर) हɇ ǔजनका èटॉक एÈसचɅजɉ पर åयापार Ǒकया 
जा सकता है। इन एसईबीआई ǒविनयिमत èवण[ उ×पादɉ मɅ िनवेश एसईबीआई 
पंजीकृत मÚयèथɉ क े  माÚयम से Ǒकया जा सकता है और ये एसईबीआई Ʈारा 
िनधा[ǐरत ǒविनयामक ढांचे Ʈारा शािसत होते हɇ। 
(viii)  एसईबीआई (àयूचुअल फं ड) ǒविनयम, 1996 भारत मɅ गोãड ईटȣएफ योजनाओं क े  िलए 
ǒविनयामक ढांचा ǒविनǑद[ƴ करता है। गोãड ईटȣएफ एसईबीआई क े  साथ पंजीकृत 
àयूचुअल फंड Ʈारा पेश Ǒकए जाते हɇ और ऐसी योजनाएं भौितक सोने और एÈसचɅज 
Ěेडेड गोãड डेǐरवेǑटव मɅ िनवेश कर सकती हɇ। गोãड ईटȣएफ िनवेशकɉ को भौितक 
सोना रखने कȧ आवæयकता क े  ǒबना कम लागत वाला िनवेश ǒवकãप Ĥदान करता 
है। 
*** 
681                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्रालय 
उद्योग संवर्धन और आंतररक व्यापार ववभाग 
राज्य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या: 2279 
शुक्रवार, 19 दिसम्बर, 2025 को उत्तर दिए जाने के ललए 
 
तलमलनाडु से प्राप्त औद्योगगक ननवेश प्रस्तावों की जांच 
 
2279. डा. कननमोझी एनवीएन सोम ूः  
  
क्या वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक: 
(क)  क्या तमिलनाडु सरकार द्वारा प्रस्तुत कोई औद्योगगक ननवेश प्रस्ताव िंत्रालय के 
ववचाराधीन हैं, यदि हााँ, तो ऐसे प्रस्तावों का क्षेत्र-वार ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ख)  प्रशासननक, ववननयािक या तकनीकी आवश्यकताओं सदहत इन प्रस्तावों की  जांच 
करने और इन्हें संसागधत करने िें शामिल कारक कौन-से हैं; और 
(ग)  िंत्रालय ककस अपेक्षक्षत सिय -सीिा के भीतर ऐसे प्रस्तावों की जांच पूरी करने और 
इनका ननपटान करने का ववचार रखता है? 
 
उत्तर 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री 
(श्री पीय ष गोयल) 
 
(क) से (ग): औद्योगगक ननवेश के संबंध िें तमिलनाडु सरकार से प्राप्त कोई भी प्रस्ताव 
िंत्रालय िें ववचारार्थ लंबबत नहीं है। 
         
***** 
 
682                                                      

1 
 
भारत सरकार 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्रालय 
उद्योग संवर्धन और आंतररक व्यापार ववभाग 
राज्य सभा 
 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या: 2280 
 
शुक्रवार, 19 दिसम्बर, 2025 को उत्तर दिए जाने के ललए 
 
'मेक इन इंडिया पहल के तहत ववननमाधि क्षेत्र का प्रिशधन  
 
2280. श्री राघव चड्ढा:  
 क्या वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक: 
(क) क्या सरकार को इस बात की जानकारी है कक 'मेक इन इंडिया' पहल के तहत सकल 
घरेलू उत्पाद (जीिीपी) में 25 प्रततशत योगदान तक पह ुँचने के कथित लक्ष्य के 
बावजूद ववतनमााण क्षेत्र भारत के जीिीपी में 17 प्रततशत से कम योगदान ही कर पा 
रहा है; 
(ख)  वस्त्त्र, इलेक्रॉतनक्स और खखलौने जैसे श्रम-गहन ववतनमााण क्षेत्रों में इष्टतम प्रदशान न 
करने के ललए सरकार द्वारा पहचान ककए गए प्रम ख कारण क्या हैं; 
(ग)  क्या सरकार द्वारा ववतनमााण इकाइयों के समक्ष आ रही उच्च संभार लाग तों, भूलम 
अथिग्रहण संबंिी बािाओं और ववतनयामक अन पालन संबंिी बोझ के म द्दे को हल 
करने के ललए ववलशष्ट कदम उठाए गए हैं; और 
(घ)  ववगत पांच वर्षों के दौरान तनवेश अंतवााह , रोजगार सृजन और क्षेत्र-वार वृद्थि 
 सहहत 'मेक इन इंडिया' पहल के तहत की गई प्रगतत का ब्यौरा क्या है? 
 
उत्तर 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री 
(श्री पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क):  देश में ववतनमााण क्षेत्र ने ववगत दशक में वृद्थि दजा की है। सांख्ययकी और 
कायाक्रम कायाान्वयन मंत्रालय (एमओएसपीआई) द्वारा जारी राष्रीय लेखा 
सांख्ययकी के अन सार, ख्स्त्िर मूल्यों पर ववतनमााण क्षेत्र का सकल मूल्यविान 
(जीवीए) ववत्त वर्षा 2013 -14 के 15.60 लाख करोड़ रुपए से बढ़कर ववत्त वर्षा 
2023-24 में 28.25 लाख करोड़ रुपए हो गया है। इसके अलावा , ख्स्त्िर मूल्यों 
पर क ल जीवीए में ववतनमााण क्षेत्र का हहस्त्सा वर्षा 2013-14 के 17.2% से 
बढ़कर वर्षा 2023-24 में 17.5% हो गया है। ( स्रोत: राष्ट्रीय लेखा सांख्ख्यकी 
2025) 
 
(ख) से (घ):  भारत सरकार ने ववतनमााण क्षेत्र के ववकास को बढ़ावा देने तिा अथिक 
रोजगार अवसर सृख्जत करने के उद्देश्य से कई उपाय ककए हैं और भारत में 
घरेलू और ववदेशी तनवेश को बढ़ावा देने के ललए ववलभन्न पहल की हैं। तनवेश 
683                                                      

2 
 
को स वविाजनक बनाने, नवप्रयोग को बढ़ावा देने , सवोत्तम अवसंरचना का 
तनमााण करने और भारत को ववतनमााण , डिजाइन और नवप्रयोग का क ें द्र 
बनाने के ललए हदनांक 25 लसतंबर, 2014 को 'मेक इन इंडिया ' पहल की 
श रुआत की गई िी। वतामान में, ‘मेक इन इंडि या 2.0’ 15 ववतनमााण क्षेत्रों 
सहहत 27 क्षेत्रों पर फोकस कर रहा है , ख्जसे ववलभन्न मंत्रालयों और ववभागों 
तिा राज्य सरकारों द्वारा कायााख्न्वत ककया गया है। मेक इन इंडिया 2.0 के 
अंतगात आने वाले क्षेत्रों की सूची अनुबंर्-I में संलग्न है। 
 
  मेक इन इंडिया पहल को आगे बढ़ाने के उद्देश्य से , भारत सरकार ने क ें द्रीय 
बजट 2025-26 में 100 करोड़ रुपए के पररव्यय से राष्रीय ववतनमााण लमशन 
(एनएमएम) की घोर्षणा की है। यह लमशन पांच प्रम ख क्षेत्रों पर ववशेर्ष बल 
देगा अिाात व्यापार करने में स गमता और उसकी लागत; अथिक मांग वाली 
नौकररयों हेत  भववष्य के अन रूप तैयार कायाबल; जीवंत और ऊजाावान 
एमएसएमई क्षेत्र; प्रौद्योथगकी की उपलब्िता; और ग णवत्तापूणा उत्पाद। 
 
“मेक इन इंडिया” पहल के तहत उठाए गए ववलभन्न कदमों में उत्पादन संबद्ि 
प्रोत्साहन (पीएलआई) स्त्कीमें, स्त्टाटा-अप इंडिया , राष्रीय लसंगल ववंिो प्रणाली, 
जीआईएस सक्षम भूलम बैंक, प्रत्यक्ष ववदेशी तनवेश (एफिीआई) संबंिी नीततगत 
स िार, मल्टीमॉिल अवसंरचना की एकीकृत आयोजना के ललए पीएम गतत 
शख्क्त राष्रीय मास्त्टर प्लान , प्रम ख अवसंरचना पररयोजनाओं की स्त्िापना में 
बािाओं को दूर करने के ललए पररयोजना तनगरानी समूह,  औद्योथगक पाकों 
की स्त्िापना , ईज़ ऑफ िूइंग बबज़नेस में स िार के ललए हस्त्तक्षेप, अन पालन 
भार में कमी के उपाय, श्रम कानूनों को य ख्क्तसंगत बनाना, माल और सेवा कर 
लागू करना, कॉरपोरेट कर दर में कमी , सावाजतनक अथिप्राख्प्त आदेशों, 
चरणबद्ि ववतनमााण कायाक्रम (पीएमपी) और ग णवत्ता तनयंत्रण आदेशों 
(क्यूसीओ) के माध्यम से घरेलू ववतनमााण को बढ़ावा देने के ललए नीततगत 
उपाय शालमल हैं। 
 
इसके अलावा, भारत के 'आत्मतनभार' बनने के ववजन को ध्यान में रखते ह ए 
और भारत की ववतनमााण क्षमताओं और तनयाात को बढ़ाने हेत , 1.97 लाख 
करोड़ रुपए के पररव्यय के साि 14 प्रम ख क्षेत्रों के ललए उत्पािन सम्बद्र् 
प्रोत्साहन (पीएलआई) स्कीमों की श रुआत की गई है। इन स्त्कीमों में उत्पादन 
को व् यापक रूप से बढ़ाने, ववतनमााण आउटप ट में बढ़ोत्तरी करने और भववष्य में 
तीव्र गतत से आथिाक ववकास में  योगदान करने की क्षमता है। पीएलआई 
स्त् कीमों का उद्देश्य प्रम ख क्षेत्रों में तनवेश और अत्याि तनक प्रौद्योथगकी को 
आकवर्षात करना; ववतनमााण क्षेत्र में दक्षता स तनख्श्चत करना और बड़े पैमाने की 
ककफायत करना एवं भारतीय कंपतनयों और ववतनमााताओं को वैख्श्वक स्त्तर पर  
प्रततस्त्पिी बनाना है। इन स्त् की मों में लगभग अगले पांच वर्षों में उत्पादन , 
रोजगार और आथिाक ववकास को व्यापक रूप से बढ़ावा देने की क्षमता है। 
684                                                      

3 
 
पीएलआई स्त्कीमों के पररणामस्त्वरूप 12 लाख से अथिक (प्रत्यक्ष और 
अप्रत्यक्ष) रोजगारों का सृजन ह आ है। लसतंबर, 2025 तक इन  पीएलआई 
स्त्कीमों में 2 लाख करोड़ रुपये से अथिक का वास्त्तववक तनवेश और 18.7 लाख 
करोड़ रुपए से अथिक का वास्त्तववक उत्पादन/बबक्री दजा की गई है। 
 
लॉख्जख्स्त्टक्स क्षेत्र की च नौततयों का समािान करने के ललए, सरकार ने राष्ट्रीय 
लॉख्जख्स्िक्स नीनत (एनएलपी) श रू की है, ख्जसके प्रािलमक उद्देश्यों में से एक 
उद्देश्य वर्षा 2030 तक भारत में लॉख्जख्स्त्टक्स लागत को कम करके  उसे 
वैख्श्वक मानकों के त लनात्मक स्त्तर पर लाना है। इसके अलावा , राष्ट्रीय 
औद्योगगक कॉररिोर ववकास कायधक्रम  एक प्रम ख अवसंरचना कायाक्रम है 
ख्जसका उद्देश्य भारत में ऐसे भववष्योन्म खी औद्योथगक शहरों को ववकलसत 
करना है , ख्जनका लक्ष्य रोजगार के अवसरों  का सृजन करना और आथिाक 
ववकास में स िार करना है ख्जससे समग्र सामाख्जक-आथिाक ववकास हो सके। 
राष्रीय औद्योथगक कॉररिोर ववकास तनगम (एनआईसीिीसी) के तहत , 20 
प्लग-एंि-प्ले औद्योथगक पाका ववकास के ववलभन्न चरणों में हैं। ये रेिी -टू-यूज़ 
पाका उद्योगों के ललए प्रवेश संबंिी बािाओं को कम करते हैं और तनवेशकों को 
जल्दी उत्पादन श रू करने में मदद करते हैं। 
 
वस्त्त्र उद्योग की संपूणा मूल्य श्रृंखला के ललए एकीकृत व्यापक और आि तनक 
औद्योथगक अवसंरचना स वविा ववकलसत करने के उद्देश्य से, सरकार ने 
2027-28 तक सात वर्षों की अवथि के ललए 4445 करोड़ रुपए के पररव्यय से 
7 स्त्िलों तलमलनाि  (ववरुिनगर), तेलंगाना (वारंगल), ग जरात (नवसारी), कनााटक 
(कलब गी), उत्तर प्रदेश (लखनऊ) , मध्य प्रदेश (िार) और महाराष्र (अमरावती ) 
में पीएम मेगा इंहटग्रेटेि टेक्सटाइल रीजन एंि अपैरल  (पीएम लमत्र ) पाका 
स्त्िावपत करने की योजना को अंततम रुप हदया  हैं। पीएम लमत्र पाका कताई , 
ब नाई, प्रसंस्त्करण और छपाई से लेकर पररिान तनमााण , सहायक उपकरण 
ववतनमााताओं तक एक ही स्त्िान पर एक एकीकृत वस्त्त्र मूल्य श्रृंखला सृख्जत 
करने का अवसर प्रदान करता है , ख्जससे लॉख्जख्स्त्टक्स और लेन-देन की लागत 
में कमी आती है। इसके अलावा, पीएम लमत्र पाका ककफायती लागत तिा पानी 
और बबजली को आकर्षाक श ल्क पर उपलब्ि करा ते ह ए ववश्व स्त्तरीय 
अवसंरचना प्रदान करते हैं। 
 
िीपीआईआईटी द्वारा ववकलसत औद्योगगक पाकध रेदिंग प्रिाली (आईपीआरएस) 
3.0 भारत के औद्योथगक अवसंरचना में पारदलशाता और जवाबदेही को शालमल 
करती है। यह ववलभन्न काया तनष्पादन संकेतकों के आिार पर औद्योथगक 
पाकों का मूल्यांकन करती है और उन्हें ग्रेि प्रदान करती है जो तनवेशकों को 
तनणाय लेने के संबंि में मागादशान करने के ललए ववश्वसनीय जानकारी देती है, 
जबकक राज्यों और संघ राज्य क्षेत्रों को अपनी स वविाओं को उन्नत करने तिा 
अथिक तनवेश आकवर्षात करने के ललए प्रेररत करती  है। भारतीय औद्योगगक 
685                                                      

4 
 
भूलम बैंक (आईआईएलबी) तनवेश आयोजना  को स गम बनाने के ललए 
औद्योथगक भूलम और अवसंरचना पर ववस्त्तृत जानकारी का जीआईएस-
आिाररत, कें द्रीकृत ररपोख्जरी की स वविा प्रदान करते ह ए इस हदशा में सहयोग 
करता है। 
 
उद्योग संविान और आंतररक व्यापार ववभाग (िीपीआईआईटी) ववलभन्न पहलों 
के माध्यम से भारत में कारोबारी माहौल बेहतर बनाने में और ईज ऑफ िूइंग 
बबज़नेस को बढ़ाने में महत्वपूणा भूलमका तनभाता है, इन पहलों में व्यवसाय 
स िार काया योजना (बीआरएपी), बी-रेिी मूल्यांकन, जन ववश्वास, राष्रीय लसंगल 
ववंिो प्रणाली, भारतीय औद्योथगक भूलम बैंक, ईज ऑफ िूइंग बबज़नेस पहल, 
व्यवसाय स िार काया योजना (बीआरएपी) और व्यवसायों तिा नागररकों पर 
अन पालन बोझ को कम करना और ववतनयमन की लागत के मापन सहहत 
व्यवसाय ववतनयमों को सरल और स व्यवख्स्त्ित करना शालमल है। ये पहलें 
भारत के कारोबारी माहौल को बेहतर बनाने , तनवेश आकवर्षात करने और 
अन पालन संबंिी बािाओं को कम करके तिा ववतनयामक वातावरण को अथिक 
व्यापार-अन कूल बनाकर आथिाक ववकास को बढ़ावा देने के ललए तैयार की गई 
हैं। 
 
राष्ट्रीय लसंगल ववंिो प्रिाली (एनएसिब्लूएस) तनवेशकों को अन मोदन के ललए 
आवेदन करने , आवेदनों को रैक करने , तनयामक जानकारी तक पह ंचने और 
अन पालन दातयत्वों को पूरा करने के ललए लसंगल इंटरफेस की स वविा प्रदान 
करती है। यह पोटाल लसंगल साइन -ऑन, नो योर अप्रूवल (केवाईए), कॉमन 
एप्लीकेशन फॉमा (सीएएफ), यूतनफाइि पेमेंट गेटवे, इंस्त्पेक्शन मैनेजमेंट, िैशबोिा, 
लशकायत तनवारण और इंसेंहटव रैककंग जैसे प्रम ख मॉड्यूल को एकीकृत करता 
है। शासन को सरल तिा अथिक व्यवसाय-अन कूल बनाने के ललए वर्षा 2020 
में अनुपालन बोझ कम करने (आरसीबी) की पहल श रू की गई िी। यह पहल 
मंत्रालयों, ववभागों और राज्यों/ संघ राज्य क्षेत्रों  को सरलीकरण , यौख्क्तकरण, 
डिख्जटलीकरण और छोटे अपरािों के गैर -अपरािीकरण के  माध्यम से 
अनावश्यक अन पालनों को समाप्त करने के ललए अपने अथितनयमों , तनयमों 
और प्रकक्रयाओं की समीक्षा करने का अथिदेश देती है।  
 
"मेक इन इंडिया" पहल के तहत सरकार द्वारा  की गई इन पहलों से, 
ववतनमााण क्षेत्र में क ल रोजगार ववत्त वर्षा 2017-18 (आथिाक सवेक्षण 2020-21) 
के 57 लमललयन से बढ़कर ववत्त वर्षा 2022-23 (आथिाक सवेक्षण 2023-24) में 
64.4 लमललयन हो गया है। 
 
***** 
686                                                      

5 
 
 
अनुबंर्-I 
दिनांक 19.12.2025 को उत् तर दिए जाने के ललए ननयत राज्य सभा के अतारांककत प्रश् न  
संख् या 2280 के भाग (ख) से (घ) के उत् तर में उख्ललणखत अनुबंर्  
 
ववननमाधि क्षेत्र 
i. एरोस्त्पेस और रक्षा 
ii. ऑटोमोहटव और ऑटो घटक 
iii. फामाास्त्यूहटकल्स और थचककत्सा उपकरण 
iv. बायो-टेक्नोलॉजी 
v. पूंजीगत वस्त्त एं 
vi. वस्त्त्र एवं पररिान 
vii. रसायन और पेरो रसायन 
viii. इलेक्रॉतनक्स लसस्त्टम डिजाइन और मैन्यूफैक्चररंग (ईएसिीएम) 
ix. चमड़ा और फ टववयर 
x. खाद्य प्रसंस्त्करण 
xi. रत्न और आभूर्षण 
xii. लशवपंग 
xiii. रेलवे 
xiv. तनमााण 
xv. नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजाा 
सेवा क्षेत्र 
i. सूचना प्रौद्योथगकी और सूचना प्रौद्योथगकी सक्षम सेवाएं (आईटी और आईटीईएस) 
ii. पयाटन और आततथ्य सेवाएं 
iii. मेडिकल वैल्यू रैवल 
iv. पररवहन और लॉख्जख्स्त्टक्स सेवाएं  
v. लेखा और ववत्त सेवाएं 
vi. ऑडियो ववज अल सेवाएं  
vii. कानूनी सेवाएं 
viii. संचार सेवाएं 
ix. तनमााण और इससे संबंथित इंजीतनयररंग सेवाएं 
x. पयाावरणीय सेवाएं 
xi. ववत्तीय सेवाएं 
xii. लशक्षा सेवाएं 
***** 
687                                                      

1 
 
 
भारत सरकार          राÏय सभा 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय       अतारांǑकत Ĥư सं. 2281  
वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग                                                
Ǒदनांक 19 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने क े  िलए 
मुƠ åयापार समझौतɉ के माÚयम से सेवाओं के िनया[त को बढ़ावा 
2281  Įी मदन राठौड़:  
Įी के सरȣदेविसंह झाला: 
Įी भुबनेƳर कािलताः  
Èया वाǔणÏय और उƭोग मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे Ǒक:  
(क) यू.क े एवं ई. यू क े  साथ मुƠ åयापार समझौतɉ (एफटȣए) को अंितम Ǿप देने कȧ वत[मान ǔèथित और समय-
सीमा Èया है तथा इन समझौतɉ से भारत कȧ सेवाओं क े  िनया[त को Ǒकस Ĥकार बढ़ावा िमलेगा;  
(ख) मंğालय Ʈारा Ǒकस Ĥकार आरबीआई क े सहयोग से ǽपये åयापार िनपटान तंğ को बढ़ावा Ǒदया जाता है और 
उसकȧ िनगरानी कȧ जाती है तथा अिधक भागीदार देशɉ को ǒवशेष ǽपया वोèĚो खाते (एसआरवीए) खोलने के  
िलए Ĥो×साǑहत करने हेतु Èया कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ;  
(ग) Ǒफनटेक, भू-èथािनक सेवाओं और एबीजीसी जैसे ¢ेğɉ मɅ सेवाओं के िनया[त को बढ़ाने क े िलए कौन-सी 
रणनीितयाँ अपनाई जा रहȣ हɇ तथा वष[ 2026 क े  िलए इनके लêय Èया हɇ; और 
 (घ) ǒविभÛन एफटȣए क े  तहत शुãक ǐरयायतɉ और उ×पǒƣ क े  िनयमɉ पर िनया[तकɉ को वाèतǒवक समय डेटा 
उपलÞध कराने हेतु Ěेड कनेÈट ई-Üलेटफॉम[ क े उपयोग मɅ अब तक Èया Ĥगित हुई है?  
उƣर 
वाǔणÏ य एवं उƭोग मंğी 
(Įी पीयूष गोयल) 
(क): भारत और यूनाइटेड Ǒकंगडम (यूके) ने Ǒदनांक 24 जुलाई, 2025 को åयापक आिथ[क और åयापार 
समझौता (सीईटȣए) पर हèता¢र Ǒकए हɇ। लागू होने के बाद, भारत-यूके सीईटȣए आईटȣ/आईटȣईएस, 
åयावसाियक सेवाओं, पेशेवर सेवाओं, िश¢ा और èवाèØय पǐरच[चा जैसे ǒविभÛन सेवा ¢ेğɉ मɅ पूवा[नुमािनत, 
उÛमुƠ और अनुकूल बाजार पहुंच Ĥदान करेगा। यह सेवा Ĥदाताओं के अèथायी आवागमन क े िलए एक 
संरिचत फेमवक[ भी तैयार करता है। åयापाǐरक आगंतुक, संǒवदा×मक सेवा Ĥदाता और èवतंğ पेशेवर èपƴ और 
पूव[िनधा[ǐरत अèथायी Ĥवेश और Ĥवास िनयमɉ क े  तहत ǒĦटेन मɅ Ĥवेश कर सकɅगे। एफटȣए के साथ लागू होने 
वाला डबल काÛĚȣÒयूशन कÛवेशंन सामाǔजक सुर¢ा अंशदान के दोहरे भुगतान से बचने का एक तंğ Ĥदान 
करेगा। इसक े  अितǐरƠ, इन Ĥावधानɉ क े  तहत Ĥित वष[ 1,800 तक भारतीय शैफ, योग Ĥिश¢क और शाƸीय 
संगीतकार ǒĦटेन मɅ काय[ कर सकɅगे। जून 2022 मɅ भारत-यूरोपीय संघ मुƠ åयापार समझौते (एफटȣए) कȧ 
वाता[ औपचाǐरक Ǿप से पुनः शुǾ होने के  बाद, अÈटूबर 2025 तक वाता[ के चौदह दौर पूरे हो चुके हɇ। Ǒदनांक 
3 से 9 Ǒदसंबर 2025 तक ǒविभÛन èतरɉ पर आयोǔजत बैठकɉ मɅ, दोनɉ प¢ɉ ने सेवाओं सǑहत ǒविभÛन वाता[ 
¢ेğɉ मɅ हािसल कȧ गई ǔèथर Ĥगित पर Úयान Ǒदया और इस गित को बनाए रखने पर सहमित åयƠ कȧ। 
(ख): भारत से िनया[त पर जोर देते हुए वैǔƳक åयापार के  ǒवकास को बढ़ावा देने और भारतीय ǽपये 
(आईएनआर) मɅ वैǔƳक åयापार समुदाय कȧ बढ़ती ǽिच का समथ[न करने के िलए, भारतीय ǽपये मɅ अंतरा[ƶीय 
åयापार िनपटान संबंधी अिधकृत åयǒƠयɉ (िनदȶशɉ/डȣलर सूचना/ǐरपोǑटɍग) Įृंखला (ए.पी. (डȣआईआर Įृंखला) 
688                                                      

2 
 
पǐरपğ संÉया 10 Ǒदनांक 11 जुलाई, 2022,  क े  माÚयम से िनया[त/आयात के  चालान, भुगतान और िनपटान के 
िलए एक अितǐरƠ åयवèथा लागू कȧ गई थी। इसक े  अितǐरƠ, भारतीय ǐरजव[ बɇक के  ए.पी.(डȣआईआर 
Įृंखला) पǐरपğ संÉया 08 Ǒदनांक 05 अगèत, 2025 के अनुसार, अिधकृत डȣलर बɇकɉ को अब ǐरजव[ बɇक से 
अनुमोदन मांगे ǒबना ǒवदेशी अिभकता[ बɇकɉ क े ǒवशेष ǽपɉ वोƸो खाते (एसआरवीए) खोलने कȧ अनुमित है। 
इसके  अलावा, भारतीय ǽपये (आईएनआर) मɅ अंतरा[ƶीय åयापार िनपटान संबंधी ए.पी. (डȣआईआर सीरȣज) 
पǐरपğ संÉया 14, Ǒदनांक 03 अÈटूबर, 2025 के अनुसार, एसआरवीए अिधशेष रािश को अब Ǒकसी भारतीय 
कंपनी Ʈारा जारȣ Ǒकए गए गैर-पǐरवत[नीय ǑडबɅचर/बांड और वाǔणǔÏयक पğɉ मɅ भी िनवेश Ǒकया जा सकता 
है। 
(ग): ǒवƣीय सेवाओं सǑहत सेवाओं का िनया[त ǑƮप¢ीय समझौतɉ और मुƠ åयापार समझौतɉ का एक Ĥमुख 
घटक है। राƶीय भू-èथािनक नीित (एनजीपी), 2022 मɅ भू-èथािनक सेवाओं कȧ वृǒƨ कȧ पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है, 
ǔजसमɅ भारत क े  समĒ Ǒडǔजटल सेवा िनया[त मɅ उनका योगदान भी शािमल है। इस नीित का उƧेæय नवाचार, 
बेहतर डेटा उपलÞधता, िनजी ¢ेğ कȧ भागीदारȣ और ¢मता ǒवकास के िलए एक अनुकूल ĥे मवक[ तैयार करके 
वैǔƳक èतर पर Ĥितèपधȸ भू-èथािनक इकोिसèटम का िनमा[ण करना है। एनजीपी 2022 के अनुसार, भू-
èथािनक सेवाओं और उनकȧ िनया[त ¢मता के  ǒवèतार के  िलए आवæयक आधारभूत संरचना, डेटा ĥे मवक[ और 
संèथागत तंğ èथाǒपत करने हेतु वष[ 2025 और 2030 तक के  लêय िनधा[ǐरत Ǒकए गए हɇ। इसके  अलावा, 
सरकार एिनमेशन, ǒवजुअल इफ ेÈÒस, गेिमंग और कॉिमÈस (एवीजीसी) सेवाओं के िनया[त मɅ वृǒƨ क े िलए कई 
कदम उठा रहȣ है। कɅ ġȣय बजट कȧ घोषणा क े  बाद अĤैल 2022 मɅ सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय Ʈारा 
एवीजीसी संवध[न काय[ बल का गठन Ǒकया गया था। इस काय[ बल ने उƭोग और सरकार को एक साथ लाकर 
यह Ǿपरेखा तैयार कȧ Ǒक भारत एिनमेशन, वीएफएÈस, गेिमंग और कॉिमÈस के ¢ेğ मɅ कौशल, रोजगार और 
िनवेश को कैसे बढ़ा सकता है; और देश को एक वैǔƳक कɅġ के Ǿप मɅ èथाǒपत कर सकता है। इस काय[ बल 
ने Ǒदसंबर 2022 मɅ अपनी ǐरपोट[ Ĥèतुत कȧ, ǔजसमɅ राƶीय एवीजीसी िमशन, उ×कृƴता कɅ ġ, मजबूत बुिनयादȣ 
ढांचा और भारतीय बौǒƨक संपदा और िनया[त के िलए समǒप[त सहयोग कȧ िसफाǐरश कȧ गई। उÍच èतरȣय 
Ĥिश¢ण और अनुसंधान को मजबूत करने के िलए इंǑडयन इंèटȣÒयूट ऑफ ǑĐएǑटव टेÈनोलॉजीज 
(आईआईसीटȣ) मुंबई कȧ èथापना कȧ गई है और इसे एक ǒविशƴ उ×कृƴता कɅġ के  Ǿप मɅ ǒवकिसत Ǒकया जा 
रहा है। उÍच गुणवƣा वाली उ×पादन ¢मता बढ़ाने, Ĥितभाओं को ǒवकिसत करने और अंतरराƶीय बाजारɉ तक 
पहुंच मɅ सुधार लाने पर Úयान कɅ Ǒġत करते हुए, वãड[ ऑǑडयो ǒवजुअल एंड एंटरटेनमɅट सिमट (वेåस) 2025 का 
आयोजन मई 2025 मɅ संपूण[ मीǑडया और मनोरंजन ¢ेğ क े  िलए एक वैǔƳक Üलेटफाम[ क े  Ǿप मɅ Ǒकया गया 
था। 
(घ): Ěेड कनेÈट ई-Üलेटफ़ॉम[ पर टैǐरफ एÈसÜलोरर सेवा ǒविभÛन मुƠ åयापार समझौतɉ (एफटȣए) और 
अिधमाÛय åयापार समझौतɉ (पीटȣए) क े  तहत पाğ भारतीय िनया[तɉ के  िलए उपलÞध टैǐरफ ǐरयायतɉ कȧ 
जानकारȣ Ĥदान करती है। इसमɅ उƠ टैǐरफ ǐरयायतɉ का लाभ उठाने के िलए अनुपालन Ǒकए जाने वाले 
उ×पǒƣ िनयमɉ का ǒववरण भी Ǒदया गया है। यह सूचना खोजने योÊय क े  Ǿप मɅ उपलÞध है, ǔजसमɅ िनया[तकɉ 
के पास गंतåय देश Ʈारा उ×पाद को Ǒदए गए हामȾनाइÏड िसèटम (एचएस) कोड या उ×पाद ǒववरण क े  आधार 
पर खोज करने का ǒवकãप होता है। िनया[तकता[ खोज क े  आधार पर अपने उ×पादɉ से सबसे िमलते-जुलते 
उ×पादɉ का चयन कर सकते हɇ और शुãक एवं उ×पǒƣ िनयमɉ कȧ जानकारȣ ĤाƯ कर सकते हɇ। अिधकृत İोतɉ 
से नई सूचना ĤाƯ होते हȣ डेटाबेस को अƭतन Ǒकया जाता है 
**** 
 
 
689                                                      

1 
 
भारत सरकार 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्रालय 
उद्योग संवर्धन और आंतररक व्यापार ववभाग 
राज्य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या: 2282 
 
शुक्रवार, 19 दिसम्बर, 2025 को उत्तर दिए जाने के ललए 
ओपन नेटवकध फॉर डिजजटल कॉमसध 
 
2282. श्री मयंककुमार नायकः 
िा. मेर्ा ववश्राम कुलकिी: 
श्री सालमक भट्टाचायधः 
 
क्या वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक: 
 
(क) ओपन नेटवकक फॉर डिजिटल कॉमर्क (ओएनिीर्ी) ककर् प्रकार 5,000 र्े अधिक 
र्ूक्ष्म, लघु और मध्यम उद्यमों (एमएर्एमई) को देशभर के उपभोक्ताओं तक पहुुँच 
प्रदान कर ई-कॉमर्क का लोकतंत्रीकरण कर रहा है तथा प्लेटफॉमक आिाररत एकाधिकार 
र्े मुजक्त ददला रहा है; 
(ख) ववशेष रूप र्े गैर -मोबबललटी क्षेत्रों िैर्े फूि, ग्रॉर्री एवं फैशन में अपनी पहुुँच का 
ववस्तार करने में ओ.एन.िी.र्ी की र्बर्े बडी उपलजधि क्या है; 
(ग) क्या ओएनिीर्ी की इंटरऑपरेबल क्यूआर कोि प्रणाली स्थानीय कारीगरों और ककराना 
दुकानों को एक र्रल डिजिटल उपजस्थतत प्रदान कर उन्हें अनेक खरीदार ऐप र्े िोड 
रही है; और 
(घ) ओएनिीर्ी ककर् प्रकार प्रमुख ववत्तीय र्ंस्थानों को नेटवकक र्े िोडकर एमएर्एमई को 
उनके डिजिटल लेनदेन इततहार् के आिार पर कायकशील पूंिी और ऋण र्हायता 
उपलधि कराने में र्क्षम बना रहा है? 
 
उत्तर 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री 
(श्री पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क): ओपन नेटवकक फॉर डिजिटल कॉमर्क (ओएनिीर्ी), र्ाइलो में काम करने वाले 
पारंपररक ई-कॉमर्क प्लेटफामों के ववपरीत , एक ओपन ईकोलर्स्टम बनाता है, िहां 
ववक्रेता प्लेटफॉमक-ववलशष्ट तनयमों और शतों की र्ीमाओं में बंिे बबना कई प्लेटफामों 
र्े ग्राहकों तक पहुंच र्कते हैं। ओएनिीर्ी यह र्ुतनजचचत करता है कक एमएर्एमई 
डिजिटल दायरे र्े बाहर न छूट िाएं और इनको उभरते ई-कॉमर्क के  पररवेश में 
690                                                      

2 
 
ओपन प्रोटोकॉल के माध्यम र्े तनष्पक्ष, पारदशी  और गैर-भेदभावपूणक रूप र्े खोिे 
िाने के अवर्र प्रदान करने में बडी भूलमका तनभाता है। यह ओपन प्रोटोकॉल, 
आकार, पैमाने या डिजिटल ववशेषज्ञता की शतों के बबना नेटवकक पर मौिूद र्भी 
ववक्रेताओं को र्मान रूप र्े ववजिबल बनाता है। ववक्रेता-पक्ष ऐप्र् अपने पूणक कैटलॉग 
को र्भी खरीदार-पक्ष ऐप्र् के ललए खोिे िाने योग्य बनाते हैं , िबकक खरीदार-पक्ष 
वाले ऐप्र्, खोि पररणामों को छांटने या र्ूचीबद्ि करने के ललए उपयोग ककए िाने 
वाले प्रमुख मापदंिों की र्ुवविा उपलधि कराते हैं, जिर्र्े ववक्रेता अपनी रैंककंग को 
बेहतर ढंग र्े र्मझ र्कें और इर्में र्ुिार कर र्क ें । र्भी नेटवकक प्रततभाधगयों द्वारा 
अपनाए गए र्ाझा मुक्त स्पेलर्कफकेशन, पारदलशकता में वृद्धि करते हैं तथा अपारदशी 
या पक्षपाती र्ूचीकरण पद्िततयों को रोकते हैं। 
 
इर्के अततररक्त, एमएर्एमई मंत्रालय की व्यापार र्क्षमता और ववपणन (टीम) 
स्कीम, ओएनिीर्ी के माध्यम र्े, एर्एमई, स्वयं र्हायता र्मूहों (एर्एचिी) र्दहत 
छोटे ववक्रेताओं, ककर्ान उत्पादक र्ंगठनों (एफपीओ) , कारीगरों, ग्रामीण उद्यलमयों 
और स्थानीय खुदरा ववक्रेताओं द्वारा डिजिटल कॉमर्क को अपनाने की प्रकक्रया को 
बढावा देती है। इर् स्कीम के अंतगकत, इ न छोटे ववक्रेताओं को डिजिटल र्ाक्षरता , 
िागरूकता, कैटेलॉधगंग और ऑनबोडििंग की ददशा में र्हायता प्रदान की िाती है। 
इर्के 50 प्रततशत लाभाथी, मदहलाओं के नेतृत्व वाले एर्एमई में र्े बनाने का लक्ष्य 
तनिाकररत करके इर्में र्मावेलशता पर ध्यान क ें दित ककया गया है। 
 
(ख): 9 ददर्ंबर, 2025 तक की जस्थतत के अनुर्ार, नेटवकक पर 630 शहरों और कस्बों के  
कुल 1.16 लाख र्े अधिक ववक्रेता हैं, िो देशभर के एकाधिक एजप्लकेशन के माध्यम 
र्े लेनदेन करते हैं। इर्में रेस्तरां, ग्रोर्री, फैशन, इलेक्रॉतनक्र् और अन्य खुदरा 
व् यापार श्रेणणयों के ववक्रेता शालमल हैं। ओएनिीर्ी में र्ुदृढ ईकोलर्स्टम भागीदारी भी 
हो रही है, जिर्में 85 र्े अधिक र्ंगठन क्रेता नेटवकक प्रततभाधगयों के रूप में तथा 
187 र्े अधिक र्ंगठन ववक्रेता नेटवकक प्रततभाधगयों के रूप में खुदरा श्रेणणयों में 
शालमल हो रहे हैं। 
 
इर्के पररणामस्वरूप, इर् नेटवकक ने नवंबर, 2025 माह में 2.5 लमललयन र्े अधिक 
खुदरा ऑिकर्क के लेन-देन को प् लेटफामक प्रदान ककया है। यह ववस्तार डिजिटल कॉमर्क 
के ललए ओपन, अंतरर्ंचालनीय मॉिल की व्यवहायकता को प्रदलशकत करता है और 
देशभर में ववववि नॉन-मोबबललटी श्रेणणयों के व् यापार को बढाने में नेटवकक की क्षमता 
को प्रदलशकत करता है। 
(ग): ओएनिीर्ी की अंतर -र्ंचालनीय क्यूआर कोि प्रणाली, स्थानीय खुदरा ववक्रेताओं, 
कारीगरों, एमएर्एमई और ककराना स्टोरों को र्भी ओएनिीर्ी -अनुकूल क्रेता ऐप में 
691                                                      

3 
 
खोिे िाने को  र्क्षम बनाकर एक र्रल और कम लागत वाली डिजिटल पहचान 
प्रदान करती है। यह छोटे व्यवर्ायों के ललए व्यविानों को कम करता है और उनके  
ललए एक व्यापक उपभोक्ता आिार तक पहुंच बनाना र्ंभव करता है, जिर्र्े 
डिजिटल कॉमर्क में अधिक भागीदारी र्ुगम होती है। 
(घ): ओएनिीर्ी अंतर-र्ंचालनीय तरीके र्े ववत्तीय र्ेवाएं उपलधि कराने के ललए नेटवकक के  
ओपन प्रोटोकॉल का लाभ उठाने के ललए प्रमुख बैंकों और ववत्तीय र्ंस्थानों के र्ाथ 
िुडा है। वतकमान में , 10 र्े अधिक ऋणदाताओं और 10 र्े अधिक ऋण र्ेवा 
प्रदाताओं के िररए पर्कनल लोन (अर्ुरक्षक्षत र्ावधि ऋण) और गोल्ि लोन की र्ुवविा 
नेटवकक पर उपलधि करा ई गई है। ये कंपतनयां उपभोक्ताओं को र्मावेशी और 
डिजिटल रूप र्े र्ुलभ ऋण उत्पाद उपलध ि करा रही हैं। 
***** 
692                                                      

1 
 
  
 भारत सरकार                                                             राÏय सभा 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय                                                        अतारांǑकत Ĥư सं. 2283 
वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग  
 
Ǒदनांक 19 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने क े िलए 
 
चाय का आयात  
 
2283 Įी Ĥकाश िचक बाराईक: 
 
Èया वाǔणÏय और उƭोग मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे Ǒक :  
 
(क)  वष[ 2020 से अब तक आयात कȧ गई चाय कȧ कुल माğा (ǑकलोĒाम मɅ) का देश-वार और वष[-वार 
Þयौरा Èया है ;  
 
(ख)  Èया भारत Ǒकसी देश से शुãक मुƠ चाय का आयात करता है, यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया 
है; 
(ग)  भारत से आयात कȧ गई चाय पर संबंिधत देशɉ Ʈारा लगाए गए आयात शुãक का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(घ)  Èया यह सच है Ǒक चाय क े आयात कȧ अनुमित क े वल पुनिन[या[त क े उƧेæय से हȣ दȣ जाती है; 
और 
(ङ)  Èया सरकार क े पास आयाितत चाय को घरेलू उ×पाद क े साथ िमिĮत करने से संबंिधत कोई 
आंकड़े हɇ?  
 
 
उƣर 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğी 
(Įी पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क): वष[ 2020 से आयात कȧ गई चाय का देश-वार और वष[-वार ǒववरण अनुलÊनक -I क े  Ǿप मɅ 
संलÊन है। 
(ख) से (घ): भारत मɅ आयाितत चाय पर 100% का मूल आयात शुãक लगता है। िनया[त उÛमुख 
इकाइयɉ (ईओयू) और ǒवशेष आिथ[क ¢ेğ (एसईजेड) इकाइयɉ Ʈारा पुन: िनया[त क े  उƧेæय से 
आयाितत चाय पर आयात शुãक नहȣं लगता है। चाय आयात करने वाले देशɉ Ʈारा लगाए गए 
693                                                      

2 
 
आयात शुãक एक देश से दूसरे देश मɅ िभÛन हो सकते हɇ और अÛय बातɉ क े  साथ-साथ यह 
åयापार समझौतɉ या अिधमाÛय दरɉ पर भी िनभ[र करते हɇ। 
(ङ): आयाितत चाय को घरेलू उ×पादन क े  साथ िमलाने क े  बारे मɅ डेटा इकÒठा नहȣ Ǒकया जाता 
है। तथाǒप, चाय बोड[ ने देश मɅ आयात कȧ जाने वाली चाय क े  संबंध मɅ कई कदम उठाए गए हɇ, 
ǔजनमɅ िनàनिलǔखत शािमल हɇ: 
o Ǒदनांक 11.11.2021 को एक अिधसूचना जारȣ कȧ गई थी ǔजसमɅ िनदȶश Ǒदया गया 
था Ǒक आयाितत चाय को जीआई चाय क े  साथ िमिĮत नहȣं Ǒकया जाना चाǑहए, 
और यǑद िमĮण Ǒकया जाता है, तो अंितम उ×पाद को जीआई चाय के  Ǿप मɅ 
दावा नहȣं Ǒकया जाना चाǑहए। 
o पैकस[ को िनदȶश जारȣ Ǒकए गए, ǔजसमɅ उÛहɅ पैक ेǔजंग पर èपƴ Ǿप से यह बताने 
को कहा गया है Ǒक िमिĮत चाय मɅ आयाितत सामĒी शािमल है।  
o आयातकɉ और िनया[तकɉ को चाय आयात या िनया[त करने  से पहले बोड[ क े 
चाय पǐरषद पोट[ल से अिनवाय[ Ǿप से मंजूरȣ Ĥमाण पğ ĤाƯ करने का िनदȶश 
Ǒदया गया है और चाय क े  पैक े टɉ पर चाय कȧ उ×पǒƣ का èपƴ Ǿप से उãलेख 
Ǒकया जाना चाǑहए। 
o आयातकɉ को आयाितत चाय क े  भंडारण èथान कȧ सूचना  आयात क े  24 घंटे क े  
भीतर बोड[ को देनी होगी। आयातकɉ को यह सुिनǔƱत करना होगा Ǒक सभी ǒबĐȧ 
चालानɉ मɅ आयाितत चाय कȧ उ×पǒƣ का उãलेख Ǒकया गया हो। 
o भारत मɅ आयात क े  समय एफएसएसएआई Ʈारा िनधा[ǐरत मानकɉ क े  अनुपालन 
क े  िलए चाय कȧ खेपɉ कȧ  जांच कȧ जाती है। चाय बोड[ आयाितत चाय से 
याǺǔÍछक नमूने भी एकğ करता है और एफएसएसएआई मानकɉ क े  अनुपालन क े  
िलए उनकȧ जांच करता है। 
o खाƭ आयात िनकासी ĤǑĐयाओं को सुǺढ़ करने क े  िलए चाय बोड[, सीमा शुãक 
और एफएसएसएआई क े  बीच संयुƠ Ĥिश¢ण सğ आयोǔजत करने कȧ ĤǑĐया 
शुǾ कȧ गई थी। 
  
 
 
694                                                      

3 
 
अनुलÊनक-1 
ᳰदनांक 19.12.2025 को उᱫर क े  िलए िनयत रा᭔य सभा अतारांᳰकत ᮧ᳤ सं᭎या 2283 क े  भाग (क) क े  उᱫर 
मᱶ उि᭨लिखत अनुलᲨक । 
देश 
भारत मɅ आयाितत चाय कȧ माğा (िमिलयन ǑकलोĒाम) 
2020-
21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 (अĤैल-
अÈटूबर) 
अजɏटȣना 1.25 1.07 0.66 0.90 1.14 1.15 
ऑèĚेिलया 0.08 0.14 0.05 0.03 0.00 0.00 
बांÊलादेश 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.17 0.00 
बेǔãजयम 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 
Ħाǔज़ल 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 
बुŸÛडȣ 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
कनाडा 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 
िचली 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
चीन 0.63 0.64 0.69 0.51 1.11 0.61 
साइĤस 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 
चेक ǐरपǔÞलक 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 
ǔज़बूटȣ 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 
इÈवेडोर 0.19 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 
िमİ 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 
इिथयोǒपया 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.12 
Ǒफनलɇड 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 
ĥांस 0.03 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
जॉǔज[या 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
जम[नी 0.05 0.01 0.18 0.10 0.11 0.02 
इंडोनेिशया 1.36 1.03 1.09 0.13 0.20 0.17 
ईरान 2.11 3.12 0.19 1.47 2.80 0.98 
इटली 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.02 
जापान 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.05 
क ेÛया 12.57 7.80 5.13 5.78 19.03 7.87 
कोǐरया 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 
लीǒबया 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 
695                                                      

4 
 
मलावी 0.23 0.28 0.33 0.19 0.26 0.20 
मलेिशया 0.03 0.04 0.12 0.08 0.20 0.03 
मेǔÈसको 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 
मोरÈको 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
मोज़ाǔàबक 0.75 0.14 0.03 0.05 0.09 0.00 
àयांमार 0.02 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
नेपाल 12.57 10.72 16.53 12.94 16.11 6.21 
नीदरलɇड 0.00 0.08 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.16 
ओमान 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.01 
Ǒफिलपींस 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
पोलɇड 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.03 
कतर 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 
Ǿस 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
रवांडा 0.10 0.13 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 
सऊदȣ अरब 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
िसंगापुर 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 
दǔ¢ण अĥȧका 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Įीलंका 0.61 0.37 0.31 0.28 0.30 0.15 
सूडान 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 
ǔèवÒज़रलɇड 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.02 
ताइवान 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.02 0.01 
तंजािनया 0.28 0.13 0.27 0.15 0.44 0.09 
थाईलɇड 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 
तुǑक[ए 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.09 0.02 
संयुƠ अरब अमीरात 0.06 0.09 0.05 0.09 2.70 0.53 
यूक े 0.49 0.33 0.42 0.18 1.30 1.57 
यूएसए 0.28 0.10 0.08 0.08 0.13 0.05 
युगांडा 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.00 
अिनǑद[ƴ 0.02 0.25 0.03 0.07 0.17 0.00 
ǒवयतनाम 4.45 3.28 3.14 1.86 3.38 2.33 
ǔज़àबाÞवे 0.29 0.39 0.41 0.07 0.05 0.05 
İोत: टȣ बोड[ 
696                                                      

1 
 
 
भारत सरकार 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्रालय 
उद्योग संवर्धन और आंतररक व्यापार ववभाग 
राज्य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या: 2284 
 
शुक्रवार, 19 दिसम्बर, 2025 को उत्तर दिए जाने के ललए 
 
घरेलू उपभोग और औपचाररक बाजार एकीकरि 
 
2284. श्री ईरण्ि कडाडी: 
 
  क्या वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक: 
 
(क)  क्या मध्यम आय वगग का बढ़ता उपभोग भारत के घरेलू बाजार को रोधक्षम बनाने में 
योगदान दे रहा है, यदद हााँ तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ख) स्थानीय ववननमागण, डिजिटल वाणणज्य और ग्रामीण बािार तक पह ाँच के  माध्यम से 
ख दरा मांग को समथगन प्रदान करने के ललए लागू की गई नीनतयों क्या हैं; 
(ग)  ये प्रयास ववलभन्न आय वगों में ककस प्रकार रोिगार सृजित कर रहे हैं और 
उपभोक्ताओं के ललए ववकल्पों में स धार ला रहे हैं; और 
(घ)  यह स ननजचचत करने के ललए क्या कदम उठाए गए हैं कक घरेलू उपभोग में वृद्धध 
और औपचाररक बािार एकीकरण से लघ  व्यवसाय और स्व-ननयोजित ख दरा ववक्रेता 
लाभाजन्वत हों? 
 
उत्तर 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री 
(श्री पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क) से (घ): राष्ट्रीय सांजययकी कायागलय (एनएसओ), घरेलू खपत व्यय के संबंध में 
ननयलमत अंतराल पर सवे करता है। घरेलू खपत व्यय सवेक्षण 2023-24 के 
अन सार, ग्रामीण क्षेत्रों हेत , वतगमान कीमतों पर  प्रनत व्यजक्त औसत माह 
वार खपत व्यय, वर्ग 2022-23 के 3773 रुपए से बढ़कर वर्ग 2023-24 में 
4122 रुपए हो गया है, िबकक शहरी क्षेत्रों में यह वर्ग 2022-23 के 6,459 
रुपए से ब ढ़कर वर्ग 2023-24 में 6 ,996 रुपए हो गया है (ववलभन्न 
सामाजिक कल्याण कायगक्रमों के माध्यम से पररवारों को प्राप्त  म फ्त 
वस्त ओं की कीमतों को इसमें शालमल नहीं ककया गया है)। मध्यम आय वगग 
की बढ़ती खपत देश के घरेलू बािार को स दृढ़ बनाने में योगदान देती है। 
 
  
सरकार ने ख दरा मांग को बल प्रदान करने, समग्र आधथगक ववकास को 
बढ़ावा देने, ईि ऑफ िूइंग बबिनेस में स धार करने, कौशल ववकास और 
रोिगार सृिन के ललए ईकोलसस्टम को सक्षम करने  तथा अवसंरचना एवं 
697                                                      

2 
 
शहरी ववकास को प्रोत्सादहत करने के ललए कई पहलें की हैं। इनमें से क छ 
पहलें ननम्नान सार हैं: 
 
 i. देश में घरेलू ववननमागण को बढ़ावा देने के ललए क छ प्रम ख पहलें श रू 
 की गई हैं, िैसे - मेक इन इंडिया , स्टाटग-अप इंडिया , पीएम गनतशजक्त , 
 राष्ट्रीय औद्योधगक  कॉररिोर कायगक्रम, उत्पादन संबद्ध  प्रोत्साहन 
 (पीएलआई) स्कीम, ईि ऑफ िूइंग बबिनेस (ईओिीबी) को बढ़ावा देना 
 और अन पालन बोझ को कम करना , व्यापार स धार कायग योिना 
 (बीआरएपी), राष्ट्रीय लसंगल ववंिो लसस्टम (एनएसिब्ल्यूएस), भारतीय 
 औद्योधगक भूलम बैंक, पररयोिना ननगरानी समूह (पीएमिी), एफिीआई 
 नीनत का उदारीकरण , भारतीय फ टववयर और चमडा ववकास कायगक्रम 
 (आईएफएलिीपी) स्कीमें। 
 
 ii. िीएसटी 2.0 ने कर संरचना को सरल और य जक्तसंगत बनाया है। 
 आवचयक वस्त ओं, सेवाओं और उभरते क्षेत्रों पर पडने वाले कर भार में 
 कमी से िीवन यापन की लागत कम होने , वहनीयता में स धार होने 
 और घरेलू खपत मांग को बढ़ावा लमलने की संभावना है। सामान्य 
 उपभोक्ता वस्त ओं और क छ ववननददगष्ट्ट सेवाओं पर िीएसटी दरों में 
 कमी से व्यापार प्रनतस्पधाग बढ़ने तथा घरेलू उद्योग को सहायता प्राप्त 
 होने की संभावना है। इसके साथ ही, दो-दर वाली सरल कर संरचना से 
 लेनदेन लागत में कमी आने , अन पालन बोझ कम होने और छोटे 
 व्यवसायों को औपचाररक क्षेत्र में प्रवेश करने के ललए प्रोत्साह न प्राप्त 
 होने की उम्मीद है , जिससे औपचाररक क्षेत्र का दायरा व्यापक रूप से 
 बढ़ेगा और कर आधार का ववस्तार होगा। क ल लमलाकर इन उपायों से 
 खपत को प्रोत्साहन प्राप्त होने , ननवेश को बढ़ावा लमलने और रोिगार 
 सृिन में बढ़ोत्तरी और िीिीपी में वृद्धध की संभावना है। 
 
 iii. ओपन नेटवकग फॉर डिजिटल कॉमसग (ओएनिीसी) , साइलो में काम 
 करने वाले पारंपररक ई -कॉमसग प्लेट फॉमों के ववपरीत , एक ओपन 
 ईकोलसस्टम बनाता है, िहां ववक्रेता प्लेटफॉमग-ववलशष्ट्ट ननयमों और शतों 
 की सीमाओं में बंधे बबना एकाधधक प्लेटफॉमों से ग्राहकों तक पह ंच 
 सकते  हैं। ओएनिीसी , छोटे व्यवसायों , स्थानीय व्यापाररयों और 
 एमएसएमई को ओपन प्रोटोकॉल के माध्यम से उभरते ई -कॉमसग 
 पररवेश के भीतर ननष्ट्पक्ष , पारदशी और गैर -भेदभावपूणग रूप से खोिे 
 िाने के अवसर प्रदान कर मदद करता है। यह प्रोटोकॉल आकार , पैमाने 
 या डिजिटल ववशेर्ज्ञता की शतों के बबना नेटवकग पर मौिूद सभी 
 ववक्रेताओं को समान रूप से ववजिबल बनाता है। सभी नेटवकग 
 प्रनतभाधगयों द्वारा अपनाए गए साझा म क्त स्पेलसकफकेशन पारदलशगता 
698                                                      

3 
 
 में वृद्धध करते हैं तथा अपारदशी या पक्षपाती सूचीकरण पद्धनतयों 
 को रोकते हैं। 
 
 iv. एमएसएमई मंत्रालय की व्यापार सक्षमता और ववपणन (टीम) स्कीम , 
 स्वयं सहायता समूहों (एसएचिी), ककसान उत्पादक संगठनों 
 (एफपीओ), कारीगरों, ग्रामीण उद्यलमयों और स्थानीय ख दरा 
 ववक्रेताओं सदहत छोटे ववक्रेताओं की डिजिटल क्षमताओं को बढ़ाने के 
 ललए श रू की गई है।  इसके अंतगगत , डिजिटल साक्षरता , िागरूकता, 
 कैटेलॉधगंग और ऑनबोडििंग की ददशा में सहायता प्रदान की िाती है। 
 इसके तहत 50 प्रनतशत लाभाथी, मदहलाओं के नेतृत्व वाले एसएमई 
 में से बनाने का लक्ष्य ननधागररत करके इसमें समावेलशता पर ध्यान 
 क ें दित ककया गया है। 
 
v. दीनदयाल अंत् योदय योिना - राष्ट् रीय ग्रामीण आिीववका लमशन 
(िीएवाई-एनआरएलएम) के तहत ग्रामीण ववकास मंत्रालय ने स्वयं 
सहायता समूहों (एसएचिी) के उत् पादों को बढ़ावा देने के  ललए ई-
कॉमसग कंपननयों के साथ लमलकर कायग ककया है। एसएचिी उत् पादों के  
ववपणन के ललए गवनगमेंट ई -माकेटप् लेस (िेम) के सहयोग से िेम के  
स् टोर फ्रंट के रूप में “सरस कलेक् शन” तैयार ककया गया है। 
 vi. इलेक् रॉननक् स और सूचना प्रौद्योधगकी मंत्रालय के सामान् य सेवा क ें ि 
 (सीएससी) नेटवकग का इस् तेमाल ओएनिीसी के िररए भारत के प्रत् येक 
 गांव को नेशनल डिजिटल माकेट से िोडने में ककया िा रहा है। अपने 
 4 लाख से अधधक ग्राम स् त रीय उद्यलमयों (वीएलई) के नेटवकग के  
 साथ – सीएससी, ओएनिीसी के िररए ग्रामीण नागररक भारत में  
 अलसस्टेि ई-कॉमसग के रास् ते खोल रहा है। इस एकीकरण से ग्रामीण , 
 व् यापक ई-कॉमसग नेटवकग तक पह ंच प्राप् त करने में सक्षम हो रहे हैं , 
 जिससे वीएलई के ललए उद्यलमता के अवसरों और आय को बढ़ावा 
 लमल रहा है। 
 
vii. कृवर् मंत्रालय, कृर्क उत् पादक संगठनों (एफपीओ) को सहायता प्रदान 
कर रहा है , तथा उनके ललए ओएनिीसी के िररए देशभर के बािारों 
तक पह ंच को आसान बना रहा है। 7000 से अधधक एफपीओ 
ओएनिीसी – अन कूल एप् लीकेशनों में शालमल हो च के हैं, िो अलभनव 
संय क् त डिजिटल मांग सृिन पहलों के सहयोग से उन् हें भारत के 160 
से अधधक शहरों में अपने उत् पाद बेचने में सक्षम बनाता है।  
 
 इन पहलों ने मांग के  दायरे को  बढ़ाया है , ग्रामीण और शहरी बािारों को 
एकीकृत ककया है, तथा भारत के ख दरा एवं घरेलू खपत ईकोलसस्टम को 
स दृढ़ बनाने में योगदान ददया है। 
***** 
699                                                      

1 
 
भारत सरकार                                                             राÏय सभा 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğालय                                                        अतारांǑकत Ĥư सं. 2285 
वाǔणÏय ǒवभाग  
 
Ǒदनांक 19 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने क े िलए 
 
दुआस[ ¢ेğ मɅ चाय बागानɉ का अिधĒहण  
 
2285 Įी रȣताĦता बनजȸ:  
 
 
Èया वाǔणÏय और उƭोग मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे Ǒक :  
 
(क)  Èया यह सच है Ǒक सरकार ने पǔƱमी बंगाल राÏय के दुआस[ ¢ेğ मɅ सात चाय बागानɉ 
को वष[ 2016 मɅ हȣ अिधगृहȣत करने का िनण[य ले िलया था;  
(ख)  Èया इस िनण[य का काया[Ûवयन Ǒकया गया है;  
(ग)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और  
(घ)  यǑद नहȣं, तो इसक े Èया कारण हɇ?  
 
 
उƣर 
वाǔणÏय एवं उƭोग मंğी 
 (Įी पीयूष गोयल) 
 
(क) से (घ): सरकार ने Ǒदनांक 28 जनवरȣ, 2016 क े   राजपğ अिधसूचना संÉया का.अ. 
260(अ) क े  माÚयम से चाय अिधिनयम, 1953 कȧ धारा 16 ङ क े  तहत चाय बोड[ को 
सात चाय बागानɉ, अथा[त् बीरपारा चाय बागान, गरगंडा चाय बागान, लंकापारा चाय 
बागान, तुलसीपारा चाय बागान, हंतपारा चाय बागान और दुमचीपारा चाय बागान जो 
मेसस[ डंकÛस इंडèĚȣज िलिमटेड क े  èवािम×व मɅ है तथा डेमǑडमा चाय बागान जो  
मेसस[ डंकÛस इंडèĚȣज िलिमटेड कȧ सहयोगी कं पनी मेसस[ शांितपारा टȣ कंपनी Ĥाइवेट 
िलिमटेड क े  èवािम×व मɅ है, क े  Ĥबंधन िनयंğण को संभालने क े  िलए कदम उठाने का 
अिधकार Ǒदया था। तदनुसार, चाय बोड[ ने सात चाय बागानɉ क े  Ĥबंधन िनयंğण को 
सɋपने क े  िलए इÍछुक चाय कंपिनयɉ से ǽिच कȧ अिभåयǒƠ आमंǒğत कȧ । इसक े  
पƱात्, मैसस[ डंकÛस इंडèĚȣज़ िलिमटेड तथा मैसस[ शांितपारा टȣ कंपनी Ĥाइवेट िलिमटेड 
700                                                      

2 
 
ने अिधसूचना को चुनौती देते हुए उÍच Ûयायालय मɅ यािचका दायर कȧ, ǔजसक े  उपरांत 
दोनɉ कंपिनयɉ ने  उƠ उÍच Ûयायालय मɅ अपील कȧ। 
 
Ûयायालय ने Ǒदनांक 20 िसतंबर, 2016 क े  अपने आदेश मɅ अंतǐरम åयवèथा क े  Ǿप मɅ 
िनदȶश Ǒदया था Ǒक चाय बागानɉ का Ĥबंधन दो कंपिनयɉ को सɋप Ǒदया जाए। इसक े 
पƱात्, कंपिनयɉ ने चाय बागानɉ क े  Ĥबंधन के  िलए åयवèथा कȧ ǔजनमɅ बीरपारा, गरगंडा, 
लंकापारा, तुलसीपारा, हंतपारा, दुमचीपारा शािमल हɇ, ǔजÛहɅ मेसस[ मेǐरको एĒो इंडèĚȣज 
Ĥाइवेट िलिमटेड और डेमǑडमा टȣ एèटेट का Ĥबंधन, डेमǑडमा टȣ कंपनी Ĥाइवेट िलिमटेड 
को सɋपा गया था। लंकापारा को छोड़कर, ये चाय बागान वष[ 2016-2018 कȧ अविध क े  
दौरान पुनः खोल Ǒदए गए। 
 
राƶीय कंपनी ǒविध ǑĚÞयूनल क े  Ǒदनांक 5.3.2020 क े  आदेश क े  तहत मेसस[ डंकÛस 
इंडèĚȣज िलिमटेड क े  ǔखलाफ Ǒदवािलयापन समाधान काय[वाहȣ शुǾ कȧ गई थी। मेसस[ 
डंकÛस इंडèĚȣज िलिमटेड का िनयंğण एनसीएलटȣ Ʈारा Ǒदवािलयापन काय[वाहȣ क े  Ǒहèसे 
क े  Ǿप मɅ िनयुƠ Ǒदवािलयापन समाधान पेशेवर हो गया है। 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
701                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2286 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम्बर, 2025 को निया िािा है । 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
  
आईएसएम 2.0 ि े  शुभारांभ िा प्रस्ताव 
2286.  डा. िल्पना सैनी: 
 श्री मयांिि ु मार नायि: 
 श्री अमर पाल मौयय: 
 श्री ि े सरीदेवकसांह झाला: 
 श्री नारायण िोरागप्पा: 
 श्री घनश्याम कतवाडी: 
  
 क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉकनिी और सूचना प्रौद्योकगिी मांत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नक: 
 
(क) इंनिया सेमीक ं िक्टर नमशि (आईएसएम) 1.0 क े  अन्तिगत इसक े  आरंभ से अब तक, निशेषकर 
निमागण (फ े निक े शि), असेम्बली एिं पैक े निंि सुनिधाओं की स्थापिा क े  संिभग में, क्या 
उपलब्धियााँ रही हैं; 
(ख) क्या सरकार आईएसएम 2.0 आरंभ करिे का प्रस्ताि रखती है, यनि हााँ, तो इसकी घोषणा और 
कायागन्वयि की संभानित समय-सीमा क्या है; 
(ि) िैनिक सेमीक ं िक्टर मूल्य श्ृंखला में भारत की ब्धस्थनत को सुदृढ़ करिे क े  नलए आईएसएम 2.0 
क े  तहत अिुमानित नित्तीय आिं्ि और निचाराधीि रणिीनतक प्राथनमकताए ाँ  क्या हैं; 
(घ) क्या सरकार की उन्नत नलथोग्राफी, सेमीक ं िक्टर उपकरण निनिमागण तथा संबद्ध प्रौद्योनिकी 
पाररब्धस्थनतकी तंत्र की क ं पनियों को िेश में नििेश हेतु आकनषगत करिे क े  नलए कोई योििा 
है/सरकार कोई निशेष किम उठा रही है; और 
(ङ) यनि हााँ, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है और भारत में सेमीक ं िक्टर आत्मनिभगरता क े  िीघगकानलक 
लक्ष्य से उसका संबंध क्या है? 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉकनिी और सूचना प्रौद्योकगिी राज्य मांत्री (श्री किकतन प्रसाद) 
 
(ि) से (ङ): सेमीक ं िक्टर निकास कायगिीनत माििीय प्रधािमंत्री क े  आत्मनिभगर भारत और मेक इि 
इंनिया, मेक फॉर ि िर्ल्ग क े दृनिकोण से प्रेररत है।  
इस कायगिीनत क े  एक भाि क े  रूप में और सेमीक ं िक्टर उद्योि की मूलभूत प्रक ृ नत को िेखते हुए , 
सरकार ्ैलें्पूल, नििाइि, फ ै निक े शि, असेंबली, परीक्षण और पैक े निंि को किर करते हुए एक संपूणग 
इकोनसस्टम निकनसत कर रही है। 
इसी कायगिीनत क े अंतिगत 'सेमीकॉि इंनिया प्रोग्राम' शुरू नकया िया है। 
3 िषों से भी कम समय में , 1.6 लाख करोड़ क े  संचयी नििेश क े  साथ िस इकाइयों (2 फ ै ब और 8 
ए्ीएमपी/ओएसए्ी) को स्वीक ृ नत िी िई है। इि इकाइयों में नसनलकॉि फ ै ब, नसनलकॉि काबागइि फ ै ब, 
उन्नत पैक े निंि, मेमोरी पैक े निंि आनि शानमल हैं। 
ये उपभोक्ता उपकरणों , औद्योनिक इलेक्ट र ॉनिक्स, ऑ्ोमोबाइल, ि ू रसंचार, एयरोस्पेस और पािर 
इलेक्ट र ॉनिक्स आनि िैसे क्षेत्रों की नचप आिश्यकताओं को पूरा करेंिे। 
702                                                      

सेमीकॉि इंनिया कायगक्रम क े अंतिगत अिुमोनित 3 इकाइयों की पायल् सुनिधाए ं  पहले से ही प्रचालि 
में हैं। 
इसक े  अलािा, िीएलआई क े अंतिगत, 24 नचप नििाइि पररयोििाओं को स्टा्गअप क े  माध्यम से समथगि 
निया िाता है, नििका क ु ल पररयोििा मूल्य 920 करोड़ रुपये है। नचप्स को नििाइि करिे क े  नलए 94 
क ं पनियों को 47 लाख घं्े से अनधक नििाइि ् ू ल क े  उपयोि को सक्षम करिे क े  नलए ईिीए ् ू ल्स तक 
नििः शुल्क पहुंच प्रिाि की िई है। 
उपयुगक्त क े  अलािा, सरकार िे सेमीक ं िक्टर क्षेत्र में 85 हिार क ु शल ििशब्धक्त निकनसत करिे क े 
उद्देश्य से नचप्स ् ू  स्टा्ग-अप कायगक्रम (सी2एस) कायगक्रम भी शुरू नकया है। 
नचपइि क ें द्र की स्थापिा सी-िैक बैंिलोर में एक कें द्रीकृ त रािर ीय सुनिधा के  रूप में की िई है , िो 
नििाइि नलंक्‍ि प्रोत्साहि (िीएलआई) योििा और नचप्स ् ू  स्टा्ग-अप (सी2एस) कायगक्रम क े अंतिगत 
व्यापक नचप-नििाइि और निमागण संसाधि प्रिाि करती है। 
300 संिठिों क े  लिभि 1 लाख छात्रों को िामांनकत नकया िया है और अग्रणी क ं पनियों क े  साथ 
साझेिारी में नििाइि प्रिाह पर 255 प्रनशक्षण सत्र आयोनित नकए िए हैं। 
सरकार की िीनतयों क े  कारण भारत में ही पूरा इकोनसस्टम निकनसत हो रहा है। निशेष िैसों , सामग्री, 
घ्कों, िेयरहाउनसंि आनि में शानमल क ं पनियां भारत में अपिे पररचालि को बढ़ा रही हैं। इलेक्ट र ॉनिक्स 
और सेमीक ं िक्टर मैन्युफ ै क्चररंि क े  नलए ् ू ल्स बिािे िाली क ं पनियों िे भी अपिे ऑपरेशि का निस्तार 
नकया है। 
भारत सरकार आिश्यकताओं को समझिे और आिश्यकतािुसार आिे  की कारगिाई करिे क े  नलए 
उद्योि, नशक्षा िित और अन्य सरकारों सनहत सभी नहतधारकों क े साथ निरंतर संपक ग  में रहती है। 
***** 
 
 
 
703                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2287 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम्बर, 2025 को निया िािा है । 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
  
किकिटल वैयक्तिि िाटा सांरक्षण अकिकियम, 2023 िी िारा 44(3) ि े  माध्यम से सूचिा 
अकििार अकिकियम ि े  प्राविाि िो िमिोर किया िािा 
 
2287.  श्री ि े . आर. सुरेश रेड्डी:   
 क्या इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकििी और सूचिा प्रौद्योकििी मांत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नक: 
 
(क) क्या निनि्ल वैयक्तिक िा्ा संरक्षण अनिनियम, 2023 की िारा 44(3) क े  माध्यम से सूचिा 
का अनिकार अनिनियम की िारा 8(1) (ञ) में नकया िया संशोिि िोपिीयता क े  िाम पर 
पारिनशिता और ििनहत को कमिोर करता है; 
(ख) इस संबंि में ‘व्यक्तिित सूचिा’ मािी िािे वाली सूचिा की श्रेनणयों का ब्यौरा क्या है; और 
(ि) यह सुनिनित करिे क े  नलए कौि-से किम प्रस्तानवत हैं नक िीपीिीपी अनिनियम आर्ीआई 
अनिनियम क े , लोकतांनत्रक नििरािी को सक्षम बिािे और िािकारी िेिे से मिमािे तरीक े  से 
इिकार करिे की प्रवृनत्त पर अंक ु श लिािे क े  मूल उद्देश्य को कमिोर ि करे? 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकििी और सूचिा प्रौद्योकििी राज्य मांत्री (श्री किकति प्रसाद) 
 
(ि) से (ि): निनि्ल वैयक्तिक िे्ा संरक्षण अनिनियम , 2023 (“ िीपीिीपी अनिनियम”) निनि्ल 
वैयक्तिक िे्ा क े  प्रसंस्करण क े  नलए प्राविाि करता है, िो िािररकों क े  अपिे वैयक्तिक िे्ा की सुरक्षा 
क े  अनिकारों और ऐसे वैयक्तिक िे्ा को कािूिी उद्देश्यों क े  नलए प्रसंस्करण करिे की आवश्यकता 
िोिों को मान्यता िेता है। 
िीपीिीपी अनिनियम की उत्पनत्त सवोच्च न्यायालय क े  2017 क े  पुट्टास्वामी निणिय से हुई, निसिे भारत 
में िे्ा संरक्षण क े  नलए एक वैिानिक ढांचे की आवश्यकता नििािररत की थी। इसक े  बाि इसे लिातार 
ि र ाफ्ट नबलों क े  माध्यम से नवकनसत नकया िया और अंततः  इसे अनिनियनमत नकया िया। 
िीपीिीपी अनिनियम को िािररकों क े  साथ व्यापक परामशि क े  बाि अनिनियनमत नकया िया और इस 
पर नवनभन्न संसिीय मंचों सनहत सनमनतयों में व्यापक रूप से चचाि की िई। सरकार िे 22,600 से अनिक 
सुझावों की समीक्षा की थी। 
अनिनियम क े  अिुसार, व्यक्तिित िािकारी का अथि है नकसी ऐसे व्यक्ति क े  बारे में कोई भी िे्ा, निसे 
उस िे्ा क े  माध्यम से या उसक े  संिभि में पहचािा िा सक े । 
सूचिा का अनिकार अनिनियम (“आर्ीआई  अनिनियम”) क े  उद्देश्य मिबूत बिे हुए हैं क्योंनक िारा 
8(2) सावििनिक नहत में व्यक्तिित िािकारी क े  प्रक्ीकरण की अिुमनत िेती है। आर्ीआई अनिनियम 
की िारा 8(2) इस प्रकार है: 
“शासकीय िुप्त बात अनिनियम, 1923 (19 of 1923) में िो क ु छ भी कहा िया है या उप-िारा (1) क े  
अिुसार अिुमत नकसी भी छ ू ् क े  बाविूि, यनि िािकारी क े  प्रक्ीकरण में सावििनिक नहत, संरनक्षत 
नहतों को होिे वाले िुकसाि से अनिक है , तो कोई सावििनिक प्रानिकरण िािकारी तक पहुुँच की 
अिुमनत िे सकता है।” 
आर्ीआई अनिनियम की िारा 8(1)(ञ) में संशोिि पुट्टास्वामी निणिय क े  अिुरूप है और सावििनिक 
नहत क े  साथ कोई समझौता िहीं करता। सावििनिक नहत आर्ीआई अनिनियम की िारा 8(2) क े  माध्यम 
से संरनक्षत रहता है।  
इस प्रकार, यह संशोिि क े वल न्यानयक नसद्ांतों को संनहताबद् और सुदृढ़ करता है। यह सुनिनित करता 
है नक वैयक्तिक िािकारी कािूि क े  अिुसार ही प्रक् की िाए। 
***** 
 
704                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2288 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम्बर, 2025 को निया िािा है । 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
  
साइबर सुरक्षा सुदृढ़ीिरण 
2288.  श्ऱीमत़ी रेखा शमाा: 
  
 क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉकिि़ी और सूचिा प्रौद्योकिि़ी मांत्ऱी यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नक: 
 
(क) भारत की साइबर सुरक्षा को सुदृढ़ करिे क े  नलए कौि-से किम उठाए िए हैं; 
(ख) सीईआर्ी-इि क े  प्रमुख हस्तक्षेप क्या हैं; और 
(ि) क्या हररयाणा में साइबर सुरक्षा क्षमता-निमााण नकया िा रहा है? 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉकिि़ी और सूचिा प्रौद्योकिि़ी राज्य मांत्ऱी (श्ऱी किकति प्रसाद) 
 
(ि) से (ि): भारत सरकार की िीनतयों का उद्देश्य सभी उपयोिकतााओं क े  नलए एक खुला, सुरनक्षत, 
निश्वसिीय और ििाबिेह इं्रिे् सुनिनित करिा है। सरकार िे िेश में साइबर सुरक्षा को सुदृढ़ करिे 
क े  नलए कई पहलें की हैं, नििमें अन्य बातों क े साथ-साथ निम्ननलखखत भी शानमल हैं -  
1. भारतीय कम्प्यू्र आपातकालीि  प्रनतनिया िल (स्ा -इि) को सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी (आई्ी)  
अनिनियम, 2000 की िारा 70ख क े  प्राििािों क े  तहत साइबर सुरक्षा घ्िाओं पर कारािाई 
करिे के  नलए राष्ट्र ीय एिेंसी के  रूप में िानमत नकया िया है। 
2. स्ा-इि द्वारा कायााखित राष्ट्र ीय साइबर समिय क ें द्र (एिसीसीसी) साइबर सुरक्षा खतरों का पता 
लिािे क े  नलए साइबर स्पेस की िांच करता है। यह कारािाई करिे क े  नलए संबंनित संिठिों, 
राज्य सरकारों और नहतिारक एिेंनसयों क े  साथ िािकारी साझा करता है। 
3. साइबर स्वच्छता क ें द्र (सीएसक े ) 
• स्ा-इि द्वारा प्रिाि की िािे िाली एक िािररक-क ें नद्रत सेिा, िो स्वच्छ भारत क े  दृनष्ट्कोण को 
साइबर स्पेस तक निस्ताररत करती है। 
• यह बॉ्िे् क्लीनिंि ए ं ड मैलिेयर एिानलनसस सें्र है और िुभााििापूणा कायािमों  का पता 
लिािे में मिि करता है और इसे ह्ािे क े  नलए मुफ्त ् ू ल प्रिाि करता है। 
• यह िािररकों और संिठिों क े  नलए साइबर सुरक्षा युखियााँ और श्रेष्ठ पद्धनतयााँ भी प्रिाि करता 
है। 
4. सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी अनिनियम, 2000 की िारा 70क के उपबंिों के अंतिात िेश में महत्वपूणा 
सूचिा अिसंरचिा के संरक्षण के नलए राष्ट्र ीय महत्वपूणा सूचिा अिसंरचिा संरक्षण क े न्द्र 
(एिसीआईआईपीसी) की स्थापिा की िई है। 
5. बैंनक ं ि और नित्तीय क्षेत्र में साइबर घ्िा प्रनतनिया के समिय के नलए स्ा-इि के तहत नित्त 
क्षेत्र में क ं यू्र सुरक्षा घ्िा प्रनतनिया िल (सीएसआईआर्ी-निि) मई 2020 से काया कर रही 
है। 
6. सीएसआईआर्ी-पािर नबिली क्षेत्र की संस्थाओं के भीतर साइबर सुरक्षा मुद्दों के समिय के 
नलए स्ा-इि की एक निस्ताररत शाखा के रूप में 23 नसतंबर 2024 से काया कर रहा है। 
7. िृह मंत्रालय (एमएचए) िे समखित और प्रभािी तरीक े से साइबर अपरािों से निप्िे के नलए 
भारतीय साइबर अपराि समिय क ें द्र (आई4सी) की स्थापिा की है। 
705                                                      

8. साइबर सुरक्षा की खस्थनत और निनभन्न संिठिों की तैयाररयों का आकलि करिे में सक्षम बिािे 
के नलए साइबर सुरक्षा मॉक नड र ल नियनमत रूप से आयोनित नकए िाते हैं। 
9. स्ा-इि िे सूचिा सुरक्षा सिोत्तम पद्धनतयों क े कायााियि का समथाि और लेखा परीक्षा करिे 
के नलए 231 सुरक्षा लेखा परीक्षण संिठिों को सूचीबद्ध नकया है। 
10. स्ा-इि आन्ानिनशयल इं्ेनलिेंस का उपयोि करक े िुभााििापूणा हमलों और क ं यू्र, िे्िक ा 
और डे्ा की सुरक्षा के नलए निरंतर आिार पर प्रनतउपायों सनहत ििीितम साइबर 
खतरों/सुभेद्धताओं क े बारे में चेतािनियााँ और परामशी नििेश िारी करता है। 
11. स्ा-इि िे सॉफ्टिेयर/उपकरणों में सुभेद्धताओं को  ठीक करिे के नलए 
शोिकतााओं/खोिकों/निि े ताओं के साथ संग्रह, निश्लेषण, शमि और समिय के नलए एक 
निम्मेिार सुभेद्यता प्रक्ीकरण और समिय कायािम संचानलत नकया है। 
12. स्ा-इि िे नसतंबर 2025 में एक साइबर सुरक्षा बेसलाइि िस्तािेज़ िारी नकया है, िो सूक्ष्म, लघु 
और मध्यम उद्यमों (एमएसएमई) के नलए अिुशंनसत सुरक्षा नियंत्रणों का न्यूितम से् प्रिाि 
करता है। इससे एमएसएमई को अपिी साइबर सुरक्षा खस्थनत को सुदृढ़ करिे के नलए आिश्यक 
उपायों को लािू करिे में मिि नमलती है। 
13. स्ा-इि िे सॉफ्टिेयर, हाडािेयर, आन्ानिनशयल इं्ेनलिेंस, क्ां्म क ं यून्ंि और निप्टोग्रािी 
आिश्यकताओं के नलए नबल ऑि मै्ेररयल्स (बीओएम) के नलए िुलाई 2025 में अद्यति 
तकिीकी निशानििेश िारी नकए हैं। 
क. इि निशानििेशों का उद्देश्य सॉफ्टिेयर, हाडािेयर और उभरती प्रौद्योनिनकयों के नलए 
आपूनता श्रृंखलाओं की सुरक्षा और पारिनशाता को बढ़ािा है। 
 
14. सूचिा सुरक्षा कशक्षा और िािरूिता (आईएसईए) िार्ाशालाए ां 
• आईएसईए सूचिा सुरक्षा में मािि संसािि क े  निमााण और िािररकों क े  बीच साइबर स्वच्छता 
िािरूकता ि ै लािे क े  नलए एक पहल है। 
• अब तक, 4,125 कायाशालाए ं  आयोनित की िा चुकी हैं, िो नशक्षानििों, कािूि प्रिताि, सरकारी 
कनमायों और आम ििता सनहत 9.25 लाख  से अनिक प्रनतभानियों तक पहंची हैं। 
हररयाणा में 9,500 से अनिक प्रनतभानियों को शानमल  करते हए 63 कायाशालाओं का आयोिि नकया 
िया है। राष्ट्र ीय प्रौद्योनिकी संस्थाि क ु रुक्षेत्र क े  माध्यम से हररयाणा में 2,800 से अनिक छात्रों/पेशेिरों को 
प्रनशनक्षत नकया िया है। 
प्रित संिणि निकास क ें द्र (सी-डैक), मोहाली द्वारा हररयाणा में 105 सरकारी अनिकाररयों को निनभन्न 
अल्पकानलक प्रनशक्षण कायािमों में प्रनशनक्षत नकया िया है। 
15. स्ा-इि द्वारा प्रकशक्षण िार्ाक्रम 
स्ा-इि सरकारी, सािािनिक और नििी संिठिों में साइबर सुरक्षा कायाबल को कौशल प्रिाि करिे क े  
नलए उद्योि भािीिारों क े  सहयोि से साइबर सुरक्षा प्रनशक्षण कायािम आयोनित करता है। 
िषा 2024 और 2025 (ििंबर तक) क े  िौराि 12014 और 19915 प्रनतभानियों को शानमल करते हए 
23 और 30 प्रनशक्षण कायािम आयोनित नकए िए, नििमें हररयाणा क े  िमशः  394 और 1002 प्रनतभािी 
शानमल थे। 
16. राष्ट्र ़ीर् साइबर सुरक्षा िािरूिता िकतकिकिर्ााँ 
सरकार िेश भर में िािररकों क े साथ-साथ तकिीकी साइबर समुिाय क े  नलए कायािमों और िनतनिनियों 
का आयोिि करती है। इिमें से क ु छ क े  रूप में निम्ननलखखत को शानमल नकया िया हैं: 
• हर िषा अक्टू बर में राष्ट्र ीय साइबर सुरक्षा िािरूकता माह (एिसीएसएएम)  
• िरिरी क े  पहले मंिलिार को सुरनक्षत इं्रिे् नििस  
• स्वच्छता पखिाडा (1 से 15 िरिरी), और 
• हर माह क े  पहले बुििार को साइबर िािरूकता नििस (सीिेडी) 
****** 
706                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2289 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम्बर, 2025 को निया िािा है । 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
  
सरिारी ईमेल अिाउांट िो जोहो में स्थानाांतरण (माइग्रेशन) 
 
2289.  श्री ि े . आर. एन. राजेश ि ु मार: 
  
 क्या इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकनिी और सूचना प्रौद्योकििी मांत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नक: 
 
(क) नकतिे कें द्रीय सरकारी ईमेल अकाउं् और प्रोडक्टिनि्ी सुइ् लाइसेंस, राष्ट्र ीय सूचिा निज्ञाि कें द्र 
(एिआईसी) से जोहो कॉपोरेशि प्ले्फॉमम में स्थािांतररत (माइग्रे्) नकए िए; 
(ख) इस पररयोििा क े  नलए सरकार द्वारा क ु ल नकतिी नित्तीय मंिूरी िी िई है और अिुबंध की नतनि और 
अिनध क्या है; और 
(ि) इि अकाउं् क े  जोहो में स्थािांतरण (माइग्रेशि) से पूिम लेखा परीक्षाए ँ  करिे िाली संस्थाओं, लेखा 
परीक्षाओं की नतनियों और उिक े  निष्कर्षों सनहत की िई सुरक्षा लेखा परीक्षाओं का ब्यौरा क्या है ? 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकनिी और सूचना प्रौद्योकििी राज्य मांत्री (श्री कजकतन प्रसाद) 
 
(क) से (ग): सरकार अपने मंत्रालय ं और विभाग ं के वलए एक मजबूत, संप्रभु और सुरवित आविकाररक ई-मेल 
प्रणाली के महत्व क  पहचानती है। 
तदनुसार, सरकार का आदेश है वक आविकाररक संचार के वलए क े िल राष्ट्र ीय सूचना विज्ञान क ें द्र (एनआईसी) 
द्वारा प्रदान की जाने िाली ई-मेल सेिाओं का उपय ग वकया जाएगा। 
इसे सुवनवित करने के वलए, सरकार ने एनआईसी के माध्यम से माचच 2024 के महीने में एक मास्टर वसस्टम 
इंटीग्रेटर (एमएसआई) – मैससच ज ह  का चयन वकया है, ज  सभी सरकारी उपय गकताचओं का समर्चन करने में 
सिम एक मजबूत क्लाउड-आिाररत ईमेल समािान के वलए है। 
ज ह  प्लेटफॉमच पर माइग्रेट वकए गए खात ं की संख्या लगभग 12.68 लाख है। 
भुगतान ज ह  प्लेटफॉमच पर माइग्रेट वकए गए ईमेल खात ं की िास्तविक संख्या के आिार पर वकया जाता है। 
ईमेल खात ं के वलए मावसक मूल्य क्रमशः  30 जीबी और 100 जीबी मेलबॉक्स आकार के वलए 200 रुपये और 
300 रुपये है। वित्तीय िर्च 2024-25 के वलए, क ु ल व्यय 41.33 कर ड़ रुपए र्ा और चालू वित्तीय िर्च 2025-26 
के वलए, अब तक वकया गया व्यय 120 कर ड़ रुपए है। 
सेिा प्रदाता का चयन एक खुली वनविदा प्रवक्रया के माध्यम से वकया गया र्ा, वजसमें शॉटचवलस्ट वकए गए 
ब लीदाताओं और सरकारी उपय गकताचओं के नावमत समूह ं के सार् अििारणा का प्रमाण (पीओसी) शावमल र्ा। 
यह पररय जना "मेक इन इंवडया" अनुपालन पर ज र देती है और यह सुवनवित करती है वक सरकार अनुबंि के 
तहत उत्पन्न सभी डेटा और बौद्धिक संपदा का पूणच स्वावमत्व बनाए रखे। 
नए ज ह  प्लेटफॉमच पर ईमेल सेिा के लाइि ह ने के बाद, विवभन्न मंत्रालय ं और विभाग ं के उपय गकताचओं से 
ऑनलाइन प्रवतवक्रया एकत्र की गई। सेिा प्रदाता - मैससच ज ह  एक पंजीक ृ त भारतीय इकाई है ज  भारतीय कानून ं 
और अविकार िेत्र के अिीन है। 
सेिा प्रदाता के सार् अनुबंि डेटा संप्रभुता का कड़ाई से पालन सुवनवित करता है। सुरवित प्रिासन और 
पररनियोिि सुवनवित करने के वलए मजबूत सुरिा मूल्यांकन वकए गए हैं: 
• मई 2024 में मानकीकरण परीिण और गुणित्ता प्रमाणन (एस्ीक्यूसी), एमईआई्ीिाई द्वारा व्यापक 
सुरिा ऑवडट 
• सेंटर फॉर डेिलपमेंट ऑफ एडिांस्ड क ं प्यूवटंग (सी-डैक), एमईआईटीिाई द्वारा अगस्त 2025 में द ू सरा 
पूणच सुरिा ऑवडट 
प्रार्वमक और आपदा ररकिरी डेटा क ें द्र ं सवहत क्लाउड-आिाररत समािान भौवतक रूप से भारत के भीतर द्धित 
हैं और वकसी भी डेटा क  देश के बाहर साझा या द हराया नहीं जा सकता है। 
****** 
 
 
707                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2290 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम्बर, 2025 को निया िािा है । 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
  
एससीएल, मोहाली ि े  आधुकििीिरण िी योजिा 
 
2290.  डा. किक्रमजीत कसांह साहिी: 
  
 क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉकििी और सूचिा प्रौद्योकििी मांत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नक: 
 
(क) क्या यह सच है नक सरकार िे फरवरी 2024 में यह घोषणा की थी नक सेमी-क ं डक्टर लेबोरे्री 
(एससीएल), मोहाली क े  नलए 10,000 करोड़ रुपए की एक आधुनिकीकरण योििा तैयार है 
और इसका प्रस्ताव मंनत्रमंडल को भेि निया िया है; 
(ख) यनि हााँ, तो सम्पूणण योििा का ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ि) क्या इस योििा पर मंनत्रमंडल में चचाण हुई है; 
(घ) यनि हााँ, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है और यनि िहीं, तो इसक े  क्या कारण हैं; 
(ङ) क्या एससीएल मोहाली क े  आधुनिकीकरण क े  नलए कोई समय-सीमा निधाणररत की िई है; और 
(च) यनि हााँ, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है और यनि िहीं, तो इसक े  क्या कारण हैं? 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉकििी और सूचिा प्रौद्योकििी राज्य मांत्री (श्री कजकति प्रसाद) 
 
(ि) से (च): सेमीक ं डक्टर विकास कायणनीवि माननीय प्रधानमंत्री क े  आत्मवनर्भर र्ारि और मेक इन 
इंवडया, मेक फॉर द िर्ल्भ क े  दृविकोण से वनदेविि है। सरकार टैलेंटपूल, वडजाइन, फ ै विक े िन, असेंबली, 
टेस्टंग और पैक े वजंग को शानमल करिे हुए एक संपूणभ इकोवसटम विकवसि कर रही है। 
सेमी-क ं डक्टर लेबोरेटरी (एससीएल), मोहाली का आधुवनकीकरण इसी रणनीवि का वहस्सा है। इसका 
लक्ष्य उत्पादन क्षमिा और दक्षिा में सुधार करक े  अंिररक्ष, रक्षा और रेलिे जैसे क्षेत्रों में र्ारि की 
रणनीविक जरूरिों को सुदृढ़ करना है। 
उन्नि सुविधा छात्रों, िोधकिाभओं और टाटभ-अप को उनक े  विप वडजाइनों को िास्तविक वसवलकॉन विप्स 
में बदलने में मदद करक े  र्ी सहायिा करेगी। 
सेमी-क ं डक्टर लेबोरेटरी (एससीएल), मोहाली 
एससीएल, मोहाली एप्लीक े िन स्पेवसवफक इंटीग्रेटेड सवक भ ट, ऑप्टो-इलेक्ट र ॉवनक्स और माइक्रो इलेक्ट र ो-
मैक े वनकल वसटम (एमईएमएस) उपकरणों क े  वलए ए ं ड-टू-ए ं ड समाधान प्रदान करिा है, वजसमें 
वडजाइन, फ ै विक े िन, असेंबली, पैक े वजंग, परीक्षण और विश्वसनीयिा आश्वासन िावमल हैं। 
वपछले 40 िर्षों में, एससीएल ने लगर्ग 400 उत्पादों सवहि 80 से अवधक विप िेररए ं ट विकवसि वकए 
हैं। इनमें मुख्य रूप से र्ारि क े  अंिररक्ष और अन्य रणनीविक क्षेत्रों क े  वलए उत्पाद िावमल हैं। 
एससीएल क े  पास प्रयोगिाला अनुसंधान से लेकर पूणभ पैमाने पर उत्पादन िक सेमीक ं डक्टर विप्स क े  
वडजाइन, वनमाभण, परीक्षण और पैक े ज की ए ं ड-टू-ए ं ड क्षमिा है। इसकी प्रमुख सुविधाओं में िावमल हैं: 
1.   चचप चडजाइन 
• एससीएल इलेक्ट र ॉवनक्स में उपयोग वकए जाने िाले विवर्न्न प्रकार क े  विप्स को वडजाइन 
करिा है, जैसे एनालॉग, वडवजटल, मेमोरी, रेवडयो-फ्रीक्व ें सी और इमेवजंग विप्स। 
• इनमें कटम विप्स (एएसआईसी), वसटम-ऑन-विप्स और टेट विप्स िावमल हैं। 
708                                                      

• इनमें से कई वडजाइन पहले ही अंिररक्ष और अन्य उच्च-विश्वसनीयिा अनुप्रयोगों में उपयोग 
क े  वलए सफलिापूिभक वनवमभि और प्रमावणि वकए जा िुक े  हैं। 
2.   चचप चनमााण (सीएमओएस फ ै ब) 
• एससीएल 180-नैनोमीटर िकनीक का उपयोग करक े  8 इंि की िेफर वनमाभण सुविधा 
संिावलि करिा है। 
• यह अत्यवधक वनयंवत्रि क्लीनरूम िािािरण में एनालॉग, वडवजटल और नमक्स्ड-वसग्नल विप्स 
का उत्पादन करिा है जो अंिररािर ीय मानकों को पूरा करिे हैं। 
3. एमईएमएस चिचनमााण 
• एससीएल 6 इंि की िेफर लाइन का उपयोग करक े  एमईएमएस वडिाइस (छोटे सेंसर और 
माइक्रो-वडिाइस) र्ी बनािी है। 
• सटीकिा और गुणित्ता सुवनविि करने क े  वलए हर िरण में उन्नि वनरीक्षण और परीक्षण 
उपकरणों का उपयोग वकया जािा है। 
4.  असेंबली और पैक े चजंग 
• वनमाभण क े  बाद, विप्स को काट वदया जािा है, इकट्ठा वकया जािा है और सुरक्षात्मक वसरेवमक 
पैक े ज में सील कर वदया जािा है। 
• स्थावयत्व और दीर्भकावलक विश्वसनीयिा सुवनविि करने क े  वलए वििेर्ष मिीनों का उपयोग 
करक े  इन प्रवक्रयाओं को क्लीनरूम में वकया जािा है। 
 
 
5.  गुणित्ता और चिश्वसनीयता परीक्षण 
• सभी नचप्स वैनिक िुणवत्ता और प्रिशणि मािकों को पूरा करिे क े  नलए सख्त परीक्षण से 
िुिरती हैं। 
• उत्पािों की सावधािीपूवणक िांच , परीक्षण और नवश्लेषण नकया िाता है तानक क े वल 
िोषरनहत और नविसिीय नचप्स की आपूनतण की िा सक े, नवशेष रूप से रणिीनतक क्षेत्रों क े  
नलए। 
6.  सहायक अिसांरचिा 
• एससीएल क े  पास नचप निमाणण क े  नलए आवश्यक नबिली आपूनतण, अनत-शुद्ध िल, स्वच्छ 
वायु और नवशेष िैसों क े  नलए सुदृढ़ प्रणानलयााँ हैं। 
• ये सुनवधाएं  सुरनक्षत और स्थिर सेमीकं डक्टर उत्पािि को बढ़ावा िेिे के  नलए अंतरराष्ट्र ीय 
िुणवत्ता मािकों पर संचानलत होती हैं। 
एससीएल मोहाली का आधुचनकीकरण 
मोहाली स्थित एससीएल का आधुनिक मािकों क े  अिुरूप उन्नयि नकया िा रहा है और सरकार इसमें 
4500 करोड़ रुपये का निवेश करेिी। इसमें उत्पािि क्षमता में बड़े पैमािे पर वृस्थद्ध शानमल होिी, निसका 
लक्ष्य वतणमाि स्तर से वेफसण का उत्पािि 100 िुिा बढ़ािा है। 
अपने आधुवनकीकरण क े  भाि क े  रूप में, एससीएल ने अपनी विप वनमाभण सुविधाओं को उन्नत करने क े  
वलए प्रस्ताि आमंवत्रि वकए थे। 
प्रस्ताि क े  कायणक्षेत्र में मौजूदा 8-इंि विप वनमाभण सुविधा (8 "सीएमओएस िेफर फ ै ब) का विस्तार करना, 
उन्नि विप्स (आरएफ-सीएमओएस, सीएमओएस इमेज सेंसर और सीएमओएस एििी एलडीएमओएस 
क े  वलए प्रौद्योवगकी आईपी) क े  वलए नई िकनीकों को अपनाना और दक्षिा और गुणित्ता में सुधार क े  
वलए आधुवनक सॉफ्टिेयर और स्विालन प्रणाली स्थावपि करना िावमल है। 
प्राप्त बोवलयों का िकनीकी मूल्ांकन और वित्तीय मूल्ांकन पूरा कर वलया गया है, और पररणाम 
एससीएल िेबसाइट पर प्रकाविि वकए गए हैं। 
***** 
 
709                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2291 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम्बर, 2025 को निया िािा है । 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
  
डेटा सेंटर सर्वर और हाडवर्ेयर िा आयात 
 
2291.  डा. किनेश शर्ाव: 
  
 क्या इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकनिी और सूचना प्रौद्योकििी र्ांत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नक: 
 
(क) निित पांच नित्तीय िर्षों क े  िौराि आयानतत सिवरों क े  मूल्य और मात्रा का िर्षव-िार प्रमुख स्रोत 
िेश-िार ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ख) डे्ा सें्र क े  नलए आिश्यक हाडविेयर क े  घरेलू उत्पािि और आयात का अिुपात क्या है और 
निित पांच िर्षों में यह अिुपात नकस प्रकार पररिनतवत हुआ है; 
(ि) उच्च क्षमता िाले सिवरों एिं सम्बद्ध अियिों क े  घरेलू निमावण को बढािा िेिे क े  नलए सरकार 
द्वारा ितवमाि या प्रस्तानित योििाओं क े  अंतिवत आिे क्या किम उठाए िािे हैं; 
(घ) क्या सरकार िे राष्ट्र ीय नडनि्ल अिसंरचिा की सुरक्षा पर आयात निभवरता के  प्रभाि का कोई 
आकलि नकया है, यनि हााँ, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है; और 
(ङ) इस संबंध में प्रस्तानित निशेर्ष प्रोत्साहिों, शुल्ों अथिा िीनतित हस्तक्षेपों का ब्यौरा क्या है? 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकनिी और सूचना प्रौद्योकििी राज्य र्ांत्री (श्री किकतन प्रसाि) 
 
(ि) से (ङ): सरकार सर्वरोों और सूचना प्रौद्योगिकी हार्वर्ेयर क े  आयात की सुरक्षा, रणनीगतक और 
आनथवक प्रभार्ोों क े  प्रगत पूरी तरह सचेत है। एआई का लोकतोंत्रीकरण करने और िणना क्षमता का गर्स्तार 
करने क े  गलए भारत क े  प्रयास क े  साथ, सर्वर और अन्य र्ेटा क ें द्र से सोंबोंगित उपकरणोों की माोंि तेजी से 
बढ़ रही है। 
भारत का दृनष्ट्कोण है नक िेश क े  भीतर सिवर और संबंनधत उपकरण एिं घ्कों क े  निमावण की आपूनतव 
श्ृंखला का क्रनमक निकास नकया िाए। 
इस रणनीगत क े  गहस्से क े  रूप में भारत में इकोगसस्टम, इलेक्ट् र ॉगनक्स क ों पोनेंट मैन्युफ ै क्चररोंि स्कीम 
(ईसीएमएस), सेमीकॉन इोंगर्या प्रोग्राम, बडे पैमाने पर इलेक्ट् र ॉगनक्स निनिमावण क े  गलए पीएलआई, आई्ी 
हार्वर्ेयर, स्पेक्स और इलेक्ट् र ॉगनक्स मैन्युफ ै क्चररोंि क्लस्टर (ईएमसी/ईएमसी 2.0) जैसी पहलोों क े  माध्यम 
से तेजी से गर्स्तार कर रहा है। 
इस सोंबोंि में भारत सरकार की प्रासोंगिक नीगतयाों निम्नािुसार हैं: 
आईटी हार्डवेयर क े  लिए पीएिआई योजना 
यह योजना सर्वर, लैपटॉप, टैबलेट, ऑल -इन-र्न (एआईओ) पीसी और अल्ट् र ा स्मॉल फॉमव फ ै क्ट्र 
(यूएसएफएफ) उपकरणोों क े  घरेलू उत्पादन को बढ़ार्ा देती है। 
इिेक्ट् र ॉलनक्स क ं पोनेंट मैन्युफ ै क्चररंग स्कीम (ईसीएमएस) 
ईसीएमएस ऑगिकल ट र ाोंसीर्र और सर्वर, राउटर और नेटर्गक िं ि गसस्टम में उपयोि गकए जाने र्ाले 
गनष्क्रिय घटकोों को कर्र करता है। सरकार को इनक े  गर्गनमावण क े  गलए उद्योि से उत्साहजनक 
प्रगतगियाए ों  गमली हैं। 
710                                                      

टेलीिॉर् उपकरणों क े  लिए टेलीिॉर् लवभाग पीएिआई योजना 
्ेलीकॉम उपकरणों क े  नलए पीएलआई योििा, िो डे्ा-सें्र और सिवर इंफ्रास्ट् र क्चर का आिश्यक नहस्सा 
होिे िाले राउ्र, स्विच और अन्य िे्िनक िं ि नियर क े  स्थािीय उत्पािि को प्रोत्सानहत करती है। 
लर्जाइन लिंक्र् इंसेंलटव (डीएलआई) 
सरकार िे भारत की नचप नडजाइि में ताकत का लाभ उठािे क े  नलए डीएलआई योििा लॉन्च की है। 
निनभन्न उत्पािों िैसे सिवर, एआई नडिाइस, ्ेलीकॉम उपकरण, स्मा्व मी्र आनि क े  नलए 24 नचप्स और 
नसस्ट्म ऑि नचप्स (एसओसीएस ) क े  नलए समथवि प्रिाि नकया िया है।  
स्व-इि िे िुलाई 2025 में सॉफ्टिेयर, हाडविेयर सनहत सिवर, आन्वनिनशयल इं्ेनलिेंस, क्ां्म क ं प्यून्ंि 
और नक्रप्टोग्रािी आिश्यकताओं क े  नलए नबल ऑि म्ीररयल्स (बीओएम) पर अपडे्ेड तकिीकी 
निशानििेश भी िारी नकए हैं। 
इन गदशागनदेशोों का उद्देश्य सॉफ्टर्ेयर, हार्वर्ेयर और उभरती प्रौद्योगिगकयोों क े  गलए आपूगतव श्रोंखलाओों 
की सुरक्षा और पारदगशवता को बढ़ाना है। 
भारत में इिेक्ट् र ॉलनक्स लवलनमाडण का लवकास 
इन सरकारी नीगतयोों और पहलोों क े  पररणामस्वरूप, इलेक्ट् र ॉगनक उत्पादन ~₹1.9 लाख करोड (गर्त्त र्र्व 
2014-15) से छह िुना बढ़कर गर्त्त र्र्व 2024-25 में ~₹11.3 लाख करोड हो िया है। इसी अर्गि क े  
दौरान गनयावत भी ~₹0.38 लाख करोड से आठ िुना बढ़कर ~ ₹ 3.3 लाख करोड हो िया है। 
र्ैगिक और घरेलू क ों पगनयाों अब भारत में गनर्ेश कर रही हैं। इनक े  गनमावण में जाने र्ाले सर्वर, नेटर्गक िं ि 
उपकरणोों और उपकरणोों को गर्जाइन और गनमावण करने क े  गलए घरेलू क ों पगनयोों की क्षमता और क्षमता 
में र्रष्क्रि हुई है। 
भारतीय क ों पगनयाों अब र्ैगिक ओईएम क े  साथ-साथ घरेलू ब्ाोंर्ोों क े  गलए सर्वर का गनमावण कर रही हैं। 
***** 
  
 
 
711                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2292 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
 
ईसीएमएस‍और‍सेमीि ां डक्‍ टर‍नवाचार‍‍‍‍ 
 
2292.  श्री‍िणाद‍पुरिायस्‍ थ:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क) इलेक्‍ ् र ानिक्‍ स कम् पोिेन् ् मेिुफ े क्‍ चररंि स् कीम (ईसीएमएस) की ि ू सरी नकश् त क े  अंतिगत, क ु ल प्रस् तानित 
नििेश तथा अिुमानित उत् पािि मूल् य सनहत, प्रिाि की िई स् िीक ृ नतयों का ब् यौरा क्‍ या है;  
(ख) िई स् िीक ृ त इकाइयां नकि राज यों में अिस्थित हैं तथा यह योििा संतुनलत क्षेत्रीय निकास और उच् च -
कौशलयुक्‍ त रोििार सृिि में नकस सीमा तक सहयोि िेती है;   
(ि) ििीितम स् िीक ृ नतयों क े  अंतिगत शानमल इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिक घ्क और सब-असेंबली की श्रेनणयां क्‍ या हैं तथा 
इि पररयोििाओं से नकि प्रमुख क्षेत्रों को लाभ नमलिे की अपेक्षा है; और  
 
(घ) भारत की प्रथम पीढी की ऊिाग-क ु शल एि नसनलकॉि नचप एआरक े ए-िीक े ्ी1 क े  अिािरण का ब् यौरा 
क्‍ या है?  
 
उत्तर 
 
इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्योकििी‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍किकतन‍प्रसाद) 
(ि) से (घ): भारत सरकार की िीनतयां माििीय  प्रधािमंत्री क े  मेक इि इंनिया और आत्मनिभगर भारत क े  
दृनिकोण से प्रेररत हैं। इसका उद्देश्य इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी क्षेत्र क े  नलए एक संपूणग इकोनसस्टम का निमागण करिा है। 
हमिे िेश में तैयार उत्पािों क े  निमागण क े  साथ अपिी इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी यात्रा शुरू की और नफर मॉड्यूल निकनसत 
करिे पर ध्याि क ें नित करिा शुरू नकया। अब उप-मॉड्यूल/घ्कों और इसक े  निमागण में िािे िाले कच्चे माल, 
उपकरण और मशीिरी को निकनसत करिे पर ध्याि क ें नित नकया िया है। 
नपछले 11 िर्षों में भारत में  इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी निनिमागण का काफी निस्तार हुआ है। हाल क े  िर्षों में भारत में  
इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी निनिमागण इकाइयों द्वारा मूल्यिधगि में भी काफी िृस्थि हुई है।   इसे निम्ननलस्थखत आँकडों द्वारा 
अिलोनकत नकया िा सकता है: 
                                                                                                                    करोड रुपये में 
# 2014-15 2024-25 कटप्पकणयाां 
इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी िस्तुओं का उत्पािि (₹) ~1.9 लाख करोड ~11.3 लाख करोड 6 िुिा िृस्थि  
712                                                      

इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी िस्तुओं का नियागत (₹) ~0.38 लाख करोड ~3.3 लाख करोड 8 िुिा िृस्थि  
मोबाइल फोि का उत्पािि (₹) ~0.18 लाख करोड ~5.5 लाख करोड 28 िुिा िृस्थि  
मोबाइल फोि का नियागत (₹) ~0.01 लाख करोड ~ 2 लाख करोड 127 िुिा िृस्थि  
 
इलेक्ट् र ॉनिक उत्पाि भारत से नियागत नकए िािे िाले शीर्षग तीि िस्तुओं सामािों में से एक हैं। 
यह पररितगि सरकार की इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी निनिमागण रणिीनत द्वारा संभि हुआ था। नपछले 11 िर्षों में कई पहलें  
की िई हैं। इसमे निम्ननलस्थखत शानमल हैं: 
• बडे पैमािे पर इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी निनिमागण क े  नलए उत्पािि संबि प्रोत्साहि (पीएलआई) योििा। 
• आई्ी हािगिेयर क े  नलए उत्पािि संबि प्रोत्साहि (पीएलआई) योििा। 
• इलेक्ट् र ॉनिक घ्कों और सेमीक ं िक्ट्रों क े  निनिमागण को बढािा िेिे हेतु योििा (स्पेक्स)। 
• इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी निनिमागण क्लस्टर (ईएमसी और ईएमसी 2.0) योििा। 
• सािगिनिक खरीि में घरेलू स्तर पर निनमगत  उत्पािों को प्राथनमकता िेिे  हेतु सािगिनिक खरीि (मेक 
इि इंनिया को प्राथनमकता) आिेश 2017 
• कराधाि में सुधार, निसमें शुल्क संरचिा का युस्थिकरण, पूंिीित िस्तुओं पर मूल सीमा शुल्क से छ ू ् 
आनि शानमल हैं। 
• लािू कािूिों/निनियमों क े  अधीि इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी निनिमागण में 100% एफिीआई की अिुमनत। 
इलेक्ट् र ॉकनिी घटि‍कवकनमााण‍योिना‍(ईसीएमएस) 
इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी निनिमागण को और अनधक सुदृढ करिे क े  नलए, सरकार िे इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी घ्क निनिमागण योििा 
(ईसीएमएस) शुरू की है। यह योििा रेऩिस्टर, क ै पेनस्र, इंिक्ट्सग, नप्रं्ेि सनक ग ् बोिग, सब-असेंबली, इलेक्ट् र ो-
मैक े निकल आनि िैसे घ्कों क े निनिमागण को प्रोत्सानहत करती है 
इस योििा को अब तक उद्योि से अभूतपूिग प्रनतनिया  नमली है। 59,350 करोड रुपये क े  लनक्षत नििेश क े  
मुकाबले 1.15 लाख करोड रुपये क े नििेश मूल्य िाली पररयोििाओं क े  नलए आिेिि प्राप्त हुए हैं। 
सरकार िे इस योििा क े  तहत अब तक 24 आिेििों को मंिूरी िी है, नििमें से 17 आिेििों को ि ू सरी चरण 
में मंिूरी िे िी िई है। 
इि 17 आिेििों में 7,172 करोड रुपये क े  नििेश, 65,111 करोड रुपये क े  उत्पािि और 11,808 प्रत्यक्ष 
रोििार सृनित होिे का अिुमाि लिाया िया है। 
इि 17 आिेििों की निनिमागण इकाइयां 9 राज्ों में स्थित हैं, िो इलेक्ट् र ॉनिक घ्कों क े  निमागण में िेश भर क े  
राज्ों की व्यापक और निनिध भािीिारी को उिािर करती हैं। 
ये स्वीक ृ त आिेिक मोबाइल, आई्ी हािगिेयर उत्पािों और संबंनधत उपकरणों क े  नलए मल्टी-लेयर पीसीबी, 
क ै मरा मॉड्यूल, किेक्ट्र, ऑनसले्र, ऑनिकल ् र ांसीिर और एिक्लोिर िैसे इलेक्ट् र ॉनिक घ्कों की एक 
निस्तृत श्रृंखला का निमागण करेंिे। 
इिका उपयोि उपभोिा इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी, ि ू रसंचार, ऑ्ो इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी और आई्ी हािगिेयर आनि िैसे निनभन्न 
क्षेत्रों में नकए िािे की उम्मीि है। 
एआरक े ए िीक े ्ी-1 एक नसस्टम-ऑि-नचप (एसओसी) है निसे  संयुि रूप से मैससग साइए ं ् सेमीक ं िक्ट्र 
और मैससग अ़िीमुथ एआई द्वारा निकनसत  नकया िया है। यह  एसओसी स्मा्ग नबिली मी्र में संभानित  
अिुप्रयोिों क े  साथ उन्नत एि-क ं प्यू् सुनिधाओं का समथगि करता है, िो स्मा्ग नग्रि, स्ीक मी्ररंि और  
आईओ्ी (इं्रिे् ऑफ नथंग्स) बुनियािी ढांचे को सक्षम करता है। 
इस एसओसी का निकास भारत क े  उद्योि की पररपक्वता और उत्पाि-संचानलत और उच्च-प्रिशगि सेमीक ं िक्ट्र 
इकोनसस्टम की ओर बिलाि को िशागता है। 
***** 
 
713                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2293 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
इांकिया-एआई‍इम्‍ पैक्‍ ट‍सकिट‍2026 
 
2293.  श्री‍सतनाि‍कसांह‍सांधू:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क) नकि िेशों, वैनिक प्रौद्योनिकी नििमों और अंतरराष्‍ ् र ीय संिठिों िे आिामी इंनिया-एआई इम् पैक्‍ ् सनम् 2026 
में भाि लेिे की पुनि की है;  
(ख) इस काययक्रम से नवशेषकर एआई अनभशासि, िवाचार और कौशल नवकास िैसे क्षेत्रों में अपेनक्षत प्रमुख पररणाम 
या सहयोिी समझौते क्‍ या हैं; और    
(ि) क्‍ या सरकार िे क्षेत्रीय एआई पहलों को प्रिनशयत करिे और अिुसंधाि एवं उद्यनमता में वैनिक साझेिाररयों को 
आकनषयत करिे क े  नलए पंिाब सनहत राज यों की भािीिारी वाले सत्रों की योििा बिाई है?  
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ ट र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्योकििी‍राज्‍ य‍िांत्री‍(श्री‍किकतन‍प्रसाद) 
का लोकतंत्रीकरण कर रही है। िास्तष्टिक दुष्टनया की समस्याओं को हल करने और अंततः  ष्टिष्टिन्न क्षेत्रों में जीिन को 
बेहतर बनाने क े  ष्टलए आष्टटिष्टिष्टियल इंटेष्टलजेंस (एआई) का उपयोि करने पर ध्यान क ें ष्टित ष्टकया जा रहा है। 
(क) से (ग): माननीय प्रधानमंत्री श्री नरेन्द्र मोदी क े  दृष्टिकोण क े  अनुरूप, सरकार प्रौद्योष्टिकी क े  ष्टिकास और उपयोि 
इसक े  महत्व को पहचानते हुए, िारत सरकार एआई क े  ष्टजम्मेदार और समािेिी उपयोि को बढािा देने क े  ष्टलए 
अंतररािर ीय िािीदारों, उद्योि, ष्टिक्षाष्टिदों और राज्ों क े  साथ ष्टमलकर काम कर रही है। 
भारत-एआई इम्पैक्ट समिट 2026 
िारत 15-20 िरिरी 2026 तक नई ष्टदल्ली में इंष्टियाएआई इम्पैक्ट सष्टमट 2026 को होस्ट कर रहा है। पहली बार, 
ग्लोबल एआई सष्टमट सीरीज़ ग्लोबल साउथ में होिी। यह बदलाि एक अष्टधक समािेिी िैष्टिक एआई संिाद की ओर 
एक व्यापक कदम का संक े त देता है। 
सात 'चक्र' 
ष्टिखर सम्मेलन की ष्टिषयित प्राथष्टमकताए ं , ष्टजन्हें सात 'चक्र' क े  रूप में जाना जाता है, इसक े  प्रमुख उद्देश्ों को रेखांष्टकत 
करती हैं। 
इनमें मानि प ंजी, समािेिन, सुरष्टक्षत और ष्टििसनीय एआई, लचीलापन, निाचार और दक्षता, एआई संसाधनों का 
लोकतंत्रीकरण और आष्टथिक ष्टिकास और सामाष्टजक कल्याण क े  ष्टलए एआई िाष्टमल हैं। 
इन ष्टिषयित क्षेत्रों में एआई ििनेंस, पारदष्टििता, मानि-क ें ष्टित ष्टिकास, कौिल ष्टिकास, निाचार और लचीलापन जैसे मुद्दे 
िाष्टमल हैं। ये चचािए ं  ष्टिखर सम्मेलन क े  कायिक्रमों और ष्टिचार-ष्टिमिि की रणनीष्टतक ष्टदिा को आिे बढाने क े  ष्टलए 
संरेखखत हैं। 
ष्टिखर सम्मेलन में रणनीष्टतक संिाद, ज्ञान क े  आदान-प्रदान और ष्टहतधारकों क े  जुडाि को सक्षम करने क े  ष्टलए ष्टिज़ाइन 
ष्टकया िया एक बहु-ष्टदिसीय कायिक्रम है। इस कायिक्रम में क्षेत्रीय और िैष्टिक एआई पहलों को प्रदष्टिित करने क े  ष्टलए 
एआई एक्सपो, अनुसंधान संिोष्ठी क े  साथ-साथ ष्टिष्टिन्न िोलमेज सम्मेलन, मुख्य िक्ता पैनल चचाि िाष्टमल हैं। 
इस ष्टिखर सम्मेलन में अलि-अलि िेशों क े  सरकारी अनधकारी, ग्लोबल और भारतीय ्ेक्नोलॉिी क ं पनियां, शैक्षनणक 
संस्थाि और न ंक ्ैंक और एआई नवशेषज्ञ और अिुसंधािकताय भाि  लेंिे। 
ष्टिखर सम्मेलन से पहले, पंजाब सष्टहत िारत क े  ष्टिष्टिन्न ष्टहस्ों क े  साथ-साथ दुष्टनया िर में ष्टिष्टिन्न प िि-ष्टिखर सम्मेलन 
कायिक्रम आयोष्टजत ष्टकए िए हैं। 
******* 
 
 
714                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
 
 अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2294 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
स्‍ वदेशी‍एआई‍मॉडल‍‍‍‍ 
 
2294. डा.‍सैयद‍नसीर‍हुसैन‍:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क)  िेश में ओपि-सोसस क ृ नत्रम बुद्धिमत् ता (एआई) अिुसंधाि और एआई िवाचार पाररद्धिनतकी तंत्र को बढावा िेिे 
क े  नलए क्‍ या किम उठाए िा रहे हैं;  
(ख)  इस तथ् य को ध् याि में रखते हुए  नक भारत में बडे स् तर पर स् विेशी एआई मॉडल िहीं है निसक े  कारण हमें 
पनिमी एआई तकिीकों पर निभसर रहिा पडता है , भारत में बडे स् तर पर आधारभूत एआई मॉडल क े  नवकास 
को बढावा िेिे क े  नलए क्‍ या उपाय नकए िा रहे हैं;     
(ि) भारत में एआई स् ्ा्सअप क े  सामिे आिे वाली प्रमुख चुिौनतयों से निप्िे क े  नलए क्‍ या किम उठाए िा रहे हैं; 
और  
 
(घ) क्‍ या मंत्रालय िे क ृ नत्रम बुद्धिमत् ता (एआई) संबंधी अिुसंधाि और नवकास को बढावा िेिे क े  नलए नििी क ं पनियों 
तथा अंतरराष्‍ ् र ीय संिठिों/अनभकरणों क े  साथ साझेिारी की है, यनि हां, तो तत् संबंधी ब् यौरा क्‍ या है?  
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍‍ ् र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्योकििी‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍किकतन‍प्रसाद) 
(ि) से (घ): भारत की एआई कायसिीनत प्रौद्योनिकी क े  लोकतंत्रीकरण क े  माििीय प्रधाि मंत्री क े  दृनिकोण पर आधाररत 
है। इसका उद्देश्य भारत क ें नित चुिौनतयों का समाधाि करिा और अवसर पैिा करिा है। 
इंनडयाएआई नमशि 
यह सात स्तंभों क े  माध्यम से भारत क े  नवकास लक्ष्ों क े  साथ एक सुदृढ और समावेशी एआई इकोनसस्टम िानपत करिे 
की एक रणिीनतक पहल है। इंनडयाएआई नमशि का नववरण www.https://indiaai.gov.in/  पर उपलब्ध है। 
 
स्विेशी फाउंडेशि मॉडल का नवकास 
इंनडयाएआई फाउंडेशि मॉडल स्तंभ क े अंतिसत, भारत सरकार बडे भाषा मॉडल, मल्टीमॉडल मॉडल और डोमेि-नवनशि 
छो्े भाषा मॉडल नवकनसत करिे क े  नलए भारतीय स्टा्सअप, संघ और संिािों का समथसि कर रही है। 
• बडे और छो्े भाषा मॉडल नवकनसत करिे क े  नलए स्टा्सअप, इंडस्ट री प्लेयरों और शैक्षनणक संिािों सनहत बारह 
संिठिों और संघों का चयि नकया िया है। 
• मॉडल सभी 22 अिुसूनचत भारतीय भाषाओं में फ ै ले भारतीय डे्ासे् क े  आधार पर नवकनसत नकए िए हैं। 
• चुिे िए प्रोिेक्ट्स में मल्टीनलंिुअल फाउंडेशिल मॉडल , स्पीच और वॉयस मॉडल , मल्टीमॉडल एआई , 
साइंन्नफक मॉडल, हेल्थक े यर रीिनिंि नसस्टम और एिेंन्क एआई प्ले्फॉमस शानमल हैं। 
पररणामी एआई मॉडल से अपेक्षा की िाती है नक वे अन्य स्टा्सअप और शोधकतासओं क े  नलए एआईकोश प्ले्फॉमस क े 
माध्यम से उन्हें उपलब्ध कराकर ओपि-सोसस इकोनसस्टम में योििाि िेंिे। यह भारत क े स्टा्सअप और अिुसंधाि समुिाय 
में िवाचार को बढावा िेिा। 
भारतीय‍डे्ासे्‍िा‍कविास‍(एआईिोष) 
• एआईकोश एक एकीकृ त रािर ीय मंच है िो एआई अिुसंधाि और िवाचार का समथसि करिे क े  नलए सरकारी 
और िैर-सरकारी स्रोतों से डे्ासे् को एकीक ृ त करता है। 
• यह शोधकतासओं, स्टा्सअप और नशक्षानविों क े  नलए एआई मॉडल, ् ू ल और अन्य िणिा संसाधिों तक निबासध 
पहुंच भी प्रिाि करता है। 
• ओपि-सोसस एआई इकोनसस्टम को सुदृढ करिे क े  नलए इंनडयाएआई नमशि क े अंतिसत नवकनसत स्विेशी एआई 
मॉडल एआईकोष क े  माध्यम से उपलब्ध कराए िाए ं िे। 
• ये साझा संसाधि डेवलपसस को बुनियािी घ्कों को नफर से बिािे क े िाि पर मुख्य एआई िवाचार पर ध्याि 
क ें नित करिे में सक्षम बिाते हैं 
एआई‍कविास‍ि े ‍कलए‍किफायती‍ि ां प्यूक्ांि‍क्षमता 
715                                                      

इंनडयाएआई क ं प्यू् नपलर क े अंतिसत, पात्र उपयोिकतासओं को ररयायती िरों पर क्लाउड पर िीपीयू एक्सेस प्रिाि करिे 
वाले पैिल वाले एआई सेवा प्रिाताओं के  माध्यम से एक रािर ीय एआई कं प्यू् क्षमता का संचालि नकया िया है। 
• अब तक, इंनडयाएआई क ं प्यू् क ै पेनस्ी फ्र े मवक स  क े अंतिसत 14 सूचीबि सेवा प्रिाताओं से 38,231 िीपीयू को 
शानमल नकया िया है। 
• चुनिंिा हाई-ए ं ड िीपीयू को छोडकर औसत िर लिभि 65 रुपये प्रनत िीपीयू प्रनत घं्ा है। 
• पैिल में शानमल प्रिाता एआई मॉडल नवकास और  पररनियोिि के नलए आवश्यक स्टोरेि, िे्वनक िं ि, एआई 
प्ले्फॉमस और अन्य सहायक सेवाए ं  भी प्रिाि कर रहे हैं। 
इांकडयाएआई एप्लिि े शन‍डेवलपमें्‍इकनकशएक्व 
• भारत सरकार िलवायु पररवतसि और आपिा प्रबंधि, स्वास्थ्य सेवा, क ृ नष, शासि प्रणाली और सीखिे की अक्षमता 
क े  नलए सहायक प्रौद्योनिनकयों िैसे क्षेत्रों में भारत की नवनशि चुिौनतयों क े  नलए एआई एद्धप्लक े शि नवकनसत 
करिे क े  नलए स्टा्सअप्स का भी समथसि कर रही है। 
• अब तक, 30 (तीस) आवेििों को स्वीक ृ नत िे िी िई है। सूची का उल्लेख अनुबांध-1 में नकया िया है। (संलग्न) 
भारतीय‍एआई‍स्टा्टअप्स‍िो‍वैकिि‍कवस्तार‍ि े ‍कलए‍सशक्त‍बनाना 
इंनडयाएआई स्टा्सअप्स ग्लोबल प्रोग्राम माचस 2025 में स्टेशि एफ (पेररस) और एचईसी पेररस क े  सहयोि से लॉन्च नकया 
िया था। 10 भारतीय एआई स्टा्सअप को यूरोपीय बािार में नवस्तार करिे में मिि की िा रही है। 
एआई‍पर‍वैकिि‍बहस‍िो‍आिार‍देना 
भारत एआई क े  नवकास, उपयोि और सुरक्षा पर वैनिक बहस को आकार िेिे में सनिय रूप से भाि ले रहा है। भारत 
ग्लोबल पा्सिरनशप ऑि आन्सनफनशयल इं्ेनलिेंस (िीपीएआई) का संिापक अध्यक्ष था। भारत िी20 नवज्ञद्धि क े  िौराि 
एआई पर आम सहमनत बिािे में सफल रहा। 
भारत 15-20 फरवरी 2026 क े  िौराि वैनिक एआई इम्पैक्ट सनम् की मेिबािी कर रहा है। नशखर सम्मेलि लोिों, नवि 
और प्रिनत पर क ें नित होिा। नवि भर से 1.15 लाख से अनधक प्रनतभानियों क े  साथ अब तक 200 से अनधक प्री-सनम् 
कायसिम आयोनित नकए िा चुक े  हैं। 
भारत‍में‍एआई‍अनुसांधान‍पाररप्लिकतिी‍तांत्र‍िो‍सुदृढ़ िरना 
इंनडयाएआई फ्यूचरद्धिल्स स्तंभ क े अंतिसत, सरकार 500 पीएचडी शोधरनथयों, 5,000 स्नातकोत्तर और 8,000 स्नातकों 
की सहायता करक े  एक व्यापक एआई प्रनतभा और अिुसंधाि पाइपलाइि नवकनसत कर रही है। 
• एआई, डे्ा क्यूरेशि, एिो्ेशि, क्लीनिंि और एप्लाइड डे्ा साइंस में शोध कायस करिे  क े  नलए िाइनल् क े  
माध्यम से न्यर-2 और न्यर-3 शहरों में 27 इंनडयाएआई डे्ा और एआई लैब िानपत नकए िए हैं। 
• 27 राज्ों/संघ राज् क्षेत्रों में 174 आई्ीआई और पॉनल्ेद्धिक को  अनतररक्त इंनडयाएआई डे्ा और एआई 
लैब िानपत करिे की स्वीक ृ नत िी िई है 
फ्यूचरप्लिल्स‍प्राइम 
• सरकार िे िैसकॉम क े  सहयोि से एआई, नबि डे्ा और क्लाउड क ं प्यून्ंि िैसे क्षेत्रों में अत्याधुनिक कौशल क े  
नलए पाठ्यिम शुरू नकए हैं 
• इस प्ले्फॉमस पर 500 से अनधक पाठ्यिम और 2000 से अनधक नडनि्ल िक्षता प्रनशक्षण कायसिम उपलब्ध 
हैं। अब तक 16.29 लाख से अनधक अभ्यथी नवनभन्न पाठ्यिमों में िामांकि/प्रनशक्षण प्राि कर चुक े  हैं। 
 
***** 
अनुबांध-1 
इांकडयाएआई‍इनोवेशन‍चैलेंि‍िा‍कववरण:‍शॉ्टकलस्ट‍किए िए‍समाधान 
क्र.सां. समाधान‍िा‍नाम समाधान‍कववरण थीम 
1 एआई का उपयोि करक े  एक िायी 
भनवष्य क े  नलए पुियोिी क ृ नष 
पिनतयों को बढावा िेिा 
मापि, ररपोन्िंि और सत्यापि  तकिीक को उत्पन्न काबसि 
ि े नड् की प्रामानणकता और िुणवत्ता सुनिनित करिे क े  नलए 
नडजाइि नकया िया है।  
क ृ नष 
2 क ृ नष सह-‘एआई’ यक -फ़ानमिंि को-
पायल् 
भारतीय भाषाओं में नकसािों को व्यद्धक्तित सलाह प्रिाि करिे 
क े  नलए एआई-संचानलत संवािात्मक सह-पायल्। 
क ृ नष 
3 कडलकम्पास - हम हाइड र ो-एआई, 
अंडरवॉ्र कॉम , आईओयू्ी और 
सेंसर िे्वक स  का उपयोि करक े  
पािी की आवाज को बढाते हैं। 
5G-सक्षम उपकरण िो एआई , आईओ्ी और उन्नत संचार 
प्रौद्योनिनकयों का उपयोि करक े  मछली पकडिे क े  तरीकों में 
बिलाव लाता है। 
क ृ नष 
4 छो्े िोत वाले नकसािों क े  नलए 
नकसािकोपायल् बहुभाषी 
मल्टीमॉडल व्यद्धक्तित  एआई 
सहायक  
क ृ नष क े  नलए धेिू क े  वन्सकल एलएलएम द्वारा संचानलत, छो्े 
नकसािों को व्यद्धक्तित क ृ नष सलाहकार सेवाए ं  प्रिाि करता 
है। 
क ृ नष 
716                                                      

5 एिआईआर स्पेक्ट र ोिोपी और 
एआई/एमएल मॉडल का उपयोि 
करक े  तेिी से, रसायि मुक्त मृिा 
परीक्षण समाधाि 
  मृिा परीक्षण का संपूणस दृनिकोण एक ऑफलाइि ऐप , 
एआई-संचानलत स्पेक्ट र ल नडवाइस और एमएल मॉडल का 
उपयोि करक े  समय पर और रसायि-मुक्त मृिा नवश्लेषण 
प्रिाि करता है। 
क ृ नष 
6 एआई डीप -्ेक द्वारा संचानलत 
मक्का की िुणवत्ता का आकलि 
एसएएएस प्ले्फॉमस मक्का की िुणवत्ता का वस्तुनिष्ठ 
मूल्ांकि प्रिाि करेिा , निसमें मूल् निधासरण और नबिी 
पाइपलाइनिंि शानमल है। 
क ृ नष 
7 एआई-संचानलत लाइव नफश  
लॉनिद्धस्टक्स और िलीय क ृ नष में मृत्यु 
िर में कमी 
एआई-संचानलत समाधाि िो  मत्स्यपालि  संचालि को 
अिुक ू नलत करता है।  
क ृ नष 
8 क्यूि ै ि एआई-संचानलत आईओ्ी समाधाि िो तािे उत्पािों क े  पूरे 
िीविचि में महत्वपूणस डे्ा को एकनत्रत करता है , खाद्य 
िुणवत्ता का वास्तनवक समय नवश्लेषण प्रिाि करता है और 
नवि े ताओं को उपयोिी िािकारी उपलब्ध कराता है। 
क ृ नष 
9 लू से निप्िे की क्षमता: अत्यनधक 
िमी की घ्िाओं क े  नलए एआई-
आधाररत उन्नत पूवासिुमाि को 
एकीक ृ त करिा 
यह एआई-आधाररत िलवायु पूवासिुमाि को स्वास्थ्य डे्ा क े  
साथ एकीक ृ त करता है तानक िमी से होिे वाले स्वास्थ्य प्रभावों 
क े  नलए एक लनक्षत िोद्धखम विीकरण प्रणाली नवकनसत की िा 
सक े । 
िलवायु 
10 बहु-िोद्धखम संवेििशीलता  
मािनचत्रण 
भूस्खलि, मलबे क े  प्रवाह और अचािक बाढ की भनवष्यवाणी 
करिे क े  नलए खतरा प्रबंधि प्रणाली। 
िलवायु 
11 डीपफ्लड: नविि ् र ांसफामसर और 
सै्ेलाइ् डे्ा का उपयोि करक े  
तेिी से बाढ बाढ का मािनचत्रण 
एसएआर डे्ा और डीप लनििंि मॉडल का उपयोि करक े  
वास्तनवक समय में स्वचानलत बाढ का पता लिािे क े  नलए उन्नत 
बाढ िलमग्नता मािनचत्रण उपकरण। 
िलवायु 
12 मॉिी्: मच्छर िनित रोिों पर  
िलवायु प्रभाव 
एआई-संचानलत प्ले्फॉमस बीमारी क े  प्रकोप की भनवष्यवाणी 
करिे और रोकिे क े  नलए मच्छरों की ् रैनक ं ि क े  साथ वास्तनवक 
समय क े  िलवायु डे्ा को एकीक ृ त करता है। 
िलवायु 
13 रेनडयोलॉिी नििाि क े  नलए ए ं ड ् ू 
ए ं ड एआई क्लाउड प्ले्फॉमस 
रेनडयोलॉिी नििाि क े  नलए एआई क्लाउड प्ले्फॉमस, सीवी, 
िीएआई, एिएलपी, नडकॉम, मोबाइल और क्लाउड क ं प्यून्ंि 
िैसी िवीि तकिीकों को एकीक ृ त करता है। 
स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा  
14 नििाि (रािर ीय स्तर पर एआई क े  
माध्यम से फ े फडे क े  स्वास्थ्य की िांच 
और ट्यूबरक ु लोनसस का पता 
लिािा) 
क्यूएक्सआर, छाती क े  एक्स-रे (सीएक्सआर) की व्याख्या करिे 
क े  नलए एक उन्नत एआई उपकरण है, िो 30 से अनधक 
निष्कषों का पता लिाता है और उन्हें िािीयक ृ त करता है। 
स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा 
15 सामानिक-आनथसक पररवतसि क े  नलए, 
रोकी िा सकिे वाली अंधता को 
रोकिे वाला प्रभावशाली एआई 
समाधाि। 
  दृनि क े  हानिकारक असामान्यताओं का शीघ्र पता लिािा। स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा 
16 मांसपेनशयों और हनियों से संबंनधत 
िोडों क े  ििस का पता लिािे और 
नििाि क े  नलए एआई संचानलत 
नवयरेबल तकिीक। 
स्वास्थ्य सेवा क े  िोडों क े  ििस क े  नििाि और पुिवासस क्षेत्रों क े  
नलए एआई-सक्षम हाडसवेयर प्ले्फॉमस। 
स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा 
17 वोक्सेलबॉक्स न्यूरो-इंफॉमेन्क्स प्ले्फॉमस िो मािव मद्धस्तष्क क े  कायासत्मक 
मािनचत्रों/किेक्टोनमक्स को मैप करिे की अिुमनत िेता है। 
स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा 
18 ओसेलक्स का नवकास: भारत में  
प्रारंनभक मधुमेह िेत्र िांच को बढािे 
क े  नलए एक एआई -आधाररत 
समाधाि। 
डायनबन्क रेन्िोपैथी, एएमडी और ग्लूकोमा िैसी िेत्र रोिों 
का शीघ्र पता लिािे क े  नलए एआई द्वारा संचानलत पो्ेबल, 
नकफायती और अत्यनधक सुलभ रेन्िा इमेनिंि नडवाइस। 
स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा 
717                                                      

19 डॉक्टर क े  िेतृत्व वाले एआई का 
उपयोि करक े  स्वास्थ्य सेवा में िांनत 
लािा 
एआई-संचानलत व्यद्धक्तित डॉक्टर 24x7 नििः शुल्क उपलब्ध है, 
निसे लोिों की बीमारी क े  समय सहायता करिे, नवयरेबल 
उपकरणों क े  माध्यम से उिक े  स्वास्थ्य की नििरािी करिे और 
बीमाररयों की रोकथाम क े  नलए स्वास्थ्य कोच क े  रूप में कायस 
करिे क े  नलए नडजाइि नकया िया है। 
स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा 
20 क ैं सर क े  चरण निधासरण, िाि 
निधासरण और मानिसि क े  नलए 
एआई/एमएल सक्षम मैफप्रो नडवाइस 
प्ले्फ़ॉमस। 
मैफप्रो हैंडहेल्ड नड्ेक्टर एक नवनकरण -मुक्त, िैर-इिवेनसव, 
सुरनक्षत और लाित  प्रभावी समाधाि प्रिाि करता है िो  
एआई/एमएल आधाररत एल्गोररिम का उपयोि करक े  नलम्फ 
िोड्स में मे्ास्टेस का मजबूती  से पता लिा सकता है और 
पयासि रूप से मूल्ांकि कर सकता है। 
स्वास्थ्य 
सेवा 
21 ररडेबल्ड(ऑिलाइि नडस्लेद्धक्सया 
प्रनशक्षण) 
नडस्लेद्धक्सया वाले बच्ों को  इं्रैद्धक्टव अभ्यास क े  माध्यम से 
ध्वन्यात्मक िािरूकता में सुधार करिे में मिि करिे क े  नलए 
नडजाइि नकया िया वेब-आधाररत एद्धप्लक े शि। 
सीखिे 
की 
अक्षमता 
22 वॉयस फ्यूिि एआई एआई एद्धप्लक े शि कई भारतीय भाषाओं में एसएलडी वाले 
व्यद्धक्तयों को सहायक सहायता प्रिाि करेिा। 
सीखिे 
की 
अक्षमता 
23 स्क्रीि प्ले  - ऑन्ज़्म और संबंनधत 
नवकारों क े  नलए एक नडनि्ल िेम 
आधाररत स्क्रीनिंि ् ू ल। 
यह एक नडनि्ल, िेम-आधाररत स्क्रीनिंि ् ू ल है निसे 3 से 6 
वषस की आयु क े  उि बच्ों की पहचाि करिे क े  नलए नडजाइि 
नकया िया है निन्हें ऑन्ज्म या संबंनधत नवकासात्मक द्धिनतयों 
का खतरा हो सकता है। 
सीखिे 
की 
अक्षमता 
24 िीवाशा एसएलडी का शीघ्र पता लिािे क े  नलए एआई -संचानलत 
डायग्नोद्धस्टक प्ले्फॉमस। 
सीखिे 
की 
अक्षमता 
25 एसएलडी क े  नलए अिुक ू ली नशक्षण 
और पहचाि 
नडस्लेद्धक्सया, नडस्ग्रानफया और नडि ै लक ु नलया िैसे एसएलडी 
का पता लिािे क े  नलए उन्नत एआई तकिीक ें । 
सीखिे 
की 
अक्षमता 
26 स्पेशल एिुक े ्र एआई एआई-संचानलत प्रणाली को भारत में नवशेष नशक्षकों की कमी 
को ि ू र करिे और एसएलडी वाले बच्ों का समथसि करिे क े 
नलए नडजाइि नकया िया है। 
सीखिे 
की 
अक्षमता 
27 िोब्रोकर ्ेिोलॉंिीि द्वारा 
कोन्वोिेि.एआई 
एआई-संचानलत संवािात्मक प्ले्फॉमस िो चै् , वॉइस, ईमेल 
और सोशल मीनडया िैसे चैिलों पर ग्राहक िुडाव को 
स्वचानलत करता है , और तेज , व्यद्धक्तित और बहुभाषी 
सहायता प्रिाि करता है। 
शासि 
प्रणाली  
28 एआई संपक स  क ें ि  मशीि ् र ांसलेशि, एिएलपी, एएसआर और ्ी्ीएस , और 
मल्टीनलंिुअल वॉइस ररकनग्नशि िैसी एआई -पावडस 
्ेिोलॉिी, भारत की भाषाई नवनवधता में कम्युनिक े शि और 
एक्सेनसनबनल्ी को बेहतर बिाकर शासि प्रणाली को बेहतर 
बिाए ं िी। 
शासि 
प्रणाली 
29 अिालत एआई: न्यायालयों क े  नलए 
एआई समाधाि 
एआई-संचानलत प्ले्फ़ॉमस अिालत  क े  संचालि को 
सुव्यवद्धित करिे क े  नलए वास्तनवक समय बहुभाषी 
् र ांसनिप्शि, अिुवाि, लाइव क े स फ्लो मैिेिमें् और 
व्हा््सएप चै्बॉ् प्रिाि करता है। 
शासि 
प्रणाली 
30 िव.नसनवस.वो् एआई-संचानलत नडनि्ल पद्धिक  इंफ्रास्ट र क्चर को िािररक 
िुडाव को अनधक समावेशी , मापिीय और व्यापक बिाकर 
भारत में सावसिनिक परामशस को बिलिे क े  नलए नडजाइि 
नकया िया है। 
शासि 
प्रणाली 
***** 
 
718                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2295 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
एआई‍अकभशासन‍और‍नागररि ां‍ि े ‍अकििार 
 
2295. श्रीमती‍कप्रयांिा‍चतुर्वेदी:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क)  क्‍ या ‘इंनिया एआई िविेंस निशा -नििेश, 2025’ नििता का अनिकार , समािता का अनिकार और 
उनचत प्रनिया सनहत िािररकों क े  मौनलक अनिकारों क े  उल् लंघि को रोकिे क े  नलए बाध् यकारी रक्षोपाय 
स् थानपत नकए नबिा उच् च िोखिम वाली क ृ नत्रम बुखिमत् ता प्रणानलयां संस् थानपत करिे की अिुमनत िेते हैं;  
(ि)  िािररकों क े  िीवि पर सीिे प्रभाव िालिे वाले क्षेत्रों में एआई प्रणानलयों को अपिािे की अिुमनत िेिे 
से पहले, स् वतंत्र लेिापरीक्षा, अपीलीय प्रणानलयों या पययवेक्षी निकायों िैसे सांनवनिक अनिकार सुरक्षा 
तंत्र प्रिाि िहीं नकए िािे क े  क्‍ या कारण हैं; और    
(ि) क्‍ या एआई प्रणानलयों से भेिभाव , िलत तरीक े  से हक़िारी से वंनचत करिे या हस् तक्षेपकारी नििरािी 
क े  िोखिम क े  बारे में कोई आकलि नकया िया है, यनि हां, तो तत् संबंिी ब् यौरा क्‍ या है?  
 
उत्तर 
 
इलेक्‍‍ ् र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्य कगिी‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍किकतन‍प्रसाद) 
 
(क) से (ग): माननीय प्रधानमंत्री श्री नरेन्द्र मोदी क े  दृष्टिकोण क े  अनुरूप, सरकार प्रौद्योष्टिकी क े  ष्टिकास और 
उपयोि का लोकतंत्रीकरण कर रही है। िास्तष्टिक दुष्टनया की समस्याओं को हल करने और अंततः  ष्टिष्टिन्न क्षेत्रों 
में जीिन को बेहतर बनाने क े  ष्टलए आष्टटिष्टिष्टियल इंटेष्टलजेंस (एआई) का उपयोि करने पर ध्यान क ें ष्टित ष्टकया 
जा रहा है। 
िारत सरकार ने इसक े  ष्टिष्टनयमन क े  प्रष्टत एक संतुष्टलत और व्यािहाररक तकनीकी-कानूनी दृष्टिकोण अपनाया 
है। िारत की एआई रणनीष्टत दुष्टनया िर क े  कानूनी ढांचे का अध्ययन करने और ष्टहतधारकों क े  साथ व्यापक 
परामिि क े  बाद बनाई िई है। 
 
िारत क े िल कानूनों या बाजार की ताकतों पर िरोसा करने क े  बजाय तकनीकी समाधानों क े  साथ कानूनी 
सुरक्षा उपायों को जोड़ता है। सरकार डीपि े क ष्टडटेक्शन, िोपनीयता सुरक्षा और साइबर सुरक्षा क े  ष्टलए एआई 
उपकरण ष्टिकष्टसत करने क े  ष्टलए आईआईटी जैसे प्रमुख संस्थानों में अनुसंधान एिं ष्टिकास पररयोजनाओं को 
ष्टित्त पोष्टित कर रही है। 
यह दृष्टिकोण िारत क े  ष्टिश्वास को दिािता है ष्टक प्रिािी एआई िासन को व्यािहाररक तकनीकी हस्तक्षेपों द्वारा 
समष्टथित ष्टकया जाना चाष्टहए। यह सुष्टनष्टित करेिा ष्टक नािररकों की सुरक्षा, ष्टिश्वास और अष्टधकारों से समझौता 
ष्टकए ष्टबना निाचार जारी रहे। 
भारत एआई शासन दिशादनिेश 
इंष्टडया एआई ििनेंस ष्टदिाष्टनदेि 5 निंबर 2025 को जारी ष्टकए िए थे। यह देि में आष्टटिष्टिष्टियल इंटेष्टलजेंस 
के  सुरष्टक्षत, ष्टजम्मेदार और समािेिी ष्टिकास को सुष्टनष्टित करने के  ष्टलए एक व्यापक रािर ीय ढांचा प्रदान करते 
हैं। 
719                                                      

ष्टदिाष्टनदेशों में यह मािा िया है नक एआई आष्टथिक ष्टिकास और सामाष्टजक पररितिन का एक प्रमुख चालक 
है। साथ ही, यह व्यक्तियों और समाज क े  ष्टलए जोक्तखम िी पैदा कर सकता है। इनमें से क ु छ में पूिािग्रह, िेदिाि, 
अनुष्टचत पररणाम, बष्टहष्करण और पारदष्टििता की कमी िाष्टमल है। 
ष्टदिाष्टनदेशों में उच्च जोक्तखम िाले एआई ष्टसस्टम के अप्रष्टतबंष्टधत नियोिि की अनुमष्टत नहीं िी िई है। यह एक 
जोक्तखम-आधाररत, साक्ष्य-आधाररत और आनुपाष्टतक िासन दृष्टिकोण अपनाता है। 
व्यक्तियों और समाज क े  ष्टलए जोक्तखमों को द ू र करने क े  ष्टलए सुरक्षा उपायों की रूपरेखा तैयार की िई है। 
ष्टदिाष्टनदेिों में कहा िया है ष्टक क्षेत्रीय ष्टनयामक अपने कानूनी जनादेि क े  िीतर प्रितिन और ष्टनिरानी क े  ष्टलए 
ष्टजम्मेदार रहेंिे। 
ष्टदिाष्टनदेिों को सुदृढ़ और लचीला बनाने क े  ष्टलए ष्टडजाइन ष्टकया िया है। िे ष्टसद्ांत-आधाररत हैं और 
ष्टनदेिात्मक नहीं हैं। इिका उद्देश्य निाचार को रोक े ष्टबना ष्टजम्मेदार एआई अंिीकरण का समथिन करना है। 
इिमें स्वतंत्र ऑष्टडट, अपील या नए ष्टनरीक्षण ष्टनकायों जैसे नए िैधाष्टनक तंत्र पेि नहीं नकए िए हैं। इसक े  बजाय, 
ष्टदिाष्टनदेि मौजूदा कानूनों पर ष्टनििर करते हैं। इनमें सूचना प्रौद्योष्टिकी अष्टधष्टनयम, ष्टडष्टजटल व्यक्तिित डेटा 
संरक्षण अष्टधष्टनयम और क्षेत्र-ष्टिष्टिि ष्टनयम िाष्टमल हैं। 
ष्टदिाष्टनदेिों में स्पष्ट नकया िया है ष्टक सरकार क े  समग्र दृष्टिकोण क े  अनुरूप इस स्तर पर नकसी नए समािांतर 
एआई कानून की आिश्यकता नहीं है। 
******* 
 
720                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2296 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
ओकिशा‍में‍इलेक्‍‍ ् र ॉकिक्‍‍ स‍किकिमााण‍क्‍‍ लस्‍ ्र 
 
2296. श्री‍शुभाशीष‍खुांक्या:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क) क्‍ या सरकार भुविेश् वर में एक इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिक्‍ स नवनिमााण क्‍ लस् ्र स् थानपत करिे का नवचार रखती है;  
(ख) नपछले पांच वर्षों में ओनिशा द्वारा आई्ी/आई्ीईएस में आकनर्षात नकए िए निवेश का ब् यौरा क्‍ या है;    
(ि) राज्य में साइबर सुरक्षा को मज़बूत करिे क े  नलए क्या किम उठाए िए हैं; 
(घ) क्या िििातीय निलों में िए निनि्ल स्किनलंि सें्र स्थानपत नकए िा रहे हैं; और  
(ङ) एआई और निनि्ल प्रौद्योनिनकयों पर काया कर रहे ओनिशा क े  स्टा्ाअप को नकतिा समथाि निया िया?  
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍‍ ् र ॉकििी‍और‍सूचिा‍प्रौद्योकििी‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍किकति‍प्रसाद) 
(ि) से (ङ): भारत सरकार की िीनतयां माििीय प्रधािमंत्री के मेक इि इंनिया और आत्मनिभार भारत के दृनिकोण से 
प्रेररत हैं।  
यह संपूणा इलेक्ट् रॉनिकी नवनिमााण इकोनसस्टम क े निमााण और उद्योि के नलए नवश्व स्तर पर प्रनतस्पधाा करिे के नलए एक 
सक्षम वातावरण बिािे पर क ें नित है। 
सांशोकित इलेक्ट् र ॉकििी‍किकिमााण क्लस्टर (ईएमसी‍2.0) 
इस दृनिकोण के भाि क े रूप में, भारत सरकार िे अप्रैल 2020 में संशोनधत इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी नवनिमााण क्लस्टर (ईएमसी 
2.0) योििा को अनधसूनचत नकया। 
यह योििा सामान्य सुनवधाओं के साथ समनपात समूहों को नवत्त पोनर्षत करक े नवश्व स्तरीय इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी नवनिमााण बुनियािी 
ढांचे के निमााण का समथाि करती है। इसमें रेिी नबल्ट फ ै क्ट् र ी (आरबीएफ) शेि/प्लि ए ं ि प्ले सुनवधाओं के साथ तैयार 
औद्योनिक भूखंि िैसी साझा सुनवधाए ं और साधि शानमल हैं। 
इस योििा के तहत, 200.76 करोड़ रुपये की पररयोििा लाित के साथ इन्फोवैली, भुविेश्वर में एक ग्रीिफील्ड ईएमसी 
को मंिूरी िी िई है। यह पररयोििा 93.09 करोड़ रुपये की क ें िीय नवत्तीय सहायता के साथ 203.37 एकड़ क्षेत्र को 
शानमल करती है। 
इस पररयोििा में 1,530 करोड़ रुपये के निवेश का अिुमाि लिाया िया है और इससे 3000 रोििार सृनित नकए िािे 
की उम्मीि है। 
इसक े अलावा, सेमीकॉि इंनिया कायाक्रम के तहत ओनिशा राज्य में 4,003 करोड़ रुपये के क ु ल निवेश के साथ िो (2) 
सेमीक ं िक्ट्र इकाइयों को भी मंिूरी िी िई है। 
ये इकाइयां उन्नत पैक े निंि, एम्बेिेि ग्लास सब्स् रे् नवनिमााण, नसनलकॉि काबााइि फ ै ब आनि के क्षेत्र में काया करेंिी। इि 
संयंत्रों में उत्पानित नचप का उपयोि ऑ्ोमोबाइल, एयरोस्पेस, रक्षा, वायरलेस उपकरणों, इलेस्कक्ट् र क वाहिों, िे्ा क ें ि, 
उपभोक्ता इलेक्ट् रॉनिकी उपकरणों आनि में नकया िाएिा। 
रािर ीय इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी एवं सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी संस्थाि (िाइनल्) िे भुविेश्वर और बालासोर (िििातीय निला) में िो क े न्द्र 
तथा ओनिशा राज्य में 35 प्रत्यानयत क े न्द्र भी स्थानपत नकए हैं। इि क ें िों िे लिभि 25,000 उम्मीिवारों को प्रनशनक्षत 
नकया है। 
ओनिशा के िििातीय निलों सनहत इि क ें िों की सूची अिुबांि-I में िी िई है। 
भारतीय सॉफ्टवेयर प्रौद्योनिकी पाक ा (एस्ीपीआई) िे आई्ी/आई्ीईएस निवेश को बढावा िेिे के नलए ओनिशा में 
निम्ननलस्कखत उत्क ृ िता क ें ि भी स्थानपत नकए हैं: 
I. इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी नसस्टम नििाइि और नवनिमााण को बढावा िेिे के नलए इलेक्ट् र ोप्रेन्योर पाक ा को ओनिशा सरकार, 
आईआईआई्ी भुविेश्वर और इंनिया इलेक्ट् र ॉनिकी ए ं ि सेमीक ं िक्ट्र एसोनसएशि के सहयोि से नवकनसत नकया 
िया है। अब तक 37 स्टा्ाअप को शानमल नकया िा चुका है। 
721                                                      

II. रचिात्मक प्रौद्योनिनकयों के क्षेत्र में स्टा्ाअप इकोनसस्टम को बढावा िेिे के नलए ओनिशा सरकार के सहयोि से 
वचुाअल और ऑिमें्ेि ररयनल्ी के नलए उत्क ृ िता क ें ि नवकनसत नकया िया है। अब तक 25 स्टा्ाअप को शानमल 
नकया िा चुका है। 
III. एम्ेक सेन्टर ऑफ एक्सीलेंस को ओनिशा सरकार, बीिू प्िायक नवश्वनवद्यालय, ओनिशा, राउरक े ला स्टील प्लां्, 
िाल्को और आईआईआई्ी भुविेश्वर के सहयोि से नवकनसत नकया िया है। अब तक 29 स्टा्ाअप को शानमल नकया 
िा चुका है। 
एस्ीपीआई की िेक्स्ट िेिरेशि इिक्यूबेशि योििा (एििीआईएस) के तहत, ओनिशा के 112 स्टा्ाअप को शानमल 
नकया िया है। 
इसक े अलावा, ओनिशा राज्य में साइबर सुरक्षा को सुदृढ करिे के नलए, िािररकों के बीच साइबर स्वच्छता िािरूकता 
के नलए 134 सूचिा सुरक्षा नशक्षा और िािरूकता (आईएसईए) कायाशालाए ं आयोनित की िईं। ओनिशा में सूचिा सुरक्षा 
पर 4200 से अनधक उम्मीिवारों को प्रनशनक्षत नकया िया है। 
 
 
अिुबांि-I 
राष्ट्र ीय इलेक्ट् र ॉकििी‍और सूचिा प्रौद्योकििी सांस्थाि 
िाइकल् स्वाकमत्व‍िाले‍‍ि ें द्र 
क्र.सां. ि ें द्र िा िाम और पता 
1 िाइनल् क ें ि, भुविेश्वर 
2 िाइनल् क ें ि, बालासोर 
िाइकल् से‍मान्यता प्राप्त ि ें द्र 
1 क ं प्यू्र ह्, क्क 
2 एक्सेल माइक्रो नसस्टम्स, संबलपुर 
3 उड़ीसा क ं प्यू्र अकािमी, बेरहामपुर 
4 उड़ीसा क ं प्यू्र एप्लीक े शि क ें ि, भुविेश्वर 
5 पें्ानसस क ं प्यू्सा, क्क 
6 प्रोफ े शिल एक े िमी ऑफ क ं प्यू्र एिुक े शि, बालासोर 
7 रीन्जज़ इंफॉमेन्क्स, भवािीप्िा 
8 ईस्टिा सॉफ्टवेयर सॉल्यूशंस, पिमपुर 
9 िसोिा इंस्टीट्यू् ऑफ ्ेक्नोलॉिी ए ं ि मैिेिमें् साइंस (िेआई्ीएमएस), बेरहामपुर 
10 ऑिलाइि क ं प्यू्र अकािमी, भिक 
11 एिआईए्ी क ं प्यू्र एिुक े शि, भुविेश्वर 
12 के.िी.एि.्ी. महासंघ (िो हॉ् ्ू ग्रास-रू् न्यू ्ेक्नोलॉिी), िुआपाड़ा 
13 सें्र फॉर आई्ी ए ं ि इं्रएस्कक्ट्व लनििंि (सीआईआईएल), सुंिरिढ 
14 उड़ीसा क ं प्यू्र अकािमी, बालासोर 
15 िाइनल्, भुविेश्वर 
722                                                      

16 क ं प्यू्र एप्लीक े शि क ें ि, भुविेश्वर 
17 मैससा शमसॉफ्ट क ं प्यू्र एिुक े शि, पुरी 
18 एिवांस क ं प्यू्र ् रेनिंि इंस्टीट्यू्, बेरहामपुर 
19 िीलाचला इंस्टीट्यू् ऑफ क ं प्यू्र ्ेक्नोलॉिी [एिआईसी्ी], बारीपाड़ा 
20 काउंनसल फॉर क ं प्यू्र नल्रेसी ए ं ि अवेयरिेस इि सेक ें िरी ि ू ल, बरिढ 
21 अच्युत इंस्कस्टट्यू् ऑफ इंफॉमेशि ए ं ि ्ेक्नोलॉिी, बेरहामपुर 
22 प्रफ ु ल्ल चंि इंस्टीट्यू् ऑफ ्ेक्नोलॉिी, भिक 
23 अिन्या एक े िमी ऑफ सॉफ्टवेयर सॉल्यूशि ए ं ि ई-्ेक्नोलॉिी (एसे्), अंिुल 
24 क्लास उड़ीसा, अट्टाबीरा 
25 िायत्री एिुक े शिल ् र स्ट, बारीपिा 
26 िेतािी इंस्कस्टट्यू् ऑफ इंफॉमेशि ्ेक्नोलॉिी (एिआईआई्ी), पिमपुर 
27 िाइस िेशिल इंस्कस्टट्यू् ऑफ क ं प्यू्र एिुक े शि प्राइवे् नलनम्ेि, भुविेश्वर 
28 ज्ञािोिय अकािमी, बलांिीर 
29 इिोवेन्व क्लासेस, बेरहामपुर 
30 मैससा इंस्टीट्यू् ऑफ क ं प्यू्र एप्लीक े शि (आईसीए), िितनसंहपुरनपि 
31 रािर ीय क ं प्यू्र अकािमी, नििापहाड़ी एस.ओ. 
32 नशखा लनििंि नसस्टम, कबीसूयाििर एस.ओ 
33 िाइनल् बालेश्वर एक्स्ेंशि क ें ि, बालेश्वर 
34 बीिू प्िायक क ं प्यू्र क ें ि, सोरो 
35 कनलंि क ं प्यू्र एिुक े शि, अथािढ एचओ 
 
***** 
 
723                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2297 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
किकिटल‍सार्विकिि‍अर्सांरचिा‍और‍साइबर‍घटिाओां‍िी‍प्रर्ृकियाां‍‍‍‍ 
 
2297. श्री‍रकर्चांद्र‍र्द्दीरािू:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क) वर्ष 2022 से अब तक सीईआर्ी-इि में सूनचत की िई साइबर घ्िाओं का वर्ष-वार आंकडा क्‍ या है;  
(ख) आधार, निनिलॉकर और उमंि िैसे प्रमुख निनि्ल अवसंरचिा प् ले्फॉमष पर िोडी िई संस् थाओं की 
संख् या नकतिी है;    
(ि) साइबर सुरक्षा क्षमता-निमाषण क े  नलए नकतिी निनध आवंन्त और उपयोि की िई; और  
 
(घ) बडे पैमािे पर साइबर खतरों क े  नलए प्रारंनभक चेताविी प्रणानलयों को मिबूत करिे क े  नलए क्‍ या किम 
उठाए िए हैं?  
उिर 
इलेक्‍‍ ट र ॉकििी‍और‍सूचिा‍प्रौद्योकििी‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍किकति‍प्रसाद) 
(ि) से (घ): भारत सरकार की नीततय ों का उद्देश्य एक सुरतित, तिश्वसनीय और जिाबदेह साइबर स्पेस 
सुतनतित करना है। यह भारत क े  तितजटल बुतनयादी ढाोंचे क े  तलए साइबर खतरे क े  प्रतत सतक क  और पूरी तरह 
से सचेत है। 
भारतीय क ं प्यू्र आपातकालीि प्रनतनिया िल (स्ष-इन) तथा राष्ट्र ीय महत्वपूणष सूचिा अवसंरचिा संरक्षण कें द्र 
(एनसीआईआईपीसी) महत्वपूणष क्षेत्रों सनहत निनि्ल सेवाओं की सुरक्षा सुनिनित करिे क े  नलए निरंतर कायष 
करते हैं। 
भारतीय कम्प्यूटर आपातकालीि प्रतततिया दल (स्ष-इन) क  सूचना प्रौद्य तिकी अतितनयम, 2000 की िारा 
70ख के  उपबोंि ों के  अोंतिकत साइबर सुरिा घटनाओों पर कारकिाई करने के  तलए राष्ट्र ीय एजेंसी के  रूप में नातमत 
तकया िया है। 
वर्ष 2022 से स्ष-इन क  ररप टक की िई साइबर सुरिा घटनाओों की क ु ल सोंख्या निम्नािुसार है: 
 
र्र्व‍ संख्या 
2022 13,91,457 
2023 15,92,917 
2024 20,41,360 
2025* 25,80,655 
                                 *(अक्ट ू बर तक) 
डिडिटल पब्लिक इन्फ्रास्ट्रक्चर  (िीपीआई) प्लेटफॉमक पर आिार, तितजलॉकर और उमंि जैसी तितभन्न 
सोंस्थाए ों  शातमल हैं, ज  इस प्रकार हैं: 
724                                                      

• आधार: भारतीय तितशष्ट् पहचान प्रातिकरण (यूआईिीएआई) क े  आिार प्रमाणीकरण इकोनसस्टम में 
क ु ल 652 सोंस्थाओों क  शातमल तकया िया है 
• डिडिलॉकर: प्लेटफॉमक ने 2,310 जारीकताकओों और 3,031 अनुर िकताकओों क  शातमल तकया है 
• उमंग: 240 सरकारी सोंस्थाओों (क ें द्र: 80 और राज्य: 160) क  उमोंि प्लेटफॉमक पर शातमल तकया िया 
है, निसक े  द्वारा 2384 सेिाए ों  प्रदान की िा रही हैं। 
भारत सरकार  वर्ष 2023 से पाोंच िर्षों क े  तलए 332.74 कर ड़ रुपये क े  बजट आिोंटन क े  साथ सूचना सुरक्षा, 
डिक्षा और िागरूकता (आईएसईए) पर एक पररय जना लािू कर रही है। 
सरकार ने बिेे़  पैमाने पर साइबर खतर ों क े  तलए पूिक चेतािनी प्रणातलय ों क  सुदृढ़ करने क े  तलए कई कदम 
उठाए हैं, तजनमें अन्य बात ों क े  साथ-साथ तनम्नतलखखत भी शातमल हैं - 
1. स्ष-इन द्वारा कायाकखित राष्ट्र ीय साइबर समिय कें द्र (एनसीसीसी) साइबर सुरिा खतर ों का पता लिाने 
क े  तलए साइबर स्पेस की जाोंच करता है। 
2. यह कारकिाई करने क े  तलए सोंबोंतित सोंिठन ों, राज्य सरकार ों और तहतिारक एजेंतसय ों क े  साथ जानकारी 
साझा करता है। 
3. स्ष-इन सतिय खतरे क  कम करने क े  तलए तितभन्न िेत् ों क े  सोंिठन ों क े  साथ अनुरूप चेतावनियााँ साझा 
करने क े  तलए एक स्वचातलत साइबर थ्रेट इोंटेतलजेंस एक्सचेंज प्लेटफॉमक सोंचातलत करता है। 
4. स्ष-इन क ों यूटर, नेटिक क  और िेटा की सुरिा क े  तलए निीनतम साइबर खतर ों/सुभेद्धताओं और 
प्रततउपाय ों क े  बारे में चेतावनियााँ और परामशी नििेश जारी करता है। 
5. साइबर स्वच्छता क ें द्र (सीएसक े ) 
• स्ष-इन द्वारा प्रदान की जाने िाली एक नािररक -क ें तद्रत सेिा, ज  स्वच्छ भारत क े  दृतष्ट्क ण 
क  साइबर स्पेस तक तिस्ताररत करती है। 
• यह बॉटनेट क्लीतनोंि ए ों ि मैलिेयर एनातलतसस क ें द्र है और दुभाकिनापूणक कायकिम ों का पता 
लिाने में मदद करता है और इसे हटाने क े  तलए मुफ्त ट ू ल प्रदान करता है। 
• यह नािररक ों और सोंिठन ों क े  तलए साइबर सुरिा युखियााँ और सिोत्तम पद्धनतयााँ भी प्रदान 
करता है। 
6. स्ष-इन ने सूचना सुरिा सिोत्तम पद्धनतयों क े  कायाकियन का समथकन और लेखा परीक्षा करने क े  तलए 
231 सुरिा लेखा परीिा सोंिठन ों क  सूचीबद्ध तकया है। 
7. स्ष-इन ने सभी सरकारी सोंिठन ों और महत्वपूणक िेत् ों में कायाकियन क े  तलए साइबर हमल ों और 
साइबर आतोंकिाद का मुकाबला करने क े  तलए एक साइबर सोंकट प्रबोंिन य जना (सीसीएमपी) तैयार 
की है। 
8. साइबर सुरिा की खस्थतत और तितभन्न सोंिठन ों की तैयाररय ों का आकलन करने में सिम बनाने क े  तलए 
स्ष-इन द्वारा तनयतमत रूप से साइबर सुरिा मॉक ति र ल आय तजत की जाती है। 
9. तसतोंबर 2024 में स्ष-इन द्वारा शुरू तकया िया आतटकतफतशयल इोंटेतलजेंस में प्रमातणत सुरिा पेशेिर 
(सीएसपीएआई) कायकिम, साइबर सुरिा पेशेिर ों क  एआई प्रणानलयों क  सुरतित करने हेतु कौशल 
से लैस करता है। 
क. यह एआई से सोंबोंतित खतर ों का समाधाि करने में मदद करता है, और अोंततः  व्यािसातयक 
पररवेश में नवश्वसिीय एआई क े  पररनियोिि को सुतनतित करता है। 
****** 
 
 
725                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2298 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
बैंकि ां ग‍क्षेत्र‍में‍साइबर‍सुरक्षा‍‍‍‍‍ 
 
2298. श्री‍मस्‍ तान‍राव‍यादव‍बीडा:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क)  क्‍ या साइबर हमले तेिी से भारत में बैंनक ं ि क्षेत्र को निशािा बिा रहे हैं;  
(ख)  यनि हां, तो अब तक सूनचत नकए िए ऐसे साइबर हमलों का ब् यौरा क्‍ या है; और     
(ि)  बैंनक ं ि क्षेत्र में साइबर सुरक्षा को मिबूत करिे क े  नलए सरकार द्वारा उठाए िए या प्रस् तानित किम क्‍ या हैं?  
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍‍ ् र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्योकगिी‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍किकतन‍प्रसाद) 
(ि) से (ग): भारत सरकार की िीनतयों का उद्देश्य एक सुरनक्षत, निश्वसिीय और ििाबिेह साइबर क्षेत्र सुनिनित करिा 
है। यह भारत क े  निनि्ल बुनियािी ढांचे क े  नलए साइबर खतरे क े  प्रनत सतक क  और पूरी तरह से सचेत है। बैंनक ं ि क्षेत्र 
सरकार की रणिीनत का एक अनभन्न अंि है। 
भारतीय कम्यू्र आपात प्रनतनिया िल (स्क -इि) को सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी अनिनियम , 2000 की िारा 70ख क े  उपबंिों 
क े  अंतिकत साइबर सुरक्षा घ्िाओं पर कारकिाई करिे क े  नलए राष्ट्र ीय एिेंसी के  रूप में िानमत नकया िया है। 
बैंनक ं ि और नित्तीय सेिाए ं  महत्वपूणक सूचिा अिसंरचिा (सीआईआई) का भी नहस्सा हैं , सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी अनिनियम , 
2000 की िारा 70क के  तहत िानमत राष्ट्र ीय महत्वपूणक सूचिा अिसंरचिा संरक्षण क ें द्र (एिसीआईआईपीसी), ऐसी 
महत्वपूणक प्रणानलयों की सुरक्षा में महत्वपूणक भूनमका निभाती है। 
एिसीआईआईपीसी बैंनक ं ि क्षेत्र क े  नलए महत्वपूणक प्रणानलयों की सुरक्षा क े  नलए स्क-इि, आरबीआई, स्क-निि और 
बैंनक ं ि संस्थािों क े  साथ नमलकर काम करता है। यह नियनमत रूप से िोखखम मूल्ांकि, क्षेत्र-निनशष्ट् सलाह िारी करिे 
और सुरक्षात्मक उपायों क े  कायाकन्वयि का संचालि करता है। 
क ं यू्र सुरक्षा घ्िा प्रनतनिया िल - नित्त (सीएसआईआर्ी-निि) नियनमत रूप से स्क-इि क े  छत्र और मािकिशकि क े  
तहत नित्तीय क्षेत्र से ररपो्क की िई साइबर सुरक्षा घ्िाओं पर प्रनतनिया िेता है। 
भारतीय ररज़िक बैंक (आरबीआई) िे बैंकों क े  नलए साइबर सुरक्षा ढांचे पर एक व्यापक पररपत्र िारी नकया है, िो मिबूत 
साइबर सुरक्षा नियंत्रणों को लािू करिे क े  नलए मािक और निशानििेश नििाकररत करता है। 
बैंनक ं ि क्षेत्र सनहत िेश में साइबर सुरक्षा को मिबूत करिे क े  नलए कई अन्य पहलें इस प्रकार हैं: 
1. स्क-इि द्वारा कायाकखन्वत राष्ट्र ीय साइबर समन्वय कें द्र (एिसीसीसी) साइबर सुरक्षा खतरों का पता लिािे क े  नलए 
साइबर स्पेस की िांच करता है। यह कारकिाई करिे क े नलए संबंनित संिठिों, राज्य सरकारों और नहतिारक 
एिेंनसयों क े  साथ िािकारी साझा करता है। 
2. साइबर स्वच्छता क ें द्र (सीएसक े ) 
• स्क-इि द्वारा प्रिाि की िािे िाली एक िािररक -क ें नद्रत सेिा, िो स्वच्छ भारत क े  दृनष्ट्कोण को साइबर स्पेस 
तक निस्ताररत करती है। 
• यह बॉ्िे् क्लीनिंि ए ं ि मैलिेयर एिानलनसस सें्र है और िुभाकििापूणक कायकिमों का पता लिािे में मिि करता 
है और इसे ह्ािे क े  नलए मुफ्त ् ू ल प्रिाि करता है। 
• यह िािररकों और संिठिों क े  नलए साइबर सुरक्षा युखियााँ और सिोत्तम अभ्यास भी प्रिाि करता है। 
3. स्क-इि िे सूचिा सुरक्षा सिोत्तम प्रथाओं क े  कायाकन्वयि का समथकि और ऑनि् करिे क े  नलए 231 सुरक्षा लेखा 
परीक्षा संिठिों को सूचीबद्ध नकया है। 
4. साइबर हमलों और साइबर आतंकिाि का मुकाबला करिे क े  नलए स्क-इि द्वारा तैयार की िई साइबर संक् प्रबंिि 
योििा सभी मंत्रालयों/निभािों द्वारा कायाकखन्वत की िाएिी। 
5. स्क-इि द्वारा साइबर सुरक्षा मॉक नि र ल्स का आयोिि, सरकारी और महत्वपूणक क्षेत्रों सनहत बैंनक ं ि क्षेत्र की संिठिों 
की साइबर सुरक्षा खस्थनत और तैयाररयों का मूल्ांकि करिे क े  नलए। 
6. िेश में प्रीपेि भुिताि नलखत  (पीपीआई) िारी करिे िाली सभी प्रानिक ृ त संस्थाओं/बैंकों को स्क-इि द्वारा 
प्राथनमकता क े  आिार पर स्क-इि क े  पैिल में शानमल लेखा परीक्षकों द्वारा निशेष लेखा परीक्षा करिे की सलाह िी 
िई है। 
क. निष्कषों का अिुपालि सुनिनित करिे और सुरक्षा सिकश्रेष्ठ प्रथाओं क े  कायाकन्वयि को सुनिनित करिे क े  नलए तत्काल 
किम उठाए िाते हैं। 
7. आरबीआई का िि िािरूकता अनभयाि 'आरबीआई कहता है ' लोिों को निनि्ल भुिताि निकल्ों और उन्हें 
सुरनक्षत, संरनक्षत और सुनििाििक तरीक े  से उपयोि करिे क े  बारे में िािकारी िेता है। 
***** 
726                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ य‍सभा 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या 2299 
निसका उत्तर 19 निसम् बर, 2025 को निया िािा है। 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक) 
 
एआई‍अनुसांधान‍और‍नवाचार‍में‍धीमी‍प्रगकत‍‍‍‍‍‍ 
 
2299. श्री‍अब्‍दुल‍वहाब:‍ 
 
क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉनिकी और सूचिा प्रौद्योनिकी मंत्री यह बतािे की क ृ पा करेंिे नकिः 
 
(क)  क्‍ या सरकार यह स् वीकार करती है नक क ृ नत्रम बुद्धिमत् ता संबंधी अिुसंधाि और िवाचार में भारत 
वैनिक निग् ििों से पीछ े  है;  
(ख) अपिे नवशाल प्रनतभा पूल क े  बाविूि एआई क े  क्षेत्र में भारत की धीमी प्रिनत क े  क्या कारण हैं; 
(ि) नपछले पांच वर्षों क े  िौराि वैनिक एआई िवाचार सूचकांकों में भारत की तुलिात्मक द्धिनत क्या है; 
और 
(घ) इस तकिीकी अंतर को पा्िे क े  नलए सरकार द्वारा क्या किम प्रस्तानवत नकए िए हैं? 
‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍उत्तर 
इलेक्‍‍ ् र ॉकनिी‍और‍सूचना‍प्रौद्योकगिी‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री‍(श्री‍किकतन‍प्रसाद) 
(ि) से (घ): भारत िे नपछले क ु छ वर्षों में एआई अिुसंधाि, िवाचार और अंिीकरण में महत्वपूणण प्रिनत 
की है। यह एक मिबूत निनि्ल सावणिनिक बुनियािी ढांचे, एक िीवंत स्टा्णअप पररदृश्य और क ु शल 
पेशेवरों क े  नवस्ताररत पूल द्वारा समनथणत है। 
स्टैिफोिण यूनिवनसण्ी  क े  ग्लोबल एआई वाइब्रेंसी ् ू ल में भारत शीर्षण तीि िेशों में शानमल है। यह 
इिोवेशि इंिेक्स में भारत क े  मिबूत प्रिशणि को िशाणता है। यह एक संपन्न स्टा्णअप इकोनसस्टम और 
एआई इकोनसस्टम नवकनसत करिे पर सरकार क े  मिबूत फोकस का भी प्रनतनबंब है। 
वैनिक आकलि, एआई प्रनतभा में भी भारत की ताकत को उिािर करते हैं। स्टैिफोिण एआई इंिेक्स 
ररपो्ण 2025 क े  अिुसार, भारत लिभि 33% की वानर्षणक भती िर क े  साथ एआई प्रनतभा अनधग्रहण में 
िुनिया का िेतृत्व करता है। 
यह एआई कौशल पैठ में नवि स्तर पर शीर्षण िेशों में शानमल है, और वर्षण 2016 क े  बाि से एआई प्रनतभा 
संक े न्द्रण में तीि िुिा से अनधक की वृद्धि िेखी िई है। 
उद्योि क े अिुमािों से पता चलता है नक भारत का एआई प्रनतभा आधार  वर्षण 2027 तक िोिुिा से 
अनधक होिे की उम्मीि है, िो लिभि 15% की चक्रवृद्धि वानर्षणक वृद्धि िर से बढ़ रहा है। 
भारत की बढ़ती एआई क्षमता, वैनिक िेवलपर भािीिारी में पररलनक्षत होती है। 
भौिोनलक नवतरण द्वारा नि्हब एआई पररयोििाओं पर नविव्यापी आंकडों क े  अिुसार, भारत 2024 
में नवि स्तर पर ि ू सरा सबसे बडा योििािकताण था, िो सभी एआई पररयोििाओं का 19.9% था। यह 
भारत क े  एआई िेवलपर इकोनसस्टम की पैठ और पैमािे को रेखांनकत करता है। 
इांकियाएआई कमशन 
इंनियाएआई नमशि िैसी पहलों क े  माध्यम से, सरकार लनक्षत निवेश और सावणिनिक-नििी भािीिारी 
के साथ िनत को तेि कर रही है। इि प्रयासों का उद्देश्य भारत की वैनिक द्धिनत को  मिबूत करिा 
और एआई में निम्मेिार और समावेशी िेतृत्व सुनिनित करिा है। 
यह नमशि सात बुनियािी स्तंभों पर आधाररत है: 
• इांकियाएआई ि ां प्यू्‍क्षमता: स्टा्णअप, एमएसएमई और शोधकताणओं क े  नलए िीपीयू सनहत उच्च-
स्तरीय क ं प्यून्ंि संसाधिों तक सस्ती पहंच प्रिाि करिा 
727                                                      

• इांकियाएआई फाउांिेशन‍मॉिल: ििरेन्व एआई में संप्रभु क्षमता सुनिनित करिे क े  नलए भारतीय 
िे्ासे् और भार्षाओं पर प्रनशनक्षत स्विेशी बडे मल्टीमॉिल और भार्षा मॉिल नवकनसत करिा 
• एआईिोष‍: एआई मॉिल नवकास क े  नलए सरकारी और िैर-सरकारी स्रोतों से उच्च  िुणवत्ता वाले 
िे्ासे् का एक एकीक ृ त मंच बिािा 
• इांकियाएआई एप्लिि े शन‍िेवलपमें्‍इकनकशएक्व: स्वास्थ्य सेवा, क ृ नर्ष, िलवायु लचीलापि, शासि 
और सहायक प्रौद्योनिनकयों िैसे क्षेत्रों में भारत-नवनशष्ट चुिौनतयों क े  नलए एआई समाधािों का समथणि 
करिा 
• इांकियाएआई फ्यूचर‍ प्लिल्स: न्यर-2 और न्यर-3 शहरों में िे्ा और एआई लैब क े  साथ-साथ 
स्नातक, स्नातकोत्तर और पीएचिी कायणक्रमों में वृद्धि क े  माध्यम से भारत की एआई प्रनतभा पाइपलाइि 
का नवस्तार करिा 
• इांकियाएआई स्टा्टअप‍फाइनेंकसांग: एआई स्टा्णअप्स को नवत्तीय सहायता प्रिाि करिा 
• सुरकक्षत और‍कवश्वसनीय‍एआई: नवाचार िो सक्षम‍िरते‍हुए पूवाणग्रह को कम करिे, िोपिीयता 
की रक्षा करिे , पारिनशणता में सुधार और एआई से संबंनधत िोद्धखमों क े  प्रबंधि पर क ें नित 13 
पररयोििाओं का समथणि करिा  
 
भारत‍में एआई‍प्रकतभा‍िा‍कविास 
इंनियाएआई फ्यूचरद्धिल्स स्तंभ क े  तहत, सरकार 500 पीएचिी फ े लो, 5,000 स्नातकोत्तर और 8,000 
स्नातक की सहायता करक े  एक व्यापक एआई प्रनतभा और अिुसंधाि पाइपलाइि नवकनसत कर रही 
है। 
एआई, िे्ा क्यूरेशि , एिो्ेशि, क्लीनिंि और एप्लाइि िे्ा साइंस में शोध कायण करिे क े  नलए 
एिआईईएलआई्ी क े  माध्यम से न्यर-2 और न्यर-3 शहरों में 27 इंनियाएआई िे्ा और एआई 
लैब िानपत नकए िए हैं। 
27 राज्ों/संघ राज् क्षेत्रों में 174 आई्ीआई और पॉनल्ेद्धिक को अनतररक्त इंनियाएआई िे्ा और 
एआई लैब िानपत करिे की मंिूरी िी िई है। 
फ्यूचरप्लिल्स प्राइम 
सरकार िे िैसकॉम क े  सहयोि से एआई, नबि िे्ा और क्लाउि क ं प्यून्ंि िैसे क्षेत्रों में अत्याधुनिक 
कौशल क े  नलए पाठ्यक्रम भी शुरू नकए हैं। 
प्ले्फॉमण पर 500+ से अनधक पाठ्यक्रम और 2000+ निनि्ल फ्लूए ं सी पाथ्वेस उपलब्ध कराए िए  
हैं। अब तक, 16.29 लाख+ उम्मीिवारों िे नवनभन्न पाठ्यक्रमों में प्रवेश/प्रनशक्षण नलया है। 
एआई‍पर वैकश्वि‍बातचीत‍िो‍आिार‍देना: 
भारत एआई शासि और निम्मेिार उपयोि पर वैनिक चचाणओं में भी सनक्रय रूप से योििाि िे रहा  
है। भारत की िी 20 अध्यक्षता क े  िौराि भारत िे एआई सवणसम्मनत को आकार िेिे में रचिात्मक 
भूनमका निभाई। भारत िे वर्षण 2023 में ग्लोबल पा्णिरनशप ऑि आन्णनफनशयल इं्ेनलिेंस (िीपीएआई) 
की भी अध्यक्षता की। 
भारत अब फरवरी 2026 में एआई इम्पैक्ट सनम् को होस्ट करेिा, निसमें सरकारों, अंतराणष्टर ीय संिठिों, 
स्टा्णअप, उद्योि और नशक्षानविों को एक साझा मंच पर एक साथ लाया िाएिा। 
***** 
 
728                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इलेक्‍ट ् र ॉनिकीटऔरटसूचिाटप्रौद्योनिकीटमंत्रालय 
राज्यटसभा 
अतारांनकतटप्रश्नटसंख्या 2300 
जिसका उत्तर 19 जिसंबर, 2025 को जिया िाना है । 
28 अग्रहायण, 1947 (शक)   टटटटटटटटटटटटटटटटटटटटटटट 
भारतटबीपीओटसंवर्धिटयोजिाट(आईबीपीएस)टऔरटउत्तर-पूवधटबीपीओटसंवर्धिटयोजिाट(एिईबीपीएस) 
 
2300.टश्रीटभुबिेश्वरटकानलतााः  
 
 क्या इलेक्‍ ् र ॉजनकी और सूचना प्रौद्योजिकी मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंिे जक: 
 
(क)  अनुमोजित लक्ष्ों की तुलना में सफलतापूर्वक स्थाजपत और कायवशील सी्ों की संख्या सजहत भारत 
बीपीओ संर्र्वन योिना (आईबीपीएस) और उत्तर -पूर्व बीपीओ संर्र्वन योिना (एनईबीपीएस) क े  तहत 
सी् आर्ं्न और पररचालन की नर्ीनतम स्थस्थजत क्या है; 
(ख) उक्त िोनों योिनाओं क े  तहत आि की जतजि तक संजर्तररत क ु ल व्यर्हायवता अंतराल जर्त्तपोषण 
(र्ीिीएफ) का राज्य/संघ राज्य क्षेत्र-र्ार और लाभािी-र्ार ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ि) आईबीपीएस और एनईबीपीएस क े  तहत स्थाजपत बीपीओ/आई्ीईएस इकाइयों क े  माध्यम से, जर्शेषकर 
ज्यर-2 और ज्यर-3 शहरों में , अब तक जकतना रोज़िार सृजित हुआ; 
(घ) क्या मंत्रालय ने इन योिनाओं क े  तहत बीपीओ/आई्ीईएस प्रचालन स्थाजपत करने और उन्हें बनाए 
रखने में क ं पजनयों क े  समक्ष आने र्ाली चुनौजतयों की समीक्षा की है; और  
(ङ) यजि हााँ, तो इसक े  मुख्य जनष्कषव क्या हैं? 
उत्तर 
इलेक्‍ट ् र ॉनिकीटऔरटसूचिाटप्रौद्योनिकीटराज्यटमंत्रीट(श्रीटनजनतिटप्रसाद) 
 
(क) से (ङ): सरकार ने डिडिटल इंडिया काययक्रम - "नौकररय ं क े  डलए आईटी" स्तंभ क े  तहत भारत बीपीओ संवर्यन 
य िना (आईबीपीएस) और पूवोत्तर बीपीओ संवर्यन य िना (एनईबीपीएस) नामक द  बीपीओ प्र त्साहन य िनाए ं  शुरू 
की। 
इन य िनाओं का उद्देश्य आईटी/आईटीईएस क्षेत्र में डनवेश क  बढावा देना था। इन य िनाओं ने गैर -मेट र   स्थान ं, 
डवशेष रूप से डटयर -II और डटयर -III शहर ं और छ टे शहर ं में बीपीओ/आईटीईएस प्रचालन ं की स्थापना क  
प्र त्साडहत करक े  र िगार सृडित डकया। 
द न ं य िनाओं में प्रडत सीट ₹1 लाख तक की वायडबडलटी गैप फ ं डिंग (वीिीएफ) प्रदान की गई। आईबीपीएस और 
एनईबीपीएस की अवडर् पूरी ह  चुकी है। 
इन य िनाओं क े  तहत, 246 इकाइय ं ने देश क े  27 राज् ं/क ें द्र शाडसत प्रदेश ं में 45,543 सीट ं वाले 
बीपीओ/आईटीईएस पररचालन स्थाडपत डकए हैं। ये 104 छ टे कस् ं/शहर ं में डवतररत डकए गए हैं, ि  डटयर 2/3 
शहर ं में 53,000 से अडर्क व्यक्तिय ं क  प्रत्यक्ष र िगार प्रदान करते हैं। 
आईबीपीएस और एनईबीपीएस क े  तहत डवत्तीय सहायता प्रडतपूडतय क े  आर्ार पर प्रदान की गई थी, ि  सीर्े इकाइय ं 
द्वारा र िगार सृिन से िुडी हुई थी। तदनुसार, 188 इकाइय ं ने वायडबडलटी गैप फ ं डिंग का दावा डकया और पात्र 
इकाइय ं क  लगभग 134 कर ड रुपये डवतररत डकए गए। 
य िनाओं क े  कायायन्वयन क े  दौरान, मंत्रालय ने बीपीओ/आईटीईएस संचालन स्थाडपत करने और बनाए रखने में 
क ं पडनय ं क े  सामने आने वाली पररचालन चुनौडतय ं का समार्ान करने क े  डलए डहतर्ारक ं क े  साथ डनयडमत परामशय 
और समीक्षा की। 
इन समीक्षाओं के  आर्ार पर, कई पाठ्यक्रम सुर्ार और छू ट पेश की गईं, डिनमें शाडमल हैं: 
• डकसी स्थान पर आवश्यक सीट ं की न्यूनतम संख्या में कमी 
• प्र त्साहन की प्रो-रे्ा ररलीज़ क े  साथ न्यूनतम र िगार लक्ष् ं में छ ू ट 
• पररचालन शुरू ह ने पर अडिम भुगतान का प्रावर्ान 
इन उपायों ने ज्यर- II और ज्यर- III शहरों में समार्ेशी जर्कास और रोििार सृिन को बढार्ा िेने क े  अपने मूल 
उद्देश्य क े  अनुरूप योिनाओं क े  तहत भािीिारी, व्यर्हायवता और रोििार पररणामों में सुर्ार करने में मिि की। 
***** 
729                                                      

भारत सरकार 
खाद्य प्रसंस्‍ करण उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्‍ न सां. 2301 
19 दिसंबर, 2025 को उत्तर िेने के दलए 
 
किला‍स्‍ तर‍पर‍नये‍खाद्य‍प्रसांस्‍ िरण‍उद्योगोां‍िी‍स्‍ थापना‍ 
 
 
2301.‍श्री‍सी.‍वी.‍षनमुगम: 
 
क्‍ या खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे दक:  
 
 
(ि) क्‍ या‍सरकार‍क े ‍पास‍िेश‍भर‍में‍दिला‍स्‍ तर‍पर‍नये‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्‍ करण‍उद्योग‍स्‍ थादपत‍करने‍का‍कोई‍प्रस्‍ ताव‍
है;  
(ख) यदि‍हााँ, तो‍तदमलनाड ु ‍सदहत‍तत्‍ संबंधी‍राज्‍ य-वार‍ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है;  
(ग) तदमलनाड ु ‍राज्‍ य‍में‍स्‍ थादपत‍दकए‍िा‍रहे‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्‍ करण‍पाकों‍क े ‍दवकास‍में‍सरकार‍ की‍भूदमका‍का‍
ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है; और‍ 
(घ) ऐसी‍इकाई‍स्‍ थादपत‍करने‍क े ‍‍दलए‍दनिी‍उद्यदमयों‍को‍िी‍गई‍दवत्‍ तीय‍सहायता‍का‍ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है? 
 
उत्तर 
 
खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग राज्‍ य मांत्री 
(श्री रवनीत कसांह) 
‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍ 
(ि)‍और‍(ख):‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्योग‍मंत्रालय‍(‍एमओएफपीआई‍)‍स्वयं‍कोई‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्योग‍स्थादपत‍
नही ं ‍करता‍है।‍पर ं तु,‍यह‍अपनी‍क ें द्रीय‍क्षेत्र‍की‍प्रधान‍मंत्री‍दकसान‍संपिा‍योिना‍(पीएमक े एसवाई)‍स्कीम,‍खाद्य‍
प्रसंस्करण‍उद्योग‍से‍िुड़ी‍प्रोत्साहन‍स्कीम‍(पीएलआईएसएफपीआई)‍और‍क ें द्र‍प्रायोदित‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍
उद्यम‍उन्नयन‍(पीएमएफएमई)‍‍क े ‍माध्यम‍से‍तदमलनाड ु ‍समेत‍पूर े ‍िेश‍में‍ऐसे‍उद्योगों‍को‍स्थादपत‍करने‍क े ‍दलए‍
प्रोत्साहन‍िेता‍है।‍ये‍स्कीमें‍क्षेत्र‍या‍राज्य‍दवदशष्ट‍नही ं ‍हैं,‍बल्कि‍मांगआधाररत‍हैं।‍तदमलनाड ु ‍समेत‍पूर े ‍िेश‍में‍इन‍
तीन‍स्कीमों‍क े ‍अंतगगत‍एमओएफपीआई‍द्वारा‍मंजूर‍की‍गई‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍पररयोिनाओं‍‍का‍दववरण‍अनुबांध‍‍
में‍दिया‍गया‍है। 
(ग)‍और‍(घ):‍पीएमके एसवाई‍की‍घटक‍स्कीम‍मेगा‍फू ड‍पाकग ‍(एमएफपी)‍स्कीम‍का‍उिेश्य‍‍क्लस्टरों‍में‍खाद्य‍
प्रसंसकरण‍उद्योग‍को‍बढावा‍िेना‍है।‍ तदमलनाडु ‍के ‍दतरुनेलवेली‍में‍एक‍मेगा‍फू ड‍पाकग ‍को‍मंजूरी‍िी‍गई‍है,‍
दिसकी‍ पररयोिना‍ लागत‍ 77.02‍ करोड़‍ रुपये‍ और‍ अनुिान‍ सहायता‍ 23.64‍ करोड़‍ रुपये‍ है।‍ एमएफपी‍ क े ‍
दनष्पािन,‍स्वादमत्व‍और‍प्रबंधन‍‍की‍दजम्मेिारी‍कायागन्वयन‍‍एिेंसी‍(आईए)‍तदमलनाड ु ‍राज्य‍क ृ दि‍दवपणन‍बोडग‍
(टीएनएसएए ं मबी)‍की‍है।‍मंत्रालय‍‍ने‍दिनांक‍01.04.2021‍से‍एमएफपी‍स्कीम‍बंि‍कर‍िी‍है। 
एमओएफपीआई,‍ पीएमक े एसवाई‍ क े‍ अंतगगत‍ क ृ दि‍ प्रसंस्करण‍ क्लस्टर‍ क े ‍ दलए‍ अवसंरचना‍ सृिन‍
(एपीसी)‍‍नामक‍एक‍घटक‍स्कीम‍लागू‍कर‍रहा‍है‍।‍यह‍मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाक ग ‍स्कीम‍िैसा‍ही‍है,‍दिसमें‍भूदम‍‍की‍‍
न्यूनीक ृ त‍आवश्यकता‍10‍एकड़‍की‍होती‍‍है।‍एपीसी‍स्कीम‍क े ‍अंतगगत,‍पात्र‍उद्यदमयों‍को‍‍सामान्य‍क्षेत्र‍में‍पात्र‍
पररयोिना‍लागत‍क े ‍‍35%‍की‍िर‍से‍अनुिान‍सहायता‍और‍िुगगम‍क्षेत्र‍तथा‍अ.िा./अ.ि.िा.,‍एफपीओ,‍एसएचिी‍
में‍पररयोिनाओं‍क े ‍दलए‍पात्र‍‍पररयोिना‍लागत‍‍क े ‍50%‍की‍िर‍से‍अनुिान‍सहायता‍िी‍िाती‍है ,‍और‍प्रदत‍
पररयोिना‍क े ‍दलए‍अदधकतम‍10‍करोड़‍रुपये‍तक‍ िाती‍है‍एपीसी‍क े ‍अंतगगत,‍तदमलनाड ु ‍में‍333.63‍करोड़‍
रुपये‍की‍पररयोिना‍लागत‍‍और‍‍81.07‍करोड़‍रुपए‍‍की‍अनुिान‍सहायता‍क े ‍साथ‍12‍पररयोिनाओं‍को‍मंजूरी‍
िी‍गई‍है‍। 
*****  
730                                                      

अनुबांध 
“किला‍स्तर‍पर‍नये‍खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍उद्योगोां‍िी‍स्थापना ” ि े ‍सांबांध‍में‍किनाांि‍19 किसांबर, 2025 िो‍
उत्तर‍हेतु‍राज्य‍सभा‍ि े ‍अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या‍2301 ि े ‍भाग‍(ि) और‍(ख) ि े ‍उत्तर‍में‍सांिकभित‍अनुबांध 
स्कीम‍िी‍शुरुआत‍से‍लेिर‍अब‍ति‍खाद्य‍प्रसांस्करण‍उद्योग‍मांत्रालय‍िी‍पीएमि े एसवाई,‍
पीएलआईएसएफपीआई‍और‍पीएमएफएमई‍स्कीमोां‍ि े ‍अांतगित‍‍स्वीि ृ त‍पररयोिनाओां‍िी‍सांख्या 
 
क्र.सां.  
राज्य/सांघ-राज्य‍क्षेत्र‍ 
पीएमि े एसवाई‍
ि े ‍अांतगित‍
स्वीि ृ त‍
पररयोिनाओां‍
िी‍सांख्या 
पीएमएफएमई‍ि े ‍
अांतगित‍स्वीि ृ त‍
सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍
प्रसांस्करण‍उद्यमोां‍
िी‍सांख्या 
पीएलआईएसएफपीआई‍
ि े ‍अांतगित‍कवकभन्न‍स्थानोां‍
पर‍मांजूर‍किए‍गए‍
आवेिनोां‍िी‍सांख्या 
 
1.  अंडमान‍और‍दनकोबार 2 18 0 
2.  आंध्र‍प्रिेश 76 8087 38 
3.  अरुणाचल‍प्रिेश 12 136 0 
4.  असम 102 4600 4 
5.  दबहार 15 27723 7 
6.  चंडीगढ 0 5 0 
7.  छत्तीसगढ 10 1280 1 
8.  िािर‍और‍नागर‍हवेली‍
और‍‍िमन‍और‍िीव 
1 12 0 
9.  दिल्ली 22 363 0 
10.  गोवा 2 137 1 
11.  गुिरात 109 1010 32 
12.  हररयाणा 99 1633 9 
13.  दहमाचल‍प्रिेश 44 2537 4 
14.  िम्मू‍और‍कश्मीर 41 1938 2 
15.  झारखंड 2 4250 2 
16.  कनागटक 98 7724 21 
17.  क े रल 54 7937 10 
18.  लद्दाख 0 90 0 
19.  लक्षद्वीप 0 0 0 
20.  मध्य‍प्रिेश 51 11944 10 
21.  महाराष्टर  244 26172 41 
22.  मदणपुर 8 308 0 
23.  मेघालय 10 227 0 
24.  दमिोरम 4 56 0 
25.  नागालैंड 4 429 0 
26.  ओदडशा 30 2732 5 
27.  पुड ु चेरी 2 192 0 
28.  पंिाब 76 3021 9 
29.  रािस्थान 55 1351 6 
30.  दसल्किम 1 65 0 
31.  तकमलनाड ु 156 17210 20 
32.  तेलंगाना 67 7266 13 
33.  दत्रपुरा 9 248 0 
34.  उत्तर‍प्रिेश 99 20575 27 
35.  उत्तराखंड 59 1037 7 
36.  पदिम‍बंगाल 55 431 9 
 
***** 
731                                                      

भारत सरकार 
खाद्य प्रसंस्‍ करण उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्‍ न सां. 2302 
19 दिसंबर, 2025 को उत्तर िेने के दलए 
 
मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाि क ‍और‍ि ृ कि‍प्रसांस्‍ िरण‍क्‍ लस्‍ टर‍ 
 
 
2302.‍ श्री‍रायगा‍ि ृ ष्‍ णैया: 
 श्री‍नरहरी‍अमीन: 
 डा.‍परमार‍जशवांतकसांह‍सालमकसांह: 
 डा.‍अकनल‍सुखदेवराय‍ब ांडे:‍ 
 श्रीमती‍माया‍नार कलया: 
 श्रीमती‍किरण‍चौधरी:‍ 
 श्री‍ि े शरीदेवकसांह‍झाला: 
 श्री‍मयांिि ु मार‍नायि:‍ 
 
क्‍ या खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्य ग मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे दक:  
 
 
(ि) िेश‍ में‍ काययशील‍ और‍ दनमायणाधीन‍ मेगा‍ फ ू ड‍ पाक य, क ृ दि‍ प्रसंस्‍ करण‍ क्‍ लस्‍ टर‍ और‍ खाद्य‍ परीक्षण‍
प्रयोगशालाओं‍की‍वतयमान‍स्थिदत‍क्‍ या‍है;  
(ख) दनमायणाधीन‍पररयोजनाओं‍में‍दवलंब, यदि‍कोई‍हो, क े ‍क्‍ या‍कारण‍हैं‍और‍तत्‍ संबंधी‍ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है; 
(ग) फ ू ड‍ पाकों‍ में‍ इकाइयों‍ क े ‍ दलए‍ अंदतम‍ मील‍ कनेस्थिदवटी, संभारतंत्र‍ समर्यन‍ और‍ कच्‍ चे‍ माल‍ की‍
उपलब्‍ धता‍को‍बेहतर‍बनाने‍क े ‍दलए‍क्‍ या-क्‍ या‍उपाय‍दकए‍गए‍है; और 
(घ) इन‍पररयोजनाओं‍‍ने‍दकसानों‍की‍आय‍बढाने , बबायिी‍कम‍करने‍और‍स्‍ र्ानीय‍क ृ दि‍मूल्‍ य‍श्ृंखला‍को‍
बढावा‍िेने‍में‍दकस‍सीमा‍तक‍योगिान‍दिया‍है? 
 
 
उत्तर 
 
खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्य ग राज्‍ य मांत्री 
(श्री रवनीत कसांह) 
 
(ि):‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्योग‍मंत्रालय‍(एमओएफपीआई)‍"प्रधानमंत्री‍दकसान‍संपिा‍‍योजना‍(पीएमक े एसवाई)"‍
नामक‍एक‍क ें द्रीय‍क्षेत्र‍की‍अंब्रेला‍योजना‍को‍विय‍2017-18‍से‍पूर े‍िेश‍में‍लागू‍कर‍रहा‍है।‍इस‍योजना‍का‍मुख्य‍
उद्द े श्य‍िेश‍में‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍क्षेत्र‍का‍समग्र‍‍दवकास‍सुदनदित‍‍करना‍है।‍इस‍योजना‍का‍लक्ष्य‍‍िेश‍में‍खाद्य‍
प्रसंस्करण‍और‍परररक्षण‍अवसंरचना‍‍क े ‍दनमायण‍क े ‍दलए‍प्रोत्साहन‍‍प्रिान‍करना‍करना‍है।‍पीएमक े एसवाई‍में‍6‍
प्रचालनरत‍घटक‍‍योजना‍और‍प्रदतबद्ध‍िेयता‍के‍सार्‍2‍बंि‍हो‍चुकी‍घटक‍ ‍योजना‍(‍01.04.2021‍से‍)‍क ृ दि‍
प्रसंस्करण‍‍क्लस्टर,‍जो‍पीएमक े एसवाई‍की‍प्रचालनरत‍घटक‍योजना‍है,‍के‍‍67पररयोजनाओं‍को‍मंजूरी‍िी‍गई‍
है,‍दजनमें‍से‍22‍पररयोजनाए ं ‍‍प्रचालनरत‍हैं।‍खाद्य‍परीक्षण‍प्रयोगशाला‍योजना‍जो‍पीएमक े एसवाई‍की‍प्रचालनरत‍
घटक‍‍योजना‍भी‍है,‍के‍अंतगयत,‍205‍पररयोजनाए ं ‍‍को‍मंजूरी‍िी‍गई‍है‍,‍दजनमें‍से‍172‍पररयोजनाए ं ‍‍पूरी‍‍हो‍
चुकी‍‍हैं।‍इसक े‍अदतररक्त,‍मेगा‍फ ू ड‍पाक य‍योजना‍जो‍दक‍01.04.2021‍से‍पीएमक े एसवाई‍का‍एक‍बंि‍हो‍चुकी‍
घटक‍योजना‍है,‍के‍अंतगयत,‍41‍पररयोजनाओं‍को‍मंजूरी‍िी‍गई‍है‍,‍दजनमें‍से‍25‍पररयोजनाए ं‍प्रचालनरत‍हैं। 
732                                                      

 
(ख):‍यदि‍पररयोजना‍कायायन्वयन‍में‍कोई‍िेरी‍हो,‍तो‍मुख्य‍रूप‍से‍संबंदधत‍एजेंदसयों‍(राजस्व‍प्रादधकरण‍सदहत),‍
नगर‍योजना,‍दवि ् युत‍प्रादधकरण,‍जल‍प्रादधकरण,‍प्रि ू िण‍दनयंत्रण‍बोडय,‍लाइसेंदसंग‍प्रादधकरण‍आदि‍से‍वैधादनक‍
मंजूरी‍प्राप्त‍करने‍में‍िेरी,‍सावदध‍‍ऋण‍मंजूरी‍और‍दवतरण‍में‍िेरी,‍आवेिकों‍द्वारा‍सामना‍की‍जाने‍वाली‍दवत्तीय‍
बाधाए ं‍जैसे‍कारकों‍के‍कारण‍होती‍है। 
 
(ग):‍पीएमक े एसवाई‍क ें द्रीय‍क्षेत्र‍की‍एक‍अम्ब्रेला‍योजना‍है‍दजसक े‍अंतगयत‍उद्यदमयों‍‍को‍खेत‍से‍खुिरा‍दबक्री‍
क ें द्र‍तक‍क ु शल‍‍आपूदतय‍‍श्ृंखला‍प्रबंधन‍के‍सार्‍आधुदनक‍अवसंरचना‍बनाने‍के‍दलए‍दवत्तीय‍सहायता‍प्रिान‍की‍‍
जाती‍है,‍दजससे‍िेश‍में‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍क्षेत्र‍क े ‍दवकास‍को‍बढावा‍दमलता‍है।‍एमएफपी‍योजना‍मेगा‍फू ड‍पाक य‍
बनाकर‍क्लस्टर-आधाररत‍,‍हब-ए ं ड-स्पोक‍मॉडल‍पर‍काम‍करती‍है।‍इसका‍उद्द े श्य‍एक‍मज़बूत‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍
उद्योग‍की‍िापना‍ करना‍है,‍दजसे‍एक‍क ु शल‍‍आपूदतय‍शंखला‍दमले‍दजसमें‍प्रार्दमक‍प्रसंस्करण‍क ें द्र‍(पीपीसी)‍
और‍संग्रहण‍क ें द्र‍(सीएस)‍के‍रूप‍में‍खेत‍के‍पास‍प्रार्दमक‍प्रसंस्करण‍और‍भंडारण‍‍के‍दलए‍अवसंरचना‍‍बनाना‍
शादमल‍है‍। 
 
(घ):‍ऊपर‍बताई‍गई‍योजना‍के‍अंतगयत‍फसलोत्तर‍अवसंरचना‍और‍प्रसंस्करण‍‍सुदवधाओं‍क े ‍सृजन‍‍‍से‍फसलोत्तर‍
नुकसान‍कम‍होता‍है।‍यह‍योजना‍उद्यदमयों‍‍को‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण/परररक्षण‍अवसंरचना‍बनाने‍के‍दलए‍अनुिान‍
सहायता‍के‍रूप‍में‍दवत्तीय‍‍मिि‍िेती‍हैं,‍दजसमें‍मुख्य‍रूप‍से‍प्रसंस्करण‍इकाइयां,‍शीत‍भंडारण‍और‍र े दिजेर े टेड‍
वाहन‍शादमल‍हैं‍तादक‍फसलोत्तर‍नुकसान‍कम‍हो‍सक े ।‍इससे‍िेश‍में‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍क्षेत्र‍क े ‍दवकास‍को‍बढावा‍
दमलता‍है‍और‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍इकाई‍ की‍क्षमता‍बेहतर‍होती‍है,‍दजससे‍दकसानों‍को,‍खासकर‍ग्रामीण‍इलाकों‍
में,‍बेहतर‍लाभ‍‍दमलता‍है,‍खेती‍की‍उपज‍की‍बबायिी‍कम‍होती‍है,‍प्रसंस्करण‍स्तर‍बढता‍है‍और‍प्रसंस्क ृ त‍खाद्य‍
पिार्य‍का‍दनयायत‍बढता‍है। 
 
‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍अवसंरचना‍क े ‍दनमायण‍‍से,‍खेती‍की‍उपज‍जो‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍इकाइयों‍के‍दलए‍कच्चा‍
माल‍है,‍की‍मांग‍बढती‍है,‍दजससे‍दकसानों‍को‍बेहतर‍िाम‍दमलते‍हैं‍और‍खेत‍से‍मुनाफा‍बढता‍है।‍पीएमक े एसवाई‍
की‍घटक‍योजना‍मेगा‍फू ड‍पाक य‍और‍क ृ दि‍प्रसंस्करण‍क्लस्टर‍के‍अंतगयत,‍अि ू बर‍2025‍तक‍,‍141577‍दकसानों‍
को‍फायिा‍हुआ‍है‍और‍36.22‍लाख‍मीदट ि क‍टन/विय‍‍परररक्षण‍और‍प्रसंस्करण‍क्षमता‍का‍दनमायण‍हुआ‍है,‍दजससे‍
िानीय‍क ृ दि‍मूल्य‍शंखला‍को‍बढावा‍दमला‍है। 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
733                                                      

भारत सरकार 
खाद्य प्रसंस्‍ करण उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सां. 2303 
19 दिसंबर, 2025 को उत्तर िेने के दलए 
 
पी.एम-एफ.एम.ई योजना िा कियान् वयन  
 
 
2303# श्री कमथलेश ि ु मार: 
 श्री अमर पाल मौयय:  
  
क्‍ या खाद्य प्रसांस् िरण उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे दक:  
 
 
(ि) प्रधान‍मंत्री‍सूक्ष्‍ म‍खाद्य‍उद्यम‍उन्‍ नयन‍(पीएमएफएमई)‍योजना‍क े ‍दियान्‍ वयन‍की‍वततमान‍स्स्‍ िदत‍क्‍ या‍है;  
(ख) एक‍दजला‍एक‍उत्‍ पाि‍(ओडीओपी)‍दृदिकोण‍ क े ‍अंतगतत‍दकतने‍लाभादितयों‍को‍सहायता‍प्रिान‍की‍गई‍है‍
तिा‍दकन‍प्रकार‍की‍इकाइयों‍को‍समितन‍दिया‍गया‍है;  
(ग) वर्त‍2024-25‍एवं‍चालू‍दवत्‍ तीय‍वर्त‍क े ‍िौरान‍स्‍ वीक ृ त‍एवं‍दवतररत‍ि े दडट-दलंक्‍ ड‍सस्िडी‍का‍ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है; 
(घ) राज्‍ य-वार‍क्षमता‍दनमातण, ब्ांदडंग‍एवं‍दवपणन‍समितन‍को‍सुदृढ़‍करने‍हेतु‍कौन-से‍किम‍उठाए‍गए‍हैं; और‍ 
(ङ) इस‍योजना‍क े ‍माध्‍ यम‍से‍रोजगार‍सृजन, औपचाररकीकरण‍एवं‍मूल्‍ यवधतन‍पर‍पड़ने‍वाले‍आदितक‍प्रभाव‍का‍
मूल्‍ यांकन‍मंत्रालय‍दकस‍प्रकार‍कर‍रहा‍है?‍‍ 
 
 
उत्तर  
 
खाद्य प्रसांस् िरण उद्योग राज् य मांत्री 
(श्री रवनीत कसांह) 
 
(ि):‍ खाद्य‍ प्रसंस्करण‍ उद्योग‍ मंत्रालय (एमओएफ़पीआई) िेश में नए सूक्ष्म‍ खाद्य‍ प्रसंस्करण‍ उद्यम‍ शुरू 
करने/अपग्रेड करने के दलए दवत्तीय, तकनीकी‍और‍व्यावसादयक‍सहायता‍िेने के दलए एक क े न्द्र‍प्रायोदजत‍"प्रधान‍
मंत्री‍ सूक्ष्म‍ खाद्य‍ प्रसंस्करण‍ उद्यम‍ उन्नयन‍(पीएमएफ़एमई) योजना" कायातस्ित कर रहा है। स्कीम का समय 
2020-21 से 2024-25 िा, दजसे एक साल के दलए बढ़ाकर माचत, 2026‍तक कर दिया गया है। 
31.10.2025 तक, प्रधान‍मंत्री‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्यम‍उन्नयन‍(पीएमएफएमई)‍स्कीम के कायातियन की‍
स्िदत‍इस तरह है: 
i. स्कीम‍के‍दवदभन्न‍घटकों‍क े ‍कायातियन‍के‍दलए‍क ें द्र‍का‍दहस्सा‍4,306.40‍करोड़‍रुपये‍जारी‍दकया‍गया‍
है। 
ii. 4,684.65‍करोड़‍रुपये‍की‍ि े दडट‍दलंक्ड‍सस्िडी‍सदहत‍1,62,744‍ऋण‍मंजूर‍दकए‍गए‍हैं। 
iii. 3,65,935‍ स्वयं‍ सहायता‍ समूह‍ (एसएचजी)‍ सिस्ों‍ को‍ 1,244.96‍ करोड़‍ रुपये‍ की‍ प्रारस्िक‍ पूंजी‍
सहायता‍की‍मंजूरी‍िी‍गई‍है। 
iv. 76‍इनक्यूबेशन‍सेंटर‍को‍मंजूरी‍िी‍गई‍है। 
v. क्षमता‍दनमातण‍के‍तहत‍1,26,353‍लाभादितयों‍को‍ट रेदनंग‍िी‍गई‍है। 
(ख): ‍एक‍दजला‍एक‍उत्पाि ‍(ओडीओपी)‍पर‍आधाररत‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍इकाईयां‍‍लगाने/अपग्रेड‍करने‍
के‍दलए‍22,524‍ऋण‍मंजूर‍दकए‍गए‍हैं।‍35‍राज्ों/क े न्द्र‍शादसत‍प्रिेशों‍के‍726‍दजलों‍में‍137‍अदितीय‍ओडीओपी‍
अदधसूदचत‍दकए‍गए‍हैं। 
(ग):‍मंजूर‍और‍संदवतररत‍ऋण‍का‍दववरण‍नीचे‍दिया‍गया‍है: 
734                                                      

कवत्तीय वर्य स्वीि ृ त ऋणोां िी सांख्या सांकवतररत ऋणोां िी सांख्या 
2024-25 50,873 42,982 
2025-26‍(31.10.2025‍तक) 25,567 24,127 
 
(घ):‍यह‍योजना‍मास्टर‍ट रेनरों‍और‍दजला‍स्तर‍के‍ट रेनरों‍के‍माध्यम‍से‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍में‍लगे‍व्यस्ियों‍और‍
समूह‍आवेिकों‍और‍प्रारस्िक‍पूंजी‍लाभािी‍स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूह‍(एसएचजी)‍के‍दलए‍उद्यदमता‍दवकास‍कायतिम‍
(ईडीपी)‍ प्रदशक्षण‍ प्रिान‍ करती‍ है।‍ राज्‍ स्तर‍ पर,‍ प्रदशक्षण‍ कायतिम‍ राज्‍ स्तरीय‍ तकनीकी‍ संिानों‍
(एसएलटीआई‍)‍िारा‍आयोदजत‍और‍समस्ित‍दकए‍जाते‍हैं,‍जबदक‍प्रदशक्षण‍प्रिान‍करने‍ ‍की‍दनगरानी‍राज्‍
नोडल‍एजेंसी‍(एसएनए‍)‍िारा‍दनयुि‍दजला-स्तरीय‍अदधकाररयों‍िारा‍की‍जाती‍है।‍इसमें‍प्रदशक्षण‍संचालन‍का‍
सत्यापन‍और‍सीखने‍के‍पररणामों‍और‍प्रदशक्षण‍प्रभावशीलता‍का‍आकलन‍करने‍के‍दलए‍लाभादितयों‍का‍आंतररक‍
मूल्ांकन‍शादमल‍है।‍पीएमएफ़एमई‍योजना‍के‍तहत‍क्षमता‍दनमातण‍घटक‍के‍प्रभावी‍कायातियन‍और‍दनगरानी‍
में‍सहायता‍करने‍के‍दलए‍िो‍रािर ीय‍स्तर‍के‍तकनीकी‍संिानों,‍अिातत्‍दनफटेम-क ुं डली‍और‍दनफटेम‍-तंजावुर‍
के‍ अलावा‍ संबंदधत‍ एसएनए‍ की‍ दसफाररशों‍ और‍ मंत्रालय‍ की‍ मंजूरी‍ के‍ आधार‍ पर‍ राज्‍ स्तर‍ पर‍ क ु ल‍ 43‍
एसएलटीआई‍की‍पहचान‍की‍गई‍है।‍राज्-वार‍प्रदशदक्षत‍लाभािी‍अनुबांध-I‍में‍दिए‍गए‍हैं। 
पीएमएफ़एमई‍ योजना‍ के‍ ब्ांदडंग‍ और‍ माक े दटंग‍ क ं पोनेंट‍ के‍ अंतगतत,‍ दकसान‍ उत्पािक‍ संघटन‍
(एफ़पीओ),‍कोऑपर े दटव्स,‍स्वयं‍ सहायता‍ समूह‍और‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्यम‍क े‍राज्‍ या‍क्षेत्रीय‍स्पेशल‍
पपतज‍व्हीकल‍(एसपीवी)‍‍के‍समूहों‍को‍पात्र‍पररयोजना‍लागत‍‍का‍50%‍तक‍अनुिान‍दिया‍जाता‍है‍तादक‍राज्‍
या‍क्षेत्रीय‍स्तर‍पर‍एक‍कॉमन‍अम्ब्रेला‍ब्ांड‍दवकदसत‍दकया‍जा‍सक े ।‍यह‍घटक‍पैक े दजंग‍और‍ब्ांदडंग,‍गुणवत्ता‍
दनयंत्रण,‍ररटेल‍और‍ई-कॉमसत‍प्लेटफॉर्म्त‍के‍साि‍टाई-अप,‍उत्पाि‍मानकीकरण‍और‍उपभोिा‍खुिरा‍दबिी‍के‍
दलए‍ खाद्य‍ सुरक्षा‍ के‍ पालन‍ हेतु‍ सहायता‍ प्रिान‍ करता‍‍ है।‍ ब्ांदडंग‍ और‍ माक े दटंग‍ में‍ अनुमोदित‍ ‍ राज्-वार‍
पररयोजनाए ं‍अनुबांध-II में‍िी‍गई‍‍हैं।‍ 
(ङ):‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्योग‍मंत्रालय(एमओएफ़पीआई)‍ने‍पीएमएफ़एमई‍स्कीम‍के‍असर‍का‍अंिाजा‍लगाने‍के‍
दलए‍ एक‍ तृतीय-पक्ष‍ मध्यावदध‍ प्रभाव‍ मूल्ांकन‍ करवाया‍ है। अध्ययन‍‍ में‍ यह‍ बात‍ सामने‍ आई‍ है‍ दक‍
पीएमएफ़एमई‍के‍जररए‍प्रौद्योदगकी‍और‍दवत्तीय‍सहायता‍क े ‍एकीकरण‍से‍उद्यदमयों‍को‍अपनी‍उत्पािन‍क्षमता,‍
टनतओवर‍और‍दबजनेस‍ग्रोि‍बढ़ाने‍में‍मिि‍दमली‍है,‍दजससे‍आय‍सृजन,‍बाजार‍पहंच/दलक ें ज‍और‍वोकल‍फॉर‍
लोकल‍को‍बढ़ावा‍दमला‍है।‍पीएमएफ़एमई‍एमआईएस‍पोटतल‍में‍िी‍गई‍जानकारी‍के‍आधार‍पर,‍31.10.2025‍
तक‍8,54,167‍लाख‍प्रत्यक्ष‍और‍अप्रत्यक्ष‍रोजगार‍पैिा‍हए‍हैं‍और‍56168‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍इकाईयों‍का‍
औपचाररकीकरण‍दकया‍गया‍है। 
 
***** 
 
 
 
  
735                                                      

अनुबांध-I 
किनाांि 19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर हेतु “पी.एम-एफ.एम.ई योजना िा कियान् वयन” ि े  सांबांध में राज्य 
सभा अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2303 ि े  भाग (घ)  ि े  उत्तर में सांिकभयत अनुबांध  
 
राज्य-वार प्रकशकित लाभाकथययोां िी सांख्या: 
 
31.10.2025 ति राज्य/ि ें द्र शाकसत प्रिेश –वार प्रकशकित लाभाथी 
ि. सां. राज्य/ि ें द्र शाकसत प्रिेश प्रकशकित ि ु ल लाभाथी 
1 अंडमान‍व‍दनकोबार‍िीप‍समूह 62 
2 आंध्र‍प्रिेश 7534 
3 अरुणाचल‍प्रिेश 1344 
4 असम 15408 
5 दबहार 514 
6 चंडीगढ़ 21 
7 छत्तीसगढ 4931 
8 िािरा‍और‍नगर‍हवेली‍और‍िमन‍
और‍िीव 0 
9 दिल्ली 786 
10 गोवा 999 
11 गुजरात 68 
12 हररयाणा 671 
13 दहमाचल‍प्रिेश 7366 
14 जम्मू‍और‍कश्मीर 65 
15 झारखंड 595 
16 कनातटक 1511 
17 क े रल 1240 
18 लद्दाख 15 
19 लक्षिीप 0 
20 मध्य‍प्रिेश 6007 
21 महारािर  35996 
22 मदणपुर 456 
23 मेघालय 2083 
24 दमजोरम 47 
25 नागालैंड 2683 
26 ओदडशा 10465 
27 पुिुचेरी 857 
28 पंजाब 671 
29 राजिान 811 
30 दसस्िम 956 
31 तदमलनाड ु 6874 
32 तेलंगाना 11298 
33 दत्रपुरा 2638 
34 उत्तर‍प्रिेश 1381 
35 उत्तराखंड 0 
36 पदिम‍बंगाल 0 
  ि ु ल योग 126353 
 
  
736                                                      

अनुबांध-II 
किनाांि 19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर हेतु “पी.एम-एफ.एम.ई योजना िा कियान् वयन” ि े  सांबांध में राज्य 
सभा अताराांकित प्रश्न सांख्या 2303 ि े  भाग (घ)  ि े  उत्तर में सांिकभयत अनुबांध  
 
राज्य-वार मांज़ूर माि े क ांग और ब्ाांक ांग पररयोजनाओां िी सांख्या 
 
िम 
सांख्या राज्य/ि ें द्र शाकसत प्रिेश स्वीि ृ त पररयोजनाओां िी सांख्या 
1 आंध्र‍प्रिेश 2 
2 दबहार 1 
3 गोवा 1 
4 हररयाणा 1 
5 झारखंड 3 
6 कनातटक 5 
7 लद्दाख 2 
8 महारािर  4 
9 पुिुचेरी 1 
10 पंजाब 2 
11 दसस्िम 2 
12 तदमलनाड ु 1 
 
 
 
 
 
737                                                      

भारत सरकार 
खाद्य प्रसंस्‍ करण उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्‍ न सां. 2304 
19 दिसंबर, 2025 को उत्तर िेने के दलए 
 
आांध्र‍प्रदेश‍में‍पीएमएफएमई‍ि े ‍तहत‍ओडीओपी‍िा‍िार्ाान्‍ वर्न‍ 
 
 
2304.‍श्री‍साना‍सतीश‍बाबू: 
  
क्‍ या खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे दक:  
 
 
(ि) रोजगार‍और‍आय‍सृजन‍पर‍एक‍दजला‍एक‍उत्‍ पाि‍(ओडीओपी)‍का‍दिशेषकर‍काकीनाडा‍में, दजला-िार‍
प्रभाि‍क्‍ या‍है; 
(ख) योजना‍ क े ‍अंतगगत‍प्रिान‍ दकए‍ गए‍ कौशल‍ दिकास, क्षमता‍ दनमागण, दित्‍ तीय‍और‍ तकनीकी‍ सहायता‍ का‍
ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है;  
(ग) आंध्र‍प्रिेश‍में‍काकीनाडा‍सदहत‍पीएमएफएमई‍‍क े ‍अंतगगत‍ओडीओपी‍क े ‍तहत‍पहचान‍दकए‍गए‍उत्‍ पािों‍
की‍दजला-िार‍सूची‍क्‍ या‍है; 
(घ) बाजार‍संपक ग ‍और‍दकए‍गए‍दनयागत‍उपायों‍का‍ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है, साथ‍ही‍दपछले‍पांच‍िषों‍में‍दजला-िार‍दकतना‍
राजस्‍ ि‍सृदजत‍हुआ; और‍ 
(ङ) ओडीओपी‍उत्‍ पािों‍से‍जुडे‍उद्यदमयों‍क े‍दलए‍ऋण‍सुदिधाओं‍को‍सुकर‍बनाने‍क े ‍दलए‍क्‍ या‍किम‍उठाए‍गए‍
और‍तत्‍ संबंधी‍दजला-िार‍ब्‍ यौरा‍क्‍ या‍है? 
 
उत्तर‍ 
 
खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग राज्‍ र् मांत्री 
(श्री रवनीत कसांह) 
 
(ि):‍ ‍ खाद्य‍ प्रसंस्करण‍ उद्योग‍ मंत्रालय(एमओएफ़पीआई) िेश में नए सूक्ष्म‍ खाद्य‍ प्रसंस्करण‍ उद्यम‍ शुरू‍
करने/अपग्रेड करने के दलए दित्तीय, तकनीकी‍और‍व्यािसादयक‍सहायता‍िेने के दलए एक क े न्द्र‍प्रायोदजत‍"प्रधान‍
मंत्री‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्यम‍उन्नयन‍(पीएमएफ़एमई) योजना" कायागन्वित कर रहा है। यह‍योजना‍इनपुट‍
खरीिने,‍सामान्य‍सेिाए ं‍लेने‍और‍ उत्पाि‍की‍माक े दटंग‍क े ‍मामले‍में‍बडे‍पैमाने‍का‍फ़ायिा‍उठाने‍क े ‍दलए‍एक‍
दजला‍ एक‍ उत्पाि‍‍ (ओडीओपी)‍ अप्रोच‍ अपनाती‍ है।‍ यह‍मूल्य‍ ‍ श्ृंखला‍ दिकास‍ और‍ सहायक‍ अिसंरचना‍क े ‍
संर े खण‍क े ‍दलए‍फ्र े मिक ग ‍िेती‍है।‍योजना‍क े ‍अंतगगत,‍ओडीओपी‍उत्पाि‍को‍प्राथदमकता‍िी‍जाती‍है।‍31‍अक्ट ू बर,‍
2025‍तक‍35‍राज्ों/संघ‍राज्‍क े ‍726‍द़िलों‍क े ‍दलए‍ओडीओपी‍को‍अदधसूदचत‍दकया‍गया‍है।‍काकीनाडा‍द़िले‍
क े ‍दलए‍मछली‍और‍झी ं गा‍से‍बने‍उत्पाि‍को‍ओडीओपी‍क े ‍तौर‍पर‍पहचाना‍गया‍है।‍काकीनाडा‍द़िले‍में‍909‍
सदहत,‍क ु ल‍दमलाकर‍8,54,167‍लाख‍प्रत्यक्ष‍और‍अप्रत्यक्ष‍रो़िगार‍पैिा‍हुए‍हैं। 
पीएमएफ़एमई‍ के‍ ़िररए‍ प्रौद्योदगकी‍ और‍ दित्तीय‍ सहायता‍ से‍ उद्यदमयों‍ को‍ अपनी‍ उत्पािन‍ क्षमता,‍
टनगओिर‍और‍दब़िनेस‍ग्रोथ‍बढाने‍में‍मिि‍दमली‍है,‍‍दजससे‍आय‍सृजन,‍बाजार‍पहुंच/संपक ग‍और‍िोकल‍फॉर‍
लोकल‍को‍बढािा‍दमला‍है। 
 
738                                                      

(ख):  पीएमएफएमई योजना के अंतगगत सूक्ष्म खाद्य प्रसंस्करण उद्यमों को उपलब्ध सहायता का दििरण 
अनुबांध- I‍में‍है। 
 
(ग):‍ आंध्र‍प्रिेश‍राज्‍क े ‍सभी‍26‍दजलों‍क े ‍दलए‍ओडीओपी‍को‍मं़िूरी‍िी‍गई‍है।‍द़िलेिार‍ओडीओपी‍दलस्ट‍
अनुबांध‍II‍में‍है। 
 
(घ):‍पीएमएफ़एमई‍योजना‍के‍ब्ांदडंग‍और‍माक े दटंग‍क ं पोनेंट‍के‍अंतगगत,‍एफ़पीओ,‍कोऑपर े दटव्स,‍स्वयं‍सहायता‍
समूह‍और‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्यम‍क े‍राज्‍या‍क्षेत्रीय ‍एसपीिी‍‍के‍समूहों‍को‍पात्र‍पररयोजना‍लागत‍ ‍का‍
50%‍तक‍अनुिान‍दिया‍जाता‍है‍तादक‍राज्‍या‍क्षेत्रीय‍स्तर‍पर‍एक‍कॉमन‍अम्ब्रेला‍ब्ांड‍दिकदसत‍दकया‍जा‍सक े ।‍
यह‍घटक‍पैक े दजंग‍और‍ब्ांदडंग,‍गुणित्ता‍दनयंत्रण,‍ररटेल‍और‍ई-कॉमसग‍प्लेटफॉर्म्ग‍के‍साथ‍टाई-अप,‍उत्पाि‍
मानकीकरण‍और‍उपभोक्ता‍खुिरा‍दबक्री‍के‍दलए‍खाद्य‍सुरक्षा‍के‍पालन‍हेतु‍सहायता‍प्रिान‍करता‍‍है।‍मंत्रालय‍
द़िले-िार‍राजस्व‍सृजन‍से‍संबन्वित‍आंकडे‍नही ं ‍रखता‍है। 
 
(ङ):‍ इस‍योजना‍क े ‍अंतगगत‍बैंकों‍से‍दमलने‍िाले‍ऋण‍पर‍ 35%‍क्र े दडट‍दलंक्ड‍सन्विडी‍िी‍जाती‍है।‍क ु ल‍12‍
राष्ट्र ीयकृ त,‍20‍प्राइिेट‍और‍165‍अन्य‍बैंक‍इस‍योजना‍को‍लागू‍करने‍में‍पाटगनरदशप‍कर‍रहे‍हैं‍तादक‍उद्य दमयों‍
को‍ऋण‍दमल‍सक े ।‍ऋण‍मं़िूरी‍पर‍ऩिर‍रखने‍क े ‍दलए‍राज्/संघ‍राज्‍सरकारों‍और‍दहस्सा‍लेने‍िाले‍बैंकों‍क े ‍
साथ‍ दनयदमत‍ समीक्षा‍ बैठक ें‍ की‍ जाती‍ हैं।‍ इसक े ‍ अलािा,‍ दिस्तृत‍ पररयोजना‍ररपोटग‍ (डीपीआर‍)‍ तैयार‍ करने,‍
आिेिन‍ करने,‍ ऋण‍ मं़िूरी‍ और‍ संदितरण‍ में‍ आसानी‍ क े ‍ साथ-साथ‍ सूक्ष्म खाद्य प्रसंस्करण ईकाइयों‍ को‍
औपचाररक‍बनाने‍क े ‍दलए‍दडन्वस्ट र क्ट‍ररसोसग‍पसगन‍क े ‍़िररए‍मिि‍िी‍जाती‍है।‍आंध्र‍प्रिे श‍राज्‍क े ‍दलए‍8101‍
ऋण‍मं़िूर‍दकए‍गए‍हैं‍और‍ 96.4‍करोड‍रुपये‍की‍सन्विडी‍जारी‍की‍गई‍है।‍आंध्र‍प्रिेश‍राज्‍क े ‍दलए‍द़िलेिार‍
स्वीक ृ त‍ऋण‍अनुबांध‍III‍में‍दिए‍गए‍हैं। 
 
इसक े ‍अलािा,‍छोटे‍उपकरण‍और‍औजार‍खरीिने‍और‍कायगशील‍पूंजी‍क े ‍दलए‍हर‍स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूह‍क े ‍सिस्य‍
को‍40,000‍रुपये‍तक‍की‍‍प्रारन्विक‍‍पूंजी‍सहायता‍ ‍िी‍जाती‍है।‍खाद्य प्रसंस्करण में‍लगे‍स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूह‍
सिस्यों‍को‍ग्रामीण‍इलाकों‍क े ‍दलए‍राज्‍ग्रामीण‍आजीदिका‍दमशन‍(एसएलआरएम)‍और‍शहरी‍इलाकों‍क े ‍दलए‍
राज्‍शहरी‍आजीदिका‍दमशन‍(एसयूएलएम)‍क े ‍़िररए‍मोदबलाइ़ि‍दकया‍जाता‍है।‍आंध्र‍प्रिेश‍राज्‍क े ‍दलए,‍
36926‍स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूह‍सिस्यों‍क े ‍दलए‍139.88‍करोड‍रुपये‍की‍‍प्रारन्विक‍‍पूंजी‍स्वीक ृ त‍की‍गई‍‍है। 
  
739                                                      

अनुबांध‍I 
कदनाांि‍ 19‍ कदसांबर,‍ 2025‍ िो‍ उत्तर‍ हेतु‍ ”आांध्र‍ प्रदेश‍ में‍ पीएमएफएमई‍ ि े ‍ तहत‍ ओडीओपी‍ िा‍
िार्ाान्‍ वर्न”‍ ि े ‍ सांबांध‍में‍राज्य‍ सभा‍ अताराांकित‍ प्रश्न‍सांख्या‍ 2304‍िे‍ भाग‍ (ख)‍‍ ि े ‍ उत्तर‍ में‍ सांदकभात‍
अनुबांध 
 
प्रधानमंत्री‍सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्यम‍उन्नयन (पीएमएफएमई) योजना‍क े ‍अंतगगत‍उपलब्ध‍दित्तीय‍सहायता‍का‍
दििरण‍दनम्नानुसार‍है: 
 
(i). व्यन्वक्तगत/समूह‍श्ेणी‍क े ‍सूक्ष्म‍उद्यमों‍को‍सहायता: पात्र‍पररयोजना‍लागत‍का 35% की‍िर‍से‍क्र े दडट-
दलंक्ड‍पूंजी‍सन्विडी, प्रदत‍इकाई‍अदधकतम‍सीमा 10 लाख‍रुपये; 
 
(ii) प्रारन्विकपूंजी‍क े ‍दलए‍स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूहों‍को‍समथगन: कायगशील‍पूंजी‍छोटे‍उपकरणों‍की‍खरीि‍क े ‍दलए‍
खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍में‍लगे‍स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूहों‍क े ‍प्रदत‍सिस्य‍को‍40,000 /-रु‍की‍िर‍से‍प्रारन्विक‍पूंजी‍जो‍प्रदत‍
स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूहों‍फ े डर े शन‍हेतु‍अदधकतम 4 लाख‍रु‍है। 
 
(iii) सामान्य‍अिसंरचना‍क े ‍दलए‍समथगन: सामान्य‍अिसंरचना‍की‍स्थापना‍क े ‍दलए‍दकसान‍उत्पािक‍संगठनों, 
स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूहों, सहकारी‍सदमदतयों‍और‍दकसी‍भी‍सरकारी‍एजेंसी‍का‍समथगन‍करने‍क े ‍दलए‍35%‍की‍िर‍
से‍क्र े दडट‍दलंक्ड‍क ै दपटल‍सन्विडी‍जो‍अदधकतम 3 करोड‍रु.‍है‍l‍सामान्य‍अिसंरचना‍अन्य‍इकाइयों‍और‍
जनता‍क े ‍दलए‍क्षमता‍क े ‍पयागप्त‍दहस्से‍क े ‍दलए‍हायरर ं ग‍आधार‍पर‍उपयोग‍करने‍क े ‍दलए‍भी‍उपलब्ध‍होगा। 
 
(iv) ब्ांदडंग‍और‍दिपणन‍सहायता: दकसान‍उत्पािक‍संगठनों/स्वयं‍सहायता‍समूहों/सहकारी‍सदमदतयों‍या‍सूक्ष्म‍
खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्यमों‍क े ‍एसपीिी‍क े ‍समूहों‍को‍ब्ांदडंग‍और‍दिपणन‍क े ‍दलए 50% तक‍अनुिान। 
 
(v) क्षमता‍दनमागण: इस‍योजना‍में‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्योग‍और‍उत्पाि‍दिदशष्ट्‍कौशल‍की‍आिश्यकता‍को‍पूरा‍
करने‍क े ‍दलए‍संशोदधत‍उद्यदमता‍दिकास‍कायगक्रम (ईडीपी) क े ‍दलए‍प्रदशक्षण‍की‍पररकल्पना‍की‍गई‍है। 
 
 
 
  
740                                                      

अनुबांध‍II 
 
कदनाांि‍ 19‍ कदसांबर,‍ 2025‍ िो‍ उत्तर‍ हेतु‍ ”आांध्र‍ प्रदेश‍ में‍ पीएमएफएमई‍ ि े ‍ तहत‍ ओडीओपी‍ िा‍
िार्ाान्‍ वर्न”‍ ि े ‍ सांबांध‍ में‍ राज्य‍ सभा‍ अताराांकित‍ प्रश्न‍ सांख्या‍ 2304‍ िे‍ भाग‍ (ग)‍ ‍ि े ‍ उत्तर‍ में‍ सांदकभात‍
अनुबांध‍ 
 
 
आांध्र‍प्रदेश‍राज्य‍िे‍किए‍ओडीओपी‍िी‍क़ििेवार‍सूची 
क्रम‍सांख्या क़ििा ओडीओपी 
1 अनंतपुर मूंगफली‍उत्पाि 
2 दचत्तूर टमाटर‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
3 पूिी‍गोिािरी क े ला 
4 गुंट ू र मसाले‍(दमचग‍और‍हल्दी) 
5 कडपा क े ला‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
6 ‍‍क ृ ष्णा मछली‍और‍झी ं गा‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
7 क ु रनूल िालें‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
8 नेल्लोर चािल‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि‍(उिाहरणाथग‍फ्लेक्ड‍और‍पफड) 
9 प्रकाशम िालें‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
10 श्ीकाक ु लम काजू‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
11 दिशाखापत्तनम आरटीई‍और‍आरटीसी‍(उिाहरणाथग‍पर ं परागत‍स्थानीय‍
स्नैक्स) 
12 दिजयनगरम दमलेट‍(उिाहरणाथग‍रागी‍और‍कोराग) 
13 पदिम‍गोिािरी मछली‍और‍समुद्र‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
14 पािगतीपुरम‍मान्यम 
लघु‍िन‍उपज‍(‍उिाहरणाथग‍इमली‍और‍आंिला) 
15 अल्लूरी‍ सीताराम‍
राजू कॉफी 
16 अनकापल्ली 
गन्ना‍(‍उिाहरणाथग‍गुड‍क्यूि,‍पाउडर‍और‍तरल‍गुड) 
17 काकीनाडा मछली‍और‍झी ं गा‍आधाररत‍उत्पािों 
18 कोनासीमा नाररयल 
19 एलुरु िालें‍(‍उिाहरणाथग‍काला‍चना‍और‍हरा‍चना) 
20 एनटीआर आरटीसी‍और‍आरटीई‍(‍जैसे‍उलिाचारु) 
21 पलनाड ु िालें‍(उिाहरणाथग‍दिनुकोंडा‍र े ड‍ग्राम) 
22 बापतला मसाले‍(उिाहरणाथग‍दमचग‍और‍हल्दी) 
23 नांियाल दमलेट‍आधाररत‍उत्पाि 
24 श्ी‍सत्य‍साईं मूंगफली 
25 दतरुपदत आरटीसी‍और‍आरटीई‍(‍जैसे‍बंगाल‍ग्राम‍मुरुक ु) 
26 अन्नमय्या इमली 
 
 
  
741                                                      

अनुबांध‍III 
कदनाांि‍ 19‍ कदसांबर,‍ 2025‍ िो‍ उत्तर‍ हेतु‍ ”आांध्र‍ प्रदेश‍ में‍ पीएमएफएमई‍ ि े ‍ तहत‍ ओडीओपी‍ िा‍
िार्ाान्‍ वर्न”‍ि े ‍सांबांध‍में‍राज्य‍सभा‍अताराांकित‍प्रश्न‍सांख्या‍2304‍िे‍भाग‍(ङ)‍िे‍उत्तर‍में‍सांदकभात‍अनुबांध 
 
आांध्र‍प्रदेश‍राज्य‍ि े ‍किए‍क़ििेवार‍स्वीि ृ त‍ऋण‍ 
क्र‍सां कििा स्वीि ृ त‍ऋण‍िी‍
सांख्या 
1 अल्लूरी‍सीताराम‍राजू 1100 
2 अनकापल्ली 370 
3 अनंतपुर 246 
4 अन्नमय्या 105 
5 बापतला 246 
6 दचत्तूर 355 
7 पूिी‍गोिािरी 465 
8 एलुरु 308 
9 गुंट ू र 228 
10 काकीनाडा 303 
11 कोनासीमा 422 
12 क ृ ष्णा 194 
13 क ु रनूल 393 
14 नांियाल 145 
15 एनटीआर 178 
16 पलनाड ु 121 
17 पािगतीपुरम‍मन्याम 249 
18 प्रकाशम 250 
19 एसपीएसआर‍नेल्लोर 328 
20 श्ी‍सत्य‍साईं 147 
21 श्ीकाक ु लम 670 
22 दतरुपदत 308 
23 दिशाखापत्तनम 146 
24 दिजयनगरम 467 
25 पदिम‍गोिािरी 245 
26 िाईएसआर 112 
 ि ु ि 8101 
 
 
 
742                                                      

भारत सरकार 
खाद्य प्रसंस्‍ करण उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्‍ न सां. 2305 
19 दिसंबर, 2025 को उत्तर िेने के दलए 
 
खाद्य‍परीक्षण‍प्रयोगशालाऍां ‍ 
 
2305.‍श्री‍सांजय‍सेठ: 
क्‍ या खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे दक:  
 
 
(ि) क ु ल‍ 100‍ खाद्य‍ परीक्षण‍प्रयोगशालाओं‍में‍ से‍दकतनी‍ प्रयोगशालाओं‍ को‍ औपचाररक‍ मंजूरी‍ दमल‍ गई‍है, 
दकतनी‍अभी दनमााणाधीन‍हैं‍और‍मंत्रालय‍को‍सभी‍प्रयोगशालाऍं ‍वास्‍तव‍में‍कब‍तक‍चालू‍होने‍की‍उम्‍ मीि‍
है;  
(ख) क्‍ या‍प्रयोगशालाओं‍का‍ज्‍ यािा‍दवकदसत‍या‍शहरी‍क्षेत्रों‍में‍ही‍क ें दित‍हो‍जाने‍का‍जोखखम‍है, दजससे‍ग्रामीण, 
िूरिराज‍या‍खाद्यान्‍ न‍पैिा‍करने‍वाले‍क्षेत्र‍उपेदक्षत‍हो‍जाए ं गे, दजन्‍ हें‍वास्‍ तव‍में‍बेहतर‍खाद्य‍सुरक्षा‍अवसंरचना‍
की‍आवश्‍ यकता‍है; 
(ग) इन‍प्रयोगशालाओं‍क े ‍दनमााण‍क े ‍पश्‍ चात‍इनक े ‍सतत‍संचालन‍(कमाचारी, परीक्षण‍अदभकमाक, रखरखाव)‍
क े ‍दलए‍मंत्रालय‍की‍दकस‍प्रकार‍दवतपोषण‍करने‍की‍योजना‍है; और 
(घ) क्‍ या‍बार-बार‍बजट‍आवंटन‍होगा‍या‍उनसे‍उपयोगकताा‍शुल्‍ क‍क े ‍माध्‍ यम‍से‍स्‍ वयं‍ही ं ‍आत्‍ मदनभार‍बनना‍
अपेदक्षत‍है? 
 
उत्तर 
 
खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग राज्‍ य मांत्री 
(श्री रवनीत कसांह) 
 
(ि):‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्योग‍मंत्रालय‍(एमओएफपीआई) ने‍दिनांक‍20.11.2025 को‍अदभरुदच‍की‍अदभव्यखि‍
(ईओआई) जारी‍की‍है दजसमें‍"प्रधानमंत्री‍दकसान‍संपिा‍योजना‍(पीएमक े एसवाई)" की‍खाद्य‍सुरक्षा‍और‍गुणवत्ता‍
आश्वासन‍ अवसंरचना‍ (एफएसक्यूएआई) योजना‍ क े ‍ अंतगात‍ एनएबीएल‍ मान्यता‍ क े ‍ साथ‍ खाद्य‍ परीक्षण‍
प्रयोगशालाओं‍की‍स्थापना‍क े ‍प्रस्ताव‍आमंदत्रत‍दकए‍गए‍हैं।‍ईओआई‍ दिनांक‍20.01.2026 तक‍खुला‍है।‍अब‍
तक‍ ईओआई‍दिनांक‍20.11.2025 क े ‍दलए‍कोई‍ प्रस्ताव‍प्राप्त‍ नही ं ‍ हुआ‍ है।‍ दिनांक 12.11.2025 क े ‍ योजना‍
दिशादनिेशों‍क े ‍अनुसार‍संबंदधत‍प्रस्तावों‍क े ‍अनुमोिन‍की‍तारीख‍से सामान्य‍क्षेत्रों‍में‍खाद्य‍परीक्षण‍प्रयोगशालाए ं ‍
24 महीने‍और‍िुगाम‍क्षेत्रों‍में‍प्रयोगशालाए ं ‍30 महीने‍क े ‍भीतर‍प्रचादलत‍हो‍जानी‍हैं। 
 
(ख): खाद्य‍ सुरक्षा‍ और‍ गुणवत्ता‍ आश्वासन‍ अवसंरचना‍ (एफएसक्यूएआई) योजना‍ मांग-आधाररत‍ है।‍ खाद्य‍
प्रसंस्करण‍ उद्योग‍ मंत्रालय‍(एमओएफपीआई) समय-समय‍ पर‍ जारी‍अदभरुदच‍ की‍ अदभव्यखि‍(ईओआई) क े ‍
माध्यम‍से‍ िेश‍भर‍से ‍आमंदत्रत‍प्रस्तावों‍क े ‍माध्यम‍से‍खाद्य‍परीक्षण‍प्रयोगशालाओं‍की‍स्थापना‍क े ‍दलए‍दवत्तीय‍
सहायता‍प्रिान‍करता‍है।‍योजना‍दिशादनिेशों‍क े ‍अनुसार‍योग्यता‍क े ‍आधार‍पर‍चुने‍गए‍प्रस्तावों‍क े ‍दलए‍दनदध‍
आवंदटत‍की‍जाती‍‍है।‍प्रयोगशालाओं‍क े ‍व्यापक‍दवतरण‍को‍बढावा‍िेने‍क े ‍दलए, मूल्ांकन‍मानिंडों‍में‍मौजूिा‍
एनएबीएल-मान्यता‍प्राप्त‍खाद्य‍परीक्षण‍प्रयोगशालाओं‍क े ‍बगैर‍दजलों‍से‍प्राप्त‍प्रस्तावों‍को‍अदतररि‍महत्व‍दिया‍
जाता‍है।‍इसक े ‍अलावा, पूवोत्तर‍क्षेत्रों/िुगाम‍क्षेत्रों/आईटीडीपी‍क्षेत्रों‍क े ‍प्रस्ताव‍सामान्य‍क्षेत्रों‍क े ‍50%‍की‍तुलना‍में‍
पात्र‍उपकरण‍लागत‍क े ‍70%‍पर‍अनुिान/सखिडी‍क े ‍दलए‍पात्र‍हैं‍और‍पात्रता‍आवश्यकताओं‍में‍भी‍छ ू ट‍िी‍गई‍
है।‍ 
 
(ग) और‍(घ): एफएसक्यूएआई‍योजना‍क े ‍अंतगात, मंत्रालय‍क े वल‍मौजूिा‍योजना‍दिशादनिेशों‍क े ‍अनुसार‍पूंजी‍
सहायता‍प्रिान‍करता‍है।‍दनर ं तर‍प्रचालन‍या‍दकसी‍आवती‍बजट‍आवंटन‍क े ‍दवत्तपोषण‍का‍कोई‍प्रावधान‍नही ं ‍
है।‍तथादप,‍एमओएफपीआई‍ने‍योजना‍क े ‍अंतगात‍एनएबीएल‍मान्यता‍क े ‍दलए‍आवश्यक‍प्रमादणत‍संिभा‍सामग्री‍
(सीआरएमएस)‍ और‍ प्रयोगशाला‍ सूचना‍ प्रबंधन‍ प्रणाली‍ (एलआईएमएस)‍ सॉफ्टवेयर‍ की‍ एकमुश्त‍ खरीि‍ की‍
अनुमदत‍िी‍है। 
 
***** 
 
743                                                      

भारत सरकार 
खाद्य प्रसंस्‍ करण उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश्‍ न सां. 2306 
19 दिसंबर, 2025 को उत्तर िेने के दलए 
 
मसाला‍उद्योग‍परीक्षण‍में‍भाप‍किटाणुशोधन‍ि े ‍कलए‍प्रोत्‍ साहन‍ 
 
2306.‍श्री‍हाररस‍बीरान: 
 ‍ 
क्‍ या खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे दक:  
 
 
(ि) क्‍ या‍सरकार‍यह‍स्‍ वीकार‍करती‍है‍दक‍ईयू‍द्वारा‍भारतीय‍मसालों‍को‍अस्‍ वीकार‍दकए‍‍जाने‍में‍बढोतरी‍का‍
कारण‍उद्योग‍का‍एदिलीन‍ऑक्‍ साइड‍(ईटीओ)‍पर‍दनभभर‍होना‍है, जो‍भाप‍दकटाणुशोधन‍की‍बहुत‍ज्‍ यािा‍
पूजी ंगत‍लागत‍का‍प्रत्‍ यक्ष‍पाररणाम‍है;  
(ख) क्‍ या‍मंत्रालय‍ने‍एमएसएमई‍क े ‍दलए‍ईटीओ‍से‍भाप‍दकटाणुशोधन‍में‍बिलाव‍को‍दवशेष‍तौर‍पर‍राजसहायता‍
िेने‍ क े ‍ दलए, सामान्‍ य‍ प्रधानमंत्री‍ दकसान‍ संपिा‍ योजना‍ (पीएमक े एसवाई)‍ अनुिान‍ से‍ अलग, एक‍ लदक्षत‍
“प्रौद्यौदगकी‍उन्‍ नयन‍दमशन”‍बनाया‍है; 
(ग) यदि‍हां, तो‍वषभ‍2025-26‍में‍इस‍बिलाव‍क े ‍दलए‍दकतनी‍दनदध‍तय‍की‍गई‍है; और‍ 
(घ) यदि‍नही ं, तो‍वैदिक‍बाजार‍दहस्‍ सेिारी‍क े ‍नुकसान‍को‍रोकने‍क े ‍दलए‍इस‍महत्‍ पूणभ‍सुरक्षा‍अनुपालन‍को‍
बढावा‍िेने‍में‍दवफल‍रहने‍क े ‍क्‍ या‍कारण‍हैं? 
 
उत्तर 
 
खाद्य प्रसांस्‍ िरण उद्योग राज्‍ य मांत्री 
(श्री रवनीत कसांह) 
 
(ि):‍प्रश्न‍का‍दवषय-वस्तु‍‍प्रशासदनक‍रूप‍से‍वादणज्य‍और‍उद्योग‍मंत्रालय‍के‍अंतगभत‍वादणज्य‍दवभाग‍(डीओसी)‍
से‍संबंदधत‍है।‍डीओसी‍द्वारा‍प्रिान‍दकए‍गए‍इनपुट‍के‍आधार‍पर‍मसाला‍बोडभ‍आयात‍करने‍वाले‍िेशों‍के‍दनयमों‍
के‍आधार‍पर‍चुदनंिा‍गंतव्ों‍के‍दलए‍चुदनंिा‍मसालों‍की‍दनयाभत‍खेपों‍का‍गुणवत्ता‍मूल्ांकन‍कर‍रहा‍है।‍मसालों‍
के‍दनयाभत‍के‍दलए‍बोडभ‍की‍गुणवत्ता‍मूल्ांकन‍प्रणाली‍के‍अंतगभत,‍दनयाभत‍खेपों‍को‍यूरोपीय‍संघ‍को‍दनयाभत‍खेपों‍
के‍ दलए‍ एदिलीन‍ ऑक्साइड‍ के‍ उपयोग‍ पर‍ प्रभावी‍ जांच‍ सदहत‍ खाद्य‍ सुरक्षा‍ और‍ गुणवत्ता‍ मापिंडों‍ के‍ दलए‍
अदनवायभ‍प्री-दशपमेंट‍सेम्प्लंग,‍परीक्षण‍और‍मंजूरी‍के‍अधीन‍दकया‍जाता‍है।‍प्रासंदगक‍दिशादनिेशों‍के‍अनुरूप,‍
मसालों‍के‍दनयाभतकों‍को‍स्टेररलाइजेशन‍के‍वैकम्पिक‍तरीकों‍जैसे‍स्टीम‍स्टेररलाइजेशन,‍इरीदडएशन‍(एनपीओपी‍
के‍अंतगभत‍जैदवक‍उत्पािों‍को‍छोड़कर)‍और‍एफएसएसएआई‍द्वारा‍अनुमोदित‍तरीकों‍का‍उपयोग‍करने‍के‍दलए‍
प्रोत्सादहत‍दकया‍जाता‍है।‍वषभ‍2025‍में,‍भारत‍से‍यूरोपीय‍संघ‍को‍दनयाभत‍दकए‍गए‍मसालों‍और‍मसाला‍उत्पािों‍
की‍लगभग‍99.5%‍खेप‍स्वीकार‍की‍गई‍l 
 
(ख)‍से‍(घ):‍जी‍नही ं‍। 
तिादप,‍मंत्रालय‍की‍मौजूिा‍योजनाओं,‍जैसे‍प्रधानमंत्री‍दकसान‍संपिा‍योजना‍(पीएमक े एसवाई)‍और‍प्रधानमंत्री‍
सूक्ष्म‍खाद्य‍प्रसंस्करण‍उद्यम‍उन्नयन‍(पीएमएफएमई)‍योजना‍के‍अंतगभत‍आधुदनकीकरण,‍टेक्नोलॉजी‍अपग्रेडेशन‍
और‍स्टीम‍स्टेररलाइजेशन‍इदिपमेंट‍समेत‍हाइजीदनक‍प्रोसेदसंग‍तरीकों‍को‍अपनाने‍के‍दलए‍मिि‍दमलती‍है।‍
खाद्य‍सुरक्षा‍और‍दनयाभत‍अनुपालना‍सुदनदित‍करने‍के‍दलए‍सरकार‍का‍तरीका‍आम‍तौर‍पर‍दनयामक‍दनगरानी,‍
टेम्पस्टंग‍इंफ्रास्ट र क्चर,‍क्षमता‍दनमाभण‍और‍अच्छी‍दवदनमाभण‍पद्धदतयााँ‍अपनाने‍पर‍आधाररत‍है। 
 
***** 
 
 
744                                                      

   भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍2307 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्‍ तर‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत 
 
प्रधानमांत्री‍ई-ड्राइव‍योजना‍ि ‍अांतर्गत‍ईवी‍चार्जिंर्‍अवसभांरचना 
 
2307 श्री‍प्रदीप‍िुमार‍वमागाः 
श्री‍महेंद्र‍ा ट्टाः 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योर् मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) ईवी चार्जिंग स्टेशनों की स्थापना , प्रबंधन तथा अनुरक्षण हेतु ननधााररत संस्थागत ढांचा 
क्या है; 
(ख) इस अवसंरचना के ललए स्वीकृत कुल ननवेश, ववत्तीय सहायता और लागू प्रावधानों का 
सार क्या है; 
(ग) महानगरों, स्माटा शहरों व प्रमुख नगरों में ईवी चार्जिंग नेटवका के ववस्तार हेतु अपनाई 
गई प्राथलमकताएँ तथा मापदंड कौन-से हैं; और 
(घ) चार्जिंग स्टेशनों के प्रभावी संचालन और सतत ननगरानी सुननर्चचत करने हेतु लागू तंत्र 
एवं उपायों का ब्यौरा क्या है? 
 
उत्‍ तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योर्‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री 
(श्री‍ा ूपितराजू‍श्रीिनवासभ‍वमाग) 
(ि) और‍(ख):‍  पीएम इलेर्क्िक ड्राइव ररवोल्यूशन इन इनोवेटटव व्हीकल एनहांसमेंट (पीएम 
ई-ड्राइव) स्कीम के तहत महानगरों, स्माटा शहरों व प्रमुख नगरों सटहत पूरे देश में सावाजननक 
ईवी चार्जिंग अवसंरचना (र्जसमें ईवी पर्ब्लक चार्जिंग  स्टेशन, बैटरी स्वैवपंग स्टेशन तथा 
बैटरी चार्जिंग स्टेशन शालमल हैं) की स्थापना हेतु ₹2,000 करोड़ का आवंटन ककया गया।  
पीएम ई-ड्राइव स्कीम के अंतगात भारत सरकार के मंत्रालय/ववभाग , क ें द्रीय सावाजननक क्षेत्रक  
उद्यम (सीपीएसई), राज्य/संघ राज्य क्षेत्र तथा उनके सावाजननक क्षेत्रक उद्यम इलेर्क्िक 
वाहन सावाजननक चार्जिंग स्टेशन ( ईवी पीसीएस ) की स्थापना हेतु प्रस्ताव प्रस्तुत करने के 
योग्य हैं। प्रस्ताव संबंधधत मंत्रालय या राज्य/ संघ राज्य क्षेत्र द्वारा नालमत नोडल एजेंसी(यों) 
के माध्यम से प्रस्तुत ककए जाने हैं, जो ईवी पीसीएस की मांग का एकत्रीकरण करती हैं। 
कियानवयन संबंधधत संस्थाओं द्वारा सीधे अथवा चाजा प्वाइंट ऑपरेटरों ( सीपीओ) को 
ववननयोर्जत करके ककया जा सकता है। 
745                                                      

यह स्कीम अपस्िीम अवसंरचना तथा ईवीएसई (चाजार) के ललए पूंजीगत सर्ब्सडी 
प्रदान करती है, जो स्थान की श्रेणी के आधार पर अधधकतम 100% तक हो सकती है। 
(र्)‍और‍(घ):   पीएम ई-ड्राइव स्कीम के तहत ईवी चार्जिंग अवसंरचना की स्थापना हेतु 
प्रचालन टदशाननदेश 26.09.2025 को जारी ककए गए हैं। इनमें महानगरों, स्माटा शहरों आटद में 
ईवी चार्जिंग नेटवका के ववस्तार के ललए अपनाई गई प्राथलमकताओं एवं मानदंडों का उल्लेख 
ककया गया है। इन टदशाननदेशों में चार्जिंग स्टेशनों के प्रभावी संचालन तथा ननरंतर ननगरानी 
सुननर्चचत करने के ललए उपलब्ध तंत्र एवं उपायों का भी वववरण टदया गया है। 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
746                                                      

भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍2308 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्‍ तर‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत 
 
एोिोमोटर‍दिवयाांगजन‍ि ‍िए ‍जी सभटी‍ररयायत‍प्रमाण‍पत्र‍िो‍बांि‍िरना 
 
2308 श्रीमती‍रांजीत‍रांजन: 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) लोकोमोटर दिवयांगजन को वाहन खरीिने पर ममलने वाली जीएसटी ररयायत को बंि 
करने के क्या कारण है; 
(ख) क्या मंत्रालय को इस बात की जानकारी है कक यह ननणणय दिवयांगजन अधिकार 
अधिननयम, 2016 में दिए गए ननयमों और दिवयांगजन के अधिकारों पर यूएन सम्मेलन के 
तहत भारत की प्रनतबद्िता का उल्लंघन करता है, यदि हााँ, तो मंत्रालय इस मुद्िे को ककस 
प्रकार हल करने की मंशा रखता है; और 
(ग) क्या सरकार ने ररयायती जीएसटी िर हटाने से होने वाले ववत्तीय प्रभाव या अनतररक्त 
राजस्व लाभ का अनुमान लगाया है, यदि हााँ, तो ववत्तीय वर्ण 2025-26 और 2026-27 के  
मलए अनुमाननत राजस्व लाभ ककतना है? 
 
उत्‍ तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योग‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री 
(श्री‍ा ूपितराजू‍श्रीिनवासभ‍वमाा) 
(ि) और (ख):    भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय (एमएचआई) ने पहले  राजस्व ववभाग की दिनांक 
30.09.2019 की अधिसूचना के अनुसार, अस्स्िववरूपता से पीड़ित पात्र दिवयांगजनों को छोटी 
कारों के मलए वस्तु एवं सेवा कर(जीएसटी) ररयायत प्रमाण पत्र जारी ककए िे।  राजस्व ववभाग 
से प्राप्त जानकारी के अनुसार, जीएसटी िरें जीएसटी पररर्ि, जो क ें द्र और राज्य सरकारों के 
प्रनतननधियों से ममलकर बना एक संवैिाननक ननकाय है , की मसफाररशों के आिार पर 
अधिसूधचत की जाती हैं,  3 मसतंबर, 2025 को आयोस्जत अपनी 56वीं जीएसटी पररर्ि की बैठक 
में, पररर्ि ने मौजूिा चार-स्तरीय जीएसटी िर संरचना को नागररक -अनुकूल "सरल कर" िो- 
स्तरीय िर संरचना में युस्क्तसंगत बनाने की मसफाररश की। पररर्ि ने अस्स्ि ववरूपता से 
पीड़ित दिवयांगजनों के मलए छोटे पेट्रोल/डीजल चामलत मोटर वाहनों पर लागू जीएसटी िर में 
कोई बिलाव की मसफाररश नहीं की , स्जस पर 18% जीएसटी लगना जारी रहा।  इसके अलावा, 
पररर्ि ने छोटे पेट्रोल/डीजल चामलत मोटर वाहनों पर जीएसटी िर को 28% से घटाकर 18% 
करने की भी मसफाररश की।   
इसके बाि , भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय (एमएचआई) ने 08.10.2025 को अधिसूधचत ककया 
कक ववत्त मंत्रालय द्वारा जीएसटी िरों को  युस्क्तसंगत बनाए जाने को ध्यान में रखते हुए, 
747                                                      

हुए, छोटी कारों पर 18% की एकसमान जीएसटी िर सभी वयस्क्तयों पर लागू होती है, स्जनमें 
अस्स्िववरूपता से पीड़ित दिवयांगजन भी शाममल हैं। 
तिनुसार, जीएसटी छूट प्रमाण पत्र स्कीम के तहत अस्स्ि ववरूपता से पीड़ित 
दिवयांगजनों के मलए जीएसटी ररयायत प्रमाण पत्र जारी करने की कोई आवश्यकता नहीं है।  
(ग)  :         भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय द्वारा ऐसा कोई अध्ययन नहीं ककया गया है। 
******* 
748                                                      

भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍2309 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्‍ तर‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत 
 
ऑटोमोबाइए‍और‍ऑटो/िांपोनेंट‍ि ‍िए ‍पी एआई‍योजना‍ि ‍अांतर्गत‍स्थानीयिरण‍प्रितबद्धता‍
िी‍उपएब्धध 
 
2309 श्रीमती‍र्ीता‍उर्ग‍चन्द्रप्रा ााः 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योर् मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) ननरंतर आयात पर ननभभर रहने वाले घटकों सहहत, ऑटोमोबाइल और ऑटो कंपोनेंट उद्योग के 
ललए उत्पादन से संबद्ध प्रोत्साहन (पीएलआई) योजना के तहत लाभार्थभयों ने स्थानीयकरण और 
मूल्य-संवधभन प्रनतबद्धता को ककस सीमा तक पूरा ककया है; 
(ख) क्या लाभार्थभयों द्वारा प्रस्तुत ककए गए ननवेश दावों, उत्पादन से संबद्ध उपलब्धध और 
स्थानीयकरण आंकडों को सत्यापपत करने के ललए कोई स्वतंत्र या तृतीय पाटी लेखापरीक्षा ककया 
गया है; और 
(ग) क्या मंत्रालय ऑटो -कंपोनेंट आपूनतभ श्ृंखला में एमएसएमई के ललए मशीनरी को उन्ननयत 
करने, परीक्षण क्षमता बढाने और पीएलआई-संरेखखत मानक प्राप्त करने के ललए पवशेष समथभन देने 
का पवचार रखता है? 
 
उत्‍ तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योर्‍राज्‍ य‍मां्ी 
(श्री‍ा ूपितराजू‍श्रीिनवासभ‍वमाग) 
 
(ि) :   गहन स्थानीयकरण को सुगम बनाने के ललए, पीएलआई-ऑटो स्कीम  उन उन्नत 
ऑटोमोहटव प्रौद्योर्गकी (एएटी) उत्पादों को प्रोत्साहन देती है ब्जनके ललए ननधाभररत घरेलू मूल्य 
संवधभन (डीवीए) प्राप्त ककया गया है। 15.12.2025 तक, पीएलआई-ऑटो स्कीम के तहत 131 
उत्पादों/वेररएंट के ललए 18 आवेदकों को डीवीए प्रमाणपत्र प्राप्त हुए हैं। 
 
(ख)‍और (र्) :   स्कीम के हदशाननदेशों के अनुसार, आवेदक के वैधाननक लेखा परीक्षक (एसए) 
को प्रोत्साहन दावों, ननवेश और पात्र बबक्री डेटा का ऑडडट और सत्यापन करने का कायभ सौंपा गया 
है। पीएलआई-ऑटो स्कीम के तहत उन्नत ऑटोमोहटव प्रौद्योर्गकी ( एएटी) उत्पादों की घरेलू 
आपूनतभ श्ृंखला पवकलसत करने के ललए ₹25,938 करोड का आवंटन ककया गया है।  यह स्कीम 
ऑटोमोबाइल क्षेत्र में ननवेश को बढावा दे रही है , ब्जससे आपूनतभ श्ृंखला की स्थापना के साथ-साथ 
पवननमाभण गनतपवर्ध में समग्र वृद्र्ध हो रही है, जहां लघु और मध्यम आकार के उद्यम (एसएमई) 
भाग ले सकते हैं और इस पाररब्स्थनतकी तंत्र से लाभाब्न्वत हो सकते हैं। 
 
******* 
749                                                      

भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍2310 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्तर‍ि े ‍लिए‍ननयत 
 
पीएम‍ई-बसभ‍सभेवा‍(पीएसभएम)‍योजना‍िा‍िायाान्वयन 
 
2310 डॉ.‍िववता‍पाटीदार: 
श्री‍िणाद‍पुरिायस्थः 
डॉ.‍ददनेश‍शमाा: 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) इस योजना के तहत अब तक तैनात या चालू की गई इलेक्ट्क्िक बसों की संख्या सहहत 
पीएम ई-बस सेवा-भुगतान सुरक्षा तंत्र (पीएसएम) योजना के कायाान्वयन की वतामान क्ट्थितत 
क्या है; 
(घ) आज की ततथि तक संसाथित ककए गए भुगतान सुरक्षा समिान दावों की कुल संख्या 
ककतनी है और पीएसएम से जारी की गई तनथि की मात्रा ककतनी है; 
(ग) क्या सावाजतनक पररवहन प्राथिकरण (पीटीए) द्वारा भुगतान संबंिी गलततयों के कोई 
मामले सामने आए हैं; 
(घ) यहद हााँ, तो इस संबंि में ककए गए सुिारात्मक उपाय क्या है; 
(ङ) क्या मंत्रा लय ने इस योजना के  तहत समथिात इलेक्ट्क्िक बसों के  प्रचालन तनपपादन, 
उपयोग दर या सेवा पररणामों का कोई आकलन ककया है; और 
(च) यहद हााँ, तो मुख्य तनपकर्ा क्या है?  
 
उत्‍ तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योग‍राज्‍ य‍मां्ी 
(श्री‍ा ूपनतराजू‍श्रीननवासभ‍वमाा) 
 
(ि):  कुल 3,435.33 करोड़ रुपए के पररव्यय वाली पीएम ई -बस सेवा-भुगतान सुरक्षा तंत्र 
(पीएसएम) थकीम 28 अक्टूबर, 2024 को अथिसूथचत की गई िी। इस थकीम का उद्देश्य 
38,000 से ज़्यादा इलेक्ट्क्िक बसों की तैनाती का समिान करना है। 15 हदसंबर, 2025 तक, 
13 राज्यों/संघ राज्य क्षेत्रों  ने भारतीय ररज़वा बैंक ( आरबीआई) में डायरेक्ट डेबबट मैंडेट 
(डीडीएम) जमा कर हदया है, जोकक इस थकीम के  तहत पात्र होने के ललए एक ज़रूरी शता है। 
750                                                      

इसके अलावा, सीईएसएल ने 6,198 इलेक्ट्क्िक बसों के ललए तनववदा आमंबत्रत की िी, 
क्ट्जन्हें आवासन और शहरी काया मंत्रालय की पीएम ई -बस सेवा थकीम के तहत पूरा ककया 
गया िा। आज की तारीख तक , सावाजतनक पररवहन प्राथिकरण (पीटीए)  द्वारा 4,472 ई-
बसों के ललए लेटर ऑफ अवाडा (एलओए) जारी ककए जा चुके हैं।  
इसके अलावा , पीएम ई -ड्राइव थकीम के तहत 10,900 ई-बसों के संचालन और 
रखरखाव के  ललए ई-बस संचालकों से सीईएसएल द्वारा आमंबत्रत तनववदाओं के  ललए 
तकनीकी बोली खोली गई है।  
(ख) सभे (ग):  इस थकीम के तहत कोई चूक संबंिी ररपोटा नहीं लमली है और न ही कोई 
दावा प्राप्त हुआ है।  
(घ):  भाग (ख) और (ग) के उत्तर को देखते हुए प्रश्न नहीं उठता।  
(ङ) और‍ (च): भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय ने इस थकीम के तहत समथिात इलेक्ट्क्िक बसों के 
प्रचालनात्मक तनपपादन, इथतेमाल की दरों या सववास के पररणामों का ऐसा कोई आकलन 
नहीं ककया है।  
******* 
 
751                                                      

भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍2311 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्‍ तर‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत 
पी म‍ई-ड्राइव‍योजना‍ि ‍तहत‍ईवी‍अवसभांरचना 
 
2311 श्री‍नीरज‍डाांगी: 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) पीएम ई -ड्राइव योजना के अंतगग त अब तक ककतने सावगजननक ईवी चार्जिंग स्टेशन 
स्थापपत ककए जा चुके हैं और ककतने राज्यों में यह कायग लंबबत है; 
(ख) इस योजना के पहले चरण के तहत ननर्ागररत लक्ष्य की तुलना में वास्तपवक प्रगनत 
ककतनी हुई है, तत्संबंर्ी ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ग) आदिवासी एवं पपछडे क्षेत्रों  में ईवी अवसंरचना पहुंचाने के ललए क्या पवशेष रणनीनत 
बनाई गई है; और 
(घ) ननजी क्षेत्र को चार्जिंग अवसंरचना स्थापपत करने हेतु सरकार द्वारा कौन-कौन से 
प्रोत्साहन (सर्ब्सडी/कर लाभ/भूलम उपलब्र्ता) प्रिान ककए जा रहे हैं, तत्संबंर्ी ब्यौरा क्या है? 
 
उत्‍ तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योग‍राज्‍ य‍मां्ी 
(श्री‍ा ूपितराजू‍श्रीिनवासभ‍वमाा) 
 
(ि) सभ  (ग):   पीएम ई-ड्राइव स्कीम के तहत आदिवासी और पपछडे क्षेत्रों सदहत पूरे भारत 
में सावगजननक ईवी चार्जिंग इंफ्रास्रक्चर की तैनाती के ललए 2,000 करोड रुपये आवंदटत ककए 
गए हैं। भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय ने पीएम ई-ड्राइव के तहत इलेर्क्रक वाहन सावगजननक चार्जिंग 
स्टेशनों (ईवीपीसीएस) की तैनाती के ललए 26.09.2025 को पररचालन दिशाननिेश जारी ककए 
हैं।  
पीएम ई -ड्राइव स्कीम के  तहत अभी तक कोई चार्जिंग स्टेशन स्थापपत नहीं ककया 
गया है।  
(घ):    पीएम ई-ड्राइव स्कीम के  तहत, भारत सरकार के मंत्रालय/पवभाग, क ें द्रीय सावगजननक 
क्षेत्र के उद्यम (सीपीएसई) , राज्य/क ें द्र शालसत प्रिेश और उनके सावगजननक क्षेत्रक  उपक्रम 
इलेर्क्रक वाहन सावगजननक चार्जिंग स्टेशन (ईवी पीसीएस) की स्थापना के ललए प्रस्ताव 
प्रस्तुत करने के पात्र हैं। प्रस्ताव संबंधर्त मंत्रालय या राज्य/क ें द्र शालसत प्रिेश द्वारा नालमत 
नोडल एजेंसी (एजेंलसयों) के माध्यम से प्रस्तुत ककए जाने हैं, जो इलेर्क्रक वाहन सावगजननक 
चार्जिंग स्टेशन (ईवी पीसीएस) की मांग को एकबत्रत करती है।  इसका कायागन्वयन संबंधर्त 
752                                                      

संस्थाओं द्वारा सीर्े या चाजग प्वाइंट ऑपरेटरों (सीपीओ) की भागीिारी के माध्यम से ककया 
जा सकता है। जहां भी लागू हो, सर्ब्सडी का ननगगमन स्कीम के दिशाननिेशों के अनुसार 
नोडल एजेंसी (एजेंलसयों) को ककश्तों में ककया जाता है।  चार्जिंग स्टेशन स्थापपत करना एक 
गैर-लाइसेंस प्राप्त गनत पवधर् है और ननजी कंपननयां पवद्युत मंत्रालय (एमओपी) के 17 
लसतंबर, 2024 के दिशाननिेशों के अनुसार ईवीसीएस स्थापपत कर सकती हैं। 
यह स्कीम अपस्रीम इंफ्रास्रक्चर और ईवीएसई (चाजगर) के ललए पूंजीगत सर्ब्सडी 
प्रिान करती है और स्थान श्रेणी के आर्ार पर सर्ब्सडी 100% तक होती है। अपस्रीम 
इंफ्रास्रक्चर और ईवीएसई की लागत ब्यूरो ऑफ एनजी एकफलशएंसी (बीईई) की  बेंचमाकग 
लागत के अनुसार है। 
******* 
753                                                      

भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍2312 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्‍ तर‍ि ‍िए ‍िनयत 
 
फ म‍इांडिया‍चरण-॥‍योजना‍ि ‍तहत‍इए क्ट्रिि‍वाहनों‍और‍बैटरी‍वविनमााण‍ि ‍िए ‍नई‍
उत्पादन‍क्षमता 
 
2312 श्री‍त जवीर‍िसभांह: 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) हाल ही में संशोधित फ े म इंडिया चरण-॥ और आगामी ईवी नीतत के तहत इलेक्ट्क्िक 
वाहनों तथा बैटरी ववतनमााण के ललए नई उत्पादन क्षमता स्था वपत करने में क्या प्रगतत हुई 
है; 
(ख) क्या सरकार ऑटोमोबाइल व मशीनरी सेक्टर में उन्नत रोबोटटक्स एवं हररत प्रौद्योधगकी 
अपनाने हेतु एमएसएमई को ववशेष प्रोत्साहन देने पर ववचार कर रही है, यटद हां, तो 
तत्संबंिी ब्यौरा क्या है; और 
(ग) क्या मंत्रालय भारत को वैक्ट्ववक ऑटो हब बनाने हेतु एकीकृत “फ्युचर मॉबबललटी पाक्सा” 
स्थावपत करने की कोई नई राष्ट्िीय योजना  बना रहा है, यटद हां, तो तत्संबंिी ब्यौरा क्या 
है? 
 
उत्‍ तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योग‍राज्‍ य‍मां्ी 
(श्री‍ा ूपितराजू‍श्रीिनवासभ‍वमाा) 
 
(ि):  फ़ े म चरण-II स्कीम, जो 31.03.2024 को समाप्त हुई, में इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहनों या बैटरी 
बनाने के ललए नई उत्पादन क्षमता लगाने का कोई प्राविान  नहीं था। हालांकक, सरकार ने 
09.06.2021 को देश में 18,100 करोड़ रुपए के बजटीय पररव्यय के साथ उत्पादन संबद्ि 
प्रोत्साहन (पीएलआई) स्कीम "नेशनल प्रोग्राम ऑन एिवांस्ि केलमस्िी सेल ( एसीसी) बैटरी 
स्टोरेज" अधिसूधचत की। इस स्कीम का उद्देवय 50 गीगावॉट घंटा एसीसी बैटरी के  ललए एक 
प्रततस्पिी घरेलू ववतनमााण पाररतंत्र स्थावपत करना है। इस स्कीम के तहत , अब तक एक 
लाभाथी फमा ने 1  गीगावॉट घंटा  की संस्थावपत क्षमतायुक्त एक गीगा -स्केल एसीसी 
ववतनमााण संयंत्र लगाया है। इसने प्रायोधगक उत्पादन शुरू कर टदया है। 
754                                                      

(ख):  एमएसएमई मंत्रालय एसआईिीबीआई (कायाान्वयन एजेंसी) के ज़ररए " एमएसई-ग्रीन 
इन्वेस्टमेंट्स एंि फाइनेंलसंग फॉर िांसफॉमेशन स्कीम (एमएसई-जीआईएफटी स्कीम)" लागू 
कर रहा है। एमएसएमई जीआईएफटी स्कीम का मुख्य उद्देवय एमएसई को ऑटोमोबबल क्षेत्र 
और इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहनों और इसकी चाक्ट्जिंग अवसंरचना की प्रौद्योधगकी सटहत स्वच्छ/हररत 
प्रौद्योधगकी अंगीकरण के ललए ररयायती दर पर संस्थागत ववत्तपोषण तक पहुुँचने में मदद 
करना और उन्हें हररत और संिारणीय व्यापार संचालन में बदलने में मदद करना है। यह 
स्कीम 2025-26 तक वैि है। 
 
(ग):   भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय में कफलहाल ऐसा कोई प्रस्ताव ववचारािीन नहीं है। 
 
****** 
 
755                                                      

भारत सरकार 
भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय 
 
राज्‍ यसभा ा‍ 
अताराांकित‍प्रश्‍ न‍सभां्‍‍ या‍2313 
19.12.2025‍िो‍उत्तर ‍ि े ‍लिए‍ननयत 
 
आयात‍पर‍नना भरता‍िम‍िरने‍िे ‍लिए‍मजबूत‍घरेिू‍बैटरी‍विननमाभण‍पाररस्थिनतिी‍तांत्र‍िा‍
वििासभ 
 
2313 डॉ.‍िक्ष्मीिान्त‍बाजपेयीीः 
 
क्या ा ारी‍उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) क्या देश में इलेक्ट्क्िक वाहनों (ईवी) को अपनाने में आने वाली मुख्य चुनौततयों में से एक 
आपूतति श्ृंखला और ववतनमािण तनभिरता है, क्योंकक भारत ललथियम और कोबाल्ट जैसे प्रमुख 
बैटरी घटकों के ललए आयात पर अत्यथिक तनभिर है; 
(ख) यदद हााँ, तो सरकार ने इस क्ट्थितत को सुिारने के ललए क्या कदम उठाए हैं, क्योंकक घरेलू 
बैटरी ववतनमािण के ललए एक मजबूत पाररक्ट्थिततकी तंत्र की कमी है, क्ट्जससे आपूतति श्ृंखला 
कमजोर हो जाती है और ईवी की कुल लागत और उपलब्िता प्रभाववत होती है; और 
(ग) ललथियम, एल्युलमतनयम और सोडियम सेल प्रौद्योथगकी आदद सदहत अलग-अलग तरह की 
बैटररयों पर ककए जा रहे अनुसंिान की क्ट्थितत और पररणाम क्या हैं? 
 
उत्तर 
ा ारी‍उद्योग‍राज्‍ य‍मांत्री 
(ूी‍ा ूपनतराजू‍ूीननिासभ‍िमाभ)  
 
(ि) सभे (ख):  भारी उद्योग मंत्रालय उत्पादन संबद्ि प्रोत्साहन  (पीएलआई) थकीम नामतिः 
"नेशनल प्रोग्राम ऑन एिवांथि केलमथिी सेल ( एसीसी) बैटरी थटोरेज" चला रहा है, क्ट्जसे मई, 
2021 में 18,100 करोड़ रुपए के कुल पररव्यय के साि 50 गीगावॉट घंटा की घरेलू उन्नत 
रसायन सेल ववतनमािण क्षमता थिावपत करने के ललए मंजूरी दी गई िी। 
 
इसके अलावा , खान मंत्रालय से प्राप्त सूचनानुसार, खान मंत्रालय ने ललथियम , तनकेल, 
कोबाल्ट आदद जैसे बैटरी खतनजों सदहत जरूरी खतनज आपूतति शृंखला को सुरक्षक्षत करने के ललए 
कई कदम उठाए हैं, क्ट्जनमें अन्य बातों के साि-साि तनमनांककत शालमल हैं: 
 
i.) क ें द्रीय मंत्रत्रमंिल ने 29 जनवरी, 2025 को नेशनल किदटकल लमनरल्स लमशन 
(एनसीएमएम) की थिापना को मंजूरी दी, क्ट्जसके  ललए ववत्त वर्ि 2024-25 से 2030-
756                                                      

31 तक 16,300 करोड़ रुपए का ववत्तीय पररव्यय है। एनसीएमएम का लक्ष्य भारत 
की महत्वपूणि खतनज आपूतति शृंखला को सुरक्षक्षत करना और मूल्य शृंखला के सभी 
चरणों को मजबूत करना है, क्ट्जसमें खतनज की खोज , खनन, िातुशोिन, प्रसंथकरण 
और प्रयोग अवथि समाप्त  उत्पादों से ररकवरी शालमल है।  खान मंत्रालय ने 
एनसीएमएम के तहत 9 संथिानों - 4 आईआईटी, 1 आईआईएस और 4 अनुसंिान और 
ववकास प्रयोगशालाओं- को उत्कृष्टता कें द्रों (सीओई) के रूप में मान्यता दी है। 
 
ii.) भारतीय भूवैज्ञातनक सवेक्षण (जीएसआई) ने महत्वपूणि और रणनीततक खतनजों की 
खोज तेज कर दी है। जीएसआई  ने देश भर में 2024-25 में 195 और 2025-26 में 
230 महत्वपूणि खतनज अन्वेर्ण पररयोजनाएं शुरू कीं। इसके अलावा, नेशनल लमनरल 
एक्सप्लोरेशन एंि िेवलपमेंट िथट (एनएमईिीटी ) ने महत्वपूणि खतनजों की खोज के 
ललए 2024-25 के दौरान 62 पररयोजनाओं और 2025-26 के दौरान 36 पररयोजनाओं 
को मंजूरी दी है। 
 
iii.) खान मंत्रालय ने महत्वपूणि खतनजों के 34 ब्लॉकों की सफलतापूविक नीलामी की है। 
iv.) खान मंत्रालय ने अन्वेर्ण लाइसेंस के 7 ब्लॉकों की सफलतापूविक नीलामी की है, 
क्ट्जनमें से तीन महत्वपूणि खतनजों के हैं। 
 
v.) क ें द्रीय मंत्रत्रमंिल ने द्ववतीयक स्रोतों से महत्वपूणि खतनजों को अलग करने और 
उत्पादन के ललए पुनचििण क्षमता ववकलसत करने हेतु 1,500 करोड़ रुपए की 
प्रोत्साहन थकीम को मंजूरी दी। इस थकीम के ददशातनदेश खान मंत्रालय द्वारा 
02.10.2025 को जारी ककए गए हैं। 
 
vi.) ओवरबििन/टेललंग्स/फ्लाई ऐश/रेि मि आदद से महत्वपूणि खतनज की ररकवरी के ललए 
प्रायोथगक पररयोजना को तनथि प्रदान करने हेतु 14.11.2025 को ददशातनदेश जारी 
ककए गए हैं। 
 
vii.) खान मंत्रालय के तहत एक संयुक्त उद्यम कंपनी, खतनज ववदेश इंडिया लललमटेि 
(केएबीआईएल) ने अजेंटीना के कैटामाकाि प्रांत में अन्वेर्ण और ववकास के ललए पांच 
ललथियम ब्राइन ब्लॉकों का अथिग्रहण ककया हैं। 
 
(ग): पीएलआई एसीसी थकीम प्रौद्योथगकी की दृक्ट्ष्ट से न्यूिल है, जो यह सुतनक्ट्चचत करती है 
कक बेहतर तकनीकी को ज़्यादा प्रोत्साहन लमले। यह थकीम बड़े तनवेश आकवर्ित करने, अनुसंिान 
और ववकास को बढावा देने और एसीसी के ललए आयात पर तनभिरता कम करने के ललए 
डिजाइन की गई है। इसके अलावा , इस थकीम के तहत , लाभािी फमों द्वारा अनुसंिान और 
ववकास (आरएंििी) पर ककए गए खचि को तनवेश मानदंि को पूरा करने की अनुमतत है, क्ट्जससे 
वे अपनी पररयोजनाओं के कायािन्वयन में नवीनतम तकनीक को एकीकृत कर सक ें। 
 
खान मंत्रालय से प्राप्त सूचनानुसार, खान मंत्रालय खनन , खतनज प्रसंथकरण , िातु-शोिन 
प्रौद्योथगकी, खतनज िातुशोिन तकनीक और पुनचििण क्षेत्र में अनुसंिान और ववकास संबंिी 
757                                                      

पररयोजना के ललए ववज्ञान और प्रौद्योथगकी कायििम  के अनुसंिान और ववकास घटक और 
एसएंिटी-पीआरआईएसएम (थटाटिअप और एमएसएमई में अनुसंिान और नवाचार को बढावा देना) 
घटकों के तहत ववत्तीय सहायता प्रदान करता है। यह तनिीयन शैक्षक्षक संथिानों, ववचवववद्यालयों, 
वैज्ञातनक और औद्योथगक अनुसंिान ववभाग द्वारा मान्यता प्राप्त अनुसंिान और ववकास 
संथिानों, थटाटिअप और एमएसएमई को दी जाती है। 2018-19 से, अनुसंिान और ववकास घटक 
के तहत, ललथियम, एल्युलमतनयम और सोडियम सेल टेक्नोलॉजी आदद सदहत बैटरी से संबंथित 
5.76 करोड़ रुपए की 11 पररयोजनाएं मंजूर की गई हैं। एसएंिटी-पीआरआईएसएम  घटक के 
तहत (नवंबर 2023 में इसकी शुरुआत के बाद से), ललथियम, एल्युलमतनयम और सोडियम सेल 
टेक्नोलॉजी आदद सदहत बैटरी से संबंथित थटाटिअप और एमएसएमई के ललए कुल 9.30 करोड़ 
रुपए के तनिीयन के साि 4 पररयोजनाएं मंजूर की गई हैं। 
नवीन एवं नवीकरणीय ऊजाि मंत्रालय (एमएनआरई) से प्राप्त सूचनानुसार, एमएनआरई  
देश में नवीन एवं नवीकरणीय ऊजाि के बड़े पैमाने पर इथतेमाल के ललए , क्ट्जसमें ऊजाि भंिारण 
प्रौद्योथगकी भी शालमल है , कुशल और ककफायती माध्यम से थवदेशी प्रौद्योथगकी और ववतनमािण 
ववकलसत करने के ललए ववलभन्न अनुसंिान संथिानों और उद्योग-जगत के माध्यम से एक 
“नवीकरणीय ऊजाि अनुसंिान और प्रौद्योथगकी ववकास कायििम (आरई-आरटीिी)” कियाक्ट्न्वत कर 
रहा है। आरई -आरटीिी  कायििम के तहत , एमएनआरई सरकारी/गैर-लाभकारी अनुसंिान संगठनों 
को 100% तक और उद्योगों, थटाटि-अप, तनजी संथिानों, उद्यलमयों और ववतनमािण इकाइयों को 
70% तक ववत्तीय सहायता प्रदान करता है। नवीकरणीय ऊजाि के क्षेत्र में लगातार अनुसंिान और 
ववकास प्रयासों के पररणामथवरूप देश में उपयोग की जा रही  नवीकरणीय ऊजाि प्रणाललयों/ 
पररयोजनाओं/भंिारण प्रौद्योथगककओं  की कुल दक्षता में वृद्थि, लागत में कमी और बेहतर 
ववचवसनीयता आई है। 
ववज्ञान और प्रौद्योथगकी ववभाग से प्राप्त सूचनानुसार, अनुसंिान नेशनल ररसचि फाउंिेशन 
)एएनआरएफ(  ने ललथियम , एल्युलमतनयम और सोडियम सेल प्रौद्योथगकी आदद सदहत अलग-
अलग तरह की बैटररयों के तहत 236 पररयोजनाओं को मंजूरी दी है। 
***** 
758                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय 
राÏ य सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2314 
(Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उ× तर देने क े ͧलए) 
 
ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ पर सामĒी का ͪवǓनयमन 
 
2314. Įी ए. डी. ͧसंहः 
Èया सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया सरकार का ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ को सÉत सामĒी ͪवǓनयमन के दायरे मɅ लाने का 
Ĥèताव है; 
(ख)  ऐसे Üलेटफॉमɟ पर आपͪƣजनक सामĒी क े संबंध मɅ ĤाÜत ͧशकायतɉ कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी 
है; और 
(ग)  सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ (मÚयवतȸ ǑदशाǓनदȶश और ͫडिजटल मीͫडया आचार संǑहता) Ǔनयम, 
2021 का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करने क े  ͧलए कौन-कौन से उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ? 
उƣर 
सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं संसदȣय काय[ राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. एल. मुǾगन) 
 
(क) से (ग): सरकार ने सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ अͬधǓनयम, 2000 क े  अंतग[त Ǒदनांक 25.02.2021 
को सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ (मÚयवतȸ ǑदशाǓनदȶश और ͫडिजटल मीͫडया आचार संǑहता) Ǔनयम, 
2021 अͬधसूͬचत ͩकए हɇ। 
इन Ǔनयमɉ का भाग-III ͫडिजटल समाचार Ĥकाशकɉ तथा ऑनलाइन सृिजत सामĒी (ओटȣटȣ 
Üलेटफॉम[) के  Ĥकाशकɉ के ͧलए आचार संǑहता का Ĥावधान करता है। आचार संǑहता के अनुसार, 
ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफामɟ पर यह बाÚयता है ͩक वे ऐसी ͩकसी भी सामĒी का Ĥसारण नहȣं करɅगे जो 
उस समय लागू ͩकसी भी कानून के तहत ĤǓतबंͬधत है। 
759                                                      

Üलेटफॉमɟ से अपे¢ा कȧ जाती है ͩक वे सामĒी का आयु-आधाǐरत वगȸकरण करɅगे तथा पया[Üत 
पहुंच Ǔनयंğण उपायɉ के माÚयम से बÍचɉ के ͧलए आयु-अनुपयुÈत सामĒी को ĤǓतबंͬधत 
करɅगे। 
इन Ǔनयमɉ मɅ Ǔनàनानुसार तीन-èतरȣय ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण तंğ का भी Ĥावधान ͩकया गया है: 
èतर-I:  Ĥकाशकɉ ɮवारा èव-ͪवǓनयमन 
èतर-II: Ĥकाशकɉ के èव-ͪवǓनयामक Ǔनकायɉ ɮवारा èव-ͪवǓनयमन 
èतर-III: कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनगरानी तंğ 
मंğालय ĤाÜत ͧशकायतɉ को ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण तंğ के  èतर-I के  अंतग[त समाधान हेतु संबंͬधत 
ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ से साझा करता है। 
सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ अͬधǓनयम, 2000 कȧ धारा 79(3)(ख) के अंतग[त मÚयèथɉ के  ͧलए अवैध 
सामĒी हटाने/उस तक पहुंच अ¢म करने हेतु अͬधसूचना जारȣ करने का Ĥावधान है।  
सरकार ने अæलȣल सामĒी Ĥदͧश[त करने के कारण भारत मɅ साव[जǓनक उपयोग हेतु 43 
ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ कȧ पहुंच ǓनिçĐय कर दȣ है। 
***** 
760                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और प्रसारण मंत्रालय 
राज्‍य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या 2315 
(किनांक 19.12.2025 को उत्‍तर िेने के कलए) 
 
िू रिर्शन और ऑल इंकिया र े कियो पर क्षेत्रीय भाषा सामग्री की समीक्षा 
2315. श्रीमती गीता उर् श चन्द्रप्रभााः 
क्या सूचना और प्रसारण मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा कर ें गे ककाः 
(क)  क्या मंत्रालय ने विगत दो िर्षों के दौरान जोडे गए नए काययक्रमों सवित द ू रदर्यन और 
ऑल इंविया र े वियो पर क्षेत्रीय भार्षाओं में उपलब्ध सामग्री की समीक्षा की िै; 
(ख)  क्या क्षेत्रीय प्रसारण क ें द्ों ने कमयचाररयों, वनमायण उपकरणों या विवजटल प्रसारण 
अिसंरचना से संबंवित बािाओं की जानकारी दी िै और ऐसे आकलन के वनष्कर्षय 
क्या िैं; और 
(ग)  क्या मंत्रालय का अल्पसेवित भार्षाई समूिों के वलए सामुदावयक स्तर पर मीविया 
साक्षरता, सामग्री-वनमायण क ें द्ों या क्षेत्रीय वनमायण सुवििाओं के विस्तार का प्रस्ताि िै? 
उत्तर 
सूचना और प्रसारण एवं संसिीय कायश राज्य मंत्री 
(िॉ. एल. मुरूगन) 
 
(क) से (ग): द ू रदर्यन नेटिक य के अंतगयत 28 क्षेत्रीय/राज्य स्तरीय चैनल काययरत िैं, जो 
अपनी-अपनी क्षेत्रीय भार्षाओं/बोवलयों में काययक्रमों का प्रसारण करते िैं। आकार्िाणी देर्भर 
में अपने 112 क्षेत्रीय चैनलों के माध्यम से 23 प्रमुख भार्षाओं तथा 182 बोवलयों में काययक्रमों 
का प्रसारण करता िै। 
दर्यकों की अपेक्षाओं एिं लोक सेिा उद्देश्ों के अनुरूप क्षेत्रीय भार्षाओं में नए काययक्रम 
वनर ं तर रूप से सम्मिवलत वकए जाते िैं।  
761                                                      

क े न्द्रीय क्षेत्र की स्कीम प्रसारण अिसंरचना और नेटिक य विकास (बीआईएनिी) (2021-26) 
के अंतगयत ₹2,539.61 करोड के पररव्यय के साथ प्रसार भारती के आिुवनकीकरण एिं 
उन्नयन का कायय वकया जा रिा िै।  
यि स्कीम द ू रदर्यन एिं आकार्िाणी के अंतगयत प्रोिक्शन उपकरणों, स्ट ू वियो सुवििाओं, 
ट ् ांसमीटरों तथा विवजटल प्रसारण अिसंरचना के उन्नयन पर क ें वद्त िै। 
प्रसारण के क्षेत्र में प्रौद्योवगकीय प्रगवत के पररणामस्वरूप कावमयकर्म्मि की बदलती 
आिश्कताओं को प्रसार भारती की संविदात्मक वनयुम्मि नीवत के अनुसार वनयुम्मियों के 
माध्यम से पूरा वकया जा रिा िै। यि कायय क ें द्ों द्वारा प्रस्तुत की गई कायायत्मक आिश्कताओं 
के अनुरूप वकया जाता िै।   
द ू रदर्यन के पास 65 काययक्रम वनमायण क ें द् िैं तथा आकार्िाणी के पास स्ट ू वियो सुवििाओं 
से युि 230 स्टेर्न िैं। इसक े माध्यम से संबंवित क्षेत्रों/स्थानीय क ें द्ों से जुडे कलाकारों, 
सृजनकतायओं एिं प्रवतभाओं का उपयोग करते हुए स्थानीय/क्षेत्रीय भार्षाओं में सामग्री का 
सृजन संभि िो पाता िै। 
**** 
762                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय 
राÏ य सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2316 
(Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उ× तर देने क े ͧलए) 
 
जàमू और कæमीर मɅ डीएवीपी ɮवारा पैनलबɮध समाचार पğ और पǒğकाएँ 
 
2316. Įी गुलाम अलȣः 
Èया सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क)  जàमू और कæमीर मɅ डीएवीपी ɮवारा पैनलबɮध ऐसे समाचार पğɉ और पǒğकाओं कȧ 
कुल संÉया ͩकतनी हɇ, िजÛहɅ दैǓनक, साÜताǑहक, पाͯ¢क और माͧसक Įेͨणयɉ मɅ 
वगȸकृत ͩकया गया है और जो छठȤ और आठवीं अनुसूची कȧ भाषाओं मɅ Ĥकाͧशत होते 
हɇ; 
(ख)  ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के  दौरान इन सभी Ĥकाशनɉ को जारȣ ͩकए गए ͪव£ापनɉ, और 
Ĥकाशन-वार åयय का Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(ग)  ऑल इंͫडया रेͫडयो/दूरदश[न पर छठȤ और आठवीं अनुसूची कȧ भाषाओं मɅ Ĥसाǐरत 
काय[Đमɉ क े ͧलए आवंǑटत दैǓनक Ĥसारण समय Èया है और उसकȧ Ĥसारण अवͬध 
ͩकतनी है? 
उƣर 
सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं संसदȣय काय[ राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. एल. मुǾगन) 
 
(क) से (ग): जàमू एवं कæमीर मɅ सीबीसी (पूव[ मɅ डीएवीपी) से पैनलबɮध समाचार-पğɉ एवं 
पǒğकाओं कȧ कुल संÉया का ͪववरण (मांगे गए वगȸकरण के अनुसार) सीबीसी कȧ वेबसाइट 
अथा[त www.davp.nic.in पर उपलÞध है। 
763                                                      

इन Ĥकाशनɉ मɅ जारȣ ͩकए गए ͪव£ापनɉ तथा ͪवगत पाँच वषɟ के दौरान उन पर ͩकए गए 
åयय से संबंͬधत सूचना भी इसी वेबसाइट पर उपलÞध है।  
दूरदश[न नेटवक[ अपने सात राçĚȣय चैनलɉ एवं अɪठाईस ¢ेğीय/राÏय èतरȣय चैनलɉ के माÚयम 
से ¢ेğीय भाषाओं और बोͧलयɉ मɅ काय[Đमɉ का Ĥसारण कर ͪवͪवध भाषाई एवं सांèकृǓतक 
समुदायɉ कȧ सेवा करता है।  
Ǒहंदȣ, बंगालȣ, तेलुगु, मराठȤ, तͧमल, उदू[, गुजराती, कÛनड़, ओͫड़या, मलयालम, पंजाबी, 
असͧमया, कæमीरȣ, कɉकणी तथा मͨणपुरȣ भाषाओं के ͧलए समͪप[त चैनल या ऐसे चैनल मौजूद 
हɇ िजनकȧ मुÉय भाषा आठवीं अनुसूची मɅ शाͧमल भाषाएं हɇ।   
इसके  अǓतǐरÈत संèकृत, ͧसंधी, नेपालȣ, बोडो, डोगरȣ, मैͬथलȣ एवं संथालȣ भाषाओं मɅ भी 
ͪवͧभÛन ¢ेğीय/राÏय èतरȣय दूरदश[न चैनलɉ के  माÚयम से काय[Đमɉ का Ĥसारण ͩकया जाता 
है।  
जàमू एवं कæमीर संघ राÏय ¢ेğ मɅ डीडी कशीर तथा Ĥसार भारती फȧãड जेनरेǑटंग èटेशन 
(पीजीएफ) जàमू के माÚयम से काय[Đमɉ का Ĥसारण ͩकया जाता है।  
छठȤ अनुसूची के अंतग[त आने वाले ¢ेğɉ मɅ संचाͧलत दूरदश[न चैनल संबंͬधत ¢ेğीय एवं 
जनजातीय भाषाओं और बोͧलयɉ मɅ काय[Đमɉ का Ĥसारण करते हɇ। ऐसे Ĥसारणɉ कȧ अवͬध 
èवीकृत काय[Đम अनुसूͬचयɉ के अनुसार ͧभÛन-ͧभÛन होती है। 
आकाशवाणी, अपनी भाषा एवं बोलȣ नीǓत के अनुǾप, संͪवधान कȧ आठवीं अनुसूची मɅ 
सिàमͧलत सभी बाईस भाषाओं मɅ काय[Đमɉ और ¢ेğीय समाचारɉ का Ĥसारण करता है। यह 
छठȤ अनुसूची के अंतग[त आने वाले ¢ेğɉ मɅ èथानीय जनजातीय भाषाओं एवं बोͧलयɉ मɅ, 
संबंͬधत ¢ेğɉ मɅ िèथत कɅ ġɉ के माÚयम से काय[Đमɉ एवं ¢ेğीय समाचारɉ का Ĥसारण करता 
है।  
दैǓनक Ĥसारण समय चैनलɉ एवं कɅġɉ कȧ èवीकृत Ĥसारण अनुसूͬचयɉ के अनुसार Ǔनधा[ǐरत 
होता है। 
***** 
 
764                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और प्रसारण मंत्रालय 
राज् य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या 2317 
(दिनांक 19.12.2025 को उत् तर िननन कन  िल ) 
 
फै क्ट चनक तंत्र की काययप्रणाली 
2317. श्री सुजीत कुमारः 
क्या सूचना और प्रसारण मंत्री यह बतानन की कृपा करेंगन ककिः 
(क)  प्रेस सूचना ब्यूरो के अधीन फैक्ट चेक यूननट (एफसीयू) की स्थापना और काययप्रणाली 
की वतयमान स्स्थनत क्या है; 
(ख)  ऑनलाइन माध्यमों से फैलाई गई भ्रामक सूचनाओं और फजी खबरों की पहचान, 
सत्यापन और उनके ववरूद्ध कारयवाई करने के ललए मंत्रालय द्वारा क्या प्रणाली 
अपनाई गई है; 
(ग)  क्या सरकारी फैक्ट -चेककंग यूननटों और सोशल मीडिया मध्यस्थों के बीच समन्वय के 
ललए मानक संचालन प्रकियाएं या दिशाननिेश जारी ककए गए हैं; 
(घ)  यदि हां, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है, और यदि नहीं, तो इसके क्या कारण हैं; और 
(ङ)  क्या सरकार ने ऑनलाइन और सोशल मी डिया प्लेटफॉमों पर भ्रामक सूचनाओं और 
ववद्वेषपूणय कथनों, जैसे कक भारत -ववरोधी वक्तव्यों, की ननगरानी और उनसे ननपटने 
के ललए उपाय ककए हैं, यदि हां, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है? 
उत्तर 
सूचना और प्रसारण एवं संसिीय कायय राज्य मंत्री 
(िॉ. एल. मुरूगन) 
(क) से (ङ): भारत सरकार से संबंधधत फजी खबरों और गलत सूचनाओं के प्रसार को रोकने 
के उद्िेश्य से नवंबर , 2019 में सूचना और प्रसारण मंत्रालय के पत्र सूचना कायायलय के 
अंतगयत एक फैक्ट चैक यूननट (एफसीयू) की स्थापना की गई है। 
 
765                                                      

भारत सरकार से संबंधधत मामलों पर प्रसाररत हो रही खबरों/सूचनाओं के संबंध में कोई भी 
लशकायत/तथ्य जांच अनुरोध व्हाट्सएप हॉटलाइन +918799711259, ईमेल 
आईिी factcheck@pib.gov.in और पीआईबी फैक्ट चेक यूननट की 
वेबसाइट https://factcheck.pib.gov.in पर भेजा जा सकता है। 
 
पीआईबी की फैक्ट चेक यूननट ररपोटय की गई खबरों/सामग्री का सत्यापन ननम्नानुसार करती 
है: 
पीआईबी फैक्ट चेक यूननट तथ्यों की जांच के संबंध में स्वतः संज्ञान लेती है और इसके 
साथ ही अपनी वेबसाइट या व्हाट्सएप हॉटलाइन पर लशकायतें प्राप्त करती है। 
यह यूननट प्राप्त सूचनाओं का वगीकरण यह सुननस्श्चत करने के बाि करती है कक क्या वे 
फैक्ट चैक यूननट के िायरे में आती हैं या नहीं। 
अधधकृत स्रोतों से प्राप्त जानकारी की प्रामाणणकता की पुस्टट करने के बाि, फैक्ट चेक यूननट 
सोशल मीडिया प्लेटफॉमों  पर प्रसार के ललए उपयुक्त किएदटव कंटेट  के माध्यम से 
जागरूकता पैिा करने के ललए सूचना, लशक्षा और संचार (आईईसी) रणनीनत का उपयोग करती 
है। 
एफसीयू अपने सोशल मीडिया हैंिल पर जांचे गए तथ्य और सही जानकारी पोस्ट करती है। 
पीआईबी फैक्ट चेक यूननट (एफसीयू) भारत सरकार से संबंधधत ऑनलाइन सामग्री की 
ननगरानी में अहम भूलमका ननभाती है। ऑपरेशन लसंिूर के िौरान, पीआईबी फैक्ट चेक यूननट 
ने झूठे िावों की तुरंत तथ्य-जांच करके , प्रामाणणक जानकारी प्रिान करके और सटीक 
जनसंचार सुननस्श्चत करके ऑनलाइन प्रसाररत हो रही गलत सूचनाओं और शत्रुतापूणय बयानों 
का सकिय रूप से खंिन ककया और इस प्रकार भ्रामक और भारत-ववरोधी बयानों के  प्रसार को 
रोकने में मिि की। 
**** 
766                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय 
राÏ य सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2318 
(Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उ× तर देने के ͧलए) 
 
सीबीएफसी ɮवारा बांÊला और अÛय ¢ेğीय भाषाओं कȧ ͩफãमɉ का Ĥमाणन 
2318. Įी साͧमक भɪटाचाय[ः 
Èया सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान कɅ ġȣय ͩफãम Ĥमाणन बोड[ (सीबीएफसी) ɮवारा Ĥमाͨणत कȧ 
गई पूण[ अवͬध वालȣ बांÊला ͩफãमɉ कȧ वष[-वार कुल संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(ख)  इसी अवͬध के दौरान तͧमल, तेलुगु, मलयालम, कÛनड़ और मराठȤ जैसी अÛय Ĥमुख 
भारतीय भाषाओं मɅ Ĥमाͨणत कȧ गई पूण[ अवͬध वालȣ ͩफãमɉ के तुलना×मक आंकड़े 
Èया हɇ; और 
(ग)  Èया ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के  दौरान इन भाषाओं मɅ Ĥमाͨणत ͩफãमɉ कȧ संÉया मɅ वृɮͬध 
या कमी के ǽझान ͧमले हɇ, यǑद हां, तो इस ǽझान के Èया कारण हɇ? 
उƣर 
सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं संसदȣय काय[ राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. एल. मुǾगन) 
(क) से (ग): कɅġȣय ͩफãम Ĥमाणन बोड[ (सीबीएफसी) देश मɅ साव[जǓनक Ĥदश[न के ͧलए 
ͩफãमɉ को चलͬचğ अͬधǓनयम, 1952 और उसके अंतग[त बनाए गए Ǔनयमɉ के Ĥावधानɉ के 
तहत Ĥमाͨणत करता है। 
ͪवͧभÛन भाषाओं मɅ Ĥमाͨणत ͩफãमɉ कȧ संÉया मɅ ͧभÛनता ¢ेğीय उɮयोगɉ मɅ ͩफãम Ǔनमा[ण 
के ͪवͪवध पैमाने, कोͪवड-19 जैसी बाधाएं आǑद जैसे ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ के कारण होती है। यह 
दश[कɉ कȧ पसंद, बाजार कȧ िèथǓत और ͫडिजटल तथा ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफामɟ कȧ बढ़ती भूͧमका 
जैसे अÛय कारकɉ से भी Ĥभाͪवत होती है। 
***** 
767                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय 
राÏ य सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2319 
(Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उ× तर देने के ͧलए) 
 
ͧसिÈकम मɅ सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो èटेशनɉ का ͪवèतार 
2319. Įी दोरजी ×शेǐरंग लेÜचाः 
Èया सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के  दौरान ͧसिÈकम राÏय कȧ ͩकसी सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो पहल ने 
सरकार ɮवारा चलाई जा रहȣ योजनाओं के तहत आवेदन ͩकया है या लाभ उठाया है; 
(ख)  यǑद हां, तो ͧसिÈकम से ĤाÜत, संèवीकृत और लंǒबत आवेदनɉ कȧ संÉया सǑहत 
त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग)  Èया सरकार का ͧसिÈकम जैसे छोटे और पहाड़ी राÏयɉ मɅ अǓतǐरÈत सामुदाǓयक 
रेͫडयो èटेशनɉ कȧ èथापना को बढ़ावा देने या सुगम बनाने का Ĥèताव है; और 
(घ) यǑद हां, तो राÏय मɅ सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो कȧ पहुंच, ¢मता Ǔनमा[ण और तकनीकȧ 
सहायता मɅ सुधार के ͧलए उठाए जा रहे या Ĥèताͪवत कदमɉ का Þयौरा Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं संसदȣय काय[ राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. एल. मुǾगन) 
(क) से (घ): सरकार सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो èटेशनɉ कȧ èथापना, मरàमत तथा रख-रखाव के 
ͧलए ͪवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान कर उÛहɅ सहायता देती है। मौजूदा एवं नए सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो 
èटेशनɉ को सु͸ढ़ करने के  उɮदेæय से सरकार ɮवारा “भारत मɅ सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो अͧभयान 
को सहायता” नामक èकȧम लागू कȧ गई है। 
 
768                                                      

इस èकȧम कȧ Ĥमुख ͪवशेषताएँ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत हɇ: 
1. नए èथाͪपत सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो èटेशनɉ को पǐरचालन आरंभ होने के तीन माह बाद 
ͪवƣीय सहायता। 
2. पाँच वषɟ से अͬधक समय से पǐरचाͧलत èटेशनɉ को पुराने उपकरणɉ के नवीनीकरण 
अथवा ĤǓतèथापन हेतु सहायता। 
3. काय[शालाओं, वेǒबनारɉ तथा सàमेलनɉ के  माÚयम से Ĥͧश¢ण एवं जागǾकता। 
4. सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो से जुड़े Ǒहतधारकɉ के मÚय पीयर लǓनɍग को स¢म बनाने हेतु 
¢ेğीय एवं राçĚȣय आयोजनɉ के माÚयम से Ǒहतधारक सहभाͬगता। 
 
ͪपछले पाँच वषɟ के दौरान, मंğालय को ͧसिÈकम राÏय से “भारत मɅ सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो 
अͧभयान को सहायता” èकȧम के तहत लाभ ĤाÜत करने हेतु एक आवेदन ĤाÜत हुआ है, 
िजसे èकȧम के Ǔनधा[ǐरत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶशɉ के अनुसार èवीकृǓत Ĥदान कȧ गई थी। 
सामुदाǓयक रेͫडयो èटेशन èथाͪपत करने, उनकȧ ¢मता मɅ वृɮͬध करने तथा सामुदाǓयक 
रेͫडयो èटेशनɉ को तकनीकȧ सहायता Ĥदान करने के उɮदेæय से, सरकार ɮवारा देश के 
ͪवͧभÛन भागɉ मɅ अनेक काय[शालाओं एवं ¢ेğीय सàमेलनɉ का आयोजन ͩकया जाता है। 
नवंबर, 2024 मɅ गंगटोक, ͧसिÈकम मɅ एक काय[शाला तथा Ǒदसंबर, 2025 मɅ गुवाहाटȣ, 
असम मɅ पूवȸ ¢ेğ के  राÏयɉ के ͧलए एक ¢ेğीय सàमेलन आयोिजत ͩकया गया था। 
***** 
 
769                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय 
राÏ य सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2320 
(Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उ× तर देने क े ͧलए) 
 
अनुसूͬचत जाǓत, अनुसूͬचत जनजाǓत और अÛय ͪपछड़ा वग[ कȧ Ǔनयͧमत और लंǒबत 
ǐरिÈतयां 
2320. Įीमती फूलो देवी नेतमः 
Èया सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) मंğालय मɅ समूह क, ख और ग के पदɉ पर पदèथ कम[चाǐरयɉ और ͪवͧभÛन Įेͨणयɉ 
मɅ ǐरिÈतयɉ का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख)  अनुसूͬचत जाǓत, अनुसूͬचत जनजाǓत और अÛय ͪपछड़ा वग[ कȧ लंǒबत ǐरिÈतयɉ का 
Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ग) लंǒबत और Ǔनयͧमत ǐरिÈतयɉ को भरने कȧ काय[ योजना का Þयौरा Èया है ताͩक 
योजनाओं को सुचाǾ Ǿप से चलाया जा सके; और 
(घ)  ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के  दौरान सेवाǓनवृƣ कम[चाǐरयɉ और नए भतȸ कम[चाǐरयɉ कȧ संÉया 
का Þयौरा Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं संसदȣय काय[ राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. एल. मुǾगन) 
(क) से (घ): ĤशासǓनक एवं काया[×मक आवæयकताओं के अनुसार मंğालय मɅ èवीकृत पदɉ 
तथा ǐरÈत पदɉ कȧ समय-समय पर समी¢ा कȧ जाती है। 
अनुसूͬचत जाǓत, अनुसूͬचत जनजाǓत तथा अÛय ͪपछड़ा वग[ से संबंͬधत बैकलोग वैकɅसी कȧ 
समय-समय पर पहचान कȧ जाती है। ǓनǑहत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶशɉ/ भतȸ Ǔनयमɉ तथा आर¢ण नीǓत 
के अनुसार बैकलोग एवं Ǔनयͧमत ǐरÈत पदɉ को भरने हेतु समय-समय पर आवæयक 
कार[वाई कȧ जाती है। 
***** 
770                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय 
राÏ य सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2321 
(Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उ× तर देने क े ͧलए) 
 
एǓनमेशन और एÈसटɅडेड ǐरयͧलटȣ (एवीजीसी-एÈसआर) ¢ेğ कȧ वृɮͬध 
 
2321. डा. परमार जशवंतͧसंह सालमͧसंहः 
Įी केसरȣदेवͧसंह झालाः 
 
Èया सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
 
(क) एवीजीसी-एÈसआर के  ͧलए नया राçĚȣय उ×कृçटता कɅ ġ (एनसीओई) ͪवशेष Ĥͧश¢ण 
और अनुसंधान एवं ͪवकास के माÚयम से ͩकस Ĥकार वचु[अल ǐरयͧलटȣ (वीआर), 
ऑगमɅटेड ǐरयͧलटȣ (एआर) और 3डी मॉडͧलंग मɅ कौशल अंतर को दूर करने मɅ मदद 
कर रहा है; 
(ख)  वे नीǓतगत उपाय कौन-कौन से हɇ िजÛहɉने वैिæवक ͩफãमɉ के ͧलए वीएफएÈस काय[ 
जैसे एवीजीसी Ǔनया[त मɅ वृɮͬध कȧ है और भारतीय सांèकृǓतक बौɮͬधक संपदाओं 
(आईपी) के सृजन को बढ़ावा Ǒदया है; 
(ग)  Èया उÍच ͧश¢ा मɅ एवीजीसी-एÈसआर पाɫयĐमɉ को एकȧकृत करना और राçĚȣय 
Ĥमाणन शुǾ करना Ĥभावी Ǿप से एक मजबूत ĤǓतभा आपूǓत[ Įृंखला का Ǔनमा[ण कर 
रहा है; और 
(घ)  मंğालय ͩकस Ĥकार ͪवदेशी Ǔनवेश सुरͯ¢त करने और वैिæवक èटूͫडयो के साथ सहयोग 
करने मɅ एवीजीसी èटाट[अÜस का समथ[न कर रहा है ताͩक "ͩĐएट इन इंͫडया" और 
"Ħांड इंͫडया" को बढ़ावा Ǒदया जा सक े? 
 
 
771                                                      

उƣर 
सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं संसदȣय काय[ राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. एल. मुǾगन) 
 
(क) से (घ): एवीजीसी-एÈसआर के  ͧलए राçĚȣय उ×कृçटता कɅ ġ को भारतीय रचना×मक 
Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ संèथान (आईआईसीटȣ) के Ǿप मɅ Ĥचालनरत ͩकया गया है। यह रचना×मक 
Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ क े  ¢ेğ मɅ एक Ĥमुख संèथान है, जो मुंबई मɅ िèथत है। 
आईआईसीटȣ को कुल 391.15 करोड़ ǽपये के आवंटन के साथ ͪवकͧसत ͩकया जा रहा है तथा 
इसे रचना×मक Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ (एवीजीसी-एÈसआर) के  ͧलए आईआईटȣ और आईआईएम कȧ 
तज[ पर बनाया गया है। इसने मुंबई िèथत एनएफडीसी पǐरसर से काय[ करना Ĥारंभ कर Ǒदया 
है। 
यह संèथान वैिæवक सवȾƣम काय[ पɮधǓतयɉ के अनुǾप उɮयोग-उÛमुख पाɫयĐम का अनुसरण 
करता है तथा पिÞलक-Ĥाइवेट भागीदारȣ मॉडल पर राçĚȣय कɅ ġ के  Ǿप मɅ हब-एंड-èपोक ढांचे 
के अंतग[त काय[ करता है। 
आईआईसीटȣ ͪवशेष Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đमɉ, उɮयोग से जुड़े पाɫयĐमɉ और अनुĤयुÈत अनुसंधान 
एवं ͪवकास क े  माÚयम से वचु[अल ǐरयͧलटȣ, ऑगमɅटेड ǐरयͧलटȣ और 3डी मॉडͧलंग मɅ कौशल 
कȧ कमी को दूर कर रहा है। 
संèथान ɮवारा गेͧमंग, पोèट-ĤोडÈशन, एनीमेशन, कॉͧमÈस तथा एÈसआर के  ¢ेğɉ मɅ 17 
ͪवशेषीकृत शै¢ͨणक काय[Đम शुǾ ͩकए गए ह ɇ। इसकȧ अͬधक जानकारȣ 
https://iict.org/academics/programs पर ĤाÜत कȧ जा सकती है।  
संèथान कȧ गूगल, मेटा, एनवीͫडया, माइĐोसॉÝट, एÜपल, अडोब तथा डÞãयूपीपी जैसी अĒणी 
वैिæवक कंपǓनयɉ क े साथ पाɫयचया[ सह-ͪवकास, उÛनत टूãस तक पहुंच, मɅटरͧशप तथा उɮयोग 
सहयोग के ͧलए साझेदाǐरयां हɇ। 
आईआईसीटȣ èटाट[-अप इनÈयूबेशन तथा आईपी ͩĐएशन का भी समथ[न करता है, िजससे 
भारत के रचना×मक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ èटाट[-अÜस को वैिæवक èटूͫडयो, Ǔनवेशकɉ तथा बाजारɉ से 
जोड़ने मɅ सहायता ͧमलती है और इस Ĥकार ‘ͩĐएट इन इंͫडया’ तथा ‘Ħांड इंͫडया’ क े  उɮदेæयɉ 
का संवध[न होता है। 
सरकार ɮवारा एवीजीसी एÈसपोट[ सǑहत रचना×मक Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ मɅ वृɮͬध के ͧलए कई कदम 
उठाए हɇ; जैसे: 
772                                                      

 सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय ɮवारा कɅġȣय बजट कȧ घोषणा के उपरांत अĤैल 2022 मɅ 
एवीजीसी Ĥमोशन टाèकफोस[ का गठन ͩकया गया था। इसने इंडèĚȣ और सरकार को एक साथ 
लाकर यह Ǿपरेखा तैयार कȧ ͩक भारत ͩकस Ĥकार एǓनमेशन, वीएफएÈस, गेͧमंग और कॉͧमÈस 
मɅ कौशल, रोजगार और Ǔनवेश को बढ़ा सकता है और देश को एम एंड ए इंडèĚȣ के ͧलए 
वैिæवक हब बना सकता है। 
टाèकफोस[ ɮवारा Ǒदसंबर 2022 मɅ अपनी ǐरपोट[ Ĥèतुत कȧ गई, िजसमɅ राçĚȣय एवीजीसी 
ͧमशन, उ×कृçटता कɅ ġ, सुǺढ़ अवसंरचना तथा भारतीय आईपी और Ǔनया[त क े  ͧलए समͪप[त 
समथ[न कȧ ͧसफाǐरश कȧ गई। 
 आईआईसीटȣ मुंबई कȧ èथापना कȧ गई है तथा इसे उÍच-èतरȣय Ĥͧश¢ण और 
अनुसंधान को सुǺढ़ करने हेतु एक ͪवशेषीकृत उ×कृçटता कɅ ġ के Ǿप मɅ ͪवकͧसत ͩकया जा 
रहा है। 
 उÍच-गुणवƣा ĤोडÈशन ¢मता के ͪवèतार, ĤǓतभा ͪवकास तथा अंतरराçĚȣय बाजारɉ 
तक पहुंच मɅ सुधार पर ͪवशेष Úयान देते हुए, मई 2025 मɅ संपूण[ मीͫडया एवं मनोरंजन ¢ेğ 
के ͧलए एक वैिæवक मंच के Ǿप मɅ ‘वेåस 2025’ का आयोजन ͩकया गया। 
इसके  अǓतǐरÈत, ‘वेåस’ एवीजीसी ¢ेğ और èटाट[Üस को Ǔनàनͧलͨखत तीन वǑट[कल घटकɉ के 
माÚयम से समथ[न करता है: 
1. वेåस बाज़ारः यह भारत क े मीͫडया एवं मनोरंजन ¢ेğ के ͧलए वष[ भर चलने वाला हाइǒĦड 
वैिæवक बाज़ार है। यह संरͬचत बी2बी बैठकɉ, सह-Ǔनमा[ण अवसरɉ को सुगम बनाता है तथा 
भारतीय ͩफ़ãम, एनीमेशन, गेͧमंग, वीएफएÈस तथा एÈसआर सामĒी को अंतरराçĚȣय खरȣदारɉ 
के सम¢ Ĥदͧश[त करता है। 
2. वेवएÈसः यह एवीजीसी-एÈसआर एवं उभरती मीͫडया Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ के ͧलए एक समͪप[त 
èटाट[-अप एÈसेलेरेटर एवं इनÈयूबेटर है। यह मɅटरͧशप, एडवांèड ĤोडÈशन और इमͧस[व-टेक 
इंĥाèĚÈचर तक एÈसेस और Èयूरेटेड इÛवेèटर ͧलंकेज Ĥदान करता है। 
‘वेåस सͧमट 2025’ मɅ, इस पहल के अंतग[त माइĐोसॉÝट तथा यूǓनकॉन[ इंͫडया वɅचस[ जैसे 
Ǔनवेशकɉ के सम¢ 30 èटाट[-अÜस को ͪपͬचंग का अवसर Ĥदान ͩकया गया तथा 100 से 
अͬधक èटाट[-अÜस को Ĥदश[नी èथान उपलÞध कराया गया। 
वेवएÈस इनÈयूबेशन टȣ-हब तथा आईआईसीटȣ क े  साथ साझेदाǐरयɉ के माÚयम से, सरकारȣ 
Ĥायोͬगक पǐरयोजनाओं, ‘भाषासेतु’ जैसी नवाचार चुनौǓतयɉ तथा आईएफएफआई जैसे मंचɉ के 
773                                                      

माÚयम से ͪवæवåयापी संपक[ मɅ सहयोग करता है, िजससे èटाट[-अÜस को ͪवदेशी Ǔनवेश ĤाÜत 
करने तथा भारतीय आईपी को अंतरराçĚȣय èतर पर माÛयता Ǒदलाने मɅ सहायता ͧमलती है। 
3. ͩĐएटोèफȧयरः ‘ͩĐएट इन इंͫडया’ के अंतग[त ĤǓतभा-खोज पहल के माÚयम से एनीमेशन,
गेͧमंग, वेबटून तथा ͫडिजटल èटोरȣटेͧलंग के ¢ेğɉ मɅ ĤǓतवष[ 30 से 35 राçĚȣय ĤǓतयोͬगताओं
का आयोजन ͩकया जाता है। यह पहल नए ͩĐएटरɉ को मɅटरͧशप, इनÈयूबेशन तथा उɮयोग
अवसरɉ से जोड़कर उनके ͪवकास को Ĥो×साǑहत करती है।
***** 
774                                                      

भारत सरकार 
सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğालय 
राÏ य सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2322 
(Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उ× तर देने क े ͧलए) 
ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफ़ॉम[ कȧ सामĒी पर अǓनवाय[ पूव[-Ĥमाणीकरण जांच 
2322. Įी एस. Ǔनरंजन रेɬडीः 
Èया सूचना और Ĥसारण मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩकः 
(क) Èया सरकार इस बात से अवगत है ͩक ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफ़ॉमɟ कȧ सामĒी पर कमजोर 
Ǔनयामक जांच के कारण नाबाͧलग हाǓनकारक सामĒी के ĤǓत संवेदनशील हो जाते हɇ; 
(ख)  Èया सरकार ओटȣटȣ सामĒी पर भी अǓनवाय[ प ूव[-Ĥमाणीकरण जांच लाग ू करने कȧ 
योजना बना रहȣ है, जैसा ͩक चलͬचğ अͬधǓनयम के तहत ͩफãमɉ के ͧलए अǓनवाय[ 
है ; ़़
(ग)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके  Èया कारण हɇ? 
उƣर 
सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं संसदȣय काय[ राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. एल. मुǾगन) 
(क) से (ग): सरकार ने सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ अͬधǓनयम, 2000 क े अंतग[त ͫडिजटल मीͫडया पर 
समाचार एवं समसामǓयक ͪवषयɉ के Ĥकाशकɉ तथा ऑनलाइन सृिजत सामĒी के  Ĥकाशकɉ 
(ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ) के  ͧलए एक संèथागत तंğ èथाͪपत करने के उɮदेæय से Ǒदनांक 
25.02.2021 को सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ (मÚयवतȸ ǑदशाǓनदȶश तथा ͫडिजटल मीͫडया आचार 
संǑहता) Ǔनयम, 2021 अͬधसूͬचत ͩकए हɇ। 
़़
़
 और
775                                                      

इन Ǔनयमɉ का भाग–III ͫडिजटल समाचार Ĥकाशकɉ तथा ऑनलाइन सृिजत सामĒी के Ĥकाशकɉ 
(ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ) के ͧलए आचार संǑहता का Ĥावधान करता है। आचार संǑहता के अनुसार, 
ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ पर यह दाǓय×व है ͩक वे ͩकसी भी ऐसी सामĒी का Ĥसारण न करɅ, जो 
वत[मान मɅ लागू ͩकसी भी कानून के अंतग[त Ǔनͪषɮध हो। 
Üलेटफॉमɟ के ͧलए आवæयक है ͩक वे सामĒी का आयु-आधाǐरत वगȸकरण करɅ तथा पया[Üत 
एÈसेस Ǔनयंğण उपायɉ का उपयोग करते हुए बÍचɉ के ͧलए आयु-अनुपयुÈत सामĒी को 
ĤǓतबंͬधत करɅ। 
ये Ǔनयम Ǔनàनानुसार तीन-èतरȣय ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण तंğ का भी Ĥावधान करते हɇ: 
 èतर– I: Ĥकाशकɉ ɮवारा èव-ͪवǓनयमन 
 èतर– II: Ĥकाशकɉ के  èव-ͪवǓनयामक Ǔनकायɉ ɮवारा èव-ͪवǓनयमन 
 èतर– III: कɅġ सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनगरानी तंğ 
आचार संǑहता के उãलंघन से संबंͬधत ͧशकायतɉ का Ǔनवारण तीन-èतरȣय ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण 
तंğ के Ĥावधानɉ के अंतग[त ͩकया जाता है तथा मंğालय को ĤाÜत ͧशकायतɉ को सूचना 
Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ǔनयम, 2021 के अनुसार समाधान हेतु संबंͬधत ओटȣटȣ Üलेटफॉमɟ को अĒेͪषत 
ͩकया जाता है। 
सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ अͬधǓनयम, 2000 कȧ धारा 79(3)(ख) के अंतग[त मÚयèथɉ को अवैध 
सामĒी को हटाने अथवा उस तक पहुंच ǓनिçĐय करने के ͧलए अͬधसूचना जारȣ करने का 
Ĥावधान है।  
सरकार ने अæलȣल सामĒी Ǒदखाने के  कारण भारत मɅ साव[जǓनक पहुंच हेतु 43 ओटȣटȣ 
Üलेटफॉमɟ को ǓनिçĐय कर Ǒदया है। 
***** 
 
776                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2323 का उƣर 
 
भारतीय रेल मɅ कवच कȧ èथापना कȧ ĤगǓत 
 
2323. Įी बाबू राम Ǔनषाद: 
Įी मदन राठौड़: 
Įीमती ͩकरण चौधरȣ: 
Įी बृज लाल: 
Įीमती माया नारोͧलया: 
डा. परमार जशवंतͧसंह सालमͧसंह: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) कवच èवचाͧलत Ěेन सुर¢ा Ĥणालȣ कȧ èथापना कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत Èया है, आज कȧ Ǔतͬथ 
तक कुल ͩकतने ͩकलोमीटर रेलमाग[ पर यह Ĥणालȣ èथाͪपत कȧ गई है, त×संबंधी जोन-वार 
Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) वत[मान मɅ ͩकतने èटेशन इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ से संचाͧलत हो रहे हɇ और ͪपछले 
दो वषȾ मɅ इसमɅ ͩकतनी वृɮͬध हुई है; 
(ग) ͪपछले दो ͪवƣ वषɟ के दौरान कुल ͩकतने ͩकलोमीटर रेलमाग[ को èवचाͧलत Þलॉक 
ͧसÊनͧलंग के अंतग[त शाͧमल ͩकया गया है और वष[ 2025-26 के ͧलए Èया लêय Ǔनधा[ǐरत 
ͩकए गए हɇ; और 
(घ) ͪपछले दो वषɟ के दौरान कवच, इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग और èवचाͧलत ͧसÊनͧलंग Ĥणालȣ 
सǑहत ͩकए गए ͧसÊनͧलंग आधुǓनकȧकरण का Þयौरा Èया है, और इसके ͧलए ͩकतनी Ǔनͬध 
आवंǑटत और उपयोग कȧ गई है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ):1. कवच एक èवदेशी ͪवकͧसत èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा Ĥणालȣ (एटȣपी) है। कवच 
अ×यͬधक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसक े ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन 
(एसआईएल-4) कȧ आवæयकता होती है। 
777                                                      

2. यǑद लोको पायलट Ħेक लगाने मɅ ͪवफल रहता है तो कवच èवचाͧलत Ħेक लगाकर लोको 
पायलट को ǓनǑद[çट गǓत सीमा के  भीतर रेलगाड़ी चलाने मɅ सहायता करता है और यह खराब 
मौसम के दौरान रेलगाड़ी को सुरͯ¢त ढंग से चलाने मɅ भी सहायता करता है। 
3. याğी गाͫड़यɉ पर पहला फȧãड परȣ¢ण फरवरȣ 2016 मɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया था। इस Ĥकार ĤाÜत 
अनुभव और तीसरे प¢ (Ǔनçप¢ संर¢ा मूãयांकनकता[: आईएसए) ɮवारा Ĥणालȣ के Ǔनçप¢ 
संर¢ा मूãयांकन के आधार पर, कवच संèकरण 3.2 कȧ आपूǓत[ के ͧलए 2018-19 मɅ तीन 
फमɟ को अनुमोǑदत ͩकया गया था। 
4. कवच को जुलाई 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय एटȣपी Ĥणालȣ के Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया। 
5. कवच Ĥणालȣ के काया[Ûवयन मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[कलाप शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
i. Ĥ×येक èटेशन, Þलॉक खÖड पर èटेशन कवच का संèथापन। 
ii. पूरे रेलपथ कȧ लंबाई मɅ आरएफआईडी टैग का संèथापन। 
iii. समĒ खंड मɅ दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन। 
iv. रेलपथ के समानांतर ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना। 
v. भारतीय रेल पर चल रहे Ĥ×येक रेल इंजन पर लोको कवच का Ĥावधान।  
6. दͯ¢ण मÚय रेल के 1465 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच संèकरण 3.2 के संèथापन और ĤाÜत 
अनुभव के आधार पर आगे और सुधार ͩकए गए। अंततः आरडीएसओ ɮवारा Ǒदनांक 
16.07.2024 को कवच ͪवͧशिçट संèकरण 4.0 को अनुमोǑदत ͩकया गया। 
7. कवच संèकरण 4.0 मɅ ͪवͪवध रेल नेटवक[ के ͧलए अपेͯ¢त सभी Ĥमुख ͪवशेषताएं शाͧमल हɇ। 
यह भारतीय रेल कȧ संर¢ा मɅ एक मह×वपूण[ उपलिÞध है। अãप अवͬध के भीतर, भारतीय रेल 
ने èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ण Ĥणालȣ ͪवकͧसत कȧ, परȣ¢ण ͩकया गया और उसे संèथाͪपत 
करना शुǾ कर Ǒदया है। 
8. कवच संèकरण 4.0 मɅ ͩकए गए Ĥमुख सुधारɉ मɅ अविèथǓत सटȣकता मɅ वृɮͬध, बड़े याडɟ मɅ 
ͧसगनल संबंधी पहलुओं कȧ बेहतर जानकारȣ, ओएफसी पर èटेशन-से-èटेशन कवच इंटरफ़ े स 
और मौजूदा इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ से सीधा इंटरफ़ े स शाͧमल है। इन सुधारɉ के साथ, 
कवच संèकरण 4.0 को भारतीय रेल मɅ बड़े पैमाने पर लागू करने कȧ योजना है।  
9. ͪवèतृत एवं åयापक परȣ¢णɉ के उपरांत, कवच संèकरण 4.0 को Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई माग[ पर 
पलवल–मथुरा–नागदा रेलखंड (633 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) तथा Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा माग[ पर हावड़ा–बद[वान 
रेलखंड (105 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) सǑहत कुल 738 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर सफलतापूव[क कमीशन 
कर Ǒदया गया है। Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई एवं Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ के शेष रेलखंडɉ पर कवच के 
काया[Ûवयन का काय[ ĤगǓत पर है।   
 
778                                                      

10. Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ सǑहत उÍच घन×व वाले मागɟ पर कवच के Ĥमुख 
मदɉ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
Đ.सं. मदɅ ĤगǓत 
i ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना 7129 ͩक.मी. 
ii दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन 860 अदद 
iii èटेशन डेटा सɅटर 767 èटेशन 
iv रेलपथ साइड उपकरणɉ का संèथापन 5672 माग[ ͩक.मी. 
v रेलइंजनɉ मɅ कवच का Ĥावधान 4,154 
 
11.  इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल के सभी जीÈयू, जीडी, एचडीएन और ͬचिéनत रेलखंडɉ को कवर 
करते हुए 15,512 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच के रेलपथ साइड कायɟ का काया[Ûवयन Ĥारंभ 
ͩकया गया है। 
12. कवच संèकरण 4.0 से अǓतǐरÈत 9,069 रेल इंजनɉ को सुसिÏजत करने हेतु बोͧलंयां आमंǒğत 
कȧ गई हɇ। रेल इंजनɉ मɅ Ǔनरंतर चरणबɮध तरȣके से कवच कȧ åयवèथा कȧ जा रहȣ है।    
13. भारतीय रेल के कɅ ġȣकृत Ĥͧश¢ण संèथानɉ मɅ कवच पर सभी संबंͬधत अͬधकाǐरयɉ को 
Ĥͧश¢ण देने के ͧलए ͪवशेष Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए जा रहे हɇ। अब तक 40,000 से 
अͬधक तकनीͧशयनɉ, ऑपरेटरɉ और इंजीǓनयरɉ को कवच Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ के  ͪवषय पर Ĥͧशͯ¢त 
ͩकया जा चुका है। इसमɅ 33,000 लोको पायलट एवं सहायक लोको पायलट सिàमͧलत हɇ। यह 
पाɫयĐम इǐरसेट के सहयोग से तैयार ͩकया गया है। 
14. अÈटूबर 2025 तक ‘कवच’ Ĥणालȣ से संबंͬधत कायɟ पर कुल 2,354.36 करोड़ ǽपए åयय 
ͩकए गए हɇ। वष[ 2025–26 के दौरान कुल ₹1673.19 करोड़ राͧश का आवंटन हुआ है। कायɟ 
कȧ ĤगǓत के अनुǾप अपेͯ¢त पूंजी उपलÞध कराई जाती है। 
15. 30.11.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार पुरानी यांǒğक ͧसगनल Ĥणालȣ के èथान पर पॉइंɪस और 
ͧसगनलɉ के कɅ ġȣकृत Ĥचालन के साथ इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग ͧसèटम 3830 èटेशनɉ पर 
èथाͪपत ͩकए गए हɇ। इसमɅ ͪपछले दो वषɟ मɅ 817 èटेशनɉ पर इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग कȧ 
कमीशǓनंग शाͧमल है। 
16. मौजूदा रेलपथ अवसंरचना के भीतर लाइन ¢मता बढ़ाने के ͧलए, 30.11.2025 तक èवचाͧलत 
Þलॉक ͧसगनल åयवèथा 6559 माग[ ͩक.मी. पर तक Ĥदान कȧ गई है। इसमɅ ͪपछले दो वषɟ 
मɅ 1959 माग[ ͩक.मी. कȧ èवचाͧलत Þलॉक ͧसगनल को कमीशन करना शाͧमल है। 
17. वष[ 2025-26 के दौरान, ͧसगनल और दूरसंचार से संबंͬधत कायɟ के  ͧलए 6800 करोड़ ǽपए 
आवंǑटत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजनमɅ से नवंबर 2025 तक 4050.62 करोड़ ǽपये खच[ हो चुके हɇ। 
 
***** 
 
779                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2324 का उƣर 
 
एबीएसएस के अंतग[त जàमू तवी रेलवे èटेशन का आधुǓनकȧकरण 
 
2324. Įी सत पाल शमा[: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना (एबीएसएस) के अंतग[त जàमू तवी रेलवे èटेशन के ͪवकास और 
आधुǓनकȧकरण कायɟ कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत Èया है, और पǐरयोजना पूण[ होने कȧ अपेͯ¢त 
समय-सीमा Èया है; 
(ख) èवचाͧलत सीǑढ़यɉ, ͧलÝट और वाई-फाई उपलÞधता सǑहत èटेशन पर सुͪवधाओं और 
अवसंरचना को बेहतर बनाने के ͧलए कौन-कौन से कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ; और 
(ग) नई Ěेनɉ और मागɟ कȧ शुǽआत सǑहत जàमू तवी रेलवे èटेशन से Ĥमुख शहरɉ के ͧलए 
संपक[ मɅ सुधार और Ěेनɉ कȧ आवृͪƣ बढ़ाने कȧ Èया योजनाएं हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग):  जàमू और कæमीर मɅ िèथत जàमू-तवी रेलवे èटेशन को अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना 
के अÛतग[त पुनͪव[कास हेतु ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है।  
 
जàमू तवी èटेशन के पुनͪव[कास का काय[ तेज गǓत से शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। दूसरे Ĥवेश ɮवार पर 
èटेशन भवन, राजकȧय रेलवे पुͧलस भवन और कटरा छोर पर 12 मीटर पैदल पार पुल का काय[ 
पूरा ͩकया जा चुका है। कटरा छोर पर ओवर ǒĦज का काय[ पूरा हो गया है। Üलेटफॉम[ संÉया 4/5 
और 6/7, 72 मीटर एयर कॉनकोस[, दूसरे Ĥवेश ɮवार कȧ ओर ͪवकास काय[ और Ǒदãलȣ छोर पर 
12 मीटर पैदल पार पुल का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
780                                                      

अमृत भारत योजना मɅ दȣघ[काͧलक Ǻिçटकोण से Ǔनरंतर आधार पर èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास कȧ 
पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है। इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए माèटर योजना तैयार करना 
और उनका चरणबɮध काया[Ûवयन शाͧमल है। Ĥ×येक èटेशन कȧ आवæयकता को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए 
इस माèटर योजना मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[ शाͧमल ͩकए गए हɇ: 
 
 èटेशन और पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ तक पहुंच मɅ सुधार,  
 èटेशन का शहर के दोनɉ भागɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार,  
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा, पेयजल बूथɉ मɅ सुधार,  
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पुल/एयर कॉनकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
 ͧलÝट/èवचाͧलत सीǑढ़यɉ/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
 Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह और Üलेटफॉम[ पर कवर मɅ सुधार/Ĥावधान 
 ‘एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद’ जैसी योजनाओं के माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए ͩकयोèक 
का Ĥावधान,  
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, यातायात के ͪवͧभÛन साधनɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएं,  
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
 एÈजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, åयावसाǓयक बैठकɉ के ͧलए नाͧमत èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग आǑद का 
Ĥावधान 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध Ǿप से एवं यथा åयवहाय[ दȣघ[काͧलक और पया[वरण 
अनुकूल समाधान, ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत पटǐरयɉ का Ĥावधान आǑद और दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ 
सेÛटरɉ के Ǔनमा[ण कȧ भी पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है। 
 
अभी तक, अमृत भारत योजना के अंतग[त ͪवकͧसत करने हेतु 1,337 èटेशनɉ को ͬचिéनत ͩकया 
गया है। इनमɅ से जàमू तवी, बडगाम, Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा और शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन 
समेत 04 èटेशन जàमू और कæमीर मɅ िèथत है।   
 
जàमू और कæमीर मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अÛतग[त èटेशनɉ पर ͪवकास का काय[ तेज 
गǓत से शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। कुछ èटेशनɉ पर काय[ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
  
 बडगाम èटेशन: पǐरचलन ¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग और पहुंच मागɟ के सुधार के काय[ पूरे ͩकए जा चुके 
हɇ। Ĥांगण, Üलेटफाम[ सतह, Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर, Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, Ǒटकट बुͩकंग काया[लय, 
याğी आर¢ण Ĥणालȣ काया[लय, एÊजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, ͪवĮाम क¢, ͧलÝट और 12 मीटर 
पैदल पार पुल संबंधी काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
781                                                      

 शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन èटेशन: èटेशन भवन, Ĥांगण, Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, पǐरचलन 
¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग, पहुंच माग[, Ĥकाश åयवèथा और संकेतक आǑद मɅ सुधार काय[ पूरे ͩकए जा 
चुके हɇ। Ĥवेश/Ǔनकास ɮवार, Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर और Üलेटफॉम[ संÉया 4/5 पर Üलेटफॉम[ सतह, 
ͧलÝटɉ, एèकेलेटरɉ और 6 मीटर पैदल पार पुल के काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
  
भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन एक सतत् और Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस 
संबंध मɅ कायɟ कȧ पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन, 
आवæयकतानुसार काय[ शुǾ ͩकए जाते हɇ। èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण 
कायɟ को èवीकृǓत देने और Ǔनçपादन के समय Ǔनचलȣ कोǑट के èटेशनɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ उÍचतर 
कोǑट के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। 
 
इसके अलावा, रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ 
और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए अिÊनशमन संबंधी मंजूरȣ, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ 
कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन èवीकृǓत इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती 
है। इनकȧ ĤगǓत जनोपयोगी सेवाओं (िजनमɅ जल/सीवेज लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल, गैस पाइप 
लाइन, पावर/ͧसगनल केवल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ) को èथानांतǐरत करना, अǓतलंघन, याğी आवागमन 
को बाͬधत ͩकए ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के Ǔनकट ͩकए जाने 
वाले कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद के कारण भी Ĥभाͪवत होती है और ये कारक काय[ के 
समापन समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ।   
 
भारतीय रेल के लगभग सभी रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर दूरसंचार सेवा Ĥदाताओं ɮवारा 4जी/5जी सेवा 
उपलÞध कराई गई है। इन नेटवकɟ का उपयोग याğी डेटा कनेिÈटͪवटȣ हेतु ͩकया जा रहा हɇ, िजससे 
याğी अनुभव बेहतर हुआ है। इसके अलावा, जàमू तवी रेलवे èटेशन समेत भारतीय रेल के 6117 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर Ǔनःशुãक वाई-फाई सेवाएँ उपलÞध कराई गई हɇ। 
 
जàमू तवी रेलवे èटेशन Ǒदãलȣ, मुंबई, कोलकाता, चेÛनई, अहमदाबाद, गुवाहाटȣ, पटना आǑद जैसे 
मह×वपूण[ गंतåयɉ के साथ संपक[ता Ĥदान करने वालȣ 110 रेल सेवाओं ɮवारा सेͪवत है।  
 
जàमू तवी-Ǒदãलȣ खंड को सेͪवत करने वालȣ गाͫड़यां : 
 
Đ.सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  16317/16318 कÛयाकुमारȣ-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा एÈसĤेस 
2.  16787/16788 Ǔतǽनेलवलȣ–Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा एÈसĤेस 
3.  11449/11450 जबलपुर–Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा एÈसĤेस 
782                                                      

4.  19803/19804 कोटा–Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा एÈसĤेस 
5.  16031/16032 पुरɪͬच तलैवर डॉ. एम.जी. रामचंġन (चेÛनै) सɅĚल–Įी माता वैçणो देवी 
कटरा  अÖडमान एÈसĤेस 
6.  22461/22462 नई Ǒदãलȣ-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा Įी शिÈत एÈसĤेस 
7.  20847/20848 दुग[–शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन एÈसĤेस 
8.  12549/12550 दुग[–शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन एÈसĤेस 
9.  22705/22706 ǓतǽपǓत–जàमू तवी हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
10.  12751/12752 हज़ूर साǑहब नाÛदेड–जàमू तवी एÈसĤेस 
11.  22477/22478 नई Ǒदãलȣ–Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा  वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
12.  12919/12920 डॉ० अàबेडकर नगर (इंदौर)–Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा  मालवा 
एÈसĤेस 
13.  12471/12472 बांġा (टͧम[नल)–Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा  èवराज एÈसĤेस 
14.  12473/12474 गांधीधाम–Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा सवȾदय एÈसĤेस 
15.  12477/12478 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–जामनगर एÈसĤेस 
16.  12475/12476 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–हापा सवȾदय एÈसĤेस 
17.  22941/22942 शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन–इंदौर एÈसĤेस 
18.  18101/18102 जàमू तवी–टाटानगर एÈसĤेस 
19.  18309/18310 जàमू तवी–संबलपुर एÈसĤेस 
20.  22439/22440 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–नई Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
21.  20433/20434 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–सूबेदारगंज जàमू मेल 
22.  12413/12414 जàमू तवी–अजमेर एÈसĤेस 
23.  12265/12266 जàमू तवी–Ǒदãलȣ सराय रोǑहãला दूरÛतो एÈसĤेस 
24.  22401/22402 शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन–Ǒदãलȣ सराय रोǑहãला एसी एÈसĤेस 
25.  20985/20986 शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन–कोटा एÈसĤेस 
26.  12425/12426 जàमू तवी–नई Ǒदãलȣ राजधानी एÈसĤेस 
783                                                      

27.  12445/12446 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–नई Ǒदãलȣ उƣर संपक[ ĐांǓत एÈसĤेस 
28.  14661/14662 जàमू तवी–बाड़मेर शाͧलमार मलानी एÈसĤेस 
29.  11077/11078 जàमू तवी–पुणे झेलम एÈसĤेस 
 
जàमू तवी-कोलकाता खंड को सेͪवत करने वालȣ गाͫड़यां: 
 
Đ.सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  22317/22318 ͧसयालदह-जàमू तवी हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
2.  13151/13152 कोलकाता-जàमू तवी एÈसĤेस 
3.  12331/12332 हावड़ा-जàमू तवी Ǒहमͬगरȣ एÈसĤेस 
 
जàमू तवी-मुंबई खंड को सेͪवत करने वालȣ गाͫड़यां: 
 
Đ.सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  19027/19028 बांġा (टͧम[नल)-जàमू तवी ͪववेक एÈसĤेस 
2.  12471/12472 बांġा (टͧम[नल)-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा èवराज एÈसĤेस 
 
जàमू तवी-चेÛनै खंड को सेͪवत करने वालȣ गाͫड़यां: 
 
Đ.सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  16031/16032 डॉ. एम.जी. रामचंġन चेÛनै सɅĚल-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा अÖडमान 
एÈसĤेस 
 
जàमू तवी-अहमदाबाद खंड को सेͪवत करने वालȣ गाͫड़यां : 
 
Đ.सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  19027/19028 जàमू तवी–बांġा (टͧम[नल) जàमू तवी एÈसĤेस 
2.  19223/19224 जàमू तवी–साबरमती एÈसĤेस 
3.  12477/12478 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–जामनगर एÈसĤेस 
4.  12473/12474 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–गांधीधाम सवȾदय एÈसĤेस 
5.  12475/12476 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–हापा सवȾदय एÈसĤेस 
6.  19415/19416 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा–साबरमती एÈसĤेस 
784                                                      

 
 
इसके अलावा, नई रेल सेवाऐं शुǾ करना एक सतत ĤͩĐया है जो ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता 
है। इनमɅ शाͧमल हɇ- 
1. उस खंड कȧ ¢मता 
2. पथ कȧ उपलÞधता 
3. अपेͯ¢त चल èटॉक कȧ उपलÞधता 
4. चल èटॉक के ͧलए उपयुÈत अवसंरचना उपलÞधता 
5. रेलवे पटǐरयɉ और अÛय पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के अनुर¢ण कȧ आवæयकता 
 
***** 
785                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2325 का उƣर 
 
जàमू रेलवे èटेशन का उÛनयन 
 
2325. Įी सत पाल शमा[: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) जàमू रेलवे èटेशन के  उÛनयन कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत Èया है, और इस पǐरयोजना के  अंतग[त 
ͩकन-ͩकन घटकɉ को èवीकृǓत Ĥदान कȧ गई है; 
(ख) Èया रेलवे ने उÛनयन कायɟ कȧ योजना, Ǔनͪवदा और Ǔनçपादन से संबंͬधत ĤͩĐयाएं आरंभ 
कर दȣ हɇ या पूण[ कर लȣ हɇ, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) Èया जàमू रेलवे èटेशन के अंदर या आसपास ͩकसी रेलवे भूͧम पर अǓतĐमण ͩकया गया 
है; 
(घ) यǑद हां, तो ऐसी भूͧम का कुल ¢ेğफल ͩकतना है, इसमɅ शाͧमल åयिÈतयɉ या संèथाओं कȧ 
संÉया ͩकतनी है और अǓतĐमण हटाने के ͧलए रेलवे ɮवारा Èया कार[वाई कȧ गई या 
Ĥèताͪवत है; और 
(ङ) Èया ऐसे अǓतĐमणɉ के  कारण उÛनयन मɅ देरȣ हो रहȣ है, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया 
है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ङ):  जàमू और कæमीर मɅ िèथत जàमू-तवी रेलवे èटेशन को अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना 
के अÛतग[त पुनͪव[कास हेतु ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है।  
 
जàमू-तवी èटेशन के पुनͪव[कास का काय[ तेज गǓत से शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। दूसरे Ĥवेश ɮवार पर 
èटेशन भवन, राजकȧय रेलवे पुͧलस भवन और कटरा छोर पर 12 मीटर पैदल पार पुल का काय[ 
पूरा ͩकया जा चुका है। Üलेटफॉम[ संÉया 4/5 और 6/7, 72 मीटर एयर कॉनकोस[, दूसरे Ĥवेश ɮवार 
कȧ ओर ͪवकास काय[ और Ǒदãलȣ छोर पर 12 मीटर पैदल पार पुल का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
786                                                      

अमृत भारत योजना मɅ दȣघ[काͧलक Ǻिçटकोण से Ǔनरंतर आधार पर èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास कȧ 
पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है। इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए माèटर योजना तैयार करना 
और उनका चरणबɮध काया[Ûवयन शाͧमल है। Ĥ×येक èटेशन कȧ आवæयकता को Úयान मɅ रखते 
हुए इस माèटर योजना मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[ शाͧमल ͩकए गए हɇ: 
 
 èटेशन और पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ तक पहुंच मɅ सुधार,  
 èटेशन का शहर के दोनɉ भागɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार,  
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा, पेयजल बूथɉ मɅ सुधार,  
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पुल/एयर कॉनकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
 ͧलÝट/èवचाͧलत सीǑढ़यɉ/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
 Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह और Üलेटफॉम[ पर कवर मɅ सुधार/Ĥावधान 
 ‘एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद’ जैसी योजनाओं के माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए ͩकयोèक 
का Ĥावधान,  
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, यातायात के ͪवͧभÛन साधनɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएं,  
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
 एÈजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, åयावसाǓयक बैठकɉ के ͧलए नाͧमत èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग आǑद का 
Ĥावधान 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध Ǿप से एवं यथा åयवहाय[ दȣघ[काͧलक और पया[वरण 
अनुकूल समाधान, ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत पटǐरयɉ का Ĥावधान आǑद और दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ 
सेÛटरɉ के Ǔनमा[ण कȧ भी पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है। 
 
अभी तक, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त ͪवकͧसत करने हेतु 1,337 èटेशनɉ को ͬचिéनत 
ͩकया गया है। इनमɅ से जàमू तवी, बडगाम, Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा और शहȣद कैपटन तुषार 
महाजन रेलवे èटेशन समेत 04 èटेशन जàमू और कæमीर मɅ िèथत है।  
  
जàमू और कæमीर मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अÛतग[त èटेशनɉ पर ͪवकास का काय[ तेज 
गǓत से शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। कुछ èटेशनɉ पर काय[ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है:  
 
 बडगाम èटेशन: पǐरचलन ¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग और पहुंच मागɟ के सुधार के काय[ पूरे ͩकए जा चुके 
हɇ। Ĥांगण, Üलेटफाम[ सतह, Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर, Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, Ǒटकट बुͩकंग काया[लय, 
याğी आर¢ण Ĥणालȣ काया[लय, एÊजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, ͪवĮाम क¢, ͧलÝट और 12 मीटर 
पैदल पार पुल संबंधी काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
787                                                      

 शहȣद कैÜटन तुषार महाजन èटेशन: èटेशन भवन, गͧलयारा, Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, पǐरचलन 
¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग, पहुंच माग[, Ĥकाश åयवèथा और संकेतक आǑद मɅ सुधार काय[ पूरे ͩकए जा 
चुके हɇ। Ĥवेश/Ǔनकास ɮवार, Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर और Üलेटफॉम[ संÉया 4/5 पर Üलेटफॉम[ सतह, 
ͧलÝटɉ, एèकेलेटरɉ और 6 मीटर पैदल पार पुल के काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
  
भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन एक सतत् और Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस 
संबंध मɅ कायɟ कȧ पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन, 
आवæयकतानुसार काय[ शुǾ ͩकए जाते हɇ। èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/ पुनͪव[कास/ उÛनयन/ आधुǓनकȧकरण 
कायɟ को èवीकृǓत देने और Ǔनçपादन के समय Ǔनचलȣ कोǑट के èटेशनɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ उÍचतर 
कोǑट के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। 
 
इसके अलावा, रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ 
और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए अिÊनशमन संबंधी मंजूरȣ, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ 
कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन èवीकृǓत इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती 
है। इनकȧ ĤगǓत जनोपयोगी सेवाओं (िजनमɅ जल/सीवेज लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल, गैस पाइप 
लाइन, पावर/ͧसगनल केवल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ) को èथानांतǐरत करना, अǓतलंघन, याğी आवागमन 
को बाͬधत ͩकए ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के Ǔनकट ͩकए जाने 
वाले कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद के कारण भी Ĥभाͪवत होती है और ये कारक काय[ के 
समापन समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ।   
 
जàमू तवी रेलवे èटेशन के पǐरसर तथा आसपास लगभग 2 हेÈटेयर भूͧम पर लंबे समय से 
अǓतĐमण है। भारतीय रेल ɮवारा रेलवे भूͧम से अनͬधकृत कÞजाधाǐरयɉ को हटाने हेतु कार[वाई कȧ 
गई है। वत[मान मɅ, सभी मामले या तो पी.पी.ई. अͬधǓनयम के अंतग[त हɇ या ͧसͪवल Ûयायालय मɅ 
ͪवचाराधीन हɇ। बहरहाल, जàमू तवी रेलवे èटेशन के पुनͪव[कास काय[ पर इन अǓतĐमणɉ का कोई 
Ĥभाव नहȣं पड़ा है। 
 
***** 
788                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2326 का उƣर 
 
रेलवे खानपान कम[चाǐरयɉ ɮवारा अͬधक शुãक वसूलȣ 
 
2326. डा. के. लêमण: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) Èया रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ, खाɮय पदाथɟ और पेय पदाथɟ, जैसे बोतलबंद पानी, को अनुमोǑदत 
कȧमतɉ पर न बेचने के मामलɉ सǑहत, खानपान कम[चाǐरयɉ ɮवारा अͬधक शुãक वसूलने के 
संबंध मɅ ͧशकायतɅ ĤाÜत हुई हɇ; 
(ख) यǑद हां, तो ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान दज[ ͧशकायतɉ कȧ वष[-वार संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(ग) जुमा[ना, Ǔनलंबन या कालȣ सूची मɅ डालने सǑहत दोषी ͪवĐेताओं के ͪवǾɮध Èया कार[वाई कȧ 
गई है; और 
(घ) अनुमोǑदत दरɉ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करने और याǒğयɉ को अͬधक शुãक वसूलȣ से 
बचाने के ͧलए मंğालय और आईआरसीटȣसी ɮवारा कौन-कौन से कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): भारतीय रेल Ĥ×येक वष[ औसतन लगभग 58 करोड़ भोजन परोसती है। औसतन केवल 
0.0008% ͧशकायतɅ ĤाÜत होती हɇ। ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान, इन ͧशकायतɉ कȧ जांच के आधार 
पर 2.6 करोड़ ǽपए का जुमा[ना लगाया गया है। 
 
भारतीय रेल पर याǒğयɉ कȧ ĤǓतͩĐया ĤाÜ त करने के पæ चात् ͧशकायत Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ को ͪपछले 
कुछ वषɟ मɅ रेलमदद पोट[ल के माÚ यम से सुǺढ़, सरलȣकृत और अͬधक सुलभ बनाया गया है। 
रेलमदद पोट[ल शुǾ होने से भारतीय रेल ने याǒğयɉ कȧ ͧशकायतɅ और सुझाव ĤाÜ त करने के  ͧलए 
एक एकल ͪवंडो Ĥणालȣ कȧ å यवè था कȧ है। 
   
789                                                      

भारतीय रेल याǒğयɉ को Ǔनधा[ǐरत दरɉ के अनुसार भोजन सामĒी उपलÞध कराने का Ǔनरंतर Ĥयास 
करती है। तदनुसार, भारतीय रेल इसे सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए समय-समय पर आवæयक कदम 
उठाती रहती है। रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ अͬधक Ĥभार को रोकने के ͧलए रेलवे ɮवारा Ǔनàनͧलͨखत कदम 
उठाए गए हɇ: 
 
1. याǒğयɉ को दर संबंधी जानकारȣ से अवगत कराने के ͧलए मेÛयू और टैǐरफ के ͧलंक के साथ 
एसएमएस। 
2. ǒबल और नकदȣ रǑहत भुगतान के ͧलए Üवाइंट ऑफ सेल (पीओएस) मशीनɉ कȧ èथापना। 
3. ǒबͧलंग को बढ़ावा देने और अͬधक Ĥभार को Ǔनयंǒğत करने के ͧलए जागǾकता अͧभयान 
चलाना। 
4. पैकबंद पेय जल बकेɪस और चाय/कॉफȧ कȧ केतͧलयɉ पर मूãयदर के èटȣकर लगाना। 
5. ऑनलाइन मॉɬयूल के माÚयम से मेल/एÈसĤेस गाͫड़ यɉ मɅ याǒğयɉ को भोजन बुक करने कȧ 
सुͪवधा के ͧलए ई-पɅĚȣ सेवा कȧ शुǾआत।  
6. ऑनबोड[ खानपान कम[चाǐरयɉ को Èयूआर कोड स¢म पहचान पğ का काया[Ûवयन। 
7. खानपान मदɉ और रेल नीर कȧ पैकबंद पेयजल कȧ मूãय दर के बारे मɅ जागǾक करने के ͧलए 
पैàÝलेट का ͪवतरण। 
8. अͬधक Ĥभार वसूलने और ǒबͧलंग संबंधी मुɮदɉ को रोकने के ͧलए ͪवशेष Ǔनरȣ¢ण अͧभयान 
चलाना। 
9. अͬधक Ĥभार ͧलए जाने के मामलɉ मɅ उपयुÈत जुमा[ना, यǑद कोई हो, Ĥभाǐरत करना। 
 
****** 
790                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2327 का उƣर 
 
महाराçĚ मɅ एबीएसएस के अंतग[त रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास 
 
2327. Įी धनंजय भीमराव महाǑदक: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना (एबीएसएस) के उɮदेæय और काय[¢ेğ Èया हɇ और यह अÛय 
èटेशन पुनͪव[कास पहलɉ से ͩकस Ĥकार ͧभÛन है; 
(ख) महाराçĚ मɅ एबीएसएस और èटेशन पुनͪव[कास काय[Đम के अंतग[त ͬचिéनत रेलवे èटेशनɉ कȧ 
कुल संÉया ͩकतनी है और उनके नाम Èया-Èया हɇ; 
(ग) इन èटेशनɉ पर पुनͪव[कास काय[ कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत Èया है, और पǐरयोजना लागत, 
ठेकेदारɉ/एजɅͧसयɉ और अपेͯ¢त समय-सीमा संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(घ) इन èटेशनɉ पर उपलÞध कराई जा रहȣ याğी सुͪवधओं और अवसंरचना सुधार, जैसे Ǿफ 
Üलाजा, वेǑटंग लाउंज, ͧलÝट, èवचाͧलत सीǑढ़यɉ और ͫडिजटल ͫडèÜले बोडɟ का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ङ) ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान इस हेतु ͩकतनी धनराͧश आवंǑटत, जारȣ और उपयोग कȧ गई है; 
और 
(च) भूͧम अͬधĒहण संबंधी समèयाओं या समÛवय संबंधी चुनौǓतयɉ जैसी ͩकसी भी देरȣ को दूर 
करने के ͧलए कौन-कौन से उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (च): रेल मंğालय ने दȣघ[काͧलक Ǻिçटकोण के साथ èटेशनɉ के पुनͪव[कास के ͧलए अमृत 
भारत èटेशन योजना शुǾ कȧ है। 
 
इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए माèटर योजना तैयार करना और उनका चरणबɮध 
काया[Ûवयन शाͧमल है। इस माèटर योजना मɅ Ǔनàनानुसार शाͧमल हɇ: 
 èटेशन और पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ तक पहुंच मɅ सुधार,  
 èटेशन का शहर के दोनɉ भागɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
791                                                      

 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार,  
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा, पेयजल बूथɉ मɅ सुधार,  
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पुल/एयर कॉनकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
 ͧलÝट/èवचाͧलत सीǑढ़यɉ/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
 Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह और Üलेटफॉम[ पर कवर मɅ सुधार/Ĥावधान 
 ‘एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद’ जैसी योजनाओं के माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए ͩकयोèक का 
Ĥावधान,  
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, यातायात के ͪवͧभÛन साधनɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएं,  
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
 Ĥ×येक èटेशन पर आवæयकता को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए एÈजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, åयावसाǓयक 
बैठकɉ के ͧलए नाͧमत èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग आǑद का Ĥावधान 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकता, चरणबɮधता और åयवहाय[ता के अनुसार संधारणीय और पया[वरण 
अनुकूल समाधान ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत रेलपथ आǑद का Ĥावधान और दȣघ[काल मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ सɅटर के 
Ǔनमा[ण कȧ भी पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है। 
 
अब तक, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त 1337 èटेशनɉ को ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है, िजनमɅ 
से 132 èटेशन महाराçĚ मɅ िèथत हɇ। अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ 
ͪवकास के ͧलए ͬचिéनत ͩकए गए èटेशनɉ के नाम Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
राÏय अमृत èटेशनɉ 
कȧ संÉया अमृत èटेशनɉ के नाम 
महाराçĚ 132 अहमदनगर, अजनी (नागपुर), अÈकलकोट रोड़, अकोला, 
आकुडȸ, अमलनेर, आमगाँव, अमरावती, अंधेरȣ, बडनेरा, 
बãहारशाह, बांġा टͧम[नस, बारामती, बेलापुर, भंडारा रोड, 
भोकर, भुसावल, बोरȣवलȣ, भायखला, चालȣसगाँव, चांदा फोट[, 
चंġपुर, चनȸ रोड, छğपǓत संभाजी नगर, छğपǓत ͧशवाजी 
महाराज टͧम[नस, ͬचंचपोकलȣ, ͬचंचवाड, दादर (मÚय रेल), 
दादर (पिæचम रेल), दǑहसर, दɋड, देहु रोड, देवलालȣ, 
धामणगांव, धरणगांव, धाराͧशव, धमा[बाद, धुले, Ǒदवा, 
दुधनी, गंगाखेर, गोधानी, गɉǑदया, Ēांट रोड, हडपसर, 
हातकणंगले, हजूर साǑहब नाÛदेड, Ǒहमायत नगर, Ǒहंगनघाट, 
Ǒहंगोलȣ द Èकन, इगतपुरȣ, जलगाँव, जालना, जेऊर, 
जोगेæवरȣ, कãयाण जंÈशन, कामटȣ, कांǑदवलȣ, कंजुर माग[, 
कराड, काटोल, केडगाँव, ͩकनवट, कोपरगाँव, कुडु[वाडी 
जंÈशन, कुला[ जंÈशन, लासलगाँव, लातूर, लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक 
टͧम[नस, लोनंद जंÈशन, लोनावाला, लोअर परेल, मलाड जं., 
मलकापुर, मनमाड जं., मानवत रोड, मरȣन लाइÛस, माटुंगा, 
ͧमराज जंÈशन, मुदखेड़ जंÈशन, मुंबई सɅĚल, मुंĦा, 
792                                                      

मुǓत[जापुर, नागरसोल, नागपुर जं., नंदगाँव, नांदुरा, नंदुरबार, 
नरखेड़ जंÈशन, नाͧसक रोड, नेताजी सुभाष चंġ बोस 
इतवारȣ जंÈशन, पाचोरा जंÈशन, पालघर, पंढरपुर, पनवेल 
जंÈशन, परभणी जंÈशन, परेल, परलȣ वैजनाथ, परतूर, 
फलटाण, Ĥभादेवी, पुलगाँव जंÈशन, पुणे जंÈशन, पूणा[ 
जंÈशन, रावेर, रोटेगांव, साɃनगर ͧशडȸ, सɇडहèट[ रोड, 
सांगलȣ, सतारा, सावदा, सेलू, सेवाĒाम, शहाड, शेगांव, 
ͧशवाजी नगर पुणे, 
Įी छğपǓत शाहू महाराज टͧम[नस कोãहापुर, सोलापुर, 
तलेगांव, ठाकुलȹ, ठाणे, Ǒटटवाला, तुमसर रोड, उमरȣ, उǽलȣ, 
वडाला रोड, ͪवɮयाͪवहार, ͪवĐोलȣ, वडसा, वधा[, वाͧशम, 
वाठार 
 
अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के तहत महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर ͪवकास काय[ तेज गǓत से 
शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ अब तक 17 èटेशनɉ (आमगांव, बारामती, चांदा फोट[, 
ͬचंचपोकलȣ, देवलालȣ, धुले, केडगांव, लासलगांव, लोनंद जंÈशन, माटुंगा, मुǓत[जापुर जंÈशन, नंदुरा, 
नेताजी सुभाष चंġ बोस इतवारȣ जंÈशन, परेल, सावदा, शाहाद और वाडला रोड) का काय[ इस योजना 
के तहत पूरा हो चुका है। अÛय èटेशनɉ पर भी काय[ तेज गǓत से शुǾ ͩकए गए है और उपरोÈत मɅ 
से कुछ èटेशनɉ कȧ ĤगǓत इस Ǔनàनानुसार  है: 
 
 वाठार èटेशन: नए पोǑट[को, èटेशन भवन का सुधार, वाटर बूथ, नया मुÉय Ĥवेश ɮवार, पाͩकɍग 
¢ेğ, पǐरपथन ¢ेğ, Ĥवेश लॉबी का सुधार, पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ कȧ चाहरदȣवारȣ, Üलेटफॉम[ संÉया 1 पर 
Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर, Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह, Ĥती¢ालय का सुधार, संकेतक और èटेशन पर Ĥकाश कȧ 
åयवèथा काय[ पूरे कर ͧलए गए हɇ। ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[ शुǾ ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। 
 
 नंदगांव èटेशन: Ĥवेश और Ǔनकास ɮवार, Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह, Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर, èटेशन भवन 
का सुधार, बुͩकंग काया[लय, पैदल पार पुल, चाहरदȣवारȣ, पǐरपथन ¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, संकेतक 
और Ĥकाश åयवèथा के काय[ पूरे हो चुके हɇ। ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
 Ǒदवा èटेशन: èटेशन के पूव[ Ǒदशा कȧ ओर पǐरपथन ¢ेğ और पाͩकɍग मɅ सुधार, पूव[ Ǒदशा कȧ 
ओर èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार, नया Ĥवेश ɮवार, पूव[ Ǒदशा कȧ ओर पैदल पार पुल मɅ सुधार, पूव[ 
Ǒदशा और पैदल पार पुल के ͧलए नई सीढ़ȣ का Ǔनमा[ण, Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 7/8 का Üलेटफॉम[ 
शेãटर, Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 5/6 और 7/8 पर Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ ऊ ं चाई बढ़ाने और फश[ मɅ सुधार, पिæचम 
कȧ ओर नया शौचालय Þलॉक और मलजल उपचार संयंğ और Üलेटफाम[ सं.7/8 पर नए 
शौचालय Þलॉक का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज टͧम[नस छोर पर 6 
मीटर चौड़े पैदल पार पुल का Ǔनमा[ण काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 
 मुंĦा èटेशन: èटेशन के Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 4 कȧ Üलेटफॉम[ सतह मɅ सुधार, Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 1 और 4 
कȧ बैठने कȧ åयवèथा मɅ सुधार, पैदल पार पुल के फश[ मɅ सुधार, नया शौचालय Þलॉक, 
मलजल उपचार संयंğ, पǐरपथन ¢ेğ मɅ सुधार, Ǒटकट बुͩकंग काया[लय मɅ सुधार का काय[ पूरा 
कर ͧलया गया है। Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 1 पर èवचाͧलत सीढ़ȣ का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
793                                                      

 
 Ǒटटवाला èटेशन: पूव[ और पिæचम Ǒदशा मɅ दोपǑहया वाहनɉ कȧ पाͩकɍग पहुंच माग[ मɅ सुधार, 
नया Ĥवेश ɮवार, Ǒटकट बुͩकंग काया[लय मɅ सुधार, नया शौचालय Þलॉक, मलजल उपचार संयंğ 
और Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 3 पर Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह और नए èटेशन भवन का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया 
है। 6 मीटर चौड़े नए पैदल पार पुल का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल पर èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण सतत् और 
Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस संबंध मɅ कायɟ कȧ पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ 
उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन, आवæयकतानुसार काय[ शुǾ ͩकए जाते हɇ। èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/ 
उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण कायɟ को èवीकृǓत देने और Ǔनçपादन के समय Ǔनचलȣ कोǑट के èटेशनɉ कȧ 
तुलना मɅ उÍचतर कोǑट के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। 
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ 
संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए फायर ÈलȣयरɅस, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन 
ÈलȣयरɅस इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती है। इनकȧ ĤगǓत 
जनोपयोगी सेवाओं को èथानांतǐरत करना (िजनमɅ जल/मलजल लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल, गैस 
पाइप लाइन, पावर/ͧसगनल केबल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ), अǓतलंघन, याğी संचलन को बाͬधत ͩकए 
ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के Ǔनकट सािÛनÚय मɅ ͩकए जाने वाले 
कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद जैसी Ħाउन फȧãड संबंधी चुनौǓतयɉ के कारण भी Ĥभाͪवत होती 
है और ये कारक काय[ के  समापन समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ। अत:, इस चरण पर कोई समय-सीमा 
Ǔनधा[ǐरत नहȣं कȧ जा सकती। 
 
सामाÛयतः अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त आने वाले èटेशनɉ के  
ͪवकास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण के काय[ योजना शीष[-53 'Ēाहक सुͪवधाएँ' के अंतग[त ͪवƣपोͪषत ͩकए 
जाते हɇ। योजना शीष[-53 के अंतग[त आवंटन का ͪववरण ¢ेğीय रेलवे-वार रखा जाता है और न ͩक 
काय[-वार, èटेशन-वार या राÏय-वार। महाराçĚ चार ¢ेǒğय रेलɉ नामत: मÚय रेल, दͯ¢ण मÚय रेल, 
दͯ¢ण पूव[ मÚय रेल और पिæचम रेलवे के  अͬधकार ¢ेğ मɅ आता है। ͪपछले तीन वषɟ और वत[मान 
वष[ के ͧलए 11,190 करोड़ ǽ. आवंǑटत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजसमɅ से अब तक (अÈटूबर, 2025 तक) 
9,198 करोड़ ǽ. का åयय उपगत ͩकया गया है। 
 
भारतीय रेल मɅ पǐरयोजनाओं के ͩĐयाÛवयन कȧ Ǔनगरानी हेतु एक सुåयविèथत èथाͪपत तंğ है, 
िजसमɅ उनकȧ समी¢ा, Ǔनरȣ¢ण, कायɟ कȧ गुणवƣा कȧ जाँच तथा लेखापरȣ¢ण शाͧमल हɇ। काय[ 
ͪवͧभÛन संǑहताओं एवं Ǔनयमावͧलयɉ मɅ Ǔनधा[ǐरत मानकɉ एवं ͪवǓनदȶशɉ के अनुǾप संपाǑदत ͩकए 
जाते हɇ। समय-समय पर ͪवͧभÛन एजɅͧसयɉ/अͬधकाǐरयɉ/बहु-ͪवषयक दलɉ ɮवारा Ǔनधा[ǐरत Ǔनदȶशɉ के 
अनुसार Ǔनरȣ¢ण/लेखापरȣ¢ण/जाँच कȧ जाती है तथा सुधारा×मक कार[वाई तुरंत कȧ जाती है। यह 
सतत एवं Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है। 
***** 
794                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2328 का उƣर 
 
कवच èवचाͧलत Ěेन सुर¢ा Ĥणालȣ 
 
2328. Įी के . आर. एन. राजेश कुमार: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) भारतीय रेलवे मɅ कवच èवचाͧलत Ěेन सुर¢ा (एटȣपी) Ĥणालȣ कȧ वत[मान ĤगǓत Èया है, 
अब तक कुल ͩकतने ͩकलोमीटर रेलमाग[ पर यह Ĥणालȣ èथाͪपत कȧ गई है, और संपूण[ 
भारत मɅ इसके काया[Ûवयन कȧ Ǔनिæचत समय-सीमा Èया है; 
(ख) रेलवे सुर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए वत[मान मɅ लागू या Ĥèताͪवत अÛय तकनीकȧ उपायɉ, जैसे 
अãĚासोǓनक दोष पहचान (यूएसएफडी), वाèतͪवक समय Ěेन सूचना Ĥणालȣ (आरटȣआईएस) 
और मशीन ͪवजन आधाǐरत Ǔनरȣ¢ण Ĥणालȣ (एमवीआईएस) का Þयौरा Èया है, साथ हȣ 
उनके काय[शील होने और काया[Ûवयन कȧ िèथǓत Èया है; और 
(ग) रेल नेटवक[ मɅ दुघ[टनाओं को कम करने और समĒ सुर¢ा मɅ सुधार लाने मɅ इन Ĥणाͧलयɉ 
का Èया ठोस Ĥभाव पड़ा है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): भारतीय रेल मɅ संर¢ा को सवȾÍच Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। ͪपछले कुछ वषɟ मɅ ͩकए 
गए ͪवͧभÛन संर¢ा उपायɉ के पǐरणामèवǾप, दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया मɅ भारȣ ͬगरावट आई है।  
 
पǐरणामी रेलगाड़ी दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया कम हो गई है जैसा ͩक नीचे ताͧलका मɅ दशा[या गया है:  
 
वष[ पǐरणामी दुघ[टनाएं 
2014-15 135 
2025-26 (अब तक) 11 (90% कȧ कमी) 
 
 
795                                                      

रेलगाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा मɅ सुधार दशा[ने वाला एक अÛय मह×वपूण[ सूचकांक पǐरणामी दुघ[टना 
सूचकांक है, िजसका Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है:  
पǐरणामी दुघ[टना सूचकांक:- 
 
वष[ दुघ[टना सूचकांक 
2014-15 0.11 
2024-25 0.03 (73% कȧ कमी) 
 
यह सूचकांक सभी रेलगाͫड़यɉ के कुल चालन ͩकलोमीटर के अनुपात के Ǿप मɅ पǐरणामी दुघ[टनाओं 
कȧ संÉया को मापता है। 
 
 
दुघ[टना सूचकांक               
 
 
 
 
गाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए ͩकए गए ͪवͧभÛन संर¢ा संबंधी उपाय Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ:  
  
1. ͪपछले कुछ वषɟ मɅ भारतीय रेल मɅ संर¢ा संबंधी गǓतͪवͬधयɉ पर åयय मɅ वृɮͬध हुई है, जो 
Ǔनàनानुसार हैः  
 
संर¢ा संबंधी गǓतͪवͬधयɉ पर åयय/बजट (करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
2013-14 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2022-23 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2023-24 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2024-25 2025-26 
39,463 87,327 1,01,651 1,14,022 1,16,470 
 
2341651355531112005-06 2009-10 2014-15 2019-20 2024-25 2025-26                             (till date)
पǐरणामी रेल दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया
पǐरणामी दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया 
रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ संÉया x ͧमͧलयन ͩकलोमीटर चालन 
796                                                      

2. मानवीय चूक के कारण होने वालȣ दुघ[टनाएं दूर करने के ͧलए 30.11.2025 तक 6,657 
èटेशनɉ पर Üवाइंटɉ और ͧसगनलɉ के कɅ ġȣकृत पǐरचालन वालȣ इलेिÈĚकल/इलेÈĚॉǓनक 
इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
3. समपार फाटकɉ पर संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 30.11.2025 तक 10,100 समपार फाटकɉ पर 
इंटरलॉͩकंग कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
4. ͪवɮयुत साधनɉ ɮवारा रेलपथ अͧभयोग के स×यापन ɮवारा संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 30.11.2025 
तक 6,663 èटेशनɉ पर èटेशनɉ के पूण[ रेलपथ पǐरपथन कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
5. कवच अ×यͬधक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसक े ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन 
कȧ आवæयकता होती है। कवच को जुलाई, 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा (एटȣपी) 
Ĥणालȣ के Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया था। कवच को चरणबɮध Ǿप से उƣरोƣर Ǿप से उपलÞध 
कराया जा रहा है। शुǽआत मɅ, कवच संèकरण 3.2 को दͯ¢ण मÚय रेलवे के 1465 माग[ 
ͩकलोमीटर और उƣर मÚय रेलवे के 80 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर लगाया गया था। कवच संèकरण 
4.0 ͪवͧशिç ट को अ.अ.मा.सं ने Ǒदनांक 16.07.2024 को मंज़ूरȣ दȣ थी। åयापक और ͪवèतृत 
परȣ¢णɉ के बाद, कवच संèकरण 4.0 को Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई माग[ पर पलवल-मथुरा-कोटा-नागदा खंड 
(633 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा माग[ पर हावड़ा-बध[मान खंड (105 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) 
पर सफलतापूव[क कमीशन कर Ǒदया गया है। कवच को Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा माग[ 
के शेष खंडɉ मɅ भी काया[िÛवत ͩकया जाना शुǾ हो गया है। इसके अलावा, कवच को भारतीय 
रेल के सभी जीÈयू, जीडी, एचडीएन और ͬचिéनत खंड को कवर करते हुए 15,512 माग[ 
ͩकलोमीटर पर काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
6. अǓनवाय[ साàयता जांच, पǐरवत[न काय[ संबंधी Ĥोटोकॉल, पूण[ हो चुके कायɟ के आरेख तैयार 
करने आǑद जैसे ͧसगनल Ĥणालȣ कȧ संर¢ा से संबंͬधत मामलɉ पर ͪवèतृत ǑदशाǓनदȶश जारȣ 
ͩकए गए हɇ।  
7. Ĥोटोकॉल के अनुसार ͧसगनल एवं दूरसंचार उपèकरɉ के ͧलए ͫडèकनेÈशन और ǐरकनेÈशन 
Ĥणालȣ पर पुनः बल Ǒदया गया है।  
8. लोको पायलटɉ कȧ सतक[ता मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए सभी रेल इंजनɉ मɅ सतक[ता Ǔनयंğण 
उपकरण (वीसीडी) लगाए गए हɇ। 
9. माèट पर रेĚो-ǐरÝलेिÈटव ͧसÊमा बोड[ लगाए जाने कȧ åयवèथा है, जो ͪवɮयुतीकृत ¢ेğɉ मɅ 
ͧसगनलɉ से दो ओएचई माèट पहले िèथत होता है ताͩक कोहरे के मौसम के कारण Ǻæयता 
कम होने पर Đू को आगे के संकेत के बारे मɅ चेतावनी ͧमल सके। 
10. कोहरे से Ĥभाͪवत ¢ेğɉ मɅ लोको पायलटɉ के ͧलए जीपीएस आधाǐरत फॉग सेÝटȣ ͫडवाइस 
(एफएसडी) कȧ åयवèथा कȧ जाती है िजससे लोको पायलट को आने वाले मुÉय èथलɉ यथा 
ͧसगनल, समपार फाटकɉ आǑद कȧ दूरȣ का पता लग जाता है। 
11. Ĥाथͧमक रेलपथ नवीकरण करते समय 60 ͩकĒा कȧ आधुǓनक रेलपथ संरचना, 90 अãटȣमेट 
टेिÛसल èĚɅथ (यूटȣएस) पटǐरयां, ĤीèĚेèड कंĐȧट èलȣपर (पीएससी) लोचदार बंधन वाले 
सामाÛय/चौड़े èलȣपर, पीएससी èलȣपरɉ पर फैनशेÜड लेआउट टन[आउट, गड[र पुलɉ पर èटȣल 
चैनल/एच-बीम èलȣपस[ का उपयोग ͩकया जाता है। 
797                                                      

12. मानवीय ğुǑटयɉ को कम करने के ͧलए पीÈयूआरएस, टȣआरटȣ, टȣ-28 आǑद जैसी रेलपथ 
मशीनɉ के उपयोग के माÚयम से रेलपथ ǒबछाने कȧ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ का यांǒğकȧकरण।  
13. संर¢ा बेहतर करने के ͧलए रेलपथ नवीकरण कȧ ĤगǓत बढ़ाने और Ïवाइंटɉ कȧ वेिãडंग से 
बचने के ͧलए 130 मीटर/260 मीटर लंबे पटरȣ पैनलɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ को अͬधकतम करना।  
14. पटǐरयɉ मɅ दोष का पता लगाने और दोषपूण[ पटǐरयɉ को समय पर हटाने के ͧलए पटǐरयɉ का 
अãĚासोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन परȣ¢ण (यूएसएफडी)। 
15. लंबी पटǐरयां ǒबछाना, एãयूͧमनो थͧम[क वेिãडंग के उपयोग को कम करना और पटǐरयɉ के 
ͧलए बेहतर वैिãडंग तकनीक अथा[त Ýलैश बट वेिãडंग अपनाना।  
16. ओएमएस (दोलन Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ) और टȣआरसी (रेलपथ ǐरकॉͫडɍग यानɉ) ɮवारा रेलपथ 
भूͧमǓत कȧ Ǔनगरानी।  
17. वेãड/पटǐरयɉ कȧ टूट-फूट का पता लगाने के ͧलए रेल पटǐरयɉ पर गæत लगाना।  
18. टन[आउट नवीनीकरण कायɟ मɅ ͬथक वेब िèवच और वेãड करने योÊय सीएमएस Đॉͧसंग का 
उपयोग।  
19. संर¢ा पɮधǓतयɉ के अनुपालन हेतु कम[चाǐरयɉ को Ǔनगरानी और जागǾक करने के ͧलए 
Ǔनयͧमत अंतराल पर Ǔनरȣ¢ण। 
20. युिÈतसंगत अनुर¢ण संबंधी आवæयकता और इनपुट के इçटतमीकरण से संबंͬधत Ǔनण[य लेने 
के ͧलए Ěैक डाटाबेस और ͫडसीजन सपोट[ ͧसèटम जैसी रेलपथ पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ वेब आधाǐरत 
ऑनलाइन Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ को अपनाया गया है। 
21. रेलपथ कȧ संर¢ा संबंधी मुɮदɉ अथा[त् एकȧकृत Þलॉक, कॉǐरडोर Þलॉक, काय[ èथल पर संर¢ा, 
मानसून संबंधी सावधाǓनयɉ आǑद पर ͪवèतृत अनुदेश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ।  
22. गाͫड़यɉ का सुरͯ¢त पǐरचालन सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए रेल पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ (सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ एवं 
मालͫडÞबɉ) का Ǔनवारक अनुर¢ण। 
23. पारंपǐरक आईसीएफ ͫडजाइन के रेल ͫडÞबɉ के èथान पर एलएचबी ͫडजाइन के रेल ͫडÞबे 
लगाए जा रहे हɇ। 
24. जनवरȣ 2019 तक बड़ी लाइन माग[ पर चौकȧदार रǑहत सभी समपारɉ (यूएमएलसी) को 
समाÜत कर Ǒदया गया है। 
25. पुलɉ का Ǔनयͧमत Ǔनरȣ¢ण करके रेल पुलɉ कȧ संर¢ा सुǓनिæचत कȧ जाती है। इन Ǔनरȣ¢णɉ के 
दौरान िèथǓतयɉ के आकलन के आधार पर पुलɉ कȧ मरàमत/पुनèथा[पन काय[ ͩकया जाता है। 
26. भारतीय रेल ने सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ याǒğयɉ कȧ åयापक सूचना के ͧलए सांͪवͬधक “आग 
संबंधी सूचनाएं” लगाई हɇ। सभी ͫडÞबɉ मɅ आग संबंधी पोèटर लगाए गए हɇ ताͩक याǒğयɉ को 
आग से बचने के ͧलए ‘Èया करɅ’ और ‘Èया न करɅ’ के बारे मɅ सूͬचत और सतक[ ͩकया जा 
सके। इसमɅ सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के भीतर Ïवलनशील वèतुएँ, ͪवèफोटकɉ को साथ न ले जाने, 
धूĨपान न करने, जुमा[ना आǑद से संबंͬधत सूचनाएं शाͧमल हɇ।  
27. उ×पादन इकाइयां नवǓनͧम[त पावर कारɉ और पैÛĚȣ कारɉ मɅ आग संसूचक एवं अवरोधन 
Ĥणालȣ तथा नवǓनͧम[त सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ आग एवं धुआं संसूचक Ĥणालȣ कȧ åयवèथा कर रहȣ 
हɇ। ¢ेğीय रेलɉ ɮवारा मौजूद सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ चरणबɮध तरȣके से ĤोĒेͧसव ͩफɪमेÛट का काय[ 
भी चल रहा है।  
798                                                      

28. कम[चाǐरयɉ कȧ Ǔनयͧमत काउÛसͧलंग कȧ जाती है और उÛहɅ Ĥͧश¢ण Ǒदया जाता है।  
29. Ǒदनांक 30.11.2023 कȧ राजपğ अͬधसूचना के तहत भारतीय रेल (चाͧलत लाइन) सामाÛय 
Ǔनयम मɅ रोͧलंग Þलॉक अवधारणा कȧ शुǽआत कȧ गई है, िजसमɅ पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के एकȧकृत 
अनुर¢ण/मरàमत/ĤǓतèथापन के काय[ को रोͧलंग आधार पर 52 सÜताह पूव[ हȣ योजनाबɮध 
ͩकया जाता है और योजना के अनुसार ǓनçपाǑदत ͩकया जाता है। 
 
रेलवे ɮवारा ͩकए गए बेहतर अनुर¢ण पɮधǓतयɉ, Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय सुधारɉ, बेहतर अवसंरचना और चल 
èटॉक आǑद संबंधी संर¢ा कायɟ का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार सारणीबɮध है:- 
 
Đ.सं. मद 2004-05 से 
2013-14 
2014-15 से 
2024-25 
 
2004-14 कȧ 
तुलना मɅ 2014-25 
Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय सुधार 
1 उÍच-गुणवƣा वाल ȣ 
पटǐरयɉ का उपयोग 
(60 ͩक.Ēा.) (ͩक.मी.) 
57,450 ͩक.मी. 1.43 लाख 
ͩक.मी. 
2 गुना से अͬधक 
2 लंबी रेल पट ǐरयां 
(260 मीटर) (ͩक.मी.) 
9,917 ͩक.मी. 77,522 ͩक.मी. लगभग 8 गुना  
3 इलेÈĚोǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग 
(èटेशन) 
837 èटेशन 3,691 èटेशन 4 गुना से अͬधक 
4 फॉग पास से Ýटȣ 
उपकरण (अदद) 
31.03.14 तक 
90 अदद 
31.03.25 तक 
25,939 
288 गुना 
5 ͬथक वेब िèवच (अदद) शूÛय 28,301 अदद   
बेहतर अनुर¢ण पɮधǓतयां  
1 Ĥाथͧमक रेल नवीकरण 
(रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
32,260 ͩक.मी. 49,941 ͩक.मी. 1.5 गुना 
2 यूएसएफडी (अãĚा 
सोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन) 
वेिãडंग परȣ¢ण (अदद) 
79.43 लाख 2 करोड़ 2 गुना से अͬधक 
3 वेãड संबंधी खराǒबयां 
(अदद) 
2013-14 मɅ: 
3699 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 
370 अदद 
90% कमी 
4 पटǐरयɉ मɅ दरारɅ (अदद) 2013-14 मɅ: 
2548 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 
289 अदद 
88% से 
Ïयादा कमी 
     
बेहतर अवसंरचना एवं चल èटॉक 
1 जोड़े गए नए रेलपथ 
ͩक.मी. (रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
14,985 ͩक.मी. 34,428 ͩक.मी. 2 गुना से अͬधक 
2 Ýलाईओवर (आरओबी)/ 4,148 अदद 13,808 अदद 3 गुना से अͬधक 
799                                                      

अंडरपास (आरयूबी) 
(अदद) 
3 बड़ी लाइन पर चौकȧदार 
रǑहत समपार (अदद)  
31.03.14 तक: 
8948 
31.03.24 तक: 
शूÛय 
(31.01.19 तक 
सभी बंद कर 
Ǒदए गए) 
हटा Ǒदए गए 
4 एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ 
का ͪवǓनमा[ण (अदद) 
2,337 अदद 42,677 18 गुना से अͬधक 
 
 कवच का काया[Ûवयन  
 
1. कवच एक èवदेश ͪवकͧसत èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा Ĥणालȣ (एटȣपी) है। कवच अ×यͬधक 
Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसक े ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के  संर¢ा Ĥमाणन (एसआईएल-4) कȧ 
आवæयकता होती है।  
2. यǑद लोको पायलट Ħेक लगाने मɅ ͪवफल रहता है तो कवच èवचाͧलत Ħेक लगाकर लोको 
पायलट को ǓनǑद[çट गǓत सीमा के भीतर रेलगाड़ी चलाने मɅ सहायता करता है और यह खराब 
मौसम के दौरान रेलगाड़ी को संरͯ¢त ढंग से चलाने मɅ भी सहायता करता है। 
3. याğी गाͫड़यɉ पर पहला फȧãड परȣ¢ण फरवरȣ 2016 मɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया था। इस Ĥकार ĤाÜत 
अनुभव और èवतंğ संर¢ा मूãयांकनकता[ओं ɮवारा Ĥणालȣ के èवतंğ संर¢ा मूãयांकन के 
आधार पर, कवच संèकरण 3.2 कȧ आपूǓत[ के ͧलए 2018-19 मɅ तीन फमɟ को अनुमोǑदत 
ͩकया गया था।  
4. कवच को जुलाई 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय एटȣपी Ĥणालȣ के Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया।  
5. कवच Ĥणालȣ के काया[Ûवयन मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[कलाप शाͧमल हɇ: 
i. Ĥ×येक èटेशन, Þलॉक खÖड पर èटेशन कवच का संèथापन। 
ii. पूरे रेलपथ कȧ लंबाई मɅ आरएफआईडी टैग का संèथापन। 
iii. समĒ खंड मɅ दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन। 
iv. रेलपथ के बगल मɅ ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना। 
v. भारतीय रेल पर चल रहे Ĥ×येक रेल इंजन पर लोको कवच का Ĥावधान।  
6. दͯ¢ण मÚय रेल के 1465 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच संèकरण 3.2 के संèथापन और ĤाÜत 
अनुभव के आधार पर आगे और सुधार ͩकए गए। अंततः आरडीएसओ ɮवारा Ǒदनांक 
16.07.2024 को कवच ͪवͧशिçट संèकरण 4.0 को अनुमोǑदत ͩकया गया।  
7. कवच 4.0 संèकरण मɅ ͪवͪवध रेलवे नेटवक[ के ͧलए आवæयक सभी Ĥमुख ͪवशेषताएं शाͧमल 
हɇ। यह भारतीय रेल कȧ संर¢ा मɅ एक मह×वपूण[ उपलिÞध है। अãप अवͬध के भीतर, भारतीय 
रेल ने èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ण Ĥणालȣ ͪवकͧसत कȧ, परȣ¢ण ͩकया और उसे संèथाͪपत 
करना शुǾ कर Ǒदया है। 
8. कवच संèकरण 4.0 मɅ ͩकए गए Ĥमुख सुधारɉ मɅ अविèथǓत सटȣकता मɅ वृɮͬध, बड़े याडɟ मɅ 
ͧसगनल संबंधी पहलुओं कȧ बेहतर जानकारȣ, ओएफसी पर èटेशन-से-èटेशन कवच इंटरफ़ े स 
800                                                      

और मौजूदा इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ से सीधा इंटरफ़ े स शाͧमल है। इन सुधारɉ के साथ, 
कवच संèकरण 4.0 को भारतीय रेल मɅ बड़े पैमाने पर लागू करने कȧ योजना है। 
9. ͪवèतृत एवं åयापक परȣ¢णɉ के उपरांत, कवच के 4.0 संèकरण को Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई माग[ पर 
पलवल–मथुरा–नगदा रेलखंड (633 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) तथा Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा माग[ पर हावड़ा–बद[वान 
रेलखंड (105 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) सǑहत कुल 738 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर सफलतापूव[क कमीशन 
कर Ǒदया गया है। Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई एवं Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ के शेष रेलखंडɉ पर कवच के 
काया[Ûवयन का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है।  
10. Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ समेत उÍच घन×व वाले मागɟ पर कवच के Ĥमुख 
मदɉ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
Đ.सं. मदɅ ĤगǓत 
i ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना 7129 ͩक.मी. 
ii दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन 860 अदद 
iii èटेशन डेटा सɅटर 767 èटेशन 
iv रेलपथ साइड उपकरणɉ का संèथापन 5672 माग[ ͩक.मी. 
v रेलइंजनɉ मɅ कवच का Ĥावधान 4,154 
 
11. इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल के सभी जीÈयू, जीडी, एचडीएन और ͬचिéनत रेलखंडɉ को कवर 
करते हुए 15,512 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच के रेलपथ साइड कायɟ का काया[Ûवयन Ĥारंभ 
ͩकया गया है।  
12. अÛय 9,069 रेल इंजनो को कवच के 4.0 संèकरण से सुसिÏजत करने हेतु बोͧलयां आमंǒğत 
कȧ गई हɇ। रेल इंजनɉ मɅ Ǔनरंतर चरणबɮध तरȣके से कवच कȧ åयवèथा कȧ जा रहȣ है। 
13. सभी संबंͬधत अͬधकाǐरयɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण देने के ͧलए भारतीय रेल के कɅ ġȣकृत Ĥͧश¢ण संèथानɉ 
मɅ कवच पर ͪवशेष Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए जा रहे हɇ। अब तक 40,000 से अͬधक 
तकनीͧशयनɉ, ऑपरेटरɉ और इंजीǓनयरɉ को कवच Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ के  ͪवषय पर Ĥͧशͯ¢त ͩकया जा 
चुका है। इसमɅ 33,000 लोको पायलट एवं सहायक लोको पायलट सिàमͧलत हɇ। पाɫयĐमɉ का 
Ǔनमा[ण आईआरआईएसईटȣ के सहयोग से ͩकया गया है।  
14. अÈटूबर 2025 तक ‘कवच’ Ĥणालȣ से संबंͬधत कायɟ पर कुल 2,354.36 करोड़ ǽपए åयय 
ͩकए गए हɇ। वष[ 2025–26 के दौरान कुल ₹1673.19 करोड़ राͧश का आवंटन हुआ है। कायɟ 
कȧ ĤगǓत के अनुǾप अपेͯ¢त पूंजी उपलÞध कराई जाती हɇ। 
 
अãĚासोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेकशन: 
 
अãĚासोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन परȣ¢ण, रेल/वेãड का अãĚासोǓनक दोष पता लगाने कȧ एक गैर-
ͪवनाशकारȣ परȣ¢ण ͪवͬध है िजसका उपयोग रेल/वेãड मɅ आंतǐरक दोष या खाͧमयɉ का पता लगाने 
के ͧलए ͩकया जाता है। रेल/वेãड का अãĚासोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेकशन परȣ¢ण भारतीय रेल मɅ Ǔनधा[ǐरत 
आवृͪƣ पर ͩकया जा रहा है। समय पर अãĚासोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेकशन परȣ¢ण कमजोर ǒबंदुओं का 
जãदȣ पता लगाने और आवæयक सुधारा×मक उपाय शुǾ करने मɅ मदद कर रहा है ताͩक दुघ[टनाओं 
कȧ संभावना कम कȧ जा सके। 
801                                                      

  
ǐरयल टाइम गाड़ी सूचना Ĥणालȣ: 
 
ǐरयल टाइम गाड़ी सूचना Ĥणालȣ एक भारत Ǔनͧम[त, एज Ĥोसेͧसंग, आईओटȣ आधाǐरत Ĥणालȣ है 
जो èवचाͧलत गाड़ी Ěैͩकंग के ͧलए भारतीय अंतǐर¢ अनुसंधान संगठन कȧ सैटकॉम और सैटनैव 
तकनीकɉ का उपयोग करती है। आरटȣआईएस उपकरण लगभग 10,500 चल èटॉक (10,310 
ͪवɮयुत इंजन, 140 ईएमयू/ईएमयू मोटर कारɅ और 50 वंदे भारत Ĝाइͪवंग कैब) मɅ èथाͪपत ͩकए 
गए हɇ। आरटȣआईएस उपकरण, èटेशन इवɅɪस (आगमन/Ĥèथान/रन Ġू) के साथ गाड़ी कȧ लोकेशन 
अपडेट भी 30 सेकंड कȧ अवͬध मɅ आरटȣआईएस कɅ ġȣय सव[र पर भेजता है। इन अपडेɪस का 
उपयोग राçĚȣय रेलगाड़ी पूछताछ Ĥणालȣ के माÚयम से याǒğयɉ को वाèतͪवक समय कȧ जानकारȣ 
Ĥदान करने के ͧलए ͩकया जाता है। 
 
मशीन ͪवज़न आधाǐरत Ǔनरȣ¢ण Ĥणालȣ : 
 
मशीन ͪवज़न आधाǐरत Ǔनरȣ¢ण Ĥणालȣ एक एकȧकृत रेलपथ Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ है जो रेलपथ 
ǐरकॉͫडɍग के ͧलए èथाͪपत कȧ गई है। भारतीय रेल पर ऐसी तीन Ĥणालȣ èथाͪपत कȧ गई हɇ। 
अǓतǐरÈत सात एकȧकृत रेलपथ Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ ͪवͧभÛन चरणɉ मɅ èथाͪपत कȧ जा रहȣ हɇ। मशीन 
का पǐरणाम जमीनी èतर पर रेलपथ रखरखाव कȧ योजना बनाने के ͧलए उपयोग ͩकया जा रहा है। 
  
भारतीय रेल और डेͫडकेटेड ĥे ट कॉǐरडोर कॉपȾरेशन ऑफ इंͫडया ͧलͧमटेड के बीच जुलाई 2025 मɅ 
वेसाइड मशीन ͪवज़न आधाǐरत Ǔनरȣ¢ण Ĥणालȣ कȧ èथापना के ͧलए एक समझौता £ापन पर 
हèता¢र ͩकए गए हɇ। यह एक एआई/एमएल संचाͧलत Ĥणालȣ है जो चलती गाͫड़यɉ मɅ लटके हुए 
Ǒहèसɉ या गायब घटकɉ का पता लगाने के ͧलए है। 
 
*****                         
802                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2329 का उƣर 
 
हाई-èपीड और सेमी-हाई-èपीड रेल पǐरयोजनाएं 
 
2329. Įी ए. डी. ͧसंह: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई-èपीड रेल पǐरयोजना कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत और पूण[ता कȧ अपेͯ¢त 
समय-सीमा Èया है; 
(ख) èवीकृत या ͪवचाराधीन नए सेमी-हाई-èपीड कॉǐरडोर का Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(ग) Èया सरकार कȧ Ĥमुख महानगरɉ और औɮयोͬगक कɅ ġɉ को जोड़ने के ͧलए ऐसे कॉǐरडोर 
का ͪवèतार करने कȧ कोई योजना है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल (एमएएचएसआर) पǐरयोजना (508 ͩक.मी.) जापान 
सरकार के तकनीकȧ और ͪवƣीय सहायता के साथ ǓनçपाǑदत कȧ जा रहȣ एकमाğ हाई èपीड रेल 
पǐरयोजना है। यह पǐरयोजना गुजरात, महाराçĚ और कɅ ġ शाͧसत Ĥदेश दादरा एवं नगर हवेलȣ से 
होकर गुजरती है और इसमɅ 12 èटेशन मुंबई, ठाणे, ͪवरार, बोईसर, वापी, ǒबͧलमोरा, सूरत, 
भǾच, वडोदरा, आणंद, अहमदाबाद और साबरमती मɅ Ĥèताͪवत हɇ।  
 
मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल पǐरयोजना के ͧलए संपूण[ भूͧम (1389.5 हेÈटेयर) का अͬधĒहण 
कर ͧलया गया है। सभी सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयां ĤाÜत कर लȣ गई हɇ। पǐरयोजना के सभी ͧसͪवल 
ठेके Ĥदान कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। कुल 28 Ǔनͪवदा पैके जɉ मɅ से 25 Ǔनͪवदा पैकेज Ĥदान कर Ǒदए गए 
हɇ। सभी 1651 साधनɉ को èथानांतǐरत कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 
803                                                      

ͪवͧभÛन Ĥमुख मदɉ कȧ अब तक कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
मद ĤगǓत 
गुजरात महाराçĚ कुल 
नींव 351 ͩकलोमीटर 65 ͩकलोमीटर 416 ͩकलोमीटर 
पाया 351 ͩकलोमीटर 58 ͩकलोमीटर 409 ͩकलोमीटर 
गड[र कािèटंग 339 ͩकलोमीटर 6 ͩकलोमीटर 345 ͩकलोमीटर 
गड[र लॉͬचंग 330 ͩकलोमीटर 2 ͩकलोमीटर 332 ͩकलोमीटर 
Ěैक बेड Ǔनमा[ण 132 ͩकलोमीटर - 132 ͩकलोमीटर 
ͧशरोपǐर उपèकर के 
ͧलए खàभे लगाना 
88 ͩकलोमीटर - 88 ͩकलोमीटर 
  
कुल 12 èटेशनɉ मɅ से 8 èटेशनɉ (वापी, ǒबलȣमोरा, सूरत, भǾच, आनंद, वडोदरा, अहमदाबाद 
और साबरमती) मɅ नींव संबंधी काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। महाराçĚ खंड मɅ, 3 èटेशनɉ (ठाणे, 
ͪवरार, बोईसर) मɅ नींव संबंधी काय[ ĤगǓत पर है तथा बीकेसी èटेशन पर खुदाई काय[ पूरा होने 
वाला है और आधार èलैब कȧ कािèटंग शुǾ हो चुकȧ है। 
 
17 नदȣ पुलɉ का Ǔनमा[ण काय[ पूरा ͩकया जा चुका है। गुजरात मɅ 4 Ĥमुख नदȣ पुलɉ (नम[दा, 
माहȣ, ताÜती और साबरमती) का काय[ अंǓतम चरण मɅ है और महाराçĚ मɅ 4 नदȣ पुलɉ का काय[ 
ĤगǓत पर है। ͫडपो (ठाणे, सूरत और साबरमती) का काय[ जोरɉ पर है। 
 
गुजरात मɅ एकमाğ सुरंग का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। समुġ के भीतर सुरंग (लगभग 21 
ͩकलोमीटर) का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। इनमɅ से, महाराçĚ मɅ घनसोलȣ और ͧशलफाटा के  
बीच 4.8 ͩकलोमीटर सुरंग का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। 
 
बुलेट Ěेन पǐरयोजना एक बहुत हȣ जǑटल और Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान पǐरयोजना है। पǐरयोजना के 
पूरा होने के ͧलए सटȣक समय-सीमा और लागत का Ǔनधा[रण ͧसͪवल संरचनाओं, रेलपथ, ǒबजलȣ, 
ͧसगनल Ĥणालȣ और दूरसंचार तथा गाड़ी सेटɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ से सभी संबंͬधत कायɟ के पूरा होने के 
बाद समुͬचत Ǿप से सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सकता है। 
 
****** 
 
804                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2330 का उƣर 
 
रेल पटǐरयɉ मɅ खाͧमयɉ का रेल संचालन पर Ĥभाव 
 
2330. Įीमती रजनी अशोकराव पाǑटल: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) वष[ 2024-25 के दौरान रेल पटǐरयɉ मɅ पाई गई खाͧमयɉ कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(ख) ͩकन ¢ेğɉ मɅ सबसे अͬधक खाͧमयां पाई गɃ हɇ; 
(ग) इसका रेल संचालन पर Èया Ĥभाव पड़ा है; 
(घ) Èया रखरखाव कͧम[यɉ कȧ संÉया पया[Üत है; और 
(ङ) पटǐरयɉ कȧ सुर¢ा मɅ सुधार के  ͧलए कौन-कौन से कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ङ): रेलपथ के आधुǓनकȧकरण और उÛनयन के ͧलए भारतीय रेल ɮवारा Ǔनàनͧलͨखत उपाय 
ͩकए जा रहे हɇ। इनमɅ शाͧमल है:- 
 
i. Ĥाथͧमक रेलपथ नवीकरण करते समय 60 ͩक.Ēा. कȧ आधुǓनक रेलपथ संरचना, 90 
अãटȣमेट टेिÛसल èĚɅथ कȧ पटǐरयां, लोचदार बंधन वाले चौड़े और भारȣ ĤीèĚेèड कंĐȧट 
èलȣपर, पीएससी èलȣपरɉ पर फैनशेÜड लेआउट टन[आउट, गड[र पुलɉ पर èटȣल चैनल/एच-बीम 
èलȣपस[ का उपयोग ͩकया जाता है।  
ii.  टन[आउट नवीनीकरण कायɟ मɅ ͬथक वेब िèवच और वेãड करने योÊय सीएमएस Đॉͧसंग का 
उपयोग।  
iii.  Ïवाइंटɉ कȧ वेिãडंग से बचने के ͧलए 130 मीटर/260 मीटर लंबे रेल पैनलɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ को 
बढ़ाना ताͩक संर¢ा बेहतर हो। 
iv.  पूव[ मɅ उपयोग ͩकए जाने वाले पारंपǐरक/बेहतर एसईजे के èथान पर ͬथक वेब िèवच 
एÈसपɇशन Ïवाइंɪस का उपयोग ͩकया जा रहा है। 
v.  पटǐरयɉ के ͧलए बेहतर वेिãडंग तकनीक अथा[त Ýलैश बट वेिãडंग को अपनाना। 
805                                                      

vi.  रेलपथ अनुर¢ण के ͧलए उÍच आउटपुट Üलेन टैàपस[ और पॉइंटɉ एवं Đॉͧसंग टैàपस[ का 
उपयोग करते हुए मशीनीकृत Ĥणालȣ को अपनाना, ताͩक रेलपथ कȧ बेहतर अनुर¢ण और 
ͪवæवसनीयता सुǓनिæचत कȧ जा सके। 
vii. पǐरसंपͪƣ ͪवæवसनीयता मɅ और सुधार लाने के ͧलए रेल Ēाइंͫडंग मशीनɉ सǑहत अ×याधुǓनक 
आधुǓनक मशीनɉ कȧ तैनाती। 
viii. पीÈयूआरएस, टȣआरटȣ, टȣ-28 आǑद जैसी रेलपथ मशीनɉ के  उपयोग के माÚयम से रेलपथ 
ǒबछाने कȧ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ का यांǒğकȧकरण।  
ix.  रेल और वेãड के परȣ¢ण के ͧलए उÛनत फ ेóड ऐरे तकनीक का उपयोग। 
x.  इçटतम अनुर¢ण आवæयकताओं का पता लगाने के ͧलए åयापक िèथǓत मूãयांकन हेतु 
एकȧकृत रेलपथ Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ और दोलन Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ कȧ तैनाती। 
xi.  सटȣक रखरखाव इनपुट ĤाÜत करने के ͧलए ͪवͧभÛन İोतɉ से ĤाÜत रेलपथ Ǔनरȣ¢ण ǐरकॉड[ 
के एकȧकरण और डेटा ͪवæलेषण के ͧलए वेब स¢म रेलपथ Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ का उपयोग 
करना। 
 
उपरोÈत उपायɉ के पǐरणामèवǾप, भारतीय रेल पर 2013-14 कȧ तुलना मɅ 2024-25 मɅ Ĥमुख 
रेलपथ खराǒबयां (रेल ĥैÈचर और वेãड ĥैÈचर) मɅ उã लेखनीय कमी आई है। ͪववरण Ǔनà नानुसार 
हɇ:  
 
रेलपथ खराǒबयां 2013-14 2024-25 2013-14 कȧ तुलना मɅ 2024-25 
रेल ĥैÈचर 2548 अदद 289 अदद 88% कमी 
वेãड ĥैÈचर 3699 अदद 370 अदद 90% कमी 
 
गाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा 
 
भारतीय रेल मɅ संर¢ा को सवȾÍच Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। ͪपछले कुछ वषɟ मɅ ͩकए गए ͪवͧभÛन 
संर¢ा उपायɉ के पǐरणामèवǾप, दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया मɅ भारȣ ͬगरावट आई है।  
 
पǐरणामी रेलगाड़ी दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया कम हो गई है जैसा ͩक नीचे ताͧलका मɅ दशा[या गया है:  
 
वष[ पǐरणामी दुघ[टनाएं 
2014-15 135 
2025-26 (अब तक) 11 (90% कम) 
 
रेलगाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा मɅ सुधार दशा[ने वाला एक अÛय मह×वपूण[ सूचकांक पǐरणामी दुघ[टना 
सूचकांक है, िजसका Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है:  
 
पǐरणामी दुघ[टना सूचकांक:- 
 
वष[ दुघ[टना सूचकांक 
2014-15 0.11 
2024-25 0.03 (73% कम) 
 
806                                                      

यह सूचकांक सभी रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ कुल चाͧलत ͩकलोमीटर के अनुपात के Ǿप मɅ पǐरणामी दुघ[टनाओं 
कȧ संÉया को मापता है। 
 
सूचकांक = पǐरणामी दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया 
   रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ संÉया x ͧमͧलयन ͩकलोमीटर चालन 
 
 
 
 
भारतीय रेल मɅ संर¢ा को सवȾÍच Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। गाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 
ͩकए गए ͪवͧभÛन संर¢ा संबंधी उपाय Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ:  
  
1. भारतीय रेल मɅ ͪपछले कुछ वषɟ मɅ संर¢ा संबंधी गǓतͪवͬधयɉ पर åयय मɅ वृɮͬध हुई है, जो 
Ǔनàनानुसार हैः  
 
संर¢ा संबंधी गǓतͪवͬधयɉ पर åयय/बजट (करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
2013-14 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2022-23 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2023-24 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2024-25 2025-26 
39,463 87,327 1,01,651 1,14,022 1,16,470 
 
2. मानवीय चूक के कारण होने वालȣ दुघ[टनाएं कम करने के ͧलए 31.10.2025 तक 6,656 
èटेशनɉ पर Üवाइंटɉ और ͧसगनलɉ के कɅ ġȣकृत पǐरचालन वालȣ इलेिÈĚकल/इलेÈĚॉǓनक 
इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
3. समपार फाटकɉ पर संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 31.10.2025 तक 10,098 समपार फाटकɉ पर 
इंटरलॉͩकंग कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
2341651355531112005-06 2009-10 2014-15 2019-20 2024-25 2025-26                             (till date)
पǐरणामी रेल दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया
807                                                      

4. संर¢ा बढ़ाने के  ͧलए 31.10.2025 तक 6,661 èटेशनɉ पर ͪवɮयुत साधनɉ ɮवारा रेलपथ 
अͧभयोग के स×यापन ɮवारा èटेशनɉ के पूण[ रेलपथ पǐरपथन कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
5. कवच अ×यͬधक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसक े ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन 
कȧ आवæयकता होती है। कवच को जुलाई, 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा 
(एटȣपी) Ĥणालȣ के Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया था। कवच को चरणबɮध Ǿप से उƣरोƣर Ǿप से 
उपलÞध कराया जा रहा है शुǾआत मɅ, कवच संèकरण 3.2 को दͯ¢ण मÚय रेलवे के 1465 
माग[ ͩकलोमीटर और उƣर मÚय रेलवे के 80 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर लगाया गया था। कवच 
संèकरण 4.0 ͪवͧशिçटे को अ.अ.मा.सं ने Ǒदनांक 16.07.2024 को मंज़ूरȣ दȣ थी।  
 
बड़े और åयापक और ͪवèतृत परȣ¢णɉ के बाद, कवच संèकरण 4.0 को Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई माग[ 
पर पलवल-मथुरा-कोटा-नागदा खंड (633 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा माग[ पर 
हावड़ा-बध[मान खंड (105 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) पर सफलतापूव[क कमीशन कर Ǒदया गया है। 
कवच को Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा माग[ के शेष खंडɉ मɅ भी काया[िÛवत ͩकया जाना 
शुǾ हो गया है।  
 
इसके अलावा, कवच को भारतीय रेल के सभी जीÈयू, जीडी, एचडीएन और पहचाने गए खंड 
को कवर करते हुए 15,512 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 
6. अǓनवाय[ साàयता जांच, पǐरवत[न काय[ संबंधी Ĥोटोकॉल, पूण[ हो चुके कायɟ के आरेख तैयार 
करने आǑद जैसे ͧसगनल Ĥणालȣ कȧ संर¢ा से संबंͬधत मामलɉ पर ͪवèतृत ǑदशाǓनदȶश जारȣ 
ͩकए गए हɇ।  
7. Ĥोटोकॉल के अनुसार ͧसगनल एवं दूरसंचार उपèकरɉ के ͧलए ͫडèकनेÈशन और ǐरकनेÈशन 
Ĥणालȣ पर पुनः बल Ǒदया गया है।  
8. लोको पायलटɉ कȧ सतक[ता मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए सभी रेल इंजनɉ मɅ सतक[ता Ǔनयंğण 
उपकरण (वीसीडी) लगाए गए हɇ। 
9. माèट पर रेĚो-ǐरÝलेिÈटव ͧसÊमा बोड[ लगाए जाने कȧ åयवèथा है, जो ͪवɮयुतीकृत ¢ेğɉ मɅ 
ͧसगनलɉ से दो ओएचई माèट पहले िèथत होता है ताͩक कोहरे के मौसम के कारण Ǻæयता 
कम होने पर Đू को आगे के संकेत के बारे मɅ चेतावनी ͧमल सके। 
10. कोहरे से Ĥभाͪवत ¢ेğɉ मɅ लोको पायलटɉ के ͧलए जीपीएस आधाǐरत फॉग सेÝटȣ ͫडवाइस 
(एफएसडी) कȧ åयवèथा कȧ जाती है िजससे लोको पायलट को आने वाले मुÉय èथलɉ यथा 
ͧसगनल, समपार फाटकɉ आǑद कȧ दूरȣ का पता लग जाता है। 
11. Ĥाथͧमक रेलपथ नवीकरण करते समय 60 ͩकĒा कȧ आधुǓनक रेलपथ संरचना, 90 अãटȣमेट 
टेिÛसल èĚɅथ (यूटȣएस) पटǐरयां, ĤीèĚेèड कंĐȧट èलȣपर (पीएससी) लोचदार बंधन वाले 
सामाÛय/चौड़े èलȣपर, पीएससी èलȣपरɉ पर फैनशेÜड लेआउट टन[आउट, गड[र पुलɉ पर èटȣल 
चैनल/एच-बीम èलȣपस[ का उपयोग ͩकया जाता है। 
12. मानवीय ğुǑटयɉ को कम करने के ͧलए पीÈयूआरएस, टȣआरटȣ, टȣ-28 आǑद जैसी रेलपथ 
मशीनɉ के उपयोग के माÚयम से रेलपथ ǒबछाने कȧ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ का यांǒğकȧकरण।  
13. संर¢ा बेहतर करने के ͧलए रेलपथ नवीकरण कȧ ĤगǓत बढ़ाने और Ïवाइंटɉ कȧ वेिãडंग से 
बचने के ͧलए 130 मीटर/260 मीटर लंबे पटरȣ पैनलɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ को अͬधकतम करना।  
808                                                      

14. पटǐरयɉ मɅ दोष का पता लगाने और दोषपूण[ पटǐरयɉ को समय पर हटाने के ͧलए पटǐरयɉ 
का अãĚासोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन परȣ¢ण (यूएसएफडी)। 
15. लंबी पटǐरयां ǒबछाना, एãयूͧमनो थͧम[क वेिãडंग के उपयोग को कम करना और पटǐरयɉ के  
ͧलए बेहतर वैिãडंग तकनीक अथा[त Ýलैश बट वेिãडंग अपनाना।  
16. ओएमएस (दोलन Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ) और टȣआरसी (रेलपथ ǐरकॉͫडɍग यानɉ) ɮवारा रेलपथ 
भूͧमǓत कȧ Ǔनगरानी।  
17. वेãड/पटǐरयɉ कȧ टूट-फूट का पता लगाने के ͧलए रेल पटǐरयɉ पर गæत लगाना।  
18. टन[आउट नवीनीकरण कायɟ मɅ ͬथक वेब िèवच और वेãड करने योÊय सीएमएस Đॉͧसंग का 
उपयोग।  
19. संर¢ा पɮधǓतयɉ के अनुपालन हेतु कम[चाǐरयɉ को Ǔनगरानी और ͧशͯ¢त करने के ͧलए 
Ǔनयͧमत अंतराल पर Ǔनरȣ¢ण। 
20. युिÈतसंगत अनुर¢ण संबंधी आवæयकता और इनपुट के इçटतमीकरण से संबंͬधत Ǔनण[य 
लेने के ͧलए Ěैक डाटाबेस और ͫडसीजन सपोट[ ͧसèटम जैसी रेलपथ पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ वेब 
आधाǐरत ऑनलाइन Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ को अपनाया गया है। 
21. रेलपथ कȧ संर¢ा संबंधी मुɮदɉ अथा[त् एकȧकृत Þलॉक, कॉǐरडोर Þलॉक, काय[ èथल पर 
संर¢ा, मानसून संबंधी सावधाǓनयɉ आǑद पर ͪवèतृत अनुदेश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ।  
22. गाͫड़यɉ का सुरͯ¢त पǐरचालन सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए रेल पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ (सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ एवं 
मालͫडÞबɉ) का Ǔनवारक अनुर¢ण। 
23. पारंपǐरक आईसीएफ ͫडजाइन के रेल ͫडÞबɉ के èथान पर एलएचबी ͫडजाइन के रेल ͫडÞबे 
लगाए जा रहे हɇ। 
24. जनवरȣ 2019 तक बड़ी लाइन माग[ पर चौकȧदार रǑहत सभी समपारɉ (यूएमएलसी) को 
समाÜत कर Ǒदया गया है। 
25. पुलɉ का Ǔनयͧमत Ǔनरȣ¢ण करके रेल पुलɉ कȧ संर¢ा सुǓनिæचत कȧ जाती है। इन Ǔनरȣ¢णɉ 
के दौरान िèथǓतयɉ के आकलन के आधार पर पुलɉ कȧ मरàमत/पुनèथा[पन काय[ ͩकया जाता 
है। 
26. भारतीय रेल ने सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ याǒğयɉ कȧ åयापक सूचना के ͧलए सांͪवͬधक “आग 
संबंधी सूचनाएं” लगाई हɇ। सभी ͫडÞबɉ मɅ आग संबंधी पोèटर लगाए गए हɇ ताͩक याǒğयɉ को 
आग से बचने के  ͧलए ‘Èया करɅ’ और ‘Èया न करɅ’ के बारे मɅ सूͬचत और सतक[ ͩकया जा 
सके। इसमɅ सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के भीतर Ïवलनशील वèतुएँ, ͪवèफोटकɉ को साथ न ले जाने, 
धूĨपान न करने, जुमा[ना आǑद से संबंͬधत सूचनाएं शाͧमल हɇ।  
27. उ×पादन इकाइयां नवǓनͧम[त पावर कारɉ और पैÛĚȣ कारɉ मɅ आग संसूचक एवं अवरोधन 
Ĥणालȣ तथा नवǓनͧम[त सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ आग एवं धुआं संसूचक Ĥणालȣ कȧ åयवèथा कर रहȣ 
हɇ। ¢ेğीय रेलɉ ɮवारा मौजूद सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ चरणबɮध तरȣके से ĤोĒेͧसव ͩफɪमेÛट का 
काय[ भी चल रहा है।  
28. कम[चाǐरयɉ कȧ Ǔनयͧमत काउÛसͧलंग कȧ जाती है और उÛहɅ Ĥͧश¢ण Ǒदया जाता है। 
29.  Ǒदनांक 30.11.2023 कȧ राजपğ अͬधसूचना के तहत भारतीय रेल (चाͧलत लाइन) साधारण 
Ǔनयम मɅ रोͧलंग Þलॉक अवधारणा कȧ शुǾआत कȧ गई है, िजसमɅ पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के एकȧकृत 
809                                                      

अनुर¢ण/मरàमत/ĤǓतèथापन के काय[ को रोͧलंग आधार पर 52 सÜताह पूव[ हȣ योजनाबɮध 
ͩकया जाता है और योजना के अनुसार ǓनçपाǑदत ͩकया जाता है। 
 
रेलवे ɮवारा ͩकए गए बेहतर अनुर¢ण कायɟ, Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय सुधारɉ, बेहतर अवसंरचना और चल 
èटॉक आǑद संबंधी संर¢ा कायɟ का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार सारणीबɮध है:- 
 
 
Đ.सं. मद 2004-05 से 
2013-14 
2014-15 से 
2024-25 
 
2004-14 कȧ तुलना 
मɅ 2014-25 
Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय सुधार 
1 उÍच-गुणवƣा वालȣ पटǐरयɉ 
का उपयोग (60 ͩक.Ēा.) 
(ͩक.मी.) 
57,450 ͩक.मी. 1.43 लाख 
ͩक.मी. 
2 गुना से अͬधक 
2 लंबी रेल पट ǐरयां 
(260 मीटर) (ͩक.मी.) 
9,917 ͩक.मी. 77,522 ͩक.मी. लगभग 8 गुना  
3 इलेÈĚोǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग 
(èटेशन) 
837 èटेशन 3,691 èटेशन 4 गुना से अͬधक 
4 फॉग पास सेÝटȣ उपकरण 
(अदद) 
31.03.14 तक 
90 अदद 
31.03.25 तक 
25,939 
288 गुना 
5 ͬथक वेब िèवच (अदद) शूÛय 28,301 अदद   
बेहतर अनुर¢ण पɮधǓतयां  
1 Ĥाथͧमक रेल नवीकरण 
(रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
32,260 ͩक.मी. 49,941 ͩक.मी. 1.5 गुना 
2 यूएसएफडी (अãĚा सोǓनक 
Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन) वेिãडंग 
परȣ¢ण (अदद) 
79.43 लाख 2 करोड़ 2 गुना से अͬधक 
3 वेãड संबंधी खरा ǒबयां 
(अदद) 
2013-14 मɅ: 
3699 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 
370 अदद 
90% कमी 
4 पटǐरयɉ मɅ दरारɅ (अदद) 2013-14 मɅ: 
2548 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 
289 अदद 
88% से 
Ïयादा कमी 
बेहतर अवसंरचना एवं चल èटॉक 
1 जोड़े गए नए रेलपथ 
ͩक.मी. (रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
14,985 ͩक.मी. 34,428 ͩक.मी. 2 गुना से अͬधक 
2 Ýलाईओवर (आरओबी)/ 
अंडरपास (आरयूबी) (अदद) 
4,148 अदद 13,808 अदद 3 गुना से अͬधक 
3 बड़ी लाइन पर चौकȧदार 
रǑहत समपार (अदद)  
31.03.14 तक: 
8948 
31.03.24 तक: 
शूÛय (31.01.19 
तक सभी बंद कर 
Ǒदए गए) 
हटा Ǒदए गए 
4 एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का 
ͪवǓनमा[ण (अदद) 
2,337 अदद 42,677 18 गुना से अͬधक 
***** 
810                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2331 का उƣर 
 
हाई-èपीड रेलवे परामश[ सेवाएं 
 
2331. Įी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई: 
डा. मेधा ͪवĮाम कुलकणȸ: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) Èया सरकार ने देश मɅ हाई-èपीड रेलवे परामश[ सेवाएं शुǾ करने के ͧलए कदम उठाए हɇ 
ताͩक इस ¢ेğ मɅ ͪवशेष£ता, योजना और Ǔनण[य लेने कȧ ¢मता को सुǺढ़ ͩकया जा सके;  
(ख) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) Èया सरकार आयात पर Ǔनभ[रता कम करने के  ͧलए हाई-èपीड रेलवे कलपुजɟ, ͧसगनल 
Ĥणाͧलयɉ और ͪवɮयुत उपकरणɉ के घरेलू ͪवǓनमा[ण को बढ़ावा दे रहȣ है; और 
(घ) यǑद हां, तो 'मेक इन इंͫडया' और 'आ×मǓनभ[र भारत' पहलɉ के  तहत èवदेशी उɮयोगɉ को 
समथ[न देने के ͧलए कौन-कौन से उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): भारत मɅ हाई èपीड रेल नेटवक[ के ͪवकास के ͧलए वत[मान मɅ रेल मंğालय,  
मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल (एमएएचएसआर) पǐरयोजना (508 ͩक.मी.) को जापान सरकार के 
तकनीकȧ और ͪवƣीय सहयोग से ͩĐयािÛवत कर रहȣ है। 
 
मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल (एमएएचएसआर) पǐरयोजना के माÚयम से ĤाÜत अनुभवɉ और 
ͪवकͧसत कȧ जा रहȣ तकनीकȧ ¢मताओं, ͪवशेष Ǿप से रेलपथ Ǔनमा[ण, उÛनत ͧसगनल Ĥणालȣ, 
चल-èटॉक ͪवǓनमा[ण एवं अनुर¢ण, पǐरयोजना Ĥबंधन आǑद से देश मɅ भावी उÍच गǓत रेल 
गͧलयारɉ के ͪवकास के ͧलए एक मजबूत आधार Ĥदान होने कȧ संभावना है। इस तरह कȧ 
ͪवशेष£ता ĤाÜत होने से, भारत हाई èपीड रेल के ¢ेğ मɅ योजना और Ǔनण[य लेने के ͧलए अपनी 
िèथǓत को सुǺढ़ करेगा। 
 
811                                                      

मेक इन इंͫडया और आ×मǓनभ[र भारत पहल के अनुǾप, भारतीय रेल आयात Ǔनभ[रता को कम 
करने के ͧलए उÍच गǓत रेल Ĥणाͧलयɉ और घटकɉ के èवदेशी ͪवǓनमा[ण को Ĥो×साǑहत कर रहȣ है।  
 
वंदे भारत कȧ सफलता के आधार पर सवारȣ ͫडÞबा कारखाना (आईसीएफ), मैसस[ भारत अथ[ मूवस[ 
ͧलͧमटेड (बीईएमएल) के  सहयोग से 280 ͩकमी/घंटा कȧ गǓत वाले हाई èपीड रेल सेट का ͫडजाइन 
और Ǔनमा[ण कर रहा है। हाई èपीड Ĥणालȣ के साथ-साथ, भारतीय रेल के पास ͪवɮयुत और डीजल 
इंजन के संबंध मɅ पहले से हȣ मजबूत èवदेशी ͪवǓनमा[ण ¢मताएं हɇ, िजनका उ×पादन भारतीय रेल 
कȧ उ×पादन इकाइयɉ यथा ͬचतरंजन रेलइंजन कारखाना (ͬचरेका), ͬचƣरंजन बनारस रेलइंजन 
कारखाना (बरेका), वाराणसी; और पǑटयाला रेलइंजन कारखाना (परेका), पǑटयाला ɮवारा ͩकया जा 
रहा है, जो उÛनत रेल Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मɅ भारत कȧ आ×मǓनभ[रता को मजबूत बनाते हɇ। 
 
ͪपछले 11 वषɟ के दौरान उ×पादन इकाइयɉ मɅ रेल इंजनɉ और सुरͯ¢त एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के 
उ×पादन मɅ उãलेखनीय बढ़ोतरȣ हुई है, जो Ǔनàनानुसार है:- 
 
वष[ 2004-14 2014-25 
एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबे 2,337 42,675 
इंजन 4,695 10,849 
 
****** 
812                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2332 का उƣर 
 
अÍचरपाÈकम रेलवे èटेशन पर Ěेनɉ का ठहराव 
 
2332. Įी आर. ͬगǐरराजन: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) Èया मंğालय को तͧमलनाडु के अÍचरपाÈकम रेलवे èटेशन पर Ěेनɉ के ठहराव के ͧलए कोई 
अनुरोध ĤाÜत हुआ है, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) Èया सरकार ने अÍचरपाÈकम रेलवे èटेशन पर अͬधक Ěेनɉ के ठहराव कȧ सुͪवधा Ĥदान 
करने हेतु कोई सकारा×मक Ǔनण[य ͧलया है, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है, और यǑद 
नहȣं, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ; और 
(ग) Èया सरकार ने अमृत भारत रेलवे èटेशन ͪवकास योजना के अंतग[त अÍचरपाÈकम रेलवे 
èटेशन के ͪवकास के ͧलए कोई कदम उठाए हɇ, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है, और 
यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके  Èया कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
 
(क) से (ग): अचारापÈकम èटेशन वत[मान मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 4 गाड़ी सेवाओं ɮवारा सेͪवत कȧ जा 
रहȣ है, जो अÛय शहरɉ के साथ-साथ ͪवãलुपुरम और चेÛनै जैसे शहरɉ से संपक[ता Ĥदान करती हɇ। 
 
Đ. सं. गाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1. 66045 तांबरम - ͪवãलुपुरम पैसɅजर 
2. 66046 ͪवãलुपुरम – चेÛनै बीच पैसɅजर 
3. 66055 तांबरम - ͪवãलुपुरम पैसɅजर  
4. 66056 ͪवãलुपुरम - तांबरम पैसɅजर 
813                                                      

इसके अलावा, गाड़ी सेवाओं के ठहराव कȧ सुͪवधा यातायात औͬच×य, पǐरचालǓनक åयवहाय[ता 
िजसमɅ खंड पर अǓतǐरÈत समय कȧ उपलÞधता और Üलेटफ़ॉम[ कȧ लंबाई आǑद जैसी समान 
अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता शाͧमल हɇ, पर Ǔनभ[र करती है। 
 
इसके अलावा, अÛय बातɉ के साथ-साथ गाड़ी सेवाओं का ठहराव देने के ͧलए सांसदɉ, Ǔनवा[ͬचत 
ĤǓतǓनͬधयɉ, संगठनɉ/रेल उपयोगकता[ओं आǑद से Ĥèताव/अनुरोध/सुझाव/ĤǓतǓनͬध×व, औपचाǐरक और 
अनौपचाǐरक दोनɉ Ǿपɉ मɅ रेलवे बोड[, ¢ेğीय रेलवे, मंडल काया[लय आǑद सǑहत ͪवͧभÛन èतरɉ पर 
ĤाÜत होते हɇ। चूंͩक ऐसे Ĥèताव/अनुरोध/सुझाव कȧ ĤािÜत एक सतत् और गǓतशील ĤͩĐया है, 
इसͧलए ऐसे अनुरोधɉ के  केÛġȣकृत सार-संĒह नहȣं रखे जाते हɇ। बहरहाल, इनकȧ जांच कȧ जाती है 
और समय-समय पर जो उͬचत और åयवहाय[ पाया जाता है, उसके अनुसार कार[वाई कȧ जाती है।  
 
èटेशनɉ का पुनͪव[कास 
 
अचरपÈकम èटेशन पर उÍच èतरȣय Üलेटफाम[, Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर, Ĥती¢ालय, पीने के पानी के नल, 
मूğालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा और पैदल पार पुल कȧ सुͪवधाएं उपलÞध हɇ। हाल के वषɟ मɅ, 
èटेशन भवन, Ĥकाश åयवèथा और Ǒदåयांगजन सुͪवधाओं के सुधार के काय[ पूरे ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण सतत् और 
Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस संबंध मɅ कायɟ कȧ पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ 
उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन, आवæयकतानुसार काय[ ͩकए जाते हɇ। èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/ 
उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण के ͧलए कायɟ को èवीकृǓत देते और ǓनçपाǑदत करते समय Ǔनचलȣ कोǑट के 
èटेशनɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ उÍच कोǑट के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है।  
 
रेल मंğालय ने èटेशनɉ के दȣघ[काͧलक Ǻिçट से पुनͪव[कास के ͧलए अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना शुǾ 
कȧ है। 
 
इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए माèटर Üलान तैयार करना और इÛहɅ चरणबɮध Ǿप 
मɅ काया[िÛवत करना शाͧमल है। माèटर Üलान मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल है:- 
 
 èटेशन तक पहुंच और पǐरचलन ¢ेğ मɅ सुधार 
 शहर के दोनɉ छोरɉ के साथ èटेशन का एकȧकरण 
 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार 
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा, वाटर बूथɉ मɅ सुधार 
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पुल/एयर कॉÛकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
 ͧलÝट/एèकेलेटर/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
 Üलेटफाम[ कȧ सतह मɅ और Üलेटफाम[ पर कवर का सुधार/Ĥावधान  
 'एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद' जैसी योजनाओं के  माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए ͩकयोèक 
का Ĥावधान 
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, मãटȣमॉडल एकȧकरण 
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएं 
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
814                                                      

 Ĥ×येक èटेशन पर आवæयकता को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए एÈजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, åयावसाǓयक 
बैठकɉ के ͧलए ǓनǑद[çट èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग आǑद का Ĥावधान। 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध एवं åयवहाय[ Ǿप से संधारणीय और पया[वरण अनुकूल 
समाधान, ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत रेलपथ आǑद का Ĥावधान तथा दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ सɅटर के 
Ǔनमा[ण कȧ भी पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है।  
 
अब तक, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त ͪवकास के ͧलए 1337 रेलवे èटेशनɉ को ͬचिéनत 
ͩकया गया है, िजनमɅ से 77 èटेशन तͧमलनाडु मɅ िèथत हɇ। तͧमलनाडु मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन 
योजना के तहत ͪवकास के ͧलए ͬचिéनत ͩकए गए èटेशनɉ के नाम Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
राÏय èटेशनɉ कȧ 
संÉया 
 èटेशनɉ के नाम 
तͧमलनाडु 77 अंबासमुġम, अंबƣूर, अरÈकोणम् जंÈशन, अǐरयालुर, आवǑद, बोिàमडी, 
चɅगलपɪटू जंÈशन, चेÛनै बीच, चेÛनै एÊमोर, चेÛनै पाक[, ͬचदंबरम, 
ͬचÛना सेलम, Đोमपेट, कोयàबटूर जंÈशन, कोयàबटूर नॉथ[, कुÛनूर, 
धम[पुरȣ, ǑदंͫडÈकल, इरोड जंÈशन, गुडुवनचेरȣ, गुइंडी, गुिàमडीपूंडी, 
होसुर, जोलारपेɪटई जंÈशन, कÛयाकुमारȣ टͧम[नस, कराइÈकुडी जं., 
कǾर जंÈशन, काटपाडी, कोͪवलपɪटȣ, कुͧलतुरई, कुंभकोणम, लालगुडी, 
मदुरै जंÈशन, माàबलम, मनापरई, मÛनारगुडी, मǓयलाडुतुरै जं., 
मेɪटुपलयम, मोरÜपुर, नागरकोइल जंÈशन, नामÈकल, पलानी, 
परमाकुडी, पेरàबूर, पोदनूर जंÈशन, पोलाची जं., पोलुर, पुदुÈकोɪटई, 
पुराची थलाईवर डॉ. एम.जी.रामचंġन सɅĚल, राजापलायम, रामनाथपुरम, 
रामेæवरम, सेलम, सामलपɪटȣ, शोलावंदन, Įीरंगम, Įीͪविãलपुƣूर, सɅट 
थॉमस माउंट, ताàबरम, तेनकासी, तंजावुर जंÈशन, Ǔतǽवǽर जंÈशन. 
ǓतǽचɅदूर, Ǔतǽनेलवेलȣ जंÈशन, ǓतǽÜपादǐरÜपुलयूर, Ǔतǽपƣूर, ǓतǽÜपुर, 
Ǔतǽसुलम, Ǔतǽƣानी, Ǔतǽवãलुर, ǓतǽवÛनामलाई, तूतीकोǐरन, 
उदगमंडलम, वेãलूर कɇट, ͪवãलुपुरम जंÈशन, वृɮधाचलम जंÈशन  
 
तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर ͪवकास काय[ तीĭ गǓत 
से शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। अब तक, इस योजना के अंतग[त तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ 18 èटेशनɉ (बोिàमडी, 
ͬचदंबरम, ͬचÛना सेलम, करईÈकुͫड जंÈशन, कुͧलतुरई, मनापरई, मÛनारगुडी, मोरÜपुर, पोलाची 
जंÈशन, पोलुर, सामलपɪटȣ, शोलावंदन, Įीरंगम, Įीͪविãलपुƣूर, सɅट थॉमस माउंट, ǓतǽवǾर जंÈशन, 
ǓतǽवÛनामलाई एवं वृɮधाचलम जंÈशन) का काय[ पूरा हो चुका है। अÛय èटेशनɉ के काय[ भी तीĭ 
गǓत से शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ और उपयु[Èत मɅ से कुछ èटेशनɉ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार नीचे Ǒदए  
गए हɇ:    
 
• ǓतǽÜपाǑदǐरÜपुलयूर èटेशन: पाͩक[ग ¢ेğ और संकेतकɉ का काय[ पूरा हो चुका है। Ĥवेश ɮवार, 
पोǑट[को, Ĥती¢ालय मɅ सुधार, Üलेटफाम[ कȧ सतह, Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर, शौचालय, गाड़ी संकेत 
बोड[, पहुंच माग[ और पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ के काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ।    
815                                                      

• वेलूर छावनी èटेशन: पǐरचलन ¢ेğ, बुͩकंग काया[लय, नए Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर, टͧम[नल भवन मɅ 
सुधार, Üलेटफाम[ कȧ सतह, Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, नई कंपाउंड चाहर दȣवारȣ, साइनबोड[, सवारȣ 
ͫडÞबा संकेत बोड[, èटɇडड[ रैàप, Ǒदåयांगजन पाͩकɍग, कम ऊ ँ चाई वाला Ǒटकट बूथ, Ǒदåयांगजन 
के अनुकूल शौचालय, èपश[नीय पथ, सुलभ माग[, लɇडèकेप और èटेशन पर Ĥकाश å यवè था मɅ 
सुधार के काय[ पूरे कर ͧलए गए हɇ। ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
• अǐरयालुर èटेशन: टͧम[नल भवन के सुधार के काय[ िजनमɅ पोच[, कॉनकोस[, बुͩकंग काया[लय, 
Ĥती¢ालय लॉबी, पǐरचलन ¢ेğ का सुधार, Üलेटफाम[ सतह Ǔनमा[ण, Ĥती¢ालय का सुधार, नया 
शौचालय, मानक रɇप, सवारȣ ͫडÞबा संकेत बोड[, Ǒदåयांगजन पाͩकɍग, कम ऊ ँ चाई वाला Ǒटकट 
बूथ, Ǒदåयांगजन अनुकूल शौचालय, èपश[नीय पथ, सुलभ माग[, Ĥकाश åयवèथा, मौजूदा पैदल 
पार पुल का सुधार, नया Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर और सवारȣ ͫडÞबा संकेतन बोड[ शाͧमल हɇ, पूरे कर 
ͧलए गए हɇ। नए 6 मीटर पैदल पार पुल का Ǔनमा[ण काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
• रामेæवरम è टेशन: पूवȸ/उƣरȣ टͧम[नल भवन, Ĥèथान Ĥांगण, आगमन Ĥांगण, आवासीय टावर, 
सब-èटेशन भवन, ¢ारȣय जल शोधन संयंğ और अपͧशçट जल Ĥबंधन संयंğ के संरचना 
संबंधी काय[ पूरे कर ͧलए गए हɇ। पूवȸ टͧम[नल भवन का Ǔनमा[ण काय[, उƣरȣ टͧम[नल भवन 
कȧ ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, Ĥèथान Ĥांगण, आगमन Ĥांगण, आवासीय टावर, Üलेटफॉम[ उÛनयन 
िजसमɅ Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर शाͧमल है और मौजूदा Ĥती¢ालय के नवीनीकरण काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए 
हɇ।  
 
èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण, िजसमɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना शाͧमल है, 
सामाÛयतः योजना शीष[-53 'Ēाहक सुͪवधाएँ' के तहत ͪवƣपोͪषत ͩकया जाता है। योजना शीष[-53 के 
तहत आवंटन और åयय का ͪववरण ¢ेğीय रेल-वार रखा जाता है न ͩक काय[-वार अथवा èटेशन-वार 
अथवा राÏय-वार। तͧमलनाडु राÏय दो रेलवे जोनɉ के अंतग[त आता है अथा[त् दͯ¢ण रेलवे और 
दͯ¢ण पिæचम रेलवे। इन जोनɉ को ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 के ͧलए 1,571 करोड़ ǽ. आवंटन ͩकया 
गया हɇ िजसमɅ से अब तक (अÈटूबर, 2025 तक) 1,011 करोड़ ǽ. का åयय उपगत ͩकया गया है।  
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ 
संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए फायर ÈलȣयरɅस, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन 
èवीकृǓत इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती है। इनकȧ ĤगǓत 
जनोपयोगी सेवाओं (िजनमɅ जल/सीवेज लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल, गैस पाइपलाइन, 
ͪवɮयुत/ͧसगनल केबल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ) को èथानांतǐरत करना, अǓतलंघन, याğी संचलन को 
बाͬधत ͩकए ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के Ǔनकट ͩकए जाने वाले 
कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद जैसी Ħाउन फȧãड संबंधी चुनौǓतयɉ के कारण भी Ĥभाͪवत होती 
है और ये कारक काय[ के समापन समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ।  
 
***** 
816                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2333 का उƣर 
 
कोटकपूरा जंÈशन पर रेलगाͫड़यɉ का ठहराव 
 
2333. डा. ͪवĐमजीत ͧसंह साहनी: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) Èया सरकार इस बात से अवगत है ͩक अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के  तहत कोटकपूरा रेलवे 
èटेशन के  चल रहे èतरोÛनयन के बावजूद, कोटकपूरा (फरȣदकोट) मɅ Ĥमुख रेलगाͫड़यɉ का 
ठहराव नहȣं है; 
(ख) Èया मंğालय रेलगाड़ी संÉया 19415/19416, 19107/19108, 20497/20498 और आगामी 
ͩफरोजपुर-Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत रेलगाड़ी के कोटकपूरा जंÈशन पर ठहराव को मंजूरȣ Ĥदान करने 
पर ͪवचार करेगा; 
(ग) यǑद हां, तो इन ठहरावɉ को मंजूरȣ देने कȧ Ĥèताͪवत समय-सीमा Èया है, यǑद नहȣं, तो 
इसके Èया कारण हɇ; 
(घ) Èया मंğालय पंजाब मɅ नई रेलगाͫड़यां चलाने कȧ योजना बना रहा है; और 
(ङ) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है, और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके  Èया कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ङ): कोट कपूरा èटेशन पर वत[मान मɅ 18 जोड़ी रेल सेवाओं (िजनकȧ सूची नीचे दȣ गई 
है) ɮवारा सेͪवत ͩकया जा रहा है, जो Ǒदãलȣ, मुंबई, जàमू तवी, अगरतला, अहमदाबाद, अजमेर, 
हǐरɮवार, हजूर साǑहब नांदेड़, अमृतसर आǑद जैसे Ĥमुख शहरɉ से संपक[ता Ĥदान करती हɇ।  
 
Đ. सं. गाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1. 12137/38 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टͧम[नस)-ͩफरोजपुर पंजाब मेल 
2. 14027/28 जींद-ͩफरोजपुर एÈसĤेस 
817                                                      

3. 14507/08 Ǒदãलȣ-फािज़ãका  
4. 14619/20 अगरतला-ͩफरोजपुर कɇट एÈसĤेस 
5. 14621/22 हुज़ूर साǑहब नांदेड़-ͩफरोजपुर एÈसĤेस 
6. 14625/26 हǐरɮवार-ͩफरोजपुर एÈसĤेस 
7. 14729/30 रेवाड़ी-फािज़ãका एÈसĤेस 
8. 14803/04 भगत कȧ कोठȤ-जàमू तवी एÈसĤेस 
9. 19223/24 साबरमती-जàमू तवी एÈसĤेस 
10. 19611/12 अजमेर-अमृतसर एÈसĤेस 
11. 20423/24 ͧसवनी-ͩफरोजपुर कɇट पातालकोट एÈसĤेस 
12. 54561/62 बǑठÖडा-ͩफरोजपुर पैसɅजर 
13. 54563/64 बǑठÖडा-ͩफरोजपुर पैसɅजर 
14. 54641/42 बǑठÖडा-ͩफरोजपुर पैसɅजर 
15. 74981/82 कोट कपूरा- फािज़ãका डेमू 
16. 74983/84 कोट कपूरा-फािज़ãका डेमू 
17. 74985/86 बǑठÖडा-फािज़ãका डेमू 
18. 74987/88 बǑठÖडा-फािज़ãका डेमू  
 
19415/16 साबरमती-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा एÈसĤेस, 19107/08 भावनगर (टͧम[.)-शहȣद कैÜटन 
तुषार महाजन (उधमपुर) एÈसĤेस, 20497/98 रामेæवरम-ͩफरोजपुर एÈसĤेस और 26461/62 
ͩफरोजपुर-Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस का कोटकपूरा के पास बǑठÖडा/फरȣदकोट/ͩफरोजपुर मɅ ठहराव 
Ǔनधा[ǐरत है।  
 
इसके अलावा, रेल सेवाओं के ठहराव का Ĥावधान यातायात औͬच×य, पǐरचालǓनक åयवहाय[ता 
िजसमɅ उस खंड पर अǓतǐरÈत समय कȧ उपलÞधता और Üलेटफाम[ कȧ लंबाई आǑद जैसी उपयुÈत 
अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता शाͧमल है पर Ǔनभ[र करता है। 
 
इसके अलावा, चूंͩक रेल नेटवक[ राÏय कȧ सीमाओं के आर-पार फैला होता है, इसͧलए नेटवक[ कȧ 
आवæयकता के अनुसार, इन सीमाओं के पार रेलगाͫड़यां चलाई जाती हɇ। हालांͩक, 2025-26 के दौरान 
(15 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 तक) भारतीय रेल ने Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 7 जोड़ी रेलगाड़ी सेवाएं (Ĥèथान/गंतåय आधार 
पर) शुǾ कȧ हɇ, िजनमɅ पंजाब राÏय मɅ िèथत èटेशनɉ कȧ जǾरतɉ को पूरा करने वालȣ वंदे भारत 
सेवाओं कȧ 2 जोͫड़याँ शाͧमल हɇ:  
 
Đ.सं. गाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  26461/26462 Ǒदãलȣ - ͩफरोजपुर कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस  
2.  15135/15136 छपरा - अमृतसर एÈसĤेस 
3.  20989/20990 उदयपुर ͧसटȣ - चंडीगढ़ एÈसĤेस 
4.  14627/14628 सहरसा - छेहरटा (अमृतसर) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
818                                                      

5.  26405/26406 अमृतसर - Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
6.  14625/14626 हǐरɮवार - ͩफरोजपुर कɇट एÈसĤेस 
7.  14621/14622 हुज़ूर साǑहब नांदेड़ - ͩफरोजपुर कɇट एÈसĤेस 
 
इसके अलावा, नई रेल सेवाओं को शुǾ करना, एक सतत चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है जो ͪवͧभÛन 
कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करती है, िजनमɅ शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
 उस खंड कȧ ¢मता 
 पथ कȧ उपलÞधता 
 अपेͯ¢त चल èटॉक कȧ उपलÞधता 
 चल èटॉक के ͧलए समान अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता 
 रेल पथ और अÛय पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ रखरखाव आवæयकता 
 
****** 
819                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2334 का उƣर 
 
ई-कॉमस[ और शीē खराब होने वालȣ वèतुओं के ͧलए समͪप[त मालगाͫड़यां 
 
2334. Įीमती सुलता देव: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) Èया मंğालय ओͫडशा मɅ संभार तंğ संबंधी द¢ता मɅ सुधार के  ͧलए ई-कॉमस[ और शीē 
खराब होने वालȣ वèतुओं के ͧलए समͪप[त मालगाͫड़यɉ कȧ शुǽआत करने पर ͪवचार करेगा; 
और 
(ख) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है, और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके  Èया कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) और (ख): भारतीय रेल पर पूरे देश मɅ पास[ल ले जाने के ͧलए एक समͪप[त Ĥणालȣ है, िजसमɅ 
ͪवशेष Ǿप से इस उ ɮदेæय के ͧलए बनाए गए ͫडÞबे शाͧमल हɇ– जैसे पास[ल वैन 
(वीपी/वीपीयू/वीपीएच), Ħेक वैन (एसएलआर), साधारण Įेणी ͫडÞबे (जीएस), आशोͬधत साधारण Įेणी 
कोच (एनएमजी/एनएमजीएच/एनएमजीएचएस) और सहायक गाɬ[स कैǒबन (एजीसी), और पास[ल 
एÈसĤेस गाͫड़यां (Ǔनधा[ǐरत सेवाएँ, पɪटे कȧ सेवाएँ और मांग सेवाएँ) आǑद। भारतीय रेल ͪवͧभÛन 
Ĥकार के  सामान, जैसे ई-कॉमस[ वèतुएं, नæयवान, सामाÛय पÖय, औɮयोͬगक कÍचा माल, मशीनरȣ, 
उपभोÈता वèतुएं और अÛय सामान क े  पǐरवहन क े  ͧलए पास[ल सेवाएं Ĥदान करता है। 
 
संयुÈत पास[ल उ×पाद-रैͪपड कागȾ सेवा (जेपीपी-आरसीएस) नीǓत के तहत, कुछ ͪवशेष èथानɉ के 
बीच 08 जोड़ी Ǔनधा[ǐरत (समय साǐरणीबɮध) सेवाएँ पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जा रहȣ हɇ, िजÛहɅ बाजार कȧ 
मांग और पǐरचालǓनक åयवहाय[ता के आधार पर योजनाबɮध ͩकया गया है। इस योजना के तहत 
820                                                      

पैनलबɮध पास[ल एĒीगेटर भारतीय रेल ɮवारा ͪवकͧसत व संèथाͪपत ऑनलाइन 'वचु[अल एĒीगेशन 
Üलेटफ़ॉम[' (वीएपी) के माÚयम से पास[ल यानɉ कȧ बुͩकंग करते हɇ। 
 
इन सेवाओं को लोकͪĤय बनाने के  ͧलए, इस योजना को उदार बनाया गया है। एĒीगेटर के  Ǿप मɅ 
पंजीकरण के ͧलए ͪवƣीय पाğता मानदंड को वापस ले ͧलया गया है और नामांकन शुãक को 
संशोͬधत करके 10,000/- ǽपए कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 
इसके अलावा, लȣज़ ͩकए गए पास[ल èथल (एसएलआर, वीपी) कȧ ई-नीलामी मɅ भागीदारȣ के ͧलए 
ͪवƣीय पाğता मानदंड और लȣज़ ͩकए गए पास[ल गाड़ी को Ǔनͪवदा मानदंड से हटा Ǒदया गया है। 
 
Ǒहतधारकɉ से ĤाÜत मांग और पǐरचालǓनक åयवहाय[ता को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए, ͪवͧशçट मागɟ पर 
पूण[ पास[ल गाͫड़यɉ कȧ योजना बनाई जाती है। ओͫडशा मɅ ई-कॉमस[ और नæयवान वèतुओं के  ͧलए 
समͪप[त पास[ल गाͫड़याँ शुǾ करने कȧ मांग का Ĥèताव ĤाÜत होने पर ͪवचार ͩकया जाएगा। 
 
****** 
821                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2335 का उƣर 
 
कवच का संèथापन 
 
2335. Įी नीरज शेखर: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) देश मɅ ͩकतने ĤǓतशत रेल Ĥणाͧलयɉ/रेलगाͫड़यɉ को टÈकर रोधी उपकरण, कवच से 
सुसिÏजत ͩकया गया है, त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) चालू वष[ और अगले वष[ क े दौरान ͩकन-ͩकन रेल Ĥणाͧलयɉ/रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ कवच संèथाͪपत 
ͩकए जाने कȧ संभावना है, त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(ग) संपूण[ भारतीय रेल मɅ कवच कȧ संèथापना मɅ तेजी लाने के ͧलए सरकार ɮवारा उठाए गए 
कदमɉ का Þयौरा Èया है और इसके ͧलए Ǔनधा[ǐरत लêय Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): 1. कवच एक èवदेशी ͪवकͧसत èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा Ĥणालȣ (एटȣपी) है। कवच 
अ×यͬधक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसके  ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन    
(एसआईएल-4) कȧ आवæयकता होती है।  
 
2. यǑद लोको पायलट Ħेक लगाने मɅ ͪवफल रहता है तो कवच èवचाͧलत Ħेक लगाकर लोको 
पायलट को ǓनǑद[çट गǓत सीमा के भीतर रेलगाड़ी चलाने मɅ सहायता करता है और यह 
खराब मौसम के  दौरान रेलगाड़ी को संरͯ¢त ढंग से चलाने मɅ भी सहायता करता है। 
 
3. याğी गाͫड़यɉ पर पहला फȧãड परȣ¢ण फरवरȣ 2016 मɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया था। इससे ĤाÜत 
अनुभव और तीसरे प¢ (Ǔनçप¢ संर¢ा मूãयांकनकता[: आईएसए) ɮवारा Ĥणालȣ के Ǔनçप¢ 
संर¢ा मूãयांकन के  आधार पर, कवच संèकरण 3.2 कȧ आपूǓत[ के ͧलए    2018-19 मɅ 
तीन फमɟ को अनुमोǑदत ͩकया गया था।  
 
4.  कवच को जुलाई 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय एटȣपी Ĥणालȣ क े  Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया। 
822                                                      

  
5.  कवच Ĥणालȣ के  काया[Ûवयन मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[कलाप शाͧमल हɇ: 
i. Ĥ×येक èटेशन, Þलॉक खÖड पर èटेशन कवच का संèथापन। 
ii. पूरे रेलपथ कȧ लंबाई मɅ आरएफआईडी टैग का संèथापन। 
iii. समĒ खंड मɅ दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन। 
iv. रेलपथ के  बगल मɅ ऑिÜटकल फाइबर के बल ǒबछाना। 
v. भारतीय रेल पर चल रहे Ĥ×येक रेल इंजन पर लोको कवच का Ĥावधान।  
6. दͯ¢ण मÚय रेल के  1465 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच संèकरण 3.2 को संèथापन और 
ĤाÜत अनुभव के आधार पर आगे और सुधार ͩकए गए। अंततः आरडीएसओ ɮवारा Ǒदनांक 
16.07.2024 को कवच ͪवͧशिçट संèकरण 4.0 को अनुमोǑदत ͩकया गया।  
7. कवच 4.0 संèकरण मɅ ͪवͪवध रेलवे नेटवक[ के  ͧलए आवæयक सभी Ĥमुख ͪवशेषताएं 
शाͧमल हɇ। यह भारतीय रेल कȧ संर¢ा मɅ एक मह×वपूण[ उपलिÞध है। अãप अवͬध के  
भीतर, भारतीय रेल ने èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ण Ĥणालȣ ͪवकͧसत कȧ, परȣ¢ण ͩकया 
गया और उसे संèथाͪपत करना शुǾ कर Ǒदया है। 
8. कवच संèकरण 4.0 मɅ ͩकए गए Ĥमुख सुधारɉ मɅ अविèथǓत सटȣकता मɅ वृɮͬध, बड़े याडɟ 
मɅ ͧसगनल संबंधी पहलुओं कȧ बेहतर जानकारȣ, ओएफसी पर èटेशन-से-èटेशन कवच 
इंटरफ़ेस और मौजूदा इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ से सीधा इंटरफ़े स शाͧमल है। इन 
सुधारɉ के साथ, कवच संèकरण 4.0 को भारतीय रेल मɅ बड़े पैमाने पर लागू करने कȧ 
योजना है। 
9. ͪवèतृत एवं åयापक परȣ¢णɉ क े  उपरांत, कवच के 4.0 संèकरण को Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई माग[ पर 
पलवल–मथुरा–नागदा रेलखंड (633 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) तथा Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा माग[ पर    
हावड़ा-बद[वान रेलखंड (105 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) सǑहत कुल 738 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर 
सफलतापूव[क कमीशंड कर Ǒदया गया है। Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई एवं Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ के शेष 
रेलखंडɉ पर कवच के  काया[Ûवयन का काय[ ĤगǓत पर है।  
10. Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ समेत उÍच घन×व वाले मागɟ पर कवच के 
Ĥमुख मदɉ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
Đ.सं. मद ĤगǓत 
i. ऑिÜटकल फाइबर के बल ǒबछाना 7129 ͩक.मी. 
ii. दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन 860 अदद 
iii. èटेशन डेटा सɅटर 767 èटेशन 
iv. रेलपथ साइड उपकरणɉ का संèथापन 5672 माग[ ͩक.मी. 
v. रेल इंजनɉ मɅ कवच का Ĥावधान 4,154 
 
823                                                      

11. इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल के सभी जीÈयू, जीडी, एचडीएन और ͬचिéनत रेलखंडɉ को कवर 
करते हुए 15,512 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच के रेलपथ साइड कायɟ का काया[Ûवयन Ĥारंभ 
ͩकया गया है।  
12. अÛय 9,069 रेल इंजनो को कवच के 4.0 संèकरण से सुसिÏजत करने हेतु बोͧलंयां आमंǒğत 
कȧ गई हɇ। रेल इंजनɉ मɅ Ǔनरंतर चरणबɮध तरȣके  से कवच कȧ åयवèथा कȧ जा रहȣ है। 
13. सभी संबंͬधत अͬधकाǐरयɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण देने के ͧलए भारतीय रेल के कɅ ġȣकृत Ĥͧश¢ण 
संèथानɉ मɅ कवच पर ͪवशेष Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए जा रहे हɇ। अब तक 40,000 
से अͬधक तकनीͧशयनɉ, ऑपरेटरɉ और इंजीǓनयरɉ को कवच Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ के ͪवषय पर 
Ĥͧशͯ¢त ͩकया जा चुका है। इसमɅ 33,000 लोको पायलट एवं सहायक लोको पायलट 
सिàमͧलत हɇ। यह पाɫयĐम इǐरसेट के  सहयोग से तैयार ͩकया गया है।  
14. अÈटूबर 2025 तक ‘कवच’ Ĥणालȣ से संबंͬधत कायɟ पर कुल 2,354.36 करोड़ ǽपए åयय 
ͩकए गए हɇ। वष[ 2025–26 के दौरान कुल ₹1673.19 करोड़ राͧश का आवंटन हुआ है। कायɟ 
कȧ ĤगǓत के अनुǾप अपेͯ¢त पूंजी उपलÞध कराई जाती है। 
 
****** 
824                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2336 का उƣर 
 
ͧसगनल पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के ĤǓतèथापन हेतु åयापक काय[योजना 
 
2336. Įी नीरज शेखर: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) Èया रेलवे ɮवारा अनुशंͧसत पǐरचालन अवͬध पार कर चुकȧ ͧसगनल पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के 
ĤǓतèथापन के ͧलए कोई åयापक काय[योजना लागू कȧ गई है; 
(ख) यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) भारतीय रेल मɅ ͧसगनͧलंग Ĥणालȣ के ĤǓतèथापन मɅ अब तक हुई ĤगǓत का ज़ोन-वार Þयौरा 
Èया है; और 
(घ) वत[मान ͪवƣ वष[ मɅ आज कȧ Ǔतͬथ तक इस उɮदेæय के ͧलए आवंǑटत, जारȣ एवं उपयोग कȧ 
गई Ǔनͬध का ज़ोन-वार Þयौरा Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): भारतीय रेल ने सुरͯ¢त और ͪवæवसनीय पǐरचालन के ͧलए ͪवͧभÛन ͧसगनल 
पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के Ǔनरȣ¢ण और रखरखाव कȧ ĤͩĐयाएं और पɮधǓतयाँ èथाͪपत कȧ हɇ। ͧसगनल 
पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ का ĤǓतèथापन एक सतत और Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ  ĤͩĐया है और इसे आयु तथा 
िèथǓत के आधार पर कोडल Ĥावधानɉ के अनुसार काया[िÛवत ͩकया जाता है। ͪवͧभÛन ͧसगनल कायɟ 
कȧ िèथǓत/ĤगǓत Ǔनàनͧलͨखत है:  
 
1. Ǒदनांक 30.11.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार 6,657 èटेशनɉ पर Üवाइंटɉ और ͧसगनलɉ के 
कɅ ġȣकृत पǐरचालन वालȣ इलेिÈĚकल/इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है।  
2. समपार फाटकɉ पर संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 30.11.2025 तक 10,100 समपार फाटकɉ पर 
इंटरलॉͩकंग कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है।  
825                                                      

3. संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 30.11.2025 तक 6,663 èटेशनɉ पर ͪवɮयुत साधनɉ ɮवारा रेलपथ 
अͧभयोग के स×यापन ɮवारा èटेशनɉ के पूण[ रेलपथ पǐरपथन कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
4. Þलॉक खंड कȧ èवचाͧलत ÈलȣयरɅस के ͧलए धुरा काउंटर, बीपीएसी (Þलॉक Ĥूͪवंग एÈसेल 
काउंटर) èथाͪपत ͩकए गए हɇ ताͩक अगलȣ गाड़ी को लाइन िÈलयर देने से पहले ǒबना मानवीय 
हèत¢ेप के गाड़ी का आगमन सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सके  और मानवीय हèत¢ेप को कम ͩकया 
जा सके । ये Ĥणालȣ Ǒदनांक 30.11.2025 तक 6,144 Þलॉक खंड पर मुहैया कराई गई है। 
5. èवचाͧलत Þलॉक ͧसगनल Ĥणालȣ (एबीएस) मौजूदा रेलपथ अवसंरचना के भीतर लाइन ¢मता 
को बढ़ाती है और Ǒदनांक 30.11.2025 तक 6559 माग[ ͩक.मी. पर मुहैया कराई गई है।  
6. भारतीय रेल ने भी उÛनत Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय Ĥणालȣ “कवच” को èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा Ĥणालȣ 
(एटȣपी) के  Ǿप मɅ लागू करने का Ǔनण[य ͧलया है। कवच एक èवदेशी ͪवकͧसत èवचाͧलत 
रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा Ĥणालȣ (एटȣपी)  है िजसके ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन कȧ 
आवæयकता होती है। कवच को जुलाई 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय एटȣपी Ĥणालȣ के  Ǿप मɅ अपनाया 
गया। 
7. Ǒदनांक 30.11.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार 3830 èटेशनɉ पर पुराने यांǒğक ͧसगनलɉ क े  
èथान पर Üवाइंटɉ और ͧसगनलɉ के कɅ ġȣकृत पǐरचालन वालȣ इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ 
कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। इसमɅ ͪपछले दो वषɟ के दौरान 817 èटेशनɉ पर इलेÈĚॉǓनक 
इंटरलॉͩकंग कȧ कमीशǓनंग शाͧमल है। 
8. वष[ 2025-26 के दौरान, ͧसगनल और दूरसंचार संबंͬधत कायɟ के  ͧलए 6800 करोड़ ǽपए 
आवंǑटत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजनमɅ से नवंबर 2025 तक 4050.62 करोड़ ǽपए खच[ हो चुके हɇ। 
 
****** 
826                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2337 का उƣर 
 
जनजातीय एवं ͪपछड़े िजलɉ मɅ िèथत छोटे èटेशनɉ के आधुǓनकȧकरण हेतु सहायता 
 
2337. Įी Ǔनरंजन ǒबशी:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:   
 
(क) Èया मंğालय जनजातीय एवं ͪपछड़े िजलɉ मɅ िèथत छोटे èटेशनɉ के आधुǓनकȧकरण के ͧलए 
ͫडिजटल ǑटकǑटंग, सौर पैनल तथा हǐरत पहलɉ से युÈत करने हेतु ͪवƣीय एवं तकनीकȧ 
सहायता Ĥदान करेगा; और  
(ख)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) और (ख): रेलवन ऐप के माÚयम से ͫडिजटल ǑटकǑटंग सेवाएं जनजातीय एवं ͪपछड़े ¢ेğɉ 
सǑहत पूरे देश मɅ याǒğयɉ के ͧलए उपलÞध हɇ जो ĒाहकोÛमुखी ͪवͪवध सेवाओं को आरͯ¢त और 
अनारͯ¢त Ǒटकट, Üलेटफॉम[ Ǒटकट, गाड़ी एवं पीएनआर जाँच, रेलमदद आǑद जैसी कई याğी-संबंधी 
सेवाओं को एक हȣ Üलेटफॉम[ पर एकल साइन-ऑन सुͪवधा के साथ एकȧकृत करता है। इसके 
अǓतǐरÈत, इंͫडयन रेलवे कैटǐरंग एंड टूǐरÏम कॉरपोरेशन कȧ वेबसाइट, आरͯ¢त Ǒटकटɉ के ͧलए 
रेल कनेÈट ऐप और अनारͯ¢त Ǒटकटɉ के  ͧलए यूटȣएस ऑन मोबाइल एिÜलकेशन भी उपलÞध हɇ। 
इन ऐिÜलकेशनो को आǑदवासी और ͪपछड़े ¢ेğɉ सǑहत भारत के ͩकसी भी èथान से डाउनलोड एवं 
उपयोग ͩकया जा सकता है, िजसमɅ उपयोगकता[ Ǒहतैषी पंजीकरण ĤͩĐया है, जो Ĥभावी ढंग से 
याǒğयɉ कȧ इन सेवाओं तक पहुंच सुगम बनाती है। 
मोबाइल ऐÜस एÜलȣकेशन ĤोĒाम इंटरफे स (एपीआई) आधाǐरत Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ पर काम करते हɇ, 
िजसमɅ उपयोगकता[ के ͫडवाइस और सव[र के बीच बहुत कम टेÈèट का आदान-Ĥदान होता है। 
इससे भारत मɅ कहȣं भी Ǒटकट बुͩकंग के ͧलए द¢तापूण[ काय[-Ǔनçपादन सुǓनिæचत होता है। 
827                                                      

èटेशनɉ पर अनारͯ¢त Ǒटकटɉ कȧ बुͩकंग के ͧलए èवचाͧलत Ǒटकट वɅͫडंग मशीनɅ लगाई गई हɇ, जो 
Ǒहंदȣ, अंĒेजी और ¢ेğ ͪवशेष कȧ èथानीय भाषाओं मɅ उपलÞध हɇ। इन मशीनɉ से उपनगरȣय और 
अनुपनगरȣय मागɟ के ͧलए याğा Ǒटकट, Üलेटफॉम[ Ǒटकट और सीज़न Ǒटकट के नवीनीकरण मɅ 
सुͪवधा होती है। èटेशनɉ पर इन ͫडिजटल सुͪवधाओं के उपयोग के बारे मɅ ͧशͯ¢त करने और 
उनकȧ सहायता करने के ͧलए सुͪवधादाताओं को ǓनयुÈत ͩकया गया है। एटȣवीएम, अनारͯ¢त 
Ǒटकट Ĥणालȣ (यूटȣएस) काउंटर और याğी आर¢ण Ĥणालȣ (पीआरएस) काउंटरɉ पर Èयूआर कोड 
èकैǓनंग के माÚयम से ͫडिजटल भुगतान कȧ सुͪवधा उपलÞध है। 
भारतीय रेल याğी आर¢ण Ĥणालȣ का आधुǓनकȧकरण कर रहा है, िजसमɅ हाड[वेयर, सॉÝटवेयर, 
नेटवक[ उपकरण, सुर¢ा अवसंरचना और नई Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ संबंधी ͧसèटम कȧ काय[Ĥणालȣ को  
उÛनत करना और बदलना शाͧमल है। वत[मान याğी आर¢ण Ĥणालȣ ĤǓत ͧमनट लगभग 25,000 
Ǒटकटɉ को संभाल सकती है, जबͩक उÛनत कȧ गई Ĥणालȣ को इससे चार गुना अͬधक ¢मता को 
संभालने के ͧलए ͫडज़ाइन ͩकया जा रहा है। 
भारतीय रेल मɅ Ǒटकट सुͪवधाओं का आधुǓनकȧकरण, Ĥणालȣ मɅ सुधार और Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय उÛनयन 
सतत ĤͩĐयाएं हɇ और इÛहɅ तकनीकȧ åयवहाय[ता और संसाधनɉ कȧ उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन ͩकया 
जाता है। 
इसके अलावा, हǐरत पहलɉ के तहत, भारतीय रेल तकनीकȧ åयवहाय[ता और धनराͧश कȧ उपलÞधता 
के आधार पर रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर सौर ऊजा[ Ĥणाͧलयाँ èथाͪपत कर रहा है। इसी के अंतग[त, 
30.11.2025 तक, 2600 से अͬधक रेलवे èटेशनɉ सǑहत भवनɉ पर लगभग 269 मेगावाट कȧ सौर 
ऊजा[ Ĥणाͧलयाँ चालू कȧ जा चुकȧ हɇ। 
****** 
 
828                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2338 का उƣर 
 
पǐरचालन लागत कȧ तुलना मɅ ͩकराया वसूलȣ 
 
2338. डा. अशोक कुमार ͧमƣल:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क) वष[ 2020 से अब तक, याǒğयɉ ɮवारा गैर-वातानुकूͧलत सामाÛय तथा èलȣपर Įेͨणयɉ 
मɅ कȧ गई याğाओं कȧ संÉया तथा पǐरचालन लागत के मुकाबले वसूल ͩकए गए 
ͩकराए का ĤǓतशत ͩकतना है, त×संबंधी राÏय-वार एवं वष[-वार Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ख)  वष[ 2020 से अब तक सामाÛय एवं è लȣपर कोचɉ मɅ भीड़भाड़, गंदगी अथवा 
अकाया[×मक शौचालय एवं पानी कȧ कमी से संबंͬधत ĤाÜत हुई याǒğयɉ कȧ ͧशकायतɉ 
अथवा घटनाओं का राÏय-वार एवं वष[-वार Þयौरा कया है;  
(ग)  वष[ 2020 से अब तक कोच रख-रखाव, सफाई एवं èवÍछता पर ĤǓत याğी-ͩकलोमीटर 
ͩकए गए तुलना×मक åयय का राÏय-वार एवं वष[-वार Þयौरा Èया है; और  
(घ)  Èया सरकार रेलवे सेवा मɅ सुधारɉ को ͪवƣपोͪषत करने तथा याǒğयɉ के ͩकराए मɅ 
वृɮͬध पर Ǔनभ[रता कम करने हेतु गैर-ͩकराया राजèव बढ़ाने के Ĥयासɉ मɅ तेजी लाने 
पर ͪवचार कर रहȣ है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): भारतीय रेल मɅ याǒğयɉ, पैसɅजर ͩकलोमीटर और सवारȣ ͫडÞबा अनुर¢ण आǑद 
पर ͩकए गए åयय के Þयौरे भारतीय रेल कȧ वाͪष[क सांिÉयकȧय ͪववरणɉ और अनुदान हेतु 
ͪवèतृत मांगɉ (मांग सं. 85) के अंतग[त उपलÞध हɇ, जो भारतीय रेल कȧ वेबसाइट 
(https://indianrailways.gov.in) पर उपलÞध हɇ। 
 
829                                                      

भारतीय रेल ɮवारा समाज के सभी वगɟ को ͩकफायती सेवाएं मुहैया कराने का Ĥयास ͩकया 
जाता है और वष[ 2023-24 मɅ याğी Ǒटकटɉ पर 60,466 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ सिÞसडी Ĥदान कȧ 
गई। इसका आशय है ͩक रेलɉ मɅ याğा करने वाले Ĥ×येक åयिÈत को औसतन 45% कȧ छूट 
दȣ जाती है अथा[त यǑद सेवा Ĥदान करने कȧ लागत 100 ǽ. है, तो Ǒटकट का मूãय केवल 
55 ǽपए है। यह सिÞसडी सभी याǒğयɉ को दȣ जा रहȣ है। 
रेलमदद, भारतीय रेल का ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण तंğ है जो याǒğयɉ को ͧशकायतɉ, सहायता और 
जानकारȣ के ͧलए एक एकȧकृत माÚयम उपलÞध कराती है। रेलमदद के अंतग[त याğी 
हेãपलाइन नंबर-139, रेलमदद वेब, ऐप और एसएमएस जैसे कई चैनलɉ के माÚयम से 
ͧशकायतɉ का समाधान हेतु अनुरोध कर सकते हɇ। रेलमदद ɮवारा याğी अपनी ͧशकायतɉ के 
समाधान पर फȧडबैक साझा कर सकते हɇ। रेलवे ɮवारा ĤǓतǑदन औसतन लगभग 2 करोड़ 
याǒğयɉ को गाड़ी सेवाएं मुहैया कराई जाती हɇ। रेलमदद के अंतग[त अनͬधकृत याǒğयɉ, 
अèवÍछ शौचालय और शयनयान एवं अनारͯ¢त सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ पानी कȧ उपलÞधता के  
संबंध मɅ ĤǓत याğी औसतन लगभग 0.008% ͧशकायतɅ ĤाÜत होती हɇ। 
भारतीय रेल ɮवारा ͪव£ापन और अÛय नवोÛमेषी ͪवचारɉ के माÚयम से गैर-ͩकराया राजèव 
मɅ बढ़ोतरȣ के ͧलए कई उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ, जैसे: 
• èटेशनɉ पर रेल ͫडèÜले नेटवक[ (आरडीएन) के माÚयम से ͪव£ापन। 
• आउट ऑफ होम (ओओएच) के माÚयम से ͪव£ापन। 
• सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ और गाͫड़यɉ के भीतर चल संपͪƣयɉ पर ͪव£ापन। 
• याǒğयɉ कȧ संतोषजनक याğा के ͧलए èलȣͪपंग पॉड कȧ सुͪवधा, एकल Ħांड Ĥीͧमयम 
आउटलेट, ऑटो एवं टैÈसी बुͩकंग कȧ सुͪवधा Ĥदान करने के ͧलए ͩकयोèक, भुगतान 
आधाǐरत ई-åहȣलचेयर सुͪवधा, èवाèØय संबंधी ͩकयोèक, जेनेǐरक दवाइयɈ के ͪवĐय 
हेतु मेͫडकल èटोर जैसे नवोÛमेषी समाधान 
• पाͩकɍग अनुबंधɉ से लाइसɅस शुãक। 
• भूͧम का मौġȣकरण। 
****** 
 
830                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2339 का उƣर 
 
चेÛनई से कडलूर रेल पǐरयोजना 
 
2339. डा. एम. धनपाल:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  È या सरकार को इस बात कȧ जानकारȣ है ͩक तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ चेÛनई से कडलूर वाया 
ईèट कोèट रोड रेलवे लाइन पǐरयोजना, वष[ 2013 मɅ भूͧम अͬधĒहण और Ĥारंͧभक काय[ 
पूण[ होने के बावजूद, अभी भी लंǒबत है; और  
(ख)  यǑद हाँ, तो Èया मंğालय ने उÈत पǐरयोजना को शीē पूण[ करने के ͧलए कोई संशोͬधत 
समयसीमा अथवा काय[योजना तैयार कȧ है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
 
(क) और (ख): चेÛनै - कɬडलोर बराèता ममãलापुरम, माराकनम, पुडुचेरȣ (179 ͩक.मी.) नई लाइन 
पǐरयोजना को बजट 2008-09 मɅ शाͧमल ͩकया गया था। पुडुचेरȣ सरकार ने ͪवलुपुरम - पुडुचेरȣ कȧ 
मौजूदा लाइन कȧ उƣरȣ और दͯ¢णी Ǒदशा कȧ ओर संरेखण बदलने के  साथ-साथ पुडुचेरȣ और 
कɬडलोर के बीच रेलपथ का दोहरȣकरण करने का अनुरोध ͩकया था। राÏय सरकार से संरेखण मɅ 
उपरोÈत संशोधन और रेलपथ दोहरȣकरण के कारण अǓतǐरÈत लागत वहन करने का अनुरोध 
ͩकया गया था। बहरहाल, राÏय सरकार ने पǐरयोजना कȧ अǓतǐरÈत मɅ अपनी असमथ[ता åयकत 
कȧ है।  
तͧमलनाडु 
हाल के वषɟ मɅ बजट आबंटन मɅ उãलेखनीय वृɮͬध हुई है। तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः 
पड़ने वालȣ अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाओं और संर¢ा कायɟ हेतु बजट आबंटन Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
831                                                      

 
अवͬध पǐरåयय 
2009-14 ₹879 करोड़ ĤǓत वष[ 
2025-26 ₹6,626 करोड़ (7.5 गुना से अͬधक) 
 
 
01.04.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार, तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ 22,808 करोड़ 
ǽपए कȧ लागत वालȣ कुल 1,700 ͩकलोमीटर लंबाई कȧ 15 पǐरयोजनाएं (9 नई लाइन, 03 आमान 
पǐरवत[न और 03 दोहरȣकरण) è वीकृत हɇ। इनका सार Ǔनàनानुसार है:- 
 
कोǑट èवीकृत 
पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ 
संÉया 
कुल लंबाई 
(ͩकलोमीटर मɅ) 
माच[ 2025 तक 
कमीशन कȧ गई 
लंबाई  
(ͩकलोमीटर मɅ) 
माच[ 2025 तक 
åयय  
(करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
नई लाइन 9 812 24 1,337 
आमान पǐरवत[न 3 748 604 3,471 
दोहरȣकरण/बहुपथन 3 140 37 2,783 
कुल 15 1700 665 7,591 
 
 
तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ कुछ पǐरयोजनाएं, िजÛ हɅ हाल हȣ मɅ पूरा ͩकया गया है, का 
Þ यौरा Ǔनà नानुसार है: 
 
Đ. सं. पǐरयोजना लागत 
(करोड़ ǽ. 
मɅ) 
1 ͫडंडीगुल-पलानी-पोलाची आमान पǐरवत[न (121 ͩकलोमीटर) 610 
2 पोलाची-पालघाट आमान पǐरवत[न (56 ͩकलोमीटर) 350 
3 पोलाची-पो× तनूर आमान पǐरवत[न (40 ͩकलोमीटर) 400 
4 िÈवलोन-Ǔतǽनेलवेलȣ-ǓतǽचɅदुर आमान पǐरवत[न (357 ͩकलोमीटर) 1122 
5 मǓयलादुतुरई-ͬथǽवǽर-कराइÈकुडी आमान पǐरवत[न (187 ͩकलोमीटर) 1338 
6 मदुरै-बोͫडयाकÛनूर आमान पǐरवत[न (90 ͩकलोमीटर) 593 
7 चɅगलपɪटू-ͪवãलुपुरम दोहरȣकरण (102 ͩकलोमीटर) 670 
8 Ǔतǽवãलुर-अराÈकोनम चौथी लाइन (27 ͩकलोमीटर) 83 
9 चेÛनई सɅĚल-बेͧसन ǒĦज दोहरȣकरण (2 ͩकलोमीटर) 31 
10 तंजावुर-पोनमलाई दोहरȣकरण (48 ͩकलोमीटर) 370 
11 ͪवãलुपुरम-ͫडंडीगुल दोहरȣकरण (273 ͩकलोमीटर) 2000 
832                                                      

12 चेÛनई बीच-कोǽÈकुपेट तीसरȣ लाइन (5 ͩकलोमीटर) 168 
13 चेÛनई बीच-अɪटȣपɪटू चौथी लाइन (22 ͩकलोमीटर) 293 
14 ओमलुर-मेƣूरडैम कहȣं-कहȣं दोहरȣकरण (29 ͩकलोमीटर) 327 
15 चɅगलपɪटू-ͪवãलुपुरम और तांबरम-चɅगलपɪटू - तीसरȣ लाइन 
(133 ͩकलोमीटर) 1122  
16 सेलम-मैÊनेसाइट जंÈशन-ओमालुर दोहरȣकरण (11 ͩकलोमीटर) 115  
17 मदुरै- मǓनयाची-तूतीकोǐरन दोहरȣकरण (160 ͩकलोमीटर) 1891  
18 मǓनयाची-नागरकोइल दोहरȣकरण (102 ͩकलोमीटर) 1752  
19 चेÛनई बीच- चेÛनई एÊमोर दोहरȣकरण (4 ͩकलोमीटर) 272  
20 कारैÈकाल – पेरलम नई लाइन (23 ͩकमी) 373  
21 कारैÈकाल पोट[ से उƣरȣ छोर बंदरगाह सàपक[ता (1 ͩकमी) 18   
तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ कुछ पǐरयोजनाएँ िजÛहɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया है, का 
Þ यौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
Đ.सं. पǐरयोजना लागत (करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1 Ǒटंडीवनम-नगरȣ नई लाइन (184 ͩकलोमीटर) 3631 
2 मोरÜपुर-धम[पुरȣ नई लाइन (36 ͩकलोमीटर) 359 
3 नागपɪǑटनम - Ǔतǽतुरईपुंडी नई लाइन (43 ͩकलोमीटर) 742 
4 ǓतǾवनंतपुरम- कÛयाकुमारȣ- दोहरȣकरण (87 ͩकलोमीटर) 3785 
5 अराÈकोनम याड[ तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन (6 ͩकलोमीटर)  98 
 
ͪपछले तीन वषɟ 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 और चालू ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 मɅ, तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ 
पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ 2,493 ͩक.मी. कुल लंबाई वाले 28 सवȶ¢ण (05 नई लाइन और         
23 दोहरȣकरण) को èवीकृत ͩकया गया है।  
 
तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ मह× वपूण[ अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाओं का 
Ǔनçपादन भूͧम अͬधĒहण मɅ ͪवलंब के कारण ǽका हुआ है। तͧमलनाडु मɅ भूͧम अͬधĒहण कȧ 
िèथǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
तͧमलनाडु मɅ पǐरयोजनाओं के ͧलए कुल अपेͯ¢त भूͧम  4326 हेÈ टेयर 
अͬधगृहȣत कȧ गई भूͧम 1052 हेÈ टेयर (24%) 
अͬधĒहण हेतु शेष भूͧम  3274 हेÈ टेयर (76%) 
 
भूͧम अͬधĒहण मɅ तेजी लाने के ͧलए तͧमलनाडु सरकार के सहयोग कȧ आवæ यकता है। 
833                                                      

 
भूͧम अͬधĒहण के कारण ͪवलंǒबत हुई कुछ मह× वपूण[ पǐरयोजनाओं का Þ यौरा Ǔनà नानुसार है:- 
Đ.सं पǐरयोजना का नाम कुल अपेͯ¢त 
भूͧम  
(हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
अͬधगृहȣत कȧ 
गई भूͧम 
(हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
अͬधĒहण हेतु शेष 
भूͧम  
(हेÈटेयर मɅ) 
1. Ǔतंडीवनम-ǓतǽवÖणामलै नई लाइन 
(71 ͩकलोमीटर) 
276 33 243 
2. अǓतपɪटू–पुƣुर नई लाइन  
(88 ͩकलोमीटर) 
189 0 189 
3. मोरÜपुर–धम[पुरȣ नई लाइन  
(36 ͩकलोमीटर) 
92 45 47 
4. मÛनारगुडी-पɪटुकोɪटई नई लाइन 
(41 ͩकलोमीटर) 
196 0 196 
5. तंजावूर-पɪटुकोɪटई नई लाइन 
(52 ͩकलोमीटर) 
152 0 152 
 
इसके अलावा, रामेæवरम – धनुषकोडी नई लाइन (18 ͩक.मी.) को 734 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ लागत पक 
èवीकृत ͩकया गया था। पǐरयोजना का ͧशलाÛयास Ǒदनांक 01.03.2019 को ͩकया गया था। 
बहरहाल, पǐरयोजना शुǾ नहȣं हो सकȧ Èयɉͩक तͧमलनाडु राÏय सरकार ɮवारा भूͧम अͬधĒहण 
नहȣं ͩकया गया है। 
भारत सरकार पǐरयोजनाओं के Ǔनçपादन के ͧलए तैयार है, बहरहाल, इनकȧ सफलता तͧमलनाडु 
सरकार के सहयोग पर Ǔनभ[र करती है। 
ͩकसी भी रेल पǐरयोजना कȧ èवीकृǓत कई मानदंडɉ/कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करती है, िजनमɅ 
Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ: 
 अनुमाǓनत यातायात पूवा[नुमान और Ĥèताͪवत माग[ कȧ लाभĤदता  
 पǐरयोजना ɮवारा Ĥदान कȧ गई पहलȣ और अंǓतम èथान पहुंच संपक[ता  
 अनुपलÞध कͫड़यɉ को जोड़ना और अǓतǐरÈत माग[ Ĥदान करना  
 संकुͧलत/संतृÜत लाइनɉ का ͪवèतार  
 राÏय सरकारɉ/कɅ ġȣय मंğालयɉ/जनĤǓतǓनͬधयɉ ɮवारा कȧ गɃ मांगɅ  
 रेलवे कȧ पǐरचालǓनक आवæयकताएँ  
 सामािजक-आͬथ[क मह×व  
 Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ समĒ उपलÞधता  
834                                                      

रेल पǐरयोजना/पǐरयोजनाओं का पूरा होना कई कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है, िजनमɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 
शाͧमल हɇ:  
 राÏय सरकार ɮवारा भूͧम अͬधĒहण  
 वन संबंधी èवीकृǓत  
 अǓतलंघनकारȣ जनोपयोगी सुͪवधाओं का èथानांतरण  
 ͪवͧभÛन Ĥाͬधकरणɉ से सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयाँ  
 ¢ेğ कȧ भूवै£ाǓनक और èथलाकृǓतक पǐरिèथǓतयाँ  
 पǐरयोजना èथल के ¢ेğ मɅ कानून और åयवèथा कȧ िèथǓत  
 पǐरयोजना èथल ͪवशेष के ͧलए वष[ मɅ काय[ करने के महȣनɉ कȧ संÉया आǑद।  
ये सभी कारक पǐरयोजना/पǐरयोजनाओं के समापन समय और लागत को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ।  
****** 
 
835                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2340 का उƣर 
 
हैदराबाद मɅ हाई èपीड रेल पǐरयोजनाएं  
 
2340. Įी अǓनल कुमार यादव मंदादȣ:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  Èया सरकार ने Ēीनफȧãड हाईवे Ĥèतावɉ के अनुǾप Ýयूचर ͧसटȣ से हैदराबाद-चेÛनै और 
हैदराबाद-बɅगलुǽ हाई-èपीड रेल पǐरयोजनाओं के सवȶ¢ण और संरेखण Ĥèतावɉ के संबंध 
मɅ कार[वाई कȧ है/आरंभ कȧ है;  
(ख)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और  
(ग)  यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके È या कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): वत[मान मɅ, मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल पǐरयोजना (508 ͩक.मी.) भारत मɅ 
एकमाğ èवीकृत हाई èपीड रेल पǐरयोजना है, िजसे जापान सरकार के तकनीकȧ और ͪवƣीय 
सहायता से ǓनçपाǑदत ͩकया जा रहा है। 
 
 
हाई-èपीड रेल पǐरयोजना अ×यͬधक पूंजी गहन पǐरयोजना है और नई पǐरयोजना शुǾ करने 
का कोई भी Ǔनण[य तकनीकȧ åयवहाय[ता, ͪवƣ एवं आͬथ[क स¢मता, यातायात मांग और धन 
कȧ उपलÞधता तथा ͪवƣपोषण ͪवकãपɉ आǑद जैसे कई कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है।  
***** 
836                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2341 का उƣर 
 
रेल याǒğयɉ के ͧलए वैकिãपक याğा बीमा कवरेज  
 
2341. Įी नारायण कोरागÜपा: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  È या यह सच है ͩक वैकिãपक याğा बीमा कवरेज (ओटȣआईसी) केवल उन याǒğयɉ को Ĥदान ͩकया जाता है जो 
आईआरसीटȣसी से ऑनलाइन Ǒटकट “कनफम['/“आरएसी” िèथǓत मɅ खरȣदते हɇ और भारतीय नागǐरक होते हɇ;  
(ख)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ग)  Èया आईआरसीटȣसी से ऑनलाइन बुक कȧ गई ǑटकटɅ िजनकȧ िèथǓत Ĥती¢ा सूची मɅ रखी गई (वेटͧलèटेड) हɇ, 
उनमɅ ओटȣआईसी कȧ सुͪवधा नहȣं ͧमलती;  
(घ)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ङ)  Èया “Ĥती¢ा सूची मɅ रखी गई (वेटͧलèटेड)" आईआरसीटȣसी ǑटकटɅ कनफम[/आरएसी िèथǓत मɅ अɮयतन होने पर 
भी ओटȣआईसी कȧ सुͪवधा नहȣं ĤाÜत करतीं;  
(च)  यǑद हाँ, त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और  
(छ)  ऑफ़लाइन बुक कȧ गई Ěेन Ǒटकटɉ के ͧलए ओटȣआईसी सुͪवधा का Þयौरा Èया है? 
उƣर 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
(क) से (छ): आरͯ¢त Ǒटकट ĤाÜत करने हेतु सभी याğी ऑनलाइन माÚयम अथवा आर¢ण काउÛटरɉ पर Ǒटकट बुक कर 
सकते हɇ। इंͫडयन रेलवे कैटǐरंग एंड टूǐरÏम कॉरपोरेशन के माÚयम से ऑनलाइन कÛफम[/आरएसी ई-Ǒटकट बुक करने वाले 
याǒğयɉ के ͧलए ͪवकãप के Ǿप मɅ वैकिãपक याğा बीमा योजना उपलÞध है। यह योजना Ĥती¢ा सूची वालȣ ई-Ǒटकटɉ के 
ͧलए उपलÞध नहȣं है। कोई भी याğी जो बीमा सुͪवधा का लाभ उठाना चाहता है, वह Ǒटकट बुक करते समय अपने ͪववेक 
से इस योजना का ͪवकãप चुन सकता है। यह योजना उन याǒğयɉ के ͧलए उपलÞध है जो इंͫडयन रेलवे कैटǐरंग एंड 
टूǐरÏम कॉरपोरेशन के माÚयम से ई-Ǒटकट बुक करते हɇ और यह उन लोगɉ को अǓतǐरÈत बीमा कवर Ĥदान करती है 
िजÛहɉने इसका ͪवकãप चुना है और Ĥीͧमयम का भुगतान ͩकया है।  
 
याğी Ǒटकट बुक करते समय बीमा योजना के ͪवकãप का चयन करते हɇ और वे ͩकराए के साथ Ĥचͧलत Ĥीͧमयम 
का भुगतान करते हɇ। याğी को एसएमएस और उनके पंजीकृत ई-मेल आईडी पर सीधे बीमा कंपनी से पॉͧलसी कȧ सूचना 
ĤाÜत होती है और नामांकन ͪववरण भरने के ͧलए एक ͧलंक ĤाÜत होता है। बीमा कंपनी पॉͧलसी जारȣ करने और दावɉ के 
Ǔनपटान के ͧलए सीधे िजàमेदार है। दावे कȧ िजàमेदारȣ बीमाकृत åयिÈत और बीमा कंपनी के बीच है। 
याğी बीमा कंपनी से ई-मेल के माÚयम से ĤाÜत दèतावेज़ɉ के अनुसार सीधे बीमा कंपनी के पास दावा दायर 
करता है। 
****** 
837                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2342 का उƣर 
 
भारतीय रेलवे ɮवारा अिज[त राजèव 
 
2342. Įी संदोष कुमार पी.:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  वष[ 2024-2025 के दौरान भारतीय रेलवे ɮवारा अिज[त कुल राजèव ͩकतना है;  
(ख)  वष[ 2024-2025 के दौरान Ǒटकट ͩकराए से भारतीय रेलवे ɮवारा अिज[त राजèव ͩकतना है;  
(ग)  Èया मंğालय आगामी वष[ मɅ वǐरçठ नागǐरकɉ और मǑहला याǒğयɉ को दȣ जाने वालȣ 
ǐरयायतɉ को पुनः लागू करने का ͪवचार रखता है;  
(घ)  यǑद हाँ, तो मंğालय ɮवारा इन ǐरयायतɉ को पुनः लागू करने कȧ अनुमाǓनत Ǔतͬथ Èया है; 
और 
(ङ)  यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
(क) से (ङ): ͪवƣ वष[ 2023-24 और 2024-25 का भारतीय रेल का कुल राजèव और याğी 
यातायात से ĤाÜत राजèव नीचे Ǒदया गया है। 
             ( करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
 2023-24 2024-25 
कुल राजèव 2,56,094 2,65,678 
याğी राजèव 70,693 75,368 
 
भारतीय रेल समाज के सभी वगɟ को ͩकफायती सेवाएँ Ĥदान करने के ͧलए ĤǓतबɮध है और वष[ 
2023-24 मɅ याğी Ǒटकटɉ पर 60,466 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ सिÞसडी दȣ गई। यह राͧश रेल मɅ याğा 
करने वाले Ĥ×येक åयिÈत को दȣ गई औसतन 45% ǐरयायत के बराबर है। दूसरे शÞदɉ मɅ, यǑद 
सेवा Ĥदान करने कȧ लागत 100 ǽपए है, तो Ǒटकट कȧ कȧमत केवल 55 ǽपए होती है। यह 
सिÞसडी सभी याǒğयɉ के ͧलए जारȣ है। इसके अलावा, Ǒदåयांगजनɉ कȧ 4 कोǑटयɉ, रोͬगयɉ कȧ 11 
कोǑटयɉ और छाğɉ कȧ 8 कोǑटयɉ जैसी कई कोǑटयɉ के ͧलए इस सिÞसडी से अǓतǐरÈत ǐरयायतɅ 
जारȣ हɇ। 
***** 
838                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2343 का उƣर 
 
वंदे भारत, अमृत भारत तथा हाई-èपीड रेल पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत  
 
2343. डा. संदȣप कुमार पाठक:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  वंदे भारत, अमृत भारत तथा हाई-èपीड रेल पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत Èया है और 
अब तक ͩक़तनी ĚेनɅ शुǾ कȧ गई है और आगामी वषɟ मɅ ͩकतनी नई Ěेनɉ के शुǾ ͩकये 
जाने कȧ संभावना है, त×संबंधी Þयौरा È या है;  
(ख)  Èया रेलवे माल ढुलाई ¢मता बढ़ाने हेतु समͪप[त माल ढुलाई गͧलयारे के ͪवèतार पर काय[ 
कर रहा है और इस संबंध मɅ कौन-कौन सी नई पǐरयोजनाएँ Ĥèताͪवत या संèवीकृत कȧ 
गई हɇ, त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और  
(ग)  इन पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ अनुमाǓनत समय-सीमा, बजट आवंटन और अब तक कȧ उपलिÞधयाँ 
È या हɇ, त×संबंधी Þयौरा È या है? 
उƣर 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): भारतीय रेल ने याǒğयɉ के याğा अनुभव मɅ सुधार लाने के उɮदेæय से आधुǓनक 
कोचɉ, उÛनत सुर¢ा सुͪवधाओं और याğी सुͪवधाओं के साथ èवदेशी Ǿप से ͫडजाइन और Ǔनͧम[त 
वंदे भारत रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ शुǽआत कȧ है। इन नई वंदे भारत रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 
ͪवशेषताएं हɇ: 
 
1. कवच कȧ åयवèथा 
2. झटका मुÈत सेमी परमानɅट कपलर 
3. कɅ ġȣय Ǿप से Ǔनयंǒğत èवचाͧलत Üलग दरवाजे और पूरȣ तरह से सीलबंद चौड़े गɇगवे। 
839                                                      

4. सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ आपातकालȣन अलाम[ पुश बटन और टॉक बैक यूǓनट। 
5. बेहतर अिÊन संर¢ा-ͪवɮयुत कैǒबनेटɉ और शौचालयɉ मɅ एरोसोल आधाǐरत अिÊन संसूचन 
और शमन Ĥणालȣ। 
6. 180/160 ͩकलोमीटर ĤǓत घंटे कȧ ͫडजाइन/पǐरचालन गǓत के साथ उÍचतर ×वरण। 
7. वॉइस ǐरकॉͫडɍग सुͪवधा और Đैश हाड[Ûड मैमोरȣ से चालक व गाड[ के मÚय संĤेषण। 
8. एयर कंडीशǓनंग इकाइयɉ मɅ èवदेशी Ǿप से ͪवकͧसत यूवी-सी लɇप आधाǐरत ͪवसंĐमण 
Ĥणालȣ लगाई गई है। 
9. बेहतर सवारȣ आराम 
10. सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ सीसीटȣवी। 
11. Ǒदåयांग याǒğयɉ के ͧलए Ĝाइͪवंग कोच मɅ दोनɉ तरफ ͪवशेष शौचालय। 
12. ͫडèÜले ǐरमोट मॉǓनटǐरंग के साथ कोच कंडीशन मॉǓनटǐरंग ͧसèटम (सीसीएमएस)। 
 
वत[मान मɅ, भारतीय रेल के बड़ी लाइन ͪवɮयुतीकृत नेटवक[ पर 164 वंदे भारत रेलगाड़ी सेवाएं 
ͪवͧभÛन सेÈटरɉ मɅ पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जा रहȣ हɇ, जैसा नीचे सूची मɅ दशा[या गया है: 
 
Đ. सं. गाड़ी सं. और नाम 
1.  22435/22436 नई Ǒदãलȣ - वाराणसी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
2.  22439/22440 नई Ǒदãलȣ - Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
3.  20901/20902 मुंबई सɅĚल - गांधीनगर कैͪपटल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
4.  22447/22448 नई Ǒदãलȣ - अंब अंदौरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
5.  20607/20608 एमजीआर - चेÛनै सɅĚल मैसूǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
6.  20825/20826 ǒबलासपुर - नागपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
7.  22301/22302 हावड़ा - Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
8.  20833/20834 ͪवशाखपƣणम - ͧसकंदराबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
9.  22223/22224 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - साई नगर ͧशरडी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
10.  22225/22226 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - सोलापुर जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
11.  20171/20172 हज़रत Ǔनज़ामुɮदȣन - रानी कमलापǓत वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
12.  20977/20978 अजमेर - चंडीगढ़ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
13.  20643/20644 चेÛनै सɅĚल - कोयंबटूर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
14.  20633/20634 कासरगोड - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
15.  20701/20702 ͧसकंदराबाद - ǓतǽपǓत वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
16.  22895/22896 हावड़ा - पुरȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
17.  22457/22458 आनंद ͪवहार - देहरादून वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
18.  22227/22228 Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी - गुवाहाटȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
19.  20911/20912 इंदौर - नागपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
840                                                      

20.  20173/20174 रानी कमलापǓत - रȣवा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
21.  20661/20662 केएसआर बɅगलुǽ - धारवाड़ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
22.  22349/22350 पटना - रांची वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
23.  22229/22230 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
24.  12461/12462 जोधपुर - साबरमती वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
25.  22549/22550 गोरखपुर - Ĥयागराज वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
26.  20835/20836 राउरकेला - पुरȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
27.  20665/20666 चेÛनै एÊमोर - Ǔतǽनेलवेलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
28.  20631/20632 मंगलुǽ - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
29.  20677/20678 एमजीआर चेÛनै - ͪवजयवाड़ा जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
30.  20979/20980 उदयपुर - जयपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
31.  20703/20704 काचीगुडा - यशवंतपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
32.  20897/20898 हावड़ा - रांची वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
33.  22347/22348 हावड़ा - पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
34.  22487/22488 अमृतसर जंÈशन - Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
35.  20646/20645 मंगलूǽ सɅĚल - मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
36.  20705/20706 हजूर साǑहब नांदेड़ - छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) वंदे भारत 
एÈसĤेस 
37.  20642/20641 कोयंबटूर जंÈशन - बɅगलुǽ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
38.  22426/22425 आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) - अयोÚया कɇट. वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
39.  22415/22416 वाराणसी - नई Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
40.  22477/22478 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा - नई Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
41.  22961/22962 अहमदाबाद - मुंबई सɅĚल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
42.  20707/20708 ͧसकंदराबाद - ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
43.  20663/20664 मैसूǽ - एमजीआर चेÛनै वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
44.  22345/22346 पटना - गोमतीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
45.  22233/22234 Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी - पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
46.  20841/20842 भुवनेæवर - ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
47.  22545/22546 लखनऊ - देहरादून वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
48.  22231/22232 कलबुरͬग - एसएमवीटȣ बɅगलुǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
49.  22470/22469 हज़रत Ǔनज़ामुɮदȣन - खजुराहो वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
50.  20887/20888 रांची - वाराणसी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
51.  22925/22926 अहमदाबाद - ओखा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
52.  20627/20628 चेÛनै एÊमोर - नागरकोइल जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
53.  20671/20672 मदुरै - बɅगलुǽ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
841                                                      

54.  22489/22490 वाराणसी - मेरठ ͧसटȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
55.  20101/20102 नागपुर - ͧसकंदराबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
56.  22499/22500 वाराणसी - देवघर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
57.  20893/20894 टाटानगर - पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
58.  22303/22304 हावड़ा - गया वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
59.  21893/21894 टाटानगर - पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
60.  21895/21896 टाटानगर - पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
61.  20981/20982 उदयपुर ͧसटȣ - आगरा कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
62.  20891/20892 टाटानगर - Ħéमपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
63.  20871/20872 हावड़ा - राउरकेला वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
64.  20829/20830 दुग[ - ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
65.  20175/20176 बनारस - आगरा कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
66.  20669/20670 हुÞबिãल - पुणे जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
67.  20673/20674 कोãहापुर एससीएसएम टͧम[नस - पुणे जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
68.  22309/22310 हावड़ा - जमालपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
69.  26901/26902 साबरमती - वेरावल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
70.  26401/26402 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा - Įीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
71.  26403/26404 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा - Įीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
72.  26501/26502 गोरखपुर - पाटͧलपुğ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
73.  26101/26102 पुणे - अजनी (नागपुर) वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
74.  26751/26752 बेलगावी - बɅगलुǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
75.  26405/26406 अमृतसर - Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
76.  26301/26302 जोगबनी - दानापुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
77.  26503/26504 सहारनपुर - गोमतीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
78.  26481/26482 जोधपुर - Ǒदãलȣ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
79.  26471/26472 बीकानेर - Ǒदãलȣ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
80.  26651/26652 बɅगलुǽ - एरणाकुलम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
81.  26461/26462 Ǒदãलȣ - ͩफरोजपुर कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
82.  26506/26505 बनारस - खजुराहो वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
 
रेलवे ने अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस नाम से पूण[तः अवातानुकूͧलत आधुǓनक गाड़ी ͪवकͧसत कȧ है। 
पहले से हȣ इसकȧ 30 सेवाएँ पǐरचालन मɅ हɇ। वत[मान मɅ, इन आधुǓनक रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ        
11 सामाÛय Įेणी के सवारȣ ͫडÞबे, 8 शयनयान Įेणी के सवारȣ ͫडÞबे, 1 रसोईयान और        
2 सामान-सह-Ǒदåयांगजन सवारȣ ͫडÞबे शाͧमल हɇ। इन रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत उÛनत 
ͪवशेषताएं और सुͪवधाएं हɇ: 
 
842                                                      

1. वंदे भारत èलȣपर कȧ तरह उÛनत Ǿप और अनुभूǓत वालȣ सीटɅ और शाǓयकाओं कȧ बेहतर 
साज-सÏजा। 
2. झटका मुÈत सेमी-ऑटोमेǑटक कपलर।  
3. Đैश ɪयूब के Ĥावधान से सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ बेहतर Đैशवदȹनैस।  
4. सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ और सामान क¢ मɅ सीसीटȣवी Ĥणालȣ। 
5. शौचालयɉ कȧ बेहतर ͫडज़ाइन।  
6. शाǓयकाओं पर आसानी से चढ़ने के ͧलए सीढ़ȣ कȧ बेहतर ͫडज़ाइन।  
7. बेहतर एलईडी लाइट ͩफǑटंग और चािजɍग सॉकेट।  
8. ईपी सहायता ĤाÜत Ħेͩकंग Ĥणालȣ का Ĥावधान। 
9. शौचालयɉ और इलेिÈĚकल Èयूǒबकãस मɅ एरोसोल आधाǐरत अिÊनशमन Ĥणालȣ। 
10. यूएसबी टाइप-ए और टाइप-सी मोबाइल चािजɍग सॉकेट।  
11. याğी और गाड[/रेलगाड़ी Ĥबंधक के बीच पारèपǐरक संĤेषण के ͧलए आपातकालȣन  टॉक-बैक 
Ĥणालȣ।  
12. उÛनत तापन ¢मता वाला अवातानुकूͧलत रसोईयान।  
13. आसानी से जोड़ने और अलग करने के ͧलए ×वǐरत मोचन Ĥणालȣ वाले पूण[ Ǿप से सीलबंद 
गɇगवे। 
 
वत[मान मɅ, भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर 30 अमृत भारत रेलगाड़ी सेवाएं चल रहȣ हɇ, जैसा ͩक नीचे 
सूची मɅ Ǒदया गया है: 
 
Đ.सं. गाड़ी सं. और नाम 
1.  15133/15134 छपरा-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
2.  15293/15294 मुजÝफरपुर-चल[पãलȣ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
3.  19021/19022 उधना-Ħéमपुर अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
4.  19623/19624 मदार जंÈशन (अजमेर)-दरभंगा अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
5.  14628/14627 छैहरटा (अमृतसर)-सहरसा अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
6.  16601/16602 इरोड जंÈशन-जोगबनी अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
7.  13697/13698 गया-Ǒदãलȣ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
8.  14048/14047 Ǒदãलȣ-सीतामढ़ȣ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
9.  22361/22362 राजɅġ नगर (टȣ)-नई Ǒदãलȣ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
10.  15567/15568 बापूधाम मोǓतहारȣ-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
11.  15561/15562 दरभंगा-गोमती नगर अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
12.  13435/13436 मालदा टाउन-गोमती नगर अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
13.  11015/11016 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ)-सहरसा अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
14.  13434/13433 मालदा टाउन-एसएमवीटȣ बɅगलुǽ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
15.  15557/15558 दरभंगा जंÈशन-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
843                                                      

 
वंदे भारत रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ ͪवशेषताओं का उपयोग करके, अंतः नगरȣय उपनगरȣय और ¢ेğीय 
दैǓनक याǒğयɉ कȧ कम दूरȣ कȧ याğा अनुभव को बेहतर बनाने हेतु नमो भारत रैͪपड रेल शुǾ कȧ 
गई है। वत[मान मɅ, भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर 4 नमो भारत रैͪपड रेल सेवाएँ पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जा 
रहȣ हɇ। नमो भारत रैͪपड रेल कȧ Ĥमुख ͪवशेषताएं Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
1. कɅ ġȣय Ǿप से Ǔनयंǒğत डबल लȣफ ऑटोमेǑटक èलाइͫडंग दरवाजे 
2. संर¢ा और याğी Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए सीसीटȣवी  
3. गɮदेदार सीटɅ और सीलबंद लचीले गɇगवे वाले मॉɬयूलर इंटȣǐरयर 
4. इमरजɅसी टॉक ͧसèटम 
5. ऊजा[ कुशल Ĥकाश åयवèथा के साथ Ǔनरंतर एलईडी Ĥकाश åयवèथा 
6. वैÈयूम इवैÈयूशन वाले एफआरपी मॉɬयूलर शौचालय 
7. Ĝाइवर कैब एसी सǑह त पूण[तया वातानुकूͧलत गाͫड़ यां 
 
वत[मान मɅ, Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 4 नमो भारत रैͪपड रेल सेवाएँ पǐरचालन मɅ हɇ: 
 
Đ. सं. गाड़ी सं. और नाम 
1.  94801/94802 अहमदाबाद-भुज नमो भारत रैͪपड रेल 
2.  94803/94804 जयनगर-पटना नमो भारत रैͪपड रेल 
 
मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल (एमएएचएसआर) पǐरयोजना: 
 
 मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल पǐरयोजना (508 ͩकलोमीटर) एकमाğ हाई èपीड रेल 
पǐरयोजना है, िजसे जापान सरकार कȧ तकनीकȧ और ͪवƣीय सहायता से Ǔनç पाǑदत ͩकया 
जा रहा है। यह पǐरयोजना गुजरात, महाराçĚ तथा कɅ ġ शाͧसत Ĥदेश दादरा और नगर 
हवेलȣ से होकर गुजर रहȣ है और इसके 12 èटेशन मुंबई, ठाणे, ͪवरार, बोईसर, वापी, 
ǒबलȣमोरा, सूरत, भǾच, वडोदरा, आनंद, अहमदाबाद और साबरमती मɅ बनाए जाने कȧ 
योजना है।  
 
 मुंबई-अहमदाबाद हाई èपीड रेल पǐरयोजना के ͧलए संपूण[ भूͧम (1389.5 हेÈटेयर) 
अͬधगृहȣत कर लȣ गई है। पǐरयोजना के  सभी ͧसͪवल ठेके दे Ǒदए गए हɇ। कुल         
28 Ǔनͪवदा पैकेजɉ मɅ से, 25 Ǔनͪवदा पैकेज दे Ǒदए गए हɇ। सभी 1651 जनोपयोगी 
सुͪवधाओं को èथानांतǐरत कर Ǒदया गया है।  
 
 ͪवͧभÛन मह×वपूण[ मदɉ कȧ अब तक कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
 
 
मद   
 
ĤगǓत 
गुजरात महाराçĚ कुल 
नींव  351 ͩकलोमीटर 65 ͩकलोमीटर 416 ͩकलोमीटर 
844                                                      

खàभे    351 ͩकलोमीटर 58 ͩकलोमीटर 409 ͩकलोमीटर 
गड[र कािèटंग  339 ͩकलोमीटर 6 ͩकलोमीटर 345 ͩकलोमीटर 
गड[र लॉंिÑचंग  330 ͩकलोमीटर 2 ͩकलोमीटर 332 ͩकलोमीटर 
रेलपथ तल Ǔनमा[ण 132 ͩकलोमीटर - 132 ͩकलोमीटर 
ओएचई माèट Ǔनमा[ण 88 ͩकलोमीटर - 88 ͩकलोमीटर 
 
 
 177 ͩकलोमीटर वायाडÈट मɅ रेलपथ ǒबछाने का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है और 78 माग[ 
ͩकलोमीटर मɅ ओएचई माèट का संèथापन पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। 
 कुल 12 èटेशनɉ मɅ से, 8 èटेशनɉ (वापी, बीलȣमोरा, सूरत, भǽच, आणंद, वडोदरा, 
अहमदाबाद और साबरमती) पर नींव का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। महाराçĚ खंड मɅ,    
3 èटेशनɉ (ठाणे, ͪवरार, बोईसर) पर नींव का काय[ ĤगǓत पर है और बांġा-कुला[ 
कॉàÜलेÈस èटेशन पर खुदाई का काय[ लगभग पूरा हो चुका है और बेस èलैब कȧ ढलाई 
का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 17 नदȣ पुलɉ का Ǔनमा[ण काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। गुजरात मɅ 4 बड़े नदȣ पुलɉ 
(नम[दा, माहȣ, ताÜती और साबरमती) पर Ǔनमा[ण काय[ अंǓतम चरण मɅ है और महाराçĚ मɅ 
4 नदȣ पुलɉ का काय[ ĤगǓत पर है। ͫडपो (ठाणे, सूरत और साबरमती) पर काय[ जोरɉ से 
चल रहा है।     
 गुजरात मɅ एकमाğ सुरंग का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। समुġ के नीचे सुरंग (लगभग 
21 ͩकलोमीटर) का काय[ शुǾ हो गया है। इसमɅ से, महाराçĚ मɅ घनसोलȣ और ͧशलफाटा 
के बीच 4.8 ͩकलोमीटर सुरंग का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। 
 बुलेट Ěेन पǐरयोजना एक अ×यंत जǑटल और Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान पǐरयोजना है। पǐरयोजना 
के पूरा होने कȧ सटȣक समय-सीमा व लागत का अनुमान ͧसͪवल संरचनाओं, रेलपथ, 
ͪवɮयुत, ͧसगनल åयवèथा एवं दूरसंचार तथा Ěेनसेट कȧ आपूǓत[ से जुड़े सभी संबंͬधत 
कायɟ के पूरा होने के बाद हȣ लगाया जा सकता है। 
 
 
समͪप[त माल यातायात गͧलयारे 
 
रेल मंğालय दो समͪप[त माल यातायात गͧलयारɉ नामतः लुͬधयाना से सोननगर (1337 ͩक.मी.) 
तक पूवȸ समͪप[त माल यातायात गͧलयारा और जवाहरलाल नेहǾ पोट[ टͧम[नल से दादरȣ    
(1506 ͩक.मी.) तक पिæचमी समͪप[त माल यातायात गͧलयारा का Ǔनमा[ण कर रहा है। पूवȸ 
गͧलयारा पूरȣ तरह से चालू है। पिæचमी समͪप[त माल गͧलयारे का 93% काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया 
गया है, शेष भाग माच[ 2026 तक पूरा कर ͧलया जाएगा। इस Ĥकार, कुल 2843 ͩकलोमीटर मɅ 
से, 2741 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर (96.4%) को कमीशन करके पǐरचालन शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 
845                                                      

कागȾ टͧम[नल 
 
भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर नए कागȾ टͧम[नलɉ, जो रेलवे के  ͧलए अǓतǐरÈत कागȾ åयवसाय ĤाÜत 
करते हɇ, के Ǔनमा[ण को सुकर बनाने के ͧलए गǓत-शिÈत मãटȣमोडाल कागȾ टͧम[नल (जीसीटȣ) 
नीǓत Ǒदसंबर, 2021 मɅ शुǾ कȧ गई थी। 
 
अब तक, भारतीय रेल मɅ 120 गǓत-शिÈत कागȾ टͧम[नल èथलɉ को कमीशन कर Ǒदया गया है 
और 133 अÛय èथल Ǔनमा[ण के ͪवͧभÛन चरणɉ मɅ हɇ (जहां इंजीǓनयǐरंग èकेल Üलान अनुमोǑदत 
ͩकया गया है)। इनमɅ से, 5 गǓत-शिÈत कागȾ टͧम[नल èथलɉ को डीएफसी लाइन पर कमीशन 
कर Ǒदया गया है तथा 4 अÛय गǓत-शिÈत कागȾ टͧम[नल èथलɉ का काय[ डीएफसी लाइन पर 
शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
****** 
 
846                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2344 का उƣर 
 
इंटर-ͧसटȣ Ěेनɉ कȧ भारȣ कमी और याǒğयɉ को होने वालȣ असुͪवधा 
 
2344. Įी संजय राउत:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क) È या सरकार को इस बात कȧ जानकारȣ है ͩक महाराçĚ मɅ मुंबई-पुणे, मुंबई-नागपुर, मुंबई-गोवा, 
नागपुर-नांदेड और पुणे-सोलापुर जैसे मागɟ पर इंटर-ͧसटȣ Ěेनɉ कȧ अ×यͬधक कमी है, िजससे 
हजारɉ याğी महȣनɉ तक Ĥती¢ा करने, अ×यͬधक भीड़ वाले ͫडÞबɉ मɅ याğा करने और दैǓनक 
कǑठनाइयɉ का सामना करने के ͧलए मजबूर हɇ;  
(ख)  Ěेनɉ कȧ Ĥ×य¢ मांग के बावजूद वंदे भारत, अमृत भारत और एमईएमयू सेवाओं के धीमे 
ͪवèतार के Èया कारण हɇ;  
(ग)  È या उÍच-यातायात वाले मागɟ पर अǓतǐरÈत ĚेनɅ चलाने और अǓतǐरÈत ͫडÞबे जोड़ने का 
ͪवचार है;  
(घ)  इस मांग और आपूǓत[ के अंतर को पाटने के ͧलए ͩकतनी Ǔनͬध और समय-सीमा आवंǑटत कȧ 
गई है; और  
(ङ)  इन मागɟ पर सुर¢ा, समय कȧ पाबंदȣ और याǒğयɉ कȧ सुͪवधा सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए   
कौन-कौन से कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
  
(क) से (ङ): चूंͩक रेल नेटवक[ राÏय कȧ सीमाओं के आर-पार फैला होता है अतः, नेटवक[ कȧ 
आवæयकता के अनुसार ऐसी सीमाओं के पार रेलगाͫड़यɉ को शुǾ ͩकया जाता है। बहरहाल, भारतीय 
रेल याǒğयɉ कȧ आवæयकताओं को पूरा करने के  ͧलए संपक[ता के संवध[न हेतु Ǔनरंतर Ĥयास करती है। 
 
वत[मान मɅ, मुंबई-पुणे सेÈटर को 22225/22226 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - सोलापुर वंदे 
भारत एÈसĤेस सǑहत 71 जोड़ी रेलगाड़ी सेवाओं (नीचे सूचीबɮध) ɮवारा सेͪवत ͩकया जाता हैः 
 
 
847                                                      

मुंबई-पुणे सेÈटर को सेͪवत करने वालȣ रेलगाͫड़यां: 
 
Đ. सं.  रेलगाड़ी संÉया एवं नाम 
1 11005/11006 दादर - पुदुÍचेरȣ एÈसĤेस 
2 11007/11008 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - पुणे डेÈकन एÈसĤेस 
3 11009/11010 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - पुणे ͧसंहगढ़ एÈसĤेस 
4 11013/11014 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - कोयàबƣूर एÈसĤेस 
5 11017/11018 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - कारेवकाल एÈसĤेस 
6 11019/11020 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - भुवनेæवर Ûयू कोणाक[ एÈसĤेस 
7 11021/11022 दादर - Ǔतǽनेवेलȣ एÈसĤेस 
8 11027/11028 दादर - सतारा एÈसĤेस 
9 11029/11030 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - कोãहापुर कोयना एÈसĤेस 
10 11035/11036 दादर - मैसूर शरवती एÈसĤेस 
11 11041/11042 दादर - साइनगर ͧशरडी एÈसĤेस 
12 11049/11050 अहमदाबाद - कोãहापुर एÈसĤेस 
13 11087/11088 वेरावल - पुणे एÈसĤेस 
14 11089/11090 भगत कȧ कोठȤ - पुणे एÈसĤेस 
15 11091/11092 भुज - पुणे एÈसĤेस 
16 11139/11040 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - होसपेट एÈसĤेस 
17 11301/11302 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - केएसआर बɅगलुǽ उɮयान एÈसĤेस 
18 12115/12116 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - सोलापुर ͧसɮधेæवर एÈसĤेस 
19 12123/12124 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - पुणे एÈसĤेस 
20 12125/12126 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - पुणे ĤगǓत एÈसĤेस 
21 12127/12128 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - पुणे एÈसĤेस 
22 12163/12164 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - चेÛनै सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
23 12219/12220 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - ͧसकंदराबाद दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
24 12263/12264 पुणे-हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
25 12297/12298 अहमदाबाद - पुणे दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
26 12493/12494 ͧमराज - हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन दश[न एÈसĤेस 
27 12701/12702 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - हैदराबाद हुसैनसागर एÈसĤेस 
28 12755/12756 भावनगर (टȣ) - काकȧनाडा पोट[ एÈसĤेस 
29 12939/12940 जयपुर - पुणे एÈसĤेस 
30 14805/14806 बाड़मेर - यशवंतपुर एÈसĤेस 
31 16209/16210 अजमेर - मैसूर एÈसĤेस 
32 16331/16332 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल (ǒğवɅġम) एÈसĤेस 
33 16339/16340 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - नगरकोͪवल  एÈसĤेस 
34 16351/16952 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - नगरकोͪवल  एÈसĤेस 
848                                                      

35 16505/16506 गांधीधाम - केएसआर बɅगलुǽ एÈसĤेस 
36 16507/16508 जोधपुर - केएसआर बɅगलुǽ एÈसĤेस 
37 16531/16532 अजमेर - केएसआर बɅगलुǽ गरȣब नवाज एÈसĤेस 
38 16533/16534 भगत कȧ कोठȤ - केएसआर बɅगलुǽ एÈसĤेस 
39 16587/16588 बीकानेर - यशवंतपुर एÈसĤेस 
40 16613/16614 राजकोट - कोयàबƣूर एÈसĤेस 
41 17221/17222 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - काकȧनाडा पोट[ एÈसĤेस 
42 17317/17318 दादर - हुबलȣ एÈसĤेस 
43 17411/17412 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - एससीएसएम कोãहापुर महालêमी 
एÈसĤेस 
44 17613/17614 पनवेल - एचएस नांदेड़ एÈसĤेस 
45 18519/18520 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - ͪवशाखपɪटणम एÈसĤेस 
46 19567/19568 ओखा - तूƣुÈकुͫड ͪववेक एÈसĤेस 
47 19667/19668 उदयपुर शहर - मैसूर हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
48 20475/20476 बीकानेर - ͧमराज सुपरफाèट एÈसĤेस 
49 20495/20496 जोधपुर - हडपसर एÈसĤेस 
50 20667/20668 जयपुर - यशवंतपुर एÈसĤेस 
51 20821/20822 सांतरागाǓछ  - पुणे हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
52 20915/20916 इंदौर - ͧलंगमपãलȣ हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
53 20919/20920 एकता नगर - चेÛनै सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
54 20953/20954 अहमदाबाद - चेÛनै एÈसĤेस 
55 20967/20968 पोरबंदर - ͧसकंदराबाद एÈसĤेस 
56 22101/22102 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - मदुरै एÈसĤेस 
57 22105/22106 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - पुणे इंġायणी एÈसĤेस 
58 22107/22108 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - लातूर एÈसĤेस 
59 22143/22144 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - बीदर एÈसĤेस 
60 22149/22150 एरणाकुलम - पुणे एÈसĤेस 
61 22157/22158 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - चेÛनै एगमोर एÈसĤेस 
62 22159/22160 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - चेÛनै सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
63 22179/22180 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - चेÛनै सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
64 22185/22186 अहमदाबाद - पुणे अǑहंसा एÈसĤेस 
65 22193/22194 Êवाͧलयर - दɋड सुपरफाèट एÈसĤेस 
66 22225/22226 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - सोलापुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
67 22497/22498 Įी गंगानगर - ǓतǽिÍचराÜपिãल हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
68 22717/22718 राजकोट - ͧसकंदराबाद एÈसĤेस 
69 22731/22732 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - हैदराबाद एÈसĤेस 
849                                                      

70 22919/22920 अहमदाबाद - चेÛनै  सɅĚल हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
71 22943/22944 इंदौर - दɋड एÈसĤेस 
 
इसी Ĥकार, 22229/22230 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस सǑहत 
मुंबई-नागपुर सेÈटर 18 जोड़ी और मुंबई - मडगांव सेÈटर 39 जोड़ी रेलगाड़ी सेवाओं ɮवारा, 
22225/22226 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - सोलापुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस सǑहत पुणे - सोलापुर 
सेÈटर 39 जोड़ी रेलगाड़ी सेवाओं ɮवारा और नागपुर - एच.एस नांदेड सेÈटर 03 जोड़ी रेलगाड़ी सेवाओं 
ɮवारा सेͪवत है।    ये नीचे सूचीबɮध हɇ: 
 
मुंबई-नागपुर सेÈटर को सेͪवत करने वालȣ रेलगाͫड़यां: 
 
Đ. सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया एवं  नाम 
1 12101/12102 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - शालȣमार £ानेæवरȣ एÈसĤेस 
2 12105/12106 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - गɉǑदया ͪवदभ[ एÈसĤेस 
3 12139/12140 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - नागपुर सेवाĒाम एÈसĤेस 
4 12145/12146 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - पुरȣ एÈसĤेस 
5 12151/12152 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - शालȣमार समरसता एÈसĤेस 
6 12261/12262 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - हावड़ा दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
7 12289/12290 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - नागपुर दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
8 12809/12810 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - हावड़ा एÈसĤेस 
9 12811/12812 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - हǑटया एÈसĤेस 
10 12859/12860 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - हावड़ा गीतांजͧल एÈसĤेस 
11 12869/12870 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - हावड़ा एÈसĤेस 
12 12879/12880 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - भुवनेæवर एÈसĤेस 
13 18029/18030 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - शालȣमार एÈसĤेस 
14 20821/20822 पुणे - सांतरागाǓछ हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
15 22357/22358 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - गया एÈसĤेस 
16 22511/22512 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - कामाÉया कम[भूͧम एÈसĤेस 
17 22847/22848 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - ͪवशाखपɪटणम एÈसĤेस 
18 22865/22866 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - पुरȣ एÈसĤेस 
 
 मुंबई-मडगांव सेÈटर को सेवा देने वालȣ रेलगाͫड़यां: 
 
Đ. सं.  रेलगाड़ी संÉया एवं  नाम 
1 10103/10104 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मडगांव मंडोवी एÈसĤेस 
2 10115/10116 बांġा (टȣ) - मडगांव एÈसĤेस 
3 11099/11100 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - मडगांव एÈसĤेस 
4 12051/12052 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मडगांव जनशताÞदȣ एÈसĤेस 
850                                                      

5 12133/12134 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मंगलुǾ एÈसĤेस 
6 12201/12202 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर गरȣब रथ एÈसĤेस 
7 12217/12218 चंडीगढ़ - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर केरल संपक[ ĐांǓत एÈसĤेस 
8 12223/12224 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - एरणाकुलम दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
9 12283/12284 हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन - एरणाकुलम दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
10 12431/12432 हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन-Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल राजधानी एÈसĤेस 
11 12449/12450 चंडीगढ़ - मडगांव गोवा संपक[ ĐांǓत एÈसĤेस 
12 12483/12484 अमृतसर - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर एÈसĤेस 
13 12617/12618 हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन - एरणाकुलम मंगला ल¢ɮवीप एÈसĤेस 
14 12619/12620 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - मंगलौर सɅĚल म×èयागंधा एÈसĤेस 
15 12741/12742 पटना - वाèको-द-गामा एÈसĤेस 
16 12977/12978 अजमेर - एरणाकुलम जंÈशन माǾ सागर एÈसĤेस 
17 16311/16312 Įी गंगानगर - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर एÈसĤेस 
18 16333/16334 वेरावल - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
19 16335/16336 गांधीधाम - नगरकोͪवल एÈसĤेस 
20 16337/16338 ओखा - एरणाकुलम एÈसĤेस 
21 16345/16346 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल नेğावती एÈसĤेस 
22 19259/19260 भावनगर - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर एÈसĤेस 
23 19577/19578 जामनगर - Ǔतǽनेवेलȣ एÈसĤेस 
24 20111/20112 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मडगांव कɉकण कÛया एÈसĤेस 
25 20909/20910 पोरबंदर - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर एÈसĤेस 
26 20923/20924 गांधीधाम - Ǔतǽनेवेलȣ हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
27 20931/20932 इंदौर - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर एÈसĤेस 
28 22113/22114 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर एÈसĤेस 
29 22119/22120 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मडगांव तेजस एÈसĤेस 
30 22149/22150 पुणे-एरणाकुलम एÈसĤेस 
31 22229/22230 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
32 22413/22414 हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन - मडगांव राजधानी एÈसĤेस 
33 22475/22476 Ǒहसार - कोयàबटूर एÈसĤेस 
34 22629/22630 दादर - Ǔतǽनेवेलȣ एÈसĤेस 
35 22633/22634 हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
36 22653/22654 हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
37 22655/22656 हजरत Ǔनजामुɮदȣन - एरणाकुलम  एÈसĤेस 
38 22659/22660 योग नागरȣ ऋͪषकेश - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम उƣर एÈसĤेस 
39 22907/22908 हापा - मडगांव एÈसĤेस 
 
 
851                                                      

पुणे-सोलापुर सेÈटर को सेͪवत करने वालȣ रेलगाͫड़यां: 
 
Đ.सं.  रेलगाड़ी संÉया एवं नाम 
1 11013/11014 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - कोयàबƣूर एÈसĤेस 
2 11017/11018 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - कारेवकाल एÈसĤेस 
3 11019/11020 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - भुवनेæवर कोणाक[ एÈसĤेस 
4 11139/11140 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - होसपेट सुपरफाèट एÈसĤेस 
5 11301/11302 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - केएसआर बɅगलुǽ ͧसटȣ उɮयान एÈसĤेस 
6 11417/11418 पुणे - सोलापुर एÈसĤेस 
7 11421/11422 हडपसर - सोलापुर एÈसĤेस 
8 12025/12026 पुणे - हैदराबाद शताÞदȣ एÈसĤेस 
9 12115/12116 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - सोलापुर ͧसɮधेæवर एÈसĤेस 
10 12157/12158 पुणे - सोलापुर हुतातमा एÈसĤेस 
11 12163/12164 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - एमजीआर चेÛनै सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
12 12169/12170 पुणे - सोलापुर एÈसĤेस 
13 12219/12220 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - ͧसकंदराबाद दुरंतो एÈसĤेस 
14 12701/12702 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - हैदराबाद एÈसĤेस 
15 12755/12756 काकȧनाडा पोट[ - भावनगर (टȣ) एÈसĤेस 
16 14805/14806 येसवंतपुर -बाड़मेर एÈसĤेस 
17 16331/16332 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
18 16339/16340 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - नगरकोͪवल एÈसĤेस 
19 16351/16352 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - नगरकोͪवल एÈसĤेस 
20 16381/16382 पुणे - कÛयाकुमारȣ एÈसĤेस 
21 16587/16588 येसवंतपुर - बीकानेर एÈसĤेस 
22 16613/16614 राजकोट - कोयàबटूर एÈसĤेस 
23 17221/17222 काकȧनाडा पोट[ - लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) एÈसĤेस 
24 18519/18520 ͪवशाखपɪटणम - लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) एÈसĤेस 
25 19567/19568 तूƣुÈकुͫड-ओखा ͪववेक एÈसĤेस 
26 20667/20668 येसवंतपुर - जयपुर एÈसĤेस 
27 20915/20916 ͧलंगमपãलȣ - इंदौर हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
28 20919/20920 एमजीआर चेÛनै सɅĚल - एकनाथनगर एÈसĤेस 
29 20953/20954 एमजीआर चेÛनै सɅĚल - अहमदाबाद एÈसĤेस 
30 20967/20968 ͧसकंदराबाद - पोरबंदर एÈसĤेस 
31 22101/22102 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - मदुरै एÈसĤेस 
32 22157/22158 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - चेÛनै एÊमोर मेल 
33 22159/22160 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - एमजीआर चेÛनै सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
34 22179/22180 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - एमजीआर चेÛनै सɅĚल एÈसĤेस 
852                                                      

35 22225/22226 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) - सोलापुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
36 22717/22718 राजकोट - ͧसकंदराबाद एÈसĤेस 
37 22731/22732 हैदराबाद - छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) एÈसĤेस 
38 22881/22882 पुणे - भुवनेæवर एÈसĤेस 
39 22919/22920 एमजीआर चेÛनै  सɅĚल - अहमदाबाद हमसफर एÈसĤेस 
 
 नागपुर-एच.एस नांदेड सेÈटर को सेͪवत करने वालȣ रेलगाͫड़यां: 
 
 Đ.सं  रेलगाड़ी संÉया एवं  नाम 
1 17609/17610 पटना - पूण[ एÈसĤेस 
2 11045/11046 कोãहापुर एससीएसएम (टȣ) - धनबाद दȣ¢ाभूͧम एÈसĤेस 
3 12767/12768 हजूर साǑहब नांदेड़ - सांतरागाǓछ  एÈसĤेस 
 
भारतीय रेल समाज के सभी वगɟ को ͩकफायती और उÍच गुणवƣा कȧ सेवाएं Ĥदान करने पर कɅ Ǒġत 
है।  रेलवे ने Ǔनàनͧलͨखत गाͫड़यां ͪवकͧसत कȧ हɇ: 
 
1. वंदे भारत सेवा:  
 
भारतीय रेल ने वंदे भारत सेवाओं कȧ शुǽआत कȧ है, जो सेमी-हाई èपीड वालȣ गाͫड़यां हɇ और याǒğयɉ 
को बेहतर याğा अनुभव और उÛनत संर¢ा Ĥदान करने के ͧलए बनाई गई हɇ। ये सेवाएं उÛनत संर¢ा 
सुͪवधाओं और आधुǓनक याğी सुͪवधाओं से लैस हɇ, जैसे- 
I. कवच Ĥणालȣ 
II. तीĭ ×वरण  
III. पूरȣ तरह से सीलबंद गɇगवे 
IV. ऑटोमैǑटक Üलग वाले दरवाजे 
V. आरामदायक याğा 
VI. हॉट केस कȧ सुͪवधा वालȣ ͧमनी पɇĚȣ  
VII. बोतल कूलर 
VIII. डीप ĥȧजर और गम[ पानी बॉयलर 
IX. ǐरÈलाइǓनंग एगȾनोͧमक सीटɅ 
X. एÈजीÈयूǑटव Èलास मɅ ǐरवॉलͪवंग सीटɉ सǑहत आरामदायक सीǑटंग 
XI. Ĥ×येक सीट के ͧलए मोबाइल चािजɍग सॉके ट 
XII. Ĝाइͪवंग Ěेलर कार मɅ Ǒदåयांगजन याǒğयɉ के  ͧलए ͪवशेष शौचालय 
XIII. सीसीटȣवी, आǑद  
 
वत[मान मɅ, भारतीय रेल मɅ बड़ी लाइन ͪवɮयुकृत नेटवक[ के  ͪवͧभÛन सेÈटरɉ पर 164 वंदे भारत गाड़ी 
सेवाएँ चलाई जा रहȣ हɇ िजनमɅ से Ǔनàनͧलͨखत (Ĥारंभ/गंतå य आधार पर) महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ िèथत 
ͪवͧभÛन èटेशनɉ को सेͪवत कर रहȣ हɇ:  
 
 
853                                                      

Đ.सं  रेलगाड़ी संÉया एवं नाम 
 1 26101/26102 पुणे-अजनी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
2 20101/20102 नागपुर-ͧसकंदराबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
3 20669/20670 हुबलȣ-पुणे वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
4 20673/20674 Įी छğपǓत शाहू महाराज (टͧम[नस) कोãहापुर-पुणे वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
5 22961/22962 मुंबई सɅĚल-अहमदाबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
6 20705/20706 हजूर साǑहब - नांदेड़ छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस  
7 22229/22230 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टͧम[नस)-मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
8 20911/20912 इंदौर-नागपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
9 22223/22224 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टͧम[नस)- साईनगर ͧशरडी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
10 22225/22226   छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टͧम[नस) - सोलापुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
11 20825/20826 ǒबलासपुर-नागपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
12 20901/20902 मुंबई सɅĚल-गांधीनगर कैͪपटल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
 
 
2. अमृत भारत सेवा: 
 
Ǔनàन एवं मÚयम आय वग[ के पǐरवारɉ को ͩकफायती यातायात साधन उपलÞध कराने हेतु भारतीय 
रेल ने अमृत भारत सेवाएँ Ĥारàभ कȧ हɇ, जो पूण[तः अवातानुकूͧलत आधुǓनक रेलगाͫड़यां हɇ। वत[मान 
मɅ, अमृत भारत मɅ 11 सामाÛय Įेणी के  सवारȣ ͫडÞबɅ, 8 शयनयान Įेणी के सवारȣ ͫडÞबɅ, 1 पɅĚȣकार 
और 2 ɮͪवतीय Įेणी सामान सह Ǒदåयांगजन सवारȣ ͫडÞबे शाͧमल हɇ। 
 
उÍच गǓत और उÛनत संर¢ा मानक इन गाͫड़यɉ कȧ ͪवशेषता हɇ, िजनमɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत उÛनत 
सुͪवधाएँ और साधन शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
i. वंदे भारत èलȣपर के समान उÛनत Ǿप और अनुभूǓत वाले सीट और बथ[ का बेहतर 
साज-सÏजा। 
ii. झटका मुÈत सेमी-ऑटोमेǑटक कपलस[।  
iii. Đैश ɪयूब के Ĥावधान से सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ बेहतर Đैशवदȹनैस।  
iv. सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ और सामान क¢ मɅ सीसीटȣवी Ĥणालȣ का Ĥावधान। 
v. शौचालयɉ का बेहतर ͫडज़ाइन।  
vi. बथ[ पर आसानी से चढ़ने के ͧलए सीढ़ȣ का बेहतर ͫडज़ाइन।  
vii. बेहतर एलईडी लाइट ͩफǑटंग और चािजɍग सॉकेट।  
viii. ईपी सहायता ĤाÜत Ħेͩकंग Ĥणालȣ का Ĥावधान। 
ix. शौचालयɉ और इलेिÈĚकल Èयूǒबकãस मɅ एरोसोल आधाǐरत अिÊन शमन Ĥणालȣ। 
x. यूएसबी टाइप-ए और टाइप-सी मोबाइल चािजɍग सॉकेट।  
854                                                      

xi. याğी और गाड[/रेलगाड़ी Ĥबंधक के बीच पारèपǐरक संĤेषण के ͧलए आपातकालȣन टॉक-
बैक Ĥणालȣ।  
xii. उÛनत तापन ¢मता वालȣ गैर-वातानुकूͧलत पɅĚȣ।  
xiii. आसानी से जोड़ने और अलग करने के ͧलए ×वǐरत मोचन Ĥणालȣ वाले पूण[ Ǿप से 
सीलबंद गɇगवे।  
 
वत[मान मɅ, भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर 30 अमृत भारत गाड़ी सेवाएँ पǐरचाͧलत हɇ, िजनमɅ 
11015/11016 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) - सहरसा अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस शाͧमल है, जो महाराçĚ राÏय 
मɅ िèथत ͪवͧभÛन èटेशनɉ कȧ आवæयकताओं को पूरा करती हɇ। 
इसके अलावा, ͩकसी माग[/खंड पर नई गाड़ी सेवाओं कȧ शुǾआत ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है, 
िजनमɅ शाͧमल हɇ: 
 उस खंड कȧ ¢मता 
 माग[ कȧ उपलÞधता 
 अपेͯ¢त चल èटॉक कȧ उपलÞधता 
 चल èटॉक के ͧलए समान अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता 
 रेलपथɉ और अÛय पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ अनुर¢ण आवæयकता 
 
वंदे भारत और अमृत भारत का उ×पाद  
 
वंदे भारत और अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस सेवाओं के उ×पादन और शुǾ करने कȧ गǓत बहुत तेज रहȣ है। 
नवंबर 2025 तक भारतीय रेल कȧ उ×पादन इकाइयɉ ने 94 वंदे भारत चेयर कार रेक का Ǔनमा[ण 
ͩकया है। इसके अलावा लंबी और मÚयम दूरȣ कȧ राǒğकालȣन याğा को पूरा करने के ͧलए वंदे भारत 
रेलगाड़ी  के èलȣपर संèकरण को èवदेशी Ǿप से ͫडजाइन ͩकया गया है। ऐसे दो रेक का Ǔनमा[ण 
ͩकया गया है और परȣ¢ण/उपयोͬगता के चरण मɅ हɇ। भारतीय रेल ने नवंबर 2025 तक अमृत भारत 
रेलगाͫड़यɉ के 26 रेक भी तैयार ͩकए हɇ। 
 
वष[ 2025-26 के दौरान 2,52,200 करोड़ ǽपए (बजटȣय सहायता) का आवंटन ͩकया गया है, िजसमɅ 
चल èटॉक के उ×पादन पर åयय भी शाͧमल है। 
 
अǓतǐरÈत एकोमोडेशन और सवारȣ ͫडÞबे: 
 
अनारͯ¢त ͫडÞबɉ  मɅ याğा करने वाले याǒğयɉ कȧ मांग को पूरा करने के उɮदेæय से, रेलवे ने सामाÛय 
Įेणी मɅ याğा कȧ मांग करने वाले याǒğयɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाओं मɅ उãलेखनीय वृɮͬध कȧ है। ͪपछले ͪवƣ 
वष[ 2024-25 के दौरान हȣ तͧमलनाडु ¢ेğ मɅ जाने वालȣ रेलगाͫड़यɉ सǑहत ͪवͧभÛन लंबी दूरȣ कȧ 
रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ 1250 सामाÛय सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग ͩकया गया है। Ǔनàन एवं मÚयम आय वग[ के 
पǐरवारɉ कȧ याğा मांग को पूरा करने के उɮदेæय से भारतीय रेल ने 17,000 अवातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ 
ͫडÞबे (सामाÛय/शयनयान) ͧलए हɇ। भारतीय रेल पर, अवातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का ĤǓतशत लगभग 
70% है जैसा ͩक नीचे दशा[या गया हैः 
 
ताͧलका 1: सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का ͪवतरण:   
 
अवातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे (सामाÛय/शयनयान) लगभग 57,200 लगभग 70%  
855                                                      

वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे लगभग 25,000 लगभग 30%  
कुल सवारȣ ͫडÞबे लगभग 82,200 100% 
 
सामाÛय सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ कȧ अͬधक उपलÞधता के कारण, सामाÛय/अनारͯ¢त सवारȣͫडÞबɉ मɅ याğा करने 
वाले याǒğयɉ कȧ संÉया मɅ वृɮͬध का ǽझान देखा गया है, जैसा Ǔनàनानुसार दशा[या गया है: 
 
ताͧलका 2: सामाÛय/अनारͯ¢त सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ याǒğयɉ कȧ संÉया: 
 
वष[ याǒğयɉ कȧ संÉया 
2020-21 99 करोड़ (कोͪवड वष[) 
2021-22 275 करोड़ (कोͪवड वष[) 
2022-23 553 करोड़ 
2023-24 609 करोड़ 
2024-25 651 करोड़ 
 
अवातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के याǒğयɉ के ͧलए उपलÞध सीटɉ कȧ संÉया मɅ भी वृɮͬध हुई है। 
वत[मान संरचना Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
ताͧलका 3: सीटɉ का ͪवतरण: 
 
अवातानुकूͧलत सीटɅ लगभग 54 लाख लगभग 78% 
वातानुकूͧलत सीटɅ लगभग 15 लाख लगभग 22% 
कुल लगभग 69 लाख 100% 
 
सामाÛय और अवातानुकूͧलत शयनयान सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग करने वाले याǒğयɉ के  ͧलए अͬधक 
èथान Ĥदान करने के उɮदेæय से, मेल/एÈसĤेस गाͫड़यɉ कȧ संरचना के संबंध मɅ मौजूदा नीǓत के 
अनुसार, 22 सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ कȧ एक गाड़ी मɅ 12 (बारह) सामाÛय Įेणी और शयनयान  Įेणी के 
अवातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे और 08 (आठ) वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे मुहैया कराए जाते हɇ, 
फलèवǾप सामाÛय और अवातानुकूͧलत शयनयान सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग करने वाले याǒğयɉ को 
अͬधक एकोमोडेशन उपलÞध कराया जा रहा है।  
 
इसके अलावा, याǒğयɉ को अǓतǐरÈत एकोमोडेशन Ĥदान करने के अपने Ǔनरंतर Ĥयास मɅ, भारतीय रेल 
×योहारɉ, छुɪǑटयɉ आǑद के दौरान ͪवशेष रेलगाͫड़याँ चलाती है ताͩक याǒğयɉ कȧ अǓतǐरÈत ज़Ǿरतɉ को 
पूरा ͩकया जा सके और Ǔनयͧमत सेवाओं ɮवारा उपलÞध è थानɉ कȧ कमी को पूरा ͩकया जा सके। 
उपयु[È त के अलावा, ͪवͧभÛन याğी वगɟ के ͧलए अǓतǐरÈत एकोमोडेशन Ĥदान करने हेतु, èथायी और 
अèथायी दोनɉ आधार पर रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ ͫडÞ बɉ कȧ संÉ या भी बढ़ाई जाती है। 
 
तदनुसार, भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर, वष[ 2025-26 (नवàबर, 2025 तक) के दौरान, लगभग 60000 
ͪवशेष रेलगाͫड़यां पǐरचाͧलत कȧ गɃ और 700 सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग èथायी आधार रेल सेवाओं मɅ 
वृɮͬध के ͧलए ͩकया गया है। 
 
856                                                      

मुंबई-पुणे सेÈटर के ͧलए 08 रेलगाड़ी सेवाओं को 12 सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग करके बढ़ाया 
गया है। इसी तरह, पुणे-सोलापुर सेÈटर कȧ 02 सेवाओं मɅ 03 अǓतǐरÈत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे लगाए गए हɇ। 
 
 
मुंबई उपनगरȣय ¢ेğ के ͧलए ¢मता संवध[न काय[ : 
वत[मान मɅ, मुंबई ¢ेğ मɅ ĤǓत Ǒदन लगभग 120 मेल/एÈसĤेस रेलगाͫड़यां ओǐरजनेट होती हɇ और 
लगभग 3200 उपनगरȣय रेलगाͫड़यां पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जाती हɇ। ¢मता संवध[न और संर¢ा बढ़ाने के 
ͧलए, भारतीय रेल ɮवारा Ǔनàनानुसार कई उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ: 
मुंबई ¢ेğ के ͪवͧभÛन èटेशनɉ पर गाड़ी संचालन ¢मता बढ़ाने के  ͧलए, ͪवͧभÛन èटेशनɉ पर 
Ǔनàनͧलͨखत Ǔनमा[ण काय[ पूरे/शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ/योजना बनाई गई हɇ: 
Đ.सं  èथान ͪववरण 
1 बांġा टͧम[नस 3 ͪपट लाइनɉ को पूरा ͩकया गया। 
2 मुंबई सɅĚल 24 एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के ͧलए Üलेटफॉमɟ का ͪवèतार 
3 जोगेæवरȣ 2 अǓतǐरÈत Üलेटफॉम[ 
4 दादर 1 अǓतǐरÈत Üलेटफॉम[ 
5 वसई रोड 6 Üलेटफॉम[, 3 ͪपट लाइन और 5 èटेबͧलंग लाइन 
6 पनवेल-कलंबोलȣ 5 Üलेटफॉम[, 4 ͪपट लाइन और 2 ͧसक लाइन 
7 कãयाण 6 Üलेटफॉम[ और 4 ͪपट लाइन 
8 लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक (टȣ) 4 Üलेटफॉम[ और 2 ͪपट लाइन 
9 परेल 6 Üलेटफॉम[, 5 ͪपट लाइन, 6 èटेबͧलंग लाइन 
10 ͪवरार 25 èटेबͧलंग लाइन 
11 दहाणू रोड 11 èटेबͧलंग लाइन 
12 मीरा रोड 25 èटेबͧलंग लाइन 
 
उपरोÈत के अलावा, 15 कार वाले ईएमयू को एकोमोडेट करने के ͧलए 34 èटेशनɉ पर Üलेटफाम[ 
ͪवèतार संबंधी काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
मुंबई उपनगरȣय ¢ेğ मɅ रेल नेटवक[ कȧ ¢मता बढ़ाने के ͧलए मुंबई शहरȣ पǐरवहन योजना 
(एमयूटȣपी)-II िजसकȧ लागत 8,087 करोड़ ǽ. है, एमयूटȣपी-III िजसकȧ लागत 10,947 करोड़ ǽ. है 
857                                                      

और एमयूटȣपी-IIIए िजसकȧ लागत 33,690 करोड़ ǽ. है, को मंजूरȣ दȣ गई है। इन पǐरयोजनाओं मɅ 
मुंबई उपनगरȣय ¢ेğ मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[ शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
Đ .सं.  पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत  
(करोड़ ǽपए मɅ) 
1 सीएसएमटȣ-कुला[ पाँचवीं और छठȤ लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-II) (17.5 
ͩक.मी.) 
891 
2 मुंबई सɅĚल-बोरȣवलȣ छठȤ लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-II) (30 ͩक.मी.) 919 
3 गोरेगांव-बोरȣवलȣ से हाब[र लाइन का ͪवèतार (एमयूटȣपी-III ए) (07 
ͩक.मी.) 
826 
4 बोरȣवलȣ-ͪवरार पाँचवीं और छठȤ लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-IIIए) (26 ͩक.मी.) 2184 
5 ͪवरार-दहानू रोड तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन  
(एमयूटȣपी-III) (64 ͩक.मी.) 
3587 
6 पनवेल-करजत उपनगरȣय गͧलयारा (एमयूटȣपी-III) (29.6 ͩक.मी.) 2782 
7 ऐरोलȣ-कलवा (एͧलवेटेड) उपनगरȣय गͧलयारा ͧलंक (एमयूटȣपी-III) 
(3.3 ͩक.मी.) 
476 
8 कãयाण-आसनगांव चौथी लाइन (एमयूटȣपी-IIIए) (32 ͩक.मी.) 1759 
9 कãयाण-बदलापुर तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन  
(एमयूटȣपी-IIIए) (14 ͩक.मी.) 
1510 
10 कãयाण-कसारा तीसरȣ लाइन (67 ͩक.मी.) 793 
11 नायगांव-जूचंġ डबल कॉड[ लाइन (6 ͩक.मी.) 176 
12 Ǔनलजे-कोपर डबल कॉड[ लाइन (5 ͩक.मी.) 338 
13 कãयाण याड[ के ढांचे मɅ पǐरवत[न संबंधी काय[ 866 
याğी ¢मता बढ़ाने के ͧलए, एमयूटȣपी-III और IIIए के अंतग[त 12 सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ वाले 238 रेक को मंजूरȣ 
दȣ गई है, िजनकȧ लागत 19,293 करोड़ ǽ. है। इन रेकɉ के Ĥापण कȧ ĤͩĐया शुǾ कर दȣ गई है। 
समयपालन: 
भारतीय रेल ɮवारा गाͫड़यɉ को समय पर पǐरचाͧलत करने के ͧलए सभी संभव Ĥयास ͩकए जाते 
हɇ। गाͫड़यɉ के समयबɮध पǐरचालन पर कई कारक Ĥभाव डालते हɇ िजनमɅ कोहरे का मौसम, माग[ 
संबंधी बाधाएं, पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ ͪवफलता, अलाम[ चेन खींचना, जनता ɮवारा आंदोलन, मवेͧशयɉ का 
कुचला जाना और अÛय अĤ×याͧशत पǐरिèथǓतयां शाͧमल हɇ। 
  
रेलगाͫड़यɉ के समय पर चलने को Ĥभाͪवत करने वाले कारकɉ के आकलन के आधार पर, 
ता×काͧलक और दȣघ[काͧलक दोनɉ सुधारा×मक उपाय ͩकए जाते हɇ, िजनमɅ रेल नेटवक[ कȧ ¢मता 
बढ़ाना, रेलपथ और ͧसगनͧलंग Ĥणालȣ का उÛनयन, पǐरचालन मɅ बाधाओं को दूर करना, याड[ का पुनः 
Ǔनमा[ण आǑद शाͧमल हɇ। 
भारतीय रेल मɅ 2024-25 के दौरान मेल/एÈसĤेस गाͫड़यɉ कȧ समĒ समयबɮधता 77.12% थी 
और 2025-26 (अĤैल-नवंबर) के दौरान यह 79.25% रहȣ। 
 
 
858                                                      

कवच: èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी सुर¢ा Ĥणालȣ  
 
1. कवच एक èवदेशी Ǿप से ͪवकͧसत èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी सुर¢ा Ĥणालȣ है। कवच एक अ×यͬधक 
Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसे सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन (एसआईएल-4) कȧ 
आवæयकता होती है। 
2. यǑद लोको पायलट Ħेक लगाने मɅ ͪवफल रहता है तो कवच èवचाͧलत Ħेक लगाकर लोको 
पायलट को ǓनǑद[çट गǓत सीमा के भीतर रेलगाड़ी चलाने मɅ सहायता करता है और यह खराब 
मौसम के दौरान रेलगाड़ी को सुरͯ¢त ढंग से चलाने मɅ भी सहायता करता है।  
3. याğी गाͫड़यɉ पर पहला फȧãड परȣ¢ण फरवरȣ 2016 मɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया था। ĤाÜत अनुभवɉ और 
èवतंğ संर¢ा Ǔनधा[रक (आईएसए) ɮवारा Ĥणालȣ के èवतंğ संर¢ा मूãयांकन के आधार पर कवच 
के वज[न 3.2 कȧ आपूǓत[ के ͧलए 2018-19 मɅ तीन फमɟ को अनुमोदन Ĥदान ͩकया गया था। 
4. कवच को जुलाई 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय एटȣपी Ĥणालȣ के Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया था। 
5. कवच Ĥणालȣ के काया[Ûवयन मɅ शाͧमल मुÉय काय[कलाप Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
i. Ĥ×येक èटेशन, Þलॉक खंड पर èटेशन कवच कȧ संèथापना। 
ii. पूरे रेलपथ कȧ लंबाई पर आरएफआईडी टैग लगाना। 
iii. संपूण[ रेलखंड मɅ दूरसंचार टावरɉ कȧ संèथापना। 
iv. रेलपथ के साथ आिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना।  
v. भारतीय रेल पर चलाए जाने वाले Ĥ×येक रेलइंजन पर लोको कवच का Ĥावधान।  
6. दͯ¢ण मÚय रेलवे मɅ 1465 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच वज[न 3.2 कȧ संèथापना के  दौरान 
काफȧ अनुभव ĤाÜत हुए, िजÛहɅ काया[िÛवत करते हुए आगे सुधार ͩकए गए। अंततः Ǒदनांक 
16.07.2024 को कवच वज[न 4.0 ͪवͧशिçटयɉ को आरडीएसओ ɮवारा अनुमोदन Ĥदान ͩकया 
गया। 
7. कवच वज[न 4.0 मɅ ͪवͧभÛन रेल नेटवक[ के ͧलए अपेͯ¢त सभी मुÉय ͪवशेषताएं शाͧमल हɇ। 
भारतीय रेल हेतु संर¢ा के संबंध मɅ यह ͪवͧशçट उपलिÞध है। अãप अवͬध के भीतर, भारतीय 
रेल ɮवारा èवचाͧलत गाड़ी सुर¢ा Ĥणालȣ को ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया, परȣ¢ण ͩकया गया और 
संèथाͪपत करना शुǾ ͩकया गया। 
8. कवच के वज[न 4.0 मɅ Ĥमुख सुधारɉ मɅ अͬधक सटȣक अविèथǓत, बड़े याड[ के ͧलए ͧसगनल 
संबंधी बेहतर जानकारȣ, ओएफसी पर èटेशन से èटेशन तक कवच इंटरफेस और मौजूदा 
इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ के ͧलए सीधा इंटरफ े स शाͧमल हɇ। इन सुधारɉ के  साथ, कवच 
वज[न 4.0 को भारतीय रेल पर बड़े पैमाने पर लागू करने कȧ योजना बनाई गई है।  
9. åयापक और ͪवèतृत परȣ¢णɉ के बाद, कवच संèकरण 4.0 को Ǒदãलȣ – मुंबई माग[ के पलवल – 
मथुरा – नागदा खंड (633 माग[ ͩक.मी) पर और Ǒदãलȣ – हावड़ा माग[ के हावड़ा–बध[मान खंड 
(105 माग[ ͩक.मी.) 738 माग[ ͩकमी पर पर सफलतापूव[क लागू ͩकया गया है। Ǒदãलȣ – मुंबई 
और Ǒदãलȣ – हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ के शेष खंडɉ मɅ भी कवच का काया[Ûवयन ͩकया जा रहा है। 
10. Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई और Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ सǑहत उÍच घन×व मागɟ पर कवच के Ĥमुख मदɉ कȧ 
ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है:- 
 
 
859                                                      

Đ.सं. मद ĤगǓत 
I. ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना 7129 ͩक.मी. 
II. दूरसंचार टावरɉ कȧ संèथापना 860 अदद 
III. èटेशनɉ पर कवच का Ĥावधान 767  अदद 
IV. Ěैक साइड उपèकर कȧ संèथापना 5672 रेलइंजन 
V. रेलइंजनɉ पर कवच का Ĥावधान  4154 
 
11. इसके अलावा Ěैक साइड, कवच काया[Ûवयन काय[ 15,512 माग[ ͩक.मी. मɅ ͩकया गया है, जो 
भारतीय रेल के सभी èवͨण[म चतुभु[ज (जीÈयू) रेलमाग[, èवͨण[म ͪवकण[ रेलमाग[ (जीडी), उÍच 
घन×व नेटवक[ (एचडीएन) हɇ और पहचाने गए रेलखंडɉ को कवर करता है। 
12. कवच संèकरण 4.0 से सुसिÏजत करने के ͧलए 9,069 अͬधक  रेलइंजनɉ के ͧलए बोͧलयाँ 
आमंǒğत कȧ गई हɇ। रेलइंजनɉ मɅ कवच को Đͧमक Ǿप से चरणबɮध तरȣके से Ĥदान ͩकया जा 
रहा है। 
13. सभी संबंͬधत अͬधकाǐरयɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण Ĥदान करने के ͧलए भारतीय रेल के कɅ ġȣकृत Ĥͧश¢ण 
संèथान मɅ कवच से संबंͬधत ͪवशेष£ता Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए जा रहे हɇ। अभी तक 
40,000 से अͬधक तकनीͧशयनɉ, ऑपरेटरɉ और इंजीǓनयरɉ को कवच Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ से संबंͬधत 
Ĥͧश¢ण Ĥदान ͩकया गया है। इसमɅ 30,000 लोको पायलट और सहायक लोको पायलट शाͧमल 
हɇ। पाɫयĐम इǐरसेट के सहयोग से तैयार ͩकए गए हɇ। 
14. कवच संबंधी कायɟ पर अÈटूबर 2025 तक कȧ 2,354.36 करोड़ ǽपए Ǔनͬध कɉ उपयोग ͩकया 
गया है। वष[ 2025-26 के दौरान Ǔनͬध का आवंटन 1,673.19 करोड़ ǽपए है। आवæयक Ǔनͬध 
कायɟ कȧ ĤगǓत के अनुसार उपलÞध कराई जाती हɇ। 
 
संर¢ा उपाय 
वष[ मɅ उठाए गए ͪवͧभÛन संर¢ा उपायɉ के पǐरणामèवǾप दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया मɅ उã लेखनीय 
कमी आई है। 
 
पǐरणामी रेल दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया मɅ कमी आई है, जैसा ͩक Ǔनà नानुसार ताͧलका मɅ Ĥè तुत 
है:-  
 
वष[ पǐरणामी रेल दुघ[टनाएं  
2014-15 135 
2025-26 (अब तक) 11 (90% कमी) 
 
गाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा मɅ सुधार दशा[ने वाला एक अÛय मह×वपूण[ पǐरणामी दुघ[टना सूचकांक है, 
िजसके ͪववरण Ǔनà नानुसार हɇ: 
 
पǐरणामी दुघ[टना सूचकांक  
 
वष[ दुघ[टना सूचकांक 
2014-15 0.11 
2024-25 0.03 (73% कमी) 
860                                                      

यह सूचकांक सभी गाͫड़ यɉ कȧ कुल चाͧलत ͩकलोमीटर के अनुपात के Ǿप मɅ पǐरणामी दुघ[टनाओं कȧ 
संÉया को मापता है। 
 
 
दुघ[टना सूचकांक =  
     
 
 
 
भारतीय रेल पर संर¢ा को सवȾÍच Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। रेलगाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा बढ़ाने के  
ͧलए ͩकए गए ͪवͧभÛन संर¢ा संबंधी उपाय Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ:- 
 
1. भारतीय रेल मɅ, ͪपछले कुछ वषɟ मɅ संर¢ा से संबंͬधत काय[कलापɉ पर åयय मɅ वृɮͬध कȧ गई है, जो 
Ǔनàनानुसार हैः 
 
     संर¢ा संबंधी काय[कलापɉ पर åयय/बजट (करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
2013-14 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2022-23 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2023-24 
(वाèतͪवक) 
2024-25 2025-26 
39,463 87,327 1,01,651 1,14,022 1,16,470 
 
2.  मानवीय चूक के कारण होने वालȣ दुघ[टनाएं कम करने के  ͧलए 31.10.2025 तक 6,656 èटेशनɉ पर 
Üवाइंटɉ और ͧसगनलɉ के कɅ ġȣकृत पǐरचालन वालȣ इलेिÈĚकल/इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ कȧ 
åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
3.  समपार फाटकɉ पर संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 31.10.2025 तक 10,098 समपार फाटकɉ पर इंटरलॉͩकंग 
कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
4. संर¢ा बढ़ाने के ͧलए 31.10.2025 तक 6,661 èटेशनɉ पर ͪवɮयुत साधनɉ ɮवारा रेलपथ अͬधभोग के  
स×यापन के ͧलए èटेशनɉ के संपूण[ रेलपथ पǐरपथन कȧ åयवèथा कȧ गई है। 
2341651355531112005-06 2009-10 2014-15 2019-20 2024-25 2025-26 (up to Nov'25 )
पǐरणामी गाड़ी दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया
पǐरणामी रेल दुघ[टनाओं कȧ संÉया 
रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ संÉया X ͧमͧलयन ͩकलोमीटर चालन 
861                                                      

5. कवच अ×यͬधक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसके ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन कȧ 
आवæयकता होती है। कवच को जुलाई, 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा (एटȣपी) Ĥणालȣ के 
Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया था। कवच को चरणबɮध Ǿप से उƣरोƣर Ǿप से उपलÞध कराया जा रहा है। 
शुǽआत मɅ, कवच संèकरण 3.2 को दͯ¢ण मÚय रेलवे के 1465 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर और उƣर मÚय 
रेलवे के 80 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर लगाया गया था। कवच संèकरण 4.0 ͪवͧशिç ट को अ.अ.मा.सं ने 
Ǒदनांक 16.07.2024 को मंज़ूरȣ दȣ थी।  
 
      बड़े और åयापक और ͪवèतृत परȣ¢णɉ के बाद, कवच संèकरण 4.0 को Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई माग[ पर 
पलवल-मथुरा-कोटा-नागदा खंड (633 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा माग[ पर हावड़ा-बध[मान खंड 
(105 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) पर सफलतापूव[क कमीशन कर Ǒदया गया है। कवच को Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई और 
Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा माग[ के शेष खंडɉ मɅ भी काया[िÛवत ͩकया जाना शुǾ हो गया है।    
      इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल के सभी èवͨण[म चतुभु[ज, èवͨण[म ͪवकण[, उÍच घन×व नेटवक[ 
और ͬचिéनत ͩकए गए खंड को कवर करते हुए 15,512 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच के काया[Ûवयन का 
काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
6. ͧसगनल Ĥणालȣ कȧ संर¢ा से संबंͬधत मामलɉ जैसे अǓनवाय[ साàयता जांच, पǐरवत[न काय[ संबंधी 
Ĥोटोकॉल, पूण[ हो चुके कायɟ के आरेख तैयार करने आǑद पर ͪवèतृत अनुदेश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ।  
 
7. Ĥोटोकॉल के अनुसार ͧसगनल एवं दूरसंचार उपèकरɉ के ͧलए ͫडèकनेÈशन और ǐरकनेÈशन Ĥणालȣ पर 
पुनः बल Ǒदया गया है।  
8. लोको पायलटɉ कȧ सतक[ता मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए सभी रेल इंजनɉ मɅ सतक[ता Ǔनयंğण उपकरण 
(वीसीडी) लगाए गए हɇ। 
9.  माèट पर रेĚो-ǐरÝलेिÈटव ͧसÊमा बोड[ लगाए जाने कȧ åयवèथा है जो ͪवɮयुतीकृत ¢ेğɉ मɅ ͧसगनलɉ से 
दो ओएचई माèट पहले िèथत होता है ताͩक कोहरे के मौसम के कारण Ǻæयता कम होने पर Đू को 
आगे के संकेत के बारे मɅ चेतावनी ͧमल सके। 
10. कोहरे से Ĥभाͪवत ¢ेğɉ मɅ लोको पायलटɉ के ͧलए जीपीएस आधाǐरत फॉग सेÝटȣ ͫडवाइस (एफएसडी) 
कȧ åयवèथा कȧ जाती है िजससे लोको पायलट को आने वाले मुÉय èथलɉ यथा ͧसगनल, समपार 
फाटकɉ आǑद कȧ दूरȣ का पता लग जाता है। 
11. Ĥाथͧमक रेलपथ नवीकरण करते समय 60 ͩकĒा कȧ आधुǓनक रेलपथ संरचना, 90 अãटȣमेट टेिÛसल 
èĚɅथ (यूटȣएस) पटǐरयां, ĤीèĚेèड कंĐȧट èलȣपर (पीएससी) लोचदार बंधन वाले सामाÛय/चौड़े èलȣपर, 
पीएससी èलȣपरɉ पर फैनशेÜड लेआउट टन[आउट, गड[र पुलɉ पर èटȣल चैनल/एच-बीम èलȣपस[ का 
उपयोग ͩकया जाता है। 
12. मानवीय ğुǑटयɉ को कम करने के ͧलए पीÈयूआरएस, टȣआरटȣ, टȣ-28 आǑद जैसी रेलपथ मशीनɉ के 
उपयोग के माÚयम से रेलपथ ǒबछाने कȧ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ का यांǒğकȧकरण।  
13. संर¢ा बेहतर करने के ͧलए रेलपथ नवीकरण कȧ ĤगǓत बढ़ाने और Ïवाइंटɉ कȧ वेिãडंग से बचने के 
ͧलए 130 मीटर/260 मीटर लंबे पटरȣ पैनलɉ कȧ आपूǓत[ को अͬधकतम करना।  
14. पटǐरयɉ मɅ दोष का पता लगाने और दोषपूण[ पटǐरयɉ को समय पर हटाने के ͧलए पटǐरयɉ का 
अãĚासोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन (यूएसएफडी) परȣ¢ण।  
  
862                                                      

15. लंबी पटǐरयां ǒबछाना, एãयूͧमनो थͧम[क वेिãडंग के उपयोग को कम करना और पटǐरयɉ के ͧलए बेहतर 
वैिãडंग तकनीक अथा[त Ýलैश बट वेिãडंग अपनाना।  
16. ओएमएस (दोलन Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ) और टȣआरसी (रेलपथ ǐरकॉͫडɍग यानɉ) ɮवारा रेलपथ भूͧमǓत कȧ 
Ǔनगरानी।  
17. वेãड/पटǐरयɉ कȧ टूट-फूट का पता लगाने के ͧलए रेल पटǐरयɉ पर गæत लगाना।  
18. टन[आउट नवीनीकरण कायɟ मɅ ͬथक वेब िèवच और वेãड करने योÊय सीएमएस Đॉͧसंग का उपयोग।  
19. संर¢ा पɮधǓतयɉ के अनुपालन हेतु कम[चाǐरयɉ को Ǔनगरानी और जागǾक करने के ͧलए Ǔनयͧमत 
अंतराल पर Ǔनरȣ¢ण। 
20. युिÈतसंगत अनुर¢ण संबंधी आवæयकता और इनपुट के इçटतमीकरण से संबंͬधत Ǔनण[य लेने के ͧलए 
Ěैक डाटाबेस और ͫडसीजन सपोट[ ͧसèटम जैसी रेलपथ पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ वेब आधाǐरत ऑनलाइन 
Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ को अपनाया गया है। 
21. रेलपथ कȧ संर¢ा संबंधी मुɮदɉ अथा[त् एकȧकृत Þलॉक, कॉǐरडोर Þलॉक, काय[ èथल पर संर¢ा, मानसून 
संबंधी सावधाǓनयɉ आǑद पर ͪवèतृत अनुदेश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ।  
22. गाͫड़यɉ का सुरͯ¢त पǐरचालन सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए रेल पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ (सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ एवं मालͫडÞबɉ) 
का Ǔनवारक अनुर¢ण। 
23. पारंपǐरक आईसीएफ ͫडजाइन के रेल ͫडÞबɉ के èथान पर एलएचबी ͫडजाइन के रेल ͫडÞबे लगाए जा रहे 
हɇ। 
24. जनवरȣ, 2019 तक बड़ी लाइन माग[ पर चौकȧदार रǑहत सभी समपारɉ (यूएमएलसी) को समाÜत कर 
Ǒदया गया है। 
25. पुलɉ का Ǔनयͧमत Ǔनरȣ¢ण करके रेल पुलɉ कȧ संर¢ा सुǓनिæचत कȧ जाती है। इन Ǔनरȣ¢णɉ के दौरान 
िèथǓतयɉ के आकलन के आधार पर पुलɉ कȧ मरàमत/पुनèथा[पन काय[ ͩकया जाता है। 
26. भारतीय रेल ने सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ याǒğयɉ कȧ åयापक सूचना के ͧलए सांͪवͬधक “आग संबंधी 
सूचनाएं” लगाई हɇ। सभी ͫडÞबɉ मɅ आग संबंधी पोèटर लगाए गए हɇ ताͩक याǒğयɉ को आग से बचने के  
ͧलए ‘Èया करɅ’ और ‘Èया न करɅ’ के बारे मɅ सूͬचत और सतक[ ͩकया जा सके। इसमɅ सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के 
भीतर Ïवलनशील वèतुएँ, ͪवèफोटकɉ को साथ न ले जाने, धूĨपान न करने, जुमा[ना आǑद से संबंͬधत 
सूचनाएं शाͧमल हɇ।  
27. उ×पादन इकाइयां नवǓनͧम[त पावर कारɉ और पैÛĚȣ कारɉ मɅ आग संसूचक एवं अवरोधन Ĥणालȣ तथा 
नवǓनͧम[त सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ आग एवं धुआं संसूचक Ĥणालȣ कȧ åयवèथा कर रहȣ हɇ। ¢ेğीय रेलɉ ɮवारा 
मौजूद सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ चरणबɮध तरȣके से ĤोĒेͧसव ͩफɪमेÛट का काय[ भी चल रहा है।  
28. कम[चाǐरयɉ कȧ Ǔनयͧमत काउिÛसͧलंग कȧ जाती है और उÛहɅ Ĥͧश¢ण Ǒदया जाता है।  
29. Ǒदनांक 30.11.2023 के राजपğ अͬधसूचना के तहत भारतीय रेलɅ (चाͧलत लाइन) साधारण Ǔनयम मɅ 
रोͧलंग Þलॉक अवधारणा कȧ शुǾआत कȧ गई है िजसम Ʌ प ǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के एक ȧकृत 
अनुर¢ण/मरàमत/ĤǓतèथापन के काय[ को रोͧलंग आधार पर 52 सÜताह पूव[ हȣ योजनाबɮध ͩकया 
जाता है और योजना के अनुसार ǓनçपाǑदत ͩकया जाता है। 
 
रेलवे ɮवारा ͩकए गए बेहतर अनुर¢ण पɮधǓतयɉ, Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय सुधार, बेहतर अवसंरचना और चल èटॉक 
आǑद संर¢ा संबंधी कायɟ का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार सारणीबɮध है:- 
 
863                                                      

Đ.सं. मद 2004-05 से 
2013-14 
2014-15 से 2024-25  2004-14 कȧ तुलना 
मɅ 2014-25 
  Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय सुधार 
1 उÍच-गुणवƣा वालȣ पटǐरयɉ 
का उपयोग (60 ͩक.Ēा.) 
(ͩक.मी.) 
57,450 ͩक.मी. 1.43 लाख ͩक.मी. 2 गुना से अͬधक 
2 लंबी रेल पटǐरयां (260 मीटर) 
(ͩक.मी.) 
9,917 ͩक.मी. 77,522 ͩक.मी. लगभग 8 गुना 
3 इलेÈĚोǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग 
(èटेशन) 
837 èटेशन 3,691  èटेशन 4  गुना से अͬधक 
4 फॉग पास सेÝटȣ उपकरण 
(अदद) 
31.03.14 तक: 
90 
31.03.25 तक: 25,939 288 गुना 
5 ͬथक वेब िèवच (अदद) शूÛय 28,301 अदद   
  बेहतर अनुर¢ण पɮधǓतयां 
1 Ĥाथͧमक रेल नवीकरण 
(रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
32,260 ͩक.मी. 49,941 ͩक.मी. 1.5 गुना 
2 यूएसएफडी (अãĚा सोǓनक 
Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन) वेिãडंग 
परȣ¢ण (अदद) 
79.43 लाख 2 करोड़ 2 गुना से अͬधक 
3 वेãड संबंधी खराǒबयां (अदद) 2013-14 मɅ: 
3699 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 370 अदद 90% कमी 
4 पटǐरयɉ मɅ दरारɅ (अदद) 2013-14 मɅ: 
2548 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 289 अदद 88% से Ïयादा 
कमी 
  बेहतर अवसंरचना एवं चल èटॉक 
1 जोड़े गए नए रेलपथ ͩक.मी. 
(रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
14,985 ͩक.मी 34,428 ͩक.मी. 2 गुना से अͬधक 
2 Ýलाईओवर (आरओबी)/ 
अंडरपास (आरयूबी) (अदद) 
4,148 अदद 13,808 अदद 3 गुना से अͬधक 
3 बड़ी लाइन पर चौकȧदार रǑहत 
समपार (अदद)  
31.03.14 तक: 
8948 
31.03.24 तक: शूÛय 
(31.01.19 तक सभी बंद 
कर Ǒदए गए) 
हटा Ǒदए गए 
4 एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का 
ͪवǓनमा[ण (अदद) 
2,337 अदद 42,677 18 गुना से अͬधक 
 
***** 
864                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2345 का उƣर 
 
रेलवे मɅ सुधारɉ के ͧलए ͪवæव èतर पर साझेदारȣ 
 
2345. Įीमती संगीता यादव:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  Èया मंğालय ने रेलवे अवसंरचना, Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ और संभार-तंğ मɅ अंतरराçĚȣय èतर पर 
साझेदारȣ कȧ संभावना का पता लगाने के ͧलए ͪवदेशी सरकारɉ अथवा उɮयोग ĤǓतǓनͬधयɉ 
के साथ संपक[ èथाͪपत ͩकया है, यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा È या है;  
(ख)  भारत के रेलवे कानून, सेवाओं और ¢ेğीय शासन को आधुǓनक बनाने के ͧलए Èया सुधार 
ͩकए गए हɇ;  
(ग)  È या मंğालय ने रेलवे कȧ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ को सु͸ढ़ करने के ͧलए Ĥौɮयोͬगक अथवा संचालन 
संबंधी सुधारɉ पर ͪवचार ͩकया है, यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और  
(घ)  रेलवे नेटवक[ मɅ ͫडिजटलȣकरण, हǐरत गǓतशीलता और नवाचार को सु͸ढ़ करने के ͧलए 
Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): रेल मंğालय ने िèवɪजरलɇड, जम[नी, Ǿस, èपेन आǑद के साथ समझौता £ापन पर 
हèता¢र ͩकए हɇ। Ǔनàनͧलͨखत ¢ेğɉ मɅ सहयोग के ͧलए समझौता £ापन पर हèता¢र ͩकए गए 
हɇ:- 
• माल यातायात पǐरचालन (ऑटोमोǑटव पǐरवहन तथा लॉिजिèटÈस और मãटȣमॉडल 
लॉिजिèटक हब/पाक[ सǑहत) 
• याğी पǐरचालन (हाई èपीड सǑहत) मãटȣमॉडल पǐरवहन। 
• हाई-èपीड रेल ͪवकास: ͪवͧशिçटयɉ, मानकɉ, संर¢ा मानकɉ को Ǔनधा[ǐरत करने मɅ सहयोग,  
हाई-èपीड रेल गͧलयारɉ कȧ योजना, ͫडजाइन, Ǔनमा[ण और पǐरचालन हेतु संर¢ा। 
865                                                      

 एक आधुǓनक, ĤǓतèपधȸ रेलवे संगठन का ͪवकास (संगठना×मक संरचनाओं के सुधार और 
रेलवे सुधार सǑहत)। 
• Ǔनिæचत अवसंरचना के रेल अनुर¢ण, Ǔनमा[ण के दौरान संर¢ा, पǐरचालǓनक संर¢ा, 
पǐरचालǓनक योजना आǑद के ͧलए सवȾƣम पɮधǓतयां। 
 रेल पǐरचालन, ͪवपणन और ǒबĐȧ के साथ-साथ ĤशासǓनक उɮदेæयɉ के ͧलए आईटȣ 
समाधान। 
 पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ का पूवा[नुमाǓनत अनुर¢ण। 
 
भारतीय रेल ने ͪपछले कुछ वषɟ के दौरान आधुǓनक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ को अपनाने, Ĥणालȣ कȧ संर¢ा, 
ĤगǓत और द¢ता को बेहतर बनाने के ͧलए कई सुधार ͩकए हɇ। इनमɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
 गǓत शिÈत Ǔनदेशालय/इकाइयाँ: पǐरवहन ¢ेğ से संबंͬधत अवसंरचना×मक पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ 
योजना बनाने और Ǔनçपादन के ĤǓत ͸िçटकोण मɅ åयापक पǐरवत[न लाने के ͧलए अÈटूबर, 
2021 मɅ Ĥधानमंğी गǓत शिÈत नेशनल माèटर Üलान (एनएमपी) शुǾ ͩकया गया था। 
भारतीय रेल ने अपनी पǐरयोजना Ǔनयोजन ĤͩĐया मɅ गǓत शिÈत के ͧसɮधांतɉ को तुरंत 
आ×मसात कर ͧलया है। मौजूदा संसाधनɉ का उपयोग करते हुए, भारतीय रेल मɅ एक बहु-
ͪवषयक गǓत शिÈत Ǔनदेशालय बनाया गया है। इसी Ĥकार, ¢ेğीय रेलɉ मɅ गǓत शिÈत 
इकाइयाँ बनाई गई हɇ। सभी Ǒहतधारकɉ और अÛय अवसंरचना मंğालयɉ/ͪवभागɉ से परामश[ 
के बाद पǐरयोजना कȧ ͪवèतृत पǐरयोजना ǐरपोटɏ तैयार कȧ जाती हɇ। उपरोÈत पहलकदͧमयɉ 
से पǐरयोजनाओं के मूãयांकन/èवीकृǓत ĤͩĐया और Ǔनçपादन मɅ तेजी आई है। 
 
 महाĤबंधकɉ और मंडल रेल Ĥबंधकɉ को पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ èवीकृǓत हेतु संवͬध[त शिÈतयां 
Ĥदान करना: पǐरयोजनाओं के ×वǐरत Ǔनçपादन के ͧलए महाĤबंधकɉ और मंडल रेल Ĥबंधकɉ 
को ͪवͧभÛन पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ èवीकृǓत हेतु शिÈतयां बढ़ा दȣ गई हɇ। 
 
 अनुबंधɉ को अंǓतम Ǿप देना और Ĥबंधन: Ǔनͪवदाओं को अंǓतम Ǿप देने के ͧलए 
महाĤबंधकɉ को पूण[ शिÈतयाँ Ĥदान कȧ गई हɇ। इसके अǓतǐरÈत, पारदशȸ एवं ×वǐरत 
अनुबंध Ĥबंधन और ठेकेदारɉ कȧ ǒबͧलंग के ͧलए काय[ अनुबंध Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ 
(आईआरडÞãयूसीएमएस) और ठेके दारɉ के ͧलए ई-एमबी को लागू ͩकया गया है। 
 कवच का ͪवकास और काया[Ûवयन: रेलगाड़ी पǐरचालन मɅ संर¢ा मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए, 
भारतीय रेल मɅ कवच को राçĚȣय èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी सुर¢ा (एटȣपी) Ĥणालȣ के Ǿप मɅ 
ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। भारतीय रेल मɅ कवच के काया[Ûवयन का काय[ ͧमशन मोड मɅ शुǾ 
ͩकया गया है। 
 
 समपारɉ को समाÜत करना: रेलगाड़ी पǐरचालन और सड़क उपयोगकता[ओं कȧ संर¢ा मɅ 
सुधार लाने के ͧलए, बड़ी लाइन पर ǒबना चौकȧदार वाले सभी समपारɉ को समाÜत कर 
Ǒदया गया है। इसके अǓतǐरÈत, ऊपरȣ सड़क पुलɉ/Ǔनचले सड़क पुलɉ के Ǔनमा[ण ɮवारा 
866                                                      

चरणबɮध तरȣके से चौकȧदार वाले सभी समपारɉ को ĤǓतèथाͪपत करने का भी Ǔनण[य ͧलया 
गया है। 
 
 पीÈयूआरएस, टȣआरटȣ, टȣ-28 आǑद जैसी रेलपथ मशीनɉ के उपयोग के  माÚयम से रेलपथ 
ǒबछाने कȧ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ और रेलपथ के बेहतर अनुर¢ण और ͪवæवसनीयता के ͧलए हाई 
आऊटपुट Üलेन टैàपर और पॉइंɪस एवं Đॉͧसंग टैàपर का उपयोग करके रेलपथ अनुर¢ण 
के ͧलए यांǒğक Ĥणालȣ को अपनाना। पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ ͪवæवसनीयता को और बढ़ाने के ͧलए 
रेल Ēाइंͫडंग मशीनɉ सǑहत अ×याधुǓनक मशीनɉ का उपयोग। समĒ काय[Ĥणालȣ मूãयांकन 
के ͧलए एकȧकृत रेलपथ Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ (आईटȣएमएस) और दोलन Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ 
(ओएमएस) को लगाना ताͩक इçटतमीकृत अनुर¢ण संबंधी आवæयकताओं का Ǔनधा[रण 
ͩकया जा सके। 
 
 èटेशन पुनͪव[कास: भारतीय रेल ने याǒğयɉ को ͪवæवèतरȣय सुͪवधाएँ Ĥदान करने और रेलवे 
èटेशनɉ पर रेलगाड़ी पǐरचालन कȧ द¢ता मɅ सुधार लाने के उɮदेæय से अमृत भारत èटेशन 
योजना शुǾ कȧ है। अब तक, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त 1,337 रेलवे èटेशनɉ 
का पुनͪव[कास शुǾ ͩकया जा चुका है, िजसमɅ से 160 èटेशनɉ का काय[ पूरा हो चुका है। 
 
 आधुǓनक रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ शुǽआत: याǒğयɉ के अनुभव को बेहतर बनाने और आरामदायक 
याğा Ĥदान करने के ͧलए, भारतीय रेल पर आधुǓनक सुͪवधाओं से युÈत अ×याधुǓनक वंदे 
भारत रेलगाͫड़याँ, अमृत भारत रेलगाͫड़याँ और नमो भारत रैͪपड रेल शुǾ कȧ गई हɇ। 
वत[मान मɅ, 164 अदद वंदे भारत सेवाएं, 30 अदद अमृत भारत सेवाएं और 4 अदद नमो 
भारत रैͪपड रेल सेवाएं पǐरचालन मɅ हɇ। 
 
 
 भारत गौरव रेलगाͫड़याँ: भारतीय रेल ने भारत गौरव रेलगाͫड़याँ नामक थीम-आधाǐरत 
पय[टक सͩक[ट रेलगाͫड़याँ शुǾ कȧ हɇ, िजसका उɮदेæय पय[टन ¢ेğ के पेशेवरɉ और अÛय 
स¢म सेवा Ĥदाताओं के  माÚयम से भारत और ͪवæव के åयिÈतयɉ को भारत कȧ समृɮध 
सांèकृǓतक धरोहर और भåय ऐǓतहाͧसक èथानɉ को Ĥदͧश[त करना है। 
 
 èटेशनɉ और रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ ͫडिजटल लेनदेन को बढ़ावा देना: ǑटकǑटंग सुͪवधा, खानपान 
इकाइयɉ आǑद जैसे ͪवͧभÛन Ēाहक संपक[ कɅ ġɉ पर ͫडिजटल भुगतान सुͪवधा शुǾ कȧ गई 
है। 
 
 माल यातायात पǐरवहन: माल यातायात को बढ़ाने के उɮदेæय से, भारतीय रेल ने मालभाड़े 
मɅ छूट, सुǓनिæचत åयवसायɉ पर छूट, कम गमन दूरȣ संबंधी ǐरयायतɅ, ͧमनी रेक लदान, 
माल शेडɉ का ͪवकास, सामाÛय Ĥयोजन माल ͫडÞबा Ǔनवेश योजना (जीपीडÞãयूआईएस), 
åयवसाय ͪवकास पोट[ल आǑद के Ǿप मɅ कई उदारȣकृत Ĥो×साहन देकर बड़े सुधार ͩकए हɇ। 
867                                                      

 गǓत शिÈत कागȾ टͧम[नल: भारतीय रेल कȧ माल लदान Ǒहèसेदारȣ को बढ़ाने के  ͧलए कागȾ 
टͧम[नलɉ हेतु अनुमोदन ĤͩĐया मɅ तेजी लाने और उनकȧ èथापना को सरल बनाने के  ͧलए 
गǓत शिÈत कागȾ टͧम[नल संबंधी पहलकदͧमयां शुǾ कȧ गई हɇ। अब तक, 120 गǓत शिÈत 
कागȾ टͧम[नल कमीशन ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। 
 
 रेलवे-भारतीय डाक एकȧकरण से "संयुÈत पास[ल उ×पाद" ͪवकͧसत करना: åयवसाय संचालन 
हेतु दो सरकारȣ ͪवभागɉ के बीच एक संयुÈत सहयोग पहलकदमी के  Ǿप मɅ, पास[ल सुपुद[गी 
कȧ एक संपूण[ ĤͩĐया शुǾ कȧ गई है, िजसमɅ डाक ͪवभाग ɮवारा Ĥथम-मील-अंǓतम-मील 
संपक[ता और रेलवे के माÚयम से èटेशन से èटेशन तक मÚयवतȸ संपक[ता Ĥदान कȧ गई 
है। 
 
 कोयला Įृंखला समÛवय समूह: कोयला Įृंखला मɅ बड़ी संÉया मɅ Ǒहतधारक शाͧमल हɇ, जैसे 
कोयला कंपǓनयाँ, Ǔनजी और वाͨणिÏयक खदानɅ, बंदरगाह, ǒबजलȣ घर, उɮयोग और 
भारतीय रेल। सभी Ǒहतधारकɉ के  साथ समÛवय èथाͪपत करने के ͧलए, रेल मंğालय मɅ 
कोयला Įृंखला समÛवय समूह èथाͪपत करने कȧ योजना बनाई गई है। 
 
 वाͪष[क भतȸ कैलɅडर: भारतीय रेल ने भǓत[यɉ के  ͧलए एक वाͪष[क कैलɅडर जारȣ ͩकया है 
िजससे न केवल अßयͬथ[यɉ के ͧलए अǓनिæचतता और Ĥती¢ा अवͬध कम होगी बिãक रेलवे 
समय पर ǐरिÈतयां भरने मɅ भी स¢म होगा। 
 
 रेल भूͧम नीǓत: Ĥधानमंğी गǓत शिÈत Ĥणालȣ के अंतग[त देश भर मɅ तेजी से एकȧकृत 
योजना और अवसंरचना के ͪवकास को स¢म करने हेतु रेलवे कȧ भूͧम पɪटा नीǓत को 
सुåयविèथत और सरल बनाने के ͧलए, दȣघ[काͧलक भूͧम पɪटा नीǓत जारȣ कȧ गई है। 
 
 रोͧलंग Þलॉकɉ कȧ शुǽआत: भारतीय रेल मɅ वष[ 2023 मɅ राजपğ अͬधसूचना ɮवारा रोͧलंग 
Þलॉकɉ क ȧ अवधारणा शुǾ क ȧ गई है , िजसमɅ प ǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के एक ȧकृत 
अनुर¢ण/मरàमत/ĤǓतèथापन का काय[ रोͧलंग आधार पर 52 सÜताह पहले हȣ योजनाबɮध 
ͩकया जाता है और मंडलɉ ɮवारा योजना के अनुसार ǓनçपाǑदत ͩकया जाता है। 
 
 रेलवे ɮवारा बेहतर अनुर¢ण पɮधǓतयɉ, Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ सुधारɉ, बेहतर अवसंरचना और चल 
èटॉक आǑद से संबंͬधत ͪवͧभÛन आधुǓनकȧकरण/उÛनयन/संर¢ा से संबंͬधत कायɟ का Þयौरा 
Ǔनàनानुसार सारणीबɮध ͩकया गया है:- 
 
 
Đ. सं. मद 2004-05 से 
2013-14 तक 
2014-15 से 
2024-25 तक 
2004-14 कȧ 
तुलना मɅ 2014-25 
 Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय सुधार 
1 उÍच-गुणवƣा वाल ȣ 57,450 ͩक.मी. 1.43 लाख 2 गुना से अͬधक 
868                                                      

पटǐरयɉ का उपयोग 
(60 ͩक.Ēा.) (ͩक.मी.) 
ͩक.मी. 
2 लंबी रेल पट ǐरयां 
(260 मीटर) (ͩक.मी.) 
9,917 ͩक.मी. 77,522 ͩक.मी. लगभग 8 गुना  
3 इलेÈĚोǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग 
(èटेशन) 
837 èटेशन 3,691 èटेशन 4 गुना से अͬधक 
4 फॉग पास से Ýटȣ 
उपकरण (अदद) 
31.03.14 तक 
90 अदद 
31.03.25 तक 
25,939 
288 गुना 
5 ͬथक वेब िèवच (अदद) शूÛय 28,301 अदद   
 बेहतर अनुर¢ण पɮधǓतयां 
1 Ĥाथͧमक रेल नवीकरण 
(रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
32,260 ͩक.मी. 49,941 ͩक.मी. 1.5 गुना 
2 यूएसएफडी (अãĚा 
सोǓनक Ýलॉ ͫडटेÈशन) 
वेिãडंग परȣ¢ण (अदद) 
79.43 लाख 2 करोड़ 2 गुना से अͬधक 
3 वेãड संबंधी खराǒबयां 
(अदद) 
2013-14 मɅ: 
3699 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 
370 अदद 
90% कमी 
4 पटǐरयɉ मɅ दरारɅ (अदद) 2013-14 मɅ: 
2548 अदद 
2024-25 मɅ: 
289 अदद 
88% से 
Ïयादा कमी 
 बेहतर अवसंरचना एवं चल èटॉक 
1 जोड़े गए नए रेलपथ 
ͩक.मी. (रेलपथ ͩक.मी.) 
14,985 ͩक.मी. 34,428 ͩक.मी. 2 गुना से अͬधक 
2 Ýलाईओवर (आरओबी)/ 
अंडरपास (आरयूबी) 
(अदद) 
4,148 अदद 13,808 अदद 3 गुना से अͬधक 
3 बड़ी लाइन पर चौकȧदार 
रǑहत समपार (अदद)  
31.03.14 तक: 
8948 
31.03.24 तक: 
शूÛय (31.01.19 
तक सभी बंद कर 
Ǒदए गए) 
हटा Ǒदए गए 
4 एलएचबी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ 
का ͪवǓनमा[ण (अदद) 
2,337 अदद 42,677 18 गुना से अͬधक 
 
 
 
 
 
869                                                      

हǐरत गǓतशीलता और नवोÛमेष 
 
• भारतीय रेल ने गैर-जीवाæम İोतɉ के माÚयम से ǒबजलȣ के उपयोग, रेलपथ के 
ͪवɮयुतीकरण से डीजल कȧ खपत मɅ बचत, माल और याǒğयɉ को सड़क माग[ से रेल माग[ 
पर èथानांतǐरत करने कȧ Ǒदशा मɅ लगातार Ĥयास, Ěेन सेट चलाने के ͧलए हाइĜोजन गैस 
का उपयोग आǑद के माÚयम से काब[न उ×सज[न को संतुͧलत कर शुɮध शूÛय काब[न 
उ×सज[क बनने का लêय रखा है। 
 
• भारतीय रेल ने Đͧमक Ǿप से अपनी ͪवɮयुत शिÈत आवæयकता को रणनीǓतक ͪवɮयुत 
Ĥापण योजना पर आधाǐरत सौर, पवन तथा अÛय नवीकरणीय ऊजा[ İोतɉ के संयोजन के 
माÚयम से पूरा करने कȧ योजना बनाई है। नवंबर 2025 तक लगभग 898 मेगावाट सौर 
ऊजा[ संयंğ (भवनɉ के छतɉ पर तथा जमीन पर èथाͪपत) तथा लगभग 103 मेगावाट पवन 
ऊजा[ संयंğ कमीशन ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। इसके अलावा, भारतीय सौर ऊजा[ Ǔनगम 
(एसईसीआई) कȧ साझेदारȣ से ‘चौबीस घंटे’ (आरटȣसी) मोड मɅ 100 मेगावाट नवीकरणीय 
ऊजा[ कȧ आपूǓत[ भी Ĥारंभ हो चुकȧ है। इसके अलावा, 1500 मेगावाट नवीकरणीय ऊजा[ 
¢मता ‘चौबीस घंटे’ (आटȣसी) हेतु साझेदारȣ कȧ गई है। यह एक हाइǒĦड समाधान है, 
िजसमɅ सौर, पवन तथा भंडारण घटक शाͧमल हɇ। 
 
• भारतीय रेल ने रेल लाइनɉ के ͪवɮयुतीकरण काय[ को ͧमशन मोड मɅ शुǾ ͩकया है। अब 
तक लगभग 99.2% बड़ी लाइन नेटवक[ को ͪवɮयुतीकृत ͩकया जा चुका है। शेष रेल 
नेटवक[ के ͪवɮयुतीकरण का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया जा चुका है। 
 
• पैसɅजर रेलइंजनɉ मɅ हेड ऑन जेनरेशन (एचओजी) योजना काया[िÛवत कȧ गई है, ताͩक 
सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ रेलगाड़ी कȧ Ĥकाश åयवèथा और वातूनुकूलन के ͧलए ͪवɮयुत आपूǓत[ 
Ĥदान कȧ जा सके, िजससे काब[न उ×सज[न, शोर और डीजल कȧ खपत कम होती है। 
 
• भारतीय रेल ने अनुसंधान अͧभकãप एवं मानक संगठन ɮवारा तैयार कȧ गई ͪवͧशçटताओं 
के अनुसार रेलवे मɅ अपने पहले हाइĜोजन रेलगाड़ी के पǐरचालन के ͧलए Ĥारंͧभक आधार 
पर हाइĜोजन चाͧलत रेल तकनीक के उपयोग को Ĥदͧश[त करने के ͧलए एक अ×याधुǓनक 
पǐरयोजना शुǾ कȧ है।  
 
• इस पǐरयोजना ने देश के पǐरवहन ¢ेğ के ͧलए एक èवÍछ और हǐरत भͪवçय सुǓनिæचत 
करते हुए वैकिãपक ऊजा[-चाͧलत रेलगाड़ी याğा मɅ ĤगǓत के ĤǓत भारतीय रेल कȧ 
ĤǓतबɮधता को èथाͪपत ͩकया है। 
 
****** 
 
870                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2346 का उƣर 
 
कुशीनगर िजले को मुÉय आͬथ[क हब से जोड़ने वालȣ एÈसĤेस Ěेन  
 
2346. Įी रतनजीत Ĥताप नारायन ͧसंह:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  कुशीनगर िजले को मुÉय आͬथ[क हब से जोड़ने वालȣ नई एÈसĤेस Ěेन शुǾ ͩकये जाने के 
Ĥèताव कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत Èया है;  
(ख)  èथानीय èटेशनɉ पर मौजूदा लंबी दूरȣ कȧ Ěेनɉ कȧ बारंबारता और èटॉपेज बढ़ाने कȧ Èया 
योजना है;  
(ग)  उÈत ¢ेğ से गुजरने वालȣ Ěेनɉ मɅ सूͬचत अ×यͬधक भीड़ और èवÍछता संबंधी समèयाओं 
को दूर करने के ͧलए Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ;  
(घ)  कुशीनगर सेÈशन मɅ रेलवे Ěैक ¢मता का उÛ नयन करने के ͧलए आवंǑटत कȧ गई Ǔनͬध 
ͩकतनी है; और   
(ङ)  याğी Ěेन सेवाओं ɮवारा समयपालन सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए Èया उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ङ) चूंͩक रेलवे नेटवक[ िजला कȧ सीमाओं के आर-पार फैला होता है, इसͧलए ऐसी 
सीमाओं के आर-पार नेटवक[ कȧ आवæयकता के अनुसार गाͫड़यɉ को शुǾ ͩकया जाता है। इसके 
अǓतǐरÈत, भारतीय रेल मɅ गाͫड़यɉ का अͬधभोͬगता पैटन[ पूरे वष[ एक समान नहȣं रहता और यह 
कम åयèत तथा अͬधकतम भीड़भाड़ कȧ अवͬधयɉ मɅ ͧभÛन होता है। अͬधकतम भीड़भाड़ कȧ 
अवͬध के दौरान, ͪवशेषकर लोकͪĤय मागɟ पर, गाͫड़यɉ कȧ अͬधभोͬगता पूरȣ रहती है, जबͩक कम 
åयèत अवͬध और कम लोकͪĤय मागɟ पर अͬधभोͬगता इçटतम से कम रहती है। 
871                                                      

 कुशीनगर िजले के अͬधकार ¢ेğ मɅ आने वाले कÜतानगंज èटेशन पर वत[मान मɅ 32 जोड़ी 
गाड़ी सेवाओं (नीचे सूचीबɮध) से सेͪवत है जो इसे Ǒदãलȣ, कोलकाता, मुंबई, अहमदाबाद, 
गुवाहाटȣ, अमृतसर, जàमू तवी, Ĥयागराज आǑद जैसे Ĥमुख शहरɉ से जोड़ती हɇ। 
 
Đ. सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  55098/55097 गोरखपुर कɇट-नरकǑटयागंज पैसɅजर 
2.  55047/55048 नरकǑटयागंज-गोरखपुर कɇट. पैसɅजर 
3.  55096/55095 गोरखपुर कɇट-नरकǑटयागंज पैसɅजर 
4.  55036/55035 गोरखपुर कɇट-सीवान पैसɅजर 
5.  55040/55039 बरहनी-नरकǑटयागंज पैसɅजर 
6.  55115/55116 थावे-कÜतानगंज पैसɅजर 
7.  55107/55108 थावे-कÜतानगंज पैसɅजर 
8.  75105/75106 थावे-नकहा जंगल डेमू 
9.  14111/14112 मुजÝफरपुर-Ĥयागराज बापूधाम एÈसĤेस 
10.  14011/14012 राͬधकापुर-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) एÈसĤेस 
11.  14009/14010 बापूधाम मोǓतहारȣ-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) चंपारण स×याĒह एÈसĤेस 
12.  14047/14048 सीतामढȣ-Ǒदãलȣ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
13.  15529/15530 सहरसा-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) जनसाधारण एÈसĤेस 
14.  15211/15212 दरभंगा-अमृतसर जननायक एÈसĤेस 
15.  15133/15134 छपरा-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
16.  14627/14628 सहरसा-छेहरटा (चंडीगढ़) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
17.  19409/19410 साबरमती-थावे एÈसĤेस 
18.  12557/12558 मुजÝफरपुर-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) सÜतĐांǓत एÈसĤेस 
19.  15001/15002 मुजÝफरपुर-देहरादून राÜती सागर एÈसĤेस 
20.  15051/15052 कोलकाता-गोरखपुर पूवाɍचल एÈसĤेस 
21.  15079/15080 पाटͧलपुğ-गोरखपुर एÈसĤेस 
22.  15273/15274 रÈसौल-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) स×याĒह एÈसĤेस 
23.  15135/15136 छपरा-अमृतसर एÈसĤेस 
24.  15113/15114 गोमतीनगर-छपरा एÈसĤेस 
25.  15655/15656 कामाÉया-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटड़ा एÈसĤेस 
26.  15653/15654 गुवाहाटȣ-जàमू तवी अमरनाथ एÈसĤेस 
27.  15557/15558 दरभंगा-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
872                                                      

28.  15567/15568 बापूधाम मोǓतहारȣ-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
29.  15561/15562 दरभंगा-गोमतीनगर अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
30.  19623/19624 मदार जंÈशन-दरभंगा अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
31.  26501/26502 पाटͧलपुğ-गोरखपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
32.  19037/19038 बांġा (टȣ)-बरौनी अवध एÈसĤेस 
 
पडरौना èटेशन, जो कुशीनगर िजले के अͬधकार ¢ेğ मɅ आता है, वत[मान मɅ 9 जोड़ी गाड़ी 
सेवाओं (नीचे सूचीबɮध) ɮवारा सेͪवत है जो इसे Ǒदãलȣ, अहमदाबाद, अमृतसर, छपरा आǑद जैसे 
Ĥमुख शहरɉ से जोड़ती हɇ।  
Đ. सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  15133/15134 छपरा-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
2.  19409/19410 साबरमती-थावे एÈसĤेस 
3.  15113/15114 गोमती नगर-छपरा एÈसĤेस 
4.  15079/15080 पाटͧलपुğ-गोरखपुर एÈसĤेस 
5.  55115/55116 थावे-कÜतानगंज पैसɅजर 
6.  55035/55036 सीवान-गोरखपुर कɇट. पैसɅजर 
7.  75105/75106 थावे-नकहा जंगल डेमू 
8.  55107/55108 थावे-कÜतानगंज पैसɅजर 
9.  15135/15136 छपरा-अमृतसर एÈसĤेस 
 
इसके अलावा, ͩकसी भी माग[/रेलखंड पर नई रेलगाड़ी सेवा कȧ शुǾआत करना या रेल सेवाएं 
बढ़ाना एक सतत ĤͩĐया है जो Ǔनàनͧलͨखत कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र है: 
 
•  उÈत खंड कȧ ¢मता 
•  माग[ कȧ उपलÞधता 
•  अपेͯ¢त चल èटॉक कȧ उपलÞधता 
•  चल èटॉक हेतु उपयुÈत अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता 
•  रेलपथ एवं अÛय पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ अनुर¢ण आवæयकताएँ 
 
इसी Ĥकार, गाड़ी सेवाओं के ͧलए ठहराव का Ĥावधान उस खंड पर अǓतǐरÈत समय कȧ 
उपलÞधता और Üलेटफाम[ कȧ लंबाई आǑद जैसी समान अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता सǑहत यातायात 
औͬच×य, पǐरचालǓनक åयवहाय[ता जैसे कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है।  
 
 
873                                                      

कुशीनगर ¢ेğ मɅ रेल संपक[ को बेहतर बनाने के ͧलए Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ:- 
Đ. सं पǐरयोजना लागत (करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1. गोरखपुर-वाãमीͩकनगर दोहरȣकरण (96 ͩक.मी.) 1,121 
2. Ǔछतौनी-तमकुहȣ रोड नई लाईन (63 ͩक.मी.) 1,731 
 
अǓतǐरÈत èथान और सवारȣ ͫडÞबे: 
अनारͯ¢त ͫडÞबɉ मɅ याğा करने वाले याǒğयɉ कȧ मांग को पूरा करने के उɮदेæय से, रेलवे ने 
साधारण Įेणी मɅ याğा करने वाले याǒğयɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाओं मɅ उãलेखनीय वृɮͬध कȧ है। ͪपछले 
ͪवƣीय वष[ 2024-25 के दौरान हȣ ͪवͧभÛन लंबी दूरȣ कȧ गाͫड़यɉ मɅ 1250 साधारण Įेणी के 
ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग ͩकया गया है। 
 
Ǔनàन और मÚयम आय वग[ के पǐरवारɉ कȧ याğा संबंधी मांग को पूरा करने के ͧलए, भारतीय 
रेल ने 17,000 गैर-वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे (सामाÛय/शयनयान) शाͧमल ͩकए हɇ। भारतीय रेल 
मɅ गैर-वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का ĤǓतशत लगभग 70% है, जैसा ͩक नीचे दशा[या गया है: 
ताͧलका 1: सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का ͪवतरण: 
गैर-वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे (साधारण और शयनयान) ~57,200 ~70%  
वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे ~25,000 ~30%  
कुल सवारȣ ͫडÞबे ~82,200 100% 
 
गैर-वातानुकूͧलत याǒğयɉ के ͧलए उपलÞध सीटɉ कȧ संÉया मɅ भी वृɮͬध हुई है। वत[मान िèथǓत 
इस Ĥकार है: 
ताͧलका 2: सीटɉ का ͪवतरण: 
गैर-वातानुकूͧलत सीटɅ ~ 54 लाख ~ 78% 
वातानुकूͧलत सीटɅ ~ 15 लाख ~ 22% 
कुल ~ 69 लाख 100% 
 
874                                                      

सामाÛय और गैर-वातानुकूͧलत शयनयान सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग करने वाले याǒğयɉ को अͬधक 
सुͪवधा Ĥदान करने के ͧलए, मेल/एÈसĤेस गाͫड़यɉ कȧ संरचना संबंधी मौजूदा नीǓत मɅ 22 सवारȣ 
ͫडÞबɉ वालȣ एक गाड़ी मɅ 12 (बारह) सामाÛय Įेणी और शयनयान Įेणी गैर-वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ 
ͫडÞबे और 8 (आठ) वातानुकूͧलत सवारȣ ͫडÞबे का Ĥावधान है, िजससे सामाÛय और गैर-
वातानुकूͧलत शयनयान सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग करने वाले याǒğयɉ के ͧलए अͬधक सुͪवधा ͧमल 
सके। 
इसके अलावा, याğा करने वाले याǒğयɉ को अǓतǐरÈत è थान Ĥदान करने के अपने Ǔनरंतर Ĥयास 
मɅ, भारतीय रेल ×योहारɉ, छुɪǑटयɉ आǑद के दौरान èपेशल रेल सेवाएं पǐरचाͧलत करती है ताͩक 
याǒğयɉ कȧ अǓतǐरÈत ज़Ǿरतɉ को पूरा ͩकया जा सके और Ǔनयͧमत सेवाओं ɮवारा उपलÞध 
è थानɉ कȧ कमी को पूरा ͩकया जा सके। उपयु[È त के अलावा, ͪवͧभÛन याğी वगɟ के ͧलए 
अǓतǐरÈत è थान Ĥदान करने हेतु, èथायी और अèथायी दोनɉ आधार पर रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ ͫडÞ बɉ कȧ 
संÉ या भी बढ़ाई जाती है। 
 
तदनुसार, भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर, वष[ 2025-26 (नवàबर, 2025 तक) के  दौरान, लगभग 
60,000 èपेशल रेल सेवाएं पǐरचाͧलत कȧ गɃ और 700 सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ का उपयोग èथायी आधार 
रेल सेवाओं मɅ वृɮͬध के ͧलए ͩकया गया है। 
 
Ǔनàन एवं मÚयम आय वग[ के पǐरवारɉ को ͩकफायती यातायात साधन उपलÞध कराने हेतु 
भारतीय रेल ने अमृत भारत सेवाएँ Ĥारàभ कȧ हɇ, जो पूण[तः अवातानुकूͧलत आधुǓनक रेलगाͫड़यां 
हɇ। वत[मान मɅ, अमृत भारत मɅ 11 सामाÛय Įेणी के सवारȣ ͫडÞबɅ, 8 शयनयान Įेणी के सवारȣ 
ͫडÞबɅ, 1 पɅĚȣकार और 2 सामान सह Ǒदåयांगजन सवारȣ ͫडÞबे शाͧमल हɇ।  वत[मान मɅ, 30 अमृत 
भारत सेवाएं पहले से हȣ पǐरचालन मɅ हɇ, िजनमɅ कÜतानगंज èटेशन कȧ जǾरतɉ को पूरा करने 
वालȣ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 14 अमृत भारत सेवाएं शाͧमल हɇ: 
Đ. सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1.  15557/15558 दरभंगा-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
2.  15567/15568 बापूधाम मोǓतहारȣ-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
3.  15561/15562 दरभंगा-गोमतीनगर अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
4.  15133/15134 छपरा-आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ) अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
5.  14627/14628 सहरसा-चंडीगढ़ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
6.  14047/14048 सीतामढȣ-Ǒदãलȣ अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
7.  19623/19624 मदार जंÈशन-दरभंगा अमृत भारत एÈसĤेस 
875                                                      

समयपालन:- 
भारतीय रेल ɮवारा गाͫड़यɉ को समय पर पǐरचाͧलत करने के ͧलए सभी संभव Ĥयास ͩकए जाते 
हɇ। गाͫड़यɉ के समयबɮध पǐरचालन पर कई कारक Ĥभाव डालते हɇ िजनमɅ कोहरे का मौसम, माग[ 
मे आने वालȣ बाधाएं, पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ ͪवफलता, अलाम[ चेन खींचना, ͪवरोध Ĥदश[न, मवेͧशयɉ का 
कुचला जाना और अÛय अĤ×याͧशत पǐरिèथǓतयां शाͧमल हɇ।  
रेलगाͫड़यɉ के समय पर चलने को Ĥभाͪवत करने वाले कारकɉ के आकलन के आधार पर, 
ता×काͧलक और दȣघ[काͧलक दोनɉ सुधारा×मक उपाय ͩकए जाते हɇ, िजनमɅ रेल नेटवक[ कȧ ¢मता 
बढ़ाना, रेलपथ और ͧसगनͧलंग Ĥणालȣ का उÛनयन, पǐरचालन मɅ बाधाओं को दूर करना, याड[ का 
पुनः Ǔनमा[ण आǑद शाͧमल हɇ। 
 
भारतीय रेल पर वष[ 2024-25 के दौरान मेल/एÈसĤेस गाͫड़यɉ कȧ समĒ समयबɮधता 77.12% 
थी और वष[ 2025-26 (अĤैल-नवंबर) के दौरान यह 79.25% थी। 
 
èवÍछता 
èवÍछता एक Ǔनरंतर ĤͩĐया है और कुशीनगर िजला ¢ेğ से गुजरने वाले के साथ अÛय गाͫड़यɉ 
को बेहतर बनाए रखने और साफ-सुथरȣ िèथǓत मɅ रखने के ͧलए हर संभव Ĥयास ͩकया जाता है। 
ͩकए जा रहे कुछ Ĥयासɉ कȧ सूची Ǔनàनानुसार है:-  
 
1) रेल पटǐरयɉ पर मल को ͬगरने से रोकने के ͧलए सभी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ मɅ बायो-
टॉयलेट लगाए गए हɇ। 
2) गाͫड़यɉ के ͫडÞबɉ कȧ मशीनीकृत सफाई, िजसमɅ शौचालय भी शाͧमल हɇ। 
3) लंबी दूरȣ कȧ मह×वपूण[ मेल/एÈसĤेस रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ, रेलगाͫड़यɉ के चालन के दौरान 
सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ के शौचालयɉ, दरवाजɉ, गͧलयारɉ और याğी सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ कȧ सफाई 
के ͧलए ऑन बोड[ हाउसकȧͪपंग सेवा (ओबीएचएस) उपलÞध कराई गई है। 
4) Èलȣन Ěेन èटेशन सीͧमत यांǒğकृत सफाई के ͧलए पǐरचाͧलत हɇ, जो माग[वतȸ 
पहचान कȧ गई गाͫड़यɉ पर Úयान कɅ Ǒġत करते हɇ। 
5) Ǔनयͧमत आधार पर सवारȣ ͫडÞबɉ और èटेशनɉ मɅ कȧटɉ और कृÛतकɉ का Ǔनयंğण। 
6) वातानुकूͧलत  और गैर- वातानुकूͧलत ͫडÞबɉ मɅ डèटǒबन उपलÞध कराए जाते हɇ। 
7) रेल मदद पोट[ल के माÚयम से Ǔनयͧमत Ǔनगरानी कȧ जाती है, िजसे याǒğयɉ को 
अपनी जǾरतɅ सामने लाने और èवÍछता संबंधी मुɮदɉ पर सहायता लेने मɅ स¢म 
बनाने के ͧलए ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। 
***** 
876                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2347 का उƣर 
 
कालका-अमृतसर रेल सेवा का पुनः संचालन 
 
2347. Įी काǓत[केय शमा[:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  È या कालका-अमृतसर रेल सेवा, जो पहले कालका, पंचकुला और आसपास के ¢ेğɉ के 
Ǔनवाͧसयɉ कȧ सुͪवधा के  ͧलए संचाͧलत कȧ गयी थी, अब बंद कर दȣ गई है;  
(ख)  यǑद हाँ, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ और Èया दैǓनक याǒğयɉ, वǐरçठ नागǐरकɉ और 
अमृतसर जाने वाले ͧसख तीथ[याǒğयɉ को हुई असुͪवधा के संबंध मɅ कोई समी¢ा कȧ 
गई है;  
(ग)  Èया सरकार याğा मɅ लगने वाले समय को कम करने और याǒğयɉ को पहले चंडीगढ़ 
रेलवे èटेशन पहुँचने कȧ आवæयकता से बचाने के ͧलए कालका और अमृतसर के बीच 
नई सीधी रेल सेवा कȧ बहालȣ अथवा शुǾ करने का ͪवचार रखती है; और  
(घ)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा और सेवा के पुनः संचालन कȧ अपेͯ¢त समय-सीमा Èया 
है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): वत[मान मɅ, कालका को Ǔनàन सूचीबɮध 08 जोड़ी रेलगाͫड़यɉ से सेͪवत ͩकया 
जा रहा है, जो Ǒदãलȣ, कोलकाता, साईनगर ͧशडȸ, भोपाल, अंबाला, चंडीगढ़ आǑद जैसे गंतåयɉ 
के ͧलए संपक[ता Ĥदान कर रहȣ हɇ। 
Đ. सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1 12311/12 हावड़ा-कालका नेताजी एÈसĤेस 
2 14503/04 कालका - Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटड़ा एÈसĤेस 
877                                                      

3 12005/06 नई Ǒदãलȣ - कालका शताÞदȣ एÈसĤेस 
4 14331/32 Ǒदãलȣ - कालका एÈसĤेस 
5 14795/96 ͧभवानी-कालका एकता एÈसĤेस 
6 12011/12 नई Ǒदãलȣ - कालका शताÞदȣ एÈसĤेस 
7 22455/56 साईनगर ͧशडȸ - कालका एसएफ एÈसĤेस 
8 54531/32 अंबाला कɇट - कालका पैसɅजर 
 
इसके अलावा, कालका के समीप, चडीगढ़ अमृतसर से Ǔनàन सूचीबɮध 08 जोड़ी गाड़ी 
सेवाओं से जुड़ा हुआ है। 
 
Đ. सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1 14631/32 देहरादून - अमृतसर एÈसĤेस 
2 18101/02 टाटानगर - जàमू तवी एÈसĤेस 
3 18309/10 सàबलपुर - जàमू तवी एÈसĤेस 
4 12411/12 चंडीगढ़ - अमृतसर एÈसĤेस 
5 15531/32 सहरसा - अमृतसर जन साधारण एÈसĤेस 
6 14615/16 लालकुआँ - अमृतसर साÜताǑहक एÈसĤेस (बराèते काशीपुर) 
7 12925/26 बांġा(टȣ) - अमृतसर पिæचम एÈसĤेस 
8 14541/42 चंडीगढ़ - अमृतसर एÈसĤेस 
 
इसके अलावा, नई गाड़ी सेवाएँ शुǾ करना Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है जो Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 
कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है िजसमɅ शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
 उस खंड कȧ ¢मता, 
 पथ कȧ उपलÞधता, 
 अपेͯ¢त चल èटॉक कȧ उपलÞधता,  
 चल èटॉक के ͧलए उपयुÈत अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता, 
 रेलपथ और अÛय पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ अनुर¢ण आवæयकता  
****** 
 
878                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2348 का उƣर 
 
रेलवे मɅ दज[ ͩकए गए अपराध 
 
2348. डा. वी. ͧशवादासन:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  ͪपछले पांच वषȾ मɅ चोरȣ, डकैती, हमला, यौन अपराध, तोड़फोड़ और 
आरपीएफ/जीआरपी ɮवारा दज[ ͩकए गए अÛय अपराधɉ सǑहत रेलवे पǐरसरɉ मɅ एवं 
रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ दज[ अपराधɉ कȧ राÏय-वार और वष[-वार संÉया ͩकतनी-ͩकतनी है;  
(ख)  इन घटनाओं मɅ घायल या Ĥभाͪवत हुए åयिÈतयɉ कȧ वष[-वार संÉया Èया है; और  
(ग)  इस अवͬध के दौरान पीͫड़तɉ को Ĥदान कȧ गई ¢ǓतपूǓत[ कȧ कुल वष[-वार और  
राÏय-वार धनराͧश ͩकतनी-ͩकतनी है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): भारत के संͪवधान कȧ सातवीं अनुसूची के अंतग[त ‘पुͧलस’ और ‘कानून åयवèथा’ 
राÏय के  ͪवषय हɇ और इस Ĥकार, राÏय सरकारɅ अपनी कानून Ĥवत[न एजɅͧसयɉ अथा[त 
राजकȧय रेल पुͧलस/िजला पुͧलस के माÚयम से रेलɉ मɅ अपराध कȧ रोकथाम, उनका पता 
लगाने, पंजीकरण और जांच करने तथा कानून-åयवèथा बनाए रखने आǑद के ͧलए उƣरदायी 
हɇ। रेल सुर¢ा बल रेल संपͪƣ, याğी ¢ेğ और याǒğयɉ कȧ बेहतर संर¢ा और सुर¢ा Ĥदान 
करने तथा उससे संबंͬधत मामलɉ के ͧलए राजकȧय रेल पुͧलस/िजला पुͧलस के Ĥयासɉ मɅ 
सहायता करता है। 
    
रेलवे मɅ याǒğयɉ के  साथ दज[ हुए अपराध कȧ घटनाओं कȧ संÉया राçĚȣय अपराध ǐरकॉड[ 
Þयूरो (एनसीआरबी) ɮवारा राÏय-वार Ĥकाͧशत कȧ जाती है। 
879                                                      

दुघ[टना पीͫड़तɉ को दुघ[टना या अͪĤय घटना के बाद अनुĒह सहायता के Ǿप मɅ शीē भुगतान 
ͩकया जाता है। 2020-21 से 2025-26 (नवंबर, 2025 तक) कȧ अवͬध के दौरान याǒğयɉ पर 
हमले कȧ घटनाओं मɅ हताहतɉ के आͬĮतɉ और घायल åयिÈतयɉ के पǐरजनɉ को रेलवे ɮवारा 
कुल अनुĒह राͧश 38.79 लाख ǽपए का भुगतान ͩकया गया है। 
 
धारा 124 और धारा 124-क (रेल अͬधǓनयम, 1989 कȧ धारा 123 के साथ पǑठत) के तहत 
यथा पǐरभाͪषत रेलगाड़ी दुघ[टनाओं और अͪĤय घटनाओं मɅ रेल याǒğयɉ कȧ मृ×यु और चोट 
के ͧलए मुआवजे का Ǔनण[य रेल दावा अͬधकरण (आरसीटȣ) ɮवारा पीͫड़तɉ/उनके आͬĮतɉ 
ɮवारा उनके सम¢ दायर ͩकए गए दावा आवेदन के आधार पर ͩकया जाता है और इसमɅ 
उͬचत कानूनी ĤͩĐया का अनुपालन करने के पæचात् मामलɉ का Ǔनपटान ͩकया जाता है। रेल 
Ĥशासन तब मुआवजा देता है जब माननीय आरसीटȣ ɮवारा दावेदार के प¢ मɅ ͫडĐȧ दȣ जाती 
है और रेलवे उस आदेश को लागू करने का Ǔनण[य लेती है। मुआवजे कȧ राͧश अनुĒह राͧश 
के अǓतǐरÈत Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। 
 
2020-21 से 2025-26 (नवंबर, 2025 तक) कȧ अवͬध के दौरान याǒğयɉ पर हुए हमले कȧ 
घटनाओं मɅ हाताहतɉ के आͬĮतɉ और घायल åयिÈतयɉ के पǐरजनɉ को रेलवे ɮवारा दȣ गई 
कुल मुआवजा राͧश 52.23 लाख ǽपये है। ͩकसी वष[ मɅ भुगतान कȧ गई मुआवजा राͧश 
जǾरȣ नहȣं ͩक वह केवल उस वष[ मɅ हुई दुघ[टनाओं/हाǓनयɉ से संबंͬधत हो। ͩकसी वष[ 
भुगतान कȧ गई राͧश इस बात पर Ǔनभ[र करती है ͩक रेल दावा अͬधकरण या अÛय 
Ûयायालयɉ ɮवारा उस वष[ मɅ ͩकतने मामलɉ का Ǔनपटारा ͩकया गया है, चाहे वे मामले ͩकसी 
भी वष[ मɅ हुई दुघ[टनाओं/अͪĤय घटनाओं से संबंͬधत हɉ। 
 
 
****** 
 
880                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2349 का उƣर 
 
ओͫडशा मɅ रेलवे संपक[ और अवसंरचना का ͪवèतार  
 
2349. Įीमती ममता मोहंता:  
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:  
 
(क)  ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ नई लाइनɅ, दोहरȣकरण, ͪवɮयुतीकरण और èटेशन पुनͪव[कास सǑहत 
वत[मान मɅ चालू रेलवे पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत और ͪपछले पांच वषȾ के दौरान 
ĤाÜत ĤगǓत Èया है;  
(ख)  ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान ओͫडशा मɅ इन पǐरयोजनाओं के ͧलए आवंǑटत और उपयोग 
कȧ गई कुल Ǔनͬध का वष[-वार Þयौरा Èया है;  
(ग)  Èया जनजातीय िजले, जैसे मयूरभंज, मɅ ͪवलंǒबत या धीमी गǓत से चल रहȣ रेलवे के 
सेÈशनɉ को पूरा करने के ͧलए समय-सीमा तय कȧ गई है, यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा 
Èया है; और  
(घ)  ओͫडशा के Ĥमुख èटेशनɉ और मालढुलाई कॉǐरडोर मɅ ͪपछले पांच वषȾ मɅ माल ढुलाई मɅ 
द¢ता कȧ बेहतरȣ और याğी सुͪवधाओं मɅ सुधार के ͧलए Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (घ): हाल के  वषɟ मɅ बजट आवंटन मɅ उãलेखनीय वृɮͬध हुई है। ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ 
पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाओं और संर¢ा कायɟ के ͧलए बजट आवंटन 
Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
अवͬध पǐरåयय 
2009-14  838 करोड़ ǽ. ĤǓतवष[ 
2025-26 10,599 करोड़ ǽ. (लगभग 13 गुना) 
 
वष[ 2009-14 और 2014-25 के दौरान ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वाले नए रेलपथɉ 
कȧ कमीशǓनंग/ǒबछाने का Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
881                                                      

 
अवͬध कमीशन ͩकए गए नए रेलपथ  नए रेलपथɉ कȧ औसत कमीशǓनंग 
2009-14 267 ͩक .मी.  53.4 ͩक .मी.  
2014-25 2,150 ͩक .मी.  195.45 ͩक .मी.   
(3.5 गुना से Ïयादा) 
 
Ǒदनांक 01.04.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार, ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ 67,496 
करोड़ ǽपए कȧ लागत कȧ 4,010 ͩक.मी. कुल लंबाई कȧ 49 पǐरयोजनाएं (19 नई लाइनɅ और 30 
दोहरȣकरण) को èवीकृत ͩकया गया है। सारांश Ǔनà नानुसार है:- 
 
 
कोǑट  
èवीकृत 
पǐरयोजनाओं 
कȧ संÉया 
नई लाइन/आमान 
पǐरवत[न/दोहरȣकरण 
कȧ कुल लंबाई  
 (ͩक.मी. मɅ) 
माच[, 2025 तक 
कमीशन कȧ गई 
लंबाई (ͩक.मी. मɅ) 
माच[, 2025 
तक ͩकया गया 
कुल åयय 
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
नई लाइनɅ 19 1,544 2,56 6,270 
दोहरȣकरण/बहुपथन 30 2,466 1,173 21,773 
कुल 49 4,010 1,429 28,043 
 
 
ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ हाल हȣ मɅ पूरȣ कȧ गई कुछ पǐरयोजनाओं का Þयौरा 
Ǔनàनानुसार है। 
 
Đ. सं.  पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत 
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1 दैतारȣ-बांशपानी नई लाइन और जखपुरा-हǐरदासपुर तीसरȣ लाइन 
(179 ͩक.मी.) 1,317 
2  एमसीएल साइͫडंग से झारसुगुडा - सरडेगा नई लाइन (53 ͩक.मी.) 1,598 
3 हǐरदासपुर-पारादȣप नई लाइन (82 ͩक.मी.)  2,397 
4 अनुगुल-सुͩकÛदा नई लाइन (104 ͩक.मी.) 2,834 
5 चंपा-झारसुगुडा तीसरȣ लाइन (152 ͩक.मी.) 1,227 
6 संबलपुर-ǑटǑटलागढ़ दोहरȣकरण (182 ͩक.मी.) 2,262 
7 राउरकेला-झारसुगुडा तीसरȣ लाइन (101 ͩक.मी.) 1,313 
8 बांशपानी-दैतारȣ-टमका-जखपुरा दोहरȣकरण (164 ͩक.मी.) 1,827 
9 संबलपुर-तालचेर दोहरȣकरण (174 ͩक.मी.) 1,539 
10 रायपुर-ǑटǑटलागढ़ दोहरȣकरण (203 ͩक.मी.) 1,171 
11 झारसुगुडा-सरडेगा दोहरȣकरण (50 ͩक.मी.) 3,200 
 
मयूरभंज िजले मɅ संपक[ता मɅ सुधार के ͧलए Ǔनàनͧलͨखत पǐरयोजनाएं शुǾ कȧ गई हɇ: 
Đ. सं.  पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत 
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1 बांगरȣपोसी – गोǾमाǑहषानी नई लाइन (86 ͩक.मी.) 2,269 
2 बदामपाहाड़ - केÛ दुझरगड़ नई लाइन (82 ͩक.मी.) 1,876 
3 बुढ़ामरा – चाकुͧलया नई लाइन (60 ͩक.मी.) 1,459 
 
882                                                      

 
इसके अलावा, ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ पूण[तः या अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ कुछ Ĥमुख पǐरयोजनाएं जो शुǾ 
कȧ गई हɇ, वे इस Ĥकार हɇ: 
 
Đ. सं.  पǐरयोजना का नाम लागत 
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
1  जुनागढ़-नबरंगपुर नई लाइन (116 ͩक.मी.) 2,865 
2  नवरंगपुर-जयपुर नई लाइन (41 ͩक.मी.) 748 
3  जयपुर-मãकानͬगरȣ नई लाइन (130 ͩक.मी.) 2,344 
4  मãकानͬगरȣ-पांडुरंगापुरम नई लाइन (174 ͩक.मी.) 3,592 
5  गुनुपुर-थǾबालȣ नई लाइन (74 ͩक.मी.) 1,166 
6  पुरȣ – कोणा[क नई लाइन (32 ͩक.मी.) 492 
7  बरगढ़ रोड-नुआपड़ा रोड नई लाइन (138 ͩक.मी.) 2,622 
8  ͪवजयनगरम-ǑटǑटलागढ़ तीसरȣ लाइन (265 ͩक.मी.) 6,996 
9  जरापदा – बुढ़ापंक तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन तालचेर मɅ फलाईओवर 
के साथ (101 ͩक.मी.) 
810  
10  राज आठगड़ के राèते बुढापंक-सालेगांव तीसरȣ और चौथी लाइन 
(170 ͩक.मी.) 
2,023 
11  Ǔनगु[Ö डी-ͪवजयनगरम जं तीसरȣ लाइन (385 ͩक.मी.) 4,963  
12  कोƣवलसा-कोरापुट दोहरȣकरण (189 ͩक.मी.) 2,500 
13  कोरापुट-ͧसंगापूर रोड़ सड़क दोहरȣकरण (165 ͩक.मी.) 2,362 
14  जगदलपुर-कोरापुट दोहरȣकरण (107 ͩक.मी.) 1,547 
15  झारसुगुड़ा-ǒबलासपुर चौथी लाइन (206 ͩक.मी.) 2,596  
16  बÛडामुÛडा-रांची दोहरȣकरण (159 ͩक.मी.) 3,029 
17  नारायणगढ़-भġक तीसरȣ लाइन (153 ͩक.मी.) 2,136 
18  भġक-Ǔनगु[िÖड तीसरȣ लाइन (92 ͩक.मी.)    1,284 
 
 
ͪपछले तीन वषɟ अथा[त् 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25 और चालू ͪवƣ वष[ अथा[त् 2025-26 
के दौरान, ओͫडशा राÏय मɅ पूण[तः या अंशतः पड़ने वाले कुल 76 सवȶ¢णɉ (30 नई लाइन, 46 
दोहरȣकरण), िजनकȧ कुल लंबाई 4,843 ͩक.मी. है, को èवीकृǓत दȣ गई है। 
 
ͩकसी भी रेल पǐरयोजना कȧ èवीकृǓत कई मानदंडɉ/कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करती है, िजनमɅ 
Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
• अनुमाǓनत यातायात पूवा[नुमान और Ĥèताͪवत माग[ कȧ लाभĤदता   
• पǐरयोजना ɮवारा Ĥदान कȧ गई पहलȣ और अंǓतम èथान पहुंच संपक[ता   
• अनुपलÞध कͫड़यɉ को जोड़ना और अǓतǐरÈत माग[ Ĥदान करना   
• संकुͧलत/संतृÜत लाइनɉ का ͪवèतार   
• राÏय सरकारɉ/कɅ ġȣय मंğालयɉ/जनĤǓतǓनͬधयɉ ɮवारा उठाई गɃ मांगɅ   
• रेलवे कȧ पǐरचालǓनक आवæयकताएँ   
• सामािजक-आͬथ[क मह×व   
• Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ समĒ उपलÞधता 
 
883                                                      

 
रेल पǐरयोजना(ओं) का पूरा होना ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है, िजनमɅ Ǔनàन शाͧमल होते 
हैः-  
• भूͧम अͬधĒहण  
• वन संबंधी मंजूरȣ 
• अǓतलंघनकारȣ जनोपयोगी सुͪवधाओं का èथानांतरण 
• ͪवͧभÛन Ĥाͬधकरणɉ से सांͪवͬधक मंजूरȣ  
• ¢ेğ कȧ भूवै£ाǓनक और èथलाकृǓतक िèथǓतयां, 
• पǐरयोजना/पǐरयोजनाओं के ¢ेğ मɅ कानून और åयवèथा कȧ िèथǓत 
• ͪवͧशçट पǐरयोजना èथल के ͧलए एक वष[ मɅ काय[ के महȣनɉ कȧ संÉया आǑद। 
 
ये सभी कारक पǐरयोजना/पǐरयोजनाओं के समापन समय और लागत को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ।   
 
रेल ͪवɮयुतीकरण: 
   
भारतीय रेल मɅ रेल नेटवक[ के ͪवɮयुतीकरण को ͧमशन मोड मɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। अब तक, 
बड़ी लाइन (बीजी) नेटवक[ का लगभग 99.2% ͪवɮयुतीकृत हो चुका है। शेष नेटवक[ मɅ 
ͪवɮयुतीकरण काय[ शुǾ हो गया है। वष[ 2014-25 के दौरान और वष[ 2014 से पहले ͩकए गए 
ͪवɮयुतीकरण Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
अवͬध माग[ ͩकलोमीटर 
वष[ 2014 से पहले (लगभग 60 वष[) 21,801 
2014 -25  46,900 
 
 
ओͫडशा मɅ, संपूण[ मौजूदा बड़ी लाइन (बीजी) नेटवक[ को ͪवɮयुतीकृत ͩकया जा चुका है। इसके 
अलावा, सभी नई लाइन/बहुपथन पǐरयोजनाओं को ͪवɮयुतीकरण सǑहत è वीकृत और Ǔनͧम[त 
ͩकया जा रहा है। 
 
 
गǓत-शिÈत मãटȣ मोडल कागȾ टͧम[नल : 
 
भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर नए कागȾ टͧम[नलɉ के  Ǔनमा[ण िजससे रेलवे कȧ ओर अǓतǐरÈत कागȾ 
åयवसाय आएगा, सुͪवधा के ͧलए Ǒदसंबर, 2021 मɅ गǓत-शिÈत मãटȣ मोडल कागȾ टͧम[नल 
(जीसीटȣ) नीǓत शुǾ कȧ गई थी।  
 
अब तक, भारतीय रेल मɅ 120 गǓत-शिÈत मãटȣ मोडल कागȾ टͧम[नल èथानɉ को कमीशन कर 
Ǒदया गया है और 133 अÛय èथान Ǔनमा[ण के ͪवͧभÛन चरणɉ मɅ हɇ (जहां इंजीǓनयǐरंग èकेल 
योजना को मंजूरȣ दȣ गई है)। इनमɅ से ओͫडशा मɅ 10 गǓत-शिÈत मãटȣ मोडल कागȾ टͧम[नल 
èथानɉ को कमीशन ͩकया गया है और ओͫडशा मɅ 7 और èथानɉ का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया 
है। 
 èटेशन पुनͪव[कास:  रेल मंğालय ने दȣघ[काͧलक ͸िçटकोण क े  साथ èटेशनɉ के पुनͪव[कास क े  ͧलए अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना शुǾ कȧ है। 
 
884                                                      

 
 
इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ मɅ सुधार करने के ͧलए माèटर योजना तैयार करना और उनका 
चरणबɮध काया[Ûवयन शाͧमल है। इस माèटर योजना मɅ Ǔनàनानुसार शाͧमल हɇ – 
 
• èटेशन और पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ तक पहुंच मɅ सुधार 
• èटेशन का शहर के दोनɉ भागɉ के साथ एकȧकरण 
• èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार 
• Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा, पानी के बूथ मɅ सुधार 
• याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पुल/एयर कॉनकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
• ͧलÝट/èवचाͧलत सीǑढ़यɉ/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
• Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह और Üलेटफॉम[ पर कवर मɅ सुधार/Ĥावधान 
• ‘एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद’ जैसी योजनाओं के  माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के  ͧलए 
ͩकयोèक का Ĥावधान   
• पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, यातायात के ͪवͧभÛन साधनɉ के साथ एकȧकरण 
• Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएं 
• बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
• Ĥ×येक èटेशन पर आवæयकताओं को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए एÈजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, 
åयावसाǓयक बैठकɉ के ͧलए नाͧमत èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग का Ĥावधान आǑद शाͧमल हɇ। 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध एवं åयवहाय[ Ǿप से दȣघ[काͧलक और पया[वरण 
अनुकूल समाधान, ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत पटǐरयɉ कȧ åयवèथा आǑद और दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ 
सेÛटरɉ के Ǔनमा[ण कȧ भी पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है। 
 
अब तक, इस योजना के अंतग[त ͪवकͧसत करने हेतु 1337 èटेशनɉ को ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है, 
िजनमɅ से 59 èटेशन ओͫडशा मɅ िèथत हɇ। ओͫडशा मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त 
ͪवकͧसत करने हेतु ͬचिéनत èटेशनɉ के नाम Ǔनàनͧलͨखत:  
 
राÏ य अमृत è टेशनɉ कȧ संÉ या  अमृत è टेशनɉ क े  नाम  
ओͫडशा 59 
अनुगुल, बादामपहाड़, बालांगीर, बालासोर, बालूगांव, बड़ǒबल, 
बरगढ़ रोड, बारȣपदा, बरपालȣ, बेलपहाड़, बेटनोटȣ, भġक, 
भवानीपटना, भुवनेæवर, ǒबमलागढ़, Ħéमपुर, Ħजराजनगर, 
छğपुर, कटक, दमनजोड़ी, ढɅकनाल, गुनुपूर, हǐरशंकर रोड, 
Ǒहमͬगर, हȣराकुंड, जाजपुर-Èयɉझर रोड, जलेæवर, जारोलȣ, जेपोर, 
झारसुगुड़ा, झारसुगुड़ा रोड, कांटाबांजी, कɅदुझारगढ़, केͧसंगा, 
खǐरयार रोड, खुदा[ रोड, कोरापुट, ͧलंगराज टेàपल रोड, मंचेæवर, 
मेरामंडलȣ, मुǓनगुडा, Ûयू भुवनेæवर, पानपोश, पारादȣप, 
पारलाखेमुंडी, पुरȣ, रघुनाथपुर, रायराखोल, रायरंगपुर, राजगांगपुर, 
रायगड़ा, राउरकेला, सखी गोपाल, संबलपुर, संबलपुर ͧसटȣ, सोरो, 
तालचेर, तालचेर रोड, Ǒटटलागढ़ जंÈशन।  
  
885                                                      

 
ओͫडशा मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के  अंतग[त रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर ͪवकास काय[ तेज गǓत से 
शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। अब तक, इस योजना के अंतग[त ओͫड़सा राÏय मɅ 06 èटेशनɉ (बारȣपदा, 
बरपालȣ, ǒबमलगढ़, कटक (ɮͪवतीय Ĥवेश ɮवार), पारलेखामुंडी, तालचेर) पर काय[ पूरे ͩकए जा 
चुके हɇ। अÛय èटेशनɉ पर भी काय[ तेज गǓत से शुǾ ͩकए गए है।  
 
 जलेæवर èटेशन: आधुǓनक शौचालय का काय[ पूण[ कर ͧलया गया है। èटेशन भवन के 
सुधार, Ĥती¢ालय, Üलेटफ़ॉम[ शेãटर, Üलेटफ़ॉम[ के सतह संबंधी काय[, पǐरचलन ¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, 
Ĥकाश å यवè था, संकेतक तथा 12 मीटर पैदल पार पुल के काय[ Ĥारàभ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
 बेटनोटȣ èटेशन: Üलेटफ़ॉम[ शेãटर तथा Üलेटफ़ॉम[ के सतह संबंधी काय[ पूण[ कर ͧलया 
गया है। èटेशन भवन के ͪवèतार, Ĥती¢ालय, पǐरचलन ¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ तथा भूͧमगत माग[ 
के काय[ Ĥारàभ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
 बालेæवर èटेशन: मुÉय èटेशन भवन तथा काया[लय पǐरसर के काय[ Ĥारàभ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ पर याğी सुͪवधाओं के  Ĥावधान सǑहत èटेशनɉ का 
ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण सतत् और Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस 
संबंध मɅ कायɟ कȧ पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन, 
आवæयकतानुसार काय[ ͩकए जाते हɇ। èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण के 
ͧलए कायɟ को èवीकृǓत देते और ǓनçपाǑदत करते समय Ǔनचलȣ कोǑट के  èटेशनɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ 
उÍच कोǑट के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। 
 
 
अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना सǑहत èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण सामाÛयतः 
योजना शीष[-53 'Ēाहक सुͪवधाएं' के अंतग[त ͪवƣपोͪषत ͩकया जाता है। योजना शीष[-53 के 
अंतग[त आबंटन और åयय का ͪववरण ¢ेğीय रेलवे-वार रखा जाता है, न ͩक काय[-वार या 
èटेशन-वार या राÏय-वार। ओͫडशा राÏय तीन ¢ेğीय रेलɉ नामतः दͯ¢ण पूव[ रेल, दͯ¢ण पूव[ 
मÚय रेल और पूव[ तट रेल के अͬधकार ¢ेğ मɅ आता है। इन ¢ेğीय रेलɉ के ͧलए ͪवƣ वष[ 
2025-26 के ͧलए 1,287 करोड़ ǽपए का आबंटन ͩकया गया है, िजसमɅ से अब तक (अÈटूबर, 
2025 तक) 913 करोड़ ǽपए का åयय उपगत ͩकया गया है।  
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ 
संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए फायर ÈलȣयरɅस, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन 
èवीकृǓत इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती है। इनकȧ ĤगǓत 
जनोपयोगी सेवाओं (िजनमɅ जल/सीवेज लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल, गैस पाइपलाइन, 
ͪवɮयुत/ͧसगनल केबल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ) को èथानांतǐरत करना, अǓतलंघन, याğी संचलन को 
बाͬधत ͩकए ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के Ǔनकट ͩकए जाने 
वाले कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद जैसी Ħाउन फȧãड संबंधी चुनौǓतयɉ के कारण भी 
Ĥभाͪवत होती है और ये कारक काय[ के  समापन समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ। अत:, इस चरण 
पर कोई समय-सीमा बताई नहȣं जा सकती है। 
 
****** 
 
886                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2350 का उƣर 
 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश मɅ रेलवे कȧ वत[मान िèथǓत 
 
2350. Įी हष[ महाजन: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ वत[मान मɅ चालू और Ĥèताͪवत सभी रेलवे पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ 
वत[मान िèथǓत Èया है; 
(ख) ͪपछले तीन वषɟ के दौरान Ĥ×येक पǐरयोजना कȧ वाèतͪवक ĤगǓत, ͪवƣीय आवंटन और 
åयय का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग)  इन पǐरयोजनाओं को पूण[ करने के ͧलए लͯ¢त वष[ अथवा समय-सीमा Èया है; और 
(घ)  Èया सरकार ने राÏय मɅ रेल संपक[ को सु͸ढ़ करने तथा याğी सुͪवधाएँ, èटेशन 
अवसंरचना और मालढुलाई सुͪवधाओं मɅ सुधार के ͧलए कोई åयापक योजना तैयार कȧ 
है, यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है? 
 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
(क) से (घ): रेल पǐरयोजनाओं का सवȶ¢ण/èवीकृǓत/Ǔनçपादन ¢ेğीय रेलवे-वार ͩकया जाता है, न 
ͩक राÏय-वार, Èयɉͩक रेल पǐरयोजनाएँ राÏय कȧ सीमाओं के आर-पार फैलȣ हो सकती हɇ। 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ रेल अवसंरचना संबंधी पǐरयोजनाएँ भारतीय 
रेल के उƣर रेलवे जोन के अंतग[त आती हɇ। 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ पूण[त:/अंशत: पड़ने वालȣ अवसंरचना पǐरयोजनाओं और संर¢ा संबंधी 
कायɟ के ͧलए बजट आवंटन इस Ĥकार है: 
 
 
अवͬध  पǐरåयय 
2009-14 108 करोड़ ǽ. ĤǓतवष[  
2025-26 2716 करोड़ ǽ. (25 गुना से अͬधक) 
887                                                      

Ǒदनांक 01.04.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार, Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ पूण[तः/अंशतः पड़ने वालȣ 
कुल 214 ͩक.मी. लंबाई कȧ 03 नई लाइनɅ Ǔनमा[णाधीन हɇ, िजनकȧ लागत 17,622 करोड़ ǽपए 
है, िजनमɅ से 64 ͩक.मी. लंबाई कमीशन कȧ जा चुकȧ है और माच[ 2025 तक 8,280 करोड़ 
ǽपए का åयय उपगत ͩकया गया है। काय[ कȧ िèथǓत सं¢ेप मɅ Ǔनàनानुसार है:- 
 
कोǑट पǐरयोजनाओं 
कȧ संÉया 
कुल लंबाई  
(ͩक.मी. मɅ) 
कमीशन कȧ गई 
लंबाई  (ͩक.मी. मे) 
माच[ 2025 तक åयय 
(करोड़ ǽ. मɅ) 
नई लाइन 3 214 64 8,280 
 
 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश मɅ संपक[ता मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए Ǔनàनͧलͨखत पǐरयोजनाओं को शुǾ ͩकया 
गया हैः 
 नंगल डैम-तलवाड़ा-मुकेǐरयां नई लाइन (123 ͩक.मी.) 
नंगल डैम - तलवाड़ा – मुकेǐरयां नई लाइन का Ǔनमा[ण 2,018 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ लागत से 
शुǾ ͩकया गया है। नंगल डैम - ऊना - अंदौरा - दौलतपुर चौक (60 ͩक.मी.) खÖड को 
कमीशन ͩकया जा चुका है। दौलतपुर चौक - काटȾलȣ पंजाब - तलवाड़ा (52 ͩक.मी.) खंड का 
काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है।  
 
 चÖडीगढ़-बɮदȣ नई लाइन (28 ͩक.मी.) 
1540 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ लागत से चंडीगढ़-बɮदȣ नई लाइन का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
 भानुपãलȣ-ǒबलासपुर-बेरȣ नई लाइन (63 ͩक.मी.) 
भानुपलȣ-ǒबलासपुर-बेरȣ नई रेल लाइन पǐरयोजना को लागत मɅ साझेदारȣ के आधार पर 
èवीकृत ͩकया गया है, िजसमɅ Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सरकार कȧ 25% Ǒहèसेदारȣ और कɅ ġȣय 
सरकार कȧ 75% Ǒहèसेदारȣ है। इसके अलावा, भूͧम कȧ 70 करोड़ ǽपए से अͬधक कȧ पूरȣ 
लागत Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सरकार ɮवारा वहन कȧ जाएगी। 6,753 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ लागत 
पर इस पǐरयोजना का ͪवèतृत अनुमान èवीकृत ͩकया गया था, िजसमɅ भूͧम कȧ 1,617 
करोड़ ǽपए कȧ लागत शाͧमल है। 
 
इस पǐरयोजना के Ǔनç पादन हेतु Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ कुल 124 हेÈटेयर भूͧम कȧ 
आवæयकता है। Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सरकार ɮवारा अपेͯ¢त भूͧम मɅ से केवल 82 हेÈटेयर 
भूͧम मुहैया कराई गई है। उपलÞध भूͧम पर काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। ǒबलासपुर से बेरȣ 
के आगे कȧ भूͧम अभी Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सरकार ɮवारा सɋपी जानी है। भूͧम कȧ 
अनुपलÞधता के कारण इस पǐरयोजना पर ĤǓतकूल Ĥभाव पड़ रहा है।  
888                                                      

इस पǐरयोजना पर अब तक 5,252 करोड़ ǽपए का कुल åयय उपगत ͩकया गया है। लागत 
मɅ साझेदारȣ करने कȧ åयवèथाओं के अनुसार Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश सरकार ɮवारा 2,711 करोड़ 
ǽपये Ǒदए जाने थे। बहरहाल, उनकȧ ओर से लागत के Ǒहèसे के Ǿप मɅ केवल 847 करोड़ 
ǽपए हȣ जमा ͩकए गए हɇ। अतः Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सरकार पर 1,863 करोड़ ǽपए 
बकाया हɇ। उनके Ǒहèसे कȧ लागत जमा न कराने के कारण इस पǐरयोजना कȧ ĤगǓत पर 
ĤǓतकूल Ĥभाव पड़ रहा है। 
 
राÏय सरकार ɮवारा ĤǓतबɮधता पूरा न करने के कारण इस पǐरयोजना कȧ ĤगǓत Ĥभाͪवत 
हुई है। पǐरयोजना को शीē पूरा करने के ͧलए राÏय सरकार का सहयोग अपेͯ¢त है। 
 
भारत सरकार पǐरयोजना को काया[िÛवत करने के ͧलए तैयार है, हालांͩक इसकȧ सफलता 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय सरकार के सहयोग पर Ǔनभ[र करती है।  
 
ͩकसी भी रेल पǐरयोजना कȧ è वीकृǓत कई मानदंडɉ/कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करती है िजनमɅ 
Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
 यातायात अनुमान और Ĥèताͪवत माग[ कȧ लाभĤदता   
 पǐरयोजना ɮवारा उपलÞध कराई जाने वालȣ आरंͧभक और अंǓतम छोर संपक[ता   
 ͧमͧसंग ͧलंकɉ का संयोजन और वैकिãपक माग[ उपलÞध कराना   
 संकुͧलत/संतृÜत लाइनɉ का संवɮ[धन 
 राÏय सरकारɉ/केÛġȣय मंğालयɉ, अÛय जन ĤǓतǓनͬध यɉ ɮवारा कȧ गई मांगɅ 
 रेलवे कȧ पǐरचालǓनक आवæयकताएं   
 सामािजक-आͬथ[क मह×व 
 Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ समĒ उपलÞधता 
 
रेल पǐरयोजनाओं का पूरा होना ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ पर Ǔनभ[र करता है, जो Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 राÏय सरकार ɮवारा भूͧम अͬधĒहण     
 वन संबंधी मंजूरȣ 
 बाधक जनोपयोगी सेवाओं का èथानांतरण    
 ͪवͧभÛन Ĥाͬधकरणɉ से सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयां   
 ¢ेğ कȧ भू-वै£ाǓनक और èथलाकृǓतक पǐरिèथǓतयां   
 पǐरयोजना èथल के ¢ेğ मɅ कानून एवं åयवèथा कȧ िèथǓत    
 पǐरयोजना ͪवशेष के èथल के ͧलए ͩकसी वष[ मɅ काय[ के महȣनɉ कȧ संÉया आǑद 
 
ये सभी कारक पǐरयोजना के समापन समय और लागत को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ।  
889                                                      

èटेशन पुनͪव[कास 
 
 
रेल मंğालय ने दȣघ[काͧलक ͸िçटकोण के साथ èटेशनɉ के पुनͪव[कास के ͧलए अमृत भारत 
èटेशन योजना शुǾ कȧ है। 
 
इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ को बेहतर बनाने के ͧलए माèटर Üलान तैयार करना और चरणबɮध 
तरȣके से उनका ͩĐयाÛवयन करना शाͧमल है। माèटर ÜलाǓनंग मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल हɇ: 
  
 èटेशन तक पहुँच और पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ मɅ सुधार 
 शहर के  दोनɉ ओर èटेशन का एकȧकरण 
 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार 
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा और पेयजल-बूथɉ मɅ सुधार 
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पुल/एयर कॉÛकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
 ͧलÝट/एèकेलेटर/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
 Üलेटफ़ॉम[ कȧ सतह मɅ सुधार/Ĥावधान और Üलेटफ़ॉम[ को ऊपर से कवर करना 
 'एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद' जैसी योजनाओं के  माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए 
ͩकयोèक का Ĥावधान 
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, मã टȣमोडल एकȧकरण 
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएँ 
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
 Ĥ×येक èटेशन पर आवæयकता को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए एÊ जीÈ यूटȣव लाउंज, åयावसाǓयक 
बैठकɉ के ͧलए ǓनǑद[çट èथान, लɇडè केͪपंग आǑद का Ĥावधान 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध एवं åयवहाय[ Ǿप से पया[वरण अनुकूल समाधान, 
ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत पटǐरयɉ कȧ åयवèथा आǑद और दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ सेÛटरɉ के Ǔनमा[ण 
कȧ भी पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है।  
 
अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त ͪवकͧसत करने हेतु अभी तक 1337 èटेशनɉ को 
ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है, िजनमɅ से अंब अंदौरा, बैजनाथ पपरोला, पालमपुर, और ͧशमला èटेशन 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय मɅ िèथत हɇ।  
 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के तहत रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर ͪवकास काय[ तेज गǓत 
से ͩकए जा रहे हɇ।  अभी तक, 02 èटेशनɉ (अंब अंदौरा, बैजनाथ पपरोला) èटेशनɉ पर काय[ पूरे 
ͩकए जा चुके हɇ। पालमपुर Ǒहमाचल और ͧशमला èटेशनɉ कȧ माèटर ÜलाǓनंग कȧ जा रहȣ है। 
890                                                      

माèटर ÜलाǓनंग एक पुनरावतȸ ĤͩĐया है िजसके  ͧलए इçटतमीकरण अपेͯ¢त होता है और इस 
èतर पर ऐसे इçटतमीकरण के ͧलए समय-सीमा और अÛय जानकारȣ नहȣं दȣ जा सकती। 
 
इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ के  उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण के काय[ सतत और Ǔनरंतर 
चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस संबंध मɅ कायɟ को पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ 
उपलÞधता के  अÚयधीन आवæयकतानुसार ͩकया जाता है। èटेशनɉ के  
ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/आधुǓनकȧकरण के ͧलए कायɟ कȧ èवीकृǓत और Ǔनçपादन के समय Ǔनचलȣ 
Įेणी के èटेशनɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ उÍच Įेणी के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है।   
 
अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना सǑहत èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण सामाÛयतः 
योजना शीष[-53 'Ēाहक सुͪवधाएं' के अंतग[त ͪवƣपोͪषत ͩकया जाता है। Ǔनͬध आबंटन और åयय 
का Þयौरा योजना शीष[-53 के अÛतग[त ¢ेğीय रेलवे-वार रखा जाता है, न ͩक काय[-वार या 
èटेशन-वार। Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश राÏय एक रेलवे ज़ोन अथा[त् उƣर रेलवे के ¢ेğाͬधकार मɅ आता है।  
इस जोन के ͧलए, योजना शीष[-53 के तहत ͪपछले तीन ͪवƣीय वषɟ मɅ 5,834 करोड़ ǽ. का 
आवंटन ͩकया गया है और अभी तक (अÈटूबर, 2025 तक) 3,890 करोड़ ǽ. का åयय उपगत 
ͩकया गया है। 
 
****** 
 
891                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2351 का उƣर 
वंदे भारत Ěेनɉ को शुǾ करने मɅ देरȣ और कवच Ĥणालȣ कȧ ĤगǓत 
2351. Įी कͪपल ͧसÞबल: 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क)  Èया वष[ 2025 मɅ श ुǾ करने के ͧलए Ǔनधा[ǐरत कई वंदे भारत Ěेनɉ मɅ ͪवलंब हुआ है; 
(ख)  यǑद हाँ, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ और प ूव[ मɅ घोͪषत शेष 100 वंदे भारत Ěेनɉ को श ुǾ 
करने कȧ संशोͬधत समय-सीमा Èया है; और 
(ग)  अÈट ूबर 2025 तक कवच टÈकर-रोधी Ĥणालȣ पर åयय कȧ गई कुल धनराͧश ͩकतनी है 
और अब तक िजन रेल मागɟ पर कवच Ĥणालȣ काया[िÛवत कȧ गई है, उनकȧ लàबाई 
ͩकतनी है? 
उƣर 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
(क) से (ग)़:़ भारतीय रेल ने  वंदे भारत सेवाएं  शुǾ कȧ हɇ जो सेमी हाई èपीड रेलगाͫड़यां हɇ और 
 
Ǔनàनͧलͨखत उÛनत संर¢ा ͪवशेषताओं एवं आधुǓनक याğी सुͪवधाओं से सुͧसÏजत हɇ – 
 कवच Ĥणालȣ
 तीĭ ×वरण
 पूण[तया सीलबंद गɇगवे
 èवचाͧलत Üलग दरवाजे
 बेहतर सवारȣ सुͪवधा
 हॉट केस के Ĥावधान सǑहत ͧमनी पɅĚȣ
 बोतल कूलर
 डीप ĥȧज और हॉट वॉटर बॉयलर
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)    
    इनका     उɮदेæय याǒğयɉ को बेहतर याğा अनभव ु
892                                                      

 ǐरÈलाइǓनंग एगȾनोͧमक सीटɅ
 एÈजीÈयूǑटव Įेणी मɅ घूमने वालȣ सीटɉ के साथ आरामदायक बैठने कȧ åयवèथा
 Ĥ×येक सीट के  ͧलए मोबाइल चािजɍग सॉकेट
 Ĝाइͪवंग Ěेलर कार (डीटȣसी) मɅ Ǒदåयांग याǒğयɉ के ͧलए ͪवशेष शौचालय
 सीसीटȣवी, इ×याǑद
वत[मान मɅ, 164 वंदे भारत रेलगाड़ी सेवाएं  (नीचे सूची मɅ दशा[ई गई हɇ) भारतीय रेल के बड़ी 
लाइन ͪवɮयुतीकृत नेटवक[ पर ͪवͧभÛन सेÈटरɉ मɅ पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जा रहȣ हɇ। इनमɅ से 132 वंदे 
भारत सेवाएँ ͪपछले 3 वषɟ अथा[त् 2022-23 से 2024-25 के दौरान शुǾ कȧ गई हɇ, जबͩक 28 
वंदे भारत सेवाएँ 2025-26 मɅ (15 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 तक) शुǾ कȧ गई हɇ: 
Đ. सं. रेलगाड़ी संÉया और नाम 
1. 22435/22436 नई Ǒदãलȣ-वाराणसी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
2. 22439/22440 नई Ǒदãलȣ-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
3. 20901/20902 मुंबई सɅĚल-गांधीनगर कैͪपटल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
4. 22447/22448 नई Ǒदãलȣ-अंब अंदौरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
5. 20607/20608 एमजीआर चेÛनै सɅĚल-मैसूǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
6. 20825/20826 ǒबलासपुर-नागपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
7. 22301/22302 हावड़ा-Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
8. 20833/20834 ͪवशाखपƣणम-ͧसकंदराबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
9. 22223/22224 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ)-साई नगर ͧशरडी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
10. 22225/22226 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ)-सोलापुर जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
11. 20171/20172 हज़रत Ǔनज़ामुɮदȣन-रानी कमलापǓत वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
12. 20977/20978 अजमेर-चंडीगढ़ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
13. 20643/20644 चेÛनै सɅĚल-कोयंबटूर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
14. 20633/20634 कासरगोड-Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
15. 20701/20702 ͧसकंदराबाद-ǓतǽपǓत वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
16. 22895/22896 हावड़ा-पु
रȣ
 वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
17. 22457/22458 आनंद ͪवहार-देहरादून वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
18. 22227/22228 Ûयू जलपाईगु
ड़ी
-गु
वाहाटȣ
 वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
19. 20911/20912 इंदौर-नागपु
र
 वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
20. 20173/20174 रानी कमलापǓत-रȣवा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
21. 20661/20662 केएसआर बɅगलुǽ-धारवाड़ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
22. 22349/22350 पटना-रांची वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस
893                                                      

23.   22229/22230 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ)-मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
24.   12461/12462 जोधपुर-साबरमती वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
25.   22549/22550 गोरखपुर-Ĥयागराज वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
26.   20835/20836 राउरकेला-पुरȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
27.   20665/20666 चेÛनै एÊमोर-Ǔतǽनेलवेलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
28.   20631/20632 मंगलुǽ-Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
29.   20677/20678 एमजीआर चेÛनै-ͪवजयवाड़ा जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
30.   20979/20980 उदयपुर-जयपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
31.   20703/20704 काचीगुडा-यशवंतपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
32.   20897/20898 हावड़ा-रांची वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
33.   22347/22348 हावड़ा-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
34.   22487/22488 अमृतसर जंÈशन-Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
35.   20646/20645 मंगलूǽ सɅĚल-मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
36.   20705/20706 हजूर साǑहब नांदेड़-छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) वंदे भारतएÈसĤेस 
37.   20642/20641 कोयंबटूर जंÈशन-बɅगलुǽ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
38.   22426/22425 आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ)-अयोÚया कɇट. वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
39.   22415/22416 वाराणसी-नई Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
40.   22477/22478 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा-नई Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
41.   22961/22962 अहमदाबाद-मुंबई सɅĚल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
42.   20707/20708 ͧसकंदराबाद-ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
43.   20663/20664 मैसूǽ-एमजीआर चेÛनै वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
44.   22345/22346 पटना-गोमतीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
45.   22233/22234 Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
46.   20841/20842 भुवनेæवर-ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
47.   22545/22546 लखनऊ-देहरादून वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
48.   22231/22232 कलबुरͬग-एसएमवीटȣ बɅगलुǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
49.   22470/22469 हज़रत Ǔनज़ामुɮदȣन-खजुराहो वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
50.   20887/20888 रांची-वाराणसी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
51.   22925/22926 अहमदाबाद-ओखा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
52.   20627/20628 चेÛनै एÊमोर-नागरकोइल जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
53.   20671/20672 मदुरै-बɅगलुǽ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
54.   22489/22490 वाराणसी-मेरठ ͧसटȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
55.   20101/20102 नागपुर-ͧसकंदराबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
894                                                      

56.   22499/22500 वाराणसी-देवघर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
57.   20893/20894 टाटानगर-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
58.   22303/22304 हावड़ा-गया वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
59.   21893/21894 टाटानगर-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
60.   21895/21896 टाटानगर-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
61.   20981/20982 उदयपुर ͧसटȣ-आगरा कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
62.   20891/20892 टाटानगर-Ħéमपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
63.   20871/20872 हावड़ा-राउरकेला वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
64.   20829/20830 दुग[-ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
65.   20175/20176 बनारस-आगरा कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
66.   20669/20670 हुÞबिãल-पुणे जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
67.   20673/20674 कोãहापुर एससीएसएम टͧम[नस-पुणे जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
68.   22309/22310 हावड़ा-जमालपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
69.   26901/26902 साबरमती-वेरावल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
70.   26401/26402 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा-Įीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
71.   26403/26404 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा-Įीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
72.   26501/26502 गोरखपुर-पाटͧलपुğ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
73.   26101/26102 पुणे-अजनी (नागपुर) वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
74.   26751/26752 बेलगावी-बɅगलुǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
75.   26405/26406 अमृतसर-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
76.   26301/26302 जोगबनी-दानापुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
77.   26503/26504 सहारनपुर-गोमतीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
78.   26481/26482 जोधपुर-Ǒदãलȣ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
79.   26471/26472 बीकानेर-Ǒदãलȣ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
80.   26651/26652 बɅगलुǽ-एरणाकुलम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
81.   26461/26462 Ǒदãलȣ-ͩफरोजपुर कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
82.   26506/26505 बनारस-खजुराहो वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
 
भारतीय रेल उ×पादन इकाइयɉ ने नवंबर 2025 तक 94 वंदे भारत चेयर कार रेकɉ का ͪवǓनमा[ण 
ͩकया है। लंबी और मÚयम दूरȣ कȧ राǒğकालȣन याğा कȧ आवæयकता को पूरा करने के ͧलए, वंदे 
भारत रेलगाड़ी का èवदेशी शयनयान संèकरण ͫडज़ाइन ͩकया गया है। ऐसे दो रेकɉ का 
ͪवǓनमा[ण ͩकया गया है और वे परȣ¢ण/कमीशǓनंग कȧ ĤͩĐया मɅ हɇ।  
895                                                      

इसके अलावा, नई रेलगाड़ी सेवाएं शुǾ करना सतत ĤͩĐया है, जो Ǔनàनͧलͨखत ͪवͧभÛन कारकɉ 
पर Ǔनभ[र करता है- 
• उस खंड कȧ ¢मता  
• पथ कȧ उपलÞधता  
• अपेͯ¢त चल èटॉक कȧ उपलÞधता  
• चल èटॉक के ͧलए उपयुÈत अवसंरचना कȧ उपलÞधता  
• रेलपथ और अÛय पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ अनुर¢ण संबंधी आवæयकता। 
कवच - èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा Ĥणालȣ 
1. कवच एक èवदेश मɅ ͪवकͧसत èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ा Ĥणालȣ (एटȣपी) है। कवच 
अ×यͬधक Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ Ĥधान Ĥणालȣ है, िजसके  ͧलए सवȾÍच èतर के संर¢ा Ĥमाणन 
(एसआईएल-4) कȧ आवæयकता होती है।  
2. यǑद लोको पायलट Ħेक लगाने मɅ ͪवफल रहता है तो कवच èवचाͧलत Ħेक लगाकर लोको 
पायलट को ǓनǑद[çट गǓत सीमा के भीतर रेलगाड़ी चलाने मɅ सहायता करता है और यह 
खराब मौसम के दौरान रेलगाड़ी को संरͯ¢त ढंग से चलाने मɅ भी सहायता करता है। 
3. याğी गाͫड़यɉ पर पहला फȧãड परȣ¢ण फरवरȣ 2016 मɅ शुǾ ͩकया गया था। इस Ĥकार 
ĤाÜत अनुभव और तीसरे प¢ (Ǔनçप¢ संर¢ा मूãयांकनकता[: आईएसए) ɮवारा Ĥणालȣ के 
Ǔनçप¢ संर¢ा मूãयांकन के आधार पर, कवच संèकरण 3.2 कȧ आपूǓत[ के ͧलए 2018-
19 मɅ तीन फमɟ को अनुमोǑदत ͩकया गया था।  
4. कवच को जुलाई 2020 मɅ राçĚȣय एटȣपी Ĥणालȣ के Ǿप मɅ अपनाया गया।  
5. कवच Ĥणालȣ के काया[Ûवयन मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत काय[कलाप शाͧमल हɇ: 
i. Ĥ×येक èटेशन, Þलॉक खÖड पर èटेशन कवच का संèथापन। 
ii. पूरे रेलपथ कȧ लंबाई मɅ आरएफआईडी टैग का संèथापन। 
iii. समĒ खंड मɅ दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन। 
iv. रेलपथ के  बगल मɅ ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना। 
v. भारतीय रेल पर चल रहे Ĥ×येक रेल इंजन पर लोको कवच का Ĥावधान।  
6. दͯ¢ण मÚय रेल के 1465 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच संèकरण 3.2 को संèथापन और 
ĤाÜत अनुभव के आधार पर आगे और सुधार ͩकए गए। अंततः आरडीएसओ ɮवारा Ǒदनांक 
16.07.2024 को कवच ͪवͧशिçट संèकरण 4.0 को अनुमोǑदत ͩकया गया।  
896                                                      

7. कवच 4.0 संèकरण मɅ ͪवͪवध रेल नेटवक[ के ͧलए आवæयक सभी Ĥमुख ͪवशेषताएं 
शाͧमल हɇ। यह भारतीय रेल कȧ संर¢ा मɅ एक मह×वपूण[ उपलिÞध है। अãप अवͬध के 
भीतर, भारतीय रेल ने èवचाͧलत रेलगाड़ी संर¢ण Ĥणालȣ ͪवकͧसत कȧ, परȣ¢ण ͩकया 
गया और उसे संèथाͪपत करना शुǾ कर Ǒदया है। 
8. कवच संèकरण 4.0 मɅ ͩकए गए Ĥमुख सुधारɉ मɅ अविèथǓत सटȣकता मɅ वृɮͬध, बड़े याडɟ 
मɅ ͧसगनल संबंधी पहलुओं कȧ बेहतर जानकारȣ, ओएफसी पर èटेशन-से-èटेशन कवच 
इंटरफ़ े स और मौजूदा इलेÈĚॉǓनक इंटरलॉͩकंग Ĥणालȣ से सीधा इंटरफ़ े स शाͧमल है। इन 
सुधारɉ के साथ, कवच संèकरण 4.0 को भारतीय रेल मɅ बड़े पैमाने पर लागू करने कȧ 
योजना है। 
9. ͪवèतृत एवं åयापक परȣ¢णɉ के उपरांत, कवच के 4.0 संèकरण को Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई माग[ पर 
पलवल–मथुरा–नागदा रेलखंड (633 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) तथा Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा माग[ पर हावड़ा–
बद[वान रेलखंड (105 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर) सǑहत कुल 738 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर सफलतापूव[क 
कमीशन कर Ǒदया गया है। Ǒदãलȣ–मुंबई एवं Ǒदãलȣ–हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ के शेष रेलखंडɉ पर 
कवच के काया[Ûवयन का काय[ ĤगǓत पर है।  
10. Ǒदãलȣ-मुंबई और Ǒदãलȣ-हावड़ा गͧलयारɉ समेत उÍच घन×व वाले मागɟ पर कवच के Ĥमुख 
मदɉ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
Đ. सं. मद ĤगǓत 
i.  ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल ǒबछाना 7129 ͩक.मी. 
ii.  दूरसंचार टावरɉ का संèथापन 860 अदद 
iii.  èटेशन डेटा सɅटर 767 èटेशन 
iv.  रेलपथ साइड उपकरणɉ का संèथापन 5672 माग[ ͩक.मी. 
v.  रेलइंजनɉ मɅ कवच का Ĥावधान 4,154 
11. इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल के  सभी जीÈयू, जीडी, एचडीएन और ͬचिéनत रेलखंडɉ को 
कवर करते हुए 15,512 माग[ ͩकलोमीटर पर कवच के  रेलपथ साइड कायɟ का काया[Ûवयन 
Ĥारंभ ͩकया गया है।  
12. अÛय 9,069 रेल इंजनɉ को कवच के 4.0 संèकरण से सुसिÏजत करने हेतु बोͧलयां 
आमंǒğत कȧ गई हɇ। रेल इंजनɉ मɅ Ǔनरंतर चरणबɮध तरȣके से कवच कȧ åयवèथा कȧ जा 
रहȣ है। 
897                                                      

13. सभी संबंͬधत अͬधकाǐरयɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण देने के ͧलए भारतीय रेल के कɅ ġȣकृत Ĥͧश¢ण 
संèथानɉ मɅ कवच पर ͪवशेष Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए जा रहे हɇ। अब तक 
40,000 से अͬधक तकनीͧशयनɉ, ऑपरेटरɉ और इंजीǓनयरɉ को कवच Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ के 
ͪवषय पर Ĥͧशͯ¢त ͩकया जा चुका है। इसमɅ 33,000 लोको पायलट एवं सहायक लोको 
पायलट सिàमͧलत हɇ। यह पाɫयĐम इǐरसेट के सहयोग से तैयार ͩकया गया है।  
14. अÈटूबर 2025 तक ‘कवच’ Ĥणालȣ से संबंͬधत कायɟ पर कुल 2,354.36 करोड़ ǽपए åयय 
ͩकए गए हɇ। वष[ 2025–26 के दौरान कुल ₹1673.19 करोड़ राͧश का आवंटन ͩकया गया 
है। कायɟ कȧ ĤगǓत के  अनुǾप अपेͯ¢त पूंजी उपलÞध कराई जाती है। 
****** 
898                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2352 का उƣर 
 
Ĥीͧमयम Ěेनɉ मे लागू डायनेͧमक फ े यर Ĥणालȣ 
 
2352. Įी इमरान Ĥतापगढ़ȣ: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  Ĥीͧमयम Ěेनɉ मɅ लागू डायनाͧमक Ĥाइͧसंग अथवा ÝलेÈसी-फ े यर Ĥणालȣ को ͩकस अवͬध 
तक जारȣ रखने का Ǔनण[य ͧलया गया है; 
(ख)  इस Ĥणालȣ से भारतीय रेल को अब तक कुल ͩकतना आͬथ[क लाभ ĤाÜत हुआ है; और 
(ग)  Èया सरकार ͩकराया नीǓत मɅ कोई संशोधन या समी¢ा करने पर ͪवचार कर रहȣ है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
 
(क) से (ग): रेलवे ͪवͪवध ͩकराया संरचना वालȣ ͪवͧभÛन Ĥकार कȧ गाͫड़यां चला रहȣ है। बेहतर 
मांग Ĥबंधन के ͧलए ÝलेÈसी-फ े यर कȧ अवधारणा गाͫड़यɉ कȧ सीͧमत संÉया यथा राजधानी, 
शताÞदȣ एवं दुरंतो गाͫड़यɉ मɅ हȣ शुǾ कȧ गई है। इसके अलावा, भारतीय रेल मɅ राजधानी, 
शताÞदȣ एवं दुरंतो गाͫड़यɉ के मागɟ पर सामाÛय ͩकराया संरचना पर वैकिãपक गाड़ी सेवाएं 
उपलÞध हɇ। 
 
2024-25 के दौरान रेलɉ ɮवारा ÝलेÈसी-फ े यर से अिज[त राजèव याğी सेवाओं से कुल 
अिज[त राजèव का केवल लगभग 1.80 ĤǓतशत है।   
  
भारतीय रेल समाज के सभी वगɟ को ͩकफायती सेवाएँ Ĥदान करने का Ĥयास करती है 
और इसने 2023-24 मɅ याğी Ǒटकटɉ पर 60,466 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ सिÞसडी दȣ। यह रेलवे मɅ 
याğा करने वाले Ĥ×येक åयिÈत के ͧलए औसतन 45 ĤǓतशत ǐरयायत के बराबर है। दूसरे शÞदɉ 
मɅ, यǑद सेवा Ĥदान करने कȧ लागत 100 ǽपए है, तो Ǒटकट कȧ कȧमत केवल 55 ǽपए है। यह 
सिÞसडी सभी याǒğयɉ के  ͧलए जारȣ है।   
****** 
899                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2353 का उƣर 
 
अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना (एबीएसएस) के अंतग[त èटेशन का पुनͪव[कास 
 
2353. Įी सदानंद महालू शेट तानवड़े: 
Įी बृज लाल: 
Įी घनæयाम Ǔतवाड़ी: 
Įीमती ͩकरण चौधरȣ: 
Įी अमर पाल मौय[: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  आज कȧ Ǔतͬथ तक अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना (एबीएसएस) के तहत अनुमोǑदत 
èटेशनɉ कȧ अɮयतन संÉया का राÏय-वार Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख)  अब तक एबीएसएस के तहत हुए कुल åयय और सभी अनुमोǑदत èटेशनɉ को पूण[ करने 
के ͧलए आवæयक अनुमाǓनत बजट ͩकतना है; 
(ग)  ͪवƣ वष[ 2024-25 के ͧलए इन èटेशनɉ के ͧलए तैयार माèटर-Üलान का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(घ)  वाèतͪवक काय[ शुǾ हो चुके, पूण[ हो चुके और Ǔनमा[ण-पूव[ कȧ चरण वाले èटेशनɉ कȧ 
संÉया ͩकतनी-ͩकतनी है; 
(ङ) Èया एबीएसएस के तहत पुनͪव[कास से याğी सेवा ¢मता, वाͨणिÏयक राजèव और 
èथानीय रोजगार बढ़ने कȧ संभावना है; और 
(च)  यǑद हाँ, तो अपेͯ¢त पǐरमाणा×मक पǐरणाम Èया हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
(क) से (च): रेल मंğालय ने èटेशनɉ के पुनͪव[कास के ͧलए दȣघ[काͧलक ͸िçटकोण से अमृत 
भारत èटेशन योजना शुǾ कȧ है। 
900                                                      

इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए माèटर Üलान तैयार करना और इÛहɅ चरणबɮध 
Ǿप मɅ काया[िÛवत करना शाͧमल है। माèटर Üलान मɅ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत शाͧमल है:- 
 
 
 èटेशन तक पहुंच और पǐरचलन ¢ेğ मɅ सुधार 
 शहर के  दोनɉ ओर से èटेशन का एकȧकरण 
 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार 
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा, पेयजल बूथɉ मɅ सुधार 
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पथ/एयर कॉÛकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
 ͧलÝट/एèकेलेटर/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
 Üलेटफाम[ कȧ सतह और Üलेटफाम[ के कवर मɅ सुधार/Ĥावधान  
 'एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद' जैसी योजनाओं के  माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए 
ͩकयोèक का Ĥावधान 
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, मãटȣमॉडल एकȧकरण 
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएं 
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
 Ĥ×येक èटेशन पर आवæयकता को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए एÈजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, åयावसाǓयक 
बैठकɉ के ͧलए ǓनǑद[çट èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग आǑद का Ĥावधान। 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध तरȣके से तथा यथा åयवहाय[ संधारणीय और 
पया[वरण अनुकूल समाधान, ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत रेलपथ आǑद का Ĥावधान और दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर 
ͧसटȣ सɅटर का Ǔनमा[ण भी शाͧमल है। èटेशनɉ को ͧसटȣ सɅटरɉ मɅ ͪवकͧसत करने और उसके  
आस-पास आͬथ[क गǓतͪवͬधयɉ को बढ़ाने के  साथ-साथ याğा अनुभव मɅ सुधार कȧ पǐरकãपना 
करता है। 
  
अब तक, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त ͪवकास के ͧलए 1337 रेलवे èटेशनɉ को 
ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है। देश भर मɅ अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के तहत रेलवे èटेशनɉ का 
ͪवकास संबंधी काय[ अÍछȤ गǓत मɅ शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। अभी तक, 160 èटेशनɉ का Ǔनमा[ण काय[ 
पूरा हो चुका है। अब तक पूरे हो चुके èटेशनɉ के नाम Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
अलनावर, अàब अÛदौरा, अंǒबकापुर, आमगांव, आनंदपुर साǑहब, अनारा, अयोÚया धाम, बदामी, 
बागलकोट, बैजनाथ पपरोला, बलरामपुर, बंटवाल, बाराभूम, बारामती, बरेलȣ ͧसटȣ, बाǐरपदा, 
बाडमेर, बरपालȣ, बेगमपेट, Þयोहारȣ, भानुĤतापपुर, ͧभलाई, ǒबजनोर, ǒबमलगढ़, बोिàमडी, बूंदȣ, 
चंदा फोट[, चÛगनाशेरȣ, ͬचदंबरम, ͬचंचपोकलȣ, ͬचÛन सेलम, ͬचरǓयनकȧÃ, कटक, डकोर, डेऱोल, 
देशनोके, देवलालȣ, धारवाड़, धुले, डɉगरगढ़, फतेहाबाद, फतेहपुर, फतेहपुर शेखावाटȣ, गड़ग, 
गोɬडा, गोगामेड़ी, गोकक रोड, गोला गोकरनाथ, गोमती नगर, गोवध[न, गोͪवंद गढ़, गोͪवंदपुरȣ, 
गोͪवंदपुर रोड, हैबरगांव, हािãदया, हापा, हरपालपुर, हाथरस ͧसटȣ, होडल, ईदगाह आगरा जं., 
इÏजतनगर, जैसलमेर, जाम जोधपुर, जाम वनथालȣ, जयचÖडी पहाड़, कांͩकनाड़ा टाउन, 
901                                                      

कãयाणी घोषपारा, कामाÉयागुड़ी, कनालूस जं., कारैÈकुड़ी जं., करमसद, करȣमनगर, कटनी 
साउथ, केड़गांव, खैरथल, कोÜपल, कोसंबा जं., कुलȣƣुराई, कुɪǑटपुरम, लासलगांव, ͧलंबडी, 
लोहारदगा, लोनंद जं., माहे, महुवा, मैलानी, मंडल गढ़, मंडावरमहवा रोड, मधुपुर, मानापराई, 
मंडी डबवालȣ, मंगलाͬगरȣ, मÛनारगुडी, माटुंगा, एम.सी.एस. छतरपुर, मीठापुर, मोरÜपुर, मोरबी, 
मुÈतसर, मुǓनराबाद, मुǓत[जापुर जं., नैनपुर जं., नंदुरा, नम[दापुरम (होशंगाबाद), नेताजी सुभाष 
चंġ बोस इतवारȣ जंÈशन, ओखा, ओरछा, पालȣताना, पानागढ़, पनकȧ धाम, परेल, परलाखेमुंडी, 
पीरपɇती, ͪपèका, पुखरायां, पोलाची जं., पोलूर, पोरबंदर, राजगढ़, राजमहल, राजुला जं., रामघाट 
हाãट, रायनपाडू, सहारनपुर जं., साǑहबजादा अजीत ͧसंह मोहालȣ, साहेबगंज, समͨखयालȣ, 
समलपɪटȣ, शंकरपुर, सावदा, ͧसवनी, शहाड, शाजापुर, शोलावंदन, शोरानूर जं., Įीधाम, ͧसɮधाथ[ 
नगर, सीहोर जं., ͧसउरȣ, Įी बालाĦéमेæवर जोगुलàबा, Įीरंगम, Įीͪविãलपुƣूर, सɅट थॉमस 
माउंट, सुãलुरपेटा, सुरैमनपुर, èवामीनारायण छाͪपया, तालचेर, तामलुक, थावे, ͬथǽवǾर जंÈशन, 
ǓतǽवÛनामलाई, तुनी, उझानी, उरकुरा, उतरन, वडकारा, वडाला रोड, वृɮधाचलम जंÈशन, 
वडÈकांचेǐर, वारंगल।   
 
èटेशनɉ पर जहां काय[ शुǽ ͩकए गए हɇ, अÍछȤ ĤगǓत हाͧसल कȧ गई है तथा ऐसे कुछ èटेशनɉ 
कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
 
 
 ǓतǽपǓत èटेशन: दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा कȧ ओर नए मुÉय Ĥवेश èटेशन भवन और दो एयर 
कॉÛकोस[ के संरचना×मक ढांचे का काय[ पूरा हो चुका है। दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा कȧ ओर नए मुÉय 
Ĥवेश èटेशन भवन का ͩफǓनͧशंग का काय[ और उƣर Ǒदशा कȧ ओर एयर कॉनकोस[, 
èटेशन भवन का संरचना×मक काय[, Üलेटफाम[ शेãटर संबंधी काय[, ͧलÝट, एèकेलेटर आǑद 
का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है।   
 
 
 नेãलोर èटेशन: पूव[ और पिæचम दोनɉ ओर èटेशन भवनɉ के संरचना×मक ढांचे, Ƀटɉ और 
Üलèतर का काय[ और एयर कॉनकोस[ का संरचना×मक काय[ पूरा हो चुका है। पूव[ और 
पिæचम दोनɉ Ǒदशाओं मɅ èटेशन भवन और एयर कॉनकोस[, अंडरपास का ͪवèतार काय[, 
पानी कȧ टंͩकयɉ और सीवेज ĚȣटमɅट Üलांट के काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
 
 यशवंतपुर èटेशन: पूव[ Ǒदशा के  èटेशन भवन के संरचना×मक काय[, पूव[ Ǒदशा के   
सब-èटेशन के ͧसͪवल काय[, पूव[ Ǒदशा पर एͧलवेटेड सड़क और मãटȣ-लेवल कार पाͩकɍग 
के काय[ पूरे हो गए हɇ। पूव[ Ǒदशा के èटेशन भवन, पूव[ Ǒदशा मɅ एͧलवेटेड सड़क और 
मãटȣ-लेवल कार पाͩकɍग, सीवेज ĚȣटमɅट संयंğ का ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, पिæचम Ǒदशा के  
èटेशन भवन और एयर कंकॉस[ के संरचना×मक काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
 
 बɅगलुǽ कɇट èटेशन: दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा मɅ 24 मीटर चौड़े डायवज[न रोड, Ĥͧश¢ण कɅ ġ, उƣर 
Ǒदशा मɅ छाğावास और दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा कȧ ओर èटेशन भवन कȧ ओर के संरचना×मक काय[ 
902                                                      

पूरे कर ͧलए गए हɇ। दͯ¢ण Ǒदशा के èटेशन भवन का ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, उƣर Ǒदशा के  
èटेशन भवन का संरचना×मक काय[ और पैदल पार पुल का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
 
 रामेæवरम èटेशन: पूव[/उƣर टͧम[नल भवन, Ĥèथान Ĥांगण, आगमन Ĥांगण, आवासीय 
टॉवर, सब-èटेशन भवन, जल Ǔनçकष[ण संयंğ और सीवेज ĚȣटमɅट संयंğ के संरचना×मक 
काय[ पूरे हो चुके हɇ। पूव[ टͧम[नल भवन के ͬचनाई संबंधी काय[, उƣर टͧम[नल भवन, 
Ĥèथान Ĥांगण, आगमन Ĥांगण, आवासीय टॉवर, Üलेटफाम[ उÛनयन िजसमɅ Üलेटफाम[ 
शेãटर शाͧमल है और मौजूदा Ĥती¢ा क¢ के नवीनीकरण के काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
 
 सफदरजंग èटेशन: ͧसगनल भवन, èटेशन भवन, Üलिàबंग और फायर फाइǑटंग, 
पǐरचालन भवन कȧ छत तक संरचना×मक काय[, एयर कॉÛसोस[ कȧ नींव और पेडेèटãस 
के काय[ पूरे हो चुके हɇ। èटेशन भवन मɅ इलेिÈĚकल और लो वोãटेज काय[, Üलेटफाम[ 
नवीनीकरण काय[, पǐरचालन भवन के ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[, ओवरहेड टɇक और एयर कॉÛसोस[ 
के काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
 
इसके अǓतǐरÈत, भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण सतत् 
और Ǔनरंतर चलने वालȣ ĤͩĐया है और इस संबंध मɅ कायɟ कȧ पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और 
Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ उपलÞधता के अÚयधीन, आवæयकतानुसार काय[ शुǾ ͩकए जाते हɇ। èटेशनɉ के 
ͪवकास/पुनͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण कायɟ को èवीकृǓत देने और Ǔनçपादन के  समय 
Ǔनचलȣ कोǑट के èटेशनɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ उÍचतर कोǑट के èटेशनɉ को Ĥाथͧमकता दȣ जाती है। 
 
इसके अलावा, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना सǑहत èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण का 
ͪवƣपोषण सामाÛयतः योजना शीष[-53 'Ēाहक सुͪवधाएँ' के अंतग[त ͩकया जाता है। योजना  
शीष[-53 के अंतग[त आबंटन और åयय का Þयौरा ¢ेğीय रेल-वार रखा जाता है, न ͩक काय[-वार 
या èटेशन-वार या राÏय-वार। ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 के ͧलए योजना शीष[-53 के अंतग[त 12,118 
करोड़ ǽपये कȧ Ǔनͬध आवंǑटत कȧ गई है और अब तक (अÈटूबर, 2025 तक) 7,253 करोड़ 
ǽपये का åयय उपगत ͩकया गया है। 
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ 
संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए फायर ÈलȣयरɅस, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन 
संबंधी èवीकृǓत इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती है। इनकȧ 
ĤगǓत जनोपयोगी सेवाओं को èथानांतǐरत करना, (िजनमɅ जल/सीवेज लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर 
केबल, गैस पाइप लाइन, पावर/ͧसगनल केबल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ) अǓतलंघन, याğी संचलन को 
बाͬधत ͩकए ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, रेलपथ एवं उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के नजदȣक 
ͩकए जाने वाले कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद जैसी Ħाउन फȧãड संबंधी चुनौǓतयɉ के 
कारण भी Ĥभाͪवत होती है और ये कारक काय[ को पूरा करने के समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ। 
 
******  
903                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2354 का उƣर 
 
"एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद” पहल कȧ ĤगǓत 
 
2354. डा. सुमेर ͧसंह सोलंकȧ: 
डा. मेधा ͪवĮाम कुलकणȸ: 
डा. परमार जशवंतͧसंह सालमͧसंह: 
Įी आǑद×य Ĥसाद: 
Įी ͧमथलेश कुमार: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  भारतीय रेलवे मɅ "एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद' (ओएसओपी) पहल कȧ ĤगǓत Èया है और 
इसका èथानीय ͧशãपकारɉ तथा लघु उɮयोगɉ पर Èया Ĥभाव पड़ा है; 
(ख)  ओएसओपी योजना के तहत Ĥ×येक रेलवे èटेशन से जुड़े ͪवͧशçट उ×पादɉ के संवध[न और 
ͪवपणन के ͧलए Èया उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ; और 
(ग)  ओएसओपी के ͪवĐय èथलɉ कȧ औसत माͧसक आमदनी ͩकतनी है? 
 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
(क) से (ग): भारतीय रेल कȧ ‘एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद’ योजना का लêय देशभर मɅ रेलवे èटेशनɉ 
पर ǒबĐȧ केÛġɉ कȧ åयवèथा के माÚयम से èवदेशी/èथानीय उ×पादɉ के Ĥदश[न और ǒबĐȧ के 
ͧलए èथानीय कारȣगरɉ, कुàहारɉ, बुनकरɉ, ͧश ãपकारɉ को संवɮ[ͬधत अवसर उपलÞध कराना है।  
 
इस योजना कȧ मुÉय ͪवशेषताएं इस Ĥकार हɇ:  
 
1. भारतीय रेल èवदेशी/èथानीय उ×पादɉ के Ĥदश[न, ǒबĐȧ और इÛहɅ उÍच ͸æयता  Ĥदान 
करने के ͧलए अɮͪव तीय Ǿप से ͫडज़ाइन ͩकए गए ǒबĐȧ केÛġɉ कȧ åयवèथा करती है।    
2. उ×पाद Įेͨणयां उस èथान कȧ èवदेशी/èथानीय होती हɇ और इसमɅ कलाकृǓतयां; 
हèतͧशãप; कपड़ा और हथकरघा; ͨखलौने; चमड़े से बने उ×पाद; पारंपǐरक उपकरण/यंğ; 
904                                                      

वèğ; र×न और आभूषण; ¢ेğ मɅ èवदेशी Ǿप से Ǔनͧम[त/उगाए गए Ĥसंèकृत, अध[ Ĥसंèकृत 
और अÛय खाɮय उ×पाद शाͧमल हɇ।   
3. सबसे Ǔनचले èतर के åयिÈतयɉ/वंͬचतɉ और कमजोर वगɟ, èव-सहायता समूहɉ आǑद को 
Ĥो×साǑहत ͩकया जाता है।    
4. इस योजना मɅ भाग लेने के ͧलए नाममाğ का पंजीकरण शुãक है।  
5. इसमɅ कोई ͪवƣीय पाğता नहȣं है। इस योजना के उɮदेæयɉ को पूरा करने वाले सभी 
आवेदकɉ को रोटेशन आधार पर आबंटन ͩकया जाता है। 
 
इस योजना को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए रेल Ĥाͬध काǐरयɉ ɮवारा ͪवͧभ Ûन साव[जǓनक आउटरȣच उपाय 
ͩकए गए हɇ, िजनमɅ समाचार-पğɉ मɅ ͪव£ापन, सोशल मीͫडया, साव[जǓनक उɮघोषणाएं, Ĥेस 
अͬध सूचनाएं आǑद शाͧमल हɇ। 
  
30.11.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार, 2002 èटेशनɉ पर कुल 2325 एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद 
आउटलेट काय[रत थे और इस योजना के तहत कुल 69,205 Ĥ×य¢ लाभाͬथ[यɉ ने लाभ उठाया 
था। भारतीय रेल इस योजना का और अͬधक ͪवèतार करने के ͧलए Ǔनरंतर Ĥयासरत है।  
 
25.03.2022 से 30.11.2025 कȧ अवͬध के दौरान एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद आउटलेɪस पर कुल 
135.31 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ ǒबĐȧ दज[ कȧ गई है। जनवरȣ-नवंबर 2025 कȧ अवͬध के ͧलए ĤǓत 
आउटलेट औसत माͧसक ǒबĐȧ 15,053 ǽपए है। 
 
****** 
905                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2355 का उƣर 
 
रेल Ǒटकट ǒबĐȧ से ĤाÜत राजèव 
 
2355. डा. जॉन ǒĦटास: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क) ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान अथा[त् 31.03.2025 तक और वष[ 2025-26 के पहले दो 
ǓतमाǑहयɉ मɅ रेलवे ɮवारा ÝलेÈसी-फे यर, त×काल, Ĥीͧमयम त×काल और Ǒटकट 
रɮदȣकरण से वाèतͪवक संÉया मɅ अिज[त ͪवͧशçट राजèव धनराͧश का Þयौरा Èया है, 
त×संबंधी वष[-वार और Įेणी-वार Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(ख)  ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान रेलवे कोͬचंग से ͧमलने वाले ͪवͪवध Ĥकार कȧ आय के तहत 
वाèतͪवक संÉया मɅ अिज[त ͪवͧशçट राजèव धनराͧश का वष[-वार और Įेणी-वार Þयौरा 
Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
(क) और (ख): 2020-21 से 2024-25 के दौरान रेलवे ɮवारा ÝलेÈसी फ ेयर, त×काल और 
Ĥीͧमयम त×काल से अिज[त राजèव याğी सेवाओं से कुल अिज[त राजèव का लगभग 6% है। 
इसके अलावा, याǒğयɉ ɮवारा Ǒटकट रɮद करने पर जमा कȧ गई राͧश का Þयौरा अलग से दज[ 
नहȣं ͩकया जाता है। 
 
ͪवͪवध कोͬचंग ĤािÜतयɉ के अंतग[त कोǑटवार Þयौरɉ कȧ अलग से गणना नहȣं कȧ जाती है। वष[ 
2020-21 से वष[ 2024-25 के दौरान ͪवͪवध कोͬचंग ĤािÜतयɉ के अंतग[त ĤाÜत कुल राजèव 
राͧश ₹9550.19 करोड़ है। 
 
भारतीय रेल समाज के सभी वगɟ को ͩकफायती सेवाएँ Ĥदान करने का Ĥयास करती है और 
इसने 2023-24 मɅ याğी Ǒटकटɉ पर 60,466 करोड़ ǽपए कȧ सिÞसडी दȣ। यह रेलवे मɅ याğा 
करने वाले Ĥ×येक åयिÈत के ͧलए औसतन 45 ĤǓतशत ǐरयायत के बराबर है। दूसरे शÞदɉ मɅ, 
यǑद सेवा Ĥदान करने कȧ लागत 100 ǽपए है, तो Ǒटकट कȧ कȧमत केवल 55 ǽपए है। यह 
सिÞसडी उपनगरȣय सǑहत सभी याǒğयɉ के ͧलए जारȣ है।   
****** 
906                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2356 का उƣर 
 
रेलवे याǒğयɉ और कम[चाǐरयɉ पर हमला 
 
2356. Įीमती जेबी माथेर हȣशम: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  ͪपछले पांच वषɟ मɅ, रेल मɅ तैनात मǑहला अͬधकाǐरयɉ सǑहत, रेलवे कम[चाǐरयɉ पर हुए 
हमलɉ के संबंध मɅ राÏय/संघ राÏय¢ेğ-वार आंकड़े Èया हɇ; 
(ख)  ͪपछले पांच वषɟ मɅ, लगी चोटɉ और मृ×यु सàबÛधी आंकड़ɉ सǑहत, याǒğयɉ, ͪवशेषकर 
मǑहलाओं पर, हुए हमलɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग)  ͪपछले पांच वषɟ मɅ ऐसे हमलɉ के ͧलए दज[ मामलɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय¢ेğ-वार आंकड़े 
और उनमɅ दोषͧसɮͬध कȧ दरɅ Èया है; 
(घ)  घायल åयिÈतयɉ, पीͫड़तɉ और मृतकɉ के पǐरवारɉ को दȣ गई ¢ǓतपूǓत[ का राÏय/संघ 
राÏय¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा और लंǒबत दावे और उनके Ǔनपटान कȧ समयसीमा Èया है; और 
(ङ) Èया मǑहलाओं कȧ सुर¢ा बढ़ाने के उɮदेæय से 'मेरȣ सहेलȣ' पहल कȧ Ĥभावकाǐरता का 
मूãयांकन ͩकया गया है, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है? 
  
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
 
 
(क) से (ङ) : भारत के संͪवधान कȧ सातवीं अनुसूची के अंतग[त ‘पुͧलस’ और ‘कानून åयवèथा’ 
राÏय के ͪवषय हɇ और इस Ĥकार, राÏय सरकारɅ अपनी कानून Ĥवत[न एजɅͧसयɉ अथा[त राजकȧय 
रेल पुͧलस/िजला पुͧलस के माÚयम से रेलɉ मɅ अपराध कȧ रोकथाम, उनका पता लगाने, 
पंजीकरण और जांच करने तथा कानून-åयवèथा बनाए रखने आǑद के ͧलए उƣरदायी हɇ। रेल 
सुर¢ा बल रेल संपͪƣ, याğी ¢ेğ और याǒğयɉ कȧ बेहतर संर¢ा और सुर¢ा Ĥदान करने तथा 
907                                                      

उससे संबंͬधत मामलɉ के ͧलए राजकȧय रेल पुͧलस/िजला पुͧलस के Ĥयासɉ मɅ सहायता करता 
है। 
    
रेल कम[चाǐरयɉ (मǑहला रेलवे कम[चाǐरयɉ सǑहत) के साथ हुए अपराधɉ के सभी मामलɉ कȧ 
ǐरपोट[ और पंजीकरण जीआरपी या िजला पुͧलस ɮवारा उनके ¢ेğाͬधकार के अनुसार दज[ कȧ 
जाती है और उसके बाद जांच और आगे कȧ कानूनी कार[वाई कȧ जाती है। याǒğयɉ के साथ हुए 
अपराध के मामलɉ मɅ िजसमɅ रेलवे कͧम[यɉ के साथ हुए अपराध भी शाͧमल हɇ, िजसे राçĚȣय 
अपराध ǐरकॉड[ Þयूरो (एनसीआरबी) ɮवारा Ĥकाͧशत ͩकया जाता है। बहरहाल, रेलवे कͧम[यɉ के  
साथ हुए अपराध के आंकड़े अलग से Ĥकाͧशत नहȣं ͩकए जाते हɇ।  
 
दुघ[टना पीͫड़तɉ को दुघ[टना या अͪĤय घटना के बाद अनुĒह सहायता के  Ǿप मɅ शीē भुगतान 
ͩकया जाता है। 2020-21 से 2025-26 (नवंबर, 2025 तक) कȧ अवͬध के दौरान याǒğयɉ पर 
हमले कȧ घटनाओं मɅ हताहतɉ के आͬĮतɉ और घायल åयिÈतयɉ के पǐरजनɉ को रेलवे ɮवारा 
कुल अनुĒह राͧश 38.79 लाख ǽपये Ǒदए गए हɇ। 
 
धारा 124 और धारा 124-क (रेल अͬधǓनयम, 1989 कȧ धारा 123 के साथ पǑठत) के तहत 
यथा पǐरभाͪषत रेलगाड़ी दुघ[टनाओं और अͪĤय घटनाओं मɅ रेल याǒğयɉ कȧ मृ×यु और चोट के 
ͧलए मुआवजे का Ǔनण[य रेल दावा अͬधकरण (आरसीटȣ) ɮवारा पीͫड़तɉ/उनके आͬĮतɉ ɮवारा 
उनके सम¢ दायर ͩकए गए दावा आवेदन के आधार पर ͩकया जाता है और इसमɅ उͬचत 
कानूनी ĤͩĐया का अनुपालन करने के पæचात् मामलɉ का Ǔनपटान ͩकया जाता है। रेल Ĥशासन 
तब मुआवजा देता है जब माननीय आरसीटȣ ɮवारा दावेदार के  प¢ मɅ ͫडĐȧ दȣ जाती है और 
रेलवे उस आदेश को लागू करने का Ǔनण[य लेती है। मुआवजे कȧ राͧश अनुĒह राͧश के 
अǓतǐरÈत Ĥदान कȧ जाती है। 
 
2020-21 से 2025-26 (नवंबर, 2025 तक) कȧ अवͬध के दौरान याǒğयɉ पर हुए हमले कȧ 
घटनाओं मɅ हाताहतɉ के आͬĮतɉ और घायल åयिÈतयɉ के पǐरजनɉ को रेलवे ɮवारा दȣ गई कुल 
मुआवजा राͧश 52.23 लाख ǽपये है। ͩकसी वष[ मɅ भुगतान कȧ गई मुआवजा राͧश जǾरȣ नहȣं 
ͩक वह केवल उस वष[ मɅ हुई दुघ[टनाओं/हाǓनयɉ से संबंͬधत हो। ͩकसी वष[ भुगतान कȧ गई राͧश 
इस बात पर Ǔनभ[र करती है ͩक रेल दावा अͬधकरण या अÛय Ûयायालयɉ ɮवारा उस वष[ मɅ 
ͩकतने मामलɉ का Ǔनपटारा ͩकया गया है, चाहे वे मामले ͩकसी भी वष[ मɅ हुई 
दुघ[टनाओं/अनहोनी घटनाओं से संबंͬधत हɉ। 
 
908                                                      

ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान, संबंͬधत ¢ेğीय रेलवे ɮवारा उƣर Ĥदेश और के रल मɅ मृ×यु होने वाले 
रेल कम[चाǐरयɉ के पǐरवार/आͬĮतɉ को Ĥ×येक को 25 लाख ǽपये, कुल 50 लाख ǽपये कȧ राͧश 
पहले Ĥदान कȧ गई है और इससे संबंͬधत कोई दावा लंǒबत नहȣं है। 
 
'मेरȣ सहेलȣ' पहल कȧ शुǾआत लंबी दूरȣ कȧ गाͫड़यɉ मɅ अकेले याğा करने वालȣ मǑहला याǒğयɉ 
को उनकȧ पूरȣ याğा के दौरान अथा[त् Ĥèथान èटेशन से गंतåय èटेशन तक बेहतर सुर¢ा और 
संर¢ा Ĥदान करने के उɮदेæय से कȧ गई है। इसके ͩĐयाÛवयन के ͧलए मǑहला आरपीएफ 
कͧम[यɉ कȧ समͪप[त टȣमɅ बनाई गई हɇ। वत[मान मɅ, इस उɮदेæय के  ͧलए लगभग 250 
आरपीएफ टȣमɅ तैनात कȧ जा रहȣ हɇ, जो ͩक भारतीय रेल नेटवक[ पर औसतन ĤǓतǑदन लगभग 
500 रेलगाͫड़यɉ को कवर करती हɇ। वष[ 2023 एवं 2024 के दौरान, ĤǓतǑदन लगभग 13,000 
ऐसे याǒğयɉ को ऐसे पहल के अंतग[त शाͧमल ͩकया गया था।  
 
ये टȣमɅ अकेलȣ याğा कर रहȣ मǑहला याǒğयɉ को याğा के दौरान अपनाई जाने वालȣ सुर¢ा 
उपायɉ के बारे मɅ और संकट के समय सहायता मांगने के ͧलए उपलÞध चैनलɉ के बारे मɅ बताती 
हɇ। याğा के माग[ मɅ आने वाले आरपीएफ पोèटɉ को भी अकेले याğा करने वालȣ मǑहला याǒğयɉ 
के याğा करने के बारे मɅ पहले से सूͬचत ͩकया जाता है और ͩकसी भी िèथǓत पर तुरंत कार[वाई 
करने के ͧलए उÍच सतक[ता पर रखा जाता है। मǑहला याǒğयɉ से ĤǓतͩĐया भी लȣ जाती है 
ताͩक इस पहल कȧ उपलिÞधयɉ और कͧमयɉ का ͪवæलेषण ͩकया जा सके और इसे और बेहतर 
बनाने का लêय रखा जा सके। 
 
****** 
 
909                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2357 का उƣर 
 
गैर-ͩकराया राजèव को बढ़ाने के  ͧलए उठाए गए कदम 
 
2357. Įी जÊगेश: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  Èया भारतीय रेलवे गैर-ͩकराया राजèव बढ़ाने के ͧलए नए कदम उठा रहा है, िजसमɅ 
अǓतͬथ गृह पɪटे पर देना और अपͧशçट सामĒी कȧ ǒबĐȧ सिàमͧलत है; 
(ख)  Èया रेलवे मंडलɉ ɮवारा बचे हुए कोयले या सीमɅट कȧ ǒबĐȧ कȧ अनुमǓत देकर वैगन 
सफाई अनुबंधɉ को मुġȣकृत ͩकया है; 
(ग)  Èया सरकार ने वत[मान गैर-ͩकराया राजèव (एनएफआर) से अिज[त आय और ͪवकͧसत 
देशɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ इसके अĤयुÈत संभावनाओं का मूãयांकन ͩकया है; 
(घ)  Èया भारतीय रेलवे गैर-ͩकराया राजèव बढ़ाने के ͧलए Ĥीͧमयम Ħांडेड खाने-पीने कȧ 
दुकानɉ के ͧलए èटेशन पर जगह कȧ नीलामी करने कȧ योजना बना रहा है; और 
(ङ)  यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
 
(क) से (ङ): भारतीय रेल ने गैर-भाड़ा राजèव बढ़ाने के ͧलए कई कदम उठाए हɇ, िजनमɅ 
Ǔनà नͧलͨखत शाͧमल है:- 
 
1. èटेशनɉ पर रेल ͫडèÜले नेटवक[ (आरडीएन) के माÚयम से ͪव£ापन। 
2. आउट ऑफ होम (ओओएच) नीǓत के माÚयम से ͪव£ापन 
3. चल पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ जैसे सवारȣͫडÞबɉ और गाड़ी के अंदर/बाहर सतहɉ तथा रेलइंजनɉ पर  
ͪव£ापन।  
910                                                      

4. याǒğयɉ कȧ सुͪवधाओं को बढ़ाने के ͧलए नवोÛमेषी समाधान जैसे ͩक èलȣͪपंग पॉɬस कȧ 
सुͪवधा, ͧसंगल Ħांड Ĥीͧमयम आउटलेट, ऑटो और टैÈसी बुͩकंग कȧ सुͪवधा के ͧलए ͩकयोèक, 
भुगतान के आधार पर ई-åहȣलचेयर सुͪवधा, हेãथ ͩकयोèक, जेनेǐरक दवाइयाँ बेचने के ͧलए 
मेͫडकल èटोर। 
 
वष[ 2024-25 मɅ, भारतीय रेल का कुल ͪवͪवध और गैर-ͩकराया राजè व (ͪवͪवध आय) 11,586 
करोड़ Ǿ. था जो रेलवे कȧ कुल ĤािÜतयɉ का लगभग 4.36% था।  
 
कुछ मंडलɉ ने छूटे हुए कोयले या सीमɅट कȧ ǒबĐȧ कȧ अनुमǓत देकर मालͫडÞबा-सफाई ठेके भी 
शुǾ ͩकए हɇ। 
 
1308 हेÈटेयर खालȣ जमीन (रेल पǐरचालन कȧ आवæयकताओं के ͧलए त× काल आवæयक नहȣं) 
को वाͨणिÏयक ͪवकास के ͧलए रेल भूͧम ͪवकास Ĥाͬधकरण को गैर-भाड़ा राजèव अिज[त करने 
के ͧलए सɋपा गया है । 
 
इसके अलावा, ¢ेğीय रेलɉ मɅ मांग और औͬच×य होने पर 'Ĥीͧमयम Ħांडेड कैटǐरंग आउटलेट' 
संचाͧलत करने कȧ अनुमǓत देने के ͧलए èटेशनɉ पर Ĥीͧमयम Ħांडेड कैटǐरंग आउटलेट आवंǑटत 
करने के ͧलए Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
                                 ***** 
 
911                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2358 का उƣर 
 
भारत गौरव पय[टक रेलगाͫड़यां 
 
2358. Įी केसरȣदेवͧसंह झाला: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  भारत गौरव पय[टक रेलगाड़ी "Įी जगÛनाथ याğा" के उɮदेæयɉ और गंतåयɉ का Þयौरा 
Èया है और यह पहल भारत मɅ पय[टन और सांèकृǓतक ͪवकास को बढ़ावा देने मɅ ͩकस 
Ĥकार योगदान देती है; 
(ख)  याǒğयɉ कȧ सुͪवधा और सुर¢ा के ͧलए भारत गौरव डीलÈस एसी पय[टक रेलगाड़ी मɅ 
कौन-कौन सी सुͪवधाएं हɇ; 
(ग)  भारत गौरव पय[टक रेलगाड़ी का आरàभ भारत सरकार कȧ "देखो अपना देश" पहल के 
साथ संरेͨखत है और यह रेलगाड़ी देश मɅ घरेलू पय[टन को बढ़ावा देने मɅ Èया भूͧमका 
Ǔनभाती है; 
(घ)  "Įी राम-जानकȧ याğा: अयोÚया से जनकपुर" पहल भारत और नेपाल के बीच ɮͪवप¢ीय 
संबंधɉ को ͩकस तरह बढ़ावा देती है; और 
(ङ)  भारत गौरव रेलगाड़ी के  माÚयम से "गरवी गुजरात" याğा भारत कȧ सांèकृǓतक ͪवरासत 
को बढ़ावा देने मɅ ͩकस तरह सहायक है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
 
(क) से (ङ): भारतीय रेल ने नवंबर, 2021 मɅ ‘भारत गौरव Ěेन’ नीǓत जारȣ कȧ है, िजसके तहत 
भारत और ͪवæव के å यिÈतयɉ को, भारत कȧ समृɮध सांèकृǓतक ͪवरासत और भåय ऐǓतहाͧसक 
èथलɉ को Ǒदखाने के ͧलए थीम आधाǐरत पय[टन सͩक[ट गाͫड़यɉ को चलाया जा रहा है। इस 
912                                                      

नीǓत के अनुसार, सेवा Ĥदाताओं को भारत गौरव पय[टक सͩक[ट गाͫड़यɉ के पǐरचालन के ͧलए 
थीम/ħमण काय[Đम तय करने कȧ पूरȣ èवतंğता है, िजसमɅ भारत के ͩकसी भी Ǒहèसे के पय[टन 
सͩक[ट शाͧमल हो सकते हɇ, जो बाजार कȧ मांग, वाͨणिÏयक åयवहाय[ता आǑद पर आधाǐरत होते 
हɇ। 
  
भारत गौरव टूǐरèट Ěेन, “Įी जगÛनाथ याğा” सͩक[ट मɅ जगÛनाथ पुरȣ, भुवनेæवर, कोणाक[, 
बैɮयनाथ, गया और वाराणसी शाͧमल हɇ। Ǒदनांक 30.11.2025 तक, Įी जगÛनाथ याğा सͩक[ट 
पर 24,463 पय[टकɉ कȧ सुͪवधाजनक याğा के ͧलए 40 भारत गौरव रेलगाͫड़यां पǐरचाͧलत कȧ 
गई हɇ। 
 
Įी राम जानकȧ याğा मɅ नेपाल मɅ िèथत जनकपुर सǑहत भगवान राम के जीवन से जुड़े 
तीथ[èथलɉ को शाͧमल ͩकया गया है। याğा काय[Đम मɅ अयोÚया, नंदȣĒाम, सीतामढ़ȣ, जनकपुर 
(नेपाल), वाराणसी और Ĥयागराज शाͧमल हɇ। इस पहल से जनकपुर लोकͪĤय हो गया है और 
अब यह भारतीयɉ का एक मह×वपूण[ तीथ[èथल है। यह अंतसɍबंध भारत और नेपाल कȧ साझा 
सांèकृǓतक और आÚयाि×मक धरोहर का उदाहरण है, जो दोनɉ देशɉ को एकजुट करने वाले गहन 
सßयतागत संबंधɉ को उजागर करता है। इस Ĥकार कȧ पहल से लोगɉ मɅ आपसी संपक[ बढ़ता है 
और सांèकृǓतक आदान-Ĥदान और मजबूत होता है।   
 
भारत गौरव डीलÈस वातानुकूͧलत पय[टक रेलगाड़ी मɅ याğा के दौरान आरामदायक और आधुǓनक 
याğी सुͪवधाएं हɇ, िजनमɅ डाइǓनंग कार, शॉवर È यूǒबकल, ऑनबोड[ घोषणा सुͪवधाएं, ͧमनी 
लाइĦेरȣ, ͫडिजटल लॉकर, फुट मसाजर, सीसीटȣवी कैमरा, सामाÛय ¢ेğ आǑद शाͧमल हɇ।  
 
Ǒदनांक 30.11.2025 तक, भारत गौरव Ěेन के माÚयम से "गरवी गुजरात" याğा कȧ 3 याğाएँ 
पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जा चुकȧ हɇ, िजसमɅ चंपानेर, पावागढ़, साबरमती आĮम, मोढेरा सूय[ मंǑदर, रानी 
कȧ वाव (पाटन), ɮवारकाधीश, सोमनाथ मंǑदर, नागेæवर ÏयोǓतͧलɍग जैसे ͪवͧभÛन सांèकृǓतक 
और ऐǓतहाͧसक èथलɉ और केवͫडया मɅ èटैÍयू ऑफ यूǓनटȣ तथा दांडी कुटȣर (अहमदाबाद) जैसे 
आधुǓनक शानदार è थल शाͧमल हɇ, को कवर ͩकया गया।  
  
****** 
 
913                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2359 का उƣर 
वंदे भारत रेलगाͫड़यɉ के संचालन कȧ िèथǓत 
2359. Įी एस. सेãवागनबेथी: 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) देश म Ʌ चलने वालȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ सूची Èया है; 
(ख) देश म Ʌ ͩकतने èथानɉ पर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस रेलगाͫड़यɉ का ͪवǓनमा[ण होता है; 
(ग) Èया सरकार उन सभी तकनीकȧ भǓत[यɉ मɅ èथानीय लोगɉ को आर¢ण देने पर ͪवचार 
करेगी जहां ͫडÞबɉ का ͪवǓनमा[ण हो रहा है; और 
(घ) Èया सरकार ͪवगत तीन वषȾ के दौरान दͯ¢णी रेलवे मɅ Ǔनयͧमत और संͪवदा आधार पर 
भतȸ ͩकए गए कम[चाǐरयɉ का Þयौरा Ĥदान करेगी? 
उƣर 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सू
चना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
(क) से (घ) : भारतीय रेल ने वंदे भारत सेवाएं शुǾ कȧ हɇ जो सेमी हाई èपीड रेलगाͫड़यां हɇ और 
इनका उɮदे æय याǒğयɉ को बेहतर याğा अनुभव और उÛनत संर¢ा Ĥदान करना है। ये सेवाएं 
Ǔनà नͧलͨखत उÛनत संर¢ा ͪवशेषताओं एवं आधुǓनक याğी सुͪवधाओं से सु
सिÏजत हɇ – 
 कवच Ĥणालȣ
 तीĭ ×वरण
 पूण[तया सीलबंद गɇगवे
 èवचाͧलत Üलग दरवाजे
 बेहतर सवारȣ सुͪवधा
914                                                      

 हॉट केस के Ĥावधान सǑहत ͧमनी पɅĚȣ 
 बोतल कूलर 
 डीप ĥȧज और हॉट वॉटर बॉयलर  
 ǐरÈलाइǓनंग एगȾनोͧमक सीटɅ 
 एÈजीÈयूǑटव Įेणी मɅ घूमने वालȣ सीटɉ के साथ आरामदायक बैठने कȧ åयवèथा 
 Ĥ×येक सीट के ͧलए मोबाइल चािजɍग सॉकेट 
 Ĝाइͪवंग Ěेलर कार (डीटȣसी) मɅ Ǒदåयांगजन याǒğयɉ के ͧलए ͪवशेष शौचालय 
 सीसीटȣवी, इ×याǑद 
 
वत[मान मɅ, 164 वंदे भारत रेलगाड़ी सेवाएं भारतीय रेल के बड़ी लाइन ͪवɮयुतीकृत नेटवक[ पर 
ͪवͧभÛन सेÈटरɉ मɅ पǐरचाͧलत कȧ जा रहȣ हɇ, जैसा नीचे सूची मɅ दशा[या गया है: 
 
Đम. सं. गाड़ी संÉ या और नाम 
1.  22435/22436 नई Ǒदãलȣ-वाराणसी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
2.  22439/22440 नई Ǒदãलȣ-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
3.  20901/20902 मुंबई सɅĚल-गांधीनगर कैͪपटल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
4.  22447/22448 नई Ǒदãलȣ-अंब अंदौरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
5.  20607/20608 एमजीआर चेÛनै सɅĚल-मैसूǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
6.  20825/20826 ǒबलासपुर-नागपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
7.  22301/22302 हावड़ा-Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
8.  20833/20834 ͪवशाखपƣणम-ͧसकंदराबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
9.  22223/22224 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ)-साई नगर ͧशरडी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
10.  22225/22226 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ)-सोलापुर जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
11.  20171/20172 हज़रत Ǔनज़ामुɮदȣन-रानी कमलापǓत वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
12.  20977/20978 अजमेर-चंडीगढ़ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
13.  20643/20644 चेÛनै सɅĚल-कोयंबटूर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
14.  20633/20634 कासरगोड-Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम सɅĚल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
15.  20701/20702 ͧसकंदराबाद-ǓतǽपǓत वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
16.  22895/22896 हावड़ा-पुरȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
17.  22457/22458 आनंद ͪवहार-देहरादून वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
915                                                      

18.  22227/22228 Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी-गुवाहाटȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
19.  20911/20912 इंदौर-नागपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
20.  20173/20174 रानी कमलापǓत-रȣवा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
21.  20661/20662 केएसआर बɅगलुǽ-धारवाड़ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
22.  22349/22350 पटना-रांची वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
23.  22229/22230 छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ)-मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
24.  12461/12462 जोधपुर-साबरमती वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
25.  22549/22550 गोरखपुर-Ĥयागराज वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
26.  20835/20836 राउरकेला-पुरȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
27.  20665/20666 चेÛनै एÊमोर-Ǔतǽनेलवेलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
28.  20631/20632 मंगलुǽ-Ǔतǽवनंतपुरम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
29.  20677/20678 एमजीआर चेÛनै-ͪवजयवाड़ा जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
30.  20979/20980 उदयपुर-जयपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
31.  20703/20704 काचीगुडा-यशवंतपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
32.  20897/20898 हावड़ा-रांची वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
33.  22347/22348 हावड़ा-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
34.  22487/22488 अमृतसर जंÈशन-Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
35.  20646/20645 मंगलूǽ सɅĚल-मडगांव वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
36.  20705/20706 हजूर साǑहब नांदेड़-छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज (टȣ) वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
37.  20642/20641 कोयंबटूर जंÈशन-बɅगलुǽ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
38.  22426/22425 आनंद ͪवहार (टȣ)-अयोÚया कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
39.  22415/22416 वाराणसी-नई Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
40.  22477/22478 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा-नई Ǒदãलȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
41.  22961/22962 अहमदाबाद-मुंबई सɅĚल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
42.  20707/20708 ͧसकंदराबाद-ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
43.  20663/20664 मैसूǽ-एमजीआर चेÛनै वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
44.  22345/22346 पटना-गोमतीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
45.  22233/22234 Ûयू जलपाईगुड़ी-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
916                                                      

46.  20841/20842 भुवनेæवर-ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
47.  22545/22546 लखनऊ-देहरादून वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
48.  22231/22232 कलबुरͬग-एसएमवीटȣ बɅगलुǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
49.  22470/22469 हज़रत Ǔनज़ामुɮदȣन-खजुराहो वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
50.  20887/20888 रांची-वाराणसी वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
51.  22925/22926 अहमदाबाद-ओखा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
52.  20627/20628 चेÛनै एÊमोर-नागरकोइल जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
53.  20671/20672 मदुरै-बɅगलुǽ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
54.  22489/22490 वाराणसी-मेरठ ͧसटȣ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
55.  20101/20102 नागपुर-ͧसकंदराबाद वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
56.  22499/22500 वाराणसी-देवघर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
57.  20893/20894 टाटानगर-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
58.  22303/22304 हावड़ा-गया वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
59.  21893/21894 टाटानगर-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
60.  21895/21896 टाटानगर-पटना वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
61.  20981/20982 उदयपुर ͧसटȣ-आगरा कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
62.  20891/20892 टाटानगर-Ħéमपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
63.  20871/20872 हावड़ा-राउरकेला वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
64.  20829/20830 दुग[-ͪवशाखपƣणम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
65.  20175/20176 बनारस-आगरा कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
66.  20669/20670 हुÞबिãल-पुणे जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
67.  20673/20674 कोãहापुर एससीएसएम टͧम[नस-पुणे जंÈशन वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
68.  22309/22310 हावड़ा-जमालपुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
69.  26901/26902 साबरमती-वेरावल वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
70.  26401/26402 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा-Įीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
71.  26403/26404 Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा-Įीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
72.  26501/26502 गोरखपुर-पाटͧलपुğ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
73.  26101/26102 पुणे-अजनी (नागपुर) वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
917                                                      

74.  26751/26752 बेलगावी-बɅगलुǽ वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
75.  26405/26406 अमृतसर-Įी माता वैçणो देवी कटरा वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
76.  26301/26302 जोगबनी-दानापुर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
77.  26503/26504 सहारनपुर-गोमतीनगर वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
78.  26481/26482 जोधपुर-Ǒदãलȣ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
79.  26471/26472 बीकानेर-Ǒदãलȣ कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
80.  26651/26652 बɅगलुǽ-एरणाकुलम वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
81.  26461/26462 Ǒदãलȣ-ͩफरोजपुर कɇट वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
82.  26506/26505 बनारस-खजुराहो वंदे भारत एÈसĤेस 
 
वंदे भारत रेलगाͫड़यां भारतीय रेल कȧ Ǔनàनͧलͨखत उ×पादन इकाइयɉ मɅ ͪवǓनͧम[त कȧ जाती हɇ: 
 
i. सवारȣ ͫडÞबा कारखाना, चेÛनै 
ii. रेल ͫडÞबा कारखाना, कपूरथला 
iii. आधुǓनक रेल ͫडÞबा कारखाना, रायबरेलȣ 
 
भारतीय रेल इन Ěेन सेटɉ का ͪवǓनमा[ण बीईएमएल और अÛय Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ साझेदारɉ के सहयोग 
से भी कर रहȣ है। 
 
भतȸ 
 
चूंͩक रेलवे कɅ ġȣय सरकार का एक संगठन है, अतः यह अͨखल भारतीय आधार पर भतȸ 
आयोिजत करती है। यह लोक Ǔनयोजन के मामलɉ मɅ समानता के अͬधकार के संवैधाǓनक 
उपबंधɉ के अनुǾप है। Ĥ×येक अßयथȸ, चाहे उसका ͧलंग, भाषा, जÛम èथान, ¢ेğ आǑद कुछ भी 
हो, यǑद वह पाğता के मानदंड को पूरा करता है, तो आवेदन करने के ͧलए èवतंğ है। वे सभी 
अßयथȸ, िजनमɅ èथानीय अßयथȸ भी शाͧमल हɇ, जो कɅ ġȣकृत रोजगार अͬधसूचनाओं के अंतग[त 
आवेदन करते हɇ, उÛहɅ रेलवे मɅ भतȸ के ͧलए समान अवसर Ǒदया जाता है। ͩकसी भी राÏय या 
¢ेğ के अßयͬथ[यɉ को कोई Ĥाथͧमकता नहȣं दȣ जाती और न हȣ भतȸ ͩकसी ͪवशेष राÏय या 
¢ेğ तक सीͧमत होती है। 
 
भारतीय रेल के आकार, èथाǓनक ͪवतरण और पǐरचालन मह×व को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए पदɉ का 
ǐरÈत होना और उÛहɅ भरा जाना एक सतत् ĤͩĐया है। Ǔनयͧमत पǐरचालन, Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय 
पǐरवत[नɉ, यंğीकरण और नवोÛमेषी पɮधǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता को पूरा करने के ͧलए पया[Üत 
और उपयुÈत जनशिÈत मुहैया कराई जाती है। इन ǐरिÈतयɉ को मुÉयतः पǐरचालǓनक और 
918                                                      

Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧय संबंधी आवæयकताओं के अनुसार रेलवे ɮवारा भतȸ एजेिÛसयɉ को मांग पğ भेजकर 
भरा जाता है।  
 
वाͪष[क कैलɅडर 2024 और 2025 के अनुसार ¢ेğीय रेलɉ और उ×पादन इकाइयɉ सǑहत भारतीय 
रेल मɅ 1,20,579 ǐरिÈतयɉ पर भǓत[यां शुǾ कȧ गई। 
 
सहायक लोको पायलटɉ (एएलपी), तकनीͧशयन Ēेड-1 ͧसगनल सǑहत तकनीͧशयनɉ, रेलवे सुर¢ा 
बल (रे.सु.ब.) मɅ उप-Ǔनरȣ¢क और कांèटेबल, जूǓनयर इंजीǓनयर (जेई)/ͫडपो सामĒी अधी¢क 
(डीएमएस)/रसायन एवं धातुकम[ सहायक (सीएमए), पैरामेͫडकल कोǑटयɉ, गैर-तकनीकȧ लोकͪĤय 
कोǑटयɉ (èनातक-èटेशन माèटर सǑहत), गैर-तकनीकȧ लोकͪĤय कोǑटयɉ (पूव[-èनातक), 
अनुसͬचवीय एवं पृथक कोǑटयɉ और लेवल-1 कोǑटयɉ जैसे सहायक, Ěैक मɅटेनर और पॉइंɪसमैन 
के पदɉ को भरने के ͧलए जनवरȣ से Ǒदसàबर 2024 के दौरान 92,116 ǐरिÈतयɉ के ͧलए दस 
कɅ ġȣकृत रोजगार अͬधसूचनाएं (सीईएन) अͬधसूͬचत कȧ गई थीं। 
 
59,678 पदɉ के  ͧलए Ĥथम/एकल चरण कȧ कंÜयूटर आधाǐरत परȣ¢ा (सीबीटȣ) पूरȣ कȧ जा चुकȧ 
है। इनका Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार हैः- 
 
परȣ¢ा अßयथȸ शहर भाषाएं 
सहायक लोको पायलट के पद (18,799 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु Ĥथम चरण 
सीबीटȣ  
18,40,347 156 15 
तकनीͧशयन के पद (14,298 ǐरिÈतयां तकनीͧशयन Ēेड-1 ͧसगनल 
सǑहत) हेतु सीबीटȣ  
26,99,892 139 15 
जेई/डीएमएस/सीएमए के पद (7,951 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु Ĥथम चरण 
सीबीटȣ  
11,01,266 146 15 
रे.सु.ब.- एस.आई के पद (452 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु सीबीटȣ  15,35,635 143 15 
रे.सु.ब. - कांèटेबल के पद (4208 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु सीबीटȣ  45,30,288 147 15 
पैरामेͫडकल कोǑटयɉ (1376 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु सीबीटȣ  7,08,321 143 15 
गैर-तकनीकȧ लोकͪĤय कोǑटयɉ (èनातक-èटेशन माèटर सǑहत) 
(8113 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु Ĥथम चरण सीबीटȣ  
58,41,774 141 15 
गैर-तकनीकȧ लोकͪĤय कोǑटयां (पूव[-èनातक) (3445 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु 
Ĥथम चरण सीबीटȣ 
63,27,473 157 15 
अनुसͬचवीय एवं पृथक कोǑटयɉ हेतु सीबीटȣ (1,036 ǐरिÈतयां) 4,46,013 139 15 
कुल अßयथȸ 2,50,31,009 
 
919                                                      

सहायक लोको पायलट, जेई/डीएमएस/सीएमए और गैर-तकनीकȧ लोकͪĤय कोǑटयɉ (èनातक) के 
पदɉ के ͧलए ɮͪवतीय चरण कȧ कंÜयूटर आधाǐरत परȣ¢ा (सीबीटȣ) भी पूरȣ कर लȣ गई है। 
इनका Þयौरा इस Ĥकार है:- 
 
परȣ¢ा अßयथȸ शहर भाषाएं 
सहायक लोको पायलट के  पद (18,799 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु ɮͪवतीय चरण 
सीबीटȣ  
2,66,363 112 15 
जेई/डीएमएस/सीएमए के पद (7,951 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु ɮͪवतीय चरण 
सीबीटȣ  
1,17,339 118 15 
गैर-तकनीकȧ लोकͪĤय कोǑटयां (èनातक) (8113 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु 
ɮͪवतीय चरण सीबीटȣ  
1,21,931 129 15 
कुल अßयथȸ 5,05,633 
 
सहायक लोको पायलट (एएलपी) के पद के ͧलए कंÜयूटर आधाǐरत अͧभ¢मता परȣ¢ा (सीबीएटȣ) 
भी पूरȣ कर लȣ गई है। इसका Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है:- 
 
परȣ¢ा अßयथȸ शहर भाषाएं 
सहायक लोको पायलट के  पद (18,799 ǐरिÈतयां) हेतु सीबीएटȣ 1,32,044 84 2 
 
लेवल-I कोǑटयɉ के 32,438 ǐरिÈतयɉ हेतु Ĥथम चरण सीबीटȣ Ǒदनांक 27.11.2025 से 15 
भाषाओं मɅ 140 शहरɉ मɅ शुǾ कȧ गई है। कांèटेबल (रे.सु.ब.) के 4,208 पदɉ के ͧलए शारȣǐरक 
द¢ता परȣ¢ा (पीईटȣ) Ǒदनांक 06.12.2025 को पूरȣ कर लȣ गई है। 
 
23,000 से अͬधक उàमीदवारɉ के ͧलए पैनल, िजसमɅ तकनीͧशयन, जूǓनयर इंजीǓनयर, पैरा 
मेͫडकल कोǑटयɉ, उप-Ǔनरȣ¢क (आरपीएफ) और सहायक लोको पायलट के पद शाͧमल हɇ, को 
अंǓतम Ǿप Ǒदया गया है। इनमɅ से अͬधकांश संर¢ा कोǑटयɉ कȧ हɇ। 
 
इसके अǓतǐरÈत, वष[ 2025 के वाͪष[क कैलɅडर के अनुसार, 28,463 ǐरिÈतयɉ के ͧलए सात 
कɅ ġȣकृत रोजगार अͬधसूचनाएँ भी जारȣ कȧ गई हɇ। इनका Þयौरा Ǔनàनानुसार है:-  
 
Đ.सं. कɅ ġȣकृत रोजगार 
अͬधसूचना संÉया 
पद का नाम अͬधसूͬचत कȧ गई 
ǐरिÈतयɉ कȧ संÉया 
अͬधसूचना जारȣ 
करने का माह 
1 01/2025 सहायक लोको पायलट 9,970 माच[ 2025 
2 02/2025 तकनीͧशयन (तकनीͧशयन 
Ēेड-1 ͧसगनल सǑहत) 
6,238 जून 2025 
3 03/2025 पैरा मेͫडकल कोǑट 434 जुलाई 2025 
4 04/2025 सेÈशन कंĚोलर 368 अगèत 2025 
920                                                      

5 05/2025 जूǓनयर इंजी Ǔनयर/ͫडपो 
सामĒी अधी¢क 
2,585 अÈटूबर 2025 
6 06/2025 गैर-तकनीकȧ लोक ͪĤय 
कोǑटयां (èनातक-èटेशन 
माèटर सǑहत) 
5,810 अÈटूबर 2025 
7 07/2025 गैर-तकनीकȧ लोक ͪĤय 
कोǑटयां (पूव[-èनातक) 
 
3,058 अÈटूबर 2025 
 
रेलवे भतȸ बोड[ कȧ परȣ¢ाएं काफȧ तकनीकȧ ĤकृǓत कȧ होती हɇ, िजनमɅ बड़े पैमाने पर कͧम[यɉ 
और संसाधनɉ को जुटाने तथा जनशिÈत के Ĥͧश¢ण कȧ आवæयकता होती है। रेलवे ने इन सभी 
चुनौǓतयɉ का सामना ͩकया और सभी Ǔनधा[ǐरत ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ का पालन करते हुए पारदशȸ तरȣके 
से भतȸ का सफलतापूव[क संचालन ͩकया। पूरȣ ĤͩĐया के दौरान पेपर लȣक होने या इसी तरह के 
कदाचार कȧ कोई घटना सामने नहȣं आई है। 
 
वष[ 2004-2005 से 2013-14 कȧ तुलना मɅ 2014-2015 से 2024-2025 के दौरान भारतीय 
रेल मɅ कȧ गई भǓत[यɉ का ͪववरण Ǔनàनानुसार Ǒदया गया है:- 
 
अवͬध भǓत[यां 
2004-2005 से 2013-2014 तक 4.11 लाख 
2014-2015 से 2024-2025 तक 5.08 लाख 
 
इसके अलावा, Ĥणालȣगत सुधार के तौर पर, रेल मंğालय ने समूह ‘ग’ पदɉ कȧ ͪवͧभÛन कोǑटयɉ 
मɅ भतȸ के ͧलए वष[ 2024 से वाͪष[क कैलɅडर Ĥकाͧशत करने कȧ एक Ĥणालȣ शुǾ कȧ है। वाͪष[क 
कैलɅडर शुǾ होने से अßयथȸ Ǔनàनानुसार लाभािÛवत हो रहे हɇ: 
 
• अßयͬथ[यɉ के ͧलए अͬधक अवसर; 
• ĤǓत वष[ योÊयता ĤाÜत करने वालɉ को अवसर; 
• परȣ¢ाओं कȧ Ǔनिæचतता; 
• भतȸ ĤͩĐया, Ĥͧश¢ण और ǓनयुिÈतयɉ मɅ तेज़ी। 
 
काय[ कȧ ता×काͧलकता के दौरान, Ǔनयͧमत पदाͬधकाǐरयɉ के काय[भार Ēहण करने तक 
कामचलाऊ åयवèथा के Ǿप मɅ संͪवदा×मक ǓनयुिÈत कȧ जाती है। ऐसी संͪवदा×मक ǓनयुिÈत 
पूरȣ तरह अèथायी और समय-सीͧमत होती है, और इसे केवल सुचाǾ रेल पǐरचालन को 
सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए ͩकया जाता है, जब तक ͩक पदɉ को मौजूदा Ǔनयमɉ और ĤͩĐयाओं के 
अनुसार Ǔनयͧमत चयन के माÚयम से भरा नहȣं जाता। 
***** 
921                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2360 का उƣर 
 
भारतीय रेलवे मɅ भोजन कȧ गुणवƣा से संबंͬधत ͧशकायतɅ 
 
2360. Įीमती सागǐरका घोष: 
Įीमती मौसम बी नूर: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  वष[ 2024-25 मɅ खाɮय गुणवƣा संबंधी ͩकतनी ͧशकायतɅ ĤाÜत हुई हɇ; 
(ख)  वष[ 2021-22 से 2024-25 तक ĤाÜत ऐसी ͧशकायतɉ कȧ जोन-वार संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(ग)  जुमा[ना लगाए जाने या अनुबंध समाÜत ͩकए जाने के मामलɉ कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी है और 
एकǒğत जुमा[ने कȧ कुल राͧश (Ǿ मɅ) ͩकतनी है; 
(घ)  Èया ऐसे ͪवĐेताओं के अनुबंधɉ का बाद मɅ नवीनीकरण ͩकया गया, यǑद हां, तो 
त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ङ)  इसी अवͬध मɅ याǒğयɉ को जारȣ ͩकए गए धनवापसी और Ǒदए गए मुआवजे कȧ कुल 
राͧश (Ǿ मɅ) ͩकतनी है; और 
(च)  ͧशकायतɉ कȧ संÉया के आधार पर शीष[ ͪवĐेताओं का Þयौरा Èया है और Ĥ×येक मामले 
मɅ Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
 
(क) से (च): रेलवे Ĥ×येक वष[ औसतन लगभग 58 करोड़ भोजन परोसता है। औसतन केवल 
0.0008% ͧशकायतɅ हȣ ĤाÜत होती हɇ। इन ͧशकायतɉ कȧ जांच के आधार पर, ͪपछले चार वषɟ 
के दौरान 2.8 करोड़ ǽपए का जुमा[ना लगाया गया है।  
 
भारतीय रेल याǒğयɉ को अÍछȤ गुणवƣा और साफ़-सुथरा भोजन Ĥदान करने के ͧलए 
Ǔनरंतर Ĥयासरत है। तɮनुसार, भारतीय रेल ɮवारा समय-समय पर याǒğयɉ के खाɮय और 
सेवाओं कȧ गुणवƣा को बेहतर बनाने के ͧलए आवæयक कदम उठाए जाते हɇ। गुणवƣा, साफ़-
922                                                      

सफ़ाई और खाɮय पदाथ[ कȧ संर¢ा को बेहतर बनाने के ͧलए Ǔनàनͧलͨखत उपाय ͩकए गए 
हɇ:- 
 ǓनǑद[çट बेस ͩकचन से भोजन कȧ आपूǓत[। 
 ͬचिéनत èथानɉ पर आधुǓनक बेस ͩकचन कȧ शुǽआत। 
 भोजन तैयार करने कȧ बेहतर Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए बेस ͩकचन मɅ सीसीटȣवी कैमरे 
संèथाͪपत करना। 
 भोजन तैयार करने के ͧलए खाना पकाने का तेल, आटा, चावल, दालɅ, मसाले, पनीर, 
डेयरȣ उ×पाद आǑद जैसे लोकͪĤय और Ħांडेड कÍचे माल का चयन और उपयोग करना। 
 खाɮय संर¢ा और èवÍछता कायɟ कȧ Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए बेस ͩकचन मɅ खाɮय संर¢ा 
पय[वे¢कɉ कȧ तैनाती। 
 गाͫड़यɉ मɅ ऑन-बोड[ आईआरसीटȣसी पय[वे¢कɉ कȧ तैनाती। 
 खाɮय पैके टɉ पर Èयूआर कोड कȧ शुǾआत करना, िजससे रसोई का नाम, पैकेिजंग कȧ 
Ǔतͬथ आǑद जैसे ͪववरण Ĥदͧश[त हɉ। 
 बेस ͩकचन और रसोई यान मɅ Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से गहन सफाई और आवͬधक Ǿप से 
कȧट Ǔनयंğण। 
 खाɮय संर¢ा मानकɉ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए Ĥ×येक खानपान इकाई के 
नाͧमत खाɮय संर¢ा अͬधकाǐरयɉ से भारतीय खाɮय संर¢ा और मानक Ĥाͬधकरण 
(एफएसएसएआई) का Ĥमाणन अǓनवाय[ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 गाͫड़यɉ मɅ भोजन कȧ गुणवƣा सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए Ǔनरȣ¢ण और Ǔनगरानी ĤͩĐया 
के एक भाग के Ǿप मɅ Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से खाɮय नमूना ĤाÜत करना। 
 रसोई यानɉ और बेस ͩकचन मɅ भोजन कȧ èवÍछता और गुणवƣा कȧ जांच के ͧलए 
तृतीय प¢ लेखापरȣ¢ा कȧ जाती है। Ēाहक संतुिçट सवȶ¢ण भी ͩकया जाता है। 
 खाɮय सुर¢ा अͬधकाǐरयɉ सǑहत रेलवे/इंͫडयन रेलवे कैटǐरंग एंड टूǐरÏम कॉरपोरेशन के 
अͬधकाǐरयɉ ɮवारा Ǔनयͧमत और औचक Ǔनरȣ¢ण। 
 Ēाहक सेवा ¢ेğɉ जैसे संवाद, ͪवनĨ åयवहार, सेवा मानक, पस[नल Ēूͧमंग और 
èवÍछता पर जोर देकर खानपान कम[चाǐरयɉ के कौशल ͪवकास हेतु इंͫडयन रेलवे 
कैटǐरंग एंड टूǐरÏम कॉरपोरेशन ɮवारा Ǔनयͧमत Ĥͧश¢ण आयोिजत ͩकया जाता है। 
 
याğी फȧडबैक ĤाÜत करने के ͧलए, ͪपछले कुछ वषɡ मɅ रेलमदद पोट[ल शुǾ करके भारतीय 
रेल मɅ ͧशकायत Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ को मजबूत, सरल और अ×यͬधक सुलभ बनाया गया है। 
रेलमदद पोट[ल कȧ शुǽआत के साथ, भारतीय रेल ने याǒğयɉ को ͧशकायतɉ और सुझावɉ को 
दज[ करने के ͧलए एकल ͨखड़कȧ Ĥणालȣ कȧ सुͪवधा Ĥदान कȧ है। 
 
यǑद ͩकसी याğी ɮवारा गाड़ी मɅ भोजन कȧ गुणवƣा संबंधी कोई ͧशकायत कȧ जाती है, तो 
सेवा Ĥदाताओं के ͨखलाफ सेवा मɅ कमी के ͧलए ×वǐरत और उͬचत दंडा×मक कार[वाई कȧ 
जाती है। 
***** 
923                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2361 का उƣर 
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर Ĥधानमंğी जन औषͬध कɅ ġ 
 
2361. Įी अमर पाल मौय[: 
 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
 
(क)  Èया सरकार ने रेल याǒğयɉ और रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर आने वालȣ आम जनता के èवाèØय, कãयाण 
और ͩकफायती दवाओं और उपभोÈता वèतुओं कȧ उपलÞधता सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए कोई 
कदम उठाए हɇ; 
(ख)  Èया सरकार ने Ĥधानमंğी भारतीय जनऔषͬध कɅ ġ (पीएमबीजेके) योजना का ͪवèतार करने के 
ͧलए कोई पहल कȧ है ताͩक अͬधक से अͬधक याǒğयɉ और आम जनता तक इसका लाभ 
पहुंचाया जा सके 
(ग)  यǑद हां, तो पीएमबीजेके कɅ ġɉ का राÏय-वार Þयौरा कया है; 
(घ)  Èया पीएमबीजेके कɅ ġɉ के ͧलए अनुबंधɉ के आवंटन हेतु कोई Ûयूनतम आरͯ¢त मूãय Ǔनधा[ǐरत 
ͩकया गया है; और 
(ङ)  Èया इन कɅ ġɉ के संचालन के ͧलए कोई लाइसɅस शुãक ͧलया जाता है? 
 
उƣर 
 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सूचना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव)  
 
(क) से (ङ): माननीय सवȾÍच Ûयायालय ɮवारा रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर और रेलगाͫड़यɉ मɅ ͬचͩक×सा सुͪवधाएँ 
मुहैया कराने कȧ आवæयकता और इन सुͪवधाओं के Ǔनधा[रण के संबंध मɅ जाँच कȧ गई थी। इन आदेशɉ 
के अनुपालन मɅ, अͨखल भारतीय आयुͪव[£ान संèथान (एàस), नई Ǒदãलȣ मɅ ͪवशेष£ɉ कȧ एक सͧमǓत 
गǑठत कȧ गई। ͪवशेष£ɉ कȧ सͧमǓत कȧ अनुशंसा के अनुसार, सभी रेलवे èटेशनɉ और याğी गाͫड़यɉ मɅ 
जीवन र¢क दवाओं, उपकरणɉ, ऑÈसीजन ͧसलɅडर आǑद से युÈत एक मेͫडकल बॉÈस मुहैया कराने के 
अनुदेश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर मã टȣ परपज़ èटाãस (एमपीएस) के माÚयम से ओवर Ǒद काऊ ं टर दवाइयाँ और 
सूखा/èĤे दूध पाउडर आǑद जैसी गैर-फामȶसी वèतुएँ याǒğयɉ को उपलÞध कराई जाती हɇ। 
 
याǒğयɉ के èवाèØय और कãयाण को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए रेलवे èटेशनɉ के पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ और 
कॉनकोस[ मɅ Ĥधानमंğी भारतीय जन औषͬध कɅ ġ èथाͪपत करने के ͧलए Ǔनदȶश भी जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
वत[मान मɅ, पूरे भारतीय रेल मɅ 117 Ĥधानमंğी भारतीय जन औषͬध कɅ ġ ͩĐयािÛवत हɇ। पीएमबीजेके 
èथाͪपत करने के ͧलए आरͯ¢त मूãय शूÛय है। इसे èथाͪपत करने के ͧलए केवल ĤǓतभूǓत जमा 
अपेͯ¢त है।    
     Ĥधानमंğी भारतीय जन औषͬध कɅ ġ को संचाͧलत करने का लाइसɅस ई-नीलामी के माÚयम से Ǒदया 
जाता है, और सबसे अͬधक बोलȣ लगाने वाले ɮवारा उɮधृत कȧ गई राͧश पर Ĥधानमंğी भारतीय जन 
औषͬध कɅ ġ संचालन के ͧलए लाइसɅस फȧस के Ǿप मɅ वसूला जाती है। 
***** 
924                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2362 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर के अंतग[त ĤाÜत उपलिÞधयाँ 
2362.   डा. के. लêमण: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास  मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर के अंतग[त ĤाÜत उपलिÞधयाँ Èया हɇ, और जीणȾɮधार, पुनèथा[ͪपत या 
नवǓनͧम[त जल Ǔनकायɉ कȧ कुल राÏय-वार संÉया ͩकतनी-ͩकतनी है; 
(ख) इस ͧमशन ने भूजल पुनभ[रण, ͧसंचाई ¢मता मɅ सुधार और Ēामीण समुदायɉ के ͧलए जल कȧ 
उपलÞधता बढ़ाने मɅ ͩकस हद तक योगदान Ǒदया है; 
(ग) सामुदाǓयक भागीदारȣ, मनरेगा और अÛय योजनाओं के साथ समÛवय और पंचायती राज 
संèथाओं कȧ भूͧमका का Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(घ) Èया मंğालय ने जलवायु रोध¢मता और दȣघ[काͧलक Ēामीण जल सुर¢ा पर ͧमशन के  Ĥभाव 
का आकलन करने के ͧलए कोई मूãयांकन ͩकया है? 
  
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क): ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर के चरण-I के तहत Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 तक Ǔनͧम[त/पुनǽɮधार ͩकए गए 
अमृत सरोवरɉ कȧ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार संÉया अनुबंध मɅ दȣ गई है। 
(ख) और (घ):   ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर ने भूजल पुनभ[रण, ͧसंचाई ¢मता मɅ सुधार और Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ 
मɅ पानी कȧ उपलÞधता बढ़ाने मɅ मह×वपूण[ योगदान Ǒदया है। ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर के Ǔनàनͧलͨखत 
दो Ĥभाव मूãयांकन अÚययन आयोिजत ͩकए गए हɇ: 
1. आईआईटȣ-Ǒदãलȣ ɮवारा ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर के चरण-I के ͧलए ͩकए गए Ĥभाव मूãयांकन 
मɅ यह बताया गया है ͩक देश भर मɅ जल Ǔनकायɉ के सतहȣ ¢ेğ मɅ 16.3% कȧ वृɮͬध हुई है 
और सूखे जल Ǔनकायɉ मɅ 42% कȧ कमी आई है, जो जल संर¢ण और जलवायु पǐरवत[न के  
Ĥभावɉ को कम करने मɅ इस ͧमशन कȧ मह×वपूण[ भूͧमका को रेखांͩकत करता है। 
2. इसके  अǓतǐरÈत, जीआईजेड इंͫडया के अÚययन मɅ बताया गया है ͩक ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर 
के कारण भूजल èतर, कृͪष, जैव ͪवͪवधता और आजीͪवका मɅ मह×वपूण[ सुधार हुए हɇ। 
925                                                      

 
 (ग):  जन भागीदारȣ को इस पूरȣ पहल कȧ कुंजी माना गया है िजसका उɮदेæय समुदाय कȧ 
सामूǑहक भावना को जागृत करना है। ͧमशन के काया[Ûवयन के सभी èतरɉ पर लोगɉ ने Ǒहèसा 
ͧलया है, िजसमɅ आधारͧशला रखने के समारोह, èमृǓत वृ¢ारोपण और गणतंğ Ǒदवस तथा èवतंğता 
Ǒदवस पर Úवजारोहण शाͧमल है। इन काय[Đमɉ का नेतृ×व समुदाय के ĤǓतिçठत सदèयɉ ɮवारा 
ͩकया गया, जैसे ͩक कोई èवतंğता सेनानी, èवतंğता के बाद के  ͩकसी शहȣद के पǐरवार का सदèय, 
या कोई èथानीय पɮम पुरèकार ͪवजेता। यǑद ऐसे åयिÈत उपलÞध न हɉ, तो èथानीय Ēाम पंचायत 
के सबसे वǐरçठ नागǐरक ɮवारा यह काय[ संपÛन कराया गया। इसके अलावा, समुदाय के सदèयɉ को 
Ǔनमा[ण सामĒी और बɅच दान करने या Įमदान (èवैिÍछक Įम) के माÚयम से भाग लेने के ͧलए 
Ĥो×साǑहत ͩकया जाता है। 
अमृत सरोवर èथलɉ को एकता और अपन×व कȧ भावना को बढ़ावा देने के ͧलए जीवंत सामुदाǓयक 
कɅġɉ के Ǿप मɅ ͪवकͧसत ͩकया जाना है। इन èथलɉ को राçĚȣय ×योहारɉ, èवÍछता रैͧलयɉ और जल 
शपथ (जल संर¢ण ĤǓत£ा), èकूल काय[Đम, धाͧम[क समारोह, सुबह कȧ सैर, योग सğ, èकूल खेल 
और अÛय मनोरंजक गǓतͪवͬधयɉ सǑहत ͪवͧभÛन गǓतͪवͬधयɉ के ͧलए कɅ ġ ǒबंदु के Ǿप मɅ काम 
करना चाǑहए। इन ͪवͪवध गǓतͪवͬधयɉ कȧ मेजबानी करके, अमृत सरोवर सामुदाǓयक जुड़ाव को 
बढ़ाएंगे और एक मजबूत, परèपर संबɮध समुदाय को बढ़ावा दɅगे। 
  
ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर को समĒ सरकारȣ ͸िçटकोण के माÚयम से काया[िÛवत ͩकया जाता है। िजसमɅ 
कई मंğालय/ͪवभाग और संगठन ͧमशन के उɮदेæयɉ को ĤाÜत करने के ͧलए समÛवय मɅ काम करते 
हɇ। ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर के तहत अमृत सरोवर के Ǔनमा[ण/कायाकãप के ͧलए संसाधन महा×मा 
गांधी नरेगा योजना, 15वɅ ͪवƣ आयोग अनुदान (सशत[ और ǒबना शत[ दोनɉ), Ĥधानमंğी कृͪष ͧसंचाई 
योजना के वाटरशेड ͪवकास घटक (पीएमक े एसवाई-डÞãयूडीसी), Ĥधानमंğी कृͪष ͧसंचाई योजना - हर 
खेत को पानी-मरàमत, नवीनीकरण और पुनǓन[मा[ण (पीएमके एसवाई-एचके के पीआरआरआर) से 
उपलÞध हɇ या राÏय/कɅ ġ सरकार से इसी तरह कȧ योजनाओं या तो åयिÈतगत Ǿप से या संयोजन 
मɅ, इस उɮदेæय के ͧलए उपयोग ͩकया जा सकता है। काय[ के ͧलए साव[जǓनक योगदान 
(Đाउडफंͫडंग/सीएसआर) कȧ भी अनुमǓत है। 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
926                                                      

 
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2362 
 के भाग (क) के  उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध 
ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर चरण-I के तहत 15.12.2025 तक Ǔनͧम[त/पुनरǓनͧम[त अमृत सरोवरɉ कȧ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ - वार 
संÉया  
Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ Ǔनͧम[त/पुनǽɮधाǐरत अमृत सरोवर 
1 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 227 
2 आंĢ Ĥदेश 2154 
3 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 778 
4 असम 2963 
5 ǒबहार 2613 
6 छƣीसगढ 2902 
7 गोवा 159 
8 गुजरात 2652 
9 हǐरयाणा 2087 
10 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 1690 
11 जàमू और कæमीर 1056 
12 झारखंड 2047 
13 कना[टक 4054 
14 केरल 865 
15 लɮदाख 100 
16 मÚय Ĥदेश 5825 
17 महाराçĚ 3055 
18 मͨणपुर 1226 
19 मेघालय 705 
20 ͧमजोरम 1029 
21 नागालɇड 255 
22 ओͫडशा 2367 
23 पुदुचेरȣ 156 
24 पंजाब 1453 
25 राजèथान 3139 
26 ͧसिÈकम 199 
27 तͧमलनाडु 2484 
28 तेलंगाना 1871 
29 दादरा नगर और हवेलȣ, दमन और दȣव 57 
30 ǒğपुरा 682 
31 उƣराखंड 1319 
32 उƣर Ĥदेश 16632 
33 पिæचम बंगाल 26 
  कुल 68,827 
İोत-ͧमशन अमृत सरोवर पोट[ल 
 
927                                                      

  
भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
  
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2363 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)   
  
मनरेगा के अंतग[त सृिजत रोजगार 
2363.  Įी सी .वी .षनमुगम: 
  
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
  
(क)  महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (मनरेगा) के अंतग[त देश मɅ ͪवगत पांच 
वषɟ मɅ से Ĥ×येक वष[ के दौरान कुल ͩकतने åयिÈत-Ǒदवस रोजगार का सृजन हुआ है; 
  
(ख) Èया मनरेगा के काया[Ûवयन मɅ ħçटाचार को रोकने के ͧलए ͫडिजटल Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ 
काया[िÛवत कȧ गई है; 
  
(ग)  यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और 
  
(घ) सरकार ɮवारा मजदूरȣ दर संशोधन, काय[Ǒदवस मɅ वृɮͬध या कौशल-आधाǐरत रोजगार सǑहत 
मनरेगा मɅ सुधार के ͧलए Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
  
उƣर 
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क): महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) के  
अंतग[त ͪपछले पाँच ͪवƣीय वषɟ के दौरान सृिजत Įम-Ǒदवसɉ का वष[-वार ͪववरण नीचे Ǒदया गया 
है:  
Đ. सं. सृिजत Įम Ǒदवस (करोड़ मɅ) 
1 2020-21 388.67 
2 2021-22 363.09 
3 2022-23 295.51 
4 2023-24 312.16 
5 2024-25 290.60 
(नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार) 
  
 
 
928                                                      

(ख) और (ग): महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना का काया[Ûवयन एक समĒ एकȧकृत लेन-देन-आधाǐरत 
Ĥबंधन सूचना Ĥणालȣ (एमआईएस) Üलेटफॉम[ नरेगासॉÝट के माÚयम से ͩकया जाता है। इसके  
अंतग[त योजना कȧ Ǔनमा[ण ĤͩĐया, ĤशासǓनक एवं तकनीकȧ अनुमोदन, जॉब काड[ जारȣ करना, मांग 
कȧ मंजूरȣ, मèटर रोल जारȣ करना, काय[ का मापन, भुगतान का अनुमोदन तथा अंततः Ĥ×य¢ लाभ 
अंतरण (डीबीटȣ)–साव[जǓनक ͪवƣीय Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (पीएफएमएस) Üलेटफॉम[ के माÚयम से लाभाथȸ 
को भुगतान तक के समèत पहलुओं कȧ Ǔनगरानी कȧ जाती है। 
  
 पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ इस योजना का मुÉय कɅ ġ ǒबंदु है। Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय ने 
राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ मɅ योजना के काया[Ûवयन मɅ पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ सुǓनिæचत करने के 
ͧलए मजबूत ĤͩĐया अपनाई है। योजना के तहत जारȣ Ǔनͬधयɉ के  उͬचत उपयोग को सुǓनिæचत 
करने के ͧलए ͩकए गए तकनीकȧ काय[कलापɉ सǑहत ͪवͧभÛन Ǔनगरानी और मूãयांकन åयवèथाओं 
पर एक संͯ¢Üत नोट अनुबंध मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
  
(घ):      महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा), 2005 कȧ 
धारा 6 (1) के अनुसार, कɅ ġ सरकार अͬधसूचना ɮवारा अपने लाभाͬथ[यɉ के ͧलए अकुशल काय[ के  
ͧलए मजदूरȣ दर ǓनǑद[çट कर सकती है। तदनुसार, Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ के 
ͧलए Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ के ͧलए महा×मा गांधी नरेगा मजदूरȣ दर अͬधसूͬचत करता है। महंगाई से 
Ǔनपटने के ͧलए महा×मा गांधी नरेगा Įͧमकɉ को ĤǓतपूǓत[ Ĥदान करने के ͧलए, Ēामीण ͪवकास 
मंğालय कृͪष Įम के  ͧलए उपभोÈता मूãय सूचकांक (सीपीआई-एएल) मɅ पǐरवत[न के आधार पर हर 
साल मजदूरȣ दर मɅ संशोधन करता है। मजदूरȣ दर Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ के 1 अĤैल से लागू कȧ जाती 
है। 
मजदूरȣ दर गणना कȧ वत[मान पɮधǓत का उपयोग करते हुए, कɅ ġ सरकार ने मजदूरȣ दर को 
अͬधसूͬचत ͩकया है और यह ͪपछले वष[ कȧ तुलना मɅ लगभग 5% (औसत) और ͪपछले 5 वषɟ मɅ 
लगभग 29% (औसत) बढ़ गई है। हालांͩक, राÏय सरकारɅ अपने İोतɉ से कɅġ सरकार ɮवारा 
अͬधसूͬचत मजदूरȣ दर से अͬधक मजदूरȣ Ĥदान कर सकती हɇ। 
  
काय[ Ǒदवसɉ को बढ़ाने के संदभ[ मɅ Ǔनवेदन है ͩक महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार 
गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा), 2005 देश के Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ पǐरवारɉ कȧ आजीͪवका सुर¢ा 
को सु͸ढ़ करने के उɮदेæय से बनाया गया एक अͬधǓनयम है, िजसके अंतग[त Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ मɅ 
उन सभी पǐरवारɉ को, िजनक े  वयèक सदèय अकुशल Įम करने के ͧलए èवेÍछा से आगे आते हɇ, 
को कम से कम एक सौ Ǒदनɉ का सुǓनिæचत मजदूरȣ रोजगार Ĥदान ͩकए जाने का Ĥावधान है।        
मंğालय ɮवारा यह अǓनवाय[ ͩकया गया है ͩक वन ¢ेğɉ मɅ Ǔनवासरत Ĥ×येक अनुसूͬचत 
जनजाǓत पǐरवार को, (Ǔनधा[ǐरत 100 Ǒदनɉ से अǓतǐरÈत) 50 Ǒदनɉ का अǓतǐरÈत मजदूरȣ रोजगार 
Ĥदान ͩकया जाए, बशतȶ ͩक ऐसे पǐरवारɉ के पास वन अͬधकार अͬधǓनयम (एफआरए), 2006 के 
अंतग[त Ĥदƣ भूͧम अͬधकारɉ के अǓतǐरÈत कोई अÛय Ǔनजी संपͪƣ न हो। 
  
 
929                                                      

इसके  अǓतǐरÈत, सूखा/ĤाकृǓतक आपदा से Ĥभाͪवत अͬधसूͬचत Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ एक ͪवƣीय 
वष[ के दौरान अͬधकतम 50 Ǒदनɉ का अǓतǐरÈत मजदूरȣ रोजगार Ĥदान ͩकए जाने का भी Ĥावधान 
है। साथ हȣ, अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 3(4) के अनुसार, राÏय सरकारɅ अͬधǓनयम के अंतग[त सुǓनिæचत 
अवͬध से परे अǓतǐरÈत रोजगार Ǒदवस Ĥदान करने हेतु अपने èवयं के संसाधनɉ से Ĥावधान कर 
सकती हɇ। 
  
 कौशल-आधाǐरत रोजगार के संदभ[ मɅ उãलेखनीय है ͩक “उÛनǓत” पǐरयोजना का उɮदेæय 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के Įͧमकɉ के कौशल आधार का उÛनयन करना है, ताͩक उनकȧ 
आजीͪवका मɅ सुधार हो सके और वे वत[मान आंͧशक रोजगार कȧ िèथǓत से पूण[ रोजगार कȧ ओर 
अĒसर हो सकɅ। यह पǐरयोजना ͪवƣीय वष[ 2019-20 मɅ Ĥारंभ कȧ गई थी तथा इसका उɮदेæय पाँच 
वषɟ मɅ, अथा[त माच[ 2025 तक, 2 लाख महा×मा गांधी नरेगा लाभाͬथ[यɉ के कौशल का उÛनयन करना 
था। अब तक इस पǐरयोजना के अंतग[त 31 माच[ 2025  कुल 90,894 अßयͬथ[यɉ कȧ उपलिÞध दज[ कȧ 
गई है। उÈत पǐरयोजना को आगे 01 वष[ अथा[त 31 माच[ 2026 तक कȧ अǓतǐरÈत अवͬध के ͧलए 
ͪवèताǐरत ͩकया गया है।  
  
  
930                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2363 
के भाग (ख) एवं (ग) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध  
i. Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ): महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार योजना (महा×मा गांधी 
नरेगा योजना) के तहत मजदूरȣ भुगतान मɅ Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ) Ĥणालȣ को 
अपनाया गया है। महा×मा गांधी नरेगा Įͧमकɉ के बɇक/डाकघर खातɉ को मजदूरȣ का भुगतान 
राçĚȣय इलेÈĚॉǓनक फंड Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (एनईएफएमएस)/इलेÈĚॉǓनक फंड Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ 
(ईएफएमएस) के माÚयम से ͩकया जाता है। 
ii. राçĚȣय मोबाइल Ǔनगरानी सेवा (एनएमएमएस): यह महा×मा गांधी नरेगा काय[èथलɉ 
(åयिÈतगत लाभाथȸ कायɟ को छोड़कर) मɅ Įͧमकɉ कȧ उपिèथǓत को Ǒदन मɅ दो बार भू-
संदͧभ[त तèवीरɉ के साथ कैÜचर करने मɅ स¢म बनाता है। यह ऐप काय[Đम के नागǐरक 
Ǔनरȣ¢ण को बढ़ाने मɅ सहायता करता है। यह पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ कȧ Ǒदशा मɅ एक 
और कदम है। 
iii. एǐरया ऑͩफसर मॉǓनटǐरंग ͪविजट एिÜलकेशन: यह ऐप राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ के अͬधकाǐरयɉ 
को अपने ¢ेğ दौरा Ǔनçकषɟ को ऑनलाइन ǐरकॉड[ करने कȧ सुͪवधा Ĥदान करता है। यह ऐप 
अͬधकाǐरयɉ को Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग ɮवारा शुǾ कȧ गई सभी योजनाओं के ͧलए समय-
मुǑġत और भू-संदͧभ[त  तèवीरɅ ǐरकॉड[ करने कȧ भी अनुमǓत देता है। इसके अलावा, यह ऐप 
¢ेğ के दौरɉ कȧ सरल ǐरपोǑटɍग ͪवकͧसत करने मɅ मदद करता है। यह ऐप ¢ेğ दौरा Ǔनçकषɟ 
को ǐरकॉड[ करता है और वǐरçठ अͬधकाǐरयɉ ɮवारा ¢ेğ दौरा Ǔनçकष[ ǐरपोट[ को देखने मɅ 
सहायता Ĥदान करता है। 
iv. जीआईएस आधाǐरत योजना- अंतǐर¢ Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ का उपयोग: देश के सभी जीपीएस के ͧलए 
संतृिÜत मोड मɅ ǐरमोट सɅͧसंग तकनीक का उपयोग करके जीआईएस आधाǐरत Ēाम पंचायत 
èतरȣय योजना (ǐरज टू वैलȣ पहुंच) तैयार करना। 
v. युÈतधारा: जीआईएस आधाǐरत योजना उपकरण - महा×मा गांधी नरेगा "युÈतधारा" के तहत 
Ēाम पंचायत èतर पर जीआईएस आधाǐरत योजना को सरल बनाने के ͧलए इसरो-
एनआरएससी के सहयोग से एक भू-èथाǓनक योजना पोट[ल ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। 
vi. सेÈयोर - रोजगार के ͧलए Ēामीण दरɉ का उपयोग करने हेतु अनुमान गणना के ͧलए 
सॉÝटवेयर: - योजना के तहत ͩकए जाने वाले कायɟ कȧ लागत का अनुमान लगाने के ͧलए 
इस ऐिÜलकेशन का उपयोग ͩकया जा रहा है। 
vii. िजयोनरेगा: इस ऐप को पǐरसंपͪƣ Ǔनमा[ण के "पहले", "दौरान" और "बाद" के चरणɉ मɅ 
िजयोटैͬगंग करके पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के Ǔनमा[ण को Ěैक करने के ͧलए अंतǐर¢ Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ का 
उपयोग करके ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। 
viii. जलदूत ऐप: देश भर मɅ भूजल èतर कȧ Ǔनगरानी को स¢म करने के ͧलए जलदूत ऐप 
ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। जलदूत ऐप Ēाम रोजगार सहायक (जीआरएस) को वष[ मɅ दो बार 
(मानसून पूव[ और मानसून पæचात) चयǓनत कुओं के जल èतर को मापने मɅ स¢म बनाता 
है। 
ix. जनमनरेगा ऐप: यह ऐप महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के काया[Ûवयन के संदभ[ मɅ नागǐरकɉ 
को जानकारȣ के सͩĐय Ĥकटȣकरण मɅ मदद करता है। नागǐरक जागǾकता योजना के  
कुशल, Ĥभावी और पारदशȸ Ǔनçपादन कȧ कुंजी है।  
931                                                      

x. लोकपाल ऐप - एक लोकपाल ऐप ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है ताͩक ͪवͧभÛन İोतɉ जैसे भौǓतक, 
ͫडिजटल और मास मीͫडया से ĤाÜत ͧशकायतɉ कȧ सूचाǾ ǐरपोǑटɍग और वगȸकरण, Ĥ×येक 
मामले पर ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुसार सरल Ěैͩकंग Ǔनण[य समय पर पाǐरत करना और     
 वेबसाइट पर ğैमाͧसक और वाͪष[क ǐरपोट[ को आसानी से अपलोड करना संभव हो सके , जो 
 महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के काया[Ûवयन से संबंͬधत है।   
xi. सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा: अͬधǓनयम के अͬधदेश के अनुसार, मंğालय ने वष[ मɅ कम से कम 
दो बार सभी Ēाम पंचायतɉ कȧ सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा कȧ सुͪवधा के ͧलए राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय 
¢ेğɉ के èतर पर एक संèथागत संरचना कȧ èथापना पर जोर Ǒदया है। मंğालय के Ǔनरंतर 
Ĥयासɉ के साथ, कुल 27 राÏयɉ और 1 संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ ने èवतंğ सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा 
इकाइयɉ कȧ èथापना कȧ है।   
  
इसके  अलावा, राçĚȣय èतर कȧ Ǔनगरानी, Ǔनयͧमत और ͪवशेष Ǔनगरानी, कɅ ġ सरकार के 
अͬधकाǐरयɉ कȧ टȣम ɮवारा Ǔनगरानी, सामाÛय समी¢ा ͧमशन टȣमɉ ɮवारा दौरɉ कȧ Ǔनगरानी, 
काय[Đम के बेहतर काया[Ûवयन के ͧलए ¢ेğ अͬधकारȣ ऐप के उपयोग के  माÚयम से Ǔनगरानी कȧ 
जा रहȣ है। राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ ͪवͧशçट समी¢ाएं भी समय-समय पर कȧ जाती हɇ। 
  
  
 
932                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2364 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
मनरेगा के अंतग[त लंǒबत भुगतान 
 2364.    Įीमती रजनी अशोकराव पाǑटल: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (मनरेगा) के अंतग[त मजदूरȣ का 
ͩकतना भुगतान लंǒबत हɇ; 
(ख) ͩकन राÏयɉ मɅ सवा[ͬधक संÉया मɅ मामले लंǒबत हɇ; 
(ग) देरȣ के Èया कारण हɇ; 
(घ) समय पर Ǔनͬध का जारȣ ͩकया जाना सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए Èया उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ; 
और 
(ङ) भुगतान Ĥणाͧलयɉ मɅ पारदͧश[ता के ͧलए Èया उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ? 
  
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क) से (ग):  महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा 
योजना) एक माँग-आधाǐरत मजदूरȣ रोजगार योजना है। 
इस योजना के तहत, कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा मजदूरȣ का भुगतान Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण 
Ĥोटोकॉल के माÚयम से सीधे लाभाͬथ[यɉ के खातɉ मɅ ͩकया जाता है। मंğालय ɮवारा उͬचत 
ĤͩĐयाओं का पालन करने के बाद राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ से ĤाÜत Ǔनͬध अंतरण आदेशɉ के 
आधार पर साव[जǓनक ͪवƣीय Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ क े माÚयम से मजदूरȣ भुगतान कȧ èवीकृǓत 
दैǓनक Ǿप से जारȣ कȧ जाती है। Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ कȧ शुǽआत मɅ, ͪपछले वषɟ कȧ यǑद कोई 
èवीकाय[ लंǒबत देयता होती हɇ तो भारत सरकार ɮवारा उनकȧ ͪवͬधवत ĤǓतपूǓत[ कȧ जाती है। 
तदनुसार, ͪवƣीय वष[ 2024-25 तक कȧ सभी देय और èवीकाय[ लंǒबत मजदूरȣ देनदाǐरयɉ का 
भुगतान (पिæचम बंगाल राÏय के मामले को छोड़कर) पहले हȣ ͩकया जा चुका है।  
933                                                      

राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ से संबंͬधत Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने 
के Ĥèताव भारत सरकार को Ĥèतुत करने होते हɇ। कɅ ġ सरकार "सहमत" Įम बजट, कायɟ कȧ 
मांग, Ĥारिàभक शेष राͧश, Ǔनͬध के उपयोग कȧ गǓत, लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ, समĒ काय[ Ǔनçपादन 
और राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ ɮवारा Ĥासंͬगक दèतावेजɉ को जमा करने के आधार पर दो भागɉ मɅ 
समय-समय पर Ǔनͬध जारȣ करती है िजसमɅ Ĥ×येक भाग मɅ एक या अͬधक ͩकèत शाͧमल 
होती हɇ। 
योजना के तहत, वत[मान ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 मɅ (14.12.2025 तक), राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय 
¢ेğɉ को 71,140.75 करोड़ ǽपये कȧ राͧश जारȣ कȧ गई है िजसमɅ मजदूरȣ घटक के  ͧलए 
59,983.78 करोड़ ǽपये और सामĒी तथा ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए 11,156.96 करोड़ ǽपये 
शाͧमल हɇ। चूंͩक मजदूरȣ के भुगतान कȧ èवीकृǓत मंğालय ɮवारा उͬचत ĤͩĐयाओं के पालन के 
बाद राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ से ĤाÜत Ǔनͬध अंतरण आदेशɉ के आधार पर साव[जǓनक ͪवƣीय 
Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ के माÚयम से दैǓनक Ǿप से जारȣ कȧ जाती है इसͧलए Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने कȧ 
िèथǓत ĤǓतǑदन अपडेट होती रहती है। 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 तक मजदूरȣ घटक के ͧलए कुल 
लंǒबत देयता 1,766.35 करोड़ ǽपये हɇ। 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 तक मजदूरȣ घटक के ͧलए 
लंǒबत देयता का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा अनुबंध मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
(घ) और (ड):    मंğालय ने महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत समय पर Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने 
और भुगतान Ĥणालȣ मɅ पारदͧश[ता सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए कई उपाय ͩकए हɇ िजनका ͪववरण 
इस Ĥकार है: 
1. Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ): इस योजना के तहत मंğालय ɮवारा मजदूरȣ का भुगतान 
Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण Ĥोटोकॉल के माÚयम से सीधे Įͧमकɉ के  बɇक खातɉ मɅ ͩकया जाता 
है। राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के संबंध मɅ एसएनए-èपश[ 
Ĥणालȣ के  माÚयम से Ǔनͬध जारȣ कȧ जाती है। 
2. साव[जǓनक ͪवƣीय Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (पीएफएमएस): मंğालय राÏयɉ और संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ 
को Ǔनͬध के सुगम और समय पर अंतरण कȧ Ǔनगरानी और Ǔनͬध अंतरण सुǓनिæचत 
करने के  ͧलए पीएफएमएस Üलेटफॉम[ का उपयोग कर रहा है। यह Ĥणालȣ Ǔनͬध के 
Ĥवाह और Ǔनͬध उपयोग कȧ वाèतͪवक समय Ěैͩकंग करने मɅ सहायक है। 
3. मजदूरȣ भुगतान के ͧलए मानक संचालन ĤͩĐया (एसओपी): अͬधǓनयम के Ĥावधानɉ के 
अनुसार, लाभाथȸ काय[ पूरा होने के  15 Ǒदनɉ के भीतर मजदूरȣ भुगतान ĤाÜत करने के 
हकदार हɇ। समय पर भुगतान सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए भारत सरकार ने सभी 
राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को एक åयापक मानक संचालन ĤͩĐया (एसओपी) जारȣ कȧ है 
जो मèटर रोल अपलोड करने से लेकर एफटȣओ अनुमोदन तक मजदूरȣ भुगतान ĤͩĐया 
934                                                      

के Ĥ×येक चरण के ͧलए Ǔनिæचत समय-सीमा Ǔनधा[ǐरत करती है। मंğालय राÏयɉ/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğɉ के साथ ͧमलकर मजदूरȣ के समय पर भुगतान मɅ सुधार के ͧलए ठोस 
Ĥयास कर रहा है। राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को समय पर भुगतान आदेश तैयार करने का 
परामश[ Ǒदया गया है। 
4. Ǔनयͧमत Ǔनगरानी और समी¢ा: मंğालय बाधाओं को पहचानने और Ǔनͬध के समय पर 
अंतरण के ͧलए राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ और बɇकɉ, पीएफएमएस तथा एनआईसी-डीआरडी 
सǑहत संबंͬधत Ǒहतधारकɉ के साथ Ǔनयͧमत समी¢ा बैठकɉ के  माÚयम से Ǔनरंतर 
Ǔनगरानी करता है। 
5. पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ को सु͸ढ़ करना: कई Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ-संचाͧलत पहल लागू कȧ गई 
हɇ िजनमɅ पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ कȧ िजयो-टैͬगंग, राçĚȣय इलेÈĚॉǓनक Ǔनͬध Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (एनई-
एफएमएस), राçĚȣय मोबाइल Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ (एनएमएमएस), आधार भुगतान ǒĦज 
Ĥणालȣ (एपीबीएस) और रोजगार के ͧलए Ēामीण दरɉ का उपयोग करके अनुमान गणना 
सॉÝटवेयर (ͧसÈयोर) शाͧमल हɇ। इसके अलावा, राçĚȣय èतर के  Ǔनगरानीकता[ 
(एनएलएम) और Ǔनयͧमत सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा भी पारदͧश[ता बढ़ाते हɇ। 
6. सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा: महा×मा गांधी नरेगा अͬधǓनयम, 2005 कȧ धारा 17(2) के अनुसार, 
Ēाम सभाओं के ͧलए योजना के तहत ǓनçपाǑदत कायɟ कȧ Ǔनयͧमत सामािजक लेखा 
परȣ¢ा करना अǓनवाय[ है। मंğालय ने सभी Ēाम पंचायतɉ मɅ वष[ मɅ कम से कम दो 
बार सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा कराने के ͧलए राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ èतर पर संèथागत 
संरचनाएं èथाͪपत करने पर जोर Ǒदया है। इसके पǐरणामèवǾप, 27 राÏयɉ और 1 संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ ने èवतंğ सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा इकाइयाँ èथाͪपत कȧ हɇ। 
  
935                                                      

  
  
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 
2364 के भाग (क) से (ग) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध 
  
Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मजदूरȣ के ͧलए लंǒबत देयता का 
राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा (ǽपये करोड़ मɅ)। 
Đ. सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ लंǒबत देयता 
1.   आंĢ Ĥदेश 425.23 
      2. अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 5.26 
3.   असम 5.31 
4.   ǒबहार 18.80 
5.   छƣीसगढ 8.31 
6.   गोवा 0.00 
7.   गुजरात 82.85 
8.   हǐरयाणा 0.87 
9.   Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 2.15 
10.   जàमू और कæमीर 70.38 
11.   झारखंड 16.93 
12.   कना[टक 10.50 
13.   केरल 419.32 
14.   लɮदाख 1.03 
15.   मÚय Ĥदेश 207.56 
16.   महाराçĚ 14.55 
17.   मͨणपुर 12.56 
18.   मेघालय 4.25 
19.   ͧमजोरम 5.91 
20.   नागालɇड 24.79 
21.   ओͫडशा 20.78 
22.   पंजाब 1.69 
23.   राजèथान 10.26 
24.   ͧसिÈकम 0.22 
25.   तͧमलनाडु 365.72 
26.   तेलंगाना 1.16 
27.   ǒğपुरा 1.80 
936                                                      

28.   उƣर Ĥदेश 24.13 
29.   उƣराखंड 1.75 
30.   पिæचम बंगाल** ** 
31.   अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.00 
32.   दादरा एवं नगर हवेलȣ और दमन एवं दȣव 2.27 
33.   ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 
34.   पुदुचेरȣ 0.00 
  कुल 1766.35 
ǑटÜपणी: मजदूरȣ घटक के अंतग[त ͪपछले वषɟ कȧ कोई लंǒबत देयता नहȣं है। 
**पिæचम बंगाल राÏय के ͧलए ͪवƣीय वष[ 2021-22 के Įम बजट मɅ वृɮͬध के Ĥèताव को 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग कȧ अͬधकार ĤाÜत सͧमǓत ɮवारा अनुमोǑदत नहȣं ͩकया गया था Èयɉͩक 
इस ͪवभाग ɮवारा जारȣ Ǔनदȶशɉ का अनुपालन नहȣं ͩकया गया था। इसके बाद, राÏय ɮवारा कɅ ġ 
सरकार के Ǔनदȶशɉ का Ǔनरंतर अनुपालन न ͩकए जाने के कारण महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण 
रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम, 2005 कȧ धारा 27 के Ĥावधानɉ को लागू करते हुए, Ǒदनांक 
09.03.2022 से पिæचम बंगाल राÏय को महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के तहत Ǔनͬध जारȣ करना भी 
रोक Ǒदया गया था। इसͧलए, नरेगा-सॉÝट के अनुसार, मजदूरȣ घटक के तहत पिæचम बंगाल 
राÏय से संबंͬधत लंǒबत देयता (08.03.2022 तक) ₹1,457.22 करोड़ है। इस देयता कȧ 
èवीकाय[ता कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा स×यापन के अÚयधीन है। 
  
  
  
 
937                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2365 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
पीएमजीएसवाई के अंतग[त Ǔनͧम[त सड़कɉ का गुणवƣा आकलन 
2365.  Įी जोस के. मͨण: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) Èया सरकार ने Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना (पीएमजीएसवाई) के अंतग[त Ǔनͧम[त 
सड़कɉ का कोई गुणवƣा आकलन ͩकया है, यǑद हां, तो ͩकतनी ĤǓतशत सड़कɅ Ǔनàन गुणवƣा 
कȧ पाई गɃ हɇ; 
(ख) Èया पीएमजीएसवाई सड़कɉ क े  Ǔनमा[ण मɅ ħçटाचार या ठेकेदार कȧ लापरवाहȣ के कोई 
मामले सामने आए हɇ, यǑद हां, तो ऐसे मामलɉ मɅ Èया कारवाई कȧ गई है; 
(ग) Èया सड़क Ǔनमा[ण मɅ ठेकेदारɉ ɮवारा तकनीकȧ और सुर¢ा मानकɉ का अनुपालन ͩकया 
जाना सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए कोई तंğ मौजूद है, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(घ) पीएमजीएसवाई के अंतग[त Ǔनͧम[त सड़कɅ लंबे समय तक चलɅ और चरम मौसम कȧ 
िèथǓतयɉ मɅ उनकȧ रोध¢मता सुǓनिæचत करने क े  ͧलए Èया कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क) से (ग): 'Ēामीण सड़कɅ' राÏय का ͪवषय है। Ĥधानमंğी Ēामीण सड़क योजना 
(पीएमजीएसवाई) के ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुसार, èवीकृत पǐरयोजनाओं का Ǔनçपादन काय[Đम 
लागू करने वालȣ संबंͬधत राÏय सरकारɉ कȧ िजàमेदारȣ है। 
पीएमजीएसवाई के तहत गुणवƣापूण[ सड़क कायɟ के Ǔनमा[ण और सड़क पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ का 
èथाǓय×व सुǓनिæचत करने क े  ͧलए पीएमजीएसवाई मɅ तीन èतरȣय गुणवƣा Ǔनयंğण Ĥणालȣ 
मौजूद है। पहले èतर के तहत, काय[Đम काया[Ûवयन इकाइयɉ (पीआईयू) के ͧलए फȧãड 
Ĥयोगशाला मɅ सामĒी और कारȣगरȣ पर अǓनवाय[ परȣ¢णɉ के  माÚयम से ĤͩĐया Ǔनयंğण 
सुǓनिæचत करना आवæयक है। दूसरा èतर राÏय गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानीकता[ (एसÈयूएम) के तहत 
राÏय èतर पर एक संरͬचत èवतंğ गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानी का है ताͩक यह सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा 
सके ͩक Ĥ×येक काय[ का Ǔनरȣ¢ण Ĥारंͧभक चरण, मÚयवतȸ चरण और Ǔनमा[ण के  अंǓतम 
938                                                      

चरण मे हो रहा है। तीसरे èतर, जो राçĚȣय èतर पर है, के तहत गुणवƣा कȧ Ǔनगरानी के 
ͧलए सड़क कायɟ के आकिèमक Ǔनरȣ¢ण के ͧलए और ¢ेğ के अͬधकाǐरयɉ को वǐरçठ 
पेशेवरɉ का माग[दश[न Ĥदान करने के ͧलए èवतंğ राçĚȣय गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानीकता[ (एनÈयूएम) 
तैनात ͩकए जाते हɇ। 3-èतरȣय Ĥणालȣ के तहत सड़कɉ कȧ गुणवƣा कȧ आवͬधक Ǔनगरानी के 
आधार पर, राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा सुधारा×मक उपाय, जहां भी आवæयक हो, ͩकए जाते हɇ। 
राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को समय-समय पर गुणवƣा Ǔनयंğण ĤͩĐया को ͪवǓनयͧमत करने के 
ͧलए ǑदशाǓनदȶश/Ǔनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
गुणवƣा जांच तंğ को मजबूती Ĥदान करने के ͧलए, भू-टैÊड फȧãड लैब कȧ èथापना को 
अǓनवाय[ कर Ǒदया गया है। इसके अलावा, गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ ऐप का एक नया 
संèकरण ई-फॉम[ और अÛय पहलɉ को शाͧमल करने के ͧलए ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है, िजससे 
गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानी Ĥणाͧलयɉ को मजबूती ͧमलȣ है। ई-माग[, दोषपूण[ देयता अवͬध के दौरान 
ठेकेदार को रखरखाव भुगतान के ͧलए सॉÝटवेयर मॉɬयूल है और इसकȧ शुǾआत के 
पǐरणामèवǾप ऐसे भुगतान Ǔनçपादन-आधाǐरत अनुबंध Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ के माÚयम से सड़कɉ 
कȧ गुणवƣा के अनुǾप ͩकए जाते हɇ। यह सुǓनिæचत करने क े  ͧलए ͩक गुणवƣा जांच करने 
वाले लोग पया[Üत Ǿप से कुशल और अÍछȤ तरह से Ĥͧशͯ¢त हɇ, Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
कȧ एक तकनीकȧ शाखा राçĚȣय Ēामीण अवसंरचना ͪवकास एजɅसी (एनआरआईडीए) 
एनÈयूएमएस और एसÈयूएमएस कȧ अǓनवाय[ द¢ता परȣ¢ण कर रहȣ है। एनÈयूएमएस, 
एसÈयूएमएस और पीआईयू के कौशल भी Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đमɉ आǑद के माÚयम से बढ़ाए जा 
रहे हɇ। 
इसके  अलावा, यह सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए ͩक गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानी जमीनी èतर पर ठȤक से 
हो रहȣ है, Ĥ×येक राÏय Ēामीण सड़क ͪवकास एजɅसी (एसआरआरडीए) के तहत एक गुणवƣा 
Ǔनगरानी Ĥकोçठ èथाͪपत करना अǓनवाय[ कर Ǒदया गया है और राÏय गुणवƣा समÛवयकɉ 
(एसÈयूसी) को एसÈयूएमएस कȧ सभी ǐरपोटɟ कȧ जांच करने और मंğालय को इस आशय 
का Ĥमाण पğ देने का काय[ सɋपा गया है। संबंͬधत सीईओ को समय-समय पर गुणवƣा 
Ǔनयंğण रिजèटरɉ कȧ जांच करने और Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने क े  Ĥèताव Ĥèतुत करते समय 
मंğालय को इस आशय का एक Ĥमाण पğ Ĥèतुत करने के ͧलए भी कहा गया है। 
एनÈयूएमएस ɮवारा दȣ गई ǑटÜपͨणयɉ पर एटȣआर कȧ समी¢ा अनुपालना राÏयɉ के माÚयम 
से कȧ जाती है। एनÈयूएमएस के साथ-साथ एसÈयूएम के Ǔनçपादन कȧ भी समी¢ा कȧ जाती 
है और ऐसे एनÈयूएम/एसÈयूएम को पैनल से हटा Ǒदया जाता है िजसका Ĥदश[न संतोषजनक 
नहȣं पाया जाता है। Ǔनçपादन समी¢ा सͧमǓत, ¢ेğीय समी¢ा बैठकɉ और अͬधकार ĤाÜत 
सͧमǓत जैसी ͪवͧभÛन समी¢ा बैठकɉ मɅ मंğालय ɮवारा पीएमजीएसवाई कायɟ कȧ गुणवƣा 
कȧ भी Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से समी¢ा कȧ जाती है। मंğालय ने पीएमजीएसवाई कायɟ कȧ गुणवƣा 
कȧ Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए आईटȣ मॉɬयूल को भी मजबूती Ĥदान कȧ है। सं¢ेप मɅ, मंğालय ने 
पीएमजीएसवाई सड़कɉ कȧ गुणवƣा कȧ Ǔनगरानी और ͪवǓनयमन के ͧलए कई उपाय ͩकए हɇ। 
939                                                      

Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना के तहत, जो काय[ चल रहे हɇ, पूरे हो गए हɇ और िजनमɅ 
संरचना×मक कͧमयां हɇ, उÛहɅ Ǔनरȣ¢ण के दौरान गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानीकता[ ɮवारा "असंतोषजनक" 
के Ǿप मɅ वगȸकृत ͩकया जाता है। जब भी एनÈयूएमएस ͩकसी काय[ को "असंतोषजनक" दज[ 
करता है, तो ठेकेदार दोषपूण[ सामĒी क े  ĤǓतèथापन के माÚयम से ğुǑट को सुधारने के ͧलए 
बाÚय होता है और जैसी भी आवæयकता होती है, वह दोषपूण[ कारȣगरȣ को सुधारता है या 
काय[ के उस ͪवशेष भाग को ͩफर से Ǔनͧम[त करता है िजसे असंतोषजनक पाया गया हो। 
इसके  बाद, एटȣआर को एसÈयूएमएस ɮवारा काय[èथल पर स×याͪपत ͩकया जाता है। 
एसÈयूसी तब एटȣआर कȧ जांच करते हɇ और अनुपालन ǐरपोट[ Ĥèतुत करते हɇ। एटȣआर कȧ 
Ǔनगरानी एनआरआईडीए ɮवारा कȧ जाती है। 
ठेके दारɉ और फȧãड अͬधकाǐरयɉ के ͨखलाफ कȧ गई दंडा×मक कार[वाई संबंͬधत राÏयɉ/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğɉ कȧ नीǓत के अनुसार कȧ जाती है। हालांͩक, इस संबंध मɅ Ǔनधा[ǐरत शतɏ राçĚȣय 
Ēामीण अवसंरचना ͪवकास एजɅसी (एनआरआईडीए) ɮवारा बोलȣ दèतावेजɉ मɅ Ĥदान कȧ 
जाती हɇ। पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ सुǓनिæचत करने और Ǔनगरानी तंğ को मजबूती Ĥदान 
करने के ͧलए, िजन एनÈयूएमएस को जांच/Ǔनरȣ¢ण सɋपे जाते हɇ, उÛहɅ माननीय 
सांसद/ͪवधायक को अपने दौरे कȧ ͪवèतृत योजना साझा करने का Ǔनदȶश Ǒदया जाता है 
िजससे वे Ǔनरȣ¢ण के दौरान उपिèथत हो पाएं। 
ͪपछले तीन वषɟ और चालू वष[ के दौरान राçĚȣय गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानीकता[ (एनÈयूएमएस) 
ɮवारा ͩकए गए Ǔनरȣ¢ण और दज[ कȧ गई असंतोषजनक गुणवƣा Ēेͫडंग का ͪववरण नीचे 
Ǒदया गया है:  
पूण[ काय[ चल रहे काय[ 
कुल Ǔनरȣ¢ण असंतोषजनक % कुल Ǔनरȣ¢ण असंतोषजनक % 
3,987 12.82 9,214 8.50 
  
(घ) पीएमजीएसवाई क े  तहत सड़क काय[ Ēामीण सड़कɉ के  ͧलए Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवǓनदȶश, 
भारतीय सड़क कांĒेस (आईआरसी) (आईआरसी: एसपी: 20) के Ēामीण सड़क मैनुअल मɅ 
Ǒदए गए तकनीकȧ ͪवǓनदȶशɉ और Ïयाͧमतीय ͫडजाइन मानकɉ के अनुसार हɇ और जहां 
आवæयक हो, इनमɅ पहाड़ी सड़क मैनुअल (आईआरसी: एसपी: 48) ͪवͧभÛन भौगोͧलक 
िèथǓतयɉ को Úयान मɅ रखने वाले और अÛय आईआरसी कोड/ǑदशाǓनदȶश को भी शाͧमल 
ͩकया जाता है। आयोजना और लेखापरȣ¢ा का स×यापन उपĒह इमेजरȣ और ͫडिजटल 
एͧलवेशन मॉडल (डीईएम) वाले पीएम गǓत शिÈत पोट[ल का उपयोग करके ͩकया जाता है 
िजससे ¢ेğ आधाǐरत योजना और वèतुǓनçठता सुǓनिæचत होती है। आपदा Ĥवण ¢ेğ, 
यातायात कȧ माğा मɅ संभाͪवत वृɮͬध वालȣ सड़कɅ, Ĥèताͪवत औɮयोͬगक गͧलयारे से गुजरने 
वालȣ सड़कɅ और इसी तरह कȧ अÛय जानकारȣ पीएमजीएसवाई IV Ĥèतावɉ के ͧलए योजना 
940                                                      

चरण क े  दौरान हȣ लȣ जाती हɇ। इसके अलावा, èथाǓय×व और लागत द¢ता को बढ़ाने के 
ͧलए, पीएमजीएसवाई कोãड ͧमÈस, अपͧशçट Üलािèटक ͧमĮण, Ýलाई ऐश, सीमɅट-
èटेबलाइÏड बेस और पहाड़ी और दूरदराज के ¢ेğɉ मɅ èथानीय Ǿप से उपलÞध सामͬĒयɉ 
सǑहत अनुमोǑदत हǐरत और वैकिãपक Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयɉ के उपयोग को Ĥो×साǑहत करती है। ये 
Ĥौɮयोͬगͩकयां ऊजा[ कȧ खपत को कम करती हɇ, कǑठन इलाकɉ मɅ काय[ Ǔनçपादन मɅ सुधार 
करती हɇ और सड़कɉ के मरàमत कȧ लागत को कम करती हɇ। 
  
 **** 
 
941                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2366 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
मनरेगा के अंतग[त मजदूरȣ का संशोधन 
2366.  Įी जोस के. मͨण: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) Èया सरकार Ēामीण रोजगार योजनाओं के अंतग[त मजदूरȣ कȧ दरɉ और रोजगार Ǒदवसɉ 
मɅ संशोधन करने का ͪवचार रखती है; और 
  
(ख) अÛय कɅġȣय योजनाओं के साथ समÛवय èथाͪपत करके Ēामीण अवसंरचना को बढ़ावा 
देने के ͧलए Èया उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क) महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) एक 
मांग-आधाǐरत मजदूरȣ रोजगार योजना है। यह Ēामीण पǐरवारɉ को बेहतर रोजगार अवसर 
कȧ अनुपलÞधता कȧ िèथǓत मɅ आजीͪवका के ͧलए एक वैकिãपक åयवèथा उपलÞध कराती 
है। 
कɅġ सरकार, महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा), 
2005 कȧ धारा 6(1) के अनुसार, अͬधसूचना ɮवारा इसके लाभाͬथ[यɉ के ͧलए अकुशल काय[ 
कȧ मजदूरȣ दर ǓनǑद[çट कर सकती है। तदनुसार, Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ 
के ͧलए राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ के ͧलए महा×मा गांधी नरेगा कȧ मजदूरȣ दर अͬधसूͬचत 
करता है। महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के Įͧमकɉ को मुġाèफȧǓत के Ĥभाव से संर¢ण Ĥदान करने 
हेतु, Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय कृͪष Įͧमकɉ के ͧलए उपभोÈता मूãय सूचकांक (सीपीआई-
एएल) मɅ पǐरवत[न के आधार पर ĤǓतवष[ मजदूरȣ दर मɅ संशोधन करता है। यह संशोͬधत 
मजदूरȣ दर Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ कȧ 1 अĤैल से लागू कȧ जाती है।  
  
942                                                      

काय[Ǒदवसɉ मɅ वृɮͬध के संबंध मɅ यह सूͬचत ͩकया जाता है ͩक महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय 
Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम, 2005 (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा) देश के Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ 
पǐरवारɉ कȧ आजीͪवका सुर¢ा को सु͸ढ़ करने के ͧलए बनाया गया एक अͬधǓनयम है, 
िजसके अंतग[त Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ मɅ अकुशल शारȣǐरक काय[ करने के इच्छुक पǐरवार के 
Ĥ×येक वयèक सदèय को कम-से-कम सौ Ǒदनɉ का सुǓनिæचत मजदूरȣ रोजगार Ĥदान करने 
का Ĥावधान है।  
मंğालय ɮवारा यह अǓनवाय[ ͩकया गया है ͩक वन ¢ेğɉ मɅ रहने वाले Ĥ×येक अनुसूͬचत 
जनजाǓत पǐरवार को Ǔनधा[ǐरत 100 Ǒदनɉ से अǓतǐरÈत 50 Ǒदनɉ का मजदूरȣ रोजगार 
उपलÞध कराया जाए बशतȶ ͩक ऐसे पǐरवारɉ के पास वन अͬधकार अͬधǓनयम, 2006 
(एफआरए, 2006) के अंतग[त Ĥदƣ भूͧम अͬधकारɉ के अǓतǐरÈत कोई अÛय Ǔनजी संपͪƣ न 
हो। 
इसके  अǓतǐरÈत, सूखा/ĤाकृǓतक आपदा से Ĥभाͪवत अͬधसूͬचत Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ ͩकसी ͪवƣीय 
वष[ के दौरान अͬधकतम 50 अǓतǐरÈत Ǒदनɉ का मजदूरȣ रोजगार उपलÞध कराने का भी 
Ĥावधान है। इसके अǓतǐरक्त, अͬधǓनयम कȧ धारा 3(4) के अनुसार, राÏय सरकारɅ अपने 
èवयं के संसाधनɉ से अͬधǓनयम के अंतग[त सुǓनिæचत अवͬध से अͬधक Ǒदनɉ का रोजगार 
उपलÞध कराने का Ĥावधान कर सकती हɇ।   
(ख): राÏय तथा िजला èतर पर कृͪष, वन, बागवानी, म×èय पालन, रेशम उ×पादन, 
पशुपालन, पंचायतɉ को चौदहवां ͪवƣ आयोग, राÏय ͪवƣ आयोग अनुदान, ͧसंचाई, खǓनज, 
राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन (एनआरएलएम), Ĥधानमंğी आवास योजना - Ēामीण 
(पीएमएवाई-जी), संसद सदèय èथानीय ¢ेğ ͪवकास योजना, रेलवे, पीने का पानी और 
èवÍछता, èकूलȣ ͧश¢ा आǑद ͪवभागɉ/योजनाओं के साथ अͧभसरण कȧ åयापक संभावनाएं हɇ।  
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के अंतग[त Ĥासंͬगक Ĥावधानɉ एवं Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶशɉ के अनुसार, राÏय/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ सरकारɅ अनुमेय कायɟ के Ǔनçपादन के ͧलए ͪवͧभÛन लाइन ͪवभागɉ के साथ 
अͧभसरण करती हɇ। राçĚȣय èतर पर मंğालय ɮवारा ͪवͧभÛन ͪवभागɉ/मंğालयɉ कȧ योजनाओं 
के साथ ͩकए गए अͧभसरण का ͪववरण अनुबंध मɅ Ǒदया गया है।   
  
  
943                                                      

 
Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को राÏय सभा मɅ उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2366 के भाग (ख) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध  
1.    आंगनवाड़ी केÛġɉ (एडब्ल्यूसी) के Ǔनमा[ण हेतु मǑहला एवं बाल ͪवकास मंğालय 
(एमओडÞãयूसीडी): महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी 
नरेगा योजना) के अंतग[त आंगनवाड़ी केÛġɉ के Ǔनमा[ण हेतु ₹8.00 लाख तक का åयय 
अनुमेय है और राÏय-ͪवͧशçट अनुमानɉ के अनुसार, शेष लागत मǑहला एवं बाल ͪवकास 
मंğालय, भारत सरकार कȧ एकȧकृत बाल ͪवकास सेवाएं (आईसीडीएस) योजनाओं तथा अÛय 
योजनाओं से जुटाई जा सकती है। इस संबंध मɅ संशोͬधत ǑदशाǓनदȶश 30 जनवरȣ 2023 को 
जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
  
2.    Ēामीण संपक[ता हेतु Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना (पीएमजीएसवाई)-Ēामीण ͪवकास 
मंğालय: महा×मा गांधी नरेगा एवं Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना के बीच अͧभसरण के 
अंतग[त, गैर–Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना बसावटɉ को एकल बारहमासी सड़क उपलÞध 
कराने हेतु ǑदशाǓनदȶश 17 नवंबर 2016 को जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ, ताͩक असंपͩक[त Ēामीण 
बसावटɉ को जोड़ा जा सके।   
  
3.    रेशम उ×पादन (सेरȣकãचर) हेतु वèğ मंğालय: महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना योजना 
तथा उ×Ĥेरक ͪवकास काय[Đम (सीडीपी) कȧ योजना के अͧभसरण के माÚयम से रेशमकȧट के  
पोषक पौधɉ को अपनाने संबंधी ǑदशाǓनदȶश 08.10.2013 को जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
4.    रेल मंğालय: रेलवे के साथ अͧभसरण हेतु 06.04.2018 को ǑदशाǓनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए 
गए हɇ, िजनमɅ लेवल Đॉͧसंग एवं रेलवे èटेशनɉ क े ͧलए पहुँच सड़कɉ का Ǔनमा[ण एवं 
अनुर¢ण, पटǐरयɉ के साथ-साथ जल Ǔनकासी वाले गहरे गɬढे एवं नाͧलयɉ कȧ ͧसãट सफाई 
एवं ͪवकास, वनèपǓत कȧ सफाई सǑहत मौजूदा रेलवे तटबंधɉ कȧ मरàमत एवं चौड़ीकरण, 
रेलवे भूͧम के आͨखरȣ छोर पर वृ¢ारोपण तथा मौजूदा रेलवे तटबंधɉ/कǑटंÊस/पुलɉ का संर¢ण 
शाͧमल है।  
  
5.    रबर के रोपण हेतु रबर बोड[: महा×मा गांधी नरेगा तथा कɅ ġ/राÏय सरकारɉ कȧ 
योजनाओं के अͧभसरण के माÚयम से रबर रोपण काय[ ͩकए जा सकते हɇ। रोपण कायɟ का 
ͪवƣपोषण महा×मा गांधी नरेगा से ͩकया जा सकता है। अͧभसरण भागीदार Ĥारंͧभक वषɟ मɅ 
कृषकɉ को हɇडहोिãडंग सहायता Ĥदान कर सकते हɇ, कटाई एवं कटाई-पæचात गǓतͪवͬधयɉ हेतु 
¢मता Ǔनमा[ण कर सकते हɇ, मूãय संवध[न (फॉरवड[ ͧलंकेज) मɅ सहायता कर सकते हɇ तथा 
सु͸ढ़ ͪवपणन नेटवक[ उपलÞध करा सकते हɇ। इस संबंध मɅ अͧभसरण ǑदशाǓनदȶश 
02.08.2013 को जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
944                                                      

6.    नाǐरयल रोपण हेतु नाǐरयल ͪवकास बोड[ / अÛय कɅ ġȣय पहलɅ: अͧभसरण कायɟ के 
अंतग[त नाǐरयल रोपण से संबंͬधत सभी Įम-Ĥधान काय[ Ĥारंͧभक 2 वषɟ के दौरान महा×मा 
गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) के अंतग[त ͩकए 
जा सकते हɇ। सामĒी कȧ आपूǓत[ एवं तकनीकȧ सहायता सǑहत गǓतͪवͬधयाँ नाǐरयल ͪवकास 
बोड[ अथवा अÛय कɅ ġȣय/राÏय पहलɉ कȧ योजनाओं के अंतग[त शाͧमल कȧ जा सकती हɇ। शेष 
गǓतͪवͬधयाँ लाभाथȸ ɮवारा लाभाथȸ अंशदान के माÚयम से कȧ जा सकती हɇ। इस संबंध मɅ 
अͧभसरण ǑदशाǓनदȶश Ǒदनांक 20.02.2015 को जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
7.    जलȣय कृͪष (एÈवाकãचर) को बढ़ावा देने हेतु पशुपालन, डेयरȣ एवं म×èय ͪवभाग 
(कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय) ɮवारा: जलȣय कृͪष को Ĥो×साǑहत करने के ͧलए 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के अंतग[त Ǔनͧम[त तालाबɉ को Þलू ǐरवोãयूशन के तहत म×èय ͪवकास 
मɅ समिÛवत उपयोग हेतु अपनाया जा सकता है। इस संबंध मɅ पशुपालन, डेयरȣ एवं म×èय 
ͪवभाग, कृͪष एवं ͩकसान कãयाण मंğालय (वत[मान मɅ म×èयपालन, पशुपालन एवं डेयरȣ 
मंğालय के अंतग[त म×èय ͪवभाग) के साथ संयुÈत ǑदशाǓनदȶश Ǒदनांक 9 नवàबर 2017 को 
जारȣ ͩकए गए थे।   
  
8.    पोषण वाǑटका हेतु राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन (एनआरएलएम)–Ēामीण ͪवकास 
मंğालय: राÏय योजनाओं एवं एनआरएलएम के साथ अͧभसरण मɅ åयिÈतगत लाभाͬथ[यɉ एवं 
समुदाय के ͧलए पोषण वाǑटका को बढ़ावा देने हेतु ǑदशाǓनदȶश Ǒदनांक 04.05.2020 को जारȣ 
ͩकए गए हɇ। पोषण वाǑटका को Ĥो×साǑहत करने वालȣ अनुमेय गǓतͪवͬधयाँ जैसे भूͧम 
समतलȣकरण, कुआँ, रोपण गǓतͪवͬधयाँ, सोक ͪपट, ǐरचाज[ ͪपट, पशु शेड, बकरȣ शेड, सूअर 
शेड, पोãĚȣ शेड, एजोला खेजी हेतु अवसंरचना, कàपोिèटंग अवसंरचना, बागवानी वृ¢, म×èय 
तालाब आǑद को महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के अंतग[त Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ ͧलया जा सकता है तथा 
बीज आǑद जैसी सहायता हेतु संबंͬधत ͪवभागɉ के साथ समन्वय ͩकया जा सकता है।   
  
9.    चारा फाम[ तथा पशुपालन एवं डेयरȣ गǓतͪवͬधयɉ को बढ़ावा देने हेतु पशुपालन एवं 
डेयरȣ ͪवभाग (डीएएचडी):  चारा फाम[ (ͧसãवी-पाæचर घासभूͧम ͪवकास), पशुपालन एवं डेयरȣ 
गǓतͪवͬधयɉ को बढ़ावा देने हेतु पशुपालन एवं डेयरȣ ͪवभाग (डीएएचडी) के साथ अͧभसरण के 
ͧलए संयुÈत ǑदशाǓनदȶश Ǒदनांक 26.06.2020 को जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
  
10.   सामुदाǓयक èवÍछता पǐरसरɉ (सीएससी) हेतु पेयजल एवं èवÍछता ͪवभाग 
(डीडीडÞãयूएस): सामुदाǓयक अवसंरचना को सु͸ढ़ करने क े ͧलए सामुदाǓयक èवÍछता पǐरसरɉ 
के Ǔनमा[ण हेतु संयुÈत ǑदशाǓनदȶश Ǒदनांक 06.07.2020 को जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। महा×मा गांधी 
नरेगा के अंतग[त अकुशल Įम घटक के  अंतग[त अͬधकतम 230 Įम-Ǒदवसɉ का कवर ͩकया 
जाएगा।   
  
945                                                      

11.   Ēाम पंचायत भवनɉ के ͧलए पंचायती राज मंğालय (एमओपीआर): पंचायती राज 
मंğालय (एमओपीआर) और Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय (एमओआरडी) ɮवारा 10.06.2020 को 
संयुÈत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ, िजनके अंतग[त Ēाम पंचायतɉ के पास उपलÞध 14वɅ 
ͪवƣ आयोग (एफसी) के अनुदानɉ तथा वष[ 2020-21 के दौरान ĤाÜत होने वाले 15वɅ ͪवƣ 
आयोग (एफसी) के अनाबɮध अनुदानɉ का उपयोग Ēाम पंचायत भवनɉ के Ǔनमा[ण हेतु ͩकए 
जाने कȧ अनुमǓत दȣ गई है। 
12.   राçĚȣय औषधीय पादप बोड[ (एनएमपीबी), आयुष मंğालय: महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के 
अंतग[त औषधीय पौधɉ को बढ़ावा देने हेतु राçĚȣय औषधीय पादप बोड[ (एनएमपीबी) के साथ 
11.08.2020 को संयुÈत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ।  
  
13.   कृͪष, सहकाǐरता एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग (डीओएसी एंड एफडÞãयू): बागवानी को 
Ĥो×साǑहत करने हेतु कृͪष, सहकाǐरता एवं ͩकसान कãयाण ͪवभाग (डीओएसी एंड एफडÞãयू) 
के साथ 14.01.2021 को संयुÈत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए गए हɇ। 
  
14.   èवÍछ भारत ͧमशन (èवÍछता एवं पेयजल ͪवभाग): महा×मा गांधी नरेगा के अंतग[त 
åयिÈतगत घरेलू शौचालय (आईएचएचएल) के Ǔनमा[ण के ͧलए 25 नवàबर 2014 को 
संशोͬधत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए गए, जो 11.09.2012, 13.06.2013, 19.08.2013 तथा 
06.01.2014 को जारȣ पूव[ Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶशɉ का अͬधĐमण करते हɇ।  
  
15.   र¢ा मंğालय: सीमावतȸ ¢ेğɉ मɅ सड़कɉ के Ǔनमा[ण के ͧलए अनुसूची मɅ 3 नवàबर 
2021 को संशोधन ͩकया गया।  
  
16.   èवÍछता एवं पेयजल ͪवभाग: एकल गɬढा शौचालय को दोहरे गɬढा शौचालय मɅ 
पǐरवǓत[त करने हेतु तरल अपͧशçट चɇबर के Ǔनमा[ण के संबंध मɅ 19 जनवरȣ 2023 को पğ 
जारȣ ͩकया गया।  
  
17.   कृͪष मंğालय: वमȸ-कàपोèट, एनएडीईपी, पशु शेड, तरल जैव-खाद, एजोला, 
सामुदाǓयक म×èय तालाब आǑद को बढ़ावा देने हेतु कृͪष मंğालय के काय[Đमɉ के साथ 
अͧभसरण के संबंध मɅ 13 जून, 2013 को पğ जारȣ ͩकया गया। 
  
18.   भूͧम संसाधन ͪवभाग (डीओएलआर): दोनɉ ͪवभागɉ के अͧभसरण मɅ वाटरशेड संबंधी 
कायɟ को संपन्न करने हेतु 20 मई 2009, 12 अĤैल 2013, 11 मई 2015 तथा  
21 ͧसतàबर 2022 को संयुÈत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश जारȣ ͩकए गए। 
  
19.   जल शिÈत अͧभयान – कैच द रेन, जल शिÈत मंğालय: जेएसए-सीटȣआर के अंतग[त 
जल शिÈत मंğालय के साथ अͧभसरण हेतु Ĥमुख Ǔनçपादन संकेतक हɇ—जल संर¢ण एवं 
946                                                      

वषा[ जल संचयन, पारंपǐरक एवं अÛय जल Ǔनकायɉ/टɇकɉ का नवीनीकरण, पुनः उपयोग एवं 
पुनभ[रण संरचनाएँ, वाटरशेड ͪवकास, सघन वनीकरण तथा महा×मा गांधी नरेगा का योगदान।  
  
20.   पया[वरण, वन एवं जलवायु पǐरवत[न मंğालय (एमओईएफ एंड सीसी): वृ¢ारोपण के 
माÚयम से आजीͪवका मɅ सुधार हेतु 19 जनवरȣ 2009 तथा 3 माच[ 2015 को Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश 
जारȣ ͩकए गए। 
  
21.   ͧमçटȣ – पया[वरण, वन एवं जलवायु पǐरवत[न मंğालय (एमओईएफ एंड सीसी): भारत 
मɅ वनीकरण Ĥयासɉ को बढ़ाने हेतु कɅ ġȣय बजट 2023-24 मɅ ‘तटȣय आवासɉ एवं वाèतͪवक 
आय के ͧलए मɇĒोव पहल (ͧमçटȣ)’ काय[Đम कȧ घोषणा कȧ गई। इस योजना का उɮदेæय 
भारतीय तटɉ पर मɇĒोव पाǐरिèथǓतकȧ तंğ का संर¢ण एवं पुनजȸवन करना तथा तटȣय 
समुदायɉ कȧ सामािजक-आͬथ[क िèथǓत मɅ सुधार करना है। संयुÈत Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश èवीकृत ͩकए 
जा चुके हɇ तथा अÈटूबर 2024 मɅ जारȣ ͩकए जाने हɇ।  
  
22.   भूͧम संसाधन ͪवभाग: डीओएलआर के अंतग[त सृिजत ĤाकृǓतक संसाधन Ĥबंधन कायɟ 
कȧ मरàमत एवं रखरखाव हेतु 27 मई 2025 को संयुÈत परामश[ जारȣ ͩकया गया, ताͩक 
Ĥधानमंğी कृͪष ͧसंचाई योजना (पीएमकेएसवाई) के अंतग[त काय[ ͩकए जा सकɅ। 
  
23.   र¢ा मंğालय: सीमा सड़क संगठन (बीआरओ) ɮवारा Ǔनͧम[त पुलɉ एवं सुरंगɉ के 
रखरखाव हेतु अनुसूची मɅ 7 जुलाई 2022 को संशोधन ͩकया गया। 
 
947                                                      

1 
भारत सरकार
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग
राÏय सभा
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2367
 (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए) 
आरएसईटȣआई कȧ उपलिÞधयां
2367.  डा. कͪवता पाटȣदार: 
 Įी बृज लाल: 
 Įी मदन राठौड़:
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक:
(क) देश म Ʌ वत[मान मɅ ͩकतने Ēामीण èव-रोजगार Ĥͧश¢ण संèथान (आरएसईटȣआई) 
काय[शील हɇ;
(ख) Èया सरकार ने आरएसईटȣआई शुǾ करने के  उɮदेæय को ĤाÜत कर ͧलया है;
(ग) यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है;
(घ) ͪवगत पांच वषɟ और चालू वष[ के दौरान Ĥͧशͯ¢त और Ǔनयोिजत (èव-रोजगार या 
वेतन रोजगार) यु
वाओं कȧ कुल संÉया ͩकतनी है;
(ङ) Èया Ĥͧश¢ण कȧ गुणवƣा, ऋण संपक[ या Ĥͧश¢ण के बाद सहायता से संबं ͬधत 
चु
नौǓतयɉ कȧ पहचान करने के ͧलए हाल हȣ मɅ कोई मूãयांकन या समी¢ा कȧ गई है;
(च) यǑद हां, तो मुÉय Ǔनçकष[ और शुǾ ͩकए गए सु
धारा×मक उपाय Èया हɇ; और
(छ) आरएसईटȣआई 1.0 कȧ तुलना मɅ आरएसईटȣआई 2.0 के अंतग[त ͩकए गए Ĥमुख 
संशोधनɉ का Þयौरा Èया है?
उƣर 
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी
(Įी कमलेश पासवान)
(क)  अभी तक, 33 राÏयɉ और संघ रा Ïय ¢ेğɉ के  612 िजलɉ म Ʌ कुल 625 
आरएसईटȣआई कɅ ġ सͩĐय Ǿप से काय[ कर रहे हɇ। इन संèथानɉ को साव[जǓनक ¢ेğ के  
बɇकɉ, Ǔनजी ¢ेğ के बɇकɉ, ¢ेğीय Ēामीण बɇकɉ और राÏय सहकारȣ बɇकɉ सǑहत 25 ͪवƣीय 
संèथानɉ ɮवारा सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है और Ĥायोिजत ͩकया जाता है। देश मɅ वत[मान 
948                                                      

2 
मɅ संचाͧलत Ēामीण èवरोजगार Ĥͧश¢ण संèथानɉ (आरएसईटȣआई) कȧ राÏय/संघ राÏय 
¢ेğ-वार संÉया अनुबंध-I मे संलÊन है।
(ख), (ग) और (घ) :  जी हाँ, सरकार ने आरएसईटȣआई के Ǔनधा[ǐरत अपने म ुÉय उɮदेæय 
को ĤाÜत कर ͧलया है और ͪपछले पांच वषɟ तथा वत[मान वष[ के दौरान देश भर मɅ 
Ĥͧश¢ण और Ǔनयोजन, èवरोजगार, एवं वेतन रोजगार का ͪववरण नीचे Ǒदया गया है:
ͪवƣीय वष[ 
कुल कुल Ǔनयोिजत अßयͬथ[यɉ से 
Ĥͧशͯ¢त Ǔनयोिजत èव Ǔनयोिजत वेतन रोजगार
2020-21 255141185234178038 7196
2021-22 314114256429249904 6525
2022-23 409802325880319546 6334
2023-24 451419350272344646 5626
2024-25 621210467259460577 6682
2025-26  
(Ǒदनांक 31-10-2025 तक)308575 201108 198673 2435
मूãयांकन/Ĥभाव अÚययन नेशनल एके डमी ऑफ आरयूडीएसएटȣआई (एनएआर) ɮवारा एके डमी 
ऑफ मैनेजमɅट èटडीज (एएमएस), लखनऊ के साथ समझौते के तहत आयोिजत ͩकया 
गया है। 
https://kaushal.rural.gov.in/assets/files/Evaluation-Impact-Study-of-Rural-Self-
Employment-Training-Institutes-Hindi.pdf" के माÚयम से ĤाÜत कȧ जा सकती है।
अÚययन के कुछ Ĥमुख सकारा×मक Ǔनçकष[ इस Ĥकार हɇ:
क.  आरएसटȣआई देश के लगभग हर िजले मɅ मौजूद हɇ। उनकȧ पहुँच बहुत åयापक है 
और वे Ēामीण गरȣब युवाओं मɅ उɮयͧमता कȧ भावना जगाकर और उÛहɅ तकनीकȧ कौशल 
ͧसखाकर उनके  रोजगार कȧ संभावनाओं पर काफȧ सकारा×मक Ĥभाव डाल रहे हɇ।
ख.  आरएसटȣआई मानक संचालन ĤͩĐयाओं के एक सेट के आधार पर काम कर रहे हɇ। 
आरएसटȣआई का समĒ Ĥदश[न अÍछा है और वे योजना के उɮदेæयɉ को पूरा कर रहे हɇ।
ग.  94% Ĥͧश¢ु फेकãटȣ से संतुçट थे।
घ.  अßयͬथ[यɉ का एक बड़ा समूह (95%) अपनाए गए पाɫयĐम से भी संतुçट था।
 
             आरएसईटȣआई के मãूयांकन/Ĥभाव अÚययन कȧ ǐरपोट[ इस ͧलकं"
(ङ), (च) और (छ): जी हाँ, Ēामीण èवरोजगार Ĥͧश¢ण संèथानɉ का एक
 
949                                                      

3 
ङ.  आरएसटȣआई मɅ नामांͩकत अͬधकांश Ĥͧश¢ुओं का उ ɮदेæय अपना उ ɮयम èथाͪपत 
करना और èवरोजगार ĤाÜत करना था।
च.  केवल 2% Ĥͧश¢ुओं को अपना अं Ǔतम Ĥमाण पğ ĤाÜत नहȣं हुआ, Èयɉͩक उÛहɉने 
इसे नहȣं ͧलया या उ Ûहɉने बीच मɅ हȣ कोस[ छोड़ Ǒदया। अͬधकांश (95%) को Ĥͧश¢ण 
पूरा होने के पहले दो महȣनɉ के भीतर अपने Ĥमाण पğ ĤाÜत हो गए जो एक सकारा×मक 
संकेतक था Èयɉͩक इससे Ĥͧश¢ुओं को ǒबना ͩकसी लंबे अंतराल के ऋण आवेदन करने 
और रोजगार के ͧलए Ĥयास करने मɅ सहायता ͧमलȣ।
छ.  िजन Ĥͧश¢ुओं से अनुवतȸ ĤǓतͩĐया लȣ गई उनमɅ से 86% ने अनु
भव ͩकया ͩक 
अनु
वतȸ कार[वाई कȧ अवͬध पया[Üत थी। यह पहाड़ी रा Ïयɉ मɅ सबसे अ ͬधक 95% और 
दͯ¢णी राÏयɉ मɅ सबसे कम 85% था।
इसके  अलावा, अÚययन मɅ यह भी ͧसफाǐरश कȧ गई है:
i. बुǓनयादȣ ढांचे कȧ उपलÞधता और गुणवƣा मɅ सुधार करने के ͧलए:
क.  गुणवƣापूण[ Ĥͧश¢ण Ĥदान करने के  ͧलए आव æयक अ Ǔनवाय[ स ुͪवधाएं
सुǓनिæचत करने हेत ु आरएसटȣआई कȧ èथापना के बाद उनके èथायी प ǐरसर
ͪवकͧसत करने के ͧलए एक उͬचत समय सीमा Ǔनधा[ǐरत करना।
ख.  ऑफ- कɇपस Ĥͧश¢ण आयोिजत करने क ȧ अन ु
मǓत केवल ग ु
णवƣापू
ण[
उपकरणɉ और बुǓनयादȣ ढांचे कȧ उपलÞधता सुǓनिæचत करने क े  बाद हȣ दȣ जाए।
ii. Ĥͧश¢ु नामांकन म Ʌ शाͧमल ĤͩĐयाओं मɅ सुधार करना और Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम का
आयोजन:
क.  लाभाͬथ[यɉ के चयन हेत ु नामांकन ल êयɉ को कम ͩकया जाए। इससे यह 
सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सक े गा ͩक क े वल èवरोजगार के ĤǓत गंभीर ǽͬच रखने वाले 
अßयͬथ[यɉ कȧ हȣ जांच और नामांकन हो। इससे नामांकन ĤͩĐया कȧ द¢ता मɅ 
सुधार होगा, बेहतर Ǔनयोजन दर ĤाÜत करने म Ʌ मदद ͧमलेगी और Ĥͧश¢ण के  
͸िçटकोण को अͬधक गुणा×मक तथा गहन बनाया जा सक े गा।
ख.  Ĥͧश¢ुओं मɅ अͬधकांश (80%) मǑहलायɅ
 थी जबͩक पुǽषɉ कȧ संÉया 20% 
थी। च ूंͩक अ ͬधकांश म Ǒहलाएं èवरोजगार को Ĥाथͧमकता देती ह ɇ, उ×पाद और 
ĤͩĐया से संबं ͬधत पाɫयĐमɉ मɅ नामांकन करती ह ɇ, और ऐसी ग Ǔतͪवͬधयɉ मɅ 
संलÊन होती ह ɇ जो उ ÛहɅ घर से काम करने क ȧ अनु
मǓत देती ह ɇ, इसͧलए यह 
950                                                      

4 
 
ͧसफाǐरश कȧ जाती है ͩक संबंͬधत पाɫयĐमɉ कȧ उपलÞधता भी इस मांग को पूरा 
करने के  ͧलए तैयार कȧ जाए। 
ग.  संèथान कȧ Ǔनगरानी के भाग क े  Ǿप मɅ Ĥायोͬगक कायɟ के संचालन और 
उनके पूरा होने कȧ िèथǓत को स×याͪपत करने का एक साधन èथाͪपत ͩकया जा 
सकता है ताͩक यह सुǓनिæचत हो सके ͩक इस मह×वपूण[ घटक को शाͧमल ͩकया 
जा रहा है। 
घ.  कौशल Ĥͧश¢ण पाɫयĐमɉ के ईडीपी घटकɉ को Ĥͧश¢ुओं ɮवारा सबसे कम 
रेǑटंग ͧमलȣ। चूंͩक आरएसटȣआई का उɮदेæय न केवल Ĥͧश¢ुओं को तकनीकȧ 
कौशल ͧसखाना है, बिãक उÛहɅ उɮयम चलाने के ͧलए सशÈत बनाना भी है 
इसͧलए यह ͧसफाǐरश कȧ जाती है ͩक कौशल Ĥͧश¢ण पाɫयĐमɉ के ईडीपी घटकɉ 
मɅ सुधार करके इस कमी को दूर ͩकया जाए। 
ङ.  कौशल पाɫयĐमɉ मɅ Ĥायोͬगक और उɮयͧमता घटकɉ को जोड़कर Ĥͧश¢ण 
कȧ अवͬध बढ़ाने कȧ ͧसफाǐरश कȧ जाती है। 
iii. Ĥͧश¢ण के ͧलए गुणवƣापूण[ Ĥͧश¢कɉ के न होने कȧ समèया के समाधान के  ͧलए: 
क.  यह ͧसफाǐरश कȧ जाती है ͩक कुछ काय[Đमɉ को Ǔनदेशकɉ और Ĥͧश¢कɉ 
दोनɉ के ͧलए अǓनवाय[ बनाया जाए ताͩक वे अपनी भूͧमकाओं को बेहतर ढंग से 
Ǔनभाने मɅ स¢म हो सकɅ। बार-बार Ǔनदेशकɉ के बदले जाने कȧ िèथǓत से बचकर 
भी यह सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सकता है ͩक आरएसटȣआई ǒबना ͩकसी åयवधान के 
काय[ करɅ। 
ख.  यह ͧसफाǐरश कȧ जाती है ͩक या तो Ĥͧश¢ण-पूव[ और Ĥͧश¢ण-पæचात कȧ 
सुͪवधाओं के ͧलए अलग ͪवंग बनाकर कम[चाǐरयɉ कȧ संÉया बढ़ाई जाए या 
कम[चाǐरयɉ को उÍच पाǐरĮͧमक Ǒदया जाए। इससे उÛहɅ बेहतर Ĥदश[न करने के  
ͧलए Ĥो×साहन और Ĥेरणा ͧमलेगी साथ हȣ ये पद ĤǓतिçठत और वांǓछत भी 
बनɅगे। 
iv.    Ĥͧश¢ण के बाद कȧ अनुवतȸ कार[वाई और Ěैͩकंग Ĥणालȣ कȧ Ĥभावशीलता मɅ 
सुधार के ͧलए: 
क.  अनुवतȸ कार[वाई कȧ ĤͩĐया को अͬधक कुशल बनाने के ͧलए यह ͧसफाǐरश 
कȧ जाती है ͩक Ĥͧश¢ुओं के Ǔनयोिजत होने तक उनसे टेलȣफोन कॉल के माÚयम 
से संपक[ ͩकया जाए। एक बार Ǔनयोिजत हो जाने के बाद, èवरोजगार करने वाले 
Ĥͧश¢ुओं का åयिÈतगत दौरɉ के माÚयम से अनुवतȸ कार[वाई ͧलया जा सकता है 
951                                                      

5 
 
िजससे कम[चारȣ यह देख सकɅगे ͩक Ĥͧश¢ु अपना उɮयम कैसे चला रहा है और 
यǑद आवæयक हो तो माग[दश[न Ĥदान कर सकɅगे। ऐसे Ĥͧश¢ु जो Ĥͧश¢ण के छह 
महȣने बाद भी Ǔनयोिजत नहȣं हो पाए हɇ, उÛहɅ पǐरसर मɅ समूह बैठकɉ के ͧलए 
आमंǒğत ͩकया जा सकता है जो ğैमाͧसक या अध[वाͪष[क आयोिजत कȧ जा सकती 
हɇ ताͩक उनकȧ ͧशकायतɉ का समाधान ͩकया जा सके और उÛहɅ अपना उɮयम 
शुǾ करने के  ͧलए माग[दश[न Ĥदान ͩकया जा सके। 
ख.  यह ͧसफाǐरश कȧ जाती है ͩक एएसएआरई (आरयूडीएसएटȣआई का पूव[ छाğ 
संघ) को Ĥͧश¢ुओं ɮवारा संचाͧलत एक मंच बनाया जाए िजसके तहत संèथान से 
जुड़े सफल Ĥͧश¢ुओं कȧ Ĥ×येक िजले मɅ पहचान कȧ जाए और उÛहɅ Ǔनदेशक तथा 
फेकãटȣ क े  माग[दश[न मɅ ğैमाͧसक एएसएआरई बैठकɅ आयोिजत करने कȧ 
िजàमेदारȣ सɋपी जाए। 
ग.  आरएसटȣआई ɮवारा ऋण सुͪवधा के सरलȣकरण मɅ सुधार कȧ आवæयकता है। 
घ.  इसके अǓतǐरÈत, सभी आरएसटȣआई मɅ जन समथ[ पोट[ल के माÚयम से ऋण 
आवेदन को Ĥो×साǑहत ͩकया जा सकता है िजससे आवेदन कȧ ĤͩĐया मɅ तेजी 
आएगी और ऋण èवीकृǓत कȧ दर मɅ वृɮͬध होगी। 
 उपरोÈत ͧसफाǐरशɉ के आधार पर, Ǔनàनͧलͨखत सुधारा×मक उपाय ͩकए गए हɇ: 
क.  आरएसटȣआई के ͧलए बुǓनयादȣ ढांचा सहायता अनुदान को ₹1 करोड़ से 
बढ़ाकर ₹2 करोड़ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
ख.  Ǒहतधारक बɇकɉ को Ǔनदȶश Ǒदया गया है ͩक वे Ĥͧश¢ुओं कȧ सुर¢ा बढ़ाने के 
ͧलए सभी आरएसटȣआई मɅ चारदȣवारȣ का Ǔनमा[ण सुǓनिæचत करɅ। 
ग.  अßयͬथ[यɉ कȧ ͪवͪवध Ĥͧश¢ण आवæयकताओं को पूरा करने के ͧलए, 
आरएसटȣआई ɮवारा Ĥदान ͩकए जाने वाले Ĥͧश¢ण पाɫयĐमɉ के दायरे का 
ͪवèतार ͩकया गया है। 
घ.  योजना कȧ वाèतͪवक समय Ǔनगरानी को स¢म करने के ͧलए एक एकȧकृत 
पोट[ल ͪवकͧसत ͩकया गया है। 
ङ.  सभी आरएसटȣआई को Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đमɉ कȧ लाइव Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए 
आईपी-स¢म सीसीटȣवी कैमरे लगाने का Ǔनदȶश Ǒदया गया है। 
च.  Ĥͧश¢कɉ कȧ गुणवƣा मɅ सुधार के ͧलए, पुनæचया[ Ĥͧश¢ण और Ĥͧश¢कɉ का 
Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम आयोिजत ͩकए जा रहे हɇ। 
952                                                      

6 
 
छ.  Ĥͧश¢ुओं के ͧलए Đेͫडट ͧलंकेज सहायता को Ĥͧशͯ¢त अßयͬथ[यɉ के 30% 
से बढ़ाकर 50% कर Ǒदया गया है िजससे Ĥͧश¢ण के बाद के अनुवतȸ कार[वाई 
को मजबूती ͧमलȣ है। 
आरएसटȣआई 1.0 कȧ तुलना मɅ आरएसटȣआई 2.0 के तहत ͩकए गए Ĥमुख संशोधनɉ का 
ͪववरण अनुबंध-II के Ǿप मɅ संलÊन है। Ĥèतुत ͩकए गए ये संशोधन Ĥͧश¢ण कȧ 
Ĥभावशीलता को बढ़ाएंगे और जलगांव लोकसभा ¢ेğ सǑहत देश भर के युवाओं के ͧलए 
रोजगार के  पǐरणामɉ मɅ सुधार करɅगे। आरएसटȣआई 2.0 के Ǒदशा-Ǔनदȶश इस ͧलंक के 
माÚयम से ĤाÜत ͩकए जा सकते हɇ: " https://kaushal.rural.gov.in/assets/files/Guidelines-
and-SOP-for-RSET-2.0-Phase-II-%20reg.pdf"। 
नीǓत आयोग ɮवारा ͩकए गए एक अलग अÚययन मɅ भी काय[Đम के  Ǔनçपादन कȧ जांच 
कȧ गई है और Ĥमुख बाधाओं कȧ पहचान कȧ गई है। नीǓत आयोग के मूãयांकन 
अÚययन कȧ ǐरपोट[ इस ͧलंक " https://kaushal.rural.gov.in/assets/files/Evaluation-of-
Centrally-Sponsored-Schemes-in-Package-5-Rural-Development-Sector.pdf" के माÚयम 
से ĤाÜत कȧ जा सकती है। 
  
*****  
  
  
953                                                      

7 
 
अनुबंध-I 
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2367 के भाग (क) क े  उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध 
  
देश मɅ काया[×मक आरएसईटȣआई कȧ राÏय-वार सूची: 
Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ काय[कारȣ आरएसईटȣआई कȧ संÉया 
1 अंडमान व Ǔनकोबार ɮवीप समूह 1 
2 आंĢ Ĥदेश 21 
3 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 2 
4 असम 27 
5 ǒबहार 38 
6 छƣीसगढ़ 27 
7 दादरा एवं नगर हवेलȣ तथा दमन एवं दȣव 1 
8 गुजरात 28 
9 हǐरयाणा 21 
10 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 10 
11 जàमू एवं कæमीर 20 
12 झारखंड 25 
13 कना[टक 32 
14 केरल 14 
15 ल¢ɮवीप 1 
16 मÚय Ĥदेश 53 
17 महाराçĚ 36 
18 मͨणपुर 4 
19 मेघालय 5 
954                                                      

8 
 
20 ͧमजोरम 3 
21 नागालɇड 1 
22 ओͫडशा 30 
23 पुदुचेरȣ 1 
24 पंजाब 18 
25 राजèथान 35 
26 ͧसिÈकम 1 
27 तͧमलनाडु 37 
28 तेलंगाना 16 
29 ǒğपुरा 5 
30 लɮदाख संघ राÏय ¢ेğ 2 
31 उƣर Ĥदेश 78 
32 उƣराखंड 13 
33 पिæचम बंगाल 19 
कुल 625 
  
   
955                                                      

9 
 
 
अनुबंध-II 
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2367 के भाग (ड),(च) और (छ) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध 
  
आरएसईटȣआई 1.0 कȧ तुलना मɅ आरएसईटȣआई 2.0 के तहत ͩकए गए Ĥमुख संशोधन 
Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ:  
Đ. 
सं. 
Ĥमुख ͪवषयगत ¢ेğ आरएसईटȣआई 1.0 
क े  तहत 
आरएसईटȣआई 2.0 क े तहत 
1. उपयुÈत Ĥͧश¢ुओं कȧ 
पहचान और उनको 
संगǑठत करना 
एसआरएलएम के  
सहयोग से 
आरएसईटȣआई èटाफ 
ɮवारा संचाͧलत 
एसआरएलएम, आरएसईटȣआई कम[चाǐरयɉ क े  
सामुदाǓयक संवगɟ और ͫडिजटल मोड मɅ (Èयूआर 
आधाǐरत फॉम[ ɮवारा) संचाͧलत 
2. अßयͬथ[यɉ कȧ 
योÊयता का उपयुÈत 
Ĥͧश¢ण पाɫयĐम क े  
साथ ͧमलान 
åयिÈतगत संपक[  क े  
माÚयम से  
योÊयता परȣ¢ण और åयिÈतगत संपक[  
3. एनआरएलएम के 
साथ बेहतर अͧभसरण 
सीͧमत अͧभसरण ͪवͧशçट पाɫयĐमɉ मɅ सामुदाǓयक संसाधनɉ कȧ 
åयापक भागीदारȣ, Ĥͧश¢ण के बाद कȧ सहायता, 
¢ेğ èतरȣय सामुदाǓयक Ĥबंͬधत Ĥͧश¢ण कɅ ġɉ 
(सीएमटȣसी) क े  उपयोग एसआरएलएम (èथानीय 
समुदाय) आǑद कȧ मांग के अनुसार संचालन, 
आǑद। 
उदाहरण के  ͧलए वन जीपी वन बीसी सखी 
ͧमशन, एफएलसीआरपी आǑद। 
4. Ĥͧश¢ण पाɫयĐमɉ 
का ͪवèतार 
कुल 64 पाɫयĐम ͪवèतृत ͩकया जाना (बहु-कौशल पाɫयĐमɉ के 
साथ) 
5. कम और लंबी अवͬध 
क े  पाɫयĐमɉ का 
अनुपात 
óयादा संÉया मɅ कम 
अवͬध क े  पाɫयĐम 
लघु और लंबी अवͬध के पाɫयĐमɉ का सहȣ 
ͧमĮण 
6. Ĥͧश¢ण ͪवतरण का 
èवǾप 
क े वल Èलास Ǿम 
Ĥͧश¢ण 
Ĥͧश¢ण ͪवतरण का ͧमͬĮत Ǿप 
956                                                      

10 
 
7. ई-लǓनɍग कोई पाɫयĐम नहȣं ई-लǓनɍग सामĒी का ͪवकास 
8. Ĥͧश¢कɉ का Ĥͧश¢ण 
और Ĥमाणन 
Ǔनिæचत अंतराल पर Ǔनयͧमत Ĥͧश¢कɉ का Ĥͧश¢ण और Ĥमाणन 
9. कौशल उÛनयन ऐसे कोई कोस[ नहȣं 
है 
कौशल उÛनयन काय[Đम पर पाɫयĐम 
10. उɮयͧमता Ĥͧश¢ण मɅ 
नेतृ×व 
मुÉय Ĥͧश¢ण 
संèथानɉ मɅ 
आरएसईटȣआई भी है 
आरएसईटȣआई मुÉय भूͧमका मɅ होगा 
11. ऑफ-कɇपस Ĥͧश¢ण 
काय[Đम 
ऑफ-कɇपस ĚेǓनंग 
ĤोĒाम कȧ संÉया पर 
सीमा 
Ĥͧश¢ण कȧ गुणवƣा सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए 
चेक सूची के साथ ऑफ-कɇपस काय[Đम 
12. गुणवƣा आæवासन 
कȧ आंतǐरक åयवèथा 
उपलÞध नहȣं है सुझाव Ǒदया गया है  
13. उɮयोगो क े साथ 
साझेदारȣ और 
सहयोग 
शूÛय सुझाए गए उɮयोगɉ क े  साथ समझौता £ापन  
14. उɮयम ͪवƣपोषण 
(Đेͫडट ͧलंकेज) 
बɇक क े ͪववेक पर सीबीएस मɅ ͪवͧशçट कोड, आरएसईटȣआई 
Ĥͧश¢ुओं के ͪवƣपोषण के ͧलए बɇकɉ को लêय 
15. Ĥͧश¢ण के  बाद 
अनुवतȸ कार[वाई 
क े वल आरएसईटȣआई 
ɮवारा ͩकया जाता है 
आरएसईटȣआई Ĥͧशͯ¢त अßयͬथ[यɉ कȧ सहायता 
क े  ͧलए Ĥͧश¢कɉ, मूãयांकनकता[ओं, सामुदाǓयक 
संसाधन åयिÈतयɉ (सीआरपी) जैसे अÛय संसाधनɉ 
(स¢मकता[ओं) को लाना। ͪवƣीय Ĥो×साहन ĤाÜत 
करने के  ͧलए संसाधन åयिÈतयɉ को लाना। 
16. राÏयɉ क े  ͧलए 
ĤशासǓनक लागत 
शूÛय राÏयɉ क े  ͧलए ĤशासǓनक लागत का Ĥावधान 
17. राçĚȣय ͧमशन Ĥबंधन 
इकाई (एनएमएमयू) 
1-2 मानव संसाधन 
ɮवारा Ĥबंͬधत ͩकया 
जा रहा है 
Ĥभावी काया[Ûवयन क े  ͧलए मंğालय मɅ 
एनएमएमयू कȧ èथापना 
18. Ĥͧश¢ुओं कȧ सा¢रता पढ़ना और ͧलखना 
जानने वालɉ को 
अनुमǓत है।  
Ǔनर¢र और अध[-सा¢र को समायोिजत करने के  
Ĥावधान 
957                                                      

11 
 
19. आरएसईटȣआई 
Ĥͧश¢ुओं कȧ आयु 
सीमा 
18-45 वष[ एसएचजी सदèयɉ को समायोिजत करने क े ͧलए 
50 वष[ तक कȧ आयु वालɉ के ͧलए कुछ 
पाɫयĐम 
20. आरएसईटȣआई कȧ 
आईईसी  और Ħांͫडंग 
कोई ͪवशेष Ħांͫडंग 
मैनुअल या पॉͧलसी 
नहȣं।  
एक Ħांͫडंग मैनुअल ͪवकͧसत करना  
21. नए आरएसईटȣआई 
खोलना 
एक िजला एक 
आरएसईटȣआई 
एक िजला एक आरएसईटȣआई (ओडीओआर) कȧ 
पूण[ अनुमǓत के साथ åयवहाय[ता ǐरपोट[ पर 
आधाǐरत नई आरएसईटȣआई 
22. ĤǓत आरएसईटȣआई 
Ĥͧशͯ¢त अßयͬथ[यɉ 
कȧ संÉया 
ĤǓत आरएसईटȣआई 
ĤǓत वष[ 750 
Ĥायोͬगक आधार पर ĤǓत वष[ 750 Ĥͧश¢ु का 
लêय 
23. Ĥͧश¢ण बुǓनयादȣ 
ढांचा और संसाधन 
2 Èलास Ǿम और 
वक[शॉप होनी चाǑहए 
अͬधक संÉया को समायोिजत करने के ͧलए 
आरएसईटȣआई ¢मता का ͪवèतार 
24. मॉडल आरएसईटȣआई 
ͪवकͧसत करना 
ऐसी कोई अवधारणा 
नहȣं 
मॉडल आरएसईटȣआई का ¢ेğ/काय[ भूͧमका 
ͪवͧशçट ͪवकास 
25. मॉडल मानव संसाधन 
नीǓत 
2015 कȧ पुरानी 
नीǓत 
अɮयतन बाजार आधाǐरत एक समान मानव 
संसाधन नीǓत 
26. आरएसईटȣआई भारत कȧ सीमा क े 
भीतर 
अÛय ͪवकासशील देशɉ मɅ Ĥͧश¢ण क े ͧलए 
आरएसईटȣआई मॉडल के  ͪवèतार कȧ खोज करना 
27. ͪवपणन सहायता सीͧमत एकğीकरण/ऑनलाइन के  माÚयम से सतत 
ͪवपणन 
  
नोट - माननीय Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी ने Ǒदनांक 08.10.2023 को ǑदशाǓनदȶश को मंजूरȣ 
दȣ है और मंğालय ɮवारा Ǒदनांक 10 जुलाई 2025 को अͬधसूͬचत ͩकया गया है। 
आरएसईटȣआई 2.0 एसओपी को अंǓतम Ǿप Ǒदया गया है तथा यह अĤैल 2025 से 
Ĥभावी है।  
*** 
 
958                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2368 
 (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
जàमू-कæमीर मɅ Ēामीण ͪवकास 
2368.  Įी गुलाम अलȣ: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) जàमू और कæमीर मɅ राçĚȣय सामािजक सहायता काय[Đम (एनएसएपी) और Ĥधानमंğी 
आवास योजना - Ēामीण (पीएमएवाई-जी) के अंतग[त आने वाले लाभाͬथ[यɉ कȧ पंचायत-वार 
संÉया ͩकतनी है और उनके नाम Èया हɇ, त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(ख) सड़क कȧ लंबाई, ͪवèतार, Ĥारंभ कȧ Ǔतͬथयां और èवीकृत समय-सीमाओं सǑहत ͪवगत 
पांच वषɟ के दौरान जàमू-कæमीर मɅ èवीकृत, ǓनçपाǑदत और पूण[ कȧ गई पीएमजीएसवाई 
सड़क पǐरयोजनाओं का िजला-वार Þयौरा Èया है और ͪवलंब कȧ िèथǓत मɅ, सड़कɉ के  नाम 
और ͪवलंब के कारणɉ का Þयौरा Èया है?  
उƣर 
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
  
(क) राçĚȣय सामािजक सहायता काय[Đम (एनएसएपी) Ēामीण और शहरȣ दोनɉ ¢ेğɉ मɅ 
गरȣबी रेखा से नीचे जीवन यापन करने वाले समाज के सबसे कमजोर åयिÈतयɉ के  ͧलए 
एक सामािजक सुर¢ा काय[Đम है। इस काय[Đम के तहत, गरȣबी रेखा से नीचे (बीपीएल) 
जीवन यापन करने वाले वृɮध, ͪवधवाओं और Ǒदåयांगजनɉ को जो एनएसएपी ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ मɅ 
Ǔनधा[ǐरत पाğता मानदंडɉ को पूरा करते है, उÛहɅ पɅशन के Ǿप मɅ ĤǓत माह 200/- ǽपये से 
लेकर 500/- ǽपये तक कȧ ͪवƣीय सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जाती है, और ऐसे पǐरवार के मुÉय 
कमाने वाले åयिÈत कȧ मृ×यु के मामले मɅ, शोक संतÜत पǐरवार को 20,000/- ǽपये कȧ 
एकमुæत सहायता दȣ जाती है। एनएसएपी 3.09 करोड़ बीपीएल लाभाͬथ[यɉ को सुͪवधा देता है 
959                                                      

िजसमɅ Ĥ×येक राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ क े  ͧलए लाभाͬथ[यɉ पर योजना-वार एक तय सीमा है। 
संघ राÏय ¢ेğ जàमू और कæमीर मɅ एनएसएपी के तहत अͬधकतम सीमा के अनुसार 
लाभाͬथ[यɉ कȧ संÉया 1,50,937 है। Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय एनएसएपी के तहत जàमू और 
कæमीर संघ राÏय ¢ेğ को पाğ लाभाͬथ[यɉ कȧ संÉया के आधार पर Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ करता है, 
िजनका डेटाबेस एनएसएपी-पीपीएस (राçĚȣय सामािजक सहायता काय[Đम - पɅशन भुगतान 
Ĥणालȣ) पोट[ल पर ͫडिजटलȣकृत ͩकया गया है, या लाभाͬथ[यɉ कȧ संÉया कȧ राÏय सीमा, 
दोनɉ मɅ से जो भी कम हो। इसके बाद, िजला/पंचायत èतर पर लाभाͬथ[यɉ को पɅशन संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ ɮवारा दȣ जाती है। 
 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय, Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ "सभी के ͧलए आवास" का लêय के ĤाÜत करने के 
उɮदेæय से 1 अĤैल 2016 से Ĥधानमंğी आवास योजना-Ēामीण (पीएमएवाई -जी) को 
काया[िÛवत कर रहा है, ताͩक माच[ 2029 तक 4.95 करोड़ पाğ Ēामीण पǐरवारɉ को मूलभूत 
सुͪवधाओं वाले आवास के ͧलए सहायता Ĥदान कȧ जा सके । पीएमएवाई -जी के तहत कɅġȣय 
लêय राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ को एक इकाई मानकर सीधे राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ को आवंǑटत 
ͩकए जाते हɇ। इसके बाद, िजला, Þलॉक और Ēाम पंचायत को इन लêयɉ का आवंटन 
संबंͬधत राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ सरकारɉ ɮवारा ͩकया जाता है। लाभाͬथ[यɉ को आवासɉ कȧ 
èवीकृǓत भी राÏयɉ ɮवारा कȧ जानी है िजसके ͧलए मंğालय Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से उनका अनुवत[न 
करता है। पीएमएवाई-जी के तहत, आवास सॉÝट Ēाम पंचायत èतर तक योजना के अंतग[त 
राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ के काय[ Ǔनçपादन पर Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए बनाया गया है। आवंǑटत, 
èवीकृत और पूण[ ͩकए गए आवासɉ और लाभाͬथ[यɉ को अंतǐरत Ǔनͬधयɉ से संबंͬधत 
िजला/Þलॉक/Ēाम पंचायत èतर का डेटा को काय[Đम क ȧ वेबसाइट 
pmayg.dord.gov.in>AwaasSoft---->Reports---->Houses progress against the 
target financial year पर देखा जा सकता है। 
  
संघ राÏय ¢ेğ जàमू और कæमीर को 3,36,498 आवासɉ का लêय आवंǑटत ͩकया गया है, 
िजनके  सापे¢ संघ राÏय ¢ेğ ने 3,34,706 आवासɉ को èवीकृǓत दȣ है और 3,20,417 
आवासɉ को पूरा ͩकया है।  
  
(ख) ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान अथा[त ͪवƣ वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक, कुल 223 
सड़कɉ (1752.118 ͩकमी) और 66 पुलɉ को èवीकृǓत दȣ गई है, जबͩक जàमू और कæमीर 
960                                                      

संघ राÏय ¢ेğ मɅ पीएमजीएसवाई के ͪवͧभÛन घटकɉ क े तहत 1474 सड़कɉ (8640 ͩकमी) 
और 140 पुलɉ को पूरा ͩकया गया है। 
  
पीएमजीएसवाई-I (छƣीसगढ़ को छोड़कर) को पूरा करने कȧ समयसीमा माच[ 2025 को 
समाÜत हो गई है। पीएमजीएसवाई -I ( केवल छƣीसगढ़), पीएमजीएसवाई-II, 
आरसीपीएलडÞãयूईए और पीएमजीएसवाई-III के लंǒबत कायɟ को पूरा करने कȧ समय सीमा 
माच[ 2026 तक बढ़ा दȣ गई है। जैसा ͩक जàमू और कæमीर संघ राÏय ¢ेğ ɮवारा सूͬचत 
ͩकया गया है, जो काय[ पूरा होने कȧ Ǔनधा[ǐरत समयसीमा से लंǒबत हो गए हɇ, वे मुÉय Ǿप 
से Ǔनàनͧलͨखत कारणɉ से हɇ:  
 भूͧम ͪववाद और भूͧम अͬधĒहण के मुɮदे। 
 अदालती मामले। 
 वन मंजूरȣ आवæयकताएं 
 संरचना ¢ǓतपूǓत[ मामले 
 उपयोͬगता èथानांतरण 
 जàमू और कæमीर के बफ[ से ढके ¢ेğɉ मɅ सीͧमत काय[ मौसम। 
 चरण I सड़कɉ के पूरा नहȣं होने और चरण II Ǔनमा[ण को Ĥभाͪवत करने वाले 
एलएसबी के कारण लंǒबत। 
 अनुबंध संबंधी मामले 
पीएमजीएसवाई के ͪवͧभÛन काय[कलापɉ/घटकɉ के  तहत ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान जàमू और 
कæमीर संघ राÏय ¢ेğ को èवीकृत कायɟ का िजले-वार, सड़क-वार ͪववरण 
pmgsy.dord.gov.in ->Proposals->Statewise List of Roads पर देखा जा सकता है। 
***** 
 
961                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2369 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
मनरेगा के अंतग[त ͫडिजटल भुगतान 
2369.  डा. अशोक कुमार ͧमƣल: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 मɅ मनरेगा के अंतग[त मजदूरȣ के भुगतान मɅ देरȣ के औसत Ǒदनɉ 
कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी है, त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) Èया आधार-आधाǐरत भुगतान Ĥणाͧलयɉ क े  कारण Ēामीण Įͧमकɉ के लेनदेन ͪवफल 
हुए हɇ, यǑद हां, तो त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ; 
(ग) गैर-स×याͪपत लाभाͬथ[यɉ को बाहर ͩकए जाने कȧ समèया का समाधान करने के ͧलए 
Èया कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ, त×संबंधी Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(घ) Èया मंğालय मजदूरȣ के समय से और उͬचत संͪवतरण को सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए 
ͫडिजटल भुगतान Ĥणालȣ कȧ èवतंğ समी¢ा करने का ͪवचार रखता है, यǑद हाँ, तो त×संबंधी 
Þयौरा Èया है और यǑद नहȣं, तो इसके Èया कारण हɇ? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क) से (घ): महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा 
योजना) के तहत लाभाͬथ[यɉ को मजदूरȣ का समय पर भुगतान सुǓनिæचत करने और 
लाभाͬथ[यɉ के बɇक खाता संÉया मɅ बार-बार पǐरवत[न और बाद मɅ इसके गैर-अɮयतन रह 
जाने के कारण उ×पÛन होने वालȣ समèयाओं का समाधान करने के ͧलए, आधार भुगतान 
ǒĦज Ĥणालȣ (एपीबी) को लागू करने का Ǔनण[य ͧलया गया था। इसे 1 जनवरȣ 2024 से 
अǓनवाय[ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
एपीबीएस इस योजना के तहत मजदूरȣ ͪवतरण कȧ पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ मɅ 
सुधार करने मɅ मदद करता है और लाभाͬथ[यɉ के खाते मɅ मजदूरȣ का तेजी से Đेͫडट 
सुǓनिæचत करता है। आधार Ĥमाणीकरण लȣकेज और ħçटाचार को भी कम करता है और 
962                                                      

यह सुǓनिæचत करता है ͩक के वल स×याͪपत पहचान वाले वैध लाभाͬथ[यɉ को हȣ मजदूरȣ 
ͧमले। एपीबीएस क े  माÚयम से भुगतान मɅ होने वालȣ ͪवफलता मɅ, भुगतान करने का एक 
वैकिãपक माग[ खाता-आधाǐरत भुगतान के माÚयम से उपलÞध है जो नेशनल ओटॉमेटेड 
िÈलयǐरंग हाउस है। वत[मान मɅ, कुल 12.15 करोड़ सͩĐय Įͧमकɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ 99.67% 
कȧ आधार सीͫडंग पहले हȣ पूरȣ हो चुकȧ है। नरेगासॉÝट मɅ 100% आधार सीͫडंग और 
एपीबीएस Ǿपांतरण ĤाÜत करने के ͧलए कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ कȧ 
लगातार Ǔनगरानी कȧ जा रहȣ है। जब भी ͩकसी मुɮदे को राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ या ͩकसी 
अÛय Ǒहतधारक ɮवारा ͬचिéनत ͩकया जाता है, तो इसे Ĥाथͧमकता के आधार पर सुलझाया 
जाता है। 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत Ǔनगरानी और मूãयांकन एक सतत ĤͩĐया है। 
मंğालय Ǔनयͧमत Ǿप से मÚयावͬध समी¢ा, सामाÛय समी¢ा ͧमशन, Įम बजट बैठकɅ, 
राçĚȣय èतर कȧ Ǔनगरानी, वचु[अल सàमेलन कȧ बैठकɉ और ¢ेğ दौरɉ जैसी ͪवͧभÛन 
Ĥणाͧलयɉ के माÚयम से ͫडिजटल भुगतान सǑहत राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ के Ǔनçपादन कȧ 
समी¢ा करता है। योजना के Ĥभावी काया[Ûवयन कȧ आवæयकता और जǽरतɉ के आधार पर, 
समी¢ा और सुधार काय[ ͩकया जाता है। 
चालू ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 (16.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार) के दौरान महा×मा 
गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मèटर रोल बंद होने के टȣ+8 Ǒदनɉ के भीतर सृिजत Ǔनͬध 
अंतरण आदेशɉ (एफटȣओ) का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार ĤǓतशत अनुबंध मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
963                                                      

राÏय सभा के अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2369 Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 के भाग (क) से (घ) के 
उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध 
  
चालू ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 (16.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार) के दौरान महा×मा गांधी 
नरेगा योजना के तहत मèटर रोल बंद होने के टȣ+8 Ǒदनɉ के भीतर सृिजत Ǔनͬध अंतरण 
आदेशɉ (एफटȣओ) का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार ĤǓतशत। 
Đ. 
सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 के ͧलए टȣ+8 Ǒदन के भीतर 
समय पर एफटȣओ सृजन का ĤǓतशत 
  
1 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 8.35   
2 आंĢ Ĥदेश 99.97   
3 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 64.33   
4 असम 96.67   
5 ǒबहार 94.33   
6 छƣीसगढ 98.45   
7 दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ तथा 
दमन और दȣव 27.35   
8 गोवा 61.44   
9 गुजरात 98.42   
10 हǐरयाणा 80.53   
11 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 96.81   
12 जàमू और कæमीर 91.61   
13 झारखंड 99.97   
14 कना[टक 96.49   
15 केरल 97.89   
16 लɮदाख 68.1   
17 ल¢ɮवीप 0   
964                                                      

18 मÚय Ĥदेश 97.18   
19 महाराçĚ 79.9   
20 मͨणपुर 26.14   
21 मेघालय 77.47   
22 ͧमजोरम 88.56   
23 नागालɇड 53.88   
24 ओͫडशा 98.37   
25 पुदुचेरȣ 31.33   
26 पंजाब 79.66   
27 राजèथान 97.78   
28 ͧसिÈकम 89.46   
29 तͧमलनाडु 99.98   
30 तेलंगाना 99.38   
31 ǒğपुरा 97.23   
32 उƣर Ĥदेश 96.53   
33 उƣराखंड 99.95   
34 पिæचम बंगाल 0   
  कुल 95.15   
(नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार) 
  
  
  
 
965                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
 राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2370 
 (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
असम मɅ राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन 
2370.  सुĮी सुिçमता देव: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) ͪवगत पांच वषɟ के दौरान असम ɮवारा दȣनदयाल अं×योदय योजना-राçĚȣय Ēामीण 
आजीͪवका ͧमशन (डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम) के  अंतग[त आवंǑटत, जारȣ और खच[ कȧ गई 
धनराͧश का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम के अंतग[त असम मɅ माÛयता ĤाÜत गरȣबɉ के ͧलए संèथानɉ 
(आईओपी) कȧ िजला-वार संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(ग) असम मɅ ͪवशेष Ǿप से मǑहला जनजातीय आबादȣ कȧ जǾरतɉ को पूरा करने वाले 
आईओपी का वष[-वार Þयौरा और संÉया Èया है; और 
(घ) उÈत अवͬध के दौरान असम मɅ डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम के आजीͪवका कौशल ͪवकास 
काय[Đम के  अंतग[त Ĥͧशͯ¢त åयिÈतयɉ कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी है? 
उƣर 
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(डॉ. चंġ शेखर पेàमासानी) 
  
(क) दȣनदयाल अं×योदय योजना- राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन (डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम) 
के तहत ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान असम ɮवारा आवंǑटत, जारȣ और åयय कȧ गई Ǔनͬधयɉ 
का ͪववरण अनुबंध-I मɅ Ǒदया गया है 
(ख) दȣनदयाल अं×योदय योजना-राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन (डीएवाई एनआरएलएम) 
के तहत, गरȣबɉ के संèथान (आईओपी) गǑठत ͩकए जाते है िजÛहɅ èवयं सहायता समूह 
(एसएचजी) कहा जाता है। डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम के तहत असम मɅ Ĥो×साǑहत एसएचजी कȧ 
िजले-वार संÉया अनुबंध-II मɅ दȣ गई है। 
966                                                      

ग) असम मɅ अनुसूͬचत जनजाǓतयɉ (एसटȣ) से संबंͬधत डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम के तहत 
Ĥो×साǑहत एसएचजी कȧ संÉया का ͪववरण अनुबंध-III मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
घ) डीएवाई-एनआरएलएम के तहत दो उप-योजनाएं हɇ - नामत: दȣन दयाल उपाÚयाय Ēामीण 
कौशãय योजना ( डीडीयू-जीकेवाई) और Ēामीण èवरोजगार Ĥͧश¢ण संèथान 
(आरएसईटȣआई), जो Ēामीण गरȣब युवाओं के कौशल ͪवकास पर Úयान कɅǑġत करते हɇ 
ताͩक उÛहɅ लाभकारȣ रोजगार Ĥदान ͩकया जा सके और देश मɅ गरȣबी उÛमूलन ͩकया जा 
सके। डीडीयू-जीके वाई के तहत ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान कुल 33,897 åयिÈतयɉ को 
Ĥͧशͯ¢त ͩकया गया है और असम राÏय मɅ आरएसईटȣआई के तहत कुल 75,782 åयिÈतयɉ 
को Ĥͧशͯ¢त ͩकया गया है। 
 ***** 
  
967                                                      

"असम मɅ राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन" के संबंध मɅ राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 
19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदये जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2370 के भाग (क) 
के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध-I  
एनआरएलएम के  तहत ͪपछले 5 वषɟ के दौरान आवंटन, जारȣ और åयय कȧ गई Ǔनͬधयɉ 
का ͪववरण (ǽपये लाख मɅ) 
  
Đ. 
सं  ͪवƣ वष[  कɅġȣय आवंटन जारȣ कɅ ġȣय Ǔनͬध * åयय 
1 2020-21 21,687.67 26,004.66 26,634.03 
2 2021-22 34,298.66 34,298.66 28,967.68 
3 2022-23 38,136.28 38,136.28 45,630.45 
4 2023-24 39,843.04 39,843.04 46,863.45 
5 2024-25 40,687.87 37,626.48 48,504.63 
  कुल 2,04,500.91 1,75,671.99 1,91,516.91 
*नोट- कुल उपलÞध Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ तुलना मɅ åयय िजसमɅ शाͧमल हɇ (शेष राͧश + कɅ ġȣय अंश 
+ राÏय अंश+अÛय ĤािÜतयाँ) 
  
968                                                      

"असम मɅ राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन" के संबंध मɅ राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 
19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदये जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2370 के भाग (ख) 
के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध-II  
एनआरएलएम के तहत असम मɅ Ĥो×साǑहत एसएचजी कȧ िजले-वार संÉया 
  
Đ. 
सं िजले कुल एसएचजी 
1 बजालȣ 4195 
2 बÈसा 8597 
3 बारपेटा 16298 
4 ǒबæवनाथ 10366 
5 बɉगईगांव 8745 
6 कछार 12335 
7 चराइदेव 6066 
8 ͬचरांग 5910 
9 दरांग 14248 
10 धेमाजी 10751 
11 धुबरȣ 20648 
12 ͫडĦूगढ़ 11815 
13 
Ǒदमा हसाओ उƣरȣ कछार 
पहाͫड़याँ 2152 
14 गोलपाड़ा 12210 
15 गोलाघाट 14141 
16 हैलाकांडी 6193 
17 होजाई 9241 
18 जोरहाट 10218 
969                                                      

19 कामǾप 20302 
20 कामǾप-मेĚो 3118 
21 काबȸ आंगलɉग 8284 
22 करȣमगंज 8120 
23 कोकराझार 11404 
24 लखीमपुर 14763 
25 माजुलȣ 3332 
26 मोरȣगांव 11171 
27 नगांव 24556 
28 नलबाड़ी 11687 
29 ͧशवसागर 9184 
30 सोǓनतपुर 14726 
31 दͯ¢ण सलमारा-मनकचर 4898 
32 तामुलपुर 6541 
33 Ǔतनसुͩकया 10534 
34 उदलगुड़ी 11196 
35 पिæचम काबȸ आंगलɉग 4000 
  
  
970                                                      

"असम मɅ राçĚȣय Ēामीण आजीͪवका ͧमशन" के संबंध मɅ राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 
19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदये जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 2370 के भाग (ग) 
के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध-III 
  
असम मɅ अनुसूͬचत जनजाǓतयɉ (एसटȣ) के èवयं सहायता समूहɉ कȧ संÉया का िजला-वार 
Þयौरा  
  
Đ. 
सं  िजले अ.ज.जा. के एसएचजी कȧ संÉया 
1 बजालȣ 222 
2 बÈसा 3824 
3 बारपेटा 165 
4 ǒबæवनाथ 2031 
5 बɉगईगांव 209 
6 कछार 323 
7 चराइदेव 246 
8 ͬचरांग 2641 
9 दरांग 611 
10 धेमाजी 5774 
11 धुबरȣ 684 
12 ͫडĦूगढ़ 1569 
13 
Ǒदमा हसाओ उƣरȣ कछार 
पहाͫड़याँ 1899 
14 गोलपाड़ा 2807 
15 गोलाघाट 1755 
16 हैलाकांडी 144 
971                                                      

17 होजाई 709 
18 जोरहाट 835 
19 कामǾप 2520 
20 कामǾप-मेĚो 772 
21 काबȸ आंगलɉग 5937 
22 करȣमगंज 155 
23 कोकराझार 3918 
24 लखीमपुर 4157 
25 माजुलȣ 1629 
26 मोरȣगांव 2027 
27 नगांव 2022 
28 नलबाड़ी 410 
29 ͧशवसागर 650 
30 सोǓनतपुर 1822 
31 दͯ¢ण सलमारा-मनकचर 57 
32 तामुलपुर 2575 
33 Ǔतनसुͩकया 1305 
34 उदलगुड़ी 4507 
35 पिæचम काबȸ आंगलɉग 3010 
  
 
972                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं.2371 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
मनरेगा जॉब काड[ को हटाना 
2371.  Įी ǓतǽÍची ͧशवा: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) ͪवगत पांच वषɟ के दौरान मनरेगा जॉब काड[ से हटाए गए Įͧमकɉ कȧ संÉया का राÏय-वार 
Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ख) Èया यह सच है ͩक हाल हȣ मɅ मनरेगा डेटाबेस से 27 लाख Įͧमकɉ को हटाया गया है, और 
यǑद हां, तो इसके  Èया कारण हɇ और त×संबंधी राÏय-वार Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) हटाए गए Įͧमकɉ कȧ संÉया मɅ वृɮͬध होने के Èया कारण हɇ; 
(घ) ͧशकायत Ǔनवारण तंğ के अंतग[त Įͧमकɉ से राÏय-वार ͩकतनी ͧशकायतɅ ĤाÜत हुई हɇ, ऐसी 
ͧशकायतɉ कȧ िèथǓत Èया है और ये ͧशकायतɅ ͩकतने समय से लंǒबत हɇ, त×संबंधी राÏय-वार Þयौरा 
Èया है; 
(ङ) Èया यह सच है ͩक दज[ कȧ गई ͧशकायतɉ मɅ से 50 ĤǓतशत ͧशकायतɅ अभी भी लंǒबत हɇ, यǑद 
हां, तो देरȣ के Èया कारण हɇ; और 
(च) Èया Įͧमकɉ, ͪवशेषकर मǑहलाओं, के ͧलए ई-केवाईसी ĤͩĐया को आसान बनाने के ͧलए कोई 
कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ?  
उƣर 
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
  
(क) से (ग): महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना एक मांग आधाǐरत मजदूरȣ रोजगार योजना है और इस 
योजना के काया[Ûवयन कȧ िजàमेदारȣ संबंͬधत राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ सरकारɉ कȧ है। जॉब काड[ को 
अɮयतन करना/हटाना राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ ɮवारा ͩकए जाने वालȣ Ǔनयͧमत ĤͩĐया है। जॉब काड[ 
मुÉय Ǿप से जालȣ/डुÜलȣके ट/गलत जॉब काड[, पǐरवार को Ēाम पंचायत से èथायी Ǿप से हटाने, 
Ēाम पंचायत को शहरȣ के Ǿप मɅ वगȸकृत करने और जॉब काड[ मɅ केवल एक सदèय का नाम होने 
और उसकȧ मृ×यु होने आǑद कारणɉ से हटाए जाते हɇ। हालांͩक, मज़दूरɉ/जॉब काड[ को हटाते/ͧमटाते 
973                                                      

समय, राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को अͬधǓनयम के Ǔनयमɉ और मंğालय ɮवारा जारȣ मानक संचालन 
ĤͩĐया का पालन करना होता है, ताͩक यह सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सके ͩक ͩकसी भी पाğ या योÊय 
पǐरवार का जॉब काड[ हटाया/Ǔनरèत न ͩकया जाए। 
जॉब काड[ हटाने कȧ ĤͩĐया को सरल बनाने के ͧलए, Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय ने हाल हȣ मɅ 
सभी राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को Ǒदनांक 25.01.2025 के पğ के  माÚयम से एक मानक संचालन 
ĤͩĐया (एसओपी) जारȣ कȧ है, िजसमɅ जॉब काड[ हटाने और वापस जोड़ने के ͧलए èपçट Ǒदशा 
Ǔनदȶश हɇ। मानक संचालन ĤͩĐया महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के Ǒदशा Ǔनदȶशɉ का पालन 
सुǓनिæचत करती है, पारदͧश[ता को बढ़ावा देती है, नाम हटाने कȧ शतɏ तय करके  कामगारɉ के 
अͬधकारɉ कȧ सुर¢ा करती है, ͧशकायत Ǔनèतारण Ĥणालȣ बनाती है, और नाम हटाने/Ǔनरèत करने 
से पहले, अगर कोई लंǒबत देनदारȣ है तो उसका Ǔनèतारण सुǓनिæचत करती है। 
मानक संचालन ĤͩĐया मɅ सहȣ ĤͩĐया के मह×व पर ज़ोर Ǒदया गया है, िजसमɅ हटाए जाने 
के ͧलए ͬचिÛहत ͩकए गए जॉब काड[ कȧ मसौदा सूची का Ĥकाशन, Ēाम सभाओं मɅ स×यापन, और 
Ĥभाͪवत कामगारɉ के ͧलए अपील का अͬधकार शाͧमल है। इसमɅ जालȣ और गलत Ĥͪविçटयɉ को 
ख×म करने के ͧलए जॉब काड[ को आधार से जोड़ना भी अǓनवाय[ ͩकया गया है। इन उपायɉ का 
उɮदेæय जॉब काड[ के गलत उपयोग को रोकना है, साथ हȣ यह सुǓनिæचत करना है ͩक सहȣ 
लाभाथȸ बाहर न हो। मंğालय महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना कȧ Ĥामाͨणकता बनाए रखने और यह 
सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए ĤǓतबɮध है ͩक इस योजना का फ़ायदा पाğ Ēामीण पǐरवारɉ तक पहुंचे। 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत ͪवƣीय वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक जोड़े गए जॉब 
काड[ कȧ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार संÉया और हटाए गए जॉब काड[ कȧ संÉया अनुबंध-I मɅ दȣ गई 
है। 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत चालू ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 (15.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के 
अनुसार) के दौरान जोड़े गए और हटाए गए Įͧमकɉ कȧ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार संÉया अनुबंध-II 
मɅ दȣ गई है। 
  
(घ) और (ङ): कɅġȣकृत लोक ͧशकायत Ǔनèतारण और Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ (सीपीĒाàस) पर दज[ 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना से संबंͬधत 1 अĤैल, 2025 से 15 Ǒदसंबर, 2025 तक कȧ अवͬध के 
ͧलए लंǒबत रहने कȧ अवͬध के साथ, जनता से ĤाÜत ͧशकायतɅ, Ǔनèताǐरत कȧ गई और लंǒबत 
ͧशकायतɉ कȧ कुल संÉया का ͪववरण राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार अनुबंध-III मɅ Ǒदया गया है।   
  
(च): जॉब काड[ स×यापन एक सतत ĤͩĐया है, Èयɉͩक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत 5 
वष[ मɅ एक बार जॉब काड[ नवीनीकरण ͩकया जाना अपेͯ¢त है। इन वैधाǓनक ĤͩĐयाओं को सरल 
बनाने और Ĥो×साǑहत करने के ͧलए, राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ से अनुरोध ͩकया गया है ͩक वे जॉब 
काड[ स×यापन और बाद मɅ नवीनीकरण के ͧलए एनएमएमएस ऐप (नेशनल मोबाइल मॉǓनटǐरंग 
974                                                      

ͧसèटम) मɅ पहले से उपलÞध ई-केवाईसी सुͪवधा का उपयोग करɅ। इसका उɮदेæय समयबɮध, 
पारदशȸ और कुशल तरȣके से जॉब काड[ स×यापन करने मɅ राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ कȧ सहायता करना 
है। ई-केवाईसी सुͪवधा का उपयोग जॉब काड[ के स×यापन के सरल, ͪवæवसनीय, सटȣक और कुशल 
तरȣके के Ǿप मɅ ͩकया जा सकता है, चूंͩक 99.67% सͩĐय Įͧमकɉ का आधार पहले हȣ जुड़ चुका 
है। राÏयɉ को सलाह दȣ गई है ͩक वे नेटवक[ जुड़ाव आǑद जैसे मुɮदɉ को हल करके  ĤͩĐया को 
यथासंभव सुचाǾ बनाने के ͧलए आवæयक उपाय करɅ। राÏय ɮवारा èपçट ͩकए अनुसार ई-केवाईसी 
कहȣं भी ͩकया जा सकता है जैसे - काय[èथल पर, Ēाम पंचायत ɮवारा आयोिजत ͪवशेष ͧशͪवर 
आǑद। यह एक ĤगǓतशील कदम है िजसका उɮदेæय महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत 
पारदͧश[ता, द¢ता और सेवा ͪवतरण मɅ आसानी को सु͸ढ़ करना है। जमीनी èतर के पदाͬधकाǐरयɉ 
को स×यापन ĤͩĐया को यथासंभव सुचाǾ बनाने के ͧलए ͪवͧभÛन मंचɉ के माÚयम से पया[Üत Ǿप 
से उÛमुख, सजग और Ĥͧशͯ¢त ͩकया गया है। ई-केवाईसी के माÚयम से जॉब काड[ का स×यापन 
01.09.2025 से शुǾ हुआ और यह अभी भी चल रहा है। अब तक 11.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के 
अनुसार 65.05% सͩĐय Įͧमकɉ का ई-केवाईसी पूरा हो चुका है। 
  
975                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदये जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 
2371 के भाग (क) से (ग) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध-I 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के  तहत ͪवƣीय वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक जोड़े गए व हटाए 
गए जॉब काड[ कȧ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार संÉया । 
Đ. 
सं. 
राÏय/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ 
कȧ सं. 
जोड़े गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
जोड़े गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
जोड़े गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
जोड़े गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ कȧ 
सं. 
जोड़े 
गए 
जॉब 
काडɟ 
कȧ सं. 
1 
आंĢ 
Ĥदेश 3426 59901
5 
18507
9 
30659
4 
28827
24 
19446
2 
37032
6 
27144
3 
14847
8 
31285
1 
2 
अǽणाचल 
Ĥदेश 6151 25738 9596 30951 8875 24736 12869 26745 15651 29200 
3 असम 9658
6 
63201
2 76244 58402
1 
15713
8 
65214
7 
28214
2 
11464
2 
57622
0 
31633
8 
4 ǒबहार 1824
07 
23856
07 
12735
14 
26680
27 
58702
25 
10998
70 
21120
92 
10001
69 
98128
4 
80738
82 
5 छƣीसगढ 1703
04 
40081
2 
13966
0 
11676
1 
26483
9 84719 29454
4 
11276
1 
39902
6 
27821
9 
6 गोवा 8 907 11 530 21 645 24 369 53 441 
7 गुजरात 1310
80 
51931
3 40289 18884
3 
14614
1 
14208
5 
33853
3 94251 53616 62266
8 
8 हǐरयाणा 1541
3 
17458
5 8531 73698 11028 38389 8834 69744 6237 10336
4 
9 
Ǒहमाचल 
Ĥदेश 8000 87479 10351 87572 18119 35869 15543 36674 4559 46205 
10 
जàमू 
और 
कæमीर 
9407
8 
12278
5 37635 78390 38388 41100 73015 23502 30123 95742 
11 झारखंड 8942
7 
14699
67 
22867
4 
39204
3 
95425
2 
45780
0 
32452
4 
82381
5 
17695
6 
53306
1 
976                                                      

12 कना[टक 7197 73719
7 41843 50172
2 
20318
5 
44866
4 96036 21624
8 27286 18048
8 
13 केरल 2377
3 
27080
4 27340 22260
2 
11072
2 
11092
2 
21875
2 84672 89300 92186 
14 लɮदाख 1336 1927 889 1034 1421 1008 897 652 452 789 
15 
मÚय 
Ĥदेश 
1062
861 
15781
65 
11001
09 
63639
6 
36634
9 
53738
8 
69527
8 
48678
8 51890 58887
2 
16 महाराçĚ 4846
0 
95295
1 28201 21977
74 72863 45401
6 37625 70765
9 26449 59799
3 
17 मͨणपुर 1112
6 22242 4449 11513 3153 5806 5778 14623 6395 21704 
18 मेघालय 8119 32181 5449 24233 3832 22702 15375 23206 13181 42502 
19 ͧमजोरम 9896 15782 8580 8610 4149 7891 4902 7314 9988 11061 
20 नागालɇड 1136 11853 1797 10191 2528 10811 3759 7995 8999 22596 
21 ओͫडशा 3136
21 
89568
0 
79329
2 
39713
0 
23700
31 
35240
1 
52362
2 
34074
2 
28600
9 
88099
7 
22 पंजाब 1433
0 
22287
6 65858 67912 34065
9 85269 69225 81560 20981 16796
9 
23 राजèथान 1176
60 
10173
78 
12928
5 
42445
9 
63480
0 
24539
0 
39379
7 
25982
9 55563 47949
3 
24 ͧसिÈकम 784 3204 1343 1745 1409 1779 2133 2159 1969 1701 
25 तͧमलनाडु 1260
17 
53295
1 
15506
5 
33743
2 
31504
9 
24909
1 
65367
7 
28906
3 
63382
0 
16858
0 
26 तेलंगाना 5282 34920
1 15976 13372
7 
51068
3 64611 84744 10565
2 80166 84168 
27 ǒğपुरा 8684 17387 5951 19332 5938 18757 20798 15578 8742 27075 
28 
उƣर 
Ĥदेश 
2018
71 
42134
97 
58207
4 
16744
45 
48580
64 
75605
5 
33151
58 
49173
3 91568 15105
46 
29 उƣराखंड 1650
8 
11583
8 26004 30541 14809
8 24081 44229 27515 45150 31360 
30 पिæचम 1937
4 
16822
97 27741 82522
5 
21775
36 
21383
8 
16969
1 1726 9026 4581 
977                                                      

बंगाल 
31 
अंडमान 
और 
Ǔनकोबार 
1528 1241 448 222 143 446 70 616 308 428 
32 
दादरा 
नगर 
हवेलȣ 
और दमन 
तथा दȣव 
0 126 0 6667 0 89 2 186 14 1184 
33 ल¢ɮवीप 1 13 8 112 18 76 52 165 37 36 
34 पुदुचेरȣ 245 3760 258 1556 4394 1284 606 4691 480 2043 
  कुल 2796
689 
19096
771 
50315
44 
12062
010 
22486
774 
63841
97 
10188
652 
57444
87 
38599
76 
15330
323 
  
978                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदये जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 
2371 के भाग (क) से (ग) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध-II 
महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत चालू ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 (15.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत क े  
अनुसार) के दौरान जोड़े गए और हटाए गए Įͧमकɉ कȧ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार संÉया 
Đ. सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ 
ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 (15.12.2025 ͩक िèथǓत के 
अनुसार) 
हटाए गए Įͧमकɉ क ȧ 
संÉया जोड़े गए Įͧमकɉ कȧ संÉया 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 1834938 473548 
2 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 31810 27354 
3 असम 112157 1121556 
4 ǒबहार 125707 1807842 
5 छƣीसगढ 512336 505920 
6 गोवा 12 1002 
7 गुजरात 70650 178840 
8 हǐरयाणा 10848 196253 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 69614 35653 
10 जàमू और कæमीर 251213 101682 
11 झारखंड 57462 391302 
12 कना[टक 627806 346255 
13 केरल 81581 145800 
14 लɮदाख 3430 2166 
15 मÚय Ĥदेश 78769 648755 
16 महाराçĚ 282855 3668064 
17 मͨणपुर 41239 53591 
18 मेघालय 16666 45892 
19 ͧमजोरम 21822 20614 
979                                                      

20 नागालɇड 225614 63472 
21 ओͫडशा 358684 451645 
22 पंजाब 65472 113045 
23 राजèथान 192842 394691 
24 ͧसिÈकम 4871 2990 
25 तͧमलनाडु 151259 111167 
26 तेलंगाना 501608 57904 
27 ǒğपुरा 64197 37931 
28 उƣर Ĥदेश 73984 1317011 
29 उƣराखंड 64156 30950 
30 पिæचम बंगाल 106 11886 
31 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 1276 901 
32 
दादरा नगर हवेलȣ तथा दमन और 
दȣव 186 5130 
33 ल¢ɮवीप 345 89 
34 पुदुचेरȣ 568 2134 
  कुल 5936083 12373035 
  
  
  
  
  
  
980                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदये जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 
2371 के भाग (घ) से (ङ) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध-III 
Đ. 
सं. 
राÏय/ संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ 
ĤाÜत कुल 
ͧशकायतɅ 
इस दौरान 
Ǔनèताǐरत 
15 Ǒदसंबर 
2025 तक 
कुल लंǒबत 
0-10 
Ǒदन 
11-
21 
Ǒदन 
22-
30 
Ǒदन 
31-
45 
Ǒदन 
46-
60 
Ǒदन 
61-
90 
Ǒदन 
91-
180 
Ǒदन 
1 
अंडमान और 
Ǔनकोबार 
ɮवीप  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 आंĢ Ĥदेश  97 91 6 2 1 3 0 0 0 0 
3 
अǽणाचल 
Ĥदेश  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
4 असम  35 32 3 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 
5 ǒबहार  525 468 57 16 6 1 6 12 16 0 
6 छƣीसगढ  72 62 10 1 4 1 1 1 0 2 
7 गुजरात  66 59 7 2 1 2 0 1 1 0 
8 हǐरयाणा  36 30 6 0 0 0 2 4 0 0 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 28 28 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 झारखंड  189 159 30 2 5 13 8 1 1 0 
11 कना[टक  90 80 10 7 3 0 0 0 0 0 
12 केरल  6 5 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
13 ल¢ɮवीप  1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
14 महाराçĚ  37 37 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 मͨणपुर  12 11 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 
16 मेघालय  1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 
17 ͧमजोरम  4 3 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
18 नागालɇड  3 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
981                                                      

19 ओͫडशा  103 92 11 5 4 1 1 0 0 0 
20 पुदुचेरȣ  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
21 पंजाब  75 67 8 1 2 1 0 1 3 0 
22 राजèथान  222 192 30 9 9 1 5 5 1 0 
23 ͧसिÈकम  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 तͧमलनाडु  198 189 9 7 1 1 0 0 0 0 
25 तेलंगाना  10 9 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
26 ǒğपुरा  5 4 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 
27 उƣर Ĥदेश  643 580 63 28 18 8 9 0 0 0 
28 पिæचम बंगाल 24 19 5 1 1 1 2 0 0 0 
29 गोवा 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
30 
जàमू और 
कæमीर 79 72 7 4 1 0 2 0 0 0 
31 लɮदाख 0                   
32 मÚय Ĥदेश 145 126 19 2 3 2 4 4 4 0 
33 उƣराखंड 43 33 10 1 0 1 7 0 1 0 
  कुल 2749 2452 297 90 62 36 50 30 27 2 
  
 
982                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं.2372 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
रायगढ़ िजले मɅ मनरेगा के काया[Ûवयन कȧ िèथǓत 
2372.  Įी धैय[शील मोहन पाǑटल: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) Èया सरकार रायगढ़ मɅ महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (मनरेगा) के 
काया[Ûवयन से संबंͬधत ͪवèतृत आंकड़े रखती है, िजनमɅ जारȣ ͩकए गए जॉब काड[, Ǔनयोिजत पǐरवार, 
रोजगार Ǒदवस, मजदूरȣ दर और åयय शाͧमल हɇ; 
(ख) जॉब काड[, काम पाने वाले पǐरवारɉ, औसत रोजगार Ǒदवस, मजदूरȣ और जारȣ/उपयोग कȧ गई 
धनराͧश से संबंͬधत नवीनतम िजला-वार आंकड़े Èया हɇ; 
(ग) जनजातीय और दूरदराज के पǐरवारɉ के ͧलए इस योजना कȧ Ĥभावशीलता Èया है और 100 Ǒदन के 
काम और समय पर मजदूरȣ भुगतान सुǓनिæचत करने के उपाय Èया हɇ; और 
(घ) िजला èतरȣय आंकड़ɉ कȧ पहुंच, पारदͧश[ता, सामािजक संपरȣ¢ा और साव[जǓनक ǐरपोǑटɍग मɅ सुधार 
के ͧलए Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ? 
उƣर 
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
  
(क): सरकार नरेगासॉÝट नामक Ĥबंधन सूचना Ĥणालȣ (एमआईएस) के माÚयम से महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय 
Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) के काया[Ûवयन पर åयापक और वाèतͪवक 
समय का डेटा रखती है। 
नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार, 13.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 के दौरान 
महाराçĚ के रायगढ़ िजले मɅ जारȣ ͩकए गए जॉब काड[, पǐरवारɉ को Ǒदए गए रोजगार, सृिजत ͩकए गए 
ĮमǑदवस, अͬधसूͬचत मजदूरȣ दरɉ और ͩकए गए åयय का ͪववरण Ǔनàनानुसार है: 
महाराçĚ का जारȣ ͩकए गए रोजगार ĤाÜत सृिजत  अͬधसूͬचत åयय 
983                                                      

िजला जॉब काड[ पǐरवारɉ  ĮमǑदवस मजदूरȣ दरɅ 
(ǽपए मɅ) 
(ǽपए लाख 
मɅ) 
रायगढ़ 209601 21586 673822 312 3353.57 
(नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार) 
  
(ख):  Ǔनàनͧलͨखत ͧलंक पर नरेगासॉÝट कȧ ǐरपोट[ नंबर R1.1.1 के  माÚयम से िजला-वार 
पंजीकृत Įͧमक/जॉब काड[ देखे जा सकते है, जो साव[जǓनक डोमेन मɅ उपलÞध है: 
https://nreganarep.nic.in/netnrega/app_issue.aspx?lflag=eng&fin_year=2025-
2026&source=national&labels=labels&Digest=0a5fZ+hdCIswROP5LqpxKg 
पǐरवारɉ को Ĥदान ͩकए गए िजले-वार रोजगार और ĤǓत पǐरवार Ĥदान ͩकए गए रोजगार के 
औसत Ǒदनɉ को Ǔनàनͧलͨखत ͧलंक पर नरेगासॉÝट कȧ ǐरपोट[ संÉया R7.1.2 के माÚयम से देखा 
जा सकता है, जो साव[जǓनक डोमेन मɅ उपलÞध है:  
https://mnregaweb4.nic.in/netnrega/state_html/outlayvscomest.aspx?lflag=eng&fin_year=2
025-2026&source=national&labels=labels&Digest=0a5fZ+hdCIswROP5LqpxKg 
Ǔनàनͧलͨखत ͧलंक पर नरेगासॉÝट कȧ ǐरपोट[ संÉया R7.1.1 के माÚयम से िजला-वार ͪवƣीय 
ͪववरण ĤाÜत देखा जा सकता है, जो साव[जǓनक डोमेन मɅ उपलÞध है: 
https://mnregaweb4.nic.in/netnrega/Citizen_html/financialstatement.aspx?lflag=eng&fin_y
ear=2025-2026&source=national&labels=labels&Digest=0a5fZ+hdCIswROP5LqpxKg 
यहां, यह उãलेखनीय है ͩक जबͩक मजदूरȣ भुगतान सीधे कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण 
(डीबीटȣ) Ĥोटोकॉल के माÚयम से लाभाͬथ[यɉ के खाते मɅ जमा ͩकया जाता है, सामĒी घटक के 
ͧलए, राÏय सरकार को Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ कȧ जाती है, और बाद मɅ राÏय एसएनए èपश[ मॉɬयूल के 
माÚयम से िजलɉ को Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ करते है।  
  
(ग):   महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा 
अͬधǓनयम), 2005 एक ऐसा अͬधǓनयम है जो Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ मɅ ऐसे Ĥ×येक पǐरवार िजनके 
वयèक सदèय अकुशल शारȣǐरक Įम करने के इÍछुक हɇ, उÛहɅ कम से कम 100 Ǒदनɉ का 
गारंटȣयुÈत मजदूरȣ रोजगार Ĥदान करके देश के Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ के पǐरवारɉ कȧ आजीͪवका सुर¢ा मɅ 
वृɮͬध करने का Ĥावधान करता है। 
        
984                                                      

मंğालय वन ¢ेğ मɅ Ĥ×येक अनुसूͬचत जनजाǓत पǐरवार को अǓतǐरÈत 50 Ǒदनɉ के मजदूरȣ 
रोजगार (Ǔनधा[ǐरत 100 Ǒदनɉ के अǓतǐरÈत) के ͧलए अǓनवाय[ Ĥावधान करता है, बशतȶ ͩक वन 
अͬधकार अͬधǓनयम (एफआरए), 2006 के तहत Ĥदान ͩकए गए भूͧम अͬधकारɉ के अलावा इन 
पǐरवारɉ के  पास कोई अÛय Ǔनजी संपͪƣ नहȣं हो। 
  
इसके  अलावा, सूखा/ĤाकृǓतक आपदा Ĥभाͪवत अͬधसूͬचत Ēामीण ¢ेğɉ मɅ एक ͪवƣीय वष[ मɅ 
अǓतǐरÈत 50 Ǒदनɉ तक मजदूरȣ रोजगार Ĥदान करने का Ĥावधान है। साथ हȣ अͬधǓनयम कȧ 
धारा 3(4) के अनुसार, राÏय सरकारɅ अपने èवयं कȧ Ǔनͬधयɉ से अͬधǓनयम के तहत गारंटȣकृत 
अवͬध के अलावा अǓतǐरÈत Įम Ǒदवस Ĥदान करने का Ĥावधान कर सकती हɇ। 
इस योजना के Ĥावधानɉ के बारे मɅ जागǾकता फैलाने करने और महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के 
तहत Ēामीण पǐरवारɉ को रोजगार के पया[Üत अवसर Ĥदान करने के ͧलए, सभी राÏय/संघ राÏय 
¢ेğ अͬधǓनयम के Ĥावधानɉ के बड़े पैमाने पर Ĥचार-Ĥसार के ͧलए दȣवार पɅǑटंग सǑहत उͬचत 
सूचना, ͧश¢ा और संचार (आईईसी) अͧभयान चलाते हɇ, मांग पंजीकरण Ĥणालȣ के दायरे और 
कवरेज का ͪवèतार करते हɇ ताͩक यह सुǓनिæचत हो सके ͩक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के 
तहत काय[ कȧ मांग अपंजीकृत न रह जाए, भागीदारȣ मोड मɅ योजनाएं तैयार करते हɇ और उÛहɅ 
Ēाम सभा मɅ अनुमोदन करवाते हɇ और 'रोज़गार Ǒदवस' का आयोजन सुǓनिæचत करते हɇ। 
इसके  अलावा, यह भी उãलेखनीय है ͩक पǐरवार महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत èवयं को 
पंजीकृत कर सकते हɇ और Ēाम पंचायतɉ सǑहत कई मंचɉ पर रोजगार ĤाÜत कर सकते हɇ। ¢ेğ 
अͬधकाǐरयɉ को इÍछुक अकुशल Įͧमकɉ को कवर करने के ͧलए Ĥ×येक महȣने कम से कम एक 
बार रोजगार Ǒदवस आयोिजत करने का Ǔनदȶश Ǒदया गया है। 
मजदूरȣ के समय पर भुगतान के संबंध मɅ, यह उãलेख ͩकया गया है ͩक अͬधǓनयम के Ĥावधानɉ 
के अनुसार, लाभाथȸ काय[ पूरा होने के 15 Ǒदनɉ के भीतर मजदूरȣ भुगतान ĤाÜत करने के हकदार 
हɇ। भारत सरकार ने समय पर भुगतान सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए सभी राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को 
एक åयापक मानक संचालन ĤͩĐया (एसओपी) जारȣ कȧ है, जो मजदूरȣ भुगतान ĤͩĐया के 
Ĥ×येक चरण के ͧलए Ǔनिæचत समय सीमा मèटर रोल अपलोड से एफटȣओ अनुमोदन तक को 
पǐरभाͪषत करती है। मंğालय राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ के साथ ͧमलकर समय पर मजदूरȣ के 
भुगतान मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए ठोस Ĥयास करता रहा है। राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को समय पर 
भुगतान आदेश सृिजत करने कȧ सलाह दȣ गई है। 
मंğालय ने महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) के 
तहत Įͧमकɉ को समय पर मजदूरȣ का भुगतान सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए ͪवͧभÛन कदम उठाए 
हɇ। इनमɅ शाͧमल हɇ: 
985                                                      

 राçĚȣय इलेÈĚॉǓनक Ǔनͬध Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (एनई-एफएमएस) मɅ सुधार 
 मजदूरȣ का समय पर भुगतान, लंǒबत और ͪवलंǒबत मुआवजे के दावɉ के  स×यापन आǑद 
को सुǓनिæचत करने के  ͧलए राÏय सरकारɉ और अÛय Ǒहतधारकɉ क े साथ गहन परामश[ 
करना। 
 समय पर भुगतान कȧ Ǔनगरानी और ͪवलंब मुआवजे के भुगतान के ͧलए मानक संचालन 
ĤͩĐया तैयार करना। 
 राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ के  साथ आवͬधक बैठकɉ के दौरान समय पर भुगतान और ͪवलंब 
मुआवजे के भुगतान कȧ िèथǓत कȧ समी¢ा करना, Ǔनçपादन समी¢ा सͧमǓत कȧ बैठकɅ, 
मÚयावͬध समी¢ा करना आǑद। 
इसके  अलावा, मजदूरȣ का समय पर भुगतान सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए ͪवͧभÛन तकनीकȧ 
काय[कलापɉ के माÚयम से मंğालय ɮवारा Ǔनरंतर Ĥयास ͩकए गए हɇ। कुछ Ĥमुख काय[कलापɉ मɅ 
Ǔनàन शाͧमल हɇ: 
 Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ): कɅġȣय खाते से मजदूरȣ सीधे Įͧमकɉ के बɇक खातɉ मɅ 
अंतǐरत कȧ जाती है, िजससे मÚयèथɉ कȧ भूͧमका कम होती है और Ǔनͬध का दुǽपयोग 
कम होता है। यह पारदͧश[ता बढ़ाने और लȣकेज को कम करने मɅ Ĥभावी साǒबत हुआ है। 
Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ) Ĥोटोकॉल के माÚयम से पूरȣ तरह से ͩकए गए मजदूरȣ 
भुगतान के साथ लगभग 100% Ǔनͬधयां इलेÈĚॉǓनक Ǿप से Ĥबंͬधत कȧ जाती है। 
 आधार भुगतान ǒĦज Ĥणालȣ (एपीबीएस): एपीबीएस Ǿपांतरण एक Ĥमुख सुधार ĤͩĐया है 
िजसमɅ महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत लाभ सीधे Įͧमकɉ के आधार से बɇक खातɉ 
मɅ जमा ͩकए जाते हɇ, अͬधमानतः आधार आधाǐरत भुगतान, ͪवतरण ĤͩĐया मɅ कई èतर 
कम हो जाते हɇ। एपीबीएस बेहतर लêय, Ĥणालȣ कȧ द¢ता बढ़ाने और भुगतान मɅ देरȣ को 
कम करने, लȣकेज को कम करके अͬधक समावेशन सुǓनिæचत करने मɅ मदद करता है 
िजससे अͬधक जवाबदेहȣ और पारदͧश[ता को बढ़ावा ͧमलता है। 
 राçĚȣय मोबाइल Ǔनगरानी Ĥणालȣ (एनएमएमएस): काय[èथल पर िजयो-टैग कȧ गई तèवीरɉ 
के माÚयम से वाèतͪवक समय पर उपिèथǓत दज[ करना, उपिèथǓत सटȣक और समय पर 
दज[ करना सुǓनिæचत करता है, जो मजदूरȣ के समय पर भुगतान मɅ मदद करता है। 
(घ):   यह योजना नरेगासॉÝट नामक पूण[त: एकȧकृत ĚांजेÈशन-आधाǐरत Ĥबंधन सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
(एमआईएस) Üलेटफॉम[ पर काया[िÛवत कȧ जाती है। इसके ɮवारा, योजना कȧ आयोजना, 
ĤशासǓनक और तकनीकȧ èवीकृǓत, जॉब काड[ जारȣ करना, मांग èवीकार करना, मèटर रोल जारȣ 
करना, काय[ का मापन, भुगतान का अनुमोदन और Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ)-साव[जǓनक 
ͪवƣीय Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (पीएफएमएस) Üलेटफॉम[ ɮवारा लाभाथȸ को अंǓतम भुगतान से संबंͬधत 
सभी पहलुओं कȧ Ǔनगरानी कȧ जाती है।  
986                                                      

Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय ने ͪवͧभÛन तकनीकȧ काय[कलापɉ के माÚयम से राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ मɅ 
योजना के काया[Ûवयन मɅ पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए एक मजबूत ĤͩĐया 
अपनाई है। योजना के उͬचत काया[Ûवयन को सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए Ǔनगरानी और मूãयांकन के 
ͧलए ͩकए गए ͪवͧभÛन तकनीकȧ काय[कलापɉ के बारे मɅ एक संͯ¢Üत नोट अनुबंध मɅ Ǒदया गया 
है। 
  
  
987                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदये जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन संÉया 
2372  के भाग (घ) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध। 
i. Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ): महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार योजना (महा×मा गांधी 
नरेगा योजना) के अंतग[त मजदूरȣ भुगतान मɅ Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण (डीबीटȣ) Ĥणालȣ अपनाई गई 
है। महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना Įͧमकɉ के बɇक/डाकघर खातɉ मɅ मजदूरȣ का भुगतान राçĚȣय 
इलेÈĚॉǓनक Ǔनͬध Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (एनईएफएमएस)/इलेÈĚॉǓनक Ǔनͬध Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ 
(ईएफएमएस) के माÚयम से ͩकया जाता है। 
ii. राçĚȣय मोबाइल Ǔनगरानी सेवा (एनएमएमएस): यह महा×मा गांधी नरेगा काय[èथलɉ 
(åयिÈतगत लाभाथȸ कायɟ को छोड़कर) पर Įͧमकɉ कȧ उपिèथǓत को िजयो-टैÊड फोटोĒाफ के 
साथ Ǒदन मɅ दो बार दज[ करने कȧ सुͪवधा देता है। यह ऐप काय[Đम पर नागǐरक Ǔनगरानी बढ़ाने मɅ 
सहायता करता है। यह पारदͧश[ता और जवाबदेहȣ कȧ Ǒदशा मɅ एक और कदम है। 
iii. ¢ेğ अͬधकारȣ Ǔनगरानी दौरा एिÜलकेशन:  यह ऐप राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ के अͬधकाǐरयɉ को अपने 
¢ेğीय दौरे के जांच-पǐरणामɉ को ऑनलाइन दज[ करने कȧ सुͪवधा Ĥदान करता है। यह ऐप 
अͬधकाǐरयɉ को Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग ɮवारा शुǾ कȧ गई सभी योजनाओं के ͧलए टाइम èटैàÜड 
और िजयोटैÊड फोटोĒाफ ǐरकॉड[ करने कȧ भी सुͪवधा देता है। इसके अलावा, यह ऐप काय[èथल के 
दौरे कȧ बाधारǑहत ǐरपोǑटɍग करने मɅ मदद करता है। यह ऐप ¢ेğीय दौरे के जांच-पǐरणामɉ को 
ǐरकॉड[ करता है और वǐरçठ अͬधकाǐरयɉ ɮवारा ¢ेğीय दौरे के पǐरणाम कȧ ǐरपोट[ को देखा जाता है। 
iv. जीआईएस आधाǐरत योजना- अंतǐर¢ तकनीकȧ का उपयोग: देश कȧ सभी Ēाम पंचायतɉ के ͧलए 
संतृिÜत मोड मɅ ǐरमोट सɅͧसंग तकनीकȧ का उपयोग करके जीआईएस आधाǐरत Ēाम पंचायत 
èतरȣय योजना (ǐरज टू वैलȣ अĤोच) तैयार करना। 
v. युÈतधारा: जीआईएस आधाǐरत योजना उपकरण– महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के अंतग[त Ēाम 
पंचायत èतर पर जीआईएस आधाǐरत योजना को सरल बनाने के ͧलए इसरो-एनआरएससी के 
सहयोग से भू-èथाǓनक योजना पोट[ल "युÈतधारा" बनाया गया है। 
vi. ͧसÈयोर- रोजगार के ͧलए Ēामीण दरɉ का उपयोग करने के ͧलए अनुमान गणना हेतु सॉÝटवेयर:- 
इस एÜलȣकेशन का उपयोग योजना के अंतग[त ͩकए जाने वाले कायɟ कȧ लागत कȧ गणना का 
अनुमान लगाने के ͧलए ͩकया जा रहा है। 
vii. िजयो नरेगा: इस ऐप को अंतǐर¢ तकनीकȧ का उपयोग करके बनाया गया है ताͩक पǐरसंपͪƣ 
Ǔनमा[ण के “पहले”, “Ǔनमा[ण के दौरान” और “Ǔनमा[ण के बाद” चरणɉ मɅ इसे िजयोटैͬगंग करके 
पǐरसंपͪƣयɉ के Ǔनमा[ण को Ěैक ͩकया जा सके। 
viii. जलदूत ऐप: देश भर मɅ भूजल èतर कȧ Ǔनगरानी के ͧलए जलदूत ऐप बनाया गया है। जलदूत ऐप से 
Ēाम रोजगार सहायकɉ (जीआरएस) को वष[ मɅ दो बार (मानसून से पहले और मानसून के बाद) 
चयǓनत कुओं के जल èतर को मापने मɅ स¢म बनाता है। 
988                                                      

ix. जनमनरेगा ऐप: यह ऐप महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के काया[Ûवयन के संदभ[ मɅ नागǐरकɉ को 
सूचना के सͩĐय Ĥकटȣकरण मɅ मदद करता है। नागǐरक जागǾकता योजना के कुशल, Ĥभावी 
और पारदशȸ काया[Ûवयन कȧ कुंजी है। 
x. लोकपाल ऐप- महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के काया[Ûवयन से संबंͬधत ͪवͧभÛन İोतɉ जैसे भौǓतक, 
ͫडिजटल और जनसंचार माÚयमɉ से ĤाÜत ͧशकायतɉ कȧ सुचाǾ ǐरपोǑटɍग और वगȸकरण, 
ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुसार Ĥ×येक मामले पर आसानी से नज़र रखने और समय पर Ǔनण[य पाǐरत 
करने तथा वेबसाइट पर Ǔतमाहȣ और वाͪष[क ǐरपोट[ को आसानी से अपलोड करने के ͧलए एक 
लोकपाल ऐप बनाया गया है। 
xi. सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा: अͬधǓनयम के अͬधदेश के अनुसार, मंğालय ने सभी Ēाम पंचायतɉ कȧ 
वष[ मɅ कम से कम दो बार सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा करने के ͧलए राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ के èतर पर 
एक संèथागत संरचना कȧ èथापना पर जोर Ǒदया है। मंğालय के लगातार Ĥयासɉ से कुल 27 
राÏयɉ और 1 संघ राÏय ¢ेğ ने èवतंğ सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा इकाइयां èथाͪपत कȧ हɇ। पंचायती 
राज मंğालय ɮवारा बनाए गए पंचायत Ǔनण[य ऐप के उपयोग से सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा को और 
सु͸ढ़ ͩकया गया है Èयɉͩक इससे सामुदाǓयक भागीदारȣ और पारदͧश[ता बढ़ती है। इस ऐप के 
माÚयम से सामािजक लेखा परȣ¢ा Ēाम सभा के दौरान ͧलए गए शेɬयूल, काय[सूची और Ǔनण[य 
देखे जा सकते हɇ। 
 
989                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2373 
 (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए) 
Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना-IV (पीएमजीएसवाई-IV) के अंतग[त Ēामीण सड़क कनेिÈटͪवटȣ 
2373.  Įी नरहरȣ अमीन: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025 के दौरान पीएमजीएसवाई- IV के अंतग [त Èया ĤगǓत हुई है, और 
राÏय-वार और संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार कवर कȧ गई बिèतयɉ का Þयौरा Èया है तथा èवीकृत एवं 
Ǔनͧम[त सड़कɉ कȧ लंबाई ͩकतनी है; 
(ख) ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025 के दौरान पीएमजीएसवाई-I, II, III और IV के अंतग[त गुजरात मɅ, ͪवशेष 
Ǿप से Ēामीण और द ूरèथ िजलɉ मɅ Ǔनͧम[त सभी मौसम म Ʌ उपयोग योÊय Ēामीण सड़कɉ 
और पुलɉ कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी है; और 
(ग) Èया पीएमजीएसवाई-IV के अंतग[त Ǔनͧम[त नई सड़कɉ से गुजरात के Ēामीण समुदायɉ के 
ͧलए अंतर-Ēाम कनेिÈटͪवटȣ, बाजारɉ, èवाèØय और ͧश¢ा सेवाओं तक पह ुंच और सम Ē 
आवाजाहȣ मɅ सुधार हुआ है? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क) Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना -IV (पीएमजीएसवाई-IV) के तहत ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025 के
दौरान èवीकृत सड़क लंबाई और बसावट ɉ का राÏयवार और संघ रा Ïय ¢ेğ-वार ͪववरण 
(14.12.2025 तक) नीचे Ǒदया गया है:  
 राÏय èवीकृत सड़कɉ कȧ संÉया èवीकृत लंबाई (ͩकमी मɅ) èवीकृत बसावटɅ 
जàमू एवं कæमीर 316 1781.33 429 
छƣीसगढ 774 2426.87 780 
उƣराखंड 184 1288.198 309 
सभी काय[ नव èवीकृत हɇ और ĤगǓत के ͪवͧभÛन चरणɉ मɅ हɇ। 
990                                                      

(ख) और (ग) : गुजरात राÏय को इस ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 मɅ ͩकसी भी काय[ के ͧलए कोई 
नई èवीकृ Ǔत नहȣं दȣ गई है। पीएमजीएसवाई- I और पीएमजीएसवाई-II के तहत èवीकृ त सभी 
काय[ माच[ 2025 तक गुजरात राÏय ɮवारा पहले हȣ पूरे कर ͧलए गए हɇ। जानकारȣ काय[Đम 
कȧ वेबसाइट https://pmgsy.dord.gov.in ->Progress Monitoring ->Financial Year-wise 
Achievement पर देखी जा सकती है। चालू ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 के दौरान, पीएमजीएसवाई- III 
के तहत 27.66 ͩकमी लंबाई कȧ 9 सड़कɅ और 12 पुलɉ का Ǔनमा[ण ͩकया गया है। 
िजलेवार ͪववरण नीचे Ǒदया गया है : 
Đ.सं. िजले का नाम Ǔनͧम[त सड़कɉ  कȧ 
संÉया 
Ǔनͧम[त पुलɉ कȧ 
संÉया 
Ǔनͧम[त सड़क लंबाई 
(ͩकमी) 
1 बनासकांठा 1 0 4.530 
2 भǾच 2 0 0.000 
3 भावनगर 0 2 0.000 
4 जामनगर 2 0 1.390 
5 जूनागढ़ 2 0 1.876 
6 नवसारȣ 0 3 0.000 
7 पाटन 0 0 12.225 
8 सुरɅġनगर 0 3 0.000 
9 देवभूͧम 
ɮवारका 
2 0 7.640 
10 अरवãलȣ 0 4 0.000 
कुल 9 12 27.661 
पीएमजीएसवाई-IV को वष[ 2024 मɅ 62,500 ͩकमी कȧ बारहमासी सड़क ( ͧसंगल लेन) के 
Ǔनमा[ण के ͧलए शुǽ ͩकया गया है, ताͩक 2011 कȧ जनगणना के अनु
सार, मैदानी ¢ेğɉ मɅ 
500+ आबादȣ, पूवȾƣर और पहाड़ी रा Ïयɉ/संघ रा Ïय ¢ेğɉ, ͪवशेष Įेणी ¢ेğɉ (आ Ǒदवासी 
अनुसू
ची V, आकां¢ी िजले/Þलॉक, रेͬगèतानी ¢ेğ) मɅ 250+ आबादȣ और वामपंथी उĒवाद से 
Ĥभाͪवत ¢ेğɉ मɅ 100+ आबादȣ कȧ लगभग 25,000 संपक[ͪवहȣन बसावटɉ को संपक[ता Ĥदान 
कȧ जा सके । योजना कȧ काया[Ûवयन अवͬध ͪवƣीय वष[ 2024-25 से 2028-29 तक है। 
गुजरात म Ʌ पा ğ बसावट ɉ क ȧ पहचान के ͧलए सव ȶ¢ण काय [ प ूरा कर ͧलया गया है। 
पीएमजीएसवाई-IV के तहत अब तक राÏय से कोई Ĥèताव ĤाÜत नहȣं हुआ है।   
*** 
991                                                      

भारत सरकार 
रेल मंğालय 
राÏय सभा 
19.12.2025 के 
 अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2374 का उƣर 
Ǔनरा रेलवे èटेशन का अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के तहत पुनͪव[कास 
2374. Įीमती सु
नेğा अजीत पवार: 
Èया रेल मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क)  Èया महाराçĚ के प ु
णे ͫडवीजन मɅ िèथत नीरा रेलवे èटेशन को अम ृत भारत èटेशन 
योजना (एबीएसएस) के तहत पु
नͪव[कास के ͧलए शाͧमल ͩकया गया है; 
(ख)  यǑद हाँ, तो इस पǐरयोजना के  ͧलए कुल ͩकतनी धनराͧश आवंǑटत कȧ गई है और इसमɅ 
कौन-कौन से Ĥम ुख काय[ (जैसे ͧलÝट/एèकेलेटर, एफओबी ͪवèतार, Ĥती¢ालय का 
उÛनयन) शाͧमल हɇ; और 
(ग)  उÈत èटेशन के प ुनͪव[कास काय[ कȧ वत[मान ĤगǓत Èया है और इसे कब तक प ू
रा करने 
का लêय Ǔनधा[ǐरत ͩकया गया है, ताͩक बारामती और फलटण जैसे पड़ोसी ¢ेğɉ के
लाखɉ याǒğयɉ को ͪवæव èतरȣय सुͪवधाएं ͧमल सक Ʌ ? 
उƣर 
रेल, सूचना और Ĥसारण एवं इलेÈĚोǓनकȧ और सू
चना Ĥौɮयोͬगकȧ मंğी 
(Įी अिæवनी वैçणव) 
(क) से (ग) : महाराçĚ मɅ िèथत पुणे मंडल के नीरा èटेशन पर उÍच èतरȣय Üलेटफॉम[ संÉया 1, 
Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर, Ĥती¢ालय, पेयजल नल, शौचालय और पैदल पार प ु
ल जैसी सुͪवधाएँ उपलÞध 
हɇ। हाल हȣ मɅ , नए èटेशन भवन का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है और नए Üलेटफॉम[ संÉया 2/3 
और पैदल पार पुल का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
इसके
 अलावा, भारतीय रेल मɅ èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/पु
नͪव[कास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण ǓनरÛतर 
और सतत ĤͩĐया है और इस संबंध मɅ कायɟ को पारèपǐरक Ĥाथͧमकता और Ǔनͬधयɉ कȧ 
उपलÞधता के
 अÚयधीन, आवæयकतानुसार ͩकया जाता है । èटेशनɉ के ͪवकास/पु
नͪव[कास/ 
992                                                      

उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण का काय[ èटेशन कȧ कोǑट/िèथǓत/संभाले जाने वाला यातायात आǑद के 
आधार पर ͩकए जाते हɇ। 
 
रेल मंğालय ने दȣघ[काͧलक ͸िçटकोण के साथ èटेशनɉ के पुनͪव[कास के ͧलए अमृत भारत 
योजना कȧ शǾआत कȧ है। 
 
इस योजना मɅ èटेशनɉ मɅ सुधार लाने के ͧलए माèटर योजना तैयार करना और उनका 
चरणबɮध काया[Ûवयन शाͧमल हɇ। इस माèटर योजना मɅ Ǔनàनानुसार शाͧमल हɇ: 
 
 èटेशन और पǐरचलन ¢ेğɉ तक पहुंच मɅ सुधार,  
 èटेशन का शहर के दोनɉ भागɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
 èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार,  
 Ĥती¢ालय, शौचालय, बैठने कȧ åयवèथा, पेयजल बूथɉ मɅ सुधार,  
 याğी यातायात के अनुǾप चौड़े पैदल पार पुल/एयर कॉनकोस[ का Ĥावधान 
 ͧलÝट/èवचाͧलत सीǑढ़यɉ/रɇप का Ĥावधान 
 Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह और Üलेटफॉम[ पर कवर मɅ सुधार/Ĥावधान 
 ‘एक èटेशन एक उ×पाद’ जैसी योजनाओं के माÚयम से èथानीय उ×पादɉ के ͧलए 
ͩकयोèक का Ĥावधान,  
 पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, यातायात के ͪवͧभÛन साधनɉ के साथ एकȧकरण,  
 Ǒदåयांगजनɉ के ͧलए सुͪवधाएं,  
 बेहतर याğी सूचना Ĥणालȣ 
 Ĥ×येक èटेशन पर आवæ यकता को Ú यान मɅ रखते हुए एÈजीÈयूǑटव लाउंज, 
åयावसाǓयक बैठकɉ के ͧलए नाͧमत èथान, लɇडèकेͪपंग आǑद का Ĥावधान 
 
इस योजना मɅ आवæयकतानुसार, चरणबɮध और åयवहाय[ Ǿप से दȣघ[काͧलक और पया[वरण 
अनुकूल समाधान, ͬगɪटȣ रǑहत रेलपथ का Ĥावधान आǑद और दȣघा[वͬध मɅ èटेशन पर ͧसटȣ 
सɅटर के Ǔनमा[ण कȧ भी पǐरकãपना कȧ गई है। 
 
अब तक, अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त 1337 èटेशनɉ को ͬचिéनत ͩकया गया है। 
िजनमɅ से 132 èटेशन महाराçĚ मɅ िèथत हɇ। अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त महाराçĚ 
राÏय मɅ ͪवकास के ͧलए ͬचिéनत ͩकए गए èटेशनɉ के नाम Ǔनàनानुसार हɇ: 
 
993                                                      

राÏय 
अमृत 
èटेशनɉ 
कȧ संÉया 
अमृत èटेशनɉ के नाम 
महाराçĚ 132 अहमदनगर, अजनी (नागपुर), अÈकलकोट रोड़, अकोला, आकुडȸ, 
अमलनेर, आमगाँव, अमरावती, अंधेरȣ, बडनेरा, बãहारशाह, बांġा टͧम[नस, 
बारामती, बेलापुर, भंडारा रोड, भोकर, भुसावल, बोरȣवलȣ, भायखला, 
चालȣसगाँव, चांदा फोट[, चंġपुर, चनȸ रोड, छğपǓत संभा जी नगर, 
छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज टͧम[नस, ͬचंचपोकलȣ, ͬचंचवाड, दादर (मÚय 
रेल), दादर (पिæचम रेल), दǑहसर, दɋड, देहु रोड, देवलालȣ, धामणगांव, 
धरणगांव, धाराͧशव, धमा[बाद, धुले, Ǒदवा, दुधनी, गंगाखेर, गोधानी, 
गɉǑदया, Ēांट रोड, हडपसर, हातकणंगले, हजूर साǑहब नाÛदेड, Ǒहमायत 
नगर, Ǒहंगनघाट, Ǒहंगोलȣ दÈकन, इगतपुरȣ, जलगाँव, जालना, जेऊर, 
जोगेæवरȣ, कãयाण जंÈशन, कामटȣ, कांǑदवलȣ, कंजुर माग[, कराड, 
काटोल, केडगाँव, ͩकनवट, कोपरगाँव, कुडु[वाडी जंÈशन, कुला[ जंÈशन, 
लासलगाँव, लातूर, लोकमाÛय Ǔतलक टͧम[नस, लोनंद जंÈशन, लोनावाला, 
लोअर परेल, मलाड, मलकापुर, मनमाड जं, मानवत रोड, मरȣन लाइÛस, 
माटुंगा, ͧमराज जंÈशन, मुदखेड़ जंÈशन, मुंबई सɅĚल, मुंĦा, मुǓत[जापुर, 
नागरसोल, नागपुर जं, नंदगाँव, नांदुरा, नंदुरबार, नरखेड़ जंÈशन, नाͧसक 
रोड, नेताजी सुभाष चंġ बोस इतवारȣ जंÈशन, पाचोरा जंÈशन, पालघर, 
पंढरपुर, पनवेल जंÈशन, परभणी जंÈशन, परेल, परलȣ वैजनाथ, परतूर, 
फलटाण, Ĥभादेवी, पुलगाँव जंÈशन, पुणे जंÈशन, पूणा[ जंÈशन, रावेर, 
रोटेगांव, साɃनगर ͧशडȸ, सɇडहèट[ रोड, सांगलȣ, सतारा, सावदा, सेलू, 
सेवाĒाम, शहाड, शेगांव, ͧशवाजी नगर पुणे, Įी छğपǓत शाहू महाराज 
टͧम[नस कोãहापुर, सोलापुर, तलेगांव, ठाकुलȹ, ठाणे, Ǒटटवाला, तुमसर 
रोड, उमरȣ, उǽलȣ, वडाला रोड, ͪवɮयाͪवहार, ͪवĐोलȣ, वडसा, वधा[, 
वाͧशम, वाठार 
 
 
अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के तहत महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ रेलवे èटेशनɉ पर ͪवकास काय[ तेज गǓत 
से शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ। महाराçĚ राÏय मɅ अब तक 17 èटेशनɉ (आमगांव, बारामती, चांदा फोट[, 
ͬचंचपोकलȣ, देवलालȣ, धुले, के डगांव, लासलगांव, लोनंद जंÈशन, माटुंगा, मुǓत[जापुर जंÈशन, 
नंदुरा, नेताजी सुभाष चंġ बोस इतवारȣ जंÈशन, परेल, सावदा, शहाड और वडाला रोड) का काय[ 
इस योजना के तहत पूरा हो चुका है। अÛय èटेशनɉ पर भी काय[ तेज गǓत से शुǾ ͩकए गए हɇ 
और उपरोÈत मɅ से कुछ èटेशनɉ कȧ ĤगǓत Ǔनàनानुसार  है: 
994                                                      

 
 फलटण èटेशन: Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर, Üलेटफॉम[ सतह, Ĥवेश रैàप मɅ सुधार संबंधी काय[ 
Ǒदåयांगजन सुͪवधाएँ तथा बैठने कȧ åयवèथा के काय[ पूण[ कर ͧलए गए हɇ। 
 
 वाठार èटेशन: नए पोǑट[को, èटेशन भवन का सुधार, वाटर बूथ, नया मुÉय Ĥवेश ɮवार, 
पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, पǐरचलन ¢ेğ, Ĥवेश लॉबी का सुधार, पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ कȧ चारदȣवारȣ, Üलेटफॉम[ 
संÉया 1 पर Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर, Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह, Ĥती¢ालय का सुधार, संकेतक और 
èटेशन पर Ĥकाश कȧ åयवèथा संबंधी काय[ पूरे कर ͧलए गए हɇ। ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[ शुǾ ͩकए 
जा चुके हɇ। 
 
 नंदगांव èटेशन: Ĥवेश और Ǔनकास ɮवार, Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह, Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर, èटेशन 
भवन का सुधार, बुͩकंग काया[लय, पैदल पार पुल, चारदȣवारȣ, पǐरचलन ¢ेğ, पाͩकɍग ¢ेğ, 
संकेतक और Ĥकाश åयवèथा के काय[ पूरे हो चुके हɇ। ͩफǓनͧशंग काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदए गए 
हɇ। 
 
 Ǒदवा èटेशन: èटेशन के पूव[ Ǒदशा कȧ ओर पǐरचलन ¢ेğ और पाͩकɍग मɅ सुधार, पूव[ Ǒदशा 
कȧ ओर èटेशन भवन मɅ सुधार, नया Ĥवेश ɮवार, पूव[ Ǒदशा कȧ ओर पैदल पार पुल मɅ 
सुधार, पूव[ Ǒदशा कȧ ओर पैदल पार पुल के ͧलए नई सीढ़ȣ का Ǔनमा[ण, Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 7/8 
का Üलेटफॉम[ शेãटर, Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 5/6 और 7/8 पर Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ ऊ ं चाई बढ़ाने और फश[ 
मɅ सुधार, पिæचम कȧ ओर नया शौचालय Þलॉक और मलजल उपचार संयंğ और Üलेटफॉम[ 
सं. 7/8 पर नए शौचालय बनाने का काय[ पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। छğपǓत ͧशवाजी महाराज 
टͧम[नल छोर पर 6 मीटर चौड़े पैदल पार पुल का Ǔनमा[ण काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया है। 
 
 मुंĦा èटेशन: èटेशन के  Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 4 कȧ Üलेटफॉम[ सतह मɅ सुधार, Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 1 और 
4 कȧ बैठने कȧ åयवèथा मɅ सुधार, पैदल पार पुल के फश[ मɅ सुधार, नया शौचालय Þलॉक, 
मलजल उपचार संयंğ, पǐरचलन ¢ेğ मɅ सुधार, Ǒटकट बुͩकंग काया[लय मɅ सुधार का काय[ 
पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 1 पर èवचाͧलत सीढ़ȣ का काय[ शुǾ कर Ǒदया गया 
है। 
 
 Ǒटटवाला èटेशन: पूव[ और पिæचम Ǒदशा मɅ दोपǑहया वाहनɉ कȧ पाͩकɍग और पहुंच माग[ मɅ 
सुधार, नया Ĥवेश ɮवार, Ǒटकट बुͩकंग काया[लय मɅ सुधार, नया शौचालय Þलॉक, मलजल 
उपचार संयंğ और Üलेटफॉम[ सं. 3 पर Üलेटफॉम[ कȧ सतह और नए è टेशन भवन का काय[ 
पूरा कर ͧलया गया है। 6 मीटर चौड़े नए पैदल पार पुल का काय[ शुǾ ͩकया गया है। 
 
995                                                      

 
सामाÛयतः अमृत भारत èटेशन योजना के अंतग[त आने वाले èटेशनɉ के  
ͪवकास/उÛनयन/आधुǓनकȧकरण के काय[ योजना शीष[-53 'Ēाहक सुͪवधाएँ' के अंतग[त ͪवƣपोͪषत 
ͩकए जाते हɇ। योजना शीष[-53 के अंतग[त आवंटन का ͪववरण ¢ेğीय रेलवे-वार रखा जाता है 
और न ͩक काय[-वार, èटेशन-वार या राÏय-वार। महाराçĚ चार ¢ेğीय रेलɉ नामत: मÚय रेल, 
दͯ¢ण मÚय रेल, दͯ¢ण पूव[ मÚय रेल और पिæचम रेलवे के  अͬधकार ¢ेğ मɅ आता है। ͪवƣ 
वष[ 2025-26 मɅ इन जोनɉ के ͧलए 3751 करोड़ ǽ. आवंǑटत ͩकए गए हɇ, िजसमɅ से अब तक 
(अÈटूबर, 2025 तक) 2342 करोड़ ǽ. का åयय उपगत ͩकया गया है। 
 
रेलवे èटेशनɉ का ͪवकास/उÛनयन जǑटल ĤकृǓत का होता है िजसमɅ याǒğयɉ और रेलगाͫड़यɉ कȧ 
संर¢ा शाͧमल होती है और इसके ͧलए फायर ÈलȣयरɅस, धरोहर, पेड़ɉ कȧ कटाई, ͪवमानपƣन 
ÈलȣयरɅस इ×याǑद जैसी ͪवͧभÛन सांͪवͬधक èवीकृǓतयɉ कȧ आवæयकता होती है। इनकȧ ĤगǓत 
जनोपयोगी सेवाओं को èथानांतǐरत करने (िजनमɅ जल/मलजल लाइन, ऑिÜटकल फाइबर केबल, 
गैस पाइप लाइन, पावर/ͧसगनल केबल इ×याǑद शाͧमल हɇ), अǓतलंघन, याğी संचलन को बाͬधत 
ͩकए ǒबना रेलगाͫड़यɉ का पǐरचालन, उÍच वोãटेज ǒबजलȣ लाइनɉ के Ǔनकट सािÛनÚय मɅ ͩकए 
जाने वाले कायɟ के कारण गǓत ĤǓतबंध आǑद जैसी Ħाउन फȧãड संबंधी चुनौǓतयɉ के कारण भी 
Ĥभाͪवत होती है और ये कारक काय[ के समापन समय को Ĥभाͪवत करते हɇ। 
 
***** 
 
996                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2375 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
तͧमलनाडु मɅ पीएमजीएसवाई के तहत सड़क Ǔनमा[ण 
2375.  Įी आर. धरमार: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) तͧमलनाडु मɅ Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना (पीएमजीएसवाई) के अंतग[त Ǔनͧम[त 
सड़कɉ और पूण[ कȧ गई पǐरयोजनाओं कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी है और इन पǐरयोजनाओं के ͧलए 
अब तक कुल ͩकतनी ͪवƣीय राͧश आवंǑटत और åयय कȧ गई है; 
(ख) Ēामीण सड़क Ǔनमा[ण, ͪवशेष Ǿप से तͧमलनाडु के दूरèथ ¢ेğɉ, मɅ आने वालȣ 
चुनौǓतयɉ, जैसे काया[Ûवयन मɅ देरȣ, बजट कȧ कमी और भूͧम अͬधĒहण संबंधी समèयाओं 
के समाधान हेतु Èया कदम उठाए गए हɇ; और 
(ग) पीएमजीएसवाई के अंतग[त तͧमलनाडु मɅ पूण[ Ēामीण सड़क कनेिÈटͪवटȣ èथाͪपत 
करने के ͧलए सरकार ने Èया समय-सीमा Ǔनधा[ǐरत कȧ है और ͪपछड़े ¢ेğɉ मɅ ĤगǓत को 
तेज करने के ͧलए Èया कदम उठाए जा रहे हɇ? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान)  
(क) तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना (पीएमजीएसवाई) क े  ͪवͧभÛन 
काय[कलापɉ/घटकɉ के तहत 26,647 ͩकमी सड़क लंबाई कȧ कुल 10,368 सड़कɉ को मंजूरȣ 
दȣ गई है। इनमɅ से 26,120 ͩकलोमीटर सड़क लंबाई कȧ कुल 10,250 सड़कɉ का Ǔनमा[ण 
पूरा हो चुका हɇ, जबͩक 342 ͩकलोमीटर सड़क लंबाई कȧ 118 सड़कɅ Ǔनçपादन के ͪवͧभÛन 
चरणɉ मɅ हɇ। राÏय ने पीएमजीएसवाई-I और पीएमजीएसवाई-II के तहत सभी èवीकृत 
पǐरयोजनाओं को पहले हȣ पूरा कर ͧलया है। 
  
997                                                      

तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ Ǒदनांक 13.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार पीएमजीएसवाई के ͪवͧभÛन 
काय[कलापɉ/घटकɉ के तहत èवीकृत, Ǔनͧम[त और शेष सड़क पǐरयोजनाओं का ͪववरण 
Ǔनàनानुसार है:  
  
काय[कलाप/घटक 
का नाम 
 èवीकृत Ǔनͧम[त शेष* 
सड़कɉ कȧ 
संÉया सड़क लंबाई 
(ͩकमी) 
सड़कɉ कȧ 
संÉया सड़क लंबाई 
(ͩकमी) 
सड़कɉ 
कȧ 
संÉया 
सड़कɉ लंबाई 
(ͩकमी) 
पीएमजीएसवाई -
I 
7,678  16,319.53 7,678 
   16,168.39 0 - 
पीएमजीएसवाई -
II 
860 
   2,940.41 860 
   2,936.46 0 - 
पीएमजीएसवाई -
III 
1,826 
   7,377.06 1,712 
   7,015.64 114  331.41 
पीएम-जनमन 4 
   10.96 - - 4   
10.96 
कुल: 10,368  26,647.97 10,250  26,120.50 118 342.37 
*शेष सड़क कȧ ल ं ब ा ई  èव ी क ृ त  औ र  प ू रȣ कȧ ग ई  ल ं ब ा ई  क े  अ ं त र  स े  क म  ह ै, Èयɉͩक सड़क कȧ 
लंबाई मɅ कमी, संरेखण मɅ पǐरवत[न, अÛय एजɅͧसयɉ ɮवारा आंͧशक लंबाई के Ǔनमा[ण आǑद 
क े  क ा र ण  क ु छ  पǐरयोजनाओं को èव ी क ृ त  ल ं ब ा ई  स े  क म  क े  स ा थ  प ू र ा  ͩकया गया था। 
  
पीएमजीएसवाई के काया[Ûवयन के ͧलए राÏय को Ǔनͬधयɉ का आवंटन ͪवͧभÛन कारण 
जैसे मौजूदा काय[, राÏय कȧ Ǔनçपादन ¢मता और राÏय के पास उपलÞध ͪपछले वष[ (वषɟ) 
कȧ अåयǓयत शेष राͧश पर Ǔनभ[र करता है। इस योजना कȧ शुǽआत से, तͧमलनाडु कȧ 
राÏय सरकार को कुल 7126.53 करोड़ ǽपये का कɅ ġȣय अंश जारȣ ͩकया गया है और राÏय 
ने काय[Đम के काया[Ûवयन के ͧलए 10,189 करोड़ ǽपये (राÏय अंश सǑहत) का åयय ͩकया 
है।   
(ख) और  (ग): Ēामीण सड़कɅ राÏय का ͪवषय होने के कारण, मंğालय पीएमजीएसवाई के 
तहत कायɟ के काया[Ûवयन क े ͧलए तͧमल नाडु सǑहत राÏयɉ को Ǔनयͧमत और पया[Üत 
बजटȣय सहायता Ĥदान करता है। कायɟ के Ǔनçपादन और समय पर पूरा करने कȧ िजàमेदारȣ 
संबंͬधत राÏय सरकारɉ कȧ है। पीएमजीएसवाई के तहत Ēामीण सड़क पǐरयोजनाओं के 
काया[Ûवयन कȧ ऑनलाइन Ĥबंधन, Ǔनगरानी और लेखा Ĥणालȣ (ओएमएमएएस) के माÚयम 
से बारȣकȧ से Ǔनगरानी कȧ जाती है तथा ¢ेğीय समी¢ा बैठकɅ (आरआरएम), Ǔनçपादन 
998                                                      

समी¢ा सͧमǓत (पीआरसी) बैठकɅ, पूव[-अͬधकार ĤाÜत/अͬधकार ĤाÜत सͧमǓत कȧ बैठकɅ, 
राÏयɉ के साथ माͧसक या आवͬधक समी¢ा बैठकɉ सǑहत ͪवͧभÛन मंचɉ पर समी¢ा कȧ 
जाती है और जब भी आवæयक हो सͬचव, अपर सͬचव और मंğालय के संयुÈत सͬचव ɮवारा 
राÏयɉ के मुÉय सͬचवɉ और Ĥमुख सͬचवɉ के साथ ͪवशेष समी¢ा बैठकɅ आयोिजत कȧ जाती 
है।  
  
ͪवलंब, ¢मता कȧ कमी, भूͧम कȧ उपलÞधता और काय[ कȧ गुणवƣा से संबंͬधत चुनौǓतयɉ का 
समाधान करने के ͧलए मंğालय ने कई उपाय ͩकए हɇ। राÏयɉ को काय[ मंजूरȣ से पहले ऋण-
मुÈत भूͧम कȧ उपलÞधता सुǓनिæचत करने कȧ आवæयकता है। कायɟ कȧ वाèतͪवक और 
ͪवƣीय ĤगǓत के आधार पर काय[Đम ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ को पूरा करने के अÚयधीन राÏयɉ को 
समय पर पया[Üत Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ कȧ जाती हɇ। åयापक भागीदारȣ और कायɟ को समय पर 
Ĥदान करने कȧ सुͪवधा क े ͧलए बोलȣ दèतावेज Ĥावधानɉ को युिÈतसंगत बनाया गया है। 
इसके  अलावा, तकनीकȧ और Ĥबंधकȧय ¢मताओं को सु͸ढ़ करने के ͧलए फȧãड इंजीǓनयरɉ, 
ठेके दारɉ और उनके कम[चाǐरयɉ को Ĥͧश¢ण काय[Đम Ĥदान ͩकए जाते हɇ। 
  
इसके  अǓतǐरÈत, Ǔनधा[ǐरत मानकɉ का पालन सुǓनिæचत करने और काय[ को समय पर पूरा 
करने के ͧलए राÏय गुणवƣा मॉǓनटर और राçĚȣय गुणवƣा मॉǓनटर के माÚयम से èवतंğ 
गुणवƣा Ǔनगरानी कȧ जाती है। 
  
तͧमलनाडु राÏय मɅ, पीएमजीएसवाई-I और पीएमजीएसवाई-II के तहत èवीकृत सभी 
पǐरयोजनाएं पहले हȣ पूरȣ हो चुकȧ हɇ। पीएमजीएसवाई-III और पीएम-जनमन के तहत काय[ 
Ǔनçपादन के ͪवͧभÛन चरणɉ मɅ हɇ। चल रहे पीएमजीएसवाई-III कायɟ को पूरा करने कȧ बढ़ाई 
गई समय सीमा माच[, 2026 और पीएम-जनमन के ͧलए माच[ 2028 है। 
पीएमजीएसवाई IV काय[Đम (2024-2029) के तहत, राÏयɉ ने Ēाम सड़क सवȶ¢ण 
एÜलȣकेशन का उपयोग करके सवȶ¢ण ͩकया है और 40,547 बसावटɉ (तͧमल नाडु मɅ 8 
बसावटɉ) का ͪववरण असंबɮध बसावटɉ के  Ǿप मɅ अपलोड ͩकया है। पीएमजीएसवाई-IV के 
तहत कायɟ को पूरा करने कȧ समयसीमा माच[, 2029 है।   
  
****  
  
  
 
999                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2376 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
मनरेगा के अंतग[त राÏयɉ को देय धनराͧश 
2376.  Įी देरेक ओĦाईन: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क)  मनरेगा योजना के अंतग[त 'मजदूरȣ' और 'सामĒी एवं ĤशासǓनक' शीषɟ के अंतग[त राÏयɉ को 
देय धनराͧश (ǽ. मɅ) का घटक-वार और राÏय-वार Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(ख)  ͪवगत चार वषɟ के  दौरान पिæचमी बंगाल को दȣ गई धनराͧश (ǽ. मɅ) का वष[-वार Þयौरा Èया 
है? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क): महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) एक 
मांग आधाǐरत मजदूरȣ रोजगार योजना है। Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ करना एक सतत ĤͩĐया है और कɅ ġ 
सरकार जमीनी èतर पर काम कȧ मांग के अनुसार राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को Ǔनͬधयां उपलÞध 
कराने के ͧलए ĤǓतबɮध है। Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार महा×मा गांधी नरेगा 
योजना के तहत मजदूरȣ, सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटक के संबंध मɅ लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ का राÏय/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा अनुबंध मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
  
(ख): पिæचम बंगाल सरकार को ͪवƣीय वष[ 2021-22 और 2022-23 के दौरान Đमश: 7,507.80 
करोड़ ǽपये और 1.33 करोड़ ǽपए जारȣ ͩकए गए। 
इसके  अलावा, इस ͪवभाग ɮवारा जारȣ Ǔनदȶशɉ का पालन न करने के कारण पिæचम बंगाल 
राÏय के ͧलए ͪवƣीय वष[ 2021-22 के मजदूरȣ बजट मɅ संशोधन पæचात वृɮͬध करने का Ĥèताव, 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग कȧ राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) कȧ 
अͬधकार ĤाÜत सͧमǓत ɮवारा अनुमोǑदत नहȣं ͩकया गया। इसके पæचात, राÏय ɮवारा कɅ ġ सरकार 
के Ǔनदȶशɉ का लगातार पालन न करने के  कारण महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ 
अͬधǓनयम, 2005 कȧ धारा 27 के Ĥावधानɉ के अनुसरण मɅ पिæचम बंगाल राÏय को Ǒदनांक 
1000                                                      

09.03.2022 से महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) 
के तहत Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ करना  रोक Ǒदया गया। 
  
इस ͪवभाग ने पिæचम बंगाल राÏय मɅ महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना का काया[Ûवयन ͩफर से शुǾ 
करने के  ͧलए Ǒदनांक 06.12.2025 को आदेश जारȣ ͩकए हɇ, जो ͪवशेष शतɟ के अǓनवाय[ अनुपालन 
के अÚयधीन है, ताͩक राÏय मɅ योजना का Ĥभावी और वैध काया[Ûवयन सुͪवधाजनक बनाया जा 
सके और यह सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सके ͩक दुǽपयोग और अǓनयͧमतताओं कȧ ͪपछलȣ  घटनाओं कȧ 
पुनरावृͪƣ न हो। राÏय सरकार से अनुरोध ͩकया गया है ͩक वह वत[मान ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 के 
संबंध मɅ Įम बजट Ĥèताव महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना कȧ अͬधकार ĤाÜत सͧमǓत के ͪवचाराथ[ 
Ĥèतुत करɅ। 
  
1001                                                      

 
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2376 के भाग (क) के  उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध  
Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 तक कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत 
मजदूरȣ, सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटक के संबंध मɅ लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ का राÏय/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा  (ǽ. करोड़ मɅ) 
राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ ĤशासǓनक सामĒी मजदूरȣ 
आंĢ Ĥदेश 80.54 583.73 425.23 
अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 0.92 49.16 5.26 
असम 28.03 410.07 5.31 
ǒबहार 15.13 416.52 18.80 
छƣीसगढ़ 9.81 106.75 8.31 
गोवा 0.02 0.43 0.00 
गुजरात 12.66 23.64 82.85 
हǐरयाणा 0.43 41.59 0.87 
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 5.74 72.03 2.15 
जàमू और कæमीर 18.16 198.34 70.38 
झारखंड 5.51 299.59 16.93 
कना[टक 39.35 578.06 10.50 
केरल 52.53 192.61 419.32 
लɮदाख 0.39 3.77 1.03 
मÚय Ĥदेश 98.81 629.21 207.56 
महाराçĚ 34.41 701.34 14.55 
मͨणपुर 4.30 156.38 12.56 
मेघालय 1.22 65.46 4.25 
ͧमजोरम 1.02 0.25 5.91 
नागालɇड 2.30 76.14 24.79 
ओͫडशा 2.66 238.09 20.78 
पंजाब 1.83 116.44 1.69 
राजèथान 9.91 838.04 10.26 
ͧसिÈकम 0.04 2.48 0.22 
तͧमलनाडु 35.41 594.80 365.72 
तेलंगाना 12.48 212.85 1.16 
ǒğपुरा 26.11 139.63 1.80 
1002                                                      

उƣर Ĥदेश 103.94 1086.81 24.13 
उƣराखंड 3.93 55.72 1.75 
पिæचम बंगाल** ** ** ** 
अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.00 0.03 0.00 
दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ तथा दमन और 
दȣव 0.00 0.01 2.27 
ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 0.00 0.00 
पुदुचेरȣ 0.47 0.00 0.00 
ǑटÜपणी: सामĒी घटक कȧ लंǒबत देयता मɅ - ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 (नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार) और ͪवƣ 
वष[ 2024-25 (वाèतͪवक) कȧ लंǒबत देनदाǐरयां शाͧमल हɇ। मजदूरȣ और ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के तहत 
ͪपछले वष[ के संबंध मɅ कोई लंǒबत देनदारȣ नहȣं है।  
** इस ͪवभाग ɮवारा जारȣ Ǔनदȶशɉ का पालन न करने के कारण पिæचम बंगाल राÏय के ͧलए 
ͪवƣीय वष[ 2021-22 के मजदूरȣ बजट मɅ संशोधन पæचात वृɮͬध करने का Ĥèताव, Ēामीण ͪवकास 
ͪवभाग कȧ राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) कȧ अͬधकार ĤाÜत 
सͧमǓत ɮवारा अनुमोǑदत नहȣं ͩकया गया। इसके पæचात, राÏय ɮवारा कɅġ सरकार के Ǔनदȶशɉ का 
लगातार पालन न करने के कारण महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम, 2005 
कȧ धारा 27 के Ĥावधानɉ के अनुसरण मɅ पिæचम बंगाल राÏय को Ǒदनांक 09.03.2022 से महा×मा 
गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) के तहत Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ 
करना  रोक Ǒदया गया। नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार, पिæचम बंगाल राÏय से संबंͬधत लंǒबत देनदारȣ 
(08.03.2022 तक) ₹3082.52 करोड़ है, िजसमɅ मजदूरȣ घटक के तहत ₹1457.22 करोड़, सामĒी 
घटक के तहत ₹1607.68 करोड़ और ĤशासǓनक घटक के तहत ₹17.62 करोड़ शाͧमल हɇ। इस 
देनदारȣ कȧ èवीकाय[ता का कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा स×यापन के अधीन है। 
****    
  
 
1003                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2377 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
मनरेगा के अंतग[त लंǒबत देनदाǐरयां 
2377.  Įी संजय ͧसंह: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम (मनरेगा) के अंतग[त वष[ 
2020-21 से 2024-25 तक राÏय-वार और वष[-वार आवंǑटत, जारȣ और उपयोग कȧ गई 
धनराͧश का Þयौरा Èया है, िजसमɅ मजदूरȣ, सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ का अलग-अलग 
Þयौरा शाͧमल है; 
(ख) वष[ 2020-21 से राÏय-वार और वष[-वार लंǒबत मजदूरȣ, सामĒी बकाया और 
ĤशासǓनक भुगतान का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) ͪवगत पांच वषɟ क े  दौरान Ǔनधा[ǐरत 15 Ǒदनɉ के भीतर मजदूरȣ ĤाÜत न करने वाले 
Įͧमकɉ कȧ संÉया और ͪवलंǒबत मजदूरȣ के ͧलए देय और वाèतव मɅ भुगतान ͩकए गए कुल 
मुआवजे का राÏय-वार Þयौरा Èया है; और 
(घ) ͪवगत पांच वषɟ के  दौरान जारȣ, रɮद और स×याͪपत ͩकए गए जॉब काडɟ कȧ संÉया 
ͩकतनी है और नकलȣ, ǓनिçĐय या धोखाधड़ी वाले जॉब काडɟ का पता लगाने क े ͧलए ͩकए 
गए ऑͫडट का राÏय-वार Þयौरा Èया है? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क): महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) 
एक मांग आधाǐरत मजदूरȣ रोजगार योजना है। महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के अंतग[त 
Ǔनͬधयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय¢ेğ-वार आवंटन नहȣं ͩकया जाता है। 
  
1004                                                      

ͪपछले पांच ͪवƣीय वषɟ मɅ महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत बजट अनुमान चरण, 
संशोͬधत अनुमान चरण, अंǓतम आवंटन और जारȣ कȧ गई Ǔनͬधयɉ के आवंटन का ͪववरण 
नीचे Ǒदया गया है: 
  
 (करोड़ Ǿ मɅ) 
ͪवƣीय वष[ बजट अनुमान संशोͬधत अनुमान  अंǓतम आवंटन वाèतͪवक Ǿप से जारȣ 
2020-21 61500.00 111500.00 111500.00 111171.00 
2021-22 73000.00 98000.00 99118.00 98468.00 
2022-23 73000.00 89400.00 90956.00 90810.00 
2023-24 60000.00 86000.00 89363.00 89268.00 
2024-25 86000.00 86000.00 86000.00 85839.00 
  
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मजदूरȣ, सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए जारȣ कȧ गई Ǔनͬधयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा  
अनुबंध-I मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
  
(ख): योजना के तहत मजदूरȣ का भुगतान कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा Ĥ×य¢ लाभ अंतरण 
Ĥोटोकॉल के माÚयम से सीधे लाभाͬथ[यɉ के खाते मɅ जमा ͩकया जाता है। मंğालय ɮवारा 
लोक ͪवƣ Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ (पीएफएमएस) के माÚयम से ĤǓतǑदन वेतन भुगतान कȧ मंजूरȣ 
जारȣ कȧ जाती है, जो उͬचत ĤͩĐयाओं के बाद राÏयɉ से ĤाÜत Ǔनͬध अंतरण आदेशɉ पर 
आधाǐरत होती है। Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ के आरंभ मɅ, ͪपछले वष[ कȧ èवीकाय[ लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ, 
यǑद कोई हɉ, कȧ भारत सरकार ɮवारा ͪवͬधवत ĤǓतपूǓत[ कȧ जाती है। तदनुसार, ͪवƣ वष[ 
2024-25 तक सभी देय और èवीकाय[ लंǒबत मजदूरȣ देनदाǐरयɉ को पहले हȣ मंजूरȣ दे दȣ 
गई है (पिæचम बंगाल राÏय के मामले को छोड़कर)। 
  
सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के संबंध मɅ, राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को भारत सरकार को 
Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने के Ĥèताव Ĥèतुत करने होते हɇ। कɅ ġ सरकार समय-समय पर दो भागɉ मɅ 
Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ करता है, Ĥ×येक भाग मɅ एक या एक से अͬधक ͩकæतɅ होती हɇ, जो "सहमत" 
Įम बजट, कायɟ कȧ माँग, Ĥारंͧभक शेष, Ǔनͬधयɉ के  उपयोग कȧ गǓत, लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ, 
समĒ Ǔनçपादन को Úयान मɅ रखते हुए और राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ ɮवारा Ĥासंͬगक दèतावेज़ 
Ĥèतुत करने के अÚयधीन होती हɇ। 
  
इस योजना के तहत, वत[मान ͪवƣीय वष[ 2025-26 मɅ (14.12.2025 तक कȧ िèथǓत 
अनुसार) राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को 71,140.75 करोड़ ǽपये कȧ राͧश जारȣ कȧ गई, िजसमɅ 
1005                                                      

मजदूरȣ घटक के ͧलए 59,983.78 करोड़ ǽपये और सामĒी और Ĥशासन के ͧलए 
11,156.96 करोड़ ǽपये कȧ राͧश शाͧमल है। चूंͩक मंğालय ɮवारा पीएफएमएस (लोक ͪवƣ 
Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ) के माÚयम से दैǓनक आधार पर मजदूरȣ के भुगतान कȧ मंजूरȣ जारȣ कȧ 
जाती है, इसͧलए उͬचत ĤͩĐयाओं का पालन करने के बाद राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ से Ǔनͬध 
हèतांतरण आदेश ĤाÜत होने क े बाद, Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने कȧ िèथǓत दैǓनक आधार पर 
अɮयतन होती रहती है। 
  
Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 तक कȧ िèथǓत के अनुसार महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत 
मजदूरȣ, सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटक क े  ͧलए लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-
वार ͪववरण अनुबंध-II मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
  
(ग): ͪपछले पांच वषɟ के दौरान महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत, मèटर रोल बंद होने 
के 15 Ǒदनɉ के भीतर 96% से अͬधक फं ड Ěांसफर ऑड[र (एफटȣओ) लगातार सृिजत हुए हɇ। 
इस योजना के तहत, कɅġ सरकार ɮवारा Ĥ×य¢ लाभ हèतांतरण (डीबीटȣ) Ĥोटोकॉल के 
माÚयम से सीधे लाभाͬथ[यɉ क े खातɉ मɅ 100% मजदूरȣ भुगतान ͩकया जाता है। चूंͩक 
मंğालय ɮवारा पीएफएमएस (लोक ͪवƣ Ĥबंधन Ĥणालȣ) के  माÚयम से दैǓनक आधार पर 
मजदूरȣ के भुगतान के ͧलए èवीकृǓतयां जारȣ कȧ हɇ, उͬचत ĤͩĐयाओं का पालन करने के 
बाद राÏयɉ से Ǔनͬध हèतांतरण आदेश ĤाÜत होने के बाद, Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने कȧ िèथǓत 
दैǓनक आधार पर अɮयतन होती रहती है। Ĥ×येक ͪवƣीय वष[ कȧ शुǽआत मɅ, ͪपछले वष[ कȧ 
èवीकाय[ लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ, यǑद कोई हो, कȧ भारत सरकार ɮवारा ͪवͬधवत ĤǓतपूǓत[ कȧ 
जाती है। तदनुसार, ͪवƣ वष[ 2024-25 कȧ सभी लंǒबत मजदूरȣ देनदाǐरयां पहले हȣ जारȣ कȧ 
जा चुकȧ हɇ। 
यहाँ यह भी उãलेखनीय है ͩक महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम, 
2005 (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा) कȧ अनुसूची–II मɅ उिãलͨखत Ĥावधानɉ के अनुसार, मèटर रोल 
के समापन कȧ सोलहवीं Ǔतͬथ के पæचात भुगतान मɅ होने वाले ͪवलंब कȧ िèथǓत मɅ, मजदूरȣ 
ĤाÜतकता[ओं को ͪवलंब कȧ Ĥ×येक Ǒदवस अवͬध के ͧलए अदƣ मजदूरȣ कȧ राͧश पर 0.05 
ĤǓतशत कȧ दर से ¢ǓतपूǓत[ ĤाÜत करने का अͬधकार होगा। ͪवलंब ¢ǓतपूǓत[ से संबंͬधत 
Ǔनयम संबंͬधत राÏय सरकार ɮवारा अͬधसूͬचत ͩकए जाते हɇ। मुआवजा हेतु देय राͧश का 
ͪवͬधवत स×यापन एवं अनुमोदन ͩकया जाता है तथा त×पæचात राÏय सरकार ɮवारा उसका 
भुगतान ͩकया जाता है। 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत देय ͪवलंब मुआवजा 
और भुगतान ͩकए गए ͪवलंǒबत मुआवजा (नरेगा सॉÝट पर उपलÞध जानकारȣ के अनुसार) 
का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा अनुबंध-III मɅ Ǒदया गया है। 
                                                                         
1006                                                      

(घ): महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना एक मांग आधाǐरत मजदूरȣ रोजगार योजना है और 
योजना के काया[Ûवयन कȧ िजàमेदारȣ संबंͬधत राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ कȧ सरकारɉ कȧ है। 
जॉब काड[ का अɮयतन/ͪवलोपन राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ ɮवारा आयोिजत एक Ǔनयͧमत ĤͩĐया 
है। जॉब काड[ मुÉय Ǿप से नकलȣ/डुिÜलक े ट/गलत जॉब काड[, Ēाम पंचायत से èथायी Ǿप से 
èथानांतǐरत पǐरवार, शहरȣ के Ǿप मɅ वगȸकृत Ēाम पंचायत और जॉब काड[ मɅ के वल एक 
सदèय और उसकȧ मृ×यु हो गई है आǑद जैसे कारणɉ से हटा Ǒदए जाते  हɇ। हालांͩक, 
Įͧमकɉ/जॉब काड[ के ͪवलोपन/हटाने के दौरान, राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को अͬधǓनयम के 
Ĥावधानɉ और मंğालय ɮवारा जारȣ मानक संचालन ĤͩĐया का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत करना 
होगा ताͩक यह सुǓनिæचत ͩकया जा सके ͩक योÊय या पाğ पǐरवार का कोई जॉब काड[ 
हटाया/रɮद नहȣं ͩकया गया है।  
जॉब काड[ हटाने कȧ ĤͩĐया को सुåयविèथत करने के ͧलए, Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय ने सभी 
राÏयɉ/संघ राÏय ¢ेğɉ को Ǒदनांक 25.01.2025 के पğ क े  माÚयम से एक मानक संचालन 
ĤͩĐया (एसओपी) जारȣ कȧ थी, िजसमɅ जॉब काड[ को हटाने और बहाल करने के ͧलए èपçट 
ǑदशाǓनदȶश थे। एसओपी महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना क े  ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ का अनुपालन सुǓनिæचत 
करता है, पारदͧश[ता को बढ़ावा देता है, ͪवलोपन के ͧलए शतɟ को पǐरभाͪषत करके, ͧशकायत 
Ǔनवारण तंğ èथाͪपत करते हुए Įͧमकɉ के अͬधकारɉ कȧ र¢ा करता है, और 
ͪवलोपन/रɮदȣकरण से पहले लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ का Ǔनपटान सुǓनिæचत करता है। 
मानक संचालन ĤͩĐया (एसओपी) उͬचत ĤͩĐया के मह×व पर जोर देता है, िजसमɅ 
ͪवलोपन के ͧलए ͬचिéनत जॉब काड[ कȧ ĜाÝट सूͬचयɉ का Ĥकाशन, Ēाम सभाओं मɅ 
स×यापन और Ĥभाͪवत Įͧमकɉ क े ͧलए अपील का अͬधकार शाͧमल है। यह डुिÜलकेट और 
धोखाधड़ी वालȣ Ĥͪविçटयɉ को ख×म करने के ͧलए जॉब काड[ को आधार से जोड़ने का भी 
आदेश देता है। इन उपायɉ का उɮदेæय यह सुǓनिæचत करते हुए जॉब काड[ के दुǽपयोग को 
रोकना है ͩक वाèतͪवक लाभाͬथ[यɉ को बाहर नहȣं ͩकया गया है। मंğालय महा×मा गांधी 
नरेगा योजना कȧ अखंडता बनाए रखने और यह सुǓनिæचत करने के ͧलए ĤǓतबɮध है ͩक 
योजना का लाभ पाğ Ēामीण पǐरवारɉ तक पहुंचे। 
ͪवƣीय वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत शाͧमल ͩकए 
गए और हटाए गए जॉब काड[ राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार संÉया अनुबंध-IV मɅ दȣ गई है। 
  
1007                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2377 के भाग (क) के उƣर मɅ संदͧभ[त अनुबंध-I 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मज़दूरȣ, सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए जारȣ Ǔनͬधयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा (करोड़ ǽपये मɅ) 
Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ 2020-21 
मज़दूरȣ सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक कुल 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 6273.13 4031.97 10305.10 
2 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 224.89 115.39 340.28 
3 असम 2154.95 447.38 2602.33 
4 ǒबहार 4756.87 2527.36 7284.24 
5 छƣीसगढ़ 3362.94 580.54 3943.48 
6 गोवा 0.00 3.57 3.57 
7 गुजरात 1066.02 412.10 1478.12 
8 हǐरयाणा 600.89 162.67 763.56 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 736.75 211.58 948.33 
10 जàमू और कæमीर 810.49 341.83 1152.32 
11 झारखंड 2399.42 1024.67 3424.08 
12 कना[टक 4251.44 1249.55 5500.99 
13 केरल 3356.22 930.55 4286.78 
14 मÚय Ĥदेश 6419.71 2667.01 9086.73 
15 महाराçĚ 1351.62 248.63 1600.26 
16 मͨणपुर 0.00 1306.74 1306.74 
17 मेघालय 974.97 309.20 1284.17 
18 ͧमजोरम 501.75 88.70 590.45 
19 नागालɇड 0.00 483.82 483.82 
20 ओͫडशा 4219.20 996.09 5215.29 
21 पंजाब 1021.25 217.89 1239.14 
22 राजèथान 8097.76 823.00 8920.76 
23 ͧसिÈकम 80.75 29.42 110.17 
24 तͧमलनाडु 6958.79 1830.02 8788.82 
25 तेलंगाना 2634.34 1476.87 4111.21 
26 ǒğपुरा 904.40 290.58 1194.99 
27 उƣर Ĥदेश 7817.58 4196.52 12014.10 
1008                                                      

28 उƣराखंड 713.17 173.09 886.27 
29 पिæचम बंगाल 9397.68 2056.37 11454.05 
30 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.00 4.86 4.86 
31 दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ 0.00 0.00 0.00 
32 दमन और दȣव 0.00 0.00 0.00 
33 ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 0.00 0.00 
34 पुदुचेरȣ 24.44 2.40 26.84 
35 लɮदाख 22.49 0.00 22.49 
कुल 81133.93 29240.38 1,10,374.31 
  
1009                                                      

 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मज़दूरȣ, सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए जारȣ Ǔनͬधयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा (करोड़ ǽपये मɅ) 
Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ  
2021-22 
मज़दूरȣ सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक कुल 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 5238.79 1943.88 7182.67 
2 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 323.55 130.19 453.74 
3 असम 1963.42 256.84 2220.26 
4 ǒबहार 3507.37 1900.00 5407.37 
5 छƣीसगढ़ 2837.20 1057.14 3894.34 
6 गोवा 0.04 0.00 0.04 
7 गुजरात 1159.56 455.69 1615.24 
8 हǐरयाणा 457.10 265.58 722.68 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 734.44 241.31 975.75 
10 जàमू और कæमीर 854.89 95.24 950.14 
11 झारखंड 2225.92 837.91 3063.83 
12 कना[टक 4644.87 1383.21 6028.08 
13 केरल 3112.95 438.98 3551.93 
14 मÚय Ĥदेश 5548.84 2930.25 8479.09 
15 महाराçĚ 1651.39 405.07 2056.46 
16 मͨणपुर 0.00 563.11 563.11 
17 मेघालय 881.77 239.89 1121.66 
18 ͧमजोरम 462.84 86.08 548.92 
19 नागालɇड 305.70 263.75 569.46 
20 ओͫडशा 4288.73 1391.42 5680.15 
21 पंजाब 899.21 358.38 1257.59 
22 राजèथान 7774.48 2093.27 9867.75 
23 ͧसिÈकम 74.13 38.29 112.42 
24 तͧमलनाडु 7354.81 2283.32 9638.13 
25 तेलंगाना 2547.34 1557.86 4105.20 
26 ǒğपुरा 814.60 174.28 988.88 
1010                                                      

27 उƣर Ĥदेश 6602.67 1906.89 8509.57 
28 उƣराखंड 499.35 142.68 642.03 
29 पिæचम बंगाल 5607.80 1900.00 7507.80 
30 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.00 7.63 7.63 
31 दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ और दमन 
और दȣव 0.00  0.00 0.00 
32 ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 0.30 0.30 
33 पुदुचेरȣ 13.07 0.00 13.07 
34 लɮदाख 42.47 16.57 59.04 
कुल 72429.31 25365.02 97794.33 
  
  
  
1011                                                      

 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मज़दूरȣ, सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए जारȣ Ǔनͬधयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा (करोड़ ǽपये मɅ) 
Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ  
2022-23 
मज़दूरȣ सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक कुल 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 5118.93 2870.16 7989.09 
2 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 352.14 225.44 577.58 
3 असम 1831.40 222.16 2052.35 
4 ǒबहार 5024.83 1369.62 6395.29 
5 छƣीसगढ़ 2381.67 1025.34 3383.55 
6 गोवा 3.75 1.29 5.12 
7 गुजरात 1011.03 683.57 1692.07 
8 हǐरयाणा 306.35 67.63 373.99 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 656.13 503.37 1157.48 
10 जàमू और कæमीर 704.37 346.25 1050.61 
11 झारखंड 2196.30 518.46 2708.64 
12 कना[टक 3793.51 2417.52 6225.28 
13 केरल 2935.75 881.21 3818.43 
14 मÚय Ĥदेश 4541.45 1156.39 5702.13 
15 महाराçĚ 1744.29 799.32 2549.73 
16 मͨणपुर 0.00 1086.63 1086.63 
17 मेघालय 670.25 446.68 1116.92 
18 ͧमजोरम 420.13 118.59 538.72 
19 नागालɇड 573.06 264.39 897.45 
20 ओͫडशा 3743.86 956.29 4638.36 
21 पंजाब 883.11 299.03 1182.13 
22 राजèथान 6757.26 2891.39 9662.99 
23 ͧसिÈकम 70.46 22.09 92.55 
24 तͧमलनाडु 7469.90 2238.92 9706.62 
25 तेलंगाना 2027.44 954.34 2988.68 
26 ǒğपुरा 672.17 250.60 922.03 
1012                                                      

27 उƣर Ĥदेश 6551.57 4075.85 10629.01 
28 उƣराखंड 433.61 357.17 792.84 
29 पिæचम बंगाल 0.00 0.00 0.00 
30 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.00 9.60 9.60 
31 ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 0.00 0.00 
32 पुदुचेरȣ 20.65 4.30 24.95 
33 लɮदाख 42.30 26.70 68.93 
34 दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ और दमन 
और दȣव 0.00 1.62 1.62 
कुल 62937.68 27091.92 90041.39 
  
1013                                                      

 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मज़दूरȣ, सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए जारȣ Ǔनͬधयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा (करोड़ ǽपये मɅ) 
Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ  
2023-24 
मज़दूरȣ सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक कुल 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 5629.31 1703.32 7332.63 
2 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 283.19 142.91 426.10 
3 असम 1943.17 278.22 2221.38 
4 ǒबहार 4284.17 1915.87 6200.03 
5 छƣीसगढ़ 2088.35 800.20 2888.56 
6 गोवा 0.88 0.00 0.88 
7 गुजरात 1000.81 800.81 1801.62 
8 हǐरयाणा 357.77 118.95 476.71 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 597.66 399.47 997.13 
10 जàमू और कæमीर 725.61 194.83 920.44 
11 झारखंड 2249.64 667.12 2916.76 
12 कना[टक 3794.71 1621.03 5415.74 
13 केरल 2953.63 559.85 3513.48 
14 मÚय Ĥदेश 3640.64 2230.51 5871.14 
15 महाराçĚ 1947.47 1086.97 3034.44 
16 मͨणपुर 0.00 0.00 0.00 
17 मेघालय 577.41 334.92 912.33 
18 ͧमजोरम 447.58 58.48 506.06 
19 नागालɇड 422.93 215.03 637.96 
20 ओͫडशा 3930.67 961.22 4891.89 
21 पंजाब 928.24 238.31 1166.55 
22 राजèथान 6490.07 2181.55 8671.62 
23 ͧसिÈकम 75.70 36.26 111.95 
24 तͧमलनाडु 10191.64 2411.72 12603.36 
25 तेलंगाना 1785.29 1723.30 3508.59 
26 ǒğपुरा 724.30 319.29 1043.59 
27 उƣर Ĥदेश 7176.97 2631.58 9808.55 
1014                                                      

28 उƣराखंड 384.98 166.67 551.66 
29 पिæचम बंगाल 0.00 0.00 0.00 
30 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.00 0.00 0.00 
31 ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 0.00 0.00 
32 पुदुचेरȣ 50.39 8.38 58.77 
33 लɮदाख 44.66 17.98 62.64 
34 दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ और दमन 
और दȣव 0.00 2.21 2.21 
  कुल 64727.83 23826.93 88554.76 
  
1015                                                      

 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत मज़दूरȣ, सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए जारȣ Ǔनͬधयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा (करोड़ ǽपये मɅ) 
Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ  
2024-25 
मज़दूरȣ 
सामĒी और 
ĤशासǓनक कुल 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 6033.82 1654.46 7688.29 
2 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 400.68 157.73 558.42 
3 असम 1556.59 366.82 1923.41 
4 ǒबहार 4796.51 1911.97 6708.48 
5 छƣीसगढ़ 2559.62 778.93 3338.56 
6 गोवा 2.3 1.4 3.7 
7 गुजरात 1101.01 437.77 1538.79 
8 हǐरयाणा 395.17 192.59 587.75 
9 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 789.34 408.71 1198.06 
10 जàमू और कæमीर 901.72 248.17 1149.89 
11 झारखंड 2411.13 280.64 2691.77 
12 कना[टक 4194.51 1500.21 5694.73 
13 केरल 2450.67 673.62 3124.29 
14 मÚय Ĥदेश 4264.64 1953.23 6217.87 
15 महाराçĚ 3172.01 1233.67 4405.68 
16 मͨणपुर 540.21 39.7 579.91 
17 मेघालय 749.99 401.7 1151.69 
18 ͧमजोरम 582.61 25.65 608.26 
19 नागालɇड 137.5 147.75 285.25 
20 ओͫडशा 2651.55 1093.09 3744.64 
21 पंजाब 934.99 393.42 1328.41 
22 राजèथान 6211.1 1361.39 7572.48 
23 ͧसिÈकम 74.49 21.78 96.26 
24 तͧमलनाडु 5984.03 1568.77 7552.8 
25 तेलंगाना 2782.79 1024.67 3807.46 
26 ǒğपुरा 717.53 321.34 1038.87 
1016                                                      

27 उƣर Ĥदेश 6544.99 3154.49 9699.48 
28 उƣराखंड 431.72 191.74 623.47 
29 पिæचम बंगाल 0 0 0 
30 पुदुचेरȣ 38.79 1.77 40.56 
31 लɮदाख 62.96 23.02 85.98 
32 अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 3.11 1.33 4.44 
33 ल¢ɮवीप 0.32 0 0.32 
34 
दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ और दमन 
और दȣव 8.66  0.36 9.02 
  कुल 63487.1 21571.89 85058.99 
 
1017                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2377 के भाग (ख) के उƣर मɅ संदͧभ[त अनुबंध- II 
  
Ǒदनांक 15.12.2025 तक कȧ िèथǓत अनुसार महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत 
मज़दूरȣ, सामĒी और ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ के ͧलए लंǒबत देनदाǐरयɉ का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-
वार Þयौरा (करोड़ɉ ǽपये मɅ) 
  
  
राÏय/ संघ राÏय ¢ेğ ĤशासǓनक सामĒी मज़दूरȣ   
आंĢ Ĥदेश 80.54 583.73 425.23   
अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 0.92 49.16 5.26   
असम 28.03 410.07 5.31   
ǒबहार 15.13 416.52 18.80   
छƣीसगढ़ 9.81 106.75 8.31   
गोवा 0.02 0.43 0.00   
गुजरात 12.66 23.64 82.85   
हǐरयाणा 0.43 41.59 0.87   
Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 5.74 72.03 2.15   
जàमू और कæमीर 18.16 198.34 70.38   
झारखंड 5.51 299.59 16.93   
कना[टक 39.35 578.06 10.50   
केरल 52.53 192.61 419.32   
लɮदाख 0.39 3.77 1.03   
मÚय Ĥदेश 98.81 629.21 207.56   
महाराçĚ 34.41 701.34 14.55   
मͨणपुर 4.30 156.38 12.56   
मेघालय 1.22 65.46 4.25   
ͧमजोरम 1.02 0.25 5.91   
नागालɇड 2.30 76.14 24.79   
ओͫडशा 2.66 238.09 20.78   
पंजाब 1.83 116.44 1.69   
राजèथान 9.91 838.04 10.26   
ͧसिÈकम 0.04 2.48 0.22   
तͧमलनाडु 35.41 594.80 365.72   
तेलंगाना 12.48 212.85 1.16   
1018                                                      

ǒğपुरा 26.11 139.63 1.80   
उƣर Ĥदेश 103.94 1086.81 24.13   
उƣराखंड 3.93 55.72 1.75   
पिæचम बंगाल** ** ** **   
अंडमान और Ǔनकोबार 0.00 0.03 0.00   
दादरा और नगर हवेलȣ और दमन और दȣव 0.00 0.01 2.27   
ल¢ɮवीप 0.00 0.00 0.00   
पुदुचेरȣ 0.47 0.00 0.00   
कुल 608.07 7889.94* 1766.35   
*सामĒी घटक कȧ लंǒबत देयता मɅ - ͪवƣ वष[ 2025-26 (नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार) और ͪवƣ 
वष[ 2024-25 (वाèतͪवक) कȧ लंǒबत देनदाǐरयां शाͧमल हɇ। मजदूरȣ और ĤशासǓनक घटकɉ 
के तहत ͪपछले वष[ के संबंध मɅ कोई लंǒबत देनदारȣ नहȣं है।  
** इस ͪवभाग ɮवारा जारȣ Ǔनदȶशɉ का पालन न करने के कारण पिæचम बंगाल राÏय के 
ͧलए ͪवƣीय वष[ 2021-22 के मजदूरȣ बजट मɅ संशोधन पæचात वृɮͬध करने का Ĥèताव, 
इस ͪवभाग कȧ राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना (महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) कȧ 
अͬधकार ĤाÜत सͧमǓत ɮवारा अनुमोǑदत नहȣं ͩकया गया। इसके पæचात, राÏय ɮवारा कɅ ġ 
सरकार के Ǔनदȶशɉ का लगातार पालन न करने के कारण महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण 
रोजगार गारंटȣ अͬधǓनयम, 2005 कȧ धारा 27 के Ĥावधानɉ के अनुसरण मɅ पिæचम बंगाल 
राÏय को Ǒदनांक 09.03.2022 से महा×मा गांधी राçĚȣय Ēामीण रोजगार गारंटȣ योजना 
(महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना) के तहत Ǔनͬधयां जारȣ करना रोक Ǒदया गया। इसͧलए, 
नरेगासॉÝट के अनुसार, पिæचम बंगाल राÏय से संबंͬधत लंǒबत देनदारȣ (08.03.2022 तक) 
₹3082.52 करोड़ है, िजसमɅ मजदूरȣ घटक के  तहत ₹1457.22 करोड़, सामĒी घटक के 
तहत ₹1607.68 करोड़ और ĤशासǓनक घटक के तहत ₹17.62 करोड़ शाͧमल हɇ। इस 
देनदारȣ कȧ èवीकाय[ता का कɅ ġ सरकार ɮवारा स×यापन के अधीन है। 
  
1019                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2377 के भाग (ग) के उƣर मɅ संदͧभ[त अनुबंध- III 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत देय ǒबलंब मुआवजे 
और भुगतान ͩकए गए मुआवजे का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा। 
(ǽपये मɅ) 
Đ. 
सं. 
राÏय/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
देय ͪवलंब  
मुआवजा  
भुगतान 
ͩकया गया 
ͪवलंǒबत  
मुआवजा 
देय ͪवलंब  
मुआवजा  
भुगतान 
ͩकया गया 
ͪवलंǒबत  
मुआवजा 
देय 
ͪवलंब  
मुआवजा  
भुगतान 
ͩकया गया 
ͪवलंǒबत  
मुआवजा 
1 अंडमान और 
Ǔनकोबार 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 आंĢ Ĥदेश 1604407 1544890 258097 224114 32806 32006 
3 अǽणाचल 
Ĥदेश 954492 204998 528799 0 178220 0 
4 असम 26842 14322 1071368 44633 1062210 2188 
5 ǒबहार 2140375 2069054 424060 302252 96591 14008 
6 छƣीसगढ़ 729 0 29551 1676 6194 5650 
7 
दादरा और 
नगर हवेलȣ 
और दमन 
और दȣव 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 गोवा 461432 67536 378322 3281 51945 0 
9 गुजरात 22358 21855 14583 2043 145016 0 
10 हǐरयाणा 17295 17291 1146 1146 53610 48957 
11 Ǒहमाचल 
Ĥदेश 89666 89206 80178 80050 135763 135362 
12 जàमू और 
कæमीर 146375 54 150742 5020 707345 6411 
13 झारखंड 82 67 42442 38700 70055 63340 
14 कना[टक 216503 136846 146319 71210 161570 21650 
15 केरल 140082 140073 6254 6254 35145 35141 
16 लɮदाख 18156 0 46792 0 44278 181 
1020                                                      

17 ल¢ɮवीप 0 0 0 0 0 0 
18 मÚय Ĥदेश 912716 750193 826760 510589 116402 458 
19 महाराçĚ 2760752 2578004 12637776 12449837 5348653 5282093 
20 मͨणपुर 0 0 0 0 210 0 
21 मेघालय 11 11 3 0 0 0 
22 ͧमजोरम 0 0 0 0 9598 0 
23 नागालɇड 5544 0 0 0 0 0 
24 ओͫडशा 32626 31896 6139 6139 2122 1450 
25 पुदुचेरȣ 0 0 0 0 0 0 
26 पंजाब 176929 78914 208499 16283 272483 193 
27 राजèथान 238976 238568 35801 35299 128166 103932 
28 ͧसिÈकम 1911 1907 843 843 0 0 
29 तͧमलनाडु 1 1 720 720 16338 16338 
30 तेलंगाना 0 0 6012 4560 3009 1255 
31 ǒğपुरा 7136 6877 2677 2677 190 40 
32 उƣर Ĥदेश 347176 150572 544039 324999 456298 328630 
33 उƣराखंड 27337 25934 2065 1504 2573 2209 
34 पिæचम 
बंगाल 3624613 3322367 477281 358178 315425 121505 
  कुल 13974522 11491436 17927268 14492007 9452215 6222997 
(नरेगा सॉÝट के अनुसार) 
1021                                                      

 
वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत देय ǒबलंब मुआवजे 
और भुगतान ͩकए गए मुआवजे का राÏय/संघ राÏय ¢ेğ-वार Þयौरा। 
(ǽपये मɅ) 
  
Đ.सं. 
  
राÏय/संघ राÏय 
¢ेğ 
2023-24 2024-25 
देय ͪवलंब  
मुआवजा  
भुगतान ͩकया 
गया ͪवलंǒबत  
मुआवजा 
देय ͪवलंब  
मुआवजा 
भुगतान ͩकया 
गया ͪवलंǒबत  
मुआवजा 
  
1 अंडमान और 
Ǔनकोबार 0 0 0 0   
2 आंĢ Ĥदेश 624  624 32 32   
3 अǽणाचल Ĥदेश 362011  0 105502 0   
4 असम 575522  3114 62344 29185   
5 ǒबहार 132532  34981 122358 53641   
6 छƣीसगढ़ 97  97 7 0   
7 
दादरा और नगर 
हवेलȣ और दमन 
और दȣव 
0 0 0 0   
8 गोवा 263563  0 149242 0   
9 गुजरात 1798  0 616 0   
10 हǐरयाणा 80809  73019 53610 44208   
11 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 233717  233596 23226 22159   
12 जàमू और कæमीर 937498  201819 1128792 357687   
13 झारखंड 105922 105047 112678 112039   
14 कना[टक 30267  6874 25609 8763   
15 केरल 8671  8555 80922 79527   
16 लɮदाख 15105  0 173 0   
1022                                                      

17 ल¢ɮवीप 0  0 0 0   
18 मÚय Ĥदेश 303524  7 68025 0   
19 महाराçĚ 1085230  183926 4890897 1814541   
20 मͨणपुर 219039  0 693591 0   
21 मेघालय 270  0 10 0   
22 ͧमजोरम 0  0 5579 0   
23 नागालɇड 0  0 99 0   
24 ओͫडशा 97928  96550 319 257   
25 पुदुचेरȣ 0  0 0 0   
26 पंजाब 396450 388 338150 0   
27 राजèथान 12635  3222 3967 0   
28 ͧसिÈकम 0  0 105 0   
29 तͧमलनाडु 15  15 267 267   
30 तेलंगाना 417  134 209 112   
31 ǒğपुरा 26  10 30 30   
32 उƣर Ĥदेश 770631  717614 1214430 1114912   
33 उƣराखंड 2415  0 1018 0   
34 पिæचम बंगाल 1201  0 0 0   
  कुल 5637917 1669592 9081807 3637360   
                
(नरेगा सॉÝट के अनुसार) 
  
1023                                                      

राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2377 के भाग (घ) के उƣर मɅ संदͧभ[त अनुबंध-IV 
ͪवƣीय वष[ 2020-21 से 2024-25 तक महा×मा गांधी नरेगा योजना के तहत राÏय/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ-वार जोड़े गए ͩकए गए जॉबकाड[ और हटाए गए जॉबकाड[ कȧ संÉया। 
Đ.
सं. 
राÏय/
संघ 
राÏय 
¢ेğ 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
सं
Éया 
जोड़े 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
संÉया 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
सं
Éया 
जोड़े 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
संÉया 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
संÉया 
जोड़े 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
सं
Éया 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
संÉया 
जोड़े 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
सं
Éया 
हटाए 
गए 
जॉब
काड[ 
कȧ 
सं
Éया 
जोड़े 
गए 
जॉब 
काड[ 
कȧ 
संÉया 
1 आंĢ 
Ĥदेश 3426 59901
5 
18507
9 
30659
4 
28827
24 
19446
2 
37032
6 
27144
3 
14847
8 
31285
1 
2 अǽणाच
ल Ĥदेश 6151 25738 9596 30951 8875 24736 12869 26745 15651 29200 
3 असम 96586 63201
2 76244 58402
1 
15713
8 
65214
7 
28214
2 
11464
2 
57622
0 
31633
8 
4 ǒबहार 18240
7 
23856
07 
12735
14 
26680
27 
58702
25 
10998
70 
21120
92 
10001
69 
98128
4 
80738
82 
5 छƣीसग
ढ़ 
17030
4 
40081
2 
13966
0 
11676
1 
26483
9 84719 29454
4 
11276
1 
39902
6 
27821
9 
6 गोवा 8 907 11 530 21 645 24 369 53 441 
7 गुजरात 13108
0 
51931
3 40289 18884
3 
14614
1 
14208
5 
33853
3 94251 53616 62266
8 
8 हǐरया
णा 15413 17458
5 8531 73698 11028 38389 8834 69744 6237 10336
4 
9 Ǒहमाच
ल Ĥदेश 8000 87479 10351 87572 18119 35869 15543 36674 4559 46205 
10 
जàमू 
और 
कæमीर 
94078 12278
5 37635 78390 38388 41100 73015 23502 30123 95742 
11 झारखंड 89427 146992286739204954254578032452823811769553306
1024                                                      

67 4 3 2 0 4 5 6 1 
12 कना[टक 7197 73719
7 41843 50172
2 
20318
5 
44866
4 96036 21624
8 27286 18048
8 
13 केरल 23773 27080
4 27340 22260
2 
11072
2 
11092
2 
21875
2 84672 89300 92186 
14 लɮदाख 1336 1927 889 1034 1421 1008 897 652 452 789 
15 मÚय 
Ĥदेश 
10628
61 
15781
65 
11001
09 
63639
6 
36634
9 
53738
8 
69527
8 
48678
8 51890 58887
2 
16 महारा
çĚ 48460 95295
1 28201 21977
74 72863 45401
6 37625 70765
9 26449 59799
3 
17 मͨणपुर 11126 22242 4449 11513 3153 5806 5778 14623 6395 21704 
18 मेघालय 8119 32181 5449 24233 3832 22702 15375 23206 13181 42502 
19 ͧमजोर
म 9896 15782 8580 8610 4149 7891 4902 7314 9988 11061 
20 नागालɇड 1136 11853 1797 10191 2528 10811 3759 7995 8999 22596 
21 ओͫडशा 31362
1 
89568
0 
79329
2 
39713
0 
23700
31 
35240
1 
52362
2 
34074
2 
28600
9 
88099
7 
22 पंजाब 14330 22287
6 65858 67912 34065
9 85269 69225 81560 20981 16796
9 
23 राजèथा
न 
11766
0 
10173
78 
12928
5 
42445
9 
63480
0 
24539
0 
39379
7 
25982
9 55563 47949
3 
24 ͧसिÈक
म 784 3204 1343 1745 1409 1779 2133 2159 1969 1701 
25 तͧमल
नाडु 
12601
7 
53295
1 
15506
5 
33743
2 
31504
9 
24909
1 
65367
7 
28906
3 
63382
0 
16858
0 
26 तेलंगा
ना 5282 34920
1 15976 13372
7 
51068
3 64611 84744 10565
2 80166 84168 
27 ǒğपुरा 8684 17387 5951 19332 5938 18757 20798 15578 8742 27075 
28 उƣर 
Ĥदेश 
20187
1 
42134
97 
58207
4 
16744
45 
48580
64 
75605
5 
33151
58 
49173
3 91568 15105
46 
29 उƣराखं
ड 16508 11583
8 26004 30541 14809
8 24081 44229 27515 45150 31360 
30 पिæचम 19374 1682227741 825222177521383169691726 9026 4581 
1025                                                      

बंगाल 97 5 36 8 1 
31 
अंडमान 
और 
Ǔनकोबा
र 
1528 1241 448 222 143 446 70 616 308 428 
32 
दादरा 
और 
नगर 
हवेलȣ 
और 
दमन 
और 
दȣव 
0 126 0 6667 0 89 2 186 14 1184 
33 ल¢ɮवी
प 1 13 8 112 18 76 52 165 37 36 
34 पुदुचेरȣ 245 3760 258 1556 4394 1284 606 4691 480 2043 
  कुल 27966
89 
19096
771 
50315
44 
12062
010 
22486
774 
63841
97 
10188
652 
57444
87 
38599
76 
15330
323 
  
****    
1026                                                      

भारत सरकार 
Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय 
Ēामीण ͪवकास ͪवभाग 
राÏय सभा 
अतारांͩकत Ĥæन सं. 2378 
  (19 Ǒदसàबर, 2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए)  
Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना-IV का काया[Ûवयन 
2378.  Įीमती राजाथी: 
Èया Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğी यह बताने कȧ कृपा करɅगे ͩक: 
(क) तͧमल नाडु राÏय सǑहत Ĥधानमंğी Ēाम सड़क योजना-IV (पीएमजीएसवाई-IV) के 
अंतग[त राÏय-वार कवर कȧ जाने वालȣ असंबɮध बिèतयɉ कȧ संÉया ͩकतनी है; 
(ख) तͧमल नाडु राÏय के ͧलए चरण-IV सǑहत ͪवगत पांच वषɟ के ͧलए पीएमजीएसवाई के 
अंतग[त राÏय-वार आवंǑटत और जारȣ कȧ गई धनराͧश का Þयौरा Èया है; 
(ग) सरकार ɮवारा मौजूदा सड़कɉ के उÛनयन, नवीनीकरण और रखरखाव के ͧलए Ǔनͬध को 
सीͧमत करने हेतु ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ मɅ संशोधन ͩकस Ǔतͬथ का ͩकया गया था; और 
(घ) Èया सरकार इन राÏयɉ मɅ मौजूदा Ēामीण सड़कɉ के उÛनयन, नवीनीकरण या रखरखाव 
के ͧलए पीएमजीएसवाई के अंतग[त कोई घटक शुǾ करने या इÛहɅ सुͪवधाजनक बनाने कȧ 
योजना बना रहȣ है? 
उƣर  
Ēामीण ͪवकास राÏय मंğी 
(Įी कमलेश पासवान) 
(क) पीएमजीएसवाई-IV काय[Đम (2024-2029) के तहत, राÏयɉ/संघ-राÏय ¢ेğɉ ɮवारा 
40,547 बसावटɉ का सवȶ¢ण ͩकया गया है िजÛहɅ संपक[ͪवहȣन बसावटɅ कहा गया है। 
एमजीएसवाई-IV ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुसार सवȶ¢ण कȧ गई बसावटɉ कȧ राÏयवार सूची, 
िजसमɅ तͧमलनाडु राÏय भी शाͧमल है, अनुबंध-I मɅ दȣ गई है। 
(ख) पीएमजीएसवाई योजना के काया[Ûवयन के ͧलए राÏय को Ǔनͬध का आवंटन, अÛय 
बातɉ के साथ-साथ, वत[मान मɅ चल रहे कायɟ, राÏय कȧ काया[Ûवयन ¢मता और राÏय 
के पास उपलÞध ͪपछले वषɟ के अåयǓयत शेष राͧश पर Ǔनभ[र करता है। ͪपछले पांच 
वषɟ और चालू वष[ मɅ पीएमजीएसवाई-IV सǑहत जारȣ कɅġȣय अंश का राÏय-वार Þयौरा 
अनुबंध-II मɅ Ǒदया गया है। पाğ बसावटɉ के ͧलए ͪवèतृत पǐरयोजना ǐरपोटɏ (डीपीआर) 
1027                                                      

राÏय से अपेͯ¢त हɇ। पीएमजीएसवाई-IV के अंतग[त Ǔनͬध तͧमलनाडु राÏय सरकार 
ɮवारा डीपीआर Ĥèतुत करने के बाद Ǔनधा[ǐरत ĤͩĐया का पालन करते हुए जारȣ कȧ 
जाएगी। 
(ग) पीएमजीएसवाई ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुसार, मौजूदा सड़कɉ के उÛनयन, नवीनीकरण 
और रखरखाव के  ͧलए ͪवƣपोषण राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा ͩकया जाना है। पीएमजीएसवाई 
के तहत Ǔनͧम[त सड़कɉ और सड़क संरचनाओं के रखरखाव कȧ Ǔनगरानी, जो Ǔनमा[ण 
पूण[ होने के 5 वषɟ कȧ डीएलपी (दोष देयता अवͬध) मɅ हɇ, मंğालय ɮवारा ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ 
मɅ वͨण[त ĤͩĐयाओं के अनुसार कȧ जाती है। Ǔनमा[ण के 5 वष[ के पæचात रखरखाव कȧ 
अवͬध समाÜत होने पर पीएमजीएसवाई सड़कɉ को ¢ेğीय रखरखाव अनुबंधɉ के तहत 
रखा जाना आवæयक होता है, िजसमɅ समय-समय पर रखरखाव चĐ के अनुसार 
नवीनीकरण सǑहत 5 वषɟ का रखरखाव शाͧमल हो, और इसका ͪवƣपोषण राÏय 
सरकारɉ ɮवारा ͩकया जाता है। 
(घ) वष[ 2019 से 2025 तक पीएमजीएसवाई-III काय[Đम, िजसे माच[ 2026 तक बढ़ा 
Ǒदया गया, का उɮदेæय सड़कɉ का उÛनयन था। पीएमजीएसवाई-III के तहत 1,25,000 
ͩकमी के लêय मɅ से 1,22,388 ͩकमी के ͧलए èवीकृǓत दȣ गई थी। ͧसतंबर 2024 मɅ 
शुǾ ͩकया गया पीएमजीएसवाई-IV काय[Đम, वत[मान मɅ काया[िÛवत होने वाला 
नवीनतम घटक है। इसका उɮदेæय उन असंबɮध बसावटɉ को कवर करना है िजनका 
राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अनुसार सवȶ¢ण ͩकया गया है। पीएमजीएसवाई-IV 
के तहत मौजूदा सड़कɉ के उÛनयन, नवीनीकरण और रखरखाव के  ͧलए ͪवƣपोषण 
राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा ͩकया जाएगा। योजना के तहत अनुमोǑदत सभी सड़क कायɟ को 
Ĥारंͧभक पांच साल कȧ रखरखाव अनुबंधɉ के तहत कवर ͩकया जाता है, िजÛहɅ उसी 
ठेके दार के साथ Ǔनमा[ण अनुबंध के तहत मानक बोलȣ दèतावेज के अनुसार ͩकया 
जाएगा। अनुबंध के संचालन के ͧलए रखरखाव Ǔनͬधयɉ को राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा बजट 
मɅ शाͧमल ͩकया जाना आवæयक है और उÛहɅ राÏय Ēामीण सड़क ͪवकास एजɅͧसयɉ 
(एसआरआरडीए) के उपयोग के ͧलए एक अलग रखरखाव खाते मɅ रखा जाता है। 
संबंͬधत राÏय मɅ योजना शुǾ करने से पहले राÏयɉ को Ēामीण ͪवकास मंğालय, भारत 
सरकार के साथ एक समझौता £ापन (एमओयू) करना पड़ता है। इस समझौता £ापन 
के अनुसार, राÏयɉ को अÛय बातɉ के साथ-साथ पीएमजीएसवाई के तहत Ǔनͧम[त/उÛनत 
सड़कɉ के Ĥारंͧभक पांच वषɟ कȧ Ǔनयͧमत देखरेख के ͧलए और इसके बाद कȧ पांच वषɟ 
कȧ Ǔनयͧमत देखरेख तथा आवæयकतानुसार आवͬधक नवीनीकरण के ͧलए पया[Üत 
Ǔनͬध Ĥदान करना आवæयक होता है। पीएमजीएसवाई ǑदशाǓनदȶशɉ के अंतग[त कɅ ġ 
सरकार ɮवारा Ǔनͬध जारȣ करने के ͧलए Ĥèताव Ĥèतुत करते समय रखरखाव हेतु 
Ǔनͬध कȧ Ǔनमु[िÈत को राÏय ɮवारा Ĥमाͨणत करना आवæयक है। एक ऑनलाइन 
1028                                                      

Üलेटफ़ॉम[ पीएमजीएसवाई सड़कɉ का इलेÈĚॉǓनक रखरखाव (ईमाग[) को सभी राÏयɉ मɅ 
काया[िÛवत ͩकया गया है ताͩक Ǔनमा[ण कȧ पूण[ता कȧ Ǔतͬथ से पांच वषɟ (अथा[त दोष 
दाǓय×व अवͬध – डीएलपी के  तहत) तक पीएमजीएसवाई कायɟ के रखरखाव कȧ 
Ǔनगरानी कȧ जा सके। 
 ****   
  
  
  
  
  
1029                                                      

अनुबंध-। 
“पीएमजीएसवाई IV के तहत राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा सवȶ¢ण कȧ गई असंबɮध बसावटɉ” के 
संबंध मɅ राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत 
Ĥæन संÉया 2378 के भाग (क) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध 
 Đ.सं. राÏय/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğ 
राÏय सरकारɉ ɮवारा पीएमजीएसवाई-IV पाğता मानदंड के अनुसार 
जीएसएस एÜलȣकेशन मɅ सवȶ¢ण कȧ गई बसावटɅ 
1 आंĢ Ĥदेश 413 
2 अǽणाचल 
Ĥदेश 
194 
3 असम 4670 
4 ǒबहार 103 
5 छƣीसगढ़ 2692 
6 गुजरात 2443 
7 Ǒहमाचल Ĥदेश 1021 
8 जàमू और 
कæमीर 
2262 
9 झारखंड 2787 
10 कना[टक 76 
11 केरल 2335 
12 लɮदाख 31 
13 मÚय Ĥदेश 9246 
14 महाराçĚ 196 
15 मͨणपुर 303 
16 मेघालय 377 
17 ͧमजोरम 63 
18 नागालɇड 224 
19 ओͫडशा 2679 
20 पंजाब 1 
21 राजèथान 1740 
22 ͧसिÈकम 283 
23 तͧमल नाडु 5 
1030                                                      

24 तेलंगाना 173 
25 ǒğपुरा 435 
26 उƣर Ĥदेश 2174 
27 उƣराखंड 873 
28 पिæचम बंगाल 2748 
  कुल 40547 
  
1031                                                      

अनुबंध- II 
राÏय सभा मɅ Ǒदनांक 19.12.2025 को उƣर Ǒदए जाने के ͧलए Ǔनयत अतारांͩकत Ĥæन 
संÉया 2378 के भाग (ख) के उƣर मɅ उिãलͨखत अनुबंध 
ͪपछले पांच वषɟ और वत[मान वष[ के दौरान जारȣ कȧ गई कɅ ġȣय अंश का राÏय-वार Þयौरा 
(करोड़ ǽपये मɅ) 
Đ.स. 
राÏयɉ/संघ 
राÏय ¢ेğɉ के 
नाम 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
2025-26 
(15.12.2025 
तक) 
  
  
1 अंडमान और 
Ǔनकोबार 0 9.22 12.22 12.22 0.05 0.00   
2 आंĢ Ĥदेश 53.2 50 644.13 140.64 507.32 0.00   
3 अǽणाचल 
Ĥदेश 952.31 1090.6 1018.74 339.9 609 184.47   
4 असम 2516.62 1591.5 664.91 391.29 79.24 101.72   
5 ǒबहार 49.13 375 1443.23 963.37 1195.44 0.00   
6 छƣीसगढ़ 924.48 394.41 995.87 401.77 325.24 203.46   
7 गोवा 0 0 0 0 0 0.00   
8 गुजरात 79.08 195.5 266.63 298.41 220.65 0.00   
9 हǐरयाणा 0 353.23 168.25 74.01 27.38 0.00   
10 Ǒहमाचल 
Ĥदेश 745.24 517.45 624.76 617.56 634.82 393.83   
11 जàमू और 
कæमीर 1727.3 1328.34 717 1304.17 1028.25 30.60   
12 झारखंड 293.5 0 332.63 752.8 961.77 0.00   
13 कना[टक 49.29 704.25 720.47 72.25 100.58 3.66   
14 केरल 89.97 0 106.76 54.25 122.27 45.67   
15 मÚय Ĥदेश 1099.54 1392.25 1557.47 599.42 703.29 29.43   
16 महाराçĚ 0 0 743 1110.8 854.93 71.70   
17 मͨणपुर 420.66 742 744.98 161.29 2.81 0.32   
18 मेघालय 355.29 483.92 405.89 122.59 219.62 134.78   
19 ͧमजोरम 1.59 74.34 584.2 141.37 87.5 28.52   
1032                                                      

20 नागालɇड 72.89 145.31 183.15 161.29 2.25 3.12   
21 ओͫडशा 774.29 404.12 1235.88 1262.55 712.39 78.12   
22 पुदुचेरȣ 0 11.66 24.72 0.27 25 0.00   
23 पंजाब 0 68.59 231.06 265.1 319.87 43.34   
24 राजèथान 237.15 917.51 199.9 404.79 450.46 155.81   
25 ͧसिÈकम 195.5 107.28 263.33 94.37 70 33.08   
26 तͧमल नाडु 265.38 440 613.7 411.36 638.66 189.91   
27 तेलंगाना 0 86.38 321.43 296.9625 132.57 6.54   
28 ǒğपुरा 69.57 73.88 267.59 185.03 172.75 17.43   
29 उƣर Ĥदेश  123.9 1418.55 2068.57 2679.63 1968.6 0.00   
30 उƣराखंड 1536.27 787 1297.16 551.05 815.5 114.96   
31 पिæचम 
बंगाल 969.31 49.94 381.03 99.275 225 126.79   
32 लɮदाख 50 140.79 109.97 37.5 113.81 59.57   
कुल 13651.46 13952.99 18948.61 14007.29 13327.03 2056.83   
  
   
  
  
  
 
1033                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इस् पात मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सांख् या 2379 
19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर ि े  किए 
इस्पात िा आयात और कनयाात 
 
2379. श्री साि े त गोखिे 
क्या इस्पात मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) वर्ष 2019 से 2024 क े  बीच भारत में इस्पात क े  आयात और कनयाषत का क ु ल वाकर्षक मूल्य ककतना है; 
(ख) क्या भारत वतषमान में इस्पात का कनवल आयातक है; 
(ग) वर्ष 2019 से 2025 क े  बीच भारत में घरेलू स्तर पर कवकनकमषत और आयाकतत  हॉट रोल्ड कॉइल्स  (एचआर 
कॉइल्स) का औसत वाकर्षक मूल्य ककतना है; 
(घ) क्या सस्ते इस्पात क े  आयात का भारत में घरेलू इस्पात उत्पादन पर नकारात्मक प्रभाव पड़ रहा है; और 
(ङ) यकद हां, तो अन्य देशों द्वारा भारत में कम मूल्य पर कवदेशी इस्पात क े  कवक्रय को रोकने क े  कलए मंत्रालय 
द्वारा क्या कदम उठाए गए हैं? 
उत्तर 
इस्पात राज्य मंत्री                   (श्री भूपकतराजु श्रीकनवास वमाष) 
 
(क) और (ख): कवत्तीय वर्ष 2019-2020 से कवत्तीय वर्ष 2024-25 तक भारत द्वारा इस्पात क े  आयात और 
कनयाषत क े  क ु ल मूल्य का कववरण कनम्नकलखखत है:- 
तैयार  इस्पात  व्यापार 
मूल्य (िरोड़ रु. में) 
वर्ा आयात कनयाात 
2019-20 44,683 36,727 
2020-21 32,154 47,170 
2021-22 46,298 99,452 
2022-23 64,455 55,829 
2023-24 68,193 59,157 
2024-25 80,737 40,585 
स्रोत:  संयुक्त संयंत्र सकमकत (जेपीसी) 
 
जारी...2/- 
1034                                                      

:2: 
वतषमान में, भारत तैयार इस्पात का  एक शुद्ध (नेट) आयातक है। अप्रैल -नवंबर, 2025 क े  दौरान, 
तैयार इस्पात का आयात 4.19 कमकलयन टन था जबकक कनयाषत 4.18 कमकलयन टन था। 
 
(ग) से (ङ): इस्पात एक कनयंत्रणमुक्त क्षेत्र है और इस्पात की कीमतें बाजार की मांग -आपूकतष संबंधी 
गकतशीलता, वैकिक बाजार की पररखिकतयों, कच्चे माल की कीमतों में रुझान , लॉकजखिक लागत, कवद ् युत 
और ईंधन लागत आकद द्वारा कनधाषररत होती है। सरकार देश में इस्पात क्षेत्र क े  कवकास हेतु एक अनुक ू ल 
नीकतगत वातावरण सृकजत कर एक सुकवधाप्रदाता क े  रूप में कायष करती है। 
 
कवत्तीय वर्ष 2019-20 से कवत्तीय वर्ष 2025-26 की अवकध क े  दौरान देश में क्र ू ड िील के उत्पादन 
और एचआर क्वाइल क े  घरेलू मूल्य का कववरण कनम्नानुसार हैं:- 
वर्ा 2019-
20 
2020-
21 
2021-
22 
2022-
23 
2023-
24 
2024-
25 
2025-26 
(अप्रैि-नवांबर)* 
क्र ू ड  िील 
उत्पादन  (एमटी) 
109.1 103.5 120.3 127.2 144.3 152.2 109.5 
एचआर क्वाइलस  
2 एमएम # का 
घरेलू  मूल्य 
(रु./टन) 
40064 45552 67775 62404 57860 52326 51720 
स्रोत: संयुक्त संयंत्र सकमकत (जेपीसी);एमटी: कमकलयन टन; *अनंकतम; 
#मूल्य जीएसटी को छोड़ कर हैं  और ये कोलकाता, कदल्ली, चेन्नई और मुंबई जैसे चार महानगरों के कलए 
जेपीसी द्वारा जारी ककए गए द ू सरे पाकक्षक मूल्यों का औसत है। 
 
भारत में अन्य देशों से इस्पात की बढ़ती डंकपंग से संबंकधत कचंताओं को द ू र करने क े  कलए क ु छ इस्पात 
उत्पादों जैसे लौह , कमश्रधातु या गैर -कमश्रधातु इस्पात (काि आयरन और िेनलेस िील क े  अलावा) के 
सीमलेस ट्यूब पाइप और हॉलो प्रोफाइल (चीन पीआर से) , इलेक्ट् र ो- गैल्वेनाइज्ड िील (कोररया आरपी, 
जापान, कसंगापुर से), िेनलेस िील सीमलेस ट्यूब और पाइप (चीन पीआर से), वेल्डेड िेनलेस िील पाइप 
और ट्यूब (कवयतनाम और थाईलैंड से) , कमश्रधातु या गैर -कमश्रधातु इस्पात क े  हॉट रोल्ड फ्लैट उत्पाद 
(कवयतनाम से) पर पाटनरोधी शुल्क (एडीडी) उपाय वतषमान में लागू हैं। 
****** 
1035                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इस् पात मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सांख् या 2380 
19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर ि े  किए 
ओकिशा में इस्पात क्षमता 
2380. श्री िेबाशीष सामांतरायः
क्या इस्पात मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः
(क) क्या चालू कित्त िर्ष में ओकिशा में इस्पात उत्पादन में िृद्धि हुई है; 
(ख) राज्य में हररत इस्पात प्रौद्योकगककयों को बढािा देने क े  कलए क्या कदम उठाए गए हैं; 
(ग) क्या मंत्रालय राउरक े ला इस्पात संयंत्र की क्षमता बढाने की योजना बना रहा है; 
(घ) सूक्ष्म, लघु और मध्यम उद्यम इस्पात इकाइयों को लौह अयस्क की उपलब्धता सुकनकित करने क े कलए 
क्या उपाय ककए गए हैं; और 
(ङ) ओकिशा क े  इस्पात क्षेत्र में किदेशी कनिेश का ब्यौरा क्या है? 
उत्तर 
इस्पात राज्य मंत्री  (श्री भूपकतराजु श्रीकनिास िमाष) 
(क): अप्रैल, 2025 से अक्ट ू बर, 2025 की अिकि क े  दौरान, ओकिशा में क्र ू ि स्टील का उत्पादन 18.07 
कमकलयन टन था, जो कपछले िर्ष की समान अिकि की तुलना में 18.8% की िृद्धि दशाषता है। 
(ख): ओकिशा सकहत भारत में  ग्रीन स्टील  क े  उत्पादन को बढािा देने क े  कलए सरकार ने अनेक उपाय 
ककए हैं, कजनमें शाकमल हैं:  कम उत्सजषन िाले इस्पात को पररभाकर्त और िगीक ृ त करने क े  कलए मानक 
प्रदान करने हेतु ग्रीन स्टील क े  कलए िगीकरण जारी करना; निीन एिं निीकरणीय ऊजाष मंत्रालय द्वारा शुरू 
ककए गए राष्ट् र ीय हररत हाइि र ोजन कमशन क े  अंतगषत इस्पात क्षेत्र में हाइि र ोजन क े  उपयोग हेतु पायलट 
पररयोजनाएं आिंकटत करना; सौर ऊजाष क े  उपयोग को बढािा देने क े  कलए निीन एिं निीकरणीय ऊजाष 
मंत्रालय द्वारा जनिरी, 2010 में राष्ट्र ीय सौर कमशन की शुरुआत ; पयाषिरण संरक्षण ( प्रयोग अिकि  समाप् त 
िाहन) कनयम, 2025 लागू करना, कजसमें िाहन कनमाषताओं को िाहन क े  प्रकार एिं पुनप्राषप्त सामग्री क े  आिार 
पर िाकर्षक  स्क्र ै कपंग लक्ष्य पूरे करना आिश्यक है; िर्ष 2019  में  इस्पात स्क्र ै प पुनचषक्रण नीकत की 
अकिसूचना।  
(ग) से (ङ): इस्पात एक कनयंत्रणमुक्त क्षेत्र है  और सरकार प्रासंकगक नीकतयों क े  माध्यम से इस क्षेत्र क े  
किकास का समथषन करती है। उत्पादन, किस्तार, कनिेश, आिुकनकीकरण, रोजगार आकद से जुडे कनणषय बाजार 
की द्धिकतयों तथा क ं पकनयों क े  प्रौद्यो-िाकणद्धज्यक किश्लेर्ण पर कनभषर करते  हैं। सरकार ने एमएसएमई 
इस्पात इकाइयों क े  कलए लौह अयस्क की उपलब्धता सुकनकित करने हेतु कई कदम उठाए हैं, कजनमें खनन 
एिं खकनज नीकत सुिार, जब्त एिं बंद पडी खदानों का शीघ्र प्रचालन तथा सीपीएसई लौह अयस्क उत्पादकों 
द्वारा उत्पादन एिं क्षमता उपयोग में िृद्धि शाकमल हैं। 
***** 
1036                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इस् पात मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सांख् या 2381 
19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर ि े  किए 
िनााटि में इस्पात उद्योग िा किस्तार और पयाािरण अनुपािन 
2381 श्री जी.सी. चन्द्रशेखरः
क्या इस्पात मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः
(क) कनााटक की वतामान इस्पात उत्पादन क्षमता क्या है और भारत क े  क ु ल उत्पादन में इसकी  कहस्सेदारी 
ककतनी है; 
(ख) बेल्लारी और कवजयनगर स्टील क्लस्टर में चल रही क्षमता कवस्तार पररयोजनाओं का ब्यौरा क्या है और 
इन पररयोजनाओं क े  कलए स्वीक ृ त क ें द्रीय कनकि की राकि ककतनी है; और 
(ग) सतत खनन और हररत इस्पात उत्पादन सुकनकित करने क े  कलए क्या पयाावरणीय सुरक्षा उपाय अपनाए 
गए हैं? 
उत्तर 
इस्पात राज्य मंत्री  (श्री भूपकतराजु श्रीकनवास वमाा) 
(क): कनााटक की क्र ू ड स्टील  क्षमता 20.9 कमकलयन टन है, जो भारत  की क ु ल क्र ू ड स्टील क्षमता में 9.6 
प्रकतित योगदान देती है। 
(ख) एवं (ग): इस्पात एक कनयंत्रणमुक्त क्षेत्र है और  सरकार संबंकित नीकतयों  क े  माध्यम से इस क्षेत्र क े  
कवकास को प्रोत्साहन देती है। क ं पकनयों द्वारा प्रौद्यो-वाकणज्यज्यक  कवचारों क े  आिार पर कनवेि ककया जाता है। 
***** 
1037                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इस् पात मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सांख् या 2382 
19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर ि े  किए 
ओकिशा में हररत और िम िाबबन वािे इस्पात प्रौद्योकििी िो बढावा 
2382 श्री मानस रांजन मांिराज: 
क्या इस्पात मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः
(क) क्या ओकिशा क े  इस्पात संयंत्र वायु, जल और भूकम प्रद ू षण से संबंकित पयाावरणीय मानदंि ं का
अनुपालन कर रहे हैं; 
(ख) कपछले तीन वषों में अनुपालन क  लेकर दजा ककए गए उल्लंघन ं की संख्या ककतनी है ; और 
(ग) राज्य में हररत और कम काबान वाले  इस्पात प्रौद्य कगकी क  बढावा देने क े  कलए क्या कदम उठाए गए 
हैं? 
उत्तर 
इस्पात राज्य मंत्री  (श्री भूपकतराजु श्रीकनवास वमाा) 
(क) राज्य प्रद ू षण कनयंत्रण ब िा, ओकिशा ने ओकिशा में इस्पात संयंत्र ं क े  प्रचालन हेतु किस्चाजा और
उत्सजान क े  कलए पयाावरणीय मानक कनिााररत ककए हैं। ब िा ऑनलाइन कनगरानी प्रणाली का उपय ग करक े  
तथा भौकतक कनरीक्षण और कनगरानी प्रणाली क े  माध्यम से उत्सजान और अपकशष्ट जल की  गुणवत्ता की 
कनगरानी करता है। उल्लंघन क े  मामल ं में जल (प्रद ू षण कनवारण तथा कनयंत्रण) अकिकनयम, 1974 और वायु 
(प्रद ू षण कनवारण तथा कनयंत्रण) अकिकनयम, 1981 क े  तहत उकचत कारावाई की जाती है।  
(ख)  कपछले 3 वषों अथाात 2023-24, 2024-25 और 2025-26 क े  दौरान ररप र्ा ककए गए उल्लंघन ं की 
सूची इस प्रकार है:- 
वर्ब सहमकत िी शतों िा अनुपािन न िरने पर 
जारी किए िए िारण बताओ नोकिस और 
कनिेश 
बांि िरने हेतु 
जारी कनिेश 
2023-24 50 00 
2024-25 59 05 
2025-26 (आज की 
स्थिकत क े  अनुसार) 
16 09 
ि ु ि 125 14 
स्र त: राज्य प्रद ू षण कनयंत्रण ब िा, ओकिशा 
जारी...2/- 
1038                                                      

:2: 
 
(ग)  ओकिशा राज्य सकहत देश में ग्रीन और कनम्न काबान इस्पात प्रौद्य कगकी क  बढावा देने क े  कलए सरकार 
द्वारा ककए गए उपाय ं का कववरण कनम्नानुसार है:- 
  
i. इस्पात मंत्रालय ने कम उत्सजान वाले इस्पात क  पररभाकषत और वगीक ृ त करने क े  कलए मानक 
प्रदान करने हेतु ग्रीन स्टील क े  कलए वगीकरण जारी ककया है। 
 
ii. इस्पात मंत्रालय ने इस उद्देश्य क े  कलए इस मंत्रालय द्वारा गकठत 14 कायाबल ं की कसफाररश ं क े  
अनुरूप "ग्रीकनंग द स्टील सेक्टर इन इंकिया: र िमैप ए ं ि एक्शन प्लान" शीषाक से एक ररप र्ा जारी 
की है, ज  वषा 2070 तक नेर्-जीर  लक्ष्य की ओर ग्रीन स्टील और संिारणीयता क े  कलए भकवष्य का 
र िमैप प्रदान करती है। यह ररप र्ा इस्पात मंत्रालय की वेबसाइर् पर उपलब्ध है। 
 
iii. नवीन एवं नवीकरणीय ऊजाा मंत्रालय द्वारा शुरू ककए गए राष्टर ीय हररत हाइिर  जन कमशन के  तहत 
इस्पात क्षेत्र में हाइि र  जन क े  उपय ग क े  कलए पायलर् पररय जनाओं क े  कायाान्वयन हेतु चार पायलर् 
पररय जनाए ं  प्रदान की गई हैं। 
 
iv. नवीन एवं नवीकरणीय ऊजाा मंत्रालय द्वारा जनवरी, 2010 में शुरू ककया गया राष्टर ीय सौर कमशन, 
सौर ऊजाा क े  उपय ग क  बढावा देता है और इस्पात उद्य ग क े  उत्सजान क  कम करने में भी मदद 
करता है। 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1039                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इस् पात मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सांख् या 2383 
19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर ि े  किए 
इस्पात  िे स्क्र ै प िा पुनर्चक्रण 
 
2383. श्री सुभाष बरािा: 
श्री किथिेश ि ु िार: 
श्री सिानांि िहािू शेट तानवडे: 
 
क्या इस्पात मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे कक: 
(क) ईएएफ (इलेक्ट्र ि क आक क  फनेस) स्क्र ै प की क्ट्िर आपूकतक सुकनकित करने क े  कलए स्क्र ै प संग्रहण बाजार 
को औपचाररक रूप देने और स्क्र ै प डीलरों को सहकारी सकमकतयों में संगकित करने हेतु क्या पहल की जा 
रही हैं; 
(ख) पंजीक ृ त वाहन स्क्र ै कपंग सुकवधाओं की िापना और ईएलवी (ए ं ड-ऑफ-लाइफ व्हीकल) स्क्र ै प की 
संगकित आपूकतक को बढावा देने हेतु सरकार द्वारा क्या कदम उिाए गए हैं; और 
(ग) स्क्र ै प-आधाररत इस्पात कनमाकण (ईएएफ/आईएफ) का ऊजाक उपयोग और संसाधन दक्षता पर क्या प्रभाव 
होता है, और यह ब्लास्ट फनेस-आधाररत उत्पादन की तुलना में ककस हद तक अकधक सक्षम है? 
 
उत्तर 
इस्पात राज्य मंत्री                       (श्री भूपकतराजु श्रीकनवास वमाक) 
 
(क) और (ख):  भारत में स्क्र ै प संग्रहण को सुगम बनाने एवं प्रोत्साकहत करने तथा पंजीक ृ त वाहन स्क्र ै कपंग 
सुकवधाओं (आरवीएसएफ) की िापना को प्रोत्साकहत करने हेतु सरकार द्वारा कनम्नकलक्ट्खत उपाय ककए गए 
हैं:- 
i. इस्पात स्क्र ै प पुनचकक्रण नीकत, 2019 कवकभन्न स्त्रोतों से  उत्पन्न लौह स्क्र ै प क े  पुनचकक्रण को 
सुकवधाजनक  बनाने और प्रोत्साकहत  करने क े  कलए कवकभन्न मंत्रालयों क े  साथ  एक समन्वय  रूपरेखा  
प्रदान  करती है। 
 
ii. पयाकवरण, वन और  जलवायु पररवतकन मंत्रालय ने पयाकवरण संरक्षण ( प्रयोग अवकध समाप्त वाहन ) 
कनयम, 2025 लागू ककए हैं, जो पयाकवरणीय दृकि से प्रयोग अवकध समाप्त वाहनों (ईएलवी) के सुरकक्षत  
जारी...2/- 
1040                                                      

:2: 
प्रबंधन हेतु एक रूपरेखा िाकपत करते हैं। इन कनयमों क े  अंतगकत कवस्ताररत उत्पादक उत्तरदाकयत्व 
(ईपीआर) को अकनवायक ककया गया है , कजसक े  तहत वाहन कनमाकताओं को वाहन क े  प्रकार तथा 
पुनप्राकप्त सामग्री क े  आधार पर वाकषकक स्क्र ै कपंग लक्ष्ों को पूरा करना आवश्यक है। 
 
iii. पत्तन, पोत पररवहन एवं जलमागक मंत्रालय द्वारा जहाज पुनचकक्रण अकधकनयम, 2019 अकधसूकचत ककया 
गया है, कजसका उद्देश्य जहाजों क े  सुरकक्षत एवं पयाकवरणीय रूप से अनुक ू ल पुनचकक्रण को कवकनयकमत 
एवं प्रोत्साकहत करना है। 
 
iv. सड़क पररवहन एवं राजमागक मंत्रालय (एमओआरटीएच) द्वारा अनुपयुक्त एवं प्रद ू षणकारी वाहनों को 
पयाकवरण क े   अनुक ू ल तरीक े  से चरणबद्ध रूप से हटाने हेतु एक उपयुक्त पाररक्ट्िकतकी तंत्र का कनमाकण 
करने क े  कलए स्वैक्ट्िक वाहन बेड़ा आधुकनकीकरण कायकक्रम (वी-वीएमपी) या वाहन स्क्र ै कपंग नीकत 
तैयार की गई है। 
 
इस नीकत क े  अंतगकत, सड़क पररवहन एवं राजमागक मंत्रालय (एमओआरटीएच)  ने कदनांक  23.09.2021 
को जीएसआर 653 ( ई) अकधसूकचत ककया है, कजसमें पंजीक ृ त वाहन स्क्र ै कपंग सुकवधा (आरवीएसएफ) की 
िापना क े  कलए मोटर वाहन (वाहन स्क्र ै कपंग सुकवधा का पंजीकरण एवं कायक) कनयम , 2021 का प्रावधान है। 
इन कनयमों को जीएसआर 695 (ई) कदनांक 13.09.2022, जीएसआर 212 (ई) कदनांक 15.03.2024 तथा 
जीएसआर 700 (ई) कदनांक 19.09.2025 क े  माध्यम से संशोकधत ककया गया है। 
 
आरवीएसएफ की िापना को बढावा देने क े  कलए,  सरकारें राज्यों को पूंजी कनवेश हेतु कवशेष सहायता 
योजना 2025–26 क े  तहत राज्यों/क ें द्र शाकसत प्रदेशों को आरवीएसएफ िाकपत करने तथा इन सुकवधाओं में 
वाहनों की स्क्र ै कपंग क े  कलए कवत्तीय प्रोत्साहन प्रदान करती है। 
 
(ग): स्क्र ै प से इस्पात कनमाकण इसकी उपलब्धता एवं लागत कवश्लेषण पर कनभकर करता है तथा  यह इलेक्ट्र ि क 
आक क  फनेस (ईएएफ) एवं इंडक्शन फनेस (आईएफ) मागों क े  माध्यम से अकधक ऊजाक एवं संसाधन-दक्ष होता 
है। स्क्र ै प क े  उपयोग से लौह अयस्क, कोकक ं ग कोल क े  क ु छ कहस्से तथा चूना  पत्थर की उसकी गुणवत्ता एवं 
सांद्रता क े  आधार पर  बचत  होती  है। स्क्र ैप आधाररत इस्पात कनमाकण ब्लास्ट फनेस–बेकसक ऑक्सीजन फनेस 
(बीएफ-बीओएफ) मागक में भी ऊजाक एवं संसाधन दक्षता में सुधार करता है ; तथाकप बीएफ-बीओएफ में स्क्र ै प 
की इनपुट मात्रा सामान्यतः  10–15 प्रकतशत तक सीकमत रहती है। 
 
****** 
 
1041                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इस् पात मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सांख् या 2384 
19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर ि े  किए 
इस्पात आयात में वृद्धि 
2384 श्री कववेि ि े . तन्ााः 
 
क्या इस्पात मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
 
(क) क्या 2024-25 क े  दौरान इस्पात आयात, किशेष रूप से चीन, कोररया और कियतनाम से, में हुई िृद्धि ने 
घरेलू कीमतों को कम ककया है और क्षमता उपयोग को घटाया है; 
(ख) 2023-24 और 2024-25 क े  कलए एचआर/सीआर कॉइल, कोटेड स्टील, स्टेनलेस स्टील और कमश्र 
धातु/बोरॉन-युक्त इस्पात क े  उत्पाद-िार और देश-िार आंकडे क्या हैं; 
(ग) क्या अि बीजकीकरण, शुल्क चोरी और एफटीए से संबंकधत हेराफ े री क े  मामले दजज ककए गए हैं; और 
(घ) घरेलू उत्पादकों की सुरक्षा क े  कलए क्या उपाय ककए गए हैं, कजसमें व्यापार उपचार महाकनदेशालय  
(डीजीटीआर) की जांच , बीआईएस की कडी जांच और भारतीय इस्पात कनमाजताओं को नुकसान  पहुंचाने 
िाली एफटीए शुल्क संरचनाओं की समीक्षा शाकमल है? 
 
उत्तर 
इस्पात राज्य मंत्री                       (श्री भूपकतराजु श्रीकनिास िमाज) 
 
(क)और(ख) : इस्पात एक कनयंत्रणमुक्त क्षेत्र है और सरकार देश में इस्पात क्षेत्र क े  किकास क े  कलए अनुक ू ल 
नीकतगत िातािरण सृकजत कर एक सुकिधा-प्रदाता क े  रूप में कायज करती है। कित्तीय िषज 2024-25 क े  कलए 
कोररया, चीन और कियतनाम से तैयार इस्पात क े  आयात से संबंकधत आंकडे कनम्नानुसार है: 
 
तैयार इस्पात आयात – 2024-25 
िेश मात्रा (एमटी में) कवगत कवत्तीय वर्ष िी 
तुिना में पररवतषन% 
कोररया 2.81 5.3 
चीन 2.53 -5.8 
कियतनाम 0.70 -5.4 
स्रोत: संयुक्त संयंत्र सकमकत ; एमटी = कमकलयन टन  
 
 
 
जारी...2/- 
1042                                                      

:2: 
िषज 2023-24 और 2024-25 क े  कलए एचआर/सीआर कॉइल्स, कोटेड स्टील, स्टेनलेस स्टील तथा 
कमश्रधातु/बोरॉन-युक्त इस्पात क े  देश-िार आयात का कििरण सांिग्नि-I में कदया गया है। 
 
(ग) कित्तीय िषज 2023-24 से 2025-26 (30.11.2025 तक) क े  कलए इस्पात आयात क े  संबंध में अंडर-
इनिॉइकसंग, शुल्क  चोरी (ड्यूटी सक ज मिेंशन) और एफटीए संबि हेरा-फ े री (डायिजजन) के संबंकधत  मामलों 
का कििरण कनम्नानुसार है: 
कवत्तीय वर्ष 
 
इस्पात आयात ि े  सांबांध में िर्ष किए 
गए मामिोां सकित अांडर-
इनवॉइकसांग, शुल्क चोरी और 
एफटीए सांबि िेरा-फ े री ि े  
मामिे/पिचान किये गए  मामिोां  
िी  सांख्या  
शुल्क चोरी 
(रु.िरोड़ में) 
 
शुल्क वसूिी 
(रु.िरोड़ में) 
2023-24 34 66.52 5.08 
2024-25 44 478.51 15.13 
2025-26 
(कदनांक 30.11.2025 
तक) 
20 31.67 10.44 
स्रोत: सीबीआईसी, राजस्व किभाग 
 
(घ) सरकार ने घरेलू उत्पादकों की सुरक्षा क े  कलए कनम्नकलद्धखत कदम उठाए हैं:-  
 
i. सरकारी अकधप्राद्धि क े  कलए 'मेड इन इंकडया ' इस्पात को प्रोत्साकहत करने हेतु घरेलू स्तर 
पर  किकनकमजत लौह एिं इस्पात उत्पाद (डीएमआईए ं डएसपी) नीकत का कायाजन्वयन। 
ii. देश क े  भीतर ‘किशेष इस्पात’ के किकनमाजण को बढािा देने और पूंजी कनिेश को आककषजत करक े  
आयात को कम करने हेतु उत्पादन संबि प्रोत्साहन (पीएलआई) योजना का शुभारंभ। 
iii. उद्योग, उपयोगकत्ताजओं और  बडे पैमाने पर आम जनता क े  कलए गुणित्तापूणज इस्पात की उपलब्धता 
सुकनकित करने हेतु इस्पात गुणित्ता कनयंत्रण आदेश  लागू करना, कजसक े  तहत घरेलू बाजार क े   साथ-
साथ आयात में भी घकटया/दोषपूणज इस्पात उत्पादों  पर प्रकतबंध लगाया गया है। 
iv. िषज 2024-25 क ें द्रीय बजट में, घरेलू किकनमाजताओं को सहायता प्रदान करने और घरेलू इस्पात 
उत्पादन को बढािा देने क े  कलए कनम्नकलद्धखत उपाय ककए गए थे:- 
क.  इस्पात उद्योग क े  कलए कच्चे माल क े  रूप में उपयोग होने िाले फ े रो-कनकल और   
मोकलब् डेनम अयस् कों तथा सांद्रों (क ं संट रेट्स) पर मूल सीमा शुल् क (बीसीडी) 2.5% से 
घटाकर शून् य कर कदया गया है। 
 
ख.    लौह स् र ैप पर बीसीडी छ ू ट कदनांक  31.03.2026 तक जारी रखी गई है। 
 
जारी....3/- 
1043                                                      

:3: 
ग.  कोल् ड रोल् ड ग्रेन ओररए ं टेड (सीआरजीओ) स् टील किकनमाजण क े  कलए किकनकदजष् ट कच् चे माल   
पर कदनांक 31.03.2026 तक छ ू ट जारी रखी गई है। इसक े  अलािा, टैररफ मद 7226 
11.00 क े  अंतगजत आने िाले सीआरजीओ स् टील क े  किकनमाजण क े  कलए ऐसे किकनकदजष् ट कच् चे 
माल पर भी छ ू ट बढा दी गई है। 
v. क ु छ इस् पात उत् पादों जैसे लौ ह, कमश्रधातु अथिा गैर -कमश्रधातु (कास्ट आयरन और स् टेनलेस स् टील 
को छोडकर) इस् पात क े सीमलेस ट्यूब, पाइप और खोखले उत्पाद (चीन गणराज् य से), इलैक्‍ ट र ो-
गैलिेनाइज् ड इस्पात (कोररया गणराज्य, जापान, कसंगापुर से), स् टेनलेस स् टील के सीमलेस ट्यूब एिं 
पाइप (चीन गणराज् य से), िेल्डेड स् टेनलेस स् टील पाइप और ट्यूब (कियतनाम और थाईलैंड से) ,  
कमश्रधातु  या गैर -कमश्रधातु  इस्पात  क े  हॉट रोल्ड फ्लैट उत्पाद (कियतनाम  से), क े  संबंध में पाटन 
रोधी शुल् क (एडीडी) उपाय ितजमान में लागू हैं। 
vi. चीन और कियतनाम से आयाकतत िेल् डे ड स् टेनलेस स् टील पाइपों और ट्यूबों पर प्रकतकारी शुल् क  
(सीिीडी) लागू है।  
*****  
  
1044                                                      

सांिग्नि -I 
तैयार इस्पात िी चुनी गई श्रेणी/ गुणवत्ता से सांबांकधत आयात 
 
कवत्तीय वर्ष 2023-24 
मात्रा: '000 टन 
  गैर-कमश्र-धातु 
अिॉय स्टीि स्टेनिेस स्टीि िेश एचआर 
िॉइल्स* 
सीआर 
िॉइल्स** िोटेड स्टीि# 
चीन 914.39 17.33 352.91 285.19 591.36 
र्ापान 713.7 35.83 215.14 126.85 55.78 
िोररया 1,308.69 238.21 479.33 525.19 86.13 
कवयतनाम 577.97 0.16 100.7 0.3 57.33 
अन य 158.22 37.99 142.39 278.97 117.09 
समग्र योग 3,672.97 329.52 1,290.47 1,216.50 907.69 
कवत्तीय वर्ष 2024-25 
मात्रा: '000 टन 
  गैर-कमश्र-धातु 
अिॉय स्टीि स्टेनिेस स्टीि िेश एचआर 
िॉइल्स * 
सीआर 
िॉइल्स**  िोटेड स्टीि # 
चीन 712 63.08 369.5 355.82 518.69 
फ्ाांस 75.1 0.26 13.39 33.02 2.79 
र्ापान 1,336.46 33.39 270.05 144.51 76.23 
िोररया 1,467.79 177.64 491.81 528.47 105.62 
कवयतनाम 447.47 0.03 65.31 0.38 172.42 
अन य 97.50 41.35 145.52 305.48 365.98 
समग्र योग 4,136.32 315.75 1,355.58 1,367.68 1,241.73 
स्रोत: संयुक्त संयंत्र सकमकत; 
*एचआर कॉइल में एचआर कॉइल्स, एचआर द्धस्ट र प्स, एचआर शीट, प्लेट्स शाकमल हैं; 
**सीआर कॉइल में सीआर कॉइल्स और सीआर द्धस्ट र प्स शाकमल हैं; 
#कोटेड स्टील में जीपी/जीसी कोटेड, कलर कोटेड शाकमल हैं;  
 
 
1045                                                      

भारत सरकार 
इस् पात मंत्रालय 
राज्य सभा 
अताराांकित प्रश् न सांख् या 2385 
19 किसांबर, 2025 िो उत्तर ि े  किए 
सेिम इस्पात सांयांत्र 
2385 श्री एस. आर. किवकिांगमः  
क्या इस्पात मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) क्या सरकार सेलम इस्पात संयंत्र (एसएसपी) में किशेषज्ञता और स्टेनलेस स्टील उत्पाद ं क े  उन्नयन, 
तकनीकी दक्षता में सुधार, उत्पाद किकिधीकरण बढाने और दीर्घकाकलक प्रकतस्पधाघत्मकता क  मजबूत करने 
क े  कलए लकक्षत कनिेश का प्रस्ताि रखती है; 
(ख) यकद हां, त  इस संबंध में सरकार द्वारा उठाए जाने िाले प्रस्ताकित कदम ं का ब्यौरा क्या है; और 
(ग) क्या सरकार ने एसएसपी क े  पुनरुद्धार क े  कलए कित्तीय पुनगघठन, बाजार किस्तार और पररचालन 
सुधार ं पर ध्यान देते हुए एक र डमैप तैयार ककया है या तैयार करने की य जना बना रही है , यकद हां, त  
सरकार द्वारा प्रस्ताकित ऐसे र डमैप  का ब्यौरा क्या है? 
 
उत्तर 
इस्पात राज्य मंत्री                     (श्री भूपकतराजु श्रीकनिास िमाघ) 
(क) से (ग): स्टील अथॉररटी ऑफ इंकडया ( सेल) की एक इकाई , सेलम इस्पात संयंत्र (एसएसपी) में 
प्रचालन दक्षता और दीर्घकाकलक स्थिरता में सुधार लाने क े  उद्देश्य से कई उपाय ककए गए हैं, कजनमें क्षमता 
उपय ग क  बेहतर बनाना , प्रचालन दक्षता बढाना , कच्चे माल तथा किद ् युत खपत क  इष्टतम करना और 
मूल्यिकधघत स्टेनलेस स्टील उत्पाद ं पर ज र देते हुए उत्पाद कमश्रण क  युस्थिसंगत बनाना शाकमल है। 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
1046                                                      

1 
 
भारत सरकार 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्रालय 
उद्योग संवर्धन और आंतररक व्यापार ववभाग 
राज्य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या: 2386 
शुक्रवार, 19 दिसम्बर, 2025 को उत्तर दिए जाने के ललए 
चमडा क्षेत्र के कायधबल प्रलशक्षि के पररिाम  
 
2386. श्री मोहम्मि निीमुल हक:  
 
क्या वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री यह बताने की कृपा करेंगे कक: 
 
(क) क्या सिफाररश के अनुिार चमडा क्षेत्र के सिए काययबि प्रसशक्षण, श्रसमक प्रततधारण, 
प्रततकिया और पररणामों की वास्तववक िमय ट्रैककिंग हेतु एक कें द्रीकृत पोर्यि ववकसित 
ककया गया है; 
(ख) यदि हािं, तो वर्य 2022 िे प्रसशक्षण पूणय करने के छः महीने के भीतर कौशि ववकाि 
ककए गए श्रसमकों की ििंख्या, प्रततधारण आिंकडे और तनयोजित ककए गए प्रसशक्षुओिं की 
ििंख्या ककतनी है; और 
(ग) यदि नहीिं, तो इिके क्या कारण हैं? 
उत्तर 
वाणिज्य और उद्योग मंत्री 
(श्री पीयूष गोयल) 
(क) से (ग): कौशि ववकाि और उद्यसमता मिंत्रािय (एमएिडीई), वर्य 2015 िे अपनी 
प्रमुख स्कीम प्रधानमिंत्री कौशि ववकाि योिना (पीएमकेवीवाई) को कायायजववत 
कर रहा है, जििका उद्िेश्य िेशभर के युवाओिं को अल्पकासिक प्रसशक्षण 
(एिर्ीर्ी) के माध्यम िे कौशि ववकाि प्रसशक्षण प्रिान करना और पूवय में 
प्राप्त प्रसशक्षण को मावयता प्रिान कर  (आरपीएि) कौशि-उवनयन (अप-
जस्कसििंग) और नए कौशि सिखाना (री-जस्कसििंग) है। इिका िक्ष्य युवाओिं में 
चमडा क्षेत्र िदहत ववसभवन क्षेत्रों के उद्योगों िे ििंबिंधधत कौशि का ववकाि 
करके रोिगार के अविरों का िाभ उठाने के सिए उनकी रोिगार क्षमता को 
बढाना है।  
 
2. पीएमकेवीवाई के तीन ििंस्करणों के पूरा होने के बाि, इिका चौथा ििंस्करण     
पीएमकेवीवाई 4.0, वतयमान में ववत्त वर्य 2022-23 िे प्रगतत पर है। 
1047                                                      

2 
 
3. 31.10.2025 की जस्थतत के अनुिार, चमडा क्षेत्र में पीएमकेवीवाई 4.0 के तहत 
प्रसशक्षक्षत और प्रमाणणत उम्मीिवारों का काययवार वववरण तनम्नानुिार है: 
िम ििं. कायय का नाम प्रसशक्षक्षत/उवमुख प्रमाणणत 
1 कर्र- फुर्ववयर 2,774 2,377 
2 कर्र-माि और पररधान 214 182 
3 फुर्ववयर और फैशन एक्िेिरीि ररर्ेि 
एिोसिएर्  
135 92 
4 हेल्पर अपर मेककिंग 79 54 
5 िाजस्र्िंग ऑपरेर्र 1,891 1,544 
6 प्री अिेंबिी ऑपरेर्र फुर्ववयर 1,924 1,417 
7 गुणवत्ता तनयिंत्रण तनरीक्षक (फुर्ववयर) 445 329 
8 नमूना तनमायता - फुर्ववयर 30 0 
9 स्काइवविंग ऑपरेर्र - फुर्ववयर 179 178 
10 जस्र्चर माि और पररधान 7,360 5,927 
11 सििाई ऑपरेर्र (फुर्ववयर) 6,650 5,380 
कुि 21,681 17,480 
 
 4. ववत्त वर्य 2015-16 िे ववत्त वर्य 2021-22 तक कायायजववत पीएमकेवीवाई 
स्कीम के पहिे तीन ििंस्करणों, यानी पीएमकेवीवाई 1.0, पीएमकेवीवाई 2.0 
और पीएमकेवीवाई 3.0 के अल्पकासिक प्रसशक्षण (एिर्ीर्ी) घर्क के अिंतगयत 
प्िेिमेंर् को ट्रैक ककया गया था। पीएमकेवीवाई 4.0 के तहत, प्रसशक्षक्षत 
उम्मीिवारों को, ववसभवन कररयर मागय चुनने के सिए िशक्त बनाने पर ध्यान 
क ें दद्रत ककया गया है, और उवहें ऑन-ि-िॉब ट्रेतनिंग (ओिेर्ी) िदहत उद्योग-
ििंगत कौशि पाठ्यिमों के माध्यम िे उपयुक्त रूप िे उवमुख ककया िाता हैं। 
  5. इि स्कीम के तहत प्रसशक्षक्षत उम्मीिवारों के पूरे प्रसशक्षण काि का प्रबिंधन 
जस्कि इिंडडया डडजिर्ि हब (एिआईडीएच) पोर्यि के माध्यम िे ककया िाता 
है। इि पोर्यि पर प्रसशक्षक्षत उम्मीिवारों का वववरण रखा िाता है, िो ििंभाववत 
तनयोक्ताओिं िे िुडने के सिए उपिब्ध है। तिनुिार, एिआईडीएच के माध्यम 
िे, उम्मीिवारों को रोिगार और सशक्षुता के ववसभवन अविरों तक पहुिंच प्राप्त 
होती है। 
***** 
1048                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2387 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
पीए् म्र पाकों क े  म ए स्य पर मनमि का आवरटन  
 
2387. श्री बृज  ा : 
श्री्ती ्ाया नारोम या: 
श्री म्थ ेश क ु ्ार: 
श्री ्िन राठौड़: 
श्री नारायण कोरागप्पा:  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) मपछ े पारच वर्षों ्ें िेश ्ें स्‍तथामपत वस्त्र पाकों की सरख्या क्या है; 
(ख) प्रिान्ररी ्ेगा एकीक ृ त वस्त्र क्षेर एवर पररिान (पीए् म्र) योजना क े  अरतगगत सा्ान्य सुमविा क ें द्र समहत 
अत्यािुमनक अवसररचना की स्‍तथा पना क े  म ए मनमि एवर सरसािनों क े  स्य पर आवरटन को सुमनमित करने हेतु 
सरकार द्वारा क्या उपाय ककए जा रहे हैं; और 
(ग) पीए् म्र योजना क े  ्ाध्य् से मनजी क्षेर की भागीिारी, कौश  मवकास और मवशेर्ष रूप से  ग्रा्ीण क्षेरों ्ें 
्मह ाओं एवर हामशए पर रहने वा े स्ुिायों क े  बीच रोजगार सृजन को बढावा िेने हेतु क्या कि् उठाए गए 
हैं?  
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पमबर ्ार्घेररटा) 
(क): सरकार ने वस्‍त र उद्योग की सरपूणग ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा के म ए एकीक ृ त बड़े पै्ाने वा ी और आिुमनक औद्योमगक 
अवसररचना की सुमविा मवकमसत करने की िृमि से, तम् नाडु (मवरूद्धनगर), ते रगाना (वाररग ), गुजरात (नवसारी), 
कनागटक (क बुरगी), उत्तर प्रिेश ( खनऊ), ्ध्य प्रिेश (िार), और ्हाराष्ट्र (अ्रावती) ्ें 4445 करोड़ रुपए क े 
पररव्यय से वर्षग 2027-28 तक सात वर्षों की अवमि के म ए 7 स्‍तथ ों पर पीए् ्ेगा एकीक ृ त वस्‍त र क्षेर और अपैर  
(पीए् म्र) पाकों की स्‍तथापना को अरमत् रूप किया है।  
(ख): इस योजना ्ें योजना किशामनिेशों क े  अध् यिीन ग्रीनीील्ड पाकों क े म ए 500 करोड़ रु. और ब्राउनीील्ड पाकों क े 
म ए 200 करोड़ तक क ु   पररयोजना  ागत क े 30% की मवकास पूरजीगत सहायता (डीसीएस) की पररकल्पना की गई 
है। अब तक, ्ध्य प्रिेश, तम् नाडु, ्हाराष्ट्र और ते रगाना ्ें पीए् म्र पाकों को क ु   160 करोड़ रुपये जारी ककए 
गए हैं। 
 
(ग): पीए् म्र योजना को प्रभावी ढरग से कियामन्वत करने क े म ए, भारत सरकार और पीए् म्र राज्यों क े  बीच 
स्झौता ज्ञापनों क े  साथ-साथ सरयुक्त उद्य् स्झौतों पर हस्‍तताक्षर ककए गए हैं। सभी ग्रीनीील्ड पीए् म्र पाकों ्ें 
मवशेर्ष प्रयोजन तरर (एसपीवी) को शाम्  ककया गया है, मजस्ें राज्य सरकारों की एसपीवी ्ें 51% महस्‍तसेिारी है और 
शेर्ष 49% भारत सरकार क े पास है। योजना ्ें मनजी क्षेर की भागीिारी को प्रोत्सामहत करने क े  म ए, मवकास क े  अन्य 
्ॉड ों क े  अ ावा मडजाइन-मबल्ड-ीाइनेंस-ऑपरेट-ट्ारसीर (डीबीएीओटी) आिार पर पीए् म्र पाक ग  मवकमसत करने 
क े  म ए एक ्ास्‍तटर डेव पर (ए्डी)  ेड ्ॉड  की पररकल्पना की गई है। यह प्रयास वस्‍त र ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा क े  मवमभ  क्षेरों 
्ें रोजगार पैिा करेगा मजससे ्मह ाओं और वरमचत स्ुिायों समहत आबािी क े  सभी वगग  ाभामन्वत होंगे। 
**** 
1049                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2388 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
भारत क े  वस्त्र क्षेर की प्रततस्‍तपर्ाात््कता 
2388. श्री सरजय क ु ्ार झा: 
क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) क्या यह सच है कक भारत क े  वस्त्र उद्योग को क ु छ ितक्षण एतियाई और ितक्षण पूवा एतियाई िेिों से 
कडी प्रततस्‍तपर्ाा का सा्ना करना पडता है; और 
(ख) यकि हार , तो उपयुाक्त कडी प्रततस्‍तपर्ाा को िेखते हुए , भारत क े  वस्त्र उद्योग की प्रततस्‍तपर्ाात््कता को 
्जबूत करने क े  त ए ्ररा य द्वारा उठाए गए प्र्ुख नीततगत हस्‍ततक्षेप क्या हैं?  
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पतबर ्ार्घेररटा) 
(क) और (ख): ितक्षण एतिया और ितक्षण -पूवा एतिया क े  क ु छ िेि आयाततत कच् ची सा्री ी क े आर्ार पर 
अतर््ान्य बाजार पहुरच क े साथ क ु छ बाजारों ्ें तैयार वस्‍त रों का तनयाात करते हैं। भारतीय वस्‍त र क्षेर की सरपूणा 
्ूल्य श्रृरख ा को एक ्जबूत र्घरे ू कच् ची सा्री ी क े  आर्ार और तवतन्ााण क्ष्ता क े साथ एकीक ृ त ककया गया 
है। भारत का वस्‍त र और पररर्ान (हस्‍तततिल्प सतहत) का तनयाात तवत्त वर्ा 2024-25 ्ें 37,755.0 त्त यन 
अ्ेररकी डॉ र था, जो तपछ े वर्ा की तु ना ्ें 5.2% की वृति को ििााता है। 
सरकार भारतीय वस्‍त र और पररर्ान क्षेर को बवावा िेने और इसकी प्रततस्‍तपर्ाा को बवाने क े  त ए तवतभन्न 
योजनाओं/पह ों को  ागू कर रही है। प्र्ुख योजनाओं /पह ों ्ें एक आर्ुतनक, एकीक ृत, तवश्व स्‍ततरीय वस्‍त र 
बुतनयािी ढारचा बनाने क े त ए पीए् ्ेगा एकीक ृ त वस्‍त र क्षेर और पररर्ान (पीए् त्र) पाक ा  योजना; बडे 
पै्ाने पर तवतन्ााण को बवावा िेने और प्रततस्‍तपर्ाात््कता बवाने क े  त ए ए्ए्एफ कपडे , ए्ए्एफ 
पररर्ान और तकनीकी वस्त्रों पर फोकस करने वा ी उत्पािन सम् बि प्रोत्साहन (पीए आई) योजना; अनुसरर्ान 
नवाचार और तवकास, सरवर्ान और बाजार तवकास पर फोकस करने वा ा राष्ट्रीय तकनीकी वस्त्र त्िन ; स्था 
- ्ारग सरचात त, रोजगार उन््ुख, कौि  कायाक्र् प्रिान करने क े  उद्देश्य से वस्‍त र क्षेर ्ें क्ष्ता तन्ााण की
योजना; रेि् उत्पािन ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा क े व्यापक तवकास क े त ए तसल् क स्री -2 ; हथकरर्घा क्षेर क े  त ए पूणा 
1050                                                      

सहायता क े  त ए राष्ट्रीय हथकरर्घा तवकास कायाक्र् िात्  हैं। वस्त्र ्ररा य हस्‍तततिल्प को बवावा िेने क े त ए 
राष्ट्रीय हस्‍तततिल्प तवकास कायाक्र् और व्यापक हस्‍तततिल्प क् स्‍तटर तवकास योजना भी  ागू कर रहा है। 
सरकार अपैर /गार्ेंट और ्ेड -अप् स क े  त ए िो छूट योजनाएर अथाात राज्य और क ें द्रीय करों और िुल् कों ्ें 
छूट योजना (आरओएससीटीए ) और अन्य वस्त्र उत्पािों क े  त ए तनयााततत उत्पािों पर िुल्क और करों की छूट 
(आरओडीटीईपी) योजना भी च ा रही है। 
सरकार ने वस्‍त र क्षेर को ्जबूत करने क े  त ए हा  ही ्ें कई उपाय ककए हैं, तजस्ें वस्‍त र क्षेर क े  तहत गुणवत्ता 
तनयररण आिेि (क्यूसीओ) से सरबरतर्त ्ा् ों क े  अतनवाया अनुपा न से छूट क े  सरबरर् ्ें अतरी ् प्रातर्कार 
योजना क े  तहत तनयाात िातयत्व अवतर् का तवस्‍ततार , प्रवेि और तनवेि ्ानिरडों को आसान बनाने क े  त ए 
ए्ए्एफ पररर्ान, ए्ए्एफ फ ै तिक् स और तकनीकी वस्त्रों क े  त ए पीए आई योजना ्ें सरिोर्न, किनारक 
31.12.2025 तक कपास पर आयात िुल्क ्ें छूट, सरपूणा ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा ्ें जीएसटी िरों को युतक्तसरगत बनाना। 
सरकार का  क्ष्य वस्‍त र क्षेर क े  त ए 40 फोकस बाजारों की पहचान क े  साथ तनयाात तवतवर्ीकरण को बवावा 
िेना है। सरकार ने अपने व्यापाररक भागीिारों क े  साथ 15 ्ुक्त व्यापार स्झौतों (एफटीए) और 6 अतर््ान्य 
व्यापार स्झौतों (पीटीए) पर भी हस्‍तताक्षर ककए हैं। इसक े  अ ावा, सरकार ने व्यापार तवत्त , बाजार पहुरच, 
िारडडरग और अनुपा न क े  त ए तनयाात प्रोत्साहन और तनयाात कििा क े  ्ाध् य् से तथा तनयाातकों क े  त ए क्र े तडट 
गाररटी योजना क े  ्ाध्य् से  ागू ककए जा रहे तनयाात सरवर्ान त्िन को ्रजूरी िे िी है, जो तविेर् रूप से 
ए्एसए्ई को 100% क्र े तडट गाररटी प्रिान करता है। 
ये सभी उपाय भारतीय वस्‍त र उद्योग की प्रततस्‍तपर्ाा को बवावा िे रहे हैं। 
*** 
1051                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2389 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
स्र्थ योजना क े  अरतर्थत प्रशिक्षु 
2389. श्री किशववजय ससरह: 
श्री्ती ररजीत ररजन: 
क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृपा करेंर्े ककिः 
(क) स्र्थ योजना क े  अरतर्थत वर्थ 2021 से प्रशिशक्षत युवाओं की सरख्या का , योजना क े  अरतर्थत पहचाने र्ए क्षेरों क े  अनुसार 
शवभाशजत, राज्य-वार और वर्थ-वार आँकडे क्या हैं; 
(ख) योजना क े  अरतर्थत प्रशिशक्षत िश त, आकिवासी और ्शह ाओं की सरख्या क े  राज्य-वार आरकडे क्या हैं; 
(र्) सरर्ठित और असरर्ठित क्षेर ्ें कायथरत योजना क े प्रशिक्षुओं की सरख्या क े  राज्य-वार आरकडे क्या ह ँ; और 
(घ) क्या ्ररा य ने यह सुशनशित करने क े श ए कि् उिाए हैं कक योजना क े अरतर्थत प्रिान ककया र्या प्रशिक्षण वतथ्ान 
उद्योर् आवश्यकताओं क े अनुरूप हो, यकि हार, तो तत्सरबरधी ब्यौरा क्या ह ?  
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पशबर ्ाघेठरटा) 
(क) और (ख): वस्‍त र ्ररा य की स्र्थ योजना (वस्‍त र क्षेर ्ें क्ष्ता शन्ाथण योजना) अशख  भारतीय स्‍त तर पर कता  और बुना  को 
छोडकर वस्‍त र की प री ् य य श्रृरख ा क े सरर्ठित वस्‍त र और सरबरशधत क्षेरों ्ें नौकठरयार सृशजत करने ्ें उद्योर् क े प्रयासों को प रा करने 
क े  श ए ्ारर् आधाठरत, रोजर्ार-उन््ुख कौि  कायथक्र् प्रिान करती ह । इस योजना क े तहत, क ु   5.26  ाख  ाभार्र्थयों को 
(शवत्त वर्थ 2021 -22) से किनारक 11.12.2025 तक प्रशिशक्षत (उत् तीणथ) ककया र्या ह , शजन्ें 4,67,596 ्शह ाएर, 1,44,708 
एससी और 68 ,621 एसटी  ाभार्ी िाश्  हैं। स्र्थ योजना क े  तहत किनारक 11.12.2025 तक राज्य/क ें द्र िाशसत प्रिेि-वार, 
क्षेर-वार और वर्थ-वार उत्तीणथ  ाभार्र्थयों की सरख्या, शजस्ें ्शह ाएर, एससी, एसटी िाश्  हैं, अनु ग्नक-I ्ें िी र्  ह  । 
(र्) : स्र्थ योजना क े  अरतर्थत राज्य/सरघ राज्य क्षेर-वार  ाभार्र्थयों की सरख्या (शजस्ें सरर्ठित और पाररपठरक िोनों क्षेर िाश्  हैं) 
(किनारक 11.12.2025 तक) अनुबरध-II ्ें िी र्  ह । 
(घ) : वस्‍त र ्ररा य ने यह सुशनशित करने क े  श ए अनेक कि् उिाए हैं कक स्र्थ योजना क े  तहत प्रशिक्षण, वस्‍त र क्षेर की वतथ्ान 
आवश् यकताओं क े  शहसाब से हो। 
i. सभी प्रशिक्षण पाठ्यक्र् नेिन  शस्‍तक  क्वाश किक े िन फ्र े ्वक थ (एनएसक् य एि) क े  शहसाब से हैं और इन
पाठ्यक्र्ों की स्य-स्य पर स्ीक्षा की जाती ह  और उद्योर् क े स्‍तटेकहोयडसथ से स ाह करक े  हर 3 वर्थ ्ें इन्हें अपडेट 
ककया जाता ह । 
ii. ट्रेसनरर् ्ॉड्य   क े  क र टेंट और सार्थकता पर इरडस्‍तट्री पाटथनसथ और स्‍तटेकहोयडसथ से स्य-स्य पर स्ीक्षा और
जानकारी  ी जाती ह , शजससे उसकी प्रासरशर्कता और  र्ातार सुधार सुशनशित होता ह । 
1052                                                      

अनु ग्नक-I 
स्र्थ योजना क े  तहत (किनारक 11.12.2025 तक) पास हुए  ाभार्र्थयों का राज्य/सरघ-राज् यक्षेर-वार और वर्थ -वार ब् यौरा नीचे 
किया र्या ह : 
क्र.सर. 
राज्य/क ें द्र िाशसत प्रिेि क्षेर 
प्रशिशक्षत  ाभार्र्थयों की सरख्या (पास) 
2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
1 अरड्ान और शनकोबार हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 21 20 47 0 0 
2 आरध्र प्रिेि 
र्ार्ेंट 1123 1212 2377 2171 2913 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 308 241 55 60 29 
रेि् 0 0 57 99 299 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 733 182 346 156 73 
3 अरुणाच  प्रिेि 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 0 57 30 0 0 
रेि् 0 0 0 0 25 
4 अस् 
र्ार्ेंट 20 0 159 0 20 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 82 0 58 0 0 
रेि् 63 27 493 520 1532 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 1279 2615 2441 2522 1973 
5 शबहार 
र्ार्ेंट 276 1002 3805 1211 6826 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 190 336 584 2036 1401 
रेि् 0 55 381 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 203 159 473 93 76 
6 चरडीर्ढ़ हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 58 29 0 0 0 
7 छत्तीसर्ढ 
र्ार्ेंट 324 351 395 337 363 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 53 100 23 0 23 
रेि् 72 49 215 111 68 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 363 72 295 194 458 
8 किय ी 
र्ार्ेंट 758 1042 2110 1827 2309 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 146 282 27 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 107 166 0 0 0 
9 र्ोवा हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 29 0 54 23 0 
10 र्ुजरात 
र्ार्ेंट 2002 1600 2337 2227 2795 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 209 258 108 29 0 
ज ट 0 27 0 0 0 
प्रसरस्‍तकरण 299 146 150 23 16 
रेि् 0 291 105 125 59 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 496 93 262 210 88 
11 हठरयाणा 
र्ार्ेंट 3250 3937 5446 6395 7591 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 55 55 59 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 68 0 117 95 50 
12 शह्ाच  प्रिेि 
र्ार्ेंट 0 0 177 339 120 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 0 175 29 0 31 
प्रसरस्‍तकरण 60 81 28 0 
रेि् 0 0 0 0 160 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 0 0 204 117 65 
1053                                                      

13 जम््  और कश््ीर 
र्ार्ेंट 0 12 24 0 0 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 296 689 135 0 18 
रेि् 0 20 0 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 460 124 190 252 157 
14 झारखरड 
र्ार्ेंट 226 284 491 745 229 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 153 180 57 20 42 
रेि् 0 0 102 81 140 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 155 93 426 131 64 
15 कनाथटक 
र्ार्ेंट 8037 18907 35439 18850 28830 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 564 620 822 728 829 
प्रसरस्‍तकरण 0 47 25 0 0 
रेि् 0 309 1124 168 179 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 617 84 291 181 225 
16 क े र  
र्ार्ेंट 0 19 67 14 14 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 201 168 55 50 40 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 557 447 467 155 132 
17  द्दाख हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 0 0 26 0 0 
18 ्ध्य प्रिेि 
र्ार्ेंट 564 948 3008 5856 6085 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 283 311 76 0 89 
प्रसरस्‍तकरण 0 82 18 50 230 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 502 199 390 209 181 
19 ्हाराष्ट्र 
र्ार्ेंट 1912 2101 2697 2989 2732 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 492 484 103 75 22 
रेि् 0 0 0 0 137 
तकनीकी वस्त्र 0 0 0 0 74 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 615 250 525 391 362 
20 ्शणपुर 
र्ार्ेंट 0 0 0 0 140 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 57 50 27 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 620 188 198 208 110 
21 ्ेघा य 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 86 24 29 49 26 
रेि् 0 0 0 0 47 
22 श्जोर् 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 59 30 39 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 194 28 260 227 178 
23 नार्ा ैंड 
र्ार्ेंट 0 0 0 0 0 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 0 26 29 0 0 
रेि् 19 83 39 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 125 446 239 159 176 
24 ओशडिा 
र्ार्ेंट 464 2275 2442 508 297 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 83 81 79 29 48 
रेि् 0 30 226 279 214 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 293 372 349 455 163 
25 पुिुचेरी 
र्ार्ेंट 0 48 57 24 138 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 145 56 30 0 0 
26 परजाब 
र्ार्ेंट 232 154 77 188 206 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 28 29 27 0 0 
1054                                                      

वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 69 55 40 16 42 
27 राजस्‍तर्ान 
र्ार्ेंट 278 2495 7139 8195 8730 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 202 481 81 16 426 
शनटटरर् 134 135 192 102 266 
प्रसरस्‍तकरण 726 502 672 548 450 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 147 183 165 144 138 
28 शसकि् हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 44 22 0 0 0 
29 तश् नाडु 
र्ार्ेंट 11010 16767 23921 11987 20892 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 501 1348 2113 1088 1423 
शनटटरर् 0 8 0 21 25 
प्रसरस्‍तकरण 30 77 62 53 5 
रेि् 0 19 312 936 286 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 866 359 856 498 513 
30 ते रर्ाना 
र्ार्ेंट 1163 1964 1833 1181 2763 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 98 97 398 116 0 
रेि् 0 22 260 51 136 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 916 196 584 179 129 
31 िािरा और नर्र हवे ी और 
ि्न और िीव र्ार्ेंट 608 499 620 305 178 
32 शरपुरा 
र्ार्ेंट 0 15 114 43 26 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 77 187 152 40 56 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 339 232 165 128 117 
33 उत् तर प्रिेि 
र्ार्ेंट 3536 6833 10475 12461 22069 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 1906 3702 6433 11093 18625 
ज ट 0 43 0 0 0 
रेि् 0 40 744 234 608 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 2039 382 895 308 178 
34 उत्तराखरड 
र्ार्ेंट 0 0 0 0 80 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 135 103 56 29 65 
रेि् 0 0 45 18 54 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 142 25 140 126 41 
35 पशि् बरर्ा  
र्ार्ेंट 0 110 189 10 27 
हस्‍ततशियप और का ीन 165 147 84 0 29 
ज ट 252 192 51 20 1 
रेि् 0 19 43 0 0 
वस्त्र एवर हर्करघा 378 66 364 210 142 
 
  
1055                                                      

 
अनु ग्नक-II 
राज्य/सरघ राज् य क्षेरों ्ें स्र्थ योजना क े  तहत, सरर्ठित क्षेर और असरर्ठित क्षेर ्ें रोजर्ार प्राप् त  ाभार्र्थयों का शववरण नीचे किया र्या ह : 
क्र.सर. राज्य/क ें द्र िाशसत प्रिेि रोजर्ार प्राप् त  ाभार्र्थयों की सरख्या 
1 अरड्ान और शनकोबार 67 
2 आरध्र प्रिेि 10338 
3 अरुणाच  प्रिेि 30 
4 अस् 8593 
5 शबहार 13216 
6 चरडीर्ढ़ 72 
7 छत्तीसर्ढ 3528 
8 किय ी 6159 
9 र्ोवा 83 
10 र्ुजरात 10990 
11 हठरयाणा 20729 
12 शह्ाच  प्रिेि 1111 
13 जम््  और कश््ीर 1537 
14 झारखरड 2681 
15 कनाथटक 96000 
16 क े र  2208 
17  द्दाख 26 
18 ्ध्य प्रिेि 16307 
19 ्हाराष्ट्र 12480 
20 ्शणपुर 1235 
21 ्ेघा य 186 
22 श्जोर् 500 
23 नार्ा ैंड 1157 
24 ओशडिा 7534 
25 पुिुचेरी 389 
26 परजाब 854 
27 राजस्‍तर्ान 24960 
28 तश् नाडु 83467 
29 ते रर्ाना 10011 
30 
िािरा और नर्र हवे ी और ि्न और िीव 2179 
31 शरपुरा 1281 
32 उत् तर प्रिेि 76588 
33 उत्तराखरड 926 
34 पशि् बरर्ा  1370 
*****  
 
 
1056                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2390 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
ओडिशा ्ें वस्त्र उद्योग का डवकास  
 
2390. श्री िेबाशीष सा्रतराय:  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) ओडिशा राज्य ्ें प्रस्‍तताडवत प्रधान्ररी ्ेगा एकीक ृ त वस्त्र क्षेर एवर पररधान (पीए् ड्र) वस्त्र पाकों की क्या 
डस्‍तिडत है; 
(ख) कटक, सरब पुर और बरगढ़ ्ें हिकरघा क् स्‍तटसस को क्या स्िसन प्रिान ककया गया है; 
(ग) ओडिशा से इकत क े  डवपणन को सुिृढ़ करने क े  ड ए क्या कि् उठाए गए हैं; 
(घ) क्या नए डिजाइन और इनक्यूबेशन क ें द्र स्‍तिाडपत ककए जा रहे हैं; और 
(ङ) राज्य ्ें ्डह ा बुनकरों और स्‍तवयर सहायता स्ूहों (एसएचजी) क्या सहायता प्रिान की गई है?  
 
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पडबर ्ाघेररटा) 
(क): सरकार ने वस्‍त र उद्योग की सरपूणस ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा के ड ए एकीक ृ त बडे पै्ाने पर और आधुडनक औद्योडगक 
अवसररचना की सुडवधा डवकडसत करने की िृडि से, वषस 2027-28 तक सात वषों की अवडध के ड ए 4,445 करोड 
रुपए क े  पररव् यय से डन्‍ नड डखत 7 स्‍ति ों पर पीए् ्ेगा एकीक ृ त वस्‍त र क्षेर और अपैर  (पीए् ड्र) पाकों की 
स्‍तिापना को अरडत् रूप किया है: तड् नािु (डवरूद्धनगर), ते रगाना (वाररग ), गुजरात (नवसारी), कनासटक 
(क बुरगी), उत्तर प्रिेश ( खनऊ), ्ध्य प्रिेश (धार), और ्हाराष्ट्र (अ्रावती)।  
 
(ख): वषस 2015-16 से 2025-26 (नवरबर 2025 तक) क े  िौरान कटक और बरगढ़ ्ें 17 हिकरघा स्ूहों क े  ड ए 
8.38 करोड रुपये की डवत्तीय सहायता प्रिान की गई डजससे 6,572 बुनकर  ाभाडववत हुए। 
 
(ग): वस्त्र ्ररा य राष्ट्रीय और अरतरासष्ट्रीय बाजारों ्ें डवपणन चैन  को डवकडसत करने और बढ़ावा िेने क े  ड ए राष्ट्रीय 
हिकरघा डवकास कायसक्र् क े  एक घटक हिकरघा डवपणन सहायता भी  ागू कर रहा है ताकक सभी डहतधारकों को 
स्ग्र और एकीक ृ त तरीक े से  ाभाडववत ककया जा सक े । वस्त्र ्ररा य राष्ट्रीय हिकरघा डवकास कायसक्र् (एनएचिीपी) 
क े  तहत ओडिशा इकत सडहत हिकरघा उत्पािों क े  सरबरध ्ें ्ा  (परजीकरण और सररक्षण ) अडधडनय् 1999 क े 
भौगोड क सरक ेत (जीआई) क े  प्रावधान को भी पूरे भारत ्ें बढ़ावा िेता है। 
 
(घ): पाररपररक हिकरघा डिजाइनों को सररडक्षत करने और हिकरघा क्षेर ्ें डिजाइन -उव्ुख उत्क ृ िता बनाने क े  ड ए 
भुवनेश्वर ्ें बुनकर सेवा क ें द्र सडहत िेश भर ्ें 16 बुनकर सेवा क ें द्रों ्ें डिजाइन सरसाधन क ें द्र (िीआरसी) स्‍तिाडपत ककए 
गए हैं। 
 
(ङ): वषस 2014-15 से 2025-26 (नवरबर 2025 तक) क े  िौरान वस्त्र ्ररा य, डवकास आयुक्त (हिकरघा) कायास य ने 
5,856 बुनकरों को कौश  प्रडशक्षण प्रिान ककया , 69 डवपणन कायसक्र्ों का आयोजन ककया , 7,685 ्ुद्रा ऋण प्रिान 
ककए गए, पीए्जेजेबीवाई/पीए्एसबीवाई क े  तहत 71,442 बुनकरों को ना्ारककत ककया गया , 56 पुरस्‍तक ृ त बुनकरों 
को ्ाडसक डवत्तीय सहायता प्रिान की गई , ओडिशा की ्डह ा बुनकरों सडहत हिकरघा बुनकरों को  ाभ पहुरचाने क े 
ड ए 9 उत्पािक क र पडनयों का गठन ककया गया। 
**** 
1057                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
वस्त्र मंत्रालय 
राज् य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या – 2391 
19 किसंबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
हथकरघा और ववद्युत करघा क े  श्रवमकों की आजीववका 
 
2391 श्री आर. विररराजनः 
 
क्या वस्त्र मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंिे ककः 
 
(क) क्या सरकार ने वपछले पांच वर्षों में हथकरघा और ववद्युत करघा श्रवमकों की आजीववका क े नुकसान और उत्पािकता 
संबंधी समस्याओं पर ध्यान किया है, यकि हां, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है; 
 
(ख) क्या अवधकांश बुनकर अपने वस्त्र उत्पािों को सरकारी संस्थानों को बेचना चाहते हैं और कच्चे माल की खरीि क े  वलए 
सवब्सडी चाहते हैं, यकि हां, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है और सरकार द्वारा उन्हें क्या सहायता प्रिान की िई है; और 
 
(ि) क्या कठोर सरकारी वनयमों और नीवतयों क े  कारण वस्त्र उद्योि कई बाधाओं और मंिी का सामना कर रहा है, यकि 
हां, तो तत्संबंधी ब्यौरा क्या है और वपछले पांच वर्षों में तथा अब तक क्या सुधारात्मक उपाय ककए िए हैं? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
उत् तर 
वस्त्र राज्य मंत्री 
(श्री पवबत्र माघेररटा) 
 
(क): इस मंत्रालय को हथकरघा और पावरलूम कामिारों की आजीववका क े  नुकसान संबंधी कोई सूचना प्राप्त नहीं हुई 
है। 
 
(ख): वस्त्र मंत्रालय, भारत सरकार ने बुनकरों और कारीिरों को अपने उत्पाि सीधे वववभन्न सरकारी ववभािों और 
संिठनों को बेचने में सक्षम बनाने क े  वलए उन्हें सरकारी ई-माक े ट प्लेस (जेम) पर ऑन-बोडड करने संबंधी संबंध उठाये हैं। 
17.02.2020 को जीएफआर 2017 क े वनयम 153 में एक संशोधन ककया िया, वजसमें यह अवनवायड ककया िया कक "क ें द्र 
सरकार के ववभािों को ज़रूरी सभी टेक्सटाइल वस्तुओँ में से, कम से कम 20% वस्तुएं हथकरघा पर बनी होनी चावहए , 
वजनकी खरीिारी क े वल क ेवीआईसी और/अथवा हथकरघा क्लस्टर जैसे पहचान काडड वाले बुनकरों सवहत सहकारी 
सवमवत, स्वयं सहाय ता समूहों  (एसएचजी), फ े डरेशन, संयुक्त िेयता समूहों  (जेएलजी), उत्पाि क ं पवनयों (पीसी), 
कॉपोरेशन आकि से की जाएिी"। 
जहाँ तक कच्चे माल की खरीि हेतु सवब्सडी का संबंध हैं, तो बताया जाता है कक हथकरघा बुनकरों को सुलभ यॉनड 
आपूर्तड क े वलए पूरे िेश में कच्चा माल आपूर्तड योजना (आरएमएसएस) कायाडवन्वत की जा रही है। योजना क े  तहत, सभी 
प्रकार क े यानड क े  वलए माल भाडा शुल्क की प्रवतपूर्तड की जाती है और कॉटन हैंक यॉनड, डोमेवस्टक वसल्क, ऊन और वलनन 
यॉनड तथा प्राक ृ वतक फाइबर क े  वमवश्रत यॉनड पर मात्रात्मक सीमा क े  साथ 15% मूल्य सवब्सडी भी प्रिान की जाती है। 
 
 
 
1058                                                      

 
(ि): वस्त्र उद्योि की वृवि को बढावा िेने और उसकी बाधाओं को िूर करने क े वलए सरकार वववभन्न उपाय कर रही 
है। मुख्य योजनाओं/पहलों में पीएम मेिा इंटीग्रेटेड टेक्सटाइल रीजन्स एंड अपैरल (पीएम वमत्र) पाक ड  योजना शावमल है, 
वजसका उद्देश्य एक आधुवनक , एकीक ृ त बडे पैमाने का, ववश्व स्तरीय औद्योविक इकोवसस्टम बनाना है , जो वनवेश 
आकर्र्षडत करने और रोज़िार बढाने में सहायता करेिा ; प्रोडक्शन ललंक्ड इंसेंरटव (पीएलआई) योजना जो बडे पैमाने पर 
मैन्युफ ै क्चररंि और प्रवतस्पधाड बढाने क े  वलए मैन मेड फाइबर और अपैरल तथा टेकिकल टेक्सटाइल्स पर क ें कद्रत है; 
नेशनल टेकिकल टेक्सटाइल्स वमशन जो ररसचड इनोवेशन एंड डेवलपमेंट , प्रमोशन और माक े ट डेवलपमेंट, वस्कललंि और 
एक्सपोटड प्रमोशन पर क ें कद्रत है; समथड – वस्त्र क्षेत्र में क्षमता वनमाडण क े वलए योजना वजसका उद्देश्य मांि आधाररत , 
रोजिार उन्मुख , वस्कललंि कायडक्रम प्रिान करना है ; संशोवधत प्रौद्योविकी उन्नयन वनवध योजना (एटीयूएफएस) जो 
बेंचमाक ड  टेक्सटाइल मशीनरी में योग्य वनवेश क े  वलए पूंजी वनवेश सवब्सडी क े  माध्यम से प्रौद्योविकी उन्नयन और 
आधुवनकीकरण को प्रोत्सावहत करती है ; रेशम उत्पािन मूल्य श्रृंखला क े  व्यापक ववकास क े  वलए वसल्क समग्र-2, राष्ट्रीय 
हथकरघा ववकास कायडक्रम और कच्चा माल आपूर्तड योजना। 
 
 इसक े  अवतररक्त, वनयाडत को  बढावा िेने क े  वलए, सरकार पररधान , वस्त्र और मेड -अप क े  वलए शून्य-रेटेड 
वनयाडत क े  वसिांत पर आधाररत राज्य और क ें द्रीय करों और लेवी की छूट (आरओएससीटीएल) योजना कायाडवन्वत कर 
रही है, जबकक अन्य वस्त्र उत्पािों को वनयाडवतत उत्पािों पर शुल्क और करों की छूट ( आरओडीटीईपी) योजना क े  तहत 
सहायता प्रिान की जा रही है। भारत ने 15 मुक्त व्यापार समझौते और 6 वरीयता व्यापार समझौते भी ककए हैं , वजससे 
वस्त्र उत्पािों की एक ववस्तृत रेंज क े  वलए वरीयता बाजार पहुंच संभव हुई है। इसक े  अवतररक्त, वस्त्र मंत्रालय ने भारत क े 
वस्त्र वनयाडत फ ु टलप्रंट को बढावा िेने क े  वलए 40 िेशों की एक बाजार ववववधीकरण रणनीवत तैयार की है , वजसक े  साथ 
क ै वबनेट द्वारा अनुमोकित वनयाडत संवधडन वमशन भी है, जो कपडा वनयाडत में वनरंतर वृवि को चलाने क े  वलए व्यापार 
सुववधा, बाजार संवधडन, क्षमता वनमाडण और संस्थाित सुिृढीकरण क े  वलए एक समवन्वत फ्र े मवक े  प्रिान करता है।   
***** 
1059                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2392 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
असरगठित ववद्युत करघा क्षेर ्ें चुनौवतयााँ 
 
2392. श्री्ती ककरण चौधरी: 
श्री नारायण कोरागप्पा:  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) ववद्युत करघा क्षेर ्ें ्हत्वपूणण कव्यों की पहचान करने क े व ए शुरू ककए गए आधारभूत सवेक्षण की वतण्ान 
वस्‍तिवत क्या है और अब तक सा्ने आए प्र्ुख वनष्कर्ण क्या हैं; 
(ख) असरगठित ववद्युत करघा क्षेर ्ें  गातार बनी हुई चुनौवतयों, ववशेर् रूप से अप्रचव त प्रौद्योवगकी और ऋण एवर 
ववत्त तक सीव्त पहुरच से सरबरवधत, क े  स्ाधान क े  व ए सरकार द्वारा क्या उपाय ककए गए हैं; और 
(ग) वर्ण 2024 तक कायणरत ववद्युत करघों की सरख्या और इस क्षेर ्ें कायणरत कायणब  पर उप ब्ध  नवीनत् राज्य-
वार आरकडे क्या हैं?  
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी 
(श्री पवबर ्ाघेठरटा) 
(क): ववद्युतकरघा क्षेर से जुडे श्रव्कों के प्रौद्योवगकी स्‍ततर, बाजार की गवतवववधयों और सा्ावजक आर्िणक पह ुओं का 
आक न सुवनवित करने के व ए, वस्‍त र ्ररा य के तहत वस्‍त र सव्वत ने ववद्युतकरघा क्षेर के बेस ाइन सवेक्षण के व ए 
एक रूपरेखा तैयार की है। अध्ययन के सरिभण की शतों को अरवत् रूप किया गया है और सैद्ारवतक अनु्ोिन प्रिान ककया 
गया है। 
(ख) और (ग): वर्ण 2013 ्ें ककए गए ववद्युतकरघा के व ए अरवत् बेस ाइन सवेक्षण ्ें पता च ा है कक िेश ्ें  गभग 
24  ाख ववद्युतकरघा हैं, वजन्ें िेश भर ्ें  गभग 44  ाख व्यवि कायणरत हैं। इस सवेक्षण की वसफाठरशों/वनष्कर्ों के 
आधार पर, सरकार ने वर्ण 2017 से 2021 की अववध के व ए 487 करोड रु. क े  पठरव्यय से पावरटेक्स इरविया ना्क 
एक योजना शुरू की िी। इस पह  का उद्देश्य ववकास, ववद्युतकरघा क्षेर ्ें रोजगार और सरपूणण ववकास को बढावा िेने के 
व ए स्ग्र िृविकोण अपनाए जाने के ्ाध्य् से पहचानी गई जरूरतों और चुनौवतयों का स्ाधान करना है। पावरटेक्स 
इरविया योजना को अब क े व  प्रवतबद् िेनिाठरयों को पूरा करने के व ए वस्‍त र क् स्‍तटर ववकास योजना (टीसीिीएस) के 
तहत शाव्  ककया गया है। टीसीिीएस ्ें शाव्  पावर टेक्स इरविया के प्र्ुख उप-घटक हैं (i) ग्रुप वक ण शेि योजना (ii) 
ववद्युतकरघा बुनकरों के व ए पीए् क्र े विट योजना और (iii) ववद्युतकरघा का यिास्‍तिान उन्नयन। वपछ े बेस ाइन 
सवेक्षण के अनुसार ववद्युतकरघा और जनशवि की सरख्या का राज्यवार वववरण अनु ग्नक के रूप ्ें सर ग्न है। 
 
  
1060                                                      

 
अनु ग् नक  
राज्यवार ववद्युतकरघा उद्योग एक नज़र ्ें 
**** 
 
 
राज् य 
 
इकाई 
 
क ु   करघे 
क ु   रोजगार शट  रवहत करघे 
उत् तर प्रिेश 59038 190874 577748 2690 
राजस्‍तिान 945 22980 54456 16434 
हठरयाणा 1600 25510 42533 1128 
परजाब और वह्ाच  प्रिेश, जम््ू 
और कश््ीर 
1162 14511 25025 1251 
्ध् य प्रिेश 8344 39979 166147 1063 
उत् तरी क्षेर क ु  71089 293854 865909 22566 
गुजरात 34966 524102 663068 34331 
्हाराष्ट्र 149613 948891 1554938 35429 
छत्तीसगढ 49 166 324 NA 
पवि्ी क्षेर क ु  184628 1473159 2218330 69760 
उडीसा 824 1793 3792 NA 
पवि् बरगा  3509 12690 20141 25 
वबहार 3839 20511 42770 12 
अस्/पूवोत्तर 30 464 868 NA 
पूवी क्षेर क ु   8202 35458 67571 37 
तव् नािु 89449 562513 1018961 8794 
आरध्र प्रिेश 12635 48176 83850 1435 
कनाणटक 18566 68795 153045 199 
क े र  1027 4463 7865 350 
िवक्षणी क्षेर क ु  121677 683947 1263721 10778 
अवख  भारत 385596 2486418 4418240 103141 
1061                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2393 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
ववद्युत करघा क्षेर की स्स्‍तयाएर  
 
2393. श्री प्र्ोि वतवारी:  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृपा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) क्या ववद्युत करघा क्षेर सरकट का सा्ना कर रहा है, वजस्ें कई ववद्युत करघों को तोड़कर कबाड़ क े  रूप ्ें बेचा जा रहा है; 
(ख) यकि हार, तो िेश ्ें काययरत ववद्युत करघा इकाइयों की सरख्या सवहत तत्सरबरधी ब्यौरा क् या है; 
(ग) हा  ही ्ें वैविक प्रशुल्क ्ें हुई वृवि का इस क्षेर पर क्या प्रभाव पड़ा है; 
(घ) क्या सरकार ्ानव वनर््यत ववस्‍तकोस, पॉव एस्‍तटर और ससरथेटटक धागे पर जीएसटी िर क् करने का प्रस्‍तताव रखती है; 
(ङ) यकि हार, तो तत्सरबरधी ब्यौरा क्या है; और 
(च) इस क्षेर क े  स्ुवचत ववकास और प्रगवत क े  साथ करघा क्षेर ्ें बने रहने क े  व ए सरकार द्वारा अवसररचनात््क, आर्थयक और 
प्रौद्योवगकी सरबरधी स्स्‍तयाओं से वनपटने हेतु क्या कि् उठाए गए हैं?  
 
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पवबर ्ाघेटरटा) 
(क) और (ख): वर्य 2013 ्ें ककए गए ववद्युतकरघा के व ए अरवत् बेस ाइन सवेक्षण ्ें  गभग 24  ाख ववद्युतकरघों का पता 
च ा, वजस्ें िेश भर ्ें  गभग 44  ाख व्यवि काययरत हैं। वपछ े बेस ाइन सवेक्षण के अनुसार ववद्युतकरघा और जनशवि की 
सरख्या का राज्यवार वववरण अनु ग्नक के रूप ्ें सर ग्न है। ववद्युतकरघा क्षेर से जुड़े श्रव्कों की नवीनत् बाजार गवतशी ता, 
प्रौद्योवगकी के स्‍ततर और सा्ावजक आर्थयक पह ुओं का आक न सुवनवित करने के व ए, वस्‍त र ्ररा य के तहत वस्‍त र सव्वत ने 
ववद्युतकरघा क्षेर के बेस ाइन सवेक्षण के व ए एक रूपरेखा तैयार की है। अध्ययन के सरिभय की शतों को अरवत् रूप किया गया है 
और सैिारवतक रूप से अनु्ोिन प्रिान ककया गया है। 
(ग): वववभन्न कारकों का सरयोजन जैसे उत्पाि अरतरण, ्ारग, गुणवत्ता, सरवविात््क  
व् यवस्‍त थाएर आकि, ववद्युतकरघा वनयायत सवहत भारत के वस्त्र क्षेर के वनयायत पर वैविक टैटरफ के प्रभाव का वनधायरण करते हैं।  सरकार 
ववद्युतकरघा वनयायत और टैटरफ के प्रभाव की ट्रैकक र ग सवहत भारत के वस्‍त र और अपैर  के वनयायत की वनयव्त रूप से वनगरानी कर रही है। 
(घ) और (ङ): 3 वसतरबर, 2025 को आयोवजत जीएसटी पटरर्ि की 56वीं बैठक ्ें, पटरर्ि ने ववकारों को िूर करने, क् उत्पािन 
 ागत, वैविक प्रवतस्‍तपधाय ्ें सुधार और वस्‍त र क्षेर ्ें ्ारग को बवावा िेने क े  व ए ्हत्वपूणय युविकरण उपायों की वसफाटरश की। 
सरकार ने उपभोिाओं और उद्योग को राहत प्रिान करने क े व ए  ोअर टैक्स स्‍त ैब क े िायरे को बवाया है। जीएसटी पटरर्ि ने 
ववशेर् रूप से,रेडी्ेड गार्ेंट और ्ेड-अप् स पर 5% जीएसटी िर क े व ए सी्ा को 1,000 प्रवत नग से 2500 प्रवत नग बवाने की 
वसफाटरश की। इसक े  अवतटरक् त, इरवटेड शुल्क सररचना (आईडीएस) को सही करने और प्रवतस्‍तपधाय  बवाने क े  व ए, ्ानव वनर््यत 
फाइबर (ए्ए्एफ) और ए्ए्एफ यानय पर जीएसटी िर क्र्शिः 18% और 12% से घटाकर 5% कर िी गई है। यह 
वववन्ायताओं पर  रबे स्य से काययशी  पूरजी क े बोझ को िूर करते हुए फाइबर-यानय-फ ै विक िरों को सररेवखत करता है। 
 
(च): वस्‍त र उद्योग ववशेर् रूप से  घु और ्ध्य् इकाइयों, क् स्‍तटरों के साथ-साथ ववक ें द्रीक ृ त ववद्युतकरघा क्षेर के ववकास के व ए, 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य वस्‍त र आयुि के कायाय य के ्ाध्य् से िेश भर ्ें प्र्ुख ववद्युतकरघा क् स्‍तटर ्ें 44 एकीक ृ त वस्‍त र और अपैर  
ववकास क ें द्रों (आईटीएडीसी) के ्ाध्य् से परीक्षण प्रयोगशा ा, प्रवशक्षण, जागरूकता, वडजाइन ववकास, स्स्‍त या क े  स्ाधान, 
ववद्युतकरघा न्ूना सवेक्षण जैसी सेवाओं के प्रावधान की सुववधा प्रिान करता है।  
 
1062                                                      

 
 
इसक े  अवतटरक् त, ववक ें द्रीक ृ त ववद्युतकरघा क्षेर की क्ष्ताओं और प्रवतस्‍तपधाय को बवाने क े  व ए, 2017-20 की अववध क े  व ए अवख  
भारतीय आधार पर पावरटेक्स इरवडया योजना शुरू की गई थी, वजसे 2021 तक बवा किया गया था। इस योजना को अब टेक्सटाइ  
क स्‍त टर ववकास योजना (टीसीडीएस) क े  तहत शाव्  ककया गया है और क े व  प्रवतबि िेनिाटरयों को पूरा करने क े  व ए च  रही 
पटरयोजनाओं को पूणय करने क े व ए स्थयन किया गया है। इसक े  अ ावा, भारत सरकार द्वारा स्य-स्य पर िेश ्ें ववद्युतकरघा 
क्षेर क े  स्ग्र ववकास को सुवनवित करने क े व ए, कई पह ें जैसे सरशोवधत प्रौद्योवगकी उन्नयन वनवध योजना (एटीयूएफएस), ग्रुप 
वक यशेड योजना, ववद्युतकरघा बुनकरों क े व ए पीए् क्र े वडट योजना, इन-सीटू अपग्रेडेशन फ र ड योजना और व्यापक ववद्युतकरघा 
क् स्‍तटर ववकास योजना (सीपीसीडीएस) च ाई जा रही हैं। 
अनु ग् नक 
एक नज़र ्ें राज्यवार ववद्युतकरघा उद्योग  
**** 
 
राज् य 
 
इकाई 
 
क ु   करघे 
क ु   रोजगार शट  रवहत करघे 
उत् तर प्रिेश 59038 190874 577748 2690 
राजस्‍तथान 945 22980 54456 16434 
हटरयाणा 1600 25510 42533 1128 
परजाब और वह्ाच  प्रिेश, जम््ू और 
कश््ीर 
1162 14511 25025 1251 
्ध् य प्रिेश 8344 39979 166147 1063 
उत् तरी क्षेर क ु   71089 293854 865909 22566 
गुजरात 34966 524102 663068 34331 
्हाराष्ट्र 149613 948891 1554938 35429 
छत्तीसगव 49 166 324 NA 
पवि्ी क्षेर क ु   184628 1473159 2218330 69760 
उड़ीसा 824 1793 3792 NA 
पवि् बरगा  3509 12690 20141 25 
वबहार 3839 20511 42770 12 
अस्/पूवोत्तर 30 464 868 NA 
पूवी क्षेर क ु   8202 35458 67571 37 
तव् नाडु 89449 562513 1018961 8794 
आरध्र प्रिेश 12635 48176 83850 1435 
कनायटक 18566 68795 153045 199 
क े र  1027 4463 7865 350 
िवक्षणी क्षेर क ु   121677 683947 1263721 10778 
अवख  भारत 385596 2486418 4418240 103141 
1063                                                      

 
भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2394 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
वस्त्र क्षेर ्ें अनुसरधान, नवाचार और प्रततस्‍तपधाात््कता को बढावा िेना  
 
2394. डा. तसक र िर क ु ्ार:  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) क्या ्ररा य ने हा  ही ्ें वस्त्र क्षेर ्ें अनुसरधान, नवाचार और प्रततस्‍तपधाात््कता को ्जबूत करने क े  त ए कोई 
योजना स्‍तवीक ृ त की है; 
(ख) यकि हार, तो तत्सरबरधी ब्यौरा क् या है; 
(ग) सरकार यह ककस प्रकार सुतनतित करती है कक स्‍त्ार्ा वस्त्र और वहनीयता पर ककए गए अनुसरधान को 
व्यावसातयक उत्पािों ्ें पररवर्तात ककया जाए; और 
(घ) क्या अग े पारच वर्षों ्ें, वस्त्र क्षेर ्ें भारत की वैतिक प्रततस्‍तपधाात््कता पर इस योजना क े  प्रभाव का ्ूलयारकन 
करने क े  त ए कोई तरर स्‍तथातपत ककया जा रहा है, यकि हार, तो इस सरबरध ्ें क्या प्रयास ककए गए हैं?  
 
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पतबर ्ाघेररर्ा) 
(क) से (ग): भारत सरकार ने छह वर्षों (तवत्त वर्षा 2025-26 से तवत्त वर्षा 2030-31) ्ें 305 करोड़ रुपये क े  पररव्यय क े 
साथ वस्त्र क ें कित अनुसरधान, ्ूलयारकन, तनगरानी, योजना और स्‍तर्ार्ा-अप (र्ेक्स-रैंप) योजना को ्रजूरी िी है। र्ेक्स-रैंप क े 
पारच घर्क हैं: 
1. अनुसरधान और प्रसार - स्‍त्ार्ा वस्‍त र, तस्‍तथरता, उत्पािन िक्षता आकि ्ें  तक्षत अनुसरधान का स्थान करने क े 
त ए। 
2. ्ूलयारकन और आक न अध्ययन - क्षेर तनिान , प्रवृतत्त पूवाानु्ान और आपूर्ता श्रृर ख ा तवश्लेर्षण शुरू करने क े 
त ए। 
3. तनगरानी और सारतययकीय प्रणा ी - डेर्ा सरग्रहण और तवश्  ेर्षण को ्जबूत करने क े त ए। 
4. योजना और क्ष्ता तवकास - कायाक्र्ों और सहयोगी प् ेर्फा्ों क े  ्ाध्य् से राष्ट्रीय/राज्य स्‍ततरीय वस्‍त र योजना 
और तहतधारक जुड़ाव का स्थान करने क े  त ए। 
5. स्‍तर्ार्ा-अप और नवाचार - उच्च ्ूलय और तनयाात -उन््ुख उद्य्ों पर ध्यान िेने क े साथ इनक्यूबेर्र, हैकथॉन और 
तशक्षातवि-उद्योग साझेिारी क े ्ाध्य् से नवाचार को बढावा िेने क े  त ए। 
 
 
1064                                                      

 
 
इसक े  अ ावा, सरकार ने आयात प्रततस्‍तथापन सुतनतित करने क े साथ -साथ तकनीकी वस्त्र वस्‍ततुओं और तवशेर्ष 
फाइबर की तनयाात क्ष्ता को साकार करने क े उद्देश्य से, राष्ट्रीय तकनीकी वस्त्र त्शन (एनर्ीर्ीए्) को तवत्त वर्षा 2020-
21 से 2023-24 तक की चार वर्षा की कायाान्वयन अवतध क े  त ए 1,480 करोड़ रुपए का पररव् यय अनु्ोकित ककया है। 
त्शन को किनारक 31.03.2026 (किनारक 31.03.28 तक स्ापन प्रावधान) तक बढा किया गया है। 1,480 करोड़ रुपये 
क े  क ु   पररव्यय ्ें से 1,000 करोड़ रुपये क े व  अनुसरधान और तवकास क े त ए आवररर्त ककए गए हैं। 
1. एनर्ीर्ीए् क े  घर्क-I क े  तहत, अनुसरधान, नवाचार और तवकास से सरबरतधत 520 करोड़ रुपए ( गभग) रातश 
की  ागत वा ी 168 अनुसरधान पररयोजनाएर िेश क े  प्र्ुख सरस्‍तथानों को प्रिान की गई हैं। 
2. एनर्ीर्ीए् क े  घर्क-I क े  तहत, तकनीकी वस्त्रों  ्ें आकारक्षी इनोवेर्सा को अनुसरधान और उद्यत्ता क े  त ए 
अनुिान (ग्रेर्) से सरबरतधत 12.16 करोड़ रुपये की क ु    ागत और भारत सरकार क े  शेयर क े  रूप ्ें 10.79 
करोड़ रुपए क े  साथ क ु   24 स्‍तर्ार्ा-अप को अनु्ोकित ककया गया है।  
 
(घ): योजना को जारी रखने क े  त ए व्यय तवभाग क े  तनिेश क े  अनुसार योजनाओं क े  प्रभावों का ्ूलयारकन अध्ययन ककया 
जा रहा है। इस सरिभा ्ें, व्यय तवभाग क े परा्शा से नीतत आयोग ने क ें िीय क्षेर की योजनाओं क े  ्ूलयारकन क े त ए ्ानक 
सरिभा शतों (र्ीओआर) का एक र्ेम्प ेर् तवकतसत ककया है। 
**** 
 
1065                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2395 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
कपास उत्पािन, ननयाात, प्रशुल्क और ककसानों को सहायता 
2395. श्री्ती रेणुका चौधरी: 
क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) नपछ े पारच वर्षों क े  िौरान िेश ्ें कपास उत्पािन का राज्य-वार ब्यौरा क् या है; 
(ख) नपछ े पारच वर्षों क े  िौरान प्रत्येक राज्य से सरयुक्त राज्य अ्ेररका को कपास ननयाात तथा अर्जात  
राजस्‍तव का ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ग) िेश ्ें कपास ककसानों की राज्य-वार क ु   सरख्या ककतनी है; 
(घ) कपास ककसानों और ननयाातकों की सुरक्षा क े  न ए सरकार द्वारा क्या कि् उठाए गए हैं , नजन्ें 
अ्ेररकी प्रशुल्क क े  ्द्देनजर प्रभानवत राज्यों क े  न ए घोनर्षत कोई भी राहत या सहायता पैक े ज 
शान्  है; और 
(ङ) क् या सरकार ने भारत ्ें कपास ायात पर 11 प्रनतशत ायात शुल्क स्ा्त  करने क े  घरे   कपास 
ककसानों पर पड़ने वा े प्रभाव का भी ाक न ककया है?  
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पनबर ्ाघेररटा) 
(क): नपछ े पारच वर्षों क े  िौरान िेश ्ें राज्यवार कपास का उत्पािन अनु ग्नक-I ्ें सर ग्न है। 
(ख): नपछ े पारच कपास वर्षों (अक्ट बर-नसतरबर) क े  िौरान प्रत् येक राज्य से सरयुक् त राज् य अ्ेररका को हुए 
कपास ननयाात का नववरण और उसका ् ल् य अनु ग् नक-II ्ें किया गया है। 
(ग) और (घ): िेश ्ें 60  ाख से ज़्यािा ककसान कपास की खेती करते हैं। ककसानों को  ाभाकारी ् ल् य 
सुनननित करने क े  न ए, वर्षा 2025-26 ्ौस् क े  न ए ्ीनिय् स्‍तटेप  कपास क े  न ए न् य नत् स्थान ् ल् य 
(ए्एसपी) ₹ 7,710 प्रनत क्व र ट  और  ॉन्ग स्‍तटेप  कपास क े  न ए ₹8,110 प्रनत क्व र ट  तय ककया गया है, 
नजससे उत् पािन  ागत पर क् से क् 50% ररटना न् ेगा। ्जब रन नबक्री को रोकने क े  न ए, भारतीय कपास 
ननग् ने 11 राज्यों ्ें 570 खरीि क ें द्र प्रचा नशी  ककए हैं और किनारक 11.12.2025 तक, पारिशी ई-
ऑक्शन नसस्‍तट् क े  ्ाध् य् से ₹13,492 करोड़ ् ल् य की 31.18  ाख गारठें खरीिी हैं। 
1066                                                      

ननयाात    क े  ्ा् े ्ें, वैनिक टैररफ से जुड़ी चुनौनतयों क े बावज ि, जनवरी-अक्ट बर 2025 क े  िौरान भारत का 
ननयाात 31.31 नबन यन अ्रीकी िॉ र रहा, जो स्ग्र नस्‍तथरता को िशााता है। ननयाातकों और वस्‍त र क्षेर को 
सहायता प्रिान करने क े  न ए, सरकार ने ननयाातकों क े  न ए क्र े निट गाररटी योजना (सीजीएसई), ारबीाई 
व् यापार राहत 2025 को  ाग  ककया है, और कपास तथा कपास ाधाररत उत् पािों पर शुल् क और करों की छ ट 
(ारओिीटीईपी) और राज् य और क ें द्रीय करों और  ेवी की छ ट (ारओएससीटीए ) क े  तहत ननररतर  ाभ 
प्रिान ककया है। ये पह ें न कवनिटी िेते हैं,  ागत का बोझ क् करते हैं, और वस्‍त र इरिस्‍तरी को कपास की पयाा्त  
उप ब्धता सुनननित करते हैं। 
सा् नहक रूप से, ये उपाय कपास ककसानों की रक्षा करते हैं, ननयाातकों को सहायता प्रिान करते हैं, और कपास 
और वस्‍त र क्षेर की प्रनतस्‍त पधाात् ्कता और अनुक   ता बनाए रखते हैं। 
(ङ): कपास उत् पािन और खपत सन्नत (सीओसीपीसी) क े  अनुसार, वर्षा 2024–25 और 2025–26 िोनों 
्ौस् ्ें घरे   कपास की खपत उत् पािन से ज़्यािा हो गी, जो वस्‍त र क्षेर क े  न ए उप ब्धता बढाने की 
ावश् यकता पर ब  िेती है। सरकार ने भारतीय वस्‍त र क्षेर को पयाात त ाप र्ता और सहायता सुनननित करने क े 
न ए किनारक 19.08.2025 से 31.12.2025 तक कपास ायात को 11% ायात शुल् क ्ें छ ट िी है। 
कपास का ायात सीन्त है और ्ुख्य रूप से नवशेर्ष प्रकार जैसे एक्स्‍तरा  ॉन्ग स्‍तटेप  तक ही सीन्त है , और 
अस्‍तथायी शुल्क छ ट से ककसानों पर नकारात््क प्रभाव होने की सरभावना नहीं है क्योंकक ए्एसपी अनभयान की 
ननररतर सुरक्षा बनी हुई है। घरे   कपास क े  ् ल्य वैनिक रुझानों क े अनुरूप  गभग ₹51,500–₹52,500 प्रनत 
क ैं िी तक बने हुए हैं, नजससे वस्त्र उद्योग क े  न ए की्त ककफायती बनी रहती है, ककसानों क े  नहत सुरनक्षत रहते 
हैं और भारत की ननयाात प्रनतस्‍तपधाात््कता ्जब त होती है।  
1067                                                      

अनुबरध- । 
नपछ े पारच वर्षों क े  िौरान िेश ्ें कपास का राज्यवार उत्पािन: 
( प्रत् येक 170 कक ोग्रा्  की  ाख गारठों ्ें ) 
क्र् सरख्या 
राज्य 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
1. परजाब 10.23 6.46 4.44 6.29 4.14 
2. हररयाणा 18.23 13.16 10.01 15.09 11.77 
3. राजस्‍तथान 32.07 24.81 27.74 26.22 17.86 
4. गुजरात 72.18 75.09 87.95 90.57 71.57 
5. ्हाराष्ट्र 101.05 82.49 83.16 80.45 73.73 
6. ्ध्य प्रिेश 13.38 14.20 14.33 18.01 15.35 
7. ते रगाना 57.97 48.78 57.45 50.80 57.89 
8. ारध्र प्रिेश 16.00 17.08 15.41 7.37 11.31 
9. कनााटक 23.20 19.55 25.68 20.59 22.73 
10. तन् नािु 2.43 3.02 3.19 2.52 2.11 
11. उड़ीसा 5.51 6.26 7.05 7.05 8.23 
12. अन्य 0.23 0.27 0.19 0.26 0.55 
क ु   352.48 311.17 336.60 325.22 297.24 
स्रोत: कपास उत्पािन और खपत सन्नत की बैठक किनारक 08.12.2025 
अनुबरध- II 
नपछ े पारच कपास वर्षों ( अक्ट बर-नसतरबर) क े  िौरान प्रत् येक राज्य से सरयुक् त राज् य अ्ेररका को कपास ननयाात नववरण 
और उसका ् ल् य  
 स्रोत: ्हाननिेशक, वानणज् य ास चना एवर सारनख्यकी (िीजीसीाईएस) को काता। 
******** 
क्र.सर. राज्य 2020-2021 2021-2022 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025 
टन ्ें  ाख रु. ्ें टन ्ें  ाख रु. ्ें टन ्ें  ाख रु. ्ें टन ्ें  ाख रु. ्ें टन ्ें  ाख रु. ्ें 
1. तन् नािु 7.49 29.12 8.42 33.89 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.36 1.93 
2. उत् तर प्रिेश 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.21 0.29 
3. राजस्‍तथान 0.25 0.58 0.05 1.24 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.09 0.78 
4. किल् ी 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.26 
5. ्हाराष्ट्र 0.15 0.55 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.12 0.02 0.17 
6. ते रगाना 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.0 0 0.00 0.02 0.02 
7. गुजरात 0.14 0.37 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.16 0.15 0.41 0.01 0.17 
8. नबहार 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.00 
9. हररयाणा 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
10. कनााटक 0.00 0.00 0.09 2.03 0.00 0.00 0.09 0.07 0.00 0.08 
11. क े र  0.90 3.85 0.88 3.82 0.79 3.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
12. परजाब 0.18 0.83 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.40 0.97 0.00 0.00 
13. पनि् बरगा 0.02 0.61 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
क ु   9.12 35.92 9.44 41.23 0.80 3.96 0.68 1.76 0.74 3.70 
1068                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्त्र मंत्रालय 
राज् य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या – 2396 
19 किसंबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
वस्त्र क्षेत्र क े  ललए पीएलआई योजना का कायाान्वयन 
2396 श्री चंद्रकांत िामोिर हंडोरेेः 
क्या वस्त्र मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककेः 
(क) हथकरघा और पारंपररक कारीगरों/लिल्पकारों , लजनमें प्रायेः अनुसूलचत जालत समुिायों सलहत लवलभन्न सामालजक 
पृष्ठभूलमयों क े  व्यलि िालमल होते हैं, की अलिक भागीिारी सुलनलित करने क े  ललए क्या किम उठाए गए हैं; 
(ख) वस्त्र क्षेत्र क े  ललए उत्पािन संबद्ध प्रोत्साहन (पीएलआई) की वतामान लथिथलत क्या ह  और लव्ीय व्ा 222 -25 में 
लनवेि और कारोबार की लनिााररत सीमा को पूरा करने वाली क ं पलनयों की संख्या ककतनी ह ; और 
(ग) थिवीक ृ त और थिथालपत ककए गए प्रिान मंत्री मेगा एकीक ृ त वस्त्र क्षेत्र और पररिान (पीएम लमत्र) पाकों की संख्या 
ककतनी ह  तथा वस्त्र क्षेत्र में लनवेि और रोजगार सृजन पर अनुमालनत प्रभाव का तत्संबंिी ब्यौरा क्या ह ? 
उत् तर 
वस्त्र राज्य मंत्री 
(श्री पलबत्र माघेररटा) 
(क): भारत सरकार, वस्त्र मंत्रालय, हथकरघा और पारंपररक कारीगरों/लिल्पकारों की और अलिक भागीिारी सुलनलित 
करने क े ललए लनम्नलललखत योजनाएं कायाालन्वत कर रहा ह : 
1. राष्ट्रीय हथकरघा लवकास कायाक्रम;
2. कच्चा माल आपूर्ता योजना;
3. राष्ट्रीय हथितलिल्प लवकास कायाक्रम;
4. व्यापक हथितलिल्प क्लथिटर लवकास योजना;
उपयुाि योजनाओं क े तहत, कच्चे माल, उन्नत करघे, सहायक उपकरण और टूलककट, लडजाइन नवाचार, उत्पाि
लवलवलिकरण, अवसंरचना लवकास , घरेलू और लविेिी बाजारों में हथकरघा और हथितलिल्प उत्पािों की माक े टटंग , 
ररयायती िरों पर ऋण , सामालजक सुरक्षा आकि क े ललए लव्ीय और तकनीकी सहायता प्रिान की जाती ह , लजससे िेि 
भर क े  बुनकरों/कारीगरों को लाभ हो रहा ह , लजसमें लवलभन्न सामालजक पृष्ठभूलम और एससी समुिाय क े लोग िालमल हैं। 
(ख): वस्त्र क े  ललए उत्पािन आिाररत प्रोत्साहन (पीएलआई) की मौजूिा लथिथलत और लव्ीय व्ा 2024-25 
(30.09.2025 तक) में लजन क ं पलनयों ने लनवेि और कारोबार की तय सीमा को पूरा ककया ह , उनकी संख्या इस प्रकार ह : 
योजना क े  तहत ररपोटा ककया गया क ु ल लनवेि 7,731.00 करोड़ रूपये 
क ु ल कारोबार 7,290.00 करोड़ रूपये (733.00 करोड़ रूपये क े  लनयाात सलहत) 
उन क ं पलनयों की संख्या लजन्होंने लव् व्ा 222 -25 में लनवेि की तय 
सीमा को पूरा ककया ह । 
22 
उन क ं पलनयों की संख्या लजन्होंने लव् व्ा 222 -25 में कारोबार की 
तय सीमा पूरी की ह । 
04 
1069                                                      

(ग): लनवेि को आकर््ात करने , रोजगार प िा करने और व लिक बाजार में अपना मजबूत थिथान बनाने क े  उद्देश्य से, 
सरकार ने 2021-22 से 2027-28 की अवलि क े ललए 4,445.00 करोड़ रुपये क े पररव्यय क े  साथ ग्रीनफील्ड/ब्राउनफील्ड 
थिथलों पर प्लग एंड प्ले सुलविा सलहत लवि थितरीय अवसंरचना वाले 07 (सात) पीएम मेगा इंटीग्रेटेड टेक्सटाइल रीजन 
और अप रल (पीएम लमत्र) पाक ा  थिथालपत करने को मंजूरी िी ह । सरकार ने पीएम लमत्र पाक ा  की थिथापना क े  ललए 07 थिथलों 
अथाात तलमलनाडु (लवरुद्धनगर) , तेलंगाना (वारंगल), गुजरात (नवसारी), कनााटक (कलबुगी), मध्य प्रिेि (िार) , उ्र 
प्रिेि (लखनऊ), महाराष्ट्र (अमरावती) को अंलतम रूप किया ह । ऐसा अनुमान ह  कक जब प्रत्येक पाक ा पूरा हो जाएगा, तो 
उससे 10,000.00 करोड़ रुपये का लनवेि होगा और लगभग 1 लाख प्रत्यक्ष और 2 लाख अप्रत्यक्ष रोजगार प िा होंगे। 
***** 
1070                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2397 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
जूट बोररयों क े  उपयोग शुल्क ्ें वृद्धि 
2397. श्री शरभू शरण पटे : 
क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) खरीफ द्धवपणन सर (क े ए्एस) 2025-26 से जूट बोररयों क े उपयोग शुल्क ्ें वृद्धि क े  द्ध ए द्धजम््ेिार कारक 
कौन-कौन से हैं; 
(ख) इन शुल्कों की स्ीक्षा क े  द्ध ए गरित सद्ध्द्धत द्वारा  ागत ्ें उतार-चढाव और प्रकियात््क  आवश्यकताओं का 
आक न ककस प्रकार ककया जाता है; 
(ग) सरशोद्धित शुल्कों का राज्य स्‍ततरीय खरीि सरचा न पर सरभाद्धवत प्रभाव क्या है; और 
(घ) क्या सरशोद्धित िरें हा  क े  खरीि सरों ्ें िेखी गई नई जूट बोररयों की  ागत ्ें हुए पररवततनों क े अनुरूप 
द्धनिातररत की गई हैं, यकि हार, तो तत् सरबरिी ब्यौरा क्या है?  
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पद्धबर ्ाघेररटा) 
(क) से (घ):  िान की खरीि क े  द्ध ए उपयोग शुल्क क े किशाद्धनिेशों क े  अनुसार, उपयोग शुल्क की स्ीक्षा क े द्ध ए गरित 
सद्ध्द्धत ने राज्य सरकारों क े सुझावों/द्धसफाररशों को ध्यान ्ें रखा और नए जूट बैग की िर , अनेक बार उपयोग की गई 
बोररयों की औसत िर, अनुपयोगी बोररयों की औसत वसू  ी योग्य ्ूल्य को द्धवचार ्ें  ेते हुए बोररयों क े  द्ध ए उपयोग 
शुल्क तय करने की पिद्धतयों पर द्धवचार-द्धव्शत ककया।  
खरीिे गए िान की पैक े जजरग क े द्ध ए बैग की व्यवस्‍तथा सरबरद्धित राज्य सरकारों और एजेंद्धसयों की द्धजम््ेिारी है। उपयोग 
शुल्क िर ्ें सरशोिन क े  बाि, जीईए्/खु ी द्धनद्धविा क े  ्ाध्य् से उपयोग ककए गए बैग की खरीि आसान हो गई है। 
किनारक 26.08.2025 को, खाद्य और सावतजद्धनक द्धवतरण द्धवभाग ने उपयोग की गई बोररयों क े  द्ध ए सरशोद्धित उपयोग 
शुल्क जारी ककया, जो नई बोररयों की  ागत ्ें वृद्धि को िशातता है। उपयोग शुल्क 10.22 रुपये प्रद्धत उपयोग ककए गए 
बैग या राज्य सरकारों द्वारा खचत की गई वास्‍ततद्धवक  ागत, जो भी क् हो, तय ककया गया है। 
*** 
1071                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्त्र मंत्रालय 
राज् य सभा 
अतारांककत प्रश्न संख्या – 2398 
19 किसंबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
 
बबहार क े  हथकरघा क्षेत्र को सशक्त बनाना 
 
2398  डा. भीम ससंहः 
 
क्या वस्त्र मंत्री यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककः 
 
(क) बडजाइन हस्तक्षेप , सामान्य सुबवधा क ें द्र, ई-माक े ट सलंक, बवत्तीय सहायता , कौशल उन्नयन और रेशम बवकास 
काययक्रमों क े  माध्यम से बबहार क े  बुनकर हथकरघा क्षेत्रों को मजबूत करने क े  बलए मंत्रालय द्वारा क्या पहलें की गई 
हैं; और 
 
(ख) क्या की गई पहलों क े  माध्यम से उत्पािन और बनयायत बढाने क े  बलए कोई लक्ष्य बनधायररत ककया गया है? 
 
 
उत् तर 
 
वस्त्र राज्य मंत्री 
(श्री पबबत्र माघेररटा) 
 
(क) और (ख): बुनकरों और हथकरघा क्षेत्र को मजबूत करने हेतु वस्त्र मंत्रालय बबहार सबहत पूरे िेश में बनम्नबलबखत 
योजनाएं/पहलें कायायबन्वत कर रहा है: 
1. राष्ट्रीय हथकरघा बवकास काययक्रम 
2. कच्चा माल आपूर्तय योजना 
 
उपयुयक्त योजनाओं क े  तहत, कच्चे माल, उन्नत करघे और सहायक उपकरण , सोलर लाइटटंग यूबनट्स , वक य शेड क े  
बनमायण, उत्पाि और बडजाइन बवकास, तकनीकी और सामान्य अवसंरचना, घरेलू/बविेशी बाजारों में हथकरघा उत्पािों क े  
बलए माक े टटंग सहायता, बुनकर मुद्रा योजना क े तहत ररयायती ऋण और सामाबजक सुरक्षा आकि क े  बलए बवत्तीय 
सहायता/छूट प्रिान की जाती है। 
 
सेरीकल्चर वैल्यू चेन क े  व्यापक बवकास हेतु वस्त्र मंत्रालय बबहार सबहत पूरे िेश में बसल्क समग्र-2 योजना/ पहल 
कायायबन्वत  कर रहा है। 
 
इसक े  अबतररक्त, बुनकरों और कारीगरों को हथकरघा उत्पािों की ऑनलाइन माक ेटटंग में सहायता क े बलए एक 
ई-कॉमसय पोटयल ( https://www.indiahandmade.com/) लॉन्च ककया गया है।  बुनकरों और कारीगरों को अपने 
उत्पाि बवबभन्न सरकारी बवभागों और संगठनों को सीधे तौर पर बेचने में सक्षम बनाने क े  बलए उन्हें सरकारी ई -माक े ट 
प्लेस (GeM) पर ऑन बोडय करने संबंधी किम उठाए गए हैं। 
 
इसक े  अलावा, समथय (वस्त्र क्षेत्र में क्षमता बनमायण योजना) क े तहत हथकरघा/रेशम बुनकरों को तकनीकी क्षेत्रों 
जैसे बुनाई, बडजाइसनंग, बसल्क रीसलंग आकि में बस्कसलंग और अपबस्कसलंग ट्रेसनंग प्रिान की जाती है। 
 
 
वस्त्र मंत्रालय द्वारा 2021-22 से 2025-26 (नवंबर 2025 तक) क े िौरान बबहार क े हैंडलूम/बसल्क बुनकरों को 
लाभ पहुँचाने हेतु 19 छोटे हैंडलूम क्लस्टरों को मंजूरी प्रिान की गई है, 1,503 बुनकरों को कौशल प्रबशक्षण प्रिान ककया 
गया है , 17 माक े टटंग इवेंट्स आयोबजत ककए गए हैं, 114 बुनकर  मुद्रा ऋण मंजूर ककए गए हैं , 873 बुनकरों को 
पीएमजेजेबीवाई/पीएमएसबीवाई क े  तहत नामांककत ककया गया है, 62 पुरस्कार बवजेता बुनकरों को माबसक बवत्तीय 
सहायता प्रिान की गई है , 5 उत्पािक क ं पबनयों का गठन ककया गया है और एक सामान्य सुबवधा क ें द्र सबहत  52 रेशम 
बुनाई और प्रोसेससंग बवशेष लाभाथी घटक/यूबनट प्रिान ककए हैं। 
***** 
1072                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2399 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
अ्ेररका द्वारा हा  ही ्ें  गाए गए प्रशुल्क का वस्त्र ननयाात क्षेर पर प्रभाव  
 
2399. डा. फौनजया खान:  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) क्या सरकार ने सरयुक्त राज्य अ्ेररका (यूएसए) द्वारा हा  ही ्ें भारतीय वस्त्र ननयाात पर  गाए  गए 50 
प्रनतशत प्रशुल्क उपायों क े  सरभानवत प्रभाव का आक न ककया है, नजससे क ु   खेप का  गभग एक चौथाई नहस्‍तसा 
प्रभानवत हो सकता है; 
(ख) प्र्ुख वस्त्र ननयाातक राज्यों ्ें ननयाात ्ूल्य और रोजगार क े  सरबरध ्ें अनु्ाननत हानन क्या है; और 
(ग) प्रभानवत ननयाातकों को राहत प्रिान करने और अ्ेररकी बाजार पर ननभारता क् करने क े  न ए बाजारों ्ें 
नवनवधता  ाने हेतु क्या कि् उठाए जा रहे हैं?  
 
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पनबर ्ार्घेररटा) 
(क) और (ख): सरकार सरयुक्त राज्य अ्ेररका और नवश् व क े  अन्य िेशों को हस्‍ततनशल्प सनहत वस्‍त र और अपैर  क े भारत क े 
ननयाात की ननयन्त रूप से ननगरानी कर रही है और वस्‍त र क्षेर क े  सभी क्षेरों पर अ्ेररकी टैररफ क े  प्रभाव पर न रर रख 
रही है। 
 
भारत का वस्‍त र और अपैर  का ननयाात (हस्‍ततनशल्प क े अ ावा) जनवरी से नवरबर 2025 क े  िौरान 32,560.04 न्न यन 
अ्ेररकी डॉ र था, जो नपछ े वर्ा की इसी अवनध की तु ना ्ें 0.26% की वृनि िजा करता है। (स्रोत: नवरबर 2025 
किक एनस्‍तट्ेट्स -डीजीसीआईएस/वानिज्य नवभाग)। 
 
उत्पाि अरतरि, ्ारग, गुिवत्ता, सरनविात््क व्यवस्‍तथा आकि जैसे नवनभन्न कारकों का सरयोजन वैनिक बाजार ्ें भारत क े 
वस्त्र क्षेर क े  ननयाात पर पारस्‍तपररक टैररफ क े प्रभाव को ननधााररत करेगा। ्ररा य भारत क े वस्त्र और अपैर  ननयाात और 
अन्य चुनौनतयों पर अ्ेररकी टैररफ क े  प्रभाव का आक न करने क े  न ए नवनभन्न राज्यों ्ें ए्एसए्ई सनहत ननयाातकों 
क े  साथ ननयन्त परा्शा कर रहा है। ्ररा य ने सरपूिा वस्‍त र और अपैर  ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा ्ें बडे और सूक्ष््,  र्घु और ्ध्य् 
(ए्एसए्ई) वस्‍त र ननयाातकों क े  साथ नवनभन्न स्‍ततरों पर िो व्यापक स ाहकार बैठक ें  बु ाई हैं। 
(ग): सरकार द्वारा एक व्यापक बहुआया्ी रिनीनत क े  ्ाध्य् से भारतीय ननयाात पर अ्ेररकी टैररफ उपायों क े  प्रभाव 
को क्  करने क े  न ए का् करना जारी है, नजस्ें पारस्‍तपररक रूप से  ाभकारी भारत -अ्ेररका नद्वपक्षीय व्यापार 
स्झौते क े न ए अ्ेररकी सरकार क े साथ गहन नवचार-नव्शा, आरबीआई क े  व्यापार राहत उपायों क े  ्ाध्य् से 
तत्का  राहत, ननयाातकों क े  न ए क्र े नडट गाररटी योजना, नेक् सट जेनरेशन क े  जीएसटी सुधारों क े ्ाध्य् से र्घरे ू ्ारग ्ें 
वृनि, नए ननयाात सरवधान न्शन जैसे ननयाात प्रोत्साहन उपाय जो ह्ारे ननयाातकों को सपोटा और सहायता प्रिान करते 
1073                                                      

हैं, नए िेशों क े  साथ एफटीए का अनुसरि करना और ्ौजूिा एफटीए का बेहतर उपयोग  शान्  है। अन्य उपायों ्ें 
एडवारस ऑथोराइजेशन योजना क े  तहत ननयाात ऑनल गेशन अवनध का नवस्‍ततार, प्रवेश और ननवेश ्ानिरडों को आसान 
बनाने क े  न ए ए्ए्एफ अपैर , ए्ए्एफ फ ै निक् स और तकनीकी वस्त्रों क े  न ए पीए आई योजना ्ें सरशोधन, 
कच् ची सा्री की उप लधता को आसान बनाने क े  न ए किनारक 31.12.2025 तक कपास पर आयात शुल्क ्ें छूट 
शान्  है। सरकार अपैर /गार्ेंट और ्ेड-अप क े  न ए राज्य और क ें द्रीय करों और  ेवी (आरओएससीटीए ) की छूट 
और अन्य वस्त्र उत्पािों क े  न ए ननयाानतत उत्पािों (आरओडीटीईपी) योजना पर शुल्क और करों की छूट अथाात िो छूट 
योजनाओं को भी कक्रयानन्वत कर रही है। इसक े  अ ावा, ्ररा य भारत क े  वस्त्र और अपैर  ननयाात और अन्य स्स्‍त याओं 
पर अ्ेररकी टैररफ क े  प्रभाव का आक न करने क े  न ए ननयाातकों, ननयाात सरवधान पररर्िों (ईपीसी) और ए्एसए्ई 
सनहत अन्य सभी नहतधारकों क े  साथ ननयन्त परा्शा कर रहा है। 
सरकार भारतीय वस्‍त र और अपैर  क्षेर को बढावा िेने और इसकी प्रनतस्‍तपधाा को बढाने क े  न ए नवनभन्न योजनाओं/पह ों 
को कक्रयानन्वत कर रही है। प्र्ुख योजनाओं /पह ों ्ें एक आधुननक , एकीक ृ त, नवि स्‍ततरीय वस्‍त र अवसररचना बनाने क े 
न ए पीए् ्ेगा एकीक ृ त वस्‍त र क्षेर और अपैर  (पीए् न्र) पाक ा  योजना; बडे पै्ाने पर नवनन्ााि को बढावा िेने और 
प्रनतस्‍तपधाा बढाने क े  न ए ए्ए्एफ फ ै निक, ए्ए्एफ अपैर  और तकनीकी वस्त्रों पर फोकस करने वा ी उत्पािन 
सम् बि प्रोत्साहन (पीए आई) योजना; अनुसरधान नवाचार और नवकास , सरवधान और बाजार नवकास पर फोकस करने 
वा ा राष्ट्रीय तकनीकी वस्त्र न्शन; ्ारग सरचान त, प् ेस्ेंट उन््ुख, कौश  कायाक्र् प्रिान करने क े उद्देश्य से वस्‍त र क्षेर 
्ें क्ष्ता नन्ााि की योजना -स्था, रेश् उत्पािन ्ूल्य श्रृरख ा क े  व्यापक नवकास क े  न ए नसल् क स्र-2 ; हथकरर्घा 
क्षेर क े  न ए एरड टू एरड सपोटा हेतु राष्ट्रीय हथकरर्घा नवकास कायाक्र् शान्  है। वस्त्र ्ररा य हस्‍ततनशल्प को बढावा िेने 
क े  न ए राष्ट्रीय हस्‍ततनशल्प नवकास कायाक्र् और व्यापक हस्‍ततनशल्प क् स्‍तटर नवकास योजना भी कक्रयानन्वत कर रहा है। 
**** 
 
1074                                                      

भारत सरकार 
वस्‍त र ्ररा य 
राज् य सभा 
अतारारककत प्रश् न सर. 2400 
19 किसरबर, 2025 को जवाब किया 
 
कपास पर आयात शुल्क और क् की्त  
 
2400. श्री रणिीप ससरह सुरजेवा ा:  
 
 क्या वस्त्र ्ररी यह बताने की क ृ पा करेंगे ककिः 
(क) क्या सरकार ने इस बात का सरज्ञान ल या है कक कपास पर 11 प्रलतशत आयात शुल्क हटाने से  घरे ू की्तों ्ें 
क्ी आई है, यकि हार, तो तत्सरबरधी ब्यौरा क्या है; 
(ख) क्या सरकार ने क् की्तों से प्रभालवत कपास ककसानों को सहायता प्रिान की है , यकि हार, तो तत्सरबरधी ब्यौरा 
क्या है; 
(ग) क् या शुल्क हटाज जाने क े  बाि सरयुक्त राज्य अ्ेररका (यूजसज) से कपास का आयात बढा है , तत्सरबरधी ब्यौरा क्या 
है; और 
(घ) भारतीय कपास लनग् ल ल्टेड (सीसीआई) द्वारा लपछ े पारच वर्षों ्ें खरीफ 2025-26 सलहत न्यूनत् स्र्थन 
्ूल्य पर खरीिी गई कपास की ्ारा सरबरलधत वर्षों ्ें क ु  उत्पािन की तु ना ्ें ककतनी है?  
 
उत् तर 
वस्‍त र राज् य ्ररी  
(श्री पलबर ्ाघेररटा) 
(क): सरकार को ज्ञात है कक कपास पर 11% आयात शुल्क की छूट क े  कारण घरे ू की्तों ्ें नर्ी आई है। शुल्क छूट 
क े  बाि से, स्तुल्य जस-6 कपास की अरतराथष्ट्रीय की्तें 19.08.2025 से पह े  गभग 79.15 अ्ेररकी सेंट प्रलत पाउरड 
से घटकर किसरबर 2025 ्ें  गभग 73.95 अ्ेररकी सेंट प्रलत पाउरड हो गईं , जो नीचे की ओर वैलिक प्रवृलि का सरक े त 
िेती है। घरे ू कपास की की्तें  गभग ₹57,000 प्रलत क ैं डी से घटकर ्ोटे तौर पर अरतराथष्‍ट रीय ्ूल् य कायथ व् यापार क े  
अनुरूप  गभग ₹52,500 प्रलत क ैं डी हो गई हैं। घरे ू की्तें वैलिक और घरे ू ्ारग-आपूर्तथ की लस्‍तर्लत, लवलन्य िर और 
गुणविा क े  आधार पर प्रभालवत होती हैं, जबकक वर्षथ 2024-25 क े  ्ौस् क े  िौरान कपास आयात की क ु   घरे ू खपत 
का  गभग 13.93% र्ा। छूट क े  बाि से, की्तें नर् हो गई हैं, जो वतथ्ान ्ें ₹51,500-₹52,500 प्रलत क ैं डी क े  बीच 
रह गई हैं, लजससे उद्योग क े ल ज उप ब् धता सुलनलित होती है जबकक ज्जसपी-आधाररत स्र्थन ककसानों क े लहतों की 
रक्षा करने क े  ल ज जारी है। 
(ख): सरकार न्यूनत् स्र्थन ्ूल्य (ज्जसपी) तरर क े  ्ाध्य् से कपास ककसानों का स्र्थन करती है , जो उत्पािन 
की  ागत पर न्यूनत् 50 प्रलतशत ररटनथ प्रिान करती है। 2025-26 सीज़न क े  ल ज, ्ध्य् स्‍तटेप  क े  ल ज ज्जसपी 
7,710 रुपये प्रलत क्व र ट  और  रबे स्‍तटेप  कपास क े  ल ज 8,110 रुपये प्रलत क्व र ट  तय ककया गया है, जो 2024-25 की 
तु ना ्ें 589 रुपये प्रलत क्व र ट  की वृलि है। भारतीय कपास लनग् ने ्जबूरन  लबक्री को रोकने क े ल ज, 11 राज्यों क े 
149 लज ों ्ें 570 खरीि क ें द्रों क े  ्ाध्य् से किनारक 11.12.2025 तक ज्जसपी अलभयान क े  तहत 13,492 करोड़ 
रुपये की  गभग 31.19  ाख गारठें खरीिी हैं। 
 
1075                                                      

 
(ग): घरे ू वस्‍त र उद्योग की गुणविा और आपूर्तथ आवश्यकताओं को पूरा करने क े  ल ज सरयुक्त राज्य अ्ेररका (यूजसज) 
से कपास आयात ्ें वृलि हुई है , जो भारत की कपास का  गभग 94% उपभोग करता है। अगस्‍तत -लसतरबर 2025 क े 
िौरान, 11%  आयात शुल्क की अस्‍तर्ायी छूट क े  बाि की अवलध सलहत, सरयुक्त राज्य अ्ेररका से आयात उद्योग की 
जरूरतों क े  अनुरूप र्ा। क ु   ल् ाकर, भारत ्ें कपास का आयात 2023-24 ्ें 15.20  ाख गारठों से बढकर 2024-25 
्ें 41.40  ाख गारठ हो गया , लजससे ्ारग-आपूर्तथ अरतर को पाटने ्ें ्िि ल् ी। ये आयात लवशेर्ष कपास ककस्‍त्ों की 
उप ब्धता सुलनलित करते हैं और लनयाथत -उन््ुख उत्पािन का स्र्थन करते हैं , लजससे भारत क े  वस्‍त र क्षेर की वैलिक 
प्रलतस्‍तपधाथ ्ें वृलि हुई है। 
(घ): भारतीय कपास लनग् (सीसीआई) ककसानों क े  ल ज  ाभकारी ्ूल्य सुलनलित करने क े  ल ज ज्जसपी क े  तहत 
कपास की खरीि करता है। ज्जसपी अलभयान ्ूल्य अलस्‍तर्रता क े  लख ाफ ककसानों की रक्षा करना जारी रखता है और 
उलचत ररटनथ सुलनलित करता है। 
उत्पािन की तु ना ्ें लपछ े पारच वर्षों क े  िौरान ज्जसपी क े  तहत खरीिी गई ्ारा िशाथने वा ा लववरण नीचे किया 
गया है: 
कपास ्ौस् उत् पािन 
( ाख गारठ) 
ज्जसपी क े  तहत खरीिी गई 
्ारा ( ाख गारठ) 
खरीि की ्ारा 
(उत्पािन का %) 
2025-26 292.15 24.92* 8.53* 
2024-25 297.24 100.16 33.70 
2023-24 325.22 32.84 10.10 
2022-23 336.60 - - 
2021-22 311.17 - - 
2020-21 352.48 99.33 28.18 
नोट: कपास ्ौस् 2021-22 और 2022-23 ्ें, कपास की की्तें ज्जसपी से ऊपर च  रही 
र्ीं। इसल ज ककसानों को ज्जसपी की जरूरत नहीं र्ी। 
* 8.12.2025 तक 
**** 
 
1076                                                      

                                                     