Vol. 267  Monday, 
No. 7                  10th February, 2025 
    21 Magha, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (page 1)
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 4) 
Reports of the Department–related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water 
Resources– Laid on the Table (page 4) 
Statements of the Department–related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
External Affairs– Laid on the Table (page 4 - 5) 
Announcement by the Chair (page 5) 
Matters raised With Permission– 
Demand for timely updation of Aadhaar details (pages 6 - 8) 
Concern over the people deprived of entitlements under the National Food Security 
Act, 2013 (pages 8 - 9) 
Need to nurture All India Radio (AIR) to make it world-class National 
 Broadcaster (pages 9 - 10)  
Need to expedite Railway connectivit y in Kalahandi, Sambalpur & Sonepur 
 regions of Odisha  (pages 10 - 12) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Demand t
o retain the height of Polava ram multi-purpose irrigation project in 
 Andhra Pradesh (pages 12 - 13) 
Need to preserve coastal culture of Goa (pages 13 - 14) 
Demand to start train services of Ra jdhani Express from Darbhanga to 
Delhi (pages 14 - 15) 
Demand to counter hostile Drone activity on the India-Pakistan 
Border (pages 15 - 16) 
Misleading facts related to Indian hist ory mentioned in the Museum of Union 
 Public  Service Commission, New Delhi (pages 16 - 17) 
Concern over damage caused to crops by  wild animals in Morni Hills area of 
Haryana (pages 17 - 18) 
D e m a n d  t o  r e v o k e  d e l i s t i n g  o f  I n d i a n  Seafood Companies from EU and export 
restrictions to the Customs Union (Russian Federation) and United 
Kingdom (pages 18 - 19) 
Concern over social and economic cond itions of sick workers of Coal 
India  (pages 19 - 20) 
Demand to include Lepcha, Bhutia and Limbu Language in the Eighth Schedule 
of the Constitution of India (pages 20 - 21) 
Demand to include traditional kitchen tips for home remedies in education system 
of the country (pages 21 - 22) 
Need to address the problem of substandard medicines in the 
country (pages 22 - 23) 
Demand to expedite Railway pr ojects under Ambala Railway 
Division (pages 23 - 24) 
Demand to establish a Centre of Excellence in Nursing Education in 
Kerala  (page 24) 
Demand for declaring Puri Ratha Yatra as a National Holiday (page 25) 
Concern over the rise in medical malp ractice that leads to people being 
overcharged (pages 25 - 26)
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Oral Answers to Questions (pages 26 - 75)
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
Government Bill– Introduced 
The Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025 (pages 75 - 76) 
The  Union  Budget,  2025-26 –  Discussion not concluded (pages 76 - 117 and 
pages 117 – 177) 
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons (page 117) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 10th February, 2025 / 21 Magha, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.
 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, pleased to  
extend greetings to hon. Member of Parlia ment, Shri Sanjay Seth, on his birthday 
today. 
Shri Sanjay Seth is in his third ter m in the Rajya Sabha since April, 2024. He had 
previously served in this august House from  2016 to 2019 and from 2019 to 2022. As a 
parliamentarian, Shri Sanjay  Seth bears a polite, suave and persuasive temperament 
and imparts inventions in the House after due diligence. 
In industry, Shri Sanjay Seth has made infrastructure development as his forte. 
His tenure as President of Confederation of  Real Estate Developers Association of 
India, Uttar Pradesh, was significant, heralding impactful reforms in the sector. 
Shri Sanjay Seth has keen interest in sports. As Vice-President of Uttar Pradesh 
Olympic Association and Uttar Pradesh Badminton Association, he initiated 
promotional sponsorships for sports. He co ntinues doing it currently as well. Shri 
Seth has widely travelled and represented our Parliament at the Asian Parliamentary 
Assembly in Bahrain in December last ye ar and made contributions that evoked 
positive response. 
Shri Sanjay Seth is married to Shrimati  Reena Seth and the couple is blessed 
with son, Kunal and Daughter, Riya. 
Hon. Members, on my own and your be half, I wish him a long, healthy and 
happy life and extend greetings to his family members. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
Notification of the Ministry of Power 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 

PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik, I lay on the Table, a copy (i n English and Hindi) of the 
Ministry of Power Notification No. S.O. 5337(E)., dated the 10 thDecember, 2024, 
amending the Principal Notificatio n No. S.O. 185(E), dated the 12 thJanuary, 2009, 
issued under clause (a) of Section 14 of the Energy Conservation Act, 2001.             
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 1963/18/25] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Communications 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  (DR. 
CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English 
and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Posts), under Section 14 of the Post Office Act, 2023: - 
(1) G.S.R. 767(E)., dated the 16 th December, 2024, publishing the Post Office
Rules, 2024.
(2) S.O. 5440(E)., dated th
e 16 th December, 2024, publishing thePost Office
Regulations, 2024.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), See No. L.T. 2172/18/25] 
Statements showing action taken by the Government on the various assurances, 
promises and undertakings 
THE MINISTER OF ST
ATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I lay  on the Table, a copy each (i n English and Hindi) of the 
following Statements showing action take n by the Government on the various 
assurances, promises and undertakings gi ven during the Session shown against 
each: - 
1. Statement No. XXXIV Two Hundred Nineteenth, 2010 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2194/18/25] 
2. Statement 
No. XXIX Two Hundred Thirty Eighth, 2016 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2195/18/25] 
3. Statement 
No. XXIV Two Hundred Forty First, 2016 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2196/18/25] 
4. Statement 
No. XXIV Two Hundred Forty Second, 2017 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2197/18/25] 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

5. Statement No.XIX Two Hundred Forty Third, 2017 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2198/18/25] 
6. Statement No.XVI Two Hundred Forty Fourth, 2017 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T.2199/18/25] 
7. Statement No.XII Two Hundred Forty Eighth, 2019 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2200/18/25] 
8. Statement No.XVIII Two Hundred Forty Ninth, 2019 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2201/18/25] 
9. Statement No.XIV Two Hundred Fifty Sixth, 2022 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2202/18/25] 
10. Statement No.IX Two Hundred Fifty Seventh, 2022 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2203/18/25] 
11. Statement No.IX Two Hundred Fifty Eighth, 2022 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2204/18/25] 
12. Statement No.VIII Two Hundred Fifty Ninth, 2023 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2205/18/25] 
13. Statement No.VI Two Hundred Sixtieth, 2023 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2206/18/25] 
14. Statement No.V Two Hundred Sixty Second, 2023 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2207/18/25] 
15. Statement No.IV Two Hundred Sixty Third, 2024 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2208/18/25] 
16. Statement No.II Two Hundred Sixty Fifth, 2024 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2209/18/25] 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
3

 
 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of DDA, New Delhi and related papers 
 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी तोखन साहू) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् 
सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under Section 26 and 
sub-section (4) of Section 25 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957:- 
(a) Annual Report of the Delhi Developmen t Authority (DDA), New Delhi, for the 
year 2022-23. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Delhi Developmen t Authority (DDA), New Delhi, for 
the year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon. 
(c) Review by Government on the working of the above Authority. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above.                         
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2190/18/25] 
 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA (Bihar)  : Sir, I  lay on the Table, a copy each (in English 
and Hindi) of the following Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Water Resources (2024-25):- 
 
(i)  First Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation; and  
(ii)  Second Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of  Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
 
 
STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY (Haryana) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following statements of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs:- 
 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
(i) Statement showing Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-ninth Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in its Twenty-
fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)   on ‘India’s Policy Planning and Role of 
Think Tanks with Special Reference to ICWA and RIS’; and 
(ii) Statement showing Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations containe d in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)   on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in its  
Twenty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘India’s Neighbourhood 
First Policy’. 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the House had decided, on the recommendation of 
the Business Advisory Committee, to skip lunch during the first leg of the Session to 
complete discussion on the Motion of Th anks and the General Discussion on the 
Union Budget.  Today, the General Discussion  on the Union Budget is scheduled to 
commence.  If the House so agrees, we ma y start the discussion at 2.00 pm, after 
lunch recess.  In order to complete th e discussion and afford a reasonable 
opportunity to Members, the House may sit late for two hours each day, today and 
tomorrow, and skip lunch hour tomorrow, if the House so agrees. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Okay, Sir. 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Thank you.  Now, Matters raised with permission. Dr. Ajeet 
Madhavrao Gopchade. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
डा.  अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े (महाराÍटर्):  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. ...(Interruptions)... Please,.. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
5

 
 
 
डा.  अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े :  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Demand for...  ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, please, 
the Leader of the House. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा) :    सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Please take your seats. 
...(Interruptions)... There may be... 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) : सर, यह तीसरी बार हो गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I am exactly doing that. ...(Interruptions)...I am sorry. 
...(Interruptions)...De
 mand for timely updation of Aadhaar details.  Mr. Gopchade, 
please continue. 
 
Demand for timely updation of Aadhaar details 
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े (महाराÍटर्) :  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय ...(Ëयवधान)... नकली 
आधार काडर् क े गलत इÎतेमाल को रोकने क े िलए पुन: सत्यापन Ģिकर्या मȂ मदर्ास उच्च न्यायालय 
ने हाल ही मȂ संपिǄ लेन-देन मȂ उपयोग िकए गए चार जाली आधार काड्सर् क े संबंध मȂ पुिलस मȂ 
िशकायत दजर् करने का आदेश िदया है। इस मामले ने धोखाधड़ी और पहचान Ģण
ाली की 
अखंडता क े बारे मȂ गंभीर िंचताएं उत्पन्न की हȅ।  महोदय, आधार काडर्, जो भारत मȂ कानूनी और 
िवǄीय लेन-देन क े िलए अिनवायर् है, उसका दुरुपयोग  न क ेवल Ëयिƪगत पहचान की सुरक्षा  को 
खतरे मȂ डालता है,  बिÊक यह पूरे िसÎटम की िवÌवसनीयता को भी कम
जोर करता है। जब ऐसे 
जाली दÎतावेज़ȗ का उप योग िकया जाता है, तो यह न क ेवल धोखाधड़ी को बढ़ावा देता है, बिÊक 
नागिरकȗ क े िलए भी एक बड़ा खतरा बन जाता है। ईडी ने झारखंड और पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ अवैध 
आĨजन की जाँच क े तहत छापे मारे थे। ये छापे उन एजȂटȗ पर क Ȃिदर्त थे, जो भारत ीय नागिरकता 
का दावा करने वाले बंगलादेशी नागिरकȗ को धोखाधड़ी वाले दÎतावेज Ģदान कर रहे हȅ। यह 
िÎथित राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा क े िलए गंभीर चुनौितयाँ पेश करती है, क्यȗिक अवैध आĨजन से न क ेवल 
सामािजक ताने-बाने मȂ खटास आती है, बिÊक यह देश क े कानूनȗ और िनयमȗ का उÊ
लंघन भी 
करता है। भारत की यूआईडीएआई ने हाल ही मȂ Ëयिƪयȗ को यह सलाह दी है िक वे अपने आधार 
काडर् की जानकारी को अपडेट करȂ। यह सलाह िवशेष रूप  से उन लोगȗ को दी गई है, िजनका 
आधार काडर् एक दशक पहले जारी िक
या गया था। महोदय, यह कदम महत्वपूणर् है, क्यȗिक समय 
क े साथ Ëयिƪयȗ की ज ानकारी , जैसे नाम, पता, जन्म ितिथ एवं Ëयिƪगत िववरण बदल सकते हȅ। 
हाल ही मȂ यूआईडीएआई ने ÎपÍट िकया है िक ये अपडेट्स करना अिनवायर् नहीं है, लेिकन इस 
मुǈे पर मȅ एक मजबूत िसफािरश करना चाहता हूं। राÍटर् की िविभन् न चुनावी Ģिकर्याओं मȂ 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
धोखाधड़ी की जाँच क े दौरान यह सामने आया है िक बंगलादेशी घुसपैिठए वोट डालने मȂ संलग्न 
हȅ। यह िÎथित लोकतांितर्क Ģिकर्या की िनÍपक्षता को Ģभािवत करती है और नागिरकȗ क े 
अिधकारȗ को भी संकट मȂ डालती है। ऐसे मामलȗ की संख्या बढ़ती जा रही है। पहचान और 
नागिरकता से संबंिधत मुǈȗ पर कड़ी िनगरानी और उिचत कारर्वाई की आवÌयकता है, तािक देश 
की सुरक्ष
ा और कानून ËयवÎथा को सुिनिÌचत िकया जा सके । महोदय, मेरा मानना है िक क Ȃदर्ी य 
सरकार को एक कानून बनाना चािहए, िजसके  तहत आधार काडर् धारकȗ को अपने आधार काडर् 
की जानकारी को िनयिमत रूप  से अपडेट करना अिनवायर् हो। इसके  साथ ही यह भी ËयविÎथत 
िकया जाए की सभी नागिरकȗ की जानकारी अǏतन और सटीक हो। महोदय, इसके  साथ ही 
क Ȃदर्ीय सरकार को अपने अपडेट क े िलए आवÌयक एक शुÊक भी लागू करना चािह
ए। यह शुÊक 
न क ेवल आधार अपडेट Ģिकर्या का Ģबंधन करने मȂ मदद करेगा, बिÊक यह भी सुिनÌचत करेगा 
िक ये लोग अपने आधार काडर् की ज
ानकारी को गंभीरता से लȂ। िसिटजन रिजÎटर्ेशन िसÎटम 
पोटर्ल क े माध्यम से अगर आधार काडर् को िसÎटम से िंलक करȂगे, तो नकली आधार काडर् क े 
दुरुपयोग  को रोकने मȂ महत्वपूणर् मदद िमलेगी। अवैध गि तिविध से जुड़ा हुआ नकली आधार काडर् 
का उपयोग िविभन्न Ģकार की धोखाधड़ी और अपराधȗ मȂ िकया जाता है। मȅ इसकी सुरक्षा क े िलए, 
आधार Ģणाली की िवÌवसनीयता को बढ़ाने क े िलए और नागिरकȗ की सुरक्षा क े िलए एक 
महत्वपूणर् उप
ाय करने क े िलए दृढ़ता से यह सुझाव देना चाहता हूं िक सरकार इस िदशा मȂ ठोस 
कदम उठाए और आधार काडर् Ģणाली को अिधक Ģभावी और सुरिक्षत बनाए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the issue 
raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade :   Shri Sujeet Kumar 
(Odisha),  Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Mad hya Pradesh),  Shri Brij Lal (Uttar 
Pradesh),  Shrimati S. Phangnon Kony ak (Nagaland),  Shri Deepak Prakash 
(Jharkhand),  Shrimati Geeta alia Chan draprabha (Uttar Pradesh),  Dr. Kalpana 
Saini (Uttarkhand),  Shri Aditya Prasad (Jharkhand),  Ms.Kavita Patidar (Madhya 
Pradesh),  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishe mba (Manipur),  Shri  R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu),  Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha),  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra),  
Shri  Jose  K.  Mani  (Kerala),  Shrimati   Sumitra   Balmik   (Madhya   Pradesh),   
Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Mah arashtra) and  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra).  
 Hon. Members, before I call out the next speaker, I will make an appeal.  We
 
are Council of States; we are House of Elders.  It is required of us to patiently hear 
anyone who has been legitimately given fl oor by the Chairman.  I will not appreciate 
any disturbance.  There are occasions when people may be euphoric and otherwise 
also.   This House has to send a very sober message that this House is meant for 
expression and dialogue and we will uphold it.  I am sure the Leader of the House and 
the Leader of the Opposition both will extend  their warmest cooperation to me.   I am 
calling Shrimati Sonia Gandhi who had taken oath as a Member on 4
th April, 2024.  It 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
7

 
 
 
is her maiden intervention in the House.  Sh e is making contribution on ‘Concern over 
the people deprived of entitlements under the National Food Security Act, 2013’.  
Shrimati Sonia Gandhi.  
 
Concern over the people deprived of entitlements under the National Food  
Security Act, 2013 
 
SHRIMATI SONIA GANDHI (Rajasthan): Hon. Chairman, thank you for giving me this 
opportunity to speak.  The National Food Security Act (NFSA) introduced by the UPA 
Government in September, 2013, was a land mark initiative aimed at ensuring food 
and nutritional security for the country’s 140 crore population.   This legislation played 
a crucial role in protecting millions of vulnerable households from starvation, 
particularly, during the Covid-19 crisis.  It is this Act that provided the basis for the 
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana .  Under the NFSA, 75 per cent of the rural 
population and 50 per cent of the urban popu lation are entitled to receive subsidized 
foodgrains.  However, the quota for the bene ficiaries is still determined based on the 
2011 Census, which is now well over a decade old.  For the first time in independent 
history, the Decennial Census has been delayed by more than four years.  Originally 
scheduled for 2021, there is still no clarity on when the Census will be conducted.  
The Budget allocations reveal that the up dated Census is unlikely to be conducted 
this year as well.  Around 14 crore eligible Indians are thus being deprived of their 
rightful benefits under the NFSA.  It is impe rative, Sir, that the Government prioritizes 
the completion of the Census as soon as  possible, and ensure that all deserving 
individuals receive the benefits guaranteed to them under th e NFSA.  Food security is 
not a privilege; it is a fundamental right. Thank you.       
                                                               
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the issue 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sonia Gandhi : Shri Mukul Wasnik (Rajasthan),  
Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala),  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra),  Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala),  Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala),  Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala),  
Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury (Telangana),  Shri Ashok  Singh (Madhya Pradesh),  
Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar (Karnata ka), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana),  Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Na d u ) ,   S h r i m a t i  R a j a n i  A s h o k r a o  P a t i l  
(Maharashtra),  Shri Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar ),  Shri Sanjay Singh (National Capital 
Territory of Delhi),  Shri Pramod Tiwari  (Rajasthan),  Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala),  Shri  Saket  Gokhale  (West Beng a l ) ,    S h r i m a t i   S u l a t a  D e o  ( O d i s h a ) ,   
Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala),  Shri K.T. S. Tulsi (Chhattisgarh), Shri Prem Chand 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Gupta (Bihar),  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav (Uttar Pradesh),  Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi (Maharashtra),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala),  Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
(West Bengal),  Shri Ritabrata Banerjee (W est Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu) Shri Rajeev Shukla (Chhattisgarh) and  Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra). 
 Now, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque on need to nurture All India Radio to 
make it world-class national broadcaster.   I appreciate your ambition because the 
entire nation is in an aspirational mode.   Please go ahead.  
 
Need to nurture All India Radio (AIR) to make it world-class National Broadcaster 
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal) : Sir, India has a great tradition 
of cricket commentary on the radio.  This Go vernment is killing that tradition.  In the 
years gone by, radio cricket commentaries had some legend s, Berry Sarbadhikary,  
Pearson Surita, Dicky Rutnagur, Anant Setalvad, Kishore Bhimani and others.   
  Why is Indian cricket commentary on radio now in such a poor shape? With 
the exception of a few commentators like Shri Sushil Doshi and Shri Vinit Garg in Hindi 
and Shri Sunil Gupta and Shri Prakash Vagankar in English, it is boring. There is a 
huge potential for Akashvani to create good content and reach larger audiences by 
producing world-class cric ket commentary. The BBC an d ABC only use the best 
commentators always. Akashvani is India's na tional broadcaster. It has 591 stations, 
reaching 98 per cent of the population. With its massive reach, it has huge potential to 
lead in this space. In the first three mont hs of 2022, Akashvani averaged just two 
crore listeners per month. The number of pod cast listeners in India is estimated to be 
17 crores. Still, the BCCI and channels don't give radio rights to Akashvani. Yes, they 
deprive Akashvani. Terrible! And Akashvani does not even send commentators to the 
venues, citing lack of funds.  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
On top of that, one cannot hear cricke t commentary on the medium wave, but 
only on FM radio or via an App called ‘News on Air’. This is absurd, Sir. An excellent 
way to further grow Akashvani's listeners' base would be to create world-class 
cricket commentary.  
For this to become a reality, my Part y, All India Trinamool Congress, suggests 
that three things must be done urgently. One, have dedicated channels for each 
language. Having the Hindi and English commentators doing the commentary, as a 
pair, is the surest way to kill good radio commentary. Two, the selection procedure of 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
9

 
 
 
commentators for Akashvani is an opaque process. To create a pool of top-notch 
commentators is essential to have an im partial and professional judging system. 
Three, from the Akashvani panel of commentat ors, it is essential to select those who 
have a thorough understanding of cricket and the style to engage the listeners. There 
is little use slotting cricket commentators on  the principle that every person on the 
panel has to be given a chance. Sir, I would like to suggest to the Minister to 
implement these three suggestio ns and appoint Shri Harsha Bhogle as the captain of 
a new team whose task would be to make  Indian radio cricket commentary world 
class. Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  धन्यवाद माननीय मोहÇमद नदीमुल हक जी। 
The following hon. Members associated  themselves with the Zero Hour 
Mention made by the hon. Member , Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque : Shri Sujeet 
Kumar  (Odisha),  Shri  Manoj  Kumar  Jha  (Bihar),  Shri  P. P.  Suneer (Kerala), 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shrimati Mausam B 
Noor (West Bengal), Shri Ravi Chandra Va ddiraju (Telangana), Shri Sandosh Kumar 
P (Kerala),  Shri  R.  Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. V. Siva dasan (Kerala), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
(Maharashtra), Shri A.A. Rahim (Ker ala), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Manadadi 
(Telangana), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham  (Kerala), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), 
Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Ritabrata 
Baneerjee (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Kh an (Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal) and Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal). 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  माननीय सुजीत क ुमार। 
 
Need to expedite Railway connectivity in Kalahandi, Sambalpur & Sonepur regions 
of Odisha 
 
Ǜी सुजीत क ुमार (ओिडशा) :  आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, सबसे पहले मȅ आदरणीय Ģध
 ान 
मंतर्ी जी, िवǄ मंतर्ी जी और रेलवे मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देता हूं िक इस बार क े बजट 
मȂ ओिडशा क े िलए रेलवे मȂ 10,600 करोड़ का Ģावधान िकया गया है।  यह ओिडशा मȂ रेलवे क े 
िलए आज तक का सबसे highest allocation है।  इस पर मȅ बजट िडÎकशन मȂ िवÎतार से चचार् 
करूं गा।  िफलहाल मȅ आप
के  माध्यम से रेलवे मंतर्ी जी से एक छोटा सा अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं।  
 Sir, I request the hon. Railway Minister to expedite and prioritize the final 
location survey, FLS in railway terms, fo r four critical projects in Western and 
Southern Odisha.  These projects are extr emely important to enhance connectivity, 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
boost regional economic development and bring out balanced development of the 
entire State, and, of course, the entire country.  
Sir, the first project is the Bhawanipat na-Kesinga Railway line, which is in 
Aspirational District of Kalahandi.  This is a 35-kilometre long railway project, which 
will be an alternative to the National Hi ghway-26, which is now teaming with heavy 
vehicles, and help ease the traffic. Also, in this route lies the Udaan Airport of Utkela, 
which is almost the lifeline of Western Odis ha. This will help br ing about multimodal 
transport connectivity, and, of course, boos t regional activities. The current distance 
between Bhawanipatna to Kesinga, the railway distance, will be reduced by 29 
kilometres if this project becomes a reality.   Sir, the second project pertains to the 
Sambalpur-Sonepur 77 kilometre railway line. Sambalpur and Sonepur are two 
important towns of Western Odisha and this will run parallel to the State highway of 
15. Again, this highway is largely used for transportation of mineral ores and hence is 
always accident-prone.  So, this railway project will again help ease the traffic and it is 
also of strategic importance because it  will connect the Jharsuguda-Sambalpur 
industrial zone to the coastal areas of Paradip, etc., and the railway distance between 
Sambalpur and Sonepur will be cut down by 80 kilometres making transport more 
efficient.  Sir, the third project pertains to the 115 kilometres Kantabanji to Koksara 
railway line in Kalahandi, Nuapada and Balang ir.  All these three are the aspirational 
districts.  
  
Sir, there is already an ex isting project from Junagarh Road to Nabrangpur via 
Koksara.  This project will not take up a lot of resources or time, but would, definitely, 
help in transportation of ir on ore from Bailadala iron ore mines to Raipur and would 
also be the lifeline of Western and Sout hern Odisha.  Districts like Kalahandi, 
Navrangpur and Koraput would benefit from th is.   The final project pertains to the 
Bhawanipatna– Phulbani railway line via La njigarh Road, M Rampur and Baliguda.  
Sorry, Sir, these are some of the names wh ich the House may not be aware of, but it 
is necessary to bring it to the notice of th e Government.  This is an LWE-affected 
region in Western-Southern Odisha and heav ily populated with the tribal population.  
This would also facilitate faster movement of goods. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Kumar :  Dr. Sikander Kumar 
(Himachal Pradesh), Shrimati Sumitra Ba lmik (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Maharaja 
Sanajaoba Leishemba (Manipur), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu) and Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh).                                                     
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
11

 
 
 
 Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla – ‘Request fo r reduction of fees of Government 
exams for the benefit of poor students’ – not present.  Shri Subhas Chandra Bose 
Pilli – ‘Demand to retain the height of the Polavaram multi-purpose irrigation project 
in Andhra Pradesh’. 
 
Demand to retain the height of Polavaram multi-purpose irrigation project  
in Andhra Pradesh 
 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI (Andhra Pradesh) :  Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
Sir, the Polavaram Project is the lifeline of Andhra Pradesh and any reduction in its 
capacity threatens its completion, functiona lity and long-term benefits.  We urge the 
Government of India to take immediate co rrective action to address the pressing 
issues.   
The proposal to lower the height of the dam from 45.72 metres to 41.15 metres 
is deeply concerning.  This reduction wo uld cut the water stor age capacity from 194 
TMC to just 115 TMC, drastically undermining the objectives of the project.  
Polavaram was designed to irrigate 7.5 lakh  acres and supply drin king water to lakhs 
of people.  Lowering its capacity will severe ly impact farmers, disrupt water security 
and betray the commitments made during th e State’s bifurcation.  The Centre must 
uphold the original plan an d ensure full storage capacity.  The project cost has now 
escalated to Rs. 30,436.95 crore and yet, the Union Budget 2025-26 has allocated 
only Rs. 5,936 crores, a figure grossly insu fficient to meet the 2026 deadline. Without 
fulfilling it further delays are inevitable.  Pushing away the project uncertainty, the 
Centre must immediately release all pend ing funds to prevent cost overruns and 
ensure timely execution.  Under our former Chief Minister, Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan 
Reddy, significant progress was made despite early floods and Covid-related 
challenges.  Essential structures includin g the spillway, spill channel and cofferdam 
were completed without disruptions. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat. 
 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI :  The Central Government must sanction Rs. 
10,127 crore for continued construction.  I request the Government to make 
Pollavaram Project its priority. 
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   T h e  h o n .  M e m b e r ,  S h r i  R .  G i r i r a j a n  ( T a m i l  N a d u )  
associated himself with the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri Subhas Chandra 
Bose Pilli. Shri Derek O’ Brien - Need to preserve coastal culture of Goa. 
 
Need to preserve coastal culture of Goa 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal) :  Sir, smaller States rarely get a chance to 
have their voices heard here.  So, I am happ y today to raise the i ssue of the need to 
preserve the rich coastal culture of Goa. 
 Sir, the coastal culture of Goa is basically made up of two communities.  One 
is the fishing community with all their gr eat traditions and the other is the toddy-
tapping community.  These are the two comm unities.  Now, the vibrant communities 
in these fishing villages – I have been th ere once or twice and have seen myself – 
have a great tradition, but now they are going through an existential crisis, for a 
variety of reasons. It is pr imarily because of the CRZ, th e Coastal Regulation Zones.  
As a result, these fishermen cannot build homes, cannot do up their homes, cannot 
park their boats and face all kinds of prob lems.  Worse than that, the trawlers are 
coming and robbing them of their livelihood.                                                         
 So, the issue here is affecting 20,000 fish ermen and about 1 lakh people in this 
community. Tough times for them! I want to quickly contrast this to what is 
happening for the fishermen in Bengal.  Th ere is a special scheme called ‘Samudra 
Sathi Scheme’ under which each fisherman gets Rs.10,000 for two months for off-
fishing season. There is another scheme calle d ‘Matsya Jeebi Credit Card’. This is to 
protect the fishermen so that they do not get duped in a long-term institutional credit.  
These are the issues. There is also one more issue in Goa relating to salt pans. This is 
an old Goa tradition of using salt pans. From salt pans, they extricate salt.  That too is 
under trouble. These should be preserved as heritage sites. We appeal to the 
Government to save the fishermen and to save Goa, as the Supreme Court said, ‘Do 
not turn it into a concrete jungle’.  We mu st protect that. And what do the people of 
Goa do? What are the options they have? Th e last time when they voted, we were 
hearing slogans. There are two ways to use Zero Hour.  One is, you can raise these 
issues or you can stand up and shout the slogans for your  leader. I am using these 
issues. The Government of Goa is doing nothing.  And what was the Opposition 
doing there? They elected 11 MLAs from the Congress in good faith.  But eight 
Congress MLAs left and went to the BJP. So, who will protect the people of Goa? 
 I appeal to this Government, leave the politics aside and let us get together to help 
the State.                              
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
13

 
 
 
          
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shri Derek O’Brien : Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham  (Kerala),  Shri  Jose  K.  Mani   (Kerala),  Ms.  Dola Sen (West Bengal), 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West 
B e n g a l ) ,   S h r i   R i t a b r a t a   B a n e r j e e   ( W e s t   B e n g a l ) ,   S h r i   M a n o j   K u m a r   J h a  
(Bihar), Shri  Prakash  Chik  Baraik  (West Bengal),   Dr.   John   Brittas  (Kerala), 
Shrimati Mausam B. Noor (West Bengal), Shri Sandosh  Kumar  P (Kerala), Shri Anil 
Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala) Beeran 
(Kerala),  Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri  Khiru Mahto  (Bihar ), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Be ngal), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil  Nadu) 
and  Shri A.A.  Rahim (Kerala). 
 Shrimati Dharmshila Gupta -- Demand to start train servi ces of Rajdhani 
Express from Darbhanga to Delhi. 
 
Demand to start train services of Rajdhani Express from Darbhanga to Delhi 
 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा (िबहार) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपका आभार िक आपने मुझे 
मेरे क्षेतर् क े अित महत्वपूणर् लोकिहत क े इस मुǈे को संसद पटल पर ĢÎतुत करने की अनुमित 
Ģदान की है। 
माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, मेरे िबहार राज्य का दरभंगा उन रेलवे Îटेशनȗ मȂ शािमल 
है, जो िक 'अमृत भारत योजना' क े अंतगर्त आते हȅ।  मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
का धन्यवाद करती हूं, िजनके  िदशा िनदȃशन मȂ दरभंगा जंक्शन को 340 करोड़ रुपए  की सौगा
त 
देकर उस Îटेशन का पूणर् रूप  से कायाकÊप करके  िवÌव Îतरीय रेलवे Îटेशन बनने की ओर 
अगर्सर िकया गया है।  
महोदय, इस सदन क े मा
ध्यम से माननीय रेल मंतर्ी जी से मेरा आगर्ह है िक दरभंगा, िजसे 
'िमिथला की सांÎकृ ितक राजधानी' कहा जाता है और जो पटना क े बाद राज्य का दूसरा सबसे 
बड़ा क्षेतर् है, वहां सारी मूलभूत सुिवधाएं, जैसे - हवाई अƿा और अब िबहार क े दूसरे एÇस क े 
िनमार्ण का कायर् भी माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ अगर्सर है।  दरभंगा मȂ मखाना सिहत 
अन्य कई क
ारोबार भी राÍटर्ीय-अंतरर ाÍटर्ीय Îतर पर िकए जाते हȅ।  ऐसे मȂ दरभंगा से िदÊली क े 
िलए राजधानी या वंदे भारत जैसी सुपरफाÎट टर्ेन चलाने की क ृपा की जाए, िजससे िक यहां क े 
Îथानीय िनवािसयȗ को Ëयापार या इलाज हेतु आने-जाने मȂ सुगमता हो।   
माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, इसके  अितिरƪ दरभंगा से गुवाहाटी क े िलए एक भी टर्ेन 
नहीं चलाई जाती है।  िदÊली से वाया समÎतीपुर-मुजÄफरपुर गुवाहाटी जाने वाली िडबर्ूगढ़ 
राजधानी टर्ेन (संख्या 20504) सÃताह मȂ 5 िदन चलती है।  मेरा अनुरोध है िक आदरणीय रेल मंतर्ी 
जी इस टर्ेन को सÃताह मȂ दो िदन क े िलए वाया समÎतीपुर-दरभंगा चलाने की क ृपा करȂ, िजससे 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
यहां क े Îथानीय िनवािसयȗ क े समय की बचत होने क े साथ-साथ उनकी परेशानी भी कम हो 
सके , धन्यवाद। 
 
Demand to counter hostile Drone activity on the India-Pakistan Border 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक (पंजाब) :   सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय को 
रखना चाहता हूँ, िजसका सीधा संबंध राÍटर्ीय सुरक्ष ा और बॉडर्र एिरया मȂ रहने वाले जो जनमानस 
हȅ, उनके  जनजीवन से संबंिधत है।  सर, पंजाब का लगभग साढ़े पाँच सौ िकलोमीटर जो बॉडर्र है, 
वह सीधे पािकÎतान से लगता है।  डर्ोन का जो intrusion है, वह िपछले कई सालȗ मȂ लगातार 
बढ़ता जा रहा है।  2020 मȂ लगभग 50 डर्ोन्स देखे गए थे, उसके  बाद हर साल यह 50 और  100
 
करते-करते िपछले साल लगभग 300-350 क े आसपास डर्ोन्स देखे गए थे।  इसमȂ सबसे 
िंचताजनक बात यह है िक number of drones, िजनको security fo
rces क े ǎारा neutralise 
िकया जा रहा है, वह काफी कम है, just few percentage है।  इसका मतलब majority of the 
drones बॉडर्र क े इस तरफ इंिडया मȂ लȅड करते हȅ और िफर वापस fly back कर जा रहे हȅ।  अगर 
यह continue रहा, तो आपको तो पता है िक अब कोई भी देश आमने-सामने होकर लड़ाई नहीं 
करता है, बिÊक proxy war चलता है, इसिलए पािकÎतान बॉ
डर्र बेÊट पर डर्ोन को जो यूज़ कर 
रहा है, वह बहुत ही सीिरयस है।  मȅ आपको बता दूँ िक पािकÎतान mostly चीन और तुकीर् से डर्ोन 
import कर रहा है।  हमारे देश मȂ anti-drone technology अभी advanced नहीं है।  हमȂ उन्
हȂ 
तुरंत acquire करना चािहए।  इसमȂ एक important चीज यह है िक हमȂ इसमȂ टर्ेिंनग को भी देखने 
की जरूरत है, क्यȗिक जो first line of commission है, वह बीएसएफ की है और second line of 
control obviously State police की रहती है।  क्य
ा बीएसएफ properly equipped है in terms 
of training and technology also?  सर, मȅ ओवरऑल यही कहना चाहता हूँ िक not only 
national security, बिÊक जो लोग बॉडर्र मȂ रह रहे हȅ, उनके  जीवन को आप इमेिजन कीिजए, 
बाकी बॉडर्र की समÎयाएं तो हȅ ही।   डर्ोन से जो डर्ग्स इधर भेजा जाता है, वह इध र आता है, 
उसके  बाद वह पूरे का पूरा गांव सील हो जाता है और वहां पर एक-एक घर को सचर् िकया जाता 
है, obviously for safety and security reasons.  जब तक आप इसके  िलए zero tolerance या 
zero intrusion policy नहीं  लाएँगे और यह practi cally possible है, तब तक यह समÎया खत्म 
नहीं होगी। हमारे पास िजतनी भी conventional technologies हȅ, वे high altitude technology 
की हȅ।  डर्ोन low altitude मȂ Äलाई करता है और low altitude मȂ Äलाई करने क े कारण यहाँ पर 
टेक्नोलॉजी को अपगर्ेड करना पड़ेगा।  यह एक ऐसी चीज है, िजसको आप वन शॉट मȂ एडर्ेस कर 
सकते हȅ और large nu
mber of equipm ents can be imported, लेिकन इस पर ध्यान देना 
पड़ेगा।  
सर, मȅ एक चीज और बता दूं िक पािकÎतान या कोई भी देश इसको हाईलाइट नहीं करना 
चाहेगा।  वह डर्ोन्स को िसफर् strategic purpose क े िलए यूज़ करेगा।  वह बम नहीं िगराने वाला 
है, rarest o
f the rare cases मȂ वह ऐसा करेगा, बाकी information को इधर भेजेगा, डर्ग्स 
भेजेगा, arms भेजेगा,  ammunitions भेजे गा  और terrorist activity क े िलए यूज़ करेगा, तािक 
सरकार की नजर मȂ न आए और वह यह continue करे।   
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
15

 
 
 
सर, मेरा सिÅमशन यह है िक proxy war का यही तरीका है।  इसको सरकार को एक 
शॉट मȂ ही करना चािहए।  Îपेशली पंजाब क े bordering area मȂ जो अमृतसर और तरनतारन है, 
यहां पर बहुत ज्यादा डर्ोन्स की एिक्टिवटीज हȅ।..(समय की घंटी)...  मȅ आपके  मा ध्यम  से 
सरकार से िरक्वेÎट करता हूँ िक यह doable है, इसिलए इसको िकया जाए।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Shri Sandeep Kumar Pa thak:- Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi  Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Prakash 
Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shri Saket Go khale (West Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala). 
 
Ǜी उपसापित : धन्यवाद, माननीय संदीप जी।  माननीय डा. िसकं दर क ुमार।  
 
Misleading facts related to Indian history mentioned in the Museum of Union Public 
Service Commission, New Delhi 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार ( िहमाचल Ģदेश) : मान्यवर, मȅ एक गंभीर िवषय की ओर आपका ध्यान 
िदलाना चाह
ता हूँ, जो िक भारत क े इितहास क े ऐितहािसक तथ्यȗ क े संबंध मȂ संघ लोक सेवा 
आयोग, नई िदÊली क े संगर्हालय मȂ उÊलेिखत इितहास क े तथ्यȗ क े ĥिमत Ģचार क े संदभर् मȂ है।  
इस संगर्हालय मȂ Ģदिर्शत इि
तहास मȂ महान योǉाओं और Ģशासकȗ क े योगदान क े बारे मȂ तथ्यȗ 
की गलत Ëयाख्या की गई है।  इनमȂ अलाउǈीन िखलजी, शेरशाह सूरी और मुगलȗ जैसे 
आकर्मणकािरयȗ को भारतीय इितहास मȂ सबसे महान योǉा और Ģशासक बताया गय ा है तथा 
भारतीय इितहास क े महान योǉाओं व Ģशासकȗ, गुÃत सĦाटȗ, चोल सĦाटȗ, िवजयनगर सĦाटȗ, 
मराठा सĦाटȗ आिद क े ऐितहािसक तथ्यȗ पर आधािरत योगदान का उÊलेख ही नहीं है, िजसके  
कारण इस संगर्हालय मȂ आने वाले भारतीय और िवदेशी आगंतुकȗ ǎारा गलत ऐितहािसक तथ्यȗ 
को सत्य मान कर भिवÍय की पीढ़ी को गलत संदेश जा रहा है।  इससे वतर्मान भारत मȂ सांÎकृ ितक 
और ऐित
हािसक ĥिमत तथ्यȗ का Ģचार होगा, िजसका असर आने वाले भिवÍय पर पड़ेगा।  
माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से भारत सरकार से आगर्ह करना चाहता 
हूँ िक भारतीय इितहास क े ऐितहािसक तथ्यȗ, जो िक संघ लोक सेवा आयोग क े संगर्हालय मȂ 
उÊलेिखत हȅ, उनका अिवलंब िनराकरण करवाया जाए और भारतीय इितहास क े महान योǉाओं 
व Ģशासकȗ, गुÃत सĦाटȗ, चोल सĦाटȗ, िवजयन
गर सĦाटȗ, मराठा सĦाटȗ आिद क े ऐितहािसक 
तथ्यȗ पर आधािरत असीम योगदान को रेखांिकत करवाया जाए, धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Dr. Sikander Kumar:-  Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Bhagwat 
Karad (Maharashtra), Dr. Sumer Singh So lanki (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Naresh 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Bansal (Uttarakhand), Dr. Anil Sukhdeor ao Bonde (Maharashtra), Shri Ram 
Chander Jangra (Haryana) and Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand).        
                                 
Concern over damage caused to crops by wild animals in Morni Hills area of Haryana 
 
Ǜी कािर्तके य शमार् ( हिरयाणा) : उपसभापित  महोदय, मȅ सदन का ध्यान हिरयाणा की मोरनी 
िहÊस क्षेतर् मȂ िकसानȗ ǎारा झेली जा रही एक गंभीर समÎया की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ।  
इस क्षेतर् मȂ जंगली जानवरȗ ǎारा फसलȗ की बबार्दी एक बहुत बड़ी चुनौती बन चुकी है। वहां वषș 
से िकसान इस समÎया से जूझ रहे हȅ, लेिकन अब िÎथित इतनी िवकट हो गई है िक िक
सानȗ का 
खेती करना किठन होता जा रहा है।  इन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ लगभग 393 गांव हȅ, 26 पंचाय तȂ हȅ और 22,000 
लोग रहते हȅ।  इनमȂ  करीब 65% लोग हÊदी, टमाटर और आलू जैसी सिÅजयȗ की खेती करते हȅ।   
महोदय, पहाड़ी क्षेतर् होने क े कारण यहां क े िकसान पहले से ही पानी की कमी से परेशान 
रहते हȅ और उनको इन समÎयाओं का सामना करते हुए भी िकसानी कर
नी पड़ती है। उसके  बाद, 
जब बड़ी मुिÌकलȗ से फसल खड़ी होती है, तो उनको जंगली जानवरȗ से नुकसान का डर बना 
रहता है।  इंिडयन काउंिसल आफ एगर् ीकÊचर िरसचर् ( आईसीएआर) ǎारा इंिडयन जनर्ल ऑफ 
ऐिनमल साइंसेज मȂ Ģकािशत एक अध्ययन क े अनुसार, हाथी और नीलगाय जैसे वन्य जीव 10 
राज्यȗ मȂ 30% से 50% तक अनाज और बागबानी फसलȗ को खा जाते हȅ या नÍट कर देते हȅ।  
हाल ही मȂ, "Ģधानमंतर्ी फसल बीमा योजना" की कव
रेज मȂ जंगली जानवरȗ क े हमले से होने वाले 
फसल नुकसान को भी शािमल िकया गया है।  यह सरकार का एक बहुत ही सकारात्मक कदम है, 
लेिकन िकसान और वन्य जीवȗ, दोनȗ क े िहतȗ की सुरक्षा क े िलए एक राÍटर् ीय रोकथाम नीित 
बनाने की अित आवÌयक जरूरत है, तािक फसल को नÍट होने से पहले ही बचाया जा सके । 
महोदय, हम इससे होने वाले आिर्थक नुकसान की बात करȂ या मानव-पशु संघषर् क े खतरे 
की बात करȂ, इस समÎया क े ऐसे कई गहरे Ģभाव हȅ।   एक िक
सान जब महीनȗ की मेहनत करके  
अपनी फसल खड़ी करता है और ऐन मौके  पर उसकी फसल नÍट हो जाती है, तो उसके  ऊपर जो 
आिर्थक तथा अन्य समÎयाएं आती हȅ, ये वही जानता है, इसिलए हमȂ उनका संज्ञान लेना चािहए।  
इस समÎया क े जो Ģमुख कारण हȅ, उनमȂ मुख्यतः वन क्षेतर् का िसमटना और संरक्षण उपायȗ की 
कमी है।   मȅ चाहे सोलर फ Ȃिंसग की बात करूं  या मजबूत बाड़ लगाने की बात करूं , ऐसे अनेक 
उपाय हȅ, िज
नसे इन समÎयाओं का समाधान िनकल सकता है। 
 महोदय, इस गंभीर समÎया का समाधान िनकालने क े िलए सोलर फ Ȃिंसग एक बहुत ही 
Ģभावी उपाय हो सकता है।  िवशेष वन्य जी व Ģबंधन क े िलए सरकार क े वन िवभाग और क ृिष 
िवभाग क े सहयोग से एक िवÎतृत योजना बनानी चािहए, िजससे जंगली जानवरȗ की बढ़ती 
संख्या पर भी िनयंतर्ण हो सके  और Ģशासन क े समन्वय क े साथ उनकी समÎया का संज्ञान भी 
िलया जा सके ।  इसके  साथ ही, जंगली जानवरȗ क े िलए वैकिÊपक भोजन इत्यािद मुहैया कराने 
की जरूरत  है और सामुदाियक भ
ागीदारी क े Îथानीय िनगरानी तंतर् को भी सक्षम करने की 
जरूरत है। 
महोदय, यह क ेवल मोरनी िहÊस क्षेतर् क े िकसानȗ की ही सम
Îया नहीं है, बिÊक िजन 
फॉरेÎट एिरयाज़ क े आसपास िकसानी होती है, वहां क े िकसानȗ को भी यही समÎयाएं झेलनी 
पड़ती हȅ।  अतः मेरा आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से अनुरोध है िक ...(समय की घं टी)... 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
17

 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Kartikeya Sharma: Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Dr . John Brittas (Kerala), and, Shri R. 
G i r i r a j a n  ( T a m i l  N a d u ) .          
  
Demand to revoke delisting of Indian Seafood Companies from EU and export 
restrictions to the Customs Union (Russian Federation) and United Kingdom 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh) :  Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
Sir, I rise to draw your attention to a grave issue concerning demand of Indian fish and 
shrimp export companies for revoking the de listing of Indian seafood companies from 
European Union, export restrictions for the Customs Union (Russian Federation) and 
the United Kingdom, and, significant challenges being faced by the shrimp industry 
currently. 
 Sir, for decades, the Indian shrimp in dustry has been a substantial contributor 
to the India’s economy.  The European Un ion remains one of the most promising 
markets for Indian seafood, particularly, th e shrimp, with its steady demand playing a 
crucial role in securing valuable foreign exchange for India. 
 Seafood Exporters Association of Indi a has appealed several times to the 
Government, explaining all the facts for relaxing Indian seafood companies from 
‘suspension orders’ imposed since 2017 by the European Union authorities on Indian 
seafood exporters.  It is to inform that no further action has been taken by the EU 
authorities to restore the EU status for the delisted Indian shrimp companies. 
 Some of the companies were already approved to export to the Customs 
Union (Russian Federation) by the Export Inspection Council (EIC), India.  The said 
companies are not yet listed in the Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary 
Surveillance (FSVPS) approved establishm ent list at Customs Union (Russian 
Federation).  On account of this, the appr oved companies are unable to export to 
Customs Union. 
 Some of the EU delisted companies ha ve been re-listed by the United 
Kingdom Health Authorities in their official websites on 30
th January, 2023.  However, 
these re-listed companies are not yet permitted to export to UK as the decision is still 
pending with the UK Government for further clearance.  Hon. Chairman, Sir, it is well 
aware that during the pandemic situation,  shrimp exporters fa ced several problems 
like congestion in operating ports at destination, etc. In this crucial situation, if 
permissions are granted to the seafood ex porters for exporting to European Union 
countries, Customs Union (Russian Federation) and the United Kingdom, it will be an 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
added advantage to the Indian exporters and to earn the foreign exchange to our 
country.  Hence, the hon. Chairman is requested for compassionate and urgent 
intervention to resolve the delisting matte r for restoring delisted shrimp export 
companies to export shrimp consignments  to European Union countries, UK and 
Russia for enhancing the market opportuniti es, strengthening the industry’s global 
reach and supporting the sustainable growth of Indian Seafood exports with key focus 
on shrimp.  Thank you, Sir.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the  matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha: Dr. Fauzia 
Khan  (Maharashtra),  Shri  R.  Girira jan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal) and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala). 
 Now, Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu on ‘Concern over Increasing Cases of 
Grabbing of NRIs’ Properties in our Country’; not present.  Shri Sanjay Singh on 
‘Concern over Social and Economic Conditions of Sick Workers of Coal India’. 
 
Concern over social and economic conditions of sick workers of Coal India 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली) : महोदय, आपने मुझे एक बहुत ही गÇभीर िवषय 
पर अपनी बात कहने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूं।  
मान्यवर, देश भर मȂ िबजली की आपूिर्त िजस थमर्ल पावर Ãलांट क े माध्यम से होती है, 
उसको संचािलत करने मȂ कोल इंिडया का और कोल इंिड
या क े मज़दूरȗ का बहुत महत्वपूणर् 
योगदान होता है। महोदय, मुझे याद है िक जब कोरोना का सम य था, उस वƪ भी कोल इंिडया ने 
अपना Ģोडक्शन बंद नहीं िकया था और मज़दूरȗ ने अपनी जान जोिखम मȂ डालकर देश क े अंदर 
िबजली की आपूिर्त बािधत न हो, इसके  िलए काम िकया।  
मान्यवर, कोल इंिडया का खुद का national Wages Act है, उस national Wages Act  
क े तहत यह साफ तौर पर िलखा गया है, उसका क्लॉज़ 9.4 कहता  है िक जो मज़दूर कोल 
इंिडया मȂ काम करते-करते गÇभीर रूप  से बीमार हो जाएगा, जैसे िकसी को क ȅसर की बीमारी, 
लीवर या िकडनी की गÇभीर बीमारी हो गई, तो उसके  िलए यह िन
यम बनाया गया िक उनके  
आिǛतȗ को नौकरी दी जाएगी और इन गÇभीर बीमािरयȗ क े िलए िचिकत्सकीय परीक्षण कोल 
इंिडया का मेिडकल बोडर् करेगा। लेिकन बहुत दुभार्ग्य की बात है िक 18 नवÇबर, 2017 - करीब 
सात साल से अिधक का समय हो गया है, आज तक वह मेिडकल बोडर् काम ही नहीं कर रहा है। वे 
जो मज़दूर हȅ, उन्हȗने कई बार महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी को Ģाथर्ना पतर् िलखा, कई बार आदरणीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को Ģाथर्ना पतर् िलख ा और कई बार कोयला मंतर्ी जी को Ģाथर्ना पतर् िलखा, उसके  
बाद वहां से जो िरÃलाई आया, वह भी संतोषजनक नहीं है, वह िरÃलाई भी उनके  पास था।  
 मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से िवनĦ अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक जब आपने 
उनके  िलए Wages Act बना रखे हȅ और यह िन
यम है िक जो लोग गÇभीर रूप  से बीमार हȗगे, 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
19

 
 
 
मेिडकल बोडर् उनका चेकअप करेगा और उनके  dependents को नौकरी दी जाएगी, तो उस 
मेिडकल बोडर् को 7 साल से क्यȗ बंद रखा गया है, वह क्यȗ काम नहीं कर रहा है? पहले तो 
इसकी जांच होनी चािहए और दोिषयȗ क े िखलाफ कारर्वाई होनी चा िहए और जो लोग राÍटर्पित 
जी को िचƻी िलखकर इच्छा मृत्यु की मांग कर चुक े हȅ, वे इस पिरिÎथित मȂ मरना चाहते हȅ, उन 
लोगȗ की तकलीफȗ पर ध्यान िदया जाए और मेिडकल जांच कराकर उनके  आिǛतȗ को अनुकÇपा 
िनयुिƪ दी जाए, कोल इंिडया मȂ नौकरी Ģदान की जाए, धन् यवाद।        
                                                                           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the  matter  raised  by  the  hon.  Member,  Shri  Sanjay  Singh:  Dr.  Fauzia  Khan 
(Maharashtra),  Shri  Haris  Beeran  (Kerala),  Shri  Sandosh  Kumar  P  (Kerala), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen 
(West Bengal), Shri Khiru Mahto (Bihar), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal),  
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Je bi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Ritabrata 
Banerjee (West Bengal),  Shri Imra n Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahi m (Kerala), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal),  and Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury (Telangana). 
 
Demand to include Lepcha, Bhutia and Limbu Language in the Eighth Schedule  
of the Constitution of India 
 
SHRI DORJEE TSHERING LEPCHA (Sikkim) :  The Government of Sikkim, since its 
merger with the Union of India, has taken a bold step towards promotion of languages 
in the State.  It is to place on record that the first democrat ically elected State 
Government had passed a historic Sikki m Official Languages Act, 1977 on 25
th 
October 1977 and adopted Nepali, Bhutia and Lepcha Languages as the State Official 
Languages of Sikkim and, thereafter, Li mbu language was also adopted as the 
Official State Language of Sikkim th rough the Sikkim Official Languages 
(Amendment) Act, 1981.  Moreover, with th e introduction of  Lepcha, Bhutia and 
Limbu languages in the school curriculum in the State, this language has been further 
extended to the Post-Graduate courses an d presently further extended to Ph.D. 
under Sikkim Central University .  News bulletin in All Indi a Radio, Gangtok, are being 
aired in these three languages.  Similarly, Sikkim Herald, a weekly newsletter, is also 
being published in these languages edition through Information and Public Relations 
Department, Government of Sikkim.  In addition, the Sikkim Legislative Assembly had 
also adopted the Resolution in the year 2008 for inclusion of Lepcha, Bhutia and 
Limbu languages in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India.   
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
       With this background, I take this pr ivilege to request the Government of India to 
kindly examine the proposal of the State Government for early inclusion of these three 
languages in the list of Eighth Schedule of the Constitution on top priority.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha:  Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Devendra Pratap Sing h (Chhattisgarh), Shri Khiru Mahto (Bihar) 
and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra).     
                                              
Demand to include traditional kitchen tips for home remedies in education  
system of the country 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी (उǄराखंड) : उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  समक्ष एक अत्यंत संवेदनशील 
और महत्वपूणर् िवषय ĢÎतुत करना चाहती हूं।  यह िवषय हमारे ÎवाÎथ्य, परंपरा और आने वाली 
पीिढ़यȗ क े भिवÍय से जुड़ा हुआ है।  आज क े आधुिनक दौर मȂ हम अपने पारंपिरक रसोई नुÎखȗ को 
भूलते जा रहे हȅ।  हम छो
टी-छोटी बीमािरयȗ और तकलीफȗ क े िलए दवाइयȗ पर िनभर्र होते जा 
रहे हȅ, जबिक हमारी भारतीय रसोई  हमेशा Ģाकृ ित क औषिधयȗ का खजाना रही है।   
 मान्यवर, हमारी रसोई मȂ उपयोग िकए जाने वाले पारंपिरक मसाले क ेवल Îवाद बढ़ाने क े 
िलए नहीं होते, बिÊक वे हमारे ÎवाÎथ्य क े िलए संजीवनी का काम भी करते हȅ।  उदाहरण क े रूप  
मȂ हÊदी, अदरक और लहसुन Ģाकृ ितक एंटीबायोिटक हȅ, जो शरीर को संकर्मण से बचाते हȅ।  
मेथी, जीरा और धिनया मȂ Ģचुर मातर्ा मȂ िवटािमन, खिनज और फाइबर होते हȅ, जो पाचन िकर्या 
को सुधारते हȅ।  हींग और अजवाइन पेट की समÎयाओं का रामबाण इलाज है। लहसुन और 
दालचीनी ǭदय को ÎवÎथ रखने, कोलेÎटर्ाल और रƪचाप को िनयंितर्
त करने मȂ सहायक हȅ।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, हम पारंपिरक नुÎखȗ को अपनाकर हम अपनी रोग-Ģितरोधक 
क्षमता को बढ़ा सकते हȅ, ǭदय ÎवाÎथ्
य क े िलए बेहतर बना सकते हȅ, डायिबटीज को िनयंितर्त 
कर सकते हȅ और मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य को भी सुदृढ़ कर सकते हȅ।  ये नुÎखे हमȂ क ेवल ÎवÎथ ही नहीं 
रखते, बिÊक पयार्वरण को संरिक्षत करने मȂ भी सहायक होते हȅ, क्यȗिक इनमȂ Ģाकृ ित और जैिवक 
सामगर्ी का उपयोग िक
या जाता है। अत: मेरा सदन क े माध्यम से सरकार से यह आगर्ह है िक 
परंपरागत रसोई नुÎखȗ को िशक्षा Ģणाली मȂ शािमल िकया जाए, Îकू Êस और कॉलेजȗ मȂ खाना 
पकाने क े Ëयावहािरक सतर् आयोिजत िकए जाएं और छातर्-छातर्ाओं को िसखाया जाए िक िकस 
Ģकार पारंपिरक नुÎखȗ का उपयोग करके  वे अपने ÎवाÎथ्य को बेहतर बना सकते हȅ। Ģाकृ ितक 
और जैिवक खाद पदाथș क े महत्व को समझाने क े िलए कायर्शालाओं का आयोजन िकया जाए।   
उपसभापित महोदय, हमारे पूवर्जȗ ने हमȂ जो ज्ञान िदया  है, उसे संरिक्षत रखना हमारा 
कतर्Ëय है।  अगर हम अपने पारंपिरक मसालȗ और नुÎखȗ को िशक्षा का िहÎसा  बनाएंगे, तो हम 
आने वाली पीिढ़यȗ को बीमारी से बचाने, उन्हȂ पोषण देने और मानिसक रूप  से सशƪ बनाने मȂ 
सफल हȗगे।  यह Ģाकृ ितक और िटकाऊ ÎवाÎथ्
य  की ओर एक कर्ांितकारी कदम होगा, धन्यवाद। 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
21

 
 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Kalpana Saini :  Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri Dhananjay Bh imrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri R. 
Girirajan  (Tamil  Nadu),  Shri  Ram  Chander  Jangra (Haryana), Shrimati Geeta 
alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shrima ti S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland),  
Dr.  Fauzia   Khan  (Maharashtra),  Shri  Sadanand  Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), 
Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Prades h), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Shrimati Darshana Singh (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (M aharashtra), Shrimati Maya Naroliya 
(Madhya Pradesh),  Shri Mayankbhai Jaydev bhai Nayak (Gujarat),  Shri Mahendra 
Bhatt (Uttarakhand), Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad (Bihar), Dr. Sangeeta Balwant (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Rwngwra Narzary (Assam ), Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya 
(Gujarat), Shrimati  Sangeeta Yadav (Utt ar Pradesh), and Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
(Uttar Pradesh).           
                                           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Shri Sanjay Seth.  Not present.  Shri Pramod Tiwari. 
 
Need to address the problem of substandard medicines in the country 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान) : उपसभापित महोदय, बाजार मȂ बढ़ती हुई घिटया दवाओं क े 
संदभर् मȂ मȅ एक सवाल उठाना चाहता हूं, िजससे करोड़ȗ लोग Ģभािवत हो रहे हȅ और उनकी मौत 
भी  हो रही है।  डर्ग क ंटर्ोलर जनरल ऑफ इंिडया की िरपोटर् है िक उन्हȗने जांच मȂ पाया िक देश मȂ 
िबक रही 50 दवाइयȗ क े नाम िदए  हȅ। ये दवाइयाँ घिटया Îतर की बन रही हȅ। इसमȂ पैरािसटामोल 
से लेकर Åल
ड Ģेशर, खांसी, मÊटी िवटािमन्स और क ैिÊशयम की दवाएं शािमल हȅ, िजनका 
इÎतेमाल लाखȗ लोग करते हȅ।  
महोदय, देश मȂ घिटया और नकली दवाओं का जाल फ ै ल रहा है। गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ घिटया 
दवाओं की अिधक चुनौितयाँ हȅ। 2022 की एक िरपोटर् क े अनुसार छोटे दव
ा िनमार्ताओं ǎारा िनिर्मत 
15 Ģितशत से अिधक दवाइयाँ गुणवǄा परीक्षण मȂ िवफल रही हȅ। छोटे दवा िनमार्ता गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ 
पर ज्यादा फोकस करते हȅ। महोदय, घिटया दव ाएं सावर्जिनक ÎवाÎथ्य क े िलए गंभीर खतरा हȅ। 
घिटया दवाओं क े सेवन से मृत्यु हो जाती है। एक अनुमान क े अनुसार उत्पािदत की जा रही 
दवाओं मȂ 12-25 Ģितशत तक िमलावटी, घिटया या नकली दवाएं हो सकती हȅ। 2023 मȂ ‘ जन 
िवÌव
ास िवधेयक’ मȂ िकए गए संशोधन क े िनयम 27 ( डी) क े तहत मानक गुणवǄा (एनएसक्यू) 
क े तहत न होने वाली दवाओं की सजा को क ंपाउंिंडग अपराधȗ मȂ क ंवटर् करने की अनुमित दी गई 
है। सर, वे लोग सजा को क ंपाउंिंडग अपराध मȂ पिरविर्तत करा देते हȅ, इसि लए यह इतना बढ़ रहा 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
है। िनमार्ता अब अपराध क े बदले जुमार्ना भर सकते हȅ, लेिकन अगर सजा हो, तो शायद लोग बच 
जाएंगे। मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक सरकार क े अनुसार इससे िनमार्ताओं का उत्पीड़न कम होगा, 
जबिक आलोचकȗ का कहना है िक इससे घिटया दवाइयाँ मुǈािवहीन बन रही हȅ। वे करोड़ȗ लोगȗ 
की तरफ नहीं देख रहे हȅ, बिÊक पैसे वाले लोग, जो इन्हȂ बना रहे हȅ, उन
की ओर देख रहे हȅ। 
ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी, मȅ यह आपके  िलए कह रहा हूं िक िरपोटर् क े अनुसार सरकारी अÎ पताल मȂ 
सबसे ज्यादा, लगभग 38 परसȂट घिटया दवाएं ĢेÎकर्ाइब की जा रही हȅ, िमल रही हȅ। मȅ इस सदन 
क े माध्यम से सरकार से आगर्ह करता हूं िक घिटया दवाइयȗ क े बारे मȂ Ëयापक जागरूकता  
अिभयान चलाने क े साथ-साथ दवाओं की िनमार्ण Îतर पर भी पयार्Ãत गुणवǄा सुिनिÌ
चत की जाए। 
अगर मȅ यह कहूं िक यह 2015 से बढ़ा है, तो वह बात भी आंकड़े बोल रहे हȅ, मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूं। 
महोदय, मेरा िसफर् यह कहना है िक यह एक ऐसा सवाल है, जो 14 0 करोड़ लोगȗ क े साथ सीधा 
जुड़ा हुआ है, गर्ामीण लोगȗ क े साथ सीधा जुड़ा हुआ है और जो क ंपाउंिंडग की गई है, उसके  बाद 
यह आंकड़ा और भी बढ़ा है। क्यȗिक माननीय नेता सदन ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी भी हȅ, इसिलए मेरा आपके  
माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से िवनĦ अनुरोध है, यही आगर्ह है िक है िक इस िवषय पर िसफर् 
जवाब न दȂ, करोड़ȗ लोगȗ की जान से न खेलȂ, अिपतु उिचत Ģबंध करȂ।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Pra
mod Tiwari:  Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), 
Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Suje et Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Ritabrata Banerjee (West 
Bengal), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Mahar ashtra), Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar 
(Karnataka), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Keral a), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Anil 
Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal). 
 
Demand to expedite railway projects under Ambala Railway Division 
 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA (Haryana): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I wish to draw the 
attention of the House to crucial infras tructure projects under Ambala Railway 
Division.  On Februrary 26, 2024, hon. Prim e Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, virtually 
laid the foundation-stone for seven Rail Ov er Bridge and Rail Under Bridge projects 
with a total investment of Rs.150.48 cror e.  These projects are aimed to eliminate 
manned level crossings, enhancing rail way safety and improving operational 
efficiency.  One of the key projects is in  Yamuna Nagar and many regions are eagerly 
waiting for the timely completion of the crucial infrastructure development. 
 Sir, through you, I wish to ask the hon. Minister of Railways: What is the 
current status of these projects? Are they progressing as per planned timeline? What 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
23

 
 
 
steps are being taken to ensure that these projects are completed on time to provide 
safer and more efficient rail and road connect ivity? I urge the Government to expedite 
these projects and ensure that the people benefited from improved transportation 
infrastructure at the earliest. Thank you.       
                           
Demand to establish a Centre of Excellence in Nursing Education in Kerala 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, it is a request to 
establish a Centre of Excellen ce in nursing education in Kerala. I am very happy that 
the hon. Union Health Minister is present here.   
 Kerala is always known as the best  State of professional nurses.  Our 
institutions are also well-known. As far as training is concerned, our institutions are 
always keeping a very high standard.  But,  the problem is that there are only 7,300 
seats in Kerala for nursing education.  So, comparing with demand, these seats are 
very less in number.  
 Our request is to give more and more seats to Kerala, start more and more 
colleges, and to start a Center of Excellenc e in Nursing profession. The migration of 
Kerala nurses to other countries, especially  the European Union, GCC started long 
ago, way back in 1960s. Even now this de mand is at a rise, always. But, we are 
nowhere to adjust to the aspirants in this field. And, our students are compelled to 
take this education from other States, especi ally neighbouring States and institutions, 
where the standard is not th at much high. I am not blam ing any other institutions.  
But, in this field, private institutions are not offering that much standard. So, I 
request, through you, Siir, to take it very seriously.  This also contributes to our 
economy in a bigger way, increase more and more seats in Kerala and start a Center 
of Excellence in Nursing field. Thank you, Sir.         
                                                                           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri  Sandosh Kumar P:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) 
and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala).   
      Now, Ms. Sushmita Dev--Need to ensure human conditions for workers working 
in hazardous industries. Hon. Member, no t present. Shri Debashish Samantaray--
Demand for Declaring Puri Ratha Yatra as National Holiday. 
 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Demand for declaring Puri Ratha Yatra as a National Holiday 
 
SHRI DEBASHISH SAMANTARAY (Odisha) : Jai Jagannath! Sir, I am sure, all of us 
here have visited or heard about Puri Ratha Ya tra. It is very surprising that there is a 
national holiday on Mahavir Jayanti and on many other functions. This is the 
international Ratha Yatra where, over a period of 7-8 days, lakhs and lakhs of 
devotees attend.  It is a sp iritual movement of India. An d, this happens not once in 
100 years, but every year. An d, the Ratha Yatra is not only held in Puri, but held 
everywhere in this country, right from De lhi to Ahmedabad to West Bengal, London, 
Los Angeles and Paris. Do not we all think--all of you should agree with me-- that the 
day of Ratha Yatra should become a nation al holiday!  With the blessings of Lord 
Jagannath, Modi 3.0 is sitting in Delhi.  
 
The hon. Chair is aware that this is su ch a sensitive issue not only for Odisha 
and Bengal but also for the whole world. An d, Lord Jagannath is called the Lord of 
the World. The word ‘Jagannath’ comes fr om the Ratha Yatra.  In the late 18
th 
Century, when a British officer recorded the Ratha Yatra, he had mentioned, this is a 
real juggernaut. Therefore, in the interest of the whole nation, let Puri Ratha Yatra day 
be declared a national holiday. Thank you, Sir.           
                                                                                                         
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri De bashish Samantaray:  Shrimati Sulata Deo 
(Odisha), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Beng al), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West 
Bengal) and Shri Ritabrata Banerjee (West Bengal).                                                            
 Shri Sanjay Seth--Concern over the rise in medical malpractice that leads to 
people being overcharged.  
 
Concern over the rise in medical malpractice that leads to people being overcharged 
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ (उǄर Ģदेश) : सर, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से इंÌयोरȂस क ंपनीज़ और हॉिÎपटÊस 
ǎारा की जा रही अनैितक लूट की ओर सरकार का ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ। आज देश 
भर मȂ अÎपतालȗ और बीमा क ंपिनयȗ की िमलीभगत से बीमा धारकȗ क े इलाज की लागत बढ़ाई जा 
रही है। एक ही ऑपरेशन क े िलए अÎ
पताल िबना पैनल वाले मरीजȗ से 40,000 रुपय े लेता है, 
लेिकन बीमा धारक ȗ क े साथ वही िबल 65,000 कर िदया जाता है। इससे बीमा क ंपिनयȗ को ज्यादा 
भुगतान करना पड़ता है और अÎपताल एवं बीमा क ंपनीज़, दोनȗ फायदा उठा रही हȅ। बीमा 
क ंपनीज़ ǎारा क्लेम की सीकर्े सी मȂ भी बहुत देरी की जा रही है और अनावÌयक कटौती क े साथ 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
25

 
 
 
मरीजȗ का आिर्थक नुकसान हो रहा है। 2024 मȂ 26,000 करोड़ रुपए  क े हेÊथ इंÌयोरȂस क्लेÇस 
क ȅिसल कर िदए गए हȅ। यह भी देखा गया है िक क ैशलेस क्लेम की मंजूरी देने मȂ बीमा क ंपिनयȗ 
को छ: घंटे से अिधक का समय लगता है, जबिक आईआरडीएआई क े िदशा-िनदȃशȗ क े अनुसार, 
इसे एक घंटे मȂ पूरा करन
ा चािहए। इसके  अलावा, मेिडकल उपकरण और दवाइयाँ थोक मȂ 25 से 
30% छू ट पर िमलती हȅ, जबिक अÎपतालȗ से बीमा क ंपिनयȗ को पूरा एम आरपी िमल रहा है, तो 
इससे उन्हȂ 25 से  30 परसȂट और ज्यादा पेमȂट िमलती है। इन सब को देखते हुए, मȅ सरकार को 
ध्यान िदलाना चाहता हूँ िक वह सभी अÎपतालȗ मȂ इला ज क े िलए एक Îटȅडडर् रेट का 
हॉिÎपटलाइजेशन तय करे, तािक बीमा धारकȗ और िबना बीमा वाले मरीजȗ क े साथ भेदभाव न 
हो। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Sanjay Seth : Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and 
Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha). धन्यवाद, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया।  Now, Question Hour. 
 
 
 
12.00 Noon 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
ODF sustainability 
 
* 61.  DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: Will the Minister of JAL SHAKTI be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government has chaire d a meeting recently to assess the 
implementation status towards achi eving Open Defecation Free (ODF) 
plus model status and progress of the Swachh Bharat Mission-Grameen 
(SBM-G), in the State of Himachal Pradesh; 
(b)   if so, the details thereof; 
(c)  the details of villages which have  been declared ODF Plus in the State ; 
and 
(d) whether Government has made an y strategy in centrally sponsored 
scheme to address identified gaps, ensuring the functionality of Solid and 
Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) assets to sustain and improve 
sanitation outcomes in the State of Himachal Pradesh? 
 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
THE MINISTER OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI C. R. PATIL) : (a) to (d) A statement is laid 
on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Hon’ble Minister of Jal Sh akti, Shri C.R.Patil has taken review 
meeting with Hon’ble Minister Incharge of Rural Sanitation  in the State of Himachal 
Pradesh on 3rd December, 2024 at New Delhi. He highlighted the need for the State to 
thoroughly assess its current ground realitie s, address existing gaps by developing 
the necessary infrastructure, and strive to achieve the objectives outlined under the 
Mission. 
 
 (c) 16,125 villages have declared th emselves Open Def ecation Free (ODF) 
Plus (Aspiring-1,497, Rising-558 and Mode l-14,070) upto 6-2-2025 in the Himachal 
Pradesh.  No. of SLWM Assets created in Himachal Pradesh are as under :- 
 
No. of 
Waste 
Collection & 
Segregation 
Sheds 
No. of 
Community 
Compost 
Pits 
No. of 
House-
hold 
Compost 
Pits 
No. of 
Vehicles 
for 
collection 
of 
Garbage 
 
No. of 
Community 
Soak pits 
No. of 
House- 
hold  
Soak  
pits 
No. of 
Kitchen 
Garden 
Phytorid/ 
DEWATS/  
Wetlands/ 
Duckweed 
 Ponds 
No. of 
Waste 
Stabilisation 
Ponds  
(WSPs) 
6532 8236 125782 4967 7903 133310 781276 2158 620 
 
(d) Sanitation is State subject, Departme nt of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
provides Financial & technical support to States. Phase II of Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Grameen) [SBM(G)] is being implemented during the period from 2020-21 to 2025-
26, with the focus on Open Defecation Free  (ODF) sustainability and to cover all the 
villages with solid and liquid waste management i.e. converting the villages from ODF 
to ODF Plus (Model). The scheme is bein g implemented in rural areas of Country 
including Himachal Pradesh.  
 
Realising that the task of constructing toilets is a continuous process and not a 
one time activity, as there are continuo usly new emerging households, migrant 
households etc. which will require Toilets, co nstruction of new Individual House Hold 
Latrines (IHHLs) continues to be the first charge on SBM(G) funds under Phase-II of 
SBM(G) and states are advised continuously to plan for left out toilets and address 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
27

 
 
 
this gap on priority. State has prepared Operation & Maintenance (O & M) Policy. 
Module for functionality of SLWM assets  has been developed. States including 
Himachal Pradesh are directed to convert dysfunctional SLWM assets to functional.  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR :  W i t h  y o u r  p e r m i s s i o n ,  S i r ,  I  w o u l d  l i k e  t o  k n o w  f r o m  t h e  
hon. Minister as to whether the Government has made any strategy to identify the 
loopholes in the schemes of rural sanitati on across the country and the approach in 
which the Government ensures community participation in waste management 
initiative under SBM-G.  
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल :  माननीय उपसभापित जी, यह Îवच्छता अिभयान 2014 से शुरू  हुआ है।  
उसके  अंदर 38 परसȂट टॉयलेट्स बने हुए थे।  उसके  बाद पांच साल क े अंदर ये क
रीब  100 परसȂट 
तक पहुंच गए हȅ।  इस Îकीम मȂ राज्य सरकारȗ क े साथ भागीदारी से क Ȃ दर् सरकार इसमȂ तकनीकी 
और आिर्थक सहायता देती है।  जब राज्य सरकार की ओर से डीपीआर बनकर आता है, तो 
डीपीआर मंजूर होने क े बाद आिर्थक सहायता दी जाती है।  िफर इनका िबल आता है, जब वे 
वेिरिफके शन करके  हमȂ भेजते हȅ और उसके  आधार पर उसको काउंट िकया जाता है।  एसबीएम 
क े आधार पर बने हुए टायलेट्स की काउंिंट
ग करना और उनकी देखभाल करना, ये राज् य 
सरकार क े क्षेतर् मȂ आता है।  िफर भी हमारी ओर से टाÎक फोसर् बनाकर हम भी उसे चेक करते हȅ 
िक उसकी क्वािलटी क ैसी है और वह िकस तरह से बना हुआ है?  इसके  बारे मȂ भी हम जांच 
करते हȅ।  जहां जगह नहीं है, वहां पर कÇयुिनटी टॉयलेट्स  बनाए  जाते  हȅ।  उनकी देखभाल क े 
िलए भी पैसा िदया जाता है।  यह अभी तक 100 परसȂट बना है, मगर लाÎट ईय र  मȂ हमने एक 
अिभयान छेड़ा था, िजसमȂ जो नए घर बने थे, उनके  अंदर करीब 3.5 लाख टॉयलेट्स देने थे।  
उनको भी 20 िदन क े अंदर सȅक्शन करके , वहां भी टॉयलेट्स बनाने का काम शुरू  हुआ है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supple
mentary question; Dr. Sikander Kumar.  
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR : Sir, my second supplementary question is this. Has the 
Government provided any financial assistan ce to Himachal Pradesh for construction 
of community sanitary complexes, and if so, the details thereof?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister; it is a very pointed question.  
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल : माननीय उपसभापित जी, िहमाचल और पूरे देश क े सभी ... 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
Ǜी सभापित : सर, सभापित। 
 
SHRI C. R. PATIL: Sorry, Sir! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Because if I lose my status, I must lose it either voluntarily or by time 
of flux or by removal.  
 
SHRI C. R. PATIL: Sorry Sir!  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : One process was already initiated from this side to seek my 
removal. There is no other way. So be kind to me. You are a nice man. Go ahead. 
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल :  सर, पूरे देश क े सभी राज्यȗ क े अंदर एसबीएम क े आधार पर टॉयलेट्स 
बनाए गए हȅ।  िहमाचल मȂ भी Îटेट की ओर जो डीपीआर बनकर आया है, उसका कायर् पूरा िकया 
गया है।  उसके  िलए उन
को आिर्थक सहायता भी दी गई है।  वहां पर भी पूरा काम हुआ है।  हमने 
अभी एक महीने पहले वहां क े अिधकािरयȗ और मंतर्ी जी क े साथ मीिंटग की थी और उन्हȗने 
बताया िक वहां िकतन
ी Ģोगर्ेस हुई है और िकसी तरह से उसको मेन्टेन िकया जा रहा है।  इस 
संबंध मȂ उनसे चचार् करके  िरपोटर् भी ली गई है और वहां काम संतोषजनक पाया गया है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplem
entary question, Dr. Fauzia Khan.  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN:   Sir, an ODF Plus village is defi ned as one that sustains its Open 
Defecation Free status, ensures solid and liquid waste management and is visually 
clean with plastic waste disposal being the key component. According to a 2024 
Standing Committee Report, only 950 out of 3,700 planned blocks have these plastic 
waste management units and linkages to ur ban facilities. Major States like Assam, 
Bihar, Gujarat and Maharashtra have PWMUs  in very few blocks. What specific steps 
is the Committee taking to ensure that Stat es expedite the installation of PWMUs and 
whether additional financial or technical  support mechanism being considered to 
speed up implementation? Sir, furthermore,  with door-to-door waste collection and 
segregation being critical to maintainin g ODF plus status, how is the Committee 
ensuring proper monitoring, including physical verification of this facility, in certified 
villages? And, how frequently are these in spections conducted to track performance 
and progress? 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
29

 
 
 
Ǜी सी.आर. पािटल : माननीय सभापित जी, SBM क े अंतगर्त जो टायलेट्स बनते हȅ, उनमȂ तीन 
अलग-अलग Ģकार क े models हȅ।  इन तीनȗ models क े अंदर अभी तक जो गाँव हȅ, उनमȂ 
आकांक्षी मȂ लगभग 1,20,336 गाँवȗ मȂ काम हुआ है; जो उभरते गाँव हȅ, उन 'Rising'  मȂ भी 8 
हजार क े ऊपर काम हुआ है और 'Model' मȂ 4,34,812 यूिनट्स बनी हȅ।  पहले ODF Plus गाँवȗ 
क े साथ क ु ल िमला कर 5,63,242 गाँवȗ मȂ इस तरह का काम हुआ है।  हमारा टारगेट था िक पहले 
टॉयलेट बनना चािहए।  टॉयलेट बनने क े बाद दूसरा टारगेट यह था िक उसके  अंदर जो तरल 
और जो कचरा िनकलता है, उसको ठीक से िनकालने की ËयवÎथा होनी चािहए।  उसके  अंदर 
तीसरा टारगेट यह था िक गाँवȗ मȂ कह ीं  भी ÃलािÎटक नहीं िदखना चािहए, साथ मȂ गाँव की सफाई 
भी होनी चािहए और उनकी दीवारȗ क े ऊपर उसका advertisement भी होना चािहए, िजसमȂ 
Îवच्छता क े िलए आगर्ह भी होना चािहए।  इस तरह क े advertisements वहाँ पर होने चािहए, इस 
Ģकार से हम गाँव क े अंदर उसका ODF Plus model तैयार करते हȅ।  यहाँ पर अभी जो 100 
परसȂट गाँव ODF Plus बने हȅ, इसमȂ उन्हȗने खुद अपने आप को ODF Plus declare िकया है।  
इसे सरकार ने declare नहीं िकया है।  गाँवȗ ने अपने आप को ODF Plus declare िकया है।  
उन्हȗने इसमȂ ठहराव पर काम िकया, राज्य सरकार को उसकी कॉपी भेजी, िफर राज्
य सरकार ने 
उसे क ेन्दर् सरकार को भेजा, उसके  आधार पर उनको upgrade िकया गया है।  उसके  अंदर यह 
बहुत अच्छा काम हुआ है।  उसके  ऊपर हमारा ध्यान भी है िक ठीक से उसको maintain िकया  
जाए।  उसके  िलए भी योजना बनी है िक िजस गाँव क े अंदर कोई टॉयलेट बहुत अच्छा बना होता 
है, उसके  अगल-बगल मȂ को
ई फ ू ल वगैरह लगाता है, उसको colour करता है, अच्छे से 
maintain करता है, उसके  िलए भी उसको क ु छ ईनाम िदया जाए।  हम लोग इस तरह का 
आयोजन भी कर रहे हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No
w, forth supplementary, Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil.  
 
SHRIMATI RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL:  Sir, my specific question to the hon. Minister 
is: What measures is the Government taking to address the issue of water scarcity in 
rural areas of the country where the implem entation of ODF plus and Swachh Bharat 
Mission-Gramin is being hindered by limited water availability? 
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल : माननीय सभापित जी, पानी की समÎया को हल करने क े िलए जल जीवन 
िमशन क े साथ अनेक योजनाएँ बना कर हम काम कर रहे हȅ।  Îवच्छता और जल जीवन िमशन, ये 
दोनȗ हमारे मंतर्ालय क े ही काम हȅ, इसिलए मȅ इन दोनȗ को जोड़ कर बता रहा हूँ।  O
DF का काम 
करीब-करीब 100 परसȂट हुआ है।  उसके  अंदर भी गाँवȗ मȂ जो पा नी की कमी है, उसके  िलए हमने 
राज्य सरकार से आगर्ह िकया है िक जल जीवन िमशन क े उपरांत जहाँ से पानी िमल सकता है, 
ground water से या surface water से, उसके  िलए पानी की ËयवÎथा करȂ, तािक उसके  ऊपर 
एक टȅक लग जाए।  हम भी उसके  ऊपर यह सोच रहे हȅ िक उसको टȅक क े िलए भी अितिरƪ 
मदद कर दी जाए, तािक वे टॉयलेट को साफ-सुथरा भी रख सकȂ और Îवच्छ
ता का जो हमारा 
आगर्ह है, िज
सके  िलए हम उसको Îवच्छ रखना चाहते हȅ, उसके  िलए पानी की जो आवÌयकता 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
है, उसकी पूिर्त भी वहाँ पर हो जाए।  हम उसके  िलए पूरी कोिशश कर रहे हȅ और वह पूरी हो भी 
रही है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, fifth supplementary, Shrimati Kiran Choudhry.  
SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY: Sir, I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether the 
Government is conducting any awareness campaigns to educate rural population 
about proper waste segregation and disposal  practices and also whether there is any 
capacity building programs and financial assistance to Panchayati Raj institutions. 
 
Ǜी सी. आर. पािटल : माननीय  सभापित जी, इसमȂ यह जो 100 परसȂट काम हुआ है, वह 
जागरूकता  होने क े कारण ही हुआ है।  आपने देखा होगा, इस कायर्कर्म क े कारण पहले 5 साल क े 
अंदर 10 करोड़ टॉयलेट्स बने थे और दूसरे फ े ज क े अंदर भी और दो करोड़ टॉयलेट्स बनने क े 
कारण अभी तक 12 करोड़ टॉयलेट्स बन चुक े हȅ। 
 महोदय, वहाँ िसफर् टॉ
यलेट्स ही नहीं बने हȅ, परन्तु इसका लाभ लेने वाले जो लोग हȅ, जो 
लोग शौच क े िलए बाहर जाते थे, वैसे करीब 60 करोड़  लोगȗ को अब शौच िकर्या क े िलए बाहर 
जाने की बजाय, टॉयलेट का उपयोग करने की आदत बनी है।  टॉयलेट का उपयोग करने से 
Îवाभािवक रूप  से ही Îव
च्छता बन रही है।  इसके  साथ ही उससे एक और बहुत बड़ा फायदा भी 
हुआ है।  अभी जो 3 मिहला सांसदȗ ने ĢÌन िकये, उन तीनȗ मिहला सांसदȗ को मȅ कहना चाहूंगा 
िक पहले मिहलाओं को शौच क े िलए जो बाहर जा
ना पड़ता था, अंधेरे की राह देखनी पड़ती थी 
और पूरी गंदगी अपने शरीर क े अंदर रखनी पड़ती थी, उसकी वजह से उनके  शरीर मȂ बीमािरयां 
भी होती थीं, वहां पर इस अिभयान क े कारण उनको उससे मुिƪ िमली है।   
 जब वे अंधेरे मȂ शौ
च क े िलए बाहर जाती थीं, तो उनकी िसक् योिरटी  का भी ĢÌन सामने 
आता था।  इससे उस िवषय मȂ भी उनको फायदा हुआ है।  WHO की िरपोटर् यह कहती है िक इस 
Îवच्छता अिभयान क े कारण करीब-करीब 3 लाख बिच्चयȗ की जान बची है।  WHO की िरपोटर् 
यह कह रही है, तो इस तरह से यह एक बहुत बड़ा काम हुआ है।  पहले जान की कोई कीमत नहीं 
होती थी, लेिकन इस Îवच्
छता अिभयान क े कारण इतना बड़ा काम हुआ है, मुझे लगता है िक यह 
सतत चलने वाला काम है, यह continuous चलने वाला काम है।  उसको िकस तरह से maintai n 
िकया जाए, इसके  िलए हम राज्य सरकारȗ क े साथ िमल कर उसको आगे भी बढ़ा रहे हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have rightly noticed all the three supplementary questions were 
from distinguished women parliamentarians. 
 Now, Q.No.62. 
 
Number of operational airports in the country 
 
*62.    SHRI SHAMBHU SHARAN PATEL: Will the Minister of CIVIL AVIATION be 
pleased to state:- 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
31

 
 
 
(a)   the number of airports along with the number of operational airports in the  
country, the details for the recent past and number of airports built during 
the last three years along with the number of airports currently operational 
in the country, State-wise details thereof; 
(b)  the budget for aviation sector fo r the recent past alon g with the current 
budget for the sector; 
(c) details of the steps taken by Government to ensure safety of aviation 
sector during the last three years; and 
(d)  the number of airports proposed to be built in the country especially in the 
State of Bihar, details thereof, State-wise? 
 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION  (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU) : (a) to 
(d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a)  As on date, there are 159 operational airports in the country. The State/ 
UT-wise list of these airports is at Annexure. During the last three years, the four (4) 
Greenfield Airports namely, Itanagar (H ollongi), Mopa (Goa), Shivamogga and 
Rajkot (Hirasar) have been built and operationalized. 
 
(b) No budgetary support per se is given by Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) 
for developing aviation-related activitie s like Airports, Cargo, Ground Handling, 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO), Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) etc. 
Aviation infrastructure and service enhanc ements, are generally funded by airport 
operators including the Airports Authority of  India (AAI), and other entities such as 
airlines, from their own resources. However,  the budget expenditure of MoCA in the 
Financial Year (FY) 2023-24  was Rs.2757.40 crore, which included capex for 
Regional Connectivity Scheme - Ude De sh Ka Aam Nagrik (RCS-UDAN), the 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) for Dr ones Scheme, Air India Debt Repayment, 
Salaries & other office expenses. The Budg et Estimate for the current FY 2024-25 is 
Rs.2357.14 crore, while the Revised Estima te for FY 2024-25 stands at Rs.2658.68 
crore. 
 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
(c) Over the past three years, the Di rectorate General of Civil Aviation 
(DGCA), the safety regulator of the count ry, has implemented several measures to 
bolster aviation safety.  These include: 
 
-DGCA maintains a robust safety oversight system, to monitor compliance with Rules 
and Civil Aviation Requirements (CARs). This process includes routine surveillance, 
spot checks, regulatory and special audits. 
-DGCA publishes an Annual Surveillance Pl an (ASP) to guide surveillance and spot 
checks across various technical areas. 
 
-Findings from audits, surveillance activitie s, and spot checks are rigorously followed 
up with the concerned operators.  Complian ce with corrective actions is verified, and 
observations are closed only after thor ough review.  Subsequent audits and 
surveillances also check the ongoing effectiveness of these actions. 
-DGCA takes enforcement action, including financial penalties, against operators 
found to be in violation of regulations or non-compliant during audits or surveillance. 
-Accident and incident data are regularly analyzed. Based on the analysis, safety 
information and recommendations are disseminated through Safety Circulars and 
advisories. 
-Recommendations from accident and incident investigation reports are implemented 
to address identified safety gaps and prevent similar incidents. 
 
(d) Government of India has accorded 'In-Principle'' approval for setting up of 
21 Greenfield Airports across the country name ly Mopa in Goa, Navi Mumbai, Shirdi 
and Sindhudurg in Maharashtra, Kalabura gi, Vijayapura, Hassan and Shivamogga in 
Karnataka, Dabra (Gwalior) in Madhya Pr adesh, Kushinagar and Noida (Jewar) in 
Uttar Pradesh, Dholera and Rajkot (Hirasar) in Gujarat, Karaikal in Puducherry, 
Dagadarthi , Bhogapuram and Oravakal (Kur nool) in Andhra Pradesh, Durgapur in 
West Bengal, Pakyong in Sikkim, Kannur in  Kerala and Itanagar (Hollongi) in 
Arunachal Pradesh, as per GFA Policy, 2008. Ou t of these, 12 Greenfield airports viz. 
Durgapur, Shirdi, Kannur, Pakyong, Kalabu ragi, Orvakal (Kurnool),  Sindhudurg, 
Kushinagar, Itanagar (Hollongi), Mopa, Shivamogga and Rajkot (Hirasar) have been 
operationalised. 
 
In Bihar, AAI has undertaken action for development of new Civil Enclaves at 
Bihta and Purnea Air Force Stations.      
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
33

 
 
 
Annexure  
S. 
NO. 
STATE / UT NAME OF AIRPORT 
1 A&N ISLAND (UT) PORT BLAIR 
2 ANDHRA PRADESH KADAPA   
3 ANDHRA PRADESH KURNOOL 
4 ANDHRA PRADESH RAJAHMUNDRY 
5 ANDHRA PRADESH TIRUPATI 
6 ANDHRA PRADESH VIJAYAWADA 
7 ANDHRA PRADESH VISAKHAPATNAM 
8 ARUNACHAL PRADESH DONYI POLO (ITANAGAR) 
9 ARUNACHAL PRADESH PASSIGHAT (CE) 
10 ARUNACHAL PRADESH TEZU  
11 ARUNACHAL PRADESH ZIRO 
12 ASSAM DIBRUGARH (MOHANBARI) 
13 ASSAM GUWAHATI  (LGBI) 
14 ASSAM JORHAT  
15 ASSAM LILABARI (NORTH LAKHIMPUR) 
16 ASSAM RUPSI 
17 ASSAM SILCHAR  
18 ASSAM TEZPUR  
19 BIHAR DARBHANGA 
20 BIHAR GAYA 
21 BIHAR PATNA 
22 CHANDIGARH (UT) CHANDIGARH 
23 CHHATTISGARH AMBIKAPUR 
24 CHHATTISGARH BILASPUR 
25 CHHATTISGARH JAGDALPUR 
26 CHHATTISGARH RAIPUR 
27 DAMAN & DIU (UT) DIU 
28 DELHI (UT) DELHI , IGI AIRPORT 
29 DELHI (UT) SAFDARJUNG  
30 GOA GOA 
31 GOA MOPA 
32 GUJARAT AHMEDABAD (SVBPI) 
33 GUJARAT BHAVNAGAR 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
34 GUJARAT BHUJ  
35 GUJARAT JAMNAGAR 
36 GUJARAT KANDLA 
37 GUJARAT KESHOD (JUNAGARH) 
38 GUJARAT MUNDRA 
39 GUJARAT PORBANDAR 
40 GUJARAT RAJKOT (HIRASAR) 
41 GUJARAT SABARMATI RIVER FRONT (WA) 
42 GUJARAT STATUE OF UNITY (WA) 
43 GUJARAT SURAT 
44 GUJARAT VADODARA 
45 HARYANA HISAR 
46 HIMACHAL PRADESH KANGRA (GAGGAL) 
47 HIMACHAL PRADESH KULLU MANALI (BHUNTAR) 
48 HIMACHAL PRADESH MANDI(H) 
49 HIMACHAL PRADESH RAMPUR(H) 
50 HIMACHAL PRADESH SHIMLA 
51 JAMMU & KASHMIR (UT) JAMMU  
52 JAMMU & KASHMIR (UT) SRINAGAR 
53 JHARKHAND DEOGHAR 
54 JHARKHAND JAMSHEDPUR 
55 JHARKHAND RANCHI 
56 KARNATAKA BELAGAVI 
57 KARNATAKA BENGALURU (BIAL) 
58 KARNATAKA BENGALURU (HAL) 
59 KARNATAKA BIDAR 
60 KARNATAKA HUBBALLI 
61 KARNATAKA JINDAL VIJAYANAGAR 
62 KARNATAKA KALABURAGI 
63 KARNATAKA MANGALURU 
64 KARNATAKA MYSURU 
65 KARNATAKA SHIVAMOGGA 
66 KERALA CALICUT 
67 KERALA COCHIN (CIAL) 
68 KERALA KANNUR (KIAL) 
69 KERALA THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
35

 
 
 
70 LADAKH (UT) LEH 
71 LAKSHDWEEP (UT) AGATTI 
72 MADHYA PRADESH BHOPAL 
73 MADHYA PRADESH GWALIOR  
74 MADHYA PRADESH INDORE 
75 MADHYA PRADESH JABALPUR 
76 MADHYA PRADESH KHAJURAHO 
77 MADHYA PRADESH REWA 
78 MAHARASHTRA AKOLA 
79 MAHARASHTRA AURANGABAD 
80 MAHARASHTRA GONDIA  
81 MAHARASHTRA JALGAON  
82 MAHARASHTRA JUHU 
83 MAHARASHTRA KOLHAPUR 
84 MAHARASHTRA MUMBAI,CSMI AIRPORT 
85 MAHARASHTRA NAGPUR  
86 MAHARASHTRA NANDED 
87 MAHARASHTRA NASIK (HAL OZAR) 
88 MAHARASHTRA PUNE  
89 MAHARASHTRA SHIRDI 
90 MAHARASHTRA SINDHUDURG 
91 MAHARASHTRA SOLAPUR 
92 MANIPUR IMPHAL 
93 MANIPUR JIRIBAM (H) 
94 MANIPUR TAMENGLONG (H) 
95 MEGHALAYA BARAPANI (SHILLONG) 
96 MIZORAM LENGPUI (AIZWAL) 
97 NAGALAND DIMAPUR 
98 ODISHA BHUBANESWAR 
99 ODISHA JEYPORE 
100 ODISHA JHARSUGUDA 
101 ODISHA ROURKELA 
102 ODISHA UTKELA 
103 PUDUCHERRY (UT) PUDUCHERRY 
104 PUNJAB ADAMPUR (JALANDHAR) 
105 PUNJAB AMRITSAR 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
106 PUNJAB BHATINDA  
107 PUNJAB LUDHIANA  
108 PUNJAB PATHANKOT  
109 RAJASTHAN BIKANER 
110 RAJASTHAN JAIPUR 
111 RAJASTHAN JAISALMER  
112 RAJASTHAN JODHPUR  
113 RAJASTHAN KISHANGARH  
114 RAJASTHAN KOTA 
115 RAJASTHAN UDAIPUR 
116 SIKKIM PAKYONG 
117 TAMIL NADU CHENNAI  
118 TAMIL NADU COIMBATORE 
119 TAMIL NADU MADURAI 
120 TAMIL NADU SALEM 
121 TAMIL NADU TIRUCHIRAPPALLI 
122 TAMIL NADU TUTICORIN 
123 TELANGANA HYDERABAD (BEGUMPET) 
124 TELANGANA HYDERABAD (GHIAL) 
125 TRIPURA AGARTALA  
126 UTTAR PRADESH AGRA  
127 UTTAR PRADESH ALIGARH 
128 UTTAR PRADESH AYODHYA 
129 UTTAR PRADESH AZAMGARH 
130 UTTAR PRADESH BAREILLY 
131 UTTAR PRADESH CHITRAKOOT 
132 UTTAR PRADESH GORAKHPUR  
133 UTTAR PRADESH HINDAN 
134 UTTAR PRADESH KANPUR (CHAKERI)  
135 UTTAR PRADESH KANPUR (CIVIL) 
136 UTTAR PRADESH KUSHINAGAR 
137 UTTAR PRADESH LUCKNOW 
138 UTTAR PRADESH MEERUT 
139 UTTAR PRADESH MORADABAD 
140 UTTAR PRADESH PRAYAGRAJ 
141 UTTAR PRADESH SHRAVASTI 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
37

 
 
 
142 UTTAR PRADESH VARANASI 
143 UTTARAKHAND ALMORAH (H) 
144 UTTARAKHAND CHAMPAWAT (H) 
145 UTTARAKHAND CHINYALI SAUR (H) 
146 UTTARAKHAND DEHRADUN 
147 UTTARAKHAND GAUCHER (H) 
148 UTTARAKHAND HALDWANI(H) 
149 UTTARAKHAND MUNSYARI (H) 
150 UTTARAKHAND NEW TEHRI(H) 
151 UTTARAKHAND PANTNAGAR 
152 UTTARAKHAND PITHORAGARH 
153 UTTARAKHAND SAHASTRADHARA(H) 
154 UTTARAKHAND SRINAGAR(H) 
155 WEST BENGAL BAGDOGRA 
156 WEST BENGAL BEHALA 
157 WEST BENGAL COOCH BEHAR 
158 WEST BENGAL DURGAPUR 
159 WEST BENGAL KOLKATA (NSCBI) 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : सभापित महोदय, माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े कालखंड मȂ आम लोगȗ का 
िवमानȗ मȂ चढ़ना आसान हो पाया है।  पटना का जो हवाई अƿा है, उसका नाम जय Ģकाश 
नारायण अंतरराÍटर्ीय हवाई अƿा है, लेिकन अभी तक वहां से कोई भी अंतरराÍटर्ीय उड़ान नहीं 
भरी जा
ती है, जबिक वहां क े बहुत से लोग gulf countries मȂ और middle east मȂ जाकर काम 
करते हȅ।  मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहता हूं िक आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ 
पटना हवाई अƿा, जो जय Ģकाश नारायण अंतरराÍटर्ीय हवाई अƿा है, क्या वहां से अंतरर
ाÍटर्ीय 
उड़ान भरे जाने या अंतरराÍटर्ीय उड़ानȗ का पिरचालन शुरु  िकये जाने की कोई संभावना है?  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Sir, hon. Member has asked a very pertinent 
question and this issue has b een there for a long time whic h is the international flight 
operations from the Patna Airport. Sir, there is a technical issue. The length of runway 
in Patna is very small. It is around 2000 meters in length. It becomes very difficult for a 
full-fledged narrow body or a wide  body aircraft to take off or land there. So, that is 
the difficulty. When you are doing intern ational operations, you need long range 
aircrafts to be there and because of this  difficulty itself, the Union Government, 
especially taking this point into consideration, has proposed for another Greenfield 
airport in Bihar which will cater to the need of international operations.  However, for 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
the existing Patna airport, there is a runw ay difficulty because of which we are not 
able to do international operations from  there. But, through regular domestic 
operations, we are trying to connect to each and every nook and corner of the 
country to the best of the possibility. 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : सभापित महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने जो जवाब िदया है, उससे मȅ संतुÍट 
तो हूं, लेिकन मȅ उनसे आगर्ह करना चाहूंगा िक वहाँ जो नया Greenfield airport बनने वाला है, 
उसका काम यथाशीघर्, जÊद से जÊद क ंÃलीट हो और वहां से कम से कम काठमांड ू और gulf
  
countries क े िलए िवमानȗ का पिरचालन जÊद से जÊद शुरू  िकया जाए।  महोदय, मेरा second 
supplementary यह है िक झारखंड भारत का एक Ģमुख राज्य है।  वहां िसफर् दो एयरपोट्सर् हȅ - 
एक रांची मȂ है और दूसरा देवघर मȂ शुरू  हुआ है।  क ु छ िदनȗ पहले अखबारȗ क े माध्यम से बोकार
ो 
Îटील िसटी, जोिक झारखंड की एक Ģमुख औǏोिगक नगरी है, उसके  बारे मȂ क ु छ पता चला था, 
तो क्या बोकारो मȂ ĢÎतािवत एयरपोटर् बनाया जाना सुिनिÌचत है या नहीं?  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU : Sir, the idea of the Central Government is to 
build as many airport
s as possible.  Th e aspirations of India have changed after 
Narendra Modiji has become the Prime Minister. In th e last ten years, we have seen 
more and more airports being built in this country and with the UDAN scheme, the 
whole air travel system has been democratized and more passengers from the 
middle-class and lower middle-class have b ecome aspirational to fly using the air 
travel.  Regarding Jharkhand, any proposal regarding an airport, if it comes from the 
State Government, then, definitely, we will look into it.  Bokaro, presently, has 
connectivity to Patna and Kolkata. If nece ssary, in the future also, we will see, 
according to the infrastructure of the airport, if there is a demand to connect to other 
destinations, we will speak to the airlines positively and try to connect those places 
also.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Shri Sanjay Singh. 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहत
 ा हूँ िक एक ही 
समय पर या 15 िमनट, 20 िमनट या आधे घंटे क े अंतराल पर अलग-अलग एयरलाइन्स की जो 
Äलाइट्स होती हȅ, उनके  िकरायȗ मȂ इतना भारी अंतर क्यȗ रहता है?  क्या उन िकरायȗ क े ऊपर 
िनयंतर्ण लगाने की सरकार क े पास कोई योजना है या कोई उप कर्म है? 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Sir, this is not directly related to the question 
which has been asked here.  But, time and again, this issue, regarding the fares, 
keeps coming up, and on multiple forums, I have discussed this and I have said in the 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
39

 
 
 
House also, during the discussion on Bhartiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, when it came for 
discussion, that it is something which is international.  It is a demand-driven strategy.  
Market dynamics come into play and based on the demand, fares are decided.  I will 
discuss about this with him separately, Sir. 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप कब तक िडÎकस करȂगे?  क्या आप एक महीने मȂ िडÎकस 
करȂगे?  
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Yes, Sir. 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय संजय जी, एक महीने मȂ आपका मंतर्ी जी क े साथ िवचार-िवमशर् हो 
जाएगा।  
 
DR. K. LAXMAN :  M r .  C h a i r m a n ,  S i r ,  g i v e n  t h a t  n o  s u p p o r t  w a s  p r o v i d e d  b y  t h e  
Ministry for the recently operationalised Gr eenfield airports, what steps  is the 
Government taking to encourage and facilitate private investment in airport 
infrastructure development?  Can the Mini stry provide more details  on the timeline
  
and strategy for implementing the new Pr oduction-Linked Incentive for the drone 
sector and how it differs from the previous schemes?  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Sir, I will answer the second part first, which 
is the PLI for drones. An amount of Rs.120/ - crores has been put up for PLI Scheme.  
And, what used to be around Rs.500 crores market for drones, by bringing in the PLI 
Scheme, we have taken it up to Rs.6,0 00 crores investment sector.  We have 
achieved a huge success, even though it was a very small intervention that the 
Government of India has done.  We have banned the import of drones in the country.  
We wanted to promote indigenous drones, we wanted to promote more 
manufacturing of drones in the country and that was the major incentive for the PLI.  It 
was designed for three years.   We are still under the disbursement of the third year.   
So, the existing PLI Scheme is still going on.   There is no new Scheme, Sir.  The 
existing one is still going on.  The disburseme nt is  still about to  happen.   Regarding 
the Greenfield airports, this policy, the Greenfield Airports Policy, was formed in 2008, 
and we have been following it  since then.  Where the States  are the first movers, that 
we need an airport here, they take the init iative, they do the land acquisition.  From 
our side, we do the feasibility study, the site clearance and the in-principle approval.  
All these things come to us. In future also, if there is a requirem ent of airport at any 
location, we will request the States to take up the initiative, to look into the demand… 
Especially, the major challenge here is the la nd. It is not about the money or it is not 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
about the policy, but the major challenge here  is the land.   Because, airports, when 
you want to build, it has to be up to 1, 000 acres or 2,000 acres.  Now we are thinking 
about aerotropolis,  because it is not just  about flying  pe ople from one destination to 
another, people are also thinking about cr eating a lot of economic activity, a lot of 
commercial activity and a lot of job creation ar ound the airport. So, when you want to 
bring in all these things to the airport, you need a lot of land.  So, that is the major 
challenge here. In future also, anyone wh o is wanting to build an airport at any 
location, the State has to come forward and try to bring that much  land into thought 
process.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Your challenge is my challenge also.  My friends in the Congress 
Party, a number of them, want to ask ques tions.  I am going by precedence in terms 
of what I received.  Shri Pramod Tiwari.  
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY: Sir, I sent… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Rajeev Shukla  wanted to as k a question.  My very dear friend, 
Renukaji  and me were together, she wanted to  ask a question, ev en the Leader of 
the Opposition wanted to, but Pramod ji’s request is
 in precedence to them.  Shri 
Pramod Tiwari. We can have, if the Govern ment agrees, hon. Minister, Half-an-Hour 
Discussion, on this. ..(Interruptions)... 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: As you say, Sir. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Pramod Tiwariji. ...(Interruptions)... That satisfies you.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह : सर, आप िबÊकु ल कर दीिजए, आप पहली बार करȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, I am trying to address every issue on which you wanted me to 
be removed from this post. One was, Half -an-Hour Discussion. I will come one-by-
one to all of them. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : Sir, the credit goes to us then. ..(Interruptions)... The 
credit goes to us then.  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
41

 
 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, the credit goes that a farmer who was here in 72 years, for the 
first time, you stole the credit, for removing him. Pramod Tiwariji. ..(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅ एक डेटा देते हुए आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना 
चाहता हूँ िक यिद िदÊली से लंदन जाने का इकोनॉमी क्लास का हवाई िटकट समय से ले िलया 
जाए, तो उसक
ा  िकराया 24,000 रुपय े है, जबिक चेन्नई से Ģयागराज जाने का िकराया 53,000 
रुपय े है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Importance of Prayagraj.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : इसी तरह, कोलकाता से Ģयागराज आने-जाने का िकराया 35,000 रुपय े है 
और हैदराबाद, मुंबई और िदÊली से वहां जाने का यातर्ी िकराया 47,500 रुपय े है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप Ģीिमयम की बात कर रहे हȅ या इकोनॉमी की?  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅ इकोनॉमी की बात कर रहा हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: ‘Economy’ at what time? 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, ‘what time’ मतलब?  
 
Ǜी सभापित : रोज तो ऐसा नहीं होता है!  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅ िफर आपसे कह रहा हूँ िक महाकुं भ क े दौरान ऐसा हो रहा है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : महाकुं भ क े कारण, जो िक 144 साल क े बाद आया है।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, यह सरकार आÎथा और सनातन मȂ िवÌवास करती है या £  मȂ िवÌवास 
करती है?  यानी, महाकुं भ क े नाम पर जनता की जेब पर £ डाली जा रही है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप ĢÌन पूिछए। Let the hon. Member ask the question.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, बȂगलुरु  से Ģयागराज का िकराया 51,000 रुपय े है। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, 
मेरा सवाल सुन लीिजए। मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी जी से अनुरोध है िक धमर् क े नाम पर 
£ बंद कर दȂ, 
सनातन क े नाम पर £ बंद कर दȂ। मȅ उनसे यह जानना चाहूँगा िक क्या इन िकरायȗ को आप 
subsidised करȂगे?   नॉमर्ल िदनȗ का जो िकराया है, उससे ज्यादा से ज्यादा डबल वृिǉ कर दȂ!  
                                                           
£  Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ģमोद जी, आप तो Ģयागराज क े िनवासी हȅ। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : जी। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप सनातन क े िलए थोड़ी पाचन शिƪ बढ़ाइए।  Hon. Minister.  
 
Ǜी िंकजरापु राममोहन नायडू :  सर, मȅने एयर फ ेयसर् क े बारे मȂ पहले ही बताया था िक वह 
demand-driven है।  अब लंदन और Ģयागराज की बात हो रही है, तो सर, आपने तो उǄर दे ही 
िदया है। Pra
yagraj is more important than Lond on. That is why more people are going 
there, and, especially, this is a 144-years’ event.  It is a very special event for not just 
the Hindu people but for all Indians. From all over the world, people are trying to 
come there to one location. Crores of people are trying to come to one location. So, 
you can already see the demand . And, I will let you know what the Government has 
done in terms of improving the capacity and infrastructure over there. What used to 
be 6,700 square metres of terminal capacity there, in record time, we have increased 
it up to 18,000 square metres.  And, what  was connected to only eight destinations 
before, we have increased it to 15 destin ations; and the movements of aircraft, what 
was 18, we have increased it up to 46 daily  connectivity from that  place. This is the 
support that we are trying to give to the people who want to come to Prayagraj, and 
this is just for these 45 days. People who are talking about fare, if you look after 
February 26
th, it is 4,000 rupees only, if you want  to go, but this is a special event, 
and you have seen it multiple  times when these kind of si tuations arise in a certain 
location, where there is a demand to go to a certain place.  In fact, the Member has 
also mentioned, अगर समय-सीमा क े भीतर और टाइम पर कोई िटकट लेता है, तो उसका 
िकराया जरूर  कम होता है और ऐसा हर जगह होता है। It is a demand-driven market. We 
want to ensure, as much as we want to give the affordability to the passengers, the 
airlines also should be there. Imagine a position where th e airlines are going bankrupt 
and out-of-the aircraft fleet, then, how we are going to move the passengers! So, it 
is a very sensitive balance that the Governme nt has to take up, and that approach is 
being followed. I have assured before also, Sir, whenever there feels to be something 
which is totally outrageous, then, the Gove rnment is intervening, the Government is 
talking to the airlines. We are sensitizing th em and we are ensuring  that the fares are 
all reasonable. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question No. 63.   
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
43

 
 
 
Investigation of coal scam 
  
* 63. SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Will the Minister of COAL be pleased to 
state: 
(a) the status of investigation of the 2018 coal scam worth  ₹ 6000 crore 
involving large companies;   
(b) whether Government has received an y additional evidence recently related 
to the scam, and if so, the details thereof;  
(c) whether Government has released gu idelines, mandates, or certifications 
for calorific value testing agencies to prevent mis-reporting; and  
(d)  the steps taken by Government to prevent such scams in future? 
  
 
THE MINISTER OF SATAE IN THE MINIST RY OF COAL AND MINES (SHRI SATISH 
CHANDRA DUBE): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a)  No such scam of 2018 worth Rs.6000 crore involving large companies has 
been reported in the Ministry of Coal. 
(b) to (d)  Does not arise in view of (a) above. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI :  Sir, in the reply, th ere is one sentence that 
says, “No such scam of 2018 worth Rs. 6,000 crore involving large companies has 
been reported in the Ministry of Coal. ”  सर, आÌचयर् होता है िक वषर् 2014 से पहले कोल 
Îकै म कहा जाता था, अब Îकै म को देश सेवा का जामा पहना कर बचाया जा रहा है। So, Sir, the 
question is this.  Is it true that a cer t
ain large conglomerate had misreported the 
calorific value of coal and overcharged th e Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution 
Company?  If true, what action has been  taken against the conglomerate and the 
third party testing agency that manipulated the calorific value? 
 
कोयला और खान मंतर्ी (Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी): आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, माननीया सदÎय ने 
जो ĢÌन पूछा है, इसमȂ कोल इंिडया, गवनर्मȂट ऑफ इंिडया और कोल िमिनÎटर्ी का कोई Îकै म 
अभी तक नहीं आया है। ĢÌन मȂ न िकसी Îकै म क े बारे मȂ बताया गया न ही िकसी कÇपनी क े बारे मȂ 
बताया गय
ा है। महोदय, आप देख सकते हȅ िक ĢÌन मȂ कोई clarity नहीं है, इसिलए जो जवाब 
िदया है, वह बराबर िदया है।  
 
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Second supplementary. ...(Interruptions)... One minute. Hon. 
M e m b e r ,    a s k    y o u r   s u p p l e m e n t a r y   w i t h   c l a r i t y .     S e c o n d    s u p p l e m e n t a r y ,    
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI :  Sir, my question was extremely crystal clear, 
but an answer has been denied to me, in re gard to the question that I had initially 
asked and even to my first supplementary questi on.  He is still not answering.  And, it 
is an RTI report which speaks about the calorific value, but I respect the Chair, Sir.  
So, the second question is a very specific ques tion.  Is it true that the Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence found evidence of over 40 companies overcharging for imported 
coal and over-stating equipment value, lead ing to higher electricity bills?  I would 
want to know what the status of that invest igation against these allegations is.  I think 
this is very specific, Sir.  I hope for a specific answer. 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, Ģाइवेट पावर जेनरेशन कÇपनीज़, चाहे वे 
गवनर्मȂट की हȗ, पिÅलक सेक्टर की हȗ  या Îटेट गवनर्मȂट की हȗ, वे जो coal import करती हȅ - 
इनके  बारे मȂ मुझे इतना ही समझ आया िक 40 कÇपनीज़ क े नाम पर investigation चल रही है। 
वतर्मान सÃल
ाई पॉिलसी क े अनुसार कोल को open general license मȂ रखा है। यह पॉिलसी वषर् 
1993 से है। इस पॉिलसी क े अंदर contextual prices and applicable duty payment करके  
import कर सकते हȅ। को
ल िमिनÎटर्ी संबंिधत पक्षȗ क े बीच मȂ िकसी भी imported fuel supply क े 
संबंध मȂ, उसके  execution मȂ शािमल नहीं होती है। इस िसÎटम क े तहत वषर् 1993 से open 
general licence - thermal power plants, powe r generation compan ies, coal assured 
procurement करती हȅ, इसमȂ power generation companies को पूरा अिधकार है, चाहे 
Ģाइवेट सेक्टर से हो, डोमेिÎटक कÇपनीज़ से हो और दुिनया मȂ कहीं से भी imported coal हो, वे 
डायरेक्ट तय करके  import करती हȅ, इसके  िलए आपने जो ĢÌन पूछा है ...(Ëयवध
ान)... Quality 
Control of India…    
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : एक ही कÇपनी इÇपोटर् करती है। 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : आप मेरा जव
ाब पूरा हो जाने क े बाद पूिछए। मȅ जवाब देने क े िलए तैयार हूं।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, look at the Chair. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : इसका िमिनÎटर्ी से कोई संबंध नहीं है। यह Îटेट गवनर्मȂट का या Ģाइवेट 
पावर कÇपनी का है। कोल इंिडया और कोल िमिनÎ
टर्ी इसमȂ कोई रोल Ãले नहीं करती हȅ। अभी तक 
हमारी एक भी complaint नहीं आई है। अभी तक हमारे यहां कोई investigation नहीं की गई है। 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
45

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Third supplementary; Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan, hon. Member in the 
Council of States from the State of Chhattisgarh.  That has relevance.  Go ahead. 
 
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहती हूं 
िक क्या यह सही है िक हसदेव कोयला खदान, छǄीसगढ़ क े िलए लगभग 8.5 लाख पेड़ काटे 
जाने का Ãलान है। आज की तारीख तक िकतने पेड़ काटे जा चुक े  हȅ और यह हमारे एन्वायनर्मȂट 
क े िलए िकतना घातक है? क्या यह सही है िक आज की तार
ीख मȂ हमारे पास इस देश मȂ 80 साल 
का कोयला उपलÅध है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी, माननीय सदÎया ने तीन बातȂ पूछी हȅ। 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : सभापित महोदय, हम कोल माइिंनग क े िलए परिमशन लेते हȅ, तो उसके  
िलए forest clearance,
 environment clearance लेते हȅ।  यिद माइन्स मȂ trees कट करने पड़ते 
हȅ, तो हम पहले उनको डबल करके , clearance लेने बाद ही कोल माइिंन ग शुरू  करते हȅ।  चाहे 
वह िजधर भी हȗ,  Îटेट  गवनर्मȂट उसकी देखभाल करती है, फॉरेÎट िमिनÎटर्ी, एन्वायनर्मȂट 
िमिनÎटर्ी उसकी देखभाल करती है।  उनकी गाइडलाइन्स क े आधार पर clearance होने पर ही 
माइिंनग शुरू  करते हȅ।  Îटेट गवनर्मȂट भी उसकी clearance देती है। Without State 
Government’s clearan
ce, without fo rest and environment clearance,  हम  एक भी कोल 
माइन भी शुरू  नहीं करते हȅ।  उसके  बाद ही शुरू  करते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप बाकी दो क े बारे मȂ भी बताइए। 
 
Ǜीमती रं
जीत रंजन : सर, आंसर नहीं िमला है। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister is responding to other two issues also.  Bear with 
him.  
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी :  सर, मूल क्वेÌचन तो अलग है।  महोदय, अगर आप आदेश दȂगे, तो मȅ 
माननीय सदÎया को िरटन मȂ भी जवाब दे सकता  हूं। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप थोड़ा और इिनिश
एिटव लीिजए। माननीय सदÎया क े दोनȗ िंबदु महत्वपूणर् हȅ।  
आप  आने वाले 15 िदनȗ मȂ इनसे चचार् कीिजए। Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश। 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूं िक कोल 
इंिडया मȂ कोल टर्ांसपोटȃशन िसÎटम मȂ जीपीएस लगाने की बाध्यता है या Ģावधान है? वहां पर 
जीपीएस िसÎटम को लगाने मȂ िजस Ģकार की पिरिÎथित पैदा हो रही है, वहां जीपीएस लगता 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
नहीं है, िजसके  चलते वहां कोयले की तÎकरी बहुत तेजी से बढ़ रही है। जीपीएस िसÎटम ठीक से 
लगे, इसके  िलए मंतर्ालय क े ǎारा क्या िकया जा रहा है? 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : सर, माननीय सदÎय टर्ांसपोटर् क े िसÎटम क े बारे मȂ बता रहे हȅ, तो हम 
रेलवेज़ क े ǎारा और अलग-अलग िसÎटम रोड क े ǎारा कोल सÃलाई भी करते हȅ।  अभी हर साल 
हमारा कोल सÃलाई का िसÎटम इÇपर्ूव हो रहा है।  हम Ģॉपर िसÎटम से कोल सÃलाई को इÇपर्ूव 
कर रहे हȅ।  अभी  देश मȂ कोल सÃलाई हो,  कोल  Ģोड्क्शन हो, तो हम हर साल उसको इÇपर्ूव 
करते आ रहे हȅ।  सर, पावर जेनरेशन क ंपनीज़ क े पास 21 िदन का कोल अभी भी िरजवर् है, 
िजससे कोल सÃलाई मȂ कोई ĢॉÅलम नहीं है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : 5th सÃलीमȂटरी, Ǜी राजीव शुक्ला। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा :  सभापित महोदय, मेरा सवाल कोल Îकै म क े बारे मȂ है।  उसको लेकर काफी 
हंगामा भी हुआ।  उसके  बाद गवनर्मȂट ने एक पॉिलसी बनाई िक कोल क े िजतने Åलॉक्स थे, उनकी 
ऑक्शन की गई।  ऑक्शन क े बाद मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूं िक अभी िकतनी 
माइन्स नॉन ऑपरेशनल हȅ, क्यȗिक िजन लोगȗ को ऑक्शन हुआ है, उन्
हȗने अभी तक उनको 
टेकओवर नहीं िकया है, क्यȗिक वे पहले कहीं और थीं और अब एक हजार िकलोमीटर दूसर ी 
जगह कर िदया।  इसकी वजह से हम िकतना कोल इÇपोटर् कर रहे हȅ?  I would like to know 
how much coal are we importing because several mines are non-operational.  
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : सर, यह क्वेÌचन से िरलेटेड नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  जी, यह िरलेटेड नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी जी. िकशन रेƿी : सर, माननीय सदÎय को जो भी इन्फॉमȃशन चािहए, उसकी िडटेल मेरे पास 
है, तो मȅ उनको इन्फॉमȃशन उपलÅध करवा दूंगा। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा :   सर, कोल Îकै म क े बारे मȂ है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Rajeevji, you are a very senior Member.  Hon. Minister will get back 
to you in writing. Is it okay? 
 Question No.65 as Question No.64 has been withdrawn.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Question No.65, Shri Vaiko ...(Interruptions)... 
 
* 64:  Question was withdrawn. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
47

 
 
 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, क्वेÌचन 64 डर्ाप क्यȗ िकया गया?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Leave it to me.  There are rules.  I only inform the House.   If anyone 
wants to know the background, I will let you know.  
 Question No.65 - Shri Vaiko ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : िलÎट होने क े बाद क्वेÌचन क्यȗ डर्ॉप िकया गया, क ै से िकया गया? 
इसको पहले ही कर देते?   ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Let me inform the Leader of the Opposition that this is not for the 
first time; as a matter of fact, it is very freq uent.  It is a parlia mentary practice. And, 
the  decision  is  taken  by  the  Chairman.  ...(Interruptions)...  Question No.65 - 
Shri Vaiko. ...(Interruptions)... Shri Vaiko is not presen t.  Any supplementaries? 
...(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, I have a supplementary on this. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : मंतर्ी जी बैठे हुए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसे Ģोटेक्ट करȂगे, तो क ै से चलेगा? 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Let me tell the hon. Members,  I realise my limitations.  My 
limitations have been indicated amply by taking recourse to the ultimate painful 
constitutional recourse of unseating me.  I would appreciate Members not to make 
insinuations, innuendoes, and I would particularly call upon  senior Members to bear 
with me.  ...(Interruptions)...  No; what you said is something ...(Interruptions)...  
What Khargeji said, I take severe exception.  Now, Q. No. 65.   
 
CSR projects by oil companies In Tamil Nadu 
 
*65. SHRI VAIKO: Will the Minister of PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS be pleased 
to state: 
(a)  the detailed Corporate Social Resp onsibility (CSR) expenditure of all oil 
companies spent in the State of Tamil Nadu over the last three financial 
years with a year-wise breakdown; 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
(b)  a further breakdown of the CSR ex penditure incurred by oil companies in 
the State of Tamil Nadu, detailing the amounts spent in different districts 
during the same period: and 
(c)  the types of projects or initiative s or schemes funded through CSR funds 
from oil companies in the State during  in the last three years, details 
thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (SHRI HARDEEP SINGH 
PURI): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
  (a) to (c) Every company registered under Companies Act, 2013, having net 
worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore 
or more, or a net profit of rupees five crore or more during the immediately preceding 
financial year is mandated to spend at l east two percent of the average net profits 
made during the three immediately precedin g financial years on welfare works under 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). Such  companies, as a part of their CSR, 
undertake CSR activities under the heads identified under Schedule VII of the 
Companies Act 2013 with special focus on He alth (Nutrition, Sanitation, and Drinking 
Water), Education, Skill Development, Rural Development, Women Empowerment, 
Environment Oriented Initiatives and Care for the Elderly & Differently-abled Persons. 
 
CSR is a Board-driven process and th e Board of the company is empowered 
to plan, approve, execute, and monitor th e CSR activities of the company based on 
the recommendations of its CSR Committee.  CSR mandated companies are required 
to file details of CSR activities annually in  MCA21 registry. Government monitors the 
compliance of CSR provisions through the disclosures made by the companies on the 
MCA21 portal. Companies are required to make necessary disclosure in the financial 
statements regarding CSR including non-co mpliance. The existing legal provisions 
such as mandatory disclosures, accountability to the CSR Committee and the Board, 
and provisions for audit of account of the company provide robust mechanism for 
monitoring. 
 
The amount of CSR funds spent by oil and gas companies in the State of Tamil 
Nadu during the last three years is as below: 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
49

 
 
 
Financial Year  
Expenditure (Rs. in Crore) 
IOCL HPCL BPCL GAIL ONGC CPCL EIL BL Total 
2021-2022 5 1 3 0 14 4 1 0 28 
2022-2023 6 4 2 1 14 5 0 0 32 
2023-2024 37 3 9 0 37 18 0 0 104 
Total 48 7 14 1 64 28 1 0 164 
 
Project-wise details of activities underta ken and amount spent under CSR in the 
country including Tamil Nadu during the last three years are available on the 
respective websites of Oil and Gas PSUs i.e. www.ongcindia.com, 
www.iocl.com,www.bharatpetroleum.com,www.hindustanpetroleum.com,www.gail
online.com,www.engineersindia.com,www.balmerlawrie.comand www.cpcl.co.in. 
 
Details of district-wise CSR expenditure incurred by oil and gas companies in the 
State of Tamil Nadu, during the last three years are at Annexure-I. 
 
Details of some of the major types/ categor ies of projects or initiatives or schemes 
funded through CSR funds from oil and gas companies in the State during in the last 
three yearsare at Annexure-II. 
 
          Annexure-I 
Details of district-wise CSR expenditure incurred by Oil and Gas Companies in Tamil 
Nadu during the last three years. 
 (Rs. in Lakh) 
S.No. District Name 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1 Ariyalur 0 32 16 
2 Chennai 743 954 2616 
3 Chengalpattu 1 13 31 
4 Coimbatore 24 15 78 
5 Cuddalore 26 16 46 
6 Dharmapuri 0 5 0 
7 Dindigul 30 0 32 
8 Erode 0 0 0 
9 Kallakurichi 2 19 0 
10 Kancheepuram 9 65 32 
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
11 Kanyakumari 0 17 15 
12 Karur 0 12 4 
13 Krishnagiri 4 7 15 
14 Madurai 94 170 41 
15 Mayiladuthurai 9 90 80 
16 Nagapattinam 76 289 555 
17 Namakkal 0 0 0 
18 Perambalur 0 0 23 
19 Pudukottai 0 6 0 
20 Ramanathapur am 222 90 527 
21 Ranipat 0 0 19 
22 Salem 10 188 439 
23 Sivaganga 0 45 10 
24 Thanjavur 34 51 54 
25 Tenkasi 0 0 0 
26 Theni 0 0 0 
27 Thiruvallur 188 348 798 
28 Thiruvarur 0 0 0 
29 Tuticorin(Thoothukudi) 4 7 14 
30 Tiruchirappalli 22 45 72 
31 Tirunelveli 0 0 104 
32 Tirupathur 0 16 10 
33 Tiruppur 0 0 0 
34 Tiruvannamalai 0 0 0 
35 The Nilgiris 0 9 6 
36 Vellore 0 70 50 
37 Villupuram 193 30 54 
38 Virudhunagar 15 167 28 
39 Multiple Districts 1123 428 4606 
  Total 2828 3203 10375 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
51

 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
Details of some of the major types of projects or initiatives or schemes costing funded 
through CSR funds from oil companies in the State during the last three years. 
  
S.
No 
CPSE F.Y. District Type Of 
Project 
CSR Activities Cost of 
Project  
(In 
Lakhs) 
1 ONGC 2024-
25 
Chennai Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Scientific 
instrumentation and ICT 
facilities in Ramakrishna 
Mission Vidyapith 
Vivekananda college, 
Chennai 
352.53 
2 ONGC 2024-
25 
Salem Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Financial assistance for 
construction of school 
main building, 
installation of water 
sump and rain water 
storage sump at 
Saraswathividyamandir 
school, Karumandurai, 
Salem 
54.81 
3 ONGC 2024-
25 
Cuddalor
e 
Sanitation Financial assistance for 
sewage renovation for 
government 
headquarters hospital, 
Cuddalore. 
32.76 
4 ONGC 2023-
24 
Tiruvallur Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Financial assistance for 
Construction of 
Community Centre at 
Panayur Panchayat, 
Thiruthuraipoondi 
Block, Tiruvallur. 
37.27 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
5 ONGC 2023-
24 
Ramanat
hapuram 
Medical Financial assistance 
towards setting up of 
Burn Ward in 
Government Hospital, 
Ramnad. 
129.65 
6 ONGC 2023-
24 
Chennai Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Scientific 
Instrumentation and ICT 
Facilities in Ramakrishna 
Mission Vidyapith 
Vivekananda College, 
Chennai 
372.32 
7 ONGC 2023-
24 
Salem Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Financial assistance for 
construction of school 
main building, 
installation of water 
sump and rain water 
storage sump at 
SaraswathiVidyaMandir 
School, Karumandurai, 
Salem District 
331.63 
8 ONGC 2023-
24 
Ramanat
hapuram 
Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Financial assistance for 
Procurement of 02 No’s 
of CNG Buses 
50.67 
9 ONGC 2023-
24 
Multiple 
Districts  
Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Other small projects, 
admin cost spread, 
Spread of Pan India 
projects attributed to 
Tamil Nadu 
1,520.64 
10 ONGC 2022-
23 
Salem Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Financial assistance for 
construction of School 
main building, 
Installation of water 
sump and rain water 
storage sump at 
Saraswathi VidyaMandir 
School, Karumandurai, 
Salem District. 
164.42 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
53

 
 
 
11 ONGC 2022-
23 
Nagapatti
nam 
Medical Part financial assistance 
for Installation of a 3D 
Mammography Machine 
for Early Detection of 
Breast Cancer in 
Women 
50.00 
12 ONGC 2022-
23 
Nagapatti
nam 
Environment 
sustainability 
Financial assistance for 
mangrove afforestation 
and olive ridleyturtle 
protectionin Karaikal 
District, Puducherry. 
33.67 
13 ONGC 2022-
23 
Multiple 
Districts  
Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Other small projects, 
admin cost spread, 
spread of pan India 
projects attributed to 
Tamil Nadu 
280.83 
14 ONGC 2021-
22 
Multiple 
Districts  
Medical 
Various project(s) for 
promoting preventive 
health care in Tamil 
Nadu 
50.25 
15 ONGC 2021-
22 
Multiple 
Districts  
Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Various project(s) for 
promoting education in 
Tamil Nadu 
33.68 
16 ONGC 2021-
22 
Multiple 
Districts  
Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Other small projects, 
admin cost spread, 
spread of pan India 
projects attributed to 
Tamil Nadu 
877.08 
17 IOCL 21-22 Dindigul Ed ucation Provision of two 
classrooms  including 
one smart Class room 
and furniture for GHS 
KozhinjipattiDindigul 
30.1 
18 IOCL 21-22 Chennai Health care Provision of Nutritional 
Park, Chengalpattu 
Medical College 
44.98 
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
19 IOCL 21-22 Tiruvallur Empowering 
Differently 
Abled 
Welfare of Persons with 
Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
by providing artificial 
limbs, and appliances, 
wheelchairs, etc. 
42.51 
20 IOCL 21-22 Madurai Drinking 
Water 
Drinking Water Kiosks 
using CDI Technology 
37.95 
21 IOCL 21-22 Ramanat
hapuram 
Education Smart classroom project 
along RoW schools 
57.23 
22 IOCL 22-23 Virudhun
agar 
Rural 
Development 
Construction of 
community Hall 
34.97 
23 IOCL 22-23 Virudhun
agar 
Empowering 
Differently 
Abled 
Health camps and 
rehabilitation for 
differently abled 
64 
24 IOCL 22-23 Chengelpet Healthcare ArogyaSelvam – 
strengthening public 
healthcare infrastructure 
44.71 
25 IOCL 22-23 Chennai Skill 
Development 
Development of skill 
&learning centre   at 
Kannagi&Ezhil Nagar, 
Chennai 
41.4 
26 IOCL 22-23 Chennai Ed ucation Saksham awareness 
campaign 2022 for 
educating masses on  
conservation of fuels 
60 
27 IOCL 23-24 Chennai Sa nitation PasumaiPudupet-
establishing and 
Operating Micro 
Composting Centre  at 
Puduppet in Zone-5 of 
GCC under healthy 
Chennai initiative 
56.86 
28 IOCL 23-24 Coimbato
re 
Nutrition Project Madhuram: 
promoting scientific 
beekeeping among 
nribals in Palamalai, 
Coimbatore for 
35.52 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
55

 
 
 
livelihood enhancement 
and nutritional security. 
29 IOCL 23-24 9 Districts Nutrition Amudasurabhi: Setting 
up Nutritious Kitchen 
Gardens in Government 
Residential Girls 
Schools across Tamil 
Nadu 
50.88 
30 IOCL 23-24 Mayiladut
hurai 
Healthcare Sahaara: empowering 
differently abled in  
Mayiladuthurai and 
Thanjavur districts 
64 
31 IOCL 23-24 Chennai Health care Establishing life saving 
Modular Operation 
Theatre 
50.4 
32 IOCL 23-24 10 
Districts 
Healthcare Udaan: improving 
dignity and quality of life 
for wheelchair users 
along SRPL Installations 
and Pipeline 
RoWvillages 
62.89 
33 IOCL 23-24 All 
Districts 
Healthcare Provision of 
Truenatmachines for TB 
diagnosis at Govt. 
hospitals across Tamil 
Nadu 
2795.52 
34 IOCL 23-24 Tiruvallur Nutrition Provision of Integrated 
Child Development 
Services (ICDS) 
(Anganwadi centres)- 2 
nos at Kaladipet, 
Tiruvallur district 
37.4 
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
35 IOCL 23-24 Chennai H ealthcare Provision of up-
gradation of Human Milk 
Bank with more 
advanced facilities to 
increase both the 
quantity and quality of 
the human milk made 
available at IOG &Govt 
Hospital for Women and 
Children, Egmore, 
Chennai 
33.78 
36 IOCL 23-24 All 
Districts 
Environmental 
Sustainability 
Saksham Campaign 
2023-24 for petroleum 
conservation 
54.04 
37 IOCL 23-24 Chennai Disaster 
Management 
& Relief 
Provision of relief 
material to affected 
people during Cyclone 
Michaung at Chennai 
and Tamabaram 
32.5 
38 IOCL 23-24 Tirunelveli Disaster 
Management 
& Relief 
Provision of relief 
material to affected 
people during devasted 
flood in Southern 
Tamilnadu 
50.64 
39 IOCL 23-24 Chennai Education Provision of smart 
classes at Greater 
Chennai Corporation 
39 
40 HPCL 2021-
22 
Chennai Education Basic infrastructure 
facilities at Higher 
Secondary School, 
Choolai. 
38.63 
41 HPCL 2022-
23 
Madurai Healthcare Construction and 
establishment of 
integrated outpatients 
treating center 
48.57 
42 HPCL 2022-
23 
Sivagang
a 
Education Class rooms at 
Government schools 
45.48 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
57

 
 
 
43 HPCL 2022-
23 
Madurai Education Classrooms at school 35.89 
44 HPCL 2022-
23 
Chennai Education Building for education 
and skill development 
68.65 
45 HPCL 2022-
23 
Tiruchirap
palli 
Healthcare USG equipment at 
primary health centres 
36.92 
46 HPCL 2023-
24 
Tiruvallur Education Building for education 
and skill development 
59.08 
47 HPCL 2023-
24 
Tiruchirap
palli 
Education Scholarship to students 
from socially and 
economically backward 
categories 
30.06 
48 HPCL 2023-
24 
Coimbatore Education Scholarship to students 
from socially and 
economically backward 
categories 
37.66 
49 BPCL 2021-
22  
 Chennai  Medical Providing 1,000 Oxygen 
Concentrators for 
effective and timely 
clinical treatment of 
Covid-19 patients 
44.44 
50 BPCL 2021-
22  
Villupuram Education Equi pment for setting up 
digital lab and solar 
plants 
176.29 
51 BPCL 2021-
22  
Ramanat
hapuram 
Sanitation Providing potable water 
to the rural population of 
Ramanathapuram 
District. 
90.26 
52 BPCL 2022-
23  
Kanchee
puram 
Medical Renovation of the 
Banyan Health Centre 
47.96 
53 BPCL 2022-
23  
 Chennai  Medical Financial assistance for 
Digital X – Ray unit and 
3 Eye equipment at 
Ramakrishna Math 
44.09 
54 BPCL 2022-
23  
 Chennai  Medical Procurement of 
Ophthalmic IOL Master 
39.10 
58
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
700 Optical Biometer 
Equipment. 
55 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Vellore  Medical Financial assistance to 
Caring the Least for 
Mankind NGO for 
establishment of 
Modular Theatre for 
Cleft and Craniofacial 
Surgery at Scudder 
Memorial 
Hospital,Ranipet. 
49.56 
56 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Chennai  Medical Financial assistance to 
Govt Stanley Medical 
Hospital forprocurement 
of Medical Equipments 
at Royapuram,Chennai 
49.99 
57 BPCL 2023-
24  
Ramanat
hapuram 
Education Construction of 
Vivekananda BPCL 
Block at Ramakrishna 
Math Vivekananda 
Vidyalaya CBSE School, 
Ramanathapuram 
district, Tamil Nadu. 
189.00 
58 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Chennai  Education Financial assistance to 
Indian Institute of 
Technology Madras for 
developing and 
providing Sun & Rain 
Protection System for 
specially designed 
wheelchair to be used 
by Specially Challenged 
People 
49.88 
59 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Chennai  Medical Financial assistance to 
Cancer Institute Adyar 
Chennai to provide 
48.00 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
59

 
 
 
Surgical Treatment for 
under privileged cancer 
patients. 
60 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Tamil 
Nadu  
Medical Financial assistance to 
Tamilnadu Kidney 
Research Foundation for 
providing accessible 
dialysis for 
underprivileged kidney 
patients. 
49.99 
61 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Salem  Medical Financial assistance to the 
NGO – “Our Lady of the 
Poor Charitable Trust” for 
upgradation of Daycare 
Home for Differently 
Challenged Children at 
Salem, Tamil Nadu.
 
45.70 
62 BPCL 2023-
24  
Tirunelveli  Medical Financial assistance to 
the NGO – Anbhalayaa 
Foundation for 
upgradation of Primary 
Health Centre at 
Vadakkankulam 
Tirunelveli District. 
38.41 
63 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Chennai  Disaster 
Management 
& Relief 
Financial assistance to 
the NGO – 
JeevaAnbalayam Trust 
for Flood Relief Activities 
in and around Chennai 
caused by Michaung 
Cyclone. 
50.00 
64 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Chennai  Medical Financial assistance to 
Cancer Institute (WIA) 
for installation of Online 
Continuous Effluent 
Monitoring System 
50.00 
60
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
(OCEMS) &treatment 
for needy cancer 
patients. 
65 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Chennai  Medical Financial assistance to 
the NGO – Idhayangal 
Charitable Trust for 
providing operational 
expenses of children 
with Type 1 diabetes in 
Tamil Nadu. 
46.02 
66 BPCL 2023-
24  
 Chennai  Medical Financial assistance to 
Department of Prisons 
and Correctional 
Services for 
implementation of 
Menstrual Hygiene & 
Welfare Project in 
association with HLL 
Lifecare Limited. 
49.94 
67 GAIL 2022-
23  
 Vellore  Nutrition Support towards 
providing supplements 
to malnourished women 
residing in rural areas in 
and around Vellore, 
Tamil Nadu 
30.00 
68 CPCL 2021- 
22  
 Chennai 
/ Others  
Healthcare Supply of Cold Chain 
Equipment for 
transportation and 
distribution of COVID -
19 vaccination to State 
Health Department, 
Govt. of TamilNadu 
150.00 
69 CPCL 2021- 
22  
 Chennai  Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Contribution towards 
stipend paid to 
apprentices engaged. 
198.75 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
61

 
 
 
70 CPCL 2022- 
23  
 Chennai  Sports 44th Chess Olympiade,  
Tournament sports 
Fund sponsored to 
TamilNadu 
200.00 
71 CPCL 2022- 
23  
 Chennai  Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Contribution towards 
stipend paid to 
apprentices engaged. 
177.79 
72 CPCL 2023- 
24  
Nagapatti
nam Healthcare Organizing Mega Eye 
Care Camp 36.50 
73 CPCL 2023- 
24  
 Chennai  Healthcare Sponsorship for full set-
up of Mobile Cardiac 
Ambulance Unit 
34.40 
74 CPCL 2023- 
24  
 Chennai  Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Industry academia 
collaboration through 
formation of Energy 
Consortium to achieve 
United Nation’s 
Sustainable 
Development Goals by 
contribution to the 
incubators of IIT. 
75.00 
75 CPCL 2023- 
24  
 Chennai  Healthcare Procurement and 
distribution of HbA1c 
Analyser, Biochemistry 
Analyser and Ultrasound 
with Colour Doppler 
equipment for Rajiv 
Gandhi Government 
General Hospital 
38.50 
76 CPCL 2023- 
24  
 Chennai  Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Development and 
upgradation of 
Metropolitan 
Transportation 
Corporation Bus Depot 
at Kathivakkam 
45.00 
62
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
77 CPCL 2023- 
24  
Chennai / 
Thiruvallur 
Welfare of 
Disabilities 
Assessment of needy 
beneficiaries and 
distribution of assistive 
devices to persons with 
benchmarked 
disabilities. 
99.00 
78 CPCL 2023- 
24  
 Chennai  Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Organizing and 
conducting Machine 
Operator Plastic 
Processing Course 
37.00 
79 CPCL 2023- 
24  
 Chennai  Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Construction of 
additional classrooms at 
Corporation Middle 
School at Tsunami 
Quarters, Tiruvottiyur. 
49.00 
80 CPCL 2023- 
24  
 Chennai  Community 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Construction of 
community Hall at 
Ramanathapuram 
locality, Tiruvottiyur 
50.00 
81 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Construction of dining 
and multipurpose Hall in 
Government Higher 
Secondary School, 
Manali 
70 
82 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Contribution towards 
stipend paid to 
apprentices engaged. 
137 
83 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Nagapatti
nam 
Healthcare Running and 
maintenance of  Mobile 
Medicare Unit in 
Nagapattinam. 
45.9 
84 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Healthcare Running and 
maintenance of  Mobile 
Medicare Unit in 
Chennai 
31 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
63

 
 
 
85 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Ramanat
hapuram 
Healthcare Running and 
maintenance of  Mobile 
Medicare Unit in 
Ramanathapuram. 
30.4 
86 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Free residential 
coaching under CPCL 
Super 30, Chennai 
Project for Engineering 
Entrance Examination 
53 
87 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Healthcare Procurement & 
disburse of robotic 
scavenger machine to 
Chennai Metropolitan 
Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board 
52.74 
88 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Upgradation of 
Polytechnic College 
building infrastructure 
and laboratory 
75 
89 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Nagapatti
nam 
Environment 
sustainability 
Removal of water 
hyacinth in rivers, 
channels and drains in 
Vennar sub basin 
42 
90 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Education & 
Skill 
Development 
Repair and maintenance 
of polytechnic college 
building 
228 
91 CPCL 2023- 
24 
Chennai Healthcare Flood relief activities 190 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, have you laid the statement on the Table?  
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI:  Yes, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The third supplementary - Shri Digvijaya Singh.  
 
64
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:   Sir, as per the rules, every corporate, which has a turnover 
of over Rs.500 crores has the responsibility,  and I think he knows the rules.  Now, I 
would like to know from the hon. Minister... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Through me.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : ...which of the oil companies and gas companies have 
fulfilled the responsibility which is cast on them under the CSR rules.  Have they 
fulfilled the two per cent requirement of their net income being spent on CSR 
activities?  I want to know this.   My question is simple, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, if you have gone through the question, it is about 
CSR projects by the oil companies in Tamil Nadu.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  I want to know for Tamil Nadu. 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :   The question specifically asked by Shri Vaiko was on 
CSR activities undertaken in the State of Tamil Nadu.    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member has taken note of it.  
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :  Now, the issue is the following.  Details about all the 
Corporate Social Responsibility spending do ne, as per the threshold incurred by all 
the OMCs, are present on their respective webs ites.  In so far as I remember,  in the 
last three years, the combined spending overall in the country is little less than 
Rs.4,000 crores.  In Tamil Nadu, it is abou t Rs.186 crores.  Now, if in a particular 
year, an OMC is not able to meet its tw o per cent obligation, then, that carries 
forward.   In so far as the specific inform ation, which is sought, whether they are all 
meeting that requirement, I will have to look into the details.  My impression is that all 
of them are meeting it and reporting it, but if there is a shortfall in a particular year, it 
could be carried forward to the next year, but we can check on that data.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Minister, the carry forward provision, it is for how many 
years?   
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :  It can carry forward it for three years.  The previous 
year can go to the next year.  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
65

 
 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  Now, supplementary number four. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, can he give this in writing?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What he said here is in writing.  It  is the ultimate thing.  Let me tell 
the hon. Member that anything said in this House is sacred, sanctified and, if it is 
wrong, it entails very severe consequences, including loss of Membership.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:   I request him to give it in writing. ...(Interruptions)...  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN :  No.  Ultimately, I decide.  It cannot be a contract between the 
Member and the hon. Minister.   
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :  Sir, I don’t need a contract.  I can confirm here and 
now, through your good offices, that all OMCs have spent twice the amount of CSR in 
Tamil Nadu that they were required to.  I have just received the confirmation.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Let us congratulate the hon. Minister.   Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai 
- fourth supplementary.  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Sir, the hon. Minister has given a reply with regard to the 
CSR spending in the State of Tamil Nadu .  If you talk about logistics or the 
transportation of oil and gas, Namakkal Distri ct of Tamil Nadu is very famous in this 
respect as this is the hub of the logistics operations or transportation of oil to the 
entire country.  But, here, the figure is zero, zero and zero.  They have not spent a 
single rupee out of the CSR funds in the Namakkal District or in some other Districts.   
Will the Minister look into it?  They are the people who are transporting oil to the entire 
country.  Namakkal District, a place where all the logistics is done, is a very backward 
District where people have a lot of suffer ings.   Will the Government do something to 
ensure that some CSR funds are also spen t for the Namakkal District, which, right 
now, has a spending of zero, zero and zero rupees? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  So close, yet so far. 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI : Sir, I am absolutely delighted that my good friend, the 
hon. Member, has asked this question.  It  is something on which I undertake real 
66
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
introspection, anguished introspection.  We  have cases of a few States.  I am not 
going to name them but in these States, th e activities of the oil marketing companies 
-- whether it relates to exploration or an y other activities -- are not encouraged; in 
fact, impediments are there.  In fact, during  the previous session of Parliament, I also 
drew the attention to the fact that in on e particular State, we have spent Rs. 1,000 
crores on exploration and production, and yet, the concerned State Government is 
depriving itself the opportunity of getting re venue from that.  With regard to the case, 
which my hon. Member mentioned just now, some States do not allow transportation 
pipelines to be laid.  So, it becomes very  difficult for any co mpany to do any CSR 
spending there.  Invariably, CSR spending is  done where there is oil and marketing or 
the E&P facility. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister, this is a House that has to find a solution.  What 
keeps you away from not getting into speci fics? This House will find an answer.  
…(Interruptions)… One minute.  Members will debate... …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI : Sir, I can name the State.  …(Interruptions)…The State 
of West Bengal has seen an investment of Rs. 1,000 crores by the ONGC and 99 wells 
have been dug.  Yet, we are not able to  proceed further. So, it is very wrong to 
expect an oil marketing company to spend CSR funds there.  …(Interruptions)…  Yes, 
this is the result.   Now, in th e case of Tamil Nadu as well…  …(Interruptions)…  No, 
no, you can deny it but I have given writte n answers, we have given press releases. 
Now, in the case of Tamil Nadu also, Sir, I would not have …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Which of the two would like to ta ke the floor? Mr. Saket Gokhale or 
Ms. Dola Sen? …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: What is this, Sir? …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : It relates to the State of West Bengal.  To make the discussion 
relevant, it is legitimate for the concerned Members to hear the hon. Minister and 
come up with a response.  That is what the House is for. 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI :  Sir, I stand ready for it at any given point of time, 
either through the platform provided by th is august House or otherwise.  I have 
always invited people to talk about it.  With 3 ½ years of experience in this Ministry, I 
can say that wherever economic activities are encouraged and refineries come up, 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
67

 
 
 
economic activities come up in hundreds of  kilometers around that place come up 
and benefit the people.  Sir, ultimately, it de pends on the States as  ‘land’ is in their 
domain. Mr. Chairman, Sir, through you, I would like to encourage the State 
Governments to please allow this kind of ec onomic activity to take place.  We will 
ensure that the benefits through CSR and other economic activities will come there.  
Sir, in Ashoknagar, the ONGC has dug wells but it is not getting the petroleum mining 
license in the last three or four years that  I have been familiar with. I have written 
several letters. So, I appeal to the representatives of the concerned State 
Government present here to please have a re-look into this matter.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Last supplementary, Shri Saket Gokhale. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I am not asking a supplementary. With your permission, 
I just want to make a point that as far as  Ashoknagar is concerned, we will give a 
written statement to the hon. Minister about how many times the permission has been 
renewed and what his Ministry has been doing.  But our request is, please ask him… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Last supplementary, Shri Mayankbhai Nayak. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मयंक भाई जयदेव भाई नायक :  सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता 
हूं िक सीएसआर फ ं ड को क ेवल ऑपरेिंटग एिरयाज़ मȂ, जहां-जहां क ंपनी काम करती है, वहीं 
यूज़ होता है या अन्य जगह पर भी यूज़ होता है?  दूसरा, जो सीएसआर फ ं ड यूज़ िकया गया है, 
क्या फ ं ड यूज होने क े बा
द उसका अच्छी तरह से रख-रखाव होता है या नहीं?  एक बार फ ं ड यूज़ 
कर िलया गय
ा, िफर साल बीतने क े बाद उसको जो मेन्टेन वगैरह िकया जाता है, तो क्या 
सीएसआर फ ं ड देने वाली क ंपनी इसकी कोई जांच करती है या नहीं?  
 
Ǜी हरदीप िंसह पुरी :  सर, जो सीएसआर फ ं ड यूज़ िकया जाता है, उसका िनणर्य उन क ंपनीज़ 
क े बोड्सर् ǎारा िलया जाता है।  यह िनणर्य उन क ंपनीज़ क े बोड्सर् क ेवल इस बात पर नहीं लेते िक 
उसकी लोके शन कहां है।  इस संबंध मȂ गाइडलाइन्स बनी हुई हȅ।  जैसे हम
 ने पहले बताया िक 
महामारी क े दौरान जो गाइडलाइन्स थीं, उनका emphasis है Êथ सेक्टर पर था।  अभी जो 
सेक्टसर् हȅ, जहां पर सीएसआर फ ंिंडग encourage की जाती है, वे  हȅ - education, 
environment sustainability, healthcare, sanita tion and social sector.  In t
he social 
sector, sports, women empowerment, rural development come. इस संबंध मȂ 
Department of Public Enterprises और Ministry of Corporate Affairs की  गाइडलाइन्स 
बनी हुई हȅ।  सीएसआर की ÎपȂिंडग का जो िडसीजन होता है, that is taken by the Boards.  
 Those proposals are approved by the Boards.   इनमȂ कई thematic areas हȅ, जैसे 
aspirational districts हȅ, which are at the lowest rung of development and where 
68
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
aspirational development is taking place.  इसमȂ जो ऑिडट होता है, that is also done 
through third parties and is also subject to CAG audit. माननीय सांसद जी का सवाल है 
िक वह क ै से खचर् होता है?  मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक उसमȂ ऑिडट भी होता और ultimately CAG 
ऑिडट भी होता है।     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Question No. 66, Shri Samik Bhattacharya. 
 
Implementation of PM Vishwakarma Scheme in West Bengal 
 
*66.  SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA : Will the Minister of MICRO, SMALL AND 
MEDIUM ENTERPRISES be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government of West Bengal has failed to form the State and 
District Monitoring Committees under the PM Vishwakarma Scheme, and 
the reasons for this delay; 
(b) the reasons for not completing registrations in the State of West Bengal 
despite over 8 lakh applications be ing submitted, and the steps being 
taken to ad
dress this backlog; 
(c) the measures that are be ing implemented to ensure smooth execution of 
the scheme in the State of West Beng al, including coordination with the 
State Government; and 
(d) the Ministry’s timeline for ensuring fu ll implementation of the scheme in 
West Bengal, including completing pending registrations and forming 
monitoring Committees? 
 
THE MINISTER FOR MICRO, SMALL AN D MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (SHRI JITAN 
RAM MANJHI):  (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c)  Government of West Bengal has not constituted the State 
Monitoring Committee (SMC) and District Implementation Committee (DIC). More 
than 7.78 lakh applications under PM Vi shwakarma have been received through 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) in West Bengal. As per the Scheme guidelines, 
these Committees are to be formed by the respective States/UTs for implementation 
of PM Vishwakarma Scheme. Before successf ul registration, applications undergo a 
three-stage verification process, as follows: 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
69

 
 
 
Stage1: Verification at the Gram Panchayat/ULB level. 
 
Stage2:  Vetting and recommendation by the DIC chaired by District 
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner/District Collector. 
 
Stage 3:   Approval by the Screen ing Committee at the Central level. 
 
Since the applications have not been ve rified due to the non-constitution of 
DIC and SMC, the registration of beneficiar ies is affected in West Bengal under PM 
Vishwakarma. 
 
Ministry of MSME, has requested Governme nt of West Bengal to constitute 
and notify the SMC and DIC to facilitate th e implementation of the Scheme in the 
State, vide letters date d 21.08.2023, 25.08.2023, 20.09.2023, 01.03.2024 and 
05.11.2024. 
 
(d)  PM Vishwakarma Scheme has appr oval for implementation pan India, 
including in West Bengal, for 5 years, t ill FY 2027-28 (i.e. 31. 03.2028). Prospective 
beneficiaries can successfully register in PM Vishwakarma af ter the prescribed 
verification process to avail the Scheme’s benefits. 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA : Thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity.  सर, 
क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने आम लोगȗ, गरीबȗ, वंिचतȗ, मिहलाओं, नौजवानȗ और िकसानȗ क े िलए तमाम 
सȂटर्ल ÎकीÇस लागू की हȅ।   इनके  कारण लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ भारी पिरवतर्न आया है, परंतु अभी भी 
क ु छ राज्य ऐसे हȅ, िजन्हȗने िकसी भी क Ȃ दर् सरकार की योजना को लागू नहीं िकया, क ेवल इसका 
नाम बदल िदया।  सर, बड़े दुख क े साथ कहना पड़ता है - My q
uestion is regarding 
Vishwakarma Scheme -  उǄर  मȂ कहा गया है िक DIC और SMC नहीं होने क े कारण 
िवÌवकमार् योजना को पिÌचम बंगाल मȂ लागू नहीं िकया गया।  सर, मȅ आप के  माध्यम से माननीय 
मंतर्ी महोदय से जानना चाहता हूं िक इस संबंध मȂ सरकार की तरफ से क्या कदम उठाए गए हȅ?   
िवÌवकमार् Îकीम क े अंतगर्त बहुत सारे गरीब लोग आते हȅ, तो मȅ जानना चाहत ा हूं िक इसका कायर् 
कब होगा? 
 
Ǜी जीतन राम माँझी : सभापित महोदय, माननीय सांसद महोदय का कथन सौ Ģितशत सत्य है।  
इस मामले मȂ िपछले उǄर मȂ भी देखा गया होगा िक भारत क े दो राज्य पिÌचम बंगाल और 
तिमलनाडु भारत सरकार की िज
तनी भी ÎकीÇस होती हȅ, वे उनके  Ģित अिनच्छु क होते हȅ और 
उनका implementation नहीं करते हȅ।  जहां तक इस योजना का सवाल है, इसके  संबंध मȂ जैसा 
िक बताया गया है िक इसकी जांच तीन Îत र पर होती है -  एक पंचायत Îतर पर, दूसरी िजला 
70
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Îतर पर और तीसरी राज्य Îतर पर।  ये सारी कमेटीज़ राज्य Îतर क े माध्यम से बनाई जाती हȅ।  
राज्य Îतर पर ये कमेटीज़ नहीं बनी हȅ।  इसमȂ आवेदन आते हȅ, लेिकन उनका रिजÎटर्ेशन नहीं हो 
पाता है, उनका िनरीक्षण नहीं हो पाता, मतलब वह आगे Ģोसेस नहीं हो ता है।  माननीय सांसद 
महोदय ने पूछा िक सरकार क्या कारर्वाई कर रही है?  सभापित जी, इसके  िलए हम लोग time 
without number सरकारȗ को िलखते हȅ।   
 हमारे सेकर् ेटरी, हमारे और जूिनयर ऑिफससर् उस राज्य मȂ जाते हȅ, उन के  साथ मीिंटग 
करते हȅ, उनसे अनुरोध करते हȅ िक यह Ģाइम िमिनÎटर का िवज़न Ģोजेक्ट है और यह गरीबȗ क े 
िलए है।  सर, इस योजना मȂ 18 Ģकार क े टर्ेड्स हȅ, जो छोटे-छोटे उǏिमयȗ क े िलए हȅ।  जैसे 
लोहार हȅ, सुनार हȅ, बढ़ई हȅ, वा
शरमेन हȅ, इत्यािद, जो गाँवȗ मȂ पाए जाते हȅ।  Ģाइम िमिनÎटर का 
यही िवज़न है िक बड़ी-बड़ी फ ैक्टिरयȗ क े िलए तो हम लोग क ु छ करते हȅ, हम उनको पैसा देते हȅ, 
यह सब होता है, लेिक
न इन छोटे लोगȗ को कोई नहीं देखता है।  इसीिलए Ģाइम िमिनÎटर 
िवÌवकमार् योजना चलाई गई है और इसके  िलए Ģयास िकया जा रहा है।  आपको यह सुन कर 
जरूर  संतुिÍ ट  होगी िक जब 5 वषर् क े िलए यह योजना चलाई गई है, तो हम लोग 30 लाख लोगȗ 
को लाभािन्वत करने का Ģयास करना चाहते हȅ।  इसमȂ other States से बात आ रही है, लेिकन 
इन दो Îटेट्स से कभी कोई answer नहीं आता, इसिलए हम लोग इन राज्यȗ मȂ इस योजना का 
implementation कराने मȂ असमथर् हȅ।  इसके  िलए बार-बार उनसे अनुरोध िक
या जाता है, कहा 
जाता है, इसके  बावजूद वे नहीं सुनते हȅ, तो यह एक political reason है।  इसिलए इसके  बारे मȂ 
क्या िक या जाए, यह माननीय सांसद या िंहदुÎतान की माननीय जनता जाने। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Supplementary number two, Shri Samik Bhattacharya. 
…(interruptions)… Hon. Member, take recourse to the given provision.  There is a 
provision.  Send a slip to me. Please don' t get up.  Let us maintain decorum.  There 
is a mechanism.  Send a slip to me.  I look around.  If it  is coal, I go to coal-bearing 
areas.  I try to balance all parties and States also.  Shri Samik Bhattacharya. 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA : Sir, we have accepted this federal structure.  We 
have accepted a multi-party democracy. If any State Government is totally ignoring or 
defying this federal system, इसके  ऊपर सरकार का क्या कहना है?  पिÌचमी बंगाल की गरीब 
जनता, जो िवÌवकमार् Îकीम से लाभािन्वत हो सकती है, उसके  िलए हम यही जानना चाहते हȅ िक 
पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ िव
Ìवकमार् Îकीम लागू होगी िक नहीं?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, ask your supplementary. 
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् : हमारा यही कहना है।  हाँ या न? ...(Ëयवधान)... .  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Member, look at me and put the question to the hon. 
Minister.  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
71

 
 
 
  
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् : सर, यह कब होगा?  सर , 7,78,000 applications िदए हुए हȅ।  यह कब 
होगा?  हाँ या न? 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी जीतन राम माँझी : माननीय  सभापित महोदय, अभी वतर्मान मȂ पी एम िवÌवकमार् योजना की 
गाइडलाइंस  मȂ जो Ģावधान है, उसके  अनुसार एक ितर्-Îतरीय किमटी है, वहाँ से ही आवेदन की 
screening तथा verifi
cation होकर इसे आना है।  अब यह कहा जा रहा है िक पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ 
गरीब लोग हȅ, अन्य Îटेट्स मȂ गरीब लोग हȅ, जहाँ implementation नहीं हो रहा है।  हम इस 
हाउस को assure करना चाहते हȅ िक हम लोग इसके  िलए consider करȂगे िक हम
ारे  जो 
गाइडलाइंस  हȅ , उस  गाइडलाइंस मȂ क्या हम इस ितर्-Îतरीय किमटी क े अलावा इससे अलग 
कोई किमटी बना कर अपनी तरफ से वहाँ जाँच करके , आवेदन ȗ  को screening तथा verification 
करके  मँगा सकते हȅ िक नहीं।  महोदय, इस पर सोचना होगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Third supplementary, Ms. Dola Sen. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN:  Sir, through you, I want to inform  the House that the State of West 
Bengal has the highest number of MSME s owned by women and it has been 
appreciated by the concerned Ministry of the Union Government. West Bengal has 
secured the first prize for the best perfor mance of MSMEs by the concerned Ministry 
of the Union Government many times in the last few years.  I want to know whether 
the concerned Ministry of the Union Government is partial or blind to appreciate West 
Bengal as West Bengal is such a low perfor mer?  I want to know this, Sir, through 
you, from the concerned Minister.  Why ha s the eco-friendly, environment-friendly 
traditional handloom sector has been excluded by the concerned Ministry of the Union 
Government from PM Vishwakarma Yojana?  Our State Government has already 
given at least Rs.200 crore towards the arti sans of the handloom sector.  Why does 
this scheme exclude the artisans of age more  t h a n  6 0 ?   I t  i s  b e t t e r  t h e y  f o l l o w  o u r  
Utkarsh Bangla, our Karmasathi, etc., which are getting the first prize for years in 
national and international arena. Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी जीतन राम माँझी : सभापित महोदय, मȅ इस बात को बार-बार कह रहा हूँ िक 'Ģाइम िमिनÎटर 
िवÌवकम
ार् योजना' क े अन्तगर्त जो criteria है , उसमȂ 3 कमेिटयȗ क े माध्यम से ही scrutinize 
होकर ही आवेदन आते हȅ, वे नहीं आ रहे हȅ।  ...( Ëयवधान)... मȅने हाउस को assurance िदया 
िक अगर कोई राज्य सरकार इस Ģकार से भारत सरकार क े िनयमȗ का उÊलंघन करती है, तो in 
the larger interest of the public, हम लोग इस पर िव
चार करȂगे िक क्या िकया जा सकता है।  
72
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, अब रही वह बात, जो उन्हȗने यह कहा िक वÎतर् उǏोग और अन्य 
उǏोगȗ क े बारे मȂ अच्छा िकया है, तो इसके  िलए हम लोग धन्यवाद देते हȅ।  लेिकन इस Ģाइम 
िमिनÎटर िवÌवकमार् योजना का एक limitation है।  हुजूर, उसमȂ हम लोग खास करके  18 सेक्टसर् 
मȂ काम करते हȅ।  कारपȂटर, नाव िनमार्ण करने वाले, अÎतर्कार, धातु िशÊ
पीकार, हथौड़ा बनाने 
वाले, tool kits बनाने वाले, ताला बनाने वाले, goldsmiths, porters, sculptures बनाने वाले, 
पत्थर तराशने वाले जो लोग हȅ, ये सब योजना मȂ हȅ।  ...(Ëय वधान )... इस योजना क े अन्तगर्त 
आने वाले को ही इसमȂ देखȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... बाकी उन्हȗने जो वÎतर् उǏोग की बात कही, तो मȅ 
उसके  बारे मȂ अलग से सूचना गर्हण करू ँगा और अगर उनको अलग से उसकी जानकारी चािहए, 
तो मȅ उनको िभजवा दूँगा 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Su
pplementary No.4; Shri R. Girirajan. 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, in this regard, we have a policy decision in Tamil Nadu.  Our 
hon. Chief Minister has written a detailed letter in this rega rd.  This scheme will spoil 
the poor people; this scheme will spoil the farmers.  ...(Interruptions)...  This is no 
match for Tamil Nadu.  We are following social justice.  We are uplifting the ground 
level people to upper level.  You are sending them down. ...(Interruptions)... A 
barber’s son will become a lawyer; a ba rber’s son will become an engineer. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please ask your supplementary.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: You are giving the opportunity to barber’s son to do the barber 
work. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your supplementary! ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: We are against it.  In this matte r, our hon. Chief Minister has 
written a detailed letter. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Girirajanji, your supplementary! ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN : Yes, Sir, that is what am asking. It is a clarification. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Girirajanji, the issue is: Implementation of PM Vishwakarma scheme 
in West Bengal. Please confine to it.   
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
73

 
 
 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, Minister has mentioned Tamil Nadu. ...(Interruptions)... 
  
Ǜी सभापित : एक िमनट।  माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने सुलभ तरीके  से, िवÎतार से जवाब िदया है, परन्तु 
िवषय पर रहना जरूरी  है। It is important for us to pose supplementaries to the hon. 
Minister on the question.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Hon. Minister has mentioned West Bengal and Tamil Nadu in his 
reply.  In Tamil Nadu, we are opposing this scheme.  We have sent a detailed letter to 
the Ministry.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: That is not a supplementary.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: I record my answer.  We are not accepting. ...(Interruptions)... 
We are not accepting the Vishwakarma scheme in Tamil Nadu. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is not a debating platform. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, I 
will again appeal to you. A question is important only when supplementaries are 
asked about the question.  If we start diverting and making a statement that we will 
not have a Central scheme, this House ha s to debate some day whether national 
schemes can really be so ignored. ...(Interruptions)... Last supplementary; Shri 
Mahendra Bhatt.  
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ : माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहूँगा िक Ģध
 ान मंतर्ी 
िवÌवकमार् योजना क े तहत िकतने राज्यȗ ने अभी तक इसको adopt नहीं िकया है, यह िवषय तो 
आ गया और दूसरा, अभी तक इस योजना क े क ु ल िकतने छोटे और लघु उǏिमयȗ को लाभ िमला 
है?  क्या उसक
ा राज्यवार कोई Åयोरा सरकार दे पाएगी? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मह Ȃदर् जी, यह जानकारी तो public space मȂ इतनी ज्यादा है, िफर भी माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी, आप बताइए। 
 
Ǜी जीतन राम माँझी : सभापित महोदय, वैसे तिमलनाडु की बात तो इस ĢÌन मȂ नहीं थी, लेिकन 
इस ĢÌन क े पीछे क ु छ ऐसी बातȂ आई हȅ िक भारत सरकार की योजनाओं को लागू करने मȂ वैÎट 
बंगाल क े साथ-साथ तिम
लनाडु भी अिनच्छु क है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
74
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
यह बात सही है िक हम गरीबȗ क े िलए करते हȅ, उनके  िलए करते हȅ, जैसे ' पीएम िवÌवकमार् 
योजना' है, यह उनके  िलए है, िजनको िकसी Ģकार से कोई लाभ नहीं िमला है।  मȅ यह पूछना 
चाहता हूँ िक क्या तिमलनाडु और पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ वैसे लोग नहीं हȅ?  हम  उनके  िलए करना 
चाहते हȅ, लेिकन लोग वैसा नहीं कर पाते हȅ.... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मेरा मन तो आपको और भी सुनने को कर रहा है, but the House stands 
adjourned to meet at
 2.00 p.m. 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
 ] 
 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
 
 
2.00 P.M. 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
 
The Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu to move for leave to introduce the 
Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025.  
 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION  (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU) : Sir, I 
move for leave to introduce a Bill to provid e for protection of interests in aircraft 
objects and to implement the Convention on International Interests in Mobile 
Equipment and the Protocol to the Conventi on on International Interests in Mobile 
Equipment on Matters Specific to Aircraft  Equipment, signed at Cape Town on 16
th 
November, 2001 and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
The question was proposed. 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
75

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: There is one notice given by Shri  Sandosh Kumar P opposing the 
introduction of the Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025.  Would you like 
to say something?  Go ahead. Are you on your seat?   
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Yes, Sir. I always speak from my seat only.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Good! This is only to make everyone know that they can speak from 
their seats only.  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P : Sir, since India is a signatory to the Cape Town 
Convention, I can understand the importance of  the Bill, the necessity of the Bill. But 
the point is that this Ministry is so enthusiast ic in bringing up legislations to adapt to 
international situations. But what about the passengers? This Bill is overwhelmingly 
focussed on the interests of lessors and creditors. The airline business had a huge 
profit of more that Rs.16,000 crores during the financial year 2022-23, and again, they 
are going to help the creditors and lessors .  So this point should be taken into 
account. The Ministry should come up with something which is beneficial to the 
passengers.  That is it.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hardly a ground to oppose. It sp eaks of greater participation.  I 
leave it to you.  Now, the question is that leave be granted to introduce the Bill. 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
 
THE UNION BUDGET, 2025-26 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Union Budget, 2025-26. I call upon Shri P. Chidambaram to 
raise the discussion. 
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, I thank the hon. Finance Minister for 
presenting the Budget for 2025-26. There ought to be a philosophy behind the 
Budget, but I cannot divine one in this Budg et. I shall not attempt to do so because 
after going through the Budget speech and th e Budget numbers, I believe there is no 
philosophy behind the Budget. It is obvious that the Budget was politically driven.  I 
76
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
shall not elaborate upon that, but I congratulate the Finance Minister for achieving one 
of her objects a couple of days ago. Cong ratulations Finance Minister! I would like to 
start on an unusual note.   
 The hon. Finance Minister asked this House to appropriate Rs.20,517 crore for 
the Ministry of External Affairs.  Usually, the MEA does not figure in a Budget speech, 
but I want to start with the MEA.  And, I will tell you why!  In 2023-24, the past year, 
we allocated Rs.28,915 crore.  In the curre nt year, the Revised Estimate is Rs.25,277 
crore -- almost Rs.3,600 crore less in the current year.  And, for next year, the 
Finance Minister is asking for only Rs.20,517 crore -- another Rs.5,300 crore less.  I 
wish the External Affairs Minister is here.  I suspect that, and I hope not, the hon. 
Finance Minister is doing an Elon Musk on  the External Affairs Minister.  Somebody 
must explain.  Are we shrinking our world presence?  Are we closing down 
Embassies?  Are we closing do wn Consulates?  Be that as it may.  A more serious 
aspect of the MEA!  MEA stumbled badly in  the last week.  And, I say that with 
responsibility.  It is now clear that th e United States info rmed India about the 
deportation.  They gave a list of deportees.  India verified the list and confirmed that 
104 or so names are Indian citizens.  So, th is was not surprise to the MEA.  It was 
surprise to the rest of the people.  Th e deportation was known to the MEA.  The 
External Affairs Minister met the Secretary of  State, Mr. Rubio, a few days before the 
deportation.  And, that was all published in the newspapers.  I ask the Government: 
Did the External Affairs Minister raise the matter with Mr Rubio?  Did he know about 
t h e  S o P ?   H e  t o l d  t h i s  H o u s e ,  “The SoP has been in place for many years since 
2012.”  If he knew about the SoP, did he pr otest about the SoP to the Secretary of 
State of the United States?  Did he know th at the SoP requires them to handcuff, tie 
the legs with ropes and cover the face with mask?  If he knew about it, did he protest 
to Mr. Rubio?  If he did not protest, why did he not protest? And, the most important 
question: Did the External Affairs Minister... …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Are you yielding?  
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM : I am not yielding.  I am only stating on basis of what he 
said.  Sir, did the hon. External Affairs Mi nister offer to Mr. Ru bio, ‘We will send an 
aircraft to bring our Indian citizens back.’  Another serious matter is, another list of 
483 Indians have been identified as ille gal immigrants.  I don't know when the 
deportation will take place!  I ask a specific question.  Will the Government send an 
Indian aircraft to bring back the Indian illegal immigrants? Now, I go to the Finance 
Minister's trump card. No pun intended, Sir.  Trump card! No pun intended. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
77

 
 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Sir, when you say twice, ‘no pun intended’, I get worried. You said 
twice, which means, pun is intended. I am wondering whether your reference to Elon 
Musk is a compliment to the hon. Finance Minister to take to the groove of efficiency. 
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM: Sir, I am looking at my clock and my Whip. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir, I will add the time. I will add one minute in your time. 
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM: Sir, ‘income tax cut’ is the FM’s main thrust of this budget 
and she has given a number of interviews. The House should know that only 3.2 crore 
persons pay income tax from the last figures av ailable. The rest file returns, but, they 
pay ‘nil’ tax. The Government has raised the threshold from Rs. 7 lakhs to Rs. 12 
lakhs and it applies to all tax payers right up to the highest tax payers.  
Now, I have looked at the last availa ble statistics of CBDT about the tax 
payers. My rough calculation is that about 80  to 85 lakh tax payers will go out of the 
tax net from next year and 2.5 crore will bene fit. These 2.5 crore includes not only the 
middle class which the hon. Finance Minist er passionately champions, it includes 
2,27,315 persons who returned a total income of more than Rs. 1 crore. It includes 
262 persons who returned a total income of more than Rs. 100 crores and it includes 
23 persons who returned a total income of more than Rs. 500 crores. So, this is not 
benefiting the middle class alone, which I welc ome, but, it is benefiting the very rich 
and the richest in the world.  
Sir, the hon. Finance Minister has also claimed that she has foregone Rs.1 lakh 
crores. Yet, she has claimed that the net tax revenues to the Centre will grow by 11.1 
per cent in 2025-26.  In 2024-25 also, it grew by 11 per cent. So, it is about the same 
number. After foregoing Rs. 1 lakh crore in this Budget, how does she claim that the 
net tax revenues to the Centre will grow by th e same 11 per cent? Th is is pure magic; 
not mathematics. I will reserve after this magic unfolds and I will comment on it later.  
Secondly, the hon. Finance Minister says that this Rs. 1 lakh crore will go into 
consumption and that consumption will boos t the economy. Initially, I find a lot of 
cheerleaders accepted that claim.  But, in the last two-th ree days, even the Finance 
Minister’s cheerleaders are becoming skep tical about that. I ask the hon. Finance 
Minister: Will not a part of Rs. 1 lakh crore go into savings? SBI Chairman had hoped 
that part of it will come to him and the banking system. Will not part of Rs. 1 lakh 
crore go into repaying old household debts?  Will not part of Rs. 1 lakh crore go into 
travel abroad? Will it not go for educating children abroad and will it not go into 
78
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
consuming imported goods? If you deduct  all this, how does the hon. Finance 
Minister claim that the entire Rs. 1 lakh  crore will go into consuming domestic good 
and services? It is only the consumption of domestic goods and services will boost 
the GDP rate. Besides, what is Rs. 1 lakh crore when compared to the size of the 
GDP? The size of GDP this year is Rs. 324 lakh crores. Sir, Rs. 1 lakh crores of Rs. 
324 lakh crores is 0.3 per cent!  
 Are you seriously saying and are you asking this House to believe that 0.3 per 
cent will boost the economy?    My humble ad vice to the Finance Minister is, do not 
rely on only one engine of growth-  consumption. Look at other engines of growth like 
exports, capital investment, etc. Those other engines must be revved up.  You 
cannot rely upon one engine of growth.   Most of this consumption will not go into 
consuming domestic goods and services.   No w, contrast, what she has forgotten.  
She remembered the middle class.  I congratulate her for that.  But what about the 
section of the people whom she has forgo tten?  Look at the plight of Indian 
households.  I am taking purely from Government numbers.  Between 2012 and 2024,  
in the 12 year period, food inflation was 6.18 per cent, education inflation was 11 per 
cent and healthcare inflation was 14 per cent.  These have crippled Indian 
households.  Household savings have fallen from 25.2 per cent to 18.4 per cent.  The 
Household Consumption Expenditure Survey, 2023 shows – and mark these 
numbers – average monthly per capita expend iture of a rural family is Rs.4,226/-, 
and in urban areas, it is Rs.6,996/-.   We must examine these numbers more closely.  
This is the average for the whole India – Rs.4,662/- and Rs.6,996/-, average for the 
whole India.  But for the bottom 50 per cent, it will be even less and the bottom 50 per 
cent of the 50 per cent will be even less.  Now, what has this Budget done for the 
average Indian household in the botto m 50 per cent and the bottom 25 per cent? 
Nothing.  What relief has the hon. Financ e Minister given them?  She could have 
done one of several things.  I am not saying  she should have done all the four things 
that I will mention.  She coul d have done one of several things.   One, instead of 
cutting income-tax, or along with cutting in come-tax, she should have cut the GST.  
Everybody pays  GST.   The  richest and the poorest are paying GST.  She could have 
cut GST.  She could have cut the tax on pe trol and diesel.  Everybody indirectly or 
directly uses petrol and diesel.  She could have increased the MGNREGA daily wage. 
She could have increased that rate because the poorest are the ones who are going 
to MGNREGA work.  And, she could have raised the statutory minimum wage across 
the board under the Minimum Wages Act.  That would have benefitted thousands and 
thousands of labourers.    She did nothing, but she wa s focussed on income-tax and 
she was focused on the Delhi election.  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
79

 
 
 
 Let me turn to another subject.  The most gravest challenge facing India, 
facing the country is unemployment.   I think all of you will agree that unemployment is 
the gravest challenge.  Even  the Treasury Benches must ag ree.  Now, the Periodic 
Labour Force Survey, popularly known as PLFS, concluded that unemployment rate 
is 3.2 per cent, and the Economic Survey al so repeats that.I am sure, the London 
School of Economics as well as every other University teaches us that any 
unemployment rate, less than 5 per cent, is eq ual to full employment. I won't get into 
the intricacies. If unemployment rate has fallen to 3.2 per cent, why should we worry? 
We should all be happy because it is fu ll employment according to economic theory. 
But the same PLFS says, youth unemploym ent is 10.2 per cent. The same PLFS 
says, graduates unemployment is 13 per cen t. If youth unemployment is 10.2 and 
graduates unemployment is 13, how does it  conclude that the total unemployment 
rate in India is only 3.2? For every job, for 100 jobs, there are million applicants. For 
1,000 jobs, there are several million applican ts. Sir, the Economic  Survey says and I 
quote, “We need to create 78.5 lakh non- farm jobs every year until 2030. ” I ask the 
hon. Finance Minister, what is her plan? What is the way-forward to create 78 lakh 
non-farm jobs between now and 2030? They will be in Government until 2029. So far 
the bulk of the period is their Government. They should tell us clearly a path to create 
78 lakh jobs every year until the end of the Government.  
Sir, next I come to the famous PLI. Th e Budget has eight lines of expenditure 
on employment generation. I have looked at it closely. If I am wrong, the hon. Finance 
Minister will correct me. There are five lines of expenditure under PLI. There is one line 
of expenditure called ‘New Employment Generation Programme.’ There is one line 
called ‘Prime Minister's Employment Genera tion Programme.’ There is one line called 
‘Skill India.’ I don't know the differences  between these acronyms. What is the 
difference between ‘Prime Minister's Ne w Employment Generation Programme’ and 
the ‘New Employment Generation Programme ?’ We don't have a new PM, we have 
the same PM.  On the eight lines in the cu rrent year -- mark these numbers -- on the 
eight lines together; I have got the breakdown  but I am taking all the eight lines of 
expenditure -- in the current year, the Bu dget allocation, when  she presented the 
Budget last year, was Rs. 28, 318 crore. This is the gravest challenge. You allocated 
Rs. 28,318 crore. But what will you spend?  By March 31, you will spend only Rs. 
20,035 crore. Why are you not spending Rs. 8,000 crore on this challenge, which is 
the gravest challenge facing the country? The PLI Scheme is a spectacular failure. 
Otherwise, you would have spent this money. Employment generation is a 
spectacular failure.  
80
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Now I look at another aspect, the wages of salaried male worker as well as 
female worker.  I am giving the numbers of  the male worker; the wages of salaried 
male worker has fallen in the last seven years from Rs. 12,665 per month to Rs. 11,858 
per month. This is her own numbers -- from  Rs. 12,665 to Rs. 11,858. The wages of 
self-employed male worker has fallen from Rs. 9,454 per month to 8,591 per month. 
So what is the position, Sir? The position  is, incomes are falling; wages are falling; 
Government expenditure is not keeping pace with the promis es; household net 
savings have fallen; and household debt has risen.  
 This is the plight of the bottom 50 per cen t of India.  There is nothing in this 
Budget for the bottom 50 per cent. I think, we  cannot divide this House into one half 
speaking for the top 50 per cent and one half  speaking for the bottom 50 per cent.  I 
am quite happy to speak for the bottom 50 per cent, but I want the Treasury Benches 
also to impress upon their Ministers to speak for the bottom 50 per cent of India. 
 Sir, let us take ‘Make in India’.  Th ey made such a hullaballoo about ‘Made in 
India’. What was ‘Make in India’ became ‘M ade in India’.  In global manufacturing 
trade, India’s share is 2.8 per cent; China’ s share is 28.8 per cent.  So, we are not a 
big player in manufacturing goods trade.  The share of India’s manufacturing in the 
GDP has fallen under this Government.  An d I give the numbers from the Economic 
Survey.  In 2014, it was 15.07 per cent, in 2019, it has fallen to 13.46 per cent and in 
2023, it is 12.93 per cent.  These are the numbers of th e World Bank.  The Economic 
Survey has proportions in the GVA, but that ha s also fallen from 17 per cent to 14 per 
cent. So, manufacturing, as a proportion of GDP, has not increased under this 
Government.  So, manufacturing is a spectacular failure and PLI is a spectacular 
failure.  Now, what has this Government got to boast about after the last 11 years? 
 Sir, I come to my penultimate point.  Now, Budget is about numbers.  I do not 
want to burden the House with numbers, but I have to mention some numbers, 
because the Budget is about numbers.  Now, the hon. Finance Minister claimed in a 
number of interviews that she has not only  met the fiscal deficit target, but has 
improved upon the fiscal deficit target.  Th at is absolutely true if you look at the 
numbers.  The target was 4.9 per cent and the achievement was 4.8 per cent.  But 
how did she achieve this 4.8 per cent?  Sh e cut capital expenditure of the Central 
Government by Rs. 92,682 crore.  Not reve nue expenditure, Sir, capital expenditure 
of the Central Government was cut by Rs. 92,682 crore.  She cut the grants-in-aid to 
States for creating capital assets -- that is  another form of capital expenditure – by 
Rs. 90,887 crore.  So, total cu t in capital expenditure of th e Centre and the States --  
I am not apportioning blame – in the current year, will be Rs. 1,83,569 crore.  By 
cutting capital expenditure by such a hum ungous amount, she saved on the fiscal 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
81

 
 
 
deficit Rs. 43,785 crore.  I can understand if she has saved on the fiscal deficit Rs. 
1,83,000 crore.  It is bad policy, but I would understand.  But after cutting Rs. 
1,83,000-odd crore, she saved about Rs. 44, 000 crore.  Is it good policy?  I don’t 
know.  Is it good economics?  I say, no; it is not good economics.  You cannot cut 
capital expenditure and compress your fiscal deficit and say, ‘I have met my fiscal 
deficit target, or I have improved my fiscal  deficit.’  On the expenditure side, I want 
hon. Members – all of us are concerned – to look at these numbers.  Where have 
the cuts fallen ” On health, Rs. 1,255 crore; on education, Rs. 11,584 crore; and on 
social welfare, Rs. 10,019 crore. 
 I wish the Agriculture and the Rural Development Minister was here. On 
agriculture, the cut is Rs.10,992 crore. On  rural development, it is Rs. 75,133 crore 
and on urban development, it is 18,907 cr ore.  Why do you make these cruel cuts? 
There are other unkind cuts -- I will not gi ve the numbers -- on POSHAN, Jal Jeevan 
Mission, National Social Assistance Programme, Pradhan Ma ntri Gram Sadak 
Yojana, Crop Insurance Scheme, Urea Subsid y and PM Garib Kalyan Yojana. In all 
these programmes, there have been cuts. Th e most cruel cuts are on -- I hope I am 
pronouncing this correctly -- Anusuchit Jati  Yojana Rs. 1,340 crore; Young Achievers 
Scholarship Rs. 455 crore; Post-Matric Scholarship for Scheduled Castes Rs.860 
crore; Programme for Development of Sc heduled Tribes Rs. 670 crore. You cut 
money for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Trib es and Anusuchit Jati and you say, ‘I 
have reached my fiscal deficit; I have improved my fiscal deficit’.   
Look at the grand announcements in this Budget. One grand announcement 
was Urban Challenge Fund in Para 58 of the Budget Speech.  I was impressed; Urban 
Challenge Fund! Rupees one lakh crore was announced. What is the allocation? It is 
only Rs. 10,000 crore!  The next is Jal Jeevan Mission in Para 55 of the Budget 
Speech. Jal Jeevan Mission sa ys, ‘We have provided water to 80 per cent of the 
population of India and we will provide for the remaining 20 per cent. We are, 
therefore, extending the scheme.’  The Bu dget Estimates for the current year was 
Rs.70,163 crore and the actual expenditure is Rs.22,614 cror e. I mean, this is pure 
magic.  You don't spend one-fourth or on e-third of your money and you claim that 
everybody has been provided water.  
Now, I come to my last point. You will give me one more minute.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I would.  I have undertaken.   
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM: Now what did the CEA say? The Chief Economic Advisor is 
a reasonably autonomous office.  I am glad  the hon. Finance Minister has given him 
82
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
the freedom to speak his mind and to be fr ank and forthright. I congratulate the hon. 
Finance Minister in the end for that also. Wh at did he say? He said, ‘Get out of the 
way’. That is all we are saying, ‘Get ou t of the way’, in a different context.  
Deregulate! Deregulation driv es growth. Work towards giving to people back their 
agency and enhancing the economic freedom s of individuals and organisations.  
What is the response of the hon. Finance Minister to get out of the way and to 
deregulate? Her response is to announce in the Budget Speech seven new schemes, 
eight new missions and four new funds! Now where will the money come for these 
schemes, missions and funds? I do not know because there is no allocation.  So, in 
conclusion, I want to say this. Governance is  in the present.  Th ere is a Government, 
but I am sorry to say there is little governance.  
 There is no philosophy, therefore, no policies.  In 1991, we faced a graver 
situation.  There was a man who entered this Parliament and entered the North Block.  
He had an economic philosophy.  He followe d it with policies that required wisdom 
and farsightedness.  Dr. Manmohan Singh had that philosophy.  And, I am urging the 
hon. Finance Minister to recapture the wisdom and the farsightedness of Dr. 
Manmohan Singh.   
 I have one last question.This is through the Finance Minister to the 
Government.  Why have you not conferre d the Bharat Ratna on Dr. Manmohan 
Singh?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I thought the former Finance Minister would cheer and congratulate 
the present Finance Minister for having created a record of  presenting eight 
consecutive Budgets, surpassing that of Shri C.D. Deshmukh.  The House takes note 
of it.  It is a history in formation.  Rest of the issues are for the two sides to deal.   I 
call upon Dr. Dinesh Sharma.  Sir, your time is 25 minutes.   
 
डा. िदनेश शमार् (उǄर Ģदेश) : Ǜीमâ, हमारे माननीय विरÍठ नेता क े ǎारा मुझे 35 िमनट का 
समय िमला था।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  How much time was he allotted? 
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFF
AIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU) :   Sir, he can 
take 35 minutes.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  It stands revised.  Dr. Dinesh Sharma has 35 minutes.  
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
83

 
 
 
डा. िदनेश शमार्: माननीय सभापित महोदय, यह मेरा सौभाग्य है िक आपने मुझे क Ȃदर्ीय बजट 
2025-26 पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है।  इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। 
 
(Ǜी उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 महोदय, वाÎतव मȂ यह एक ऐितहािसक अवसर है, जब हमार ी  सÇमािनत िवǄ मंतर्ी जी क े 
ǎारा लगातार मोदी 3.0 मȂ, यह जो तीसरी बार एनडीए की सरकार है, इसमȂ आठवीं बार बजट 
का ĢÎतुितकरण िकया गया है।  मȅ इस पूणर्कािलक क Ȃदर्ीय बजट की Ģमुख िवशेषताओं को सदन 
क े सÇमुख रखना चाहता हूं।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, यह राजनीितक अथर्ËयवÎथा की आवÌयकताओं की संपूिर्त 
करने वाला एक असाधारण रूप  से सफल बज
ट है।  मȅ ऐसा इसिलए कह रहा हूं िक इसने जहां 
िविभन्न वगș को छ ु आ है, वहीं िनÇन Îतर पर जो कम आय वाले लोग हȅ, उनके  िलए आय का 
सृजन करना, उनकी आय मȂ संवृिǉ करना भी इस बजट का उǈेÌय रहा है।  
मान्यवर, इसमȂ आवास, शहरी मामले, नवाचार, अनुसंधान एवं िवक
ास, मिहला 
सशिƪकरण और जनजातीय सशिƪकरण क े क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत सारे कर्ांितक ारी पिरवतर्न िकए गए हȅ।  
मȅ जानता हूं िक बजट का ĢÎतुितकरण - हालांिक बजट की यह ËयवÎथा तो पहले 1997 तक शाम 
को 5:00 बजे होती थी, क्यȗिक उस समय अंगर्ेजȗ का जो समय होता था, वह वहाँ 11:00 बजे होता 
था, लेिकन अब इसकी ĢÎतुित िदन मȂ होती है।  यान
ी भारतीय ËयवÎथा क े अनुसार इसका जो 
Ģितपादन होता है, मȅ िवǄीय अनुशासन को बनाए रखने क े िलए माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को बधाई 
देता हूं। मȅ उनको इसि लए भी बधाई देता हूं िक हमारा लÑय जो पांचवीं अथर्ËयवÎथा की तरफ 
बढ़ने का है, तो िनिÌचत रूप  मȂ िजस Ģकार से राजकोषीय घाटे को कम िकया गया है, िजस 
Ģकार से हमारे िवकास की जो दर है, वह िÎथर रूप  मȂ लगा तार बढ़ रही है, हम 2026 तक चौथी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा क े रूप  मȂ पूरे िवÌव क े पटल पर आएंगे।  हमारा यह कहना है िक हमारे इस बजट मȂ 5 
िटर्िलयन डॉलर की इकोनॉमी की तरफ जो तमाम Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ, इनसे िनिÌचत रूप  मȂ यह 
2047 मȂ 'िवकिसत भारत' की पिरक
Êपना का एक रोड मैप क े रूप  मȂ ĢÎतुत हुआ है।   
महोदय, यह सही है िक अंतरराÍटर्ीय मुदर्ा कोष क े ǎारा भी इसकी Ģशंसा की गई है और 
उसने वैिÌवक मंदी क े बीच भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा को एक उज्ज्वल Îथान िदया है और इसे िवकास 
का क Ȃ दर् बनाया है, जो ह
मारी मजबूत नीितयȗ और दूरदशीर् सोच क े कारण ही संभव हो पाया है।   
मान्यवर, मȅ जानता हूं िक हालांिक अभी हमारे पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी महो दय सÇभवत: चले गए हȅ, 
उन्हȗने बड़े अच्छे तरीके  से इसका िवÌलेषण िकया है। 
 मान्यवर, आज एक िवडंबना है िक भारत मȂ और खास तौर से राजनीित मȂ दो चीजȂ बहुत 
तेजी क े साथ समाÃत हो रही हȅ - एक है Ëयिƪ का भरोसा और दूसरा है कांगर्ेस पाटीर्।  ये दोनȗ 
बहुत तेजी से समािÃत की तरफ बढ़ रहे हȅ।  मȅने इसको ऐसे नहीं कहा।  वे िज
न नीितयȗ क े कारण 
अभी तक बजट का िवÌलेषण कर रहे थे, उन्हȗने कभी गरीब को नहीं छ ु आ, कभी मध्यम वगर् को 
नहीं छ ुआ।  मȅने तो तमा
म िवपक्षी नेताओं क े बयान उस समय पढ़े थे, जब वे कह रहे थे िक मध्यम 
वगर् क े िलए जो 7 लाख रुपए  तक की सीमा है, उसक ो आप 10 लाख रुपए  तक कीिजए।  Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी  क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ हमारे िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने उसको 12 लाख  रुपए  तक कर िदया है।  जो 7 
84
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
लाख रुपए  तक करना था, उसको 12 लाख रुपए  तक की छू ट दे दी गई है।  मȅ यही कहूंगा िक 
यही अǌुत समायोजन है और आज क े भारत की आिर्थक ËयवÎथा मȂ नेकनीयती क े कारण इस 
Ģकार से अथर् संतुलन बना है।  मȅ कांगर्ेस क े िलए कभी-कभी हँसी मȂ कहता हूँ : 
 
'ख़ुद िचराग़ बन क े जल वĩत क े अंधेरे मȂ, 
भीक क े उजालȗ से रौशनी नहीं होती।' 
 
 वह राÍटर्ीय पाटीर् आज छो
टे-छोटे दलȗ पर, छोटी-छोटी न ीितयȗ पर, तमाम िवघटनकारी 
मंतËयȗ पर अपनी नीितयȗ को उǇािटत करती है।  आदरणीय खरगे जी चले गए, वे हमारे विरÍठ 
नेता हȅ और आज हम लोगȗ ने आदरणीय सोिनया जी का उǊोधन सुना है।  मȅ इतना ही कहूँगा िक 
आपका लगातार जो Ģदशर्न है, उसके  िलए मȅ आपको बधाई देना चाह
ता हूँ और कोिटश: बधाई 
देना चाहता हूँ।  आपने कम-से-कम िदÊली की िवधान सभा चुनाव मȂ तीन सीटȗ पर अपनी 
जमानत बचाई है - इसके  िलए मȅ आपको बधाई देना चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधा न)...  आप कहते रह 
गए, बदनाम करते रह गए िक संिवधान खतरे मȂ है।  आप बदनाम करते रह गए िक आरक्षण 
समाÃत हो रहा है और जनता ने आपकी जो बदनीयती थी, उसको पहचाना।  हिरयाणा आया, 
महाराÍटर् आया, िदÊली आया और आगे की तैयारी Ģारंभ है।  इसीिलए मȅ आप सबसे कहना चाहता 
हूँ, हमारे जो िमतर् हȅ, उनसे मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक आपकी सम
Îया क े दो कारण हȅ।  एक कारण 
तो यह है िक िबना सोचे कायर् करना, जो मन मȂ आया, कर डाला और दूसरा है िबना कायर् िकए 
सोचते रहना।  आपने जो िकया नहीं, उसके  िलए भी आप सोचते रहते हȅ।   
आदरणीय िचदÇबरम साहब ने अभी अपने उǊोधन मȂ कहा िक मनमोहन िंसह जी को 
'भारत रत्न' देना चािहए।  आपने उनको क्या िदया?  अगर 80 क े दशक की बात की जाए, जब वे 
एक संवैधािन
क पद पर थे, िवǄ मंतर्ी नहीं थे, संभवत: योजना आयोग क े उपाध्यक्ष थे...  अभी जो 
पूछा जा रहा था िक आपने गर्ामीण मȂ क्या िक या?  गर्ामीण  ËयवÎथा क े उन्नयन क े िलए माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े मागर्दशर्न पर सीतारमण जी ने जो िकया, वह अभूतपूवर् है।  मȅ यह इसिलए कह 
रहा हूँ क्यȗिक उस समय यही बात मनमोहन िंसह जी ने कही थी।  उस समय आदर णीय राजीव 
गाँधी जी Ģधान मंतर्ी हुआ करते थे और उन्हȗने उस समय मनमोहन िंसह जी का अपमान करते 
हुए कहा था िक यह जोकरȗ का समूह है।  उस समय मनमोहन िंसह जी जोकरȗ का समूह िदखाई 
पड़े थे।  जब उनके  िव धेयक को कांगर्ेस क े एक बड़े नेता फाड़ रहे थे, जो उनको यूज़लेस िदख रहा 
था। ...(Ëयवधान)...  वे कौन नेता हȅ, यह तो आप जानते ही हȅ, जो जाड़े मȂ भी गमीर् का अहसास 
करते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान).. .   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  नो, नो, Ãलीज़। 
 
डा. िदनेश शमार्: महोदय, आज बदले हुए समय मȂ जब सरकार काम कर रही है, तो सरकार क े 
काम क े समय, आज उसको यह कहा जाता है िक आपने यह वादा पूरा नहीं िकया, वह नहीं 
िकया।  अग
र हमने वादा पूरा नहीं पूरा िकया, तो हम सǄा मȂ क ै से आए, हमने क ै से जीता!  मȅ तो 
कहूँगा:  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
85

 
 
 
'हर वादा िदल से िनभाते हȅ हम, 
तभी तो जनता क े मन मȂ भाते हȅ हम।' 
 
हम लगातार जीत रहे हȅ और आप लगातार हार रहे हȅ।  अगर आज इसका िवÌलेषण िकया 
जाए, तो जहां हमने िवǄीय अनुशासन को बनाया है, वहीं जो एफआरबीएम है, बजट Ģबंधन 
अिधिन
यम है, उसके  ǎारा हमने िनधार्िरत लÑयȗ की ĢािÃत क े िलए राजकोषीय घाटे को लगातार 
कम करने का जो संकÊप िलया था, उसको आज हमारी सरकार ने बखूबी ĢÎतुत िकया है।  अगर 
आप बजट का अवलोक न  करȂ और उसका िवÌलेषण करȂ, तो एक अǌुत चीज िदखाई पड़ती है।  
िवǄीय वषर् 2023 मȂ हमारा राजकोषीय घाटा चार Ģितशत था, िवǄीय वषर् 2025 क े बजट का जो 
िरवाइज्ड एिÎटमेट हुआ, उसके  अनुसार हमारा राजकोषीय घाटा 1.9 Ģितशत था और िवǄीय वषर् 
2026 क े िलए बजट का जो एिÎटमेट है, उसके  अनुसार हमारा राजक
ोषीय घाटा 1.5 Ģितशत 
आएगा।  
 अथर् Ģबंधन की क ुशलता का यही एक मापन यंतर् है।  मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक आज 
िजस Ģकार से हमारी ये ËयवÎथाएं चल रही हȅ, अगर यही रुझान  जारी रहा तो वषर् 2030 मȂ 
राजÎव अिधशेष, िजसे आप revenue surplus कहते हȅ, उस
की तरफ हम लोग तेजी क े साथ बढ़ 
जाएंगे, बिÊक हम उसको ĢाÃत करȂगे।  आप कह सकते हȅ िक एक यह बार और 1981 मȂ ĢाÃत 
िकया गया था, लेिकन उसके  बाद आपने क्यȗ Ģा
Ãत नहीं िकया, भारत को सोना क्यȗ बेचना पड़ा? 
क्यȗ भारत एक deficit financing की तरफ बढ़ता गया? आपकी नीितयȗ ने भारत को कमजोर 
बनाया और पराधीन बनाया।  यही कारण था िक आप अमेिरका से सड़ा हुआ लाल रंग का गेहूं 
मंगाते थे, िजसको लेने क े िलए यहां पर लोग राशन काडर् लेकर ला
इन लगाते थे, उन पर 
लाठीचाजर् होता था और बमुिÌकल से उनको थोड़ा-सा राशन िमल पाता था।  इन्हीं आिर्थक 
नीितयȗ क े कारण आज क ु छ-क ु छ Ģदेशȗ मȂ 10 िकलो  राश न मुÄत िमल रहा है, कहीं 5 िकलो 
राशन मुÄत मȂ िमल रहा है।  यही अथर् Ģबंधन का एक सारांश है, िजसको समझने की जरूरत  थी।  
महोदय, मȅ माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया को धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ।  आदरणीय खरगे 
साहब उनके  िलए कई बार बड़े सÇमा
न से "माताजी" शÅद का Ģयोग करते हȅ। मȅ यह नहीं मानता 
िक उन्हȗने भूल से ऐसा कहा होगा, हो सकता है िक उनके  मन मȂ उनके  Ģित आदर भाव रहा हो, 
लेिकन मां क्या है?  मा ं तो वह है जो घर मȂ सभी बच्चȗ का ख्याल रखती है।  जो कमजोर है, वह 
उसकी इच्छ
ाओं की भी संपूिर्त करती है।  जो सबल है, वह उसको भी Ãयार करती है और पूरे 
पिरवार का संचालन करती है।  आज अगर हम इस बजट को देखȂ, तो आदरणीय िवǄ मंतर्ी 
महोदया ने जहां गर्ामीण अथर्ËयवÎथा क े उन्नयन क े िलए काम िकया है, वहीं उन्
हȗने शहरी 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर को भी ठीक िकया है।  वहीं पर, बच्चȗ की िशक्षा क े िलए और िशक्ष ा क े क्षेतर् मȂ 
कर्ांितकारी पिरवतर्न क े िलए बजट का आवंटन है, तो वहीं आईआईटीज़ और आईआईएÇस क े 
िलए भी इसमȂ क ु छ न क ु छ Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ।   
महोदय, मȅ आपसे करना चाहता हूँ िक जब लोग कहते हȅ िक भारत की जो मूल अवÎथा 
है, उसकी Ģगित की जो जड़ है, वह िनिÌच
त रूप  से यहां का मध्यम वगर् है।  िपछली सरकारȗ ने 
मध्यम वगर् क े ऊपर क्यȗ नहीं ध्यान िदया?  इस बजट का जो मूल तत्व समािहत है, मȅ समझता हूँ 
िक उसने आज से पहले कभी िकसी ने इसके  बारे मȂ नहीं सोचा िक मध्यम Ǜेणी की िज
तनी इनकम 
86
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
नहीं होती, उससे ज्यादा उनको टैक्स देना पड़ता है और कभी-कभी तो उनको अपनी आय का 
30% तक का टैक्स देना पड़ता था।  उसके  बारे मȂ उन्हȗने कभी नहीं सोचा था।  आज का जो 
बजट है, उसमȂ िनिÌचत रूप  से 12,75,000 रुपय े तक की व ािर्षक  आय वालȗ का आयकर शून्य 
कर िदया है। अभी आयकर का िवधेयक भी आने वाला है, िजसमȂ उसका सरलीकरण भी होगा 
और अन्य तमाम चीजȂ भी हȗगी।  मȅ कह सकता हूँ िक सरकार क े ये जो कदम हȅ, ये Ease of 
Doing Business को बढ़ावा देने वा ले हȅ, क्यȗिक आज िनवेश बढ़ रहा है। 
 मान्यवर, आज आिर्थक िवकास तेजी से बढ़ रहा है और शायद हमȂ यही अमृत काल की 
ओर और मजबूती से ले जाने वाला है।  अभी क ु छ िदन पहले, आरबीआई ने रेपो रेट कम िकया है।  
क ु छ लोग इस पर भी Ëयंग्य कर सकते हȅ।  रेपो रेट कम होने का मतलब क्य
ा है? इसका मतलब 
यह है िक लोन सÎते हो जाएंगे, लोगȗ क े हाथȗ मȂ धन आएगा, िजसे वे या तो खचर् करȂगे या उसे 
बचाएंगे।  अगर वे उसे बच
ाएंगे, तो िनवेश बढ़ेगा और अगर खचर् करȂगे, तो उपभोƪा वÎतुओं की 
मांग बढ़ेगी और मांग बढ़ेगी तो Ģोडक्शन बढ़ेगा।  इस Ģकार, ये सारी चेन, जो एक साथ चल रही 
है, मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह
ी भारत का असली अथर्शाÎतर् है, िजसका ĢÎतुितकरण होना चािहए था, 
िजसे  आजादी क े बाद भी करने मȂ कांगर्ेस की सरकार असफल रही।  मȅ इस बारे मȂ भी कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक भारत मȂ तम
ाम चीजȂ हमारे सामने आईं।  हमारी जो िवकास दर है, अगर हम देखȂ तो 
वषर् 2025-26 मȂ 6.4 तक की वािर्षक िवकास दर का अनुमान है। पूंजीगत Ëयय को 8.2 Ģितशत 
तक बढ़ाने का जो अनुमान है, मȅ समझता हूँ िक वह भी हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा का एक मजबूत पहलू 
बनकर हमारे सामने आता है, जो हमा
रे देश को उन्नित की ओर ले जाएगा।  इस Ģकार, हर क्षेतर् 
मȂ काम हुआ है।   
मान्यवर, अभी आवास क े बारे मȂ िटÃपणी हो रही थी।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने तो  मिहलाओं क े 
नाम पर आवास का आवंटन िकया है!  अगर हम देखȂ तो हमारी आयुÍमान भ
ारत की जो Îकीम है, 
उससे तमाम लोगȗ का घर-पिरवार सुखी हुआ है।  अगर उनके  पास अपने मकान हȗगे तो एक 
मिहला ÎवÎथ वातावरण मȂ रहेगी, Îव
Îथ वातावरण मȂ उसके  बच्चȗ का पालन होगा और वह 
अपनी ÎवÎथ मानिसकता का योगदान अपने अन्य कायș क े उन्नयन क े िलए दे सकती है।  
इसिलए मȅ कहूंगा िक आवास और शहरी मामलȗ क े हम ारे जो माननीय मंतर्ी हȅ,उन्हȗने 
एक अच्छी पहल की है। 
 मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एनडीए की तीसरी बार बनी हुई सरकार ने सबके  िलए घर का जो 
लÑय रखा है, उसके  तहत पूरे देश मȂ और तीन करोड़ पिरव ारȗ को पक्का घर िमलने वाला है। 
इतना ही नहीं, इस योजना क े िलए 5 लाख, 36 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े बजट का Ģावधान िकया गया 
है। मोदी जी जो कहते हȅ, वही गारंटी है। मोदी जी जो कहते हȅ, वही करते हȅ। क ु छ लोग तो कहते 
हȅ िक मोदी जी आपको िदÊली क े िलए अगला जन्म लेना पड़ेगा, तो मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाह
ता हूं िक 
मोदी, जी इसी जन्म मȂ बड़े से बड़ा काम करने की क ूËवत रखते हȅ। आपदा समाÃत हुई है, लेिकन 
आपदा समाÃत होने क े बाद िदÊली आज खुशहाली मना रही है। क ु छ लोग यहां मौजूद नहीं हȅ, 
लेिकन मȅ राजनीितक Ëयिƪयȗ क े िल
ए उनसे कहूंगा िक जाड़े मȂ ठंड और Ëयिƪ का घमंड – दोनȗ 
ही अकड़ पैदा करते हȅ। और जनता राजनीित मȂ अकड़ को बड़
ी जÊदी ठीक करती है। वही हुआ - 
अगले जन्म की ज़रूरत  नहीं पड़ी, इसी जन्म मȂ फ ैसला हो गया। इसिलए मȅ कहना चा हता हूं िक 
इस बजट से क ु छ लोगȗ मे मन और मिÎतÍक मȂ घबराहट पैदा हुई है। वहीं क े, एक राज्य क े भूत - 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
87

 
 
 
मान्यवर मेरे मुंह से भूत शÅद गलत िनकल गया - भूतपूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी, हालांिक ‘भूत’ शÅद भी गलत 
नहीं है। भूत की एक िवशेषता है िक वह चारȗ तरफ चक्कर काटता रहता है। भूतपूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी ने 
कहा था िक यह बजट गरीबȗ को िलए और मध्यम Ǜेणी क े लोगȗ क े िलए होना चािहए था। मȅ 
बताना चाहूंगा िक मध्यम Ǜेणी क े िलए जो पहले कभी सोचा भी नहीं था, वह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ हो गया है। उन्हȗने 10 लाख की आय सीमा की बात की थी, यहां 12 लाख रुपय े हो गई, 
रेपो रेट कम हो रहा है, आठवȂ वेतन आयोग का गठन भी हो गय
ा है। अगर आप देखȂ तो गरीब और 
दिलत मिहलाओं क े िलए िकसी ने कभी सोचा ही नहीं था। इसमȂ एससी/एसटी क े िलए 2 करोड़ 
रुपय े तक क े टमर् लोन की ËयवÎथा हुई है। कौन सा वगर् ऐसा है, जो अछू ता रहा हो? कोई नहीं 
रहा। मान्यवर, हम अमृतकाल की तरफ मज़बूती से आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ, यह शायद इसि लए भी संभव 
हुआ िक हमने जो रोटी, कपड़ा और मकान... दीनदयाल जी कहते थे: 
 
“भूल गए राग रंग, भूल गए जकड़ी 
तीन चीज़Ȃ याद रहीं नून, तेल, लकड़ी” 
 
अब नून, तेल और लक
ड़ी की िज़Çमेदारी भी हम ले रहे हȅ। दीन दयाल जी क े अनुयायी, 
उनके  मानने वाले और िशÍयवत भाव रखने वाले Ģधान मंतर्ी जी सब क ु छ पूरा कर रहे हȅ। अब 
अगर दवा की ज़रूरत है, तो सरकार मुहैया क राएगी। बच्चे का िववाह है, तो उसकी िंचता 
सरकार करेगी। िशक्षा की आवÌयकता है, तो मुÄत िशक्षा की ËयवÎथा हमारी सरकार करेगी। आज 
रोज़गार की ज़रूरत है, तो मुदर्ा लोन क े तहत बढ़ी हुई रािश सरकार देगी। हर चीज़ की िंचता 
करने वाली यह िंचतनश
ील सरकार है। मान्यवर, जो िंचता करता है, वह िनिÌचत रूप  से पराभव 
का भाव लेता है। जो िंचता करने वाले लोग थे, वे आलोचना करते थे, कटाक्ष करते थे, Ëयंग्य करते 
थे। इन सबके  बीच न क ेवल एक दूरदशीर् बजट आया, बिÊक बजट ने वषर् 2025 तक और 40
 
हज़ार घर पूरे करने का संकÊप िलया है। उन्हȗने ‘Special Window for Affordable and Mid-
Income Housing Fund’ क े अंतगर्त 50 हज़ार घर दे िदए हȅ। वषर् 2025 तक  हम और 40 हज़ार  
मकान देने वाले हȅ। आपक
ो और क्या चािहए? मȅ काËय का रचनाकार या कोई किव नहीं हूं, बिÊक 
काËय का Ǜोता हूं, उसका Ǜवण करता हूं। Ǜवण करते हुए मुझे क ु छ बातȂ याद आती हȅ: 
  
“एक छत तो हर िसर का अिधकार है 
भारत क े घरȗ मȂ पलता िवकास का आध
ार है। 
दीवारȂ नहीं, यह हर बƳे की मुÎकान है, 
हर घर मȂ बसता भारत का सÇमान है।” 
 
यह जो भारत का सÇमान है, इस सÇमान क े उन्न्यन क े िलए हमारी सरकार ने काम िक या 
है। मान्यवर, आज गरीबȗ क े िलए हर क्षेतर् मȂ कायर् िकए जा रहे हȅ। मान्यवर, मȅ यही कहूंगा िक: 
  
“जो अज्ञात को खोजने का साहस रखते हȅ, 
वही िवकास की नई िदशा भी गढ़ते हȅ।” 
88
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
 आज तमाम जगहȗ पर जो नहीं हो रहा था, उसको भी खोज कर सरकार ने पूरा िकया है।  
अभी तीन िदन पहले मȅ समाचार पतर् मȂ सुभाष चंदर् बोस जी क े डर्ाइवर कमरुǈीन साहब का एक 
िचतर् देख रहा था।  कमरुǈीन साहब, सुभाष चंदर् बोस जी क े डर्ाइवर रहा करते थे और वे बदहाली 
क े वातावरण मȂ अपना जीवनयापन कर रहे थे।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने उनको खोजा और न क ेवल 
खोजा, बिÊक उनकी सारी आवÌयकताओं को पूरा िकया और Ģधान मंतर्ी जी कमरुǈीन जी क े 
चरण छू ते हुए  िदखाई  िदए।  यही भारत है।   जो वाÊमीिकयȗ क े क ुं भ मेले मȂ सफाईकिर्मयȗ क े पैर 
धोते हुए देश का Ģधान मंतर्ी िदखाई दे, यही भारत का Ģतीक है।  सर,  िवपक्ष क े िलए यही 
िवडÇबना ददर्नाक बनती जा रही है।  वे तरह-तरह की बातȂ, जो भारत क े Ģतीक हȅ, भारत की जो 
सÆयता है, जो भारत का सनातन है, कभी-कभी उस पर आघात भी करते हȅ और बाद मȂ कभी-
कभी डुबकी भी लगाते हȅ।  हमारे उǄर Ģदेश मȂ क ुं भ मȂ बहुत िनमर्ल पानी था।  यह अलग बात है 
िक वहां एक अिĢय घटना घटी, तो उस पर हमारे राÍटर्पित जी ने भी दुख Ëयƪ िकया।  यह घटना 
नहीं घटनी चािहए थी, उससे सबक ो  दुख हुआ। एक जमाने मȂ चार करोड़ लोग आते थे, लेिकन 
आज िजस तरह की ËयवÎथा है, िजसकी वजह से आज 2025 मȂ 40 करोड़ का आंकड़ा पार कर 
चुक े हȅ।  वहां लोग आ रहे हȅ,  क्यȗिक वहां ËयवÎथा भी अच्छी है और लोगȗ का जाित-पाित, अलग 
करो, काटो, बांटो और राज करो का जो अिभयान था, उसकी जगह वहां सनातिनयȗ का एक 
साथ Îनान होता है।  अगर नाव का क ेवट है, तो पंिडत जी भी साथ मȂ हाथ िमलाते हुए िदखाई देते 
हȅ।  वहां कोई दिलत समुदाय की जाित नहीं पूछता, कोई धमर् नहीं पूछता और साथ िमलकर ईÌवर 
की Îतुित मȂ अपने को नतमÎतक करते हȅ।  यही महाकुं भ का जो िजÎट है, उस िजÎट क े ममर् को 
कोई समझ नहीं पाया।  वहां पर लोग गए और वीआईपी कÊचर मȂ गए।  100 लोगȗ की सेना लेकर 
गए थे, 11 डुबकी लगाई।  हमारे यहां सÇमािनत है, मȅ सÇमान करता हूं।  वैसे लोग कहते हȅ िक क ुं भ 
क े मेले मȂ बहुत सारे लोग खो जाते हȅ।  हालांिक क ुं भ मȂ खोया-पाया का क ैÇप लगा हुआ है, लेिकन 
िदÊली मȂ जो  चुनाव का महाकुं भ था, उसमȂ उǄर Ģदेश क े दो लड़के  खो गए।   एक लड़का कह 
रहा था िक वह नेशनल हैराÊड क े घोटाले का आरोपी है, तो दूसरे उǄर Ģदेश क े लड़के  कह रहे 
थे िक ये शराब घोटाले क े आरोपी हȅ। ये दोनȗ िमलȂगे, अलग हȗगे, तो वह उनका अपना कायर् है, 
लेिकन मेरा ĢÌन यह है िक जब आपने 11 डुबिक
यां लगाई  थीं, तो कम से कम यमुना मईया मȂ 
साथ मȂ हाथ पकड़ कर एक डुबकी तो लगा लेते।  आपने नहीं लगाई, क्यȗिक आपने वादा पूरा नहीं 
िकया।   जब वादा पूरा नहीं िकया,  तो  िनिÌचत रूप  मȂ जनता ने आपको नकार िदया।  यह जो 
बजट  है, यह वादȗ को पूरा करने वाला है।   कर्म
श: हर जगह  पर एक-एक छोटे-छोटे वादȗ को 
पूरा करने वाला है।  जनजाितयȗ क े संबंध मȂ देखȂ, तो ‘ धरती आबा जनजाित गर्ाम  उत्कषर् 
अिभयान’ चलाया है।  अगर आप देखȂगे, तो 24,100 करोड़ रुपय े का बजट रखा गया है, वह न्याय 
महाअिभयान पीएम-जनमन क े िलए रखा गया है।   अगर आप देखȂ िक जो अत्यंत िपछड़े जनजाित 
समूह हȅ, उनको लंबे समय से उपेिक्षत रखा गया था, उनके  िलए तमा
म कÊयाणकारी योजनाएं 
हमारी सरकार ने बनाई हȅ।  पहली बार ‘ जनजातीय गौरव िदवस’ मनाने का काम भी हमारी 
सरकार ने िकया है।  मȅ कह सकता हूं िक गर्ामीण ȗ क े िलए, जनजाित क े िलए, दिलत मिहलाओं क े 
िलए और नौजवानȗ  क े  िलए  Îटाटर्-अप  को भी दुगना बढ़ा िदया गया है।  आज  मुदर्ा  लोन को 
भी  दुगना कर िदया है।  रोजगार का सृजन करने वाला है, तो वहीं चम ड़ा उǏोग मȂ नई  कर्ांित 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
89

 
 
 
लाने क े िलए  लगभग 20 से 22 लाख नौकिरयȗ का सृजन करने वाला है।  अगर आप  दूसरी तरफ  
देखȂगे, तो तमाम Ģकार क े एआई क े ऊपर भी तमाम बजट का Ģावधान िकया गया है।   अगर मȅ 
देखूं, तो हर तरफ चौमुखी िवकास क े लÑय िमलȂगे।  यह महत्वपूणर् है, लेिकन अगर कोई इसमȂ 
बहाना ढ ूंढ़ता है िक यह नहीं िकया, यह करना चािहए था, तो िनिÌ
चत रूप  से हमȂ जो करना 
चािहए था, हम कर रहे हȅ।  हमने आिर्थक सशिƪकरण क े िलए एक ‘ Ģधान मंतर्ी जनजातीय 
िवकास िमशन’ को शुरू  िकया है। उǏिमता क े िलए हमने वोकल फॉर लोकल को शुरू  िकया है। 
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
हम आवासीय िवǏालयȗ क े माध्यम से 1 लाख, 25 हज़ार  आिदवासी बच्चȗ को िशक्ष
ा की गुणवǄा 
मȂ आगे लेकर आए हȅ। दस वषș मȂ हमारी सरकार ने आिदवासी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 10 से  30 नय े मेिडकल 
कॉलेज खोलने का िनणर्य  िलया है।  
Ǜीमान, शायद यही वेदना थी और यह वेदना बजट से पूवर्, राÍटर्पित महोदया क े 
अिभभाषण क े पहले िदन िदखाई पड़ी। भाजपा सरकार आिदवािसयȗ क े िलए, दिलतȗ क े िलए 
योजना लाएगी। महोदय, एक बड़े नेता, क्यȗिक वे सदन क े नेता नहीं हȅ, वे Ģितपक्ष क े नेता हȗगे, 
लेिकन उनका जोश इतना रहता है िक वे सदन मȂ खुद तो सोते हȅ और जब राÍटर्पित महोदया 
भाषण देती हȅ, तो कहते हȅ िक उबाऊ भाषण था। एक आदरणीया, जो खुद बहुत अमीरी का जीवन 
जी रही हȅ, वे पुअर लेडी कहती हȅ। वे सुÎत लेडी या थकी हुई लेडी बताती हȅ। कौन थका है – 
इसका िनणर्य आप करȂगे!  
महोदय, संवैधािनक पद पर आसीन एक उच्च पदÎथ आिदवासी मिहला क े िलए इस 
Ģकार क े वƪ
Ëयȗ का Ģयोग करने क े िलए मȅ समझता हूं िक यह भारत की राजनीित मȂ शमर्नाक है। 
महोदय, यही नहीं, उन्हीं की पाटीर् क े एक नेता हȅ, जो बंगाल से आते हȅ – वे पहले उनके  नेता थे, 
उन्हȗने उन्हȂ राÍटर्पत्नी क े रूप  मȂ संबोिधत िकया। आप अपमान क े कौन-सी सीमा पर ले जाना 
चाहते हȅ? एक नेता, जो कभी उनके  साथ रहकर, असत्य का पूरा पुिंल
दा लेकर उनके  बारे मȂ 
कहते हȅ िक ये राम मंिदर नहीं गईं, ये वहाँ नहीं गईं आिद-आिद, तो मȅ उनसे कहना चाहता हूं िक 
आपको क्या पता िक माननीय राÍटर्पित महोदया आज क ुं भ मȂ Îनान कर रही हȅ। महोदय, यही 
भारत की सनातन संÎकृ ित है। अगर आपको उनके  बारे मȂ पता करना है, तो सचर् कर लीिजएगा 
िक वे धमर् का Ģदशर्न नहीं करतीं। वाÎ तव  मȂ अगर देखा जाए, तो मई, 2024 मȂ हमारी राÍटर्पित 
महोदया राम मंिदर गई थीं और उन्हȗने सरयू नदी मȂ Îनान भी िकया था। उन्हȗने वहाँ पर पूजा भी 
की थी, वे महा आरती मȂ शािमल भी हुई थीं। आपको इन बातȗ की जानकारी नहीं है, आप तो बस 
इसिलए आरोप लगाते हȅ, तािक आप लोगȗ मȂ भेद पैदा करȂ। यह अगड़ा है, यह िपछड़ा है, यह 
अनुसूिचत है, यह दिलत है, इनको बाँटो, इनको अलग करो, िफर राज करने की पिरकÊपना 
करो। अगर ये क ुं भ चले जाएंगे,  तो  क ुं भ मȂ एक साथ िमलकर आपस मȂ सब एक हो जाएंगे! 
इसिलए इन
की जो दुÌमनी थी- महोदय, मȅ दुÌमनी शÅद का Ģयोग कर रहा हूं - वह दुÌमनी 
िकसी और से नहीं थी, बिÊक वह क ुं भ और सनातन पर थी, इसीिलए वे सोच रहे थे िक ये सभी 
आपस मȂ िमल क्यȗ रहे हȅ? ये इस चीज़ की तलाश मȂ भटक रहे थे िक दुख की घड़ी आ जाए। 
इनकी जो िग
ǉ दृिÍट है, वह एक दुखद घटना की तलाश मȂ भटक रही थी।  
90
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
महोदय, एक घटना होने क े बाद िजस तरीके  से शमर्नाक बयान िदए गए, मȅ समझता हूं 
िक वे उिचत नहीं थे। महोदय, आज समय बदला है और इस बदले हुए समय पर मȅ समझता हूं िक 
हमारा जो बजट है, वह एक नई िदशा और दृिÍ ट की तरफ बढ़ रहा है। मȅ इसकी िदशा और दृिÍट 
इसिलए कहूंगा, क्यȗिक इसमȂ Atal Innovation Mission से लेकर  National Quantum Mission 
तक की उपलÅधता है। इसमȂ AI और Semiconductor Ecosystem को मजबूत करने से लेकर 
Deep Tech Startup को बढ़ावा देने तक का िवज़न है। इसमȂ एक सोच है, िजसमȂ 10 हज़ार, 300 
करोड़ क े ऐितहािसक िनवेश क े साथ  In
diaAI Mission, यानी भारत मȂ क ृितर्म बुिǉमǄा क े 
पिरĢेÑय को कर्ांितकारी रूप  मȂ बदलने क े िलए भारत को तैयार करने का िवज़न है।  
मान्यवर, यह बजट शोध और नवाचार, िजसको आप research and innovation कहते 
हȅ, उस क्षेतर् मȂ वैिÌवक हब बनाने क े िलए अपनी Ģितबǉता को और मजबूत कर रहा है। महोदय, 
यह ऐसे ही नहीं है। लाल बहादुर शाÎतर्ी जी ने ‘जय जवान-जय िकसान’ कहा था, अटल जी ने 
उसमȂ ‘ जय िवज्ञान’ जोड़ा, आदरणीय Ģध
ान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा ‘ जय जवान-जय िकसान-जय 
िवज्ञान-जय अनुसंधान’ और जय अनुसंधान क े साथ इन तमाम नवाचारȗ मȂ, तमाम Ģयोग करने क े 
िलए आज हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने धन का आवंटन िकया है। शायद इसी का पिरणाम था िक भारत 
ने वैक्सीन का उत्पादन Îवयं कर डाला।  
महोदय, वैक्सीन का उत्पादन करने क े साथ-साथ भारत ने 120 दे शȗ को उसकी संपूिर्त 
भी की। अब भारत Ģध
ान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ याच ी  नहीं है, बिÊक यह भारत दाता बनकर 2047 
क े िवकिसत भारत की पिरकÊपना की तरफ तेज गित से अपनी आिर्थक यातर्ा पूरा कर रहा है। 
मान्यवर, मȅ यह कहूंगा िक आज भारत Nuclear Energy Mission की तरफ, Îवच्छ और िटकाऊ 
ऊजार् को बढ़ाने की तरफ अगर्सर है। अगर कहा जाए िक देश िनजी भागीदारी से िरसजर्, 
डेवलपमȂट और इनोवेशन क े साथ-साथ 20 हज़
ार करोड़ क े िनवेश की तरफ बढ़ रहा है, तो यह 
अितÌयोिƪ नहीं है।                                                
 हमारा भारत नवाचार अनुसंधान की संÎकृ ित को आगे बढ़ा रहा है। शायद यही िवकिसत 
भारत 2047 की पिरकÊपना है। “अबला जीवन हाय तुÇहारी यही कहानी, आंचल मȂ है दूध और 
आंखȗ मȂ पानी।” हमने ऐसी बहुत सारी किवता की लाइंस का समय-समय पर Ģयोग िकया है, 
इनका उÊलेख िकया है। लेिकन, यह क्यȗ िकया है? क्यȗिक, यह उस समय की Ëय
वÎथा थी। 
नारी, जो आधी आबादी की हकदार थी, उसे अिधकार नहीं िमला था। उस नारी पर अत्याचारȗ की 
बाढ़ थी, वह िशिक्षत नहीं थी, वह तमाम क ुरीितयȗ की िशकार थी। उसके  पास अपने अिध कारȗ क े 
िलए आगे बढ़ाने क े कोई उपाय नहीं थे। तमाम रूिढ़वािदता  से िघरी हुई उस नारी क े बारे मȂ आज 
से 50 साल  पहले की ये उिƪयाँ िक “अबला जीवन हाय तुÇहारी यही कहानी, आंचल मȂ है दूध 
और आंखȗ मȂ पानी”, आज नहीं है। आज क े मोदी जी क े भारत मȂ, Ģधान
मंितर्त्व काल क े भारत मȂ 
अब नारी जीवन हाय तेरी कहानी नहीं है, बिÊक अब नारी क े जीवन मȂ न आंसू हȅ, न पानी है। नारी 
क े जीवन मȂ उमंग है, उत्साह है, आगे बढ़ने की पिरकÊपना है और यही कारण है िक आज यह 
बेटी बचाओ, बेटी पढ़ाओ योजना, यह बाल िववाह से मुिƪ क े िलए बाल िवव
ाह मुƪ भारत 
अिभयान, यह Ģधानमंतर्ी मातृ वंदना योजना, यह लखपित दीदी योजन ा, यह नारी शिƪ वंदन 
अिधिनयम और अगर आप देखȂ, तो इनके  साथ-साथ 91 लाख से अिधक Îवयं सहायता समूह क े 
माध्यम से दस करोड़ मिहलाओं क े सशिƪकरण का अिभयान है। इनके  साथ-साथ, तीन करोड़ 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
91

 
 
 
लखपित दीदी बनाने का अिभयान Ģारंभ हो चुका है। 1,15,00,000 मिहलाएं इस मुकाम तक पहुंच 
चुकी हȅ। यही भारत है, यही भारत की अथर्नीित है, यही भारत का Ģबंधन है, यही भारत का 
Îवराज्य है। मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक बी त े 6 महीने मȂ 50 लाख मिहलाओं ने इस लÑय को ĢाÃत भी 
िकया है।  
मान्यवर, बहुत सारी बातȂ हȅ। मȅने तो एक उिƪ ही बताई है, एक किवता की लाइन बताई 
है। मȅ लखनऊ से हूँ। लखनऊ मȂ एक मशहूर श ायर हुए थे – मजाज़ लखनवी। उन्हȗने कहा: 
  
“ितरे माथे पे ये आँचल बहुत ही खूब है लेिकन 
तू इस आंचल से इक परचम बना लेती तो अच्छा था।” 
 
अब वह आँचल से परचम लहरा रही है। आज वह गृहणी नहीं है, बिÊक आज वह फाइटर 
Ãलेन को चलाने वाली भी बन चुकी है। आज वह नेतृत्वकतार् भी है, तो आज वह राजनीित मȂ 
भागीदारी भी कर रही है। मिहला सशिƪकरण की इस दौड़ ने पूरे िवÌव को भारत का िवÌलेषण 
करने क े िलए मजबूर िकया है। मान्यवर, मȅ कह सकता हूँ िक आज लोग कहते हȅ िक मयार्दा 
पुरुषोǄम Ǜी राम क े बारे मȂ कहते हȅ िक राजकु मार राम को भगवान राम बनाने का कायर् 
जनजातीय समाज ने िक
या था। आज उस जनजातीय समाज क े उन्नयन क े िलए िजस Ģकार से 
काम िकया है, मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह अǌुत है। अगर देखा जाए, तो आज 70 साल  क े बाद भी 
भारत आगे बढ़ने क े कगार पर चला है, तो वह हमारे देश का संिवधान है। संिवधान मȂ कह ा था िक 
हमारे यहां क े सभी िनचले Îतर क े लोगȗ का उन्नयन हो, तो आज मध्यम Ǜेणी क े लोगȗ क े िलए 
आठवां वेतन आयोग बना है। रेपो रेट कम करने क े बाद, उनकी लोन की सीमा बढ़ेगी। वे बचत 
करȂगे। आज वे 12 लाख रुपए  तक आयकर की सीमा से मुƪ हुए हȅ। मȅ समझता हूँ िक जब खचर् 
बढ़ेगा, तब ये सीमाएं और लाभ भारत की िवकासशीलत ा मȂ आगे बढ़Ȃगे। आदरणीय िवǎज्जन यहाँ 
से रोज लापता हो जाते हȅ। आज क्या है, वे तो रोज ही लापता हो जाते हȅ। ये पूरे भारत क े पिरदृÌय 
से लापता हȅ। मȅ उनसे क ु छ कहना चाहता था। मȅ उनसे यही कहूँगा िक आप दूसरे की लकीर छोट ी 
करने मȂ क्यȗ लगे रहते हȅ, कभी आपने लकीर को बड़ा करने की क्यȗ नहीं सोची। मोदी जी कहते 
नहीं हȅ, बिÊक करते हȅ और शायद यही कारण है िक जो लÑय का िनधार्रण नहीं भी था, उस लÑय 
क े िनधार्रण क े साथ आज हमारा संकÊप तेजी से बढ़ा है।  
मान्यवर, मȅ बताना चा
हता हूँ िक आज महंगाई की दर 10 वषș से 5.1% रही  है। 
आदरणीय पी. िचदÇबरम जी चले गए। मȅ उनसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक इसे आपने क्यȗ नहीं िकया, 
आपके  पास तो अवसर था, लेिकन आप नहीं कर पाए। भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार आने क े 
बाद, 10 वषș मȂ महंगाई की दर 5.1 Ģितशत रही, जबिक मनमोहन काल मȂ यह दर करीब 8. 2 
Ģितशत थी। 
 इस समय भारतवषर् मȂ महंगाई की दर 5.1 Ģितशत है।  यह अǌुत है।  हमारा िवदेशी मुदर्ा 
भंडार भी बढ़ चुका है।  आज हमारे समय मȂ िवदेशी मुदर्ा भंडार 619 अरब डॉलर पहुंच गया है, 
जबिक आपके  समय मȂ, कांगर्ेस क े शासनकाल मȂ यह 292 अरब डॉलर था।  हम कह सकते हȅ िक 
आज बेरोजगारी की दर घटी है।  यह 2018-19 मȂ  5.8 फीसदी  थी और 2022-23 मȂ यह 3.
2 
फीसदी हो चुकी है।   
92
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
मान्यवर, हमारा आज का जो कर्म है - मȅ समझता हूं िक चाहे वह भारतीय रेलवे हो, 
भारतीय रेलवे ने तो अǌुत काम िकया है।  इसके  अलावा अबर्न डेवपलमȂट मȂ भी अǌुत काम िकया 
गया है।  िशक्षा क े क्षेतर् मȂ नई िशक्ष ा नीित कर्ांित लाई है।  इसमȂ सभी भाषाओं को सÇमान िमलेगा।  
आज आप सभी भाषाओं मȂ शोध कर सकते हȅ।  आप 14 से अिधक भाषाओं मȂ परीक्षाएं दे सकते हȅ।  
िशक्षा क े क्षेतर् मȂ भी अभूतपूवर् काम िकया गया है और गृह मंतर्ा लय ने एक लाइन खींची है।  लोग 
कहते थे िक आप असत्य वादा करते हȅ, लेिकन क्या हुआ - 70 साल की समÎया 70 िमनट मȂ वन, 
ट ू, थर्ी हो गई और पता चला की धारा 370 और 35ए गायब हो गई।  आज कÌमीर मȂ सुशासन है।  
आज कÌमीर अच्छी तरह से आगे बढ़ रहा है।  मȅ यह
ी कहना चाहता हूं िक regional trend का युग 
है।  हवाई अƿे तेजी क े साथ बढ़ रहे हȅ।  रेलवे, वाटरवे, हाइवे, बुलेट टर्ेन मȂ जो ऐिसहािस क सुधार 
है, यह सारा क ु छ अǌुत िदखाई पड़ता है। 
मान्यवर, मȅ चुनाव क े समय नागपुर गया था।  माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय ने जो काम िकया था, 
मȅ उसे देखकर अचिÇभत था िक नीचे सड़क है, ऊपर पुल है और उसके  ऊपर मैटर्ो है।  आज यह 
भारत उन िव
किसत राÍटर्ȗ को चुनौती दे रहा है, िजनकी बराबरी हम डेवलवमȂट Ģोसेस मȂ तो कर 
चुक े हȅ, लेिकन अब हम उनको पछाड़ने की तरफ आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ।   
मान्यवर, मȅ कहूंगा िक ह
मारा जो यह बजट है, यह न क ेवल तमाम उपलिÅधयȗ को लाने 
वाला बजट है, बिÊक इस बजट क े माध्यम से मȅ कह सकता हूं िक हम आज उन बारीिकयȗ को भी 
देख रहे हȅ, जैसा बाबा साहेब भीमराव अÇबेडकर जी ने सपना देखा था िक हम एक संवैधािनक 
ËयवÎथा वाला भारत देखȂगे।  वे संÎकृ त भाषा को लाना  चा
हते थे और उन्हȗने जमर्नी की एक 
यूिनविर्सटी मȂ संÎकृ त भाषा पढ़ी भी थी, लेिकन उस समय की कांगर्ेस की सरकार ने नहीं लाने दी 
थी।  कमरुǈीन जी, उस समय भाषा सिमित मȂ थे, उन्हȗने संÎकृ त भाषा को लाने क े िलए संसद मȂ 
भाषण िदया था, लेिकन उस समय की सरकार ने वह कायर् नहीं िकया।  आज िशक्षा नीित क े 
माध्यम से यह सब हो रहा है।  ...(समय की घं
टी)...  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ अपनी बात को समाÃत करता हूं।  आज हमारे  िलए गए 
फ ैसले िवकिसत भारत की नींव रखȂगे।  एक ऐसा भारत, जो आिर्थक रूप  से मजबूत, सामािजक 
रूप  से समावेशी और तकनीकी रूप  से आगे हो, जहां से तरक्
की, समृिǉ, नवाचार की रोशनी पूरे 
िवÌव मȂ फ ै लेगी।  मȅ माननीन िवǄ मंतर्ी Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को इतना दूरदशीर् और 
Ģगितशील बजट ĢÎतुत करने क े िलए बधाई और धन्यवाद देता हूं और इसका पूरा समथर्न करता 
हूं।  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित :  माननीय सभा क े नेता। 
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा):  माननीय उपसभापित जी, जब भारत क े पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी बोल 
रहे थे, तो मȅ उसमȂ इन्टरवीन करना चाहता था, लेिकन माननीय पूवर् िव
Ǆ मंतर्ी जी ने yield नहीं 
िकया, हमȂ परिमशन नहीं दी, लेिकन वे िजन फ ैक्ट्स क े बारे मȂ बोल रहे थे, मुझे लगता िक उनको 
यहां पर क्लेिरफाई करना हमारी िजÇमेवारी है।  पहली बा
त तो मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आई िक 
Chidambaram Saheb was speaking on Budget or speaking on the External Affairs 
Ministry!  He started his speech where he qu estioned, ‘Did the Foreign Minister have 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
93

 
 
 
a talk with the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of America?’  मुझे आÌचयर् हुआ िक 
उन्हȗने यह क्वेÌचन 2012 मȂ क्यȗ नहीं पूछा when he was the Minister?  मेरे मन मȂ यह ĢÌन 
आया िक why they did not ask this question in 2013?  Why they did not ask this 
question in 2009?  Here, the hon. External  Affairs Minister made a statement and he 
has come out with facts.  He made a st atement in this very House, where he 
explained it in detail.    
                                                            
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Along with that, he took the questions and also gave the clarifications. The 
clarifications were given.   
 मȅ आज िफर इस बात को ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूँ, क्यȗिक ऐसा बताया जा रहा है, जैसे िक 
ये जो deport िकए गए, ये अम
ानवीय ढंग से जो हुए, इसकी िंचता आपको ही है!  यह अलग बात 
है िक 2009 मȂ नहीं थी, 2010 मȂ नहीं थी, 2011 मȂ नहीं थी, 2012 मȂ नहीं थी, 2013 मȂ नहीं थी।  
जागे, तो 2025 मȂ जागे!  देिखए, national interest को कभी भी political चÌमे से नहीं देखना 
चािहए।  मȅ बताना चाह
ता हूँ, ...(Ëयवधान)... Hon. Members would be aware that the 
process of deportation is not a new one. I repeat, it is not a new one and has been 
ongoing for several years. I would like to  share with the House, the details of 
deportation from the United States of Am erica since 2009. The numbers year-wise, 
as available with our law enforcement ag encies, are as follows: 2009 - 734 persons 
…(Interruptions)… यह सारा का सारा पढ़ा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... अंत मȂ, ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : सु िनए, जयराम जी, I got your point.  यह  हो तो चुका है, पर होने क े बा
 द 
माननीय िचदÇबरम जी  ने बात कही, इसिलए ये बोल रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, यह क्या है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am chairing. …(Interruptions)… Yes, hon. Leader of the House.  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Sir, I would just like to say, deportations by the U.S. 
are organized and executed by the I mmigration and Customs Enforcement 
Authorities. The Standard Operating Procedure -- deportations by aircraft used by 
ICE -- is effective from 2012. I repeat, it is effective from 2012 and provides for the use 
of ‘restraints’.  Restraints मȂ ही 2009 से लेकर सभी लोग आए हȅ और ये 2025 मȂ भी आए हȅ।  
लेिकन मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आता है िक िजस Ģकार से वही चाँद कभी अमावÎया मȂ चला जाता है, 
कभी पूणर्मासी मȂ आ जाता है, पता नहीं जब अपनी बारी आती है, तो वे अम
ावÎया मȂ रहते हȅ और 
जब हमारी बारी आती है, तो पूणर्मासी मȂ अपनी पूरी चाँदनी िदखाने की कोिशश करते हȅ।  यह 
94
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
double standard ठीक नहीं है।  इतने विरÍठ नेता ने बात कही, तो मुझे हाउस मȂ इसको clarify 
करना था, मȅने इसको clarify िकया और मȅ इसको authenticate भी करता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You will get your turn after one speaker. …(Interruptions)… I permit 
a very brief intervention by Shri Tiruchi Siva. You have one minute. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : He gave a clarification that it is happening since 
2012 that they were deported in an air force flight. But we would like to know if they 
had been handcuffed and chained even from 2012. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : T h a t  i s  w h a t  h e  s a i d .  …(Interruptions)… T h a t  i s  w h a t  h e  s a i d .  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: No, Sir. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He said in ‘restraints’. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: He did not tell that. …(Interruptions)… It happened only t
his year, 
Sir. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. …(Interruptions)… Let me clarify. I persuade Members 
of the House.  They are very learned to know about the procedure. Mr. Chidambaram 
knows it much more than anyone else. The expression used by the hon. Leader of the 
House is very categorical, ‘restraint’.  You know what 'restraint' means… 
…(Interruptions)… Sir, it is there since 2009, he said so. …(Interruptions)… He exactly 
says the same thing. 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : सर, इधर क े लोग कभी जेल नहीं गए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... इधर क े लोग 
...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ इधर बोल रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... इनको मालूम नहीं है िक जब custody ली 
जाती है, तो आपको ध्यान मȂ होगा, ...(Ëयवधान)..
. Ask them to …(Interruptions)…  मुझे मालूम 
नहीं है, शायद ये िकसी ज़ुमर् मȂ गए हȗगे, वह मुझे मालूम नहीं, लेिकन मȅ यहाँ ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 साके त बाबू, मȅ इधर की बात कर रह ा हूँ, आप क्यȗ बीच मȂ आ रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आप उधर की बात क्यȗ कर रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, इन्हȗने जेल नहीं देखी है।  जब िकसी 
को कÎटडी मȂ िलया जाता है.. इसमȂ सारे SOPs िलखे हुए हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... You have to 
follow those SOPs. ...(Interrupti
ons)... SOPs follow िकए जाते हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... वे 
सारे SOPs follow िकए जाते हȅ और वही 2009 मȂ भी follow हुए, जो 2025 मȂ हुए हȅ। 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
95

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House is progressing rather we ll.  Ignore the past few minutes; 
it should not be a precedent. I will make one appeal.  The hon. Members of this 
House may work to get more involved with the procedure, and the ‘restraint’ used by 
the Leader of the House and its connotation s are sometimes dictated for survival and 
safety of the person  subjected to restraint.   After the External Affairs Minister made 
the Statement, I learnt myself in detail to all that the External Affairs Minister had 
indicated, and I will share it with Jairam ji, during the course of the day in my 
Chamber.  He will fully appreciate that ‘r estraint’ is sometimes generated for pure 
safety of the person concerned. …(Interruptions)…  I call  Shri Ritabrata Banerjee. You 
have 15 minutes. 
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE (West Bengal) : Sir, I stand to make my speech, 
speaking on the Budget for the All India Tr inamool Congress. As an MP from Bengal, 
this is a special time to be speaking. Last week, history was being made in my State.  
Captains of industry, thought leaders, head s of missions of 40 countries and leading 
entrepreneurs from across the world  were drawn to Bengal for the two day Bengal 
Global Business Summit.  Last week, many  path-breaking projects were announced,  
from AI to tourism,  from steel to energy  to telecom.  About a mammoth of Rupees 
four lakh plus crores in new investments and tens of thousands of prospective jobs 
made the headlines. One of the world’s biggest  industrialists said this at the Bengal 
Global Business Summit in Kolkata- “Now Bengal is also witnessing a renaissance in 
economy and business... and no power on earth can stop Bengal’s resurgence.”   
 
(THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI SUNETRA AJIT PAWAR) in the Chair.) 
 
Yes, Madam, Bengal means business.   
Now, let me dissect the below par Union Budget presented last week. India 
has more than 50 per cent of its population  below the age of 25 years and more than 
65 per cent, below the age of 35.   Now the question is whether the country looks 
upon this population as a lia bility or as a resource.  This  is the basic question which 
the Budget must deal upon. In dark times, will there also be singing?  Yes, there will 
also be singing; there will be singing about the dark times.   The hon. Finance Minister 
has just left.  The previous Budget presented by her in Ju ly 2024 after the Lok Sabha 
election had accorded priority to employment  and skill development, given the nature 
of the election mandate. The Finance Mi nister had announced a Prime Minister’s 
package of five schemes and initiatives to facilitate jobs and internship opportunities 
for 4.1 crores youth over a fi ve year period with a Central outlay of Rupees two lakh 
96
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
crore.  However, this year’s Budget, February 1 st, did not refer to the Prime Minister’s 
package even once. There is not even a single  mention of the package.   What do we 
learn? That the Cabinet note on employment-linked incentive scheme  is under 
finalization and several meetings have been held with the Ministry of Labour and the 
CII to discuss the relationship between  capital expenditure and employment 
generation.  In other words, the future of  the Scheme looks completely bleak.  Now, 
the Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) – it is a Government data – revealed that  
in 2023-24, youth unemployment rate, for those aged 15-29 years, had gone up to 
10.2 per cent and the  unemployment rate among graduates was 13 per cent.    The 
latest Economic Survey data shows that average real earnings of  self-employed male 
workers in India have been decreasing cons tantly from 2017-18.  There is a constant 
decline.The monthly real wage of male workers, salaried workers, is constantly 
declining. Surplus labour, inundating the job market, combined with high food 
inflation have severely squ eezed the real incomes and liv elihoods of an overwhelming 
majority of Indian workforce. For a Finance Minister and a Government always telling, 
Sabka Saath Sabka Vikaas , to overlook this is really, really dangerous. Modi 
Government's mammoth 
£ for the last 10 years, has taken a toll on our hard-earned 
public money. Over the last 10 years, frau ds and corporate sharks frittered away; at 
least, Rs. 12 lakh crore of Rs. 16.11 lakh crore our banking system has written off. Out 
of this, the nationalised banks alone have written-off more than Rs. 12 lakh crore. 
When the hon. Finance Minister replies, I wi ll urge upon that she must tell us, tell the 
House, how much of these written-off lo ans of nationalised  banks have been 
recovered.   
 Now, we could also compare this Rs. 16 .11 lakh crore that has been written-off 
that disappeared over 10 years with th e Union Government budgets for Education 
where the total expenditure was less than 40 per cent of this, and for Health, where it 
was less than half. To make up for this lost money, banks charge higher and higher 
user charges for every little service. The rates for loans go up because banks have 
suffered at the hands of frauds and fund-siphoning.  
 Now, Madam, the stupefying increase in the wealth of the favoured 10 topmost 
cronies through favours, rule-tweakening and the low-value sale of high-value 
national assets during Modi's Rule has been massive. But the ‘Rs. 12 lakh crore 
wipe-out’ by nationalised ba nks may help us understand ho w the next tier of cronies 
and beneficiaries gain from the regime. Afte r all, our money in banks did not really 
                                                           
£  Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
97

 
 
 
disappear. They just hopped on to line th e pockets of those who knew their way 
around in very complex, corrupt and dark times.  
Now, in 1956, both the Houses deliberated for three months. LIC was formed. 
The then Prime Minister of the country, Pa ndit Jawaharlal Nehru, gave from the 
corpus Rs. 5 crore for the formation of th e LIC. The LIC started its journey. Today, 
LIC means 51,000 crore of rupees. LIC means 30 crore of policyholders. Now, you are 
allowing 100 per cent FDI. Allowing total freedom and greater access to foreign capital 
could only retard the orderly growth of th e insurance industry with  the focus more on 
profits rather than providing the people and business the much-needed security.  
Our hon. Chief Minister has written to the Finance Minister last year on August 
2nd. She wrote a letter asking her to withdr aw the 18 per cent GST on life insurance 
and health insurance policies. I quote from the letter, “With deep anguish, I am writing 
to you regarding the imposition of 18 per cent GST on life insurance and health 
insurance policies and the withdrawal of deductions. The GST is bad because it 
adversely affects the people's  ability to take care of their basic vital needs. This 
additional burden may be acting as a deterre nt for many individuals from taking new 
policies or continuing their existing in surance coverage, thereby leaving them 
vulnerable for unforeseen financial distre ss." Now regarding the withdrawal of the 
GST on health insurances, the Finance Minister is always shifting the onus to the GST 
Council. Madam, everybody is aware who is  in charge of the GST council, who 
controls the GST council. It is the BJP-ruled States which have the majority in the 
GST council. Then what is stopping the Finance Minister and her party? The lack of 
political will is stopping them to roll-back this GST on health insurances.  
Madam, I was born and brought up in a refugee colony in the added areas of 
Kolkata. Migrated people, bearing the brunts of partition, had set up these colonies 
where from our adolescence we learnt that when politics determines our future, we 
must determine the politics. Political awareness runs in every blood and veins of 
Bengal in general and these innumerable re fugee colonies in particular. Though I 
don't have the first-hand experience of the horrors of partition unlike my father, still 
like many third or fourth generation refugee,  I consider my refugee ancestry as one of 
my greatest badges of honour. This ‘refugee ancestry’ has passed on the political 
understanding of fighting for legitimate rights. As a trade union activist, fighting for the 
rightful dues of the working people becomes my duty. You are denying the people of 
their dues, denying the people of Bengal of  their rightful dues. You are denying the 
MGNREGS workers.They are not in a begging mood anymore as th ey have realized 
that this denial is completely political. We st Bengal owes a staggering figure of Rs. 
1.75 lakh crores. The delay has not only affected the implementation of critical 
98
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
programmes but also created challenges for local governance, particularly, in rural 
areas that depend heavily on such f unds for employment and infrastructure 
development.  
 Madam, the fight for these funds is necessa rily political.  We are aware that we 
may be standing here, but if we shift our position and we shift to the other side, things 
will fall in place.  But Bengal refuses to surrender.  Bengal hates to surrender.  Bengal 
will never surrender.  Bengal will never bo w down. I understand the problem of the 
Treasury Benches.  You cannot fight Mamata  Banerjee politically, you cannot match 
Mamata Banerjee’s good governance, you cannot match Mamata Banerjee’s welfare 
schemes and hence, you continue to depr ive lakhs of our people.  The more the 
deprivation, the sharper and greater will be our resolve, the resolve of our people to 
fight you in a befitting manner.  The resolve finds resonance in the immortal words of 
the true polymath, who has been our greatest identity.  
 It was the greatest Bengali 
of the last thousand years, Tagore, who said:  
 
“Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high; 
Where knowledge is free; 
Where the world has not been broken up into fragments by narrow domestic walls; 
Where words come out from the depth of truth; 
Where tireless striving stretches its arms toward perfection; 
Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into the dreary desert sand of 
dead habit; 
Where the mind is led forward by Thee into ever-widening thought and action — 
Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake.” 
 
Now, Madam, as I am a trade union activist, I want to give this august House 
some important figures.  I am not a student of economics, but these are very basic 
figures.  When unorganized workforce in our country goes on increasing, the health of 
the economy is not in proper shape.  Now,  let me look into the figures that are 
available. Figures show that in Africa, 86 per cent of the labourers are in the 
unorganized sector while 14 per cent are in the organized sector; in Asia Pacific and 
Arab countries, 68 per cent are in the unorg anized sector and 32 per cent in the 
organized sector; in the Americas, 40 per cent are in the unorganized sector and 60 
per cent are in the organized sector; in Europe and Central Asian countries, 26 per 
cent are in the unorganized sector while 74 per cent are in the or ganized sector.  And 
                                                           
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
99

 
 
 
now, we now come to vishwaguru India. Let me tell the House, as a trade union 
activist, we are facing these problems.  There are serious implications of this.  Ninety-
three per cent of the workforce has fallen under the unorganized sector; only seven 
per cent are organized workers. The organized workers definitely have some statutory 
benefits, but the unorganized workers are deprived of the statutory benefits.  Fifty per 
cent of the contribution to the GDP of  our country comes from the unorganized 
sector.  Only six per cent of them are co vered by social security measures.  The 
blood, toil, sweat and tears of these workers are the bulwark of our economy.  But 
the Budget has completly neglected them and has said nothing about them.   
Now, I want to mention about two schemes.  One is the Pradhan Mantri Shram 
Yogi Maandhan Yojana , PMSYM, a Central scheme and the other is a State scheme 
of Bengal known as Bina Mulya Samajik Suraksha Yojana , BMSSY.  Now, people 
from the unorganized sector who are covered by the Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi 
Maandhan Yojana, PMSYM, have to contribute every month.  They have to contribute 
money every month. In the BMSSY scheme  of Mamata Banerjee, they need not 
contribute a single rupee; the entire money, from the age of 18 to 60 years, is given by 
the Government.  Now, I come to flat figure s.  In the report up to January, 2025, in 
Bengal, the number of registrations of  unorganized workers made under the Bina 
Mulya Samajik Suraksha Yojana  of Mamata Banerjee is one crore and seventy-six 
lakh-plus.  The number of benefits distri buted is 34,94,000, almost 35 lakhs.  The 
amount distributed is Rs. 2,606 crores.  Let the Central Government show the 
political will, take up the responsibility and make the entire contribution for the 
workers, like Mamata Banerjee is doing, in the Central schemes.  Now, Sir, I am a 
trade union worker and Mr. Prakash here stays in a tea garden in the northern part of 
Bengal.  I will mention some tea-chronology that is very essential to mention here. 
 In 2016, when I was a Member of this House, hon. Finance Minister was the 
then Commerce and Industry Minister.  This is the Gazette Notification. The Gazette 
Notification is dated 28th of January, 2016.  Before that, the hon. Prime Minister had 
gone to Madarihat.  He had promised abou t taking up some sick tea gardens. So, 
this Gazette Notification on 28th of Ja nuary mentioned that Birpara, Garganda, 
Lankapara, Tulsipara, Hantapara, Dumchipa ra, Dimnima, seven tea gardens, will be 
taken over by the Tea Board.  Within eight months, all these gardens got closed. And 
it was Mamata Banerjee and the Labour Department who took all the initiative of 
opening these tea gardens. 2016 was the Assembly elections of Bengal!   
Now come to 2021-22 Budget. In the Bu dget, thousand crores announced for 
Assam and Bengal tea gardens. I don't know  about Assam, but as far as Bengal's 
experience is concerned, not a single penny  has reached us.  Now, this year, when 
100
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
the Budget has been announced, their tea imports are hampering us. Such problems 
like Central Government's decision of plucking dates; damage of 7 per cent tea crop 
are also there. There is discussion in the tea garden.  Common workers are 
discussing in the tea garden, ‘Oh, this y ear is 2025; so, in this Budget, nothing will 
come. Bengal’s Assembly election is in 2026.   So, in 2026, defi nitely, you will have 
some promises, some jumlas, about the tea gardens’. But the results will come out in 
the month of May.  Next year, when Mama ta Banerjee becomes the Chief Minister of 
West Bengal for the fourth consecutive time , we will be back here in the House and 
we will not raise slogans. We will be raisin g people's issues. Now, Madam, the fight 
against the anti-people policies will intensif y.  The fight against discrimination of 
Bengal will intensify. This regime will try to suppress all truth by all possible means. 
(Time-bell rings)… I will take half a minute, Madam.  This regime will try to suppress 
all possible truth by all possible means. There will be conspiracies to bury Bengal into 
oblivion. But the boys of Bengal cannot be  choked.  The boys of Bengal cannot be 
stifled. The people of Bengal, under the l eadership of Mamata Banerjee, will give a 
befitting rebuff to the anti-people policies.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार) : आपका बोलने का समय समाÃत हो गया है। 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN : The Party has so much of ti me. Please do not switch the 
microphone off. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार) : आपकी बात पूरी हो गई है। 
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE: The fight ag
ainst the anti-people policies will intensify.  
The fight against the discrimination of Beng al will intensify. This regime will try to 
suppress all truth by all possible means. There will be conspiracies to bury Bengal and 
Bengalis into oblivion. But, our voice canno t be choked. Our voice cannot be stifled. 
Bengal, under the leadership of Mamata Banerj ee, will give a fitting rebuff to the anti-
people policies of the Government.    “El pueblo, unido bojo Mamata Banerjee, 
Jamas Sera vencido.”  
 The people, united under Mamata Banerjee, shall always be victorious. Jai Bangla!   
                                                                               
                                                           
  Hon. Member spoke in Spanish. 
  English translation of the original speech delivered in Spanish. 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
101

 
 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN :  Madam, everyone is participat ing in the Budget discussion, 
and take one minute this way or that way.   But what has happened today is that 
microphone has been switched off.  These are very basic issues not to fight over. 
Somebody from that side may go over by one minute. We may go over by one 
minute. The Party has 45 minutes of time. At  45 minutes, we switch it off. Madam, 
with all respect to you, can you please ensu re that this thing doesn't happen? It is 
unbelievable that it has happened. His conclusion has been wiped off. 
...(Interruptions).. Just one minute.  This is not a complaint. Madam, it is a good 
debate. Everybody is speaking.  But, please, understand how we are feeling. The 
second largest opposition Party here with 13 MPs, with 40 minutes on our clock, our 
opening speaker's mic is swit ched off!  Somebody has to  take care. And my appeal 
to you, through the Chairman, is not to make this happen again. Thank you. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार) : आप सबको बोलने का समय िदया जाएगा। 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) :   Madam, a Budget is not merely a statement of 
accounts, but it is a statement of intent.  The Budget reveals the priorities of the 
Government, and the priorities show the real governance of today.  Our Prime 
Minister has described this Budget as a roadmap to ‘Viksit Bharat’.  Am I right?  The 
word is ‘Viksit Bharat’, which means ‘develop ed India’.   But, th e numbers show very 
well that the path seems only a mirage.  Th ere are so many reasons to explain that.  
For example, the Union Budget was pres ented as a proclamation of progress, 
conveniently hiding the realities on the ground of stagnant growth, growing 
inequalities and a sizeable demographic di vidend slipping off the fingers into a 
demographic disaster.  This Government’s  economic policies have always enriched 
the privileged few, leaving behind a lot of sections of the people into joblessness, 
inflation and shrinking opportunities.  We have got so many things to say about that, 
but before that, the Finance Minister was pr aised highly by the hon. Chairman that 
she has continuously presented her eighth Bu dget.  But, what is the progress?  The 
graph, instead of going up, is dipping down.   
 I would like to recall what all she has told  from 2019.  In 2019, while presenting 
the Budget, she quoted from Purananuru, which is an advice to a Pandya king, 
Arivudai Nambi.  I don’t want to take th e Tamil version and consume my time.  In 
English, it says that a few mounds of rice from paddy, that is harvested from a small 
piece of land, would suffice for an elephant, bu t what if the elephant itself enters the 
field and starts eating?  What it eats woul d be far lesser than what it would trample 
over. This is the version of the hon. Finance Minister quoting Purananuru from 
102
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Sangam Literature. But now, we experience that the elephant, the Union 
Government, is trampling upon the States’ fields which had cherished very well.  I will 
substantiate why I am telling all these things.  There are, of course, ample evidences.   
 In 2019, it was Purananuru , and in 2020, she quoted Thirukkuralar.  The 
English translation of which means, 
 “A country’s five jewels are : unfailing health, 
farm productivity, joy, good defence and wealth”.  Any person, who accepts anything 
in reality will see what the development toda y is after these Budgets presented by her 
or by this Government.  Unfailing health - we are treading behind. Farm productivity- 
why are one lakh tractors waiting outside the borders of Delhi?  If they were 
contended and productivity was more, or, th ey were given more, it would not have 
happened.  So also is the case with weal th.  In 2021, she quoted other lines of 
Thirukkuralar,  “ A good king is one who is able to acquire wealth, guard it and 
distribute it justly.”  That is it.  Of course, you collect revenues and you guard it, but 
the question is:  whether it is distributed justly to all the people equally in this country?  
The answer is, ‘No’.  As I said earlier, it  enriched the privileged few and deserted the 
people who are in this country in the lower r ung.  That is what my senior colleague,   
Mr. Chidambaram,   told   here.   Only   one   per   cent of this population is enjoying 
or controlling 22.6 per cent of the income and 40.1 per cent of the wealth.   
 One percent of our population controls 40.1 per cent of wealth and enjoys 22.6 
per cent of income.  Whereas, the poor, the people at the bottom, have only 15 per 
cent of the income and 6.4 per cent of the w ealth!  It is totally disproportionate.  I 
think, the hon. Finance Minister has to explain all these things.   
 Madam, in 2025, the hon. Finance Minist er said, English translation of which 
means,    “ All earth looks up to heaven whence raindrops fall; All subjects look to 
king that ruleth all."  As living beings look  upon the sky for rain s, the citizens look 
upon the Government for good governance. ”  Yes, they are looking upon, looking 
upon and looking upon but no  good governance!  These are not mere allegations.  
This is happening b ecause of the partisan approach of this Government. For 
example, if a woman is going to buy some fl owers from a woman, wh o is selling it on 
the roadside, she will measure it with her ha nds, but if the customer is regular and 
very well known to her, you can measure it  with your own hands because the seller’s 
hands may be small.  Like that, if you talk about their yardstick, they have a yardstick 
for the States ruled by the ruling party and th ey have a smaller yardstick for the States 
being ruled by the Opposition parties.  I thin k, they have to explain this also.  These 
are not just allegations, there are ample evidences. 
                                                           
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
103

 
 
 
This House being the Council of States, and, I, myself being the representative 
from the State of Tamil Nadu, I would like to talk about my State.  Before going into 
the larger issue and greater implications, I have to mention something about my State 
w i t h  r e g a r d  t o  w h a t  w e  a r e  s u f f e r i n g ,  t h o u g h  w e  p e r f o r m  v e r y  w e l l .   T a m i l  N a d u ’ s  
contribution to the GDP of this country is 9. 04 per cent, while what it gets by way of 
devolution of funds is 4.08 per cent.  The 14 th Finance Commission recommended for 
42 per cent tax devolution; the 15th Finance Commission reduced it to 41 per cent but, 
actually, it is only 32 per cent.  It is not even  that.  So, what I want to say is: when we 
contribute 9.04 per cent to the GDP, we are given back only 4.08 per cent!  I have no 
grudges with any other person from any other State.  But, for the sake of statistics, I 
have to tell these figures. 
 The contribution of the State of Uttar Pradesh to the country’s GDP is 8.19 per 
cent while it is getting 17.94 per cent of th e devolution.  What is  the rationale behind 
it?  …(Interruptions)… Please.  I have already said, I have no grudges against your 
State but what is happening has to be eluc idated.  Madam, the contribution of the 
State of Bihar towards the nation’s GDP is 2.87 per cent while it is getting back 10.08 
per cent!   We are giving more and what we are getting back is not even half of what 
we are giving!   Why is this discrimination?  Why is this partisan  attitude?  The hon. 
Finance Minister has to enlighten us with rationale behind this approach, which I call 
as victimization or discrimination just b ecause these are Opposition-ruled States.  
Despite this, we are doing very well, better than the Union Government, and we can 
say it holding our heads high.  It is not just a statement.  Let us see the Union 
Government’s allocation towards education. 
 M a d a m ,  j u s t  n o w ,  m y  s e n i o r  c o l l e a gue, the former Finance Minister, who 
initiated the debate, mentio ned about Make-in-India.  In the year 2015, lofty 
proclamations about Make-in-In dia were made by the hon. Prime Minister.  At the 
same time, Make in China was proclaimed in China.  In 2025 , the recently-elected 
President of the United States of America,  Mr. Donald Trump, spoke about Make in 
America.  As soon as he  assumed power, he addressed a conference of the 
international investors.  In  that conference, he said, “You are all manufacturing 
outside America and making America a ma rket.  Hereafter, you should make 
everything in America; only then, you will be given the benefits or else, I will be taxing 
you very heavily, which you cannot tolerate.” 
 This is the way of cohesion. This is the way he is approaching, that the status 
of economic position of America should  improve by ‘Make in America’. What 
happened to 2015 proclamation of India and China? China has reached its target, but 
India has not. Why? It is because the basic things which a nation needs are 
104
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
education, healthcare and infrastructure. Ev erything has been achieved by China.  
But here, the situation is very poor.  It ha s to be admitted. The Union Government is 
allocating only 2.5 per cent of total expend iture to education. That is Rs. 1,20,628 
crore.  In my State, the Tamil Nadu Government is allocating Rs. 49,700 crores, that 
is, 13.6 per cent of our tota l expenditure. What Tamil Nadu Government is spending 
towards education is 40 per cent of the total allocation by the Union Government to 
the entire country. Ours is 13.6  per cent; this year, it is 13.17 per cent. So also is the 
healthcare. The Union Government allocation is 1.89 per cent. India is the thickest 
populated country.  What we have but America does not have is the youth 
population.America may have very good education, may have very good 
infrastructure, but they do not have the yo uth force as we are ha ving. We are having 
64 per cent of our population as youth force. How are you going to utilize that? They 
are suffering because of unemployment. And healthcare is very much important. The 
last rung of the people who work, do not get anything.  What is the reality of the 
income tax slab which Madam Finance Minister has announced  that up to 12 lakh of 
income will be exempted? I do not want to go into it. How many are the 
beneficiaries? Only one crore of the people  are benefited by this .  We have nothing 
against it. Let them enjoy it. But what about the remaining 139 crore of the people?  I 
want to say another thing which is abou t the EWS, which the Government is very 
much proud of.  For the economically weaker section, the slab is 8 lakh rupees per 
year. That is 75,000 per month. And five acres of land and 1,000 square feet of 
residential flat or anything which they live in and 8 lakh rupees, that is the slab for 
economically weaker section of people. Leav e that alone. What does the BPL slab 
show? I am not creating anything on my ow n.  All the learned Members here know 
that very well. Those who live in the urban ar eas, if their spending is below Rs. 37 per 
day, they come under the BPL.  And in the rural area, it is Rs. 29. A person who is 
not able to earn even Rs. 1,000 a month is considered as BPL, but a person earning 
Rs. 8 lakh will be considered economically weak er.  That is a different thing, but they 
need basically education and healthcare fo r their children.  This Government is 
allocating only 1.89 per cent of its total expe nditure to healthcare, whereas my State, 
the Tamil Nadu Government, is spending 5.8 per cent of the total expenditure. What I 
am telling about Tamil Nadu is the Dravid ian model of Government by Mr. M. K. 
Stalin. What I am telling about the Union Government is Modi's form of Government. 
The billionaires are increasing.  In this one year, many will be surprised, not shocked 
because this is happening, 75  persons have added up to the billionaires list in our 
country. It is going up and up. What is  actually happening is, billionaires are 
increasing, whereas the basic needs of th e people are not fulfilled. Another very 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
105

 
 
 
important statistics is, every five days, one billionaire is coming out successfully, 
millionaire or billionaire. Numbers are increasi ng. Every five days, India sees a person 
becoming a millionaire.  
 At the same time, I have some other stat istics.  There are two different views.  
You see a very high building wher e a millionaire is living.  …( Interruptions)…  On the 
other hand, look at the number of rape cases in India.  There are approximately 87 
cases per day. If you look at the number of murder cases, there are approximately 78 
cases per day.  …(Interruptions)…  If you look at the number of farmers’ suicide, there 
are approximately 31 cases per day.  …( Interruptions) …   M y  d e a r  b r o t h e r ,  M r .  
Murugan, I will come to that.  I kn ow what you are saying. Wait.  …( Interruptions)…  
Thanks for your interruptions because you in terrupted and I got a point.  I have got 
with me very good statistics. If you look  at the number of unemployment related 
suicides, there are approximately 9 cases per day. Look at the number of human 
trafficking cases, ther e are approximately 6 cases per day.  Look at the number of 
dalit atrocities, there are approximately 141 cases per day.  Look at the number of 
students’ suicide, there are approximately 36 cases per day.  Look at the figure of 
cyber crimes, there are approximately 180 cases per day.  There are two different 
views.  On the one hand, the rich are becoming richer.  On the other hand, the poor 
are becoming poorer.  This is the real st age of this country.  He said, ‘What about 
Tamil Nadu?’  Now I am telling about Tamil Nadu.  Tamil Nadu is performing very 
well.  The national average of en rolment in higher education  …( Interruptions)…  You 
have presented the Budget with statistics . I am also speaking on statistics.  On 
enrolment of students in higher educatio n, national average is 27 per cent whereas 
Tamil Nadu’s is 47 per cent.  And what is it  that we are getting?  The UGC is used by 
the Union Government to suppress the State Governments. The colleges, the 
universities are within the jurisdiction of th e States.  The land belongs to the States.  
Money for building structures is spent by th e States.  The salaries of the teachers, 
who are working there, are given by the State Governments.  Scholarships and 
concession to students are given by the St ate Governments.  The UGC, crossing its 
jurisdiction, has recently given some guidel ines that the Vice-Chancellors of those 
universities will be selected by a panel head ed by the Governor of the State and the 
Members will be appointed by the UGC.  What  is the role of the State Government in 
that?  You have to tell that.  Everything is ours.  We are looking after governance.  We 
are looking after education, though it is in  the Concurrent List.  Our enrolment is 47 
per cent.  But you want to indirectly brin g your people inside through the Selection 
Committee headed by the Governor, who is  always against the Governments which 
are ruled by the opposition.  If the State Government enacts a law for the needs of the 
106
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
people, even for that, the Governor will no t give his assent and he will act as 
authority… …(Interruptions)… He will be heading the Search Committee, and the 
Members will be appointed by the UGC.  What  will happen?  There is stiff opposition 
to it, but nobody listens.  Why is this happening?  Because, indirectly, the Union 
Government is encroaching upon the powers of the States.  They are transgressing 
and snatching the   powers of the States.  This is not the way for reforming education.  
Comparatively, wherever you are ruling and wherever all these th ings are being said, 
everything is very low.  Tamil Nadu is doing very well but we are being victimized.   
In this Budget, we have, of course, ve ry sad observation.  Our hon. Finance 
Minister also belongs to Tamil Nadu.  That is why she quoted Purananuru and 
Thirukkural.  I can also do that.  But I am not in  a position to do that.  We are only 
looking at the Union Government.  We feel that we are in the Union of India.  We are a 
State  in the  Indian Union.  But  the Union  Government  does  not  recognize us so. 
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
You talk much about infrastructure and we are asking for metro projects. ...(Time-
bell rings )... Madam, we have time and we will adjust. The metro projects for 
Coimbatore and Madurai, which have be en demanded by the State Government, 
have not been mentioned in the Budget. An d so many national highways, which we 
asked for, have not found a place in this . For Centrally-Sponsored Schemes, like 
MGNREGA, earlier, the share was 75:25, but, now it is 60:40. The State has spent its 
due share, but the Centre has not give n its share. So also is for SSA. 
...(Interruptions)... I don't know the difference in meaning. It is SSA. Even in that, 
the States are not being given its due share by the Union. Do you know why? It is 
because the States are not implementing the NEP. See, it is th e State Government's 
choice, whether to accept a policy, which is to the convenience of the Union 
Government. We are saying that we have got our own new Education Policy; we have 
constituted a committee that would come out with it. But, it says that if you do not 
adopt NEP, you would not be given your due share; likewise, UGC says that if the 
State does not abide by the guidelines of the University Grants Commission, the 
universities cannot award degrees to the st udents. How strange? Who are they to 
dictate? Who are they to dictate to th e universities that you cannot do that? 
Surprisingly, Madam, you yourself may see what is right or wrong. The Vice-
Chancellors in the universities need not have academic background! They need not 
have been a Professor, a tutor, an Assist ant Professor or anything. Any person from 
outside will come and head th e university; he will decide the curriculum and he will be 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
107

 
 
 
guiding the colleges. What is it? It is authoritarian to the extreme in every sector.  As 
mentioned about UGC, so also the schools ar e victimized that we are not entitled to 
have share under SSA from the Central Govern ment! So also is disaster relief. There 
were two cyclones -- Fengal and the Mich aung. There were two cyclones and Tamil 
Nadu suffered a lot. We have been asking for a relief measure of Rs.30,000 crore from 
the Union Government. I also raised it du ring the Zero Hour and I have received a 
reply from the Home Ministry saying that the State could give it from the SDRF.  It is 
beyond that; it exceeds SDRF limits. What is NDRF for? They give only lame excuses. 
Members from all the parties with conscience tell us. We asked for Rs.30,000 crore, 
b u t  w e  w e r e  g i v e n  o n l y  R s . 2 6 7  c r o r e .  W h a t  i s  i t ?  W e  h a v e  t o  u n d e r t a k e  s o  m a n y  
things that have been damaged during the cyclone like infrastructure and people have 
to be brought back to normalcy. For th at, the States are sp ending, whereas the 
Union Government stays off and says that they do not have anything. So, in this way, 
disaster relief is not being compensated properly. We are being victimized under SSA. 
In MGNREGA scheme, we do not get what we want. We are not getting the road 
projects, which we asked for. Also, the devo lution of taxes is not in the due manner 
or rational manner to my State.  
Madam, what is happening in my country?  As I said earlier, on one side, we 
see richer people; on the other side, we see something different.  MSME is a very 
important Ministry. MSME is the largest em ployment provider next to agriculture. 
Moreover, as per the Budget of the hon. Finance Minister, it is 7.5 crore who are 
getting employment. 36 per cent of the manufacturing of this country is by MSME.  45 
per cent of the exports of this country are fr om MSME. But, what is the support this 
Government is extending to MSME? When they go to banks for loan under PMEGP, 
every bank has a different rate of interest. The topmost bank, which is very close by 
the person who is going to be an entrepre neur, charges the highest.  They do not 
know; they cannot classify and, surprisingly, what I noticed in this Bu dget is that it is 
enhancing the limits of MSME. 
 The investment limit for microenterprises, currently, is Rs. 1 crore. It will be 
enhanced to Rs. 2.5 crore and the turnover to Rs. 10 crore. Small Enterprises, from 
Rs. 10 crore to Rs. 25 crore investment and turnover from Rs. 50 crore to Rs. 100 
crore. And, for Medium Enterprises, from  Rs. 50 crore to Rs. 125 crore investment 
and turnover from Rs. 250 crore to Rs. 500 crore. My dear colleagues, please tell me, 
what is a Micro Enterprise? MSME people are in just for Rs. 5 lakhs; just getting a five 
lakh rupee loan. A woman is running something, doing some business and gives 
employment to seven persons, two from the same family and five  from that village. 
So, instead of projecting that we have disbursed that much amount of loans, you 
108
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
have to give loans to more number of pers ons in order to generate employment. That 
is the purpose of the MSME. For example, a shopkeeper, after he closes his shop, 
would not come and check how much collection is there.  But, he will see how many 
bills have been given and ho w many persons have entered his shop. That means, he 
is bothered about the number of customers than the collect ion. In a mall, customers 
will be very less in a shop.  In a multinational brand comp any, the collection will be 
very much. But, at the same time, the ordina ry textiles in our bazaar will have a lot of 
people but the collection will no t be even half of what is collected in a mall. So, what 
is necessary? It means, you have to help the MSMEs, that too, the poorest people, 
to have more enterprises, and in that wa y you can generate more employment. And, 
this year, very surprisingly, there is an incr ease in the income tax slab. Everyone is 
praising it. The collection of taxes-- dire ct taxes is 56.78 per cent from personal 
income tax and the corporate tax has come down! Sir, direct taxes is 56.78 per cent, 
out of which, 53.3 per cent is from ordina ry people. What have you done to these 
ordinary people? Instead of them, you are favouring the corporates! And, indirect 
taxes remained at 42.68 per cent or somethin g. The indirect taxes mostly constitute 
the GST.  Sir, 83 per cent of the indirect ta xes is from GST. That is what, again, our 
former Finance Minister told here. What are you doing with that? Why do not you cut 
down the GST? Every person, ev en an auto driver, even a farmer, even a labourer in 
a farm, is paying GST. Income tax is gi ven by other people-- middleclass or upper 
middleclass. Every individual is paying GST. Why do not you cut down that? Have 
you cut down the Excise Duty on petroleum products? As he said, it would have 
benefited a lot in the nation.  But you have not done so! You are not doing anything to 
the common man. You don't have them in focus. You are making a Micro Enterprise 
into a mini corporate! How can a Rs. 10  crore turnover one is called a micro 
enterprise? MSME is not able to market. That is why the Government has a scheme-
-PPP.   The public sector undertakings ha ve to procure from the MSME; 25 per cent 
of their purchase should be from the MSMEs.  In that, there is a slab, sub quota of 4 
per cent, to the SC/STs and 3 per cent fo r women. That has not yet been reached. 
We have been telling as to why you do not include the OBC also in that. But, though 
there is allocation, reservation, sub quota, but it is not achieved.  They are not able to 
market it. What are the devices you have for the MSME products to be marketed? 
How will you control the interest rates equally? You can prevail upon the RBI. You can 
have your say on Repo Rate or anything of that sort. But, an ordinary person who 
goes to a bank, the nearby bank, should not be taxed in the name of interest 
verification.                                    
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
109

 
 
 
 In that way, again I say, the MSME, the largest employment provider has to be 
taken care of. But you are trying to make it a corporate. The indirect taxes, the GST is 
going up and up. I cannot say everything in th is very short time what are the details of 
GST; which is more, which is less.  Eve rything is contradictory which affects the 
common man. You have taken away all the revenue rights of the State Governments 
and it has been subsumed in to GST.  But do you compensate that? You collect GST 
compensation cess.  You collect surcharg e for welfare schemes. These surcharges 
and cess are not in the divisible pool. So , you are getting more  money by another 
way, shortcut way, by way of cess and surcharge and the Union Government is 
keeping that without sharing with the State Governments.  The last person is paying, 
but the State Governments are not benefitted. I have got much more to say. There is 
one more thing about the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY). Even in that, the 
State Government, my Government is spen ding Rs.6 lakhs for a house. The Union 
Government is giving only Rs.1.5 lakh; even  that is not being given. This is about 
PMAY-Rural and PMAY-Urban. So is the case with Jal Jeevan Mission. What was the 
estimate last time? The Budget Estimates was Rs.67,000 crores, but the revised was 
Rs.22,000 crores. And this year, again, it is Rs.70,163 crores.  When you have not 
achieved the target you fixed the earlier year, you are giving rosy pictures. So it is only 
the numbers that attract the people.  
Madam, I would like to conclude with  one thing. Whenev er a Budget is 
presented, everyone is looking. The stoc k market is stumbling. The middle class 
people are relying upon the stock market. The poor people are expecting the prices to 
come down. The prices are going up. Th ere is wealth ineq uality, inequitable 
distribution of wealth and in  such a situation, they are all disappointed. We are not 
speaking anything ill or have ill will towards against any individual. The Government of 
the day, which has to take care of the people, is not taking care of them.  You have to 
mend your ways or else the people will end your days. Thank you very much. 
    
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO (Andhra Pradesh) : Madam Vice-Chairman, I thank for 
giving me an opportunity to speak on the Union Budget 2025-26 in this august House. 
I also thank my party YSRCP, President and former Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, 
Shri Jagan Mohan Reddy garu for giving me the opportunity to speak on the important 
subject on the Union Budget. I congratulate the hon. Finance Minister for presenting 
the Budget successfully for eight years continuously. I was given only eight minutes’ 
time. As our senior Members pointed out a lot of weaknesses in the Budget, I too 
endorse the senior Members for what they spoke about the reality in the Budget. In 
110
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Telugu there is a sentence, the Eng lish translation of which means,   “Regret for 
some, love for some.” Here, ‘love’ for privileged sections and ‘regret’ for unprivileged 
sections.  The entire Budget, from each and every point, has deceived the poorer and 
vulnerable sections.  
 I will go through only five-six subjects.   The budgetary allocations are fuel for 
the governance of the country. Everything is  dependent on better financial allocation 
and optimal utilization of financial resource s. The total expenditure in 2025-26 is 
expected to Rs. 50,65,345 crores, which is an increase of 7.4 per cent over the 
Revised Estimate of 2024-25.  Out of this, Rs.16,21,899 crores is proposed to be 
spent on Central Sector Schemes which is 7.2 per cent increase over the Revised 
Estimate of 2024-25 and Rs. 5,41,850 crores  is proposed to be spent on Central 
Sponsored Schemes which is 30.5 per cen t over the Revised Estimate.  The 
Government receipts, excluding borrowings, are estimated to be Rs.34,96,409 crores 
which is 11.1 per cent higher than the Revised Budget Estimate.  But, it is a tough 
task to bridge the gap between the r eceipts and the expenditure of Rs.15,68,936 
crores as the revenue deficit is targeted at  1.5 per cent of GDP and fiscal deficit is 
targeted at 4.4 per cent. There is a great need to cut the wasteful expenditure to 
bridge the fiscal deficit.  The Government increased the income tax exemption limit to 
Rs.12 lakhs which is considered to be gr eat relief to the middleclass but, in the 
process, Government loses Rs.1 lakh cror es.  I appreciate the income tax exemption 
will benefit a large number of people in this income tax bracket.  But, this is no help to 
the poorest of the poor who are in the margins of society, though statistics say the 
number of people living below poverty line ha s decreased considerably, still there is a 
lot to be done for the poorer sections of th e society.  Due to decrease in the value of 
money, whatever has been given to the poor is little and a lot needs to be done.   For 
example, the value of 500 rupees per day wa ges, has got much value five years ago 
than now. Similarly, whatever the povert y alleviation measures taken are not much 
effective in the changed economic scenario.  So, there is a great need to improve 
poverty alleviation measures to match with increase in the cost of living.  Similarly, 
inflation continues to make much impact on  our day-to-day life, especially household 
budgets making essential commodities, fuel  transport and health care become more 
expensive.  So, a lot more needs to be done to address the basic economic problems 
facing the citizens, especially the weaker se ctions of the society.  Allocation towards 
MGNREGA and PM KISAN remained as the same as the revised estimates for the 
2024-25, despite the fact that rural distress has been increased.  The Government 
                                                           
  English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
111

 
 
 
would have increased the allocation for MG NREGA and PM KISAN as it remained the 
same since 2024 Budget Estimates. The im portance of these two schemes are well 
known to the Government.  As majority of poor and unemployed are dependent on 
these two programs for their livelihood, thes e two programs need to be given higher 
allocation, at least, in the future.  Th e allocation towards the Ministry of Rural 
Development is increased by Rs.14,527 crore which 8.3 per cent to Rs.1,90,406 crore 
in 2025-26.  Programmes for the welfare of  women and children have been allocated 
Rs.5,65,161 crore in 2025-26 -- an increase of 18.5 pe r cent over the Revised 
Estimates in 2024-25.  These allocatio ns include programmes being implemented 
across all Ministries.  Allocation towards the welfare of women is estimated to 
increase due to increased allocation for the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana for which the 
female head of the family must be co-owner of the house.  The allocation towards the 
welfare of children is estimated to incr ease due to higher allocation towards the 
school education under Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan. 
 The allocation for Scheduled Castes  has to increase due to increased 
allocations under the National Rural Livelihoods Mission. For the first time, a new 
scheme for SC, ST and Women is there. Other vulnerable groups have been allocated 
Rs. 2,523 crores compared to the last y ear’s budget allocation of Rs. 1,620 crores. 
The Central schemes and projects have been allocated Rs. 1,324 crores compared to 
last year’s budgetary allocation of Rs. 910 crores. The allocation in this year’s Budget 
has increased. But, there is need to im plement these programmes to achieve the 
targets. For example, the funds for Nati onal Commission for SC, ST and OBC have 
been reduced in this Budget by Rs. 26 crores over the previous year’s Budget.  
In this context, Madam, I want to appeal to the hon. Finance Minister and the 
Government of India, even for the entire five  years, the Social Justice Ministry is really 
spending very, very meager on all their programme. …(Time-Bell rings)…  If you take 
allocation for women, OBC, SC and ST welfare, put together is not even 2 per cent of 
the Budget allocated! It is most unfortunate. I strongly feel that instead of calling it 
Social Justice Ministry, we should call it as ‘Social Injustice Ministry’. This is my 
personal feeling about the Budget. We all have studied in the social welfare hostels.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार) : माननीय सदÎय, आप conclude कीिजए। आपका 
बोलने का समय समाÃत हो गया है। 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : When we were studying, so
 many facilities were there. For 
five years, there were no sc holarships; there were no funds for National SC Finance 
and Development Corporation, the Na tional OBC Finance and Development 
112
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Corporation and even for the National Wo men Corporation. How will they increase 
their standard of living? This is really unf ortunate. I request the hon. Finance Minister 
and the hon. Prime Minister to look into this deficit.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार) : माननीय सदÎय, आपका बोलने का समय समाÃत 
हो गया है। 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : I once again request the august House to really think over 
the real deceiving towards the poor people of our nation. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार) : माननीय सदÎय, आपका बोलने का समय समाÃत 
हो गया है।  The next speaker is Shri Debashish Samantaray. 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : Madam, 90 per cent people of our country are poor, but, 
the entire Budget is meant fo r rich people. I will tell you one example, Madam.  Even 
in my State, Andhra Pradesh, our former Chief Minister has allocated Rs. 275 crores 
for the poor people, for BCs, SCs, STs, Minorities, for all these people. 
 
SHRI DEBASHISH SAMANTARAY (Odisha) : Madam, I start with the key 
shortcomings in this Budget. Firstly, there is limited focus on  wage growth. While
  
there are mentions of employment generation and skilling initiatives, there is no clear 
plan to increase minimum wages or labour conditions.  
Gig and informal workers - the speech briefly acknowledges Gig workers and 
proposes healthcare benefits. But, it does not address concerns like job security, 
social security and fair wages for the growing informal workforce. Absence of direct 
support for industrial labour - The speech discusses boosting MSMEs and 
manufacturing, but does not propose substantial measures to improve the working 
conditions, wages or rights of factory an d industrial workers. Housing and social 
welfare gaps - While SWAMIH Fund 2 is intr oduced to address housing concerns. It 
primarily targets middle income housing rather than affordable housing solutions for 
the low income workers. Lack of direct cas h transfers or subsidies - Unlike previous 
budget, this one does not propose new or expanded direct financial support for low 
income workers to counter inflation and rising living costs.  
 Coming straight to the State of Odisha , sadly, with concern, I highlight the 
persistent neglect of Odisha by successive Governments at the Centre.   This Budget 
which was expected to bring inclusive gr owth has once again failed to address the 
pressing issues faced by the people of Odisha.  I would call it a double betrayal.  They 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
113

 
 
 
came to power and said that now Odisha ha s a double engine.  But, this double 
engine has failed in Bhubaneswar. This do uble engine Government had spoken a lot 
about infusing urban facilities.  Of course, in this regard, I would like to state that the 
ex-Chief Minister, hon. Naveen Patnaik ji had given a tremendous boost to the urban 
growth of Odisha whereby Bhubaneswar became the number one smart city.  It is 
surprising; the Centre has announced a hu ge amount for the urban development.  
Shri Naveen Patnaik, in his tenure, had sanctioned Bhubaneswar-Puri-Cuttack metro 
and started work on it. And, then, he left the Government with a surplus of 
Rs.48,000/- crores.  He ha d never come to the Centre begging for funds for his 
metro.  He left the Exchequer of Odisha with a surplus of Rs.48,000/- crores. Will the 
metro of Bhubaneswar ever se e the day or has it been ju st shelved?  There is no 
clarity about it by the Finance Minister.  He  left Rs.48,000/- crores.  What have they 
done?  The so-called main engine in Delh i has not funded Odis ha after they got 20 
seats.   That is why, Modi 3.0 is here. This fund has been spent on some promises 
which were made in the manifesto of the BJP.  They spent from Rs.5,000/- crores to 
Rs.10,000/- crores for giving an MSP and Rs.20,000/- crores  were spent for 
Subhadra Yojana.  To change the colour of Odisha into saffron, they have spent 
Rs.2,000/- crores. It is a disappointing Bu dget, that ignores the common man.   The 
Budget attempts to shining the surface but beneath that shine lies disappointment. It 
has failed to address the concerns of the common man -- rising unemployment, 
soaring prices and inflation, worsening povert y levels and lack of investment in health 
and education.   There has been an attemp t to window dress the Budget but it falls 
far short of what the people of this country, especially, Odisha deserve.  No measures 
have been taken so far to control inflation. There is not a word by the Finance Minister 
on how this inflation is going to be controlled.   While the Finance Minister has 
announced a tax relief of up to Rs.12,00,000/-, what about the rural poor, daily wage 
workers and tribal communities who are struggling under price rise?  Inflation remains 
unchecked. Take the case of kendu leaf workers.  It is a major livelihood source for 
lakhs of tribal women. They are forced to pay 18 per cent GST on kendu leaves.  Is 
this the way to support th e most marginalized communities?  We have been 
repeatedly asking for special category status.  Other States are receiving special 
funds because of this Government’s political  compulsions.   Bihar has been given a 
substantial amount.  
 That is not my concern. Let Bihar get it . Odisha contributes significantly to the 
divisible pool of taxes. Yet it does not receive  its fair share. Due to this, we are losing 
vital funds that could have boosted infras tructure, strengthened welfare schemes and 
accelerated income growth. This is nothin g short of economic injustice. There is 
114
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
exploitation of Odisha's natural resources, the rich minerals that we have. The Centre 
is the authority of these major minerals. Th ere are mineral royalties and auctions. The 
Centre auctions Odisha's mineral blocks, but the State gets an  unfair share of the 
revenue. Coming to coal block auction, Odisha was promised Rs. 70,000 crores, but 
it received a meagre Rs. 370 crores. Wh at happened to the coal blocks being 
auctioned and what happened to that money?  I hope the Finance Minister will give a 
reply regarding this. ...(Time-bell rings). .. This is an unjust burden on States like 
Odisha which are already struggling with fund shortages. The Finance Commission 
must take these commitments into account. Th ere is historical neglect of Odisha's 
infrastructure, Railways. They earn a  whopping Rs. 25,000 crore annually and they 
have allotted only Rs. 10,000 cror e to Odisha. Key railway projects like 
Bhubaneswar station ... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार ) :  माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है।  
 
Ǜी देबाशीष सामंतराय :  टाइम खत्म हो गया है, लेिकन एक-आधा िमनट और दे दीिजए। सभी 
को ज्यादा टा
इम  िदया है, िफर आप मुझे क्यȗ रोक रही हȅ? आप लोगȗ ने इतना टाइम िलया है, 
तभी तो क ंÃलȂट नहीं कर रहे हो। ..(Ëयवधान)… Odisha's rail density is much lower, much 
lower than neighbouring States like West  Bengal, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. Key 
railway projects are pending. ...(Interruptions)... बोल तो रहा हूं, क ु छ नहीं दे रहे हȅ, 
िकसी को भी नहीं दे रहे हȅ, क ेरल को क्या िदया है? This is how the Centre treats t he State 
that contributes so much to the nation al economy. Under Clean Energy Cess, the 
Central Government collects Rs. 21,000 crore. But they have given nothing towards 
that. I don't know whether the other States have got anything or not. The coal royalty 
has not been revised since 2015.  
In the end, I would conclude by requ esting, through you, that Orissa be 
granted Special Category status, fair share of Central taxes and revenues, higher 
investment in railway and infrastructure, revi sion of coal royalty, and equitable share 
from clean energy cess.  Thank you. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) : Thank you, Madam Vice Chairman, for giving 
me this opportunity. On beha lf of AIADMK party and on behalf of my Leader, Shri 
Edappadi Palaniswami, I rise to participat e in the discussion on the Union Budget, 
2025-26, presented by the hon. Finance Minister.  
Madam, I want to mention certain poin ts which my leader , Shri Edappadi 
Palaniswami, has observed about this Budget. First, in the Economic Survey, for the 
year 2024-25, it was mentioned that ‘there  is a necessity to promote investment 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
115

 
 
 
capital and increase domestic consumption to  achieve specific economic growth.’ It 
was expected that the Budget for 2025-26 wo uld include plans for focusing on the 
poor, women, farmers, and youth, but we are missing that. At the same time, my 
Leader, Shri Edappadi Palaniswami, obse rved that he is welcoming the changes 
made in the custom duty to promote domestic production. The income tax limits have 
been changed, which we also welcome.  
As my other colleagues spoke from Tamil Nadu, we are also disappointed that 
more  allocation is not made for Tamil Na du. While Bihar has got more Schemes, the 
States like Tamil Nadu did not get any major schemes or proposals in this Budget.  
Tamil Nadu is a water-deficit State. We are sad to note that there is no project 
to take care of the irrigation needs of Tamil Nadu. We expected projects like 
interlinking of rivers, but there is no me ntion about that in this Budget. Godavari-
Kaveri Interlinking project would benefit Ta mil Nadu but it did not find a place in the 
Budget.  
 We expected some new railway line projects. There is no mention of that in this 
Budget.There is no mention of metro ra il projects in cities like Coimbatore and 
Madurai, as our friends here mentioned.  Madam, we have been repeatedly asking for 
railway lines between Jolarpettai via Krishnagiri-Hosur-Bengaluru, but there is no 
mention of that here.  We requested for a Greenfield airport in Hosur but that has not 
been mentioned.  I am not sure about the fa te of other Greenfield airports like the one 
at Parandur.  I am not aware if any steps have been taken by the Central Government 
in this regard.  
 Madam, as hon. Member, Shri Tiruchi Siva said, there are many National 
Highway projects that we requested for, but they were not considered.  There was an 
eight-lane project that the Edappadi Pa lanisamy Government had requested from 
Salem to Chennai.  That has not yet mate rialised.  When I was a Member of Lok 
Sabha representing Karur, I had requested for extension of the road from Karur to 
Coimbatore under the eight-lane project.  That was also not accepted.  I had also 
requested for a link from Tiruchi to Karur,  which would have eas ed travel between 
Coimbatore and Tiruchi.  That too has not been done. 
 Madam, talking about expansion of medical education, the Finance Minister 
has said in her Budget Speech that next year, 10,000 seats would be added.  I 
appreciate that.  It is worthw hile to mention here that th e former Chief Minister of 
Tamil Nadu, Shri Edappadi Palanisamy, was the only Chief Minister to have 
established 23 medical colleges in four y ears as Chief Minister.  He also made 
reservation for 7.5 per cent of MBBS seats in those colleges for students from 
Government schools, especially from rural areas, in order to benefit them.  Enrolment 
116
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
in higher education is very high in Tamil Nadu.  I appreciate wh at the hon. Member 
here said.  But it was because of our former Chief Ministers, Puratchi Thalaivar, MGR, 
Jayalalitha and Edappadi Palanisamy that more engineering colleges were 
established. ...(Interruptions)... Now, I wish to talk about rape cases in Tamil Nadu.  
The number of cases of rape has increased in  Tamil Nadu.  If you take into account 
the statistics in Tamil Nadu after the ne w Government assumed office, rape cases 
have increased. ...(Interruptions)...  I have got limited time. 
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Sir, I appreciate the demand for more money for Tamil Nadu, but the present 
DMK Government has failed to fulfil the promises made at the time of elections.  Four 
years are over.  Electricity bills have increased, property tax has increased and 
registration fee has increased.  The presen t DMK Government has failed to fulfil the 
election promises.  Coming to the housing scheme, the Central Government as well 
as the State Governments are providing funds,  but the money is not sufficient.   The 
money allotted for each house is very less.  For better quality, the allocation needs to 
be enhanced.  Poor people are not able to  get good houses and are suffering.  Our 
leader, Edappadi Palanisami, has always insisted that the Central Government as well 
as the State Government must increase the allocation for construction of houses for 
the poor people, especially those living in the rural areas, the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, so that they get good ho uses.  I would request the Minister to 
consider all these points.  Thank you, Sir.      
 
  
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons 
                                                                         
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Ramji Lal Suman; five minutes.  Before that, hon. Members, I 
have included the names of Shri Rajeev Shukla and Dr. M. Thambidurai in the Panel 
of Vice-Chairpersons to help the Chair, in addition to the earlier Panel.  Shri Ramji Lal 
Suman. 
 
 
THE UNION BUDGET, 2025-26– Contd. 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन (उǄर Ģदेश) : सभापित जी, यह 2025-26 का जो बजट है, यह िनराश 
करने वाला बजट है।  इसमȂ िवशेष रूप  से गर्ामीण अंचल की उपेक्षा हुई है।  मनरेगा एकमातर् 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
117

 
 
 
योजना थी, जो गर्ामीण अंचल क े Ǜिमकȗ को काम देती थी।  सभापित महोदय, 2021 और 2022 मȂ 
मनरेगा का बजट 98 हज़ार करोड़ रुपए  था, िजसे 2025-26 मȂ घटाकर 86 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े 
कर िदया गया।  सबसे अहम सवाल यह है िक मजदूरȗ ने जो िपछले वषर् मȂ काम िकया था, तो 
िपछले वषर् क े 9,754
 करोड़ रुपय े मनरेगा क े Ǜिमकȗ का वेतन बाकी रह गया है।   
सभापित महोदय, लोकसभा मȂ एक सिमित है, गर्ामीण िवकास और पंचायती राज सिमित, 
िजसके  अध्यक्ष Ǜी सÃतिगरी शंकर उलाका हȅ।  उस कमेटी ने इस संबंध मȂ िरकमंडेशन दी है।  
लोक सभा अध्यक्ष जी ने भी कहा िक यह तो िमनी संसद है।  इस कमेटी ने िरकमंड िकया, 
िसफािरश की िक मनरेगा क े Ǜिमकȗ को जो वेतन िमलता है, उसकी समीक्षा होनी च ािहए और 
महंगाई को आधार मानकर उनका वेतन सुिनिÌचत होना चािहए।  सभापित महोदय, यह सरकार 
5 िकलो अनाज तो लोगȗ को दे रही है, लेिकन रोजगार देने क े िलए तैयार नहीं है।  मȅ आपके  
माफर् त िनवेदन करना चा ह ूंगा िक 2022 और 2024 क े बीच मȂ 1 करोड़, 55 लाख Ǜिमकȗ क े नाम 
काट िदए गए हȅ।  इनके  नाम काटने से पहले यह समीक्षा होनी चािहए थी िक इनके  नाम न काटने 
पड़Ȃ और Ǜिमकȗ को बराबर रोजगार िमलता रहे।  सरकार ने संसद मȂ एक जवाब मȂ खुद Îवीकार 
िकया है िक िपछले 10 वषș मȂ 50 हज़ार सूÑम, लघु और मध्य
म उǏोग बंद हुए हȅ और 3,17,641 
लोगȗ की नौकिरयां खत्म हुई हȅ।   
सभापित महोदय, आज भारत सरकार पर 712 अरब डॉलर िवदेशी कजार् है और 
िंहदुÎतान मȂ हर Ëयिƪ पर 5 डॉलर, यानी 430 रुपय े का कजार् है।  हमारे देश क े पास िजतनी 
िवदेशी मुदर्ा है, उससे ज्यादा िवदेशी कजार् हमारे ऊपर है और आज हम देश की Ģगित की बात 
कर रहे हȅ!  बजट का 20 Ģितशत भाग तो जो िव देशी कजार् है, उसके  Åयाज मȂ ही चला जाता है।  
अभी देश मȂ 42 Ģितशत लोग क ृिष पर िनभर्र हȅ।  लोगȗ को रोजगार देने मȂ क ृिष का योगदान 18.2 
Ģितशत है। सभापित महोदय, क ृिष का जो बजट है, वह क ेवल 4.8 Ģितशत है।   क ृिष क े संरक्षण 
और संवधर्न का जो काम हमारे देश मȂ होना चािहए था, वह नहीं हुआ है।  2024 क े आकड़ȗ क े 
अनुसार 127 देशȗ मȂ से भूख क े सवाल पर हम 105वȂ Îथान पर हȅ।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ यह िनिÌचत रूप  से यह कहना चाहूंगा िक हमारे देश क े 1 Ģितश
त 
लोगȗ क े पास 44 Ģितशत दौलत है। यह जो आिर्थक असंतुलन है, यही िंहसा को जन्म देता है।  
यह असमानता दूर होनी चािहए। मȅ आपके  माफर् त िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक यह िकसान िवरोधी 
बजट है, नौजवानȗ क े िखलाफ बजट है, गर्ामीण अंचल क े िखलाफ बजट है और क ु ल िमलाकर 
आम जनता का इस बजट से कोई लेना-देना नहीं है। बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA (
Maharashtra): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I will, hopefully, 
complete within time.  सर, भारत एक बहुत ही िविवधता भरा देश है।  गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ लोगȗ की 
िडमांड्स बहुत अलग हȅ।  शहरी इलाकȗ मȂ लोगȗ की बहुत सारी िडमांड्स हȅ।  एमएसएमईज़ की 
अलग िडमांड्स हȅ। क ृिष जगत मȂ लोगȗ की अलग िडमांड्स और एक्सपेक्टेशन्स हȅ।  मȅ मानता हूं 
िक देश क े िकसी भी िव
Ǆ मंतर्ी को सभी कांÎटीǷुएंसीज़ को संतुÍट रखना, उनको खुश करना 
बहुत ही किठन है और एक Ģकार से असंभव है।   
 But, I woul
d like to say that, genuinely, in my parliamentary tenure, very rarely 
have I seen a Budget where there is very little to add to, और  इसिलए मȅ माननीय िवǄ 
118
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूँ िक उन्हȗने इस बजट क े माध्यम से middle class से लेकर 
MSMEs तक सभी constituencies को खुश िकया है।   
 सर, एक Ģकार से मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को इसिलए भी बधाई देना चाहूँगा िक उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ 
अंतरार्
Íटर्ीय Îतर पर जो ऐसे बहुत सारे international, economic, political shocks आए, भारत 
ने उन shocks का सफलता से सामना िकया।  Whether it is the Covid pandemic, managing 
inflation, driving structural reforms like the PLI scheme, tax rationalisation and capital 
market deepening, the Finance Minister has demonstrated remarkable leadership and 
today, India’s fiscal strength, our record  Foreign Direct Investment inflows and 
booming digital economy stand as a testament to her execution capabilities.  
 
(THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. DINESH SHARMA) in the Chair.) 
 
 सर, मेरा मानना है िक आज एक Ģकार से इस बजट मȂ जो सबसे महत्व पूणर् फोकस है, 
that is to make India and to make India’s smaller companies export ready.  For 
decades, Indian businesses have competed globally despite challenges like complex 
regulations and inadequate infrastructure.  This Budget, in my opinion, changes the 
game completely.  Number one, corporate tax कम करने से MSMEs को  एक level 
playing field का अवसर िदया जाएगा।   Number two, compliance का जो बोझ है, उस बोझ 
को घटाने से एक Ģकार से business-friendly environment अिधक मजबूत होगा।  िवǄ मंतर्ी जी 
ने अपने भाषण मȂ, जब उन्हȗने बजट ĢÎतुत िकया, she spoke about many measures to 
deregulate inefficient regulations.  I look forward to hearing from her in the months 
ahead on what the Finan ce Ministry plans to do.  तीसर
ा, logistics और digital 
infrastructure मȂ िनवेश करके  भारत ने ‘Make in India’ को ‘Export from India’ मȂ बदल िदया।  
 सर, जब हमारे पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी जी बोल रहे थे, मȅ actually गाड़ी मȂ था और मȅने मोबाइल 
फोन पर उनका बजट क े ऊपर भाषण सुना।  िचदÇबरम जी ने कहा, सर, आपके  पहले कहा। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : अभ
ी वे यहाँ नहीं हȅ। 
 
Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवरा : उन्हȗने कहा िक budgets are about numbers, and he rightly said 
this.  Budgets are about numbers. I spoke recently on the President’s Address also.  
Therefore, I will be very brief today.  I only  want to highlight the unparalleled progress 
that India has seen in th e last decade and I want to  quote 14 numbers and 14 
statistics.   
 Number one, in 2014, India’s forex rese rves were 304 billion do llars.   In 2024, 
last year, India’s forex reserves have reached 642 billion dollars, more than doubled.  
Ease of Doing Business ranking, which is very important, यिद हमȂ चीन क े against, बाकी 
देशȗ क े against compete करना है, तो Ease of Doing Busi
 ness ranking is very important.  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
119

 
 
 
2014 मȂ भारत की Ease of Doing Business ranking 142 थी, जबिक 2024 मȂ भारत की Ease 
of Doing Business ranking 63 है।  It has come down by more than half.   
 Regarding FDI in manufacturing, क ु छ लोगȗ ने कहा िक PLI schemes are not 
working.  Manufacturing मȂ investment कहा ँ आ रहा है!  मȅ उनका ध्यान इस statistics की 
ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहूँगा।  2004 से लेकर 2014 तक 10 वषș मȂ Foreign Direct Investment 
in manufacturing was 98 billion dollars.  2014 से लेकर 2024 तक Foreign Direct 
Investment in manufacturing is 165 billion dollars.  Internet connections - 2014 मȂ हमारे 
देश मȂ क ेवल 25 करोड़ internet conn
ections हुआ करते थे।  आज हम गवर् से कह सकते हȅ िक 
2024 मȂ 97 crore internet connections are there, which is an increase of four times.  मȅ 
एक ही statistics को repeat कर रहा हूँ, जो मȅने िपछले भाषण मȂ भी कहा।  UPI transactions - 
िदसंबर 2016 मȂ क ेवल एक महीने मȂ 7 billion UPI transacti ons took place.  In December 
2024, just two months ago, in one month on ly, 17 billion UPI transactions took place 
across different platforms.  
 सर, परमाणु ऊजार् क्षमता क े बारे मȂ जो आज िवǄ मंतर्ी ने कहा िक सरकार nuclear 
energy को unleash करना चाहती है, मȅ इसका तहे िदल से Îवागत करना चाहूँगा।  परमाणु 
ऊजार् क्षमता 2014 मȂ 4,780 मेगावाट थी, जबिक 2024 मȂ यह 8,180 मेगावाट है। 
 In 2024, it went up to 8,180 MW.  2014 मȂ मोबाइल फोन उत्पादन क े क्षेतर् मȂ यहाँ 
क ेवल 2 factories हुआ करती थीं, लेिकन 2024 मȂ भारत दुिनया का सबसे बड़ा मोबाइल 
manufacturing देश बना है। अगर भारतीय exports देखȂ, तो 2013-14 मȂ 466 िबिलयन डॉलसर् 
क े एक्सपोट्सर् हुआ कर त े थे, लेिकन 2023-24 मȂ 777 िबिलयन  डॉलसर् क े एक्सपोट्सर् हो रहे हȅ।   
Sir, medical colleges benefit the common pers ons.   In 2014, there were 387 medical 
colleges, of which 7 were AIIMS.  In 2024, there are 660 medical colleges, of which 23 
are AIIMS.  This is an increase of two times.  As far as II Ts and IIMs are concerned, in 
2014, there were only 16 IITs and 13 IIMs wh ile in 2024, we have 23 IITs and 21 IIMs in 
our country.  जब हम infrastructure की बात करते हȅ, the biggest statistics, in my 
opinion,  is the airports.  10 साल पहले भारत मȂ क ेवल 74 एयरपोट्सर् थे, जबिक 2024 मȂ 157 
एयरपोट्सर् हमारे देश मȂ हȅ।   This num ber has more than doubled.  
जो multi-dimensional गरीबी है, वह 2013-14 मȂ 29.17 परसȂट थी, जो 2022-23 मȂ 11.2 
परसȂट हो गई।  अगर हम जन-धन खाते देखȂ, तो 2014 मȂ क ेवल 15 करोड़ अकाउन्ट्स थे, जबिक 
2024 मȂ 50 करोड़ अकाउन्ट्स हो गए।  It is an increase of more than three times.  In 2014, 
the renewal energy capacity was 76 GW while  in 2024, it went up to 203 GW, which, 
again, is an increase of three times.  I we lcome the former Finance Minister’s remarks 
that Budgets are about numbers. These are the numbers which I have highlighted to 
show what progress has been made in the last ten years.   
Sir, there is one last point which I woul d like to make and my friends from the 
Congress may correct me, if I am wrong.  I think, in 1997, when Mr. Chidambaram, 
the then Finance Minister, presented his Budget speech, said, “The world does not 
120
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
wait for those who hesitate. ”  He also praised Dr. Manmohan Singh ji.  मȅने भी 
President’s Address पर बोलते हुए अपनी Îपीच मȂ डा. मनमोहन िंसह जी की Ģशंसा की थी।  
To be fair to Dr. Singh, he never hesitate d when UPA was in power nor was he in two 
minds or confused.  But, unf ortunately, there were elements in his Government who 
were hesitant about taking India forward.  Because of that unfortunate thing, India 
lost a decade of progress.  Today, one of the biggest reasons that India has 
progressed, has been progressing and is able to withstand the global shocks that the 
world is throwing at us, is the decisive  leadership of the hon. Prime Minister, 
Narendra Modi ji, having no ambiguity that  to make the country grow and to solve the 
problem of inequality, we have to have aggressive economic growth.   
With these words, I once again praise the hon. Finance Minister for an 
outstanding Budget.  Thank you very much. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : आपने समय से अपनी बात समाÃत की।  आपने बहुत अच्छे शÅदȗ 
मȂ पूरा िववरण िदया।  धन् यवाद। Now, Shri Jose K Mani. You have five minutes. 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI (Kerala) : Sir, when it comes to the General Budget, we talk 
about the whole nation but, today, I am comp elled to talk about my State, Kerala.  I 
stand here to raise the voice of the people of the State of Kerala because the Budget 
has completely neglected the State of Kerala.    
Sir, if you see the last eight Union Budgets, can any Member from the Treasury 
Benches point out one single project, one single assistance or one single scheme 
exclusively for the State of Ke rala?  Nothing has been done  for the State of Kerala.  
Why, Sir?  I am not asking for any special tr eatment for the State of Kerala.  I am only 
asking for a fair treatment.  Sir, as you kn ow, Kerala is a shining example of growth in 
the field of education, healthcare, tourism and other aspects.   
 We have earned our place in the India' s growth map. In the case of human 
development, we are much higher than some of the States in the country. But then, 
why are we being neglected? One of the Stat e Ministers in the Ce ntral Ministries was 
commending Kerala and saying, if you want  assistance, you must deteriorate the 
development and we will give you money.  It  is not that, but I will tell you the reason. 
The reason is that the BJP do not envisage an y political gain in Kerala. Sir, out of Rs. 
25 lakh crores for the allocation of all the States, Kerala has requested for Rs. 40,000 
crores.  But what has been given to Kerala? It is nil; it is zero.  
Now, if you talk about Wayanad, devastating landslide took place there.  It was 
there on the national TV, everywhere.   It happened when the House was in Session. I 
remember, about 375 people lost their liv es and thousands of people lost their 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
121

 
 
 
homes, their dear ones. The hon. Prime Minister visited Wayanad. Thank you for that.  
He visited the camps, caught hold of all the people inside the camp, got a little child, 
a boy of about 12 years, got close to him and said, “Don't worry.  We will take care of 
all the people over here. We will give you assistance.”  And what has he given? What 
has he allotted?  So many months have passed but not even a single pie has been 
allotted.  
We have been talking about AIIMS. You know the nurses of Kerala.  They are 
most sought after in the world.  But we ha ve been asking for AIIMS for the last 10 
years, but deliberately, it is not being allowe d; deliberately, it is not being sanctioned 
because there is no political gain for BJP in Kerala.  
Now, I will talk about rubber.  For th e last ten years, I have been speaking 
about rubber in the Lok Sabh a.  Here also, I have been  speaking about rubber. The 
Kerala economy revolves around the price of rubber. Ten years back, the rubber price 
was Rs.240 per kilo. Now, it has come down  to Rs.140 per kilo, the lowest during 
many years. It is so because of uncontrolle d import of natural rubber. Now, let it be 
that you are supporting or it is being done for the tyre manufacturer s.  Let it be like 
that. But why is the import duty on it? It is to protect the rubber growers, isn't it? 
During the last five years, the Government has earned about Rs.5000 crores on the 
import duty. That import duty is not the re venue of the Central Government. It is the 
sweat and toil of the farmers of Kerala beca use 75 per cent of the production is from 
Kerala.  We have a scheme in Kerala, Sir.  It is a beautiful scheme, maybe one of the 
best in Kerala.  Under this scheme, the mini mum support price of rubber is Rs.180.  If 
the price goes below Rs.180, they will comp ensate. So, I request the Government of 
India to give 75 per cent of the money to  the Rubber Production Incentive Scheme. 
One more thing is about the NRIs.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया आप conclude कीिजए। 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI: Just one last point, Sir.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्): चूँिक आपका समय पूरा हो गया, इसिलए आप conclude 
कीिजए। 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI: India received an estimate of Rs
.129 billion worth of remittance, 
the highest ever in the country in years. (Time-bell rings.) But the Budget is a slap on 
the Non-Resident Indians all over the world by introducing an oppressive tax regime 
on NRIs under the guise of global financial transparency. (Time-bell rings.) 
122
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : धन्यवाद, धन्यवाद, आपकी बात आ गई है। 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI :  I f  y o u  l o o k  a t  K e r a l a ,  i t  i s  a  s l a p  b y  t h e  C e n t r e  t o  K e r a l a  
because there is no political gain.  It is unfair. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्): आपका समय पूरा हो गया, इसिलए आप अपनी बात को पूरा 
कीिजए।  
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI: Thank you, Sir.         
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. DINESH SHARMA) :  The next speaker is Shri Birendra 
Prasad Baishya.  Ten minutes. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (ASSAM) : Thank you, Vice-Chairman, Sir, for 
allowing me to speak on the Union Budget. I rise here to speak on the Budget on 
behalf of my Party, Asom Gana Parishad, and on behalf of our Party President, Mr. 
Atul Bora.  
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
Sir, this Budget is for the economic growth of the country.   This Budget is a farmer-
friendly Budget. This Budget is for the poor and the middle-class people of our 
country.  I am delighted to say that the Bu dget is also for the development of the 
North-Eastern Region of our country, including Assam.  
Sir, for development, four engines are required.  These are:  agriculture sector, 
MSME sector, invest
ment sector and expo rt sector.  Our Government has given 
topmost priority to our agriculture sector.  It includes farmers' welfare and increasing 
the income of the farmers of our country. Th is Budget is a very good Budget.  People 
in every part of the country say that this Budget is for the poor people and the middle-
class people of our country.  In her Budget speech, our Finance Minister has given 
tax holiday for up to 12 lakh rupees.  It will be helpful for the middle-class people and 
the  poor  people of our country. This is possible only because our Prime Minister, 
Shri Narendra Modi, is here. This is possible only because Modi hai to mumkin hai.   
Sir, this Budget has given more for cap ital expenditure and development.  The 
Government is going to invest more than Rs .11.21 lakh crore for capital expenditure, 
which is three per cent of our GDP.  Capi tal expenditure means there will be creation 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
123

 
 
 
of new airports, new railway lines, new industries and new ports.  It means money will 
be coming in the market in a big way.  It means capital expenditure is going to expand 
in our country.  It will help in job crea tion in our country. I must compliment hon. 
Minister, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman.  I would also like to compliment our hon. 
Prime Minister for his wonderful guidance.  This Budget is a historic Budget for the 
North-Eastern Region.  
In the Budget proposal, the Railway Mi nister has proposed to invest about 
Rs.11,000 crore for the infrastructure development and to improve railway connectivity 
in the North-Eastern Region.  Redevelopment of 92 railway stations will be done as 
part of the Amrit Bharat Station scheme an d the entire Assam ra ilway network will be 
covered by electricity.  This is a histor ic announcement by the Railway Minister. I 
welcome it.  For the first time, the Railway Minister is going to spend about Rs.11,000 
crore for the development of the North-Easter n Region.  For more than 40 years, we 
have been fighting for electrification in  the Railways.The Railway Minister has 
announced that by 2025 all the railway tracks will be connected with electricity.   
With due respect to our former Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh ji, I would 
like to say one thing.  Dr. Singh was a gr eat economist.  He was from Assam.  Our 
Fertilizer Minister was from Assam.  For more than 30-40 years, we have been saying 
about Namrup fertiliser plant.  Can you imagine this fertiliser company was there in the 
60s? Now, this Budget has given proposal to set up urea production in our State. 
There will be urea industry in Namrup which is going to produce 12.7 lakh metric 
tonne urea annually.  
 It is a historic decision because fertilizers have played a very important role in 
the socio-economic development of Assam and the North-Eastern region. Fertilizers 
have played a very important role for the tea growing industry of our country. But, for 
the last several years, we had been fighti ng and we were not getting justice. There 
was nobody to look after us; nobody was wo rking for us. I am grateful to the hon. 
Prime Minister of the country who took this initiative; there will be a urea production 
unit in India which is going to produce 12.7  lakh metric tonne urea annually. In this 
regard, I would like to say a simple sentence expressed by the hon. Chief Minister of 
Assam because in this project Assam Gove rnment is going to invest 40 per cent 
share.  I must compliment the hon. Chief Minister of Assam for his courageous and 
active support to this project which will create new industrial development in the 
country.  Dr. Himanta Biswa Sarma said that  after the upcoming semiconductor plant 
in Jagiroad in the State, the new urea prod uction facility will be a ‘game-changer for 
the entire North-East’ and described the day as  ‘historic for Assam’.  Yes, Sir, this is 
a historic decision for Assam because this will be a game-changer for the 
124
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
development of our North-Eastern region.  We will go towards ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ 
in urea production with this project.  For th is, we will get market from the South-East 
Asia, Bangladesh and other countries. So, I am grateful. 
 Sir, I would like to mention one more thing. The Assam Government took up an 
ambitious plan to attract investors in the North-Eastern region. This is Advantage 
A s s a m  2 . 0 .   I  a m  v e r y ,  v e r y  h a p p y  t o  s a y  t h a t  m a n y  p r o m i n e n t  i n d u s t r i a l i s t s  f r o m  
many countries of the world including Ja pan, Korea and nearby countries already 
have accepted to participate in Advantage Assam 2.0 in 2025 whic h will be organized 
in Guwahati during February 25-26. I must compliment the hon. Chief Minister of 
Assam. This will be a new era. This will start a new history for the economic 
development of Assam. After successful organization of Advantage Assam 2.0, 
Assam will be one of the major industrial players of our country.  
 Sir, I am very proud that I belong to  a tea producing State of Assam. We 
produce tea. Assam tea has international name which earns a lot of foreign exchange, 
is helpful and a boost for our economy.  In our economy, small tea growers play a 
very, very important role because they are self-emplo yed.  I humbly request the 
Government.  We are getting all possible support from the Government for looking 
after the small tea growers of our country.  They are self-made, self-employed and if 
they get some justice and help from the Gove rnment of India, our tea industry will go 
better. Our small tea growers play a very important role.  Again, I salute Nirmala 
Sitharamanji and the hon. Prime Minister for giving income tax relief up to an income 
of Rs.12 lakh to the people of Assam which will be helpful to the poor people, middle-
class people, etc. It means that our Gove rnment, Narendra Modi Government, is for 
the poor people.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : अब आप conclude कीिजए। 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA : It is for the economically backward people and 
it is for the middle class people.  With this, I totally support the Budget and 
compliment our hon. Prime Minister. Than k you very much for giving me this 
opportunity. 
     
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्) : नेक्Îट Îपीकर, डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलकणीर्। आपके  बोलने का 
समय 20 िमनट है। 
 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलक
णीर् (महाराÍटर्): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक 
आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर, बजट पर चचार् करने क े िलए और अपना समथर्न देने क े िलए 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
125

 
 
 
मौका िदया। मेरे भाषण क े शुरू  मȂ मȅ सवर्Ģथम िदÊली की ऐितहािसक जीत क े िलए सबको बधाई 
देती हूं।  यह कायर्कतार् और जनता का जो िवÌवास है, उसको मोदी जी ने हािसल िकया, इसिलए 
क ेन्दर् मȂ जो काम चल रहा है, वही िदÊली मȂ हो सके , इसिलए डबल इंजन की सरकार को उन्हȗने 
चुना है।  Ëहाट्सएप पर बहुत सारे वायरÊस आ रहे थे िक लोगȗ ने आिखर शीशमहल मȂ रहने वालȗ 
को आईना िदखा ही िदया।  पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी कह रहे थे िक मोदी जी मुझे कभी हरा नह ीं सकते, 
लेिकन मȅ कहना चाहती हूं िक सरकार तो िगर गई, सरकार तो हार ही गई, लेिकन खुद की सीट 
भी नहीं बचा सके ।  मȅ यह भी कहना चाहती हूं िक चींटी को मारने क े िलए हथ ौड़े की आवÌयकता 
नहीं होती है।  ऐसी ऐितहािसक हार उनकी हुई है और उनको आईना िदखाने क े िलए िदÊली वालȗ 
का बहुत-बहुत आभार।   इससे पहले महाराÍटर् ने ऐसी ही बड़ी होश उड़ाने वाली जीत हािसल की 
थी, तो महाराÍटर् भी अिभनन्दन का पातर् है।  हिरयाणा ने शुरुआत  की थी, तो हिरयाणा ने एक 
Ǜृंखला, एक कड़ी की शुरुआत  की और इसमȂ बाद मȂ महाराÍटर् और िदÊ
ली आगे बढ़ते गए।  आने 
वाले चुनावȗ मȂ बाकी राज्य भी इस कड़ी मȂ जुड़ते जाएंगे, यह मेरा िवÌवास है। मȅ 2025-26 क े 
वािर्षक िवǄीय िववरण पर बात रखूंगी ही, लेिकन उसके  पहले मȅ एक िहसाब चुकता करना 
चाहती हूं।  इस वषर् क े अंदाजपतर् क े शुरू  मȂ बजट सादर होने क े पहले आदरणी य राÍटर्पित 
महामिहम दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी ने बहुत ही Ģेरणादायी भाषण िकया।  उन्हȗने कहा िक 2047 तक भारत 
एक ऊ ंची उड़ान ले सकता है।  यह उड़ान क ैसी होगी, इसके  बारे मȂ उन्हȗने संकÊप िच तर् रखा।  
िवकिसत भारत की  यातर्ा मȂ कोई छू टने न पाए, इस ध्येय अनुरूप  यह सरकार काम करेगी, यह 
एजȂडा उन्हȗने बताया।  सच्चा राÍटर्वाद, क ेवल भारत की भौितक एकता नहीं, सांÎकृ ितक एकता 
का मजबूतीकरण भी होना चािहए।  डा. Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् का यह वाक्य उन्हȗने उǉृत िकया।  
उन्हȗने कहा िक एक राÍटर् मȂ अनेक रूप  हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन इन सबमȂ हमारी पहचान एक है और 
वह है भारत और इस भारत का एक ही संकÊप है और वह है िवकिसत भारत।  इनके  Ģेरणादायी 
वाक्यȗ ने मुझे तो रोमांिच
त कर िदया।  िपछले साल का मुझे याद है, जब मȅ नई-नई सांसद बनी 
थी, तो उनका पहला ही अिभभाषण था।  उन्हȗने जो अिभभाषण क े अंत मȂ कहा, वह वाक्य इतना 
अच्छा है, इतना गहरा है, तो मȅ आपके  िलए उसको एक बार दोहराना चा हती हूं।  उन्हȗने कहा िक 
यह सदी भारत की सदी है और इस सदी की पीढ़ी का योगदान आने वाले हजार साल याद रखȂगे।  
ये वाक्य उन्हȗने कहे थे, जो मेरे मन मȂ बस गए हȅ। जहां-जहां मुझे मौका िमलता है, वहां मȅ इन 
वाक्यȗ को लोगȗ को जागृत करने क े िलए उǉृत करती हूं।  मȅ लोगȗ को यह बताने क े िलए िक 
आओ, चलो, इस सदी की पीढ़ी क े लोग क ु छ ऐसा करȂ िक आने वाले हजार साल भारत की तरफ 
कोई भी वकर्दृिÍट से देख नहीं पाएगा,  ऐसा  काम करके  जाएं।  इतना गहरा यह वाक्य है।  मुझे 
आÌचयर् हुआ िक जो भाषण मुझे Ģेिरत करता है, बाकी जो अनेक राÍटर्भƪ लोग थे, उनको भी 
Ģेिरत करता है, तो वह िकसी को बोर क ै से कर सकता है? सर, मȅ एक अध्यापक हूं।  मुझे मालूम है 
िक क ु छ-क ु छ Îटू डȂट्स की ऐसी िदमागी हालत होती है, बौिǉक क्षमता क ु छ ऐसी होती है िक 
उनको क ु छ समझ मȂ नह
ीं आता, उनका concentration भी नहीं होता है, उनका ध्यान नहीं 
लगता है, कभी-कभी वे बोर हो जाते हȅ और कभी-कभी सो भी जाते हȅ।  आपने देखा होगा िक 
िकरेन िरिजजु जी क े भाषण क े समय वे बहुत गहरी नींद मȂ थे िक कोई उनको उठा रहा था, वह 
भी उनको पता नहीं चल रहा था। 
126
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
महोदय, ऐसी बात करने वाले कभी-कभी जागते हȅ और जागने क े बाद क्या बात करते हȅ? 
वे यह बात करते हȅ िक हमारी लड़ाई िकससे है, भारत की राÍटर् संÎथा क े साथ हमारी लड़ाई है, 
भारत की राज्य संÎथा क े साथ हमारी लड़ाई है। मतलब, ये अपने ही राÍटर् से लड़Ȃगे। जब वे जागते 
हȅ, तब £ की ऐसी भाषा बोलते हȅ। मुझे दुख भी होता है, ददर् भी होता है  
और शॉक भी लगता है। जैसे हमȂ शॉक लगा िक वे एक सांसद होकर ऐसी बात क ै से कर सकते  हȅ 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह भी वही िवषय है, बजट का एजȂडा है, मȅ आपको उǄर नहीं दूंगी, क्यȗिक 
आपका एजȂडा अलग है। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... यह राÍटर्भिƪ पर समिर्पत बजट है, यह राÍटर् को समिर्पत 
बजट है। िजनका mind  £  है, उन्हȂ यह बजट िनराशाजनक लगेगा, लेिकन जैसे हम शॉक मȂ चले 
गए, वैसी ही एक घटना बताना चाहती हूं। महोदय, हमारे िबहार क े एक सामान्य नागिरक हȅ – 
मुक े श चौधरी जी। कदािचÞ आपने भी यह न्यूज सुनी होगी, लेिकन जब उन्हȗने यह न्यूज सुनी िक 
माननीय ‘xyz’ ने ऐसा  £  िवधान िकया है, तो उनके  हाथ मȂ दूध की एक बोतल थी, वह बोतल हाथ 
से िगर गई और उनका दूध waste हो गया। वे दौड़े-दौड़े कोटर् मȂ गए और उन्हȗने मुकदमा चलाना 
चाहा िक मेरा भी नुकसान हुआ है, मेरे देश का भी नुकसान हुआ है और ऐसे £ यहाँ नहीं होने 
चािहए। मतलब, इनकी बातȗ से लोगȗ का िदमाग खराब होता है, उन्हȂ शॉक लगता है, उन्हȂ दुख 
होता है, ददर् होता है, लेिकन इन्हȂ राÍटर्भिƪ क े भाषण से बोिरयत होती है और ये बाहर जाकर 
लोगȗ से बात करते हȅ िक poor thing. आप  poor thing िकसे बोलते हȅ? आप भारतीय नारी का  
अपमान करते हȅ। ...(Ëयव
धान)... वे एक उच्च पद पर आसीन हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप वह छोड़ 
दीिजए।  िदÊली क े चुनाव ने यह बता िदया है िक अगर कोई भी भारतीय नारी का अपमान करेगा, 
तो एक Ǜाप लगेगा ही लगेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... भारतीय नारी क े िलए ऐसी अभदर् भाषा बोलने वाले 
लोगȗ को आने वाले समय मȂ और भी बोर होना पड़ेगा, क्यȗिक उन्हȂ िकसी भी राज्
य मȂ सǄा नहीं 
िमलेगी, उनके  मेÇबसर् चुनकर नहीं आएंगे और जब घर मȂ बैठने की   नौबत आएगी,  तो      उनके       
िलए वह समय  और भी बोर  होने वाल
ा है। जब ऐसा होगा, तब उन्हȂ पता चलेगा िक असली  poor 
thing क्या होती है। चिलए, छोिड़ए, मȅ बजट पर बात करती हूं, लेिकन आप सुिनए। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... मȅ मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ चल रही इस सरकार और आदरणीय िवǄ मंतर्ी िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी  का अिभनंदन करना चाहती हूं िक उन्हȗने आठवीं बार यहाँ पर अपना बजट सादर 
िकया है। यह बजट सवȊकक्ष और सवर्समावेशी है, इसिलए उनका बहुत-बहुत अिभनंदन।  
महोदय, मोदी जी ने अपने भाषण मȂ कहा था िक यह हर भारतीय क े सप
नȗ को साकार 
करने वाला बजट है, यह हर भारतीय नागिरक का तुिÍटकरण नहीं, संतुिÍटकरण कर ने वाला 
बजट है। महोदय, आदरणीय िनमर्ला जी ने भी कहा था, A country is not just its soil, a 
country is made up of its people.  इससे अटल जी की किवता याद आती है िक भारत क ेवल 
एक जमीन का ट ुकड़ा नहीं, जीता-जागता राÍटर्पुरुष है, हम िजएंगे तो इसके  िलए, और मरȂगे तो 
इसके  िलए। यह इस राÍटर्पुरुष को और ज्यादा मजबूत बनाने वाला बजट है। इस बजट का 
संकÊप क्या है? महोदय, इस बजट का संकÊप िवकिसत भार
त है। इसको कब तक िवकिसत 
भारत बनाना है? इसको 2047 तक िवकिसत भारत बनाना है। क ै से बनेगा िवकिसत भारत? यह 
सबका िवकास करके  िव
किसत भारत बनेगा। सबका िवकास क ै से होगा?  महोदय, reform, 
                                                           
£  Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
127

 
 
 
perform and transform से सबका िवकास होगा। महोदय, िरफॉÇसर् क ै से हȗगे? इसके  िलए चार 
growth engines या  आप चार pillars भी  बोल सकते हȅ, उन्हȂ identify िकया  गया है। ये चार 
िपलसर् क ृिष, MSME, investment और िनयार्त हȅ। महोदय, िकतने अच्छे तरीके  से िवचार करने 
क े बाद बजट तैयार िकया गया है िक िकसको strong बनाएंगे और कौन-सी पटरी पर हमारा देश 
चलेगा। महोदय, इसके  िलए चार गर्ोथ engines बनाए गए हȅ।    
 सबसे वीकर – हम  वीक
र क्यȗ बोलȂ? अगर उन्हȂ Îटर्ाँग िकया जाएगा, तो देश Îटर्ाँग हो 
सकता है। उन्हȗने ऐसे चार घटक चुने हȅ, िजनमȂ अन्नदाता, युवा, नारी और गरीब हȅ। इसके  
िसǉांत क्या हȅ – उन्हȗने कहा िक गरीबी से मुिƪ - यह िसǉांत है। अच्छे Îतर की िशक्षा - यह 
एजȂडा है। सÎती, बेहतर एवं सुलभ ÎवाÎथ्य Ëयव Îथा - यह एजȂडा है। शत-Ģितशत क ुशल 
कामगार और साथर्क रोजगार – यह थीम है। आिर्थक गितिविधयȗ मȂ 70 Ģितशत मिहलाएं 
समािवÍट हȗ - यह थीम है। हमारा देश फ ू ड बाÎके ट ऑफ िद वÊडर् बने, इसके  िलए िकसानȗ को 
सक्षम करना चािहए - यह थीम है। डेवलपमȂट मȂ तेजी, मध्यम वगर् की क्षम
ता को बढ़ाने मȂ मदद, 
समावेशी इन्क्लूिसव डेवलपमȂट, िनजी क्षेतर् मȂ िनवेश को बढ़ाना और पिरवारȗ क े मनोबल को 
उÊलिसत करना, मतलब इतने अच्छे थीम पर कोई भी योजना हो, कोई भी बजट डा ला हो, कोई 
भी Ģावधान हो, सबके  िलए यह थीम है िक इससे क्या होने वाला है। अब, मध्यमवगर् का उÊलेख 
िकया है, तो मध्यमवगर् क े बजट को, उनके  बडर्न को कम करने क े िलए 12 लाख तक की आय पर 
पूरे तर
ीके  से टैक्स ģी कर िदया है। जो जॉब करते हȅ और उनकी सेलेरी आती है, उन्हȂ 
12,75,000 क े ऊपर टैक्स नहीं होगा। आप तुलना कर सकते हȅ। अगर हम 2014 की बात करȂ, तो 
2014 मȂ आपकी आय आठ लाख होत
ी, तो आपको 90,000 टैक्स देना पड़ता था, अगर आपकी 
आमदनी 12 लाख होती, तो दो लाख का टैक्स देना पड़ता था, अगर 24 लाख की आमदनी होती, 
तो 2.06 लाख टैक्स देना पड़ता, लेिकन सामान्य नागिरक की इस टैक्स की रकम की बचत हो 
चुकी है, इसि
लए उनके  िलए ये Ģावधान, ये घोषणाएं बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् और फायदा देने वाली हȅ। 
हालांिक, हम दूसरȗ से तुलना क्यȗ करȂ। माननीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ चल रही यह सरकार खुद 
से ही Îपधार् करती है। िप
छले साल हमने क्या िकया था, उससे आगे जाकर हम क्या करने वाले हȅ 
और क्या कर सकते हȅ, अपनी ही पूँजी बढ़ाने का काम यह सरकार करती है। मȅ आपक ो एक और 
तुलना बताती हूँ। अगर 2024 मȂ आपकी इनकम आठ लाख रुपय े होती, तो 30,000 टैक्स भरना 
पड़ता। अगर आपकी इनकम 12 लाख होती, तो 80,000 टैक्स देना पड़ता और आपकी इनकम 24 
लाख है, तो 1,10,000 इनकम टैक्स देना पड़ता, लेिकन अब इसमȂ बचत हो गई है, तो सवर्सामान्य 
नागिरक, जो मध्यमवगीर्य है, वह बहुत खुश है। कर सुधार क े िलए और भी नए तर
ीके  और भी एक 
सरल िबल आने वाला है, जो लोगȗ को अच्छा लगेगा। 36 जीवन  रक्षक दवाओं मȂ से टैक्स हटा 
िदया है। सीिनयर citizen
s क े िलए सुिवधा रहे, उनके  Åजाय पर टैक्स न लगे, इसका िनणर्य िकया 
गया है। िकराया लेने वाले मकान मािलक क े िलए िनणर्य िलया गया है। सभी िडपाटर्मȂट मȂ बहुत 
सारी िन
िध का Ģावधान िकया है। हम comparison कर सकते हȅ िक 2013 मȂ िकतना बजट आता 
था और 2025 मȂ िकतना बजट आ रहा है। इस साल का िडफȂ स का बजट 4,90,000 है। रूरल  
डेवलपमȂट का 2,66,000 है, होम अफे यसर् का 2,33,000 है। मȅ सभी आंकड़े िगनवा सकती हूँ। 
आवासन का बजट 96,077 करोड़ रुपय े है। ये सब आंकड़Ȃ करोड़ मȂ हȅ। सड़क का बजट है –
 2.87 
128
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
लाख करोड़। अगर देखा जाए, तो 2013 मȂ यह बजट 31,000 करोड़ था और अब यह बढ़कर 2.87 
करोड़ हो गया है, मतलब यह बजट कई गुना बढ़ा है।  
 
(THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) in the Chair.) 
 
इसका इफे क्ट हम देख सकते हȅ। हम जहाँ-जहाँ भी जाएं, सभी जगहȗ पर बहुत अच् छी 
सड़कȂ बनी हȅ। इतने साल मȂ ये इसे कर नहीं सके , लेिकन हमारी सरकार ने यह करके  िदखाया है। 
रेलवे का बजट हो, Îटील का बजट हो, सभी मȂ अच्छी तरह से आवंटन िकया गया है। मȅ महाराÍटर् 
क े बारे मȂ ज्यादा बात करना चाहूँगी। जब िपछली बार महाराÍटर् क े चुनाव होने वाले थे, हुए नहीं थे, 
तब महाराÍटर् को बजट िद
या गया। सबने बोला िक महाराÍटर् क े चुनाव हȅ, तो महाराÍटर् को बजट दे 
रहे हȅ, लेिकन ऐसा नहीं है। इस साल भी हमȂ बहुत अच्छी तरह से बजट िमला है।  
 पुणे मेटर्ो क े िलए 837 करोड़, मुÇबई अबर्न टर्ांसपोटर् Ģोजेक्ट क े िलए 1,400 करोड़, मुला-
मुथा नदी संरक्षण Ģोजेक्ट क े िलए 230 करोड़, नाग नदी सुधार पिरयोज ना क े िलए 295 करोड़, 
मुÇबई-अहमदाबाद हाई Îपीड रेल क े िलए 4,000 करोड़ , हाई Îपीड रेल टर्ेिंनग इंिÎटǷूट क े 
िलए 126 करोड़, मुंबई मेटर्ो क े िलए 1,600 करोड़, गर्ामीण सुधार क े िलए 683 करोड़ रुपय े िमले।  
अगर मȅ इत
ना सब यहां िगनाऊं गी, तो बोलने वाला भी थके गा और सुनने वाला भी थके गा िक 
इतना बजट िदया है। मȅ कÇपैिरजन करना चाहती हूं।  मȅ पुणे से आती हूं।  जब तक क Ȃ दर् मȂ माननीय 
मोदी जी की सरकार नहीं आई थी, तब तक पुणे मȂ, महाराÍटर् मȂ एक भी काम क Ȃ दर् की योजना से 
नहीं हो पाया था।  आज यह िÎथित है िक पुणे मȂ हर जगह मैटर्ो का नेटवकर् बन रहा है।  आज भी 
मȅने पुणे मैटर्ो क े बारे मȂ पढ़
ा िक उसे 800 करोड़  से ज्यादा का बजट िदया गया है।  पुणे मȂ नदी 
सुधार का Ģोजेक्ट चल रहा है, पुणे मȂ सड़कȂ बन रही हȅ।  अभी धनंजय जी ने आलंदी का िजकर् 
िकया था िक आलंदी से पंढरपुर तक और देहू से पंढरपुर तक वारी जाती है, तो वारी का जो मागर् 
है, वह बहुत अच्छा मागर् है, यह कायर् वारकरी संĢदा
य क े िलए क Ȃ दर् ǎारा िक या गया है, चाहे िंरग 
रोड हो, एसटीपी Ãलांट्स हो, सभी क े िलए इतना अच्छा बजट िदया है।  मोदी जी की सरकार इस 
तरह से देश को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए काम कर रही है।   
आज दुिनया मȂ मोबाइल बनाने मȂ भारत देश नंबर वन पर है। िडफȂ स मȂ 10 गुना एक्सपो टर् 
बड़ा है।  दुिनया का सबसे बड़ा Îटील Ģोǹूिंसग देश भारत है।  हर िदन दो कॉलेजेस बन रहे हȅ।  
हर िदन 37 नए Îटाटर्अÃस बन रहे हȅ।   भारत मत्Îय िन यार्त मȂ िवÌव मȂ दो नंबर पर है।  इसके  
अलावा भी बहुत सारी उपलिÅधयां हȅ, जैसे आवास योजना है, Îटाटर्अÃस है, आयुÍयमान भारत है, 
अन्न सुरक्षा योजना है, जल जीवन िमशन है।  इसी Ģकार ए यरपोट्सर् की संख्या 157 हो गई, अन्य 
120 डेिÎटनेशंस होने जा रहे हȅ, आईआईटीज़ हȅ, पीएम िरसचर् फ ैलोिशप मȂ छातर्ȗ को 10 हज़ार 
फ ैलोिशÃस दी जाएंगी।  इतने आंकड़े िगनाने क े बाद भी ये बोलȂगे िक क ु छ कर नहीं सकते हȅ और  
ÎटेिटिÎटक्स यह नहीं बता रहा है, वह नहीं बता रहा है।  मतलब जैसे क ु Ǆे की दुम होती, वैसे क ु छ 
लोग होते हȅ िक क ु छ भी करो, उनको क ु छ भी बताओ, िसǉ करो, आंकड़े बताए जाते हȅ, लेिकन 
िफर भी वे नहीं मानȂगे।  टीका-िटÃपणी करना उनकी िफतरत मȂ है।  कभी चुनाव पर बोलȂगे, कभी 
ईवीएम पर बोलȂगे, कभी संिवध
ान पर बोलȂगे, कभी वोटसर् रिजÎटर्ेशन िकतना हुआ है, इस पर 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
129

 
 
 
बोलȂगे, कभी धािर्मक िवषयȗ पर बोलȂगे।  इन्हȗने तो क ुÇभ तक को नहीं छोड़ा।   सर, मेरी िवनती है 
िक क ृपया मेरा समय थोड़ा सा बढ़ा दीिजए।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) :  समय तो नहीं बढ़ेगा, क्यȗिक आपकी पाटीर् ने आपको जो टाइम 
िदया, यह उसी क े िहसाब से है।   आप
के  पास 1 िमनट और 37 सेक ं ड का समय बाकी है।  मैडम, 
आपने जो क ु Ǆे वगैरह बोला है, तो यह बाद मȂ देखना पड़ेगा िक वह अलाउड है या नहीं।  आप 
बोिलए।   
 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलक
णीर् :  सर, मȅने एक एिनमल क े बारे मȂ बोला।  मȅने िकसी आदमी क े बारे मȂ 
नहीं बोला।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) :  आपने लोगȗ की तुलना तो एिनमल से की है। 
 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलकणीर् :  सर, यह मुहावरा है।  जब Îव
 तंतर्ता क े बाद का पहला क ुÇभ था, तब 
क े माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नेहरू  जी वहां गए थे और उनके  जाने क े बाद वहां जो भगदड़ हुई,  तो 
उस पर ये राजनीित नहीं करȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... लेिकन आज अगर कोई दुघर्टन ा घटी है 
...(Ëयवधान)...  मȅ 2003 की बात करती हूं।  नािसक मȂ क ुÇभ हुआ था।  नािसक क े क ुÇभ मȂ 
कालाराम मंिदर क े सामने दिक्षण ǎार पर भगदड़ हुई थी और बहुत सारे लोगȗ की मौत हुई थी।  
2013 मȂ मॉरीशस क े Ģधान मंतर्ी आए थे और गंदग
ी देखकर रोते-रोते वापस चले गए िक अरे, क्या 
यह गंगा है, ऐसी गंगा तो मȅने कभी सोची नहीं थी!  इस तरह से तब क ुÇभ का आयोजन िकया गया 
था।  तब क ुÇभ का आयोजन िकसने िकया था?  आजम खान जी को यह िजÇमेदारी 2013 मȂ उस 
वƪ क े मुख्य मंतर्ी जी ने दी थी।  उस वƪ क े मुख्य मंतर्ी जी ने अब इस साल वहां क ुÇभ मȂ जाकर 
डुबकी लगाई।  जब उǄर Ģदेश की सारी टीम जा
ती है, वहां क े सब िमिनÎटसर् जाते हȅ, डुबकी 
लगाते हȅ और फोटो िनकालते हȅ, तब बोलते हȅ िक आलोचना होती है।   अरे, फोटो िनकालने की 
क्या जरूरत  है, आप पि
Åलिसटी करते हȅ। ... (समय की घंटी)... लेिकन जब वे खुद जाएँगे, 
िवपक्षी दलȗ क े भी सारे लोग वहाँ जाकर आए, उन्हȗने फोटो िनकाली, िफर भी वे आलोचना करते 
हȅ, तब उनको नहीं लगता िक टीका करनी चािहए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : धन्यवाद, मैडम।  Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह। 
 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलक
णीर् : सर, मुझे एक िमनट और दे दीिजए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : ठीक है, मैडम, आप 30 सेक ं ड मȂ conclude किरए। 
 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलक
णीर् : सर , मȅ क ेवल एक आवाहन करना चाहती हूँ िक राजनीित को छोड़ 
दीिजए।  िवकिसत भारत की यातर्ा मȂ कोई छू टने न पाए, यही तो एजȂडा है।  आप भी इससे अलग 
मत जाइए, आप भी इस िवकिसत यातर्ा मȂ आइए, इस बजट का समथर्न कीिजए और आने वाले 
130
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
समय मȂ हमȂ अपनी अथर्ËयवÎथा को तीसरे नंबर पर लेकर जाना है, तो उसके  िलए जो भी तरीके , 
जो भी योजनाएँ लाई जाएँ, तािक अच्छी अथर्ËयवÎथा हो, इसके  िलए हम काम कर रहे हȅ, तो 
उसमȂ शािमल हो जाइए, मȅ इतनी ही िरक्वेÎट करू ँगी,  धन्यव ाद।               
                                             
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : आपने क ुं भ की मौत का जो 800 का आँकड़ा बताया था, उसको 
आज आप authenticate करके , िलख कर टेबल ऑिफस को दे दीिजएगा। 
 
डा. मेधा िवǛाम क ुलकणीर् : हाँ, हाँ, िबÊकु ल। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : ठीक है।  Ǜी अिख लेश Ģसाद िंसह। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह (िबहार) : महोदय, आपने मुझे अपनी पाटीर् की तरफ से बजट पर बोलने 
का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका बहुत धन्यवाद करता हूँ।  मेरे िलए यह खुशिक Îमती  है िक 
आपके  जैसा िवǎान आदमी चेयर पर बैठा है और मुझे बजट पर बोलने का मौका िदया गया।   
 महोदय, िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का इस बार का जो बजट भाषण था, उसको मीिडया मȂ और सब 
जगह ऐसे पेश िकया गया, जैसे िबहार को बहुत बड़ ी सौगात िमली है।  संजय क ुमार झा जी उधर 
से मुÎकरा रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक इस तरह की सौगात वे बहुत बार देख चुक े हȅ।  यह मेरे िलए गौरव की 
बात है िक िबहार क े एक पूवर् मुख्यमंतर्ी और देश की सरकार मȂ अभी मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ का म कर रहे 
आदरणीय जीतन राम माँझी जी भी इस सदन मȂ मौजूद हȅ।  मȅ िबहार क े दुख-ददर् को उनसे साझा 
करना चाहता हूँ।  िबहार क्या था और िबहार िकस तरह से systematicall
y neglect हुआ है, मȅ 
आपके  माध्यम से यहाँ उसकी चचार् करना चाहता हूँ।  महोदय, 2000 मȂ मȅ िबहार िवधान सभा का 
सदÎय था और उसी समय िबहार का बँटवारा हुआ था।  Reorganization Bill पर जब देश की 
संसद मȂ बहस हो रही थी, तब उस सम
य क े तत्कालीन गृह मंतर्ी, एल.क े. आडवाणी जी, जो अब 
भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की तरफ से मागर्दशर्क मंडल मȂ बैठे हȅ, उन्हȗने िबहार क े बँटवारे पर चचार् 
करते हुए िब
हार को हिरयाणा और पंजाब बनाने की बात कही थी और िबहार को 1,80,000 करोड़ 
का पैक े ज देने की बात की थी।  आज भी िबहार क े लोग उस पैक े ज की बाट जोह रहे हȅ िक वह 
पैक े ज कहाँ गया!  उसके  बाद िबहार क े संदभर् मȂ systematic तरीके  से जो क ु छ हुआ, मȅ उसक ी 
चचार् आपके  सामने करना चाहता हूँ।  िपछले दो-तीन साल से हम लोग लगातार िवǄ मंतर्ी जी की 
5 िटर्िलयन इकोनॉमी और 2047 तक भारत को िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाने की बात सुनते आ रहे हȅ।  
हम सब लोगȗ की भी यही इच्छ
ा है िक भारत एक िवकिसत राÍटर् बने, जो सबसे जरूरी काम है।  
आिर्थक िवकास की दृिÍट से देश मȂ जो regional imbalance है, देश मȂ जो क्षेतर्ीय असंतुलन की 
िÎथित है, उसको जब तक address नहीं िकया जाएगा, या जब तक उसका कोई िवज़न नहीं 
रखा जाएगा, तब तक यह िवकिसत राÍटर् की Ǜेणी मȂ नहीं खड़ा हो सकता है।  महोदय, िपछले 60 
सालȗ मȂ क्षेतर्ीय असंतुलन की दृिÍ ट  से िबहार की जो िÎथित हुई है, वह अपने आप मȂ बेहद 
िंचताजनक है। कहीं और की िरपोटर् होती, तो आप लोग भी उसको मानने से सीधे तौर पर इनकार 
कर देते, लेिकन खुद Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की जो Economic Advisory Cou ncil है, ये तो उसी की 
िरपोटर् क े आंकड़े हȅ और मȅ उसी से क्वोट करना चाहता हूं।   
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
131

 
 
 
महोदय, 1960-61 मȂ िबहार मȂ per capita income national average का 70 परसȂट हुआ 
करता था, लेिकन आज की डेट मȂ िबहार का per capita income national average का लगभग 
32 परसȂट रह गया है।  यानी अगर national average 100 रुपय े है, तो िबहार की per capita 
income क ेवल 32 रुपय े है।  इतना ही नहीं, 1960-61 मȂ देश क े क ु ल जीडीपी मȂ िबहार का 
योगदान लगभग 8 पर
सȂट था, जो आज मोदी जी की िरजीम मȂ घटकर 4 परस Ȃट रह गया है।  
िबहार मȂ िनवेश और इंģाÎटर्क्चर पर खचर् की क्या िÎथित है, इसके  िलए भी मȅ क ु छ Îपेिसिफक 
डेटा सदन मȂ रखना चाह
ता हूं।  िबहार मȂ सड़कȗ पर per capita खचर् क ेवल 44 रुपय े है, जबिक 
national average 117 रुपए  है।  इसी तरह से िंसचाई पर िबहार मȂ per capita खचर् क ेवल 104 
रुपए  है, जबिक national average 199 रुपए  है।  नाबाडर् ने खुद अपनी एक िरपोटर् मȂ Îवीकार 
िकया है िक िबहार मȂ देश क े बाकी राज्यȗ क े मुकाबले agricultural loan का जो dis
bursement 
है, वह काफी कम है, यानी देश की लगभग 9-10 परस Ȃट आबादी वाला जो राज्य है, वह अगर 
आिर्थक िवकास क े सभी parameters पर इतना पीछे है, तो ऐसे मȂ आप देश को िवकिसत राÍटर् 
बनाने की बात क ै से कर सकते हȅ और कौन इस पर िवÌ
वास कर सकता है?  
महोदय, क ेवल यही नहीं, अगर आप नीित आयोग की िपछली ितमाही की या िपछले 6 
महीनȗ की िरपोटर् देख लȂ, तो देश मȂ जो 28 बड़े राज्य हȅ, उनमȂ Ģाय: सभी मानकȗ पर, चाहे वहां 
की ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा हो, िश
क्षा ËयवÎथा हो और औǏोिगकीकरण क े मामले मȂ िबहार Ģाय: या तो 28वȂ 
Îथान पर और नहीं तो 27वȂ Îथान पर चला गया है।  मȅ इन आंकड़ȗ क े आधार पर क ेवल इतना 
कहना चाहता हूं िक िबहार का िवक
ास इस सरकार की Ģाथिमकता मȂ कहीं भी नहीं है।  जब 2014 
मȂ मोदी जी की सरकार आई, यहाँ भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार बनी, िबहार ने पहले आपको 
32 सांसद िद य े, उसके  बाद 2019 मȂ आपको 39 सांसद िदए, इस बार यह आंकड़ा थोड़ा घटा है 
और इस बार आपको 30 सांसद िदये हȅ।  सर, एक तो मȅने आपको िबहार क े बंटवारे क े समय की 
बात बात बताई।  2015 मȂ जब आदरणीय नीतीश जी अलग थे, उस समय भी िकस तरह से Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी ने िबहार की बोली लगाई थी, उसे िबहार क े लोग अच्छी तरह से जानते हȅ।  िबहार क े 
िभन्न-िभन्न दलȗ क े कई सांसद यहां बैठे हुए हȅ।  1 0,000 करोड़ , 20,000 करोड़, 50,000 करोड़ 
और अंत मȂ 1,25,000 करोड़ की घोषणा हुई।  ठीक दूसरे िदन िबहार क े मुख्य मंतर्ी आदरणीय 
नीतीश जी का एक इÌतहार अखबार मȂ आता है और उसमȂ 1,25,000 करोड़ मȂ से क ेवल 17,000 
करोड़ क े एक नये पैक े ज की घोषणा थी, बाकी जो पुरान ी योजनाएं थीं, उन्हीं को पैक े ज मȂ घोषणा 
क े रूप  मȂ घोिषत िकया गया था। ...(Ëयवधान)... िनत्या बाबू, आप अपनी नौकरी बचाइए।  क ु छ-
क ु छ सही बातȂ भी सुननी चािहए, तभी जाकर क ु छ कर सकते हȅ।   पहले भी यहाँ पर िबहार से मंतर्ी 
थे, हम लोग भी मंतर्ी थे, लेिकन उस समय लगता था िक िदÊ
ली की सरकार मȂ एक धमक थी, 
एक हनक थी।  आज तो कोई जानता ही नहीं िक वहाँ से कौन-कौन मंतर्ी हȅ।  मȅ आपको साफ तौर 
पर कहना चाहता हूं।  मȅ आपको कोई ऐसी-वैसी बात नहीं कहूँगा, िजसमȂ सच्चाई नहीं हो।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : आप बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
132
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : िनत्या बाबू, आप बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... बैठ जाइए।  
...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): He is not yielding.  
 
 Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : लंबा अरसा हो गया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप भी वषर् 2000 की  उसी 
िवधान सभा मȂ थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : माइक इनका ऑन है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SING
H:  Sir, I am not yielding.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : माइक इनका ऑन है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : इसके  बाद उनको मौका दे दीिजएगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): He can speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
उनको नहीं बोलना है, माइक इनका ऑन है। आप बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : यह systematic neglect है।  मȅ इस
िलए  बात कर रहा हूँ क्यȗिक इस 
बजट मȂ िबहार क े बारे मȂ िफर एक घोषणा की गई िक वहाँ पर फ ू ड Ģोसेिंसग का नेशनल 
इंिÎटǷूट खोला जाएगा - यह बहुत अच्छी बात है।  हम लोग इसका Îवागत करते हȅ।  आप जहां 
से आते हȅ, वह
ां क े ले की बहुत अच्छी खेती होती है।  वहाँ क्वािलटी बनाना का उत्पादन होता है, 
लेिकन मखाना आयोग तो बनेगा, बनाना आयोग कब बनेगा?  वहीं आपके  बगल मȂ इतना बिढ़या 
लीची का उत्पादन होता है, इसिलए आप लीची आयोग भी बनवाइए, तािक उसको भी इसका 
फायदा िमले। लेिकन जो सबसे बड़ी जरूरी चीज है, वह पयार्Ãत संख्या मȂ कोÊड Îटो
रेज की 
Îथापना है।  िपछली सरकार से, उस समय भी पारस जी फ ू ड Ģोसेिंसग क े िमिनÎटर थे, वे Îवगीर्य 
रामिवलास पासवान जी क े भाई थे और अभी उनके  सुपुतर् िच
राग पासवान जी उसी िवभाग क े मंतर्ी 
हȅ।  िबहार मȂ दूसरे राज्यȗ की तुलना मȂ कोÊड Îटोरेज की क्या िÎथित है - इसके  िलए भी मȅ एक-
दो आंकड़े आपके  सामने रखना चाहत
ा हूँ,  िजसे सुन कर आपका िसर शमर् से झुकना चािहए िक 
िबहार क े साथ क्या हो रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : क ृपया आप सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... जब आपका नंबर आएगा, 
तब आप भी जवाब दीिज
एगा। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : महोदय, लोक सभा मȂ 11 अगÎत, 2023 को एक अतारांिकत ĢÌन क े 
जवाब मȂ क ृिष मंतर्ालय ने जो आंकड़ा िदया, उसके  अनुसार िबहार मȂ कोÊड Îटोरेज की क ु ल 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
133

 
 
 
संख्या 313 है, जबिक अके ले गुजरात मȂ 1,000 से ज्यादा कोÊड Îटोरेज है और उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 
कोÊड Îटोरेज की संख्या लगभग 2,500 है।   आप एक तरफ तो लंबी-लंबी घोषणाएं करते हȅ, 
दूसरी तरफ जो जमीनी हकीकत है, वह यह है।   आप उसमȂ िजतना पैसा दे रहे हȅ, मȅ िबहार क े 
संदभर् मȂ उसके  िलए भी एक आंकड़ा बताना चाहत
ा हूँ।  फ ू ड Ģोसेिंसग मंतर्ालय कोÊड Îटोरेज की 
Îथापना क े िलए राज्यȗ को जो आिर्थक मदद देता है, उसमȂ िबहार को वषर् 2021-22 मȂ 33 करो ड़ 
रुपए  िमले, वषर् 2022-23 मȂ िफर से 33 करोड़ रुपए  िमले और वषर् 2023-24 मȂ यह रािश घट कर 
32 करोड़ रुपए  हो गई।  यह तो है आपकी कथनी और करनी मȂ फकर् ।  इसको समझना चािहए। 
अब देखते हȅ िक आप लोगȗ ने पहले जो घोषणाएं की हȅ, उनकी क्या िÎथित है।  आदरणीय 
रिव शंकर Ģसा
द जी जब आईटी िमिनÎटर थे, तब उन्हȗने बड़े जोर-शोर से कहा था िक िबहार मȂ 
बȂगलुरु  और हैदराबाद की तरह आईटी पाकर् Î थािपत करȂगे और इलेक्टर्ॉिनक क्लÎटर खोले 
जाएंगे। 10 साल बीत गए, लेिकन मेरे ख्याल मȂ एक कॉल सȂटर भी िबहार मȂ Îथािपत नहीं हुआ।   
अब चीनी िमल की बात कर लेते हȅ।  यहीं 1960, 1961, 1962 मȂ, उस समय  आदरणीय 
माँझी जी कांगर्ेस पाटीर् मȂ काम करते थे, यही िबहार मȂ 27 पर
सȂट चीनी िबहार नेशनल िकटी मȂ 
देने का काम करता था और जब अभी डबल इंजन की सरकार है, तो वह घट कर 2 परसȂट से भी 
नीचे चली गई है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी एक बार मोितहारी गए और चुनाव क े सम य मȂ, अभी जैसे बजट 
आया है, िबहार िबहार हो रहा है, िबहार मȂ बहार िफर से आ रही है, इसी तरह से वहां पर एक 
सभा को संबोिध त  करते हुए उन्हȗने कहा िक अगली बार जब मȅ आऊँ गा, तब इस बंद चीनी िमल 
की िचमनी से धुआँ िनकलता रहेगा और इसी चीनी िमल की चीनी से मȅ आप लोगȗ क े साथ बैठ कर 
चाय िपयूँगा।  आज भी चीनी िमल उसी िÎथित मȂ है, कोई ची नी िमल खुली नहीं, िकसी बंद चीनी 
िमल की िचमनी से धुआँ नहीं िनकल रहा है।  यह िÎथित है, इसिलए मȅ कह रहा हूँ िक िबहार को 
एक systematically neglect करने की आपकी राजनीितक £ है, क ेवल वहाँ क े लोगȗ का वोट 
लेना है और िफर िबहार को िपछड़ेपन का िशकार बना कर रखना है।  मȅ इसके  पीछे भी एक बड़ा 
कारण देखता हूँ।  िबहार को इसिलए systematically neglect िकया जा रहा है, क्यȗिक इस देश 
मȂ जो बड़े उǏोग घराने हȅ, बड़े उǏोग-धंधे वाले लोग हȅ, उनके  दबाव मȂ आपकी सरकार का
म 
करती है, आपकी सरकार नीितयां बनाती है और वे लोग चाहते हȅ िक िबहार एक लेबर फ ैक्टर्ी क े 
रूप  मȂ पूरे देश मȂ काम करे।  िबहार क े लोग िबहार से िनकल कर उन बड़े कल-कारखान ȗ मȂ काम 
करȂ, तािक उनका उǏोग-धंधा ठीक से चलता रहे। 
 इस बार एक गर्ीनफीÊड एयरपोटर् की भी घोषणा हुई।  यह चुनाव   का   साल   है,   वहा ं  
6-8 महीने   बाद   चुनाव है।   वहां  एक  पताही    एयरपोटर् है।  इसी तरह, वहां पूिर्णया और 
भागलपुर का एयरपोटर् है, जो पहले का
म करता था, लेिकन फ ंक्शनल नहीं हो पाया।  मेरे एक और 
साथी हȅ, जो लोक सभा मȂ हȅ, वे भी इस Ģयास मȂ लगे हुए हȅ िक सोनपुर मȂ एक एयरपोटर् शुरू  हो 
जाए, लेिकन उस पर को
ई िवचार नहीं िकया जा रहा है।  आदरणीय मुख्य मंतर्ी जी जब से आपके  
साथ सरकार चला रहे हȅ, तब से वे इमोशनली एक बात लगातार कहते आ रहे हȅ िक िबहार एक 
लȅडलॉक्
ड Îटेट है, िबहार मȂ लगातार बाढ़ और सूखे की समÎया रहती है, जब तक आप िबहार 
को Îपेशल Îटेटस का दजार् नहीं दȂगे, तब तक िब हार  लो इनकम Îटेट से िमडल इनकम Îटेट क े 
                                                           
£  Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
134
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
गर्ुप मȂ नहीं आएगा और िबहार की आिर्थक बदहाली दूर नहीं होगी, लेिकन कभी भी आपकी 
सरकार ने उनकी बात नहीं सुनी, इसिलए हम इस बात को िफर दोहराते हȅ।   
पटना िवÌविवǏालय की मांग भी मुख्य मंतर्ी जी हमेशा पिÅलक मीिंटग्स मȂ करते रहे, 
लेिकन उनकी भी एक नहीं सुनी गई।  पटना िव
ÌविवǏालय जैसा लÅधĢितिÍठत  िवÌविवǏालय, 
िजससे हजारȗ अफसर पढ़कर िनकले, हजारȗ बड़े-बड़े डॉक्टसर् िनकले और हजारȗ इंजीिनयसर् 
िनकले, िजनका देश मȂ क ंटर्ीÅयूशन है, लेिकन उसको भी सȂटर्ल िवÌविवǏालय का दजार् नहीं 
िमला।  िबहार क े साथ इस Ģकार की उपेक्षा और अपमान लगातार हो रहा है। ...(समय की घं
टी)... 
क्या हमने आपको इतना िवǎान इसीिलए कहा था? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : अब आप खत्म कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : िबहार जैसे गरीब Îटेट पर इस तरह की राजनीित बंद होनी चािहए।  
िबहार मȂ नालंदा िवÌविव
Ǐालय था, जहां दुिनया भर से लोग पढ़ने आते थे।  िबहार मेहनत और 
ज्ञान का Ģतीक है और वह बुिǉज्म, जैिनज्म तथा िसिखज्म का कÊचरल सȂटर रहा है।  अगर आप 
िबहार की उपेक्षा और अपमा
न ज्यादा िदनȗ तक करȂगे, तो वहां क े लोग कम इनकम वाले हो 
सकते हȅ, गरीब हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन पोिलिटकली वह एक सजग Îटेट है और आने वाले चुनाव मȂ 
वे आपको सीख दȂगे, आपको कान पकड़कर बाहर करȂगे।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ इतना ही कहकर आपक
ो ǭदय से धन्यवाद करता हूँ। हालांिक, 
आपने बीच मȂ घंटी बजा दी, लेिकन कोई बात नहीं, िबहार क े साथ इस तरह का अत्याचार आप न 
तो कीिजए और न सरकार को करने दीिजए, तभी जाकर इस बजट का कोई मतलब होगा।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह :  सर, िजस िदन बजट आया था, उस िदन हम अपने एक सीिनयर 
कलीग से बात कर रहे थे और उनसे पूछ रहे थे िक यह िकस तरह का बजट है, तो मेरे सीिनयर 
कलीग ने कहा िक यह बज
ट वोकल और लोकल लोगȗ क े बीच मȂ फ ं स गया है।  जो 2% लोग हȅ, 
िजनको 12 लाख का झुनझुना यह कहकर थमाया जा रहा है िक उत नी इनकम पर टैक्स नहीं 
लगेगा, उनके  िलए तो ठीक है, लेिकन 98% लोग, जो इनकम टैक्स नहीं देते हȅ, उन लोकल 
लोगȗ का भी आप ख्याल कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : धन्यवाद।  सुǛी सुिÍमता देव जी।… 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह :  सर, यह आदरणीय जयराम रमेश जी ने ही कहा था। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
जब इन्हȗने कह िदया, तो मȅ बता रहा हूँ िक लोकल और वोकल क े बीच मȂ यह बजट फ ं स गया है। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)...  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : धन्यवाद।  सुǛी सुिÍमता देव जी। 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
135

 
 
 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV (West Bengal) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I would like to start by 
thanking my Party for giving me the opport unity to speak on the Budget for 2025-26.  
I am honoured for two reasons as I am posi tioned very uniquely in  this House.  The 
first reason is that I come from a State in the North-East, my vote is in Assam, but 50 
MLAs across Bengal have voted me into the Council of States.  I thank my leader, 
Ms. Mamata Banerjee.   
 The second and the more significant r eason why I am positioned uniquely in 
this House is because when I look to my left and see so many Members of Parliament 
who come from the North-Eastern States, they tend to remain silent on all the ailing 
issues that the eight States of the North-East  face.  I feel lucky that when I look on 
this side of the House, when I look at the Opposition, I think, apart from Mr. Bhuyan, I 
am the only other Member of the Parliament  in the Opposition.  The silence on that 
side is killing - not a word on what happen ed in Manipur, not a word on what is 
happening in Assam and the NRC, not a word  on the Nagaland Accord, not a single 
word of sympathy, not a single word of apathy.   
 Sir, I would like to say that this Budget is an insensitive Budget; insensitive to 
the people of the country and more insensitive, in particular, to the North-East of 
India. I heard Prime Minister Modi say afte r the Budget that the sop that has been 
given to the middle class is going to have a multiplier effect.  But, when it comes to 
the North-East, all the things that ail this na tion, whether it is price rise, whether it is 
unemployment, whether it is lack of investment, the only multiplying effect that I know 
is that all these problems multiply as we  go towards the North-Eastern States.  I 
would like to say that it has consistently b een the vision of the Government of India 
that they have given the States of North- East special status and special focus.  
Today, I recall, with a lot of respect and gr eat tribute, our former Prime Minister, Dr. 
Manmohan Singh.  It was his vision when he , in 1991, said that if we want the North-
Eastern States to develop, then we have to  Look East.  What he  meant was that the 
North-East was the gateway to the South-Ea st and East Asia.  It was a landlocked 
region of India and if it had to trade, if it  had to create employment, if it had to attract 
investment, then we have to Look East. Whatever efforts were made by Dr. 
Manmohan Singh’s Government over decades  have been undone by Prime Minister 
Modi by one single incident in one State, which is the State of Manipur.  The Prime 
Minister Modi changed the Look East Policy to Act East Policy, but today, till the 
gateway to the South-East Asia, which is the State of Manipur, continues to burn, the 
Act East Policy is destined to fail.  It is destined to fail, and I would like to say that 
today, with our security concerns with Ch ina, the political situation in Myanmar and 
the political situation in Bangladesh, I can tell you with great surety that the prospects 
136
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
of the economy of the North-Eastern States  growing are rather dismal.  I heard the 
hon. Finance Minister talk about Bihar.  I heard the hon. Finance Minister talk about 
middle-class with the Delhi elections which were due.  But, I never once heard the 
name of Manipur from the Finance Mi nister where 60,000 people have been 
displaced, where hundreds of people ha ve been murdered and butchered and 
women raped and children who are out of schools.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : जब आपका नÇबर आएगा, तब आप बोिलएगा। 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV:  Thousands have fled from Manipu r to different parts of India, 
whether it is Kolkata, whether it is Assam, whether it is Delhi. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : जब आपका नÇबर आएगा, तब बोिलएगा। आप ऐसा मत 
कीिजए।  
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV:  Today, what the Finance Minister should have said is not just 
Bihar, but she should have promised a co mprehensive package fo r the rehabilitation 
of Manipur, which she did not.  There should have been a comprehensive package 
because what happens to Manipur impacts all the North-Eastern States.   Today, we 
cannot accept just a resignation of the Chief Mi nister as a solution to Manipur, and if 
the Manipur tapes are investigated, we will see, we will find out, and we want to know 
if it was State-sponsored mahyem that was created in Manipur.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA:  Sir...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : आप समझ नहीं रहे हȅ, िफर वह उनके  टाइम मȂ जुड़ जाएगा। 
जब आपका नÇबर आएगा, तब आप जवाब दीिजए
गा। 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV:   Now, I come to the cuts in the Budget.  The nine lakh rupee 
Central pool of resources have been slashed by 30 per cent.  ...(Interruptions)...  
The North-East Special Infrastructure De velopment Scheme’s allocation has been 
slashed by 39 per cent.  ...(Interruptions)...Special development package has been 
slashed by 28.8 per cent. …(Interruptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) :  आप समझ नहीं रहे हȅ, िफर वह उनके  टाइम मȂ जुड़ जाएगा। 
जब आपका नÇबर आएगा, तब आप जवाब दीिजए
गा। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
137

 
 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV:  Grants under PM-DevINE, th at is, the Prime Minister’s 
Development Initiative for North East Regi on, have been slashed by 36 per cent.  
Grants to Autonomous Councils has been slashed by 96.6 per cent.  Grants by 
Ministry of Home Affairs have been decreased by 45.6 per cent, and I can go on and 
on and on.  When is this lip service to the North Eastern States going to stop, I want 
to know from the hon. Finance Mini ster?  Madam, please tell us about ‘ achche din’.  
Nobody knows about ‘achche din’ .  What happened to that?  Then, we were all 
hoping for a ‘New India’.  Nobody knows what happened to ‘New India’.   Now, she 
says that our new destination is ‘Viksit Bharat  by 2047’.  I do not think, I will be alive 
and here in this Parliament to see what ha p p e n s  i n  2 0 4 7 .    S i r ,  I  w a n t  t o  r a i s e  a n  
important issue about my own State, the State of Assam.   I thank the Government for 
giving us a urea plant.  I have no pr oblem with it, but this Government has 
systematically destroyed the public sector  enterprises in the State of Assam. Two 
paper mills owned by the Hindustan Corporation have been shut down.  We heard 
about ‘Advantage Assam’ from hon. Member  of Parliament who just spoke before 
me, and, I want to say that more than 50 per cent of the investment that ‘Advantage 
Assam’ has attracted is from public sector undertakings and not private investment.    
 Today, we hear that all the capitals of the North Eastern States will be smart 
cities.Let me give you just one example. Ka litaji is here.  One flash flood in Guwahati, 
an eight year old boy falls from the scooter and gets drowned in the current of water! 
A flash flood caused it in Guwahati!  Sir, the hon. Finance Minister talks about ‘Heal in 
India’ initiative and Medical Tourism.  Medical tourism, for us in the North East, is that 
for small surgeries, for minimal treatments, we have to go to Chennai, Kolkata and 
Delhi.  That is medical tourism for us in the North East.    
Let us talk about UDAN scheme. I come from a remote area in Assam called 
Silchar.  I have been repeatedly saying it in this Parliament and I am pained to say that 
there is not a single route, I repeat, not a single route, from the Silchar airport which is 
recognized by UDAN.  I ask myself why. 
‘सबका साथ, सबका िवकास’ बहुत बड़ा Îलोगन है। I  w a n t  t o  s a y  t h a t  i t  i s  a  b i g  
slogan but this Government has to realize that without strong States, you cannot have 
a strong Centre.  When is this Government going to realize this?  Sir, the hon. 
Finance Minister said that she will start an  index to see which are the States that are 
friendly to private investors.  िवǄ मंतर्ी जी, एक और इंिडके टर उसमȂ लगा दीिजए।  Please 
have an in
dicator of the States which yo u deprive, the States you deny, and the 
States which thrive despite that. I am talk ing about the State of West Bengal.  Please 
add that indicator and you will see that West Bengal is ready, you will see that 
Mamata Banerjee has succeeded in Bengal not because of Modi Government but 
despite the Modi Government.   …(Interruptions)…  मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूं िक असम क े 
138
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
िलए भी एक इंडेक्स बनाइए …(Ëयवधान)…  असम मȂ जो इन्वेÎटमȂट्स आ रहे हȅ, उसके  िलए एक 
नया इंिडके टर बनाइए ।…(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : आप िडÎटबर् मत कीिजए। जब आपका नÇबर आएगा, तब आप 
जवाब दीिजएगा। 
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव : उस इंिडके टर मȂ हमȂ यह िदखना चािहए िक असम मȂ जो इन्वेÎटमȂट्स आ रहे 
हȅ, …(Ëयवधा
न)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) : यिद आप बीच मȂ बोलȂगे, तो उनको एक्Îटर्ा टाइम देना पड़ेगा।  
…(Ëयवधान)… िजतना आप िडÎटबर् करȂगे, उतना उनको एक्Îटर्ा टाइम देना पड़ेगा। 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: 
£ शायद इसमȂ असम सबसे आगे होगा।  
 Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I hope, as Parliamentarians, we go beyond the 
headlines and look at the fine print to see th at, in effect, it is an insensitive Budget 
which does not talk about unemployment, wh ich does not talk about price-rise and 
which does not address the ailing and burning issues of this country.  
  
6.00 P.M. 
 
It is an absolute and total neglect of the North Eastern States and Bengal. Unless you 
rectify your ways, you will be routed from  North-East and you will be routed from 
Bengal because, Sir, let me submit that today people are suffering and people's voice 
in a democracy is the loudest voice.  I can tell you that today Assam has got a urea 
plant and the one single reason is Assam is headed for elections, and Mr. Biren Singh 
has been asked to resign only because the entire tribal community of India has moved 
away from the Bharatiya Jana ta Party.  With those wo rds, I once again thank the 
party for giving me this opportunity.       
                                                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  Thank you. Now, Shri P. Wilson. 
  
SHRI P. WILSON:  Thank you, Vice-Chairman, Sir. I wanted five more minutes.  You 
should not be like a Finance Minister.  Be  gracious enough to give me five more 
minutes. 
 
                                                           
£  Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
139

 
 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) :  When you give your next speech, 
take another five minutes in that speech, not in this one. 
   
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, this Budget is not a Budget for the people of this 
country.  It is a Budget of missed opportunities, misaligned priorities and economic 
stagnation.  In a nutshell, this is not a Union Budget; this is a coalition Budget, aimed 
at political appeasement rather than nation al development.  This does not reflect 
inclusive growth.  
Sir, I will list out how Tamil Nadu has b een ignored in this Budget. Tamil Nadu 
is the second largest contribu tor to the GDP, third in the GST and fourth in the direct 
tax.  However, this year, it is ranked 15
th in Railway Budget allocation. This year, the 
allocation is Rs. 6,626 crores, which is ju st 2.5 per cent of the national Railway 
Budget. A State like Madhya Pradesh has been  allocated Rs. 14,745 crores and Uttar 
Pradesh has been allocated Rs. 19,858 cr ores.  For every one rupee which Tamil 
Nadu gives to the Union kitty, it got only 26  paise last year.  Now, this has still gone 
down. Our request to approve metro rail projects in Tamil Nadu, especially in Madurai 
and Coimbatore, is neglected. 
 
(THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) in the Chair.) 
 
No new high-speed rail line is approved and no new expressway is announced. 
Nothing is there on FAME bus scheme in this Budget. There is no allocation for 
Chennai metro rail project. Other States like UP has metro available in five cities, 
Maharashtra has metro in four cities, but we are not getting enough funds even for 
one metro project which is in Chennai.  Coimbatore's AIIMS project is totally ignored. 
The Madurai AIIMS, inaugurated with fanfare by the hon. Home Minister in 2019, is still 
moving at a snail's pace.  It looks like that  the first batch of st udents will graduate 
from a temporary building without even seeing the Madurai AIIMS. In December 2023, 
when cyclone Michaung and flood hit Chennai and other coastal districts, our 
Government demanded Rs. 37,000 crores for damages and compensation.  But, 
unfortunately, Union Government gave only a paltry sum of Rs. 276 crores. However, 
when a cyclone hit Gujarat, the Union Government immediately released Rs. 5,000 
crores when the hon. Prime Minister visi ted. Sir, no new major National Highway 
expansion or railway corridor projects were  sanctioned in Tamil Nadu.  Higher 
allocations were made for Gujarat and U.P. under the Bharatmala and railway 
modernization. There is reduction in Ru ral Development Fund which impacts Tamil 
Nadu. This reduction will affect crucial ru ral infrastructure and poverty alleviation 
140
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
programmes in Tamil Nadu.  There is insuffici ent allocation for smart cities and urban 
development. Cities like Chennai, Coimbatore and Madurai received no specific urban 
development allocation despite their crucial role in the Smart Cities Mission.  The 
Chennai-Kanyakumari Industrial Corridor pr oject was not given additional funding 
despite repeated requests from the State Government.  This will now slow down the 
industrial and manufacturing sector growth in Tamil Nadu.   
 Sir, there is a disproportionate tax devolution and GST compensation to Tamil 
Nadu tax share. There is a 10.5 per cent increase in devolution to other States, but no 
specific relief or GST compensation is given for Tamil Nadu. The State has been 
demanding higher GST compensation due to the revenue loss post-GST 
implementation. There is no special packag e for fishermen affected by Sri Lankan 
territorial issues and even for the climatic change.  A Blue Economy Fund to support 
the fishing industry is absent in the Budget which was expected. There is no increase 
in the funds for disaster management for Tamil Nadu. Tamil Nadu is prone to floods 
and cyclones.  It expected higher allocatio n for disaster resilience.  The disaster 
management grant was increased by only five per cent which may not be sufficient 
during disaster time to meet any crisis.  There is a neglect of Tamil Nadu renewable 
energy push. The Budget focussed more on nuclear energy.  Tamil Nadu, a leader in 
wind and solar energy, was not allocated addi tional funds for its renewable projects.  
We expect higher Central grants for Tamil Nadu offshore wind energy projects. There 
is no special status or financial suppo rt for Tamil Nadu, which has demanded a 
special financial package considering its high revenue contribution to the Centre.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है।  
 
SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, another five minutes. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : क ृपया समाÃत कीिजए।   Not at all. 
 
SHRI P. WILSON: I will complete, Sir. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : हाँ, क ंÃलीट कर लीिजए। 
 
SHRI P. WILSON :  There is less per cap
ita funding compared to many northern 
States. In the Union Budget 2025, several sectors experienced a decrease in 
allocation compared to the previous fiscal year. (Time-bell rings.) Thank you, Sir.   
                                                        
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
141

 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी।  
 
SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) :  Sir, for me, the Budget presents a 
mixed bag. It has a continuity and commitmen t. It ticks off the macro boxes well.  It 
has a proper fiscal glide path. It is showin g the way towards fiscal consolidation. The 
capital expenditure could have been little more, but it has been maintained constant 
because last year the utilisation was not co mplete.  Overall, it seems like a sound 
Budget on macro factors, but the Budget also has its challenges. If I can take a 
neutral point of view, the country faces gl obal headwinds in terms of economic 
prospects. There is a slowdown of global growth.  There is a slowdown of global 
trade. So the Government and the Finance Minister have to confront these 
challenges. I look at the Government trying to stick to fiscal discipline.  This is my 
starting point.  I would like to compliment the Finance Minister and the Government. 
Maybe it shows some light in relation to the recent NITI Aayog Re port about some of 
the States needing to learn something from th e  C e n t r e  t r y i n g  t o  s t i c k  t o  t h i s  f i s c a l  
discipline. I may have a few differences with the hon. Finance Minister with regard to 
the allocation, but I would like to start by complimenting the Government that they 
have remained fiscally responsible.  The biggest flash the Budget makes is in terms of 
the tax relief that is granted to the middle class.  All of us welcome it because these 
are the classes that have been contributing  to the direct taxes which constitute the 
largest chunk of the revenue that the Govern ment gets.  But one la kh crore rupees is 
substantive money. I would want to buy into the Government’s and the hon. Finance 
Minister's belief that this will spur the consumption growth leading to the money 
funnelling back into the economy, but I th ink the Government would have to be 
mindful. One lakh crore rup ees per year is substantive amount. The total education 
budget estimate for the next year is one lakh twenty-eight thousand crore rupees. For 
health, it is ninety-nine thousand eight hund red and fifty-eight cr ore rupees.  For the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information T echnology, the total Budget Estimate is 
twenty-six thousand and twenty-six crore ru pees. I notionally look at this one lakh 
crore rupees being divided amongst the Edu cation, Health and Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology, if there was no tax cut. I am just giving a hypothetical 
example.  I am not suggesting there should not be a tax cut. 
 It would have meant Rs. 33,000 crore mo re for education. One-third of that 
amount would have meant that the education sector would have got 25 per cent jump 
on the Budget Estimates that the Education Department has.  Then, Rs. 33,000 crore 
for health for one year would have been a 33 per cent growth on the amounts that 
would be allotted. For Ministry of Electro nics and Information Technology, which I 
142
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
believe is going to be the engine of driving India's growth tomorrow, the growth would 
have been 130 per cent. Let us just pause fo r a minute and think that  if this Rs. 1 lakh 
crore could hypothetically be divided am ongst these three, the growth and the 
impetus that each of these sectors had go t would have been stupendous. But, as I 
mentioned, I would want to be optimistic. Let me buy into the Government's vision; 
let me buy into the hon. Finance Minister's vision that this will spur consumption 
growth. I am slightly sceptical, but even if it were to translate into a 50 per cent reality, 
it would still be worth it because a large se ction contributing to the Indian economy is 
felt rewarded by the Government. Those s ections will feel that the Government is 
l i s t e n i n g  t o  t h e m ,  b u t  i t  i s  t i m e  t h a t  m o s t  o f  t h a t  m o n e y  – I  w o u l d  a p p e a l  t o  t h o s e  
people who are getting those tax monies – is ploughed back into the Indian 
economy. Do not splurge it on travelling abroad; please travel in India. Do not splurge 
it on spending on foreign goods; please sp end it on goods that are manufactured in 
India. The Government made an overture to  you. If you respond and if you were to 
give Government a helping hand, you will get mo re reliefs later. If this does not work 
for the Government, then, the tax-paying cl ass needs to understand that they are not 
repaying the Government's faith and the Government may not want to extend these 
kinds of benefits. Please note this as a warning for ourselves. I have touched upon 
three areas that could have immensely be nefited, if the amounts were to be 
contributed to them, I will touch upon only  these three areas as my theme on the 
three suggestions that I want to make.  
Sir, within the limited allocation that is made, one area I want the Government 
to really speed up this process, but which is  sadly lacking, is the internet connectivity 
to schools. The UDISE report of 2023-24, which is of the Government of India, shows 
that only 57 per cent of the Indian school s have functional computers and only 53 per 
cent of the schools have intern et access. If we have to take  up digital education, and 
that is the easiest way to scale and give ed ucation to large masses, I would hope that 
the Government can get these figures to reach 100 per cent as soon as possible.  
Sir, on health, I want to suggest to th e Government two issues. One is that we 
need to have Artificial Intelligence rollout in terms of providing healthcare benefits to 
the people, because that will really scale up this whole process. I also find, one 
looming threat that we face is antimicr obial resistance. The Government has been 
considerate; it has increased the Budget allocation from Rs. 52 crore to Rs. 54 crore.  
But I want the Ministry to note that the ut ilisation has come down from Rs. 38 crore in 
2022-23 to Rs. 17 crore in 2023-24. So, the lo ss, in notional GDP terms, is going to 
be very high for India. This is a looming crisis. Everybody is forgetting about it 
because this does not immediately shriek fo r attention, but it is one of the largest 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
143

 
 
 
crises that will confront India in the next two to three years. I want the Ministries to 
give it full attention.  
Sir, then, the last topic that I want to touch upon is the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology. As I said in th e earlier part of my speech, this Ministry is 
going to be the greatest engine driver of growth because this Ministry will work across 
sectors. It will work through education; it w ill work through health; it will work through 
every sector that is possible. The allocations are very minimal. Then comes the 
Centres of Excellence. India cannot have on e Centre of Excellence for one discipline 
i n  o n e p art  o f t h e  co u n t ry.  I  t h i n k  i t  i s  t i m e  t h at  b y n o w  w e s h o ul d  h ave C e n t res  o f  
Excellence in every zone, if no t in every State. I would request the Government to, at 
least, make provisioning from next year onwards that these Centres of Excellence are 
given to each State.  
Sir, since I have another 30 seconds, the last topic is urban development. I 
would compliment the Government for havi ng this Urban Challenge Fund and an 
amount of Rs. 10,000 crore is allotted. The only recommendation and suggestion I 
have for the Government is, if possible, pl ease use 80 per cent or  90 per cent of this 
fund for urban planning.                                                                   
States are not doing urban pl anning. All our cities are b ecoming cesspools.  Sir, 40 
per cent of Indian population is going to be  living in cities by 2035 or 2040. And, no 
urban planning goes into the growth of cities. We do not have new greenfield cities. 
Please plan five or ten new greenfield cities. Make provision out of this urban fund.  
And, with that, Sir, I would want to wi sh the Government the best. As I said, I 
do not think it is a great Budget, but it is  a good Budget. I am willing to live with it. 
But, I will feel it is great if they, actually, implement the schemes well. Thank you, Sir.   
                                       
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : धन्यवाद, रेƿी साहब।  माननीय Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव। 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव : Ǜीमâ, मȅ क ेवल चार-पाँच िमनट बोलूँगा, आपक
 ो घंटी बजाने का अवसर 
नहीं दूँगा। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : हम आपके  िलए घंटी क्यȗ बजाएँगे? 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव ( उǄर Ģदेश)  : सर, इस बजट मȂ देश की तरक्की क े िलए, िवकिसत 
भारत क े िलए जो सबसे महत्त्वपूणर् सेक्टसर् हȅ, जैसे एगर्ीकÊचर है, एजुक ेशन है, हेÊथ सेक्टर है, 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर है, िपछले साल का जो बजट था, उसकी तुलन
ा मȂ in terms of percentage of 
GDP, इन चारȗ सेक्टसर् मȂ इस बार बजट कम हुआ है।  एगर्ी कÊचर  मȂ िपछले वषर् यह 2.7 परसȂट 
था, अब 2.5 परस Ȃट रह गया है।  टोटल मȂ 5-10 करोड़ बढ़ जाए, उससे क ु छ नहीं होगा, लेिकन 
144
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
comparison तो हम िपछले साल क े जीडीपी क े िहसाब से ही करȂगे।  इंģाÎटर्क्चर, जो बहुत 
जरूरी है, उसमȂ िपछली बार यह 3.4 परसȂट था, अब यह 3.1 परसȂट है।  हेÊथ मȂ तो यह 2 परसȂट 
भी नहीं है, 1.97 परसȂट है, जबिक लÑय रखा गया था िक कम से कम 2.5 परसȂट हो जाए।  अगर 
यह 2.5 परसȂट भी हो जाए, तो जो out of pocket expenditure है, वह बहुत कम हो सकता है।  
अभी आँकड़े क ु छ कहते हȗ, लेिकन वाÎतिवक
ता यह है िक 60 परसȂट लोग ऐसे हȅ, िजनको अपनी 
जेब से इलाज का पैसा देना पड़ता है।  इसिलए यह बहुत आवÌयक है।  एक िरपोटर् आई थी, जब 
मȅने दो-तीन साल पहले हेÊथ किमटी मȂ क ु छ एक्सपट्सर् को बुलाया था, तो उन्हȗने कहा िक हर 
साल 4-
5 परसȂट लोग क ेवल बीमारी क े इलाज पर पैसा खचर् करने की वजह से below poverty 
line मȂ चले जाते हȅ।  एजुक ेशन मȂ 2020 मȂ ही नई एजुक ेशन पॉिलसी मȂ 6 परसȂट का लÑय था, वह 
अभी four point something है।  ये जो सबसे महत्वपूणर् सेक्टसर् हȅ, अग र उनको बजट मȂ 
नजरअंदाज िकया जाएगा, तो िवकिसत भारत नहीं बन सकता है, आप बात िकतनी भी करȂ।   
 सर, मुझे एक बात की बहुत िंचता है िक रेपो रेट कम िकया गया है।  आप इंटरेÎट रेट कम 
कर दȂगे।  इसका दुÍपिरणाम क्या होगा!  यहाँ बैठे हुए लोग, माँझी जी calculate किरए, अगर हम 
बȅक से 50 लाख रुपए  का कजर् लȂ, तो िपछली बार की तुलना मȂ जो रेपो रेट कम हुआ है, उसमȂ 
हमȂ क ेवल 1,
950 रुपए  का लाभ होगा।  1,950 रुपए का लाभ 50 लाख रुपए का कजर् लेने पर!  
लेिकन बȅकȗ का क्या हाल होगा!  बȅकȗ से तो लोग हजारȗ करोड़ रुपए , लाखȗ करोड़ रुपए  लेते हȅ।  
बȅकȗ का ÎवाÎथ्य बहुत खराब होगा।  दूसरे, अब fixed deposi
t मȂ कोई जमा नहीं करना चाहेगा।  
बȅकȗ मȂ पैसा नहीं जाएगा, बȅक्स कमजोर होते जाएँगे।  लोगȗ को, अथर्शािÎतर्यȗ को यह आशंका है 
िक अगर यही िÎथित रही, तो बȅक्स ड ूबने लग सक ते हȅ।  िजन लोगȗ ने अपना एक-एक पैसा जमा 
िकया है, आम लोगȗ ने, बड़े लोगȗ का कजर् तो write-off भी हो जाता है, लेिकन िजन लोगȗ ने पैसा 
जमा िकया है, उनका पैसा ड ू ब जाएगा।  िरजवर् बȅक ऑफ इंिडया का यह Ģावधान है िक आपका 
चाहे िजतन
ा पैसा जमा हो, अगर बȅक ड ू ब जाए, तो एक लाख रुपए  दȂगे।  चाहे आपका 100 करोड़ 
जमा हो, चाहे 200 करोड़ जमा हो, चाहे 50 लाख जमा हो, वे क ेवल एक लाख दȂगे।  यह िÎथित 
बहुत ठीक नहीं है।   
 सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीया मंतर्ी जी का ध्
यान एक और चीज की ओर आकिर्षत 
करना चाहता हूं।  यह जो NCLT है, इससे बड़ा ĥÍटाचार िंहदुÎतान क े इितहास मȂ कभी नहीं 
हुआ, जो लगातार हो रहा है।  यह बȅकȗ को नुकसान पहुंचा रहा है और क ु छ Ëयिƪयȗ को लाभ 
पहुंचा रहा है।  जैसे NPA होता है, यिद िकसी Ëयिƪ की Ģॉपटीर् पर 50,000 करोड़ का कजर् है, 
उसने 2 लाख करोड़ की Ģॉपटीर् ले ली और उसे क ेवल 40,000 करोड़ मȂ नीलाम िक या गया, तो 
10,000 करोड़ तो haircut मȂ चला गया, बȅक का loss हुआ, लेिकन अब बȅक का इससे कोई लेना-
देना नहीं है।  िकसी की जो 2 लाख करोड़ की जमीन थी या कोई Ģॉपटीर् थी, वह िकसी Ëयिƪ 
िवशेष को क ेवल 40,000 करोड़ मȂ िम
ल गई।  यह िवǄ मंतर्ी और िवǄ मंतर्ालय की नाक क े नीचे 
हो रहा है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना चाहूंगा िक वे इस मामले की जांच करȂ िक िकन-िकन लोगȗ 
ने NCLT
 क े माध्यम से Ģॉपटीर् खरीदी है, उसकी actual value क्या रही होगी और haircut क े 
ǎारा बȅकȗ को िकतना नुकसान पहुंचाया गया है। इस corruption पर रोक लगाने की जरूरत है।  
िवǄ मंतर्ी जी अगर कभी टाइम दȂगी, तो मȅ उन्हȂ personally क ु छ ऐसे examples दूंगा िक उन्हȂ 
आÌचयर् होगा िक यह क्या हो रहा है। 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
145

 
 
 
महोदय, मȅ ज्यादा नहीं कहना चाहता हूं।  मȅ अपनी बात यही कह कर खत्म करना चाहता 
हूं िक अगर देश को िवकिसत करना है, तो जो महत्वपूणर् sectors हȅ, उनका allocation बढ़ाया 
जाए तथा NCLT क े जिरए यह जो ĥÍटाचार लगातार िकया जा रहा है और क ु छ लोगȗ को लाभ 
पहुंचाया जा रहा है, इसको रोक
ा जाए।  थȅक यू, सर।      
                                                                         
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : धन्यवाद, Ģोफे सर साहब।  Ǜीमती सुलता देव; three 
minutes.   
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव (ओिडशा) : जय Ǜी जगन्नाथ।  Thank you, Vice-Chairman, Sir, for the 
opportunity.  फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर सािहबा ने बहुत सारे आंकड़े िदए हȅ, मȅ भी क ु छ आंकड़े देना 
चाहती हूं।  Global Peace Index, India is at 1
16th rank, Global Happiness Index, 126 th; 
Gender Gap Index, 129 th; Global Hunger Index, 105 th; Human Development Index, 
134th; Passport Index, 84 th; Gender Inequality Index, 129 th; Corruption Perceptions 
Index, 93rd; Press Freedom Index, 159 th; Sustainable Development Goals Index, 112 th 
– यह है िवकिसत भारत की छिव।  कौन सा 'अमृत काल'?  हमको जो गुलाबी िचतर् िदखाया जा 
रहा है, वह सुनने मȂ अच्छा है, मगर कौन सा 'अमृत काल' आ गया?  ऐसा 'अमृत काल' आ गया, 
जब गरीब महंगाई क े नाम का जहर खाकर अपना पेट भर रहा है, मगर िफर भी अमृत का ल, 
अमृत काल बोलते जुबान नहीं थकती।  यह 'अमृत काल' आप लोगȗ को और िबÎकु ट मीिडया को 
मुबारक हो।  
 मान्यवर, अब मȅ जीडीपी क े ऊपर आती हूँ।  इन्हȗने कहा था िक हम GDP को ऊपर 
लाएंगे।  GD
P ऊपर आ रही है, लेिकन कौन सी GDP?  Gross Domestic Product नहीं, तो यह 
कौन सी GDP ऊपर  आ रही है?  गैस , डीजल और पेटर्ोल की GDP ऊपर आ रही है, आज यह 
100-100 रुपय े मȂ आ रहा है।  यही GDP की बात कर रहे थे!  ये 'सबका साथ, सबका िव कास' 
कह रहे थे, तो कहां गया ' सबका साथ, सबका िवकास?'  यहां पर पूँजीपितयȗ का साथ और 
गरीबȗ का िवनाश ही िवनाश हो रहा है।  यह है - आज का 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास!'   
मान्यवर, जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी Motion of Thanks on Presid ent’s Address क े अवसर 
पर ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ बोल रहे थे, तो उन्हȗने पारादीप-हिरदासपुर रेलवे लाइन क े बारे मȂ कहा 
िक यह उनके  कालखंड मȂ क ंÃलीट हो गया।  मगर उसी कालखंड मȂ खुदार्-बोलांगीर लाइन क े पूरा 
होने मȂ िकतना टाइम लगेगा? पाराद
ीप-हिरदासपुर रेलवे लाइन तो िमनरÊस लेने क े िलए क ंÃलीट 
हो गया, मगर खुदार्-बोलांगीर लाइन मȂ िमनरÊस नहीं हȅ, यह तो वहाँ क े पैसȂजसर् क े िलए है, 
इसीिलए वह क ंÃलीट नह ीं  हो रहा है।  यह क ैसा बजट हुआ िक बस 'िबहार-िबहार' सुनाई दे रहा 
था।  इसमȂ हमȂ कोई ĢॉÅलम नहीं है, मगर यह बजट एक political instrument बन  चुका है।  इस 
बजट मȂ ओिडशा क े िलए उतना क ु छ है ही नहीं, क्यȗिक जहां इलेक्शन होना होता है, बजट वहीं 
िदया जाता है।  बार-बार यही हो रह
ा है।  यह federal structure को मारने की £ है।  ओिडशा 
‘Special Focus State’ status की  demand  कर  रहा है, ‘Special Category’ status की 
                                                           
£  Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
146
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
demand  कर रहा है, special disaster fund की demand  कर रहा है, मगर यह उसे नहीं िमल 
रहा है।  ऐसा नहीं होना चािहए।   
महोदय, अगर आगे देखȂ, तो 5-trillion economy क े बारे मȂ जो बात की जा रही है, उसमȂ 
हम कहां हȅ, यह क ै से होगा, यह भी एक गुलाबी िचतर् है।  5-trillion economy क ै से हो सकती है? 
जब एक डॉलर की रुपए  मȂ कीमत सȂचुरी म
ारने की कगार पर खड़ी है, तो आप क ै से 5 िटर्िलयन 
डॉलर इकोनॉमी की बात कर रहे हȅ?  यह  क ै से होगा?  यहा ँ पर जो बजट ĢÎतुत िक या गया है, 
उसमȂ एगर्ीकÊचर, एजुक ेशन, रूरल  डेवलपमȂट, हेÊथ, सोशल वेलफे यर क े बजट को घटाया 
गया है।  टेिलकॉम, रेलवे, बȅिंकग मȂ ओिडशा का शेयर नेशनल एवरेज से बहुत कम है।  अगर 
ओिडशा िडमांड भी कर रहा है, 20 सा ंसद भी िदया है, िफर भी अनदेखा िकया जा रह
ा है।  यिद 
देखा जाए, तो पता चलेगा िक ओिडशा को नेशनल एवरेज से तो कम िमला ही है और पड़ोसी 
Îटेट्स से भी कम िमला है।  रेलवे बजट decline कर रहा है।  िपछली बार इसके  िलए 2.62 लाख 
करोड़ रुपए  था, जबिक इस बार 2.55 लाख करोड़ रुपए  है।  आईटी और टेिलकॉम बजट िपछले 
साल 1.16 लाख करोड़ रुपए  था, लेिकन इस बार 95.289 हजार  कर
ोड़ रुपए  है।  ऐसे क ै से 
चलेगा?  मȅ इसिलए बोल रही हूँ िक यह कहाँ का िवकास हो रहा है?  ओिडशा मȂ हम लोग बोलते 
हȅ िक इंटरनेट नहीं है, बȅक फ ै िसिलटीज़ नहीं हȅ, सब जगह रेलवे कनेिक्टिव
टी नहीं है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  क ृपया आप समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव :  आप कहाँ जा रहे हȅ? ...(समय  की घं
टी)... सर, मȅ आधा िमनट मȂ 
conclude कर रही हूँ। सर, हमारे ओिडशा मȂ अभी एक गाना बहुत टर्Ȃड मȂ है, बहुत वायरल है।   
 “You recognised the value of gold, but failed to value the worth of a human being.” 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  माननीय सदÎया, आपका समय समाÃत हुआ। 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : सर, आज ये गरीब मनुÍय को िचÏन नहीं पा रहे हȅ, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।     
                                                                                    
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, I stand here to support this Budget on behalf 
of my party, Tamil Maanila Congress (Moopanar ).  This Budget, no doubt, drives to 
push Viksit Bharat, 2047.  The proposed measures include important sectors – poor, 
youth, farmers, and women.  Sir, no doubt, the middleclass provides strength for 
India's growth and I would appreciate the ho n. Finance Minister for giving this very 
important Budget.  I would also say this is the most pro-middleclass Budget in India's 
history.  By raising the Nil Tax Slab of inco me tax payable from Rs. 2.5 lakh in 2014 to 
Rs.5 lakh in 2019 and Rs.7 lakh in 2023 is now being raised to Rs.12 lakhs in 2025-26.  
As a result of this, ab out Rs.1 lakh crore, in direct taxes, could be foregone.  I am 
                                                           
 English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
147

 
 
 
very happy, Sir, that India's middleclass coul d use this extra savings for driving their 
aspirations and quality of life which is the need of the hour in the country today, which 
the hon. Finance Minister has reflected in her Budget.  
 Hon. Prime Minister has always a special  focus on Tamil Nadu, be it direct or 
indirect. As recommended by 15 th Finance Commission, Tamil Nadu's share of 
Central taxes is 4.079 per cent.  The amount to be received by the State has been 
increased from Rs. 52,491.88 crores in the revised Union Budget estimates.  It was 
only Rs. 50,873.76 crores in the initial Esti mates.  Sir, thanks to the hon. Finance 
Minister, an outlay of Rs.1.5 lakh crores is  proposed for 50-year interest-free loans to 
States for capital expenditure and invest ments for reforms, besides incentives to 
boost local manufacturing in areas like mobile phone, electric vehicles, textiles, etc.  
Tamil Nadu accounts for 40 per cent of India's textile production with Tirupur, 
Coimbatore, Erode and Karur as major center s.  The new outlay would further boost 
Tamil Nadu industries.  A six year mission has been proposed for Atmanirbhar Bharat 
in pulses. It will, definitely, focus on  improving productivity, domestic pulse 
production, assuring price for farmers and climate-resilient seeds.  
 Sir, this effort will enhance cotton and pulses production. It will benefit the 
farmers of Tamil Nadu, especially in Madu rai, Virudhunagar and Coimbatore region. 
Sir, Kisan Credit Card facility, short-term loans will help 7.7 crore farmers, fishermen 
and dairy farmers.  I am sure, lakhs and la khs of farmers will be benefited in Tamil 
Nadu with these schemes. At the same time , Cauvery river water is the need of our 
farmers. I would request the Central Govern ment that the Cauvery Board should be 
given importance and the award should be give n in favour of the State of Tamil Nadu, 
so that lakhs and lakhs of our delta regi on farmers will be helped, especially, in 
Thanjavur. Sir, KCC loan has been increas ed from Rs. 3 lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs under 
the Modified Interest Submission Scheme; it will help us. The Swadesh Darshan 2.0 
and the PM Vishwakarma Yojana could massively boost tourism in Madurai, 
Mahabalipuram and Kanyakumari.  
Sir, Rs. 6,626 crores have b een allocated for Tamil Nadu railway projects. It is 
increased by 4 per cent from last year. The average outlay between the year 2009 and 
2014 for the State was only Rs. 879 crores. The current allocation to Tamil Nadu is 
eight times higher. It could support doublin g, new lines and station development. I 
thank the hon. Minister for this concern.  
To conclude Sir, I would like to say th at this Budget has given a powerful 
message to the country for its future progre ss. The people of the nation trust the 
Government under the hon. Prime Minister. The recent Delhi Assembly election 
148
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
results is the outstanding example for th e success of the Union Budget. Thank you, 
Sir. 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल ( िबहार) : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे बजट पर बोलने का मौका 
िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका ǭदय से आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ और आपको धन्यवाद देता हूँ। 
 महोदय, मȅ पूरे िबहार की 14 करोड़ जनता की ओर से माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व 
वाली सरकार को उसके  तीसरे कायर्काल क े Ģथम आम बजट क े िलए धन्
यवाद देता हूँ, साधुवाद 
देता हूँ िक आपने िबहार की 14 करोड़ जनता की आकांक्षाओं को पूरा करने हेतु इस आम बजट मȂ 
बहुत से Ģावधान िकए हȅ, एक्Îटर्ा पैक े ज िदया है।  इसके  िलए मȅ आपको और िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती 
िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को साधुवाद और धन्यवाद देता हूँ। 
 महोदय, क ु छ महीने पहले िबहार क े अित िपछड़ȗ क े मसीहा, अित िपछड़ȗ और िपछड़ȗ क े 
लाल, गुदड़ी  क े लाल, िबहार क े पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी, आ
दरणीय कपूर्री ठाकु र जी को Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
"भारत रत्न" देने का काम िकया है।  इसके  िलए मȅ पूरे अि त िपछड़ा और िपछड़ा समाज की ओर 
से माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ।  महोदय, मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी, िवǄ राज्य मंतर्ी और उनके  अिधकािरयȗ को भी ǭदय से धन्यवाद देता हूँ िक 
आपने 140 करोड़ भारतीयȗ की आकांक्षाओं को पूणर् करने, मध्यम वगर् को पूणर् राहत देने, समाज 
क े सभी वगș की रक्ष
ा करने, भारत को 2047 तक िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाने तथा सशƪ, समावेशी, 
सवर्Îपशीर् और राÍटर् Ģथम की भावनाओं से ओत-Ģोत बजट इस सदन मȂ पेश िकया है। महोदय, 
अभी क ु छ देर पहले हमारे बड़े भाई, कांगर्ेस क े सांसद, Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह जी को मȅ सुन 
रहा था, जो पूवर् मȂ क Ȃ दर् मȂ मंतर्ी भी रहे हȅ।  वे अभी सदन मȂ नहीं हȅ।  वे कह रहे थे िक िबहार मȂ...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, वे सदन मȂ नहीं हȅ, लेिकन सदन का 
िनयम यह है िक जो वƪा बोले, उस
को कम से कम तब तक सदन मȂ रहना चािहए, जब तक 
उसके  बाद कोई दूसरा वƪा बोले।  यह संसदीय परंपराओं मȂ है।  अब आप अपनी बात किहए। 
 
Ǜी शं
भू शरण पटेल : ठीक है, उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय। महोदय, मȅ िबहार जैसे आकांक्षी राज् य से 
आता हूं। वषर् 2005 क े पहले िबहार मȂ लगभग 50 वषș तक यूपीए की सरकार ने शासन िकया, 
िजसमȂ कांगर्ेस ने सबसे अिधक शासन िकया। वषर् 1990 से वषर् 2005 क े दशक मȂ आरजेडी का 
शासनकाल रहा। महोदय, कांगर्ेस और कÇयुिनÎट साथ िमल कर िबहार मȂ सरकार चलाती थीं। 
हम तो बहुत छोटे थे, लेिकन उस कालखंड क े बारे मȂ जब हमारे बुज़ुगर् लोग बताते हȅ, तो सुनकर 
रूह  कांप जाती है। उस समय हाई कोटर् को भी यह बोलना पड़ा था िक िबहार मȂ शासन नहीं, 
बिÊक जंगलराज है। उस जंगलराज क े पुरोध
ा कांगर्ेस और आरजेडी वाले हम लोगȗ को, भारतीय 
जनता पाटीर् वालȗ को नसीहत देने का काम करते हȅ। वषर् 2005 क े पहले िबहार क े पूरे 38 िजल े 
उगर्वाद, नक्सलवाद, जाितव
ाद, जातीय नरसंहार और संगिठत अपराध क े िलए जाने जाते थे। 
वषर् 2005 क े बाद जब से भारतीय जनता पाटीर् और एनडीए की सरकार आई है, तब से लेकर अब 
तक िबहार मȂ सुशासन है। कोई भी अपराध करके  वहां नहीं बच सकता। वहां अपराध ी मारे गए या 
जेल की सलाखȗ क े पीछे पहुंच गए या अपराध छोड़कर समाज की मुख्य धारा मȂ आ गए।  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
149

 
 
 
महोदय, अिखलेश जी ने कहा है िक िबहार को इस बजट मȂ क ु छ नहीं िदया गया है, तो मȅ 
उनको सदन क े माध्यम से कहना चाहता हूं िक या तो उनको अपने एलओपी पर िवÌवास नहीं है, 
क्यȗिक माननीय मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी ने बजट भाषण मȂ कहा था िक लग ता है यह बजट िसफर् 
िबहार क े िलए है। माननीय अिखलेश जी पहले आपस मȂ फ ैसला कर लȂ िक वे अपने राÍटर्ीय 
अध्यक्ष, खरगे जी क े साथ हȅ या नहीं हȅ। वे उनकी बातȗ से इǄेफाक रखते हȅ या नहीं रखते हȅ।  
महोदय, वषर् 2014 मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार बनी। उसके  पहले िबहार मȂ िसफर् एक 
एयरपोटर् ‘जयĢकाश नारायण हवाई अƿा’ था। वषर् 2014 क े बाद िबहार मȂ दरभंगा जैसे िजले मȂ - 
जो उǄर िबहार की एक रीढ़ है, िमिथला की राजधानी है, वहां ‘दरभंगा एयरपोटर्’ देने का काम 
िकया है। महोदय, अगर उनको यह िवकास नहीं िदखता है, तो उसमȂ मुझे क ु छ नहीं कहना है।  
आज़ादी क े बाद िसफर् 7 एÇस थे, उन 7 एÇस मȂ 6 एÇस माननीय पूज्य अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी 
क े समय मȂ बने और अभी पूरे िहन्दुÎतान मȂ 10 एÇस हȅ, िजनमȂ 2 एÇस िसफर् िबहार को नरȂदर् मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारत सरकार ने देने का काम िकया। अगर यह िवकास कांगर्ेिसयȗ को और 
आरजेडी वालȗ को नहीं समझ आता है, तो इसमȂ मुझे क ु छ नहीं कहना है।  
महोदय, िबहार को दो भागȗ मȂ बांटा जाता है, उǄर िबहार और दिक्षण िबहार। उǄर 
िबहार को जोड़ने क े िलए हाजीपुर से होते हुए एक राजेन्दर् सेतु पुल था, जो 1980 क े दशक मȂ बना 
था। उसके  बाद उǄर िबहार को जोड़ने क े िलए करोड़ȗ रुपय े की लागत से माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी की सरकार मȂ बक्सर गंगा िĤज बनकर तैयार हुआ है। महोदय, अंगर्ेजȗ क े ज़माने से ही सोन 
नदी पर एकमातर् कोईलवर पुल हुआ करता था। हमारे नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार आने क े बाद 
वहां करोड़ȗ रुपय े की लागत से कोईलवर का िĤज बनकर तैयार हुआ है, अगर वह कांगर्ेिसयȗ को 
नहीं िदखता है, तो यह हमारी ĢॉÅलम नहीं है। उन्हȂ अपने चÌमे का नंबर बदलवाने की ज़रूरत  है।  
महोदय, बेगूसराय को जोड़ने क े िलए जो िसमिरया घाट है, जहां क ुं भ की तरह अधर् क ुं भ 
का मेला लगता है, वहां राÍटर्किव रामधारी िंसह िदनकर जी की जन्मभूिम भी है। उनको जोड़ने क े 
िलए िसफर् एक राजȂदर् सेतु था, जो जजर्र िÎथित मȂ था। अभी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार मȂ करोड़ȗ 
रुपय े की लागत से मोकामा और बेगूसराय को जोड़ने क े िलए – मोकामा से बेगूसराय पार करȂगे 
तो सीमांचल तक, नेपाल क े बॉडर्र और बंगलादेश क े बॉडर्र तक जाने क े िलए िĤज बना है। अगर 
यह िवपिक्षयȗ को समझ मȂ नहीं आता है िक यह िबहार का िवकास है, तो इसमȂ मुझे क ु छ नहीं 
कहना है।  
महोदय, मȅ अपने Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को साधुवाद और धन्यवाद देता हूं िक उन्हȗने मखाना 
बोडर् बनाने की घोषणा की है। महोदय, मखाना िजतना खाने मȂ ÎवािदÍट है, िजतनी पौिÍटकता 
उस मखाने मȂ है, उसकी खेती करना उतना ही किठन और मुिÌकल भरा काम होता है। आज 
‘मखाना बोडर्’ बन जाने से िमिथला क े हमारे लाखȗ िकसानȗ को, लाखȗ मज़दूरȗ को, लाखȗ अित 
िपछड़ȗ और लाखȗ दिलत समुदाय क े लोगȗ को, जो मज़दूरी करते हȅ, जो खेती करते हȅ, उन 
सबको पूणर् लाभ िमलेगा।                                                        
 उनको उनके  मखाना की लागत का उिचत मूÊय िमलने की वजह से उनकी मजदूरी 
बढ़ेगी, उनकी आय बढ़ेगी, इससे जो हमारे मखाने क े िकसान हȅ, उनका िवकास होगा।  िवपक्ष ने 
कहा िक यह क्यȗ नहीं िदया गया, तो आप 50 साल से थे, आप मखाना बोडर् बना देते, आप लीची 
बोडर् बना देते! आपको िकसी ने नहीं रोका था।  आिखर मȂ जो भी िदया, वह नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने ही 
150
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
िदया।  आपने िबहार को नक्Îलवाद, उगर्वाद, जाितवाद िदया, इसके  अलावा आपने क ु छ  नहीं 
िदया।  सर, नरेन्दर्  मोदी जी की सरकार ने िबहटा मȂ शायद करोड़ȗ की लागत से, मȅ एग्जेक्ट 
उसका मूÊय नहीं जानता हूं, लेिकन 600 बेड का ईएसआई हॉिÎपटल िदया। पटना, जो िबहार की 
राजधान
ी है, मुिÌकल से वहां से 35 िकलोमीटर पर है।  आजादी क े बाद से कोसी को कोई देखने 
वाला नहीं था।  आज उस कोसी नदी पर कोसी महासेतु बना है, वह नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े कायर्काल 
मȂ बना है।  अगर िवपिक्षयȗ को यह िवकास नहीं िदखत ा है, तो उसके  बारे मȂ मुझे क ु छ नहीं कहना 
है।  इस बजट मȂ माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप बहुत क ु छ कह रहे हȅ।  आगे किहए। 
 
Ǜी शं
भू शरण पटेल : सर, मȅ गलत नहीं बोल रहा हूं। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप सही  बोल रहे हȅ, बोलते रिहए। आप बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : सर, मेरा आगर्ह है िक मेरा समय बढ़ा िदया जाए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप बोिलए। िजतना समय िमला है, उसमȂ तो बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी शं
भू शरण पटेल : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने, माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने 
इस बजट मȂ मखाना बोडर् क े साथ-साथ पटना मȂ आईआईटी देने का काम िकया।  मȅ िवपिक्षयȗ से 
पूछना चाहता हूं िक उन्हȗने पटना को आईआईटी देने का काम क्यȗ नहीं िकया था? आज 
आईआईटी, पटना का िवÎतारीकरण करने क े िलए वहां का जो छातर्
ावास है, उसको डेवलप 
करने क े िलए उन्हȗने इस बजट मȂ Ģावधान िक या है, तो हमारे िवपक्ष क े सािथयȗ को बुरा लगता 
है।  आज भारत िवÌव की पांचवीं सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन गया है।  अगर वे देख नहीं पाते हȅ, तो 
यह उनका कसूर है।  हमारे नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े कायर्काल मȂ िबहार क े िलए पैक े ज देने का का यर् 
िकया गया है, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ संिक्षÃत मȂ अपनी सरकार की दस वषș की उपलिÅधयȗ को बताना 
चाहूंगा। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार क े नेतृत्व मȂ पटना मȂ दो एÇस, आईआईटी, पट ना, िबहटा  मȂ 
ईएसआई हॉिÎपटल, कोईलवर पुल, िबहटा से हाईवे, मोकामा से बेगूसराय जोड़ने क े िलए 
करोड़ȗ की लागत से पुल, िसमिरया घाट का पुल, पटना और हाजीपुर को जोड़ने क े िलए उǄर 
िबहार को जोड़ने क े िलए तीन नए िĤज …(समय की घंटी)… सर, मȅने अपने एमओएस से आगर्ह 
िकया है िक मुझे थोड़ा और समय िदया जाए।  मȅ  पह
ली बार बजट पर बोल रहा हूं।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप समाÃत करȂ।  
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : सर, मुझे पांच िमनट का समय और दे दीिजए।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप समाÃत करȂ। 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
151

 
 
 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : सर, आप आगे िकसी और भाषण मȂ मेरा समय काट लीिजएगा।  आप मुझे 
िसफर् पांच िमनट बोलने दीिजए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : यहां गुणा-भाग नहीं होता है।  आप जÊदी अपना भाषण 
समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : सर, हमारे नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने गंगा िĤज पर चार नए पुल देने का 
काम िकया है, जो उǄर िबहार को जोड़ेगा।  अगर यह सब िवपक्ष को समझ मȂ नहीं आता है,  तो मȅ 
क ु छ नहीं कर सकता हूं।  मȅ आपसे पांच िमनट इसिलए मांग रहा हूं …(Ëयवध ान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप इतना क ु छ कर रहे हȅ।  
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : उन्हȗने िबहार का बहुत अपमान िकया है।  एक काËय क े जिरए मȅ अपने 
िबहार का बखान िवपिक्षयȗ को करना चाहता हूं। …(Ëयवधान)…  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  वह आप अंत मȂ काËय क े ǎारा ही कर दीिजए। 
 
Ǜी शं
भू शरण पटेल :  िजस तरह से कांगर्ेस और िवपक्ष की पािर्टयȗ क े नेताओं ने िबहार का 
उपहास िकया है, िजस आरजेडी और कांगर्ेस ने िमलकर 50 वषș तक शासन करने क े बाद भी 
हमारे िबहार को िवनाश की ओर ढके ला था, उस िबहार क े बारे Îपेशल पैक े ज देकर माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने उसको बढ़ाने का काम िकया है, तो उन्हȗ
ने कहा िक यह िबहार का बजट है, 
िबहार का उप हास िकया और आरजेडी वालȗ ने उसका सपोटर् िकया।  मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक मȅ 
क्या हूं और िबहार क्या है? 
“हां, मȅ िबहार हूं। 
मȅ जनक जननी सीता मईया की जन्म Îथली 
पुनौरा धाम हूं, सीतामढ़ी  हूं, हां मȅ िबहार हूं। 
हां, मȅ िबहार हूं, 
मयार्दा पुरुषोǄम Ǜीराम का ससुराल हूं, हां मȅ  िबहार हूं। 
गुरु  िवǚािम
तर् जी की धरती और भगवान Ģभु Ǜीराम और 
लÑमण जी की पहली पाठशाला बक्सर हूं, हां मȅ िबहार हूं। 
भगवान गौतम बुǉ की ज्ञानÎथली हूं, हां मȅ िबहार हूं। 
दुिनया को अिं
हसा और मानवता का पाठ पढ़ाने वाले”…(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  माननीय सदÎय, आप समाÃत करȂ। 
 
152
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल : सर, एक िमनट, Ãलीज़। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :   माननीय सदÎय, समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल :  सर, अभी मेरा 15 िमनट का समय पूरा नहीं हुआ है। आप मुझे बोलने 
दीिजए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  माननीय सदÎय, आप अपना भाषण समाÃत कीिजए।  
...(Ëय
वधान)... 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल :  उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ एक-दो िमनट मȂ समाÃत कर दूंगा।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी,  िबना भेदभाव मानवता की रक्षा करने वाले िसख धमर् क े दसवȂ धमर् गुरु , 
गुरु  गोिंबद िंसह महाराज ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ित
वाड़ी) :  माननीय सदÎय, आप अपना भाषण समाÃत कीिजए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल :  उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, …(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया समाÃत कीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आपका समय तो वैसे भी समाÃत हो गया है। राजीव  शुक्ल जी, आप अपना भाषण आरंभ कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा (छǄीसगढ़) : उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, बज
ट पर हो रही चचार् मȂ भाग लेने का अवसर 
देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल :  उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, आप िव रािजए।  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : महोदय, मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया, िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को इस बात की बधाई 
देता हूं िक वे आठवाँ बजट पेश कर रही हȅ।  यह अपने आप मȂ एक िरकॉडर् है, इसके  िलए मȅ उन्
ह Ȃ 
बधाई देता हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल :  उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, िबहार क े बारे मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  माननीय सदÎय, िबहार क े बारे मȂ सब जानते हȅ, आपका 
भाषण बहुत अच्छा था। आपका समय पूरा हो गय
ा  है, आप इधर ध्यान दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
153

 
 
 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : महोदय, बजट क्या है? मुझे ऐसा लगता है िक  Budget is of the elections, 
by the elections and for the elections. यह चुनावी बजट है, यह 140 करोड़  भारतीयȗ का 
बजट नहीं है, यह भारत क े भिवÍय का बजट नहीं है, बिÊक यह उन राज्यȗ क े िलए होता है, जहाँ 
या तो चुनाव हो रहे हȗ या होने वाले हȗ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  शायद इसीि
लए one nation-one election का िवषय चल 
रहा है।  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : महोदय, वह Ģैिक्टकल नहीं है। क ै से लागू करȂगे? जब तक पाँच साल तक 
हाउस िडज़ॉÊव न हो, जब तक उसका Ģोिवज़न न हो, तब तक वह पॉिसबल नहीं है।  
 महोदय, मȅ उदाहरण क े िलए कहना चाहूंगा िक जैसे िदÊली मȂ चुनाव था, तो बजट मȂ 
िदÊली क े बारे मȂ घोषणा की गई है, िबहार मȂ है, तो िबहार क े बारे मȂ घोषणा की गई है, लेिकन 
अगर िबहार की असिलयत देखȂ - अिखलेश जी ने तो बताया है िक इसके  पहले पाँच साल तक 
िबहार याद नहीं आया। ...(Ëय
वधान)... 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल :  िबहार क े बारे मȂ ...(Ëयव धान )... 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : महोदय, क्या आपको पता है िक िबहार की पर क ैिपटा इन्कम सबसे कम है? 
यह 60 हज़ार  रुपय े है, जबिक बाकी राज्यȗ की 70 हज़ार रुपय े हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप सुिनए। 
पटेल साहब, आप Îपेशल राज्य का दजार् नहीं िदला पाए।  किवता पढ़ने से क ु छ नहीं होता है, 
Îपेशल राज्य का दजार् दीिजए।  …(Ëयवधान)... हमने कारण बताए हȅ, आप दस साल से बैठे हȅ, 
आप दजार् दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी शं
भू शरण पटेल :  महोदय …(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëय
 वधान)...  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : महोदय, इस टाइम को मेरे टाइम मȂ जोड़ दीिजए, िजससे अगर ये टोका-टाकी 
करȂगे, तो मेरा टाइम कम न हो। …(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, आपको टाइम दे दȂगे। ...(Ëयवधा
न )...  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : महोदय, ये टोका-टाकी करȂगे, तो मेरा टाइम कम होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल :  महोदय ...(Ëयवधान)... 
  
154
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : पटेल जी,  आप िवरािजए। आप क ृपया उन्हȂ बोलने दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : महोदय, अगर िबहार की असली मदद करनी है, तो वहाँ की पर क ैिपटा इन्कम 
बढ़ाइए, Ģित Ëयिƪ आय बढ़ाइए, जीडीपी मȂ उसका योगदान ज्यादा कीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
अगर आप ऐसा करȂगे, तो िबÊकु ल ठीक नहीं है। क्या यह कोई तरीक ा है िक आप बोलते चले जा 
रहे हȅ? जब आप बोल रहे थे, तब क्या हम बोले थे? ...(Ëयवधान)...आप नंबर बढ़ाने का काम  मत 
कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : पटेल जी,  क ृपया आप िवरािजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : आप अपना एगर्ेशन वहाँ पर िदख
ाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, आप िवरािजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैठ 
जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी अिनल क ुमार यादव मंदादी (तेलंगाना):  आप क्या बात कर रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयव
 धान)... आप 
िकसकी धमकी दे रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आसन 
की िबना अनुमित क े जो भी बोला गया है, वह अंिकत नहीं िकया जाएगा, िसफर् राजीव शुक्ला जी 
बोलȂगे।   
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : सर, उसका टाइम भी देख लीिजए।  
This is not
 a fiscal policy; this is a polit ical expediency.  This is what I want to 
say. जब बेरोजगारी की बात आती है, तो हम पाते हȅ िक 45 साल मȂ सबसे ज्यादा बेरोजगारी दर 
बढ़ी है। यह CMIE क े डेटा मȂ कहा गया है। महोदय, यूथ, जो हमारी शि ƪ होती थी - क्या आपको 
पता है िक इस देश की जो 60 Ģितशत युवा शिƪ थी, उसके  िलए सब जगह पर कहा जाता था 
िक भारत सबसे यंग देश है, भारत सबसे नौजवान देश है? लेिकन आज वह नौजवान कहाँ है? 
वह नौजवान आज गाँव मȂ बैठा हुआ है। क्यȗिक क
ोरोना क े बाद जब वह गया, तो वापस लौटकर 
नहीं आया। आप देख लीिजए िक पंजाब मȂ न क ृिष क े िलए मजदूर उपलÅध हȅ, न गुजरात क े सूरत 
मȂ जो डायमंड इंडÎटर्ी है, उसके  िल
ए मजदूर उपलÅध हȅ और न मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग क े िलए मजदूर 
उपलÅध हȅ।  
 मुंबई मȂ हमारी लेबर कॉÎट इतनी ज्यादा बढ़ गई है िक उससे मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग सेक्टर सफर 
कर रहा है। इससे कॉÎट ऑफ Ģोडक्शन भी बढ़ जाता है, इसिलए अÊटीमेटली हमारा एक्सपोटर् 
सफर करता है। इस मामले मȂ चीन, िवयत
नाम, इंडोनेिशया, ये आगे िनकल जाते हȅ। हम अपनी 
युवा शि ƪ  को क ै से वापस मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग मȂ ले जाएं, उन्हȂ छोटे-छोटे कल-कारखानȗ, उǏोगȗ मȂ 
भेज सकȂ, यह होना चािहए। जो हमारी युवा शिƪ बेकार बैठी है, िनिÌचत रूप  से, हमȂ उसे कायर् 
देना चािहए और िरयल Îटेट सेक्टर और सब जगह पर उन्हȂ मौका देना चािहए। अब मनरेगा का 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
155

 
 
 
एलोके शन 33 परस Ȃट कम कर िदया गया है, जबिक गाँव मȂ यह रोजगार का एकमातर् साधन है। 
वहाँ इसी से लोगȗ को रोजगार िमलता है और इसी से लोगȗ का पेट पलता है, लेिकन यह उस 
समय की मनमोहन िंसह सरकार की योजना थी। मȅ माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी से जानना चा हता हूँ िक 
उसका 33  परसȂट एलोके शन क्यȗ कम हुआ है? वह एक ऐसी Îकीम है, जो िनिÌचत रूप  से 
गर्ामीणȗ को कजर् से िनकालती है, क्यȗिक तमाम गर्ामीण कजर् मȂ ड ू बे हुए हȅ और उन्हȂ इससे मद द 
पहुंचती है।  
वेÊथ िडÎपेिरटी - एक Ģितशत लोगȗ क े पास 40 Ģितशत धन है। यह जो accumulation 
of money है, इसका िजतना ज्यादा िवकȂदर्ीकरण होगा, िजतना लोगȗ मȂ जाएगा, उतना अच्छा है। 
यह तभी हो सकता है, जब आप सबक ो अवसर मुहैया कराएं और उन्हȂ मौका दȂ। हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी 
जी से यह माँग है िक यह जो पूंजी का क Ȃदर्ीयकरण हो रहा है, वह रुकना  चािहए।  
महंगाई क े िरकॉडर् क े बारे मȂ तो आपसे कहने की जरूरत ही नहीं है िक इसमȂ िकतना बुरा 
हाल है। हर चीज महंगी है। पेटर्ोल-डीजल तो छोड़ दीिजए, इसके  अलावा खाने-पीने की सारी 
चीज बेइंतहा महंगी हȅ। िरटेल इन्Äलेशन 5.7 Ģितशत है, जबिक लोगȗ की जो वेजेज़ बढ़ी है, वह 
0.8 परसȂट से 5 परसȂट तक बढ़ी है। यह जो दोनȗ का गैप है, इसमȂ से लोगȗ को क ै से राहत 
िमलेगी, क्यȗिक अग
र महंगाई पर काबू नहीं िकया गया -- यह वादा था िक महंगाई पर का बू 
करȂगे, लेिकन दाल हो, सÅजी हो, तेल हो, िजतनी भी खाने-पीने की चीज़Ȃ हȅ या कपड़ा इत्यािद हȅ, 
हर चीज़ इतनी महंगी होती जा रही है िक उस महंगाई पर काबू नहीं हो पा रहा है, िजसके  िलए 
सरकार को Ģयास करना चािहए। िहडन टैक्स भी एक तरह से महंगाई है। आप आय कर मȂ 
िजतनी भी छू ट देते हȅ, दूसरे करȗ मȂ छू ट देते हȅ, उसका भुगतान लोगȗ को महंगाई क े जिरए 
करना पड़ता है। वह उत
ना बढ़ जाता है, तो उसका दाम देना पड़ता है। यह एक बहुत बड़ी 
समÎया है।  
अब मȅ Äलैगिशप Îकीम पर आता हूँ। मȅ योजना मंतर्ी भी था। Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना क े 
25 Ģितशत फ ं ड यूिटलाइज ही नहीं हुए, उनका इÎतेमाल ही नहीं हो पाया। 2022 तक हरेक को 
छत देने का जो वा
दा था, वह नहीं पूरा हुआ। वादा तो लाल िकले की Ģाचीर से िकया गया था, 
लेिकन आज तक वह वादा नहीं पूरा हुआ। ...(Ëय वधान)... चार करोड़ तो हो सकता है, लेिकन 140 
करोड़ लोगȗ क े देश मȂ चार करोड़ से क्या फकर् पड़ने वाला है?  जो Ģधान मंतर्ी गर्ाम सड़क योजना 
है, उसमȂ एक्सपट्सर् क े सवȃ मȂ बताया गया है िक 21  परसȂट रोड्स संतोषजनक िÎथित मȂ नहीं पाए 
गए हȅ। इसका मतलब िक उनके  रख-रखाव, maintenance और बनाने की क्वािलटी पर भी हमȂ 
ध्यान देना होगा, क्यȗिक इससे बहुत बड़ा नुकसान है। अगर गर्ामीण सड़कȂ इस तरह से बनीं, तो 
हमȂ इसका बहुत भारी नुकसान होगा। गर्ामीण कौशल योजना - 2,369 टर्ेिंन
ग सȂटसर् क े िलए पैसे 
िदए गए, उन्हȂ बनाया गया, लेिकन काम िसफर् 629 कर रहे हȅ। यह भी एक बहुत बड़ा फ ेिलयर है, 
यह Îकीम बहुत बड़ी Äलॉप  हुई है। फसल बीमा योजना मȂ धन घटता चला जा रहा है। पहले 
िकसानȗ को 29,000 करोड़ िदया जाता था, अब 16,000 करो
ड़ रह गया है। सर, एजुक ेशन क े 
बजट की बात करते हȅ। देश  मȂ सबसे जरूरी तो िशक्षा है। अगर हमने युवाओं को नहीं पढ़ाया,  
आज की जेनरेशन को नहीं पढ़ाया, इस पीढ़ी को नहीं पढ़ाया, तो आगे क ै से तरक्की करȂगे। 
डॉक्टसर्, इंजीिनयर िव
देश मȂ क ै से नाम करȂगे। जीडीपी का िसफर् चार परसȂट बजट एजुक ेशन क े 
िलए है। मेरे ख्याल से िश
क्षा क े िलए यह बहुत कम अमाउंट है। इसे बढ़ाना चािहए। इससे क ु छ होने 
वाला नहीं है। िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को इस तरफ भी ध्यान देना होगा। पिÅलक हेÊथ क ेयर सबसे इÇपॉटȄट 
है। कोिवड हुआ, तो कोिवड क े समय मȂ लोगȗ को समझ मȂ आया िक हमारे अÎपताल, हमारे 
156
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
equipments, हमारी दवाएं, यह सब बहुत बिढ़या होना चािहए। देश मȂ उस समय Ëयिƪ क े पास 
िकतना भी पैसा था, उसके  हाथ मȂ क ु छ नहीं रह गया था। 
 लोग एक-एक ऑक्सीजन क े िसलȂडर क े िलए लाखȗ रुपय े देने को तैयार थे, लेिकन वह 
नहीं िमल रहा था, तो उस समय लोगȗ की समझ मȂ आया िक हमारा पिÅल
क हैÊथ क ेयर िसÎटम 
िकतना मजबूत होना चािहए।  यह दुख की बात है िक उसके  िलए बजट मȂ Ģावधान 2 परसȂट से 
नीचे है।  यह बहुत ज्यादा होना चा िहए, क्यȗिक एक बहुत इÇपॉटȄट चीज़ है।  पिÅलक हेÊथ क ेयर 
क े िलए एक लंबा चौड़ा बजट िदया जाना चािहए।  हम कोरोना से भी सबक नहीं ले पाए और 
इसके  िलए बजट 2 परसȂट से नीचे ही है।   
आरएंडडी का बजट - शोध सबसे इÇपॉटȄट ची
ज़ है, अगर हम शोध नहीं करȂगे, नई-नई 
चीजȂ नहीं िनकालȂगे और पिÌचमी देशȗ क े भरोसे रहȂगे, तो हम Ģगित नहीं कर सकते हȅ।  अगर हम 
शोध नहीं करȂगे, तो िवक िसत  भारत नहीं बन सकता है।  हमȂ िरसचर् पर सबसे ज्यादा खचर् करना 
चािहए।  इस पर चीन 2.4 Ģितशत खचर् करता है।  दिक्षण कोिरया जैसा देश भी 4.5 Ģितशत खचर् 
करता है, लेिकन हम इस पर 0.7 परसȂट खचर् करते हȅ, जो क ु छ भी नहीं है, िब Êकु ल मूंगफली क े 
बराबर है।  सरकार को इस तरफ भी देखना होगा।  यह एक बहुत इÇपॉटȄट चीज़ है।  एक बात का 
िजकर् आज सुबह सोिनया जी ने िकया िक जो फ ू ड फॉर िसक्योिरटी है, िजसके  जिरए लोगȗ को 
गांव मȂ मुÄत राशन वगैरह िदया जा रहा है, वह मनमोहन िंसह सरकार की योजना थी, कांगर्ेस 
सरकार की योजना थी।  अच्छा है िक उसको लागू िकया गया, लेिकन 2011 का हमारा जो सȂसस 
था, जो जन
गणना थी, वह उसके  आधार पर था।  इससे कम से कम 5 करोड़ लोग वंिच त हȅ।  
जनगणना कराई जानी चािहए और वंिचत लोगȗ  को इसका लाभ िमले, तो बहुत अच्छा होगा।  यह 
बात आज सोिनया जी ने सुबह उठाई थी, मȅ भी इसे दोबारा इसमȂ रखना चाहता हूं।  एक बड़े 
अथर्शाÎतर्ी हȅ - रुिचर शमार्
।  अभी हाल मȂ उनकी पुÎतक आई है और उन्हȗने कहा भी है िक इस 
देश मȂ उǏिमयȗ, उǏोगȗ और Ëयापार को जो छू ट िमलनी चािहए, जो ģीडम िमलनी चािहए, वह 
नहीं िमल रही है, क्यȗिक उनके  ऊपर सरकारी एजȂिसयȗ का इतन ा दबाव है िक वह आदमी चाहे 
जीएसटी देने वाला हो, चाहे इनकम टैक्स देने वाला हो, चाहे अन्य कोई हो, उसे ईज़ ऑफ 
िबजनेस, Ëयापार मȂ आसानी नहीं लग रही।  इस बात को दोनȗ तरफ क े लोग अनुभव करते हȅ िक 
Ëयापार मȂ सब डरे रहते हȅ।  इसीिलए आप देखȂगे िक कम से कम एक लाख उǏमी और Ëयापारी 
नागिरकता छोड़ चुक े हȅ और हजारȗ लोग भारत छोड़कर दुबई और अन्
य जगहȗ पर जाकर बस 
गए हȅ। जब एक उǏमी जाता है, तो लाखȗ लोगȗ का नुकसान होता है, क्य
ȗिक वह बहुत लोगȗ को 
रोजगार देता है।  अगर वह चला जाता है, तो रोजगार चला जाता है।  वह िवदेशȗ मȂ जाकर 
रोजगार ले रहा है और वहां क े लोगȗ को रोजग ार दे रहा है।  यहां वह सरकारी एजȂिसयȗ से इतना 
डरा हुआ है िक वह यहां से भाग जाता है।  िबजनेस की ģीडम और इकोनॉिमक ģीडम होनी 
चािहए।  यह बात रुिचर  शमार् ने भारत क े िलए अप नी  बुक मȂ वÊडर्वाइड कही है।   
इन्हȗने एयर फ ेयर का भी िजकर् िकया िक िकस तरह से िवमानȗ क े िकराए वगैरह पर 
िनयंतर्ण होना चािहए।  मȅ भी इस बात को मानता हूं।  यह ठीक है िक आज कोई सरकारी 
एयरलाइंस नहीं रही, सारी ए यरलाइंस Ģाइवेटाइज हो गई हȅ, लेिकन इस संबंध मȂ िसिवल 
एिवएशन िमिनÎटर्ी को ध्यान देना चािहए िक अनाप-शनाप िकराया न िलया जाए और क ु छ इस 
तरह की ËयवÎथा करȂ, तािक लोगȗ को उसका लाभ िमल सके ।   
एक बहुत बड़ ी चीज है - डॉलर क े मुकाबले रुपए  की िगरती िÎथित।  आपको पता है िक 
आदरणीय मोदी जी ने मनमोहन िंसह जी का िकतना मजाक बनाया था िक रुपय े की ऐसी िÎथित 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
157

 
 
 
है िक वह Ģधान मंतर्ी की उĦ पार कर गया है, लेिकन आज क्या िÎथित है?   आज  यह 87, 88 
रुपय े पर पहुंच गया है और िकसी भी समय 90 रुपय े पर भी पहुंच सकता है।  यह मजाक का िवषय 
नहीं है।  िजस तरह से रुपए  की िÎथित िगर रह ी है, यह हमारे िलए िंचता का िवषय है, क्यȗिक 
हमारा एक्सपोटर् नीचे जा रहा है और फॉरेन इन्वेÎटमȂट भी लोग िनकालकर ले जा रहे हȅ।  हमारी 
िÎथित ऐसी हो गई है िक हमारा जो िवदेशी मुदर्ा भंडार है, फॉरेक्स िरज वर् है, वह िबिलयंस ऑफ 
डॉलर मȂ िगर रहा है।  रुपए  मȂ िगरावट को रोकने क े िलए आपको काफी पैसा डालना पड़ता है।  
वह िबिलयन डॉलसर् हमारे फॉरेक्स िरजवर् से, जो िवदेशी मुंदर्ा भंडार है, उससे कम होता चला जा 
रहा है।  हमȂ इस तरफ भी ध्यान देना पड़ेगा िक रुपय
ा क ै से मजबूत रहे।  यह ठीक है िक आप यह 
करते हȅ, उससे एक्सपोटर् को Ģमोशन िमलेगा, लेिकन आज की िÎथित मȂ हमारा एक् सपोटर् तो 
डाउन जा रहा है।  उसमȂ वह िÎथित नहीं रह गई है।   
जीएसटी क े संबंध मȂ आप भी जानते हȅ।  राजÎथान आिद जगह मȂ भी देखते हȅ। जब यह 
कर आया था, तो लोगȗ को लगा था िक बहुत बड़ी आजादी िमलेगी। इसी िलए 1947 की तरह, 
आपको  याद होगा िक सȂटर्ल हॉल मȂ फ ंक्शन िकया गया था िक आज कर से आजादी िमली है, 
देश आजाद हुआ है, लेिकन जीएसटी से हर Ëयापारी परेशान है, हर उǏोगपित परेशान है, छोटे-
छोटे उǏोग वाले परेशान हȅ, दुकानदार परेशा
न हȅ।  जीएसटी क े लोग उनको बहुत तंग करते हȅ 
और अनाप-शनाप जीएसटी लगा देते हȅ।  उसका वह Ģावधान तो सबसे खराब है िक आप सरकार 
मȂ कोई काम करते हȅ, तो िजस िदन आपने िबल रेज िक
या, िजस िदन िबल लगाया, उस िदन ही 
वे जीएसटी काट लेते हȅ और गवनर्मȂट से पेमȂट साल भर बाद आता है। 
 
7.00 P.M. 
 
आप सोिचए िक आदमी को लोन ले-ले कर जीएसटी देना पड़ रहा है।  इस चीज पर भी माननीया 
िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को ध्यान देना चािहए।  मȅ सुझाव िसफर् इसिलए दे रहा हूँ िक क ै से वे इससे राहत दे 
सकȂ और इस समÎया का समाधान हो सके ।   
 सर, इलेक्टोरल बॉन्ड्स क े ऊपर चुना
वी चंदे को लेकर सुĢीम कोटर् का जजमȂट आया था।  
आज तक न उस पर चचार् हुई और न ही उस पर कोई बात हो रही है।  उस मामले मȂ सरकार को 
Ëहाइट पेपर लाना चािहए और सुĢीम कोटर् ने जो कहा था, उस तरह से सारी बातȂ और तथ्य 
जनता क े सामने रखनी चािहए, जो हम नहीं रख पा रहे हȅ।   
 अगर हम जी
एसटी क े मामले मȂ कहȂ, माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी यहाँ नहीं है, तो अब जैसे 
पॉपकॉनर् को लेकर जो Ģा
वधान है, जो मक्के  की चीज है, पॉपकॉनर् क े बारे मȂ आप देिखए िक वे 
कह रही हȅ िक जो नमकीन पॉपकानर् है, उस पर 5 परसȂट जीएसटी और जो मीठा पॉपकानर् है, 
उस पर 18 परस Ȃट जीएसटी लगेगा।  लोगȗ की समझ मȂ ही नहीं आ रहा है िक पॉपकॉनर् पर दो 
जीएसटी क ै से हो सकते हȅ!  इसको तो आम लोग खाते हȅ।  सब जगह आज क े युवा, बच्चे, सारे 
लोग, चाहे Îकू ल क े हȗ, कॉलेज क े हȗ, सब पॉपकानर् खाते हȅ।  इस बात का िकतना मजाक उड़ता 
है!  यह देखना चा
िहए िक आप पैिरटी, समानता क ै से लाएँ।  अगर आप एक ही Ģोडक्ट पर दो 
जीएसटी उतने फकर् क े साथ लगाएँगी, तो उसका बहुत ज्यादा फकर् पड़ता है।   
 क ु ल िमला कर मȅ यही कहूँगा िक यह बजट युवा, िकसान, मिहलाओं, Ëयापारी और 
बेरोजगारȗ क े िलए नहीं है, बिÊक बैलेट बॉक्स और वोट बȅक क े िलए है।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
158
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : धन्यवाद, शुक्ला जी।  Next speaker, Shri Manas 
Ranjan Mangaraj to speak in Odia.  You have three minutes’ time. 
 
SHRI MANAS RANJAN MANGARAJ (Odisha) :  “ There is a proverb in Odia—
"Speech is admirable if one knows how to speak it well. ”   This implies that even the 
most insignificant things can gain attention and can be popularized if you master in 
the art of distorting it. The 2025-26 Budg et, presented by the Finance Minister in 
Parliament, is similarly a collection of minor and insignificant provisions. There is no  
inconsistency in calling this Budget a "Bihar Budget"  instead of a Budget for the 
entire country. The Finance Minister seems to have forgotten that India comprises 
many other States and Union Territories besides Bihar. 
 
We are not against providing special grants and assistance to any State. 
However, in a federal structure, states like Odisha are equally entitled to such 
benefits. The Finance Minister spoke about Bihar alone for three minutes out of her 
77-minute speech, mentioning the State nine  times. But are other States–Odisha, 
West Bengal, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kera la, and Maharashtra—not part of India? 
Six months ago, in the 2024 budget, Biha r was granted a special assistance package 
of ₹59,000 crore. Andhra Pradesh receive d a special package for Polavaram. 
However, Odisha received nothing then , and once again, nothing has been 
announced for the state in this budget. 
The BJD, under former Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik, has been demanding 
special category status for disaster-prone Odisha. Yet, Odisha neither enjoys this 
status nor receives special assistance. Re venue generated from Odisha’s mineral 
resources is being utilized in other States. Odisha’s coal powers the nation, but 
despite the Central Government collecting ₹10,000 crore annually from Odisha under 
the Green Cess, not a single penny is allocated for the development of coal mining-
affected areas in the State. 
The Union Budget makes no significant pr ovisions for agricultural production, 
income growth, rural employment, nutritional assistance, inflation control, or debt 
relief for farmers. The Government has rema ined silent on farmers' long-standing 
demand for a legal guarantee on minimu m support prices (MSP) for crops. The 
increase in the KCC loan limit from ₹3 lakh to ₹5 lakh appears to be aimed more at 
sustaining the corporate sector’s sale of  expensive agricultural goods rather than 
genuinely boosting economic growth. 
                                                           
  English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
159

 
 
 
The Rural Development budget has increased by just ₹1 crore compared to the 
previous year. For agriculture and allied sectors, the increase is merely ₹20,000 crore. 
Ironically, the food subsid y has been reduced from ₹2.5 lakh crore in the last budget 
to ₹2.3 lakh crore this year. How can such a budget benefit the people? 
The Central Government's contribution to  the monthly allowance for crores of 
elderly, widows, and disabled indi viduals has remained stagnant at ₹200 since 2006. 
It is regrettable that this Budget offers no increase in that amount. 
While the Government dreams of a five  trillion dollar economy, the rupee has 
hit an all-time low. At the time of indepe ndence, the value of th e rupee and the dollar 
were nearly the same; today, the exchange rate has touched ₹88 per dollar. India’s 
ranking on the Happiness Index continues to decline, and the strength of the Indian 
passport weakens each year. What kind of growth is this? 
The Finance Minister announced tax exemptions for individuals earning up to 
₹12 lakh. However, when employment opportuni ties remain elusive, such a rebate is 
merely pleasing to the ears—it offers little real benefit to the youth.” 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, आप समाÃत करȂ। आपका समय समाÃत 
हुआ।  माननीय सदÎय, वैसे भी संसदीय परंपरा मȂ पढ़ना allowed नहीं है, पर मȅने आपको allow 
कर रखा है।  आप क ृपया बैठ जाएँ, आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ।   
 
SHRI MANAS RANJAN MANGARAJ : Thank you, Sir. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : धन्यवाद।  Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा। 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा (िबहार) :
  आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूं िक 
आपने मुझे इस बजट पर बोलने का मौका िदया है।   
महोदय, मȅ िसफर् दो-तीन िवषय आपके  सामने रखना चाहता हूं।  एक तो आदरणीया िवǄ 
मंतर्ी जी ने कर मȂ जो छू ट िदया, उससे िनिÌचत रूप  से 1,75,000 करदा ताओं को फायदा होगा 
और उन्हȗने जो एक लाख करोड़ रुपय े छोड़े हȅ, यह उन लोगȗ की बचत होगी।  हमारे एक साथी 
यहाँ पर यह अपेक्षा करते हुए ठीक ही बोल रहे थे िक जब लोगȗ का वह पैसा माकȃ ट मȂ जा एगा, तो 
यह consumption मȂ, saving मȂ और investment मȂ काम आएगा।  जब आप माकȃ ट मȂ जाकर 
पैसा खचर् करते हȅ, तो उसके  बाद वह chain develop होता है।  इससे productivity भी होगी, 
manufacturing भी होगी और  माकȃ ट भी चलेगा।   वह यहीं पर खचर् करे, यह अपेक्षा जरूर  की 
गई होगी।  उसी तरह मȅ TDS, TCS देख रहा था।  आजकल हम लोग देखते हȅ िक जो इनकम 
टैक्स िरफं ड है, वह एक िदन मȂ, दो िद
न मȂ आ जाता है, 48 घंटे मȂ आ जा ता है।   उसे faceless 
कर िदया गया है और इसमȂ टेक्नोलॉजी को use िकया गया है।  इन सब चीजȗ से पिरिÎथितयाँ 
काफी बदली हȅ।   
160
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
मȅ एक और क्षेतर् की बात करना चाहता हूँ।  हमारे मंतर्ी माँझी जी यहां बैठे हुए हȅ।   इनके  
MSMEs मȂ भी बहुत सारे issues को address िकया गया है, िजसमȂ credit access regulatory 
simplification है, physical and digital infrastructure मȂ सुधार क े िलए काम िकया गया है और 
यह देश एक manufacturing hub बने, global manufacturing hub बने, उस पर काम िकया 
गया है।  इस बजट मȂ एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् बात यह है िक दलह
न मȂ आत्मिनभर्रता क े िलए 6 साल 
का िमशन लॉन्च िकया गया है और अगले 4 सालȗ तक िकसानȗ से दलहन की क Ȃदर्ीय खरीद की 
जाएगी।  िबहार जैसे Ģदेश मȂ, जहां मोकामा टा
ल वगैरह मȂ दलहन की खेती होती है, वहाँ 
िनिÌचत रूप  से दलहन क े उत्पादन बढ़ने से इसका लाभ िमलेगा।  
एगर्ीकÊचर सेक्टर मȂ एक और काम यह िकया गय ा है िक जो 100 low productivity वाले 
िजले हȅ, उनको adopt करने का काम िकया गया है।  ऐसे 100 districts को चुना गया है, जहां 
उपज कम होती है।  वहाँ crop diversification करके , production बढ़ान े हेतु उनको चुना गया 
है।  उसी तरह से िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् क े िलए सीमा को 3 लाख से बढ़ाकर 5 लाख िक या गया है।  
पीएम Îविनिध योजना का नवीकरण िकया गया है, िजसमȂ street vendors को 30,000 की सीमा 
मȂ UPI linked credit card और बȅक लोन िमलेगा।  जो gig workers है, जो ऊबर, ओला, जोमैटो 
आिद मȂ काम करते हȅ, उनकी संख्या करीब 1 करोड़  है।  उनको आयुÍमान भारत और हेÊथ 
इंÌयोरȂस क े तहत अन्य सामािजक सुरक्षा योजनाओं का लाभ का िमले, इसका Ģावधान इस बजट 
मȂ िकया गया है। 
हम लोग देखते हȅ िक अभी क
ोरोना हुआ, यूकर् े न मȂ वॉ र हुआ।  वहाँ हमारे बहुत सारे 
Îटू डȂट्स मेिडकल की पढ़ाई करने गए हुए थे।  यहाँ इसकी बहुत िडमांड है, इसिलए मेिडकल 
Îटू डȂट्स क े िलए अगले 1 साल  मȂ 10,000 और अगले 5 सालȗ मȂ 75,000 सीट्स बढ़ाने की बा त 
इस बजट मȂ आई है।  उसी तरह urban infrastructure क े िलए जो challanges हȅ, उनके  िलए 
Îपेशल फ ं ड िदया गया है।  इस बार तो िदÊली क े चुनाव मȂ हम लोग देख रहे थे िक िदÊली की 
कॉलोिनयȗ मȂ रोड और पानी का िक स तरह का हाल था।  उस चीज क े िलए पूरे देश क े िलए 
Ģावधान िकया गया है।  उसी तरह जहाँ तक मुझे मालूम है, nuclear energy क े िलए भी सरकार 
ने 20,000 करोड़ का बजट िदया है। 
महोदय, मȅ एक बात यह कहूंगा िक बजट मȂ जो जनरल चीजȂ हाईलाइट करने वाली थीं, 
उनके  िलए मȅ धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं।  अभी कांगर्ेस क े हमारे एक साथी बता रहे थे िक िबहार को 
historically neglect िक
या गया।  महोदय, जब झारखंड भी िबहार क े साथ था, तब freight 
equalisation था।  झारखंड क े सा
रे िमनरÊस पूरे देश मȂ जाते थे, लेिकन उसका कोई भी 
advantage िबहार को नहीं िमला।  िबहार की हमेशा यह िडमांड रही, जोिक एक सही बात है िक 
उसे िवशेष राज्य का दजार् िमले।  लेिकन फाइनȂस कमीशन ने यह बात खत्म कर दी और हमारी 
पाटीर् तथा हमारे नेता, नीतीश क ुमार जी ने कहा िक अगर िबहार को िवशेष राज्य का दजार् नहीं 
िमलता है, तो िबहार को िवशेष पैक े ज िमले। हम आदरणी य Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को 
धन्यवाद देना चाहते हȅ िक उन्हȗने िपछले बजट मȂ भी िबहार क े flood को address िकया, जबिक 
पहले वह कभी address नहीं हुआ था और वहाँ कोसी का flood आता रहा। मȅ िजस एिरया से 
आता हूँ, वह िमिथला एिरया है।  वहाँ हम हर साल flood देखते रहे।  
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
161

 
 
 
 हमेशा यह होता था िक नेपाल मȂ हाईडैम बन रहा है, लेिकन पहली बार भारत सरकार ने 
नॉथर्-िबहार क े िमिथला क े Äलड को भी एडर्ेस िकया है।  आज मखाना की चचार् दुिनया मȂ हो रही 
है, जबिक मखाना का Ģोडक्शन तो हमेशा से होता रहा है, लेिकन पहली बार वहाँ मखाना बोडर् 
बनेगा।  मखा
ना की उत्पादन िबहार मȂ होता था, लेिकन उसकी पैक ेिंजग बȂगलुरु  मȂ होती थी।  अब 
वहाँ पर ही पैक ेिंजग होगी, माकȃ ट िंलके ज होगा।  दरभंगा मȂ एयरपोटर् है और पूिर्णया मȂ भी 
एयरपोटर् शुरू  होने वाला है, उसके  माध्यम से कागȘ की Ëय
वÎथा होगी।  इससे वहां क े लोगȗ क े 
पॉके ट मȂ पैसा आएगा।  इसी तरह से िबहार क े िलए और एक बड़ा अना उ ंसमȂट हुआ है।  पूरी 
दुिनया िबहार का diaspora है और खास करके  गÊफ क ंटर्ीज वगैरह मȂ वहां क े लोग रहते हȅ, 
लेिकन एक इंटरनेशनल Äलाइट िबहार से नहीं चलती है।  िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने तीन गर्ीनफीÊ ड 
एयरपोट्सर् की जो घोषणा की है, उनमȂ से एक गर्ीनफीÊड एयरपोटर्, जो इंटरनेशनल एयरपोटर् 
होगा, वह पटना क े बगल मȂ होगा।  वह एयरपोटर् बनने से िनिÌचत रूप  से इंटरनेशनल Äलाइट भी 
िबहार से जानी शुरू  हो जाएगी।  मुझे लगता है िक एक जो सबसे बड़ा अनाउंसमȂट हुआ है, वह 
वेÎटनर् कोसी योजन
ा  का है। 1972 से उसका डीपीआर बन कर Ģोजेक्ट चल रहा था, 53 साल, 
हम लोग तो पैदा ही हुए थे।  पूरे उǄर िबहार की िंसच ाई  को लेकर वेÎटनर् कोसी योजना बनी थी, 
लेिकन वह आज तक क ंÃलीट नहीं हुआ।  हम िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया को धन्यवाद देना चाहते हȅ िक 
उन्हȗने अपने भाषण मȂ िमिथला का भी नाम िलया और वेÎटनर् कोसी Ģोजेक्ट को भारत सरकार 
सȅक्शन करके  उस पर काम करना शुरू  करेगी।  सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक इस बार क े बजट मȂ वे 
खुद भी मधुबन
ी पȂिंटग की साड़ी पहन कर आईं।   कम-से-कम उस पȂिंटग से जुड़े हुए िमिथला क े 
जो लोग हȅ, जो देश और दुिनया मȂ हȅ, उन सबके  िलए यह एक ĢितÍठा की बात हुई िक िवǄ मंतर्ी 
जी ने जब अपना बजट पढ़ा, तो उसमȂ इसका ध्यान रखा।  मुझे लगता है िक िबहार कभी भी 
फोकस मȂ नहीं आया।  अभी हम देख रहे थे िक िबहार मȂ चार एगर्ीकÊचर रोड मैप मȂ काम हुआ है 
और क ृिष मȂ वहां पर िरव
ॉÊयूशन आया है।  अभी सÅजी क े उत्पादन मȂ िबहार देश मȂ चौथे नंबर पर 
आया है।  बहुत सारा काम िबहार मȂ िपछले 17, 18, 19 सालȗ मȂ हुआ है।  िबहार टेक ऑफ Îटेज मȂ 
है।  जो डेटा यहां पढ़ा जा रहा था, वह सही है िक ये ĢॉÅलÇस हȅ, लेिकन हम लोगȗ ने कांगर्ेस और 
आरजेडी से जो inherit िकया, उसको भी ध्यान रखना चा
िहए।  यह भी देखना चािहए िक हम लोग 
शुरू  कहां से िकए थे।  हम लोगȗ को िबहार मȂ क्या िमला था, जब हम लोग सरकार मȂ आए थे।  
आज हम लोग कहां से कहां टर्ेवल िक
ए।  िबहार टेक ऑफ Îटेज मȂ है।  पहली बार िबहार भी डबल 
इंजन का मजा ले रहा है।  क ेन्दर् का जो िवशेष ध्यान िबहार क े ऊपर है, उससे हम लोगȗ को लगता 
है िक िनिÌचत रूप  से अगले 5 साल मȂ िबहार भी टॉप टेन Îटेट मȂ आएगा।  दोनȗ बजट, िपछला 
बजट भी और इस बार क े बजट मȂ भी क Ȃ दर् सरकार का और आदरणीय Ģध
ान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
का पूवȘदय का एक पिरकÊपना है िक जब तक पूरब क े Îटेट्स मेन िंलक मȂ नहीं आएंगे, तब तक 
िवकिसत भारत का जो सपना है, वह पूरा नहीं हो पाएगा।  उनका िबहार पर जो िवशेष ध्यान गय
ा 
है, इससे िनिÌचत रूप  से आने वाले समय मȂ, िबहार क े लोग वैसे भी मेहनती हȅ, िबहार भी टॉप टेन 
Îटेट मȂ आए
गा।  महोदय, आपने मुझे अपनी बात रखने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका 
बहुत आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ।  
 
162
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha) :  Sir, I genuinely believe that this is a visionary, 
historic, forward-looking and futuristic Budget.  These are not empty, vague words.  I 
will justify over the next 10-12 minutes why I believe so.   Hon. Finance Minister has 
focused on women, youth and other margin alized groups by removing barriers to 
credit, technologies, skilling and other th ings.  I compliment her and hon. Prime 
Minister for laying the road map for a five  trillion dollar economy.  Some of the hon. 
Members who spoke previously kept on harping, ‘ क ै से बनेगा 5 िटर्िलयन डॉलर की 
इकोनॉमी’। This is basic common sense.  With a base of 4 trillion dollar economy, if you 
grow at 6.4 per cent which we are doing today, then, over 3-4 years, we will, 
definitely, become a 5 trillion dollar econ omy. And by 2047, we will become a 30 
trillion dollar economy and Viksit Bharat.  
Sir, reference was made to a particul ar railway project - Khurda- Balangir 
Railway Line.  But conveniently, what was not mentioned was that the project started 
in 1974.  सर, उस समय मेरा जन्म भी नहीं हुआ था और उस समय अिÌवनी वैÍणव जी भी रेल 
मंतर्ी नहीं थे, वे तो 2021 मȂ रेल मंतर्ी बने हȅ तथा Ģधान मंतर्ी भी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी नहीं थे, वे तो 2014 
मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी बने हȅ।  मȅ यह पूछना चा
हता हूँ िक यह 40 सालȗ तक क्यȗ नहीं बना?   
 Sir, today, almost 256 kilometres of that particular railway line of 304 kilometres 
is complete. वह 80 परसȂट से ज्यादा कÇÃलीट हो चुकी है, जो इस सदन मȂ बताया नहीं गया है।  
Sir, one incorrect statement was also made that the allocation for Odisha r
ailway in 
the Budget has reduced over the last year. It is incorrect.  This year, the Budget 
allocation for Odisha railway is Rs. 10,600 cr ore; in the last financial year, 2024-25, it 
was Rs.10,536 crore.  सर, यह दो साल का बच्चा भी बता देगा िक 600 मैथेमैिटक्स मȂ 536 से 
ज्यादा होता है।   But this incorrect statement was made just for cheap publicity.   
Sir, now, I will come to the substantia l part of the Budget. No Member has 
spoken about sports. I believe  that every one of us will be interested in sports.  
At Rs. 3,794 crore, this is the highest ever allocation to sports and we must 
compliment the hon. Finance Minister for th is. She has never got a due, which shows 
that she has been focusing on sports. When  Prime Minister Modiji talks about hosting 
or aspiring to host the Olympics in 2036, we  need to focus on sports and we need to 
allocate more. Actually, I would request hon. Finance Minister to allocate, at least, 
Rs. 10,000 crore to sports. One data is pertinent here. I do  not want to make this a 
2013-14 ve rsus 2025-26 thing, but this is interest ing. An amount of only Rs.1,219 
crore ही वषर् 2013-14 मȂ sports क े िलए allocate िकया गया था, जो इस बार 3,800 करोड़ क े 
आसपास है, almost 3.1 times. This should be remembered.  I will urge the Government 
to nudge the private sector to invest in sports as it is done in other countries. सर, यहां 
पर Ģाइवेट सेक्टर sports मȂ खचर् नहीं करता है। The Government should motivate them to 
spend. Then comes green growth. In this august House, there are many Members, 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
163

 
 
 
including Shri Jairam Ramesh and other Members, who are passionate about climate 
change, environment and sustainability i ssues. But the hon. Prime Minister has 
walked the talk by hiking the Budget for MNRE from BE of Rs. 19,100 crore in last year 
to Rs. 25,600 crore; it is a hi ke of almost 39 per cent.  सर, बोलना एक बात है, लेिकन 
करके  िदखाना दूसरी बात है।  Renewable Energy Department को 25,600 करोड़ की लागत 
से  40 परसȂट hike िकया गया है। 
Sir, then, there is the Pradhan Mantri Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana.  Imagine 
one crore household getting free electricity, up to 300 units through this! This is going 
to save them almost Rs. 15,000 to Rs. 18,000 annually.  उनकी साल की 15,000 रुपय े से 
लेकर 18,000 रुपय े की बचत हो रही है from this Pradhan Mant ri Surya Ghar Muft Bijli 
Yojana. Then there is the National Green Hydrogen Mission. Again, it is something 
related to sustainability and green growth . The Budget has been hiked from Rs. 300 
crore at RE last year to Rs. 600 crore in BE of this year.   
सर, िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने EV क े बारे मȂ बात की।  Basic customs duty on EV component
s 
has been brought down so that EVs beco me cheaper and affordable to a large 
section of people. Then comes R&D. This is the sixth time I am speaking on the 
Budget from 2020 and every time मȅ R&D की  बात करता हूँ। At 0.75 per cent of our 
GDP, we are one of the worst spenders on R&D in the world. सर, मȅ यहां पर 
comparable numbers दूंगा।  चाइना का खचर् 2.2 है, यूएस 3.2 खच र् करता है, साउथ कोिरया 
4.5 खचर् करता है,  Israel spends 5.6 per cent of its GDP on R&D, जबिक हम लोग 
दुिनया मȂ सबसे कम खचर् करते हȅ।  World average is 1.8 per cent.  सर, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
"जय जवान, जय िकसान, जय िवज्ञ
ान, जय अनुसंधान" का जो Îलोगन िदया था, उसे उन्हȗने 
पूरा करके  िदखाया।  Now, in this Budget, following the letter and spirit of what the hon. 
Prime Minister said, hon. Finance Minister  made an announcement for 50,000 Atal 
Tinkering Labs in our Government schools in the next five years. सर, वहीं से curiosity 
develop होती है, वहीं से innovation आता है।  Broadband connectivit y has been assured 
to all Government secondary schools.  सर, यह सोिचए िक अगर देश क े हर सरकारी Îकू ल 
मȂ broadband connectivity हो जाएगी, then what will be the future of our country?  
Sir, then comes the Centre of Excellence in AI. This is the age of AI and Centre 
of Excellence in AI for education has an outlay of Rs. 500 crore. An amount of Rs. 
20,000 crore has been allocated for private sector driven R&D.  These are extremely, 
extremely laudable announcements in the Budget.  Then comes Startups. We all 
know that the hon. Prime Minister has been a great votary of Startups, and we are the 
third largest Startup hub with almost 1.6 la kh registered Startups in Startup India 
Initiative. In the State of Odisha, where I come from, there are almost 2,500 Startups, 
of which 50 per cent have been started by women. Again, the focus on Startup was 
clearly there in this Budget. A deep t ech-focussed Fund of Funds was announced. A 
164
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
new scheme was announced for five lakh women, SC and ST entrepreneurs where 
they can avail term loan up to Rs. 2 crore during the next five years. 
 सर, 5 लाख ऐसी मिहलाएं और हमारे एससी/एसटी भाई-बहन हȅ, जो Îटाटर्अÃस करते 
हȅ, जो entrepreneurs हȅ। उनको अगले पांच साल मȂ दो करोड़ रुपय े तक का लोन िमल सकता 
है। Finally, about tax exemption. I work a lot with Startups. सर, सारे Îटाटर्अÃस ने बोला 
था िक यह जो tax exemption था, यह 31 माचर्, 2025 को खत् म हो जाएगा। क ृपया करके  इसको 
बढ़ाने की कोिशश कीिजएगा। I am so glad and thank the hon. Finance Minister िक उसको 
5 साल क े िलए बढ़ाया गया है, िजससे Îटाटर्अप कÊचर और ज्यादा होगा। सर, Gig workers क े 
बारे मȂ बात की गई थी। सर, नीित आयोग की िरपोटर् क े िहसाब से there are ten million (1  
crore) Gig workers in the country.  By 2029, there will be 23 million means 2.3 crore 
Gig workers in the country.  Gig workers, pr ovide employment and they also help in 
bringing gender parity.  सर, जो Gig sector है, इसमȂ बहुत सारी मिहलाएं काम करती हȅ, 
and because of the flexible working hours, women find it convenient to work in the 
Gig sector. By supporting Gig sector in th e Budget, hon. Finance Minister has shown 
that this Government is for gender parity, for women empowerment and for job 
creation.  She announced ID Cards & regist ration on the e-Shra m portal for the Gig 
workers.  All the Gig workers will be enrolled under the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana which is going to help one crore Gig workers.   
Now, defence is another area in which I am very interested.  Many 
Parliamentary Standing Committees have r ecommended that we should spend, at 
least, 3 per cent of our GDP on Defence.  It has not happened yet. We are still at 2 
per cent. Today, our spending on Defence is almost 80 billion dollars.  The exact 
number is Rs. 6.81 lakh crore. China spends about 300 billion dollars.  It is almost four 
times of ours.  We know as to what kind of relationship we have with China.  Every 
time, I have been speaking that we should  spend more on Defence, and I must thank 
the hon. Finance Minister that she has hike d the Defence Budget this year by 6.3 per 
cent over last year’s BE.  Regarding the export of Defence products, now, we are 
exporting Rs. 21,000 crore worth of Defence products which will grow to almost Rs. 
50,000 crore over the next three-four years.  I could go on and on.   
Regarding Education and Healthcare, आईआईटी की सीट्स बढ़ाई जाएंगी, 
मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ की सीट्स 7 , 5 0 0  o v e r  t h e  n e x t  f i v e  y e a r s .   S e t t i n g  u p  o f  D a y  C a r e  
Cancer Centres in all district headquarter hosp itals.  We all know and everyone in this 
whole August House has a family member or a fri
 end who has cancer.  How difficult it 
is to go to Tata Memorial, Mumbai or any city hospital to get cancer treatment? Now, 
with these Day Care Cancer Centres in district hospitals, it will be great boon for small 
towns in India and rural India.  On 36 life saving drugs, Basic Custom Duty has been 
reduced which will help millions of our patients.   
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
165

 
 
 
Finally, I will come to my State of Odisha .  I applaud the hon. Finance Minister 
when she announced a Mission for Cotton productivity.  I come from Kalahandi 
District —just one or two minutes, Sir—which is known for its black cotton soil.  We 
have one of the finest black cotton soils in the country and I had, in the past also, 
during the Zero Hour, requested the Government to set-up a Cotton Research 
Institute in Kalahandi.  Now, again, I will request the Government to consider this.   
 Hon. Finance Minister also announced five National Centres of Excellence for 
Skilling.  What a wonderful announcement! I request the Government that one of the 
centres should be set up in the State of  Odisha, preferably, in Western Odisha.  
Regarding Tourism, in the last Budget, hon. Finance Minister had acknowledged 
Odisha’s abundant tourism potential. Throug h you, I have a couple of suggestions.  
One is of Bali Yatra which is declared as a national festival.  Then, Dhanu Yatra which 
is the largest open air theatre on Earth and, for 11 days, one town called Bargarh 
becomes Mathura Nagri.  That should be considered fo r intangible cultural site of 
UNESCO.    
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : क ृपया अपनी बात समाÃत करȂ।  
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR : Sir, I will take 30 seconds.  Finally, Sir, about Railways.  
During the UPA regime, between 2004 to 2014, ओिडशा को 734 करोड़ रुपय े सालाना 
िमलते थे। Today, it is ten times mo re per year.  This year ha s been Rs. 10,600 crore.  
10 गुना ज्यादा िमल रहा है। आज ओिडशा की railway density 20 है, neighboring State मȂ 48 
है, पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया अपनी बात समाÃत करȂ।  
 
Ǜी सुजीत क ुमार : सर, इसके  िलए अिÌवन
ी वैÍणव जी िज़Çमेदार नहीं है, इसके  िलए िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी िज़Çमेदार नहीं हȅ, this is past legacy.  िपछली सरकारȗ ने काम नहीं िकया, तभ ी 
यह legacy आई, िजसे अब सुधारा जा रहा है।  Finally, Madam Finance Minister… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Sir, just last point.  We should acknowledge the reality.  When 
we demand more funds, is this enough? No!  I do not think so.  As a Member from 
Odisha, I definitely expect more funding from the Government. Thank you, Sir.    
                                                           
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): Shri Vivek K. Tankha. 
166
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा (मध्य Ģदेश) : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इस वƪ जब बोलने क े िलए िनमंतर्ण 
िमलता है, तो ऐसा लगता है that you are like a night watchman, जैसे िकर्के ट मȂ होता है िक 
लाÎट मȂ मौका िमलता है। Anyway, let me do the best.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप तो अच्छे batter हो, आप night watchman क ै से हो 
सकते हȅ! 
 
Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा : सर, यह Îपीच िववेक तन्खा की नहीं है, यह Îपीच है देश क े करोड़ȗ युवकȗ 
की, यह Îपीच है देश क े सवा करोड़ गरीबȗ की, यह Îपीच है देश क े लाखȗ मरीजȗ की और यह 
Îपीच है देश क े करोड़ȗ Ǜृǉालुओं की,जो हर बजट को बहुत उÇमीद और आशा से देखते हȅ। 
बजट comi
ng year की income, expenditure and expected expenditure का एक लेखा-
जोखा होता है।  हमȂ बार-बार यह बताया जा रहा है िक िवकिसत भारत का लÑय, जो 2047 तक 
हािसल होगा, as if, यह बजट उस ‘ िवकिसत भारत’ का बजट है। यह बज
ट तो एक साल का 
बजट है। हमȂ तो यह भी नहीं पता िक चार साल बाद क्या ËयवÎथा होगी। इसी चुनाव मȂ अगर बीस 
सीटȂ कम हो जातीं, तो क ु छ दूसरी ËयवÎथा हो सकती थी। मेरा यह कहना है िक बजट को annual  
feature मान कर उस साल क े बारे मȂ हम बात करȂ। हम आज क ुं भ क े बारे मȂ बात करना चाहते हȅ। 
बारह साल मȂ महाकुं भ का आयोजन होता है। बारह सालȗ क े बजट मȂ आपने उस क ुं भ क े िलए क्या 
Ģावधान िक
या? वहां 300 िकलोमीटर की कतार है। वहां घुसना मुिÌकल है । एयरपोटर् से क ुं भ 
एिरया मȂ पहुंचने मȂ diffic ulty है। Where is that infrastructure? आप जो infrastructure की बात 
कर रहे हȅ, where is that infrastructure? जो क ु छ भी आपने बनाया है, it is cosmetics. मेरा 
तो यह कहना है िक अगर धािर्मक पयर्टन, िजससे दो लाख करोड़ से ज्यादा की आमदनी होने 
वाली है, उन लोगȗ की Ëयथा तो देिखए िक उनकी क्या हालत है? कोई planning नह ीं है, कोई 
infrastructure नहीं है । आपको तैयारी क े िलए बारह साल का समय िमला था। हमने इन 12 सालȗ 
मȂ क्या िकया? मेरा तो कहना है िक वाराणसी, मथुरा, उज्जैन, नमर्दा, जबलपुर, क ेदारनाथ, 
वैÍणो देवी ये सभी Ģाचीन और धािर्म क शहर हȅ।  ऐसी समÎया सब जगह उठती हȅ।  हमारे जो  
repeated Budgets आए हȅ, उसमȂ इन शहरȗ क े बारे मȂ और ऐसे बड़े-बड़े आयोजनȗ क े बारे मȂ 
क्या सोचा गया, उसके  िलए क्या Ģावधान हȅ?  मुझे  तो क ु छ खास नहीं िदखता है।  िमशन 
आत्मिनभर्र भारत,  pulses क े  बारे मȂ आपने बोला, The aim is to reduce impor
t 
dependency.  Financial year 2024 मȂ pulses का  आयात hit a six-year high, surging by 
84 per cent. India is the la rgest vegetable oil importer. हम  जो vegetable oil का import 
करते हȅ, fulfilling 70 per cent of its demand from foreign sources. Without investment in 
research and high-yielding seeds, such  announcements remain a mere slogan. मुझे 
खुशी हुई िक मखाना बोडर्, िबहार का एक unique initiative है, but आज USA मखाना का एक 
super market बन चुका है। जो हमारे farme
rs हȅ, उनको तो मखाना की MSP तक नहीं िमलती 
है और जो  profits होते हȅ, वे सब बाहर जाते हȅ।  आपके  पास जो ËयवÎथाएं हȅ,  इन ËयवÎथाओं 
पर तो बजट का allocation होना चािहए।  इसी तरह मȅ आपको MSMEs क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहता 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
167

 
 
 
हूं। MSMEs contribute 30 per cent to GDP and 45 per cent to exports. आप कहते हȅ िक 
हमने credit guarantee to MSMEs बहुत increase की हȅ, तो हम उसका Îवागत करते हȅ, 
लेिकन 19,828 MSMEs 2023-24 मȂ shut down हुए हȅ। अगर िपछले एक साल मȂ बीस हजार 
MSMEs बंद हो रही हȅ, तो इसकी क्या कहानी है।  हम िकस कहानी की बात कर रहे हȅ।  I s the 
support reaching the right beneficiaries? This is the question. इसी तरह fiscal target क े 
बारे मȂ बात की िक 4.4 per cent of the GDP कर रहे हȅ down from 4.8 last year. अब आप 
Deficit reduction तो कर रहे हȅ at the cost of massive cuts, but in what? Capital 
expenditure. आपने Education को 11,584 करोड़ रुपय े से कम िकया। आपने social welfare 
को 11,900 से reduce िकया। 
  आपने रूरल  डेवलपमȂट को 75 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपय े से िरǹ ूस िकया, एिगर्कÊचर को 
10,992 करोड़ रुपय े से िरǹ ूस िक
या। इस सबका क्या मतलब है? अगर आपने डेिफिसट कम भी 
िकया, पर इन सब चीज़ȗ को, क ैिपटल एक्सपȂिडचर को िरǹ ूस कर िदया, तो आपने मेन टैक्सेस 
को अनएडर्ेस छोड़ िदया।  
महोदय, अब मȅ टैक्सेशन की बात कर
ता हूं।  World मȂ progressive taxation policies 
होती हȅ। Indirect taxes contribute 27 per cent of gross receipts.  Contribution of income 
tax is 22 per cent, जबिक income tax indirect tax से ज्यादा होना चािहए, अगर हम country 
मȂ equity की बात कर रहे हȅ। Contribution of corporate tax is just 17 per cent, िजसको 
सबसे ज्यादा टैक्सेबल करना चािहए। ऐसा लगता है िक पूरा सर कारी  तंतर् corporate क े िलए है, 
आप उन्हीं को benefit देना चाहते हȅ, उन्हीं को support करना चाहते हȅ। So, this partiality 
towards corporates become very heavy on a common man.  यह  जनता  क े बीच 
common बातचीत का एक  िवषय बन चुका है। In Pandit Nehru’s word, ‘The Government 
is relying on distribution of poverty.’  हम poverty को distribute करना चाहते हȅ। आप 14th 
CAG Report on Outstanding Demand on Income  Tax Assessee क े बारे मȂ सोिचए। क ै ग 
की िरपोटर्  एक है।  हमारा IT Department  िडफं क्ट हो गया है। हमारे Secretary-General, 
Modi sahib, Head of the IT, Income Tax Ward मȂ थे.  Actually IT De partment defunct  
हो गया है। CAG Report का यह कहना है िक 2011 मȂ  CAG found 84.3 per cent of 
outstanding tax demand to be unrecoverable.  And, this has now risen to 97 per cent.  
That is, Rs.19.35 lakh crores is unrecoverable. आप recovery ही नहीं कर सकते। क ै ग 
कहता है, despite multiple requests, CBDT refuse d to share tax defa ulter's data from 
March, 2020 to 2024.  अगर आप की transparency ही नहीं है और CBDT अपना  data, जो 
िडफॉÊटसर् का है, जब CAG से ही share नहीं कर रहा है, तब हम क्या बोलȂ? क ै ग यह कह रहा 
है िक IT department failed to produce re cords for several high demand cases, 
including three firms owin g about Rs.11,000 crores.  आप क ै ग से िछपाते हȅ, आप क ै ग को 
बताने क े िलए तैयार नहीं हȅ। Out of 2,156 audit  queries sent by the CAG, क ै ग ने जो 2,156 
क्वैरीज़ भेजीं, उनमȂ से 81 per cent were unanswered.  उनका आन्सर ही नहीं िदया गया,  
exposing systemic inefficiency in the tax recovery. आप कहते हȅ िक हम िवकिसत भारत 
की तरफ जा रहे हȅ, आपके  टाइम मȂ tax system बहुत अच्छा है, लेिकन इस क ै ग िरपोटर् क े बाद 
168
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
मȅ क्या सोचूँ और क्या समझूँ? अगर ये 19 लाख करोड़ रुपय े, जो हम  efficiently collect कर लेते 
हȅ, तो आप सोिचए िक हमारे social sector की spending on health, education, research, 
Defence, food subsidy, MGNREGA and even a better Kumbh आिद उससे आगर्नाइज़ हो 
जाते।  But, हम हमारा िसÎटम इतना िशिथल हो गया है िक अपनी outstanding demands 
collect ही नहीं कर पा रहे हȅ।  
महोदय, अब मȅ Indian judiciary पर आता हूं। आप देिखएगा िक  5 cro
re cases 
pending हȅ। आपने judiciary की तरफ क्या ध्यान िदया है? 2024-25 मȂ आपने Rs.6,461 crores 
judiciary को िदए थे, 2025-26 मȂ आप Rs.5,850 crores propose कर रहे हȅ, यानी आपने कम 
कर िदया है। महोदय, Cases की, arrears की संख्या बढ़ती जा रही है। यह 5 करोड़ तक  पहुँच 
रही है, इसका बजट कम होता जा रहा है।  
महोदय, आप
ने Mediation Bill पास िकया। It is a non-starter. क्यȗिक Mediation Bill 
भी parallel set-up, जैसे  c o u r t  का set-up है , you need a parallel mediation set-up.  
Where is that set up?  Where are mediators?  Where is building?  जो लोग आएंगे, वे 
कहाँ बैठȂगे? िजतनी सूट्स फाइल होती हȅ, उतन ा िमिडएशन होना चािहए। That is the law.  
उतने कोटर् रूÇस होने चािहए, उतने mediators हȗगे, counsellors हȗगे, clients आएंगे, लेिकन 
आपके  पास infrastructure नहीं है, सेट-अप नहीं है। हमारी इंģाÎटर्क्चर की Ãलािंनग ही नहीं 
होती है। We still have more than 5 crore cases pending.  Every time, you make a new 
law.  आपको न्यू लॉ से एक impact assessment करना चािहए िक िकतने क े सेस generate 
हȗगे।   
        कोट्सर् मȂ िकतने क े सेज़ बढ़Ȃगे। ऐसी कोई Ã
लािंनग नहीं रहती है।  For judges, police and 
prosecutors, extensive training करनी चािहए, which is lacking.   Then, digital 
infrastructure for case management and evidence storage, कहाँ पर है? आज अगर 
चेन्नई मȂ कोई crime होता है और हमȂ िदÊली मȂ biometrics से connect करना है िक क्या उस 
आदमी ने िदÊली मȂ कभी कोई crime िकया था, तो इसके  िलए कोई central
ized system ही नहीं 
है। Then, coming to implementation co st for new procedural requirements, मतलब  िक 
आपने हर चीज़ बहुत difficult बनाई  हुई है। अगर आप बजट क े माध्यम से, judiciary क े साथ 
liberal होते, तो हो सकता है िक एक modern judicial set up आ जाता। मेरा तो कहना है िक 
Rs.3,000 crores for  fast trac k commercial courts to cl
ear business disputes within 12 
months – आपको  यह बनाना चािहए। अगर आप चाहते हȅ िक देश पाँच िटर्िलयन डॉलर की 
इकोनॉमी बने, तो यह क ै से बनेगा? लोगȗ को िवÌवास ही नहीं है िक यहाँ पर disputes resolve 
हो सकते हȅ, सालȗ तक busines s disputes resolve ही नहीं हȗगे। इसके  िलए आपका कोई 
िसÎटम ही नहीं है। आपको 1,500 करोड़ चािहए to recruit 5,000 new judges in courts and 
tribunals.  Where is that in the Budget? आपको िमिनमम एक हजार करोड़ लगȂगे to 
establish evening courts in metro citi es for contract enforcement cases. अपने बजट क े 
माध्यम से कोई नई सोच तो लाइए। जो systems already collapse कर चुक े हȅ, उन्हȂ आप कहाँ 
address कर रहे हȅ? िसफर् slogan से address हो जाते, तो चीज़Ȃ बहुत पहले ही ठी क हो गई 
होतीं। हमारा कहना यह है िक around Rs.6,00,000/- crores of investment projects are 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
169

 
 
 
stuck in legal battles due to judi cial delays. On infrastructure, छ: लाख करोड़ क े cases 
pending हȅ। Real Estate and infrastructure projects  worth Rs.1.3 lakh crores are stuck 
in land acquisition disputes.  Land disp utes alone account for 66 per cent of civil 
cases dealing in infrastructu re and industrial projects. ऐसे मȂ, इंिडया मȂ कौन foreign 
investor आने वाला है, जबिक आप कहते हȅ िक हमारे यहाँ दुिनया आने वाली है। सर, दुिनया मȂ 
से कौन आएगा?  दुिनया तब आएगी, जब आपका Ease of Doing Business really सा मने 
िदखेगा। उस  आदमी को लगना चािहए िक मेरे साथ अन्याय हो, मेरे साथ गलत हो और मȅ कोटर्-
कचहरी गया, tribunal गया , अिधकारी क े पास गया, तो मेरी problem  solve हो जाएगी। 
Coming to health care,  health care spending remains at 2.1 per cent of GDP, which is 
barely enough for bandage. I mean, forget a health revolution, bandage क े िलए हो 
जाए, तो बड़ी बात है।  
       In the UK, the USA, Europe, peop le pay 40 or 50 per cent taxes and get 100 per 
cent optimum health care.  In India, we pay 50 to 60 per cent taxes, but get no health 
care.
 आप मध्य Ģदेश, उǄर Ģदेश, राजÎथान, हिरयाणा, िहमाचल Ģदेश, उǄराखंड, कहीं भी 
देख लीिजए, सब लोग Delhi AIIMS मȂ आना चाहते हȅ and Delhi AIIMS is so overcrowded.   
There is no place to stand.  आपको patients क े relatives बाहर रोड्स पर और inside metro 
station िमलȂगे। Surgeries की dates एक-एक साल बाद, दो-दो साल बाद िमलती हȅ! मेरे पास 
रोज requests आती हȅ िक सर, हम बचȂगे ही नहीं, तो surgery करवा कर क्या करȂगे? आप िकस 
िवकिसत भार
त की बात कर रहे हȅ, िकस health mechanism  की बात कर रहे हȅ? हम CGH 
Scheme लेकर आए। आप बताइए िक िकतने Ģाइवेट हॉिÎपटÊस CGH Scheme को accept 
करते हȅ? वे patients को भगा देते हȅ। वे कहते हȅ िक सालȗ तक हमारे bills clear नहीं होते हȅ। 
सर, यह बात सबको पता है। Finance Minister  allocation for hospitals क्यȗ नहीं बढ़ाते हȅ? 
About 50 per cent o
f Indians lack basic health insurance. 20,000  से 75,000  क े बीच मȂ 
जो mid segment  वाले लोग हȅ, उन्हȂ ये benefits ही नहीं िमलते हȅ। CAG Report  मȂ आयुÍमान 
भारत क े बारे मȂ बहुत सारी बातȂ बोली हȅ िक वहाँ पर िकतन
ा ģॉड चल रहा है।  
       Coming to education, आपका school drop-out  is 15 to 20 per cent.  The National 
Centre of Excellence for Skilling is like throwi ng a birthday party with one balloon.   
The Government promises Viksit Bharat by 2047, but we want  IITs, IIMs and medical 
colleges today, not in 2047, Sir.    So, आप 300 incubation scheme ले कर आए। आप 
बताइए िक क्या आपने एक unicorn produce भी  िकया? आप करोड़ȗ रुपय े incubation 
scheme पर लगा देते हȅ, पर आपने इंिडया मȂ uni
corn कौन बनाया। मेरा यह कहना है िक आप 
R&D मȂ बजट नहीं बढ़ाएं। आप  R & D  मȂ क्या spend करते हȅ – 0.64 परसȂट! अगर आप 
R&D मȂ spend नहीं करȂगे, तो आप बताइए, China, spends 2.4 per cent, the US spends 
3.5 per cent, उनसे क ै से compete  करȂगे?                             
 गवनर्मȂट का R&D 55 परसȂट है, Ģाइवेट सेक्टर का 45 परस Ȃट है, जब
िक यूरोप मȂ 70 
परसȂट है। DeepSeek  and ChatGPT is the new breakthrough. ...(समय की घंटी)... 
170
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Breakthrough जो गया है, वह तो अमेिरका और यूरोप मȂ हो रहा है और हम कहते हȅ िक हम 
new era मȂ जा रहे हȅ।  
सर, मेरे पास कहने को बातȂ तो बहुत सारी हȅ, क्यȗिक 15 िमनट हो गए हȅ, इसिलए मȅ 
ज्यादा टाइम नहीं लूंगा। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : समय हो गया है।  अब आप िवरािजए।   
 
Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा :  सर, मȅ लाÎट मȂ यही कहना चाहूंगा िक GST को rationalize कीिजए।  
GST मȂ ĢॉÅलम क्या है, apart fro
m the tax rates, जो  without determination लोगȗ को 
अरेÎट करके  जेल मȂ डाल िदया जा ता है, इससे पूरी इंडÎटर्ी डरी  हुई है।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, अब आप समाÃत करȂ।  
 
Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा :  आपका execution खराब  है, आपकी Ãलािंनग नहीं है और आपकी कोई 
ÎकीÇस नहीं हȅ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : धन्यवाद, तन्
 खा साहब।  Ǜी शुभाशीष खुंिटया, अनुपिÎथत।  
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बच्चन, अनुपिÎथत।  डा. वी. िशवादासन। 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) : Respected Chair, the Budget it self is very insufficient.  
The Government has failed to mobilise the re sources. The total Budget is only 14.2 
per cent of the GDP. In USA,  the expenditure of the Fe deral Government is 23 per 
cent of GDP. The Government should mobi lize the resources and spend them for the 
common good.  But the Union Government do es not have proper vision and proper 
foresight.  Gandhiji was martyred on 30
th January.  The Budget is presented on 1 st of 
February.   We say, ‘Gandhiji lives in our hearts.’  But can we see Gandhiji in the 
Budget documents?  Gandhiji gave a talisman to us. “Recall the face of the poorest 
and weakest human being whom you may have seen and ask yourself if the stuff you 
contemplate is going to be of any use to them. ” The Budget fails according to 
Gandhiji’s talisman. Gandhiji talked about Gram Swaraj but rural India was completely 
neglected in this Budget. The Government  has not spent the allocated amount, Rs. 
75,000 crore for the rural sector in 2024-25. They have announced many schemes but 
they did not spend the money. The Government is not ready to increase the allocation 
for the MGNREGA by even a single paisa from Rs. 86,000 crore. The Government has 
been cutting the allocations for employment  guarantee scheme. It was Rs. 1.1 lakh 
crore in 2020-21 but now it is only Rs. 86, 000 crore. Each year, they have decreased 
it. They are telling that MGNREGA is a demand-driven project. But they will give more 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
171

 
 
 
money -- that is their announcement -- acco rding to the demand.  Since last year, 
the Union Government has not been ready to allocate more than a single paisa to the 
MGNREGA scheme.  The Union Budget has fa iled to address the basic issues of the 
common people.  The value of the rupee is decreasing day-by-day.  In the history of 
India, we have never seen such a fall of Indian rupee.  The cr edit goes to the Union 
Government according to the statements of  a former Gujarat Chief Minister. The 
Government is selling the valuable assets of the nation. The Government plans to 
raise Rs. 47,000 crores by selling public sector enterprises. They are telling about 
Ujjwala Yojana but the LPG subsidy has been reduced by Rs. 2,600 crore.     
 Sir, what about the allocation for welf are programs?  Only  Rs. 12,500 crore 
have been allocated for the Mid-day Meal Scheme.  Sir, the amount allocated last 
year was Rs. 12,460 crore, but they revise d it and reduced the amount to Rs. 10,000 
crore.  In India, peasants are struggling, but the amount allocated for the Crop 
Insurance Scheme has been reduced.  Fertilizer subsidy has been reduced.  The 
amount meant for irrigation schemes has been reduced.  Earlier, it was Rs. 11,840 
crore, but now it is only Rs. 10,764 cror e.  The allocation towards scholarships for 
adivasis and dalits has been reduced.  The allocation  for pre-Matric scholarship has 
been reduced.  They did not increase a single rupee for Anganwadi  workers, ASHA 
workers and Mid-day Meal Scheme workers.  They have presented a Budget that has 
completely neglected the rural poor and marginalized.  In the banking sector, 
employees are working day and night, but th ey are not getting proper remuneration.  
They are trying to privatize the Life Insurance Corporation through foreign investment.  
 Sir, I come from Kerala.  This Government neglected the tears of the people of 
Wayanad in Kerala.  I would like to remind them that Wayanad is in the Indian 
Republic.  ...(Interruptions)... आप राम का नाम बोलते हȅ, लेिकन  ...(समय की घंटी)... Sir, 
I request the Government to protect the interests of the people of the country. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप समाÃत करȂ। 
 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, just a minute.  They are tr ying to reduce the allocations for 
all the welfare measures.  ...(Interruptions)... They did not increase a single rupee 
for the pension scheme. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय समाÃत हुआ। ...(समय की 
घंटी)... माननीय सदÎय, आपका भाषण समाÃत हुआ।   
 
172
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:   Sir, give me just one minute. I lost one minute because of the 
disturbance. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप अपना भाषण समाÃत करȂ।  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:   Sir, they are not ready to in crease even a single rupee for the 
pension scheme.  They did not increase even a single rupee for widow pension, 
pension for elderly persons and pension fo r the weaker sections.  How would they 
protect the interests of the common people?  I request the Government not to sell the 
assets of the people.  Do not sell the nation ’s legacy to foreign countries.  I request 
the Government to take protective measures for the people. 
 With these words, I conclude my remarks on  the Budget.  Thank you, Sir.       
                                                                                                    
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : धन्यवाद, डा. िशवादासन।  माननीय Ǜी संजय राउत। 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत (महाराÍटर्) : सर, आजकल क े जो बजट होते हȅ, वे िकस
ी  राज्य मȂ चुनाव है, यह 
देख कर बनाए जाते हȅ, चाहे चुनाव िदÊली का हो, चाहे चुनाव िबहार का हो।  उस बारे मȂ कोई 
तकरार करने की, क ंÃलȂट करने की जरूरत नहीं है, सब हमारे देश क े िह Îस े हȅ।  अब िबहार का 
चुनाव है, तो अगर िबहार क े िलए बजट मȂ क ु छ ज्यादा िदया गया है, तो हम उसका Îवागत करȂगे, 
लेिकन उसके  साथ सभी राज्यȗ को भी अपना िहÎसा िमलना चािहए।  दूसरी बात है िक िबहार को 
िपछले बजट मȂ 60,000 करोड़ िदया गया था।  मेरे िहसाब से, जो जानकारी मेरे पास है, 60,00
0 
करोड़ का पैक े ज िदया गया था, लेिकन यह सरकार उसमȂ से िकतना खचर् कर पाई है?  अब तक 
600 करोड़ भी खचर् नहीं हुआ है, यह जानकारी मुझे िकसी ने दी है।  अगर यह सही है, तो पैक े ज 
पर पैक े ज देकर िकसी राज्य को आप इस तरह से अपने कजर् मȂ या दबाव मȂ लेना चाहते हȅ।   
 सर, हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा को आगामी क ु छ वषș मȂ 5 िटर्िलयन यूएस डॉलर इकोनॉमी बन ाने 
का लÑय है और मȅ उसका Îवागत करता हूँ, लेिकन उसके  िलए जो इंģाÎटर्क्चर खड़ा करना 
चािहए, बहुत सी बातȂ करनी चािहए, देश की जनता क े िलए बहुत क ु छ करने की जरूरत  है, मुझे 
इस बजट मȂ उसमȂ बहुत सी किमयाँ िदखत
ी हȅ।  आप िकसानȗ की इनकम डबल करने का वादा 
हमेशा करते आए हȅ, लेिकन इस बारे मȂ इस बजट मȂ कोई खास योजनाएँ नहीं हȅ।  िकसानȗ की 
कम से कम िमिनमम सपो
टर् Ģाइस की जो माँग है, िजसके  िलए आज भी पंजाब का िकसान 
आंदोलन कर रहा है, अगर आप यह घोषणा इस बजट मȂ करते, तो जरूर  हम उसका Îवागत 
करते।  
 सर, हमारे देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा बहुत बड़ी है, िफर भी हमारे देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा आज भी 
कजर् मȂ ड ूबी हुई है।  भारत सरकार पर आज भी लगभग 185 हजार करोड़ का कजर् है, िफर भी 
सरकार ने क ु छ िगने-चुने उǏोगपितयȗ का लगभग 16 लाख करोड़ का कजर् माफ िकया, लेिकन 
िकसानȗ का कजर् हम अब तक माफ नहीं कर पाए हȅ।  हमारी पूरी अथर्ËयवÎथा करीब 325 लाख 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
173

 
 
 
करोड़ की है और यह जो कजर् हमने माफ िकया है, यह अथर्ËयवÎथा क े 50 परसȂट क े बराबर है।  
देश क े हर Ëयिƪ पर आज भी सवा लाख रुपए  का कजर् है। 
सर, सरकार कहती है िक यह िमडल क्लास का बजट है, क ै से?  आपने 12 लाख तक की 
इनकम को इनकम टैक्स मȂ छू ट दी है, िसफर् इसीिलए यह बजट िमडल क्लास का बजट नहीं हो 
सकता।  देश की आबादी लगभग 140 करोड़ क े पार हो गई है।  उसमȂ 12 लाख इनकम पाने वाले 
िकतने लोग हȅ?  अगर आज लोग इनकम टैक्स से ज्यादा परेशान हȅ, तो जीएसटी से परेशान हȅ।  
जीएसटी का भी सीधा असर इस देश क े िमडल क्ल
ास पर हो रहा है।  लोग माकȃ ट मȂ जाते हȅ, रोज 
काम आने वाले सामान ख रीदत े हȅ और हर सामान पर कॉमन लोगȗ को जीएसटी पे करनी पड़ती 
है, इसीिलए महंगाई बढ़ गई है।  अगर आपने इनकम टैक्स क े साथ-साथ, िमडल क्लास क े लोगȗ 
क े िलए जीएसटी क े ऊपर भी कोई अच्छा पैक े ज दे देते, तो इस देश की जनता सचमुच खुश 
रहती, क्यȗिक आज जीएसटी की वजह से महंगाई बढ़ी है, जीएसटी की वजह से Ëयापारी खुश 
नहीं है और जीएसटी की वजह से एक ऐसा बहुत बड़ा वगर् है, जो अपना consumption कम कर 
रहा है।  ये सभी जो बातȂ हȅ, ये जीएसटी से जुड़ी हȅ, लेिकन आपने कॉमन पीपल को जीएसटी क े 
मामले मȂ कोई क ं सेशन नहीं िदया है। 
सर, दूसरी बात यह है िक अगर आप िमडल क्लास की बात करȂ, तो आज भी यह सर कार 
85 करोड लोगȗ को ģी राशन दे रही है, यानी ये सभी लोग below poverty line हȅ।  इसका 
मतलब यह है िक उनके  पास कोई इनकम नहीं है।  देश मȂ 15 परसȂट लोग ऐसे हȅ, िजनके  पास 
कोई काम नहीं है, वे पूरी तरह से बेरोजगार हȅ, उनका कोई इनकम नहीं है और हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी 
जी ने अपने भाषण मȂ बेरोजगारी क े बारे मȂ न तो को
ई योजना दी है और न ही बेरोजगारȗ का कोई 
नाम िलया है।  देश मȂ महंगाई बढ़ रही है, उसको कम करने क े िलए को ई योजना नहीं है।  रुपया 
िदनȗ-िदन िगर रहा है, उसके  बारे मȂ हमारे पास कोई मजबूत योजना नहीं है।   
महोदय, अगर हम ये सारी बातȂ देखȂ, तो इस बजट मȂ िदखावा ज्यादा है।  इसमȂ िदखावा 
ज्यादा है, शो ज्यादा है।  यह शो इत
ना ज्यादा है िक यह शो देखकर लोग भूल जाते हȅ, लोग 
ĥिमत हो जाते हȅ।  आप बड़े-बड़े भाषण करते हȅ, अच्छी बात है, आपकी सरकार है।  लेिकन मȅ 
हमेशा कहूंगा िक जब तक इस देश मȂ िमडल क्ल
ास िंजदा है, तब तक यह देश िंजदा रहेगा, 
क्यȗिक इस देश मȂ लड़ने वाला जो आदमी है, वह िमडल क्लास का है।  आने वा ल े िदनȗ मȂ चाहे 
वह बजट हो या आपकी योजनाएं हȗ,  िमडल क्लास को ध्यान मȂ रखकर, जो लोग below 
poverty line हȅ, उन सबको ध्यान मȂ रखकर आपको अपनी योजनाएं तैयार करनी पड़Ȃगी, 
धन्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : राउत साहब, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  Ǜी मÎतान 
राव यादव बीडा। 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, 
on behalf of our TDP Party and our leader,
 hon. Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, 
Nara Chandrababu Naidu garu, I am partic ipating in the Discussion on the Union 
Budget for 2025-26. The Union Budget, 2025- 26 marks a significant milestone in 
174
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
India's economic journey under the visionary leadership of our hon. Prime Minister, 
Narendra Modi ji and the hon. Finance Mi nister, Nirmala Sitharaman ji. This 
development-orientated Budget reaffi rms the Government's commitment to 
economic growth, social welfare and fiscal prudence.   
Sir, first, I will speak on Andhra Pradesh’s scenario as I don't want to waste 
much of time discussing other things. Firs t, I will speak on Budget allocation and its 
impact. Recognising hon. Chief Minister Ch andrababu Naidu's pivotal role in India's 
economic growth, the Union Budget 2025-26 ha s allocated significant funds for the 
State across multiple Ministries and schemes. 
 These allocations are in line with Vision  2047 of the Government of Andhra 
Pradesh, that is, Viksit Andhra Prades h 2047, which emphasiz es infrastructure 
growth, agricultural modernization, employment generation and digital 
transformation.   
As per the wish of our hon. Chief Mi nister, Shri Chandrababu Naidu Garu, I 
would like to highlight the key Ministry-wise allocation for Andhra Pradesh.  For the 
Ministry of Rural Development, the allocation is Rs.12,000 crore (MGNREGS, PMAY-
Rural, PMGSY), which is an increase of 9.1 per cent from Rs.11,000 crore in the 
previous year.  For the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the allocation is 
Rs.18,500 crore (expansion of NHs, Expre ssways), which is an increase of 8.8 per 
cent from Rs.17,000 crore in the previous year.  For the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare, the allocation is Rs.1 0,000 crore (PM-KISAN, Crop Insurance, 
Irrigation), which is an increase of 7.5 pe r cent from Rs.9,300 crore in the previous 
year.  For the Ministry of Jal Shakti, th e allocation is Rs.6,800 crore (Jal Jeevan 
Mission, Polavaram Project), which is an increase of 6.3 per cent from Rs.6,400 
crore in the previous year.  For the Ministry of Education, the allocation is Rs.8,500 
crore (new IIT, Skill Development), whic h is an increase of 7.6 per cent from 
Rs.7,900 crore in the previous year.  For th e Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
the allocation is Rs.7,200 crore (AIIMS ex pansion, Rural Healthcare), which is an 
increase of 8.3 per cent from Rs.6,650 crore in the previous year.  
As per the demand of our hon. Chief Minister, Shri Chandrababu Naidu, I 
would like to talk about the approved project s in Andhra Pradesh. The Budget clearly 
reflects the Government’s focus on infrastr ucture development, with key allocations 
directed towards infrastructure by pr oviding Rs.12,000 crore for roads under 
Bharatmala Phase-II, which is 10 per cent increase from Rs .10,900 crore in the 
previous year.  For Metro and Railways, it provides Rs.4,000 crore for Visakhapatnam 
Metro and Rail Network Expansion, which is 7.5 per cent increase from Rs.3,720 
crore in the previous year.  For Renewabl e Energy, it provides Rs.5,000 crore for 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
175

 
 
 
Green Energy Corridor, which is 8.7 per cent increase from Rs.4,600 crore in the 
previous year.  For Urban Development, it  provides Rs.5,000 crore under the Smart 
Cities Mission, which is 6.8 per cent increase from Rs.4,680 crore in the previous 
year.  For the Polavaram Irrigation Project,  it provides Rs.6,500 crore additional 
funding, which is 5.4 per cent increase from Rs.6,170 crore in the previous year.   
These allocations reaffirm the idea of our hon. Chief Minister, Shri 
Chandrababu Naidu Garu, for strong co -operative federalism between Andhra 
Pradesh and the Central Government.   I would like to quote the legendary leader Shri 
N.T. Rama Rao, who said, “Development is the right of every citizen, and governance 
must ensure it reaches every corner of the society.”   This Budget fulfills that vision by 
empowering Andhra Pradesh’s economy and in frastructure.  These initiatives support 
Aatmanirbhar Andhra Pradesh,  leveraging the Centre’s vi sion to transform the State 
into an innovation and technology hub.   
With deep gratitude to the hon. Prime Mi nister, Shri Narendra Modi, the hon. 
Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah, the ho n. Finance Minister, Shrimati Nirmala 
Sitharaman, and our hon. Chief Minister, Shri Nara Chandrababu Naidu, we 
acknowledge their steadfast commitment to  India’s progress and Andhra Pradesh’s 
development.  Jai Bharat! Jai Andhra Pradesh!  Thank you, Sir.        
                                                                                          
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) :  डा. भागवत कराड़। 
  
डा. भागवत कराड़ (महाराÍटर्) : माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपका और हमारे हाउस 
लीडर जे. पी. नƿा जी तथा पािर्लयामȂटरी िमिनÎटर माननीय िकरेन िरिज
 जु जी का आभार Ëयƪ 
करता हूँ िक इन्हȗने मुझे इस बजट पर बोलने क े िलए वƪ िदया है।  माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया 
का यह दूसरा िरकॉडर् बन रहा है।  जब उन्हȗने 2024 मȂ बजट पेश िकया था, तब उन्हȗने एक 
मिहला िवǄ मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ सातवाँ बजट पेश िकया था और अभी उन्हȗने आठवाँ बजट पेश िकया 
है।  इसिलए मȅ माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का िदल से अिभनन्दन करना चाहता हूँ।  माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारत बदल रहा है और भा रत मȂ हर क्षेतर् मȂ िवकास हो रहा है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी का 2047 मȂ भारत को िवकिसत भारत बनाने का जो सपना है, उसके  िलए हम सभी को िमल 
कर काम करना पड़ेगा।  
 
8.00 P.M. 
 
सर, मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक िजस तरह यह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े तीसरे टमर् का पहला बजट है, उसी 
तरह से यह बजट इस सȂचुरी का... 
 
176
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आपका भाषण कल जारी रहेगा।  
The House stands adjourned to meet  at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 11 th 
February, 2025. 
 
The House then adjourned at eight of the clock till eleven of the clock  
On Tuesday, the 11th February, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 10 February, 2025 ]
177

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 