Vol. 266 
     Friday, 
No. 9              06 December, 2024 
       15 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBA
TES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Lai
d on the Table (pages 1 - 6) 
Reports of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on 
Finance- Laid on the Table (pages 6 - 7) 
Reports of the Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes- Laid on the Table (page 7) 
Motion for Election to the Committee on Welfare of Other Backward Classes 
(OBCs) - Adopted (pages 7 - 8) 
Motion for Election to the Committee on Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes (SCs & STs)- Adopted (page 8) 
Motion for Election to the All India In stitute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Bhubaneswar- Adopted (pages 8 - 9) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Motion for Election to the All India In stitute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Mangalagiri- Adopted (page 9) 
Motion for Election to the All India In stitute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Bilaspur - Adopted (page 9 - 10) 
Statement regarding Government Business (page 10) 
Announcement by the Chairman (pages 10 - 16) 
Matters Raised with Permission-- 
Demand to grant more Visas to technical experts from China (pages 16 - 17) 
Concern over rising cases of non-co mmunicable diseases (NCDs) in the 
country (pages 17 -18) 
Demand to organize special classes of tr aditional sports in schools (pages 18 -
19) 
Demand for financial assistance to vict ims of devastation caused by Cyclone 
Fengal in Tamil Nadu (pages 19 -20) 
Need to improve the well-being of  employees in private sector 
companies (pages 20 -22) 
Demand to expedite the work related to  infrastructure and tourism development 
projects in Tamil Nadu (pages 22 -23) 
Demand to start superfast train from Ka npur Central to Somnath (pages 23 - 
24) 
Need to address the problem of rice mills in Punjab (pages 24 - 25) 
Concern over increasing cases of drug abuse in the country (pages 25 - 27) 
Concern over high pendency of court cases in India (pages 27) 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 27 - 55) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
E-mail   : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Private Members’ Resolution-- 
Resolution regarding Reforms in Indian Judiciary- Under Consideration  (pages 
55 -59) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 6th December, 2024/15, Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Papers to be laid on the Table.  
I. Notification of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
II. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of GeM , New Delhi; JKDFC, Jammu and related
papers
III. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of KASEZA, Gujarat ; FSEZ, Kolkata and related
papers
IV. Reports (2023-24) and Accounts of NCB, Ballabgarh, Haryana; NID, Ahmedabad;
SEPC, New Delhi; EEPC INDIA, Kolka ta; IRMRI, Thane, Maharashtra and 
related papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS  (DR. 
L. MURU
GAN): Sir, on behalf of my  colleague, Shri Jitin Prasada, I lay on the
Table—
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology Notification No. A-12013/13/RR/2016-UIDAI(E)., dated the 17
th October,
2024, publishing the Unique Identification Au thority of India (Appointment of Officers
and Employees) Second Amendment Regulati ons, 2024, under Section 55 of the
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services)
Act, 2016.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1006/18/24] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following p apers, under sub-section (1)
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: -
(i) (a) Seventh Annual Report and Acco unts of the Government e-Marketplace
(GeM), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24 , together with   the Auditor'
s 

Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 901/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Nineteenth Annual Report an d Accounts of the Jammu and Kashmir 
Development Finance Corporation Limited (JKDFC), Jammu, UT of 
Jammu & Kashmir, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1204/18/24] 
 
III.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(4) of Section 37 and sub-section (3) of Section 39 of the Special Economic Zones 
Act, 2005: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Kandla Special Economic Zone 
Authority (KASEZA), Gujarat, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 902/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Falta Special Economic Zone Authority 
(FSEZ), Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1627/18/24] 
 
IV. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(i) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the National Council for Cement and 
Building Materials (NCB), Ballabgar h, Haryana, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Brief of the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1628/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Sixty-third Annual Report and Acco unts of the National Institute of Design 
(NID), Ahmedabad, Gujarat, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 896/18/24] 
(iii) (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the Se rvices Export Promotion Council 
(SEPC), New Delhi, for the year 2023- 24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 900/18/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Sixty-ninth Annual Report and Accounts of the EEPC INDIA, Kolkata, 
West Bengal, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on 
the   Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1206/18/24] 
 
(v) (a) Sixty-fifth Annual Report and A ccounts of the Indian Rubber Materials 
Research Institute (IRMRI), Thane, Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1203/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2023-24)  of KCDC Limited, Mangal uru, Karnataka;  NCCD, 
Gurugram, Haryana and related papers 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
 
(i)  
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of th e following papers, under   sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
 (a) Forty-sixth Annual Report and Accounts of the Karnataka Cashew 
Development Corporation (KCDC) Limited, Mangaluru, Karnataka, for 
the year 2023-24, together with the Au ditor's Report on the Accounts and 
the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1214/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Centre for Cold-chain 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
3

Development (NCCD), Gurugram, Haryana, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 905/18/24] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and 
Hindi) of the Ministry of Informatio n and Broadcasting Notification No. N-
10/001(2)/2024-PBRB., dated the 13
th September, 2024, publishing the Prasar 
Bharati Recruitment Board (Procedure and Conduct of Business) Regulations, 2024, 
under Section 34 of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1014/18/24] 
 
Report (2022-23)  of the Central Agricultural University, Imphal, Manipur  
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
 
 (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(3) of Section 29 of the Central Agricultural University Act, 1992: - 
 (a) 
Annual Report of the Central Agricultur al University, Imphal, Manipur, for 
the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
 (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 971/18/24] 
 
I.    Notifications of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
II. Report and Accounts (2022-23) of NMPPB, New Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
 
(SHRI RAVNEET SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries, under sub-section (2) of Section 39 of the National 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

Institutes of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management Act, 2021: - 
 (1) I-11018/1/2023-ID., dated the 7 th August, 2024, publishing the National 
Institute of Food Technology Entr epreneurship and Management-Kundli, 
Haryana Academic Ordinances, 2024. 
 (2) I-12052/3/2023- ID., dated the 12th October, 2024, publishing the National 
Institute of Food Technology, En trepreneurship and Management, 
Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu Academic Ordinances, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1050/18/24] 
 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Meat and Po ultry Processing 
Board (NMPPB), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Board. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1051/18/24] 
 
 
Reports (2023-24) and Accounts of MANTRA, Surat, Gujarat; SASMIRA and BTRA, 
Mumbai; IJIRA, Kolkata; NITRA, G haziabad; WRA, Thane, Maharashtra  
and related papers 
 
वÎतर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पिबतर् मागȃिरटा): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ  की  एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
(i) (a) Forty-fourth Annual Report an d Accounts of the Man-Made Textiles 
Research Association (MANTRA), Sura t, Gujarat, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.  
 (b) Review by the Government on the working of the above   Association. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1263/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Seventy-fourth Annual Report an d Accounts of the Synt hetic and Art Silk 
Mills’ Research Association (SASMIRA ), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the 
year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1262/18/24] 
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
5

 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग संबंिधत िवǄ संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े 
िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
 (i) First Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Financial Services, Investment & Pu blic Asset Management and Public 
Enterprises); 
 (ii) Second Report on 'Demands fo r Grants (2024-25)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue); 
 (iii) Third Report on 'Demands for Gran ts (2024-25)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs; 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Bomb ay Textile Research Association 
(BTRA), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1261/18/24] 
 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Jute Industries’ Research 
Association (IJIRA), Kolkata, We st Bengal, for the year 2023-24, 
together with   the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1264/18/24] 
 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the No rthern India Textile Research 
Association (NITRA), Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
(vi) (a) Fifty-ninth Annual Report and Ac counts of the Wool Research Association 
(WRA), Thane, Maharashtra, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1265/18/24] 
 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 (iv) Fourth Report on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Planning; 
 (v) Fifth Report on 'Demands for Grants (2024-25)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; 
 (vi) Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 59 th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Cyber Security 
and Rising Incidence of Cyber/White Collar Crimes’; and 
 (vii) Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 66th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Performance Review and Regulation of Insurance Sector’. 
   
 
REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE WELFARE OF SCHEDULED CASTES 
AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (मध्य Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ अनुसूिचत जाितयȗ तथा अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ 
क े कÊयाण संबंधी सिमित (2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा 
िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ:- 
 (i) First Report on Action ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-first Report   (17 th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on “Implementation of reservation Policy in the 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India with specific reference to 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD)”; and 
 (ii) Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on "Role of Ministry of Personnel, Pu blic Grievances 
and Pensions (Department of Perso nnel and Training) in formulation, 
implementation and monitoring of reservation policy”. 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE COMMITTEE ON WELFARE OF OTHER 
BACKWARD CLASSES (OBCs) 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUG AN): Sir, I move the following 
Motion:- 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
7

 
“That this House concurs in the recommend ation of the Lok Sabha that the Rajya 
Sabha do agree to nominate one Member from Rajya Sabha vice Shri Beedha Masthan 
Rao Yadav, who resigned from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.08.2024, to 
associate with the Committee on Welfare of  Other Backward Classes (OBCs) for the 
remaining term of the Committee and do pro ceed to elect in such manner as directed 
by the Chairman, one Member from amongst the Members of  this House to serve on 
the said Committee.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE COMMITTEE ON WELFARE OF SCHEDULED 
CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES (SCs & STs) 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, I move the following motion:-  
 
“That this House concurs in the reco mmendation of the Lok Sabha that the 
Rajya Sabha do agree to nomi nate one Member from Rajy a Sabha vice Shri Krishan 
Lal Panwar, who resigned from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 14.10.2024, to 
associate with the Committee on the Welf are of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes (SCs&STs) for the remaining term of the Committee and do proceed to elect, 
in accordance with the system of proportional  representation by means of the single 
transferable 107 vote, one Member from amongst the Members of this House to serve 
on the said Committee.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL  
SCIENCES (AIIMS), BHUBANESWAR 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE; 
AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA PATEL): Sir, I move the following motion:- 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

              “That in the pursuance of Section 4(g) read with Section 6 (1) of the All India 
Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, as amended by the All India Institutes of 
Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, this House do proceed to elect, in such a 
manner as directed by the Chairman, one member from amongst the Members of the 
House, to be a member of the All Indi a Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Bhubaneswar, subject to the provisions of the Act.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF 
 MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), MANGALAGIRI 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE; 
AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA PATEL): Sir, I move the following motion:- 
             “That in the pursuance of Section 4( g) read with Section 6 (1) of the 
All India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, as amended by the All India 
Institutes of Medical Sciences (Amendment ) Act, 2012, this House do proceed to 
elect, in such a manner as directed by the Chairman, one member from amongst the 
Members of the House, to be a member of the All India In stitute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), Mangalagiri, subject to the provisions of the Act.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF  
MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS), BILASPUR 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE; 
AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA PATEL): Sir, I move the following motion:- 
“That in the pursuance of Section 4(g) r ead with Section 6(3) of the All India 
Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956, as amended by the All India Institutes of 
Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, this House do proceed to elect, in such a 
manner as directed by the Chairman, one member from amongst the Members of the 
House, to be a member of the All Indi a Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
9

Bilaspur, in the vacancy caused due to the retirement of Shri Anil Baluni from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2024, subject to the provisions of the Act.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted 
 
 
STATEMENT REGARDING GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, statement regarding Government Business. Dr. L. Murugan. 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, I rise to announce that the 
Government Business in this House for the week commencing Monday, the 9
th of 
December, 2024, will consist of: 
1. Consideration and passing of the Bank ing Laws Amendment) Bill, 2024, as 
passed by Lok Sabha. 
2. Consideration and return of the Appropri ation Bill relating to First Batch of 
Supplementary Demands for Gr ants for the year 2024-25, after it is introduced, 
considered and passed by Lok Sabha.  
3. Consideration and passing of the following  Bills, after they are considered and 
passed by Lok Sabha:- 
(i) The Railways (Amendment) Bill, 2024; 
(ii) The Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024; 
(iii) The Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2024;  
(iv) The Bills of Lading Bill, 2024; 
(v) The Coastal Shipping Bill, 2024; and 
(vi)   The Readjustment of Representation  of Scheduled Tribes in Assembly 
Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2024. 
 
4. Consideration and passing of the Mercha nt Shipping Bill, 2024, after it is 
introduced, considered and passed by Lok Sabha. 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I hereby inform that during the routine anti-
sabotage check of the Chamber, after th e adjournment of the House yesterday, 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

apparently a wad of currency notes was recovered by the security officials from Seat 
No. 222, presently allotted to Dr. Abhishek  Manu Singhvi, elected from the State of 
Telangana for the term 2024-26. The matter was brought to my notice and I felt it 
expedient, as per practice and ordainment, to  ensure that investigation takes place in 
accordance with law, and the same is underway. …( Interruptions)… Nothing is going 
on record. …( Interruptions)… Please take your seats. …( Interruptions)… Hon. 
Members, it was my duty, and I am obliged to inform the House. And, information is 
imparted for a very simple reason that th is is a routine anti-sabotage check which 
takes place. When it was brought to my notice, I thought someone would come to 
reclaim it. Nothing has happened this morn ing. Number one, I am not aware; you 
cannot make out from the look, whether the currency notes are fake or not.  
Apparently, denomination is of 500 rupees. The wad appears to be physically of 100 
notes. But all these are subject to seriou s investigation. And, I am sure, no one 
should be opposed to an investigation be cause this House even otherwise has to 
send a signal.   
We are increasingly getting into formal ec onomy.  Does it indicate the state of 
economy, hon. Finance Minister, that people can afford to forget! …( Interruptions)… 
Yes, speak on this issue only. I will request you to confine to this issue. 
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir, I will 
speak only on this issue. I am not going be yond that because I know that you will not 
allow if I will go beyond that. सभापित जी, मेरा एक ही िनवेदन है। आपने कहा है िक यह मैटर 
इन्वेिÎटगेशन मȂ है, इसिलए जब तक इन्वेिÎटगेशन पूरा नहीं हो जाता और जब तक आपके  समक्ष 
ऑथȂिटिसटी से यह िसǉ नहीं हो जाता िक वह िकसी एक Ëयिƪ क े पास या िकसी एक सीट क े 
ऊपर िमला है, तब तक उसका नाम नहीं बोलना है। ...(Ëयवधान)... Sir, you know; you all
 are 
all lawyers; can he do something like this!  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: And these people.. ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing is going on record. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, the 
Leader of t
he Opposition has said two things. …(Interruptions)… One minute, I have 
taken note of it. …(Interruptions)… The Leader of the Opposi tion has said one thing 
that when a matter is under investigation, w e  s h o u l d  n o t  b e  m a k i n g  a  d e b a t e  o f  i t .  
…(Interruptions)… I would greatly appreciate if this is followed. …(Interruptions)… I find 
its breach virtually every day. Everything under investigation is more the subject of 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
11

investigation in our debate. Secondly, to respond to hon. LoP, I was extremely 
concerned and, therefore, I myself ascert ained whether the hon. Member had really 
attended the House. I could not go more th an that. And, I found out from the record 
which we maintain, electronically, that the ho n. Member has, in fact, signed that he 
had come to the House. …(Interruptions)… Now, I have not made any reflection. Hon. 
Members, I cannot even say whether the cu rrency notes are genuine or not. I can’t 
even say whether there were hundred notes or not. I cannot say that. 
…(Interruptions)… Mr. Tiruchi Siva. …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Mr. Chairm an, Sir, you are the custodian of the House. Sir, we 
repose everything on you on ly. You made an observatio n. We all were silent. A 
Minister is provoking their Members to get up and shout. It is totally unfair, Sir. 
…(Interruptions)… It is totally unfair. I saw that, …(Interruptions)…  I saw that. It is 
totally unfair, Sir. Why should they disturb the House unnecessarily? 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सर, ज़ीरो ऑवर चलाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFA IRS AND THE MINISTER OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU): Sir, this is the Upper House and it is highly regarded.  
Every word spoken and every action we do here are well record ed, documented and 
people are watching. In the very initial stag e, you have observed correctly that as per 
the routine protocol checking, the anti-sabotage team checked the seats just to wind 
up the proceedings and the House. During  that procedure, the so-called currency 
notes were found. The seat number was deciphered and the Member has also signed 
that day. You have already mentioned it. But I do not understand why there should be 
objection, that the Chair should not take the name of the Member. …(Interruptions)…  
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Let us have Zero Hour. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI KIREN RIJIJU: Mr. Chairman has righ tly pointed out the seat number and also 
the Member who occupies that particular seat. …(Interruptions)…  What is wrong in 
that?  Why should there be an objection to that? Moreover, when the Members have 
agitated, there is a reason. You can’t just put the blame on th e Members who have a 
concern. Don’t you think that while we are going towards Digital India, carrying a 
bundle of notes in the House is appropriat e? Definitely, this is not appropriate. 
…(Interruptions)…   We don’t carry note bundles to the House. You don’t need to pay 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

that much of money, even if  these were genuine notes. Th at is why, it is a serious 
matter. …(Interruptions)…  I fully agree with the obse rvations of the hon. Chairman, 
that there must be serious investigation and the concerns raised by the hon. 
Members are also very genuine.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think hon. Members, the step taken at my end was minimal. It 
does not cast that I have transgressed.  It was my duty to bring it to your notice. 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Sir, you said, it is under investigation. Without 
investigating, how can you say, ‘a particular man or a particular seat’?  
…(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You are casting aspersions on the Chair.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. 
Members, I have said, it was recovered from a seat allotted to someone.  
…(Interruptions)..
 Why do you target me every time?  Targetting the Chairman is the 
least easy.  …(Interruptions)… Now, hon. Leader of the House.     
 
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): आदरणीय सभापित जी, यह जो घटना घटी है... 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह जो घटना घटी है, यह बहुत ही असाधारण घटना है और बहुत ही सीिरयस 
नेचर की घटना है। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह घटना पक्ष और िवपक्ष मȂ िवभािज त होने क े िलए नहीं है, 
बिÊक सदन की गिरमा पर एक चोट है। ...(Ëयवधान)... सदन क े कतृर्त्व पर एक तरीके  का 
ĢÌनवाचक िचÏन है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मुझे आप पर और आपकी रूिंलग  पर पूरा भरोसा है िक 
इन्वेिÎटगेशन िडटेल मȂ होगी और दूध का दूध, पानी का पानी होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ģजातंतर् म Ȃ 
क ु छ बातȂ अपने पक्ष मȂ आती हȅ, क ु छ अपने िवपक्ष मȂ आती हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप िकसी पर तीĨता 
िदखाओ और िकसी मुǈे पर िमƺी डालो, यह ठीक नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... हमारे लीडर ऑफ 
अपोिजशन विरÍठ नेता
 हȅ। मȅ expect कर रहा था िक वे कहȂगे यह इन्वेिÎटगेशन अच्छे तरीके  से 
हो। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅ भी lawyer हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI SANJAY SINGH:  Sir, Zero Hour. 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: आज जीरो ओवर की बड़ी िंचता हो रही है! ...(Ëयवधान)... Sir, good 
sense should prevail on the Opposition always. उन्हȂ सǊुिǉ
 आए और जीरो ओवर चले, 
लेिकन लीडर ऑफ अपोिजशन क े वƪËय मȂ कहीं इन्वेिÎटगेशन को pre-empt करने की कोिशश 
तो नहीं चली रही है, इसे भी ध्यान मȂ रखने की जरूरत है। इसिलए  with healthy mind and with 
healthy spirit, we should take it an d the investigation should continue, और इसकी 
िडटेल आनी चािहए। इधर क े पक्ष और उधर क े पक्ष सभी लोगȗ को इस घटना को condemn 
करना चािहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
13

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. ...(Interruptions)...  Before the Leader of the 
Opposition speaks, you have said, I have  named someone. Let me invite your 
attention that from this Chair, I am scrupulo us that nobody is hurt. What I said was, 
apparently a wad of currency notes was recove red by the security official from Seat 
Number 222 presently allotted to Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi elected from the State of 
Telangana. I did not cast any aspersion on anyone. It is a seat. ...(Interruptions)... I 
have to indicate to whom it is allotted. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: I request you. Si r, you yourself said that it will be 
investigated. And after investigation only, you can come to the conclusion. We never 
objected that you should not investigate. Have we objected? Why Mr. Nadda should 
say, ‘I am trying to suppress that matter?’ We never. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on 
record. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सर, आप देिखए िक मंतर्ी एक क े बाद एक खड़े होकर बोल रहे हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
वािणज्य और उǏोग मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पीयूष गोयल): सर, यह एक बड़ा गंभीर िवषय है, क्यȗिक आज 
wad of currency notes  िमले हȅ, लेिकन कल पता नहीं िक उस तरफ और क्या-क्या चीज़Ȃ िमल 
सकती ह
ȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... हम कई सेशन्स से देखते आ रहे हȅ िक क ै से फ े क नेरेिटव, फ े क न्यूज़ 
और फ े क आरोप क े ऊपर िवपक्ष क े नेता, सदन मȂ िवपक्ष क े नेता और इनके  सभी अनैितक 
गठबंधन क े नेताओं ने बार-बार सदन को नहीं चलने िदया, देश मȂ लोगȗ को *  करने की कोिशश 
की और िवदेशी ताकतȗ क े ऊपर ये अपने पूरे नेरेिटव को बनाते हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... ये िवदेशी 
िरपोट्सर् क े ऊपर बार-बार सदन की गितिविधयȗ को खराब करते हȅ और सदन को चलने नहीं देते 
हȅ। मȅ समझता हूं िक यह बड़ा गंभीर िवषय है। ...(Ëयवधा
न)... कहीं इसमȂ िवपक्ष की कोई *  तो नहीं 
है, िजससे आगे चलकर ये फ े क नेरेिटव को और आगे बढ़ाएं। इसके  िलए क्या िगव एंड टेक होता 
है, इन सब चीज़ȗ क े ऊपर लोगȗ को िंचता करनी पड़ेगी। ...( Ëयवधान)...  आज  जो माननीय 
लीडर ऑफ िद अपोिजशन ने कहा है, मȅ समझता हूं िक सदन मȂ इस संबंध मȂ एक रूल  बनाया 
जाए िक कोई भी िवषय िजस पर इन्वेिÎटगेशन हो रही हो, कोई भी िवषय िजसके  ऊपर गंभीरता 
से कानूनी Ģिकर्या चल रही हो, क्या िव
पक्ष आज सदन और देश को कहना चाहता है िक आगे से वे 
सदन को ठीक से चलने द
Ȃगे और कभी भी ऐसे फ े क नेरेिटव क े ऊपर सदन को िडÎटबर् नहीं करȂगे 
                                                            
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

और फ े क नेरेिटव क े ऊपर, िवदेशी ताकतȗ क े ऊपर कभी अपना िवÌवास नहीं जताएंगे। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. The hon. Minister has responded to an issue raised by 
LoP that if a matter is under investigation, that should not be debated. Fair enough. 
...(Interruptions)... But he says that it should be a general rule. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Sir, I had neve r said that. I said, when our Chairman 
is investigating ...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am not investigating. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: It is not a court. ...(Interruptions)... I never said, 
‘the judiciary’. ...(Interruptions)... I said, when you are investigating...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am not investigating. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: ... and when yo u are getting information, they need 
not bother.  ...(Interruptions)... We are safe in your hands. ...(Interruptions)... As 
long as you are fair, we are safe in your hands. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I do not inve stigate myself. I cause investigation to 
take place. For example, let me tell you... ...(Interruptions)...  I have been extremely 
careful that anti-sabotage check is very seve re because in this highly technological 
situation where chemicals are used, anyone ma y use anything, this side or that side.  
The first and foremost is security. From that perspective, it was done. 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, जब वह इंिसडȂट हुआ था, गैलरी से कोई नीचे उतरा, तब िकतने िदन 
इन्हȗने हाउस नहीं चलने िदया था। ...(Ëयवधान)... तब भी तो वह investigate हो रहा था, तब 
िकतने िदन
 इन्हȗने हाउस नहीं चलने िदया था। ...(Ëयवधान)... लीडसर् को यह तय करना चािहए 
िक हाउस को चलने द
Ȃगे। माननीय सदÎयȗ और नेताओं को यह तय करना चािहए िक ज़ीरो ऑवर 
हम सबकी संपिǄ है, तो ये संतुÍट करȂ िक आगे से हर बार ज़ीरो ऑवर मȂ कभी disturb नहीं 
करȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... क्वेÌचन ऑवर उतना ही जरूरी  ह ै, गवनर्मȂट का Legislative Business 
उतना ही जरूरी  है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Final word from Leader of the House. ...(Interruptions)...  Leader 
of the House, final word, so that I proceed further. ...(Interruptions)... 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
15

 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: सभापित जी, आज जब िवपक्ष क े ऊपर इतना good sense prevail कर 
रहा है, तो हम सबको सवर्सÇमित से यह ĢÎताव पािरत करना चािहए िक Legislative Business 
को कभी disturb न िकया जाए और general तरीके  से हाउस की proceedings चले तथा ज़ीरो 
ऑवर और क्वेÌचन ऑवर िनिÌचत रूप  से चले। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: वह तो दूध का धुला है और उसकी िबना बात क े दूसरे क े ऊपर आरोप लगाने मȂ 
expertise है। 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, लीडर ऑफ़ िद हाउस ने एक अपील की है। हम लीडर ऑफ िद 
अपोिजशन, खरगे जी को भी उनकी उĦ की वजह से भी और उनके  experience की वजह से भी 
बहुत इज्जत देते हȅ, िफर भी वे लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस को 'िमÎटर नƿा' कह कर address करते 
ह
ȅ। अभी भी यह िरकॉडर् मȂ है। हाउस क े अंदर एक-दूसरे की इज्जत बरकरार रखना, यह बहुत 
अिनवाय
र् है। सर, अभी आप िरकॉडर् चेक कर लीिजए। आज लीडर ऑफ िद अपोिजशन ने जो 
वƪËय िदए हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)... सदन चलेगा, तो परंपरा और इज्जत क े साथ। ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसा 
नहीं होता
 है। लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस ने लाÎट मȂ जो अपील की है, अपनी पाटीर् की ओर से हम लोग 
सदन peacefully चलाना चाहते हȅ। लेिकन मेरा इतना कहना है िक उन्हȗने जो लाÎट अपील की, 
उसके  िलए क्या formally एलओपी साहब बता सकते हȅ िक आगे आप यहाँ छोटे-छोटे िवषय का 
मुǈा उठा कर हाउस
 disturb नहीं  करȂगे? आपकी तरफ से unnecessary मुǈा उठा कर आप 
हाउस disturb नहीं करȂगे, आपको भी इसका commitment देना पड़ेगा और आप यहाँ fake 
narrative खड़ा नहीं करȂगे, इसका भी आपको वादा करना पड़ेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have re
ceived one notice under Rule 267, seeking 
discussion on the problem of farmers. I do no t find the same in order and, therefore, I 
am unable to agree to that.  
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Matters raised with Permission of the Chair.  
...(Interruptions)...  Nothing else will go on record. Yes, Shri A. D. Singh.   
     
Demand to grant more Visas to technical experts from China 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Sir, private sect or enterprises from footwear and textiles 
to engineering and electronics in India have purchased huge machinery from China 
but are unable to use them productively without the help of Chinese technicians. The 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

machinery is lying idle and export orde rs remain unfulfilled. The Secretary, 
Department for Promotion of Industries an d Internal Trade, has accepted the claims 
by Indian companies that a significant skill gap exists between the Chinese and Indian 
factory supervisors and workers. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
The leaders of these private companies are of  the view that Chinese professionals are 
highly productive and less expensive.   
In view of this, the Engineering Export Pr omotion Council of India is of the view 
that more Visas should be given to Chinese experts so that the machinery in India can 
be put to an efficient use. Hence, strategi es should be designed in such a way that 
the experts are issued Visas after due diligen ce keeping in view na tional security. The 
process should be expedited.                                                                                  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri A.D. Singh: Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha).    
 
Concern over rising cases of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in the country 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI (Kerala): Sir, I rise to day to draw attention to a growing public 
health crisis in our country -- the risi ng cases of Non-Communicable Diseases 
(NCDs). These diseases, including diabet es, cardiovascular diseases, cancer and 
chronic respiratory diseases, are now responsi ble for over 60 per cent of all deaths in 
India, according to the World Health Organi sation (WHO). In 1990, this was around 
38 per cent. Alarmingly, these diseases are increasingly affecting younger population, 
particularly those in their 30s and 40s. The economic impact of NCDs is severe. One 
in four Indians has a risk of dying from an  NCD before they reach the age of 70. And 
majority of them die at young age. Every lif e lost is not just a personal tragedy, but 
also a loss to our nation’s progress, potent ial and to the family. At the heart of this 
crisis are poor lifestyle choi ces, such as unhealthy diets, lack of physical activity, 
smoking, excessive alcohol consumption and also high level of air pollution. Limited 
access to primary healthcare, lack of preventive care and insufficient early detection 
mechanisms mean many of these Non-Communicable Diseases go undiagnosed until 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
17

it is too late. Large Indian companies and Multi-National Companies in India often use 
pesticides excessively and irrationally in food production to maximise yield and profits. 
This contaminates crops, soil and water, leaving harmful chemicals in food consumed 
by the public.  These pesticide-laden foods have been linked to the rising incidence of 
Non-Communicable Diseases.   
With the rise of consumerism, our population, especially the youth, are lured 
by the Multi-National Companies into unhealthy food habits. The Government’s 
current efforts are insufficient in addr essing this growing epidemic. So, the 
Government should, with immediate effect, bring stringent regulations and ensure its 
effective and time-bound implementation. This includes stringent regulations on 
harmful food practices, banning of all health-hazard items used in food production, 
nation-wide campaigns promotin g healthy living, better heal thcare infrastructure and 
fostering a  culture that prioritise well-bein g over  consumerism. We need to ensure 
that health is not a privilege, but a promise kept for every single citizen. Thank you.    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Jose K. Mani: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharasthra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Na du), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West 
Bengal), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri A. A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odi sha), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy (Andhra Prad esh), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala),  
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).     
 
Demand to organize special classes of traditional sports in schools 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी (उǄराखंड): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ वतर्मान समय मȂ पारंपिरक 
खेलȗ को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए िवǏालयȗ मȂ पारंपिरक खेलȗ की िवशेष कक्षाओं क े आयोजन क े संबंध 
मȂ सुझाव देना चाहती हूँ, जो अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् और समय की आव
Ìयकता है। 
महोदय, आजकल बच्चे ज्यादातर इंटरनेट की दुिनया मȂ सीिमत हो चुक े हȅ, िजससे उनके  
शारीिरक िवकास और मा
निसक िवकास पर Ģितकू ल असर पड़ रहा है। पारंपिरक खेल न क ेवल 
शारीिरक क्षमता, बिÊक मानिसक दक्षता का भी िवकास करते हȅ, जो बच्चȗ क े समगर् िवकास क े 
िलए आवÌयक है। ये खेल िकसी अितिरƪ बजट या धनरािश की आवÌयकता नहीं रखते, जैसे 
कबƿी, खोखो, जो बजट ģ
Ȃडली हȅ और आसानी से Îकू लȗ मȂ आयोिजत िकये जा सकते हȅ। इन 
खेलȗ क े आयोजन से बच्चȗ को शारीिरक सिकर्यता क े साथ-साथ टीमवकर्, संघषर् और रणनीित 
सीखने का भी अवसर िमलेगा। शुरुआत  मȂ िशक्षकȗ
 को Ģिशक्षण देकर इसकी शुरुआत  की जा 
सकती है, तािक वे बच्चȗ को पारंपिरक खेलȗ से पिरिचत करवा सकȂ । इसके  िलए डॉक्युमȂटर्ी और 
इनफॉमȃिटव वीिडयोज़ जैसे माध्यमȗ का उपयोग िकया जा सकता है, जो बच्चȗ मȂ उत्सुकता और 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

रचनात्मकता को Ģोत्सािहत करȂगे। इस Ģकार की गितिविधयȗ से बच्चȗ की शारीिरक िफटनेस मȂ 
सुधार होगा और वे ÎवÎथ जीवन की िदशा मȂ कदम बढ़ाएँगे, जो उनके  समगर् िवकास क े िलए 
लाभकारी होगा। 
 महोदय, मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय िशक्षा मंतर्ी, Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान जी से िनवेदन करती 
हूँ िक Îकू लȗ मȂ िनयिमत रूप  से िवशेष कक्षाओं का आयोजन िक
या जा सकता है, िजनमȂ बच्चȗ को 
पारंपिरक खेलȗ क े महत्व और उनके  इितहास से पिरिचत  कराया जा सकता है। इन कक्षाओं क े 
माध्यम से बच्चȗ को न क ेवल खेलȗ क े बारे मȂ जानकारी होगी, बिÊक उन्हȂ इन ख
ेलȗ को खेलने क े 
िलए भी Ģोत्सािहत िकया जाएगा। गिर्मयȗ की छ ुिƺयȗ मȂ Îकू लȗ ǎारा िहल Îटेशनȗ पर समर क ȅ प 
आयोिजत िकये जा सकते हȅ। इन Ģितयोिगताओं क े आधार पर बच्चȗ को पुरÎकार िदये जाएँ, जो 
उन्हȂ उत्सािहत और Ģेिरत करȂगे और खेलȗ मȂ उनकी भागीदारी को बढ़ावा िमलेगा, धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Dr. Kalp ana Saini:-  Shrimati Geeta alias Chan
draprabha  (Uttar 
Pradesh), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Prad esh), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal 
(Uttarakhand), Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra).                               
 
Demand for financial assistance to victims of devastation  caused by Cyclone Fengal 
in Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Depu ty Chairman, Sir, th rough the Chair, I 
want to draw the attention of the Governme nt to act with urgency in addressing the 
severe and widespread devastation caused by Cyclone Fengal. The Cyclone Fengal 
emerged as a low-pressure cyclone in No vember 2024 and it brought too much of
 
rain in Thanjavur, Thiruvar ur, Nagapattinam, Mayiladut hurai and Tiruchirappalli.  
Later, the cyclone hit the shores on 1 st and 2 nd December, causing a great damage 
across. It has ravaged 14 districts, direct ly affecting 1.5 crore people, displacing 69 
lakh families and has caused loss of 40 preci ous lives, along with loss of 3,000 cattle 
and 2.50 lakh poultry. Heavy rainfall, exceed ing 50 centimetres in one day, has totally 
submerged the districts of Villupuram, Cu ddalore, Tiruvannamalai and Kallakurichi.  
There were also damages in Chennai, Chengalpattu, Ka nchipuram, Thiruvallur, 
Vellore, Ranipet and Krishnagiri.   
 The Tamil Nadu Government has deploy ed a workforce of 38,000 officials and 
1,20,000 first responders, who actively engage d in relief and rescue operations. Nine 
teams from the NDRF and nine teams from  the SDRF were also deployed. Despite 
these commendable efforts, the scale of destruction far surpassed the State’s 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
19

capacity to recover independently. So, the initial assessment shows that we need 
Rs.2,475 crores, but the State Governme nt has demanded Rs.2,000 crores as 
immediate relief from the Union Government. We are worried looking at the past 
inadequacies in disaster relief. We had asked for Rs.37,000 crores, but we were given 
only a paltry Rs.267 crores. It is very ne cessary. This has caused a great damage.  
The Cyclone Fengal requires a decisive and compassionate response.   
 I would urge that helping out at the time of need is, of course, a test of federal 
governance and federal solidarity. I would urge the Ministry of Home Affairs to act with 
urgency to demonstrate fairness and sensitivity in this issue. The Tamil Nadu Chief 
Minister has written a letter to the hon. Pr ime Minister also. So, kindly release Rs. 
2,000 crores for interim relief, which would only rescue the people. People have totally 
lost their livelihoods. So many houses have been washed out. Still, it has not been 
recovered. It is still raining there. Tamil Na du is in a very distressed position because 
of this cyclone and we have approached it in the right manner.  Now also, I would like 
to draw the attention of the House and urge the Government to kindly act with 
compassion and give relief to the States concerned. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Shri Tiruchi Siva: Sh ri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Ms. Dola Sen 
(West Bengal), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sand osh Kumar P. (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jhark hand), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. Sa smit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha) and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala).                                                          
 
Need to improve the well-being of employees in private sector companies 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal): Mr. De puty Chairman, Sir, the issue that I 
wish to bring to the notice of th is House is very important. On 20
th of July this year, a 
young 26-year-old woman, named, Anna Sebastian, suddenly died. She was found 
dead. Her mother then wrote an open letter  on social media where the mother said 
that her daughter had died because she was made to overwork in the company where 
she was working. The company happens to  be one of the big four consulting 
companies; it is a multinational company. 
Similarly, before that, in February, Satish Nandgaonkar, a journalist working 
with a very major Indian newspaper in Mumb ai, suffered a cardiac arrest. At that time 
also, his family, even the Press Council, sa id that this happened because, at work, 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

the boss allegedly was very toxic, who kept berating him and also insulting him. So, 
after these two shocking incidents, there ha s been a groundswell of complaints also 
on social media from people in the privat e sector saying that presently, at many 
places, there is a toxic work culture, a wo rk culture where employees are made to 
work for long hours and are subjected to insu lts. A lot of this is happening in private 
companies today.  
Sir, for me also, this i ssue is very important becau se we are talking about 
private companies. Why it is important for my State is because Bengal means 
business. Today, this is a priority for me be cause we have more than 1.45 lakh active 
companies in our State. Today, the IT sector  in West Bengal employs more than 2.6 
lakh employees.  So, the issue of reforms in private sector is very important.  
Sir, there is a reason as to why I wish to draw the attention of the House to this 
particular issue. This year, Government re venue from corporate tax was less than the 
Government revenue from income tax. Who ar e paying income tax? It is the people 
working in private companies. I will just give some examples in which they are 
subjected to a very toxic atmosphere. Ther e is no overtime pay provision in the 
contracts in India. People are made to work  8 hours, 10 hours an d even 12 hours.  
There is no provision for overtime unlik e other countries. A lot of employees, who 
work in client-facing companies, are subject  to whims of their clients, who call them 
on weekends, etc.  So, there is a need that our labour la ws regulate this. We do not 
have legislation right now to regulate it. What happens at times is that employees lose 
their jobs and unemployment happens. Today, the condition is so bad that people 
who have worked in my State of West Bengal have not been given their MNREGA 
dues. The total pending dues amount to Rs. 8,377 crores.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak on the subject.   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: These are the people who have worked.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: गोखले जी, जो आप सÅजेक्ट क े ऊपर बोलȂगे, वही िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा I यह आप 
जानते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: These are the people who have worked.  … (Interruptions)… 
When people lose their jobs, they get this sort of deprivation… …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Confine yourself to the subject. …(Interruptions)…  
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
21

SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: That is why I am saying that this toxic work culture and 
deprivation of people is so mething which the Government and this House needs to 
take seriously. People who are employed  need a healthy work atmosphere and 
people who have worked need to be paid, be it the private sector or be it the 
MNREGA workers in West Bengal. Thank you very much.                         
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Saket Gokhale: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Keral a), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West 
Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Ms . Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri Prakash 
Chik Baraik (West Bengal) and Ms. Sushmita  Dev (West Bengal), Shri Samirul Islam 
(Kerala), Shrimati Mausam B Noor (West Bengal), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Sa smit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha) and Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand). 
 
Demand to expedite the work related to infrastructure and tourism development 
projects in Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Depu ty Chairman, Sir, there has been a 
persistent neglect and inequitable treatment faced by the State of  Tamil Nadu in the 
hands of the Union Government, which has led to the stalling of various infrastructure 
works and tourism development projects. The compensation mechanism promised 
under the new GST regime was abruptly st opped by the Union Government in the 
year 2022, resulting in an annual revenue loss of Rs. 20,000 crores for Tamil Nadu.  
The Union Government's increasing re liance on Cesses and surcharges has 
severely restricted Tamil Nadu's share in th e divisible pool of taxes. In the Financial 
Year 2022-23, the Union Government collect ed Rs. 5.1 lakh crores through cesses 
and surcharges. Had these collections been included in the divisible pool, Tamil Nadu 
would have received an additional amount of Rs. 20,800 crores in just one year. 
Further, unfair limitation on State’s borrowi ng ability by fixing a ceiling of three 
per cent of GSTP has led to a loss of Rs. 8,500 crores in borrowing space over the 
last four years, which impacts Tamil Na du's ability to finance critical public 
infrastructure and welfare projects. In the Union Budget 2023-24, Tamil Nadu was 
allotted a mere 2.5 per cent of national resources, whic h is inadequate. The Union 
Government has been progressively shifting the burden of Centrally-Sponsored 
Schemes on the State Government.  
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

A classic example is affordable housin g in partnership, wherein the Union 
Government contributes Rs 1.5 lakhs per unit while the Government of Tamil Nadu 
contributes around Rs 12-14 lakhs per unit. Over the last four years, the total 
allocation for railway projects in Tamil Nadu has been equivalent to the annual Railway 
budget for Uttar Pradesh. Various major ra ilway projects have been stalled due to 
insufficient fund allocation. No mega infrastructure projects, including highways, have 
been sanctioned for the last ten years in our State. The proposal for various tourism 
development projects in Tamil Nadu, incl uding transformation of Rameshwaram 
Town, Nature Trail at Pykara, Ooty and Shore Temple Garden, Mamallapuram, has 
been submitted and needs the Union Go vernment’s immediate attention. The 
approval and works for Parandur Airport, Hosur Airport, Greenfield Cuddalore Port, 
Metros for Kovai, Madurai and Hosur, ex pansion of Kovai, Trichy, Madurai and 
Turicorin Airport has to be expedited by the Union Government. Sir, Tamil Nadu has 
long been a beacon of progress, contributi ng significantly to India’s economy and 
development. Yet, the systematic denial of its rightful resources and support has 
immensely strained the State’s fiscal health.   
 I request the Union Government, through you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, to 
address these issues urgently and provide the State of Tamil Nadu with a fair share of 
resources and support.                                                 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri P. Wilson: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand),  
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Sh ri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala) and Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala).                                                                                          
 
Demand to start superfast train from Kanpur Central to Somnath 
 
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद (उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से 
आपका ध्यान आकृ Íट कराना चाहता हूँ िक कानप
 ुर सेन्टर्ल से सोमनाथ क े िलए वाया- कानपुर 
सेन्टर्ल, हमीरपुर रोड, सुमेरपुर, रागौल, बाँदा, िचतर्कू ट, सतना, जबलपुर, इटारसी से होते हुए 
वेरावल सोमनाथ तक Ģितिदन एक सुपरफ़ाÎट टर्ेन चलाने हेतु आगर्ह कर रहा हूँ। इस रूट  पर 
सोमनाथ क े िलए कोई भी टर्ेन उपलÅध नही है।  
महोदय, इस रूट  पर रेल का आवागमन न होने क े कारण दैिनक रेल याितर्
यȗ को परेशानी 
का सामना करना पड़ता है और अन्य महंगे साधनȗ से यातर्ा करने पर िववश होना पड़ता ह ै, 
िजसमȂ इनके  धन और समय दोनȗ की बबार्दी होती है। 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
23

माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस रूट  पर टर्ेन क े आवागमन से Ģभु Ǜी राम की तपोभूिम 
िचतर्कू ट धाम, शिƪ पीठ माँ मैहर देवी सतना, महाकाल ज्योितिलȊग उज्जैन एवं सोमनाथ 
ज्योितिलȊग क े दशर्न करने वाले Ǜǉालुओं को सुगमता होगी और उǄर Ģदेश, मध्य Ģदेश एवं 
गुजरात क े आम जनमानस को रोज़गार क े अवसर ĢाÃत हȗगे एवं रेल राजÎव मȂ बढ़ोतरी होगी। 
यह टर्ेन बुंदेलखंड क्षेतर् क े िवकास क े िलए मील का पत्थर सािबत होगी। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, हमȂ पूणर् िवÌवास है िक आपके  माध्यम से माननीय रेलमंतर्ी जी 
उपरोƪ मांग क े सÇबन्ध मȂ उिचत कायर्वाही करके  क्षेतर् की जनता
 को रेल िवकास की सौगात 
अवÌय दȂगे और कानपुर से सोमनाथ तक टर्ेन चलाने की मेरी मांग Îवीकार करȂगे, बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।                                                    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shri Baburam Nishad: Shri Chunnilal Garasiya 
(Rajasthan), Shri Bal
yogi Umeshnath (M adhya Pradesh), Shri Kunwar Ratanjeet 
Pratap  Narayan  Singh  (Uttar Pradesh),  Shri  Kesridevsinh Jhala (Gujarat), 
Shrimati  Kiran  Choudhry   (Haryana),   Shri   Ram   Chander  Jangra (Haryana),  
Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh (Gujarat ), Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
(Gujarat), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Shri Dorjee 
Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim), Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), 
Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri mati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai (Gujarat),  Shri Banshilal Gurj ar (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Sh ri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel (Gujarat), 
Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhatisgar h) and Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar 
Pradesh).  
 
Need to address the problem of rice mills in Punjab 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक (पंजाब): सर, पंजाब मȂ जो artificial crisis create िकया गया, िजसमȂ 
िकसानȗ, आढ़ितयȗ और rice millers को बहुत įयादा नुकसान हुआ, आज मȅ आपके  माध्यम से 
उस संबंध मȂ क ु छ बातȂ रखना चाहता हूं। यह इसिलए
 important है, क्यȗिक यह पूरे देश मȂ जहां-
जहां खेती होती है, उससे संबंिधत है। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, अनाज को खरीदने की एक Ģणाली और Ģिकर्या होती ह
ै। 
इस Ģिकर्या मȂ िकसान मंडी मȂ जाकर अपने अनाज को बेचता है। वह अनाज मंडी से rice millers 
क े पास आता है, वहां उसकी milling होकर वह FCI क े गोदाम मȂ जाती है। FCI क े गोदाम मȂ जाने 
क े बाद िफर उसको कई राज्यȗ मȂ distribute िकया जा
ता है। अगर इस पूरी Ģिकर्या मȂ एक भी 
कड़ी को हटा िदया जाए या disrupt कर िदया जाए तो सीधे िकसानȗ, आढ़ितयȗ और rice millers 
को बहुत नुकसान होता है। यह उनके  business को बहुत hit करता है।  
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 महोदय, पंजाब मȂ इस बार धान खरीदी क े समय FCI क े गोदाम खाली नहीं िकए गए। 
उसके  अलावा िपछली फसल का जो 2 लाख मीिटर्क टन धान rice millers क े पास stored था, 
उसको हटाया नहीं गया। जब आपके  गोदाम और rice millers मȂ जगह ही खाली नहीं बचेगी, तो 
procurement hit होगा। इससे यह हुआ िक िकसान लाइन लगाकर मंडी पर खड़े रहे, उनको 
हड़बड़ी और डर क
े  कारण कई जगह अपनी फसल सÎते रेट पर देनी पड़ी। इसके  अलावा यह भी 
हुआ िक िकसान की अगली फसल मȂ देरी हुई। जब िकसानȗ की अगली फसल मȂ देरी होती है, तो 
सीधे देश की इकोनॉमी पर असर पड़ता ह
ै। आढ़ितयȗ को फ़कर् यह पड़ता है िक पहले ढाई परसȂट 
एमएसपी पर िदया जाता था, आज क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने उसको 45 रुपय े पर िफक्स कर िदया, इससे 
बहुत įयादा नुकसान है। आगर आप rice millers को देख
Ȃ, तो वे जो milling करते हȅ, उस पर जो 
बायĢोडक्ट बचता है, उसी पर फायदा होता है। उनकी milling रुक  गई। इस तरीके  से  
economic agrarian States क े ecosystem को िडÎटबर् करने का Ģयास िकया गया। पंजाब 
सरकार ने िपछले छह महीने मȂ सात िचिƻयां िलखीं, लेिकन उनका कोई जवाब नहीं आया। यह 
िरक्वेÎट की गई िक जो गुड्स की 18 टर्ेन्स ह
ȅ, उनको बढ़ाकर 36 िकया जाए। मेरा यह मानना है 
िक अगर इस तरीके  से हम established process को  disrupt करȂगे, तो मȅ आपके  माध्यम से 
देश से पूछना चाहता हूं िक क्या FCI क े process  tenderized  नहीं  ह
ȅ, क्या FCIs क े timeline 
क ै लȂडर मȂ frozen नहीं है िक फलाने महीने की फलाने तारीख को फलाने चीज़ होनी है। अगर यह 
िफक्Îड है, तो इस बार ऐसा क्या हुआ िक इस पूरी Ģिकर्या को अÎत-ËयÎत िकया गया।  क्या 
सरकार िकसानȗ से अभी भी बदला लेना चाहती है, क्या क ेन्दर् सरकार उस काले कानून  वाले 
मैटर पर अभी भी बदला लेना चाहती है? मेरा यह सबिमशन है। आपने िकसानȗ की बात मानकर 
बड़ा िदल िदखाया है ...( Ëयवधान)… आप उसका कर् ेिडट लीिजए ...( समय की घंटी)…  वह 
बड़Ãपन ह
ै। ...(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: संदीप जी, आपका टाइम खत्म हो गया है। Ãलीज़, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। संजय 
जी, आप सीट पर बैठकर न बोलȂ। 
The following hon. Members associated th
emselves with the matter raised by 
the  hon.  Member,  Shri  Sa ndeep  Kumar  Pathak :  Shri  A.  A.  Rahim  (Kerala), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal (Punjab), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shrimati Phulo Devi 
Netam (Chhattisgarh) and Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand).                          
 
Concern over increasing cases of drug abuse in the country 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी ( राजÎथान): उपसभापित महोदय, आज देश क े युवा बड़ी संख्या मȂ नशे की 
िगरÄत मȂ हȅ। यह संख्या लगातार बढ़ती जा रही है, जो िंचता का िवषय है। मादक दर्Ëयȗ का सेवन 
देश क े शारीिरक, सामािजक और आिर्थक ÎवाÎथ्य पर Ģितकू ल Ģभाव डाल रहा है। National 
Drug Dependence Treatment िरपोटर् क े अनुसार द
ेश की आबादी क े 10 से  75 वषर् तक क े 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
25

करीब 20 Ģितशत लोग िकसी न िकसी तरह नशे क े आदी हȅ। एक सरकारी एजȂसी अवैध डर्ग्स 
कारोबार का अकाल लगभग 30 हजार करोड़ रुपय े आंकती है। 2014 से लेकर 2023 जून तक 
Narcotics Control Bureau ǎारा जÅत िकए गए नशीले पदाथș की मातर्ा मȂ लगभग 100 Ģितशत 
की वृिǉ हुई है और इससे िनपटने वालȗ क े दजर् मामलȗ मȂ 152 Ģितशत की वृिǉ हुई है। सरकारी 
आंकड़ȗ मȂ नशा करने की वजह से 2017 मȂ 745, 2018 मȂ 875 और  2019 मȂ 704 लोगȗ की मौत 
हुई है और सबसे ज्यादा राजÎथान और उǄर Ģदेश मȂ हुई है। इसमȂ 30 से 45 आय ु वगर् क े लोगȗ 
की संख्या सब
से ज्यादा है। नशाखोरी से उपजी समÎयाओं क े चलते औसतन सात-आठ लोग रोज 
आत्महत्या करते हȅ।  Ģमुख भारतीय शहर अब िंसथेिटक डर्ग्स से भरे पड़े हȅ। अफगािनÎतान और 
पािकÎतान की सीमाओं से डर्ग्स की तÎकरी क
े  िलए कई मामले सामने आ चुक े हȅ। नशीली दवाओं 
की तÎकरी से भारत की सीमा-सुरक्षा को खतरा पैदा हो रहा है। जब-जब  डर्ग्स की सÃलाई की 
बात होती है, तब-तब गुजरात क े मुंदर्ा पोटर् का नाम जरूर  आता है। यह बंदरगाह नशे की सÃलाई 
को लेकर बदनाम हो चुका है। क ु छ महीने ही गुजरते हȅ िक मुंदर्ा पोटर् मȂ नशे की खेप को बरामद 
करने की खबर आ जाती है। यह बड़ा पोटर् है, जहां 21,000 करोड़ की डर्ग्स बरामद हुई है।  
 मान्यवर, इस पोटर् पर आए िदन करोड़ȗ की िसक्योिरटी जÅत होती है। ...( Ëयवधान)…  
गुजरात डर्ग्स का स
Ȃटर बन गया है और सारे डर्ग्स म ुंदर्ा पोटर् से िनकल रहे हȅ, लेिकन सरकार यहां 
कारर्वाई नहीं कर रही है। गुजरात  क े युवाओं क े भिवÍय नÍट हो रहे हȅ। मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम 
क ेन्दर् सरकार से आगर्ह करता हूं, क्यȗिक मुझे आपके  माध्यम की जरूरत  है, क्यȗिक मुंदर्ा पोटर् क े 
मािलक अडाणी हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)…  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ģमोद जी, आप िवषय पर बोलȂ। 
 
(सभापित महोदय
 पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
Ǜी सभापित: Ģमोद जी, आप िवषय पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, आप आ गए हȅ, तो अब मȅ िवषय पर ही बोलूंगा।  मान्यवर, मȅ कहना चाहता 
हूं ...(Ëयवधान)…   
 
Ǜी सभापित: म
ȅ रहूं या नहीं रहूं, बात तो िवषय पर ही करनी चािहए। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: मुंदर्ा पोटर्, गुजरात मȂ पािकÎतान और अफगािनÎतान से सीधे डर्ग्स आ रही है, 
जो अडाणी का पोटर् है। अब बताइए िक अफगािनÎतान और पािकÎतान से कनेक्शन िकसका ह
ै? 
...(Ëयवधान)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised  by  the  hon.  Member,  Shri  Pramod  Tiwari :  Shri A.  A.  Rahim (Kerala), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

(Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharas htra), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jhark hand), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana),  Shri  Neeraj  Dangi  (Rajasthan),  Shri  Tiruchi  Siva (Tamil Nadu), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan).  
 
Concern over high pendency of court cases in India 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Sir, I rise to place before the hon. House the alarming 
situation in the country due to high pendency of judicial cases. As per the National 
Judicial Data Grid of India, there are mo re than 4.5 crore cases  pending in various 
courts in India as on date. Out of those 4.5 crore pending cases, about 60 lakh cases 
are presently pending in different High Courts and more than 82,000 cases are 
pending in the Supreme Court of India. Th ere are various reasons for it, apart from 
inadequate strength of Judges, judicial vacancies, procedural delays, etc. I am not 
here to talk about the problems but to ta lk about the solution s. The solution is 
implementation of the National Litigation Policy which has been pending since 2010. I 
hope that the Government will take due cour se of action and ensure implementation 
of the National Litigation Policy. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) associated himself 
with the matter raised by hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra.                           
Now, Zero Hour.  Hon. Members, from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m., we will take up the 
remaining Zero Hour mentions. Is it okay? Is it the sense of the House? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. Good.   
 
 
12.00 Noon 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question Hour.   
 
Steps to enhance farmers’ income 
 
*121. SHRI JOSE K. MANI: Will the Mi nister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
27

WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) the steps taken by Government to e nhance the income of farmers across the
country;
(b) in what manner the implementation of Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) has
contributed to farmers' income growth in the last three years; and
(c) whether any new initiatives are under consideration to promote alternati ve income
sources such as agri-tourism or allied activities?
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE (SHRI SHIVRAJ 
SINGH CHOUHAN): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table of the house. 
Statement 
(a) Government of India’s commitment to fa rmers and making farming more
remunerative have led to adoption of a num ber of measures starting with designating
this Ministry as Ministry of Agriculture & Fa rmers Welfare in 2015 with focus only on
farmers. There has been an unprecedented enhanc ement in budget allocation. In the
year 2013-14 the budget allocation of Depart ment of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare
was only 21933.50 crore. This has increased by more than 5.59 time to Rs. 122528.77
crore in 2024-25.
Scheme/programmes run by Department of Agricult ure and Farmers Welfare 
for overall growth of farmers are as under:  
Central Sector Schemes: 
1. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN)
2. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMF BY)/Restructured Weather Based
Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS)
3. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM-KMY)
4. Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF)
5. Formation and Promotion of 10,000 Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs)
6. Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay Sanrakshan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA)
7. Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS)
8. National Bee Keeping and Honey Mission (NBHM)
9. Agri Fund for Start-Ups & Rural Enterprises' (AgriSURE)
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

Central Sponsored Schemes: 
National Mission on Natural Farming 
Krishonnati Yojana 
1. National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM)
2. National Mission on Edible Oil-Oil Seeds (NMEO-OS)
3. National Mission on Edible Oil-Oil palm (NMEO-OP)
4. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH)
5. Digital Agriculture Mission
6. Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region
(MOVCDNER)
7. Sub-Mission on Agricultural Extension (SMAE)
8. Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Ma rketing -National Agriculture Market
(ISAM-eNAM)
9. Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing-Others (ISAM-Others)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) 
1. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana- DPR (RKVY-DPR)
2. Paramparagat Krishi VikasYojana (PKVY)
3. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC)
4. Soil Health and Fertility
5. Rainfed Area Development (RAD)
6. Agroforestry
7. Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM)
8. Crop Residue Management (CRM)
9. Crop Diversification Programme (CDP)
(b) Government fixes Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for 22 mandated agricultural
crops and Fair & Rem
unerative Price (FRP) for sugarcane on the basis of the
recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP), after
considering the views of State Governme nts and Central Ministries/Departments
concerned. The 22 mandated  crops include 14  Kharif crops viz. paddy, jowar, bajra,
maize, ragi, tur (arhar), m oong, urad, groundnut, soyabean, sunflower, sesamum,
nigerseed, cotton and 6 Rabi crops viz. wheat, barley, gram, masur (lentil),
rapeseed & mustard, safflower and two commercial crops viz. jute and copra.
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
29

The Union Budget for 2018-19 had announced the pre-det ermined principle to 
keep Minimum Support Price (MSP) at levels of one and half times of the cost of 
production. Accordingly, Government had increased MSP for all mandated Kharif, 
Rabi and other Commercial crops with a mini mum return of 50 percent over all India 
weighted average cost of production from  year 2018-19 onwards. Farmers of the 
country are benefited from the successful implementation of increased MSP. 
Minimum Support Price fixed by the Government during last ten years is given 
at Annexure-I and a summary sheet regarding procurement on MSP and amount paid 
to farmers is at Annexure-II.  
Studies to Assess Farmers Income 
i. The NITI Aayog (erstwhile Planning  Commission) has conducted a study
entitled Efficacy of minimum support prices on farmers ”, in 2016. The study has
found, among other things, that MSP declared by the Government has encouraged
78% of the farmers covered under the st udy for adopting improved methods of
farming such as high yielding varieties of  seeds, organic manure, chemical fertilizer,
pesticides and improved methods of harvesting etc.
ii. Indian Council on Agricultural Research  (ICAR) has released a compilation of
success stories of 75,000 farmers who have increased their income more than two
times by convergence of schemes being operated by Ministry of Agriculture & FW
and the allied Ministries/Departments.
(c) Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers welfar e as well as other stakeholder M inistries
like Ministry of Cooperation, Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying,
Department of Fisheries and Ministry of Rural Development etc., have launched
various schemes/programmes to make agri culture more remunerative and farmers
may get maximum benefit.
       Regarding Agri Tourism, there is no proposal under consideration in DA&FW in 
this regard.  
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

Annexure-I 
Minimum Support Price 
(Marketing Season-wise)(₹/quintal) 
Sl. 
No. 
Commodities 
KMS 
2013-
14 
KMS 
2014-
15 
KMS 
2015-
16 
KMS 
2016-
17 
KMS 
2017-
18 
KMS 
2018-
19 
KMS 
2019-
20 
KMS 
2020- 
21 
KMS 
2021- 
22 
KMS 
2022- 
23 
KMS 
2023- 
24 
KMS 
2024- 
25 
% increase 
2013-14 to 
2024-25 
KHARIF 
CROPS 
1 
Paddy 
(Common) 1310 1360 1410 1470 1550 1750 18 15 1868 1940 2040 2183 2300 75.57 
Paddy  
(Grade ‘A’) 1345 1400 1450 1510 1590 1770 1 835 1888 1960 2060 2203 2320 72.49 
2 Jowar (Hybrid) 1500 1530 1570 1625 1700 2430 2550 26 20 2738 2970 3180 3371 124.73 
Jowar 
(Maldandi)  1520 1550 1590 1650 1725 2450 2570 2640 2758 2990 3225 3421 125.07 
3 Bajra 1250 1250 1275 1330 1425 1950 2000 2150 2250 2350 2500 2625 110.00 
4 Ragi 1500 1550 1650 1725 1900 2897 3150 3295 3377 3578 3846 4290 186.00 
5 Maize 1310 1310 1325 1365 1425 1700 1760 1850  1870 1962 2090 2225 69.85 
6 Arhar(Tur) 4300 4350 4 625 5050 5450 5675 5800 60 00 6300 6600 7000 7550 75.58 
7 Moong 4500 4600 4850 5225 5575 6975 7050 7196 7275 7755 8558 8682 92.93 
8 Urad 4300 4350 4625 5000 5400 5600 5700 6000 6300 66 00 6950 7400 72.09 
9 
Cotton  
(Medium Staple ) 3700 3750 3800 3860 4020 5150 52 55 5515 5726 6080 6620 7121 92.46 
Cotton  
(Long Staple )
  4000 4050 4100 4160 4320 5450 5550 5825 6025 6380 7020 7521 88.03 
10 Groundnut 4000 4000 4030 4220 4450 4890 5090 5275 5550 5850 6377 6783 69.58 
11 Sunflower Seed 3700 3750 3800 3950 41 00 5388 5650 5885 6015 6400 6760 7280 96.76 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
31

12 
Soyabean 
Yellow 2560 2560 2600 2775 3050 3399 3710 38 80 3950 4300 4600 4892 91.09 
13 Sesamum 4500 4600 4700 5000 5300 6249 6485 6855 7307 7830 8635 9267 105.93 
14 Nigerseed 3500 3600 36 50 3825 4050 5877 5940 6695 6930 7287 7734 8717 149.06 
RABI CROPS 
RMS 
2014-
15 
RMS 
2015-
16 
RMS 
2016-
17 
RMS 
2017-
18 
RMS 
2018-
19 
RMS 
2019-
20 
RMS 
2020-
21 
RMS 
2021-
22 
RMS 
2022-
23 
RMS 
2023-
24 
RMS 
2024-
25 
RMS 
2025-
26 
% increase 
2014-15 to 
2025-26 
15 Wheat 1400 1450 1525 1625 1735 1840  1925 1975 2015 2125 2275 2425 73.21 
16 Barley 1100 1150 1225 1325 1410 1440  1525 1600 1635 1 735 1850 1980 80 
17 Gram 3100 3175 3500 4000 4400 4 620 4875 5100 5230 5335 5440 5650 82.26 
18 Masur 2950 3075 3400 3950 4250 4475 4800 5100 5500 6000 6425 6700 127.12 
19 
Rapeseed & 
mustard 3050 3100 3350 3700 4000 4200 44 25 4650 5050 5450 5650 5950 95.08 
20 Safflower 3000 3050 3300 3700 4100 49 45 5215 5327 5441 5650 5800 5940 98.00 
COMMERCIAL 
CROPS 
2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 
2021-
22 
2022-
23 
2023-
24 
2024-
25 
% increase 
2013-14 to 
2024-25 
21 Jute 2300 2400 2700 3200 3500 3700 39 50 4225 4500 4750 5050 5335 131.96 
2013 2014 
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 % increase 
2013 to 2024 
22 Copra (Milling) 5250 5250 5550 5950 6500 75 11 9521 9960 10335 10590 10860 11160 112.57 
 Copra (ball) 5500 5500 5830 6240 6785 7750 9920 10300 10600 11000  11750 12000 118.18 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Annexure - II 
 
Summary Sheet 
A B C D E = D - C  F = 
E/C*100 
G = D / 
C 
Commodity Variety  2004-14 2014-24 Absolute 
increase 
% 
Increase  
Number 
of times 
Increase  
Procurement of MSP Crops (In LMT)  
Total Kharif (1) 4678.93 7095.42 2416.49 51.65 1.52 
Total Rabi (2) 2302.09 3228.62 926.53 40.25 1.40 
Grand Total = (1) + (2)  6981.02 10324.04 3343.02 47.88 1.48 
MSP Amount Paid to Farmers (In Rs. Lakhs Crores)  
Total Kharif (1) 4.75 14.04 9.29 195.66 2.96 
Total Rabi (2) 2.65 6.50 3.85 145.52 2.46 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI: Sir, during the month of August, in answer to a question in 
Parliament, it was mentioned that out of the procurement of 22 crops, the major 
chunk, about 98 per cent, was the procuremen t of wheat and rice.  Six crops have 
zero procurement and the rest is about le ss than one per cent of the procurement. 
That shows the failure of the particular  scheme. There is a huge gap between the 
income of farmers and the organized sector, and this gap is widening.  For example, 
price of paddy in Kerala during 1968 was Rs.1.40 per kilogram. In 2023, price of 
paddy was Rs.28.20 per kilogram. It has incr eased 19 times.  At the same time, the 
basic pay of the last grade worker in the State Administration was Rs.70 during 1968. 
It went up to Rs.23,000 by now. It has increased 328 times. It is the same story for 
other States also. The gap between the haves and the have-nots and the farmers is 
increasing.  My question to the Minister is: In order to provide a decent income to the 
farmers at par with salary and income in the organized sector, has the Government 
any plan to change the Minimum Support Pr ice to Decent Remunerative Price, DRP, 
so that the income of farmers increases and comes at par with increase in general 
income?  
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
33

 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, क ृिष भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा की रीढ़ है और 
िकसान उसकी आत्मा। Ģधानमंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार िकसानȗ को लाभकारी 
मूÊय देने क े िलए लगातार Ģितबǉ है। माननीय सभापित महोदय, सबसे पहले तो मȅ यह कहना 
चाहूंगा िक 2015 मȂ इस मंतर्ालय का नाम क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय रखा गया था। इससे 
पहले िकसान कÊयाण का कोई संबंध ही नहीं था।  
महोदय, बजट आवंटन मȂ अभूतपूवर् वृिǉ हुई है। 2013-14 तक यह क ेवल 21,900 करोड़ 
रूपय े था, लेिकन अब यह बढ़कर 1 लाख, 22 हज़ार, 528 करोड़ रुपय े हुआ है। माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, िकसानȗ की आय बढ़ाने क े िलए इस सरकार की 6 स
ूतर्ीय रणनीित है। इसमȂ नÇबर 1 पर 
उत्पादन बढ़ाना है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम स े सदन को आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूं िक उत्पादन बढ़ाने क े 
िलए, अच्छे बीज बनाने क े िलए आईसीएआर अब और पूरी ताकत क े साथ इस िदशा मȂ Ģयत्न 
करेगा। सूÑम िंसचाई की ËयवÎथा हो या फिर्टलाइज़र सिÅसडी देने का मामला हो, मȅ इसके  
िवÎतार मȂ नहीं जा रहा हूं, लेिकन यह बताना चाहता ह
ूं िक भारत सरकार ने Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ उत्पादन की लागत कम करने का Ģयत्न सदैव िकया है। आप जानते हȅ िक 
िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् क े माध्यम से कम Åयाज की दरȗ पर उसे ऋण देने का सवाल रहा हो - 
उत्पादन का ठीक दाम देने क े िलए हमारे िवǎान िमतर् बता रहे थे, व
े एमएसपी की चचार् कर रहे 
थे।  
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहूँगा िक एमएसपी तब देते हȅ, जब 
एमएसपी की दरȗ से नीची दरȗ पर अनाज या बाकी उत्पादन िबकता है। अब कई फस
लȂ ऐसी हȅ, 
जो अभी भी एमएसपी क े ऊपर िबक रही हȅ, उन पर एमएसपी देने की जरूरत  नहीं पड़ती ह ै, 
लेिकन एमएसपी पर जो खरीद हुई है, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ भी बताना चाहता हूँ। अगर मȅ खरीफ की 
बात करू ँ, तो 2004 से 2014 तक जो क ु ल खरीद हुई थी, वह 40,79,00,000 मीिटर्क टन हुई थी 
और 2014 से 2024 क े बीच 71,27,00,000 मीिटर्क टन खरीद की गई है। हम खरीद क े िलए गंभीर 
हȅ। माननीय सभापित महोदय, अगर रबी की फसल देखी जाए, मȅ यह क ु ल खरीद की बात बता 
रहा हूँ, 2004 से 2014 तक यह 23,02,00,000 मीिटर्क टन खरीदी गई थी और 2014 स
े 2024 क े 
बीच 32,29,00,000 मीिटर्क टन खरीदी गई ह
ै।  
माननीय सभापित महोदय, अगर रािश क े रूप  मȂ देखा जाए, तो यह सरकार की मंशा को 
ÎपÍट करता है। िकसानȗ को भुगतान की गई एमएसपी की रािश 2004 से 2014 क े बीच 4,44,000 
करोड़ थी और 2014 से 2024 क े  बीच यह बढ़कर 12,51,000 करोड़ रुपय े हो गई। माननीय 
सभापित महोदय, म
ȅ आपको गेहूं पर िकसानȗ को भुगतान की गई एमएसपी की रािश बारे मȂ बता 
रहा हूँ। 2004 से 2014 क े बीच मȂ यह 2,56,000 करोड़ थी और 2014 से 2024 क े बीच 5,65,000 
करोड़ रुपय े हो गई है। माननीय स
भापित महोदय, मȅ िवǎान सदÎय को दलहन क े िवषय मȂ 
अवगत कराना चाहूँगा। 2004 से 2014 क े बीच िकसान को भुगतान की गई एमएसपी 1,900 करोड़ 
से बढ़कर 91,000 करोड़ रुपय े हो गई है। माननीय सभापित महोदय, चाहे ितलहन हो, बाकी 
वािणिज्यक फसलȂ हो, अगर सभी एमएसपी की फसलȗ को द
ेखा जाए, तो एमएसपी की रािश 
2004 से 2014 क े बीच क े 7,41,000 करोड़ से बढ़कर  2014 और 2024 क े बीच मȂ 20,57,000 
करोड़ रुपय े हो गई है। यह हमारी सरकार की मंशा का पिरणाम है। माननीय सभापित महोदय, 
इस सरकार ने िनरंतर एमएसपी बढ़ाने का काम िकया है। मȅ िवǎान सदÎय को यह ध्यान िदलाना 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
चाहूँगा की 2019 तक जो एमएसपी तय की जाती थी, वह लागत पर 50 परसȂट जोड़कर तय नहीं 
की जाती थी। 2019 मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने यह फ ैसला िकया िक लागत पर 
50 परसȂट Ģॉिफट जोड़कर एमएसपी की दरȂ तय की जाएंगी। माननीय सभापित महोदय, म ȅ 
उदाहरण दे सकता हूँ। जब उधर की सरकार थी, तब एमएसपी ए2+एफएल नहीं िदया जाता था। 
मेरे पास पूरा िरकॉडर् है। इन्हȗने कभी भी लागत पर 50 परसȂट से ज्यादा लाभ नहीं िदया, लेिकन 
हम किटबǉ हȅ, Ģितबǉ हȅ िक कम-से-कम 50 परसȂट ज्यादा लाभ देकर िकसानȗ की फसलȂ 
खरीदȂगे। म
ȅ माननीय सदÎय को आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूँ िक िकसान का कÊयाण हमारी 
Ģितबǉता है। अगर वे चाहते हȅ, तो मȅ पूरा िरकॉडर् उपलÅध करा सकता हूँ, आ ंकड़े दे सकता हूँ। 
हमने लगातार एमएसपी बढ़ाने का काम िकया है और जहाँ जरूरत  है, वहाँ एमएसपी पर फसल 
खरीदने का भी काम िकया है। मȅने आपको आंकड़े बताए हȅ। आगे भी हम िकसानȗ क े कÊयाण मȂ 
कोई कसर नहीं छोड़Ȃगे। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary Q.No.2, Shri Jose K. Mani.   
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI:  Sir, as
 you know, the natural rubber is a strategic product and 
that the Rubber Act was enacted in 1947 sh ows the importance.  Over the last ten 
years, for the price of natural rubber, the farmers have never ever got a remunerative 
price. This is mainly because of huge impo rt of natural rubber from other countries.  
Presently, the import bound duty or the import duty of natural rubber is 25 per cent.  If 
that natural rubber is listed as an agricu ltural product, the bound duty can be 
increased to 113 per cent for the agricultur al product, average of  more than 40 per 
cent.  That would curtail the import of natu ral rubber.  Not only that, the taskforce of 
the constituted committee of the Central Go vernment have recommended that this 
should be listed in the agriculture product and it should be under the MSP also.  In 
fact, the jute and cotton, which were commercial products, have also been converted 
into agricultural product. So, my question to the Minister is whether you have any plan 
to list this natural rubber as an agricultural product.  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, अभी ऐसी कोई योजना नहीं है, लेिकन मȅ 
इतना जरूर  कहना चाहता हूं िक हम रबड़ उत्पादक िकसानȗ की समÎया पर भी गंभीरता से 
िवचार करȂगे।    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary; Shri Vaiko. 
 
SHRI VAIKO: Mr. Chairman, Sir, in this country, the worst-affected lot is the farmers. 
 
That is the fact.  I come from a village, fr om a farmers’ family. All the villages, even 
urban areas, agriculturists are the worst-af fected. Before election in 2014, our hon. 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
35

 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, thunder ed in every meeting, wherever he goes, 
that the farmers' income will be doubled wi thin a year when we come to power. But 
nothing has happened. And, the M.S.  Swaminathan Committee recommended 
C2+50, that is, the cost of production, which is C2, plus 50 per cent of the total 
income will be delivered to the farmers. But that did not happen. And, 200 farmers 
from Tamil Nadu were fasting for the last six months on roads! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary! 
 
SHRI VAIKO: The Prime Minister has never stood up for them. He has not even given 
appointment to the farmers for six months . Sir, Haryana and Punjab farmers came 
here.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your supplementary!  
 
SHRI VAIKO: The agriculturists are totally neglected by the Modi Government.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your supplementary! …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI VAIKO: So, I want to know whether Swaminathan's Committee Report will be 
implemented or not.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, जब उधर क े िमतर् सǄा मȂ थे, तब ऑन 
िरकॉडर् उन्हȗने यह कहा था िक जो Îवामीनाथन कमेटी है, हम उसकी िवशेषकर 50 परस Ȃट 
लागत पर लाभ देने संबंधी िसफािरशȂ नहीं मान सकते हȅ। मेरे पास िरकॉडर् है, िजसको मȅने यहां 
सदन मȂ रखा है।  इन्हȗने हमेशा इन्कार िकया, लेिकन ... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No
; hon. Minister.  This r ecord, you will place it on the Table of the 
House during the course of the day.  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, Ǜीमान कांितलाल भूिरया, तत्कालीन क ृिष 
राज्य मंतर्ी, इनके  अलावा शरद पवार जी, तत्कालीन क ृिष मंतर्ी, क े.वी. थॉमस जी, तत्कालीन 
मंतर्ी तािरक अनवर, राज्य मंतर्ी, इन सभी ने यह कहा िक 50 परसȂट से अिधक लाभ नहीं िदया जा 
सकता है, क्यȗिक बाजार िवकृ त हो जाएगा। माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ इसको ऑन िरकॉडर् 
पटल पर रखता हूं।  इन्हȗने कभी िकसान का आदर नहीं िकया और  उन्हȂ लाभकारी मूÊय द
ेने क े 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
बारे मȂ कभी गंभीरता से नहीं सोचा। …( Ëयवधान)...  मȅ सदन को आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूं िक 
2019 मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने फ ैसला िकया िक लागत पर 50 परस Ȃट मुनाफा देकर ही 
िमिनमम सपोटर् Ģाइस तय िकया जाएगा और वह लगातार तय िकया जा रहा है।  …(Ëयवधान)... मȅ 
इसके  बारे मȂ िरकॉडर् पर बता सकता हूं।  हम लगातार लाभकारी म
ूÊय देने का काम कर रहे हȅ।  
अगर तीन सालȗ का ही िववरण आप देखना चाहȂ, तो हमारी जो अलग-अलग फसलȂ हȅ, उनके  
संबंध मȂ आपको बताना चाहता हूं
।  …(Ëयवधान)...  
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, इनके  समय मȂ धान िजस रेट पर खरीदा जाता था, मȅ उसकी 
बात आज नहीं करना चाहता हूं …(Ëयवधान)... लेिकन इसे आज 2,300 रुपया िंक्वटल खरीदने का 
काम हमारी सरकार कर रही है।  अगर मȅ इनके  समय क े र
ेट बताऊं गा, तो यह कहते हुए 
तकलीफ होती है िक इन्हȗने कभी भी िकसान को लाभकारी मूÊय देने का Ģयत्न नहीं िकया।  
…(Ëयवधान)... चाहे धान हो, ज्वार हो, बाजरा हो, रागी हो, मक्का हो, अरहर  हो, मूंग हो, उड़द 
हो, कपास हो, मूंगफली हो, सोयाबीन हो, ितल हो या रामितल हो, इन सभी फसलȗ को 50 
परसȂट से ज्यादा लाभ देकर खरीदा जा रहा है।  इसके  अलावा कई फसलȗ मȂ तो हम 100 परसȂट 
लाभ देकर भी िमिनमम सपोटर् Ģाइस तय कर रहे हȅ।   
माननीय सभ
ापित महोदय, क ेवल इतना ही नहीं, हम बीच मȂ भी हÎतक्षेप करते हȅ।  िपछले 
िदनȗ जो सोयाबीन उत्पादक िकसान थे, जब सोयाबीन क े दाम िगर गए, तब उनके  िलए सरकार 
ने तत्काल फ ैसला िकया िक जो पाम ऑयल और िरफाइंड ऑयल आ रहा है, जो ज़ीरो परसȂट 
ǹ
ूटी पर आता था, उस पर 27.5 परसȂट ǹूटी  लगाने का काम मोदी सरकार ने िकया, तािक 
िकसानȗ को सोयाबीन का ठीक रेट िमल सके ।  माननीय सभापित महोदय, जब Ãयाज सÎता 
िबकने लगा, तो 40 परस Ȃट एक्सपोटर् ǹूटी  को घटा कर 20 परसȂट एक्सपोटर् ǹूटी  करने का 
काम इसी सरकार ने िकया।  जब चावल की कीमत ठीक नहीं िमल रही थी, तो जो िमिनमम 
एक्सपोटर् Ģाइस था, उसको खत्म करने का काम िकया
 और एक्सपोटर् से Ģितबंध हटाया, तो  इसी 
सरकार ने हटाया।  माननीय सभापित महोदय, हम 50 परस Ȃट लागत पर, मȅ कम से कम 50 
परसȂट कह रहा हूं, कई फसलȗ पर हम 100-100 परसȂट लाभ दे रहे हȅ, उसे देकर हम समथर्न 
मूÊय घोिषत भी करते हȅ।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन को आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूं िक िमिनमम 
सपोटर् Ģाइस पर िकसान का अिधसूिचत
 फसलȗ का उत्पाद खरीदा जाएगा।  यह मोदी की 
सरकार है और मोदी की गारंटी पूरा करने की गारंटी है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Manoj Kumar Jha; fourth supplementary. 
  
Ģो. मनोज क
ु मार झा: सभापित महोदय, मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी जी से एक सीधा सा सवाल है और मȅ 
सीधा सा जवाब लेने की उÇमीद करता हूं िक क्या कोई इस Ģकार का proposal है िक िकसानȗ 
की कजर् माफी क े िलए एक Ëयापक ģ ेमवकर् बनाया जाए, तािक non-institutional lenders पर 
उनकी dependence खत्म हो सके ? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: म
ंतर्ी जी, वे कह रहे हȅ िक उन्हȗने simple सवाल पूछा है। 
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
37

 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: मȅ simple जवाब दे रहा हूं। 
  माननीय सभापित महोदय, मोदी जी की सरकार बहुत दूरदिर्शता से काम करती है।  
हमारी जो योजना है, वह यह है िक हम उत्पादन बढ़ाएंगे, उत्पादन की लागत घटाएंगे, उत्पादन 
का उिचत मूÊय दȂगे, फसल मȂ अगर नुकसान हो तो  उसकी भरपाई Ģधानमंतर्ी फसल बीमा 
योजना क े ǎारा करȂगे, हम क ृिष का िववधीकरण करȂगे, Ģाकृ ितक खेती की तरफ ले जाकर 
िकसानȗ की आय इतनी बढ़ाएंगे िक बार-बार वह कजर् माफी क े िलए मांग करने की िÎथित मȂ नहीं 
होगा। माननीय सभापित महोदय, हम आय बढ़ाने पर िवÌवास रखते ह
ȅ।  यह सरकार िनरंतर 
उसके  िलए काम कर रही है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Jairam Ramesh; fifth supplementary.  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, आज कई िकसान संगठन संसद माचर् कर रहे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप ĢÌन पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: आज कई िकसान संगठन संसद माचर् कर रहे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: जयराम जी, मȅ आपको बता सकता हूँ, िशवराज जी से मेरी लंबी बात हुई है। सुिनए। 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: 
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: हमारे िकसानȗ का ददर् दुिनया क े सामने रखा।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Jairam Rameshji…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: 
*  
 
Ǜी सभापित: उसके  पहले मȅ बता दूं िक माननीय मंतर्ी जी मेरे साथ थे, जाते समय भी थे और आते 
समय भी थे। मȅने माननीय मंतर्ी जी से कहा और मȅ आÌवÎत हुआ िक देश मȂ िजस आदमी की 
पहचान 'लाडली' क े नाम से थी, अब वह 'िकसान का लाडला' होगा। मȅ पूरी तरह आशावान हूं।  
ऊजार्वान मंतर्ी अपने नाम, िशवराज क े अनुरूप  यह करके  िदखाएंगे। जयराम रमेश जी से मुझे 
उÇमीद थी िक वे कोई ĢÌन प
ूछȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... िकसान को बड़ा अच्छा लगता, अगर एक  बार 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
भी Adjournment Motion आता, लेिकन वह आया नहीं। िशवराज जी, आप बोिलए। आज मȅने 
आपका नामांकन कर िदया है - 'िकसान क े लाडले'। 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: आपको Ģणाम। 
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, आदरणीय जयराम रमेश जी का मȅ बहुत आदर करता हूं।  
उन्हȗने पूछा है िक एमएसपी क े बारे मȂ मेरी राय क्या है, तो बहुत पिवतर् राय है। हम लागत क े 50 
परसȂट स
े ज्यादा िमिनमम सपोटर् Ģाइस तय करȂगे और खरीदने का भी काम करȂगे। आपने नहीं 
खरीदा, मȅ एक-एक आंकड़ा पढ़ कर बता सकता हूं। जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, तो कभी आपने 
एमएसपी पर खरीद नहीं की। िकसान खून क े आंसू रोता था, लेिकन मेरे िलए िकसानȗ की स
ेवा 
भगवान की पूजा है और यही मान कर हम उनकी स ेवा क े काम मȂ िनरंतर लगे रहȂगे। हमने 
एमएसपी पर िकसानȗ का उत्पाद खरीदा है और अिधसूिचत फसलȗ का उत्पाद खरीदȂगे।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: और एक िदन मȂ दो िदन का काम करȂगे। 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: हम 24 घंट
े काम करȂगे और आपने जो अपेक्षा Ëयƪ की है, मेरी कोिशश 
रहेगी िक हम संपूणर् सामथ्यर् और क्षमता झȗक कर, काम करके  अपने िकसानȗ की सेवा कर सकȂ 
और क ृिष क े पिरदृÌय को और बेहतर बना सकȂ । Ģधान मंतर्ी नरȂदर् मोदी जी ने 'िवकिसत भारत' का 
संकÊप िलया है, उसी का एक रोड मैप हमने क ृिष मȂ भी बनाया है। हम उसको पूरा करने मȂ कोई 
कसर नहीं छोड़Ȃगे।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Q. No. 122. 
 
Socio-economic inclusion 
of women entrepreneurs 
 
*122. 
 DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH: Will the Minister of RURAL 
DEVELOPMENT be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the steps taken by Government in collaboration with private companies for 
socio economic inclusion of women entrepreneurs; and 
(b)  the details of Sustainable Transpor t for Rural Entrepreneurs through Electric 
Bicycles(STREE) in empowering rural wo men by providing them access to green 
mobility? 
 
THE MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT (SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN): (a) 
and (b) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
  
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
39

 
Statement 
 
(a) Government of India has ta ken up various initiatives in collaboration with private 
companies for socio-economic inclusion of women entrepreneurs. Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD) is implementing Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM) which is striving for conducive rural 
entrepreneurship environment consider ing factors like access to finance, 
infrastructure and market opportunities. 
MoRD has entered into Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) with different 
online platforms namely Flipkart Internet Pvt. Ltd., Amazon, Fashnear Technologies 
Pvt. Ltd. (Meesho) and Jiomart respectively for onboarding and marketing of Self-
Help groups (SHGs) products. Following  support is being provided by these 
companies to the members of Self-Help groups: 
i. Training to SHG members on onboar ding on online platforms, account 
management and business growth 
ii. Product cataloguing 
iii. Photography and content creation 
iv. Dedicated store front (dedicated page) for display of SHG products 
MoU has also been signed between the Mi nistry and Easytrip Planners Ltd. (EMT) 
for conducting a pilot by supporting the selected SHG members for setting up and 
managing Travel Booking enterprises in the States of Bihar,  Gujarat, Madhya 
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.  EMT provided the following support to the SHG 
members: 
i. Skill building of SHG members on ticket booking platform of EMT for air, rail 
and bus 
ii. Setting up of ticket book ing enterprise by providin g laptop and other basic 
infrastructure support. 
 
(b) Energy Efficiency Services Limited ( EESL), a joint venture under the Ministry of 
Power, and its subsidiary Convergence Energy Services Limited (CESL) have 
collaborated with MoRD to launch the Sust ainable Transport for Rural Entrepreneurs 
through Electric Cycles (STREE) program. The MoU promotes green micro-mobility 
through the supply of E-bicycles at subsid ised rates for rural SHG women to address 
their transport needs and enhance th eir outreach for economic activities.   The pilot 
has been initiated in the States of Bihar, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh. 
 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH: Sir, I would like to ask our hon. Minister 
what measures have been taken by our Go vernment to ensure easy availability of 
funds and sponsorship for the women entrepreneurs in rural India.  That’s it. 
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI: Sir, there are two ways that we empower 
rural women.  One, as being part of the SHG Group. Each member can get anywhere 
from Rs.25,000 to Rs.30,000.  And, it is  usually comprised of 10 people. On an 
average, as a group, they can get two-and- a-half lakhs worth of money. And this is 
given at an interest subversion of around 4 per cent.  So, in a sense, they get this at 
the interest rate of 7 per cent. That is numbe r one.  And, if some  of these people are 
quite successful and if they want to get additional money, independent of the SHG 
Group, they can also get a loan up to Rs.5  lakhs. Out of that, first one-and-a-half 
lakh rupees they get 1.5 per cent interest  subversion. The Government will pay this 
entire money to banks under credit guaran tee scheme, so that banks can lend this 
money to SHG members, because they ar e usually coming from the bottom of 
income strata and they do not have any se curity assets for banks. So, these are the 
two ways. Overall, over the last 10 years,  the Government has given more than Rs.9 
lakh crores worth of loans. But, before 2024, it was only Rs.22,900 crores.  So, this is 
almost 50 times more over the last 10 years. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh. 
 
DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH: My question to the hon. Minister is a bit 
longer and in two parts.  How does trai ning provided to SHG members for ticket 
booking platforms be integrated with broader entrepreneurship developmental goals? 
And, what measures are in place to track long-term success of Self Help Groups and 
manage travel booking enterprises in States like Bihar and Gujarat?   
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI: Sir,  the NRLM division has made a 
collaboration with Easy Trip Planner. This was done recently as a pilot project. And, 
this is basically a skill building for ticket booking platform for rail, air, and bus. So, 
obviously, since this is at the pilot stag e, more detailing has to  be done. And, in 
general, SHG empowerment is a continuous process. This is not something that 
happens in one day. It depends on wh ich areas these programmes need to be 
implemented or needed. We have almo st 6 lakh community resource persons 
distributed across the country to hand-hol d them, nurture them and identify the 
problems. In this process, these 6 lakh community resource persons, otherwise 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
41

 
trainers, will be subdivided ba sed on the necessary skill. If  this is related to the 
booking of flight tickets, certain subsectio n of these people will be trained and then 
they will continue to nurture them in the long run.  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: मंतर्ी जी, आपके  ऊपर बहुत भारी एमपी का Ģोटेक्शन है और वह 
एमपी हȅ हमारी िमतर् रेणुका चौधरी जी। मȅ आपसे यह पूछना चाहती हूँ:  What provision have 
you made for handicapped women entrepreneurs in your Ministry? 
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI: Sir, in general, when we combine these SAG 
(Self-help Affinity Group) members, the data is taken from the Socio-Economic 
Caste census. Obviously, anytime, SCs, STs, disabled people and women are the 
primary beneficiaries of this entire progr amme. Whatever we do, it all depends on 
their specific needs. If there is a disabled pe rson, we look at what are the things that 
they can do by themselves. We will devi se programmes depending on the needs of 
their particular area. We cannot categoric ally say that these programmes are meant 
for all the disabled people. It all depends on local necessities and needs. 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Sir, this question pertains to women entrepreneurs and green 
mobility. But, our concern is financial mobility. Apart from Self Help Groups-- I realize 
that this question is on rural
 entrepreneurs--, I feel that women-led MSMEs also form 
the backbone of economy of every State. Sir, in the last ten years, 57 lakhs new 
MSMEs have given 1.3 crore jobs in the State of West Bengal and women have played 
a very important role in it. I would like to te ll the hon. Minister that in the traditional 
banking institutions, collateral is a proble m for women. Apart from that, a lot of 
women do not have a credit history. So, I appreciate the training part, I appreciate the 
role private companies are playing, but wh at steps the Government is taking to 
overcome these hurdles with traditional banking institutions.  
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI: Sir, as I said earlier, the Government pays 
credit guarantee money to banks, so that ba nks can lend this amount of money.  For 
example, the Government can give close to  Rs. 2 lakhs worth of money and because 
of the interest subversion and because of th e credit guarantee, on  an average, they 
can save Rs. 20,000 and five installments. This  is what we do when it comes to Self 
H e l p  G r o u p s .   S i n c e ,  M S M E  i s  a  d i f f e r e n t Ministry; I cannot talk completely about 
those details. But, as far as the Self Help  Groups are concerned, we have created so 
many sub-sections of these programmes. As I said, women entrepreneur earlier used 
to get Rs. 1.5 lakh loan with no guarantee and it is based on  an individual. Sir, so far, 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
we have disbursed Rs. 9 la kh crores. Before 2023, the amount of capitalization 
support was only Rs. 1500 crores. Today, th ey have a capitalization support with a 
revolving fund of almost Rs. 46,000 crores . Today, the NPAs are only at 1.5 percent 
because of all the measures that the Government has taken. And, in addition, if you 
look at it, we have created so many pilot programmes. One of the pilot programmes 
is Drone Didi. Through Drone Didi programme, we are giving almost 15,000 drones for 
SHG members; and, with one SHG woman oper ating with drone, it will be generating 
an additional income of one-and-a-half lakh within a year.  So, these are the 
programmes depending on the needs.  We are continuously monitoring and adding 
additional programmes.  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: भारत मȂ लगभग 80 लाख मिहलाएं एमएसएमईज़ का संचालन करती 
हȅ, िजसमȂ से एक बड़ा िहÎसा गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ है। इंटरनेशनल फाइनȂस कॉरपोरेशन क े अनुसार, 
मिहलाओं ǎारा संचािलत एमएसएमईज़ का भारत मȂ कर् ेिडट गैप तकरीबन 150 िमिलयन डॉलर से 
ऊपर है, जो मेरे िहसाब से एक गंभीर समÎया है।  
सर, मेरा आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से ĢÌन है िक मिहलाओं ǎारा संचािलत एमएसएमईज़ 
का जो िवशाल कर् ेिडट गैप है, उसको िरǹ ूस करने क े िलए सरकार क्या ठोस कदम उठा रही 
है? 
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI Sir, again, this is a similar question that they 
have put. As I said earlier, so far, fo r the Government schemes, there has been 
disbursement of rupees nine lakh crores. An d, a lot of this credit guarantee fee is 
being given to banks by the Government of  India so that the banks can lend this 
money.  If you look at this entire SHG --  since they are asking about MSME and I am 
mainly concerned about SHG and rural de velopment -- this programme was actually 
started by my hon. Chief Minister Shri  Nara Chandrababu Naidu, when Andhra 
Pradesh was a combined State. But, the brand creation for this programme has been 
done by hon. Prime Minister, Narendra Modiji, over the last 10 years.  When the initial 
programme was initiated, it was even difficult to recruit women from the rural areas. 
And, that phase was completed in the first three to four years since 2014. The second 
biggest challenge was banks giving this loan  to the rural women. And, that is where 
the Government stepped in and gave this  Credit Guarantee Sc heme. Then, the RBI, 
our department, and the Ministers pushed  all banks to give these loans and 
encourage them. And, that is why we have  given loans to the tune of more than 
rupees 9 lakh crores in all these years. So, the Government is continuously doing it in 
the respective sector, and see how much we can do.  
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
43

MR. CHAIRMAN:  Q.No.123. 
Promotion of bio-fertilizers 
*123.  DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS
WELFARE be pleased to state:
(a) whether it is a fact that chemical fertilizers harm the agricultural lands;
(b) if so, the details thereof including the awareness created  among the farming
community;
(c) whether Government is promoting other forms of fertilizer like bio-fertilizer;
(d) if so, the details thereof: and
(e) the steps taken by Government fo r promoting its use among the farming
community?
THE MINISTER OF  STATE  IN  THE  MINISTRY  OF AGRICULTURE  AND 
FARMERS WELFARE (SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH CHOUHAN): (a) to (e) A statement 
is laid on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
(a) and (b) There are no  harmful effects of fertilizers on soil fertility, if applied in a 
balanced and judicious manner. However, indiscriminate and imbalanced  use of 
chemical fertilizers coupled with low addition of organic matter and neglect of micro  
and secondary nutrients, over the years, may cause  multi-nutrient def iciencies and 
deterioration of soil health.
The Indian Counc il of Agricultural Research (ICAR) , based on the results of All 
India Coordinated Research Project  on “Long Term Fertilizer Experiments” over five 
decades, is recommending balanced and integrated  nutrient management through 
combined use of both inorganic and organic sources (manure, biofertilizers, green 
manuring, in-situ crop residue recycling etc.) of plant nutrients. In additio n, split 
application of fertilizer, use of slow releasi ng f ertilizers including neem-coated urea 
and growing leguminous crops are also advocated. 
The Government  of India is implementing Soil H ealth & Fertility Scheme. 
Under the Scheme, the So il H ealth Cards are issued to farmers for providing 
information on fertility status of soils and  recommends dosages of fertilizers, micro-
nutrients, and macro-nutrients.  Further, the Soil Health Card reco mmends the 
dosage of fertilisers to be applied and the type of crop to be sown. 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Based on the soil health cards generate d, advisories are issued to farmers 
through Agricultural Techno logy Management Agency (ATMA) and Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra (KVK). In addition, 70,000 Krishi Sa khis are trained to issue soil health card 
advisories. Further, till date, approximatel y 7 Lakh demonstrations, 93,781 farmer’s 
training programmes and 7,425 farmer’s mela have been organized on the proper use 
of fertilizers to improve soil quality. 
 
(c) to (e) The steps taken by  Government of India for promoting use of bio-fertilizers 
and organic fertilizers are as under- 
(i) Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), a scheme that promotes the use of 
organic inputs by giving assistance of Rs.15,000 per ha for a period of three years to 
farmers through DBT for on- farm / off- farm organic inputs including bio-fertilizers. 
(ii) Mission Organic Value Chain Deve lopment for North Eastern Region 
(MOVCDNER), a scheme that promotes the use of organic inputs by giving 
assistance of Rs.15,000 per ha for a period of three years to fa rmers through DBT for 
on- farm / off- farm organic inputs including bio-fertilizers. 
(iii) Development of Bio-fert ilizers network production units:-  To increase domestic 
production of organic fertilizers, a new component, “development of Bio-fertilizers 
network production units” has been included under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana.  
(iv) National Mission on Natural Farming:- The Union Cabinet on 25th November 2024 
approved the National Mission on Natural Farming. The Mission has a target to initiate 
1 crore farmers to natural farming, spreading over 7.5 Lakh ha land. Natural Farming 
is a chemical free farm ing, involving livestock integrat ed natural farming methods and 
diversified crop systems. Natural farming package of practices involves use of on-
farm made natural farming bio-inputs lik e Beejamrut, Jeevamru t, Ghanjeevamrut, 
Panchagavya etc. which improv es the soil texture and its fertility, enhances the soil 
organic carbon content, increases nutrient availability to the plants, increases water 
use efficiency etc. 
Further, National Center of Organic and Natural Farming (NCONF) , under 
DoA&FW along with its regional centres (5 ) organizes various training on organic 
and natural farming as well as on- farm production and use of various kinds of organic 
and bio- fertilizers. The  ICAR also imparts training, organizes front-line 
demonstrations, awareness programs etc. to educate farmers on all these aspects. 
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has developed improved 
technologies to prepare various types of organic manures such as phospho-
compost, vermicompost, municipal solid waste compost, etc. from organic wastes 
and such technologies are disseminate d to farmers through training and 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
45

 
demonstration. In order to promote bio-fe rtilizers use, ICAR has developed improved 
and efficient strains of bio-fertilizers specifi c to different crops and soil types. Liquid 
bio-fertilizer technology with higher shelf-life has also been developed. 
The Government of India not only promotes the use of bio-fertilizer but also 
ensures the availability of good quality of th ese bio-fertilizer/organic fertilizer to the 
farmers. Under the Fertilizer Control Or der (FCO), 1985, the bio-fertilizers and 
organic fertilizer are notified  and their specifications are specified. The specifications 
prescribed are mandatorily followed for manuf acture and sale of bio-fertilizer/organic 
fertilizer. Further, the quality of bio-fertilizer /organic fertilizer is regularly checked by 
taking random samples. Any violation of  the provisions of FCO invokes both 
administrative action under FCO and penal action under Essential Commodities ACT, 
1955 with punishment from three months to seven years with fine. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, my first supplem entary is this. The chemical fertilisers 
cause, among others, water pollution, acidification of the soil, mineral depletion of the 
s o i l .  T h e y  c a u s e  s e v e r e  d a m a g e  t o  b o t h  animals and human beings. Hon. Minister 
has stated in his reply that they are re commending balanced way of applying the 
chemical fertilisers as well as other organi c fertilisers.  Since the rural people are 
illiterate, they may not be aware of all these things. So, I would like to know -- 
because agriculture is a State Subject– wh ether there is any coordination between 
the Central Government and the State Govern ments, especially with the Government 
of Tamil Nadu because it is cooperating wi th the Central Government to sensitise the 
farmers to utilize fertilisers in a balanced manner to avoid these kinds of hazards in the 
field.  
 
Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय िवǎान सदÎय ने आज एक बहुत ही 
ज्वलंत ĢÌन पूछा है। वाकई मȂ, चाहे यह सृिÍट हो, चाहे हमारी धरती हो, चाहे इंसान हो, चाहे 
पशु-पक्षी हȗ और चाहे Ģाणी हो, ये सब पांच तत्व से बने हȅ और मनुÍय भी पांच तत्व से बना है।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सदÎय को और इस सदन को बताना 
चाहूंगा िक यिद मुझे ज़ुकाम हो गया, तो मȅ डॉक्टर क े पास जाऊं गा। डॉक्टर साहब कहȂगे िक 
आपको सुबह और शाम दो बार दो डोज़ लेनी है। अगर मȅ 4 बार या 6 बार उस डोज़ को लूंगा, तो 
क्या वह दवा मुझे फायदा करेगी या नुकसान करेगी? वही िÎथित रासायिनक खाद क े बारे म Ȃ है। 
महोदय, आपको ध्यान होगा िक छठे दशक मȂ वह िÎथित भी आई थी िक तत्कालीन Ģधान मंतर्ी 
लालबहादुर शाÎतर्ी जी ने कहा था िक देशवािसयो, एक िदन का उपवास रिखए। वह िदन भी था, 
परंतु हमारे वैज्ञािनकȗ ने हिरत कर्ांित लाकर इस देश को खाǏान मȂ आत्मिनभर्र बनाया। सभापित 
महोदय, मेरा िनवेदन है िक अित सवर्तर् विर्जत है। यिद िकसी चीज़ का अ
ंधाधुंध Ģयोग करȂगे, चाहे 
रासायिनक खाद हो, pesticide हो या कोई अन्य चीज़ हो तो उसके  अंधाधुं
ध Ģयोग से धरती 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
बीमार होगी। जब धरती बीमार हो जाएगी, तो िसफर् मनुÍय, पशु-पक्षी ही नहीं बिÊक Ģाणी मातर् 
इससे Ģभािवत होगा। यह वही िÎथित है। महोदय, आपको पता है िक 1984 मȂ जैिवक खेती की 
शुरुआत  क े िलए एक अिभयान चला था, परंतु दुभार्ग्य था – बहुत बड़े-बड़े नारे िदए गए, देश का 
अन्नदाता महान है। महो
दय, आपसे तो कोई चीज़ िछपी नहीं है, मȅ हमेशा कहता हूं िक इस देश 
का अन्नदाता महान है, न उसके  काम करने की कोई आयु-सीमा है, न कोई समय-सीमा है, 
इसिलए यह बड़ी खुशी का बात है िक हमारी सरकार इस धरती
 को बचाने क े िलए वषर् 2014 मȂ 
एक-दो नहीं, बिÊक तीन-तीन योजनाएं लेकर आयी।  
 माननीय सदÎय ने रासायिनक खाद को लेकर जो िंचता Ģकट की है िक धरती माता ठीक 
क ै से हो, इसके  िलए 70,000 क ृिष सखी को क ेवाईसी क
े  माध्यम से लाभ पहुंचाया है और उवर्रकȗ 
क े िलए देश भर मȂ 7 लाख टर्ेिंनग Ģदशर्न िकए गए। इतना ही नहीं, 93,781 िकसानȗ को इस 
कायर्कर्म मȂ सिÇमिलत िकया गया और 7,425 िकसान मेले लगाए गए। महोदय, ‘राÍटर्ीय Ģाकृ ितक 
क ृिष िमशन’ ĢारÇभ िकया
 गया। जैिवक क ृिष और Ģाकृ ितक खेती क े ऊपर भी िवशेष तौर पर ध्यान 
िदया गया है।  
 महोदय, मुझे यह कहते हुए खुशी होती ह ै िक हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और 
भारत सरकार क े क ृिष मंतर्ी िशवराज िंसह चौहान जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ क ृिष क े क्षेतर् मȂ िजतने भी 
नवाचार हो सकȂ, वे उन्हȂ करने क े िलए कायर् करȂगे, क्यȗिक इस द ेश क े अन्नदाता और इस धरती 
माता को भी बचाना है। इसके  िलए पूरे Ģयास िकए जा रहे हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Thambidura i, you are one of the ve ry experienced Members. 
When I got into Parliament, you handheld me .  The hon. Minister has spelt out of his 
heart what he feels. And he has, in his own style, conveyed the feelings of the farmer. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am sure, with your ex perience, you will appreciate it. Now, 
second supplementary, Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Hon. Chairman, Sir, you are a farmer, I am also a farmer and 
another farmer has replied very well. I appreciate you, Sir. Mr. Chouhan is also very 
famous. He has successfully implemented so many agricultural programmes in 
Madhya Pradesh. I am appreciating that. Sir,  through you, I want to tell the Minister 
that in Tamil Nadu there is a lot of dema nd for fertilizers, particularly, during the 
cultivation time when farmers require it. Du ring the AIADMK period, we had properly 
given the fertilizers to the farmers for cultivation during the particular season. But the 
present DMK Government is failing in it. They are not giving fertilizers at the particular 
time, and they are blaming the Central Gove rnment. They are not properly allocating 
the fertilizer which is required to be given by the Government. Is that a fact? Is what 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
47

the DMK Government criticizing correct? Th ey are not serious about the farmers. 
…(Interruptions)… They are not serious about the farmers of Tamil Nadu. 
…(Interruptions)… They are only criticizing the Ce ntral Government. I want to know 
whether the Central Government has not been allocating it properly as is required by 
their Government for the Tamil Nadu farmer s. We did everything properly during 
AIADMK’s time when Mr. Palaniswami  was the Chief Minister.  He is also a farmer. 
But now the present Government is blaming the Central Government...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: They are not properly allocating fertilizers. Is it a fact? Is it the 
Central Government’s deficiency or the State Government’s deficiency? This is what I 
want to know, Sir.  
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी (Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम 
से माननीय सदÎय को यह बताना चाहता हूं िक राज्य सरकार अपने उवर्रकȗ की िडमांड क ृिष 
मंतर्ालय को भेजती है। उसके  बाद हम फिर्टलाइजर िमिनÎटर्ी को उसके  िहसाब से आगर्ह करते हȅ 
िक इतना फिर्टलाइज़र आवंिटत िकया जाए। मुझ
े बताते हुए खुशी है िक तिमलनाडु क े िलए खाद 
की पयार्Ãत ËयवÎथा करने का काम भारत सरकार ने िकया है। इसमȂ हमने कोई कोताही नहीं की। 
पयार्Ãत खाद की उपलÅधता
 है। खाद चाहे डीएपी हो, यूिरया हो, लगातार आ रही है और हरेक 
राज्य, Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े िलए समान है।  हम सब भारत मां क े लाल, भेदभाव का कहां 
सवाल। सारा भारत एक है।  इसिलए तिमलनाडु क े िकसानȗ का भी हमने पूरी गंभीरता और िशǈत 
से ध्यान रखा है। मȅ विरÍठ सदÎय को िफर से आÌवÎत करना चाहूंगा िक तिमलनाडु को िजतने  
फिर्टलाइज़र की जरूरत  होगी, उतना िकसानȗ क
े  िलए उपलÅध करवाया जाएगा। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, नेता Ģितपक्ष ने एक बहुत अच्छी बात की है िक इधर भी 
देखो। आप ऐसा करो, मेरी तरफ ही देखो। िनयम यह कहता है िक जवाब िकधर भी दो, मेरी तरफ 
देखो। मेरे माध्यम से खरगे जी क े पास सीधा पहुंच जाएगा।   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: वे बार-बार उधर समझा रहे हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)…  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, they are diverting the issue. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, थंबी दुरै जी, उनका झगड़ा यहां पर ला रहे हȅ।  …( Ëयवधान)… हम 
डायवटर् नहीं कर रहे हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)… आप जरा सुिनए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। …(Ëयवधान)… ऑनरेबल मेÇबसर्, मȅ अपने आपको बहुत अच्छे 
तरीके  से शीशे मȂ देखकर आता हूं िक आप मुझे ही देखȂ। 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: सभापित महोदय, आपको तो पूरा सदन देखता है .. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: और मȅ भी लगातार आपकी ओर देखता रहता हूं, क्यȗिक आपसे भी 
देश को बड़ी अपेक्षाएं हȅ, लेिकन मȅ यह िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक न क
े वल फिर्टलाइज़र 
उपलÅध कराएंगे, बिÊक सबिसडी भी दȂगे।  महोदय, मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक िपछले साल 
भी िकसानȗ को 1,94,000 करोड़ रुपय े की सिÅसडी दी गई ह
ै, तब जाकर यूिरया की बोरी और 
डीएपी की बोरी िकसान को सÎती िमलती है।  2,100-2,100 रुपय े की एक बोरी पर सिÅसडी देने 
का चमत्कार नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िकया है और तिमलनाडु सिहत सारे भारत क े िकसानȗ 
को सिÅसडी द
ेकर हम समय पर फिर्टलाइज़र उपलÅध कराने का काम कर भी रहे हȅ और आगे भी 
करते रहȂगे।  सर, इतना मȅ जरूर  कहूंगा िक क ेिमकल फिर्टलाइज़र क े असंतुिलत और अंधाधुंध 
Ģयोग क े कारण जो नुकसान होते हȅ, उसके  िलए भी हम अवेयरनेस िकर्एट कर रहे हȅ। Ģधानमंतर्ी 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी उसके  िलए भी िंचितत हȅ, इसिलए हम जैिवक खेती और Ģाकृ ितक खेती की तरफ 
भी ध्यान द
े रहे हȅ। लेिकन मȅ िफर भी पूरी िजÇमेदारी क े साथ कहना चाहूंगा िक िकसानȗ को 
सिÅसडी क े साथ पूरी खाद देने मȂ इस सरकार ने न तो कभी कोताही बरती ह ै, न आगे बरतेगी 
तथा पयार्Ãत मातर्ा मȂ खाद उपलÅध कराई जाएगी।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 3, Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya. 
...(Interruptions)... I am calling you, hon. Member. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: Sir, the ho n. Minister has very rightly said that 
under the leadership of Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, our Government has 
given priority to organic farming. More use of  Urea and fertilizers is really harmful, as 
Dr. Thambidurai has very rightly said, to both human beings and animals. Organic 
farming is the need of the hour. Sir, eight States belong to the North Eastern Region 
and the North Eastern Region is the hub of organic farming.  I would like to know from 
the hon. Minister as to how much money ha s been allotted for organic farming in our 
country and, especially, what percentage of that money has been allotted for the 
eight States of the North Eastern Region? The hon. Prime Minister has always given 
priority to organic farming and has always recognized the contribution of the eight 
States of the North Eastern Region to organic farming. 
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
49

 
Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जैिवक खेती क े बारे मȂ बताया है। 
महोदय, माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने इस बार जो तीसरा कायर्काल संभाला है, उसमȂ 
सबसे पहले उनकी कलम इस देश क े अन्नदाता क े िलए चली है। वे इस धरती माता को बचाना 
चाहते हȅ, इसिलए उन्हȗ
ने अब की बार जैिवक खेती पर ज़ोर िदया है। मȅने पहले ही िनवेदन िकया 
था िक soil health and fertility, परंपरागत क ृिष िवकास योजना और पूवȘǄर क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िमशन, 
organic value chain development आिद क
े  िलए उन्हȗने तीन योजनाएँ बनाकर और काम िकए 
हȅ। उन्हȗने िवशेष तौर से पूवȘǄर राज्यȗ मȂ हर हाल मȂ – क्यȗिक पूवȘǄर राज्यȗ मȂ ऑगȃिनक खेती 
िवशेष तौर से होती है, इसिलए इसको बढ़ावा देने क े िलए उन्हȗने बहुत क ु छ िकया है।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपको यह बताना चाहूंगा िक हमारे आईसीएआर ने और हमारे 
वैज्ञािनकȗ न
े soil health card और िमƺी परीक्षण क े िलए एक नई तकनीक चालू की है, तािक 
अनपढ़ Ëयिƪ को भी लाभ हो। सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने यह कहा था - आपको पता है 
िक िकसान अिशिक्षत ह
ȅ, वे जानते नहीं हȅ,  हमारी लैब मȂ क ृिष मंतर्ालय ने  soil health card क े 
तहत …(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सभापित महोदय, मंतर्ी जी से सवाल का जवाब देने क े िलए किहए। 
...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी: मȅ जवाब दे रहा हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: वे जवाब दे रहे हȅ।  
 
Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी: आप पढ़े-िलखे हȅ, लेिकन मȅ उनके  िलए कहना चाहूंगा।  
सभापित महोदय, िमƺी की परीक्षण िरपोटर् क ै से आती है, उसने िमƺी का परीक्षण कहाँ पर 
करवाया है, िमƺी का परीक्षण
 कराने वाला कौन-सा संÎथान है, उसका नाम, एडर्ेस आिद सब 
क ु छ उसमȂ हो। उससे अनपढ़ आदमी भी जान सके गा िक उसमȂ Nitrogen उपलÅध है या नहीं है, 
उसमȂ pH की क्या िÎथित है, उसमȂ  Sulphur उपलÅध ह
ै या नहीं है,  Iron उपलÅध है या नहीं है, 
Phosphorus है या नहीं है और electrical conductivity है या नहीं है।  
सभापित जी, मȅ सदन मȂ पूवȘǄर राज्यȗ क े िलए बताऊं गा। उसमȂ Magnesium, Copper, 
Boron, Carbon, Potassium आिद ऐसी िजतनी भी चीजȂ उपलÅध हȅ, उनके  िलए िसफािरश, 
सलाह दी जाती
 है और संक े त क े माध्यम से पता लग जाता है िक आिखर क्या िÎथित है। सभापित 
महोदय, यिद मȅ उǄर-पूवर् राज्यȗ क े िलए कहूं, तो इससे 2.15 लाख िकसान लाभािन्वत हुए हȅ। 
इसके  अलावा 15 हज़ार से भी ज्यादा - पूवȘǄर राज्यȗ मȂ जो 1,270 सȅटर बनाए गए हȅ, वे इसिलए 
बनाए गए हȅ िक इन राज्यȗ को ज्यादा से ज्यादा फायदा क
ै से हो सकता है। 1.85 लाख हेक्टेयर 
जमीन को ऑगȃिनक खेती का लाभ देने क े िलए क ृिष मंतर्ालय ने, भारत सरकार ने काम िकया है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित:
 सÃलीमȂटर्ी नंबर फोर, Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी। 
 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: महोदय, मȅ आपकी आभारी हूँ िक आपने मुझे सवाल पूछने का अवसर िदया 
है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: पहले तो मȅ बता दूँ िक माननीय मंतर्ी जी शुǉ िकसान हȅ और क ृिष को पूरा समझते 
हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅन े उनकी एक-एक बात सुनी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी: सर, मȅ भी िकसान हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... िकसान की बेटी हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मȅ आपसे भी पूछू ंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ma’am, I am coming to you. आप िकसान 
नहीं, हमारी आदशर् िकसान हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान).
 .. 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, िकसानȗ की आय मȂ भी वृिǉ हो और धरती माता 
भी सुरिक्षत रहे, इसको ध्यान मȂ रखकर माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने जैिवक खेती की तरफ बढ़ने 
की ओर िकसानȗ का ध्यानाकषर्ण िकया
 , उसके  िलए मȅ धन्यवाद देना चाहती हूँ। महोदय, जैिवक 
मूÊय Ǜृंखला िवकास िमशन क े तहत, जैिवक उवर्रकȗ क े उपयोग को बढ़ावा देते हȅ, िजससे 
िकसानȗ की तीन वषș तक Ģित हेक्टेयर 15,000 रुपय े की सहायता रािश डीबीटी क े माध्यम से 
ऑन फामर् जैिवक उवर्रकȗ क े िलए Ģदान की जाती ह
ै। मेरा सवाल यह है िक अब तक देश मȂ 
िकतने िकसानȗ को डीबीटी क े माध्यस से 15,000 रुपय े Ģित हेक्टेयर सहायता दी गई है और जो 
िनचले Îतर पर आम िकसान हȅ, उन्हȂ जैिवक ख
ेती की जानकारी हो, इसके  Ģचार-Ģसार क े िलए 
सरकार की तरफ से िकस तरह का माध्यम चुना गया है? खास करके , उǄर Ģदेश  मȂ िकतनी 
सहायता रािश दी गई? मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानकारी चाहती हूँ ।  
 
Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, जैिवक खेती और Ģाकृ ितक खेती क े िलए हमारे 
क ृिष मंतर्ालय, भारत सरकार ने समय-समय पर सभी की मदद दी है, क्यȗिक िकसान को िजतना 
िदया जाए, उतना ही कम है। िवशेष तौर पर, यह मȅने पहले ही बताया था िक 70,000 क ृिष सखी 
को Ģिशिक्षत िकया गया है, जो मृदा ÎवाÎथ्य काडर् क े आधार पर सलाह Ģदान करती हȅ। 93,781 
िकसान Ģिशक्षण कायर्कर्म चलाए गए ह
ȅ और 7,425 िकसान मेल े आयोिजत िकए गए हȅ। इसके  
अलावा, जैिवक खेती क े िलए िकसान को 4,500 पर एकड़ देने का Ģावधान रखा गया है, तािक वे 
जैिवक खेती और Ģाकृ ितक खेती की ओर जाएं, इसिलए देश भर मȂ छ: करोड़, 22 लाख िकसानȗ 
को रिजÎटर िकया गया है और इसमȂ लाभािन्वत करने क े िल
ए पूरे उǄर-पूवर् क्षेतर् मȂ भी 2 करोड़, 
15 लाख िदए गए हȅ। जैिवक खेती क े िलए 4,500 रुपय े पर एकड़ तो दे ही रहे हȅ, इसके  अलावा, 
जो जैिवक खेती करेगा, उसके  िलए भी िकसान को 400 रुपय े हर महीने Ģोत्साहन रािश देने का 
Ģावधान िकया गया ह
ै।  
 
Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी: आप चȚक गए िक मȅ सवाल पूछू ंगी, लेिकन मुझे िकसानी नहीं आती है। 
सर, मȅ धरती माँ की तरफ से सवाल पूछ रही हूँ।  
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
51

 
Ǜी सभापित: मुझे लगता है िक इस हाउस मȂ सबसे ज्यादा िकसानी भागीरथ जी को आती है। खेती 
का मामला भागीरथ जी को सबसे ज्यादा पता है।  
 
Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी: सर, आपने कभी मेरे मुकाबले मȂ नहीं देखा है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मȅ इन्हȂ 50 साल से खेती करते हुए देख रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी: सर, मेरी उĦ 50 साल से थोड़ी ज्यादा है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: चिलए, आपको कर् ेिडट दे देते हȅ। भागीरथ जी, आप नंबर ट ू पर हȅ।  
 
Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी: मȅ आपको बता देती हूँ िक सबसे पहले Punukula गर्ाम, खÇमम िडिÎटर्क्ट, 
त
ेलंगाना मȂ कपास की non-pesticide फािमȊग मȅने शुरू  की। आप िडिÎटर्क्ट कलेक्टर से पूछ 
लीिजए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Renuka ji, I have respect for every Member of the House.  
 
Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी: मȅ िकसान हूँ और उसी का सवाल पूछ रही हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Bu
t the difference between natural and organic has also to be 
understood. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY: Non-pesticide farming is natural. There is a huge 
shortage of import of organic manure and fertilizers. हम िकसान क े िलए जो खाद बनाते 
हȅ, जो भी ये बता रहे हȅ, हम अपने आप वमीर् कÇपोÎट आिद बनाते हȅ। आप बताइए िक forward 
linkages की क्या सहूिलयत दी गई है?  महाराÍटर् मȂ पॉलीहाउस
 फािमȊग हुई, तो वहां बहुत सारा 
Ģोǹूस हुआ but because of no forward lin kages and backward linkages, िकसान 
नुकसान मȂ आ जाता है।  In organic farming, at the all-India level, you have to have a 
registration.  अब जो भी िंटडा, िंभडी, तोरी आिद को मािर्कट मȂ ऑगȃिनक नाम पर छाप कर 40 
गुना रेट बढ़ाकर भेज रहे हȅ...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपका सिÃलमȂटरी क्या है? 
 
Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी: हमारी िडमांड यही है। There is
 a shortage  of organic manure. 
आपका import of organic manure बहुत कम हो गया है।  आप ऑगȃिनक िकसानȗ क े िलए आगे 
जाकर क्या forward linkages दे रहे हȅ? उनकी value addition  पर िकतना दाम बढ़ा सक
ते हȅ? 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
इसके  अलावा जहां helpline और नÇबर नहीं है, वहां all-India certification for recognizing 
organic produce भी होना चािहए।  
 
Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी: सभापित महोदय, मȅ अभी भी खुद खेती करता हूं।  मȅने बैलȗ से खेती की है 
और आज भी मȅ खेती करता हूं। मȅ आपको इसके  संबंध मȂ बताना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक मुझे पता है िक 
िकसान का क्या ददर् ह
ै।  माननीय सदÎया ने पूछा है िक जैिवक खेती क े िलए क्या Ģोत्साहन िदया 
जा रहा है।  जैिवक खेती रूपा ंतरण, खेत क े  बाहर इनपुट क े िलए िकसानȗ को Ģत्यक्ष लाभ 
हÎतांतरण हेतु तीन वषș क े िलए 15 हज़ार रुपय े िदए जा रहे हȅ। जैसा िक मȅने पहले भी बताया, 
िकसानȗ को जैिवक खेती की Ģथाओं मȂ Ģिशक्षण और क्षमता िनमार्ण  हेतु 4,500 रुपय े Ģित िकसान 
िदए जा रहे हȅ। िकसानȗ को PGS - जै िवक Ģमाण पतर् क े िलए भी तीन वषș क े िलए Ģित हेक्टेयर 
4,500 रुपय े िदए जा रहे हȅ, िजसमȂ दÎतावेजीकरण और सवȃ क े िलए तैनाती भी शािमल है। 
िकसानȗ क े समूह की िवपणन गितिविधयȗ क े समथर्न क े िलए राज्यवार तीन वषș क े िलए Ģित 
हेक्टेयर 450 रुपय े Ģदान िकए जा रहे हȅ। यह योजना िकसानȗ क े समथर्न क े िलए है। जो िकसान 
योजना मȂ शािमल नहीं है, उनको भी Ģ
ेिरत करने हेतु जैिवक Ģमाणन क े िलए तीन वषș क े  िलए 
Ģित हेक्टेयर 2,000 रुपय े Ģदान िकए जा रहे हȅ।  जैिवक उवर्रक को ‘राÍटर्ीय क ृिष िवकास िमशन’ 
मȂ जोड़ा गया है।  इसके  िलए जैिवक उवर्रकȗ को पंजीकृ त भी िकया जाएगा।   
सर, मेरा
 एक िनवेदन यह है िक मȅने अभी जो आंकड़ा करोड़ मȂ बताया था, वह आंकड़ा 
करोड़ मȂ न होकर लाख मȂ है। यानी, ऐसे 6 लाख, 22 हज़ार िकसान हȅ, िजनको इससे जोड़ा गया 
है।  
     
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No. 124.  
 
Hyderabad-Bengaluru Industrial Corridor (H
BIC) 
 
*124. SHRI ANIL KUMAR YADAV MANDADI:  Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND 
INDUSTRY be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  status of the Hyderabad – Beng aluru Industrial Corridor as on date; 
(b)  the details of the funds earmarked  for implementation of Hyderabad – 
Bengaluru Industrial Corridor as on date; 
(c)  the tentative time by which the Hyde rabad – Bengaluru Industrial Corridor will 
be made operational; and 
(d)  potential employment opportunity that will be generated when Hyderabad-
Bengaluru Industrial Corridor is completed? 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL): (a) to 
(d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
53

 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) Government of India (GoI) in December, 2020 had approved Hyderabad-  
Bengaluru Industrial Corridor (HBIC) as part of National Industrial Corridor 
Development Programme (NICDP). Under HBIC , Orvakal Industrial Area in the State 
of Andhra Pradesh has been approved on 28 th August, 2024 by GoI with a total 
project cost of Rs. 2,786.10 crore (inc l. land cost) for development of trunk 
infrastructure packages. Tentative timelines for operation of HBIC depend  on various 
approvals required for implementing the project. The total construction timelines of 
36-48 months start from the actual date  of appointment of EPC contractor. The 
potential employment opportunity is estima ted at around 45,000 upon completion of 
HBIC, as per the detailed project proposal. 
 
Ǜी अिनल क ुमार यादव मंदादी: सर, अभी िसफर् दो िमनट बाकी हȅ, िफर भी मȅ जÊदी से अपना 
सवाल पूछ लेता हूं। As per the reply, the Governme nt had approved the Hyderabad-
Bengaluru Industrial Corridor in the year 2020 . Now, we are in the last month of 2024. 
Even after four years of the announcement of the project, the Government could not 
tell the time by when the project will be operational. In my first supplementary, I would 
like to know from the Minister the status of appointment of EPC contractor of the 
Hyderabad-Bengaluru Industrial Corridor project.   
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, ये तो 2007 मȂ यह Îकीम लाए थे और 2014 तक, सात साल तक इसमȂ 
क ु छ नहीं िकया।  जब 2014 मȂ चुनाव आया, तो जनवरी, 2014 मȂ ये तैयार हुए और क ु छ 
एनाउंसमȂट कर दी। ये क्या पूछ रहे ह
ȅ, मȅ समझ नहीं पा रहा हूं। वाÎतिवक िÎथित यह है िक 2020 
मȂ corridor announce हुआ था और जो indust
rial nod है, वह इसी साल 2 महीने पहले 28 
अगÎत को एनाउंस हुआ है। आंधर् Ģदेश सरकार और हमारा जो joint venture है, वह इसमȂ EPC 
contractor की tendering करेगा। हम हर एक चीज़ पारदिर्शता से करते हȅ। कोई आधा-अधूरा, 
िकसी को कोयले की खदानȗ की तरह क ु छ बांट िदया
, ईपीसी कॉन्टर्ैक्ट बांट िदया, यह हमारे 
काम का Îटाइल नहीं है। ...( Ëयवधान)... आंधर् Ģदेश की सरकार ईपीसी कॉन्टर्ैक्ट को 
पारदिर्शता से चुनेगी। उसमȂ टȂडिंरग होगी और िफर उसके  बाद उसमȂ काम होगा।  
...(Ëयवधान)... आप पहले कॉिरडोर और नोड क े बीच म
Ȃ िडफरȂस समिझए। 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
Corridor एक पूरा region होता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... एक जगह से दूसरी जगह पूरा corridor होता 
है और उसके  अंदर nodes तय होते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question Hour is over. …(Interruptions)…  I am taking up Zero Hour. 
Shrimati Mamata Thakur.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI MAMATA THAKUR:  Sir, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House is adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
 
The House then adjourned at one minute past one of the clock. 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
] 
 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ RESOLUTION 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon.  Members, this is Private Members’ Resolution.  
...(Interruptions)... आप सब Ãलीज़ अपनी जगह पर बैठȂ। ...( Ëयवधान)... माननीय 
सदÎयगण, यह Ģाइवेट मȂबसर् रेजोÊयूशन है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  यह अवसर कभी-कभी आता है, 
इसिलए आप अपने समय का अच्छी तरह सदुपयोग करȂ। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप सबसे मेरा 
अनुरोध है िक यह मȂबसर् का समय है। ...( Ëयवधान)... मȅ अÅदुल वहाब जी को ब
ुलाता हूँ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़ आप अपनी जगह लȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB (Kerala): Thank you very much, Sir, for allowing me to move a 
Resolution on this day, the December 6
th. It is an important day today.  
...(Interruptions)... * 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आप अपनी जगह पर  बैठȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  Please speak on the 
subject.  ...(Interruptions)... Only that will go on the record.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  I am moving the Resolution. ...(Interruptions)... 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
55

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अÅदुल वहाब जी, आपका सÅजेक्ट दूसरा है, लेिकन आप दूसरी चीज पर बोल 
रहे हȅ, वह िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Resolution regarding Reforms in Indian Judiciary 
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  Sir, I move:  
"Having regard to the fact that:- 
(i)   the country’s low judge-to-population ratio causes judicial officers to be under 
a lot of stress at work, which makes them prone to make mistakes; 
(ii)  as per the directions imparted in th e All India Judges Association judgement of 
2002, by 2007, there should be 50 judges per million, however, there are currently 
less than 25 judges per million in the country; 
(iii)   as a result, there are currently over  4.5 crore cases outstanding in the country, 
with over 2.5 crore of those cases related to criminal proceedings; 
(iv)   the typical case pendency in count ry’s High Courts is three years and the 
average pendency in lower courts is 6 years; 
(v)   the average number of pending cases  in the country is am ong the highest in 
the High Courts of Rajasthan, Allahabad, Karnataka, Calcutta, Orissa and Delhi; 
(vi)  the Bombay High Court has the la rgest percentage of ongoing civil cases 
(65.2%), while the Jharkhand High Cour t has the most percentage of pending 
criminal cases (75%); 
(vii)  Gujarat has the highest average pendency case count (9.51 years), followed 
by Dadra and Nagar Haveli (8.79 years); 
(viii)  one of the main causes of pendency is administrative inefficiency along with 
deficiencies in infrastructure and human resources; 
(ix) in all States, the rate at which civil ca ses are cleared is higher than the rate at 
which criminal cases are cleared, which cau ses a greater number of criminal cases in 
the country; 
(x)   
despite this, there are still a lot of vacancies in India's lower, high and other 
courts; 
(xi)   the country’s judiciary has begun digi tizing its records, but there are still many 
unnecessary procedures and a sluggish use of  technology which should be avoided 
to improve the system's efficiency; 
(xii)   because of the long processing time  and low case resolution rate, dealing with 
the Indian judiciary is sometimes expe nsive and out of reach for those from 
underprivileged and economically disadvantaged groups in our society; 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(xiii)   as per the NCRB data of 2022, it is  a matter of great con cern that out of the 
5,73,220 inmates in Indian jails, 4,34,302 (75.7%) are undertrials and out of the 
23,772 women in prisons, 18,146 (76. 33%) are undertrials and many are 
incarcerated for far longer than they would be  if they were found guilty of the charged 
offenses; 
(xiv)   it is also extremely concerning that, as per the NCRB data of 2022, over 55% 
of the undertrial population is made up of members from Muslim, Dalit, and Tribal 
communities, and many of them are underprivileged; and 
(xv)  the general public is becoming mo re skeptical in the legal system and its 
processes, and in the judiciary itself, which is raising concerns about the legitimacy of 
judiciary amongst the public,  
the House urges upon the Government to:- 
(a) raise the number of judges in both lower and higher courts to at least 50 judges 
per million people; 
(b) ensure that all courts have an effective system and procedure in place for the 
vacancies to be filled up promptly; 
(c) ensure that Indian courts quickly embr ace technological advancements in their 
proceedings and do away with redundant processes; 
(d) improve the infrastructural facilities an d enhance human resource capacities at 
the lower courts and ensure that all citize ns have the greatest possible access to the 
lower courts and legal rights; 
(e) ensure that every court makes special plans and arrangements to expedite and 
resolve the long-pending cases, especially those involving under-trial prisoners; 
(f) ensure that regular training  to handle evolving legal situations is a fundamental 
component of the judicial process, which in cludes ongoing legal education to judges 
and enhancement of use of technology by giving training to court staff; 
(g) set up an expert group to carry out stud ies to enhance the current state of our 
legal system and promptly implement th e recommendations after consulting the 
judicial community; 
(h) ensure that the Collegium encourages more young lawyers to join judiciary and 
elevate more young judges to High Courts and Supreme Court; and 
(i) encourage the legal community to instill tr ust in our nation's judicial system and 
its processes among the public.” 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seats.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
57

 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB: As per the directio ns imparted in the All-India Judges 
Association judgement of 2002, by 2007, there should be 50 judges per million.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप Ãलीज़ अपनी जगह पर बैठȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB: However, there are curre ntly less than 25 judges per million in 
the country.   ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, यह Ģाइवेट मȂबसर् रेजोÊयूशन है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   यह 
आपका समय है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  आप इसका सदुपयोग करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...     
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB: As a result, there ar e currently over 4.5 crore outstanding 
cases in the country, with over 2.5 cror e of those cases related to criminal 
proceedings.  ...(Interruptions)...  The typical case pendency  in the country’s High 
Courts is three years and the average pendency in lo wer courts is 6 years.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB
: The average number of pending cases in the country is among 
the highest in the High Courts of Rajastha n, Allahabad, Karnataka, Calcutta, Odisha 
and Delhi.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ आपसे बैठने का अनुरोध कर रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB: The Bombay High Court has the largest percentage of 
ongoing civil cases, 65.2 per cent, while th e Jharkhand High Court has the highest 
percentage of pending criminal cases, 75 per cent.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, यह महत्वपूणर् िवषय है। ...( Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। 
...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  Gujarat has the hi ghest average pendency case count, 9.51 
years, followed by Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 8.79 cases.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ आपसे िफर अनुरोध कर रहा हूँ। ...( Ëयवधान)...  
Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB: One of the main cau ses of pendency is administrative 
inefficiency along with deficiencies in  infrastructure and human resources. 
...(Interruptions)...  In all the States, the rate at  which civil cases are cleared is 
higher than the rate at which criminal cases are cleared, which causes a greater 
number of criminal cases in the country.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅ आपसे पुन: अपील कर रहा हूँ िक आप क ृपया बैठ जाएँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ 
आप दोनȗ पक्षȗ से अपील ही कर सकता हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
SHRI ABDU
L WAHAB: Despite this, there are still a lot of vacancies in India’s lower 
courts, High Courts and other courts.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅ आप सभी से अपील कर रहा हूँ िक आप अपनी-अपनी जगह पर बैठȂ।   
...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)...     
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  The country’s judiciary has begun digitizing its records, but 
there are still many unnecessary procedures and a sluggish use of technology which 
should be avoided to improve the system’s efficiency.  ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, please.  ...(Interruptions)... The House 
stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 9th December, 2024.   
The House then adjourned at four minutes past two of the clock till eleven of the clock 
on Monday, the 9th December, 2024. 
[ 06 December, 2024 ]
59

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 