Vol. 261  Monday ,  
No. 1 18 September, 2023  
 27 Bhadra , 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
National Anthem (page  1) 
 
Oath or Affirmation (page 1) 
 
Birthday Greetings (page 1) 
 
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons (pages 1 - 2) 
 
Reference by the Chair  
Felicitations on successful conduct of G20 New Delhi Summit (pages 2 - 4) 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 4 - 5) 
 
Opening remarks by the chair (pages 5 - 6) 
 
Discussion on "Parliamentary journey of 75 years starting from Samvidhan Sabha- 
Achievements, Experiences, Memories and Learnings" (pages 6 - 120) 
 
Observation by the Chair (page 120) 
 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
                       http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
  E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF MEMBERS 
 
A 
 
Abdul Wahab, Shri (Kerala) 
Abdulla, Shri M. Mohamed (Tamil Nadu) 
Agrawal, Dr. Anil (Uttar Pradesh) 
Agrawal, Dr. Radha Mohan Das (Uttar Pradesh) 
Ahmad, Dr. Faiyaz (Bihar) 
Ali, Shri Gulam (Nominated) 
Alla, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy (Andhra Pradesh) 
Amin, Shri Narhari (Gujarat) 
Arora, Shri Sanjeev (Punjab) 
Athawale, Shri Ramdas (Maharashtra) 
 
B 
 
Bachchan, Shrimati Jaya (Uttar Pradesh) 
Baishya, Shri Birendra Prasad (Assam) 
Bajpai, Dr. Ashok (Uttar Pradesh) 
Bajpayee, Dr. Laxmikant (Uttar Pradesh) 
Bakshi, Shri Subrata (West Bengal) 
Balmik, Shrimati Sumitra (Madhya Pradesh) 
Baluni, Shri Anil (Uttarakhand) 
Bansal, Shri Naresh (Uttarakhand) 
Bara, Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai (Gujarat) 
Baraik, Shri Prakash Chik (West Bengal) 
Beeda, Shri Masthan Rao (Andhra Pradesh) 
Bharti, Shrimati Misha (Bihar) 
Bhattacharyya, Shri Bikash Ranjan (West Bengal) 
Bhonsle, Shri Chh. Udayanraje (Maharashtra) 
Bhuyan, Shri Ajit Kumar (Assam) 
Bishi, Shri Niranjan (Odisha) 
Biswas, Shri Abir Ranjan (West Bengal) 

(ii) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Bonde, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao (Maharashtra) 
Brijlal, Shri (Uttar Pradesh) 
Brittas, Dr. John (Kerala) 
 
C 
 
Chadha, Shri Raghav (Punjab) 
Chakraborty, Shri Subhasish (West Bengal) 
Chandrasegharan, Shri N. (Tamil Nadu) 
Chandrasekhar, Shri Rajeev (Karnataka) 
Chandrashekhar, Shri G.C. (Karnataka) 
Chaturvedi, Shrimati Priyanka (Maharashtra) 
Chaudhary, Shri Jayant (Uttar Pradesh) 
Chavan, Shrimati Vandana (Maharashtra) 
Chidambaram, Shri P. (Tamil Nadu) 
 
D 
 
Dangi, Shri Neeraj (Rajasthan) 
Deb, Shri Biplab Kumar (Tripura) 
Deo, Shrimati Sulata (Odisha) 
Desai, Shri Anil (Maharashtra) 
Devegowda, Shri H.D. (Karnataka) 
Dharmar, Shri R. (Tamil Nadu) 
Divakonda, Shri Damodar Rao (Telangana) 
Dubey, Shri Satish Chandra (Bihar) 
Dwivedi, Shrimati Seema (Uttar Pradesh) 
 
 
 
E 
 
Elango, Shri N.R. (Tamil Nadu) 
 
 
 

 [18  September, 2023]  (iii) 
 
G 
 
Geeta alias Chandraprabha, Shrimati (Uttar Pradesh) 
Gehlot, Shri Rajendra (Rajasthan) 
Girirajan, Shri R. (Tamil Nadu) 
Gogoi, Shri Ranjan (Nominated) 
Gohil, Shri Shaktisinh (Gujarat) 
Gokhale, Shri Saket (West Bengal) 
Goswami, Ms. Indu Bala (Himachal Pradesh) 
Goyal, Shri Piyush (Maharashtra) 
Gupta, Shri Narain Dass (National Capital Territory of Delhi) 
Gupta, Shri Prem Chand (Bihar) 
Gupta, Shri Sushil Kumar (National Capital Territory of Delhi) 
 
H 
 
Hanumanthaiah, Dr. L. (Karnataka) 
Haque, Shri Mohammed Nadimul (West Bengal) 
Harivansh, Shri (Bihar) 
Hegde, Shri Aneel Prasad (Bihar) 
Heggade, Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra (Nominated) 
Hooda, Shri Deepender Singh (Haryana) 
Hussain, Shri Syed Nasir (Karnataka) 
 
I 
 
Ilaiyaraaja, Shri (Nominated) 
Islam, Shri Samirul (West Bengal) 
 
J 
 
Jaggesh, Shri (Karnataka) 
Jain, Dr. Anil (Uttar Pradesh) 
Jaishankar, Shri S. (Gujarat) 
Jangra, Shri Ram Chander (Haryana) 
Javadekar, Shri Prakash (Maharashtra) 

(iv) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Jesangbhai, Shri Desai Babubhai (Gujarat) 
Jethmalani, Shri Mahesh (Nominated) 
Jha, Prof. Manoj Kumar (Bihar) 
Jhala, Shri Kesridevsinh Digvijaysinh (Gujarat) 
Joginipally Santosh Kumar, Shri (Telangana) 
 
K 
 
Kadadi, Shri Iranna (Karnataka) 
Kalita, Shri Bhubaneswar (Assam) 
Kalyanasundaram, Shri S. (Tamil Nadu) 
Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar, Shri (Andhra Pradesh) 
Karad, Dr. Bhagwat (Maharashtra) 
Kardam, Shrimati Kanta (Uttar Pradesh) 
Kareem, Shri Elamaram (Kerala) 
Karim, Shri Ahmad Ashfaque (Bihar) 
Ketkar, Shri Kumar (Maharashtra) 
Khan, Dr. Fauzia (Maharashtra) 
Khan, Shri Javed Ali (Uttar Pradesh) 
Khan, Shri Muzibulla (Odisha) 
Kharge, Shri Mallikarjun (Karnataka) 
Kharlukhi, Dr. Wanweiroy (Meghalaya) 
Konyak, Shrimati S. Phangnon (Nagaland) 
Koragappa, Shri Narayana (Karnataka) 
Krishnaiah, Shri Ryaga (Andhra Pradesh) 
Kumar, Shri Mithlesh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Kumar, Dr. Sikander (Himachal Pradesh) 
Kumar, Shri Sujeet (Odisha) 
 
L 
 
Lachungpa, Shri Hishey (Sikkim) 
Laxman, Dr. K. (Uttar Pradesh) 
Leishemba, Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba (Manipur) 
 
 

 [18  September, 2023]  (v) 
 
M 
 
Mahadik, Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao (Maharashtra) 
Mahto, Shri Khiru (Bihar) 
Maji, Shrimati Mahua (Jharkhand) 
Mandaviya, Dr. Mansukh (Gujarat) 
Mangaraj, Shri Manas Ranjan (Odisha) 
Mani, Shri Jose K. (Kerala) 
Mansingh, Dr. Sonal (Nominated) 
Margherita, Shri Pabitra (Assam) 
Mather Hisham, Shrimati Jebi (Kerala) 
Meena, Dr. Kirodi Lal (Rajasthan) 
Mittal, Dr. Ashok Kumar (Punjab) 
Modi, Shri Sushil Kumar (Bihar) 
Mohanta, Shrimati Mamata (Odisha) 
Mokariya, Shri Rambhai Harjibhai (Gujarat) 
Mopidevi, Shri Venkataramana Rao (Andhra Pradesh) 
Muraleedharan, Shri V. (Maharashtra) 
Murugan, Dr. L. (Madhya Pradesh) 
 
N 
 
Nadda, Shri Jagat Prakash (Himachal Pradesh) 
Nagar, Shri Surendra Singh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Nanda, Dr. Prashanta (Odisha) 
Narzary, Shri Rwngwra (Assam) 
Nathwani, Shri Parimal (Andhra Pradesh) 
Netam, Shrimati Phulo Devi (Chhattisgarh) 
Nirmala Sitharaman, Shrimati (Karnataka) 
Nishad, Shri Baburam (Uttar Pradesh) 
Noor, Shrimati Mausam (West Bengal) 
 
O 
 
O' Brien, Shri Derek (West Bengal) 
Oraon, Shri Samir (Jharkhand) 

(vi) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
 
P 
 
P, Shri Sandosh Kumar (Kerala) 
Pandey, Ms. Saroj (Chhattisgarh) 
Panwar, Shri Krishan Lal (Haryana)  
Patel, Shri Praful (Maharashtra) 
Patel, Shri Rajmani (Madhya Pradesh) 
Patel, Shri Shambhu Sharan (Bihar) 
Pathak, Shri Sandeep Kumar (Punjab) 
Patidar, Ms. Kavita (Madhya Pradesh) 
Patil, Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao (Maharashtra) 
Patnaik, Dr. Amar (Odisha) 
Patra, Dr. Sasmit (Odisha) 
Pawar, Shri Sharad (Maharashtra) 
Pilli, Shri Subhas Chandra Bose (Andhra Pradesh) 
Pradhan, Shri Dharmendra (Madhya Pradesh) 
Prakash, Shri Deepak (Jharkhand) 
Prasad, Shri Aditya (Jharkhand) 
Prasad, Shri V. Vijayendra (Nominated) 
Pratapgarhi, Shri Imran (Maharashtra) 
Puri, Shri Hardeep Singh (Uttar Pradesh) 
 
R 
 
Rahim, Shri A. A. (Kerala) 
Rajbhar, Shri Sakaldeep (Uttar Pradesh) 
Rajeshkumar, Shri K.R.N. (Tamil Nadu) 
Ram Shakal, Shri (Nominated) 
Ramadoss, Dr. Anbumani (Tamil Nadu) 
Ramesh, Dr. C.M. (Andhra Pradesh) 
Ramesh, Shri Jairam (Karnataka) 
Ramji, Shri (Uttar Pradesh) 
Rane, Shri Narayan (Maharashtra) 
Ranjan, Shrimati Ranjeet (Chhattisgarh) 
Rao, Shri G.V.L. Narasimha (Uttar Pradesh) 

 [18  September, 2023]  (vii) 
 
Rao, Dr. K. Keshava (Telangana) 
Rathwa, Shri Naranbhai J. (Gujarat) 
Raut, Shri Sanjay (Maharashtra) 
Ray, Shri Nagendra (West Bengal) 
Ray, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar (West Bengal) 
Rebia, Shri Nabam (Arunachal Pradesh) 
Reddy, Shri B. Parthasaradhi (Telangana) 
Reddy, Shri K.R. Suresh (Telangana) 
Reddy, Shri S Niranjan (Andhra Pradesh)  
Reddy, Shri V. Vijayasai (Andhra Pradesh) 
Rupala, Shri Parshottam (Gujarat) 
 
S 
 
Sahney, Shri Vikramjit Singh (Punjab) 
Sahu, Shri Dhiraj Prasad (Jharkhand) 
Saini, Dr. Kalpana (Uttarakhand) 
Scindia, Shri Jyotiraditya M. (Madhya Pradesh) 
Selvaganabathy, Shri S. (Puducherry) 
Selvarasu, Shri Anthiyur P. (Tamil Nadu) 
Sen, Ms. Dola (West Bengal) 
Sen, Dr. Santanu (West Bengal) 
Shanmugam, Shri C. Ve. (Tamil Nadu) 
Shanmugam, Shri M. (Tamil Nadu) 
Sharma, Shri Kartikeya (Haryana)  
Shekhar, Shri Neeraj (Uttar Pradesh) 
Shukla, Shri Rajeev (Chhattisgarh) 
Sibal, Shri Kapil (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri A. D. (Bihar) 
Singh, Shri Ajay Pratap (Madhya Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Akhilesh Prasad (Bihar) 
Singh, Shri Arun (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Bashistha Narain (Bihar) 
Singh, Shrimati Darshana (Uttar Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Digvijaya (Madhya Pradesh) 
Singh, Shri Harbhajan (Punjab) 

(viii) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Singh, Dr. Manmohan (Rajasthan) 
Singh, Shri Sanjay (National Capital Territory of Delhi) 
Singh, Shri Sant Balbir (Punjab) 
Singhvi, Dr. Abhishek Manu (West Bengal) 
Sinha, Shri Rakesh (Nominated) 
Sircar, Shri Jawhar (West Bengal) 
Siroya, Shri Lahar Singh (Karnataka) 
Siva, Shri Tiruchi (Tamil Nadu) 
Sivadasan, Dr. V. (Kerala) 
Solanki, Dr. Sumer Singh (Madhya Pradesh) 
Somu, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN (Tamil Nadu) 
Soni, Shri Kailash (Madhya Pradesh) 
Sonowal, Shri Sarbananda (Assam) 
Soren, Shri Shibu (Jharkhand) 
Surjewala, Shri Randeep Singh (Rajasthan) 
 
T 
 
Tanawde, Shri Sadanand Shet (Goa) 
Tankha, Shri Vivek K. (Madhya Pradesh) 
Tasa, Shri Kamakhya Prasad (Assam) 
Thakur, Shri Ram Nath (Bihar) 
Thakur, Shri Vivek (Bihar) 
Thambidurai, Dr. M. (Tamil Nadu) 
Tiwari, Shri Ghanshyam (Rajasthan) 
Tiwari, Shri Pramod (Rajasthan) 
Tomar, Shri Vijay Pal Singh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Trivedi, Dr. Sudhanshu (Uttar Pradesh) 
Tulsi, Shri K.T.S. (Chhattisgarh) 
 
U 
 
Usha, Shrimati P. T. (Nominated) 
V 
 
Vaddiraju, Shri Ravichandra (Telangana) 

 [18  September, 2023]  (ix) 
 
Vaiko, Shri (Tamil Nadu) 
Vaishnaw, Shri Ashwini (Odisha) 
Vanlalvena, Shri K. (Mizoram) 
Vasan, Shri G.K. (Tamil Nadu) 
Vats (Retd.), Lt.Gen. (Dr.) D. P. (Haryana) 
Vemireddy, Shri Prabhakar Reddy (Andhra Pradesh) 
Venugopal, Shri K.C. (Rajasthan) 
Verma, Shri B.L. (Uttar Pradesh) 
Viswam, Shri Binoy (Kerala) 
 
W 
 
Wasnik, Shri Mukul Balkrishna (Rajasthan) 
Wilson, Shri P. (Tamil Nadu) 
 
Y 
 
Yadav, Shri B. Lingaiah (Telangana) 
Yadav, Shri Bhupender (Rajasthan) 
Yadav, Shri Harnath Singh (Uttar Pradesh) 
Yadav, Prof. Ram Gopal (Uttar Pradesh) 
Yadav, Shrimati Sangeeta (Uttar Pradesh) 
Yajnik, Dr. Amee (Gujarat) 
 

(x) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
THE CHAIRMAN 
Shri Jagdeep Dhankhar  
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN 
Shri Harivansh 
 
PANEL OF VICE-CHAIRPERSONS 
1. Shrimati Kanta Kardam; 
2. Shrimati Sumitra Balmik; 
3. Shrimati Mamata Mohanta; 
4. Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha; 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh; 
6. Shri Narain Dass Gupta; 
7. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy; and 
8. Dr. Santanu Sen. 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL 
Shri P. C. Mody 
  

 [18  September, 2023]  (xi) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEES 
 
Business Advisory Committee 
 
Hon'ble Chairman — Chairman  
 
Shri Harivansh 
Shri Bhupender Yadav 
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
Shrimati Misha Bharti 
Shri Prakash Javadekar 
Shri Derek O' Brien 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
Shri Sanjay Singh 
 
Committee on Ethics 
 
Shri Prakash Javadekar — Chairman  
 
Shri Jairam Ramesh 
Shri Derek O' Brien 
Shri Tiruchi Siva 
Shri Sanjay Singh 
Dr. Sasmit Patra 
Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
Shri Elamaram Kareem 
Shrimati Jaya Bachchan 
Shrimati Misha Bharti 
Shrimati P.T. Usha 
 
 
 

(xii) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
 
General Purposes Committee 
 
 Hon'ble Chairman — Chairman  
Shri Harivansh 
Shri Tiruchi Siva  
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
Shri Derek O' Brien 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah  
Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
Dr. K. Keshava Rao  
Shri Elamaram Kareem  
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur  
Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Committee on Government Assurances 
 
Dr. M. Thambidurai— Chairman 
 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
Shri Sakaldeep Rajbhar 
Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
Shri Gulam Ali 
 
 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xiii) 
 
 
House Committee 
 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh— Chairman 
Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar 
Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
Shri Pabitra Margherita 
Ms. Dola Sen 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
Shri B. Lingaiah Yadav 
Committee on Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
 
Shri Harivansh — Chairman  
 
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee  
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam  
Shrimati Mausam Noor  
Shri P. Wilson   
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
Shrimati Sulata Deo  
Shri Masthan Rao Beeda  
Shri R. Dharmar  
Shri G.K. Vasan  
Shri Praful Patel  
Shri Kartikeya Sharma  
Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
 
Committee on Papers Laid on the Table 
 
Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa— Chairman  
 
Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 

(xiv) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Shri Anil Desai 
Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde 
Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
Shri Deepak Prakash 
Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan 
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
Shri Abdul Wahab 
Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
 
Committee on Petitions 
 
Shri Sujeet Kumar— Chairman  
 
Shrimati Sumitra Balmik 
Shri Rajendra Gehlot 
Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade 
Shri Nabam Rebia 
Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
Shri Arun Singh 
Shri Sanjay Singh 
Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
Committee of Privileges 
 
Shri Harivansh — Chairman  
 
Dr. Anil Jain 
Shri Elamaram Kareem 
Shri Kumar Ketkar 
Ms. Saroj Pandey 
Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
Shri Rakesh Sinha 
Shri G.K. Vasan 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xv) 
 
 
Committee on Information and Communication Technology Management in  
Rajya Sabha 
 
Shri Narain Dass Gupta — Chairman  
Shri Rakesh Sinha  
Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
Shri R. Girirajan 
Shri Muzibulla Khan 
Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi  
Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy  
Shrimati Misha Bharti 
Dr. John Brittas 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur  
 
Committee on Rules 
 
Hon'ble Chairman — Chairman  
 
Shri Harivansh 
Shri Anil Baluni 
Shri N.R. Elango 
Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
Dr. K. Laxman 
Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
Shrimati Mamata Mohanta 
Shri Parimal Nathwani 
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 

(xvi) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
 
 Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee — Chairman  
 
Shri Raghav Chadha 
Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
Shri R. Dharmar 
Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
Dr. Amar Patnaik 
Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
Shri S Niranjan Reddy 
Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
Shri K. T. S. Tulsi 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEES  
 
Committee on Commerce 
 
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi— Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
Shri Deepak Prakash 
Shri Vikramjit Singh Sahney 
Shri K. Vanlalvena 
Shri Sadanand Shet Tanawade 
 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xvii) 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Prasun Banerjee 
Shri Raju Bista 
Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
Shrimati Kalaben Mohanbhai Delkar 
Shri Rameshbhai Lavjibhai Dhaduk 
Shri Arvind Dharmapuri 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
Shri Srinivas Kesineni 
Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal 
Shrimati Manjulata Mandal 
Shri Nakul K. Nath 
Dr. Gautham Sigamani Pon 
Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
Shri Prajwal Revanna 
Shri Gowdar Mallikarjunappa Siddeshwara 
Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
Dr. Anil Agrawal 
Shri Sanjeev Arora 
Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 

(xviii) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
Dr. Santanu Sen 
Shri A. D. Singh 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
Ms. Ramya Haridas 
Shri K. Navas Kani 
Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
Shri C. Lalrosanga 
Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
Shri Arjunlal Meena 
Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
Adv. Adoor Prakash 
Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen 
Shri Anurag Sharma 
Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
Dr. Krishnapal Singh Yadav 
 
Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Shri Brijlal   — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
Shri P. Chidambaram
 
Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xix) 
 
Shri N.R. Elango 
Dr. Anil Jain 
Shri Sujeet Kumar 
Shri Derek O' Brien 
Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Shri Rakesh Sinha 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
Shri Dilip Ghosh 
Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami 
Shrimati Kirron Kher 
Thiru Dayanidhi Maran 
Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik 
Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar 
Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal 
Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi 
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
Shri Ravneet Singh 
Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
 
 
  

(xx) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
 
Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur — Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
Dr. K. Keshava Rao  
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
Dr. M. Thambidurai 
Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar  
Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
Shri Gangasandra Siddappa Basavaraj 
Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
Shri Balak Nath 
Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
Shri T.N. Prathapan 
Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xxi) 
 
Shri Dharambir Singh 
Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
Shri S. Venkatesan 
 
Committee on Industry 
Shri Tiruchi Siva— Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya 
Shrimati Sulata Deo 
Shri Mithlesh Kumar 
Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
Shri Rajeev Shukla 
Dr. Amee Yajnik 
Dr. Sikander Kumar  
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Hanuman Beniwal 
Ms. Mimi Chakraborty 
Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
Dr. S.T. Hasan 
Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
Shri Ravindra Kushawaha 
Shrimati Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato 
Shri Ramprit Mandal 
Shri Vincent H. Pala 
Shri Chirag Paswan 
Shri T.R.V.S. Ramesh 
Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
Shrimati Gomati Sai 
Shri Ravi Kishan Shukla 

(xxii) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Shri Sunil Soren 
Shri Sunil Dattatray Tatkare 
Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
Shri Vijayakumar (Alias) Vijay Vasanth 
Shri Kumbakudi Sudhakaran 
 
 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
 
Shri Sushil Kumar Modi – Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
Shri Mahesh Jethmalani 
Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar 
Shri Sanjay Raut 
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray 
Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
Shrimati Darshana Singh 
Shri Vivek K. Tankha 
Shri P. Wilson 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
Shri Pradan Baruah 
Shri Venkatesh Netha Borlakunta 
Shri Vinod Chavda 
Shrimati Veena Devi 
Shri Jasbir Singh Gill 
Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
Shri Raghu Ramakrishna Raju Kanumuru 
Shri Jyotirmay Singh Mahato 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xxiii) 
 
Shri Malook Nagar 
Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank" 
Shri Suresh Kumar Pujari 
Shri A. Raja 
Shri Omprakash Bhupalsingh alias Pavan Rajenimbalkar 
Shri Upendra Singh Rawat 
Shrimati Sandhya Ray 
Shri Kuldeep Rai Sharma 
Shri Mahendra Singh Solanky 
Shri Rajan Baburao Vichare 
 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
 
Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
Shri Anil Baluni 
Shri Niranjan Bishi 
Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
Shri Jose K. Mani 
Shri Parimal Nathwani 
Shri Nabam Rebia 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
Shri Sunny Deol 
Shri Anantkumar Hegde 

(xxiv) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
Dr. Swami Sakshi Ji Maharaj 
Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani 
Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
Shri Anurag Sharma 
Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
 
Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy – Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
Shri A. A. Rahim 
Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
Shri Anto Antony 
Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
Shri Tapir Gao 
Shri Rahul Kaswan 
Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xxv) 
 
Shri K. Muraleedharan 
Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
Shri Chhedi Paswan 
Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
Shri Prince Raj 
Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
Shrimati Mala Roy 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
Shri Dushyant Singh 
Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua" 
 
 
  

(xxvi) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
 
Cabinet Ministers 
 
Shri Narendra Modi The Prime Minister and also in-charge of the 
following Ministries/Departments:- 
i) The Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions; 
ii) The Department of Atomic Energy; 
iii) The Department of Space; 
All important policy issues; and 
All other portfolios not allocated to any Minister 
Shri Raj Nath Singh The Minister of Defence 
Shri Amit Shah The Minister of Home Affairs; and 
The Minister of Cooperation 
Shri Nitin Jairam Gadkari The Minister of Road Transport and Highways 
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman The Minister of Finance; and 
The Minister of Corporate Affairs 
Shri Narendra Singh Tomar The Minister of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare  
Shri S. Jaishankar The Minister of External Affairs 
Shri Arjun Munda The Minister of Tribal Affairs 
Shrimati Smriti Zubin Irani The Minister of Women and Child Development; and 
The Minister of Minority Affairs 
Shri Piyush Goyal The Minister of Commerce and Industry;  
The Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution; and  
The Minister of Textiles 
Shri Dharmendra Pradhan The Minister of Education; and  
The Minister of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xxvii) 
 
Shri Pralhad Joshi The Minister of Parliamentary Affairs;  
The Minister of Coal; and 
The Minister of Mines 
Shri Narayan Rane 
The Minister of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises 
Shri Sarbananda Sonowal The Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways; 
and  
The Minister of AYUSH 
Dr. Virendra Kumar 
The Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment 
Shri Giriraj Singh The Minister of Rural Development;  and 
The Minister of Panchayati Raj  
Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia The Minister of Civil Aviation; and  
The Minister of Steel 
Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw The Minister of Railways;  
The Minister of Communications; and 
The Minister of Electronics and Information 
Technology 
Shri Pashu Pati Kumar Paras 
The Minister of Food Processing Industries 
Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat The Minister of Jal Shakti 
Shri Kiren Rijiju The Minister of Earth Sciences 
Shri Raj Kumar Singh The Minister of Power; and 
The Minister of New and Renewable Energy 
Shri Hardeep Singh Puri The Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas; and  
The Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs 
Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya The Minister of Health and Family Welfare; and 
The Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers 

(xxviii) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Shri Bhupender Yadav The Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change; and 
The Minister of Labour and Employment 
Dr. Mahendra Nath Pandey 
The Minister of Heavy Industries 
Shri Parshottam Rupala The Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying. 
Shri G. Kishan Reddy The Minister of Culture; 
The Minister of Tourism; and   
The Minister of Development of North Eastern 
Region 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
The Minister of Information and Broadcasting; and 
The Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
 
Ministers of State (Independent Charge) 
 
Rao Inderjit Singh The Minister of State of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation;  
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Planning; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs 
Dr. Jitendra Singh 
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Science and 
Technology;  
The Minister of State in the Prime Minister's Office; 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, 
Public Grievances and Pensions; 
The Minister of State in the Department of Atomic 
Energy; and  
The Minister of State in the Department of Space 
Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
The Minister of State of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice;  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Parliamentary 
Affairs; and  

 [18  September, 2023]  (xxix) 
 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Culture 
 
Ministers of State 
 
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik The Minister of State in the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Tourism 
Shri Faggansingh Kulaste The Minister of State in the Ministry of Steel; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Rural 
Development 
Shri Prahalad Singh Patel The Minister of State in the Ministry of Jal Shakti; 
and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries 
Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of  Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of  Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change 
General (Retd.) V. K. Singh The Minister of State in the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
Shri Krishan Pal 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of  Power; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of  Heavy 
Industries 
Shri Danve Raosaheb Dadarao The Minister of State in the Ministry of Railways; 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Coal; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Mines 
Shri Ramdas Athawale The Minister of State in the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
Sadhvi Niranjan Jyoti The Minister of State in the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution; and  

(xxx) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Rural 
Development 
 
Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Balyan 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 
Shri Nityanand Rai The Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri Pankaj Chaudhary The Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance 
Shrimati Anupriya Singh Patel The Minister of State in the Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry 
 
Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
 
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology 
 
Sushri Shobha Karandlaje 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare 
 
Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises 
 
Shrimati Darshana Vikram 
Jardosh 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Textiles; and  
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Railways 
 
Shri V. Muraleedharan 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of External 
Affairs; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Parliamentary 
Affairs 
 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xxxi) 
 
Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi The Minister of State in the Ministry of External 
Affairs; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Culture 
 
Shri Som Parkash 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry 
 
Shrimati Renuka Singh Saruta The Minister of State in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
Shri Rameswar Teli The Minister of State in the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of  Labour  and 
Employment 
 
Shri Kailash Choudhary 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare 
 
Shrimati Annpurna Devi 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Education 
Shri A. Narayanaswamy The Minister of State in the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
 
Shri Kaushal Kishore 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
 
Shri Ajay Bhatt 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of  Defence; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Tourism 
 
Shri B. L. Verma 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Development 
of North Eastern Region; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Cooperation 
 
Shri Ajay Kumar 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri Devusinh Chauhan The Minister of State in the Ministry of 
Communications 

(xxxii) [RAJYA SABHA] 
 
Shri Bhagwanth Khuba The Minister of State in the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers 
 
Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj 
 
Sushri Pratima Bhoumik 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
 
Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Education 
Dr. Bhagwat Karad The Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance 
Dr. Rajkumar Ranjan Singh The Minister of State in the Ministry of External 
Affairs; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Education 
 
Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar The Minister of State in the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
 
Shri Bishweswar Tudu 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Tribal Affairs; 
and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
 
Shri Shantanu Thakur 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways 
 
Dr. Munjapara Mahendrabhai The Minister of State in the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of AYUSH 
 
Shri John Barla 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs 
 

 [18  September, 2023]  (xxxiii) 
 
Dr. L. Murugan The Minister of State in the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying; and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting 
 
Shri Nisith Pramanik 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs; 
and 
The Minister of State in the Ministry of Youth Affairs 
and Sports 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
OFFICIAL REPORT  
IN THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY FIRST SESSION OF THE RAJYA SABHA 
 
Commencing on the 18
th September, 2023/27 Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 18th September, 2023 / 27 Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.  
 
 (The National Anthem, ‘Jana Gana Mana’, was played) 
 
 
OATH OR AFFIRMATION 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Oath or Affirmation.  
  Dr. Dinesh Sharma (Uttar Pradesh) 
 
  
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I take this opportunity to extend birthday greetings 
to hon. Member of Parliament, Shri Sanjeev Arora. 
 Shri Arora has been a Memb er of this august House since April, 2022.  He is an 
industrialist by profession with a passion for social service.  His efforts to promote 
cancer care in India is highly laudable.  Sh ri Arora likes travelling and enjoys watching 
sports in his spare time.  He is married  to Shrimati Sandhya Arora and has a son 
Kavya and a daughter Ketki. 
 H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  o n  m y  a n d  o n  y o u r  behalf, I wish him a long, healthy and 
happy life and extend greetings to his family and friends.  
 
  
PANEL OF VICE-CHAIRPERSONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I have to inform the hon. Members that the Panel of Vice-
Chairpersons has been re-constituted with effect from 13th September, 2023, with the 
following Members: Shrimati Kanta Kard am; Shrimati Sumitra Balmik; Shrimati 
Mamata Mohanta; Shrimati Geeta alias Chan draprabha; Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh; 
Shri Narain Dass Gupta; Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy; and Dr. Santanu Sen.   

Hon. Members, you will be pleased to know that we are continuing with the same 
mechanism- 50 per cent women as Chairperso ns. But I can assure you, it is only a 
matter of time; the percentage may go higher.  
 
 
REFERENCE BY THE CHAIR 
 
Felicitations on successful conduct of G20 New Delhi Summit 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it gives me imme nse pleasure to congratulate the 
entire nation at the successful conduct of G20 New Delhi Summit that has filled heart 
of every Indian with pride and raised the leadership stature of the country at the global 
level.   
 I laud the Prime Minister's vision that made it truly people's G20.  Having more 
than 200 meetings in 60 cities covering all the States and Union Territories of India, it 
is unprecedented.  At the same time, the G20 Ne w Delhi Leaders' Summit, with 42 
delegations, was one of the largest in size, scale and scope. This has provided 
opportunity to the world to experience richne ss of diversity, democracy and talent of 
India.   
 India's G20 Presidency has proven to be  inclusive, ambitious, action- oriented, 
decisive and people-centric. The outc omes of the G-20 Leaders Summit are 
transformational and would contribute to the reshaping of the global world order in the 
decades ahead.  
 With the Prime Minister's vision and guidance, the New Delhi G20 Leaders' 
Declaration was adopted unanimously and wi th consensus, including on difficult 
issues. It is globally acknowledged that India's leadership and endeavours were 
crucial in bridging the North-South divi de and overcoming the strong East-West 
polarisation. This is reflective of India's elevated stature and standing and the work 
that this Government has done in the last ni ne years.  It is a testament to the global 
trust and goodwill that India enjoys under the Prime Minister's leadership. It is a 
recognition that India is a voice of pea ce and moderation in a world ridden with 
divisions.  
 India's Presidency has been instrumental  in bringing voice of the Global South 
into the heart of the G20 discourse. At th e beginning of its Pres idency, India hosted 
the Voice of the Global South Summit in January, 2023, with participation of leaders 
of 125 countries. The priorities and expectations of the countries of the Global South 
were brought onto the G20 Agenda. The Su mmit Declaration amplified and delivered 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

on issues of interest to the developing co untries, including poverty alleviation, climate 
finance, handling debt vulnerabilities, f ood security, health security, digital 
infrastructure development, among others.  
 The Prime Minister's initiative led to  the historic decision to accept African 
Union as a permanent member of the G20. It  was a wonderful sight to see the world 
leaders pay respect to the Father of the Nation at Rajghat. They all endorsed the 
universal idea of peace and non-violence espoused by Mahatma Gandhi and its 
relevance in today's world.  The Prime Mini ster has himself made a strong pitch for 
reform of the international institutions which must keep pace with the changing times. 
This is important for true multilateralism in a divided world to ensure stability, growth 
and development. The focus of the G20 has moved from a mere economic centric to 
a much broader human-centric approach . The priority accorded to realizing 
Sustainable Development Goals, reforming international financial institutions, 
establishing digital public infrastructu re, promoting a Green Development Pact, 
encouraging women-led development, taking  global Initiative on digital health, 
recognizing the role of traditional medicine , are praise-worthy. The energizing of the 
international economy, availability of greater resources for development, expansion of 
tourism, global workplace opportunities, stronger food security through millet 
production and consumption, addressing th e skill gaps and mobility, mapping global 
value chains, supporting MSMEs, and a deeper commitment to bio-fuels are among 
the prominent outcomes of the G20 Summit th at will benefit the entire nation. The 
launch of India-Middle East-Europe Econ omic Corridor and the Global Biofuels 
Alliance during the Summit are significant. These initiatives have sowed the seeds for 
a connected future in which India will cont inue to play an important role. India's 
climate leadership was visible with the adoption of High Le vel Principles on LiFE for 
building pro-planet people; and recognition by the developed worl d to substantially 
scale-up investment and climate finance to  meet climate goals. India's Presidency 
achieved new milestones in setting up  new G20 Working Groups on Women and 
Disaster Risk Reduction, as also a new G20 engagement group on Start-ups. The 
Deccan High Level Principles on Food Security, Gandinagar Roadmap on Land 
Initiative, Goa Roadmap on Tourism, Che nnai High Level Principles on Blue and 
Ocean Economy and the Kashi Cultural Pathway will provide global guidance in 
various sectors for times to come and make our people proud.  
 Hon. Members, next month, our Parliame nt would have the honour to host the 
Parliament-20 Forum as part of our G-20 Pr esidency. I request each member of this 
august House to participate in welcoming the world to the Mother of Democracy and 
building on the theme 'Vas udhaiva Kutumbakam - One Earth, One Family, One 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
3

Future'. I am confident that this august House will join me in commending Prime 
Minister's leadership, in recognising the enthusiasm of the people of India and 
appreciating the contribution of all organi sations and individuals on this historic 
achievement.  
Now, Papers to be laid on the Table.  Secretary-General.
 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
Statement showing the Bills passed by th e Houses of Parliament during the Two 
Hundred and Sixtieth Session of the Rajya Sabha and assented to by the President 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL:  Sir, I lay on the Ta ble, a statement (in English and Hindi) 
showing the Bills passed by the Houses of  Parliament during the Two Hundred and 
Sixtieth Session of the Rajya Sabha and assented to by the President:- 
 
(i)  The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(ii)  The Multi-State Co-operative  Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(iii)  The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(iv)  The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(v)   The Constitution (Scheduled Trib es) Order (Second Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(vi)  The Forest (Conservation) Amendment Bill, 2023 
(vii)  The Mines and Minerals (Developme nt and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 
(viii)  The Offshore Areas Mineral (Devel opment and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 
2023 
(ix)  The Jan Vishwas (Amendme nt of Provisions) Bill, 2023 
(x)  The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(xi)  The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(xii)  The National Dental Commission Bill, 2023 
(xiii)  The Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023 
(xiv)  The Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(xv)  The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(xvi)  The Anusandhan National Research Foundation Bill, 2023 
(xvii)  The National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Bill, 2023 
(xviii) The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(xix)  The Inter-services Organisations (C ommand, Control and Discipline) Bill, 2023 
(xx) The Pharmacy (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

(xxi)  The Central Goods and Se rvices Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(xxii)  The Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(xxiii)  The Mediation Bill, 2023. 
 
 
OPENING REMARKS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I extend warm greetings to you on the beginning of 
261st Session of Rajya Sabha.  
 Hon. Members, this Session makes ava ilable a befitting opportunity to reflect 
and introspect on "Parliamentary Journey of 75 years starting from Samvidhan Sabha 
- Achievements, Experiences, Memories an d Learnings". Traversing over seven 
decade journey, from Samvidhan Sabha to  the present day in Amrit Kaal, these 
hallowed precincts have witnessed many milestones.  
 Hon. Members, this journey had historical moments - from 'Tryst with Destiny' 
a t  M i d n i g h t  o f  1 5
th August, 1947 to unfolding of innovative, forward looking GST 
regime at midnight of June 30, 2017 and, now, this day. 
  Deliberations in the Constituent Asse mbly in various Sessions spread over 
three years exemplified decoru m and healthy debate. Conten tious and highly divisive 
issues were negotiated in a spirit of consen sus. There is enough take away from this 
for us all.  
 Healthy debate is hallmark of a blo ssoming democracy. We must eschew 
confrontational posturing. Weaponising disr uption and disturbance as strategy would 
never secure sanction of the people. We a ll are constitutionally ordained to nurture 
democratic values and must so justify and vindicate the trust of the people. We owe it 
to the nation to optimally utilise the opportunity and time to subserve public interest.  
 Hon. Members, this is also an occasion to recall and glorify - our tenacious 
freedom fighters -- they were the pioneers, in true sense, to fight for democratic 
rights; our erudite constitution al forefathers -- they were farsighted visionaries who, 
after much deliberations and discussions,  provided us a Constitution which has 
stood the test of time; our statesmen and politicians -- they have time and again 
respected and abided by constitutional ideals and have democratised the Constitution 
itself by taking its essence to the masses; the Civil Service - the bureaucrats who 
have been steadfast day in and day out in ensuring that the stat e machinery works in 
a free and fair manner; and, finally, it is the masses whose deep faith and unflinching 
belief in the parliamentary democracy sust ained it and thwarted the worst possible 
attempt to deny democratic values. 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
5

 The success of our democracy is thus a collective concerted endeavour of 
"We the People of India." 
 Expectedly, the hon. Members, during th e course of the day, would enrich the 
House and enlighten the people at large as  regards our 75 years' journey and unfold 
vision for years ahead. 
 Hon. Members, use of wit, humour, sarcasm and even acerbic comments 
inside Parliament are important inaliena ble facets of a vigorou s democracy. These 
days, we do not get to hear such light-h earted exchanges. Hopefully, we will see the 
revival of wit, humour and scholarly debates. 
 The hallowed precincts of Parliament for years have witnessed highs and lows 
which we need to reflect and de liberate so as to take our Bharat to its rightful place in 
2047 when it celebrates centenary of Independence.  
 
 
DISCUSSION ON "PARLIAMENTARY JOURNEY OF 75 YEARS STARTING FROM 
SAMVIDHAN SABHA- ACHIEVEMENTS, EXPERIENCES, MEMORIES AND 
LEARNINGS" 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I now invite the hon. Leader of the House, Shri Piyush Goyal to 
initiate the Discussion on "Parliamentary Journey of 75 years starting from Samvidhan 
Sabha - Achievements, Experiences, Memories and Learnings." 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana): Sir, before that, as this is a special Session, we 
want special items of Business also to be taken up. ...(Interruptions).... We are 
welcoming this and we are not against it.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Keshava Rao, please address the Chair. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: Sir, we want Women's Reservation  Bill to be taken up in this 
Session. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Anyone who raises such things  will suffer the consequences. 
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, have it from me, put it on the table immediately. 
Everyone who does it is in breach of rules and regulations. ...(Interruptions)... Don’t 
force my hands. ...(Interruptions)... Dr. Keshava, this was least expected. 
...(Interruptions)... How can you on earth raise it? ...(Interruptions)...  This was the 
least expected. ...(Interruptions)... 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: How do we communicate with you? ...(Interruptions)... I am 
sorry about this attitude. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am so sorry... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  I really don’t want to do it. ...(Interruptions)... I am very 
sorry for this attitude. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am so sorry... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: You don’t hear us. ...(Interruptions)... The only thing is that 
I show a placard ...(Interruptions)...  I don’t want to disturb the House. 
..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Keshava, please don’t do it. ...(Interruptions)...  For my sake, 
don’t do it.  
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: I said, it was discussed for two hours in the leaders' meeting 
yesterday. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I can assure the Members. ...(Interruptions)...  Each of the 
Members, who has done it, is cautioned by m e  n o t  t o  d o  i t .  I  a m  o n e  o f  y o u .   I  
depend on your wisdom, on your talent, on your knowledge to exemplify the best 
conduct which can be approved by the peop le outside. Let us not make mockery of 
it. ...(Interruptions)... We are at a time when we are having great moments.  Our 
country is defining global discours e. These are not political issues. 
...(Interruptions)... All I say is, ...(Interruptions)... You will have the occasion. 
...(Interruptions)... Dr. Keshava, please take your seat . ...(Interruptions)... You will 
have the occasion to fully indicate.   The agenda has been spelt out. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka): What is the agenda? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Mr. Jairam Ramesh, you will know it. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. 
Jairam Ramesh, the least you can do is, if you want to address the Chair, you can 
gentlemanly rise and make your poin t, not in a cozy chair like this. 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
7

...(Interruptions)...  Yes, the Leader  of the Opposition ...(Interruptions)... खरगे जी, 
उसके  पहले मȅ आपसे एक बात कहूँगा िक मȅने जो िवट/ǩूमर की बात की है, वह आप पर लागू 
नहीं है।  आपने िवट भी िदखाया है, ǩूमर भी िदखाया है और सरकाज्म भी िदखाया है।  वह बात 
मȅन
े बािकयȗ क े िलए कही थी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) : सर, मȅ दौड़ते-दौड़ते रात क े डेढ़ बजे यहाँ पर पहुँचा। मȅ 
यह समझकर आया था िक आज का िदन बहुत अच्छा है और हमारे चेयरमैन साहब गुÎसे मȂ नहीं 
रहȂगे, िकसी को डराएँगे नहीं और बड़े Ģेम क े साथ सबको लेकर चलȂगे - मȅ इस उÇमीद से आया 
था।  यहाँ आते ही एकदम आपने गुÎसा ज़ािहर िकया ...(Ëयवधान)... 
  
Ǜी सभापित : मȅन
े कहाँ िकया?  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : उन्हȂ रोका।  यह हो रहा है।  कम से कम आज खुशी का िदन है।  हमारे 
संजय िंसह जी और राघव चǀा जी को कम से कम हाउस मȂ लाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... नहीं तो दो 
मेÇबसर् को बाहर रख कर ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, दो मेÇबसर् को बाह
र रख कर अगर Îपेशल सेशन 
का पहला िदन, इÇपॉटȄट िदन ...(Ëयवधान)... अमृत काल  ...( Ëयवधान)... अमृत काल कहो 
और मेरे िलए िवष काल कहो, लेिकन मȅ आपसे यही िवनती करता ह ूँ िक मेÇबसर् को बाहर रख कर 
यह काम नहीं होता, यह ठीक नहीं लगता।  तो आप क ृपया इस पर ज़रा ध्यान दीिजए, बड़ा िदल 
िदखाइए, गुÎसा कम कर दीिजए और कायर्वाही अच्छी तरह चलने दीिजए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we are having di scussion on a very important issue 
and it will be a six-hour discussion. Everyo ne will get an opportunity. Apart from the 
floor leaders, we have presence of very distinguished Members, who have seen more 
than three decades of parliamentary perfor mance. I am quite sure and I have no 
doubt that the contribution by hon. Memb ers will e
nlighten the people at large.  
Therefore, let us have scholarly debate, dictated only by decorum and contribution.  I 
call upon the Leader of the House, Shri Piyush Goyal, to speak. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, it is important.  ...(Interruptions)...  I seek a 
clarification and enlighten us whether it is a Special Session or 261
st Session of Rajya 
Sabha. Will a Special Session be counted as  a Session? Kindly enlighten and then, I 
think, we can proceed. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is 261
st Session, Special Session.  Yes, Mr. Piyush Goyal.  
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी पीयूष गोयल) : माननीय सभापित जी, मेरा सौभाग्य है िक आज गणेश चतुथीर् 
की पूवर् संध्या पर हम सब यहाँ पर इतने अच्छे वातावरण मȂ चचार् क े िलए एकितर्त हुए हȅ। सबसे 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

पहले मȅ आपको और आपके  माध्यम से सभी सािथयȗ, सांसदȗ और देशवािसयȗ को हम सबकी 
तरफ से गणेश चतुथीर् की बहुत-बहुत बधाई और शुभकामनाएँ देना चाहता हूँ।  
 माननीय सभापित जी, पािर्लयामȂट महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी और दोनȗ सदनȗ - लोक सभा 
और राज्य सभा - इन तीनȗ का समागम
 है। हमारे हाउस को 'हाउस ऑफ एÊडसर्' कहा जाता है, 
'उच्च सदन' कहा जाता है।  मेरे िलए यह बड़े सौभाग्य की बात है िक िवÌव क े सबसे बड़ी जनतंतर्, 
लोकतंतर् की जननी मȂ मुझे इस उच्च सदन मȂ अब तीसरे टमर् मȂ सेवा देने का मौका भारतीय जनता 
पाटीर् ने िदया, उसके  िलए मȅ सदैव आभारी रहूँगा। मुझे काम करने का अवसर िमला और मȅन
े जो 
सीखा और समझा, उसके  ऊपर आज की जो चचार् है, यह वाÎतव म Ȃ हम सबको आगे क े िलए भी 
और ज्यादा उत्साह देगी िक क ै से हम देश क े िनमार्ण मȂ अपना-अपना योगदान दे सकते हȅ।  
 माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने कहा था िक हमारा जो लोकतंतर् है, यह एक 
Ģकार से Ģेरणादायी है, यह हम सबको Ģेरणा देता है। हमारा जो संिवधान ह
ै, वह हम सबको 
इच्छाशिƪ देता है और पािर्लयामȂट, देशवािसयȗ की जो उमंग है, देशवािसयȗ क े जो संकÊप हȅ, 
उनको साझा करने का सबसे सही इंिÎटǷूशन है। लोकतंतर् को जीिवत रखने तथा इसको और 
मजबूत बनाने का अगर कोई सबसे बड़ा Ãलैटफॉमर् है, तो वह हमारी स
ंसद है।  
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
  
माननीय उपसभापित जी, इस देश
 क े 140 करोड़ लोग हमारे लोकतंतर् को मजबूत बनाते हȅ और 
उसको सफल बनाते हȅ। भारत क े लोकतंतर् की जो Ģणाली है, वह Îवदेशी आधार पर बनी हुई है। 
जो अलग-अलग देश गुलामी से मुƪ हुए, उनमȂ से बहुत कम बड़े देश हȅ, जो आज भी लोकतंतर् क े 
रूप  मȂ हȅ। उनमȂ से अिधका
ंश देशȗ मȂ लोकतंतर् िटक नहीं पाया, क्यȗिक उनके  सामने अलग-अलग 
Ģकार की समÎयाएँ आईं, पर इतने बड़े देश मȂ गुलामी क े बाद भी लोकतंतर् िदनȗिदन मजबूत होता 
गया, यह हम सबका सौभाग्य भी है और उसमȂ दोनȗ सदनȗ ने बहुत बड़ा योगदान िदया है। भारत 
को हम सब लोग लोकतंतर् की जननी मानते हȅ। अगर हम पुराने व ैिदक टेक्Îट्स मȂ भी जाते हȅ, तो 
वहाँ भी ये शÅद - सभा, सिमित, संसद - देखने को िमलते हȅ। सभा, सिमित, संसद - ये शÅद 
हजारȗ साल पहले भारत मȂ कहे जाते थे, इÎतेमाल होते थे और सुने जाते थे। हमने यहाँ पर िसफर् 
ये शÅद नहीं िलए हȅ, बिÊक उनकी आत्मा भी आज सदन मȂ, लो
क सभा तथा राज्य सभा मȂ देखने 
को िमलती है। मȅ समझता हूँ िक हमȂ ज्यादा द ूर जाने की जरूरत नहीं है। अभी-अभी माननीय 
सभापित जी जी20 की भारत की अध्यक्षता की सफलता की बात कर रहे थे। 'वसुधैव क ु ट ुÇबकç' 
की भावना पूरे िवÌव मȂ है, तो हमारे िलए देश ही नहीं, बिÊक पूरा िवÌव एक पिरवार ह ै और हम 
सबकी िंचता करने वाले देश हȅ। यही भावना लेकर भारत की जी20 की अध्यक्षता बहुत 
सफलतापूवर्क अभी-अभी संपन्न हुई और लीडसर् सिमट का समापन हुआ है तथा 30 नवंबर को 
हमारी अध्यक्षता का समय पूरा होगा। हमने पूरे िवÌव मȂ भारत की अध्यक्षता की, भारत क े नेतृत्व 
की एक अिमट छाप अवÌय छोड़ी ह
ै। Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की िजस Ģकार से आज पूरे 
िवÌव मȂ एक एक्सेÃटȂस बनी है तथा उनकी लीडरिशप क े Ģित जो आÎथा द
ेखने को िमलती है, वह 
पूरे देश तथा देशवािसयȗ को गौरवािन्वत करती है। माननीय उपसभापित जी, जो संिवधान सभा 
आयोिजत हुई थी, उसमȂ जो िडबेट्स हुई थीं, उनका Îतर बहुत ऊ ँ चा था। जब हम उन्हȂ पढ़ते हȅ, 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
9

तो हमȂ बहुत क ु छ देखने-सुनने को िमलता है। उस समय, जब Constituent Assembly की 
िडबेट्स चल रही थीं, तब बड़े-बड़े लोगȗ ने कहा था िक दो सदनȗ की क्या आवÌयकता है। बड़े-
बड़े Ëयिƪ, जैसे माननीय Ǜी मोहÇमद तािहर जी, माननीय Ǜी िशÅबन लाल सक्सेना जी, माननीय 
Ǜी लोकनाथ िमǛा जी ने oppose िकया था िक सेक ं ड चैÇबर की आवÌयकता नहीं है, एक ही 
चैÇबर बहुत होगा, लेिकन माननीय Ǜी गोपालÎव
ामी अयंगर जी, भारत रत्न डा. भीमराव 
अÇबेडकर जी और Ǜǉेय सवर्पÊली राधाकृ Íणन जी ने इस बात को बल िदया था, इस बात का 
समथर्न िकया था िक दो सदन होने चािहए, उच्च सदन का अपना Îथान है। इसके  बा
द अĢैल, 
1952 मȂ यह सदन बनाया गया और इसकी पहली सभा 13 मई, 1952 को हुई। एक Ģकार से, इन 
71 वषș का जो Ģवाह है, आज हम सब उसकी चचार् करने वाले हȅ। सामान्यत: राज्य सभा स
े यह 
अपेक्षा थी िक यहाँ पर अच्छी चचार् होगी, अच्छी िडबेट्स हȗगी। चचार् और वातार्लाप क े माध्यम से, 
वाद-िववाद से ऊपर उठकर, देशिहत को सामने रखते हुए राज्य सभा चलेगी। माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने भी कहा था िक हमारी जो भी िडबेट्स होती हȅ, जो भी वातार्लाप, 
िडÎकशन, डायलॉग्स होते हȅ, चाहे वे सदन क े अंदर हȗ, चाहे सदन क े बाहर हȗ, उन सबमȂ एक 
बात कॉमन है, एक बात पक्की है िक देश की सेवा करने और देश क े िहतȗ की रक्षा करने की जो 
हमारी शपथ है, हम सब उसे बहुत बल दȂगे और उसे सवȘपिर रखȂगे। मȅ समझता हूँ िक इसमȂ हम 
सभी ने अपना-अपना दाियत्व अपने-अपने िहसाब से िनभाया है। इस 71 वषर् क े Ģवाह मȂ कई सारे 
महानुभावȗ ने भारत क े संिवधान की रक्षा करने क े िलए, भारत क े लोकतंतर् की रक्षा करने क े िलए 
अपना-अपना योगदान िदया। हमारे कई विरÍठ चेयरमैन रहे, मȅ उन सभी का नाम लूँगा, लेिकन 
क ु छ Ģमुख नाम तुरंत ध्यान मȂ आते हȅ, जैसे डा. सवर्पÊली राधाकृ Íणन जी, डा. ज़ािकर हुसैन जी, 
जिÎटस िहदायतुÊलाह जी, डा. शंकर दयाल शमार् जी, Ǜी क े.आर. नारायणन जी, Ǜी भैरȗिंसह 
शेखावत जी, हािमद अंसारी जी, Ǜी वȂक ैया नायडु जी और हमारे वतर्मान सभापित, Ǜी जगदीप 
धनखड़ जी। सभी ने अपने-अपने कायर्काल मȂ इस सदन की गिरमा बनाई और इस सदन को और 
नए अवामȗ तक ल
े जाने मȂ बहुत अच्छा योगदान िदया। वȂक ैया नायडु जी की बातȂ तो याद आती 
रहती हȅ। वे कई बार Ëयंग्य भी करते थे, कई बार िवषय को बहुत अच्छे तरीके  से समझा ने का 
Ģयास भी करते थे। एक बार उन्हȗने कहा था, ‘People want the House to discuss, debate 
and decide – 3 Ds.  They don’t want  the other ‘D’, i.e., ‘disruption.’ मȅ समझता हूँ िक 
हम सबने अपने-अपने तरीके  से Ģयास िकया है िक यह सदन अच्छे तरीके  से चले और सदन मȂ 
अच्छी चचार् क े माध्यम से हम देश की सेवा कर पाएं। बड़े-बड़े बुिǉजीवी, जनता क े बड़े-बड़े 
Ģितिनिध, कई सारे मेÇबसर्, जो नॉिमनेट होते हȅ, ऐसे बहुत-से विरÍठ महानुभावȗ ने इस सदन की 
गिरमा बढ़ाई है और अपनी-अपनी छाप छोड़ी
 है िक उनके  समय मȂ इस सदन ने क ै से काम िकया। 
आज भी जो हमारे नॉिमनेटेड सदÎय हȅ, उन्हȗने अलग-अलग क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ एक से बढ़कर एक देश सेवा 
की है, बहुत बड़ा योगदान िदया है। मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह भी इस सदन की एक िवशेषता है िक 
चाहे वे खेल की दुिनया से हȗ, िफÊम की दुिनया से हȗ, Çयूिज़क की दुिनया से हȗ या डर्ामे की 
दुिनया से आिर्टÎट्स हȗ, अलग-अलग और बड़े-बड़े महानुभावȗ ने इस सदन की गिरमा बढ़ाई है। 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, इस सदन न
े बहुत सारे बड़े फ ैसले भी िलए हȅ, जो िजन्दगी और देश क े 
िलए बहुत अहम भूिमका िनभाते हȅ और शायद सिदयȗ-सिदयȗ तक याद रखे जाए
ंगे।  इस सदन मȂ 
कई सारी बड़ी अच्छी और इंटरेिंÎटग िडबेट्स भी हुई हȅ।  यहां पर चाहे अटल जी, आडवाणी जी 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

और सुषमा जी की िडबेट्स हȗ या डा. कणर् िंसह जी, वी.पी. िंसह जी, चन्दर्शेखर जी या हमारे 
वतर्मान सदÎय और पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी देवगौड़ा जी की िडबेट्स हȗ, उन अलग-अलग बहुत 
महत्वपूणर् िडबेट्स मȂ बड़े-बड़े महानुभावȗ ने भाग िलया है।  कई बार बड़ी fierce debates होती 
थीं, वाद-िव
वाद भी बढ़ जाता था, लेिकन साधारणत: बहुत गंभीर वाद-िववाद मȂ भी हम यह मौका 
ढ ूंढ़ते थे िक क ै से न क ै से हम सब िमलकर काम करȂ।  एक बार एक बहुत गमार्-गमीर् की िडबेट मȂ 
माननीय अटल िबहारी बाजपेयी जी ने एक आÏवान िदया था िक हम सब राजनीितक दल िमल-
जुलकर काम करȂ, अपनी जो अलग-अलग सोच और िवचारधाराएं हȅ, उनको रखते ह
ुए भी हम 
उनमȂ से राÎता ढ ूँढ़कर आगे चलȂ और द ेशिहत तथा जनिहत क े िलए अपने-अपने काम करȂ। 
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, मुझे याद आता है िक एक कÇयुिनÎट पाटीर् क े एक सदÎय Ǜी 
पी. राजीव थे, जो िफर क ेरल मȂ जाकर मंतर्ी बने।  वे सीपीआई(एम) क े  बड़े विरÍठ नेता थे और 
इस सदन मȂ बहुत ही अच्छी तैयारी करके  आते थे। ऐसी नई-नई चीज़Ȃ, िजनके  बारे मȂ हममȂ से 
लगभग कई लोगȗ को ध्यान नहीं होता था िक वे भी इस सदन क े अिधकार क्षेतर् मȂ पड़ती हȅ, ऐसे 
नये-नये िवषय Ǜी पी. राजीव कई बार इस सदन मȂ लाते थे।  चाहे वे क ेरल मȂ हȗ या कभी िदÊली 
आएं, मȅ अभी भी जब उनसे िमलता ह
ूँ तो आनन्द आता है।  इसी Ģकार हम सब एक-दूसरे की 
आलोचना कर सकते हȅ, हममȂ मतभेद हो सकता है, पर अगर हम मतभेद से ऊपर उठȂ और 
मतभेद को शालीनता क े साथ रखȂ तो मȅ समझता हूँ िक हमारे िजन पुराने सदÎयȗ ने यहां पर हमȂ 
उदाहरण क े रूप  मȂ जो अच्छी-अच्छी बातȂ िसखाईं और वतर्मान मȂ भी सदÎय एक Ģकार से िमल-
जुलकर काम करने की पूरी कोिशश करते हȅ, यह देश को तेज गित से आगे लेकर जाने मȂ अपनी 
महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभाए
गा। 
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, डा. सवर्पÊली राधाकृ Íणन जी ने 1955 मȂ एक बात रखी थी, 
िजसको मȅ यहां क्वोट करना चाहूंगा।  यह सâ 1955 की बात है, यानी यह लगभग 68 साल पहले 
की बात है।  अगर यह आज भी इस सदन मȂ गूंजे तो यह िकतना relevant होगा!  डा. राधाकृ Íणन 
न
े कहा था, "We want to maintain the good name and dignity of this  House. I do not 
want it to be said that sometimes these discussions suggest that we are not behaving 
like serious, responsible Members of Pa rliament but rather like irresponsible 
professional agitators." 
  हमारे विरÍठ नेताओं ने अलग-अलग तरीकȗ से हमȂ बहुत क ु छ िसखाया है, समझाया है, 
लेिकन मेरा िवÌवास है िक हम सबकी भावना और हम सबका मन यही बोलता ह
 ै िक सदन अच्छे 
तरीके  से चले, तािक इस देश मȂ नई-नई चीज़Ȃ हȗ और हम देश को और आगे बढ़ाएं।  इस 'अमृत 
काल' मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने हम सबको जो एक आÏवान िदया ह ै िक भारत एक िवकिसत 
देश बने, उसमȂ हम सबका अपना-अपना रोल रहेगा।  िवपक्ष का भी उतना ही अहम रोल है िक वह 
सरकार को िनयंतर्ण मȂ रखे, सरकार का रोल है िक वह नये-नये कानूनȗ, नई-नई योजनाओं और 
नये-नये तरीकȗ स
े देश की िदशा और दशा को आगे बदले।  मुझे लगता है िक सभी माननीय 
सदÎय अपनी िजÇमेदािरयȗ को भली-भांित िनभाने का पूरा Ģयास कर रहे हȅ और वे आगे भी करते 
रहȂगे। 
 अगर हम अपनी मेमोरी मȂ जाएं तो पाएंगे िक अटल जी को किव
ता सुनाने की आदत थी।  
वे कई बार बोलते समय किवता मȂ चल पड़ते थे।  माननीय अरुण  जेटली जी, जो लीडर ऑफ िद 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
11

हाउस भी रह चुक े हȅ, उसके  पहले वे लीडर ऑफ िद अपोिजशन भी रह चुक े हȅ, उनका कटाक्ष 
बड़ा शापर् होता था।  वे िवषय को अपने तरीके  से बहुत wittily, बहुत अच्छे तरीके  से रखते थे।  जैसे 
उन्हȗने कहा था, this is the “new normal.”  हमारे पास उनकी भी इस Ģकार की बहुत सारी 
अलग-अलग
 सुंदर यादȂ हȅ।  माननीय वȂक ैया नायडु जी की तेलुगू मȂ proverbs देने की आदत थी, 
िजसे वे बीच-बीच मȂ क्वोट करते थे।  माननीय गुलाम नबी आज़ाद जी शेर-ओ-शायरी मȂ काफी 
मािहर थे और वे कई बार अपने भाषणȗ मȂ शेर-ओ-शायरी कहकर िनकल पड़ते थे।  माननीय 
खरगे जी भी आजकल बहुत शेर-ओ-शायरी करने लगे ह
ȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : एक्सपंज भी हो जाता है।   
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल : सर, यह सदन की गिरमा रही है िक हम सब कई बार गमार्-गमीर् मȂ भी िवषय को 
बहुत सुंदर तरीके  से संभाल लेते हȅ, आगे बढ़ते हȅ और इसी से लोगȗ का िदल भी जीतते हȅ।  
 माननीय उप
सभापित जी, मुझे याद है िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने गुलाम नबी आज़ाद 
जी की टमर् खत्म होने पर फ ेयरवेल Îपीच मȂ गुलाम नबी आज़ाद जी और पूवर् महामिहम राÍटर्पित 
जी क े काम को याद िकया था िक उनके  सरकार म
Ȃ रहते हुए, जब िवपक्षी सरकार गुजरात मȂ थी, 
उस समय िकस Ģकार से उन्हȗने गुजरात क े लोगȗ को कÌमीर से पुन: वापस जाने मȂ तब मदद 
की, जब आतंकवाद चरम सीमा पर था। उस समय क े जो अनुभव Ģधान म
ंतर्ी जी ने यहां से बताए 
थे, वे एक Ģकार से हम सबको एक संदेश देते हȅ िक हम सबको अच्छी बातȂ याद करके  अच्छी 
चीज़Ȃ करने क े िलए अप
ना-अपना Ģयास करना चािहए। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने तो वाÎतव मȂ यह भी 
कहा था िक ' मȅ गुलाम नबी आज़ाद जी को सैÊयूट करता हूं और मȅ आगे भी आपसे सलाह-
मशिवरा करता रहूंगा।' चाहे सǄा दल हो या िवपक्ष, हम सब इसी िमतर्ता की भावना से आगे भी 
काम करते रहȂग
े, यह हम सबका िवÌवास है। सदन की गिरमा इसी मȂ होगी िक अगर हम देशिहत 
और जनिहत को सवȘपिर रखȂगे, तो Îवाभािवक रूप  से सदन की गिरमा बढ़ती जाएगी और अच्छे 
काम भी होते जाए
ंगे।  
 महोदय, मुझे याद आता है िक जब मȅ पहली बार मेडन Îपीच देने क े िलए उठा था, तब मȅ 
नया-नया सदÎय था। यह जुलाई, 2010 की बात है। जहां माननीय पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी जी अभी ब ैठे हȅ। 
जहां तक मुझे याद है, मȅ वहीं बाजू मȂ सैयद नािसर हुसैन जी की सीट पर बैठा था। उस समय डा. 
मनमोहन िंसह जी Ģधान मंतर्ी थे और माननीय Ģणब मुखजीर् िवǄ म ंतर्ी थे। माया िंसह जी हमारी 
चीफ िËहप थीं। उस समय IRDA और SEBI पर क ु छ वाद-िववाद चल रहा था। वे आयीं और बोलीं 
िक परसȗ तुÇहȂ िडबेट शुरू  करनी है। मȅ एकदम हैरान हो गया, क्यȗिक मुझे सदन मȂ आए हुए 2 
िदन ही हुए थे। शायद तब तक मȅने क ुतार्-पायजामा और जैक े ट भी नहीं िसलवायी थी। जब माया 
िंसह जी ने कहा िक दो िदन बाद तुÇहȂ िडबेट शुरू  करनी है, तो मȅ थोड़ा परेशान हुआ और उसी 
िदन रात को मुÇबई गया, क्यȗिक सÅजेक्ट भी मेरे िलए नया था। मȅ सेबी तो समझता था, पर 
इंÌयोरȂस क े बारे मȂ मुझे बहुत ज्यादा जानकारी नहीं थी । मȅ वाद-िववाद समझने क े िलए प
ूरे दो 
िदन तक िदन-रात िरसचर् करता रहा
, पूरी तरह से समझा िक क्या िवषय है, क्या समÎया है और 
क्या िववाद है। मुझे इसका फायदा भी हुआ। मुझे कई चीज़Ȃ मालूम पड़ीं िक जो िनजी इंÌयोरȂस 
क ंपिनयȗ की पॉिलसीज़ होती थीं, वे उस समय क ै से एकतरफा होती थीं। मुझे िवÌवास है िक अब 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

तो बहुत बदलाव आ गया होगा, पर तब नई-नई इंÌयोरȂस क ंपनीज़ आनी शुरू  हुई थीं और 
एकतरफा पॉिलसीज़ होती थीं। उसका मुझे Ëयिƪगत लाभ यह हुआ िक मȅने िनजी क ंपिनयȗ से ली 
हुई कई पॉिलसीज़ क ȅिसल कर दीं, क्यȗिक तब मेरे ध्यान मȂ आया िक क ै से वे उपभोƪाओं क े 
िखलाफ जाती थीं। उस समय मेडन Îपीच क े िलए समय की सीमा नहीं होती थी। मȅने लगभग 30-
40 घंटे मेहनत करके  पढ़ाई की थी, तो Îपीच भी लÇबी चली। मȅन
े करीब 40-42 िमनट तक अपनी 
बात रखी, पर उसका स
माधान िमला। उस समय क े माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी ने उस Îपीच क े बाद 
िडबेट पर िरÃलाई िकया। मȅ उनके  पूरे वाक्य नहीं पढ़ना चाहूंगा, बिÊक क ु छ वाक्य बताना चाहूंगा। 
उन्हȗने िजस Ģकार से मुझे एिĢिशएट िक या, िजस Ģकार से एनकरेज िकया, वह वाÎतव मȂ मेरे 
Îमरण मȂ िज़न्दगी भर रहेगा। उस समय उनकी बात मȂ जो भाव था, जो उन्हȗने एक Ģकार से 
एिĢिशएशन मȂ कहा था िक बहुत अच्छे Ģकार से मȅने अपनी मेडन Îपीच मȂ िवषय को रखा था। पूरे 
सÅजेक्ट को Îटडी िकया था, वह आगे चलकर मुझे पािर्लयामȂट की सेवा करने मȂ मदद करेगा।  
उन्हȗने यहां तक कहा था "This is the Chamber, this is  the system, where we ag
ree to 
disagree.  There will be divergence of views,  there will be differences of opinion, and 
through these divergences, through these diffe rences of opinion, through discussion, 
we will arrive at a solution." उनका यह वाक्य मुझे िंजदगी भर एक Ģकार स े िदशा िदखाता है 
िक क ै से आगे चलकर हमȂ अपनी बात रखनी है और दूसरȗ की बात से भी सीखना है।  मुझे याद 
आता है, डा. मनमोहन िंसह जी सामने बैठे हȅ,  एक बार cash for votes scandal हुआ था, 
उसके  ऊपर बड़ी गÇभीर चचार् चल रही थी।  माननीय मनमोहन िंसह जी ने उदूर् क े शायर िमज़ार् 
गािलब जी को क्वोट िकया
 था :  
"हमको है उनसे वफ़ा की उÇमीद 
                                                 जो नहीं जानते वफ़ा क्या है।"  
 उसी समय तुरंत माननीय सुषमा Îवराज जी, जो उस तरफ ब ैठी थीं, उन्हȗने जवाब मȂ 
कहा : 
"क ु छ तो मजबूिरयां रही हȗगी, 
यूँ ही कोई बेवफा नहीं होता।" 
 
 यह जो दोनȗ तरफ भावना थी, वह वाÎतव मȂ इस सदन की गिरमा बढ़ाती थी। यह जो छाप 
है,  
इस Ģकार की यादȂ हम यहां से लेकर जब नए सदन क े नए Ģांगण मȂ जाएंगे, नए वाÎतु मȂ 
जाएंगे, तो मȅ समझता हूं िक हम सभी Ģयास करȂगे िक और अच्छे तरीके  से हम आगे अपना-अपना 
काम कर सकȂ ।  अटल जी ने एक बार मई, 1996 मȂ अपने ऐितहािसक भाषण मȂ कहा था िक सǄा 
का तो खेल चलेगा, सरकारȂ आएंगी, जाएंगी, पािर्टयां बनȂगी, िबगड़Ȃगी, मगर यह देश रहना 
चािहए,  इस  देश का लोकतंतर् अमर रहना चािहए।  मȅ समझता ह ूं िक हम सबको कभी न कभी 
reconcile करना पड़ेगा िक पिरिÎथितयां बदली हȅ और हम कोई भी entitled नहीं हȅ।  यह sense 
of entitlement कई जगह पर देखने को िमलती है, कई जगह पर अनुभव होती है। उससे जब देश 
उठेगा, तो मȅ समझता हूं िक सही मायने मȂ देश की सेवा मȂ हम और अच्छा काम कर सकȂ गे।  सर, 
छोटे-छोटे Ģतीक होते ह
ȅ - जैसे सभी मंितर्यȗ की लाल बǄी खत्म कर दी गई थी।  यह छोटा 
Ģतीक है, लेिकन बहुत बड़ा म
ैसेज देश को गया िक sense of entitlement िकसी क े िलए भी अब 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
13

इस देश मȂ नहीं चल सकती है।  वषर् 2014 मȂ हमारी सरकार बनी, वह भी एक ऐितहािसक मौका 
था, क्यȗिक पहली बार गैर-कांगर्ेसी सरकार पूणर् बहुमत क े साथ देश ने चुनकर भेजी थी।  2014 से 
अभी तक इस सदन मȂ कई सारे बड़े landmark legislations पास िकए गए हȅ, िजनका देश की 
िवकास यातर्ा मȂ और सामािजक
 समरसता, समाज को आगे लेकर जाने मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान है।  
मȅ समझता हूं िक कोई भी इस बात से इंकार नहीं कर सकता िक नौ वषर् का समय बड़ा 
transformative, देश
 क े बदलाव का समय रहा है।  आज माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी  नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ और  माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी िनमर्ला जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारत िवÌव की पांचवीं सबसे बड़ी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा बना है और हम सबने एक Ģकार से उस Ģवाह मȂ अपना-अपना योगदान िदया, 
अपना-अपना काम िकया, अपनी िजÇमेदारी िनभाई। मȅ सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ को इस बात की 
बधाई भी देना चाहता हूं। मȅ समझता हूं िक सबकी इच्छा है और जैसा माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
कहा िक अगले टमर् मȂ, अगले चार-पांच वषș मȂ द
ेश िवÌव की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन 
जाएगा और 2047 तक हम एक िवकिसत भारत क े रूप  मȂ लोकतंतर् क े 100 वषर् मनाएंगे।   
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, जब हमने 5 अगÎत, 2019 को आिर्टकल 370 और 35(A) को 
समाÃत करने का एक बड़ा
 ऐितहािसक िनणर्य इस सदन मȂ िलया, यह सही मायने मȂ एक Ģकार से 
देश को जोड़ने क े िलए, देश को एक बनाने क े िलए िलया गया कदम था। िजस देश  मȂ हम सबकी 
इच्छा थी िक एक संिवधान रहे, एक ही कानून ËयवÎथा  रहे,  कान ून  ËयवÎथा  सभी क े िलए 
समान रहे और जो-जो लाभ देश क े अन्य इलाकȗ मȂ लोगȗ को िमलते हȅ, वे हमारे कÌमीर क े भाई-
बहनȗ को भी िमलȂ। उसके  िलए एक बहुत अहम कदम इस सदन से शुरू  हुआ था और िफर यहां से 
लोक सभा मȂ गया था।  5 अगÎत, 2019 का वह िदन इस सदन क े िलए सदैव एक बहुत ही 
यादगार और ऐितहािसक िदन रहेगा।  सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल का देश की एकता और 
एकजुटता को मजबूत करने की इच्छा, तीĨ इच्छा शिƪ, काम और Ģ
यास था, हमने उस िदन 
पूरी तरीके  से सÇपन्न करके  देश को एक बनाने का काम पूरा िकया।  वैसे जब आिर्टकल 370 लगा 
था, तब उस समय क े Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इच्छा जािहर की थी िक यह तो टेÇपररी Ģोिवज़न है, क ु छ 
वषș मȂ यह िनकल जाएगा और जÇमू-कÌमीर को अपना खुद का भिवÍय भारत क े साथ अच्छे 
तरीके  से बनाने मȂ क ु छ समय लगेगा।  वह क ु छ समय थोड़ा लÇबा हो गया, पर हम सब क
े  िलए 
आनंद की बात है िक हमने वह िनणर्य 2019 मȂ िलया।   
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, क ु छ अन्य चीज़Ȃ भी हमारे ध्यान मȂ आती हȅ।  जैसे उǄराखंड, 
छǄीसगढ़ और झारखंड बनाने का िवषय था।  िकतने सुंदर तरीके  से, लगभग सबकी सवर्सÇमित 
से और एक साथ िमल-जुलकर ये तीन नए राज्य बने।  इन तीनȗ राज्यȗ को अपना आगे का भिवÍय 
तय करने का मौका िमला और कन्सȂसस क े साथ पीसफु ली डायलॉग और िडÎकशन क
े  माध्यम से 
ये तीनȗ राज्य बने।  थोड़े-बहुत दुभार्ग्य की बात है िक कई ऐसे िवषय होते हȅ, िजन पर हम ऐसी 
सवर्सÇमित नहीं बना पाते हȅ।  म
ȅ समझता हूं िक अगर हम उसमȂ भी शालीनता क े साथ अपनी-
अपनी बात रखकर आगे चलȂ, तो ज्यादा अच्छा रहेगा।  मुझे याद है, जब तेलंगाना का नया राज्य 
बना, तो मȅ भी इस सदन मȂ था।  वे दृÌय शायद एक बहुत खराब उदाहरण क े रूप  म Ȃ इस देश क े 
Îमरण मȂ रहȂगे।  मȅ उÇमीद करता हूं िक आगे हमारे नए भवन मȂ ऐसा दृÌय देश और दुिनया को 
कभी न देखना पड़े।   
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 माननीय उपसभापित जी, 2017 मȂ ऐितहािसक गुड्स एंड सिर्वसेज़ टैक्स आया, िजससे 
'वन नेशन, वन टैक्स' Îथािपत हुआ।  मȅ इसको इसिलए ऐितहािसक कहता हूं, क्यȗिक लगभग 
एक Ģकार से यह भी सवर्सÇमित से बना।  इसमȂ पूरे देश की सÇमित थी और देश क े हर राज्य ने 
इसमȂ अपना सहयोग िदया।  We are the House of Elders refl
ecting the States' wishes and 
desires. इस Ģकार से सभी राज्य िमलकर हमारे पास यह ĢÎताव लाए।  वह जो 2017 का िदन 
है, वह ऐितहािसक िमडनाइट सेशन 30 जून  - 1 जुलाई, 2017 की रात को सेन्टर्ल हॉल मȂ हुआ।  
आज उसका लाभ पूरा देश अनुभव कर रहा है, उससे Ëयापार, उǏोग को नया बल िमला है और 
बहुत तेज गित से देश आगे बढ़ रहा है।  कई सारे ऐसे िनणर्य भी थे, जो बहुत महत्वपूणर् रहे।  उनमȂ 
से एक abolition of Privy Purses िवषय था, िजसमȂ अलग-अलग
 ËयूÃवाइंट्स  थे और 
पािर्लयामȂट ने उसको पास करके  एक बड़ा अच्छा संदेश िदया।  इसी Ģकार, िटर्पल तलाक को 
िकर्िमनलाइज़ िकया गया और उसका कानून 2019 मȂ लाया गया।  इससे हमारी बहनȗ, माताओं 
को अपना सÇमान िमला।  यह एक
 बड़ा significant reform का measure था , िजसने  gender 
discrimination को समाÃत करने मȂ अपना योगदान िदया है।  इस Ģकार यह सरकार मिहलाओं 
क े सÇमान क े िलए तत्पर रही है और नौ - साढ़े नौ वषș मȂ लगातार एक क े बाद एक कई सारे बड़े 
िनणर्य हमारी बहनȗ, माताओं और बेिटयȗ क
े  िलए इस देश मȂ िलए गए हȅ।   हम चाहते हȅ िक right 
from day one, 'बेटी बचाओ, बेटी पढ़ाओ' से लेकर आज तक और भिवÍय मȂ भी हमारी बहनȗ को 
और अच्छा सÇमान और Îथान िमले।  हम ऑलरेडी देख रहे हȅ िक आज बड़े पैमाने मȂ हमारी बहनȂ 
काम कर रही ह
ȅ, they are joining the workforce.  भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ और भारत क े आगे 
क े भिवÍय मȂ भी उनका योगदान बढ़े, मुझे लगता है िक यह हम सबका Ģयास है और हम सबकी 
इच्छा भी ह
ै।   
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, हमारे सामने क ु छ खराब उदाहरण भी हȅ, िजनसे हमȂ सीखने को 
िमला।  जैसे, पािर्लयामȂट मȂ जो अटैक हुआ था, उससे हम सबको और ज्यादा चौकन्ना रहना 
पड़ेगा। जो सुरक्षा क े Ģयास िकए जाते हȅ, सुरक्षाकमीर् जो अपना काम करते हȅ, हमारी सुरक्षा करते 
हȅ, देश की सुरक्षा करते हȅ और हमारे द
ेश की आन, बान और शान को संभालने क े िलए, जो 
सुरक्षाकमीर् काम करते हȅ, मȅ समझता हूं िक उसमȂ हम सबका भी योगदान हो, हम भी co-
operate करȂ तथा  हम भी sense of entitlement से ऊपर उठ जाए
ं, तो शायद सुरक्षा और देश 
क े सÇमान की सुरक्षा अच्छी तरह से हो पाएगी और 2001 जैसे अटैक कभी नहीं हो पाएंगे।  उसके  
बाद हमने पूरे देश को एक संदेश unity  का िदया िक हमारे लोकतंतर् को को
ई हरा नहीं सकता है।  
Our democracy is invincible.  परंतु मुझे लगता है िक इसको पुनः हम Îमरण करते रहȂ और 
आगे भी कभी हमारे देश की एकता और एकजुटता पर कोई आघात नहीं आए, यह हम सबका 
एक सामूिहक Ģयास रहना चािहए। माननीय Ģधान म
ंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ आज 
भारत बहुत आत्मिवÌवास क े साथ, बहुत तेज गित से िवकास क े Ģवाह मȂ आगे बढ़ रहा है। इसमȂ 
कई सारे मौके  हम सबके  िलए आते हȅ िजसमȂ एक आवाज़ से देशिहत और जनिहत को हम आगे 
लेकर जा सकते हȅ। मȅ समझत
ा हूं िक जो हमने पुराने lessons सीखे हȅ, उनसे हमȂ भिवÍय को 
बनाने मȂ और अच्छा बल िमलेगा । ज
ैसे जब इमरजȂसी आई थी और एक Ģकार से भारत क े 
लोकतंतर् क े कई सारे Ģावधान रोक िदए गए थे, उन पर अंक ु श लगा िदया गया था, तब माननीय 
अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने कहा था : -  
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
15

 
“अनुशासन क े नाम पर, अनुशासन का खून, 
भंग कर िदया संघ को, क ैसा चढ़ा जुनून।” 
 
  मȅ समझता हूं िक यह पूरे देश क े िलए एक  wake-up call  थी । हमने कई सारे  इसमȂ से 
सबक सीखे और आगे चलकर जो 42nd Constitution Amendment था, उसको भी पुनः बदला 
गया तथा  44th Constitution Amendment, 1978 मȂ आया। जो हमारे Fundamental Rights  क े 
ऊपर अंक ु श लगा था, उसको पुनः एक बार Îथािपत िकया गया और बाद मȂ तो बहुत सारे मौके  
आए, जब सदन मȂ भी और और कोट्सर् ने भी भारत क े जो  basic principles हȅ, हमारी आजादी 
क े, हमारे संिवधान क े, उनको कोई आघात न पहुं चे, उसके  िलए कई सारे कदम हम सबने और 
देशवािसयȗ ने उठाए हȅ। 
  माननीय उपसभापित जी, कई सारे ऐसे कानून थे, जो गुलामी  क े समय से चले आ रहे थे। 
हम एक Ģयास कर रहे हȅ िक उन कानूनȗ को भी बदला जाए, contemporary, आधुिनक बनाया 
जाए,  आज क े बदले हुए पिरĢेÑय मȂ क ै से वे रेलेवȂट हȗ, उसके  िलए सभी सरका
रȂ Ģयास करती हȅ। 
पहले Companies Act, 1956  का था, जो पूरे तरीके  से लाइसȂस राज को बल  देता था, उसको 
2013 मȂ बदला गया और कई सारे measures िलए गए िजससे उǏोग तथा Ëयापार को और बल 
िमल सके । उसमȂ भी समय -समय पर कई सारे और बदलाव 2014 से 2022 तक लाए गए हȅ, 
िजससे आज ईज़ ऑफ ड ू इंग िबज़नेस को और ईज़ ऑफ िलिंवग को हमने अपनी Ģाथिमकता 
बनाते हुए, द
ेश को आगे बढ़ाने का काम िकया है। जो नई पािर्लयामȂट की िबिंÊडग बनी है, यह भी 
अपने आप मȂ बहुत गवर् की बात है और हम सबके  िलए गवर् की बात है। यह हम सबका सदन है।  
आधुिनकता से पूरा युग और आगे भिवÍय की जो जरूरत Ȃ हȅ, उनको पूरा करने वाला यह नया 
वाÎतु, मȅ समझता हूं िक पूरे िवÌव मȂ भारत क े िलए एक नये उत्साह और एक  नई उमंग क े साथ 
आगे जाने का एक संदेश पहुंचाएगा।  ऐसे ही िपछले दो महीनȗ मȂ भारत मंडपç, जो पुराना Ģगित 
मैदान था और एक ǎारका मȂ िÎथत यशोभूिम सȂटर  का उǉाटन माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी  Ǜी नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी ने िकया है।  ये दोनȗ नये भारत क े Ģतीक क े रूप  मȂ देश को आगे लेकर जाएंगे।  अब 
हमारा देश िवÌवÎतरीय  fairs,
 exhibitions, conventions, conferences कर पाएगा और 
उसका एक जीता-जागता Îवरूप G20 Leaders' Summit  मȂ भी देखा गया। ये सब िनणर्य इस 
देश
 को आगे ले जाने क े िलए समावेशी और एक Ģकार से पारदिर्शता क े Ģतीक क े रूप  मȂ लोगȗ 
की आशाएं, अपेक्षाएं पूरा करने क े िलए, सबका Ģयास हȅ।  
 
12.00 Noon 
 
हम सब िमलकर इस Ģयास म
Ȃ जुड़Ȃ, देशवािसयȗ का िवÌवास जीतȂ और देशवािसयȗ को एक 
कǄर्Ëय भावना से जोड़Ȃ। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने आज़ादी क े अमृत महोत्सव मȂ लाल िकले से जो 
पाँच Ģण िदए थे िक हम सभी 140 करोड़  द ेशवासी कǄर्Ëय भावना से देश की एकता और 
एकजुटता को संभालȂ, देश को गुलामी की मानिसकता से िनकालȂ। हमारे इितहास से हमȂ जो 
सीखने को िमला है, हमारे इितहास मȂ, हमारी परंपराओं मȂ जो िरच कÊचर और हैिरटेज है, 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

पािरवािरक वैÊयू िसÎटÇस हȅ, उन सबसे हम जो सीखते हȅ, उन सभी को कǄर्Ëय भावना से आगे 
लेकर जाएं, नारी शिƪ का सÇमान करȂ और एक ĥÍटाचार मुƪ भारत को िवकिसत भारत बनाने 
का संकÊप लेकर हम सभी आगे चलȂ। इस इच्छा क े साथ, इस सदन मȂ जो आज का िवषय ह ै, हम 
सभी उस पर चचार् करȂ। डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी का संिवधान सभा, अथार्Þ काँÎटीǷूएंट 
असेÇबली मȂ जो भाषण था, िजसमȂ उन्हȗने कहा था, and I quote, "When constitutional 
methods are open, there could be no just ification for unconstitutional methods."  मȅ 
समझता हूं िक यह एक बड़ा अच्छा वाक्य है, जो हम सभी को याद िदलाता रहता है िक आगे 
चलकर भी यह सदन अपनी  गिरमा कायम रखे। इितहास क े पन्नȗ से हमȂ बहुत क ु छ सीखने को 
िमला है, हम सभी क े अपने-अपने अनुभव हȅ। जब हम इस सुंदर सदन मȂ पुराने िदन याद करते हȅ, 
तो अच्छे-अच्छे िवचार आते हȅ। इस महत्
वपूणर् कक्ष मȂ हम सभी ने िमलकर जो पल गुज़ारे हȅ, हम 
उन पलȗ को एक याददाÌत क े रूप  मȂ सँवारे। हम जब नये भवन मȂ जाएँ, नये वाÎतु मȂ जाएँ, तो 
नयी सोच क े साथ इस देश की िदशा और दशा को नया रूप  देने क े िलए, भारत क े 140 करोड़ 
लोगȗ की आशा
ओं, अपेक्षाओं को पूरा करने क े िलए  हम सभी संकÊप लेकर Ģितबǉता क े साथ 
कल नये सदन मȂ Ģवेश करȂ। मȅ उसके  िलए आप सभी को तहेिदल से बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूं 
और नये सदन की शुभकामनाएं देता हूं, धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद, माननीय पीयूष गोयल जी। अब िवपक्ष क
े  नेता, माननीय Ǜी 
मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी, अपना भाषण दीिजए।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सभापित जी, क्यȗिक आपने मुझे जÊदी बुलाया और मुझे अपनी बात रखने 
का मौका िमला, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभारी हूं। मȅ अपनी बात इस शतर् से शुरू  करूं गा, तािक 
कोई यह न समझे िक यह हमारे िलए ही बोल रहे हȅ, बिÊक जो आम जनता बोलती है, मȅ वही बात 
यहाँ रख रहा हूं। मȅ आगे यह भी बोलूंगा िक संिवधान क
ै से बना, संिवधान क े तहत हम कहाँ तक 
चल पाए और हमȂ संिवधान न े  िजतनी आज़ादी दी है, हम उसका कहाँ तक, िकस ढंग से और 
अच्छे तरीके  से देश को बनाने मȂ इÎतेमाल कर रहे हȅ। महोदय, यह बहुत बड़ी बात है। ठीक है, 
आपके  भाषण मȂ आपकी अचीवमȂट्स भी आईं, आपके  अनुभव भी आए और आप जो चाहते थे, 
उसको यहाँ पर रखने की कोिशश भी की गई है, लेिकन मȅ अपनी बात इससे शुरू  करता हूं िक,  
''बदलना है, तो अब हालात बदलो, 
ऐसे नाम बदलने से क्या होता है? 
देना है, तो युवाओं को रोज़गार दो, 
सबको बेरोज़गार करके  क्या होता है? 
िदल को थोड़ा बड़ा करके  देखो, 
लोगȗ को मारने से क्या होता है? 
क ु छ कर नहीं सकते, तो क ुसीर् छोड़ दो 
बात-बात मȂ डराने से क्या होता है?'' 
"बात-बात मȂ डराने से क्या होता है, 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
17

अपनी हुक्मरानी पर तुÇहȂ गरूर है, 
लोगȗ को डराने से, धमकाने से क्या होता है। 
बदलना है तो हालात बदलो, 
ऐसे नाम बदलने से क्या होता है, 
और यहाँ से वहाँ जाने से और क्या होता है।" 
 
 सर, तो सबको देश पर गवर् है और इसीिलए मȅ यह कहूँगा िक आजादी क े बाद जो 
संिवधान बना, इस संिवधान क े तहत हम सभी को चलना है और देश क े िलए हमȂ क ु छ करना है।  
इसमȂ मȅ एक ही बात कहूँगा िक इस पािर्लयामȂटरी जनीर् मȂ संिवधान सभा क े  जो 75 साल  हुए, 
उसके  एचीवमȂट, एक्सपीिरयंस, मेमोरीज़ और लिनȊग्ज़, इस पर ही हमȂ बात करनी थी।  इसी पर 
मȅ थोड़े शÅदȗ मȂ यह कहूँगा िक असेÇबली और पािर्लयामȂट िमला कर इस जनीर् म Ȃ मेरा भी 52 साल 
का िहÎसा है, लेिकन मुझे यहाँ ज्यादा समय नहीं िमला।  मुझे वहीं रहना पड़ा, मȅ बȂगलुरु  मȂ ही था।  
मुझे यहाँ बहुत से नेताओं क े भाषण सुनने का कम मौका िमला, िसफर् 14 साल िमले।  राजीव शुक्ला 
जी, आप कहाँ जा रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवध
ान)... बड़ी हड़बड़ी मȂ जा रहे थे, मुझे लगा, तो इसिलए मȅने 
पूछा था।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : यह टच करना कानून का उÊलंघन भी है। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, हमारे हाउस मȂ उÊलंघन बहुत होते हȅ, िफर भी आप िदलदार हȅ, तो 
उसको सँभाल लेते हȅ।  इसीिलए मȅने कहा िक संजय िंसह और राघव चǀा को बुला लीिजए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... राजीव शुक्ला जी आ गए।  म ुझे वही िंचता थी िक क्या वे उधर गए! ...(Ëयवधान)... 
सर, यह भवन आजाद भारत क े सारे बड़े फ ैसलȗ का गवाह है।  इसी भवन मȂ हमारी संिवधान सभा 
11 सतर्ȗ मȂ 165 िदन बैठी।  उसने 90 हजार शÅदȗ वाला जो संिवधान बनाया, वह 26 जनवरी, 1950 
को लागू हुआ था।  जब 26 नवंबर, 1949 को संिवधान सभा ने इसकी मंजूरी दी, तो वहाँ की बहस 
सुनने क े िलए इस मौके  पर करीब 53 हजार िविज़टसर् आए थे।   
 सभापित जी, आपने अपने जयपुर क े पीठासीन अिधक ारी सÇमेलन मȂ संिवधान सभा क े 11 
सतर्ȗ क े Ëयवधान रिहत संचालन को एक आदशर् िÎथित कहा था।  यानी वह िकस ढंग से चली और 
िकतनी अच्छी िÎथित थी, यह आपने जयपुर क े अपने वƪËय मȂ कहा।  वह एक ऐसा वƪ था, जब 
लोग सबको लेकर चलते थे और लोकतंतर् को ठीक ढंग से, ठीक राÎते पर ल
े जाने क े िलए िकतनी 
कोिशशȂ होती थीं, इससे यह अंदाजा लगता है। उस वƪ Ģाइम िमिनÎटर कौन थे? पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  थे। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  सर, आपकी याददाÌत बहुत अच्छी है, आप उधर की तरफ क्यȗ देख रहे हȅ? 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह tactical है। ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसा लगता है िक बहुत अच्छा िÎकर्Ãट िकया हुआ 
है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
एक माननीय सदÎय : सर, आपको याद िदला रहे थे। 
Ǜी दीपेन्दर् िंसह हुƿा  (हिरयाणा): आपने जो संिवधान सभा की Ģशंसा की, नेहरू  जी की तारीफ 
उसी मȂ िनिहत थी।  
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  िबÊकु ल ऐसा ही था, क्यȗिक तब राÍटर् की बुिनयाद रखने का काम हो रहा 
था। बुिनयाद क े अंदर जो पत्थर होते हȅ, वे िदखते नहीं है, लेिकन िजस वॉल पर आप नाम 
िलखवाते हȅ, वही िदखती है। आप कहीं भी जाइए, आपने तो अब तक अनेकȗ कोट्सर् का उǇाटन 
िकया होगा.. आप कहीं भी जाइए, िबिंÊडग िजस बुिनयाद पर ठहरत
ी है, उसके  अंदर क े मज़बूत 
पत्थर िकसी को नहीं िदखते, लेिकन ऊपर का नाम ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय खरगे जी, मȅ हाल ही मȂ भारत मंडपç गया था। मȅने वहां की नींव भी देखी 
और ऊपर भी देखा।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :   मȅ भी यही बोल रहा हूं िक आपने बहुत से भवन देखे हȗगे। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : दुिनया क े नेताओं ने मुझे जो कहा, उनकी बात सुन कर मȅ आÌचयर्चिकत हो गया। 
वहां उसकी नींव का आधार भी समझ मȂ आया और ऊपर का भी समझ मȂ आया।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  साहब, इतनी िबिंÊडग्स और इमारतȂ बनी हȗगी, राजे-रजवाड़ȗ क े  महल 
बने हȗगे और हमारी यह पािर्लयामȂट भी बनी, जो पहले की है। नई पािर्लयामȂट मȂ जाने मȂ अभी 
िदक्कतȂ हȅ, क्यȗिक कौन िदखे, कौन नहीं िदखे, पता नहीं। हमारी जगह कहां होगी, वह भी ढ ूंढ़नी 
पड़ेगी। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : उसमȂ मȅ आपकी मदद करूं गा, आज ही करूं गा।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :   संिवधान सभा मȂ िविभन्न धाराओं क े महान नायक चुने गए थे, जो अपने 
दौर क े महारथी थे। उन सबका बहुत बड़ा जमीनी अनुभव भी था। Îवतंतर्ता, समानता, न्याय, 
मानवीय गिरमा और लोकतंतर् उनकी नसȗ मȂ समाया था और उसके  िलए ही वे लड़ रहे थे। 
संिवधान िनमार्ताओं न
े उस वƪ हमȂ जो संिवधान िदया, वही आज भी हमȂ एक बनाए हुए है। उसी 
संिवधान ने राÍटर् क े िलए सशƪ ढांचा तैयार िकया है और उसी क े कारण लोकतंतर् क े िसǉांत 
और Ëयवहार आज भी जनता क
े  Îवभाव का अिभन्न अंग हȅ।  
 भारतीय संिवधान हमारा सबसे बड़ा मागर्दशर्क है, उसी क े आधार पर संसदीय Ģणाली  क े 
हक मȂ फ ैसला हुआ। हमको जो एडÊट ģ Ȃचाइज़ िमला, वह सबसे बड़ ी बात है। आपको मालूम ही है 
िक 1935 ऐक्ट क े तहत जो वोिंटग राइट्स थे, वे उनको थे, जो इन्कम टैक्स देते थे, िजनके  पास 
जमीन थी, जो पढ़े-िलखे थे। पहले उसी तरह क े लोगȗ को ही वोिंटग का अिध कार था, लेिकन 
हमारा जो संिवधान बना, पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू , डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर, सरदार वÊलभ 
भाई पटेल या बहुत से अन्य महान नेता उस वƪ कॉिÎटǷूएंट असैÇबली मȂ थे, उन्हȗने ही हमȂ 
एडÊट ģ Ȃचाइज़ िदया। आप पढ़े-िलखे हȗ या अन
पढ़ हȗ, गरीब हȗ या अमीर हȗ, सबको एकसमान 
वोट का अिधकार िमला और उनके  वोट की वैÊयू भी एक ही रखी गई। फज़र् कीिजए, एक बहुत 
 
  
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
19

अमीर बड़ा आदमी हो, अडाणी क े जैसा अमीर आदमी, उसको भी एक ही वोट का अिधकार िदया 
गया। सबके  वोट्स की वैÊयू भी एक समान रखी गई। हमारे जो छोटे कायș मȂ लगे हुए कमर्चारी हȅ, 
उनको भी एक ही वोट का अिधकार िदया गया। यह अिधकार िकसने िदया, यह अिधकार हमारा 
काँिÎटǷूशन बनाने वाले कांगर्ेस क े लोगȗ ने िदया, जो लोग उस वƪ आज़
ादी क े िलए लड़े, हमȂ 
आज़ादी िदलवाई, उसके  बाद यह ढांचा बना। इसीिलए आज भी एडÊट ģ Ȃचाइज़ से यह देश 
िजन्दा है, एक है और इंक्लूिसव है।  अगर इंक्लूिसव बोलȂ तो उनको थोड़ा सा डर होता है।  
इंक्लूिसव बोलȂ तो ' इंिडया' को छोटा करने क े िलए हमारे नƿा साहब
 ' इंडी' बोलते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... ठीक है, इसीिलए तो बोला िक नाम बदलने से क ु छ नहीं होता। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
'
इंडी' बोलो ...(Ëयवधान)... 'इंडी' बोलो या क ु छ भी बोलो, हम हȅ - ' इंिडया।' ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आप क ु छ भी बोलȂ, हम सब 'इंिडया' हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप क्यȗ 
बोलते हȅ?  आप बȂगलुरु  से आये हȅ, चुप बैिठए।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 सर, हमारे नायकȗ ने बहुत म
ंथन करके  जो संिवधान िदया, वह जनता की आकांक्षाओं पर 
खरा उतरा है।  अगर आपकी इजाज़त हो तो बाबा साहेब ने संिवधान सभा क े अपने अिन्तम भाषण 
म
Ȃ जो कहा था, वह मȅ क्वोट करना चाहता हूँ।  क्या आपकी इजाज़त है?   
 
Ǜी सभापित : है। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : "मौज ूदा मसौदा सिमित का कायर् बहुत ही किठन हो जाता, यिद यह 
संिवधान सभा िविभन्न िवचार वाले Ëयिƪयȗ का एक
  समुदाय मातर् होती।"  यह िविभन्न 
िवचारधाराओं क े लोगȗ का एक समुदाय मातर् होती।   " यह एक उखड़े हुए फशर् क े समान होती, 
िजसमȂ कहीं काला पत्थर होता, तो कहीं सफे द और िजसमȂ Ģत्येक Ëयिƪ या Ģत्येक समुदाय Îवयं 
अपने को िविधवेǄा समझता।  िसवाय उपदर्व क े और क ु छ नहीं होता।"  यानी व
े उस वƪ बोल रहे 
हȅ िक इतना सब रहने से िसवाय उपदर्व क े क ु छ नहीं होता।  "सभा मȂ कांगर्ेस पक्ष की उपिÎथित ने 
इस उपदर्व की सÇभावना को पूणर्त: िमटा िदया और इसी क े कारण कायर्वािहयȗ मȂ ËयवÎथा और 
अनुशासन दोनȗ बने।  कांगर्ेस पक्ष क े अनुशासन क े कारण ही मसौदा सिमित, यह िनिÌचत रूप  मȂ 
जान कर िक Ģत्येक
 अनुच्छेद और Ģत्येक संशोधन का क्या भाग्य होगा, इस संिवधान का 
संचालन कर बैठी।"  तो बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने यह कांगर्ेस क े िलए कहा है िक क ै से संिवधान 
बना, क्यȗिक उस वƪ इतने िडफरȂट लोग थे, इंटेिलजȂट लोग थे और अगर वे एक-दूसरे से लड़ते 
भी थे, तो बाहर आकर एक होते थे।  वे कभी िकसी क े ऊपर क
ु छ नुƪाचीनी करने नहीं बैठते थे।   
 सर, मȅ आपको एक और बात बताना चाहता हूँ िक बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने डर्ािंÄटग - 
यानी संिवधान बनाने क े िल
ए िकतनी कोिशशȂ की हȅ, यह बहुत लोगȗ को मालूम नहीं है।  क ु छ यह 
कह दȂ िक वे डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी क े चेयरमैन थे, वह क्या है, यह क्या है- ऐसा बोलने वाले लोग बहुत 
हȅ, क्यȗिक िकसी Ëयिƪ को लोग नहीं चाहते हȅ, खास कर दिलतȗ की हमेशा यह हालत होती है।  
उन्हȗने इतना कÍट सहन करके , रात-िदन ब
ैठ कर संिवधान बनाया।  उस पर टी.टी. 
क ृÍणमाचारी जी का एक ÎटेटमȂट है, जो मȅ आपके  सामने पढ़ कर बताता हूँ ।  " संिवधान का 
िनमार्ण करने वाली चुिंनदा 7 सदÎयȗ की डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी मȂ सबसे बड़ी भूिमका डा. अÇबेडकर ने 
िनभाई।  इसमȂ 7 सदÎय थे।  इसमȂ क्या होता था?  उसके  7 सदÎयȗ मȂ से एक सदÎय ने त्यागपतर् 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

िदया, िकतने बचे - 6; एक सदÎय का िनधन हो गया, िकतने बचे - 5; जबिक  एक सदÎय 
अमेिरका चला गया, एक सदÎय िरयासत क े कायș मȂ ËयÎत रहा और 2 सदÎय िदÊली से दूर थे, 
उनकी सेहत खराब होने क े कारण मौजूदगी कम होती थी, तो सारा दारोमदार बाबा साहेब 
अÇबेडकर पर था।"सर,
 यह इितहास है, लेिकन हम इसको कभी नहीं कहते हȅ। ये बार-बार यही 
बोलते हȅ िक ये डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी क े चेयरमैन थे तथा सब मेÇबसर् ने िमल कर इसको बनाया है। 
टी.टी. क ृÍणमाचारी, जो Constituent Assembly क े मेÇबर थे और खासकर डर्ािंÄटग कमेटी क े 
मेÇबर थे, उन्हȗने यह बात कही है। इस Ģकार एक
 Ëयिƪ ने देश को बदलने क े िलए, संिवधान को 
मजबूत करने क े िलए, लोकतंतर् को मजबूत करने क े िलए और संिवधान को जीिवत रखने क े िलए 
सबसे  क
ं सÊट करके  जो consensus बनाया - वह िकसके  जमाने मȂ हुआ? वह काँगर्ेस ने िकया। 
हम उसकी रक्षा क े िलए लड़ रहे हȅ, हम उसके  िलए तैयार  हो गए हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... हम यह नहीं 
समझते िक हम जो कहȂगे, वह हमको िमलेगा। हम सभी का एक इरादा है िक जो चीज़ इतने कÍट 
से, इतनी मेहनत से कमाई है, उसको हम गँवाना नहीं चाहते हȅ।  
 उसके  बाद, जब 1950 मȂ भारत ने लोकतंतर् अपनाया
, तब बहुत-से िवदेशी िवǎानȗ को 
लगता था िक यहाँ लोकतंतर् िवफल हो जाएगा, क्यȗिक ये करोड़ȗ अंगूठा छाप लोग हȅ। सर, 
आपको तो मालूम है, मुझे बोलने की आवÌयकता नहीं है, लेिकन िफर भी मȅ कह रहा हूँ। उस 
समय िĤिटश Ģधान मंतर्ी, चिर्
चल ने कहा था, " अंगर्ेज चले गए, तो उनके  ǎारा Îथािपत 
न्यायपािलका, ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाएँ, रेलवे और लोक िनमार्ण का पूरा तंतर् खत्म हो जाएगा"। यह चिर्चल 
ने कहा था, यानी हमȂ इतना undermine िकया गया िक ये लोग अनपढ़ ह
ȅ, अँगूठा छाप हȅ, ये लोग 
क्या करȂगे, डेमोकर्सी को क ै से िटकाएँगे, लेिकन हमने िटका कर िदखाया। हमने इसको मजबूत 
िकया, इसका संरक्षण िकया, लेिकन बार-बार हमȂ टोका जाता है िक 70 साल मȂ आपने क्या 
िकया? हमने 70 साल  मȂ यही िकया, हमने इसको मजबूती दी, हमने लोकतंतर् को बचाया और 
संिवधान को लेकर आगे बढ़े। आपके  पास बोलने क े िलए क ु छ नहीं है, इसिलए आप बार-बार यही 
बोलते जाते हȅ, लेिकन आप और िकतने िदनȗ तक यह बोलते रहȂगे? 
 सर, वÊडर् वार-II क े बाद आज़ाद ह
ुए सात देशȗ मȂ सैिनक तानाशाही थी, िफर भी हमारे 
लोगȗ ने मजबूती क े साथ इस देश मȂ इस संिवधान को िटकाया, ड ेमोकर्सी को िटकाया, लेिकन 
हमारे यहाँ सǄा का हÎतांतरण गोली-बंदूक से नहीं हुआ। महात्मा गाँधी जी ने हमȂ जो आज़ादी 
िदलाई, वह non-violence और non-cooperation से िदलाई। इसीिलए हमारे संिवधान क े  जो 
आदशर् हमारे सामने हȅ, उनकी वजह से आज सभी लोग इसका पालन करते हȅ और इसको आगे 
ले जाते हȅ।  
 सर, मȅ दूसरी बात यह कहूँगा िक इस भवन मȂ 75 सालȗ क े दौरान देश की िकÎमत बदली 
है और देश की सूरत बदलने वाले तमाम कानून यहाँ बने हȅ। जमींदारी एबोिलशन कानून, छ ुआछू त 
िमटाने संबंधी कानून, ओबीसी आरक्षण कानून, EWS 
को आरक्षण देने संबंधी कानून सिहत तमाम 
कानून यहाँ पर बने।  
 सभापित जी, मȅ पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी जवाहरलाल न
ेहरू  जी का खास तौर पर िजकर् करना 
चाहता हूँ। उनका मानना था िक संसद तभी तक Ģासांिगक रहती है, जब तक यह समय क े साथ 
बदलती जरूरतȗ क े मुतािबक िनरंतर िवकिसत, गि
तशील संÎथा बनी रहती है। तेजी से बदलाव 
क े दौर मȂ संसद को तेजी से काम करना होगा। यह नेहरू  जी का कहना था, इसिलए हम तो तेजी 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
21

से काम करने क े िलए कोऑपरेट कर रहे थे, लेिकन कभी-कभी झगड़े की बात ही ज्यादा होती है। 
सर, मȅ आपको यह बता रहा हूँ िक पहले क ै से सब डेमोकर्े िटक वे से चलता था। नेहरू  जी अपनी 
क ैिबनेट मȂ सबको अपने साथ लेकर चलते थे। उन्हȗने जो पहली क ैिबनेट बनाई, उसमȂ सबसे 
योग्य लोगȗ को शािमल िकया। जो काँगर्ेस मȂ नहीं थे, वैसे पाँच लोगȗ को शािमल िकया। साहब, 
उन्हȗने तो पाँच Opposition क े लोगȗ को शािमल िकया , िजनसे उनकी सहमित नहीं बनती थी, 
उन्हȂ भी शािमल िकया, लेिकन आप तो हमारी छाया भी नहीं देखना चाहते हȅ। उन्हȗने जो पहली 
क ैिबनेट बनाई थी, उसमȂ बाबा साहेब और Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् जी समेत पाँच दूसरी िवचारधारा 
क े लोग
 थे। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : सर, यह परंपरा कब तक चली?  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : इसके  बाद तो हर पाटीर्, हर िवचारधारा क े लोग अपना-अपना Äलैग लेकर 
िनकलने लगे और झंडे अलग हो गए। उन्हȗने इसकी बुिनयाद डालने, इसे सहन करने, सबको 
लेकर चलने का काम िकया। अब तो यह चल रहा ह
ै िक आप opposition को सहन नहीं करते हȅ, 
लेिकन उन्हȗने सहन करके  अपनी क ैिबनेट मȂ िलया। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आपको क्या इितहास मालूम ह
ै, मȅ आपको बताता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... जब भी कोई पाटीर् बनाते हȅ, 
तब अलग-अलग पाटीर् मȂ ही होते हȅ। मȅ आपसे बाद मȂ बहस करता हूँ। आप आइए, मेरे पास सब 
सबूत हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 सर, opposition 
को लोग, खास करके  बीजेपी क े लोग नेहरू  जी क े बारे मȂ बहुत बातȂ 
बोलते हȅ। आप यह छोड़ दीिजए। िजस Ëयिƪ ने 14 साल  जेल मȂ रहकर, सब क ु छ सहन करके  
देश की बुिनयाद डाली, बड़े-बड़े कारखाने लगाए, पिÅलक सेक्टर बनाया, नौकिरयाँ दीं, इतना 
क
ु छ िकया, वही बुिनयाद डालने से देश बढ़ा और हम पाँच साल मȂ ही आगे बढ़ गए। मȅ आपको 
आगे थोड़ा सा बताऊँ गा िक िकस ढंग से बोलते हȅ। नेहरू  जी का िकतना बड़Ãपन था िक उन्हȗ ने 
अपनी राजनीितक िवचारधारा क े िवरोधी Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् जी को क Ȃ दर् मȂ इंडÎटर्ी और सÃलाई 
का िमिनÎटर बनाया। नेहरू  जी संसद का बहुत सÇमान करते थे और िडबेट्स क े दौरान अकसर 
अपने सहयोिगयȗ और युवा सांसदȗ को एक उदाहरण क े रूप  मȂ धैयर्पूवर्क बैठकर सुनते थे, लेिकन 
अब तो ये अंदर भी नहीं आते हȅ। वे तो धैयर् से सुनते थे, लेिकन यहाँ तो Ģाइम िमिनÎटर अंदर भी 
नहीं आते हȅ।  
 
एक माननीय सांसद : उनके  दशर्न ही नहीं होते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्
न खरगे : क्या वे भगवान हȅ, जो दशर्न दȂगे! आप कम-से-कम डेमोकर्े िटक तरीके  से 
आने क े िलए बोिलए। इससे गोयल जी को भी थोड़ा relief िमलेगा, नहीं तो हर बात को िडफȂ ड 
करना पड़ता है और गोयल जी को उठना पड़ता है। ज़रा उन्हȂ िबठाकर, Ģाइम िमिनÎटर को 
बोलना चािह
ए। इससे हम भी बोलȂगे िक हमारे Ģाइम िमिनÎटर आए हȅ। उन्हȂ द ेखे हुए बहुत िदन हो 
गए हȅ। अगर कोई पूछेगा िक तुÇहारे Ģाइम िमिनÎटर क ै से हȅ, तो मȅ क्या बोलूँगा! मȅ अपोिज़शन का 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

लीडर हूँ। मȅ यह इसिलए कह रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक संसद को जानकारी नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने 
आपकी तारीफ की है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी यहाँ पर आते हȅ, तब आप लोग बाहर चले जाते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्
न खरगे : जब  वे आते हȅ, तब हम बाहर चले जाते हȅ!... आप क ु छ कहकर, झगड़े 
िनकालकर उन्हȂ पहले ही भगा देते हȅ। चिलए, इसे छोड़ दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... हमȂ सब मालूम है 
िक आप कहाँ पर िबठाते हȅ, क ै से करते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... अब स ुिनए। नेहरू  जी महत्वपूणर् मुǈȗ पर 
लगातार िवपक्षी नेताओं से िमलते रहते थे, Ģमुख मुǈȗ पर बहस क े दौरान सांसदȗ की बातȂ ध्यान से 
सुना करते थे। नेहरू  जी ने तो यहां तक कहा था िक मुझे इस सदन की शिƪयȗ से ईÍयार् है और मȅ 
नहीं चाहूंगा िक कोई उन शिƪयȗ को सीिमत कर दे। यानी उनमȂ इतना बड़Ãपन था। मȅ िकसी को 
सीिमत करना नहीं चाहता, सुनना चाह
ता हूं, सबकी ओिपिनयन लेना चाहता हूं, यह बात उन्हȗने 
कही थी। आज यह होता है िक हमारी बात सुनने क े िलए कोई नहीं आता है। नेहरू  जी का िवचार 
था िक मज़बूत िवपक्ष न होने का अथर् है िक ËयवÎथा मȂ महत्वपूणर् खािमयां ह ȅ। अगर मज़बूत िवपक्ष 
नहीं है, तो वह ठीक नहीं है, ऐसा नेहरू  जी का कहना था। अब तो मज़बूत िवपक्ष है, तो उसको 
ई.डी., सी.बी.आई. क े ज़िरए कमज़ोर क ै से िकया जाए, वह इधर है। अगर कोई है, तो 
immediately उसको लेना, कमज़ोर करना, िफर व
ािंशग मशीन मȂ डालना, क्लीन होकर बाहर 
आएगा, वहीं पर permanent रहेगा।  
 सर, आज क्या हो रहा है, यह हम सब देख रहे हȅ। संसद मȂ पीएम साहब कभ ी-कभार आते 
हȅ। जब आते हȅ, तब ईवȂट बना कर चले जाते हȅ। सर, मिणपुर क े बारे मȂ आपको तो मालूम है। वहां 
तीन मई से आज तक दंगे चल रहे हȅ, लोगȗ को मारा जा रहा है, घर जलाए जा रहे हȅ, आज एक 
Ëयिƪ मर गया। इसके  बारे मȂ व
े एक ÎटेटमȂट दे देते, हमने इतनी कोिशश की। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : कोिशश तो मȅने की थी।    
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : आपने की थी। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  कोिशश तो मेरी तरफ से थी िक हाउस
 मȂ चचार् हो, आधी रात तक चचार् हो। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : आप लोग क्यȗ उनको irritate करत े हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, आपने तो 
कोिशश की, लेिकन वे आपकी बातȗ को भी नहीं मानते, यह मुिÌकल है। आप हमको बोलते हȅ, तो 
बार-बार हम आपकी तरफ देखते हȅ। जब हम आपकी तरफ देखते हȅ, तो िफर आप उनकी तरफ 
देखते हȅ।   
 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
23

Ǜी सभापित :  खरगे जी, मȅ मजबूर नहीं हूं, मज़बूत हूं। मेरी बात को आप मानते, तो लोक सभा से 
पहले चचार् होती, ज्यादा साथर्क चचार् होती। मिणपुर पर Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और गृह मंतर्ी जी ने लोक 
सभा मȂ बोला। मȅने बड़ी कोिशश की िक इस सदन मȂ Ëयापक चचार् हो, आपने नहीं होने दी।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्
न खरगे : सर, वह बात गई, उसे जाने दीिजए। रात गई, बात गई। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 िशक्षा मंतर्ी; तथा कौशल िवकास और उǏमशीलता मंतर्ी (Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान) : सर, ये तो आपके  
चैÇबर मȂ भी नहीं आते।
 
Ǜी सभापित :  यह बड़ी इÇपॉटȄट बात है। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : आज क्या हो रहा है, ये सब देख रहे हȅ। सर, वे देश क े कोने-कोने मȂ जाते 
हȅ, लेिकन मिणपुर क्यȗ नहीं जाते हȅ? 
 
Ǜी सभापित :   पहले आपको  िशकायत थी िक वे आपकी constituency मȂ क्यȗ गए। माननीय 
खरगे जी, आपने इस सदन मȂ कहा था िक वे मेरी constituency मȂ क्यȗ जाते हȅ?  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, उन्हȂ मेरी constituency मȂ आने दीिजए, वे क ु छ काम करके  
िदखाते, व
े क ु छ तो करते नहीं हȅ! खैर, डेमोकर्े सी मȂ हार-जीत तो अलग बात है, लेिकन वे आते हȅ, 
तो ईवȂट बनाकर चले जाते हȅ। मȅ चाहता था िक गुलबगार् मȂ एक िडवीज़न बने, मȅने एक फ ैक्टरी 
बनाई थी, मȅ चाहता था िक वे उसको शुरू  करȂ। मȅ चाहता था िक वहां जो एक सȂटर्ल यूिनविर्सटी 
है, उसको वे improve करȂ। हमारे लेबर िमिनÎटर कहां हȅ? मȅ उनसे आते-जाते नमÎते करता हूं 
िक साहब, मेरा क्या हुआ, एक एÇस बनाकर दीिजए। वहां बहुत बिढ़या हॉिÎपटल बनाया, वह 
उनके  क ंटर्ोल मȂ है। वे उसमȂ क्यȗ इंटरेÎट नहीं ले रहे हȅ? जब तक मोदी साहब की परिमशन नहीं 
िमलती, तब तक व
े नहीं दȂगे। मेरी मुिÌकल यह है िक आप सरकार से िरक्वेÎट क्यȗ नहीं करते हȅ?  
िरक्वेÎट छोिड़ए, दबाव भी डाला, तो भी नहीं कर रहे ह
ȅ। मȅ समझता हूं िक आते-जाते यादव जी 
को मेरे 50 सलाम हो गए हȗगे।  वे मेरे बाजू मȂ हȅ।  यह अच्छी िबिंÊडग है, उन्हȗने ख ुद देखी है।  खैर 
जाने दीिजए, हमारी िकÎमत अच्छी नहीं है, मेरे लोगȗ की िकÎमत अच्छी नहीं है।  वहां क े लोग 
पहले ही बैकवडर् हȅ और भी उनको दूर रखा गया है।  उनको मिणपुर जाना चािहए था, वहां क
े  
लोगȗ क े दुख-ददर् को देखना था, लेिकन िकसी वजह से वे जा नहीं सके , यह अच्छा नहीं हुआ।  
सभापित जी, अटल जी ने अपने छह साल क े कायर्काल म Ȃ 21 बार बयान िदया, डा. मनमोहन िंसह 
जी ने 30 बार बयान िदया, क ेवल हमारे मौजूदा पी.एम. साहब ही ऐसे हȅ, जो सदन मȂ नौ सालȗ मȂ 
customary बयानȗ को छोड़कर क ेवल दो बार बोले हȅ -  यह डेमोकर्े सी है!   अब इसको  क ै से 
सुधारȂगे, यह मȅ आप पर ही छोड़ देता हूं।   
 
Ǜी सभापित :   खरगे जी, आप थोड़ा-सा ज्ञानवधर्न कीिजए। यह customary बयान कौन-सा 
होता है? 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, customary बयान का मतलब यह होता है जैसे राÍटर्पित जी का या 
जो ऐसे इÌयूज़ रहते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... बोलना ही चािहए। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  खरगे जी,  customary नहीं, सबसे महत्वपूणर् तो वही हȅ।  िदिग्वजय िंसह जी, यह 
महत्वपूणर् मुǈा है। यिद Ģधान म
ंतर्ी उन customary मुǈȗ पर बोलते हȅ, तो वह िकतना आवÌयक है।  
I am not in defence of anyone.  But, I am on hard facts.  मȅ तो यह समझता था िक 
माननीय खरगे जी को िशकायत होगी िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी लोक सभा और राज्य सभा मȂ 
इतना ज्यादा क्यȗ बोलते हȅ!  I will ask the Secretariat to have full update on this and 
inform Leader of the Opposition in next three days.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, आप अपने Îटाफ से पूिछए िक अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने 21 बार 
बयान िदया।  बयान देना अलग है, customary उǄर देना, राÍटर्पित क े अिभभाषण पर भाषण 
देना अलग है।  वाजपेयी साहब ने जो 21 बार बयान िदया, वह अलग-अलग occasions पर िदया।  
इसी तरह से मनमोहन िंसह जी ने 30 बार बयान िदए और अलग-अलग occasions पर िदए-यह 
बात मȅ बोल रहा हूं।  वे यहां भाषण नह
ीं देते हȅ, बोलते नहीं हȅ, लेिकन बाहर बहुत बोलते हȅ, इतना 
बोलते हȅ िक वह हमȂ हज़म ही नहीं होता ह
ै,  इतनी बार बोलते हȅ।  सभापित जी, आपने बोला िक 
आपने चांस िदया, तो भी हम लोग नहीं बोलते हȅ, चचार् नहीं करते हȅ।  सर, इस सदन मȂ Rule 267 
मȂ सात बार चचार्
 हुई है।  Question Hour suspend करके  दस बार चचार् हुई है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : ऐसा िकतने सालȗ मȂ हुआ है? In how many years?  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मȅ यह कह रहा हूं िक इस सदन मȂ यह हुआ है, लेिकन आप एक बार 
भी नहीं कर रहे हȅ।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप म
ुझे कटघरे मȂ खड़ा कर रहे हȅ, इसिलए मȅ आपसे संरक्षण मांग रहा हूं िक आप 
जो िफगसर् दे रहे हȅ, आपके  हाथ मȂ िजन्हȗने िफगसर् दी हȅ, उनसे पूिछए िक िकतने दशक म Ȃ यह 
हुआ है? 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मȅ आपको date-wise figure दे दूंगा। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  मȅ बहुत नमर् िदल का आदमी हूं।    
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल
 (गुजरात) : सभापित जी, हमारे टाइम मȂ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shaktisinh Gohilji,  have respect for your leader.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : आप लोगȗ को चेयरमैन साहब को सताना नहीं चािहए। 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
25

 
Ǜी सभापित : खरगे जी, पहले आप उकसाते हो, िफर उनको डांटते हो।…(Ëयवधान)...आपने 
पहले वाली बात भी बहुत सही कही थी।  I became the first Chairm an where the Leader of 
the Opposition declined to see me in the Chamber at my request.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  सर, संसद और िवधान सभा जनता की सवȘच्च Ģितिनिध संÎथाएं हȅ, 
िजनके  माध्यम से जन आकांक्षाओं को अिभËयिƪ िमलती है और बदलते समय मȂ जनता की 
अपेक्षाएं बढ़ रही हȅ, िलहाजा सदनȗ मȂ Îतरीय चचार् होनी चािहए।  इन चचार्ओं को पूरे देश को 
लाइव देखना चािहए।  इसको जरा ठीक कीिजए।  अभी तो
 मेरा चेहरा िदख रहा है, बाकी क े वƪ 
तो अपोिज़शन से िकसी का ज्यादा आता ही नहीं ह
ै।  इसका क ंटर्ोल हमारे गोयल साहब या कौन 
करते हȅ, इसके  बारे मȂ मुझे मालूम नहीं है, लेिकन यह बोल दीिजए।  हमको तो बाहर चांस नहीं 
िमलता है, यहां चांस िमलता है, तो हमȂ जरा िदखा दीिजए।  यहां हम जनता क े सवाल उठा सकते 
हȅ, जैसे अभी हमारे तेलंगाना क े नेता सवाल उठा रहे थे।  ऐसे सवाल उठते रहते हȅ, हम डांटते 
रहते हȅ, लेिकन वे जो कहते हȅ, कम से कम वह यहां रिजÎटर होता है, तो बाहर भी लोगȗ को 
मालूम होता है िक कोई हमारी बात भी रख रहा है।  संवैधािनक तरीके  से हम जो काम करते ह
ȅ, 
उसको आपका Ģोत्साहन िमलना चािहए और सरकार की भी हमको देन
े की कोिशश होनी चािहए।  
यह संसद लोगȗ क े िहतȗ तथा अिधकारȗ की संरक्षक है और आप हमारे guardian हȅ।  अगर हमारे 
ऊपर क ु छ अन्याय हो रहा है, तो फौरन हमȂ संरक्षण देने वाले आप ही हȅ।  हम तो इतने कम लोग  
हȅ, उतने सारे लोग अगर हमको मारते-पीटते रहȂगे, तो िफर बाद मȂ आपके  पास कौन रोएगा, वह 
हमȂ ही रोना पड़़ता है और इसीिलए हमȂ  आपका संरक्षण जरूरी है।  मȅ यह कहूंगा िक कोरोना की 
महामारी मȂ भी बहुत क ु छ किमयां थीं, िफर भी हमारे देश मȂ उसको भी ठीक ढंग से िनभाने की 
कोिशश हुई, लेिकन चंद जगहȗ पर, जैसे यूपी और जो दूसरी Îटेट्स हȅ, उनमȂ जो भी किमयां थीं, 
उनको पहले हम यहां पर चचार् मȂ लाए थे और उनका पूरा िजकर् यहां पर हुआ,
जो िक 2020 मȂ  33 
िदन, 2021 मȂ 58 िदन और 2022 मȂ 56 िदन था।   
 सभापित जी, वैसे तो दुिनया भर मȂ 19वीं सदी मȂ िनिर्मत दो दजर्न संदन भवन उपयोग मȂ 
लाए जा रहे हȅ।  भारत मȂ लोगȗ क े िदल-िदमाग पर 144 ख
ंभȗ वाली यह गोल इमारत छायी हुई है।  
यहां पर देश की आज़ादी क े बाद से 75 सालȗ मȂ सारे महत्वपूणर् फ ैसले हुए।  इस इमारत की वाÎ तु 
कला पर भारतीय परंपरा की छाप है।  इसको नफरत से नहीं देखना चािहए, क्यȗिक इस सदन मȂ 
नेहरू  जी, अÇबेडकर जी, वÊलभभाई पटेल जी जैसे बड़े-बड़े नेता बैठे थे।  इसिलए, इसको भूल 
ही जाना, उधर ही जाए
ंगे, ऐसा कहना शुरू  हुआ है।  शायद वहां हमȂ कल लेकर जा रहे हȅ, यह 
मुझे अभी मालूम नहीं है।   
 सभापित जी, यह माना जाता है िक संसद का सबसे बेहतरीन कामकाज पहली लोक सभा 
मȂ 1952 से 1957 क े बीच, िसफर् पांच साल मȂ हुआ, िजसमȂ 677 बैठकȂ हुईं और 319 िवधेयक पािरत 
हुए।  उस दौरान कानूनȗ पर ह
ुई बहसȂ िजज्ञासाओं का क Ȃ दर् बनी हुई हȅ। संसद का मुख्य काम 
कानून बनाना है, लोगȗ को सशƪ बनाना ह
ै, इसीिलए इसके  िलए यहां पर नीितयां तय होती थीं 
और सभी लोग एकमत से ऐसी नीितयȗ का सपोटर् करते थे। सर, राज्य सभा और लोक सभा मȂ एक 
से एक अनुभवी सांसद आज भी हȅ और पहले भी थे इसिलए सबको बोलने की आजादी िमलनी 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

चािहए, क्यȗिक अगर बोलने की आजादी नहीं िमली  -  हो सकता है, मेरी भी गलती हो सकती है – 
नहीं है, मȅ ऐसा नहीं बोलता हूं,  लेिकन मेरी गलती की, एक छोटी सी गलती की आप बहुत बड़ी 
सजा देते हȅ और वे इतनी बड़ी गलितयां करते हȅ, िजन्हȂ सारा देश देखता है, लेिकन उनको माफ 
कर देते हȅ। इसिलए मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक क ृपा करके  दोनȗ तरफ बैलȂस करके  चिलए।  अगर 
आप दोनȗ को ब
ैलȂस करके  चलȂगे, तो हमȂ भी एक मौका िमलेगा  -  बार -बार आपको कहने का और 
िवनती करने का।  ये सब चीज़Ȃ होती हȅ। 
 सर, मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं।  कानून बनाते समय िबलȗ को Îटȅिंडग कमेटी मȂ 
छानबीन क े िलए नहीं भेजा जाता है। कम से कम यह तो सरकार को करना ही चा
िहए। आपको यह 
कहने का हक है िक नहीं, इस िबल मȂ खािमयां हȅ, इसीिलए इस िबल को Îटȅिंडग कमेटी क े पास 
भेजना चािहए। मȅ आपको उदाहरण क े तौर पर चंद चीज़Ȃ बताना चाहता ह ूं। कमेिटयȗ को भेजे जाने 
वाले िबÊस का Ģितशत वषर् 2009 और 2014 क े दौरान 71 परसȂट था, वहीं 16वीं लोक सभा मȂ वषर् 
2014 से 2019 क े बीच यह घटकर 47 परसȂट रह गया और 2019 क े बाद से इसमȂ इतनी िगरावट 
आ गई है िक यह 13 
परसȂट रह गया है।  सर, कहां  यह 71 परसȂट था और िफर आप पूछते हȅ िक 
आपने क्या िकया। हमने यही िकया, 71 परसȂट िबलȗ को छानबीन करने क े िलए Îटȅिंडग कमेटीज़ 
मȂ भेजा और आपने क्या िकया - 13 परसȂट और 47 परस Ȃट िबलȗ को भेजा!  इस तरह करने से 
िबल क ै से Îकर्ूटनाइज़ हȗगे?  जै सा िदल मȂ आया, वैसा हो जाएग
ा, िफर बाद मȂ हम पछताएंगे। 
िफर सुĢीम कोटर् बोलेगा िक इसकी छानबीन करके  नहीं लाए और कहेगा िक शायद राज्य सभा 
और लोक सभा क े मेÇबसर् अनपढ़ हȗगे, समझते नहीं, इसिलए ऐसे ही भेज देते हȅ - ऐसी िटÃपणी 
हमारे िलए सुĢीम कोटर् से आएगी। दूसरी ओर जनता यह कहती ह ै िक हमारे बारे मȂ ये सोचते नहीं 
हȅ, सोचकर कानून नहीं बनाते हȅ। लेिकन आप हड़बड़ी मȂ इतने कानून भेज देते हȅ, जो बुलेट टर्ेन 
से भी फाÎट आते हȅ! बुलेट टर्ेन से भी फाÎट तरीके  से यहां िबÊस पास होते हȅ। सर, मȅ अभी 5 
िमनट का समय और लूंगा, आपको बोर नहीं करूं गा।  
 
Ǜी सभापित :  आपने देखा है िक समय खत्म हो गया है। आप 5 िमनट और बोल लीिजए। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर, आज आलम यह है िक सरकार िवधेयकȗ को सीिमत समय म
Ȃ पािरत 
कराने से लेकर सदनȗ की बैठक कम से कम कराने की कोिशश करने लगी है। इस कारण कानून 
की गुणवǄा वैसी नहीं रहती, जो Ëयापक िवचार मंथन या छानबीन स े गुजरे कानूनȗ की होती है। 
आज आलम यह भी है िक 2021 मȂ भारत क े Ģधान न्यायाधीश ने कहा िक िबना Ëयापक बहस क े 
जÊदबाजी मȂ संसद मȂ कानून बनाने से गंभीर खािमयां रह जाती ह ȅ, कई पहलू अÎपÍट रह जाते हȅ। 
यही बात मȅने कही है। पहले ऐसी हालत नहीं होती थी िक लोग िदÊली क े बॉडर्र पर बैठ जाएं, 
हमारे िकसान धरने पर बैठ जाएं। तीन क ृिष कानून इतनी जÊदबाजी मȂ पास िकए िक उनको 
एिजटेशन क े बाद सरकार को लागू करने से रोकना पड़ा।  ऐसा होने से िकसान हमारे ऊपर 
नाराज़ हȅ िक पािर्लयामȂट ऐसा क्यȗ करती है!  सर, 30 जनवरी , 2011 को तत्कालीन िवपक्ष  क े 
न
ेता Ǜी अरुण  जेटली जी न े बात की थी। क्यȗिक वे लोग हमसे बार-बार बोलते हȅ िक आप चले 
गए, भाग गए, नहीं सुना। वे ऐसा बोलते हȅ, लेिकन जब हम अपनी बात रखने की कोिशश करते हȅ 
- सर, हमारा काम िकसी क े साथ झगड़ा करना नहीं है, िकसी को िडÎटबर् करना नहीं है, लेिकन 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
27

जब हम अपनी बात शांित क े साथ नहीं रख सकते, तब हमारे लोग इिररेट होते हȅ िक हम इतनी 
कोिशश करके  लोगȗ क े मुǈȗ को आपके  सामने रखना चाहते हȅ, पर हमȂ मौका नहीं िमल रहा है। 
महोदय, यह होता है। हमारी िकसी से दुÌमनी नहीं है, हम सब एक ही हȅ और सभी िमलकर देश 
की भलाई क े बारे मȂ सोचते हȅ, क ेवल हमारे तरीके  अलग-अलग हȗगे। सर, राज्य
 सभा मȂ 
तत्कालीन नेता िवपक्ष, Ǜी अरुण  जेटली इसी जगह पर ब ैठते थे।  उन्हȗने 30 जनवरी, 2011 को  
कहा था, '' संसद का काम है चचार् करना, लेिकन कई मौकȗ पर जब मुǈȗ की अनदेखी होती है, 
तो अवरोध पैदा करना लोकतंतर् क े िहत मȂ होता है।''  सर, क्या मȅ एक बार और पढ़ू ँ? 
 
एक माननीय सदÎय : आगे पिढ़ए।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  मȅ आगे पढ़ता  हूं,  ''अवरोध  पैदा करना लोकतंतर् क े िहत मȂ होता है, 
िलहाज़ा संसदीय अवरोध को अलोक
तांितर्क नहीं कहा जा सकता।" उन्हȗने जो िसखाया, जब 
वही काम हमारी तरफ से होता है, तो यहाँ हमȂ टोकते रहते हȅ। सर, अवरोध प
ैदा करना लोकतंतर् 
क े िहत मȂ होता है, िलहाज़ा संसदीय अवरोध को अलोकतांितर्क नहीं कहा जा सकता - ये उनकी 
बातȂ हȅ। मȅ आपसे यह भी कहूंगा िक उस हाउस मȂ सुषमा Îवराज जी ने भी यही बात कही थी िक 
संसद को न चलने देना भी अन्य तरीकȗ की तरह लोकतंतर् का एक
 रूप  है। ये सारी चीज़Ȃ वहीं से 
आईं और मȅ आपसे यह िवनती करूं गा िक खासकर िदग्गज़ नेताओं को यहाँ पर समय देना 
चािहए।  मȅ दो-चार
 और छोटी-छोटी बातȂ रखकर अपने भाषण को खत्म करता हूं। इसके  िलए 
मȅने पहले भी कई बार आकर िवनती की िक जब छोटी-मोटी चीज़Ȃ होती हȅ - आप तो हम सबसे 
ऊपर हȅ, हम नीचे हȅ, हमारे ऊपर पहला हाथ आप ही का आता है, क्यȗिक हम नीचे रहते हȅ। 
..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
Ǜी सभापित : आज  तो आपका पूरा अटैक मुझ पर ही है। आप मूल मुǈे से भटक गए। आप खुद 
देिखए िक आपने अभी तक क्या कहा है। साहब, आप िवषय से पूरा भटक
 गए, दूर-दूर तक चले 
गए। देश की जनता उÇमीद करती थी िक यहाँ से ऐसा मैसेज जाएगा िक आगे का राÎत
ा क ैसा 
होगा। ..(Ëयवधान).. एक िमनट। खरगे जी, आपने कहा..(Ëयवधान)..कौन बोल रहा है? 
..(Ëयवधान).. You must learn to be decorous.  He has yielded. जब सदन मȂ पहली बार 
कोई डेकोरम हो रहा हो, तो परेशानी क्यȗ होनी चा िहए?  
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu) :  Mr. Chairman, Sir, let us skip our lunch; otherwise, we 
small parties are affected. We don't get the chance to speak. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You will get the chance to speak. You are a very senior Member.  
You will get the chance. 
 
                                         
Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  I agree with him.  We may skip the lunch. It is a good idea.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It is a good idea, but I will do that only at 1 o'clock. खरगे जी, मȅ 
माननीय सदÎयगण से अपील करूं गा और मȅने यह बात लगातार गहन िंचतन-मंथन क े बाद कही 
है िक हम कब तक पाÎट िĢिसडȂट्स को लेकर हाउस को िडÎटबर् करते रहȂगे? हम कब तक 
िडÎटबȄस को जिÎटफाईर् करते रहȂगे? खरगे जी, आप अंदाज़ा लगाइए िक मुझ पर क्या बीत रही  
होगी, जब  आप  बोल  रहे थे िक मुझे बोलने नहीं देते हो! मȅ इतना आकलन करता हूं और दुखी 
होता हूं िक जहाँ पािर्टिसपेशन हो सकता था, वहाँ आप लोग थ े नहीं। आप अंदाज़ा लगाइए ... 
मतलब आप अंदाजा लगाइए, if the Leader of Opposition would rely, on this critical 
occasion, to sanctify di sturbance and disruption, आपने खुद कॉिन्ÎÜयुएंट असेÇबली को 
क्वोट िकया है, वहाँ तो कभी नहीं हुआ! 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, let him speak. ...(Interruptions)....  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Jairamji, this is not a good habit. ...(Interruptions).... No, no. You 
are a victim of this habit. ...(Interruptions).... Don’t have this habit. 
...(Interruptions).... Don’t have this habit. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Let him finish, Sir. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No. when the hon. LoP has yielded, why are you being super-LoP?
 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Because we wanted to listen to him. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He does not need assistance. ...(Interruptions)....  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: We wanted to listen to him. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No, no.  You wanted to listen to him; but it is regulated by the 
Chair. ...(Interruptions).... Otherwise, come and sit here and control it. 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH : Sir, I have no desire to sit there. ...(Interruptions).... I 
wanted to listen to him. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Even if you have, there is a mechanism. ...(Interruptions).... 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
29

 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, you are constantly... ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions).... Hon. Khargeji, this is a 
rare historic occasion where, after taking note of 75 years, we are required to unfold a 
vision for the next 25-50 years. 
 
SHRI SYED NASIR HUSSAIN (Karnataka): Sir, he exactly knows that.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: I know it. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI SYED NASIR HUSSAIN: He knows that.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I know what he knows. ...(Interruptions).... And, in the entire 
discourse, you have focused on two things. ...(Interruptions).... I find it...  
...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI K. C. VENUGOPAL (Rajasthan): Sir, this is the problem. ...(Interruptions)....  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The problem is, when there is ti me to participate, I have seen 
absence.  The problem is, when an i ssue has to be debated, discussed and 
deliberated, you have walked out of the House. ...(Interruptions)....  The problem 
is... ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI K. C. VENUGOPAL: 
 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, 
*...(Interruptions)....  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please sit down. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, 
*...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Jairam, take your seat. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, you are not debating here. ...(Interruptions).... Let him 
speak. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh) : Sir, you are not debating here. 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Digvijayaji, as per... ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH : Sir, let him speak. ...(Interruptions)....आप बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... Sir, let him speak.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Digvijayaji, with my modest understanding, I can tell you – and I am 
a great judgment of myself; I self-judge – I am not a stakeholder in politics.  I am, 
certainly, a stakeholder that this Upper House,  the House of Elders, conducts itself in 
a manner, so that it earns respect of others.  ...(Interruptions).... We must exemplify 
our conduct through decorum and discipline. ...(Interruptions)....One minute, 
please. ...(Interruptions).... Would you approve that tw o hon. Members should 
every time come to the rescue of LoP?  Is  it not insult to the position he holds? 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : Sir, allow him to speak. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Put some people in discipline code. ...(Interruptions).... I would 
urge, if you don’t curb these tendencies of other Members, let me tell you, things will 
get on a tangential  route.  And, there was an occas ion when you wanted to speak 
and somebody said, ‘Give Digvijaya Singhji an  opportunity.’  In the process, the hon. 
Member was insulting you; insulting me! ...(Interruptions)....  We don’t want that. 
...(Interruptions).... So, all I say is, we have had some discussion.  We have to 
emanate from this theatre a most impo rtant message to the world outside. 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मȅ अभी खत्म करता हूँ।  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, that applies to all of us. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Khargeji, conclude now. ...(Interruptions)....  
Hon. Members, with the sense of the House, we are continuing during the 
lunch recess as well. Now, go ahead. 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
31

 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : थȅक यू । 
 
Ǜी सभापित : अच्छा हुआ, आपने थȅक यू तो कहा! 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सभापित जी, मȅ ज्यादा बात नहीं कहना चाहता हूँ, क्यȗिक अब मामला 
टȂशन मȂ आ रहा है।     
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
सर, हम बहुत िदनȗ से कोिशश कर रहे हȅ और सभी की यह इच्छा भी है िक मिहला 
िरज़वȃशन िबल आना चािहए। मिहलाओं को िरज़वȃशन िदया जाना चािहए, यह ǹ
ू है। आज तक 
हमने सारी कोिशशȂ कीं, लेिकन अब मȅ समझता हूं, जब आप यह मुǈा उठाएंगे, तो  सब जरूर  
आपकी बात को मान्यता दȂगे। मȅ आपको थोड़े से आंकड़े देना चाहता हूं।  
 सभापित जी, दुिनया बदल गई है। इस समय राज्य सभा मȂ 10% एवं लोक सभा मȂ 14% 
मिहला सांसद हȅ। िवधान सभाओं मȂ मिहलाओं की भागीदारी 10% है। 1952 मȂ नेहरू  जी क े 
Ģधानमंितर्त्व काल मȂ, पहली लोक सभा मȂ क ेवल 5% मिहला सांसद थीं, लेिकन 70 साल  क े 
बाद, आज भी मिहलाओं की भागी
दारी मातर् 14-15 या 10 Ģितशत क े अंदर ही है। मȅ आपको थोड़े 
और आंकड़े देना चाहता हूं।  दूसरी क ंटर्ीज़ मȂ पहले मिहलाओं का Ģितशत हमारे देश जैसा ही था। 
अमरीका की संसद म
Ȃ 2% मिहला सांसद थीं और िĤटेन की संसद मȂ 3% मिहला सांसद थीं, 
लेिकन आज अमरीका की संसद मȂ 28% और  िĤटेन की संसद मȂ 33% मिहला सांसद हȅ। 
इसीिलए मȅ आपसे गुज़ािरश करूं गा िक मिहला िरज़वȃशन का जो िबल है, उसको आप पास 
कीिजए।  
 दूसरा, अनइÇÃलॉइमȂट की बात चल रही है। एक तरफ हम 75 साल की आज़ादी  की बात 
करते हȅ, लेिकन इधर अनइÇÃलॉइमȂट इतना बढ़ गया है िक आज 8 करोड़ एजुक े टेड लोग राÎते 
पर हȅ। इन्Äलेशन सब जगह बढ़ रहा है, यह तो आपको मालूम ही है। जब एक माननीय सांसद गले 
मȂ टमाटर डाल कर आए थे, तो आपने उनको बहुत डांटा था, लेिकन वह हकीक
त थी, तब 
टमाटर 400-500 रुपय े िकलो िमल रहे थे। शायद आपने अपने घर मȂ नहीं पूछा होगा िक आजकल 
टमाटर, Ãयाज, तेल या दालȗ की क्या कीमतȂ हȅ? वह िहसाब आपने इसिलए नहीं पूछा होगा,  
क्यȗिक शायद आपने घर की पूरी िजÇमेदारी वहां छोड़ दी और यहां की िजÇमेदारी
 ले ली। हो 
सकता है इसिलए ज़रा अनुमान लगाना मुिÌकल हो, लेिकन आज इन्Äलेशन को क ंटर्ोल करना 
बहुत जरूरी है, बहुत इÇपॉटȄट है, नहीं तो ड
ेमोकर्े सी िडÎटर्ॉय हो जाएगी। अगर अनइÇÃलॉइमȂट 
बढ़ता गया, तो डेमोकर्े सी नहीं रहेगी। मȅ आपसे िवनती करता हूं िक आप इन चीज़ȗ क े भी क ु छ 
उǄर दȂ। िसफर् यह बता देना िक हमने यह िकया, वह िकया, वह सब तो ठीक है, G2 की  बात 
करना ठीक है। G2 या G20?  
 
Ǜी सभापित : G20  
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  ज़ीरो मȂ तो कमल का फ ू ल ही िदखता था, आप देिखए साहब।  कभी-भी 
आप एडवटार्इज़मȂट देखȂ, तो ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Very good gossip! …(Interruptions)… खरगे जी, आपका Îतर यह नहीं 
है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, एक तो मेहरबानी करके  जी20 का मज़ाक मत उड़ाइए, G20 
 एक बहुत 
बड़ा समूह है।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :   मȅ मज़ाक नहीं उड़ा रहा हूं।  
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल : सर , माननीय लीडर ऑफ िद अपोिज़शन कांगर्ेस क े अध्यक्ष भी हȅ, उनको तो 
िसफर् Two-G िदखते हȅ - One 'G' and 'Son-G'.  उन्हȂ िसफर् दो 'G' ही  िदखते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :   सर, मȅ ईमानदारी क े साथ कहता हूं, जब देश की बात आती है, तो उसमȂ 
हम सब लोग एक हȅ। उसमȂ कोई फकर् नहीं है, लेिकन तुम बार-बार वह गुƺा मत लाओ िक तुम ही 
पेिटर्ऑट हो। पेिटर्ऑट तो हमारे लोग हȅ, जानȂ हमारे लोगȗ ने दीं, मरे हमारे लोग, लेिकन मज़ा आप 
उठा रहे हो और हमको िसखाते हो!  
आिखर मȂ, एक और बात कह कर मȅ अपनी बात खत्म करता हूं। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : खरगे जी, आज आप बहुत एिजटेटेड हȅ, बहुत गुÎसे मȂ हȅ। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :   नहीं।  
 
"हमारी वतनपरÎत
ी की अनिगनत तारीखȂ हȅ, बेशुमार िकÎसे हȅ। 
हȗ भी क्यȗ ना! वतन से मोहÅबत, यह तो हमारे ईमान का िहÎसा ह
ै।" 
  
सर, आपने मुझे बोलने क े िलए इतना टाइम िदया, उसके  िलए धन्यवाद। 
  
Ǜी सभापित : खरगे जी, आज आपने शुरू  मȂ और आिखर मȂ क ु छ पंिƪयां पढ़ीं, लेिकन क ु छ समय 
पहले भी आपने क ु छ पंिƪयां पढ़ी थीं, जब माननीय व
Ȃक ैया नायडू जी का फ ेयरवेल था, तब आपने 
कहा था- 
"मौसम क ैसा होगा! िकतना सताएगा!"..(Ëयवधान).... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, आज का आपका attitude देखने क े बाद, really पहले का जो मौसम 
था, वह िफर आ गया है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
33

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, hon. LoP has reflected. I would again appeal to 
everyone, it is not a time for us to be agit ated.  We have to send  a message from this 
place how our Bharat will move for next several decades, and, therefore, when we 
make light of certain things like G-20, G-20  can't be reduced to G-2 and then lotus. 
...(Interruptions)....  The World Order has been defined. For the first time, G-20 has 
been so impactful that the global order has been defined. Inclusion of African Union is 
being globally applauded.  ...(Interruptions)....  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : जो बात उन्हȗने कही, वह तो मȅ लाऊँ गा।  वहाँ जो फोटो डाले हȅ, मȅ उनकी 
बात कर रहा हूँ, जी20 की नहीं।  मȅ भी जी20 की मीिंटग्स मȂ शािमल हुआ हूँ।  मȅ लेबर िमिनÎटर 
की हैिसयत से जी20 की 10 मीिंटग्स मȂ गया हूँ।  मȅ अमेिरका गय
ा, इटली गया..  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आपने ऐसा कभी नहीं देखा होगा।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : मȅ Ĥाज़ील भी गया।  आपने लुला को आज जो handover िकया, व
 े पहले 
Ģाइम िमिनÎटर थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मुझे मालूम है िक क ैसी िरÎपेक्ट देनी चािहए।   देश क े बारे 
मȂ मȅने पहले ही बोला िक देश क े िवषय मȂ, देश का जब भी कोई मामला आता है, हम पहले लोग 
हȅ, जो उसको िसर क
े  ऊपर रखते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  इसिलए आप यह मत बोिलए।  जो िलखा 
हुआ बोल रहे हȅ, वह मȅ बोल रहा हूँ।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय खरगे जी, मुझे भी दुिनया क े नेताओं से चचार् करने का सौभाग्य िमला and 
how proud I felt!  The World Bank का Ģ
ेिज़डȂट कहता है िक 'Our attainment in six years 
is something which can't be attained in  50 years.'  Now, Shri Mohammed Nadimul 
Haque.  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal) :  Sir, thank you very much for 
giving me the chance to speak on this issue.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Four minutes; it is the time allotted for your party.  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE:  Thank you for limiting me also, Sir.  
 Sir, the word 'federal' is not mentioned in the Constitution even once, yet it is 
the spirit and soul of this country.  
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KANTA KARDAM) in the Chair.] 
 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 Remember that this is not the House of Elders; it is the Council of States.  Do 
not do anything that will hurt federalism.  Do not do anything that will compromise the 
States. Do not assault federalism. 'Federalism' is a nation's precious asset. Madam, 
depriving the States of funds is a threat to  democracy. Let me give you an example of 
my State, West Bengal. Labourers who wo rked under 'MNREGA' from 2021 till now 
have not been paid their wages, amounting close to four thousand crore rupees.  If 
we include the non-wage component, the amount goes up to seven thousand crore 
rupees.  
 Madam, 11,36,000 beneficiar ies have been denied the Gramin Awas Yojana . 
Under different Schemes, the Union Govern ment has blocked tens of thousands of 
crores to West Bengal. This is not 'federal'. This is against the States.  Seventy-five 
years ago, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar said, and I quote, "The Indian Constitution is a federal 
constitution in as much as it is establis hed what may be called a dual polity which will 
consist of the Union at the Centre and the States at the periphery, each endowed with 
sovereign powers to be exercised in the fi eld assigned to them  respectively by the 
Constitution."Remember that the double engine government that you propose is 
against the federalism that our founders envisioned for this country.  It is against the 
very spirit of India. 
 Madam, we are in 2023.  I quote Arundhati Roy - "It is no longer just our 
leaders that we must fear, but a whole sectio n of the population.  The banality of evil, 
the normalization of evil, is now manifest in our streets, in our classrooms, in very 
many public spaces.  The mainstream Pr ess, the hundreds of  24 hour news 
channels, have been harnessed to the cause of fascist majoritarianism.  The India's 
Constitution has been effectively set asid e.  The Indian Penal Code is being re-
written." 
 Madam, in conclusion, I must say that In dia's equilibrium depends on fair play.  
Do not penalize those States that have do ne better in successful implementation of 
schemes but oppose you politically.  Politic al parties come and go, Prime Ministers 
will come and go, but India, its Parliament and its Constitution, will remain forever. 
 Thank you very much. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KANTA KARDAM):  Shri K.R.N. Rajesh 
Kumar - not present.  Dr. Sasmit Patra. 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  We are going through a change, Madam.  We will 
come a little later in the sequence. 
 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
35

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KANTA KARDAM):  Dr. Amar Patnaik - not 
present; Shri S. Niranjan Reddy - not present; Dr. K. Keshava Rao - not present; Shri 
Ram Nath Thakur - not present.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil. 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल (गुजरात) : मैडम, हम आज संसदीय परंपराओं, पािर्लयामȂटरी Ģोसीज़र की 
बात करते हȅ, लेिकन मȅ यह कहूँगा िक मȅ गुजरात से आता हूँ, फÎटर् Îपीकर ऑफ लोक सभा, 
गणेश वासुदेव मावलंकर जी, िजसे मावलंकर दादा क े नाम से पहचाना जाता था, वे महाराÍटर् स
 े 
थे, पर उनकी कमर्भूिम गुजरात होने क े नाते उन्हȗने गुजरात मȂ एक बहुत बिढ़या परंपरा बनाई। 
उसी को देखते हुए आज जब मुझे यहाँ पर बात करनी है, तब मȅ सबसे पहले यही कहूँगा िक भवन 
बदलने से क
ु छ नहीं होगा, बिÊक िदल की भावना बदलनी चािहए। इन परंपराओं को ठीक करने 
क े िलए हमȂ जो काम करना चािहए, उसकी आज जरूरत है। दुिनया मȂ सबसे अच्छा लोकतंतर् को 
माना जाता है। 'Democracy is the best system.' िफर भी हम क्या कहते हȅ? हम कहते हȅ िक 
राम राज्य हो, तो अच्छा ह
ै। हम यह क्यȗ कहते हȅ? हम यह इसिलए कहते हȅ, क्यȗिक वह एक 
ऐसा राजा था, जो लोगȗ की आवाज सुनता था। Ģश ासक क े िखलाफ, राजा क े िखलाफ एक धोबी 
की आवाज िनकली, तो राजा ने उसको देशदर्ोही नहीं माना। राजा ने यह नहीं कहा िक उस धोबी 
क े यहाँ ईडी, सीडी, सीबीआई भेज दो। राजा ने कहा िक राजा शक से परे होना चािहए। हम राम 
राज्य की बात करते ह
ȅ। हम राम राज्य की बात क्यȗ करते हȅ? हम राम राज्य की बात इसिलए 
करते हȅ, क्यȗिक वह शासक, वह राजा ऐसा था, िजसने शबरी माँ क े जूठे बेर खाए। चूँिक वह 
शासक मिहला सÇमान
 मȂ िवÌवास रखता था, इसिलए उसने माँ शबरी क े जूठे बेर खा िलए। हम 
आज क्या बात करते हȅ? मिणपुर मȂ एक मिहला पर अत्याचार होता है, तब तक हमारे शासक को 
उस मिहला क े सÇमान की िंचता  नहीं होती है, लेिकन जब सुĢीम कोटर् फटकार लगाता है तब 
जाकर उसकी िंचता होती है।  
 महोदया, हम बात करते हȅ, लोकतंतर् की। मȅने एक कहानी सुनी थी। वह कहानी यह थी 
िक एक गाँव मȂ एक शासक था। वह बड़ा ही िडक्टेटर था। वह प ूरे गाँव को इकƻा करता था और 
िफर कहता था िक मȅ यह करना चाहता हूँ। इस पर गाँव क े लोग 'हाँ' बोलते थे। एक िदन उसी गाँव 
क े एक आदमी का बेटा, जो बाहर क े राज्य मȂ पढ़ने गया था, वह आया और उसने कहा िक यह तो 
बड़ी अच्छी बात है िक हमारे राजा प
ूरे गाँव से पूछते हȅ और िफर तय करते हȅ, इसिलए मȅ भी 
जाऊँ गा। उसके  बाप ने कहा िक बेटे आना है तो आ, पर जो कहते हȅ, उस पर 'हाँ-हाँ' ही बोलना, 
और क ु छ मत बोलना। उसका बेटा वहाँ पर गया और शासक ने कहा - बकरी ले गई ऊ ँ ट को, तो 
पूरे गाँव ने कहा, हाँ जी, हाँ जी। इस पर वह लड़का खड़ा हो गया िक बकरी इतनी छोटी सी है, तो  
ऊ ँ ट को क ै से ले जाएगी! मȅ इस पर सहमत नहीं हूँ। इस पर सभा बरखाÎत हुई, पर जैसे ही वह घर 
आया, तो बाप ने थÃपड़ लगा िदया िक त
ूने यह क्या कर िदया। वह बोला िक मȅने सच ही बोला है। 
वह बोला, नहीं, बकरी ले गई ऊ ँ ट को, इस पर हाँ, जी, हाँ, जी कहना है, क्यȗिक इसी शासक क े 
नीचे रहना है। थोड़ी देर मȂ पुिलस वाला आया िक तुमने राÍ टर्दर्ोह िकया है और उसके  बेटे को 
उठाकर ले गया। थोड़ी देर मȂ इन्कम टैक्स की रेड हुई, थोड़ी देर मȂ ईडी आई, थोड़ी देर मȂ 
सीबीआई आई और पूरा घर बरबाद हो गया। यह भी एक शासन है। यहाँ क े लोग कहते हȅ िक 
बकरी ले गई ऊ ँ ट को, हाँ, जी, हाँ, जी कहना है, इसी नगर मȂ रहना ह
ै। मȅ यह जरूर  कहना 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

चाहूँगा िक जब संिवधान सभा िमली थी, हमȂ बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर की उस Îपीच को देखना 
होगा। मȅ तो आपके  जिरए सभी से यह िरक्वेÎट करू ँगा। मȅ पूवर् Îपीकर, मीरा क ुमार जी का 
धन्यवाद करू ँगा, काँगर्ेस की अगुवाई वाली उस य ूपीए सरकार का धन्यवाद करू ँगा, िजसने पूरी 
संिवधान सभा की डॉक्यूमȂटर्ी एक बहुत अच्छी तरह बनाकर रखी। ...(समय की घंटी).. 
 मैडम, मȅ िसफर् दो िमनट मȂ समाÃत करू ँगा। मैडम, जब अÇबेडकर जी ने संिवधान सभा मȂ 
यह बात रखी और कहा िक जब हमने यह संिवधान सभा शुरू  की थी, तब मȅ यह समझकर इसका 
मेÇबर बनकर आया था िक दिलतȗ की क
ु छ बात तो कर ही लूँगा। मुझे ताज्जुब हुआ, जब मुझे 
डर्ािंÄटग किमटी का मेÇबर बनाया गया। मुझे ताज्जुब हुआ, जब मुझे डर्ािंÄटग किमटी का चेयरमैन 
बनाया गया। जब ये सारी चीज़Ȃ पास हुईं, तब मुझे और ताज्जुब हुआ, पर मȅ इन सब चीज़ȗ क े िलए 
इंिडयन नेशनल काँगर्ेस पाटीर् क े discipline को मानता हूँ, उसे Ǜेय देता हूँ। ...(समय की घंट
ी)... 
मȅ एक ही लाइन मȂ अपनी बात खत्म करता हूँ। जब ये नेहरू  जी क े िलए कहते हȅ, तब मȅ कहता हूँ 
िक अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने पािर्लयामȂट क
े  अंदर नेहरू  जी क े िलए जो लÄज़ कहे थे, कम-
से-कम उन्हȂ एक बार पढ़ लेना, उन्हȂ एक बार िदल से लगा लेना। उस समय वाजपेयी जी िवपक्ष 
क े नेता थे। उन्हȗने नेहरू  जी क े िलए जो कहा था, कम-से-कम उसे याद कर लेना, िफर आपको 
न
ेहरू  जी क े िखलाफ बोलने की कभी भी िदल से इच्छा नहीं होगी।  
 
"मुख्तर सी िंजदगी है अजीब से अफसाने हȅ, 
यहाँ तीर
 भी चलाने हȅ और पिंरदे भी बचाने हȅ।" 
 
 चूँिक वƪ की पाबंदी है, इसिलए मȅ लंबी बात नहीं करते हुए, यहीं पर अपनी बात खत्म 
करता हूँ, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KANTA KARDAM): Now, Dr. M. 
Thambidurai.   
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Madam,  Vice-Chairman, I rise to participate 
here.  As some Members expressed, this is not the House of the Elders, this is Rajya 
Sabha, representing the States.  As States ' represent atives, we come here and see 
to it that federalism is estab lished.  That is the history an d for that only this House is 
here. I have served five terms as Lok Sabha Member and also served two terms as 
Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha and I have serve d as the Presiding Officer for nearly 15 
years.  That is part of the history of Indian Parliament.  But, first of all, I want to say 
that the founder of our Dravid ian Party, Anna, came here and sat in this House.  He 
was the single Member of our Party at th at time in this House, and we had two 
Members in Lok Sabha then.  After that, political developments took place in a 
different way and my leader, Puratchi Thalai vi Amma, created history in Indian politics 
by bringing 50 Members to the Indian Pa rliament - 37 Lok Sabha Members and 13 
Rajya Sabha Members.  That was the high est number of Members of our Dravidian 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
37

Party in our Parliament.   Our founder, An na, started it with one Member and then 
history was created when we had 50 Members in the Parliament.   
 When Anna was here, he fought for the federalism and the language issue 
because the language has been one of the important issues that we all discuss.  
Federalism and regional sentiments have to be respected.  Especially in Tamil Nadu, 
we all raise our voice for giving due import ance to our language.  Anna had said that 
Tamil should be made the official language of  this country.  That is the spirit of the 
issue.  Not only Tamil, but all the Eighth Schedule languages should be declared as 
the official languages of this country.  That  is what he had raised  here.   We do not 
know as to when this is going to be implemented.   
 Then, I want to make some other points.  I would like to highlight that 1967 
onwards, only Dravidian parties are rulin g the State of Tamil Nadu and no other 
national party has won the elections there.  That is the situation because regional 
sentiments are also very important and that  is what we are representing in Rajya 
Sabha, that is, the rights of the States .  Sometimes, the States are given step-
motherly treatment and they are not given due importance.   
 During the time when our Party's presen t General Secretary, Shri Edappadi K. 
Palaniswami, was the Chief Minister, he raised the issue of funds on many occasions.  
He wanted more funds from th e Centre, but we could not ge t.  In spite of that, he 
ruled very well and got good name.  For four years during his tenure, he established 
good government in Tamil Nadu and was appreciated by everyone.   At present, even 
though we have limited numb er of Members in the Rajya Sabha, we are still fighting 
for the people of Tamil Nadu on importan t issues like Cauvery and Katchatheevu.   
Without the approval of the Parliament, at v a r i o u s  p o i n t s  o f  t i m e  i n  1 9 7 2 ,  1 9 7 4  a n d  
1979, the Congress people gave away the Katchatheevu Island to the Sri Lankan 
Government.  It is still part of India.  Th is action has still not been approved by our 
Parliament.  The AIADMK is fighting for th at.  Our great leader, Amma, went to the 
Supreme Court on this issue. The Katchatheev u  I s l a n d  i s  p a r t  o f  I n d i a .   O u r  T a m i l  
fishermen are suffering there.  We have been fighting for their cause and we will 
continue to fight.  
 Apart from that, we are now facing so many problems, but we keep on raising 
people's issues in the Parliament.   For ex ample, during the time of Covid pandemic, 
we all got united on the issue of solving that  problem.  Our hon. Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modi, was successful in doing so ma ny wonderful things at that time.  At 
the same time, our State Government, under the leadership of Shri Palaniswami, 
implemented a lot of schemes to save the people.   The Central Government also 
gave a lot of assistance to the State Governments and co-operated with us.  With the 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

help of our hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narend ra Modi, the then Chief Minister of Tamil 
Nadu, Shri Palaniswami, did excellent work at that time.  So, the history shows how 
the Parliament functions and how we play our respective roles for the welfare of the 
people. Sometimes, it is said that the Parl iament was built by British.  No, it was 
Indian property.  Even though we are moving from this bu ilding to the new building, it 
is the same site, the same ar ea where the British established the Parliament.  It is not 
situated in some remote place from here .  For the sake of convenience, we are 
moving to the new building.  I must appreciate Modi ji for having come forward to 
make the new building, which can accomm odate more Members, which has better 
facilities. We are moving to that building for these things and not for any other reason. 
 In this journey of these 75 years of democracy, we also have had so many 
obstacles and issues, which were solved by  the country and the Parliament.  I must 
say that federalism must be protected and States should be given more rights.  I am 
talking not only about Tamil Nadu but for ot her States also.  Madam, I have one more 
request -- an issue which Periyar and Anna a l s o  r a i s e d  - -  t o  m a k e  m y  l a n g u a g e ,  
Tamil as well as Telugu, Malayalam, Mara thi and other languages, the official 
languages of the country.  That is the spirit  we have to follow.   Parliament is the 
highest body in our democratic system.  In our journey, we have to have respect for 
the States and their respective cultures.  Madam, our Prime Minister, Shri Narendra 
Modi, has always praised Tamil culture.  In the same way, we request that the 
Parliament must come forward and ensure  that all the languages of the Eighth 
Schedule must be made official languages.  That should be the spirit of democracy 
and also federalism, and this is the Parliament which should ensure this. 
 Once again, I thank my leader, Puratchi Thalaivar MGR, who sent me to 
P a r l i a m e n t  a n d  m a d e  m e  D e p u t y  S p e a k e r  o f  L o k  S a b h a .   A t  t h a t  t i m e ,  S h r i  R a j i v  
Gandhi was the Prime Minister.  Afterwards , Amma made me Unio n Minister in the 
Vajpayee Government.  After that, Modi ji  and Amma, once again, made me Deputy 
Speaker in 2014.  This kind of experience  I got in my life, and, these were the 
opportunities to serve the nation.   I hope that the spirit of parliamentary democratic 
system must continue.   
 We all know that in democracy, there mu st be some kind of opposition.  At the 
same time, the ruling party also has to im plement their policies and programmes.   
Both of them have to work together.  There must not be any differences between 
them.  The ruling party has to have its say in the implementation of its policies and 
programmes as it has been elected by the pe ople.  At the same time, the Opposition 
must raise the issues and not disrupt the proceedings.   Such kind of democracy 
should be there in the country.  Today , when we are celebrating 75 years of 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
39

democracy, once again, I say -- this is what  our forefathers also said -- federalism 
must be protected.   The place where I am sp eaking is called Rajya Sabha.  It is not 
House of Elders.  Some are elders, some ar e not.  There are some young people in 
the House.  This is not the Ho use of Elders.  This is Rajy a Sabha.  Representatives of 
the States are here.  Therefore, whatever State issues are raised here, they must be 
given importance and must not be nullified.   
 Once again, I thank my leaders, Puratc hi Thalaivar MGR, Puratchi Thalaivi 
Amma, Shri Edappadi Palanisami, my Gene ral Secretary, who sent me to Rajya 
Sabha.  Thank you.  I am grateful to you fo r having given me suff icient time to speak 
on this important issue.    
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म) : डा. क े. क ेशव राव, आपके  पास बारह िमनट का समय है।  
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana) : Madam, Vice-Chairperson, today, I rise to 
speak on the 75 years of democracy.  Ever ybody knows we have really made great 
strides of progress.  There is no doubt about it.  I do not want to politicize the entire 
thing but let me tell you that our journey had been a tragic journey in the beginning.  In 
the beginning, we thought of independence for one nation but we got two nations.  It 
would have been alright had we got two nations but, unfortunately, it became two 
people.  It would have been alright had it  been two people only, but it became two 
races and the world over they started fighting each other.  It is one thing we could not 
fight nor could win over during the last 75 y e a r s .   I t  r e a l l y  h u r t s  m e .   T o d a y ,  t h e  
hangover continues.  Today, th e people are getting identified more by their religion, 
caste and region than as individuals.  It  is something that 75 years of independence 
could not set right.  Economically, we have  done very, very good. It is better than 
many of the States.  We have been a fast-g rowing nation. But we still have this kind 
of a divide.  The Britishers took advantage of this at one time to differentiate these two 
people, the Hindus and Muslims.  That was the divide they have depended on.  Sadly 
it is still continuing.  Its shadows are still le ngthening.  This is something which really 
hurts us today when we are st anding against it.  Really speaking, Madam, it is not 
1947, but it was 1930 when  the Congress Party declared  "independence" and they 
passed a resolution in this respect.  At that time, there were celebrations of 
independence all over the country.  Whatever it is, we did not have it at that time.  
When we had independence and when Nehru went to give his stirring speech of 'Tryst 
with Destiny', where he said 'we have prom ises to keep, if not totally, at least, 
substantiall
y', we feel proud that we did it substantially well,  during the past 75 years.  
I am not talking only about the last 10 year s.  Even during these 10 years, we have 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

done good.  This morning, we were hearin g a statement made by our Chairman on 
G-20 .Whether it was a resolution or what! I don’t know or in what manner it came.  
But it did come.  He spoke very well of good things.  The wordings were impressive.  
But I only hope that we had also followed it in our country to give rise to the people's 
voice, as you wanted to do it internationa lly, when you want that all the 21 countries 
should do it.  This should have been really good.  That is the feeling that carries 
along.  Madam, when we think of Nehru' s speech, there is something that comes to 
my mind in a sideline.  Nehru, after his spee ch, went to submit his list of Ministers to 
the Governor-General.  He went and gave an empty envelop.  There was no paper at 
all inside.  There were no name s of the Ministers inside it.  It was only fifteen minutes 
before the swearing-in that they found the missing paper and they sworn in 
thereafter.  Why I am mentioning this is just to remind, please look at the kind of polity 
that we had at that time.  It was Gandhi ji, who said that we got independence for the 
country, not for the Congress.  And in that Cabinet we constituted, we had people 
who were opposed to Congress, who did not pa rticipate in the freedom struggle etc.  
But yet, Nehru did not have any reservation in  including these able men.  I am talking 
about Ambedkar or Shyama Prasad Mukh erjee who were against Congress, who 
were not only against, but who were su pporting the rulers of the day on some 
occassions. I am not trying to undermine or dilute their importance.  What I am telling 
you is the kind of broad mind the Government had at that time.  It  wanted to take all 
people along.  It wanted to be inclusive.  That ideal  is being lost today.  In the name 
of 'Hindutva', or whatever you call it, today, majoritarianism has become mass 
mobilization movement for politics, which is  wrong.  We have a different view of 
majoritarianism when we speak of Hindus.  But today it has become a mass 
movement for political mobilisation.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH) in the Chair.] 
 
 That is also something which we must  not do.  Sir, it was Amartya Sen who 
said Hindutva movement seeks to convert the religion of the majority in an identity of 
mass mobilisation.  He said, secularism, as it  is practiced in India, to some degree, 
and working of Indian democracy which remains the best guarantee of Indian 
pluralism have served to create India's va rious particularisms.  He was particular 
about these pecularities.  If you look at each decade, they had their own map.   
The second thing that we should have  done after getting independence was 
not only get this kind of inclusive Cabinet to govern, but expand it, to get all people on 
the board.  This is what exact ly Gandhi ji did at that particular time asking for unity, 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
41

because there was no other party at that time to whom he could speak.  Let me not 
talk about it more. At the same time, we had other challenges to face.  We had the 
challenge of language.  We had the challenge of caste.  We had the challenge of 
religion.  We had the challenge of States which has turned out to be an issue of 
federalism.  We had the challenge of class -- rich and poor.  This was very important.  
These are the things which we had to tackle .  Then we had the challenge of gender 
also.   
 Sir, I would first try to tell you about the class approach or the class situation 
that we inherited at that time.  Some were  very rich and some we re poor.  What did 
we do in these 75 years?  We did not bridge  the gap at all.  We have allowed it to 
continue, so much so that today in a given developing situation, it shows you more 
cracks than the bridging elements.   This has to be understood .  I am only trying to 
point it out, because I don't want to take  much time.  We can talk much about the 
divide between the rich and the poor and how one per cent of the people are holding 
4 0  p e r  c e n t  o f  t h e  n a t i o n ' s  w e a l t h .   A l l  t h i s  c a n  b e  d i s c u s s e d .   I  a m  o n l y  t r y i n g  t o  
mention it because all of you, who have di scussed these issues earlier in this House 
or outside, know it better as to what exactly is the situation is as far as the class is 
concerned.  We always talk only abou t the caste.  Caste is there.  The varna system 
that we have inherited is something whic h debases our sensibilities and which is an 
insult to our nation.  Yesterday, I was trying to raise the issue of Sanatana Dharma in 
the meeting of the Leaders of the Opposi tion because I am a student of Hindu 
philosophy.  Let the people sitting that side  know that they are not the monopolist of 
the Hindu philosophy.  'Hinduism' is some word which came only in the sixth century.  
All right, let us forget that.  We talk about Sanatana Dharma. I am talking about it 
because the Constitution speak s about it.  The Constituti on and its Preamble ensure 
it, although it did not use the word 'secular. '  When it said about equality of religions, 
it talked about secularism originally, in th e first book.  But I sh ould congratulate the 
Government and the nation on bringing the 42
nd Amendment wherein they made it 
specific -- a socialist, secu lar nation. These were the tw o things which were missing 
at first, although we were practising them . This nation was essentially a socialist 
nation.  We must understand it.  At least 64 per cent of the people at the time of 
independence were really poor  and 36 per cent of the peop le were below the poverty 
line.  The word 'socialist' meant equal distribu tion of the nation's wealth.  This exactly 
we realised and we brought an amendment to the Constitution itself, to its Preamble.  
This is another great achievement that we have made. Having brought that, did we do 
anything?  Did we walk the talk ?  We did not.  The system did not allow.   Today, we 
are trying to talk about the 75 years of jour ney.  I will tell you the story about the last 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

10-15 years.  Let me say 1991 , when we talked of liberalism in Shri P.V. Narasimha 
Rao's time.  Unfortunately, we had given a go-bye, if not bid total goodbye to social 
control. We had started diluting the importance of looking at the poor or looking at the 
development from the socialistic angle.  We had a socialistic view from the Avadi 
Session when the Congress moved ahead with 'a  socialistic pattern of society'.  Even 
the Communist Party had to nearly close down  their shutters because everything that 
they wanted ideologically for the society came from Avadi.  All of us were in schools in 
those days.  I am a witness to the 75 years of journey.  Today, I am 84 but I have seen 
the 75 years of journey.  At the time when the Avadi Session came out with 'a 
socialistic pattern of society', we did not ta lk about socialism in doctrinnaire view as 
such because there was a serious debate at that particular ti me over its definition.  It 
is a part of the 75 years of journey.  We must understand that a great debate went on 
whether we should go totally towards the Russian model or should have 'socialism' of 
our own.  Because Ram Manohar Lohia ji and other socialists in this country thought 
that 'socialism' can be considered in tune with the Indian ethos.  Confused by this 
kind of, if not dichotomy, a discourse, schism, Nehru thought that we will say the 
same thing but in a pattern; it will be 'a socialistic pattern of society' to develop on the 
basis of socialistic ethos.  When he said this, it has become a reality.   
 Sir, the third great thing that we have  achieved was during Shri V.P. Singh's 
time.When Mr. V.P. Singh came, the Mandal issue was there. The issue of 
reservation for backward classes was there in the Congress regime. I was a Minister 
during the Congress regime.  We knew th at there was 25 per cent reservations in 
States but the point was of accepting it at national level. But, under varna system, 
you considered these people as something lower.  I would not agree because I desist 
that very word varna. So, Mr. V.P. Singh is the one person who brought this and 
thought that this should go through - which goes as a feather in the cap of the Indian 
achievements.  (Time bell rings.) Is time over?  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH): Yes; 12 minutes are over. 
  
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO : S i r ,  n o w ,  I  c o m e  t o  t h e  p a r t  o f  r e l i g i o n .   A s  I  s a i d  e a r l i e r ,  
today, we are trying to identify more by  one religion rather than by our nation.  
Musashi, the great Italian writer, said that they got Italy but not yet got Italians.  Not 
that Nehru is the person who has made us all Indians.  We were Indians.   
There were cynics at that time when we got our independence like Churchill, 
Kipling, Strechy etc.  There were many. You name them and you get them.  All of 
them thought that India will not be able to sustain Freedom, "that India will go back to 
the age of barbarism, the age of privation of the middle classes" and those kinds of 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
43

things. But India sustained stability and de mocracy exemplarly. Not only democracy 
lived here but it lived so well that other na tions are looking forward to us for model of 
our democracy.  It is because we had demo cracy since millennia. In Maurya's time, 
we had janapads or republics.  There were something like 26 republics in the Mauryan 
empire. What we talk today as caste was jati at that time.  There were something like 
3,000 jatis in ancient times.  But there were no clashes as we  find today.  This is how 
we have not been able to manage.  This is a recent phenomenon.  Let me also tell 
you this.  We had earlier communal tension;  we had communal violence etc.  But in 
the present time, it has become some kind of acceptable thing. As I said, 
majoritarianism has become handy for mass mo bilization.  Once it comes, it really 
troubles you the most.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH) : Rao sahib, please 
conclude.  
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO : Sir, when I talk about Hindui sm, I don't want to talk on 
fundamentalism in Hinduism because there is nothing like fundamentalism at all in 
Hinduism.  Take it from me.  Hinduism is a way of life.  Anything that transcends time 
and space is called truth. Today, you say some thing here. After 100 years, if people 
believe the same thing and anywhere else in the world it is the same thing, it remains 
a truth. Gandhi reduced the very aspect of  God as a concept and said that truth is 
G o d .  T h i s  i s  w h a t  H i n d u i s m  i s  a l l  a b o u t .   It is not that I should believe in Rama or 
Krishna to be Hindu. Just now, the AIADMK  man told TN that in Madras they had a 
movement where they have totally oppose d the idolatory. Today, we have people 
who don't believe in God. The question is, if Hinduism could do all that we need, then 
there would not have been the need of Juda ism; if Judaism was all that we needed, 
there would be no need of Christianity; if Christianity was all pr oblem-solving, there 
would not have been the need of Islam; if Islam was all that we needed, there should 
not be need of Sikhism.  So, all these are not fully satisfying to life.  They have 
included truth though. That is exactly what Hinduism has done. I consider Hinduism is 
one of the greatest thought processes which take everything that is truth.  
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH): Please conclude.  Your 
time is over.  
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO : Sir, If I believe in God, I am Hind u; if I don't believe in God, 
but materialism, I am charvaka yet Hindu.  If I believe in somebody who believes in 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

existential truth, I am Buddhist and yet a Hind u. If I am Jaina, many of you are there 
that side. In Karnataka, as I told the Leader  of the Opposition meeting, that they have 
their mathas.  Basweswara did not believe in caste system. They don't believe in 
God; they believe in seva . So, what is Hinduism is self -realization.  So, let us all 
believe that.  Let not the Prime Minister say that all sanatanis should join and unite as 
if it is a "war cry".  I think, at this age,  this is not something which is good to come 
from a person of his stature, because we accept all religions are same and respected.  
Yesterday, Mr. Chidamabaram was saying something about Sarva Dharma Harmony.  
He was quoting Madhvacharya, a 16 th century Hindu saint.  When he said 'Sarva 
Dharshana Samabhava', the same thing is  quoted by Ramanujacharya and other 
saints.  Hinduism believes that all are one; that is why, they say, 'Ekam Sat Vipra 
Bahudha Vadanti'.  People may call it by different names but truth is only one.  We 
believed in it unlike others; I am not trying to criticize other relig ions.  They believed 
that their God is exclusive.  There is no Christ or Mohammad or  Zarathustra and like 
that. In Indian Religion, we had a transcending thought process as such.  So, in this, 
I do not know, if we are losing track.  We must get on to that.  ...(Time-bell rings.)...  
We must build a nation, the Indian nation. We are Indians first, Indians last, we are 
Indians.  There is no question of first or last like sanatanis say 'there is no beginning 
and no end'.  If there is no beginning, where is the question of being there?  So, it is 
not like that.  It is there.  It is truth.  It  is all pervading.  So, I tell you, the 75 years' 
journey has been really rewarding, has been  very good.  I also congratulate you, the 
G20 was a welcome thing.  But, as I suggested  earlier, let us learn to live with what 
we always boast of.  We have, this morning, heard a welcome statement.  It spoke of 
giving scope for expression from all sides.  That is what I call freedom of expression. 
That should be respected.  People's urges should be respected.  You should not use 
your own agencies because you are in power.   If that were to be the case, earlier 
regimes would have done the same, leading nowhere.  Nobody has done it.  They 
have respected the nation.  They have allowed the nation to grow.  As Gandhi ji said: 
"Independence is not for Congress, Indepe ndence is for the nation."  Let us all 
realize that this nation's development is fo r the entire nation, not for one party or one 
thing.  Thank you very much.        
   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD  SINGH):  Now, Mr. G.K. Vasan.  
You have three-four minutes.   
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu):  Thank you, Sir, for giving me an opportunity. We 
all understand that this is the historic Parlia ment building.  Today is the last day of our 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
45

speech in this building.  Maybe, tomorrow,  we all would go to the new Parliament 
building.  This is the time to salute and respect our leaders who fought for our 
Independence and got Independen ce for us.  This is the 75 th year of our 
Independence. We remember the Father of  the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi, and all our 
leaders from various parts of India who were with Gandhi ji and who fought for this 
country's freedom and who taught us ahimsa in this country.  We also have to be very 
proud that we are the larges t democracy in the world.  We have genuinely preserved 
the sovereignty, integrity, security and solidarity of this country with pride.  We have 
made remarkable progress in these 75 years in the field of education, agriculture, 
healthcare, industrial growth, economic equality and even in scientific space 
research.  Above all, as Indians, we are all proud today that our nation is looked upon 
by foreign countries for extending our helpin g hand and support even in international 
problems today.  This is a Parliament where legends have spoken on various subjects 
in the interest of this great nation.  We sh ould be very thankful to  our regional leaders 
who have been in this Parliament, spoken in the interest of the country.  From Tamil 
Nadu, I would like to proudly quote Rajaji and Kamarajji, who have been the pioneers.  
Even today, they are leaders who are the ic ons for youth in this country, especially, 
Tamil Nadu.  The national approach and outlook of leaders from the South has been 
great in the development of this country. I must also place on record that India has 
achieved great heights during these ni ne years under Prime Minister Modi ji.  To 
conclude, I would say that schemes, plans and programme s launched by the 
Government have embraced every citizen and have enhanced and improved the living 
conditions of every Indian.   
 With this, I conclude my speech.  Th ank you very much, Mr. Vice-Chairman, 
Sir, for giving me opportunity.  
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र (िबहार): Ǜीमâ, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA (Assam): Thakur ji, one minute. Can I ask the Chair 
as to when our chance will come? That is just a question.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH): I was told that you will 
speak after half-an-hour. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Who said that? ...(Interruptions).... I did not say 
that. ...(Interruptions).... It is good that we should make new traditions.  But, then, 
we have to follow the traditions also as to how the House runs.  ...(Interruptions).... 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH) :  Please let  him speak . 
...(Interruptions)....  Now, Shri Ram Nath Thakur. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: But, I have a ri ght to ask a question from the Chair.  
...(Interruptions).... I appreciate your support but then, in the process, our turns are 
not coming. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH) :  There is no 
discrimination. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN : Sir, give him time. ...(Interruptions).... Most of the Members 
have gone for lunch. ...(Interruptions).... Nobody is in their seats.  Other Members 
should know....  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH):  I will also give you a 
chance to speak. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN :  Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, others should also get an opportunity.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH) :  Yes, please.  I will also 
give you a chance. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र : Ǜीमâ, मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूं िक आपने इस महत्वपूणर् सदन क े 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI VAIKO:  S i r ,  i t  i s  n o t  p r o p e r .  ...(Interruptions)...
.  I had given my name...   
...(Interruptions).... Then, it was at number one but, here, I find my name in the sixth 
place. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH) :  You will get your 
chance. ...(Interruptions).... No worries. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र : Ǜीमâ, िपछले 75 वषș मȂ इस सदन की बहुत गिरमा रही है और िकतने ही  
महान पुरुष  इस सदन क े सदÎय रहे हȅ। Ǜी पीलू मोदी, डा. राधाकृ Íणन, डा. अÇबेडकर, 
चन्दर्शेखर जी, राज नारायण जी जैसे महत्वपूणर् सदÎयȗ ने जनता की आवाज़ को उठाने का काम 
िकया। उसी स
ंदभर् मȂ मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक समाजवािदयȗ का जो ध्येय था, 
समाजवािदयȗ की जो मांग थी, उनके  ǎारा उसी मांग को यहां ĢÎतुत िकया गया था। काका 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
47

कालेलकर की जो िरपोटर् थी, उस िरपोटर् को तब Ģकािशत नहीं िकया गया था, 1978 मȂ उस 
िरपोटर् को Ģकािशत िकया गया।  िबहार मȂ पहले िजनका राज था - जननायक कपूर्री ठाकु र जी ने 
वहां आरक्षण लागू करने का काम िकया था। 1990 मȂ मंडल आयोग का इस सदन पर दवाब पड़ा 
था, वह इसी सदन की बात है। उस समय सǄा पर जो दबाव पड़ा था, उस दबाव क े चलते ही 
मंडल आयोग लागू हुआ था। मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक िबहार का जो मॉडल था, उसके  अनुसार पूरे 
देश मȂ जातीय गणना होनी चािहए थी, लेिकन िबहार न
े उसको लागू करने का काम िकया। 
मिहलाओं की गैर-बराबरी हटाने क े िलए 2005 से नगर िनकायȗ मȂ, पंचायत मȂ मिहलाओं को जो 
आरक्षण िदया गया, उस आरक्षण को िबहार ने लागू करने का काम िकया।  
Ǜीमâ, हम आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहते ह
ȅ, हम लोग जब नये भवन मȂ िशÄट हो रहे हȅ, तो 
क्यȗ नहीं सरकार मिहलाओं को 33% आरक्षण देने और लागू करने का काम करती है? मȅ तो 
समझ रहा था िक सरकार क े ǎारा जो िवशेष सतर् बुलाया गया ह ै, उसमȂ मिणपुर पर चचार् होगी, 
मिणपुर की समÎयाओं को दूर भगाने क े िलए सरकार क ु छ एनाउंसमȂट करेगी, लेिकन अभी तक 
मिणपुर क े बारे मȂ कोई काम नहीं हो सका है। महोदय, मȅ दो-तीन बातȂ कह कर, अपने सुझाव 
आपके  सामने रखना चाहता हूँ
।  इन 75 वषș मȂ से 9 वषș मȂ सरकार ने कई काम िकये हȅ।  मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से सरकार से िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक जेलȗ मȂ बन्द जो क ैदी हȅ, िजन पर कोई आरोप 
नहीं है, जो गरीब हȅ, दुखी हȅ, वंिचत हȅ, िजनके  पास पैसे नहीं हȅ िक व
े अपनी बेल करा सकȂ और 
क े स लड़ सकȂ - आज 75 वषर् क े उपलÑय मȂ आपने यह सतर् बुलाने का जो काम िकया है, तो आप 
जेलȗ मȂ बन्द पड़े इन क ैिदयȗ को भी छोड़ने का काम करȂ, यह मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ
। 
 मȅ आपसे दूसरा िनवेदन यह करना चाहता हूँ िक इसी तरह िव शेष सतर् बुला कर या िवशेष 
िदन रख कर महँगाई पर चचार् होनी चािहए और उसका िनदान करना चािहए।   उसी तरह जो 
बेरोजगार हȅ, जो बेरोजगारी बढ़ी है, उन बेरोजगारȗ क े िलए नौकरी क े िलए आपको 
announcement करनी चािहए थी।   इससे आपकी सरकार की उपलिÅध बढ़ती।   
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम
 से एक यह िनवेदन करके  अपनी बात समाÃत करना चाहता हूँ िक : 
   " सब लोग िजधर वो हȅ उधर देख रहे हȅ। 
                             हम देखने वालȗ की नज़र देख रहे हȅ।" 
 
 इन्हीं चंद शÅदȗ क े साथ, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से िनवेदन करना चाहता ह
ूँ िक 
िजन-िजन मुǈȗ को हमने उठाने का काम िकया है, सरकार उन पर ध्यान दे और उन पर अमल 
करने का काम करे, धन्यवाद।                 
                       
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD  SINGH): Now, Dr. John Brittas.  
You have six minutes. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Sir, when we are havin
g a discussion with regard to 
the Amrit Kaal , I would say that I have a three- dimensional view of the Indian 
Parliament.  I used to watch the Parliament from outside, from above, and now, I am, 
being part of this Parliament, sitting be low. When we speak about Parliament, the 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

basic aspect which we need to keep in mind is parliamentary democracy.  That is very 
important. What is the tenet of parliame ntary democracy? The fundamental, cardinal 
principle of parliamentary democracy, as  Kharge saheb said, is accountability of 
Executive to the Legislature. िनरंजन साहब, आप Senior Advocate हȅ।  यह बात सही है न? 
Have you ever seen an accountability of the Executive to the Legislature?  Have you 
ever seen it?  Now, the Opposition Lead er was speaking about the presence of the 
Prime Minister.  I was trying to dissect there. Do you know what is the presence of the 
Prime Minister in Parliament?  It is 0.001 per cent!  So, that is the period for which he 
attend the Parliament session.  
 Sir, the Leader of the House was very vocal, but he missed many crucial 
names  including  Jawaharlal  Nehru,  intentionally.  I know that when Dharmendra 
saheb will be speaking, he would deliberatel y fill those voids and would bring in 
Jawaharlal Nehru and Ambedkar saheb.  Dharmendra ji, I am telling you, the names 
which have been missed by Piyush Goyal ji, you will have to spell out when you will be 
speaking.  Sir, the exercise would be meaningful if you discuss about the dreams and 
goals of architects of our Constitution. Sir, I will just dwell on its Preamble. What does 
it say?  It speaks about liberty, equality and fraternity.  If you take justice, you will 
notice that we have reached the bulldozer er a. That is the justice now.  The justice 
that is being imparted is the bulldozer era.  If it is economic justice, we do not want to 
speak about the Oxfam report because that is not a good organisation for the present 
dispensation.  It is black-listed.  
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
You see the inequality that is spiralling up. The liberty that has been assured in, where 
has it reached?  Now, it is more manifested in the form of sedition and UAPA.  That is 
the liberty which has reached.  
 Sir, another cardinal principle is equality of status and opportunities.  This 
Government is honest to say that they don’t believe in it.  Ambedkar, who they try to 
appropriate now, was absolutely clear when he said that, 'Democracy is not the law 
of majority but the protection of minority.'  Rajeev Chandrasekhar sahab, protection 
of minorities!  It is not said by John Brittas, it is said by Ambedkar.  Sir, what is the 
representation of 20 crore Muslims in Executive , in Legislature, in Judiciary, even in 
Media?  P.T. Usha ji, you know the representation of Muslims, Christians, Minorities 
in Kerala.  What is the situation in Delhi,  in Parliament, in Executive?  We all know 
about that.  Sir, this Government's pet to pic is discussion about Mughals.  I said, 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
49

they talk about Mughals more than the Indians now actually .  In Akbar's court, or in 
Aurangzeb's court, more than 50 per cent of the Ministers were Hindus. Neeraj 
sahab, आप तो जानते हȅ न िक बीरबल कौन था?  He was a Hindu. Can you spot 
s o m e b o d y  i n  t h i s  E x e c u t i v e  n o w ?   W h a t  is the status of the representation of 
minority?  Nehru's Cabinet, that was the fi rst Ministry, it was the model Government.  
It had given representation to ever y segment.   Dharmendra Pradhan saheb, two 
Muslim Cabinet Minister.  You know Maulana Azad, Rafi Ahmed Kidwai, John Mathai; 
there was a Parsi, Sikh; everyone, of cour se, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee; even not 
having, I would say, ideological togetherness.  Derek saheb, representation from 
Bengali was also there.  Sir, it was Maul ana Azad, who stood on the steps of Jama 
Masjid and said, 'This country is ours.  We ha ve built up this country.  There is no 
need of going away from this country'.  You want to obliterate the last set of memory 
about Maulana Azad.  You scrapped the scholarship.  Dharmendra Pradhan ji, you 
scrapped the scholarship.  Not you, I think, Smriti Irani ji.  Sir, coming to fraternity, 
what is the new usage of fraternity?  Ma dam, you know what is the new usage of 
fraternity?  Go to Pakistan! Go to Pakistan !  If somebody speaks, they will say, 'You 
go to Pakistan'.  We are a part of this country.  We are as patriotic as you are, maybe 
more.  Sir, now coming to G20; there have been a lot of discussions, fanfare about 
G20.  We appreciate if India gets a standing  amongst the other nations.  But, if you 
look at the indices!  Rajeev Saheb, what are indices?  It is per capita GDP, Human 
Development Index, Hunger Index.  हम लाÎट हȅ, िबलकु ल लाÎट हȅ।   And, is that the 
reason why you brought in African Union to the G20 so that we will not be last? 
Anyway, I appreciate that.  Sir, coming to the Preamble again.  'Sovereign, Socialist, 
Secular, Democratic Republic'.  What is sovereignty now?  Hugging Western leaders, 
from Trump to Biden, doesn’t mean sove reignty.  You finished off NAM because 
Nehru's name is there.  You don’t want Non-Alignment Movement to be there, just 
because Jawaharlal Nehru was instrumental in setting up Non-Alignment Movement!  
Now, Sir, the second word 'Socialism'.  What is socialism, Sir?  Socialism has 
become Adanism.  That is the new word 'Adanism'.  P.T. Usha Madam, socialism 
बदल गया, Adanism हो गया।  चुपचाप बैठȂ हȅ आप!  You should be standing up and talking 
about that.  Now, Sir, Secularism
.    You know how a gentleman sitting in Prime 
Minister's Office had the au dacity to say.  Dharmendra ji, सुिनये सर। Bibek Debroy 
said, 'This Constitution has become useless.  Only seventeen years, it can stand'. He 
said he does not understand the meaning of socialism and secularism. A gentleman 
who is heading the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister had the audacity 
to come and say that he does not unde rstand the meaning of secularism and 
socialism. I would have respected a Cabinet Minister, the stature of Dharmendra 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

Pradhanji to say, 'shut your mouth'. ...(Time Bell rings.)... Did you say that, Sir? You 
should have said it.  
 Sir, now, another word is 'Democracy'. Many of the Members think that 
Democracy has turned to be 'Namocracy' or  'Modicracy'. Sir, it has changed to 
'Namocracy' or 'Modicracy' because we do not see the Prime Minister. My daughter 
asked me: Did you get an opportunity to sit with the Prime Minister? I said 'No', very 
rarely, I have got it. So, what does it  mean? Democracy means accountability of the 
Executive to the Parliament and the Parlia ment being accountable to the people; that 
is democracy.  
 Sir, then, 'Republic'; where is Rakesh Sinha ji? For Rakesh Sinha and others, 
you know what is the meanin g of 'Republic', Vice-Chairman , Sir, do you know what 
is the meaning of 'Republic'? It is Arnab Goswami. That is the meaning of 'Republic' 
for many of the Members of the Treasury Benches. 
...(Time Bell rings.)... Sir, that is 
the state of affairs of this country. Dharmendra ji, please do not look at me like this.  
...(Interruptions).... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH): Please conclude. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, you have to give me time.  
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान: उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मेरे िमतर् जॉन िĤटास जी अच्छा बोलते हȅ। हम लोग उनके  मुंह 
से नेहरू  जी की Ģशंसा सुन रहे थे, यह अच्छा है। जब पहली बार नंबूदरीपाद जी की सरका
 र को 
क ेरल मȂ तोड़ िदया गया था, तब राज्य सभा मȂ क्या िडबेट हुई थी, उनकी पाटीर् ने क्या Ëयू िलया 
था? अभी वे डेमोकर्े सी क े बारे मȂ बहुत नसीहत दे रहे थे। कÇयुिनÎट पाटीर् क े लोग पहली बार 
क ेरल म
Ȃ जीते थे और वही सरकार, िजसके  आज वे कसीदे पढ़ रहे हȅ, उन्हȗने नंबूदरीपाद जी की 
इलेक्टेड गवनर्मȂट को बरखाÎत िकया था। जॉन िĤटास जी, हम आपसे यह अपेक्षा कर रहे थे िक 
उस समय सीपीएम क
े  िमतर्ȗ ने राज्य सभा मȂ क्या बोला था, आप इस पर थोड़ी लाइट डालते। Dr. 
John Brittas, you are a very enlightened and very knowledgeable person, do not 
laugh at your colleagues. You may get boxe d news in the Indian Express. But, we 
expect some good views of yours when Shri Namboodiripad was dismissed from 
Kerala, what the view of CPM in Rajya Sabha was? Please enlighten us. 
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : I would thank Dharmendra ji for reminding me about the 
dismissal of Shri E.M.S. Namboodiripad. For such misdeeds, they have been 
punished; they are sitting here, and precisely  that is the reason. Otherwise, do you 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
51

think that they would have been put here? But, you are repeating the same mistake. 
You are calling us, depicting us as Somalia. The extreme poverty in Uttar Pradesh 
and Bihar is almost 30 to 40 per cent. In Southern States, it is 10 per cent. In Kerala, it 
is almost zero. ...(Interruptions).... Yes, the extreme poverty is almost zero. Sir, it is 
because ...(Interruptions).... S i r ,  t h e r e  i s  s o  m u c h  d i s r u p t i o n ,  I  w a n t  y o u r  
protection. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have my protection. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, this happened because ...(Interruptions).... Mr. 
Muraleedharan seems to be a Keralite, but hi s only job is to act against Kerala. Sir, 
when we talk about 75 years of Indian de mocracy, we cannot forget the name of 
Mahatma Gandhi. I was surprised that no body from the Treasury Benches even 
referred to Mahatma Gandhi. Just because he held Bhagwad Geeta, Quran and Bible  
...(Time Bell rings.)... close to his chest, he was assassinated. He was assassinated 
only because of that; everyb ody knows that. Sir, you are replacing Mahatma Gandhi 
with Savarkar and that is why the new Par liament had to be inaugurated on the birth 
anniversary of Savarkar instead of Maha tma Gandhi. If you had some respect, you 
would not have done that. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The time allotted is over. I wanted to say that your time is over, but I 
came to know that your time can never be over!  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  In two minutes, I will finish, Sir. ...(Interruptions)... Please. 
...(Interruptions)... The main business of this Govern ment is to appropriate people.  
Sardar Patel, they think,  Sardar Patel is theirs.  Wasn’t it Sardar Patel, who banned 
RSS after the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi? What did he say, Sir? "The 
banning was to root out the force of hate an d violence that are at work in our country 
and imperil the freedom of nation and darken  her fair name."  Another person who is 
being appropriated is Vivekananda.  Didn’t  he say so that sectarianism, bigotry and 
its horrible descendents, fanaticism have long possessed this beautiful earth? They 
have filled the earth with violence.  That is what Vivekananda said.  The unfortunate 
part is this.  You are a legal luminary.  We  are very happy that you preside over this 
House. You have rich knowledge.  I have seen you as a Minister  in 1989 when you 
came to Lok Sabha.  I was in the galleries.  With huge admiration, I have been 
observing and watching you. But the unfortuna te part is that the demolition of every 
institution from Parliament to the Election Commission…  
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude now. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, I am talking about you also. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: That is why you have to conclude. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: I am going to talk about you also, Sir. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Kindly conclude. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Every institution in this country is being demolished, from 
Parliament to Election Commission.  What is Election Commission now? Now they 
have weakened the status of the Election Commission from the Supreme Court Judge 
status to Cabinet Secretary and the day after tomorrow, Dharmendra Pradhanji will 
bring a Bill to make them a chaprasi. That is going to happen.  Every institution is 
being dismantled. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Vaiko.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Only one minute. ...(Interruptions)... I am going to wind up. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Take one minute. ...(Interruptions)....  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  It says that India, that is, Bh arat, shall be the Union of States. 
Federalism! Kerala contributes one rupee and gets back twenty-five paise. That is the 
status of federalism in this country. ...(Interruptions)... Yes, it has turned to be like 
that. ...(Interruptions)... I would say that you told here ...(Interruptions)... Mr. 
Chairman, you wanted us...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The hon. Member has made a statement of facts. He will 
authenticate. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Yes, I will authenticate. Sir, Kerala contributes one rupee to the 
national kitty and gets back 25 paise. I repeat it; I will place the document on the 
Table of the House.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: During the course of the day.  
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
53

 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Sir, the last thing is that it is good that we are taking stock of 
this country, democracy, institutions, Parliament in this Amrit kaal. Sir, structure does 
not matter, new Parliament or old Parlia ment.  The process matters, the content 
matters.  Can we enrich the parliamentary proceedings? Can we enrich the 
democratic process in this country? You can build mansions, structures, but that will 
not strengthen the democracy in this country. Unless you enrich...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  I would urge the Treasury Benche s, through you, Sir, let us all 
resolve to enrich democracy of this great nation. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  O n  a  p o i n t  o f  i n f o r m a t i o n  f r o m  y o u ,  h a v e  y o u  b e e n  t o  S t a t u e  o f  
Unity? ...(Interruptions)... Have you been to Statue of Unity? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  I have not gone, but I will go. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I strongly suggest you go there once. ...(Interruptions)... It takes 
great effort to appropriate someone.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  I will go, Sir. If you give an invitation, I will go, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have been there. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:   I will be happy to go with you, Sir. ...(Interruptions)... I will go 
with you.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, I will go with you. ...(Interruptions)...Mr. Vaiko.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, let me have a towering personality beside me when I go.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let us hear Mr. Vaiko.  
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu) :  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I am extrem ely thankful for giving me 
this opportunity to participate in the discu ssion on Parliamentary Journey of 75 years, 
starting from Constituent Assembly, its achievements, experience, memories and 
learning.  It was also a long journey for me, having entered Parliament in 1978 as a 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

M e m b e r  o f  R a j y a  S a b h a .   N o w  i t  i s  m y  f ourth term in the Rajya Sabha. Apart from 
being a Member of the Upper House, I had the honour to be a Member of the Lok 
Sabha for two terms, in the 12th Lok Sabha and the 13th Lok Sabha.  There were many 
streams and waves  the nation has witnessed in the last 75 years.  But what is 
s h o c k i n g  t o  m e  i s  w h y  t h e  n a m e  i s  c h a nged to 'Bharat'.  When the G-20 meeting 
took place, before the Prime Minister, the name was 'Bharat', not 'India'.  So, we are 
not representing India!  Then, it should be  called the 'United States of India'. All the 
States should be given equal opportunity.  From where did the word 'Bharat' come 
from?  It came from Upanishads, from Sanatana and from Hindu Rashtra.  So, they 
are trying to take this country towards Hind u Rashtra, but I would like to tell them one 
thing, you never entered our area.  The Guptas never entered, the Mauryas never 
entered, nobody entered Tamil Nadu, but we have come to th e Ganges, we have 
come to the Himalayas.  Sir, I am very sorry to say that the Prime Minister of India has 
put 'Bharat' instead of 'India'.  Why is he af raid of 'INDIA', the formation of 'INDIA'?  
It has threatened them.  The formation of INDIA has threatened them.  Therefore, they 
have put the name as 'Bharat'.  Sir, I do  not want to take much time because you 
have given me a privilege to take this time.  I demanded installation of Dr. Ambedkar's 
Portrait in the Central Hall of Parliament allowing Army  men belonging to Muslim 
community to offer Jummah  prayers on Friday.  Sir, secularism is under threat.  The 
Muslims are under threat.  The Sanatan forces are threatening them.  They are afraid 
because they hear, 'You leave India; you Mu slims, leave India.  This is not your 
country.'  This is the voice of the Hindu Rashtra people.  In this way the country will 
be balkanized.  I warn you on this particular day.  It should be noted.  It will become 
the Soviet Union. What happened in Soviet Union will happen in In dia.  India will be 
balkanized into many States and, therefore,  I said, 'United States of India'; but at 
least you make the name as 'United States of India'; otherwise, India will not be one 
where you want to celebrate the centenary celebrations of Independence; but in 2047 
there won't be any such India.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, there have been en ough reflections on Dr. B. R. 
Ambedkar.  The Leader of the Opposition was very focused.  I hope he was here, but 
it was a glorious moment for me as a Member  of Parliament in 1989, it was during our 
tenure of the 9
th Lok Sabha that we could give the great man something that was long 
overdue, the Bharat Ratna. Now, Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. 
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार) : सभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  आज का िदन 
बेहद महत्वपूणर् है।   
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
55

 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता)पीठासीन हुईं।] 
  
मैडम, आप मेरी शुभकामनाएं Îवीकार करȂ।  यह बहुत अच्छा अवसर है िक आप यहां आई हȅ, मुझे 
बहुत खुशी हो रही है। आज सुबह माननीय सभापित महोदय ने कहा था िक ǩूमर हमारी िंजदगी 
से चला गया है। मȅ Constituent Assembly debates की एक ही िकताब लेकर आया हूं, लेिकन 
ऐसी पांच िकताबȂ ह
ȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...कांिÎटǷूएंट असेÇबली िडबेट्स की ऐसी पांच िकताबȂ हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, 75 क ै से बनाया जा रहा है, यह मेरी समझ मȂ 
नहीं आ रहा है।  अगर हम कांिÎटǷूएंट असेÇबली से 75 जोड़Ȃ, तो वह 2021 मȂ पूरा होता है, अगर 
आज़ादी से जोड़Ȃ, तो वह 2022 मȂ पूरा होता है और अगर पहली लोक सभा से जोड़Ȃ, तो वह 2027 
मȂ पूरा होता है, तो यह 75 की  गणना कहां हुई और िकस ज्योितषी ने की, यह म
ुझे नहीं पता है।  
मेरे िहसाब से यह 75 नहीं है, लेिकन मȅ 75 वाली फील मȂ अपनी बात रखूंगा।   
  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हुआ यूं िक संभवत: 11 िदसÇबर, 1946 को सरोिजनी 
नायडू जी को बोलने क े िलए ब
ुलाया गया।  यहां कम लोगȗ को यह पता होगा िक सरोिजनी नायडू 
जी िबहार से चुनकर संिवधान सभा मȂ आई थीं।  उनको चेयरमैन साहब ने कहा िक अब बुलबुल-
ए-िंहद, नाइिंटगेल ऑफ इंिडया आएंगी, लेिकन किवता मȂ अपनी बात कहȂगी, Ģोज़ मȂ नहीं 
कहȂगी।  उन्हȂ थोड़ा बुरा लगा।  मजाक मȂ ही सही, उन्हȗने कहा िक आपका यह Ëयवहार, आपका 
यह कहना unconstitutional है।  उन्हȗने कहा िक िफर भी आपको स
ुनाना होगा।  उन्हȗने एक 
चीज़ सुनाई, िजसे मȅ माननीय सभापित जी को पेश-ए-नज़र कर रहा हूं, क्यȗिक वे सुबह बड़ी 
बेसĤी से कह रहे थे िक ǩूमर चला गया।  उन्हȗने सुनाया िक - 
 
"बुलबुल को गुल मुबारक गुल को चमन मुबारक, 
र
ंगीं तबीअतȗ को रंग-ए-सुख़न मुबारक"। 
 
 मȅ बता रहा हूं िक यह हमारा ध्येय था।  सुबह हमारे लीडर ऑफ द हाउस ने बहुत खूबसूरत 
चचार् की और सवर्पÊली राधाकृ Íणन जी का िजकर् िकया।  यहां, ठीक सामने सवर्पÊली राधाकृ Íणन 
जी की तÎवीर ह
ै।  उन्हȗने एक बात कही थी और मȅ वह Ìलोक पढ़ना चाहता हूं - 
 
"मृदुना दारुण ं हिन्त मृदुना हन्त्यदारुणç, 
नासाध्यं मृदुना िंकिचÞ तÎमाÞ तीĨतरं मृदु"। 
 
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, इसका आशय यह है िक एगर्ेशन स
े, एगर्ेिसव िबहेिवयर से 
आप चीज़Ȃ हािसल नहीं कर सकते हȅ।  उधर से मेरे िवǎान सािथयȗ ने उपलिÅधयां िगनाईं, यहां स े 
हमारे क ु छ िवǎान सािथयȗ ने किमयां िगनाईं और मȅ दोनȗ क े बीच मȂ चुनौितयां िगनाना चाहता हूं।  
चुनौितयȗ की वजह से हम आज यहां हȅ और िसफर् हम ही नहीं हȅ, 140 करोड़ लोगȗ का यह भवन 
है, चाहे वह नया वाला हो या पुराना वाला हो।  आज क
े  िदन मेरी ओर से और मेरे दल की ओर से 
इस इमारत को यह एक िवदाई भाषण भी है, िजस इमारत मȂ संिवधान सभा क े माध्यम से 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

िंहदुÎतान की तकदीर िलखी गई और वे तकदीर िलखने वाले संकीणर् दायरȗ मȂ नहीं सोचते थे।  मȅ 
इस पर दो िमनट क े बाद आऊं गा।   
   माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, देश मȂ बंटवारे की बहुत चचार् होती है।  1947 मȂ इस देश 
का बंटवारा हुआ था, लेिकन बंटवारे और पीड़ा क े बावजूद उतनी घृणा, उतनी नफरत नहीं थी।  
अभी हाल मȂ रोिमला
 जी की एक िकताब आई है, िजसमȂ वे बड़ी खूबसूरती से कहती हȅ, Have we 
moved from integrated nationalism to segregated nationalism? क्या हम एकीकृ त 
राÍटर्वाद से एक िवभािजत, िवखंिडत राÍटर्वाद की ओर बढ़ रहे हȅ?  
क्यȗिक यह इमारत, इसकी 
बुिनयाद मेल-जोल मȂ है।  इसकी बुिनयाद मȂ बंटवारे क े बावजूद बंटवारा नहीं हुआ।  मȅ हाथ 
जोड़कर िवनती करूं गा िक सरकार जरूर  बनाइए, अगला चुनाव भी लड़Ȃगे और िदल से लड़Ȃगे।  
इंिडया भी रहेगा, भारत भी रहेगा।  इनमȂ से कोई एक च्वॉयस नहीं है, क्यȗिक हमको इंिडया, 
भारत करके  जÇबू ǎीप तक नहीं जाना है।  
 मȅ िसफर् इतना कहूंगा िक वह जो मेल-जोल की सीमȂट 
है, उसका खात्मा हो रहा है, उसको बचाइए।   
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, म
ȅ दो Ëयिƪयȗ क े मध्य मȂ अपनी क ु छ बातȂ रखना चाहता 
हूं। संिवधान सभा मȂ objective resolution जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी लेकर आए और संिवधान सभा 
मȂ जब डर्ाÄट सिÅमट हुआ, तो बी. आर. अÇबेडकर जी ने वह डर्ाÄट सिÅमट िकया।  मȅ िसफर् कहता 
ह
ूं िक objective resolution मȂ बहुत सारी बातȂ थीं।  ĢÎतावना क े बारे मȂ, मौिलक अिधकारȗ क े 
बारे मȂ और Sovereign Democratic Republic क े बारे मȂ काफी क ु छ बोल चुक े हȅ िक 
sovereignty िगरवी न चली जाए।  म
ैडम, आपके  पीछे एक तराजू है, वह तराजू हमȂ लगाना होगा 
िक मौिलक अिधकारȗ मȂ हम कहां पहुंचे, sovereignty मȂ कहां पहुंचे, democratic republic क े 
मसले पर कहां पहुंचे। High-flying words don’t cover up ou r failures.  Let us not look for 
that.   एक मसला आया, उन्हȗने ( नेहरू  जी न
े) एक िज़कर् िकया Oath of Tennis Court. 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, French Revolution  क े बाद जब बड़ी िशǈत से लोग अिधकारȗ 
पर बात करने क े िलए काम पर लग गए, तो राजा को शुरू  मȂ परेशानी नहीं हुई। लेिकन राजा को 
लगा िक क ु छ ऐसा कर रहे हȅ िक खुराफात की बू आ रही है। उसने क्या िकया, उसने दरवाजे बंद 
करवा िदए, िजस हॉल मȂ वे लोग बैठते थे। वे दूसरे रूम मȂ चले गए, उसको भी बंद करवा िदया, 
तो वे tennis court मȂ चले गए। सारी कारर्वाई पूरी की और उसको  Oath of Tennis Court  कहा।  
Oath of Tennis Court का िज़कर् ज
वाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने इसिलए िकया था िक हमारे अंदर वह 
जज्बा है। इमारत बनाने, िबगाड़ने से, इबारतȂ नहीं बदलनी चािहए। हमारा ज़ज्बा वही होना 
चािहए, जो  Oath of Tennis Court मȂ  जवाहरलाल न
ेहरू  जी, हमारे फÎटर् Ģाइम िमिनÎटर ने 
कहा था। 
 अब आते हȅ िक बाबा साहेब भीमराव अÇबेडकर जी ने क्या कहा।   माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदया, आप िजस इलाके  से आती हȅ, मȅ िजस इलाके  से आता हूं, वहां यह बात बड़ी Ģबल  है। 
आज़ादी का मूÊयांकन होगा, तो इस आधार पर होगा िक राजनैितक आज़ादी, सामािजक-
आिर्थक आज़ादी मȂ िकतनी तÅदील हुई, अगर नहीं हुई, तो क्यȗ नहीं हुई? उन्हȗने कहा था िक 
एक िदन एक ज्वालामुखी बन जाएगा और मȅ उस ज्वालामुखी को बनते देख रहा हूं - जब मȅ यह 
देखता हूं िक िबहार क े जाितगत
 सवȃक्षण पर देश क े Solicitor General  कोटर् मȂ खड़े हो जाते हȅ, 
तो मȅ देखता हूं  िक Åलॉक करने की कोिशश हो रही  है। यह aspirational  वगर् है, िपछड़ȗ की बड़ी 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
57

आबादी है, उसके  aspirations को आप  social democracy  क े नज़िरये से देिखए, िजसके  बारे 
मȂ बाबा साहेब कह गए थे। 1931 मȂ आिखरी जनगणना हुई थी, उसके  बाद पािकÎतान और 
बंगलादेश बना। क्या इस देश को, यहां की सरकारȗ को, राज्यȗ की सरकारȗ को वैज्ञािनक आंकड़े 
नहीं चािहए? क्या आप आंकड़े आसमान स
े िगराएंगे? मȅ समझता हूं िक आज क े िदन यह भी 
सुिनिÌचत करना होगा  िक हम इन आंकड़ȗ को लाएं, उनके  आधार पर अपनी नीितयां तय करȂ। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, अÇबेडकर साहेब दो और चीज़Ȃ कह कर गए - ‘Preventing 
Tyranny of Majority’ और म
ȅ बार-बार इस सदन मȂ कह चुका हूं िक majority बेहद आवÌयक 
चीज़ है, majority क े िबना सरकार नहीं चलती है। लेिकन majority और majoritariansim  मȂ 
फक़र् है। इस फक़र् को अगर हमारी सरकार भूल जाती है, तो बहुत बड़ी पीड़ा होती है। मȅ अकसर 
देखता हूं िक हम जैसे लोग अगर छोटी
-मोटी आलोचना भी करते हȅ, जो कभी Ëयिƪगत नहीं होती 
है, तो आप कहते हȅ िक पािकÎतान चले जाओ! आपने कभी देखा भी है  िक वहां पर िकतनी जगह 
है, वहां का भ
ूगोल क्या है! वहां पर इतने लोग नहीं आ पाएंगे। मान लीिजए िक आपको 65 परसȂट 
लोगȗ ने वोट नहीं िदया, तो क्या सबको पािकÎतान भेज दोगे, क्या ऐसी कोई ËयवÎथा होती ह ै!  
यहीं पर िमल-जुलकर रहना है, इन चीज़ȗ को मȅ नहीं कर रहा हूं, खुद अÇबेडकर साहेब कह कर 
गए थे।  
 महोदया, आपके  माध्यम से मȅ एक-दो छोटी चीज़Ȃ कह कर अपनी बात समाÃत करूं गा।  
इस देश की एक बड़ी आबादी  ...(समय की घं टी)... महोदया, मȅ दो िमनट का समय और लूंगा, 
आप पहली बार वहां पर बैठी हȅ, इसिलए इतनी नज़र-ए-इनायत कर दीिजए। मȅ िसफर् इतना 
कहना चाहूंगा िक बेरोजगारी को लेकर हमारा दृिÍटकोण साफ होना चािहए।  सरकार म Ȃ आप हȗ 
या हम हȗ, बेरोजगारी हम सबकी पॉिलिटक्स खत्म कर देगी।  Right to Employment  क े िलए 
हम क्या सोच रहे हȅ ?  इस देश की एक बड़ी आबादी से हम जो देशभिƪ का Ģमाण पतर् मांगते हȅ, 
वह कहीं चलेगा नहीं। मȅ एक बात बताना चाहता हूं िक एक घर मȂ पांच सदÎय हȅ, उसमȂ हर पांचवां 
सदÎय, उस आबादी का है।  अगर उस घर म
Ȃ उस पांचवȂ सदÎय को आप alienate कर Ȃगे, दूर 
करȂगे, तो घर कभी महफू ज़ नहीं रह सकता।  
 आिखर मȂ, मȅ सािहर की तरफ जाता हूं और वहीं खत्म कर दूंगा, आपको घंटी बजाने की 
जरूरत नहीं पड़ेगी :- 
“आओ िक आज ग़ौर करȂ इस सवाल पर 
देखे थे हम ने जो वो हंसी Īवाब क्या हुए। 
दौलत बढ़ी तो मुÊक मȂ अĽलास क्यूँ बढ़ा 
ख़ुश-हाली-ए-अवाम क े अÎबाब क्या हुए। 
जो अपने साथ साथ चले क ू-ए-दार तक 
वो दोÎत वो रफ़ीक़ वो अहबाब क्या ह
ुए। 
क्या मोल लग रहा है शहीदȗ क े ख़ून का 
मरते थे िजन पे हम वो सज़ा-याब क्या हुए। 
ब
े-कस बरहनगी को कफ़न तक नहीं नसीब 
वो व अदा-हा-ए-अतलस-ओ-िकम-Īवाब क्या हुए। 
जÇहूिरयत-नवाज़ बशर-दोÎत अƕ-ख्वाह 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

खुद को जो खुद िदए थे वो अलक़ाब क्या हुए। 
मज़हब का रोग आज भी क्यूं ला-इलाज है 
वो नुÎख़ा-हा-ए-नािदर-ओ-नायाब क्या हुए। 
हर क ूचा शोला-ज़ार है हर शहर क़त्ल-गाह 
यक-जहती-ए-हयात क े आदाब क्या हुए।” 
सहरा-ए-तीरगी  मȂ भट
कती है िंज़दगी 
उभरे थे जो उफ़ु क़ पे वो माहताब क्या हुए। 
मुजिरम हूँ मȅ अगर तो गुनहगार तुम भी हो, 
ऐ रहबरना-ए-क़ौम ख़ता-कार तुम भी हो।" 
 
  मैडम, जय िंहद  and salute to all the freedom fighters और संिवधान सभा क े उन 
तमाम लोगȗ को! मȅ चाहूंगा िक सȂगोल क े बगल मȂ एक बड़ी आकृ ित क े रूप  मȂ इनकी तÎवीरȂ लगाई 
जाएँ और हमȂ Ģेरणा िमलती रहे। जय िंहद!  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI  MA
MATA  MOHANTA): Shri Birendra Prasad 
Baishya. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam): Thank you, Madam Vice-Chairman, 
for allowing me to speak on this historic occasion.  Today is the last day when, in our 
Parliament life, we, all the Members, are sitting here, for the last time, in this building. 
Tomorrow, another journey will start. It is a privilege to us.  We are the Members who 
got the opportunity to speak and attend this  old Parliament buil
ding and we are going 
to get opportunity to speak in our new Parliament building. 
 I remember, Madam, when I was a student of Class VIII, for the first time in my 
life, I visited Delhi. Madam, I am from A ssam.  You know, the North-Eastern Region 
is more than 2,000 kilometres away from Delhi. Definitely, as a school student, I 
visited here and we were travelling to all th e important parts and spots of Delhi. So, in 
Class VIII, in my life, for the first time, ph ysically, I had seen ou r Parliament House; 
and it was from outside, not from inside.  Madam, in 1996, I was elected as a Member 
of Parliament from Assam to Lok Sabha.  In Class VIII, physically, I had seen the 
Parliament House from outside, and, in 1996, physically, for the first time, I had 
entered this House as a Member of Parliament .  Fortunately, I also took responsibility 
as a Cabinet Minister of the country in the year 1996 and it was my privilege to attend 
both the Houses, Lok Sabha and Rajya Sa bha. Although I wa s a Member of Lok 
Sabha, but, as a Minister, I was attending this  House also. No doubt, it is painful that 
from tomorrow, we will not be here, but we are jubilant also.  We are privileged, we 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
59

are lucky that from tomorrow, we are going to attend the new Parliament House built 
with modern art and technology.   
 The Parliament has a long history. I remember many things.  This is the 
building where the first Indi an Finance Budget was got passed by the then Prime 
Minister, Shri Jawaharlal Nehru. Again, wh ile I am speaking, I remember when China 
attacked my country, my motherland, in the 60s, the then Pr ime Minister, Shri 
Jawaharlal Nehru, had bid goodbye to the people of North-Eastern Region from 
India. This is our sentiment.  After that ,  m a n y  t h i n g s  w e r e  d iscussed inside this 
Parliament.  When China neared Tezpur, Ch ina came up to Bomdil a, people of the 
North-Eastern Region, especially people of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh, cried, 
saying that they were not equipped to fight against China.  At that time, Assam had 
given a farewell to the then Prime Minister, Pa ndit Jawaharlal Nehru.  But I salute the 
great parliamentarian of India from Assa m, Hem Barua, who fought for Assam and 
who had, in the 61
st Session of Parliament, warned the Government from this House. 
 Madam, this Parliament is also witne ss to the imposition of Emergency in our 
country.  For the first time, Emergency was invoked in our country.  At that time, 
Parliament was not functioning; Parliament  was dissolved.  Our hon. Prime Minister 
always says that India is the mother of demo cracy.  The Prime Minister is very right; 
India is the mother of demo cracy.  But you must remember what historians said, Dr. 
Santanu Sen.  They said that ancient Greece was the first country of the world to have 
invoked democracy.  But this is not correct.  In Bihar, democracy was first started in 
Vaisahli.  It was not 500 years ago; it wa s first started in Vaishali 600 years ago.  
Vaishali in our country was the first plac e where democracy started.  Six hundred 
years ago, in Vaishali town, 7000 people lo cally selected people to sit together and 
take decisions.  This was the first democratic process in our country. 
 Madam, we would be entering the New Parliament Building tomorrow.  This 
House will be witness to modern technology  and modern art there.  We hope and 
believe that in the new Ho use, where we would be goi ng tomorrow, we would be 
bringing more important laws for the growth and economic development of our 
country and many more discussions will take place.  I remember having seen very, 
very important dignitaries functioning in this House. (Time-bell rings. )  Madam, I 
would take just two more minutes. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता)   : आपके  पास पाँच िमनट का समय था। 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA:  All right, Madam. 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 I remember, Shri K.R. Narayanan, who chaired this House, being Vice-
President of the country.  I remember Sh ri Bhairon Singh Shekhawat, Shri Hamid 
Ansari and Shri Venkaiah Naidu for their contributions to our parliamentary 
democracy.  I must say one thing from my heart.  I salute Shri Venkaiah Naidu 
because from this Chair he used to al ways encourage Members of the House to 
speak in their mother tongue.  He was a very knowledgeable person.  He was always 
seen encouraging the mother tongue.  Sure ly, Shri Venkaiah Naidu has made great 
contributions to this House. Equally, ou r present Chairman has always given us 
guidance, speaking about our hi story, especially on legal side.  He has always given 
us guidance.  I have got an opportuni ty to witness the speech of Vajpayee ji, Budget 
presentation of Pranab Mukerjeeji, wonderful oratory personality of Madam Sushma ji 
and learned speaker Arun Jaitleyji.  I have learnt many things from these people.  I still 
remember the day when I was a student of Class 8 th and I saw this Parliament 
Building from outside.  In the year 1996, I entered this House as a Member of 
Parliament.  This is the beauty of our democracy.  My family doesn't have any political 
background.  I am not a son of any Minister; I am not a son of any Member of 
Parliament; I am not a son of any politician, but I am a son of the soil.  This is the 
beauty of democracy that I, a son of th e soil, am elected to this Parliament.  
Definitely, if I do not speak of my political Party, it will not be fair. I have got this 
opportunity due to my political party.  My political party, the Asom Gana Parishad, is 
a regional political party with a national ou tlook.  In my life, I have worked for one 
party only, that is, my Party,  the Asom Gana Parishad.  Still, I am a member of the 
Asom Gana Parishad.  I am really grateful to my party for sending me to Lok Sabha 
and for sending me to Rajya Sabha as a Member of Parliament.   
 With this, I believe, we, all the Members who have gathered here on the last 
day in this building, will always rememb er in our memory this  building and from 
tomorrow, in new building, we start our new parliamentary life and our new 
democratic life.  With these words, I conclude.  Thank you. 
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI (Kerala): Madam Vice-Chairman, today, we have gathered here 
to reflect upon our extraordinary journey of  75 years of Indian Pa rliament.  For three 
quarters of a century, it has served as a cornerstone of our nation's governance.  It is 
a journey marked by trials, triumphant, an d unyielding commitment to the ideals of 
democratic republic.  The framers of our Constitution en visioned a vibrant democracy 
where every citizen, irrespect ive of caste, creed or gend er had a voice and a vote.  
Our Parliament was entrusted with a sacred duty of upholding these principles.   
 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
61

(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 In the last seven decades, many Lati n-American and Afro-Asian countries, 
who sailed along with us, sank and disappeared.  Even the mighty USSR and the 
entire Eastern European nations collapsed like a palace of cards.  But we keep on 
sailing because on most of ou r ships, the flag of parliamentary democracy flutters.  
We have seen heated debates, fiery di scussions and passionate arguments, which 
are the very essence of parliamentary democracy.  Over the years, it has played a 
pivotal role in shaping India's destiny.   It has been a source of progressive 
legislations, from the eradication of untou chability to the establishment of gender 
equality, from comprehensive land reforms to the liberalisation of our economy.  As 
we celebrate the remarkable journey, let us also acknowledge the challenges we face. 
Our Parliament, like any other institution, has had its share of ups and downs.  It is an 
undeniable fact that recent years have  witnessed instances of undemocratic 
parliamentary methods and procedures which threaten the very essence of 
democracy.  There have been occasions where legislative debates have been 
curtailed, opposition's voice silenced and crucial Bills passed without due discussions 
and scrutiny.   
 The integrity of the Parliamentary Committee, an integral part of our 
democratic system, has, at times, been co mpromised.  Delays in appointments and 
politicisation of these Committees have hindered their effectiveness.  Only 25 per cent 
of the Bills were referred to these Committees.  Such a low referral rate of the Bills to 
the Committees during the 16
th Lok Sabha clearly shows th at the Government is not 
open to the scrutiny and engagement that the Committee system offers.  The 
suppression of the dissent, be it from the civil society, academia or the media, is a 
matter of deep concern.  A thriving democracy encourages diverse perspective and 
respects the right of dissent.  Recent inci dents involving curtailment of free speech 
cast doubts on the Government's commitmen t towards these democratic values.   
The robust democracy thrives on open communication and the free exchange of 
ideas.  Curtailing these Fundamental Rights  poses a threat to the health of 
democracy.   
 With the inauguration of the New Par liament Building, let us anticipate a 
transformative shift in our engagement with this paramount institution.  May this 
symbol of progress empower us all to become the collective voice of the people of our 
nation thereby steering our democracy toward s a brighter and more inclusive future!  
May our Parliament continue to be the beacon of hope and the voice of the people for 
the generations to come!  Thank you, Sir.  
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL (Maharashtra):   Than k you, Mr. Chairman, Sir.  I get up to 
speak, probably, for the last time in this very august Building. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   How can you be so sure? 
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL:  Well, I said, 'probably'.    
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Tomorrow, we are meeting, Dr. Keshava Rao.  
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  Yes, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Praful Patel and I came together in Parliament as Members of 
the Ninth Lok Sabha. 
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL:  We have all assembled here and,  obviously, this is a sense of 
nostalgia, as you have very rightly pointed out, not only our long association but my 
very own long association with Parliament, with many times in Lok Sabha as well as in 
the Rajya Sabha, having completed 32 years as a Member of Parliament.   
 So, I share the sentiments of most of my colleagues who have been speaking 
here and definitely, during these 75 year s of independence, our country has really 
come a long way and our democracy, no ma tter what the assaults have been from 
within and outside, has withstood the test of time and has got stronger by the passing 
day.  And, this democracy, which we pr ide ourselves in, and which the world also 
now looks up to us, has something to be  cherished.  Dr. Ambedkar gave us a 
wonderful Constitution.  Along with him,  many other stalwarts joined him and 
presented the Constitution to the Constituen t Assembly.  Certainly, our Constitution 
can be rated as one of the finest constituti ons drafted anywhere for any country in the 
world. I think, that is something we should be very proud of.  A country which is as 
diverse as India, as vast as India, as popu lous as India, certainly requires a binding 
force, a glue, and that our Constitution ha s very ably provided us, which stood the 
test of time. 
 Sir, when we go abroad, we see many countries and look at their 
democracies.  Of course, there are very many shining examples but I would again 
say, if a country as populous as India, which has 140 crore people who speak so 
many languages, so many dialects, follow so many religions, and, which comprises of 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
63

so many States and so many ethnicities, re mains together as one, it is something 
which really astonishes many people in the world.   
 We recently had G-20 summit in India.  Although we could not participate 
ourselves but as the Government of India ha s projected and as has been seen by us 
and the world, I am sure that every single  leader who came to India would have been 
proud of what India has achieved in the last 75 years.  It is not a mean feat, Sir.  When 
we came to Parliament, I remember, and, I am sure, all of  us, who were there in the 
past, remember it; राम गोपाल जी को भी याद होगा िक पहले हम यह सोचते थे िक 25 
टेिलफोन कनेक्शन िकसको दȂ या अपने एमपी कोटा से गैस िसिंलडर िकसको दȂ। क ेशव राव जी, 
यहाँ से हमारी शुरुआत  होती थी। हमने वे िदन भी देखे हȅ, जब हम अगर नॉमर्ल कोसर् मȂ टेिलफोन 
कनेक्शन क े िलए नंबर लगाते थे, तो 15-15, 20-20 साल क े बाद नंबर आता था और गैस 
कनेक्शन की भी वही िÎथित थी। इसको म
ेÇबर ऑफ पािर्लयामȂट का िĢिवलेज माना जात ा था। हम 
उस ज़माने से लेकर आज यहाँ तक पहुँचे हȅ। हरदीप जी, आप पेटर्ोिलयम मंतर्ी हȅ, आपको मालूम 
है िक आज हमारे देश मȂ, चाहे गैस कनेक्शन की बात हो या टेिलफोन कनेक्शन की बात हो या 
कोई भी क्षेतर् हो, उसमȂ बड़े पैमाने पर Ģगित हुई है। यह दुिनया क े िलए बहुत बड़ी िमसाल है। जब 
हम 75 साल पूरे करते हȅ, 'अमृत काल' की बात करते हȅ और इस सदन से नए सदन मȂ जाने की 
बात करते ह
ȅ, तो आज का भारत और भिवÍय का भारत क ैसा होना चािहए, आधुिनक भारत क ैसा 
होना चािहए, इसके  िलए इस सदन मȂ िनिÌचत रूप  से एक अच्छी चचार् होनी चािहए और इस पर 
मंथन होना चािहए। यहाँ पर हर Ëयिƪ क े सुझाव का एक अहम महत्व होता है। हमȂ हर संसद 
सदÎय, जो यहाँ पर बैठा है, चाहे वह इस सदन मȂ हो या उस सदन मȂ हो, उनके  अनुभव का 
देशिहत तथा जनिहत मȂ पूरा इÎतेमाल करके  उसका फायदा उठाने का का
म करना चािहए।  
 आज देश मȂ क्या-क्या बातȂ नहीं होती हȅ! आज हम यह देखते हȅ िक हमारे देश मȂ िकतनी 
िवषमताएँ हȅ। यहाँ पर गरीबी भी है, अमीरी भी है, लेिकन सब क ु छ होते हुए भी लोग यहाँ िमलजुल 
कर Ģेम भाव से रहते हȅ। यह हमारे भारत की संÎकृ ित
 का बहुत बड़ा अिभन्न अंग है। हमारे देश मȂ 
जब कोई भी समÎया या बाधाएँ आती हȅ, तो हम उनको पार कर पाते हȅ, क्यȗिक हमारे देश मȂ 
सहनशीलता है और हमारे मन मȂ सबको साथ लेकर चलने की भावना है और यही हमारे संिवधान 
ने हमȂ िदया
 है। हम एक Ëयिƪ को एक वोट का अिधकार की बात करते हȅ। हम अमेिरका की 
डेमोकर्सी की बहुत बातȂ करते ह
ȅ, लेिकन बहुत लोगȗ को शायद यह मालूम भी नहीं होगा िक 
अमेिरका की डेमोकर्सी मȂ भी जो काली चमड़ी क े लोग थे, जो अģीकन िडसȂट क े लोग थे, उनको 
भी वोट का अिधकार 1960 क े दशक म
Ȃ तब िमला, जब मािर्टन लूथर िंकग ने लड़ाई लड़ी। उससे 
पहले उनको बराबरी का अिधकार नहीं था। हमारे देश मȂ डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर और उनके  
साथ हमारी Constituent Assembly ने, हमारे founding fathers ने 1950 मȂ हमारे संिवधान मȂ 
इस देश मȂ सभी को बराबरी का अिधकार िदया, जो अपने आपमȂ एक बहुत बड़ी उपलिÅध रही ह
ै, 
जो िवÌव क े और कई बड़े देशȗ मȂ नहीं रही है। हम दूसरे देशȗ से बहुत बड़ी-बड़ी बातȗ  की तुलना 
करते हȅ, लेिकन हमारे देश का जो गौरवशाली इितहास है, आज उसको Îमरण करने का वƪ है।  
सर, अब हम नए सदन मȂ जाएँगे। आप तो वहीं िवराजमान हȗगे, जहाँ आज हȅ, वहाँ भी आप वहीं 
पीठासीन हȗगे। म
ȅने अभी तक नया भवन नहीं देखा है, लेिकन नए भवन मȂ एक आधुिनक भारत 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

और भिवÍय क े भारत की झलक नजर आएगी। एक ओर हम चन्दर्मा पर पहुँचे, दूसरी ओर हम 
अपने देश मȂ तंतर् और िवज्ञान का उपयोग कर रहे हȅ। आज हमारा देश टेक्नोलॉजी क े क्षेतर् मȂ िवÌव 
मȂ एक अगर्णी Îथान ĢाÃत कर चुका है। अमेिरका और िवÌव की जो बड़ी-बड़ी टेक्नोलॉजी 
क ंपनीज़ हȅ, जो उन सभी क ंपनीज़ क े Ģमुख लोग हȅ, वहाँ क े Ģमुख इनोवेटसर् हȅ, साइंिटÎट्स हȅ, वे 
हमारे भारतीय हȅ। यह हम
ारे िलए बहुत गवर् की बात है। जब हम एक ऐसे आधुिनक युग मȂ जा रहे 
हȅ, जब हम भिवÍय क े भारत का, नए भारत का सपना देख रहे ह
ȅ, नौजवान भारत का सपना देख 
रहे हȅ, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से, इसमȂ नए सदन का भी एक अहम महत्व रहेगा। मुझे िवÌवास है िक 
आपके  न
ेतृत्व मȂ हमारे नए सदन मȂ भी कामकाज जारी रहेगा और नए सदन क े माध्यम से, हमारे 
देश क े युवाओं और भिवÍय की पीढ़ी की जो आकांक्षाएं और अपेक्षाएं हȅ, उनकी जरूर  प ूिर्त होगी। 
इसी िवÌवास क े साथ, हमारे देश क े 75 वषर् पूरे हुए, इसके  िलए हमारे देश क े लोगȗ और हमारे 
देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देते हुए, मȅ अपने शÅदȗ को िवराम देता ह ूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Now the hon. Member has put across his points with positivity, 
and that is what is required.  On an occasion like this, we all have to converge to see 
Bharat blossoms, politics apart.  So, that is  a very important contri bution.  Now, Shri 
Bhubaneswar Kalita.     
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : गलत जगह पर बैठे हुए हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : अब क्या पता िक कौन िकतनी गलत जगह बैठा हुआ है। 
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir, for giving
 me this 
opportunity to speak on this historic occas ion to speak on the Parliamentary Journey 
of 75 Years, starting from Samvidhan Sabha.  
 Sir, today I remember the day when I cam e to the Rajya Sabha for the first time 
in 1984 when Justice Hidayatullah was presid ing over the Chair.  He was, of course, 
followed by R. Venkataraman ji and Shankar Dayal Sharma ji, and today, you are in 
the Chair.  The Indian democracy and Indi an Parliament have come over years of 
development and strengthening in this country.    
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI SUMITRA BALMIK) in the Chair.] 
 
I congratulate the new Vice-Chairman for taking the Chair.   
 Today, as we assemble here to reflec t upon the parliamentary journey of 75 
years, starting from the inception of the Samvidhan Sabha, we embark on a profound 
exploration of our nation's democratic evol ution.  This remarkable journey has been 
marked by achievements, experiences, memo ries and invaluable lessons that have 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
65

not only shaped our parliamentary institutions , but have also left an indelible imprint 
on the course of our nation's history.  Madam Chair, while speaking on 75 years of 
our journey, we must remember some of th e key milestones in the history of Indian 
Parliament.   The Constituent Assembly co nvened for the first time on December 9, 
1946.  So, our journey starts from there.   On 26 January, 1950, India adopted its 
Constitution, a momentous event for Indian  parliamentary democracy.  In 1952, the 
first general elections were held, marking the initiation of our democracy.  In 1956, the 
States Reorganisations Act was passed, leading to reshaping of State boundaries.  
There was some struggle, but the Members of the State Assembly had given shape to 
this country, particularly by re-organizing the States for the convenience of the people 
and administration.   
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
In 1957, with the second general election, things started moving.  In 1961, Goa and 
Daman & Diu were liberated and they were recognised as State and Union Territories 
respectively.   
 One historic occasion we must remember in  this regard is that for the first time, 
the Preamble of the Constitution was amended.  We all remember the 42
nd 
Amendment.  Of course, that was the pe riod, during 1975-1977, which the Indian 
democracy will remember and the Parliament arians particularly will remember, and 
the people of this country will remember because of its effects on the people.   
 In 1986, a historic Bill was passed. The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights 
on Divorce) Act was enacted.  This is one hi storic legislation which gave women of all 
religions and all communities equal power, equal opportunity and equal right.  This 
one, we must remember during the discussion in this debate.   
 The economic liberalisation came in 1991 during the Prime Ministership of Shri 
P.V. Narasimha Rao.  Step by step, we are moving ahead to liberalise the economy.  
Today, the benefits of the economy are reaching the poor and the vulnerable sections 
because of that.  Today, the country is progressing.  The country has made 
remarkable progress in the economic field.  Today, India is cons idered as the fifth 
largest economy in the world.  Our hon. Pr ime Minister has publ icly announced that 
within the next few years, India will be one of the three top economies of the world.   
 Another remarkable event during the progress of this parliamentary democracy 
was the Goods and Services Tax (GST). It was implemented to streamline the 
taxation system.  The motto was ' One Nation, One Tax '.  Today, we have seen that 
the national exchequer has been enriched by the GST and a remarkable tax collection 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

has been made which is helping in the deve lopment of this country.  I remember it.  
The country will remember the GST which is for the benefit and for the progress of this 
country. 
 It was about ' One Nation, One Tax '. But till 2019, this country had two 
Constitutions and two Flags.  To make 'One Nation, One Flag and One Constitution'  
possible, an amendment was brought under the Abrogation Act of Article 370 in 2019.  
Now we can proudly say 'One Nation, One Flag and One Constitution'.  I congratulate 
the Government for that.  ...(Interruptions)....  I did not disturb you, although you 
said certain objectionable things, includin g balkanisation of the country.  So please 
don't do that.   
 The great war that India fought was CO VID-19 pandemic. India not only came 
out of this pandemic successfully but also  helped other nations and neighbouring 
countries to fight with this. The biggest  achievement was the vaccines that India 
manufactured; the entire country was vaccinate d and today, we are safe in terms of 
healthcare.   
 Madam, today we are talking about th e achievements during the 75 years of 
our journey.  What achievements has this country made?  The main achievement 
which I am going to discuss is the inclusiv ity.  On inclusivity, one of the earlier 
speakers, who is a senior leader, was giving us an example that it is not only India but 
other parts of the world also have inclus ivity in terms of women representation.  
Women representation has increased from five per cent in 1951 to 14 per cent in 2019.  
The number of voters increased dramatically from 173.2 million in 1951 to 912 million in 
2019. So, this is not a small achievement. This has strengthened the democracy of 
this country.  These things have improved  and this has brought achievement for our 
parliamentary democracy.  Madam, we ha ve some experiences and achievements.  
In 2023, where are we? Today, we are sitting  in the Rajya Sabha chamber.  Some of 
our Members became emotional that maybe from tomorrow we will be going to the 
New Parliament Building.  This New Parliame n t  B u i l d i n g  i s  t h a t  w e  h a v e  t o  c r o s s  a  
line.  Up to 75 years, we have achieved a lot but from here on, we have to go and 
make a leap forward so that this country becomes a developed economy. So, for next 
25 years, in the New Parliament  Building, we are having our Amrit Kaal  where India 
will reach the stage of developed nation. Th at will be our effort.  Every one of us 
should make our efforts in our own way. Every Indian and every single citizen should 
make his or her own effort to make this co untry a developed nation by 2047 when we 
will complete 100 years of our Indian Independence and Indian democracy.   
 Madam, I am going to conclude becau se there are some more speakers who 
are going to speak. This Special Session is convened today to commemorate the 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
67

journey of 75 years of our Parliament. What is our experience during this period? To 
conclude my speech here, I want to say that our journey through parliamentary 
evolution of India over past 75 years has been one of both reflection and insight. While 
we have witnessed certain challenges and sh ifts in the parliamentary dynamics, it is 
essential to recognise the significant effort s made to foster inclusivity within our 
democratic institutions. The rise of wome n's representation, the active engagement 
of citizens in public debates, the crucia l role of Parliamentary Committees and the 
passage of legislations aimed at social welfare and labour rights are testaments of our 
commitment to inclusivity. Madam, as we  commemorate the key milestones in the 
history of Indian Parliament, we are reminded of the enduring spirit of our democracy.  
From the adoption of Constitution in 1 950 to the recent inauguration of the new 
Parliament Building in 2023, these events signify our nation's growth, resilience and 
adaptability in the face of challenges.  As we  move forward, it is imperative that we 
continue to uphold the principles of democracy, inclusivity and transparency that have 
been the cornerstones of our parliamentary democracy.  By learning from our past 
and embracing the opportunities of the futu re, we can ensure that our democratic 
institutions remain robust and responsive to the ever-changing needs and aspirations 
of our diverse and dynamic nation.  Let us celebrate this journey, Madam.  Let us 
celebrate this journey with pride and co mmitment to a more inclusive and vibrant 
future of Indian democracy. Thank you, Madam Vice-Chairperson, for giving me the 
opportunity.  Thank you very much. 
     
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY (Punjab) :  Madam Vice-Chairperson and my 
fellow Parliamentarians, today, when I stand here to speak on this historic occasion of 
the transition from this historic Parliament House to the iconic new Parliament Building 
representing the new India, India a pproaches a major milestone in the 75
th year of 
Parliament.   
 Madam, Parliament House is not just a building of bricks and mortar, whereas 
it is a living institution which has to safeguar d and embrace the idea of India.  It is the 
fundamental temple of the world's largest democracy.   
 Indian Parliament is an aspiring story of a civilization striving for respect and 
resources with our values int act as the largest democracy in the world.  We embody 
the unique fibre of our being, of unity in dive rsity, secularism, pluralism, social justice 
and equal fundamental rights for each citizen.   
 On this historic occasion, I would lik e to remember and pay homage to our 
ancestors and as my father us ed to narrate, the horrors of partition still haunt us.  I 
think, Punjab and Punjabis suffered the mo st of it.  There were about two million 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

people who lost their lives and about four teen million people had to abandon their 
homes in the giant exodus.  तब  लाखȗ लोग बेघर हो गए और उन्हȗने इंिडया को, भारत को, 
अपनी मातृभूिम को अपनी जन्मभूिम माना।  अपना कारोबार, अपने बतर्न, अपनी जायदादȂ, अपना 
सब क ु छ छोड़ कर लाखȗ पंजािबयȗ ने सफर करते हुए भारत को चुना, भारत को माना।  A s a 
refugee they started their career और िफर refugee से build up िकया।  यह उनकी देशभिƪ 
की सबसे बड़ी िनशानी है और उनकी देशभिƪ, उनका patriotism अभी तक हमारे सामने है।  I 
also pay homage to all the great Sikh l eaders who spurned the offer of the then 
Muhammad Ali Jinnah and deci ded to upkeep India as th eir motherland.  Punjabis 
and Sikhs have been proving their patrioti sm till today. We Sikhs are not by chance 
Indians; we are proudly by choice Indians.  We also pay tribute to them:   
 
"देह िशवा बरु मोिह इहै सुभ करमन ते कबहूं न टरȗ। 
जब आव की अउध िनदान बनै अित ही रन मै तब जूझ मरȗ।" 
 
I would also like to remember on this historic occasion Shaheed-e-Azam Bhagat 
Singh who drew the attention of the British samrajya in
 this very own Parliament to 
further strengthen the freedom  struggle.  In the same Parliament Building, while 
presenting the Constitution to our country, Dr. Bhim Rao Ambedkar had said:  
"However good a Constitution may be, if those who are implementing are not good, 
it will prove to be bad. However bad a Constitution may be, if those implementing it 
are good, it will prove to be good." Sir, so th e onus is on us, the parliamentarians, in 
the 75th year of Parliament.  The dream, voice and aspirations of a nation suppressed 
by colonial rule came to surface.   
 As they say, "With great power, comes gr eat responsibility", we all sit here as 
public representatives, we are emblematic of the aspirations of 1.4 billion people who 
wants us to serve them.  We represent them .  We are their voice; we are their eyes 
and we are their ears.  Eradicating pove rty, unemployment, corruption, agrarian 
crisis, casteism and communal hatred, have no place for India and this Parliament 
have to work for fundamental things like en suring health, education, infrastructure, 
nation's inclusive development, women empowerment and youth empowerment.   यह 
अमृत काल तभी अमृत होगा, अगर हम िशक्षा का अमृत, सेहत का अमृत, हेÊथ का अमृत, 
रोजगार का अमृत हर एक गांव मȂ, हर एक भारतीय तक पहुंचाएंगे।  
 So, we, as representatives of our nationals, have to conduct ourselves, define 
the character of the august House and, th erefore, our conduct withholds ou
 r respect 
to the underlying values and nobleness of this esteemed institution forged for our 
safeguarding by our fore-leaders. 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
69

 Hon. Vice-Chairman, Madam, the disrup tions which happen in the Parliament 
act as a hurdle in this fundamental process.  For a smooth functioning of Parliament, I 
personally, think with my experience of one year, both Treasury Benches and the 
Opposition have to play together a positive and constructive role so that optimum 
productivity of this institution is maintained. 
 I take this historic opportunity to pay homage to stalwarts like my elder brother, 
Shri Arun Jaitley , and my eldest dearest sister who gave me love as a brother for 25 
years, Shrimati Sushma Swaraj  and we pray for the long life of stalwart, Dr. 
Manmohan Singh who is here with us desp ite his ill-health.  It was Dr. Manmohan 
Singh who brought radical changes to the economy in 1991 and he had said,  
 
“क ु छ ऐसे भी मंजर हȅ तारीख की नज़रȗ मȂ, 
लÇहȗ ने खता की सिदयȗ ने सज़ा पाई।” 
 
It is our humble invocation to every individu al sitting here both from the Government, 
the Treasury Benches, and the Opposition  that we all should commit to this 
Parliament that in the new Parliament House, we will ensure healthy debates, 
discussions, least disruptions and adjour nments and we do maximum work for the 
nation building. Jai Hind!  
  
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI SUMITRA BALMIK): Now, hon. Member, 
Shrimati Mamata Mohanta. 
 
Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता (ओिडशा) : धन्यवाद मैडम, मेरी पाटीर् बीजू जनता दल ने इस पिवतर् गृह म
 Ȃ 
मुझे बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ अपनी पाटीर् को धन्यवाद देती हूं। मेरा देश भारत है - 
धमर्, भाषा, वणर् और जाित क े दायरे से आगे िनकलकर हम सभी एक हȅ। हम क ेवल भारतीय हȅ। 
आप सभी भारत वषर् का इितहास जानते हȅ। भारत द
ेश क ै से और कब Îवाधीन हुआ, िकतने 
बिलदान, त्याग, समपर्ण क े बाद हमȂ Îवतंतर् भारत हािसल हुआ। मȅ सभी Îवाधीनता सेनािनयȗ को 
इस पिवतर् गृह से नमन करती
 हूं, Ǜृǉांजिल ज्ञािपत करती हूं।  Îवाधीन भारत क े सभी लोगȗ को 
शासन पǉित मȂ रखकर सुिवधा देने क े िलए देश को संिवधान की आवÌयकता पड़ी, जो सभी 
भारतीयȗ को समानता Ģदान करे। मȅ संिवधान िनमार्ता बाबा साहेब भीमराव रामज ी अÇबेडकर को 
भी इस गृह से नमन करती हूं, िजनकी कलम की ताकत से इस पुरुष Ģधान समाज मȂ मिहलाएं भी 
समानता ĢाÃत कर रही हȅ।  26 जनवरी, 1950 को संिवधान लागू होने क े बाद गणतंतर् भारत की 
शुरुआत  हुई। तभी से जाित, वणर्, धमर्, िशक्षा आिद क्षेतर्ȗ म
Ȃ सभी को समान सुिवधा िमली। इस 
संिवधान क े चलते देश मȂ शासन पǉित लागू हुई। इस Ģजातंतर् अथार्Þ गणतंतर् मȂ िवधाियका, 
कायर्पािलका और न्यायपािलका को समान गुरुत् व िदया गया। आज हम 21वीं सȂचुरी मȂ पहुँच गए 
हȅ। महोदया, अन्य देशȗ क े मुकाबले यहाँ का लोकतंतर् और सुदृढ़ हुआ है। आज एक आिदवासी 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

मिहला भारत देश की सबसे बड़ी पदवी, महामिहम राÍटर्पित की पदवी पर Îथािपत हȅ। मȅ एक 
आिदवासी िजले से यहाँ आकर आपके  सामने क ु छ कह पा रही हूं, इससे बड़ी बात और क्या हो 
सकती है? मȅ आपको मिहलाओं क े िवकास का और क्या उदारहण  दूं? आज अगर आप कहीं भी 
जाएंगे, तो आप ज्यादातर मिहला िजला कलेक्टर, मिहला िजला एस.पी., मिहला सरकारी 
कमर्चारी पाएंगे। आप िशक्षा क्षेतर् मȂ देिखएगा िक आईआईटी, आईआईएम, एमबीबीएस, यूपीएससी 
आिद सभी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ मिहलाओं का दबदबा है। भारतवषर् मȂ 700 से ज्यादा आिदवासी वगर् हȅ। भारत मȂ 
इनकी संख्या 8.6 Ģितशत है। आज क े िहसाब से इनकी संख्या बढ़ गई है। देश क े गठन क े समय 
से ही इस वगर् को ग
ुरुत्व िदया गया है।  सभी राज्यȗ ǎारा आिदवासी वगș को साम ािजक एवं 
आिर्थक िवकास, उनकी संÎकृ ित की सुरक्षा तथा भाषा की सुरक्षा दी जा रही है।  उनके  िवकास क े 
िलए Îवतंतर् मंतर्ालय बनाया गया है। सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक उन्हȂ उनकी भाषा मȂ िशक्षा दी जा 
रही ह
ै। आिदवासी संĢदाय की आंचिलक भाषा को सुरक्षा देते हुए इसे Ģाथिमक िशक्षा ËयवÎथा मȂ 
शािमल करना जरूरी  है और संिवधान की अÍटम अनुसूची मȂ शािमल करने की भी आवÌयकता है। 
भारत की पावन भूिम से चाँद तक की यातर्ा िशक्ष
ा क्षेतर् मȂ भारत की सफलता का सबसे बड़ा 
उदाहरण है। यहाँ िवÌविवǏालय, वैिÌवक िवÌविवǏालय, िरसचर् िवÌविवǏालय समेत िकतने ही 
अनुÍठान हȅ। यहाँ से लाखȗ की संख्या मȂ िवǏाथीर् िनकलते हȅ, जो द ेश-िवदेश मȂ भारत का नाम 
रोशन करते हȅ। इस देश मȂ  77 Ģितशत से ज्यादा लोग िशिक्षत हȅ। 
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 यहाँ 84 Ģितशत से ज्यादा मिहला और 71 Ģितशत से ज्यादा पुरुष िशिक्षत हȅ। अगर मȅ क ृिष क्षेतर् 
की बात कहूं, तो यहाँ 60 Ģितशत िकसान हȅ। हम इनको भगवान
 मानते हȅ, क्यȗिक ये लोग हमारे 
दो वƪ क े खाने की ËयवÎथा मȂ जुटे रहते हȅ। सरकार ने भी इन िकसानȗ क े िलए बहुत सी योजनाएं 
बनाई हȅ। इनके  िलए Ģित वषर् Îवतंतर् बजट िदया जाता है। महोदय, ÎवाÎथ्य क्षेतर् म
Ȃ भी बदलाव 
आया है और सभी रोगȗ का तुरंत इलाज हो पा रहा है। भवन कला, िशÊप कला, टेक्नोलॉजी एवं 
िवज्ञान क े  क्षेतर् मȂ हम बहुत आगे हȅ। आज हमारा देश इन सभी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ बहुत आगे है। इस नई संसद 
से भारतवषर् का नया इितह
ास िलखा जाएगा। मȅ सभी को बधाई देकर अपना वƪËय समाÃत करती 
हूं, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now Dr. Amar Patnaik.  Sometimes it is very good to catch 
someone off guard. Then the productivity  and contribution is
 more genuine and 
authentic. Go ahead. 
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK (Odisha): Sir, it is, indeed, a privilege for me to be present here 
speaking about 75 years of Parliament of the largest and one of the most diverse 
democracies of the world. It is no mean  feat that parliamentary democracy has 
flourished in this country because of this Parliament. What is currently happening or is 
about to happen is that we would be moving  in a symbolic fashion from old to the 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
71

new, from new to the aspirational and from  a democracy, which was marked by Bills 
and Acts, which led the foundation or whic h will be the foundation for several such 
new Bills and Acts in the future in the new building. Sir, I would like to speak about a 
speech which Dr. Ambedkar made in the Law College of University of Delhi, way back 
in 1948.  He says, "There could be no do ubt that one of the countries which could 
boast of a great  ancient civilization was India.  It had parliamentary institutions when 
the people of Europe were mere nomads".  It is not that India did not know what 
democracy is.  There was a time when Indi a was studded with republics, and even 
where there were monarchies, they were either elected or limited. It is not that India 
did not know Parliaments or parliamentary procedure. A st udy of the Vinaya Pitaka 
and the Buddhist Bhikshu Sanghas discloses that not only there were Parliaments, --  
the Sanghas were nothing but Parliaments – but the Sanghas knew and observed all 
the rules of parliamentary procedure known to modern times.  So, I would concur 
with what other Members were referring to .  To say that democracy did not really 
originate in Greece but it originated much, much, many, many year s before in this 
particular land.  Sir, if we are talking about Parliament, I would like to think that since 
we knew about the parliamentary functioning for a long time and since we are talking 
about the Constituent Assembly, the Constitu ent Assembly gave us the Constitution.  
But, it is the Parliament that helps to ma ke the Constitution a living document by the 
process of amendments and that is how, each one has enabled and strengthened the 
other and these amendments have actu ally made the Parliament, made the 
functioning of the Parliament, closure to th e socioe-conomic and political reality of 
each of the times in the entire history of this particular seventy-five years.  Sir, the role 
of Parliament, in a sense, anywhere in the world, could be four-fold.  One - to make 
laws, which will be evolving with the times;  second - to pass the Budget, third - to 
raise national, State and local issues; and, number four, to hold the Executive to 
account by various procedures, questions and answers, and Committees, PAC, 
CoPU and other such matters.  Now, if we talk about the first and the foremost duty 
of Parliament, it is to make laws.  I know that the Parliament has made several laws.  
There are more than hundred  amendments which have b een passed.  But, I would 
like to concentrate on a few.  And those are, the first one on the Centre-State 
relations.  Sir, the Parliament, right from  the time the Constituent Assembly debates 
have taken place, has been cognizant of the fact that the States have a very important 
r o l e  t o  p l a y  i n  d e m o c r a c y .   I n  f a c t, Renuka Ray, she was the Member of the 
Constituent Assembly, while agreeing with Pandit Kunzru, says, 'It is necessary that 
the Centre should be in a position to see that the provinces do not fall behind in 
regard to the minimum standards of developm ent. But, agreeing with Pandit Kunzru, 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

it is also not possible for a province to admi nister its responsibilities in an adequate 
manner if its financial position is unstable or uncertain'.  Therefore, the Parliament's 
job is threefold.  One - legislative relations, administrative relations and financial 
relations. While on the first two fronts, I think, there has not been much divergence 
except occasional allegations of Centre legislating on the State List, the problem has 
been the financial relations, the devolution of funds.  I think this is where our Chief 
Minister, my leader, hon. Naveen Patnaik has always been saying that the Cess and 
Surcharge which comes to the Central kitty should be made a part of the divisible 
pool.  I think this is what we have to look forward in the next twenty five years to be 
happening, to make the States actually financially independ ent and financially 
sustainable to take the entire goal of the nation forward.  The second aspect that I 
would like to talk about is on the issue of  women.  So on the issue of women, the 
Parliament has passed several landmark legislations an d many of them have already 
been spoken about here.  One is the Hi ndu Marriage Act.  It removed polygamy, 
marriage of a maiden and that of a widow,  the registration of Hindu marriage, the 
divorce.  The Hindu Succession Act is very si gnificant because it gave property rights 
to women.  We have the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, Child Marriage Act 
and several such Acts relating to women.  Bu t, I think it stops short of one particular 
last legislation and that is reservation  for women in the Parliament and the 
Assemblies.  And, that you know, Sir, ou r leader, hon. Naveen Patnaik has been 
taking it forward for a long, long period of time, sent emissaries to all political parties.  
We have spoken here all the time to bring th is legislation so that the gender parity and 
the gender equity, the theme reaches its fina l conclusion by this Parliament whether 
here or in the new building. The last point that I would like to talk about is 
environmental constitutionalism. Sir, this is the Parliament which has passed most of 
the environmental laws starting with the Pr evention of Air Pollution, Prevention of 
Water Pollution, Environmental Protection  Act and several such  l a w s  h a v e  b e e n  
passed and that is how the Parliament has re sponded to the existential crisis that is 
facing this world at large because of climate change. I think, the Parliament has 
responded very well, but, there are two ga ps which probably could be brought in. 
That is how the Parliament of India would ha ve responded to the world and that is to 
bring in a legislation to ensure that net zero is reached in a fixed period of time and 
incentives are given for proper environmental response. Sir, lastly, while we transition 
from here to the new building, it would also mark a transition in the way the 
Parliament of India is responding to tec hnology. So, we are moving from more of a 
physical Parliament to a Parliament which is both physical and digital; it is a Digital 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
73

Sansad. It is not a hybrid, but that would be a way forward. So, with this, I would end 
my speech. Thank you so much for giving me this opportunity.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, you have very-well audited; that is your background. The next 
speaker is Shri Tiruchi Siva.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, it is called as a Special Session, but, we are 
still not aware of the Business to be transacted in the remaining four days. A shock or 
surprise may be awaiting us. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We have a Business Advisory Committee tomorrow and you will be 
enlightened; by tomorrow, you will know everything; go ahead.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : I am telling as of now; we do  not know about it. A shock or 
surprise may be awaiting and we are also waiting! Sir, we have completed 75 glorious 
years of Independence and 72 successful years of the journey of Parliament.  This 
milestone makes it important to recall the hopes, the ideals which we have cherished, 
which we have accomplished in  this Parliament fulfilling those visions of the people 
who fought for freedom and of those who drafted the Constitution.  
Sir, at the outset, I would like to pay my  tributes to those who laid down their 
lives for our freedom, the Independence whic h we are enjoying. Starting from Puli 
Thevan, Veerapandiya Kattabomman, Marut hu Brothers Velu Nachiyar, Kuyili and 
Tilak, Gokhale, Mahatma Gandhi, Nehru, Sa rdar Patel, V.O. C. and unsung heroes 
and heroines. This is very, very important. Sir, I think, this is the right time to tell that 
in our freedom struggle in Tamil Nadu, many women participated with their 
involvement. One lady participated with a one year child in her hand. When the police 
attempted to disburse the crowd, they op ened fire and when the crowd disbursed, 
she fell in a place; the flag which she was holding was in another place and the child 
fell in another place. The bullet that was fi red hit the infant and the child died. The 
child who knew nothing sacrificed his life and the mother of the child named 
Kaliammal did not hesitate, she again took th e flag and marched. Sir, there are so 
many unsung heroes and heroines who have  to be recollected at this very proud 
moment. Democracy is a popular sovere ignty. The concept of this popular 
sovereignty is attaining its completion by way of functioning of the Parliament. Sir, 
post the first Indian general elections in 1952, the Manchester Guardian commented, 
"Parliamentary Institutions have not had a very good time in  Asia. All that is 
happening in Asia throws a spotlight on the Parliament in Delhi as the one institution 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

of the kind which is working in an exemplary way." Sir, there are two salient features 
which have brought India as the largest democracy, one is our Constitution and 
another is the Parliament. Sir, Thomas Jefferson, the architect of America, once said, 
'No Constitution will survive the test of time for more than twenty  years'. But ours is 
very vibrant even after 72 y ears because of the amending  provisions.  We have 
changed to time and ours is not only the longest and it has been the one which has 
been discussed with a very long period of nearly three years. Si r, democracy when it 
came into existence; some people say, Greece, some people say somewhere else, 
but we are the predecessors, we are the fo rerunners in everything. For example, in 
Tamil Nadu, in early Chola period, that was in second or third century, some 
excavations near Chennai, Uthiramerur, brought out the fact that there was a 
Kudavolai system, there was an earthen po t into which people deposited in palm 
leaves their choice of candidate and deposi ted there, and a child would pick up one 
leaf out of that and that person will be the Sarpanch of that area.  So, this democracy 
has been in India for more than two thousand  years that too from the Southern end.  
Sir, coming to the Parliament, sentiments are not attached only to humans, of 
course, buildings too. I can recollect many th ings.  Even if you mo ve to a rich looking 
new Parliament, I think, you or I, many of us would visit this Parliament and especially 
the Central Hall. How can we forget this? How many things have happened which are 
in history? Sir, the foundation stone for th is Parliament was laid  in February 1921 by 
Duke of Connaught and it was inaugurated by Viceroy, Irwin, in 1927; it took six years.  
Sir, we should be very happy to note that the buildings were designed by Sir Herbert 
Baker along with the Edwin Lutyens, architects of new imperial capital. That is not the 
issue, Sir. What I would like to highlight here is, the sandstone columns in our 
Parliament are state-of-the-art.  It is said that 2,500 stone cutters had been 
employed to design the top of the Parliament  and it took so many years; 2,500 stone 
cutters and masons were employed to shape the marble there. The Central Hall was 
originally designated to be a library.  Si r, you know everything very well. Later, the 
Constituent Assembly sat there for four years, from 1946 to 1950, and after that, it is a 
surprise that the Supreme Court had its sitting s here in this Central Hall till it migrated 
in 1958 to the presen t building. This Central Hall has wi tnessed a lot.  Sir, I can hear 
two sounds.  In June 1929, the record of  the blast of bomb, which was thrown by 
revolutionary Bhagat Singh and Batukeshwar Dutt to attain freedom and thereafter in 
2001, there was a terrorist attack on the Parliament, which was to foil our freedom 
and a challenge to our democracy. But, th is Parliament withstood that challenge, 
thanks to the design and construction of this  as well as the security guards who were 
very much awakened and acted to the situation. Sir, this  circular shape of this 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
75

Parliament is reminiscent of the Rome Coliseum, they said.  I have been here for more 
than two decades.  I have b een once in Lok Sabha and fo urth term here. No other 
place in the world I love than this Parliament premises for many reasons.  Sir, we have 
been contributing our service through this  Parliament. We voice out the people's 
aspirations.  We fulfill their expectations.  We redress their grievances by urging the 
Government to understand and act. So, this is it, this is the set up of our Parliament.  
We make the Government accountable and this way we have worked a lot and have 
contributed and  we are setting a trend to the whole world. The Central Hall has seen 
s o  m a n y .   A g a i n ,  S i r ,  y o u  k n o w  i t  v e r y  w e l l .   I t  s t a r t s  f r o m  R i c h a r d  N i x o n ,  t h e n  
Eisenhower, then Khrushchev, Margaret Thatcher, Barak Obama... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Many have come. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  Along with that, our Presid ents have addressed the Joint 
Sessions of Parliament after the General Elections and before the commencement of 
Session every year. Sir, what all the people like you as Vice-Presidents have done, all 
these are reminiscences. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  So, what is your point? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  I am praising about this building.   When we are celebrating 75 
years of Independence, I have to exalt the building, the Parliament.  It is not just a 
building. How many laws were passed!  In the first two terms of this Parliament, in 
1952 and 1957 only, 700 laws have been enact ed in this Parliament and moreover in 
those first 15 years, till 1967, the legacy of the freedom struggle was continued by the 
Congress as well as the Opposition parties.   Who were all there?  The Communists, 
the Socialists as well as the culturally conservative Jan Sangh. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You are getting sentimental beyond sentiment. What exactly are 
you focusing on? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Sir, after the DMK entered into the Parliament, the doors were 
opened for the regional parties.  In a federal set up, the regional parties should have a 
very important place and it cannot be dispen sed with.  It was established only after 
the DMK here.  Our first founder leader, A nna, how his voice echoed in this Upper 
House, is still in the annals of his time.  I also visualize who all have been here - Pandit 
Nehruji, Dr. Ambedkar, Shri  Lal Bahadur Shastri, Dr . Kripalani, Shri Madhu 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

Dandavate, Vajpayeeji, Advaniji, Shri Ram Manohar Lohia, our beloved Anna and Shri 
Murasoli Maran, your colleague when you were in the Ministry under Shri V. P. Singh.  
His performance in Doha Conference is still a history.  Coming to all these points,... 
(Time-bell rings.)  I think, I have some time. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What I am saying is, the entire time of the main Opposition party 
had been taken by the hon. LoP, but I would still accommodate some of them, given 
their huge experience.  That being the situat ion, I am rationally, uniformly curtailing 
the time more of the ruling party and of Others also.  So, please cooperate with me. 
   
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  I could hear, though I was not there, the Tryst with Destiny 
speech of Pandit Nehruji at the stroke of the midnight hour.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What I said was that we had a tryst with destiny on 15
th August, 
1947.  Again the Parliament met at midnight  rolling out a GST regime after a gap of 70 
years. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  'When the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom.'  
He started his speech saying these words.  I had the privilege of being here during the 
Golden Jubilee celebrations of Independen ce and in the Central Hall, we heard the 
speeches of Mahatma Gandhi and Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose.  That is a green 
memory and so also are these speeches.  Afte r the speech of Pandit Nehru, what is 
important here is to mention Dr. Ambedkar, the architect of our Constitution.  This is 
the right time because when we are speak ing about the Constitu tion, we have to 
preserve also.  So, I have to quote only two things, one of Dr. Ambedkar's and 
another of Anna's.  I am  quoting Dr. Ambedkar.  “However good a constitution may 
be, if those who are implementing it are not good, it will prove to be bad. However 
bad a constitution may be, if those implementing it are good, it will prove to be good if 
those who are called to work it, happen to be a good lot.  The Constitution can 
provide only the organs  of State such as the Legislature, the Executive and the 
Judiciary. The factors on which the working of those organs of the State depends are 
the people and the political parties they w ill set up as their instruments to carry out 
their wishes and their politics.” The climax is, 'If I find the Constitution misused, I shall 
be the first to burn it.'  It  was said by none other than Dr. Ambedkar. So, also during 
his last speech in the Constituent Assemb ly, he congratulated everyone, those who 
supported and those who dissented.  'The proceedings of the Constituent Assembly 
would have been very dull if all Members had yielded to the rule of party discipline.  
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
77

Party discipline in all its rigidity would have converted this Assembly into a gathering of 
yes men.' So, he also goes on to thank all those who dissented. 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: It has relevance here. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, everything has relevance. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: All I can say is that Dr. Ambedkar had been very, very prophetic.  I 
wish the people sitting in this House would be in a position to take a call while being 
here.  That is something which has eluded us. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, I quoted two things very much here – howsoever a 
Constitution may be good, if those who are implementing it are not good, it is proved 
to be bad; and, secondly, if it is misused, he will be number one to burn it.   
 Our late leader Anna – it is very impo rtant, Sir – entered into this Parliament 
and said, ‘I am from the Dravidian stock.  I have something distinct and different to 
offer to the nation at large.’  He spoke on  the Official Languages (Amendment) Bill.  
He said and I quote, ‘If it is uniformity that you are going to aim at, you are not going 
to achieve it come what may.  This country consists of different ethnic elements, 
different cultural elements and different linguistic groups.  It  is only unity within this 
diversity that we should arrive at, and no t by destroying the fine niceties of this 
diversity and mistaking uniformity for unity.  May I ask Members of this House and the 
Prime Minister, whether language alone is the cementing force needed for the unity of 
this country?  There are regional imbalances. There are regional leanings.  There are 
linguistic leanings.  All these th ings have got to be bridged if you want to have a sort 
of unity without uniformity for this country.’ 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank You. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, this Parliament has experienced very well.  It has flourished 
all the diversities of social, regional, linguistic, ethnic, religion, etc.  But, that has to 
be maintained.  That is our foremost wish.   
 Sir, many things have to be mentione d.  I don’t know why you are hurrying up 
when you are liberal to others.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes.  Mr. Siva, even the time allotted to you is over. 
 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, please give me two more minutes.  Let me conclude. 
 Sir, everyone is optimistic when we ar e moving to the new Parliament.  It is a 
new building. But, our conventions will be same.  Our functioning will be the same.  
We will be upholding the democracy.  Th e Constitution is the guiding light and 
guardian. And, it is the responsibility and du ty of everyone to protect it.  Parliament 
understands and establishes that whoever is in the Opposition w ill be the ruling party 
next time.  This is, of course, democracy.   The Parliament understands this.  The 
process of change of Government is repeated. 
 Sir, I would like to say only one th ing.  In recent days, the space for the 
Opposition is shrinking.  There has been a decline in the ability of Parliament to hold 
the Government accountable.  With fewer days  of working, scrutiny of legislative 
proposals is weakening. Expansive executive control over the legislative process 
persists.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay.  Thank you. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : The Government resorts to Ordinance than legislation.  This is 
only our concern.  Sir, at least, you have to be considerate.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Y o u  a r e  r i g h t .   B u t ,  w h e n  I  l o o k  within, I find lost opportunities.  
Enough opportunities were available. Why we re those not availed?  We have to be 
very rationale and committed.  It is good to speak these things; good to talk of 
sublimity.  But, I keep a diary.  And, mind you, I am in pain.  I did everything, in spite 
of whatever be the perception, to make available the platform to every section. 
   
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, we are talking about the Government, not you.  You are our 
protector. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Let us hope, pray and wish that we will avail every opportunity to 
make contribution in this great theatre without disturbance and without disruption. 
Now, Shri Niranjan Reddy. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : That is great, Sir.  We repose  our confidence in you. Sir, only 
last sentence. We follow the ideals of Anna  and the Dravidian policy. We are second 
to none in upholding the sovereignty of th i s  c o u n t r y .     W h e n Chinese aggression 
came, we gave up our policy, the individual Dravida nadu. And, when the Bangladesh 
war came, the then Chief Minister of ours,  Dr. Kalaignar, gave Rs.6 crores, the first 
ever in the State. …(Interruptions)… 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
79

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri S. Niranjan Reddy. Please go ahead.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, we are pursuing that and we will be for the sovereignty and 
democracy of the country.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir.  I think 
it is my fortune that I have finally got to address the House with you being in the Chair, 
m a y b e ,  o n  t h e  l a s t  d a y  i n  t h i s  H o u s e .   Parliamentary journey of 75 years is quite a 
historic occasion for someone like me to have an opportunity to speak. I regard 
myself as someone who is relatively inexperienced and young parliamentarian 
because I have completed only one year.  Ma ybe, I bring the advantage of fresh eyes 
to see the ongoings of the Parliament, to give  some inputs of mine.   But I have been 
an old student of the Constitution. I was go ing to actually speak a little more about it 
until I realized you have much more expe rience than me about understanding the 
Constitution.  I think the single biggest achievement of our Constitution has been that 
it has managed to survive.  It has manage d to survive despite some challenges it 
faced during some emergencies. It has managed to survive despite it being tested 
during a long coalition period when the co untry came out democratically rich.  It has 
continued to serve the country most positively.  While we speak of the new Parliament 
House where the functioning may shift, I remi nd myself that we belong to the Rajya 
Sabha which is a continuous House, and we are serving under a Constitution which is 
a continuous document.  So, both of these are going to be permanent features that 
would possibly guide the functioning of our House even in the new Parliament. Sir, my 
passion with this Constitution subject st arted with my reading of the Constituent 
Assembly debates. Today’s topic is ‘Samvi dhan Sabha and the Co nstitution working 
for seventy-five years’.  Every time I read the Constituent Assembly debates, they are 
an education in itself because the quality of debates, the kind of divergent views that 
were expressed in a very productive manner and the symbiotic manner in which the 
Constitution came to be forged, resulted in the most prolix constitution and the most 
living and breathing Constitution.   In my view,  when someone says that the Indian 
Constitution is possibly one of the most am ended Constitutions, with more than 100 
Amendments, it is a salute to the Constitu tion that the Constitution permits such 
changes to be made having regard to the diversity and the advances of the society. 
We have remained up-to-date with our Cons titution.  It is possibly the most brilliant 
legal document that the world has seen.   In terms of the learni ngs and challenges, I 
think, we have completed 72 years of being a Republic; we have completed more 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

than 75 years from the time the Constituen t Assembly originally sat to prepare the 
Constitution document.   I think, when we now move into the new House, with 
possibly new infrastructure and digital infras tructure, we may have to be mindful of a 
few challenges we may have having regard to  the learnings of the past.   One of the 
challenges that I would be looking at, and I am quite sure, Sir, that the Government 
would steer us through these challenges, woul d be the role of States.  I would like to 
just say; maybe, my inexperience and my green eyes  allow me to see something, 
where I find that Rajya Sabha increasingly  is becoming like an echo Chamber of the 
Lok Sabha  where we debate the same issu es, on the same footings  and on the 
same concerns.   Sir, we are a Council of States.  We represent the States.  So, I 
would suggest, but subject to correction by all the seniors here who  have much more 
experience than me,  that when we possibly move into the new House, we look at our 
role as a Council of States more seriously.  We may have to look at representing the 
interests of States.  Sir, when I speak of re presenting the interests of States, I do not 
speak in terms of a divisive Central versus   State sphere because I also understand 
that  the same party which is ruling the Cent ral Government is in power in majority of 
the States.  So, when we speak of State subjects and States’ interests being 
protected, it is not a device of debate that I am trying to provoke, but I am trying to 
say that it can be done in a constructive manner. Sir, one other challenge that may be 
facing us ... ...(Time-bell rings.)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Last.  
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY: Sir, I shall take only one minute more.  
 There is one other challenge that we may have to encounter. Sir, with the 
enlarged space in the new Lok Sabha, there are a few concerns about the South-
Indian States and the more developed States feeling that will they be, in that sense, 
outnumbered because Article 82 gives a protection up till 2026!  Would that be 
balanced in some manner?  Sir, I am sure, we will have an opportunity to debate it, 
but, I think, it is a matter of concern which I just wanted to place for the House to 
consider in due course.  
 Sir, then the last point I want to make is, we are now moving towards a 
developed nation.  We have the 25-year  goal. We would want to commend the 
Government and support it fully as Indians.   Everyone wants India to be a developed 
country.  But, talking of development, in  many respects, apart from the material 
development that we are gaining, the ve ry fact that we are perserving the 
constitutional ethos in its fullest form is  possibly the greatest tribute to India as a 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
81

democracy. Sir, the most satisfying thing for me about G-20 was India calling itself as 
a mother of democracy because that clearly shows the path India wants to take going 
forward as a democratic country.  
 Sir, I thank you for granting me an o pportunity to speak on such an important 
occasion.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Rajeev Shukla. Very brief, please. 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा (छǄीसगढ़) : सभापित जी, सबसे पहले यह िडबेट कराने क े िलए आपका 
धन्यवाद। इस संसद भवन से हम सबकी िवदाई हो रही है और कल से हम नए संसद भवन मȂ 
जाएंगे, तो आज यहां की ऐितहािसक यादȗ क े बारे मȂ सब उÊलेख कर रहे हȅ।  इस छत क े नीचे 
एक से एक महान लोग आए, एक से एक महान लोग यहां रह कर गए और उनके  भाषणȗ की 
Ģितध्विनयां आज तक यहां गूंज रही हȅ।  सर, जब कोई आता है, तो बड़ा उत्साह होता है और जब 
यहां से जाता है, तो िबछड़ने का द
ुख होता है।  िजस तरह की िÎथितयां होती हȅ, हमने उन्हȂ झेला 
है, हमने दोनȗ बार की िÎथितयȗ मȂ भाषण िकए हȅ।  यह एक ऐसी जगह है, जो एक िमलन क ेन्दर्  है।  
आपकी बाहर िकतनी भी शतर्ुता हो, िकतनी भी कटु ता हो, िकतनी भी दुÌमनी हो, लेिकन यहां 
आकर सब एक-दूसरे से िमलते हȅ, बात करते हȅ और यह Îथान लोगȗ को जोड़ता है।  मȅ हमेशा से 
कहता हूं िक राजनीित मȂ, लोकतंतर् मȂ कटु ता क े िलए कोई Îथान नहीं है। There is no place fo
r 
acrimony in Indian politics.  Ther e can be difference of opinion.  हमारी िवचारधारा मȂ 
मतभेद हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन शतर्ुता और दुÌमनी का Îथान नहीं होना चािहए। ये ही चीजȂ सब 
िसखाती हȅ।   
सभापित जी, मȅने देखा िक एक बार मधु िलमये जी नए एमपी बनकर आए थे।  उन्हȗने 
लोक सभा मȂ पंिडत नेहरू  क े िखलाफ ज़ोरदार भाषण िदया और नेहरू  जी ने वह भाषण सुना।  
जब शाम को वे घर जा
ने लगे, तो उन्हȗने यह पता लगाया िक आज जो नया युवा बोला है, वह 
कहां रहता है।  उनको बताया गया िक वे साउथ एवेन्यू मȂ रहते हȅ।  उन्हȗने कहा िक मुझे उनके  घर 
ले चलो।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी उनके  घर पहुंच गए।  उन्हȗने घंटी बजाई और दरवा
ज़ा खुला।  नेहरू  जी 
का Ëयिƪत्व अलग था और मधु िलमये जी नए-नए एमपी बने थे, वे एकदम घबरा गए और उन्हȗने 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी से कहा िक आप यहां क ै से, तो  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक आप चाय िपलाओ।  
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने उनके  साथ चाय पी और कहा िक तुम बहुत अच्छा बोलते हो।  उन्हȗने चाय पर 
िडÎकशन म
Ȃ कहा िक तुम बहुत अच्छा बोलते हो  और तुÇहारे अंदर क्षमता है।  मȅ राजनीितज्ञ क े 
नाते एक सलाह दूंगा िक तुम आगे से फ ैक्ट्स करेक्ट करके  लाओ।  तुÇहारे क ु छ फ ैक्ट्स गलत थे।  
मधु िलमये जी ने अपनी िकताब मȂ इस बारे मȂ िलखा िक उस िदन क े बाद स े मȅने तय िकया िक जब 
मȅ संसद मȂ बोलूंगा, तो अपने तथ्यȗ को िबÊकु ल ठीक करके  बोलूंगा और उसके  बाद वे बहुत बड़े 
पािर्लयामȂटेिरयन हुए।  इस तरह से यहां पर बहुत क ु छ सीखने को िमलता है।  जब मȅ संसदीय 
कायर् मंतर्ी बना, तब Ģणब म
ुखजीर् जी थे और हम उनके  साथ काम करते थे और उनको बहुत 
अनुभव था।  वे मुझे बोले िक वही सबसे अच्छा पािर्लयामȂटरी अफे यसर् िमिनÎट र है - जैसे रघुरमैया 
जी होते थे - जो हमेशा अपोिजशन बȅच पर बैठा िदखाई दे।  तुÇहȂ इस चीज से जाना जाएगा िक 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

िवपक्ष क े साथ तुÇहारे िरÌते िकतने अच्छे हȅ, इसके  िलए नहीं जाने जाओगे िक तुम बैठ कर 
सǄापक्ष की तरफ क्या कर रहे हो।  ये सब चीजȂ संसद मȂ देखने और सीखने को िमलती हȅ।  सर, 
सȂटर्ल हॉल इस चीज का Ģतीक है - िकतनी भी शतर्ुता हो, लेिकन जब आमने-सामने हो जाते हȅ, 
तो बैठकर चाय-कॉफी पी लेते हȅ, वहां से बात खुल जाती है और मेल-जोल हो जाता है।  यहां पर 
जो संिवधान बना हुआ है, उसमȂ हर Ģधान मंतर्ी का योगदान है - चाहे नेहरू  जी का हो, चाहे 
शाÎतर्ी जी का हो, चाहे मोरारजी देसाई जी का हो, चाहे इंिदरा जी का हो, चाहे राजीव जी का 
हो, चाहे चौधरी चरण िंसह
 जी का हो, चाहे नरिसÇहा राव जी का हो, चाहे देव ेगौड़ा जी का हो, 
चाहे गुजराल साहब का हो, चाहे अटल जी का हो, चाहे मनमोहन िंसह जी का हो और अब मोदी 
जी का है।         
 
 4.00 P.M. 
 
सब यहां आते हȅ और काम करते हȅ।  आज हमȂ संकÊप लेना चािहए िक हम नए भवन मȂ जा रहे हȅ, 
तो अपना मन बदलȂ, िदल बदलȂ।  जैसा अटल जी ने कहा था िक सǄा आती है और जाती है, 
पािर्टयां बनती हȅ और िबगड़ती हȅ, ल
 ेिकन मनमुटाव नहीं होता है।  हमारे िदल उसी तरह से रहने 
चािहए और आपस मȂ मेल-जोल बना रहना चािहए।   
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, िवपक्ष क े पास संसद मȂ बोलने क े अलावा क्या है?  उसके  पास न ऑिफस है, 
न दÄतर है, न ऑडर्र करने क े िलए फाइल ह
ै, क ु छ नहीं है, वह िसफर् अपनी बात कह सकता है।  
अगर बात कहने का वह अवसर भी िवपक्ष को न िमले, तो िफर िवपक्ष क े पास क्या रह गया?  हम 
नई िबिंÊडग म
Ȃ बड़े िदल क े साथ जाएं, कटु ता छोड़Ȃ, शतर्ुता छोड़Ȃ और िमलजुल कर काम करȂ, तो 
बहुत अच्छा रहेगा।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  Ãलीज़ कन्क्लूड करȂ। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा :  सर, मȅ िसफर् एक िमनट मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत कर रहा हूं।  हम सभी पिरवार 
की तरह रहȂ, क्यȗिक दुÌमनी एक कदम, दो कदम - त
ुम भी थक जाओगे और हम भी थक जाएंगे।  
इससे क्या फायदा होगा?  राजनीित  मȂ दुÌमनी की तो कोई गुंजाइश नहीं होती ह ै और लोग तो 
लगे रहते हȅ। ...(समय की घंटी)...  
'चारȗ तरफ लकड़हारे हȅ, िफर भी पेड़ कहां हारे हȅ', 
 
तो यहां लोग जुटे रहते हȅ।  यहां जो भी आता है, चाहे वह इधर रहे या उधर रहे, सबको यह 
एहसास होना चािहए।  ज
ैसा िक कहा गया है :   
"शोहरत की बुलंदी भी पल भर का तमाशा है, 
िजस डाल पे बैठे हो वो ट ूट भी सकती है।" 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
83

 
हम सभी को यह एहसास होना चािहए। 
   
Ǜी उपसभापित :  धन्यवाद, माननीय राजीव जी। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा :  जब हम नई संसद मȂ जा रहे हȅ, तो यही संकÊप होना चािहए और उसका 
Îवागत करते हुए मȅ यही कहूंगा िक वहां जाकर हम अपना मन बदलȂ, िदल बदलकर बैठȂ।  दूसरी 
चीज़ यह है िक हम वहां जाकर गरीब कÊयाण क े िलए काम करȂ, महंगाई पर काबू करȂ, युवाओं 
को रोज़गार द
Ȃ और सबको न्याय दȂ।  ... (समय की घंटी)... सर, मȅ एक बात और कहूंगा िक 
ज्यूिडिशयल िरफॉÇसर् आने चािहए।  अभी तक ज्यूिडिशयल िरफॉÇसर् नहीं आए हȅ।  वह काम नए 
संसद भवन मȂ होना चािहए। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  माननीय राज
ीव जी, अभी अनेक और भी वƪा हȅ।   
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा :  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह जानना चाहता ह ूं िक इस 
िबिंÊडग का क्या उपयोग होगा?  यह ऐितहािसक िबिंÊडग है और यहां सब क ु छ हुआ है, इस बारे 
मȂ सभी ने बताया है, लेिकन इस िबिंÊडग का क्या उपयोग होगा?  इस िबिंÊडग क े उपयोग क े बारे 
मȂ भी सरकार को सोचना चािहए।  यह एक ऐितहािसक ध
रोहर है और इसका क ु छ न क ु छ 
इÎतेमाल होना चािहए।  यह Ëहाइट एिलफȂ ट बनकर न रह जाए।  इसको संसदीय कायर् या िकसी 
न िकसी कायर् क े िलए इÎतेमाल करना चािहए। 
 
डा. फौिज
या खान (महाराÍटर्) :   सर, हम आज िजस इमारत को अलिवदा करने जा रहे हȅ, यह 
इमारत िसफर् एक इमारत नहीं है, यह हमारे संसदीय लोकतंतर् का मंिदर है,  यह हमारी संसदीय 
परंपराओं का खजाना है, यह हमारे Ãयारे भारत क े सपनȗ का गुिलÎतां है।   
 †۔ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮ ﻓﻮﺯﻳہ ﺧﺎﻥ) ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ(: ﺳﺮ، ﮨﻢ ﺍٓﺝ ﺟﺲ ﻋﻤﺎﺭﺕ ﮐﻮ ﺍﻟﻮﺩﺍﻉ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﻳہ ﻋﻤﺎﺭﺕ ﺻﺮﻑ ﺍﻳﮏ 
ﻋﻤﺎﺭﺕ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ، ﻳہ ﮨﻤﺎﺭے ﺳﻨﺴﺪﺋﻴﮯ ﻟﻮک ﺗﻨﺘﺮ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻨﺪﺭ ﮨﮯ، ﻳہ ﮨﻤﺎﺭی ﺳﻨﺴﺪﺋﻴﮯ ﭘﺮﻣﭙﺮﺍﺅں ﮐﺎ ﺧﺰﺍﻧہ ﮨﮯ، ﻳہ ﮨﻤﺎﺭے 
ﭘﻴﺎﺭے ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺕ ﮐﮯ ﺳﭙﻨﻮں ﮐﺎ ﮔﻠﺴﺘﺎں ﮨﮯ  
 
Sir, the soul of parliamentary democracy dwe lls here.  It is through this Parliament 
that India has lived by our Constitution. सर, Constituent Assembly मȂ 15 मिहला सदÎय 
थीं, उनमȂ से एक मिहला सदÎय Dakshayani Velayudhan ने कहा था, "A Constituent 
Assembly not only frames a Constitution, but also gives the people a new framework 
of life."  Sir, it is by this framework of life th at we are living in this Parliam
ent.  This is 
certainly not like an old, faded garment which is discarded and replaced by a glittering 
attire.  This institution has a history.  It  has sanctity.  The soul of democracy is 
                                         
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

important.  सर , डर यह है िक जब हम अपनी इमारत का शरीर बदलने जा रहे हȅ, तो कहीं 
लोकतंतर् की आत्मा यहीं न रह जाए। 
 
 †ﺳﺮ، ڈﺭ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺟﺐ ﮨﻢ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﻋﻤﺎﺭﺕ ﮐﺎ ﺷﺮﻳﺮ ﺑﺪﻟﻨﮯ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺗﻮ ﮐﮩﻴﮟ ﻟﻮک ﺗﻨﺘﺮ ﮐﯽ ﺍٓﺗﻤﺎ ﻳﮩﻴﮟ ﻧہ ﺭﻩ  ﺟﺎﺋﮯ۔ 
 
Sir, the Constitution of India came into force on 26 th January, 1950.  The first 
General Elections under the new Constitution  were held during the years 1951 and 
1952 and the first elected Parliament came into  existence in April, 1952.  Since then 
this Parliament has been the custodian of democracy.  This has been the custodian of 
the dreams and aspirations of the people of In dia.  This has been the custodian of the 
rights of men, women and children.  This  has been the custodian of equality and 
justice.  Several Prime Ministers have led this country.  Several Prime Ministers have 
led this glorious nation.  Their vision and their contribution has made India grow like a 
75-floor skyscraper.We are a skyscraper  now.  But that foundation was very 
important and this foundation was laid by Shri Jawaharlal Nehru, who was the Prime 
Minister of India for 16 year s, who has been called the Fa ther of Modern India, who 
carried forward the noble ideals of Maha tma Gandhi and laid the foundation of 
socialist-secular values and communal harmon y.  We cannot forget that it was his 
vision of modern India and his decisions of starting IITs, IIMs. (Time-bell rings.)  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: It is over! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.  For 'Others', it is three to four minutes only. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: All right.  I am coming back to th e context of the present times.  I 
will say, many Prime Ministers have led this country.  Rajiv Gandhiji brought about the 
IT revolution; he brought reservation fo r women in the local-self Government and 
there were so many decisions taken.  Indira Gandhi ji was the Prime Minister who 
broke Pakistan into two.   वह आयरन लेडी िजसकी वजह से पािकÎतान क े दो ट ुकड़े हो गए 
... (समय की घंटी)...  Sir, please give me a minute.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is already four minutes.   
 
                                         
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
85

DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, please give me a minute.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This has been the time which has been allocated here; it is 
three to four minutes.  Please cooperate.   
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Should I conclude or continue? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.   
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Okay, Sir, मȅ लाÎट मȂ इतना ही कहूंगी िक आज हम मन की बात कर रहे 
हȅ, आज सरकार मन की बात करती है, लोग सरकार क े मन की बात करते हȅ, लेिकन हमारे 
ितरंगे मȂ जो रंग हȅ, आज वे सरकार को नजर नहीं आ रहे हȅ। सर, जो तीन रंग हȅ, वे नहीं िदख रहे 
हȅ, शायद कलर Åलाइंडनेस की बीमारी हो गई है। सर, यह कलर Åलाइंडनेस की बीमारी ...(समय 
की घंट
ी)... जो भी हमारी एडिमिनÎटर्ेिटव एजȂसीज़ हȅ, जैसे सीबीआई है, ईडी है, जो अलग-अलग 
autonomous agencies हȅ, आज उनको एक ही रंग नजर आ रहा है, धन्यवाद। 
 
ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮ ﻓﻮﺯﻳہ ﺧﺎﻥ) ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ(: ﺍﻭ۔ﮐﮯ، ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﻻﺳﭧ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺗﻨﺎ ﮨﯽ ﮐﮩﻮں ﮔﯽ ﮐہ ﺍٓﺝ ﮨﻢ ﻣﻦ ﮐﯽ ﺑﺎﺕ ﮐﺮﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺍٓﺝ 
ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﻣﻦ ﮐﯽ ﺑﺎﺕ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﻟﻮگ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﮯ ﻣﻦ ﮐﯽ ﺑﺎﺕ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﮨﻤﺎﺭے ﺗﺮﻧﮕﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺟﻮ ﺭﻧﮓ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺍٓﺝ 
ﻭﻩ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﻮ ﻧﻈﺮﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺍٓﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﺟﻮ ﺗﻴﻦ ﺭﻧﮓ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﻭﻩ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺩِﮐﻬ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﺷﺎﻳﺪ ﮐﻠﺮ ﺑﻼﺋﻴﻨﮉﻧﻴﺲ ﮐﯽ ﺑﻴﻤﺎﺭی 
ﮨﻮﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻳہ ﮐﻠﺮ ﮉﻧﻴﺲﺑﻼﺋﻴﻨ ﮐﯽ ﺭی
ﺑﻴﻤﺎ ۔۔۔)ﻭﻗﺖ ﮐﯽ ﮔﻬﻨﭩﯽ(۔۔۔ ﺟﻮ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﻤﺎﺭی ﺍﻳﮉﻣﻨﺴﭩﺮﻳﭩﻴﻮ ﺍﻳﺠﻨﺴﻴﺰ ﮨﻴﮟ، 
ﺟﻴﺴﮯ ﺳﯽ ﺑﯽ ﺍٓﺋﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﺍی ڈی ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻮ ﺍﻟﮓ ﺍﻟﮓ ﺍٓﭨﻮﻧﺎﻣﺲ ﺍﻳﺠﻨﺴﻴﺰ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺍٓﺝ ﺍﻥ ﮐﻮ ﺍﻳﮏ ﮨﯽ ﺭﻧﮓ ﻧﻈﺮ ﺍٓﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ، 
ﺩﻫﻨﻴﻮﺍﺩ۔ 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is
 already five minutes. आप तीन िमनट क े बजाय पांच िमनट 
बोली हȅ।  Now, Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav. 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश) : Ǜीमâ, समय तो है नहीं, परन्तु टॉिपक ऐसा है िजस पर 
पूरे िदन बोला जा सकता है। लेिकन जो िलिमटेड दो-तीन िमनट का टाइम होगा, मȅ उसमȂ ही 
अपनी बात खत्म करूं गा।  हम कहां से चले थे और कहां पहुंचे, यातर्ा  यही है, यातर्ा की िबिगिंनग 
होती है, यहां से शुरू  की थी, यहां पहुंची, अभी खत्म नहीं हुई है।  नेहरू  जी से चले और मोदी जी 
तक आ गए, आगे कहां पहुंचȂगे, वह तो आगे की बात है।  
 मȅ तीन-चार उदाहरण दूंगा, आज मȅ कोई ज्ञान देने क े िलए खड़ा नहीं हुआ हूं।  पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  Ģधान मंतर्ी थे, वे एक बार इलाहाबाद गए, तो समाजवादी युवजन सभा क े 
लोग - जनेÌवर िमǛ, मोहन िंसह और बृजभूषण ितवारी क े नेतृत्व मȂ उन्हȗने काले झंडे िदखा िदए। 
नेहरू  जी ने अपनी गाड़ी रुकवाई  और वे नीचे उतर कर आए – बोले, इन लड़कȗ को बुलाओ। 
उनसे पूछा िक भाई, क्यȗ काले झंडे िदखा रहे हो, तो लड़कȗ ने कहा िक हमारी यूिनविर्
सटी की 
और हॉÎटल की फीस बढ़ा दी है।  हम गरीब लड़के  हȅ, आसपास क े गांवȗ क े रहने वाले हȅ, हॉÎटल 
                                         
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

मȂ रहते हȅ और अब हम पढ़ने की िÎथित मȂ नहीं हȅ। उस समय सȂटर्ल यूिनविर्सटी नहीं थी, लेिकन 
पंिडत जी तो वहां क े िलए कह ही सकते थे, तो नेहरू  जी ने कहा िक वाइस चांसलर को बुलाइए। 
उन्हȗने वीसी से कहा िक आपने फीस क्यȗ बढ़ा दी? कल तक यह आदेश वापस हो जाना चािहए 
और आदेश वापस हो ग
या।  एक बार जनेÌवर िमǛ जी को इलाहाबाद यूिनविर्सटी क े वाइस 
चांसलर ने बाहर िनकाल िदया। वी सी एडिमशन दोबारा ले नहीं रहे थे। उस समय पंिडत 
कमलापित ितर्पाठी उǄर Ģदेश
 से िशक्षा मंतर्ी थे। लड़के  पंिडत जी क े पास गए, तो उन्हȗने वी.सी. 
से कहा िक इनको दािखला दीिजए। वी.सी. ने कहा िक नहीं,  यह लड़का आंदोलन बहुत करता 
है। तब पंिडत कमलापित ितर्पाठी ने कहा िक आंदोलन नहीं करȂग
े, तो इस यूिनविर्सटी से नेता क ै से 
िनकलȂगे! उनका दािखला िकया गया, िफर जनेÌवर िमǛ जी यहां पर इस देश क े कई मंतर्ालयȗ 
क े मंतर्ी भी रहे।  मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक इलाहाबाद यूिनविर्सटी मȂ करीब 300 िदन  से 
लड़के  अनशन िकए हुए हȅ  िक Îटू डȂट यूिनयन का गठन होना चािहए। 300 िदन से ज्यादा हो गए 
हȅ, वे बैठे हुए हȅ, लेिकन कोई सुनने वाला नहीं है। अभी िदÊली य ूिनविर्सटी मȂ Îटू डȂट्स यूिनयन क े 
चुनाव होने जा रहे हȅ, लेिकन Ģयागराज यूिनविर्सटी, जो सȂटर्ल यूिनविर्सटी है, उसमȂ चुनाव नहीं 
होने जा रहे हȅ।  
महोदय, मȅ दो उदाहरण और दूंगा। रुपाला  साहब, आप नाराज मत होइएगा। Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी पूवार्ंचल एक्सĢेस का उǇाटन करने क े िलए गए थ
े। हमारे मुख्य मंतर्ी उन्हȂ िरसीव करने क े 
िलए खड़े हुए थे। गाड़ी आगे चली गई, हमारे मुख्य मंतर्ी पीछे-पीछे पैदल चले और बहुत देर तक 
चलते रहे। कोई क ेयर
 करता है? नेहरू  जी लड़कȗ से िलए खड़े हो जाते हȅ, लेिकन Ģधान मंतर्ी की 
गाड़ी मुख्य मंतर्ी क े िलए नहीं खड़ी होती! आपके  यहाँ क्या हुआ गुजरात मȂ? उǄर Ģदेश क े चुनाव 
क े बाद अगले ही िदन
 या दूसरे िदन गुजरात मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी का रोड शो था। पूरे देश ने देखा या 
नहीं िक आपके  मुख्य म
ंतर्ी खड़े हुए थे और एसपीजी साइड करके  चला गया, उन्हȂ हटा िदया और 
गाड़ी सीधी चली गई, पूरा कारवाँ चला गया और मुख्य मंतर्ी खड़े रह गए। हम चले वहाँ से थे, 
लेिकन पहुँच गए यहाँ, इसिलए आप िवचार कीिज
ए िक डेमोकर्े िटक िसÎटम को कायम रखना है 
या नहीं रखना है? कल हम नए सदन मȂ जा रहे हȅ। इस सदन मȂ बहुत बड़े-बड़े लोग रहे हȅ, बहुत 
बड़े मन क े लोग रहे हȅ। यहाँ पर हमेशा बहुत उच्च कोिट की बहसȂ ह
ुई हȅ, इसने देश को बहुत क ु छ 
िदया है। संिवधान सभा मȂ हमारा जो इितहास रहा है, उसके  बारे मȂ लोगȗ ने कहा ही है। आप सब 
जानते हȅ िक जब यह बना, तब यह दुिनया का सवर्ǛेÍठ संिवधान था। क्या हम उस संिवधान को 
ठीक तरीके  स
े रख सके , उसमȂ क ु छ जोड़ सके ? रोजाना िसफर् घटाने का काम कर रहे हȅ। अगर 
सǄा मȂ बैठे हम लोग देश क े हर Ëयिƪ को संदेह की दृिÍट स
े देखȂगे, तो काम नहीं चल सकता है। 
कानून बनता है क ु छ चीज़ȗ को रोकने क े िलए, कानून सारे देश की जनता को आतंिकत करने क े 
िलए नहीं बनाया
 जा सकता। ऐसे-ऐसे कानून बने हȅ, जो अपरािधयȗ पर लगने चािहए, आिर्थक 
अपरािधयȗ पर लगने चािहए, लेिकन उनकी कहीं भी Ëयाख्या नहीं है। िजस पर चाहȂ, िजसको 
चाहȂ, उसको पुिलस जाकर पकड़ लेगी, ई.डी. पहुँच जाएगी। क्या तब संिव धान िनमार्ताओं की इस 
तरह क े कानून बनाने की कभी मंशा रही थी? उनकी ऐसी मंशा कभी नहीं रही होगी। वे बहुत अच्छे 
डेमोकर्े ट्स थे और वे सभी लोग थे। इस संसद मȂ बैठकर भी इस तरह क े कानून नहीं बने। ..(समय 
की घंटी).. पो
टा बना, टाडा बना, अन्य कानून बने, लेिकन सभी कानून वापस हुए या नहीं हुए? 
अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी जैसे बड़े आदमी थे, आडवाणी जी थे। उस सदन मȂ इ ंदर्जीत गुÃता, 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
87

सोमनाथ चटजीर् से लेकर बहुत बड़े-बड़े लोग थे िवपक्ष मȂ। डा. लोिहया रहे - वे और पहले रहे तथा 
संिवधान सभा मȂ तो थी ही सारी intellectual cream देश की, लेिकन उसके  बाद भी बहुत बड़े 
लोग रहे और अच्छे कानून बने। यहाँ, आपकी कÇयुिनÎट पाटीर् क े िहरेन  म ुखजीर्, भूपेश गुÃता रहे, 
अन्य और न जाने कौन-कौन लोग रहे, हर क्षेतर् क े लोग रहे, बहुत बड़े लोग रहे, लेिकन कभी इस 
तरह क े कानून ģ े म नहीं हुए, लेिकन ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : क ृपया समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव :  उपसभापित जी, मȅ समाÃत कर रहा हूं। कभी भी इस तरह क े कानून ģ े म 
नहीं हुए, िजन कानूनȗ से आम लोग डरने लगȂ। जब आम लोग कानून से डरने लगȂ, तो यह द
 ेश क े 
िलए बहुत खतरनाक चीज़ होती है। मȅ इस सदन मȂ, इस संसद मȂ तीस साल से ज्यादा रहा हूं, 
इसिलए Îवाभािवक है लगाव तो है ही, कल दूसरे सदन मȂ चले जाएंगे, इसिलए हम ईÌवर स े यही 
Ģाथर्ना करȂगे िक नए संसद भवन मȂ आगे चलकर जो भी नए लोग आएं, उनमȂ से क ु छ बड़े लोग 
पैदा हȗ और देश क े संिवधान को, देश की ËयवÎथा को ठीक राÎते पर लेकर चलȂ।  उपसभापित 
जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद और मुझ
े उÇमीद है िक 
आपका यही लगाव वहाँ भी रहेगा। डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा, आप बोिलए।  
 
डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा (ओिडशा) : उपसभापित जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। आज एक
 िवशेष 
िदन है और यह वह िदन है, जब यह सदन इस िबिंÊडग मȂ आिखरी बार बैठ रहा है। महोदय, 24 
घंटे बाद इस िबिंÊडग की लाइट्स बंद हो जाएंगी और 75 सालȗ मȂ जो काम हुआ है, वह नई 
िबिंÊडग मȂ आगे चलता रहेगा। क्यȗिक बहुत कम समय है, अपना वƪËय रखने क े िलए क ेवल तीन 
िमनट हȅ, इसिलए मȅ कहना चाहूंगा िक हमारे देश क े िजतने ģीडम फाइटसर् थे, स ंिवधान सभा क े 
जो सारे मैÇबसर् थे, िजन्हȗने काँÎटीǷूशन को खड़ा िकया, मȅ उन सभी को नमन करते हुए अपना 
वƪËय शुरू  करता हूं। मान्यवर, 75 सालȗ को 3 िमनट मȂ कहना बहुत मुिÌकल है, पर म ेरे सामने 
मेरी पाटीर् से दो वƪा ऑलरेडी बोल चुक े हȅ। महोदय, 75 सालȗ मȂ बहुत क ु छ हुआ है... और 
बोलना शुरू  िकया जाए, तो खत्म होने का नाम नहीं लेगा।  मान्यवर, मगर 75 साल  मȂ हम जो 
चीज कर सकते थे, उसमȂ एक
 चीज छू ट गई।  इस सदन मȂ वह एक चीज छू ट गई है, जो शायद 
अगर हम कर जाते, तो हमȂ लगता िक आज हम क ु छ पूरा करके  नए सदन मȂ जा रहे हȅ।  हमȂ यह 
एक एहसास होता।  मान्यवर, वह क्या छू ट गया, क्या रह गया?  1996 म
Ȃ जब िवमȂस िरज़वȃशन 
िबल आया था, वह पािरत नहीं हो पाया था।  यह 1996 मȂ आया, 1998 मȂ आया, 1999 मȂ आया।  
यह तीन बार इसी पािर्लयामȂट मȂ आया, लेिकन पािरत नहीं हो पाया।  मान्यवर, यह वह िवमȂस 
िरज़वȃशन िबल है, जो म
ȅ आपके  पास लेकर आया हूँ, िजसे 9 माचर्, 2010 को इस सदन ने पािरत 
िकया और लोक सभा मȂ भेजा िक इस देश की हमारी मिहलाओं को लोक सभा और िवधान सभाओं 
म
Ȃ 33 Ģितशत संरक्षण िमलना चािहए।  अगर यह िबल उस िदन पािरत हो जाता, तो 75 साल  मȂ 
हमने िजतने काम िकए हȅ, 75 साल क े उन कामȗ क े साथ अगर यह जुड़ जाता, तो शायद 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

मुकÇमल लगता।  मȅ िसफर् इतना कहना चाहता हूँ िक जो िवमȂस िरज़वȃशन िबल 9 माचर्, 2010 को 
इस सदन ने, इस राज्य सभा ने पािरत िकया था और आज लंिबत है, हम उस पर शपथ लेकर यह 
Ģण लȂ और सरकार से दरख्वाÎत करȂ िक अगर मुकÇमल करना है, तो मिहला संरक्षण िबल को 
पहले िदन नई वाली िबिंÊडग म
Ȃ लाइए, हम सब िमल कर उस िबल को Îवीकार करȂगे, Îवीकृ त 
करȂगे, साकार करȂगे।  मिहला संरक्षण िबल को पािरत करने क े िलए हम यह Ģण ले सकते हȅ।  हम 
यह Ģण ले सकते हȅ, यह िवचार ले सकते हȅ।  हमारी 66 करोड़ माँएँ और बहनȂ, जो हमȂ देख रही 
हȅ, उनकी एक सोच है, उनकी एक मंशा है िक िपछले 27 सालȗ स
े जो िबल लंिबत है, अगर 
उसको मुकÇमल करना है, तो एक नई सोच, एक नए िवÌवास, एक नई ऊजार् क
े  साथ हम चलȂ।   
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
   
एक छोटा सा िवषय कह कर मȅ अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूँ, क्यȗिक समय समाÃत हो चुका है।   
 
"मȅ अके ला ही चला था जािनबे मंिज़ल मगर, 
लोग साथ आते रहे और कारव
ाँ बनता गया।" 
  
मान्यवर, इस सदन की 75 साल की जो जनीर् रही है, हम सब एक साथ मुकÇमल होकर चले हȅ।  
हमȂ िवÌवास है िक अपनी माँओं क े िलए, अपनी बहनȗ क े िलए, 66 करोड़ उन लोगȗ क े िलए आज 
तक हमने जो कई Ģॉिमसेज़ िकए हȅ, लेिकन िजनको साकार नहीं िकया है, हम वह काम कर 
सकते हȅ।  यह वह िवमȂस िरज़वȃशन िबल है, जो इस सदन ने पास िकया था, इसको नए सदन मȂ 
लाइए और पािरत किरए।  हम जो एक नए भारत का िवÌवास देना चाहते ह
ȅ, उस ऊजार् क े साथ, 
उस िवÌवास क े साथ हम आगे बढ़Ȃ और देश ही नहीं, पूरी दुिनया मȂ जब हम नंबर वन बनने का 
कारण रखते हȅ, हम इस िवÌवास को कायम करȂ।  अगर हम यह काम करते ह
ȅ, तो आने वाली 
पीिढ़याँ सच मȂ सोचȂगी िक क ु छ ऐितहािसक हुआ था, िसफर् िबिंÊडग नई नहीं थी, बिÊक सोच नई 
थी, िवÌवास नया था, एक नया आयाम था िक हम मिहला संरक्षण िबल को पािरत कर
ते हुए नई 
ऊजार्, नए िवÌवास, नए भिवÍय की तरफ जाएँगे।  बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, this is indeed a momentous occasion and the 
House has the benefit of having two of it s Members, who had the occasion of being 
the Prime Minister of this country, and, it is gratifying for all of us that both of them are 
present.   I will now give the floor to Shri H.D. Devegowda.  Sir, you can speak while 
sitting.  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka) : Sir, I will speak only for a few minutes.  
Yesterday, the leaders of all the political parties were summoned by the Parliamentary 
Affairs Minister.  That meeting was chaire d by our Defence Minister, Shri Rajnath 
Singh.  In that meeting, some of our frie nds from the neighbouring State raised the 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
89

issue of Cauvery waters.  I did not raise any objection while they were speaking.  Sir, I 
have served in this Parliament for forty ye ars but it is my misfortune to notice that 
yesterday all the electronic media in Karnataka highlighted that Devegowda was not 
interested to protect the State's interests on the Cauvery issue while the people are 
suffering from it. I do not want to go into the merits or demerits of what is going on.  
All the people from Tamil Nadu have been fi ghting this battle for the last 60 years.  I 
don’t want to go back to all those things. I would like to raise only one point.  
Whatever unity that they have, ha s been exposed.  When Kharge ji was speaking, I 
was watching.  Your good self said, "I will give opportunity to speak for a few minutes 
to all the Members." I have come here lastly .  With your kind permission, I would only 
say that I stand by the people in problem that has been created by the unity of our 
friends.  Yes, they have the majority - 40 Members.  We are only 26 or 28 Members.   
There is no unity among ourselves in Karn ataka. The people are suffering.  But I 
would like to say that as a single member I have fought the battle for the last sixty 
years. I don’t want to go back to the ol d history. My friends know what happened 
when Manmohan Singh ji was the Prime Minister. I don’t want to take much time.  I 
only want to say just one word.This quarrel will not be solved legally.  If at all, my 
friends want to have some sort of smooth understanding, then all of us have to sit 
together and sort out the problem.  Otherw ise, things will continue and the struggle 
from both sides will go on.  This will not solve the problem.  I will only humbly request 
this.  I pray all our colleagues from Tamil Nadu.  Unfortunately, Karnataka is 
surrounded by all the projects.  On one si de, there is Goa, and on the other side, 
there is Telangana.   There is Almatti issu e; there is Cauveri issue.  The people are 
suffering.  I only say that this problem will not be solved unless we sit together and try 
to sort out the issue.  Certainly, the legal battle is not going to solve this problem.  
Two hundred years back, the issue started on Cauveri.  I don’t want to take much of 
the time.  I can go on and give all the deta ils.  You have permitted me.  What I would 
like to say is that I also stand by the people  of Karnataka who are suffering.  I will pray 
all our colleagues if they are going to sit together and solve the problem among 
themselves, it will be one of the most brillia nt decisions.  All the rivers surround us, 
but Karnataka is the worst suffe rer.  That is the position, Sir.  I don’t want to make 
any ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Sir, this is not ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, the issue has already been settled.  
...(Interruptions).... Based on the Supreme Court directions, ...(Interruptions).... 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

Karnataka is not obeying to the Tribunal's orders.  ...(Interruptions)....  We have 
respect for the former Prime Minister, Shri Devegowda.  ...(Interruptions)....  
Sympathy has been created in this House. ...(Interruptions).... People of Tamil 
Nadu are suffering.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Please, please.  ...(Interruptions).... On this day, when we are 
trying to reflect, introspect and chal k out a path for way forward approach,... 
...(Interruptions)....  I will give opportunity.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA:  Sir, let five Members of this House ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  I get your point.  ...(Interruptions)....  S e t t l e  d o w n .   
...(Interruptions)....  Please, send a chit to me.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN :  Sir, we have respect for our former Prime Minister. 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA :  Sir, I would like to request that let five Members of this 
House from both sides, who do not belong  either to Karnataka or to Tamil Nadu, 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Vaiko, would you please take your seat?    All of you please 
take your seats.  ...(Interruptions).... 
   
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA :  T a k e  f i v e  M e m b e r s  o f  t h i s  H o u s e .   Y o u  p l e a s e  
delegate...(Interruptions).... Let them go and see the condition there. 
...(Interruptions)....   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Vaiko, please. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA:  The people are suffering.  ...(Interruptions)....  Let them 
report to this House.  I will accept that .  Let us not unnecessarily quarrel.  
...(Interruptions)....  Those people who are not concerned about this 
problem...(Interruptions)....  Sir, I beg you..(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seats.  ...(Interruptions)....   
 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
91

SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA:  The Members who are not concerned ...(Interruptions)...  
Let them go and study the situation there an d report it back to the House.  I will 
accept it.  ...(Interruptions)...  This is not the way.  ...(Interruptions).... 
   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, please.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: This is because of your strength.  ...(Interruptions)...  You 
have got forty Members.  ...(Interruptions)....  You are all united.  
...(Interruptions)...  And we are divided.  ...(Interruptions)....  T h a t  i s  y o u r  
advantage.  ...(Interruptions)....  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Would you please be good enough in taking your seats?  
...(Interruptions)....  Take your seats.  ...(Interruptions).... 
   
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA : This is not going to solve the problem.  
...(Interruptions)....  If they want to go on like this, this is not going to solve the 
problem.  ...(Interruptions)....  I am 91.  I don't know how many years more I am 
going to survive.  I only made an appeal.  Let five Members, who do not belong to 
Karnataka or Tamil Nadu, go there, study the situation and report to your good self.  
You finally give the decision.  This is my request.  Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  We all wish Devegowda ji a very long, healthy life.  Hon. Members, 
I was carefully listening to every word whic h the former Prime Minister spoke.  The 
underlying concept was that these issues need to be determined consensually.  That 
being the situation, we must leave it at that.  Shri Pramod Tiwari.   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी ( राजÎथान) :  माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत आभारी हूँ िक 
आपने मुझे बोलने का अवसर िदया है।  कल हम सब नये भवन मȂ जाएँगे।  हमारी ढेर सारी 
Ëयिƪगत यादȂ यहाँ से जुड़ी हȅ।  अगर हम देश क े इितहास को देखȂ तो मȅ गवर् क े साथ कह सकता 
हूँ िक हम सब उस सदन क े सदÎय हȅ, राज्य सभा क े, िजसने इस देश का गौरवशाली इितहास 
रचा
 है।   
 मान्यवर, हम इस संसद भवन मȂ 14 और 15 अगÎत, 1947 की रात मȂ पंिडत जवाहरलाल 
नेहरू  का िदया वह भाषण क ै से भूल सकते हȅ!  जब आज़ादी का उǇोष हो रहा था, तो उन्हȗने 
कहा था िक जब सारी दुिनया सो रही है, उस समय िहन्दुÎतान जाग रहा है - एक नयी destiny, 
एक नया अध्याय िलखने क
े  िलए।  यह उन घटनाओं का साक्षी है, यह संिवधान बनाने का साक्षी है।  
मȅ इस िववाद मȂ नहीं पड़ूँगा िक 75 साल दो साल पहले पूर
े हुए या 75 साल दो साल बाद पूरे हȗगे।  
मȅ इसके  िनमार्ताओं को Ģणाम करते हुए इतना जरूर  कहना चाहता हूँ िक आपने एक ऐसा 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

संिवधान िदया।  इस संिवधान की खूबसूरती क े िलए तो मȅ एक िजकर् करना चाहता हूँ िक अगर 
भारत का नक्शा देखȂ, तो भारत मȂ लोकतंतर् पहले िदन से िज़न्दा है।  यह 15 अगÎत, 1947 से 
लेकर आज तक िज़न्दा है, यहाँ एक क्षण क े िलए भी लोकतंतर् कभी समाÃत नहीं हुआ है।  लेिकन 
ज़रा भारत का नक्शा उठा  कर देख लीिजए, बगल मȂ नेपाल म
Ȃ क्या हुआ, पािकÎतान मȂ क्या 
हुआ, चीन मȂ क्या हुआ, Ǜीलंका मȂ क्या हुआ?  हमारे संिवधान िनमार्ताओं ने जो संिवधान बनाया 
था, यह उसकी खूबसूरती है िक हमारा जो सबसे अनमोल रत्न था, लोकतंतर्, वह आज तक 
िज़न्दा है।  इसिलए मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक ये दोनȗ सदन उस घटना क े साक्षी हȅ। मान्यवर, म ȅ एक 
चीज जरूर  कहूँगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... क ु छ लोगȗ को बीच मȂ बेतुका, बेसुरा बोलने की आदत होती 
है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
एक माननीय सदÎय : दोनȗ सदन आपातकाल क े भी साक्षी हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : मान्यवर, मȅ तो बहुत Ãयार से बोल रहा था, लेिकन क ु छ लोग ऐसे होते हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... अब, जब इन्हȗने बोल िदया, तो मȅ इनको बता दूँ िक उस आपातकाल को 
स
ंिवधान क े दायरे मȂ लगाया गया था, लेिकन आपने जो लगाया है, वह संिवधान क े दायरे मȂ नहीं, 
बिÊक संिवधान का ताना-बाना पहन कर लगाया ह
ै और आज आपातकाल जैसी िÎथित है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : ितवारी जी, कई बार Ãयार से बहुत डर लगता है। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, सही बात है। यह अपना-अपना अनुभव है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : देिखए, यिद हम आज क े िदन राजनीितक दायरे मȂ रह कर बात करȂगे, तो आगे का 
राÎता साफ नहीं िनकलेगा।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, नहीं िनकलेगा। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : जब म
ȅ आज की हकीकत यहाँ सुनता हूँ और दुिनया क े लोगȗ स े सुनता हूँ, तो मुझे 
लगता है िक मȅ कहाँ आ गया। Let us be proud of our acc omplishments.  They are the 
products of our human resource, our bu reaucratic system and our visionary 
leadership. Where is the harm in it? 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, मȅ वही काम कर रहा था, लेिकन बीच मȂ िवघ्न हो गया।...(Ëयवधान)... 
मȅ तो लोकतंतर् क े िनमार्ताओं और संिवधान क े िनमार्ताओं की तारीफ कर रहा था।...(Ëयवधान)...  
ठीक ह
ै, सर। िवघ्न कौन डालते हȅ, यह आप भी जानते हȅ और हम भी जानते हȅ।  
 सर, लोकतंतर् की सबसे बड़ी खूबसूरती क्या है? यह एक ऐसा चमन है, िजसमȂ रंग-िबरंग े 
फ ू ल िखलते हȅ। जब हर रंग क े फ ू ल को िखलने िदया जाता है, तो लोकतंतर् मजबूत होता है। मȅ 
िफर िकसी की तरफ इशारा नहीं कर रहा हूँ, पर िसफर् यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक इस लोकतंतर् की 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
93

सबसे बड़ी Åयूटी यही थी िक यहाँ हर धमर्, हर भाषा, हर जाित को फ ूलने-फलने का अिधकार 
िमला। जब हुक ूमतȂ धमर् क े नाम पर लोगȗ को बाँटȂगी, तो लोकतंतर् पर सवािलया िनशान लगेगा 
और िजन्हȗने यह संिवधान बनाया है, उनके  Ģित अनादर का भाव जािहर होगा। मȅ इस बात को 
जरूर  कहना चाहता हूँ िक हमारे लोकतंतर् की यह ताकत है िक हम आज भी लोकतंतर् मȂ िजन्दा हȅ 
और आगे भी रहȂगे। चाहे िजतने दौर आएँ, वे आक
र चले जाएँगे, ल ेिकन िहन्दुÎतान का लोकतंतर् 
कभी नहीं िमटेगा, यह मȅ िवÌवासपूवर्क और दावे क े साथ कहता हूँ। 
  मान्यवर, जब इितहास पढ़Ȃ, तो एक लाइन मȂ यह कह कर बखार्Îत न कर दȂ िक 70 सालȗ 
मȂ क्या हुआ? 1947 मȂ जब पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  ने सǄा संभाली थी, तब िहन्दुÎतान क े  पास 
क्या था? उस समय िकतने गाँवȗ मȂ िबजली थी? हम िकतनी िबजली पैदा करते थे? िकतने गाँवȗ 
मȂ टेिलफोन सेवाएँ थीं? िकतने गाँवȗ मȂ िवकास क े िलए सड़कȂ थीं? आज अगर ये सब हȅ, तो इनके  
िलए सारे लोगȗ न
े िमल कर काम िकया है, इसिलए आज यह दौर आया है। मȅ एक बात जरूर  
कहना चाहता हूँ िक जब गौरवशाली इितहास पढ़ा जाएगा, तो Ģधान मंतर्ी पंिडत जवाहरलाल 
नेहरू  जी क े योगदान तथा उनके  समय मȂ िकए गए कायș की सराहना क े िबना िहन्दुÎतान का 
इितहास अधूरा रहेगा। शाÎतर्ी जी का स
ंिक्षÃत कायर्काल था।   
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) पीठासीन हुईं।] 
  
मैडम, आपको इस उÇमीद क े साथ बधाई और शुभकामनाएँ िक आप याद रखȂगी िक अभी मेरे दस 
िमनट बाकी हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... महोदया, शाÎतर्ी जी का कायर्काल बहुत स
ंिक्षÃत था। उस 
शिख्सयत को िहन्दुÎतान हमेशा याद रखे, िजसने 'जय जवान, जय िकसान' का नारा िदया था। 
तब वह िहन्दुÎतान था, जब 1965 का युǉ रोकने क
े  िलए हम पर पीएल-480 की धमकी दी गई 
थी, उससे भी हम िनकले।  
 महोदया, इंिदरा जी क े बगैर इंिडया का इितहास अधूरा रहेगा। यह वह इंिदरा गाँधी है, 
िजसने मिहला सशिƪकरण िकया, बंगलादेश का िनमार्ण िकया। लोग तो इितहास मȂ क
ु छ पन्ने 
िलखते हȅ, उन्हȗने तो geography बदल दी। दुिनया क े नक्शे मȂ जब तक बंगलादेश रहेगा, तब 
तक इंिदरा गाँधी का नाम रहेगा। इंिदरा गाँधी की कोई तो ताकत थी, इंसािनयत थी, शराफत थी, 
स
ंसदीय मयार्दाएँ थीं िक अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने उनकी तुलना दुगार् माँ से की थी! यह है 
देश का लोकतंतर्!  
 महोदया, आज 'िडिजटल इंिडया' की बड़ी बात होती है, लेिकन मȅ यह पूछना चाहता हूँ 
िक इसके  जन्मदाता कौ
न थे? इसके  जन्मदाता राजीव गाँधी जी थे। क्या हम उनके  योगदान को 
भुला सकते हȅ? अगर आज पंचायती राज मȂ, नगर िनकाय मȂ िपछड़े वगर्, दिलत वगर् तथ ा मिहलाएँ 
मेजर क े पद पर, िजला अध्यक्ष क े पद पर या बड़े-बड़े पदȗ पर बैठी हȅ, तो उसमȂ काँगर्ेस क े Ģधान 
मंतर्ी राजीव गाँधी जी का योगदान है। मȅ आपसे इतना जरूर  कहना चाहता हूँ िक 18 साल  क े 
नौजवान को जो मतािधकार िमला है, वह इन्हीं 70 वषș म
Ȃ िमला है। इसके  िलए युवा आभारी हȅ।  
 महोदया, अगर मȅ बात आगे बढ़ाऊँ , तो इतना जरूर  कहना चाहता हूँ िक पी. वी. 
नरिसÇहा राव जी ने आिर्थक उदारीकरण शुरू  िकया, मनमोहन िंसह जी ने उसको परवान 
चढ़ाया। आज दुिनया मȂ भारत की जो ताकत है, वह सपनȗ से नहीं आई है, बिÊक इन दोनȗ क े 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

आिर्थक उदारीकरण क े कारण आई है। हम इनके  योगदान को नहीं भूल सकते। मȅ आपसे एक बात 
जरूर  कहना चाहूँगा िक उदारीकरण का जो आज Îवरूप है, वह उधारीकरण और बेचीकरण मȂ 
तÅदील हो रहा है। इसे रोका जाना चािहए। हमारा उदारीकरण और बेचीकरण क े बीच म Ȃ बहुत 
बड़ा फासला है। मȅ यह जरूर  कहूँगा िक इस संिवधान की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी मयार्दा फ ेडरल 
Îटर्क्चर है। ...(समय की घंटी)... अब दस िमनट शुरू  कर दीिजए। राज्यȗ से िमलकर ही यह संघ 
बना है और इसीिलए हम यहाँ बैठे हुए हȅ। मȅ आपसे िवनĦतापूवर्क िसफर् इतना ही कहना चाहता हूँ 
िक राज्यȗ क े फ ेडरल Îटर्क्चर क े अिधकार क े साथ िखलवाड़ न िकया जाए, जो िक हो रहा है। 
आप गोवा मȂ चुनी हुई सरकारȗ को िगराते हȅ, मध्य Ģदेश  मȂ चुनी हुई सरकारȗ को िगराते हȅ। िजस 
तरीके  से िविभन्न राज्यȗ मȂ भी सरकारȂ िगराई जा रही हȅ, ये खतरनाक लक्षण हȅ, िजसका िजकर् 
मेरे भाई भी कर थे, वही आपातकाल की तानाशाही , जो िबना लगाए आ रही है।  
 महोदया, मȅ दो बातȂ कहकर अपनी बात समाÃत कर दूँगा। मुझे िसफर् दो िमनट दीिजए। मȅ 
एक खतरनाक बात की ओर इशारा कर रहा हूँ, जो िदल से सबको अच्छी लगेगी। ...(समय की 
घंटी)... सबको अच्छी लगेगी, ल
ेिकन बोलȂगे नहीं, क्यȗिक पाटीर् की Ģितबǉता होती है। पहले 
सांसद क े अिधकार होते थे, िवधायक क े अिधकार होते थे, मंतर्ी क े अिधकार होते थे, िजनसे 
लोकतंतर् की ताकत बढ़ती थी। आज इन तीनȗ ताक तȗ और िवधाियका को कमजोर िकया जा रहा 
है। ये खतरनाक लक्षण हȅ, जो उिचत नहीं हȅ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया आप समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : हम जो बात कह रहे हȅ, वह आपको अच्छी लगेगी। सोिनया जी ने 9 Ãवाइंट्स 
का एक पतर् िलखा है। ...(समय की घंटी)... उसे आप भी पढ़ लीिजएगा, इन्हȂ भी पढ़ा दीिजएगा 
और कह दीिजएगा िक इसे मान जाएंग
े, तो 75 साल  का सब क ु छ पूरा हो जाएगा, बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद। आपको एक बार िफर स
े बधाई। जो लोग लोकतंतर् को क ै द करना चाहते हȅ, तो 'इंिडया' 
आ रहा है और आप जा रहे हȅ - यह उǇोष करते हुए मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक आपकी ताकत िदन-
ब-िदन कमजोर हो रही है, आप समाÃत हȗगे, अब आपको देश नहीं चाहता है। 'इ ंिडया' आएगा, 
'इंिडया' जीतेगा। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : माननीय सदÎय, िकरोड़ी लाल मीणा जी 
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सदÎय, िकरोड़ी लाल मीणा जी ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सदÎय, िव. 
िवजयसाई रेƿी जी। 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) :  Madam, in many ways, the 
Parliamentary journey represents so many  struggles and so ma ny achievements and 
also aspirations of the people of India.   I have no hesitation to refer to the struggles 
that we have undergone during the 75 years, more particularly th
e struggles relating 
to the 1976 which represents the darkest year of our parliamentary democracy, and 
the Congress Party was responsible for it. The 42 nd Constitution Amendment was 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
95

passed by the then ruling Congress Party in  the most controversial circumstances.  
This has to be taken note of.  If the subsequent Governments had not undone the 
horrors of the 42 nd Constitution Amendment, the Co ngress Party would have passed  
unsavoury laws to institutionalize Emergency in the country forever.  So, it is the 
anomalies that they have introduced, that have been undone.  That is the reason why 
we are still here and our democracy is sa ved. The UPA regime was marred by crony 
capitalism, corruption, policy paralysis and a decline in the econo mic growth. This is 
what their achievement is.  Th e struggles I have already explained, and I have already 
explained their achievements.  More particul arly, in relation to Andhra Pradesh what 
the Congress Party has done, during the bifurcation, has to be explained. Despite 
protests, the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisa tion Bill was passed in the most unruly 
manner which is a black mark on the demo cracy and Andhra Pradesh, hence, was 
the biggest victim of misuse of power by the Congress Party.  Madam, the live 
telecast of the parliamentary proceedings was cut-off.  A demand for the division of 
voting was denied.  All Andhra Members of  Parliament were unfairly suspended and 
the doors of Lok Sabha were closed.  The passage of the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Bill was based on unscientific and irrational considerations which have 
been authored by my friend, Shri Jairam  Ramesh. Madam, the next point is...  
...(Interruptions).... You can go ahead with your co mments but I will continue my 
observations.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 Madam, the Governments may come and Governments may go, but for sitting 
Government, that is, the BJP Government is under an obligation to fulfill the statutory 
promises made by previous Government, that is, the Congress Government.  One 
important point is, the Congress Party has held the power for 50 years; 50 years out 
of these 75 years and if any other party had been in place other than the Congress 
Party, I have no hesitation to say that India would have been a developed country by 
now and not a developing country.  It woul d have been a developed country.  That is 
the achievement of the Congress Party in  so far as democracy is concerned. 
...(Interruptions).... You can go ahead. ...(Interruptions)....  The evidence of this is 
in front of our eyes now.  With a non-Cong ress Government in the past 10 years, you 
have been seeing, we have been watchi ng as to what the performance is.  
...(Interruptions)....  
 Madam, the last point is of Parliament productivity .  The average number of 
sitting days per year has decreased from 12 0 days in the 1950s to roughly 70 days at 
present which is really alarming. 
 I will have to give the comparative figure s.  In 2022, the Indian Parliament sat 
for 56 days, the U.S. Congress sat for 156 days, the British Parliament sat for 137 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

days and the Canadian Parliament sat for 96 days. I request the BJP Government to 
increase the number of sittings of the Parliament  so as to do justice to the people of 
this country.   
 Madam, youth, particularly, the signif icance and the importance of the youth, 
at present, is coming down slowly and the participation of youth is also coming down.  
MPs in 25 to 40 age bracket have fallen from 26 per cent in the 1st Lok Sabha to 12 per 
cent in 17th Lok Sabha.  Now, next is about the welfare of backward classes.  I would 
request the Government, and the hon. Finan ce Minister is sitting here, so, I would 
request the hon. Finance Minister, also the hon. Prime Minister and the BJP 
Government to introduce reservation for BC s based on the BCs' population in this 
country.   BCs constitute more than 50 pe r cent in this country.  Therefore, the 
reservation has to be given to the BCs base d on the proportion of population.  No 
caste census has been conducted and the last  caste census had been done in 1931 
and since then, no socio-economic or population data on BCs was released.   
The next is about the Women's Reservat ion Bill. The women constitute 50 per 
cent of the population.  The YSR Congress Pa rty, under the leadership of Shri Jagan 
Mohan Reddy Garru, right from day one, sin ce the inception of the party, has been 
demanding reservation for women and as of today, in the State Assemblies, the 
percentage of women is only 8 per cent and i n  L o k  S a b h a ,  i t  i s  1 5  p e r  c e n t .   T h e  
Women's Reservation Bill, therefore, has to  be passed.  We request the Government 
of India, BJP, particularly, to pass the Women's Reservation Bill.  
Madam, even in the yesterday's m eeting--all-party meeting was held 
yesterday--my colleague, my friend from Andhra Pradesh, has vociferously raised the 
issue of arrest of Shri Chandrababu Naidu. Though it is not relevant here, since he 
has raised that issue in the all-party meetin g and he is also going to raise the issue 
again on the floor of this House, I have no ot her option but to address this issue.  Shri 
Chandrababu Naidu has been arrested by the CID of the Andhra Pradesh 
Government on the charges of corruption in a particular case relating to Siemens India 
and there is ample evidence which has been produced to the court and the court has 
remanded him to judicial custody. Now th at arrest has been made and the remand 
has been given by the Judiciary and the pro cess of court proceedin gs has started; it 
is for the court to decide.  ...(Interruptions).... And the court has also observed that 
there is a prima facie case against Shri Chandrababu Naidu and the court will decide 
the matter...(Interruptions).... Madam, it is not only ...(Interruptions).... It is Shri 
Chandrababu Naidu who had ...(Interruptions).... This is the book, Madam. 
...(Interruptions).... This is the book. (Interruptions)... 
 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
97

SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR (Andhra Pradesh) : Madam, this is out 
of context...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: * 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Madam, this is not the ... 
...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: 
* And again, it is not one case or two cases against Shri 
Chandrababu Naidu,...(Interruptions).... there are a number of cases. 
...(Interruptions).... It is his own affidavit. ...(Interruptions)....  (Time-bell rings.) 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR : Madam, this should be 
expunged...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Madam, it is his own affidavit which has been filed before 
the Election Commission ...(Interruptions)....wherein he has 
stated...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR : I s  t h a t  s o  i m p o r t a n t ?   
...(Interruptions).... Madam, it should be expunged from...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : There are nine criminal case s against Shri Chandrababu 
Naidu. ...(Interruptions).... Therefore, when he himself has declared that there are 
criminal cases against 
* ..(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: 
# 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : यह िरकॉडर् मȂ नहीं जाएगा। जो िवजयसाई जी बोल 
रहे हȅ, वही िरकॉडर् मȂ जाएगा । ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : He has been implicated in a criminal conspiracy 
...(Interruptions).... Therefore, he has been impli cated in the corruption case. 
...(Interruptions)....  (Time-bell rings.)  One more point, Madam.  
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
# Not recorded. 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: # 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: * 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : आपकी बात िरकॉडर् मȂ नहीं जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  
* 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : िवजयसाई रेƿी जी, आपका समय पूरा हो गया 
है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: 
* 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : Ǜी समीर उरांव। 
 
Ǜी समीर उरांव ( झारखंड) : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपका बहुत-बहुत आभार िक आपने मुझे 
इस ऐितहािसक िवषय पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया है। महोदया, संसद भवन भारत क े 
वतर्मान और भिवÍय की पिरिÎथितयȗ तथा देश
  की समÎयाओं  पर िंचतन, मनन क े साथ ही शासन 
चलाने क े िलए िवधान िनमार्ण का एक क ेन्दर् रहा है।  वषर् 1927 मȂ बनकर तैयार हुआ संसद भवन 
1947 तक अंगर्ेजȗ की गुलामी मȂ रहा था।  वषर् 1947 से ल े कर आज तक यह संसद भवन आमजन 
क े िलए होने वाली नीित का एक Ģमुख क ेन्दर् बनकर िनरंतर काम कर रहा है।  यह संसद भवन 
देश क े िलए इसिलए भी महत्वपूणर् है, क्यȗिक इस संसद भवन मȂ 2 वषर्, 11 महीने, 18 िदन तक 
संिवधान सभा की बैठकȂ हुईं। तत्पÌचाÞ 1950 म
Ȃ भारत क े संिवधान को इसी भवन मȂ लागू िकया 
गया।  महोदया, संिवधान लागू होने क े पÌचात महामिहम राÍटर्पित, लोक सभा एवं राज्य सभा को 
िमलाकर भारतीय संसद का िनमार्ण िकया गया।  ये तीनȗ ही भारतीय स ंसदीय Ģणाली क े अिभन्न 
अंग बनाए गए।  मुझे गवर् है िक मȅ राज्य सभा क े सदÎय क े रूप  मȂ इस सदन का िहÎसा बना, 
क्यȗिक िपछले 75 वषș मȂ राज्य सभा संसद क े Îथाई सदन क े रूप  मȂ कभी भंग हुए िबना िनरंतर 
देश की िंचताएं करती रही ह
ै।  महोदया, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक पूवर् मȂ सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ ने 
इस सदन की बहुत सारी उपलिÅधयȗ और बहुत सारे अनुभवȗ को बताने का काम िकया है।  मुझे 
लगता है और मȅ जो अनुभव करता हूं िक बहुत सारी ऐसी उपलिÅधयां ह
ुई हȅ, िजनको यहां बहुत 
सारे िवǎान माननीय सदÎयȗ ने अपनी बातȗ को चचार्ओं ǎारा यहां पर रखा, लेिकन क ु छ ऐसी भी 
चीज़Ȃ हुईं, िजनका यह सदन गवाह बना है और बहुत सी गिरमाएं भी खंिडत हुई ह
ȅ।   
महोदया, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक इस सदन ने आपातकाल जैसी िÎथितयȗ को भी देखा है।  
इसी Ģकार से हम देखते हȅ िक यह जो 370 जैसी समÎया थी, अगर उन िदनȗ मȂ यह नहीं रहता, 
                                         
# Not recorded. 
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
99

तो यह जÇमू-कÌमीर अलग नहीं होता।  इन 75 वषș मȂ इस सदन ने इसी Ģकार क े अनेक ऐसे 
उदाहरण पेश िकए हȅ।  मȅ जनजातीय मामले क े िवषय मȂ भी जब िवचार करता हूं और उसे देखता 
हूं, तो मुझे याद आता है िक 1969 मȂ सदन क े एक तत्कालीन माननीय सदÎय Îवगीर्य कािर्तक 
उरांव जी जनजात
ीय िहतȗ क े िलए एक िवशेष िबल लाए थे, वह िबल भी उस समय की क ु छ 
राजनीितक पिरिÎथितयȗ क े कारण इस सदन क े अंदर दफन हो गया।  महोदया, इस Ģकार से 
ऐसे कई उदाहरण हȅ।  म
ȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक बीच क े समय मȂ हमारे इस सदन क े अंदर भी जो 
अच्छे उदाहरण हȅ, जो अच्छी अचीवमȂट्स हȅ, उनके  बारे मȂ मȅ बताना चाहता हूं।  आजाद भारत मȂ 
पहली बार जनजाितयȗ क े िवकास क े िलए तत्कालीन Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜǉेय अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी 
जी ने जनजातीय मामलȗ क े मंतर्ालय की Îथापना की। जनजाितयȗ क े सवार्ंगीण िवकास क े िलए 
कई Ģकार की योजनाएं लाई गईं।  उस समय एकलËय मॉडल रेिजडȂिशयल Îकू ल की Îथापना की 
गई तािक आिदव
ासी बच्चȗ की ठीक से पढ़ाई हो, उनको ज्ञान िमले, वे आगे बढ़Ȃ, अपने पिरवार को 
आगे बढ़ाएं और देश की सेवा मȂ शािमल हȗ।  इसिलए ऐसे महत्वपूणर् एकलËय मॉडल रेिजडȂिशयल 
Îकू ल की Îथापना करके  आिदवासी  बच्चȗ की पढ़ाई क े िलए भी आगे बढ़कर कायर् िकया गया है।  
...(समय की घंटी)... 
 महोदया, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक हमारे यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी 
जी ने देश की आज़ादी की लड़ाई क े िलए लड़ने वाले उन िदनȗ क े आिदवासी अनसंग हीरोज़ क े 
नाम से भी संगर्हालय बनाने का काम िकया और भगवा
न िबरसा मुंडा जी की जयंती, 15 नवÇबर क े 
िदन को 'राÍटर्ीय जनजातीय गौरव िदवस' मनाने का काम Ģारंभ हुआ।  देश की जनजाितयȗ को 
भी सÇमान िमलने का जो काम हुआ है, उसकी गवाह यह संसद रही है। महोदया, मȅ यह बताना 
चाहता हूं िक जनजाित क े लोग जो जंगलȗ मȂ, पहाड़ȗ
 मȂ रहते हȅ, उनके  िलए फॉरेÎट राइट्स ऐक्ट 
क े अंतगर्त CFR का Ģावधान िकया। उनके  िलए सामुदाियक वन संसाधन अिधकार का Ģावधान 
हुआ है। आज जनजाित क े लोग अपने वन क्षेतर्ȗ क
े  अंदर रहकर नॉन िटÇबर फॉरेÎट Ģोǹूस को 
संकिलत करके , अपने िलए वेÊयु एिडशन करते हुए... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģ
भा) : आप समाÃत किरए। 
 
Ǜी समीर उरांव : अपनी आमदनी को बढ़ाने का काम कर रहे हȅ। Ģधान मंतर्ी आिद आदशर् गर्ाम 
िवकास योजना क े माध्यम से जनजाितयȗ क े गांवȗ मȂ सभी Ģकार क े िवकास क े कामȗ क े िलए 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने काम िकया है। इसके  अलावा आिद महोत्सव जैसी योजनाएं बनाकर, हमारी 
जनजाितयȗ क
े  लोकल फॉर वोकल क े तहत जो Îथानीय उत्पाद हȅ, उनको क ै से हम टर्ाइफे ड क े 
माध्यम से बेचकर उनकी आमदनी को बढ़ाएंगे, इस पर काम िकया गया ह ै।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : धन्यवाद, समीर जी। 
 
Ǜी समीर उरांव :  महोदया, कहने क े िलए बहुत है, लेिकन मȅ इतना जरूर  कहना चाहता हूं िक 
यह सदन इन सारी चीज़ȗ का गवाह बना है। कल हम इस सदन से दूसरे नये सदन मȂ जा रहे हȅ, मȅ 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

आशा करता हूं िक नये सदन मȂ भी नये-नये कीिर्तमान Îथािपत हȗगे।  इसी िवÌवास क े साथ, मȅ 
अपनी वाणी को िवराम देता हूं।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा) : Ǜी अÅदुल वहाब।  
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB (Kerala) : Madam, all the praises to the Almighty for giving me 
an opportunity to participate in the last deba te which is happening in this hall of Rajya 
Sabha. On the very firs t day, when this building started in 1952, two of my leaders 
were here, M. Muhammad Isma il Saheb and B. Pocker; they  were in the Constituent 
Assembly also. So, now, our party is al so completing 75 years. On November 16 th, 
we are coming to Delhi to inaugurate our new office. So, this is Am rit Kaal to us also. 
This building is very dear to me also because my leader s came here and they were 
here on the first day of Rajya Sabha and now I am also in Rajya Sabha. So many 
people predicted the future of Indian Union Muslim League. But, in the last 75 years, 
we have proved that we are very much he re and we are looking after the minorities, 
dalits and SCs and STs. We are working h eavily in our area for skill development of 
minorities, dalits and SCs and STs. Thank you very much giving me time.  
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
  
 I think, when Mr. Chairman is coming, I will get some more time. Sir, I have 
started just now. I do not know in between; maybe the transition has come; I started 
my speech just now. I was tellin g for your information that this is a wonderful moment 
for me personally because my leaders came he re on the first day of Rajya Sabha. On 
the last day also, I am here. So , I will be here till the end of  this Session just to say, 
'bye, bye' to Rajya Sabha; 'bye Rajya Sabha'; I will be here. Thank you so much once 
again for giving me the wonderful opportunity; thank you all. We hope the very best in 
the new Rajya Sabha building. 
 
SHRI NARAIN DASS GUPTA (National Capital Territory of Delhi ): Thank you very 
much, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to speak in this Special Session on a very 
important subject. Sir, I would like to say that this Parliament building which is a 
historical landmark has guided India's de stiny before and after Independence. This 
House which was constructed in 1927, was occupied originally by the Imperials 
Legislative Council from 1927 till 15
th August, 1947 and, after that, by the Constituent 
Assembly till 1950. Thereafter, we are o ccupying this. Sir, this Independence was 
achieved after the sacrifice of our forefathers and leaders. 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
101

5.00 P.M. 
 
The Constitution which was drafted in 1950, has given rights to every citizen of the 
country of liberty, free speech, justice and to  promote fraternity among citizens. A lot 
of development has taken place in the last 75 years whether it may be on account of 
agriculture, it may be on account of IT or  it may be on account of power sector or 
industrial sector or the cooperative moveme nt. During this period, this country has 
won war of 1971 of Bangladesh .  This Constitution has prov ided liberty and rights to 
the citizens.  I would like to say that federal system has been provided in the 
Constitution and the powers have been defined between the States and the Centre.  I 
am from the Aam Aadmi Party which came into being ten years back in 2012. Since 
then it has contested three elections in Delhi and every time it has formed the 
Government also.  This is my first tenure. Even my party is represented here in Rajya 
Sabha for the first time. I was nominated by ou r Chief Minister, Shri Arvind Kejriwal.  I 
will sincerely thank him for considering me to be nominated as a Member of this 
House.  Sir, I would like to share that in  2015, when for the first time, our party 
contested and got 67 seats out of 70, the total number of Assembly seats,  which was 
almost 95 per cent, and it was an unprecedente d victory,  but what we have seen is 
that the moment our Government took oath  in February 2015, on May 15, through 
notifications, the powers which were gi ven under the Delhi State Act, were 
withdrawn.  I would say that it is contrary  to the rights what is provided under the 
Constitution. The powers have been de fined both for State and the Central 
Government. Again, there was an election in February 2020 and there was again 
unprecedented victory and Delhi people voted for the Aam Aadmi Party Government. 
Again it has got 86 per cent of the total seat s; out of total 70 seats, it won 62 seats. 
This again, I would say, was unpreceden ted. That was the faith and confidence 
expressed by the citizens of Delhi in the Aam Aadmi Party Government.  But what has 
happened is that in the last Session, we have seen that, first through an Ordinance, 
the powers which were given under the Delh i State Act were withdrawn, and later a 
Bill was introduced here and passed. This is  totally against the federal system of the 
country.  I think this is contrary to what is provided in the Constitution.  I would like to 
say here that this type of attitude, this type of system has b een prevailing here. We 
should go according to what is provided unde r the Articles of th e Constitution. Even 
there was an amendment to Articles also be sides the Delhi State Act. This is against 
the federal system, cooperative system of what is defined in the Constitution. About 
this Parliament building, I would like to say that this is a historical building and my 
earlier speakers have told about it. It has guided India's destiny before and after 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

Independence. This is because of the Cons titution and the provisions which have 
been laid down by the framers of this  Constitution, and the architect of the 
Constitution, Dr. Ambedkar. We are going to  the new building.  We should go there 
with a new thought and confidence. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: New positive thoughts. 
 
SHRI NARAIN DASS GUPTA : We should go there with a positive thought and the 
things which have taken place in the past, we should try to avoid them. With this, I 
thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Prakash Javadekar; not present. Dr. M. Thambidurai; not 
present.  Shri Vivek Tankha. You have to speak from your seat; you are not on your 
seat. 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA (Madhya Pradesh):  Sir, actually I had given up the hope.  
That is why I was sitting with Mr. Sibal.  I am going to be very, very brief. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Why should a distinguished lawyer like you give up hope? 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA: It is a question of time. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Do you wait till the judgment is pronounced?  You are in a very 
sound company of Kapil Sibalji.  So, you cannot give up hope!   
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA :  Anyway, Sir, what I am going to say today is, six hours is 
too short a time for a history of 75 years.  The history starts with the Constituent 
Assembly sitting and deliberating over a document which was one of the most well 
drafted documents at that period of time, an d it continues to be so even today.  Our 
Constitution, I would say, is amongst the be st in the world.  The UK did not have a 
Constitution; the American Constitution is a very short constitution. So, this 
Constitution served us so well.  That is why I say that the Parliament is the voice of the 
people which expresses through the Constitution and the Supreme Court is the voice 
of law.  Now, one good point is that roughly 105 Constitution Amendments have 
happened but in this history of 105 Cons titution Amendments, only one Amendment 
has been struck down fully and that is the NJAC.  Six or seven Amendments were 
partially struck down or clarified.  So, the test of law has also been good for the 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
103

purposes of testing the Constitution Amendments.  Another thing I would like to say is 
that it is very, very good to  see a lot of lawyers in the Parliament because if you see 
even at the time of drafting.... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Vivekji, there are very distinguishe d lawyers here.  They contribute 
from outside.  On the floor of the House, I have analysed that their contribution is 
either by absence or silence.  This is a very  painful scenario and I have no difficulty in 
saying because we have distinguished legal luminaries like Mr. Kapil Sibal here.  Mr. 
Kapil Sibal knows it. On Mondays and Fridays, this House is not your priority.  
Therefore, I would particularly appeal to th e fraternity, to which I belonged, to please 
introspect and reflect. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Dr. Singhvi is not here.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  There are regional considerations .  Secondly, there is so much 
legal talent in the House of a global re pute which can enlighten the Supreme Court 
also as to what are the jurisdictional limits in separation of powers  doctrine.  The fact 
is that distinguished senior advocates are performing outside on television channels. 
Coming to Dr. Singhvi, he was on a te levision channel, Kapilji, talking about 
parliamentary working.  I immediately sent to the other person the contributions of the 
gentleman for the past ten months; now it is nearly a year. What has he done?  
Therefore, when a message came to me that Mr. Kapil Sibal wants to make a 
contribution, obviously, I should have not taken a second and belie ving in the system 
as I do and you know, precedence could have been given.  I told my assistant and he 
looked at me with surprise!  I said, 'Let Mr. Kapil Sibal sit for some time.  His 
presence here physically will send a good si gnal and that applies to you also, Mr. 
Tankha.' Otherwise, make a speech an d walk away! I am so sorry but I am 
expressing out my heart. 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA : Let me share, in these 75 years of glorious history, 
everybody – lawyers and non- lawyers – has contributed in a very beautiful way.  
Look, all your laws, as I said, have been up held by the Supreme Court.  Sir, out of 
105 Amendments to the Constitution, only one was struck down fully i.e., NJAC. But, 
on NJAC, the Supreme Court has its own views. So, I would not call it a true struck 
down. 
 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: But, one thing Mr. Tankha, and le t me reveal my mind.  You are a 
Member of this House.  Everyone here passed that Bill, with only one abstention. The 
Lok Sabha passed it unanimously.  What ha s happened to that?  Did this august 
House ever concern itself with what th ey have done?  How can you countenance a 
scenario like this?  It is the prime obligatio n of everyone in this House that if this 
House has sanctified, and by majority with only one abstention, with total unanimity in 
the Lok Sabha and 16 State Assemblies endo rsing it, my very distinguished legal 
luminaries have to be on front-foot.  I aw ait what Kapil Sibalji would say.  Go ahead, 
Vivekji. Your name signifies everything that you have. 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA: Sir, let me try and complete my speech.  
 Now, I am taking the hon. Chairman an d the House to another aspect.  I felt 
that there are three big issues which need your kind attention and the attention of this 
House.  One is working days.  A good Parlia ment has, at least, 100 working days.  
Sir, UK has about 100 working days.  But, it should be 100 plus days. Our working 
days have been abysmally low and getting lower and lower by the year.  I can never 
be a votary of disruption, because I believe in debate. But, my point is this.  I am 
making three suggestions.  In the UK, ther e is a tradition and law, which has now 
been given the shape of a rule, that 20 da ys out of 100 days are allotted to the 
Opposition to make agenda.  It means, if I have 20 days, out of 100 days, I cannot 
blame the ruling party.  If I want a certai n agenda to be discussed, it has to be 
discussed.  Out of those 20 days, 17 days are given to the largest party – We have 
many parties here – and 3 days are given to  the second largest party.  Maybe, we 
could think of this.  It may stop or reduce disruptions, because if opposition parties 
have the authority or right to also set agenda of the day, they will bring topic which 
they wanted to discuss.  Otherwise, the ruling party may not find it compatible.   
 Secondly, Sir, there should be a rule that if 10-20 per cent of MPs want a 
motion to be discussed, it should be accepted.  Otherwise, it is very demeaning thing 
that 20 Members giving it in writing and we  are not getting discussion!  What do we 
want, ultimately?It is only discussion! So , I feel, it needs a review if certain 
percentage of MPs  make a request, whet her it should be accepted or not accepted. 
But, I think, it should be accepted. 
 Thirdly, Special Session of Parlia ment can only be summoned by the 
Government!  That is the law in this count ry. But, now, a lot of jurists have been 
saying – it may get adopted in the Europe  very soon – that if 25-35 per cent of MPs 
want a special session of Parliament, for a special reason, it can get summoned.  
What I am trying to say is this.  As we move to the new building, let us go with new 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
105

thoughts. Let us find new ways of dealing with problems that are going to face and 
confront us very soon.  It cannot be a system  where only the Government decides.  It 
should also not be a system where we only disrupt.  It should be a system where we 
can also decide, they can also decide an d we can all try and work together. Thank 
you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi. 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी (महाराÍटर्): सर, 75 साल की पािर्लयामȂटरी डेमोकर्े सी...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Very briefly. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI  :  Sir, I will be very brief,  िसफ र् दो िमनट।  अब 
आदत पड़ गई है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  You are right.  Repeated walk-outs का मतलब यह हुआ है िक िडबेट 
करने की आदत नहीं है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका
 चतुवȃदी : सर, मȅ िडबेट करती हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... बहुत सारी िडबेट्स करती हूँ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  I am feeling it from both sides. …(Interruptions).. 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी  : सर, पािर्लयामȂट मȂ िडबेट करने का मौका नहीं िमलता है।  मȅ िडबेट 
करती हूँ, मुझे पािर्लयामȂट क े बाहर िडबेट करने का मौका जरूर  िमलता है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Go ahead. 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी ( महाराÍटर्) : सर, मुझे पािर्लयामȂटरी डेमोकर्े सी क े 75 साल की जनीर् क े 
बारे मȂ चचार् करने का सौभाग्य िमला है।  मȅ यह मानती हूँ िक हमारे संिवधान को बनाने मȂ िजन्हȗने 
योगदान िदया ह
ै, उन्हȗने मुझे इतना सपना देखने का मौका जरूर  िदया है िक मȅ कभी 
पािर्लयामȂटरी डेमोकर्े सी का िहÎसा बनने का सपना देख सकूँ  और उस सपने को पूरा भी कर सकूँ ।  
मेरी पाटीर् ने मुझे यह मौका िदया है। 
 सर, यहाँ मेरी जनीर् तीन साल की रही है।  इन तीन सालȗ
 मȂ चाहे वह सȂटर्ल हॉल हो, 
इÇपॉटȄट िडÎकशंस मȂ चचार् हो या महात्मा गांधी जी की Ģितमा क े पास समय िबताने का म ुझे मौका 
िमला हो - एक पूरे सेशन मȂ मȅने वहाँ काफी घंटे िबताये थे।  यह राज्य सभा है, काउंिसल ऑफ 
Îटेट्स है और इस समुदर् मȂ मȅ तो एक ितनका हूँ।   चूँिक यह काउंिसल ऑफ Îटेट्स है, इन तीन 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

सालȗ मȂ मȅने यह भी देखा िक िकस तरीके  से महाराÍटर् मȂ सरकार को िगराया गया, पािर्टयȗ को 
तोड़ा गया और अब दो साल होने को आ गये हȅ - हम जो लोकल गवनर्मȂट्स की बहुत सारी बातȂ 
करते हȅ, उन लोकल गवनर्मȂट्स क े  चुनाव भी नहीं हो रहे हȅ।  बाई-इलेक्शंस आ जाते हȅ, लेिकन 
बाई-इलेक्शंस का भी नोिटिफके शन महाराÍटर् को लेकर नहीं आता है, तो यह एक सȂस ऑफ 
क ंसनर् है।   
हम नयी पािर्लयामȂट मȂ जा रहे हȅ।  जब हम 75 साल  की बात करते हȅ, तो हर िडके ड म Ȃ 
हमने ऐितहािसक िबल पास िकये हȅ, ऐितहािसक कानून बनाये हȅ।  एक कानून, िजसकी मȅ उÇमीद 
कर रही थी िक हम उसे यहाँ से पास करके  नयी पािर्लयामȂट की शुरुआत  करȂगे, वह है - 
मिहलाओं क े अिधकारȗ से सÇबिन्धत िबल की बात, उनको 33 परसȂट िरजवȃशन देने वाले िबल की 
बात। मȅ उÇमीद करती हूँ िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : 
िĢयंका जी, नाउÇमीद मत होइए, सब क ु छ मुमिकन है।  वह होकर रहेगा। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका
 चतुवȃदी : सर, वही तो मȅ कह रही हूँ िक मुमिकन है, परन्तु अगर यह यहाँ से 
मुमिकन होता, तो इस पािर्लयामȂट की शान और ज्यादा बढ़ती।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Go ahead. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयं
का चतुवȃदी :  नहीं, नहीं।  ' इंिडया' है, तो मुमिकन है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅ बस 
यही कहना चाहूंगी िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One second.  I got a letter from a boy of 13 years.   He wrote to me, 
"Sir, I.N.D.I.A., I dot, N dot… ., how can it be India? …( Interruptions)..  You reflect 
on that. 
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी :  सर, इसको इंिडया बोल लीिजए, भारत बोल लीिजए, िहन्दुÎतान बोल 
लीिजए, इसकी ड
ेमोकर्े सी का जो एसȂस है, उसको मत तोिड़ए, मȅ बस यही कहना चाह रही हूँ।   
 सर, पािर्लयामȂट क े इस सेशन मȂ मुझे इसकी उÇमीद है िक चूँिक यह एक Îपेशल सेशन है, 
इसिलए मिहलाओं क े अिधकारȗ से सÇबिन्धत िबल क े ऊपर समय पर चचार् होगी और उस िबल को 
पास िकया जाएगा।  यह भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े म
ैिनफे Îटो मȂ भी रहा है और हम सब िवपक्ष मȂ 
बार-बार यही कहते रहते हȅ िक अगर इस िबल पर चचार् होगी और इस पर हमारा समथर्न चािहए, 
तो हम सब िम
ल कर इसका समथर्न करȂगे...(समय की घंटी)... और ऐितहािसक Îपेशल सेशन 
मनाएँगे, जो खुद Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने कहा है।  आपका बहुत-बहुत आभार, धन्यवाद। 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी ( उǄर Ģदेश) :  माननीय सभापित
 महोदय, आज हम सब लोग इस संसद मȂ 
इस देश क े लोकतंतर् क े 75 वष र् पूरे होने पर चचार् करने क े िलए एकितर्त हुए हȅ।  जब हम 75 वष र् 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
107

की इस यातर्ा का िंसहावलोकन करते हȅ, तो Îवतंतर्ता से लेकर आज तक क े सभी बड़े िनणर्य और 
बड़ी घटनाएँ बरबस हमारी आँखȗ क े सामने आ जाती हȅ।   यिद हम Îवतंतर्ता से ĢारÇभ करȂ, तो मȅ 
याद िदलाना चाहता हूँ िक महिर्ष अरिंबदो ने यह कहा था िक जो Îथान इस शरीर मȂ आत्मा का है, 
वही Îथान भारत का पूरे िवÌव मȂ है। 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी नारायण दास ग
ुǔा) पीठासीन हुए।] 
  
अथार्Þ, आज से 75 वषर् पूवर् िसफर् भारत ही Îवतंतर् नहीं हुआ था, बिÊक प ूरे िवÌव की मानवता की 
सोई हुई आत्मा जीवन्त हुई थी और भारत की वह जीवन्तता िकस रूप  मȂ आती थी, यानी हम क्या 
थे -  2,000 वषर् से अिधक क े आकर्मण, 800 वषर् से अिधक की गुलामी और उसके  बाद हमने 
Îवतंतर्ता का सवेरा देखा। तो हमȂ समझना चािहए िक यह वह द
ेश था, िजसके  बारे मȂ Ǜी अरिंबदो 
ने ऐसे ही नहीं कहा था।  इसके  िलए शाÎतर्ȗ मȂ कहा गया है : 
   
"गायिन्त देवा: िकल गीतकािन धन्याÎतु ते भारत भूिमभागे। 
Îवगार्पवगार्Îपदमागर्भूते भविन्त भूय: पुरुषा : सुरत्वाÞ।।" 
 
अथार्Þ वह भारत भूिम धन्
य है, देवता िजसकी Îतुित मȂ गीत गाते हȅ। जो Îवगर् क े समÎत पदȗ पर 
रहने क े बाद यहाँ मनुÍय क े रूप  मȂ जन्म लेने को लालाियत रहते हȅ। आप इसको समिझए। चूँिक 
मोक्ष भूिम यही है और यहीं से मोक्ष िमलता था। हम उस देश क े Ģतीक थे, िजसने आज़ादी की वह 
पहली िकरण देखी। म
ȅ मानता हूँ िक लोकमान्य ितलक का ' पूण र् Îवराज्य' का उǇोष, महात्मा 
गाँधी का ' िहन्द Îवराज', सुभाष चन्दर् बोस जी की सैन्य शिƪ और बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर की 
लेखनी की शिƪ - ये सब क े सब कहीं न कहीं इसी िवचार से Ģेिरत थे। जब इस देश ने तत्कालीन 
Ģधान मंतर्ी पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी क
े  नेतृत्व मȂ आधी रात को िनयित क े साथ अपना पहला 
िमलन देखा, तब हमȂ उसकी एक बड़ी कीमत भी चुकानी पड़ी थी। सेक ं ड वÊडर् वार क े बाद क े दौर 
मȂ दुिनया क े कई देश तबाह भी हुए, िडवाइ
ड भी हुए। कोिरया िडवाइड हुआ था, जमर्नी िडवाइड 
हुआ था, जापान तबाह हुआ था, इजराइल ने holocaust क े बाद एक नया अिÎतत्व पाया था, चीन 
मȂ बड़ा पिरवतर्न आया था, परंतु हम कह सकते हȅ िक हमने भी उस आज़ादी की बहुत बड़ी कीमत 
चुकाई थी, िजसमȂ लाखȗ लोगȗ ने अपने Ģाण गँवाए थे और डेढ़ से दो करोड़ लोग बेघरबार होकर 
इधर से उधर
 गए थे, which is the biggest exodus in the documented history of mankind. 
जब इतनी बड़ी कीमत चुका कर हमȂ आज़ादी िमली, तो
 हमȂ उसके  मूÊय को समझना चािहए। हाँ, 
ये सारे देश जो हमारे साथ आज़ाद हुए थे, ये एक दौर मȂ बहुत तेजी से आगे हुए थे, पर हम कह 
सकते हȅ िक आज मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हम उस पंिƪ मȂ आकर खड़े हुए हȅ, जब उन सारे देशȗ क े 
साथ भारत की गणना अगर्णी देशȗ मȂ होती है। अभी हमारे Ģितपक्ष क े सदÎय मनोज झा जी ने 
उÊलेख िकया था िक उनको आज समाज मȂ उतनी कटु ता
 िदखाई पड़ती है, िजतनी िवभाजन क े 
समय भी नहीं थी। मान्यवर, मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक िवभाजन क े समय कटु ता की बात नहीं, बिÊक 
दृढ़ता की कमी थी। जो दृढ़ता आज है, अगर यह उस समय होती , तो शायद िवभाजन का िवधान 
ही पास नहीं होता।  
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

"यिद देश िवभाजन का Îवीकार िवधान नहीं होता, 
तो भारत माँ का अंचल पािकÎतान नहीं होता।" 
 
अब मȅ 75 वषर् क े इस कालखंड को तीन कालखंड मȂ िवभािजत करना चाहूँगा। पहले 25 वषर्, 1947 
से 1972; दूसरे 25 वषर्, 1972 से 1997 और तीसरे 25 वषर्, 1998 से आज का समय।  पहले 25 वषर् 
क े बारे मȂ हमारे नेता Ģितपक्ष, माननीय खरगे जी ने कहा िक दुिनया को इस बात को लेकर संदेह 
था िक भारत मȂ लोकतंतर् रह पाएगा या नहीं। मȅ उनकी बात का समथर्न करता हूँ, क्यȗिक उस 
समय भारत की डेमोकर्सी क े बारे मȂ यिद यह कहा जाए िक वह embryonic stage मȂ थी, यानी 
गभार्वÎथा मȂ थी, तो यह अितश
योिƪ नहीं होगी। यानी, लोगȗ को यह शक था िक यह लोकतंतर् 
रहेगा, उठ पाएगा या नहीं। मगर क्या आप यह जानते हȅ िक इस Ģकार का शक िकसको था? इस 
Ģकार का शक क ेवल उन्हीं को था, िजन्हȂ भारत की परंपरा और भारत की ËयवÎथा क े बारे मȂ पता 
नहीं था। उस गभार्वÎथा क े संÎकार हजारȗ वषș से बहुत Ģबल थे। मȅ यहाँ पर क्वोट करना चाहता 
हूँ
। बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने 28 अक्टूबर, 1951 को कहा िक डेमोकर्सी आज भले ही हमारे िलए नई 
िदखाई पड़ती हो, परंतु हमारा बहुत गहरा Ģभाव है। उन्हȗने कहा िक महापिरिनवार्ण सूƪ मȂ यह 
िलखा है िक जब भगवान बुǉ का महापिरिनवार्ण हो रहा था, तब उन्हȗने कहा िक जहाँ पर सभा 
बैठी हुई है, वह वहाँ पर अपनी कारर्वाई पूरी करे और उसके  उपरांत ही
 लोग यहाँ पर आएँ, अथार्Þ 
ËयवÎथा क े तहत बैठ कर लोकतांितर्क िनणर्य िकस Ģकार स े होते थे, उन्हȗने इस िवषय को 
रेखांिकत िकया था। सदन क े नेता, पीयूष गोयल जी ने इस बात का उÊलेख िकया था िक वैिदक 
काल मȂ भी 'सभा' और 'सिमित' शÅद थे।  Ģितपक्ष क े कई लोगȗ ने बोला िक चोल साĦाज्य मȂ गाँवȗ 
मȂ सिमितयȗ का चयन वोट क े ǎारा होता था। 12वीं शताÅदी मȂ भगवा
न बसवन्ना क े 'अनुभव मंडप:' 
मȂ बैठ कर िनणर्य होता था। वैशाली का वह गणराज्य, िजसे दुिनया का पहला गणराज्य कहा जाता 
है। हमारी बहुत िवराट परंपरा थी। इसीिलए िसफर् उनको संदेह था, जो भारत को भारत की दृिÍट 
से नहीं समझ पा रहे थे। जो भारत
 को भारत की दृिÍट से समझ पा रहे थे, उन्हȂ पूरा यकीन था। 
माननीय Ģधान म
ंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक India is the mother of democracy, मगर मȅ क ु छ आगे 
जोड़ना चाहता हूँ। लोग यह मानते हȅ िक हमारे यहाँ िसफर् political democracy थी, ऐसा नहीं था। 
मȅ उदाहरण देना चाहता हूँ। दुिनया मȂ िजतनी भी सÆयताएँ और देश थे, उनमȂ कहीं भी धािर्मक 
िवषय पर, religious िवषय क े ऊपर डेमोकर्सी का कोई उÊलेख नहीं है, कोई िडÎकशन नहीं हो 
सकता। जो कहा गया है, िसफर् उसे स
ुन लीिजए, इसके  अलावा िडÎकशन का कोई उÊलेख नहीं 
है, परंतु हमारे यहाँ यह होता था। व
ैिदक काल मȂ शाÎतर्ाथर् होता था। एक ही धमर् गर्ंथ क े एक िहÎसे 
को लेकर एक ǎैत का मत है, एक अǎैत का मत है और एक िविशÍटाǎैत का मत है। जो "कÎमै 
देवाय हिवषा िवधेम" कहा गया है, इसका मतलब है - ĢÌन और उसके  बाद िनणर्य। म
ȅ कह 
सकता हूँ िक India is not just the mother of  political democracy, but also the 
fountainhead of religious and spiritual democr acy, which is not found anywhere in the 
world. मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक हमारे संिवधान िनमार्ताओं ने इस भाव को भली-भांित समझा, 
परंतु जब डेमोकर्े सी 25 वषर् क े अपने Ģारंिभक कालखंड मȂ थी, यिद उस समय क
े  बारे मȂ िवचार 
िकया जाए, तो कहा जाता है िक सǄापक्ष क े बहुत से लोगȗ ने बड़ा योगदान िदया, तो मȅ भी यह 
याद िदलाना चाहता हूँ िक हमने क्या योगदान िद
या। देश क े सामने जब भी चुनौती आई, तब हमने 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
109

कभी इस बात की िंचता नहीं की िक हम Ģितपक्ष मȂ हȅ या हमारे साथ क्या हुआ है। 1962 मȂ चाइना 
से वॉर हुआ, तब हमने भारतीय जनसंघ क े रूप  मȂ तत्कालीन Ģधान मंतर्ी, पंिडत नेहरू  जी का 
सहयोग और समथर्न िकया। जनसंघ ही नहीं, बिÊक राÍटर्ीय Îवयंसेवक स ंघ ने इतना सहयोग 
िकया िक नेहरू  जी ने उनकी भूिर-भूिर Ģशंसा की और उन्हȂ 26 जनवरी, 1963 की गणतंतर् िदवस 
परेड मȂ बुलाया। 1965 क े वॉर मȂ लालबहादुर शाÎतर्ी जी का िजस Ģकार से सहयोग िकया, वह पूरे 
तरीके  से ऑन िरकॉडर् है िक उन्हȗने ऑल पाटीर् मीिंटग मȂ जनसंघ क े अध्यक्ष को ही नहीं, बिÊक 
गुरू  गोलवलकर जी को भी ब
ुलाया था। इन पहले 25 वषș से आगे बढ़ते हुए जब हम 1972 क े पास 
पहुँच
े, तो आप सभी यह बड़े गवर् से कहते हȅ िक 1971 क े वॉर क े समय अटल जी ने इिन्दरा जी की 
भूिर-भूिर Ģशंसा की थी। यह होता है - लोकतंतर् को मजबूत रखने क े िलए िवपक्ष क े रूप  म Ȃ एक 
सकारात्मक भूिमका िनभाना। हमने उस Ģारंिभक अवÎथा मȂ यह क ै से िकया था! वैसे मȅ भी बता दूँ 
िक अटल जी ने वह नहीं बोला, जो बहुत ज्यादा बोला जाता है। इिन्दरा जी की ऑिफिशयल 
जीवनी पुपुल जयकर जी ने िलखी थी और उन्हȗने इसे बहुत खोजा भी था, मगर जो कहा जाता 
है, वह बात नहीं िमली थी। हालांिक यह ईमानदारी की बात है िक Ģशंसा की गई थी और इसके  
ǎारा देश बढ़ता हुआ आगे तक पहुँचा। मȅ कह सकता  हूँ िक हमने पहले कालखंड मȂ िवपक्ष क े रूप  
मȂ डेमोकर्े सी को मजबूत करने मȂ महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभाई। अब अगला कालखंड आता है - 1972 
ट ू 1997. इसके  िलए मȅ कह सकता हूँ िक this is the nascent stage of democracy, क्यȗिक 
पहले कालखंड क े 25 वषș मȂ चुनाव तो होते थे, लेिकन सरकार नहीं बदलती थी और सरकार नहीं 
बदलती थी, तो लोकतंतर् का दूसरा Îवरूप नहीं आता था। अब 1972 से 1997 वाल े काल
खंड मȂ 
सरकारȂ बदलनी शुरू  हुईं। लोकतंतर् ने इमरजȂसी का वह काला अध्याय देखा, जो िक बहुत 
ददर्नाक
 और दुखद था, परंतु आज क े इस अवसर पर मȅ उसकी िडटेल मȂ न जाते हुए, िसफर् 
इतना ही कहना चाहूँगा िक भारत का लोकतंतर् इतना जीवंत था िक हम लोगȗ ने जे.पी. क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ वह आंदोलन खड़ा िकया और चाहे िजतनी भी दमनकारी शिƪयाँ थीं, अ
ंतत: 1977 मȂ क Ȃ दर् मȂ 
पहली बार सǄा पिरवतर्न हुआ और बदलाव आया। मȅ एक बात और याद िदलाना चाहता ह ूँ िक 
सभी लोगȗ को िमलाकर एक गठबंधन बना था, मगर वह गठबंधन 1979 मȂ ही क ु छ छल, क ु छ 
Ģपंच, क ु छ अहमन्यता मȂ िबखर गया था। मȅ याद िदलाना चाहता हूँ िक इस संसद ने वह समय भी 
देखा है, जब 24 िदन की सरकार बनी थी, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी सदन मȂ नहीं आए थे। उस समय अटल 
जी ने दुखी होकर एक किवता िलखी थी। आप सब लोगȗ ने 'गीत नया गाता हूँ' तो स
ुना होगा, पर 
उन्हȗने िलखा था, 'गीत नहीं गाता हूँ'। उन्हȗने उस समय की घटना से दुखी होकर िलखा था -  
 
"लगी क ु छ ऐसी नजर, 
िबखरा शीशे सा शहर, 
अपनȗ क े मेले मȂ मीत नहीं पाता हूँ। 
गीत नहीं गाता हूँ।" 
 
 महोदय, आज भी मेला कई बार लग चुका है। पटना, बȂगलुरु  स
े लेकर मुंबई तक क े मेले मȂ 
कौन िकसका मीत है, यह तो शायद अंदर बैठने वालȗ को ही पता होगा िक उन्हȂ मीत िमल पा रहा 
है या
 नहीं। मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक हमȂ अटल जी की यह बात आज भी एकदम उिचत और उपयुƪ 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

नजर आती है। इसके  बाद उस कालखंड मȂ 1980 का दशक आया और इस देश ने एक ऐसा दौर 
भी देखा, जब 1980 मȂ Ǜीमती इिन्दरा गाँधी जी की सǄा मȂ वापसी हुई। हमारे नेता Ģितपक्ष और 
कई लोग कहते थे िक सरकारȗ को हटाया गया। िवपक्ष की तम ाम सरकारȂ क ेवल इस आधार पर 
बरखाÎत कर दी गईं िक क Ȃ दर् मȂ आपकी पाटीर् चुनाव हार गई है, तो आपके  पास राज्यȗ मȂ भी 
शासन करने का अिधकार नहीं रह गया है। मुझे लगता है िक इस आधार पर सरकार क Ȃ दर् मȂ आई 
और उसने िवपक्ष की सारी सरकारȗ को एक झटके  मȂ बरखाÎत कर िदया। यह भी लोकतंतर् क
े  
िलए एक चुनौती का दौर था। 80 क े दशक मȂ हम लोगȗ ने दो सबसे शिƪशाली सरकारȂ देखीं। 
हमने Ǜीमती इंिदरा गांधी जी की दो ितहाई बहुमत की सरकार और राजीव गांधी जी की 80 
Ģितशत बहुमत की सरकार देखी, मगर इसी समय मȂ द
ेश ने बहुत बड़ी चुनौितयां भी देखीं। यह भी 
एक िवडÇबना थी िक सबसे शिƪशाली बहुमत की सरकारȗ क े दौर मȂ देश ने आतंकवाद भी सबसे 
भयानक रूप  मȂ उठता हुआ देखा। िफर एक दौर आया, जब 1980 क े दशक का अंत हुआ। उस 
समय राÍटर्वाद एक
 नए Îवरूप मȂ उभरा। भारत क े समाज मȂ भी पिरवतर्न आया, सामािजक न्याय 
एक नए Îवरूप मȂ उभरा। Ǜी राम जन्म भूिम का आंदोलन उभरा और इस देश की पॉिलिटक्स 
uni-polar से bi-polar हुई, जब 1991 मȂ हम लोग 120 सीटȗ क े साथ मुख्य िवपक्षी दल बने। उसी 
समय अथर्ËयवÎथा का भी पुराना ढांचा ट ूटा, जो Nehruvian model था। उस समय डा. मनमोहन 
िंसह जी फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर थे और Ǜी पी.वी. नरिसÇहा राव जी Ģधान मंतर्ी थे, उन्हȗने उसको 
समाÃत िकया। मȅ उस सम
य Îटू डȂट था, मुझे याद है िक उस खुली अथर्ËयवÎथा क े ऊपर भाषण देते 
हुए सदन मȂ अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने बड़े च
ुटीले अंदाज़ मȂ एक बात कही थी। उन्हȗने कहा था 
िक अथर्ËयवÎथा क े दरवाज़े खोल िदए गए हȅ, कह िदया गया है िक अब खुली अथर्ËयवÎथा आ गई 
है। मगर उन्हȗने कहा, "महोदय, िज
तने दरवाज़े आगे क े खोले गए हȅ, उतने ही पीछे क े दरवाज़े 
भी खोल िदए गए हȅ।" िफर उन्हȗने कहा िक "क ु छ तो ऐसे भी हȅ, जो पीछे क े दरवाज़े ही नहीं, 
बिÊक रोशनदान स
े भी अंदर आने क े िलए दरवाज़े खोल िदए गए हȅ।" इस Ģकार से उन्हȗने उस 
खुली अथर्ËयवÎथा का समथर्न और उसकी िवदर्ूपता क े ऊपर एक अटैक करने का भी कायर् िकया। 
िफर इस देश ने वह दौर भी देखा, जब 13 िदन  की सरकार बनी। उस 13 िदन  की सरकार ने 
संसद क े इितहास मȂ मील का पत्थर Îथािपत कर िदया, जब हमने संसद की कायर्वाही का सीधा 
Ģसारण उस 13 िदन की सरकार मȂ ĢारÇभ िकया। लोकतंतर् मȂ पारदिर्शता और संसदीय कायर् की 
पारदिर्शता मȂ हमने 1996 मȂ उस 13 िदन की सरकार मȂ एक मील का पत्थर Îथािपत िकया। िफर 
1997 मȂ, क्यȗिक अब हम उǄरोǄर शिƪशाली होते जा रहे थे, तो सब िमलकर हमारे िखलाफ 
एकजुट थे। इस संसद ने वह दृÌय भी देखा िक सामान्यत: सरकार मȂ एक दल होता है और बाकी 
सब दल िवपक्ष मȂ होते हȅ। इस 50वȂ साल मȂ हमने वह दृÌय देखा िक िवपक्ष मȂ एक दल था और 
बाकी सारे दल सरकार मȂ थे, सरकार क े साथ थे। वे सरकार क े अंदर थे या सरकार क े बाहर थे। 
आप सबको ध्यान होगा, Ģमोद महाजन जी ने बोला था िक जब वे िवदेश मȂ गए, तो चाइना म
Ȃ 
उनका पिरचय हुआ िक साहब, हम सबसे बड़े दल हȅ और हम सरकार से बाहर हȅ, हम िवपक्षी दल 
हȅ। िफर, उन्हȗने कांगर्ेस क े सदÎय का पिरचय कराया िक ये दूसरे सबसे बड़े दल हȅ, मगर ये 
सरकार मȂ नहीं हȅ, समथर्न कर रहे हȅ। िफर, उन्हȗने तीसरे Ëयिƪ का पिरचय कराया और कहा िक 
साहब, ये सरकार क े साथ हȅ, मगर मंतर्ी नहीं हȅ, सरकार मȂ नहीं हȅ। िफर उन्हȗने रमाकांत खलप 
जी क े बारे मȂ कहा िक ये अपने दल क े एकमातर् सांसद हȅ और ये सरकार हȅ। मेरे िवचार से संसद 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
111

का यह Îवरूप भी उस समय हमने देखा। वैसे, इस अवसर क े ऊपर मȅ कोई चुभती बात नहीं करना 
चाहता, पर यह भी याद है िक वषर् 1997 मȂ गुजराल जी की सरकार िकस मामले पर गई थी। जैन 
कमीशन की िरपोटर्, Îवगीर्य राजीव गांधी जी की दुखद हत्या और उसको लेकर क ु छ लोगȗ की 
पािर्टयȗ क े नेताओं क े साथ सÇबन्ध को लेकर यूनाइटेड ģन्ट की सरकार िगराई गई थी और कहा 
गया था िक यह सरकार नहीं चल सकती, यिद डीएमके  क े साथी समथर्न वापस नहीं लेते। परंतु 
कोई बात नहीं, आज 25 साल क े बाद राजीव गांधी जी क े Ģित Ǜǉा का ज्वार गठबंधन क े खुमार 
मȂ कहीं दब गया है, इसिलए
 अब पिरिÎथित िभन्न है।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
  
अब मȅ इस कालखंड पर आता हूं। वषर् 1998 से लेकर वषर् 2023 तक  क े इस तीसरे कालखंड की 
शुरुआत  पोखरण क े िवÎफोट क े साथ हुई। तब भारत
 की शिƪ का उदय हुआ। मȅ एक और अंतर 
ÎपÍट कर दूं। वषर् 1974 मȂ भी इंिदरा गांधी जी ने परमाणु िवÎफोट िकया था और 1998 म Ȃ भी िकया 
गया था, इन दोनȗ मȂ फ ंडामȂटल िडफरȂस यह था िक 1974 मȂ हमारी घोषणा करने से पहले 
सोिवयत यूिनयन और अमेिरका, दोनȗ ने घोिषत कर िदया था िक भारत ने ट ैÎट िकया है। परंतु 
जब हमने वषर् 1998 मȂ िकया, जब अटल जी ने Ģेस कॉन्ģȂ स करके  कहा था, तब तक अमेिरका को 
भी नहीं पता था िक परमाणु िवÎफोट हो गया है। दूसरा यह िक वषर् 1998 मȂ हमने 5 एक्सÃलोज़ंस 
िकए थे, िजनमȂ हाइडर्ोजन बम स
े लेकर सब-िकलोटन तक क े थे और अंतर यह था िक वषर् 1974 
मȂ हमने कहा था िक हमने यह शांितपूणर् पपर्ज़ क े िलए िकया है, वषर् 1998 मȂ हमने कहा, Now, 
we are the nuclear State और हमने अपने को न्यूिक्लयर Îटेट िडक्लेयर िकया था। िफर, इसी 
सदन मȂ एक और चीज़ हुई। सभापित महोदय, कभी-कभी क्या होता है िक technicality and 
morality क े बीच की धारा बहुत छोटी होती ह
ै।  अĢैल, 1999 मȂ एक वोट से सरकार िगरी थी।  वह 
एक वोट िकसका था?  
उस समय Ǜी िगिरधर गमांग, जो िक ओिडशा क े मुख्य मंतर्ी बन चुक े थे, 
टेक्नीकली वे वोट कर सकते थे, पर मȅने कहा िक technicality and morality क े बीच की जो 
धारा होती है, वह बहुत हÊकी होती है।  खैर, कोई बात नहीं, एक वोट से सरकार िगरी, परंत
ु 
उसके  बाद पुन: हम लोग सǄा मȂ आए।  उसके  बाद 2004 का दौर आया।  वषर् 2004 मȂ हम सात 
सीटȗ क े अंतर से चूक गए, लेिकन उस दौर मȂ भी, जब डा. मनमोहन िंसह जी Ģधान मंतर्ी बने, तो  
मȅ एक बात कहना चाहूंगा - बहुत सारे लोग िवदेश क े अखबारȗ और संÎथानȗ को क्वोट करते हȅ - 
कई िवदेशी अखबारȗ और कई अंतरराÍटर्ीय बुिǉजीिवयȗ ने, िजनमȂ भारत क े  बुिǉजीवी भी थे, 
भारत क े नोबल पुरÎकार िवजेता भी थे, उन्हȗने 2004 मȂ एक बात कही थी िक "India is a marvel 
of democracy, क्यȗिक उन्हȗने कहा, a leader of the ruling party, who is a Christian lady, 
is asking a Muslim President to appoint a Sikh as the Prime Minister of the country 
when 80 per cent are Hindus.  That is why India is a marvel of democracy. मȅ यह कह 
सकता हूं िक यही crux of democracy है।  यह मूलभाव है, िजसकी वजह से यहां सबको समान 
रूप  से रहने का मौका िम
लता है और आगे चलने का मौका िमलता है।  मȅ इस समय आगे क े दस 
वषș क े ऊपर कोई िटÃपणी नहीं करना चाहूंगा, क्यȗिक मेरे िवचार से "इशारȗ को अगर समझो, 
राज़ को राज़ रहने दो।"  यह बात सबको पता है िक उस काल खंड मȂ क्या हुआ।  अब मȅ 2014 पर 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

आता हूं।  जब 16 मई, 2014 को Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमȂ ÎपÍट बहुमत िमला, तो उस 
समय पिरिÎथित क्या थी। मȅ याद िदलाना चाहता हूं िक 18th o f M ay,  2 0 14,  L o n d o n  क े The 
Sunday Guardian ने अपने Editorial मȂ िलखा, मȅ िसफर् पहली लाइन बोलूंगा, आगे की नहीं 
बोलूंगा, उन्हȗने कहा "This is India's second tryst with destiny." यह िनयित क े साथ दूसरा 
िमलन था, क्यȗिक पहली बार एक ऐसे दल को सǄा िमली थी, िजसकी उत्पिǄ, िजसके  िवचार 
Îवतंतर् भारत मȂ हुए और पहली बार िकसी गैर-कांगर्ेसी दल को ÎपÍट बहुमत िमला।  परंतु यह 
सरकार िसफर् सरकार बदलने क े िलए नहीं थी, यह िव
चार बदलने क े िलए भी थी, इसिलए मोदी 
जी ने Ģधान मंतर्ी बनने क े बाद क ु छ ऐसे िवषय उठाए, जो कहा गया िक non-political हȅ।  ज ैसे 
उन्हȗने 'Îवच्छ भारत अिभयान', 'बेटी बचाओ-बेटी पढ़ाओ' क े िवषय कहे।  यह िवचार बदलने क े 
िलए था। आज आप देिखए, हमारे या आपके  हाथ मȂ कोई पैक े ट या रेपर होता है, िजसे आसानी से 
लोग फ Ȃ क िदया करते थे - अब ऐसा नहीं होता है।  उन्हȗने 'ब
ेटी बचाओ-बेटी पढ़ाओ' कहा, तो 
नवजात िशशुओं क े िंलग अनुपात मȂ भारी पिरवतर्न दजर् िकया गया और इस साल पहली बार ऐसा 
हुआ िक नवजात िशशुओं मȂ लड़िकयȗ की संख्या अिधक आई है, यानी इतना बड़ा पिरवतर्न आया।  
अभी हमारे खरगे जी उदारता की बात कर रहे थे, तो
 मȅ याद िदलाना चाहता हूं िक इसी दरिमयान 
जब Standing Committees की बात होती है, तो 2014 क े बाद सरकार की तरफ से 46 Bills 
आए हȅ।  िज
समȂ 14 Standing Committees को और 23 Select Committees को गए हȅ, यानी 
46 मȂ से 37 - 80 per cent िबÊस Parliamentary Committees को गए हȅ।  यह फ ैक्ट भी हमȂ 
ध्यान मȂ रखने की आवÌयकता है।  इसी क े साथ मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं िक उन्हȗने कहा 
था िक थोड़ा बड़ा ǭदय होना चािहए। मोदी जी का 2014 का पहला भाषण याद कीिजए
। उन्हȗने 
यह कहा था िक हम तो समाज क े सबसे गरीब Ëयिƪ की तरफ नज़र रखते हȅ, चूंिक हम 
दीनदयाल जी क े अन्त्योदय से Ģेिरत हȅ। आगे उन्हȗने यह कहा िक चाहे महात्मा गांधी हȗ, लोिहया 
जी हȗ या
 दीनदयाल जी हȗ, सभी का िवचार इसी भाव से Ģेिरत था।  हमने इसकी कोई िंचता नहीं 
की िक कौन हमारी पाटीर् का है, कौन हमारी पाटीर् का नहीं है।  उन्हȗने इतना िवशाल ǭदय 
िदखाया िक सरदार पटेल की मूिर्त दुिनया की सबसे िवशाल मूिर्त बनाकर िदखाई।  हम पर इस 
बात से कोई Ģभाव नहीं पड़ता, भले ही उनके  कालखंड मȂ आरएसएस पर बैन लगा हो, लेिकन 
िजसने देश क े िलए इतना ऊ ंचा  काम िकया, उसका मुकाम भी उतना ऊ ंचा होना चािहए।  मȅ यह 
भी याद िदलाना चाहता हूं िक मोदी जी क े कालखंड मȂ िसफर् इतना ही नहीं हुआ, हमने Ǜी अटल 
िबहारी वाजपेयी जी को ही भारत रत्न नहीं िदया, बिÊक Ģणब  मुखजीर् जी को भी भारत रत्न िदया।  
हमने तरुण  गोगोई जी को पǍभूषण िदया, एस.सी. जमीर जी को भी पǍभूषण िदया, बगैर इस 
बात की िंचता िकए हुए िक कौन हमारी पाटीर् का है, कौन हमारी पाटीर् का नहीं है - भारत क े 
इितहास मȂ यह देखने को नहीं िमलता है, जो उदाहरण उन्हȗने िदया।  हां, यह जरूर  कह सकते 
हȅ िक बहुत से ऐसे लोग हȅ, िजनको इसमȂ भी उदारता नजर न आई हो। जो बाबा साहेब का बहुत 
उÊलेख करते हȅ, उन बाबा साहेब को भारत रत्न देने मȂ इतना लंबा समय लग गया था, वह उनके  
कालखंड म
Ȃ नहीं िमला था। जब अटल जी की सरकार आई, तो जहां उन्हȗने अंितम सांस ली थी, 
उस अलीपुर रोड क े बंगले को सरकार ने लेकर Îमारक बनाया।  मोदी जी इसके  िलए मुंबई और 
लंदन तक गए।  लंदन मȂ िजस मकान मȂ डा. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर रहे थे, उसको भारत सरकार 
ने लेकर Îमारक बनाने का काम िकया और 26 नवंबर को ' संिवधान िदवस' क े  रूप  मȂ उसको 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
113

Îथािपत िकया।  यह दशार्ता है िक िजस-िजस ने भी इस देश क े िलए योगदान िदया, उन सब क े 
Ģित हमने ईमानदारी से और पूरी दृढ़ता क े साथ इन 75 वषș मȂ यह करने का Ģयास िकया है।   
एक और बड़ा पिरवतर्न आया है।  इस देश क े Ģथम Ģधान मंतर्ी पंिडत जवाहरलाल न ेहरू  
जी बने, वे ईÌवर की क ृपा से एक समृǉ पिरवार से आते थे।  बचपन से उनके  मुंह मȂ सोने का 
चÇमच था और आज 75 वष र् क े बाद एक ऐसा Ģधान मंतर्ी है, िजसने अपना बचपन Ãलेटफॉमर् पर 
चÇमच और चाय क े िगलास को ल
ेकर दौड़ते हुए गुजारा है।  मȅ यह कह सकता हूं िक अंतर यह 
आया है।  यह लोकतंतर् की पिरपक्वता है।  हम सबको इसको सेिलĤेट करना चािहए िक अब 
लोकतंतर् लÑमी नारायण की क ृपा से लेकर दिरदर् नारायण क े सÇमान तक आकर खड़ा हो गया है।  
इन 75 वषș मȂ लोकतंतर् मȂ यह पिरवतर्न आया है।  इस संसद मȂ भी चार सवȘच्च पद माने जाते ह ȅ - 
राÍटर्पित, उपराÍटर्पित, Ģधान मंतर्ी और लोक सभा अध्यक्ष।   आज राÍटर्पित पद पर दर्ौपदी मुमूर् 
जी हȅ।  आज हम कह सकते हȅ िक चाहे जनरल क्लास हो, शेǹूÊड काÎट हो, ओबीसी क्लास 
हो, शेǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस हो या माइनॉिरटीज़ हȗ, अब कोई भी वगर् ऐसा नहीं कह सकता िक मुझ े 
संसद क े चारȗ सवȘच्च पदȗ मȂ से िकसी एक पर कभी Ģितिनिधत्व करने का मौका नहीं िमला।   इस 
लोकतंतर् को हमने उस मुकाम तक पहुंचाया है।  मेरे िवचार से इस 'अमृत काल' मȂ इसके  िलए भी 
मोदी सरकार का अिभनंदन िकया जाना चािहए।  म
ȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूं िक इस समय यह 
सुखद संयोग देिखए िक सभी पदȗ पर बैठे हुए लोग वे हȅ, जो आज़ादी क े बाद उत्पन्न हुए हȅ, 
अथार्Þ अब Îवतंतर् भारत का, Îवतंतर् भाव का नेतृत्व इस समय संसद मȂ िभन्न-िभन्न रूप  मȂ आगे 
चल रहा है।  शिƪिंसह गोिहल जी ने एक बात कही थी।  मȅ उसका भी जवाब देना चाहता हूं।  
उन्हȗने एक दोहा बोला था, वह हम लोगȗ की तरफ भी गांवȗ मȂ बोला जाता है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित :  आपने शा
यद ध्यान नहीं िदया िक आपके  एक वाक्य को सुनकर वे बाहर गए हȅ।  
 
 डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी :  मान्यवर,उन्हȗने एक सेन्टȂस बोला था।  हम लोगȗ की तरफ भी गांवȗ मȂ कहा 
जाता है:-  
"कहै घाघ सुन भƿरी, यहीं गाँव मȂ रहना है, 
ऊ ँ ट िबलारी ले गई, हाँ जी, हाँ जी कहना है।" 
 
वे कह रहे थे िक हां जी, हां जी कहना पड़ता है, यह तो उनके  मन की कÊपना थी।  मȅ िसफर् तीन 
चीज़Ȃ क्वोट करता हूं।  मȅ िकसी क े Ģित क ु छ नहीं कह रहा हूं।  मौलाना आज़ाद जी की िकताब 
'इंिडया िवन्स ģीडम', उसके  आिखरी 30 पन्ने, िजनके  िलए उन्हȗने कहा था िक व े मेरी मृत्यु क े 
30 वषर् क े बाद पिÅलश हȗ, उसको पढ़ लीिजए।  Ǜी पी.वी. नरिसÇहा राव जी की िकताब ' द 
इन्साइडर' िजसका िंहदी अनुवाद 'अन्तगार्था' क े रूप  मȂ भी िवǏमान है, वह भी पढ़ लीिजए और 
Ǜी नटवर
 िंसह जी की िकताब 'One Life is not Enough' भी पढ़ लीिजए, तो िफर मेरे िवचार से 
शिƪिंसह गोिहल जी को वह शिƪ िमलेगी िक हां जी, हां जी क ै से कहना है।  मȅ एक बात और 
कहना चाहूंगा िक खरगे जी ने जी20 पर कहा िक कमल का फ ू ल िदख रहा था।  मान्यवर, जी20 
पर जो कमल का फ ू ल था, वह पांच पंखुिड़यȗ वाला फ ू ल है, जो भारत का राÍटर्ीय पुÍप है। 
...(समय की घंटी)... हमारा कमल का फ
ू ल आठ पंखुिड़यȗ वाला है।  मगर मȅ यह भी कहना 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

चाहता हूं िक उनको ध्यान रखना चािहए िक आज अगर भारत को सुपर पावर बनना है, तो हमȂ 
intellectually भी आगे बढ़ना है और फाइनȂिशयली भी आगे बढ़ना है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी :  सर, एक िमनट का समय और दे दीिजए।  मȅ कन्क्लूड कर रहा हूं
 ।  हमȂ 
लÑमी जी की भी क ृपा चािहए और सरÎवती जी की भी क ृपा चािहए और ये दोनȗ ही कमल पर 
िवराजती हȅ।  िजतना कमल िखला रहेगा, हमारा Ģगित का मागर् उतना ही ĢशÎत रहेगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी :  सर, मȅ बस एक िमनट मȂ summarize कर रहा हूं।  मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं 
िक हमारे Ģधान म
ंतर्ी जी क े ऊपर हमने जी20 मȂ वह िवकास िदखाया है िक आज 7.8 परसȂट क े 
साथ हम दुिनया की सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथाओं मȂ सबसे त ेजी से बढ़ती हुई अथर्ËयवÎथा हȅ।  आज 
दुिनया मȂ चाइना, अमेिरका, यूरोप की क्या िÎथित है, पािकÎतान और Ǜीलंका छोड़ दीिजए। 
...(समय की घंटी)... मȅ मोदी जी क े िलए िसफर् एक लाइन कहना चाहूंगा और उसके  बाद एक 
लाइन और कहूंगा।  मोदी जी क े िलए आप लोगȗ क े मन मȂ जो भाव आता है, तो
 मȅ कहना चाहता हूं 
िक इस िवपरीत पिरिÎथित मȂ उन्हȗने जैसे देश को चलाया है: 
 
"हमȂ इÊजाम मत दीिजए, बहुत अफसोस होता है, 
बड़ी तरकीब से कÌती यहां तक लेकर आए हȅ, 
बदल देते हȅ हम दिरया की लहरȂ अपनी िहÇमत से, 
आंिधयȗ मȂ भी अक्सर िचराग हमने जलाए हȅ।" 
 
 सर, अंत मȂ, मȅ अटल जी की एक पंिƪ से अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूं।  मȅ आप सबको 
आÏवान करता हूं िक आप नई संसद मȂ जा रहे हȅ, उनकी एक पंिƪ थी – ‘ आओ िमलकर दीया 
जलाएं’, तो मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं:- 
 
“आहुित बाकी यज्ञ अधूरा, 
अपनȗ क े िवघ्नȗ न
े घेरा” 
 
अपने लोग ही क ु छ िवघ्न उत्पन्न कर रहे हȅ, कोई बात नहीं। 
“आहुित बाकी यज्ञ अधूरा, 
अपनȗ क े िवघ्नȗ ने घेरा, 
अंितम जय का वजर् बनाने 
नव दधीिच हिƿयाँ गलाएँ। 
आओ िमलकर दीया जलाएँ।” 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
115

Ǜी सभापित : Ǜी देरेक ओĤाईन। 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी :  और यज्ञ का धुआं उन सारे वायरस को नÍट करे, िजसमȂ डȂगू भी है, मलेिरया 
भी है, कोरोना भी है, एचआईवी भी है तथा जो मन मȂ बैठा है, उस वायरस को भी नÍट करȂ और 
एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत का मागर् ĢशÎत करȂ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Mr. Derek O'Brien.  You have 10 minutes. 
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN (West Bengal) : Sir, we had 21 minutes  and my colleague has 
spoken for 3 minutes. 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  No, no
. I adjusted most people ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN :  That is not how we have done it.  We had 21 minutes.  My 
colleague has spoken for 3 minutes.  So, I have got 18 minutes.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One second.  Listen to me now.  
  
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: The board is saying, 18 minutes, Sir.  I have not even started.  
The board is saying, 18 minutes and you are telling me 10 minutes.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I am aware of it.  The ruling party is left with one hour because I 
have accommodated the opposition.  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN:  Sir, the board is saying, 18 minutes.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Okay, go ahead, if you can't under stand the simple thing that I 
have accommodated the Opposition out of ruling party's time of one hour.  
   
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN:  Sir, I can only understand that my Trinamool Congress was 
given 21 minutes.  My colleague has spoken for 3 minutes.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, please. Your time is already on.  Go ahead. 
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN:  Give me back my Parliament.  Give me back my Parliament, 
which is not mocked.  Give me back my Pa rliament, which is not undermined.  Give 
me back my Parliament, where Prime Ministers come and answer questions on the 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

floor of Lok Sabha and on the floor of Rajy a Sabha.  In the last seven years, not a 
single question has been an swered on the floor of Par liament.  Give me back my 
Parliament, where urgent national issues can be discussed from 11 o'clock in the 
morning under a special rule.  In the last  seven years, not one notice given by the 
Opposition has been accepted.  Give me b ack my Parliament, where we get to see 
the hon. Prime Minister regularly here with us.  In 2021, our hon. Prime Minister was 
here for four hours and three minutes betw een the two Houses.  Give me back my 
Parliament, where Members are allowed to vo te when Bills are put to vote, and not 
the sacrilege which happened during the Farm  Bill.  Give me back my Parliament, 
where we have a Deputy Speaker  in the Lok Sabha.  For the last five years, there has 
been no Deputy Speaker.  Give me back  my Parliament, where policy making is 
collaborative, not dictatorial.  On record I say, from 2014 to now, one out of ten Bills is 
sent to Parliamentary Standing Committees for scrutiny.  Give me back my 
Parliament, where legislation undergoes rigoro us stakeholder evaluation.  On record I 
say, nine out of ten Bills marked by zero or incomplete pre-legislative consultation.  
Give me back my Parliament, where Bills are passed keeping this House in mind, the 
Council of States, the federal structure.  On record I say, about one out of three Bills 
passed have been anti-federal, hurting the St ates.  And, on a personal note, we may 
be going to the new building.  But we have so many bonds, so many friendships, so 
many crossing of ideological barriers, so many times when we have condoled with 
colleagues from different parties who have lost their loved ones, or celebrated the 
births of grand children.  We used to do this in the Central Hall.  Sir, give me back my 
Parliament.  Let's go to the new Parliament but keep our Central Hall alive.   
G i v e  m e  b a c k  m y  I n d i a .   G i v e  m e  b a c k my Bharat.  Give me back my India 
where a State is not consumed by violence for five months.  Sorry, Manipur, we still 
haven't managed to send our ho n. Prime Minister to you. Fr om all of us, 'sorry'. Give 
me back my India where one out of three youth are not unemployed.  Give me back 
my India where the double-digit food price in flation does not lead to three out of four 
people in a situation where they cannot afford  a healthy diet.  Give me back my India 
where crimes against women are met with  the harshest punishments; where our 
champion athletes don't get sexually hara ssed; and where abusive men in power are 
not shielded. Yes, my Party, All India Trinamool Congress, led by Ms. Mamata 
Banerjee needs no lectures on Women's Rese rvation Bill.  Whether you bring the Bill 
or don't bring the Bill, we already have one-third of our elected representatives 
women here in Parliament.  But don't spar e the men who have done what they have 
done.  It doesn't matter whichever party th ey come from.  Give me back my India 
where farmers are guaranteed MSP for crops; where farmer suicides are a thing of the 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
117

past; and where farmers get prioritised ov er large corporations.  Ten thousand 
farmers committed suicide in 2021.  Give me  back my India where the Prime Minister 
pays condolences when jawans are martyred  and not attend party functions.  Don't 
show us hollow nationalism to win political  points.  Give me back my India where 
States -- and I say this from the Council of States -- are not deprived of funds 
because a State's political ideology is differ ent from the Union's political ideology and 
my Bengal, our Bengal, is deprived of funds worth ten thousand crore rupees.  Give 
me back my India where its profitable PS Us, where its crown jewels -- Rail, SAIL, 
BHEL, BSNL -- are not privatised.  Give me back my India where people's hard-
earned money is not used to cover up frauds and corporate losses amounting to 
about 13 lakh crore rupees.  Give me back my India where economic offenders do not 
loot this country and then flee to another land while the common people have to face 
rise in the price of gas cylinder and price rise. Give  me back my India where 
institutions are not systematically weak ened to be subservient to the ruling 
dispensation.  Give me back my India.  Give me back my Bharat. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have lost your track.  The subject is specific. Yes, Mr. Derek 
O' Brien, don't look around.  Each word you said had nothing to do with the subject. 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN:  Sir, just one minute.  ...(Interruptions).....  Sir, my subject 
is...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Two minutes. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN:  What is two minutes, Sir?  ...(Interruptions).... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Two minutes. ...(Interruptions).... 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN:  What is two minutes?   I have got 16.  Sir, I am reading from 
here -- Parliamentary journey of 75 years, achievements, experiences, memories and 
learnings.  As a Parliamentarian of 13 year s, I am sharing my learnings here in the 
Council of States.  Please allow me, Sir, to express myself.  I disagreed with a lot of 
what the BJP spokesperson said.  He is a brilliant speaker.  I disagreed with his 
ideology.  We quietly sat.  No one disturbed him.  He spoke.  That was his view.  Let 
me express my view.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I will conclude at six o'clock.  You can continue up to 5.58 p.m. 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN : Give me back my India wher e media owners -- let's not 
blame the journalists -- are not enslaved by th e party in power.  Real journalists will 
remain real journalists. The real villains are the media owners. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You said, 'party in power'. In Delhi or in State? 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN:  Sir, I am making a speech.  If it is somebody's right to make 
a speech, it is your right also to give comment ary.  I will keep qu iet and sit down. Sir, 
I say this humbly.  We expect not to be interrupted.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I was just getting informed.  We are a federal structure. So, when 
you said, party in power, is it Centre or State?  
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: You are right.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And you know why I am asking.  No one knows better than you as 
to why I am asking.  
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN:  Okay, Sir.  Mr. Modi's Bharatiy a Janata Party! Give me back 
my India where the Government does no t have to revise the methodology of 
calculating GDP to make its number appear artificially higher. This has been changed. 
Give me back my India where slums are not covered with green curtains when we are 
hosting international events.  Give me ba ck my India where dissent does not mean 
jail. There are Father Stan, Siddique Ka ppan, Varavara Rao, Gautam Navlakha, 
Anand Teltumbde and so many.  Give me b ack my India where religious propaganda 
does not trump science. We have cham pions -- the champions of Chandrayaan.  
Give me back my India where citizens do not die because of one man's whimsical 
announcement of demonetisation at 8 p.m.  And if you are talking about positives, 
look at the policies by some State Governments like in Bengal where there is a 
migrant policy in place, migrant board in pl ace, etc. Please learn from States.  Give 
me back my India where statistics and data  were not the enemy of the State.  Give 
me back my India where the environment was not sacrificed at the altar of corporate 
profit. Give me back my India where language was a means of communication..(Time 
bell rings.).. not for Mr. Siva and not for everybody else who are now marked out.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  
 
[ 18 September, 2023 ]
119

SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN : Sir, I don't believe this. ...(Interruptions)....   Sir, I do not 
believe this. I humbly appeal to you.  My  Party has 18 minutes.  How much more 
humility do you want me to show? ...(Interruptions)....    
 
 
OBSERVATION BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  One minute!  Hon. Members, throughout the discussion today, 
valuable inputs have been provided by  Members by stating their experience and 
memories. ...(Interruptions)....   Nothing will go on record.  Some inputs have also 
been provided about the fu ture roadmap. In all, we  had a very meaningful and 
purposeful discussion on parliamentar y journey of 75 years starting from Samvidhan 
Sabha, achievements, memories and learnings. ...(Interruptions)....  
...(Interruptions)....  Hon. Members, I could not have  been fairer to the opposition. 
...(Interruptions)....  I have given more than one hour of time. ...(Interruptions)....   
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, you have not given me my time.  What are 
you talking about? ...(Interruptions)....   You have taken away my time. 
...(Interruptions)....  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Will you take your seats? ...(Interruptions)....    If you want to hear 
me, the Leader of the Opposi tion took the entire time. ...(Interruptions).... I 
accommodated them all. ...(Interruptions)....    
The House stands adjourned to meet  on Tuesday at 2.15 p.m. on 19
th 
September, 2023 in the Rajya Sabha Chamber of the New Building of Parliament.  
 
The House then adjourned at fifty-nine minutes past five of the clock 
 till fifteen minutes past two of the clock on Tuesday, the 19th September, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 