Vol. 261 Wednesday,   
No. 3 20 th September, 2023 
 29 Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (page 1) 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 5) 
 
Report of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Labour, 
Textiles and Skill Development –Laid on the Table (page 5 ) 
 
Reports of the Committee on Public Accounts – Laid on the Table (page 5) 
 
Statement by Minister Correcting Answer to Question – Laid on the Table (page 5) 
 
Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee (page 6) 
 
Announcement by the Chair (page 6) 
 
 
 
[P.T.O 
 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Observations by the Chair (pages 6 - 9 and pages 129 - 130) 
 
Discussion on "India's Glorious Space Journey marked by successful Soft Landing of 
Chandrayaan-3"(pages 9 -  129) 
 
Resolution – Adopted  
Recognition and appreciation of scientists for successful soft landing of 
Chandrayan-3 on South Pole of the Moon (pages 130 - 131) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
      http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA  
Wednesday, the 20th September, 2023 /29 Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस तो आते ही नहीं हȅ। 
Ǜी सभापित: वे आप ही क े िमतर् हȅ। Hon. Members, I have the pleasant opportunity to 
wish birthday greetings to hon. Member  of Parliament, Shri Mohammed Nadimul 
Haque. Shri Haque has been a Member of th is House since April, 2012. He is serving 
his second term in the House from April, 2018. He is a jo urnalist and writer and takes 
keen interest in sports. Shri Haque is marri ed to Shrimati Farah Khan and is blessed 
with son Fardeen and daughter Farheen. On  my own and your behalf, I wish him a 
long, healthy and happy life.  
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
Notifications of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
 
पृथ्वी िवज्ञान मंतर्ी (Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु): महोदय, मȅ भारतीय अंटाकर्िटक अिधिनयम  ,2022 की 
धारा  57 क े अधीन पृथ्वी िवज्ञान मंतर्ालय की िनÇनिलिखत अिधसूचनाओं की एक-एक Ģित 
(अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
(1) S.O. 3508 (E), dated the 7 th August, 2023, constituting a Committee on
Antarctic Governance and Environmental Protection.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10059/17/23] 
(2) S.O. 3509 (E), dated the 7 th August, 2023, appointing the 7 th day of August,
2023, as the date on which the p
rovisions of the said Act shall come into force.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10060/17/23] 
(3) G.S.R. 592 (E), dated the 7 th August, 2023, publishing the Indian Antarctic
Environmental Protection Rules, 2023.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10058/17/23] 

 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Finance 
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ:- 
 
(A) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue), und er sub-section (7) of Section 9A of 
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, along with Explanatory Memoranda:— 
 
(1) G.S.R. 586 (E), dated the 3
rd August, 2023, imposing an Anti-Dumping duty 
on Dispersion Unshifted Single Mode Op tical Fiber originating in, or exported 
from China PR, Indonesia and Korea RP. 
(2) G.S.R. 634(E), dated the 29 th August, 2023, imposing an Anti-Dumping duty 
on Fishing Net originating in, or exported from China PR and Malaysia. 
(3) G.S.R. 661(E), dated the 11 th September, 2023, imposing an Anti-Dumping 
duty on Flat Base Steel Wheels originating in, or exported from China PR. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (3) See No. L.T. 10061/17/23] 
 
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue), under sub-section (1) of Section 8 of 
the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, along with Explanatory Memoranda:— 
 
(1) G.S.R. 616(E), dated the 19
th August, 2023, amending the Second Schedule to 
the said Act, by inserting certain entries in that Schedule. 
(2) G.S.R. 628(E), dated the 25th August, 2023, amending the Second Schedule to 
the said Act, by inserting certain entries in that Schedule. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No. L.T. 10062/17/23] 
 
(C) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue), und er Section 159 of the Customs Act, 
1962, along with Explanatory Memoranda:— 
 
(1) G.S.R. 617(E), dated the 19 th August, 2023, exempting the onions, when 
exported out of India, from so much of the duty of customs leviable thereon.  
(2) G.S.R. 629(E), dated the 25 th August, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R.796 (E), dated the 31 st October, 2022, by inserting 
certain entries in that Notification. 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(3) G.S.R. 643(E), dated the 31 st August, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R.69 (E),  dated the 1 st February, 2021, by substituting 
certain entries in that Notification. 
(4) G.S.R. 653(E), dated the 5 th September, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R. 785 (E), dated the 30 th June, 2017, by  substituting 
certain entries in that Notification. 
(5) G.S.R. 656(E), dated the 5 th September, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R. 785 (E), dated the 30 th June, 2017, by 
omitting/substituting certain entries in that Notification. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (5) See No. L.T. 10063/17/23] 
 
(D) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue), un der sub-Section 2 of Section 38 of 
Central Excise Act, 1944, along with Explanatory Memoranda:— 
 
(1) G.S.R. 600(E), dated the 14 th August, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. 584(E), dated the 19 th July, 2022, by su bstituting certain 
entries in that Notification. 
(2) G.S.R. 601(E), dated the 14 th August, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. 492(E), dated  the 30 th June, 2022, by substituting certain 
entries in that Notification. 
(3) G.S.R. 646(E), dated the 1 st September, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. 584(E), dated the 19 th July, 2022, by su bstituting certain 
entries in that Notification. 
(4) G.S.R. 647(E), dated the 1 st September, 2023, amending the Principal 
Notification No. 492(E), dated the 30 th June, 2022, by substituting certain 
entries in that Notification. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (4) See No. L.T. 10064/17/23] 
 
(E) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue), Notification No. G.S.R. 571(E), dated the 31 st July, 2023, allocating 
certain areas of jurisdiction among the authorized Competent Authorities, under 
Section 69 of the Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10065/17/23] 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
3

 
 
Reports (2021-22) of the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan of Kerala and Goa and related 
Papers 
 
िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜीमती अƐपूणार् देवी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक -एक 
Ģित (अगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ :- 
 
(1)  (a)  
Annual Report of the Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan, Goa, for the   year 
2021-22. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Programme. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
(2) (a)  Annual Report of the Samagra Shiksh a Abhiyan, Kerala, for the year 
2021-22. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Programme. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No. L.T. 10092/17/23] 
 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Education 
 
िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (डा. सुभाष सरकार):  महोदय, मȅ क ेन्दर्ीय संÎकृ त िवÌविवǏालय 
अिधिनयम, 2020  की धारा  44 की उप-धारा (2) क े  अधीन िशक्षा मंतर्ालय ( उच्चतर िशक्षा 
िवभाग) की िनÇनिलिखत अिधसूचनाओं की एक -एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी) मȂ सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ :- 
 
(A)  
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Education (Department of Higher Education), under sub-section 
(2) of Section 44 of the Central Sanskrit Universities Act, 2020:— 
 
(1) No. (ii) LBSNU/REG / (11) / Ordinance / 2023, dated the 7 th August, 2023, 
publishing the Ordinances-2023 of Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit 
University. 
(2) No. (ii) LBSNU/REG / (11) / Ordinance / 2023, dated the 7 th August, 2023, 
publishing the Regulations - 2021 of Shri  Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit 
University. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No. L.T. 10073/17/23] 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(B) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Education (Department of 
Higher Education) Notification No.IIMB/Reg/590/2023, dated the 31st August, 
2023, publishing the Indian Institute of Management Bangalore Regulation, 
2023, under Section 37 of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017. 
[Placed in Library.  See No. L.T. 10072/17/23] 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON LABOUR, TEXTILES AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT  
 
Ǜी िवजय पाल िंसह तोमर (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ालय से संबंिधत 
"कमर्चारी राज्य बीमा िनगम-ईएसआई योजना क े तहत Ģयोज्यता और िहतलाभ, ईएसआई 
अÎपतालȗ का कायर्करण और काियक िनिध का Ģबंधन" िवषय क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत Ǜम, 
वÎतर् और कौ
शल िवकास संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2022-23) क े इक्यावनवȂ Ģितवेदन* 
की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL (Gujarat): Sir, I la y on the Table, a copy each (in English 
and Hindi) of the following Reports of  the Committee on Public Accounts (2023-
24):—  
 
(i) Seventy-fourth Report on ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation’;  and  
(ii) Seventy-fifth Report on ‘Issues related to Cultural Institutions’. 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER CORRECTING ANSWER TO QUESTION 
 
िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (डा. सुभाष सरकार) : महोदय, मȅ 'देश मȂ िवǏािर्थयȗ ǎारा की जाने 
वाली आत्महत्याएं' क े संबंध मȂ 29 माचर्, 2023 को राज्य सभा मȂ अतारांिकत ĢÌन सं. 3231 क े 
िदए गए उǄर क े संशोधनाथर् एक िववरण (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ।  
 
                   
* The Report was presented to the Speaker, Lok Sa bha, on 11th September, 2023 under Direction 71 
A (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, when the House was not in Session and the peaker 
was pleased to order the printing, publication and circulation of the Report under Rule 280 of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. The Chairman, Rajya Sabha had seen the Report 
on 13.09.2023. 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
5

 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I have to inform the House that the Business 
Advisory Committee at its meeting held on the 20th September, 2023 has allotted time 
for Government Legislative Business as follows:- 
 TIME ALLOTTED 
1. Consideration and passing of the Post Office Bill, 2023 Two hours  
2. Consideration and passing of the Constitution (One 
Hundred and Twenty-Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2023 after it is 
considered and passed by Lok Sabha.  
Seven and a half 
hours 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I may inform you that the Chamber, Lobby and 
Galleries referred to in the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the 
Council of States, Rajya Sabha, shall mean  Chamber, Lobby and Galleries of the 
Parliament House of India, as notified on 18th September, 2023.  
 Hon. Members may further note that the Lobby has extended or elongated 
areas that are to be used as sitting lounges by the hon. Members. Accordingly, the 
said areas shall also be incl uded in the definition of Lobby for the purpose of the 
Rules.  
Hon. Members, I have received one no tice under Rule 176 for Short Duration 
Discussion. The same is from Shri A.A.  Rahim, CPI(M). The notice is under my 
active consideration.  
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, it gives me immense pride that we are going to 
have a discussion on the achievements  of Bharat in space exploration to 
commemorate the glorious accomplishmen ts of our space scientists. From the 
inception of our space programme, we have consistently pushed the boundaries of 
space exploration and our achievements in this domain have catapulted the nation 
onto the global centre-stage. From Chandrayaan missions to the Moon, Mars Orbiter 
Mission (Mangalyaan) and Aditya L1's solar exploration, India has shown that the sky 
is not the limit; it is just the beginning.   
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 Over the span of nearly six decade s, India's space programme has seen the 
country evolve from a nation relying on fore ign launch vehicles to becoming fully self-
reliant with its indigenous launch capabilities.  
Notably, India has not only developed the capacity to launch its own satellites 
but has also extended its services to la unch satellites for other countries. Hon. 
Members, from January 2018 to November 2022, the ISRO achieved a significant 
milestone by successfully launching a total of 177 foreign satellites from a diverse 
array of countries.  
So far, we have launched 424 foreig n satellites of which more than 90 
percent (389) were launched in  the last nine years. We have launched satellites 
of USA (231), UK (86) and Singapore (20). They are the top three 
beneficiaries of India' s international cooperation in this sector . Having diligently 
attended to our country 's developmental needs through our space endeavours 
and enhancing communication infr astructure to enabling re mote sensing and 
weather forecasting, it is only but natura l that we now decisi vely turn our focus 
towards the unc harted realms of planetary exploration and deep space 
missions.  
With the latest successful Chandrayaan-3 Mission, India's space 
agency, ISRO has et ched its name in the annals of space exploration. India is 
only the fourth country in history to have soft landed a spacecraft on the Moon, 
and the first to have done so in the Moon's South Polar Region. '  
Exhibiting tremendous tenacity and turning failures into stepping stones 
for future success, ISRO took away the right lessons from the preceding 
Chandrayaan-2 Mission. As Governor of the State of West Be ngal, I was in the 
Science City, Kolkata, on 7 th September, 2019, past mi dnight, with a group of 
young boys and girls. The landing was not soft. I had then remarked that 
Chandrayaan-2 was a major success though was not 100 per cent . The lessons 
we had learnt from this mission he lped us to see ultimate success in 
Chandrayaan-3.  
With this achievement, India is now a member of the Artemis Accords, 
the US-led multilateral initiative to  place humans on the Moon by 2025 and 
subsequently advance human space exploration throughout our solar system's 
broader vicinity.  
Hon. Members, our achievements reach beyond  the lunar surface. India's 
Mars Orbiter Mission, unofficially known as Mangalyaan, showcased our ability 
to reach the Red Planet on our maiden attempt . The Mangalyaan spacecraft 
successfully entered Mars orbit on September 23, -2014, making ISRO the first 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
7

 
 
Asian and the fourth country in the world to  do so and it achieved this feat with 
unparalleled cost-effectiveness.  
Just as we were celebrating the achievements of the Chandrayaan-3 
Mission, ISRO unveiled yet another ambitious endeavor - the Aditya L-1 
Mission. Launched just last week, this mission seeks to gain a deeper 
understanding of the Sun from a unique vantage point approximately 1.5 million 
kilometers away from earth that allows for continuous and uninterrupted study 
of the S un. With this mission, India is poised to join an exclusive group of 
countries dedicated to the study of our nearest star, the Sun. Following its 
successful missions to explore the Sun and the Moon, ISRO has an array of 
exciting future endeavors. I am delighted to know that it is now setting its sights 
on the second most scorching planet in our Solar System -- Venus. 
Shukrayaan-1, ISRO's upcoming spacecraft, is likely to be launched by the end 
of December, 2024.  Our scientists and engineers have  meticulously crafted 
Shukrayaan-1 to withstand the extreme conditions of Venus and to operate 
under the most challenging circumstances. 
 With three more launches on the horizon, spanning this year and the 
next, ISRO has positioned advance earth monitoring, demonstrate advanced 
capabilities for precision, proximity, oper ations in space and explore some of 
the most enigmatic objects in the universe.  
Having said that, I believe, ISRO's journey into space exploration has 
been nothing short of extraordinary. Its achievements in reaching uncharted 
territories in space garnered international attention. What truly sets ISRO apart, 
however, is its ability to achieve these re markable feats at a fraction of the cost 
when compared to some of the world' s other major space agencies, such as 
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA). Emphasis on indigenization of 
critical components and reducing reliance  on imports has been a critical aspect 
of its cos t-effective approach and has indeed  sparked discussions within the 
international space community.  
Taking a giant leap towards a bright er, more innovative and economically 
robust future in space exploration,  the Indian Space Policy of 2023 'welcomes 
private enterprises into the realm of space exploration. 
It acknowledges that 
the private sector possesses the innovati ve spark, the entrepreneurial spirit 
and the financial acumen to propel India's space ambitions to greater heights.  
The implications of this decisi on, hon. Members, are profound.  
India's journey in space exploration is indeed a matter of national pride. 
As we look forward to many more chapters of discovery, innovation and global 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
collaboration in the thrillin g saga of space exploration , let us celebrate Bharat 's 
unstoppable journey to greatness !  
I now invite the hon. Leader of the House , Shri Piyush Goyal, to initiate the 
Discussion on "India's Glorious Space Journey Marked by Successful Soft Landing 
of Chandrayaan-3."  
 
 
DISCUSSION ON "INDIA'S GLORIOUS SPACE JOURNEY MARKED BY 
SUCCESSFUL SOFT LANDING OF CHANDRAYAAN-3" 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) :  Thank you very much, hon. 
Chairman, Sir.  It is indeed a matter of great pride for the entire nation and for all of us 
in this august House that you have permitte d this subject to be taken up as the very 
first subject in the new Parliament.  This is truly something which makes every citizen 
of 140 crore Indians proud of their scient ists, proud of Indian industry which has 
contributed in a big measure to various comp onents that have come into the entire 
mission.  And today, as I stand before you, this is one moment in history that will be 
etched for generations to come as the turn ing point in which India truly entered the 
space age as one of the top four countries in  the world.  As you very rightly pointed 
out, Mr. Chairman, Sir, the fact that we we re the first country in the world to land on 
the South Pole of the Moon, is, by itself, giving us a completely new and elevated 
pleasure.   
Hon. Chairman, Sir, ISRO, the Indian Space Research Organisation, by 
scripting this glorious chapter to India's space journey and proving that even the sky 
is not the limit for India, has truly made the entire nation very, very proud and scripted 
this new space journey.   
Hon. Chairman, Sir, the successful landin g of Chandrayan-3 is a trailblazing 
event which happened over years of consistent focus on the subject. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
There has been a lot of resear ch, a lot of effort, lot of successes, lot of failures and 
this has been one area in which India has progressed st ep-by-step.  Whenever we 
have faced adversity in its stride, in the mission phase, we have learnt from our 
failures, made failures the stepping stone to success.   
And, finally, the historic achievement of  the landing is a matter of great pride 
for every Indian.   In fact, three lunar mission s in fifteen years -  it almost feels as if 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
9

 
 
the Moon is beckoning India, as if the Moon is awaiting India and, more, particularly, 
so,  when we see the images coming out from there, when we see the messages 
that ISRO comes out, I think, each succe ssive success is strengthening our resolve 
to capture the space.   
 Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, today, we stand before the world unlocking new 
avenues of scientific discov ery with a new confidence, the self-confidence of an 
Atmanirbhar Bharat , the self-confidence of a count ry which produces the highest 
number of STEM graduates in the world, the self-confidence of a country which 
today stands before the world with one of the lowest cost missions and one of the 
most effective and speedy successes that any other country could have achieved.  I 
remember that picture where in the Chandrayaan-II Mission, where after having 
almost come so close to the surface of the moon, for a small technical reason, we 
were not successful, a lot of naysayers had started trying to run down the Indian 
Mission, run down the ISRO, run down our scientists and fo r  all those naysayers, for 
all those people who have this negativity about India, जो नकारात्मक सोच क े लोग हȅ, 
उन सबके  िलए उस िदन सबक था, जब Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने उस समय क े इसरो क े चेयरमैन 
को गले लगाया, उनकी क्षमता क े ऊपर उनको बध
 ाई देते हुए आगे की चुनौितयȗ क े िलए उनको 
तैयार िकया, उनका आत्मिवÌवास बढ़ाया और उनको Ģोत्सािहत िकया। मȅ समझता हूं िक वह जो 
िचतर् है, वह देश क े 140 करोड़ लोगȗ क े ज़ेहन मȂ, उनके  िदल मȂ और उनके  मन मȂ बस गया है। 
उस िदन क े Ģोत्साहन को, उस िदन क े माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े वाक्
यȗ को जैसे 
उन्हȗने पूरे जी-जान से अपने जीवन का एक अंश बना िलया और अपने जीवन का िमशन बनाते 
हुए, िजस Ģक
ार से वे आगे चले और इतने कम समय मȂ चंदर्यान-3 की सक्सेस जी-20 क े थोड़े 
ही िदन पहले हुई, मȅ समझता हूं िक यह पूरे देश क े िलए बहुत ही गवर् की बात है।  
 मुझे ध्यान है िक जयपुर मȂ हमारे जी-20 क े Trade and Investment Ministers, वािणज्
य 
और िनवेश क े मंितर्यȗ की बैठक चल रही थी। बैठक 24 और 25 अगÎत को होनी थी। उसी की पूवर् 
संध्या पर 23 अगÎत को हम सभी ने िमल कर एक साथ जब चंदर्यान-3 की Moon landing देखी, 
तो हम सबको गौरव महसूस हुआ। उस िदन िजस Ģकार से पूरा देश गौरवािन्व
त हो रहा था, मȅ 
समझता हूं िक वह इतना infectious था, उसका Ģभाव िवदेश से आए हुए मंितर्यȗ क े ऊपर भी 
इतना गहरा था िक लगभग िवÌव की सभी बड़ी ताकतȗ क े नेता, सभी बड़े देशȗ क े वािणज्
य और 
िनवेश से संबंिधत मंितर्यȗ ने अपने-अपने भाषण मȂ हमारी मीिंटग मȂ एक Îवर मȂ भारत की ता रीफ  
की। उन्हȗने भारत की उपलÅधता को बहुत ही िवशेष बताया, साइंिटिफक कÇयुिनटी क े िलए, 
हमारे साइंिटिफक अचीवमȂट क े िलए भारत की सराहना की और माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी को दुिनया भर क े नेताओं ने जी-20 की मीिंटग मȂ बधाई दी िक India has truly arri ved at the 
world stage. अब भारत िवÌव पटल पर अपनी छाप छोड़ रहा है। यह मैसेज आज भारत से 
बढ़कर पूरे िवÌव मȂ गया है िक भारत अब बड़ी-बड़ी चुनौितयȗ का सफलतापूवर्क सामना कर 
सकता है, सफलता ĢाÃत कर सकता है। सर, पहले हम सुनते थे िक यू.एस., यू.एस.एस.आर, 
चाइना आिद देशȗ ने ऐसे एक-एक िमशन क े िलए हज़ारȗ-लाखȗ करोड़ रूपय े खचर् िकए थे। मȅ 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
समझता हूं िक भारत एक ऐसा देश है, िजसने बहुत कम खचर् पर, बहुत कम लागत पर यह काम 
िकया। उसमȂ जो अिधकांश पुजȃ लगे हȅ, उनको भारत मȂ बनाकर, मेक इन इंिडया का जो ज़ोर 
लगाया गया है, यह सब आज भारत को एक अलग ही Ǜेणी मȂ लेकर जाता है। उस मीिंटग क े 
दौरान कई देशȗ क े मंितर्
यȗ ने मुझसे साझा बातचीत भी की िक अब वे भी चाहते हȅ िक Îपेस िमशन 
मȂ वे हमारे साथ जुड़Ȃ, उनके  जो Äयूचर Îपेस Ãलांस हȅ, उनमȂ भारत क े साथ वे साझा भागीदारी 
करना चाहते हȅ, पाटर्नरि
शप करना चाहते हȅ, सीखना चाहते हȅ और आगे चलकर Îपेस की तरफ 
ज्वाइंट एंडेवर बढ़ाना चाहते हȅ।  
 माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, जो लȅडर और रोवर क े िमशन लाइव हुए, इसकी सराहना 
हमने अलग-अलग पितर्काओं मȂ देखी। इसके  तीन Ģमुख जो उǈेÌय थे, the three main 
objectives of Chandrayaan-III, उन तीनȗ की इतनी सफलतापूवर्क, इतने precision से exact 
06:04 िमनट पर लȅिंडग हुई। हमारे जो तीनȗ लÑय थे – पहला यह िक मून सरफे स क े ऊपर सेफ 
और सॉÄट लȅिंडग होगी; दूसरा था िक हम rover operations को demonstrate कर सकȂ, िदखा 
सकȂ, जो मून पर रोवर बाहर िनकला और उसने operations िकए और on site experiments, 
जो लूनर सर
फे स पर करने थे, इन तीनȗ मȂ शत-Ģितशत सफलता Ģा Ãत करना हम सबका 
सौभाग्य है। मȅ पूरे सदन क े सदÎयȗ की तरफ से आपके  माध्यम से Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की 
Îपेस, साइंस और टेक्नोलॉजी की जो टीम क Ȃ दर् और राज्यȗ मȂ इस िवषय क े ऊपर िंचता करती है 
तथा जो इसरो की पूरी टीम है, िजसने इसमȂ िदन-रात मेहनत की, िव
शेषकर जो हमारी मिहला 
साइंिटÎट्स हȅ, उनको िवशेषकर धन्यवाद भी देता हूं, बधाई भी देता हूं। हमने गत िदनȗ मȂ देखा है 
िक क ै से मि
हला साइंिटÎट्स ने हमारे अलग-अलग Îपेस िमशंस मȂ एक Ģमुख भूिमका िनभाई है। 
ये मिहला साइंिटÎट्स आज वाÎतव मȂ भारत का गौरव बनी हȅ। मुझे लगता है िक हम उनको 
धन्यवाद क े रूप  मȂ तोहफा देने जा रहे हȅ। हम उÇमीद करते हȅ िक लोक सभा से पास होकर आज 
रात तक वह िबल यहां आ जाए और कल राज्य सभा मȂ हम जब मिहला आरक्षण िबल पास करȂगे, 
Constitutio
n (Amendment) Bill पास करȂगे, तो मȅ समझता हूं िक सही मायनȗ मȂ हमारी बहनȗ, 
माताओं और हमारी छोटी बेिटयȗ क े िलए, िजन्हȗने इतने बड़े लÑय ĢाÃत करने मȂ अपनी अिमट 
छाप छोड़ी है, इतना बड़ा योगदान िदया है, उनके  Ģित भी पूरे देश और िवÌ व को मैसेज जाएगा 
िक यह देश बहुत क ृतज्ञ देश है। यह देश मिहलाओं का सÇमान करने मȂ कटौती नहीं करता और 
आगे चलकर मिहलाओं को और बड़े रूप  मȂ इस देश क े िवकास क े Ģवाह मȂ जोड़ने क े िलए अहम 
कदम उठा रहा है।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, यह जो िव
कर्म लȅडर था, जो Ģज्ञान रोवर था और जो 
ĢपÊशन मॉǹ ूल था, यह भारत मȂ बना। मुझे याद है िक वषर् 2014 मȂ जब मेक इन इंिडया का 
माननीय Ģध
ान मंतर्ी जी ने आÏवान िकया था, तब कई सारी िटÃपिणयां आती थीं िक यह मेक इन 
इंिडया सफल नहीं हो रहा है, मेक इन इंिडया मȂ क्या हो रहा है, क्या नई चीज़ की! अभी क ु छ 
िदनȗ पहले मȅ एक नेता का बयान पढ़ रहा था, जो एक Ģकार से बड़े ओछे शÅदȗ मȂ, बहुत छोटे 
Îतर पर मेक इन इंिडया का मज़ाक उड़ाने की कोिशश हो रही थी। मȅ सम
झता हूं िक हमारे इस 
िमशन ने, चंदर्यान-3 ने और इसरो की कामयाब ी ने पूरी तरह से यह िसǉ कर िदया िक भारत मȂ 
बना हुआ सामान, भारत मȂ बने हुए पुजȃ और भारत मȂ बने हुए अलग-अलग components तथा 
equipments, जो इस िमशन मȂ लगे, इस सबने इस देश को नई ऊ ंचा इयȗ तक पहुंचाया है और 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
11

 
 
आज पूरा िवÌव भारत की तरफ देखता है। जब वे देखते हȅ िक हमȂ manufacturing capabilities 
चािहए, हमȂ टैलȂट चािहए, हमȂ िÎकÊस चािहए, तो उनको जो एक िवÌवसनीय देश नज़र आता 
है, िवÌवसनीय साझेदारी मȂ भाग लेने वाला पाटर्नर नज़र आता है, वह भारत नज़र आता है। आज 
भारत क े ऊपर िवÌ
व की िनगाहȂ िटकी हुई हȅ, िवÌव का िवÌवास बना हुआ है।  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, अगर हम design capabilities देखȂ, तो चंदर्यान-3 क े 
दौरान जो design capabilities डेवलप हुई हȅ, उनसे हमȂ आगे चलकर बहुत लाभ होगा 
हमने अलग-अलग तरीके  से देखा है िक Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी का लाभ भारत की िवक
ास 
यातर्ा मȂ िसफर् Îपेस ही नहीं, बिÊक वह हमारे लोकल डेवलेपमȂट मȂ भी बहुत बड़े तरी क े  से लाभ 
देता है। माननीय सदÎय जानते हȅ और आपने भी भली-भांित देखा है िक 'पीएम गित शिƪ' क्या 
है - यह एक Ģकार से Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी का इÎतेमाल करते हुए भारत की आधारभूत सुिवधाएं, 
भारत क े इंģाÎटर्क्चर को मजबूती देने, गित देने और Ģगित को तेज करने का एक साधन है।  
'पीएम गित शिƪ' मȂ Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी इÎतेमाल करके  अलग-अलग layers of data तैयार िक
या 
गया है, Îपेस से मैिंपग की गई है। इस काम क े संबंध मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, जब आज से 12-14 सा ल 
पहले गुजरात क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, तब उनके  मन मȂ एक कÊपना आई थी िक भारत मȂ Îपेस 
टेक्नोलॉजी का मैिक्समम इÎ त ेमाल क ै से िकया जाए, भारत Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी का क ै से लाभ ले 
सकता है। तब उन्हȗने गांधी नगर मȂ एक BISAG नामक संÎथा establish की।  उन्हȗने BISAG क े 
माध्यम से यह शुरुआत  की िक क ै से भारत क े भिवÍय की िवकास यातर् ा मȂ आधुिनक सुिवधाएं देते 
हुए सफलतापूवर्क हम भारत को एक International Centre for Manufacturing Trade and 
Business बना सकȂ । लाखȗ-करोड़ȗ लोगȗ को नौकिरयां देने क े िलए हम जो काम कर रहे हȅ, 
उसके  िलए Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी का इÎतेमाल करने का जीता-जागता उदाहरण 'पीएम गित शिƪ' 
है।  इस Ģकार से हम Îपेस से जो भी सीखȂगे, जो भी चन्दर्
यान-3 की उपलिÅधयां हȗगी, उनसे 
आगे चलकर भारत मȂ इंģाÎटर्क्चर डेवलप होगा। भारत मȂ िकस Ģकार से आगे हमȂ critical 
mineral resources पर काम करना है - अलग-अलग तरीके  से यह Îपेस का िरसचर् भारत को 
नई ऊचांइयȗ तक लेकर जाएगा। मेरा िवÌव
ास है िक इस उपलिÅध मȂ हम सब िमलकर जो आगे क े 
बड़े ambitious plans हȅ, जो योजनाएं हȅ, जो हमारी दूरदशीर् सोच है िक क ै से हमारी Îपेस 
टेक्नोलॉजी और Îपेस िम
शन्स भारत को आगे लेकर जाने मȂ काम करȂगे, उन पर काम करȂगे।  यह 
जो नया उत्सािहत भारत है, यह जो aspirational India की नई आकांक्षाएं हȅ, इनको पूरा करने मȂ 
चन्दर्यान क े बाद आने वाला गगनयान िमशन है, जो लगभग 2024 मȂ अनुमािनत है, Ãला
न्ड है, 
उसको भी हम क ै से सफल बनाएंगे, उसके  िलए हम सब इसरो को शुभकामनाएं दȂगे।  हम सब 
िमलकर एक संदेश दȂ िक आगे आने वाले गगनयान क े िलए भी इसरो पूरे तरीके  से सफल हो।  
हमारी माताएं, बहनȂ,  हमारे इसर
ो क े साइंिटÎट्स पूरी लगन क े साथ इसमȂ लगे हुए हȅ, उनको 
हम यहां से एक शुभ संदेश दȂ िक उनका गगनयान िमशन भी सफल हो।  हम देख रहे हȅ िक 
आिदत्य-L1 िमशन, जो Earth और Sun क े बीच मȂ यहां से लगभग 15 लाख िकलोमीट
र की दूरी 
पर जाकर stationed होगा, जो lagrange point है, वहां से सूयर् की िकरणȗ की ताकत, सूयर् की 
ताकत क े बारे मȂ Îट्डी करेगा, वह उस Ãवाइंट तक सफलतापूवर्क पहुंचे।  वह राÎते मȂ है और 
successfully लान्च हो चुका है।  वह पहला dedicated Sp
ace का Mission है, जो सूयर् को 
Îटडी करने क े िलए यहां से भेजा गया है।  इसी क े साथ -साथ एक dedicated Polarimetry 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Mission, XPoSat  है, जो x-ray क े माध्यम से Polarimeter Satellite क े रूप  मȂ बाहर काम 
करेगा।  इस तरीके  से हमारी जो आगे की नई-नई योजनाएं हȅ, उनके  िलए हम सब िमलकर इस 
सदन से एक Îवर मȂ एक अच्छा संदेश और शुभकामनाएं भेजȂ।  एक तरफ चंदर्यान-3 की 
सफलता क े िलए बधाई और दूसरी तरफ शुभेच्छा, आगे क े बड़े-बड़े लÑयȗ को ĢाÃत करने क े 
िलए। जब एक Îवर मȂ पूरा सदन यह मैसेज भेजेगा, मȅ समझता हूं िक सभी लोग, जो इस िमशन 
क े साथ जुड़े हुए हȅ, चाहे वह Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का Ģोत्साहन हो, चाहे हमारे अफसर
गण 
हȗ, चाहे इसरो क े साइंिटÎट्स हȗ, हर एक Ëयिƪ, जो इन अलग-अलग िमशन्स मȂ अपने-अपने 
पुजȃ या अपने-अपने कÇपोनȂट्स, इिक्वपमȂट्स बना कर योगदान दे रहा है और एक Ģकार से  140  
करोड़ देशवािसयȗ का उत्साहवधर्न करने का काम करते हुए आज िडÎकशन मȂ हम जो यह 
संदेश देने जा रहे हȅ, यह भी बड़ा शुभ संदेश है।  मȅ उÇमीद करता हूं िक कल यहां पर मिह लाओं 
को आरक्षण देने से संबंिधत िबल जब यह सदन सवर्सÇमित से पास करेगा, पािरत करेगा, तो दो 
शुभ संदेश  -  एक तरफ यहां का हमारा Ģवेश, आज का इसरो को चंदर् यान-3 की बधाई और 
शुभकामनाओं का मैसेज और तीसरा, कल आगे का जो लेिजÎलेिटव भारत का Ģवाह है, भारत क े 
आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ अमृत काल मȂ िवकिसत भारत बनाने की जो जन ीर् रहेगी, उसमȂ हमारी  
माताओं, बहनȗ और मिहलाओं को आरक्षण देकर इस पािर्लयामȂट और असेÇबलीज़, दोनȗ मȂ 
ज्यादा योगदान िमले, इसके  िलए हम जो कदम उठाने जा रहे हȅ, मȅ समझता हूं िक ये तीनȗ शुभ 
संदेश एक Ģकार से एक नई सुबह लेकर इस सेशन को भी यादगार बनाएंगे।  यह नई सुबह देश 
की अमृत काल की यातर्
ा मȂ भी हम सबके  िलए ऐितहािसक क्षण बनेगी और हम सब इसके  साक्षी 
हȅ, इसमȂ भाग ले रहे हȅ,  यह हम सबका बहुत बड़ा सौभाग्य है।  आपने मुझे इस चचार् को शुरू  
करने क े िल
ए मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभारी हूं।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, पीयूष गोयल जी।  माननीय Ǜी ज यराम रमेश। 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka) :  Sir, I rise to speak on a discussion that is 
titled, "India's glorious space journey marked by successful soft landing of 
Chandrayaan-3." Listening to the Leader of the House, it appeared as if this glorious 
space journey started only in 2014, and that the sutradhar of this space journey is the 
Prime Minister! Sir, I want to take this occasion to revisit this glorious space journey 
not to make political debating points but to  pay tribute to a remarkable generation of 
Indian scientists and technologists who could have worked anywhere in the world but 
chose to come back to India in the 1950s an d 1960s.  I have before me a Government 
Order issued on the 22
nd of February, 1962.  This is dated 22 nd of February, 1962, an 
Office Order issued by the Government  o f  I n d i a ,  w h i c h  r e a d s ,  " T h e  U n i o n  
Government has set up the Indian Nati onal Committee for Space Research.  The 
Committee set up on the recommendations of the Scientific Advisory Committee to 
the Cabinet will advise the Government on the promotion of research in exploration of 
space and its utilization for peaceful purposes." India's glorious space journey began 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
13

 
 
on the 22 nd of February, 1962 whic h was marked by the esta blishment of the Indian 
National Committee on Space Research . There were two people who were 
responsible for getting this INCOSPAR set up. Both were the great scientists of India, 
one was Homi Bhabha, who was then the Chairman of the Scientific Advisory 
Committee to the Cabinet and the second was Vikram Sarabhai, a great name, a 
man who had a vision for Indian space, and I expected the hon. Leader of the House, 
at least, to make a passing mention of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  Sir, I am agreeing... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka):  I am not yielding. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH :  Sir, it was two weeks before INCOSPAR was set up that 
the then Prime Minister of India, Jawaharl al Nehru, went to Ahmedabad to visit the 
Physical Research Laboratory that was cr eated by Vikram Sarabhai, way back in 
1947.  This is a photograph that I have of Pandit Nehru with Dr. Vikram Sarabhai and 
Dr. E V Chitnis.  In the old Parliament Ho use, you could have seen this photograph, 
but in this New Parliament House, we need  a telescope to see each other.  I don't 
have a telescope, Sir, but you can take my  word, this is a photograph of the Prime 
Minister of India with Dr. Vikram Sarabhai and Prof. E V Chitnis, who is 97 years old 
and is still alive.  He is one of the key fi gures in this space journey.  In fact, Prof. 
Chitnis's greatest contribution to our sp ace programme was the recruitment of a 
young engineer from the Madras Institute of Technology named APJ Abdul Kalam.  
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Sir, after the establishment of INCOSPAR on the 22
nd of February, 1962, the 
second milestone in this glorious space journey was on the 21 st of November, 1963, 
when India launched its sounding rocket fr om Thumba near Trivandrum.  This was 
called TERLS, namely, the Thumba Equatorial  Rocket Launching Station.  This was 
the first sounding rocket, launched way back on the 21 st of November, 1963, and this 
was made possible because of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai, because of Shri H.G.S. Murthy, 
because of Dr. Abdul Kalam, because of  Dr. EV Chitnis and a large number of 
scientists and technologists. 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 Sir, ISRO was created on the 15 th of August, 1969.  This was when Dr. Vikram 
Sarabhai created the Indian Space Research  Organization to give a developmental 
boost to the Indian space programme.  Th e Indian space programme is the only 
programme in the world that has not come out of the milit ary sector.  It has been a 
civilian programme all through.  The Indi an space programme is the only programme 
to have a developmental thrust -- the use of space for remote sensing, the use of 
space for rural development, the use of  space for communication and for weather 
forecasting.  This has been the hallmark of India's space programme, going back to 
the creation of ISRO on 15th of August, 1969. 
 Sir, on the 25 th of December, 1971, unfortunate ly, Dr. Vikram Sarabhai passed 
away, very suddenly, at the young age of 52 .  He died of a heart attack in Kovalam 
Beach near Trivandrum.  The Indian sp ace programme was then faced with a huge 
crisis.  It had lost its karta dharta,  it had lost its nirmata, it had lost its visionary, 
Vikram Sarabhai, who had lived and dreamt of  India as a space power.  It was then 
that the then Prime Minister of India, Smt. Indira Gandhi, took what I consider to be 
the most important step that has made India the space power that we are all proud of 
today.  She wrote a letter to an Indian sc ientist who was then taking a sabbatical at 
the famous California Institute of Technology in Pasadena in California.  The name of 
the scientist is Prof. Satish Dhawan, and it is in his honour that our launch centre in 
Sriharikota is called the Satish Dhawan Launch Centre.   
Sir, Indira Gandhi wrote a letter on the 7
th of January, 1972, and I wish to 
quote a few lines from this letter.  This is the writing of the Prime Minister of India: 
"Dear Dr. Dhawan, Vikram's sudden and tragic death has deprived our entire space 
research programme of leadership.  You ar e aware of the heavy investment we have 
made in it.  The ten year profile of the development of space shows the extent of our 
commitment.  We cannot afford to allow the en tire organization to crumble.  I should 
like you to accept the stewardship of our space programme, which I am proposing to 
separate from the Atomic Energy Commission ."  Sir, as we know, till 1972, Space 
and Atomic Energy were together.  But it is in 1972 that Space got separated from the 
Atomic Energy Commission. She further writ es: "It will be for you to structure this 
new organization.  Please let me know urgent ly when I may expect you to return and 
what arrangements you would like us to ma ke for the interim period.  I hope you will 
respond to an emergency situation in a sensitive area of national importance." 
This is a letter written by the Prime Mini ster of India to a scientist taking a 
sabbatical in California, who wa s then the Director of the In dian Institute of Science, 
Prof. Satish Dhawan.  Prof. Satish Dhaw an immediately accepte d the offer of the 
Prime Minister. He put some conditions, that he would like ISRO to be headquartered 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
15

 
 
in Bangalore, that he would not like to be posted in New Delhi, that he would like to 
continue as the Director of the Indian Inst itute of Science and that he would like full 
freedom to run ISRO the way it should be run.  The Prime Minister of India accepted 
and acceded to all these conditions.  Sir, wh en he came back to India, when he took 
over as Chairman of ISRO, her Secretary, Mr. P.N. Haksar, sent Mrs. Gandhi a note, 
and I was fortunate enough to get a copy of  this note in the archives.  Mr. Haksar 
wrote, on the 25 th o f  M a y ,  1 9 7 2 ,  t o  t h e  P r i m e  M i n ister.  He wrote, "Dr. Satish 
Dhawan is an extremely sensitive human be ing. Hitherto, he has led a relatively 
cloistered life, devoting himself to the pursuit of his own scientific specialty in the field 
of aerodynamics.  I know he has many doubts and hesitations in accepting the 
responsibility of heading our Space Organization. And if he were to opt out of it, we 
literally have no one at present as the seco nd best choice. It is, therefore, of vital 
importance that our Prime Minister should express, in her own way, her appreciation 
of the high sense of duty, which has led Dr. Dhawan to respond to the Prime 
Minister's call to him.  It is  equally necessary to say that Dr. Dhawan will continue to 
receive her personal support in sorting ou t any problems he may run up against any 
administrative and other fields, that Dr. Dhawan should not hesitate in coming to the 
Prime Minister and that he will always have direct access." 
Sir, it is from this day onwards that Pr ime Ministers of India have held direct 
control of the Department of Space.  It is from this day onwards that the Chairman of 
ISRO, the Chairman of the Space Commission, the Secretary, Department of Space, 
three roles combined in one in dividual, have only reported to the Prime Minister and 
nobody else.  So, the glorious space journey, that the Leader of the House wants us 
to believe started in 2014, ha d the first milestone on the 22 nd of February, 1962.  The 
glorious journey, that the Leader of the House wants us to believe started in 2014, 
had its second milestone on the 15 th of August, 1969 with th e creation of ISRO.  The 
glorious journey, that the Leader of the House wants us to believe began in 2014, had 
its third milestone in July, 1972, when Pr of. Satish Dhawan became the Chairman of 
ISRO. 
Sir, the success of Chandrayan-3 is  based on the competencies, the 
capabilities, the capacities that have been created over a 60 year period.  We 
launched satellites, but we first launched sa tellites on Soviet rockets. We did not 
have a Satellite Launch Vehicle.  In July, 1979, our first SLV launch failed. 
Dr. Kalam was in tears.  So , Prof. Satish Dhawan said , "I am your leader.  I 
will take responsibility for the failure.  You sit at the back."  That is leadership.  In 
August 1980, the SLV-3 succeeded.  Prof. Dh awan said to Dr. Kalam, "Kalam, you 
take credit for this.  I will sit at the back."  This is leadership.  Leadership is not about 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
taking credit when things are going good and running away when things are going 
bad.  Leadership is when you have the courage to take the responsibility for the 
things that are going wrong as much as you take credit  when the things are going 
right.  So, these are the milestones of a successful journey.  
There have been many scientists and I want to recall them. I have mentioned 
Dr. Homi Bhabha; I have mentioned Dr. Vikram Sarabhai; and, I have mentioned Dr. 
Abdul Kalam. There is a great scientist of In dia who is forgotten today. He is the only 
scientist who has worked and contributed for our nuclear programme as well as for 
our space programme, and if you go to th e Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre in 
Thiruvananthapuram, you will see a statue of him in the space organisation 
headquarters.  His name is Dr. Brahm Prak ash. He is probably one of the greatest 
metallurgists that India has produced an d he made a huge difference to our space 
programme and to our atomic energy programme. We have had a series of 
successful Chairmen of ISRO.  We had Prof. Satish Dhawan, Prof. U.R. Rao, Dr. 
Madhavan Nair, Dr. Kasturirangan, Dr. Radhakrishnan, Dr. Sivan and now, of 
course, we have Shri Somanath.  Each of  them has made contributions because the 
political leadership has given them the freedom to make those contributions.   
I also want to say that India's space programme has always had a 
developmental orientation.  It has alwa ys been space for development, space for 
communication, space for rural developmen t, space for weather forecasting and 
space for identifying sources of water.  Indian scientists and technologists have never 
seen India's space programme as a symbol of Indian nationalism.  It has always been 
seen in a developmental perspective.  It ha s always been seen as an instrument of 
fulfilling developmental aspirations, and, that is why, we had INSAT, the Indian 
national communication satellite.  It is because of INSAT that we improved our 
weather forecasting, located sources of water, created new maps and created 
platforms like Bhuvan.  So, while it is natural for all of us to take pride, I would like to 
urge all of us to please look at our space programme fundamentally as an instrument 
of development and not as an instrument of muscular nationalism.  This has been the 
hallmark of India's space programme for the last 60 years and let it be in that spirit, 
with which it was founded by our scientists and technologists.   
I am entirely in agreement with the Prim e Minister when he said yesterday that 
the Chandrayan-3 achievement creates a new excitement for science.  But, what is 
the point in creating an excitement for science when you are removing Darwin's 
Theory of Evolution from the textbooks? What is the importance of creating an 
excitement for science when you reject  Newton and Einstein?  You think all 
knowledge was available to India 2,000 years a go.  That is not the scientific temper.  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
17

 
 
Scientific temper is the spirit of enquiry an d the spirit of questioning.  We have had a 
glorious tradition in mathematics.  We have had a glorious tradition in metallurgy.  We 
have had a glorious tradition in astronomy.  Let us take pride in  our past, but let us 
not think that all of modern science, all of  modern technology was known to us 2,000 
years ago.  We have to move with the times.  That is the scientific temper and that is 
the scientific spirit.  If you re ject science, if you do not give your scientific institutions 
freedom, if you do not allow scientific endeavour to flourish in a spirit of 
professionalism, you can have all the Chandrayans of the worl d, but it is not going to 
make a difference to the minds of the young.   We have to create a scientific spirit, 
the spirit of questioning, the sp irit of enquiry, the spirit of doubt.  That is the spirit of 
science, which, I hope, will be created by this excitement.   
Along with Chandrayan-3, let us not forget Chandrayan-1 which was launched 
in 2008.  I have no hesitation in saying  that the first announcement of Chandrayan 
was made by the then hon. Prime Minister , Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, on the 15 th 
August in 2003.   After that announcement in 2003, we had Chandrayan-1 in 2008.  
We had Chandrayan-2 in 2019 and we had Chandrayan-3 in 2023.  What does it 
mean?  It means that there is continuity in governance.  If a Prime Minister refuses to 
acknowledge continuity in governance, if a Prime Minister believes that the world has 
started only when he became the Prime Minister, if a Prime Minister believes that 
Indian science and Indian space program me have become great only when he 
became the Prime Minister, I beg to differ.  Along with Chandrayan-1, let us take 
Aditya-L1, which was also a great success.   It has not been mentioned in the 
Resolution, but Aditya-L1, the solar laboratory was launched one week after 
Chandrayan-3.  When did Aditya-L1 start?  Aditya-L1 started in the year 2006.  It 
took 17 years for Aditya-L1 ...(Interruptions)... Sir, can I finish?  ...(Interruptions)...  
It took 17 years for Aditya-L1 to be concei ved, to be planned, to be executed and to 
be launched.   
The hon. Leader of the House said that we are now making things in India.  
We have always been making things in In dia.  There are so many companies we can 
think of, like Larsen and Toubro and Walc handnagar Industries, which have been 
associated with the Indian space programme  going back to the 1970s.  To say that 
suddenly, after 2014, we have started maki ng things for our space programme is a 
complete distortion of facts.  In fact, the Indian space programme has always been 
based on creative partnerships with Indian private sector and Indian public sector.  
Our nuclear reactors are made in India; our rockets are made in India; our launchers 
are made in India; our satellites are made in  India, and they were being made in India 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
before 2014 also.  Sir, I do not know what your intention is, whether you want to pass 
a Resolution at the end of the discussion or not. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One second.  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH :  L e t  m e  f i n i s h ,  S i r .   I f  y o u  d o  w a n t  t o  p a s s ,  p l e a s e  
acknowledge that the capabilities, competencies and capacities that have resulted in 
Chandrayan-3 success, are the results of in vestments made over the last 60 years.  
These are based on contributions of successive Prime Ministers.  These are based on 
the contributions of a large number of Indian  scientists and technologists, many of 
whom we don't even know of, many of whom we don' t even acknowledge, but, I 
think, today is the day when we should salute our Indian scientific and technological 
community.  It is the Indian scientists and technologists who gave India the Green 
Revolution in 1970s.  It is the Indian scientists and technologists who gave India the 
White Revolution in 1970s.  It is the Indian scientists and technologists who have 
created our Missile Development Programme - the Agnis, the Prithvis and the Nags.   
It is the Indian scientists and Indian  technologists who have given our space 
programme the profile in the world that it is today.  I want to say one thing about 
these scientists and engineers.  All the newspaper headlines, all our talk is based on 
our elite institutions of learning.  I happen  to come from one of them.  I have no 
hesitation in saying that the contributi ons in the space programme have come from 
men and women who are graduates of Gove rnment engineering colleges, who are 
graduates of lesser-known engineering colleges.  They are not from IITs, they are not 
from IIMs, but they are from colleges in Kolkata, colleges in Trivandrum, colleges in 
Surat, colleges in Baroda, colleges in Pune, colleges in Bhopal, colleges in 
Rajasthan, colleges in Indore, colleges in Jaipur, colleges in Chennai and many other 
places.  Sir, this is the strength of Indian  science.  The strength of Indian science 
does not come from 5 institutes, 10 institutes  or 15 institutes.  The strength of Indian 
science comes from a very large population  of engineering institutions, which we 
have to nurture, which we have to upgrade, which we have to recognize and to 
which we must give full freedom to operate. 
 So, Sir, I associate myself with the sentiments of the Leader of the House who 
has not heard whatever I have said because he has been busy in conversation with 
the person next to him throughout.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : H e  h a s  t o  r e a c t  n o w .  Mr. Jairam, now, you have made a 
reflection, let him react. The Leader of the House. Before that, let me say something.  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
19

 
 
Jairam, you were on the right track but when I took the seat, you got a little political, 
and, from science, you travelled to politics.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, I had got up in between also. Unfortunately, Jairam 
Rameshji thought... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, हमारा पुराना िरÌता है।  इन्हȗने क ु छ साल पहले आइंÎटाइन और न्यूटन 
को कन्Äयूज़ भी कर िदया था।  मȅ उनको उसकी याद नहीं िदलाऊँ गा, पर आज उनसे भाषण 
सुनना पड़ा, Ģवचन सुनना पड़ा िक हमारे Îपेस Ģोगर्ाम की क्या उपलिÅधयाँ हȅ! 
 
Ǜी सभापित: पुराना िरÌता और पुरान
ा घाव मीठा ददर् देता है। 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, I associate myself with the Leader of the House and we 
acknowledge, we salute and we applaud ISRO ; the past members of ISRO family as 
well as the present members of ISRO family.  We congratulate our Indian scientists.  
We also congratulate our Indian techno logists. I am sure that many more 
achievements will be there in the years to co me.  But, Sir, I will only end by pleading 
that we need to give our scientific and technological institutions full freedom, we need 
to give our scientific and technological institutions full independence and 
professionalism and we need to free our scie ntific and technological institutions from 
any political patronage, political interference and political intervention.    
 Let us, on that thought, acknowledge th e glorious space journey that we have 
had and let us also acknowledge the milestones that we have gone through.  Even 
though the Prime Minister and the Leader of the House may choose to airbrush them 
away from history, they are fact of life an d they cannot be erased from the history.  
They are very much part of our space journey.  I think, it is important for me to remind 
the House as to where we have come from, the journey that we have undertaken, the 
achievements that we have had, the people  who have contributed, rather than fall 
victim to this new impression that has b een created that this  entire accomplishment 
of Chandrayaan-3 and Aditya L-1 is the result of only one individual.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Mr. Jawhar Sircar.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL : Sir, I got up as Jairam Ramesh initiated, and, you are right, 
he started on the right track.  I got up only to say that I fully agree with him and 
associate with him while he was talking ab out the journey but, unfortunately, he did 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
not yield.  But, now, since he has also take n it to a political level, I have only two 
comments to make.  
 Of course, the journey is extremely important.  We have all assembled here 
and we are going to speak about the variou s aspects of journey and we have many 
other speakers who will be delving on who played what role and who provided what 
kind of funding support, who made this wh ole mission really get the kind of speed 
and scale that made it a success.  But, at  the end of the day, I am sure, my hon. 
colleague and friend, Jairam, will also appr eciate that people run many races.  There 
are marathon runs, there are sprint runs , there are 100 meter, 200 meter or 42 
kilometer, all sorts of races are there ...(Interruptions).. but ultimately, one must 
also acknowledge that that it is the determination that makes the winner win.   
Secondly, he made a pers onal comment on me.  Everybody is human and 
everybody can make mistakes.  I may not be as infallible as Mr. Jairam Ramesh.  He 
is, of course, infallible and he has never made any mistakes in life...  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please. 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: I have, very openly and in public, acknowledged that I made a 
mistake at that point of time in the rush of speaking but I have not made the kind of 
colossal mistakes   I think, we can leave it and ha ve discussion outside the House.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana): Sir, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY (Telangana): Sir, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, please.  ...(Interruptions)... I will come to you.  
Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... P l e a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members,  I hope the comment I am making now will be 
appreciated as the intellectual level of the House is very high.  About three decades 
ago, I was in Rajya Sabha as a junior Minister. A very distinguished Member was 
making a scholarly address, as Jairam Rame sh just made.  At that point of time, 
there was entry of another Member.  It is in  the context of Leader of the Opposition 
saying, "I fully agree with him", I am on  that.  When that Member entered, the 
speaker got worried that that Member will un settle him.  Immediately, he said, "Even 
                   
 Not recorded. 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
21

 
 
my very good learned friend agrees with me" so that he does not say otherwise, and, 
came the swift comment, "Fools never differ".  That was the comment.  I said, "You 
have to understand that I said it in apologetic mode that if these two have agreed, we 
will have to see in several persp ectives. Now, Mr. Jawhar Sircar.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, it is ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, what did you say?  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : Sir, look at the rejoinder of the Leader of the House after 
such a brilliant speech, bringing in the issue of   ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : One second. ...(Interruptions)...  One second.  
...(Interruptions)...  It is deleted.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL : He threw a point at me, and I threw a point at him.  
...(Interruptions)... Where is...(Interruptions)...  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please.  ...(Interruptions)...  Piyush ji, it is deleted.  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: It is between two friends.  Let him not come in the way.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The comment is not on record.  Hon. Members, after a long time, 
we had a good debate. ...(Interruptions)... After a long time, the people were 
informed. Maybe, there is a political pull which will be th ere on both sides, on all 
sides.  But after a long time, we are on tr ack.  Therefore, we must appreciate it.  My 
light comment was in that direction only.  Let us ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, you should expunge his remarks. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I will look into it.  But all I am sa ying is, after a long time, we have 
had some return to a situation where outs ide people will get some knowledge, they 
will get inspired.  ...(Interruptions)...  Do you want to say something, Madam? 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA BACHCHAN (Uttar Pradesh) : I was saying that I associate with 
you, Sir.  
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Well, one of the greatest artists, -- I have admired her for a long 
time, for several decades -- if she associates with the sentiment, it is a great positive 
gain for all of us. Now, Mr. Jawhar Sircar.  He brings on the table huge bureaucratic 
experience.   
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal) :  Thank you, Sir.  As I can't see any clock, I 
hope my time starts now.  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have twenty-one minutes.   
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR:  The first point that I would like to make is across the House.  
We are Indians first, and as Indians, we  take immense pride in the Chandrayaan 
Mission, we take immense pride in the scientific achievements of India, irrespective of 
which part of India we come from, what we  represent. That is the first basic point 
that we have to remember.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI GEETA ALIAS CHANDRAPRABHA) in the 
Chair.] 
 
India is a continuum; India is eternal.  We cannot slice a part of India and say, 'this 
was my part and all the cr edit happened during this part, all discredit happened 
during that part.'  We were all part of a continuum.  
When we talk of Chandrayaan -- Mr. Jairam Ramesh has explained it in great 
detail, the Chair also has explained in  great detail -- the whole journey of 
Chandrayaan spans over six decades and more. Numerous individuals have 
contributed to it.  Today is a time when we need to remember them.  We need to 
celebrate the moment, but we also need to remember our history.  We also need to 
celebrate history.   
So, I will begin with what Mr. Jairam Ra mesh said about the great contribution 
of Pandit Nehru to the whole episode, to th e whole journey.  As Indians, no one can 
deny -- I am not speaking parochially -- the immense contribution of the man who 
introduced scientific temper in India, the man who introduced all forms of scientific 
research, Dr. Vikram Sarabhai.  We have come to a new House and there should be 
a new approach.  Instead of only political leaders, we should celebrate the images, 
the statuaries of Vikram Sarabhai, of Abdu l Kalam, of Homi Bhabha.  These are the 
ones who took us to where we are.  We have  to admit that it is the great leadership, 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
23

 
 
the great vision, the unending toil of Homi Bhabha, of Satish Dhawan, of Vikram 
Sarabhai, of Abdul Kalam which took us to where we are today. 
  We also cannot acknowledge or disacknowledge or deny the role played by 
the Prime Ministers.  The present Prime Minist er must have surely contributed to this 
great journey.  But that does not mean that earlier Prime Ministers, who laid the path, 
did not contribute and should be forgotten.  As an Indian, my h eart leaps when I see 
our Space Launch Vehicles propel the satellit es of other countries and place them in 
space.  We do a big favour to the rest of  humanity, who are these nations.  But my 
heart is big.  As an Indian, as a person  who shares the timelessness of India, we 
should have a big heart. A big heart that  not only takes Space Launch Vehicles, but 
also propels ideas. Today, my heart leaps with joy for another reason, and the reason 
is that science is finally gaining over su perstition. We have to believe in both 
experimentation, in empiricism and evidence before we open our mouths.  Before we 
open our mouths, we must think of the co nsequences of what we are saying.  How 
can one say that Ganesha's head was pl aced by plastic surgery?  We had his 
chaturthi yesterday.  We believe in the greatness of Ganesha, but how can you say 
that his head was placed by plastic surgery?   How can you talk of stem cell science 
bringing in a particular large section in th e Mahabharata?  You ha ve to have faith in 
something as well as a strong belief in rati onality. Personally, I don’t find any great 
conflict between faith in something and ration ality; others may, but I don’t.  As an 
Indian, I can move along with faith and I ca n also move along with rationality, but I 
would not ever like to see the day when faith, superstition and backwardness trample 
upon the fruits of science.  We had a Sc ience Minister who came and said that we 
reject Darwin. We have another Minister who comes and says that we reject Einstein. 
For God sake, if you reject science, you cannot celebrate science, just because the 
timing was such.  You cannot reap the benefits of timing and then say this.  
We had a Science and Technology Minist er who said that we discovered the 
theories of Pythagoras before Pythagoras.  For God sake, you are the Minister of the 
great Republic of India!  You cannot make  these statements.  I beseech of you, 
please restrain them from making irresponsible statements.  A Vice-Chancellor of 
Andhra University talks about ancient stem cell research. A Chief Minister talks of 
internet and space communication during the age of Mahabharata.  Let us, from this 
moment, take a note that before we make unscientific comments, we will restrain 
ourselves, we will stick to science so th at we have many mo re Chandrayaans, we 
have many more Adityas, we have a superi or 'Make in India'.  Since people were 
talking about contribution, a very important po int that we need to remember is that 
this contribution of Chandrayaan reveals that it is the smaller technological colleges of 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
India, that are not in the limelight, non-IITs,  if I may put it bluntly, that have taken 
India into such a glorious position.  We are feeding the IITs, but many of the products 
of IITs are going abroad to serve the inte rests of world capitalism, to serve the 
interests of world domination. Why are we doing it? We need to shift our emphasis to 
our smaller colleges. Bengal, in cidentally, has sent 31 scie ntists in ISRO.  We could 
have said more about it. 
  Now, when I mention about superstiti ons, I also come to two small spoiler 
points.  We have spoken about the great ness of ISRO, but we have not mentioned 
one word about the Devas-Antrix Scandal.  The Devas-Antrix scandal remains alive 
till today.  A few months ago, the Delhi High Court pronounced the judgement which 
will make you shiver. They say that it is poison in the seed. The entire thing is a 
p o i s o n ed  effo rt .  I t  d o es  n o t  m att er t o  m e w h i ch  reg i m e d i d  i t . N o  reg i m e g et s  i n t o  
such great detail. It does not matter.  We  should have closed this chapter. We 
should have punished them because we remain vulnerable to an international fraud of 
something like Rs. 30,000 crores. Why shou ld we pay it?  Just because some 
technocrat made a dirty deal!  We talk of the Nambi Effect.  We celebrate.  We can 
celebrate science.  We can celebrate the effects of science. We can celebrate our 
victories, but do not, as the Chair has said, bring politics into it.  
This brings me to a point where I say th at if you want to really move forward 
with more Chandrayaans, with  more Adityas, with more progress in this domain, 
then, free science.  You have made science subservient to the rules of bureaucracy.  
You have created Departments and Minist ries of Science where you have placed 
scientists, but the rules remain the same.  The rules remain the same.  You have to 
have a separate set of rules.  You have to go in for faith.  You have to allow them to 
function, not shackle them with bureaucratic rules.  My heart leap s when I hear that 
India has joined the six nations for the Na tional Quantum Mission.  This National 
Quantum Mission will take India forward.  Whether 'x' regime stays or 'y' regime 
comes or 'z' regime goes, it doesn't matte r. This permanent contribution to the 
National Quantum Mission will take India forward. We should move higher. 
  We have already moved high on the I nnovation Index. The world over look at 
us to see how much we have innovated, not how much we have talked. How many 
patents have we filed?  This is a hard fact.  And we have actually gone up. But we 
need to go further up.  This is where th e focus should be. Th e tragic point about 
Indian science is that even the budget of  ISRO has been cut by eight per cent. The 
tragic part of Indian science is that we do not contribute enough to research and 
development (R&D).  It is an international shame. I am saying it to the Ministers that 
it is an international sham e because when we make claims, we must substantiate 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
25

 
 
claims.  Contribution of our GDP to rese arch and development is 0.65 per cent, out 
of which four per cent is contributed by the state sector, that is the Government 
sector, and only 0.2 per cent is contributed by the corporate sector in India.  It is the 
same corporate sector for whom you have  allowed remission of  f o u r  l a k h  c r o r e  
rupees.  I am repeating it. You have remitted  four lakh crore rupees by way of taxes 
from 2019.  What have you got in return?  Can you make them contribute half a per 
cent more?  This is the remission of income  tax or what you call corporation tax by 
way of favours. I am repeating the point.  It is Rs.12.5 lakh crore.  I am repeating it.  
Rs.12.5 lakh crore of bank customer s' money has evaporated, has been 
extinguished and has been written off to favour big corporates.  A big corporate, who 
belongs to a political party and who was also a Member of this House, has got away 
with Rs.5,000 crore...(Interruptions)...  My submission, Madam, is not politics.  My 
submission is that this is the type of mo ney that could get in to help the science 
sector, with more funding.  That is all.  All I am saying is this.  Don't talk of lack of 
resources.  Say that we have resources but they have gone in wrong directions. 
  Now that we are conscious of our capabilities in science and technology, in 
industry and in Make in India, let us put more money in research and development.  
And where do we get the money from?  I have already mentioned about Rs.5,000 
crore that has been remitted.  Do not perm it these things to go on. We have had a 
long discussion on Space Mission. We have had an erudite discussion by Shri Jairam 
Ramesh, by hon. Chairman and by the Leader  of the House. I thank all of you.  We 
should have found time not only for the space and the moon but also for Manipur.  
We have had no time at all to discuss Manipur.   
 With these words, I thank you and I su pport the Resolution in favour of 
congratulating Indian science as a whole for several generations. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Madam, I am very proud to participate in the 
discussion on India's glorious space journe y marked by successful soft landing of 
Chandrayaan-3 on the moon as a citizen of In dia, and not of Bharat.  It is really a 
proud moment. The whole world is celebrati ng it.  Chandrayaan-3 landed on the 
moon very softly. The lander and the rover are doing their work very softly.  But as we 
have landed in this new Parliament Bu ilding, we have seen  only turmoil and 
turbulence in the past few days. That is m oon and this is Parliament.  It is a very 
happy moment that India is the first country to have landed on the south pole of the 
moon.  This is being celebrated across the wo rld, though it stands fourth among the 
other countries which have reached the m oon. After this successful Mission, India's 
space exploration industry is being talked about in a big and proud way across the 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
world and the Indian spacecraft are being cons idered and seen as milestones of this 
sector.  All the credit goes to the team of  ISRO. Their relentless pursuit, dedication 
and passion have made this country very famo us globally.  I don't want to repeat 
what Mr. Jairam Ramesh told or Mr. Sircar spoke here. Yes, its history is very long.  
Vikram Sarabhai, who has to be recollected at this moment, started the ISRO journey 
from a church. The church gave its prayin g space to Vikram Sarabhai to launch its 
first rocket when he was searching for a suitable space. On this, no caste, no 
religion; it is India. India has travelle d a long way. Now we are reaching greater 
heights which are being appreciated.   
 It is very important and I want to say it very emphatically. The Mission Director 
of Chandrayaan-3, which is very much celebrated, is Mr. P. Veeramuthuvel .  He is 
from Villupuram, Tamil Nadu.  Our Finance Minister also did her schooling from this 
place.  He studied in a Government school .  He went to Coim batore and did his 
engineering.  He worked in Lakshmi Engineering Works.  Then he came to Tiruchi, to 
my place, and did from NIT.  Now he is co nsidered to be a very shining example for 
all the aspiring scientists and engineers who are indulged in aerospace.   
 Project Director of Chandrayaan-2 wa s Ms. Vanita Muthiah.  She is from 
Chennai.  She comes from a very ordinary, humble family.  She also studied in a 
Government school.  She studied in various engineering colleges in Tamil Nadu. She 
was the Project Director of Chandrayaan-2.  
 Then there was Chandrayaan-1.  Mr. Mylswamy Annadurai who is known as 
the Moon Man; he was, indeed, the first one.  In 1969, Apollo landed on the moon 
with Armstrong and returned.  But it wa s the Mission of Mr. Mylswamy Annadurai 
which came with the result th at water is available on th e moon, and that is being 
hailed across the world. He is responsi ble for 60 satellites which have been 
successfully launched by ISRO.  He is also from a very humble family. He studied in a 
Government school and achieved it. 
   Now Aditya-1 is going to explore the sun. The Mission Director is Ms. Nigar 
Shaji Sultana from Shengottai which is the southern end of Tamil Nadu. She is also 
from a very humble family. She studied in a Government school and did her 
engineering. What has been established by all these things is that to achieve 
something, a person need not study in a private school or a person need not go 
abroad to get education. All these stud ents and all these engineers who have 
succeeded are from Tamil medium school and their second language is English only.  
To reach the space, Mr. Veeramuthuvel, th e successful Mission Director, started 
from Villipuram and landed on the moon without Hindi and Sanskrit. We are very 
proud to say that these scientists have sh own to the world that India's ISRO and its 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
27

 
 
space exploration is par excellence.  It is better than the developed countries.  So 
also they have established that even persons from ordinary families, with expertise in 
their own mother tongue, and having Englis h as their link language, can successfully 
achieve many things.  This is a very, very important thing that we have learnt in this.  
We have to compliment every one of the scientists. Sivan, who was the former 
Chairman of ISRO from Kanyakumari, an d the present Chairman , Somanath, and all 
have made us very proud.  This Parliament , cutting across party lines, as citizens, as 
responsible Members of Parliament and on behalf of DMK Party, I congratulate them.  
Mr. Veeramuthuvel was immediately called and appreciated by our Chief Minister, 
Mr. M.K. Stalin, after the mission was su ccessful. So, as Members of Parliament, 
with all responsibility and proud, let us compliment and congratulate the team of 
ISRO for having taken India globally to a very, very remarkable place. Thank you very 
much.  
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक (पंजाब): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आज इस बहुत महत्वपूणर् सफलता 
क े िलए पूरे देश को बधाई देना चाहता हूँ और सबसे ज्यादा उन वैज्ञािन
कȗ  और लीडसर् को बधाई 
देना चाहता हूँ, िजन्हȗने इसमȂ contribute िकया है। मȅ आपको यह बताना चाहूँगा िक Îपेस िमशन 
की शुरुआत  Îवतंतर्ता से बहुत पहले हो गई थी। कोलकाता मȂ Ģोफे सर िमतर्ा थे, सी.वी. रमण 
साहब थे और आते-आते Îवतंतर्ता क े बाद िफर िव
कर्म साराभाई और होमी भाभा थे। इन लोगȗ ने 
एक ऐसी मजबूत scientific leadership की नींव रखी, िजसके  कारण आज हमȂ इसरो का यह 
Îवरूप देखने को िमल रहा है। 1960 मȂ ही सबसे पहले Indian National Committee बनी थी, 
बाद मȂ िफर उसका नाम इसरो िकया गया था। ज
यराम जी ने िडटेल मȂ इसके  बारे मȂ बताया है, 
उस पर मȅ नहीं जाऊँ गा। लेिकन यह जानना बहुत जरूरी है िक इसरो सबसे पहले Department 
of Atomic Energy क े अंडर आता था और बाद मȂ िफर Department of  Science बना कर 
उसको अलग िकया गया और होमी भाभा को उसका सेकर् ेटरी बनाया गया तथा िवकर्म साराभाई, 
जो साइंिटÎट थे, उनको इस इंिÎटǷूट का Ģमुख बनाया गया। यह सबको जानना चािहए िक 10 
इंÎटीǷूशन्स क े build होने क े 10 साल क े अंदर ही सबसे पहला सैटेलाइट इसरो ने लाँच कर 
िदया था, जो अपने आपमȂ एक बहुत बड़ी बात है। 20 साल होते-होते, जो सैटेलाइट लाँच Ëहीकल 
होते हȅ, इंिड
या ने उनको तैयार कर िलया था और 20वȂ साल क े पहले ही अपने खुद क े Ëहीकल से 
अपने सैटेलाइट लाँच करने शुरू  कर िदए थे। जी
एसएलवी, पीएसएलवी ऐसे लाँच ËहीकÊस हȅ, 
िजनके  ǎारा देश क े ही नहीं, बिÊक दूसरे देशȗ क े सैटेलाइट को भी अंतिरक्ष मȂ Îथािपत करने का 
काम िकया जा रहा है। ĢÌ
न आज यह नहीं है, बिÊक मूल ĢÌन को समझना पड़ेगा िक मूल ĢÌन 
क्या है।  मूल ĢÌन यह है िक भारत ने Îपेस साइंस मȂ इतना अच्छा क ै से कर िलया?  आज कई 
सारी जो दूसरी संÎथाएँ हȅ, उन दूसरी संÎथाओं को क्या हुआ? वे कहाँ पीछे रह गयीं? भारत ने 
Îपेस क े क्षेतर् मȂ ऐसा क्या िकया िक इस
रो इतना आगे चला गया? सबसे मह त्वपूणर् चीज़ होती है, 
एक Ëयिƪ।  मȅ भी साइंिटÎट हूँ। मȅ राजनीित मȂ आने से पहले साइंिटÎट था, इसिलए मȅ इस बात 
को अच्छी तरह से समझता हूँ। िकसी एक साइंिटÎट से ज्यादा महत्वपूणर् होती है, संÎथा और 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
उससे भी महत्वपूणर् होती है उस संÎथा को बनाने वाली लीडरिशप। यह संभव है िक हम सबके  
राजनीितक मूÊयȗ मȂ और राजनीितक रूप  से एक-दूसरे से मतभेद हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन आज 
अगर पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  को याद नहीं िकया गया, तो वह बेमानी होगा। 
 मȅ आपको याद िदला दूँ िक आज़ादी क े बाद हमारे देश की प
िरिÎथित ऐसी थी िक कई 
जगहȗ पर खाने क े िलए पयार्Ãत अन्न भी नहीं था। जब देश मȂ पयार्Ãत अन्न भी नहीं था, तो उस 
समय कोई Ë
यिƪ क ै से यह सोच सकता है िक पैसा Îपेस साइंस मȂ लगाना है। िनिÌचत रूप  से 
उनका राजनीितक रूप  से बहुत िवरोध हुआ होगा, लेिकन उन सारे िवरोधȗ को अलग रखते हुए 
उन्हȗने अपनी राजनीितक दूरदृिÍट और ÎपÍटता िदखाई । इसको कहते हȅ, लीडरिशप - उन्हȗने 
ऐसी लीडरिशप िदखाई। आज जहाँ भारत है और जहाँ पािकÎतान है, उसका मूल कारण क्या है? 
उसका मूल कारण यह है िक भारत को आज़ादी क े बाद पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  िमले और पािकÎ
तान को पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ िजन्ना िमले। यही एक-
दो मूल कारण हȅ, िजनके  कारण ही पािकÎतान आज कहाँ है और भारत आज कहाँ है। हमारे कई 
सारे मतभेद हो सकते हȅ। यह जरूरी नहीं है िक हम हर चीज़ मȂ सहमत हȗ, लेिकन साइंस और 
टेक्नोलॉजी मȂ पंिडत ज
वाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने जो काम िकया, उसको पूरा देश मानता है और 
उनकी लीडरिशप को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए हम सबको अनवरत बढ़ते रहना होगा।             
 जब इन्हȗने इसरो को बनाया, तो उनक
ा िवज़न क्या था? िवज़न यह नहीं था िक छाती 
पीट-पीट कर दूसरȗ को अपनी ताकत का एहसास कराना है, िवज़न यह नहीं था िक अपने आप 
मȂ ताकत एकि तर्त करना है, िवज़न यह था िक साइंस और टेक्नोलॉजी को जनमानस क े िहत मȂ 
क ै से उपयोग िकया जाएगा। यही वह उǎेिलत और अंडरलाइन रीज़न था, िजसके  कारण पंिडत 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने इस पर भरोसा िदखाया था। आज आप जो क ु छ भी देखते हȅ चाहे मौसम 
िवभाग से संबंिधत जान
कारी हो या Communication technology हो, कई सारे क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ Îपेस 
टेक्नोलॉजी ने जो contribution िदया है, उसके  कारण ही आज हम साइंस क े दूसरे क्षेतर् मȂ भी 
आगे बढ़ पा ए  हȅ। लेिकन यह भी देखना पड़ेगा िक क्या पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी सब क ु छ 
अके ले कर पाते? क्या राजनीितक पिरिÎथितयाँ अके ले allow करतीं? यह संभव नहीं था। सरदार 
पटेल जी भी थे, िजन्हȗने उस समय देश मȂ राजनीितक िÎथ रता लाई। अÇबेडकर जी भी थे, 
िजन्हȗने constitutionally इस  देश को एक ऐसा महान Constitution िदया। इस तरीके  से एक 
टीमवकर् होता है। िकसी भी देश क े िवकास क े िलए टीमवकर् सबसे महत्वपूणर् होता है। मुझे लगता 
है िक आज गैर-राजनैितक दलȗ मȂ भी और अपने खुद क े सभी राजनैितक दलȗ मȂ भी इस तरीके  
क े टीमवकर् का अभ
ाव है। िवज़न बड़ा साफ था िक साइंस एण्ड टेक्नोलॉजी का उपयोग देश क े 
िहत क े िलए करना है।  
 एक और महत्वपूणर् चीज़ है िक अगर नींव का पत्थर सीधा लगता है, तो बाकी क े पत्थर भी 
सीधे लगते जाते हȅ और दीवार सीधी होती है। अगर नींव का पत्थर ही टेढ़ा लग जा
ए, तो कोई 
िकतनी भी कोिशश कर ले, दीवार िफर सीधी नहीं होती है। इसिलए हमारे पॉिलिटक ल लीडसर्, 
िजनमȂ पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी तो शािमल थे ही, उसके  बाद इंिदरा गाँधी जी ने भी बहुत 
contribute िकया, िफर अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने भी जो contribution िदया, वह अभूतपूवर् 
था। 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
29

 
 
 आप सबको पता होगा िक जब चीन ने अपनी एक Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी लाँच की, तब अटल 
िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने इसरो क े साइंिटÎट्स को यह कहा था िक इसका क ु छ कीिजए, हमȂ भी 
इस पर क ु छ अच्छा करना है। तब जाकर चन्दर् यान -Ģथम की पिरकÊपना की गई।  चन्दर्यान-
Ģथम, चन्दर्यान-िǎतीय और िफर जाकर चन्दर्यान-तृतीय की उत्पिǄ हुई और उसमȂ सफलता 
िमली। कहने का यह मतलब है िक पूरे देश की कलेिक्टव लीडरिशप ने एकजुटता िदखाई और 
ÎपÍटता िदखाई िक हमȂ इस िदशा मȂ अगर्सर रह ना है। यह भी important चीज़ है। आप कोई भी 
देश देख लȂ, जो िवकिसत है। ऐसा क्या कारण है िक वह देश िवकिसत है और ऐसा क्या कारण है 
िक क ु छ देश अिवकिसत हȅ या िवकासशील हȅ? उसका Ģमुख कारण यही है िक िजन-िजन देशȗ 
मȂ देश क े मुǈȗ पर राजन
ीित नहीं खेली जाती है, वही देश आगे बढ़ते हȅ। पॉिलिटकल पाटीर्ज़ तो 
आती रहȂगी, आज एक पॉिलिटकल पाटीर् है, कल दूसरी आएगी, िफर तीस री आएगी और िफर 
चौथी आएगी, लेिकन ĢÌन यह है िक क्या देश से संबंिधत मुǈȗ पर राजनीित होनी चािहए? आज 
जो भी देश िवकिसत हȅ, वे ऐसे मुǈȗ पर राजनीित नहीं करते। मुझे Ģसन्नता है िक इस मुǈे पर, 
यानी Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी मȂ सभी राज
नीितक दलȗ ने, आज तक भी Ģधान मंतर्ी ने जो कहा, उसमȂ 
सभी ने अपनी एकजुटता िदखाई है। इसिलए अगर िवकिसत देश बनना है, तो नारे देने से काम 
नहीं होगा, िसफर् sloganeering करने से काम नहीं होगा। अगर िवकिसत बनना है, तो उसके  
िलए उस तरीके  की ËयवÎथा बनानी पड़ेगी। हम जब भी बात करते हȅ, तो ऊपर-ऊपर की बात 
करते हȅ िक हम यह कर दȂगे, वह कर दȂगे, फलां यह हो जाएगा, वह हो जाएगा, लेिकन क ै से 
होगा? जब तक आप आ
धारभूत चीज़ȗ पर deliberate नहीं करȂगे, ËयवÎथा नहीं बनाएँगे, तब तक 
चीज़Ȃ आगे नहीं बढ़ सकती हȅ।  
दूसरा ĢÌन यह उठता है िक बहुत सारे institutions हȅ, DRDO है,  IITs हȅ ,  IIMs हȅ, बहुत 
सारे regional engineering colleges हȅ, मुझे लगता है िक हमारे देश मȂ सबसे ज्यादा िरसचर् वाले 
इंÎटीǷूशन्स हȅ, लेिकन ऐसा क्या कारण हुआ िक इसरो िवकिसत हो गया और बाकी क े 
इंÎटीǷूशन्स िवकिसत नहीं हो पाए? पॉिलिटकल लीडरिशप तो उस सम य भी थी, सबके  िलए 
समान थी, िफर इसरो ही िवकिसत हुआ और बाकी क े इंÎटीǷूशन्स िवकिसत क्यȗ नहीं हुए? 
उसका एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् कारण यह भी था िक साइंिटिफक लीडरिशप भी important होती है। 
इसरो को जो लीडर िमले, िवकर्म साराभाई और होमी भाभा क े रूप  मȂ, उनकी साइंिटिफक 
लीडरिशप ने भी जो नीं
व का पत्थर रखा, उसके  कारण इसरो आज यहाँ तक पहुँचा।  
आप एक चीज़ और देिखए, वकर् कÊचर िकसी भी इंÎटीǷूशन क े िलए सबसे महत्वपूणर् 
होता है। अग र उस इंÎटीǷूशन का वकर् कÊचर सही है, तभी इंÎटीǷूशन आगे बढ़ेगा। अगर वकर् 
कÊचर खराब हो गया, तो चाहे आप चले जाएँ, मȅ चला जाऊँ  या दुिनया का कोई भी Ëयिƪ चला 
जाए, वह न उसको इधर कर सकता है, न उधर कर सकता है।  
 
 (सभापित मह
ोदयपीठासीन हुए। ) 
 
वकर् कÊचर को ठीक करना पड़ेगा। इसरो क े वकर् कÊचर मȂ ऐसा क्या हुआ है? जहाँ तक 
मेरी थोड़ी समझ है, मेरे कई सारे िमतर् भी वहाँ पर काम करते हȅ, तो वहाँ पर िडलीवरी बेÎड 
टारगेट्स होते हȅ। वहाँ पर merito
cracy पर  सबसे ज्यादा ध्यान िदया गया है। जब आप 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
साइंिटÎट्स की भतीर् करते हȅ, साइंिटÎट्स को लेते हȅ, तो आप िजस तरीके  से यह करते हȅ, जो 
इसकी मानिसकता है, वह आधार बनाती है। इसरो का जो वकर् कÊचर है, हमारे देश मȂ वह 
सवȘǄम है। अब यह तो जान गए िक इसर ो मȂ वकर् कÊचर ठीक है, लेिकन क्या हमने उस वकर् 
कÊचर को दूसरी संÎथाओं मȂ लाने का Ģयास िकया है? क्या हमने कभी ऐसी कोई किमटी बनाई 
है? जो बाकी सरकारी संÎथाएं हȅ, वे क्यȗ फ े ल हो रही हȅ? मȅ 'फ े ल हो रही हȅ', तो नहीं कहना 
चाहूँगा, लेिकन अगर आप उÇमीद से कम परफ
ॉमर् करते हȅ, तो हमȂ इसे फ े ल मानना पड़ेगा। क्या 
आपने यह सोचा है िक हमारे देश मȂ िकतने सरकारी िरसचर् इंÎटी Ƿ ूशंस हȅ, उन्हȂ िकतनी फ ंिंडग 
जाती है और फ ंिंडग क े िहसाब से िकतने साइंिटÎट्स हȅ और इसका क्या आउटपुट है? बहुत सारे 
ऐसे इंÎटीǷूशंस हȅ, जहाँ पर आउटपुट िबÊकु ल ज़ीरो है, िफर भी वे चले जा रहे हȅ। हमारे गाँव मȂ 
यह कहा जात
ा है िक सरकारी नौकरी बहुत अच्छी होती है। अगर आप उनसे पूछȂगे िक सरकारी 
नौकरी मȂ क्या है, तो वे कहते हȅ िक वहाँ पर काम नहीं करना पड़त ा है। क्या मȅ गलत कह रहा हूँ? 
यह हो सकता है िक कई लोग मुझसे असहमत हȗ, लेिकन सरकारी संÎथाओं की यह पिरिÎथित 
हो गई है िक उन्हȂ अब ऐसी जगह माना जाता है िक वहाँ पर आपको का म  नहीं करना पड़ेगा। 
अगर सारे इंÎटीǷूट्स क े वकर् कÊचर को समय रहते ठीक नहीं िकया, तो यह मानना िक भारत 
िवकिसत होगा, एक िदवाÎवपन होगा। मȅ राजनीितक दलगत मȂ उतरकर इतने महत्वपूणर् मुǈे को 
िविशएट नहीं करना चाहता हूँ। आपको वकर् कÊच र को ठीक करना पड़ेगा और इसके  िलए 
सबको िमलकर काम करना पड़ेगा।  
 मȅ क ैिÇĤज, ऑक्सफोडर् और एमआईटी मȂ पढ़ने क े बाद आईआईटी मȂ Ģोफे सर बना था 
और मȅ भी साइंिटÎट था। जो साइंिटिफक फ ंिंडग है, वह धीरे-धीरे कम होती जा रही है। मȅ मान 
सकता हूँ िक इसके  पीछे कई सारी पिरिÎथितयाँ हȗ
गी, लेिकन यही तो लीडरिशप का पिरचायक 
होता है। जब आपको कÍट होता है, जब आपके  पास कम पैसे होते हȅ, तब आप कम पैसे मȂ 
िकसको िक
तना फ ं ड करते हȅ और आपकी priority क्या है, यही दशार्ता है िक आपकी लीडरिशप 
क ैसी है। जब आपके  पास पूरे पैसे हȅ, पयार्Ãत पैसे हȅ, तब सबको बराबर बांट देना, यह कोई बड़ी 
बात नहीं है। ĢÌन यही उठता है िक हम साइंिटिफक फ ंिंडग्स को धीरे-धीरे क्यȗ काटते जा रहे 
हȅ? हमȂ बैठना पड़ेगा, हमȂ सोचना पड़ेगा और इसे दलगत राजनीित से ऊपर उठाना पड़ेगा िक 
कोई भी सरकार आए, कोई भी पाटीर् आए, इन सब पर राजनीित िबÊकु ल नहीं होनी चािहए। यह 
सबसे महत्वपूणर् ĢÌन है। 
 महोदय, हम बार-बार यह कहते हȅ िक Ĥेन डर्ेन हो रहा है। मȅ भी िवदेशȗ मȂ ही था। मȅ भी 
साढ़े नौ-दस सालȗ क े िलए बाहर ही था। मेरे मिÎतÍक मȂ यह िक्लयर था िक मुझे भारत मȂ आना 
है, चाहे जो मजीर् हो जाए, मȅ अपने देश क े िलए काम करू ँगा, लेिकन मुझसे अच्छे-अच्छे 
साइंिटÎट्स भी हȅ, जो मुझसे भी अच्छा कर सकते हȅ, वे िवदेशȗ मȂ ही रुके  हȅ। उन मȂ से कई वापस 
आए भी थे और कई वापस आकर चले भी गए। मȅ आपको एक उदाहरण देता हूँ। जब आप िवदेश 
से अच्छी पढ़ाई कर के , साइंिटÎट बनकर यहाँ आते हȅ, तो साइंिटÎट बनने क े बाद आप चाहȂगे िक 
मुझे लैबोरेटरी चािहए। िबना लैबोरेटरी क े साइंिटÎट वैसे ही होता है, जैसे िबना पानी क े मछली 
और िबना भाषण का नेता। अगर आप िकसी साइंिट Îट को दो-तीन साल क े िलए िबना लैबोरेटरी 
छोड़ देते हȅ, तो दो साल मȂ उसके  काम करने की चेÍटा, उसका सारा साइंस धरा का धरा रह 
जाता है और िफर दो साल क े बाद वह एक सरकारी नौकर बन जाता है। दो साल क े बाद उसे 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
31

 
 
िसफर् यह टȂशन रहती है िक मुझे नौकरी क ै से बचानी है, मेरा promotion क ै से होना है और जैसे-
तैसे जुगाड़-तुगाड़ करके  काम कर लो, काम करके  promotion हो जाएगा, तनख्वाह तो िफक्Îड 
है। मȅ िकसी क े िवरुǉ नहीं कह रहा हूँ, बिÊक मȅ वकर् कÊचर की बात कर रहा हूँ। एक तो आपको 
वैज्ञािनकȗ क े िलए मूलभूत सुिवधा उप
लÅध करानी पड़ेगी। अगर हम यह नहीं करा पाते हȅ, तो यह 
सोचना िक देश िवकिसत होगा, यह िदवाÎवपन ही होगा। हम वहीं क े वहीं बैठे रहȂगे और ताली 
बजाते रहȂगे।  
 सर, एक और बात है - meritocracy. मुझे लगता है िक साइंिटÎट्स की िरकर्ूटमȂट करके  
अपने देश मȂ लाना, यहाँ पर उन्हȂ अच्छे तरीके  से Ãलेस करना, यह सबकी िजÇमेदारी होती है। 
अगर हम अच्
छे साइंिटÎट्स लाकर उन्हȂ िरटेन नहीं कर पाए, अच्छा वकर् कÊचर नहीं दे पाए, तो 
मुझे लगता है िक सारी सेिलĤेशंस बेमानी हȗगी। हमने एक इसरो तो बना िलया, लेिकन , िसफर् 
एक इसरो होने से पयार्Ã
त नहीं होता है। अगर हमȂ अपने देश को िवकिसत बनाना है, तो सारे 
सरकारी और Ģाइवेट इंÎटीǷूशंस क े वकर् कÊचर को ठीक करना पड़ेगा और यह ऑटोमेिटक 
नहीं होगा। हर चीज़ क े िलए कहा जाता है िक इसमȂ पॉिलिटक्स मत लाइए, लेिकन पॉिलिटक्स 
नहीं लाएंगे, तो क ु छ सुधरने वाला नहीं है, इसिलए पॉिलिटक्स लेकर आइए, िक
न्तु अच्छी 
पॉिलिटक्स लाइए। हम सबको अच्छी पॉिलिटक्स लेकर आनी है, अच्छे इंÎटीǷूशंस बनाने हȅ। मȅ 
एक बार िफर इसर
ो क े साइंिटÎट्स और देश क े उन सभी साइंिटÎट्स को बधाई देता हूँ, जो कम 
सुिवधा क े बावजूद इतना Ģयास कर रहे हȅ। मȅ उÇमीद करता हूँ िक ऐसे िवषयȗ पर दलगत 
राजनीित से ऊपर उठक
र देशिहत मȂ ऐसे काम करȂ, जो भारत और भारत माता को िवकिसत 
और सवȘच्च बनाएं।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Dr. Jitendra Singh.   
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY; 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE; THE MINISTER OF 
STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND 
PENSIONS; THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC 
ENERGY; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE  (DR. 
JITENDRA SINGH) :  Thank you, Chairman , Sir, for giving me this opportunity.  I 
have been keenly listening to all the speakers -- Mr. Jairam Ramesh, Mr. Sandeep 
Kumar Pathak and Sivaji.  Mr. Jairam Ramesh is quite well-versed with this subject.  
We respect him for his studiousness.  He has tried to also place some of the facts 
before the House and, in between, tried to also talk politics in science which I shall 
respond to in the course of few minutes, not in very big philosophical platitude as he 
did, but with statistical data because, as students of science, we are taught to 
speak with facts, figures and evidence.  But before I do that and leave some 
thought for him to go home and ponder  over, I seek your kind indulgence.  Ģधान 
मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व की सरकार की मयार्दा क े अनुक ू ल, यिद आपकी अनुमित है, 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
तो गैलरी मȂ हमारे एक सज्जन बैठे हȅ, अगर वे खड़े होकर सदÎयȗ को अपना चेहरे िदखाएंगे, तो 
अच्छा लगेगा। Mr. Veeramuthuvel is the Project Di rector of Chandrayaan.  You have 
celebrated Chandrayaan, you have s een Chandrayaan, you have sung 
Chandrayaan, but this is the culture under the Government headed by Prime 
Minister Modi. With all the patronage and support from all the quarters in the 
Government, this team works in anonymity.  If there was an iota of politics, this 
would not have been so; it would have been  otherwise. He is not a dynast.  He is 
not there by virtue of being a member of an y family.  He is there, and he does not 
even boast to be there.  His appointmen t was made by the present Government to 
oversee Chandrayaan-3, the series of which started with Chandrayaan-1.  The 
clearance for this was given by the then Prim e Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee and 
the third of series happening under Prime Minister Modi.   
Now, before I move further, I would give you full statistics, enough food for 
thought, but I would not create an unpleasan t taste for the House.  So, let us first 
celebrate what it is.  I think, we are fi rst here to celebrate the science and the 
scientists. If you go back and see the pict ures in the archives, Sarabhai carried 
launcher vehicle on a bicycle carriage.  Who was the Prime Minister at that time?  
Which was the Government at that time? सभापित जी, हमारे वैज्ञािनकȗ मȂ कभी Ģितभा की 
कमी नहीं थी, योग्यता की कमी नहीं थी। उनमȂ िनÍठा भी थी, मेहनत करने का जज्बा भी था, 
आँखȗ मȂ सपने भी थे और क ु छ न होते हुए भी क ु छ कर गुजरने का साहस भी था, लेिकन अभाव 
था, अनुक ूलता का और वह अभाव अब पूरा हुआ है। यह जो आंकड़े बताए गए हȅ, this is part of 
the history. I do not think we have to repeat  it; everybody is familiar with that.  We do 
not even need a 'crorepati' question for this.  Everybody knows that
 it started in 1962.  
It began and, in 1969, you had the I.S.R.O. All that has been given. What is 
important is: when we started our programme  in the earlier mid sixties, on the one 
hand, you had Sarabhai devoid of transport.    
Sir, on the other hand, you had Soviet Union and United States preparing to 
land a human being on the surface of m oon.  That was the gap.  That was the 
difference and the distance be tween the two.  And, st ill, this group of young 
scientists had that courage.  Now, wh at has happened which has led to this 
quantum leap.  Something might have happened.   कोई जादू की छड़ी आ गई है।  अभी 
हमारे िमतर् कह रहे थे िक वैज्ञािनकȗ को पैसा नह
ीं  िदया जाता, Ģोत्साहन नहीं िदया जाता।  मȅ 
एक-एक करके  उसकी भी बात करू ँगा।  वे शायद हाल ही क े क ु छेक दÎतावेजȗ से पिरिचत नहीं 
हȅ।  ऐसा क ु छ तो हुआ होगा, that we started meeting su ccess now and not then; three 
generations later.  इन्हȗने कहा िक this is not a military programme.  जयराम जी ने ठीक 
कहा and he complimented for not making it a military programme.  The question then 
is, if it was not a military programme, th en, why were the civili
ans debarred from 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
33

 
 
entering the premises of Sriharikota?  You had regimented it. It is for the first time 
that the gates of Sriharikota have been unl ocked in 2020.  Who th e Prime Minister at 
that time was, I am not going to say.  It is because this debate is not around Prime 
Ministers.  Unfortunately, it is being sought to be.... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Why do you... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : No; no, you made it. You made  it a Nehruvian debate.  I 
don't want to go into Nehruvian blunders. I am not going into that at all.  It is because 
as I said, it is all honesty.  We will talk in  facts and figures on the basis of evidence.  
We don't even need to name the Prime Minister.  I am not naming anybody.  But, this 
happened only in 2020. At the time of launching of Chandrayaan, there were 
thousands and thousands of media persons ri ght at the site, watching it with their 
naked eye.  Somebody tweeted from that side -- I do not know whether it was 
Jairamji himself -- as to what the difference is, क्या बड़ा हो गया?   I was, at that time, 
at that site, and the landing had just happened ten minutes earlier and the media 
persons confronted me, 'What do you say?' उनका यह बयान आया। वे भी िवǎान हȅ। वे 
कह रहे हȅ िक क्या फकर् पड़ा जो इतना शोर हो रहा है? I asked him, 'When did you come 
here last?' He said, 'Sir, for the first time.' I said, 'That is the difference.'  
...(Interruptions)...  No; this will tell you... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सैयद नािसर हुसैन (कनार्टक): मीिडया को...(Ëय
 वधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please don't interrupt. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह: बात तो आगे करȂगे, क्या हुआ?  ...(Ëयवधान)... तो यह ट्वीट करने का क्या 
मतलब था? ...(Ëयवधान)...  आप बात को सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Now, the point is that the 
common man was debarred from even peeping inside the gates.  This will address all 
that is being said.  Now, they are saying as to why they were kept away.  You had 
kept the Space Department behind a veil of  secrecy.  You had re gimented it.  You 
had disallowed it to be synergized with all the stakeholders.  You had disallowed the 
industry to
 indulge in this and that is why;  the progress got halted.  It took us 75 
years to reach where we ha ve reached.  That has happened after the quantum leap 
of the last few years.  What  has happened is, before 2014,  there were four start-ups 
in space.  It is embarrassing to say.  Between 2020 and today,  there are 150 start-
ups, and earlier ones have already turned into entrepreneurs like Skyroot and others.  
One of our friends spoke about the science at  large, but let us first celebrate as to 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
what we are doing.  Then, it was said about engineering colleges, Government 
engineering colleges and women co lleges, this is what Jairam ji was saying.  He was 
saying as to why do we celebrate five IITs only.  Thank God, we celebrate.  These 
w e r e  c r e a t e d  b y  N e h ru .   B u t ,  w e  h a v e  n e v e r  s a i d  t h a t  o u r  s c i e n t i s t s  a r e  o n l y  f r o m  
IITs.  Even today, this entrepreneur I have introduced is not from IIT; none of them.  
We have also celebrated women scientists; Mr. Veeramuthuvel is the Project Director 
and the Joint Director is Ms. Kalpana.  Of  course, for Aditya, as Shri Tiruchi Siva ji, 
rightly mentioned, Nigar Shaji is from Tamil Nadu.  Now, you have narrated the entire 
history because you think that you are addressing a House which hardly reads 
science, which hardly reads space.  So, you score that in 1962, this happened and in 
1969, Sarabhai died.  We know all those de tails.  About Sarabhai, I can tell you even 
further details as to how he died and wh at happened. He died from myocardial 
infection and there was a conference in IIT; h e  d i d n ' t  w a k e  u p  i n  t h e  m o r n i n g  a n d  
then Satish Dhawan...  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, this is most uncalled for. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : No; you have spoken . ...(Interruptions)...  You have 
spoken. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, what is this? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : I am not yielding .  ...(Interruptions)... What I am trying to 
say is that you are trying to relate a chronology.  ...(Interruptions)... You are trying 
to relate a chronology simply to submerge the facts.  
 
SHRI SYED NASIR HUSSAIN : You told as to what all you have done .... 
...(Interruptions)...  You can come and go.   You can narrate the achievements... 
...(Interruptions)...  
  
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : I can ... ...(Interruptions)...  I am coming to that.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Never from the seats like this. ...(Interruptions)...  No. 
...(Interruptions)... Please, no. ...(Interruptions)...  I have not given you the floor. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
35

 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH :  I didn't interrupt . ...(Interruptions)... No; I am not yielding 
and I didn't interrupt. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I do not give you the floor. ...(Interruptions)... Please take your 
seats. ...(Interruptions)... Please continue.  No; no. ...(Interruptions)...  Don't 
come in defence of Jairam. ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on record.  Jairam is 
competent to defend himself. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SYED NASIR HUSSAIN: * 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH:  I am narrating all.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : And, if there will be an occas ion, I will give opportunity. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH :  I am narrating both what the past Governments did as well 
as this Government does and I am not naming the Prime Ministers. 
...(Interruptions)... Everybody knows that Sarabhai passed away unfor tunately at 
the prime of his life and Satish Dhawan st epped in and, of course, he had to, for 
legacy reasons, the headquarters continue s to be in Bengaluru.  Now, who knows 
Satish Dhawan more.  Incidentally, he be longed to Jammu and Kashmir which many 
of the friends here may not be aware of.  Nevertheless, that is besides the point.  
What I am trying to say is, need not share these facts just to impose ourselves.  Let 
us  actually talk  about the facts and figures.   Now, when you say as to what is new, 
and as it was tweeted, the new is the Budg e t  i t s e l f .   I  a m  g o i n g  t o  c o m e  t o  t h e  
funding as a whole.  But, if you see per se, it is only the Government Budget.  If you 
see the Space Budget alone; there is a 142 pe r cent increase in the last nine years.  
The Budget of Department of Space in 2013-14, you can check and verify, was Rs. 
5,168.96 crore. The Budget in 2023-24, for the Department of Space is Rs. 12,543.91 
crore, nearly Rs. 13,000 crore and there is almost three times increase.  Now, for the 
friends who were generalizing and saying as to what is the Science Budget.  I can 
give you individually.  Overall, if you s ee, all the Science Departments, the total 
Budget in 2013-14 was Rs. 21,0 25 crore.  This year, it is  Rs. 57,303.69 crore.  I am 
not going in to the other Departments of Science.  For example, for Atomic Energy as 
somebody was referring to Atomic Energy, it was Rs. 7,561 crore in 2013-14 and it is, 
                   
* Not recorded 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
now, up three times to Rs. 25,078.49 crore.  If you look at Department of Science & 
Technology, it was Rs. 7,000 crore in 2013- 14, to be precise, Rs . 7,051.74 crore.  
Somebody can take down these figures and verify it.  In 2023-24, it is more than 
twice, that is, Rs. 16,361.41 crore.  Now,  w h at  m o re i n  fu n d in g?  O u r fri e n d ,  wh o  
claims to be a scientist, was bemoaning this, what earlier Governments did not do 
a n d  w h a t  t h i s  G o v e r n m e n t  h a s  d o n e .   W h a t  h e  w a s  t r y i n g  t o  s u g g e s t  i s  t h a t  w e  
should make it more liberal for funding.   
Maybe, he has not gone through it because that day there was so much of din 
and, unfortunately, discussion could not happen when I brought in the Anusandhan 
National Research Foundation Bill over he re.  I wish you were there, we could 
deliberate on that. That has precisely a ddressed what hon. Member, Mr. Pathak, 
was mentioning.  Issues which could not be addressed by the earlier Government 
successively for 75 years have been addre ssed now.  I am not going to name who 
the Prime Minister was.  The Anushandan National Research Foundation Bill 
envisages almost 80 per cent of funding from non-Governmental sources.  It was 
important for India.  Hon. Members and hon. Chairman, Sir, if we have to grow 
globally, we have to live up to global parameters, we have to be ready for global 
challenges and we have to beat them in th e global strategies.  America already had a 
foundation--I am sure he must be aware of it since he is claiming that he is a scientist 
from abroad--which was called the National Research Society. Some of the 
European countries like Germany had. Why did we not have?  Why did we have to 
wait for 14 Prime Ministers? Why did we wait for 14 Prime Ministers?  Who will 
answer this?  And this is all based on facts and figures; you can check it. Today, we 
have National Research Foundation in the form of... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We will resume at 2.00 p.m.  The House stands adjourned to meet 
at 2.00 p.m., today.  
       
The House then adjourned for lunch at one minute past one of the clock. 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Jitendra Singh to resume. 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH :  S i r ,  w h e n  I  l e f t ,  w e  w e r e  talking about some statistical 
figures. As I promised in the beginning, I shall talk about science and only science 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
37

 
 
and not referring to what happened under which Prime Minister, and let the House 
decide. So picking up from my last observation, there is a 142.68 per cent increase in 
the Space Budget between 201 3-14 and 2023-24.  If in 2013-14, it was Rs.5,168.96 
crores and this year,  it was Rs.12,543.91 cror es. I agree with what was being said 
that there was activity happening earlier also and private participation having earlier 
also.  But, as I said, the figure was so dismal, where there were only four space 
start-ups in 2014 and today, we have 150.   And, that has been possible because a 
new arrangement was set up, an interface was set up which is known as 'IN-SPACe' 
which facilitates the engagement of indust ry and it is headed by a non-Government 
person, a person from the corporate sector, who is presently heading it.  At the same 
time, a PSU was also set in called NSIL, New Space India Limited, in order to engage 
in collaborations.  And, this is what has given the outcomes, a multiple or a manifold 
investment. So, there is a huge synergy now between research, academia, start-ups 
and industry.  And, in certain ways and in certain projects, industry has quite a meaty 
contribution.  Then, I was referring to Anus andhan which is just coming and that is 
where I had to stop. Out of the Rs.50,000 cr ores Budget that has been envisaged for 
five years, in Anusandhan National Resear ch Foundation, you will be glad to know, 
as much as Rs.36,000 crores, almost 70 p e r  c e n t ,  i s  g o i n g  t o  c o m e  f r o m  n o n -
Government sources and this has happened on ly six months back.  I do not have to 
say who the Prime Minister was, and this will pave the way for a greater involvement 
of the industry because I, personally, also believe the time is gone when there used 
to be a demarcation for private and public sectors and if we have to grow further from 
where we are, as the hon. Prime Minister keeps reiterating the Amrit  Kaal, at the end 
of 2047, and if we have to be a global player and decide  a global leadership for us, 
we have to meet the global challenges, live up to the global parameters and have to 
have the global strategy. Now, this Nati onal Research Foundation was a concept 
being practiced in U.S. and also in some  of the European countries.  Why did we 
have to wait for six decades and who all were the Prime Ministers in between?  I 
leave it at that.  Now, as far as the foreig n engagement is concerned, it was said that 
the satellites were being launched earlier also . Yes, I am not denying what is true. I 
am only adding to the half truth said. The total number of foreign satellites -- yes, this 
process first happened in 1990 -- till date, it is 424.  Now what I am trying to say, the 
next sentence is interesting.  Out of 424 satellites launched till 1990s, as many as 
389, more than 90 per cent launched in the last nine years. Which was the 
Government and who was the Prime Minister?  We have so far earned 174 million US 
dollars from the launching of the foreign satellites. Out of these 174 million US dollars, 
as much as 157 million dollars have been ea rned only in the last nine years. Which 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
was the Government, who was the ruler was, I don't have to spell that out. The 
figures speak for themselves. Out of the Eu ropean satellites launched so far, in the 
last nearly 30 years or more than that , the total revenue generated is 256 million 
Euros; interestingly, out of 256 million Euro s, 223 million Euros, that is, almost 90 per 
cent, have been earned in the last nine years, which means the scale has gone up, 
the speed has gone up.  And, therefore, there is, as I said, a huge jump that has 
happened.  Now, I think credit should be gi ven to our scientists and to the kind of 
patronage, as I said in the beginning an d which was very well also put out by hon. 
Jairam. 
We had brilliant scientists like Sarabhai and Homi Bhabha, another brilliant 
scientist who incidentally came to India for a vacation or holiday, but the war broke 
out and he could not go back. By that time , the Independence was in the offing, he 
stayed back. But, nevertheless, the point is that we had to wait all these years for so 
many things to happen which could have happened earlier also. I am sure somebody 
would analyse as to why this could not have happened earlier when we had the 
human resources. What was lacking? Wh at did not happen has happened. And, 
what could have happened, why did it no t happen? The acumen was so much. I am 
saying so because the people should know and appreciate that our Chandrayaan had 
cost us just Rs. 600 crores, whereas a simultaneous lunar mission which did not 
prove to be successful costed around Rs . 16,000 crores! So, our scientists are 
working under huge financial constraints and they are admirably made up for that by 
investing in cerebral assets. We might be lacking in financial assets, but not in 
cerebral assets. So, what were we doing? We moved out and took about 20 circles 
around the earth using the gravitational force. It was like driving a car in a neutral gear 
in order to save the fuel. Then, we immedi ately trajected out, went into the lunar 
orbit, took around 40 circles around the mo on and it took us around 30 to 40 days, 
quite in contrast to the Russian Mission  that happened simultaneously. But, we 
saved a lot. I have to compliment the scient ific community of India. They have given 
the world the concept of cost-effective sp ace missions by producing missions which 
are not even 1/10
th of the cost of the other missi ons. Our Aditya-L1 Mission, which 
was very rightly applauded by hon. Jairamji and others, had cost us just about Rs. 
380 crores. On the other side, it gives us  an idea that if we  did not have the 
constraints that the scientists are confronted with, they could have gone much higher 
and that is what is sought to be provided in  the last few years. It is not about giving 
credit to anybody or taking credit from an ybody. The processes were there, but they 
sought to be given a new global outlook. Now,  if you go only by th e figures, I think, 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
39

 
 
the record of sending 104 satellites, that is a world record, this was set up in February 
15, 2017. I do not have to say which Government it was.  
The first GSLV MKIII was sent on 5 th June, 2017. The record number of foreign 
satellites launched in single go was 31. Out of which, 28 were foreign, sent on 12 th 
June, 2018. In 2017, on 5 th May, a South-Asian satellite,  which sometimes popularly 
described as SAARC Satellite, is catering to all kinds of inputs to the neighbouring 
countries including Nepal, Bhutan, Bangla desh.  Unfortunately, Pakistan chose to 
remain out of it to its own disadvantage. So , we are now in a position also to provide 
inputs and useful information to the neighbouring countries. It is very much in the 
spirit of Atmanirbhar Bharat and also in the same spirit of the Vaccine Maitri. A 
country which hardly had the concept of protective healthcare, it was like this. Even if 
we fell sick, we left it to God. If you get well, it is mother's blessings. If you do not get 
well, it is िपछले जन्म का कमर्। It may be because of the socio-economic constraints. 
Even the concept of healthcare was not socially or culturally commanding that kind of 
priority,  That country today has become a leader in protective healthcare by 
providing first ever DNA vaccine and gifting it to the world. In the same spirit, the 
space technology now also is being provided  for the benefit of the other countries. 
The other part of it is, which has very co nspicuously happened in the last eight to 
nine years, that we have not confined ours elves only to the launching of rockets. The 
launching of rockets catch nation's fancy. The entire nation was glued to the screen 
when landing happened and it was because  the gates had been opened up. The 
whole country took it as its own mission. What used to happen earlier? You had a 
launching in the remote corner of a news paper' you used to see a single column 
news saying 'Sriharikota'. You could not ev en make out where Sriharikota is located. 
Now, we are getting tourists there, we are getting visitors there, we are getting boys 
and girls. We had 10,000 spectators to wa tch the launch of Aditya-L1 Mission, in 
comparison to just 10 of the team member s we used to have in 2014. The spectators 
were from all the sections of the society.  S o ,  w e  h a v e  t o  m o v e  i n  a  s y n e r g i s e d  
manner, we have to involve people. This ha s to be whole of Government plus whole 
of nation's effort and that is precisely has happened now which has led to generation 
of cumulative, collective human resource as well as knowledge resource.  
The other part as I was mentioning is, in the last eight to nine years, we have 
not confined ourselves to the launching of  rockets, space technology today is being 
applied virtually in every development projects of every sector. I have no hesitation to 
say that the space technology has entered ev ery Indian household. Some of us may 
not realise but it has already happened. In detection of floods and disasters, of 
course, we are ahead of others. The other day somebody has asked: what would be 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the benefit of spending Rs. 600 crores on Chandrayaan? Many of  us do not realise 
that the amount that has been saved by averting disasters through space technology 
is much, much more than the amount spent on Chandr ayaan. So, in the age of 
figures, statistics and evidence, I cannot say, it is true, since I am saying so . Also, 
gone are the days when I would say, I am more experienced and wiser than you or I 
am more grey-haired.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir, I do not see grey hair. I see gr ey material; but, grey hair is not 
visible. 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Sir, all kinds of colours are available in the market today. Sir, 
with an inspiring Chairman like you, I think,  it motivates everybody to use the kind of 
colour which he or she wants.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : For grey hair, you can look to Shri Jairam Ramesh, he has 
complete grey hair. 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: I will share some with him also. But, he has more grey matter 
than me.  
 So that was about our disaster-tackling capability. Again, through space 
technology, we have launched a huge smart city  project in the last ten years. A role 
model success story which is now being emulated  in the rest of the world also is our 
SVAMITVA Programme, which as I said, is  working through whole of Government. 
We have Department of Rural Development and the Revenue Department. This is 
regarding mapping of land, mapping of farms using space technology and drones 
which brings in more of transparency, less of corruption. You do not have to make 
rounds to the revenue offices, you can assess it  by yourself. I think, out of nearly six 
lakh inhabited Panchayats, almost three lakhs or so have been completed through 
this programme. It is being used for laying of railway tracks and for unmanned railway 
crossings, for telemedicine, of course, I do not have to  mention about it. Then, we 
have agriculture sector also. Sir, virtually in every sphere of life and every sphere of 
sectoral development, we have the space technology now. I think, the time has 
come where I agree with most of the Me mbers who very optimistically concluded 
their speeches. The measure of  our success is always relative. The Einstein's theory 
has survived on that.  
So, what is important is, as was being mentioned by someone, that US 
landed a human being in 1969.  True! If  you recall and those who are the keen 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
41

 
 
watchers would remember, Neil Armstrong landed there, took a stroll, BBC captured 
a film. That was the main news agency in  those days. He made a famous statement 
which has gone down in the history.  He said , 'one small step for man, giant step for 
mankind.'  He said so, no doubt, but he could not notice the presence of water even 
though he had a stroll around. It was ou r Chandrayaan which later on went and got 
the evidence of the water molecules, the H2O, which co uld give a direct or indirect 
indication of the possibility of human habitat. सभापित महोदय, हम तसËवुर मȂ जो 
कहािनयाँ सुना करते थे िक चाँद पर क्या होता होगा, लोग बसते हȅ िक नहीं बसते हȅ, बसते हȅ, तो 
क ै से हȅ, वहाँ पर पिरयाँ नाचती हȗगी - उन पहेिलयȗ का वैज्ञ ािनक उǄर ढ ूंढ़ने की Ģेरणा अगर 
िकसी ने दी, तो हमारे चंदर्यान ने दी।  I think also one of the best examples of combining 
our traditional knowledge, which is our a sset with the most modern cutting edge 
technology. िवमान का नाम चंदर्यान, वह जहाँ पहुँचा वह िशव शिƪ, लेिकन जो उसके  
इनपुट्स आ रहे हȅ, वे हमसे भी कहीं पहले नासा उपलÅ ध करवा रहा है because that is a virgin 
area, virgin territory, nobody had ever vent ured here. So, even those agencies which 
started much before us, now, that takes us  to the other inference, and we are today 
at par as far as science, technology an d innovation capabilities are concerned with 
any other country of the world. In some spheres, we have even moved one step 
ahead.  And again, to give you an eviden ce, an example -- I am not talking which 
Government -- television debate happened in USA in 1950.  All the learned Members 
of the Upper House know that in 1960, th e famous Presidential election was finally 
determined by the outcome of a TV de bate between John Kennedy and Richard 
Nixon.  He turned the tables against Nixon. We, in India, did not have a cue what this 
was all about, what is TV, what is debate , how it happens.  We saw TV for the first 
time sometime close to 1970, that too a weekly Chitrahaar. Which Government, 
which head of Government it was, I am not saying. Even computers came 15 years 
later.  Today, quantum technology, the latest cutting edge technology, we are 
among five or six countries in the world wh ich are into it. We are among the first who 
have Mission Quantum Technology launched ju st six months back; this again, under 
whom, I need not say. We are at the same level, the R&D level because in scientific 
projects, you have different levels. We have not yet gone into application level, but if 
they are in the research an d development, we do.  Otherwise, what would happen? 
Television would have become popular in Am erica. They would have indulged in TV 
debates for elections and then we would su ddenly wake up to something called this 
new discovery. Similarly, in space techno logy, as has been said, we are already 
among the first two or three.  Now co mes the space economy.  True, our space 
economy is not something that we can boast of, but I do have the courage to say 
that this is a cumulative eff ect of the last sixty-seventy years since we have started. 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Today we are only 8 billion space economy. I am very humbly, modestly admitting it, 
but our projection for 2040 is 40 billion. So, if since 1960s, as was being said, till 
2000, second decade or third decade, we re ached eight billion, and in the next 15 
years, we will reach 40 billion, but the most interesting part is that only a few days 
back, I think, hardly a week back, we had a famous Report called, ADL Report, one 
of the international reports, Arthur De Little Report.  They keep making such 
projections. The Report says that India could go up to not 40 but 100 billion dollar 
economy by 2040. In other wo rds, my own projection about myself is lesser than 
what the others are thinking about me , which means that the world today has 
recognized the quantum jump that India has undertaken, the fast track in which it is 
moving. Now, our startups, as was being mentioned by some other Members, in 
2014, we were only 350 to 400 startups .  Which Government, all Members are 
learned enough.  In 2016, Standup India, Startup India Policy was launched from the 
ramparts of Red Fort, announcement made  in the Independence Address by the 
Prime Minister. Within a few years today, hon. Chairman, Sir, we have 1,25,000 
startups, more than 110 unicorns.  And what  I am not saying, the Ruling Party is not 
saying, the Treasury Bench is not saying, th e world is saying that India has suddenly 
jumped up to the third position in startu p ecosystem in the world.  Now if it has 
happened now, how can we he lp it? And if it has happened now, something must 
have been contributed to make this happe n, some enabling milieu might have been 
created, and some enabling provision might ha ve been created. Similarly, in Global 
Innovation Index, again, not mine, not yours, internationally determined parameters 
have recognized. In 2013-14, we were in 81
st position, today we have jumped 41 
positions and we are at number 40. Now, is  it not a matter of pride for each one of 
us? When we talk of space economy, we can  foresee that space economy is going 
to be a major contributor, India's future economy as well and we have jumped. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have got an inpu t from some Members in writing.  
They say, 'many of us feel it is so co ld.' One thing is very good. The Secretary-
General will take steps to moderate the temperature and another significant facet, we 
are not generating heat, we are in full co llaboration. The hon. Minister must have 
been very serious student of Shakespear e. He, in his speech, has taken to Julius 
Caesar, and our Jairam Ramesh has not interrupted him.  Please go ahead.   
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : I would like to tell, Sir, that th e Aditya is going to study this 
part also, the thermal aspects, the ma gnetic aspects and the solar aspects 
emanating from the Sun,  how effectivel y the possible harmful effects could be 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
43

 
 
avoided, and to what extent this could be put to advantage for those living on planet 
earth.  
Sir, coming back, Global Innovation Index and International Index, we have 
come up 41 positions in nine years.  Overall space economy is going to be an 
important part of it. We are today fifth and, I think, in many quarters, more 
celebration is done when it is said that we have overta ken the United Kingdom.  So, 
just as we have overtaken th e United Kingdom, some people also feel rejoiced that 
we are now launching US satellites. Now what I am trying to say is that now the world 
looks up to us.  Gone are the days when India used to be led by others. Today the 
world is ready to be led by India under Prime Minister, Modi. ...(Interruptions).. On 
biotechnology, how can I not say that it did not happen unless the Prime Minister 
changed? You have to accept it.  Now biotechnology, we were only 50 startups in 
2014. Fifty, we could not even say this very respectfully. ...(Interruptions)..  
With the new provisions brought in , now we are going to have bio-
manufacturing policy also. It has gone up today to 6,000. Our bio-economy was 10 
billion US$ in 2013-14. Today, it has gone up eight times to 80 billion US$. So, in 65-
70 years, we reached 10 billion US$; in nine years, we reached to 80 billion US$. So, 
eight times increase in eight or nine years! For a country which has a huge bio 
resource, we have a wide range of the Himala yas. Three-four States are in the lap of 
the Himalayas--Arunachal Pradesh, Utta rakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir. I don’t have to read all of those. We have 7,500 kilometres long coastal line, 
the longest in the world beginning from Odisha up to Maharashtra. The sea bed is full 
of minerals, metals and bio-diversity and bio-sources. Now, we have also launched 
Samudrayaan under the Ministry of Earth Scie nces to explore that wealth. I am sure, 
given your kind of penchant and humour, you would appreciate that we are the only 
country which has an ocean named as Indian Ocean. The other day, I was telling 
some friends from Australia, ‘You come fr om a place which is a country, an island 
and a continent--Australia! But the ocean is not known as the Australian Ocean.’ 
Because my forefathers must have fo reseen the huge wealth lying inside. उस अपार 
सÇपिǄ को िनकालने का काम भी अभी िपछले 5 साल मȂ समुदर् यान मȂ शुरू  हुआ। ...(Ëयवधान).
..  
समुदर् तो वहीं था। ...(Ëयवधान)... ठीक है, ' भारत ओशन' रख लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
Welcome; a good suggestion and it is well taken. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think, that is the sense of the House! 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : I think, there is a sense of acceptance; I am glad. 
...(Interruptions)... So, these exclusive resources will contribute to our economy 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
and these are primarily scientifically dr iven. We have an Aroma Mission. It has 
happened only in the last five  years. India has given the world the Purple Revolution. 
It has begun from the Himalayan States. No w, it is being emulated by all others--
cultivation and production of aroma produc ts, lavender products, giving competition 
to some of the imported products including their perfumes, etc., the confectionaries. 
All this has not only given us a sense of esteem to science and scientists, this has 
also given a sense of esteem to the common citizen of India.  
 Somebody was saying: What is done for the scientists to come back to India? 
What has happened to education? Though this discussion is not related particularly 
to education, of course, scientists have to undergo some kind of an education. We 
had a National Education Policy. At the risk  of sounding unorthodox, I would say that 
we had a National Education Policy which ha s enabled to give us the best of the 
emirates as far as the scientists are concerned. It is said that an anomaly is sought to 
be created through the National Education Policy, 2020! ...(Interruptions)... False. I 
will tell you how it is. The professor will unders tand it better. After I did Class-XII, my 
parents wanted me to be a doctor; I did no t manage it to a medical college. What do 
I do? I do graduation. Which subject? In Bi ology or Botany. I can’t go to any other 
subject. The professor knows it better. Then, after graduation, what do I do? 
...(Interruptions)... That is what I am coming to. I go for the civil services 
examination. If I make it, it is good; if I don’t, then what do I do? I go for M.Sc. Again 
the same subjects--botany and zoology. I can’t go to economics. Finally, either you 
do a Ph.D., then become a scientist or wh atever. It was happening by default. Now, 
you have given credentials to aptitude, to talent, to the inherent capacity. You have 
exit-entry provisions. You can change your  subjects after Class-XII. You are no 
longer a prisoner of your aspirations.  You can combine science with economics. ... 
(Interruptions)... I am not yielding. Please go through the NEP 2020 document, then 
we can have a debate. You have not gone through that. After Class-XII, I can change 
my medical subjects; I go over to the economics. Was it there? Why was it not there 
before? ... (Interruptions)... 
 Please go through the draft, then we can debate. Secondly, this National 
Education Policy, 2020 has happened in 2020. The name indicates the year! What do 
I do? It didn’t happen earlier. ... (Interruptions)... Yes, partly, I agree to the 
delinking of degree. It has also happene d through this policy. We have actually 
liberated our science aptitude s, science capabilities and human resource at multiple 
levels--the level of funding, level of encouraging, level of also exercising the choice 
and preferences. Therefore, I can go on an d on. But, I would conclude because I 
have taken more than the time required.  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
45

 
 
 Sir, it is a moment to celebrate. I th ink, this should be in anybody’s mind. 
...(Interruptions)... Yes, and those who facilitate them. ...(Interruptions)... If you 
are serving a class; if a scientist is working for 24 hours, like a good Samaritan, if you 
offer him a cup of tea, do I not appreciate yo u? Yes, that is what we are doing. We 
are offering them funds when they require it. We are offering them the environment 
when they require it. We are offering th em freedom when they require it. We are 
offering them energy when th ey require it. We have libe rated them from those self-
imposed shackles. We have liberated them from this. This has happened in the last 
n i n e  y e a r s !  S i r ,  j u s t  t o  c o n c l u d e ,  I  w o u l d  s a y ;  i t  i s  n o t  m e  s a y i n g  o r  t h e  T r e a s u r y  
Benches saying. It happened during  Prime Minister’s U.S. visit. I can’t help it. It is in 
the public domain. The U.S. solicited that our astronauts should accompany them to 
the international space stations. That means,  they have recognised the worth of our 
astronauts. What do I do? If the Opposition Members have a problem with that, it is 
not my fault. ...(Interruptions)... Are you my well-wisher or what?  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, the board displays that he is the Parliamentary Affairs 
Minister; but he is the Science & Technology Minister.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Friends, we are looking at all situations. Several small and minor 
things have to be done. No effort will be  spared. I have requested the Members and 
the leaders to make suggestions to me al so. I had an occasion to get their inputs 
also. We need only some breathing space. We are having ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Sir, I would not take long. The Americans today solicited that 
our astronauts should be accompanying th em to the international space stations. 
That means they recognise our capabilitie s. The Americans today suggest that we 
should be part of their semi-conductor co nsortium. That means, they think that we 
have some value addition to do with them . The Americans today want us to be their 
Artemis Agreement. Without any pride or prejudice, regardless of which side we are 
sitting, there is something to celebrate. Chandrayaan was a moment of glory for 
India. I don’t think anybody can deny that. Now, of course, as Jairamji said, we will 
be going ahead with Gaganyaan. Just to sh are a small bit of information, we got 
delayed because of Covid and supply chain problems. We would be shortly sending 
the first trial mission which will be non-huma n. It will go quite a few miles. Then the 
second mission will again be non-human, bu t will mimic a human being; it will be a 
robot mission with a female robot, scientist Vyom-Mitra, possibly by the beginning of 
the next year.  
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Finally, as was being said by the hon.  Member, we would have, in 2024, the 
first human space mission, Gaganyaan. Though our human space mission had been 
there, but again you would say Rakesh Shar ma went there and he told Mrs. Gandhi 
'Saara Jahan Se Achcha', जो अभी तक बजता है। But, we are conveniently forgetting 
that was a Soviet Mission. A totally indigenous Mission from nut-bolt is now in the 
offing and that is why the world today looks up to us and recognizes us as a partner 
who is equally engagable and maybe a force to reckon with  in the times to come.  
Thank you. 
   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, it is very soothing to hear from all sides.  We are 
having a scholarly debate.  This will send  a very good message an d I am sure it will 
continue.  Shrimati Sulata Deo. 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha):  Hon. Chairman, Sir, Jai Jagannath!  I will speak 
on "India's glorious space journey marked by successful soft Landing of 
Chandrayaan-3." सर, मȅ सुबह से सबकी बात सुन रही हूं और अभी मȅने मंतर्ी जी को भी सुना। 
मȅ एक बात कहूंगी - डा. िवकर्म साराभाई, डा. होमी भाभा और डा. ए.पी.जे. अÅदुल कलाम जी 
को आज यहीं से मेरा नमन है, Ǜǉांजिल है।  
 
[उपसभाध्य
क्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता) महोदया पीठासीन हुईं ।] 
 
जो साइंिटÎट्स आज हम लोगȗ क े बीच मȂ नहीं हȅ, उनका जो Îव Ãन था, वह ÎवÃन तब पूरा 
हुआ, जब चंदर्यान-3 की सॉÄट लȅिंडग हुई। हम लोगȗ ने 2019 मȂ जब चंदर्यान-2 का Ģक्षेपण िकया 
था, तब क ु छ तकनीकी खराबी क े कारण उसकी सक्सेसफु ल सॉÄट लȅिंडग नहीं हो पाई थी। मुझे 
याद है, तब न्यूयॉकर् टाइÇस ने हम लोगȗ का िजकर् एक satire c
artoon िदखा कर िकया था। आज 
अभी माननीय मंतर्ी जी बता रहे थे िक वही अमरीका आज हमारे साथ काम करना चाह रहा है। यह 
है हमारा भारत, जो कर िदखाने की क्षमत ा रखता है। एक कहावत है :  
 
"लहरȗ से डरकर नौका पार नहीं होती 
कोिशश करने वालȗ की कभी हार नहीं होती।" 
 
भारत ने जो कोिशश की, वह कहीं न कहीं आज सक्सेसफु ल हुई है। मȅ एक बात और 
कहूंगी, हालांिक 2019 मȂ चंदर्यान-2 की लȅिंडग फ े ल हो गई थी,  ले िकन जब हमने चंदर्यान-3 
भेजा, तो कहीं न कहीं उस
को बहुत मोिडफाई िकया गया था, िजसकी वजह से उसकी सक्सेफ ु ल 
सॉÄट लȅिडग या सेफ लȅिंडग हो पाई। यह कोई कम बड़ी बात नहीं है। जब जुलाई मȂ इसरो क े 
माध्यम से हम लोगȗ ने चंदर्यान-3 भेजा, तो 3,84,400 िकलोमीटर की दूरी पार करने क े बाद 
उसने चन्दर्मा पर सॉÄट लȅिंडग की।  23 अगÎत, 2023 को भारत ही नहीं, सारे िवÌव की नज़र 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
47

 
 
भारत क े चंदर्यान-3 क े ऊपर थी िक वह क ै से लȅड कर रहा है। यह है हमारे भारत क े वैज्ञािनकȗ 
का बेहतरीन काम, जो हमारे भारत क े वैज्ञािनकȗ ने िकया और उस काम को पूरी दुिनया ने देखा। 
मȅ अभी भी कहूंगी िक Îव
तंतर्ता क े बाद भारत ने अंतिरक्ष क े क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत महत्वपूणर् कदम उठाए 
और चंदर्यान-1 और चंदर्यान-2 जैसे िमशंस को Ģक्षेिपत िकया।  
भारतीय अंतिरक्ष अनुसंधान संगठन ( इसरो) ने चंदर्यान-3 िमशन क े तहत चंदर्मा की 
सॉÄट लȅिंडग क े िलए Ģ
यास िकया। चंदर्यान-3 का मुख्य  उǈेÌय चंदर्मा की सतह पर नमर् Îपशर्, 
यानी सॉÄट लȅिंडग करना था, िजससे वहां का वैज्ञािनक डेटा और जानकारी ĢाÃत की जा सकती 
थी। यह िमशन भारत क े अंतिर क्ष क्षेतर् मȂ अिǎतीय तकनीक और अन्वेषण क्षमताओं का Ģतीक है। 
चंदर्यान-3 क े सफल िनदȃशन और डेटा संगर्ह की मदद से वैज्ञािनक समुदाय को मूÊयवान 
जानकारी िमलेगी, जो अंतिरक्ष और चंदर्मा की समझ मȂ मदद करेगी। चंदर्यान-3 की सफल 
लȅिंडग मȂ भारत ने अपने अंतिर
क्ष िमशन मȂ एक और महत्वपूणर् कदम बढ़ाया है और िवÌवभर मȂ 
अपनी तकनीक का Ģदशर्न िकया है। इस सफलता क े साथ भारत ने अंतिरक्ष और िवज्ञान मȂ अपनी 
ĢितÍठा बढ़ा दी है और िव
Ìवभर मȂ भारत एक महत्वपूणर् िखलाड़ी बन गया है।  
चंदर्यान-3 क े माध्यम से भारत ने चंदर्मा की सतह पर िवज्ञान क े क्षेतर् मȂ नये अवसरȗ की 
ओर कदम बढ़ाया है और अगले िमशन क े िलए साथी डेटा ĢाÃत िकया है। इस िमशन क े माध्यम से 
भारत ने अंतिरक्ष मȂ जान
कारी और वैज्ञािनक सामथ्यर् क े सुधार का संक े त िदया है, जो देश क े 
िवकास क े िलए महत्वपूणर् है। चंदर्यान-3 की सफलता ने भारत क े अंति रक्ष िमशन की अगली 
पीिढ़यȗ को Ģेिरत िकया है और दुिनया को िदखाया है िक भारत अंतिरक्ष अनुसंधान मȂ मान्यता 
ĢाÃत करने क े िलए तैयार है। मȅ यह बोलूंगी  िक रूस , अमरीका और चाइना क े बाद भारत चतुथर् 
क ंटर्ी है, िजसने चंदर्मा पर लȅड िकया है। देखा जाए तो भारत पहली ऐसी क ंटर्ी है, िजसने South 
Polar regio
n पर लȅड िकया है। यह कोई कम बड़ी कथा नहीं है, क्यȗिक जो क ंटर्ीज़ हम लोगȗ को 
पहले आड़
ी आंख से भी नहीं देखती थीं, आज वे हम लोगȗ की सराहना कर रही हȅ।  
महोदया, मȅ गवर् क े साथ बताना चाहूंगी िक Chairman, ISRO, Dr. S. Somanath ji क े 
साथ मȂ िजतने भी वैज्ञािनक थे, उनमȂ 100 से भी अिधक मिहला वैज्ञािनक और इंजीिनयसर् थीं, 
िजन्हȗने चंदर्यान-3 की लाँिंचग मȂ टेकअप िकया था। इनमȂ इसरो की एसोिसएट Ģोजेक्ट 
डायरेक्टर कÊपना जी भी एक हȅ।  
मȅ गवर् क े साथ एक बात और कहूंगी िक मेरी Îटेट ओिडशा से बहुत सारे young 
scientists इसरो मȂ का
म करते हȅ, िजनमȂ से चार युवा साइंिटÎट्स चंदर्यान-3 की लाँिचग मȂ 
शािमल थे - Debashish Mohapatra from Berhampur, K. Nagaraju from Berhampur, Dr. 
Sharat Kumar Das from Dhenkanal, Su shil Kumar Naik fropm Kendrapara.  जब  
ओिडशा की बात आती है, तो मȅ िफर से बताना चाहूंगी िक ओिडशा मȂ 1984 मȂ Space 
Application Centre (ORSAC) की Îथापना हुई थी, जो एक apex body है।  space 
technology क े साथ-साथ ORSAC - IT projects like GIS, GPS based remote se
nsing मȂ 
भी ओिडशा अपना योगदान दे रहा है। ORSAC आज भी GRAM SAT और EDUSAT 
Programme को चला रहा है।  
ओिडशा गवनर्मȂट क े संबंध मȂ एक और बात पर मुझे मेरी सरकार, मेरे मुख्य मंतर्ी और 
हमारे भूतपूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी, Îवगीर्य बीजू बाबू क े ऊपर गवर् होता है।  ओिडशा गवनर्मȂट क े अतगर्त 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
एक Ëहीलर ǎीप है, जो ओिडशा क े भदर्क िडिÎटर्क्ट मȂ िÎथत है। ओिडशा क े Ëहीलर ǎीप का 
नामकरण डा. ए.पी.जे. अÅदुल कलाम जी की second death anniversary पर 'डा. ए.पी.जे. 
अÅदुल कलाम ǎीप' क े रूप  मȂ िकया है। इससे भी बड़ी बात यह है िक Îवगीर्य बीजू पटनायक जी, 
जो ओिडशा क े फॉमर्र चीफ िमिनÎटर  थे, उन्
हȗने डा. ए.पी.जे. अÅदुल कलाम जी की िरक्वेÎट 
पर Ëहीलर ǎीप को Ministry of Defence को एलॉट कर िदया था। कहीं न कहीं ओिडशा का यह 
जो योगदान है, वह सराहनीय है, क्यȗिक science and technology मȂ देश की सभी Îटेट्स का 
योगदान होना चा
िहए। अगर सब क ु छ ठीक रहा, तो बहुत ही जÊदी Made in Odisha  miniature 
satellite CubeSat क े माध्यम से ओिडशा की natural calamities like cyclone को क ै से रोका 
जाए और cyber security को क ै से बढ़ाया जाए, इसके  िलए काम करेगी। Bhubaneswar-
based Silicone Institute of  Technology ने Kristellar Aero space Pvt Ltd of Bengaluru क े 
साथ एक पैक्ट साइन िकया है, to develop the satellite, जो ISRO क े जिरए लाँच होगी। अभी 
भी मȅ यही कहूंगी िक आज भारत को सारा िवÌव देख रहा है। यह जो Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी है, यह 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता) : माननीय सदÎया, आपका टाइम 8.00 िमनट ही था। 
  
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: मȅ एक िमनट मȂ खत्म कर रही हूँ। 
 महोदया, यह जो Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी है, यह कहीं न कहीं हम लोगȗ को बहुत आगे लेकर 
जाएगी, भारत की इक
ोनॉमी को भी आगे लेकर जाएगी।  चूँिक आज इस रो ने यह सािबत कर 
िदया है िक हम लोग सॉÄट लȅिंडग कर सकते हȅ, इसकी वजह से Îपेस क े िजतने इÇपॉटȄट 
इंटरनेशनल Ģोजेक्ट्स हȗगे, जैसे अभी वे नासा को िमल रहे हȅ, वैसे ही हम लोगȗ को भी िमलȂगे, 
हम लोग Îटाटर्अप मȂ भी आगे बढ़Ȃगे।  इसरो क े मा
ध्यम से हम ऑलरेडी Îटाटर्अप मȂ आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ 
और इसरो इसको गाइड कर रहा है।  अगर आगे भी ऐसा ही चलता रहा, तो हमारे साइंिटÎट्स 
को, हमारे वैज्ञािनकȗ को और भी ज्यादा काम िम
लȂगे।  हमारे भारतवषर् मȂ 2040 मȂ 100 िबिलयन 
डॉलर का यह काम होगा, जब यह Îपेस टेक्नोलॉजी मȂ शािमल हो जाएगा और Îपेस मȂ इसकी 
अथर्नीित बढ़ेगी - मȅ इतना ही कहूँगी।   हमारे चंदर्यान-3 की सफल लाँिंच ग मȂ हमारे यहाँ क े 
िजतने भी लोगȗ का, िजतने भी साइंिटÎट्स का हाथ रहा है, मȅ उन सब लोगȗ क े Ģित यहाँ से 
तहेिदल से शुकर्गुजार हूँ।  मȅ भारत की नागिरक हूँ और मȅ इसके  िलए खुद गिर्वत हूँ।   
नमÎकार, वन्दे उत्कल जननी। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPE
RSON (SHRIMATI MAMATA MOHANTA):  Now, Shri V. 
Vijayasai Reddy.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) :  Madam Vice-Chairperson, thank 
you for the opportunity you have given.   
 Madam, the recent landing of Chandr ayaan-III on the Moon has solidified 
India’s position as a world leader in space trav el.   India is the first country to land on 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
49

 
 
the South Pole of the Moon, which no other country has done so far.  This is a matter 
of immense pride for all the people of India.   So, we appreciate the scientists and the 
Government in this regard.   Madam, my friend, Rameshji, is not there.   He is 
coming now.  Madam, my friend extens ively spoke about the professionalism in 
ISRO, scientific research; my friend spoke extensively about the political interference; 
my friend has spoken extensively about th e freedom and also budgetary resources.   
He has claimed that it was in 1962 that science and technology research in space had 
started.   Yes, that is correct.  But, if I don’t bring to your kind notice one particular 
incident which had occurred, probably, I will not be doing justice to that.  The 
injustice the Congress Party has done to the scientists’ community has to be 
discussed in this august House.  The Congress Party has got the legacy of stifling the 
scientific intellect.  That unfortunate case,  you might have forgotten, but we will not 
forget.  Just remind the case of Nambi Narayanan, the injustice what you have done 
to the scientists’ community.   It is a case to be discussed, and which I should bring 
to the notice. It is the Congress Party that was in power, both at the Centre and also 
in Kerala; it is the Congress Party which has foisted the cases.  The Congress Party 
has got the habit of foisting the false cases on many politicians.   …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत (महाराÍटर्): महोदया ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  T h e y  h a v e  f o i s t e d  n o t  o n l y on politicians, they have 
foisted even on the scientists. …(Interruptions)… Please, please. …(Interruptions)…  
When you spoke, I was silent. 
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया शान्त रिहए।   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Madam, it is the Congress Party……(Interruptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):  माननीय सदÎय, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Madam, please listen to me; don’t listen to them. 
…(Interruptions)… Madam, it is the
 Congress Party.. …(Interruptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):  आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगी। ...( Ëयवधान)... 
आप शान्त रिहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Madam Vice-Chairperson, don’t look at them.   Please 
look at me, Madam. ..(Interruptions)..  It is the Congress party which had put Shri 
Nambi Narayanan in jail for 50 days. ..(Interruptions).. and subjected  him to torture, 
and they have done so with ze ro proof against Nambi Narayanan ji.   There was 
absolutely no evidence, but, however, they  had foisted false cases on him.  They 
have harassed the scientists and the scient ists community at large to fulfil their 
political vendetta.   This is not good for the country.  Madam, everyone knows in this 
country the reality in that particular case.   What had happened in this particular 
case?   Finally, the hon. Supreme Court ca me to the rescue.   The Supreme Court 
had categorically stated that the arrest  was wrongful, illegal and unlawful; and, 
therefore, ordered probe into the matter against the officers who had foisted the false 
cases.   This has to be taken note of, Madam.  This is the habit of the Congress 
party.   ..(Interruptions)..   Don’t look at them, Madam.    
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):   क ृपया शान्त रिहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : They have the tendency and habit of disturbing the 
country and disturbing the people. ..(Interruptions)..  S o ,  d o n ’ t  l o o k  a t  t h e m .  
..(Interruptions)..  On the one hand, my friend, Rameshji, claims that they had 
started in 1962, on the other hand, the BJP claims that they have done everything 
from 2014 onwards.  Yes, from 2014 onwards, there is a rapid improvement and there 
is significant development.   Madam, in  between the Congress party and the BJP, I 
have to state here that the Leader of the Opposition from Andhra Pradesh, he comes 
in between and claims that he has done  a lot in the scientific research and 
technology. ..(Interruptions)..   
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR (Andhra Pradesh): 
 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: And, the Leader of the Opposition of Andhra Pradesh…. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):   माननीय सदÎय, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : The Leader of the Op position of Andhra 
Pradesh….(Interruptions)… 
                   
 Not recorded. 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
51

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):   यह बात िरकॉडर् नहीं होगी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Please. The Leader of th e Opposition of Andhra 
Pradesh, several times, on many occasions…….(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: *…(Interuptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : He has claimed that he has invented the computer and 
he is the founding father of space research... 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR:  * 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता) : Ãलीज़ आप शान्त रिहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप शान्त 
रिहए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: And, he is th e person who has invented the cellphone 
also! ….(Interruptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप शान्त रिहए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
  
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: * 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: * 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Dr. Keshava Rao, please sit down.  I am not yielding. 
….(Interruptions)…  Please sit down. ….(Interruptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप शान्त रिहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: * 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप शान्त रिहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
                   
 
* Not recorded. 
 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Madam, don’t look at him.  … .(Interruptions)… I am not 
yielding to them.   
  
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  * 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: * 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Sivaji, you have no right to speak.  … .(Interruptions)… 
You have no right to indulge in …(Interruptions).. You have no right. 
….(Interruptions)… You are absolutely doing wrong. … .(Interruptions)… Please sit 
down. … .(Interruptions)… When I am speaking, who are you to intervene.  
….(Interruptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप बैठ 
जाइए।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: It is the Vice-Chairperson who can prevent me, not you. 
….(Interruptions)… Sivaji, please sit. ….(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: 
* 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: You also address the Chair.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Madam, please listen to me.  My request to you is.. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): Ãलीज़, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आपकी बात िरकॉडर् 
पर नहीं जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : It is for the good of the country. … .(Interruptions)… It is 
for the good of the country.  The Leader of the Opposition of Andhra Pradesh who is 
claiming that he is the founding father of everything, you investigate the case. 
…(Interruptions)…   
 
                   
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
53

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... क ृपया बैठ 
जाइए।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: You find out the facts….  
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :..whether he has really inve nted everything, invented 
information technology, invented computer, invented cellphone.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... आपकी बात िरकॉडर् नहीं 
होगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : If that is true, India can claim patent rights on that.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोह
ंता) :   आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : And, all hardware manufacturing companies, software 
companies and also the cellphone companie s in India would be making billions of 
rupees towards the patent rights that India will have, if Chandrababu Naidu’s claim is 
correct.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):   Ãलीज़, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: 
 …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Madam, next issue is, …(Interruptions)… 
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):   आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
  
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : No point of order when debate is going on. 
…(Interruptions)..  The entire Opposition is 
† party. The Congress party is † party.   
                   
 Not recorded. 
†Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
And, these parties have joined with  Congress party and made the country †  
…(Interruptions).. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता):  Ãलीज़ आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Please listen to me, Madam.  Don't look at them. 
...(Interruptions).   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया आप बैिठए।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Madam Vice-Chairperson, coming to the Budget. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए।... ...( Ëयवधान)... क ृपया आप अपनी बात 
कहȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  India's Space Programme has the Budget of Rs. 2 
billion dollars, whereas, the NASA of Amer ica has got the Budget 31 times bigger 
than India's Budget, which is at 62 billion dollars. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया ËयवÎथा बनाए रखȂ। ...( Ëय
 वधान)... आप शांत 
रिहए। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
  
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Let them make noise.  ...(Interruptions)...  Whatever 
they want to make, let them do.  ...(Interruptions)... But it can't deter me from 
exposing the other parties. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप शांत रिहए। ...( Ëयवधान)... क ृपया ËयवÎथा बनाए 
रखȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : I t  c a n ' t  d e t e r  m e  f r o m  exposing Chandrababu Naidu.  
...(Interruptions)... Madam, I have already told that these parties are 
† parties. 
...(Interruptions)... They are interested in disturbing the country. 
...(Interruptions)... Madam, please look at me. ...(Interruptions)...  
                   
 
 
†Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
55

 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया शांत रहȂ। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Mangalyaan was the ch eapest Mission, the most 
economical mission. ...(Interruptions)... It is an economical mission which was 
completed with Rs. 450 crores. ...(Interruptions)... Madam, the Budget of 
Chandrayaan-3 was very cost-effective and the Mission costed only Rs. 615 crores. 
...(Interruptions)... So, we need to appreciate the Government and Narendra Bhai 
Modi in this regard.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप शांत रहȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Madam, I have no hesitation to say that the cost of 
Chandrayaan-3, which is Rs. 615 crore, is  lower than the Budget of a blockbuster 
movie.  ...(Interruptions)... It is less than the cost of blockbuster movie which cost 
around 700-800 crores of rupees. We need to appreciate the hon. Prime Minister in 
this regard. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): अगर कोई आपिǄजनक बात कही गई है, तो उस
 की जाँच 
होगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... क ृपया आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Madam, the question now is, if ISRO can achieve so 
much with so little financial resources, ju st imagine how much it can achieve with 
more resources which the Congress Party ha s not provided during its 50 years of 
rule, which now the present Government is providing. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): अगर क ु छ आपिǄजनक बात होगी, तो उसकी जाँच की 
जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Madam, in the Budget of 202 3-24 of the Department of 
Space, the expenditure was slashed by eight per cent, and I request the Government 
of India not to slash the Budget  expenditure in this regard. ...(Interruptions)... 
Madam, last year, the expenditure was re vised downward by 23 per cent from the 
Budget Estimate of Rs. 13,700 crore to the Revised Estimate of Rs. 10,530 crore. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया आप लोग बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Madam, the biggest cut for the Space Technology 
under the Central Sector Schemes was slashed by Rs. 1,094 crores. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): अगर कोई भी आपिǄजनक बात होगी, तो  उसकी जाँच 
की जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY : Madam, now, I come to global comparison. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया आप लोग बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... जो भी 
आपिǄजनक बात होगी, उसकी जाँच की जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI R
EDDY: Madam, I have already told that the Congress Party has 
learned, over a period of fifty years of their rule, how the ...(Interruptions)...  Look at 
the global comparison. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया आप लोग बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... अगर क ु छ 
आपिǄजनक बात होगी, तो उसकी जाँच की जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  क ृपया आप लोग बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Madam, NASA was founded only four years before the 
ISRO was founded, but since then th e NASA has undertaken 1,000 Missions, 
whereas ISRO stands at little over 500 Missions.    ...(Interruptions)...  My point in 
this regard is, if ISRO is provided with adequate funds, it can achieve more than what 
NASA can achieve. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Madam, in 2021, China has 55 launches, and we had only two launches. 
Compared to India's launch vehicle, the 4 tonner GSLV-Mk3, China has Long March 
5 rocket which is capable of carrying five times more payload. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): क ृपया आप लोग सुिनए। माननीय सदÎय को continue 
करने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  अगर क ु छ आपिǄजनक बात होगी, तो उसकी जाँच की जाएगी। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
57

 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Therefore, I request the Government and the hon. 
Prime Minister to increase the number of launches.  ....(Interruptions)...  
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  ( SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE):   Madam, 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY :  Madam, I am not yielding. Whether he is LoP or 
anybody, I am not yielding.   ...(Interruptions)... Madam Vice-Chairperson, I am not 
yielding. ...(Interruptions)...  Let him be the Leader of Opposition, I am not yielding. 
...(Interruptions)... If you want to give priority to the Leader of Opposition, you can 
give priority to the Leader of Opposition, but I am not yielding. ...(Interruptions)... I 
am not yielding. ...(Interruptions)...  
Madam Vice-Chairperson, Asia's first Space University was established in 
Thiruvananthapuram.  ...(Interruptions)... I am talking about Thiruvananthapuram. 
...(Interruptions)... Let Members from Kerala listen.   Let Kerala friends listen. 
...(Interruptions)... Asia's first Space University was established in 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, in 2007. ...(Interruptions)... Manojji, please be seated.  
I am not yielding to you, Manoj ji.  ...(Interruptions)...  Sivaji, I am not yielding. 
...(Interruptions)... But I request the Government that more public spaces ...(Time-
bell rings.)... and educational institutions are requir ed to be built in India and India is 
to scale up the space activities. ...(Interruptions)... 
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): माननीय सदÎय, आपका टाइम पूरा हो गया। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
  
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  One minute, Madam.  
Madam, it is also concerning to note  that thousands of engineers pass out 
each year and they are migrating to other countries due to the limited opportunities 
within the country. ...(Interruptions)...  ...(Ti
 me-bell)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): माननीय सदÎय, आपका टाइम पूरा हो गया। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: I request the hon. Prime Minister to enhance the Budget 
and provide more opportunities in Indi a to accommodate those engineers who pass 
out from Indian universities.  ...(Interruptions)... One-third of all IIT graduates leave 
the country and work abroad.  This is my request. ...(Interruptions)... 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON ( SHRIMATI MAMATA MOHANTA ): Shri K.R. Suresh 
Reddy. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY (Telangana) : Madam, at the outset, I would like to 
thank you for the opportunity given to me, and I can assure you that from the heavy 
headwinds, my speech will sail through tailwinds. 
 Madam, today, the BRS Party joins th e rest of the House to celebrate a 
remarkable milestone in the history of sp ace exploration-- the triumphant landing of 
Chandrayaan-3 on the Moon's surface.  Th is achievement not only represents a 
momentous occasion for India but also a significant leap for humanity as we continue 
to explore and unlock the mysteries of th e cosmos. Madam, this Mission was born 
from the experiences and lessons learnt from its predecessors, Chandrayaan-1 and 
Chandrayaan-2, showcasing the spirit of innovation and resilience of the Indian 
Space Research Organization, as we know it as ISRO.  
 Chandrayaan-3 is India's ambitiou s and successful Lunar Mission.  
Chandrayaan-3 is India's successful atte mpt to achieve a soft landing on the 
Southern Pole of the Moon's  surface for the first time.  India is the only country to 
reach this part of the moon so far. To mark this great technological success, National 
Space Day will be celebrated each year on 23
rd August. From Nehruji to Modiji, we 
salute the leadership, not getting into the po litics of it, but for creating a firewall for 
space technology for non-political interference.  
 Also, I pay my respects to all, from the great Aryabhatta to Shri Somanath, 
who was instrumental behind this pilot project. 
 Madam, through Chandrayaan-3, India aims to showcase its technological 
prowess, scientific capab ilities and its commitment to space exploration.  If 
Chandrayaan-3 is a success, it would further strengthen India's position in the global 
space community. The mission would inspir e the younger generation to pursue 
careers in Science, Technology, Engineer ing and Mathematics. Now, the question 
which lies before the Government and all of us is -- Is the Government prepared to 
take the kind of volumes which would be  coming in through space technology?  I 
was told that the data gene rated by the Chandrayaan Mi ssion, the Aditya-L1 Mission 
and various satellites -- the hon. Minister  informed this House of hundreds of 
satellites being sent -- is being analyzed by students and researchers who study the 
subject, Geospatial Science and Technology.  Now, it is ironical that neither AICTE 
nor UGC recognizes this subject as an in dependent subject because it is a multi-
disciplinary subject.  Chandrayaan and Aditya-L1 missions would generate huge 
data.  We need to prioritize and recogniz e this particular subject of Geospatial 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
59

 
 
Science and Technology through AICTE and UGC.  I feel that this would be the right 
moment for the Minister to make an interv ention and take necessary action in this 
regard.  We need to bring to speed the va rious changes.  As most of the Members 
suggested, schools and colleges in the rural areas need to be connected.  It is not 
only in the IITs, but also in the various engineering colleges across the nation that 
these brilliant students, these brilliant scientists, are being produced.  They need to 
be continuously encouraged. Now, as a step in this direction, Madam, the 
Government in my State of Telang ana, under the leadership of KCR garu, has 
initiated certain measures through a T-SAT initiative, which the Telangana 
Government has started. Now, T-SAT impa rts quality education using satellite and 
digital communication to the nook and corner of the State.  Every corner of the State 
gets this facility and two satellite channels , Nipuna and Vidya, impart diversified 
education in schools, colleges, agricult ural universities and also for students 
preparing for UPSC exams, reducing the financial cost which otherwise would have 
been a burden for them if they were in private colleges. 
 Madam, when the Chandrayaan launch was being shown live, students in 
remote areas watched the events live, thanks to this technology.  When you get to 
speak to these young students after the laun ch of Chandrayaan, what really inspires 
all policy makers like us today is the kind of  scientific temper that this one take-off 
has inspired in the students.  Today, whether you go to the remotest of the villages or 
into the urban cities, you see students comi n g  f o r w a r d .   T h e y  t a l k  n o t  j u s t  a b o u t  
becoming engineers and doctors but also  becoming scientists, astronauts and 
delving deep into the outer space and bringing back whatever they can to help this 
nation.  This is what the Chandrayaan Mission has done to the entire nation, 
especially, the young minds of India. The kind of scientific temper which it has 
brought in them goes a long, long way and we salute the fraternity of ISRO for giving 
us this opportunity. 
 Madam, talking about the T-SAT program me in Telangana, we have 35 lakh 
subscribers on the digital platform. It just  gives you an assessment of the kind of 
impact that this policy is making. The Gove rnment of India needs to intervene.  They 
need to support such initiatives. Yesterday, the hon. Prime Minister was talking 
about the federal structure of this country.  I would like to bring to the notice of this 
House that here is a Government which is im parting such wonderful initiatives, but it 
is not being adequately funded. We hear ta lks of it becoming centralized, moving it 
away from Telangana and bringing it here to centralize it.  So, another form of 
federalism coming in here is the fear that mo st of us have.  Please allow the States to 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
bask in their scientific achievements.  Le t them localize the needs.  Such facilities 
would go a long way in helping the States. 
 Madam, before I conclude, I would like to say that Shri Jairam Ramesh really 
enlightened the House a lot about science,  which was very good.  But then, the 
Leader of the House came with some polit ical science and we have our own reasons 
to talk about that here.  ...(Interruptions)... When he talked about the bifurcation of 
Andhra Pradesh into Telangana and Andhra not having been done scientifically, we 
have a very strong reason to object beca use it goes against the sentiments of the 
people of Telangana.  We have been repeat edly saying that hundreds of people have 
sacrificed their lives to see this day.  Today, Telangana is one of the number one 
progressing States.  And if the hon. Leader  of the House says that it was not done 
scientifically, then through you, I would like to ask him, in the last nine years, have 
you brought in any amendments to improve it?  Have you given anything more apart 
from what is there in the Bill?  You had an opportunity to do that, but, unfortunately, 
you did not.  Playing around with sentiments like this is not really good.  As we speak 
about federalism, it gives us a chance to sa y that Telangana is in deed an example of 
unity in diversity that this great country is proud about.  Telangana is proving it not for 
some political achievements; Telangana is talk ing about how it is contributing to this 
country. It is contributing economically, agricu lturally and even scientifically today.  
So, when things like these are happening, when progress like this can happen, if the 
party heading the Government comments like this, it would go against the interests of 
the State; this would go against the sentiments of the State. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO :  Just a minute, Madam. If they trust the people of 
Telangana... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप 
continue किरए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सदÎय, आप बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... आप continue किरए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY:  Madam, I am not yielding. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता): आप continue किरए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY:  Madam, I would not like to bring in any politics here.  I 
only wanted to speak on science, but politics is what has come from that side.  So, I 
need to set the record straight. ...(Interruptions)... Those remarks were not 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
61

 
 
expunged.  They are on record.  If they are on record, then we have to object to it.  
Our point is, don't disturb the harmony.  We said we would get separated as 
brothers and sisters. ...(Interruptions)...  W e  c o n t i n u e  t o  b e  l i k e  b r o t h e r s  a n d  
sisters.  You develop and we develop. ...(Interruptions)... And, it is the 
responsibility of the Government of India to  come to the rescue of both the States 
and set right matters if they feel that something has gone wrong.  In the last nine 
years, have they brought in one single am endment to the Bill?  No?  Then where has 
something gone wrong?  If you have seen  something going wron g, have you made 
any special allocation?  No.  Have you se ttled the water dispute?  No.  What is 
happening then?  Why do you make such  sweeping remarks when we are just 
healing our wounds, trying to get closer to each other and becoming a part of the 
country's progress?   
I request through you, Madam, that th e remarks made by the Leader of the 
House may be expunged.  Thank you very much.  
   
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON ( SHRIMATI MAMATA MOHANTA ): Hon. Member, Shri 
A.D. Singh. 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH  (Bihar): Thank you, Madam Chairperson for giving me this 
opportunity to speak on this issue.  On behalf of my leader, Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav 
and my Party, I would like to say that it is a matter of great pride.   
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Big congratulations to ISRO for maki ng us proud through this successful 
mission.  Their untiring efforts made the fl awless journey of Chandrayaan-3 possible, 
that too in a very small budget.  Further, I want to bring to the notice of my 
colleagues, on both sides, that Pandit Jawa harlal Nehru's vision is what brought us 
all to this stage. 
If we go back to 1962, that was the time when Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, 
independent India's first Prime Minister, rec ognised the need for investment in space 
research and set up the Indian Nation al Committee for Space Research and he 
inculcated the vision of developing a scient ific temper, and all institutions related to 
science and technology, fortunately, got established under his leadership in India, 
and by successive Prime Ministers, including Modi ji from 2014.   So, we cannot give 
individual congratulations only to one or two persons.  It was a joint effort of all the 
successive Governments equally and we ar e not here to compare as to which 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Government did better.  I am fed up of hearing that af ter 2014 to this day, such and 
such things have happened.  In fact, I ge t dreams that before 2014, I never used to 
wear clothes also.  So, I don't really know because if that is the situation in this 
country... ...(Interruptions)...  
 It all started in 1940 when Dr. Vikram Sarabhai came to the Indian Institute of 
Science, Bengaluru campus, after completi ng an undergraduate degree in Physics 
and Maths from the Cambridge University. Dr. Sarabhai became interested in the 
study of cosmic ray under the influence of  Dr. C.V. Raman. In  1942, Dr. Sarabhai 
met Dr. Homi Bhabha, who had become a Professor at the newly-established 
Cosmic Ray Research Institute.  They bo th saw cosmic rays from two different 
perspectives.  While Dr. Bhabha was inte rested in cosmic rays for the atomic 
particles, Dr. Sarabhai woul d come to see them as tools to study the outer space.  
When India gained independen ce in 1947, Dr. Homi Bhabha  wrote to the then Prime 
Minister to set up a separate branch of sc ience relating to atomic energy.  In 1954, 
Pandit Nehru created the Department of At omic Energy seeing the launch of Sputnik 
satellite by the Soviet Union.  Pandit Ne hru instructed the Department of Atomic 
Energy, where Dr. Bhabha was the Secretary,  to look after space research from the 
next year.  Pandit Nehru fa mously said, "It is science alone that can solve the 
problems of hunger and poverty, of insani tation and illiteracy, of superstition and 
deadening custom and tradition, of vast resources running to waste, or a rich country 
inhabited by starving people..."   
 I also heard the hon. Minister on th e other side that they welcomed and 
opened the ISRO gates for ever ybody.  Let me clarify to th e hon. Minister that as the 
gates were shut all these years, that is  the reason for ISRO being so successful 
because, being a Member of the Consultative Committee of Defence, I have seen 
that organisations like DRDO and others which are there, there are lobbies, both 
Indian and foreign, who stall the developmen t of science.  For example, though we 
are talking that we are supporting the scie ntific community, but even today, we don't 
have a testing ground in the field of Defe nce.  All the equipments that we develop 
have to be sent abroad for testing and it depends upon the whims and fancies of the 
local governments there to do it properly or not.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 Then, the hon. Minister spoke of the h i g h  l e v e l  o f  i n v e s t m e n t  t h a t  w e  a r e  
making.  India spends mere 0.66 per cent of GDP on science and technology, which 
is the lowest amongst the BRICS nations.   Similarly, various Members from the 
Treasury Benches have talked about the 'Amrit Kaal'.  Yes, sure, it is 'Amrit Kaal', 
but actual 'Amrit Kaal' will come when we  are able to provide employment or 
sustainability for the 800 million people whom we are feeding by giving rice and wheat 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
63

 
 
and everything today.   So, what kind of 'Amrit Kaal' is this?  We have two Indias.  
One is the rich India and the ot her is the poor India.  The poor India is starving even 
today.  We are sitting on a time bomb of unemployment.  So, as the hon. Minister 
said that on this index, we have become from 81 to 40, यह तो बताइए िक इस साइंस 
और टेक्नोलॉजी क े जमाने मȂ जो गरीब भूखȗ मर रहे हȅ, उन गरीबȗ क े िलए आप क्या कर रहे हȅ?  
आप चिलए और देिखए िक कई Îटेट्स मȂ उनकी क्या हालत है।  यह 'अमृत काल' कह-कहकर, 
I am only being reminded of Goebbels' phil osophy that untruth to
ld many times will 
appear to be truth.  जो  800 िमिलयन  का गरीब इंिडया है, अगर आप उसके  िलए क ु छ कर 
पाइएगा तो वह 'अमृत काल' होगा।  जहाँ तक नेहरू  जी को हर िवषय पर बोलने की बात है, तो it 
was Pandit Nehru's democratic mind and visi on for creating institutions by which we 
are able to speak like this today.   मȅ नेहरू  जी या िकसी और की बड़ाई नहीं कर रहा और न 
ही ऑनरेबल Ģाइम िमिन
Îटर की बुराई कर रहा हूँ।  ऑनरेबल Ģाइम िमिनÎटर भी बहुत अच्छा 
काम कर रहे हȅ।  जहाँ तक आप लोग यह बोल रहे हȅ िक West या अमेिरका हमारी इज्जत करता 
है, तो मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक I travel all over the world.  I interact
 with the highest level of 
people in the society, whether it is West or other parts of the world, and whenever I 
ask them as to what is the position of India.  † ठीक है, efforts भी हो रहे हȅ।  यहाँ-वहाँ 
उसकी 200 मीिंटग्स हुईं।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Just a minute.   The hon. Member has made a statement. He 
needs to revisit it.  All of us here in the Ho use are alive to the rising morale and spirit 
of Bharat and everyone has contributed towards this. All segments of the House have 
contributed towards this.  I have been ab road thrice. I have interacted with G-20 
leaders. Don't you recognize the World Bank Chairman saying what we have 
achieved in six years could not be achieved in 50 years?  Let us not demean and dent 
our institutions.  You are a very informed person.  Your personal experience is very 
limited on this count.  The entire House has contributed to the rise of India.  Everyone 
has done it.  Both the sides have contribute d.  Don't make such a statement.  I will 
look into that statement.   
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH:  Hon. Chairman, Sir, I offer my apologies in case I have offended 
anybody.  I definitely have neither the knowledge nor the experience at your level, but 
I can speak the truth in the House.  I can speak what I feel.  It may be wrong.  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have taken your time.  Thank you.   
                   
†Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH:   Sir, I wish to congratulate a ll the scientists, and I want to make 
suggestions about the Administration in this country, through you, Mr. Chairman, 
that हमारी various organizations मȂ जो साइंिटÎट्स हȅ, उनको हम 60 साल  की उĦ मȂ 
िरटायर क्यȗ करते हȅ?  हम उनको कम से कम 65-70 साल तक रखȂ, because after reaching 
the age of 50 or 60 years, that is the time they have rea lly matured mentally. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, hon. Member.  
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH :  I will take only one or two minut es.  I have been to various 
institutions. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have exceeded your time.  Thank you.   
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH:  Right, Sir.  Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Dr. V. Sivadasan.  उससे पहले मȅ आपको बता दूँ िक इस देश की 
िवकास यातर्
ा पक्ष और िवपक्ष क े भारी योगदान से हुई है।  इस देश की िवकास यातर्ा मȂ देश क े हर 
नागिरक का योगदान है,  उसमȂ िकसान का योगदान है, मजदूर का योगदान है।  यिद कोई महज 
पक्ष-िवपक्ष की वजह से बात करे, तो यह ठीक नहीं है।  There can be no contribution without 
participation of paks
h and vipaksh, the Treasury Benches and the Opposition 
Benches. This is an occasion and a subject, on which I, as an Indian, felt hurt when a 
Member of this House said that we ar e being driven, and he gets such an 
impression. I am sure that impression may no t be shared by many.  At least, I have 
widely travelled and so have many of the Members here.   
Rise of India is being noticed and it is contribution of one and all.  If Mr. Kharge 
will go abroad, he will add to the lustre  respect of the country.  We cannot 
monopolise it.  I will have a look at the ob servation made by hon. Member.  If our 
artists go abroad, they create a name fo r us.  Our musicians, our singers, our 
politicians, our industrialists, they all do it.  Now, Dr. V. Sivadasan.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, I have a point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Under which rule? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: It is Rule 258.  Sir, on page 7 of Unparliamentary Expressions...  
 MR. CHAIRMAN: What exactly is your point of order? 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
65

 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, it is with reference to the book, 'Unparliamentary 
Expressions'.  Please see page 7. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I enquired from you something very simple.  Under which rule, you 
are raising a point of order.  
  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, it is Rule 258. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I have passed on the book for th e wisdom of the Leader of the 
Opposition so that he can also have a look at Rule 258.  What is the substance? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Substance is very simple.  It is with reference to page 7 of the 
book, Unparliamentary Expressions.  We n eed your protection.  When you were not 
here, during the course of the speech, hon.  Member, Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy said, 
"All the Opposition parties are 
†"  Sir, the word † is unparliamentary expression.  
Please expunge it.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will look into it.  Hon. Members, I started the practice that a lady 
Member of this House would also be sitti ng as Vice-Chairperson on the panel of 
Vice-Chairpersons. Now, we had a very distinguished Member of this House 
occupying this Chair. I wanted her to be here for a little longer.  Whenever I go inside, 
I watch the debate very carefully.  I will look into it.  Trust me and have my word for it.  
If I am not in the House, I am glued to the television to see what is happening in the 
House.  So, I will look into it.  Our women Members are enormously  talented.  I have 
a request from them, and tomorrow perhaps,  I may have in the panel, only women 
Members of the House. They are very talented.  We will have it.  Now, Dr. V. 
Sivadasan. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN ( Kerala): Respected Chairman, Sir, we are all very happy and 
proud of the achievements of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and the 
scientific community.  Chandrayaan-3 is the re sult of collective effort of many public 
and private entities.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KANTA KARDAM) in the Chair.] 
                   
† Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 Six public-sector companies from Kerala  including Keltron, Kerala Minerals 
and Metals Limited (KMML) and Steel and Fo rgings Industries Limited (SIFL) have 
contributed in this effort.  This is a proud mo ment for all of us.  This is the victory of 
scientific temper and spirit of the nation.  Madam, science is a product of critical 
thinking.  We can progress in science only if we have the courage to ask and answer 
questions.  So, I see Chandrayaan as an o ccasion to uphold the spirit of critical 
thinking.  Our Constitution has upheld the scientific temper.  Our education system 
and the institutions should be built with this spirit. 
 Madam, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru said, "A university stands for humanism, for 
tolerance, for reason, for adve nture of ideas and for the search of truth."  In 1963, 
Dr. Vikram Sarabhai, the Father of Indian  Space Programme, established India's first 
rocket launching station at Thumba near Thiruvananthapuram.  He taught us the 
importance of cultivating the new generation  with scientific temper.  Our respected 
Leader of the House did not mention his name .  Dr. Vikram Sarabhai said, "There is 
no leader and there are no led.  A leader  has to be a cultivator rather than a 
manufacturer.  He has to prov ide the soil and the overall climate and environment in 
which the seed can grow."  It should not be forgotten. 
 Madam, this achievement is the re sult of our long-standing commitment 
towards science, but I am sorry to say that this Government is not ready to promote 
scientific temper.  Science will provide un iversal view and solidarity to all human 
beings.    
 Madam, in India, existing situation is very difficult.  If the budgetary allocation 
for science education and space research is  curtailed, how will development take 
place in the future? In the text books of  NCERT, 'Theory of Evolution' has been 
deleted.  Why are they not interested in  the promotion of sc ience?  Aryabhatta, 
Galileo, Bruno, Copernicus, Darwin, C.V. Raman and Dr. S. Chandrasekhar, all 
have contributed to the development of science. I remember one of the social 
reformer in Kerala, Sahodaran Ayyappan, who wrote a prayer 'Science Dasakam'.  
Please read it.   
 Madam, please see the figures of basi c science fellowship  in India.  The 
number of fellowships has come down from  4,134 in 2016 to 703 in 2021 and the 
expenditure has come down from 105 crore of  rupees to 15 crore of rupees in the 
same period.  Only 15 crore of rupees!  A lot of women scientists are working for the 
missions. You are talking about 'Nari Shakti '.  But, post-doctoral fellowships for 
women has come down from 642 to 434 in this period and the expenditure has come 
down from 32 crore of rupees to 19 crore of rupees.   
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
67

 
 
 Now, let us see the budgetary allocatio n to ISRO and space research.  In 2019, 
it was Rs. 13,139 crore but in 2021, it has come down to Rs. 12,642 crores.  Only 
12,642 crore of rupees!  In  space research also, the am ount has come down from 
Rs. 13,700 to Rs. 12,543 in 2023-24.   
 Madam, embracing the scientists is easy, tweeting is very easy but giving 
money is difficult for this Government.  In 2023-24, the Government has allocated Rs. 
16,361 crore for the Union Ministry of Science & Technology.  (Time bell rings.)   
One minute, Madam.  Everybody got a chance to speak.  It is only 0.4 per cent of our 
Budget.  We are spending a very little port ion of our GDP on science research. In 
Korea, they are spending 4.8 per cent of GDP on science and technology. 
In the U.S., this amount is 3.45 per cent of GDP; in China, it is 2.4 per cent; 
and in India, only 0.7 per cent of the GD P is spent on science and technology.  
Madam, Chandrayaan should be  an occasion to bring our focus to science.  We 
need more scientists.  (Time-bell rings.) 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): आपका एक िमनट का समय पूरा हो गया है।   
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Just one minute more, Madam.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): आपको सात िमनट का समय दे िदया गया है। 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Madam, I have received an answer... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती का
न्ता कदर्म): आप आधे िमनट मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN : Okay, Madam. I have received an answer in this House 
regarding the total number of missions. I have been told that during 2018-19, 14 
space missions were launched and all the 14  missions were successful.  But in 2019-
20, the number came down to 11.  That means, 11 were launched and 11 were 
successful.  But in 2020-21, this number came down to 5, and 5 were successful.  
But in 2021-22, only 5 missions were launche d and 3 were successful.  It is not due 
to lack of hard work from our scientists.  I believe that it is due to lack of Government 
funding. Madam, they are spending larg er amount on making statues than on 
science education. Regarding expenditure of Chandrayaan... (Time-bell rings.)   
Madam, just one minute.   
 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): आपको एक िमनट का समय और िदया जाता है।  आप 
अपनी बात जÊदी समाÃत कीिजए। आपका समय दो िमनट ज्यादा हो गया है।  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN :  Madam, the Chandrayaan project was for Rs. 615 crores, but 
the expenditure on statues might be of ten thousand crores.   
I have another really important point regarding the HEC.  They made the 
sliding doors for Chandrayaan spacecraft.  
  
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): आप अपनी बात जÊदी समाÃत कीिजए।   
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Their 2,400 employees have not been getting their salary for the 
l a s t  1 8  m o n t h s .   S o ,  t h i s  s h o u l d  b e  c o n s i d e r e d .  (Time-bell rings.)  This is my 
request.  T
hank you.  
  
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB ( Kerala):  Thank you, Madam. I have seen you were giving 
extra time to my comrades.  I hope the same thing will be done for me also.   
 First of all, I congratulate the whole te am of scientists, ISRO and everybody for 
their wonderful job.  It is no t only from Jawaharlal Nehru ji to Modi ji, but before them 
also, so many people might have worked. I don’t know exactly.  I do not want to go 
into that discussion, but my only questi on is this. Our Minister of Science and 
Technology is not looking this way.  So, I am talking to the empty Treasury Benches.  
I can see only Mr. Neeraj talking to somebo dy.  Otherwise, everything is completely 
free.  Thank you very much for ignoring this session.  So, Chandrayaan is a very 
small thing for them.  But our Chairman was telling... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): वहाब जी, ऐसा नहीं है।  आप गलत बात कह रहे हȅ।  आप 
देिखए, िकतने लोग बैठे हुए हȅ।  आपने एक मेÇबर का नाम िलया है। 
 
SHRI ABD
UL WAHAB :  Okay, I will change the track.  ...(Interruptions)...  I will 
come to the scientific temper. The Indian Space Research Organisation is the world's 
sixth largest national space agency.  We agr ee.  Whatever is happening now, we are 
a l l  a  p a r t  o f  t h a t ,  f r o m  K e r a l a  t o  K a s h m i r .  B u t  m y  p r o b l e m  i s ,  w e  s e n t  t h e  
Chandrayaan to the south side of the moon where it is very dark . The aim should be 
to send it from the north, from Delhi to South, to Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka.  I 
am not saying, Andhra.  It is divided.  I do n’t know what they are going to do here.  I 
am not saying about Andhra.  It will make a big uproar.  So, I am not touching it.   
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
69

 
 
 My first and foremost point is this. Me and my party congratulate all leaders, 
from Modi ji to Nehru ji for doing all this work. I am not seeing any difference.  But, 
Madam, you have to remember one thing. Through you, I am trying to tell this.  
Nowadays, it is not 50 years or 5 years. Now, everything  happens immediately.  The 
Minister was telling about the last nine years. Technology has gone that far.  Now, 
everything varies every month, not every year. So, नेहरू  जी क े टाइम मȂ ऐसा हो गया, इस 
टाइम ऐसा हो गया। नहीं, अभी everything is fast. We are agreeing that we are on the fast 
track.   
I want to add one more thing about wh atever we say about scientists. My 
uncle used to be a scientist in BARC, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre. He was 
telling me something.  They work for 24 hour s, you were just admiring.  But they are 
getting very low salary in comparison with others. People are going for techies 
everywhere.  Why?  It is because less mone y is here.  My friend was telling about his 
experiences outside. He was insulted. ...(Interruptions)...  N o w ,  o u r  M i n i s t e r  i s  
coming.  Anyways, he was insulted for going  outside.  Why are we going outside?  I 
was also outside for many years.  Why?  It is because there are no avenues here, 
there is no employment here.  Our fr iend was telling about his experience, 
†  Can we 
not express our feelings inside the House?  Should we always speak only about Modi 
ji, Modi ji and Modi ji, just like the Treasury Benches?  It  is just not possible.  We will 
tell our views openly.  This is the only place we have got.  If we speak outside, we will 
be arrested under UAPA.  So, this is the place where we can open our heart.  (Time-
bell rings.)  Is my time finished? 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): आप अपनी Îपीच जÊदी कन्क्लूड कीिजए। 
  
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:   You should not say this so early to me, Madam, because 
everybody was given extra time.  I will come to the point and conclude immediately.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): आप आधे िमनट मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  Madam, the current Chairman, ISRO, Mr. Somanath, is from 
Kerala.  He studied from T.K.M. Engineering College, Kollam.  ...(Interruptions)...  
It is Thangal Kunju Musaliar College of Engin eering.  It is a minority-run institution.  
...(Interruptions)...  Why are you against this one?  Is this engineering college not 
important?  You are always on the Pinarayi  Vijayan, Communist Party and all that.  
                   
† Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Come out of all that.  Be a Keralite.  He st udied in a college where he was felicitated.  
He was telling about what he has done in IS RO and all that.  So, we have to mention 
about him also.   
 I will now talk about cost-effectivene ss of Chandrayaan.  Why is it cost-
effective?  It is because you are giving me agre salary to scientists.  You give them 
more.  They are getting only one-fifth of th e salary they can get outside.  Outside, 
they can get five times more.  (Time-bell rings.)   So, this cost-effectiveness is 
because of this.  You can cut cost in ma ny different ways.  I cannot speak much 
now.  It is also not allowed inside.  Anyw ay, the cost effectiven ess is not the only 
reason.  It is because they are not getting salary.  One of my friends here was giving 
me a paper.  What is it saying? 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म): आप जÊदी अपनी बात समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB :  Launching pad of Chandray aan was made by HEC, Heavy 
Engineering Corporation.  Its employees have  not been getting salary for the last ten 
months.  (Time-bell rings.)  According to the BBC news, they are selling tea and idli.  
What a shame it is for us!   Even after Chandrayaan has been launched, they have 
not got their salary of ten months.  
  
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: They are not ISRO employees. 
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  But they worked for Chandrayaan.   
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH:  Just one second.  That was a half baked information which 
was reported. They supplied equipment to ISRO, and ISRO is expected to pay for the 
equipment, which they have done. Now, this is between th e employer and the 
employee.   
  It is like this. You have a factory. I purchase products from you and I give you 
an amount for the purchase. Th en you don't pay them.  ...( Interruptions)... If you 
are not paying your employee, then that is a di fferent story.  It is like that.   ISRO is 
only a buyer for that factory.    
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  I don't know whatever happens backstage.  But the image of 
the country is tarnished by the BBC which is  telling this story. At least ask them now 
to pay their salary.  Don't cut the cost just like this.  Thank you, Madam. 
                                                                                
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
71

 
 
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL  (Uttar Pradesh) :  Madam, I thank the Chair for giving me this 
opportunity to intervene in this debate. I ha ve been listening with great attention to 
the somewhat fractious nature of the debate . I remember the learned Minister talking 
about Neil Armstrong way back in 1962. I thin k at that point in time the President of 
the United States was Richard Nixon. But there were no proceedings in the Senate to 
celebrate what Neil Armstrong had done. There were no proceedings in the House to 
demonstrate as to what the great scientist in the United States had done.  But we still 
welcome the Prime Minister and welcome th e Government for having taken up this 
issue to celebrate the achievements of the scientific community.   
 Science is a subject that is so far-reach ing that it can change our lives.  But to 
change our lives, we have to think about innovations in science at every level.  At one 
level is what ISRO has done.  It has been able to land Chandrayaan on the south pole 
of the moon.  But at another level, we have to think about 1.4 billion people in this 
country and ask ourselves this question:  What has science done for them?   
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 I remember when I was the Minister in  the Government, we started a project 
called 'Project - 800'.  That 'Project - 800'  dealt with 800 million people who almost 
live at the poverty line.  I asked my scie ntific community why our rickshaw pullers 
have to pull rickshaws.  Because of the kind  of gasping that it results in, most of 
them get TB.  When they get TB, their lives  are shortened.  Why can't you think of a 
solution by which they don't have to pull a rickshaw?  You may reach the moon.  You 
may reach the stars.  You may research the skies.  But what  you need to do is, look 
after the people on the gro und.  And what happened, Sir?   We invented something 
called 'Soleckshaw'. Now, through technol ogy, people don't have to pull weight 
behind the rickshaw. That is what we were able  to do.  I also told them to look at the 
coolies at the railway stations. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please look through the Chair. 
 
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL :  They have to carry weight. Why do they have to carry weight?  
Why can't we find solutions for them?  Look at the way we treat our dead, the 
corpses, and the way we carry them in the vans and then try to offload them.  Why 
can't we have a scientific solution for th em?  I talked about doing research for the 
common people, for planning and for things that will improve the lives of the common 
people.  One of the problems that we have is this.  And the Minister knows it.  The 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
kind of funding that we do for research is so minimal that we won't be able to find 
those solutions.  You may send man on the moon, but what you have to deal with is 
the man on the ground.  May I tell you, Si r, one small thing?  Nobody had ever gone 
to Antarctica.  I decided one day that le t us go to the Antarctica and see what is 
happening on the ground ther e.  When we reached there -- I cannot even explain to 
you the pathetic conditions in which our sc ientists were living -- we found that those 
were absolutely inhuman conditions.  For six months in a year, they have to be inside 
closed rooms.  By the time they come ou t during summer, most of them lose their 
minds. They came back as broken souls. Why? Because there was no 
communication with their families and the rest of  the world.  There were no toilets.  I, 
as the Minister, went there.  There was no toilet to go to.  You can't imagine how we 
dealt with it.  I changed all that.  The Mini ster will not talk about it.  We changed all 
that.  We brought information technology.  ...( Interruptions)...  We established the 
Himadri Station. Through information technology, through satellites, they talked to 
their families every weekend. We provided  entertainment to them.  We provided 
movies to them.  Why?  Because science and technology must bring solutions to 
ordinary people in this country.   
 Sir, may I tell you another thing?  In research, the total research funding that 
we have in this country is about 50-60 billion dollars.  Do you know how much China 
spends on R&D?  It spen ds 560 billion dollars every year.  How can we compete 
with them?  We may send a man to the moon.  It is a great thing that ISRO has done.  
I think we all must celebrate it.  But there are miles to go before we sleep.  There is 
no need to congratulate ourselves for landing on the moon.  We will congratulate you 
and we will call a Special Session of this House when you solve the problems of the 
people of this country through technology.  (Time-bell rings.)   May I tell you, Sir, 
something very interesting?  Because of ou r then Prime Minster, we set up a system 
near the Delhi Gate.  I told them that, th rough science and technology, without going 
to any house, we can find out what unaut horised construction has taken place.  I 
actually took them to that place and sh owed them every morning the kind of 
unauthorised construction that was taking place.  That project is still there.  But 
nobody goes there.  It is because no body wants to deal with unauthorised 
construction.  I informed them that we can actually decide what amount of house tax 
can be paid without visiting the house. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
73

 
 
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL :  Sir, there are fabulo us things that science has done for the 
common people of this country which are not being talked about today.  I just want to 
tell about it to the House.  I don't mind si tting down.  I have no  problem with that.  
But I just want to tell you that it is time for the people to realise this.   
 Sir, you know it very well that we brought out the Tsunami Warning System 
w h i c h  i s  t h e  m o s t  m o d e r n  i n  t h e  w o r l d .   I n  1 2 0  d a y s ,  w e  s e t  i t  u p .   I t  i s  t h e  m o s t  
modern Tsunami Warning System in the worl d.  And everybody appreciates it.  We 
did it during our time.  So, we must congratulate you for what you have done.  But 
remember that it is not enough to congratulate yourselves.  The only 
thing...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Shri Prakas h Javadekar. ...( Interruptions)...  Okay.  
...(Interruptions)... One minute.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL:  Sir, thank you very much.  Maybe on another day you will let me 
speak.  Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Sibal, you can take one minute.  Your mike is on.  
  
SHRI KAPIL SIBAL:  Sir, in agriculture, we set up a system through which we can find 
out moisture in the soil.  We can inform the agriculturalist as to when the rain is going 
to come or when a particular plot of land doesn't have enough moisture, so that the 
agriculturalist can actually access water.  We  were able to tell the fishermen as to 
when chlorophyll in the ocean was enough fo r the fish to come, so that they can go 
and fish.  We were able to tell the fi shermen of the country through the warning 
system of inclement weather, as to when it is going to happen. The entire climate 
system was in analogue mode.  We changed it all to digita l mode. The kind of things 
that have happened in this country are so gr eat that we must celebrate science on a 
daily basis.   
 Sir, the last thing that I want to say is  this.   Not only that.  We have actually 
achieved so many milestones in the biotechno logy sector in this country.  But people 
don't talk about that because people want to use this forum to pat themselves on the 
back.  Thank you very much, Sir.  
                                     
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Prakash Javadekar. 
 
Ǜी Ģकाश जावडेकर (महाराÍटर्):  सर, मेरा िकतना समय है? 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ģकाश जावडेकर जी, मȅने बड़ी कोिशश की, मȅ आपका समय तो नहीं बता सकता 
हूं, पर आपके  पािर्टिसपेशन का समय 15 िमनट है।   
 
Ǜी Ģकाश जावडेकर:  सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका बहुत शुकर्गुज़ार हूं िक आपने मुझे अपनी 
बात रखने की परिमश
न दी है।  दो िदन पहले जब हमारी चचार् हुई थी, तब मȅ उस समय 
िमसइन्फॉमȃशन या िमसकÇयूिनके शन क े कारण नहीं आ पाया था। 
 
(उपसभापित महोदयपीठासीन हुए।) 
 
सबसे पहले तो मȅ आप सबके  साथ चंदर्मा पर हमारा जो चंदर्यान गया, उसकी देश मȂ जो 
खुशी है, उसमȂ सहभाग
ी बनता हूं। िवकर्म साराभाई से लेकर सभी वैज्ञािनक, िजन्हȗने भारत मȂ 
Îपेस साइंस की शुरुआत  की - क्यȗिक अगर आप नेहरू  बोलते, तो िफर मो दी  बोलना पड़ता। आप 
एक चीज़ तय कीिजए, अगर वैज्ञािनकȗ की बात करनी है, तो मȅ वही कर रहा हूं। ..(Ëयवधान).. 
एक िमनट। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Mr. Javadekar, please address the Chair. Please.  
...(Interruptions)...   क ृपया शोर मत कीिजए। Hon. LoP, please take your seat.  
...(Interruptions)...  Nothing is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...    M r .  
Javadekar, please address the Chair. ...(Interruptions)...  
  
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) : 
* 
 
Ǜी Ģकाश जावडेकर:  मȅ बताता हूं।  यह एक बड़ा माइलÎटोन है, क्यȗिक किपल िसÅबल जी ने 
अभी कहा िक बायोटेक्नोलॉजी से लेकर हर क्षेतर् मȂ तरक्की हुई है। मȅ उन्हȂ आÌवÎत करना चाहता 
हूं िक सारे नये Ģयोग ȗ और भारत ने आज तक जो भी हािसल िकया है, उनका देश की तरक्की क े 
िलए उपयोग हो रहा है। सरकार बदलते ही टेक्नोलॉजी पुरानी हो गई है - ऐसा बोलकर फ Ȃ क नहीं 
देते हȅ, उलटा आगे बढ़ाते हȅ - हमारी ऐसी दृिÍट है। मȅ सबसे कहूंगा िक एक ‘रॉके टरी’ मूवी है, 
उसको देिखए। यह बहुत अच्छी मूवी है और उसमȂ यह बताया गया है िक भ
ारत मȂ एटम बम क ै से 
बना और रॉके ट क ै से बनने शुरू  हुए। उस िफÊम मȂ यह सब कहान ी है और इसको िफÊम मȂ बहुत 
अच्छी तरह से रखा गया है। उनको क्या िदक्कतȂ आईं, वह भी उस िफÊम मȂ िदखाया गया है। 
सवर्Ǜी भाभा, साराभाई, कलाम, िचटनीस और धवन क े Ģित देश हमेशा शुकर्गुज़ार रहेगा, 
क्यȗिक इन्हȗ
ने देश का नाम रोशन िकया है। कोई बोल रहा था िक उन्हȂ कम तनख्वाह िमलती है, 
तो मȅ उनसे यह कहना चाहता हूं िक कम तनख्वाह िमलने क े बावजूद भी देश Ģेम क े कारण 
सतीश धवन वापस आए थे - यह हमȂ कभी नहीं भूलना चािहए, बिÊक उनका ज्यादा शुकर्गुज़ार 
                   
* Not Recorded. 
  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
75

 
 
रहना चािहए। आज हमारे यहाँ, बीच मȂ ऐसी-ऐसी राजनीितक नȗक-झȗक हुई िक दुिनया मȂ क्या 
िरएक्शन है। आज सुबह सबने अखबार मȂ पढ़ा होगा िक नवाज़ शरीफ कह रहे हȅ िक पािकÎतान 
कहीं नहीं है और भारत तो चंदर्मा पर भी चला गया। यह उनका दुख है और आज यह भ ारत की 
उपलिÅध है, िजस पर हमȂ गवर् होना चािहए। ..(Ëयवधान).. एक िमनट। उपगर्ह छोड़ना, यानी 
उपगर्हȗ को लाँच करना - दूसरे देशȗ क े या िकसी क े भी हȗ, हमारा जो इिच्छत Îथल है, वहाँ तक 
उसे लाँच करना, वहाँ पर रखना - इस काम मȂ हमने महार
त हािसल की है। अगर अमरीका, 
िĤटेन और ģांस जैसे देश हमारे यहाँ पर आकर करवाते हȅ, तो हमȂ खुशी होनी चािहए,  इसम Ȃ 
दुख की क्या बात है, इस मȂ िववाद की क्या बात है?  
खरगे जी, आपको यह सुनकर अच्छा लगेगा िक एक बार पूना मȂ ऑल पाटीर् या कोई 
सरकारी कायर्कर्म था, उसमȂ कांगर्ेस पाटीर् क े मंतर्ी Ǜी रामकृ Íण मोरे बोल रहे थे, उनके  बाद मȂ 
अटल जी बोले। अटल जी ने यह कहा िक हम यह कभी नहीं कहते िक आपके  जमाने मȂ क ु छ नह
ीं 
हुआ। आपके  जमाने मȂ क ु छ नहीं हुआ - ऐसा हम नहीं कहते, लेिकन िजतना और जैसा होना 
चािहए था, वैसा नहीं हुआ - यह हम कहते थे। मोदी जी एकमा
तर् Ģधान मंतर्ी हȅ, जो बार-बार 
लाल िकले की Ģाचीर से भी कहते हȅ िक हर Ģधान मंतर्ी ने अच्छा काम िकया है। ..(Ëयवधान).. हर 
Ģधान मंतर्ी ने देश क े िलए काम िकया है - ऐसा मोदी जी कहते हȅ। मुझे यह बताइए ..(Ëयवधान).. 
एक िमनट। एक Ģधान मंतर्ी Çयूिज़यम  तैयार हुआ है। वह
ाँ पर नेहरू  जी का, इंिदरा जी का, 
राजीव गाँधी जी का..(Ëयवधान).
.नहीं, उसके  पीछे है, आप लोग गए ही नहीं हȅ, तो हम क्या करȂ? 
आप जाइए, लेिकन मुझे यह बताइए िक क्या आपने कभी ऐसा सोचा था िक सभी Ģधान मंितर्यȗ 
का कोई Çयूिज़यम होगा और उसमȂ अटल जी का और बाकी Ģधान मंितर्यȗ क े भी जीवन का 
िवÎतार लगेगा! ..(Ëय
वधान).. नहीं करȂगे, नहीं िकया। मȅ आगे बताता हूं।  ..(Ëयवधान).. यह मन 
की उदारता होनी चािहए। ..(Ëयवधान)..मȅ नरिसÇहा राव जी की याद नहीं कराऊं गा, आपको 
मालूम है, लेिकन अगर कोई बड़ी ची ज़ होती है और देश का लीडर कौन है - ऐसा बोलते हȅ, तो 
उस पर लोग बोलते हȅ, हमȂ बोलने की जरूरत नहीं है।  
 महोदय, मȅ दूसरे पक्ष पर आता हूं, जो मूल मुǈा है, िजस पर संदीप पाठक जी ने भी बोला 
और किपल िसÅबल जी ने भी अभी बोला है िक w
e  l a c k  i n  i n n o v a t i o n .   W e  h a v e  t o  t a k e  
innovation much further. इनोवेशन से जो संपिǄ तैयार होती है, उससे देश आगे बढ़ता है। 
Îटीव जॉÅस - जो आईफोन क े िनमार्ता हȅ, मȅ दो िदन उनके  साथ था। उस समय आईफोन नह ीं 
िनकला था, उन्हȗने हाथ मȂ िदखाकर, जैसा hand-held  है, वैसा िदखाकर बोला था िक मȅ ऐसा 
hand-held  तैयार करूं गा, जो  multi use क े िलए होगा और सारी दुिनया बदल जाएगी, way of 
communication - यह उन्हȗने बताया था। बाद मȂ आईफोन आया और हमने देखा िक िकतन ा 
पिरवतर्न हुआ। लेिकन इनोवेशन पर मȅने एक बार कहा िक आईफोन क े जो सारे पाट्सर् हȅ, अगर 
आप उनकी कीमत लगाएंगे ..(Ëयवधान)..राजीव जी, यह मोबाइल मȂ है।  manufacturing cost 
of those products may not be more than Rs.15,000 or Rs.20,000.  जो raw material है, 
लेिकन उसकी उपयोिग
ता आई, तो 1 लाख रुपय े का हो गया।  This is the wealth generated 
by innovation.  इनोवेशन  का सÇमान होना चािहए। हम आज जो ĢÎताव लाए हȅ, वह इनोवेशन 
का सÇमान करने क े िलए है, साइंिटÎट्स को मुबारकबाद देने क े िलए है, इसिलए यह यहाँ है।  
..(Ëयव
धान).. एक िमनट। मȅ बता रहा हूं, अभी खरगे जी गए हȅ, िचदÇबरम जी आज नहीं हȅ, 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िचदÇबरम जी कहते थे िक मोबाइल से पेमȂट होगी, मोबाइल से ऐसा होगा - यह क ै से होगा! जैसे 
कल खरगे जी बोल रहे थे िक बैकवडर् क्लास की मिहला अनपढ़ है। अरे! यह िकसने कहा?  
..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please speak on the subject.  Ģकाश जावडेकर जी, आप 
Ãलीज़ सÅजेक्ट पर बोिलए। ..(Ëय
वधान).. 
 
Ǜी Ģकाश जावडेकर: उनका अपमान मत कीिजए। वे Îकू ल जाते हȅ, कॉलेज मȂ जाते हȅ, पढ़ना 
चाहते हȅ, आगे बढ़ना चाहते हȅ। सवाल यह है िक वह लोगȗ को क ै से सम झ ेगा - ऐसा बोलते थे। 
लेिकन आज यिद अमरीका से हमारा कोई दोÎत आता है, तो बाज़ार जाने क े बाद सबसे ज्यादा 
अचÇभा करता है िक कोई काडर् से पेमȂट ही नहीं कर रहा है, कोई काडर् लेकर एटीएम तक जा ही 
नहीं रहा है, सभी मोबाइल से  ही पेमȂट कर रहे हȅ।  ऐसा दुिन
या मȂ कहीं नहीं हो रहा है, जो भारत 
मȂ हो रहा है। यह साइंस है, यह हमारी उपलिÅध है, देश की उपलिÅध है, सभी की उपलिÅध है 
और सभी को बढ़ते हुए भारत को  Ģोत्
साहन देना चािहए, समथर्न देना चािहए - ऐसा मेरा कहना 
है।  
महोदय, यह इनोवेशन क ै से बढ़ेगा? जब मȅ िशक्षा मंतर्ी था, तब एक कÊपना आई थी। 
इंजीिनयिंरग कॉलेज क े िलए hackat hon शुरू  िकया गया था िक इंजीिनयिंरग क े 6 Îटू डȂट्स 
इकƻे बैठȂगे और िजसका सॉÊयूशन नहीं हुआ है, वैसे 500 सवाल उनके  िलए िदए गए। इसमȂ से 
कोई भी सवाल चुनकर, उस पर तीन-चार महीने एफटर् करȂ, शोध करȂ, आइिडयाज़ लगाएं और 
उस तरीके  से अपना सॉ
Êयूशन पेश करȂ, कोड पेश करȂ। हमने पहले वषर् मȂ इस तरह से िकया था। 
इसमȂ 40 हज़ार इंजीिनयिंरग छातर्ȗ ने भाग िलया था।    
मुझे अच्छा लगा िक अब इसके  8 साल हो गए और 8 साल मȂ यह संख्या 5 लाख से भी 
अिधक हो गई है।  इतने छातर् हर साल यह काम करते हȅ।  यह सही िशक्षा है, यह शोध की संÎथा 
है, यह शोध का संÎकार है, इससे ही देश आगे बढ़ेगा।   
 इससे आगे जाकर हमने सभी आईआईटीज़ और एनआईटीज़ मȂ इन्क्यूबेशन सȂटसर् शुरू  
िकए।  इन्क्यूबेशन सȂटर मȂ आज इंडÎटर्ी, यूिनव
िर्सटी, एजुक ेशनल इंिÎटǷूट्स और Îटू डȂट्स, 
सब इकƻे आ रहे हȅ।  देश की जो लैÅस हȅ, पहले ऐसा होता था िक लैÅस अलग, इंडÎटर्ीज़ अलग 
और यूिनविर्सटीज़ अलग होती थीं, हमने तीनȗ को जोड़ िदया।  इसके  कारण शोध का एक माहौल 
बना।  इसके  कारण इस इन्क्यूबेशन सȂटर मȂ क ेवल सैकड़ȗ नए Ģयोग ही नहीं हो रहे हȅ, बिÊक 
बहुत अच्छे शोध क े पेटȂट्स भी लग रहे हȅ।  पहले तो पेटȂट िमलने मȂ भी 4-4 साल लगते थे, 
लेिकन अब 4 महीने मȂ पेटȂट िमलता है।  हमने यह बदलाव करके  िदखाया है।  गर्ȅड चैलȂज हुआ।   
 मेरा यह सौभाग्य रहा िक नेशनल एजुक ेशन पॉिलसी की दो साल जो तैयारी हुई और जो 
पॉिलसी तैयार हुई, कÎतूरीरंगन जी ने मुझे उसकी आिखरी कॉपी सȚपी।  िफर दूसरे िदन मȅ 
पयार्वरण मंतर्ी था।  यह नेशनल एजुक ेशन पॉिलसी एक बहुत बड़ी ...(Ëयवधान)..
. एक िमनट, 
नेशनल एजुक ेशन पॉिलसी एक बहुत बड़ी उपलिÅध है।  आज आपको पता नहीं होगा िक इसरो 
और डीआरडीओ की टेक्नोलॉजी कहाँ-कहाँ उपयोग मȂ आती है!  जो मछु आरे मछली क े Ëयवस ाय 
क े िलए समुदर् मȂ जाते हȅ, उनके  िलए navigation is very important.  Now, with the satellite, 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
77

 
 
they have a phone, they can  receive all signals and ge t the correct direction.  यह हो 
रहा है, यह इसरो का शोध है।  पहले कॉलेजेज़ क े इंÎपेक्शन क े िलए हमारे 4-4, 5-5 Ģाध्यापकȗ 
या िशक्षािवदȗ की अनेक टीमȂ बनती थीं और वे सभी जगह जाते थे।  हमने सब बंद िकया और अभी 
...(Ëयवधान)... एक िमनट, सब बंद हुआ और यह हुआ िक अब इसरो और डीआरडीओ क े जो 
अच्छे शोध हुए, उनका उ
पयोग करके  हम आज यहीं 5 लोग बैठ कर इंÎपेक्शन कर सकते हȅ और 
उसमȂ कोई हेराफे री नहीं कर सकता।  इसिलए साइंस, ...(Ëय वधान)... एक िमनट, मȅ बताता हूँ 
िक साइंस का ... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please, do not comment while sitting.  This is not fair.  
Please.  ....(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी Ģकाश जावडेकर: साइंस का उपयोग क ेवल एक क्षेतर् मȂ नहीं होता है, जब एक िवज्ञान तैयार 
होता है, तो उसका अनेक क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ उपयोग होता है।  इसिलए हमȂ यह सम
 झना पड़ेगा और हमȂ भी 
यह बोलना पड़ेगा िक अगर हम एक काल मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी का नाम लȂगे और दूसरे काल मȂ उनका 
नाम नहीं लȂगे,  तो ऐसा तो नहीं होगा।  Ģधान मंतर्ी देश का एक Ģितिन िध होता है।  वह जनता का 
चुना हुआ, 140 करोड़ लोगȗ ǎारा िवÌवास िदया हुआ Ģितिनिध है।  हम उनका नाम नहीं लȂगे, 
ऐसा क ै से होगा!  उन्हȗने सपोटर् िदया, िजसका वणर्न िजतेन्दर् िंसह जी ने बहुत िडटेल मȂ िकया है।  
वे हमȂ एक ही बात कहते थे िक हम यह जो नई िश
क्षा नीित बना रहे हȅ, इसमȂ साइंिटिफक टȂपर 
क ै से तैयार होगा, वही तैयार करना है और वही आज हुआ है।  देिखए उसके  नतीजे!  भारत आने 
वाले 10 सा
ल मȂ बहुत आगे बढ़ेगा और िवÌव की तीसरी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनेगा, मȅ इतना ही िवÌवास 
Ëयƪ करता हूँ।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय जावडेकर जी।  माननीय डा. सांतनु सेन जी, आप
क े  पास 6 
िमनट हȅ। 
 
DR. SANTANU SEN (West Bengal):   Thank you, respected Chair.  First of all, I 
would like to wish my previous speaker, Prakash Javadekarji, a good ministerial berth 
in the coming reshuffling, the way he was praising Modi ji's Government.  It is 
because after 2024 Parliament elections, there would be no chance at all.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  On the subject, please.  ....(Interruptions)... Please 
speak on the subject.  
  
DR. SANTANU SEN:   Yes, I am coming to the subject.  Sir, as we all know, the 
Indian National Committee for Space Resear ch, that is, INCOSPAR was set up in 
1962.  It was superseded by I.S.R.O. in 1969.  But I have got every doubt, while 
taking all the credit to their own account , the Treasury Bench can loudly speak out 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
and pronounce the full form of INCOSPAR or I.S.R.O. because both start with India.  
We have seen, being very scared of the I. N.D.I.A. alliance, they are in a mood to 
remove India from every nomenclature. 
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject.  ....(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. SANTANU SEN:  I am coming on the subject.  ....(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  This is not the subject, please.  
  
DR. SANTANU SEN:   During landing of Chandrayaan -3, we have seen our learned 
Prime Minister celebrating sitting in South Africa because he went there to attend the 
BRICS Summit.  Unfortunately, amongst all the BRICS countries, India is paying the 
lowest possible GDP for science and technology. That is only 0.6 per cent in 
comparison to that of America, which is 3 per cent; China, whic h is 2.4 per cent and 
South Korea, which is 4.5 per cent.  I would cite some examples to show the real 
concern of our Government of India as far as  I.S.R.O. is concerned.  The funding of 
I.S.R.O. for 2022 was Rs.13,700 crores.  For 2023, it has come down to Rs.10,530 
crores.  So far as the budget ary allocation is concerned, the Budget allocated in the 
Financial Year 2024 is only Rs.12,544 crores.  It has been slashed down by 8 per cent 
if you compare it with the previous allocat ion.  My previous colleague was talking 
about enormous development in  science and technology in the country.  Of course, 
that is why, during Covid, we had to keep faith on ' thali bajao' and cow's urine to get 
rid of Covid.  That is the ultimate exam ple of science develo pment and science and 
technology in our country. I will tell you that our State of Bengal has played a 
significant part in the historic feat.  31 sc ientists were there from Bengal. Shri Anuj 
Nandi from Islampur of West Bengal was not just a part of Chandrayaan-3 mission 
team… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Dr. Saheb, just a second.  आपकी पाटीर् से एक और वƪा हȅ 
और आपकी पाटीर् क े पास क ु ल 6 िमनट्स हȅ।  आप उनके  िलए िकतना समय छो
 ड़Ȃगे, that you 
decide. 
        
DR. SANTANU SEN:   …but he also worked as the Chief Designer of the camera that 
was attached to the primary body of Chan drayaan-3.  I would like to let the House 
know a very important information.  There is a person in Jharkhand whose name is 
Deepak Uprariya.  He was an expert of I. S.R.O.  Now, there is a photograph in my 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
79

 
 
mobile which has been published in a very  renowned newspaper.  He is selling idlis 
on the road because he, like many others, is  not getting their salary for 18 months.  
He has a bank loan of Rs.4 lakhs.  He ha s kept all his wife's ornaments on mortgage 
to earn his livelihood.  This is the great de velopment of our Government.  I would like 
our learned publicity masters to see to it .  Another important point is this.  In 
Chandrayaan-2, two women, Shrimati M.  Vanitha and Shrimati Ritu Karidahl 
Srivastava, played a very important role in the form of Project Director and Mission 
Director. But, we have seen, in the cas e of Chandrayaan-3, there are all males 
performing in the team.  My humble submis sion to our Government will be:  Please 
try to encourage more and more women in this system.  Finally, I would request our 
Treasury Benches: Please, do not forget th e name of Dr. C.V. Raman, Dr. Vikram 
Sarabhai, Dr. Homi Jehangir Bhabha, Dr. A. P.J. Abdul Kalam, who were the pillars 
of this institute.  My final submission to the Government is this.  Yes; we have been 
seeing many publicity masters who are spen ding even 85 per cent of a particular 
project for publicity, who are spending hu ge and huge amounts of money in building 
up new buildings which are of hardly any necessity. But I.S.R.O., the pride of our 
nation, is severely ignored by our Gove rnment.  My humble submission would be 
this.  Yes; try to take the credit of this  Chandrayaan-3 but, at the same time, please 
look into it that another Deepak Uprari ya does not come on the field and sells idlis 
because of your neglect.  Thank you very much, Sir.  
  
Ǜी उपसभापित: डा. सांतनु सेन जी, आपने अपनी पाटीर् का लगभग पूरा समय ले िलया, so, the 
next speaker will not get time.  This is just for information. Thank you. Now, 
Mananiya M. Mohamed Abdulla.  You have three minutes to speak. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, nine minutes. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, three minutes. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, I have to say.  ...(Interruptions)...  I told the Chairman.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I have n
o information. Are you speaking? 
...(Interruptions)...  Do you want to speak? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : No, Sir, I would like to give just a suggestion and he will 
continue.  Please.  Chairman Sir has give n his consent.  One of the Directors of 
Chandrayaan-3, Mr. Sankaran was my junior in college.  It was a Government 
College which was meant for rural people.  He had successfully do ne that and he is 
now working for Aditya-L1 also.  I thought,  we may felicitate in the college or 
anywhere else, but, it is right to mentio n those names here.  That would be a real 
credit to them. In general, instead of me ntioning it each and every name, I would 
suggest that the House can move a motion and adopt to congratulate all the 
scientists and engineers who were in the successful mission.  I think, all the Members 
would agree and such a motion could be moved.  I also conveyed it to the Minister.  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, Mananiya  M. Mohamed Abdulla. You have three 
minutes. 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA : Sir, the total allotted time is fifteen minutes. He has 
already spoken for six minutes and I have nine minutes to speak.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We will check it.  Please speak.  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, on this pride moment 
that India becomes the first country to reach the South Pole and the fourth to be on 
the Moon, with the remembra nce of Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, a Tamil pride, a 
national pride, I start my speech. 
 Sir, the country's ability to execute sp ace missions reflects its confidence and 
shows that this is India's time.  The Lander  Module of the ISRO's third lunar mission 
Chandrayaan-3 made a successful landmark landing on the Moon's Southern Pole 
on August 23, as an iconic moment for India. 
 On this historic occasion, I would like to recall one thing that Chandrayaan-3's 
successful soft landing on the Moon had gi ven Tamil Nadu an extra reason to cheer. 
Yes, all the Project Directors of this count ry's Lunar Mission and also the first Indian 
mission dedicated to observing the Sun are from our State of Tamil Nadu.  
Dr. Mylswamy Annadurai, dubbed as the 'Moon Man of India', led the maiden 
Chandrayaan Mission in 2008,  confirmed the presence of water on the Moon.  With 
this, the world turned towards India.  Then, at the second time in 2019, as the first 
Indian woman to lead India's lunar mission , Shrimati Vanitha Muthaiah, a Tamil lady, 
becomes the Project Director of Chandrayaan-2.   
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
81

 
 
 Then, Chandrayaan-3 was launched on Ju ly 14 and successfully landed safely 
on the Moon after 40 days and this co untry once again turned the world's gaze 
towards itself with Mr. Veeramuthuvel as it s Project Director.  Then, ADITYA-L1, the 
India's first Solar Mission and Shrimati Ni gar Shaji, a Tamil lady, is the Project 
Director.  
 Sir, the most important thing, I would like to mention, at this time, through this 
august House is that all these scientists are not only form our State of Tamil Nadu, 
but they all studied in our State educatio n system of Tamil Nadu, according to our 
State curriculum, from the poor and mi ddle-class background belonging to the 
backward communities and minority communities. 
 Sir, Tamil Nadu have a visionary hist ory behind this achievement.  Through 
that, we had shown the best 'Governance Model' known as 'Dravidian Model' not 
only to the country but also to the entire world; that everyone should know and be 
aware of now. 
 Tamil Nadu has many firsts to its credit  but very few are aware that it was in 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu that the world's first Mid-Day Meal was served to the students 
way back in 1920, hundred years back, base d on the idea of Shri  P. Theagaraya, the 
then President of the Dravidian Party, namely, the  Justice Party. Shri A. 
Subbarayalu, the first Chief Minister of Madras Presidency impl emented the Mid-Day 
Meal Scheme in a corporation school in Chennai.  
 The constitutional provision for univers alization of primary education has not 
yet been fully implemented in India.  It b ecomes a distant goal even now.  But, Tamil 
Nadu tries to be ahead of achieving it.  Ta mil Nadu is one of the most literate States 
in India now.  
 Following the pioneering initiative of Ju stice Party Leader, Sh ri P. Theagaraya, 
our ex-Chief Ministers, Shri K. Kamaraj and Dr. Kalaignar had tweaked the feeding 
programme and contributed to its steady evol ution.  Gradually, its focus shifted to 
addressing nutritional issues and checking drop-outs from schools.  
 The purpose was the same when Kama raj expanded the programme to all 
schools across the State.  So, they wanted  to see more students from poor socio-
economic backgrounds enrolling in schools.   The mid-day meal was a boon for 
students from the Scheduled Castes and the backward comm unities when Dr. 
Kalaignar insisted on five eggs and bana nas to be supplied along with the mid-day 
meal in Government schools.  
 Sir, even after the development of Mid-Day Meal Scheme, Tamil Nadu found 
the gap in achieving the universalisation of school education to all.  Hence, it is 
realized that for the overall development of the nation and State, education must be 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
made easily available to all.  But, poor pe ople in rural as well as urban areas fail to 
send their children to schools due to several reasons. 
 Keeping it on mind, as a part of that, the Tamil Nadu Government has started 
another scheme providing free bicycles to st udents initiated by Dr. Kalaignar.  The 
name of the Scheme is Free Bicycle Scheme.  
 Dr. Kalaignar made higher education free for first generation learners and even 
launched the EVR Nagammai Memorial Free Graduate Educaiton for Girls Scheme.  
He was constantly launching similar sche mes that made education accessible to 
everyone, especially, the under-privileged s ections of society. There was 15 per cent 
reservation for rural students in prof essional courses and entrance exam for 
professional courses was scrapped.  In 1 989, he introduced Free Bus Pass Scheme 
for the school students to go to school.  Free computer training for school students 
was launched.... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mananiya Mohamed Abdulla, we are having discussion on 
Chandrayaan.  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA: Yes, Sir, I am coming back to the point. 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  We are having discussion on Chandrayaan.  
...(Interruptions)... Please.  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA: Yes, Sir, I am coming back to the point. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA : Yes, Sir, this is how our backward scientists came 
to... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Leave all the background and come to the subject.  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA: Yes, Sir, I am just explaining. These are just a few of 
the many schemes started by Dr. Kalaignar.  Even now, it is being continued under 
the leadership of our hon. Chief Minister Thalapathy M.K. Stalin which aims to 
optimize social welfare gains by tweaking a century-old scheme to offer it as the first 
meal of the day that is called as the Tam il Nadu Chief Minister Breakfast Scheme. As 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
83

 
 
Shri Jairam Ramesh said, it is a journey of 60 years of Indian education, but in Tamil 
Nadu, it has its own journey of about 100 years through the Dravidian ideology.  
 Through this, we have contributed not only to our State but also to our nation.  
This is what I have to point out now and this is how the uniqueness of our federal 
system contributes to the nation-building.   The others are criticizing our welfare 
schemes as a "freebies" but we are investin g it for the development of the nation in 
view of social justice. That is why we are proudly calling it as 'dravidian model', which 
is very much needed at this  time for this country, no t only for the scientific 
development but also for all-round development. 
 With that, I conclude.  Thank you. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल, आपके  पास 5.00 िमनट का समय है। माननीय 
सदÎयगण, आपको मालूम ही है िक िडÎकशन का जो िवषय है, उसी पर हमȂ बोलना है and not 
other points related to it. Please speak on the subject. You know the rules.  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल ( पंजाब): माननीय उप
 सभापित महोदय, आज मुझे इस नये सदन मȂ 
चंदर्यान क े ऊपर बोलने का मौका िदया जा रहा है, इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय सभापित जी को 
धन्यवाद देता हूं। सबसे पहले मȅ इसरो क े अध्यक्ष, Ǜी एस. सोमनाथ जी, उनकी पूरी टीम और 
उनकी पूरी संÎथा को इस सदन की तरफ से, अपनी तरफ से और पूरे देश की तरफ से 
मुबारकबाद देना चाहूंगा, धन्यवाद कर
ना चाहूंगा। उन्हȗने पूरे िवÌव मȂ भारत का परचम फहरा 
िदया है।  
सर, 1965 मȂ हमारे तत्का
लीन Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी लाल बहादुर शाÎतर्ी जी ने पािकÎतान युǉ 
क े दौरान देश को एक नारा िदया था -'जय जवान, जय िकसान।'  बाद मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
Ǜी वाजपेयी जी ने पोखरण क े दौरान इस नारे मȂ संशोधन िक या और कहा -' जय जवान, जय 
िकसान, जय िवज्ञान।'  मुझे वह समय याद है, जब 3 जनवरी, 2019 को हमारे माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी लवली Ģोफे शनल यूिनविर्सटी मȂ इंिडयन साइंस कांगर्ेस की अध्यक्षता 
करने क े िल ए आये, तो उन्हȗने इस नारे मȂ एक और संशोधन िकया -'जय जवान, जय िकसान, 
जय िवज्ञान' इस नारे मȂ उन्हȗने एक नया शÅद जोड़ा - ' जय अनुसंधान' और पूरा नारा बना - 
'जय जवान, जय िकसान, जय िवज्ञान, जय अनुसंधान।'  मȅ खुशिकÎमत हूँ िक जब Ģधान मंतर्ी 
Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने यह नारा िदया, तो मȅ उसका साक्षी था।    
 
 (सभापित मह
ोदयपीठासीन हुए। ) 
 
माननीय महोदय, मुझे खुशी है िक Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े उस नारे की वजह से आज 
हमारा देश चन्दर्यान की सफलता को पूरे िवÌव मȂ ज़ोर-शोर से मना रहा है।  मȅ इसके  िलए िफर 
अपने पूरे देश को मुबारकबाद देना चाहूँगा।   
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सर, 23 अगÎत को चंदर्यान-3 ने सफल लȅिंडग की और उसके  एक सÃताह बाद हमारे 
देश का एक पिवतर् त्यौहार ' रक्षा बंधन' आता है।  िजस Ģकार हर बहन अपने भाई को राखी 
भेजती है, मुझे ऐसा Ģतीत हो रहा था, पूरे देश को ऐसा Ģतीत हो रहा था िक हमारे देश की 70 
करोड़ बहनȗ ने चंदर्मा को, िजसको हम 'चंदा मामा' भी कहते हȅ, चंदर्यान क े रूप  मȂ एक राख
ी 
भेजी है।   
माननीय महोदय, चांद का हम सबके  जीवन से एक भा वनात्मक जुड़ाव है, सÇबन्ध है।  
बचपन की लोरी 'चंदा मामा दूर क े' सुन-सुन कर हम लोग बड़े हुए हȅ।  अगर हम बॉलीवुड की 
बात करȂ, तो मेरे ख्याल मȂ पुरानी मूवीज़ मȂ कोई भी गाना ऐस ा  नहीं होता था, िजसमȂ चंदा का 
वणर्न नहीं होता था।  जैसे - 'चाँद सी महबूबा हो मेरी' या 'चंदर्मा मȂ भी एक दाग है', इस तरह क े 
गाने सुन-सुन कर हम बड़े हुए हȅ।   इसके  साथ-साथ एक और इंटरेिंÎटग तथ्य यह है िक 
हॉलीवुड की एक मूवी आयी थी - ' िमशन इÇपॉिसबल', जो साइंस और टेक्नोलॉजी क े िफक्शन 
पर थी।  उसका बजट क्या था, हम बाद मȂ उसकी बात करȂगे, लेिकन हमारे भारतीय वैज्ञािनक 
चंदर्यान-2 की असफलता से उत्सािहत ही हुए, नीचे नहीं गये और चंदर्यान-3 को ' िम शन आई 
एम पॉिसबल' बना कर हमारे सामने पेश िकया।  सर, चंदर्यान-3 एक िरएिलटी है, यह िफक्शन 
मूवी नहीं है िक 615 करोड़ मȂ हमारे वैज्ञािनकȗ ने इसको कामयाब िकया। यह हमारे िलए और भी 
हषर् का िवषय है िक इस िमशन मȂ मिहलाओं का भी पूरा योग
दान रहा, मिहला वैज्ञािनकȗ का भी 
पूरा योगदान रहा और हमारा दूसरा सदन इस टाइम मिहला िरजवȃशन पर बात कर रहा है, यह 
हम सबके  िलए हषर् का एक िवषय है।   
 हॉलीवुड मȂ जेÇस बांड की मूवीज़ बहुत Ģिसǉ हȅ।  उसमȂ एक मूवी थी -'Octopussy' 
...(समय की घं
टी)... सर, िसफर् एक िमनट। उसमȂ भारत को snake charmer कहा गया है, 
जादू-टोने वाला देश कहा गया है।  सर, मȅ उससे Ģेरणा लेते हुए बोलना चा हूँगा िक हां, भारत 
जादू का देश है।  यही वह देश है, उसी मȂ ही जादूगर इसरो है, िजसने इतने कम समय मȂ और 
इतने कम खचर् मȂ एक सफल चंदर्यान बना कर हम सबके  आगे पेश िकया।  यह भारत का ही जादू 
है और भारत ही एक जादूगर है।  सर, चंदर्यान इस टाइम Îलीप मोड मȂ है, लेिकन यह पूरा 
सदन, पूरा देश जागा हुआ है और हम सब इस सदन क े माध्यम से पूरे देश को बधाई दे रहे हȅ।   
सर, मेरी एक छोटी सी िवनती है।  ...(समय की घं
टी)... सर, एक िमनट।  हमने 2023-
24 मȂ चंदर्यान लाँच िकया और इसी वषर् हमने इसरो का बजट घटा िदया!  िपछले साल जो 
13,700 करो
ड़ का बजट था, वह 12,543 करोड़ रह गया।  सरकार से मेरी िवनती है िक इसको 
दोबारा िरËयू िकया जाए। 
सर, अन्त मȂ मȅ अपने वैज्ञािनकȗ को, भारत क े वैज्ञािनकȗ को, इसरो क े वैज्ञािनकȗ को 
बधाई और अि
भनन्दन करने क े िलए दो पंिƪयȗ से अपनी बात समाÃत करू ँगा : 
"पिरन्दȗ को िमलेगी मंिजल यकीनन, ये फ ै ले हुए उनके  पंख बोलते हȅ।" 
"वे लोग रहते हȅ खामोश अकसर.." - हमारे वैज्ञा िनक  -   
"वे लोग रहते हȅ खामोश अकसर, जमाने मȂ िजनके  हुनर बोलते हȅ।" 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman.  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
85

 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN) : Sir, I thank you very much for giving me an 
opportunity to speak on an issue in which the entire nation feels very proud and also 
has been one in voicing such a sense of pride in appreciating the ISRO.  With the 
landing of Chandrayaan-3, pa rticularly, on the South Pole of the Moon, India has 
become the first country to do so. Whilst countries have launched and landed on the 
Moon, we are only the fourth  in the line, but for reachin g the Moon's Southern Pole, 
we are the first.  Now, I just want to briefl y recall how, in 1975, In dia with the help of 
the Soviet Union, the then USSR, launched the Aryabhata Satellite. That was a heavy 
satellite, but it was launched by the Soviet Union for us. So, that was the first ever 
attempt by India's ISRO to position something in the sp ace, to enter the space itself. 
But after that, if you look at this spectac ular journey that the ISRO has had, this 
success of Chandrayaan-3 is certainly going to have a very big impact on India's 
industrial and technological ecosystem. It is , of course, going to affect directly and 
positively the satellite systems area, te lecommunications area and there are very 
many other related fields all of which will benefit from it. Although in 1975, we needed 
the Soviet Union's help to launch our A ryabhata Space Station to go into the space 
for the first time from India, yet, as of Ju ly, 2023, our record is such that we have 
already launched 431 foreign satellites for other countries.  34 different countries have 
utilized ISRO's facility and its knowledge systems to launch their satellites. I am just 
recalling, in 1975, our Aryabhata was launched by the Soviet Union for us. But, today, 
we are in a position to launch 34 different countries' satellites totalling to 431.  What a 
spectacular journey this is for ISRO!  So, Chandrayaan-3, in my observation, also 
stood out for one particular achievement which has a blend of innovation, has a blend 
of how technology and innovation working together can work for global achievements 
and sustainability.  I remember also seei ng a lot of comments which said, "Oh, but 
this is no good.  It has taken this many number of days  to reach there. Did it require 
that many number of days? Ca n it not be done in lesser number of days?"  Quoting 
some other countries, they said, "They reached the Moon in 20  days, whereas, you 
took 45 days" and so on.  
But the secret behind that, the fact behi nd that, is the innovative way in which 
ISRO has handled it.  In that, they chos e a path to reach the Moon which was not 
otherwise thought of but though t only due to the route selection.  And, I am using a 
very pedestrian language here. I am consciou s of that. Using such a route selection, 
I S R O  m a d e  i t  p o s s i b l e  t o  d o  i t  c o s t  e f f ectively because the gr avitational pulls in 
magnetic fields which come in the way, -- I am sorry again for a pedestrian language 
-- can exhaust more fuel but the way in which ISRO decided to take this 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Chandrayaan-3 was chosen not for a racing ex pedition that I will have to reach there 
faster than somebody else but I have to reach there in a cost effective manner using 
lesser fuel and, therefore, serve the purpose of sustaina bility.  Space research also 
has to be sustainable because otherwise it becomes too expensive and cannot be 
afforded at all. So, innovation intertwined wi th sustainability, particularly in the realm 
of space, is what ISRO has achieved by ch oosing the route with which it reached the 
South Pole of the Moon. Now the Lander th at is there was named 'Vikram Probe'.  
Obviously, the name reminds us of Vikram Sarabhai who set up the first rocket 
launching station which we are now using repeatedly.  Nobody ever in India can 
forget the contribution that Vikram Sarabhai  or Homi Bhabha did.  Of course, Homi 
then moved over to the Atomic Energy Commission which was carved out of the then 
body ISRO.  So, Vikram Probe  did something spectacular again having reached the 
South Pole, for the first time, the density and the temperature of the Moon's 
ionosphere has been recorded. Several peop le went to the Moon earlier, landed in 
the Moon earlier, but we did the first thing of landing in the South Pole.  But, for the 
first time, again, the Moon's ionosphere and its density and the temperature there 
has been recorded by Vikram Probe.  Interestingly, from the Probe, the Rover, which 
is moving slowly on the surface of the Moon, the Pragyan Rover, in its exploration, 
has unearthed ground breaking discoveries.   The presence of sulphur, for instance, 
in the Lunar South Pole, has come as a very big surprise to the scientific community.  
So, I am happy to say Chandrayaan-3 landin g in the South Pole, for the first time, 
does not just stop there, it has also create d a lot more record on its own.  Just going 
back, Chandrayaan-2 also would have achiev ed but for the last minute tragic failure, 
but ISRO showed case to the world that it shall not be deterred by that failure, it 
would learn lessons.  Every strand of the errors have been identi fied, lessons learnt 
and, today, we see that the ISRO has corr ected itself to the extent that very many 
little errors which had crept in earlier ha d been removed and better solutions have 
been offered than what had been given in Chandrayaan-2 itself.  No wonder, that the 
Chief S. Somanath has been received by the Indian common citizen everywhere.  
When he went into a flight, people stood up and clapped for him.  This is the kind of 
respect Indians have, our people have, for such great achievements of the scientists 
of this country; nobody ever forgets them.  And, today, ISRO and ISRO scientists are 
all very much recognized by people of In dia and, in the process, proved another 
thing; I will later delve into this point.  Th ey are people who have studied from tier 2, 
tier 3 colleges, gone into Indian Institute of  Sciences and many such institutions, but 
they are there sitting and contributing for the future development of India and also 
sharing their knowledge with the entire space community all over the world.  Now, if I 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
87

 
 
spoke about Chandrayaan-2, Si r, I will also take this opportunity to say about 
Chandrayaan-1, which was launched in 2008.  Even that was a wonderful... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, what a sight!  Look at the Galleries!  Jaya ji, look 
at the Galleries, all your gender people, an d you are iconic to all of them, and, at a 
time, when the hon. Finance Minister is on her legs! This has happened right from 
the beginning.  But that it would happen so continually, is unimaginable, spectacular. 
My tribute to this great power, which is be ing unleashed in India to change it for the 
better and to take it to 2047 gloriously.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Thank you very much, Sir.  Sir, I will take this 
opportunity which you have given me by highlighting the women and girls in the 
Gallery.  Equally impressive, Sir, and I am sure you would have noticed it as well and 
Jayaji would also probably appreciate what we have.  ...(Interruptions)...  W h a t  I  
wanted to say is, Jayaji, seeing the school children who are here, I am so touched by 
the fact that they are here to observe what  we are discussing and I am sure, yes, all 
the Members would feel happy about the pres ence of the future generations of India 
here.  ...(Interruptions)...  Oh! okay.  Hon. Leader of  the House reminds me that I 
am not wrong in mentioning  hon. Jaya ji's name because she apparently acted as a 
school child.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes. 
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Student with uniform in a film. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I was reflecting hon. Members to that memorable contribution as a 
great artist and elevating her to iconic stat us which she has sustained all throughout.  
Hon. Finance Minister. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Appreciations, Jaya ji.  Sir, I did mention about 
Chandrayaan-2 and wanted to  move over to briefly talk about Chandrayaan-1 as 
well.  But, before I do talk about Chandr ayaan-1, I want to remind myself and also 
place it before the hon. Members in this House that, probably, on 7th September 
2019 midnight, the then Governor of West Bengal and the now Vice-President of 
India witnessed that landing which, of course, had a problem,  but there were 
hundreds of school children in the Science City of Kolkata, and, today you are 
reminding us about the school  children who are here to lis ten to this debate on the 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Chandrayaan-3's success.  So, Chandrayaan-1, if I can just go one step backward, 
was also a very successful mission.  In 2008, when it was launched, it discovered the 
presence of water on the Moon surface and it also provided a lot of insights into the 
lunar geology. So, obviously, every time th e ISRO had attempted to do, they have 
come out with extraordinary contribution s to the Space Science and that is now 
actually being used by the space community, scientist community from all over the 
world.  And, repeatedly, when we talk abou t ISRO, I will, definitely, recollect that the 
founders of ISRO, as I named them earlier,  Vikram Sarabhai and Homi Bhabha, had 
all remembered that this contribution or th is investment in space is an investment in 
future and that it will be done for the sake of development and also for the sake of 
humanity. That spirit continues even today.   I would want to highlight that. And, 
when I do that, it is pu rposely because I want to bring to the context that 
continuously in India, ISRO has received that kind of a support from all communities, 
ordinary citizens, students, children, scient ific community, and from the Government 
of the day, the kind of support that ISRO has received is something which all of us 
are proud of and we will continue doing that. 
But, of course, before I go into talking many more things, I want to mention a 
theme here, and I would probab ly respond to it repeated ly. It is a comment which 
Shri Jairam Ramesh has made. Hon. Memb er is not here. Bu t, he has made a 
comment in the morning about 'muscular nation alism' and said that 'you leave it to 
the scientists'. Sir, I was not in the Hous e ,  b u t ,  I  h a v e  s e e n  i t  s u b s e q u e n t l y .  O u r  
former President, Shri A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, referred to Prof. Sati sh Dhawan and said 
leadership should be like that. When a mission failed, he had said "Don't worry at all; 
leave it there. I take the full responsibility as the head." But, next year, when it was 
corrected and they achieved success, Prof . Satish Dhawan had told our former 
President, the then scientist,  Shri A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, "The success is due to your 
team and the success is to you." As a true leader, he gave the credit to the team. 
Absolutely! Who would deny the scientists and their contribution? But, if the Prime 
Minister of the country stands next to a scie ntist or a team of scientists who worked 
for something and when there is, unfortuna tely, failure or disappointment, and say 
'do not worry, you will be doing better next time', what is wrong in it? Hon. Prime 
Minister stood next to Prof. Sivan, the scie ntist,  during the launch of Chandrayaan 2 
which in the last minute unfortunately broke all our hearts and disappointed all of us 
as much as the scientific community when it just could not land. Sir, standing next to 
him who had tears in his eyes, when he st ood with him, Mr. Sivan had tears in his 
eyes. The Prime Minister said, "Last night,  I understood your frame of mind. The 
look in your eyes said a lot. That is wh y I did not stay here for long. We might not 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
89

 
 
have reached the lunar surface as planned.  You came as close as you could. Stay 
steady and look ahead. We have full co nfidence when it comes to a space 
programme. The best is yet to come."  These are not words of any muscular 
nationalism. These are truly the words of ou r Prime Minister who wants to stand next 
to his scientists even at the time of di sappointment as much as at the time of 
success. So, to decry this and say, 'Oh! You stop your muscular nationalism', is a 
bit of a perversion, which I think somebody of Mr. Jairam Ramesh's experience, it is 
not expected, Sir. And, this is not the firs t time. In 2014, ISRO had, by that time, 
launched 104 satellites at one go. Prime Minister Modi was the first one to say, India 
salutes all the scientists. It was on his Tw itter handle, it is there even now. So, 
scientists are being given the due credit an d we shall continue to give due credit; 
every Government has done it, we also do it. But, when we do it, because it is Prime 
Minister Modi, please do not give any other attributes which are not true.  
Sir, for a minute, I will dwell again into cost of the mission. And that is one of 
the interesting facts about Chandrayaan 2, as much as of the Mangalyaan. One of 
the most interesting facts is that Chandr ayaan 3 Mission costs around 75 million US 
Dollars only, approximately Rs. 615 crores. These are not final figures, because that 
will have to be finalised through the Departme nt after tying up all the expenditures. It 
is approximately Rs. 615 crores.  Then, ag ain, for repeated comparison, Sir, our 
Chandrayaan 3 commanded a lesser budget when compared to some of the movies 
which are made on space itself. You are making movies on space so that we can 
understand better.  We want to know better, our future generation would know what 
it means and, therefore, interesting films are being made. But, those films cost more 
than the cost of Chandrayaan 3 Mission. I will give you a random selection of names 
of some films and their costs; 'Interstellar' costs 165 million US Dollars, 'Passengers' 
costs 110 million US Dollars, 'The Martian'  costs 108 million US Dollars, 'Gravity' 
costs 100 million US Dollars and Chandrayaa n 3 cost only 75 million US Dollars! As I 
said earlier, innovative cost-cutting methods are the reason. It took a few days more, 
because of the gravitational pull, the ma gnetic fields dragged the satellite and 
therefore it exhaust the fuel. This is in my  laymen language. I am sure there are some 
scientists here who would smear at my langua ge. But, simply put, that is the reason 
why they chose the track with which they could reach even if it takes a few more days 
it cost them less.  
Sir, I will come to the point that India's Space programmes are increasingly 
becoming Atmanirbhar. And the immense po tential of home-grown industries and 
their technologies are now increasingly helping our expeditions to the space; 
Chandrayaan 3 benefitted from this.  
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
I would like to highlight where these kind s of Atmanirbhar Bharat has come to 
interplay with the space programme. Indi a actually, through Chandrayaan 3, has 
displayed and showcased its capability to  design, to develop and to manufacture 
high-end equipments which are so requir ed; but, all domestically. Now, leading 
companies like Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, which provided significant mechanical 
hardware and Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, contributed with their titanium tanks 
which were so crucial and actually helped in cutting cost as  well. But, it is a very 
innovative way in which we could do it. Sir, numerous private Indian firms have 
contributed to this, particularly, in th e realms of mechanical and electronic 
fabrication. For a minute, I want to quote Vikram Sarabhai again. He says, "if we are 
to play a meaningful role nationally, and in the community of nations, we must be 
second to none in the app lication of advanced technol ogies." Now, these advanced 
technologies are not just coming from HAL and BHEL. They sure, are, coming from 
HAL and BHEL. But, private players, today,  are giving these high-end technologies 
and have made an immense contribution to the efficiencies which are now getting 
recorded. The kinds of equipments which we see in Chan drayaan 3 are the state-of-
the-art scientific instruments being used an d all of them developed in India. They 
include: seismometer, langmuir probe inst ruments, thermal probe instruments, both 
X-ray and laser-based spectrometers, all of th em have been built in India. So, I want 
to underline here, Sir, that scientific temp er, scientific achievements are absolutely 
praiseworthy in ISRO. But, policy has also been doing a lot of rigorous changes 
which has now come to help with priv ate participation in the space sector. I 
remember, during Atmanirbhar announcements  and subsequently in the Budget of 
2021-22, we had announced a strategic disinv estment policy, particularly, for Central 
Public Sector Enterprises in which we said, 'in the strategic areas, a minimum 
presence of the Government will be there and will continue to be there'.  
We are not going to shut every unit there, not at all, but there will not be any 
area in India which will not be available for private sector, that is to say, no area will 
be shut for private sector.  That policy ha s, actually, helped in getting the private 
sector to enter into space area and, as a result today, you have innovative ideas 
working together with the ISRO and that has made a lot of difference. India actually 
ranks fifth among countries for equity in vestments in space in the past decade and 
that is consistently because the policy ha s been made more and more favourable 
and, as a result, we are improving in getti ng equity funding for the private sector 
which wants to involve itself in space. But ev en today it is only 3 per cent of all the 
money which goes into the space arena glob ally.  We need to have more private 
equity coming for those private companies wh ich want to do innovative work in the 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
91

 
 
space area.  Sir, you have rightly given the tone of women even at the beginning of 
my intervention, I would like to say how Chandrayaan-3, the la nding spot in the 
Moon, has been named Shiv Shakti.  Shiv Shakti obviously denotes the 
Ardhnarishwar principles, and, therefore, both Shiva and Shakti give the energy and 
the action.  Therefore, I want to say, it is a tribute to the women scientists who 
worked in that mission.  Indian women scie ntists have contributed immensely to the 
space programme.  Women scientists and I quote the Prime Minister here, 'Women 
scientists of this mission have played a cr ucial role in ensuring its success.  Without 
their contribution, this achievement was not just possible. They will inspire 
generations to come.'  Sir, about or slig htly over hundred women staff have played a 
direct significant role in conceptualizing, designing, realizing, testing and executing 
Chandrayaan-3. Over hundred women staff includes those who are scientists.  The 
huge participation of women shows that th e scientific empowerment of women has 
helped and glass ceiling has actually been brok en in ISRO for quite some time now, I 
am not saying it happened yesterday, but for quite some time now, and as a result 
empowerment of women scientists.  And havi ng broken the glass ceiling, no doubt, 
metaphorically, they are reaching to the space. This empowerment of women 
scientists clearly shows that in India, there is enough opportunity and more for 
women provided they are given access, given opportunity, and, that is why, in this 
context, I would like to place on the Table here that Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam 
which has been introduced in the Lok Sabh a is necessarily an instrument through 
which we hope the political empowerment also can be done just as scientific 
empowerment has been happening in ISRO.  I f  t h a t  k i n d  o f  a c c e s s  i s  g i v e n  t o  
women, opportunity is given to women; they can perform as well as our scientists are 
performing in ISRO itself, in the political ar ena.  I am sure when the Bill comes to the 
Rajya Sabha, it will have a smooth passage.  I am sure all parties, all Members would 
kindly cooperate to have that cleare d. Sir, because we are talking about 
Chandrayaan-3, I would like to highlight the names of those women scientists who 
have contributed to Chandrayaan-3. Amon g many others, which include more than 
hundred women staff, I am naming some of them here; they include Shrimati Kalpana 
Kalahasti, Dr. Ritu Karidhal Srivastava, wh o is known as the rocket woman of India, 
Shrimati Vanitha Muthaia, Shrimati Nand ini Harinath, Shrimati Anuradha T.K., 
Shrimati Moumitta Dutta and Shrimati B.R. Lalithambika. So, these are scientists 
who have come from various parts of this country, have studied in  institutions which 
are, probably, the two or three institutions, but sheer wantin g to perform with 
excellence has moved them to do many things on reaching ISRO and today 
contributing towards the launch of Chandr ayaan-3.  Sir, Chandrayaan-3 was a great 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
success.  There are other cosmic endeavours by the ISRO which is launching Aditya-
L1, which is a space based observatory dedi cated to studying the Sun.  Here again 
the innovative thought of the ISRO has pl ayed an important function.  Its primary 
function is, of course, to monitor solar corona, while simultaneously conducting 
direct observations of the solar wind at th e point where it will be located and that 
point, I think, is called Sun-Earth Lagragian point, a point where it could stay without 
having to consume too much fuel because it is such a position that it can help in 
observing Sun without any obstruction in between.  So, the Sun-Earth Lagrangian 
point which is about 1.5 million kilometers  away from the Earth going towards the 
Sun, is a very important mission.  The signifi cant feature of this on e is that it has got 
seven payloads which include the visible em ission line coronagraph which like I said 
earlier, Chandrayaan, BHEL, HAL have contribu ted in this case, the Indian Institute 
of Astrophysics, which is located in Bangalore has contributed in this particular visible 
emission line coronagraph which is going to be very important an instrument which is 
going to be observing the Sun. So, Aditya -L1, which was launched from Sriharikota 
by ISRO on the 2 nd of September, 2023 is one of those very important observatories 
for the Sun which India will be doing.  Th ere are three other countries which again 
have done this before, but India has no w achieved it. Sir, here again a woman 
scientist has contributed in the Aditya-L1,  Nigar Shaji is a woman scientist who is 
actually behind this Aditya mission.  So, I will come for the last bit, Sir.   
Before I conclude, I just want to high light a few points about how we see the 
future of space and ISRO in India. I just want to highlight the point that we shall 
continue the spirit of Vikram Sarabhai.  In  that achievements by ISRO shall be for the 
mankind, achievements by IS RO shall be for developmen t and achievements will be 
for sharing with all.  With that, actually, th at is why the Prime Minister said, when he 
looked at Vasudhaiva Kutambhkam, G20 and so on, India will continue to explore, 
learn and share for the betterment of all humankind.  So, this is what the Prime 
Minister said and this is what was the ap preciation also given to the scientists and 
again standing by the scientists.  Now I have my friend, ho n. Member, Jairam 
Ramesh, saying the point that muscular na tionalism does not play here, standing 
next to the scientists at the time of ach ievement and also during disappointments.  
So, that is the point I would like to highlight.  More importantly, Sir, it is important, in 
June 2023, when the Prime Minister visited the United States of America, we signed 
an accord, the Artemis Accord, very important in that, India also will be one of those 
27 countries, which have signed this Accord.  It is a multilateral space initiative, led 
by West, in which one of the objectives is to send humans back to the Moon through 
an international space station and we shall be happily a party to that. In this context, I 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
93

 
 
would want to pick up on something whic h a former NASA Asso ciate Administrator 
observed.  His name is Mike Gold.  
He was a former associate administrator in NASA. He was behind drafting and 
shepherding Artemis Accord. So, it is import ant to understand what his perspectives 
were when India joined th is Accord. I quote him. “India will not only fill the void that 
Russia is leaving, but will far exceed it. ” This is Mike Gold saying, who is a former 
associate administrator at NASA who draf ted and shepherded the Artemis Accord. 
He further says, “The capabilities of India to engage, to innovate, to support a more 
robust industry, particularly commercial spa ce, is going to far outstrip anything that 
Russia had ever been able to do. ” He also says, “India was a sleeping giant in the 
space world but that is awakening now.” He says, “Already, the country has done so 
much with so little. ” Again that frugality with whic h our scientists are working has 
been observed by the former associate administrator of NASA.  
 Sir, I believe, one of the hon. Members in the morning, while talking--probably 
it is hon. Member Jawhar Sircar--said, “Bureaucracy now should  be off science. 
ISRO should be devoid of bureaucratic influence. ” Now, it is not me, not anybody 
from India. But, I would like to again recall the words of former associate 
administrator of NASA, Mike Gold. He says, “India’s bureaucratic reforms in its 
space efforts are helping the country move faster in the sector.” So, bureaucracy has 
not been obstructive; actually, the reforms ar e helping it to move faster. So, moving 
faster is not being an obstruction. We need to understand that these reforms are 
taking place so that this kind of an appro ach where you are able to take decisions in 
time is facilitating the bureau cracy. The National Research  Foundation is not headed 
--I am sure, the Minister was here and migh t have spoken about it in the morning--
by a bureaucrat with huge funds given for them to decide where that should be 
deployed. It is headed by a scientist, Dr. Sood, if I am right. He heads it; no 
bureaucrat, no former IAS is sitting there. It  is a scientist who is dealing with it. So, I 
would like to highlight that these reforms, th erefore, will be transformative not just for 
India but also for the U.S., the commercia l space sector as a whole. It is the 
observation we have heard by the former associate administrator of NASA.  
 Finally, Sir, the current Government’s policies have helped the power of the 
youth, the power of the scientific community , the power of the Indian StartUps. All of 
them together are helping today’s ISRO. I am  not taking more time, Sir, in case you 
want me to conclude. There are now over 140-plus registered space tech StartUps, 
all of whom are doing brilliant work. As a continuation of the policy which I said, 
AatmaNirbhar Bharat of the 2021-22 Budg et, and now you have the Indian Space 
Policy 2023, which has come out. That seek s to institutionalise the private sector 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
participation in space sector; the establis hment of Indian National Space Promotion 
and Authorization Center (IN-SPACe) is also facilitating the usage of ISRO by private 
entities. With all these, the Government is also spending a considerable amount to 
re-skill nearly 4,000 technicians, technical an d scientific assistants of ISRO so that 
they can improve upon their skills.  
 Sir, I finally close with again one observa tion, that Indian scientists are not just 
being in ISRO, Indian scientists are contributing to the space programmes all over the 
world. How can we ever forg et Kalpana Chawla’s contribution in the 1997 Shuttle? 
She was the first woman of Indian origin to  be in space! I would also now recall that 
in January, 2023, A.C. Charania has become NASA’s new Chief Technologist serving 
as Principal Advisor to the administrator Bi ll Nelson. Similarly, in March, 2023, we 
heard of Amit Kshatriya who has become th e first head of NASA’s newly established 
Moon to Mars Programme. So, Indians in space are not just in ISRO but also all over 
the world.  
 Sir, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I have two quick observations. Sh ri Jawhar Sircar, who, as you 
indicated, has been a bureaucrat for four decades! We have been liberal with time 
and, as the Finance Minister, please be liber al with the finance! Everyone agrees on 
that!  Now, Dr. Prashanta Nanda. 
 
DR. PRASHANTA NANDA (Odisha): Thank you,  Mr. Chairman, Sir, for giving me 
this opportunity. Chandrayaan-3 rightly deserves the space and time in Parliament of 
India and it has got that in Lok Sabha and in Rajya Sabha also.  
 Sir, you were saying that the galleries were full and that the people from 
everywhere in this country must be watching our academic discussion in Rajya Sabha 
regarding Chandrayaan-3, to listen about the total story of Chandrayaan-3 from 1962 
till today. In that deliberation, they must have been happy to listen to Shrimati Nirmala 
Sitharaman, Jairam Rameshji and others too.  
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सांतनु सेन) महोदयपीठासीन हुए।] 
 
लेिकन इस बातचीत मȂ, टोटल िडबेट मȂ कौन िकसकी नानी को याद कराना चाहता था, 
मुझे नहीं मालूम, पर मुझे इतना मा
लूम है िक मुझे आज अपनी मां याद आ गई। 74 साल पहले जब 
भी मȅ खाना नहीं खाता था, तब मेरी मां मुझे छत क े ऊपर लेकर जाती थी और कहती थी िक बेटा, 
मामा को देख ले, खाना खा ले, नहीं तो मा
मा गुÎसा हो जाएगा, वह घर नहीं बुलाएगा। मȅ खाना 
खा लेता था, लेिकन िफर भी मामा घर नहीं बुलाते थे। उन्हȗने कभी घर नहीं बुलाया। इसी दुख को 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
95

 
 
दूर करने क े िलए 1962 मȂ जो शुरुआत  हुई, वह 23 अगÎत, 2023 को पूरी हो गई। अभी िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी बोल रही थीं िक hundred women scientists - मैडम, वे hundred scientists 
नहीं थीं, hundred मांएं थीं। वे मांएं थीं, जो लाखȗ-करोड़ȗ मांओं का वादा पूरा करा रही थीं, और 
उनका वादा पूरा हो ग
या। यहां हमȂ िसफर् उन्हीं क े बारे मȂ बोलना है। कौन िकधर है, कौन पावर मȂ 
है और कौन पावर मȂ नहीं है, इसके  साथ हमारा कोई लेना-देना नहीं है। सीधी सी बात है िक एक 
4X4 की hundred meters की  िरले रेस चल रही है। उसमȂ चा
र Ëयिƪ भागते हȅ, िजनमȂ से कोई 
बहुत फाÎट होता है - लेिकन ओलिÇपक मȂ जब मेडल िमलता है, तो चारȗ लोगȗ को खड़ा कर देते 
हȅ और बोल त े हȅ िक सबको मेडल िमलेगा। वषर् 1962 से लेकर अब तक िजतने साइंिटÎट्स, िजतने 
Ģधान मंतर्ी इसमȂ लगे थे, मेरे िहसाब से सबको एक-एक मेडल िमलना चािहए। They deserve it.  
मȅ यह भी बोलना चाहता हूं िक आज इसरो मȂ िज तने लोग हȅ, उनमȂ 16,000 females हȅ, 
जो काम कर रही हȅ। वे हमारी मां हȅ, इसीिलए हम सोच रहे हȅ।  
क्यȗ न लोक सभा और राज्य सभा मȂ उतनी संख्या मȂ हमारी लेडीज़ आ जाएं! अगर डबल 
इंजन की बात करते हȅ, तो उसमȂ यही होगा िक एक इंजन पुरुष है और दूसरा इंजन Îतर्ी है।  
अगर ये दोनȗ इंजन काम करȂगे, तो बहुत बिढ़या होगा।  सर, मेरे पास ज्
यादा टाइम नहीं है, 
लेिकन मेरा बोलने का बहुत िदल कर रहा था और सुनने का भी िदल कर रहा था, इसि लए मȅ बैठा 
रहा हूं।  मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं िक यह कहा गया िक पहले कम पैसे िमलते थे और आज हम 
ज्यादा पैसे देते हȅ।  मेरे िपत ाजी को 30 रुपय े तनख्वाह िमलती थी और हम आराम से खाते-पीते 
थे, लेिकन आज उतने आराम क े िलए तीन लाख रुपय े लगȂगे। पैसȗ का devaluation हुआ है, 
इसिलए पैसȗ की बात न करȂ, िदल की बात करȂ और अक्ल की बात करȂ। यिद अक्ल की बा त 
करȂगे, तो 60 नहीं , 6,000 साल पहले भी जो इंिडयन बनवास करते थे, जो साधु-संत थे, वे भी 
साइंिटÎट्स थे और आज भी जो हȅ, वे भी साइंिटÎट्स हȅ।  सब साइंिटÎट्स थे, तो िकसी को पैसȗ 
की जरूरत  नहीं है, उनको एकागर्ता की जरूरत  है और िजतनी एकागर्ता देश उनसे चाहता है, 
उन्हȗने हर काल मȂ दी है।  उन्हȗने हमȂ वेद िदए हȅ, उपिनषà िदए हȅ, गीता दी है और आज 
चन्दर्यान भी दे िदया।  वही साइंिटÎट्स लोग हȅ, क ेवल उनका नाम बदल गया है, लेिकन उन्हȗने 
ही िदया है।  इसमȂ मेरा इतना कहना है िक हम ओिड
शा से आए हȅ।  सभी को यह लगता होगा िक 
यह तो छोटा-सा है।  मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं िक यह छोटा-सा है, बहुत बड़ा नहीं है, लेिकन 
हमारी भी इसमȂ साझेदारी है।  हमारी भी कहानी सुन लीिजए िक हम इस यातर्ा मȂ क ै से जा रहे हȅ।  
सर, मȅ ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ बोल रहा हूं।  In 1984, Odisha  Spac e Applications Centre 
(ORSAC), the apex body of the State of Odisha for space technology applications, 
was established in the year 1984. Along wi th space tech, ORSAC is involved in IT 
projects like Remote Sensing, GIS  and GPS based projects, Geographic Information 
System and Global Positioning System.  The organisation also runs GRAMSAT and 
EDUSAT.  In 2017, Odisha formally name d the outer Wheeler Island in Bhadrak 
district of Odisha as  APJ Abdul Kalam Island - यह नाम िदया गया है  as a tribute to 
the former President on his second death anni versary.  Former Chief Minister, Shri 
Biju Patnaik (Time-bell rings.)  सर, मुझे एक िमनट का समय दे दीिजए। Former Chief 
Minister, Shri Biju Patnaik,  had allotted the historic Wheeler  Island to the Ministry of 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Defence on the request of Dr. Kalam in 1993. Dr. Kalam had described the Wheeler 
Island as his theatre of action. He said, 'I t is my theatre of action'. Dr. Kalam also 
played a key role in ensuring that the island is the nesting ground for the endangered 
Olive Ridley turtles remained safe by  changing the illumination structure. लाÎट मȂ मȅ 
यह कहना चाहता हूं िक हम ओिडशा क े लोग इतना कहना चाहते हȅ िक यह हम कर सकते हȅ। If 
everything goes well, then, Made in Odisha  miniature satellite, Cube Sat will soon 
support the State in managing natural cal amities like cyclone and enhancing cyber 
security.  िजस साइक्लोन से हम लड़ रहे हȅ, साल मȂ दस बार लड़ रहे हȅ ...(समय की घं टी)... 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सांतनु सेन): आपका एक िमनट का समय पूरा हो गया है।  
 
डा. Ģशांत नन्दा:  उसकी जानकारी क े िलए जो सैटेलाइट होगी, वह ओिडशा की होगी।   
इसिलए हम बोल रहे हȅ िक यह जो यातर्ा है, जो सफलता है और सब लोग जो  गो Êड मेडल लेने 
क े िलए खड़े हȅ, उसमȂ ओिडशा भी शािमल है, क्यȗिक हमने भी उसमȂ योगदान िदया है, ओिडशा 
की मिहलाओं ने भी योगदान िदया है।  मेरे पास बहुत समय नहीं है, िफर भी इतना याद रिखए िक 
यह एक नेशनल गवर् है। It is a pride of our nation
.  (Time-bell rings.) 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  You have taken one minute 
extra.  Please conclude. 
 
DR. PRASHANTA NANDA:  This is the day of the scientists who have made it... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
 
डा. Ģशांत नन्दा: मȅ यह बोलना चाहता हूं िक आज हम गवर् से छाती ठोककर बोल सकते हȅ िक 
िकतने देश हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... िजसमȂ हम बोल सकते हȅ िक India is not comparable with other 
scientists. We can and we would say that
 हमारा अगला जो गगनयान िमशन है या जो 
आिदत्य िमशन है, वे भी आएंगे और वे भी करके  िदखाएंगे िक इंिडया क्या चीज़ है - उस िदन क े 
िलए इंतजार करȂ।  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu):  Than k you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir.  On 
behalf of the AIADMK party, I would like to participate in the discussion on India's 
glorious space journey marked by successful  soft landing of Chandrayaan-3. Mr. 
Vice-Chairman, Sir, since morning, we have been listening to most of the speakers.  
It was initiated by the Minister of Commerce and Industry. Then afterwards, the 
Minister of Space intervened.  Later on, th e Minister of Finance also intervened.  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
97

 
 
Now, at the fag end of the day, we are going  to participate in the discussion.  I am 
thankful for that.  Chandrayaan-1, Chandr ayaan-2, Chandrayaan-3 are all described 
by various Members.  It is a success for In dian scientists. We have to remember all 
the scientists like Sir C. V. Raman, a nobel laureate.  He is a man who gave physics 
which is the base for all development.  So, we have to think of Sir C. V. Raman, the 
nobel laureate.  Next is, Vikram Sarabhai , Homi Bhabha and Dr. A. P. J. Abdul 
Kalam.  Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam studied in MIT in Chennai.  You know very well.  
That is a famous institute in Chennai.  It is a place for education.  He studied in that 
place.  As others said, there are so many people who contributed for the 
development of space research and eminent scientists also  participated.  So many 
Prime Ministers put so much of efforts; bu t, our Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, 
in his period, was successful.  That is why ma ny people appreciated Modiji and it is a 
success in his period where Chandrayaan-3 safely landed, started research and gave 
so much information to the whole world.  That is why we are appreciating and also 
our Minister of Space was explaining that  education is also very important for the 
success of India.  Before education, supe r beliefs are there.  Super beliefs are 
explained in health and in various superstitions, but if all these are removed... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Your time is over. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  How is the time over?  I can't understand.  I will just take a 
few minutes.  We are four Members in our party.  No Member has spoken.  We are 
coming to a close.  It is embarrassing to us .  I was the senior presiding officer in Lok 
Sabha and I was five times Lok Sabha Member .  I know the sense of the House.  I 
am speaking because this is th e successful story and I am explaining it.  I have just 
started and you say that my time is over! How can I conclude?  Okay, I will restrict 
myself.  What did he say about the success of  education?  I want to speak only on 
that point.  Education means science edu cation which is also very important.  
Especially in Tamil Nadu, Dravidian movement is the root cause for giving good 
education in our country. 
That is why, even in Chennai, the Birl a Kolarangam at the Periyar Science and 
Technology Centre near Guindy has been established. I want to highlight the 
achievements the country has made in space and its successful journey.  Puratchi 
Thalaivar MGR, our founder leader of the AIADMK Party, had started many 
educational institutions, especially for tec hnical education.  There are many ITIs and 
polytechnics.  So, that kind of science education is given.   
 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Please conclude. 
  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  You have to creat e so many scientists. I also want to 
specifically mention about some people fr om Tamil Nadu, because names of various 
persons have been mentioned.  Our Mini ster mentioned about Veeramuthu. Then, 
Vanitha Muthiah, Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam..(Time-bell rings.) 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): You have already taken two 
minutes extra.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  Like that, there are many highly educated people in Tamil 
Nadu because of the good educational standards. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Thank you.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: They have all contributed to the space journey.  Once again, 
I thank our hon. Prime Minister, Narendra Mo diji.  During his period, this successful 
mission has taken place. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Thank you very much.   
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: I would like to thank all Prime Ministers and the Indian 
scientists who have contributed towards this.  Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Now, Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas. 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS (West Bengal): Sir, I thank you very much for giving 
me the opportunity.  At the very outset, le t me start by congratulating heartily our 
great scientists who successfully executed the Chandrayaan-3 Mission making India 
the first nation to land  on the South Pole of the Moon.  Our scientists  worked hard 
for the success of Chandrayaan and just  at the crucial moment  when the 
Chardrayaan was about to land, the entire  nation was deprived of the chance of 
seeing the landing  or our scientists congra tulating each other because the official TV 
feed got cut to a video showing  the PM wavi ng the National Flag. ..(Interruptions)..  
The camera was turned to the PM while the nation waited with bated breath to see 
the actual landing video and the celebration of  our scientists.   Sir, the scientists, I 
reiterate, were the real heroes  because  despite the Department of Space having a 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
99

 
 
budgetary cut of more than eight per cent this year, compared to the last fiscal year 
2022-23, which, in turn, had an expenditur e cut of 32 per cent for the space science 
part notwithstanding the fact   that Chan drayaan-III and  Aditya L-I Missions  were 
included in this.   That is why I say that th is is the very reason why I laud our heroes, 
our scientists, and Bengal has played  a part in it. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):   Just a minute. The hon. Minister 
wants to say something.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : I did not want to interrupt him because he is speaking in a 
good flow.   
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Sir, I am not yielding.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: I just wanted to put the records straight.   When the PM was 
shown on the screen, the other part of the sc reen was showing the landing.  So, it is 
not… 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS:  No, no; they could not see the landing.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: The whole nation is a witness to that. You can get it 
replayed.  
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Sir, video is there. 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Yes, the video is there. 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Sir, video is there.  It is for all to see.   What the truth 
is, let the nation decide.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Just because the PM’s face was there does not mean that 
the landing was not shown.  
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Hon. Minister , the video is there. Let the nation 
decide.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Yes.  
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: It is for the nation to decide.  The video is there.  It is 
in public domain.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: You are stating the ha lf truth.  The Prime Minister’s face was 
there, but the landing was also being shown.  
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Anyway, Vice-C hairman, Sir, my time is being eaten 
away.   
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: It was being shown simultaneously.  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal): Sir, he is eating away his time.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: It was being shown simultaneously. You understand that. 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Sir, I am not yielding. I seek your protection, Sir.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH:  You are not understanding...  
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Mr. Vice-Chairm an, Sir, I seek your protection. I am 
not  yielding.  Please let me have my chance to speak. 
  
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: I am saying, even before the PM’s face came, our faces were 
also there.   
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, my time is being eaten 
away.… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): You will be given time.  Don’t 
worry.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Vice-Chairman, Sir, they were showing the team. The ISRO 
team was there.  The Mission team was there.   We were watching from one location.  
We were there.  And that slot went to PM. 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
101

 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS:  Sir, I have no t yielded.  Please give me my chance to 
speak.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH:  But the landing video was continuing simultaneously. 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Mr. Biswas, please continue. 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Sir, much of my time has been eaten away.  Please 
give me the due time.   Firstly, I will say, it is in public domain and it is for all to see 
and decide.  Okay.  
 Sir, I would like to say, since I laud the scientists, 31 of them, we proudly say,  
have come from Bengal as part of the Mission.   As you know, Anuj Nandi was from 
Islampur, West Bengal.  He also played a very crucial role in this Mission, working as  
the Chief Designer of the cameras attached to the primary body of Chandrayaan-3.   
I would also like to say that after meeting the ISRO scientists in Bengaluru, the hon. 
Prime Minister landed in Delhi and ma de a bizarre statement.   He said, “Use space 
technology for delivery of services. ”  This statement has not been clarified as yet. 
Then, we see, the Governor of Bengal writing to ISRO asking for “Help of space 
technology to curb ragging of students in colleges ”. It is most astonishing and 
agonizing also to see the  achievements of  our scientists being  mocked by such 
illogical statements, which seek to take away their success and seem to undermine 
them.   
 Further, I would like to say that during the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, our hon. 
Prime Minister was suddenly seen addressing  the nation on the success of ‘Mission 
Shakti’. The sole purpose was to take cr edit for the success of our scientists for 
political and electoral gains. Again, from  the speech of the Leader of the House 
today, it seems that the Government does not want the focus of today’s discussion 
to be celebrated as the success of one of  our scientists and our space programme 
but as a personal credit festival for the PM  and only the PM.  Let us move past the 
self-congratulatory and chest-thumping po stures and stand up as a nation to 
congratulate the real heroes, our scientists.    
In the end, all I have to say is, while we have our eyes on space, let our feet 
touch the ground reality, discussing  nati on-related harsh realities of price rise, 
unemployment, MSP for farmers, Manipur, recent CAG reports etc., which, 
seriously, concern the people at large.  Let there be a celebration, but also along with 
that, an introspection if as a nation we wa nt to move forward with much more such 
achievements and phenomenal successes. Thank you, Sir.  
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Shri Sanjay Raut.  
 
SHRI SANJAY RAUT (Maharashtra): Sir we  are discussing India’s glorious space 
journey.  यह जो जनीर् है, यह बहुत ही गौरवशाली है।  सरकारȂ आती हȅ और सरकारȂ चली जाती 
हȅ, Ģधान मंतर्ी भी आए और चले गए, लेिकन इंिडया की यह Îपेस जनीर् िनरंतर चल रही है और 
चलती रहेगी।  पंिडत नेहरू  versus नरेन्दर् मोदी जैसा झगड़ा नहीं होना चािहए।  आप वहां से 
मोदी-मोदी कहȂगे, हम यहां नेहरू -नेहरू  कहȂगे - यह टीम वकर् है।  ...( Ëयवधान)... 2014 से 
पहले भी इस देश मȂ बहुत बड़ा काम हुआ है और उसकी बदौलत आज चंदर्यान ऊपर गया है।  
...(Ëयवधान)... Ģधान मंतर्ी की अपनी-अपनी सोच होती है, कोई िवज्ञानवादी होता है, कोई 
अंध-Ǜǉावादी होता है, कोई अंध भƪ होते हȅ, कोई भƪ होते हȅ।  पंिडत नेहरू  क े जम
ान े मȂ भी 
बहुत नािलयां और गटर होते थे, लेिकन पंिडत नेहरू  ने यह नहीं कहा िक गटर से गैस 
िनकालकर चाय बनाओ।  लेिकन यह भी िवज्ञान है  - मȅ यह नहीं मानता हूं िक यह िवज्ञान नहीं है, 
यह भी साइंस है।  गटर से भी हम गैस िनकाल सकते हȅ, यह भी सांइस है, लेिकन पंिडत नेहरू  
की सोच ऊपर थी।  पंिडत नेहरू  ने इसरो बनाया था।  पंिडत नेहरू  ने ज्ञान, िवज्ञान और तंतर् 
िवज्ञान की नींव रखी थी और आज हम 70 साल मȂ यहां तक पहुंच गए हȅ।  सर, िमशन चंदर्यान-3 
की कामयाबी अǌुत है।  यह यातर्ा चंदर्
यान-1 से शुरू  हुई थी, यह चंदर्यान-2 मȂ भी जारी रही और 
चंदर्यान-3 ने इितहास रच ा  है।  यह हमारे 60-70 साल क े टीमवकर् का नतीजा है।  यह जो हमारा 
ऐितहािसक पुराना संसद भवन है, उसमȂ जो आिखरी संयुƪ बैठक हुई, उसे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
संबोिधत िकया।   
वे सांसदȗ क े साथ यहाँ नए संसद भवन मȂ पैदल चलकर आ गए। 1947 से हमारा सफर, 
इस देश का सफर इसी तरह से हो रहा है। पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरु , जो देश क े पहले Ģधान 
मंतर्ी थे, उस वƪ इस देश मȂ एक सुई तक नहीं बनती थी, क ु छ नहीं बनता था, लेिकन आज हम 
अपना चंदर्यान ऊपर भेज रहे हȅ। सर, आयर्भƺ भारत का पहला उपगर्ह था, िज
से 19 अĢैल, 1975 
मȂ कॉसमॉस-3एम नामक लाँिंचग Ëहीकल से लाँच िकया गया था। सर, मȅने कहा िक यह 
गौरवशाली यातर्ा है, आज इसरो भा
रत का गौरव है। ..(समय की घंटी).. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
  
Ǜी संजय राउत:  इसकी Îथापना 1962 मȂ हुई थी। िवकर्म साराभाई जी क े बारे मȂ जयराम रमेश 
जी ने पूरी कहानी सुनाई। िवकर्म साराभाई जी उस वƪ इसरो क े टीम लीडर थे और उनक
 ी टीम 
भी बहुत छोटी थी। उनके  पास िगने-चुने वैज्ञािनक थे, पैसȗ की तंगी थी, लेिकन साल भर मȂ भारत 
ने पहला रॉके ट लाँच िकया और उसके  पाट्सर् को साइिकल पर लाद कर लाँिंचग सȂटर तक 
पहुँचाया गया। वह ऐितहािसक तÎवीर आज भी हमारे शरीर क े रȗगटे खड़े कर देती है। 6 दशक 
क े बाद चाँद पर, मंगल पर, गगनयान पर - जो यह सब देन है, यह हमारे देश क े साठ-सǄर 
सालȗ मȂ, पंिडत नेहरू  से लेकर आज तक क े Ģध
ान मंतर्ी माननीय मोदी जी की भी देन है। .. 
(समय की घंटी) .. 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
103

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत:  मȅ सभी क े नाम लेना चाहता हूं। सर, कल Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक हमȂ 
मजबूत भारत बनाना है, बड़ी सोच से ही भËय और मजबूत भारत का िनमार्ण होगा, सोच बड़ी 
होगी, तो बड़े काम हो जाते हȅ और साइंस और टेक्नोलॉजी क े िबना यह देश आगे नहीं बढ़ेगा। 
लेिकन हमने कोरोना काल मȂ क्या देखा? पापड़ बेचो, थािलयाँ बजाओ, तािलयाँ बजाओ, this is 
not science and technology. यह science and technology नहीं है, यह अंधǛǉा है।  
...(Ëयवध
ान).. यह science and technology नहीं है...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-
CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Sanjay Rautji, please conclude. 
...(Interruptions)...  Sanjay Rautji, please conclude. ...(Interruptions)... ...(Time-
bell)... 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत:  इस देश क े वैज्ञािनकȗ ने वैक्सीन बनाई और वैक्सीन बनने क े बाद उस वैक्सीन 
क े कवर पर Ģधान मंतर्ी ने िसफर् अपनी फोटो लगाकर Ģचार िकया। यह ठीक नहीं है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Sanjay Rautji, please conclude. 
...(Interruptions)...  Please conclude. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी संजय राउत:  हमȂ अपने साइंिटÎ
ट्स का, अपने िवज्ञान का और अपनी टेक्नोलॉजी का आदर 
करना चािहए।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SE N): Thank you. The next speaker is 
... 
  
Ǜी संजय राउत:  सर, यह देश बहुत बड़ा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
...(Interruptions)...    Please conclude. You have taken almost three minutes extra. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत:  सर, science and technology राजनीित करने का िवषय नहीं है। राजनीित 
करने क े िल
ए बहुत से िवषय हȅ, लेिकन क ु छ लोग इस िवषय मȂ भी राजनीित लेकर आए हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...हमȂ राजनीित नहीं करनी चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... 
Next speaker is, Dr. Anil Jail. ...(Interruptions)...   Dr. Anil Jain.  
   
Ǜी संजय राउत:  सर, क ु छ लोगȗ ने कहा िक science and technology मȂ तेलंगाना और आंधर् 
का झगड़ा लगा िदया। यह कब तक चलेगा? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Dr. Anil Jain. 
    
डा. अिनल जैन (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, आपने मुझे लोकतंतर् क े इस नए मंिदर क े ऐितहािसक 
Ģथम सतर् क े दूसरे िदन बोलने का मौका िदया है, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ 
अपने आपक
ो बहुत गौरवािन्वत महसूस करता हूं और मुझे िवÌवास है िक लोकतंतर् क े इस नए 
मंिदर से भËय भारत की एक नई तÎ
वीर िनकलेगी।  
महोदय, भारत क े लोकतंतर् की जरूरतȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए हमारे दूरदृÍटा Ģधान मंतर्ी 
ने आगे आने वाली पीढ़ी क े िलए लोकतंतर् का यह भËय मंिदर ĢÎतुत िक या है। यहाँ से भारत की 
एक नई तÎवीर िनकलेगी - इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का धन्यवाद करता हूं। हमारे 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा है िक अमृत काल की सुबह हमारा भारत नए संसद भवन मȂ भिवÍय क े 
संकÊप क े साथ आगे बढ़ रहा है। मान्यवर, पहले हम कहते थे - चलो िदलदार चलो, चांद क े पार 
चलो, लेिक
न हमारे साइंिटÎट्स ने कहा - हम हȅ तैयार चलो और साइंिटÎट्स ने चंदर्यान तैयार 
कर चाँद क े पार पहुँचाने का काम िक
या है। मȅ पूरे सदन क े माध्यम से और अपनी तरफ से इस 
देश क े साइंिटÎट्स का तहेिदल से शुिकर्या अदा करता हूं, उनका वंदन और अिभनंदन करता हूं। 
िवकर्म साराभाई जी ने जो परंपरा Ģा
रंभ की थी, उस परंपरा को तब से लेकर आज तक, एस. 
सोमनाथ तक, हमारे साइंिटÎट्स ने कायम रखा है। इसके  िलए हम उनका वंदन और अिभनंदन 
करते हȅ। हम उस नेतृत्व का भी वंदन और अिभनंदन करते हȅ, िजसने साइंिटÎट्स क े िलए ऐसा 
करने का माहौल ĢÎतुत िकया, ËयवÎथाएं दीं, बजट िदया। महोदय, हम ऐसे Ģधान मंतर्ी का भी 
वंदन और अि
भनंदन करते हȅ। हम चाँद क े पार जा चुक े हȅ। हम ऐसे चाँद क े पार गए हȅ, िजस पर 
िंहदुÎतान क े साथ अभी तक तीन और देशȗ ने सॉÄट लȅिंडग की थी, लेिकन चाँद क े पार जाकर 
साउथ पोल तक पहुँचने का काम हमारे देश क े साइंिटÎट्स ने चंदर्यान-3 को पहुँचा कर िकया है। 
यह क ेवल और क ेवल भारत ने िक
या है और भारत क े िलए यह बहुत गवर् की बात है। हम सभी 
लोग इस बात से बहुत गौरवािन्वत होते हȅ।  
 महोदय, चंदर्यान-3  चंदर्
यान-2 क े बाद बना।  चंदर्यान-2  क े समय जब देश ने देखा िक 
िकन्हीं तकनीकी कारणȗ से वह अंितम Îथल तक नहीं पहुंच सका, तो उस समय क े इसरो क े 
डायरेक्टर,  डा. क े. िसवन साहब जब आँसुओं से िवÏवल हुए थे, तब उनके  क ं धे पर हा थ रखने 
का काम इस देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी ने िकया था। उन्हȗने साइंिटÎट्स का हौसला बढ़ाया िक 
वैज्ञािनकȗ, हम तुÇहारे साथ हȅ और चƺान की तरह तुÇहारे पीछे खड़े हȅ, तुम आगे बढ़ो, हम 
चंदर्यान की सफलता को भी देखȂगे। चंदर्यान-3 क े इस क
ािन्फ़गरेशन क े  िलए िमशन Ģोफाइल 
तैयार की गई। चंदर्यान-3 को ĢॉपÊशन मॉǹ ूल, लȅडर और रोवर मॉǹ ूल से कािन्फ़गर िकया 
गया है। इसके  Ģाथिमक उǈेÌय हȅ - चंदर्मा की सतह पर सुरिक्षत लȅिंडग, चंदर्मा की सतह पर 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
105

 
 
घूमना और यथाÎथान वैज्ञािनक Ģयोगȗ का दुिनया से पिरचय कराना। चंदर्यान-3 की लȅिंडग 
भारत की Îवदेशी तकनीकी शिƪ का Ģदशर्न करती है,  इसकी वैज्ञािनक मनोवृिǄ को नई शिƪ 
Ģदान करती है। चंदर्मा पर लȅिंडग की सफलता क े साथ हमȂ उÇम ीद  है िक अंतिरक्ष क े क्षेतर् मȂ 
भारत की क ंपिनयाँ नए िसरे से आगे बढ़Ȃगी। अन्वेषक, घटक, िनमार्ण, नेिवगेशन, मैिंपग, 
अवलोकन डेटा जैसी अन्य िविभन्न गितिविधयाँ भी इसमȂ शािमल हȅ। चंदर्यान-3 क े सफल समापन 
से भिवÍय क े सहयोगी िमशनȗ और अंति
रक्ष अन्वेषणȗ मȂ लगे अन्य देशȗ क े साथ भारत की 
साझेदारी क े ǎार खुलȂगे और भारत वैिÌवक अंतिरक्ष पहलȗ मȂ सिकर्य रूप  से भाग ले सके गा। 
भारत दुिनया को भिवÍय क े गहन अंति रक्ष अन्वेषणȗ मȂ योगदान दे सकता है।  
महोदय, िसतंबर, 2015 मȂ राÍटर्ीय बैठक क े बाद अंतिरक्ष ĢौǏोिगिकयȗ का उपयोग साठ 
मंतर्ालयȗ तक बढ़ाया गया। यह पहले क ेवल क ु छ मंतर्ालयȗ तक ही सीिमत था, लेिकन अब 
औǏोिगक ĢौǏोिगिकयȗ का उपयोग साठ मंतर्ालयȗ तक बढ़ाया गया है। मनरेगा, 
पीएमजीएसवाई, पीएमके एसवाई, अमृत, पीएमएफबीवाई, Îवािमत्व और यूआईडीआईए आिद 
सभी जनभागी कायर्कर्म बेहतर Ģशासन क े िलए अंतिर
क्ष डेटा का उपयोग कर रहे हȅ। हमारे सूयर् 
िमशन, आिदत्य एल 1 ने अंतिर क्ष  से पहली सेÊफी भेज दी है और वह सूयर्देव क े चक्कर लगा रहा 
है। आिदत्य सूयर् क े कर्ोमोÎफीयर, कोरोनो और हेिलयोÎफीयर मȂ उसके  Ģभाव का अध्ययन कर 
रहा है। यह सौर वायु और ज्वालाओं पर भी नज़र रख रहा है, तािक हमारी अंतिरक्ष संपिǄ 
सुरिक्षत रह सके । मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से भ
ारतीय अंतिरक्ष अनुसंधान संगठन अथार्Þ इसरो को 
देश क े महत्वाकांक्षी िमशन गगनयान क े िलए भी शुभकामनाएं देता हूं, जो हमारे देश का पहला 
मानव िमशन होगा।  
 हालाँिक वह पहले अन-मैन्ड जाएगा, िजसमȂ अंति
रक्ष यातर्ा करने वाली Ëयोमिमतर् नाम की 
ǩूमनॉइड मिहला रोबोट जाएगी, उसके  बाद मानव रिहत और अंत मȂ मानव िमशन सफल होगा।  
ऐसे मȂ भारत की अंति रक्ष उपलिÅधयȗ पर संसद मȂ बोलना मेरे िलए एक गवर् की बात है, क्यȗिक पूरे 
िवÌव मȂ लोग इसी मुǈे पर बात कर रहे हȅ।  आज पूरा िवÌव यह जानने को बेताब है िक आिखर 
ऐसी कौन सी जादू की छड़ी हाथ लग गई, िजसका भारत ने उपयोग करके  िपछले 9 वषș मȂ 
अंतिर
क्ष की ओर इतनी लंबी छलांग लगाई। अगर हम भारत की अंतिरक्ष मȂ लगाई गई इस छलांग 
का िवÌलेषण करȂ, तो हम देखते हȅ िक इसरो की कािबिलयत और माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ मोदी सरकार की राजन
ीितक इच्छाशिƪ ने बड़ा काम िकया है।  आज वतर्मान क ेन्दर् 
सरकार क े कायर्काल मȂ पूरा भारत अपने सामथ्यर् क े साथ आगे बढ़ रहा है, तो इसिलए िक 
सरकार ने उसे अपने सामथ्यर् का सदुपयोग करने क े िलए उिचत माहौल उपलÅध कराया है। 
हमारे यहाँ चंदर्यान-3 से पहले की यह बात है, 
 
"रख कर चाँद क े उस पार कदम, 
आज हम इि
तहास बना दȂगे, 
और िजनको शक था हमारी कािबिलयत पर, 
आज उन सबको गवाह बना दȂगे।" 
 
आज चंदर्यान की सफलता क े िलए सारा िवÌ
व भारत का गवाह बना हुआ है। 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 महोदय, वतर्मान क ेन्दर् सरकार ने 2014 क े बाद से Îपेस सेक्टर क े बजट मȂ 150 Ģितशत 
की वृिǉ की है।  वतर्मान क ेन्दर् सरकार क े कायर्काल मȂ भारत क े Îपेस सेक्टर मȂ सफलता की 
कहानी चंदर्मा पर पहुँचने िजतनी ही िदलच Îप और उÊलेखनीय भी है।  भारत ने चंदर्मा क े दिक्षणी 
धर्ुव पर उतरने वाला पहला देश बन कर जो इितहास बनाया है, वह मोदी सरकार ǎारा िकए गए 
क ु छ ऐितहािसक सुधारȗ और इसरो को क ेन्दर् से िमलने वाले समथर्न क े कारण ही संभव हो पाया 
है।  इसमȂ उनका यह योगदान है।  इसके  िलए हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी और हमारे महान वैज्ञािनकȗ को 
िजतना धन्यवाद िदया जाए, उतना कम है। 
 महोदय, कभी पहले हम, कभी पहले तुम, यह तो चलता ही रहेगा।  इसरो ने 2014 से 
पहले क ेवल 35 िवद ेशी उपगर्ह लॉन्
च िकए थे।  ध्यान रिखए, 2014  से पहले क ेवल 35 िवद ेशी 
उपगर्ह लॉन्च िकए गए थे और 2014 क े बाद इन 9 सालȗ मȂ 389, यानी एक कम 390, 389 उपगर्ह 
लॉन्च िकए गए हȅ। इन उपगर्हȗ क े लॉन्च करने से भारत क े इसरो को 3,300 करोड़  रुपए  की 
आमदनी भी हुई है। यह काम 9 सालȗ मȂ हुआ है।  60 सालȗ मȂ जो 35 थे, िपछले 9 सालȗ मȂ 389 हुए 
हȅ। 
 महोदय, सरकार ने अंतिरक्ष िवभाग क े िलए बजटीय आवंटन, जो 2013-14 मȂ 5,615 
करोड़ रुपए  था, उसको बढ़ा कर 2023-24 मȂ 12,543 करोड़ िकया है, यानी तीन गुना िकया है।   
 महोदय, अंतिरक्ष मȂ भारत की सफलत
ा की कहानी को समझने क े िलए हमȂ क ेन्दर् सरकार 
क े उन 6 मागर्दशर्क िसǉांतȗ को सम झना  होगा, जो 6 मागर्दशर्क िसǉांत सरकार ने रखे।  वे 
मागर्दशर्क िसǉांत हȅ: पहला, िनजी उǏमȗ को सक्षम बनाना; दूसरा, Îवतंतर् अंतिरक्ष गितिविधयȗ 
को बढ़ावा देना; तीसरा, इसरो क े बुिनयादी ढाँचे और ĢौǏोिगकी को मजबूत करना; चौथ ा, 
सावर्जिनक क्षेतर् को अनुसंधान और िवकास कायș क े िलए संसाधन उपलÅध कराना; पाँचवाँ, 
अंतिरक्ष संपिǄयȗ क े िवकास क े िलए माँग संचािलत दृिÍटकोण अपनाना और छठा, युवाओं को 
बड़े सपने देखने क े िलए Ģेिरत कर ना।   इसके  साथ ही, भारतीय अंतिरक्ष नीित, 2023 को मंजूरी 
देना।  2022 मȂ भारतीय अंतिरक्ष नीित बनी थी, 2023 मȂ इसकी मंजूरी हुई।  भारतीय अंतिरक्ष संघ 
क े साथ आईएन-एसपीएसीई का गठन करना, ये क ु छ ऐसे कदम हȅ।  क ेन्दर् सरकार ने 201 9 मȂ न्यू 
Îपेस इंिडया िलिमटेड का गठन िकया।  इसका काम भारतीय अंतिरक्ष कायर्कर्मȗ का Ģचार और 
वािणिज्यक दोहन है।  न्यू Îपेस इंिडया िलिमटेड का गठन भी एक मील का पत्थर सािबत हुआ है। 
 महोदय, वषर् 2017 मȂ पीए सएलवी  सी-37 ǎारा एक साथ 104 उपगर्ह छोड़ कर पूरी दुिनया 
मȂ भारत ने िरकॉडर् बनाया है।  2017 मȂ पीएसएलवी सी-37 ने 104 उपगर्ह छोड़े और यह िवÌव 
िरकॉडर् बना, जो भारत क े नाम दजर् है।  इस Ģकार भारत की Îपेस यातर्ा मȂ इन 9 सालȗ मȂ ये बड़े 
काम हुए।   
 महोदय, सरकार क े इन Ģयासȗ से 2023 तक  अंतिरक्ष Îटाटर्अÃस की संख्या 140 हो गई 
है, जो पहले 4 थी।  अंतिर
क्ष क े क्षेतर् मȂ क ु ल 4 Îटाटर्अÃस थे, जबिक इन 9 सालȗ मȂ 140 Îटाटर्अÃ स  
शुरू  हुए हȅ।  आज अंतिरक्ष उǏोग का िवÎतार 16 िबिलयन डॉलर हो गया है।  इस िवÎतार क े 40 
िबिलयन डॉलर की बात हुई और अन्य देश क े लोग इसके  100 िबिलयन डॉलर तक की बात कर 
रहे हȅ।  इस Ģकार भारत अपनी अंतिरक्ष यातर् ा को माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ आगे बढ़ा रहा है।   
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
107

 
 
 महोदय, िपछले 9 वषș मȂ भारत सरकार ने बड़ी संख्या मȂ युवाओं को अंतिरक्ष जगत से 
जोड़ा है। हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने देश क े युवाओं को हमेशा से बड़े सपने देखने क े िलए Ģेिरत 
िकया है। जब देश क े युवाओं ने अंतिरक्ष क े सपने देखने शुरू  िकए, तो उन्हȂ उिचत संसाधन 
उपलÅध करा कर सरकार ने उनके  सपन
ȗ को पंख िदए।  आप सबको जान कर आÌचयर् होगा िक 
एसएसएलवी डी2 से 3 उपगर्ह लॉन्च हुए और इन तीनȗ की लॉिंन्चग मȂ 750 छातर्ाओं ने योगदान 
िदया।  यह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े युवाओं को Ģोत्सािहत करने क े कारण हुआ है।   महोदय, िपछले 
वषș मȂ अंत
िरक्ष िवज्ञान से जुड़े देश क े अलग-अलग संÎथानȗ मȂ 603 छातर्ȗ ने एडिमशन िलया और 
इन छातर्ȗ को  100 परसȂट ÃलेसमȂट की गारंटी दी गई।  ये संÎथान ितर्वȂदर्म, जÇमू और अगरतला 
मȂ हȅ।  भावी अंतिर
क्ष वैज्ञािनकȗ की नई पौध तैयार हो, इस िदशा मȂ यह क ेन्दर् सरकार का एक बड़ा 
कदम है।  यह है दूरदृिÍट!   
 महोदय, वतर्मान मȂ भारत वैिÌवक अंतिर
क्ष अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ 2 से 3 Ģितशत का योगदान 
देता है और आगे आने वाले 5-6 साल मȂ अंतिरक्ष अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ भारत एक महाशिƪ बन जाएगा।  
भारत अब ना सा क े नेतृत्व वाले समूह से जुड़ गया है।  अब नासा और भारत िमल कर एक साथ 
कई अंतिरक्ष खोजȗ पर काम कर रहे हȅ।  इससे एयरोÎपेस और िडफȂ स सेक्टर को भी बड़ा लाभ 
होगा।  चंदर्यान-3 की सफ लता  से ही अंतिरक्ष अनुसंधान, इंजीिनयिंरग और संचार क े क्षेतर् को 
बड़ा लाभ िमलने जा रहा है।  मेससर् Îकाईरूट एयरोÎपेस Ģाइवेट िलिमटेड, हैदराबाद ǎारा एक 
सब-ऑिर्बटल लॉन्च Ëहीकल, िवकर्म-एस ( ĢारÇभ िमशन) का Ģक्षेपण 18 नवंबर, 2022 को 
सफलतापूवर्क संपन्न हुआ।  िव
कर्म-एस का Ģक्षेपण भारत और दिक्षण एिशया मȂ लॉन्च िकया गया 
पहला िनजी तौर पर िनिर्मत रॉके ट बन कर भारतीय अंतिरक्ष क्षेतर् क े इितहास मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् 
अध्याय है।  यह Ģाइवेट क्षेतर् से है।  भारत ने इसक ो Ģमोट िकया है।   
 महोदय, अंतिरक्ष मȂ भारत की सफलता का लाभ पूरी मानवता को िमलेगा, ऐसा वादा 
हमारे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने िकया है।  हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा है िक भारत समÎत 
मानव जाित की भलाई क े िलए खोज, सीखना और जानकारी को साझा करना जारी रखेगा।  
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ 2015 मȂ राÍटर्ीय बैठक क े बाद अंति
रक्ष ĢौǏोिगिकयȗ का 
उपयोग 60 मं तर्ालयȗ तक बढ़ाया गया है, जबिक यह पहले क ेवल 20 मं तर्ालयȗ तक ही सीिमत 
था।  जैसा Îवयं Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का मत है िक Ģेिरत कायर्बल, Îवदेशी क्षम
ताएँ और उत्साहजनक 
माहौल मȂ भारत क े अंतिरक्ष क्षेतर् क े िलए अवसर असीिमत हȅ, इसिलए इसमȂ न क ेवल घरेलू, 
बिÊक िवÌ
वËयापी बाजार मȂ भी तेजी से Ģवेश करने की क्षमता है।   
 महोदय, अंत मȂ मȅ सदन को बड़े ही गवर् क े साथ कहता हूँ िक हम दुिनया की तीसरी सबसे 
बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनने जा रहे हȅ और साथ ही हम दुिनया की सबसे बड़ ी अंतिरक्ष अथर्ËयवÎथाओं 
क े समूह मȂ भी शािमल होने की िदशा मȂ तेजी से आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ।  इसिलए मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से 
और Îवयं अपनी तरफ से इस देश क े वैज्ञािनकȗ को चंदर्यान-3 की सफल सॉÄट लȅिंड ग और 
वैज्ञािनक अनुसंधान क े िलए बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूँ और देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी का धन्यवाद करता 
हूँ िक उन्हȗने इस देश मȂ ऐसा वातावरण बनाया।  बहुत-बहुत धन् यवाद। 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMA R (Andhra Pradesh):  Hon. Vice-
Chairman, Sir, I am very thankful to you for giving me this opportunity to participate in 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the discussion on India's glorious space journey marked by the successful soft 
landing of Chandrayaan-3. 
 Sir, August 23 rd of this year is a remarkable and historic day for India.  The 
scientists of ISRO were succe ssful in making Chandrayaan-3 's lander to land on the 
Moon's Southern Pole.  After that, the rover started its journey to undertake research 
at the designated place. 
 The successful launch of Chandrayaan- 3 made India the fourth country after 
Russia, USA and China to make successful soft landing on the Moon.  Landing of the 
lander and sending the rover to study the southern region of the planet is a unique 
achievement that India has made. 
  The first two missions, namely, Ch andrayaan-1 and Chandrayaan-2 did not 
give desired results. Chandrayaan-2 wa s almost going to be successful.  
Unfortunately, we lost communication with th e satellite.  The visionary scientist, Dr. 
Vikram Sarabhai, made all-round efforts to make ISRO as a force to reckon with.  
 Chandrayaan-3 was launched with the Launch Vehicle Mark-III.  Whenever 
there is a mention about launch vehicles, one cannot forget the contribution made by 
Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam, who had been a rocket  scientist in the ISRO and later became 
the President of India.  It was due to his tireless and sustained efforts that India had 
its own launch vehicles of varying types.  He is considered as  the pioneer in SLV 
(Satellite Launch Vehicles).  In order to gi ve a befitting recognit ion to him, he was 
elected as the President of India.  It is al so an important point to be noted that our 
Party leader, Shri N. Chandr ababu Naidu, played a pivo tal role in suggesting the 
candidature of late Dr. Abdul Kalam and ensuring his victory in the election.   
 From its humble beginning to its presen t status and mammoth launching site at 
Sriharikota in my native State, Andhra Prad esh, the ISRO has made  great leaps.  In 
the recent past, India has become more desi red destination for lunch of satellites.  
Almost all the countries throughout the world are seeing India as a desired 
destination and the ISRO as their truste d partner. I take this opportunity to 
congratulate the scientists, the Project He ad of Chandrayaan-3 and others for their 
grand success.   
 On this occasion, I have to discharge my duty.  My friend, Shri V. Vijayasai 
Reddy, has made irrelevant and irrespon sible comments on my leader and TDP 
President.  My friend and his Chief Minister, Shri Jagan Mohan Reddy, 
†   
 
                   
† Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
109

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please stick to the topic. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR:   In view of the CBI and ED cases, † 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please stick to the topic.  
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR:  They alleged that as the then Chief 
Minister of Andhra Pradesh, he sanc tioned skill development project and an 
expenditure of Rs.371 crores was incurred.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please stick to the topic. 
...(Interruptions)...  
  
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: 
† 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Mr. Ravindrakumar, please 
speak on the subject. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: An other important issue is that case 
against Shri Chandrababu Naidu has no relevant documents. ...(Interruptions)...  
CBI and ED are investigating against them and they are accused.(Time-bell rings.)
 †  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Now, Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR:   In order to divert the attention of the 
public, a false case has been framed  against Shri Chandrababu Naidu.  
...(Interruptions)...   
     
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Now, Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
                   
 
† Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO (Uttar Pradesh):  Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, the whole 
nation is elated on the success of Chandr ayaan-3 and I rise to congratulate the 
scientists for the success of Chandrayaan-3.  I would also like to congratulate the 
hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, for providing leadership to the success of 
our space agenda and also fo r the encouragement to the scientists.  I think one 
statistics, that will surprise everyone is the budget with which we have achieved the 
success of Chandrayaan-3.  We have spen t only Rs.600 crores on Chandrayaan-3 
Mission, while Russia, which launched thei r lunar mission around the same time, 
which did not succeed, had spent Rs.16,000 crores.  So, that tells us how cost-
effectively we have launched our space mission.   
 In the speeches of some of our Oppositi on friends, particularly Shri Jairam 
Ramesh, rather than elation, I saw a sense of disappointment and jhalak of jealousy.  
I think they seem to somehow not join the whole country in this celebratory mode.  
They said that the space journey did not be gin in 2014.  We have never made that 
claim.  This Government has never made the claim that the space journey began only 
in 2014, but for the Congress Party, the jour ney begins with one family and ends with 
one family.  I was a little disappointed that Shri Jairam Ramesh...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): One minute; Shrimati Jaya 
Bachchan ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO:  Sir, I am not yielding. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜीमती जया बƳन ( उǄर Ģदेश): सर, मȅ जयराम रमेश जी को बधाई देती हूं िक िजतनी बार 
इनकी पाटीर् क े सदÎयȗ ने Ģधान मंतर्ी का नाम िलया, उतनी बार इनका नाम भी ले 
िलया।...(Ëयवधान)..  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPE
RSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Narasimha Rao ji, please 
continue.  
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO: Sir, I am disappointed that Shri Jairam Ramesh 
forgot to take the name of Dr. Manmohan  Singh, in whose Government he was a 
Minister. How can anyone be so ungrateful?  He even did not take the name of Shri 
P.V. Narasimha Rao, who was the Prime Mi nister when Shri Jairam Ramesh made 
his political debut.  ...(Interruptions)...  I think, for the Congre ss Party, they have a 
different G-20 slogan. Our G-20 slogan is: 'One Earth; One Family; One Future'.   
For the Congress Party, their slogan is...(Interruptions)...  Please, listen.  I think you 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
111

 
 
will be happy to listen to this. The Congress Party's slogan is: 'One Family; One Past; 
One Future'.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please stick to the issue. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO:  The Cong ress Party's slogan is: 'One Family; One 
Past; One Future'.  It starts with one family and it ends with one family.  So, we have 
to see how our hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, gave a strong impetus to 
the space programme of this country. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Mr. Narasimha Rao, please stick 
to the issue.  
 
S H R I  G . V . L .  N A R A S I M H A  R A O :   H e  h a d  m a d e  i t  c l e a r  o n  h o w  h e  g a v e  a  h u g e  
impetus to the space programme.  Look at the transition of this country.   The 
Congress Party claims that it's  all a continuum.  It is not just a continuum.  In 2014, 
we were one of the five weakest economies  i n  t h e  w o r l d .   W e  w e r e  a m o n g s t  t h e  
'fragile five'. ...(Interruptions)...  We were called one of the five fragile economies of 
the world, and today, we are the fifth largest economy of the world.  So, certainly, on 
what the Congress claims, I would say that their claims are completely absurd and 
not based on reality. This country's real journey, the real development, the speed 
and the scale have started only after 2014.   
 Sir, we all know the dict um that success has many fath ers; failure has none.   
In today's context, it is even more releva nt.  The Bill relating to women's reservation 
was introduced earlier also and we saw the Congress Party claiming, यह हमारा बेबी है। 
If it was your baby, why did you not nurture the baby between 2010 and 2014? 
...(Interruptions)... So, the Congress Party has only 
† claims to make and it does 
not have the real achievements. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Hon. Members, it is already 6.00 
p.m.  If the House approves, we will continue till the debate ends. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Right, Sir. 
 
                   
†Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN): Okay.  Please continue. 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO: Sir, Modiji is not a politician like the politicians which 
the country has seen in the past.  He is truly a statesman.  ... (Time-bell rings.)...  
That is the reason why afte r the Chandrayaan-2, he moti vated the scientists.  After 
the loss of contact of Chandrayaan-2 with lander Vikram, the Prime Minister said, 
"We are with you; the country is with you.  Every obstacle teaches us something 
new.  It inspires us to do more." 
   
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO: Hon. Prime Minister further said, "There is no failure 
in science. There are only experiments and efforts." This is what a true statesman 
would say.    
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO: Sir, please give me three more minutes.  I have a 
few more important points to make. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  You have already taken extra 
time.  Please conclude. 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO: As part of Atmanirbhar Vision, the Government 
came up with the New Space Policy, which allowed participation of the private sector 
and massive investments.  We came up wi th what is called the Indian Space Policy - 
भारतीय अंतिरक्ष नीित, 2023.  This policy clearly outlined the vision of the country.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO: It created the institutional framework, it provided an 
ecosystem for the space industry to flourish. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SE N):  Next speaker is Shri Binoy 
Viswam.  
  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
113

 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO: Sir, let me conclude by saying that a spurious 
dichotomy was sought to be drawn between nationalism and development.  It is not 
a dichotomy.   
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM (Kerala): Sir, on beha l f  o f  t h e  C o m m u n i s t  P a r t y  o f  I n d i a ,  I  
salute the scientists, the employees and the workers who shed their tears, blood and 
sweat for the success of Chan drayaan-3.  Sir, Chandrayaan -3, of course, is a great 
victorious moment for the country and for the whole world, I should say.  But before I 
come to that part, let me make a point and bring it on record.  It is regarding the 
incident that happened day be fore yesterday, that is, on the last day in the old 
building.  On that day, when the House was discussing the 75-year journey of the 
Indian Parliament, the Communist Party of India, the TDP and the RLD were not 
allowed to speak.  SP was also denied time  and the TMC also was given half of the 
time.   Sir, is this the proper way to run a meaningful Parliament? We talk about great 
things when it comes to taking action, we  forget it.  So, with all seriousness, I 
register my protest in the House.   
 Sir, I remember the moment when a world-renowned scientist Dr. Vikram 
Sarabhai went to a Bishop in Trivandrum.  His name was Bishop Pereira.  Dr. Vikram 
Sarabhai went to Thumba because of its geographical importance.  It is on the 
equator and it has got some magnitude, wh ich has got some relevance for scientific 
launching.  His plea was to a llow him to build a launching base near the church.  The 
Bishop said, "I cannot reply on my own.  Please give me some time.  Please come 
tomorrow.  I will have a meeting with my people here."  Next day in the morning, 
when he went there, there was a big gather ing.  To that gathering, Bishop Pereira 
said, "He is a world-renowned scientist and he has come with a request that he 
needs some space from our property to have a scientific centre for launching a rocket 
from here for the country's future."  He  asked them, "What do you say?"  The 
common people, the fishermen, after one minute silence, said in one voice, 'Amen'!, 
which means, 'We are for that'.  That was the beginning of Thumba rocket launching 
station.  I had the honour and privilege to visit that centre many a times.  I know many 
of them right from Somanath.  Taking all th e names is not possible.  I know many of 
them very closely.  All of them are my friend s.  They are a very go od team of people.  
They are dedicated and committed for science and the country, and, their 
contribution is invaluable.   They have made  a record.  That reco rd is the record of 
human endeavour - collective and dedicated .  I am sorry to hear that all those 
achievements of those people and the scient ists to be minimised to the name of a 
single man.  I know our Prime Minister is great but, I do not think that singing glories 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
for the Prime Minister all the time while ta lking about Chandrayaan is not a scientific 
way of dealing with things.  So, I register my views with regard to this also. 
 Sir, science is for what?  Science is for progress, for social progress and also 
for the progress of the mankind.  ISRO has proved that it has the ability to help the 
country in so many ways. I remember, ma ny years ago, when I was the Forest 
M i n i s t e r  o f  K e r a l a ,   w e  d i s cussed with them the issue of forest fires.  One of their 
teams came to the forest headquarters and we  sat with them for two, three hours.  
(Time-bell rings ) Last time also, our Party was denied the opportunity to speak.  
Today, also I have just started. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):   You have alread y taken your five 
minutes.  Please conclude.   
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM: I myself experienced  that ISRO team helped the forest 
department of Kerala to find a possible solution to prevent the forest fires.  In such a 
way, in many aspects of human life, science can help us. ISRO is doing that help.  In 
this regard, the issue of funds given to th e ISRO has to be considered seriously but 
that part is being neglected by the Government.   I request the Government to please 
take it up seriously and ensure that the f unds provided to ISRO are increased as that 
great institution has to do a lot for the country and its future.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Please conclude. 
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM: India is a country wi th great advancements but a country of 
poor people.  Its people are poor.  Sir, one per cent of the population is still 
controlling 80 per cent of the wealth of the co untry.  In such a situation, we need the 
people of the country to be fed properly.  They have the right to education and the 
right to employment, and, for such rights, sc ience can play a great role and that role 
has to be emphasized. In the name of science, sometimes, we promote 
superstitions. The Government has come to a conclusion that we can replace 
science with superstition. I emphatically say, science is science, it is not superstition.  
If I talk about cow dung, I know its importance but it is not the fuel for the progress of 
the country.  I can tell you one more thing.  Science is most important than anything 
else but what was said today. We are going to the priests to decide the time for 
launching.  It may not be good.  Science and not other ways of doing things can help 
us.  We believe that the Government has to learn from ISRO.  ISRO will help the 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
115

 
 
G o v e r n m e n t  t o  f u n c t i o n  i n  a  s c i e n t i f i c  w a y .  G i v e  t h e m  t h e  f r e e d o m  t o  w o r k  
scientifically and properly for doing things.  Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SANTANU SEN):  Thank you.  Now, Shri Arun 
Singh. 
 
Ǜी अरुण िंसह ( उǄर Ģदेश): सर, आपने मुझे बोलने क े िलए मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका 
धन्यवाद।  
(सभापित महोदयपीठासीन हुए ।) 
 
सर, सभी देशवासी, छोटे कÎबे से लेकर गली-मुहÊले तक सभी लोग 23 अगÎत को सायं 
6 बजे टीवी पर आँख गड़ा कर यह देख रहे थे िक अब चंदर्यान-3 की सॉÄट लȅिंडग होगी। वे मन 
मȂ यह सोच रहे थे िक इसकी सॉÄट लȅिंडग होगी या नहीं होगी या यह क ै से होगी। उस समय सभी 
क े मन मȂ इसको लेकर उत्सुकता थी। यह सभी ने देखा िक जब चंदर्यान-3 की सॉÄट लȅिंडग हुई, 
तो कÌमीर से कन्याकु मारी तक च
ारȗ िदशाओं मȂ पटाखे फ ू टे, लोगȗ ने िमठाइयाँ बाँटी। सभी 
देशवािसयȗ ने एकजुटता क े साथ, हषȘÊल ास  क े साथ इस उपलिÅध क े िलए साइंिटÎट्स को भी 
बधाई दी और Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का भी इसके  िलए अिभनन्दन िकया।  
सर, यह बहुत अच्छा हुआ िक सरकार ने आज आपके  माध्यम से संसद मȂ इसके  ऊपर 
चचार् करने क े िलए एजȂडा रखा। यह इसिलए भी जरूरी था िक देश क े कोने-कोने तक लोगȗ को 
इसके  बारे मȂ जानकारी िमले। चूँिक हमȂ ध्यान है िक जब इसकी लȅिंडग हुई, तो राजÎथान मȂ 
काँगर्ेस सरकार क े एक मंतर्ी ने यह िलखा िक चंदर्यान-3 की लȅिंडग मȂ जो तीन साइंिटÎट्स गए 
थे, उन्हȗने सुरिक्षत लȅिंडग की। उनक
ो यह भी मालूम नहीं था िक उसमȂ साइंिटÎट नहीं गए थे। वे 
राजÎथान सरकार क े मंतर्ी थे।...(Ëयवधान)... यह ऑन िरकॉडर् है। इसिलए आज जब इस पर 
चचार् हो रही है, तो देशवािसयȗ को संसद क े माध्यम से इसके  बारे मȂ अि
धक-से-अिधक जानकारी 
िमलेगी। हम इसके  िलए सरकार का अिभनन्दन करते हȅ।  
मान्यवर, यह वाÎतव मȂ गौरवािन्वत करने वाली उपलिÅध है, एक ऐितहािसक उपलिÅध है। 
यह कोई सामान्य उपलिÅध नहीं है। हमारे पूवर् वƪा
ओं ने भी कहा िक अमेिरका, रूस , चीन क े 
साथ हम भी िविशÍट क्लब मȂ शािमल हो गए। इसके  साथ ही भारत साउथ पोल पर जाने वाला 
पहला देश बना। जहाँ रूस  और चीन ने हजारȗ क
रोड़ रुपए  खचर् करके  'लूना-25' तथा Chang'e 
4 lunar mission बनान े का काम िकया, वहीं हमारे देश मȂ यह भी ऐितहािसक ही होगा िक 
चंदर्यान-3 क े िलए 960 करोड़  रुपए  का बजट था, लेिकन वह 613 करोड़ रुपए  मȂ ही पूरा हो 
गया। मȅ इस
के  िलए साइंिटÎट्स को ढेर सारी बधाइयाँ देता हूँ और उनका अिभनन्दन भी करता 
हूँ। यह इसिलए भी ऐितहािसक उपलिÅध है क्यȗिक हम कहते हȅ िक 2047 मȂ भारत िवकिसत 
भारत होगा। हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने आÏवान िक या है िक 2047 मȂ भारत िवकिसत भारत होगा। 
उसके  िलए भी यह बहुत बड़ी उपलिÅध है, क्यȗिक िरसचर् और डेवलपमȂट क े िबना कोई भी देश 
आगे नहीं बढ़ सकता, चाहे अमेिरका हो, यूक े हो या यूरोिपयन क ंटर्ीज हȗ। अगर उनकी आिर्थक 
Ģगित हुई है, तो वह िरस
चर् और डेवलपमȂट क े आधार पर ही हुई है। वे िरसचर् और डेवलपमȂट क े 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
आधार पर ही आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ। हमारे देश मȂ काँगर्ेस क े शासन काल मȂ इसके  बारे मȂ ध्यान ही नहीं 
िदया गया। ये Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी हȅ, िजनकी नीितयȗ और दूरदिर्शता क े कारण, जो भारत 2014 
मȂ 10 वीं अथर्ËयवÎथा था, आज वह पाँचवीं अथर्ËयवÎथा है और 2027 तक भारत तीसरी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा बन जाएगा तथा 2047 तक भारत पूणर् रूप  से िवक
िसत भारत हो जाएगा। यह उनके  
संकÊप को भी िसिǉ मȂ बदलने का काम करेगा।  
यह इसिलए भी गौरवशाली और ऐितहािसक उपलिÅध है, क्यȗिक इसके  िजत ने भी पाट्सर् 
व इिक्वपमȂट्स हȅ, वे 'मेक इन इंिडया' क े तहत भारत मȂ बनाए गए हȅ। क ु छ पाट्सर् को एचएएल ने 
बनाया, क ु छ को भेल ने बनाया। इस तरह से अलग-अलग क ंपिनयȗ ने इसके  पाट्सर् बनाए, 
इसिलए ' मेक इन इंिडया' क े माध्यम से यह पूणर् रूप  से Îवदेशी है। चूँिक इसमȂ नट-बोÊट्स से 
लेकर सब क ु छ Îवदेशी है, इसिलए भार
त क े िलए यह बहुत ऐितहािसक उपलिÅध है। इससे क्या 
लाभ होगा? मान्यवर, इसके  माध्यम से बहुत बड़ा लाभ होगा। ...( समय की घं
टी)... सर, 15 
िमनट का समय है या 5 िमनट का समय है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: फाइव िमनट्स। 
 
Ǜी अरुण िंसह: सर, इसके  माध्यम से Îपेस रेवेन्यू का लाभ होगा। इसके  माध्यम से हमारे िडफȂ स 
सेक्टर का एक्सपो
टर् काफी बढ़ेगा और आयात भी कम होगा। हमȂ इससे Îटाटर्अÃस क े माध्यम से 
'आर एंड डी' क े क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत बेिनिफट्स होने वाले हȅ। हमȂ इससे Îटाटर्अÃस, टेक्नोलॉजी और 
'मेक इन इंिडया' क े िलए बहुत Ģोत्साहन िमलेगा।  
अंत मȂ, मȅ इतना ही कहना चाहूँगा िक यह तभी संभव होता है, जब ऐसा नेतृत्व हो, जो 
भरोसेमंद हो, िजस पर लोगȗ का िव Ìवास  हो, जो लोकिĢय हो, जो िनणर्य लेने वाला हो और 
त्यागी तथा तपÎवी भी हो। ऐसा नेतृत्व क ेवल नरेन्दर् मोदी जी मȂ है, इसीिलए यह सब संभव हो रहा 
है और िदन-Ģितिदन इितहास क े पन्नȗ मȂ एक-एक उपलिÅध Îविर्णम अक्षरȗ मȂ िलखी जा रही है, 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shrimati Vandana Chavan.   
 
SHRIMATI VANDANA CHAVAN (
Maharashtra):  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Madam, you have three minutes.   
 
SHRIMATI VANDANA CHAVAN:  Yes, Sir.  I will try.   
At the outset, I would like to thank you for having taken up this discussion that 
marks the successful landing of Chandray aan on the Moon.  As congratulatory 
messages were coming from far and wide, from different Heads of the States and 
various space organizations, it was in fitness of things that we discuss this issue here 
and express our heartfelt kudos to the scie ntists, experts and all others involved 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
117

 
 
directly and indirectly, who are responsible fo r this stellar achievement.  On behalf of 
the NCP, to the entire team, I would like t o  s a y ,  " Y o u  h a v e  m a d e  u s  i m m e n s e l y  
proud."  And we express our best wishes for more such successes.   
 Sir, we are all set to pass the Women's Reservation Bill tomorrow.  On the eve 
of this historical day, it would be noteworthy -- Nirmala ji has already mentioned it -- 
to observe, acknowledge and also celebra te the significant involvement of the 
women scientists and experts in this mission .  It is extremely encouraging that not 
only does the women force in ISRO constitute 20 to 25 per cent of the entire force of 
16,000 employees, but as we learn, 54 wo men played a very important role in this 
mission. Just to be on the record, which Nirmala ji has already said and I had also 
noted, I would like to take name of just fo ur scientists -- I am sure that there are 
many more -- Kalpana K., who is Associate Project Director; Nandini Harinath, 
Scientist and Operational Specialist; Anurad ha T.K., Scientist and Project Director; 
Ritu Srivastava, Senior Scientist.  Tiruchi Siva ji has also made an appeal that we 
make a register and all of us sign it.  I second that, Sir.  This is a moment of great 
pride for us.  These sisters have not only  contributed richly in the success of the 
mission, but have also instilled a sense of motivation, purpose and hope of fulfillment 
of aspirations for the young girls of India.   
Sir, as we celebrate the success of Chandrayaan and India's glorious space 
journey into the celestial space, I will be failin g in my duty if I do not pay my heartfelt 
tributes to India's two greatest scientists, Dr. Vikram Sarabhai and Dr. Homi Bhabha, 
who, in a way, laid the foundation of Indi a's science and technology revolution with 
their vision and foresight.  I will also be fa iling in my duty if I do  not mention the rich 
contribution of our first Prime Minister, Pand it Jawaharlal Nehru, who, in spite of the 
glaring challenges in our country, like po verty, unemployment, disease, disaster, 
enthusiastically supported scie ntific temper in our country,  and over the years, laid 
the foundation for establishment of several technical and scie ntific institutes, so also 
addressing subjects ranging from atomic en ergy to space science, earth sciences to 
astrophysics, genomics to nanotechnology, and the list can go on.  ( Time-bell 
rings.)  
My last point has already been voiced by many Members.  Sir, my only ask is -
- as many Members have also said and you ha ve also seconded or rather voiced that 
opinion -- that the budgetary allocation for R&D has to be increased, and I am sure 
that will happen.  Today, India has the lowest  allocation in the world.  U.S. spends 
2.9 per cent; Sweden spends 3.2 per cen t; Switzerland spends 3.4 per cent.  
Amongst the BRICS countries, we spend the least.  Therefore, Sir, it is very 
necessary that we address this issue for three reasons -- one is, more innovation will 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
happen; second, there will be less brain drain;  and thirdly, the Make in India will be 
converted to Made in India.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.   
 
SHRIMATI VANDANA CHAVAN:  Sir, allow me  just last one line.  There are many 
songs about the moon.  There is one song wh ich is very important and relevant here.  
I would like to say this and finish my speech. 
 
"ये चंदा रूस का न ये जापान का, 
न ये अमेिरकन Ãयारे, 
ये तो है िहन्दुÎतान का।" 
 
 Thank you very much, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri G.K. Vasan.  You have three minutes.   
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, today, I am very happy to join 140-plus crore 
Indians in thanking our honourable scientists  who have proved themselves.  It is their 
commitment, concentration, hard work an d intelligence that brought us name and 
fame at the international level and that too in the 75
th year of our independence.   
 Sir, India is equipped in the field of education, farming and healthcare.  Now 
we have proved ourselves in the space sector .  I would only like to congratulate all 
the scientists.  At the same time, being a proud Indian from Tamil Nadu, I would like 
to congratulate the Project director an d the Mission Managers who have been 
helping in this success from Tamil Nadu.  Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, जब भी वैज्ञािनक कोई बड़ा काम करते हȅ, उपलिÅध 
हािसल करते हȅ, तो वह सारी मानवता क े कÊयाण क े िलए ही होती है। उसे देश की सीमाओं क े 
अंदर नहीं बांधा जा सकता है। हमारे वैज्ञािनकȗ ने अभी जो काम िकया है, जो यह उपलिÅध है, 
कालांतर मȂ इसकी िरसचर् से जो िरजÊट्स आएंगे, मुझे उÇमीद है िक उनसे सारी दुिन
या क े लोग 
लाभांिवत हȗगे, इसिलए मȅ अपनी तरफ से, अपनी पाटीर् की तर फ से इसरो क े सारे वैज्ञािनकȗ को 
ǭदय से बधाई देता हूँ और यह कामना करता हूँ िक उनकी ये उपलिÅधयाँ आगे भी िनरंतर जारी 
रहȂ और बढ़ती रहȂ। इस अवसर पर अगर मȅ िजतेन्दर् िंसह जी, जो िक संबंिधत मंतर्ी हȅ, को बधाई न 
दूँ, तो यह भी उिचत नहीं होगा, क्यȗिक लीडरिशप तो कहीं-न-कहीं होती ही है। मȅ वैज्ञािनकȗ को 
एक और काम क े िलए भी बधाई देना चाहता हूँ िक उन्हȗने लȅडर का नाम 'िवकर्म' रखा।  
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
119

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I am on a point of fact.  Hon. Prime Minister is the Cabinet Minister 
for this Department. 
 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV:  That I know, Sir. 
   
MR. CHAIRMAN:   I am his student.  A student can always put across a situation.   
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: सर, बड़े पेड़ क े नीचे वाले पेड़ȗ को भी छाया िमलती रहनी चािहए, हवा 
िमलती रहनी चािहए। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: यह आपने बहुत ठीक कहा है। When our first Prime Minister, a giant of a 
person, was there, तब कहा गया था, 'Nothing grows under the b a n y a n  t r e e . '   I t  i s  
heartening to note िक यहाँ banyan tree क े नीचे डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह जी भी हȅ।   P
 lease go 
ahead.   
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: आप इन लोगȗ से क्या कहना चाहते हȅ? उनके  नीचे एक भी नहीं पनपȂगे!  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: अगर ऐसा होगा, तो चेयरमैन क े.. ...(Ëयवधान)... यह मुिÌकल हो जाएगी। 
 
Ģो. रा
म गोपाल यादव: हमारा टाइम ज़ीरो किरए। यह घड़ी वाला टाइम ज़ीरो किरए। 
 सर, नए सदन मȂ जो चचार् शुरू  हुई है, कायर्वाही शुरू  हुई है, यह लंबे असȃ क े बाद बहुत 
अच्छे तरीके  से शुरू  हुई है। आज जब इस पर बहस शुरू  हुई, तो इसे जयराम रमेश जी ने िजतना 
बिढ़या तरीके  से रखा और हमȂ और पूरे सदन को हमारे मंतर्ी जी की तरफ से िजतना ज्ञान िमला, 
that was a
 remarkable begi nning of the discussion.  हालांिक बाद मȂ यह िडरेल हो गया। 
इसमȂ बहुत ज्यादा राजनीित घुसेड़ने की जरूरत नहीं थी। वैज्ञािनकȗ क े िलए बात कर रहे हो और 
कहाँ से कहाँ चले जा रहे हो! 
 
Ǜी सभापित: Ģोफे सर साहब, अब आप राजनीित मȂ जा रहे हȅ। 
 
Ģो. रा
म गोपाल यादव: सर, अब आप हमȂ बीच मȂ िडÎटबर् मत किरए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज मȅ 
पाँच-छ: िमनट बोलूँगा, बीच मȂ घंटी मत बजाइगा। 
सर, यह बहस िजतनी बिढ़या तरीके  से शुरू  हुई थी, उसका अंत उतना ठीक नहीं था। 
क ु छ लोगȗ को यह नहीं मालूम है िक हमारे Ģध
ान मंतर्ी जी िकतने इंटेिलजȂट हȅ। वे सब जानते हȅ 
िक क्या बोल रहे हȅ, क्यȗ बोल रहे हȅ। मȅ एक उदाहरण देना चाहता हूँ। एक बार राज् य सभा मȂ नए 
सदÎयȗ की शपथ हो रही थी और हमारे बगल मȂ लालू जी बैठे थे। उनका एक क ȅिडडेट शपथ लेने 
क े िलए आया, तो मȅने कहा िक लालू जी, कल इसने पूरा ÃलाÎटर बांधा हुआ था और कह रहा था 
िक हम लालू जी की जमानत क े वƪ झारखंड गए थे, तो लाठीचाजर् मȂ मेरा पैर ट ू ट गया, लेिकन 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
आज यह सही चल रहा है। वे बोले िक राज्य सभा मȂ आने क े िलए कर रहा था। मȅने कहा िक िफर 
आपने इसे िटकट क्यȗ दी, तो इस पर वे बोले िक इसकी जाित का कोई बड़ा आदमी नहीं था, 
इसिलए देनी ही थी। इसे मजबूरी मȂ लाना पड़ा है। मȅ जानता हूँ िक वह बहुत बड़ा † था। मोदी जी 
सब जानते हȅ िक कौन क्या है। आप लोग ऐसी बातȂ मत िकया करो िक आपके  नेता को Îवयं लगे 
िक यह ज्यादा शिमȊदा कर रहा है। कई बार क ु छ लोग ऐसी बातȂ करते हȅ। यह कौन नहीं जानता 
है? उनके  िलए िजतना कहना चािह
ए, आप लोग उतना कह भी नहीं पाते हȅ, इसिलए मȅ कहता हूँ 
िक बहस को बहस तक ही रिखएगा। कई बार क ु छ लोग अपने नेता का अनावÌयक नाम लेकर 
उसे िववाद मȂ ले आते हȅ। उसकी कह ीं आलोचना ही नहीं होनी चािहए, लेिकन अगर आप ऐसी 
बात कहȂगे तो लोग अनावÌयक ही उसका जवाब देने लगȂगे। जो समझदार लोग हȅ, वे अपने नेता 
पर कभी आँच नहीं आने देते हȅ। मȅ बीजेपी की लीडरिशप से कहना चाहता हूँ िक आपके  साथ 
बहुत अच्छे-अच्छे वƪ
ा बैठे हुए हȅ। हमेशा ठीक लोगȗ को बोलने का मौका िदया कीिजए। मȅ यह 
राय देना चाहता हूँ। मȅ आप लोगȗ से उĦ मȂ भी बड़ा हूँ और अनुभव मȂ भी बहुत बड़ा हूँ। जब मȅ 
बोलता हूँ, तब मȅ कभी राजनीित नहीं लाना चाहता हूँ। मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक अगर लीडर क े पक्ष 
मȂ हो, तो कभी अपनी बातȗ से, अपने कमर् से उसके  ऊपर लांछन मत लगने देना, लेिक न यहाँ 
लोग इसी तरीके  की बातȂ करने लगते हȅ। बहस का Îटȅडडर् शुरू  मȂ इतना बिढ़या था, लेिकन सब 
खराब हो गया। मȅ क ेवल वैज्ञािनकȗ को धन्यवाद देने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ। मȅ इस गवनर्मȂट से 
कहना चाहूँगा िक आप कहते हȅ िक इस पर इतने पैसे खचर् हुए हȅ, तो इस अ
िभयान क े िलए िजतने 
खचर् हुए हȅ, उससे दस गुणा ज्यादा भी खचर् हो जाते, तब भी कम थे। यह कोई मामूली उपलिÅध 
नहीं है। चाहे अमेिरका हो या सोिव
यत यूिनयन हो, सारी दुिनया इससे अचंिभत है। भले ही उन्हȗने 
1969 मȂ नील आमर्Îटर्ांग को चंदर्मा पर उतार िदया हो, भले Yuri Gagarin, Valentina 
Tereshkova
 और तमाम लोगȗ को अंतिरक्ष मȂ भेज िदया हो, लेिकन िहन्दुÎतान की यह उपलिÅध 
सारी दुिनया क े वैज्ञािनकȗ को, राजनेताओं को चिकत करने वाली थी। यह कोई मामूली उपलिÅध 
नहीं थी, इसिलए यह मत किहए िक यह 600 कर ोड़ मȂ हुआ है, क्यȗिक इतनी बड़ी उपलिÅध क े 
िलए िजतना भी खचर् हो जाता, वह कम था।  
 मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूँ, आप उसे पसंद करȂगे। जब चंदर्मा की फोटोज़ भेजी गईं, 
तब क ु छ सािहत्यकारȗ और क ु छ लोगȗ को बहुत िदक्कत हुई और वह िदक्कत Îवाभािवक थी। 
हमारे यहाँ तो कर
वाचौथ पर मिहलाएं चंदर्मा को देखती हȅ और उसे बहुत खूबसूरत माना जाता 
है। मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूँ िक क ेशव जी िहन्दी क े एक बहुत बड़े किव हुए। सुधांशु ितर्वेदी जी 
अभी बैठे थे, अब वे कहाँ गए? यह सब जानते हȅ िक उन्हȂ किठन काËय का Ģेत कहा जात
ा है। एक 
बार वे यूिनव िर्सटी  क े गेट पर बैठे हुए थे। क ु छ बिच्चयाँ आ रही थीं, तो उन्हȗने सोचा िक आज तो 
हमारी तरफ लड़िकयाँ आ रही हȅ। वे आईं और आकर उन्हȗने कहा िक बाबा, लाइĤेरी िकधर है 
और चली गईं, तो उन्हȗने दो लाइनȂ िलखीं - 
 
"क ेशव क ेसिन अिस करी, बैिरहु जस न करािंह। 
चंदर्वदन मृगलोचनी बाबा किह किह जािंह।।" 
                   
† Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
121

 
 
 क ेशव क े सफे द बाल थे, इसिलए उन्हȗने कहा िक इन बालȗ ने ऐसी दुÌमनी िनभाई है िक 
कोई दुÌमन भी नहीं करता है। चंदर्मा जैसे चेहरे वाली, िहरणी जैसी आँखȗ वाली लड़िकयाँ बाबा 
कहकह चली जाती हȅ। चंदर्वदन, यान ी चंदर्मा जैसा बदन। अब एक लड़की का नाम शिश है, तो 
उसने कहा िक चंदर्मा का चेहरा तो बहुत खराब है और हमारा नाम शिश है और शिश का मतलब 
चंदर्मा होता है। कोई शिशĢभा हȅ, कोई चंदर्Ģभा हȅ और तमा म आदिमयȗ क े नामȗ क े पीछे भी चंद 
लगा हुआ है।  
सुभाष चंद, मािनक चंद, ितलक चंद, फलां चंद।  यह चन्दर्मा से ही तो लगा हुआ है!  हम 
लोग अनंत काल से चन्दर्मा को बहुत खूबसूरत मानते रहे, इसिलए हम तो अपने वैज्ञािनकȗ से 
कहȂगे िक बदसूरत फोटो मत भेिजए, िरसचर् करते रिहए। ...(Ëय
वधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपके  six minutes हो गए हȅ। 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: सर, आपने मुझे काफी समय िदया, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  मȅ 
वैज्ञािनकȗ क े साथ-साथ इस सदन क े सभी सदÎयȗ को बधाई देना चाहता हूँ िक आज एक बहुत 
अच्छे काम मȂ हम लोग यहाँ जुटे।  थȅक यू। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Mahua Maji; three minutes.  
 
SHRIMATI MAHUA MAJI (Jharkhand): Hon. Chairman, Sir, I thank you िक आपने मुझे 
इंिडया की ग्
लोिरयस  Îपेस जनीर् चंदर्यान-3 की सॉÄट लȅिंडग पर बोलने का अवसर िदया। मȅ 
इसरो और देश का गौरव बढ़ाने वाले तमाम साइंिटÎट्स को िदल से धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगी। इस 
उपलिÅध क े िलए पूरी दुिनया उनकी आभारी हो गई है और उन्हȗने हम सबको गौरवािन् वत िकया 
है। 
 मुझे इस बात का भी गवर् है िक मेरा जन्म एक ऐसे शहर मȂ हुआ, जहाँ पर हेवी इंजीिनयिंरग 
कॉरपोरेशन ( एचईसी) है, िजसने इंिडया क े Îपेस Ģोगर्ाम को हमेशा बहुत आगे बढ़ाया।  आप 
सभी जानते हȗगे िक चंदर्
यान वन, ट ू एंड थर्ी, इन तीनȗ मȂ जो लाउंिंचग पैड है, उसके  साथ-साथ 
बहुत सारे उपकरण एचईसी मȂ बने हुए हȅ।  यह 1952 मȂ बना था और इसे हमारे पंिडत नेहरू  जी ने 
बनाया था।  यह एिशया की सबसे बड़
ी इंडÎटर्ी है और यह मदर इंडÎटर्ी मानी जाती है।  लेिकन 
मुझे यह कहते हुए बहुत दु:ख हो रहा है िक मȅ कई वषș से ल गातार  यह देख रही हूँ िक 2014 क े 
पहले तक उसकी िÎथित लगभग ठीक थी, लेिकन 2014 क े बाद से वह लगातार deteriorate कर 
रही है और िपछले 18 महीने से वहाँ क े कमर्चािरयȗ और अफसरȗ को सैलरी नहीं िमली है।  वे लोग 
सुबह मȂ चाय बेचते हȅ, िफर ऑिफस जाते हȅ। मȅ आपको बता दूँ िक उनके  पा
स अभी कोई परमानȂट 
सीएमडी भी नहीं है।  वहाँ पर भेल क े सीएमडी को तीन साल से रखा गया है, जो वहाँ पर तीन 
साल क े अंदर 5 से 6 बार ही आए हȅ।  वहाँ पहले कोई डायरेक्टर भी नहीं था, अभी िकसी तरह से 
वहाँ पर टेÇपररी डायरेक्टर रखा गया है। 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 मȅ आपको बता दूँ िक वहाँ क े जो कमर्चारी और जनĢितिनिध हȅ, उनका आंदोलन क े समय 
मȂ यह कहना होता है िक नीित आयोग ने Ģाइवेट हाथȗ को बेचने क े िलए िजन 48 पिÅलक सेक्टसर् 
की िलÎट बनाई, उनमȂ हेवी इंजीिन यिंरग  कॉरपोरेशन का नाम भी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you have raised a very important issue and you 
should be grateful that the hon. Minister wants to react to it.   
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: Ãलीज़, मुझे बोलने िदया जाए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute, please. 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: मȅ उनको बोलने दूँगी, लेिकन पहले मुझे बोलने िदया जाए, क्यȗिक मेरा 
समय बहुत कम है।  ...(Ëयव
 धान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will add to it.   
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: वहाँ लगातार आंदोलन हो रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ उनको सुनूँगी, लेिकन 
पहले मुझे बोलने िदया जाए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you have raised a very good issue, a humane issue, 
and your success lies in the fact that the hon. Minister is ready to respond.   
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: लेिकन सर, इसको पूरा तो करने दीिजए! ...(Ëय
 वधान)...मȅ यह बोलना 
चाहूँगी िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Allow him to respond.  You will resume after he responds.  
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: ठीक है, सर। 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: चेयरमैन सर, मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह बहुत ही साथर्क चचार् रही है।  इसमȂ सभी ने 
बहुत अच्छे तरीके  से हम
 ारे साइंिटÎट्स की अचीवमȂट्स क े बारे मȂ चचार् की, पूरे 60 वषș क े 
पिरǛम की चचार् की।  अगर कोई इस Ģकार का आरोप तथ्यȗ क े साथ टेबल करे, तब तो मȅ समझ 
सकता हूँ। मुझे लगता है िक माननीय मंतर्ी, डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह जी ने इसके  ऊपर पूरे िव Îतार से 
जानकािरयाँ दी हȅ। शायद आपने डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह जी क े भाषण को सुना नहीं होगा।  आप िजन 
िवषयȗ क े बारे मȂ बात कर रही हȅ, उन्हȂ आपको substantiate करना  चािह ए।  अगर हम इतनी 
अहम संÎथा, खास तौर पर इसरो जैसी इÇपॉटȄट संÎथा क े ऊपर ऐसे आरोप लगाएँ, तो यह ठीक 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
123

 
 
नहीं है। जयराम जी ने ठीक बताया िक इसका 60 वषș का इितहास इस देश को गौरवािन्वत 
करता है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. Hon. Minister, you have made your point. Please conclude.  
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: आप मेहरबानी करके  इस िवषय को डायवटर् न करȂ, बिÊक आज उनकी 
उपलिÅधयȗ क े ऊपर ही चचार् करȂ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I can tell you that no one can  divert the issue.  Anyone who makes 
a statement is under obligation to prove it.  We will take steps.  Hon. Member, you 
please go ahead and conclude.  
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: सर, मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूँ िक एचईसी क े पास बहुत बड़
ी लȅड थी, जहाँ 
पर Îमाटर् िसटी बनायी गयी।  उन्हीं की लȅड को लेकर अभी उनकी िÎथित बहुत खराब है।  उनके  
पास वकर् ऑडर्र है, लेिकन उसके  िलए उनके  पास पूँजी िबÊ कु ल नहीं है।  मȅ आपको बता दूँ िक 
वहाँ पर काम करने वाले कमर्चािरयȗ क े जो बच्चे हȅ, उनके  नाम Îकू ल से कट रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक वे 
अपने बच्चȗ की फीस नहीं दे पा रहे हȅ।  उन के  बच्चे अखबार बेच रहे हȅ।  एचईसी से पहले जो 
टैलȂटेड बच्चे िनकलते थे, वे आज पूरी दुिनया मȂ साइंिटÎट्स हȅ, डॉक्टसर् हȅ, इंजीिनयसर् हȅ और 
बड़े-बड़े पदȗ पर हȅ, लेिकन आज वहाँ की िÎथित इतन ी खराब है िक हम लोगȗ से देखा नहीं 
जाता।  इससे करीब 2,500 कम र्चारी affected हȅ।  मȅ िरक्वेÎट करना चाहती हूँ िक एचईसी क े 
िलए क ु छ िकया जाए।  कल वे लोग यहाँ जंतर-मंतर पर धरना देने क े िलए आ रहे हȅ।  अगर मȅ 
फ े क कह रही हूँ तो आप लोग वहाँ से पता कर ल
ीिजए, वहाँ क े कमर्चारी धरना देने आ रहे हȅ।  
इस तरह से वे लगातार परेशान हȅ। ...(समय की घं टी)... क ेवल अभी ही नहीं, बिÊक मȅने राज्य 
सभा मȂ यह मुǈा पहले भी उठाया था, लेिकन उस पर अभी तक क ु छ भी नहीं िकया गया है।  िजस 
तरह से भारतीय रेल, इंिडयन एयरलाइंस, एयरपोट्सर् तथा बंदरगाह जैसे सरकारी उपकर्म 
लगातार बेचे जा रहे हȅ, उन्हȂ ऐसा लगता है िक श
ायद उसको भी बेचने क े िलए उसे िसक इंडÎटर्ी 
घोिषत करने की कोिशश हो रही है, तािक उसे Ģाइवेट हाथȗ को बेचा जा सके । 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: सर, मेरा क ेन्दर् सरकार से अनुरोध है िक क ृपया इस पर ध्यान िदया जाए।  
वहाँ एक पूणर्कािलक सीएमडी िमले और वहाँ क े लोगȗ को िपछले 18 महीनȗ से जो वेतन नहीं 
िमल रहा है, वह उनको िमले।  थȅक यू। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. You are gifted 100 per cent.  I would request the hon. 
Member; she has given, I am sur
e, very thoughtfully, after verification, certain factual 
assertions. The hon. Minister has a different opinion on that.  I would urge you to put 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the relevant record on the Table of the House during the course of the day. Now, Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P. ...(Interruptions)...  Okay. I think it is a very valid and reasonable 
point.  You do it by tomorrow till the end of the Session.  Now, Shri Sandosh Kumar 
P. 
  
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala):  Mr. Chai rman, Sir, I thank you for allowing me 
to take part in this importan t discussion.  I join with the hon. Members of this august 
House to congratulate those scientists and workers who made this spectacular 
achievement possible. There is no poin t in making a lengthy speech.  Jairam 
Rameshji made an absolutely brilliant speech on how mesmerizing is the history of 
the Indian space science.  It all started with  the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru, who 
had friendship with Albert Einstein and many  other scientists. I would like to take this 
opportunity to point out one thing. I am  from Kerala, a State which introduced 
science policy in the year 1972 for the first time  in the history of In dia.  But I am sorry 
to say that when I asked a question to th e Minister concerned about the Indian State 
which introduced the science policy for the first time, the answer was really shocking.  
The answer is that it is Gujarat in th e year 2018.  This shows how the ruling 
dispensation is creating new history. They are absolutely disconnected with history 
and reality. In their mad rush to praise Mr . Modi, they even forget Mr. Vajpayee. So, 
this is what is happening. I request the Chai rman to take care of these things.  Kindly 
correct that answer because it was Mr. C. Achutha Menon, one of the great 
statesmen of this country, who introduced the first science policy in the country, and 
not in Gujarat in 2018. It is absolutely contrary to the facts.   
 Sir, it is important to note that our country is moving forward and in the coming 
years, we will achieve more and more th ings. Science and technology is not the 
monopoly of anyone. Science and technology  will continue to improve. There is no 
point in comparing the speeds of Lunar Mission, Aditya and Chandrayaan. The 
Minister was comparing the speeds of Lunar Mission, Aditya and Chandrayaan. Time 
has changed; technology has changed. Obvi ously, new technology will help us to 
move forward with more pace. That reality has to be accepted. It is not because of 
the political leadership. Political leadership  has an important role to play but don't 
undermine history, don't try to eclipse the contributions of others. This is what I 
would like to say. Thank you very much.   
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, I stand to express my deepest 
admiration and gratitude to the scientific community, to the institution of ISRO and, of 
course, to the leadership which the Govern ment of today has, whether it is the 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
125

 
 
Minister in charge or as you rightly pointe d out that the Cabinet Minister is the Prime 
Minister of the country himself.   Undoubte dly, credit goes to him, to the entire 
Cabinet, to the Government and to the instit utions that in one swoop, we landed on 
the dark side of the Moon.  I think we ha ve lit a fire of imagination.  We have 
illuminated the possibilities that exist fo r the youth of our country when apply 
ourselves, when we put our en tire focus and resources, when we take our scientific 
ideas forward.   
So, again, a great discussion today from Jairam Ramesh ji, who made very 
forceful points.  Of course, we appreciated the intervention of Nirmalaji, hon. Finance 
Minister, who brought out many facets and in formation that were, perhaps, not there 
in the public domain.  Sir, at the same time , we give credit to the leadership of this 
Government and, of course, to the visionar y leadership of Governments in the past, 
because, as another Member said, it's a baton race, it's not a singular race.  It is the 
team effort.  We must also recognize that if Indian cricket team wins the World Cup 
tomorrow, our spectators are not going to th ank the Chief of the B.C.C.I.  A large 
part of the credit will go to the team India,  to the players, to the coaches and to the 
management.  Similarly, largest effort should be made to provide more courage, 
more resources to foster an open learning  environment for our youth, our students 
and open the minds of the generations to  come.  Noble Laureate Shri Ramakrishnan 
has said that science flourishes when r eal freedom exists in terms of ideas and 
opinions and minimal ideological interferen ce.  I remind this august House of our 
constitutional mandate. I remind the citizens of this country of our constitutional 
mandate, our Fundamental Duty to build our scientific temper. But, what is 
happening?  We are also seei ng mob temper.  We are seeing deaths at the hands of 
mobs.  We are seeing more incitement for hate using religious identities, using caste 
identities, using biases that have existed for thousands of years in our society.  We 
must rid ourselves of these things.  And, here, I remember the rationalists -- Shri 
Narendra Dabholkar,  Kalburgi. No civilized society can tolerate such murders.  
Whoever was responsible, the ideology that  was responsible, should be brought to 
book.  We talk about scientific temper.  हम यहां क्यȗ बैठे हȅ? यह समय, यह तारीख क ै से 
चुनी गई और क्यȗ चुनी गई? अगर सरकार शुभ अवसर की तलाश मȂ, शुभ तार
 ीख की तलाश मȂ 
फ ैसले लेगी और टालेगी, तो ठीक नहीं है। यह सदन तैयार था, इसका उǇाटन हो गया था और 
हम सब लोग अंतमर्न मȂ ही जानते हȅ िक यह तारीख चुनी गई, क्यȗिक एक त्योहार है, सबको 
लगा िक शुभ अवसर है। ज्योितष क े जो िवǎान हȅ या कोई पच
ीर् िनकालने वाला बाबा है, उनके  
इशारे पर और उनके  कहने पर आप फ ैसला मत लीिजए। जब जो सही है, जहां आप सक्षम हȅ, 
आप फ ैसला लीिजए, पूरा देश आपके  साथ है। Sir,
 talking about resources, our Minister for 
Science, Jitendra ji, is very well aware of the facts.   He asserted that we have 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
increased the Budget for I.S.R.O., wher eas our eminent Member of Parliament 
pointed out and I reiterate that if you look  at the last Budget, compare it with the 
Budget Estimates of the current year, the Budget of 2023-24, look at the Department 
of Science, you have actually cut the Budget by 8 per cent!  I.S.R.O. is achieving so 
much and they need so much more. We ha ve spent p altry amount on this mission 
which is a great achievement, but look at this grand environment in which we are 
sitting and debating. We are spending thou sands of crores on convention centres, 
on facilities for ourselves. So, I think, we must stand and salute our scientists and 
provide them more resources. I will close my thing.  I am aware of the shortage of 
time.  I will quote two eminent people, tw o eminent thinkers.  One is Isaac Asimov.  
He said:  "The saddest asp ect of life right now is that  science gathers knowledge 
faster than society gathers wisdom." Scien ce will not wait for us.  Scientists cannot 
be stopped.  They will continue their work  but society must continue to evolve and 
assimilate those ideas at th e earliest.  In the end, इसरो की बात हुई है, आिखर मȂ खुसरो 
की बात कर लȂ तो कोई बुरा नहीं मानेगा। छोटी सी कहावत है, जो बताती है िक हम अलग-अलग 
बात करते हȅ, आिखरकार तो Ãयार की बात हावी हो
 गी, एक बात चलेगी,  
'छाप ितलक सब छीनी रे मोसे नैना िमलाइके ।' 
 धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we have had real great participation and every 
Member has had the occasion to contribute effectively. We must now have someone 
who can contribute to it in a poetic manne r.  I now call upon Shri Ramdas Athawale 
as the last speaker on this issue.   
 
सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी रामदास अठावले): सभापित 
महोदय, आज बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर चचार् हो रही है। सभी पाटीर्ज़ क े जो मेÇबसर् ऑफ 
पािर्लयामȂट हȅ, ये साइंिट
Îट्स की तारीफ कर रहे हȅ। अभी मȅ 4 िदन क े िलए लंदन मȂ था, वहां मुझे 
बहुत सारे लोग िमले, उन्हȗने मेरा अिभनंदन िकया िक भारत क े साइंिटÎट् स ने बहुत बड़ा काम 
िकया है। जयराम रमेश जी हमारे पुराने िमतर् भी हȅ, वे बहुत क्लेवर आदमी भी हȅ। कांगर्ेस को 
बढ़ाने मȂ उनका बहुत बड़ा योगदान है। मȅ इतन ा  ही बताना चाहता हूं िक : 
कांगर्ेस क े बड़े नेता हȅ रमेश जयराम, कांगर्ेस क े बड़े नेता हȅ रमेश जयराम। 
सभी का आपने नाम िलया, लेिकन आपने नहीं िलया नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का नाम ।।  
आज की बहुत ही सुंदर है शाम, आज की बहुत ही सुंदर है शाम। 
अब तो नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को याद करो रमेश जयराम।। 
 
  हम जानते हȅ िक इसमȂ साइंिटÎट्स का बहुत बड़ा योगदान है। आदरणीय जवाहर लाल 
नेहरू  जी ने इसरो की Îथापना की, यह इितहास है। साइंिटÎट्स ने बहुत बड़ी कोिशश की, 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
127

 
 
लेिकन हमȂ चांद पर जाने की सफलता नहीं िमली थी। आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ जब 
देश काम कर रहा है, तब हम सबने देखा िक चंदर्यान-2 क े चांद पर उतरते समय थोड़ी गलती क े 
कारण चंदर्यान वहां नहीं पहुंच सका, ल ेिकन एक साल बाद ही - हमारे साइंिटÎट्स ने Ģितज्ञा की 
िक इस वƪ भारत का चंदर्यान चांद पर ज़रूर  पहुंचेगा। जब हम चंदर्यान-2 मȂ सफल नहीं हुए थे, 
तब माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने बȂगलुरु  मȂ जाकर उनका अिभनंदन िकया था और कहा िक आप 
डिरए नहीं, मȅ आपके  साथ हूं। आप चंदर्यान-3 की तैयारी कीिजए। इसीिलए चंदर्यान-3 सफल 
हुआ ह
ै। आज  दुिनया भर मȂ भारत का नाम है - पहले भी नाम था, लेिकन अब और ज्यादा बढ़ 
गया है। इसीिलए मुझ
े लगता है िक इसमȂ राजनीित करने की आवÌयकता नहीं है।  
 सभापित महोदय, जो भी काम होता है, उसमȂ सब लोगȗ को सहयोग करना चािहए। नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी क े कायर्काल मȂ इतनी बड़ी उपलिÅध हुई है। उन्हȗने इस चंदर्यान क े िलए साढ़े तेरह 
हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े दे िदए थे, तो नाम लेने मȂ क्या िदक्कत है! जयराम रमेश
 जी तो आदरणीय 
नेता हȅ। आपने मोदी साहब का नाम नहीं िलया। आप मत लीिजए, लेिकन हम लोग उनका नाम 
लेते हȅ और जनता उनका नाम ले रही ह
ै। जयराम रमेश जी ने बहुत अच्छा इितहास बताया। 
उन्हȗने वषर् 1952 से लेकर अब तक का इितहास बताया। हम चंदर्यान-3 मȂ सफल हुए हȅ। हमȂ जी-
20 की अध्यक्षता भी िमली। हम ड
ेवलपमȂट की िदशा मȂ आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ।  
 सभापित महोदय, हम यह नहीं बोलते िक हमने ही पूरा काम िकया है, आप लोगȗ ने भी 
िकया है, लेिकन आपने जो नहीं िकया, वह करने क े  िलए हम आए हȅ। आप अगर कर देते तो हम 
नहीं आते। जनता हमȂ आने ही नहीं देती। इसीिलए जनता जो तय करती है, वह होता है। भारतीय 
जनता पाटीर् क े 1982 मȂ 2 एम.पीज़ थे, अटल जी क े समय मȂ 182 लोग  चुन कर आए, नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी क े समय मȂ वषर् 2014 मȂ 282 लोग चुन कर आए और वषर् 2019 मȂ 303 लोग चुनकर आए। 
  जयराम रमेश जी , 2024 मȂ िकतनी आएंगी ,यह पूिछए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप भी  2024 
की तैयारी किरए।  आपको िजतने लोगȗ को इकƻा करना है ,वह किरए।  आप न
ेताओं को इकƻा 
किरए, हम जनता को इकƻा कर रहे हȅ।  ...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you, hon. Minister.  
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले:  उनको भी सǄा मȂ आने का अिधकार है।  आप  60 वषș तक सǄा मȂ रहे 
और मȅ भी आपके  साथ रहा हूं।  इसीिलए म
ुझे लगता है िक लोकतंतर् मȂ जनता िजनके  साथ जाती 
है ,उनको सǄा िमलती है।  आप कई नेताओं को एक साथ लाए हȅ।  हमȂ ज्यादा नेताओं को साथ 
लाने की जरूरत  नहीं है।  अगर और भी ज्यादा प
ािर्टयȗ को ले लȂगे, तो िटकट देना मुिÌकल हो 
जाएगा।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
   
Ǜी रामदास अठावले:  हमȂ ज्यादा पािर्टयȗ की जरूरत  नहीं है।  हमारी ताकत है, बीजेपी क े साथ 
मेरी आरपीआई, जो बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी की पाटीर् है।  गांव-गांव मȂ मेरी पाटीर् की शाखाएं हȅ। 
 मेरी पाटीर् क े िकतने एमपीज़ हȅ, यह मत प
ूिछए।  मेरी पाटीर् का एक भी एमपी नहीं है।  मȅ लोक 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सभा मȂ चुनकर आता था।  मȅ जब  2014 मȂ मोदी साहब क े साथ आया, तब अगर मȅ आगर्ह करता 
िक मुझे लोक सभा क े िलए लड़ना है  -  मȅ तीन बार लोक सभा मȂ चुनकर आया था और चौथी बार 
मȅ इसिलए नहीं जा रहा था ,क्यȗिक मȅने सोचा िक और पांच साल क े बाद क्षेतर् बदलना ठीक नहीं 
है, इसीिलए मȅने बीजेपी से राज्य सभा की सीट मांगी और बीजेपी ने मुझे राज्य सभा मȂ भेजा, नहीं 
तो मȅ लोक सभा से आता था।  राज्य सभा मȂ आने क े बावजूद भी माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने मुझे 
उनके  मंितर्
मंडल मȂ ले िलया है और मुझे सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय की 
िजÇमेदारी दी है।  
   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले:  हमारी  2024 की तैयारी चल रही है और हम आगे बढ़ते रहȂगे।    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you, hon. Minister.  
 
 
OBSERVATION BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, we now come to  the end of a very fruitful and 
constructive discussion on the nation's glorious journey in space exploration.  I heard 
the hon. Members' views, in the House and outside, observations and assessment 
with rapt attention.  One common thread  was evident in the speeches - national 
interest and that it is glorious, concerte d effort.  There was resonance of a shared 
sense of pride and accomplishment in ou r space odyssey, made possible by the 
brilliant minds of our scientists and technicians and visionary leadership on 
appropriate occasions. 
 The vast expanse of space has enchan ted humanity since time immemorial.  
Members have reflected on that in terms of  poem also.  Bharat, one of the oldest 
civilizations in the world, has nurtured a strong tradition of space science and 
astronomy. There are contributions of our earliest scholars like Aryabhatta, 
Varahamihira, Brahmagupta, Bhaskara amon g others are recognized not just by 
Bharat, but by the world at large!  In rec ognition of their contribution, the very first 
Indian spacecraft named after the mathematician and astronomer of Gupta era about 
1500 years old, Aryabhatta, was launched in 1975. 
 The spirit of exploration, built upon ou r scientific heritage, fuelled by courage 
and innovation, has propelled us to explor e the uncharted territories of space with 
renewed vigour! While doing so, on the one hand, we are showcasing our 
technological prowess. On the other hand , we remain firmly dedicated towards 
reaping its benefit for social good, and to enhance the lives of our countrymen.  
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
129

 
 
Hon. Members, you may recall, during the Mission Chandrayaan-2, our hon. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, wa s personally present to encourage and 
motivate the scientists at ISRO headquarters in Bengaluru.  
 This consistent support and belief of leadership in scientific community has 
undoubtedly been a vital factor in th e success of Chandrayaan-3 and our earlier 
missions.  
 India's space programme is a source of national pride.  It is a befitting 
testament to the country's scientific and technological self-reliance.  It is our duty, as 
the custodians of people's aspirations and stakeholders in their future, to provide 
steadfast support to the new frontiers of space exploration.  Let us be resolved to 
stand by Bharat as it marches to regain its past glory in the Amrit Kaal.  
 
 
RESOLUTION 
 
Recognition and appreciation of scientists for successful soft landing of Chandrayan-
3 on South Pole of the Moon 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, various leaders, Sh ri Tiruchi Siva, Dr. K. Keshava 
Rao, Shri Jairam Ramesh and others, -- I can name all of them -- they said that it is 
an occasion and the temper of the debate was very high.  It was contributory.  
Brilliant speeches were made by Shri Jairam  Ramesh, by the hon. Minister and by 
the hon. Finance Minister.  But, I can tell you that I have listened to each and every 
speech.  Every speaker has contributed a pers pective to the issue.  In that view, I 
place the following Resolution before the House. I am quoting the Resolution. 
 
"India's Space programme is a source of national pride. It is a continuing 
testimony to the nation's inherent scientific and technological prowess.  
Affirmative ecosystem and visionary lead ership has enabled our scientists to 
fully realize their potential, unleash their ener gy and attain this historical milestone. 
 This House recognizes and appreciates the scientists, including, particularly, 
the women scientists, for achieving this arduous feat with the successful soft landing 
of Chandrayaan-3 near unconquered Sout h Pole of Moon. This accomplishment, 
along with the other space missions, will usher in long-lasting economic and social 
upliftment." 
 May I take that this Resolu tion is adopted unanimously? 
 
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Resolution is adopted unanimously. Thank you. 
Hon. Members, I have to inform you that  it has been decided in consultation 
with the floor leaders that the Constitution (128 th) Amendment Bill, 2023, will be 
taken up for consideration and passing after it is reported to this House tomorrow.  Is 
this the sense of the House? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  Sir, I just wanted to clarify whether it will be reported also 
tomorrow morning. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes.   
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL : Reported, introduced, considered and passed, all in the 
space of tomorrow.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Leader of the House, it has been worded to categorically 
convey that... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, the reported time is 7.5 hours for discussion.  That has 
also being agreed.  So, please reiterate.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: 7.5 hours is not the time.  It is, 'not less than 7.5 hours'.   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Agreed. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The House stands adjourned to m eet at 11 a.m. on Thursday, the 
21
st September, 2023.  
 
The House then adjourned at six minutes past seven of the clock till eleven of the 
clock on Thursday, the 21st September, 2023. 
 
 
[ 20 September, 2023 ]
131

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 