Vol. 269     Monday, 
No. 2 02 December, 2025 
11 Agrahayana,1947(Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Lai
d on the Table (pages 1 - 4) 
Message from Lok Sabha — Reported and Government Bill laid on the Table   
The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 2025 (page 5) 
Report    of     the    Committee     on     Government     Assurances,     Rajya     Sabha 
— Presented (page 5) 
Reports of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on 
 Finance — Laid  on the Table (page 5) 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology — Laid  on the Table (page 6) 
Motion for Election to the Central Supervisory Board (CSB) (pages 6 - 7) 
Statement by Minister — 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Thirty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (page 7) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Matters raised with Permission— 
Need for inclusion of the Preamble and a summary of the Book Annihilation of 
Caste in the daily morning school assemblies in the Country (page 8 - 10) 
Need to grant long pending Scheduled Tr ibe (ST) status to six communities of 
Assam (page 11) 
Concern over the present situation and ongoing unrest in Tezpur University, Assam 
(page 15) 
Concern over rising cases of drug abus e and its impact on youth and National 
Security (pages 15 - 16) 
Concern over the progress of irrigation pr ojects in the Bundelkhand region of Uttar 
Pradesh (pages 16 - 17) 
Need for modernisation of Anganwadi Nu trition Kitchens to improve child and 
maternal nutrition (pages 20 - 21) 
Need to enable Private Sector participation in India’s nuclear energy 
expansion (pages 21 - 22) 
Need to establish Bhojpuri language academy in Uttar Pradesh (pages 22 - 23) 
Need for a national clean ai r enforcement drive to address alarming air pollution in 
Delhi and Visakhapatnam (pages 23 - 24) 
Need to establish Central biogas/bio-CNG plants in Mayurbhanj, Odisha for clean 
energy and waste management (pages 24 - 25) 
Welcome to Parliamentary Delegation from Georgia (page 12) 
R e g a r d i n g   M a t t e r s   r a i s e d   u n d e r   R u l e   2 6 7  a n d  o t h e r  i s s u e s  ( p a g e s  1 2  –  1 4  
pages 17 – 19  and Pages 25 - 29) 
Announcement by the Chair (page 29)
Government Bill — Returned  
The Manipur Goods and Services Ta x (Second Amendment) Bill, 
2025 (pages 29 - 50)
 
Website :  http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:     rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

 
 
Special Mentions— 
Demand for starting Vande Bharat/Raj dhani Express from Narmadapuram to 
Delhi (pages 50 - 51) 
Demand for inclusion of “Sanamahi” as a separate religion in the Census of  
India (page 51) 
Demand to confer Bharat Ratna award to  Gaura Devi ji, the leader of Chipko 
movement (page 52) 
Need for balancing heritage preservation and tourism promotion (pages 52 - 53) 
Concern  over   cybercrime    and    its    profound    impact     on    poor     citizens 
(pages 53 - 54) 
Demand for gender-safe smart public  transport for small and medium  
towns (page 54) 
Demand for improvement in the run timings of trains in the South Eastern Division 
of Indian Railways (page 55) 
Concern over rising pollution in Uttar Pradesh (pages 55 - 56) 
Concern over MSME exporters affected by the US tariffs (page 56) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 2nd December, 2025/11 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, Papers to be laid on the Table.  
Reports and Accounts (2024-25) of IREDA, New Delhi, SECI, New Delhi, NISE, 
Gurugram; SSS-NIBE, Kapurthala, Punjab and NIWE, Chennai and related papers 
नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी Ǜीपाद येÎसो नाईक) : महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(A) A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) Thirty-eighth Annual Report and A ccounts of the Indian Renewable
Energy Development Agency Limite d (IREDA), New Delhi, for the 
year 2024-25, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts 
and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
thereon. 
(b) Performance Review by Govern ment on the working of the above
Company.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5176/18/25] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Solar Energy Corporation of
India Limited (SECI), New Delhi, for the year 2024-25, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Ac counts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5177/18/25] 
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:-
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Solar Energy

(NISE), Gurugram, Haryana, for the ye ar 2024-25, together with   the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5175/18/25] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Sardar Swaran Singh National
Institute of Bio-Energy (SSS-NIBE) , Kapurthala, Punjab, for the year 
2024-25, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5173/18/25] 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional Institute of Wind Energy
(NIWE), Chennai, Tamil Nadu, for the year 2024-25, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Performance Review of the abov e Institute, for the year 2024-25.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5174/18/25] 
I. Notification of the Ministry of Finance
II. Report and Accounts (2024-25
) of SPMCIL, New Delhi
III. The Forty-fifth Progress Report on th e Action Taken pursuant to the
recommendations of the JPC on Stock Market Scam
नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी Ǜीपाद येÎसो नाईक): महोदय, मȅ Ǜी 
पंकज चौधरी की ओर से िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:-  
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Econom ic Affairs), under Section 31 of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992:-
(1) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/252., dated the 5 th August, 2025, publishing
the Securities and Exchange Boar d of India (Research Analysts)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2025.
(2) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/253., dated the 5 th August, 2025, publishing
the Securities and Exch ange Board of India (Investment Advisers)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2); see No. L. T. 5936/18/25] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:-
(a) Twentieth Annual Report and Account s of the Security Printing and
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL), New Delhi, for the year 
2024-25, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5061/18/25] 
III. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Fo rty-fifth Progress Report on the Action
Taken pursuant to the recommendations  of the Joint Parliamentary Committee
(JPC) on Stock Market Scam and matters relating thereto, (December, 2025).
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5062/18/25] 
Reports and Accounts (2024-25) of the SCL, Chennai;  the Mumbai Port Authority, 
Mumbai; MPA, Mormugao, Goa;  the Mumbai Port Authori ty Pension Fund Trust 
Mumbai and related papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND 
WATERWAYS ( SHRI SHANTANU THAKUR): Sir, I lay on the Table:— 
(A) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:- 
(a) Twentieth Annual Report and Accounts of the Sethusamudram
Corporation Limited (SCL), Chennai,  Tamil Nadu, for the year 2024-25,
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5224/18/25] 
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (4) of Section 44 of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021:- 
(i) (a) 146 th Annual Administration Report of  the Mumbai Port Authority,
Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 2024-25.  
(b) Annual Accounts of the Mumbai Port Authority, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, for the year 2024-25 and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Authority.
(d) Review by Government of the Annual Accounts of the above Authority.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5231/18/25] 
(ii)
(a) Annual Administration Report of the Mormugao Port Authority (MPA),
Mormugao, Goa, for the year 2024-25.  
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
3

 (b) Annual Accounts of the Mormugao Port Authority (MPA), Mormugao, 
Goa, for the year 2024-25, and the Audit Report thereon.     
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Authority. 
 (d) Review by Government of the Annual Accounts of the above Authority. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5230/18/25] 
 
(iii) (a) Administration Report and Accounts of the Mumbai Port Authority 
Pension Fund Trust, Mumbai, Maha rashtra, for the year 2024-25, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government of the Annual Accounts of the above Trust. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5509/18/25] 
 
Reports and Accounts (2024-25) of  CWC, New Delhi; WDRA, New Delhi and 
related papers 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜीमती िनमुबेन 
जयंतीभाई बांभिणया) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखती हूं:- 
       (i)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (11) of Section 31 of the Warehousing Corporation Act, 1962: - 
(a) Sixty-eighth Annual Report and Accounts of  the Central Warehousing 
Corporation (CWC), New Delhi, for the year 2024-25, together with   the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5197/18/25] 
 
     (ii)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 39 and sub-sectio n (4) of Section 38 of the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 2007:- 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e Warehousing Development and 
Regulatory Authority (WDRA), New Delh i, for the year 2024-25, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5196/18/25] 
 
 
 
 
 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MESSAGE FROM LOK SABHA 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha at its sitting held on the 1 st December, 2025 passed the Manipur Goods and 
Services Tax (Second Amendm ent) Bill, 2025. The Speake r has certified that the 
Bill is a Money Bill.  
I lay a copy of the said Bill on the Table.    
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON GOVERNM ENT  ASSURANCES, RAJYA SABHA 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI  ( Tamil Nadu ): Sir, I rise to present the Seventy Ninth 
Report (in English and Hi ndi) of the Committee on  Government Assurances, 
Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELAT ED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
SHRI YERRAM VENKATA SUBBA REDDY ( Andhra Pradesh): Sir, I lay on the 
Table, a copy each (in English and Hi ndi) of the followi ng Reports of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance:- 
(i) Twenty-seventh Report of  the Committee on ‘Per formance review of 
National Statistical Commission (NS C)’ pertaining to  the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
(ii) Twenty-eighth Report of the Commi ttee on ‘Review of working of 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Corp orate Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
5

 
REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT-RELAT ED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATI ONS AND INFORMATION  
TECHNOLOGY 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharashtra) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy 
each (in English and Hindi) of the following Reports* of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2024-25):-  
(i) Twenty-first Report of  the Committee on ‘Impact of Information 
Technology Agreement in the new age’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology; and 
(ii) Twenty-second Report of the Committee on ‘R eview of mechanism 
to curb Fake News’ pe rtaining to the Minist ry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Today is Leader of the House, Ja gat Prakash Naddaji’s, birthday.  
On behalf of all of us, we are wishing him a very lo ng and healthy life. Many many 
happy returns of th e day, Naddaji!  
Now, Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda to move  a motion for election of one woman 
Member to the Central Supervisory Board.  
 
 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO CENTRAL SUPERVISORY   BOARD (CSB) 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE; AND THE MINISTER OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  (SHRI JAGA T PRASAD  NADDA): Sir, I rise to 
move the following Motion:- 
 
“That in pursuance of Sect ion 7(2)(f) read with S ection 8(1)(a) of the Pre-
Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic  Techniques (Pro hibition of Sex 
                                                            
* The Report was presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 4 th October, 2025 under Direction 71 A (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha when the House was not in Session and the Speaker was 
pleased to order the printing, publication and circulation of t he Report under Rule 280 of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Selection) Act, 1994, this House do proceed to elect, in the manner as 
directed by the Chairman, one woma n Member from amongst the Members 
of the House to be a member of the Central Supervisory Board, constituted 
under the said Act." 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER  
 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-
second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
उपभोƪा मामले , खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜीमती िनमुबेन 
जयंतीभाई बांभिणया): महोदय  , मȅ उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय 
(खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण िवभाग) से संबंिधत ' भारत मȂ चीनी उǏोग  -  एक समीक्षा' क े 
संबंध मȂ िवभाग -संबंिधत उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी 
सिमित  (सतर्हवीं लोकसभा) क े बǄीसवȂ Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरश
ȗ /समुिƪयȗ क े 
कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ वƪËय सभा पटल पर रखती हूं।   
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 5196/18/25] 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, 21 notices  have been received today on five 
different subjects under Rule 267.  Since no ne of these notices received today are in 
adherence to the requirement of the rules and directions imparted by the Chair on 8 th 
December, 2022 and 19 th December, 2022, I am not admitting any of these  
notices. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karanataka):  Sir, what are the subjects? …(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, ‘Matters raised with Permission of the Chair’ – Prof. Manoj 
Kumar Jha. …(Interruptions)… 
 
 
 
 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
7

MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
Need for inclusion of the Preamble and a Summary of the Book Annihilation of Caste 
in the daily morning school assemblies in the Country 
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा ( िबहार): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से एक महत्वपूणर् 
िवषय की ओर आपका ध्यान आकृ Íट करना चाहता हूं। सभापित महोदय, माहौल नहीं है, िफर भी 
मȅ कहना चाहता हूं। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Go back to your seats. …( Interruptions)… No, no; not in the Well. 
You may go back to your seats. …( Interruptions) …   No, no; this is not correct.  If you 
get into the Well of the House, I am not going to heed anything from you.  None will 
be… …(Interruptions)…  No, not at all.  I am not going to encourage anybody who is 
getting into the Well. …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा: इस देश मȂ आज जो हालात हȅ, मȅ चाहूंगा िक तमाम िवǏालयȗ की prayer मȂ 
Preamble and ‘Annihilation of Caste’ का summarized version पढ़ाया जाए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
िĢएÇबल इसिलए पढ़ाया जाए, क्यȗिक समता, समानता और बंधुत्व ऐसे भाव हȅ, िजन भावȗ को 
लोगȗ तक पहुँचना चा
िहए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Nothing will go on record  except the speech of Prof. Manoj Jha. 
…(Interruptions)…  
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा: महोदय,  इस भाव मȂ अवरोधक बहुत हȅ।  आप Îवीकार करȂगे िक इस देश मȂ 
सामािजक सौहदर्, बंधुत्व और समता की बातȂ अपने न्यूनतम पायदान पर हȅ। …(Ëयवध ान )… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You may all be seated.  If you all sit, then, I would call you. 
…(Interruptions)… Ask him to go there.  This way I am  not going to allow. If you all go 
back, I would give a chance. When you are shouting, how can I give a chance?  No, 
not at all. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ इसके  साथ ही  आपसे यह अनुरोध करूं गा 
िक ‘Annihilation of Caste’  जो बाबा साहेब डॉ. भीमराव अÇबेडकर की one of the best 
writings हȅ,  उसको बताना चािहए। …(Ëयवधान)… क्यȗिक सरकारी पक्ष को भी यह समझना होगा 
िक हम जब तक समता और बंधुत्व Îथािपत नहीं करȂगे, तब तक बहुत मुिÌकल होगी
। 
…(Ëयवधान)…  
 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. CHAIRMAN: You cannot take the House for granted. …(Interruptions )… No!  
Nothing will go on record except his speech. …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा:  इस देश मȂ जहाँ िवÌविवǏालयȗ, महािवǏालयȗ और िवǏालयȗ मȂ जाितगत 
उत्पीड़न क े अलग-अलग क े सेज़ हȅ, वैसे माहौल मȂ Preamble and ‘Annihilation of Caste’ इन 
दोनȗ का summarized version लोगȗ तक पहुँचाया जाए। यह िकसी भी Ģाथर्ना से बेहतर  
होगा। …(Ëयवधान)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You are not in
 a position to take your people to their seats, why are 
you shouting? …(Interruptions )… What right do you have?  Every time you are 
shouting like this. …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा:  आपके  माध्यम से यह अनुरोध अपेिक्षत है। मेरी बातȂ शोरगुल मȂ खत्म हो 
गईं, इसिलए मुझे िफर से बोलने का मौका िदया जाए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member, Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), has 
associated herself with the matter raised by hon. Member, Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha.  
…(Interruptions)… I am not going to allow this indiscipline. …( Interruptions)
 …  I am not 
at all going to allow indiscipline.  You ar e always denying the rights of individual 
Members. That cannot be encouraged. Now, Dr. Ashok Kumar  
Mittal. …(Interruptions)…  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब):  सभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। आज मȅ 
सदन का ध्यान एक महत्वपूणर् मुǈे की ओर िदलाना चाहता हूं। * …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan. … ( Interruptions)… Nothing will go on 
record except what Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan speaks. …( Interruptions)… The next 
speaker is Dr. Fauzia Khan. …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Sir, the House is not in order. 
...(Interruptions)... The House is not in order.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Do you want to speak or not? You tell me. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, I cannot. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
9

MR. CHAIRMAN: Why are you worried about them? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: I cannot. ...(Interruptions)... * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You address me.  ...(Interruptions)...  No; if you want to speak on 
the subject, you speak.  Otherwise, I am going to call the next speaker. 
...(Interruptions)...  I am not going to listen to you other than the subject. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, kindly listen. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   No; Dr. V. Sivadasan.  
 
DR.V.SIVADASAN ( Kerala): Respected Sir, my topic is the attack of wild animals.* 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No! ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, this is the topic. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Nothing will go on record other than the subject. 
...(Interruptions)... I am going to call the next Member. If you do not want to speak 
on the subject, I am going to call the other Member. ...( Interruptions)... You stick to 
your subject. Otherwise, I am not going to allow you to speak. ...( Interruptions)... 
Nothing will go on record other than the subj ect.   If you want to speak, you speak on 
the subject. Otherwise, I am going to call the next speaker. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I am asking you. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR.  CHAIRMAN:  Not at all. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Attack of wild animals is my topic. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: If you want to speak, speak on the subject.  I am giving you the last 
chance. ...( Interruptions)... You speak on the subject; otherwise, I am calling the 
next speaker.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, wild animal attack is serious. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Need to grant long-pending Scheduled Tribe (ST) status to six communities of Assam 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam):  Sir, I rise here today on behalf of the 
p e o p l e  o f  A s s a m ,  o n  b e h a l f  o f  m y  P a r t y ,  A s s a m  G a n a  P a r i s h a d ,  a n d  m y  P a r t y  
President, Atul Bora, supporting demand by the six communities of Assam -- Tai, 
Ahoms, Moran, Matak, Chutia, Khoch-Rajbongshi and the Tea Tribes.  
...(Interruptions)... They are demanding to grant them Scheduled Tribe status in 
Assam.  These six communities are indigenous  tribes of Assam and they are sons of 
the soil. ...(Interruptions )... Their demand is justified.   So, I am supporting their 
demand and I would like to request to gran t ST status to these six communities of 
Assam.  ...( Interruptions)... In the year 1968, when India was ruled by the British 
Government, the then British Government de scribed them in the Gazette Notification 
as tribal communities.  Similarly, Simo n Commission also recommended and granted 
them tribal status. ...( Interruptions)... For these six communities of Assam, namely, 
Tai, Ahoms, Moran, Matak, Chutia, Khoc h-Rajbongshi and th e Tea Tribes, their 
demand is very justified and is a genuine demand. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA:  They fulfil all the crit eria to get the ST status, 
but it depends upon the willingness of the Government.  Everything depends on the 
Government. ...(Interruptions)...  So, I humbly request the Government to grant the 
ST status to these six communities of Assam - Tai Ahom, Moran, Matak, Chutia, 
Koch-Rajbongshi and Tea Tribes.  They should get the tribal status. 
...(Interruptions)...  I hope and I believe that the Government will bring the Bill in the 
present Session itself. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA:  I hope  this Bill will be passed and these six 
communities will get the ST status.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
 
 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
11

          WELCOME TO PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION FROM GEORGIA 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  o n  b e h a l f  o f  t his august House, I have great 
pleasure in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Shalva Papuashvili, Chairman of the 
Parliament of Georgia and the Members of the Parliamentary Delegation who are on a 
visit to India as our honoured guests.  ...(Interruptions)...  
A Parliamentary Delegation has co me. Please go back to your  
seats.  ...(Interruptions)... I am calling him.  Let me complete the welcome remarks 
for them. You ask all your Members to sit down. I am going to call...(Interruptions)...  
A delegation has come. We are welcoming them.  A delegation from Georgia has 
come.  Let me complete this.  ...(Interruptions)...  
The Chairman of the Parliament an d the Members of the Parliamentary 
Delegation are on a visit to India as our ho noured guests.   We have strong bilateral 
relations with Georgia.  The visit of Geor gia’s Parliamentary Delegation will further 
strengthen our bilateral relations.   
 The Parliamentary Delegation arrived in  Delhi from Georgia on Monday, the 1
st 
December, 2025.  They are now seated in the Special Box.  They are scheduled to 
meet/call on various dignitaries Delhi.  Besi des Delhi, they will also visit Agra before 
their departure from India.  We wish them a pleasant and fruitful stay in our country.  
Through them, we convey our greetings and best wishes to the Members of 
Parliament, the Government and the friendly people of Georgia.   
 
 
REGARDING MATTERS RAISED UNDER RULE 267 AND OTHER ISSUES 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Tiruchi Siva. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu):   Sir, I have a point of order.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  When there is so much of disturbance, what point of order can be 
taken up?  No point of order can be taken up.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  That is why, I want to raise ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No; you have to speak on the subject.  Otherwise, I am going to 
give the chance to the next Member.  ... (Interruptions)...  Your own people are 
shouting here.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Sir, I am on a point of order.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You tell me very clearly whether you want to speak on the subject 
or not.   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  I want to speak, but before that, we need an explanation.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : How can I allow a point of order when everybody is  
shouting?  ...(Interruptions)...  There is no point of order.    When there is no order, 
then, what is the use of ta king a point of order?  ... (Interruptions)...  Let everybody 
go to their seats, sit there and, then, I can allow.   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  They are going to their seats.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I will tell you one thing.  Nobody can take the House 
for granted.  Everybody should go by the norms of the House.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Everybody has to go by the rules.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes! But then, under which rule are you occupying the Well?   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  They have gone back.  All of them have gone back.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Let them go back to their seats and sit. Otherwise, you have to 
read in din.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Mr. Ch airman, Sir, all are in their respective seats.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY (Telangana) : The LoP should be permitted to  
speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I will give a chance to everyone, provided you are in order.   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Now, they are in order.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, go ahead.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, we have come here to speak only. …(Interruptions)…  
 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
13

SHRI SANJAY SINGH (National Capital Territory of Delhi ): Sir, now, they are 
disturbing.  …(Interruptions)…  Now, they are disturbing. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, this side of the House is in order.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Okay!  You tell me the rule under which you want to speak.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Mr. Chairman,  S i r ,  t h i s  s i d e  o f  t h e  H o u s e  i s  i n  o r d e r .   
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I will come to you later. …( Interruptions)… Please sit  
down.  …(Interruptions)…  Mr. Siva, what is your point of order? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, it is under Rule 239, which says, “When, for the purposes of 
explanation during discussion or for any other sufficient reason, any member has 
occasion to ask a question under the consideration of the Council, he shall ask the 
question through the Chairman. ”  Sir, I have a simple qu estion.  We all gave the 
notice under Rule 267 but you dispensed wi th them and you did not even tell the 
reasons as to why you dispensed with them.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The reason has been read out by me in my answer  
itself.  …(Interruptions)…  I am rejecting it.  I have told you the reasons.     
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  At least, we should know the reasons.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: There is no point of order. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, pleas e allow the Leader of the  
Opposition.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: There is no point of order. …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सरकार चचार् से क्यȗ भाग रही है? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan. 
 
 
 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION–Contd. 
 
Concern over the present situation and ongoing unrest in Tejpur University, Assam 
 
SHRI AJIT KUMAR BHUYAN (Assam): Respected Chairman, Sir, I would like to draw 
your attention towards the prevailing situation in  Tejpur University, Assam.  Sir, it is a 
Central University established by an Ac t of Parliament in the year 1994. Its 
establishment is considered to be one of the outcomes of Assam Accord signed in 
1985.  …(Interruptions)…  For the last two months, the University has been witnessing 
dharnas and protests against some omissions and commissions on the part of the 
university’s authority. The Vice-Chancellor is not in the university campus for around 
two months and the students are staging dharnas and protests but no sincere 
attempt has been made to resolve the impasse.  …( Interruptions)…  Several facts and 
information surface in the pu blic domain regarding irregularities and corruption which 
have taken place under the direct and tacit approval of the authorities.  The Vice-
Chancellor cannot escape the responsibilit y simply by keeping away from the 
university campus.  The need of the hour is  to bring back the educational atmosphere 
to normalcy. …( Interruptions)…   For one individual, the highest temple of learning 
cannot be allowed to suffer.  The Governme nt should be cautious in the matter of 
appointment of Vice-Chancellor and any ex traneous consideration should not be 
pursued in approving or appointing the VC.  …(Interruptions)…   
While expressing my anguish over the ma tter, I request the hon. Minister of 
Education to step in, take appropriate action and restore congenial atmosphere in the 
university.  Thank you.            
               
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Shri Javed Ali Khan (Uttar Pradesh), associated 
himself with the Zero Hour mention raised  by the hon. Member, Shri Ajit Kumar 
Bhuyan.                                                           
 
Concern over rising cases of drug abuse and its impact on youth and  
National Security 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, I rise today to express deep concern over the 
rising tide of drug abuse in India, which po ses a grave threat to our youth, our public 
health and even our internal security. …( Interruptions)…   While the Government of 
India has taken commendable steps throug h the National Action Plan for Drug 
Demand Reduction and by strengthenin g the Narcotics Control Bureau and 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
15

enforcement agencies, the scale of the cris is today requires even more urgent and 
targeted intervention.  According to conserva tive estimates by the United Nations, 13 
per cent of drug abuse victims in India are under the age of 20. …(Interruptions )…   
This is such an alarming situation in the co untry that almost all the States and most of 
the Districts are affected. A staggering 100 million people in India are currently 
affected by substance addiction and drug consumption has risen by 70 per cent over 
the past eight years. The Ministry of So cial Justice and Empowerment previously 
reported that there are nearly 31 million cannabis users, 24 million opioid users and 
7.7 million inhalant users in the country.  …( Interruptions)…  Sir, the problem is not 
merely medical; it is often social and structural, usually tied to unemployment, 
violence and exploitation. Even the celebrities  in the country are also victim of drug 
abuse.  Social scientists have warned that adolescent addiction is becoming endemic 
in pockets of vulnerability, and drug abuse is increasingly linked to the rise in violent 
and economic crimes.  …( Interruptions)… Through you, Sir, I urge the Government to 
expand rehabilitation centres in high-r isk districts, launch de-addiction and 
awareness campaigns in schools and coll eges, strengthen coordination between 
enforcement, health and social agencies.  …( Interruptions)… Crack down on drug 
peddlers, especially those who target educational institutions, youths and students, 
targeting Indian youth.   Let us act before th is silent epidemic robs us of our nation’s 
future.  Thank you, Sir.                
                                                                          
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Baburam Nishad. 
 
Concern over the progress of irrigation projects in the Bundelkhand region of  
Uttar Pradesh 
 
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय सभापित जी, जल सुरक्षा 21वीं सदी की सबसे बड़ी 
चुनौितयȗ मȂ से एक है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... िबना खाए तो क ु छ िदन कट सक
 ते हȅ, परन्तु िबना पानी 
क े तो एक िदन भी काटना बहुत बड़ी समÎया होती है।  यह पीड़ादायी होता है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश राज्य का हमारा बुंदेलखंड लंबे समय से पानी की कमी से जूझता 
रहा, वहाँ क े खेत-खिलहान व
ीरान होते रहे और मेहनत से पाले-पोसे गए मवेशी अन्ना व छ ुƺा 
होते रहे, परन्तु गरीब-गुरुबा  का िहतैषी होने का दावा करने वालȗ की आंखȗ मȂ पानी नहीं उतरा। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  गृहिणयȗ को अपने रोजमरार् क े काम छोड़क
र घरेलू कामȗ क े िलए पानी लाने क े 
िलए लंबी दूरी तय करनी पड़ती थी, िफर भी यूपीए सरकार ने ऐसे पिरवारȗ को नल का पानी 
उपलÅध कराने पर कोई ध्यान नहीं िदया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार 
है, िजसने हमारे अन्न
दाताओं और गृहिणयȗ क े बारे मȂ सोचा और जल की उपलÅधता  
सुिनिÌचत की।   
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

मȅ आज इस सदन मȂ बुंदेलखंड क्षेतर् की जनता की ओर से देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी 
नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी जी का धन्यवाद Ëयƪ करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)...  िपछले वषर् 
हमारे पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी परम Ǜǉेय Ǜी अटल िबहारी वा जपेयी जी की सौवीं जयंती क े मौके  पर, 
Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने बुंदेलखंड क्षेतर् की जनता को क े न-बेतवा नदी जोड़ो पिरयोजना 
की सौगात दी थी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... इसके  पहले Ǜी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार ने जल-संबंधी 
चुनौितयȗ का गंभीरता से समाधान कर
ना शुरू  िकया था, लेिकन 2004 क े बाद उन्हȂ दरिकनार 
कर िदया गया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... हालांिक मोदी सरकार अब देश भर की निदयȗ को जोड़ने क े 
काम को गित दे रही है और िनिÌचत रूप  से क े न-बेतवा िंलक पिरयोजना जÊद ही साकार होने 
वाली है, जो बुंदेलखंड क्षेतर् मȂ समृिǉ और खुशहाली क े नए ǎार खोलेगी। 
महोदय, भारत सरकार ने वषर् 2021 मȂ 35,000 करोड़ रुपए  की अनुमािनत लागत से क े न-
बेतवा नदी जोड़ो पिरयोजना क े कायार्न्वयन को मंजूरी दी है।  इस जीवन
दाियनी पिरयोजना को 
वषर् 2030 तक पूरा करने की पिरकÊपना की गई है, िजसका शुरुआती  लाभ 2026 से िमलना शुरू  
हो जाएगा।  िपछले 11 सालȗ को भारत क े इितहास मȂ जल सुरक्षा और संरक्षण क े एक अभूतपूवर् 
दशक क े रूप  मȂ याद िकया जाएगा।  यूपीए सरकार ने जल-संबंधी उǄरदाियत्व
ȗ को िविभन्न 
िवभागȗ क े बीच बांट रखा था, लेिकन यह हमारे दूरदशीर् Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार 
थी, िजसने इस समÎया का समाधान करने क े िलए अलग से जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय का गठन िकया 
और पहली बार हर घर मȂ नल से जल उपलÅध कराने क े िलए एक राÍटर्ीय िमशन की शुरुआत  हुई 
है। ...(Ëयवधान)...                  
 
 
REGARDING MATTERS RAISED UNDER RULE 267 AND OTHER ISSUES- Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The Leader of the Opposition.  Please be brief and express your 
concern.   
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता ( Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) :  सर, आपने मुझे जो समय िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका 
धन्यवाद करता हूँ। आज हमने रूल  267 क े तरह जो नोिटस िदया है, उसका उǈेÌय क्या है, 
सÅजेक्ट क्या है और कौ न -कौन से सदÎयȗ ने  नोिटस िदए हȅ, उनके   नाम और सÅजेक्ट बताना   
चािहए।  यह परंपरा रही है।  जैसे  िक िनचले हाउस मȂ जब adjournment motion िदया जाता है, 
तब ऐसा ही वहां पर िकया जाता है और यहाँ पर भी िकया जाता था, लेिकन su ddenly िजन 
सदÎयȗ ने अपने नाम से नोिटस िदए हȅ, आप उनके   नाम भी नहीं पढ़ते हȅ और सÅजेक्ट भी नहीं 
पढ़ते हȅ - यह अच्छा नहीं है।  I do not want to embarrass you because today is the first 
day of working.  You try to see everywhere.  Earlier, they used to see only one side - 
Nadda saheb’s.  Now you are looking only at the Table and you are not looking at us. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What do I have to see?  Do you want me to see all the people in 
the well?  That is what I have to see! 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
17

 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Yes.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  That I am not going to see.  You are a very senior leader.  When 
the House is in order, I will listen to everyone.  When the House is not in order, how 
can a Chairperson listen to everyone?  … (Interruptions)…  What to listen?  
…(Interruptions)…  You are speaking.  I am listening now.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, हाउस को ऑडर्र मȂ लाना आपका काम है, सरकार का काम है, 
हमारा काम नहीं है।  हम जो सÅजेक्ट आपके  सामने रखते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yesterday, you raised some points.  Immediately, I asked the 
Parliamentary Affairs Minister to respond. He responded.  He wants some time.  But 
you are not agreeing to it.   
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  No!  He evaded. … (Interruptions)…  Sir, you allow 
us. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yesterday, the Parliamentary Affairs Minister … (Interruptions)…  
Please!  Yesterday, the Parliamentary Affairs Minister responded positively.  He seeks 
some time to answer to your request.  We sh
 ould give that to him.  …(Interruptions)… 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Sir, these are urgent matters.  People are dying.  SIR 
is taking place rapidly.  Nearly 12-13 people have died.  These are BLOs.  
…(Interruptions)…   S o m e  2 8  p e o p l e  h a v e  d i e d .   …(Interruptions)…  Sir, this is an 
urgent matter to save democracy.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have said that.   I will ask the Government to respond.   
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  I want the discussion to take place now in the 
interest of democracy, in the interest of ci tizens and in the interest of our country.  
 I request you to do that.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat.  I will ask the Government. 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Sir, you shou ld allow the discussion.  Our Members 
are ready.  We will definitely cooperate with  you.  We do not want to say anything 
else.  Kindly allow it.  We will keep quiet.  And we will speak one by one.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Do you want to respond?   
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA):  Sir, the Leader of 
the Opposition has raised the question of discussion and about Rule 267.  Yesterday, 
the Parliamentary Affairs Mini ster had said that we woul d come back.  Today, I am 
told by the Parliamentary Affa irs Minister that very soon a meeting is going to take 
place with the Opposition Leaders and, accordingly, we will decide.   
…(Interruptions)… That the Parliamentary Affairs Minister will tell.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Do you want to respond, Rijiju ji?     
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIR; AND THE MINISTER OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU) : Sir, yesterday, what I said was, please do not put 
condition of timeline on anything. ...( Interruptions)... दोला जी, आपकी आवाज मȂ बहुत 
जोर है। My only limited request is that I am  going to engage with the leaders of 
different Opposition parties. It may be forma lly or informally but, ultimately, it would 
come to you formally once we start the process of some consultation. 
...(Interruptions)... Now, the problem starts when you start questioning the time. 
...(Interruptions)... Everything cannot be mechani cal. In parliamentary democracy, 
we have to engage in dialogue.  ...( Interruptions)... We have to engage in 
discussion. ...(Interruptions)... There are many issues in the country. You should not 
undermine one issue and take up another issue. All the issues are important. 
...(Interruptions)... देिखए, आप लोग चुनाव नहीं जीत पाते हȅ, जनता आप पर िवÌवास नहीं 
करती है और आप गुÎसा यहाँ सदन मȂ िनकालते हȅ, यह िबÊकु ल ठीक नह
ीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
लोकतंतर् मȂ चुनाव का Ãलेटफॉमर् जनता क े बीच मȂ होता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... हमने कल भी िरक्वेÎट 
की िक िबज़नेस तैयार िकया गया है, हम लोग चचार् क े िल ए तैयार हȅ, लेिकन एक बार हमȂ 
औपचािरक रूप  से िमलना तो चािहए! ...(Ëयवधान)... ये टाइम क े बारे मȂ कहते हȅ िक अभी बताओ 
िक कब से होगा।  ऐसा कोई तरीका नहीं होता है। ...(Ëय वधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You please go back to your seats. ...(Interruptions)... The Minister 
has agreed to discuss it with Opposition leaders. Let it happen in the evening or 
tomorrow.  ...( Interruptions)... Let them come back to us. Till that time, we would 
proceed with the Listed Business. ...( Interruptions)... Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury; 
not present. ...(Interruptions)... Shrimati Rekha Sharma. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
19

MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION–Contd. 
Need for modernisation of Anganwadi Nutrition Kitchens to improve child and 
maternal nutrition 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA (Haryana): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I rise to bring before this 
House an issue that affects the earliest an d the most crucial stage of a child’s life. 
...(Interruptions)... While the Anganwadi network is one of India’s proudest social 
welfare achievements, the infrastructure, especially nutrition kitchens, requires 
modernisation to meet today’s needs. ...( Interruptions)... Sir, I humbly propose a 
national programme for modernizing Anganwad i nutrition kitchens with the following 
components. For modern kitchen infrastructure, I request consideration for stainless-
steel utensils and food-storage units; clean preparation counters; safe drinking water 
units; and, exhaust systems for ventilation. ...( Interruptions)... Millet-based nutrition 
menu is very important.  While many States ar e following this, we need to follow it in 
other States also.   We need to give millet-based porridge, ragi laddoos, bajra khichdi 
and seasonal nutrient-rich sn acks to the children. This w ill improve protein, fiber and 
micro-nutrient intake among children. ...(Interruptions)... 
 Sir, there is a need for integration of Self-Help Groups.  This work is very, very 
important.  Women-led SHGs are already doing remarkable work in food processing. 
They may be encouraged to manage fres h food preparation, supply chains and 
quality checks.  ...(Interruptions )... Odisha and Telangana have shown how SHG-
led kitchens improve nutrition  delivery and strengthen local women’s income.  Digital 
monitoring and growth tracking is happening  in Anganwadi workers but we need to 
strengthen the system. Sir, by using simp le mobile-based tools, child weight and 
height can be recorded, attendance can be tracked, supply logs can be digitalized 
and nutrition gaps can be quickly identi fied.  This would ensure accountability and 
data-driven action.  …(Interruptions)… Supplementary nutrition for high-risk mothers 
should be taken up.  Pregnant wome n with anemia, low-BMI or high-risk 
pregnancies should be given: special take-home rations, iron-folic acid fortified foods 
and weekly monitoring at anganwadi centres should happen.  …(Interruptions)…  Early 
childhood nutrition determines  a child’s cognitive ability, health outcomes and future 
productivity. Investing in anganwadi modernization is not expenditure...  
…(Interruptions)… 
                                                      
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
r a i s e d    b y    S h r i m a t i    R e k h a  S h a r m a  :    S h r i   S a t    P a u l  S h a r m a  ( J a m m u  &  
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Kashmir), Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and 
Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha).                  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Kartikeya Sharma.   
Need to Enable Private Sector participation in India’s nuclear energy expansion 
S H R I  K A R T I K E Y A  S H A R M A  ( H a r y a n a ) :    S i r ,  I  r i s e  t o  s p e a k  o n  a  m a t t e r  o f  u r g e n t  
national importance.  …(Interruptions)…  At the time of our Independence, Churchill 
said and believed that India would splint er under its own weight and not sustain 
orderly governance or modern scientific progress.  …(Interruptions)…  Today, the very 
nation, they doubted, leads the missions to  Moon and advances one of the world’s 
most ambitious indigenous nuclear energy pr ogrammes.   I would, definitely, want to 
quote Poet Iqbal who said:  “Civilizations far older and far richer disappeared, but 
India endures because there is something in  this soil that refuses to be erased. ”  
…(Interruptions)…  It was the resolve of our pion eering scientists like Dr. Vikram 
Sarabhai, Dr. Homi Bhabha and many others that laid the foundations of scientific 
rigour and scientific self-re liance in India.  Our path was never easy.  The Western 
world denied us critical technologies; we were isolated and forced to build our own 
capabilities but we did not stop.  …(Interruptions)…  From carrying rocket parts on 
bullock carts in Thumba, to becoming the first country to land on the lunar South 
Pole; from Aryabhata to India’s first hum an spaceflight mission Gaganyaan, we have 
come a long way.  …(Interruptions)…   
MR. CHAIRMAN: You take them to their seats.  …(Interruptions)…  No, no; if you 
want, you can take them to their seats.  Yo u cannot take this House for granted.   I 
am not going to allow it.  …(Interruptions)…   
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:  Sir, the major turning point came when the Government 
led by the hon. Prime Minister, Shri Nare ndra Modi, opened the space sector to 
private participation in 2020.  …(Interruptions)…  IN-SPACe and Antrix became active 
facilitators for technology tran sfer from ISRO to industry.   The Government did not 
merely ‘open the door’; it walked in with the innovators.   As a result, India’s space 
start-up ecosystem has grow n from less than 10 compan ies a decade ago to more 
than 200 companies.  …(Interruptions)…  In the last five year s, Indian space start-ups 
have raised more than 350 million dollars and it is time now that India’s nuclear energy 
awaits a similar moment of “Renaissance”. Today, our installed nuclear capacity is 
around 8.8 giga watts.  …(Interruptions)…  A s  w e  m o v e  t o w a r d s  t h e  g o a l  o f  Viksit 
Bharat by 2047 and Net Zero emission by 207 0, nuclear energy becomes a critical 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
21

pillar for reliable, round-the-clock an d carbon-free base-load power. Heavy 
industries such as steel, cement and al uminium – all seeking to decarbonise – are 
now evaluating captive nuclear power.   Moreover, a strengthened nuclear ecosystem 
would deliver benefits far beyond electri city, supporting cancer treatment, atomic 
medicine, medical isotope production, agricu ltural research and food irradiation.  
…(Interruptions)…  W e  h a v e  s e t  a n  a m b i t i o u s  t a r get of reaching 100 giga watts of 
nuclear capacity by 2047.  This transition would require something close to Rs.20 lakh 
crores in cumulative investment and priv ate capital and private players are very 
important and integral part of this expansion.  …(Interruptions)…  In countries like 
U.S., 68 per cent of the investments are made by private players, in China more than 
72 per cent whereas in India we are only at 36 per cent.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by Shri Kartikeya Sharma:  Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Kavita Patidar 
(Madhya Pradesh) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (M aharashtra).Now, Shri Ratanjit Pratap 
Narain Singh. 
Need to Establish Bhojpuri language academy in Uttar Pradesh 
Ǜी रतनजीत Ģताप नारायन  िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश)  : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका अत्यंत आभारी 
हूं िक आपने मुझे देश की सांÎकृ ितक चेतना से जुड़े एक ऐसे िव षय  पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है, 
जो क ेवल एक भाषा नहीं, बिÊक 25 करोड़  लोगȗ की सांÎकृ ितक अिÎमता से जुड़ा  
हुआ है। …(Ëयवधान)… हमारे यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी  ने हमेशा अपनी मातृभाषा 
पर गवर् करने का मंतर् िदया है। जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी Îवयं िबहार और पूवार्ंचल की रैिलयȗ मȂ और 
यहां तक िक मॉिरशस एवं नेपाल जैसे देशȗ मȂ ‘रौरा सबके  Ģणाम’ कहते हȅ… तो  करोड़ȗ  भोजपुरी 
भािषयȗ का सीना गवर् से चौड़ा हो जाता है। …(Ëय
वधान)… उनकी इसी आत्मीयता से यही उÇमीद 
है िक हमारी भाषा को संवैधािनक हक जरूर  िमलेगा।  सच्चाई यह है िक आज भारत क े उǄर 
Ģदेश, िबहार और झारखंड से लेकर सूरीनाम, िफजी, ितर्िन
दाद और मॉिरशस तक लगभग 25 
करोड़ से अिधक लोग भोजपुरी बोलते हȅ।  यह Ǜम और संÎकृ ित की भाषा है। …(Ëयवधान)… 
महोदय, आज मȅ सरकार क े समक्ष एक मांग रखता हूं िक भोजपुरी अब क ेवल एक बोली नहीं रही 
है, बिÊक यह एक समृǉ, सािहत्य और लोक संÎकृ ित की वाहक है।  िदÊली और िबहार मȂ 
भोजपुरी अकादमी दशर्कȗ से कायर्रत है। …(Ëय
वधान)… यहां तक िक मध्य Ģदेश मȂ भोजपुरी 
सािहत्य अकादमी है, लेिकन भोजपुरी का ǭदय Îथल कहे जाने वाले उǄर Ģदेश मȂ आज तक 
कोई समिर्थत अकादमी नहीं है।  मेरा िविशÍट आगर्ह है िक उǄर Ģदेश क े क ुशीनगर या देविरया 
जनपद मȂ एक क ेन्दर्ीय भोजपुरी सािहत्य अकादमी की Îथापना की जाए। …(Ëयवधान)… यह क्षेतर् 
िबहार क े छपरा से लेकर अयोध्या तक 50 जनपदȗ क े क ेन्दर् मȂ है।  यह अका
दमी बनने से न क ेवल 
पूवार्ंचल, बिÊक िमिथला और नेपाल क े सािहत्यकारȗ और कलाकारȗ को एक मंच िमलेगा और 
हमारी िवलुÃत होती हुई िवधाओं का संरक्षण हो सके गा। …(Ëयवधान)… महोदय, भोजपुरी समाज ने 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

अपनी कमर्ठता से देश क े िनमार्ण मȂ अहम भूिमका िनभाई है।  हमȂ पूरा िवÌवास है िक भोजपुरी 
अकादमी पूवार्ंचल मȂ जÊद से जÊद Îथािपत हो, तािक  भोजपुरी एसन भाषा बा िक देश क े Ǜम मȂ 
काम करेला।                                                                                             
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associat ed themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh: Shri Pradip Kumar 
Varma (Jharkhand); Dr. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh); Sh ri Shambhu Sharan 
Patel (Bihar); Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh); Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(Uttar Pradesh); Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala (G ujarat); Shri Samik Bhattacharya (West 
Bengal); Shri Neeraj Shekhar (Uttar Pradesh) and Shri Surendra Singh Nagar (Uttar 
Pradesh).                                                                                      
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury.  …(Interruptions)…  Renuka 
Chowdhuryji, do you want to speak?  …(Interruptions)…  Only on the subject, nothing 
else! …(Interruptions)…  You have to speak on the subject? …(Interruptions)…   
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY (Telangana): Sir, the House… …(Interruptions)…   
MR. CHAIRMAN: If there is any deviation from the subject, it will not go on record.  
Now, Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury. …(Interruptions)…   
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY :  Sir, this matter is a continuation of what is 
troubling the House here.*   …(Interruptions)…   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record. …(Interruptions)…   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri   Ayodhya    Rami   Reddy   Alla.   …(Interruptions)…    
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla. …(Interruptions)…   
Need for a national clean air enforcement drive to address alarming air pollution in 
Delhi and Visakhapatnam 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhra Pradesh) : Mr. Chairman, Sir, air 
pollution has escalated into one of India's most pressing public health emergencies. 
…(Interruptions)…  Nearly one in every seven resi dents in Delhi faces the risk of 
premature death due to air pollution, with over  17,000 deaths in the last year directly 
attributed to deteriorating air quality. …(Interruptions)…  The capital's Air Quality Index 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
23

frequently remains in the "severe" category,  driven by vehicular emissions, biomass 
burnings, and also construction dust that is coming around. …(Interruptions)…   
Sir, a similar crisis is unfolding in Visakhapatnam, where PM10 levels have 
increased by 32.9 per cent ov er the past seven years. …(Interruptions)…  D e s p i t e  
allocation of Rs. 129.4 crore under the Na tional Clean Air Programme (NCAP) for 
Andhra Pradesh, only Rs. 39.6 crore has b een utilised, exposing serious lapses in 
monitoring, inter-departmental co-ordination and local enforcement. (Interruptions)…   
Sir, unchecked air pollution is now not only an environmental challenge but a 
national health and economic threat.  …(Interruptions)…  Sir, I have to tell you that in 
India, due to air pollution, it is costing mo re than 3 per cent of its GDP every year.  
…(Interruptions)… Thereis  also major losses from higher healthcare costs, loss 
productivity, worker absenteeism, and damage to the long-term health of population.  
…(Interruptions)… It is a direct and ongoing drag  on India’s economic growth. Sir,  I 
would tell you how the other major economies have handled this issue. We have to 
bring in a social and political will which declares a war on pollution.  …(Interruptions)…   
This meant a great deal of policy creation, enforcement around emission standards, 
ensuring control on power plants, air qualit y monitoring and investing in clean energy 
sources.  …(Interruptions)…   More than specific polic y or funding commitments, the 
key is how this can become a national, politi cal and social priority. One thing which is 
most important is, we need to create the da ta.   With the right data in place, we can 
certainly ensure that the pe ople in place are aware of th is data and with the data, 
real-time governance can happen. With this we can control the pollution.     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Dr. Fauz ia Khan (Maharashtra), associated 
herself with the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla.            
Need to establish Central biogas/bio-CNG plants in Mayurbhanj, Odisha for clean 
energy and waste management 
SHRIMATI MAMATA MOHANTA (Odisha): * “ Mr. Chairman, Sir, through you, I 
would like to draw the attention of th e House, towards the urgent need for 
establishing a central biogas or bio-CNG plant in the Mayurbhanj district of  
Odisha. …(Interruptions)… Mayurbhanj is the largest, most marginalised, and 
underdeveloped district in the State, with  a predominantly tribal population. Its 
agriculture and animal husbandry-based economy generates a large amount of 
                                                            
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia. 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

organic waste daily. Due to a lack of scient ific processing, this valuable resource is 
not only being wasted but is also causing environmental pollution. …(Interruptions)…    
In line with the objectives of the hon. Prime Minister's "GOBARdhan" scheme, 
Mayurbhanj is an ideal and high-potential district for generating green energy from 
bio-waste. Based on available resources, a plant with a capacity of 100 to 120 tonnes 
per day could regularly produce 4,000 to 5, 000 kilograms of bio-CNG and 30 to 40 
tonnes of organic fertiliser.  …(Interruptions)…   Such a plant would strengthen the 
district's waste management system, ensure environmental protection, provide high-
quality organic fertiliser to farmers, and create direct and indirect employment for 
thousands of youth and women.  This proj ect could prove to be a historic step 
towards establishing Mayurbhanj as Odisha’s first 'Zero-Waste District' and a pioneer 
in "Waste to Energy" conversion. It coul d become a model district for the entire 
country under the "GOBARdhan Mission." …(Interruptions)…     I, therefore, urge the 
Government to immediately sanction assistance and technical support for establishing 
a Central Biogas or Bio-CNG Plant in Mayurbhanj district. This initiative would ensure 
significant progress in three critical areas, namely, cleanliness, green energy 
generation, and local employment.       
                                                                                                                                                          
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), associated himself 
with the matter raised by the ho n. Member, Shrimati Mamata  
Mohanta. …(Interruptions)…     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House is adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m., today. 
 
The House then adjourned at fifty-four minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
REGARDING MATTERS RAISED UNDER RULE 267 AND OTHER ISSUES- Contd. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka) :  Sir, the Parliamentary Affairs Minister was 
supposed to make an announcement. 
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIR S; AND THE MINISTER OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS
 (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU) : I am happy that all the hon. Members are sitting 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
25

patiently. Sir, we would like to, from th e Government side, propose a discussion 
related to further electoral reforms which are related to the matter the Opposition 
parties have been demanding.  And, my sp ecific appeal is that when Government is 
ready to take up the discussion, please do not put a condition that it should take 
precedence over the other matter.  Another point which I would like to mention is this. 
In the first Business Advisory Committee m eeting, the Government had proposed a 
discussion on the 150 th Anniversary of the Vande Matram  and that is already listed.  
...(Interruptions)... So, as per the list proposed by the Government, we had sought 
time for all the Listed Business.  We had decided the time for three items of Business 
and we decided that we will decide about allo cation of time for other items in the next 
meeting. In the meantime, what I would lik e to request today, through you, to the 
Opposition Members, especially the hon. lead ers of different political parties, is that 
Vande Matram is a matter related to our fr eedom struggle, which inspired millions.  
The matter related to electoral reforms is also extremely important.  Besides this, 
there may be many more issues which the parties would like to raise in the House, 
because there are many Members who come from different States, different regions 
and hence have different issues.  However, considering the consistent issue on which 
the  Opposition parties have united to rais e, -- matter related to electoral reforms -- 
the Government is ready to take up the discussion, but to take it before discussion on 
the Vande Matram may not be appropriate. Well, now what I want to say is this.  
Once the Government is ready,  we will propose a date for discussion in consultation 
with other Members and the hon. Chair.   Please allow the other normal listed 
Business to be taken up as decided.   
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal):  Sir, I have a point of order. 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: देरेक जी, आप हमेशा इतने जोश मȂ मत रिहए। यहाँ ठंडे िदमाग से बात करना 
अच्छी बात होती है।  Derek ji, not  the first time; I told you many times, don't get over 
worked out because it doesn't help anybody.  My only re quest is: We will discuss on 
the demands of the Oppositio
n also and th e Government is also  ready.  But please 
don't insist that it should be taken up within a timeline.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:  Sir, I have a point of order. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What point of order?  
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN :  Sir, I will first tell you the rule.  The point of order is under 
Rule 176. More than 14 Opposition Parties want discussion on a particular issue, since 
people are dying because of SIR.  ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, let me finish.  
MR. CHAIRMAN : There is no point in that. Agai n you are going back to the same 
thing.  There is no point of order. 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:  Sir, let me finish.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: You wanted the Minister to say so mething.  The Minister has said 
something and you are again raising the same thing! 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE) : Sir, what the 
Parliamentary Affairs Mi nister said is different. Whatev er the Agenda is or whatever 
the Agenda is put before the House, it sh ould get priority over  Rule 267. Rule 267 
says that all other issues should be kept aside and the first preference should be given 
to the discussion under Rule 267. That is why we have given notices; otherwise, there 
is no need to give notices under Rule 267. See, it prevails over other Business. So, 
keeping aside all other Business, the Govern ment, rather the House should take up 
discussion under Rule 267. That is importan t. That is why we request you give us 
permission to start discussion under Rule 267 on SIR. And, we have every time been 
telling about the Vande Mataram, and we w ill tell 100 times. ...(Interruptions)... Sir, 
you are a hardcore leader and you know very well that Vande Mataram comes from 
us, not from them. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Vande Mataram is for everyone. ...(Interruptions)...  No; no.   Let 
him complete.  One by one, please.  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Thank you, Sir, for giving this opportunity. This 
afternoon, as the Parliamentary Affairs Minister told here, he called a meeting of all the 
Opposition leaders and we had an elaborate discussion with him. And, as he said 
now that Vande Mataram should precede, we are never of a second opinion that it 
should be discussed. But, at the same time , the issue of S.I.R. electoral reform is 
very serious. On 11
th, it has to be over and since so many BLOs are dying, we want to 
discuss it. So, give priority to that. We ar e not insisting that it should be today.  
Considering the situation of the Government, we said that we can take it up tomorrow 
and day after tomorrow in both the Houses. He said that he would come back. Again, 
Sir, he is going back to square one and repeating the same thing. 
...(Interruptions)...  
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
27

SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:  Yes, you are not keeping your words. ...(Interruptions)...  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, so, how we can… ...(Interruptions)...  We have come to 
represent the people… 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, everybody is representing the people here.   
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, we have come here to represent the people and their issues. 
But we are not given a vent to let out our voices. ...(Interruptions)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Let him complete.   
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, we should be given an opportunity to vent our views and 
express our voices. Sir! ...(Interruptions)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No, Mr. Siva.  I am just asking him to sit down and allow you to 
complete.  And, then, he can raise his point. ...(Interruptions)...  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Okay, Sir. ...(Interruptions)...  I am telling, through you, to the 
G o v e r n m e n t  t h a t  w h e n  w e  h a v e  s o m e  b u r n i n g  i s s u e ,  w e  w a n t  t o  r a i s e  t h a t  o n  t h e  
floor of the House because pe ople are asking what the O pposition parties are doing. 
So, kindly consider our demand, which is very genuine in nature and very serious in 
nature. Give priority to that. And, for an y other Business you list out, we are always 
prepared to cooperate. 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Sir, the urgency of the ma tter has been underscored 
by the hon. Minister. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   No; no!  ...(Interruptions)...  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, please understand....(Interruptions)...   Please allow me to 
say.  Sir, I am referring to Rule No. 177. The Chairman is in favo ur of the discussion; 
the Minister has also conceded that there should be a discussion on that. And, the 
matter needs to be discussed because there is urgency in the matter. That is what 
Rule 177 is all about. And, moreover, in  the All-Party Meeting on Sunday, we had 
proposed that. Now, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, three days have lapsed. Our 
only request is that tomorrow, let it start at 2 o'clock. Let it conclude day after 
tomorrow. Such a reasonable proposition has come from the Opposition. And how 
can they be obdurate? ...(Interruptions)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No; no! ...(Interruptions)...    
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

DR. JOHN BRITTAS : S i r ,  I  a m  q u o t i n g  R u l e  n u m b e r  1 7 7 .  I t  i s  v e r y  c l e a r .  Y o u  
considered it. He has also considered it.  
MR. CHAIRMAN : I understand that. You please co nclude. The Government has 
already agreed to discuss it. Let the Government deci de it. They will come  
back. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, a request has been received from the Ministry of 
Parliamentary Affairs for ta king up the Manipur Good s and Services Tax (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 2025, before the Statutory Resolution regarding the adoption of the 
Water Prevention and Control of Pollution  (Amendment) Act, 2024, in the State of 
Manipur.  ...(Interruptions)...         
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Sir, …(Interruptions)..  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record except what is listed in today’s Revised 
List of Business. … (Interruptions)..  I have acceded to the request of the Minister. 
…(Interruptions)..  Accordingly, the Supplementary Li st of Business has been issued 
and the Manipur Goods and Service Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 2025, will now 
be taken up first for the consideration and return. … (Interruptions)..  Shri Pankaj 
Chaudhary to move a motion for consideration of the Manipur Goods and Service Tax 
(Second Amendment) Bill, 2025.  
 
GOVERNMENT BILL  
THE MANIPUR GOODS AND SERVICES TAX (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL,  
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी) : महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूँ : 
 "िक मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर अिधिनयम ,2017 का और संशोधन करने क े िलए 
िवधेयक पर ,लोक सभा ǎारा पािरत रूप  मȂ ,िवचार िकया जाए।" 
The question was proposed. 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
29

MR. CHAIRMAN: Motion moved.  Now, I call upon the Members whose names have 
been received for participation in the discus sion.  Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla; your 
allocated time is 10 minutes. …(Interruptions)… 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE) : Sir, 
…(Interruptions).. 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
SHRI HARSH VARDHAN SHRINGLA (Nominated) : Hon. Chairman, Sir, I rise today 
to wholeheartedly support the Mani pur Goods and Services Tax (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 2025.  This Bill is not just a routine legal update  but comes at a very 
crucial time for the State. Sir, Manipur today stands at an important turning point after 
facing prolonged disturbance, economic slowdown, disruptions in trade and mobility.  
The Government has been working tirelessly to restore peace, rebuild confidence and 
revive normal life.  In this background ,  the Manipur  Goods and Services Tax 
(Second Amendment) Bill, 2025 is a major step to strengthen  the tax system, 
improve revenue, help struggling busine sses and support Manipur’s economic 
revival. I appreciate the relentless efforts of the Government for taking up both 
security and economic reforms together, so that Manipur can move towards stability 
and growth.   
The Bill reflects the major tax reforms approved by the 56
th GST Council 
meeting where the Centre and States together  decided to rationalize  GST rates  on 
nearly 375 items by merging earlier slabs into just two main slabs of 5 and 18 per cent.  
This simplified structure will greatly benefit Manipur by reducing compliance burden, 
bringing price stability and encouraging local businesses, especially small traders, 
handloom and handicraft units, agro-processi ng enterprises and service providers. A 
clearer and more predictable GST system will boost investment, improve tax revenue 
and support the  State’s efforts towards  economic recovery and growth.  One of the 
key reforms in the previous Amendment Act enabled the State to levy SGST on Extra 
Neutral Alcohol and rectified spirit. This is a major source of revenue for  the State, for 
a State like Manipur where development n eeds are high and revenue options are 
limited.  
At a time when the Government is rebu ilding infrastructure, repairing damaged 
public assets, supporting families and restor ing normalcy, this additional revenue will 
help us invest in health services, educat ion, welfare and local development without 
putting extra burden on common citizens.  
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

The earlier Act also brough t much-needed clarity in tax administration. Today, 
when Manipur's business sector, especially, those in the Imphal Valley, hill districts 
and rural areas are trying to get back on  their feet after months of disruption, 
predictable timelines are essential.  By cl early fixing a 42-month limit for issuing 
notices, the Bill ensures that taxpayers ar e not harassed with uncertainty. A stable 
and fair tax environment will encourage more  traders to reopen shops, revive local 
supply chains and invest again in Manipur.  
Hon. Chairman, Sir, I must also hi ghlight how the previous Amendments 
provided genuine relief for small and medium  businesses who faced hardships during 
the earlier transition to GST. These Amendm ents have given them new opportunities, 
that too, at a time when local businesses are recovering from losses; and this relief 
will greatly ease their cash flow .  The Amendments that are proposed are not merely 
technical changes but will prove a lifeline for many Manipur businesses. Many of them 
are dealing with reduced demand, disrupte d markets and financial stress. Clearing 
old disputes without heavy penalties will allow them to start afresh without fear of past 
burdens pulling them down.  The earlier GS T Amendments have already helped bring 
stability and confidence to Manipur's economy, clearer rules for financial transactions, 
reduced confusion for banks and insurers, an d making it easier for them to support 
local businesses. The reduction in pre-deposit requirements has also eased the 
burden on small traders and rural ente rprises that can now appeal without  
heavy costs.  
Hon. Chairman, Sir, all these reforms ar e timely because Manipur is now in a 
phase of rebuilding. The small industri es like handloom, handicrafts, bamboo 
products, agro-processing, dairy, piggery, food processing need immediate support. 
With the GST Council initiating rate rationalisation in 2025 and with the relief measures 
in this Bill, these sectors will get fresh momentum. By simplifying compliance, easing 
financial burden and reducing litigation, this Bill strengthens the very foundation on 
which Manipur's local economy stands.  I mu st take this approach to appreciate the 
Government for taking such a balanced st ance, combining administrative reforms, 
financial discipline, developmental initiative s and peace efforts.  Even during difficult 
circumstances, the Government has ensured continuity of welfare schemes, support 
for displaced families, restoration of esse ntial services, and rebuilding of confidence 
among citizens. This Amendment Bill comple ments those efforts by ensuring fiscal 
stability and smoother business operations.  
In conclusion, I would say, the Mani pur GST (Amendment) Bill, 2025 is not 
merely a tax amendment. It is the pr o-people, pro-business, pro-development 
reform. It widens the State's revenue base at a time when every rupee is needed for 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
31

rehabilitation and development.  It brings lo ng-pending relief to honest taxpayers.  It 
simplifies GST procedures and reduces hara ssment.  It supports small businesses, 
artisans, traders and entrepreneurs who ar e the backbone of Manipur's economy, 
and, above all, it strengthens the Stat e's capacity to rebuild, recover and move 
forward unitedly. I, therefore, urge all Me mbers of this House to support this Bill 
wholeheartedly. Passing this Bill will send a clear message that Manipur is committed 
to recovery, committed to reform and committed to fairness and governance.   
Mr Chairman, Sir, I take this opportunity  to congratulate you on assuming the 
Chair of this august House and joining all my other colleagues earlier. I am sorry, I did 
not mention this in the beginning because of  the disruptions that were there, but we 
are very, very honoured to serve under your  able leadership. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Chairman Sir. 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA (Man ipur):  Thank you, Sir, for giving 
me this opportunity to participate in the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 2025.  My heartfelt grat itude to the hon. Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modi and the hon. Finance Mini ster, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman, for 
bringing this very important Bill to the Ho use.  Sir, the Manipur Goods and Services 
Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 2025 seeks to  replace, through an Act of Parliament, 
the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Sec ond Amendment) Ordinance promulgated 
on 7 th October, 2025.  The Bill ensures seamle ss continuity of tax administration in 
Manipur, aligning State laws with the Ce ntral GST Act and avoi ding any repugnancy 
with the Central law. 
Sir, here are some very important po ints on the Manipur Goods and Services 
Tax (Second Amendment) Bill 2025:- (1) Admi nistrative stability as a pillar of  
peace -- At a time when Mani pur is recovering from internal disturbances, a legal 
vacuum in tax administration would be disastrous by replacing the ordinances and 
validating all actions taken under it. The Mo di Government is ensuring uninterrupted 
revenue collection and enforcement, keep ing the administrative machinery steady 
when the State needs it the most. The stab ility directly reinforces the border peace 
building effort in the State that has seen  70,000 insurgents surrender and an 82 per 
cent decline in terror incidents from 2008 to 2023. Additionally, with a Rs. 500 crore 
contingency fund for Manipur in place, the Bill ensures that Manipur remains 
physically prepared and institutionally resilient, strengthening the foundations 
necessary for lasting peace and development. The second important point is cracking 
down on illicit trade vi a ‘track and trace’.  While the previous tax regime of Congress 
era suffered from systemic loopholes th at fuelled an illicit economy, the Modi 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Government is deploying technology-backed measures to shut it down.  Through this 
Amendment, the Government has inserted a new Section 148A, which introduces a 
mandatory ‘track and trace’ system with unique digital markings to detect fake 
invoicing and smuggling in real time.  Backed by Section 122B, which imposes a strict 
penalty of one lakh rupees or  10 per cent of tax payable for violation and mandating 
end-to-end digital monitoring, this provision ensures strict compliance, effectively 
securing the tax revenue against destabilizing networks.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please conclude. 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA:  Thank you, Sir. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. Sikander Kumar. 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार (िहमाचल Ģदेश): माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् 
िबल, 'मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर (दूसरा संशोधन) िवधेयक, 2025 पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, 
इसके  िलए मȅ आपका और सदन क े माननीय नेता का हािर्दक आभार Ģकट करता हूँ।   
सभापित महोदय, अगर मई, 2014 से पहले देश की आिर्थक िÎथित पर नजर डाली जा
ए, 
तो हम पाएँगे िक उस समय हमारे देश की आिर्थक िÎथित ठीक नहीं थी।   उस समय देश मȂ 
economical
 and physical discipline की बहुत कमी थी, िजसका मुख्य कारण उस समय देश 
का कमजोर नेतृत्व और िनणर्य लेने मȂ अक्षमता थी।  िजसकी वजह से देश आिर्थक तौर पर 
कमजोर हुआ, लेिकन मई, 2014 को देश को यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े 
रूप  मȂ एक सशƪ, दूरदशीर्, िनणार्यक और िन
भीर्क नेतृत्व वाला Ģधान मंतर्ी िमला, िजन्हȗने देश 
िहत मȂ कई कड़े फ ैसले लेकर आज भारत को दुिनया क े चुिंनदा देशȗ की Ǜेणी मȂ खड़ा कर  
िदया है।  
जब जन-धन खाते खोले गए, तब पूरी दुिनया इसके  बारे मȂ सोच रही थी िक ऐसा क्यȗ 
िकया जा रहा है।  आज 55,000 करोड़ अक
ाउंट्स क े माध्यम से सरकारी योजनाओं का लाभ, 
डीबीडी क े माध्यम से लोगȗ को िमल रहा है।  इससे देश मȂ टर्ांसपेरȂसी आई और लाभािर्थयȗ को 
डायरेक्ट लाभ िमलने लग
ा।  इसकी वजह से देश आिर्थक तौर पर िदन-ब-िदन आगे बढ़ता गया।  
देश को आगे ले जाने का एक रोडमैप तैयार िक या गया, देशिहत मȂ कड़े फ ैसले िलए गए, 
िजनका पिरणाम आज देश क े साथ पूरा िवÌव भी महसूस कर रहा है।  अब हमारा देश ग्यारहवीं से 
फोथर् अथर्ËयवÎथा बन गया है और आने वाले समय, यानी वषर् 2027 तक उसको तीसरी सबसे बड़ी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा बनाने का लÑ
य माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी ने रखा है।  मȅ समझता हूँ िक आने वाले समय, 
यानी वषर् 2027 तक हमारा देश तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनकर उभरेगा। 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस वषर्, यानी 2025 क े Îवतंतर्ता िदवस क े उपलÑय पर 
जीएसटी मȂ बड़ी राहत देने का जो एक वायदा िकया था, उसके  अंतगर्त 3 िसतंबर, 2025 को 
जीएसटी काउंिसल की 56वीं मीिंटग मȂ जीएसटी क े पहले क े 5%, 12%, 18% और 28% क े 
चार ÎलैÅस को घटाकर क ेवल 5% और 18% क े दो ÎलैÅस मȂ पिरविर्त त िकया गया।  मȅ समझता 
हूँ िक इससे देशवािसयȗ को एक बहुत बड़ी राहत िमली है।  इसी तरह, 28% की जीएसटी क े 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
33

अंतगर्त आने वाले 90% Ģोडक्ट्स को 18% की  जीएसटी क े अंतगर्त लाया गया और 12% की 
जीएसटी क े 99 Ģोडक्ट्स को 5% की जीएसटी मȂ लाया गया।  33 महत्वपूणर् जानलेवा बीमािरयȗ 
क े इलाज को जीएसटी क े दायरे से बाहर िकया गया, यानी उन पर जीरो जीएसटी िकया गया।  
इससे हमारे देशवािसयȗ को एक बहुत बड़ी राहत िमली है।  ÎवाÎथ्
य क े िलए हािनकारक उत्पादȗ 
को 40% क े Ĥैक े ट मȂ रखा गया।  रोजमरार् की जरूरतम ंद चीजȗ, जैसे दूध, दही, पनीर, रोटी को 
जीएसटी से बाहर करके  एक बहुत बड़ी राहत देशवािसयȗ को दी गई।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Pl
ease conclude. Three minutes have been allocated to you.  It is 
already three-and-half minutes. 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: Sir, please give me two more minutes. सर, देश और 
देशवािसयȗ को एक बहुत बड़ी राहत क े रूप  मȂ 22 िसतंबर, 2025 से नवराितर् और िदवाली का 
एक बहुत बड़ा तोहफा माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने िदया।  हम सभी को पता है िक जब हमारे देश मȂ 
जीएसटी से पहले वैट था, तो मुझे लग
ता है िक तब हमȂ 10% से 50% टैक्स हमȂ देना पड़ता था।  
आज क ेवल दो Ĥैक ेट्स क े बीच मȂ  5% और 18% क े टैक्स का Ģावधान िकया गय ा है, इससे हमȂ 
एक बहुत बड़ी राहत िमली है। मȅ समझता हूँ िक इसके  कारण एक तरफ देश मȂ जहाँ महंगाई कम 
होगी, उपभोग बढ़ेगा, सेिंवग बढ़ेगी, इन्वेÎटमȂट बढ़ेगा, वहीं दूसरी तरफ देश मȂ रोजगार क े बहुत 
से अवसर पैदा हȗगे और हमारी इक
ोनॉमी भी और boost up होगी।  इससे पहले, हमारे देश मȂ 
जीएसटी की कलेक्शन जहाँ 82,000 करोड़ रुपय े Ģित मंथ थी, वहीं आज हमारी जीएसटी की 
मंथली कलेक्शन बढ़कर 2 लाख करोड़ रुपय े से ऊपर हुई है और हमारी जीएसटी की ईयरली 
कलेक्शन लगभग 25 लाख करोड़ हुई है।  अथर्शाÎतर् का एक िवǏाथीर् होने क े नाते मȅ समझता हूँ 
िक देशिहत मȂ यह एक बहुत बड़ा िनणर्य िलया गया है।  मȅ इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ, The Manipur  
Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 2025 का समथर्न करता हूँ।      
          
MR. CHAIRMAN: The next speaker is Dr. Di nesh Sharma.  Three minutes have been 
allocated to you.  
डा. िदनेश शमार् ( उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे बोलने का अवसर िदया, 
इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। 
मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर (दूसरा संशोधन) िवधेयक, 2025 क े संदभर् मȂ हम सब जानते 
हȅ िक देश तेजी क े साथ आिर्थक रूप  से Ģगित कर रहा है और इसका सबसे बड़ा नमूना अभी क ु छ 
ही िदन पहले इसकी 8.2 परसȂट की जीडीपी की ित
माही दर की िरपोटर् का आना है।  इससे यह 
िसǉ होता है िक हम िवÌव की सबसे तेज गित से बढ़ने वाली अथर्ËयवÎथा वाले देशȗ मȂ से एक देश 
क े रूप  मȂ सुशोिभत हुए हȅ।  वतर्मान मȂ भारत ने अपने सभी राज्यȗ को बराबरी से उनकी Ģगित क े 
िलए काम िकया है।  मान्यवर, आज का जो समसामियक मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर ( दूसरा 
संशोधन) िव
धेयक, 2025 है, इसकी मूल भावना 7 अक्टूबर, 2025 को इसी संसद क े माध्यम से 
जारी िकये गये अध्यादेश को िव धेयक मȂ बदलने की एक Ģिकर्या मातर् है।  
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

यानी नीयत साफ है िक हम सुरक्षा और आिर्थक ËयवÎथा भी, सामािजक समरसता और 
एक Ģगित क े तौर पर मिणपुर को एक ǛेÍठ Îथान पर पहुंचाने की अिभकÊपना क े साथ काम कर 
रहे हȅ। भारत आज आिर्थक, सामािजक, शैिक्षक और रक्षा क े क्षेतर् मȂ जो Ģगित कर रहा है – यहां 
हमारे कांगर्ेस क े िमतर् उपिÎथत नहीं हȅ, उनके  पूवर् रक्षा मंतर्ी ए.क े. एंटनी जी ने खुले आम Îवीकार 
िकया है िक जो उनकी सरकार थी, कांगर्ेस की सरकार क े समय सीमा सुरक्षा की उपेक्षा की गई 
थी, जो दशकȗ तक कमज़ोर बनी रही। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, please conclude.  
डा. िदनेश शमार् : मȅ इस िवधेयक का न क ेवल समथर्न करता हूं, बिÊक मȅ समझता हूं िक आिर्थक 
उन्नित क े तौर पर और सीमांत Ģदेश क े तौर पर मिणपुर िनिÌचत रूप  मȂ Ģगित की तरफ जाएगा 
और आिर्थक उन्नित से वहां क े Ëयापािरयȗ को कर क े सरलीकरण से होने वाले लाभ आसानी से 
ĢाÃत हो सकते हȅ।  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Arun Singh. 
Ǜी अरुण  िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय, मȅ the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 2025 क े संदभर् मȂ बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हूं।  
महोदय, इस िबल क े माध्यम से बहुत सारी irregularities और  किठनाइयां दूर हȗगी। जो 
पहले plant और machinery था, उसकी definition बदली गई है। उसी क े साथ-साथ ऐसे 
provisions हȅ, िजनके  मा
ध्यम से ‘track and trace’ Ģणाली को लागू करने से यह एक अच्छी 
िडिजटल Ģणाली होगी।  
महोदय,जब मȅ मिणपुर से संबंिधत िवधेयक पर बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं, तो यह ज़रूर  
बताना चाहूंगा िक देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का मिण
पुर से िकतना लगाव है। 
अभी हम सब लोगȗ ने देखा िक 13 िसतंबर, 2025 को Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को चुराचांदपुर जाना था। 
चुराचांदपुर मȂ बािरश हो रही थी। वहां मिणपुर क े लोग खड़े थे। वे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का बािरश मȂ भी 
इंतजा
र कर रहे थे। मिणपुर मȂ जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने land िकया, तब लोगȗ ने बताया िक 
helicopter से आप नहीं जा सकते, क्यȗिक weather खराब है। उसके  बा द भी माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िनणर्य िलया िक मिणपुर क े लोग हमारे हȅ, वे हमारा इंतजार कर रहे हȅ, तो 
हमको जाना चािहए। लोगȗ ने कहा िक 65 िकलोमीटर  की दूरी है, आप by road जाएंगे, तो डेढ़ 
घंटे से अिधक समय लगेगा। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक डेढ़ घंटा ही नहीं, अगर 3 घंटा भी लगे, तो 
भी चुराच
ांदपुर जाऊं गा, लोगȗ से िमलूंगा और उनसे बात करके  आऊं गा। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी वहां गए 
और जाने क े बाद उन्हȗने 8,500 करोड़ रुपय े की पिरयोजनाओं का िशलान्यास और उǇाटन 
िकया। मिणपुर मȂ बहुत तेज गित से िवकास हो रहा है।  मिणपुर मȂ लोगȗ क े पक्के  घरȗ हेतु क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार ने लगभग 1 लाख, 1 हज़ार  से अिधक घरȗ क े िलए Îवीकृ ित दी है, उसके  िलए 1,054
 
करोड़ रुपय े खचर् हो रहे हȅ। 
 महोदय, जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, तब क ेवल 5.7 परस Ȃट घरȗ मȂ पानी पहुंचा था, 
लेिकन Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ ‘ जल जीवन िमश न’ क े माध्यम से आज मिणपुर क े 80 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
35

परसȂट घरȗ मȂ नल से जल पहुंच चुका है। इसी Ģकार से चाहे खेल हो, कला हो, संÎकृ ित हो, 
उसके  िलए भी 507 करोड़  रुपय े देने का काम यिद िकसी सरकार ने िकया है, तो वह हमारी 
सरकार ने िकया है। 
मिणपुर मȂ चहुंमुखी िवकास हो और वहां पर शांित-ËयवÎथा रहे, इसके  िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी 
मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने - यहां िवǄ मंतर्ी जी बैठी हुई हȅ – पूरा क Ȃ दर् सरकार का 
खजाना खोल िदया है िक मिणपुर क े एक-एक लोगȗ को, िजनका घर का नुकसान हुआ है, यिद 
पक्का है तो 10 लाख रुपय े दȂगे और कच्चा होगा तो 5 लाख रुपय े दȂगे। मिण
पुर क े भाई-बहन 
हमारे हȅ; िजतना भी पैसा लगेगा, क Ȃ दर् सरकार उन को दे रही है। वहां नए-नए National Highway 
बन रहे हȅ और ऐसी अनेक पिरयोजनाएं हȅ, वहां sports center बन रहे हȅ। सर, मȅ एक चीज़ जरूर  
कहना चाहूंगा िक जब इितहास क े पन्नȗ मȂ Îविर्णम अक्षरȗ से िल खा जाएगा, तब दो तारीखȂ हमेशा 
ध्यान रहȂगी। एक तो 1 जुलाई, 2017 और दूसरी - 22 िसतंबर, 2025 ध्यान रहेगी। 1 जुलाई, 2017 
इसिलए ध्यान रहेगी िक देश मȂ 17 Ģकार क े अलग टैक्स थे, 13 cess थे, octroi, VAT, entry tax 
जैसे अनेक टैक्स थे। यह हमारी सरकार, मोदी जी की सरकार है, िज सने सारे टैक्सȗ को खत्म 
करके  1 जुलाई, 2017 से एक देश मȂ एक कानून क े तहत GST लागू करने का काम िकया।                                   
  दूसरी तारीख 22 िसतÇबर, 2025 इसिलए ध्यान रहेगी, क्यȗिक इस िदन देशवािसयȗ को 
राहत िमली।  देशवािसयȗ पर कम टैक्स लगे।  जो िवǏाथीर् पȂिसल से लेकर िकताबȂ खरीदते हȅ, 
उस पर टैक्स न लगे, तो मोदी जी ने िनणर्य िलया िक जीएसटी की दर कम करȂगे।  उन्हȗने सभ ी  
वÎतुओं पर, चाहे ट ूथपेÎट हो, ट ूथĤश हो, ऑयल हो, बैटरी हो, िकताब हो या कॉपी हो,  हर वÎतु 
पर टैक्स कम करने का काम िकया और क ेन्दर् सरकार ने एक तरीके  से अपने 48 हजार करोड़ 
रुपय े माफ िकए और Ģत्येक देशवािसयȗ को राह त देने का काम िकया।   
 महोदय, मेरा और भी बातȂ बोलने का मन करता है, लेिकन समय नहीं है।   इसिलए मȅ 
आपकी घंटी का इंतजार नहीं करूं गा और अपनी बात समाÃत करूं गा। मȅ इतना ही कहूंगा िक जब 
कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, तो 2014 से पहले मिणपुर की जीडीपी की दर 1 परसȂट थी, लेिकन आज 
मिणपुर की जीडीपी 8 परसȂट से अिधक हो गई है और मिणपुर तेज गित से आगे चल रहा है।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ पुन: एक बार माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का ǭदय से अिभनंदन करते 
हुए अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूं।           
                  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
DR. M. T
HAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, with regard to the GST and its 
implementation, I would say that even th ough it was conceptualized during the 
Vajpayee Government but, actually, things were put into shape during the Congress 
Government.  At that time, AIADMK had a di fferent opinion about the GST.  At that 
time, even the present Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, opposed it. But, after 
assuming power, he has implemented it pr operly and due importance is being given 
to nation’s development.  In that respect, we  also support it and there is no different 
opinion.   
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 On behalf of my Party Ge neral Secretary, Shri Edappa di Palanisamy, I rise to 
strongly support the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 
2025. The proposed Amendments are time ly and necessary to strengthen the GST 
framework in the State of Manipur.  These Amendments will help improve 
compliance, enhance transparency, ensure smooth administration of the tax system, 
and, ultimately, benefit trade and business.   
 Sir, a lot of Tamil people also stay in Manipur.  Manipur people are also 
working in Tamil Nadu.  When the riots took place in Manipur, at that time, my leader, 
Shri Edappadi Palanisamy, raised the issue of protecting the Tamil people and took 
steps to ensure that Tamil people staying in Manipur are not affect ed.   At that time, 
Tamil leader, Mr. Moreh Shekhar, was there in Manipur.  Our aim is to bring normalcy 
in Manipur and we also want development th ere.  Therefore, Sir, we support the GST 
(Second Amendment) Bill brought forward by hon. Finance Minister, Shrimati 
Nirmala Sitharaman.  I am sure, these kind s of Amendments will benefit the Manipur 
people and their economy as a whole.  On behalf of my Party, AIADMK, once again, I 
support the Bill.   Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shrimati Dharmshila Gupta.  
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा (िबहार): आदरणीय सभापित जी, आपका आभार िक आपने मुझे इस 
महत्वपूणर् िबल मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर ( दूसरा संशोधन), िवधेयक, 2025 पर अपने िवचार 
रखने का अवसर िदया है।  एक मिहला जनĢितिनिध क े रूप  मȂ मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूं िक यह 
िवधेयक क ेवल कर पिरव
तर्न का दÎतावेज नहीं, यह मिणपुर की आिर्थक आत्मिनभर्रता की नई 
उÇमीद है, नई ऊजार् है और िवकास का मजबूत आधार है।  सबसे पहले मȅ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की और हमारी माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारम
ण जी की 
सराहना करना चाहती हूं।  जीएसटी जैसे जिटल िवषय को सरल, पारदशीर् और जनिहतकारी 
बनाना यह उनकी Ģितबǉता और Ģमाण है।    मोदी जी क े दूरदशीर् नेतृत्व मȂ यह जीएसटी िरफॉमर् 
संभव हो पाया है। आदर
णीय सभापित महोदय, अपनी बात को आगे बढ़ाने से पहले मȅ एक शेर 
दज़र् करना चाहती हूं : 
     “इरादȗ मȂ दम हो तो राहȂ खुद बन जाती हȅ 
               जो देश क े िलए चले उनकी मेहनत रंग लाती है।” 
  सभापित जी, हमारी आदरणीय िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण की 
कायर्शैली मȂ यही जįबा साफ नज़र आता है। मȅ आपको बताना चाहती हूं िक मȅ िबहार की बेटी हूं 
और पूरे दाियत्व क े साथ यह कह सक
ती हूं िक िबहार ने जीएसटी जैसा उÊलेखनीय लाभ महसूस 
िकया है। जीएसटी से पहले राज्य व क Ȃ दर् क े अलग-अलग Ģकार क े कर ȗ क े कारण Ëयापार मȂ 
अिनिÌचतता और जिटलता बनी रहती थी, लेिकन अब िबहार क े Ëयापारी एक सरल टैक्स 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
37

संरचना क े तहत काम कर रहे हȅ।  िबहार मȂ जीएसटी से कर संगर्ह मȂ िÎथर और सतत वृिǉ दज़र् 
हुई है। इससे राज्य क े बुिनयादी ढाँचे, गर्ामीण सड़कȗ, ÎवाÎथ्य और िशक्षा पर अिधक संसाधन 
लगाने की क्षमता िमली है।  
सभापित महोदय,  िबहार मȂ एनडीए की Ģचंड जीत हुई है। यह आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
और हमारे राÍटर्ीय अध्यक्ष आदरणीय जे.पी. नƿा जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हुआ है। मȅ इसके  िलए इन्हȂ 
आभार और बधाई भी देना चाहती हूं। इससे राज्य को राज Îव की  मजबूती िमली है। 
सभापित जी, Extra Neutral Alcohol (ENA), जो शराब िनमार्ण का मूल आधार है, इस 
पर कर लगाने का अिधकार अब राज्य सरकार को ही िमलेगा। पहले, जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, 
तब राज्य क े पास यह अिधकार नहीं था, िजसकी वजह से मिणपुर को करोड़ȗ रुपय े क े राजÎव का 
नुकसान होता था।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Pl
ease conclude. 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा: जी, मेरा टाइम पूरा हो गया है! मȅ लाÎट का Ãवाइंट बोल देती हूं। 
आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, मिणपुर की पहाड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा को नए राजÎ व ǣोतȗ की जरूरत  है। 
इससे छोटे दुकानदारȗ, मिहलाओं, उǏिमयȗ और युवाओं को कर Ģिकर्या मȂ राहत िमली है। एक 
मिहला होने क े नाते मȅ िदल से कहना चाहूंगी िक जब नीितयȗ मȂ संवेदना हो और फ ैसलȗ मȂ 
ईमानदारी, तभी बनती है वह सरकार, जो जनता क े िदल मȂ उतर जाती है।  
महोदय, यह िवधेयक मिणपुर को आिर्थक मज
बूती Ģदान करेगा, राजÎव की आय 
बढ़ाएगा, Ëयापािरयȗ को राहत देगा और िवकास की गित को आगे बढ़ाएगा। मȅ इसके  साथ ही इस 
िबल का समथर्न करती हूं।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Sh
ri Sujeet Kumar.   
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha):  Sir, thank you for giving me the opportunity.  At the 
outset, I would like to extend my heartiest congratulations.  I am looking forward to 
working under your able guidance and leadership. सर ,  हम  सबसे पहले तो पूरे 
देशवािसयȗ की तरफ से Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और िवǄ मंतर्ी िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद एवं कोिट-कोिट आभार देना चाहȂगे िक वे जो next generation GST 
refo
rms लेकर आए हȅ, वह सराहनीय है। इससे करोड़ȗ देशवािसयȗ को जो फायदा हुआ है, मȅ 
उसका एक उदाहरण ĢÎतुत करना चाहता हूं।  
 सर, मेरा एक डर्ाइवर है, वह मुझे बता रहा था िक उसका मेिडिसन्स पर महीने का 7 
हज़ार रुपय े का खचार् आत
ा था, लेिकन जब से उसने जन औषिध सुिवधा मȂ मेिडिसन्स खरीदनी 
शुरू  की हȅ, वह खचार् घटकर 2,300 रुपय े हो गय ा और जीएसटी का रेट घटने से वह 2,300 
रुपय े का खचर् 1,950 रुपय े हो गया है। ऐसा मेरे डर्ाइवर का कहना है।  This is the benefit which 
the common man of the country is getting because of the next generation GST 
reforms.  This Bill will align the State law with the Central GST Act and ensure 
continuity of tax administration.  As was mentioned, this is not just a routine update or 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

not just an isolated tax reform.  It is a part  of Prime Minister Mod iji’s larger effort to 
bring stability and peace across the States an d to bring dignity to the people of 
Manipur.  Some data have al ready been given.  I will just repeat them.  A sum of Rs. 
600 crore for investment under the PM Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
along with Rs. 507 crore for education for Manipur is there.                                                                    
Sir, Arun Singh ji was talking about the Jal Jeevan  Mission.  The saturation of 
Jal Jeevan Mission was only 5.7 per cent under the previous Congress regime which 
has now reached 80 per cent.  More than one lakh houses have been sanctioned 
which is 93 per cent of the target under th e Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Gramin.  
An amount of Rs.1,054 crore has been sanctioned under the PMAY - Gramin and 
PMAY- Urban in the current Budget.  
Sir, as far as security and peace are concerned, 10,000 personnel have been 
deployed to bring peace and stability in Ma nipur and 1,500 km of fencing has been 
done.  An amount of Rs.1,000 crore has been sanctioned for modernization of police 
forces.  An amount of Rs.2,866 crore ha s been sanctioned in the 2025-2026 Budget 
to combat insurgency.  Insurgency is a by -product of the long Congress rule in the 
State.  Today, situation in Manipur is returning to normalcy.  
With this Amendment to the GST Act, ad ministrative stability will bring peace.  
When Manipur is recovering from internal disturbances, the nation does not want a 
vacuum.  And, this is why, by replacing this Ordinance and validating all the actions 
under it, the Modi Government is ensuring revenue collection, which is an essential 
component of bringing peace and stability in  the development process of the State.  
Stability will reinforce the broader peace-bu ilding effort.  The numbers will speak for 
themselves.  
Sir, 7,000 insurgents have surrendered in  the State in the la st one year. There 
has been 82 per cent decline in terror incidents in the last one year.  A Contingency 
Fund of Rs.500 crore for Manipur has been prepared which will ensure fiscal resilience 
for the State.  Some loopholes will be pl ugged through this Amendment Bill which will 
enhance the revenue of the State.  By bringing fiscal discipline to the State's revenue, 
the procedural gaps, which were there, will be plugged.  And the tax administration 
will be more transparent and watertight.  
Sir, I will conclude by again thanking th e hon. Prime Minister and hon. Finance 
Minister for the landmark next generati on GST reforms, which have brought in 
genuine Diwali gifts to crores of Indian citizens.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
39

SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:  Sir, when hon. Prime Minister said that these next generation 
reforms will be a Diwali gift for you, it act ually was a Diwali gift for the common man, 
for the farmers, for the MSMEs, for the women, for the youth, for the middle class 
and for 140 crore Indian citizens.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:  Sir, just imagine paying no GST on insurance; paying only 5 
per cent GST on most of the products that we use, whether it is toothpaste or soap or 
bread; paying almost nil GST on life-saving drugs; and paying a reduced GST of only 
5 per cent on farm machinery equipment.  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Sir, these are the ki nd of reforms that the next generation 
GST reforms brought in.  I will conclude by saying that this Amendment Bill will 
significantly expand public services and social  infrastructure in the State of Manipur.  
It will help us reach our dream of Viksit Bharat.  Thank you very much, Sir.                                    
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर् (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ आज ‘ मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर ( दूसरा 
संशोधन), िवधेयक, 2025’ क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ। मȅ सबसे पह
ल े यह कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक इस िवधेयक क े िलए देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 2014 मȂ 
समाज क े बीच एक संकÊप लेकर चले थे िक देश का कोई भी कोना हो, चाहे पूरब हो, पिÌचम हो, 
उǄर हो या दिक्षण हो, सबको िवकास की मुख्य धारा मȂ जोड़
ना है। महोदय, मिणपुर क े साथ दो 
Ģकार की िÎथितयाँ थीं। पहली, काँगर्ेस की सरकारȗ ने मिणपुर को िवकास की मुख्य धारा से 
अछू ता रखा था। दूसरी, उस Ģदेश मȂ उगर्वाद की घटनाएं होती थीं। इन दो Ģकार की घटनाओं ने 
मिणपुर को पीछे की तर
फ ले जाने का काम िकया है। यह काँगर्ेस क े राजकीय शासन मȂ 60 सालȗ 
तक चलता रहा, लेिकन आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े संकÊप ने मिणपुर को िवकास की मुख्य 
धारा क े साथ जोड़ने क े संकÊप को पूरा िक
या।  इतना ही नहीं, वहां पर अब तक 7,000 से अिधक 
उगर्वािदयȗ ने समपर्ण िकया और आज 82 परस Ȃट उगर्वाद की घटनाएं समाÃत हो गई हȅ।  यह 
नरेन्दर् मोदी सरकार की उपलिÅधयां है।   
महोदय, कांगर्ेस की सरकारȂ इस देश क े उǄर, दिक्षण, पूरब, पिÌचम मȂ भेद पैदा करने 
का काम करती थीं।  वे िवकास की धारा मȂ Ëयिƪ और समाज को अलग-अलग रचनाओं मȂ देखने 
का काम करते थे।  वे कभी पूवȘǄर क े लोगȗ को चीनी की संज्ञा देते थे, तो कभी दिक्षण क े लोगȗ 
को अģीकी की संज्ञा देते थे और कांगर्ेस की सरकारȗ ने देश क े अंदर अपनी सǄा को Îथािपत 
करने का काम लगातार 60 वष र् तक एक पिरवार की राजनीित क े कारण िकया।  कबीर जी ने  
कहा था: 
“कबीरा क ु आं एक है, पानी भरे अनेक, 
बतर्न मȂ ही भेद है, पानी सब मȂ एक।” 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

यह देश, यह भारत की संÎकृ ित, चाहे वो पूरब हो या पिÌचम हो, उǄर हो या दिक्षण हो, 
भारत की रचना मȂ सबकी संÎकृ ित अलग थी, पहनावे अलग थे, वेशभूषा अलग थी, लेिकन भारत 
एक था।  आज नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने भारत की संÎकृ ित को समृिǉ की तर फ पहुंचाने का संकÊप 
िलया है। एक तरफ िवकास की बात करते हȅ और एक तरफ देश की एकता और अखंडता दोनȗ 
को एक धागे मȂ िपरो कर मिणपुर क े मुक ु ट को आज भारत क े क Ȃ दर् मȂ Îथािपत करने का काम अगर 
िकसी सरकार ने िकया है, तो वह नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िकया है। 
 महोदय, इतना ही नहीं, मिणपुर मȂ सामािजक और आिर्थक पुनिर्नमार्ण मȂ यह िवधेयक 
मदद करने वाला है।   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ple
ase conclude.  
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर्:  इससे राजÎव की िÎथरता आएगी।  क Ȃ दर् सरकार ÎवाÎथ्य, जल, जल जीवन 
िमशन आिद सभी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ काम कर रही है।  महोदय, मȅ एक बात कह कर अपनी बात को समाÃत 
करता हूं।   देश मȂ िवकास की धारा चल पड़ी है।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ho
n. Member, please conclude.  
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर्:  2047 तक िवकिसत भारत क े सपने को पूरा करने का एक लÑय लेकर क े 
मिणपुर क े लोगȗ ने संकÊप िलया है िक: 
“पूणर् Ģखरतम उज्ज्वल रिवसम, 
िवकिसत राÍ टर्  साकार Ģकट हो, 
सुखी सबल समरस भारत हो, 
एक िदशा मȂ हो Ģयासरत, 
राÍटर् समूचा चले िवजय पथ, 
जग मȂ गूंजे जय जय भारत।” 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक जी। 
 
Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक (गुजरात): चेयरमैन सर, आज मȅ मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर (दूसरा 
संशोधन) िव
धेयक, 2005 क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। माननीय सभापित महोदय, 
आज िजस िवधेयक पर हम चचार् कर रहे हȅ, वह क ेवल एक तकनीकी संशोधन नहीं है, बिÊक 
मिणपुर की िÎथित, िÎ
थरता, सुरक्षा, उǏोग और भिवÍय को तय करने वाला ऐितहािसक 
दÎतावेज है।  मȅ इस िवधेयक का पूणर् समथर्न करता हूं और साथ ही क ु छ राजनीितक सच्चाइयȗ 
को भी सदन क े सामने रखना मȅ अपना दाियत्व समझता हूं। कांगर्ेस की दशकȗ की उपेक्षा से 
मिणपुर को अिÎथरता िम
ली।  
माननीय सभापित महोदय, यह बात पूरे देश को पता है िक मिणपुर जैसे संवेदनशील 
राज्य को कांगर्ेस ने दशकȗ तक िसफर् वोट बȅक समझकर छोड़ िदया था। वहां न सुरक्षा का इंतजाम 
था, न सीमा Ģबंधन था, न आधारभूत ढांचे पर िनवेश था, न उǏोगȗ को Ģोत्साहन था और न ही 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
41

पारदशीर् Ģशासन था।  इसका पिरणाम यह हुआ िक वहां उगर्वाद पनपा, अवैध Ëयापार बढ़ा, डर्ग 
मािफया ने जड़Ȃ जमा लीं और आम जनता भय मȂ जीने को मजबूर हो गई।  आज जो सुधार हम देख 
रहे हȅ, कांगर्ेस इस िदशा मȂ एक कदम भी उठा नहीं पाई थी।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
क े नेतृत्व मȂ मिणपुर मȂ एक ऐितहािस
क बदलाव आया है।  हमारी सरकार ने वह िकया है, जो 
कांगर्ेस की सरकार करना तो दूर, बिÊक सोच भी नहीं सकती थी।  2008 से  2023 तक 7,000 
उगर्वािदयȗ ने आत्मसम
पर्ण िकया है।  82 परसȂट आतंकी घटनाओं मȂ भी कमी आई है।  सड़क, 
िबजली, Îकू ल, अÎपताल मȂ 50 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े से भी ज्यादा िनवेश हुआ है।  डर्ग मािफया पर 
बड़ी कायर्वाही हुई है और सीमा Ģबंध को भी कड़ा िकया गया है।  पहली बार एएफएसपीए हटाने 
की Ģिकर्या भी शुरू  हुई है। मिणपुर आज शांित की राह पर इसिलए है, क्यȗिक क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने 
राजनीितक इच्छाशि
ƪ िदखाई है।                                                                                  
Track and trace online ËयवÎथा और अवैध Ëयापार पर कठोर Ģहार करना, यह 
माननीय मोदी जी की सरकार मȂ संभव हुआ है।  कांगर्ेस क े समय अवैध Ëयापार, तÎकर
ी, नकली 
िबिंलग और ĥÍटाचार खुलेआम चलते थे।  इस िवधेयक क े तहत digital track and trace की 
Ģणाली लागू होगी।  तÎ करी और अवैध कारोबारी अब बच नहीं पाएंगे।  िनयम तोड़ने पर 10 लाख 
रुपए  का जुमार्ना और 10 परसȂट अितिरƪ कर भी लगाया जाएगा।  यह मिणपुर को काले धन और 
मािफयाओं से मुƪ करने की िदशा मȂ सबसे बड़ा कदम क Ȃ दर् सरकार उठा रही है।  उǏोग और 
Ëयापार क े िलए बड़ा सुधार और आईटी
सी मȂ भी कर्ांित ... 
MR. CHAIRMAN:    Please conclude. 
Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक: 2017 क े एक्ट मȂ संशोधन करके  यह सरकार ला रही है। "सबका साथ, 
सबका िवकास, सबका Ģयास और सबका िवÌवास", इन चार मूल मंतर्ȗ पर माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी देश को मजबूत करने क े िलए िजस तरह से 2047 मȂ िव
किसत भारत का सपना देख रहे हȅ 
और मिणपुर को भी आिर्थक रूप  से संपन्न करने क े िलए यह जो बदलाव ला रहे हȅ, मȅ उसका 
समथर्न करता हूं।  भारत माता की जय!  वंदे मातरम!                                                                               
MR. CHAIRMAN:    Now, Dr. Kalpana Saini. 
डा. कÊप
ना सैनी (उǄराखंड) : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आज इस महत्वपूणर् िवधेयक, मिणपुर माल 
और सेवा कर िवधेयक, 2025 पर िवचार और पािरत करने क े ĢÎताव का सम थ र्न करती हूं।  सबसे 
पहले मȅ हमारे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी तथा िवǄ मंतर्ी, आदरणीया िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को 
धन्यवाद देती हूं, िजन्हȗने समय की आवÌयकता को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए यह संशोधन सदन क े 
समक्ष ĢÎतुत िकया।  मȅ यह िवशेष रूप  से कहना चाहूंगी िक पारदिर्शता, सरलता और 
िवÌवसनीयता, इन तीन
ȗ मूÊयȗ क े िबना कोई भी कर ËयवÎथा मजबूत नहीं बन सकती।  यह 
िवधेयक इन सभी िंबदुओं पर खरा उतरता है।  
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, मिणपुर ने िपछले कई वषș मȂ सामािजक-आिर्थक चुनौितयां 
देखी हȅ।  ऐसे समय मȂ एक िÎथर, सरल और भरोसेमंद कर ËयवÎथा वहां क े Ëयापािरयȗ, 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

मिहलाओं, उǏिमयȗ, Îटाटर्अÃस और छोटे उǏोगȗ क े िलए बहुत आवÌयक है।  इसको ध्यान मȂ 
रख कर हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने यह ËयवÎथा दी है।   
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, जीएसटी 'एक राÍटर् एक कर' की अवधारणा पर आधािरत है, 
िजसका लÑय है कर Ģणा
ली का सरलीकरण, कर चोरी पर िनयंतर्ण, Ëयापार मȂ सुिवधा तथा 
राजÎव संगर्ह मȂ मजबूती।  ऐसे मȂ यह संशोधन Îथानीय उǏिमयȗ, छोटे Ëयापािरयȗ और उǏोग 
जगत को राहत Ģदान करेगा।  साथ ही िडिजटल अनुपालन और कर भुगतान Ģिकर्या और अिधक 
सरल होगी।  इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से अनेक सुधार हȗगे।  मि
णपुर मȂ जीएसटी की Ģिकर्या और 
अिधक सरल होगी, िजससे छोटे Ëयापारी, खास कर वे मिहलाएं, जो घर मȂ Ëयवसाय करती हȅ, 
उन्हȂ बड़ी राहत िमलेगी।  िरफं ड और इनपुट टैक्स कर् ेिडट की Ģिकर्या पारदशीर् और तेज होगी।  
इससे Ëयापार मȂ नकदी Ģवाह सुधरेगा और Îथानीय अथर्ËयवÎथा को गि
त िमलेगी।  िडिजटल 
अनुपालन को आसान बना कर सरकार ने यह सुिनिÌचत िकया है िक दूरदराज पहाड़ी क्षेतर्ȗ तक 
भी सुरिक्षत और सरल ऑनलाइन ËयवÎथ
ा पहुंच सके ।  इस संशोधन से मिणपुर को आिर्थक 
िÎथरता िमलेगी, जो वहां िवकास, िनवेश और रोजगार सृजन क े िलए बेहद महत्वपूणर् है।  आज 
जब देश मिहला शिƪ, नारी उǏिमता और आिर्थक Îवावलंबन को बढ़ावा देने की िदशा मȂ आगे 
बढ़ रहा है, तब यह आवÌयक है िक कर ËयवÎथा भी gender responsive और Ëयापार अनुक ू ल 
बने।  यह िव
धेयक उसी सोच को आगे ले जाता है।  
 सभापित महोदय, मȅ यह पूरी ÎपÍटता से कहना चा हूंगी िक मिणपुर मȂ शांित, िवकास और 
आिर्थक आत्मिनभर्रता तभी संभव है, जब वहां की कर ËयवÎथा िÎथर और िवÌवसनीय हो।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:    Please conclude. 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी: यह संशोधन Ëयापार जगत को नई ऊजार् देगा, िवशेष कर उन मिहलाओं को, 
जो अपने पिरवार और सम
ाज को आगे ले जाने मȂ महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभा रही हȅ।  मȅ यह भी कहना 
चाहूंगी िक कर Ģणाली तभी सफल होती है, जब वह Ëयापािरयȗ की सुिवधा, राजÎव वृिǉ और 
सुशासन तंतर् क े बीच संतुलन बनाए रखे।  यह िवधेयक उस उǈेÌय को मजबूती Ģदान कर ता है।  
राज्य मȂ शांित, िÎथरता और आिर्थक पुनरुत्थान क े िलए बेहतर िवǄीय ढांचा अत्यंत आवÌयक है 
और यह संशोधन उसी कड़ी का एक महत्व पूणर् भाग है।   
 अंत मȂ, मȅ पुन: माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और आदरणीया िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी क े Ģयासȗ की सराहना करते हुए सदन से आगर्ह करती हूं िक इस िवधेयक को 
पािरत िकया जाए, तािक मिणपुर क े आिर्थक पुनिर्नमार्ण, सामािजक िÎथरत ा और िवकास यातर्ा 
को नई िदशा िमल सके ।  जय िंहद!  जय भारत! 
 
3.00 P. M. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shrimati Sulata Deo. 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव (ओिडशा): जय Ǜी जगन्नाथ!  Thank you, hon. Chairman, Sir.  पहले तो 
मȅ आपका अिभनंदन करती हूं िक यह आपके  सामने मेरा पहला िडÎकशन है।   आज यहाँ पर The
  
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
43

Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 2025 क े ऊपर िडÎकशन 
हो रहा है। 
महोदय, पहले तो मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगी िक मिणपुर मȂ शांित वापस आए, मिणपुर से 
राÍटर्पित शासन हटाया जाए, मिणपुर मȂ इलेक्शन हो और मिणपुर मȂ गवनर्मȂट हो।  यह तो वैसे 
Îटेट का मैटर है, लेिकन चूंिक वहां पर राÍटर्पित शासन लगा हुआ है, इसीिलए हम लो
ग उसके  
ऊपर आज यहां िडÎकशन कर रहे हȅ।  मेरे नेता नवीन पटनायक जी हमेशा चाहते हȅ िक मिणपुर 
जैसे Îटेट मȂ मिहलाएं सुरिक्षत हȗ, मि हलाओं क े िलए वहाँ शांित आए और मिणपुर मȂ शांित  
वापस आए।   
महोदय, अब मȅ जीएसटी क े िवषय पर आती हूं।  जीएसटी चाहे कहीं भी हो, मिणपुर मȂ हो, 
ओिडशा मȂ हो या भारत मȂ कहीं भी हो,  सारे िवÌ व मȂ भारत ही एक ऐसा देश है, जहां पर सबसे 
ज्यादा, 28 परसȂट जीएसटी िलया जा रहा है, जबिक अजȄटीना मȂ भी यह 27 परस Ȃट ही है, 
इसिलए इस मामले मȂ हम उससे भी ऊपर आ गए हȅ।  अभ ी यहां जो महंगाई हो रही है, तो 
जीएसटी लगाना तो महंगाई क े ऊपर और भी बड़ी मार है।  चाहे कोई िरक्शा वाला, कोई भी छोटा 
काम करने वाला या चाय वाला अगर पैक े ट वाला मूड़ी खरीदे, तो उस पर भी जीएसटी लगा आता 
है।  वे इतना जीएसटी देकर क्या करȂगे?  ट ूथपेÎट, ट ूथĤश जैसी छोटी-छोटी सामिगर्यȗ और बच्चे 
जो दूध पीते हȅ, उस पर भी जी
एसटी है तथा मेिडिंसस और लाइफ सेिंवग डर्ग्स क े ऊपर भी 
जीएसटी है।  जीएसटी का Îलैब कम करना चािह
ए।  कई चीजȗ पर से तो पूरी तरह से इसे हटा 
देना चािहए।  इमरजȂसी वाली जो कमोिडटीज़ हȅ, जैसे – दूध, मेिडिंसस, इन पर तो इसे पूरी तरह 
से हटा देना चािहए।   
हम जीएसटी को लेकर मिणपुर क े बारे मȂ जो बात कर रहे हȅ, तो मिण
पुर एक ऐसा 
संघषर्मय Îटेट है िक वहाँ बहुत सारी कमोिडटीज़ पर से जीएसटी हटा देना चािहए।  जीएसटी क े 
चलते वहां पर जो ऑिफससर् हȅ, वे वहां क ै से सबकी हेÊप करȂ, उसको भी मǈेनजर रखना चािहए।  
सबसे बड़
ी बात यह है िक जो इंटरनेट कनेक्शन है, इलेिक्टर्िसटी है, वह अगर वहां पर ठीक से 
नहीं हो, तो जीएसटी क े बारे मȂ क्या बोलȂगे?  जीएसटी काउंिसल यहां पर बैठती है, मगर 
जीएसटी काउंिसल मȂ सारे Îटेट्स को िवÌ
वास मȂ लेना जरूरी है और िफर पुनिर्वचार करना 
जरूरी है।  यहां पर िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी बैठी हȅ।  संसद मȂ बार-बार मȅने और 
हमारे बीजू जनता दल क े सारे सदÎ
यȗ ने कहा है िक क Ȃ दू लीफ क े ऊपर जो 18 परसȂट जीएसटी 
था,  उसको  हटाइए, पूरा हटाइए।  नवीन पटनायक जी की िडमांड थी।  मȅ इस बात क े िलए 
धन्यवाद देती हूं िक वह 5 परसȂट तो हो गया है, मगर क Ȃ दू लीफ क े ऊपर से जीएसटी पूरा हटा 
दीिजए।  इसके  जुड़े कामȗ मȂ मिहलाएं बहुत सारी जुड़ी हुई हȅ।  इसमȂ  1
0 लाख मिहला Ãलकसर् हȅ, 
िजनको इस
से बेिनिफट िमलेगा।  हमारे यहाँ क े जो आिदवासी Ģोडक्ट्स होते हȅ, उन पर भी 
जीएसटी लगाया जाता है।  महुआ, जूना आिद क े ऊपर से भी जीएसटी हटा देना चािहए और 
हȅडीकर्ाÄट, हȅडलूम क े ऊपर से भी जीएसटी हटा देना चािहए।  इसके  साथ ही मȅ एक  
बात और बोलूँगी।  
MR.CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜीमती सुलता देव: सर, मȅ क ंक्लूड कर रही हूं।  मȅ ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ एक और बात बोलूंगी।  
ओिडशा मȂ जब हमारी सरकार थी, तब करीब 4,000 करोड़ का जीएसटी बकाया था, लेिकन वह 
आज तक िमला या नहीं, यह पता नहीं है।  हम तो जब छोड़ कर आए, तब यह बात थी।  अब तो 
वहां डबल इंजन हो गय
ा है, इसिलए हम सोच रहे हȅ िक वह जीएसटी हम लोगȗ को िमल  
गया होगा। 
MR.CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. …(Interruptions)…   
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: सर, उसको देखते हुए, मȅ बस इतना ही कहूंगी िक यह जो जीएसटी है, 
इसको सारे Îटेट्स को िवÌवास मȂ लेकर िकया जाए।  Thank you so much, Sir.  जय  Ǜी 
जगन्नाथ! 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Ayo
dhya Rami Reddy Alla. 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhra Pradesh) : Mr. Chairman, Sir, thank 
you for giving me the opportunity to speak on the Manipur Goods and Services Tax 
(Second Amendment) Bill, 2025. The uniform GST compliance and economic growth 
aligning Manipur's GST with Central rules ensures seamless interstate trade, reduces 
legal and administrative conflicts, and prov ides clarity and predictability for investors 
and businesses. This uniformity encourages investment, stimulates local production, 
and creates employment opportunities, mirroring the economic growth and prosperity 
observed in other States following harmon ized GST frameworks. These harmonized 
rules, including modern compliance mechanisms like “track and trace”, help minimize 
tax disputes and enhance revenue collection.  By reducing compliance burdens and 
ensuring transparency, Manipu r can focus on sustainable development, tapping into 
national economic progress and benefiting from inclusive growth that strengthens 
both the State and the country as a whole.  
Sir, I would like to bring certain issues to your attention, especially, focussing 
on the peace and economic stability in Manipur. In Manipur, violent incidents declined 
significantly over the past decades, from a peak of 740 incidents in 2008 to 97 in 2020, 
and 112 in 2021. Similarly, insurgent fatalities also fell from 364 in 2008 to 7 in 2020 and 
18 in 2021. While civilian deaths dropped from  28 in 2013 to 9 in 2020. Howev er, only 
in 2023, this declining trend has slowed down. As of April, 2025, there were about 260 
deaths that were reported. This needs to be  certainly looked into . Periods of relative 
peace also clearly support higher economic activities.  As s een in the trade, 
entrepreneurship and local industries, conversely, during episodes of ethnic violence, 
Manipur’s exports collapsed by nearly 80 per cent highlighting how sustained peace is 
essential for economic prosperity and stability. Sustainable peace also requires 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
45

addressing disparities between hill and va lley regions and between majoritarian and 
tribal communities also. We also need to re visit the Input Tax Credit (ITC) provisions 
for tourism and hospitality sector in Manipu r. In terms of critical GST issues, one 
industry that urgently requires  our attention and support is tourism and hospitality in 
that place. I also wish to draw the attent ion to the pricing and compliance distortions 
created by the current GST stru cture for textiles. We need to certainly look into it.  
Given these concerns, it is important that the… 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA: With all these comments and suggestions, we, 
from YSR Congress Party, support this Bill. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to reply to the discussion.  
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; THE MINIST ER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS (SHRIMATI 
NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I wish to recognize and I am grateful to you that for the 
first time with you in the Chair, I am being called to respond to a Bill. For that, I extend 
my gratefulness to you. Today, we are discussing on the Manipur Goods and 
Services Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 2025. Every time the Central Government 
amends the Central Goods an d Services Act of 2017, we also need the States to 
amend their State GST-related laws. Through the Finance Act, 2025, Sections 121 to 
134 of the Central Goods and Services Act were amended. It got enacted in August, 
2025. The changes have come into effect from October, 2025, and that could happen 
after more than half of th e States updated their GST la ws. So, every time, something 
happens in the Centre, the States also will h a v e  t o  p a s s .   O n c e  h a l f  o f  t h e m  h a v e  
passed, it comes into effect; that is how th is set of change came  to Sections 121 to 
134 which were made through the Finance Act of 2025 and ha ve come into effect in 
October because States have passed. Bu t, unfortunately, because Manipur was 
under the President’s rule, th e corresponding effect givi ng measures could not be 
taken up in the State GST laws. That simp ly was in a suspended mode, and Manipur 
Goods and Services Act of 2017 was not am ended but it was amended through an 
Ordinance.  That was promulgated by the Central Government.  That was done on 
7th October.  So, now, this Bill is coming  to replace that Ordinance and the changes 
which have been brought will be made permanent for Manipur's sake.  
 Sir, before I go into the few details whic h I want to Table he re, I want to say a 
word about the Opposition leaders, Opposition  parties.  Sir, day in and day out, we 
saw them shedding crocodile tears about Manipur for everything.  Did the hon.  Prime 
Minister visit? Did the hon. Home Minist er visit? Did the law and order come to 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

normalcy?  Every time about Manipur, they  will raise issues, they will voice their 
grievance, total crocodile tears!  I have seen it even earlier once when we brought in a 
Bill for Manipur's Budget because again it  was under the President's rule and the 
Governor was doing it, we had to present the Budget for Manipur.  Even at that time, 
they did not participate in the debate.  Even at that time, they did not think of Manipur 
people's welfare, that the money should  go to them through the Budget being 
passed.  They didn't think about it.  Even today, when the GST benefits have to go to 
the State Government because they will, ot herwise, not earn the revenue out of it, 
when we are trying to  have an Ordinance be converted to be a regular Bill and get it 
passed here to become an Act, they are not here to participate.  So, all the grievance 
that they voiced about Manipur, accusing  the Prime Minister, accusing the Home 
Minister, they are all just drama!  I am as hamed to say this.  I am sorry to say this.  
िवपक्ष का रोल यह होता है िक उसे एक िजÇमेदाराना रवैया अपनाना चािहए।  एक Îटेट, िजसके  
ऊपर वह इतनी बातȂ कर रहे हȅ, उसकी बेहतरी क े िलए जब कोई कानून पािरत होता है, जब 
उसका बजट पािरत होता है, तो उसक
ो उसमȂ शािमल होना चािहए, उसमȂ भाग लेना चािहए, 
मगर यह िवपक्ष तो मगरमच्छ क े आँसू बहा रहा है!  जब मिणपुर क े critical Bills आते हȅ, तो ये 
लोग भाग जाते हȅ।  सर, यह शमर्नाक बा त है।   I am sorry.  मȅ आपके  सामने यह कहना चाहती हूँ 
िक आज भी उन्हȗने मिणपुर की चचार् मȂ भाग नहीं िलया।  मȅ यह दुःख क े साथ कहना चाहती हूँ।  
Sir, this particular Amendment is very important because it does two things.  The very 
important reform-based steps that we have  taken in GST, include the track and trace 
system.  Once you do the track and tra ce system, which is a very big step in 
administering the GST, you are able to prev ent leakages and, therefore, that was one 
of the things which was passed in the Finance Act of 1925.  Now, we are making it 
into a Bill for Manipur.  Similarly, at the ti me of supply, particularly for vouchers, the 
rules which were dealing with it are bein g removed so that it becomes simple and 
because issuing a voucher is not actually th e supply of goods or service, this change 
will bring in ease of doing business, avoid unnecessary disputes at the time when the 
tax becomes payable.  So, that becomes a disputable point.  Now, that will be 
removed. There was from the beginning, a little ambiguity when we described plant 
and machinery.  W
e said, ‘plant or mach inery’.  The word ‘or’ led to a lot of 
confusion.  So, this time through the February Finance Act we have removed the 
word ‘or’ and put the word ‘and’ ‘Plant and machinery’ and, as a result, the ambiguity 
will be removed.  But again, I like to confirm here, which is for the good of the people 
of Manipur, we made ‘plant and machinery’ , removing ‘plant or machinery’, removing 
‘or’, it is not going to be affected only from today.  It will be affected from 1
st July 2017 
when the GST was originally for the first time brought to play.  So, as a result, people 
in Manipur, businesses in Manipur, enterpri ses in Manipur also will benefit from this 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
47

removal of ambiguity, which the entire na tion has benefited fr om.  But Manipur has 
been denied because there was no Government.  Now we are giving that benefit.  
Also, Sir, when there is a dispute, peop le are expected to pay 10 per cent pre-
deposit. We are only asking for 10 per cent pre-deposit for appeals before the 
appellate authority or the appellate tribunal, even in cases  where only the penalty is 
being challenged. So, this keeps the appeal process consistent so that it does not 
look as if we are taking the 10 per cent fo r appellate authority and not for the tribunal; 
those confusions will not prevail. We are bringing consistency in the process and 
discouraging frivolous litigation because people will just go in for some kind of a time-
buying or whatever; that frivolous litigation will be now discouraged. 
And lastly, Sir, when goods are kept in  a Special Economic Zone or a Free 
Trade Warehousing Zone and are sold before being taken out of the zone itself, such 
transactions will now be treated as neither a supply of goods nor a supply of services, 
providing again the much-needed clarity and avoiding unintended consequences. So, 
even before it is removed from the SEZ or the Special Economic Warehousing Zone, if 
the sale happens, we will treat it as non-sale, in the sense, we will treat it as neither a 
supply of goods nor a supply of services; so, there will not be any confusion. 
So, these Amendments have been carried  out in the Central GST Act.  But 
again, as I said earlier, it had not happene d in the Manipur State GST because of the 
Ordinance which had to be brought in; now, we are converting that Ordinance into  
a law. 
Sir, there are one or two points of clarification which some Members spoke 
about, which I will very quickly finish. In fact, there were 13 of them who spoke, and 
some of them did raise some issues.  Ho n. Member, Madam Sulata Deo, mentioned 
that in the recent rates, the maximum GST rate is 28 per cent. Twenty-eight per cent 
has actually been abolished, Sir. We do no t have 28 per cent anymore. It is not there 
anymore; it has been abolished. And, it ems which were in 28 per cent either moved 
to 18 per cent, or, if they were in goods, they moved to 40 per cent. So, there is no 
more 28 per cent. And when we say ‘sin  goods’, we say demerit goods, such as, 
tobacco, tobacco-products.  They have all gone to 40 per cent. So, that is one thing, 
Sir. 
Madam Sulata Deo also mentioned th at essentials, like, milk, food, 
toothpaste, handicrafts are subject to GS T. The rates of essentials have been 
reduced from 12 per cent to 5 per cent, Sir.  Handicrafts have come to 5 per cent. In 
fact, milk has no GST at all. It has never had. And, even now, except for that UHT, 
which has a specialised package, high-tem perature heating, and then it can be 
preserved without refrigeration, it used to  come in a specialised pack that, till you 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

open it, it can remain without refrigeration. After that, if you open  it, you will have to 
keep it in the fridge. That used to have a rate of tax. Other than that, milk never had a 
tax. Even this has now come to zero. The UHT has also come down to zero. So, I just 
want to give that clarification.  
As always, Members from Odisha, I can't  see Sambit Patra here, he always 
refer to the kendu leaves or the tendu leaves, in which tobacco is put in and it is rolled 
to make a beedi. That leaf is called tendu leaf. It  is collected as a minor forest 
produce. Sir, I want to reassure the hon. Member that it has now come down to five 
per cent, and she has recognised that in her speech. But on kendu leaves, at least 
four GST Councils have met and spoken on it. Elaborate discussions have happened. 
And if one State, Odisha, wants it, Telangan a would not want it. We have crossed all 
those stages and now we have brought it down to five. ‘Bring it down to zero!’ I am 
sorry to say, Sir, many requests come like that. By keeping an item at zero, where 
even some input credit can be accruing to yo u, this will not accrue to you if you keep 
it at zero. So, there is a benefit in keeping it at the lowest possible rate, which is five 
percent. If I move to zero, even the little refund that you get, you will not get.  So 
there is a reason, Madam, that we have kept it at five. This I want to inform the hon. 
Member through you, Sir.                                          
Then, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy spoke about inverted duty structure. I am 
happy to say that as much as work happened on rate rationalization, namely, bringing 
rates down, making four rates into only two, not having four, an equal amount of work 
went into correcting inverted duty structur e. And, in most of the items, inversion 
happened. That was because the final products were sold at, let us say, five per cent 
but the inputs were being bought at 12 per cent.  That difference could not be 
retrieved, and, as a result, there was an in version, but for retrieving the difference, 
you had to give them refunds.  I am happy to say that that inversion problem has been 
largely addressed in the new generation GS T which has come into force. So, I would 
like to inform Shri Ayodhy a Rami Reddy that the issu e of inversion has been 
addressed almost 99 per cent.  There can st ill be one or two which we will address as 
and when it happens or comes about, Sir. 
 A particular mention was made by the hon. Member on hospitality. We have 
actually reduced the GST on hotel rooms with a tariff of Rs. 7,500/-  or less   per night 
to five per cent. Earlier, it was 12 per cent. The hotel rooms with a tariff of Rs. 7,500/-  
or less, which were earlier taxed at 12 per cent, now, they have all come down to five 
per cent. This will, I am sure, make travel easier. Tourism will have an attractive point 
there. And, they will have a reason to encourage tourists to take care of the rooms, 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
49

which are at that cost. So, with these words, Sir, I request the House to pass this Bill, 
because it will help the State of Manipur. Thank you very much, Sir.      
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The question is: 
 
 “That the Bill to further to amend the Manipur Goods and Se rvices Tax Act, 
2017, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill. 
Clauses 2 to 16 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I move: 
 “That the Bill be returned.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Special Mentions. 
 
 
 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Ajeet Madh avrao Gopchade; not present. Shri A. D. Singh; not 
present. Shrimati Maya Naroliya.  
 
Demand for starting Vande Bharat/Rajdhani Express from Narmadapuram to Delhi. 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया (मध्य Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद ज्ञािपत 
करती हूं िक आपने मुझे िवशेष उÊलेख पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया है। मȅ सरकार का ध्यान 
मध्य Ģदेश क े नमर्दापुरम (होशंगाबाद) िजले की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहती हूँ। नमर्दापुरम से 
Ģितिदन बड़ी संख्या मȂ यातर्ी राजधान
ी नई िदÊली की ओर यातर्ा करते हȅ, लेिकन इस मागर् पर 
कोई भी सीधी, सुपर फाÎट और आधुिनक Ǜेणी की टर्ेन उपलÅध नहीं है, इसि लए यहां क े याितर्यȗ 
को भोपाल या इटारसी होकर यातर्ा करनी पड़ती है, िजससे समय और धन दोनȗ का नुकसान 
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

होता है। इस क्षेतर् की जनता लंबे समय से वंदे भारत अथवा राजधानी जैसी तेज़ एवं सुरिक्षत टर्ेन 
सेवा की मांग कर रही है। यह सुिवधा छातर्ȗ, नौकरीपेशा Ëयिƪयȗ, Ëयापािरयȗ और याितर्यȗ सभी 
क े िलए बहुत अिधक आवÌयक है।   
 महोदय, मȅ सरकार से इस समÎया क े िनराकरण क े िलए आगर्ह करती हूँ िक  नमर्दापुरम से 
िदÊली क े बीच सीधी वंदे भारत या राजधानी एक्सĢेस टर्ेन शुरू  करने का अध्ययन िकया 
जाए। इससे नमर्दा घाटी क्षेतर् क े लाखȗ याितर्यȗ को सुिवधा ĢाÃत होगी l 
  महोदय, मȅ सरकार से इस मांग पर सकारात्मक कारर्वा
ई िक अपेक्षा करती हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The following hon. Members associated themselves with the 
Special Mention made by Shrimati Maya Naroliya: Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh) and Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh),Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu; 
not present.  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba.   
Demand for Inclusion of 'Sanamahi' as a Separate Religion in the Census of India. 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA (MANIPUR) : Sir, the Manipur 
Legislative Assembly, through a una nimous Resolution adopted on 5
th August, 2022, 
had urged the Registrar General and the Census Commissioner of India to include 
Sanamahi as a separate relig ious category. This Resolution reflects not only the 
collective voice of State’s elected repr esentatives but also the long-standing 
sentiments of the Meitei/Meetei community for whom ‘Sanamahi’ is an indigenous 
and ancient faith with unique religious practices, rituals and cultural heritage. 
  Despite repeated appeals from scholars, civil society organizations, 
community leaders and religious boards or authority like Lainingthou Sanamahi 
Temple Board and Uttra Shanglen, Sana  Konung, etc., the absence of an 
independent enumeration code for Sanama hi has led to misrepresentation and 
dilution of the religious identity of its fo llowers. Thousands of in dividuals continue to 
identify with Sanamahi in practice, yet ha ve no appropriate category to record their 
faith in the Census Schedule. Recognizin g Sanamahi as a distinct religion would 
ensure accurate demographic representation, safeguard cultural heritage and uphold 
the constitutional principles of religious freedom and identity. 
  So, I urge upon the Government to incl ude ‘Sanamahi’ as a separate religion in 
the Census of India and issue a clear direct ive to the Census authorities accordingly. 
Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Ramji Lal Suman; not pr esent. Dr. Fauzia Khan; not present.  
Shri Mahendra Bhatt.  
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
51

Demand to confer Bharat Ratna award to Gaura Devi ji, the leader of  
Chipko movement. 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड):  महोदय, गौरा देवी जी उǄराखंड क े सीमांत जनपद चमोली की 
जोशीमठ िवकास खण्ड क े रेणी गांव की भोिटया जनजाित की गर्ामीण मिहला थीं, िजन्हȗने अपने 
जीवन काल मȂ पयार्वरण संरक्षण क े िलए ‘ िचपको आंदोलन’ की शुरुआत  की थी । ‘ िचपको 
आंदोलन’ िहमालय क्षेतर् मȂ बड़े पैमाने पर और पेड़ȗ की कटाई क े िखलाफ मातृशिƪ ǎारा वृक्षȗ क े 
आिंलगन से जुड़ा आंदोलन था। आज इस आंदोलन क े 51 वषर् पूणर् हो गए हȅ। 
  महोदय, पयार्वरण बचाने क े िलए यह िचपको आंदोलन 26 माचर्, 1974 को इस सीमांत क्षेतर् मȂ 
Ģारंभ हुआ था। जब पेड़ȗ को काटने वाले ठेक ेदारȗ ǎारा पेड़ काटने क े िलए मजदूरȗ को भेजा गया 
था,  तब गौरा देवी जी की नेतृत्व मȂ मिहलाएँ इन पेड़ो से िचपक गईं।  उन्हȗने कहा पेड़ȗ को काटने 
से पहले उन्हȂ काटा जाए। 
  इस आंदोलन की गूँज को भारत सिहत संपूणर् दुिनया ने सुना। ‘ िचपको आंदोलन’ ने देश मȂ 
पयार्वरण संरक्षण को बड़ा मुǈा बना िदया और यह आंदोलन भारत क े िहमाचल, कनार्टक, 
राजÎथान तथा िबहार राज्यȗ तक फ ै ल गया। इस आंदोलन का ही पिरणाम रहा िक तत्कालीन 
भारत सरकार ने 15 वषș तक िहमालयी राज्यȗ मȂ पेड़ कटान को पूणर्त:  Ģितबंिध त कर िदया। 
  ‘ िचपको आंदोलन’ गौरा देवी जी क े संघषș की कहानी है। जंगल Ģकृ ित क े िलए िकतने 
मूÊयवान है, यह बात उस आंदोलन क े गीत मȂ िनिहत है, िजसमȂ कहा गया है : 
“िचपका डाÊथु पर न क ंटण दÈवा, पहाड़ȗ की सÇपि
Ǆ अब न लूटण दÈवा।” 
  महोदय, मȅ सरकार से मांग करता हूं िक इस महान िवभूित को मरणोपरांत “भारत रत्न” से 
सÇमािनत िकया जाए। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Memb ers associated themselves with the 
Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri  Mahendra Bhatt: Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
(Uttar Pradesh) and Shrimati Rekha Sharma (Haryana).  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal – not 
present.  Shri Lahar Singh Siroya. 
 
Need for balancing heritage preservation and tourism promotion 
Ǜी लहर िंसह िसरोया (कणार्टक) : चेयरमैन, साहब आपका बहुत-बहुत Îवागत। कनार्टक की 
छ: करोड़ जनता की तरफ से आपका अिभनंदन और Îवागत।  
Sir, I bring the attention of the Government  to the critical state of our national 
heritage, exemplified by Hampi, the magnificent "open-air museum" and a 
profound testament to the Vijayanagara empire's glory. Following the hon. Prime 
Minister’s recent call to citizens to visit 25 heritage sites, we mu st urgently balance 
tourism promotion with effective, long-term heritage conservation.   
Recent media reports highlight seriou s concerns at Hampi. Unchecked 
vegetation on monuments, stalled restor ation work and an expert vulnerability 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

assessment raise doubts about the adequacy of current management by concerned 
agencies.  Recent interactions with experts,  following the launch of a publication on 
Hampi underscored the deep concern for it s preservation. Our irreplaceable cultural 
treasures demand a sustained nation al commitment. Excessive, often  
unruly tourism, directly causes heritage degr adation. We must consider international 
best practices, including regulating or limitin g tourist numbers at critical sites during 
peak periods. 
I, therefore, urge the Union Government to mandate the Archaeological Survey 
of India (ASI) to urgently devise a comprehe nsive, national-level formula to actively 
and sustainably balance heritage preserva tion and tourism ma nagement across all 
our heritage sites. The Government must also launch a sustained national campaign 
to educate citizens on the profound value of our heritage and the vital importance of 
its preservation. 
Hampi is a jewel of Indian history.  Its pr otection, and that of all such sites, is a 
paramount national and global responsibilit y. Let us act now to ensure that the 
magnificence of our heritage endures.     
                   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil – not present.  Dr. Dinesh 
Sharma. 
Concern over cybercrime and its profound impact on poor citizens 
डा. िदनेश शमार् (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय, तकनीकी Ģगित क े साथ-साथ साइबर अपराधȗ का 
Ģसार हमारे िलए एक गंभीर चुनौती बन गया है। जहाँ िडिजटल लेनदेन और ऑनलाइन सेवाओं ने 
जीवन को सरल बनाया है, वहीं साइब
र अपरािधयȗ क े िलए लोगȗ की Ëयिƪगत जानकारी चुराना 
और उन्हȂ आिर्थक नुकसान पहुँचाना आसान हो गया है। िफिंशग, पहचान की चोरी, ऑनलाइन 
ठगी और हैिंकग जैसे अपराध आम हो चुक े हȅ। इनके  कारण नागिरक, िवशेषकर गरीब और 
तकनीकी रूप  से कम जागरूक  लोग, बड़े नुकसा
न का िशकार हो रहे हȅ। ऐसे लोग अपनी मेहनत 
की कमाई िडिजटल माध्यमȗ मȂ सुरिक्षत रखने का Ģयास करते हȅ, लेिकन अपयार्Ã त जानकारी क े 
कारण साइबर अपराधȗ का िशकार हो जाते हȅ। 
साइबर सुरक्षा क े अभाव मȂ गरीब वगर् क े लोग, जो इंटरनेट की सुरक्षा क े बारे मȂ पूरी तरह 
से पिरिचत नहीं हȅ, अपरािधयȗ क े िलए आसान िशकार बन जाते हȅ। उनके  िलए िकसी भी तरह की 
आिर्थक क्षित एक गंभीर आघात होती है, िजससे उबरना उनके  िलए किठन हो जाता है। इसके  
अलावा, िडिजटल अरेÎट जैसे मामलȗ मȂ भी गरीब नागिरकȗ को अिधक समÎयाओं का सामना 
करना पड़ता है, जो उनके  िलए मानिसक और आिर्थक संकट का कारण बनता है। साइबर 
अपराधȗ की समÎया से िनपटने हेतु क ु छ महत्वपूणर् सुझाव इस Ģकार हȅ।  पहला, साइबर सुरक्षा 
कानूनȗ को सख्त बनाया जाए, तािक गरीब और अिशिक्ष
त नागिरकȗ की रक्षा सुिनिÌचत हो सके ।  
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
53

दूसरा, गरीब वगर् क े िलए िडिजटल लेनदेन की Ģिकर्या सरल बनाई जाए और साइबर ģॉड क े 
Ģित जागरूकता  गाँव और नगर Îतर तक पहुँचाई जाए।  तीसरा, Îथानीय पुिलस को साइबर 
अपराध की िरपोिटȊग क े िलए Ģिशिक्षत िकया जाए और इन मामलȗ मȂ गरीबȗ की सहायता हेतु 
िवशेष Ģावधान सुिनिÌचत िकए जाएं।   
मȅ सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूं िक गरीब नागिरकȗ की सुरक्षा हेतु िडिजटल सुरक्षा पर 
यथासंभव आवÌयक कद
म उठाए जाएं। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Dr. Su mer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), 
associated himself with the Special Mentio n made by the hon. Member, Dr. Dinesh 
Sharma. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Raghav Chadha; not present.  Shrimati Rekha Sharma. 
Demand for gender-safe smart public transport for small and medium towns 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA (Haryana) :  Sir, I draw attention of Government to a 
fundamental requirement for women's empowerment and economic participation, the 
need for safe, reliable and modern public  transport system in India's small and 
medium towns.  While metropolitan cities have seen improvement in bus fleet, metro 
services and surveillance systems, thousands of women in Tier-2 and Tier-3 towns 
still face daily challenges simply in commuting to school, colleges, workplaces, 
hospitals or markets. I humbly demand the creation of Gender-S afe Smart Transport 
Network across such towns. These need no t be heavy infrastructure projects, but 
they can be practical, affordable and quickly implementable.  A key component of this 
initiative should be electric minibuses fleet, which is ideal for narrow town roads, 
ensuring frequent, reliable and low emissi on mobility from early morning to late 
evenings. Equally important are small safety  features, including GPS tracking, linking 
to a public dashboard, CCTV surveillance in side buses, and at major stops, panic 
buttons connected to centralised control rooms and live tracking mobile apps for 
women passengers. Many wome n hesitate to use public  transport after sunset 
because bus stops are poorly lit. Solar-powered LED lighting, CCTV-enabled shelters 
and clean seating arrangements can make a significant difference. Transport planning 
must also consider women-focused routes and timings, covering girls' colleges, 
nursing institutes, industrial areas and marketplaces with reliable evening return 
services. Additionally, employing women as  conductors, supervisors and control 
room staff will enhance confidence and crea te dignified employment. Safe mobility 
strengthens women's access to education, employment, entrepreneurship and social 
participation. I urge the government to look into it.  
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Demand for improvement in the run timings of train in the South Eastern Division of 
Indian Railways 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal):  Sir, Indian Railways has made major 
progress in safety, passenger  facilities, cleanliness and modernisation under the 
leadership of our hon. Prime Minister.  West Bengal has also benefited greatly 
through new services and better infrastruc ture. However, passengers travelling on 
local and express trains in the South Eastern Division Headquarters at Garden Reach, 
Kolkata, are now facing frequent dela ys, cancellations and disruptions. These 
problems occur due to infrastructure work , technical issues and other operational 
reasons.  The Division handles important routes connecting Kolkata with major cities 
like Mumbai, Chennai and carries many tourists, patients and long-distance 
travellers. People from West Bengal as  well as neighbouring States - Bihar, 
Jharkhand and Odisha - depend heavily on these trains. These repeated disruptions 
cause serious inconvenience, especially to the patients travelling for urgent medical 
treatment.  Although officials in the Division are trying to manage the situation, more 
focused intervention is needed.   
Therefore, I request the Government of India to kindly look into this matter and 
take steps to improve train punctuality and operations in the South-Eastern Division at 
the earliest.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Tejveer Singh.  
Concern over rising pollution in Uttar Prades
 h 
Ǜी त े जवीर िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, मȅ सरकार का  ध्यान उǄर Ģदेश मȂ हाल क े 
महीनȗ मȂ बढ़ते वायु Ģदूषण और जल Ģबंधन से जुड़ी गंभीर चुनौितयȗ की ओर आकिर्षत करना 
चाहता हूँ।  राज्य क े Ģमुख शहर लखनऊ, नोएडा, गािजयाबाद, कानपुर और मेरठ लगातार देश 
क े अत्यिधक Ģदूिषत शहरȗ की सूची मȂ शािमल होते रहे हȅ।  खराब वायु गुणवǄा न क ेवल लोगȗ क े 
ÎवाÎथ्य को Ģभािवत कर रही है, बिÊक आिर्थक गितिविधयȗ, िवǏालयȗ, पिरवहन और जनजीवन 
पर भी गहरा असर डाल रही है।  इसके  साथ ही, कई क्ष
ेतर्ȗ मȂ सीवेज टर्ीटमȂट Ãलांट्स की क्षमता 
सीिमत है, जबिक औǏोिगक अपिशÍट का अनुिचत िनÎतारण और भूजल का अिनयंितर्त दोहन 
िÎथित को गंभीर बना रहा है।  Ģदूषण िनयंतर्ण तंतर् मȂ तकनीकी और Ģबंधन स े जुड़ी किमयाँ भी 
सामने आई हȅ, िजनके  कारण सुधारȗ की गित अपेिक्षत Îतर तक नहीं पहुँच पा रही है। 
  अत: मȅ सरकार से इसके  िलए क ु छ कदम उठाने का अनुरोध करता हूँ।  पहला, 
Ģदूषण-Ģभािवत शहरȗ मȂ Îवच्छ हवा सुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए एक Ģभावी और समयबǉ ‘क्लीन 
एयर एक्शन Ãलान’ लागू िकया जाए; दूसरा, औǏोिगक अपिशÍट िनÎतारण और उत्सजर्न मानकȗ 
की कड़ी िनगरानी क
े  िलए एक िवशेष ĢकोÍठ Îथािपत िकया जाए और तीसरा, भ ूजल संरक्षण 
और वषार् जल संचयन को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए राज्यËयापी अिभयान चलाया जाए। 
[ 25 December, 2025 ]
55

 अ ंत  मȂ, मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करता हूँ िक उǄर Ģदेश की पयार्वरणीय चुनौितयȗ का 
समाधान Ģाथिमकता क े आधार पर िकया जाए, तािक नागिरकȗ को Îवच्छ हवा और सुरिक्षत जल 
उपलÅध हो सके । 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Sanjay Seth.  
Concern over MSME exporters aff ected by the U.S. Tariffs 
Ǜी संजय स ेठ (उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ Micro, 
Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME) क्षेतर् ने अभूतपूवर् Ģगित की है। आज ' उǏम' और 
'उǏम अिसÎट' पोटर्ल पर 6.5 करोड़ से अिधक इकाइयाँ पंजीकृ त हȅ, िजन्हȗने देश मȂ 28 करोड़ 
लोगȗ को रोजगार िदया ह
ै।  देश क े जीडीपी मȂ 30 परसȂट से अिधक और एक्सपोट्सर् मȂ 45 परसȂट 
से अिधक की िहÎसेदारी रखने वाला यह सेक्टर आज 'िवकिसत भारत' क े संकÊप को आगे बढ़ा 
रहा है।  सरकार ǎारा ' पीएम िवÌव कमार्' और PMEGP जैसी योजनाओं क े माध्यम से छोटे 
उǏिमयȗ को जो सहायता दी जा रही है, वह सराहनीय है, लेिकन वतर्मान मȂ अमेिरका ǎारा 
लगाए गए 50 परसȂट टैिरफ क े कारण हमारे MSMEs एक 'Liquidity Crisis' का सामना कर रहे 
हȅ।  Textile, leather और  handicraft जैसे labour-intensive sectors का माल गोदामȗ मȂ फ ंसा 
है और cash fl
ow पूरी तरह रुक  गया है।  भुगतान मȂ 90 िदनȗ से अिधक की देरी होने क े कारण 
कई छोटी इकाइयȗ क े खाते NPA घोिषत होने क े कगार पर हȅ।  संकट की गंभीरता को देखते हुए 
तत्काल बȅिंकग राहत की आवÌयकता है, इसिलए मेरा सरकार और RBI से  िवनĦ आगर्ह है िक 
इस संकट क े समाधान हेतु एक Unified Relief Measure लागू िकया जाए, िजसके  माध्यम
 से 
RBI उन खातȗ क े िलए One Time Forbearance (िवशेष छू ट) Ģदान करे, िजनकी िकÎतȂ ट ैिरफ 
क े कारण रुकी हȅ, तािक वे NPA न बनȂ। साथ ही, िनयार्तकȗ की working capital को सुचारू  
रखने क े िलए 'Interest Subvention Scheme' और 'Repayment Moratorium' को तत्काल 
Ģभाव से लागू िकया जाए।  यिद समय रहते MSME उǏिमयȗ को यह आिर्थक सहायता िमल गई, 
तो हमारे 28 करोड़  रोजगार स ुरिक्षत रहȂगे और वे ' िवकिसत भारत' क े लÑय मȂ अपना योगदान 
देते रहȂगे।      
MR. CHAIRMAN: Next is Shri Tiruchi Siva - not pr esent. Shri Sant Balbir Singh- not 
present. The House stands adjourned to m eet at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 3 rd 
December, 2025. 
The House then adjourned at forty-six minutes past three of the clock till eleven of  
the clock on Wednesday, the 3rd December, 2025. 
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 