Vol. 268       Monday, 
No. 18 18 August, 2025 
  27 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Obituary Reference (p
age 1) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 2  - 4) 
Matters raised with Permission- 
Need to rename roads named after historical invaders (pages 4 - 5) 
Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee- (page 5) 
Government Bill —Passed   
The Indian Ports Bill, 2025- (pages 6 - 45) 
 [Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
 ] 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :  http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:  rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 18th August, 2025/27 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock,  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
OBITUARY REFERENCE 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I refer with profound sorrow to the 
passing a
way of Shri La. Ganesan, a fo rmer Member of this House, on the 15 th 
of August 2025, at the age of 80.  He served as a Member of this House, representing 
the State of Madhya Pradesh, from October 2016 to April 2018. 
Born on 16 th February 1945  in Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, Shri La. Ganesan  was a 
multifaceted personality - a dedicated public  servant, author, editor, lyricist and a 
staunch cultural nationalist. 
He served as the Editor  of the Tamil magazine,  Ore Nadu , contributed 
extensively to the mainstream publications, and was the founder-President 
of  POTRAAMARAI, a non-political literary organi zation committed to promoting 
cultural discourse.  A committed social and political worker, Shri Ganesan actively 
worked to restore communal harmony in Tamil Nadu during the times of social unrest. 
Shri La. Ganesan served as the Governor of Manipur from  August 2021  till 
February, 2023.  During this time, he held the additional charge as the Governor of 
West Bengal briefly from July  to November, 2022.  From 20
th February 2023, until his 
sad demise, he served with distinction and dignity as the 16 th Governor of Nagaland, 
upholding the values of public service and unity. 
A patriot to the core, Shri Ganesan’ s life was wholly devoted to nation-
building, cultural preservation and selfless pu blic service.  In the passing away of Shri 
La. Ganesan,  the country has lost a principled l eader, a devoted nationalist and a 
tireless champion of cultural and social harmony. 
We deeply mourn the passing away of Shri La Ganesan. I request hon. 
Members to rise in their places and obse rve silence as a mark of respect to the 
memory of the departed. 
(Hon. Members then stood in silence for one minute) 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Secretary-Gene ral will convey to the members of the 
bereaved family our s
ense of profound sorrow and deep sympathy. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 

PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
Notifications of the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM 
ENTERPRISES (SUSHRI SHOBHA KARANDLAJE) :  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy 
each (in English and Hindi) of the following  Notifications of the Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises, under sub- section (3) of Section 29 of the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006: - 
(1) S.O. 4845(E)., dated the 7 th November, 2024, issuing the instructions that
all companies registered under the Comp anies Act, 2013 with a turnover of
more than Rs. 250 crore and all Centra l Public Sector En terprises shall be
required to get themselves onbo arded on the Trade Receivables
Discounting System platforms, set up as per the notification of the Reserve
Bank of India, along with delay statement.
(2) S.O. 1376(E), dated the 25 th March, 2025, directing that all companies who
get supplies of goods or services fr om micro and small enterprises and
whose payments to micro and small ente rprise suppliers exc
eed forty five
days from the date of acceptance or th e date of deemed acceptance of the
goods or services, shall submit a half yearly return to the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs stating the specifications mentioned therein.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), See No. L.T. 5035/18/25] 
Statements showing action taken by the Government  on the various assurances, 
promises and undertakings during various s
essions 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) :  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy 
each (in English and Hindi) of the following  Statements showing action taken by the 
Government on the various assurances, promises and undertakings given during the 
Session shown against each: - 
1. Statement No. XIV
Two Hundred Forty Eighth, 2019 
2. Statement No. XX Two Hundred Fiftieth, 2019 
3. Statement No. XIX Two Hundred Fifty Third, 2021 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

(a) Report of the Comptroller and Audi tor General of  India on Direct Taxes for
the period ended in March, 2023 - Union Government - Department of
4. Statement No. XIX Two Hundred Fifty Fourth, 2021 
5. Statement No. XVII Two Hundred Fifty Sixth, 2022 
6. Statement No. XI Two Hundred Fifty Eighth, 2022 
7. Statement No. XI Two Hundred Fifty Ninth, 2023 
8. Statement No. VIII Two Hundred Sixtieth, 2023 
9. Statement No. VII Two Hundred Sixty Third, 2024 
10. Statement No. VI Two Hundred Sixty Fifth, 2024 
11. Statement No. IV Two Hundred Sixty Sixth, 2024 
12. Statement No. II Two Hundred Sixty Seventh, 2025 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (12), See No. L.T. 5036/18/25] 
 
Report and Accounts (2023-24) of the AI Engineering Services Limited, New Delhi 
and other related papers  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION  (SHRI 
MURLIDHAR MOHOL):  Sir, I lay on the Table— 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1)
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: -
(a) Twentieth Annual Report and Accounts of the AI Engineering Services
Limited, New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report
on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India thereon.
(b) Statement by Government accepting the above Report.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers
mentioned at (1) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5010/18/25] 
Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN T
HE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) :  Sir, on behalf of Shri Pankaj 
Chaudhary, I  lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following 
Reports under clause (1) of article 151 of the Constitution:- 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
3

Revenue - Report No. 14 of 2025 (Compliance Audit-Civil); and 
(b) Report of the Comptroller and Audito r General of India on Compliance of the
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Ma nagement Act, 2003 for the year 2023-
24 - Union Government - Department of Economic Affairs - Ministry of
Finance - Report No. 19 of 2025
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5037/18/25] 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, 19 notices have been received today on 
four different subjects
 under Rule 267.  Of these, 11 notices do not contain a motion 
drawn in proper terms as per the requiremen t of Rule 267 to obtain a decision of the 
House. Further, 10 notices do not mention th e date on which their notices under Rule 
267 are to be invoked.   Eleven of these notices do not contain rules which the 
Members Seek to suspend. In addition, 13 of these notices demand discussion on a 
matter which is sub judice.  Since none of these notices received today are in 
adherence to the requirement of the rules, I am not ad mitting any of the notices. 
...(Interruptions)... N o w ,  M a t t e r s  t o  b e  r a i s e d  w i t h  P e r m i s s i o n  o f  C h a i r .  
...(Interruptions)... Zero Hour submissions – Need  to rename roads named after 
historical invaders. Dr. Dinesh Sharma. ...(Interruptions)... क ृपया ज़ीरो आवर चलने दȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह मेÇबसर् आवर है।...(Ëयवधान)... इÌयूज़ हȅ, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
Need to rename roads named after historic
al invaders 
डा. िदनेश शमार्  (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे आकर्ांताओं क े नाम पर 
रखे गए सड़कȗ क े नाम बदलने की आवÌयकता पर बोलने की अनुमित दी, इसके  िलए आपका 
आभार। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़ ...( Ëयवधान)... ज़ीरो आवर और क्वेÌचन आवर बहुत महत्व पूणर् है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़ आप अपनी सीट पर जाइए। ...( Ëयवधान)... सदन को चलने दीिजए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
डा. िदनेश शमार्:  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन का ध्यान एक अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् 
राÍटर्ीय और सांÎकृ ितक िवषय की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया सीट पर जाएँ और सदन को चलने दȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  यह ज़ीरो आवर 
का समय है, क ृपया ज़ीरो आवर चलने दȂ।   Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. िदनेश शमार्:  महोदय, हमारे देश मȂ आज भी कई सड़कȂ और संÎथान ऐसे िवदेशी आकर्ांताओं, 
आतताि
ययȗ और अत्याचािरयȗ क े नाम पर हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़ ...( Ëयवधान)... आप ज़ीरो आवर नहीं चलने देना चाहते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... सदन की कायर्वाही दोपहर दो बजे तक क े िलए Îथिगत की जाती है। 
 
The House then adjourned at six minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the Chair. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : I have to inform Members 
...(Interruptions)...  Please sit down.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please settle down.  
I have to inform Members that the Business Advisory Committee, in its meeting 
held today, on the 18
th of August, 2025, has allotted ti me for Government Legislative 
Business as follows:  
 Business Time 
Allotted 
1. Consideration and Passing of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025 as passed 
by Lok Sabha. 
Three 
Hours 
 
2. Consideration and Passing of the Indian Institutes of Management 
Amendment Bill, 2025  after it is introduced, considered and 
passed by Lok Sabha.  
  
    One 
    Hour 
 
 
THE  VICE-CHAIRMAN  (DR.  SASMIT  PATRA) : Now,  for  the  Listed Business, 
Shri Sarbanand Sonowal to move a motion fo r consideration of the Indian Ports Bill, 
2025, and also speak briefly on it, if it is so desired. 
 
 
 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
5

GOVERNMENT BILL 
 
The Indian Ports Bill, 2025 
 
THE MINISTER OF PORTS, SHIPPING  AND WATERWAYS (SHRI SARBANANDA 
SONOWAL):  Sir, I move:  
                “That the Bill to consolidate the law relating to ports, promote integrated 
port   development, facilitate ease of  doing business and ensure the optimum 
utilisation of India's coastline; establis h and empower State Maritime Boards for 
effective management of ports other than major ports; establish the Maritime State 
Development Council for fostering structured  growth and development of the port 
sector; provide for the management of po llution, disaster, emergencies, security, 
safety, navigation, and data at ports; ensure compliance with India’s obligations 
under international instruments to which it is a party; take measures for the 
conservation of ports; provide for adjudicat ory mechanisms for the redressal of port-
related disputes; and address matters connect ed therewith or incidental thereto, as 
passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.”                                                                             
 
The question was proposed. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Motion moved.  There is one 
Amendment by Dr. V. Sivadasan for referen ce of Indian Ports Bill, 2025 to a Select 
Committee of the Rajya Sabha.  Hon. Member s, Sub-Rule 2 of Rule 72 of the Rules 
and Procedure and Conduct of Business in  the Council of States, Rajya Sabha, 
stipulates that no Member shall be appointed to a Select Committee if he is not willing 
to serve on the Committee and that the mover of the motion that the Bill is referred to 
a Select Committee shall ascertain whether a Member proposed to be named by him 
is willing to serve on the Committee.  I presume that the hon. Member has, while 
submitting his notice of motion for referring the Bill to the Select Committee, complied 
with the requirements of Rule 72 (2).  Th e Member may move the Amendment at this 
stage without any speech. Dr. V. Sivadasan, are you moving your Amendment? 
...(Interruptions)... Dr. V. Sivadasan, are you moving your Amendment?  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, 
* ...(Interruptions)...   
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Is the Amendment moved or not?  
...(Interruptions)…  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, ...(Interruptions)...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): No; this is not going on record.  Are 
you moving the Amendment or not?  ...( Interruptions)...  Are you moving the 
Amendment, hon. Member?  ...(Interru ptions)... I will come  to that.  
...(Interruptions)... No; you ar e not moving the Amendment! 
...(Interruptions)...Amendment is not moved.   ...(Interruptions)... Hon. LoP, I am 
going to… ...(Interruptions)... Everyone, please go to your places.  Hon. LoP, before 
I give you the floor, as you are aware, und er the Rules of this House, any matter 
which is sub judice or is a part of the judicial proceedings right now, cannot be taken 
on record.  ...(Interruptions)... And anything that is not a part of the Listed Business 
will not go on record.  ...(Interruptions)... I am just giving that clarity.  Hon. LoP, the 
floor is yours.   
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE) :  You are the 
supreme authority.  You are our guardian. 
* ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon.  LoP, this is not part of the Bill.  
…(Interruptions)... It is not the Listed Busine ss.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. LoP, this is 
not going on record.  …(Interruptions)... I am sorry, this is not going on record.   
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): *...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  T h i s  i s  n o t  g o i n g  o n  r e c o r d .   
…(Interruptions)…  No.  This is not part of the Bill.  …(Interruptions)…  This is not going 
on record.  …(Interruptions)…  This is not going on record.  …(Interruptions)… This is 
not part of the Bill.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Leader of the Opposition, you are aware 
of it.  …(Interruptions)…  It is not going on record.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, हम  वॉकआउट करते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
7

(At this stage some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :   Yes, hon. Leader of the House.  
…(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, please go to your seats.  Only what the hon. 
Leader of the House says is going on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing else is going 
on record.   Silence in the House, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Leader of the 
House is on his legs.  Only what he says will go on record.   
 
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सर, मȅ िफर से अपनी बात िरपीट करता हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
21 जुलाई को जब सतर् शुरू  हुआ था, तब मȅने  बड़े ÎपÍट शÅदȗ मȂ कहा था िक यह सरकार 
िनयमसंगत, whatever is permitted under the rules, this Government, under the 
dynamic leadership of Prime Mini
ster Modi, is ready to have discussion on any subject 
to be taken up...  …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Let us have order in the House. If you 
have to leave, please leave silently. …(Interruptions)… Thank you.  Yes, hon. Leader 
of the House.   
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : Time and again, the Chai r has given the ruling that 
the issue which they wanted to raise cannot be raised according to the Rules of 
Business.  … (Interruptions)… It has been expressed by you too from the Chair many 
times.  They have got no interest in the discussion  …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Let us have order in the House. 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : I would like to bring it on record that they have 
wasted 69 hours-and-one-minute of this House. …(Interruptions) …  Sixty-nine hours 
have been wasted because of the way they have been behaving! … (Interruptions)…   
This irresponsible behavior of the opposition the country is Seeing.  देश देख रहा है और 
हम यह बताना चाहते हȅ िक इनको िकसी भी चचार् मȂ रुिच  नहीं है, जैसा मȅने पहले भी कहा िक 
िसफर् anarchism और obstructionism मȂ इनका िवÌवास है। इनकी िजतनी भी भत्सर्ना की जाए, 
वह कम है। मȅ यहां िफर से हाउस क े माध्यम से देश को बताना चाहत
ा हूं िक हम सभी मुǈȗ पर 
चचार् कर न े क े िलए तैयार हȅ। जो इस िनयमावली और िनयमȗ क े तहत आता है, उस पर चचार् 
होगी। हमने ऑपरेशन िंसदूर की बात कही थी, तो हमने ऑपरेशन िंसदूर पर चचार् की, सारी 
बारीिकयȗ पर चचार् की और इनको मुंह की खानी पड़ी, इनको समझ मȂ आया। ये िक स तरीके  से 
पाटीर् का िवरोध करते-करते देश का िवरोध करने लगे हȅ। आज आपने उन्हȂ यहां बोलने की 
परिमशन दी। वे कहते हȅ िक Leader of the Opposition को बोलने नहीं िदया जाता। आपने 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

परिमशन देने से पहले बताया िक अगर वे सÅजेक्ट पर बोलȂगे, िजसके  िलए परिमशन दी गई है, 
उस पर बोलने क े िलए परिमशन िमलेगी। आपने कहा िक कोई भी बात िवषय से बाहर की होगी, 
तो वह on record  नहीं  जाएगी। इन्हȗने यहां जो बातचीत की, वह िवषय से जुड़ी हुई नहीं थी, 
िजस पर चचार् चल रही थी। इन्हȗने गलत तरीके  से मौके  का फायदा उठाया। वह एक्
सपंज होना 
चािहए और िरकॉडर् से बाहर भी होना चािहए। इस बात को हमȂ ध्यान मȂ रखना चािहए। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  I had already ruled, before hon.
 
Leader of the Opposition started speaking, that a matter, which is sub judice  or 
before the courts, is not before us at this point in time and will not go on record.  The 
Legislative Business today is about Indian Po rts and anything else beyond it does not 
form the scope of our discussion, and the same will not go on record.  I have clarified 
it to him.  I am clarifying it again right now.   We will go on to the list of speakers.  I 
now call upon the Members whose names have  been received for participation in the 
discussion.  Shri Mokariya Rambhai. 
 
SHRI MOKARIYA RAMBHAI (Gujarat):   Sir, the Indian Ports Bill, 2025, is a landmark 
reform that would redefine the legislative di mensions of India’s maritime landscape.  
India’s more than 11,098-kilometre-long coastline is the driver of its four trillion dollars 
economy, powering over 95 per cent of our trade by volume and nearly 70 per cent by 
value.  Major port cargo handling has touche d a historic high of 855 million tonnes in 
the Financial Year 2024-25, up from 581 MT in the Financial Year 2014-15, which is an 
increase of 47 per cent.  The port capaci ty has expanded by 87 per cent at major 
ports in the last decade.  Ships, that on ce lingered nearly for four days, now turn-
around in just 48 hours, a 48 per cent im provement through digitalization and process 
streamlining.  Under Sagarmala , 272 projects worth Rs.1.41 lakh crore are 
completed, including jetties, ferry terminals, port-conn ectivity corridors and berth 
expansion.  Coastal shipping  has increased 118 per cent, while cargo movement on 
inland waterways has witne ssed an astonishing 700 per cent surge, from 6.9 MMT in 
2014 to over 55 MMT today.  It is a big achievement but ये कांगर्ेस वालȗ और अपोिज़शन 
वालȗ क े माइंड मȂ नहीं आता है िक मोदी साहब क्या काम कर रहे हȅ?  उनको अपोिज़ट ही करना 
है।  मȅ भगवान से Ģाथर्ना करता हूं िक इनको सदबुिǉ दे।  यिद ऐसे ही करते रहȂगे, तो  हम और 
आगे बढ़ जाएंगे और वे और डाउन हो जाएंगे।  Nine Indian ports now rank in the World 
Bank’s global Container Port Performanc e Index (CPPI) with Vishakhapatnam at 
No.19 and Mundra at No.27.  From just 21  million tonnes in 1950, India’s maj
or ports 
now handle a record 855 million tonnes, a 28 -fold leap that has redrawn the nation’s 
maritime map.  The Indian Ports Bill, 2025, is our opportunity to transition from catch-
up mode to global leadership, matching in ternational ports.  The current framework 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
9

lacks statutory provisions for long-ter m port planning.  The pre-defined and 
coordinated protocols for emergency response and disaster management are absent.  
A dispute resolution mechan ism suited to a complex stakeholder ecosystem is the 
need of the hour.  सर, मȅ पोरबंदर से आता हूं।  मेरा नेिटव Ãलेस पोरबंदर है।  वहां गवनर्मȂट का 
एक नेचुरल पोटर् है।  मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से िरक्वेÎट करना चाहता हूं िक उस पोटर् को थोड़ा 
डेवलेप करȂ। वहां बार-बा
र रेत अंदर आ जाती है, िजसकी वजह से नािवकȗ और Îटीमर को अंदर 
जाने मȂ िदक्कत होती है।  वह िडफȂ स क े िलए भी एक इÇपोटȄट पोटर् है।  वह बारहमासी बंदरगाह है 
और वहां एक रेलवे लाइन भी है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से बताना चाहता हूं िक कांगर्ेस क े समय मȂ रेलवे 
टर्ैक क े ऊपर illegal encroachment कर ली गई थी।  उसको हटाने क े बाद पोटर् मूवमȂट क े िलए 
टर्ेन भी वहां पहुंचनी च
ािहए और इसके  िलए मंतर्ी जी से बात की थी और अब  मूवमȂट हो रही है। मȅ 
दोनȗ मंितर्यȗ को अिभनंदन करता हूं।  वह बारहमासी पोटर् है और सबसे पुराना पोटर् है।  िडफȂ स क े 
िहसाब से वहां कोÎट गाडर् भी है, नेवी भी है।  सर, पोरबंदर मह
ात्मा गांधी जी की जन्म भूिम है। 
उसके  आगे वेरावल पोटर् है, मुंदर्ा पोटर् है।  वलसाड से आगे जो समुंदर् है, उसकी रȂज भी अभी बढ़ 
गई है। शायद पहले 1,600 िकलोमीट
र थी।   वह अभी 2,300 िकलोमीटर से अिधक बढ़ गई है। इस 
Ģकार से वहाँ पर काफी opportunities ĢाÃत हȅ।    
महोदय, हमारे गुजरात का एक कोÎटल हाइवे है, मȅ इसके  िवकास क े िलए मंतर्ी जी से 
िरक्वेÎट करूं गा।  मȅ इस िबल का समथर्न कर
ता हूँ, लेिकन इसके  साथ ही एक िडमांड यह भी 
रखता हूं िक इसके  िवकास क े िलए भी क ु छ कीिजए। गुजरात काफी डेवलप हो रहा है, लेिकन सी 
शोर पर इंटÎ
टर्ीज़ काफी कम हȅ। यिद इसके  िलए भी क ु छ cruise आ जाएगा, तो  बेहतर हो 
जाएगा।  मȅ इसके  िवकास क े िलए सरकार से िडमांड करता हूं।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आपने मुझे इस िबल पर अपनी बात रखने का अवसर िदया है, इस के  
िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  Shri Golla Baburao. 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO (Andhra Pradesh) :  Sir, at the outset , I congratulate the 
hon. Prime Minister and the hon. Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways for 
introducing this very important Bill.  
As you all know that our Indian coastline is around  10,000 kilome tres, but our 
A.P. alone got around 974 kilometres.  Sir, in fact, I have so many issues, but you 
have given me only three minutes.  So, I request yo u to give me another two 
minutes... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The time is allotted as per the 
formula.  You continue.  
  
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : As far as the major ports ar e concerned, among all other 
major ports, our Visakhapatnam Port is really doing excell ently well and its rank is 
always third and fourth among the major port s in India.  But, coming to the minor 
ports, there are around 10 ports in our A.P. alone.  The only problem with minor 
ports is they lack infrastr ucture; they lack financial help and they lack all the 
facilities. For example, I tell you, when ou r hon. former Chief Mi nister was in office, 
he started four ports, Ramayapatnam, Machilipatnam, Kakinada, and Mulapeta. 
One port is worth of Rs. 5, 000 crores and another is worth of Rs. 3,500 crores. 
And, he had also started 10  fishing harbours and six fi sh landing centers. They are 
very helpful not only for fishin g trade, the internal trade,  external trade, but also 
giving employment to these fishermen community and othe r people who are residing 
on the coastline... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Let us keep decibels low, please, in 
the House.  
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : Now, Sir, I come to these im portant issues, one-by-one.  
The second point is lack of proper planni ng. Sir, for the development of a port, you 
have to have master plan for the development of port ecosystem, like identification 
of base cargo, proximity to  the specific manufacturing and consumption hubs and 
augmentation of port capacity. More than  60 ports, out of to tal, about 270 non-
major ports are handling only  15 to 20 per cent of tota l cargo handled by the non-
major ports.  I am not giving other examples due to shortage of time.  I want that the 
Government of India should also help th e coastal States by giving them proper 
planning which will go a long way in  helping them and be part of the Viksit Bharat . 
…(Time-bell rings.)…  Everybody visualizes Viksit Bharat  and we all want to achieve 
the goals of Viksit Bharat.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Please conclude.  
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : These ports will play a major role in the achievement of a 
Viksit Bharat in the coming years.  Thank you very much. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Now, Shrimati Sulata Deo.  
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव (ओिडशा):  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय,  आपका बहुत-बहुत  धन्यवाद िक आपने 
मुझे The Indian Ports Bill, 2025 पर बोलने का मौका िदया है।  महोदय, जब ओिडश
ा की बात 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
11

आती है और मैरीटाइम का िजकर् करते हȅ, तो हमारे सामने ओिडशा का इितहास आ जाता है। जब 
ओिडशा का मैरीटाइम देखते हȅ, तो मालूम होता है िक यह इितहास मȂ भी िलिपबǉ रहा है। 
महोदय, हमारे ओिडशा क े साधव जावा, सुमातर्ा, बाली आि द जगहȗ पर जाकर िकस तरह 
िबजनेस िकया करते थे।  
इसे देखकर ही पता लगता है िक हमारा मैरीटाइम क्षेतर् िकतना डेवलप था। हमारा सी, 
हमारा पोटर् तब भी िकतना डेवलप था। आज जब हम इंिडयन पोट्सर् िबल, 2025 पर िडÎकशन 
कर रहे हȅ, तो इसे मǈेनज़
र रखते हुए, ओिडशा पर ज्यादा से ज्यादा गुरुत्व िदया जाए। यह 
सबको मालूम है िक ओिडशा की कोÎटल लाइन 480 िकलोमीटर की है। मगर ओिडशा की 
कोÎटल लाइन को डेवलप करने को लेकर ओिडशा गवनर्मȂट क े पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी, नवीन पटनायक 
जी की तरफ से कई बार िलिखत रूप  मȂ ĢÎताव आए हȅ। हम लोगȗ ने कई बार ĢोटेÎट भी िक
या है 
िक ओिडशा की 480 िकलोमीटर की कोÎटल लाइन क े चलते, हमȂ क ै से भी करके  सागरमाला 
Ģोजेक्ट िदया जाए और इसका डेवलपमȂट िकया जाए। हम लोग इससे कभी िडनाई नहीं कर 
सकते हȅ िक भारतवषर् मȂ िगने-चुने िजत
ने भी बंदरगाह हȅ, उनमȂ जब हम ओिडशा का पारादीप 
बंदरगाह देखȂगे, तो पाएंगे िक वह एक सबसे अच्छा बंदरगाह है। इसके  सा थ ही, गोपालपुर और 
धामरा जैसे Ģाइवेट पोट्सर् हȅ, िजन्हȂ डेवलप िकया जाना चािहए। उन्हȂ िजतना डेवलप होना 
चािहए, आज वे उतने डेवलप नह ीं  हȅ। अगर हम सोचȂगे िक यह िसफर् एक पोटर् है, तो यह नहीं हो 
सकता है। जबिक, यह वहाँ क े कोÎटल लोगȗ की लाइफलाइन है। वहाँ क े कोÎटल एिरयाज़ मȂ जो 
िमिनमम थर्ी िमिलयन पीपÊस िनवास करते हȅ, उनकी फाइनȂिशयल गर्ोथ िकस तरह से हो, वहाँ 
पर जो मछु आरे हȅ, उन्हȂ िकस तरह से आगे बढ़ाया जाए, उन्हȂ िकस तरह से डेवलप िक
या जाए, 
कोÎटल लाइन िकस तरह से डेवलप हो - यह सबसे ज्यादा िंचताजनक बात है। 
महोदय, मȅ एक और बात कहना चा हती हूँ। जब हम लोग साइक्लोन क े बारे मȂ बात करते 
हȅ, तो साइक्लोन की क ैिपटल ओिडशा को बोला जाता है। साइक्लोन क े बाद वहाँ क े कोÎटल 
एिरयाज़, जैसे पारादीप, जगतिंसहपुर, क Ȃदर्ापाड़ा, गोपालपुर या कोई भी जगह ले लीिजए, वह 
वृहद रूप  से क्षितगर्Îत होती है। मगर हमारे िफशरमैन या वहाँ की लोके िलटी मȂ जो लोग रहते हȅ, 
उन्हȂ मुआवज़ा नहीं िमल पाता है। महोदय, जब पोटर् बनाया गय
ा था, तब उन लोगȗ को िवÎथािपत 
िकया गय ा  था। ...(समय की घंटी)... मगर उन्हȂ िवÎथािपत करने क े बाद, उन लोगȗ क े िलए कोई 
पैक े ज नहीं िनकाला गया। इसे मǈेनज़र रखते हुए, हम साइक्लोन को रोक पाएं और मȅगर्ोव 
फॉरेÎट को ज्यादा से ज्यादा बढ़ाया जाए। इसके  साथ ही, मȅ कहना चाहूँगी िक इस िबल क े 
माध्यम से, िजत
ने भी िनयम आ रहे हȅ, लोगȗ को इनकी सुिवधा िमलनी चािहए। खास करके , 
ओिडशा क े मैिरटाइम क्षेतर् को मǈेनज़र रखते हुए, सारे पोट्सर् का अपगर्ेडेशन िकया जाए, गर्ीन 
पोटर् का िनम
ार्ण िकया जाए।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please conclude. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: हमारी यही िडमांड रहेगी। 480 िकलोमीटर की कोÎटल लाइन को ज्यादा से 
ज्यादा यूज़ िकया जाए। इसके  साथ ही, हमारा सागरमाला Ģोजेक्ट बहुत िदनȗ से पȂिंडग है। हमȂ 
सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट से एÌयोरȂस िमलता है िक हम इसे करȂगे, मगर क ु छ नहीं हो पाता है। मेरी िडमांड 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

रहेगी िक जब हम पोटर् िबल को ला रहे हȅ, तो इसमȂ सागरमाला Ģोजेक्ट को भी शािमल िकया 
जाए। ओिडशा क े साथ कभी सौतेला Ëयवहार न िकया जाए। ओिडशा क े पोट्सर् का डेवलपमȂट 
िकया जाए, क्यȗिक ओिडशा क े पोट्सर् से आयरन, कोल जैसे बहुत सारे िमनरÊस आते हȅ, जो 
अथर्नीित को ÎवाबलÇबी बनाते हȅ। मेरी िडमांड रहेगी िक ओिडशा क े पोट्सर् पर ज्
यादा से ज्यादा 
नज़र रखी जाए और Ģाइवेट पोट्सर् पर भी ध्यान िदया जाए।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you. We will have to conclude. 
  
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: मȅ एक और बात कहूँगी। िसक्योिरटी को भी मǈेनज़र रखा जाए। पोट्सर् क े 
ज़िरए कहीं कोई गलत सामान न जाए। जैसे िक हम लोग सुन रहे हȅ िक पोटर् क े ज़िरए यह सब 
चीज़Ȃ जा रही हȅ, तो ऐसा न हो। इसके  चलते भी यह िकया जाए। नमÎकार! 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Now Dr. M. Thambidurai.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Hon. Vice-Chairman Sir, I t
hank you very much 
for giving me this opportunity to participate in the discussion on the Indian Ports Bill, 
2025. On behalf of the AIA DMK Party, my leader Edappadi Palaniswami, I want to 
bring certain facts to the notice of this House about this Bill. Sir, in this, I have noted 
that amendments have been given on port  operations, notification of new ports and 
alternation of port limits, and adherence to  national perspective plan and guidelines 
issued by the Council. I want to limit to th is. We are having thre e major ports in Tamil 
Nadu.  There are also minor ports like Cuddalore and Nagapattinam near 
Pondicherry.  These are the small ports that we are having.    
Our AIADMK party has consistently b een demanding for the development of 
Cuddalore Port. There is significant demand for this project, and we are committed to 
making it a reality. Similarly, there is also a strong need to develop Nagapattinam 
Port. Although it is a minor port, it ho lds considerable importance and must be 
developed.   
Sir, this Bill is regarding port operations.  I want to say one thing regarding port 
operations.  How are the ports operating in T a m i l  N a d u ?   I t  i s  h a p p e n i n g  i n  T a m i l  
Nadu, especially,*.  Various kinds of drugs are imported through ports.  They are 
coming through ports.  We have Seen it in Chennai and Tuticorin ports.  We have 
Seen it in all the places.  This Government is not even taking any action.  
* And, they 
are not able to control that.   The elections  are coming.  They are offering a lot of 
promises to bring the law and order situation under control and also other things.  
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
13

But, these kinds of drugs are coming to the ports.  *However, despite my leader 
Edappadi Palaniswami raising this issue multiple times on various platforms, no action 
has been taken so far.  Therefore, I am requesting the Government to bring the law 
and order situation under control.  This is more important. * Sir, there is no safety for  
women because of  the prevalent drug addictio n and the students are also spoiled.     
The present DMK Government gave a lot  of  promises to bring so many reforms in 
Tamil Nadu, but they utterly failed. This is the problem we are facing.  I am requesting 
that in order to See …(Interruptions)…  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please conclude. Time is running out. 
…(Interruptions)…  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Now, I am raising this issue.  But, why has the DMK 
Government failed? Why have they walked out? …(Interruptions)…  As I am speaking, 
they are coming inside now. …(Interruptions)…  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Hon. Member, please conclude. 
…(Interruptions)…  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  Why are they coming now?  They have walked out.  They are 
coming now because I am raising the issu e of law and order problem in which the 
DMK Government has failed. …( Interruptions)…  Inefficient Government is there, that 
is why I am speaking. …( Interruptions) …    S i r ,  I  h a v e  t h e  r ight to speak.  Let them 
come. …( Interruptions)… Let them counter it. That is a relevant point. 
…(Interruptions)…  This is the point I am raising about the ports. …( Interruptions)…  
They cannot raise the point of order becau se this issue is related to the Bill. 
…(Interruptions)… The subject is port operations.  How the ports are operating?  How 
these things are happening?   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Please go back to your seats. 
…(Interruptions)…  I will allow the point of order, but not in the Well. …(Interruptions)… 
I will give you a chance to raise poin t of order but not in the Well.  …( Interruptions)…  
Hon. Member, please conclude. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Mr. Tiruchi Siva may raise the point of order.  I know that.  
…(Interruptions)… He will say that what I have been speaking is not relevant to the Bill. 
…(Interruptions)…  
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : You please conclude. 
…(Interruptions)…  Please conclude, hon. Member.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : I have been four times the Lok Sabha Member. 
…(Interruptions)…  I presided over the Lok Sabha.  I know the rules and regulations.  
What to speak and what not to; I know that .  He cannot raise this kind of point of 
order to divert the attention of the House.   The House cannot accept it, even if he 
raises.  …(Interruptions)…  Please, I request you.  I relevantly spoke because the Bill is 
regarding port operations.  The subject is relating to port.  Thank you. 
                                                               
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Thank you.  I will allow you a point of 
order. …(Interruptions)… Please have a seat, everyone.  I will allow him the point of 
order. …( Interruptions)…  Please take your seats. …( Interruptions)…  If you are 
standing, I cannot allow him the point of order. Please take your seats. 
…(Interruptions)…  Can I have silence in the House please? Hon. Member used the 
word ‘ *’.  It is unparliamentary. …( Interruptions)…  No, I have heard you.  
…(Interruptions)…  I will give my ruling now.  …( Interruptions)…  Please hon. Member, 
this has already been given to me by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat, which clearly says 
that, ‘*’ as a word, …(Interruptions )…  Please, hon. Members, let me make my 
ruling.  …( Interruptions)…  I am making my ruling. …( Interruptions)…  * as a word is 
unparliamentary.  It will not go on  record.  That  is to be struck off.  Yes, point of 
order, under which rule? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, Rule 240. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Okay.  Please read the rule. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Mr. Vice-Chairman, before that, I would like to say something.   
This Bill is related to…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please let him raise the point of order.  
…(Interruptions)… Yes; you continue. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  Let me read ou t the rule, Sir. 
 It says, “The Chairman, after 
having called the attention of the Council to the conduct of a Member who persists in 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
15

irrelevance or in tedious repetition, either of his own arguments or of the arguments 
used by other members in debate, may direct him to discontinue his speech. ”  Sir, 
now that he has completed his speech, my po int is simple.  This Bill is on Indian 
Ports, to strengthen and to, of course, increase the optimum utilisation  of India’s 
coastline.   What it has got to do with  the State Government there and unnecessarily 
involving and dragging… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : What is your point of order? 
…(Interruptions)…
 Please sit down. 
     
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, let me please… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Yes, hon. Member.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  Earlier, Sir, when some other Bills were being discussed,  and 
when some of the Members  from this si de spoke about S.I.R., the Chair gave the 
ruling that nothing other than the Bill shou ld be spoken.  So, the same should be 
applied here and all those that has been spoken apart from the Bill may kindly be 
expunged, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Your point of order has been made.  I 
will give a ruling.   I will hear him; I will give my ruling.  Yes.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, this Bill is regarding ports and 
operation of ports.  How their operation is going on and what all is happening, I 
mentioned. Secondly, minor ports come under the control of the State Government.  
Therefore,  even though that  is there,  I have the right to speak about Cuddalore. 
Nagapattinam port also comes under the State Government.  Therefore, it is relevant.  
The Government that is there, the State Go vernment of Tamil Nadu, is not able to 
handle properly. That is what I have said. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : I have heard both of you. 
…(Interruptions)… No;  I will not go in for a debate now.  Hon. Tiruchi ji,  I have heard 
you.  I gave you patient hearing. I have heard him.  I will make my ruling, please… 
  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Kindly expunge all those that are not relevant… 
 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): I will make my ruling.   The ruling is 
very clear, that if there is anything that does not deem to be part of the matter on 
record, the same will not be part of the r ecord.  That will be examined by the Table 
under the direction of the hon. Deputy Chai rman and the same will be dealt with.   I 
have made my ruling.  We move  on.  Shri Praful Patel; no t present.  Shri Dhairyashil 
Mohan Patil.  …(Interruptions)… If you have to leave, please leave.  If you have to 
stay, please stay.  …(Interruptions)…  We will not have this going on in the House.   
Yes, Patil ji .  No cross talk. … (Interruptions).. Either you have to go, or you have to 
sit.  You decide.  I will not allow this to continue.  …(Interruptions)…  Patil ji,  please 
start.  … (Interruptions)… It is entirely between them, but this is not the place.   
…(Interruptions)…  No further discussion.  Shri Pa til, please address the  Chair.  
…(Interruptions)…  This is the point of order right now.  ..(Interruptions)… No point of 
order on point of order; not allowed  ..(Interruptions)..  Now, Shri Patil. 
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
Ǜी धैयर्शील मोहन पािटल (महाराÍटर्): आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ यहाँ िद इंिडयन 
पोट्सर् िबल पर अपनी बात रखने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ।  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, 1908 का भारतीय 
बंदरगाह अिधिनयम इस अिधिन
यम की पूवर्पीिठका है।  जब भारतीय बंदरगाह अिधिनयम, 1908 
का िनमार्ण हुआ था, उस समय उसका जो Ģारूप था, वह Ģारूप उस टाइम क े िहसाब से बनाया 
गया था।  एक बात तो यह है िक जब ये िनयम बनाए गए थे, तो उस वƪ जो शासन चलाने वाले 
थे, जो िĤटेन मȂ रहते थे, ये उनकी सहूिलयत क े िहसाब से बनाए गए थे।  अभी बंदरगाह मȂ जो 
गितिविधयाँ चलती हȅ, िजस तरीके  से िशÃस का आवागमन होता है, िजस तरीके  से अभी उनकी 
गितिविधयाँ बढ़ने लगी हȅ, इन गितिविधयȗ क े बढ़ने क े कारण उनसे संबंिधत होने वाला पॉÊयूशन 
भी अभी अल
ग-अलग Îवरूप मȂ समुदर् को Ģदूिषत करने लगा है।  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इसिलए 
यह बहुत जरूरी था िक अब अलग िनयम बनाए जाएँ।  अभी की िÎथित मȂ, इस टाइम क े िलए जो 
अच्छा रहे, जो िरलेट करे, वैसे िनयम बनाए जाएँ।  इसके  िल
ए यह नया अिधिनयम यहाँ पर लाया 
गया है।  
महोदय, इस बीच कई सारी संिधयाँ अलग-अलग देशȗ क े बीच इस संबंध मȂ हुई हȅ।  एक 
‘International Convention for the Pr evention of Pollution from Ships’ है, मतलब जहाजȗ 
से होने वाले Ģदूषण की रोक
थाम करने क े िलए क ु छ अिधिनयम इंटरनेशनली बनाए गए थे, क ु छ 
संिधयाँ हुई थीं।   
 महोदय, यहाँ िनरामय पानी की भी एक बात आती है,  मतलब िजसे ballast water कहते 
हȅ - जब िशप यहाँ से िकसी दूसरी जगह पर जाती है, तो क ु छ सामान लेकर जाती है और िफर 
जब उसको वापस आना होता है, तब उसमȂ से िजतना सामान िनकाला गया है, उस वजन को 
बैलȂस करने क े िलए वहाँ का पानी भी उसमȂ भरना पड़ता है और उसको बैलȂस करके  िफर वा
पस 
लाना पड़ता है।  उस पिरिÎथित मȂ वह जो पानी यहाँ लाया जाता है, तो जो ecological condition 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
17

वहाँ क े पानी की है और उस पानी क े साथ कई सारे कीटाणु, कई सारी biological ecology की 
चीजȂ जो साथ मȂ आ जाती हȅ, तो उनसे भी पूरे वÊडर् मȂ एक बड़े pollution का भी Ģादुभार्व हो 
सकता है।  इसके  िलए बीते कई सालȗ मȂ िजतने भी international conventions हुए हȅ, उनका भी 
इस अिधिन
यम मȂ क ु छ न क ु छ समावेशन करना जरूरी था।  उसके  कारण सारा Ģबंध करना, 
Ģितबंध करना, regulation करना, prohibition करना - इसके  िलए एक अलग िनयम की जरूरत  
थी और यह िनयम कई सालȗ क े बाद हमारी सरकार आज इस सभा गृह मȂ लायी है।  मȅ इसका 
बहुत ही आन
न्दपूवर्क Îवागत करता हूँ और इस िबल को सपोटर् करता हूँ। 
 महोदय, चूंिक मȅ कȗकण रीजन से आता हूँ, तो ये जो बंदरगाह हȅ, िजनको मȅ िरĢेजȂट 
करता हूँ, उनक
ा इससे बहुत ही गहरा संबंध है।  मȅ यहाँ पर यह भी अनुरोध करू ँगा िक जो भी 
छोटे-छोटे मछु आरे हȅ, जो छोटे बंदरगाह क े मािलक हȅ, उनके  िलए भी इस िबल मȂ क ु छ अच्छी 
सुिवधा हो।  मȅ यहाँ पर इस तर
ीके  की मांग करता हूँ िक  इसमȂ उनकी licensing रहे या पिरचालन 
रहे और िनजी पोटर् बनाने मȂ उनके  िलए कोई फाइनȂिशयल सपोटर् रहे, इसका भी िवचार इसमȂ 
होना चा
िहए।  मȅ यहाँ पर यही अनुरोध करता हूँ और इस िबल को सपोटर् करता हूँ, नमÎकार। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI RAM CHANDER JANGRA: Sir, please allow me.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Under which rule?  
 
SHRI  RAM CHANDER JANGRA (Haryana): Rule 235. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : On which part? We have already 
moved from that 
  
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: सर, अभी थोड़ी देर पहले जो हुआ.. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): आपको जो बोलना है, दो िमनट मȂ बोल दीिजए।  I
  am 
allowing you.  
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा:  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, िनयम 235 (iii) मȂ यह ÎपÍट िलखा हुआ है 
िक " राज्य सभा मȂ Ģवेश करते समय या राज्य सभा से बाहर जाते समय और अपने Îथान पर 
बैठते समय या वहाँ से उठते समय भी सभापीठ क े Ģित नमन करेगा।"  महोदय,   लोग बाहर बैठ 
कर सदन की कायर्वाही देख रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... जैसे ही कोई माननीय सांसद यहाँ बोलता 
है और उनको कोई बात अच्छी नहीं लगती, तो वे एकदम सदन मȂ आते हȅ और िफर न चेयर की 
तरफ नमन करना, न अपनी सीट पर बैठना और हो-हÊला कर
के  िफर से वापस िनकल जाते हȅ।  
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

...(Ëयवधान)...  इन लोगȗ क े िखलाफ कारर्वाई करनी चािहए।  ये आपके  ही बनाए हुए िनयम हȅ, 
सारे सदन क े बनाए हुए िनयम हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
एक माननीय सदÎय: सर, कारर्वाई होनी चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Hon. Members, please take your 
seats. We are all aware about how it is, and are all mindful of  it.  We have to be extra 
cautious and extra careful, going forward fo r each Member of Parliament, including 
those who are coming in and going out, that they do so with the appropriate protocol. 
I agree with you. We should maintain prot ocol in the House, and the dignity of the 
House should be maintained. I agree with you. Thank you. We will go to the next 
speaker. Shrimati Rekha Sharma.  
 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA (Haryana) :  Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I rise to support 
the Indian Ports Bill, 2025, a landmark reform that will redefine the legislative 
framework of our maritime sector and prep are India fo
 r global leadership in this 
century.   
Sir, why is this Bill needed? I would like to speak on this. Our ports have long 
been governed by the Indian Ports Act, whic h  i s  m o r e  t h a n  1 0 0  years old.  It was 
drafted at a time when Indians ports handled only 21 million tons of cargo.  But today, 
our major ports handle 255 million tons.  Th at is a huge number and a 28-fold leap.  
Clearly, a statute written more than a century ago cannot serve the needs of a four 
trillion dollar economy and a dynamic global trade environment. What the old law 
lagged in was that it was not meant for long -term planning.  Also, there was no real 
time data available.  Environmental safegu ards were not there and global treaties 
were not taken care of.  Emergency and disast er protocol was not there.  Also, there 
was no modern dispute resolution mechanism in the previous Bill. So, it is evident 
that we needed a forward-looking framework that matched global practice.   
Sir, India's progress in the last decade has been huge.  That is why we needed 
this change and that is why the Government thought of this new Bill. Under the 
visionary leadership of ou r Prime Minister, hon. Modi ji, our ports have transformed. 
Cargo handling at major ports has jumped from 581 million tonnes in 2014-15 to 855 
million tonnes, which is a huge jump. Port capacity has expanded by 87 per cent in 
the last decade. Turnaround time for the sh ip has reduced from fo ur days earlier to 
just 48 hours. The difference is 48 per cent.   So, we have improved in the turnaround 
time also. Under Sagar Mala , 272 projects worth Rs. 1.41 lakh crore have been 
completed, creating modern jetties, ferry terminals and corridors.  
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
19

Sir, coastal shipping has grown by 118 percent, again a huge jump, while 
cargo movement on inland wa terways has surged by 700 per cent.  Nine Indian ports 
now feature in the World Bank's global ra nking. Vishakhapattnam is now ranked 19 
while the Mudra Port is ranked 27.  This gr owth not just showcases our potential, but 
also highlights why an outdated 1908 law is wholly inadequate for today's realities.   
Sir, talking about the key reforms in to day's Bill, the first is consultative 
federalism.  It establishes a Maritime St ate Development Council with members from 
both the Centre and the State to enable inte grated planning for all the ports.  Then, 
States are empowered to create State Mariti me Boards with uniform administrative 
power for effective governance.  A Disput e Resolution Committee has been provided 
for, a sector-specific time-bound mechanis m at the State level with provision for 
appeal to High Courts.  Environmental safeguards have been put in place.  
Compliance with the  MARPOL  and Ballast  Water Management Convention has been 
made mandatory and waste reception facilities and pollution control plans are in 
place.  Better safety and securi ty measures are provided for in  this Bill. It states that 
every port must have emergency response and disaster management plans in place.  
Compliance with International Ship and Port Facility Security Code is ensured.  Sir, 
there is adoption of new technology and tran sparency in this Bill.  We have modern 
penalties; old provisions have been deleted, penalties rati onalized and many offenses 
decriminalized for ease of doing business.  We have also inculcated global best 
practices in this new Bill, like in Singapore and South Africa.  Planning is guided by a 
central export body, the MSDC, which is the Maritime State Development Council. 
Like Europe, India will now enforce strict pollution control and waste 
management norms.  Like Rotterdam, Sing apore and Sri Lanka, ports will publish 
tariffs online and it will also ensure tran sparency. Like United States and Europe, 
every port will prepare for emergency with clear safety protocol. I will conclude by 
saying that this Bill replaces museum piece legislation with modern, competitive and 
investor-friendly framework.  It embodies the vision of ‘Maritime Amrit Kaal’, 
preparing India to emerge as a global maritime leader. I would also like to thank hon. 
Prime Minister, Modi ji, for making Indian laws ready for the Viksit Bharat.  Thank you.                        
 
Ǜीमती सुनेतर्ा अजीत पवार (महाराÍटर्): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ आज भारतीय पǄन 
िवधेयक, 2025 का समथर्न करने क े िलए खड़ी हुई हूँ। भारत की 7,500 िकलोमीटर से ज्यादा 
लंबी तट रेखा है, लेिकन हमारे बंदरगाहȗ का Ģबंधन अभी तक 1908 क े पुराने औपिनवेिशक 
कानून क े तहत हो रहा था।  इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से सरकार ने आधुिनक तकनीक, पयार्वरणीय 
चुनौितयां और भारत की Åलू इकोनामी की जरूरतȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखकर एक नया और दूरदशीर् 
कानूनी ढांचा तैयार िकया है।  यह िवधेयक न क ेवल पुराने कानून को हटाएगा, बिÊक यह भारत 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

क े समुदर्ी िवकास क े िलए एक नई िदशा भी Ģदान करेगा।  मȅ इस िवधेयक को लाने क े िलए 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, मंतर्ी जी और उनकी पूरी टीम को बधाई देती हूँ।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, भारतीय पǄन िवधेयक, 2025 सहकारी संघवाद, दक्षता और िÎथरता 
क े िसǉांतȗ पर आधािरत है।  मुझे िवÌवास है िक यह िनÇनिलिखत क े िलए एक कानूनी ढांचा 
Ģदान करेगा :- 
- यह समुदर्ी राज्य िवकास पिरषà (MSDC) को वैधािनक मान्यता Ģदान करेगा। 
- यह क Ȃ दर् और राज्यȗ क े बीच बंदरगाह िवकास मȂ समन्वय सुिनिÌचत करेगा, िजससे एक एकीकृ त 
राÍटर्ीय रणनीित बनेगी। 
- यह िवधेयक राज्य समुदर्ी बोडș को गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ का Ģभावी Ģबंधन और रेगुलेट करने का 
अिधकार देगा। 
- यह िवकȂदर्ीकरण की िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् कदम है, जो राज्यȗ को अपने बंदरगाहȗ की योजना 
बनाने, उनका िवकास करने और Ģशासन करने का अिधकार देगा, िजसमȂ शुÊक िनधार्रण और 
सुरक्षा एवं पयार्वरण मानकȗ का Îथायी Îतर पर अनुपालन सुिनिÌचत होगा। 
- राज्य Îतर पर िववाद समाधान सिमितयȗ (DRCs) की  Îथापना एक कर्ांितकारी कदम है।  ये 
सिमितयां िववादȗ को सुलझाने क े िलए एक समिर्पत और त्विरत तंतर् Ģदान करȂगी, िजससे हमारी 
अदालतȗ का बोझ कम होगा और िनवेशकȗ क े िलए आधुिनक अनुक ू ल माहौल बनेगा। 
- नया िवधेयक हमारे कानूनȗ को MARPOL जैसे अंतरराÍटर्ीय सÇमेलन क े अनुरूप  बनाता है, जो 
कड़े पयार्वरणीय सुरक्षा उपायȗ तथा आपदा Ģबंधन Ģोटोकॉल को अिनवायर् बनाता है। 
- Ģिकर्याओं को सरल बनाकर, िडिजटलीकरण को बढ़ावा देकर और पारदशीर् टैिरफ नीितयȗ को 
सुिनिÌचत करके  यह िवधेयक लॉिजिÎटक्स लागत को उÊलेखनीय रूप  से कम करेगा और हमारे 
िनयार्त की competitiveness को बढ़ाएगा।  हमारा मानना है िक इससे न क ेवल बड़ी क ंपिनयȗ 
को, बिÊक हमारे सूÑम, लघु और मध्यम उǏोगȗ को भी लाभ होगा। 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क ु छ रचनात्मक सुझाव ĢÎतुत करना चाहती हूँ।  
भारत को समुदर्ी िवज्ञान, Îवच्छ ऊजार् और वैिÌवक ĢौǏोिगकी मȂ अगर्णी बनाने क े िलए हमȂ समुदर्ी 
अनुसंधान और Ģिशक्षण संÎथानȗ का िनमार्ण करना चािहए। वतर्मान कानूनȗ का िवÎतार करके  
समुदर्ी िवÌविवǏालयȗ तथा कौशल िवकास क ेन्दर्ȗ को एकीकृ त करके  हम समुदर्ी िवज्ञान, Åलू 
अथर्ËयवÎथा और समुदर्ी कानून जैसे क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िवशेषज्ञता िवकिसत कर सकते हȅ।  कई बड़े 
बंदरगाह, जैसे - रॉटडर्म, िंसगापुर, दुबई पहले से ही AI, Blockchain और IoT जैसी तकनीकȗ 
का उपयोग कर रहे हȅ।  भारत को भी एक Ëयापक AI आधािरत पोटर् Ģबंधन Ģणाली को अपनाना 
चािहए। इसके  िलए एक राÍटर्ीय Îतर की िवशेष योजना, िजसे “Îमाटर् पोटर् िमशन” कहा जा 
सकता है, लागू की जानी चािहए। 
महोदय, भारत क े बंदरगाहȗ को 2030 तक काबर्न-न्यूटर्ल और Ģदूषण-मुƪ बनाने की 
आवÌयकता है, तािक वे अंतरराÍटर्ीय उत्सजर्न लÑयȗ क े साथ तालमेल िबठा सकȂ । इसके  िलए, 
सभी बंदरगाहȗ पर सौर, पवन और हा
इडर्ोजन Äयूल सेल जैसी Îवच्छ ऊजार् का उपयोग अिनवायर् 
िकया जाना चािहए। 
बंदरगाहȗ का िवकास क ेवल उǏोगȗ तक सीिमत नहीं होना चािहए, बिÊक इसमȂ मछली 
पकड़ने, पयर्टन और छोटे Ëयवसायȗ को भी शािम ल करना चािहए। “पोटर्-कÇयुिनटी पाटर्नरिशप 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
21

ģ ेमवकर्” क े माध्यम से Îथानीय समुदायȗ को रोज़गार, Ģिशक्षण और पयार्वरण संरक्षण क े अवसर 
िदए जाने चािहए। बंदरगाहȗ क े िवकास मȂ मछु आरȗ, छोटे िकसानȗ और Ǜिमकȗ जैसे कमजोर वगș 
का पुनवार्स, िशक्षा और ÎवाÎथ्य सुिनिÌचत करना महत्वपूणर् है, क्यȗिक समावेशी िवक ास ही पूणर् 
िवकास है। 
भारतीय बंदरगाहȗ को आिर्थक िवकास क े इंजन मȂ बदला जा सकता है। Ģत्येक Ģमुख 
बंदरगाह क े पास औǏोिगक क्लÎटर Îथािपत करके  िनयार्त, उत्पादन और रोज़गार को बढ़ाया 
जा सकता है, जैसा िक चीन, िंसगापुर और नीदरलȅड ने िकया है। भारत को भी इस रण नीित को 
अपनाना चािहए। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मेरा मानना है िक अगर इस िवधेयक मȂ औǏोिगक क्लÎटर, समुदर्ी 
िशक्षा संÎथान, AI Ģणाली, हिरत बंदरगाह और तटीय समुदाय क े िवकास से जुड़े इन सुझावȗ को 
शािमल िकया जाए, तो भ
ारतीय बंदरगाह िवधेयक, 2025 िसफर् एक कानून ही नहीं रहेगा, बिÊक 
भारत को अगले 50 सालȗ मȂ एक समुदर्ी महाशिƪ बनाने का िवज़न िमलेगा।  यह िवधेयक सदी 
पुराने औपिनवेिशक कानून की जगह लेता है और भारत की समुदर्ी शिƪ को आधुिनक बन ाता है। 
महोदय, मȅ इस ऐितहािसक िवधेयक का समथर्न करती हूं। इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से हम 
दुिनया को यह संदेश दȂगे िक भारत का समुदर् िसफर् Ëयापार का राÎत ा नहीं है, बिÊक हमारे भिवÍय 
की नींव है। इन्ही शÅदȗ क े साथ मȅ अपनी वाणी को िवराम देती हूं। धन्यवाद।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  N o w ,  S h r i  K a n a d  P u r k a y a s t h a ,  n o t  
present; Shri P.P. Suneer, not present; Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel.  
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल (िबहार): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे भारतीय पǄन िवधेयक, 
2025 पर बोलने का मौका िदया, िजस
के  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूं।  
महोदय, मȅ आज भारतीय बंदरगाह िवधेयक, 2025 क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए इस सदन 
मȂ खड़ा हुआ हूं। The Indian Ports Bill, 2025 एक दूरदशीर् कानून है, जो औपिनवेिश क युग क े 
भारतीय बंदरगाह अिधिनयम, 2008 को िनरÎत करके  21 वीं सदी क े “िवकिसत भारत” की 
ज़रूरतȗ क े अनुरूप  एक समगर् और आधुिनक ढांचा Îथािपत करने का Ģयास करता है। 
महोदय, यह िवधेयक क ेवल हमारे समुदर्ी कानूनȗ का तकनीकी उन्नयन नहीं है, बिÊक 
यह भारत क े माननीय Ģध
ान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की एक शिƪशाली घोषणा है। यह 
एक संदेश है िक भारत अब पुराने औपिनवेिशक कानूनȗ की ज़ंजीरȗ मȂ बंधा नहीं रहेगा, बिÊक 
दक्षता, पारदिर्शता और पयार्वरणीय िज़Çमेदारी से पिरभािषत एक भिवÍय की ओर आत्मिवÌवास क े 
साथ अगर्सर होगा। 
महोदय, इस िवधेयक का महत्व शÅदȗ मȂ नहीं समाया जा सकता। वषर् 2023-24 तक, 
भारत मȂ 12 Ģमुख बंदरग
ाह और 217 गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाह थे, िजनमȂ से हमारे दो गैर-Ģमुख  
बंदरगाह – मुंदर्ा और िसक्का – देश की समुदर्ी कागȘ यातायात का 19 परसȂट अके ले संभालते हȅ। 
यह अपने आप मȂ यह बताने क े िलए काफी है िक अब गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाह िकसी भी तरह से 
मामूली नहीं रहे हȅ।  
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

महोदय, यह िवधेयक राज्य समुदर्ी बोड्सर् को वैधािनक मान्यता Ģदान करता है,  िजससे 
राज्य सरकारȂ  अपने गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाह का अिधक ÎवायǄता और ढांचे क े साथ िविनयमन और 
िवकास कर सकȂ । यह िवधेयक समुदर्ी राज्य िवकास पिरषद को मान्यता  देता है, िजसकी 
अध्यक्षता क Ȃदर्ीय मंतर्ी करते हȅ, ता
िक तटीय राज्यȗ, सशÎतर् बलȗ और िशिंपग Ģािधकरणȗ क े बीच 
राÍटर्ीय समन्वय सुिनिÌचत िकया जा सके ।  
महोदय, यह िवधेयक MARPOL और  Ballast Water Management Convention जैसे 
वैिÌवक समुदर्ी समझौतȗ क े अनुपालन को अिनवायर् करता है, िजससे भारत अंतरराÍटर्ीय मानकȗ 
क े अनुरूप  कायर् कर सके ।  बंदरगाह मȂ पयार्व
रण ऑिडट आपदा की तैयारी और अविशÍट Ģबंधनȗ 
क े िलए यंतर् Îथािपत करना, िजससे िक सतत िवकास वैकिÊपक नहीं, बिÊक अिनवायर् हो जाता 
है।   
सर, इस िवधेयक का मकस द संघवाद और पारदिर्शता को सशƪ करना है।  यह भारतीय 
बंदरगाह िवधेयक, 2025 मȂ संघीय भावना िवशेष रूप  से िनिहत है।  यह िवधेयक सहकारी संघवाद 
क े सार को आत्मसार करता है,  जहां क Ȃ दर् और राज्य, दोनȗ अपने-अपने संवैधािनक अिधकारȗ को 
बनाए रखते हुए एक-साथ िमलकर राÍटर्ीय िवकास क े िलए कायर् करते हȅ।  संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 
246 क े अनुसार Ģमुख बंदरगाह संघ सूची मȂ आते हȅ, जबिक गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाह समवतीर् सूची मȂ 
हȅ।  हालांिक गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ का Ģशासन मुख्य रूप  से राज्य सरकारȗ ǎारा िकया जाता है।  
यह िवधेयक राज्य समुदर्ी बोडș को वैधािनक मान्यता देने क े साथ लगभग हर तटीय राज्य मȂ 
कायर्रत है।  इस Ģकार यह उन संÎथा
गत ढांचȗ को औपचािरक रूप  देता है, जो पहले से ही भारत 
क े 66 चालू छोटे कागȘ बंदरगाहȗ क े माध्यम से लगभग 47 Ģितशत समुदर्ी माल यातायात का 
Ģबंधन करता है।  
 सर, अंगर्ेजȗ क े कायर्काल मȂ िजतने भी कानून बने थे, उनको अंगर्ेजȗ ने अपने िहसाब से 
बनाया था।  वे भारतीयȗ पर राज करने क े िलए बनाए थे, भारत को ज्यादा से ज्यादा दंिडत करने 
क े िलए बना य े थे।  अब िजतने भी नए-नए िवधेयक आ रहे हȅ,  उनका मूल मकसद यह है िक जो 
कानून हȅ, वे Îवतंतर् भारत क े कानून हȗ और भारत को िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाने क े कानून हȗ।  उसी 
क े कर्म मȂ यह भारतीय पǄन िवधेयक, 2025 है।  भारत क े बंदरगाह ȗ से जो Ëयापार हुआ है, उसके  
मȅ आंकड़े देना चाहता हूं।  2023-24 क े अनुसार क ु ल 1,543 िमिलयन टन माल की ढ ुलाई हुई है।  
इसमȂ Ģमुख बंदरगाह से 1,819 िमिलयन टन, िजसमȂ 53 परसȂट का Ģबंधन Ģमुख बंदर गाह ǎारा 
िकया गया है, जबिक गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ का लगभग 724 िमिलयन टन, 47 परसȂट क ंटर्ीÅयूशन 
रहा है।  इसमȂ अके ले मुंदर्ा पोटर् ने लगभग 173 िमिलयन टन, 11 परसȂट,  िसक्का बंदर गाह ने 128 
िमिलयन टन, 8 परस Ȃट का संचालन िकया है, जो  यह  दशार्ता है िक अब गैर Ģमुख बंदरगाह 
गौण नहीं हȅ, वे जीवंत, उच्च दक्षता और उच्च क्षमता वाले आिर्थक इंजन हȅ।   
महोदय, यह िवधेयक समुदर्ी राज्य िवकास पिरषद, MSDC, िजसे वैधािनक मान्यता ĢाÃत 
है िक राÍटर्ीय समन्वय मंच क े रूप  मȂ कायर् करेगी, िजसमȂ िक क Ȃदर्ीय मंतर्ालय, तटीय राज्य मंतर्ी, 
नौसेना और तट रक्षक बल क े Ģितिन
िध तथा क Ȃदर्ीय मंतर्ी इसके  अध्यक्ष क े रूप  मȂ रहȂगे।  यह 
MSDC क े िनÇनिलिखत कायș की िनगरानी करेगा।  नए िबल क े अनुसार सभी बंदरगाहȗ से डेटा 
संगर्ह करना और Ģसार क े िलए समान िदशा-िनदȃश देना। …(समय की घं
टी)…  सर, मुझे एक 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
23

िमनट का समय और दे दीिजए।  सर, अभी अपोिजशन क े लोग यहां नहीं हȅ, तो आप मुझे बोलने 
दीिजए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): आप कन्क्लूड कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: सर, मȅ कन्क्लूड कर रहा हूं।  मȅ िबहार जैसे आकांक्षी राज्य से आता हूं और 
मेरा पड़ोसी राज्य बंगाल है।  अभी टीएमसी वाले यहां नहीं हȅ।  बंगाल मȂ एक िखिदरपुर पोटर् हुआ 
करता था।  उसको सबसे पहले कांगर्ेिसयȗ ने बरबाद िकया, उसके  बाद सीपीआई वाले जब सǄा 
मȂ आए, उन्हȗने बरबाद िकया और बचा-खुचा टीएमसी वालȗ ने िखिदरपुर बंदरगाह को पूरी तरह 
से नÍट कर िदया।  हमारे नरȂदर् मोदी जी की सरकार की Ģाथिमकता है िक भारत क े सभी राज्यȗ 
का संपूणर् िवकास हो, समान िवकास हो। इसी कड़ी मȂ िबहार मȂ समुदर्ी तटीय इलाके  नहीं हȅ, िफर 
भी िबहार राज्य मȂ पटना क े बगल मȂ िबहटा एयरप
ोटर् भी बन रहा है। वहां पर भारत सरकार ने डर्ाई 
पोटर् बनाने का काम िकया है, िजससे आने वाले समय मȂ िबहार क े लोग भी  डायरेक्ट समुदर् क े 
मागर् से जुड़ सकȂ । उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ पुन: इस िबल का समथर्न करते हुए अपनी वाणी को 
िवराम देता हूं, धन्यवाद।   
                                                                                          
3.00 P.M. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam):   M
r. Chairman, Sir, on behalf of my 
party, Asom Gana Parishad, and my party lead er, Shri Atul Bora, I rise here today to 
support the Indian Ports Bill, 2025.  This is a historic Bill because there were a lot of 
lacunae in the old Bill.  The hon. Minister has proposed to amend the old Bill with the 
new dimension. Sir, it is very diffi
cult for me to understand, and it should be known to 
the nation, as to what the aim of the Cong ress is.  All the time  they speak for the 
farmers; all the time they speak about environment. But when time comes, they do 
not support the farmers, they do not support the environment friendly Bill. Water 
connectivity is the call of the hour.  We have an 11,000 kilometre-coastal line.  Along 
with the 11,000 kilometre coastal line,  the Barak Valley waterways and the 
Brahmaputra Valley waterways pl ay a very significant role in the port development of 
our country. Sir, the aim of th is Bill is to make Indian po rts stronger and stronger. I 
would like to say one thing in this House.  Port connectivity is the call of the hour. We 
have railway connectivity, we have air conne ctivity, and we have road connectivity. 
Among all these, I think waterways is the most environment-friendly connectivity.  Not 
only that, Sir, it is helpful for the farmers also, because cost of shipping through ports 
is very less compared with the cost through railway connectivity.  When we speak for 
the interests of the farmer, these Congress people always boycott. They have only 
made slogans for the development of the fa rmers, but when time is knocking, they 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

boycott. They are not helping the Government or the people or the farmers at all.  Sir, 
waterways connectivity is very important fo r the States in the North Eastern Region. 
During the flood time, our ro ad and railway connectivity is totally destroyed. During 
the flood time, there is no railway connectivity, there is no road connectivity. Only one 
connectivity that remains alive in our country is shipping through the ports.  So, it is 
very important and significant.  (Time-bell rings ) I would like to request the hon. 
Minister, especially in the flood situatio n in the North Eastern Region, the Ministry 
should adopt a special policy, special op eration for the flood-affected areas of 
Assam. Sir, mighty Brahmaputra is a huge river.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  You will have to conclude. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA :  Yes, Sir, I am concluding.  It is the call of the 
hour, hon. Minister, to look after, to de velop all the ports of the Guwahati, Pandu 
Port, Dhubri Port, Silchar Port and other po rts of the State. Simultaneously, I would 
like to request the hon. Minister that th ere should be more ports in the river 
Brahmaputra to help the farmers because  shipping is environmentally-friendly, 
shipping is economically friendly. Sir, I wa nt to say one thing he re.  Congress has not 
done anything for the port development of  our country. They destroyed our ports. 
They are not doing anything, and they are not going to do anything in the interest of 
the ports, in the interest of the economy of the country, in the interest of the farmers, 
in the interest of the environment. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Thank you.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA : They want to speak only.  They don't want to 
do anything.   So, this move of the hon. Minister is very necessary. The old Bill is a 
very old Bill. There is a lot of lacunae in th e old Bill. I am very hopeful that this new 
Amendment Bill will make Indian ports stronger and stronger. I, definitely, compliment 
the hon. Prime Minister of our country and the Shipping Minister, Shri Sonowal, for 
making Indian ports stronger.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you.  You have to conclude. 
The aim of the Bill is to make Indian Ports stronger and stronger.  I compliment hon. 
Prime Minister for his visionary leadership.  Under his leadership, I believe the Indian 
economy will develop more and more and Indian Ports will develop more and more. 
 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
25

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  We will have to move on.  I am sorry.  
I have already given you two minutes more.  Please conclude in ten seconds. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA:   We have nine globally ranked ports in our 
country.  I hope, under the le adership of Narendra Modi ji, our ports will play a vital 
role in the world economy and Indian economy and it will help our farmers.  With this, 
I conclude.  Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade.  
He is not present.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha. 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh) :  Sir,  on behalf of Telugu 
Desam Party and our leader, Shri Nara Chan drababu Naidu garu, I rise to speak on 
the Indian Ports Bill, 2025, aa landmark le gislation that Seeks to repeal and replace 
the Indian Ports Act, 1908.   
The Indian Ports Bill, 2025 rests on fo ur core principles: modernisation, 
transparency, environmental sustainability and cooperative federa lism.  As far as 
recognition of Maritime Institutions is concerned, the Bill gives statutory recognition to 
the Maritime State Development Council and the State Maritime Boards, enabling 
better coordination between the Centre and coastal States.  As far as efficient Dispute 
Resolution Mechanism is concerned, St ate Governments must establish Dispute 
Resolution Committees to adjudicate disputes between non-major ports, 
concessionaires, users and service providers. As far as environmental safeguards and 
global standards are concerned, the Bill mandates compliance with key global 
conventions like MARPOL and the Ballast Wa ter Management Convention. As far as 
streamlining of tariff setting is concerned, for non-major ports, tariffs will be fixed by 
the State Maritime Boards or their authoris ed concessionaires, ensuring that pricing 
remains transparent and competitive while respecting local realities.  As far as 
updated offences and penaltie s are concerned, while retain ing key safety provisions 
from the Act of 1908, the Bill decriminalises minor offences. 
Now I come to maritime vision of Andh ra Pradesh.  My ow n State of Andhra 
Pradesh, with its 1,054 km coastline, is strategically positioned to be India's maritime 
gateway. It already ranks second in non-major port EXIM cargo handling and is 
building four new greenfield ports.  Under th e leadership of hon. Chief Minister, Shri 
N. Chandrababu Naidu garu, the State ha s adopted the Andhra Pradesh Maritime 
Policy, 2024.  The key targets include at least one Andhra Pradesh port among the 
top 20 global ports by 2047; handling 20 per cent of India's total cargo by 2047; 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

reducing port turnaround time to under 15 hours; training 5,000 maritime professionals 
by 2028; and establishing a global shipya rd to meet domestic and international 
demand.  This policy aligns perfectly with the spirit of the Indian Ports Bill, 2025.  With 
these words, on behalf of Telugu Desam Party, I strongly support the Indian Ports Bill, 
2025.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक (गुजरात):  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज भारतीय पǄन िवधेयक, 2025  
राज्य सभा मȂ िवचार और पािरत हेतु लाया गया है। मȅ इस िबल का समथर्न करता हूँ। हमारे 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी सबका साथ, सब
 का िवकास, सबका Ģयास और 
सबका िवÌवास क े ध्येय को लेकर चलने वाले हȅ। चाहे वह रेल हो, रोड हो या समुदर्ी िवकास हो, 
भारत को नंबर वन क ै से बनाया जाए, इसकी सतत िंचता करते हȅ। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का 
2047 मȂ िवक
िसत भारत बनाने का Îवपन है। इसे पूरा करने क े िलए, भारत का हर क्षेतर् मȂ िवकास 
हो, इसके  िलए सभी मंतर्ालय कायर् करते हȅ।   
उसी Ǜृंखला मȂ आज माननीय मंतर्ी Ǜी सबार्नंद सोनोवाल जी इस िबल को लेकर आए हȅ।  
भारत की 11,000 िकलोमीटर से ज्यादा  लंबी तट रेखा चा
र िटर्िलयन डॉलर की अथर्ËयवÎथा की 
धुरी है, जो हमारे क ु ल Ëयापार की 95 परस Ȃट मातर्ा और लगभग 70 परस Ȃट मूÊय मȂ संचािलत 
करती है।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारे समुदर्ी क्षेतर् ने अभूतपूवर्क 
Ģगित की है।  Ģमुख बंदर
गाहȗ पर कागȘ हȅडिंलग 2014-15 मȂ 581 िमिलयन टन से बढ़कर 2024-
25 मȂ 855 िमिलयन टन क े ऐितहािसक Îतर पर पहुंच गई है और इसमȂ 47 परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई है।  
िपछले दश
क मȂ Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ की क्षमता मȂ भी 87 परस Ȃट का िवÎतार हुआ है।  जहाज, िजन्हȂ 
कभी लगभग 4 िदन लगते थे, अब वे क ेवल 48 घंटȗ मȂ टनर् अराउंड हो रहे हȅ।  िडिजटलीकरण 
और Ģिकर्या सरलीकरण क े कारण 48
 परसȂट से भी ज्यादा सुधार हुआ है।  सागरमाला क े अंतगर्त 
1,41,000 करोड़ रुपय े मूÊय की 272 पिरयोजनाएं पूरी की गई हȅ, िजनमȂ जेƺी, फ ेरी टिर्मनल, 
पोटर् कनेिक्टिवटी, कॉिरडोर और बथर् िवÎतार को शािमल िकया गय
ा है।  तटीय िशिंपग मȂ 118 
परसȂट वृिǉ हुई है, जबिक अंतदȃशीय जलमागș पर माल ढ ुलाई मȂ 700 परसȂट की चȚकाने वाली 
वृिǉ हुई है।  यह 2014 मȂ 6.9 एमएमटी थी, जो िक बढ़कर आज 55 एमएमटी से अि धक हो गई है।  
िवÌव बȅक क े ग्लोबल क ं टेनर पोटर् परफॉमȄस इंडेक्स मȂ भी अब नौ भारतीय बंदरगाह हȅ, िजनमȂ से 
िवशाखापǄनम 19 वȂ और मुंदर्ा 27वȂ Îथान पर आया है।  पुराने का नून की चुनौितयां थीं।  हमारे 
बंदरगाह 1908 क े भारतीय बंदरगाह अिधिनयम ǎारा शािसत हȅ और जो औपिनवेिशक काल की 
अĢासंिगक ËयवÎथा है।  1950 मȂ 21 िमिलयन टन सÇभालने वाले Ģमुख बंदरगाह आज 855 
िमिलयन टन सÇभाल रहे हȅ और उस मȂ 28 परस Ȃट वृिǉ हुई है।  वतर्मान ढांचे मȂ दीघर्कालीन 
योजनाओं और पयार्वरणीय Ģावधान, आपदा Ģबंधन, Ģोटोकॉल और िववाद िनवारण जैसी कई 
आवÌयक ËयवÎथाओं का अभाव था, परन्तु नए िवधेयक मȂ वैिÌवक समझौते क े साथ पयार्वरण 
संरक्षण का उपाय, आपातकालीन Ģितिकर्या और आपदा Ģबंधन क े Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ।  इसमȂ 
तकनीकी ए
कीकरण, पारदिर्शता और आधुिनक शासन ËयवÎथा को शािमल िकया गया है और  
अĢासंिगक Ģावधानȗ को हटाकर आधुिनक िनयम शािमल िकए गए हȅ।  क Ȃ दर् और राज्य क े परामशर् 
ढांचे क े माध्
यम से बंदरगाहȗ का समिन्वत िवकास हो, यह सब कायर् माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
27

नेतृत्व मȂ हो रहा है।  राज्य क े समुदर्ी बोडș का गठन और सशिƪकरण हो और गैर-Ģमुख 
बंदरगाहȗ पर िववाद िनवारण सिमितयȗ से समयबǉ समाधान हो, इसके  िलए भी इस िबल मȂ 
ËयवÎथा की गई है।  आपदा Ģबंधन हो या सुरक्षा Ģोटोकॉल लागू करना हो, यह भी माननीय Ģध ान 
मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हो रहा है।  मैरीटाइम िंसगल िंवडो Ģणाली, िडिजटल घोषणा और 
इलेक्टर्ॉिनक डेटा को साझा िकया गया है।  शुÊक और दरȗ मȂ पारदिर्शता क े िलए ऑनलाइन 
Ģकाशन भी िकया जा रहा है।  राज्य और क Ȃ दर् को सहयोगात्मक िनयम बनाने क े िलए भी अि
धकार 
िदए गए हȅ।  दंड Ģावधानȗ का आधुिनकीकरण और क ु छ अपराधȗ का गैर-अपराधीकरण करने की 
ËयवÎथा भी इस िबल मȂ की गई है।   वैिÌवक सवȘǄम Ģथाओं क े अनुरूप , िंसगापुर और दिक्ष ण 
अģीका की तरह क Ȃदर्ीय िवशेषज्ञ पिरषद ǎारा योजना बनाई जाएगी।  यूरोपीय संघ की तरह 
अपिशÍट Ģबंधन और Ģदूषण िनयंतर्ण का भी इस िबल मȂ Ģावधान िकया गया है।  रॉटलडैम, 
िंसगापुर, Ǜीलंका की तर ह शुÊक मȂ पारदिर्शता आए, ऐसा भी इस िबल मȂ Ģावधान िकया गया है।   
इस  िबल  क े  आने से जो अपेिक्षत पिरणाम हȅ, उनमȂ िनजी और Ģत्यक्ष िवदेशी िनवेश मȂ वृिǉ 
होगी, बंदरगाह-िंहटरलȅड कनेिक्टिवटी मजबूत होगी और लॉजेिÎटक्स लागत मȂ कमी होगी। 
...(समय की घं
टी)...      
इससे समुदर्ी सुरक्षा, पयार्वरण अनुपालन और आपदा Ģबंधन मȂ भी सुधार होगा और 
उभरते क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ Åलू इकोनॉमी, कर्ूज़ टिर्मनल, गर्ीन पोटर्, टर्ांसिशपमȂट और हब को Ģोत्साहन 
िमलेगा।  यह िवधेयक भारत को 2047 तक वैिÌ
वक समुदर्ी नेतृत्व िदलाने वाला मैरीटाइम अमृत 
काल का आधार बनेगा।  इसिलए मȅ इस िबल को लाने क े िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और माननीय मंतर्ी, Ǜी सबार्नंद सोनोवाल जी का अि भनंदन करता हूँ और इस 
िबल का समथर्न करता हूँ।  धन्यवाद।                        
                       
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Now, Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju. 
 
SHRI RAVI CHANDRA VADDIRAJU (Telangana): & Hon’ble Vice-Chairman Sir, I 
thank you for giving me the opportunity to participate in the debate on the Indian 
Ports Bill, 2025. This Bill, which replaces the old Ports Act, 1908, is  a far-sighted bill 
that will modernize the Indian Maritime sect or. I congratulate the Hon’ble Minister of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Shri Sarb ananda Sonowal, and the Government of 
India for bringing this Bill.  Establis hed under Section 3, the Maritime State 
Development Council (MSDC) will be chaired by the Union Minister and will include 
representatives of the coastal states and Union Territories. It will provide national 
coordination, speedy decision-making, encourage competition, and guide growth. It 
will help states like Telangana move goo ds more smoothly. The empowerment of 
State Maritime Boards under Clauses 13 and 15 will allow states to develop small ports 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

independently. The decentralization of executive decisions will bring about new 
innovations that suit regional needs. 
This Bill tackles Dispute Resolution under  Clause 16. Each State must set up a 
Dispute Resolution Committee, which will have the power to resolve  
disputes within 6 to12 months. This wi ll increase investor confidence and boost 
investments in the PPP model. Telangan a businesses will experience fewer delays 
and become more competitive. 
On the environmental front, the Bill a ligns with global standards like the 
MARPOL Convention and the Ballast Water Management Convention. Waste disposal 
and emergency preparedness plan s will be mandatory at ports. This will help protect 
the environment. 
The Bill also focuses on transparency in port tariffs under Clause 47. Port tariffs 
will be determined by the Board and pub lished online. This will reduce costs to 
businesses and ensure fair pricing. 
Inland Connectivity is another key aspect of the Bill. As per Clause 12, the  
MSDC will lead the development of road, rail and multimodal networks. If corridors 
like Hyderabad-Visakhapatnam and Hydera bad-Mumbai are improved, Telangana 
will become a logistics hub. This Bill also pr omotes integration with inland waterways 
and coastal shipping under its broader fram ework. There are opportunities for cargo 
transportation through rivers like the Godava ri. Additionally, the establishment of Dry 
Ports or Inland Container Depots (ICDs) may take place in Telangana in the future. 
The modernization of ports will create ne w jobs in logistics, warehousing and 
transport sectors. This will be a signifi cant boost for industries in Telangana. 
Additionally, Clause 19 strengthens the po wers of conservators to ensure vessel 
safety and port efficiency, while Clause  53 introduces clear penalties for non-
compliance, ensuring accountability. 
Mr. Vice-Chairman Sir, the Indian Ports Bill, 2025 is a powerful Bill that will 
transform our country into a more vibrant,  greener and a better connected maritime 
economy. It will also provide benefits to la ndlocked states like Telangana, including 
reduced logistics costs, improved connectivity and new economic opportunities. I 
support this Bill.  Thank you, Sir.     
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Now, Shri Mithlesh Kumar.  
 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे भारतीय बंदरगाह 
िवधेयक, 2025 क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत 
आभारी हूँ।  मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से भारतीय बंदरगाह िवधेयक, 2025 पर  अपने िवचार रखने 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
29

का अवसर पाने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत आभारी हूँ।  यह िवधेयक हमारे देश की समुदर्ी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा, Ëयापार और राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा की दृिÍट से अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् है।  भारत 11 हजार  
िकलोमीटर लंबी समुदर्ी तट रेखा, 12 Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ तथा  
200 से अिधक लघु एवं मध्यमवगीर्य बंदरगाहȗ वाला राÍटर् है।  यह िव
धेयक देश को Åलू इकोनॉमी 
का वैिÌवक क ेन्दर् बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक ऐितहािसक कदम है। 
महोदय, हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, माननीय मोदी जी ने Îवतंतर्त ा  िदवस क े अवसर 
पर लाल िकले की Ģाचीर से राÍटर् को सÇबोिधत करते हुए, खुद पर िनभर्र और िवकिसत भारत का 
लÑय - आत्मिनभर्रता को देश का आधार बताया है। िकसी भी देश क े बंदरगाह उस देश क े िवकास 
तथा देश की सुरक्षा की महत्व
पूणर् कड़ी होते हȅ और अगर उनका Ģबंधन सही तरीके  से नहीं िकया 
जाए, तो आए िदन नयी समÎया पैदा होती रहती है।  बंदरगाहȗ क े सुरिक्षत संचालन मȂ, भारतीय 
बंदरगाह अिधिनयम, 2025 भारत क े िलए िवशेष कारगर सािबत होगा।   
मान्यवर, Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ मȂ cargo handling
 िवǄ वषर् 2024-25 मȂ 855 िमिलयन टन क े 
ऐितहािसक उच्च Îतर को छू  गयी है, जो िवǄ वषर् 2014-15 क े 581 िमिलयन टन से 47 Ģितशत 
अिधक है।  जो जहाज कभी लगभग 4 िदन रुकत े थे, अब िडजीटलीकरण होने और Ģिकर्या को 
सुËयविÎथत करने क े कारण, वे क ेवल 45 घंटे  मȂ वापस आ जाते हȅ, जोिक 48.65 Ģितशत की 
वृिǉ है।   
मान्यवर, िवÌव बȅक क े वैिÌवक क ं टेनर बंदरगाह Ģदशर्न सूचकांक, CPPI मȂ अब 9 
भारतीय बंदरगाहȗ को Îथा
न िमला है, िजनमȂ िवशाखापǄनम 19 वȂ और मुंदर्ा 27 वȂ Îथान पर हȅ।  
हमारे बंदरगाह एक पुराने कानून, 1908 क े भारतीय बंदरगाह अिधिनयम ǎारा शािसत हȅ, जो एक 
औपिनवेिशक अवशेष है, िजसके  Ģावधान पुराने पड़ चुक े हȅ और आज क े गितशील और िडिजटल 
समुदर्ी पािरिÎथितक तंतर् क े िलए सीिम
त Ģासंिगकता रखता है।   
मान्यवर, 1950 मȂ क ेवल 21 िमिलयन  टन की तुलना मȂ, भारत क े Ģमुख बंदरगाह अब 
िरकॉडर् 855 िमिलयन टन का भार सÇभालते हȅ।  यह एक 28 गु ना बड़ी छलांग है, िजसने देश क े 
समुदर्ी मानिचतर् को नय
ा रूप  िदया है।  िपछले दशक मȂ Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ की क्षमता मȂ 87 Ģितशत 
की वृिǉ हुई है।   
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, इस िवधेयक क े जो Ģमुख Ģावधान हȅ, उनको मȅ आपके  माध्यम 
से सदन मȂ रखना चाहता हूँ: (1) बंदरगाह Ģािधक
रण का आधुिनकीकरण - सभी Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ 
को आधुिनक तकनीक, िडिजटलीकरण और Îवचािलत Ģबंधन Ģणाली से जोड़ा जाएगा। (2)  
िनजी भागीदारी एवं िनवेश – पिÅलक-Ģाइवेट पाटर्नरिशप क े माध्यम से बंदरगाहȗ का िवक ास 
होगा, िजससे रोजगार क े नए अवसर उत्पन्न हȗगे।  (3) पयार्वरण संतुलन - बंदरगाह िवकास क े 
साथ पयार्वरण संरक्षण हेतु हिरत ऊजार्, तटीय पािरिÎथितकी और Ģदूषण िनयंतर्ण पर िवशेष बल 
िदया गया है।  (
4) राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा - तटीय सुरक्षा को मजबूत करने क े िलए, आधुिनक िनगरानी 
तंतर्, कोÎट गाडर् और नेवी क े साथ समन्वय बढ़ाया जाएगा। (5) वैिÌवक ĢितÎपधार् - यह िवधेयक 
भारतीय बंदरगाहȗ को िंसगापुर, दुबई और शंघाई जैसे वैिÌव क  hub क े बराबर ĢितÎपधीर् बनाने मȂ 
सहायक होगा।  
मान्यवर, यह िबल देश क े port sector को आधुिनक बनाने, coordinated तरीके  से 
िवकिसत करने और ease of doing business को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए लाया गया है।  इस 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

ऐितहािसक कानून का उǈेÌय सिदयȗ पुराने भारतीय बंदरगाह अिधिनयम, 1908 को नया रूप  देना 
तथा भारत क े िवशाल बंदरगाह नेटवकर् क े भीतर एकीकृ त िवकास, उन्नत िविनयमन और 
पयार्वरणीय िÎथरता को बढ़ावा देना है।  इस िवधेयक मȂ Ģमुख और गैर-Ģमुख, दोनȗ बंदरगाह ȗ की 
अिधक ÎवायǄता और संरिक्षत िवकास सुिनिÌचत करते हुए महत्वपूणर् सुधारȗ का ĢÎताव िकया 
गया है।   
महोदय, इस िबल मȂ गैर-आपरािधक दंड 23 से घटाकर 15 कर िदए गए हȅ, लेिकन जुमार्ने 
मȂ उÊलेखनीय वृिǉ की गई है।  जुमार्ने की रािश 10,000 रुपय े से 2 लाख रुपय े तक है, िजसमȂ 
काराव
ास भी हो सकता है।  अपराधȗ क े आधार पर कारावास क े Ģावधान 6 महीने तक क े हȅ।  
बंदरगाह पर बढ़ते यातायात और कड़े सुरक्षा मानदंडȗ क े अभाव क े कारण अपराधȗ का िवÎ तार 
हुआ है।  उन अपराधȗ मȂ शुÊक का भुगतान नहीं करना, बंदरगाह संचालन मȂ बाधा डालना, संपिǄ 
को नुकसान पहुंचाना, सुरक्षा उÊलंघन, बंदरगाह तक अनिधकृ त पहुँच और सीमा शुÊक एवं 
आĨजन Ģिकर्याओं का पालन न करना शािमल हȅ।  
महोदय, यह िवधेयक MSDC को एक वैधािनक सलाहकार िनकाय क े रूप  मȂ औपचािरक 
रूप  देने का Ģयास करता है, िजस
की अध्यक्षता माननीय क Ȃदर्ीय पǄन, पोत पिरवहन और 
जलमागर् मंतर्ी जी करȂगे।  MSDC अपनी  सलाहकार भूिमक ा बरकरार रखेगा, लेिकन इसकी 
राÍटर्ीय पिरĢेÑय योजना और िदशािनदȃश क Ȃ दर् सरकार और राज्य सरकारȗ, दोनȗ पर बाध्यकारी 
हȗगे। इससे िनवेशकȗ और Ëयापक बंदरगाह पिरिÎथितकी तंतर् क े िलए पूवार्नुमान और िÎथरता 
सुिनिÌचत होगी।  
महोदय, यह िवधेयक एसएमबी को वैधािनक दज
ार् Ģदान करता है, िजससे गैर-Ģमुख 
बंदरगाहȗ पर उनका अिधक िनयंतर्ण सुिनिÌचत होता है।  यह िवधेयक राज्य समुदर्ी बोडș और 
Ģमुख बंदरगाह Ģािधकरणȗ को बंदरगाह शुÊक िनधार्िरत करने का अिधक ार देता है।   
इस िवधेयक मȂ Îवािमत्व एवं सुरक्षा मȂ पिरवतर्न िकया गया है।  िकसी बंदरगाह क े Îवािमत्व 
या िनयंतर्ण मȂ िकसी भी पिरवतर्न क े िलए क Ȃ दर् सरकार की पूवर् अनुमित आवÌयक है।  क Ȃ दर् सरकार 
िकसी बंदरगाह को 10 वष
ș तक िनिÍकर्य रहने या राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा संबंधी िचताओं क े कारण िनिÍकर्य 
घोिषत कर सकती है।  
इस िवधेयक मȂ ' मेगा बंदरगाहȗ' का वगीर्करण िकया गया है।  क Ȃ दर् सरकार राज्यȗ क े 
परामशर् से नए बंदरगाहȗ का वगीर्करण करेगी।  ' मेगा बंदरगाहȗ' की अव
धारणा शुरू  की गई है।  
वगीर्करण क े मानदंड क Ȃ दर् और राज्य सरकारȗ ǎारा संयुƪ रूप  से िनधार्िरत िकए जाएँगे।  
महोदय, ' भारतीय बंदरगाह िवधेयक, 2025' का उǈेÌय 12 Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ और राज्य 
क्षेतर्ािधक
ार क े अंतगर्त 217 अिधसूिचत गैर-Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ क े साथ एक एकीकृ त, क ुशल और 
पयार्वरण की दृिÍट से उǄरदायी समुदर्ी ढाँचा तैयार करना है।  संरिचत िवकास सुिनिÌचत करके  
िनवेश को बढ़
ावा देकर और पयार्वरण एवं सुरक्षा मानदंडȗ को बढ़ा कर यह िवधेयक भारत को 
वैिÌवक समुदर्ी क्षेतर् मȂ अगर्णी बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् कदम है।   
इस िवधेयक मȂ राज्य सरकारȗ से अपेक्षा की गई है िक वे राज्य क े भीतर गैर- Ģमुख 
बंदरगाहȗ, िरयायतगर्ािहयȗ, उपयोगकतार्ओं और सेवा Ģदाताओं क े बीच िव
वादȗ का िनपटारा 
करने क े िलए एक िववाद समाधान सिमित (डीआरसी) का गठन करȂ।  डीआरसी क े आदेशȗ क े 
िवरुǉ अपील उच्च न्यायालय मȂ की जा सके गी।  दीवानी अदा लतȗ को डीआरसी को सȚपे गए 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
31

मामलȗ से Ģितबंिधत िकया गया है।  राज्य समुदर्ी बोडș ǎारा िकए गए समझौते या Ģािधकरण 
डीआरसी क े अलावा मध्यÎथता या वैकिÊपक िववाद समाधान तंतर् Ģदान कर सकते हȅ। 
इस िवधेयक मȂ िकसी Ģमुख बंदरगाह क े िलए शुÊक िनÇनिलिखत ǎारा िनध ार्िरत  िकया 
जाएगा :- (i) Ģमुख बंदरगाह Ģािधकरण का बोडर्, या (ii) क ंपनी क े रूप  मȂ पंजीकृ त बंदरगाह का 
िनदेशक मंडल। (iii)  गैर -Ģमुख बंदरगाहȗ क े िलए राज्य समुदर्ी बोडर् या उसके  ǎारा अिधकृ त 
िरयायतगर्ाही शुÊक िनधार्िरत करेगा । 
इस िवधेयक मȂ अिधिनयम संरक्षक को Ģत्येक बंदरगाह या बंदरगाहȗ क े समूह क े िलए 
राज्य सरकार ǎारा िनयुƪ एक बंदरगाह अिधकारी क े रूप  मȂ िनिर्दÍट करता है।  िवधेयक मȂ कहा 
गया है िक अन्य सभी बंदरगाह अिध कारी संरक्षक क े अधीनÎथ हȗगे।  अन्य बंदरगाह अिधकािरयȗ 
मȂ एक बंदरगाह माÎटर और एक ÎवाÎथ्य अिधकारी शािमल हȅ।  
इस िवधेयक मȂ सुरक्षा और संरक्षण अिधिनयम उन कायș क े िलए दंड का Ģावधान करता 
है, जो सुरक्षा को खतरे मȂ डालते हȅ, जैसे बोया को घायल करना, आग्नेयाÎतर्ȗ का इÎ तेमाल 
करना और जहाज पर ज्वलनशील पदाथș को उबालना। 
महोदय, इस िवधेयक से न क ेवल देश क े Ëयापािरक ढाँचे को गित िमलेगी, बिÊक ' मेक 
इन इंिडया' और ' आत्मिनभर्र भारत' अिभयान को भी बल  िमलेगा।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
िजस तरीके  से आत्मिनभर्र बनाने का Ģयास िक
या है, उस अिभयान को भी बल िमलेगा।  समुदर्ी 
Ëयापार मȂ दक्षता बढ़ेगी, लॉिजिÎटक्स लागत कम होगी और भारत िवÌव क े सÃलाई चैन मȂ एक 
मजबूत कड़ी बनेगा। 
महोदय, मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से एक माँग भी करता हूँ िक हमारे उǄर Ģदेश क े Ģयागराज 
मȂ अभी जब 'महाकुं भ' का मेला हुआ था, तब तम
ाम लोग जहाज क े माध्यम से वहाँ से 'गंगाजी' का 
जल लाकर 'काशी िवÌवनाथ' मȂ चढ़ा
ते थे। ...(समय की घंटी)... मान्यवर, आपको कभी मौका 
िमले, तो ' काशी िवÌवनाथ' जाइएगा और वहाँ पर जब ' गंगा माँ' की आरती होती है, तो सामने 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े माध् यम से सैकड़ȗ जहाज खड़े होते हȅ और शाम को एक अǌुत दृÌय होता है, 
जो देखने लायक होता है।  इसिलए मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से िनवेदन करता हूँ िक वे अपनी नजर 
उǄर Ģदेश क े जहाजरानी िवभाग पर बनाए रखȂ और उसको बिलया तक बढ़ाने का Ģयास करȂ।  
यह क ुशीनगर की िवशेष माँग है। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Thank you.  
  
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार: महोदय, अंत मȂ, मȅ इस सदन से आगर्ह करता हूँ िक हम सभी दलगत 
राजनीित से ऊपर उठ कर इस ऐितहािसक िव धेयक का समथर्न करȂ तािक भारत आने वाले वषș 
मȂ एक वैिÌवक समुदर्ी महाशिƪ बन सके ।  इसिलए माननीय मंतर्ी जी सदन मȂ यह जो 'भारतीय 
बंदरगाह अिधिनयम, 2025' लाए, इसके  िलए मȅ उनको बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूँ।  ' जय िंहद, 
जय भारत',
 'भारत माता की जय'! 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  Thank you.  Now, Shri Praful Patel, 
you will have the entire time of your party.  So, please consume that.  You will have 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

the entire time of your party, notwithstand ing, whatever has been allotted to you.  
Now, Shri Praful Patel.  You will have th e entire time of your party; so, please 
consume that.  You will have the  entire ti me of your party notwithstanding whatever 
has been allotted to you.  
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL (Maharashtra): Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I thank you for having 
given me the opportunity.  I rise to support the legislation, a very important legislation, 
brought about by the Minister of Shipping , the Indian Ports Bill, 2025, which is 
absolutely the need of the hour considerin g that India is one of  the fastest growing 
economies in the world.  Also, the other aspect being that we have almost 7,400 
kilometers of coastline.  So, we can, definitely, be one of the major maritime powers 
in the world.  As you know that all internat ional trade, --  barr ing a very few, less 
volume, I would say more expens ive  hardware or software  can be exported by air or 
by other means -- a bulk of trade, import and export,  is definitely to be carried out  
by the sea route.  Therefore, the Indian port s  play a very important role  in the entire 
development of the nation. We have heard,  we have Seen the figures of 855 million 
tons of cargo as of date but I am sure  the Shipping Minist er would know  the kind of 
volumes which are being  done by ports in other countries and especially the smaller 
countries which have actually developed themselves  as, I would say, maritime 
nations.  And, the countries which are  main ly situated on the shipping routes, they 
are doing a lot of trans-shipment cargo also.  Those countries are doing volumes 
even bigger than a large country like India.  Therefore, it is imperative that we  do 
expand our sea ports. It is the vital infras tructure.  Infrastructure building, as you 
know, also leads to development of the entire nation, the economy of the nation. One 
small example, but a recent example, is the under-construction Vadhavan port in 
Maharashtra which is going to be the largest port of our country.  And, that one single 
port is estimated to cost Rs.75,000-80, 000/- crores. That would be the direct 
investment.  What about the lakhs of crores  of investment which will come due to the 
Vadhavan port coming around there?  It will generate employment for lakhs of people. 
It will give impetus to the entire region wh ich requires development. So, there are so 
many spin-offs and peripheral benefits of developing seaports. It is, as I said, the 
need of the hour. India is already the fourth  largest economy growing at a rate of at 
least 6.5 per cent,  if not more. It can go up to eight per cent or nine per cent in the 
years to come. And, if we become the thir d largest economy, it will not be happening 
without improving our overall infrastructure, out of which, especially, for import and 
export, you will require seaports. There were  times, of course, when we had bulk 
cargo and it will still be, I would say, a majo r volume at the ports. Virtually, you See 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
33

anywhere in the world, container ports are doing large volumes and some figures 
have been given about our own ports at what the standing are. We are 19 and we are 
number 27 in two of our ports in terms of volume of containers. I am sure we can be in 
the top three; I am sure we can be in the top four or five. There is no reason why, 
considering the size of our country and the volumes which we import, we export.  So, 
I personally feel, Sir,  that it is important that this activity be  expanded at the earliest. 
We have  many ports.  There was a time   when Mumbai was known only because 
Mumbai had the port.  It used to be the prin cipal, I would say, occupation for a lot of 
people in Mumbai, and following that was, I would say, the textile mills of Mumbai. 
These were the only two things for whic h Mumbai was famous. Today, the port of 
Mumbai  is just not anywhere in the standing  because it is landlocked and it is a small 
area.  But considering what the developments are taking place now, -- in China, I 
was told, there is one port; I have not been to that port – I have Seen one port which 
would probably subsume  almost all the po rts of our country put together into one 
port.  So that is the kind of vision which we have and that is the kind of vision with 
which our Prime Minister Narendra Modi is trying to take India to.  
And, for that, we have to really bring a ll our legislations also in tune with the 
rest of the world like ports, airports, etc. These are all activities which are interlinked 
with the global economy. Theref ore, rules, regulations, and all that will also have to 
be on par with all the other maritime nations of the world. That is why it is imperative 
that this Bill, which is a landmark Bill, wh ich sets the tone for port-building in the 
future, shipping in the future for our count ry, needs to be passed unanimously by this 
House. After all, India is on the path of growth. 
 I would also like to just tell the hon. Minister that even in the existing ports, not 
that it has not been done, much more impetus needs to be given by way of other 
Ministries also, I would say, interlocking themselves with the de velopment of a port. 
Because after all, a port is only comple te when there is a great road network 
connecting it, where there is a great railw ay network connecting it; and even the 
power and other peripheral infrastructure has to be put in place. Then only a port can 
become a huge success. I think we still have  some bottlenecks here and there in the 
country and the speedier the infrastructure, peripheral infrastructure we build, we will 
make those ports also successful. Fortunate ly, we are a large geography and a large 
coastline which is covering almost, as I said, 7,400 kilometers, which wraps all 
around the country. We are also on many shipping routes which connect the East 
with the West or the other way. That is wh y we can have a lot of transshipment ports 
also. You know a lot of cargo which comes from the Middle East, the Gulf, from all 
these areas, if it is going East, in no way,  you can bypass India.  And so would it be 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

from the East. India, as a maritime power,  and even with the great Navy, we are one 
of, I would say, the custodians of the In dian Ocean. We not only control our own 
coastline, but we control the maritime move ments of the entire Indian Ocean region. 
That is why India has a very important role to play.  
Therefore, I would like to say that the Indian Ports Bill, 2025 is a move in the 
right direction, not only to improve the ports, the connectivity and to increase the 
volume, but if India really has to be truly known as a global power in every single way 
and the vision of the Prime Minister of 2047 being Vikshit Bharat, the moment of India, 
we will all have to work in that direction,  and, therefore, I compliment the Minister, 
Sonowalji. He has really been, I would say, painstakingly following every step of this 
Bill,  piloting it. He has visited all the ports.  I have Seen him in action, even in Mumbai 
and other places. He is taking interest; and there are inland waterways also. The 
Prime Minister has actually given a vision about inland waterways. Inland waterways 
are one of the needs of the hour because it is the cheap est mode of transportation. 
Even within India, Sir, from East, from th e coast, from the State you come from, to 
move any  bulk goods, to say the Western re gion, say, Mumbai, or to other parts of 
Gujarat, the simplest, the cheapest and the mo st cost-effective ways to move it is by 
sea, even today.  So we have to build ev en inland shipping, inland waterways, and 
that will all combine together with these ma jor ports to make India a great shipping 
nation. Thank you.                                      
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Shri Milind Murli De ora, not present. 
Shri Kanad Purkayastha.  
 
Ǜी कणाद पुरकायÎथ ( असम): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज यह सदन भारतीय 
बंदरगाह िवधेयक, 2025 पर िवचार कर रहा है। यह िवधेयक मातर् एक कानूनी दÎतावेज़ ही नहीं, 
बिÊक Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े “Maritime Amrit Kaal - 2047 ” क े दृिÍटकोण की ठोस 
नींव है। 
 महोदय, भारत की 11,093 िकलोमीट
र से अिधक लÇबी तटरेखा हमारी 4 िटर्िलयन डॉलर 
की अथर्ËयवÎथा की जीवनरेखा है। हमारे Ëयापार की 95 परसȂट मातर्ा और 70 परस Ȃट मूÊय हमारे 
बंदरगाहȗ क े माध्यम से होता है। माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार आने क े बाद 
2014 मȂ कागȘ हȅडिंलग 581 िमिलयन टन थी, जो आज 855 िमिलयन  टन पर पहुंच चुकी है।  
जहाजȗ का टनर्अराउंड समय 4 िदन से घटकर 48 घंटे रह गया है।  सागरमाला क े तहत 1.41 
लाख करोड़ रुपय े की 272 पिरयोज
नाएं पूरी हुईं।  अंतदȃशीय जलमागș पर माल ढ ुलाई 700 
परसȂट बढ़ी।  आज नौ भारतीय बंदरगाह िवÌव बȅक क े वैिÌवक पोटर् परफॉमȄस इंडेक्स मȂ शािमल 
हȅ।  ये उपलिÅधयां इस बात का Ģमाण हȅ िक मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारत का समुदर्ी क्षेतर् वैिÌवक 
ĢितÎपधार् मȂ खड़ा है। यह िबल हमारी औपिन
वेिशक िवरासत को हटाकर पुराने कानून को 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
35

हटाएगा।  1908 का इंिडयन पोट्सर् एक्ट अंगर्ेजȗ क े समय का है और पुराना, अĢासंिगक और 
हमारे समय की चुनौितयȗ क े लायक नहीं है।  िवपक्ष ने दशकȗ तक इस कानून को जस का तस 
रहने िदया।  उन्हȗने सुधारȗ की बात तो की, लेिकन कभी ठोस कदम नहीं उठाए।  ये नए िवधेयक 
की िवशेषताएं हȅ।  Maritime Development Council को  वैधािनक दजार् देना क Ȃ दर् और राज्यȗ क े 
बीच सहकारी संघवाद की िमसाल है।  राज्य समुदर्ी बोड्सर् का गठन और सशƪीकरण, िववाद 
िनवारण सिमितयां और समयबǉ समाधान।  M ARPOL और  BWM जैसी अंतरराÍटर्ीय संिधयȗ क े 
अनुरूप  Ģदूषण िनयंतर्ण और पयार्वरणीय सुरक्षा Ģत्येक बंदरगाह क े िलए आपदा Ģबंधन योजना 
अिनवायर् है।  Maritime Single Window Digitalization और पारदिर्शता, शुÊक और दरȗ का 
पारदशीर् Ģकाशन हो, तािक िनवेशक और उǏोग को भरोसा िमले।  इन Ģावधानȗ का 
आधुिनकीक
रण और अनावÌयक Ģावधानȗ का हटाना।  सर, जहां अतीत की सरकारȂ 
औपिनवेिशक कानूनȗ की परछांई मȂ सोई रहीं, वहीं मोदी सरकार ने उन्हȂ बदलकर आधुिनक, 
आत्मिनभर्र और िवÌवÎतरीय भारत बनाने की िदशा मȂ ऐितहािसक कदम उठाया है।  यह िवधेयक 
िनवेश बढ़ाएगा, logistics लागत घटाएगा, पयार्वरण की रक्षा करेगा और Blue economy एवं 
green port जैसे भिवÍय क े क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ गित देगा।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह िवधेयक भारत को 204
7 तक वैिÌवक 
समुदर्ी महाशिƪ बनाने का मागर् ĢशÎत करता है। यह िवधेयक भारत को औपिनवेिशक अतीत से 
िनकालकर आत्मिनभर्र भिवÍय की ओर ले जाने वाला है।  मȅ इस िवधेयक का समथर्न करता हूं 
और िवपक्ष से भी आगर्ह करता हूं िक वे संकीणर् राजनीित छोड़कर इस ऐितहािसक सुधार क े साथ 
खड़े हȗ।  मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यव
ाद करता हूं।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  Hon. Minister, Shri Sarbananda 
Sonowal to reply to the discussion.  Hon. Minister, the floor is yours. 
 
THE MINISTER OF PORTS, SHIPPING  AND WATERWAYS (SHRI SARBANANDA 
SONOWAL):  Respected Sir, I am sincerely than kful to all the respected Members of 
Parliament who have participat ed in the discussion on th is Bill.  This Bill is very 
significant because it is a legislative reform initiative. हम  सबको मालूम है िक देश क े 
आदशर्वादी नेता, दुिनया क े सबसे लोकिĢय नेता Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने refo
 rm, perform 
and transform क े रूप  मȂ हमȂ जो मागर्दशर्न िदया है और speed and skill की नीितयȗ पर 
आधािरत आज माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सारे मंतर्ालय िनÍठापूवर्क अपनी भूिमका िनभा 
रहे हȅ, इसकी वजह से िपछले 11 साल मȂ देशवािसयȗ को जो उप
लिÅधयां हािसल हुईं, उस पर हर 
नागिरक गवर् महसूस करता है।  मȅ भी एक नागिरक होने क े नाते गवर् महसूस करता हूं, क्यȗिक मȅने 
भी कई सालȗ तक िदÊली मȂ जो भी पा टीर् सǄा संभाल रही थी, जो सǄा मȂ रहे, उन लोगȗ का मȅने 
चिरतर् भी देखा। यिद उनका Ëयवहार, उनका कामकाज भी देखा, तो उसे िसफर् मȅने ही नहीं देखा, 
बिÊक देशवािसयȗ ने भी देखा।  
महोदय, 2014 मȂ, जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने शपथ ली और देश की जनता क े Ģित समिर्पत 
भावना से काम करने की जो Ģितज्ञा ली, उस Ģितज्ञा को साकार कर
ने मȂ उन्हȗने जो िनÍठापूवर्क 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

कदम उठाए हȅ, उनकी वजह से आज देश जाग उठा है। अब देश दुिनया की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा बनने जा रहा है। महोदय, 2014 मȂ िकसी ने भी ऐसा नहीं सोचा था, क्यȗिक कांगर्ेस ने 
55 सालȗ तक राज करते हुए देश पर इतना अन् याय िकया, इतनी नाइंसाफी की िक हर वगर् को 
भुगतना पड़ा और शायद यही कारण रहा िक वे लोग आज यहाँ नहीं रह पाए।  
 महोदय, मȅ जो आंकड़ा बताने जा रहा हूं, उसको बताकर मȅ कांगर्ेस क े का य र्काल का एक 
छोटा-सा नमूना पेश करना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक उनके  कायर्काल मȂ हमारे Port, Shipping and 
Waterways मंतर्ालय की तरफ ध्यान नहीं िदया गया। उन्हȗने इस मंतर्ालय का अध्ययन नहीं 
िकया, अनुसंधान नहीं िकया, इस मंतर्ालय क े ज़िरये हम देश को आगे क ै से ले जा सकते हȅ – इस 
बात का भी उनका कोई अनुभव नहीं था। महोदय, इसकी वज
ह से िकसी भी विर्टकल मȂ, वह चाहे 
पोटर् हो, िशिंपग हो, वॉटरवेज हो, वे कोई कदम नहीं उठा पाए। उनके  पास न तो कोई नीित थी, न 
कोई का
यर्कर्म था और न ही कोई िवज़न था। लेिकन परम आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस 
मंतर्ालय को शिƪ देने क े िलए जो िवज़न िदया है, उसकी वजह से मंतर्ालय ने आज जो भी 
सफलता ĢाÃत की है, उसके  िलए हम हर पल चाहते हȅ िक हमारी क ृतज्ञता Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े िलए 
हमेशा रहे, क्यȗिक देशवािसयȗ ने भी यह देखा है िक अगर सही नीित, सही नेता और सही नीयत 
एक साथ िम
ल जाएं, तो सब क ु छ संभव हो सकता है।  
महोदय, आज परम आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने ग्यारह सालȗ मȂ जो नीित दी है, उसक
ी 
वजह से आज देश क े हर वगर् को सामािजक सुरक्षा िमली है और अथर्ËयवÎथा को मजबूत बनाने क े 
िलए सभी को सुनहरा मौका भी िमला है। आज सभी लोगȗ को इज्जत से जीने का एक शि
ƪशाली 
माहौल िदया गया है।  
महोदय, कांगर्ेस ने इस मंतर्ालय की ओर ध्यान नहीं िदया। वे इसके  िलए 2014 से लेकर 
2024 तक, यानी पूरे दस साल तक क ेवल एक ही कानून बना पाए। उनके  िदमाग मȂ कोई भी 
लेिजÎलेिटव िरफॉमर् नहीं था। िĤिटशसर् ने सौ सा
ल पहले जो कानून बनाए, उनमȂ से अिधकतर 
कानून कमज़ोर रहे, क्यȗिक वतर्मान मȂ, 21 वीं सदी मȂ Ģितयोिगता का जो माहौल है, उसमȂ िकसी 
भी देश का अपनी शिƪ िदखाने क े िलए जो सबसे पहला कद
म होता है, वह कानून ËयवÎथा होती 
है। अगर कानून ËयवÎथा modern and competitive बने, effective बने, business-friendly बने, 
eco-friendly बने, people-friendly बन े, तो हम कानून क े ज़िरये देश को आगे बढ़ा सकते हȅ। 
महोदय, हम इसी भावना की शिƪ से परम आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े कायर्का
ल मȂ उनके  
िनदȃश क े मुतािबक िपछले 11 सालȗ मȂ 11 कानून यहाँ नए रूप  मȂ लाए हȅ। This has been brought  
before this august House after going throug h wider consultation with all the coastal 
States and other stakeholders like users of ports, exporters and importers.  This is the 
vision of our hon. Prime Minister.   
महोदय, मȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूं िक हम क्या-क्या कानून लेकर आए हȅ। These 
legislations are: the National Waterways Act, 2016; the Admiralty (Jurisdiction and 
Settlement of Maritime Claims) Act, 2017; the Recycling of Ships Act, 2019; the Inland 
Vessels Act, 2021; the Marine Aids to Navi gation Act, 2021; the Major Ports Authority 
Act, 2021; the Bills of Lading Bill, 2025; th e Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2025; the 
Coastal Shipping Bill, 2025; the Merchant Sh ipping Bill, 2025; and now, the Indian 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
37

Ports Bill, 2025.   This is the power of re forms, through which we are going to make 
India one of the leading maritime nations in  the world, under the dynamic leadership 
of our hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi.   
 िवशेष रूप  से, आज हमारे परम आदरणीय सांसदȗ, रामभाई मोकिरया जी, गोला बाबूराव 
जी, सुलता देव जी, मु. तंबी दुरै जी, धैयर्शील मोहन पािटल जी, रेखा शमार् जी, सुनेतर्ा अजीत 
पवार जी, शंभू शरण पटेल जी,  बीरेन्दर् Ģसाद बैÌय जी, मÎतान राव यादव बीडा जी, मयंककु मार 
नायक जी, रिव
चंदर् वǈीराजू जी, िमथलेश क ुमार जी, कणाद पुरकायÎथ जी और हमारे Ģफु Êल 
पटेल जी - आप लोगȗ ने आज इस िडबेट मȂ भाग िलया और अपना मीिंन गफु ल क ंटर्ीÅयूशन िदया 
है। And, these hon. Members have made th is particular Legislative Business very 
meaningful not only for the House but for the entire country also.  The ports are the 
gateway of growth.  These are the ports thro ugh which we can connect to the world.  
I have always been saying that water is th e wisdom, water is the wealth, water is the 
weather and water is the war.   So, this is the power of water.  Without water, we 
cannot achieve anything because since the time human civilization started, it has 
been the mode of waterways through which people have travelled from one part of 
the world to other parts and the societies got connected and also could have better 
interactions on religion, culture, trading, etc.  I believe this is the power of waterways.  
And, realizing this importance of making available resources for the waterways, the 
hon. Prime Minister has developed these visions, namely, the Maritime India Vision 
2030, and the Maritime AmritKaal Vision 20 47.   But, during the Congress regime, 
they did not have any vision on where to go, what to achieve, what are the targets 
and how to compete with the best of the maritime nations of the world.  So, this 
vision was always missing in the Congre ss policy and programme.  But, the hon. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, has made all the people of the country motivated 
and given a direction that let us come to gether, join hands with each other with a 
spirit of एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत। हमȂ देश को आगे बढ़ाना है और दुिनया मȂ यह सािबत करना है 
िक हम सबसे बेहतर हȅ। We are t
 he best in the world in  all the verticals, in all the 
subjects.  That is why, I believe that with  this particular commitment, dedication and 
devotion, sincerity and discipline, the hon. Prime Minister has br ought all the people 
together, whether it is Nort h, South, East or West, सब लोगȗ को एकितर्त िकया। सबका 
साथ, सबका िवकास मंतर् क े ǎारा सब लोगȗ का अनुभव जगाया और एक िदशा दी िक हमȂ इस 
देश का आत्म िनभर्र भारत क े िहसाब से िनमार्ण करना है और दुिनया क े सबसे मजबूत, िवक िसत 
राÍटर् क े िहसाब से देश की पहचान खड़ी करनी है। I So, I believe this is how all the people 
of the country are motivated and connected  with each other and they are able to 
realise now that yes, we have the ability to perform to that extent, and this is how he 
has generated the confidence of the people of the country.     
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Earlier it was missing, but now people have self-confidence that ‘vocal for 
local’ can be converted into reality.  This ca n be articulated into action.  This is how 
things have happened and our nation is S eeing better and better results every day. I 
believe the Congress and its gathbandhan, DMK and all others ...( Interruptions)...  
Yes, yes, I am just coming to that.  I belie ve, at least, they should develop a sense of 
respect to the nation because they are also the citizens of the country, they also have 
a big role to play as an Opposition. The role of Opposition is not only to oppose but 
responsibility and responsiveness are the tw o important qualities that the Opposition 
should always possess and represent.  Responsibility and responsiveness! But in this 
case, I have Seen these missing.  Very sad.  ...( Interruptions)...  I am coming to 
that.   
Sir, among other issues, our senior Me mber of Parliament, Dr. Thambidurai, 
raised the issue of the contraband goods.  In this case, the Government of India is 
always empowered to issue direction to the ports.  So, as you know, there are 
different categories of ports.  There are so me major ports run by the Government of 
India.  There are some non-major ports. It is more than 250 in number across the 
country, particularly on the coastal belt.  And out of these, some are operated by 
State Governments, some are operated by th e private players.  This is the system 
how ports are operated.  But, now, after this august House passes this particular Bill, 
then, definitely, a lot of discipline will come into the aspect of port operation.  We 
want to operate it with quality effort, wi th sustainability and with the spirit of 
cooperative federalism.   States and Cent re equally will be joining hands with each 
other, so that whatever provisions...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Hon. Member, please.  
...(Interruptions)... Please continue, hon. Minister.  
 
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL :  I have already reacted to your concern. So, I 
believe this is how the entire framework is being developed.  I am sure, after this 
august House passes this particular Bill, defi nitely, in the near future, it will empower 
us to achieve the goal, objective and targ et destination that we have set for the 
country as a whole, and, it is eco-friend ly. There are some provisions which were 
missing in the earlier legislation.  Let me mention some.  Number one is about 
integrated planning. What is integrated planning? It statutorily establishes the 
Maritime State Development Council, a recommendatory body  to facilitate integrated 
long-term planning and data-driven decision -making across all ports.  It was missing 
in the earlier Act. Number two is a provisio n for dispute resolution.  If there is any 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
39

dispute among the concessionaries, it lays down as to how it can be sorted out within 
a short span of time.  The Bill introduces a State-level Dispute Resolution Committee 
to provide a fast, efficient and transparent mechanism for resolving port-related 
disputes.  So, this way, Ease of Do ing Business environment will be created. 
Environmental and safety compliance is also a very, very important aspect. 
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
It mandates, particularly the present Bill, that all the ports adhere to 
International Conventions, like MARPOL, requ iring them to have a robust plan for 
emergency preparedness, pollution preventi on and disaster management. Third is 
digital integration. In line with our inte rnational obligations, the Bill empowers the 
Government to direct ports to establish a maritime single-window system, enabling 
seamless electronic data exchange and im proving the ease of doing business.  
Whatever tariff will be set by the authority,  it will be made transparent. It will be 
published so that whoever is interested to operate business in that particular sector, 
he will be very much concerned, and he will be having very easy access to this 
particular data. Then, we have modern-d ay deterrence against violation. The Bill 
consolidated penalties into schedules, upda tes their quantum, decriminalizes certain 
offences and removes outdated provisions, replacing them with modern and relevant 
provisions. Next is transparency in port ta riff.  Whatever tariff  will be fixed by the 
authority, this will be made transparent. The Bill overhauls provision on fees and other 
charges to ensure clarity and transparency, consolidating the fees and other charges, 
which may be levied at each port. This Bill is meticulously designed to align with the 
best global practices, mirroring the integrated planning model of Singapore -- 
Singapore is considered to be one of  the best models -- and the robust 
environmental standards of all the nations under the European Union. This has been 
designed accordingly. So, by modernizing our legal framework, we are not just 
playing catch-up, we are laying the foundatio n for India to become a global maritime 
leader by 2047. In line with our vision of Viksit Bharat, I request all the respected 
Members of the House to extend their service, particularly their support, to get this 
particular Bill considered and passed.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The question is: 
 
“That the Bill to consolidate the law relati ng to ports, promote integrated port 
development, facilitate ease of doing business and ensure the optimum utilisation of 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

India's coastline; establish and empowe r State Maritime Boards for effective 
management of ports other than major ports; establish the Maritime State 
Development Council for fostering structured  growth and development of the port 
sector; provide for the management of po llution, disaster, emergencies, security, 
safety, navigation, and data at ports; ensure compliance with India’s obligations 
under international instruments to which it is a party; take measures for the 
conservation of ports; provide for adjudicat ory mechanisms for the redressal of port-
related disputes; and address matters connect ed therewith or incidental thereto, as 
passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
THE  VICE-CHAIRMAN  (DR.  SASMIT  PATRA):  We  shall  now  take  up Clause-
by-Clause consideration of the Bill.  In Clause 2, there are two Amendments; 
Amendment (No. 2) by Shri Sandosh Kuma r P; not present, and Amendment (No. 
25) by Dr. V. Sivadasan; not present.  Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : In Clause 3, there are three 
Amendments; Amendments (Nos. 26-28) by  Dr. V. Sivadasan; not present. 
Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  In Clause 5, there is one Amendment 
(No. 29) by Dr. V. Sivadasan; not present. Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 5 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  In Clause 6, there is one Amendment 
(No. 30) by Dr. V. Sivadasan; not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 6 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 7 to 10 were added to the Bill.   
 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
41

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : In Clause 11, there are two 
Amendments; Amendment (No. 3) by Sandosh Kumar P; not present, and 
Amendment (No. 31) by Dr. V. Sivadasan; not present. Amendments not moved.  
 
Clause 11 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 12, there is one 
Amendment (No.32) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 12 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 13, there is one 
Amendment (No.33) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 13 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 14, there is one 
Amendment (No.34) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 14 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 15 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 16, there are two 
Amendments; Amendment (No.4) by Shri  Sandosh Kumar P, not present; and 
Amendment (No.35) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present.  Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 16 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  There is an Amendment for insertion 
of New Clauses 16A and 16B.  Amendment (No.5) by Shri Sandosh Kumar P, not 
present. Amendment not moved. 
 
Clauses 17 to 23 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 24, there are three 
Amendments; Amendments (Nos .6 and 7) by Shri Sandosh Kumar P, not present; 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

and Amendment (No.36) by Dr. V. Sivada san, not present.  Amendments not 
moved. 
Clause 24 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 25 to 35 were added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In  Clause 36, there is one 
Amendment (No.8) by Shri Sandosh Kumar P, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
Clause 36 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 37 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In  Clause 38, there is one 
Amendment (No.9) by Shri Sandosh Kumar P, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
Clause 38 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In  Clause 39, there is one 
Amendment (No.10) by Shri Sandosh Ku mar P, not present.  Amendment not 
moved. 
Clause 39 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 40, there is one 
Amendment (No.11) by Shri Sandosh Ku mar P, not present.  Amendment not 
moved. 
Clause 40 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 41 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  In Clause 42, there is one Amendment 
(No.12) by Shri Sandosh Kumar P, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
Clause 42 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 43 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 44, there is
  one 
Amendment (No.13) by Shri Sandosh Ku mar P, not present.  Amendment not 
moved. 
Clause 44 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 45 to 48 were added to the Bill. 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
43

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 49, there is one 
Amendment (No. 14) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 49 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 50 to 53 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 54, there is one 
Amendment (No. 15) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 54 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 55 to 65 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 66, there is one 
Amendment (No. 16) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 66 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 67, there is one 
Amendment (No. 17) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 67 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 68, there is one 
Amendment (No. 18) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 68 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 69, there is one 
Amendment (No. 19) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 69 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 70 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 71, there is one 
Amendment (No. 20) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 71 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 72 was added to the Bill. 
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In
 Clause 73, there is one 
Amendment (No. 21) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present.  Amendment not 
moved.  
Clause 73 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 74 to 77 were added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 78, there are two 
Amendments; Amendment (Nos. 22 and 23) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present. 
Amendments not moved.  
Clause 78 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 79 to 85 and Schedule 1 to Schedule 3 were added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  In Clause 1, there are two 
Amendments; Amendment (No. 1) by Shri Sandosh Kumar  P; not present and 
Amendment (No. 24) by Dr. V.  Sivadasan, who is also no t present.   Amendments 
not moved.  
Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 
The Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  Hon. Minister, Shri Sarbananda 
Sonowal to move that the Bill be passed.  
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL:  Sir, I move: 
      “That the Bill be passed.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The House stands adjourned to meet 
at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 19th August, 2025. 
The House then adjourned at fourteen minutes past four of the clock till eleven of 
 the clock on Tuesday, the 19th August, 2025. 
[ 18 August, 2025 ]
45

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 