Vol. 265 Tuesday, 
No. 2 23rd July, 2024 
      1 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (page 1) 
Rulings by the Chair (pages 1 - 3) 
Regarding Rule 238 and other matters (pages 3 - 5) 
Observations by the Chair (pages 5 - 6) 
The Union Budget, 2024-25 (pages 6 -7) 
Fiscal Policy Statements, 2024-25 (page 7) 
The Budget of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25 (page 7) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Website: http://rajyas
abha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 23rd July, 2024 /1 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at thirty minutes past one of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I am please d to extend birthda y greetings to hon. 
Member of Parliament, Shri Su brata Bakshi. Shri Bakshi is a Member of this august 
House since April, 2020. He is the West Be ngal State unit President of AITC and also 
Deputy Leader of the Party in Rajya Sabha. He brings with him a wealth of experience 
- a Cabinet Minister in West Bengal Go vernment (Minister of Public Works and
Transport), Member of Lok Sabha from 2011-2014 and 2014-201 9 and a Member of
West Bengal Legislative Assembly from  2001-2011. He exemplifies amiability,
decorous demeanour and his participation ha s been highly impactful and enriching.
H e  i s  m a r r i e d  t o  S h r i m a t i  S a h a n a  B a k s h i and the couple is blessed with a son-
Saptarshi.
Hon. Members, on behalf of this Hous e, I wish him a long, healthy and happy 
life and extend greetings to the family members.    
RULINGS BY THE CHAIR 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member s, yesterday I had indi cated that I will give my ruling 
on the issue of electronic filing of notices.  
(i) Hon. Members, India's digital stride has globally been acknowledged. The
World Bank chief, Shri Ajay Banga, reflected thus: "I cannot praise enough what
India is doing to open up space for entreprene urs. That is visible in the digital space.
India put in place public digital infrastructure that is so well attuned for private
initiatives to blend in to take advantage of this infrastructure".
World Bank in its G20 document has reflected that India has achieved financial 
inclusion targets in just six years which wo uld otherwise have taken at least 47 long 
years owing to its Digital Payment Infras tructure (DPI) such as Jan Dhan Bank 
accounts, Aadhaar and Mobile Phones (the JAM trinity). 
Adaptability and acceptability of digitisati on is reflected in India accounting for 
more than half of the global  transactions. Even millions of  farmers receive three times 

 
a year direct transfers to their accounts. Such service delivery is increasingly getting 
into this digital mode.  
 In this situation, hon. Members, it wo uld not be sending right signals that we, 
from the Parliament, do not lead by example.  
 After deep thought and taking into consideration the concerns raised by 
Members, a suitable mechanism for facilitating the hon. Members in the matter has 
been put in place and an IT Helpdesk has b een set up in the Lobby for resolution for 
their queries in this regard and also for contingent situations. I would welcome any 
suggestion of hon. Members to enable them to go digital.  
 In this premise, I am sure, hon. Me mbers will appreciate and support this 
gesture. We have to be forward-looking ra ther than be retrog rade and this would 
inspire and motivate people at large to go digital.               
 
(ii) Hon. Members, Shri Digvijaya Singh,  while addressing the House, on 22
nd July, 
indicated and I quote : "Sir, I have a point of order under Rule 238." And, he, in 
particular, made reference to the explanation thereof, relevant extract as under:  
  
 " 238. Rules to be observed while speaking 
  A member while speaking shall not –  
   ***** 
 (v) reflect upon the conduct of a pe rson or persons in high authority 
 unless the discussion is based on  a substantive motion drawn in 
 proper terms. 
 
 Explanation:-  The words "persons in high authority means persons whose 
conduct can only be discussed on a substantive motion drawn in proper terms under 
the Constitution or such other persons whose conduct, in the opinion of the 
Chairman, should be discussed on a subs tantive motion drawn in terms to be 
approved by him", that is, Chairman. 
 The occasion for Shri Digvijaya Singh to raise the point of order was at my 
taking serious notice of the conduct of Shri Jairam Ramesh, who sitting in his chair 
and without permission of the Chair, in high decibel, made highly derogatory 
objectionable observations against high consti tutional authority, that were instantly 
expunged.  I had indicated thus and I quote what I said: 
 "...I take it not only as nuisance but also as disturbance...Don’t create it like a 
street. Mr. Jairam Ramesh, you cannot cr eate like this. ...I take a very strong 
objection....The hon. Member, firstly, is sp eaking while sitting in his chair; then, the 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
hon. Member is speaking without getting my permission and the hon. Member is 
using disparaging words, objectionable! ...I appeal to the senior leadership that let us 
rise to the occasion and see that the dignity of this House is not so shattered..." 
 The contextual situation, as indicated, leaves no doubt that the point of order 
has been raised in a wholly inconceivabl e manner and, as a matter of fact, takes 
exception to the disregard of mandate of Ru l e  2 3 8  b y  S h r i  J a i r a m  R a m e s h .  I n  t h i s  
situation, the point of order raised by Sh ri Digvijaya Singh, under Rule 238(v), is 
without merit and declined. 
 Hon. Members, I take the opportunity to urge all of you in this august House to 
follow protocol and adhere to the rules. It  is highly inappropriate for a Member to 
address the House without leave of the Chair.  In this case, the conduct of the hon. 
Member is aggravating as he, in  high decibel, without leave of the Chair, sitting in his 
seat, imparted unbecoming and disparaging remarks against high constitutional 
authority, causing disturbance and disrupti ons in the House. Such conduct by one 
with parliamentary experience and ministerial background is unfortunate and 
reprehensible. Given the frequency of such  incidents, I urge the hon. Member to 
reflect and adhere to rule-based conduct. 
 I also seek to draw attention of hon. Members that late Shri S.B. Chavan, as 
the first Chairman of the Ethics Committee, in  1998, in the First Report of the Ethics 
Committee, had imparted directions to the Members including, inter alia, that 
Members must not do anything that brings  disrepute to the Parliament and affects 
their credibility. I would urge the hon. Members to go through the Report carefully and 
ensure that they uphold the standards it sets forth.  
 The Report, for the benefit of hon. Me mbers, has already been uploaded today 
on Member’s Portal. We need to exemplify, hon. Members, our conduct that is worth 
emulation. And, I would urge the hon. Me mbers that this is a very, very serious 
aspect. I find that there has been some mu rmur. I have carefully thought about it and 
unless we rise to the occasion, we will be sending a wrong signal. 
 
 
REGARDING RULE 238 AND OTHER MATTERS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Tiruchi Siva, do you want to say something? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) :  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I recall that earlier, in the 
House, an issue was raised about a Memb er of the other House. And, we had 
objected saying, the Members of the other House cannot have an opportunity to 
[ 23 July, 2024 ]
3

 
explain themselves; so, the matter cannot be raised. At that time, you had given a 
ruling that anything under the sky can be  debated and discussed here. Then, I had 
asked whether Rule 238 had become redundant. You had said that you would be 
giving a ruling later on. Rule 238 mentions  all these things -- a matter which is sub 
judice or a person who is not able to defend himself in the House – cannot be raised.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Just one minute.  This is not the issue at the moment.  Mr. Tiruchi 
Siva, you are a senior Member.  Our Rules of Procedure specifically provide that the 
conduct of a Member of Lok Sabha can be discussed in this House.  Rules provide 
this. It says that if an allegation is to be levelled against an hon. Member of the Lok 
Sabha, then, permission of the Chair has to be taken. Therefore, when I gave my 
ruling, -- I will have it sent to you also -- I had covered all these aspects. We, in this 
House, have to be rigorously bound by the rules and protocol. If we say that we can 
raise anything in this House, that is subj ect to the Rules of Procedure. It cannot be 
that we can raise all the matters we want, in any manner we like. I find quite often that 
a Member is normally not satisfied with th e answer of the hon. Minister. There is a 
mechanism. We should take recourse to that mechanism. It is an elaborate procedure 
and there will be wholesome outcome. Now, the Leader of the Opposition.  Sir, we 
had an occasion to greet you on your birthday. 
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE) :  Thank you, 
Sir.  But, that was a very short introduction I found in that.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No, Sir, it was very long.  ...(Interruptions)... I reflected your 
career; your son, as a Minister; your son-in-law, as a Member of Lok Sabha. 
...(Interruptions)... I will have it sent to you, Sir. ...(Interruptions)...  I will have it 
sent to you today. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : Sir, I am thankful to you that, at least, you 
remembered me.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Sir, I remembered you on two o ccasions – one, on your birthday 
when I called you and you blessed me; second, yesterday in the House, as per 
practice.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Thank you very much for that.   
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 सर, आपने यह कहा िक इस हाउस मȂ हमको रूÊस क े तहत चलना है और रूÊस छोड़ 
कर कोई भी िकतना बड़ा नेता हो, उसको उससे हट कर बात करना ठीक नहीं है। आपने हमको 
बार-बार यह भी याद िदलाया िक सदन मȂ जो ली डर  ऑफ द हाउस हȅ, उनकी िजतनी मयार्दा 
होती है, उतनी ही मयार्दा लीडर ऑफ िद अपोिज़शन की होती है। यह आपने बार-बार कहा।  
हमने भी उसको यही समझा िक लीडर ऑफ द हाउस को जो मौका िमलता है, वे हाथ उठाते हȅ, 
तो आप सबको िबठा कर उनकी बात सुनवाते हȅ, लेिकन जब हम उठते हȅ, तो कभी-कभी बहुत 
कोिशश करनी पड़ती है। आज तो हमȂ चांस िमला, लेिकन बाकी वƪ बहुत कोिशश, जǈोजहद, 
लड़ना और इतना होता है िक रूÊस छोड़ कर मेरा आकर आपसे पूछना, मुझे भी शमर् आती है।  
लेिकन जो इस हाउस मȂ गलत बात कहते हȅ, अग
र उसको retort करना है, जब मȅ उठता हूँ, तो 
मुझे भी वही हक होना चािहए।*   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   No, Sir, you are digressing now.  ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will 
go on record now.  ...(Interruptions)... I am sorry, nothing will go on record.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : 
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : It will not go on record.  ...(Interruptions)... Sir, I expect 
you...(Interruptions)... Please bear with me.  Noth ing will go on record now.  
...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have receive d five notices under Rule 267.  And, 
imagine the Agenda we have for the day,  a n d  w e  w a n t  t o  h a v e  t h a t  A g e n d a  
suspended! Notice from Shri Jawhar Sircar, Member seeking discussion over sudden 
spike in terrorist activities in Jammu and Kashmir, while Shrimati Sagarika Ghose, Shri 
Saket Gokhale, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Ha que, Members have sought discussion 
over fake certificates being used for appointment throug h UPSC;  Shrimati Sushmita 
Dev has demanded to abolish the Nation al Testing Agency and decentralize the 
examination process.    
 Hon. Members, the only listed Business for today is laying of Union Budget 
2024-25; Fiscal Policy Statements, 2024-25 and the Budget of Union Territory of 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
[ 23 July, 2024 ]
5

 
Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25, which is a constitutional requirement in terms of 
Article 112 of the Constitution of India.  I fail to comprehend what these Members want 
to dispense.  Do they not want these Papers to be laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha?  
Such a liberal use of Rule 267 is not do ing any good to us. Ho n. Members may also 
recall that Rule 267 has been rarely resorted to in the past. Last time, it was accepted 
in 2016. Keeping in view the fact…  …(Interruptions)..  One minute, take your seat. 
Keeping in view the fact that in the past 36 years, this provision has been allowed only 
on about six occasions, -- and I get a number of these on every sitting of the Session 
-- I urge the Members and the floor leaders to seriously reflect and introspect this 
indiscriminate resort to the provisions of Rule 267 on a daily basis, virtually without 
exception, when the House is  in Session. These notices  do not conform to the 
directives imparted by the Chair in this be half, the same I cannot persuade myself to 
accept.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala):  Sir,…(Interruptions).. 
 
 
 
THE UNION BUDGET, 2024-25 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Finance Minister, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman 
deserves congratulations and accolades for the milestones she has to her credit while 
presenting the Budget before Parliament . The Budget is Shri mati Sitharaman’s 
seventh consecutive Union Budget since 2019,  including an interi m one in February 
this year. The only Finance Minister to have done so, she surpasses the record of Shri 
Morarji Desai, who had presented six co nsecutive Budgets from 1959 to 1964 
including an Interim Budget. The Finance Minister, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman, 
happens to be Bharat’s first full-time woma n Finance Minister appointed in 2019.   
She happens to be the first Finance Minister to present  Budget of the most populous 
nation…(Interruptions)… first woman Finance Minister to present Budget for a 
Government that is continually in its third term.   …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, 
these accolades, in a sense, also exemp lify Bharat’s emerging empowerment of 
women and women-led empowerment. Now, the Union Budget 2024-25, Shrimati 
Nirmala Sitharaman.  ….(Interruptions)… 
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I lay on the Table, a statement (in English 
and Hindi) of   the   estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government, for the 
year 2024-25.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 189/18/24] 
 
 
FISCAL POLICY STATEMENTS, 2024-25 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Fiscal Policy Stat ements, 2024-25. Shrimati Nirmala 
Sitharaman. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I la y on the Table, under sub-section (1) 
of Section 3 of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003, a copy 
each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:-  
(i) Medium-term Fiscal Policy cum Fi scal Policy Strategy Statement;  
(ii) Macro-Economic Framework Statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 190/18/24] 
 
 
THE BUDGET OF UNION TERRITORY OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR, 2024-25 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Budget of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25; 
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, I la y on the Table, stat ements (in English 
and Hindi) of the estimated receipts and expenditure (2024-25) of the Union territory 
of Jammu and Kashmir (with Legislature). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 190A/18/24] 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, 
the 24th July, 2024.  
 
The House then adjourned at fifty minutes past one of the clock till eleven of the clock 
on Wednesday, the 24th July, 2024. 
 
[ 23 July, 2024 ]
7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 