Vol. 267       Tuesday, 
No. 23   1st April, 2025. 
         11 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (pages 1 - 2) 
Papers Lai
d on the Table (pages 2 - 8) 
Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs-Laid on the Table (page 8 ) 
Reports of the Committee on Welfare of other Backward Classes -Laid on the 
Table (page 8 - 9) 
Statement by Minister- 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the Third Report 
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel-Laid on the Table (page 9) 
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons (page 9) 
Regarding notices received under rule 267 and Point of Order (pages 9 - 13) 
Matters raised with Permission  
Concern over delay in conducting the decen nial census (pages 13 - 14) 
Request regarding Unique Disability ID Certification Camps for Autistic Children 
and Young Adults (pages 14 - 16) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Need to improve the nutrition quality of food under Mid-day meal  
programme (pages 17 - 19) 
Demand to repeal Mahabodhi Vihar Act of 1949 (pages 19 - 20) 
Need to review the recent gu idelines issued by RBI on  repayment terms of jewel 
loans, to mitigate the significant impact  on the vulnerable sections of society 
(pages 20 - 21) 
Concern over the sale of 400 acres of la nd belonging to Hyderabad University  
(pages 21 - 23) 
Demand to release outstanding MGNR EGS funds to the State of Tamil  
Nadu (pages 23 - 24) 
Demand for legal protection to stop any fund diversion of Scheduled Caste Sub 
Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) (pages 24 - 25) 
Need for Judicial Reforms in the country (pages 25 - 26) 
Concern over rising cost of children's education in India (pages 26 - 28) 
Concern over alarming rise in hate crimes and need to strengthen law 
enforcement mechanisms (pages 28 - 29) 
 
Observations by the Chair (page 17) 
 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 29 - 59) 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
 
Government Bills-Passed 
The Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025 (pages 59 - 88)  
The   "Tribhuvan"   Sahkari   University   Bill,   2025   (  pages   88   -   139   and  
pages 140 - 172) 
Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee (pages 139 - 140) 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
               http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
E-mail   : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 01st April, 2025 / 11 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, Birthday Greetings. A mild suggestion to all the 
hon. Members; if they seek to speak amongst th emselves, please keep their decibel 
low.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, may I have your attention?  I urge all the hon. 
Members, -- being present in this Hous e is a serious business; there will be 
occasions when you need to interact with  one another -- make it very dignified, 
decorus and in low decibel.  I find this bein g transgressed on occasions.  This is my 
appeal to you. 
Hon. Members, I am extremely pleased to  extend birthday greetings to hon. 
Members of Parliament, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita and Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda.   
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, वे यहाँ से वहाँ चले गए हȅ। 
Ǜी सभापित: जयराम जी, आप तो इधर से उधर जाने की सोच रहे हȅ, तो आप िश िंÄटग  क े 
िखलाफ क्यȗ हȅ? It is a natural process. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita, currently, the 
Chairman of the Committee on Science an d Technology, Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change is serving his fifth term si nce April, 2020, representing the State of 
Assam in the Rajya Sabha.  Shri Kalita, an advocate by profession has a distinguished 
political career having previously served for four terms in this august House, (1984-
1990, 1990-1996, 2008-2014,  and 2014 to 2019) and as a Member of Lok Sabha 
(1998-1999)... 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, पाटीर् क े साथ बोिलए। 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The suggestion is noted by me. I will confer with the Leader of the 
House and the Leader of the Opposition for that.  He has been a Cabinet Minister in 

the Government of Assam from 2002 to 2004 during his tenure in the Assam 
Legislative Assembly, 2001 to 2006.   
Hon. Members, I had the great privilege and honour to be guided by him when 
I got into Parliament in 1989 and shared that  period along with him though he was in 
the other House.  A seasoned parliamentaria n, ever smiling and full of positivity, Shri 
Khalita has contributed significantly throug h his effective partic ipation in debates, 
deliberations and discussions in the Ho use. He is widely travelled and has 
represented India in many global fora. He is  married to Shrimati Rwitticka Kalita, an 
ex-IAS officer, who has served in various capaci ties in Assam as well as in Delhi. 
Their son, Shri Siddhartha Kalita is also an advocate by profession.   
Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda, a distin guished Member of this House since 
June, 2022, is currently serving his first term  representing the State of Telangana.  He 
founded the renowned newspapers ‘ Namaste Telangana’  and ‘Telangana Today’, 
and was a key founding member of the T-News channel, wh ich played a pivotal role 
in the Telangana Statehood Movement. Shri  Damodar Rao Divakonda is married to 
Smt. Swaroopa Rani and the couple is bl essed with son, Raghav, and daughter, 
Gowthami. 
Hon. Members, on my own and your behalf, I wish the hon. Members a long, 
healthy and happy life and extend greetings to their family members and friends.    
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No
w, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
II. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of G APL, Goa; HLL Lifecare Limited,
Thiruvananthapuram;  and AIIMS, New Delhi and related papers
III. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of CNCI, Kolkata; ICMR, New Delhi; FSSAI,
New Delhi; LGBRIMH, Tezpur, Assam; and NEIAH, Shillong, Meghalaya and
related papers
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
I. (i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

Notification No. G.S.R. 1516(E)., dated the 15 th December, 2017, publishing the 
Food Safety and Standards (Second Amendm ent) Rules, 2017, under Section 93 of 
the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006, along with delay statement and Extract of 
the Rules amended. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2497/18/25] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Notification No. G.S.R. 742(E)., dated the 3 rd December, 2024, publishing the
Cigarett
es and other Tobacco Products (Packaging and Labelling) Amendment
Rules, 2024, under sub-section (3) of S ection 31 of the Cigarettes and other
Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advert isement and Regulation of Trade and
Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2496/18/25] 
II. (A) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: -
(i) (a) Forty-third Annual Report and Accounts of the Goa Antibiotics and
Pharmaceuticals Limited (GAPL), Goa, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.   
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2491/18/25] 
(ii)
(a) Fifty-eighth Annual Report and Accounts of the HLL Lifecare Limited,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts an d the comments of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon.     
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company.
(2) Statements (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the
papers mentioned at (1) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2490/18/25] 
(B) (1) A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following pa
pers, under sub-
section (4) of the Section 18 and Section 19 of the All India Institute of Medical
Sciences Act, 1956:-
(a) Sixty-eighth Annual Report and A ccounts of the AllIndia Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delh i, for the year 2023-24, together
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
3

 
 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2498/18/25] 
 
III. (A) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(i) (a) Annual Report of the Chittaranjan Na tional Cancer Institute (CNCI), 
Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute (CNCI), 
Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report 
thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2492/18/25] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), New 
Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Indian Counc il of Medical Research (ICMR), 
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Council. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2493/18/25] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Food Safety and Standards Authority 
of India (FSSAI), New Delhi, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Authority. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2495/18/25] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi 
Regional Institute of Mental Health  (LGBRIMH), Tezpur, Assam, for the 
year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2494/18/25] 
 
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nort h Eastern Institute of Ayurveda 
& Homoeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong, Meghalaya, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2618/18/25] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Finance 
   
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता  हूं:- 
(i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), under Section 31 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992: - 
 
 (1) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2024/209., da ted the 18th November, 2024, 
publishing the Securities and Exch ange Board of India (Alternative 
Investment Funds) (Fifth Amendmen t) Regulations, 2024, along with 
delay statement. 
 (2) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2024/217., da ted the 11th December, 2024, 
publishing the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue and Listing 
of NonConvertible Securities) (Thi rd Amendment) Regulations, along 
with delay statement. 
 (3) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2024/221., da ted the 16th December, 2024, 
publishing the Securities  and Exchange Board of  India (Mutual Funds) 
(Third Amendment) Regulations, 2024, along with delay statement. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
5

 
 
 (4) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/230., date d the 14th February, 2025, 
publishing the Securities  and Exchange Board of  India (Mutual Funds) 
(Amendment) Regulations, 2025. 
 (5) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/233., dated th e 4th March, 2025, publishing 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue of Capital and 
Disclosure Requirements) (Amendment) Regulations, 2025. 
 (6) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/235., date d the 11th March, 2025, publishing 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Prohibition of Insider 
Trading) (Amendment) Regulations, 2025. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (6), see No. L. T. 2619/18/25] 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) Notification No. SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2024/218., dated the 
12th December, 2024, publishing the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(Listing Obligations and Disclosure  Requirements) (Third Amendment) 
Regulations, 2024, under Section 31 of the Securities and Exchange Board of 
India Act, 1992 and sub-section (3) of S ection 31 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2620/18/25] 
 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) Notification No. SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/229., dated the 
13th February, 2025, publishing the Securi ties and Exchange Board of India 
(Procedure for making, amending and revi ewing of Regulations) Regulations, 
2025, under Section 31 of the Securiti es and Exchange Board of India Act, 
1992 and sub-section (3) of Section 31 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 and Section 27 of the Depositories Act, 1996. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2621/18/25] 
 
(iv) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), under sub-section (7) of 
Section 9A of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975:- 
 (1) G.S.R. 175(E)., dated the 17th Marc h, 2025, imposing anti-dumping 
duty for a period of five years on “vacuum insulated flask and other 
vacuum vessels, of stainless steel ” originating from or exported from 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
I. Appropriation Accounts (2023-2024) of Union Government (Postal Services)  
II. Reports (2023) of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 151 क े खंड (1) 
क े अधीन िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित ( अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ:- 
I.    Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Postal Services) – for the year 
2023-2024. 
II.    (i)  Report of the Comptroller and Au ditor General of India for the year ended 31 
March 2023 – Union Government – Finance and Communication – Report No. 
China PR, along with Explanatory Memorandum. 
 (2) G.S.R. 176(E)., dated the 17th Ma rch, 2025, imposing provisional anti-
Dumping duty on imports of  “Aluminium foil upto 80 micron, excluding 
aluminium foil below 5.5 micron for non-capacitor application ” 
originating in or exported from China PR, in pursuance of preliminary 
findings issued by DGTR, along with Explanatory Memorandum. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), see No. L. T. 2622/18/25] 
 
Report and Accounts (2023-24) of SPFO, Mumbai and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
Shri Shantanu Thakur, I to lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of 
the following papers:— 
 
 (a) Fifty-eighth Annual Report and Accounts of the Seamen’s Provident 
Fund Organization (SPFO), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 2023-
24, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Organization. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2623/18/25] 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
7

 
 
1 of 2025 (Compliance Audit); and 
(ii) Report of the Comptroller and Au ditor General of India on Working of 
Mancheswar Carriage Repair Workshop in East Coast Railway and Construction 
of 5th and 6th Line between Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT)-Kurla 
Station – Union Government – Ministry of Railways – Report  No. 2 of 2025 
(Compliance Audit– Railways). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2624/18/25] 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and Hindi) of 
the Sixth Report of the Department-relat ed Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
External Affairs (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, 
PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers : All Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, 
including the status of the Emigration Bill’. 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON WELFARE OF OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES 
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार (मध्य Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ अन्य िपछड़े वगș क े कÊयाण संबंधी सिमित क े 
िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूं:- 
(a) Fifth Report of the Committee (2024-25)  on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in its Thirty-second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Measures undertaken to secure representation of 
Other Backward Classes in employment  and for their welfare in Central 
Industrial Security Force (CISF)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(b) Sixth Report of the Committee (2024 -25) on ‘Implementation of various 
measures/schemes for Welfare of OBCs’ under the Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment); and 
(c) Seventh Report of the Committ ee (2024-25) on ‘Formulation and 
implementation of Reservation Policy for OBCs in the posts and services under 
Government of India & Union Territories  and Measures undertaken to secure 
representation of OBCs in employment and for their welfare in various 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Departments/Organisations/ Institutions  under Department of Personnel and 
Training (DoPT)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions. 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF STEEL (SHRI BHUPATHI RAJU 
SRINIVASA VARMA): Sir, with your permission, I lay a statement regarding Status of 
implementation of the recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Steel. 
 
 
PANEL OF VICE-CHAIRPERSONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, in addition to the ex isting Members on the panel of 
Vice-Chairpersons, I have nominated Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya and Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla to the panel of Vice-Chairpersons. 
 
 
REGARDING NOTICES RECEIVED UNDER RULE 267 AND POINT OF ORDER 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, 12 notices have been received under Rule 267. 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav, Shri Javed Ali Kh an have demanded di scussion over the 
alleged threat and attempt to attack on the residence of former Union Minister and a 
sitting Member of the Rajya Sabha at Agra by some anti-social elements.  The notices 
of Smt. Sagarika Ghose, Shri Saket Go khale, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, Ms. 
Dola Sen, Ms. Sushmita Dev have demanded discussion over the alleged lapse of the 
Election Commission in issuance of multiple  duplicate Electors Photo Identity Cards 
across the States. The notices of Shri A.A. Rahim, Dr. John Brittas, Shri P.P. Suneer 
and Shri Santosh Kumar P have demanded discussion over the alleged threat to 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
9

 
 
freedom of expression by deliberate an d malicious attack on the movie, L2 
Empuraan... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, it is Empuraan. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. What he says will go on reco rd.  He knows it. Thank you.  The 
notice of Shri P. Wilson demand discussion  over the alleged non-disbursement of 
pending wages under MGNREGA by the Union Government…, ...(Interruptions)... 
Nothing will go on record.  Please. I have  spoken on a number of occasions, let us 
exemplify our conduct worth emulation by all.   Hon. Members, some of the issues 
have been deliberated.  Some of the issues  are being reiterated in respect of which 
directive of the Chair has emanated.  Taking  an overall view, all these notices do not 
merit acceptance. I will be open to the ho n. Members, to take recourse to other 
mechanisms, with an assurance, they will be accommodated. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MS. DOLA SEN (West Bengal): Sir, I am on a point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, I have a point to make. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. There is a point of order by Ms. Dola Sen. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Sir, I have point of order under rule... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  I am amazed that you are rais ing a point of order by taking 
recourse to your electronic equipment as yo u if you are already prepared for it.  Go 
ahead. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN : Thank you, Sir, for appreciation. I have a point of order under Rule 
267. For discussion on duplicate EPIC, four of us, on behalf of All India Trinamool 
Congress, had given notices un der Rule 267 on last Frid ay. You had said that you 
would give your ruling. But, no ruling was given. Sir, notices under Rule 267 were not 
called out on Friday.  So, I am humbly requesting your ruling of Friday. Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: In any case, Members often use this as a parliamentary practice to 
invite the attention of the Chair. The rulin g will come. And, ruling will come also on 
this. Now, Matters to be raised with permission of Chair... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सुǛी दोला सेन : *  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : P l e a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on 
record. ...( Interruptions)... Take your seat. ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your 
seat. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, we are walking out in protest.  
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Sanjay Rautji, I will make it partic ipatory.  Please take your seat. 
...(Interruptions)... Take your seat.  Let me first dispose of this.  ...(Interruptions)... 
One minute. Let me deal  with the issue.  ...(Interruptions)... H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  t h i s  
kind of tactics is not in consonance with healthy parliamentary practice - 
premeditated, deliberated, raising it on mu ltiple occasions; the Chair having decided 
on the same issue, look at the level of casual attitude!  I invited the attention of the 
House that one of the Members, Shrimati Sagarika Ghose, wanted proceedings to be 
suspended for an earlier date. That was the attitude. On 25th or 26th March, she 
wanted proceedings of 20th of  March to be suspended; and this was at two places. 
Now, if that is the attention you are paying to parliamentary work, and that is how you 
wish to seek traction of a narrative, I am sure, there will not be many people to favour 
it. I strongly urge the Members, you are very  intellectual, all of you, please let us not 
take it to that ridiculous level --  same day, same thing. ...(Interruptions)...  A view 
has been taken by me thoughtfully, in acc ordance with rules, and every time faced 
with the same situation. I had to say that even Artificial Intelligence does not help me 
to suspend that meeting which has already taken place.  And, a point of order was 
raised by Ms. Dola Sen about Friday; I said, I will come with my ruling, and I have just 
taken the seat. Now just imagine, if I have to act with the earliest of speed, it could be 
during the course of the day. I urge all of you; you have your political stance. 
...(Interruptions)... You are well within your rights.  But let us take recourse only to 
rules. ...(Interruptions)... One minute. I will not op en the discussion, sorry. 
...(Interruptions)... Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav and all others, please take your seats.  
Yes, Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav. 
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
11

 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव ( उǄर Ģदेश):  सभापित महोदय, मȅने ģाईडे को आज क े िलए नोिटस 
िदया था।  उसके  बाद भी क ु छ घटनाएं हुईं। कल ही अलीगढ़ से एक Ëयिƪ ने यह कहा, यह सब 
सोशल मीिडया पर है, अखबारȗ मȂ हȅ, अगर रामजी लाल सुमन की कोई हत्या कर दे, तो मȅ 
उसको 25 लाख रुपय े दूंगा और मुझे िमल जाएं, तो मȅ ही उड़ा दूंगा।  ये घटनाएं रोज़
ाना हो रही 
हȅ, इसिलए मȅने कहा है िक मȅ सुरक्षा क े संबंध मȂ बात करना चाहता हूं।  …( Ëयवध ान)…  िकसी  
एमपी की जान को खतरा हो, तो आप उसको  सीिरयसली नहीं लȂगे!  …(Ëयवधान)…    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute.  Hon. Members, … …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस और पािर्लयामȂटर्ी अफे यर िमिनÎटर जब चाहे, तब 
बोल सकते हȅ, उस पर िकसी को कोई एतराज नहीं, लेिकन अन्य लोगȗ ने भी जो चाहा, वह कहा।  
…(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please,… …(Interruptions)… Now, nothing is going on record. 
…(Interruptions)… Either side, nothing is going on record. …(Interruptions)… You have 
had your say.  Thank you. Leader of the Opposition, please. ...( Interruptions)... 
Please, yield for the leader of the Opposition.  
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): माननीय सभापित जी, माननीय सदÎय ने नोिटस िदया है 
और आपने परिमशन दी है। वे सीिनयर मोÎट लीडर हȅ और कभी भी बीच मे उठकर रूÊस क े 
िवरुǉ ऐसे नहीं बोलते हȅ। जब ऐसे माननीय सदÎय एक माननीय सदÎय की िसक्युिरटी क े बारे मȂ 
बात करना चाहते हȅ, उनक
ी िंजदगी, जो इतनी तबाह की गई है, उस बात को आपके  और सदन 
क े नोिटस मȂ लाना चाहते हȅ, तब इनको क्यȗ दुख हो रहा है? उन्हȂ बोलने दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: उनसे पूछ लȂगे। …(Ëयवधान)... Now, Shri Sandosh Kumar P.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P.: Sir, * ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, nothing will go on record;  absolutely ‘no’.  ...(Interruptions)...  
I will not withstand, I am so sorry. Please take your seat. ...( Interruptions)... Now, 
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge – Concern over delay in conducting decennial Census. 
...(Interruptions)...  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, we are forced to leave the Chamber. 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(At this stage, hon. Members left the Chamber) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge. 
 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
Concern over delay in conducting the decennial census 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता  ( Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सभापित जी, हमारे देश मȂ हर दस साल मȂ होने वाली 
जनगणना 1881 मȂ शुरू  की गई थी। तमाम आपातकालीन हालात, युǉ और दूसरे संकट आए, 
लेिकन यह काम जारी रहा। 1931 की जनगणना 26 फरवरी , 1931 मȂ शुरू  होकर साल भर चली 
थी। …(Ëयवध
ान)… उसी दौरान जाितगत जनगणना भी हुई थी। इस जनगणना से पहले महात्मा 
गाँधी जी ने कहा था िक जैसे अपने शरीर की  पड़ताल क े िलए हमȂ पीिरयोिडकली मेिडकल 
एग्ज़ािमनेशन कराना पड़ता है, उसी तरह जनगणना िकसी राÍटर् का सबसे महत्वपूणर् परीक्षण 
होती है। महोदय, जनगणना बहुत महत्व का काम होता है और इस काम मȂ काफी बड़ी तादाद मȂ 
लोग लगते हȅ। उन्हȂ पॉÃयुलेशन क े आंकड़े, employment, fam
ily structures, socio-economic 
conditions और अन्य कई  key para meters की पड़ताल करनी होती है।  
महोदय, दूसरे िवÌव युǉ क े दौरान और 1971-72 मȂ भारत-पाक युǉ क े बावजूद भी 
जनगणना हुई थी, लेिकन बहुत दुख की बात है िक इितहास मȂ पहली बार सरकार ने िरकॉडर् देरी 
की है। महोदय, आप चाहȂ तो जनगणना क े साथ जाितग
त जनगणना भी संभव है, क्यȗिक आप 
एससी/एसटी वगर् क े डेटा कलेक्ट करते हȅ, इसिलए साथ ही अन्य जाितयȗ क े डेटा भी कलेक्ट 
कर सकते हȅ, लेिकन जाितगत जनग णना और जनगणना, इन दोनȗ िंबदुओं पर यह सरकार मौन 
है। दुिनया क े 81 परस Ȃट देशȗ ने इस बीच, कोरोना महामारी क े बावजूद भी जनगणना का काम 
सक्सेसफु ली पूरा कर िलया है, लेिकन भारत मȂ जनगणना कब होगी, इसके  बारे मȂ साफ तौ र पर 
क ु छ नहीं कहा जा रहा है।  
महोदय, इस साल बजट मȂ क ेवल 575 करोड़ रुपय े का आवंटन िकया गया है। इससे 
लगता है िक सरकार जनगणना कराने से बचना चाहती है। जनगणना मȂ देरी होने क े दूरगामी 
पिरणाम िनकलते हȅ। तम
ाम बुिनयादी आंकड़ȗ की गैर मौजूदगी मȂ यह तुगलकी नीित बनती जाती 
है। Consumer Survey, National Family Health Survey, Peri odic Labour Force Survey, 
National Food Security Act, National Social Assistance Programme सिहत कई महत्वपूणर् 
सवȃक्षण और कÊयाणकारी कायर्कर्म जनगणना क े आंकड़ȗ पर िनभर्र करते हȅ। लंबी देरी क े कारण 
लाखȗ नागिरक सरकारी कÊयाणकरी योजनाओं की पहुंच से बाहर हो चुक े हȅ। नीित िनम
ार्ताओं क े 
पास आम फ ैसला लेने क े िलए भरोसेमंद डेटा उपलÅध नहीं है। महोदय, लेटेÎट और सटीक 
जानकारी क े िबना आप कोई नया का
म ठीक से नहीं कर सकते हȅ, इसीिलए मȅ सरकार से यह 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
13

 
 
िनवेदन करता हूं िक जनगणना का काम तत्काल शुरू  हो। मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करता हूं िक 
जनगणना और जाितगत जनगणना, इन दोनȗ कामȗ को जÊदी शुरू  कराना चािहए।      
                                                                                      
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge  :  Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra  (Odisha), Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal (Punjab), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Prakas h Chik Baraik  (West Bengal), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Ashok 
Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), 
Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shrimati Ra jani Ashokrao Patil (Maharashtra), Shri 
Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan),  Smt. Ranjeet  Ranjan (Chhattisgarh), Smt. Phulo Devi 
Netam, (Chhattisgarh), Shri N.R. Elango (T amil Nadu), Shri Chandrakant Handore, 
(Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu ), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri 
Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri Sanjay Raut (Maharashtra), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu),  Prof. 
Ram Gopal Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Pr em Chand Gupta (Bihar), Shri Imran 
Prat
apgarhi (Maharashtra) and  Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan  (Uttar Pradesh). 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Sujeet Kumar.  
 
Request regarding Unique Disability ID Certification Camps for Autistic Children and 
Young Adults 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha) :  Sir, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to 
bring to the attention of the Government on  an issue which, I am sure, will have the 
support of the entire House. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu):  Sir,... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Please, listen to him. ...( Interruptions)...  I have noted your 
request.  I will come back to you.   Please, listen to him.  
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:   Sir, the month of April is the Autism Awareness Month and 
the 2
nd of April, that is, tomorrow, is the Auti sm Awareness Day.  Autism incidence is 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
rising globally and India is no exception.  Currently, about 1.5 per cent of children and 
youth in India suffer from autism.  It  is also called the ASD (Autism Spectrum 
Disorder), and it is the number one pediatri c concern for the parents.  I take this 
opportunity to salute all the parents wh o have autistic kids, and I express the 
solidarity with all those parents.  
In 2016, the hon. Prime Minister launc hed a visionary scheme called the UDID 
(Unique Disability ID), which was a recogn ized proof of disability issued by the 
Government and it also helped to create a national database of differently-abled 
persons and also helped all the parents to access Government schemes.  Again, I 
compliment the Government for running vari ous schemes to support individuals with 
ASD, such as Niramaya, Aspiration, Gyan Prabha, Sa marth, Gharonda and Udhyam 
Prabha.  However, it has been brought to  m y  n o t i c e  b y  m a n y parents, who have 
autistic children, that obtaining a UDID card is very cumbersome.  Currently, there is 
a six-stage process to obtain the UDID card, which is extremely complex.  I 
understand that this six-stage process has been created to bring transparency and 
efficiency in the obtaining of the ID card and also in  availing of the Government 
benefits because we do not want duplicat e and fake beneficiaries.  So, it is 
understandable. However, many parents of autistic kids cannot submit to this 
complex process because unlike kids with ot her disabilities, autistic kids do not 
tolerate crowds, they do not tolerate diff erent environment and they do not tolerate 
hospitals. This is depriving the parents of the intended benefits which the kids could 
have and it compounds to their stress and su ffering. Then, there is also a very long 
waiting process and also very few hospit als are there which o ffer the certification 
process.  
So, Sir, through you, I would like to request very humbly to the Government 
the following things.  One is to set up these certification camps  in all the Anganwadis, 
mainstream schools, NHM centers, MCH cente rs, and normal schools also, so that 
parents of autistic kids can go to these places and obtain the certification with 
minimum hassles and avail all the benefits. Secondly, the Government should make 
this announcement in its websites of all the Departments, so that there is wider 
publicity and dissemination.  And finally, the Government should rope in... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Leader of the Ho use, the Unique Disability ID card is an 
affirmative scheme. I had the occasion to inaugurate one of the high excellence 
autism schools, and having noticed at my level also, with many representations, this 
Unique Disability ID card is very essentia l for extension of governmental benefits.  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
15

 
 
 
Now, if these children go to the hospital, th ey face a different environment, daunting 
environment, and autism, unlike dyslexia an d others, is virtually life-long.  Tomorrow 
is the World Autism Awareness Day. I wo uld urge that facilitation mechanism be 
indicated. One way could be that team could go to such institutes or such places 
where there is grouping of su ch kind of people. This will go a long way in realising a 
very well thought out scheme that has been in vogue now for about eight-nine years.  
So, tomorrow is the day when you can contemplate of unfolding a scheme so that 
these people -- the number is large, around 30 million -- get the benefit fastest. 
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Kumar :  Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Mahar ashtra), Shri Tiruchi Siva 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Ram Chander Jangra  (Haryana), Smt. 
Rekha Sharma(Haryana), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Dr. Sumer 
Singh Solanki  (Madhya Pradesh), Smt. Mamata Mohanta (Odisha),Smt. Maya 
Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh),  Smt. S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik 
(Madhya Pradesh), Shri Rwngwra Narzary (Assam),  Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal (Punjab) and Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
(Uttar Pradesh).     
                                            
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawa l; Need to improve nutrition 
quality of food under Mid-day Meal Programme. 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: माननीय सभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Mr. Chairman, Sir…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute, Radha Mohan Agrawal ji.  Yes, Mr. Tiruchi Siva. 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Thank you very much.   Sir, you are the custodian of this House, 
of the rules as well as of the Members of Parliament.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav has 
raised a genuine concern about threat to the life of a Member of this House.  You 
have to take cognizance and render justice.  
 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I had the painful duty, on the last occasion, to 
indicate that when, in the burst of emotion, an hon. Member exceeds decorum, there 
is a mechanism of rectification. The obse rvations made by the hon. Member were 
expunged.  They were hurtful to the chivalry and patriotism of a great son of the soil.    
Now, the observations having been exp unged, the minimum respect a Member can 
pay is not to reiterate the same.  The reit eration of what has taken place is something 
which hon. Members need to think about. Secondly, I am sure, security of every 
citizen as well as a Member is important and those concerned will take all steps in that 
direction, and there is no doubt about it. But these are issues wherein we need to 
moderate the temperature and make the climate a little more wholesome so that the 
societal dysfunction is contai ned. And, I made a fervent a ppeal on that day also but 
the reiteration was in a very aggravating form. I would urge the hon. Member to 
contemplate and appeal to Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav to bring his good influence, as a 
veteran parliamentarian, to bring quietus to this issue.  And, quietus can be brought 
about only by respecting the Chair, an d the Chair had found those observations 
unacceptable. I leave it to your wisdom. As regards security, every Member’s security 
is important.  We need to function on that  principle.  Let us not expand the debate 
now. I would have accommodate d Jaya ji but I do not want  to expand the debate 
now. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, it is not on this issue. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Then, Madam, as per rules, right now, we have to take up the listed 
matters.  Please send a chit to me.  We will try to accommodate whatever you have 
to say under the permissible rules. Shri Radha Mohan Das Agrawal, please resume.  
Your time starts now.   
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION - Contd. 
 
Need to improve the nutrition quality of food under Mid-day meal prograame 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल (उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, Mid-Day Meal एक बहुत 
महत्वपूणर् और बहुत Ģशंसनीय अिभयान रहा है और इससे बच्चȗ को बहुत लाभ हुआ है। मȅ 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
17

 
 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का आभारी हूँ िक िसतंबर, 2021 मȂ उन्हȗने 24 लाख आँगनवाड़ी वकर् सर्, 
आशा वकर् सर्, मदरसा और मकतब को भी इस योजना मȂ शािमल िकया।   
 
( उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए। ) 
 
इस योजना क े तहत सारा अनाज, logistic, transport और िकचन बनाने का खचर्, यह सब क ेन्दर् 
सरकार देती है।  यहाँ तक िक खाना बनाने का 60 Ģितशत िहÎसा भी भारत सरकार देती है।  
महोदय, इस योजना ने बच्चȗ क े ÎवाÎथ्य मȂ महत्वपूणर् पिरवतर्न िकया है, लेिकन मȅ आपके  सामने 
क ु छ आंकड़े रखना चाहता हूँ।  ये बच्चȗ क े क ुपोषण की दर से संबंिधत हȅ।  भोपाल मȂ 55 परस Ȃट 
बच्चे wasted हȅ; सुिलया, कणार्टक मȂ 26.5 परसȂट; बȂगलुरु  मȂ 52 परसȂट बच्
चे malnourished हȅ; 
इलाहाबाद मȂ 65.53 परस Ȃट; वेÊलोर, तिमलनाडु मȂ 83 परस Ȃट; बरेली, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 38.4 
परसȂट; करीमनगर, तेलंगाना मȂ 29.3 परसȂट; कोिझकोड, क ेरल मȂ 46.3 परसȂट; पूरे वेÎट बंगाल 
मȂ 22.8 परसȂट; लखन
ऊ मȂ 57 परस Ȃट; क ुरनूल मȂ 63 परस Ȃट; वेÎट बंगाल मȂ 39.7 परस Ȃट; 
िकन्नौर, िहमाचल Ģदेश मȂ 21.4 परसȂट; अहमदाबाद मȂ 29.44 परसȂट; िटहरी गढ़वाल मȂ 60.9 
परसȂट; बरहामपुर, ओिडशा मȂ 69 परसȂट; चंडीगढ़ मȂ 73.3 परसȂट और संथाल परगना मȂ 38.65 
परसȂट हȅ । 
 महोदय, ये आंकड़े यह बताते हȅ िक जब यह िमड-डे-मील योजना शुरू  हुई होगी, तो यह 
योजना बहुत इफे िक्टव रही होगी।  मȅ िकसी की मंशा पर कोई अिवÌवास Ģक
ट नहीं कर रहा हूँ।  
इस योजना को भारत सरकार एक सȂटर्ल सेक्टर Îकीम क े तहत सहायता देती है और इसको 
लागू करने का काम िविभन्न राज्यȗ की मशीनरीज़ को करना होता है।  मȅ यह महसूस करता हूँ िक 
बहुत लंबे समय से चलती आ रही एक योजना, जो एक समय मȂ Ģभावी रही है, धीमे-धीमे अपना 
असर खो रही है और बच्चȗ क े अंदर क ुपोषण की दर मȂ जो Ģभा
वी कमी होनी चािहए, यह उनके  
अन्दर उस कमी को नहीं ला पा रही है।  बच्चȗ का ÎवाÎथ्य देश क े नौजवानȗ और वृǉȗ क े ÎवाÎथ्य 
का कारक हो ता  है। अगर ये बच्चे आज क ुपोिषत हȗगे, तो इस देश क े बड़े नागिरक क ुपोिषत हȗगे।  
इसिलए मȅ सरकार से अपेक्षा करता हूँ िक वह सभी राज्य सरकारȗ से इस संदभर् मȂ बात करेगी, 
उनकी एक सामूिहक बैठक बुलाएगी िक इस योज ना को िकस Ģकार से और बेहतर तरीके  से लागू 
िकया जाए और अगर मशीनरीज़ सही तरीके  से भोजन नहीं पहुँचा पा रही हȅ, तो इसकी क्या 
वैकिÊपक ËयवÎथा की जाए।  इस योजना क े कारण बच्चȗ क े ÎवाÎथ्य मȂ जो पिरवतर्न हो रहा है, 
उसके  बारे मȂ मȅने आपको जो िरपोटर् दी है, वह बच्चȗ क े डॉक्टसर् क े ǎारा जो अध्ययन िक
ए गए हȅ, 
उनकी िरपोटर् दी है।  मȅ सरकार से भी आगर्ह करूं गा िक पूरे देश क े Îतर पर Ëयापक सवȃ कराया 
जाए और क ुपोषण की जो दर िमले, उसके  िहसाब से या तो भोजन क े अमाउंट मȂ या इस योजना 
को लागू करने मȂ, जो पिरवतर्न जरूरी  हȅ, वे िकये जा
यȂ, धन् यवाद।                
                                                                     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Sanjay Yadav 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(Bihar), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Sujeet Kumar, (Odisha), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Anil 
Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Deepak 
Prakash (Jharkhand), Ms. Indu Bala Goswami (Himachal Pradesh), Shrimati 
Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri 
Rwngwra Narzary (Assam), Dr. Bhim Singh (B ihar), Shri Banshilal Gurjar (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Rambha i Harjibhai Mokariya (Gujarat), Shri 
Mithlesh Kumar (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati 
S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Ms. Kavi ta Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati 
Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).        
     Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik, ‘Deman d to repeal Mahabodhi Vihar Act of 1949’. 
 
Demand to repeal Mahabodhi Vihar Act of 1949 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक (राजÎथान): उपसभापित महोदय, 12 फरवरी, 2024 से बोधगया 
मȂ बौǉ िभक्षु महासंघ ने इस मांग को लेकर िवरोध-Ģदशर्न शुरू  िकया िक महाबोिध महािवहार को 
बौǉȗ को सȚप िदया जान
ा चािहए।  बोधगया एक िवÌव Îतरीय बहुत पिवतर् Îथान है।  ढाई हजार 
साल पहले िसǉाथर् गौतम को यहीं ज्ञान की ĢािÃत हुई थी।  चकर्वतीर् सĦाट अशोक ने यहां एक 
भËय िवहार बनवाया था।  पुरातत्ववेǄा  एलेक्जȂडर किंनघम ने खुदाई क े दौरान इसकी खोज की, 
तब से यह Îथा
न िवÌव क े आकषर्ण क े साथ-साथ तथागत बुǉ क े बताए दुखȗ से मुिƪ का मागर् भी 
बना।  तथागत ने इसी भूिम से पूरे िवÌव को शांित, Ģेम, मैतर्ी, शील और करुणा  का मानव तावादी 
संदेश िदया, इसिलए बोधगया को दुिनया भर मȂ आÎथा और मानवतावादी िवचार का पिवतर् 
Ģतीक माना जाता है।   
दुिनया मȂ बौǉȗ क े आकषर्ण का क Ȃ दर्, बोधगया मȂ हर साल बड़ी संख्या मȂ देश-िवदेश से 
नागिरक आते हȅ।  यहीं से सÇयक सÇ
बुǉ क े मानवतावादी िवचार पूरी दुिनया मȂ फ ै ले।  बुǉ-ज्ञान 
की ऊजार्वान भूिम, बोधगया महाबोिध महािवहार कई वषș से गैर-बौǉȗ िनयंतर्ण मȂ है, इसिलए 
बोधगया मुिƪ आंदोलन को न क ेवल भारत मȂ, बिÊक पूरे िवÌव मȂ समथर्न िम ल रहा है।  कई राज्यȗ 
मȂ 500 से ज्यादा संगठनȗ ने इस आंदोलन को समथर्न िदया है।  यह आंदोलन वैिÌवक Îतर पर भी 
महत्वपूणर् हो गया है।  बी.टी. एक्ट, 1949 क े तहत बोधगया मंिदर Ģबंधन कमेटी मȂ 9 सदÎय हȅ।  
इन 9 सदÎयȗ मȂ क ेवल 4 बौǉ और 5 िंहदू, यानी गैर-बौǉ हȅ।  भारत एक धमर्िनरपेक्ष देश है और 
वहां कई जाि
तयां, धमș और संĢदायȗ क े लोग रहते हȅ।  संिवधान ǎारा यहाँ सभी को धािर्मक 
Îवतंतर्त
ा है।  मंिदर, मिÎजद, चचर्, गुरुǎारा जैसे धािर्मक Îथानȗ का Ģबंधन उसी धािर्मक समुदाय 
का होता है, िजसका वह Ǜǉा-Îथान है, तो महाबोिध इसका अपवाद क्यȗ?  
महोदय, 100 वषș से बोधगया को गैर-बौǉȗ से मुƪ करने का संघषर् चल रहा है।  2013 मȂ 
इस कानून मȂ संशोधन हुआ, लेिकन वह पयार्Ãत नहीं है।  मȅ आज यहां सदन मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार से यह 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
19

 
 
मांग करना चाहूँगा िक 1949 का यह जो बी.टी. एक्ट है, इसे जÊद से जÊद खािरज कर िदया 
जाए, इसे िरपील कर िदया जाए।  इसकी जगह पर बौǉȗ की मांग को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए, एक नए 
कानून को शीघर्ाितशीघर् बनाने की आवÌयकता है, धन्यवाद।                 
                                                                             
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by h
on. Member, Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik: Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri Chandrakant Handor e (Maharashtra), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
(Bihar), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Phulo Devi Ne tam (Chhattisgarh), Shri M. Shanmugam 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri P. P. 
Suneer (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sh ri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri N.R. 
Elango (Tamil Nadu), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Upendra Kushwaha (Bihar), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), 
Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pr adesh), Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
(Maharashtra), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana) and Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala).                                                                   
 Shri Vaiko, ‘Need to reveal the recent guidelines issued by  RBI on repayment 
terms of jewel loans to mitigate the significant impact on the vuln erable sections of 
society’.  
 
Need to review the recent guidelines issued by RBI on repayment terms of jewel 
loans, to mitigate the significant impact on the vulnerable sections of society 
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, it has become essential for people to take jewel loans 
from banks, cooperative banks and non-banking financial companies for their 
emergency cash needs.   The poor people, farmers and small businessmen in Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises depend heavily on jewel loans for their immediate 
needs.  If you pledge your jewel with pawn  broker or commission agent, you will have 
to pay higher interest. Due to this, many people get jewel loans from banks, as the 
interest is reasonable and risk is no t involved. However, because of the new 
guidelines issued by the RBI , with stringent guidelines  for re-mortgage by jewel 
borrowers, the borrowers are deeply worried. The present norm is that at the end of 
the tenure of jewel-loan period, the borrowe r can pay interest only and re-mortgage 
the jewels for further period without paying the principal amount. The new notification 
issued by the RBI says that the jewels pledged in the bank can be  returned after full 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
payment, both principal and interest. At the same time, the same jewels can be re-
mortgaged only the next day and cannot be pledged on the same day. So the poor 
people and farmers have to turn over th e entire amount, which is putting lot of 
financial and mental strain on the borrowers. The option to re-pledge the jewels for 
loan by paying interest only was more bene ficial to the poor people. For example, a 
person who has taken a loan of Rs.2 lakh can pay back the interest only and he can 
re-pledge the jewel for another tenure in the earlier system. Now the compliance of 
these conditions would create a situation of informal credit or borrowing from private 
individuals, pawn brokers and commission agen t s  a t  h i g h e r  r a t e  o f  i n t e r e s t  a t  t h e  
exploitation of farmers and other borrowers. 
 I am given to understand that the RBI  wanted a more transparent and fair 
lending environment and that is  why issued this guideline.  But it is like throwing the 
baby out with the bath water.  I would, therefore, urge upon the hon. Finance Minister 
to intervene in the matter and ensure th at new guidelines for jewel loans are 
withdrawn and the old norms are followed. Thank you very much, Sir.          
                                                             
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri Vaiko : Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra ), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bi shi (Odisha), Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri P. P. 
Suneer (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri N. 
Chandrasegharan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shri Jose 
K. Mani (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala) and Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu). 
 Dr. K. Laxman.  Concern over the sale  of 400 acres of land belonging to 
Hyderabad University.   
 
Concern over the sale of 400 acres of land belonging to Hyderabad University 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN (Uttar Pradesh):  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for allowing 
me to speak on the most important and se nsitive concern of the Telangana people. 
The Congress Government in Telangana has decided to auction 400 acres of land 
claimed by the University of Hyderabad,  a prestigious Central University. The 
University of Hyderabad was established in 1974 and was allotted 2,300 acres of land 
but till now no demarcation has taken place.  The move not only undermines the 
rights of Central Institutions but also ra ises serious questions about environmental 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
21

 
 
conservation and governance. The land, put to auction, includes ecologically 
sensitive areas, such as mushroom rock an d other biodiversity-rich zones near the 
University’s East Campus. Unfortunately, it happened on this campus on festival day 
at mid night by this Government. Bulldozers with heavy police bandobast have 
ravaged the forests, lakes and habitats. There is unrest in the student community and 
campus. The Congress Government claims sustainable development, but how can 
destroying Hyderabad’s green lungs and educational institutions be sustainable 
development? काँगर्ेस पाटीर् बार-बार कहती है, ' मुहÅबत की दुकान'।  The students have 
now almost declared war.  ...(Interruptions)... The university has declared war on 
the students.   ...(Interruptions)...   
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, let him authenticate this. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please. 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN :  S i r ,  t h e  f u t u r e  o f  s t u d e n t s  i s  at stake.  Is this how democracy 
functions under the Congress rule?  Even today our BJP MLAs tried to visit that 
disputed place.  They have been put under house arrest since early morning.  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, let him authenticate the facts. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please. 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN :  Sir, till now, no demarcation ha s taken place. The land is purely 
environmentally sensitive and biodiversity rich.  I urge the House to take cognizance of 
this issue.The auction must be stopped immediately. The ownership should be clearly 
established. And environmental concerns should be addressed. Let us not allow 
Hyderabad’s heritage and greenery to be bull dozed for short-term gains, for the sake 
of your revdi announcements, the promises which you are unable to fulfill.  Now you 
are putting for auction all the Government’s  land in Telangana.  This is how in 
Telangana डॉ. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर का संिवध
 ान नहीं लागू हो रहा है, िसफर् और िसफर् राहुल 
गाँधी, रेवंत रेƿी का संिवधान चल रहा है।  यह जबदर्Îती से चल रहा है। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Dr. K. Laxman : Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri 
Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli (A ndhra Pradesh), Dr. John Bri ttas (Kerala), Shri Madan 
Rathore (Rajasthan), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba 
Leishemba (Manipur), Shri Ravi Chandra Va ddiraju (Telangana), Shri K.R. Suresh 
Reddy (Telangana) and Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy (Telangana).      
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
         Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar; De mand for releasing outstanding MGNREGS funds 
to the State of Tamil Nadu. 
 
Demand to release outstanding MGNREGS funds to the State of Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR (Tamil Nadu) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, the subject 
of my today’s Zero Hour mention is : Demand for Releasing Outstanding MGNREGS 
Funds to Tamil Nadu. I rise to bring to the attention of this august House a critical 
issue affecting rural livelihoods in Tamil Nadu. The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme, MGNREGS, has been a lifeline for over 91 lakh 
workers in the State. It is to be noted that 86 per cent of employment is provided to 
women workers and nearly 29 per cent of workers belong to SC/ST households. 
However, Tamil Nadu has been facing severe challenges due to delay in the release of 
outstanding wages due to this vital sche me. Funds amounting to nearly Rs. 4,000 
crore are pending with the Union Government as wages for workers under MGNREGS 
for the past four-and-a-half months, as on 1
st April, 2025. This delay has caused a 
huge financial distress to lakhs of poor rural households who depend on timely 
payments under this scheme. The Tamil Nadu  State Finance Minister has already met 
the Union Finance Minister and submitted a representation, requesting for immediate 
release of these dues.  Earlier, the hon. Ch ief Minister of Tamil Nadu had written to 
the hon. Prime Minister on 13 th January, 2025, urging to release the pending wages 
amounting to Rs. 2,985 crore and to approve the State’s request to increase Labour 
Budget. This delay in releasing funds not on ly disrupts the livelihood of rural workers 
but also affects the implementation of th is flagship programme in Tamil Nadu. The 
situation demands urgent attention and action from the Union Government.  
 Therefore, I urge the Union Government  to release pending MGNREGS dues of 
Rs. 4,000 crore to Tamil Nadu and also appr ove the proposal to revise and increase 
the Labour Budget, ensuring sustained empl oyment opportunities for rural workers. 
Last Saturday, MGNREGS workers protested in front of Block Panchayat Office in 
Tamil Nadu.  In my constituency, tribal pe ople, tribal workers and SC/ST workers are 
struggling. Please save their livelihoods. Thank you.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar : Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Sh ri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. John Br ittas (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
23

 
 
Nadu), Shri N.R. Elango (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Prakash Chik 
Baraik (West Bengal) and Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu).                                                               
 Shri Iranna Kadadi ; Demand for legal protection to stop any fund diversion of 
Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP). 
 
Demand for legal protection to stop any fund diversion of Scheduled Caste Sub Plan 
(SCSP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) 
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी (कनार्टक):  महोदय , आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय को उठाने का अवसर 
Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।  आज मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से कणार्टक मȂ कांगर्ेस 
सरकार की Ģशासिनक िवफलताओं और असंवैधािनक िवचारधारा की ओर सरकार तथा देश का 
ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चा
हता हूँ।  
महोदय, कांगर्ेस पाटीर् ने कणार्टक मȂ 5 गारंिटयȗ क े वादे पर वषर् 2023 मȂ चुनाव लड़ा और 
सǄा मȂ आई, लेिकन अब वे ही पांच गारंिटयाँ राज्य क े बजट पर 52,000 करोड़ का बोझ बन चुकी 
हȅ।  यह ÎपÍट है िक राज्
य सरकार क े पास इस भारी-भरकम खचर् को वहन करने क े िलए िवǄीय 
संसाधन नहीं हȅ। ¥  
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन ( कनार्टक): सर, आप उनसे किहए िक वे इसको authenticate करȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I will ask him to authenticate. ...( Interruptions)... नािसर 
जी, बैठ जाइए। I will ask him to authenticate.  
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी : ¥ यह क ेवल आिर्थक अन्याय नहीं है, बिÊक यह भारत क े संिवधान क े 
सामािजक न्याय क े िसǉांतȗ और खुद कांगर्ेस सरकार ǎारा 2013 मȂ लाए गए कानून का भी सीधा 
उÊलंघन है, िजसके  अनुसार बजट का 24% उपयोग  क ेवल दिलतȗ और आिदवािसयȗ क े 
कÊयाण पर खचर् िक
या जाना अिनवायर् है। इस फ ं ड को अन्य योजनाओं मȂ खचर् करना न क ेवल इन 
समुदायȗ क े अिधकारȗ का हनन है, बिÊक यह उस भरोसे का भी अपमान है, जो उन वगș ने 
लोकतांितर्क सरकार पर िकया है।  
डॉ. बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर ने दिलतȗ और आिदवािसयȗ को सामािजक न्याय सुरिक्षत 
करने क े िलए संिवधान मȂ संरक्षण िदया था, ¥इतना ही नहीं, कणार्टक मȂ कांगर्ेस सरकार ने 
सरकारी ठेकȗ मȂ एक िवशेष समुदाय को चार Ģितशत आरक्षण देने की ËयवÎथा की है, 
...(Ëयवधान)... िजससे दिलतȗ और आिदवािसयȗ क े िलए आरिक्षत अवसरȗ का हनन होगा। जब 
भाजपा क े िवधायकȗ ने इस मुǈे पर कणार् टक िवधानसभा मȂ आवाज उठाई, तो 18 िवधायकȗ को 6 
महीने क े िलए िनलंिबत कर िदया गया, जो लोकतंतर् का अपमान है। ¥ 
                                                                                                  
                                                            
¥  Not recorded as directed by the Chair. 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद। Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी जी, आपने जो भी तथ्य कहे हȅ, उनको 
authenticate करके  दे दीिजएगा। 
The following hon. Members associated  themselves with the matter raised  by 
hon. Member, Shri Iranna Kadadi : Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Niranjan 
Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar, (Odisha) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Shri Raghav Chadha, “ Need for Judicial Reforms in the 
country.”   
 
Need for Judicial Reforms in the country 
 
Ǜी राघव  चǀा (पंजाब):  सर, हम भारत क े लोग अदालत को न्याय का मंिदर कहते हȅ। आम 
आदमी जब इस अदालत की चौखट पर जाता है, तो उसे िवÌवास होता है िक न्याय जरूर  
िमलेगा। जैसे ऊपर वाले क े दरबार मȂ देर है, अंधेर नहीं, वैसे ही यह माना जाता है िक समय भले 
ही लग जाए, लेिकन अन्
याय नहीं होगा। समय-समय पर judiciary ने अपने भरोसे और िवÌवास 
को और अिधक मजबूत भी िकया है। लेिकन हाल ही मȂ घटी क ु छ घटनाओं क े चलते देश िंच ितत है 
और focus judicial reforms पर है। जैसे इस देश मȂ electoral reforms,  police reforms, 
education और healthcare reforms हुए, वैसे ही judicial reforms होने की आवÌयकता है। 
लेिकन ऐसे reforms जो judicial independence को  मजबूत करȂ और judicial corruption को 
समाÃत करȂ। 
मȅ इस िवषय पर दो महत् वपूणर् मुǈे उठाना चाहूंगा - Appointment of judges से लेकर 
retirement of judges तक।  जहाँ तक जजȗ की िनयुिƪ की बात है, समय-समय पर कॉलेिजयम 
िसÎटम की shortcomings, यानी िक खािमयां Law Commission की reports और legal 
luminaries क े बयानȗ क े माध्यम से सामने आई हȅ। शायद इसी कारण NJAC जैसा कानून ला ने 
की जरूरत भी पड़ी। लेिकन अब समय आ गया है िक कॉलेिजयम Îवयं ही अपने आप को reform 
करे, खुद को reinvent करे, तािक दो मुख्य मुǈे - lack of transparen cy, lack of public 
scrutiny - जो कॉलेिजयम िसÎटम की आलोचना का कारण बनते हȅ, उन्हȂ दूर िकया जाए। एक 
independent transparent proces
s बने, िजसमȂ seniority, merit और integrity क े आधार पर 
िनयुिƪ हो। 
मȅ इस संदभर् मȂ एक सुझाव रखना चाहूंगा। पहले, advocates को senior advocates 
designate करने क े िलए एक opaque system था, लेिकन सुĢीम कोटर् ǎारा Îथािपत नई Ģिकर्या 
क े तहत अब एक transparent point-based process अपनाई गई है। इस Ģिकर्या मȂ आवेदन पतर् 
िलया जाता है, िफर उनकी number of years of practice, pro bono matters
 की संख्या, और 
reported judgement क े  आधार पर नÇबर देकर िनयुिƪ की जाती है। इसी तरह, यिद 
कॉलेिजयम िसÎटम एक transparent point-base d, merit-based system अपनाए, तो जजȗ 
की िनयुिƪ मȂ जनता का िवÌव ास और अिधक बढ़ेगा।  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
25

 
 
दूसरा मुǈा retirement of judges से संबंिधत है। देश मȂ एक चलन चलता आया है िक 
retirement क े बाद सरकारȂ judges को executive या administrative role मȂ िनयुƪ करती हȅ। 
इससे conflict of interest, executive interference in judiciary और influence over pre-
retirement judgements पर कई ĢÌन खड़े होते हȅ।  मȅ चाहूंगा िक post-retirement job से 
संबंिधत क ु छ restri
ctions लाए जाएं। उदाहरण क े िलए, भारतीय संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 148 क े 
तहत, भारत क े िनयंतर्क एवं महालेखा परीक्षक (CAG) की सेवािनवृिǄ क े बाद उन्हȂ क Ȃ दर् या 
राज्य सरकार ǎारा िकसी भी सरकारी पद पर िनयुƪ नहीं िकया जा सक ता। इसी तरह, यिद 
absolute restriction संभव न हो, तो कम से कम दो साल की अिनवायर् अविध ( क ूिंलग ऑफ 
पीिरयड) होनी चािहए, िजसमȂ िकसी जज को सेवािनवृिǄ क े बाद कम से कम दो साल तक क Ȃ दर् 
या राज्य सरकार ǎारा िनयुƪ न िकया जाए।  यिद ऐसा होता है, तो यह भारत क े न्याियक 
इितहास मȂ एक मील का पत्थर सािबत होगा। हम, देश क े लोग, अदालत को मंिदर और जजȗ को 
न्याय का मूतर् रूप  मा
नते हȅ। यिद ये सभी judicial reforms होते हȅ, तो ...(समय की घं टी)... तो 
देश का भला होगा।                       
                                     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri Raghav Chadha : Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Sanjay Yadav 
(Bihar), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Subhas 
Chandra Bose Pilli (Andhra Pradesh), Shri A.  A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Prakash Chik 
Baraik (West Bengal), Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal (Punjab), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Su jeet Kumar, (Odisha) and Shri Tiruchi 
Siva (Tamil Nadu).       
 Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil; Concern over rising cost of children's education 
in India.  
 
Concern over rising cost of children's education in India 
 
SHRIMATI RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL (Maharashtra): Sir, today, I want to address a 
critical issue impacting millions of families across India—the rising cost of education in 
metro cities and the deteriorating conditio n of Government schools. Education is a 
fundamental right, yet for many, it is becoming increasingly inaccessible. Recent 
surveys reveal that Indian parents spen d an average of Rs.40,000 to Rs.2 lakhs 
annually at LKG and nursery level with costs going up to Rs.2 lakh in tier-I cities. 
Additionally, families spend an average of Rs.16,000 per year on after-school 
education like tuition, coaching, etc. These costs put an immense financial burden on 
middle class and lower-middle class making quality education a privilege rather than a 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
right.  While private education costs soar, the Government schools, which are meant 
to provide affordable  education, are failing in their purpose. The Annual Status of 
Education Report (Rural) 2024 shows that enrolment in Government schools for 
children aged 6 to 14 years has dropped from 72.9 per cent in 2022 to 66.8 per cent in 
2024. This suggests that parents, even th ose struggling financially, prefer private 
schools over Government institutions due to poor infrastructure, lack of trained 
teachers and inadequate resources. Instead  of being centers of learning, many 
Government schools are stru ggling with basic facilities like clean drinking water, 
functional classrooms and digital education tools, etc. This forces parents into a 
difficult choice, either pay exorbitant private school fees or risk their child’s future in 
an underfunded Government school. To bridge this gap, the UPA Government 
brought in the Right to Education (RTE) Ac t in 2009, which includes an important 
provision that mandates 25 per cent reservation for children from Economically 
Weaker Sections (EWS) and disadvantaged groups in private schools. This law 
ensures that underprivileged children have access to quality education alongside their 
peers from higher-income backgrounds. Ho wever, in many States, implementation 
remains weak due to poor monitoring and lack of awareness among parents. Schools 
often resist admitting EWS students, and financial reimbursements from the 
Government are delayed.  Strengthening the enforcement of this provision is crucial to 
making education more inclusive and reducing inequality.  Recently, in The Hindu 
newspaper, our CPP Leader, Shrimati Sonia Gandhi has written about this. …(Time-
Bell rings)…              
                                  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil: Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu ), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Prad esh), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Ker ala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Chandrakan t Handore (Maharashtra), Shrimati Phulo 
Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri P. P. S uneer (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), Dr . V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Ajit Kumar 
Bhuyan (Assam), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Ma ndadi (Telangana), Shri Ashok Singh 
(Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shri Imran 
Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra).   
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
27

 
 
           Shri Manoj Kumar Jha;  Concern over alarming rise in  hate crimes and need to 
strengthen law enforcement mechanisms.  
 
Concern over alarming rise in hate crimes and need to strengthen law enforcement 
mechanisms 
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार): उपसभापित महोदय, मूलत: औपचािरकता मȂ नहीं कह रहा हूं, 
लेिकन कई महीनȗ से इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर सदन क े समक्ष, सदन की राय अपने माध्यम से 
रखना चाहता था। मान्यवर, आज आने से पूवर् मȅने एक िकताब ‘Mobilising Hate: The Story of 
Hitler's Final Solution’ साथ मȂ ली। सर, यह िंचता का िवषय है िक घृणा आधािरत भाषण और 
नफरत आधािरत क ृत्य क े कारण छोटे रसूखदार बड़े रसूखदार मȂ तÅदील होते जा रहे हȅ। छोटे 
ओहदेदार बड़े ओहदेदार मȂ तÅदील होते जा रहे हȅ और चारȗ तरफ ऐसा  माहौल हो गया है िक 
नफरत को naturalize कर िदया गया है।   
 सर, िजतने regulatory mechanism हȅ—हमारे regulatory mechanism है—
regulatory mechanism inadequate हȅ। नेशनल ǩूमन राइट्स कमीशन, नेशनल माइनॉिरटीज़ 
कमीशन, िजतनी तरह क े कमीशन्स हȅ, मȅ माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करूं गा िक घृणा 
आधािरत जो क ृत्य हो रहे हȅ, जो भाषण हो रहे हȅ, उसकी वजह से, यह बात established है, जो 
Antonio Guterres ने भी कही थी।  वे यूएन क े सेकर् ेटरी जनरल थे।  Gas
 chamber यू  ही नहीं 
बन गया था, उसके  पीछे घृणा की एक परंपरा थी। वही हमने बोसिनया मȂ देखा, कÇबोिडया मȂ 
देखा, रवांडा मȂ देखा। मȅ अपने देश को उस फ ेहिरÎत मȂ शािम
ल होते हुए नहीं देखना चाहता हूं।  
मेरे कोई साथी नहीं देखना चाहते।   
 सर, आजकल पवर्, त्यौहार आते हȅ, तो कपड़े नए, िमठाइयां नई होती हȅ। मन मȂ होता है 
िक िकसी तरह पवर्, त्यौहार बीत जाएं। शुभ-शुभ करके  बीत जाएं, कोई हादसा न हो। यह हम
ने  
अपनी हकीकत बना ली है। Tragedy, comedy मȂ तÅदील हो जाती है और इितहा स क े  बासी 
पन्नȗ मȂ घुसकर हम झगड़े कर रहे हȅ। एक िसनेमा आता है और उस पर बाड़ȗ मȂ बंट जाते हȅ। सर, 
बस आिखरी िटÃपणी यह करूं गा िक  
“क़ ु बर्तȂ होते हुए भी फ़ासलȗ मȂ क़ ै द हȅ 
            िकतनी आज़ादी से हम अपनी हदȗ मȂ क़ ै द हȅ।” 
 यह हद तोड़ने की जरूरत है।  जय िहन्द और इस मौके  क े िलए शुिकर्या। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha : Shri Haris Beeran
 
(Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu ), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Prem Chand Gupta (Bihar), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Sanjay Yadav (B ihar), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Prof. Ram 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Gopal Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Sandos h Kumar P (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Ni ranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Tiruchi Siva 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri P. P. Suneer (Kerala) , Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shrima ti Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuy an (Assam) and Ms. Sushmita Dev (West 
Bengal).      
 
 
12.00 Noon 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
₹ Depreciation due to exiting foreign investors 
 
*316. SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE : Will the Minister of FINANCE
 be pleased to 
state: 
(a) whether it is a fact that the current bout of Rupee depreciation against US Dollar 
is primarily due to the exit of foreign investors from India; and 
(b) if so, the details thereof and the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (SHRI PANKAJ 
CHAUDHARY): (a) and (b) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Various domestic and global f actors influence the exchange rate of the 
Indian Rupee (INR) against the US Dollar (USD), such as the movement of the Dollar 
Index, trend in capital flows, level of intere st rates, movement in crude prices, current 
account deficit etc. 
 Since the commencement of the last qu arter of calendar year 2024, INR along 
with other major Asian currencies depr eciated against the USD amid global 
uncertainties. US Dollar Index rose 3.7% du ring October 1, 2024, to March 26, 2025, 
with all Asian currencies depreciating agai nst the USD. INR has depreciated 2.2% 
against the USD during this period, l east among major Asian currencies. South 
Korean Won, Indonesian Rupiah and Malaysian Ringgit depreciated by 10.5%, 8.7% 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
29

 
 
and 6.9% respectively during this period. Further, all G-10 currencies (except 
Swedish Krona) also depreciated during October 1, 2024 to March 26, 2025 with Euro 
and British Pound depreciating by 3.4% and 3.6%, respectively. 
 Further, foreign portfolio investment (F PI) outflows of around USD 19.9 billion 
from Indian markets during October 1, 2024  to March 26, 2025 wa s also one of the 
contributory factors for the depreciation of INR against the USD. 
 
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE :  Sir, a crucial factor that determines the demand for 
any currency is the demand  among foreigners for the goods and assets of the 
country.  Since foreigners will first have to  purchase the local currency before they 
can purchase goods and assets, high de mand for a country's goods and assets 
translates to high demand for its currency.  Between January, 2023 and March, 2024, 
Foreign Portfolio Investors pulled out nearly 15 billion dollars from Indian equity 
markets, leading to a significant pressure on rupee.  Sir, through you, I want to know 
from the Government: Can the Government  provide a detailed break-up of sector-
wise Foreign Portfolio Investors' outflows and their correlation with the depreciation of 
our rupee? 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने िवदेशी पोटर्फोिलयो िनवेशकȗ क े बारे मȂ 
बात की है िक उससे मूÊय Ǫास हुआ है, इसिलए मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक मूÊय Ǫास क े कई 
कारण होते हȅ और उसका उǄर सभ
ा पटल पर पहले ही रख िदया गया है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से भी 
माननीय सदÎय को बताना चाहता हूं िक िवदेशी पोटर्फोिलयो िनवेशकȗ का जो Îवभाव होता है,  
वह सामान्यत:  fly by night का होता है और िपछले क ु छ महीनȗ मȂ FPI ने भारतीय बाज़ार से 
Ģॉिफट बुक िकया है, जो िवदेशी िनवेशकȗ क े भारतीय बाज़ार मȂ भरोसे को Ģदिर्शत करता है। 
महोदय, अगर िपछले 10 वषș का आंकड़ा देखȂ, तो िवदेशी िनवेशक ȗ का भारतीय बाज़ार पर, 
भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा पर पूरा भरोसा बढ़ा हुआ है। जहाँ तक अक्टूबर क े बाद िनवेशकȗ का पैसा 
िनकला है, उसके  Îथान पर, आप वहीं पर, अगर माचर् का आंकड़ा देखȂ, तो 3.84 िबिलयन डॉलर 
वापस भी आय ा है। मȅ यह कह सकता हूं िक इस Ģकार से जो िवदेशी िनवेशक वापस आ रहे हȅ, 
इससे आप यह समझ सकते हȅ िक उनके  आने का टर्Ȃड Îटाटर् हो गया है। मȅ माननीय सदÎय को 
बताना चाह ता हूं िक यह इस Ģकार की िनरंतर चलने वाली Ģिकर्या है और इसमȂ महत्वपूणर् बात 
यह है िक हमारा िवǄीय बाज़ार रोबÎट होकर उभरा हुआ है। 
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE:  Sir, the RBI has been usin g its dollar reserves to prop 
up the value of the rupee by artificially increasing the supply of dollars in foreign 
exchange market. Sir, India's Current Account Deficit, widened to 1.2 per cent of our 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
GDP in quarter three of financial year 2024-25.  Through you, Sir, I want to know from 
the Government:  What policy measures has the Government explored to stabilize our 
currency? 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी:  सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जो Current Account Deficit की बात 
की है, उस संदभर् मȂ मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक िपछले 2 वषș से Current Account Deficit 
लगातार नीचे आ रहा है। महोदय, अगर Covid की वजह से देखȂ, तो 2022-23 मȂ, जहाँ यह 67.
1 
िबिलयन डॉलर था, वहीं पर 2023-24 मȂ घटकर 26.1 िबिलयन डॉलर हो गया, 2024-25 (April-
September 2024) का देखȂ, तो 21.4 िबिलयन डॉलर हो गया है। सरकार दीघर्कािलक Ģयासȗ 
क े माध्यम से सभी मंतर्ालयȗ और िवभागȗ की योजनाओं क े अंतगर्त िनयार्त को लगातार बढ़ावा दे 
रही है, ताि क  Current Account Deficit कम िकया सके ।  महोदय, यिद जनवरी से देखȂ, तो 
उसके  िलए RBI ने भी लगातार Ģयास िकये हȅ। 2025 मȂ Ģवासी भारतीयȗ को एक िवशेष अिनवासी 
रुपया खाता खोलने की अनुमित दी गई है और आरबीआई ǎारा बȅकȗ को िदसंबर 2024 से FCNR 
जमा रािश
यȗ की Åयाज दर ऑफर करने की अनुमित भी दी गई है।  महोदय, FPI ǎारा िनधार्िरत 
सीमाओं से अिधक िवदेशी िनवेश को FDI मȂ बदलने क े िलए एक framework नव ंबर, 2024 मȂ 
जारी िकया गया है। Auto route से िवदेशी वािणिज्यक उधार सीमा को बढ़ाकर 1.5 िबिलयन 
अमरीकी डॉलर कर िदया गया है। इस
के  अलावा डॉलर की आवक बढ़ाने क े िलए आरबीआई और 
सरकार ǎारा भी कई दीघर्कािलक Ģयास िकए जा रहे हȅ।                                                                                  
 
DR. SIKANDAR KUMAR : Sir, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  I 
would like to know from the hon. Minister : What is the current status of the rupee 
relative to the US dollar? Has the rup ee appreciated or depreciated in value 
compared to the US dollar over the past two years? 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सदÎय को बताना 
चाहता हूं िक भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा कहीं न कहीं एक बहुत मज
बूत िÎथित मȂ है।  माननीय सदÎय 
ने मूÊयȗ क े Ǫास क े िवषय क े बारे मȂ कहा है।  अगर देखȂ, तो 2014 से पहले मूÊयȗ का Ǫा स  डबल 
िडिजट मȂ हुआ करता था, लेिकन अगर 2024 से 26 माच र्, 2025 तक देखȂ, तो मातर् 2.2 Ģितशत 
का ही Ǫास हुआ है।  अगर उसने आप पूवीर् एिशया मȂ देखȂ, तो मȅ अवगत कराना चाहता हूं िक 
दिक्षण कोिरयाई वॉ न  10.5 Ģितशत घटा है, इंडोनेिशयन रुपया 8.7 Ģितशत घटा है, मलेिशया 
िंरगिगट 6.9 Ģितशत िगरा है, वहीं पाउंड 3.6 Ģितशत िगरा है और यूरो 3.4 Ģितशत कमजोर 
हुआ है।   ये आंकड़े िदखाते हȅ िक भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा क े फ ंडामȂटल मजबूत हȅ और माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ और माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी की देखरेख मȂ हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा वषर् दर 
वषर् बेहतर कर रही है। 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
31

 
 
SHRI MILIND DEORA : Sir, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  The 
question posed by my friend may have been slightly political in nature, but 
unfortunately, it has lost its relevance because the question was about the rupee 
depreciating against the dollar. However, in the last month, we have seen the rupee 
appreciating against the dollar. From a high of Rs. 88 or so, today, the US dollar is 
around Rs. 85.  So, firstly, I congratulate  the hon. Finance Minister and the Finance 
Ministry for undertaking many steps to en courage FDI in many sectors, which will 
enhance our forex reserves and essentially make our rupee far stronger.  While a 
stronger rupee against the US dollar is certainly good for India's imports, it puts some 
pressure on our exports. Furthermore, what we are seeing in the U.S., with higher 
inflation and tariffs being imposed, these ar e essentially making the US dollar weaker, 
relative to the Indian rupee.  So, my pointed question to the hon. Finance Minister 
would be: What steps will be taken to ensure  that our exports remain competitive in 
the months to come, while the rupee becomes stronger against the US dollar? 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी: माननीय सभापित जी, जब से मोदी सरकार आई है, तब से हमारे देश मȂ िनवेश 
क ै से बढ़े और िनयार्त क ै से बढ़े, इसके  िलए जैसा मȅने पहले भी कहा है िक  सभी मंतर्ालयȗ क े ǎारा 
कायर्कर्म चलाए जा रहे हȅ िक देश का िनयार्त ज्
यादा से ज्यादा बढ़े, तािक हमारा इÇपोटर् कम हो 
और िनयार्त ज्यादा हो। 
 
SHRIMATI RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL: I would like to ask, through you, Sir, as to 
what impact the weakening of the rupee ha s had on inflation, trade balance, and 
foreign debt servicing; and, what steps the Government is taking to mitigate these 
effects. 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, जहां तक रुपय े का सवाल है, अगर देखȂ, तो 
िवदेशी मुदर्ा क े सापेक्ष मȂ रुपय े का मूÊय बाजार से िनधार्िरत होता है।  जब रुपय े क े मुकाब
ले डॉलर 
महंगा होता है, तब हमारा आयात थोड़ा महंगा होता है।   यह घरेलू बाजार की कीमतȗ क े अलावा 
कई अन्य क
ारकȗ पर भी िनभर्र होता है, जैसा िक मौसमी कारण हो, सÃलाई चेन मȂ बाधा हो, 
िडमांड-सÃलाई मȂ गैप हो।  सरकार महंगाई पर िनरंतर िनगाह रखती है। अगर देखȂ, तो बीच मȂ 
मौसमी कारण से जब महंगाई बढ़ी थी, तो आम आदम
ी पर बोझ न पड़े, इसके  िलए हमारी सरकार 
ने तत्काल कदम उठाया था और भारत Ĥांड क े तहत सÎती दरȗ पर खाǏान्न आम लोगȗ को 
उपलÅध कराने का काम िकया था।  साथ ही साथ हमारी सरकार दीघर्कालीन कदम भी उठा रही 
है।  जैसे हमारे यहां सबसे ज्यादा इÇपो
टर् ईंधन का होता है, पेटर्ोिलयम पदाथș का होता है, इसके  
िलए सरकार इथेनॉल ÅलȂिंडग की ËयवÎथा बना रही है।  इसके  साथ-साथ सोलर एनजीर्, िजसमȂ 
हम पूरी दुिनया मȂ तीसरे Îथान पर पहुंच रहे हȅ, उसको भी हम बढ़ावा दे रहे हȅ।  हम सूयर् घर 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
योजना क े माध्यम से ऊजार् मȂ आत्मिनभर्रता को बढ़ावा दे रहे हȅ।  अभी हाल ही क े बजट मȂ आप 
देखȂ, तो हम पÊस िमशन लेकर आए हȅ, तािक दलहन मȂ हमारी आत्मिनभर्रता बढ़े।  साथ ही साथ 
पीएम धन-धान्य क ृिष योजना भी हम लेकर आए हȅ, तािक हमारी आत्मिनभर्रता बढ़े। 
 इन सभी का नतीजा है िक जहाँ तक महँगाई का सवाल है, अगर हम देखȂ, तो फरवरी, 
2025 तक हमारी मुदर्ा Î
फीित 3.6 परसȂट रही है, जो 7 महीने मȂ सबसे कम की िÎथित रही है।  
अगर हम headline infl
ation की भी बात करȂ, तो िपछले क ु छ वषș मȂ यह कम रही है, जो िक 
2024-25 मȂ मातर् 4.7 परसȂट रही है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Hon. Minister to supplement. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (S HRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, I would like 
to add to what my colleague has said on the issue of foreign exchange reserves and 
the management of our current account defi cit, which has understandably raised 
concerns among the hon. Members of Par liament, and rightly so. I would like to 
assure you that, as of March 21, 2025, our total foreign exchange reserve stands at 
US$ 658.8 billion. We are the fourth-largest  holder of foreign exchange reserves 
globally. Fourth largest! This means that our reserves are sufficient to cover 11 months 
of imports. I would like to inform the hon.  Members that although there has been a 
slight decline in our foreign exchange rese rves, we remain the fourth-largest holder 
globally. As I mentioned earlier, our reserves can cover 11 months of imports. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Q. No. 317 
 
Disparity in healthcare funding across states 
 
*317.  DR. ASHOK KUMAR MIT
TAL: Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) the measures being taken to address the significant disparity in healthcare 
funding across States, particularly in underserved regions; 
(b) whether Government plans to increase healthcare spending to  meet the global 
average, given that India’s healthcare spending remains at just 1.8 per cent of GDP; 
(c) the manner in which Government intends to improve healthcare infrastructure and 
access, considering the current inadequacies highlighted by experts; and 
(d) the accountability mechanisms in place to ensure that the States prioritize 
healthcare in their budgets? 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
33

 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMI LY WELFARE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) With the objective of attainment of universal access to equitable, affordable 
and quality health care services, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) is 
implementing National Health Mission (N HM). Government provides technical and 
financial support to the States/UTs for improvement in health infrastructure, 
availability of adequate human resources to health facilities, to improve availability and 
accessibility to quality health care especially for the underserved and marginalized 
groups. 
 Based on the proposals received fr om the States in their Programme 
Implementation Plan (PIP), approvals are provided keeping in view the resource 
envelope of the States/UTs as well as existing norms. 
 Under NHM, norms have been relaxed fo r tribal area to address need-based 
intervention in terms of healthcare infrastructure and human resources: 
 The population norms for setting up health  facilities in tribal areas have been 
relaxed from 5,000, 30,000 and 1,20,000 to 3000, 20,000 an d 80,000 for setting up of 
Sub-Health Centre (SHC), Primary Heal th Centre (PHC) and Community Health 
Centre (CHC) in tribal and hilly areas respectively; 
 Against norm of one ASHA per 1000 popu lation in normal areas, one ASHA per 
habitation in Tribal/hilly and difficult areas; and 
 Against the norm of 2 Mobile Medical Units (MMU) per district in plains, 4 
MMUs per district in tribal/ hilly/ inaccessible/ remote and hard to reach areas. 
 Under the Pradhan Mantri Janjati Ad ivasi Nyaya Maha AbhiyaN (PM JANMAN) 
launched on 15th November, 2023, furthe r relaxation in NHM norms has been 
provided to the Particularly Vulnerable Tr ibal Groups (PVTG) areas such as 10 MMU 
per district, additional ANM and Multi Purpos e Centres, and beneficiary saturation in 
PVTG areas. 
Further, details of a few major schemes promoting health infrastructure are as under: 
 NHM is a centrally sponsored scheme, which involves a three-tier system with 
SHC (Rural), PHC (Urban and Rural) an d CHC (Urban and Rural) as the three 
pillars of Primary Health Care System in India. 
 Pradhan Mantri- Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM-ABHIM): 
PM-ABHIM is one of the largest Pan-India Scheme with an outlay of Rs.64180/- 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Crores for strengthening health  care infrastructure to ef fectively manage and respond 
to any future pandemics and outbreaks acro ss the country. The scheme period is for 
5 years i.e. FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26. This has both centrally sponsored as well as 
central sector components. 
 Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY):  The scheme provides 
support for (i) Setting up of All Indi a Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) ; and (ii) 
Up-gradation of existing Government Medical College/ Institutions 
 Establishment of new medical colleges attached with existing district/referral 
hospitals: This centrally sponsored scheme aims at Establishment of Medical Colleges 
in underserved areas and aspirational districts. 
 15th Finance Commission (FC-XV):  The FC-XV has r ecommended grants 
through local governments for specific components of the health sector to the tune of 
Rs. 70,051 cr. 
 As per National Health Accounts Estimates for India 2021-22, the Government 
Health Expenditure (GHE) as percentage  of Gross Domestic  Product (GDP) has 
increased from 1.13% in 2014-15 to 1.84% in 2021-22. Centrally sponsored schemes 
(CSS) encourage States to earmark funds for healthcare in their budget. 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल:  सर, सरकार ने िपछले 10 वषș मȂ 22 नए एÇस खोलने की घोषणा की, 
जो िक सराहनीय है। लेिकन जब हम एÇस का नाम लेते हȅ, तो भ
ारत  क े िकसी भी नागिरक क े मन 
मȂ एÇस, िदÊली की छिव आ जाती है, जहाँ सभी िडपाटर्मȂट्स हȅ, अच्छे डॉक्टसर् हȅ, अच्छी सुिवधाएँ 
हȅ। सच्चाई यह है िक िपछले 10 वषș मȂ एक भी नया एÇस पूरी तरह operatio nal नहीं हो पाया है।  
िसफर् 6 एÇस, जो िक आम तौर पर पुराने हȅ, अब fully operational हȅ, 12 एÇस partly functional 
हȅ और 4 अभी भी िनमार्ण की Ģिकर्या मȂ हȅ।  Example क े तौर पर, एÇस, मदुरै 2015 मȂ शुरू  हुआ।  
वहाँ MBBS की  classes भी लग गईं, बच्चे pass o ut भी हो गए, लेिकन building अभी  भी नहीं 
बनी।  सर, यह क ैसा एÇस है!  यह एÇस है, लेिकन इसकी अपनी building भी नहीं है।  सर, इसकी 
दूसरी बात यह है िक बजट मȂ एÇस क े िलए 2,200 करोड़ रुपए  िनधार्िरत हुए, जो िक कम हȅ, 
लेिकन इस 2,200 करोड़ मȂ से िसफर् 1,736 करोड़ खचर् हुए। एक तरफ तो हमारे एÇस नहीं बन पा 
रहे, वहीं दूसरी तरफ जो बजट मȂ पैसा िमला, चाहे वह कम है, लेिकन वह भी नहीं खचर् हो पा रहा 
है। इसिलए मेरा मंतर्ी जी से ĢÌन है िक नए एÇस को पूरी तरह चालू करने की समय सीमा क्या है; 
जो बजट खचर् नहीं हो पा रहा है, उसके  पीछे क्या कारण है और सरकार क्य
ा corrective action 
ले रही है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: ऑनरेबल िमिनÎटर। 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
35

 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: माननीय सभापित जी, माननीय सदÎय ने जो ĢÌन पूछा था, वह ĢÌन 
disparity in the health services से संबंिधत था। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Funding across the States... 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Funding across the States. लेिकन ĢÌन का जो 
supplementary आया, वह All India Institute of Medical Sciences पर आया है। मȅ दोनȗ 
िवषयȗ क े बारे मȂ चचार् करना चाहता हूँ। ÎवाÎथ्य िवभाग क े कायर्कलापȗ पर और कायर् की 
गितिविध पर जब चचार् चल रही थी, तो उस समय मȅने बड़े िवÎतृत रूप  मȂ कहा िक िदÊ
ली का All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences 60s मȂ आया, जबिक इसकी recognition 80s मȂ बनी।  
एक Institute को Institute of repute बनने मȂ 20 साल लगे। Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
एक लंबी छलांग लगाई गई है और 10 साल मȂ 22 All
 India Institute of Medical Sciences बने 
हȅ। Infrastructure की दृिÍट से देिखए, तो it is huge. हमने कोिशश की है िक हम under-served 
areas को cover करȂ। North क े जो areas थे, North-East क े जो areas थे, हमने गुवाहाटी मȂ 
खोला, वेÎट बंगाल मȂ खोला, ओिडशा मȂ खोला। हम लोगȗ ने disparity को भी ध्यान मȂ रख कर 
इसको खोला है। 
 मȅ माननीय सदÎय को आÌवÎत कर
ना चाहता हूँ िक All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences क े िलए हम लोगȗ ने एक बड़ा अच्छा िसÎटम बनाया है। इसमȂ हमारा एक 
selection process है। एक तो मȅ फा
इनȂस िमिनÎटर सािहबा का धन्यवादी हूँ, िजन्हȗने All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences क े posts क े sanctioning मȂ कोई िदक्कत नहीं होने दी है और 
उसको fulfill करने मȂ हमȂ पूरे तरीके  से सक्षम बनाया है। अब हम उसका selection कर रहे हȅ। मȅने 
selection क े बारे मȂ पहले भी कहा िक AIIMS is a bran
d. उस brand को  हमारा िवभाग 
compromise नहीं होने दे रहा है। Every AIIMS has got its own Selection Committee, and 
that Selection Committee keeps on meeting. It meets at least twice a year. इसमȂ दूसरी 
बात यह होती है िक हम निसȊग क े िलए भी central level पर दो बार exam लेते हȅ और  हम 'B' 
तथा 'C' क े िलए भी exam लेते हȅ। इस Ģकार हम faculty को fulfill करने क े िलए पूरी ताकत से 
process कर रहे हȅ। हम
ने faculty मȂ भी rosters को बहुत strictly implement िकया है, तािक 
िकसी क े मन मȂ यह बात नहीं रहे िक हम SC, ST  और OBC को जगह नहीं दे पा रहे हȅ। इनको 
पूरी जगह देने का Ģयास हो रहा है और उसको हम strictly follow कर रहे हȅ। लेिकन इसमȂ होता 
यह है िक अगर हमने 60 posts क े िलए इंटरËयू िलया, तो selection process मȂ वह 20 पर रुक  
जाता है और  r
est is ‘Not found fit.’ हम ‘Not found fit’ क े िलए  re-advertise करके , िफर से 
process करते हȅ, इसिलए यह process थोड़ा सा लÇबा चल रहा है। हमȂ 22 इंÎटीǷूशंस को 
भरना है। आपने मदुरै की बात की, तो मदुरै मȂ infrastructure क े मामले मȂ देरी हुई है। उसका 
रीजन यह रहा िक फ ंिंडग की दृिÍट से जायका क े साथ जो बातचीत हुई थी, उसमȂ ĢॉÅलम आई 
थी। लेिकन अब वहाँ पूरी ताकत से काम चल पड़ा है। वहाँ 26 परस Ȃट से ज्यादा काम हो चुका है 
और हम तीĨ गित से, दो-तीन सालȗ क े अंदर उसके  infrastructure को complete करȂगे। आपने 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
जो दूसरी बात कही िक क ु छ एिरयाज को आप आगे बढ़ा रहे हȅ और क ु छ एिरयाज को नहीं, तो 
ऐसा नहीं है। हमारे यहां Programme Implementation Plan है, जो Îटेट्स बनाती हȅ और Îटेट्स 
जो बनाती हȅ, उनको हम fund करते हȅ। हम उनको fund करने मȂ कोई भी कमी नह ीं रखते।  
उनका जो resource envelope होता है, उस resource envelope मȂ हम उसको fulfill करते हȅ।  
आपने जो कहा िक health State subject है , तो हम technical, financial और human 
resource capacity building क े िलए financial support देते हȅ। उसको implement करना राज्य 
सरकारȗ का काम है। उसमȂ मेरा भी यह मानना है िक Ģदेश सरकारȂ, िजतन ी तीĨ गित से उसको 
implement करना चािहए, नहीं कर पा रही हȅ। मȅ personally भी Health Ministers से िमल रहा 
हूँ और video conferencing  से  भी meeting कर रहा हूँ। मȅने उनको बताया है िक PM-ABHIM 
योजना क े तहत about Rs.63,000/- crores have b een sanctioned by Prime Minister, 
Modiji in 2021-22. लेिकन उसके  implementation का जो process है, वह States क े gap को 
fill करने क े िलए है। मȅ आप सबसे उस gap को fill करने क े िलए िनवेदन करूं गा।  मȅने उस सम
य 
भी कहा था और आज भी आपको कहता हूँ। Consultative Committee की जो मीिंटग हुई, उसमȂ 
भी मȅने कहा था। रेणुका जी उसमȂ उप
िÎथत थीं। मȅने उसमȂ कहा िक आपको पूरा अिधकार है िक 
आप Director (Health), Chief Medical Officer, Block Medical Officer से पूिछए िक आपने 
अपने फ ं ड क े िलए इस साल क्या-क्या मांगा है और िकतना implement िकया है?  You are my 
ambassadors. आप हमारे ambassadors हȅ। आप पूरी ताकत लगाइए और उसको implement 
कराइए। मोद
ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ फ ं ड की कोई कमी नहीं है, जो चािहए होगा, वह िमलेगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal. 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, हम जब भारत मȂ हेÊथ क ेयर की बात करते हȅ, तो एक िकर्िटकल 
पहलू दवाइयȗ का आत
ा है, िजनमȂ सÎती दवाइयां, समय पर दवाइयां और नई दवाइयां हȅ।  भारत 
सरकार ने अमेिरका, िĤटेन, जापान, ऑÎटर्ेिलया, कनाडा और यूरोिपयन संघ मȂ approved 5 
categories की दवाइयȗ को local clinical trials क े िबना approval देने की इजाज त दे दी है, जो 
िक एक अच्छा कदम है। लेिकन सर, समÎया यह है िक इन categories क े अलावा, अभी भी 
ज्यादातर दवाइयां clinical trials मȂ 5 से 20 वष र् तक फ ंसी रहती हȅ। कोरोना मȂ हमने वैक्सीन को 
approval दी, िजसके  clinical trials  शायद दूसरे देशȗ मȂ भी पूरे नहीं हुए थे, उसके  अच्छे 
िरजÊट्स आए। इसके  साथ-साथ आज antimicrobial resistance, जैसा global health crisis 
की एक अलग समÎया आ रही है, िजससे मौजूदा दवाइयȗ की effectiveness कम होती जा रही 
है।  इसके  अलावा भारत की जो pharma industr y है, उसके  70 परस Ȃट API का आयात चीन से 
हो रहा है, जो िक बढ़ रहा है। 2019-20 मȂ 16,000 करोड़ रुपए , 2023-24 मȂ 27,000 करोड़ रुपए  
हो गया, जबिक 1990 क े दशक मȂ almost ज़ीरो था। सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से 
यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक क्या सरकार जो बाकी essential drugs हȅ, उनकी approval और  
िक्लिनकल टर्ायल की Ģिकर्या मȂ तेजी लाने क े िल
ए नेशनल लेवल पर कोई Ãलान कर रही है और 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
37

 
 
एपीआई का इंपोटर् कम हो, तािक चीन और बाकी देशȗ पर dependency कम हो तथा AMR से 
िनपटने क े िलए क्या सरकार कोई योजना बना रही है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: सर, चूँिक यह मूल ĢÌन से जुड़ा हुआ ĢÌन नहीं है, इसिलए वे अलग से 
मुझसे बात कर लȂ, लेिकन िक्लिनकल टर्ायÊस क े िलए we are going as fast as w
e can do. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 3. Shrimati Sulata Deo. 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: चेयरमैन सर, मȅ आपकी आभारी हूँ िक आपने मुझे सÃलीमȂटर्ी ĢÌन पूछने का 
अवसर िदया। सर, 'वन्दे उत्कल जननी', - आज ओिडशा का उत्कल जननी िदवस है, इसिलए मȅ 
इस सदन से सारी ओि
डशावािसयȗ को शुभेच्छा देती हूँ। सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मान्यवर मंतर्ी, 
Ǜी जे. पी. नƿा जी से यह जानना चाहती हूँ, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी का ना म  इसिलए ले रही हूँ, 
क्यȗिक ये बार-बार ओिडशा आते हȅ, इसिलए उनको ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ सब क ु छ पता है। जब 
ओिडशा मȂ ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा क े बारे मȂ बात हो रही है, तो मȅ बताना चाहती हूँ िक साउथ ओिडशा 
अलग है और वह बहुत दूर है, वेÎटनर् ओिडशा अलग है और कोÎटल ओिडशा अल
ग है - ये सब 
इनको मालूम है। उन्हȗने बताया िक भुवनेÌवर मȂ ' एÇस' है और यह भी बताया िक क ु छ under-
served areas क े िलए भी 22 नए 'एÇस' बनाए गए हȅ, इसके  िलए मȅ उनको धन्
यवाद देती हूँ और 
ओिडशा क े 'एÇस' क े िलए भी धन्यवाद देती हूँ, मगर मेरा यह ĢÌन है िक और ओिडशा मȂ वेÎटनर् 
ओिडशा क े संबलपुर, कोÎटल ओिडशा क े बालेÌवर और दिक्षण ओिडशा क े कोरापुट क े िलए हम 
लोगȗ ने नया 'एÇस' क े िलए िडमांड िकया है और हमारे नेता नव
ीन पटनायक जी ने इसके  िलए 
बहुत बार िचƻी भी िलखी है।  क्या मान्यवर मंतर्ी जी यह बता सकते हȅ िक ओिडशा क े टर्ाइबल 
एिरयाज़ क े िलए नया 'एÇस' खोलने की कोई योजना है?  अगर है, तो वह क्या है और क ै से है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा:  सर, सबसे पहले तो 'उत्कल िदवस' क े िलए माननीय सदÎया को और 
समÎत ओिडशा क े भाइयȗ को बहुत-बहुत बधाई और शुभकामनाएँ।  माननीय सदÎया ने कहा िक 
मȅ बार-बार ओिडशा आता हूँ, 11 तारीख को मȅ िफर ओिडशा आ रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक वहाँ पर ÎवाÎथ्
य 
की दृिÍट से ही एक कायर्कर्म है। उन्हȗने under-served areas क े बारे जो कहा, उसके  संबंध मȂ 
अभी मेरे पास exact fig
ure नहीं है, लेिकन हम लोगȗ ने िपछले 10 सोलȗ क े अंदर ओिडशा मȂ 
शायद 4 से 5 एक्Îटर्ा मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ िदए हȅ।  I don’t have the exact  numbers, लेिकन वह 
5 से ज्यादा ही है। बलांगीर मȂ मȅ खुद नवीन पटनायक जी क े साथ गया था और वहाँ उसका 
Ǜीगणेश िकया था, उǇाटन िकया था। हम लोगȗ ने under-served areas को ही ध्यान मȂ रख 
कर इस काम को िकया है। मȅ माननीय सदÎया से एक ही िनवेदन करू ँगा िक जो 'पीएम-अिभम' 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
योजना है, उसमȂ 64,000 करोड़ रुपए  Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने इसी काम क े िलए िदया है तािक 
उस गैप को भरा जा सके । इसिलए आप Programme Implementation Plan क े तहत अपने चीफ 
मेिडकल ऑिफसर, िडिÎटर्क्ट क े ऑिफससर् और डायरेक्टर, हेÊथ क े साथ बैठ कर उसको देख 
लȂ। ओिडशा मȂ super-speciality block िदया गया - यह बरहामपुर मȂ िदया गया, बुलार् मȂ िदया 
गया और कटक मȂ िदया गया, यानी तीन तो super-special
ity blocks िदए  गए हȅ और उसी 
तरीके  से नए कॉलेजेज़ भी खोले गए हȅ। इस Ģकार से हमारी यह कोिशश है िक जो under-
served
 areas हȅ, उनको हम Ģाथिमकता दȂ। आप उसको Programme Implementation Plan मȂ 
डलवा कर भारत सरकार को िभजवाएँ। हम जरूर  Programme Implementation Plan को 
अक्षरश:  पूरा करने का Ģयास करȂगे। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 4; Shri A.A. Rahim. 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM : Sir, for the Financial Year , 2023-24, Rs. 1,376.70 crore was 
allotted to Kerala under the National Heal th Mission, of which Rs. 826.68 crore was 
the Union Government’s share. However, Rs . 636.88 crores of this amount has not 
been released to Kerala. The Union Government  claims that this is due to the State’s 
delay in branding Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres as per Union 
Government’s guidelines. 
 Despite this, the Government of Kerala has approved the branding and 72.4 
per cent of institutions have already been branded. So my question is: Why is the 
Union Government not releasing the pending amount to Kerala? Through you, I would 
like to ask the hon. Minister one more ques tion. What is the reasonable and rational 
explanation behind this branding? What is  the reason
 ? What is the rationale? Can 
you brief it rationally about the branding? What is the intention of this branding? 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: As I said, under the 2017 health policy, we have 
enunciated that we will provide equitable, af fordable and quality healthcare. For that, 
what we have tried to do is to see to it that the Sub-Health Centres and the PHCs are 
being made as Ayushman Arogya Mandir and we are standardising it. उसको  
standardize िकया जा रहा है। उस standardization क े िलए गाइडलाइंस बनी हȅ। Those 
guidelines have to be followed. We have  requested the Government of Kerala to 
follow those guidelines. The moment the guid elines are followed, the funding will be 
released accordingly. This is actually not in the original question. So, I do not have the 
exact answer about how much funding has been done or how much funding has not 
been done. But I can assure the hon. Member  that if the guidelines are followed, the 
funding will be done in total. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
39

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fifth Supplementary, Ǜी राजीव शुक्ला। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा: सर, जो मूल ĢÌन है, उसको मȅने बजट मȂ भी उठाया था।  मȅ ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी से 
कहना चाहता हूँ िक जब देश का ÎवाÎथ्य बजट ही 2 Ģितशत से नीचे है, तो आप कहाँ-कहाँ, 
क्या-क्या दे पाएँगे, िकतनी सुिवध
ाएँ दे पाएँगे? जब कोरोना आया था, तो उस समय सबसे ज्यादा 
िंचता इसी बात पर Ģकट की गई थी िक इस देश मȂ हेÊथ का इंģाÎटर्क्चर बहुत खराब है। तब 
लोग परेशान हो रहे थे, तर्ािह-तर्ािह मची थी, लोगȗ को न तो ऑक्सीजन िसलȂडसर् िमल पा रहे थे 
और न ही क ु छ और िमल पा रहा था, एक अजीब िकÎम की भ
यावह िÎथित थी। उस समय सबके  
मन मȂ यही था िक देश का ÎवाÎथ् य  बजट कम से कम दोगुना होना चािहए। सब 4 Ģितशत की बात 
कर रहे थे, लेिकन िफर भी यह 2 Ģितशत से नीचे रह गया। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यही जानना 
चाहता हूँ िक आप ÎवाÎथ्य बजट क्यȗ नहीं बढ़ा रहे हȅ? उसके  िबना क ु छ नहीं होगा। राज्यȗ क े 
पास भी सीिमत संसाधन हȅ और तमा
म राज्य ऐसे हȅ िक जहाँ संसाधन ही नहीं है। मȅ यह जानना 
चाहता हूँ िक ÎवाÎथ्य बजट क्यȗ नहीं बढ़ाया जाता? माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी से भी अनुरोध है िक 
वे इस पर फोकस करके  Îव
ाÎथ्य बजट बढ़ाने की क ृपा कब करȂगे? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: सर, मȅ सभी सदÎयȗ से िवनĦतापूवर्क हाथ जोड़कर िनवेदन करता हूँ िक 
यह narrative न  बनाया जाए िक Îव ाÎथ्य क े िलए बजट नहीं है।  आप 2 परसȂट, 3 परसȂट, 1 
परसȂट, 1.5 परसȂट कहते हȅ। " Ģधान मंतर्ी अभीम योजना" मȂ Rs.64,180 crores have been 
sanctioned. ...(Ëयवधान) ... एक िमनट। जब हम सारी चीजȗ क े गैप को भरने क े बाद उसकी 
यूिटलाइजेशन की बात करते हȅ, the utilization  is somewhere around Rs.20,000 crores. 
उसी तरीके  से, 15th Finance Commission मȂ Rs.70,000 crores have been sanctioned and 
the amount released is Rs.27,000 crores, क्यȗिक यूिटलाइजेशन सिर्टिफके ट ही नहीं आता 
है, इसिलए आप सबसे पहले इस narrative से  िनकल जाएँ। W e  h a v e  t o  c o m e  o u t  o f  t h e  
narrative िक फ ंिंडग नहीं हो रही है, फ ंिंडग नहीं हो रही है। भाई, आप अपनी Îटेट से पूिछए न िक 
क्या उसने खचर् िकया?  सभापित जी, मȅ िपछले से िपछले tenure मȂ बतौर ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी था।  तब 
मȅने जो terti
ary cancer centres an d State cancer institutes िदए, उनके  िलए 120 करोड़ 
रुपए  िदए गए।  मȅ जब इस term मȂ आया हूँ, तब उनको implement होता हुआ देख रहा हूँ।  Now 
you see, इतना जो gap होता  है, इस gap मȂ re-t endering, re-tendering, re-tendering! 
Our State systems have to be improved so  that they implement the programmes in 
time and utilise the funds. The Utilisation Ce rtificate is most important. The moment 
you utilise, we will give you the funds. 
 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी सभापित: जब आप ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी नहीं थे, तब भी ÎवाÎथ्य की बड़ी िंचता करते थे। मȅने डॉक्टसर् 
क े कई Ģोगर्ाÇस attend िकए और इन्हȗने कहा िक िवभाग तो मेरा नहीं है, पर डॉक्टसर् मेरा पीछा 
नहीं छोड़ते, मȅ उनका पीछा नहीं छोड़ ता।  
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: सर, िनमर्ला जी थोड़ा इन पर ध्यान दȂ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  िनमर्ला जी, मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक जी ने अच्छी बात की है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  N o w ,  Q .  N o . 3 1 8  i s  b y  S h r i  A s h o k r a o  S h a n k a r r a o  C h a v a n .   T h e  
hon. Member had sought my leave owing to unavoidable reasons, and I have granted 
him leave.  Supplementaries! 
 
*318. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Buffer stock of pulses 
 
*318.  SHRI ASHOKRAO SHANKARRAO CHAVAN : Will the MINISTER OF 
CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION be pleased to state: 
 (a) whether Government is unable to buy sufficient Tur, Urad and Masoor pulses 
from farmers due to higher prices availabl e in the open market as compared to the 
Minimum Support Price (MSP), leading to a direct impact on the buffer stock of 
pulses in the country, if so, the details thereof; 
(b) the present status of buffer stock of major pulses in the country; 
(c) whether Govern
ment proposes to impo rt pulses to control the prices and 
maintain buffer stock, if so, the details thereof; and 
 (d) other measures taken/being taken by Government to control the expected rise in 
prices of pulses in the country? 
 
THE MINISTER OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
(SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI):  (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b)  The prevailing market prices of  Tur, Urad and Masoor  have declined in 
recent months to the level of Minimum Su pport Price (MSP) which facilitated the 
procurement of Tur in current Kharif  marketing season (2024-25). Till 25 th March, 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
41

 
 
2025, a total of 2.46 lakh tonnes (LMT) of  Tur has been procured at MSP, and the 
procurement is still in progre ss. The procurement of Rabi crops of Urad and Masoor 
for buffer stock will start on the commen cement of Rabi procurement season.The 
present status of stock of major pulses with the government pr ocured under Price 
Stabilisation Fund (PSF) and Price Support Scheme (PSS)is given below: 
 
Stock of major pulses with the Government 
(in LMT) 
Pulse PSF Buffer PSS Stock Total Stock 
Tur 0.20 2.46 2.66 
Moong 1.57 5.88 7.44 
Urad 0.05 0.00 0.06 
Chana 0.00 0.08 0.08 
Masur 5.46 0.05 5.51 
Total 7.28 8.47 15.75 
 
(c) Currently there is no proposal to im port pulses for building buffer stock under 
PSF. Pulses procured under PSS are transferred to PSF as per buffer requirement. To 
augment domestic availability of pulses an d control price volatility, government has 
allowed import of Tur and Urad under ‘Free’ category till 31 st March, 2026. Duty free 
import of Yellow Peas has also been allowed till 31 st May, 2025 to further augment the 
overall availability of pulses. 
(d) In order to make dals available to co nsumers at affordable prices, part of the 
stock of Chana, Moong and Masoor from th e buffer are converted to dals for retail 
sale under the Bharat brand. Bharat Chan a Dal was made available at MRP of Rs.70 
per kg; Bharat Moong Dal at Rs.107 per kg and Bharat Masoor Dal at Rs.89 per kg. 
 Department of Consumer Affairs monitors  the daily retail and wholesale prices 
of selected essential food commodities, including prices of five major pulses, 
submitted by the 555 price monitoring centr es that have been set up with Central 
assistance by the State Governments and UT Administrations across the country. The 
daily report of prices and indicative price trends are duly analysed for taking 
appropriate decisions such as release of st ocks from the buffer, stock disclosure by 
stockholding entities, imposition of stock limits, changes in trade policy instruments 
like rationalisation of import duty, changes in  import quota, restrictions on exports of 
the commodity etc. Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) reviews and deliberates, on 
regular basis, the situation of prices and price trends of essential agri-horticulture 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
commodities and suggests measures to enhance availability through increased 
domestic production and through imports. 
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर ĢÌन 
पूछने का अवसर Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देती हूं। महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी से मेरा ĢÌन है िक मुदर्ा Îफीित को िनयंितर्त करने पर PSF क्या Ģभाव पड़ा है 
एवं Ãयाज की कीमतȗ को िनयंितर्त करने क े िलए सरकार ǎा
रा क्या उपाय िकए गए हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी Ģहलाद जोशी: सर, जहां तक PSF का सवाल है, तो मोदी जी क े सǄा संभालने से पहले इस 
देश मȂ PSF का concept
 ही नहीं था। पहले जो भी inflation और price rise होता था, it was left 
to the God. जो होता है, वह होता है, लेिकन In 2015-16, under the guidance and 
leadership of the hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, we started the Price 
Stabilisation Fund (PSF). इस Price Stabilisation Fund क े कारण ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, अगर 
ये बीच मȂ पॉिलिटक्स करते हȅ, तो मȅ आपकी अनुमित से पॉिल
 िटकल उǄर देता हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: आप हमेशा political उǄर देते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  माननीय मंतर्ी जी, मȅ आपके  कथन से सहमत नहीं हूं। जयराम रमेश जी बीच मȂ 
पॉिलिटक्स नहीं करते हȅ, वे  24X7 politics करते हȅ। 
 
Ǜी Ģहला
द जोशी: सर, जैसा मȅने कहा िक हमने यह PSF शुरू  िकया। उसके  कारण overall जब 
El Nino का effect पड़ा, बीच मȂ कोिवड क े कारण भी कहीं-कहीं production कम हुआ और 
excess rain भी हुई। इन सब क े बावजूद जब overall price įयादा हुआ था, तब भी PSF क े फ ं ड 
क े कारण – हम  जो PSS मȂ खरीदते हȅ, वह भी PSF मȂ convert करते हȅ और कभी-कभी हम 
माकȃ ट से भी खरीदते हȅ। हमने बहुत बड़ी मातर्ा मȂ Ãयाज़ भी ख रीदा  था और पहली बार Ãयाज क े 
िलए six express trains from Nasik to Delhi and three trains to Chennai were sent. 
Overall, the inflation 3.75 से कम हो गया है। There is no such condition under the PSF 
and the buffer stock is released in a calibra ted manner whenever the prices increase.  
Because of this, almost food inflation remains well under control. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, supplementary by Shri Amar Pal Maurya. 
 
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर्: महोदय, मȅ सुनता था िक पहले हम अनाज क े िलए दुिनया क े देशȗ क े सामने 
याचक क े रूप  मȂ रहते थे, लेिकन आज मुझे यह कहते हुए गवर् महसूस हो रहा है िक आज भारत 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
43

 
 
अनाज क े उत्पादन मȂ आत्मिनभर्र है। इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और माननीय मंतर्ी जी 
का अिभनन्दन करता हूं। मेरा ĢÌन यह है िक दालȗ क े उत्पादन मȂ भारत का Ģदशर्न क ैसा है? क्या 
हाल क े िदनȗ मȂ दालȗ का उत्पादन बढ़ा है या कमी आई है? साथ ही, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ दालȗ क े 
उत्पादन की िÎथित क्या है एवं भारत को दालȗ क े मामने मȂ आत्मिनभर्र बनाने क े िलए सरकार ने 
क्या पहल की है? 
 
SHRI PR
ALHAD JOSHI : Sir, the total requirement of pulses has considerably  
increased.  इसका एक इÇपोटȄट कारण यह है िक हमने पांच िकलोगर्ाम राशन पर, चाहे धान हो, 
गेहूं हो या िमलेट्स हȗ, जब उनको free-of-cost देना शुरू  िकया, तब से मािर्कट मȂ pulses की  
demand ज्यादा हुई है।  पहले क े comparison मȂ िडमांड ज्यादा हुई है।  इसके  अनुसार Ģोडक्श न 
भी इÇपर्ूव हुआ है। कम हुआ है, ऐसा नहीं है।  दस वषर् से पहले हमारा 157 LMT  था, as of today, 
this year’s expectation is 242 LMT. As pe r Mission of ‘Aatmanirbharta in Pulses’, 
िजसके  बारे मȂ माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने बजट भाषण मȂ एनाउंस िकया, उसमȂ तुअर मȂ, मसूर मȂ, 
ऐसे तीन pul
ses मȂ अभी NAFED और NCCF मȂ िजतना उत्पादन होता है, उतना Ģी-रिजÎटर्ेशन 
क े साथ फामर्सर् डायरेक्टली खरीद रहे हȅ।  अगर  जरूरत है, तो हम मािर्कट से भी खरीदते हȅ। 
ओवरऑल Ģोडक्शन बढ़ाने क े िलए, under ‘Aatm anirbharta in Pulses’, अभी तक  NAFED मȂ 
9 लाख और NCCF  मȂ छह लाख से अिधक फामर्सर् का रिजÎटर्ेशन कर रहे हȅ और उनसे खरीदने 
की भी कोिशश कर रहे हȅ।  इसके  साथ ही साथ हमȂ एक िवषय मȂ बहुत इÇपॉटȄट कदम िलया है। 
These are: Development and commercial av ailability of climate-resilient seed इसमȂ 
ज्यादा Ģोडिक्टिवटी करने क े िलए, सीड्स की इÇपर्ूवमȂट क े िलए भी क ृिष मंतर्ालय काम कर रहा 
है; enhancement of pro
tein conten –  उसमȂ Ģोटीन कन्टȂट का enhancement करने क े िलए 
काम कर रहे हȅ; Increasing productivity per acre हमारा बाकी देशȗ क े comparison मȂ कम 
है, उसको ज्यादा करने क े िलए एगर्ीकÊचर िमिन
Îटर्ी कदम उठा रही है;  improving the post-
harvest storage and management; and, Assuring the remunerative prices to the 
farmers. ये हम कर रहे हȅ। इसके  साथ-साथ जैसा मȅने कहा िक तूअर, उड़द और मसूर का 
िजतना उत्पादन करते हȅ, उतना पूरा खरीदने की ËयवÎथा हम कर रहे हȅ। अगर मािर्कट मȂ ज्यादा 
Ģाइस है, तो मािर्कट मȂ बेच सकते हȅ। मािर्कट मȂ कम होता है।  मािर्कट मȂ िजत
ना रेट है, उस पर 
हमने खरीदने का िनणर्य िकया है। 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Hon. Minister, are you still importing pulses 
from other countries into our country? If so, from where and how much and which are 
these pulses? 
 
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI : Sir, I gave the comparat ive figures - 230 LM
T is our 
production, 242 LMT is the expectation this  year, and, 280 LMT is our requirement.  
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
इसिलए इÇपोटर् हो रहा है। सरकार इÇपोटर् नहीं करती है।  क ु छ चीज़Ȃ हमने without any import 
duty ģी रखी हȅ।  …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  माननीय मंतर्ी जी, माननीय सदÎया जानना चाहती थी िक हम िकतनी pulses 
import कर रहे हȅ और उनके  ǣोत क्या हȅ? यिद अभी इसके  बारे मȂ जानकारी उपलÅ ध नहीं है, तो 
माननीय सदÎया को इसके  बारे मȂ जानकारी उपलÅध करा दी जाए। 
 
Ǜी Ģƨाद जोशी: सर, मȅने वही कहा िक there is a difference.   Production is 242 LMT and 
हमारी requirement है 280 LMT और बाकी 30 परस Ȃट इÇपोटर् करना पड़ेगा। हम कभी चना 
इÇपोटर् करते हȅ, तुअर दाल इÇपोटर् करते हȅ और जहां से इÇपोटर् करते हȅ, उसके  बारे मȂ मȅ माननीय 
सदÎया को जानकारी उप
लÅध करवा दूंगा। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप  माननीय सदÎया को जानकारी उपलÅध करवा दीिजएगा। आप मेरी भी एक 
मदद कीिजए। यह कहा जाता है िक मुंह और मसूर की दाल की क्या Ëयाख्या है? 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, मंतर्ी जी क े पास सही जानकारी ही नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  जयराम जी, जब आप भी इधर  थे और अनेक बार ऐसा हुआ …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, कभी नहीं हुआ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप मेरी बात सुिनए।  The hon. Mi
nister is very well prepared but if you ask 
statistics… Jaya ji is right in asking statisti cs, and, I have ruled fr om the Chair that the 
hon. Minister will make available that information to Jaya ji, and, also information to 
me िक मुंह और मसूर की दाल की क्या Ëयाख्या है?              
            
Ǜी Ģƨाद जोशी: सभापित महोदय, मȅने उǄर मȂ भी कहा है िक the difference is about 30 to 
40 LMT.  इतना इÇपोटर् तो करन
ा ही पड़ता है। इÇपोटर् मȂ कौन-सी कमोिडटी, कहाँ से करते हȅ, मȅ 
इसकी जानकारी माननीय सदÎय को भेज दूंगा। वैसे मेरे पास पाँच साल की िफगसर् उपलÅध हȅ, 
लेिकन मȅ इन सबको पढ़ नहीं सकता हूं, िफर भी माननीय सदÎय को बता देता हूं िक हमने येलो 
पीिसस मȂ 2018-19 मȂ 1,50,408 एलएमटी इÇपोटर् िकया गया है। …(Ëयवध
ान)… 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी, आप यह जानकारी सूचीबǉ करके , एक्युरेसी क े साथ माननीय सदÎया 
को Ģेिषत कर दीिजगा और इसी सÃताह सदन क े पटल पर भी रख दीिजए
गा। 
 
Ǜी Ģƨाद जोशी: ठीक है।          
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
45

 
 
                                                   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 319, Shri M. Shanmugam. 
 
Scheme for Special Assistance to States for Capital Expenditure 
 
*319.  SHRI M. SHANMUGAM: Will the Minister of FINANCE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government has la unched Scheme for Special Assistance to States 
for Capital Expenditure in view of poor fiscal condition of States post-Covid 
and introduction of GST; 
(b) if so, the details thereof and special assistance released to various States 
including Tamil Nadu in the last three years; 
(c) whether representations are received fr om States for increasing the quantum 
of special assistance to meet urgent capital expenditure including infrastructure 
projects; 
(d) if so, the details thereof; and 
(e) whether there is any proposal to streng then fiscal conditions of the States, 
through loan or external borrowings, if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (SHRI PANKAJ 
CHAUDHARY): (a) to (e) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Yes, Sir. The financial year 202 0-21 saw a shortfall in tax revenue due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. Consider ing the tough fiscal enviro nment faced by the State 
Governments, the Union Government ca me out with a ‘Scheme for Special 
Assistance to States for Capital Expenditure’ in October, 2020. Capital expenditure 
has a higher multiplier effect and enhances  the productive capacity of the economy. 
Therefore, the Scheme has been included in the budget of every financial year 
thereafter. State-wise details of Special Assistance released under the Scheme to 
various States including Tamil Nadu in the last three years i.e. from 2021-22 to 2023-
24 are provided in Annexure-I. 
 
(c) and (d) Yes, Sir. State governments ha ve requested for continuing the Scheme 
and enhancing the outlay for the Scheme from time to time. Such requests have been 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
received in 2024-25, inter a lia, from the States of An dhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Manipur and Nagaland. 
 
        (e) The Union Government has fixed the Net Borrowing Ceiling (NBC) of all States at 
3 percent of the Gross State Domestic Pr oduct (GSDP) for the financial year 2024-
25. In addition, State Governments may also  avail additional borrowing of up to 
0.50% of GSDP based on cer tain performance criteria in power sector. Further, 
States are allowed extra borrowing ceiling equivalent to the employer’s and 
employee’s share of contribution of its employees actually deposited with the 
designated authority i.e. ‘National Securities Depository limited (NSDL)/ trustee bank 
as per the guidelines of Na tional Pension System (NPS), over and above, the normal 
net borrowing ceiling of 3% of GSDP. The state wise consent for open market 
borrowing issued by the Government of India (GoI) and market borrowings availed by 
States during 2024-25 (as on February 28, 2025) is at Annexure-II. 
 
Annexure- I  
Special Assistance (loan) released under t he Scheme for Special Assistance to 
States for Capital Expenditure/Investment dur ing the last three years i.e. from 2021-
22 to 2023-24: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl. No. States 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1 Andhra Pradesh 501.79 6105.56 4090.81 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 371 .19 1564.10 2363.42 
3 Assam 600.00 4300.14 5804.43 
4 Bihar 1246.50 8455.85 8814.80 
5 Chhattisgarh 423.00 2941.97 3365.25 
6 Goa 111.04 572.75 695.20 
7 Gujarat 432.00 4045.82 4254.32 
8 Haryana 135.00 1267.00 1702.05 
9 Himachal Pradesh 800.00 650.80 1515.97 
10 Jharkhand 246.00 2964.32 4580.61 
11 Karnataka 451.50 3399.35 3879.24 
12 Kerala 238.50 1902.74 0.00 
13 Madhya Pradesh 1512.36 7360.20 12636.21 
14 Maharashtra 771.73 6744.16 5376.31 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
47

 
 
15 Manipur 212.85 467.22 542.70 
16 Meghalaya 281.20 1049.02 1293.06 
17 Mizoram 299.99 297.50 743.28 
18 Nagaland 300.00 504.16 973.20 
19 Odisha 517.12 75.00 3532.14 
20 Punjab 223.50 798.22 0.00 
21 Rajasthan 692.41 5595.64 8513.42 
22 Sikkim 300.00 551.36 797.85 
23 Tamil Nadu 505.50 4011.27 5326.42 
24 Telangana 214.14 2500.98 1948.34 
25 Tripura 118.54 349.79 662.92 
26 Uttar Pradesh 1483.00 7940.50 19215.08 
27 Uttarakhand 263.92 1124.01 1911.71 
28 West Bengal 933.00 3655.92 5015.58 
Total 14185.78 81195.35 109554.30 
 
Annexure-II  
 
Details of borrowing consent issued by Government of India and borrowings raised by 
States in 2024-25 (Up to 25.02.2025) 
(Rs. in crore) 
 Sl.  
No. 
 Name of State Consent issued by 
Government of India for 
 Open Market 
Borrowings  
Actual amount of Open 
Market Borrowings availed 
by States 
(as on February 28, 2025) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 73,900 70,057 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1,010 795 
3 Assam 22,055 15,700 
4 Bihar 47,546 47,546 
5 Chhattisgarh 18,898 10,500 
6 Goa 4,500 1,050 
7 Gujarat 41,500 30,200 
8 Haryana 49,500 37,500 
9 Himachal Pradesh 7,149 6,700 
10 Jharkhand 14,999 0 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
11 Karnataka 78,392 72,025 
12 Kerala 41,527 40,922 
13 Madhya Pradesh 80,174 41,000 
14 Maharashtra 1,25,238 99,000 
15 Manipur 1,500 1,250 
16 Meghalaya 1,882 1,882 
17 Mizoram 1,086 1,049 
18 Nagaland 1,750 550 
19 Odisha 15,780 9,000 
20 Punjab 38,852 38,830 
21 Rajasthan 66,927 63,565 
22 Sikkim 2,064 1,488 
23 Tamil Nadu 1,24,074 1,01,025 
24 Telangana 58,777 49,709 
25 Tripura 1,511 0 
26 Uttar Pradesh 62,000 35,000 
27 Uttarakhand 7,500 6,400 
28 West Bengal 99,747 51,500 
Total 10,89,838 8,34,243 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM:  Sir, after introduction of GST and abolition of various tariffs, 
taxes and cess levied by the State Govern ments, the volume of State finance has 
shrunk and the States have to depend only on the Union Government. Being a 
coastal State, every year, Tamil Nadu is devastated with cyclones, floods and heavy 
rains. The condition of our roads, infrastr ucture, bridges, street lights, sanitation, 
buildings, etc., is affected due to natural disasters, for which much-needed financial 
assistance has not been extended by the Union Government. Through you, Sir, I 
would like to know whether the Union Govern ment will give more funds for disaster 
management to our State. 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने अभी जो िवषय उठाया है िक तिमलनाडु 
राज्य को धन नहीं िदया जा रहा है, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन और माननीय सदÎय को बताना 
चाहता हूं िक तिमलनाडु राज्य को जो कर हÎतांतरण हुआ है, वह 2009-2014 तक 62,758 
करोड़ रुपय े, 2014-2019 मȂ 1,19,455 करोड़ रुपय े, वह 2019-2025 तक 2,33,334 करोड़ रुपय े 
का हुआ है। इसी Ģकार से, अगर वहीं पर अनुदान क े रूप  मȂ देखȂ, तो 2009-2014 मȂ,  35,262 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
49

 
 
करोड़ रुपय े, 2014-2019 मȂ 95,734 करोड़ रुपय े और 2019-2025 मȂ 1,83,495 करोड़ रुपय े की 
िफगर है। 
 महोदय, उन्हȗने जो िवशेष सहायता की बात कही है, अगर आप देखȂ, तो 2021-2022 मȂ 
505.50 करोड़ रुपय े, 2022-23 मȂ 4,011.27 करोड़ रुपय े, 2023-24 मȂ 5,326.42 करोड़ रुपय े 
और 2024-25 मȂ 7,345.46 करोड़ रुपय े की िफगर है। सभापित महोदय, जहाँ तक कर 
हÎतांतरण का सवाल है, तो मȅ बताना चाहूंगा 2004-2014 तक 94,971 करोड़ रुपय े थे और 2024
 
मȂ जो 2,92,113 करोड़ रुपय े हुए हȅ, वह वृिǉ 207 परस Ȃट तक हुई है। महोदय, उसी Ģकार से 
अगर आप अनुदान मȂ भी देखȂगे, तो तिमलनाडु राज्य मȂ इसकी 342 परसȂट तक की बढ़ोतरी की 
गई है। सभा
पित महोदय, वे िडजाÎटर की बात कर रहे थे, इसिलए मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक 
अभी तिमलनाडु राज्य को 1,121.5 करोड़ की रािश दी गई है और उसकी डेट भी बढ़ा दी गई है 
िक आप उस रािश को 31.12.2025 तक खचर् कर सकते हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Second suppl
ementary, Shri M. Shanmugam. 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM : Sir, the rural people of Tam il Nadu are agitated about not 
having received their dues from the Union Government to the tune of Rs. 4,000 crores 
under the MGNREGA.  I would like to know from the hon. Minister when the funds will 
be released. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister; very pointed question. 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, जहाँ तक MGNREGA का सवाल है, मȅ माननीय 
सदÎय को बताना चाहता हूं िक Îटेट्स को इस योजना की गाइडलाइन्स क े आधार पर पैसा िदया 
जाता है। मȅ माननीय सदÎय से कहन
ा चाहता हूं िक तिमलनाडु राज्य को भी िनिÌचत तौर पर 
िदया गया होगा। यिद कोई िदक्कत होगी और माननीय सदÎय उसके  बारे मȂ हमȂ बताएंगे, तो उस 
िदक्कत को दूर िकया जाएगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Su
pplementary No. 3, hon. Member, Shri P. Chidambaram. 
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM : Sir, I am glad the hon. Minister has said that capital 
expenditure has a multiplier effect.  I agree. Now, in the Annexure to the Answer, they 
have given the capital expenditure assistance to States for the three previous years.  
The year 2024-25 ended yesterday. I have a pointed question.  If capital expenditure 
has a multiplier effect and they swear by ca pital expenditure, then, why in the year 
2024-25, the Central Government’s capital expenditure was cut from Rs.11,11,111 
crore to Rs.10,18,429 crore and why th e assistance to States was cut from 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Rs.3,90,778 crore to Rs.2,99, 891 crore?  Together, they cut capital expenditure by 
almost Rs.1,80,000 crore. Why? 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN) :  Sir, capital 
expenditure has not been cut. The previous year, it was up to Rs.11.11 lakh crore.  
Actually, in the Budget which ended yesterday, it has gone up to Rs.11.21 lakh crore.   
The capital expenditure has not been cut at  all. This is one. And second, capital 
assistance to the States from Rs.11.21 lakh  crore has also gone up  proportionately.  
Earlier, it was Rs.1,00,000 crore for the States .  Again, proportionately, we brought it 
up and increased it to Rs.11.21 lakh crore. So, cutting down capital expenditure is not 
the case with us.  … (Interruptions)…  I am talking about 2024-25.  …(Interruptions) …  
Sorry.  Sir, 2025 is the year ending yest erday. Right?  New Budget commences from 
today for 2025-26. I am talkin g about the year ended. I have pointedly answered the 
question pointedly asked by the former Finance Minister about the year 2025 which 
ended yesterday. So wher e am I escaping answer?…( Interruptions) …    Y e s ,  I  a m  
giving you the numbers. I will give you the numbers.  You can repeat the question if 
you want. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes. 
 
SHRI P. CHIDAMBARAM : Look at your ‘Budget At  A Glance’. For 2024-25, the 
original Budget allocation for Centra l Government capital expenditure was 
Rs.11,11,111 crore. But as the year ended, yo ur Revised Estimate is only Rs.10,18,429 
crore. Similarly, for assistance to the St ates, the Budget Estimate was Rs.3,90,778 
crore. The Revised Estimate is Rs. 2,99,891  crores. I have added the two. You have 
cut in 2024-25, both on your capital expenditure as well as assistance to States, 
about Rs.1,80,000 crore, about the year ended yesterday? I am not talking about 
2025-26. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : I have answered about the year ended 
yesterday.  I am not saying something differently.  I want to draw your attention to the 
numbers, particularly for the States. The sp ecial assistance which is being given to 
the States for capital expenditure is 50-year  interest-free. In 2020-21, approval was 
for Rs.11,912 crore, and the actual rel ease was Rs.11,830 crore. In 2021-22, 
Rs.15,928 crore were approved  and the released were Rs .14,186 crore. In 2022-23, 
Rs.95,147 crore were approved and Rs.8 1,195 crore were re leased. In 2023-24, 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
51

 
 
Rs.1,27,492 crore were approved but the re leased were Rs.1,09,554 crore.  And for 
the year 2024-25, which ended yesterday, Rs.1,53,673 crore were approved.  And up 
to up to 26th March 2025, which is four more days left for the end of the financial year, 
Rs.1,46,362 crore have been released to the States. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 4; Shri R. Girirajan. 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, I have not submitted my na me for this; I had submitted for 
Question No. 318. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 4 now goes, not by default, but by calculation 
also, to Shri Manoj Kumar Jha. 
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा: माननीय सभापित महोदय, सतर् मȂ महज 3 िदन और बाकी हȅ।  Finance 
Minister और उनकी पूरी टीम यहाँ है। इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से आगर्ह करू ँगा िक तमाम 
सांसद, जो पक्ष या िवपक्ष क े हȅ, उनको लगातार scheme workers की  ओर से representation 
िमलता है, चाहे आशा हो, रसोइया हो, आँगनवाड़ी हो और कई राज्यȗ की fiscal condition क े 
कारण वे इस मानदेय बढ़ोतरी क े िलए तैयार नहीं हȅ। मȅ तो माननीया Finance Mini
ster से यह 
जानना चाहूँगा िक क्या वे centrally ऐस े िकसी Ãलान पर बात कर रही हȅ, तािक जो skilled 
workers की न्यूनतम मज
दूरी है, across the board, across the States, सब जगह यह 
बढ़ोतरी सुिनिÌचत की जाए? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister, the supplementary has no connect, in the 
least, but it emanates from a pure heart. Yo u will take it into consideration. It was a 
very smart mechanism by Shri Manoj Kumar Jha to ask a soothing question and make 
a point. Last supplementary; Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Mr. Chairman, Sir, the hon. Finance Minister has given 
details of Special Assitance (loan) releas ed under the Scheme for Special Assistance 
to States for Capital Expenditure/Investment  during the last three years.  Different 
States are mentioned here. Fo r Tamil Nadu, in 2021-22, it  is nearly Rs. 500 crore; 
then Rs. 4,000 crore next year; then, Rs. 5,326 crore.  This Special Assistance is for 
Capital Expenditure. I want to know from the hon. Minister: Is the Government aware 
that State Governments are using this mo ney for capital expenditure or any other 
thing? Have they got Utilization Certific ates for the money given under Special 
Assistance? That is what I want to know. 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, maybe, not instantly; at the instance when 
the money is sent, I would not know whethe r it is used for capital expenditure or 
something else.  But, gradually, with ti me lag, through SNA-SPARSH and various 
other digital ways by which money is put into specific nodal accounts for expenditure, 
we will come to know. Since the hon. Member did talk about Tamil Nadu, again, I 
would like to repeat. When this scheme of Special Assistance to the States for Capital 
Expenditure was introduced in  2021, that year, Tamil Nadu  did not draw anything on 
that account. In 2021-22, an amount of Rs. 505.50 crore was drawn; in 2022-23, an 
amount of Rs. 4,011.27 crore was taken; in 2023-24, an amount of Rs. 5,326.42 
crore was taken; in 2024-25, up to 26.03.2 025, an amount of Rs. 7,345.86 crore has 
been given. Cumulatively, a total of Rs. 17,189.05 crore has been given to Tamil Nadu 
in which there is untied portion which goes and there are additional tied portions. 
Both untied -- additional untied and original untied -- put together is more than Rs. 
4,500 crore.  But, under the categories of  tied, where you do with some reforms 
undertaken, there are several more; all totali ng to Rs. 7,345 crore has been given to 
Tamil Nadu. There is one or two which Ta mil Nadu has not taken because they did 
intend or did not want to do the reform. One is: Scrapping of old vehicles. On that, 
they have not taken anything at all.  Simila rly, on urban planning reforms, not having 
undertaken any urban planning reforms, no money has been taken for capital 
assistance.  I just wanted to highlight that. After the completion of the project, when 
the Utilization Certificate comes to us, it is only then, through you, Sir, I can inform 
the hon. Member, Dr. M. Thambidurai, we can get to understand whether the money 
has been used for capital expenditure purpose or anything else. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Q.No.320. 
 
CGHS like scheme for common people 
 
#*320. SHRI RAMJI LAL SUMAN : Will the Minister of  HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government is considerin g to bring a scheme like the Central 
Government Health Scheme (CGHS) for the treatment of common people that would 
allow every Indian to receive treatment by paying a fixed amount; 
                                                            
# Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
53

 
 
(b) if so, the details thereof, and if not, the reasons therefor; 
(c) which people are being provided CGHS facility for treatment; and 
(d) whether there is any Government m echanism to fix the rates for tests and 
treatments in private hospitals, if not, whether Government proposes to bring the 
same? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY  
WELFARE (SHRI PRATAP RAO JADHAV) : (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the 
Table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d): Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mant ri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) is a 
flagship scheme of the Government which provides health cover of Rs. 5 lakhs per 
family per year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization to approximately 55 
crore beneficiaries corresponding to 12. 37 crore families constituting economically 
vulnerable bottom 40% of India’s population . In March 2024, the eligibility criteria 
under the scheme were expanded to incl ude 37 lakh Accredited Social Health 
Activists (ASHAs), Anganwadi Workers (AWWs), Anganwadi Helpers (AWHs) and 
their families. Recently, the scheme has been expanded to cover 6 crore senior 
citizens of age 70 years and above belonging to 4.5 crore families irrespective of their 
socio-economic status through Ayushman Vay Vandana cards. The services provided 
to eligible beneficiaries are free of cost under the AB-PMJAY and the scheme is fully 
funded by the government. 
Further, Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) is a contributory health 
scheme primarily catering to  Central Government employ ees and pensioners. CGHS 
fixes rates for consultation, investigations  and procedures. The details of eligibility 
criteria under the Central Government Health Scheme are at Annexure. 
The Government of India enacted the Clinical Establishments (Registration and 
Regulation) Act, 2010 for registration an d regulation of clinical establishments 
belonging to all recognized systems of me dicine of both Government and private 
sector (except those of Armed Forces) with  a view to prescrib e minimum standards 
of facilities and services as may be provid ed by them. ‘Health’ being a State subject, 
it is the primary responsibility of States / UTs to comply with the conditions and norms 
required to be fulfilled for registration and re gulation of clinical establishments as per 
provisions of the Act. At pr esent, 19 States / UTs have adopted the Act. The clinical 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
establishments in the States / UTs, which have not adopted and implemented the 
Act, are registered and regulated by the State Acts. 
Section 52 of the Clinical Establishmen ts (Registration and Regulation) Act 
gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions 
of the Act.  Accordingly, the Clinical Es tablishments (Central Government) Rules, 
2012 were notified. Rule 9 (ii) of the Rules states that, for registration and 
continuation of registration of clinical establishments, the clinical establishments shall 
charge the rates for each type of procedur es and services within the range of rates 
determined and issued by the Central Government from time to time in consultation 
with the State Governments. 
 
Annexure 
Persons Eligible under the Central Government Health Scheme are: 
 
1. All Central Government employees paid fr om the Central Civil Estimates (except 
Railways and Delhi Administration), including their families. 
2. Pensioners of Central Government (ex cept pensioners belonging to Railways 
and the Armed Forces) and their families. 
3. Central Government Pensioners retiri ng with Contributory Provident Fund 
benefits and their families. 
4. Widows of Central Government pensioners, in receipt of family pension. 
5. Delhi Police personnel and their families, in Delhi only. 
6. Railway Board employees. 
7. Civilian employees of Defence paid from  Defence Service Estimates (except in 
Mumbai where the scheme is in operation). 
8. Child drawing pension on death of a Central Government employee including 
minor brothers and sisters of such child. 
9. Ex-Governors and Lt. Governors and their families. 
10. Ex-Vice Presidents and their families. 
11. Central Government servants who ar e deputed to semi-government and 
autonomous bodies receiving substantial grant from, or financed by the Central 
Government. 
12. Central Govt. employees on deputation to statutory/autonomous during the 
period of deputation. 
13. Military Officers while on deputation to civil departments and getting their 
emoluments from Central Civil Estimates. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
55

 
 
14. Families of Governments servants tran sferred to a non-CGHS area, for a 
maximum period of six months on deposit of CGHS contribution (for the period 
of 6 months) in advance. 
15. Families of IAS Officers on North-Eastern Cadre, who continue to stay back in 
Delhi even after repatriati on of the IAS Officer to the North Eastern Cadre, 
provided that they continue to occupy Government accommodation in 
Delhi/New Delhi, on deposi t of CGHS contribution in advance (one to three 
years). The same also applies to families of IAS Officers of J&K Cadre. 
16. Parliamentary Secretaries of the Central Government and their families. 
17. Members of Parliament and their families. 
18. Ex-Members of Parliament. 
19. Sitting Judges of Supreme Court and High  Court of Delhi and former Judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts. 
20. Work Charged and Industrial Staff working in establishments run by various 
Ministries/Departments of Central Government, immediately from the date of 
their joining the service. 
21. Employees of Kendriya Vidyalays Sangathan stationed at Delhi & NCR, 
Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Mumbai and Bengaluru. 
22. Employees of Ordnance Factory Board Headquarters, Kolkata and Ordnance 
Equipment Factories Headquarters, Kanpur. 
23. All India Service pensioners who retire while serving under the State at their 
option. 
24. Freedom Fighters and members of their family receiving Central Pension under 
the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme. 
25. Family members of the Deceased Ex-Members of Parliament. 
26. Pensioners of Ordnance factories. 
27. Members of Staff Side of the Nation al Council of the Joint consultative 
Machinery, even though not serving as Central Government employees. 
28. Persons employed in semi-government and autonomous bodies who are 
permitted to join the CGHS Scheme. 
29. An Accredited Journalist who produces a certificate from the Press Council of 
India stating that he is a member of th e Press Association, New Delhi (for OPD 
and at RML Hospital). 
30. Retired Divisional Accountants of the Indian Audit and Accounts Department and 
those whose pay and pension are entirely borne by the State governments. 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
31. PSU absorbees who had commuted 100% of their pension and have been 
restored 1/3rd portion of their pension after 15 years. 
32. Employees of Statutory Bodies/Autonomous Bodies of Central Govt. (including 
those who proceeded on deputation initia lly or were on deem ed deputation and 
then absorbed), who are in receipt of Central Civil Pension. 
33. Serving and retired Railway Audit Staff. 
34. Retired Divisional Accounts Officers and Di visional Accountants of the Office of 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
35. CISF personnel (and their families) and CAPF (Central Armed Police Forces) 
personnel posted in CGHS cities. 
36. Employees of Supreme Court Legal Services Committee Employees of India 
Pharmacopoeia Commission, and their families. 
37. Family and dependent members of a Central Govt. employee (a CGHS 
beneficiary) who stay back in CGHS co vered area after posting of the employee 
to N.E. region (including Sikkim), Andaman & Nicobar Lakshadweep or 
Ladakh region and CAPF personnel post ed in Left Wing Extremist areas, on 
payment of annual CGHS contribution in advance. 
38. Defence Industrial Employees of Nava l Dockyard Central Ordnance Depot and 
AFMSD, in Mumbai. 
 
Eligibility Criterion 
"Residence" alone (and not the Headquarters) is the criterion for determining 
eligibility of a Central Government servant  for availing medical facilities under the 
Central Government Health Scheme. Thus, Central Government employees and their 
family members etc., residing in any of the notified cities, are covered under the 
scheme. 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सभापित जी, मेरे ĢÌन से पहले, ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी ने एक जवाब मȂ 
फरमाया था िक यहां से जो िदशािन
 दȃश जाते हȅ, उनमȂ राज्य सरकार का जो रवैया है, वह थोड़ा 
लचर है। दूसरा, 2010 का कोई कानून है, उसके  मुतािबक भारत सरकार ने सरकारी और िनजी 
क्षेतर् की सभी मान्यताĢाÃत िचिकत्सा पǉितयȗ क े संबंध मȂ आम लोगȗ को Îव ाÎथ्य की सेवाओं क े 
संबध मȂ राहत िमले, उसके  बारे मȂ िदशािनदȃश जारी कर िदए थे।  सभापित महोदय, अभी मंतर्ी जी 
ने बताया िक ÎवाÎथ्य राज्य का िवषय है।  मȅ आपके  माफर् त यह आगर्ह करना चाहूँगा िक भारत 
सरकार जो क ु छ लागू कर
ती है, यहां से जो आदेश जाते हȅ, फरमान जाते हȅ और सरकार जो 
implement करना चाहती है, वह राज्य सरकार क े माफर् त करती है।  मȅ मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना 
चाहता हूँ िक आप यहां से राज्
य सरकारȗ को जो िदशा िनदȃश जारी करते हȅ, अगर राज्य सरकारȂ 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
57

 
 
आपके  उस िदशािनदȃश का पालन नहीं कर रही हȅ, तो क्या आपने कोई ऐसा तंतर् िवकिसत िकया 
है, mechanism develop िकया है, िजसके  माध्यम से आप राज्य सरकारȗ पर िनयंतर्ण रखȂ, 
उनकी िनगरानी करȂ और िजस मंशा से आपने राज्य सरकारȗ को िलखा है, आपकी वह मंशा पूरी 
हो?  मȅ इनसे यह जानना चाहता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊ
याण मंतर्ी (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा):  महोदय, माननीय सदÎय क े ĢÌन 
से एक ध्विन आती है िक क Ȃ दर् सरकार अपनी पॉिलसीज़ क े बारे मȂ बोलती है और Ģदेश सरकार 
लचर है। यह शÅद उन्हȗने उपयोग िकया। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: इन्हȗने आपको quote िकया, परन्तु लचर शÅद use नहीं िकया था। 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा:  महोदय, मȅ इसीिलए correct
 कर रहा हूँ। मȅने ऐसा कभी नहीं कहा।  मȅने 
यह कहा िक the capaci
ty of the State has to incr ease as far as the implementation for 
the utilization of funds.  मȅ यहां पर दो बातȂ कहना चाहता हूँ। सभी Ģदेश सरकारȗ ने ÎवाÎथ्य 
को िनचले Îतर तक ले जाने मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान िकया है। इसके  िलए मȅ उनकी सराहना करता 
हूँ, उनको बधाई देता हूँ, उनको साधुवाद देता हूँ।  अभी 100 िदन का National Tuberculosis 
Elimination का Programme हु आ। उसमȂ हमारा दो लाख टारगेट था, Tuberculosis से पीिड़त 
हमारे जो लोग पकड़ मȂ नहीं आ रहे हȅ, उनको screen
 करना, उनको ढ ूंढ़ कर िनकालना। जब 
इस काम मȂ हमारे Îटेट्स लगे, तो Tuberculosis क े 7 लाख से ज्यादा cases िनकल गए। तो 
िनचले Îतर पर यह हमारी effecti
vity है। कोरोना की महामारी आई।  इसमȂ कोई भी Western 
country 60-70  परसȂट से ज्यादा vaccination नहीं कर सका।  मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह भारत 
है और वे Îटेट्स हȅ, िजन्हȗने िनचले Îतर पर काम िकया िक 220 करोड़ do se और double dose 
with booster लगे। यह िकसने िकया? And what are the areas? Areas are like Lahaul 
Spiti, Ladakh, Gadchiroli, Bastar, Narayanpur. ये सब difficult areas हȅ, एकदम दूरदराज 
क े areas हȅ। यहां भी हमारे workers ने पहुंच कर क े vaccination िकया। इसिलए यहाँ 
implementation का part बहुत अच्छा है। हमारे सभी Îटेट्स ने leprosy elimination मȂ, Kala 
Azar elimination मȂ और सभी कामȗ मȂ नीचे Îतर पर बहुत अच्छा काम िकया है। लेिकन हमȂ िजस 
चीज मȂ तकलीफ आ रही है, वह फ ं ड मȂ है। फ ं ड की capacity of utilization मȂ उनको और जोर 
देने की जरू
रत है।  मȅ माननीय सदÎय को बताना चाहूँगा िक हमारे हर Ģोगर्ाम क े बारे मȂ, समय-
समय पर उनके  साथ हमारी वातार् भी होती रहती है, video conferencing भी होती रहती है,  
Health Minister से बातचीत करके , जहां-जहां, जो-जो कमी रहती है, उस पर हम reporting 
भी लेते हȅ और उनको हम financially and technically support भी करते हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Su
pplementary No.2, Shri Ramji Lal Suman. 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन:  सभापित जी, जो सरकारी ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाएं हȅ, उनकी हालत अच्छी नहीं 
है।  आप AIIMS को देख लȂ। चाहे कोई िकतना भी serious patient हो, उसको यहां महीनȗ तक 
बैड नहीं िमल पाता।  पिरणाम यह होता है िक बीमार आदमी तो खत्म हो जाता है, लेिकन उसको 
िचिकत्सा सुिवधाएं नहीं िमल पातीं।  इसका पिरण
ाम यह होता है िक िफर वह िनजी हॉिÎपटल मȂ 
जाता है। 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
सभापित जी, िनजी हॉिÎपटÊस मȂ fees क े जो rate हȅ, उनकी कोई सीमा नहीं है, मयार्दा नहीं है।  
मȅ आपके  माफर् त माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहूँगा िक जो िनजी हॉिÎपटÊस हȅ, ये आपके  
रहमोकरम पर िजन्दा हȅ, आप इनको संचालन मȂ मदद करते हȅ... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjour
ned to meet at 2.00 p.m., today. 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
] 
 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair 
 
GOVERNMENT BILLS 
 
$The Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025- Contd.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, further consideration of the Motion for consideration 
of the Protection of Interests in Aircraft  Objects Bill, 2025 moved by Shri Kinjarapu 
Rammohan Naidu on the 28th March, 2025.  माननीय संजय क ुमार झा।   
 
                                                            
$ Further discussion continued on a motion moved on 28.03.2025. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
59

 
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा (िबहार): आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, The Protection of Interests in 
Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025   एक बहुत ही important Bill है, क्यȗिक देश मȂ बहुत सारी 
एयरलाइंस हȅ और एक perception है  िक वे सब जहाज खरीदकर ही लाती हȅ, जबिक करीब 
90% एयरकर्ाÄट्स लीज़ पर ली जाती हȅ। इसका मतलब यह है िक एयरलाइंस क े पास अिधकांश 
िवमान अपने नहीं होते, बिÊक वे इन िवमानȗ को ली
ज़ क ंपिनयȗ से िकराए पर लेती हȅ।  ये अक्सर 
आयरलȅड, हांगकांग, दुबई और िंसगापुर जैसे देशȗ से इन एयरकर्ाÄट्स को लीज़ पर लेकर आती 
हȅ।  यह सही भी है और right reason
 भी है।  हवाई जहाज खरीदना एक बहुत बड़ा िवǄीय िनणर्य 
है।  यह एयरलाइंस क े िलए एक challenging investment होता है। जैसे, एयरबस 320, बोइंग 
777, 787 और 737 की  कीमत 700 करोड़  से 1,100 करोड़ रुपए  तक होती है। यहाँ बहुत सारी 
एयरलाइंस बंद हो गईं, उनको Îटाटर् िकया गया, लेिकन वे िफर बंद हो गईं और अब दो ही 
एयरलाइंस हȅ। एयर इंिड
या और इंिडगो क े अलावा अब 60% से ज्यादा शेयर एक ही एयरलाइन 
क े पास है और largely वही पूरी मा कȃ ट को लेकर चलती है। एयरलाइन क े िलए leasing एक  
बेहतर िवकÊप होता है, क्यȗिक इसमȂ primary investment से बचने मȂ सहायता िमलती है और 
GIFT City  िवमान लीिंजग क ंपिनयȗ को 10 साल क े िलए कर मȂ छू ट भी देती है। GIFT  City  अभी 
गुजरात मȂ आया है। DGCA  ने  GIFT City  मȂ registered leasers को  िवमान लीज पर लेने या 
इंपोटर् करने मȂ prior approval से छू ट दी है। To some extent, this has worked. Since 2019, 
more than 26 aircraft leasing entities in cluding some global players have been 
registered there. However, on ly a handful of these estab lished have actually engaged 
in leasing transaction. लेिकन, अब सरकार इस िÎथित को बदलना चाहती है, तािक भारत का 
िवमान लीिंजग क्षेतर् वैिÌव क  मानकȗ क े अनुरूप  और िनवेशकȗ क े िलए आकषर्क बन सके । This Bill 
gives the lessor something they have wanted for years. Leasers का सबसे बड़ा डर यह 
था िक अगर वे िकसी एयरलाइन को िवमान िकराए पर देते हȅ और वह एयरलाइन िदवािलया हो 
जाए, तो उनको वहाँ से िवमान िनकालने मȂ बहुत लंबा टाइम लग जाता था और उनको अपने 
िवमान वापस पाने क े िलए लीगल मैटर बहुत लंबा होता था, जैसा िक पहले Kingfisher, Jet 
Airways an
d Go First Airlines क े मामले मȂ हुआ। उसमȂ leasers अपने िवमानȗ को वापस नहीं ले 
पाए। हम लोग एयरपोट् सर् पर देखते थे िक वहाँ एक लाइन मȂ Ãलेन्स खड़ी होती थीं, क्यȗिक वे 
tribunal मȂ जाते थे और उसमȂ लंबे समय तक फ ैसला नहीं हो पाता था। इस नये िवधेयक क े आने 
क े बाद अगर कोई एयरलाइ न िडफाÊट करती है, तो leaser क ेवल दो महीने क े भीतर अपना 
िवमान वापस ले सकता है। इसके  अलावा, िकसी भी िववाद मȂ tribunal न जाकर सीधे हाई कोटर् 
भी जाया जा सकता है।    
सर, मुझे इसमȂ एक इंपȘटȂट इÌयू यह लगा िक leasing की मदद से एयरलाइन एक बड़े 
कजर् से बचती है और आज leasing Ëयापार का वैिÌवक आकार बहुत बड़ा हो गया है।   जैसा मȅने 
कहा िक इंिडया मȂ भी 90 परसȂट ÃलȂस लीज पर ली हुई है, यानी वे कम खरीदी गई हȅ।  6  साल 
पहले, 2019 क े अपने बजट भाषण मȂ फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर ने िवमान leasing उǏोग मȂ Ģवेश की 
घोषणा की थी और यह कदम भारतीय एयरलाइंस क े िलए एक बेहतरीन अवसर है।  अब उन्हȂ 
िवमान लीज पर लेने क े िलए दूसरे देशȗ पर िन भर्र नहीं रहना पड़ेगा, जैसा िक ऐसे तीन-चार 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
क ंटर्ीज़ हȅ, जहाँ से वे िवमान लेकर आती हȅ। अब भारत मȂ भी एयरलाइन अपने घरेलू िवमान 
लीिंजग बाजार से िवमान ले सकती है, िजससे उन्हȂ लागत मȂ कमी और अिधक Îवतंतर्ता िमलेगी। 
इसके  अलावा, जो नए िवधेयक हȅ, अगर इस वज ह से, क्यȗिक यहां पर यह फ ैिसिलटी नहीं थी, 
इसिलए िपछले साल यूनाइटेड िंकगडम िÎथत एिवएशन विकȊ ग गर्ुप (AWG) ने लीजरȗ क े िलए 
कम सुरक्षा क े कारण भारत की रेिंटग को हाई िरÎक मȂ डाउनगर्ेड कर िदया था। 
इसका असर यह हुआ िक भारतीय एयरलाइन क े िलए लीिंजग करना बहुत महंगा हो गया
। 
अब िवधेयक लागू होने क े साथ …(समय की घंटी)…  AWG ने भारत की रेिंटग को मीिडयम िरÎक 
जुिरिडक्शन मȂ िफर से अपगर्ेड कर िदया है। जब यह िवधेयक कानून बन जाएगा, तो भारत की 
रेिंटग और भी बेहतर हो जाएगी। लेिकन मȅ मंतर्ी जी से एक बात जरू
र कहना चाहूंगा, for 
instance, European banks support the leas ing business in Ireland; similarly, the 
Government-owned Temasek Holdings and Singaporean banks support leasing from 
Singapore.  भारत मȂ इस तरह का कोई Ģावधान नहीं है, क्यȗिक बȅक िवमानन से जुड़ी िकसी भी 
चीज को लोन देने मȂ reluctant रहता है। इसका पिरणाम यह है िक GIFT िसटी (Gujarat 
International Finance Tec-City) मȂ काम कर रहे lessor को भी िवदेशी फ ंिंडग पर िनभर्र करना 
पड़ता है। इसिलए, इस पर िवचार करना चािहए िक यिद financial institutions  समथर्न कर 
सकते हȅ, …(समय की घंटी)…  तो यह लाभकारी होगा। 
मȅ एक िमनट मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत करूं गा। अब, क्यȗिक यह तो तकनीकी बा त है जो आप 
िबल ला रहे हȅ, लेिकन मȅ िबहार से आता हूं और वहां क े तीन मुǈे बहुत महत्वपूणर् हȅ। इस बार क े 
बजट मȂ आदरणीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने पटना क े पा स  एक गर्ीनफीÊड इंटरनेशनल एयरपोटर् की 
घोषणा की है। यिद उसकी लोके शन तत्काल फाइनल करके  उस पर काम शुरू  हो जाता, तो यह 
िबहार क े िलए बहुत लाभकारी होता। वतर्मान मȂ िबहार मȂ कोई भी पूणर् रूप  से कायर्शील 
अंतरर
ाÍटर्ीय एयरपोटर् नहीं है। गया मȂ एक है, लेिकन वह पूरी तरह फ ंक्शनल नहीं है, और पटना 
क े पास तो है ही नहीं, कोई बड़ा रनवे भी नहीं है। दरभंगा और पूिर्णया, दोनȗ एयरपोटर् एक साथ 
announce हुए थे। दरभंगा फ ंक्शनल है, लेिकन पूिर्णया अब तक फ ंक्शनल नहीं हो पाया है। 
…(समय की घं
टी)… यिद इसे भी शीघर् चालू कर िदया जाए, तो यह बहुत अच्छा होगा। दरभंगा 
एयरपोटर् एक सफल एयरपोटर् सािबत हुआ है। मुख्यमंतर्ी जी ने वहां और भूिम अि धगर्हण की 
Ģिकर्या शुरू  कर दी है और मुख्य सिचव की ओर से ĢÎताव भी आया है िक इसे अंतरराÍटर्ीय 
एयरपोटर् घोिषत िकया जाए। यिद इस पर िवचार कर इसे फाइनल कर िदया जाए, तो यह अत्यंत 
लाभदायक होगा। 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद! 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: Ǜी सदानंद महालू शेट तानवड़े। 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa) :  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I 
stand before this House today to extend my support for the Protection of Interest in 
Aircraft Objects Bill 2025 and to emphasize its significance to India's aviation sector.  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
61

 
 
Sir, this Bill seeks to provide legal backing to the Convention of International Interest 
in Mobile Equipment, Cape Town Conven tion 2001, and its Protocol on Matters 
Specific to Aircraft Equipment, ensuring their enforceability within our jurisdiction. I 
would like to add that, while India signed the Cape Town Convention in 2008, the 
absence of ratification has so far prevented its provisions from being legally binding. 
Therefore, the introduction of this Bill will legally enact the Cape Town Convention in 
India. It marks a crucial step towards addr essing this gap, strengthening investors' 
confidence, and enhancing India's global standing in the aviation sector. 
As one of the world's largest growing aviation markets, India's air travel sector 
has experienced rapid growth, with an estimated market size of $13.89 billion in 2024, 
expected to reach $26.8 billio n by 2030. This growth ha s led to aircraft leasing 
becoming an important aspect of the Indian aviation industry. It is a practice in which 
airlines and aviation operators rent airc raft from leasing companies rather than 
purchasing them. 
To date, India lacks specific laws dealing with aircraft leasin g and financing of 
airplanes, which may involve different count ries. With this new law, airplanes will be 
available at competitive rates to airlines and aviation operations. Currently, lessors 
face higher risks in India due to uncertainti es in repossession rights, in case an airline 
defaults on payment. This risk forces lesso rs to charge higher risk premiums, adding 
extra costs to cover potential losses, making leasing more expensive for Indian 
airlines. These higher leasing costs are ultimately passed on to passengers in the form 
of higher airfares. Therefore, if the Bill is passed in Parliament, it will ratify the Cape 
Town Convention, automatically guaranteeing the rights of lessors to repossess their 
leased equipment, such as airframes, aircraft engines, and helicopters. This will bring 
down the cost of risk premium. 
Sir, this Bill seeks to enhance the leas ing framework in India, in line with 
international standards. Through this legi slation, costs are expected to decrease, 
accessibility to air travel will improve, and investment will be attracted, as India 
anticipates a surge in aircraft acquisition. Over 1,000 new aircraft by the end of this 
decade will further make air travel more affordable for the people of our country. 
 Sir, as a representative from Goa, I would say that Goa, which is a tourist 
destination, sees increasing footfall each year. I cannot overstate the importance of 
the Bill. During peak season, we all know  that air fares skyrocket, making travel 
unaffordable not only for tourists but also for Goa’s local residents who rely on air 
travel for work, medical needs, education and family visits. I believe, Sir, the high cost 
of leasing aircraft along with limited availability directly contributes to these  inflated air 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
fares. Sir, an essential aspect of this Bill is its  provisio n for financial transparency and 
accountability. The proposed legislation mand ates that debtors must maintain and 
submit records of dues related to the ownershi p or use of an aircraft or aircraft object 
to the Directorate General of Civil Aviation . This requirement will ensure that leasing 
transactions remain transparent, preventing dispute over unpaid dues and fostering 
greater confidence among lessors, creditors and regulatory bodies.    
 Sir, from 2014, after Modi Government came to power, there is more 
development in all sectors including civil aviation.  अगर हम देखȂ, तो  the total number 
of airports in India were 74 before  2014.  अभी पूरे देश मȂ 159 एयरपोट्सर् बने हȅ।    Goa is a 
very small State with a population of around 16 or 17 lakhs. गोवा मȂ दो एयरपोट्सर् हȅ।  
North Goa मȂ अलग है और South Goa मȂ अलग है। Passengers’ growth देखȂ, तो  
Passengers’ growth from  January, 2024, to December, 2024,  was 161 million as 
against  152 million during the previous year. That is, there is a growth of 6.1 per cent.  
The number of aircraft for sc heduled operation has increased from 400 in 2014 to 836 
as on 28.2.2025. Through Regional Connecti
 vity Service, that is, RCS-UDAN, उड़े देश 
का आम नागिरक - air travel has become more accessible to people, by connecting 88 
airports including 13 heliports and two water aerodromes. More than 148.62 lakh 
people have availed benefit of the UDAN Scheme since its inception. 
 The Krishi Udan Scheme मȂ देखȂ, तो टोटल agriculture waste होता है, इसके  िलए 
क ृिष उड़ान क े माध्यम से यह facility agricultural products क े िलए की है और उसका फायदा 
देश क े farmers को हो रहा है। Operation Ganga क े माध्यम से हमने देखा िक जब यूकर् े न का 
युǉ हुआ, more than 22,500 In
dian nationals we re safely rescued from Ukraine by 
operating 90 evacuation flights from 1 st February, 2022 to 11 th March, 2022.  अगर हम 
Digi Yatra मȂ देखȂ, through facial recognition tec hnology, any traveller may pass 
through various check points at the ai rport through paperless and contactless 
processing using facial features to establish  the identity. देश क े 24 एयरपोट्सर् पर यह 
फ ै सेिलटी उपलÅध की है। मुझे गवर् है िक गोवा का जो मोपा इंटरनेशनल एयरपोटर् है, उस पर भी 
यह फ ै सेिलटी दी गई है। As regards the leasing of aircra fts, with the enables in place, 
from zero base in 2014 as of 31 st December, 2024,  33 aircra ft leasing entities have 
registered in GIFT-IFSC for undertaking aircraft leasing business. 
 अगर हम इसमȂ कागȘ का देखȂ, तो कागȘ मȂ भी काफी सुधार और ज्यादा िबजनेस हो रहा 
है। India Re Electio n ICAO Council मȂ during 41st General Assembly of ICAO, India has 
been re-elected to the ICAO  Council(2022-25) under Part II comprising of countries 
which make the largest contribution to the pr ovision of facilities for international civil 
air navigation.  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
63

 
 
Ease of Doing -- ‘ भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024’ पास होने क े बाद जो िरफॉमर् हुआ 
है, उसका लेिजÎलेचर िरफॉमर् हुआ है, और modernizing India’s aviation sector मȂ भी काफी 
सुधार हुआ है। सर, अगर हम देखȂ, तो यह जो यह िबल है, it is a very important Bill. मȅ इसके  
िलए हमारे मंतर्ी जी का अि
भनंदन करता हूं और हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को भी धन्यवाद देता हूं।  
 Sir, all of this tells us how meritorious this Bill is. It will provide much-needed 
statutory framework to deal with the legal ob stacles in the event of insolvency of an 
airline company as well as make aviation financing and leasing transaction simpler and 
certain. It will future improve contract en forceability and provide the creditors/lessors 
with a way out to either take back the ai rcraft objects or have their dues paid. 
Therefore, I support the Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025.  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala) : Thank you Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for giving 
me this opportunity. Sir, since we are a signatory to an important international 
Convention, we have to follow the same and we have to implement it in our country. 
We also have to protect the interests of passengers, creditors and all the stakeholders 
related to the industry.  
Sir I take this opportunity to raise a fe w questions/queries, through you, to the 
Minister. The first thing is : Do we have any data related to the total credits of Indian 
investors, namely, the banks and other fi nancial institutions? Now we are talking 
about an international obligation. Yes, of course, we have to implement the same.  
But the point is that we know one gentleman who was a Member of this august House 
who came to the House with the su pport of a former Prime Minister  and who was the 
leader of that Party for some time. Later on, he looted our country and its people and 
he is now somewhere in London. People lik e Mallya and others are there. So what 
about the liability created by these people? Ar e we going to solve this? When we talk 
about international issues and international cr editors, are we in a position to help our 
banks to regain its own money? It is a very serious issue. So my request is that we 
have to reconsider the criteria because peop le will come and say that we are ready t
 o 
offer airline business, and if the Government is allowing it without understanding their 
capacity, then, later on, we have to pay th e price for it. So please consider this 
particular point.   Secondly, the Civil Avia tion Ministry is having a very meagre amount 
as budget allocation as compared to other Ministries. Now the Director General of 
Civil Aviation will have to function more. There are many duties assigned to him. So, 
do you think that with this limited amount , he can perform properly? I don't think so. 
So, we need to enhance the budgetary allocation also. Otherwise, the entire area is 
left for private players only. The airline routes, price and everything  else as has been 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
pointed out to the main speakers, it is un der the control of private players only. The 
Aviation Ministry, in a way,  is a mute spectator. It cannot dictate any company. For 
example, now, when we talk about the plig ht of the passengers, I fear, tomorrow the 
private airlines may charge us even for us ing washrooms. Now they are charging for 
seats. Tomorrow, there is every chance  of taking money from us for using 
washrooms. So, this is a sorry state of affairs of the poor passengers. How you are 
going to tackle these types of issues? When we all are in agreement of implementing 
the international Convention, we have to take care of this. ...(Time-bell rings)...  
Finally, Sir, whenever we peop le from Kerala stand up to talk on the Civil Aviation 
Ministry, the Minister thinks that we will raise the issues related to Kannur International 
Airport.  
 I do not want to talk much about that. So many people, so many organizations 
and so many politicians have already po inted out the issues related to Kannur 
International Airport. It is public money, people's money. So, political consideration 
should not be there. We have every righ t to get it. So, please give Point-of-Call 
status to Kannur International Airport. Thank you.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद। Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद – अनुपिÎथत। Ǜी ए. ए. रहीम।   
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala): Sir, the Bill seeks to provid e a legal framework to protect 
the rights of lessors and financiers in aircra ft transactions. However, this Bill should 
be discussed in the broader perspective of how it affects the lives of common people. 
The Union Government has already opened the Indian aviation sector to Indian 
corporates. My colleague, Comrade Sandosh Kumar P, has already mentioned the 
same here. Now, through this Bill, it is further opening the doors for international 
corporates as well. That is my concern. The hon. Minister must clarify how this Bill is 
going to benefit the common people. Air tr avel is becoming increasingly inaccessible 
for the ordinary citizens. That is my concern. That is not only my concern, so many of 
my colleagues have already mentioned the same concern in this House.  A study by 
Airports Council International (ACI) reveal s that India has recorded the second 
highest increase in domestic airfares in Asia-Pacific and West Asian regions. So, 
what is the take of the Government in this  regard? See, there is  43 per cent rise in 
terms of fare, according to this Report. Ca n you imagine the plight of expatriates in 
the Gulf region? As you know that we are representing Kerala, a lot of our brothers 
and sisters have been working over there.  Actually, can you imagine the plight of 
those NRIs? They work there throughout the year and only occasionally get leave. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
65

 
 
Yesterday was the Eid. On ho ly Ramadan day, on Onam and so many other events, 
they can come back to their homeland. But, unfortunately, the NRIs, the Pravasis, 
cannot come even if they get leave. Even if  they get leave, they cannot come due to 
exorbitant hike of travel fare. So, what is the role of the Union Government? …( Time-
Bell rings)… Sir, just a minute; I have time. Ca n you imagine the plight of these 
passengers? Another thing is that the Gove rnment is making laws in favour of 
corporates, but where are the policies that protect the interest of common citizens? I 
would like to flag an important report. The 356th Report of the Standing Committee 
on Transport, Tourism and Culture recommended measures to control airfare and 
make air travel accessible to the common man. What is the Government’s role? What 
is the Government’s take? Another thing is regarding the Kannur International Airport. 
This is an issue for Kerala. You have given the Point-of-Call status to Mopa Airport in 
Goa, which is a non-metro airport. …( Time-Bell rings)… Despite all infrastructure, 
they did not allow Point-of-Call status for Kannur International Airport. Hon. Minister, 
please look into it. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Haris Beeran. 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala) :  Sir, this legislation is a very necessary legislation.  I 
agree to that fact. It will bring clarity for the international lessors and others on what is 
to be done if there is a default. But, let us understand that this particular legislation 
has been brought about not b ecause of any foresight but under the pressure of the 
crisis triggered by the insolv ency of a lot of airlines, th e latest being the Go First 
Airlines; plus the global downgrade of India's aviation leasing environment.   
Now, through you, Sir, I would like the hon. Minister to particularly note two 
points. The first point is that Section 9 of the Bill states that in case of an 
inconsistency between a provision of this Ac t and any other law, for the time being in 
force, the provisions of this Act shall prev ail to the extent of such inconsistency.  
Now, this Bill, in fact, has been brought about because of certain provisions of the 
IBC, the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, because once there is an Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code proceedings, then a moratorium creeps in, and once the 
moratorium is there, you would not be able  to take your machin es out.  But, the 
problem is about the IBC code.  There is a provision under the IBC in Section 238.  
Section 238 of the IBC says, “The provisions of this Code shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the 
time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.”  So, the 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
IBC says that notwithstanding any other law, the IBC will prevail. Section 9 of the 
present Bill states that notwithstanding any other law, our law will prevail. Now, our 
law has been brought in because of the provis ions of the IBC. Therefore, I think there 
is some inconsistency between the provisions  of our Bill and the IBC. My suggestion 
will be that you can incorporate in Section 9 of our Bill that notw ithstanding anything 
contained in the IBC specifically, so that you can get over this particular 
inconsistency. That is my suggestion to the hon. Minister.   
Now, I come to Section 9(3) of the Bill.  It preserves India's sovereign right to 
arrest or detain an airc raft, which is a very welc ome change, but I urge the 
Government to clarify how in practice this  right will be exercised in the face of 
aggressive international enforcement by le ssors. Will Indian public sector dues and 
the claims of airport operators and empl oyees receive equal priority and swift 
resolution, or will they be left struggling while aircraft are swiftly deregistered and 
removed from Indian soil?   
This particular legislation is, in fact, for the purpose of the prosperity of the 
airline industry. Now, for the airline industry to prosper, our airports also will have to 
prosper. In Kerala, there are two airports. One is the Calicut Airport. Now, it is a time 
for the Hajj pilgrims to go for Hajj. The difference in fare between the Calicut 
International Airport and Kannur Airport, which is just 80 kilometers away, is Rs. 
40,000.  You are charging Rs. 40,000 more from the Calicut Airport.  Calicut Airport is 
the place where you have the Hajj Embarkation Point, Hajj terminal and everything.  
Now, this particular inconsistency is be cause you are not allowing the wide-bodied 
aircrafts to land at Calicut Airport. So al so is the problem with the Kannur Airport.  
Here, you can land wide-bodied aircraft, but the problem is that you do not give point 
of call status over there. So, if you want the airline industry to prosper over there, 
along with these legislations, I beseech the ho n. Minister through you, Sir, that these 
measures also should be taken. Thank you, Sir.      
    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju. He will speak in 
Telugu.  
 
SHRI RAVI CHANDRA VADDIRAJU (TELANGANA) : “
&Hon. Deputy Chairman Sir, 
thank you for allowing me to speak on the Pr otection of Interests in Aircraft Objects 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
67

 
 
Bill, 2025. I believe this Bill represents a significant legal reform with the potential to 
transform India's aviation sector. It is not merely a legal change; it is a decisive step 
toward positioning India as a leader in the international aviation industry. The Bill aims 
to secure the future of In dia's aviation sector, enhan ce international investors' 
confidence, and make air travel more accessible to Indians. 
Sir, through you, I would like to bring to  the attention of this august House the 
current situation of the aviation sector in  India. Last year, 376.43 million passengers 
traveled through Indian airports. By 2030, India is expected to become the third-
largest aviation market in the world, followi ng the United States and China. Airlines 
such as Indigo and Air India have already placed orders for over 1,000 new aircraft, 
and the number of airports is projected to increase from 153 to 3 50. I consider this a 
significant achievement, and I congratulate  the hon. Aviation Minister for this 
progress. However, I would like to highlight an im portant issue concerning 
Telangana. Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) in Hyderabad is one of the major 
airports in the country, yet, there are currently no direct flights from Hyderabad to the 
United States. In the financial year 2023- 24, 1.02 million passengers traveled from 
Hyderabad to the United States. Notably, 40 percent of passengers traveling to the 
U.S. from Delhi are from Telangana and An dhra Pradesh. Unfortunately, the direct 
flight service on the Chicago-Hyderabad route, which operated at 90 percent 
occupancy, has been canceled. Therefore, I ur ge the hon. Minister to restore direct 
flight services from Hyderabad to cities su ch as New York, Dallas, Chicago, and San 
Francisco. 
Sir, on behalf of the Bharat Rashtr a Samithi (BRS) Party, I would like to 
congratulate Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu, the hon. Minister of Civil Aviation, for 
reopening the Warangal airport, which was operational until the 1980s. Sir, the 
Bhadradri Kothagudem and Greenfield airports  are yet to receive full approval. Land 
has been acquired for the Greenfield airport at Jakranpalli, Nizamabad. Additionally, 
airports should also be constructed in Ramagundam and Adilabad. Under the 
leadership of Shri KCR, we have been ad vocating for these airports for the past ten 
years.  Our request to Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu, the hon. Minister of Civil 
Aviation, is to allocate these five requeste d airports to Telangana during his tenure. 
We believe this will contribute to the development of our State. 
Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu is a popular Telugu-speaking Minister, and 
we kindly request him to allocate these five requested airports to Telangana during his 
tenure. These developments will significantly contribute to the progress of Telangana. 
Furthermore, I would like to highlight that most students travelling to the United States 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
are from Hyderabad and Andhra Pradesh. Th erefore, I urge the Minister to restore 
direct flight services from Hyderabad to  the U.S. Once again, I thank the hon. 
Minister for the reopening of Warangal Airport and request him to consider my request 
for the other airports in Telangana. Thank you, Sir.” 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai – no t present.  Hon. Minister, 
Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu to reply to the discussion. 
 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION  (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU) : Mr. 
Deputy Chairman, Sir, around 16 Members have  participated in the discussion on this 
very important Bill, namely, the Protection of In terests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025.  I 
am glad that extensive interest has been shown by the hon. Members.  I would like to 
thank the hon. Members for giving suggest ions and participating intensely in the 
debate. The discussions were not limited to the Bill alone but more than that, and this 
shows the kind of passion that the civil aviation sector is invoking in all the Members 
of Parliament and also the citizens of the country.  
 I would like to put it on record that th e kind of progress th at we have achieved 
in civil aviation sector in the last ten year s was, definitely, not an easy task.  What we 
have achieved and the growth that we are seeing today was definitely not one day’s 
job.  Sir, I can definitely say that even though it was not one day’s job but it was the 
mission of one man, who is the Prime Minist er of this country, Shri Narendra Modi.  
Since 2014, when he became the Prime Minister  of this country, owing to the kind of 
support and the kind of vision with which he has encouraged and moved civil aviation 
sector in the country, we have been able to grow so much that we can now proudly 
say that we are the third-largest domestic civil aviation market in the whole world.   
Sir, I would like to share some numbers wi th the august House.  I keep saying 
this on every platform, incl uding the Parliament while answering the questions and 
also while attending important summits. In 2014, the total domestic passenger market 
that we had in this country was 60.7 million and where do we stand today in 2024!  It 
is 161.3 million. More than double growth in the domestic passenger market! If you 
add international passengers, this number was 43 million in 2014 while we are now at 
66.8 million in 2024. The number of aircrafts that were operating in the country in 2014 
was around 359 whereas today, we have 840 aircrafts operating in the country, 
making 4,000 journeys across the world every single day. 
 And, look at the number of airports . Just now some Members have also 
highlighted that number, which is 74.  From 74 airports in 2014, it has increased to a 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
69

 
 
staggering number of 159 in 20 25, and still counting. This is the kind of growth which 
no other country in the last ten years wo uld have witnessed. Many countries are 
similar to India in the financial stages. So me are having very similar conditions.  But 
the kind of growth that India has seen is because of the vision and the mission of one 
man, that is, our hon. Prime Minister, Narendra Modi ji. The year-on-year growth that 
civil aviation has seen is 9.7 per cent CA GR. Many Departments try to achieve this 
growth, but we can proudly sa y that the Civil Aviation has achieved this kind of 
growth. The mission behind the drive for our Prime Minister has also been one 
mantra, which is ‘ hawaai chappal se hawaai jahaaj ka safar ’. Many people have 
spoken about it. They might have different minds on why we are talking about it.  But, 
has that mantra ever been thought about before 2014? Why was it not spoken in such 
a way? Before 2014 also, we had civil aviation in the country. We  had planes moving 
in the country. We had aspirational citi zens of the country who wanted to dream 
about flying in the airplane.  But it was on ly after Narendra Modi ji came into picture 
that he envisioned that civil aviation should not be an exclusive way of travel, it should 
be an inclusive way of travel. Every one of th e country should aspire to travel by air.  
And that is where this mantra has propelled the Government to bring in many 
changes, to bring in many good schemes, so  that we can fulfill the ambitions, the 
aspirations, the dreams of the common man of  this country.  Just like a flight takes 
off, Narendra Modi ji wanted to give the 14 0 crore people of this country the wings to 
fly, the wings for their dreams to fly in this country. And we have done that through 
the UDAN scheme, Udey Desh Ka Aam Nagarik, a revolutionary scheme.  I would like 
to once again say that what we have do ne for civil aviation, what this NDA 
Government has done in the last 10 years for civil aviation, is not just renovation. 
There were many airports in the country we  wanted to renovate to increase the 
capacity. But it is not just renovation. What NDA Government has done for civil 
aviation is, it brought in a re volution in the country for civil aviation. That is what we 
have proudly done. That revolution was done through the airports, through the 
airlines. And it was a very challenging period also. A couple of big airlines exited the 
industry. Go Air and Jet Airways have gon e bankrupt. On the ot her side, you have 
seen Covid, which hit majorly the civil avia tion industry. At one point of time, all 
hundreds of planes moving in the country were just grounded. Even with these kinds 
of challenges, I have just given you the num bers, how exponentially civil aviation has 
grown in this country. So, I would once agai n use the floor of the House to thank our 
hon. Prime Minister for the continuous supp ort that he has given through his vision, 
for continuously encouraging us. In fact, you would see, the two Ministers, we are 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
both sitting here, the Minister for Civil Aviation and the Minister of State for Civil 
Aviation, Murlidhar Mohol ji, who comes from Pune, we are both very young today. 
The reason our Prime Minister has given us th e responsibility of driving civil aviation is 
he feels that civil aviation requires young  blood today.  Whatever growth we have 
seen in the last ten years is still the be ginning. We need new ideas. We need new 
ways of dealing with this. We need harmon ization with the international standards. 
And it is with that approach that the Govern ment is trying to keep the momentum that 
we have achieved in civil aviation and will continue to move it forward. One other 
major challenge that we see, which many pe ople also talk about, is the airfares.  
Airfares is not just an issue where we have one single point of approach by saying that 
we can do this, we can bring the airfares down. Civil aviation is a global subject 
today. We do domestic travel, but we do in ternational travel also. Flights travel from 
Delhi to New York. Flights travel from Mumbai  to Australia. So, it is the harmonization 
that is required across the international jurisdictions. 
 It was in 2001 when aircraft leasing business was also growing. That was when 
the international leasing industries, airlin es and Governments came together to do 
something more to harmonise the whole in dustry across countries. This was an issue 
which was majorly faced by the leasing indu stries. Because the lessor was sitting in 
one country; the banks, who were trying to f acilitate the lease, were sitting in another 
country; and the airlines which want to oper ate were sitting in another country. They 
all had multiple jurisdictions in their own co untries trying to deal with this leasing 
business. That became a challenge internationally for the airlines, the industry and the 
banking sector. It was in 2001 when th e Cape Town Convention happened. One of 
the reasons for this was just how to facili tate the leasing indu stry and bring all the 
countries on board and create a uniform legislation which everyone can follow.  There 
were three protocols which were discussed. One was re garding the space industry.  
The second was regarding the railway industry. And the other one was regarding the 
aircraft objects industry. In 2001, the Convention happened, protocols were 
discussed and deliberated and protocols were  also formulated. But India initially was 
not a signatory of this.  In 2001, everything happened. By 2005, pressure was building 
up on India that it also had to assent to  this Protocol and Convention because the 
leasing business was growing at that time.  I have to tell you that civil aviation is a very 
price-sensitive industry. We all want more planes to come into the industry and more 
planes to fly in our skies. But every plane is very, very expensive.  For you to purchase 
a plane as a company, it pu ts a lot of financial stress on your balance-sheets which 
was why there was a lot of encouragement towards the leasing industry. And around 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
71

 
 
this time -- 1990s and 2000s, a lot of nationalisation was happening with the air 
carriers -- they were all becoming privatis ed. There were many countries like France.  
You had British Airways which the Governme nt was holding before. They all were 
privatised. Once privatisation happened, the way they wanted to operate was through 
leasing model. In 2005, pressure started bu ilding up. India at that time was thinking 
how to bring the Cape Town Convention into e ffect in India also. It took the opinion of 
the Law Ministry at that time. The Law Minist ry was of the opinion that we don’t need 
to have a separate law in the country and we can go with ratifying it through the 
Cabinet itself. In 2007, the Cabinet ratified it. India signed the papers. It sent the 
declaration to the International Civil Aviation  Authority. And by 2008, things were in 
place. But we did not have any legislation ye t. We were just a signatory to the Cape 
Town Convention and the Aircraft Protocol. We had a small mechanism within 
ourselves that we agreed to have this ki nd of system in India. Things started 
happening and leasing business grew. In 2015, we had observed that there were 
some inconsistencies happening in the indu stry. In 2015, Spice Jet defaulted on a 
couple of lessors’ payments at that time. The lessors were very eager to get their 
money back. They had this IDERA Agreement which actually gives them the right to 
take back the aircraft in case of any default of payments. But when they were trying to 
invoke IDERA, the DGCA which is the offi cial authority to manage these kinds of 
things, they were of the opinion that ther e was no legislation which was backing them 
to invoke IDERA. At that time, the easiest  thing to do was to change the Aircraft 
Rules. Through the Aircraft Rules, the DGCA was given the power to invoke IDERA 
and a temporary solution was formulated at  that time. In 2016, the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code came into place which was dealing with insolvency and bankruptcy 
in a blanket way of all the companies. Afte r that in 2019, Jet Airways went bankrupt. 
But when Jet Airways went bankrupt and the NCLT wanted to put the moratorium, 
the lessors were a little bit aware of the picture what might happen.  They invoked 
IDERA and took all the planes. They deregi stered them through the DGCA and took 
them back. 
 So, what could have been a very big pr oblem at that time, because of the 
quick readiness of the lessors, we were able to avoid it. But, still, things were moving 
according to the rules and just the general signatory that we have. Then, GoAir also 
went bankrupt. When GoAir went bankrupt , the NCLT put a moratorium and it said 
this time DGCA won't get the planes dere gistered. So, many of the planes which 
were supposed to be taken back by the lessors were sitting on the ground. They were 
not being able to maintain the aircrafts.  So, there was general loss the industry had 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
felt. Now, from all these examples that I have mentioned, what was observed by the 
industry, the airlines, the banks and everyone else was that there was no proper 
legislation in the country. There were a lot of inconsistencies happening. There were a 
lot of interpretations from different peop le in a different way. So, there was no 
common legislation which was dealing with th e leasing industry. And this whole thing 
led to a drop in the Cape Town Conven tion Compliance Index, which is being 
maintained by Aviation Working Group acro ss the globe. More than 400 stakeholders 
are part of it and they maintain a score an d India's score went down to 50. Just to 
give an example on where we stand, Singap ore has up to 92 and the US has around 
90. Some of the countries, whic h really regularly deal with this leasing industry, try to 
maintain above 90. We were suddenly dropped to 50. Now, what this created was a 
ripple effect that once the score goes do wn, the leasing costs go up because nobody 
finds it more attractive to come to India and lease their planes. Now, if leasing costs 
go up and if you want to lease more planes , it becomes harder on you to lease these 
planes. If you have more hardships in l easing these planes, you will have less number 
of fleet operating; with less number of fleet  operating and more demand – the kind of 
demand we are setting on the other side in  the country – of thes e planes for having 
passengers travel on them, air prices also ri se up. So, everything is interlinked with 
one another. That is why, the whole reason we are bringing this Bill is to give force of 
law to the Cape Town Convention and the prot ocol. So, that is what it is; if you see 
the majority of the Act also, other than giving it the force of  law, it contains the Cape 
Town Convention, it contains the aircraft protocol, and the declaration which we are 
signing and abiding ourselves to both the Co nvention and the protocol as a signatory 
to International Civil Aviation Organization. That is the major gist of this. You can look 
at the airlines and their comments on how they feel about this  leasing industry 
business, which is going on. Air India ha s said that, upon enactment of this 
legislation, we improve India's complian ce score in AWG's outlook, making Indian 
airlines eligible for CTC discount, which will significantly reduce leasing costs by 
approximately 8 to 10 per cent. So, once by getting this Act into place, you are 
reducing the leasing cost by 8 to 10 per cent. Now, these are the costs which are 
going to trickle down to the passengers an d also the airfares. That is why this 
becomes very, very important for us. ...( Interruptions)... Indigo also! It said that in 
the absence of legislation, it might be possible that other lessors may reduce their 
exposure in India or increase their pricing further between anothe r 5 and 10 per cent, 
over and above, and to the increase of 15 per cent. They also have a very similar 
picture in mind. Akasa Air has said that in the absence of legislation, lease rates may 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
73

 
 
increase by an additional USD 15,000 per month, and SLB gains drop by an additional 
USD 1.5 million per aircraft over the already higher rates. So, they all are indicating 
that if you don't have the legislation, you are basically paying high rates, and you are 
at a disadvantage compared to other countr ies. This is the time civil aviation is 
growing in India. You need to have proper le gislations in place so that we can bring in 
more planes into the country. So, this was the idea from the industry also. One of the 
Members asked as to how the industry is reacting and how the airlines are reacting to 
this legislation. They are very eagerly waitin g that as soon as we pass this Bill here, 
followed by the Lok Sabha and it becomes an Act, they will be getting the advantage, 
through which, they can trickle down th e advantage to the passengers of this 
country. More than that, I have talked ab out the AWG score also, which is up to 50 
now.  
 There is a slight improvement up to 62.  But we are aiming to reach up to 90 so 
that the leasing business also flourishes. Also, with the support of our hon. Prime 
Minister, Gift City, was done in Gujarat. We  also have specific incentives which were 
given so that we can have the leasing industry in the country itself. Now, one, you can 
have the leasing industry outs ide where Ireland takes a very  good advantage.  Ireland 
has a very good leasing industry hub in the whole world. Dubai has also taken a 
certain lead in that industry. Singapore also  has taken a certain lead in this industry. 
Now, our hon. Prime Minister has come to the thought as to why should we not have 
our own leasing industry. We are leasing so many planes every year.  I have talked 
about 840 planes operating in  our Indian skies and 86.4 pe r cent of those planes are 
in the leasing model today. The airlines pr efer to go into the leasing model. Now, 
when they lease, they go to other countries and lease. When you go to other 
countries and lease, forex trading also happ ens there.  So, you lose out on that. The 
costs added up in the forex also come down  basically onto the passenger. Therefore, 
our Prime Minister thought th at we should have the leas ing industry here and, based 
on that, many incentives have been given in the Gift City like exemption on income tax 
for the sale of equity shares of IFSC entiti es involved in aircraft leasing subject to 
specific conditions, exemption of dividend income for units engaged in aircraft leasing 
at the IFSC and 100 per cent tax holiday for first ten years of operations. So, many of 
these incentives have been clubbed togeth er so that we can encourage the local 
industry to also cater for leasing business. Through this, we have done many 
significant strides also. 33 aircraft leasing entities have been registered by January 
31
st, 2025, leasing 146 aviation assets includ ing 75 aircrafts and 71 engines.  So, we 
have made significant progress in this industry.  But, everywhere, when we talk about 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
leasing in the Indian landscape, everyone  requested asking when we are going to 
have the legislation. It is because no matte r how far you travel down this road, always 
the roadblock that they seem to face or th e doubt, the confusion which they seem to 
raise was because of not having the legal backing to this kind of legislation.  
Therefore, this is what we aim to bring through this Act.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka) : Indian leasing companies or foreign leasing 
companies?  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  It is both. We are not differentiating between 
Indian and foreign leasing companies but this is definitely going to give a boost for the 
Indian leasing companies also because for the Indian leasing companies, -- just now 
Sanjayji has also mentioned – anyway, the wh ole backing comes from the banking 
industry. That is where the money comes from . Even for the banking industry, it is for 
them to see how to support this industry becau se for them risk is also involved.  For 
them, it is important to have legislation in place because without the legislation, how 
will the industry perform? Take one other example, the Securitization and Asset 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Instructions Act, 
2002. This SARFAESI Act does not apply to  aircraft. Again, there was a need for 
some Act to give that backing so that th e banking industry feels that they can be a 
little more profitable in entering into the aircraft business. So, the CTC Bill, which is 
this Bill, is intended to give  protection to security interests by which financiers like the 
banks would be comfortable in financing avia tion assets also. So, there are multiple 
benefits that we are getting just by giving legal force of law to the whole Cape Town 
Convention. Through this, we also see that the whole leasing industry is also going to 
increase. There are a lot of requirements from the airline side also, just like I have 
mentioned, how they all want to improve the leasing business in the country. There 
are many different things which are depe ndent on the leasing like the sale and 
leaseback model, which is another part of the leasing industry. Th e airlines are also 
trying to purchase the aircraft first, then sell it and then lease back from the same guy.  
This is a model which Indigo has been su ccessfully operating today. Out of 397 
aircraft that they have bought, 350 have been put unde r the SLB model, where they 
have sold these 350 back to someone and th en leased from there. The industry and 
the leasing processes which are gaining moment um all need this kind  of Act in place.  
Definitely, this is going to give a lot of push to the whole civil aviation in the country. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
75

 
 
 And on top of this, many other questi ons have also been raised during the 
discussion on this by many of the Member s. An important one is, how it deals with 
the inconsistencies of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code because that is the major 
relation this one has. IBC code, in general,  deals with the insolvency and bankruptcy 
of companies. They have the NCLT and they  have a certain way of dealing with it.  
But now with aircraft also coming into that ambit, it created a lot of confusion for the 
lessors who wanted to lease. A simple wa y of explaining it is—what was happening 
before, if not for the Bill—now if you are tryi ng to rent a house from an owner and you 
have to pay someone some kind of money and if you are not paying, the person who 
you owe the money is going back to the owner of the house and asking him for the 
money. This is a strange combination that has arisen because of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code in respect to aircraft. So there was supposed to be some kind of 
clarity with the airline industry and that is  what we have brought in through the CTC 
Bill. This is going to create a lot of clarit y on how the whole leasing industry should 
function. Also, especially, when there is a problem of insolvency in the country 
regarding the airlines, then, this Bill can co me into effect. Ther e is a period of 60 
days, two calendar months, within which yo u can settle all the dues and the lessors 
can take their planes back, which they ri ghtfully owned. It was very important to 
create that kind of differentiation between  the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and 
the Cape Town Convention and that is what we have done here. How are the 
domestic laws protected under this Bill? Th is Bill gives force of law to international 
obligations of India arising from the accession of concession, convention and 
protocol, like I have already said. It has also been provided that the Bill, in addition to 
the provisions of the Bill, provides adequate  protection to the existing domestic laws 
by overriding only such provisions whic h are inconsistent wi th the already acceded 
treaties. So, it is not going into any domain  which is not related to aircraft objects. 
Only when the aircraft objects come into place, this Bill will come into effect. The 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code deals with many bigger things. So we are not 
entering into all the things that Insolven cy and Bankruptcy Code deals with. We are 
only saying that whenever there is an aircra ft object coming into place, then, this Bill 
is going to prevail and this Bill is going to lo ok after the things on how to deal with the 
aircraft objects.  
Sir, just now Jairamji has also asked about international and domestic lessors.  
We have answered that. There is no differentiation, lessor is a lessor. From our side, 
we want the domestic lessors also to come more and more. This Bill is going to give 
that kind of strong protection to the domestic lessors also so that they can come into 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
the industry. How does it protect the smalle r airlines? Just like I said, if the leasing 
industry improves, even for the smaller people  running smaller aircraft, smaller airline 
operators, they also will find it more and more incentivized for th em to lease planes. 
Without this, just with the compliance report very low, the CTC index very low, it 
becomes very hard for the smaller people also to lease any plane. With this, the 
smaller airlines can lease much higher nu mber of planes and then with the more 
number of planes, automatically, it gives a boost to both the airline operators and also 
the civil aviation market.  Now what is the role of DGCA in all of this?  Through the Bill 
only, we have mentioned that DGCA beco mes the domestic registry. There is an 
international registry at the ICAO and the do mestic registry is going to be maintained 
by the Central Government, especially, the division of DGCA. Now, through the Bill, 
we have also created a provision that all the airline operators have to regularly intimate 
the DGCA on how many dues are still pendin g with what kind of lessors on plane 
basis. Not just overall from the airline po int of view, but plan e-by-plane, whatever 
anyone is leasing from any lessor, they have to periodically intimate the DGCA. They 
have to keep a list of all the dues they have  with all the lessors. That registry is going 
to be maintained.  Even for the lessors, they have to also continuously intimate about 
the activity that they are doin g in the country. This will creat e a lot of security for both 
the lessors, lessees and the overall aviation market also because there has been a lot 
of confusion in this area. It has been a grey area for some time.   
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
Now, with the bringing of this Bill, definitely , it is going to create a lot more clarity.   
And, we hope this is going to give a lot of  push for the leasing industry, which is the 
need of the hour. There is an immediate need  for this Bill to be there in the industry, 
Sir.  It is with this speed that we wanted to bring it.  And, I am very happy that many 
of the hon. Members, who ha ve spoken on this Bill, un derstand the seriousness of 
this and they have supported it. There have been many hon. Members who have 
taken the opportunity of this Bill, to talk ab out some local issues, some of their airport 
issues, some of the connectivity issues also and it is very difficult to answer each and 
every hon. Member individually, but I woul d like to mention some States.  One was 
Bihar. They have mentioned about not having an international airport, other than Gaya 
International Airport. I will come to some  of the States. Biha r has a very peculiar 
situation. Bihar has Patna. In the capital city, there are two airports at present. One is 
the Patna Airport and also Bihta Airport which we are trying to develop as it is a civil 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
77

 
 
enclave. It is an Air Force Airport and we  have taken some land and we want to 
develop. Even though both will be oper ating, we can't do international planes 
because of the fixed runway length there. We can't run wide-body aircrafts there.  
That is why in the interest of Bihar and the citizens there, we want to create an 
international airport. And, I would like to thank the hon. Finance Minister for 
specifically mentioning it in the Budget that we will be creating an international airport 
near Patna in Bihar. And from our side, civ il aviation side, we are looking at all the 
possible locations and we will choose one of the best locations near Patna and from 
where international planes can fly from the city of Patna.  And that is the intention with 
which we are moving.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat. 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU :  I will come to all the States. Please give me 
some time.  I know this is the most interesting aspect, Sir. The Bill is there, definitely, 
but the aspiration is for the local demand in  the local airports.  And, other than this, 
we are developing Darbhanga Airport with a cost of more than Rs.1400 crores, we 
have put in. The work is going on. Purnia Ai rport also, we are developing right now.  
There has been cooperation from the State Government in respect to land that is 
required. We are presently constructing it. And, by August or September, we see that 
the terminal is going to finish. Definitely, we  are going to start operations from Purnia 
Airport also.  And, we have already star ted constructing building. Then, we have 
other airports.  Let me take the State of Telangana now.  In Telangana, we have taken 
a historical decision of granting in-princip le approval including site clearance, for 
airport in Warangal, Sir. Warangal used to  be one of the biggest airports in the 
country, during pre-independence era. And,  after some time, there used to be 
Vayudoot Airlines flying from  there. But, because of di fferent reasons, the Airport 
stopped functioning in 1980s.  Since then, there has been a strong demand from the 
locals to start airport and now, with the support of State Government, with the proper 
vision of the Central Government, we were able to grant the site  clearance and very 
soon we are going to start the work at Warang al Airport.  We plan to build one of the 
best airports in the country in Warangal . The Telangana Government also has a 
demand for many other areas and, with the cooperation and support from the State 
Government, we are going to see if we get the required piece of land in the required 
area.  Then, Sir, we will also look into all the other areas including the State of  Kerala.  
I am coming to your point, Sir, regarding Kerala.   In Kerala, one Kannur Airport, right 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
from Chief Minister to hon. Members here, both Lok Sabh a, Rajya Sabha, have been 
asking for Point-of-Call from that Airport. Kerala is the only State where they have 
three airports which already have Point-of-Call. They are: Trivandrum, Kochi and 
Calicut and  international flights are operating properly and some domestic flights also 
are flying from  Kannur Airpor t, Sir. About Point-of-Call,  definitely, there are many 
requests from across the count ry.  We need to have a ba lanced approach for all the 
other States.  So, definitely we will look into it.  But, it has to be a balanced approach 
by considering all States. The only thing th at the Government has here, and I will be 
very honest and open with you, is this. Si r, there are two things; One, we want to 
have our own Indian airports to function  as hubs. Now, you see, in the Gulf, 
Singapore, Turkey and all these countries, they are trying to grow their own airports at 
the cost of our Indian airports, because they  are trying to take the passenger traffic 
from here, take them to their own countries and from there, they are trying to connect 
to the whole world. What we want to see is, India having its own hubs in the country 
itself, so that they can also flourish.  Now,  we are at a strategical location for the East 
and the West where people from the West can use India as the hub.  Now, unless we 
try to improve hubs in the country, we can't be  able to facilitate for that and, if you 
start diverting our traffic to all other areas, then it becomes very difficult for our Indian 
airports to grow at that stage. And, the second thing is that we want to protect Indian 
carriers operating from India. So, we have an obligation to improve the 
competitiveness of Indian carriers as well. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, Mr. Wilson.   
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU :  So, it is with these two considerations in 
mind that we need to take a balanced a pproach when thinking about adding a Point 
of Call for a new destination. However, I agree with the demand, as it is a 
longstanding request from across the country. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Mr. Rahim, please take your seat.   
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  And, we are going to see what best we can 
do. We have done a lot for the State of Ke rala also and we will continuously keep 
doing so. Our support for Kerala is continuous ly going to be there from the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation. We want all the airports to grow.  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
79

 
 
And, one challenge about the Haj, that  has been addresse d, was mentioned. 
For the Haj, every year there is a tender by the Ministry of  Minority Affairs for all the 
airports on how many people need to be carried to the Haj.  The bidding, which 
happens at that level, is a very transp arent and accountable way of handling Haj-
related logistics. ...(Interruptions)...  That is how the bidders came in. It was through 
the process how they were selected.  
One interesting thing about Calicut is that  we are trying to extend the runway. 
Once the runway is extended, wide-body airc raft will also be able to operate from 
there. We will then return to the situation before. Due to an incident that occurred at 
the Calicut airport, we wanted to avoid havi ng a tabletop airport. Instead, we wanted 
to extend the runway. The Ministry is cont inuously reviewing the situation, and we 
want to complete the work as soon as  possible, which will improve the airport 
situation in Calicut.  
Other than that, our hon. Members from Odisha have also requested for many 
other airports. ...(Interruptions)... We are thoroughly assessing all the requests that 
we are getting. The only thing we see is the economic feasibility and also the technical 
feasibility of the land. Then, we start moving  on. I have already told that from 74 
airports, we have moved on to 159 airpor ts. Only because of the support, which the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation is able to give, we have been able to increase this. We are not 
restricting people from having airports. Bu t definitely, the support has to come from 
the State Government also in providing the land. Today, we are also seeing that major 
cities like Bangalore, Delhi, Mumbai, Chenna i, Kolkata, require a second airport. We 
have come to that stage where all the metr opolitan cities are getting saturated and 
require new airports. In Mumbai, the existing  airport is at Santa Cruz. Now, we are 
building Navi Mumbai Airport. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, बैठ कर आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU : Delhi is having the IGI Airport.  
...(Interruptions)... And, another airport is going to  come up. Bangalore has already 
been discussing for a new airport there. Th e State Government is proactively moving 
and selecting some sites for that. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seat. The Chair has not allowed you.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU : Bhubaneswar is also trying to have an 
additional airport in Puri. Th ey have selected some land and are trying to move in 
Puri. In Chennai also, the Parandur Airport is coming up.  
So far as West Bengal is concerned,  I would like to make a request that 
Kolkata Airport also needs another one right now, being a metropolitan city and a very 
important city in the country. So, the Stat e Government should look at having an 
alternate airport, a second airport, which caters to the city of Kolkata because that is 
very much required today. Unless you start moving in that direction today, unless you 
start providing that land, it will become very difficult in the future. So, like other 
metropolitan cities are moving in that direction, I would request States and the 
Governments there to thoroughly look at this . This is a requirement not just for today, 
but for the future also. I would use this forum to request through the hon. Members to 
their respective States. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Please, Mr. Wilson.  
  
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU : Please support the idea of creating more 
airports. Sir, we are with the idea that in the next five years, we can build 50 more 
airports. And, I would also like to thank the hon. Finance Minister that the UDAAN 
scheme, which has been there for 10 years from 2016 to 2026, because of the way it 
has revolutionized and democratized air trav el in the country, has been extended for 
another 10 years from 2026 to 2036. So, we are going to see an expanded UDAAN 
scheme through which we want to create 120 new destinations in the country. We 
want to make 4 crore people travel under the UDAAN scheme, which is going to give 
much more access to the citizens of this country.  
 So, we have grand plans coming in the future also. And, to achieve this, we 
also require the support of the State Governme nts in providing land and also in trying 
to acquire the land. So, if the States can be proactive in this area, then, definitely 
from the Central Government and the Ministry of Civil Aviation, we  will provide all the 
necessary support. We do not see any politics in this area. We just want the country 
to thrive. We just want the country to become  number one in civil aviation,  not just in 
terms of hub and connectivity but also in giving accessible, comfortable and 
convenient travel to the passengers.  We have started one initiative under the UDAN 
scheme, where, Sir, we have connected the unserved and underserved airports of 
this country.  Where there were no flights travelling at all, there was a challenge on 
how to connect these airports and it was through that vision that the UDAN Scheme 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
81

 
 
came into place. And, after UDAN Scheme came into place, we have started more 
than 642 routes in this country where no pl anes were operating earlier.  No airlines 
were trying to take up those routes. But through the Viability Gap Funding under 
UDAN Scheme, development of those airports  and by creating such infrastructure 
that people and planes can move from that  area,  we have been able to start 600 
more routes in those areas. And, now, we  have taken certain inspiration from UDAN 
Scheme also. You may agree or not agree, --  some people in this House -- but after 
the the UDAN Scheme, a lot of people from the lower middle class and a lot of people 
who are migrant labours working in different countries, they all have started using air 
travel. What used to be a travel by train, now they are doing it by plane. Now, there 
has been a lot of debate on the prices in th e airports also. Taking inspiration from the 
UDAN Scheme, we have started Udaan Yatri Ca fe at the airports also, where we are 
providing water bottle for 10 rupees, tea,  coffee for 20 rupees and samosa for 20 
rupees. This is the first kind of initiative  and I don't think even the railways will have 
these kind of prices what airports are trying to give today. We have started in Kolkata 
which is doing record number of sales. We have started in Chennai. We have started 
in Ahmedabad. We are starting in eight more  airports. We want to do it in each and 
every airport of this country.  In each and every airport of this country we want to have 
a stall, so that, at least if someone wants to buy something, he doesn't feel that he 
can't have anything here.  Even though airp orts are supposed to be facilitating for the 
travel, we are ensuring that at least in this sense, he doesn't go hungry at the airport.  
So, we are creating these Udaan Yatri caf es, which have been successfully done, 
under this initiative, and in future, we are goi ng to make it possible in all these things. 
When it comes to airfare, I know it is a ve ry contentious topic of discussion for all the 
Members. I have already told you that when  it comes to airfares, it is a work in 
progress and a lot of things need to come in to place. If you try to break up the airfare 
itself, there will be hundreds of things which try to affect the airfares, right from the 
fuel prices, the kind of leasing charges that are taken,  the MRO costs that are 
involved to the kind of people that get invo lved in maintaining the aircraft.  So many 
things are there. So capping the airfares an d trying to have a one-stop approach is 
not followed by any country. We are trying  to follow dynamic fare pricing. And, 
definitely, in that if there is anything, for example, malpractices are there or 
misutilization or taking advantage of the market is there, definitely, the  Ministry of 
Civil Aviation is going to take necessary ac tion. We are going to ensure that those 
kind of situations do not arise.  But for havi ng planes or airlines run in the country and 
providing those connections,  it is important for us to have a balanced approach in all 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
of this, Sir. And you have seen that all th e airlines, if you look at their financials, 
except for Indigo,  all of them are having nega tive balance sheets right now.   So, it is 
important to see that the airlines also perform. If you take out one airline, let us say, if 
you make it non-viable for one airline and if they go bankrupt , and if 200 of their 
planes don't perform in the country, then how many cities get disconnected now.  
How many of the routes don't get facilitated now? So, it is important for us to think on 
a long term and try to see how collectively we  can grow so that the airfares are also 
reasonable, the air travel continuously grow s, and also the industry creates a lot of 
job creation for the youth who are very passionate about civil aviation in the country. 
And I would once again, on be half of myself and the MOS, Shri Murlidhar Mohol, like 
to seek the full-fledged support of this House in this Sir. …(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please sit down.  …(Interruptions)…  Mr. Wilson, this is not 
proper. 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU : Sir, since it is our ex-Prime Minister, Deve 
Gowda ji’s constituency, for Hasan Airport, we are continuously trying to push it from 
our side. The State Government also needs to step up in that area. We are trying to 
d o  o u r  b e s t  s o  t h a t  w e  c a n  c o m p l e t e  i t  o n  t i m e .  S o  I  j u s t  w a n t e d  t o  g i v e  t h e s e  
remarks to the hon. ex-Prime Minister.  
With this, I would like to ask for each and ev eryone's support in this Bill. This is 
a very important Bill which the indust ry needs today; and everyone, each and 
everyone, from the industry is going to appr eciate the way this is going to change the 
aviation landscape in the country. So, once again, I would like to sincerely request for 
the support.  
Sir, with these words, I would like to conclude.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: िबल पर माननीय मंतर्ी का जवाब खत्म हुआ। अब हम लोग आगे बढ़Ȃ, इसके  
पहले माननीय एलओपी का क ु छ सजेशन है या कोई query है। माननीय एल
 ओपी। 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सर, यह इस िबल से संबंिधत तो नहीं है, लेिकन मंतर्ी जी 
ने िवÎतार से उǄर िदए, िजसमȂ हासन का िजकर् िकया गया और चेन्नई आिद सब जगहȗ का 
िजकर् िक
या गया। इसके  िलए मȅ उनको धन्यवाद देता हूँ, लेिकन िजस जगह एयरपोटर् बनाया गया 
है, उस जगह Äलाइट्स नहीं हȅ। मȅ एक उदाहरण देना चाहता हूँ। इतने लोगȗ मȂ या िजतने भी 
एमपीज़ हȗ या राज् यसभा  क े िजतने मȂबसर् हȗ,  शायद अपने मत क्षेतर् मȂ कोिशश करके  सरकारी 
लȅड नहीं, सब िमल कर एक-एक लाख रुपय े डाल कर एक हजार एकड़ जमीन सरकार उनको 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
83

 
 
हȅडओवर िकया। उसके  बाद भी वह रनवे नहीं बन सका। उसके  बाद हमने Îटेट गवनर्मȂट से फ ं ड 
लेकर रनवे बना िदया। उसके  बाद वह even िबिंÊडग बनाने क े िलए तैयार नहीं था, तो िबिंÊडग 
बनाने मȂ भी हमने मदद की और िबिंÊडग भी बन गई। िफर लाइिंटग का इंतजाम नहीं था, हम ने 
लाइिंटग का इंतजाम भी करवा िदया। उसके  बाद िफर हमने 'मनरेगा' मȂ compound  डाल कर 
भी िदया, क्यȗिक इससे लोगȗ को काम भी िमलता है और वहाँ क े एयरपोटर् को सुरक्षा भी िमलती 
है। ये सब हमने करके  िदया। ये सब देने क े बावजूद उन्हȗने एक आदमी को, कोई एक Îटार एयर 
लाइन या क ु छ है, को दे िदया। वह 3 िदन मȂ एक बार आता है और िफर बाद मȂ गायब हो जाता है।  
वह गुटखा ऑनर है। अगर ऐसे लोगȗ को देकर...  हम लोगȗ ने इसके  िलए िरक्वेÎट िकया, Ģा
इम 
िमिनÎटर को भी लेटर िलखा, नायडू साहब को भी लेटर िलखा, ज्योितरािदत्य एम. िंसिधया जी 
को भी लेटर िलखा। इसके  िलए मȅ 4 साल से कोिशश कर रहा हूँ। क्या मेरे से दुÌमनी है - यह मुझे 
मालूम नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित:  आप बताएँ, माननीय मंतर्ी करȂगे।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, आप सुिनए।  यह बहुत interesting है। It is the longest airport in 
Karnatak
a after Bangalore. इसीिलए खुद Ģधान मंतर्ी जी दो बार कलबुगीर् (गुलबगार्) उतरे।  वे 
वहाँ इसिलए उतरे, क्यȗिक वह biggest, lengthiest runway है। वे वहाँ से सोलापुर गए, लातूर 
गए,  बीदर  गए। वहाँ पर अपना contribution देकर ये सारी फ ै सेिलटीज़ Ģदान की गईं। इतना 
रहते हुए भी मुझे यह कहने मȂ शमर् आती है िक िज
न लोगȗ ने लȅड िदया, िजन लोगȗ ने मदद की 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर, मȅ कोई गलत तो नहीं बोल रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: आपने अपनी बात बता दी। 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : This is public contribution. ...(Interruptions)... उस 
एिरया क े लोगȗ क े contribution को बोडर् मȂ बैठ कर भी तय िकया गया, लेिकन मȅ इस संबंध मȂ 
हमेशा लेटर िलख रहा हूँ। मȅ इनको ही लेटर नहीं िलख रहा हूँ, बिÊक इनसे पह ले जो मंतर्ी थे, 
उनको भी लेटर िलखा हूँ। पहले इसी गुटखा वाले का बȂगलुरु  से कलबुगीर् daily एक Äलाइट था, 
वह यूपी से िनकलता था, लेिकन वह बंद हो गया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: आपने अपनी बात िवÎतार से बता दी।  अब हो गया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर, आप मेरी बात तो सुिनए।  मȅ आपको असत्य तो नहीं बता रहा हूँ। 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: नहीं, नहीं, आपने अपनी बात िवÎतार से बता दी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर, मȅ उनको यह बताऊँ गा िक हमने इस सÅजेक्ट पर क्या िकया। आपने 
बोल िदया िक हासन मȂ बन जाएगा। ऐसा कह कर आपने एक्स -Ģाइम िमिनÎटर को तो खुश कर 
िदया। उन्हȗने Ģाइम िमिनÎटर रहकर नहीं िकया, चीफ िमिन
Îटर रहकर नहीं िकया, लेिकन अब 
आप उनके  पीछे िगर रहे हȅ, यह मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आ रहा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय एलओपी।   माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  ...(Ëय
वधान )... आपने िवÎतार 
से बता िदया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आपको जो बताना था, वह आपने बताया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: नहीं, आपका रूल  है, जब कभी अपोिजशन लीडर उठकर बात करता है, 
तो उसको मौका देना चािहए।  क्या मȅ गलत बात कर रहा हूँ? 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: आपने बता िदया, आपने बता िदया।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: साहब, आप देिखए िक वहाँ कौन-कौन से institutions हȅ, हमने िकसिलए 
िडमांड की? वहाँ सȂटर्ल यूिनविर्सटी है, वहाँ पर ESI क े मेिडकल कॉलेज, पैरामेिडकल कॉलेज, 
निसȊग कॉलेज और डȂटल कॉलेज, इतने कॉलेजेज़ हȅ। वहाँ गवनर्मȂट क े तीन कॉलेज हȅ।  
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद।  माननीय एलओपी, आपने िवÎतार से बता िदया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: देिखए, अगर आप बोलने नहीं देते, तो -- हमने उसी छोटी जगह मȂ हाई 
कोटर् बनाया और हाई कोटर् क े चार जजेज़ बȂगलुरु  से आते-जाते हȅ।  इसके  अलावा, िरÃलाई तो हो 
गया न! ...(Ëयव
धान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय एलओपी, आपने पूरा बता िदया।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: उपसभापित जी, अगर आप सुनना नहीं चाहते ...(Ëय
वधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपने पूरा बता िदया, अब नई बहस शुरू  नहीं करनी है।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: मȅने बता तो िदया, लेिकन क्या होना है? 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
 ित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
85

 
 
 
Ǜी िंकजरापु राममोहन नायडू: सर, सीिनयर मेÇबर, खरगे जी ने कलबुगीर् एयरपोटर् का िजकर् 
िकया, पर िजस तरीके  से उन्हȗने उसके  बारे मȂ passionately बोला, मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक देश 
मȂ जो 150 एयरपोट्सर् बने, उन सभी मȂ सभी का योगदान था। हर Îटेट गवनर्मȂट ने उतने ही 
passionately िदया। ऐसा नहीं है िक यहाँ पर अलग से क ु छ ज्
यादा हुआ है। Everywhere people 
have donated their land. State Governments have come into picture. They have taken 
that airport building very, very seriously. With everyone's cooperation only, we have 
built it. It is not just one Government or  one person doing anything everywhere. We 
have received the request and we are trying to do our best. We speak to the airlines. 
Every now and then, when ho n. Members in the House an d outside the House meet 
me, their whole aspiration is to get their pl ace connected.  Now, this is the way India 
is operating today. We have these airports  located at all these locations. Now, there 
are not much planes that we can cater to  the demand today. So, to cater to the 
demand, we need more number of planes. We are continuously discussing it with the 
airlines to give better connectivity where th e demand is there. And, for Kalaburagi 
also, we are trying to facilitate the connect ion. We were talking about the ex-Prime 
Minister. उनका भी mention इसिलए िकया, क्यȗिक वह Îटेट गवनर्मȂट का -- सर, आप Îटेट 
गवनर्मȂट से बात करके  हासन को कÇपली
ट करने मȂ थोड़ी सहायता दीिजए।  अभी आप गुलबगार् 
की बात कर रहे थे, उसमȂ सहायता दे दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसमȂ भी थोड़ी मदद कर दीिजए।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, the discussion is over. The question is:  
             "That the Bill to provide for protection of interests in aircraft objects and to 
implement the Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment and the  
Protocol to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment on Matters 
Specific to Aircraft Equipmen t, each signed at Cape To wn on 16th November, 2001 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, be taken into 
consideration."  
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, we shall take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill. 
Clauses 2 to 5 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 6, there is one Amendment (No.2) by Dr. John 
Brittas.  He is not present. 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Clause 6 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, Insertion of new Clause 6A. There is one 
Amendment (No.5) for insertion of new Clau s e  6 A  b y  D r .   V .  S i v a d a s a n .  A r e  y o u  
moving? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Yes, Sir, I move:   
 
(No.5) 
That at page 3, after  line 12, the following new section be inserted, namely:– 
“6A.(1) No aircraft shall be deregistered or 
repossessed under this Act unless a certificate of 
compliance is issued by th e Directorate General of 
Civil Aviation (DGCA), confirming that all workers' 
wages, dues, and social security benefits have 
been paid in full.  
 
(2) In case of insolvency or financial distress, 
workers of the concerned airline shall have first 
right over the assets and receivables before any 
foreign or domestic creditor claims.” 
Protection of 
Workers’ Rights in 
Aircraft Ownership 
and Leasing 
Agreements. 
 
 
The question was put and the motion was  negative. 
Clauses 7 to 9 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR.  DEPUTY  CHAIRMAN:   In  Clause  10,  there  is   one  Amendment  (No.3) by 
Dr. John Brittas.  He is not present.  
 
Clause 10 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  In Clause 11, there ar e two Amendments: Amendment 
(No.1) by Shri A.A. Rahim and Amendment (No.4) by Dr. John Brittas.  Dr. John 
Brittas is not present.  Shri A.A. Rahim, are you moving the Amendment? 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala):  Yes, Sir. I move: 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
87

 
 
(No.1) That at page 4, line 14, for the words, “the Central Government may make ”, 
the words, “The Central Government may, with the prior approval of both the Houses 
of Parliament, make,”, be substituted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
 
Clause 11 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 12, the First Schedule, the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule were 
added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Now, Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu to move that the 
Bill be passed.  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  Sir, I move: 
 “That the Bill be passed.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, we shall take up the "Tribhuvan" Sahkari University 
Bill, 2025.  Shri Murlidhar Mohol to mo ve a motion for consideration of the 
"Tribhuvan" Sahkari University Bill, 2025.  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, क ैिबनेट मंतर्ी कहां हȅ? 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अनेक क ैिबनेट मंतर्ी बैठे हȅ। 
 
The “Tribhuvan” Sah
 kari University Bill, 2025 
 
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा नागर िवमानन मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी मुरलीधर 
मोहोल): महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूं: 
                 " िक इंÎटीǷूट आफ रूरल  मैनेजमȂट, आणंद, "ितर्भुवन" सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी क े रूप  मȂ 
ज्ञात िवÌविवǏालय की Îथापना करने और उसे राÍटर्ीय महत्व की संÎथा घोिषत करने; सहकारी 
क्षेतर् मȂ तकन
ीकी और Ģबंधन िशक्षा तथा Ģिशक्षण Ģदान करने; सहकारी अनुसंधान और िवकास 
की Ģोन्नित करने तथा 'सहकार से समृिǉ' क े दशर्न को चिरतर्ाथर् करने क े कर्म मȂ इसमȂ वैिÌवक 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
ǛेÍठता क े मानकȗ को ĢाÃत करने और संÎथाओं क े तंतर् क े माध्यम से देश मȂ सहकारी आंदोलन 
को मजबूत करने क े िलए, और संÎथान को िवÌविवǏालय क े एक Îकू ल क े रूप  मȂ घोिषत करने 
और उससे संबǉ तथा उसके  आनुषंिगक िवषयȗ का उपबंध करने वाले िवधेयक पर, लोक सभ ा 
ǎारा पािरत रूप  मȂ, िवचार िकया जाए।" 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क्या आप इस िबल पर क ु छ बोलना चाहते हȅ? 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: सर, बाद मȂ।                                                       
 
The question was proposed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Motion moved. I shall now call upon the Members whos e 
names have been received for participation in the discussion. Shri Digvijaya Singh.  
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह (मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, हम चाहते थे िक माननीय गृह 
मंतर्ी जी यहां पर मौजूद हȗ, क्यȗिक यह उन्हीं क े कायर्क्षेतर् का मसला है और उन्हीं क े िववेक एवं 
सुझाव पर शायद मंतर्ालय क ृिष िवभ ाग  से लेकर गृह िवभाग को सȚपा गया है। हम माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी और सरकार क े आभारी हȅ िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, शांित बनाए रखȂ। 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय क े िबल का नामकरण एक ऐसे विरÍठ, तत्कालीन 
सहकािरता क े कांगर्ेस क े कायर्कतार्, आदरणीय Ǜी ितर्भुवनदास पटेल जी क े नाम पर रखा है, 
िजन्हȗने सरदार वÊलभ
भाई पटेल की Ģेरणा से और V. Kurien साहब क े सहयोग से इस देश मȂ 
Ìवेत कर्ांित की अगुवाई की। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ 201 4 क े पहले की बात कर रहा हूं। उसके  बाद क्या हुआ 
है, इसकी जानकारी शायद मंतर्ी जी दȂगे। 
महोदय, लोकतंतर् मȂ सरकार की नीयत उसकी नीित, िनयम और कानूनȗ मȂ झलकती है। 
इनके  11-12 साल क े कायर्काल मȂ तीन िंबदु साफ झलकते हȅ। पहला- हर नीित मȂ, िनयम मȂ, 
कानून मȂ इन
की नीयत पूंजीवादी ËयवÎथा क े पक्ष मȂ झलकती है। दूसरा, सǄा क े क ेन्दर्ीयकरण मȂ 
और राज्यȗ क े अिधकारȗ को हिथयाने मȂ इनकी नीयत झलकती है। तीसरा, आप जानते हȅ िक हर 
बात मȂ सांĢदाियक कटु ता फ ैलाकर वे अपनी नीयत Ģदिर्शत करते हȅ।   
महोदय, गुजरात क े गांव क ैरा मȂ दूध उत्पादकȗ ने आंदोलन िकया। उस समय Polson 
butter क े िलए वहां से दूध ले जाया जाता था। िकसानȗ ने आंदोलन िकया िक आप कम भाव मȂ दूध 
लेते हȅ और मुंबई िमÊक Îकीम को महंगा बेचते हȅ। वे सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल क े पास आए।  
सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल जी ने कहा िक दूध सहकारी सिमित का गठन करो और मोरारजी भाई 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
89

 
 
देसाई को कहा िक आप इनका सहयोग कीिजए। वषर् 1946 मȂ अमूल सहकारी सिमित Ģारंभ हुई।  
यह एक ऐसा उदाहरण है, जो Ģोǹूसर और क ंज्यूमर क े बीच की खाई को पाटता है। सामान्य 
तौर पर आज की ËयवÎथा मȂ िबचौिलए और Ģोसेिंसग क े बाद िकसान को उनकी उपज का क ेवल 
30-40 Ģितशत ही िमल पाता है, लेिकन अमूल एक ऐसी संÎथा है, िज
सका 80 Ģितशत भाग 
उपभोƪाओं से आता है, वह िकसानȗ क े पास जाता है। यही शिƪ है सहकािरता की।  इसमȂ यही 
कारण है, िजसकी वजह से भारतीय संिवधान मȂ आिर्टकल 243 सहकािरता क े ऊपर संिवधान मȂ 
रखा गया है। सरदार पटेल ने कहा था िक “There is no other instrument as potentially 
powerful and full of social purpose as the cooperative movement.”  
महोदय, मȅ आपसे अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक सरदार पटेल ने कहा था िक सहकािरता 
क ेवल आिर्थक गितिविध नहीं है, बिÊक वह एकता की, न्याय की और समरसता की एक अलग 
Ģकार की जीवनशैली है। 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा) पीठासीन हुईं।] 
 
इसी सहकािरता क े बारे मȂ उन्हȗने कहा था िक यह भारत को शिƪशाली बनाएगा और अखंड 
रहेगा और  आिर्थक और सामािजक िवकास क े माध्यम से इसे आगे बढ़ाएगा। इसिलए संिवधान मȂ 
इसे राज्यȗ की सूची मȂ रखा गया है। देखने मȂ यह आ रहा है िक लगातार राज्यȗ क े अिधकारी, 
हमारा राज्यȗ का हाउस है और इस राज्यȗ क े हाउस मȂ लगातार राज्यȗ क े अिधकार को धीरे-धीरे 
कम िकया जा रहा है। माननीय मंतर्ी जी यहां उपिÎथत नहीं हȅ। अगर अिमत शाह जी, आपको 
सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल क े रूप  मȂ दूसरा सरदार गुजरात का बनना है, तो आप कम से कम 
उनके  िवचारȗ को अंगीकार कीिजए। सहकािरता क े माध्यम से, जनता क े िकसानȗ क े माध्यम, 
उपभोƪाओं क े माध्यम से  …( Ëयवधान)… जी, मȅ वही कह रहा हूं िक आपको करना है, तो उनके  
िवचारȗ का पालन कीिजए, लेिकन इन्हȗने राज्यȗ का अिधकार छीना है। मȅ आपसे अनुरोध करना 
चाहता हूं िक आज क ेन्दर् सरकार ने सहकारी मंतर्ालय बनाया। पूवर् मȂ यह मंतर्ालय क ृिष िवभाग क े 
साथ था। पहले यह Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation हुआ करती थी, लेिकन िकस 
उǈेÌय क े साथ, िकस मंशा क े साथ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने सहकािरता को अलग िकया… और 
सहकािरता को क ृिष से अलग करके  गृह मंतर्ालय क े साथ जो जोड़ा गया है, उसमȂ क्या राज िछपा 
है, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ आपसे कह नहीं सकता हूं। ...(Ëयव धान)... 
 महोदया, मȅ आज इस मामले मȂ आपसे अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक ...(Ëयवधान)... जोशी 
जी, इसमȂ क्या राज िछपा है, इसके  बारे मȂ आप पता नहीं लगा पाएंगे, यह गुजरात का मामला है। 
मȅ अनुरोध कर
ना चाहता हूं, आप देख रहे हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):  माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया बैठ जाइए।  
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: महोदया, I am not yielding. इस िबल क े माध्यम से कोऑपरेिटव का 
कॉपȃरेटाइटेशन हो रहा है। यानी िक जो कोऑपरेिटव िमिनÎटर् ी है और कोऑपरेिटव सहकािरता 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
है, वह सहकािरता िकसान और मजदूरȗ क े हाथ से िनकालकर उǏोगपितयȗ क े हाथ मȂ सȚपने का 
Ģयास है।  
महोदया, मȅ आपसे अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक भारत और िवÌव Îतर पर हुए सहकािरता 
आंदोलनȗ मȂ हमेशा से समाजवादी िवचारधारा िनिहत रही है। यह Ǜिमक क Ȃिदर्त आंदोलन रहा है 
और Ǜिमकȗ क े नेतृत्व मȂ चलता है। क ेिपटिलज्म, कॉरपोरेट्स और सहकािरता मȂ यही अंतर है। 
क ेिपटिलज्म मȂ कॉरपोरेट्स पूंजी से मजदूर लेते हȅ और सहकािरता मȂ मज दूरȗ से पूंजी इकƻी 
करके  मजदूरȗ को उनका हक िदया जाता है। कॉरपोरेट्स और कोऑपरेिटव क े बीच मȂ यही फकर् 
है।  
महोदया, मȅ आपसे अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक हमारे संिवधान क े अनुसार कोऑपरेिटव 
सोसायटीज़ मȂ हर पाँचवȂ साल चुनाव होने चािहए
। उनके  िलए 6 महीने  क े एक्सटȂशन क े बाद 
िकसी भी हालत मȂ चुनाव कराना आवÌयक है। लेिकन आप देख रहे हȅ और मुझे मालूम है िक 
अनेक Ģदेशȗ मȂ, जहाँ पर भारतीय जनत
ा पाटीर् की डबल इंजन की सरकारȂ हȅ, वहाँ पर सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ क े चुनाव नहीं कराए जाते, बिÊक वहाँ पर Ģशासक िनयुƪ िकया जाता है। महोदया, वे 
Ģशासक क े माध्यम से सहकारी सिमितयȗ मȂ जैसा चाहते हȅ, वैसा मनमाना िनणर्य कराते हȅ।  
महोदया, मȅ और राज्
यȗ क े बारे मȂ तो ज्यादा बात नहीं जानता हूं, लेिकन मध्य Ģदेश क े 
बारे मȂ कहना चाहता हूं िक मध्य Ģदेश मȂ 4,536 PACS हȅ, यानी Primary Agricultural Credit  
Societies हȅ। उनमȂ से 3,800, यानी जो 80 Ģितशत Primary Agricultural Credit Societies हȅ, 
वे आज पूरी तरह से overdue हो चुकी हȅ, भारी घाटे मȂ हȅ और वहाँ पर चुनाव भी नहीं हो रहे हȅ। 
महोदया, इसी Ģकार से 38 िजला सहकारी बȅक्स मȂ से लगभग 13 िजला स हकारी बȅक्स की हालत 
यह है िक वे अपने सदÎयȗ को 2,000 रुपय े भी नहीं दे सकतीं।   
महोदया, इसी Ģकार से अन्य घोटालȗ का भी अंबार है। िशवपुरी िजला सहकारी बȅक मȂ 
100 करोड़ रुपय े का गबन हुआ, लेिकन कोई कारर्वाई नहीं हुई, ग्वािलयर मȂ 25 करोड़ रुपय े का 
गबन हुआ, लेिकन कोई कारर्वाई नहीं हुई। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, इतना ही नहीं अनेक 
सहकारी संÎथाओं मȂ 20 साल  से सहकारी सिमित क े चुनाव नहीं हुए और वहाँ पर Ģशासक को 
िबठा रखा है। माननीय मंतर्ी जोशी जी, आप इस मा
मले मȂ गृह मंतर्ी जी को कम से कम इतना बता 
दीिजए, ..(Ëयवधान)..सहकािरता मंतर्ी जी को बता दीिजए िक आप सहकािरता क े मंतर्ी हȅ, 
इसिलए क ृपा करके  कम से कम राज्यȗ मȂ सहकािरता की क्या हालत है, उसका पता लगा 
लीिजए। पाँच साल मȂ चुना
व होना चािहए – ऐसा  संिवधान मȂ Ģावधान है, लेिकन मध्य Ģदेश की 
डबल इंजन सरकार ने उसमȂ भी कानून पिरवतर्न करके  कह िदया िक चुनाव न हȗ, तो न हȗ, 
लेिकन अनंतकाल तक चुनाव Îथिगत करने का अिधकार दे िद
या और अनंतकाल तक Ģशासक 
को बैठने का अिधकार भी दे िदया। ये हȅ सहकािरता क े हालात इस देश मȂ!  
महोदया, माननीय सहकािरता मंतर्ी अिमत शाह जी, जो सरदार पटेल का एक दूसरा रूप  
बनना चाहते हȅ, मȅ इसी तरह से कहना चाहता हूं िक मध्य Ģदेश क े  cooperative apex bank क े 
Ģबंध संचालक पर गबन की िशक
ायत हुई थी, 12 बार Ģाइम िमिनÎटर ऑिफस, यानी पीएमओ ने 
राज्य सरकार को िलख कर भेजा िक इस पर कारर्वाई कीिजए, लेिकन राज्य सरकार ने उन पर 
कोई कारर्वाई नहीं की। यह डबल इंजन सरकार की हालत है! क ुिरयन साहब ने पूरी तरह से 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
91

 
 
अमूल का Ģबंधन िकया और उसे Îटेटस िदया। उन्हȗने IRMA का  गठन इसिलए िकया, क्यȗिक 
वहां पर ऐसे मैनेजसर्, ऐसे कायर्कतार्ओं, ऐसे कमर्चािरयȗ और अिधकािरयȗ की जरूरत  थी,  जो  
िकसान और मजदूर क े िहत की बात समझȂ और िकसानȗ को संगिठत करने की क्षमता उनमȂ पैदा 
की जाए। NDDB, गुजरात सरकार और अन्य लोगȗ ने िमल
कर संयुƪ Ģयासȗ से इसका गठन 
िकया। आज इस IRMA जैसे संगठन को हिथयाने क े िलए यह सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी िबल लाया 
गया है, क्यȗिक इसमȂ राज् यȗ  क े अिधकारȗ की बात थी।   
मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक मोटे तौर पर आज इसको दूसरे मैनेजमȂट कोसȃज क े साथ 
नहीं जोड़ा जाना चािहए, क्यȗिक जो दूसरे िबजनेस मैनेजमȂट इंिÎटǷूट्स हȅ, उनका सारा 
concentrati
on और focus उस तरह क े मैनेजर और अिधकारी बनने क े पक्ष मȂ होता है, िजनसे 
शेयरहोÊडसर् को ज्यादा मुनाफा हो, तािक शेयसर् क े Ģाइसेज बढ़Ȃ। आज कोई भी कॉपȘरेट मुनाफे  
को वकर् सर् और employees क े साथ शेयर नहीं कर रहा है। IRMA क े अंदर जो मैनेजमȂट कोसȃज 
हȅ, उन पर उसका हमेशा से अिधकार था और उसकी ऑ
टोनॉमी थी। िबल मȂ कहा गया िक हम 
ऑटोनॉमी कायम रखȂगे, जबिक क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े रहते हुए वाइस चांसलर वे अपॉइंट करȂगे, 
चांसलर वे अपॉ
इंट करȂगे और गविनȊग बॉडी क े सारे मȂबसर् भी वे अपॉइंट करȂगे, तो ऑटोनॉमी कहां 
तक रहेगी? तो पूरे तरीके  से IRMA को हिथयाने क े िलए यह यूिनविर्सटी िबल लाया गया है।   
मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं िक मूल रूप  से IRMA अभी तक िकस
ानȗ क े िहत मȂ - IRMA जो है, 
यह सरकार की संÎथा नहीं है, बिÊक यह संÎथा वहां पर दूध उत्पादकȗ और िकसानȗ क े 
शेयरहोÊडसर्, मािलकȗ की वजह से उन के  Ģित िजÇमेदार थी, लेिकन अब इस कानून क े माध्यम से 
उनका हक चला जाएगा और िजन्हȗने शेयर िलए हुए हȅ, उनका अिधकार छीनकर क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने 
अब उस पर कÅजा कर िलया है। माननीय मंतर्ी जी, मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहत ा हूं और आपके  
माध्यम से अिमत शाह जी से अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक कम से कम इसकी फ ैकÊटी की 
अपॉइंटमȂट मȂ इस बात का ध्यान रखा जाए िक आप िकन्हȂ वहां पर अपॉइंट करने जा रहे हȅ। जैसा 
िक आपने बताय
ा िक यह ऑटोनॉमस रहेगा, लेिकन उस ऑटोनॉमी मȂ इस बात पर ध्यान देने की 
आवÌयकता है िक उसमȂ जो कोसȃज हȗ और जो फ ैकÊटी अपॉइंट हो, उनमȂ उन लोगȗ का चयन 
होना चा
िहए, िजनकी सोच और िवचारधारा िकसानȗ क े िहत मȂ हो, जो सहकािरता क े पक्ष मȂ हȗ 
और जो मजदूरȗ क े पक्ष मȂ हȗ। सहकािरता आंदोलन की पूरे िवÌव मȂ जो कÊपना है, िजसको 
सरदार वÊलभभाई पटेल ने हमेशा आगे बढ़ाया और वे इसके  बड़े नेता रहे हȅ। आज आप सरदार 
वÊलभभाई पटेल की बड़ी-बड़ी मूिर्तयां लगाते हȅ और उनके  नाम से कसम खाते हȅ 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... लेिकन पूरे IRMA को , वहां क े सहकािरता आंदोलन को समाÃत करने क े िलए 
यह िवÌव
िवǏालय कायम िकया गया है।   
मȅ यह भी अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक इसके  एडिमशन टेÎट को िबजनेस मैनेजमȂट 
इंिÎटǷूट मȂ जो कÇबाइन्ड एडिमशन टेÎट होता है, उससे अलग रखना चािहए, क्यȗिक जो छा तर् 
यहां पर भतीर् होना चाहते हȅ, वे लोग मूल रूप  से कॉपȘरेट सेक्टर मȂ काम करने क े िलए उन 
इंिडयन इंिÎटǷूट्स ऑफ मैनेजमȂट मȂ एमबीए कोसȃज़ क े िलए जाते हȅ।                   
 लेिकन IRM A क े िलए अलग से चयन Ģिकर्या होनी चािहए, अलग से admission test 
होना चािहए, िजससे उसी Ģकार क े लोग वहाँ पर admission लȂ, वे ही छातर् उसमȂ admission 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
लȂ, जो गरीबȗ क े बीच मȂ, िकसानȗ क े बीच मȂ, मजदूरȗ क े बीच मȂ, slums मȂ, गरीब इलाकȗ मȂ काम 
करने की मानिसकता रखते हȗ। जो अपना भिवÍय उनकी सेवा मȂ लगाना चाहते हȅ, कम से कम 
उसी Ģकार क े छातर् वहाँ पर Ģवेश लȂ। 
 मȅ यह भी कहना चाहता हूँ िक आज IRMA की autonomy कायम रखना अित आवÌयक 
है।  हम नए िवÌविवǏालय की Îथाप
ना का समथर्न करते हȅ और इस तथ्य की भी सराहना करते हȅ 
िक आपने इसका नाम हमारे कांगर्ेस क े एक महान नेता, ितर्भुवनदास पटेल जी क े नाम पर रखा, 
लेिकन इसकी कोई आवÌयकता नहीं थी। आप IRMA को इसमȂ शािमल िकए िबना भी 
िवÌव
िवǏालय बना सकते थे, लेिकन आपका जो hidden agenda है, वह hidden agenda है - 
IRMA को समाÃत करो, िकसानȗ का सहकारी आंदोलन समाÃ त करो, तभी जाकर उनका उǈेÌय 
पूरा होगा।  यही उनकी नीयत है, िजसका िज़कर् मȅने आपसे पहले िकया था।   
 माननीय जोशी जी, मȅ आपसे इतना ही अनुरोध करू ँगा िक आप हाथ जोड़ कर हमारा 
Ģाथर्ना संदेश पहुँचा दीिजए िक वे कम से कम इसे बख्शȂ और आज भी समय है, IRMA को 
ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी मȂ से बाहर करȂ।  आप अलग से सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी बनाइए, अलग 
से सहकािरता क े कोसȃज़ चलाइए, लेिकन आप कम से कम IRMA को  बबार्द मत किरए।  बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद।     
             
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): धन्यवाद, माननीय सदÎय।  माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी नरहरी 
अमीन।  आपके  पास 15 िमनट का समय है। 
               
        
SHRI NARHARI AMIN (Gujarat):  & Madam Vice Chairperson, I rise in support of the 
Tribhuvan Sahakari University Bill, 2025. I would like to deliver my speech in Gujarati. 
The roots of the cooperative movement in the nation were planted prior to 
independence. Tribhuvan Das Kashibhai Patel of Kheda district was an activist, 
lawyer, and statesman of the Indian indepe ndence struggle. He aligned himself with 
Mahatma Gandhi and Sardar Vallabhbhai Pa tel during the struggle for independence. 
He was the founding figure of the Kheda Di strict Milk Producers Cooperative Union 
and the Anand Cooperative Movement, earning  him the moniker of the father of the 
cooperative movement in India. Under hon. Sardar Patel's   guidance,the Gujarat Co-
Operative Milk Marketing Federation, An and Amul Dairy, and National Dairy 
Development Board were established in 19 46, laying the groundwork for the co-
operative movement. Presently, Amul Dairy stands as the largest dairy in India and 
Asia, serving as a lifeline for countless smal l and medium farmers. In our nation, the 
co-operative sector has flourished due to the Government's dedication, with Gujarat 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Gujarati. 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
93

 
 
boasting a rich tradition in this domain. Ov er the past decade, significant strides have 
been made by the Government under the le adership of the esteemed Prime Minister, 
Shri Narendrabhai Modi, in revitalizing cooperative activities, particularly in the rural 
and agricultural sectors. A dedicated Ministry of Cooperation was established in the 
Central Government, outlining a comprehe nsive vision to expand the reach of 
cooperative endeavors and ensure equitabl e progress across all states. Aiming to 
elevate the cooperative movement to new heights, a holistic approach has been 
adopted. Numerous cooperativ e entities in the state have long operated under the 
motto 'No way-out without cooperation'. 
Milk cooperatives, Agricultural Produce Market Union, Credit Societies, District 
Cooperative Banks, and particularly Servic e Cooperative Societies have conferred a 
unique identity upon the cooperative sector  of Gujarat. Operat ing in accordance with 
the cooperative principles, these societies fulfill their societal obligations in a 
democratic manner while fostering the grow th of their members. Amidst the Covid 
pandemic, our cooperative enti ties have been at the forefront of service initiatives. 
Upholding their fundamental values, they have spared no endeavor in assisting 
individuals during times of crisis. Service Cooperative Societies have not only 
significantly contributed to the economic progress of the state but have also played a 
pivotal role in promoting social cohesion. Currently, Gujarat hosts 1 State Government 
Bank, 18 Central District Cooperative Ba nks, 10166 Primary Agricultural Credit 
Societies, 223 Citizen Co-operative Banks,  16091 Milk Societies, 2017 Consumer 
Cooperative Stores, and 83134  diverse cooperative entiti es including Agricultural 
Produce Market Committees and Taluka Cooperative Purchase and Sale Unions. 
Nationally, there are over 800,000 cooperative societies, encompassing 
approximately 98% of rural India. Around 30 crore individuals are affiliated with such 
cooperatives, indicating that one in every five citizens is linked to the cooperative 
sector in some capacity. Remarkably, a quar ter of all cooperative societies worldwide 
are located in our nation, making a substantial contribution to rural development and 
economic fortification. Small service cooperative societies engage in a spectrum of 
activities such as operating local farmer assistance center s, dispensing fertilizers and 
seeds, managing retail outlets for petrol  and diesel, overseeing water resource 
management, and installing solar panels. The States of Maharashtra and Gujarat have 
made a huge contribution to the cooperative sector in the entire country. To study the 
cooperative activities of Maharashtra and Gu jarat, cooperative leaders of the country 
and States as well as cooperative leaders fr om many countries of the world come to 
study. Gujarat state has given many national level cooperative leaders; Shambhubhai 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Patel, Jayarambhai Patel, Atmaram Patel, Dwarkadas Patel, Shantibhai Patel, 
Popatlal Vyas, Arvindbhai Maniyar, Pars i Bhatol, Galbabhai Chaudhary, Motibhai 
Chaudhary and many other cooperative leaders have accelerated cooperative 
activities from Gujarat. The current Unio n Home and Cooperation Minister Shri 
Amitbhai Shah was associated with various cooperative organizations since 1999, the 
t i m e  h e  w a s  t h e  l e a d e r  o f  B J P  Y u v a  M orcha. Respected Amitbhai Shah was the 
chairman of Asia's largest ADC Bank, whic h currently has more than 106 branches. 
He was also the Director in Gujarat State Co-operative Bank for years. Shri Digvijay 
Singh has left. I want to tell him something.  During his speech, he asked, why did the 
hon. Prime Minister Modiji give the responsibility of the Ministry of Co-operation to 
Shri Amitbhai Shah. The reason  is that Shri Amitbhai Shah  was the leader of the BJP 
Yuva Morcha since 1999. He has a vast experience of the co -operative sector. 
Beginning from the co-operative activities at the rural level, he has worked at various 
levels, that is the State and national leve ls. Shri Amitbhai Shah, who was associated 
with cooperative activities from a young age,  was entrusted with the responsibility of 
the Minister of Cooperation by the Prime Mi nister of the country, Shri Narendrabhai 
Modi. After 70 years of independence, the hu mane Prime Minister Shri Narendrabhai 
Modi has made cooperative activities flouri sh throughout the country and the country 
develops through cooperative means. Also, to  give priority to cooperative activities, 
the Ministry of Cooperation was created  separately in the year 2021 and its 
responsibility was entrusted to the hon. Sh ri Amitbhai Shah and in the current five-
year period, the work of accelerating coop erative activities in the country is being 
done by the hon. Home Minister Shri Amitbh ai Shah. During this 5 year period, all the 
co-operative institutions, beginning from the Block level (Taluka level) to the State 
level, all the Co-operative institutions are prospering under the leadership of BJP 
leaders. 25 years ago, there wa s a time all the Co-operative  institutions were led by 
the Congress party. Today, the Congress has ZERO institutions. All the institutions 
are functioning under the leadership of BJP leaders. People are sure that under the 
BJP regime and the able guidance of the hon.  Minister of Co-operation Shri Amitbhai 
Shah, the activities in the co-operative sector will prosper more and more. The 
members of these co-operative societies earn more dividend. Today, in Gujarat, 
there are many state level co-operative in stitutions and societies that give 15-20 
percent dividend to its members.  
During the Congress regime (UPA Government), the Budget of the Ministry of 
Cooperation was only Rs 122 crore in th e year 2013-14. Wherea s today, after the 
setting of the Ministry of Cooperation in th e Government led by hon. Amitbhai Shah 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
95

 
 
and hon. Prime Minister Shri Narendrabhai Modi ji, this Budget has increased to Rs 
1183 crore which is nine times more than the UPA Government. To bring flexibility in 
the working style of cooperative societies,  the Government has so far completed the 
process of computerization of more than 63,000 Primary Agricultural Credit Societies 
(PACS).  The Government has also set a ta rget of computerizing 1851 agricultural 
banks and Registrar of Co-operative Society offices of the country at a cost of Rs. 
225 crore. To realise the vision of “Cooperation for Prosperity ”, the Ministry of 
Cooperation, Government of India, has taken various initiatives to revive and 
strengthen the cooperative sector across th e country. Due to these initiatives, the 
institutions will be strengthened even in  those States/Union Territories where the 
cooperative movement is not in a good condition at present and thus the equitable 
development of the cooperative institutions/society of the country will be ensured.  To 
increase the penetration of cooperative-base d products in the international market, 
the Ministry of Cooperation has established the “ National Cooperative Export 
Limited”, which will focus on exporting cooperat ive products by reaching out to large 
markets outside the country. Today, 8863 cooper ative institutions in the country have 
become its members. To make the Primary Agricultural Credit Societies of the country 
multipurpose and multi-dimensional, “Model Bylaws ” have been prepared as a 
guideline for all the states and provisio n s  h a v e  a l s o  b e e n  m a d e  t o  m a k e  i t s  
membership more extensive, so that wo men and SC, ST communities get adequate 
representation. 32 states of the country ha ve adopted these Bylaws.  To strengthen 
such Primary Agricultural Credit Societies, a “Computerization Project” with a cost of 
Rs. 2516 crores has been approved and a plan to establish dairy and fisheries 
cooperatives to make them multipurpose ha s also been approved.  In the next five 
years, through the coordination of variou s organizations of the country and various 
schemes of the Government of India, “ the world’s largest decentralized grain storage 
scheme” has also been approved in the cooperative sector. Th is will reduce the 
wastage and transportation costs of grains. Farmers will get better prices for their 
produce.  To make generic medicines and fertilizer related services easily available to 
farmers at the rural level, Primary Agricu lture Societies have been enabled to run 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Kendras and Kisan Samriddhi Kendras, due to which 
36193 such Primary Agriculture Credit Societ ies have become functional today. In 
addition, the Ministry of Co-operation has set a target of increasing milk production of 
dairy cooperatives by 50% in the next fi v e  y e a r s  u n d e r  S h w e t  K r a n t i  2 . 0 .   T o  
strengthen the sugar cooperative mills of the country, a loan scheme of Rs. 10000 
crore has been launched and their old hard claims have been resolved, due to which 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
such mills have received relief of more th an Rs. 46000 crore. While the esteemed 
Prime Minister of the country is moving fo rward with the resolution of Developed 
India-2047 and the esteemed Home and Cooper ation Minister is moving forward with 
the approach of Cooperatives through whic h the first university in the cooperative 
sector of India is being established thro ugh this Act. The Government has so far 
worked for the sugar mills and agriculture sector. NCDC has worked for the 
development of the cooperative sector. But so far no specific policy or process was 
decided for training, education, research , rural development, improvement in the 
efficiency of institutions in cooperatives. By bringing all under this one “umbrella”, the 
scope of cooperative activities will increase an d it will be possible to survive in global 
competition. A proposal has been submitted to establish “Tribhuvan Co-operative 
University” with the aim of giving a holistic educational form to the cooperative 
movement in the country. The establishmen t of this university will prepare a new 
educated generation and professionals fo r the sound administration and all-round 
development of cooperative organizations, changes will be made according to global 
standards, the efficiency of the orga nizations will increase and the country's 
organizations will be developed by making the cooperative movement compatible with 
global competition. The National Cooperative Development Corporation is running the 
"Youth Cooperative Cooperative Enterprise  Support and Innovation Scheme" across 
the country, its main objective is to prom ote newly formed cooperative societies and 
provide assistance to societies that have been functioning for three months. Under 
this scheme, co-operative societies from the North-Eastern states, co-operative 
societies selected by NITI Aayog and soci eties in which 100% members are SC, ST, 
Divyang and women members get assistance on the basis of 80:20. The National 
Cooperative Development Corporation has also launched the following other schemes 
with the aim of strengthening farmer coop eratives and increasing crop production. 
The ‘Ayushman Sahakari’ scheme covering hospitals, health care, medical nursing 
and paramedical education and health insura nce is in operation. Many such schemes 
are being run by the Ministry of Co-operation. This Bill is oriented to give momentum 
to the activities in the co-operative sector in the coming days. I welcome this Bill. 
                                                                          
4.00 P.M. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎय, Shri Narhari Amin, आपका समय 
समाÃत हुआ। माननीय सदÎया, सुǛी दोला सेन। आपका समय पाँच िमनट है।  
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
97

 
 
MS. DOLA SEN (West Bengal) :  Thank you, Vice-Chairman , Madam, for giving me 
an opportunity  to speak.  Thanks to our party, All India Trinamool Congress, and our 
leader, hon. Mamata Banerjee, for giving  me the opportunity to speak on the 
"Tribhuvan" Sahkari University Bill, 2025.   
Sir, the All India Trinamool Congress demands that this Bill should be sent to a 
Committee.  Don't rush this like you rush through other Bills. & “We want that this Bill 
be sent to a Committee. ”  Madam, this Bill talks of cooperatives.  However, the 
Government's true intention on cooperatives  is very different.  In 2023-24, the Union 
Government utilized only three out of five ru pees it allocated for cooperatives in the 
Budget. & " Only 3 rupees out of 5 rupees, Mada m"! The biggest fund slash by the 
Ministry was on computerization of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies and grants to 
States.  I want to ask in this House: Why is this Government so anti-farmer?  Why are 
you so anti-federal? After all, cooperativ es are a State subject. Only Multi-State 
Cooperatives are under the Union List. Th en, why are you cutting the grants to 
States? And, then you talk ab out cooperative federalism!  &“Why so much 
opposition to the farmers? Why so much opposition to federalism? Why so much 
opposition to the opposition-ruled Stat e Governments?  Coop erative societies, 
according to the Constitution, is enumerated in the State List. ”  Madam, another 
example of their anti-federal mindset is  the funds disbursed by the National 
Cooperative Development Corporation in 2024 .  Only Rs. 3 crores was given to my 
State, West Bengal, that has 9 th highest development corporation, in 2024, whereas 
Rs.2,800 crores was given to a State that has 18 th  highest cooperative societies! The 
difference between these two States is simp le. One is BJP-ruled and another is ruled 
by a leader who understands cooperating way better than the Treasury Benches. 
&“In states, where there is a double engine Government, a sum of Rs. 2800 crore has 
been allocated, whereas, our opposition-r uled State has been granted a paltry sum 
of Rs. 3 crore.”                             
 On the one hand, the Government claims  that micro-ATMs are being set up 
within cooperative societies to provide easier access to banking services. However, 
on the other hand, the RBI has increased charges on withdrawal of money from 
rupees 2 to rupees 23 per transaction. This  makes me ask you: Why are you so anti-
poor? Why so anti-people? Why are you imposing such heavy penalties on people for 
withdrawing their own money from ATMs? & “Why so much opposition to the poor? 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali. 
 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Now one would require to pay a charge of 23 rupees for withdrawing one’s own 
money from ATM, Madam?” 
 Can you have a look at the Home and Cooperation Minister's reply in this 
discussion on the Bill in the Lok Sabha, wh ere he claimed that this university would 
train individuals annually and lead to job creation in the cooperative sector? Let me 
give some statistics on the track record of this Government. Under their flagship 
programme, PMKVY, only 15 per cent of th e trained candidates were placed under 
the programme. In fact, the placements have been dwindling since PMKVY 4.0. Half 
of the college students are not ready to be employed after graduating, and only 4 out 
of 10 youth in the workforce possess formal skills. 
Eighty per cent of the unemployed are yo uth, and 1 in 3 youth are neither in 
education or employment, nor in training; wo men make up 95 per cent of this group. 
This is their track record. Whereas, when I compare this to my home State Bengal, I 
am proud to say that today in Bengal; we  have over 30,000 cooperatives, employing 
nearly 90 lakh people. In fact, if we look  at women in Self-Help Groups, Bengal has 
the second-highest number of women mob ilised in Self-Help Groups, with over 1 
crore women; whereas, hon. Prime Minister  and hon. Home Minister's home State, 
Gujarat, has only around 28 la kh women in Self-Help Groups. 
& “If you look at West 
Bengal, approximately 90 lakh people work in 30,000 cooperative societies across the 
State and in terms of Women’s’ Self-help Groups, Bengal is at 2 nd position in the 
country, where about one crore women are em ployed.  Whereas, in Gujarat, only 28 
lakh women are employed".  
  Learn from our three-time outstanding Chief Minister. She is one of the most 
respected leaders across the world, who recently addressed Oxford University, 
showcasing the success story of Bengal, that is, Bengal's development. She is 
unparalleled and unlike mainstream polit ics in all respects. I leave you three 
suggestions. One, send this Bill to the Department-Related Standing Committee on 
Education for more scrutiny. 
*  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):  माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया आप बैठ जाएं। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
माननीय सदÎय, आप शांत रहȂ, बैठ जाएं।  ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
MS. DOLA SEN: * 
 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
99

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):  माननीय सदÎय, आप िबल पर ही बोलȂ। यह िरकॉडर् मȂ 
नहीं जा रहा है, आप िबल पर ही बोलȂ। माननीय सदÎय, आपका बोलने का समय समाÃत हुआ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MS. DOLA SEN:  इस िबल को किमटी मȂ भेिजए, thank you.                                                                        
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):  धन्यवाद। Ǜी क े.आर.एन. राजेश क ुमार। आपके  बोलने 
का समय 9 िमनट है।         
                 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESH KUMAR (Tamil Nadu) ;  & Madam Vice Chairman, I thank you 
very much for giving me the opportunity to speak on 'The "Tribhuvan" Sahkari 
University Bill, 2025'. I thank hon.  Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Thalapathy  M.K. 
Stalin, hon. Deputy Chief Minister of Ta mil Nadu, Brother Udhayanidhi and also our 
party leader in this House, Brother Tiruchi Siva, for giving me this opportunity. It was 
in Thiruvuru village of Tamil Nadu, the co-operative society was first formed in India in 
the year 1904. It is our State, Tamil Nadu, which first introduced co-operative system 
in the country. I would like to register this fact in this House as my duty. The objective 
of this Bill is to establish a Co-operative University. There are va rious Ministries and 
various Departments under the Union Go vernment. Can each and every Ministry 
establish a University? Usually they have  to be established under the Central 
University Act. Only if they are established under the Central University Act, University 
Grants Commission gives its approval to the Degrees offered by the Universities.  
Two years ago, in the same House, a B ill was passed to establish a University 
which would function under the Ministry of Railways.  It was established under the 
Central University Act. This was the conventi on for many years. But this University is 
not established under the Central University Act.  It is au tonomously set up under the 
Ministry of Cooperation through this Bill. Wh ether this University has the approval of 
the UGC, whether the post Graduate cour ses and the research degrees awarded by 
this University has the approval of UGC, is to be clarified. I would like to know these 
facts.  
Madam, this University is named as 'The  "Tribhuvan" Sahakari University'.  It 
is going to be established in the State of Gujarat. We welcome that it is named after a 
great leader of Gujarat. How can we under stand the term 'Sahakari'? It means co-
operatives. How can people from non-Hi ndi background understand the term 
                                                            
 Not recorded. 
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
'Sahakari'. We are following two language formula in Tamil Nadu. Many States are 
following two language formula. In this Ho use, a former Prime Minister had approved 
the usage of two language formula in many  States. This principle had been followed 
at many instances during the rule of Congress party also.  
If this University is established in the name 'The "Tribhuvan" Sahakari 
University', will the same name continue in future also?  It may continue as The 
"Tribhuvan" Sahakari University' even if it  is written in English. I would like to 
recommend renaming of this University as 'Co-operative University' in this 
Amendment itself. Only then, will the real objective come into existence.  People from 
non-Hindi background also will understand the significance of this University.  
Hon. Vice Chairman Madam, not only in Tamil Nadu, but also in various States 
of India, many universities offer Graduate and Post Graduate courses with respect to 
co-operative sector. There is an institute by name National Council for Cooperatives 
Training which functions under the Union Government. Twenty-one colleges are 
affiliated to this Council.  Vaikunth Mehta Na tional Institute of Cooperatives, Pune is 
also functioning under the Council. It is a very popular institute at the international 
level.  Many Such institutes also cater to the needs of co-operative education. Then, 
what is the necessity of setting up this Un verisity? Our former Prime Minister Pandit 
Jawaharlal Nehru laid the foundation for setting  up of many universities. It is our duty 
not to spoil that structure.  
The objective of setting up this Universi ty is not clear. Co-operative trainings 
are given by the respective State Governme nts in many states. Then, what is the 
need for establishing this University?  Ma dam, now you are offering a course in co-
operative sector. What would be the employ ment opportunities for those, graduated 
from this University? It is a great qu estion mark. Nowadays, modernisation is 
spreading at a rapid pace. Computerisation is  entering almost all fields. If students 
complete graduation from this University, wh at is the guarantee for their employment.  
It has to be explained. 
Madam, in this Bill, many new terms are used. It is mentioned as an Institute of 
National Importance. It has been mentioned as a Centre of Excellence. We agree with 
these objectives. But what is the source of fund for this Institute? It is nowhere 
mentioned in this Bill about the source of fu nds needed for this Institute. I would like 
to point out this issue here.  
Madam, many co-operative societies are functioning under various ministries. 
Significantly, there are various co-operatives functioning under various Ministries. The 
Ministry of Cooperation should formulate co -operative policy, should allocate funds 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
101

 
 
for the schemes meant for cooperatives, and should also have future plans for the 
development of co-operatives. It is my duty  to record this view  i n  t h i s  H o u s e .  B u t  
now, the Ministry aims to take control of all the co-operative societies under its 
administration. 
I would like to mention about IFFCO, In dian Farmers Fertiliser Co-operative 
Limited. It is a well-established co-opera tive society. It has been functioning 
efficiently since independence. It was under the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers. 
But now, it has been brought under the ad ministrative control of the Ministry of 
Cooperation. It is good for any institution to function under the respective Ministry. 
But now, the Institute which was functioning under the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilisers is brought under the control of th e Ministry of Cooperation. What is the 
objective behind this transfer of admini strative control? A co-operative society 
functioning for a particular s ector should be under the administrative control of that 
particular ministry. Only then can the cha llenges be faced. For example, during the 
Ukraine war, the role of IFFCO was significant.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):  माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है, 
Please conclude.  
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESH KUMAR:    One minute, Madam.  & What is the difference that 
is going to happen due to this change?  Wh at benefit are we going to get? What are 
the advantages due to this change of Minist ries? IFFCO played a vital role in efficient 
functioning of the Ministry of Fertilisers.  Mo reover, in this Bill, the University was not 
established newly. Already an institut e for Dairy and Animal Husbandry, was 
functioning in Anand, Gujarat. That instit ute has been upgraded to the status of a 
University by this Bill. An Institute has been renamed and re-registered as a 
University. Is it acceptable?   
Madam, nowadays, the Ministry of Cooperation is announcing a scheme, 'One 
District, One Co-operative Bank'. Now, the scheme is only at the naming stage. But 
more fund has to allocated for this 'One  District, one Co-operative Bank' scheme. 
More funds have to be allocated to NABARD also if this Ministry is functioning for the 
welfare for co-operative societies. With these words, I conclude my speech. Thank 
you for giving me this opportunity.”     
                                                                        
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। डा. अशोक 
क ुमार िमǄल, आपके  पास सात िमनट हȅ।  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल  ( पंजाब):  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक 
आज आपने मुझे ‘ ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी िबल, 2025’ पर बोलने का अव सर िदया है।   
महोदया, यह एक अच्छी पहल है और कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् को िशक्षा से जोड़ने का एक अच्छा Ģयास 
भी है। कोऑपरेिटव की धारा िबÊकु ल शांत नदी की तरह बहती है, यह िकसी की सीमा नहीं 
देखती, िक
सी मंिजल को नहीं देखती, यह जब भी जाती है, िवकास क े छोटे-बड़े बीज बोती हुई 
जाती है, आगे चलती जाती है और आिर्थक सहयोग को िवकिसत करती है। भारत मȂ सहकािरता 
की परंपरा काफी पुरानी है। अगर हम इितहास की ओर देखȂ, तो महात्मा गाँधी जी ने गर्ाम Îवराज 
क े िवचार क े माध्यम से, खादी और गर्ामीण उǏोगȗ क े माध्यम से सहकािरता को बढ़ावा िदया और 
इसको आज़ादी की लड़ाई से भी जोड़ा, मतलब यह है िक यह हमारे िल ए इतना महत्वपूणर् है!  
महोदया, Ǜी ितर्भुवन भाई पटेल जी जैसे अन्य िकसानȗ ने इसे आगे लाकर इस िवचार को साकार 
िकया और इस सहकािरता से जन्मी ‘अमूल’ भारत ही नहीं, बिÊक दुिनया का सबसे बड़ा डेयरी 
Ĥांड बन चुका है। मȅ आज इस मौके  पर  विर्गस क ुिरयन जी को भी नमन करता हूं िक उन्हȗने भारत 
मȂ कोऑपरेिटव मूवमȂट को आगे बढ़ाने मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान िदया।  
महोदया, यह िवधेयक उस समय आ रहा है, जब युनाइटेड नेशन्स ने 2025 को 
इंटरनेशनल ईय
र ऑफ कोऑपरेिटव घोिषत िकया हुआ है। हम जानते हȅ िक आज भारत मȂ 8 
लाख से अिधक सहकारी सिमितयां हȅ, िजनमȂ 30 करोड़ सदÎय जुड़े हुए हȅ।  इसका मतलब यह है 
िक हमारी सो
साइटी का एक बहुत बड़ा सेगमȂट इस सेगमȂट से जुड़ा हुआ है।  हम उÇमीद करते हȅ 
िक यह िबल कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् क े िलए वही कायर् करेगा, जो IITs ने  इंजीिनयिंरग क े िलए और 
IIMs ने मैनेजमȂट एजुक ेशन क े िलए िकया है।  यह तभी संभव हो पाएगा, जब यह एक डायनेिमक 
यूिनविर्सटी बने, एक मÊटी-डाइमȂशनल यूिनविर्सटी बने और एक इंटर-िडिसिÃलनरी यूिनविर्सटी 
बने।   
अब मȅ क ु छ बातȂ िबल क े Ģावधान ȗ पर करना चाहूंगा।  क्लॉज 4 क े तहत इंिÎटǷूशन ऑफ 
रूरल  मैनेजमȂट आणंद को एक िवÌविवǏालय क े रूप  मȂ िवकिसत करने का Ģावधान है और 
इसका नाम ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय है। सरकार ने इसके  िलए 500 करोड़ का फ ं ड भी 
घोिषत िकया है। यह िवÌविवǏालय एक Institute of Nation
al Importance क े रूप  मȂ घोिषत 
िकया जाएगा, जो िक एक अच्छा कदम है।  इसके  साथ-साथ आईआरएमए, जो पुराना इंिÎटǷूट 
चल रहा है, उसको भी सȂटर ऑफ एिक्सलȂस घोिषत िकया जाएगा और उसकी ऑटोनमी को 
मेन्टेन रखा जाएगा। क्लॉज 6 मȂ िवÌव
िवǏालय क े उǈेÌय ÎपÍट िकए गए हȅ, जैसे िक कोऑपरेिटव 
सेक्टर क े िलए टर्ेन्ड मैनपावर तैयार करना, कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटीज़ क े कमर्चािरयȗ और बोडर् 
मेÇबसर् को टर्ेिंनग देना, िरसचर् और डेवलपमȂट को बढ़ावा देना और इस क्षेतर् मȂ StartUps,  
innovation और entrepreneurship क े िलए भी जरूरी कदम उठाना।    
अब मȅ आगे बढ़ते हुए क ु छ सुझाव देना चाहूंगा।  कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटी मȂ पीिढ़यȗ से क ु छ 
लोगȗ ने बहुत ज्यादा योगदान िदया है और वे इस मूवमȂट से भी जुड़े रहे हȅ, जैसे शुगर िमÊस हȅ, 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
103

 
 
डेयरी यूिनयन्स हȅ, एपीएमसीज़ हȅ, वुमेन सोसाइटी हȅ, िकसान ऑगȃनाइजेशन्स हȅ।  मȅ सरकार से 
िनवेदन करूं गा िक ऐसे लोग, जो इसमȂ पीिढ़यȗ से जुड़े हुए हȅ, उनको एडिमशन मȂ Ģाथिमकता दी 
जाए और उनको नौकिरयȗ मȂ भी Ģाथि मकता  दी जाए, यानी उनके  िलए इस िबल क े अंदर ही 
िवशेष िरज़वȃशन का Ģावधान िकया जाए। इस िवधेयक क े क्लॉज़ 7 मȂ एक Ģावधान है िक 
िवÌविवǏालय अपनी जरूरत  और उǈेÌयȗ की पूिर्त क े िलए outlying campus या िÎकल 
डेवलपमȂट क ैÇपस खोल सकता है।  आपके  माध्यम से मȅ माननीय  मंतर्ी जी से इस अवसर पर एक 
मांग करूं गा।  मȅ पंजाब से आता हूं और पंजाब एक ऐसा राज्य है, िजसने कोऑपरेिटव मूवमȂट मȂ 
सबसे ज्यादा सहयोग िदया है। जब देश की खाǏ सुरक्षा की बात आई, तब पंजाब सबसे आगे 
आकर खड़ा हुआ। यिद देश मȂ गर्ीन रेवोÊ
यूशन सक्सेसफु ल हुआ, तो उसमȂ भी सबसे ज्यादा 
योगदान पंजाब का रहा और पंजाब ने पूरे देश का पेट भरा।   पंजाब मȂ वेरका, सोहना और पंजाब 
एगर्ो जैसी सर
कारी संÎथाएं भी हȅ, िजनका इसमȂ महत्वपूणर् योगदान है।   
मȅ सरकार से िफर दोबारा मांग करूं गा िक ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्स टी का जो सबसे 
पहले outlying campus खोला जाए, वह पंजाब मȂ खोला जाए। यह माननीय मंतर्ी जी से मेरा 
िनवेदन है और मुझे लगता है िक इसमȂ बाकी लोग भी मुझे सपोटर् करȂगे। सहकािरता क े बारे मȂ कई 
बार हमȂ लगता है िक वह िसफर् आिर्थक संरचना है, बिÊक वह एक आटर् भी हो सकती है और वह 
एक साइंस भी हो सकती है, क्यȗिक इसमȂ हर क्षेतर् आ जाता है। इसमȂ डेयरी भी आती है, क ृिष भी 
आती है, टेक्सटाइल का रॉ मैटेिरयल भी आता है, बȅिंकग भी कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटी का एक 
अिभन्न अंग है, हाउिंसग भी उसमȂ आता है, िफशरीज़ भी आता है, हȅडीकर्ाÄट भी आता है और 
कॉटेज इंडÎटर्ीज भी आता है।  इसमȂ बहुत अलग-अलग मुǈे आते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मेरा सुझाव 
होगा िक इस िवÌ
विवǏालय मȂ सेक्टर-Îपेिसिफक कोसȃज शुरू  िकए जाएं, िजससे कोऑपरेिटव 
सेक्टर की सÃलाई चेन क े हर अंग को मजबूती िमले और गर्ा उंड लेवल से ग्लोबल लेवल तक 
भारत की सहकािरता को मजबूत बनाया जा सके । यह आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से मेरा 
िनवेदन रहेगा। क्लॉज 9 मȂ सरकार क े पास क ु छ एक्सेिसव पावसर् हȅ, यहां तक िक वह यूिनविर्सटी 
क े िकसी िडसीजन को भी रǈ कर सकती है। एक तरफ हम इसे Institute of National 
Importance बना रहे हȅ, तो वहीं दूसरी तरफ कह रहे हȅ िक सरकार बीच मȂ कभी भी उसके  िकसी 
फ ैसले को रǈ कर सकती है, तो यह थोड़ा contradictory है। इसिलए मȅ आपके  through मंतर्ी जी 
से िनवेदन करू ँगा िक उसकी importance को बचाए रखने क े िलए, उसके  eminence क े status 
को बचाए रखने क े िलए सरकार की दखलअंदाज
ी न हो और सरकार को उसके  िकसी फ ैसले को 
रǈ करने का अिधकार न हो। 
 मैडम, मȅ एमपीज़ की तरफ से मंतर्ी जी से एक िनवेदन करू ँगा िक बहुत से क Ȃदर्ीय 
िवÌव
िवǏालय मȂ Member of Parliament को Governing Body मȂ एक सीट दी जाती है, लेिकन 
इसमȂ वह Ģावधान नहीं है। हममȂ से बहुत से Members of Parliament ऐसे हȗगे, जो cooperative 
movement से जुड़े हुए हȅ, जो िकसान movement से जुड़े हुए हȅ। ...(समय की घं
टी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎय, please conclude. 
 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: मैडम, मुझे बस आधा िमनट दे दीिजए।  यह हम सभी की माँग है।  
इसिलए उसमȂ एमपीज़ मȂ से एक मेÇबर जरूर  बनाया जाए, तािक वे हमारे एमपीज़ का फायदा 
उठा सकȂ । ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):  धन्यवाद, माननीय सदÎय। 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल  मैडम, बस आिखरी लाइन रह गई। चूँिक यह मंतर्ालय अिमत शाह जी 
क े पास है, तो हम सबकी उÇमीद बढ़ जाती है िक इसमȂ बहुत बिढ़या काम होगा। इसीिलए मȅ 
उÇमीद करता हूँ ... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPER
SON (SHRIMATI DHARMSHILA GUPTA): Please conclude.   
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: मैडम, मȅ बस conclude कर रहा हूँ। इसमȂ मेरे suggestion क े ऊपर 
ध्यान िदया जाए। मैडम, मȅ बस दो लाइनȂ कह कर अपनी बात खत्म करू ँगा।  अब ज्ञान से सहकार 
का दीप जलाएँ हम। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):
 माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया।  आपकी 
बात आ गई, Ãलीज़ बैठ जाइए।  Ǜी शुभाशीष खुंिटया जी। आपके  पास 8 िमनट्स हȅ। 
 
SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA (Odisha) : Hon. Vice-Chairman, Madam, today, on 
Utkal Diwas, we honour Odisha’s rich cultur al heritage and contributions. I extend my 
best wishes to all.  Bande Utkal Janani.  
 Madam, thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak on the Tribhuvan 
Sahkari University Bill, 2025.  मैडम, यह िबल हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा क े दो महत्वपूणर् Îतंभȗ, 
िशक्षा और cooperative से जुड़ा हुआ है। At first glance, this Bill appears to be about 
strengthening co-operative education. लेिकन असल मȂ यह cooperati
ve संÎथानȗ को िशक्षा 
क े नाम पर क ेन्दर् क े िनयंतर्ण मȂ लाने का Ģयास है।  मैडम, हमारे संिवधान की Concurrent List मȂ 
िशक्षा का िवषय आता है, िजसका मतलब है िक क ेन्दर् और राज् य, दोनȗ को िमल कर फ ैसला लेना 
चािहए, लेिकन यह सरकार राज्य से िबना सलाह िकए िदÊली से सीधे फ ैसले थोपने की आदत 
बना चुकी है।   
 I would like to mention some of the Clauses of the given Bill which promote 
centralisation.  Clause 2 declares this newly- established University as an Institution of 
National Importance ensuring Central control. Clauses 11 and 15 bring IRMA under 
this new University by establishing the Institute of Rural Management and School 
within this. Clause 9 gives the Central Government power to review and issue 
directions threatening control.  Is this co-operative federalism?  Where is the dialogue 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
105

 
 
with the States in taking decisions mentioned in this Bill? Where is the discussion with 
existing co-operative institutions in taking decisions mentioned in this Bill?  This is a 
complete violation of the constitutional provision given under Schedule VII of the 
Constitution. सरकार cooperative federalism की बात करती है, लेिकन हकीकत मȂ यह 
cooperative hijacking कर रही है।   
 मैडम, हर राज्य का सहकारी मॉडल अलग होता है। The co-operatives function 
according to local needs and regulations an d their operations vary from State to 
State.  These involve local techniques, tec hnicians and different styles of working.  
For example, the sugarcane co-operatives of Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh are 
different from the dairy co-operatives of Gujarat.  In Odisha, we have palm cultivation 
co-operatives, fishery co-operatives an d Mission Shakti Women-led SHGs, each 
with distinct structures. सब अलग-अलग ढंग से काम करते हȅ। Yet, this Bill fails to 
recognise this variation and forces all co-operatives to work under one Central 
framework, undermining the very essence of the decentralisation.   
 The IRMA was established with State participation and operates 
independently, but this Bill takes the opposite approach
  of full Central control.   Why?  
This is not co-operative education.  This is co-operative capturing. मैडम, अगर सरकार 
वाÎतव मȂ cooperatives को मजबूत करना चाहती है, तो उसे जनता को अिधकार देना चािहए।  
Odisha has already empowered 70 lakh women through Mission Shakti under the 
leadership of our beloved leader, Shri Naveen  Patnaik, by giving them direct control 
over the Self-Help Groups. Why is this Government afraid of empowering the people?   
 सरकार मिहलाओं क े empowerment क े िलए ओिडशा मȂ university क्यȗ Îथािपत नहीं 
कर सकती, जबिक इसके  िलए पहले से ही एक मजबूत structure मौजूद है?  इस े बस थोड़ा 
बढ़ावा देने की जरूरत  है, िजससे बड़े और Ģभावी पिरण
ाम िमल सकते हȅ। मैडम, सरकार इस 
िवÌविवǏालय का नाम ितर्भुवन दास पटेल जी क े नाम पर रख रही है। He was the pioneer of 
India’s cooperative movement. ितर्भुवन जी महात्मा गांधी जी क े follower थे। वे 
decentralization, सहकािरता, सशिƪकरण और Îथानीय उǏोगȗ क े पक्षधर थे, जबिक यह िबल 
िवपरीत िदश
ा मȂ जाकर, सहकारी संÎथाओं का क ंटर्ोल िदÊली को दे रहा है।  
 Madam, it is good that the Government ha s proposed to set up this university.  
In this context, I would like to say that Od isha is home to some of the largest and 
most-vibrant cooperative movements in th e country. Like Mission Shakti, Odisha’s 
Jagannath Temple in Puri runs one of wo rld’s largest cooperative kitchens serving 
lakhs of devotees daily. Traditional artisans, carpenters, painters and cooks play a 
crucial role in Odisha’s economy through cooperative framework. Why not establish a 
Skill Development University in Odisha to st rengthen Mission Shakti, food processing 
cooperatives and rural artisans and empowe r women and people at large in a proper 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
cooperative framework, and why not se t a Food Craft Institute in Puri? सरकार यिद 
co-operative education को मजबूत करना चाहती है, तो ओिडशा को Ģाथिमकता देनी चािहए।   
मैडम, ओिडशा मȂ 40 परसȂट एससी-एसटी आबादी है, भारत क े क ु ल खिनज उत्पादन मȂ 
ओिडशा का योगदान 50 परस Ȃट है, लेिकन लाभ िकसे िमलता है - not the tribal people who 
live on this land and who are the true ow ners of these resources but a handful of 
corporate players! क्यȗ?  जमीन उनकी, खिनज उनका और उसका फायदा िकस ी और को!  
The biggest reason for this exploitation is rise of mine developers and operators as 
well as firms that act as middlemen reducing  tribal people to daily-wage labourers on 
their own land. क्यȗ हमारे आिदवासी भाई-बहन अपनी ही जमीन पर एक मजदूर की तरह काम 
करȂ और corporates अरबȗ रुपय े का मुनाफा कमाए?  हम Ȃ MDOs क े Îथान पर co-operative 
mining करनी चािहए।  We need tribal-led mining so th at they extract their own minerals 
and reap the benefits. The Government  should establish a Skill Development 
University for Tribal Cooperative Mining.  Madam, cooperatives are not built through 
bureaucratic control. They grow by empowering people but sadly, the word 
‘empowerment’ is not there in this Government’s dictionary.  मैडम, भारत मȂ लगभग 8 
लाख co-operatives हȅ, िजनके  30 करोड़ से अिधक सदÎय हȅ और हर पांचव
ां भारतीय िकसी न 
िकसी सहकारी संÎथा का िहÎसा है। 75 वषर् मȂ भारत को पहली बार एक सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय 
िमलने जा रहा है।  
 Madam, this is a historical moment. If th is Bill is to serve its true purpose, it 
must do the following - ensure academic an d financial autonomy for the university, 
respect the role of States in cooperative education, support decentralized cooperative 
education models, encourage participatory governance not bureaucratic interference.  
It should take help from the local regional  college, which will bring expertise from all 
sectors including technical, health, agricultural, rural m anagement and many more. मȅ 
सरकार से अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं िक इस िवधेयक मȂ जरूरी  संशोधन करे, तािक यह वाÎतव मȂ 
co-operatives को मजबूत कर सके ।    
मȅ अंत मȂ यही कहना चाहता हूं िक, नींव क े िबना इमारत नहीं िटकती है और िब ना  
जनभागीदारी क े िवकास िदखता नहीं है।  यह िबल अगर रोशनी है, तो Ģकाश हर जगह पहुंचना 
चािहए, न िक िसफर् िदÊली क े दरबार मȂ झलकना चािहए।  धन्यवाद, वंदे उत्कल जननी! जय 
जगन्नाथ!  मȅ एक बार िफर आप सभी को 'उत्कल िदवस' की बधाई देता हूं, जय जगन्नाथ!      
                                                  
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय Ǜी अयोध्या राम
ी रेƿी आला। आपके  पास 8 िमनट 
का समय है।  
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhra Pradesh) :  Thank you, Madam, for 
giving me the opportunity to speak on th e Tribhuvan Sahakari University Bill, 2025. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
107

 
 
The purpose of this Bill is to establish IR MA as a Tribhuvan Saha kari University. The 
objectives are very clear.  It is going to bring education, training and capacity building 
in cooperative sector. It also undertakes R&D activities in related areas. Through the 
University, this Bill is also going to offe r the postgraduate degrees, distance learning 
programmes, e-learning programmes and courses on centre of excellence in 
cooperative sector, which is very welcoming. It is also going to establish outlying 
campuses or affiliate institutions across In dia and abroad. This is also a very good 
objective.  The current IRMA will become an autonomous school within the University. 
It will become centre of exce llence for rural management for the entire country, which 
is, again, very welcoming. Through this Bill, the University is going to be instituted for 
systematic study of cooperative institutions. It is a laudable achievement and benefits 
the non-credit sectors such as weavers,  artisans, marketing professionals and 
others. Our country has used this economic model as a vehicle, as a symbol of 
democratic wealth creation.  Identifying the potential, our Prime Minister aptly called it 
a middle path between socialism and capitalism where wealth is created in a 
democratic manner with collective ownership.  
Madam, there are some issues around the cooperative s ector. One of the 
most important issues is non-fulfillment of announced cooperation, that is, linked 
targets. I want the Union Minister of Cooper ation to look at how cooperative societies 
played a huge role in the country. It is accounting for 19 per cent in agriculture credit, 
35 per cent in fertilizer distribution, 25 per cent in fertilizer production, 31 per cent in 
sugar production, 10 per cent in production and procurement of milk, 13 per cent in 
wheat procurement, 20 per cent in paddy procurement and 21 per cent in fish 
production. In this area, the linked targets to the sector are not properly fulfilled. I 
want the Ministry to look into it. Also, there is stagnant allocation of National 
Cooperative Development Corporation Fund, the NCDC Fund. If you look at it, the 
allocation of NCDC has been stuck at Rs. 500 crore for the past two years. This is a 
failure on the promise that would have ot herwise gone into strengthening and adding 
fuel to the growing cooperative sector in th e country. Also, there is sectoral disparity 
within cooperative societies. The Nation al Cooperative Plan included reducing 
regional disparities in the cooperative sector. However, attention must also be paid to 
reducing disparities in between the sector s. The 2023-24 cooperative societies data 
shows that the handloom sector, agro-p rocessing and women's welfare in lower 
ranks of both society and sector count with in cooperative institutions. This is yet 
another gap that remains unresolved. As we st and to discuss this Bill, I want that the 
sectoral disparity must be addressed. We also need to look at the plight of the 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
handloom cooperatives in Andhra Pradesh. Actually, Andhra Pradesh's handloom 
sector is facing a severe crisis today. The per capita income is very low, as low as 57 
rupees per day, which is even less than  the NREGA payments. The Andhra Pradesh 
State Handloom Weavers Cooperative Society also appoints a huge number of 
people. More than two lakh people are its me mbers. There is a lot of struggle that is 
going on for raw materials, quality of the material and getting the right prices for that.                         
 Even to meet the operating expenditures , there is a serious problem. Also on 
formal banking credit, working capital aid and some welfare basic things like ESI and 
EPF benefits. There is a huge problem that th is Andhra cooperative sector is facing.  
Hence, I request the Minister of Cooper ation to remove the GST on handlooms; 
allocate Rs.3,000 crore for the protection of  handloom sector in  Andhra Pradesh; 
issue immediate orders to support the weav er community by implementing a scheme 
of free 200 electricity units, clearing pendin g yarn subsidies and interest arrears; and 
establish a handloom welfare fund board for Andhra Pradesh.  
Madam, since we are talking about the University Bill, I want to tell you that 
there were some 17 Vice-Chancellors in Andhra Pradesh who were directly or 
indirectly forced to resign in one go. This is what I actually wanted to say.  It is in the 
Concurrent List where State and Centre work together. In our federal system, this has 
never been experienced in this form. It shou ld be certainly looked into by the Central 
Government.   
Next is dilution of the Nadu-Nedu Sc heme and politicisation of educational 
reforms. In the previous YSR Government , more than 56,000 Government Schools 
were brought under NADU-NEDU scheme -- mo re than 15,000 crore in Phase 1 and 
more than 7,000 crore in Phase 2. A lot of money was spent on it.  But that scheme is 
not properly going on now. There should not be any partiality when it comes to 
education. The good things that have come should be continued.   
Next is, removal of English as a medium of instruction in Andhra Pradesh 
schools. Former Chief Minister Jaga n Mohan Reddy brought in a very good 
improvement in bringing educational standards for the children in Andhra Pradesh by 
bringing in English as a medium of instru ction. That will help children in accessing 
global platforms and developing a very stro ng leadership. They will become CEOs of 
great institutions in times to come.  
Madam, this is a very good Bill. We suppo rt this Bill. The Government of India 
should focus on strategising and structuring key deliverables for implementation.  The 
Government should come out with good mo dels State-wise and sector-wise which 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
109

 
 
can sustain in times to come. With this, from YSR Congress Party, we support this 
Bill.  Thank you, Madam. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): धन्यवाद, महोदय।  माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी संजय यादव,  
आपके  पास पाँच िमनट हȅ।  
 
Ǜी संजय यादव (िबहार): मैडम, छः िमनट हȗगे।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): पाँच िमनट हȅ।  
 
Ǜी संजय यादव:  मैडम, मुझे " ितर्भुवन" सहकारी यूिन
 विर्सटी िवधेयक, 2025 की चचार् मȂ भाग 
लेने हेतु समय देने क े िलए आपका धन्यवाद। मैडम, यह िबल IRMA की academic freedom और 
institutional autonomy को completely undermine करता है।  जब मȅ इस िबल की Governing 
Body की composition को देख रहा था, तो पता चला िक इसमȂ St ate representation को 
िबÊकु ल minimize कर िदया गया है। इसमȂ क ेवल चार Principal Secretaries को include िकया 
गया है, वह भी rotation basis पर।  सबसे दुखद बात यह है िक जब आप Governing Body का 
social composition या composition देख रहे हȅ, तो पता चलता है िक उसमȂ वंिचत, उपेिक्षत, 
SC, ST,
 OBC  क े िलए इन्हȗने कोई सीट िरजवर् नहीं की है।  SC, ST, OBC को Governing 
Body से completely boycott कर िदया गया है। यह दशार्ता है िक इस सरकार मȂ Ģायः िजतने 
भी Bills आ रहे हȅ, अगर हम उन्हȂ देखते हȅ, तो उनमȂ SC, ST, OBC को  हर Îतर पर eliminat e 
करने का एक क ुचकर् रचा जा रहा है। इसकी Governing Body मȂ representation को लेकर मेरा 
यह सुझाव है िक इसमȂ 20 परस Ȃट PACS क े representatives होने चािहए और 50 परस Ȃट Îटेट 
क े representatives होने चािहए।  
 मैडम, जब इस िवधेयक मȂ हम reservation policy देखȂगे, तब इसमȂ पाएंगे िक facult y 
recruitment मȂ academic council हो, administrative role हो या students क े admission हȗ, 
उनमȂ SC/ST और OBC क े िलए reservation policy क ै से लागू होगी, इसके  िलए कोई ÎपÍटता 
नहीं है। जब आप एक यूिनविर्सटी बना रहे हȅ, तो उसमȂ आप फ ैकÊटीज िरकर्ूट करȂगे, बच्चȗ का 
एडिमशन होगा, तो आप बहुजनȗ को क ै से छांट सकते हȅ? अब Ģाय: देखने मȂ आता है िक िजतने 
भी िरकर्ूटमȂट हो रहे हȅ, चाहे कोई भी यूिनव
िर्सटी हो - हम सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी की ही बात नहीं 
कर रहे - उसमȂ िपछड़े, अित िपछड़े, दिलत और आिदवािसयȗ को छांटने क े िलए इन
की पहली 
चाल यह होती है िक एकल पद को सृिजत िकया जाता है। एकल पद मȂ बोल िदया जाता है िक 
आरक्षण नीित लागू नहीं होगी। 
दूसरा, यिद चार-पांच पद हȗ, जहाँ आरिक्षत वग ș क े लोग अÃलाई कर सकȂ, तो उसमȂ यह 
कह िदया जाता है िक NFS - Not Found Suitable, यानी देश की 80 फीसद आबादी, िजसमȂ 
िपछड़े, दिलत, अित िपछड़े शािमल हȅ, उनमȂ कोई भी क ȅिडडेट सूटेबल नहीं िमलता। इस देश क े 
मूल िनवािस
यȗ मȂ इनको कोई एक क ȅिडडेट ऐसा नहीं िमलता, जो उस चीज़ क े िलए सूटेबल है। 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): क ृपया, आप िबल पर बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी संजय यादव: मȅ िबल पर ही बोल रहा हूं। िबल मȂ ही िरज़वȃशन की कोई ÎपÍटता नहीं है। मȅ यही 
बात बोल रहा हूं। यही नहीं, इसके  अलावा जब इस िबल मȂ f ee capping, तो इन्हȗने फीस 
िरवीज़न को inflation क े  index से relate कर िदया है। मतलब महंगाई बढ़ेगी, तो उसके  अनुपात 
मȂ फीस भी बढ़ेगी। जो एससी, एसटी या ओबीसी क े लोग हȅ, वे कहां से इस महंगाई क े अनुपात मȂ 
फीस भरȂगे। उस पर क ैिंपग होनी चा
िहए। इस िबल क े माध्यम से हमारी मांग है िक आपको 
आरिक्षत वगर् क े बच्चȗ को िरयायत देनी चािहए और फीस को क ै प करना चािहए।     
आप सहकार से समृिǉ की बात करते हȅ, लेिकन जब तक िकसान क े सुख, सÇमान और 
आय मȂ वृिǉ नहीं होगी, तब तक समृिǉ कहाँ से आएगी? मैडम, जैसे दीया और बाती का, अंक ु र 
और माटी का िरÌ
ता होता है, वैसे ही सहकािरता और क ृिष का, तथा सहकार जनȗ और िकसानȗ 
का िरÌता होता है। जब तक आप िकसानȗ को आव
Ìयक सुिवधाएँ नहीं दȂगे, उनकी आय मȂ वृिǉ 
नहीं करȂगे, तब तक सहकार से समृिǉ संभव नहीं। 
अब िबहार की बात करȂ तो वहाँ सहकािरता िवभाग क्या कर रहा है? िबहार मȂ सहकािरता 
िवभाग क े नाम पर सरकारी खचȃ से का
यर्कर्म होते हȅ, लेिकन उनमȂ िसफ़र् पॉिलिटकल भाषण होते 
हȅ। आप सहकािरता को क ै से बढ़ाएँगे? को-ऑपरेिटव सेक्टर मȂ क्या काम करȂगे? इस पर कोई 
चचार् नहीं होती। 
िबहार मȂ 8,463 PAC
S हȅ। यिद हम 2014 से अब तक का बजट उठाकर देखȂ, तो हर साल 
यह कहा जाता है िक computerization होगा। लेिकन 8,463 PACS मȂ से क ेवल 226 PACS मȂ 
ही अब तक हाडर्वेयर की आपूिर्त की गई है और उन्हȂ ऑनला इन नहीं िकया गया है। िबहार मȂ 
PACS computerization क े नाम पर क ेवल हाडर्वेयर िडÅबȗ मȂ बंद है। न तो कोई टर्ेिंनग दी गई, न 
कोई ऑनलाइन िसÎटम िवकिसत िकया गया। हाडर्वेयर लगाया तक नहीं गया - CPU और 
मॉिनटर तक नहीं जोड़े गए। 
अब यिद हम िबहार मȂ कमिर्शयल बȅकȗ की िÎ
थित देखȂ, तो क ेसीसी (Kisan Credit 
Card) क े तहत िकतना लोन िदया गया है? सहकािरता से क ै से समृिǉ होगी? िबहार का कर् ेिडट-
िडपॉिज़ट रेिशयो (CDR) देश मȂ सबसे कम है। मतलब, िबहार क े िकसानȗ और आम लोगȗ से 
पैसा िलया जाता है, लेिकन उन्हȂ कज़र् नहीं िदया जाता। यह कज़र् िबहार क े बाहर िदया जाता है 
और िफर उस कज़ȃ को नीरव मोदी, मेहुल चौकसी जैसे लोग लेकर भाग जाते हȅ, जबिक िबहार क े 
लोग देखते रह जाते हȅ। जो सीडीआर रेÌय
ो है, उस पर ध्यान देने की आवÌयकता है। गितशिƪ 
यूिनविर्सटी भी गुजरात मȂ चली गई, जो सहकािरता इरमा था, वह भी चला गया। मैडम, िबहार मȂ 
क ु छ होना चािहए। वहां से इतने एमपीज़ हȅ, तो वहां भी कोई यूिनविर्सटी दे दीिजए। गितशिƪ भी 
चली गई।   
िबहार का जो साख जमा अनुपात है, वह 50 परसȂट है, जो िक राÍटर्ीय औसत से बहुत कम 
है। िबहार मȂ क ृिष ऋण और भी कम िमलता है - क ेवल 12 परस Ȃट िकसानȗ को क ेसीसी लोन 
िमलता है। पशुपालन और मत्Îय पालन क्षेतर् मȂ तो और भी बुरा हाल है। 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
111

 
 
यह िÎथित तब है, जब िबहार क े लोग NPA नहीं बनाते, यानी वे िडफॉÊट नहीं करते। िफर 
भी उन्हȂ लोन नहीं िदया जाता! 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎय, आप सही आंकड़े बताएं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया बैठ जाएं।  
 
Ǜी संजय यादव: मैडम, मȅ मांग कर ता हूँ िक िबहार मȂ भी सहकािरता यूिनविर्सटी या अन्य उच्च 
Îतरीय यूिनविर्सटी Îथािपत की जाए। ...(समय की घंटी)... सब क ु छ क ेवल गुजरात मȂ ही नहीं 
होना चािहए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎय, Ãलीज़ कन्क्लूड। 
 
Ǜी संजय यादव: गुजरात को महात्मा गांधी क े नाम से जाना जाता है, लेिकन िबहार महात्मा गांधी 
की कमर्भूिम भी रही है।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा) : माननीय सदÎय, Ãलीज़ कन्क्लूड। आपका बोलने का 
समय समाÃत हुआ। 
 
Ǜी संजय यादव: वहाँ भी सरकार को क ु छ ध्यान देना चा
िहए, शुिकर्या। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎय, डा. मु. तंबी दुरै। आपके  पास बोलने क े 
िलए चार िमनट का समय है।  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :  Madam, I rise to participate in the discussion 
on the Bill. Madam, this Bill seeks to es tablish the Institute of Rural Management 
Anand, Gujarat as “ Tribhuvan” Sahkari University, which is now a registered society. 
 
The University is going to provide educat ion, training and capacity building in co-
operative sector and will undertake research and development activities. The object of 
the University is that the research and de velopment is more important and not just 
selling the degrees. What is happening in Indi a is, most of the private universities and 
deemed universities are only selling degrees  and not concentrating on research and 
development, I want to bring this to your notice.   
Now, we are speaking about cooperation.  DMK talks about federal 
cooperation.  I want to know:  “Is there any cooperation from DMK-ruled Government 
to the Central Government? ”  I do not know.  If there is no cooperation, how would 
development take place in Tamil Nadu?  There must be cooperation in that.  Not only 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
cooperation from the Government side, there is no cooperation between the 
Governor of Tamil Nadu and Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu.  …(Interruptions)…  There is 
no cooperation there also in appointing th e Vice-Chancellors.  As we are discussing 
about the University, universit y means that the Vice-Chance llor would be the head of 
the university.  Without a Vice-Chancellor, how can we run the un iversity?  You tell 
me.  In Tamil Nadu, in nine universities, there are no Vice-Chancellors. I was also a 
Professor teaching in the Anna University. In  that Anna University, there is no Vice-
Chancellor now. Molestation of a la dy took place in Anna University. 
…(Interruptions)…  What action was taken?  This is very shameful.   
Next, I come to the point re garding the UGC guidelines.  …(Interruptions)…  
UGC has brought the guidelines on how to  appoint the Vice-Chancellors.  Now, I 
have an objection.  The present UGC is going to bring in 2025, “without the 
nomination of the State Government.”  It is against the federal setup.  I am protecting 
that because I was also an Education Minister. At that time, I had the role to nominate 
from the Government side – I was one of the selecting committee members – for 
selecting a Vice-Chancellor.  I am telling this  because Shri Digvijaya Singh said in his 
speech that Vice-Chancellors were not appoin ted in Tamil Nadu, Kerala and said so 
many other things. Who is responsible for th is?  The Congress is responsible for this. 
The UGC regulations, 2010, stipulated that  there must be a nominee from the UGC. 
Who did it? The Congress did it. Who was there at that time? The DMK was the 
partner of the Government. Therefore, at that time, they accepted this kind of 
regulation to have a nomin ee from UGC. Still that regula tion is there. Therefore, 
Governor is asking:  “Why is the State Government rejecting to put a UGC nominee?”  
…(Interruptions)…  What is their problem? Let th em put a UGC nominee and select 
the Vice-Chancellor.  This regulation was brought by UPA Government, DMK and 
Congress, in 2010.  Who is responsible? Ther efore, this kind of system is there in 
Tamil Nadu. How did they conduct the convocation?  As there is no Vice Chancellor, 
convocations are not happening  properly. In Madras Univ ersity, there is no Vice-
Chancellor, it is a reputed University.  At Anna University, no Vice-Chancellor is there.  
Like that, there are so many universities. For another one year, I do not think, any 
appointment would be there in other univers ities because of the failure of the DMK 
Government, not cooperating with the Ce ntral Government as well as with the 
Governor to solve this problem.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎय, बैठ जाएं।  Ãलीज़ शांत रहȂ। 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
113

 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI :  This is the basic problem.  …(Interruptions)… This is also 
because Education has come into the Concurrent List. How has it come? Education 
has come into the Concurrent List because of the Emergency period. Shrimati Indira 
Gandhi, the Prime Minister at that time, br ought Education from the State Subject to 
the Concurrent List. That is why they are suffering now. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI DHARMSHILA GUPTA): Please conclude. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: They ruled for 18 years. They never bothered to remove these 
kinds of things. I am once again saying th at Tamil Nadu is suffering without Vice-
Chancellors in many universities. The State Government should look into this… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI DHARMSHILA GUPTA) : Please conclude. 
माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है, क ृपया आप बैठ जाइए।  Shri Abdul Wahab. 
आपके  पास तीन िमनट हȅ 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB (Kerala) : Thank you very much, Mada m, for giving me three 
minutes with your courtesy. I proposed about this university last year. I congratulate 
Amit Shah ji. At least, out of these 18 years, I have got one chance of having my 
proposal accepted. It is very good, everythi ng is good. The only problem is the name 
and the place. There is a little problem for us. With regard to ‘ Tribhuvandas’, we do 
not have anything against him. But the only  thing is, it is not George Kurian, but 
Verghese Kurien. Everybody knows Verghese Kurien. If it was in Kerala and in his 
name, it would have been wonder ful. That is my only regret. In Gujarat, there is only 
one Anand. But in Kerala , there are many Anands, like ULCC, Kudumbashree and 
many others. We are not havi ng AIIMS. We are not getting that. Nothing! No national 
institution is coming. I do not know with out the cooperation of Kerala Government 
and Governor - that also we have acce pted now. Pinarayi Vijayan and the new 
Governor are always sitting together. Okay ! But now also, we are not getting. Even 
this also is in Gujarat. There is nothing wrong with Gujarat. Gujarat is also a part of 
India. It is not a problem. But why only in Gujarat? That is the only problem.  
Secondly, last year, I proposed this one and we got it this year. On seeing Mr. Jayant 
here, I propose for a skill university which should be there. That also should not go to 
other places or in your place. It should come to Kerala. I have spoken about the name 
of the university and the location. Another thing that I want to mention is about 
reservation. I do not know how they are doin g it. It is not very clear and, definitely, 
there will be a Vice-Chancellor. Do not worry, Dr. Thambidurai! It is not a question of 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

Vice-Chancellor or Chancellor. The only thin g needed  is cooperation. There is no 
cooperatio
n between the States and the Central Government. That is what is 
happening in Kerala. It is for namesake only. The name is the problem. Everything is 
in the name of ‘PM’, which our Kerala Government is not accepting. There should be, 
at least, ‘CM’. Instead of ‘PM’, it  should be ‘CM’, ‘Chief Minister Yojana’.  We are 
okay with the Hindi word ‘ Yojana’. We are not objecting just like Tamil Nadu. We do 
not worry about any Hindi name. We ar e only worried about the content. 
…(Interruptions)… It need not necessarily be in Ma layalam.  I request the Government 
that there should be some reservation—I am not asking for Muslims—for differently-
abled.   
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI DHARMSHILA GUPTA): Please conclude.  
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB: Can I get some more time?  I can get 
BJP’s time now if I am 
supporting 
the Bill. Agreed!  See, they are agreeing.  
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI DHARMSHILA GUPTA) : No, please 
conclude.  
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB:  But you are not agreeing. This is the problem. Thank you very 
much; I am accepting the words of Dr. M. Thambidurai.   
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI DHARMSHILA GUPTA ): Please conclude.   
माननीय 
सदÎय, आपका बहुत-बह ुत धन्यवाद। सुǛी इंदु बाला गोÎवामी, आपके पास दस िमनट 
हȅ, आप अपना भाषण आरंभ कीिजए।  
सुǛी इंदु बाला गोÎवामी (िहमाचल Ģदेश ): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
महोदया, ‘ितर्भुवन’ सहकारी   िवÌविवǏालय िवधेयक, 2025 पर बोलने का अवसर देने के िलए मȅ 
आपके Ģित आभार Ģकट करती  हूं। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, देश के यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी के नेतृत्व म Ȃ  बीते दस वषर् से अिधक का कायर्काल सेवा, सुशासन और गरीब  कÊयाण को 
समिर्पत रहा है। यही कारण है िक यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने अपनी दूसरी टमर् मȂ ही सहकािरता 
क्षेतर् के िलए अलग  मं तर्ालय की घोषणा की  और इस  मं तर्ालय की िजÇमेदारी भी कु शल 
संगठनकतार गृह मंतर ी जी को दी, िजन हȗने सहकािरता क षेतर मȂ एक अगर णी भूिमका िनभाई है।  
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
115

 
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
इतना ही नहीं, इस मंतर्ालय क े िलए 1,186 करोड़ से अिधक क े बजट का Ģावधान िकया, जो 
यूपीए सरकार क े बजट से लगभग 10 गुना से भी अिधक है। यूपीए सरकार क े कायर्काल 2013-14 
मȂ सहकािरता क े िलए मातर् 122 करोड़ क े बजट का ही Ģावधान था। इतना कम बजट होने क े 
कारण 100 से अिधक स
हकारी शुगर िमÊस बंद हो गईं और िकतनी ही सहकारी सिमितयां बजट 
न िमलने क े कारण ठÃप पड़ गईं। मोदी सरकार ने डेयरी सहकारी योजना क े अंतगर्त सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ और िकसान उत्पादक संगठ नȗ, एफपीओज़ क े आधुिनकीकरण और क्षमता िनमार्ण क े 
िलए 5,000 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया है, जो यूपीए सरकार से दो गुना ज्यादा है।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आज सहकािरता क्षेतर् देश क े िवकास मȂ महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभा 
रहा है। आज
ाद भारत मȂ पहली बार ऐसा मंतर्ालय बनाया गया है, जो Ĥȅड न्यू कॉन्सेÃट क े साथ 
सहकािरता मȂ अपनी महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभा रहा है। कोऑपरेिटव सेक्टर का एक separate 
administrative, legal and policy making framework बनाया गया है, िजसके  माध्यम से आज 
कोऑपरेिटव सेक्टर को सुदृढ़ता देने क े िलए, उसके  िवÎतारीकरण क े िलए इस मंतर्ालय ǎारा 
महत्वपूणर् कद
म उठाए जा रहे हȅ। माननीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ और Ǜी अिमत शाह जी क े क ुशल 
िकर्यान्वयन क्षमता से भारत क े सह कािरता सेक्टर मȂ एक नया रेवोÊयूशन आया है। बजट मȂ 
सहकािरता क्षेतर् को टैक्स संबंिधत िरयायतȂ देने से मैनुफ ैक्चिंरग करने वाली नई सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ को फायदा िमला है।    
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ नए िनयम बनाने से और इन्हȂ आिर्थक सुदृढ़ता देने 
से अब PAC
S, डेयरी, मत्Îय पालन, अन्न भंडारण, जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् जैसे 30 से  अिधक िविवध 
क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ Ëयवसाियक गितिविधयां संचािलत करने वाली सहकारी सिमितयां लाभािन्वत हुई हȅ।  मोदी 
सरकार ने देश मȂ 10,000 एफपीओज़ बनाने का लÑय रखा था। एक अलग सहकारी मंतर्ालय होने 
का नतीजा यह है िक आज देश मȂ 8,000 एफपीओज़ का गठन हो चुका है और इनमȂ से कई 
एफपीओज़ की सक्सेस Îटोरीज़ की चचार् आज अंतरर ाÍटर्ीय Îतर पर हो रही है।  सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ 
मिहलाओं की भागीदारी आज 60 Ģितशत से अिधक हो गई है।   मोदी सरकार का मानना है िक 
सÇपूणर् सहकार की पिरकÊपना मिहलाओं की सहकारी आंदोलन मȂ अगर्णी भूिमका क े िबना संभव 
ही नहीं है।  इसी बात को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए मोदी सरकार ने अब बहुराज्य सहकारी सिमितयां, 
एमएसईज़ और Ģाथिमक क ृिष साख सिमितयां, PACS क े िलए मिहला िनदेशकȗ की िनयुिƪ 
अिनवायर् कर दी है।   सरकार का यह कदम मिहलाओं को सहकारी सिमितयȗ मȂ Ģबंधकी य पदȗ 
पर महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभाने मȂ Ģेिरत करेगा।  आज डेयरी और क ृिष मȂ सहकािरता से जुड़े 
िकसानȗ मȂ अिधकतर संख्या मिहलाओं की है।  मिहलाओं क े सहकारी सामथ्यर् को बढ़ाने क े िलए 
मोदी सरकार ने सहकार से जुड़ी नीित
यȗ और योजनाओं को Ģाथिमकता दी है। मोदी सरकार ने 
मिहलाओं मȂ उǏमशीलता बढ़ाने क े िलए नंिदनी सहकार योजना शुरू  की है, िजससे सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ मȂ मिहलाओं का नेतृत्व बढ़ा है।  एनसीसीटी और वैम नीकॉम जैसी Ģिशक्षण इकाईयȗ ने 
डेयरी, हथकरघा, माइकर्ो कर् ेिडट, गर्ामीण उǏिमता, मधुमक्खी पालन, औǏोिगक सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ आिद जैसे क्षेतर्ȗ को कवर करते हुए कई कौशल िवकास कायर्कर्म आयोिजत िकए हȅ।  
इनमȂ मिहलाएं मुख्य रूप  से Ģितभािग ता  क े रूप  मȂ अपना पािर्टिसपेशन कर रही हȅ।  वषर् 2020-21 
मȂ  लगभग  40,288  लोगȗ  ने  Ģिशक्षण  िलया,  िजनमȂ  लगभग  10,000 मिहलाएं थीं, 2021-22 मȂ  
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
लगभग 62,474 लोगȗ ने Ģिशक्षण िलया, इनमȂ लगभग 15,000 मिहलाएं थीं और 2022-23 मȂ 
लगभग 2,01,507 लोगȗ ने Ģिशक्षण िलया, िजनमȂ लगभग 78,000 मिहलाएं थीं। National 
Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC) ने मिहला सहकारी सिमितयȗ को लगभग 
5,715 करोड़ रुपए  िवतिरत िकए हȅ, िजनसे 1.56 करोड़ से अिधक मिहला शिƪ लाभािन्वत हुई है। 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् आज गरीब व मध्यम वगीर्य पिरव ारȗ क े ÎवाÎथ्य 
क े सुिवधा ǣोत बन रहे हȅ।  आज सहकािरता मंतर्ालय PACS क े माध्यम से जन औषिध क Ȃदर्ȗ को 
बढ़ावा दे रहा है, िजससे एक तरफ आम नागिरकȗ को बेहद सÎती generic दवाइयȗ का लाभ 
िमल रहा है, वहीं ये PAC S भी आिर्थक Ģगित का ǣोत बन रही हȅ। 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, सहकािरता को लेकर संिवधान िनमार्ता भी िकतने गंभीर थे, इस 
बात का अंदाजा आप इसी बात से लगा सकती हȅ िक इसे संिवधान क े Fundamental Rights क े 
अंतगर्त आिर्टकल 19 मȂ दशार्या गया है। Directi ve Principles of State Policy क े 43 बी और 
भारतीय संिवधान क े पाटर् बी मȂ भी इसे िनदȃिशत िकया गया है, क्यȗिक पुरातन समय से ही भारत 
क े आिर्थक िवकास का ढाँचा सहकािरता पर िनभर्र रहा है।  इितहास गवाह है िक जब भी देश पर 
कोई आिर्थक संकट आया, तो इन सहकारी सिमितयȗ ने आगे बढ़ कर देश को उस संकट से 
उबारने मȂ बेहद महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िन
भाई है।  सहकािरता सेक्टर ने िनबर्ल, िनधर्न, गरीब, पीिड़त, 
शोिषत लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ बहुत अहम भूिमका िनभाया है। जो लोग िसÎटम को नहीं समझते, उनके  
िलए एक-दूसरे की मदद करके , एक-दूसरे का हाथ पकड़ कर आगे बढ़ने का नाम ही सहकािरता 
है। सभी जानते हȅ िक अमूल भी इसी आंदोलन से िनकला है।  आज dairy production Ëयापार मȂ 
अमूल ने एक अिमट छा
प छोड़ी है। इसी क्षेतर् मȂ मदर डेयरी भी महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभा रही है।  
खादी को आज भारतीय सहकारी सिमितयȗ ने भारत मȂ ही नहीं, बिÊक िवÌव मȂ भी उच्चतम 
िशखर पर पहुँचा िदया है। आज देश मȂ 8 लाख से अिधक सहकारी सिमितयाँ हȅ, जो क ृिष, मत्Îय, 
डेयरी सिहत न जाने िकतने क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ काम कर रह
ी हȅ। अगर संख्या क े िहसाब से देखȂ, तो आज हम 
िवÌव क े सब
से बड़े सहकारी समूहȗ मȂ शािमल हȅ। हर दूसरे घर का कोई न कोई सदÎय िकसी न 
िकसी रूप  से सहकािरता से जुड़ा है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, सहकािरता िसफर् मुनाफा कमाने का साधन नहीं है, बिÊक 
मानवीयता क े िवक
ास का भी राÎता है। भारतीय संÎकृ ित क े साथ-साथ यह पािरवािरक व 
सामािजक जीवन क े िवकास का भी मूल मंतर् है। यही कारण है िक आज भारत की सहकािरता क्षेतर् 
मȂ 60 Ģितशत भाग ीदारी है।  इसका अंदाजा आप इस बात से लगा सकती हȅ िक क ृिष िवतरण मȂ 
29 परसȂट, क ृिष कर् ेिडट मȂ 30 परस Ȃट, उवर्रक िवतरण मȂ 35 परसȂट, उवर्रक उत्पादन मȂ 25 
परसȂट, चीनी उत्पादन मȂ 35 परस Ȃट, दुग्ध उत्पादन मȂ 15 परसȂट, गेहूँ उत्पादन मȂ 13 परसȂट, 
दलहन मȂ 20 परस Ȃट, मत्Îय उत्पादन मȂ 21 परसȂट योगदान सहकारी क्षेतर् से आता है।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, 2019-20 क े एक आँकड़े क े अनुसार डेयरी सहकािरत
ा ने भारत मȂ लगभग 
4.80 करोड़ लीटर दूध लगभग 1.7 करोड़ सदÎयȗ से इकƻा िकया है।  इससे ही आप अंदाजा 
लगा सकती हȅ िक सहकािरता िक
तने लोगȗ को Ģभािवत कर रही है।  इस सबके  बावजूद, यूपीए 
सरकार ने इस क्षेतर् की हमेशा अनदेखी की, िजसके  कारण Îटȅडडर् मानक ȗ, कौशल गुणवǄा और 
professionalism की कमी से यह क्षेतर् िपछड़ता गया।  आज सहकारी क्षेतर् ...(समय की घंटी)...  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
117

 
 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष(Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎया, please conclude. आपका समय 
समाÃत हुआ।  आपके  पास 10 िमनट समय था।  Please conclude.  
 
सुǛी इंदु बाला गोÎवामी: आज सहकारी क्षेतर् भारत की ही नहीं, िवÌव की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ भी 
महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभा रहा है, िजसको ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए आज जमर्नी, क ेन्या को
 लंिबया और 
Îपेन मȂ सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय बने हȅ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): माननीय सदÎया, धन्यवाद।  Please conclude.   
 
सुǛी इंदु बाला गोÎवामी: ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय िवधेयक ... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): आपका टाइम समाÃत हो गया।  
 
सुǛी इंदु बाला गोÎवामी: मैडम, मेरे पास 15 िमनट का समय है।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा):
 आपके  10 िमनट्स ही थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
सुǛी इंदु बाला गोÎवामी: िवधेयक, 2025 लाकर, मोदी सरकार ने ... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): आपके  10 िमनट्स ही  थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... इसमȂ 10 
िमनट ही िलखा हुआ है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... धन्यव
ाद।  माननीय Ǜी जी.सी. चन्दर्शेखर।  आपके  
पास 10 िमनट का समय है। 
 
SHRI G.C. CHANDRASHEKHAR (Karnataka):  Madam, I have 14 minutes.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा): यहाँ 10 िमनट ही िलखा हुआ है।   
 
Ǜी जी.सी. चन्दर्शेखर:  पाटीर् क े टोटल 31 िमनट्स हȅ।  Digvijaya Singhji spok
 e for 18 
minutes. So, we are left with 14 minutes be cause he spoke for 18 minutes out of 31 
minutes.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI DHARMSHILA GUPTA):  Okay. 
 
SHRI G.C. CHANDRASHEKHAR: Thank you, Madam, for having given me the 
opportunity to speak on the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University B ill, 2025. This  name, 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Tribhuvan, is inspired by  Tribhuvandas Patel, a great freedom fighter  and key person 
in cooperative movement in India who  founded Kaira District Cooperative Milk 
Producers’ Union, or AMUL. He played a crucial role in mobilizing farmers against 
British monopoly. And also, Prime Minist er Jawaharlal Nehru recognized the 
importance of cooperative model and supported its expansion and was committed to 
strengthening cooperative movement.  He inaugurated Amul’s first dairy plant in 1955. 
Cooperative institutions are not just mone y business, but symbols of regional pride 
and self-reliance. Same like Amul, I am proud to say in my State our Nandini 
Karnataka Milk Federation, KMF, is the second  largest dairy cooperative in India.  It 
started with just Rupees four crores in  1975, and today it has reached around 
Rs.27,000/- crores, with 15,210 village-level  cooperative diaries, out of that, 4,340 
cooperative dairies run exclusively by women --this is the women empowerment in 
rural area, Madam, -- where approximately 27 lakh farmers supply milk daily.  Around 
one crore litres of milk is procured by the Government by giving around Rs.1,800/- 
crores of subsidy annually. Madam, why I mentioned ‘Nandini’ here, is because 
during the North East Cooperative Dairy Co nclave in Guwahati, our Home Minister 
stated that five multi-city dairy cooperatives would be merged with Amul by 
advocating  ‘One Nation, One Society’ to fa vour Amul. This is against the federal  
cooperative system of the country. A decision like this should not be encouraged.  As 
much as AMUL is important to Gujarat, in th e similar way, ‘Nandini’ is a pride of our 7 
crores Kannadigas.  At any cost, at any mo ment, we will not allow to merge ‘Nandini’ 
with any other society. For your kind inform ation, Karnataka was the first State in the 
country to start the Agricultural Credit Co operative Society in 1905 in a very small 
village called Kanaginahal of Gadag district under the leadership of Shri 
Siddanagouda Sanna Ramanagouda Patil who is recognized as the Father of 
Cooperative Movement in Karnataka. Ma dam, on this occasion, we have to 
remember the contribution of Dr. Verghese  Kurien known as the Father of White 
Revolution.  His contribution is remarkable.  
Madam, now, I would like to mention some of my observations on the Bill. The 
Central Government will decide key positions like Vice Chancellor and Executive 
Board members. This could lead to politi cal interference and reduce the University’s 
independence. The Bill says, IRMA will remain independent, but in reality it will have 
to follow Central Government rules, whic h could limit its decision-making power. 
Madam, already the proposed changes to  the University Grants Commission, UGC 
regulations affect the appointment pr ocess for University faculty and Vice-
Chancellors. The new rules give Governor s the exclusive power to appoint VCs, 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
119

 
 
replacing the current system where States form search committees. This takes away 
power from the elected State Governments and affects University’s governance. We 
have already seen problems in States lik e Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and West Bengal.  
Madam, not only these States, in all over the country, the Governors are interfering in 
the University matters and appointing VC s and Registrars. It should not happen, 
Madam. These new rules lower the academ ic experience required for the VCs, 
allowing non-academic individuals to take leadership roles.  A VC should be the 
academic leader, not a bureaucrat.   
 This will increase political interference. ‘Education’ is in the Concurrent List. So 
why should the institutions developed with State-funding and effort be controlled by 
the Centre? The University is being set up in Gujarat, while the States like 
Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, with strong cooperative sectors, are 
being ignored. The Bill does not guarantee opportunities for women, young people or 
tribal communities in cooperative education. The Bill does not say whether the 
University will be funded by the Government or private co mpanies, raising concern of 
the financial stability. The Bill plans to merg e around 284 cooperative training centres 
into the university. This may create financial stress and disrupt their current progress. 
Madam, one system may not work for all. Different regions and different 
industries like dairy and fisheries have diff erent cooperative needs. A single approach 
may not work everywhere. The Bill says, the university will train 8 lakh people every 
year, but there is no clarity or clear plan how it will be achieved and how they will give 
the jobs for those people. Many universitie s, especially, in Maharashtra and Kerala, 
already offer cooperative management courses. Instead of creating a new university, 
the Government should improve those exis ting programmes.  The Bill talks about 
meeting global education standards but do es not explain how it will work with 
international institutions or adopt global best practices.  
Madam, ‘cooperative’ is a very big sector . Nearly 8 lakh societies are there in 
India and depositors and dependants are middle class and lower- middle class people 
but run by very big sharks. The scams will ra rely come to light. In most of the cases, 
people will not get justice at all. For exam ple, Madam in Karnataka, there are nearly 
42,551 cooperative societies, out of wh ich 25,035, nearly, 58.86 per cent are under 
profit and 14,498, nearly, 34.7 per cent ar e under loss. Madam, just to be more 
precise, I will give one example. In one Assembly Constituency in Karnataka, 
Bengaluru, known as Basavanagudi, there ar e five cooperative banks, namely, Guru 
Raghavendra Cooperative Bank, Vasista Cooperative Bank, Souharda Cooperative 
Bank, Nagarathna Cooperative Bank and Guru  Sarva Bahuma Cooperative Bank. All 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
these five bank scams affected two lakh i nnocent depositor-families. Ninety per cent 
of the people deposited their retirement fund meant for their livelihood and healthcare. 
Due to this distress, many depositors lost their lives. Even though the State 
Government has given the cases to CBI, but CBI is not taking up the investigation to 
provide justice. Who will hear the cry of these common people, Madam?  
Madam, I will say one thing. From th ese cooperative banks, most of the 
politicians -- irrespective of the political party, I am telling you -- and their relatives 
have taken the loan. It is not a small loan.  It is of Rs. 100 crores-Rs. 150 crores.  After 
10-15 years, they have not paid even the interest. All this has accumulated, and they 
have also not paid back this money. Mada m, now those people who have deposited, 
whether they are getting full money or not but, at least, these people who cheated the 
bank, who cheated those people, they ha ve to be punished. I will urge the 
Government, through you, that it has to take necessary action against them.  
Madam, one part of the cooperative sector  is suffering due to malfunction of the 
system.  
Lastly, I quote, “Sahkar Se Samruddhi”. I am telling you that this name is really 
very beautiful. For all the captions for the programmes’ names, the BJP gives very 
fancy names, and they also market it very well.  Whether these programmes will reach 
the people or not, but the names will b ecome very famous. As you know, Madam, 
most of the programmes are not new programmes. It was there earlier also. They 
renamed, rebranded them. For example, ‘National Manufacturing Policy’ in 2011 
became ‘Make in India’ in 2014; ‘National e-Governance Plan’ became ‘Digital India’ 
in 2015. ‘Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojana’ in 2008 became ‘Ayushman Bharat’ in 2018. 
‘Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan ’ in 2012 became ‘ Swachh Bharat Abhiyan ’ in 2014. ‘ Rajiv 
Awas Yojana’ in 2009 became ‘Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana’ in 2015.  
 This Central Government gives only Rs .2 lakh to the State Government. The 
State Government gives Rs.5 lakh to each house. But, the State Government does 
not take the credit. The Central Government, by just giving Rs.2 lakh, is taking credit 
like anything.  The State Government is givi ng Rs.5 lakh, but the Central Government 
is only giving Rs.2 lakh. On that, they are charging 18 per cent GST. Totally, they will 
collect 18 per cent on Rs.7 lakh which co mes to around Rs.1,26,000 back.  Thus, the 
Central Government’s contribution will be only Rs.75 thousand.  
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) in the Chair.] 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
121

 
 
But they are taking the credit like anything. This is the position how the BJP is taking 
the credit. The National Girl Child Day Programme has become Beti Bachao, Beti 
Padhao. They have just got the name changed. The situation has not got changed. 
From 2014 to 2022, approximately 2,99,520 rape cases were reported across India, as 
per the NCRB data. For the programme between 2014-15 to 2019-20, Rs.448 crores 
were allocated. In this, nearly 78.91 per cent just went for publicity purpose. Just 
imagine how they are spending money for publicity! िसफर् नाम बदलने से क्या होगा? 
असली काम है, the programme has to reach the peop le, then only it will happen. This 
University should be useful to people; it should not for publicity sake. Protect the 
autonomy of the University, uphold federa lism and respect the needs and aspirations 
of States because States and the Centre have to work hand in hand. The Centre 
should not take away the power from States; it is not correct. Since we are living in a 
federal system, the Centre has to suppo rt the State Government. Thank you very 
much. 
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal) : Sir, I rise today on behalf of 
the All India Trinamool Congress, to share my observations on the Tribhuvan Sahakari 
University Bill, 2025. This Bill, much like ma ny of the Government's recent initiatives, 
is long on grand promises, but short on real  solutions.  We are being told that this 
University will revolutionise cooperative ed ucation and create employment.  But, in 
reality, it does neither. Instead, it is yet another attempt by this Government to 
centralise power, divert resources from real priorities and mislead people with hollow 
assurances. Institute of Rural Manageme nt Anand, IRMA’s, administrative and 
academic autonomy will be subjected to  frameworks specified by the Union 
Government. The Bill's provisions might erode the work of the cooperative 
movement, which strives on decentralised an d self-governing principles. If IRMA’s 
autonomy can be overridden, it sets a prece dent for other autonomous institutions to 
be similarly absorbed into centralised frameworks. The spirit of cooperatives has 
always been one of local autonomy and community-driven decision-making.  
Cooperatives thrive when farmers, small traders and local stakeholders are in control. 
But, time and again, this Government has shown its deep distrust of decentralised 
governance. From GST regime to the amendments to the cooperative banking laws 
and now with this Bill, the pattern is cl ear. The BJP Government wants to bring 
everything under the control of the Union, l eaving no room for States or local bodies 
to make decisions. This Bill is yet anothe r example of how cooperative federalism is 
being steadily dismantled and replaced wi th a command-and-control approach that 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
weakens the very institutions it claims to support. This Bill is one which was rushed 
through without sufficient consultation wi th key stakeholders. Moreover, what have 
you done on education? One out of thr ee sanctioned Ekalavya schools is not 
functional. Funds for States like West Be ngal are stopped because we do not accept 
the name PM-SHRI. In 2023, the Union Go vernment was supposed to give Rs.1,750 
crores to West Bengal under the Samagr a Shiksha Mission. However, only Rs.310 
crores have been released so far. The Union's expenditure on  education has been 
0.37 per cent of GDP. So, what is the use of setting a 6 per cent target in the New 
Education Policy? Over 5,000 teaching posts in  the Central Universities are vacant.  
On the other hand, in Bengal, 47 lakh yo uth have received industry-orientated skill 
training under Utkarsh Bangla.  
 Ten lakh youths have been absorbed by  the industry. One cr ore girl students 
have benefited from Kanyas hree scheme. In 13 years, we have established 30 new 
universities and 24 new Government MBBS medical colleges. Four crore students 
have benefited under Aikyashree and on e crore students have benefited under 
Shikshashree scholarships. Eighty thousand  credit cards under the Student Credit 
Card Scheme and Rs.2,800 crore worth bank  loans have been sanctioned. Our Party 
has always believed in strengthening co-ope rative institutions, while ensuring that 
their autonomy and regional character rema in intact. If the Government is truly 
committed to establishing an independent institution that is free from political and 
bureaucratic interference, which is accountable to stakeholders rather than to the 
Union Government and genuinely focused on  empowering co-operatives rather than 
controlling them, we are open to supporting this  initiative. But, if this Bill is merely a 
tool to bring co-operatives under the central ised control, then we cannot and will not 
support it. The Government must make its stance clear whether it wants a university 
for the co-operatives or a university to control the co-operatives. That is my question.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA):   The next speaker is 
Shri R. Girirajan.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, before I start, I would like to put on record in 
this august House the humongous contribution  made by our leader Dr. Kalaignar in 
the field of co-operative federal system in this country. No other leader in this country 
has done so much for the establishment an d development of co-operative system to 
boost the life and nature of poor people in the country.    
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
123

 
 
 The title of the Bill should have been  in English. Why to impose Hindi or 
Sanskrit unnecessarily even in naming of the Bill? The kind of Hindi imposition is not 
at all good for the country like India where unity in diversity is the backbone of the 
democratic nation.  Do not break the backbone of our democracy.   
 The "Tribhuvan" Sahkari University Bill, 2025, is aimed to enhance the co-
operative education, training, research, po licy and development. This Bill sets the 
foundation for knowledge-driven globally co mpetitive co-operative sector. At this 
juncture, I would like to say something regarding the UGC. The UG C is unnecessarily 
interfering with the functioning of the St ate Universities, including unnecessarily 
nominating persons to the Selection Committee for selecting Vice-Chancellors of 
State Universities.  The UGC has no power to interfere with the State Universities  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) :   You can respond 
when your turn comes.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN:  The co-operatives are the foundat ion of national development.  
The co-operatives are also the foundation of local self-government organisations. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) :   Allow him to speak.  
Later, you can raise your issue.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN : As regards the foundation of national development of co-
operative democracy, I can pr oudly say that the first co -operative society in the 
country was started in 1904 in a village called Thirur in the present Thiruvallur District 
of Tamil Nadu.  I request that one more Univ ersity should be set up in Tamil Nadu at 
Thirur where the first co-operative societ y was started in this country. The poor 
cannot do anything for their benefit on thei r own. They can succeed only if they make 
joint efforts. So, we emphasise the need for co-operatives.  
There is a saying in Tamil, 
& “Only if people gather together and pull a chariot, 
the chariot will move. ” Today, the co-operative systems are operating in all sectors 
and farmers, dairy farmers, weavers, manufacturers, goat breeders, sugarcane 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil. 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
growers, housing, village workers, fishermen and women, all sectors are forming their 
own co-operatives to protect their interests.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA ):  Hon. Member, kindly 
try to conclude.  
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN:  The co-operative movement play ed an important role in mixed 
economy… …(time-bell rings)… I will take only one minute. Nearly 30,000 co-operative 
societies are functioning effectively in Ta mil Nadu. The economy will be maintained 
and the democracy will be maintained if co -operatives thrive in this country. This 
movement should function according to the wishes of their members without political 
interference. Co-operative federal system  is the fundamental principle of our 
Constitution. Our hon. Chief Minister, Thalap athy M.K. Stalin, has reiterated that if 
there is any disturbance to co-operative federalism, the Government and the people 
of Tamil Nadu will stand in front to op pose such move and save co-operative 
federalism in the country. Thank you, Sir.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  Sir, I have a point of order.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Under which rule?  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, give me one minute...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) : Your point of order is 
under which rule? …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, I want to say something... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) : Hon. Member, kindly 
mention the rule first. …( Interruptions)…  Mention the rule under which you want to 
raise the point of order. …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: 
* 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
125

 
 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) : No, no.   It is not 
going on record.  …( Interruptions)…Nothing is going on record.   …( Interruptions)… 
You are not mentioning the rule under which you want to speak.  …(Interruptions)… 
Nothing will go on record. No w, I would like to request hon. Member, Dr. Vikramjit 
Singh Sahney to speak on this Bill.  
 
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY (Punjab) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, today, I rise to 
discuss the transformative power of cooperative movements, especially in the context 
of “सहकार से समृिǉ”I In a land where Gandhiji’s methods found home, the   
cooperative   sector has been not only the backbone of rural empowerment but has 
proven to be sustainable model for economic and social upliftment in our country.  
सर, हमȂ देखना होगा िक cooperative movements, िजसका आधार सहकार से समृिǉ तक है।  
यह सहकिरता से हमारे गरीब िकसानȗ की, हाउिंसग कोऑपरेिटव की, गरीब लोगȗ का 
cooperative banks मȂ पैसा जमा हुआ, उससे िकतनी समृिǉ आई। W
hat is cooperative? 
Cooperative is where individuals इकƻे होकर अपने िरसोसȃज़ को पूल करके  िरÎक शेयर 
करते हȅ और collective strength से सबको बेिनिफट होता है। This ethos is evident across 
India where cooperatives have played a pivotal role in empowering farmers thereby 
boosting rural economy. India’s cooperativ e movement is not merely an economic 
initiative; it is tied to social empowerment. हमारे देश मȂ कई सेक्टसर् मȂ cooperatives हȅ, 
िजनके  बारे मȂ आज हम िडÎकस कर रहे हȅ -  dairy farming, milk, agriculture cooperatives, 
housing cooperatives,
 cooperative banks in finance sector, textiles and rural credit 
are our primary rural societies. Cooperatives continue to face several challenges. Sir, 
generally, in cooperatives, we see lack of professional management, internal conflicts 
amongst Members coming from various b ackgrounds and very weak leadership.  
There is also an issue of transparency because these cooperatives do not come 
under the purview of institutions like Comp troller and Auditor General (CAG) or CVC.  
The issue of governance of our cooperatives is a big concern.   
Sir, you will be surprised to note that while the age limit for a normal 
Government servant is 58 or 60 years, some of the CEOs of cooperatives can 
continue well into their 80s, highlighting a significant gap in governance. Despite the 
success stories, sahkari or cooperative movement faces various challenges.   
Now, let us turn to today’s topic, that  is, Tribhuvan Sahkari University Bill, 
2025.  Amul, originating in Gujarat’s Anand, stands as a beacon. ितर्भुवन दास पटेल जी 
ने, सरदार पटेल जी की गाइडेन्स मȂ इसकी नींव रखी, लेिकन आज हम अपने कतर्Ëयȗ का 
उÊलंघन करȂगे, अगर डॉ. वगीर्स क ुिरयन का नाम नहीं लȂगे, िजन्हȗने 1946 मȂ अमूल Ĥȅड को 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
आणंद मȂ Îथािपत िकया, िजसमȂ आज 36 लाख  farmers member हȅ।                       
मȅ समझता हूं िक यह दुिनया का सबसे बड़ा कोऑपरेिटव है। इसका 60 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े तक 
का रेवेन्यू है। The Bill proposes establishment of  ‘Tribhuvan’ Sahakari University. मȅ 
समझता हूं िक ऐसी यूिनविर्सटीज़, हमारी agrarian States, िजनमȂ पंजाब है, हिरयाणा है, यूपी 
है, वहाँ पर ऐसे campus बनने चाि
हए, ऐसी cooperative universities बननी चािहए, तािक 
हमारी dairy farming, हमारे िकसान भाइयȗ, हमारी primary agriculture societies को मदद 
िमले।  
महोदय, मȅ तो यहाँ तक कहूंगा िक cluster farming मȂ बड़े cooperatives क े साथ हमȂ 
छोटे cooperatives, पाँच-सात गाँवȗ को इकƻा करके , उन का एक  cooperative cluster बनाया 
जाए, जहाँ पर िकसान खुद ही अपने perishable goods की storage करे। िकसान दाल, सरसȗ 
का तेल, आटे की चक्की, सभी क ु छ, जो value addition है, उनको वहाँ पर cooperatives मȂ 
करे, तािक उसको अपनी फसल का सही दाम िमल सके ।  
महोदय, हम जो िकसान की इन्कम डबल करना चाहते हȅ, वह तभी संभव होगी, जब 
िकसान value added cooperatives
 की तरह अपनी फसल को न बेचे, बिÊक वहीं पर value 
addition करे।  
महोदय, एक Ãवाइंट यह है िक agriculture credit societies बहुत कम हȅ।हमारे देश मȂ 
इनकी संख्या िसफर् 12,000 है, जबि क हमारा लÑय 2 लाख तक करने का है। यह कब और क ै से 
पूरा होगा - यह मȅ गृह मंतर्ी जी, जो कोऑपरेिटव िमिनÎटर भी हȅ, उनसे जानना चाहूंगा।  
महोदय, यह बहुत अच्छी बात है िक इसका एक सेपरेट िडपाटर्मȂट बना िदया गया है, 
इसिलए हमȂ one-district one-pro
duct one-cluster - महात्मा गाँधी जी का जो Îवराज का 
सपना था, हमȂ उसको पूरा करना होगा, तािक हमारे देश मȂ one-district one-product one-
cluster का cooperative बने। हम इसकी उÇमीद करते हȅ, लेिकन इसको िसफर् गुजरात मȂ बनाने 
से काम नहीं चलेगा, बिÊक agrarian States मȂ इसकी शाखाएं और इस university क े campus 
भी होने च
ािहए, तािक यह सहकारी मूवमȂट घर-घर मȂ फ ैलाया जा सके  और सहकािरता मȂ 
accountability एवं transparency लाई जा सके । उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) : Thank you. Now, 
hon. Member, Sivadasan ji.   
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN
 (Kerala) : Sir, the headquarters of the proposed University is 
suggested at Gujarat.  The noted personality in the cooperative sector, Dr. Verghese 
Kurien, had also given immense contribution to the cooperative sector and to the 
nation, especially in Gujarat. But, he has been neglected by this Government.  Sir, 
Dr. Kurien is known as the ‘Father of Whit e Revolution’ in India. He was felicitated 
with various awards, including the World Food Prize in 1989. He has contributed 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
127

 
 
immensely to the cooperative sector and the IRMA. Still the Government completely 
sidelined him. It is shocking. I suggest the name of this University should be 
Tribhuvan-Kurien University. The cooperative sector of Kerala is an example of the 
success of democratic and decentralized coop erative network. The local autonomy is 
the key feature of cooperative movement.  It is the strength of the cooperative sector 
and cooperative activities.   
Sir, cooperatives function best when they are free to operate. A centralized 
University under this model will become a tool of polit ical control of the Union 
Government. The Union Government is tryi ng to destroy the cooperative movement 
where it is in the right path in letter and spirit. I am representing here the State of 
Kerala. Kerala’s cooperative banks serve  as the backbone of rural economy, 
providing financial support to the farmers,  small traders and self-help groups. The 
Union Government is attacking them and the Right Wing is spreading the negative 
propaganda against our cooperative sector banks. They want to make way for private 
and corporate banking dominance which will be nefit large financial institutions over 
small scale borrowers. The BJP-led Union Government has been pushing for the 
greater RBI control over our cooperative banks. They are reducing the powers of the 
State Government which violates the federa l structure and the State’s managing in 
managing the cooperative sector.  
 Cooperative sector is in the State List. But the Union Government is trying to 
grab the power of States. That is why they are intervening in this sector with wrong 
intention. In India, Kerala is one of the largest centres of coop eratives according to 
investment and diversity of activities. In c ooperative sector, we have banks; we have 
dairy production units; we have hospitals; an d we have transportati on facilities. It is 
also involved in electricity generation. The network of cooperative banks in Kerala is 
an example of robust and popular bankin g network which is accessible to people.  
The protection and assistance of the Unio n Government is very necessary for the 
advancement of cooperative sector. The se lf-help attitude and togetherness of the 
people constitute the strength of cooper ative sector. The base of the cooperative 
sector is the strong faith in each other.  There is no wonder  that those who are 
injecting the politics of venom are trying to destroy the cooperative sector.  … (Time-
bell rings.) …  Only one minute, Sir. The Union Government is trying to destroy the 
strong bond of the local communities and to centralise cooperative sector. In this Bill, 
there is only a nominal representation of the State with only four State or Union 
Territory representatives. This means that th e University will be completely controlled 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
by the Union Government. This is against the basic principle of the cooperative 
movement. 
   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA):  Hon. Member, try to 
conclude.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:   Si r,  g i ve m e 3 0  s eco nd s .  T h e Go vern m en t  s h o u l d d esi g n  t h e 
university in a democratic way.  It should ensure that all the St ates have meaningful 
representation. The cooperative sector shou ld be free from centralisation. The base, 
autonomy and decentralisation of cooperat ive sector should be protected. Thank 
you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) :  Next speaker is hon. 
Member, Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai.   
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई ( गुजरात): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ “ितर्भुवन” सहकारी 
िवÌविवǏालय िवधेयक, 2025 पर बोलने क े खड़ा हुआ हूं। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, 
आदरणीय मंतर्ीगण और सÇमािनत सदन क े सदÎयगण, आज मȅ इस महत्वपूणर् “ितर्भुवन” 
सहकारी िवÌ
विवǏालय िवधेयक, 2025 क े समथर्न मȂ खड़ा हुआ हूं, जो हमारी िशक्षा ËयवÎथा को 
एक नई िदशा और नई ऊ ंचाइयȗ तक ले जाने वाला है। यह िवधेयक क ेवल िवÌविवǏालय Ģशासन 
मȂ बदलाव नहीं, बिÊक आने वाली पीिढ़यȗ क े सुनहरे भिवÍय की नींव है। यह सरकार की 
दूरदिर्शता और िशक्षा क े Ģित गहरी Ģि
तबǉता है।   
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं िक 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी क े िद ल  मȂ 140 करोड़ जनता का ददर् है।  इसीिलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
युवा, नारी, गरीब और िकसान - ये चार भारत क े ÎतÇभ रखे हȅ। यह िबल इन चारȗ ÎतÇभȗ को 
फायदा पहुंचाने वाला है।  महोदय, िशक्षा समृिǉ का मूल आधार है। िशक्षा क ेवल ज्ञान ĢाÃत करने 
का माध्यम नहीं है, बिÊक राÍटर् िनम
ार्ण और आिर्थक िवकास का आधार भी है। कोई भी देश तब 
तक सशƪ नहीं बन सकता है, जब तक उसकी युवा शिƪ िशिक्षत, सशƪ और आत्मिनभर्र न हो।  
इसी सोच क े साथ हमारी सरकार ने “ितर्भुवन” सहकारी िवÌ
विवǏालय िवधेयक, 2025 को ĢÎतुत 
िकया है, िजससे यह िवÌविवǏालय आधुिनक, नवाचार आधािरत और वैिÌवक Îतर पर ĢितÎपधीर् 
बन सके । माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ माननीय सहकािरता मंतर्ी का बहुत-बहुत आभार 
मानता हूं िक यह िव
ÌविवǏालय हमारे गुजरात मȂ आणंद मȂ आ रहा है, इसीिलए सारे गुजरात की 
ओर से हम सहकािरता मंतर्ी का बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद करते हȅ।   
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, गुजरात मॉडल से Ģेरणा उच् च  िशक्षा की िदशा मȂ एक 
कर्ांित है। गुजरात जो आज िवकास, नवाचार और आत्मिनभर्रता का Ģतीक है, उसने िशक्षा क े क्षेतर् 
मȂ भी कई ऐितहािसक सुधार िकए हȅ। गुजरात सरकार ने िǎÎतरीय िवÌविवǏालयȗ, Îटाटर्अप 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
129

 
 
कÊचर और उǏोग आधािरत िशक्षा Ģणाली को बढ़ावा देकर अपने युवाओं को रोजगार योग्य और 
नवाचार क े िलए Ģेिरत िकया है।   
 इसी मॉडल से Ģेरणा लेकर ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय िवधेयक, 2025 को लाया 
गया है, िजससे यह संÎथान देश और िवदेश क े छातर्ȗ क े िलए एक Ģमुख शैक्षिणक क Ȃ दर् बन सके ।  
माननीय उप
सभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह िवधेयक ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय को शैक्षिणक और 
Ģशासिनक ÎवायǄता Ģदान करेगा, िजससे यह अपने िनणर्य लेने मȂ अिधक सक्षम होगा। नई 
िनगरानी Ģणा
ली मȂ पारदिर्शता और जवाबदेही सुिनिÌचत की जाएगी, तािक िवÌविवǏालय मȂ 
अिनयिमतता को रोका जा सके ।   
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारे गुजरात मȂ इस सहकािरता मॉडल क े कारण गुजरात 
को एक मॉडल बोला जाता है। हमारे गुजरात मȂ बनासकांठा मȂ बनास डेयरी है, साब रकांठा मȂ 
साबर डेयरी है, पंचमहल मȂ पंचामृत डेयरी है, आणंद मȂ अमूल डेयरी है और सूरत मȂ सुमुल डेयरी 
है। देश मȂ ऐसी अनेक cooperatives मȂ चलने वाली हमारी सहकारी डेयिरयाँ हȅ। हमारी सहकारी 
डेयिरयाँ गुजरात की सबसे बड़ी दूध उत्पादक हȅ। ये सहकारी डेयिरयाँ दूध मंडिलयȗ और 
सहकारी मंडिलयȗ क े मा
ध्यम से, िकसानȗ को जो तकलीफ होती है, उसमȂ वे finance grant भी 
करती हȅ और िकसान
ȗ को बचा लेती हȅ।  जो दूध मंडिलयाँ हȅ, वे farmers को पशुपालन क े िलए 
गाय और भȅस जैसे दूध वाले पशु खरीदने क े िलए भी पैसा देती हȅ।   
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, िशक्षा की गुणवǄा क े सुधार मȂ तकनीकी िशक्षा, digit al 
learning और कौशल िवकास को Ģाथिमकता दी जाएगी, तािक छातर् वैिÌवक Îतर पर ĢितÎपधीर् 
बन सकȂ ।  नवाचार और अनुसंधान को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए छातर्ȗ को िवशेष अनुदान मȂ सुिवधा दी 
जाएगी।  िव
Ǆीय िÎथरता और वैिÌवक सहयोग क े माध्यम से ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय को 
अंतरार्Íटर्ीय िवÌविवǏालयȗ और उǏोग जगत क े साथ जोड़ने क े िलए िवशेष योजनाएँ बनाई 
जाएँगी।  िनजी क्षेतर् की भागीदारी को Ģोत्सािहत िकया जाएगा, िजससे िवÌविवǏालय आत्मिनभर्र 
बन सके  और िश क्षा का Îतर ऊ ँचा हो।  छातर्ȗ और िशक्षकȗ क े िलए, Ëयापक सुधार क े िलए छातर्ȗ 
को अंतरार्Íटर्ीय छातर्वृिǄ, अनुसंधान अनुदान और Îटाटर्अप Ģोत्साहन देने क े िलए योजनाएँ बनाई 
गई हȅ। योग्यता आधािरत भतीर् Ģणाली लागू होगी, िजससे क ेवल सवर्ǛेÍठ िशक्षक ही छा तर्ȗ को 
िशिक्षत कर सके ।   
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, नया भारत और नेपाल की िदशा मȂ यह एक ऐितहािसक 
कदम है। ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय क ेवल एक शैक्षिणक संÎथान नहीं है, बिÊक यह एक 
वैिÌवक िशक्षा क Ȃ दर् क े रूप  मȂ पिरवतर्न करने की िदशा मȂ एक बड़ ा कदम है। िजस तरह गुजरात मȂ 
िशक्षा और नवाचार मȂ नए मानक Îथािपत िकए गए हȅ, उसी तरह यह िवधेयक नेपाल और भारत 
की िशक्षा ËयवÎथा को एक नई ऊ ँचा ई तक ले जाएगा। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, सरकार की 
िशक्षा क े Ģित Ģितबǉता है। हमारी सरकार का सपना है िक हर छातर् को उच्च गुणवǄा वाली 
िशक्षा िमले, िजससे वह िसफर् एक िडगर्ीधारी नहीं, बिÊक एक क ुशल और आत्मिनभर्र नागिरक बन 
सके । यह िवधेयक िश क्षा क े माध्यम से आिर्थक िवकास, रोजगार सृजन और सामािजक 
सशƪीकरण को नई िदशा देगा।   
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह क ेवल एक िवधेयक नहीं, बिÊक हमारी युवा शिƪ क े 
उज्ज्वल भिवÍय की नींव है। मȅ सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ से अपील करता हूँ िक वे राजनीितक 
मतभेदȗ से ऊपर उठ कर इस ऐितहािसक िवधेयक का समथर्न करȂ।  हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का सूतर् 
है, आइए, हम 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका िव
Ìवास और सबका Ģयास' क े मंतर् क े साथ 
िशक्षा को नई ऊ ँचाई पर ले जाएँ।  
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ िबखरे हुए शैक्षिणक ढाँचȗ को संबोिधत 
करने की िद
शा मȂ यह एक महत्वपूणर् कदम है। यह मोदी सरकार क े Ëयापक दृिÍटकोण 'सहकार से 
समृिǉ' क े अनुरूप  है।  इस िदशा मȂ सरकार ने 8 लाख से अिधक सहकारी संÎथाओं की क्षमता का 
पूणर् उपयोग करने क े िल ए यूपीए सरकार क े क ृिष एवं सहकािरता मंतर्ालय से अलग एक Îवतंतर् 
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय का गठन िकया। इस क्षेतर् मȂ िकए जा रहे Ģयासȗ को सुिनिÌचत और 
सुËयविÎथत करने क े िलए मोदी सरकार ने ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌ विवǏालय िवधेयक, 2025 
ĢÎतािवत िकया है, िजससे गर्ामीण Ģबंधन संÎथान, आणंद (IRMA) को एक िवÌविवǏालय का 
दजार् देने का Ģयास िकया गया है, तािक सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ इसकी महत्वपूणर् भूिमका को मान्यता दी 
जाए।                                                                          
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह पह ल  तकनीकी और Ģबंध िशक्षा को सशƪ बनाने क े 
िलए, अनुसंधान एवं िवकास को Ģोत्सािहत करने क े िलए, वैिÌवक मानकȗ को पूरा करने क े िलए, 
भाजपा नीत एनडीए सरकार क े दृिÍटकोण क े अनुरूप  है। आत्मिनभर्र सहकारी सिमितयȗ क े िलए 
दृिÍटकोण, Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का अन्त्योदय का दृिÍटकोण, सहकारी संÎथाओं मȂ 
आत्मिनभर्रता को रेखांिक
त करता है, िजससे उन्हȂ भारत क े आिर्थक पिरĢेÑय मȂ क ेन्दर्ीय भूिमका 
दी जा सके ।  
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, पूवर्वतीर् यूपीए सर कार क े दौरान, िवत वषर् 2013-14 मȂ 
सहकारी संÎथाओं क े िलए बजट आवंटन मातर् 122 करोड़  रुपय े था, िजसके  कारण गर्ामीण 
कारीगरȗ क े िलए आवÌयक कायर्कर्मȗ को पयार्Ãत िवǄीय सहायता नहीं िमल सकी और महाराÍटर् 
मȂ 101 सहकारी चीनी िमलȂ बंद हो गईं।  इसके  िवपरीत, मोद ी सरकार ने 2021 मȂ एक Îवतंतर् 
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय की Îथापना की और इस क्षेतर् क े िलए बजट को बढ़ाकर 1,183 करोड़ रुपय े 
कर िदया, जो यूपीए सरकार क े कायर्काल क े आवंटन का 9.7 गुना है। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, डेयरी सहकार योजना क े अंतगर्त, डेयरी सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ और िकसान उत्पादक संगठनȗ (FPOs) क े आधुिनकीकरण और क्षमत
ा िनमार्ण क े िलए 
5,000 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया गया है, जो यूपीए सरकार ǎारा राÍटर्ीय डेयरी योजना मȂ 
आवंिटत रािश का दोगुना है।  यह मह त्वाका ंक्षी िवधेयक सरकार क े इस सहकारी ढांचे को मजबूत 
कर हािशए पर मौजूद समुदायȗ को सशƪ बनाने की Ģितबǉता को दशार्ता है। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मोदी सरकार ǎारा 'आत्मिनभर्र भारत' बनाने क े िलए 
िविशÍट िशक्षा को मजबूत करने और मुख्य क्षेतर्ȗ क े िल ए िविशÍट िवÌविवǏालयȗ की Îथापना 
करने से भारत क े उच्च िशक्षा क े पिरपेÑय का सिकर्य रूप  से पिरवतर्न हो रहा है। महोदय, ितर्भुवन 
सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय, िजसे IRMA क े रूप  मȂ िवकिसत िकया जाएगा, सहकारी क्षेतर् की िश क्षा 
पर क Ȃिदर्त होगा और सहकार से समृिǉ क े दृिÍटकोण को सुदृढ़ करेगा। ठीक इसी Ģकार, जैसे 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
131

 
 
IRMA लंबे समय से 'अमूल' जैसी भारत की Ģमुख सहकारी संÎथा को Ģितभा मȂ सहायता Ģदान 
करता है। इसी तरह गित शिƪ िवÌविवǏालय, पिरवहन और लॉिजिÎटक क े क्षेतर् मȂ िवशेषज्ञता 
को बढ़ावा दे रहा है, जबिक राÍटर्ीय रक्षा िवÌविवǏालय आंतिरक सुरक्षा और पोिलिंसग अध्ययन 
को सशƪ बना रहा है। लǈाख मȂ िÎथत िंसधु क Ȃदर्ीय िवÌ
विवǏालय जलवायु िवज्ञान, ऊजार् और 
लोकनीित मȂ अनुसंधान को आगे बढ़ा रहा है, जो इस क्षेतर् की िविशÍट भौगोिलक चुनौितयȗ का 
समाधान करने मȂ सहायक है। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह संÎथान क ेवल एक शैक्षिणक क Ȃ दर् ही नहीं है, बिÊक 
रोजगार सृजन का भी एक Ģमुख ǣो
त है, जो छातर्ȗ को िविशÍट कौशल Ģदान कर, उन्हȂ भारत क े 
आिर्थक और रणनीितक क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सीधे योगदान क े िलए तैयार कर रहा है, िजससे उच्च गुणवǄा 
वाले रोजग
ार क े अवसर और क्षेतर्ीय िवकास सुिनिÌचत हो रहा है।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, सहकार को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए सिकर्य नीितगत कायर्वान 
मोदी सरकार ने हमेशा िवधायी और नीितगत कायर्वाही आधािरत शासन का समथर्न िकया है।  
सरकार की यह दूरदृिÍट सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ भी पिरलिक्षत होती है। मह
ोदय, मोदी सरकार ने वषर् 
2023 मȂ बहु-राज्यीय सहकारी सिमित अिधिनयम, 2002 मȂ संशोधन ĢÎतुत िकया था, िजसका 
उǈेÌय सहकारी संÎथाओं मȂ Ģशासन को सशƪ बनाना, पारदिर्शता बढ़ाना, जवाबदेही सुिनिÌचत 
करना और चुनावी Ģिकर्
याओं मȂ सुधार लाना था। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मोदी सरकार ने 
वतर्मान िवधेयक क े माध्यम से देश मȂ सहकारी आंदोलन क े संÎथाओं को एक नेटवकर् क े माध्यम से 
मजबूत करने का Ģयास िकया है। ĢÎतािवत सहकारी िव
ÌविवǏालय की Îथापना क े साथ, 
सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ क ुशल कायर्बल की िनरंतर आपूिर्त सुिनिÌचत होगी। 
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, क्षमता िनमार्ण पर इस िवशेष ध्यान से न क ेवल तकनीक ी 
दक्षता मȂ वृिǉ होगी, बिÊक यह हािशए पर मौजूद वगș को सशƪ बनाते हुए उन्हȂ सहकारी शासन 
मȂ अिधक भागीदारी का अवसर Ģदान करेगा। मȅ मानव संसाधन मȂ िनवेश क े माध्यम से सहकारी 
सिमितयȗ की क्षमता क े संबंध मȂ बताना चाहता हूँ िक िवǄ वषर् 2024-25 क े क Ȃदर्ीय बजट मȂ भारत 
की जनसांिख्
यकीय संपदा का लाभ उठाने और अमृत पीढ़ी को सक्षम बना कर िवकिसत भारत, 
2047 की मजबूत नींव रखने पर िवशेष बल िदया है। यह सुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए िक सहकारी 
क्षेतर् भी अमृत काल क े लाभȗ का पूरा लाभ उठा सके , मोदी सरकार राÍ
टर्ीय सहकारी Ģिशक्षण 
पिरषद (एनसीसीटी) और वैक ुं ठ मेहता राÍटर्ीय Ģबंधन संÎथान जैसी पहलȗ पर कायर् कर रही है।  
ये संÎथान डेयरी Ģबंधन, गर्ामीण उǏिमता और िडिजटल साक्षरता जैसे महत्वपूणर् क्षेतर्ȗ को कवर 
करने वाले लिक्षत Ģिशक्षण कायर्कर्म
ȗ क े आयोजन मȂ महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभा रहे हȅ।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, 2022-23 मȂ 2,01,000 से अिधक Ëयिƪयȗ को Ģिशिक्षत 
िकया गया, िजसमȂ मिहलाओं की उÊलेखनीय भागीदारी रही। एनसीसीटी ने 2023-24
 मȂ 3,619 
Ģिशक्षण कायर्कर्म आयोिजत िकए, जो अपने िनधार्िरत लÑय 1,740 से कहीं अिधक थे। क्षमता 
िनमार्ण क े Ģित इस Ģितबǉता से सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ क ुशल पेशेवरȗ की सतत आपूिर्त सुिनिÌचत 
होती है। 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, ĢÎतािवत सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय इस Ģयास को और 
अिधक सशƪ बनाएगा, िजससे हािशए पर मौजूद समुदायȗ को सक्षम बना कर सहकारी शासन मȂ 
उनकी भागीदारी को बढ़ावा िमलेगा और एक अिधक समावेशी आिर्थक पिरदृÌय का िनमार्ण होगा।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका िवÌवास और सबका 
Ģयास' का मंतर् सहकािरता की रीढ़ क े रूप  मȂ है।  मोदी सरकार ने सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ हािशए पर 
मौजूद समुदायȗ, िवशेष रूप  से अनुसूिचत जाित और अन्य िपछड़ा वगर् (ओबीसी) क े समावेश को 
उÊलेखनीय रूप  से बढ़ावा िदया है। वंिचत इका ई समूह और वगर् की आिर्थक सहायता योजना 
(VISVAS) समान भागीदारी सुिनिÌचत करने वाली सहकारी सिमितयȗ की Îथापना या िवÎतार 
करने क े िलए अनुसूिचत जाित, ओबीसी और सफाई कमर्चािरयȗ जैसे हािशए पर रहने वाले समूह 
को िवǄ सहायता Ģदान करती है। ...(समय की घं
टी)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) : You have taken 
enough time. It is time to conclude.  
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई:  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मेरा सहकार मंतर्ी से यह िवनती है 
िक मȅ गोपालक समाज से आता हूँ...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी बीरेन्दर् Ģसाद बैÌय):  आपको काफी समय िमला है, अब आप conclude 
कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई: चूँिक हमारी गो
पालक मंडिलयȗ को मतािधकार से वंिचत िकया 
गया है, इसिलए मȅ मंतर्ी जी से यह आगर्ह करता हूँ िक उसके  बारे मȂ अच्छी तरह से सोचा जा ए, 
धन्यवाद।           
        
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BI RENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA):  The next speaker is 
hon. Member, Shrimati Sagarika Ghose. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (West Bengal) : Respected Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, 
on behalf of All India Trinamool Congress, I rise to speak on the " Tribhuvan" Sahkari 
University Bill, 2025, which seeks to esta blish the Institute of Rural Management 
Anand (IRMA) as “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University or India’s first national cooperative 
university.The Government has suddenly remembered the enormous contributions 
that IRMA and the cooperative movements ha ve played in Gujarat. But why is the 
Modi Government trying to rewrite hist ory? The recognition of respected Shri 
Tribhuvandas Patel is good. But, in full-page  advertisements released by Amul, there 
is one glaring omission. Why is the Govern ment reluctant to honour the giant, who 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
133

founded IRMA in 1979, built and nurtured IRMA and whose le gacy shaped Amul in the 
Milk Revolution in Gujarat in India? I refe r here, Sir, to India’s milkman, father of 
India’s White Revolution and founder of IRMA, Dr. Verghese Kurien. Why is Dr. 
Verghese Kurien’s name missing from this  university? Why? The reason why this 
Government is not recognizing a pioneering son of India and dedicated servant of the 
people like Dr. Verghese Kurien is because he never became part of the BJP 
ecosystem. Dr. Kurien staunchly believed that if universities have to become 
excellent, they need to be above all, au tonomous. In his lifetime, he had been 
outspoken on refusing to let the BJP Government meddle with IRMA.  
6.00 P.M. 
Sir, I ask a question to this Government :  Is the Government finding it difficult to give 
due credit to Dr. Kurien ¥ Is that the reason this Government not honouring Dr. 
Verghese Kurien? ¥ 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Hon. Members... 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Yes, Sir.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA ): It is now 6.00 p.m.  If 
the House agrees, we may sit beyond 6. 00 p.m. today till the disposal of 
the"Tribhuvan" Sahkari University Bill, 2025.  Do I have leave of the House to extend 
sitting beyond 6.00 p.m.?   
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) : So, the House will 
continue now.   
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE : 
¥Of the 54,000 educational institutions run by 
Christians, about 75 per cent of  those students are non-Christian. They are Hindus, 
they are Muslims, they are Jains, they are Sikhs. Instead of targeting minorities, when 
¥ Not recorded as directed by the Chair. 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
will we learn to acknowledge their stellar contri bution in all walks of our national life?  
Gujarat was Dr. Verghese Kurian's karmabhoomi. He lived all his life in Anand, 
building 17 major institutions, including the NDP or National  Dairy Development 
Board.  But, what did the BJP do? ¥How very sad, Sir!  How very sad!  Shri 
Tribhuvandas Patel set up the Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers' Union.  But, 
who changed the destiny of milk cooperatives?  …( Interruptions)… Who brought all 
milk cooperatives together?  Who helped set up Anand Milk Union Limited (AMUL)?  
It was Verghese Kurien.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA):  Kindly authenticate. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE : Sir, Amul ushered in an economic and social 
revolution.  ‘One line, one can, one vote’, said Dr. Kurien.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA):  Kindly authenticate. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE :  All milk producers, irrespective of caste and creed, 
stand in one line, pour milk into one can and each would have a vote.  That was the 
egalitarianism. The milk revolution was a revolution in egalitarianism and social 
equality. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) :  Kindly authenticate 
your allegation. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE:   It was Varghese Kurien who resigned from the Indian 
Institute of Management, Ahmadabad becaus e he did not believe that Government 
subsidies should go to training mana gers who would then work abroad in 
multinational corporations. He founded th e concept of the "barefoot manager". He 
created the concept of "rural management".  T h a t  i s  h o w  I R M A  w a s  b o r n .  I t  i s  a  
brainchild of Dr. Verghese Kurien. The respected Mr. Tribhuvandas Patel and Dr. 
Kurien enjoyed a father-son relationship. Si r, today Dr. Verghese Kurien’s daughter 
calls Tribhuvandas Patel ‘ kaka’. ‘Tribhuvan kaka ’, is what she calls him. They had a 
father-son bond.  It was Tribhuvandas Patel who pleaded with Dr. Kurien to stay on in 
Anand and build the Milk Cooperative with new technologies, new machines. History 
                                                            
¥  Not recorded as directed by the Chair. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
135

 
 
did not start in 2014, Sir. The Cooperative movement was built decades before 
Narendra Modi ji became Chief Minister of Gujarat. There is a long line of the great 
Nehruvian nation builders like Dr. Verghese  Kurien, Dr. Manmohan Singh that this 
Government cannot bring itself to credit and acknowledge. This Government has an 
antipathy to the great Nehruvian nation builders like Dr. Kurien. But this antipathy and 
hostility to the Nehruvian nation builders mu st not get the better of good sense. Dr. 
Kurien founded IRMA and, as a proud son of Gujarat, Dr. Verghese Kurien’s name 
must find place in this new University.   
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your time is over. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE:  Sir, they are trying to re write history but those who 
try to rewrite history will never be forgiven by history. History will never forgive those 
who rewrite history. Thank you, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.   
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा (हिरयाणा): सर, मेरा एक Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes. 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: सर, यह िनयम 238क से संबंिधत है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, go ahead. 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़
 ा: सर, माननीय सदÎया ने इस कोऑपरेिटव िबल को minority और majority 
क े साथ जोड़ा है िक वगीर्ज़ क ुिरयन को इसिलए ignore िकया गया, क्यȗिक वे minority class से 
हȅ। यह सरासर गलत है।  िनयम 238क मȂ कहा गया है, "कोई सदÎय िकसी अन्य सदÎय या लोक 
सभा क े िकसी सदÎय क े िवरुǉ मानहािनकारक या अपराध मȂ फ ंसाने वाले Îवरूप का कोई आरोप 
नहीं लगायेगा जब तक िक आरोप लगाने वाने सदÎय ने सभा
पित और संबंिधत मंतर्ी को भी इसकी 
पूवर् सूचना न दी हो तािक मंतर्ी उǄर िदये जाने क े Ģयोजन क े िलए इस िवषय की जांच कर सके ।"  
सभापित जी, इसको delete करना च
ािहए।  
 
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, whether this House can reflect on the conduct of 
persons who are not Members of this House,  there is a detailed ruling given by the 
Chair. I will examine it in that perspective. It is on two-fold situations: If there is 
anything which is inculpating the person  or incriminating th e person, then, the 
mechanism is different; if it is  an assertion of a factual situ ation, then, it is different. 
The matter will be examined. 
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल (महाराÍटर्): सभापित महोदय, आज मȅ ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी िबल, 2025 
पर चचार् करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ। महोदय, मȅ इस िबल का पूरी तरह से समथर्न करते हुए एक 
जानकारी आपके  माध्यम से सदन को देना चा
हता हूँ और बड़े गवर् क े साथ देना चाहता हूँ िक 
ितर्भुवनदास पटेल, जो खेड़ा िडिÎटर्क्ट िमÊक Ģोǹूसर कोऑपरेिटव क े संÎथापक रहे, हमारे 
पूवर्ज भी वहीं से आते हȅ, जहां से ितर्भुवनदास जी ने शुरुआत  की।  सर, जो आणंद शहर है, मेरी 
पत्नी भी वहीं से आती हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपने यह कह कर बहुत आनंिदत िकया है, क्
यȗिक उनके  ǎारा आयोिजत एक 
कायर्कर्म मȂ मȅ गया था। She was a towering figure and you were only assisting. मȅ आपके  
इलाके  मȂ गया था, वह बड़ा अच्छा कायर्कर्म था। 
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: बड़ी गÇभीर चचार् हो रही थी, क ु छ लोग नाराज़ हो रहे थे, तो मȅने सोचा िक ज़रा 
मूड बदलने का काम िक
या जाए। हमारे िमतर् जयराम जी भी थोड़ा मुÎकु रा दȂ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: तो मेरा आप
से अनुरोध है िक आप अक्सर हाउस मȂ रहा करȂ। 
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: तो हाउस हमेशा Ģफु िÊलत रहेगा। सर, एक जानकारी और भी बता देता हूँ, 
क्यȗिक बहुत सारे सदÎयȗ ने इस िबल पर चचार् की। अमूल नाम क ै से आया? आणंद िमÊक यूिनयन 
िलिमटेड, इसिलए अमूल उसका शॉटर् फॉमर् है। हम लोग अमूल बटर, अमूल की बात कर
ते हȅ। 
बहुत सारे लोग जानते नहीं हȗगे, इसिलए मȅने सोचा िक पूवर्ज वहाँ से आए, तो इतनी जानकारी 
तो मेरे पास होनी चा
िहए और मुझे इसे साझा करने की भी यहाँ कोिशश करनी चािहए। 
सर, यह जो िबल है और जो इंिडयन इंिÎटǷूट ऑफ रूरल  मैनेजमȂट, आणंद की बात हो 
रही है। नो डा
उट, यह एक बहुत अच्छी संÎथा है। उस संÎथा का एक Îवरूप, आज क े आधुिनक 
युग मȂ, कोऑपरेिटव सहकािरता क े महत्व को और बढ़ाने क े िलए है। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का लÑय है - 
"सहकार से समृिǉ" - यह एक बहुत ही नेक लÑ
य है, और इसे आगे और भी सशƪ बनाने की 
ज़रूरत है। यह िबल उसी िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् कद म  है। 
यह जो हमारा कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् है, नो डाउट, हम अमूल की बात करते हȅ। वहाँ से लाखȗ 
पिरवारȗ क े जीवन मȂ उन्नित और पिरवतर्न आया, खासकर मिहलाओं क े माध्यम से आया। क्यȗिक 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
137

 
 
जो दूध का उत्पादन करने वाले हȅ, उनमȂ 99 Ģितशत मिहलाएँ ही इस धंधे से जुड़ी रही हȅ। उन्हȗने 
अपने पिरवार को अिधक आय का एक साधन इस कोऑपरेिटव मूवमȂट क े माध्यम से Ģदान िकया। 
ितर्भुवनदास पटेल जी की जो बात यहाँ हुई, नो डाउट, वगीर्स क ुिरयन साहब का योगदान 
भी कहीं से कम नहीं समझना चािह
ए। लेिकन अगर कोई महान Ëयिƪ और वह भी Îवतंतर्ता 
सेनानी हȅ... 
 उसके  बाद िजन्हȗने सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल क े आदेश पर गुजरात मȂ इतन ी बड़ी 
कोऑपरेिटव मूवमȂट की शुरुआत  की, अगर उनका नाम इस यूिनविर्सटी को िदया जाता है, तो 
उसका हमȂ सहषर् Îवागत करना चािहए। मȅ गवर् क े साथ कहना चाहता हूं िक यह जो कदम है, वह 
लोगȗ को अच्छे काम करने क े िलए Ģेिरत करेगा। जहां तक हमारे क ु छ साथी डॉ. वगीर्स क ुिरयन 
की बात कर रहे थे, नो डाउट, उनके  बारे मȂ िकसी क े मन मȂ कोई ĢÌन िचन्
ह नहीं होना चािहए।  
उन्हȗने इस देश क े िकसानȗ और खासकर दूध उत्पादन क े िलए बहुत बड़ा योग दान िदया।  
उसको भी कहीं िकसी को नजरअंदाज करने की जरूरत नहीं है। मुझे लगता है िक हमारे राÍटर् ने 
उनको कई बार सÇमािनत िकया है और अवÌय ऐसा कहीं न कहीं  मौका आएगा, जो उनका और 
भी सÇमान िकसी न िकसी माध्यम से जरूर  होगा।  आज कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् मȂ, क्यȗिक मȅ महाराÍटर् 
से जुड़ा हुआ हूं, गुजरात मȂ हमारे पूवर्ज थे, मगर महाराÍटर् और गुजरात, खासकर ये दोनȗ जो 
राज्य हȅ, ये बहुत ही …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपका कायर्क्षेतर् महाराÍ
टर् से आगे और Ģांतȗ मȂ भी है।   
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: जी, सर। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: तो आप महाराÍटर् तक सीिमत क्यȗ हो रहे हȅ?  
 
Ǜी Ģफु ƥ पटेल: सर, मȅने कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् क े मामले मȂ कहा। हमारे भाई िदिग्वजय जी ने भी 
पहले अपने भाषण मȂ यह बात दोहरायी थी िक महाराÍटर् और गुजरात ने इस क्षेतर् मȂ काफी पहल 
की थी। अब पूरे देश मȂ चाहे मध्य Ģदेश हो, छǄीसगढ़ हो, अन्य राज्
 य हȗ या आपका Ģांत 
राजÎथान हो, सभी जगहȗ पर आज कोऑपरेिटव का एक बहुत बड़ा जाल फ ैला हुआ है।  
कोऑपरेिटव अब क ु छ िलिमटेड दायरे मȂ नहीं, बिÊक िविभन्न क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ आज उसका बहुत बड़ा 
योगदान रहा है। पहले एक जमाना था िक हमारे महाराÍटर् मȂ हम लोग कहते थे िक कोऑपरेिटव 
मतलब शुगर फ ैक्टरी है,  शक्कर कारखाना है, बस वही एक कोऑपरेिटव है, ऐसा नहीं है।  दूध 
संघ है, वही कोऑपरेिटव है, ऐसा नहीं है। आज मȅ आपको कहना चाहता हूं िक कॉटन गर्ोइंग मȂ 
हमारा Îटेट काफी बड़ा है। आज कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् मȂ इतनी सारी टेक्Îटा
इÊस की spinning और 
weaving mills का हमारे यहां िनमार्ण हो गया है। आज हमारे वहां पर Inland fisheries मȂ 
कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत बड़ा Ģगित का काम हुआ है। आज क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ Farmer Producer 
Organisation हो, अन्य जो भी हमारी कोऑपरेिटव संÎथा है, उसके  माध्यम से लाखȗ और करोड़ȗ 
लोगȗ को अपना जीवन बदलने का एक मौका िमला है। आज जंगल कामगारȗ क े िलए, जो वन मȂ 
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
काम करते हȅ, जैसे ओिडशा मȂ काम करते हȅ, छǄीसगढ़ मȂ काम करते हȅ, मध्य Ģदेश मȂ, महाराÍटर् 
मȂ वन कामगारȗ की भी कोऑपरेिटव सोसायटीज़ हȅ और उनको भी वन उपज क े माध्यम से चाहे 
महुआ Äलावर हो, तȂदुपǄा हो और बाकी बहुत सारे उत्पादन को कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् क े माध्यम से 
बढ़ा रहे हȅ।  आज बȅिंकग मȂ एक बात िनिÌचत है। क ु छ अपवाद, इधर-उधर की घटनाएं, 
दुघर्टनाएं, बȅिंकग क्षेतर् मȂ, कोऑपरेिटव मȂ हुई हȗगी, लेिकन आज अगर आप मोटा-मोटी देखȂ, तो 
जो बȅिंकग की rea
ch है, चाहे nationalized banks हȗ या Ģाइवेट बȅक्स हो, उनका जाल पूरे देश 
मȂ नजर आता है। आज भी ऐसा कोई गांव नहीं बचा होगा, जहां पर बȅिंकग की जरूरत  हो और बȅक 
न पहुंची हो और अगर वहां बȅक पहुंची है, तो क ेवल कोऑपरेिटव बȅक पहुंची होगी। यह बहुत 
जरूरी  है और इसी वजह से आज यह जो िबल है, इसमȂ खाली यूिनविर्स टी तो एक माध्यम है, 
यूिनविर्सटी क े माध्यम से लोगȗ को अच्छी टर्ेिंनग िमले,  वहां से अच्छे मैनजमȂट क े गर्ेजुएट्स तैयार 
हȗ, वहां पर जाकर फ ैकÊटी उनको नई-नई techniques िसखाए।  सर क ेवल नाम क े िलए 
कोऑपरेिटव है, लेिकन साथ-साथ आज आधुिनक युग मȂ उनके  िलए sky is the limit. उस वजह 
से उनको अगर नई techniques,  नई चीज़ȗ क े बारे मȂ जानकारी िमलती है, तो उसका हम लोगȗ 
को सहषर् Îवागत करना चािहए।  यह जो िबल है, वह कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् को सशƪ बनाने क े िलए, 
हमारे देश मȂ नई पीढ़ी को नई िदशा देने क े िलए, क्यȗिक नई पीढ़ी मैनेजमȂट मȂ बाकी चीज़ȗ मȂ 
चली जाती है। कोई फाइनȂस मȂ चला जाएगा, कोई टेक्नोलॉजी क े क्षेतर् मȂ जाता है, लेिकन रूर ल 
मैनेजमȂट क े क्षेतर् मȂ नई पीढ़ी को आकिर्षत करने क े िलए िकया जाता है, िजसके  माध्यम से अपने 
पैरȗ पर खड़े हो सकते हȅ, अपने भिवÍय को बना सकते हȅ।  
 यह भी इस िबल का एक बहुत बड़ा उǈेÌय है। मȅ इस वजह से इस िबल का पूरी तरह से 
समथर्न करते हुए पुनÌच: सरकार को भी बधाई दूंगा िक ितर्भुवन दास पटेल, िजन्हȂ गुजरात मȂ 
‘ितर्भुवन काका’ भी कह ते हȅ, हर Ëयिƪ उनका सÇमान करता है। हमारे नरहरी भाई और मेरे, हम 
दोनȗ क े पूवर्ज एक ही िजले क े हȅ, इसिलए नरहरी भाई को भी मालूम है िक पूरा गुजरात ‘ितर्भुवन 
काका’ क े नाम से ितर्भुवन दास पटेल क े योगदान को बहुत महत्व देता है, अत: मȅ सरकार को 
बहुत-बहुत बधाई देते हुए इसका पुरज़ोर समथर्न करता हूं।  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  I  h a v e  t o  i nform that the Business Advisory 
Committee in its meeting held on the 1st of April, 2025 has allotted time for 
Government legislative business as follows:  
1. Consideration and passing of the Immigration and Foreigners 
Bill,  2025, as passed by Lok Sabha.    
Five hours.  
 
2. Consideration and passing of the followi ng Bills after they are considered and 
passed by Lok Sabha:-  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
139

 
 
(i) The Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 202 5, as reported by the Joint 
Committee.  
(ii) The Mussalman  Waqf (Repeal)  Bill, 2024. 
Eight hours to 
be discussed 
together 
(iii) The Indian Ports Bill, 2025. Two hours.  
The Committee also recommended that the House may dispense with the 
lunch hour on 2nd and 3rd April, 2025, an d also sit late to complete the listed 
business on both days. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH : Sir, I am sorry. The Government said that the Indian Ports 
Bill will not be taken up during this Session. That is what th ey said. So it is not three 
hours in this Session. I just want to clarify it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your point is noted. Shri P.P. Suneer.  
 
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) in the Chair.] 
 
The “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University Bill, 2025-Contd. 
 
SHRI P.P. SUNEER (Kerala) : Hon. Chairman, Sir, than k you for giving me this 
opportunity.  Sir, I rise to speak on the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University Bill with a sense 
of concern.  While the University is m eant to serve the cooperative sector,  its 
governance structure tells a different story. In true BJP fashion, decision-making is 
excessively centralised. The proposed governi ng board is packed with bureaucrats, 
and not a single expert from the field of ed ucation has been included. What does this 
reveal? A Government that is short-sighte d, that does not recognize the importance 
of educational expertise in running a uni versity, let alone one dedicated to the 
cooperative movement!  
 The story of the man after whom this  University is named, Tribhuvandas 
Kishbhai Patel, is a story of grassroots empowerment. The foundations of Amul were 
laid by him, and it was the technological i nnovations  and social entrepreneurship of 
Dr. Verghese Kurien and Shri H.M. Dalaya  that transformed it into a globally 
recognized branch. The cooperative moveme nt was strengthened with technology 
and innovation by Dr. Verghe se Kurien and paved the way for India's self-sufficiency 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
in the dairy sector. That same spirit is the need of the hour - aligning the cooperative 
movement with technological innovations.  
Sir, while the Government pats itself on  the back for the rise in start-ups in 
recent years, how many of these start-up s follow a cooperative ownership model?  
What incentives has the Government provided to promote cooperative-based start-
ups? The answer remains unclear. How do es the Government plan to integrate 
technological advancements with the co operative movement? That too remains 
unanswered. The Government must addr ess these concerns. Further, if the 
Government is truly committed to honourin g the cooperative movement, why has the 
IMRA not been named after Dr. Verghese Kurien, the architect of India's White 
Revolution? His contributions transformed India into a self-sufficient dairy nation, and 
I demand  that the Institute of Rural Ma nagement Anand be na med after its founder, 
Dr. Verghese Kurien, as part of the Bill itself. The cooperative sector cannot be 
strengthened through mere slogans and bureaucratic control. It needs real 
investment, real innovation and real part icipation from those who understand both 
education and cooperatives. A university in  name alone will not serve the movement 
unless it is structured to embody the true spirit of cooperation and democracy. Thank 
you. 
 
Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक ( गुजरात): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िबल पर 
बोलने मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।  मȅ कांगर्ेस क े िमतर्ȗ को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देना 
चाहता हूं, िजन्हȗने आज अन्य पिरवारȗ क े नाम लेने क े बजाय माननीय सरदार पटेल जी को याद 
करके  इस स
हकािरता आंदोलन मȂ जोड़ने की बात की है, तो मȅ कांगर्ेस क े सभी िमतर्ȗ का आभार 
Ëयƪ करता हूं।  माननीय मोदी जी की सोच है िक अंत्योदय की योजना क े माध्यम से इस देश मȂ 
मजबूत राÍटर् बनाने क े िलए गांव, गरीब, िकसान, मजदूर सभी तक िवकास पहुंचे। इसीिलए 
माननीय मोदी जी कायर् कर रहे हȅ। उस ी Ǜृंखला मȂ उन्हȗने सहकािरता मंतर्ालय जब अलग िकया, 
तो देश क े गृह मंतर्ी और Ģथम सहकािरता मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ आदरणीय अिमत भाई शाह जी को 
इसकी िजÇमेवारी दी। उस िजÇमेवारी को लेकर और सहकािरता मंतर्ाल य मȂ आमूल पिरवतर्न 
लाकर सहकािरता आंदोलन क े माध्यम से गांव को मजबूत करने क े िलए, गांव मȂ िकसान, 
पशुपालन और सहकारी मंडिलयȗ क े साथ जुड़े हुए िकसानȗ और खेत मजदूरȗ क े िलए कायर् 
िकया। इस सहकािरता आंदोलन क े अच्छे पिरणामȗ और उन
की आय मȂ क ै से बढ़ोतरी हो, उस 
िदशा मȂ कायर् करने क े िलए जब से यह मंतर्ालय बना है, तब से वह कायर् पर लगा है।   
माननीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हर क्षेतर् मȂ िवक ास हो रहा है और हर क्षेतर् मȂ टेक्नोलॉजी को 
जोड़कर उस क्षेतर् को क ै से बेहतर से बेहतर बनाया जाए, इस पर कायर् हो रहा है।  जब वे गुजरात 
क े तत्कालीन मुख्यमंतर्ी थे, तो उन्हȗने पेटर्ोिलयम क्षेतर् क े िलए पेटर्ोिलयम यूिनविर्सटी बनाई थी, 
न्याय क्षेतर् क े िलए लॉ यूिनविर्सटी बनवाई थी, िचÊडर्न्स यूिनविर्सटी बन
वाई थी और कामधेनु 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
141

 
 
यूिनविर्सटी भी बनवाई थी। अलग-अलग क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िवकास करने क े िलए और टेक्नोलॉजी से जोड़ने 
क े िलए उन्हȗने इस क्षेतर् मȂ काम िकया है। इसी क्षेतर् मȂ Îवगीर्य ितर्भुवनदास पटेल जी, िजन्हȗने 
सहकारी क्षेतर् क े आंदोलन की नीव रखी थी और 1940 मȂ जब िकसानȗ का शोषण हो रहा था, तब 
उन्हȗने माननीय सरदार पटेल जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ, उनकी अगुवाई मȂ आंदोलन शुरू  िकया था। 14
 
िदसंबर, 1946 को खेड़ा दूध उत्पादक सहकारी संघ की Îथापना की और उसी का Ģोडक्ट अमूल 
का जो Ĥांड है, उससे न क ेवल भारत मȂ, बिÊक िव
Ìव क े बाजारȗ मȂ भारत क े िकसान की बात और 
िकसान का Ģोडक्ट सभी जगह पहुंचा है। 1973 मȂ अमूल की जब 25वीं सालिगरह मनाई गई, तब 
यह देश की सबसे बड़
ी सहकारी डेयरी बन चुकी थी। अमूल सहकारी डेयरी, िजसकी शुरुआत  
250 लीटर दूध से हुई थी, आज करोड़ȗ लीटर दूध गुजरात क े माध्यम देश मȂ पहुंचाया जा रहा है।   
कांगर्ेस क े शासन मȂ इस मंतर्ालय को 300 करोड़ रुपया का आवंटन िकया जाता था, मगर मुझे 
कहते हुए गवर् हो रहा है िक माननीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इस क्षेतर् मȂ इस िवभाग को 600 करोड़ 
रुपय े से भी ज्यादा की रािश दी गई है और इस सहकािरता िवभाग को मज बूत करने का Ģयत्न 
िकया जा रहा है, तािक सहकािरता आंदोलन पूरे देश मȂ जाए और देश क े सभी िकसान इससे 
जुड़े। लोगȗ को जोड़कर इस यूिनविर्सटी क े माध्यम से उनको िश क्षा देने और नई-नई 
टेक्नोलॉजीज़ क े माध्यम से िशिक्षत करके  देश और गांव को मजबूत करने क े िलए यह िबल लाया 
गया है। इस िबल क े माध्यम से जो नई टेक्नोलॉजी िमलेगी, उससे करोड़ȗ दूध उत्पादक िकसान 
और खेत मज
दूरȗ की आमदनी बढ़ेगी।   
 मिहला सशƪीकरण और उसके  िलए सहकािरता मॉडल, यह पूरे िवÌव मȂ और पूरे भारत 
मȂ नंबर वन है। गुजरात मȂ सहकािरता आंदोलन क े माध्यम से सेवा सहकारी मंडली क े ǎारा 
िकसानȗ को 2 लाख रुपए  िदए जाते थे, िजसे अभी हमारी सरकार ने 5 लाख रुपए  िकया है, वह 
िकसानȗ को ज़ीरो परसȂट Åयाज पर िदया जाता है। पूरे भारत मȂ िसफर् हमा
रा Îटेट ऐसा है, जहाँ 
पूरे िकसानȗ को 5 लाख रुपए  का ऋण ज़ीरो परसȂट सूद पर िदया जा
ता है। करोड़ȗ िकसान इस 
योजना क े माध्यम से अपनी खेत मȂ उपज पैदा करते हȅ। खेती की उपज क े िलए एमएसपी पर 
िकसान से जो खरीद-िबकर्ी की जाती है, वह भी इस सहकारी मॉ डल क े माध्यम से की जाती है।  
उसकी उपज को खरीदने क े िलए सहकारी संÎथाओं को भी यह दाियत्व िदया जाता है। यह इतना 
बड़ा नेटवकर् है िक उसे आधुिनक बनाने, टेक्नोलॉजी क े साथ सज्ज करने और दुिन या क े माकȃ ट 
मȂ अपने िकसान क े product को value added करने क े िलए इस िबल क े माध्यम से technocrats 
क े माध्यम से इसे देश और दुिनया क े सामने रखा जाएगा। अभी िकसान contract farming क े 
माध्यम से नए-नए products बनाता है। Contract  farming क े माध्यम से िकसान का मुनाफा और 
उसकी लागत पहले से ही तय हो जाती है।  इस मॉडल क े कारण िकसान ज्यादा से ज्यादा उपज 
पैदा कर सके , नई-नई टेक्नोलॉजी क े माध्यम से नए-नए आयामȗ को छू  सके , इसीिलए एक 
यूिनविर्सटी क े माध्यम से नए-नए technocrats इस फीÊड मȂ आएँगे और देश क े products को  
पूरे देश और दुिनया क े माकȃ ट मȂ लेकर आएँगे। महोदय, सहकारी ĢवृिǄ क े माध्यम से दूध और 
दूध क े products की तो बात हुई, मगर जो पशु है, उसके  गोबर को भी इकƻा करके , उसका बȅक 
बना कर हमारे यहाँ एक मॉडल बना है, िजसमȂ गोब
र गैस क े माध्यम से CNG produce िकया 
जाता है और इसके  साथ ही, CNG का पेटर्ोल पंप बना कर four-wheelers, two-wheelers, 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सबमȂ उसे डालने का काम हमारे बनासकांठा मȂ शुरू  हुआ है। सहकारी संÎथा क े माध्यम से जो 
िकसान क े गाय-भȅस का गोबर है, उससे भी उसको आय िमल सके , इस तरह का मॉडल गुजरात 
मȂ Îथािपत िकया गया है। अभी इस मॉडल क े माध्य म से आधुिनक खेती मȂ sprinkler क े माध्यम से 
िकसान खेती करे, िजससे पानी की बचत हो, नए-नए Ģयोग करके  सरकारी बȅक और डेयरी जैसी 
संÎथाओं क े माध्यम से िकसानȗ की इनकम बढ़े, इसके  िलए कायर् िकया जा रहा है। यह हमारी 
सामािजक िजÇमेदारी है और सामािजक िजÇमेदारी िनभाते हुए हमारे यहाँ गुजरात मȂ सहकारी 
संÎथाओं क े माध्यम से चा
हे मेिडकल कॉलेज चलाना हो, Îकू ल चलाना हो, कॉलेज चलाना हो या 
सैिनक Îकू ल चलाना हो, यह भी सहकारी संÎथाओं क े माध्यम से चल रहा है।   
 महोदय, इस िबल को िज
स तरह से माननीय मोदी साहब और माननीय सहकािरता मंतर्ी, 
आदरणीय अिमत भाई शाह साहब ने पेश िकया है, इसके  माध्यम से आत्मिनभर्र भारत बनाने का 
ÎवÃन है। 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका िव
Ìवास और सबका Ģयास', इस सूतर् को चिरताथर् 
करने क े िलए माननीय मोदी जी का जो Ģयास है और यह जो िबल लाया जा रहा है, िजसको इस 
संसद क े माध्यम से भारत की जन ता क े सामने रखा गया है, उसका मȅ भरपूर समथर्न करता हूँ।  
मेरी गुजािरश है िक इस िबल से भारत क े जो िकसान हȅ और िकसान क े साथ ही जो पशुपालक हȅ, 
पशुपालक क े अलावा िजत ने भी cooperative banks हȅ, sugar factories हȅ, उनमȂ मजबूती 
आएगी और आने वाले िदन क े िलए माननीय मोदी जी ने 2047 मȂ भारत को िवÌव गुरु  बनाने का 
जो ÎवÃन देखा है, उसको पूरा करने क े िलए यह िबल एक महत्व का िबल होगा।  इसी बात क े 
साथ, मȅ इस िबल का भरपूर समथर्न करता हूँ।  ध
न्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): धन्यवाद, नायक साहब।  Ǜी संजय राउत जी।  आपके  पास 
3 िमनट हȅ। 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत (महाराÍटर्): वाइस-चेयरमैन सर, देश मȂ एक नई यूिन विर्सटी बन रही है और 
यूिनविर्सटी का िवरोध करने का कोई कारण नहीं है और वह भी देश की पहली cooperative 
university - Tribhuvan Cooperative University. ितर्भुवन भाई का नाम cooperative 
movement मȂ बहुत आदर से िलया जाता था।  उनका काम भी बड़ा है और अमूल की Îथापना मȂ 
उनका बड़ा योगदान रहा।   
 लेिकन हमारे कोऑपरेिटव िमिनÎटर और गुजरात क े हमारे सभी भाई जो भाषण कर रहे 
थे, वे एक Ëयिƪ को भूल गए, िजसका नाम है - वैक ुं ठ मेहता। वैक ुं ठ मेहता cooperative 
movement क े Pioneer रहे, founder रहे और doyen रहे। वैक ुं ठ मेहता जी क े नाम से महाराÍटर् 
क े पुणे मȂ एक सबसे बड़ा cooperative management institute है। मोहोल साहब, वह आपके  
कायर्क्षेतर् मȂ है।  Vaikunth Mehta National Institute of Cooperative Management को कांगर्ेस 
की सरकार ने 1967 मȂ बनाया, िजसे VAMNICOM नाम से जाना जाता है। वह 70 साल  से काम 
कर रहा  है। वह 70 सालȗ से वह काम कर रहा  है, जो मंतर्ी जी ितर्भुवन यूिनविर्सटी से अभी करना 
चाहते हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप िगन लीिजए, बाद मȂ हम बैठȂगे। वैक ुं ठ मेहता कोऑ परेिटव 
इंिÎटǷूट अपने आप मȂ एक University है और िवÌव क े लगभग 40 देशȗ क े साथ उसका नेटवकर् 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
143

 
 
है। पुणे क े Savitribhai Phule University से उसका affiliation है। जो युवा cooperative 
management मȂ अपना किरयर बनाना चाहते हȅ, उनके  िलए सभी educational facilities उस  
VAMNICOM मȂ आज भी हȅ । तो मेरा कहना है िक एक नई युिनविर्सटी बन रही है, इसका Îवागत 
है, लेिकन वह भी एक युिनविर्सटी है, उसको भी अगर आप cooperative university का दजार् देने 
Ģयत्न करते, तो 2 universities हो जातीं। वैक ुं ठ भाई गुजरात से थे। ितर्भुवन पटेल यूिनविर्सटी 
बनाने का उǈेÌय क्या है - Technical, management education training और Cooperative मȂ 
research and development.  ये सभी faculties वैक ुं ठ मेहता कोऑपरेिटव इंÎटीǷूट मȂ चल 
रही हȅ। आप उनका Ģोगर्ाम देिखए। Cooperative banking, coop erative marketing, housing 
cooperative, dairy management, cooperative laws, sugar, forest, computers - ये सभी 
सÅजेक्ट्स वैक ुं ठ मेहता कोऑपरेिटव इंÎटीǷूट मȂ आज भी पढ़ाए जाते हȅ। Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, Government of In dia has recognized the institute as a 
consultant for evaluating the Women Dairy Projects. देश का best cooperative journal 
यहां से िनकलता है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎय, अब समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत: वहां एक हॉÎटल है और उस हॉÎटल मȂ 200 कमरे हȅ। एक यूिनविर्सटी क े िलए 
और क्या चािहए? तो सबसे बड़ा काम वहां चल रहा है।  मȅ यह मानता हूं िक ितर्भुवन पटेल 
यूिनविर्सटी देश क े िलए एक मागर्दशर्क रहेगी, अच्छा काम करेगी, लेिकन मȅ मंतर्ी जी से कहना 
चाहता हूं िक उसके  साथ-साथ इस देश मȂ जो Vaikunth Mehta National Institute of 
Cooperative Management चल रहा है, उसको भी आप इस युिनविर्सटी से affiliate किरए।  
देश क े िलए एक बड़ी यूिनविर्सटी बने, हमारे जो युवा इस क्षेतर् मȂ काम करना चाहते हȅ या किरयर 
बनाना चाहते हȅ, उनके  िलए भी यह आपका एक योगदान रहेगा। इसके  साथ मȅ आभ ार Ëयƪ 
करता हूं िक आपने मुझे समय िदया।    
                                                                 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे ( महाराÍटर्): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज ितर्भुवन सहकािरता 
िवधेयक, जो िवǏापीठ का िवधेयक है, मȅ इस िवधेयक का समथर्न करने क े िलए खड़ा हूं।  
महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी, िजनका लÑय सहकार से समृिǉ है, उसको पूरा 
करने क े िलए हमारे सहकािरता मंतर्ी, माननीय अिमत शाह जी और मȅ महाराÍटर् से राज्य मंतर्ी 
मुरलीधर मोहोल जी का नाम लेना चाहता हूं, इन्हȗने यह जो िबल लाया है, उसका मȅ समथर्न 
करता हूं। सहकािरता क े ऊपर Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का  इतना ख्याल है िक National Cooperative 
Policy, 2025 क े िलए अभी-अभी 6 माचर्, 2025 को उन्हȗने एक मीिंटग चेयर की, िजसमȂ 
सहकािरता मंतर्ी थे, सहकािरता राज्य मंतर्ी थे, सेकर् ेटरीज़ भी थे।  इसमȂ सबसे महत्वपूणर् बात यह 
है िक गर्ामȗ की आिर्थक ËयवÎथा सुधारने क े िलए और youth तथा मिहलाओं को prioritize करने 
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
क े िलए Cooperative Policy मȂ क्या बदलाव कर सकते हȅ और नई पॉिलसी क ै से ला सकते हȅ, 
वह भी सहकार से समृिǉ की, तो इस सहकार से समृिǉ की जो पॉिलसी है, इसमȂ सब क ु छ आ 
रहा है। अिभमान की बात ऐसी है िक िजन्हȗने सहकािरता की नींव रखी, चाहे वे वैक ुं ठ मेहता जी 
हȗ, ितर्भुवन पटेल जी हȗ या हमारे मह
ाराÍटर् मȂ सहकार महिर्ष,  धनंजय गाडिगल जी, िवƻल राव 
िवखे पाटील तथा और भी बहुत से लोग हुए.. ये सहकार महिर्षयȗ ने उस वƪ से सहकार से 
समृिǉ लाने की कोिशश की और आज ितर्भुवन काका पटेल क े नाम से जो यूिनव
िर्सटी हो रही है, 
इससे सच मȂ उनका सÇमान हो रहा है। मȅ कांगर्ेस क े लोगȗ से सच मȂ पूछना चाहता हूँ िक 70 साल 
मȂ, िजन्हȗने अमूल का Ĥांड बनाया, उनक
ा सÇमान करने क े िलए ऐसी यूिनविर्सटी बनाने की बात 
उनके  िदमाग मȂ कभी क्यȗ नहीं आई? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी संजय राउत: माननीय सुखदेवराव बȗडे जी, महाराÍटर् मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी):  क ृपया आप बैिठए। ...(Ëय
वधान)... 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: सर, आपको पता है िक काँगर्ेस ने वैक ुं ठ जी मेहता क े नाम से 
इंिÎटǷूट बनाया, यूिनविर्सटी नहीं बनाई। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी):  क ृपया आप बैिठए। ...(Ëय
 वधान)... 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: सर, ये अभी यह िडमांड कर रहे हȅ िक उसको affiliate कीिजए, 
उसको यूिनविर्सटी बनाइए। यह बात आपके  भी िदमाग मȂ नहीं आई। कांगर्ेस क े िदमाग मȂ तो वैक ुं ठ 
जी मेहता का भी सÇमान करने की बात नहीं आयी। पहली बार उनको यह सÇमान िमल रहा है।  
यह यूिनव
िर्सटी अनोखी है, क्यȗिक हमȂ मालूम है िक गवनर्मȂट की यूिनविर्सटी रहती है, Ģाइवेट 
यूिनविर्सटी रहती है, लेिकन Cooperative University of its o wn kind पहली बार पूरे भारत देश 
मȂ पहली यूिनविर्सटी हो रही है। यह सरकारी यूिनविर्सटी नहीं है, Ģाइवेट यूिनविर्सटी नहीं है, 
कॉरपोरेट यूिनविर्सटी नहीं है और इसकी फ ंिंडग भी कोऑपरेिटव Îटर्क्चर से होने वाली है।  इसमȂ 
महत्वपूणर् बा
त यह समझने की है िक इस कोऑपरेशन को अभी ग्लोबल करने की जरूरत  है।  
बहुत सारे लोगȗ ने बोला िक यह Îटेट का सÅजेक्ट है। िनिÌचत  यह Îटेट का सÅजेक्ट है, लेिकन 
सभी Îटेट्स मȂ सहकार उत
ना समृǉ नहीं हुआ है, जबिक आज हमȂ सहकार क े माध्यम से global 
competitiveness मȂ जाना पड़ेगा। अगर global competitiveness मȂ जाना पड़ेगा, तो नॉलेज, 
इनोवेशन, िरसचर् और टर्ांसपेरȂसी, ĥÍटाचार मुƪ सहकार, िवमेन एंटरĢेन्योरिशप और youth 
involvement - ये सब चीजȂ जब हम सहकार मȂ लाएंगे, उसमȂ टेक्नोलॉजी लाएंगे, rules and 
regulations to become transparent लाएंगे, तभी हम global competit
iveness मȂ एंटर्ी कर 
सकते हȅ। इन सब चीजȗ क े िलए ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी िबल क े माध्यम से जो यह पहल की 
गई है, उसके  िलए मȅ सहकािरता मंतर्ी जी का ǭदय से Îव
ागत करता हूँ। ' सहकार से समृिǉ' 
मोदी गवनर्मȂट का जो Îलोगन है, यह िसफर् Îलोगन नहीं है, बिÊक उन्हȗने उसमȂ बहुत सारी चीजȂ 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
145

 
 
करके  रखी हȅ। 63,000 पैक्स (Ģाइमरी एगर्ीकÊचर सोसाइटी)  हȅ, जो सब गांवȗ मȂ हȅ। महाराÍटर् मȂ 
सबसे ज्यादा हȅ। मोदी जी क े पहले पैक्स का computerization नहीं हुआ। ये सभी पैक्स का 
computerization करने, उसका पूरा डेटा लेने, उसको एक कॉ मन Ãलेटफामर् पर लाने, सभी को 
एक ही सॉÄटवेयर देने और सभी का जो कायर्भार रहेगा, उसको पूरे ग्लोबल नेटवकर् मȂ रखने क े  
िलए 2,516 करोड़ रुपए  का इन्वेÎटमȂट िकया गया। मȅ भी गर्ामीण इलाके  से आता हूँ, सहकार से 
ही आता हूँ और आपको पता है िक हम Ģाइमरी एगर्ी
कÊचर सोसाइटी क े बारे मȂ िसफर् यह जानते 
थे िक यह िसफर् खेती क े िलए कजार् देने क े िलए है। अब इन्हȗने इसका Îटर्क्चर ही बदल डाला।  
अभी Ģाइमरी एगर्ीकÊचर सोसाइटी जन औषिध भी ले सकती है, पेटर्ोल पंप भी ले सकती है, 
कॉमन सिर्वस सȂटर भी ले सकती है। 30,000 कॉम
न सिर्वस सȂटर पैक्स को िदए गए हȅ। इसके  
तहत 5,000 जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् हȅ और Ģधान मंतर्ी िकसान समृिǉ क Ȃ दर्, िज समȂ खाद भी बेची जाती 
है और अनाज भी खरीदा जा सकता है, उसको भी पैक्स कर रहा है, यानी ऐसे 28 काम इनको 
िदए जा सकते हȅ। Financial support देने  क े िलए मोदी सरकार ने सिर्टफाइड सीड, ऑगȃिनक 
फािमȊग और एक्सपोटर् - इन तीनȗ चीजȗ को बनाने क े िलए एक सȂटर्ल कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटी का 
िनमार्ण िकया है। नेशनल कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटी क े तहत ती
न Ģकार क े िनमार्ण िकए गए हȅ, 
इसिलए जो ऑगȃिनक फािमȊग कर रहे हȅ, सिर्टफाइड सीड का कर रहे हȅ, उनको वहाँ से अच्छी 
तरह से हेÊप िमल सकती है।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्स
टी बाकी की टर्ेिडशनल 
यूिनविर्सटीज़ से बहुत ही अलग है, क्यȗिक बाकी की यूिनविर्सटीज़ मȂ Åयूरोकर्े सी का influence  
होता है, फ ंिंडग कभी-कभी नहीं िमलती है और वहाँ आउटडेटेड किरकु लम होते हȅ, िजनका 
जीवन से कोई संबंध नहीं होता है। लेिकन, यह ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी एक कोऑपरेिटव 
यूिनविर्सटी है, यह community driven है, यानी इसके  stakeholders सोसाइटी मȂ से आ रहे हȅ, 
सहकािरता मȂ से आ रहे हȅ। यह financially sustainable है और इसमȂ सोसायटी क े िडफरȂट 
सेक्टसर् से equity ली जा सकती है।  इस Ģकार की यह पहली यूिनव
िर्सटी है और अगर समय 
िमला तो मȅ इसके  िडफरȂसेज़ क े बारे मȂ डेिफनेटली बताऊँ गा। कोऑपरेिटव को आत्मिनभर्र बनाने 
मȂ ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिन
विर्सटी का सबसे बड़ा रोल रह सकता है। देिखए, सहकािरता बहुत पहले 
से आई है। सहकार क्षेतर् मȂ जो-जो लोग ईमानद ार थे, िजन्हȗने सोसायटीज़ को ĥÍटाचारमुƪ 
रखा, वे लोग अच्छे से Ģकट हो सके , लेिकन उसमȂ गवनर्मȂट का बहुत ज्यादा सपोटर् नहीं रहता 
था। पहले इसका वािर्षक बजट 112 करोड़ रुपए  रहता था, जबिक अभी सȂटर्ल का बज ट  10 गुना, 
यानी 1,012 करोड़ रुपए  है। इसके  अलावा, 5,000 करोड़ की डेयरी सहकार Îकीम अलग है।  
Farmer producer organization क े िलए 10,000 करोड़  का गवनर्मȂट का अलग से फ ं ड आ रहा 
है। यानी, ये सब चीजȂ जब हो रही हȅ, तब इसमȂ ĥÍटाचार होने की संभावना भी रहती है।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, सहकार से समृिǉ होनी चािहए, लेिकन सहकार से Îवाहाक
ार 
नहीं होना चािहए। उसके  िलए मोदी जी की सरकार 2023 मȂ Multi-State Cooperative 
Societies Act, 2002 मȂ अमȂडमȂट लाई। उसमȂ दो चीज़Ȃ थीं, िजनसे governance मȂ भी 
transparency आती है और आिर्थक Ëयवहार मȂ भी transparency आती है। उसकी वजह से जो 
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
बहुत सारी PACS थीं,  जो  बहुत सारी Multi-State Cooperative Societies थीं, जो stagnant 
हुई थीं,  वे अब अच्छी तरह से काम करने लगी हȅ।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी क्या करेगी? यह cooperative 
leadership की capacity building करेगी।  जो नेतृत्व करने वाले हȅ, उनको global atmosphere 
मालूम होना चािहए िक US और UK की कोऑपरेिटËस मȂ क्या चल रहा है और क ंपनीज़ मȂ क्या 
चल रहा है। बेिसकली, रूरल  से अटैच करने क े िलए यह जरूरी  है। कोऑपरेिटव सेक्टर मȂ 
r
esearch and innovation करना इस यूिनविर्सटी का एक बड़ा काम रहेगा। दूसरी इंपॉटȄट बात 
यह है िक कोआपरेिटव मȂ िसफर् क ृिष क े िहसाब से ही नहीं, बिÊक िविभ
न्न Ģकार क े िÎकल 
डेवलपमȂट करने हȅ। जब िदिग्वजय िंसह जी से बोल रहे थे, तो मुझे उनकी बात सुनकर आÌचयर् 
हुआ। उन्हȗने कहा िक पहले क ृिष मंतर्ालय मȂ ही यह मंतर्ालय था। साहब, यह मंतर्ालय नहीं था, 
यह सहकार िडपाटर्मȂट था। इसको अब सेपरेट मंतर्ालय िम
लना और इसके  खुद का सेकर् ेटरी 
िमलना, यह बहुत बड़ी बात है, नहीं तो यह पहले कोऑपरेिटव िडपाटर्मȂट होता था। मोदी जी ने 
एगर्ीकÊचर सेक्टर मȂ दो इंपॉटȄट काम ये िकए हȅ िक उन्हȗने animal husbandry का भी एक 
िवशेष मंतर्ालय बना िदया और उसका एक मंतर्ी बना िदया। वैसे ही, उन्हȗने इसके  िलए 
सहकािरता मंतर्ी बना िदया और वह भी ताकतवर मंतर्ी बना िदया। अब सहकािरता मȂ िसफर् 
एगर्ीकÊचर नहीं आता, बिÊक इसमȂ हाउिंसग भी आता है, fisheries
 भी आती है, animal 
husbandry भी आता है। Even, घास उगाने वाले भी अब अपना एगर्ीकÊचर यूिनट बना सकते हȅ।  
सर, महत्वपूणर् बात यह है िक कोऑपरेिटव मȂ िवमेन का participation बढ़ाने क े िलए यह 
यूिनविर्सटी काम करेगी। भारतीय कोऑपरेिटव संÎथाएँ सहकारी संÎथाएँ  हȅ। उनका ग्लोबल 
कोऑपरेिटव सेक्टर मȂ िजत ना  stake है, especially, US, Europe, G-20 तथा जो एिशया क े 
देश हȅ, वहाँ उसको बढ़ाने क े िलए यह काम कर सकती है। Integration with national 
development - हमारा गोल क्या है?  हमारा  गोल 2047 तक िवकिसत भारत बनाना है। उस 
िवकिसत भारत का गोल िनमार्ण करने क े िलए हमȂ यह करना बहुत जरूरी है। Increased budget 
allocation
 क े साथ पूरा नेशनल कोऑपरेिटव डेटाबेस, Multi-State Cooperative Societies 
Act, यानी rules and regulations भी सही करना चािहए। 
 उसकी फ ंिंडग भी करनी चािहए और इसके  अलावा, tax exemption बेहद  महत्वपूणर् है। 
इनकम टैक्स क े सेक्शन 155 क े अंतगर्त महाराÍटर् की शुगर कोऑपरेिटव िमल पर 10 हज़ार 
करोड़ रुपय े का टैक्स बकाया था। इस मुǈे को लेकर महाराÍटर् क े तत्का
लीन मुख्य मंतर्ी देवȂदर् 
फडणवीस और सहकािरता मंतर्ी अिमत शाह जी क े पास गए, क्यȗिक इतनी बड़ी टैक्स देनदारी 
क े कारण शुगर िमलȗ का संचालन संभव नहीं हो पा रहा था। माननीय अिमत शाह जी ने इस 10 
हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े क े इनकम टैक्स को माफ करने का महत्व
पूणर् िनणर्य िलया और नेशनल 
कोऑपरेिटव डेवलपमȂट कॉरपोरेशन (NCDC) क े माध्यम से इन कोऑपरेिटव शुगर िमलȗ को 
सशƪ बनाने का कायर् िक
या। 
इसके  अितिरƪ, सरकार ने एक करोड़ से 10 करोड़ की आय पर लगने वाले सरचाजर् को 
12 परसȂट से घटाकर 7 परसȂट कर िदया। Alternative Minimum Tax rate from cooperatives, 
उसको क ंपिनयȗ से compare करके  18.5 परसȂट से घटाकर 15 परसȂट तक िकया गया। अब को ई 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
147

 
 
भी बड़ी कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटी एक करोड़ या तीन करोड़ तक की रािश बȅक से without 
deduction of tax or TDS िनकाल सकती है। 
महोदय, कोऑपरेिटव सेक्टर बहुत बढ़ा है और उसके  माध्यम से अच्छे से समृिǉ हो 
सकती है। महाराÍटर् क े संत तुकाराम जी ने कहा था - " एक मे सहाय करूं , अवघे धरू  सुपंथ",  
अथार्त यिद हम सब िमलकर कायर् करȂ, तो हम समृǉ हȗगे। इसी िवचार को आगे बढ़ाते हुए, Ģधान 
मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और सहकािरता मंतर्ी अिमत शाह जी का यह ÎपÍट दृिÍटकोण है िक "िबना 
सहकार नहीं उǉार"। 
“अंत्योदय और मिहलाओं की एक ही पुकार, 
उƐित का मागर् है िसफर् सहकार।” 
 
समृिǉ का मूलमंतर् ज्ञान और तकनी
की से युƪ, पारदशीर् सहकािरता Ģणाली मȂ िनिहत है। 
इसी िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् पहल क े रूप  मȂ ितर्भुवन काका पटेल क े नाम से एक सहकारी 
िवǏापीठ Î
थािपत िकया जा रहा है, जो िवकिसत भारत क े िनमार्ण मȂ सहकारी नेतृत्व को सशƪ 
बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक बड़ा कदम है। 
अत: मȅ इस िवधेयक का पूणर् सम थर्न करता हूँ और सहकािरता मंतर्ी अिमत शाह जी एवं 
राज्य मंतर्ी मुरलीधर मोहोल जी का अिभनंदन करता हूँ। हम सभी गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ क े युवा, मिहलाएँ 
और गरीब नागिरक िमलकर सहकािरता क े मा ध्यम से भारत को समृǉ बनाने का संकÊप लेते हȅ। 
धन्यवाद। जय िंहद!                 
                                                        
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): मȅ भी आपको धन्यवाद करता हूं। डा. फौिज़या खान; 
अनुपिÎथत हȅ। Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू। 
 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू (नामिनदȃिशत): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे इस बहुत ही महत्व पूणर् 
िबल पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए आपको बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
महोदय, इस िवषय क े साथ मेरा बहुत deep connection है, क्यȗिक मȅ एक एक िकसान 
का बेटा हूँ और educat ionist भी हूँ। िकसान का बेटा होने क े नाते मȅने बचपन से ही सहकािरता 
लहर क े साथ काम िकया है, इसके  बारे मȂ अपने दादाजी से सीखा, इसको देखा है, इसको िजया 
है। मȅ िपछले 25 वषș से education मȂ काम कर रहा हूँ, मȅ education की सेवा कर रह ा हूँ और 
इसे जी रहा हूँ। मेरे जीवन मȂ मुझे दो यूिनविर्सटीज़ Îथािपत करने का अवसर भी िमला है और मुझे 
ऐसा लगता है िक यह िवषय मेरे िदल क े बहुत करीब है। 
सभापित महोदय, यह एक ऐितहािसक अवसर है, जब भारत दुिनया की पहली domain 
specific co
operative university Îथािपत करने जा रहा है। िनिÌचत तौर पर, इस िवÌविवǏालय 
की Îथापना क े साथ ही भारत कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् मȂ िवÌव का सबसे बड़ा thought leader बनकर 
उभरेगा। 
 चेयरमैन साहब, ितर्भुवन कोऑपरेिटव यूिनविर्सटी िसफर् एक academic in
stitution नहीं, 
बिÊक सहकािरता का global centre of excellence बनने जा रहा है। यह दुिनया की पहली full-
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
fledged co-operative domain-specific University होगी, जहां  co-operative finance, agri 
business, digital co-operative और startup for specialized courses करवाए जाएंगे। यह 
िवÌविवǏालय international institutions क े साथ भी सहयोग करेगा, िजससे भारत की सहकारी 
संÎथाएं वैिÌवक Îतर पर पहचान बना पाएंगी। इस University की Îथापना से co-operative 
sector मȂ नई ऊजार् आएगी, professional human resource तैयार होगा, competent 
leadership पैदा होगी और world class research क े साथ नए अवसर भी पैदा हȗगे। यह Bill 
िसफर्  U
n i v e r s i t y  की Îथापना तक सीिमत नहीं रहेगा, बिÊक इसका उǈेÌय co-operative 
societies को empower करना, उनके  operations को transparent बनाना और modern 
technology का integration करना भी रहेगा।   
महोदय, भारत मȂ सहकािरता का एक गौरवशाली इितहास रहा है। भले ही देश मȂ पहला 
सहकारी कानून 1904 मȂ आया, लेिकन भारत मȂ सहकािरता की जड़Ȃ 200 साल से भी ज्यादा 
पुरानी हȅ। मȅ तो यह भी कहना चाहूंगा िक आिदकाल से ही सहकािरता हमारे जीवन का अिभन्न 
अंग रही है। भारतीय समाज की संरचना ही आपसी सहयोग पर आधािरत रही है। हमारे गांव, 
हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथ
ा, हमारा सामािजक ढांचा, सब क ु छ सहकािरता पर आधािरत रहा है। जब देश 
मȂ banking system मजबूत नहीं था, तब सहकािरता ही थी, िजसने भारत की आिर्थक Ģगित और 
financial inclusion को संभव बनाया। भारत क े सहकारी model को आज Harvard, World 
Bank, International Co-operative  Alliance और United Nations जैसे वैिÌवक संÎथान case 
study क े रूप  मȂ पढ़ा रहे हȅ। यह हमारे सहकारी आंदोलन की सफलता का Ģत्यक्ष Ģमाण है।  
सर, यह Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की दूरदिर्शता और मजबूत leaders
hip का पिरणाम 
है िक भारत आज िवÌव co-operative leader बनकर उभर रहा है। मोदी सरकार ने  2021 मȂ  
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय का गठन िकया, िजससे भारत मȂ सहका
री संÎथानȗ को नई मजबूती िमली। 
इसके  साथ ही Ǜी अिमत शाह जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार ने सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ lan dmark, 
institutional and structural reforms भी िकए। सहकारी आंदोलन हमेशा ही भारत क े िवकास 
और आत्मिनभर्रता का आधार बना रहा है। Îवतंतर्ता संगर्ाम क े दौरान भी इसने अहम भूिमका 
िनभाई। सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल ने इसे एक आिर्थक और सामािजक कर्ांित क े रूप  मȂ देखा।  
Îवतंतर्त
ा क े बाद सहकारी आंदोलन ने लोकतांितर्त Ģणाली को मजबूत िकया और भारत क े 
िवकास model को जन-जन तक पहुंचाया।   
महोदय, जब भी भारत मȂ सहकारी आंदोलन की बात होती है, तो गुजरात इसका role 
model बनकर उभरता है। 1946 मȂ सरदार पटेल,  मोरारज ी देसाई और ितर्भुवन दास पटेल जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ िकसानȗ ने िĤिटश सरकार को झुकने पर मजबूर िकया और यहीं से अमूल की नींव रखी 
गई। आज अमूल न क ेवल  भारत मȂ, बिÊक िवÌ व  का सबसे बड़ा dairy brand बनकर उभरा है।  
देश मȂ गुजरात, पंजाब, महाराÍटर् और राजÎथान ने भी सहकारी model मȂ बेहतरीन सफलता 
हािसल की है।  मेरा अपना गृह राज्य पंजाब co-operatives का गौरवशाली इितहास संजोए बैठा 
है, जो करीब 150 साल पुराना है। सर, पंजाब का Milkfed, Markfed और Punjab State Co-
operative Bank जैसी co-operative associati
ons ने देश मȂ आज सफलता की नई िमसालȂ 
कायम की हȅ।  अमूल क े बाद पंजाब का Verka देश का दूसरा बड़ा dairy product बनान े वाला  
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
149

 
 
brand  है।  सर, जैसे-जैसे देश िवकास की राह पर आगे बढ़ा, वैसे-वैसे देश मȂ सहकािरता भी 
मजबूत होती गई, लेिकन इसके  चलते क ु छ ऐसी घटनाएं भी हुईं, िजससे सहकािरता आंदोलन 
को ठेस भी पहुंचने लगी। सहकािरता  आंदोलन  को झटके  देने क े बाद देश का  co-operative  
sector क ु छ पिरवारȗ और दलȗ क े हाथ मȂ आ गया। आदशर् घोटाला, NDCCB घोटाला,  पुलपÊली 
घोटाला और जाने एक क े बाद एक ऐसे िकतने घोटालȗ को अंजाम िदया गया।  
 Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने देश मȂ cooperative की अहिमयत को पहचाना और उनके  
दूरदशीर् नेतृत्व मȂ भारत का cooperati
ve sector एक सशƪ और आत्मिनभर्र गर्ामीण अथर्ËयवÎथा 
की िदशा मȂ आगे बढ़ रहा है। सरकार ने 63 हज़ार PACS क े क ंÃयूटरीकरण क े िलए 2,516 करोड़ 
रुपय े क े projects allocate िकए हȅ, िजससे िकसानȗ को digital लेन-देन और transparency का 
लाभ िमलेगा, PAC
S को farmer-producer organizations मȂ बदलने की योजना से िकसानȗ को 
सीधे बाज़ार से जोड़कर उनकी income बढ़ाने का एक ज़िरया बनेगा।  
महोदय, NCDC क े माध्यम से सहकारी चीनी िम लȗ क े िलए 10,000 करोड़ रुपय े क े लोन 
की ËयवÎथा की गई है, िजससे गन्ना िकसानȗ और चीनी उǏोग को नई ऊजार् िमलेगी। 
 महोदय, Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की गरीब और िकसान समथर्क नीितयȗ का ही 
पिरणाम है िक आज भारत दुिनया की सबसे बड़ी cooperative food  storage scheme लागू 
करने जा रहा है, िजसमȂ क ृिष उत्पादन की efficient storage हो पाएगी और िकसानȗ को उनकी 
उपज की सही कीमत िमल पाएगी।  
महोदय, पैक्स क े तहत 2,000 जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् खोलने का भी िनणर्य िलया गया है, 
िजससे गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सÎ ती  दवाइयाँ उपलÅध हȗगी।  
महोदय, Molasses पर GST को 28 परस Ȃट से घटाकर 5 परसȂट करने का िनणर्य भी 
िकसानȗ और शराब उǏोग क े िलए लाभकारी सािबत हुआ है।  
इसके  अलावा पैक्स को गर्ामीण जल आपूिर्त योजनाओं से भी जोड़ा गया है, िजससे 
सहकारी सिमितयाँ पानी सिमितयां बन गई हȅ और जल संरक्षण मȂ भी अपना योगदान दे रही हȅ। 
महोदय, यह ÎपÍट है िक Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का कोऑपरेिटव सेक्टर को सशƪ बनाने 
का संकÊप भारत को आत्म
िनभर्र बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक ऐितहािसक कदम है।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आज भारत मȂ सहकािरता की लहर चल रही है। देश  मȂ 8.5 लाख से 
अिधक सहकारी सभाएं हȅ, िजनमȂ 30 करोड़  से अिधक लोग सदÎय हȅ। यह संख्या कई देशȗ की 
क ु ल जनसंख्या से भी अिधक है। महोदय, सहकािरता का भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ बहुत िवश ाल 
योगदान है। IFFCO और Amul जैसे brands दुिनया क े सबसे बड़े सहकारी संÎथानȗ मȂ शािमल हȅ 
और दुिनया भर क े िलए एक िमसाल बनकर उभरे हȅ। इसके  साथ ही भारत का dairy उǏोग 30 
लाख से अिधक िकसानȗ को directly जोड़ता भी है। इसी Ģकार fertilizer cooperatives
 ने भारत 
को क ृिष उत्पादन मȂ आत्मिनभर्र बनाया है। इसके  साथ ही cooperative banks ने गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ  
financial services provide कराई हȅ। यह िवÌविवǏालय सहकारी क्षेतर् को  professional रुप से 
संगिठत करेगा, इसे नए युग की तक
नीकȗ से जोड़ेगा और आने वाली पीिढ़यȗ को सहकािरता क्षेतर् 
मȂ नेतृत्व करने क े िलए तैयार करेगा। 
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 महोदय, ‘ितर्भुवन’ कोऑपरेिटव यूिनविर्सटी क ेवल एक िवÌविवǏालय नहीं, बिÊक भारत 
क े  सहकारी आंदोलन क े नए युग की शुरुआत  है। 2025 मȂ, जब पूरा िवÌव  International Year of 
Cooperatives मना रहा होगा, तब यह िवÌविवǏालय भारत को सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ global 
superpower बनाने का कायर् करेगा ।   
महोदय, एक educationist होने क े नाते मुझे यह पक्का िवÌवास है िक िवÌविवǏाल मȂ AI, 
Blockchain, IoT जैसी आधुिनक तकनीकȗ को शािमल िकया जाएगा, िजससे सहकारी संÎथानȗ 
की पारदिर्शता और कायर्क्षमता बढ़ेगी। इसके  साथ ही ‘ ितर्भुवन’ कोऑपरेिटव यूिनविर्सटी की 
International Cooperative Alliance और top global university क े साथ साझेदारी भी बनाई 
जाएगी, त
ािक सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ world-class research and innovation को बढ़ावा िमल 
सके ।  
महोदय, िवÌविवǏालय मȂ cooperative start-ups और agri-tech innovations को 
बढ़ावा देने क े िलए incubation centres Îथािपत िकए जाएंगे, िजससे युवाओं को इस क्षेतर् मȂ 
रोजगार और उǏिमता क े अवसर िमल पाएं। 
 महोदय, मेरा यह भी मानना है िक िवÌविवǏालय मȂ climate resilient cooperatives
 पर 
भी िवशेष पाǸकर्म लाया जाए, िजससे सहकारी संपिǄयाँ sustainable agriculture, 
renewable energy and waste management जैसे क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ नवाचार कर सकȂगी।  
महोदय, यह िवधेयक िसफर् सहकारी िशक्षा को ही नहीं, बिÊक भारत क े लोकतांितर्क 
मूÊयȗ, आिर्थक समृिǉ और आत्मिनभर्रता को भी नई ऊ ंचाइयȗ तक पहुंचाने का एक महत्वपूणर् 
माध्यम बनेगा।  
महोदय, मुझे खुशी है िक मȅ इस ऐितहािसक क्षण का िहÎस
ा हूं और इस िवधेयक का 
समथर्न कर
ता हूं। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, अपनी बात रखने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
7.00 P.M. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :  N o w ,  S h r i  M a s t h a n  R a o  
Yadav Beedha. 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh) :  Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir.  
On behalf of our party, Telugu Desham Pa rty and our leader and hon. Chief Minister 
Shri Nara Chandrababu Naidu, I stand he re to speak on the "Tribhuvan" Sahkari 
University Bill, 2025. Sir, fr om around 5,000 Societies in 1911, there are more than 8 
lakh Societies at present. Cooperatives ac ross India serve an important role in the 
development of our country, particularly rural development, financial inclusion, 
empowerment of marginalized communities. Andhra Pradesh has a rich history of 
cooperative development with a strong netw ork of agriculture, dairy, and credit 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
151

 
 
cooperatives. The State has witnessed a significant success in leveraging 
cooperatives to promote rural development and empower marginalized communities.  
Our party founder, Nandamuri Taraka Rama  Rao Garu, believed in the power of 
cooperatives, even introduced important le gislation regarding the cooperatives. The 
Andhra Pradesh Mutually Aided Cooperativ e Society Act, 1995, with a target of 
promoting self-reliant, responsible, acc ountable and autonomous cooperative 
societies with their own bye-laws, thereby making the cooperative movement more 
vibrant. Shreeja Mahila Milk Produ cer Company - One shining example of 
cooperatives in my State of Andhra Prad esh is the Shreeja Ma hila Milk Producer 
Company. It stands as a success sto ry of female-centric, socio-economic 
empowerment within the dairy sector, glob ally recognized as the largest woman-
owned and woman-managed entity of it s kind.  Commencing operation with a 
modest membership of 27, it has achieved a remarkable expansion. Currently, it has 
a shareholder base of 1,09,000 women, all of whom are rural cattle-rearing 
practitioners.  
 Sir, Andhra Pradesh has more than 17,000 cooperatives at present. They 
would all benefit from training programme s and detailed educational assistance from 
established institutions such as the prop osed Tribhuvan Sahakari University. Sir, 
through you, I would like to urge the hon. Minister to consider establishing such 
college or institution in our new capital city of Andhra Pradesh, Amravati. Here, I want 
to bring to your kind notice one thing.  While speaking, hon. MP, Shri Ayodhya Rami 
Reddy Alla, from YSRCP, made some false alle gations in this House. I strongly refute 
a misleading and factually incorrect statemen t made by him during his speech on this 
Bill regarding the resignation of Vice-Chan cellors and alleged removal of English 
medium education in Andhra Pradesh. Th e claim that 17 Vice-Chancellors were 
forced to resign by the current Government is completely false and baseless, Sir. Out 
of 17 resignations, 10 were due to personal reasons. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया आप िवषय से बाहर न जाएं।   
...(Ëयवधान)... आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है। धन्यवाद  . . (Ëयवधान)..
 . Ǜी सुभाष बराला।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
 SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA:  Please, Sir.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Your time was three minutes.  
I have given you four minutes. Please sit down.  …(Interruptions)…  
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला (हिरयाणा): धन्यवाद, माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् 
िवषय पर बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। आज मुझे बहुत खुशी है और 
खासकर इसिलए भी खुशी है िक मȅ छातर् राजनीित क े बाद जब अपने क्षेतर् मȂ काम करने क े िलए 
आया, तब 1995 मȂ मुझे भी कोऑपरेिटव मूवमȂट का िहÎसा बनने का अवसर िमला। अपने क्षेतर् मȂ 
शुगर िमल क े डायरेक्टर, वाइस-चेयरमैन, हिरयाणा शुगर फ ेडरेशन क े डायरेक्टर क े नाते मुझे 
इस क्षेतर् मȂ काम करने का मौका िमला। बहुत सारी समÎयाएं इस क्षेतर् मȂ सामने आती थीं।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हम गर्ामीण क्षेतर् से आते हȅ और आप भी उसी Ģकार क े क्षेतर् से आते हȅ।   
 हमने बड़े नजद
ीक से देखा है और हम कह सकते हȅ िक िकस Ģकार से सहकार तो हमारी 
संÎकृ ित का िहÎसा रहा है, लेिकन वतर्मान समय क े अंदर जब पूरी दुिनया क े अंदर सहकारी क्षेतर् 
को बढ़ावा िमल रहा हो और उसमȂ भारत की भागीदारी, हमारे िहन्दुÎतान की भागीदारी लगभग 
25 Ģितशत की हो और उसके  अंदर क ु छ नया करने की कोई योजना बनाने वाला Ëयिƪ न हो, तो 
लगता था िक यह बड़े दुभार्ग्य की बात है।  अगर हम बात करȂ, तो हम िक सान पिरवार से आते हȅ, 
हम देखते आए हȅ िक गर्ामीण क्षेतर् की और गाँव की अथर्ËयवÎथा अपने आप मȂ सहकार क े माध्यम 
से चलती थी। िकसान अपने खेत क े अंदर काम करता था, बी ज उसका अपना होता था, हल भी 
उसका अपना होता था, उसको बाकी औजारȗ की जरूरत पड़ती थी, तो गाँव क े अंदर लोहार था, 
िकसी दूसरी ËयवÎथा की जरूरत होती थी, तो वह उसको गाँव क े अंदर िमल जाती थी।  धोबी, 
नाई वगैरह, अगर हम इन सारी Ëय
वÎथाओं को देखȂ, ये सारी की सारी क ृिष क्षेतर् क े ऊपर 
आधािरत थीं और सहकार की भावना से चलती थीं। िकसान क े घर क े अंदर भी जब पहली बार 
खेत से िनकल कर अनाज आता था, तो सब लोगȗ क े अंदर आवÌयकता क े अनुसार, वह िजतन ा 
उनसे काम लेता था, उसको बाँटने का काम करता था। जब हमारी संÎकृ ित मȂ ही सहकार रचा-
बसा है, तो उस क्षेतर् को और ज्यादा आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए मुझे लगता है िक बहुत साल पहले Ģयास 
िकए जाने चा
िहए थे, लेिकन दुभार्ग्य की बात है िक इसके  बारे मȂ सोचा नहीं गया।   
 मान्यवर, यह िवधेयक Îवाधीन भारत क े 75 साल  बाद आ रहा है, इसिलए इसका अपने 
आप मȂ बहुत महत्व बढ़ जा ता है। सौभाग्यवश माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और हमारे 
सहकािरता मंतर्ी, माननीय अिमत भाई शाह जी का मȅ बहुत धन्यवाद करू ँगा िक उनकी दूरदृिÍट 
क े चलते इसके  महत्व को समझा गया और वषर् 2021  मȂ इसे एक मामूली से िवभाग क े Îथान पर 
Îवतंतर् मंतर्ालय का दजार् Ģदान िकया गया।   
 महोदय, अभी हम सब लोग देख रहे थे िक अनेक बार इसी सभा मȂ cooperative 
federalism की बात बड़े जोर-शोर से की जाती रही, लेिकन जब इस सेक्टर को मजबूत करने क े 
िलए यह ितर्
भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी का िबल इस हाउस मȂ आने से लेकर अब तक की चचार् की 
बात करȂ, तो इस िबल की िकतनी ही आलोचनाएँ हुई हȅ। कोई इसके  नाम को लेकर आलोचना कर 
रहे थे, क्यȗिक 'ितर्भुवन' जो नाम है, उस नाम से जो पिरिचत नहीं हȅ, उनके  मन क े अंदर तरह-
तरह की शंकाएँ थीं। हम यहाँ क ु छ ऐसे लोगȗ की चचार् भी सुन रहे थे, लेिकन मुझे बड़ी खुशी है िक 
ितर्भुवन सहकारी िव
धेयक, 2025 क े शीषर्क और अंतवर्Îतु को लेकर िजस Ģकार की चचार्एँ थीं 
और यहाँ पर जो चचार्एँ हुई हȅ, इसके  पक्ष क े अंदर िजन्हȗने अपना वƪËय रखा है, उन्हȗने मुझसे 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
153

 
 
पहले भी बहुत िवÎतार से इस बात को रखा है िक िकस Ģकार से यह िबल है, िकस Ģकार से 
यूिनविर्सटी काम करेगी और िकस Ģकार से इसका नामकरण िकया गया है। ितर्भुवन जी का 
उÊलेख मुझसे पूवर् क े बहुत सारे िव ǎान वƪाओं ने िकया है िक िकस Ģकार से क Ȃ दर् सरकार 
Îवतंतर्ता सेनानी और भारत मȂ सहकारी आंदोलन क े जनक, ितर्भुवनदास िकिशभाई पटेल क े नाम 
क े Ģित क ृतज्ञता का भाव रखती है। महोदय, इस सभा क े िलए यह भी बहुत गौरव की बात है िक 
ितर्भुवनदास िकिशभाई पटेल 1967 से लेकर 1974 क े बीच दो बार राज्य सभा क े सदÎय रहे। उन्हȂ 
असाधारण समाज सेवा क े िलए 1963 मȂ मैग्सेसे पुरÎकार और 1964 मȂ पǍ भूषण पुरÎकार से भी 
नवाजा गया।   
 मान्यवर, 1855 मȂ गिठ
त ICA यानी िक International Cooperative Alliance का जो 
िरकॉडर् है, वह यह िदखाता है िक भारत सिहत 105 देश इसके  सदÎय हȅ, क ु ल 306 से अिधक 
सहकारी संगठन इसके  सदÎय हȅ और भारत से भी 18 संगठन इसके  सदÎय हȅ। इस संगठन ǎारा 
जारी आंकड़ȗ क े अनुसार यिद िवÌ
व मȂ क ु ल 30 लाख सहकारी सिमितयां हȅ, तो उनमȂ 8,54,000 
सहकारी सिमितयां अके ले भारत मȂ हȅ, जो दुिनया का लगभग 25 Ģितशत आंकड़ा बैठता है। जब 
यह क्षेतर् इत ना  बड़ा है, तो िफर इस क्षेतर् को ठीक Ģकार से िदशा देने क े काम मȂ कहां िदक्कत 
आती है? इधर क े हमारे िवǎान सदÎयȗ को िकस बात से तकलीफ होती है? इस मंतर्ालय क े 
माध्यम से इतनी बड़ी यूिनविर्सटी बन ा कर जो एक काम शुरू  हुआ, चाहे हम FPO  की बात करȂ 
या सहकारी बȅकȗ, PACS या अन्य गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ चल रहे बȅकȗ का क ंÃयूटरीकरण करने की बात 
हो, बड़ी खुशी की बात है िक PACS का क ंÃयूटरीकरण करने क े िलए 2,516 करोड़ रुपए  का 
बजट भी अलॉ
ट िकया गया और यह टारगेट रखा गया िक Ģिशिक्षत युवा आगे आएँ।  जब इस 
Ģकार का टारगेट सेट िकया गया, जब इस Ģकार क े काम को करने का लÑय सामने रखा गया, 
तो िफर यह जरूरी भी हो जाता है िक इस Ģकार क े काम क े िलए Ģि शक्षण क े िलए, कोई ऐसे 
िवÌविवǏालय की Îथापना की जाए, जहां से युवा िनकल कर क े आएँ और पूरी दुिनया मȂ िजस 
Ģकार से कोऑपरेिटव का काम चल रहा है, उससे भी आगे बढ़कर क े देश मȂ कोऑपरेिटव क्षेतर् 
को मजबूत करने का काम करȂ।  हमारी सरकार की Ģाथिमकता policy paralysis  को दूर करना 
है, इसिलए इसकी आलोचना नहीं करनी चा
िहए।  मȅ तो कहता हूं िक इधर क े सािथयȗ को इसका 
Îवागत कर
ना चािहए। 
 मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इस िवषय मȂ आगे बताना चाहूंगा िक अगर हम वैिÌवक Îतर 
पर बात करȂ, तो ICA, यानी International Cooperative Alliance क े चार क्षेतर्ीय कायार्लयȗ मȂ से 
एक कायार्लय भारतवषर् क े अंदर है, जो हमारे िलए बड़े गवर् की बात है। World Cooperative 
Monitor Report, 2023 क े अनुसार भारत की स
हकारी संÎथा IFCO िवÌव रȅिंकग मȂ पहले Îथान 
पर आई है, अमूल को दूसरा Îथान िमला है और क ृभको छठे Îथान पर रही है। यह सरकार िजस 
Ģकार से हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की दूरदृिÍट क े िवजन क े आधार पर चलती है और हमारे 
कोऑपरेिटव िमिनÎटर, माननीय अिमत शाह जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िजस Ģकार से िवभाग आगे बढ़ रहा 
है, उससे मुझे लगता है िक इस Ģकार क े जो आंकड़े आज हम लोगȗ को िद खाई देते हȅ, इस Ģकार 
क े हमारे तीन बड़े संÎथान दुिनया क े अंदर पहले तीन Îथान बनाए हुए हȅ।  अगर इसी गित से हम 
154
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
लोग आगे लगे रहȂ, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से हमारे और ज्यादा संÎथान दुिनया क े 10 नं बरȗ क े अंदर 
अपना Îथान अंिकत करȂगे। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ अपनी बात को समाÃत करते हुए हाउस से यह अनुरोध 
करना चाहूंगा िक इस Ģकार का बहुत महत्वपूणर् िबल, जो ितर्भुवन सहकारी िव ÌविवǏालय 
िवधेयक, 2025 लोकसभा मȂ पहले ही पास हो चुका है, हम सबकी िजÇमेवारी बनती है िक हम 
इसको पास करȂ और हमारे गर्ामीण क्षेतर् को, हमारे सहकार क े क्षेतर् को दुिन या क े अंदर और आगे 
लेकर क े जाएं।  आपने मुझे जो समय िदया, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): Ǜी नरेश बंसल। 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड): उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आज बड़ा महत्वपूणर् िबल, ितर्भुवन सहकारी 
िवÌव
िवǏालय क े Îथािपत होने क े बारे मȂ आया है। मȅ उसके  समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ 
हूं।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ बȅक मȂ नौकरी करता था।  जब मȅ उसको छोड़कर राजनीित मȂ आय ा , 
तो मुझे सबसे पहला काम सहकािरता ĢकोÍठ का िमला। 
 मȅने उसके  Ģदेश महामंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ राजनीित मȂ काम Ģारंभ िकया और यहाँ तक पहुंचा हूँ।  
सहकािरता से मेरा िवशेष लगाव भी है और सहकािरता हमारी संÎकृ ित का एक अंग है।  भारत जब 
िवÌव गुरु  था, संपन्न था, तब भी सहकािरता से सब काम हो
ते थे। मȅ तो ध्यान देता हूँ, तो पाता हूँ 
िक जब भगवान राम ने लंका पर िवजय ĢाÃत कर ने क े िलए 'राम सेतु' का िनमार्ण िकया, तो वह 
सेतु भी सहकािरता क े आधार पर बना। ǎापर मȂ Ǜीकृ Íण भगवान ने सब ग्वालȗ को साथ मȂ लेकर 
गोवधर्न उठाया, तो वह सहकािरता का रूप  है। युगानुक ू ल पिरव त र्न हमारी संÎकृ ित का अंग है।  
चूँिक 2047 मȂ हमने वह वैभव ĢाÃत करना है, जो हमारा पुराना वैभव था, िवकिसत राÍटर्ȗ की Ǜेणी 
मȂ खड़ा होना है, इसिलए उसकी तैयारी क े िलए जो-जो चीजȂ चािहए, वे सब हम कर रहे हȅ।  
हमारे यशÎ
वी Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सहकािरता क े आधार पर देश की आिर्थक 
िÎथित बदलेगी, गर्ामीण भारत का आिर्थक उन्नयन होगा, अंत्योदय का िवकास होगा, अंितम 
सीढ़ी पर बैठे हुए Ëयिƪ को समृिǉ िमलेगी। उसके  िलए, उस के  Ģबंधन क े िलए ऐसे युवकȗ, ऐसी 
बेिटयȗ और मिहलाओं की आवÌयकता होगी, जो उसके  Ģबंधन मȂ योगदान दे सके । आणंद मȂ 
'इरमा' क े नाम से रूरल  मैनेजमȂट इंिÎटǷूट पहले से था, उस मैनेजमȂट Îकू ल से जो बच्चे पढ़ 
कर िनकलते हȅ, उनका उस क्षेतर् मȂ, Îथानीय क्षेतर् मȂ कोऑपरेिटव मȂ बड़ा योगदान है। अमूल को 
भी वहाँ से िनकले हुए बहुत सारे युवक िमले, िजन्हȗने अमूल क े िवकास मȂ योगदान िदया।  अब 
उसको और अिधक Ģभावशाली बनाने क े िलए, जैसी िवÌव Îतर पर िÎ
थित है, िवÌव Îतर पर 
चुनौितयाँ हȅ, उनका सामना करने क े िलए और अिधक ज्ञान-संपन्न तथा और अिधक क ै पेिसटी 
िबिंÊडग क े िहसाब से हम
ारे छातर्-छातर्ाएँ हȗ - इस उǈेÌय को ध्यान मȂ रख कर 'ितर्भुवन सहकारी 
िवÌविवǏालय' की Îथापना हुई। अभी मेरे से पहले क े वƪाओं ने बताया िक यह कोऑपरेिटव 
सेक्टर का पह ला िवÌविवǏालय बन रहा है। यह न कोई सरकारी यूिनविर्सटी है, न कोई Ģाइवेट 
यूिनविर्सटी है, बिÊक यह सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय है और सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् क े िलए है। इसका 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
155

 
 
उǈेÌय ही है सहकािरता आधािरत िशक्षा Ģणाली को बढ़ावा देना, छातर्ȗ को उǏमशीलता और 
आत्मिनभर्र बनाना, गर्ामीण और शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ समान िशक्षा का अवसर Ģदान करना, शोध और 
सदाचार को सहयोिगत करना।  इस Ģकार से इसका उǈेÌय सहयोग और नवाचार को सहयोिगत 
करना है।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, इस िव
ÌविवǏालय मȂ सहकारी Ģबंधन, क ृिष, िवǄ और गर्ामीण िवकास 
से जुड़े पाǸकर्म हȗगे। इन सारे पाǸकर्मȗ से Ģिशिक्षत होकर जो युवा िनकलȂगे, उनको एक 
अच्छे रोजगार क े अवसर भी िमलȂगे और सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ एक पारदशीर् Ģबंधन होगा, एक 
िमतËययी Ģबंधन होगा, िजससे सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् से सहकार से समृिǉ का जो हम
ारे यशÎवी 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का संकÊप है, वह सपना भी पूरा होगा। हमȂ सहकार से समृिǉ की ओर बढ़ने क े 
िलए Ģिशिक्षत होना आव
Ìयक है। यह िवÌविवǏालय Ëयवसाियक और तकनीकी िशक्षा को 
सहकारी दृिÍटकोण से जोड़ेगा, िडिजटल िशक्षा और अनुसंधान को बढ़ावा देगा, सहकारी 
संÎथाओं क े साथ जो Ģैिक्टकल टर्ेिंनग है, Ëयवहािरक Ģिशक्षण है, वह भी अिनवायर् रूप  से होगा। 
 इसका Ëयाप
क Ģभाव राÍटर् और सामािजक जीवन पर पड़ने वाला है। इससे भारत मȂ 
सहकारी आंदोलन को और मजबूती िमलेगी।  अभी तक सामान्य रूप  से यह माना जाता है िक 
सहकािरता का आंदोलन महाराÍटर् और गुजरात मȂ ज्यादा फला-फ ूला है। लोग मा नते हȅ िक 
सहकारी बȅक, शुगर िमल ज्यादातर इन्हीं दो राज्यȗ मȂ हȅ, लेिकन आज यह Ëयापक रूप  से पूरे देश 
मȂ फ ैला है। चाहे टेक्सटाइल हो, जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् हȗ, सामान्य सुिवध ा  क Ȃ दर् हȗ, पेटर्ोल पंप हȗ, 
सीएनजी पंप हȗ, फिर्टलाइजर का िडÎटर्ीÅयूशन हो, तो 60,000 Ģाइमरी एगर्ीकÊचर कोऑपरेिटव 
सोसाइटी क े माध्यम से यह पूरे देश मȂ हो रहा है। अब उसके  साथ इतनी चीजȂ और जुड़ गई हȅ िक 
िविभन्न बहुउǈेशीय मÊटी
Îटेट कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटीज़ भी बन रही हȅ।  इस Ģकार, अब इसका 
क्षेतर् Ëयापक हो रहा है। इस Ëयापक क्षेतर् क े िलए Ģिशिक्षत युवाओं की आवÌयकता है और यह 
यूिनविर्सटी इस उǈेÌय को भी पूरा करेगी।  इस से भारत मȂ सहकारी आंदोलन को मजबूती िमलेगी, 
गर्ामीण युवाओं को गुणवǄापूणर् िशक्षा और रोजगार क े अवसर भी िमलȂगे, आत्मिनभर्र भारत 
अिभयान मȂ सहकारी िशक्षा अपना योगदान देगी और क ृिष, दुग्ध उत्पादन, क ुटीर उǏोग आिद मȂ 
नवाचार और सतÞ िवकास होगा।   
उपसभापित जी, मȅ उǄराखंड से आता हूँ। जहाँ तक इसमȂ मिहलाओं क े योगदान की बात 
है, तो देश भर मȂ एक करोड़ लखपित दीदी बनी हȅ। सेÊफ हेÊप गर्ुप भी एक Ģकार से स हकािरता  
का ही काम है, क्यȗिक उसमȂ 10-11 मिहलाएँ एक गर्ुप बनाती हȅ, वह छोटी सोसाइटी होती है, जो 
गांव मȂ होती है और छोटा कारोबार करती है। उनमȂ से कोई अचार बनाने का काम करती है, कोई 
मुरÅबा बनाने का काम कर ती  है, कोई कढ़ाई का काम करती है और कोई बुनाई का काम करती 
है। मȅ अनेक रोज़गार मेलȗ मȂ जाता हूँ और वहाँ देखता हूँ िक उससे हमारी माताएँ-बहनȂ िकस 
Ģकार से लाखȗ रुपए  साल कमा रही हȅ। सहकािरता आंदोलन को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए एक-दूसरे 
से समन्वय करते हुए कोऑपरेिटव बȅक्स भी उसमȂ उनको ऋण देते हȅ। 5 लाख रुपय े तक का ऋण 
आज ज़ीरो परसȂट पर उनको िमल रहा है, िज
ससे उनका काम आगे बढ़ रहा है। मेरे क्षेतर् मȂ 
िमलेट्स होत
ा है, तो वहाँ िमलेट्स की क ुकीज़ बनाने की फ ैक्टर्ी अभी लगी है। कोऑपरेिटव सेक्टर 
मȂ एलईडी क े बÊब बन रहे हȅ, शॉल बन रहे हȅ। इस Ģकार से ये चीजȂ िनरंतर आगे बढ़ रही हȅ। यह 
156
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय एक Ģकार से सहकािरता आंदोलन, सरकार का जो सहकार से समृिǉ 
का लÑय है, उसको आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए चल रहा है। इस उǈेÌय की पूिर्त की िदशा मȂ ितर्भुवन 
सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय की Îथापना एक महत्वपूणर् कदम है, जो सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ नवाचार और 
उǏिमता को Ģोत्सािहत करेगा।   
पूवर्वतीर् यूपीए सरकार क े दौरान, िवǄ वषर् 2013-14 मȂ सहकारी संÎथाओं क े िलए बजट 
का आवंटन 122 करोड़ रुपय े था, िजसके  कारण गर्ामीण क
ारीगरȗ क े िलए आवÌयक कायर्कर्मȗ 
को पयार्Ãत िवǄीय सहायता नहीं िमल सकी और म हाराÍटर् मȂ 101 सहकारी चीनी िमलȂ बंद हो गईं।  
इसके  िवपरीत, हमारे यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी जब से आए हȅ, तब से उन्हȗने सहकािरता, 
जो पहले क ृिष मंतर्ालय का एक भाग होता था, उसको अलग सहकािरता मंतर्ालय बनाकर उस पर 
िवशेष ध्यान िदया है और हमारे अिमत भाई इसके  मंतर्ी बने हȅ। उन्हȗ
ने वषर् 2021 मȂ Îवतंतर् 
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय की Îथापना की और इस क्षेतर् क े िलए बजट 1,183.39 करोड़ कर िदया, जो 
यूपीए सरकार क े बजट से 9.7 गुना ज्यादा है। 
 इसके  अलावा, डेयरी सहकारी योजना क े अंतगर्त डेयरी सहकारी सिमितयȗ और िकसान 
उत्पादक संगठनȗ क े आधुिनकीकरण और क्षमता िनमार्ण क े िलए पांच हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े का 
Ģावधान िक
या गया है, जो यूपीए सरकार ǎा रा  राÍटर्ीय डेयरी योजना मȂ आवंिटत रािश का दोगुना 
है। यह महत्वाकांक्षी िवधेयक सरकार क े सहकारी ढांचे को मजबूत कर हािशये पर मौजूद 
समुदायȗ को सशƪ बनाने की Ģितबǉता को दशार्ता है। 
आत्मिनभर्र भारत क े िलए िविश Íट  िशक्षा को मज़बूत करना मोदी सरकार का लÑय है। 
मुख्य क्षेतर्ȗ क े िलए िविशÍट िवÌविवǏालयȗ की Îथापना करके  भारत क े उच्च िशक्षा पिरदृÌय को 
सिकर्य रूप  से पिरविर्तत िकया जा रहा है। उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय, 
िजसे आईआरएमए से िवकिसत िकया जाएगा, सहकारी क्षेतर् की िशक्ष ा पर क Ȃिदर्त होगा और 
"सहकार से समृिǉ" क े दृिÍटकोण को सुदृढ़ करेगा। ठीक उसी Ģकार, जैसे आईआरएमए लÇबे 
समय से अमूल जैसी भारत की Ģमुख सहकारी संÎथाओं को Ģितभा Ģदान कर रहा है। 
मȅने पहले भी कहा है िक िजस Ģकार आणंद का रूरल  मैनेजमȂट संÎथ
ान युवाओं को 
Ģिशिक्षत कर रहा है और अमूल को उसका बड़ा लाभ िमल रहा है, उसी Ģकार इस िवÌविवǏालय 
की Îथापना क े बाद देश-िवदेश क े छातर् भी पढ़ने क े िलए आएंगे। उनके  Ģिशक्षण से Ģिशिक्षत 
युवक-युवितयाँ पूरे देशभ
र मȂ िवदेशी संवाद Îथािपत करȂगे और सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ महत्वपूणर् 
योगदान दȂगे। इस िवÌव िवǏालय  की भूिमका अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् होगी। 
िजस तरह गितशिƪ िवÌविवǏालय पिरवहन और लॉिजिÎटक्स क े क्षेतर् मȂ िवशेषज्ञता को 
बढ़ावा दे रहा है और राÍटर्ीय रक्षा िवÌविवǏालय आंतिरक सुरक्षा व पुिलिंसग क े अध्ययन का क Ȃ दर् 
बना हुआ है, उसी Ģकार लǈाख मȂ िÎ थत िंसधु क Ȃदर्ीय िवÌविवǏालय जलवायु िवज्ञान, ऊजार् और 
लोक नीित मȂ अनुसंधान को आगे बढ़ा रहा है। यह िवÌविवǏालय क्षेतर् की िविशÍट भौगोिलक 
चुनौितयȗ का समाधान करने मȂ सहायक है। हर क्षेतर् की अपनी अलग-अलग चुनौितयाँ होती हȅ 
और िवÌव
िवǏालयȗ की यही भूिमका होती है िक वे छातर्ȗ को भिवÍय की चुनौितयȗ क े समाधान क े 
िलए तैयार करȂ। 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
157

 
 
ितर्भुवन िवÌविवǏालय सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ आने वाली चुनौितयȗ को संबोिधत करेगा 
और युवक-युवितयȗ को सहायता Ģदान करेगा। यह संÎथान क ेवल एक शैक्षिणक क Ȃ दर् ही नहीं 
होगा, बिÊक रोजगार सृजन का भी Ģमुख ǣोत बनेगा। यह छातर्ȗ को िव िशÍट कौशल Ģदान कर 
उन्हȂ भारत क े आिर्थक और रणनीितक क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सीधे योगदान क े िलए तैयार करेगा, िजससे उच्च 
गुणवǄा वाले रोज़गार क े अवसर सृिजत हȗगे और क्षेतर्ीय िवकास सुिनिÌचत होगा। 
सहकािरता को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए सिकर्य नीितगत कारर्वा ई करते हुए मोदी सरकार ने 
हमेशा िवधायी और नीितगत कारर्वाई आधािरत शासन का समथर्न िकया है। सरकार की यह 
दूरदृिÍट सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ भी पिरलिक्षत होती है। वषर् 2023 मȂ मोदी सरकार ने बहुराज्य सहकारी 
सिमित अि
धिनयम, 2002 मȂ संशोधन ĢÎतुत िकया, िजसका उǈेÌय सहकारी संÎथाओं मȂ Ģशासन 
को सशƪ बनाना, पारदिर्शता बढ़ाना, जवाबदेही सुिनिÌचत करना और चुनावी Ģिकर्या मȂ सुधार 
लाना था। 
वतर्मान िवधेयक क े माध्यम से मोदी सरकार देश मȂ सहका री आंदोलन को संÎथानȗ क े 
एक नेटवकर् क े माध्यम से मजबूत करने का Ģयास कर रही है। ĢÎतािवत सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय 
की Îथापना क े साथ सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ क ुशल कायर्बल की िनरंतर आपूिर्त सुिनिÌचत हो गी।  क्षमता 
िनमार्ण पर इस िवशेष ध्यान से न क ेवल तकनीकी दक्षता मȂ वृिǉ होगी, बिÊक यह हािशये पर 
मौजूद वगș को सशƪ बनाते हुए सहकारी शासन मȂ अिधक भागीदारी क े अवसर भी Ģदान करेगा। 
...(समय की घंटी)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): धन्यवाद। आप समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜी नरेश बं
सल: महोदय, मȅ बस तीस सेक ं ड मȂ अपनी बात समाÃत कर दूंगा। उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदय, मानव संसाधन क े िनवेश क े माध्यम से सहकारी सिमितयȗ का क्षमता िनमार्ण िवǄ वषर् 
2024-25 क े क ेन्दर्ीय बजट मȂ भारत की संपदा का  …(Ëयवधा न)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल: भारत की संपदा का लाभ उठाने और अमृत पीढ़ी को सक्षम बनाकर िवकिसत 
भारत, 2047 की मजबूत नींव रखने का Ģयास इसके  माध्यम से होगा। अंत मȂ मȅ क ेवल यही 
िनवेदन करता हूं िक िजस सǌावना और सहकार से समृिǉ और अंत्योदय को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए 
यूिनविर्सटी की Îथापना क े िलए िबल लाया गया है, इसका सब लोग Îवागत करȂ और समथर्न 
करȂ।  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-
CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Next speaker is Shri Ravi 
Chandra Vaddiraju.  Hon. Member will speak in Telugu.  You have five minutes. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
158
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
SHRI RAVI CHANDRA VADDIRAJU (Telangana) : *“ Hon. Deputy Chairman, thank 
you for allowing me to speak on the "T ribhuvan" Sahkari University Bill, 2025. 
Education, research, and skill developm ent are essential to strengthening the 
cooperative sector, and I support this Bill introduced by the Central Government.  I 
believe the allocation of Rs. 1, 122 crore for this Bill will sign ificantly contribute to the 
development of the cooperative sector. A llocating Rs. 500 crore to the university and 
aiming to train 8 lakh people each year th rough 284 cooperative training centers are 
promising steps. Additionally, the allocation of Rs. 600 crore for the digitization and 
modernization of Primary Agricultural Cred it Societies (PACS), start-ups, and the 
establishment of innovation centers in the cooperative sector is a commendable 
decision. However, I am concerned about the insufficient priority given to Telangana 
in this Bill. Currently, we have only one cooperative training ce nter in Hyderabad, 
making it challenging to provide adequate trai ning to cooperatives at the district level. 
It is essential to expand training cente rs to areas like Adilabad, Nizamabad, and 
Khammam.  
While schemes such as Rythu Bandhu, Rythu Bima, and the Dharani Portal 
support the cooperative system in Telangana, it remains unclear how much our State 
has genuinely benefited from these Central Government initiatives. We must ensure 
that funds provided by NABARD and NCDC to cooperative societies are adequately 
distributed to our State. Moreover, priori ty should be given to Telangana while 
allocating funds to women's self-help groups . Primary Agricultural  Credit Societies 
(PACS) and dairy cooperatives in Telangan a require modernization. I propose that 
special funds be established to support new cooperative start-ups in the State. 
Additionally, adequate representation fo r the States should be ensured in the 
governing bodies of the cooperative sector. If appropriate changes are made to this 
Bill, we can further strengthen the cooperative sector. Therefore, the Central 
Government should consider the views of the States while drafting the Bill.  
With the Indira Kranthi Patham (IKPs), milk dairies, women's self-help 
groups, and the expansion of procurement centers from 6,000 to 9,000, Shri KCR has 
turned Telangana into a "Golden Tela ngana." The Government has purchased 
crops, including corn and rice, to benefit the farmers of Telangana. We request the 
establishment of a university in Telang ana and a Millet Research Centre in 
                                                            
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Telugu. 
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
159

 
 
Rajendranagar, especially since this year ha s been declared the International Year of 
Millets. I suggest introducing a course on millets.  
The incumbent Congress Government in Telangana plans to sell 400 acres of 
valuable land located at the Hyderabad Cent ral University. Instead of selling this land, 
it could be used to establish a new university. It is the responsibility of all of us, 
particularly the Central Government, to safeguard this land.  
Shri KCR has built nearly 2,600 Rythu Ve dika centers across Telangana, with 
one center established for every 5,000 acres of land. Farmers used these centers to 
discuss issues related to farming. There are nearly 900 PACS in Telangana, which 
have played a critical role in disbursing loans to farmers. Shri KCR has also 
significantly contributed to the development of fisheries in Telangana by providing free 
fish and rehabilitating rivers and canals for the benefit of fishermen.  
Telangana is a leading state in inland fi sheries, and cooperative societies in the 
region have been digitized and modernized  under the leadership of Shri KCR. The 
weavers' society has also been strength ened, leading to large-scale employment 
opportunities.  
 The establishment of additional coop eratives can strengthen the country’s 
economy, and Telangana serves as a prim e example of this. Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs) have been establis hed in Telangana; ho wever, farmers are 
advocating for an increase in the number of FPOs in the State. If cooperatives are 
managed with an agricultural approach, input costs will be reduced. I support this Bill 
and reiterate that the responsibility of pr otecting the valuable land at Hyderabad 
Central University lies with a ll of us, particularly the Central Government. Thank you, 
Sir.”      
          
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  Now, hon. Minister, Shri Murlidhar Mohol, to 
reply to the discussion.   
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: उपसभापित महोदय, आज सदन मȂ देश का पहला सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय 
Îथािपत करने क े िवषय पर चचार् हो रही है। सदन मȂ, इस चचार् मȂ िपछले लगभग चार, साढ़े चार 
घंटे तक, लगभग 28 माननीय  सदÎयȗ ने भाग िलया है। महोदय, सबसे पहले तो सदन क े ज्येÍठ 
सदÎय माननीय िदिग्वज
य िंसह जी ने इसकी शुरुआत  की और अभी आिखरी सदÎय क े रूप  मȂ 
माननीय रिवचंदर् वǈीराजू जी ने यहाँ पर अपने िवचार रखे। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅने 
सदन मȂ सभी माननीय सांसदȗ क े भाषण सुने हȅ। इस िवषय पर यहाँ अनेक सदÎयȗ ने अपने सुझाव 
भी िदए हȅ और मȅ उन सुझावȗ का Îव
ागत करता हूं। क ु छ माननीय सदÎयȗ ने राजनीितक टीका-
160
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िटÃपणी भी की है, लेिकन िफर भी मेरा यह मानना है िक सदन मȂ जो चचार् हुई है, उस चचार् को 
सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ क े माध्यम से समृǉ िकया गया है। 
 मोदी जी और देश क े गृह एवं हमारे सहकािरता मंतर्ी माननीय अिमतभ ाई शाह जी को 
धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगा िक देश का पहला सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय Îथािपत करने क े ऐितहािसक 
िनणर्य पर आज इस सदन मȂ जो चचार् चल रही है, उन्हȗने मुझे उसका िहÎसा बनने का अवसर 
िदया है।  
माननीय उप सभापित  महोदय, मुझे इस सदन मȂ सभी को यह बात बताते हुए बहुत गवर् है 
िक िदÊली मȂ नवंबर, 2024 मȂ एक वैिÌवक सहकारी सÇमेलन संपन्न हुआ था। भारत मȂ यह 
सÇमेलन पहली बार हुआ था, िजसमȂ पूरे िवÌव से 106 देशȗ क े Ģितिनिध शािमल हुए थे। उस 
सÇमेलन मȂ यूनाइटेड नेशन्स ǎारा हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और हमारे 
सहकािरता मंतर्ी माननीय अिम
तभाई शाह जी की उपिÎथित मȂ वषर् 2025 को  ‘ अंतरार् Íटर्ीय 
सहकािरता वषर्’ घोिषत िकया गया है। यह हमारे देश और देश की सहकािरता का सÇमान है और 
हम सबके  िलए गौरव का िवषय है। महोदय, आज, जब हम यह अंतरार्Íटर्ीय सहकािरता वषर् 2025 
मना रहे हȅ, तो उसी दौरान, आज सदन मȂ देश क े पहले सहकारी िवÌ विवǏालय की Îथापना पर 
चल रही चचार् मȂ भाग भी ले  रहे हȅ। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, जब माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारत ने 2027 मȂ दुिनया की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनने का लÑय 
रखा है, तब इस लÑय  को  पूरा करने मȂ देश की गर्ामीण अथर्ËयवÎथा का भी महत्वपूणर् योगदान 
रहेगा।                                              
हमारा देश एक क ृिष Ģधान देश है। आज देश की लगभग 50 Ģितशत से ज्यादा जनसंख्या 
क ृिष क्षेतर् से जुड़ी हुई है। अगर हम सहकािरता क्षेतर् को देखȂ, तो आज देश मȂ लगभग 8 लाख 
सहकारी संÎथा
एं कायर्रत हȅ और इन संÎथाओं की सदÎय संख्या 30 करोड़ है। आज 30 करोड़  
सदÎय इस पूरे देश क े सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ काम कर रहे हȅ। इसका मतलब है िक हर िकसान 
पिरवार का कोई न कोई एक सदÎय इस सहकािरता क्षेतर् से जुड़ा हुआ है। इतने बड़े लोकसंख्या 
से जुड़े सहकारी क्षेतर् को िपछले कई सालȗ से कांगर्ेस की सरकारȗ ने क ै से नजर अंदाज िकया है, 
इसके  मȅ क ेवल दो उदाहरण यहां देना चाहूंगा। हमारे सीिनयर माननीय सदÎय Ǜी िदिग्व
जय िंसह 
जी ने कहा था िक िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ सहकािरता क े िलए आपने क्या िक या। यह भी मȅ बताने वाला 
हूं और मȅ इस पर अभी आने वाला हूं, लेिकन उससे पहले अगर हम 2013-14 का सहकारी िवभाग 
का बजट देखȂ - तब हमारा यह िवभाग क ृिष मंतर्ालय क े अंतगर्त था – वह िसफर् 122 करोड़ रुपए  
था।  अगर आज हम मो
दी जी की सरकार मȂ देखȂ, तो इसमȂ करीब 10 गु ना वृिǉ होकर हमारा 
बजट लगभग 1,190 करोड़ रुपय े है।  इससे यह मालूम होता है िक हमने सहकािरता को िकतना 
महत्व िदया है। इतना ही नहीं, 30 करोड़  से अिधक सदÎयता वाली इन स हकारी सिमितयȗ को 
पहले क Ȃदर्ीय क ृिष मंतर्ालय क े तहत वषș से चलाया जा रहा था और इतना बड़ा क्षेतर् होने क े 
बावजूद भी क ेवल एक संयुƪ सिचव क े Îतर क े अिधकारी पूरे देश की सहकािरता चला रहे थे, 
लेिकन माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इससे ध्यान मȂ आता है िक सालȗ से यह सहकािरता क्षेतर् 
कांगर्ेस की सरकारȗ क े सम
य मȂ दुलर्िक्षत रहा।   
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
161

 
 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, जैसे िक हमारे सवȘच्च नेता माननीय मोदी जी कहते हȅ िक 
कांगर्ेस की सरकार ने कई अच्छे काम हमȂ करने क े िलए छोड़े हȅ, जैसे िक राम मंिदर का िनमार्ण, 
कÌमीर से धारा 370 को हटाना, िटर्पल तलाक पर रोक लगाने का कानून, ऐसे ही कई काम 
िगनाए जा सक
ते हȅ और वैसा ही एक और ऐितहािसक िनणर्य जो देश क े करोड़ȗ िकसान पिरवारȗ 
क े कÊयाण क े िलए िलया गया, वह था Îवतंतर् सहकािरता मंतर्ालय की Îथापना करना।  आज हम 
देखते हȅ िक पूरे देश मȂ चाहे वह PAC
S हो, डेयरी हो, शुगर इंडÎटर्ी हो, कोऑपरेिटव बȅक्स हȗ, 
टेक्सटाइल िमÊस हȗ, ऐसी लाखȗ सहकारी सिमितयां काम कर रही हȅ। उनके  िवकास और 
िवÎतार क े िलए और इस सहकारी आंदोलन को मजबूत करने क े िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
ǎारा जुलाई, 2021 मȂ इस Îवतंतर् मंतर्ालय को गिठत िकया गया और एक दूरदशीर् िनणर्य िलया 
गया।    
माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन को क ु छ तथ्य भी बताना चाहूंगा, जो मुझे 
लगता है िक कम लोग जानते हȅ।  एक ऐसा Ëयिƪत्व, िजस
ने अपने गांव क े PACS मȂ भी काम 
िकया, िजसने अपनी बाजार सिमित मȂ भी काम िकया, वे िजला सहकारी बȅक क े अध्यक्ष भी थे, वे 
Îटेट कोऑपरेिटव बȅक क े संचालक डायरेक्टर भी बने, िजनका सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ बड़ा योगदान 
और अनुभव रहा, ऐसे हम
ारे नेता माननीय अिमत भाई शाह देश क े पहले सहकािरता मंतर्ी बने।  
यह हम सबके  िलए बड़े गौरव की बात है। उन्हीं क े नेतृत्व मȂ जुलाई, 2021 से अब तक िसफर् साढ़े 
साल मȂ सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ǎारा अभूतपूवर् कायर् िकए गए हȅ, िजन पर मȅ अभी आने वाला हूं।  
बहुत सारे सदÎयȗ ने पूछा िक 10 साल मȂ क्या िक या?                              
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज हम यह िबल लेकर आए हȅ, लेिकन सहकािरता 
िवÌविवǏालय की आवÌयकता क्यȗ है, इस िबल को इस समय लाने की क्या जरूरत  है, तो मुझे 
िवÎतार से सदन क े सामने इस िवषय को रखना है। हमारे यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने 
देश मȂ 'सहकार से समृिǉ' की पिरकÊपना रखी और उसे साकार करने क े िलए िपछ
ले साढ़े तीन 
साल मȂ हमारे सहकािरता मंतर्ालय ने िकतने काम िकए, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से पूरे देश क े 
सामने रखना चाहता हूँ। माननीय अिमत भाई क े क ुशल नेतृत्व मȂ हमारे मंतर्ालय ने भिवÍय मȂ इस 
देश क े सहकािरता क्षेतर्ȗ को नई िदश
ा देने क े िलए 60 नई initiatives लीं।  इसमȂ सबसे पह ले हमारे 
मंतर्ालय ने जो सबसे बड़ा कायर् शुरू  िकया, िजस पर इस सदन मȂ बहुत चचार् हुई, वह है हमारी 
PACS.  हमने जो सबसे पहला काम हाथ मȂ िलया, वह था PACS का सशƪीकरण। माननीय 
उपसभापित महोदय, PACS हमारे सहकािरता क्षेतर् की सबसे महत्वपूणर् कड़ ी है। PACS गाँव को 
सहकािरता से जोड़ने का एक Ģमुख क Ȃ दर् है और यह Ģमुख कायर् करती है। यहाँ बहुत सारे अनुभवी 
सभासद हȅ, िजन्हȗने सहकािरता पर भाषण भी िकया, उसमȂ उन्हȗने बताया िक PAC S क े माध्यम 
से पहले क ेवल छोटे-छोटे काम होते थे। जैसे short term crop loan हो या input supply का 
काम हो, बस इतना ही काम PACS क े माध्यम से होता था। इसी वजह से उनके  Ëयवसाय पर 
मयार्दा आती थी।  लेिकन माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इसी मयार्दा को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए और 
इसके  समाध
ान क े िलए PACS क े model bye-laws मȂ सुधार िकए गए और इसके  माध्यम से 
हमने PACS को multi-purpose बनाने का महत्वपूणर् िनणर्य िलया। माननीय अिमत भाई ने हर 
राज्य क े मुख्य म ंतर्ी से चचार् की, पतर् Ëयवहार िकया और मुझे यहाँ यह कहने मȂ बड़ी खुशी होती है 
162
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िक हमने PACS को multi-purpose बनाने क े िलए जो model bye-laws बनाए, पूरे देश मȂ 32 
राज्यȗ और क Ȃ दर् शािसत Ģदेशȗ ने इसको adopt िकया। उस राज्य मȂ िकसी भी िवचारधारा की 
सरकार हो, लेिकन सभी ने इसको सकारात्मक Ģितसाद िदया। मȅ यहाँ पर उन सभी का धन्यवा द  
Ëयƪ करना चाहता हूँ।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, PACS क े बहुउǈेÌयीय होने से अब उनके  माध्यम से 
Common Service Centres भी चल रहे हȅ, पेटर्ोल और एलपीजी डीलरिशप भी PACS को िमल 
रही है, Custom Hiring Centres भी PACS क े माध्यम से चल रहे हȅ, Ģधानमंतर्ी जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् 
चल रहे हȅ, Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान समृिǉ क Ȃ दर् PACS क े माध्यम से चल रहे हȅ, गर्ामीण नल जल पूिर्त 
योजना क े Ģबंधन का काम भी हमारी PACS कर रही हȅ। ऐसे 25 नए Ëयवसाय इन PACS को देने 
का काम हम
ारी सरकार ने िकया। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, उदाहरणÎवरूप मȅ यहाँ पर यह 
बात रखना चाहूँगा िक आज देश मȂ हमारी 43 हजार PACS Common Servic
e Centres चला 
रही हȅ।  आज हमारी 36 हजार PACS Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान समृिǉ क Ȃ दर् चला रही हȅ। हमारी 4 हजार 
PACS Ģधानमंतर्ी जन औषधालय चला रही हȅ। देश मȂ अनेक PAC S हȅ, जो पेटर्ोल पंप भी चला 
रही हȅ। ऐसे बहुत सारे काम PACS क े माध्यम से आज देश भर मȂ शुरू  हȅ।  
 इसी तरह से जब PACS आिर्थक रूप  से सशƪ हȗगी, तभी तो उस गाँव क े िकसान का 
पिरवार भी सशƪ होगा, वह गाँव भी समृǉ होगा और यही हमारी कÊपना है, यही मान
नीय मोदी 
जी की कÊपना है। अगर हम 'सहकार से समृिǉ' क े बारे मȂ बोलȂ, तो हमारे यहाँ गाँवȗ मȂ इन PAC S 
क े माध्यम से जो काम चल रहा है, पहले हमȂ उसे अच्छा करना था, मुझे इस सदन मȂ यह कहते 
हुए बड़ा आनंद होता है। इन्हीं PACS क े कायर् मȂ सुलभता लाने क े िलए भारत सरकार ǎारा, हमारे 
मंतर्ालय ǎारा अभी देश भर मȂ लगभ
ग 67 हजार PACS का computerization िकया जा रहा है।  
उसका मुǈा भी यहाँ चचार् मȂ आया था िक कौन से राज्य मȂ िकतना िकया जा रहा है, हमारे राज्य मȂ 
िकतना िकया जा रहा है। माननीय उप सभापित  महोदय, िबÊकु ल ऐसा नहीं है।  आज देश की 67 
हजार PACS computerize की जा रही हȅ और उसके  िलए 2,516 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् िकए जा रहे 
हȅ।   
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, यहाँ पर बार-बार चचार् हुई िक ' सहकािरता' राज्य का 
िवषय है। हाँ, यह राज्य का िवषय है, लेिकन राज्य की सहकािरता को सशƪ बनाने क े िलए, 
उनको ताक
त देने क े िलए हमने आज ऐसे काम हाथ मȂ िलए हȅ। मुझे यह कहने मȂ बड़ा आनंद होता 
है िक यह राज्य का िवषय है, PAC S राज्य  की हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)...       
                                                     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat.  Let him reply.    …(Interruptions)…  
No, please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: यह राज्य का िवषय है, लेिकन हमारी सरकार ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
163

 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: हमारी सरकार PACS क े सशिƪकरण क े िलए आज इतना क ु छ काम कर 
रही है। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  शान्त रिहए। क ृपया आपस मȂ बात 
नहीं करȂ।  
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन को यह भी अवगत करना 
चाहता हूँ िक देश मȂ अभी भी कई पंचायतȂ ऐसी हȅ िक जहाँ पर कोई सहकारी संÎथा नह
 ीं है, अभी 
वहाँ काम नहीं कर रही है। हमारी सरकार का Ģयास यह है िक देश का हर गांव सहकािरता क े 
माध्यम से समृǉ हो। इस के  िलए हमारे मंतर्ालय ने आने वाले 5 सालȗ मȂ 2 लाख नए PACS बनाने 
का लÑय रखा है। महोदय, उनमȂ से 14,000 PACS बन भी चुक े हȅ।  इसमȂ बड़ी बात यह देिखए िक 
सहकािरता पर िजन्हȗने बात की, अपनी बातȂ रख ीं और बोले िक सहकािरता कांगर्ेस ने की, लेिकन 
िपछले कई सालȗ से PACS की संख्या 1 लाख से ऊपर नहीं गई, अब अगले 5 सालȗ मȂ पूरे देश मȂ 
PACS की संख्या 3 लाख तक जाएगी। यह सहकािरता को देखने का ह मारा  दृिÍटकोण है। मुझे 
लगता है िक अगर ये PACS बनȂगे, तो पूरे देश मȂ सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ वह एक नयी कर्ांित होगी। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, हमारी सरकार ने PACS को बहुउǈेÌयीय बनाने क े साथ-
साथ, NDDB क े माध्यम से dairy और NFDB क े माध्यम से fisheries  को भी बढ़ावा देने का काम 
िकया। जब हम नए PACS बना रहे हȅ, तो उनमȂ देश की सामािजक रचना को भी ध्यान मȂ रखा 
गया है। वह क ै से, तो मȅ आपको यहाँ बताना चाहूँगा िक हमारी सरकार ने समाज क े सभी वगș और 
मिहलाओं को सहकारी संÎथाओं मȂ Ģितिनिधत्व देने का िनणर्य िक
या है। अब हमारी सरकार ने 
by-laws क े तहत PACS क े board of directors मȂ एक SC-ST वगर् का सदÎय और एक मिहला 
सदÎय का होना अिनवायर् िकया है और सहकािरता क े क्षेतर् मȂ हम लोग इसी क े माध्यम से 
सामािजक न्
याय देने का काम भी कर रहे हȅ। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, वतर्मान मȂ पूरे देश क े सहकािरता क्षेतर् की िÎथित जानने क े 
िलए और भिवÍय की िद शा तय करने क े िलए, हम सभी राज्य सरकारȗ को साथ मȂ लेकर काम 
कर रहे हȅ। मȅ बार-बार यह शÅद इसीिलए Ģयोग कर रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक बहुत बार यह सुनने को आया 
िक राज्य का िवषय है, राज्य का िवषय है, लेिक न हम राज्यȗ को साथ मȂ लेकर काम करते हȅ।  
हमने सभी राज्यȗ को साथ मȂ लेकर पूरे देश का एक National Cooperative Database तैयार 
िकया है। आज हमȂ क ेवल एक click पर , क ेवल एक िमनट मȂ, राज्य, िजला, तहसील और गांव 
सभी Îतरȗ पर कायर् करने वाली हमारी सहकारी संÎथाओं की जानकारी िमलत
ी है। 8 लाख क े 
ऊपर हमारी सहकारी संÎथाएँ हȅ। यह काम हमने सभी राज्यȗ को साथ मȂ लेकर अभी िकया है।  मȅ 
सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ का भी आÏवान करना चाहता हूँ िक इस Database का उपयोग करके  हम 
सभी अपने क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सहकािरता को मजबूत करने मȂ भी अपना-अपना योगदान दे सकते हȅ। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, 2002 क े बाद पहली बार हमारे देश क े Ģधानमंतर्ी माननीय 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ और अिमत भाई जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारे देश की राÍटर्ीय सहकािरता 
164
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
नीित भी बनाई जा रही है। क ु छ िदन मȂ वह भी सभी को िदखेगी। देश भर मȂ राÍटर्ीय सहकािरता 
नीित लाने का हमारा एक संकÊप है।  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, 2023 मȂ देश मȂ पहली बार माननीय अिमत भाई क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
हमने देश क े िकसानȗ को बीज से बाजार तक सुिवधा देने क े िलए राÍ
टर्ीय Îतर पर तीन नई 
सहकारी सिमितयां बनाईं। उनमȂ पहली BBSSL, दूसरी NCOL और तीसरी NCEL हȅ। महोदय, 
हमारे देश मȂ जो पारंपिरक और मीठे बीज हȅ, उनके  संवधर्न और Ģसार का काम भारतीय बीज 
सहकारी सिमित िलिमटेड क े माध्यम से अभी शुरू  हो गया है। देश मȂ जैिवक उत्पादन की खेती को 
National Co-operati
ve Organics Limited क े माध्यम से बढ़ावा देने का काम शुरू  िकया गया 
है। हमारे िकसानȗ क े क ृिष उत्पादȗ क े िनयार्त क े िलए National Cooperative Export
s Limited 
ǎारा अब िकसानȗ को िवदेशी बाजारȗ से जोड़ा जा रहा है। महोदय, ये जो तीन हमारी राÍटर्ीय 
सहकारी सिमितयां हȅ, अब तक देश मȂ 34,000 सहकारी संÎथाएं इनकी सदÎय बनी हȅ और मुझे 
लगता है िक इससे अब िकसानȗ क े आय मȂ भी िब
Êकु ल वृिǉ होगी। 
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज देश भर मȂ लगभग 1,450 अबर्न कोऑपरेिटव बȅक्स 
हȅ, िजनका देश क े शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ क े आिर्थक िवकास मȂ महत्वपूणर् योगदान है। हम सब जानते हȅ िक 
नाबाडर् क े माध्यम से हमारे िजला कोऑपरेिटव बȅक, Îटेट कोऑपरेिटव बȅक को मदद की जाती 
है, उनकी सहायता की जाती है।  लेिकन आज हमारे देश मȂ इतनी बड़ी संख्या मȂ अबर्न 
कोऑपरेिटव बȅक्स हȅ, उनकी मदद क े िलए, उनकी सहा
यता क े िलए आज तक ऐसी कोई 
ËयवÎथा नहीं थी।  आज मुझे सदन मȂ यह कहते हुए बहुत आनंद और अिभमान महसूस हो रहा है 
िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े मागर्दशर्न और माननीय अिमत शाह जी की दूरदिर्शता और 
अथक Ģयासȗ से अबर्न कोऑपरेिटव बȅक्स क े िल
ए भारतीय िरजवर् बȅक क े साथ समन्वय करके  
अंĤेला ऑगȃनाइजेशन की Îथापना की गई है।  
माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, अब इससे क्या होगा? जैसे मȅने कहा िक कोऑपरेिटव बȅक 
हो, चाहे वह Îटेट कोऑपरेिटव बȅक हो या िजला कोऑपरेिटव बȅक हो, उनके  िलए नाबाडर् तो है 
और अगर उनको कहीं पर िदक्कतȂ आती हȅ, समÎयाएँ आती हȅ, तो वे उन के  िलए खड़ी रहती हȅ। 
अब हमारे अबर्न कोऑपरेिटव बȅक्स इस अंĤेला ऑगȃनाइजेशन क े माध्यम से आईटी सिर्वसेज़ दे 
सकते हȅ, टेिक्नकल इन्ģाÎटर्क्टर क े िलए मदद दे सकते हȅ और आवÌयक आिर्थक सहायता भी 
दे सकते हȅ। इस वजह से अब अबर्न कोऑपरेिटव बȅक्स भी शेǹूल  बȅक्स की तरह सेवा
एँ Ģदान 
कर पाएँगे।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, हमारे मंतर्ालय ने िकसानȗ क े कÊयाण क े िलए एक और 
महत्वपूणर् िनणर्य िलया है। हम सबको इस बात का गवर् है िक हम
ारे देश क े िकसानȗ की मेहनत की 
वजह से आज हमारा देश क ृिष उत्पादन मȂ अगर्णी देशȗ मȂ िगना जा रहा है। परंतु, िफर वही एक 
दुख की बात यह है िक इतने सालȗ से यह िकसी क े ध्यान मȂ नहीं आया। इस मामले मȂ िपछली 
सरकारȗ की लापरवाही थी। उन्हȗने उसको दुलर्Ñय िकया, िज
सकी वजह से अनाज उत्पादन क े 
क्षेतर् मȂ भंडारण की क्षमता नहीं बनाई गई है। इसी को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए आज हमारे सहकािरता 
मंतर्ालय ने िवÌव की सबसे बड़ी अन्न भंडारण योज
ना बनाई है। आज पूरे देश मȂ पैक्स क े माध्यम से 
अन्न भंडारण योजना का काम शुरू  हो गया है। इसके  कारण अब टर्ांसपोटȃशन कॉÎट मȂ कमी 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
165

 
 
आएगी, फसल की सुरक्षा होगी और िकसानȗ को नजदीक मȂ भंडारण की सुिवधा भी िमलेगी एवं 
इससे िकसान को आिर्थक रूप  से अिधक लाभ भी होगा।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, एनसीडीसी सहकािरता क्षेतर् क े िवकास और िवÎतार क े 
िलए कायर् करने वाली एक Ģमुख संÎथा है। एनसीडीसी क े माध् यम से पूरे देश मȂ सहकािरता क्षेतर् 
को एक आिर्थक सहायता क े Îवरूप मȂ मदद की जाती है, एक आधार िदया जाता है।  मȅ िफर उसी 
मुǈे पर आना चाहूँगा िक िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ हमने क्या िकया? अगर हम कांगर्ेस की सरकार क े 
समय मȂ देखȂ और 2013-14 क े आंकड़े देखȂ, तो 2013-14 मȂ एनसीडीसी क े मा
ध्यम से देश की 
सहकारी संÎथा को िसफर् 5,300 करोड़ रुपए  की मदद की गई। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, 
वहीं आज हमारे नरेन्दर् मो
दी जी की सरकार ने उसमȂ 25 गुना वृिǉ की और आज हमने 1,28,000 
करोड़ रुपए  की आिर्थक सहायता को एनसीडीसी क े माध्यम से मंजूरी दे दी है। क ेवल इसी एक 
वषर् मȂ एनसीडीसी ने देश की चीनी िमलȗ को लगभग 10,000 करोड़ रुपए  की आिर्थक सहायता 
की है। माननीय अिम
त शाह जी क े Ģयासȗ से कई सालȗ से लंिबत चीनी िमलȗ की लगभग 46,000 
करोड़ रुपए  की income tax liability को भी माफी िमली है और  इसका सीधा फायदा आज हमारे 
िकसानȗ को िमला है।  NCDC क े माध्यम से और भी अनेक कायर् िकये जा रहे हȅ, िजससे आज देश 
की सहकािरता मजबूत हो रही है। 
 माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, सहकािरता को और मजबूत करने क े िलए माननीय अिमत 
शाह जी ने एक और पिरकÊपना रखी। उन्हȗने एक महत्वपूणर् कदम उठाया और उन्हȗने 
'सहकािरता मȂ सहकार' की एक पिरकÊपना लाई, यानी cooperation am
ongst cooperatives.  
इसमȂ हमने एक ऐसा िनणर्य िलया िक यिद कोई िजला कोऑपरेिटव बȅक है, तो उस बȅक मȂ उस 
िजले की सभी कोऑपरेिटव सोसाइटीज़ और संÎथाएँ हȗ और उनका अका उंट वहीं पर खोला 
जाएगा एवं उनके  आिर्थक Ëयवहार उन्हीं क े माध्यम से हȗगे। 
 
8.00 P.M 
 
उनके  जो सदÎय हȅ, उनके  अकाउंट्स भी हमारे िजला कोऑपरेिटव बȅक मȂ खोले जाएँगे।  मȅ यहाँ 
बताना चाहूँगा िक यह िन
 णर्य होने क े बाद, अब तक देश क े िविभन्न िजला सहकारी बȅकȗ की जमा 
रािश मȂ कई गुना वृिǉ हुई है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: अब आप यूिनविर्सटी पर आइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please wait, he will come. …( Interruptions)… Please, 
please. 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: मȅ अब उसी पर आता हूँ।  इस यूिनविर्सटी की जरूरत क्या है, इसका यह 
पहला अध्याय है। ...(Ëयवधान).
.. आप सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
166
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, please. 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल:  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इसका उǈेÌय इतना ही है िक अगर हमारा 
िजला कोऑपरेिटव बȅक आिर्थक रूप  से सक्षम होता है, तो हमारा Îटेट कोऑपरेिटव बȅक भी सक्षम 
होगा और उसका फायदा चाहे PACS क े माध्यम से हो या िकसी और सुिवध ा क े माध्यम से हो, वह 
सीधे हमारे िकसानȗ को होगा, इसीिलए मुझे लगता है िक इस पिरकÊपना को आज पूरे देश मȂ 
बहुत अच्छा Ģितसाद िमल रहा है।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज देश मȂ लगभग 1,730 Multi-State Cooperative 
Societi
es भी हȅ, िजनमȂ सुधार क े िलए हमारी सरकार ने 2023 मȂ Multi-State Cooperative 
Societies Act मȂ भी बदलाव िकए।  हमने कायर्क्षमता मȂ वृिǉ और पारदिर्शता लाने क े िलए इस 
एक्ट मȂ बदलाव िकए।  हमारी सरकार ने Central Registrar क े कायार्लय का भी क ंÃयूटराइजेशन 
िकया। मȅ िफ र यह कहता हूँ िक अब हम सरकार क े माध्यम से राज्यȗ क े RCS कायार्लयȗ का 
क ंÃयूटराइजेशन भी कर रहे हȅ। Multi-State Cooperative Societies को सुिवधा Ģदान करने क े 
िलए अब देश मȂ CRCS क े क्षेतर्ीय कायार्लय भी अन्य राज्यȗ मȂ खोले जाएंगे। 
 माननीय उ
पसभापित महोदय, मȅने अभी िवÎतार से बताया िक क ै से देश का सहकािरता 
आंदोलन मजबूत हो रहा है, देश सहकार से समृिǉ की ओर आगे बढ़ रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसमȂ 
गितशीलता लाने और इसका िवÎतार करने क े िलए एक institutional ËयवÎथा की जरूर त है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ आया न! 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आपस मȂ बात न करȂ।  माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप बोलȂ।  
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मुझे यही कहना था िक हम सहकािरता क्षेतर् 
मȂ िपछले 10 साल मȂ िकतनी बड़ी कर्ांित लाए और हमने िकतना बड़ा काम िकया है।  अब इसे आगे 
ले जाने क े िलए, इसे और बढ़ाने क े िलए हमȂ एक institutional ËयवÎथा की जरूरत है, इसीिलए 
हमने इस यूिनविर्सटी की Îथापना की है।   
माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, जैसा िक मȅने पहले भी बताया, वतर्मान मȂ देश मȂ 8 लाख से 
अिधक सहकारी सिमितयाँ काम कर रही हȅ।  इनमȂ लगभग 40 लाख कमर्चारी और 80 लाख 
िनवार्िचत बोडर् मȂबसर् काम कर रहे हȅ।  ऐसे क ु ल सवा करोड़ लोग आज इस सहकािरता से सीधे 
जुड़े हुए हȅ। उनका सम
य-समय पर क्षमता िनमार्ण और कौशल िवकास करना भी जरूरी है।  
इसके  साथ ही, हमने अक्सर यह देखा है िक कायर्क्षमता मȂ कमी होने क े कारण कई सहकारी 
संÎथाओं की performance अच्छी नहीं होती, मैनेजमȂट मȂ अिनयिमतता होती है और टेक्नोलॉजी 
का कम उपयोग होता है। ऐसी अनेक िदक्कतȗ का सामना आज हमारे देश की कोऑपरेिटव को 
करना पड़ रहा है।   
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस यूिनविर्सटी क े माध्यम से सहकािरता क्षेतर् का scal e 
and scope भी  िनिÌचत रूप  से बढ़ने वाला है। इससे नए उǏम, Îवरोजगार और नवाचार क े 
अवसर भी पैदा हȗगे।  आज PACS क े सिचव से लेकर apex bank क े MD तक  सभी Îतरȗ पर 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
167

 
 
कायर् सुलभता और अनुशासन क े िलए योग्य Ģिशक्षण की आवÌयकता है। ऐसा अनुमान है िक आने 
वाले पाँच सालȗ मȂ सहकािरता क्षेतर् को लगभग 17 लाख Ģिशिक्षत युवाओं की आवÌयकता पड़ेगी 
और इसके  िलए हमने यह इिनिशएिटव िलया है। महोदय, वतर्मान मȂ सहकािरता मȂ हर Îतर पर 
िशक्षण-Ģिशक्षण की ËयवÎथा पयार्Ãत नहीं है और वह िवखंिडत भी है। इसको ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ और म
ाननीय अिमत भाई क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिन
विर्सटी को Îथािपत करने का दूरदशीर् िनणर्य हमारे मंतर्ालय ने िलया और 
आने वाले समय मȂ यह िवÌविवǏालय राÍटर्ीय Îतर पर सहकािरता क्षेतर् की Ģिशिक्षत मैनपावर की 
आवÌयकता को िनिÌचत रूप  से पूरा करेगा। यह िवÌविवǏालय देश क े युवाओं मȂ कोऑपरेिटव 
िÎĢट की भावना को िव
किसत करेगा, सहकारी क्षेतर् मȂ लॉन्ग टमर् किरयर बनाने क े िलए 
Ģोत्सािहत करेगा। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन मȂ इस िवÌविवǏालय का नाम ितर्भुवन दास 
जी क े नाम पर क्यȗ रखा गया, इस पर भी बोलना चाहता हूं। सरदार वÊलभ भाई पटेल हȗ या 
ितर्भुवन दास पटेल जी, यह हमारी संÎकृ ित है। हमारी पाटीर् का िवचार है िक कोई भी Ëयिƪ, 
िजसने समाज की िकसी भी ËयवÎथा मȂ बड़ा योगदान िदया है, तो उसका सÇमान िक या जाना 
चािहए। यह हमारी संÎकृ ित है। आज ितर्भुवन दास जी क े नाम पर आक्षेप िलया गया, लेिकन मȅ 
कहना चाहता हूं िक वे कांगर्ेस क े ही थे। िफर भी, हम उनके  कायर् और योग दान का सÇमान कर 
रहे हȅ और इसे आपको Îवीकार करना चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Îवगीर्य ितर्भुवन दास जी Îवतंतर्ता सेनानी भी थे और भारत मȂ सहकारी आंदोलन क े 
जनक माने जाते हȅ। वे खेड़ा िजला सहकारी दूध उत्पादक संघ क े संÎथापक अध्यक्ष भी रहे। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ योगदान देते समय, ितर्भुवन दास जी ने गांधी जी और सरदार 
पटेल क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ कायर् िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। Dr. John Brittas, please take yo ur seat.  
...(Interruptions)... िसफर् माननीय मंतर्ी जी का बात िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। 
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल:  मȅ िफर से यह बात दोहराना चाहता हूं। सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ योगदान देते 
समय, ितर्भुवन दास जी ने गांधी जी और सरदार पटेल क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ कायर् िक या। उनके  नेतृत्व 
मȂ देश क े डेयरी क्षेतर् मȂ कर्ांित आई। उनकी नीितयȗ क े कारण ही आज लगभग 60 हजार करोड़ 
रुपय े का वािर्षक Ëयापार करने वाला अमूल, िवÌव Îतर पर Ģिसǉ Ĥांड बन चुका है और इसका 
सीधा लाभ आज अमूल से जुड़े 36 लाख िकसानȗ को िमल रहा है। ...(Ëयव
धान)... सहकािरता 
आंदोलन क े ऐसे महान Ëयिƪत्व का नाम इस िवÌविवǏालय से जुड़ना अपने आप मȂ गौरव की बात 
है। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, क ु छ माननीय सदÎयȗ ने Ǜी वग
ीर्ज क ुिरयन जी क े बारे मȂ 
भी सदन मȂ चचार् की। इस िवषय पर लोकसभा मȂ माननीय सहकािरता मंतर्ी अिमत शाह जी ǎारा 
उǄर िदया गया था। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ इस सदन को अवगत कराना चाहत ा हूं िक इसमȂ कोई दो 
168
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
राय नहीं है िक क ुिरयन जी का सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान है। हम इसे Îवीकार भी 
करते हȅ। 
गुजरात राज्य मȂ – आज आप क ुिरयन जी का नाम ले रहे हȅ, िजन राज्यȗ मȂ आपकी 
सरकारȂ हȅ – आपको पता ही नहीं है िक क ुिरयन जी का शत ाÅदी वषर् मनाया जा रहा है। यह 
गुजरात सरकार मना रही है। यह हमारी भाजपा सरकार ही है जो इसे मना रही है। आप यहां 
क ुिरयन जी का नाम ले रहे हȅ, लेिकन हमारी गुजरात सरकार उनके  शताÅदी महोत्सव का 
आयोजन कर रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)
... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please take 
your seat, Dr. John Brittas.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, एक माननीय सदÎय ने कहा िक वगीर्ज 
क ुिरयन बीजेपी क े नहीं थे, इसिलए उनका नाम नहीं िदया गया। मȅ िफर से ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूं 
िक भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की संÎकृ ित िकसी भी क्षेतर् मȂ बड़े कायर् करने वाले Ëयिƪ का सÇमा
न 
करने की है। हमारे मन मȂ उनके  Ģित आदर और सÇमान की भावना है। लेिकन जब िक सी क्षेतर् मȂ 
सबसे बड़े योगदानकतार् का नाम िदया जाता है, तो सहकारी आंदोलन मȂ ितर्भुवन दास जी का 
योगदान सवȘपिर माना जाता है और इसिलए यह नाम िदया गया है। यह हमारे िलए गौरव की बात 
है। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, क ु छ सदÎयȗ ने इस िवÌव िवǏालय क े संचालन क े बारे मȂ 
भी पूछा है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से बताना चाहता हूं िक ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय को संसद क े 
अिधिनयम क े तहत " इंÎटीǷूट ऑफ नेशनल इंपॉटȄस" का दजार् िदया जाएगा। इसका मुख्य 
उǈेÌय सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ शैक्षि
णक और अनुसंधान गितिविधयȗ को unified और standardize 
करना होगा। 
यह राÍटर्ीय Îतर का िवÌविवǏालय सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ िशक्षा और अनुसंधान क े कायर् को 
Ģभावी ढंग से संचािलत करेगा। िव ÌविवǏालय  क े संचालन क े िलए चांसलर, वाइस चांसलर, 
रिजÎटर्ार और अन्य आवÌयक अिधकािरयȗ की िनयुिƪ ĢÎतािवत है। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, ितर्भुवन सहकारी िवÌविवǏालय मȂ सहकािरता क्षेतर् से जुड़े 
शैक्षिणक कायș क े साथ-साथ research and development की गितिविधयां भी शािमल हȗगी। 
इस िवÌ
विवǏालय मȂ आवÌयकता क े अनुसार देश क े िविभन्न Îथानȗ पर sector-specific 
schools Îथािपत हȗगे।  यह िवÌविवǏालय अलग-अलग राज्यȗ क े Ģिशक्षण संÎथानȗ क े साथ 
साझेदारी भी करेगा। दसवीं, बारहवीं उǄीणर् िवǏाथीर् भी इस िवÌविवǏालय क े कोसर् कर पाएंगे।  
इस िवÌविवǏालय मȂ Graduate, Post Graduate, Ph.D., and short -term courses  भी 
ĢÎतािवत हȅ।  इस िवÌविवǏालय क े पाǸकर्म मȂ िवÌव  क े सहकािरता  क्षेतर् की  best practices 
भी शािमल हȗगी।  उपसभापित महोदय, राज्यȗ क े सहकार का क ेन्दर्ीयकरण चल रहा है, राज्यȗ 
की सहकािरता का क्या होगा, ऐसी क ु छ शंकाएं इस सदन मȂ उपिÎथत हुईं, लेिकन मȅ उनको 
आपके  माध्यम से यह बताना चाहता हूं, उनको अवगत कराना चाहता हूं िक ितर्भुवन सहकारी 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
169

 
 
िवÌविवǏालय देश क े िविभन्न राज्यȗ क े मौजूदा सहकारी िशक्षण और अन्य Ģिशक्षण संÎथाओं को 
hub- and-spoke model पर affiliate करेगा।  यह  affiliation पूरी तरह से Îवैिच्छक होगा।  
उसमȂ एक बात और है िक हमने यह भी Ģावधान िकया है िक पूरे सहकािरता का िशक्षण पूरे देश मȂ 
िजस-िजस राज्य मȂ  आएगा, उसमȂ Ģांती
य भाषा मȂ िदया जाएगा।  भिवÍय मȂ आवÌयकता क े 
अनुसार िविभन्न राज्यȗ मȂ नए outline campuses भी Îथािपत िकए जाने पर िवचार िकया 
जाएगा।  जैसे मȅने अभी कहा िक ĢÎतािवत पाǸकर्म जरूरत  क े अनुसार Ģांती य भाषाओं मȂ पढा़या 
जाएगा।   
महोदय, हमारे महाराÍटर् क े एक सदÎय यहां VAMNICOM का इÌयू उठाकर चले गए।  
मुझे लगता था िक उनको सुनना चािहए था।  V A M N I C O M   का महत्व हमारी दृिÍट से अच्छा 
इंÎटीǷूट है और यह यूिनविर्सटी होने क े बाद VAMNICOM, ितर्भुवन िवÌव िवǏालय का 
important part होगा। यह िवÌविवǏालय  hub-and-spoke model  पर कायर् करेगा। हमारा 
VAMNICOM का एक Ģमुख सȂटर, पुणे मȂ काम करेगा। सर, क ु छ माननीय सदÎयȗ ने यहां पर 
क ु छ बातȂ रखी थीं िक पिÌचम बंगाल और बाकी राज्यȗ क े सभासद यहां थे, उन्हȗने की। हमारे यहां 
क ेन्दर्ीयकरण का काम चल रहा है, राज्यȗ क े साथ समन्वय नहीं, मȅने अभी कहा िक हम जो 
model by-laws लाए, आप सदÎयȗ को यह बात मालूम नहीं है िक आपक
ी सरकार ने इस model 
by-laws को भी adopt िकया है।  उसके  साथ हम काम कर रहे हȅ। यह सरकार क े समन्वय  क े 
कारण ही होता है।  हमारे ज्येÍठ सदÎ
य ने कहा िक क ेन्दर्ीयकरण िकया जा रहा है। मुझे लगता है 
िक िवÌविवǏालय एक ÎवायǄ रूप  से अिधिनयमन, पिरिनयम और अध्यादेशȗ क े अधीन कायर् 
करेगा और इससे िवǄीय एके डे िमक और Ģशासिनक ÎवायǄता होगी। हम सहकारी संघवाद क े 
िसǉांतȗ क े साथ काम कर रहे हȅ। यह िवÌव
िवǏालय योग्य Ǜम बल तैयार करेगा, जो सभी राज्यȗ 
क े सहकारी सिमितयȗ क े काम आएगा।   
उपसभापित महोदय, मुझे लगता है िक इस सदन मȂ िपछले चा
र घंटे से चचार् चल रही है, 
तो उस पर मेरा यह िनवेदन था िक भावना सभी की अच्छी है, सभी की भावना एक ही है िक 
िवÌविवǏालय होना चाि हए , लेिकन उसमȂ से क ु छ सुझाव िदए, इस िवÌविवǏालय क े िलए यहां 
पर guidelines रखी गई हȅ। मȅ अंत मȂ एक बार िफर से इस सदन क े सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ का इस 
चचार् मȂ भाग लेने क े िलए धन्यवाद करता हूं। इस िबल क े माध्यम से देश क े पहले सहकारी 
िवÌव
िवǏालय की Îथापना होगी। आने वाले समय क े िलए ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी हमारे 
सहकािरता क्षेतर् मȂ कायर् करने क े िलए skilled manpower का सृजन करेगी, देश मȂ  
cooperative spirit को बढ़ावा देगी और भिवÍय क े िलए cooperative l eadership को तैयार  
करने क े िलए एक महत्वपूणर् योगदान देगी। हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने 2047 मȂ 
िवकिसत भारत का संकÊप  िलया है,  उस े पूरा करने क े िलए Ǜी अिमत शाह जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
हमारा सहकािरता मंतर्ालय अपना योगदान देगा। इसी अपेक्षा क े साथ मȅ यह अनुरोध करता हूं िक 
राजनीित से ऊपर उठक
र आज एक Îवर मȂ देश क े सहकािरता क्षेतर् को मजबूती Ģदान करने वाले 
इस ितर्भुवन सहकारी यूिनविर्सटी को Îथािपत करने क े िबल का समथर्न करȂ और सवर्सÇमित से 
इस िबल को पािरत करȂ। िफर से आप सभी को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।             
                                                             
170
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question is:  
 “ That the Bill to establish the Institut e of Rural Management Anand, as a 
University to be known as the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University and to declare the same 
as an institution of national importance; to impart technical and management 
education and training in co-operative sector : to promote co-operative research and 
development and to attain standards of global excellence therein in order to realise 
the vision of “Sahkar Se Samriddhi” and to strengthen the co-operative movement in 
the country through a network of institutions, and also to declare the Institute as one 
of the Schools of the University and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill.  
Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 4, there is one Amendment (No. 1) by Dr. John 
Brittas. Are you moving it?  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, I am certainly moving it. I move:  
 
(No. 1)  That at page 3, line 41, after the words, “University may”, the     
             words, “, after consultation with and concurrence of the 
              concerned   State  Government,”, be inserted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 5 to 8 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 9, there is one Am endment (No. 2) by Dr. John 
Brittas. Are you moving the amendment?  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, I move:  
(No. 2)  That at page 9, lines 3 to 20, be deleted. 
[ 01 April, 2025 ]
171

 
 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
 
Clause 9 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 10 to 53, the First Schedule and the Second Schedule were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, Shri Murlidhar Mohol to move that the Bill be 
passed.  
 
Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल:  महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूं: 
“िक िवधेयक को पािरत िकया जाए।“ 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on 
Wednesday, 2
nd April, 2025. 
 
The House then adjourned at eighteen minutes past eight of the clock till eleven of the 
clock on Wednesday, the 2nd April, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 