Vol. 262     Wednesday , 
No. 3   6th December, 2023 
 15 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 3) 
 
Report of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs - Laid on the Table (page 3)  
 
Report of Study Visit of the Committee on  the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes - Laid on the Table (page 4) 
 
Statements of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment- Laid on the Table (pages 4 -5 ) 
 
Matters raised with permission - 
Demand to reschedule Rajdhani Expre ss running between New Delhi to Ranchi 
(page 5) 
Poor state of under-trials (pages 5 - 6) 
Need for inspection by teams of Central Go vernment in different States to check 
the implementation process of different Government projects (pages 7 - 8) 
 
                                                                                                                                [P.T.O. 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Issue of health-related problem faced by people who have recovered from Corona 
virus (pages 8 -9) 
Threats to the Kulsi River in Assam (pages 9 - 10) 
Need to improve facilities to Railway passengers (pages 10 - 11) 
Demand to start Railway services from  Baripada to Balasore in Odisha  
(pages 11 - 12) 
Demand for homes to the poor of Odis ha under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(pages 12 - 13) 
Need to address the issues for the develo pment and welfare of tribals in Odisha 
(pages 13 -14) 
Issue of fencing on Bangladesh border (pages 14 -15) 
Demand to start railway services betw een Chhitauni and Tamkhui in Bihar  
(pages 15 - 16) 
Demand to streamline the admissions to professional, arts and science courses 
(pages 16 - 17) 
Establishment of a Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) in Titlagarh, Odisha (pages 17 -18) 
Issue of brain drain in Jharkhand (pages 18 -19) 
Safety and Security of Doctors (pages 19 -20) 
Issue of drought and floods in various st ates including Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, etc. (pages 20 -22) 
Issue of wild animals damaging the ag ricultural crops in Uttar Pradesh  
(pages 22 -23) 
Demand to start welfare schemes for Carpenters (pages 23 -24) 
Need to strictly implement laws in public  spaces for safety and security of women 
(pages 24 -25) 
Demand to install centralised Solar Dryer System to dry medicinal plants in 
 Amravati District (pages 25-26) 
Insufficient supply of electricity in Pangi Valley of Himachal Pradesh  
(pages 26 - 27) 
 
Announcement by the Chair (page 26) 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
                                       http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
                                           E-mail : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

Oral Answers to Questions (pages 27 - 56) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise] 
 
Supplementary Demands For Grants 2023-2024 - Laid on the Table (page 56) 
 
Short Duration Discussion - Not concluded  
Economic Situation in the Country (pages 56 -117) 
 
Special Mentions - 
Demand to declare cow as National Animal to protect our culture (page 118) 
Children with Type 1 Diabetes (pages 118 -119) 
Need to address the conditions of Tea plantation workers in West Bengal  
(pages 119 - 120) 
Concern over stray animals (pages 120-121) 
Demand for including prime tourist site s of Odisha into Iconic Sites list  
(pages121 -122) 
Need for adequate Special trains to Kerala during festive seasons  (page 122) 
Exploitation of women of the country, espe cially the women of Punjab in the Gulf 
countries (page 123) 
Demand to give preference to the online railway ticket holders for the parcel service 
as well (pages 123 - 124) 
Rising cases of destruction by wild boar (pages 124 - 125) 
Demand for a policy for filling up seat in National Board of Examination (NBE) in 
Medical Sciences Post-MBBS diploma s eats through state-level counselling  
(page 125) 
Demand for Production-Linked Incentive Scheme (page 126) 
Demand to include unorganized workers under ESIC coverage (pages 126 - 127) 
Demand for opening of an additional Kend riya Vidyalaya in Hapur, Uttar Pradesh 
(pages 127 - 128) 
Demand to establish Blood Bank at Block level (page 128) 
 
Messages from Lok Sabha - Reported 
The Jammu and Kashmir Reservat ion (Amendment) Bill, 2023 - Laid on the Table  
(page 128) 

The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisa tion (Amendment) Bill, 2023 - Laid on the 
Table (page 128) 
 
Resignation by Member -Accepted (page 129) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
Wednesday, the 6th December, 2023 /15 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.  
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE  
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) : सर, इधर तो हम आपको नमÎते करते हȅ, लेिकन आप 
उधर बहुत छ ु प-छ ु प कर नमÎते करते हȅ।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Leader of the House and the L eader of th e Opposition have a 
special place; but when it comes to Mr. Khar ge -- a man of sublim ity, a man of great 
experience -- I take all his words as reflection of blessings even after he had said िक 
मेरा िदल उधर है, तो मोहÅबत इनसे कर रहा हूँ।  
Ǜी Ģमोद ित वारी  ( राजÎथान): सर, मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस नहीं आते।  
इसिलए यह नोट कर िलया जाए िक हम लोग तो पूरे आदर क े साथ करते हȅ, वे थोड़ी सी 
अवहेलना करते हȅ।  आप टाइट किरएगा, आज जब आएँ, तब डाँिटएगा।  
Ǜी सभापित : ऐसा है, a very senior Minister, a  very capable Minister, Shri Dharmendra 
Pradhan, is present here. The Government is duly represented by a very, very senior 
Minister.   
Now, Papers to be Laid on the Table.   
Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of the Delh i Police Housing C orporation Limited, 
New Delhi; NDMA, New Delhi and NIDM, New Delhi and related papers 
गृह मं तर्ालय  मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ :- 
(i) A copy  each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:-
(a) Sixteenth Annual Report and Accounts of the Delhi Police Housing
Corporation Limited, New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together with  the
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India thereon.

 
(b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Corporation.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10108/17/23] 
 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) of Section 70 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005:- 
 (a) Annual Report of the National Di saster Management Authority 
(NDMA), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Statement of Objectives an d Reasons alongwith Statement of 
Explanatory Notes pertaining to the above-mentioned Report. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Authority. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10109/17/23] 
   
(iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:— 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional Institute of Disaster 
Management (NIDM), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together 
with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement of Objectives and Reasons pertaining to the above-
mentioned Report. 
  (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10110/17/23] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी अजय क ुमार) : महोदय, मȅ गृह मंतर्ालय की िदनांक 22 अगÎत, 
2023 की अिधसूचना संख्या का.आ. 3744(अ), िजसमȂ यह अिधसूिचत िकया गया है िक भोपाल 
(मध्य Ģदेश), धारवाड़ (कनार्टक) और गुवाहाटी (असम) मȂ Îथािपत क ȅपस राÍटर्ीय न्यायालियक 
िवज्ञान िवÌ
विवǏालय अिधिनयम, 2020 की धारा 53 की  उप धारा (2) क े अधीन राÍटर्ीय 
न्यायालियक िवज्ञान िवÌविवǏालय क े क ȅपस क े रूप  मȂ सिÇमिलत हȗगे, की एक Ģित ( अंगर्ेज़ी 
तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं।  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10113/17/23] 
 
I. Notification of the Ministry of Education 
II. Report and Accounts (2021-22) of IIIT, Allahabad and related papers 
 
िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( डा. सुभाष सरकार) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
 
 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 पटल पर रखता हूँ :- 
 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Education (Department of 
Higher Education) Notification No. NSU/DR/Publication of Ordinances/2023, 
dated the 5 th September, 2023, notifying that the Ordinances of National 
Sanskrit University, Tirupati as mentio ned therein, received the assent of the 
President on 15 th May, 2023 and publishing these Ordinances for general 
information, under sub-section (2) of Section 44 of the Central Sanskrit 
Universities Act, 2020. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10102/17/23] 
 
II. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (5) of Section 30 and sub-sect ion (3) of Section 39 of the Indian 
Institutes of Information Technology Act, 2014:- 
  (a) Annual Report of the Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), 
Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22. 
  (b) Annual Accounts of the Indian Institute of Information Technology 
(IIIT), Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22, and the Audit 
Report thereon. 
  (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 
  (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 10101/17/23] 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
 
DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL (Punjab):  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and 
Hindi) of the Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on External Affairs (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recomme ndations contained in the Twentieth 
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants  of the Ministry of External Affairs for 
the year 2023-24. 
 
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
3

 
REPORT OF STUDY VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE WELFARE OF 
SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
डा. सुमेर िंसह सोलंकी (मध्य Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ अनुसूिचत जाितयȗ और अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ 
क े कÊयाण संबंधी सिमित क े िदनांक 24 अगÎत, 2023 से 29 अगÎत, 2023 तक हैवलॉक ǎीप, 
पोटर् Åलेयर, महाबलीपुरम और मुंबई क े अध्ययन दौरे संबंधी Ģितवेदन की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा 
िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। 
 
 
STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय , मȅ सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता संबंधी 
संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2023-24) क े िनÇनिलिखत िववरणȗ की एक-एक Ģित ( अंगर्ेज़ी तथा 
िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ:- 
 
(i) Statement showing the Final Action  Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 36th  Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (2021-2022) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recomme ndations contained in 23rd Report 
of the Committee on  ‘Assessment of Sche me for Implementation of the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (S IPDA)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities).  
(ii) Statement showing the Final Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contai
ned in the 37th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (2021-22) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 30th Report 
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2022-23) of the Mi nistry of Tribal 
Affairs. 
(iii) Statement showing the Final Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 49th Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment ( 2022-23) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
contained in their 42nd Report on ‘R eview of the functioning of National 
Institutes established for different types of disabilities’. 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Matters raised with permission. Shri Khiru Mahto – Demand 
to reschedule Rajdhani Express running between New Delhi to Ranchi.  
 
Demand to reschedule Rajdhani Express running between New Delhi to Ranchi 
 
Ǜी खीरू महतो (िबहार) : महोदय, मȅ आपके  संज्ञान मȂ देते हुए, माननीय रेल मंतर्ी जी से आपके  
माध्यम से िनवेदन करता हूँ िक राँची राजधानी एक्सĢेस, जो राँची से चलकर नयी िदÊली आती है 
और नयी िदÊली स
े राँची जाती है, उसमȂ जनसुिवधा को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए इसके  समय को 
घटाया जाए।  यह जो 5 बजे खुलती है, उसको 3 बजे िकया जाए, तािक वह समय पर, 9.00-
9.30 बजे नयी िदÊली पहुँच सके ।   
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
अभी यह 11.00, 11.30 या 12.00 बजे तक पहुँचती है।  मȅ आसन क े माध्यम से माननीय रेल मंतर्ी 
जी से िनवेदन करता हूँ िक वे इसको सुधारȂ एवं इसका समय चȂज करȂ। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member:  Dr . Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Be ngal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and 
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).  
 
माननीय Ǜी राजीव शुक्ला जी -  Concern over  poor status  of undertrials.  
 
Poor state of under-trials 
 
SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA (Chhattisgarh) :  
 Sir, I rise to bring to the attention of this 
august House the alarming state of undertria ls in India and the imperative need for 
judicial reforms in the light of the 78 th Report of the Law Commission and data from 
the National Crime Report Bureau.   Over the past decade, the undertrial population  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
5

 
 
has consistently risen, peaking in 2021, with 76 per cent of all prison inmates being 
undertrials in 2020, as per the NCRB.   The concerns surrounding undertrials are 
multi-faceted, from the disproportionate a rrest of resourceless individuals to the 
prevalence of  violence and ab uses in jails.   The criminalis ation by prison authorities  
leading to potential fatalities adds a critical dimension to this crisis.  सर, मȅ आपको 
बताना चाहता हूँ िक देश भर मȂ िजतने क ैदी हȅ, उनमȂ से 76 परस Ȃट अंडर टर्ायल हȅ।  अदालतȂ 
इसमȂ 4-5 साल ले रही हȅ, वे कोई फ ैसला नहीं करती हȅ।  अभी सुĢीम कोटर् क े जज, संजय िकशन 
कौल जी ने कहा िक जो लोअर कोट्सर् हȅ, हाई कोट्
सर् हȅ, वे लोगȗ को जमानत दȂ।  वे 4 साल बाद 
उनको ģी करते हȅ, acquittal करते हȅ, िरहा करते हȅ।  इसमȂ उनकी िजन्दगी क े 4 साल बरबाद 
हो जाते हȅ।  सर, ज्युिडिशयरी मȂ अ
ंडर-टर्ायÊस की समÎया बहुत बड़ी है और ज्युिडिशयल 
िरफॉÇसर् की जरूरत है।  ऑनरेबल चेयरमैन साहब ने कई बार यह बात कही है।  ज्युिडिशयल 
िरफॉÇसर् होते नहीं हȅ।  िकर्के ट मȂ िरफॉमर्, हॉकी मȂ  िरफॉमर्, मेिडकल काउंिसल मȂ  िरफॉमर् - सब 
चीजȗ म
Ȃ ज्युिडिशयरी कहती है िक िरफॉमर् करो, लेिकन हमारे यहाँ कोई िरफॉमर् नहीं करो।  यानी 
ज्युिडिशयरी मȂ कोई िरफॉमर् नहीं हो, जैसा चल रहा है, वैसा ही उनका िसÎटम चलता रहे।  
कॉलेिजयम िसÎटम, जैसा है चलता रहे; जज जैसे बनते हȅ, बनते रहȂ और िकसी चीज मȂ अपने 
यहाँ कोई िरफॉमर् नहीं हो, जबिक बाकी जगहȗ पर जिÎटस खुद इतना िडले करते हȅ िक अभी 76 
परसȂट अंडर-टर्ायÊस हȅ।  वे तमाम क ैदी जो बाद मȂ छू ट जाते हȅ - जब उनका अपराध सािबत नहीं 
होता, तो वे िरहा हो जाते हȅ, लेिकन तब तक वे जेलȗ मȂ पड़े रहते हȅ।  80-90 साल की बेचारी 
मिहलाएँ वहाँ बन्द
 हȅ, जो िक एक िचिड़या भी नहीं मार सकतीं, लेिकन बेवजह क े आरोपȗ मȂ वे 
बन्द हȅ।  उनको बाद मȂ िरहा करते हȅ।  इसिलए यह बहुत गÇभीर समÎया है।   
 सर, मȅ लॉ िमिनÎटर से, भारत सरकार से अनुरोध करू ँगा िक इस समÎया का कोई 
िनदान िनकालȂ और ये जो अंडर-टर्ायÊस हȅ, िजनक
ा टर्ायल चल रहा है, लेिकन वे िडले की वजह 
से जेलȗ मȂ पड़े हुए हȅ, इसका कोई राÎता िनकालȂ, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour mention raised by the ho n. Member:  Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri N.R. Elango (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra),
 Shri Ajay Pratap Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), 
Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Shri Su jeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar (A ndhra Pradesh) and Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).   
 Now, Dr. Santanu Sen – Demand fo r inspection by teams of Central 
Government in different States to check the implementation process of different 
Government projects. 
 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Need for inspection by teams of Central Government in different States to check the 
implementation process of different Government projects 
 
DR. SANTANU SEN (West Bengal) :  Sir, we all know th at maintaining the basic 
essence of cooperative federalism is provided by the Constitution of India, though it is 
hardly maintained nowadays; several projects run in several States in which there is a 
certain Central share and there is a certain State share.  But, unfortunately, in the 
name of investigation, we have seen that these investigating teams are serving the 
basic political interest of the ruling part y of the Centre. Let me cite you certain 
examples. In the name of National Level Mo nitors and in the name of Central Team, I 
will cite you four examples.  As far as this MGNREGA Project is concerned in our 
State of West Bengal, 16 Central teams led by the Government of India, that too 
above the rank of Joint Secr etary, have visited.  Then, 32 National Level Monitors, 
which constituted several NGOs and persons, of course, appointed by the 
Government of India, have visited.   Action Taken Report submitted with respect to all 
observations of those Committees.  Last Ac tion Taken Report was submitted on 27
th 
June, 2023; unfortunately, ther e is no response since th en. 22 lakhs of people are 
getting deprived of their basic rights, which is amounting to nearly Rs.7,500 crores.   
Unfortunately, they are raising the question of corruption. This payment is being made 
by Direct Benefit Transfer mechanism th rough banks. So, where is the scope of 
corruption, Sir? 
So far as the complaint of fake job card is concerned, let me tell you, our 
State, West Bengal, ranks second. Sir, 99.68 per cent job card and Aadhar link has 
been done in our State of West Bengal; on ly Andhra Pradesh is having 99.7 per cent. 
Let me cite you some examples of double-engine  Sarkar. In Gujarat, it is only 53 per 
cent; in Assam, it is only 57 per cent; in Maha rashtra, it is only 43 per cent.  But it is 
only Bengal which is being deprived time and again. 
 So far as the Awas Yojana is concerne d, let me tell you, 69 teams visited the 
State of West Bengal in the name of in spection of this Awas Yojana Project. Our 
Minister of West Bengal came to meet the Central Minister on 7
th November, 2022.  
On 24 th of November, an allotment of 11,36, 000 households were given.  In due 
course of time, within a month, all the do cuments were uploaded in the portal. Then 
several teams visited once again.  There ar e several queries in the month of May, 
2023. The Action Taken Report was submitted in June, 2023. Then, there was a 
silence of six months.  Then, once again, on 5
th of November, several questions were 
given, and that were answered on 20th... ...(Time-bell rings.)...    
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
7

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Time is over, Dr. Saheb.  Not going on record now.   
 
DR. SANTANU SEN:   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Time is already over.  I have nothing in my hands.  यह िसफर् 
तीन िमनट का समय पहले से तय है। हम चाहȂ भी तो इसे एक्सटȂड नहीं कर सकते हȅ।  
 The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Dr. Santanu Sen:  Dr . John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Mohammed 
Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Shrimati Mausam 
Noor (West Bengal), Shri Prakash Chik Ba raik (West Bengal), Shri Sandosh Kumar 
P. (Kerala), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri Javed Ali Khan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Samirul Islam (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Kh an (Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil 
N a d u ) ,  S h r i  A b i r  R a n j a n  B i s w a s  ( W e st Bengal), Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar (Andhra Pradesh) amd Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala).   
 
Issue of health-related problem faced by people who have recovered from Corona 
virus 
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र (उǄर Ģदेश) : उपसभापित महोदय, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे 
महत्वपूणर् बातȗ को उठाने का समय िदया।  
 महोदय, 2021 क े बाद 2022-23 म
Ȃ कोरोना अचानक 11 परसȂट बढ़ गया और इसके  बढ़ने 
क े कारण इससे 45 से  60 वष र् क े लोगȗ की जानȂ गईं। यह 36 राज्यȗ का आंकड़ा है और यह 
आंकड़ा क ेन्दर्ीय एजȂिसयȗ क
े  ǎारा उठाया गया है। हम सरकार से यह माँग करते हȅ िक कोरोना 
जैसी महामारी को रोकने क े िलए और जो बच्चे कोरोना क े बाद हाटर् अटैक से मर रहे हȅ, उस पर 
लगाम लगाने क े िलए समय-सीमा क े अंदर 36 क े 36 राज्यȗ और क ेन्दर्शािसत Ģदेशȗ, खास करके  
िबहार मȂ इस बात की जानकारी ल
Ȃ िक ऐसे िकतने बच्चȗ की मौतȂ हुई हȅ। इस पर िनगरानी रखकर, 
उनका समुिचत इलाज हो, इसकी ËयवÎथा की जाए, हमारी यही माँग है, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by t
he hon. Member, Sh ri Ram Nath Thakur:   Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Dr . Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Dhananjay Bh imrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shrimati 
Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Shri Sujeet Kumar 
                                         
Not recorded. 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Am ar Patnaik (Odisha), Shri Abir Ranjan 
Biswas (West Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Kanakamedala Ravind ra Kumar (Andhra Pradesh) and Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala).  
Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan. Your subject is, 'Concern over Threats to Kulsi River in 
Assam.’ 
 
Threats to the Kulsi River in Assam 
 
SHRI AJIT KUMAR BHUYAN (Assam) : Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for 
giving me this opportunity to raise an important issue pertaining to national 
importance.  
The Kulsi River in Assam is a habitat of the endangered Ganges River Dolphin, 
but illegal sand mining and the existence and construction of bridges are altering the 
water-flow regime, posing a serious threat to the aquatic mammal and to the riparian 
communities that depend on the Kulsi for their livelihoods.  
Indiscriminate and illegal mechanised sand mining, unplanned industrial growth 
and construction activities have destroyed the Kulsi River, the unique habitat of the 
endangered GangesRiverDolphin. The Assam Government declared the River Dolphin 
the "State Aquatic Animal" in 2008 and the Central Government notified it as the 
"National Aquatic Animal" in 2009.  
A report brought out by the Wildlife Instit ute of India, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, 
titled "Status of Ganges River Dolphins in  Kulsi River, Assam 2021" states: "Based 
on long-term observations in Kulsi and elsewh ere, it is now understood that dolphins 
prefer habitat where depth is greater than 2 metres. During our recent survey in Kulsi 
River, it is found that the average water depth was less than or equal to one metre. 
An internationally recognized river dolp hin expert, who has been monitoring the 
dolphins of the Kulsi for the past 17 years as  part of his research work on the dolphins 
of the Brahmaputra river system, said th at India accounted for 90 per cent of the 
global population of the Ganges River Dolphin and Assam accounted for 30 per cent 
of the dolphin population of the country.  Me re restoration of the flow of water could 
not restore the ecology of dolphins in the Kuls i River.  There has to be a strict ban on 
the harmful anthropogenic activities in Kulsi for a specific duration so that the river 
gets the time it requires for the restoration of its entire ecosystem. 
 Sir, I urge the Government, through you, for comprehensive and suitable 
interventions for protecting Kulsi River as well as the habitat of the National Aquatic 
Animal, the Ganges River Dolphin.
  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
9

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan:   Shri Javed Ali Khan 
(Uttar Pradesh), Shri Sandosh Kumar P. (K erala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala). 
 
Need to improve facilities to Railway passengers 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी (महाराÍटर्) : उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आज सदन मȂ टर्ेनȗ मȂ यातर्ा करने 
वाले देश भर क े याितर्यȗ का दु:ख-ददर् साझा करना चाहता हूँ।   
 
'वादा िकया गया था, उजालȗ का क्या हुआ? 
जƐत क े उन हसीन हवालȗ का क्या हुआ? 
शाहȗ की सैर क े िलए राÎते तो बन गए, 
लेिकन हमारे पैर क े छालȗ का क्या हुआ?' 
 
 कहां तो हवाई चÃपल वाला हवाई जहाज मȂ यातर्ा करेगा और लोकल टर्
ेन वाला बुलेट टर्ेन मȂ यातर्ा 
करेगा, ऐसे नारे हम स
ुनते रहे और धरातल पर िÎथित यह हो गई िक रेलवे की पुरानी यातर्ी 
सुिवधाएं भी रसातल मȂ चली गईं।   
  महोदय, देश मȂ रेल को आम जनता का यातायात माना जाता है।  क्या सरकार इस सÎते 
सावर्जिनक पिरवहन को असुरिक्षत, असÇमानजनक और असुिवधाजनक बना देगी? उपसभापित 
महोदय, आम जनता क े िलए वेिंटग िटकट की समÎय
ा इतनी बड़ी तर्ासदी है िक इसे रेल मंतर्ालय 
शायद समझना ही नहीं चाहता। महीनȗ पहले भी अगर टर्ेनȗ का िटकट लेने का Ģयास कीिजए तो  
अिधकांश िटकट वेिंटग मȂ ही िमलेगा या िफर तत्काल क े नाम पर आपकी जेब लूटी जाएगी।  
महोदय, आजकल तो डायनेिमक फ ेयर क े नाम पर  * चल रही है।  अभी िपछले महीने नवÇबर मȂ 
मुÇबई से पटना जाने वाली सुिवधा एक्सĢेस मȂ सेक ं ड एसी का फ ेयर... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी जी, we will have to check whether the word 
* 
is unparliamentary or not.  Please, be careful.  
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : ठीक है, सर।  मȅ उस शÅद को वापस ले रहा हूँ।  मȅ पुन: लूट शÅद 
इÎतेमाल कर रहा हूँ िक डायनेिमक फ ेयर क े नाम पर लूट चल रही है।  अभी िपछले िदनȗ नवंबर 
मȂ मुंबई से पटना जाने वाली सुिवध
 ा एक्सĢेस मȂ सेक ं ड एसी का फ ेयर 9,395 रुपए  पहुंच गया था। 
बेस फ ेयर 2,950 रुपए  था, उस पर 5,900 का डायनेिमक फ ेयर - गजब की लूट है!  क्या रेल 
मंतर्ालय ऐसी कोई तरकीब िवकिसत नहीं कर सकता, िजसमȂ वेिंटग िटकट लेन े वाली याितर्यȗ क े 
िलए अलग से कोच लगाया जाए?   
                                         
* Withdrawn by the hon. Member. 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
उपसभापित महोदय, रेलवे मȂ सुरक्षा और रेलवे की सुरक्षा, आजकल दोनȗ भगवान भरोसे 
हȅ। रेल दुघर्टनाओं की बाढ़ आ गई है। ओिडशा क े टर्ेन हादसे मȂ मारे गए सैकड़ȗ याितर्यȗ क े 
पिरवारȗ क े आंसू अभी सूखे नहीं हȅ। पहले रेल हाद से होते थे, रेल मंतर्ी जवाबदेही लेते थे, जमीर 
की आवाज पर इÎतीफा िदया करते थे।  अब शायद जमीर की आवाजȂ नहीं होती हȅ, क्यȗिक रेल 
मंतर्ी जवाबदेही नहीं लेते, इÎतीफा नहीं देत े। भाजपा की सरकारȗ मȂ इÎतीफे  नहीं हुआ करते। 
याितर्यȗ की सुरक्षा की सुध भला कौन ही ले, जब मंतर्ी जी को फ ु सर्त ही नहीं है!  25 नवंबर को 
मध्य Ģदेश क े मूंगावली Îटेशन पर टर्ेन का इंतजार  कर रही मिहला से जीआरपी अिधकारी गȅगरेप 
करता है।  रेल मंतर्ी जी वन्दे भारत क े वीिडयो ट्वीट करके  अपडेट करते हȅ।  मȅ उनसे कहूंगा िक 
कभी पटना-लखनऊ-इलाहाबाद से िदÊली और मुंबई जाने वाली टर्ेनȗ क े  िडÅबȗ का वीिडयो शूट 
कराकर आप िट्वटर पर डािलए, तब समझ मȂ आए िक असिलयत कहां पर है और सच्चाई कहां 
पर है।  बुलेट टर्ेन की बाट जोह रहे इस देश क े पास लोकल टर्ेनȗ की सुिवधाएं लगभग समाÃत ह ȅ। 
आरपीएफ का जवान चेतन िंसह टर्ेनȗ मȂ पूछ-पूछ करके  लोगȗ को गोली मारता है, लेिकन सरकार 
एक ट्वीट तक करना गवारा नहीं समझती, मंतर्ी जी एक शÅद बोलना नहीं चाहते। इन सुिवधाओं 
को सुधारा जाए, मेरा यह अनुरोध
 है।   
             
Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम (छǄीसगढ़) : महोदय, मȅ Îवयं को इस िवषय क े साथ संबǉ करती हूँ। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Imran Pratapgarhi:    Shri Sandosh Kumar 
P. (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sh ri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (M aharashtra), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
 
Demand to start Railway services from Baripada to Balasore in Odisha 
 
Ǜीमती ममता मोहंता (ओिडशा) : उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर 
बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।   
महोदय, िकसी भी अ
ंचल का िवकास तभी संभव है, जब उस अंचल मȂ यातायात की संपूणर् 
सुिवधा हो और देश क े िकसी भी Îथान से उस अंचल मȂ सुिवधा क े साथ पहुँचा  जा सके , चाहे वह 
िवमान सेवा हो, रेल सेवा हो, बस सेवा हो या कोई भी सेवा हो। ओिडशा क े मयूरभंज िजले मȂ 
किÃतपाड़ा सब िडवीजन है, जहां क े लोग रेल सेवा पाने  से वंिचत ह ȅ। भारत को Îवाधीन हुए 75 
साल हो गए, लेिकन दुख की बात यह है िक इस िजले क े किÃतपाड़ा सब-िडवीज़न क े लाखȗ लोग 
रेल सेवा से वंिचत हȅ। इस इलाके  क े लोग रेल सेवा पाने क े िलए सौ िकलोमीटर दूर यातायात 
करते हȅ। मेरा रेल िवभाग से ĢÎताव और अनुरोध है िक बारीपदा से खुन्टा, उदला, किÃतपाड़ा, 
नीलिगरी होकर बालेÌवर Îटेशन तक रेल कनेक्ट की जाए। वहां रेल कनेक्ट होगी तो उस इलाके  
क
े  लोग रेल सेवा पा सकȂ गे और भुवनेÌवर-िदÊली क े जैसे देश की अन्य सभी जगहȗ पर 
सुिवधापूवर्क यातायात कर सकȂ गे। अगर इस अंचल मȂ रेल सेवा होगी तो इसका िवकास भी होगा।  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
11

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Mamata Mohanta:  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odish a), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
  
Demand for homes to the poor of Odisha under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK (Odisha) :   Sir, the Centre launched the Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana with the very laudable objective of 'housing for all' to provide pucca houses 
with basic amenities to the homeless or those living in dilapidated kuchcha structures.  
Under this Yojana, the Odisha Government proposed housing assistance to be 
covered under the PMAY for 15 lakh houses.  This included houses to be provided to 
a large population of the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes and also to the 
people who were affected by Fani Cyclone.   
 In December, 2021, the hon. Chief Minister , Shri Naveen Patnaik, wrote a letter 
to the hon. Prime Minister seeking more ho uses for Fani cyclone-hit families and also 
the poor in the tribal and backward district s of the State.  But, unfortunately, after 
three-and-a-half years, despite persuasion by all the Members of Parliament of Biju 
Janata Dal in both the Houses and also submitting a memorandum to the concerned 
Minister, only 8 lakh houses have been sa nctioned and still 7 lakh houses have been 
left behind.  The result is that there is a large chunk of people in these tribal areas who 
have not been able to get houses even now.   
In order to support those deprived of th eir right to shelter, the Government of 
Odisha, under the leadership of the hon. Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik, has 
come out with Mo Ghara Scheme, that is, My House Sche me, in 2023.  It is a credit-
linked subsidy scheme.  This was done be cause there was a large chunk of people 
who could not be covered under the Central scheme.  Under this scheme, loans up to 
Rs.3 lakhs are being provided , and the more significant th ing is that persons with 
disabilities are being covered, who were no t being covered under the Pradhan Mantri 
Awas Yojana.  The financial implication of th is Mo Ghara Scheme is that in two years, 
Rs.2,150 crores are proposed to be met from the State Budget.  
Now, Sir, through you, I would like to urge upon the Government that 
remaining 7 lakh houses, which have not b een provided by the Central Government, 
could be provided to those people in Odisha  who have been deprived of this.  This 
would actually ensure that the people, who are actually in the lower strata of society in 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
rural parts of Odisha, get this benefit and the objective of 'Housing for All' actually 
gets achieved.  In a State like Odisha which is having a large population living in the 
rural areas, this would actually help them to  come up to a stage in life where their 
basic capabilities would also improve because of this facility.  Thank you, Sir.        
         
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Amar Patnaik: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Be ngal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
 
Need to address the issues for the development and welfare of tribals in Odisha 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  * "Thank you, hon'ble Dy. Chairman, Sir, for allowing 
me to speak in my mother tongue Odia. 
Hon’ble Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patn aik, has always given priority to the 
development and welfare of the tribal brothe rs and sisters of Odisha. In this regard, 
many programs have been taken up in the State of Odisha, and due to paucity of 
time, I am not delving deeper into the details. Sir, through you, I would like to draw 
attention of the Government towards three vita l issues relating to our tribal brothers 
and sisters. The first issue is regarding the inclusion of five languages, Ho, Mundari, 
Saora, Kui and Bhumij  that are spoken by the tribal s of Odisha, in the Eighth 
Schedule of the Indian Constitution. In th is regard, our hon'ble Chief Minister has 
been continuously endeavouring, and has written several letters to the Government of 
India. Moreover, the Odisha Cabinet has also passed resolutions for the Kui and 
Saoralanguages, and the same has the appr oval of the State Government also. The 
second issue is regarding the inclusion of  169 communities in the Scheduled Tribes 
list. These communities had requested through the Government that their 
communities be included in the ST List of Odisha, and the Government of Odisha had 
also duly forwarded the same to the Central Government, but the same is still 
pending. The matter should be taken into co nsideration on priority so that the hopes 
and aspirations of these tribals are realized. 
The third issue is regarding the withdr awal of 18 per cent GST on Kendu 
leaves. About 10 Lakh women, our tribal sisters, depend on Kendu leaf collection for 
their livelihood but due to the imposition of 18 per cent GST on Kendu leaves, their 
                                         
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Odia.  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
13

 
livelihood is getting adversely affected. In th is regard, our hon'ble Chief Minister Shri 
Naveen Patnaik has written to the Centra l Government, and had requested the latter 
to completely withdraw the 18 per cent GST on Kendu leaf in the larger interests and 
welfare of the tribals of Odisha. Therefore through you, I urge upon the Government 
to consider these three demands sincerely,  and include Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Saora 
and Kui in the Eighth Schedule  of the Indian Constitution. Secondly, it is requested 
that the pending issue of including 169 tribal  communities of Odisha in the ST list of 
Odisha be also considered. Thirdly, the present 18 per cent GST, which has been 
imposed on Kendu leaves,may be withdrawn completely.   Our leader and Chief 
Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik, has been pe rsistently endeavoring in this regard, and 
we are hopeful that the Government will look into the matter in due earnestness." 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra:  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharasht ra), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik 
(Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (West Bengal), Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas (West 
Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil  Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu).  
 Now, Shri Nagendra Ray to raise the issue of fencing on Bangladesh Border. 
 
Issue of fencing on Bangladesh border 
 
Ǜी नगेन्दर् रॉय (पिÌचमी बंगाल) : उपसभापित जी, मȅ भारत एवं बंगलादेश क े बॉडर्र क े बारे मȂ 
क ु छ कहना चाहता हूं।  सर, बड़े दुख की बात है िक हमारे बंगलादेश बॉडर्र पर illegal migrants 
होते हȅ, जो इ
ंिडया मȂ आकर वोटर िलÎट मȂ अपना नाम िलखवाते हȅ I  हमने सुना है िक तृणमूल क े 
लीडसर् बंगलादेश क े नागिरकȗ को इंिडया मȂ लाकर वोटर िलÎट म Ȃ उनका नाम जुड़वाते हȅ।  ऐसा 
लगता है िक वे गवनर्मȂट ऑफ इंिडया क े फॉरेन अफे यसर् िडपाटर्मȂट का काम कर रहे हȅ।  यह जो 
activity हो रही है, वह anti social activity चल रही है, इससे भारत को बहुत खतरा है।  यह 
इसिलए हो पा रहा ह
ै िक unfenced इलाके  मȂ िदन-दहाड़े लोग इंिडया मȂ घुस जाते हȅ। जैसे 
cattle smuggling होती है,  जब भी  Border Security Force invisible होती है, तब यह ज्यादा 
होता है।  बॉडर्र पर हज़ारȗ लोग इकƻे होकर यह काम करते हȅ।  बॉडर्र पर जो unfenced इलाका 
है, मȅने वहां पर जाकर देखा और मȅने बीएसएफ क े कमांडर को पूछा िक यह unfenced क्यȗ है, 
तो वह बोलता है िक वैÎट बंगाल गवनर्मȂट land allotment नहीं कर रही है।  छह साल से land 
allotment नहीं हो रहा है,  इसिलए  इस पर fencing नहीं हो पा रही है, जैसे smuggling नहीं 
रुक  रही है।  तब म
ȅने उनसे पूछा िक आपने गवनर्मȂट से बात क्यȗ नहीं की। वे बोले िक हम लोगȗ ने 
डीएम साहब से बात की, लेिकन there was no response.  िफर  म
ȅ जलपाईगुड़ी िडिÎटर्क्ट क े 
डीएम साहब क े ऑिफस मȂ गया और मȅने उनसे िमलना चाहा, लेिकन उन्हȗने deny कर िदया िक 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
मȅ काम मȂ ËयÎत हूं। उन्हȗने कहा िक आप एडीएम से िमिलए।  उसके  बाद मȅने एडीएम से बात की 
और उन्हȂ बता िदया की fencing का  काम जÊद से जÊद होना चािहए।  उन्हȗने हमȂ आÌवासन 
िदया िक देखते हȅ।  सर, अगर इस तरह से चलता रहेगा, तो क ै से काम चलेगा?  हमारी  वैÎट 
बंगाल पुिलस ने बंगलादेशी को पकड़ा। It i
s very dangerous. यह हमारे भारत क े िलए बहुत बड़ा 
खतरा है।  िकसी भी हालत मȂ यह जÊद से जÊद रुकना  चािहए?  मȅ िरक्वेÎट करता हूं िक जÊद 
से जÊद व
ैÎट बंगाल सरकार land allot कर दे। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है, धन्यवाद।  माननीय Ǜी सतीश चंदर् दूबे जी।  
...(Ëयवधान)... Nothing is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...   
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Shri Nagendra Ra y: Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(Maharashtra) and Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha).  
Now, Shri Satish Chandra Dubey on 'demand to start railway services between 
Chhitauni and Tamkhui in Bihar.' 
 
Demand to start railway services between Chhitauni and Tamkhui in Bihar 
 
Ǜी सतीश चंदर् दूबे (िबहार) :  उपसभापित महोदय, वषर् 2007 मȂ िछतौनी तमकु ही रेल लाइन का 
िशलान्यास तत्कालीन रेल मंतर्ी ǎारा िकया गया था।  र
ेल लाइन पिनयहवा से िछतौनी होते हुए, 
नारायणी नदी क े िकनारे होते हुए िबहार Ģांत क े मधुबनी, धनहा, खैरा टोला इत्यािद Îथानȗ से 
होकर ग
ुजरेगी तथा क ुशीनगर क े तमकु ही रोड रेलवे Îटेशन पर यह कÃतानगंज-थावे रेल लाइन 
मȂ िमल जाएगी।   
 वषर् 2014 से लेकर 2019 तक जब मȅ लोक सभा का सदÎय था, तब मȅने अनेक बार 
पतर्ाचार िकया और सदन म
Ȃ आवाज उठाई।  इसके  िलए धनरािश Îवीकृ त भी की गई और क ु छ 
कायर् भी हुए, लेिकन अभी तक इसमȂ क ु छ ठोस कायर् होता िदखाई नहीं दे रहा है।  अिधकािरयȗ से 
वातार् करने क े बाद बताया गया िक धन क े अभाव मȂ कायर् पूरा नहीं हो रहा है।  इस रेल लाइन क े 
िनमार्ण से नारायणी नदी क े इस पार िÎथत िबहार क े िनवािसयȗ क े िलए बड़ी राहत होगी, उन्हȂ 
आवागमन की अच्छी सुिवधा सुलभ हो जाएगी और इसके  साथ ही हर साल आने वाली बाढ़ स
े भी 
Îथायी तौर पर बचाव होगा।  हमारा चÇपारण सत्यागर्ह की धर
ती है और वहां क े लोग आज भी चार 
Åलॉक की रेल से वंिचत हȅ।  इस रेल लाइन से बहुत उÇमीदȂ हȅ।   
अत: आपसे नĦतापूवर्क आगर्ह है िक इस रेल लाइन को अिधक स
े अिधक धनरािश देकर 
पूणर् करवाया जाए।  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका संरक्षण चाहता हूं।  इस रेल लाइन को धन 
देकर िनिÌचत रूप  से इसका कायर् पूरा कराया जाए, क्यȗिक यह गांधी जी क े  सत्यागर्ह की धरती 
है और चÇपारण का यह बहुत बड़ा सपना पूरा होगा।  अत: आपसे आगर्ह है िक इसको अिधक से 
अिधक धन देकर कम समय क े अंदर पूरा करवाया जाए। 
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
15

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Satish Chandra Dubey:   Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha) and Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
   Now, Shri Selvaganabathy on 'Deman d to Streamline the Admissions to the 
Professional, Arts and Science Courses.' 
 
Demand to streamline the admissions to professional, arts and science courses 
 
SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY (Puducherry) :  Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I rise to 
request the Government of India to stream line the admission process for professional 
courses like medicine, paramedical and engineering which are completed very late, 
extending up to October.  However, the academic year of arts and science courses in 
all colleges and the universities normally  commence in June and the admissions are 
normally completed in the month of July.  The first semester in arts and science 
colleges ends in November.  It is being fo llowed by the examinations.  But those who 
are admitted to science courses leave the institution in the middle when they get seats 
in professional courses.  It leaves a numbe r of vacancies in arts and science courses 
which is a waste of public exchequer.  Ev en if the universities extend the date of 
admissions to arts and science colleges, those who are admitted in those vacancies 
have very little time to prepare for their first semester examination.  Sir, almost all 
higher secondary examinations, which are the porters for engineering and medical 
courses, are completed by the Central and State Boards well before April.  Mostly, 
the results are also published in the month of May.  They spend one or two months in 
coaching centres who charge huge fees.  This  is sheer commercial exploitation.  This 
also gives an added advantage to the well- privileged and the wealthy sections of the 
society.  But many poor people  cannot afford this.  In my opinion, this is a denial of 
natural and social justice.  Sir, this can be  avoided easily if the national level JEE and 
NEET examinations are conducted immediately a week after their qualifying 
examinations.  Then, admissions to medi cine and engineering courses may be 
completed before the end of July itself.  Only then, arts and science courses will run 
with full strength.  Therefore, Sir, I urge the Government to take immediate steps to 
narrow the time gap between school examinations and college entrance examinations 
so as to ensure equal parity between all students.  This will also ensure that the 
admission process in professional an d graduation courses are conducted 
simultaneously thereby resulting in reductio n of dropout students in science and arts 
colleges.  Thank you very much, Sir.  
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri S. Selvaganabathy: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Dhanan jay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Shri Abir 
Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal) and Ka nakamedala Ravindra Kumar (Andhra 
Pradesh).  
Shri Niranjan Bishi on the issue 'Regarding Establishment of Kendriya Vidyalaya 
in Titlagarh, Odisha'.   
 
Establishment of a Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) in Titlagarh, Odisha 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha):  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Ch airman, Sir, for allowing 
me to raise this matter of urge nt public importance.  It is  regarding establishment of a 
Kendriya Vidyalaya at Titlagarh in Bolangir District, Odisha, in coordination with and 
financial support from the East Coast Railw ay, Bhubaneswar, Odisha.  I would like to 
draw the kind attention of the Government of India, through you, Sir, to this matter.  
The District Administration and Educat ion Department had arranged temporary 
accommodation at Dhubaleshwar Governme nt, upgraded high school for the 
functioning of Kendriya Vidyalaya at Titlagarh.  However, despite fulfilling prerequisites 
since November 2020, no further action has been taken by the Government of India 
towards the establishment of Kendriya Vidyalaya.  Titlagarh being an underprivileged 
area urgently requires educational support, especially through a Kendriya Vidyalaya, 
to benefit the children of Central Governme nt employees working in the Departments 
of Railways, Posts, Bank, Insurance, Bhar tiya Khadya Nigam, BSNL employees and 
also employees working under the Govern ment of Odisha.  Hence, I urge the 
Government to direct the Kendriya Vidyal aya Sangathan authorities to expedite the 
pending process swiftly ensuri ng the establishment of Kend riya Vidyalaya at Titlagarh 
in time for the upcoming academic session.  The initiative aligns with our commitment 
to providing quality education in underdeveloped region and fulfilling the educational 
needs of the students belonging to the empl oyees of the Government of India and the 
employees of the State Government.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Niranjan Bishi: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Santanu 
Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odi sha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).            
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
17

 
Shri Deepak Prakash on 'Issue of brain drain in Jharkhand.' 
 
Issue of brain drain in Jharkhand 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश (झारखंड) : उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। उपसभापित 
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से झारखंड राज्य की साढ़े तीन करोड़ ममार्हत जनता की भावनाओं से 
सदन को अवगत कराना चाहता हूं। झारखंड राज्य खिनज सÇपदा से पिरपूणर् राज्य है। इसे 
रत्नगभार् Ģदेश भी कहा जाता है। ईÌवर ने और Ģकृ ित
 ने दोनȗ हाथȗ से इस Ģदेश को वरदान िदया 
है। यह Ģदेश आयरन ओर, कोयला, तांबा, सोना, गर्ेनाइट, यूरेिनयम, लीिथयम, बॉक्साइट जैसी 
अनेक खिनज सÇपदाओं से पिरपूणर् Ģदेश है।  
 महोदय, मȅ आज आपके  सामने इस िवषय को इसिलए रखना चाहता हूं िक हालांिक यह 
Ģदेश
 खिनज सÇपदा से पिरपूणर् है, लेिकन वहां की राज्य सरकार की नीित और नीयत मȂ खोट है।  
सर, क ेन्दर् सरका
र ǎारा लगातार सारी formalities  पूरी करने क े बावजूद वहां की राज्य सरकार 
आयरन ओर को खोलने क े िलए तैयार नहीं है। वहां पर राज्य सरकार एक तरह से आयरन ओर 
को बंद करने क े िलए िववश कर रही है। सर, वहां पर एक  भी आयरन ओर खुला हुआ नहीं है। हम 
यह भी जानते हȅ िक कोयले का यहां पर ऑक्शन होने क े बाद लोगȗ को लीज़ िमल रही है, लेिकन 
ज़मीन का अिधगर्हण उस राज्य की सरकार की नीयत मȂ खोट होने क े कारण नहीं हो रहा ह ै, 
िजसके  कारण उǏोग और उǏोग क े माध्यम से रोजगार का जो सृजन होता है, उसमȂ क ु ल 
िमलाकर बाधा पड़ी हुई है और वहां से उǏोग और उǏोगपित लगातार दूसरे Ģदेश मȂ पलायन कर 
रहे हȅ। वहां पर लोग बेरोजगारी को तो झेल ही रहे हȅ, साथ ही कई अपराधी, संगिठत अपराधी 
िगरोह अपने आप को उसमȂ शािमल कर रहे हȅ।  सर, चाय बागान उसका उदाहरण ह
ै।  
 सर, मȅ आपका ध्यान इस ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं िक माइिंनग लीज़ पर होने क े 
बाद भी जो आयरन ओर की माइन्स नहीं खुलती हȅ, उसके  पीछे संगिठत अपरािधयȗ का एक 
िगरोह है, जो इÊलीगल माइिं
नग करते हȅ, * सर, यह बहुत दुखद बात है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : दीपक जी, ध्यान रखȂ जो कमȂट्स आप कर रहे हȅ, वे नहीं करȂ।  
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश : सर, वहां से लोग पलायन कर रहे हȅ। उनके  पलायन क े मूल कारणȗ को तो हम 
लोगȗ को समझन
ा पड़ेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश : हम क ेरल की बात नहीं कर रहे हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... हम क ेरल की बात नहीं कर 
रहे हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... हम ĥÍटाचार की भी बात नहीं कर रहे हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... वहाँ क े जमीन 
घोटाले की बात नहीं कर रहे हȅ, वहाँ क े शराब घोटाले की भी बात नहीं कर रहे हȅ।        
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
...(Ëयवधान)..     मȅ   वहाँ   क े  कोयले घोटाले की भी बात नहीं कर रहा हूं। ....(Ëयवधान).....मȅ तो 
आपको वहाँ की पिरिÎथितयȗ से अवगत करा रहा हूं।...(Ëयवधान) 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :   दीपक Ģकाश जी, आपका समय समाÃत होने वाला है, आप अपने मुǈे पर 
बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी दीपक
 Ģकाश : हम सभी रोज़गार क े सृजन क े िलए जानते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... .. (समय की 
घंटी).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Nothing is going on record. आपका समय खत्म हो गया है। 
The following hon. Members associated th emselves with the matter raised by the 
hon. Member, Shri Deepak Prakash: Shri Samir Oraon (Jharkhand), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra) and Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha).   
 माननीय डा. अशोक बाजपेयी जी, आप बोिलए।   
 
Safety and security of Doctors 
 
डा. अशोक बाजपेयी ( उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय  उपसभापित  महोदय, मȅ आपका और सदन का 
ध्यान एक बहुत गंभीर और महत्वपूणर् िवषय की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं। महोदय, देश मȂ 
लगभग 25 लाख से अिधक िचिकत्सक हȅ। धरती पर इन्हȂ इस तरह से माना जाता है िक 
िचिकत्सक धरती का देवता है, वह लोगȗ का जीवन बचाने का, उनकी रक्षा
 करने का काम करता 
है। मान्यवर, िजसे हम धरती का देव कहते हȅ, जो लोगȗ क े जीवन की रक्षा करता है, वह Îवयं 
अपना जीवन असुरिक्षत Ëयतीत करता है। आए िदन ऐसी घटनाएं बढ़ रही ह ȅ िक अगर अÎपतालȗ 
मȂ कहीं कोई क ै ज़ुअÊटी हो जाती है, तो उस पेशȂट क े पिरवार से लोग आकर डॉक्टर क े साथ 
िजस तरीके  का िमसिबहेव करते हȅ, मारपीट करने का काम करते हȅ, उससे डॉक्टर Îवयं को 
असुरिक्षत महसूस करता है।  
 मान्यवर, आज िंहदुÎतान क े डॉक्टसर् का दुिनया मȂ जो सÇमान है, दुिनया क े तमाम 
िवकिसत देश भारतीय डॉक्टसर् पर भरोसा करते ह
ȅ और वे सÇमान क े साथ अपनी ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाएं 
देने का काम करते हȅ। हमारे भारतवषर् मȂ भी जब कभी ऐसी पिरिÎथितयाँ बनीं - आप देखȂगे िक 
कोिवड जैसी महामारी क े समय हमने उन्हȂ कोिवड वॉिरयर कहा और सÇमान देने का काम िकया 
- जब तमाम लोग घरȗ मȂ बैठे थे, तब डॉक्टसर् अपने Ģाणȗ को असुरिक्षत  महसूस करते हुए भी 
मरीजȗ क े जीवन की रक्षा करने का काम कर रहे थे, परंतु इसके  बावजूद इन डॉक्टसर् की सुरक्षा 
क े िलए कोई ËयवÎथा नहीं की गई। मान्यवर, वैसे तो ÎवाÎ थ्य सेवाएं देना राज्य का िवषय है, 
लेिकन मेरा यह अनुरोध है िक भारत सरकार इसके  िलए कोई िवधेयक लाए और इस िवधेयक क े 
माध्यम से इन िचिकत्सकȗ की सुरक्षा हो सके ।  
महोदय, बहुत सारे ऐसे मामले होते हȅ, िजन्हȂ लेकर िचिकत्सकȗ क े साथ कोटर् म
Ȃ मारपीट 
की गई। उसके  बाद अगर सीआरपीसी क े अंतगर्त डॉक्टर अपना मुकदमा दज़र् कराता है, तो 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
19

 
उसके  बाद एक लंबी Ģिकर्या होती है, डॉक्टर का टर्ांसफर वहाँ से दूसरे अÎपताल मȂ हो जाता है, 
लेिकन उसमȂ कभी भी किन्वक्शन नहीं होता है, न ही दोिषयȗ को दंड िदया जाता है। इसके  िलए 
कोई मेिडकल िटर्Åयूनल बनना चािहए - जैसे तमाम अन्य सेवाओं म Ȃ िटर्ÅयूनÊस बने हुए हȅ, वैसा ही 
एक मेिडकल िटर्Åयूनल बनना चािहए। इसमȂ पेशȂट का भी पक्ष सुना जाए और डॉक्टर का भी पक्ष 
सुना जाए। उस िटर्Åयूनल मȂ ÎपेशिलÎट भी हȗगे और यिद िकसी डॉक्टर का कोई क ृ त्य िंनदनीय 
है, तो उसको दंिडत िकया जाए। अगर डॉक्टर िनदȘष होगा, तो एक्सपटर् क े माध्यम से सारी 
सच्चाई सामने आ सके गी। मȅ समझता हूं िक इससे डॉक्टर की सुरक्षा भी बढ़ेगी और वे ज्यादा 
मनोयोग क े साथ अपना काम कर सकȂ गे। 
 मान्यवर, तमाम ऐसे आकिÎ
मक अवसर भी आते हȅ, िजनमȂ डॉक्टसर् अनेक तरह की 
पिरिÎथितयȗ का सामना करते हȅ। एिक्सडȂट क े समय डॉक्टर एिक्सडȂट को झेलने का काम करता 
है, यिद ड
ेथ हो जाती है, तो उन पिरिÎथितयȗ को भी हȅडल करने का काम करता है। मान्यवर, 
तमाम ऐसी आकिÎमक पिरिÎथितयाँ होती हȅ, िजनसे डॉक्टर जूझता है, लेिकन डॉक्टर की सुरक्षा 
की कोई ËयवÎथा नहीं है।  
मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन से यह अपील करना चाहता ह ूं िक सरकार देश क े उन 
25 लाख से अिधक िचिकत्सकȗ की सुरक्षा क े िलए कोई ऐसा िवधेयक लेकर आए, िजससे वे 
सुरिक्षत हो सकȂ । माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी बैठे हȅ, .. (समय की घंटी).. म ेरी इनसे भी Ģाथर्ना है िक 
कोई ऐसा िवधेयक लाएं, िजससे वे सुरिक्षत हो सकȂ । मान्यवर, आपने मुझे यहाँ पर बोलने का 
अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।    
          
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member , Dr. Ashok Bajpai: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Shrimati S. Phangnon 
Konyak (Nagaland), Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Harnath Singh 
Yadav (Uttar Pradesh)
, Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) , Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Ms. Indu 
Bala Goswami (Himachal Pradesh), Shri Pabitra Margherita (Assam), Shri Abir 
Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal), Shrima ti Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra), Dr. 
Santanu Sen (West Bengal) and Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar (Andhra Pradesh). 
  
Issue of drought and floods in various states including Karnataka, Maharashtra,  
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, etc. 
 
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir, I wish to raise a 
matter of utmost importance to the people of  Karnataka and the neighbouring States.  
Karnataka is currently grappling with one of the most severe droughts in the last 123 
years.  A staggering 223 out of the total 226 talukas in th e State have b een adversely 
affected by these drought conditions.  Am ong these, 196 talukas are experiencing 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
severe consequences while 27 talukas face  moderate effects.The damage to crops 
ranges from 40 per cent to 90 per cent in  many cases.  Total estimated loss due to 
crop damage in the State of Karnataka is pegged at Rs.35,162.05 crore.   
Compounding the severity of the situation,  Karnataka is confronting a new challenge 
referred to as "green drought", where crops have matured, yet there is no yield.   
In response to this critical situation, the State Government has sought 
assistance amounting to Rs.18,171.44 crores  from the National Disaster Response 
Fund (NDRF).  This financial support is crucial for providing input subsidies, 
gratuitous relief, and implementing other immediate drought relief measures.  Due to 
low rainfall, water in various reservoirs is al so at an alarmingly low level.  The water 
storage is at its lowest in the last 5 year s.  Going forward, the State will also see 
shortage of drinking water for cattle an d people.  Thus, the Government should 
realize the precariousness of the situation.   Under MGNREGA, the State has already 
achieved 98.16 per cent of its target of pe rson-days generated for this year.  The 
State Government has also requested for an increase in number of working days from 
100 to 150 days.   ...( Time-bell rings.)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आपका टाइम खत्म हो गया है।  3 िमनट क े बाद ऑटोमेिटकली माइक बंद हो 
जाता है। 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : The Karnataka Government has released various 
amounts from its own funds to provide imme diate relief and assistance to the people 
of the State.  The Government has taken several decisions to help farmers and people 
in the State including crop damage.   
Sir, though my time is still left... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is already finished. 
   
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : I request you because not only there is drought in 
some areas but the flood is also serious in Chennai particularly, Kerala and other 
places, and Vidarbha is also suffering from  drought in various places.  But the funds 
from the Central Government are not going there.  Though the Chief Ministers are 
coming and requesting but the BJP Government is not taking any interest because 
they have won the elections.  That is why I think that people are fully supporting them 
but they are not ready to redress
 their sufferings.  Therefore, through you, I request 
them to please respond to these points and release the necessary funds. 
   
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
21

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge:   Shri 
Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Syed Nasir Hussain (Karnataka), Shri Imran 
Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha) , Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Shri 
Binoy Viswam (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (O disha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Kanakamedala 
Ravindra Kumar (Andhra Pradesh), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal, 'Concern over rising cases of Human Trafficking.'  Not 
present.  …(Interruptions)…  Those who associate, please send your names here. 
Now, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi, 'Issue of wild  animals damaging the agricultural crops 
in Uttar Pradesh.'   
Issue of wild animals damaging the agricultural crops in Uttar Pradesh 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी (उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज मȅ िकसानȗ से जुड़ी 
समÎया को सदन मȂ रखना चाहती हूँ।  महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश एक बहुत बड़ा Ģदेश है और यहाँ पर 
Ģाय: िकसान अपना जीिवकोपाजर्न खेती क े माध्यम स
े करते हȅ।  मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को 
धन्यवाद देना चाहती हूँ, जो अपने तमाम कायर्कर्मȗ क े माध्यम से िकसानȗ की आय क ै से दोगुनी 
हो, इसके  िलए लगातार Ģयास कर रहे हȅ।  जैसे इसके  िलए िकसान सÇमान िनिध योजना, 
िकसान टर्ैक्टर योजना, िकसान िमतर् योजना, Ģधान मंतर्ी िकसान मान धन योजना, िकसान 
कर्
े िडट काडर् योजना आिद योजनाएँ चल रही हȅ।  Ģदेश सरकार भी गाँव-गाँव मȂ पशुशाला खोल 
कर पशुओं को रोकने का एक अच्छा कायर्कर्म लाग
ू कर रही है। महोदय, मȅ आपके  सामने यह 
कहना चाहूँगी िक उǄर Ģदेश मȂ जौनपुर, Ģतापगढ़, इलाहाबाद, Ģयाग, सुÊतानपुर जैसे हमारे 
तमाम िजले ऐसे हȅ, जो िबÊकु ल नदी क े िकनारे बसे हȅ।  वहाँ पर आवारा पशुओं, जैसे नीलगाय, 
जंगली सूअर आिद का इतना आतंक है िक उनसे िकसानȗ की फसलȂ भारी मातर्ा मȂ बबार्द हो रही 
हȅ।   
महोदय, मेरा अपना मानना है िक सरकार तो िनयम बना रही है, सरकार का काम बहुत 
अच्छ
े से हो रहा है, लेिकन मुझे ऐसा लगता है िक इसमȂ जन-सहभािगता होनी भी जरूरी  है।  लोग 
अपने पशुओं को छ ुƺा भी छोड़ देते हȅ, जो खेतȗ मȂ जाकर फसलȗ को बबार्द करते हȅ।  मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से यह कहना चाहती हूँ िक हमारे जो ज
ंगली जानवर हȅ, इनकी रोकथाम क े िलए और 
जन-सहभािगता बने, क्यȗिक जन-सहयोग की भी इसमȂ जरूरत पड़ेगी, उसके  िलए भी कोई ऐसा 
ठोस कानून बनाया जाए, तािक लोग अपने पशुओं को छ ुƺा नहीं छोड़Ȃ। 
मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  सामने यह भी कहना चाहूँगी िक हमारे िकसान बड़े पिरǛम क े साथ 
अपनी फसलȗ का उत्पादन करते ह
ȅ।  हमारे यहाँ बड़ी मातर्ा मȂ आलू, गन्ना, गेहूँ, धान, अरहर की 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
फसलȂ पैदा होती हȅ, लेिकन मȅने आज की तारीख मȂ देखा है िक गाँव-गाँव मȂ िकसान रात भर 
जाग-जाग कर इनसे अपने खेत-खिलहान की रखवाली करता है, वह रात भर जाग-जाग कर 
उसकी घेराबंदी करता है।  इसके  अितिरƪ आपको यह भी देखने को िमला होगा िक ये जो 
नीलगायȂ होती हȅ, वे कभी-कभी सड़क को इस Ģकार से कर्ॉस करती हȅ िक इससे काफी संख्या मȂ 
एिक्सडȂट्स होते हȅ और उनसे बहुत से लोगȗ की अकÎमाÞ मृत्यु भी हो जाती है।  इसिलए  महोदय, 
मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन से अनुरोध करना चाहती हूँ िक सरकार इसके  बारे मȂ कोई ठोस कदम 
उठाए और जन-सहभािगता को भी साथ मȂ लेकर इसके  बारे मȂ रोकथाम करे, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi:   Dr. Amar Patnaik 
(Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. 
Sasmit Pa
tra (Odisha) and Shri Ajay Pratap Singh (Madhya Pradesh) 
 Now, Shri Ram Chander Jangra. The issue is 'request to start welfare schemes 
for Carpenters'.  
 
Demand to start welfare schemes for Carpenters 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा ( हिरयाणा): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ देश क े कारीगर समाज से 
सÇबिन्धत एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय को सदन मȂ उठाना चाहता हूँ।  आपने इसके  िलए मुझे जो मौका 
िदया है, उसके  िलए धन्यवाद। 
 मान्यवर, देश का बढ़ई समाज 'आत्मिनभर्र भारत' और 'मेक इन इंिडया' क े संकÊप को 
तो पूरा करता ही ह
ै, साथ ही साथ छोटे गर्ामीण कारीगरȗ को रोजगार भी देता है।  माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी ने ' पीएम िवÌवकमार् योजना' क े माध्यम  से इस वगर् क े कÊयाण क े िलए एक बहुत बड़ा 
कदम उठाया है।   
 मान्यवर, मȅ इनकी एक मूलभूत समÎया की ओर सदन का ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता 
हूँ।   एनजीटी क े िनयमȗ की आड़ मȂ अफसरशाही ने इस कारीगर समाज क े काम मȂ अनावÌयक 
िनयम थोप िदए, िजससे इनके  िलए काम करना दूभर हो गया है।  इनको काम करने मȂ Ģयोग मȂ 
आने वाली छोटी आरा मशीनȗ का वन िवभाग से ला
इसȂस लेना अिनवायर् कर िदया गया है, जबिक 
ये लोग जंगल की कोई लकड़ी नहीं काटते।  ये तो वन िवभाग क े ǎारा ही काटी गई लकड़ी क े लƻे 
लेकर उन्हीं से फनीर्चर, दरवाजे, िखड़िकयाँ आिद बनाते हȅ।  ये जंगल की कोई लकड़ी नहीं 
काटते हȅ, लेिकन जब इनकी आरा मशीनȗ को सील कर िदया जाता है, तो ये चाह कर भी कोई 
काम नहीं कर पाते हȅ।   
 मान्यवर, आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से मेरा आगर्ह है िक 10-15 िकलोवाट तक का िबजली 
का छोटा कनेक्शन ल
ेने वाले और तैयार लकड़ी से सामान बनाने वाले बढ़ई समाज क े  कारीगरȗ 
को एनजीटी और वन िवभाग क े िनयमȗ से मुƪ िकया जाए और इनको लाइसȂस Ģथा से छू ट दे दी 
जाए, तािक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े 'आत्मिनभर्र भारत' और 'मेक इन इंिडया' क े सपने को ये 
साकार कर सकȂ, धन्यवाद। 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
23

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Ram Chander Jangra: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. 
Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Abir 
Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal) and Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) (Haryana). 
 Dr. Amee Yajnik.  The issue is, 'need to  implement laws strictly in public 
spaces for safety and security of women.'   
 
Need to strictly implement laws in public spaces for safety and security of women 
 
DR. AMEE YAJNIK (Gujarat): Sir, the latest NCRB data has said that there has been 
a four per cent rise in crimes against women and it is talking about the data of all the 
States where there is domestic violence on the rise, many criminal acts on the rise 
and rise in violence against women.  But, Sir, the most importan t fact is at public 
spaces, where women have a right to fr eedom and where women have access to 
enjoy the same rights as everyone, they cannot move freely as incidents of 
harassment, passing lewd remarks, modest y outraging and also committing physical 
violence are on the rise.  We have the data on rape which I would not like to give right 
now but the violence against women in public spaces has a big, big detrimental effect 
on the development of this particular nation and economy.  There have been 
directives from the hon. apex Court that th ere should be policies and there should be 
schemes where you have PCR vans continuously monitori ng activities and you have 
CCTV cameras. There should be people on the road where they can always have 
some kind of a surveillance so that these crimes don't take place in public spaces.  
Sir, there have been thes e directives for a long time now. Many States are 
implementing these directives. There is very  poor lighting on the footpaths and public 
spaces and women do not get the right pr otection. Sir, despite helplines and 
WhatsApp helpline numbers, when the victim  is harassed, she does not have access 
to these particular helplines available to her and that is why the crimes are occurring in 
public spaces all the time. Sir, I request the Government, I urge through you, that 
they should see to it that all the strict policies, strict laws are implemented and women 
feel safe and secure in public spaces.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Zero Hour mention raised by the hon.  Member, Dr. Amee Yajnik:  Shri Jose K. 
Mani (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri  P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Abir 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal), Dr. Santan u Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Vandana Chav an (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), Prof . Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar) and Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam (Chhatisgarh ) .              
 The next speaker is Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao  Bonde; demand to install centralised 
solar dryer system in the District of Amravati to dry medicinal plants.  
 
Demand to install centralised Solar Dryer System to dry medicinal plants in Amravati 
District 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्) : महोदय, अमरावती िजले मȂ िंपपरी की लताएं लगाकर, 
इस िंपपरी औषधीय पौधे की खेती लंबे समय से की जाती रही है। यह वषर् मȂ एक बार होने वाली 
फसल है। यह बेल जनवरी माह म Ȃ लगाई जाती है। इस बेल क े िलए हेटा या पांगारा सहायक वृक्ष 
लगाए जाते हȅ। कई बार इस िंपपरी क े फलȗ को िनकालने क े बाद धूप मȂ सुखाया जाता है, लेिकन 
बेमौसम बािरश से नुकसान की संभावना होती है। इस साल बेमौसम बािरश क े कारण कटी हुई 
िंपपरी गीली हो गई, उस पर फ ंगस आ गई, िजससे यह औषधीय वनÎपित, िंपपरी िकसी काम की 
नहीं रही। िंपपरी की वैली को यंतर् क े माध्यम से सुखाया जाए, तो Ģाकृ ितक खतरे स े बचा जा 
सकता है। आम तौर पर, 150 से 250 हेक्टेयर पर िंपपरी का उत्पादन होता है और इसे पूरे देश मȂ 
आयुवȃिदक औषिध क े रूप  मȂ यूिटलाइज़ िकया जात ा है। सौर ऊजार् आधािरत सुखाने की मशीन से 
इसका बचाव िकया जा सकता है। इस िंपपरी बेल क े आधार क े िलए हेटा और पांगारा वृक्ष लगाए 
जाते हȅ। इसके  पǄे को जानवरȗ क े खाǏ क े रूप  मȂ उपयोग मȂ लाया जाता है, लेिकन क ु छ सालȗ 
स
े पांगारा क े ऊपर बुरशीजन्य बीमािरयाँ आ रही हȅ, िजनकी वजह से ये पांगारा क े वृक्ष िवकिसत 
नहीं होते हȅ। उनका पिरणाम िंपपरी क े ऊपर भी होता है। िंपपरी वैली क े ऊपर भी मर बीमारी का 
Ģादुभार्व ज्यादा हो रहा है तथा वायु-जल पिरवतर्न क
े  कारण िंपपरी क े उत्पाद क े ऊपर भी बहुत 
से पिरणाम देखने को िमल रहे हȅ, इसिलए सरकार से िवनती है िक औषिध वनÎपित, िंपपरी पर 
आने वाला मर रोग, आधार वृक्ष हेटा और पांगारा पर आने वाली बुरशीजन्य बीमािरयाँ तथा वायु-
जल क े पिरवतर्न से होने वाले न
ुकसान क े िलए अिधक संशोधन िकया जाए। इसके  साथ ही, िंपपरी 
औषिध को वायु-जल क े पिरवतर्न पर आधािरत बीमा मȂ अंतभूर्त िकया जाए , तािक औषिध 
वनÎपित का उत्पादन करने वाले िकसान, जो परंपरागत िंपपरी का उत्पादन कर रहे हȅ, उन्हȂ 
संरक्षण िमल सके । इसका जो उपयोग आयुवȃद मȂ हो रहा है, वह िनरंतर रहेगा और िकसानȗ को 
होने वाले नुकसान को स
ंरिक्षत करने वाले बीमा क े माध्यम से िकसानȗ को बचाया जा सके गा। मȅ 
सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूँ िक अमरावती िजले मȂ िंपपरी औषधीय पौधȗ-फलȗ की कटाई क े बाद 
मȂ सुखाने क े िलए एक अिभनव योजना क े रूप  म
Ȃ सुखाने का सौर क ेन्दर्, सोलर डर्ायर शुरू  करȂ 
और िंपपरी हवामान आधािरत बीमा योजना मȂ अंतभूर्त करȂ, धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Zero Hour mention raised by the hon.  Member, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde:  Dr. 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
25

 
Santanu Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan ( M a h a r a s h t r a ) ,     D r .  S a s m i t  P a t r a  
(Odisha) and Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha). 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : मȅ अगले माननीय सदÎयȗ को आमंितर्त करू ँ, उससे पहले माननीय सदÎयȗ क े 
िलए एक सूचना है। Hon. Members, as you are aware, the Short Duration Discussion on 
the 'Economic Situation in the country' was not concluded yesterday. Considering the 
interest generated, it has been decided to allow the hon. Members, who wish to 
participate in the discussion, to give their names to the Table office through their party 
leader/whip by 1 p.m. today.  
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION - Contd. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The next speaker is Dr. Sikander Kumar; concern over 
insufficient supply of electricity in Pangi Valley of Himachal Pradesh. 
 
Insufficient supply of electricity in Pangi Valley of Himachal Pradesh 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार (िहमाचल Ģदेश) : माननीय  उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इस सदन 
का ध्यान िजला चÇबा, िहमाचल Ģदेश की पांगी घाटी मȂ िवǏुत आपूिर्त की कमी क े ऊपर िदलाना 
चाहता हूँ। आजादी क े 75 वषर् बीत जाने क े बाद भी पांगी घाटी जनजातीय क्षेतर् मȂ िवǏुत की कमी 
है। घरȗ की जनसंख्या करीब 25 
हजार है तथा िवǏुत आपूिर्त 950 िकलोवाट है, जबिक घाटी की 
जरूरत लगभग 11-12 मेगावाट की है।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
उपरोƪ 950 िकलोवाट भी करीब 12 वषर् पहले बहाल की गई थी, ल
ेिकन आज िदन तक 
इस संदभर् मȂ कोई सकारात्मक पहल नहीं की गई है। साच-पास होकर 33 िकलोवाट  लाइन, 
िजसका क ु छ खंड भूिमगत Îवीकृ त था, लेिकन करीब आठ वषș से उपरोƪ कायर् ब ंद पड़ा है। 
िवÌवÎत सूतर्ȗ से मालूम हुआ है िक उƪ 33 िकलोवाट पर करीब 35 करोड़ खचर् हो गए, लेिकन न 
तो संबंिधत ठेक ेदार को ÅलैकिलÎट िकया गया है और न ही आज तक उƪ 33 िकलोवाट को पुन: 
आरंभ िकया जा सका है। िवǏुत बोडर् िबÊकु ल मौन है। घाटी मȂ करीब आठ नाले तथा चंदर्भागा नदी 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
बहती है। उƪ नदी-नालȗ का दोहन िकया जा सकता है।  अगर एक नाले पर कहीं भी पावर हाउस 
का िनमार्ण िकया जाता है, तो िवǏुत की समÎया हल हो जाएगी।   
अत: मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूँ िक वह इस समÎया की ओर ध्यान 
दे। ...(समय की घंट
ी)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Sikander  Kumar (Himachal Pradesh) Dr. Santanu 
Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra). 
 
 
12.00 Noon 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
Vulnerable Tribes 
 
*31. SHRI RAKESH SINHA: Will the Minister of TRIBAL AFFAIRS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that a number of vulnerable tribes in general, and 
Meghalaya in particular,are facing problem of not only cultural identity but also 
economic exclusion due to their ownpsychological reasons; 
(b) if so, the steps taken to protect their identity and existence; 
(c) the reasons for continuously decreasing population of these tribes; and 
(d) whether there are any stat istics to show the number of  children in these tribes 
in the age group of zero to twelve (0-12), if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS (SHRI ARJUN MUNDA): (a) to (d) A statement 
is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) There are 75 groups of most vulnerable sections amongst the tribal 
communities who are classified as the Partic ularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) 
spread over 18 States and theUnion Territory of Andama n & Nicobar Islands. There 
are no such identified PVTGs in State of Meghalaya. 
For cultural preservation and promotion of tribes including PVTGs, Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs(MoTA) is administrating the scheme of “ Support of Tribal Research 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
27

 
Institute” under whichfinancial assistance is pr ovided to the Stat e Tribal Research 
Institutes (TRIs) for implementing vari ous projects including preservation and 
promotion of their art, culture, practices and traditions based on the annual proposals 
submitted by the States/UT. 
 In so far as socio-economic develo pment of PVTGs, this Ministry is 
implementing the Scheme of “ Development of PVTGs ” with the objective of overall 
socio-economic development and welfare of these most vulnerable sections among 
tribal people. Funds are provided to the concerned StateGovernment / UT on the 
basis of their proposals for Conservation cum Development (CCD) plans. Besides 
development projects are undertaken by the States out of Tribal Sub-Plan funds. 
Government has recently launched Pradha n Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha 
Abhiyan (PMJANMAN)that aims to saturate PVTG households and habitations with 
basic facilities such as safe housing, clean drinking water and sanitation, improved 
access to education, health andnutrition , road and telecom connectivity, and 
sustainable livelihood opportunities. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs is also implementing a flagship scheme “Eklavya Model 
Residential School (EMRS)”  to provide quality education to ST Students from class 
6th to 12th. 5% seats in each of the EMRSs is reserved for PVTG students. 
In the scheme of National Fellowship, 25 sl ots out of 750 slots are reserved for PVTG 
students.Under National Overseas Scholarship for ST students, 3 slots out of 20 slots 
are reserved for PVTG candidate. 
 
(c) and (d) As the enumeration of trib es other than STs has not been done 
separately in any of the decadal Census es since 1951 Census, the population 
figure/trend for the PVTGs communities as a whole is not available centrally. 
However, information, as provided by the Of fice of Registrar General of India, on the 
State-wise decadal population for PVTGs does not show decreasing population of 
these tribes. Further, such statistics to sh ow the number of child ren in these tribes 
inthe age group of zero to twelve (0-12) are not available. 
 
Ǜी राके श िसन्हा :  सभापित महोदय, जो vulnerable tribes हȅ, जो िवशेष रूप  से कमजोर 
जनजाितयाँ हȅ, उनकी िÎथित 1947 से लगातार कमजोर होती गई है, लेिकन 2014 क
 े  बाद से 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने उन पर िवशेष ध्यान िदया और ' Ǜी  Ģधानमंतर्ी जनमन 
योजना' लागू की गई।  चूंिक इस योजना को 75 िवशेष रूप  से कमजोर टर्ाइÅस क े िलए लागू िकया 
गया है, िविभन्न मंतर्ालयȗ क े ǎारा इसे लागू िकया जाता है, उसका कन्वजȄस होता है, तो मȅ 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चाहता ह
ूँ िक इसमȂ जनजातीय मंतर्ालय क्या कर रहा है? 
 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा : माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय, राके श िसन्हा जी बहुत महत्वपूणर् 
ĢÌन इस सदन मȂ लाए हȅ।  माननीय सांसद, राके श िसन्हा जी शोध कायर् क े साथ काफी 
जनजातीय क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ कायर् करने क े िलए लगातार तत्पर रहते हȅ और अभी भी मेघालय क े कȗगथȗग 
(सȂग खासी), मौमांग जैसे कई गाँव, जहाँ टर्ाइबल डेवलपमȂट क े िलए कायर् करना आवÌय
क है, 
उन्हȂ गोद लेकर काम करते हȅ।   
 महोदय, यह बात सही है िक देश मȂ यह पहला अवसर है जब माननीय Ģधान म ंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् 
भाई मोदी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एक संवेदनशील सरकार, एक संवेदनशील Ëयिƪत्व और एक संवेदनशील 
कायर्कर्म का सूतर्ण करने की एक बृहद कायर्योजना तैयार की गई है। इस समय देश मȂ जो 
महामिहम राÍटर्पित महोदया हȅ, इसमȂ उनकी भी काफी संव
ेदनशील पृÍठभूिम इस दृिÍट से रही है, 
क्यȗिक राÍटर्पित महोदया देश क े सवȘच्च नागिरक क े पद पर आसीन होने क े बाद लगातार देश 
क े अंदर िविभन्न राज्यȗ म
Ȃ, जहाँ भी उनका कायर्कर्म बना, वहाँ समय िनकालकर, Ģमुखता क े 
साथ उन वगș को, िजन्हȂ देश ने पीवीटीजी, यानी पािर्टक ुलरली वलनरेबल टर्ाइबल गर्ुप क े रूप  मȂ 
जाना है, वैसे लोगȗ क े साथ िमलकर इस बात की भी जानकारी ली और उनके  बारे म Ȃ िचन्ता 
जािहर की।  एक संवेदनशील Ģधान मंतर्ी होने क े नाते उन्हȗने इस देश मȂ पहली बार Ģधानमंतर्ी 
जनमन, यानी Ģधानमंतर्ी जनजाित आिदवासी न्याय महाअिभयान को 24,000 करोड़ से अिधक 
की धनरािश का Ģावधान करते हुए इसी िवǄीय वषर् से Ģारंभ िकया है। 
 सभापित महोदय, मȅ थोड़ी सी इसकी पृÍठभूिम म
Ȃ जाना चाहता हूँ और सदन को अवगत 
कराना चाहता हूँ िक चौथी पंचवषीर्य योजना क े दौरान 1971-72 मȂ Ǜी एस.सी. दुबे की अध्यक्षता 
मȂ एक िवशेषज्ञ सिमित बनी थी और बाद मȂ रांची यूिनविर्सटी क े एंथर्ोपोलोजी क े बहुत ही Ģख्यात 
Ģोफे सर, एल.पी. िवǏाथीर् की अध्यक्षता मȂ एक टाÎक फोसर् का गठन िकया गया।  पाँचवीं 
पंचवषीर्य योजना म
Ȃ इस बात को देखा गया िक िजस तरीके  से देश की पंचवषीर्य योजनाएँ चल 
रही हȅ और िजस तरीके  से Ģाथिमकताएँ तय हो रही हȅ, उसमȂ समÎत देश क े जनजाित क्षेतर् िपछड़ 
रहे हȅ।  उनके  िपछड़ने क
े  क ु छ कारण इस तरीके  से हȅ िक सुदूरवतीर् क्षेतर्, पहाड़ी एिरया मȂ इन का 
िनवास तथा इनका जो डेमोगर्ािफक पैटनर् है, वह िबÊकु ल अलग है।  दूसरा, उन िदनȗ जो सǄा मȂ 
रहे, उन्हȗने अपनी Ģाथिमकता को ज्यादा तय िकया, बजाय उन लोगȗ की, िजनको ज्यादा 
आवÌयकता थी। इसिलए उस समय वषर् 1974-75 मȂ एक नीित िनधार्िरत की गई िक राज्य और 
सȂटर भी टर्ाइबल सब-Ãलान एिरया (टीएसपी) क
े  आधार पर रािश आवंिटत करते हुए सुिनिÌचत 
करेगा, लेिकन उसमȂ भी इस बात का ध्यान नहीं रखा जा सका। इस बात क े िलए उसमȂ मूÊयांकन 
िकया गया, सब चीज़Ȃ देखी गईं, एक आबादी िनधार्िरत की गई, िजनमȂ 500 क े टोले हȗगे, बÎती
 
होगी, 300 लोगȗ की बÎती होगी, ऐसे आबादी क्षेतर्, जो टर्ाइबल हȗगे, सामान्य क्षेतर् से अलग हȗगे, 
उनको Ģाथिमकता दी जाएग
ी। मȅ इस सदन मȂ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक आज िजन लोगȗ को 
लÑय बनाकर 'पीएम जनमन योजना' क े तहत काम िकया जा रहा है, उसमȂ 300 या 100 से भी 
कम, यानी जो िपछले 75 वषș मȂ हमेशा िपछड़ते रहे, िजनकी आबादी एक-एक टोले मȂ, PVTG 
टोले म
Ȃ 100 से भी कम है, अंडमान-िनकोबार से लेकर देश क े िविभन्न राज्यȗ क े 75 PVTG गर्ुÃस 
को इस योजना मȂ सिÇमिलत करते हुए यह सुिनिÌचत िकया गया है िक सामूिहक रूप  से हमारे जो 
मंतर्ालय हȅ, 9 मंतर्ालयȗ क े माध्यम से उनके  िलए मानदंडȗ को relax करते हुए योजनाबǉ तरीके  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
29

 
से अमृतकाल मȂ ऐसे गांवȗ तक पहुंचȂ, जहां आज़ादी क े बाद कभी देश की कोई ËयवÎथा नहीं पहुंच 
पाई।  
 महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक जैसे गर्ामीण िवकास क े माध्यम से देश मȂ ' Ģधानमंतर्ी 
आवास योजना' चल रही है, इन समुदायȗ क े  िलए 'Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना' मȂ लागत बढ़ाई गई 
है, पूणर् रूप  से उन गांवȗ को आच्छािदत करना सुिनिÌचत िकया गया और 4 लाख, 90 हज़ार नए 
आवास PVTG समुदाय क े पिरवारȗ को िदए जाएंगे।  
इसी तरह इन गांवȗ क े िलए 1 हज़ार  मोबाइल हैÊथ वैन्स ĢारÇभ की जाएंगी। एजुक े शन 
िडपाटर्मȂट की तरफ से इन पिरवारȗ क े बच्चȗ क े िलए 500 नए  छातर्ावास देकर िशक्षा मȂ नए 
अवसर Ģदान करने का काम िकया जाएगा। इसी तरह से िजन गांवȗ मȂ बहुत कम आबादी है, वहां 
2,500 नए आंगनवाड़ी क Ȃ दर् खोले जाएंगे। इसके  साथ ही हमारे मंतर्ालय क े ǎारा वन-धन क Ȃ दर् क े 
माध्यम से रोज़गारोन्मुखी कायर्कर्म क े िलए 500 क Ȃ दर् खोले जाएंगे। टेलीकॉम िडपाटर्मȂट क े माध्यम 
से 3,000 गा ंवȗ मȂ Îपेशल तरीके  से नए टावर लगाए जाएंगे, तािक वे गांव, जो इन सारी चीज़ȗ से 
अछू ते रहे हȅ, उन्हȂ सारी सुिवधाएं उपलÅध हȗ। इस Ģकार ' पीएम जनमन
 योजना' यानी ' पीएम 
जनजाित आिदवा
सी न्याय महाअिभयान' को अमृतकाल मȂ सफल िकया जाएगा। 
 
Ǜी राके श िसन्हा : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आÌचयर् मȂ हूं िक टर्ाइबल इÌयु पर िवपक्ष क्यȗ नहीं सुनना 
चाहता है?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please.     
 
Ǜी राके श िसन्हा : महोदय, ये जो 75 कमज़ोर  जनजातीय समुदाय हȅ, इनका अिÎतत्व लगभ ग 
िमट जाता, यिद वषर् 2014 मȂ मोदी जी की सरकार नहीं बनती। मेरा दूसरा सिÃलमȂटरी ĢÌन है िक 
कई सȂटर्ली Îपॉन्सडर् ÎकीÇस चल रही हȅ, जो राज्य सरकारȗ क े साथ चल रही हȅ, तो जनजातीय 
मंतर्ालय िकस Ģकार से राज्य सरकारȗ क े साथ समन्वय करते हुए इन योजनाओं को लागू कर 
रहा है?  
 
Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा : महोदय, य
े सभी सȂटर्ली Îपॉन्सडर् योजनाएं चल रही हȅ और सभी राज्यȗ को इनमȂ 
सुिनिÌचत िकया गया है। मȅ इस सदन मȂ यह बताना चाहता हूं  वषर् 201 1 मȂ जनगणना क े जो 
आंकड़े आए, उसमȂ पाया गया िक वषर् 2001 क े मुकाबले बहुत सारे PVTG समुदायȗ की जनसंख्या 
मȂ कमी आई है। इसिलए सभी मुख्य मंितर्यȗ को संवेदनशीलता क े साथ इस बात का ध्यान रखने क े 
िलए आगर्ह िकया गया िक इन समुदायȗ की संख्या मȂ जो िगरावट आई है, उस पर शोध और खोज 
करȂ। टीआरआई, जो टर्ाइबल िरसचर् इ
ंिÎटǷूट है, उसको हमने अलग से इसका टाÎक भी िदया 
है िक वह इन सारी चीज़ȗ पर शोध करे।  क ु छ जगहȗ पर द ेखा गया है िक पलायन हुआ है और 
क ु छ जगहȗ पर मृत्यु दर ज्यादा है। आज मȅने िजन योजनाओं का उÊलेख िकया, उन योजनाओं क े 
पीछे यह उǈेÌय है िक यिद हम एक हज़ार हेÊथ मोबाइ ल वैन्स Ģारंभ कर रहे हȅ, तो इसके  पीछे 
यही कारण है िक हम उनको सही तरीके  से ÎवाÎथ्य की सुिवधा िदलाएं और 100 परसȂट उनका 
आयुÍमान भारत का काडर् बने तथा उनको सारी सुिवधाएं उपलÅध हȗ।  
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
  
SHRI AMAR PATNAIK: Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to put this question to the hon. 
Minister.  What is the reason behind merging two major and vastly different central 
initiatives, that is, the Development Acti on Plan for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes Components into the Prime Minister’s Social Inclusion Mission for 
Welfare of SCs and STs?  I believe, the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes 
has also taken some kind of an objection to  this because they think that the problems 
of the Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes are completely different.   
 
Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा : महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जो ĢÌन पूछा है, मȅ यह ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूं िक 
शायद उनको इस बारे मȂ पूरी सूचना ĢाÃत नहीं हुई है।  मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक टर्ाइबल अफे यसर् 
िमिनÎटर्ी का गठन ही इसिल
ए िकया गया है िक सारे डेवलपमȂट Ãलान्स को हम फोकÎड वे मȂ 
टर्ाइबल एिरया और टर्ाइबÊस क े िलए बनाएं। जो एसटी क ंपोनȂट होता है, शैǹूÊड टर्ाइब क ंपोनȂट 
रािश का आवंटन होता है, उसमȂ इस देश क े िलए िविभन्न योजनाओं क े माध्यम से 1 लाख, 15 
हजार करोड़ रुपय े की ËयवÎथा की गई है।   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Sir, since the question pertains to the tribal communities, 
which are vulnerable, especia lly in the State of Meghalaya, prot
ection of vulnerable 
languages is also a big constituent of prot ecting tribal communities.  Through you, I 
would like to ask the hon. Minister as to wh at the current status of including the Garo 
and Khasi languages of Meghalaya in the Eigh th Schedule of the Constitution of India 
is.  And, by when does the Government plan to bring Garo and Khasi languages into 
the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think, it does not concern the hon. Minister. You can reword your 
question.  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Since we are asking about the tribes of  Meghalaya and we 
are asking about the tribal population, the protection of language ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, the hon. Minister can respond only to those in his 
jurisdiction.  ...(Interruptions)... You, as very informed  young Member, are fully 
aware of the mechanism of inclusion of languages.  I would give you an opportunity to 
put another question.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
31

 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE :  But, they have received a proposal.  ...(Interruptions)...  
They have received a proposal from the Government of Meghalaya as recently as two 
months ago.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Alright.  Hon. Minister, have you anything to add on this?  
 
Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा : सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय जो जानना चाहते हȅ, उसके  बारे मȂ मȅ आपको 
बताना चाहता हूं िक देश मȂ 700 से  अिधक टर्ाइबल गर्ुÃस हȅ।  टर्ाइबÊस की क्वािलटी यह है िक 
उनमȂ बहुत सारी भाषाएं िवǏमान हȅ।  देश भर मȂ सभी क्षेतर्ȗ की अलग-अलग भाषाएं हȅ।  मȅ सदन 
को यह सूचना देना चाहता हूं िक हमारी जो नई िशक्षा नीित 2020 बनी है, हम उस िशक्षा नीित मȂ 
क्षेतर्ीय भाषाओं को, Îथानीय भाषाओं को अिधक से अिधक Ģोटेक्ट कर सकȂ, मान्यता दे सकȂ और 
पहचान देकर, जो परंपरागत रूप  से उनकी संÎकृ ित बनी हुई है, वह बनी रह सके , हमने इसको 
सुिनिÌचत िकया
 है।  वे आठवीं अनुसूची क े बारे मȂ कह रहे हȅ।  मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूं िक आठवीं 
अनुसूची की एक अलग Ģिवि
ध है, अलग ËयवÎथा है और उसमȂ आबादी वगैरह, सारी चीजȗ को 
ध्यान मȂ रखकर देश मȂ िवचार िकया जाता है।  िकसी एक क्षेतर् मȂ अगर हम 700 टर्ाइबÊस क े बारे मȂ 
िंचता करȂगे, तो उसमȂ इन सारे िवषयȗ को नीितगत रूप  से देखना पड़ेगा िक इसमȂ क्या-क्या 
मेिरट्स, िडमेिरट्स या क्या complications हȅ। वह एक
 क्षेतर् को लेकर नहीं कर सकते, बिÊक पूरे 
देश को देखकर इस पर फ ैसला िलया जाएगा।   
 
DR. SASMIT PATR
A:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, my special interest in this question stems 
from the fact that my State of Odisha has the largest number of PVTGs, that is, 13.  
The hon. Minister in his reply has rightly mentioned that the population figures of 
PVTG communities as a whole are not av ailable centrally, and from 1951, the 
enumeration has not been done.  But the PVTG definition itself says that the 
population reduction of specific tribal groups led to them becoming PVTGs.  
Therefore, my specific question would be:  Considering the sensitivity of enumeration 
for PVTGs to understand whether they are growing or decreasing, I would like to 
know whether the hon. Minister would co nsider taking a targetted census or 
enumeration for only these 75 PVTG groups, s o  t h a t  w e  w o u l d  b e  a b l e  t o  h a v e  a  
central database to find out whether they  are increasing in numbers or they are 
decreasing, the patterns of migration and thereby these programmes would be 
helpful.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Question No. 32...   Now, hon. Minister.  
 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा :  सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय जो जानना चाहते हȅ, उसके  बारे मȂ मȅ बताना 
चाहता हूं िक यह जो कायर्कर्म है, इसमȂ पोटर्ल बनाया गया है, िजसमȂ इनकी सारी इन्फॉमȃशन 
डाली जाएगी।  माननीय सदÎय भी उसको देख सकते हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I read out Q. No. 32 because Shri Saket Gokhale had raised a good 
issue but from the wrong Minister.  His jurisdicti on is not
 there.   I am sure he will find 
a way out to raise this issue comprehensively at a proper forum as per rules.  
 Question No.32. 
 
Reservation of seats for women in PRI 
 
*32. SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH: Will the Minister of PANCHAYATI RAJ be pleased to 
state:  
(a) the percentage of Panchayati Raj se ats reserved for women which are vacant, 
in States with 50% reservation for women, for the fiscal 2019 to 2022, State-
wise;  
(b) the number of Elected OBC Women Re presentatives in the PRI from 2019 to 
2022;  
(c) whether there has been a dip in the number of Elected Women 
Representatives in PRIs, post-COVID;  
(d) if so, details thereof, State-wise; and  
(e) whether Government has taken any steps apart from 1/3 reservation of seats to 
improve participation of women in PRIs , and to address the issue of token 
representation, if so, details thereof and if not, reasons therefor?  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ (SHRI KAPIL 
MORESHWAR PATIL): (a) to (e) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
 (a) to (d) Article 243D of the Constitution  of India provides not less than one-third 
reservation for women in Panchayati Raj Inst itutions (PRIs). However, 21 States and 
2 Union Territories have gone even furthe r and have made provisions, in their 
respective State Panchayati Raj Acts/Rules , for 50% reservation for women in PRIs. 
Reservation for women in PRIs is to be provided through the respective State 
Panchayati Raj Acts. Since this subject is in the purview of  States, details in respect 
of PRIs like percentage of seats vacant or caste-based data of elected 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
33

 
representatives or any analysis of dip in the number of elected women representatives 
post-COVID, are not maintained by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.  
Further, as the percentage of women representatives in Panchayats is 
constitutionally and statutorily determined, there seems to be no reason for any kind 
of reduction in the number of elected women representatives in PRIs, post-COVID.  
 
(e) Government has been encouraging in creased involvement of women in the 
functioning of Panchayats through active pa rticipation in the Gram Sabha meetings 
for preparation of Gram Panchayat Deve lopment Plans and various schemes being 
implemented by the Panchayats. This Minist ry has issued advisories to States to 
facilitate holding of separate Ward Sabha and Mahila Sabha meetings prior to Gram 
Sabha meetings. Advisories have also be en issued to States for enhancing the 
presence and participation of women in  Gram Sabha and Panchayat meetings, 
allocation of Panchayat funds for women centric activities, combating the evil of 
women trafficking, female foeticide, child marriage etc.  
 
SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH : Respected Chairman, Sir, now the Supreme Court of 
India has given a judgement that SC/ST/OBC reservation should not cross the limit of 
50 per cent.   In response to this judgement, in almost all States, the OBC reservation 
was decreased from 34 to 18 to 20 per cen t.   But the Central Government has not 
taken any steps to increase the reservation as per the population of the OBCs.  The 
Andhra Pradesh and the Telangana Government  also lowered the reservation from 34 
per cent to 22 per cent on the basis of the Supreme Court judg ement.  But, the 
Andhra Pradesh Government has given an additional 20 per cent on behalf of the 
Party.  But, no other State in India has in creased the reservation on behalf of their 
parties.  The only permanent answer to this  matter is this. There is a need to amend 
the Constitution to provide population-based reservation.   At the time of 73
rd and 74th 
Amendments to the Constitution, some Stat es,  particularly, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand 
and Chhattisgarh were not having  OBC list.   Now, all the States are having  the OBC 
list.  So, I request the Government to am end the Constitution and provide the OBC 
reservation on the basis of population in local body elections.  
 
Ǜी किपल मोरेǚर पाटील :  सभापित महोदय, संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 243(घ) क े तहत आरक्षण 
िदया गया है।  एक-ितहाई से कम आरक्षण न हो, इसमȂ ऐसा Ģावधान है, लेिकन 21 राज्य ऐसे हȅ, 
िजन्हȗने िनणर्य िकया है िक उन्हȗने 50 Ģितशत तक आरक्षण को बढ़ाया है।  सÇमाननीय सदÎय ने 
संिवधान मȂ संशोधन करके  ओबीसी का आरक्षण बढ़ाने क े बारे मȂ कहा है।  िफलहाल इस मंतर्ालय 
क े माध्यम से इस तरह का कोई भी ĢÎताव हमारे िवचाराधीन नह
ीं है।  
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Second supplementary; hon. Member. 
 
SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH: Sir, there is a ceiling or cap for educational and 
employment reservation.  It is purely politi cal reservation.  Why is the Government not 
taking any steps for population-based reservation in local body elections? There is no 
political reservation.... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have made your point.  Hon. Minister.     
 
Ǜी किपल मोरेǚर पाटील : सभापित महोदय, मिहलाओं को  50 Ģितशत का आरक्षण है और 
उसी क े तहत ओबीसी को िकतना आरक्षण िमले, एस.सी./एस.टी. को िकतना आरक्षण िमले, 
इसी मȂ इसका Ģावधान है।  अभी माननीय सदÎय ने पूछा है और इसके  बारे मȂ मȅने पहले भी कहा है 
िक ऐसा कोई भी ĢÎताव सरकार क े िवचाराधीन नहीं है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Third supplementary; Mr.
 P. Wilson.  
 
SHRI P. WILSON : Mr.Chairman, Sir, so far as OBC reservations in local bodies are 
concerned, the Supreme Court says, ‘Unle ss you have an empirical data, you can’t 
give reservation.’  Is it not against Consti tution?  What steps have you taken to see 
that the Constittuion is amended and the rese rvation to OBCs in local bodies is given 
without any hassle or without such requir ement? Number two, why don’t you amend 
Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution and provide reservations for the Other Backward 
Classes in accordance with their population?   
 
Ǜी किपल मोरेǚर पाटील : सभापित महोदय, ओबीसी का आरक्षण बढ़ाने का Ģावधान करने की 
िजÇमेदारी राज्य सरकारȗ की है। राज्य सरकार को अपने Îतर पर ओबीसी का आरक्षण िकतना 
रखना ह
ै, इसका क ेन्दर् सरकार से कोई संबंध नहीं है। आिर्टकल 243 ( घ) क े तहत आरक्षण का 
जो Ģावधान ĢÎतािवत है, उसी क े तहत क ेन्दर् सरकार िनणर्य करती है। जैसे महाराÍटर् मȂ अभी जो 
इÌयू हुआ, कहीं लोकल बॉडीज़ क े इलेक्शन ओबीसी क
े  आरक्षण क े कारण नहीं हुए हȅ, क्यȗिक 
सुĢीम कोटर् ने कहा है िक जब तक empirical  data नहीं िमलता, तब तक हम 50 Ģितशत क े 
ऊपर आरक्षण देने मȂ सहमित नहीं द
े सकते। इसीिलए वहां पर भी चुनाव नहीं हुआ है। िनिÌचत 
तौर पर इस सÅजेक्ट मȂ राज्य सरकार अपने Îतर पर िनणर्य करे। ...(Ëयवधान)… 
 
SHRI P. WILSON: Why don’t you amend the Constitution? ...(Interruptions)... 
  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
35

 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Wilson, you are a dist inguished senior advocate. If you go 
through constitutional prescriptions, in Parts 9 and 9A, you w ill find enough space 
also available to the States. Come with a suggestion. I am open to having a 
discusison on this.  Avail the rules. ...(Interruptions)... Shri Neeraj Dangi; the fourth 
supplementary.  
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूं िक 
गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ पंचायती राज सीटȗ पर मिहलाओं का Ģितिनिधत्व  और उनकी भागीदारी बढ़ाने क े 
िलए मंतर्ालय ǎारा िकए गए Ģयासȗ और कायर्कर्मȗ का िववरण क्या है एवं िपछले पांच वषș क े 
दौरान देश मȂ पंचायतȗ क े िलए हुए चुनावȗ  मȂ मिहला Ģितिनिधत्व का राज्यवार Åयौरा क्या है?  
 
Ǜी किपल मो
रेǚर पाटील : सभापित महोदय, मȅने जैसा पहले भी कहा है िक देश मȂ ऐसे 21 राज्य 
हȅ, िजन्हȗने मिहलाओं को 50 Ģितशत आरक्षण िदया है। मिहलाओं की भागीदारी बढ़ाने क े िलए 
जब से इस देश मȂ मोदी जी की सरका
र आई है, तब से लेकर आज तक मंतर्ालय क े माध्यम से कई 
Ģयास िकए गए हȅ। आज की तार
ीख मȂ मȅ बताऊं गा तो राज्य की अलग-अलग जगहȗ पर हम लोगȗ 
ने मिहलाओं को सक्षम करने क े िलए, मिहलाओं की कांģ Ȃ स करके , वे जैसे ही चुनकर आती हȅ, 
उनके  िलए छह महीने क े अंदर टर्ेिंनग देने का Ģावधान िकया है। आज हमारी बहनȂ इतनी सक्षम हो 
गई हȅ िक जब हमने िवज्ञान भवन मȂ आइकॉिनक वीक का सेिलĤेशन िकया था, तो वहां पर 
लगभग 1,500 साथी आए थे, उनमȂ से 800 हमारी बहनȂ थीं। उन्हȗने अपने िवचार वहां पर रखे थे। 
म
ȅ भी एक सरपंच रह चुका हूं। मुझे गांव मȂ भाषण करने क े िलए भी िहÇमत नहीं होती थी। लेिकन 
आज हमारी बहनȂ इतनी सक्षम हुई हȅ िक िवज्ञान भवन मȂ आकर वे अपने अनुभव श ेयर करती हȅ 
और उन्हȗने अपने गांव का िवकास िकस तरह से िकया है, उसके  बारे मȂ बताती हȅ। यह जो 
सक्षमता उनमȂ आई है, उसके  िलए िनिÌचत तौर पर हमारे मंतर्ालय ने मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ जो 
Ģयास िकए हȅ, उसी क े कारण आई है। यह मȅ खाली राजनीितक तौर पर नहीं बता रहा ह
ूं, लेिकन 
जो हमारी िनवार्िचत बहनȂ हȅ, उनको आिर्थक दृिÍटकोण से सक्षम करने क े िलए 7,113 Åलॉक्स मȂ 
लगभग 90 लाख  सेÊफ हेÊप गर्ुÃस काम कर रहे हȅ। उसमȂ से 9 करोड़, 90 लाख
 पिरवारȗ को 
रोज़गार से जोड़ने का काम मिहलाओं को सक्षम करने की वजह से संभव हुआ है। इसी तरह से 
आज़ादी क े अमृत महोत्सव मȂ मिहला सरपंचȗ का जो योगदान ह ै, वह िनिÌचत तौर पर एक बहुत 
बड़ा योगदान है। 17 अĢैल, 2023 को हमारी सÇमाननीय महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी, जो िक एक 
मिहला हȅ,  उनके  हाथȗ से िवज्ञान भवन मȂ मिहला सरपंचȗ को पुरÎकार Ģदान िकए गए - वहाँ 
सभी सरपंचȗ को पुरÎकार िदए गए थे और िजन 42 लोगȗ को पुरÎकार िदए गए थे, उनमȂ से 18 
हमारी मिहला सरपंच थीं। यह हमारे िलए बहुत ही गौरव की बात है। इसी तरह से मिहलाओं को 
सक्षम करने क े िलए मंतर्ालय क े अलग-अलग तरीके  से, अलग -अलग राज्यȗ मȂ, अलग-अलग 
सÅजेक्ट थे। जैसे sustainable development goal है, वह अचीव करने क े िलए उन्हȂ सक्षम करने 
क े िलए मंतर्ालय का Ģयास चालू है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary - Shrimati Vandana Chavan. 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRIMATI VANDANA CHAVAN:  Sir, my original question  was regarding training, but 
my colleague has already asked it.  Let me ask another question.  We talk a lot about 
people's participation in local self- governance.  Talking especially about Gram 
Sabhas, it is expected that a women's Gram Sabha should specially be organized.  It 
is seen that at several places that doesn't happen.  So, what are the efforts that the 
Government is making to make sure that not just elected representatives, but women 
as an entity are actually made to particip ate in the governance process?  Are self-
help groups being considered for this? 
 
Ǜी किपल मोरेǚर पाटील :  सभापित महोदय, सÇमाननीय सदÎया ने  बहुत अच्छा सवाल पूछा 
है। इसमȂ मिहलाओं की जन भागीदारी इतनी बढ़ गई है िक कहीं-कहीं तो राज्यȗ ने कानून भी 
बनाए हȅ। कई जगहȗ पर तो उनकी फ ैिमली क े लोग इसमȂ इंटर्Îट लेकर हÎतक्षेप करते थे, लेिकन 
अब हमारी बहनȂ बहुत सक्षम हो गई हȅ। मȅ िजÇमेदारी क े साथ कहता
 हूं िक आगे आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ 
उन्हȂ टर्ेिंनग देने की भी आवÌयकता नहीं पड़ेगी। अभी हम लोगȗ ने हमारे मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह 
अिनवायर् कर िदया है िक साल मȂ 6 गर्ाम सभाएं हȗ और उनमȂ से मिहलाओं की एक Îपेशल गर्ाम 
सभा हो। मिहलाओं को सक्षम करने क
े  िलए और इसमȂ मिहलाओं की जन भागीदारी बढ़े - इसके  
िलए मंतर्ालय ने यह कदम उठाया है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी तो सरपंच रह चुक े हȅ। मȅ सदन मȂ बताना चाहूंगा िक अब बड़ा 
बदलाव आया है। जब शुरुआत  हुई थी, तो कमेटी मȂ पूछते थे िक आप कौन हȅ और वह Ëयिƪ 
कहता था िक मȅ सरपंचपित हूं, मȅ Ģधानपित हूं, मȅ िजला Ģमुखपित हूं। That thing is over now. 
Now,next Question. Q.No.33. 
 
Foreign Universities Campuses in the country 
 
*33. DR. K. LAXMAN: Will the Minister of EDUCATION be pleased to state:  
(a) whether Government has any proposal to open campuses of Foreign 
Universities in the country;  
(b) if so, the details thereof; and  
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?  
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN):  (a) to (c) A 
statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) Internationalization of education is one of the key priorities under the  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
37

 
National Education Policy (NEP) 2020. To promote internationalization, NEP 2020 
states that high performing Indian universities will be encouraged to set up campuses 
in countries abroad, and similarly, top unive rsities in the world will be facilitated to 
operate in India.  
The Hon’ble Finance Minister in the Union Budget 2022-23 announced that 
world-class Foreign Universities and Institutions will be allowed in the Gujarat 
International Finance Tech-City (GIFT City) to offer courses in Financial 
Management, FinTech, Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics free from 
domestic regulations, except those by International Financial Services Centres 
Authority (IFSCA). Foreign Universities an d Institutions can set up their Branch 
Campuses in GIFT City as per the criter ia and standards laid down in the IFSCA 
(Setting up and Operation of Internationa l Branch Campuses and Offshore Education 
Centres) Regulations, 2022. The Regulations is available on the website of IFSCA. 
Deakin University and University of Wo llongong from Australia have received in-
principle approval from IFSCA to establish their campus in GIFT City.  
The University Grants Commission (UGC) has also issued enabling 
Regulations to facilitate the establishment of  campuses of Foreign Higher Institutions 
(FHEIs) in India. The UGC (Setting up and Operation of Campuses of Foreign Higher 
Educational Institutions in India) Regu lations 2023 have been issued on 08.11.2023. 
The Regulations is available on the webs ite of UGC. Eligible Foreign Higher 
Educational Institutions desiring to set up  their campuses in In dia may apply on the 
Registration Portal https://fhei.ugc.ac.in. The portal was opened on 09.11.2023 after 
the gazette notification of the regulations.  
 
DR. K. LAXMAN :  Sir, at the outset, I would like to welcome the decision of the 
Government to internationalize education as per NEP 2020.  Many of our students opt 
to go overseas to seek high quality educat ion.  We know about the financial burden 
that it puts on parents.  Later, students  never come back.  This causes huge loss to 
the Indian economy as also brain drain.  Bu t, what would be the challenges faced in 
setting up foreign universities because some  feel it will harm the Indian education 
system and also result in the commercia lization of education?  What are the 
preventive steps taken by the Government to ensure that the fee structure as also the 
admission process is reasonable and transparent? 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Hon. Chairman, Sir, ta lking about the National 
Education Policy 2020, the Expert Group has recommended internationalization of our 
education system, as rightly pointed out by the hon. Member.  More foreign students 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
should come to India and more Indian st udents should get exposure to global 
institutions. Today, our students are compelled to go outside. A lot of foreign 
students are coming to India. To accelerat e that, to make it manifold, NEP has 
recommended internationalization of education. Now foreign institutions will come to 
India.  Already two of them have started their process to open their campuses in the 
GIFT City of Gujarat.  In the last Budget  speech, hon. Finance Minister invited global 
institutions. Two of them have turned up. Recently, the University Grants 
Commission, in the last month only, has come out with a new set of regulations to 
invite more foreign institutions.  Now the port al is open and a lot of quality institutions 
are getting registered in that portal.  Hon.  Member has raised two pertinent issues.  
One is regarding maintaining the quality of education and the second is regarding the 
fee structure.  These two things are envisioned in the new regulation.  Today, we 
have to spend billions of dollars on our students who are going out of country.  Now 
there will be global standards and they will tie up with the local university also.  We are 
inviting foreign universities with dual degree and tuning of courses.  The UGC will have 
a Committee to scrutinise the applications to look into the minimum regulatory 
mechanism because we have to  give autonomy to institut ions.  Gradually, there is a 
consensus among the academia and the policy makers of our country that we have to 
give autonomy to academia and institutions so that more institutions of global 
standards can come.  The Government of India is in the right direction to invite them.  
I am happy to inform this august House, through you, that two of our IITs are going to 
open their overseas campuses.  One is IIT , Delhi which is opening its campus in Abu 
Dhabi and the other one is IIT, Chennai whic h is opening its campus in Zanzibar to 
look after the needs of Af rican countries. This is not going to be a one-way 
mechanism. With international mechanism, this is going to be a two-way mechanism. 
   
DR. K. LAXMAN: Is there any proposal by the Gove rnment to encourage, collaborate 
and partner with existing Indian institutions , which will help to mitigate competition 
and ensure that the benefits of foreign universities are shared with the Indian 
institutions and the Indian students? 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Sir, this is an old practice and tradition of our Indian 
institutions.  Almost all IITs, NIITs and all reputed institutions run by the Union 
Government and the respective State Govern ments have global tie up with their 
counterparts.  With this NEP and the focusse d concept of internationalisation, it will 
get an accelerating effect.   
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
39

 
DR. SANTANU SEN:  Sir, we all know that a few days back, a circular has gone to all 
the universities and colleges from the UGC that there should be a selfie stand with the 
photograph of our respected Prime Minister in the background.  Through you, with all 
humility, I would like to know from the learne d Minister as per which rule or guideline 
of the UGC, this could be done. As is apparent, this seems to be nothing but a 
political publicity before the 2024 elections.  
  
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : Hon. Member's question has nothing to do with 
this Question.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Keep in mind that I had been the Governor of the State of West 
Bengal. 
  
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: I know that, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Santanu Sen has raised the issue ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : I cannot forget the scene when you took the 
constitutional responsibility on the very first day of this  present Government.  This 
country can never forget your position.  With due respect, Sir, this is a separate 
question. I am proud of my Prime Minist er. This country is proud of hon. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi.  This is my answer.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: President, Prime Minister and constitutional functionaries belong to 
the nation.  They represent the nation as much as a Chief Minister represents a State. 
And, therefore, I will appeal to all sections  of the House that when it comes to the 
constitutional functionaries, be at the State level or at the Central level, let our vision 
be not through politics but in general.  Now, Prof. Manoj Jha, it is your subject.  
 
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA:  Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I am sure you will put a pointed question to the hon. Minister.  Your 
time starts now.  
 
Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा : शुिकर्या, सभापित महोदय।  सर, माननीय मंतर्ी जी से मेरा एक आगर्ह है, 
एक सवाल है िक foreign universities का आना, campus  खोलना एक बहुत सकारात्मक पहल 
ह
ै, लेिकन हमारी िशक्षा ËयवÎथा affirmative action क े Ģोगर्ाम पर है, तो foreign universities मȂ 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Constitutional mandate  क े िहसाब से affirmative action introduce हो, क्या इसकी ËयवÎथा 
की गयी है? 
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : सर, ये foreign universities उन देशȗ क े कायदे पर चलȂगी।  यहाँ quality 
education पर फोकस है।  हमारे देश मȂ 1,100 public universities हȅ, क ु छ private universities 
भी हȅ।  अभी भी हमारे देश की जो Îटेट एक्ट क े अंतगर्त चलने वाली  private universities और 
deemed universities  हȅ, उनमȂ affirmative action का form अलग
 है।  धीरे-धीरे िवÌव का जो 
education pattern आजकल बना है, scholarship  एक नया instrument बन रहा है।  वह भी 
एक तरीके  का affirmative action है।  सारी चीजȗ को एक ही चÌमे से देखना उिचत नहीं होगा।  
देश मȂ quality institutions  आयȂ, यह priority है।   
 
SHRI JOSE K. MANI :  Sir, opening up of foreign unive rsities in India promises globa
l 
exposure and high-quality education.  However, while starting foreign universities, 
some face challenges, like (i) there could be a drastic drop-out of students from the 
domestic universities, (ii) very high cost of tuition, (iii) potential cultural misalignment 
affecting adaptation, (iv) resource allocation concern, (v) risk of educational 
inequalities, and (vi) rejection of recognitio n of foreign universities' degrees by Indian 
companies.  So, I would like to know from  the hon. Minister about the measures 
taken by the Government to face all these challenges.  Has he taken care of these 
aspects?  
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Sir, all these questions are very important but these 
are uncalled for at this time.  We have to face the global challenge.  These questions 
are there, but the Government is quite co mpetent and the UGC is quite a competent 
body with its experts and it will look into all these aspects. These are all very 
premature questions and we should not view everything with a negative prism.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No. 34, Shri Sant Balbir Singh.  
 
Promotion of non-polluting fuels 
 
*34. SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH : Will the Minister of ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS be pleased to state: 
(a) whether Government has emphasized on the substitution of petrol and 
development of non- polluting, indige nous methods and alternative fuels 
(CNG/LNG),to keep the environment clean, if so, the details thereof; 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
41

 
(b) the steps taken to use CNG, LNG and ethanol for road equipment machinery 
in the country, specifically for the State of Punjab; 
(c) whether any plan has been prepared to build roadside township, smart city, 
logistics park, industrial cluster, if so, the details thereof; and 
(d) the details of roads which come under these projects, State-wise? 
 
THE MINISTER OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS (SHRI NITIN JAIRAM 
GADKARI): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a)  To facilitate the development of Motor Vehicles running on non-fossil fuels like 
CNG, Bio- CNG, LNG, EV, Biofuels, etc. the Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways has notified mass emission standards in respect of blends of ethanol with 
gasoline, flex-fuel, Biodiesel, Bio-CNG, Li quefied Natural Gas (LNG), blends of 
Methanol with gasoline, dual fuel, Hydrogen etc. 
Further, the Production Linked Incenti ve (PLI) scheme for Automobile and 
Auto Components incentivizes the Auto OEMs (Original Equipment Manufacturers) to 
accelerate the introduction of Flex Fuel vehicles in India. 
 
(b)  The Government vide GSR 1151(E)  dated 29th November, 2018 had already 
notified norms for dual fuel use of CNG/Bio -CNG/LNG in Agricultural tractors, power 
tillers, Combined Harvestors and Construction Equipment Vehicles (CEV). 
 
(c) and (d) Gati Shakti National master Pl an provides for the overall framework for 
the creation of a system for interconnected  and multimodal infrastructure projects. 
Accordingly, concerned Ministries/Depar tments undertake projects taking into 
account available and planned infrastructure. Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs 
(CCEA), Government of India have approved development of 35 Multi Modal 
Logistics Parks (MMLPs).to be underta ken by Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways. The perspective of development of MMLPs is location-wise and not on 
road-wise. The list of approved locations is as under:- 
 
Sr. No. Locations State 
1 Delhi-NCR (Delhi, Gurgaon, Ghaziabad,  
Faridabad, Noida) 
Delhi/Haryana/UP 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
2 Mumbai (Mumbai, Mumbai Suburbs, JNPT, 
 Mumbai Port, Raigad District) 
Maharashtra 
3 North Gujarat (Ahmedabad and Vadodara) Gujarat 
4 Hyderabad Telangana 
5 South Gujarat (Surat and Bharuch) Gujarat 
6 South Punjab (Ludhiana, Sangrur, Patiala) Punjab 
7 North Punjab (Amritsar, Ja landhar, Gurudaspur) Punjab 
8 Jaipur Rajasthan 
9 Bangalore Karnataka 
10 Pune Maharashtra 
11 Vijayawada Andhra Pradesh 
12 Chennai Tamil Nadu 
13 Nagpur Maharashtra 
14 Indore Madhya Pradesh 
15 Patna Bihar 
16 Kolkata West Bengal 
17 Ambala Haryana 
18 Valsad Gujarat 
19 Coimbatore Tamil Nadu 
20 Jagatsinghpur Odisha 
21 Nasik Maharashtra 
22 Guwahati Assam 
23 Kota Rajasthan 
24 Panaji Goa 
25 Hisar Haryana 
26 Visakhapatnam Andhra Pradesh 
27 Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 
28 Sundargarh Odisha 
29 Bhatinda Punjab 
30 Solan Himachal Pradesh 
31 Rajkot Gujarat 
32 Raipur Chhattisgarh 
33 Jammu UT of Jammu 
34 Kandla Gujrat 
35 Cochin Kerala 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
43

 
Ǜी संत बलबीर िंसह : * "चेयरमैन साहब, आपने समय िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवादI मंतर्ी 
जी, आप बहुत  अच्छा काम कर रहे हȅ।  मȅ मंतर्ी महोदय से पयार्वरण क े िवषय मȂ बात करना 
चाहता हूँI आज सबसे अिधक Ģदूषण डीज़ल से चलने वाले वाहनȗ क े कारण फ़ ै ल रहा हैI आज 
लुिधयाना सबसे अिधक Ģदूिषत शहर ह
ै और इसका Ģमुख कारण डीज़ल से चलने वाले वाहन हȅI 
मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूँ िक पयार्वरण  को Îवच्छ रखने क े िलए क्या सरकार 
पेटर्ोल की जगह कोई वैकिÊप
क Ģदूषण रिहत ईंधन क े िवकास पर काम कर रही है? यिद हाँ,  तो 
क ृपया उसका िववरण ĢÎतुत करȂI देश मȂ और िवशेष कर पंजाब मȂ सड़कȗ क े िनमार्ण क े िलए 
िजस मशीनरी का Ģयोग िकया जा रहा है, उसमȂ डीज़ल क े Îथान पर सी.एन.जी, एल.एन.जी, 
इथेनॉल इत्यािद वैकिÊपक ईंधनȗ क े Ģयोग क े बारे मȂ सरकार क्या कदम उठा रही है, क ृपया 
उसके  िवषय मȂ बताया जाएI"  
 
Ǜी िनितन जयराम गडकरी : माननीय सभापित महोदय, यह बात िबÊकु ल सही है िक हमारे देश 
मȂ जो 40 per cent emission of CO2 है, pollution 
है, वह transport sector मȂ होता है और यह 
िदन ब िदन बढ़ता जा रहा है, यह िचन्ता का िवषय है।  There is 330 millio n metric tonnes of 
CO2 emission every year.  It is a very dangerous problem.  इसमȂ से हमारे देश मȂ जो 85 
per cent fuel ह
ै, वह fossil fuel है , जो िक import होता है, िजसके  import की cost 16 लाख 
करोड़ रुपय े है। इकोनॉमी और पॉÊयूशन, दोनȗ क े िहसाब से यह बहुत गंभीर समÎया है। िवशेष 
रूप  से, पेटर्ोल और डीजल क े कारण जो पॉÊयूशन होता है, िजसकी बात सÇमाननीय सदÎय ने 
रखी है, उसके  िलए भारत सरकार ने काफी Ģयास िकए हȅ और उसे Ģायोिरटी दी है। सभापित 
महोदय, इंिडया कार मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग, ऑटोमोबाइल मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग मȂ पहले पाँचवȂ नंबर पर था, पर 
आज हमारा नंबर तीसरा हो गया है। इसमȂ पहले नंबर पर अमेिरका है, दूसरे नंबर पर चीन है और 
िफर हम ह
ȅ। हमने जापान को भी पीछे छोड़ िदया है। एक बात यह भी है िक इसका गर्ोथ रेट बहुत 
बढ़ा है। टोटल ËहीकÊस मȂ यह 9.91 परसȂट है और कार एवं फोर Ëहीलसर् मȂ 20 परसȂट है। यह 
इंडÎटर्ी भारत सरकार और राज्य सरकार को सबसे ज्यादा जीएसटी दे रही है और इसमȂ साढ़े 
चार करोड़ जॉÅस िकर्एट हुई हȅ। इसके  बावजूद, सÇमाननीय सदÎय ने जो बात रखी, उसके  
आधार पर भारत सरकार ने ऑÊटरनेिटव Äयूल और बायो Äयूल, इन दोनȗ को िवशेष रूप  से 
Ģाधान्य िदया है। यह जो जी20 सिमट हुआ था, उसमȂ ग्लोबल बायोÄयूल एलायंस िनिÌचत िकया 
गया और यह टारगेट तय
 िकया गया िक हम 2070 तक  नेट जीरो एिमशन तक जाएंगे। मुझे इस 
बात की खुशी है िक हमने ऑÊटरनेिटव Äयूल पर अलग Ģकार क े Ģयोग िकए हȅ। सर, मȅ खुद 
इसका बाहर Ģचार करता रहता ह
ूँ। मȅ पािर्लयामȂट मȂ आता हूँ, तो हाइडर्ोजन की गाड़ी मȂ आता हूँ 
और अभी मȅ Äलैक्स इंजन की गाड़ी मȂ आता हूँ। ये दोनȗ भी गािड़याँ हȅ। Äलैक्स इंजन का मतलब 
यह है िक हमारे यहाँ जो Ĥोकन राइस, बायोमास, श
ुगरके न जूस और मोलेसेस हȅ, इनसे इथेनॉल 
बनता है और टोयोटा की इनोवा गाड़ी 100 परसȂट इथेनॉल पर चलती है। अभी बाकी क ंपनीज़ भी 
ऐसी गाड़ी लाँच कर रही हȅ, जो 100 परसȂट इथेनॉल  पर चलेगी। सर, इथेनॉल का रेट है, 60 रुपय े 
लीटर और पेटर्ोल का रेट है, 120 रुपय े लीटर। इसके  साथ ही, यह इथेनॉल की गाड़ी 60 परस Ȃट 
                                         
* Hindi translation of the original speech delivered in Punjabi. 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
िबजली तैयार करती है, तो इससे भी पॉÊयूशन कम होता है। हमने पहले Äलैक्स इंजन को 
Ģोत्साहन िदया। ऑटोमोबाइल मैन्यूफ ैक्चरसर् तो Äलैक्स इंजन ला रहे हȅ, पर बजाज, टीवीएस 
और हीरो अपनी मोटरसाइिकल भी लेकर आए हȅ। हम पेटर्ोिलयम मंतर्ालय क े साथ िमलकर जÊदी 
ही इथेनॉल पÇप की शुरुआत  कर रहे हȅ, िजससे इस ĢॉÅलम क े बड़े Ģमाण पर कम
 होने मȂ मदद 
िमलेगी। 
 दूसरी महत्वपूणर् बात है िक all types of excess foodgrains और excess sugar - इससे 
िकसानȗ की िÎथित सुधर जाएगी। It is diversification of ag riculture towards energy and 
power sector. इस साल गन्ना िक
सानȗ को जो भाव िमले हȅ, उसके  कारण हम इथेनॉल की 
इंडÎटर्ी और इथेनॉल को बढ़ावा दे रहे हȅ। हमारे देश मȂ छ: लाख मोबाइल टावसर् हȅ और उनके  
ऊपर डीजल जेनरेटसर् हȅ। यह जो छ: लाख मोबाइल टावसर् हȅ, इनमȂ से एक को 8,000 लीटर  
डीजल लगता है। आज क
े वल ये जेनरेटसर् ही 250 करोड़ लीटर डीजल यूज़ कर रहे हȅ। हम लोग 
इसे कम करने क े िलए इथेनॉल बेÎड लाने की कोिशश कर रहे हȅ। एगर्ीकÊचर मȂ जो ÎĢेिंयग होती 
है, वह डर्ोन lithium-ion बैटरी पर चलता है। उसे भी Äलैक्स इ
ंजन पर लाने की कोिशश हो रही 
है। इसके  अलावा, मȅ आदरणीय सदÎयȗ को यह िवशेष रूप  से कहूँगा िक हमने बायोमास से, 
पराली से बायो सीएनजी और बायो एलएनजी को बहुत Ģोत्साहन िदया है। इसके  कारण शुगर 
िमल वेÎट, जैसे Ģेस मड, कॉटन Îटर्ॉ, Ëहीट Îटर्ॉ, राइस Îटर्ॉ, बगास और पराली है, इसके  कम-
से-कम 36 Ãलांट्स चालू हो गए हȅ, जो सीएनजी बना रहे हȅ। इसके  साथ ही, इसके  175 Ãलांट्स 
Ģोसेस मȂ हȅ और मैिक्समम पंजाब मȂ बन रहे हȅ। मुझे इस बात की खुशी है िक पानीपत मȂ इंिडयन 
ऑइल ने पराली से इथेनॉल बनाने का अपना पहला Ãलांट डाला है, जो एक लाख लीटर इथेनॉल 
तैयार करता ह
ै और 150 टन bio-bitumen तैयार करता है, जो िक रोड्स मȂ काम मȂ आता है। हमȂ 
80 लाख टन bitumen लगता है, िजसमȂ से 30 लाख टन हम इÇपोट र् कर रहे हȅ। यह पराली जलाने 
से जो Ģदूषण होता है, अब इसकी बजाय bio-bitumen बनेगा वहीं अब बायो एिवएशन Äयूल बन 
रहा है। जो हवाई ईंधन है, उसमȂ भी वÊडर् लेवल पर एक परसȂट डालने का Ģोिवज़न हुआ है और 
यह ईंधन भी देश मȂ बनेगा। मुझे िवÌवास ह
ै िक यह गर्ीन हाइडर्ोजन Äयूचर का Äयूल है।  
सÇमाननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ हाइडर्ोजन की कार मȂ ही काफी बार आता हूँ।  सरकार ने 
हाइडर्ोजन तैयार करने क े िलए अभी पाँच हाइडर्ोजन
 िमशंस बनाए, िजनमȂ हमको 5 िमिलयन 
मीिटर्क टन हाइडर्ोजन Ģित वषर् लगेगा।  हाइडर्ोजन तीन Ģकार का है।  जो कोयले से बनता है, वह 
Åलैक हाइडर्ोजन  है, जो पेटर्ोिलयम से बनता है, वह Ĥाउन हाइडर्ोजन है और जो पानी, बायोमास 
या Çयुिनिसपल वेÎट्स से बनता है, वह गर्ीन हाइडर्ोजन है।  सरकार ने गर्ीन हाइडर्ोजन िमशन 
बनाया है। Knowledge to wealth and
 waste to wealth. जैसे, innovation, 
entrepreneurship, science, technology, research, skill and successful practices को 
हम नॉलेज कहते हȅ, उसी तरह, इस टेक्नोलॉजी को लाकर हम knowledge to wealth और no 
material is waste; no person is waste की ओर बढ़ रहे हȅ।  I t  i
s  d e p e n d i n g  u p o n  t h e  
appropriate technology and appropriate vision  of the leadership that you can convert 
waste into wealth.  सर, हमने हाइडर्ोजन तैयार करने क े िलए यह उपकर्म भी अपने हाथ मȂ 
िलया है।  इससे बहुत बड़ा रोजगार िनिर्मत होगा और िकसानȗ को भी फायदा होगा। अभी इसका 
रेट 300 रुपय े Ģित िकलोगर्ाम है, क्यȗिक यह electrolyzer से बनता है, िजसमȂ 50 यू िनट पावर 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
45

 
लगती है।  हमारे यहाँ, िवशेष रूप  से बȂगलुरु  का Indian Institute of Science और  मुÇबई मȂ 
यादव नाम से एक क ेिमकल इंिÎटǷूट है, िजन्हȗने बायोमास से गर्ीन हाइडर्ोजन बनाया है।  हमारा 
यह Ģयास है िक इसका रेट एक डॉलर से भी कम आए।  अगर यह एक डॉलर से भी कम मȂ आएगा 
और एगर्ीकÊचर बायोमास का उपयोग होगा तो िकसान समृǉ और संपन्न होगा।  हम ऊजार् को 
आयात करने वाला नहीं, बिÊक ऊजार् को िनयार्त करने वाला देश बनȂ, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क
े  नेतृत्व मȂ 
हमारी यही महत्वाकांक्षा है।  इसीिलए िवशेष रूप  से जी20 मȂ जो ग्लोबल एलायंस हुआ, वह इसी 
क े िलए एक Ģयास है। 
सर, माननीय सदÎय ने एक बात construction equipments क
े  बारे मȂ भी कही िक वे भी 
बहुत ज्यादा पॉÊयूशन करते हȅ।  म ȅने दो िदन पहले हाइडर्ोजन पर चलने वाला JCB लाँच िकया है 
और अब जÊद ही क ंÎटर्क्शन टर्क्स और बसेज़ मȂ हाइडर्ोजन आएगा।  अब ऑÊटरनेिटव Äयूल क े 
रूप  मȂ तो इलेिक्टर्क पॉपुलर हो गया और electric scooters, electric cars, electric bus आिद 
भी कॉमन हो
 गए।  अब धीरे-धीरे ऑÊटरनेिटव Äयूल तथा बायोÄयूल का उपयोग करके  तथा 
वेÎट्स से एनजीर् तैयार करके  हम िकसानȗ की भी आिर्थक िÎथित सुधारȂ और Ģदूषण को कम करȂ, 
ऐसी कोिशश सरकार की ओर से हो रही है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Second supplementary; Shri Sant Balbir Singh. 
 
Ǜी संत बलबी
र िंसह : *"बहुत धन्यवाद। मंतर्ी जी, मȅ पूछना चाहता हूँ िक क्या सड़कȗ क े िकनारे 
Îमाटर् िसटी, टाउनिशप, लॉिजिÎटक पाकर् एवं उǏोग क्लÎटर बनाने की कोई योजना तैयार की 
गई है? यिद हाँ, तो उसका िववरण दȂ I िकन -िकन सड़कȗ पर ये पिरयोजनाएं शुरू  की जाएंगी, 
उनका राज्यवार Åयोरा िदया जाए I" 
 
Ǜी िनितन जयराम गडकरी: सÇमाननीय सभापित महोदय, हम द
ेश मȂ टोटल  
35 multi modal logistic parks (MMLP) बना रहे हȅ।  इसमȂ असम क े जोगीघोपा मȂ जो MMLP 
है, वह मÊटीमॉडल है।  यानी, उसमȂ रोड भी है, हवाई जहाज क े िलए एयरपोटर् भी है, जलमागर् भी 
है और उनके  साथ रेलवे भी है।  आदरणीय सदÎय पंजाब से आते हȅ, वहाँ भी नॉथर् पंजाब म
Ȃ 
अमृतसर, जालंधर और गुरदासपुर मȂ pre-feasibility study कÇÃलीट हुई है, िजसका हम िवचार 
कर रहे हȅ। साउथ पंजाब मȂ लुिधयाना, स ंगरूर  और पिटयाला मȂ हम लोग लȅड क े िलए Îटेट 
गवनर्मȂट से बात कर रहे हȅ।  इसके  अलावा, हम लोग बिंठडा मȂ भी काम कर रहे हȅ।  आपको पता 
होगा िक हमने बिंठडा से जामनगर िरफाइनरी क े  िलए करीब 28,000 करोड़ रुपय े खचर् करके  
एक बहुत बड़ा डायरेक्ट एक्सĢेस हाईवे बनाया है।  उसके  आजू-बाजू भी हम इस Ģकार की बातȂ 
सोच रहे हȅ।  हम िवशेष रूप  से 670 road side amenities बना रहे हȅ, िजनमȂ से पंजाब मȂ 40 हȅ।  
मुझे यह बताते हुए खुशी है िक पंजाब मȂ उन 40 मȂ से 7 क े िलए वकर् अवॉडर् हुआ है और 33  un
der 
bidding हȅ।  देश मȂ ऐसी टोटल 640 road side amenities हȗगी।  हम वहाँ पर वहीं क े फ ूड्स और 
वहीं क े हȅडलूÇस-हȅिडकर्ाÄट्स का भी Ģोत्साहन करȂगे।  वहाँ पर पेटर्ोल, डीज़ल, गैस, सीएनजी, 
                                         
* Hindi translation of the original speech delivered in Punjabi. 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
एलएनजी, एथेनॉल क े पÇÃस भी हȗगे और इलेिक्टर्क चािजȊग Îटेशंस भी हȗगे।  िवशेष रूप  से, 
चूंिक वहाँ पर लोग रुक  सकते हȅ, इसिलए वहाँ पर उनके  एंटरटेनमȂट की भी ËयवÎथा होगी।  इस 
Ģकार, इन दोनȗ योजनाओं का िकर्यान्वयन करने की कोिशश हो रही ह ै। 
 
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन : सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह कहना चाहती हूं िक हम Ģदूषण 
को कम करने की बात कर रहे हȅ, वाहन Ģदूषण को कम करने क े िलए हम इलेिक्टर्क वाहन को 
भी Ģोत्सािहत कर रहे हȅ, लेिकन क्या यह बात सही है िक एक िरसचर् आया है िक जो इलेिक्टर्क 
वाहन ह
ȅ, बैटरीज़ हȅ, वे िजस Ģोसेस से बनती हȅ, उसमȂ बनाने वालȗ की सेहत को ज्यादा खतरा है 
और जब बैटरी लाइफ खत्म होती है तो उसको डÇप करने का जो Ģावधान है, उससे हमारी धरती
 
और भी ज़हरीली होगी, फटार्इल लȅड को नुकसान होगा? क्या Ģदूषण को कम करने क े िलए 
इलेिक्टर्क वाहन को Ģोत्सािहत करना डीज़ल और पेटर्ोल से बेहतर है या उससे भी ज्यादा 
खतरनाक है? 
जो िरसचर् है, वह यह कहता है िक यह उससे भी ज्यादा खतरनाक है।   
 
Ǜी िनितन जयराम गडकरी : आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, हमारे देश मȂ 16 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का 
fossil fuel का  इÇपोटर् होता है, उसका Ģदूषण िकतने बड़े पैमाने पर है, यह िदÊली वालȗ को 
समझाने की आवÌयकता नहीं है। जहां तक लीिथयम आयन बैटरी है, उस बैटरी  मȂ चार 
chemistry हȅ, एक एÊयुिमिनयम, एक लीिथयम क े साथ िंजक, एÊयुिमिनयम, Îटील आयन बैटरी 
है, इसकी क ेिमÎटर्ी पर भी काम हो रहा है। एक एÊयुिमिनयम एयर टेक्नोलॉजी पर भी काम हो रहा 
ह
ै।  
 महोदय, दूसरी महत्वपूणर् बात यह है िक जहां पेटर्ोल और डीज़ल क े िलए हम 110-120 
रुपय े लगाते हȅ, वहीं इलेिक्टर्क ËहीकÊस मȂ हमारे 10 रुपय े लगते हȅ। हम हमारे िटकट र ेट्स कम 
कर सकȂ गे। लीिथयम आयन बैटरी की कॉÎट 150 dollar per unit की थी, िंकतु अब वह 115 
dollar पर आयी है। जो per kilowatt 150 डॉलर की थी, अब वह 115 पर आयी है। अब हमारे देश 
मȂ भी लीिथयम आयन िमला है। जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ िवÌव का छठा largest lithium-ion rese
rve 
िमला है। हम 1,200 टन लीिथयम आयन import करते हȅ। मुझे िवÌवास है िक अभी तक इस Ģकार 
क े िरसचर् की जो बात कर रहे हȅ, ऐसी कोई िरपोटर् हमारे पास नहीं है। अगर आएगी तो हम इसके  
ऊपर अवÌय िवचार करȂगे। हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी जी न
े अपने बजट भाषण मȂ सकुर् लेशन इकोनॉमी की 
बात कही थी, िजसमȂ हम लोग वेÎट मैटीिरयल की सकुर् लेशन इकोनॉमी बनाएं। अभी हमारे पास 
कार की Îकर्ै िंपग हो रही है, रबर टायर की Îकर्ै िंपग करके  जो रबर िनकलता है, उसे िबटु मेन मȂ 
डालने का काम 15 परसȂट कर रहे हȅ। ÃलािÎटक का 7 परसȂट रोड मȂ डाल रहे हȅ, उस
ी Ģकार से 
iron slag का उपयोग कर रहे हȅ। हमने तो क ेवल इकोलॉिजकल एन्वायानमȂट को Ģोटेक्ट करने 
क
े  िलए िदÊली का Çयुिनिसपल वेÎट  25 लाख टन, अहमदाबाद का 25 लाख टन और िदÊली 
मुÇबई हाईवे मȂ और डाला। ऐसा 50 लाख  टन Çयुिनिसपल वेÎट रोड क े अंदर डाल िदया। जहां 
तक आपने लीिथयम आयन बैटरी की बात की है, इसके  बारे मȂ हम पूरी िंचता करȂग
े और इसकी 
रीसाइिंक्लग करने मȂ कहीं भी उसके  दुÍपिरणाम न आएं, कहीं भी कोई नई समÎया न हो, इसकी 
िंचता सरकार करेगी। यह क ेिमÎटर्ी रोज़ बदल रही ह
ै, यह ÄयूचिरिÎटक टेक्नोलॉजी है। Our 
Government is working in that direction with futuristic technology, futuristic vision and 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
47

 
futuristic planning.  'आत्मिनभर्र भारत' बनाने का Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का जो सपना है, वÊडर् की 
Îटर्ॉन्ग इकोनॉमी बनाने का जो सपना है, मȅ िवÌवास क े साथ कहूंगा िक आने वाले 5 साल क े अंदर 
इलेिक्टर्क ËहीकÊस, बसेज़, even टर्क्स भी, इनको एक्सपोटर् करने वाला पहले नÇबर का देश 
िहन्दुÎतान बनेगा। इतना पोटȂिशयल हमारे पास है और इतना काम हो रहा है। वÊडर् क े सब 
reputed brands ह
ȅ, साढ़े बारह लाख करोड़ रुपय े की इकोनॉमी है। अब जापान को पीछे छोड़कर 
हम तीसरे नÇबर पर आए हȅ और िनिÌचत रूप  से जÊद ही हम और आगे जाएंग े। इसमȂ बहुत अच्छी 
तरह से हमारा एक्सपोटर् बढ़ेगा, नए रोज़गार पैदा हȗगे और देश समृǉ होगा, िनिÌचत रूप  से मुझे 
यह िवÌवास है। अगर ऐसी कोई बात होगी या िरपोटर् आएगी, तो सरकार की ओर से उस पर 
िनिÌचत रूप  से िंचता की जाएगी। 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA: Sir, I would like to know from the hon. Minister about the 
status of adoption of e-vehicl
es and the steps taken for their promotion in the State of 
Haryana and NCR Region.   
 
SHRI NITIN JAIRAM GADKARI : The subject is related with the Heavy Industries 
Ministry and the Urban Development Ministry. I think you are talking about purchasing 
of e-buses...  
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:  E-vehicles. 
 
SHRI NITIN JAIRAM GADKARI:  For e-vehicles, there is no problem.  In the 
Government everywhere and even in the priv ate sector, people are using e-vehicles.  
It is very popular.  The only problem is  the cost difference between petrol/diesel 
vehicles and e-vehicles.   Cost of e-vehicles  is high.  It is dependent upon volume.  
When volume increases, I feel -- it is my estimate; I am not giving you a promise-- 
that within one-and-a-half years, the cost of petrol/diesel vehicles and the cost of 
electric vehicles will be the same.  Suppose  the expenditure on petrol four-wheeler 
vehicle is Rs.30,000 per month; for elec tric, it will come down to Rs.3,000 or 
Rs.4,000 per month.  So, there is a saving and no pollution.  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN : Mr. Chairman, Sir, while I must acknowledge it because hon. 
Minister is from Maharashtra and his work an d his vision must definitely be admired, 
but, through you, I would like to ask the hon.  Minister one point. Many times, he has 
visited the place where we live. He himself will say that the condition of the highways 
and HAM roads there is very, ve ry poor because of the poor  quality of construction.  
When the road is actually constructed, MoRTH guidelines are not followed. One 
example is, for embankment level, the particle  size has to be 75 mm; in sub-grade, it 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
has to be 50 mm. It cannot be more than that.  But we see that huge boulders are put 
on roads and nobody is supervising it. Because of that, roads break very, very soon.  
Sir, it is a very important issue.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Your question please! 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, I am sure the Minister will agree with me.  It is because of this 
and because of lack of supervision.  Extern al consultants are hired and actual officers 
are not supervising.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please ask your supplementary question.  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN : I just want to ask one thing from the Minister. If MoRTH 
guidelines are not followed, what is the accountability of the officers? What 
punishment is prescribed? 
  
SHRI NITIN JAIRAM GADKARI : Mr. Chairman, Sir, the qu estion which the hon. 
Member is asking is not related to this question.  
 
Ǜी सभापित :  यह सीधे महाराÍटर् का मामला है।  
 
SHRI NITIN JAIRAM GADKARI : I know that she is complainin g for that particular road 
in Parbhani District for many days. We ha ve checked all quality norms and I am very 
much cautious about it and we are transp arent, time-bound, result-oriented and 
corruption-free.  Up till now, for the last 10 years, we have awarded works of more 
than Rs.50 lakh crores with Government Budget and public-private investment. Our 
quality is well-known to the people but still if the hon. Member is complaining about 
the quality of a road in Maharashtra, we will check it up. Many Members from 
Maharashtra are present here.  We are spending Rs.5 lakh crore on road construction 
in Maharashtra.  Still, I will again check up th e particular case of quality issue of that 
road, of which the hon. Member  has given me the reference.   I will see how it can be 
improved further.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question No. 35. 
 
 
Skill development centres in Chhattisgarh 
 
*35. SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA : Will the Minister of SK ILL DEVELOPMENT AND  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
49

 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the number of Skill Development Centres (SDCs) functioning in the State of 
Chhattisgarh at present, district-wise; and 
(b) the number of youths and girls who have benefitted in their lives on the 
basis of training along with the district-wise details? 
 
THE MINISTER OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP (SHRI 
DHARMENDRA PRADHAN): (a) and (b) A Stat ement is laid on the Table of the 
House. 
Statement 
 
(a) The Govt of India, under the Skill India Mission (SIM), aims at skilling, re-skilling 
and up-skilling to ensure all young Indian s are prepared for the large number of 
opportunities coming up as the economy expands and India moves to become the 
third largest economy in the world. SIM ai ms to equip the youth of the country with 
market-relevant skills. 
Under SIM, the Ministry of Skill Deve lopment and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) 
delivers skilling, re-skilling and up-sk illing programmes through a comprehensive 
network of skill development centres/inst itutes across the country under various 
schemes viz. Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), Jan Shikshan 
Sansthan (JSS), National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme (NAPS) and Craftsmen 
Training Scheme (CTS) through Industrial Tr aining Institutes (ITIs). The district-wise 
number of Skill Development Centres under these Schemes of MSDE in Chhattisgarh 
is at Annexure-I. 
 
(b)  The District-wise details of number of male and female candidates who have 
benefitted under various schemes viz. PMKVY, JSS, NAPS, CTS (ITIs) in 
Chhattisgarh are at Annexu re-II, Annexure-III, Anne xure-IV and Annexure-V 
respectively. 
Annexure -I 
 
District-wise number of Skill Development Centers functioning under PMKVY, JSS, 
NAPS, and ITIs in Chhattisgarh: 
 
S. 
No. 
District PMKK’s 
Centers 
JSS 
centers 
NAPS* ITI 
Govt. ITIs Pvt. ITIs 
1 Balod -- -- 4 8 4 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
2 Baloda Bazar 1 -- 6 4 4 
3 Balrampur 1 -- 44 3 0 
4 Bastar -- 1 5 4 3 
5 Bemetara 1 -- 4 5 5 
6 Bijapur 1 1 1 2 0 
7 Bilaspur 1 1 60 7 12 
8 Dantewada -- 1 5 2 1 
9 Dhamtari -- -- 10 7 0 
10 Durg 1 -- 50 6 27 
11 Gariaband 1 -- -- 2 0 
12 Gaurella-Pendra-Marwahi -- -- -- 2 1 
13 Janjgir-Champa 1 -- 9 9 15 
14 Jashpur 1 -- 1 2 1 
15 Kabirdham 1 -- 1 2 2 
16 Kanker 1 1 2 5 1 
17 Kondagaon 1 1 3 3 0 
18 Khairagarh-
Chhuikhadan-Gandai 
-- -- -- -- -- 
19 Korba 1 1 17 3 5 
20 Koriya 1 1 1 4 5 
21 Mahasamund 1 1 4 2 3 
22 Manendragarh-Chirmiri Bharatpur -- -- -- -- -- 
23 Mohla-Manpur -- -- -- -- -- 
24 Mungeli 1 -- 2 2 1 
25 Narayanpur 1 1 -- 2 1 
26 Raigarh 1 -- 68 9 3 
27 Raipur 1 1 114 5 10 
28 Rajnandgaon 1 1 14 9 5 
29 Sarangarh -- -- 2 -- -- 
30 Sakti -- -- -- -- -- 
31 Sukma -- 1 1 2 0 
32 Surajpur 1 -- 4 6 0 
33 Surguja 1 1 11 3 3 
 Total 22 14 443 120 112 
* Number of establishments participating in NAPS 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
51

 
Annexure II 
 
District-wise no. of candidates trained under PMKVY in Chhattisgarh during last three 
years (2020- 21, 2021-22 and 2022-23): 
 
 FY-20-21 FY-21-22 FY-22-23 
District Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Balod 140 264 41 28 - - 
Baloda Bazar 261 512 220 162 191 99 
Balrampur 165 252 231 98 135 105 
Bastar 92 383 49 54 81 24 
Bemetara 57 237 198 163 153 47 
Bijapur - - 17 5 74 50 
Bilaspur 129 307 122 275 155 142 
Dantewada - - 12 8 23 27 
Dhamtari 312 661 115 151 53 42 
Durg 641 854 274 316 78 40 
Gariyaband 34 136 10 39 - - 
Janjgir-
Champa 
148 290 400 112 102 18 
Jashpur 57 72 278 92 22 - 
Kabirdham 88 218 296 23 120 - 
Kanker 73 137 132 73 106 84 
Kondagaon 27 23 162 151 82 46 
Korba 461 624 335 388 262 123 
Korea 368 649 305 504 50 12 
Mahasamund 82 309 152 194 27 42 
Mungeli 44 244 129 254 51 129 
Narayanpur 32 50 136 83 102 53 
Raigarh 772 1,069 408 309 170 77 
Raipur 506 1,919 316 509 222 155 
Rajnandgaon 396 707 223 217 110 81 
Surajpur 290 722 70 58 153 87 
Surguja 11 6 219 422 176 298 53 
Total 5,291 10,858 5,053  4,442 2,820 1,536 
 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Annexure III 
 
JSS: District-wise no. of candidates trained under JSS in Chhattisgarh during last 
three years (2020- 21, 2021-22 and 2022-23): 
 
S.  
No. 
District 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Male Female Male Female Male Female 
1 BASTAR 44 6 1347 331 1453 837 1861 
2 BIJAPUR 0 0 247 610 996 1704 
3 BILASPUR 0 0 630 1145 787 1912 
4 DANTEWADA 0 0 205 675 815 1882 
5 KANKER 0 0 159 741 720 1980 
6 KONDAGAON 0 0 131 769 288 2412 
7 KORBA 305 1494 492 1301 756 1938 
8 KOREA 436 1264 259 1541 541 2149 
9 MAHASAMUND 0 0 75 825 432 2267 
10 NARAYANPUR 0 0 123 537 660 2040 
11 RAIPUR 187 1613 182 1590 292 2407 
12 RAJNANDGAON 20 1560 94 1705 331 2368 
13 SUKMA 0 0 85 406 733 1967 
14 SURGUJA 549 1250 409 1391 867 1832 
Grand Total 1,943 8,528 3,422 14,689 9,055 28,719 
 
Annexure IV 
 
NAPS: District-wise details of youth and women engaged as apprentices at present 
in the State of Chhattisgarh from FY 2019-20 to FY 2023-24 till 31.10.2023: 
 
District FY-20-21 FY-21-22 FY-22-23 
Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Balod 6 5 0 0 3 6 
Balodabazar-Bhatapara 0 39  87 4 153 
Balrampur 21 158 12 75 18 141 
Bastar 0 2 4 0 1 1 
Bemetara 0 0 0 8 0 8 
Bijapur 0 0 0 0 0 0 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
53

 
Bilaspur 73 426 129 648 110 353 
Dakshin Bastar 
Dantewada 
0 0 3 1 46 236 
Dhamtari 9 11 2 4 3 21 
Durg 24 186 50 262 132 513 
Janjgir-champa 0 30 1 13 3 37 
Jashpur 0 0 0  0 1 
Kabeerdham 0 0 0   8 
Kondagaon 0 1 4 1 0 0 
Korba 16 216 24 377 40 417 
Korea 0 9 0 0 0 0 
Mahasamund 0 0 0 2 2 4 
Mungeli 0 1  0 0 0 
Raigarh 0 6 7 66 10 109 
Raipur 31 549 109 881 389 2254 
Rajnandgaon 5 4 0 5 11 32 
Sarangarh Bilaigarh 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Sukma 0 0 0 1 0 0 
Surajpur 0 0 0 0 2 6 
Surguja 0 4 1 1 0 12 
Uttar Bastar Kanker 0 0 3 2 1 0 
Grand Total 185 1,647 349 2,434 775 4,312 
 
Annexure V 
 
CTS : District-wise no. of candidates en rolled under CTS in Chhattisgarh during 
last three years (2020, 2021and 2022) 
 
Sr. No. Districts 2020 2021 2022 
Male Female Male Female Male Female 
1 Balod 633 332 1008 470 801 434 
2 Baloda Bazar 570 201 694 215 606 207 
3 Balrampur 111 40 87 37 110 41 
4 Bastar 458 164 460 217 441 190 
5 Bemetara 361 129 442 170 493 183 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
6 Bijapur 89 38 128 52 98 41 
7 Bilaspur 1,702 452 1,895 523 1,516 475 
8 Dantewada 184 55 236 83 230 63 
9 Dhamtari 481 299 523 295 417 311 
10 Durg 1,848 866 2,420 909 2,318 931 
11 Gariyaband 135 65 131 72 122 87 
12 Gaurella Pendra Marwahi 217 111 193 104 185 113 
13 Janjgir-Champa 1,775 373 1,964 388 1,822 383 
14 Jashpur 98 47 147 57 128 49 
15 Kabirdham 209 47 272 50 200 54 
16 Kanker 152 249 205 280 170 261 
17 Kondagaon 304 130 337 136 302 115 
18 Korba 418 233 558 262 481 191 
19 Korea 453 1,65 382 172 332 14 9 
20 Mahasamund 370 101 385 108 364 126 
21 Mungeli 153 38 147 39 132 50 
22 Narayanpur 231 79 240 95 262 92 
23 Raigad 714 285 801 279 824 350 
24 Raipur 1,209 311 1,224 284 1,239 295 
25 Rajnandgaon 735 331 845 351 757 361 
27 Sukma 24 16 56 26 48 22 
28 Surajpur 184 102 222 102 183 97 
29 Surguja 336 157 375 167 391 173 
Total 14,154 5,416 16,377  5,943 14,972 5,844 
 
SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA : Sir, I have seen the reply of the Minister.  The scheme is a 
spread-over and all those things . I want to know if there is  a special focus on tribal 
districts where tribal youth can be skilled an d trained.  But, before that, I want to 
request one thing. क ु छ िमिनÎटसर् अच्छी तरह से तैयार होकर आते हȅ और क ु छ कम तैयार 
होकर आते हȅ, लेिकन गडकरी जी तो इतना तैयार होकर आते हȅ िक एक सवाल पर 25-25 िमनट 
लग जाते हȅ। इनकी इतनी preparedness है, तो इसकी जरा टाइम िलिमट कर दीिजए।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Rajeevji, I can tell you that while  everyone will agree about hon. 
Gadkariji, but performance of Dharmendra  Pradhanji today has been amazing. I 
thought you will compliment him.  He has b een very forthright and very exhaustive.  
Now, hon. Minister.  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
55

 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : माननीय सभापित जी, आदरणीय राजीव शुक्ला जी ने ĢÌन पूछा है िक 
आिदवासी युवाओं क े बारे मȂ क्या करना है।  अभी मेरे senior colleague, Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा जी ने 
'पीएम जनमन योजना' क े अंदर िÎकल डेवलपमȂट क े बारे मȂ जो Ģमुख क ंपोनȂट है, उसके  बारे मȂ 
उÊलेख िकया है।  भारत सरकार का गर्ामीण िवकास िवभाग, पंचायती राज िवभाग, एगर्ीकÊचर 
िवभाग, िÎकल िडपाटर्मȂट और सभी राज्य सरकारȂ फोकÎड तरीके  स
े देश क े गर्ामीण युवाओं की 
िÎकल क ै पेिसटी बढ़े, इसके  संबंध मȂ योजना बना रही हȅ।  मȅने इसका एक िववरण रखा ह
ै।   
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा :  सर, क ु छ Ģाइवेट क ंपनीज़ क े साथ गवनर्मȂट collaboration कर रही है, जैसे 
Blinkit, Apna, Quess आिद हȅ।  क्या ऐसा नहीं है िक इन लोगȗ को क ु छ फायदा हो जाए या 
इनको सेलेक्ट करने का कोई Ģोसीजर है? …(समय की घंटी)...  
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान :  सर, हमारी सरकार मȂ पारदिर्शता है, बाकी मेरे िमतर् राजीव शुक्ला जी की दृिÍट 
मȂ चाहे जो िदखे, हमारे यहां तो सारे पारदशीर् हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House is adjourned to meet at 2 p.m. today.  
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise ] 
 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2023-2024 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Supplementary Demands for Grants 2023-2024; Shri  Pankaj 
Chaudhary.  
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी) :  महोदय, मȅ अनुपूरक अनुदान मांगȗ, 2023-24 
को दशार्ने वाला िववरण (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
 
 
SHORT DURATION DISCUSSION  
 
Economic Situation in the Country 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक) : सर, हाउस मȂ कोई भी क ैिबनेट मंतर्ी उपिÎथत नहीं हȅ। I have a 
point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
                                         
 Further discussion continued from the 5th December, 2023. 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, we will take up the Short Duration Discussion. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : सर, हाउस मȂ कोई भी क ैिबनेट मंतर्ी उपिÎथत नहीं हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Further discussion on the "Economic Situation in the country", 
raised by Shri Derek O'Brien on 5th December, 2023. On 5 th December, 2023, Shri 
Rakesh Sinha had concluded hi s address while participatin g in the discussion.  Any 
other Member desiring to speak, that was indicated.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश : सर, हाउस मȂ कोई भी क ैिबनेट मंतर्ी उपिÎथत नहीं हȅ। 
  
MR. CHAIRMAN : T h e  t e l e p a t h y  o f  S h r i  J a i r a m  R a m e s h  i s  s o  s t r o n g  o v e r - t a k i n g  
physical hurdles. The hon. Minister, who is deeply committed to parliamentary 
practices and has been in this House as mu ch as you have been or perhaps more, is 
very much here.  ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, I had in dicated that we would 
like to accommodate as many Members as possible.  Some names have come.   We 
would try to accommodate the hon. Member s. Now, Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar. 
...(Interruptions)...  Now, Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav.   
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश)  : धन्यवाद सभापित जी।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : We will have benefit of his thou ghts on a very important subject, 
very wholesomely initiated by Shri Dere k O'Brien, impactfully initiated.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, what is going on! You are becoming very complimentary 
to Shri Derek O' Brien.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Let me tell you, our equation always has been the same.  But, right 
now, what has happened is, you seem to have acquired a new intellectual ability to 
find it out.   
 
Ģो. राम गोपा
ल यादव : सर, आप 20-22 सेक ं ड क े समय को एडजÎट करवा दीिजए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir, I am here to take care of everything.   
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
57

 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV: Okay, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will drive the technology rather than be driven by it.  
 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: Ǜीमâ, आपने मुझे इस िवषय पर बोलने की अनुमित दी, इसके  िलए 
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ कल से भारत की आिर्थक िÎथित पर हो रही चचार् को सुन रहा हूं 
और बहुत सारे आंकड़े भी िदए गए ह
 ȅ। ये आंकड़े आम तौर पर भूलभुलैया होते हȅ, इन्हȂ पता नहीं 
कौन बनाता है, क ै से बनाता है। िकसी को इधर क े लोग क ंटर्ािडक्ट करते हȅ, तो... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : और कहां बनाता है, इस ग्लोब क े िकस िहÎसे मȂ बनाता है? 
 
Ģो. राम गोपा
ल यादव : सर, मȅ वैसे भी ज्यादा नहीं बोलता हूं, इस बात को आप भी जानते हȅ। आप 
इसको अदरवाइज़ नहीं लीिजएगा, कल जब इधर से लोग बोल रहे थे, तो मुझे ऐसा लग रहा था 
िक य
े िकसी दूसरे गर्ह से आए हुए लोग हȅ, िजनको यहां क े धरातल की कोई जानकारी नहीं है। 
िजनको यहाँ क े धरातल की कोई जानकारी नहीं है। सच बात तो यह है िक मोदी जी क े पिरǛम 
और मोदी जी क े नाम से ये लोग आ जाते हȅ, लेिकन गाँव मȂ देखना नहीं चाहते हȅ िक क्या हो रहा 
है, िकतना िदया जा रहा है और क ु छ लग रहा है या नहीं। जैसे मोदी जी से Ģचार करा िदया -'हर 
घर जल, हर घर नल'। 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  नहीं, 'हर घर नल, तो िफर जल'। 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल  यादव : 'हर घर नल-हर घर जल'। Sorry. Thank you, Sir.
 जब हम अपने 
इलाके  मȂ जाते हȅ, तो लोग हमसे िमलने आते हȅ। क्यȗिक उनकी समÎयाएं होती ह ȅ, इसिलए कोई 
मदद क े िलए आता है, कोई िकसी काम क े िलए आता है। मȅ अक़सर उनसे पूछता हूं िक बताइए, 
क्या आपके  गाँव मȂ हर घर मȂ पानी पहुंच गया है? मȅ कई गाँवȗ मȂ Åयाह-शािदयȗ म Ȃ जाता हूं। सारी 
पक्की गिलयाँ, जो िवधायकȗ ने, सांसदȗ ने,  या Åलॉक िजला पंचायतȗ ने बनवा दी थीं, वे खुदी 
पड़ी हȅ, क्यȗिक वहाँ से पाइपलाइन्स जानी हȅ। वहाँ पाइपलाइन नहीं बनी, टंकी नहीं बनी। यह क्यȗ 
नहीं बनी? लोग जो बताते हȅ, उसके  अनुसार गुजरात वाले लोग - आप उसको अदरवाइज़ मत 
लीिजएगा, वहाँ क े लोग कहते हȅ िक सारे ठेक ेदार गुजरात क े थे और पैसा लेकर चले गए। 
(...Ëयवधान  ...)  लोग
 ऐसा कह रहे हȅ। आप सुिनए, आप िरकॉडर् मȂ देख लीिजए िक ऐसा है िक 
नहीं। मȅ यह ऐसे ही नहीं कह रहा हूं, मȅ ऐसा आलोचना की दृिÍट से नहीं कह रहा हूं, लेिकन कोई 
गाँव ऐसा नहीं है, िजसमȂ हंडर्ेड परसȂट घरȗ मȂ पानी गया है,  
िकसी गाँव मȂ तो एक भी घर मȂ पानी 
नहीं गया है। आपको इसको देखने की जरूरत है, इन लोगȗ से कहने की जरूरत है िक इसको 
कीिजए। आप या तो Ģधान मंतर्ी जी स
े, इतने बड़े आदमी से Ģचार मत कराइए या िफर उस काम 
को पूरा कराइए। िचदÇबरम जी ने कल कहा था िक जमीन पर नहीं िदखता है िक हमारी इकोनॉमी 
बड़ी है, दुिनया मȂ गर्ोथ रेट सबसे ज्यादा है। सुशील मोदी जी ने कहा िक अगर नीचे नहीं िदखता 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
तो तीन राज्यȗ मȂ जनता ने क ै से िजता िदया? लेिकन अगर मȅ यह पूछू ँ िक िहमाचल Ģदेश, 
तेलंगाना और कणार्टक मȂ आप क्यȗ हारे, तो क्या जवाब है? यह कोई तकर् नहीं है, यह कोई 
पैरामीटर नहीं हो सकता है। अगर आंकड़े की बात करȂ, तो यह सही बात है िक पाँचवीं 
अथर्ËयवÎथा ह
ै, सारा मामला बहुत बÊक है, लेिकन पर क ैिपटा जीडीपी मȂ देखȂगे, तो पाएंगे िक 
हम 194 देशȗ मȂ से 133वȂ नंबर पर हȅ। जो आम आदमी की िÎथित है, वह यह दशार्ती है िक हम 
दुिनया मȂ कहाँ Îटȅड करते हȅ, भले ही पाँचवȂ न
ंबर पर क्यȗ न हȗ! हम 194 देशȗ मȂ से 133वȂ नंबर 
पर हȅ।  
सर, ग्लोबल हंगर इंडेक्स 2023 की वÊडर् डेवलपमȂट िरपोटर् क े आधार पर क्या कहता है? 
यह िरपोटर् बताती ह
ै िक 125 देशȗ मȂ से हमारी िÎथित 111 वȂ नंबर पर है। हालांिक एफएसएसआई 
ने इसका क ंटर्ािडक्शन िकया है। इसिलए मȅने पहले ही कहा था िक आंकड़े कौन बनाता है, क ै से 
बनाते है। इसके  आंकड़ȗ पर जाने की जरूरत नहीं है, ल
ेिकन अगर जरूरत  है, तो मȅ यह आंकड़ा 
भी दे रहा हूं िक हम कहाँ stand  करते हȅ, इसिलए क ेवल आंकड़ȗ पर भरोसा मत क ीिजए।  
महोदय, राके श िसन्हा साहब अभी यहाँ पर नहीं हȅ। उन्हȗने कई उदाहरण िदए थे। मȅ जब 
अपने क्षेतर् मȂ रहता हूं, तो मुझसे सैकड़ȗ लोग िमलते हȅ। मेरे पास ऐसे तमाम लोग आते हȅ िक मेरी 
बेटी की शादी है, क ु छ मदद करवा दीिजए। अभी परसȗ ही एक ऐसी िÎथित हुई, जब मȅ वहाँ था।  
- मȅ यहाँ पर दो-तीन िदन
 नहीं था,  मȅ वहाँ था, तब ऐसी ही िÎथित हुई। एक आदमी बैठा था, मȅने 
उससे पूछा िक बताओ, तुÇहारा क्या काम है? उसने कहा िक सर, मȅ अके ले मȂ बात करना चाहता 
हूं। मȅने बाकी लोगȗ से कहा िक अगर सबकी बात हो गई हो, तो चले जाए
ं, नहीं तो मȅ इनको लेकर 
जाऊं । मȅने कहा िक आप चाय पीकर जाएं। उसने कहा िक मेरी बेटी की शादी है, उसकी 
सहेिलयाँ, िजनकी शादी हुई है, वे थोड़े संपन्न पिरवार की हȅ। उसने मुझसे नहीं कहा, अपनी माँ से 
कहा िक जैसे हमारी और सहेिलयȗ की शादी क े िलए लहंगा बनाया जाता है, वैसी हमारी हैिसयत 
नहीं है - क्यȗिक लहंगा तो टीवी क े ज़िरये अब ऐसा िदखने लगा है िक यह 1 करोड़  रुपय े का 
बनता ह
ै, लड़िकयाँ 50 हज़ार का लहंगा भी पहनती हȅ। ऐसा भी होता है, लेिकन सभी लड़िकयȗ 
का मन तो होता ही है। गरीब लड़की हो या कोई और भी हो, वह शादी क े िदन बेहतर लहंगा 
पहनना चाहती है, 1 करोड़ रुपय े का नहीं, तो 10-15 हज़ार रुपय े का ही लहंगा बनवा दो - मेरी  
पत्नी से उनकी बेटी ने कहा था। मȅने कहा िक हम इसकी ËयवÎथा करवा दȂगे, आप िनराश मत 
होइए। लेिकन िÎथित ऐसी नहीं है, जैसा आप कहते हȅ िक उन्हȗने यह कह िदया। उज्ज्वला योजना 
मȂ गैस का िसिंलडर देते हȅ।  उसमȂ यह तो पता कीिजए
 िक जो िसिंलडर िदये गये, उनमȂ से िकतने 
भरे गये।  लोगȗ क े पास उनको भरवाने क े िलए पैसे ही नहीं हȅ।  80 फीस दी लोगȗ क े पास उनको 
भरवाने क े िलए पैसा नहीं है।  पड़ोिसयȗ ने उनसे यह कह कर ले िलया िक आप िसिंलडर हमȂ दे 
दीिजए।  उसमȂ यह िÎथित है।   
 सर, मȅ तो अब यह चाहता हूँ िक लोग गाँव मȂ जाकर देखȂ िक वहाँ जो शौचालय बने हुए ह ȅ, 
उनका उिचत Ģयोग हो रहा है या नहीं हो रहा है।  वहाँ कहीं पर बकिरयाँ बँधी हȅ, कहीं पर लोगȗ ने 
उसमȂ भूसा भर िदया है।  वहाँ पानी की ËयवÎथा नहीं है।  यह िÎथित है।  इस गर्ाउंड िरयिलटी को 
नहीं दशार्या गया है।  यहाँ तो कम से कम ऐसी बात किहए, िजसको सुनने वाला यह समझे िक हाँ, 
यह सही बात कही जा रही है।  इसमȂ स
ुनने वाला क्या कहेगा, यह तो उसके  िसर क े  ऊपर से 
िनकल जाएगा।   
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
59

 
 Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने ÎवाÎथ्य क े िलए बहुत सारी योजनाएँ बनायीं।  यह सही है िक 5 लाख 
रुपय े तक की िचिकत्सा की ËयवÎथा की गयी, लेिकन उसको डॉक्टर नहीं मान रहे हȅ।   आप 
आÌचयर् करȂगे िक इलाहाबाद की एक एमपी हȅ, जो िक बहुगुणा जी की बेटी, रीता जी हȅ, उन्हȗने 
एक मरीज को ग
ंगाराम अÎपताल मȂ भेजा, तो उसने वापस कर िदया िक हम इस काडर् को नहीं 
मानते।   उन्हȗने िचƻी िलखी और मुझसे Ëयिƪगत रूप  से आकर कहा िक आप हेÊथ कमेटी क े 
चेयरमैन हȅ, इसमȂ क ु छ मदद कीिजए, क्यȗिक उसने लाखȗ रुपय े का िबल बना िदया और वह 
इसको मान ही नहीं रहा है।  मȅने गंगाराम अÎपताल क े सुपिंरटȂडȂट से बात की।  मȅ उनको जानता 
हूँ
।  वे एÇस की गविनȊग बॉडी मȂ मेरे साथ थे, उनसे कभी-कभी मुलाकात हो जाती थी।  उन्हȗने 
कहा िक इस काडर् का कोई िठकाना नहीं है।  अब आप यह द
ेिखए िक यह गवनर्मȂट का ऑथȂिटक 
काडर् है, लेिकन इसिलए िक उस पर आप जब ज्यादा पेम Ȃट लȂगे, तो मालूम पड़ जाएगा िक 10 
रुपय े की जो चीज़ है, उसका दाम 1,000 रुपय े ले रहे हȅ, इसिलए कोई इसका फायदा नहीं दे रहा 
है।  क ु छ िनजी अÎपताल ऐसे हȅ िक 500 रुपय े की दवा दी और वे 5,000 रुपय े का िबल बना द ेते हȅ 
िक हमȂ पैसा िमल जाएगा।  यानी इसमȂ लूट हो जाती है।  हमारे यहाँ जो out of pocket 
expenditure है, वह दुिनया मȂ सवार्िधक है।  हमारे ही हेÊथ िवभाग की और दुिनया क े दूसरे देशȗ 
की यह िरपोटर् है िक out of pocket expenditure क े कारण 2-3 परसȂट लोग
 poverty line क े 
नीचे चले जाते हȅ।  ...(समय की घंटी)... अगर एक घर मȂ कोई Ëयिƪ क ȅसर का मरीज हो गया, 
तब उसकी तो जमीन िबक गई।  िफर out of pocket expenditure क ै से कम हो?  मȅ सरकार से 
आपके  माध्यम से अनुरोध करना चाहूँगा  िक यह सबसे बड़ी बात है।  अगर इसको कम
 कर दȂगे, तो 
ठीक रहेगा।  आपकी गवनर्मȂट ने कोिशश की है, no doubt, लेिकन उसका implementation 
सही तरीके  से नहीं हो रहा है।  क ु छ दूसरे देशȗ मȂ, जैसे इंग्लȅड वगैरह मȂ यह क ेवल 2-3 परसȂट है।  
यह पिÌचमी द
ेशȗ मȂ बहुत कम है।  यहाँ अगर इसकी ËयवÎथा नहीं होती है, तो कोई लाभ होने 
वाला नहीं है, आप कहते रिहएगा।   इसिलए मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक इन आंकड़ȗ पर मत 
जाइए।  गाँव मȂ, देहात मȂ, गर्ामीण इलाकȗ मȂ जाकर असिलयत को देख
Ȃ, लोगȗ से बात करȂ और 
किमयȗ को दूर करȂ।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR
 (Andhra Pradesh): Hon. Chairman, Sir, I 
am  ver y t h an k fu l  t o  y o u  fo r g i vi n g  m e t h i s  o p p o rt u n i t y.  As  o n  3 1st March, 2023, the 
debt of the Central Government was Rs.155.6 lakh crore.  This is 57.1 percent of GDP 
in financial year, 2022-23. When compared with unemployment rate as on July, 2023, 
it is 7.95 percent. During the first qu arter of the current financial year, the 
manufacturing sector was not pe rforming well to the expected level.  But, it seems 
the second quarter of this part of growth in the manufacturing sector is there.  Under 
these situations, a big question which aris es in everybody's mi nd is whether the 
Government will be able to become a five  trillion economy by 2025. That has to be 
looked into. In the employment sector, th ere is a big gap. The Government had set 
the ambitious task of providing one million jobs by the end of 2023.  We are in the 
month of December, only a few days are left  at the end of 20 y ears. It has to be 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
considered by the hon. Minister. Sir, we have given to ourselves a cooperative 
federalism. The Centre has the responsibility to  take care of the financial condition of 
the States. There are certain parameters which every State has to follow. But, what is 
happening in the State of Andhra Pradesh is known to everybody. As on date, the 
debt of the State is Rs. 11,28,992 crores. As  per the information given in an answer a 
Parliamentary question, the debt of the Stat e Governments at the end of the financial 
year 2022-23 is estimated to be about 28 per cent of GDP.  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
The debt percentage of the State Govern ment of Andhra Pradesh falls within 
28 per cent of GDP.  As pe r the statement of RBI, . ..(Interruptions)... Sir, what is 
happening every day? . ..(Interruptions)... State is a part of the country. Every day 
they are interrupting.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : You have to speak on the Indian economic situation. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR : It is about finance and Andhra Pradesh 
is a part of India.  ...(Interruptions)...  It is a part of India, not outside. Sir, it is as per 
the record of the RBI. . ..(Interruptions)...  As per the statement of RBI, the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh raised Rs. 46, 443 crores from market.  It repaid only 
Rs.10,339 crores.  It has not even paid half of the amount borrowed from market.  In 
reply to my parliamentary question, on 1
st August 2023, it has been inter alia stated 
that guarantees of Rs. 22,363 crores du ring financial year 2021-22 and Rs. 57,444 
crores during financial year  2022-23 have been issued by  the State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The subject is 'Position of Indian Economy', your speech 
will be examined, please. You have to speak on Indian economy. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR:  The State Government has pressed into 
service its State Public Sector companie s, Special Purpose Vehicles and other 
equivalent instruments into borrowing s and thereby attempted to deceit the 
Government that its net borrowings are with in the prescribed lim it. But, the Central 
Government has stated that the borrowing s by the State Public Sector companies 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
61

 
and other equivalent instruments ...(Time Bell rings.)...  where principal and the 
interest are to be serviced out of the State Budgets. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Your time is over....(Time Bell rings.)...  
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR : In spite of this advisory issued by the 
Central Government, they did not stop the borrowings. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar, please conclude; 
your time is over. The time was three minutes, please conclude. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR : Hon. Chairman has given ten minutes' 
time to my colleague Member.  The State is becoming a debt-ridden State, the debts 
of the Government are increasing day by day.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am inviting other person now. Your time is already over; 
please conclude. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR : As per records, the CAG itself has 
observed the Government is making heinou s mistakes in financial management. The 
CAG itself said about the financial year ending on 22
nd March that it has borrowed Rs. 
1,20,000 crores without showing or telling the Assembly. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude now. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR : The Audit certificate in the name of 
qualified opinion was given in the history of the country. ... (Time Bell rings)...  She 
said that she can tell the debts of the corporation as per what is given to her, but she 
is not giving full information about the debt s of the corporation. CAG says that for 
every rupee spent in 2021-22, there is a debt of 51 paise.  
* 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I am inviting other speaker now; it will not go on record 
any more.  
The next speaker is Shri Jethmalani. ...(Interruptions)...  Please speak on the 
subject. ...(Interruptions)... Your time is fifteen minutes. ...(Interruptions)...  
                                         
* Not recorded. 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Nothing is going on record . Please follow the rules. ...(Interruptions)...  Now, Shri 
Mahesh Jethmalani. 
 
SHRI MAHESH JETHMALANI (Nominated):  Hon. Deputy Chairman, I thank you for 
this opportunity to speak on this most im portant subject on th e economic health of 
this country. Sir, the essence of the critic ism from the Opposition Benches led in the 
main by the former Finance Minister, Mr. Chidambaram and hon. Member, Mr. Derek 
O' Brien is that there is no point in the present Government tom-tomming about 
India's high growth rate. On the ground, this  high growth rate has not translated into 
indicators vital for the poor such as high  employment and low inflation. Sir, Mr. 
Chidambaram, as usual, has shifted the goalp ost, but this shift is heartening in one 
respect. In April this year, citing the World Bank's latest GDP estimate for India, he 
attacked the Government and he said that  it was only Mr. Mo di, who was boasting 
about the economic growth rate in th e country. The World Bank Development 
Update, which he relied on, had cut India's growth forecast to 6.3 per cent from the 
earlier 6.6 per cent.  Mr. Chidambaram, ho wever, has been rep eatedly wrong about 
his economic forecast regarding the NDA Government's policies and programmes. 
Again, the World Bank's estimates have proved to be hopelessly wrong and in the last 
two quarters, India's growth rate has been very impressive and way above, the world 
average growth rate at 7.6 per cent and 7. 8 per cent.  Now, Sir, Mr. Chidambaram, 
in a clear case of what can only be calle d convenient amnesia, accepts the growth 
rate. He doesn’t dispute these figures thou gh he earlier did and criticized us for 
boasting about it and predicting this high  growth rate.  Now he  has moved on from 
his blind reliance on foreign forecast about India's growth, but he  laments now that 
what use of high growth rates if high unemployment and high inflation persists.  As for 
employment, Mr. Chidambaram relies upon the Periodic Labour Force Survey.  Sir, it 
is a very good survey. It has got good meth odology and its data is unexceptionable. 
So, let us go by the PFLS data. First, the data reflects -- I am afraid I will have to read 
this out because there are fi gures involved; normally, I don’t like reading it out; 
normally I would like to address ad hoc, exte mpore, but I will read it out -- that both 
in quantity and quality, the employment situation improved consistently before the 
Covid pandemic.  From 2017-18 to 201 9-20, regular wage/salaried employees 
increased by 1.5 crores, a gr owth of 13.2 per cent; th e increase among females was 
0.72 crores or 29.4 per cent; and that for males 0.79 crores or 8.8 per cent.  Further 
formal employment increased by 1.2 cror es or 25.3 per cent. The quantity of 
employment improved pre-pandemic as well. From 2017-18 to 2019-20, the UR, that 
is, the unemployment rate, which capture s long-term unemployment decreased from 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
63

 
6 per cent to 4.8 per cent.  The Labour Force Participation Rate, LFPR, increased 
from 49.8 per cent to 53.5 pe r cent; the Workers' Population Ratio increased from 
46.8 per cent to 50.9 per cent.  These chan ges were widely dispersed in rural and 
urban areas and for males and f e m a l e s .   N o w ,  S i r ,  t h i s  i s  t h e  p r e - C o v i d .   A s  
everybody knows, there was a setback to the economy during Covid.  But let us 
come to the post-Covid situation.  Post-Covid urban employment registered a robust 
V shape recovery after the adverse impacts during lockdown and the second wave of 
the pandemic.  Compared to the October- December 2019 quarter, in the April-June 
2023 quarter, the worker population ratio increased from 44.1 per cent to 45.5 per 
cent. The labour force participation ratio has increased from 47.8 per cent to 48.8 per 
cent.  Unemployment rate has declined fr om 7.8 per cent to 6.6 per cent. Sir, as 
urban areas were most aff ected by the Pandemic, the complete recovery in 
employment in urban areas is crucial.  Th e unemployment rate recorded in April-June 
2023 quarter is the lowest.  This is import ant. The unemployment rate recorded in 
April-June, 2023 quarter is the lowest over the last five years.   
The annual PLFS survey data on whic h Mr. Chidambaram relies upon, which 
covers both rural and urban areas, also shows complete recovery in employment 
post-Pandemic. This pattern of complete recovery in employment is reflected similarly 
if you look at data from the EPFO an d the MGNREGA. The monthly EPFO data 
discloses – this is again very important stat istic – net additions in August, 2023, has 
been 116 per cent higher than in December,  2019.  Hon. Chairman, you know that 
EPFO data the additions to which is empl oyees’ contribution, there is 116 per cent 
addition to the EPFO which reflects the quantum of employees that have risen and the 
quantum of employment, therefore, risen. The demand for work – this is also very 
important – under NREGA in December, 2022, is half the demand when compared to 
2023.  Sir, NREGA is chosen when people are desperate for work where there is no 
other work. It is now half the demand.  It  shows that the demand for distress work 
has declined sharply in rural areas.   
 Finally, as per PLFS – again the same  survey which Mr. Chidambaram relies 
upon – the unemployment rate for person, th is is an overall picture, aged 15 and 
above, at the all India level, has decreased to 3.2 per cent only in 2022-23 from 4.1 
per cent in 2021-22.  This is the stat e of unemployment which Mr. Chidambaram 
harps on.   
 As regards inflation, as per data releas ed by the National St atistics Office, the 
CPI was 4.25 per cent in May th is year, 4.81 per cent in J une this year and 5.02 per 
cent in September, well below the RBI’s up ward tolerance limit of 6 per cent. We 
have been below 6 per cent continuously.  Ultimate test – forget figures and  
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
statistics – is this.  Employment and inflat ion are matters of great concern to poor.  
Ultimately, the only test whether unemployment and inflatio n is hurting people is the 
election results. Sir, the overwhelming resu lts recently show that people are satisfied 
with employment and inflation levels. 
 Sir, a former British Prime Minister is alleged to have said that there are three 
kinds of lies – lies, dam lies and statistics.  Mr. Chidambaram is an excellent juggler 
of facts.  I leave it to hon. Members of th e House and others watching this debate to 
decide which category do Mr. Chidambaram’s st atements fall within.  Sir, perhaps, it 
merits emphasis that, as Finance Minister, Mr. Chidambaram, presided over some of 
the greatest scams this country has ever se en which devastated our banking sector, 
ruined investors and severely retarded  economic growth and the very important 
indicators of employment and inflation, wh ich he has so eloquently waxed about in 
this House.  Sir, the only silver lining I may add personally is that his activities and 
those of his Government have, in their aftermath, enriched a battalion of lawyers 
whose earnings I cannot grudge. Sir, hon. Member, Mr. O’Brien, being a leader from 
a regional party, the TMC, has struck a parochial note. He talks about 8.4 per cent 
growth rate in West Bengal, which is true. I can’t deny that.  But, being a Member of 
a national party, I have all India concerns. Bu t, I do admit to having a soft corner for 
West Bengal, having studied in a boarding sc hool there from the age of ten to sixteen 
in that picturesque hill station, Darjeeling. The burden of Mr. O’Brien’s song is that 
India’s high growth rate has only enriched  billionaires and has widened the inequality 
gap.  I acknowledge, as I said, that West Bengal has a high growth rate of 8.4 per 
cent, which is above the national average. But, perhaps, an examination of the State-
wide data should reveal to Mr. O’Brien where the fruits of economic growth in West 
Bengal have gone.  If per capita income is the measure of economic welfare, then, 
West Bengal’s per capita income is well below the national average. And, in fact, 
apart from a few North-Eastern States, it is  one of the lowest in the country.  Then, 
again, on the question of in come inequality, which he talk s so much about, the gini 
coefficient which is now a measure used by  economists to measure income inequality 
income distribution.  As a measure of ineq uality, West Bengal has a coefficient of 
0.38, which is the third-largest in the country, and more than the national average.  
So, if you go by income inequality and inco me distribution, his State performs the 
third-worst in the country.  Perhaps, as a former quiz master, he  needs to ask some 
questions to himself; and, he may discover some home truths.   
Sir, in conclusion, it is the right of th e Opposition not merely to ask questions, 
but to ask incisive and searching questions of the Treasury Benches.  But, equally, it 
behoves the Opposition not to buttress th eir case with selective facts, slanted 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
65

 
questions, and distorted data.  The people of  this country deserve to know from their 
elected representatives the unvarnished truth. 
Thank you very much, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Shri Binoy Viswam.  You have three minutes.  
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM (Kerala): Sir, please give me ten minutes.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  There is nothing in my hands.  It is there in the list here. 
   
SHRI BINOY VISWAM: Sir, my friends, including my previous speaker Mr. Jethmalani, 
on the BJP side are trying very hard to pose  a picture which is most untrue.  Where is 
the ‘V’ shaped development, which you are talking about? It can’t be seen in the 
country. The fact is that the people are hungry.  The youth is unemployed. The young 
people are knocking at every door for employment.  I ask you what happened to your 
promise of providing two cror e jobs every year. Where is it?  Do you know that 22.4 
crore Indians are hungry in the country?  And,  you say that everything is fine here! 
You live on propaganda. The BJP thrives on propaganda. And, you thrive on 
propaganda in a very nasty way.  What happened to your Beti Bachao Beti Padhao  
scheme? Major share of its fund, to the tune of 42.3 per cent, has gone for 
propaganda alone. This is the right wing way of development! You forget the poor; 
you forget the people. You just live on propaganda and spend money on 
propaganda. This is the real truth of the country today. The economy is in shambles. 
Unemployment is on the increase, hunger is on the increase, and the people have no 
huts to live in. Your projects are great but they are not bringing the fruits for the 
people. Sir, we want a decent life. At this age of ours, when the country has 
completed 77 years of Independence, in this country, the maximum number of people 
are illiterate even today. Today, at night, the maximum number of people go to sleep 
with half stomach.  Sir, this is the country in which children below the age of five years 
are dying the maximum in number.  This is the countrywhere the pregnant women are 
anaemic the maximum. These are WHO statem ents, and you shut your eyes to this 
fact. You tell the whole world Vishwaguru, Vishwaguru.  No; that Vishwaguru’s story 
is not a real story; it is a story of illusions;  it is a story of lies and half-truths, and you 
tell the world that the whole world is looking at you. ( Time-bell rings.)  Sir, the time 
has come that the people demand a chan ge in the country. Don’t think too much 
about the victory. That victory is a temporar y victory. I can tell you when all the forces 
of this country which stand for secularism and democracy, if they ever stand together 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
and hold hands together, we are sure th at you can be defeated. The struggle has 
begun. Don’t think that the struggle has ende d. It is only a temporary situation. The 
struggle continues and this House states that the people will win, not the propaganda 
masters.  Sir, Pope Francis has told ab out one fact.  What is that point? ( Time-bell 
rings.)  Sir, one minute. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.  
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM : Sir, Pope Francis said, if a ll the endeavours of the human 
beings are centred only for profits, th en, the whole ecosystem, the whole ethics, 
religion, will be in shambles.  So, people are important, Sir, not the profits.  This is 
the question.  We ask the question to you:    Who are important - the people or the 
profits?   We say, the people ar e important and not your profits. ( Time-bell rings )  
You plead for Adanis, Ambanis.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude. 
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM: Your Government is a Adani-Ambani Government.  Don’t give 
their figures.  You present a rosy picture saying that this country is growing. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM: No.  This country is growing only for the seven per cent of the 
population.  They are growing, not the peop le.  Your figures are their figures and not 
the peoples’ figures.  We stand for the people, not for your figures.   Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Mahua Maji, you have three minutes. 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी (झारखंड) : उपसभापित महोदय, 'Economic situation in the country' 
िवषय पर मȅ यही कहना चाहूंगी िक िकसी भी देश क े िवकास क े िलए आिर्थक िवकास सबसे 
महत्वपूणर् हो
ता है।  यह मेरुद ंड की तरह होता है।  यिद वह सीधा न हो, तो देश चरमरा जाता है।  
हम 21वीं सदी मȂ हȅ और िवÌव गुरु  बनने की ख्वािहश भी रखते हȅ।  मगर िंचता का िवषय यह है िक 
देश मȂ बेराजगारी चरम पर है, िजसका असर हर क्षेतर् मȂ पड़ रहा है।  रोटी, कपड़ा और मकान 
जैसी बुिनयादी जरूरतȗ क े पूरे होने क े बाद ही हम कला, संÎकृ ित, सािहत्य आिद क े िवकास की 
बात सोच सकते हȅ।  अब कला, सािहत्य, स
ंÎकृ ित क्यȗ - क्यȗिक कला, संÎकृ ित, सािहत्य और 
संगीत मनुÍयȗ को पशुओं से अलग करता है, देश को सÇमािनत Îथान देता है और िवÌवगुरु  बनाने 
मȂ महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभाता है।  एक भूखा पेट Ëयिƪ देश क े िवकास मȂ क्या साथ देगा और द ेश 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
67

 
को िवÌवगुरु  बनाने की ख्वािहश को क ै से पूरा करेगा?  उन्हȂ सÇमानजनक रोजगार चािहए और 
आिर्थक िनिंÌचतता चािहए।  क्या हर साल दो करोड़ नौकिरयां देने का वायदा वतर्मान क ेन्दर् 
सरकार पूरा कर पाई?  यिद कर पाती, तो अब तक 2014 से 2023 तक लगभग 20 करोड़ लोगȗ 
को नौकरी िमल जाती, देश मȂ आिर्थक िनिंÌचतता आती और ज्यादा स
े ज्यादा लोग देश को 
िवÌवगुरु  बनाने की मुिहम मȂ लग जाते।  अिग्नवीर - फौज मȂ लगभग तीन साल की नौकरी।  पहले 
जब एक गरीब का बेटा फौज मȂ जाता था, तो पूरा पिरवार िनिंÌचत हो जाता था, लेिकन अब तीन 
साल क
े  बाद जब उसकी शादी होगी, बच्चे हȗगे, बूढ़े मां-बाप हȗगे, तो वह क्या करेगा?  वह तो 
बेरोजगार हो जाएगा।  क्या वह आत्महत्या क े बारे मȂ सोचेगा या िफर वह क ेन्दर् सरकार का जो 
वायदा है िक 80 करोड़ जनता को मुÄत राशन िदया जा रहा ह
ै, उस वायदे क े अनुसार सरकार से 
राशन लेकर अपने पिरवार का पेट पालेगा?  इससे उसके  आत्मसÇमान का क्या होगा?  क्या वह 
आत्महत्या करने पर मजबूर नहीं होगा?  क Ȃ दर्
 सरकार कहती है िक जीडीपी बढ़ रहा है, Îटॉक 
मािर्कट ऊपर जा रही है, लेिकन इससे क ु छ बड़े उǏोगपितयȗ सिहत क ु छ ही Ģितशत लोगȗ को 
मुनाफा हो रहा है, देश की ज्यादातर गरीब जनता को इससे मुनाफा नहीं हो रहा है। सरकार 
कहती है िक िवकास हो रहा ह
ै, सरकार क े दावे क े अनुरूप  यिद लगभग 80 करोड़ भारतीयȗ को 
मुÄत राशन िदया जा रहा है, िजनके  पास खाने को पैसे नहीं हȅ, तो इसका साफ मतलब ह ै िक 
इतने लोग बेरोजगार हȅ, युवाओं क े पास रोजगार नहीं है िक वे अपने पिरवार का पेट पाल सकȂ, 
अपनी आय से आटा, चावल, अनाज खरीद सकȂ ।  80 करोड़, यानी देश क े लगभग तीन-चौथाई 
लोगȗ की आिर्थक िÎथित दयनीय है।  
 महोदय, सरकार ǎारा िकए जा रहे खचर् मȂ भी Ëयापक
 असमानता िदखती है और खचर् की 
priority आÌचयर्चिकत करती है। एक तरफ मनरेगा जैसी गरीबȗ की योजना क े पैसे समय पर 
Îटेट को देने मȂ आनाकानी हो रही है, वहीं क ेन्दर् सरकार क े िवज्ञापनȗ एवं पिÅलिसटी का खचार् 
बढ़ता ही जा रहा है। ‘बेटी बचाओ, बेटी पढ़ाओ’ जैसी योजनाओं मȂ भी पिÅलिसटी की जा रही ह
ै। 
महोदय, झारखंड सरकार क े भी मनरेगा क े अंतगर्त सामगर्ी मद मȂ भुगतान हेतु लगभग 426 
करोड़ रुपए  ल
ंिबत हȅ, जबिक झारखंड गरीब और िपछड़ा राज्य है। यह देश क े अन्य राज्यȗ से 
नीचे दूसरे नÇबर पर है। यह पठारी इलाका है, बािरश क े अलावा खेती-बाड़ी नहीं होती है। यहां पर 
टर्ैिफिंकग की समÎया है, पलायन और िवÎथापन की समÎया है। इसीिलए बहुत जरूरी  है िक 
मनरेगा क
े  पैसे समय पर िदए जाएं।  
महोदय, भारत सरकार की कोल क ंपिनयȗ ǎारा झारखंड मȂ कोयले की रॉयÊटी क े 
लगभग 1 लाख 36 हजार करोड़ रुपए  लंिबत ह
ȅ। ...(समय की घंटी)... माननीय मुख्य मंतर्ी जी ǎारा 
बार-बार आगर्ह करने क े बावजूद अभी तक रॉयÊटी का पैसा नहीं िदया गया है, जबिक देश मȂ 
कोयले की िजतनी खपत है, उसका मैिक्समम िहÎसा झारखंड से आता है। यह आिर्थक सौतेलापन 
क्यȗ है?  
महोदय, पुरानी पȂशन ËयवÎथा िफर से लागू की जाए, नहीं तो लोगȗ क े बुढ़ापे की लाठी भी 
िछनती जा रही है। हमारी Îटेट मȂ हमारी सरकार ने पुरानी पȂशन ËयवÎथा को बहाल कर िदया है 
और ऐसा हर Îटेट मȂ होना चािहए। राज्य
ȗ को जीएसटी संगर्ह की देय रािश समय पर नहीं िमलती 
है। झारखंड जैसा गरीब राज्य भी इस वजह से आिर्थक परेशानी झेल रहा है। Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास 
योजना का लाभ हमारे राज्य मȂ आठ लाख गरीबȗ को नहीं िमला है। यह लाभ भी उनको नहीं िदया 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
जा रहा है। गैर-भाजपा राज्यȗ क े साथ आिर्थक मामलȗ मȂ भेदभाव नहीं होना चािहए। ...(समय की 
घंटी)... ‘सबका साथ, सबका िवकास’ िसफर् जुमला नहीं होना चािहए, धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद। Now, Dr. Fauzia Khanji. Three minutes.  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Sir, there has been a lot of discussion on numbers 
and economic indicators since yesterday that measure the economic situation of our 
country.  Perhaps, it is time for a recalibrati on of our matrix to ensure that the pursuit 
of progress is accurately reflected.  Economic growth isn’t just about numbers.  There 
is a deeper narrative to explore.  These numbers have to reflect on ground.  
Sir, it is essential to move beyond  surface level reporting.  The most 
concerning issue this year is  the escalating unemployment cris is in India, particularly, 
the dearth of Government job opportunities.  
 सर, मȅ एक किव की छोटी सी किवता पढ़ना चाहूंगी। जो बेरोजगारी पर है - “बेरोजगार”। 
यह देवी Ģसाद िमǛ की िलखी हुई है। 
 
“यह सवाल उसे शिर्मन्दा कर देता है, 
िक क्या कर रहा है वह आजकल। 
वह डकै ती नहीं डालता, वह तÎकरी नहीं करता, 
वह हत्याएं नहीं करता, वह फरेबी क े वादे नहीं करता, 
वह देश नहीं चलाता है, 
                िफर भी यह सवाल उसे शिमȊदा कर देता है िक 
क्या कर रहा है वह आजकल। ” 
 
ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺷﺎﻋﺮ ﮐﯽ ﭼﻬﻮﭨﯽ ﺳﯽ ﻧﻈﻢ ﭘﮍﻫﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﻮﻧﮕﯽ۔ ﺟﻮ ﺑﮯ ﺭﻭﺯﮔﺎﺭی ﭘﺮ ﮨﮯ،’’ ﺑﮯ ﺭﻭﺯﮔﺎﺭ‘‘۔ ﻳہ 
ﺩﻳﻮی ﭘﺮﺳﺎﺩ ﻣﺸﺮﺍ ﮐﯽ ﻟﮑﻬﯽ ﮨﻮﺋﯽ  ﮨﮯ؎
 
ﻳہ ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﺍﺳﮯ ﺷﺮﻣﻨﺪﻩ ﮐﺮﺩﻳﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ، 
ﮐہ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮐﺮﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ ﻭﻩ ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﻞ۔  
ﻭﻩ ڈﮐﻴﺘﯽ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ڈﺍﻟﺘﺎ، ﻩ ﺗﺴﮑﺮی ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ،  
ﻳہ ﮨﺘﻴﺎﺋﻴﮟ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ، ﻭﻩ ﻓﺮﻳﺒﯽ ﮐﮯ ﻭﻋﺪے ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ،  
ﻭﻩ ﺩﻳﺶ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﭼﻼﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ،  
ﭘﻬﺮ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻳہ ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﺍﺳﮯ ﺷﺮﻣﻨﺪﻩ ﮐﺮﺩﻳﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ  
ﮐﻴﺎ ﮐﺮﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ ﻭﻩ ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﻞ۔  
 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, unemployment is intertwined with alarming 
consequences notably with the rise in youth suicides. According to a report from Azim 
                                         
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
69

 
Premji University, 42 per cent young gradua tes were unemployed.  Sir, according to 
CMIE data, jobs in manufacturing droppe d 31 per cent between 2016 and 2023.  
According to the latest report by the NCRB, over 13,000 students took their own lives 
in India in 2022; 9.6 of the suicides were those who were self-e mployed or salaried 
professionals.  Unemployed persons comprise  9.2 per cent of all suicides reported in 
India. Graduates account for 5.2 of all suicide deaths.  This dire scenario, Sir, often 
pushes vulnerable individuals towards extrem e measures either towards an uptick in 
the use of drugs, petty crimes or suicides.  
Sir, we understand that this Govern ment has decided to put the number-
system on fifth gear by relying on head line-friendly numbers turning the nation’s 
progress into a clickbait economy. But, Sir, this is reducing complex issues to 
attention-grabbing figures and potentia lly overlooking the nuanced aspects of 
comprehensive development.   Development is not about tall buildings or tall claims; it 
is about the quality of life that can never be measured in numbers. मȅ एक किव की दो 
पंिƪयाँ कहकर अपनी बात खत्म करूं गी। अगर गरीब और गरीब होता जा रहा है और धनवान 
और धनवान होता जा रहा है, तो मȅ कहूंगी  िक,  
 
"मालूम करो हाथ उन्हीं का तो नहीं है, 
जो लोग आग बुझाने मȂ लगे हȅ।" 
 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपने मुझे यहाँ पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है, इसके  िलए 
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
†ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮ ﻓﻮﺯﻳہ ﺧﺎﻥ: ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺷﺎﻋﺮ ﮐﯽ ﺩﻭ ﻻﺋﻨﻴﮟ ﮐﮩہ ﮐﺮ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﺑﺎﺕ ﺧﺘﻢ ﮐﺮﻭﻧﮕﯽ۔ ﺍﮔﺮ ﻏﺮﻳﺐ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻏﺮﻳﺐ ﮨﻮﺗﺎ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ 
ﺍﻭﺭ ﺩﻫﻨﻮﺍﻥ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺩﻫﻨﻮﺍﻥ ﮨﻮﺗﺎ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺗﻮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﮩﻮں ﮔﯽ ﮐہ،  
  
ﻣﻌﻠﻮﻡ ﮐﺮﻭ ﮨﺎﺗﻬ ﺍﻧﻬﻴﮟ ﮐﺎ ﺗﻮ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ،  
ﺟﻮ ﻟﻮگ ﺍٓگ ﺑﺠﻬﺎﻧﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻟﮕﮯ   ﮨﻴﮟ۔
  
  ﻣﺎﻧﻴﺌﮯ ﺍُپ ﯽﺳﺒﻬﺎﭘﺘ ﺟﯽ، ﺍٓپ ﻧﮯ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﻳﮩﺎں ﭘﺮ ﺑﻮﻟﻨﮯ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ ﺩﻳﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺍٓپ ﮐﺎ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﮩﺖ 
ﺩﻫﻨﻴﻮﺍﺩ۔ 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, Dr. Fauzia Khan.  Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai; 
you have three minutes. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :  Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, thank you for 
giving me the opportunity to participate in today's discussion on behalf of the AIADMK 
Party. 
                                         
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 To begin with, it may be claimed that In dia is one of the fastest growing major 
economies of the world and that it is the sixth largest economy now.  Since there is 
paucity of time, I would come straight to the subject.  The GST plays its role in the 
country's economic development.  We hear a lot from Members of different States 
here that the share of the GST pertaining to their State has not been given their due to 
which their economies were suffering.  Th e Government must work out a mechanism 
to settle the issue immediately, without maki ng the States suffer due to non-payment 
of GST share from the Centre.   
Sir, as far as the erstwhile Governme nt of Tamil Nadu is concerned, the 
AIADMK Government also suffered during that period.  Hon. Amma, Puratchi 
Thalaivi, Dr. Jayalalita, and Edappadi Palanisamy , as Chief Ministers, faced financial 
constraints.  Despite that, hon. Amma was able to implement many welfare measures 
like providing laptops and bicycles to students, through Amma canteens, Amma 
pharmacies, distributing gold mangalsutras to young women at the time of marriage, 
etc.  During Shri Edappadi Palanisamy's term as Chief Minister, despite huge financial 
crisis, he also extended welfare programme s for farmers and efficiently tackled the 
situation during Covid period.  He also ex tended financial assistance of Rs. 2,500 for 
each family during Pongal festival.  He also ensured reservation of 7.5 per cent 
students from Government schools for admission into MBBS courses and also 
established 23 Medical Colleges for medical education.  
As mentioned by many hon. Members ye sterday, we support the demand for 
financial assistance by the present Government in Tamil Nadu to tackle the situation 
arising out of heavy rains and floods in Ch ennai, Thiruvallur and Kanchipuram due to 
Cyclone Michaung.  When th e earlier Government faced su ch a flood situation, the 
Amma Government and Edappadi Palanisamy Government tackled it very efficiently 
and took all possible measures.  Also, I wi sh to state here that the present Chief 
Minister of Tamil Nadu said th at while it was an artificially created situation earlier, the 
present one was a natural situation.  I am unable to understand what Tamil Nadu 
Chief Minister mean by 'artificial situation'. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Sir, I would like to say here that the present DMK 
Government has failed to take adequate precautionary measures to tackle the 
rainflood situation in Tamil Nadu. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
71

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please, confine yourself to  the discussion on national 
economy. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI :  Sir, they spent Rs. 4,500 cror es on drainage work.  We fail 
to understand where the money has gone. ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, the DMK 
Government needs to explain their inefficien cy in tackling the rainflood situation in 
Tamil Nadu. ...(Interruptions)...  ...(Time-bell rings)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Your time is over. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, Tamil Nadu is in India. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Your time is over. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Sir, I have got every right to speak about what the DMK 
Government is doing. ...(Interruptions)...  The floods have created havoc in Tamil 
Nadu and people are suffering.  Especially  in Chennai, people are unable to move 
out.  The present DMK Government ha s failed to tackle the situation. 
...(Interruptions)...  They want Rs. 5,000 crore from the Central Government.  What 
happened to the Rs. 4,500 crore wh ich was allocated for this ...  ...(Interruptions)...  
They must explain where it has gone. ...(Interruptions)... 
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : We are discussing the national economy. 
...(Interruptions)... Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI :  Sir, flood rain water is not flow ing there; it is liquour that is 
flowing throughout Tamil Nadu. ...(Interruptions)... There is ganja flowing in Tamil 
Nadu. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please. ...(Interruptions)... I am calling the next speaker. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Sir, there is a lot of ineffici ency in Tamil Nadu Government. 
That is what the Tamil Nadu Government is doing. ...(Interruptions)...Thank you, 
Sir.  
 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The next speaker is hon. A jit Kumar Bhuyan.  You have 
three minutes. ...( Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. ...( Interruptions)... 
Whatever Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan is speaking will go on record. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI AJIT KUMAR BHUYAN (Assam):  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, thank you for 
giving me this opportunity.  Despite an impressive growth rate of 7.2 per cent in the 
current financial year ended by March, 2023, the demand side economy of the nation 
shows a very dismal picture.  The demand  for goods and services in India has been 
stagnant or declining due to various factors such as low income gr owth, high rate of 
inflation, massive unemployment and inequa lity in income and wealth.  Some hon. 
Members were talking about employment. The views of the Members of the ruling 
party are a part of propaganda and are ba sed on some lies. The unemployment rate 
for the country touches 3.2 per cent for the year 2022-23 as per the official Report 
published by the Centre for Monitoring In dian Economy. As per the NSO data, the 
rate of inflation in Indian economy is 5.02 per cent which is slightly declining from 6.83 
per cent in August, 2023. Oxfam India's Repo rt on 'Inequality in India', which is 
released recently, finds that  5 per cent of Indians own mo re than 60 per cent of the 
country's wealth. That is the reality. The extreme inequality in numbers has put the 
whole Indian economy in a situation of serious concern.  In the list of World Happiness 
Index published by the United Nations Su stainable Development Solutions Network, 
India ranks at 126
th position out of 150 countries for 2023.  In accordance with the last 
HDI Report, India ranked at 132nd position out of 191 countries of the world.  It is also a 
very serious concern for Indian economy that '2023 Global Hunger Index' gives India a 
rank of 111 out of 125 countries.    
I am from Assam.  So, let me speak a few words on Assam.  If we consider the 
State of Assam, it is the 16th largest, 15th most populous and 26th most literal State out 
of 28 States of India.  In terms of GDP, Assam's rank is 17th.  It is Rs. 5.67 lakh crore.  
Approximately 32.07 per cent of Assam's popula tion lives below the poverty line.  As 
per the official statistics, Assam is India's 6th poorest State.  Thank you. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The next speaker is Shri Ramd as Athawale; not present.  
The next speaker is Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam): Sir, today, world economy is suffering 
very seriously.  At this critical time of  world economy, we are discussing here the 
economic situation of our country.  Countri es like the United Kingdom and Germany 
are very seriously thinking about their economies.  The Prime Minister of New Zealand 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
73

 
publicly announced inability to develop workforce and towards unemployment issue in 
New Zealand due to poor economic condition. But, at this critical juncture, India is 
making unprecedented historic economic development in our country under the 
leadership of the hon. Prime Minister, Shri  Narendra Modi.  Today, inflation is going 
down and the foreign exchange reserve in Indi a is at an all time high.  Infrastructure 
development is going on at a very fast pace in  I n d i a .   T h i s  i s  t h e  r e a l i t y  o f  I n d i a n  
economy today and this has been acknowl edged by even the World Bank.  In a 
recent report, the World Bank has stated that in this critical time that the world 
economy is facing, the Indian economy is do ing very well.  This is not my opinion.  
This is the opinion of the World Bank.  Rece ntly, they have published the Bulletin.  In 
this Bulletin, the World Bank has recognised an unprecedented economic growth of 
our country.  According to the World Bank's latest report titled 'India Development 
Update (IDU)', India continues to show resilience against the backdrop of a 
challenging global environment. It further states that India is growing at very fast pace 
and India has witnessed unprecedented expa nsion in its economy. As per the World 
Bank's half-yearly report, despite the signif icant global challenges, India emerged as 
one of the world's fastest growing major economies in the Financial Year 2022-23 with 
a growth rate of 7.3 per cent.  India's gr owth rate was the second highest among the 
G-20 countries.  Recently, we very successfully conducted the G-20 Summit in India, 
and India's rank is second among the G-20 countries in the matter of economic 
development.  This is the present scenario of our country.   
 I would like to say one more thing.  This resilience wa s underpinned by a 
robust domestic demand, strong public infrastructure investment and a strengthening 
financial sector.  Bank credit growth increased to 15 .8 per cent in the first quarter of 
the Financial Year 2023-24 when compared with 13.3 per cent in the first quarter of 
the Financial Year 2022-23.  The Indian banking sector is working on a sound banking 
system.  India follows the branch banking system and not the unit banking system as 
is followed in the USA.  At a time when banks in major countries of the world are 
sinking and becoming financially bankrupt, the Indian banking system is doing very 
well and it has played a major role in the development of our country.   
 Then, many hon. Members have talked about inflation. It is agreed by 
everybody, and even when Shri P. Chidambaram was sp eaking yesterday, he also 
admitted that inflation rate, in the last three months, is going down like anything in our 
country. This is the real situation of our country. Before Independence, the per capita 
income of Assam was higher than that of ot her parts of the country.  For a long time, 
when India was ruled by the Congress Party,  the per capita inco me of Assam went 
down like anything.   
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Birendraji, please conclude.   Your time is over.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA :  What is the reason?  Why is the per capita 
income of Assam going down?  I would like to say that this is due to the critical flood 
situation there.  So, I appeal that in this  strong financial position, the Government 
should show some positive intent to help Assam in dealing with the flood situation.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA : I would like to say just one more thing. In our 
economy, tea industry plays a very important role. In earning foreign exchange also, 
tea industry plays a major role. Now, the Indian tea industry, particularly in Assam and 
West Bengal, is facing serious challenge from the tea industries of Sri Lanka and 
Kenya.  So, I would like to request the Government of India to come forward and help 
the tea industry of Assam for its growth and to face the challenged posed by the tea 
industries of Sri Lanka and Kenya.  Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Dr. Santanu Sen.  You have nine minutes.   
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
DR. SANTANU SEN (West Bengal) : Sir, before I come to the subject, I would like to 
strongly protest the pose and posture of one of our Cabinet Ministers targeting the 
only lady Chief Minister of  the country just a few minutes  back regarding one film 
festival.  I can show you the video if you want.  I strongly protest it. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please come to the subject. 
 
DR. SANTANU SEN: I am coming to the subject but it should be noted.   
 So far as economy is concerned, ther e are two pictures of Indian economy.  
One is the picture of privilege and the other pi cture is of the poverty.  Sir, we live in 
India where six out of ten people survive on less than 260 rupees a day.  So far as 
Global Hunger Index is concerned, out of 125 countries, it is  very unfortunate to 
remind you that India ranks 111
th.   India witnesses thirty suicides a day due to poverty 
or unemployment.  We live in India where,  on the one hand, we talk about multi-
trillion economy while, on the other hand, al most 550 lakh people are pushed into 
poverty due to healthcare cost and mainly due to out of pocket expenditure.    At the 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
75

 
same time, you are targeting a few States  by withholding the money for National 
Health Mission, which is depriving the common  people of particularly-targeted States 
like West Bengal.  It can be won over by political path.   We live in India where it would 
take more than 200 years for a minimum wage  worker in a rural area to earn what a 
top paid executive in an Indian company earns in a year. 
 So far as NREGA is concerned, it is  very unfortunate that though a sizable 
Indian population depend on NREGA, in th e last Budget, the budgetary allocation for 
NREGA has been curtailed by more than 33  per cent and we have heard our learned 
Prime Minister talking about NREGA when he said, यह तो माटी खोदने का काम है।  We 
have seen in the Budget that it has been  decreased.  Sir, 154 farmers, daily wage 
earners and labourers commit suicide every day. 
 So far as NREGA is concerned, let me te ll you that in our State of West Bengal, 
there are more than 21 lakh of people who have already done their job but they are still 
deprived of their wages for the last two co nsecutive years despit e repeated, official 
and formal intimation.  So many teams have  come and in the name of investigation, 
they have made many excuses. 
 Let me give you a recent example. Let me share with you today's reply given in 
Lok Sabha regarding fake job card.  Out of  7.4 lakh fake job cards found in the 
country as a whole, 3 lakh were from Uttar Pradesh, a State having double-engine 
sarkar; 1.15 lakh were from another State being run by an unofficial ally of BJP, that 
is, Odisha; and, 47,000 were found in anot her State being run by another friendly 
political party of BJP, that is, Andhra Prades h.  So far as West Bengal is concerned, 
it is only 5,000.  So far as job card and Aadhar linking is concerned, West Bengal 
ranks second.  In Andhra Pradesh, it is 99.7 per cent and in West Bengal, it is 99.68 
per cent.  Even then, Bengal is  being deprived of its funds.   Sir, 21 lakh people are 
getting deprived including one lady from Hoogly District, Nupar Hati, which was 
mentioned by our leader, Shri Derek O'Brien yesterday.  
 Sir, I was not here to raise the issue of gini coefficient but I have seen my 
colleague, a BJP Nominated Member, a renowned lawyer talking about the gini 
coefficient while addressing our Party leader, Derek O'Brien who does enough 
research before putting forward any fact or figure.  Let me give you the facts.  You 
were talking about gini coefficient targeting West Bengal.  I will give you data of gini 
coefficient in the whole country.   The Gini coefficient in India is forecast to amount to 
0.35 in 2023.  Number of people in India,  who are earning less than 2 dollars per day 
is forecast to amount to 0.16 billion in 2023. This is for my beloved colleague.  Sir, we 
live in India where we are having the maxi mum possible unemploymen t in the last 45 
years.  Per capita income in India is even less than one-fifth of that of China and less 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
than one-thirty two of that  of the USA.  We live in India where green curtains 
gracefully conceal the harsh truth that over 40 per cent of India's urban populace calls 
slums their homes.  We can recall that day of Namaste Trump when a four feet wall 
was built just to conceal the actual scenario  because the friend of learned Narendra 
Modi ji, Donald Trump, was supposed to visit our country.  That is the harsh reality.  
Sir, in India, on November, 2016, we found demonetization.  We know what its effect 
was and how the poor people suffered from this.   
   
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) in the Chair.] 
  
Sir, we live in India where 2 per cent of wealth tax on hundred billionaires can feed the 
children under the Mid Day Meal Programme  for 3.5 years and where 3 per cent of 
wealth tax on the Indian b illionaires can fund the Nation al Health Mission for three 
years.   
So far as the Awas Yojana is concerned, eleven lakh and thirty three thousand 
people are being deprived.  Several teams visited our State of West Bengal in the 
name of national-level monitors, in the na me of Central team.  What did they do?  
Sixty-nine teams visited, Sir.  Our Minister came on 7
th November, 2022.  Then, on 
24th November, entire data was supposed to be given, and it was put on the portal in 
due course of time.  Several enquiries were there.  Action taken report was submitted 
in due course of time.  Again, on 25th of November, questions were raised which were 
replied on 28th of November.  But till date, no fund has come.  Once again, on the 1 st 
of December, another intimation has come to our Government of West Bengal that 
again 7 teams will visit 14 districts of our Stat e of West Bengal.  Why, Sir?  Is it the 
only reason that it is being run by the Trinamool Congress, and Madam Mamata 
Benerjee cannot be defeated politically?  Is it the only reason? Just tell me one State 
other than West Bengal which is being deprived in the same fashion.  You can't.   
 Now, Sir, let me tell you India's external debt.  It rises up to  629 billion dollars.  
The report given by the RBI in June, 2023 says  this.  Total debt per Indian over nine 
years has increased by 2.5 times.  The outs tanding debt on the Government of India 
was 55.87 lakh crore rupees on 31 st March, 2014 and it has become 155.31 lakh crore 
rupees on 31 st March, 2021, courtesy our BJP Government.  Sir, every Indian has a 
loan which he has not taken.  In 2014, the per capita loan was Rs. 43,214 and in 2023, 
it has become Rs. 1,09,373, courtesy our BJP Government.   
Sir, let me tell you another fact.  So far as houses are concerned, 63 per cent 
of women of India and 35 per cent of men don't have their own house.  So far as 
cooperative federalism is concerned, it hardly  exists in the recent scenario.  We are 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
77

 
talking about the economy.  Covid has unveile d the real scenario.  We have seen the 
migrant labourers who were walking from on e place to another.  They were carrying 
their parents on their shoulders.  Our Go vernment has taken no step to solve the 
issues of these migrant labourers.  (Time-bell rings.)  Covid has shown the path, but 
unfortunately, our Government never takes any lesson from this incident.  So far as 
the unemployment is concerned, Centre for Monitoring of Indian Economy speaks 
about unemployment.  There is highest unemployment in th e last 45 years.   More 
than 40 lakh sanctioned Central Govern ment posts are there. Around 30 lakh 
employees are there and more than 9.6 lakh posts are lying vacant till date.  That is 
the real scenario of Indian unemploymen t. Unfortunately, so far as literacy is 
concerned, there is a tremendous gender disparity in literacy. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY):  Please conclude.  
  
DR. SANTANU SEN:  We don't know when Census will take place.  Sir, just give me 
thirty seconds more. Sir, I will finish by saying that we are celebrating 75 years of 
Independence.  We have two different ideas in  India.  And the story is called 'survival 
of the richest'.  Let us strive for true eq uality and create a soci ety where not a single 
individual is left behind.   
 My final comment will be this.  We ar e  v e r y  h a p p y  t o  t a k e  p a r t  i n  t h e  S h o r t  
Duration Discussion.  Earlie r it was for four hours.  (Time-bell rings.)   N o w  i t  h a s  
been extended for eight hours.   We are really very happy.  My two suggestions are:  
W h y  c a n ' t  w e  h a v e  t h e  s a m e  t y p e  o f  S hort duration Discussion on Cooperative 
Federalism?   
 Lastly, I have got one question in my mind .  If I can be satisfied by your reply.. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : Dr. Sen, please.  I am 
sorry. 
 
DR. SANTANU SEN:  The Government is giving so much time for Short Duration 
Discussion.  Are they not having any Busine s s ?   T h a t  i s  t h e  q u e s t i o n  i n  m y  m i n d .   
Thank you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY):  Dr. Dinesh Sharma. 
 
डा. िदनेश शमार् (उǄर Ģदेश) : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपकी क ृपापूवर्क अनुज्ञा से आज आिर्थक 
िवषय पर मȅ इस िवǎत समूह क े समक्ष क ु छ िवचार रखना चाहता हूं
। हम सब जानते हȅ िक भारत 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
की अथर्ËयवÎथा तेजी क े साथ आगे बढ़ रही है।  एक वह समय था, जब िवदेश क े लोग भारत की 
खराब छिव को Ģदिर्शत करते थे और वृǄिचतर्ȗ मȂ उपहास उड़ाते हुए हम सब देख लेते थे िक कहीं 
गरीब, भूखा, नंगा और इस Ģकार की आवृिǄ वाला Ëयिƪ, जो दीनहीन अवÎथा मȂ है, उसको 
भारत का नागिरक बताकर व
ृǄिचतर् मȂ िदखाते थे।  मोदी जी क े आने क े बाद जो नौ वषर् का समय 
गुजरा है, उसमȂ आज वही भारत का नौजवान हाथ मȂ क ंÃयूटर िलए हुए जब िवदेश मȂ जाता है, तो 
अमेिरका जैसे देश क े राÍटर्पित को यह कहना पड़ता है िक इंिडयन्स से बच कर रहो, कहीं ऐसा न 
हो िक ये हमारे द
ेश क े नौजवानȗ का रोज़गार छीन लȂ।  मान्यवर, अथर्ËयवÎथा का जो Îवरूप 
बदला ह
ै, उसका मूल कारण यह रहा है िक कर्मागत तरीके  से, एक िविधसÇमत तरीके  से Ģत्येक 
िंबदु को छू ने का Ģयास इस भारतवषर् मȂ नौ वषș से लगातार िकया गया है।  क े न्दर् सरकार की जो 
भी योजनाएं थीं, उन योजनाओं का एक-दूसरे क े साथ कनेक्शन रहा है।  हम सब जानते हȅ िक 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ǎारा जब 'जन-धन योजना' की घोषणा की गई थी, तो लोग उपहास उड़ा रहे 
थे।  130 करोड़ िंहदुÎतािनयȗ मȂ से क ेवल 25 लाख या 50 लाख लोगȗ क े पास ही खाते हुआ करते 
थे, जबिक आज 55 करोड़ क े आस-पास जन-धन क े खाते हȅ।  मुझे यह बताते ह
ुए Ģसन्नता होती 
है िक अथर्ËयवÎथा का बदलाव क ै स े हुआ।  आज जनधन खातȗ मȂ लोगȗ क े िलए यह जरूरी  नहीं है 
िक एक िनिÌचत रािश को जमा करȂ, िफर भी हमारे देशवािसयȗ का हौसला देिखए िक आज जो 
जनधन खातȗ मȂ, जो ये 55 करोड़ खाते हȅ, उनमȂ औसत 4 हज़ार रुपय े जमा हȅ।   
हम कह सकते ह
ȅ िक िनिÌचत रूप  से यह Ģगित हमारे देश मȂ इस बात की पिरचायक है 
िक हमने Îवदेशी को अपनाया,  हमने उत्पादन को बढ़ाया। जहां तक लघु उǏोग की बात है, गांधी 
जी कहा करते थे िक हमȂ बहुत बड़ा उत्पादन नहीं, हमȂ बहुत लोगȗ क े ǎारा िकया गया उत्पादन 
चािहए। आज हमने न क
े वल एमएसएमईज़ को बढ़ाया है, हमने न क ेवल करोड़ȗ लोगȗ को मुदर्ा 
लोन देकर उǏमी क े रूप  मȂ पिरलिक्षत िकया, बिÊक हमने Îटाटर्अप क े माध्यम से, मेक इन 
इंिडया, Îटैण्डअप इंिडया और िडिजट
ल इंिडया क े माध्यम से अĢत्यक्ष रूप  मȂ रोजगारȗ क े सृजन 
की Ģिकर्या को तेज िकया है।  मान्यवर, आज भारत एक तेज िवकास गित से बढ़ने वाला देश बना 
है।  भारत की मजबूत अथर्ËयवÎथा ने भारत की अंतरराÍटर्ीय छिव
 को बढ़ाया है।  आज यह देश 
आत्मिनभर्रता की तरफ बढ़ रहा है।  हम कह सकते हȅ िक इन नौ वषș मȂ हम भारत क े हर गांव मȂ 
िबजली पहुंचाने क े लÑय क े िबÊकु ल िनकट पहुंचे हȅ।  यह देश मिहला, युवा, िकसान, गरीब क े 
कÊयाण क े िलए समिर्पत लोगȗ का देश बन चुका है।  आपके  संज्ञान मȂ यह लाना जरूरी  है िक 
आज सरकार क
े  समावेशी Ģयासȗ क े माध्यम से सरकार ने साढ़े तेरह करोड़ से अिधक लोगȗ को 
गरीबी  रेखा से ऊपर िकया है। आज 'पीएम िकसान' सिहत कई योजनाओं क े माध्यम से अन्नदाता 
को बड़े पैमाने मȂ सशƪ करने का Ģयोजन चल रहा है।  द ेशभर मȂ चल रहे रोजगार मेले ने बहुत 
सारे रोजगार पैदा िकए हȅ।  आज भारत िरकॉडर् तोड़ जीएसटी का कलेक्शन कर रहा है।  क ृिष 
उत्पादन क े मामले मȂ आज िनत्य नए िरकॉडर् बन रहे हȅ।  मान्यवर, यह वह भारत है, जहां पर करȗ 
का भार पड़ा करता था।  सतर्ह-सतर्ह करȗ का समावेशन करने क े बाद उनका सरलीकरण िकया 
गया।  आज कई गुना, बिÊक मȅ तो कहूंगा िक पचासȗ गुना ज्यादा करȗ का जो संगर्ह है, उस संगर्ह 
ने आज पूरे भारतवषर् को यह िदखाया है िक भारत याची नहीं है।  भारत वह देश नहीं है, जहां 
कांगर्ेस क े शासनकाल
 मȂ जरूरत पड़ने पर अमेिरका से सड़ा हुआ लाल रंग का गेहूं आता था और 
यहां आने क े बाद राशन काडर् ǎारा वह लोगȗ को ब
ंटता था।  वह लाल रंग का गेहूं वहां क े जानवर 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
79

 
नहीं खाते थे, तो वह िंहदुÎतान क े िलए भेजा जाता था।  आज इस देश मȂ आप देखȂ, तो पांच िकलो 
अन्न ढाई वषș से, कोरोना क े बाद भी आज मुÄत मȂ देने का काम िकया जा रहा है।  इसके  कारण 
आज यहां गरीबी रेखा स
े ऊपर उठने का कर्म सतत जारी है।   
 मान्यवर, best credit-rating agency S&P Global क े अनुसार, भारत 2030 मȂ तीसरी 
बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनने जा रहा है।  आज हम यह कहते हȅ िक हम पांचवीं अथर्ËयवÎथा हȅ।  हालांिक 
पहले हम अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ दसवȂ नÇबर पर थे या उससे पहले ग्यारहवȂ नÇबर पर थे, जबिक आज 
हम पांचवीं अथर्ËयवÎथा बन च
ुक े हȅ।  इस पांचवीं अथर्ËयवÎथा क े बनने क े पीछे मȅ यह कह सकता 
हूं िक िजसे हम purchasing power parity (PPP) बोलते हȅ, उसका अगर आकलन िकया  जाए, 
तो भारत तीसरी अथर्ËयवÎथा की तरफ अगर्सिरत हो चुका है।  आज भारत का नागिरक जब 
िवदेशȗ मȂ जाता है, तो वह िसर उठाकर देख सकता है और मȅ यह कह सकता हूं िक हमारा 
जीडीपी, जो िपछली ितमाही मȂ 7.6 परसȂट हुआ है, उसने भी बहुत लोगȗ को चȚकाया है।  आज 
चीन म
ुदर्ाÎफीित क े कारण कराह रहा है, आज जमर्नी मुदर्ाÎफीित क े कारण अपने न्यूनतम िंबदु 
पर पहुंचा है, आज अमेिरका मȂ हलचल मची हुई है और िĤटेन की आिर्थक िÎथित को सुधारने क े 
िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी को इÎतीफा देना पड़
 रहा है और आिखर मȂ िÎथरता आ सके , इसके  िलए एक 
सनातनी को लाकर Ģधान मंतर्ी बनाना पड़ता है और जब सनातनी आता है, तो वह वहां की 
अथर्ËयवÎथा को िÎथर करने का काम करता ह
ै। लेिकन वहीं दूसरी ओर यह भारतवषर् है, िजसका 
जीडीपी आगे बढ़कर 7.6 Ģितशत हो गया है, जबिक वैिÌवक दर 3 Ģितशत क े आस-पास है।  
आज आईएमएफ भारत की सराहना कर रहा है और चीन की गर्ेिंडग कम कर रहा है।  आज भारत 
िवÌव नेतृत्वकतार् क े रूप  मȂ जी20 मȂ उभरकर आया।  उसका मूल कारण यह था िक हमारा 
उत्पादन बढ़ा है।  हमने उपभोƪा क े अनुसार िडमांड को िकर्एट िकया ह ै, आज हमारा टर्ेड बैलȂस 
फ ेवर मȂ हुआ है।  आज िनयार्त संवधर्न की नीित पांव पसार रही है, आज आयात कम हुए हȅ, आज 
Îवदेशी क े कारण हमारा जो उत्पादन है, उसकी लागत Ģित इकाई कम होती जा रही ह ै।  यही 
वजह है िक भारत आज ऐसा भारत बना है। लोग Ëयाख्या कर रहे थे िक बंगाल मȂ जी डी पी 8.5 
परसȂट है।  बंगाल तो पहले से समृǉ Ģदेश हुआ करता था।  अंगर्ेज जब सोने की िचिड़या समझकर 
िंहदुÎतान मȂ आए थे, तो सबसे पहले वे आिर्थक राजधानी क े रूप  मȂ बंगाल मȂ गए थे।  बंगाल मȂ जब 
िविभन्न Ģकार क े शासन आए, तो कर्मागत रूप  म
Ȃ उनकी आिर्थक ËयवÎथा का Ǫास होता गया।  
एक समय रोजगार
 क े िलए लोग कहीं जाते थे, तो वे बंगाल जाया करते थे।  मुझे खुशी है िक मȅ 
उǄर Ģदेश से हूं।  कोरोना क े काल मȂ तमाम लोग वापस उǄर Ģदेश आए।  उनको उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 
रोजगार िमला।  आज बंगाल क
े  लोगȗ को रोजगार खोजने क े िलए दूसरी जगहȗ पर जाना पड़ रहा 
है।  मȅ यही कहना चाहता हूं िक आज की बदलती हुई िÎथित मȂ 13.5 करोड़ लोगȗ को हमारी 
सरकार ने गरीबी की रेखा से ऊपर उठाया है और 'पीएम िकसान सÇमान नीिध' जैसी योजनाओं 
ने अन्नदाताओं को बड़े पैमाने पर सशƪ िकया है।  रोजगार मेलȗ क े माध्यम से आज रोजगारȗ का 
सृजन हुआ है।  क ेवल नौकरी देने से रोजगार नहीं होता है।  हम अĢत्यक्ष रूप  मȂ रोजगार देते हȅ।  
हम नौकरी भी देते हȅ और Îटाटर्-अप से नौकरी को िकर्एट भी करते हȅ।  हम िविभन्न
 Ģकार क े 
पूंजी िनवेश को बढ़ाते हȅ।  हम सोना नहीं बेचते हȅ, बिÊक हम अपनी िनिध का सृजन Îवयं िकया 
करते हȅ।   आज  अगर  आप देखȂ तो िनरंतर बढ़ते हुए जो UPI transactions ह
ȅ, उनसे 
िडिजटलीकरण क े Ģतीक क े रूप  मȂ भारत िनत्य नए िशखरȗ को छू  रहा है। अभी हमने त्योहार 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
मनाया, दीवाली मनाई। हालांिक पहले जब हम त्योहार मनाते थे, तो हमारे उǄर Ģदेश मȂ curfew 
लगा करते थे िक दीवाली आई तो curfew, ईद आई  तो curfew, ले िकन अब की दीवाली मȂ पूरे 
देश ने चार लाख करोड़ रुपए  से ज्यादा का Ëयवसाय िकया है। यह भारत की समृǉता की ओर 
बढ़ने का  एक कदम ह
ै। लोग बोलते हȅ िक भारतीय जनता पाटीर् आती है तो वह काशी क े 
िवÌवनाथ बाबा का िज़कर् करती है, वह मथुरा का िज़कर् करती है, वह अयोध्या का िज़कर् करती है, 
लेिकन मोदी जी की सोच देिखए िक आज धािर्मक पयर्टन की दृिÍट से काशी िवÌवनाथ कॉिरडोर 
बनने क
े  बाद कई गुणा लोग वाराणसी मȂ आने लगे हȅ। आज कई लाख लोग अयोध्या मȂ आ रहे हȅ, 
जहां पर Ǜी रामलला का मंिदर बनने जा रहा है। धािर्मक आÎथा का सÇमान  और साथ मȂ आिर्थक 
समृिǉ का भी आयाम ĢाÃत हो, यह  नीित क ेवल उसी की हो सकती है, जो िनÍपक्षता क े भाव से 
काम करे।  
मान्यवर, आज जो वैिÌवक रेिंटग हुई है, उसमȂ 2030 तक हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा को तीसरी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा बनाने क े बारे म
Ȃ कहा गया है। क ु छ लोगȗ ने कहा है िक हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा िवÌव की 
तीसरी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनेगी, economic power बनेगी, वह 2027 तक बनेगी।  भारतवषर् मȂ मोदी जी 
मुदर्ा योजना लेकर आए और आज आठ करोड़ लोग इसके  कारण उǏमी बन चुक े हȅ। आप लोग 
रोजगार सृजन की बात कहते हȅ। मȅ आपको रोजगार स
ृजन की बात बताना चाहता हूं िक 2014 मȂ 
क ेवल 350 startups थे और आज 1,25,000 startups हȅ और 110 से ज्यादा unicorns active हȅ। 
हमारे देश मȂ लोगȗ की औसत आय भी बढ़ी है। मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक आयकर िवभाग क
े  
जो आंकड़े हȅ, उन्हȗने यह बताया है िक 2014 मȂ औसत आय 4 लाख रुपए  थी, आज यह 2023 मȂ 
बढ़कर 13 लाख रुपए  हो गई है। अगर यह िवÌलेषण नहीं होता तो यह आय क ै से बढ़ती, कहां से 
पैसा आया।  जो overhead expenditures थे, जो उपिरËयय थे, उन पर रोक लगाई गई, जो 
ĥÍटाचार था, उस पर रोक लगाई गई और उन पर रोक लगाने क े बाद जो पैसा आया, वह जनता 
का पैसा, जनता क े खातȗ मȂ पहुंचाया गया। यह मोदी नीित
 है और इस मोदी नीित क े कारण आज 
जो बदला हुआ पिरदृÌय है, उसमȂ आज IITs खुल  रहे हȅ, आज IIMs खुल रहे हȅ, आज medical 
colleges खुल रहे ह
ȅ। आज यह साÇĢदाियक दंगȗ वाला Ģदेश नहीं है, आज यह सनातिनयȗ का 
िवरोध करने वाला देश नहीं है, क ु छ जगह पर लोग हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन पूरा देश नहीं है। आज 
यह देश का सÇमान बढ़ाने वाला देश है। यह अब सोने की िचिड़या नहीं रहा  है-- पहले हमारा देश 
सोने की िचिड़या होता था, िवदेशी आते थे और पंख उखाड़ कर चले जाते थे-- अब यह सोने का 
दहाड़ता हुआ शेर वाला देश  बना है। यह मोदी क े ÎवÃनȗ का देश है और यह आिर्थक सÇपन्नता की 
ओर जाने वाला देश है। मान्यवर, मȅ आपको एक उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं िक रोजगार क ै से बढ़ता 
है। आज से 9 साल पहले खादी गर्ामोǏोग मȂ क ेवल 25-30 हजार  करोड़ रुपए  का Ëयवसाय था, 
जबिक आज 1,30,000 करोड़  से ज्
यादा का Îवदेशी उत्पाद बढ़ चुका है। यह Îवदेशीकरण की 
जो Ģिकर्या है, उसके  कारण अब भारत हिथयारȗ को खरीदने वाला देश नहीं है, अब हिथयारȗ की 
supply करने वाला देश
 भी बन गया है। अगर आप देखȂ, तो भारत ने 2022-23 मȂ 15,920 करोड़ 
रुपय े का रक्षा िनयार्त िकया है। िपछली सरकारȗ क े मुकाबले भारत का आिर्थक Îवाबलंबन कई 
गुना बढ़ा है।  आज  मोबाइल क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत पूरी दुिनया मȂ नÇबर दो पर बना हुआ है।  
मान्यवर, जब मȅ उǄर Ģदेश मȂ उपमुख्यमंतर्ी था, तब  IT 
मंतर्ालय मेरे पास था।  मȅने देखा 
िक कोरोना क े समय चीन से कÇपिनयां भाग रही थीं, तो वे िवयत नाम नहीं जा रही थीं, वे कोिरया 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
81

 
नहीं जा रही थीं, वे िहन्दुÎतान मȂ आ रही थीं और िहन्दुÎतान मȂ भी वे उǄर Ģदेश मȂ आ रही थीं। 
अगर आज 100 मोबाइÊस बनते हȅ, तो 65 मोबाइÊस उǄर Ģदेश मȂ बनते हȅ और उसके  उपकरण 
भी उǄर Ģदेश मȂ बनते हȅ।  यह बदलते हुए भारत का Îवरूप ह ै। यह मोदी जी का िनÍपक्ष भाव से, 
समपर्ण भाव से अथर्ËयवÎथा को ठीक करने का जो चकर् था, उसके  कारण हुआ है। आज उपभोग 
साल दर साल बढ़ रहा है, िपछले वषर् की तुलना मȂ इस वषर् digital transaction की  संख्या 61  
फीसदी और digital transaction की रािश मȂ 47 फीसदी की वृिǉ हुई है। यही नया भारत है। यह 
नव भारत का उत्थान है। यह वह भारत नहीं है, जो कटोरा लेकर भीख मांगने जाएगा। हम याची 
नहीं हȅ, अब हम दाता बन गए हȅ। यह वही भारत है िक जब यहां पर एड्स होता था, मलेिरया होता 
था, डȂगू होता था, तो हमारा देश दूसरे देशȗ क े सामने हाथ फ ैलाता था िक टीका दे दो, टीका दे 
दो। कई गुणा दामȗ पर वह टीका, वह वैक्सीन िहन्दुÎतान को िमला करती थी और सालȗ बीत 
जाते थे तथा हजारȗ, लाखȗ लोग मर जाते थे। यहां पर कोरोना आया। इससे पूरा िवÌव Ģभािवत 
रहा और दिसयȗ लाख
 लोगȗ की मृत्यु अमेिरका जैसी जगह पर हुई। भारत मȂ तीन-तीन वैक्सीन् स 
बनीं और 120 देशȗ को वैक्सीन सÃलाई करने का काम िकया गया।  
मान्यवर, यह बढ़ता हुआ देश है और मȅ आपके  संज्ञान मȂ लाना चाहूंगा िक लोग अमेिरकन 
डॉलर, यह डॉलर, वह डॉलर का उÊलेख करते थे, लेिकन आज जब से भारत जी20 का िसरमौर 
बनकर आया है, 18 देशȗ मȂ रुपय े मȂ टर्ांजेक्शन होने लगा है। मान्यवर, भारत की मुदर्ा बढ़ रही है, 
भारत का अिÎतत्व बढ़ रहा ह ै, भारत का सÇमान बढ़ रहा है। मȅ आपके  संज्ञान मȂ यह भी लाना 
चाहूंगा िक जो डायरेक्ट बेिनिफट टर्ांसफर (डीबीटी)Îकीम है, उसकी वजह से अब कोई कहने 
वाला नहीं है िक 100 रुपय े भेजते हȅ, 85 रुपय े का गबन हो जाता है और क ेवल 15 रुपय े ही पहुंचते 
हȅ। मोदी जी कहते हȅ िक हम डायरेक्ट बेिनिफट टर्ांसफर Îकीम से जो 100 रुपय े भेजते हȅ, वे 100 
क े 100 रुपय े आज जनता क े खाते मȂ पहुंचते हȅ।  
मान्यवर, यह बदलता हुआ भारत है और मȅ इस बदलते हुए भारत मȂ कह सकता हूं िक 
इनकम टैक्स िरटनर् का भी एक डेटा आया है। उस डेटा से यह पता चलता है िक िविभन्न आय 
वगș मȂ टैक्स बेस बढ़ा है। हर वगर् मȂ टैक्स फाइिंलग मȂ कम से कम तीन गुना वृिǉ हुई है। मान्यवर ,
यह पारदिर्शता है, यह ईमानदारी
 है, यह Îवेच्छाचािरता से  काम करने की ĢवृिǄ का पिरणाम है 
िक लोग आज Îवेच्छा से कर देने क े िलए आगे आए हȅ। ..( समय की घंटी).. मान्यवर, म
ȅ एक 
अनुरोध करूं गा िक आज आपने मुझे पहली बार इस िवǎत समूह मȂ बोलने का सुअवसर Ģदान 
िकया है, अत: मेरी आपसे यह अपेक्षा है िक आप मुझे क ु छ समय दȂग े। क्यȗिक मȅ पहली बार बोल 
रहा हूं, इसिलए मȅ आपसे यह अपेक्षा करूं गा िक आप मुझे थोड़ा समय दȂगे।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुखȂदु शेखर रॉय) :  मेरे हाथ बंधे हȅ। जो टाइम एलॉट िकया गया है, आपको 
उसी क े िहसाब स
े बोलना है।  
 
डा. िदनेश शमार् : मान्यवर, मȅ पहली बार बोल रहा हूं, इसिलए मुझे benefit दे दीिजए। 
   
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुखȂदु शेखर रॉय) : आपको पंदर्ह िमनट दे िदए हȅ, आप एक िमनट और बोल 
लीिजए। Please. ...(Int
erruptions)... Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
डा. िदनेश शमार् : मान्यवर, मȅ यह कह सकता हूं िक आज पूरा भारतवषर् िजस तेजी से िवकिसत 
हुआ है, उसके  कारण आज भारतवषर् मȂ लोगȗ की भावना बढ़ी है। उन्हȗने भारत क े बारे मȂ कहा है 
िक क ेवल यह वषर् भारत का नहीं है बिÊक यह सदी भारत की होने वाली ह ै, यह सदी भारत की है। 
यह भारत अथर्ËयवÎथा क े मामले मȂ सुदृढ़ होगा, आत्मिनभर्र होगा और िवÌव का नेतृत्व करने वाला 
होगा।   
मान्यवर, मȅ आिखर मȂ सÇमािनत िवपक्ष से एक  बात कहूंगा। मȅ बहुत सपने संजोकर आया 
था िक मȅ िवǎतजनȗ क े समूह मȂ बोलने का अवसर पाऊं गा। यहाँ िवǎतजन हȅ भी, लेिकन मȅने देखा 
है िक जैसे फ ु टबॉल का मैच होता है, उसमȂ आप देखते हȅ िक रेफरी भी दौड़ता है और फ ु टबॉल क े 
िखलाड़ी भी दौड़ते हȅ, लेिकन दोनȗ मȂ एक अंतर होता है। िखलाड़ी गोल करने क े िलए दौड़ते हȅ 
और रेफरी गलती िनकालने क
े  िलए दौड़ता है। मȅने देखा िक िवपक्ष की भूिमका रेफरी की भ ूिमका 
बनी है। यिद रेफरी भी नकारात्मक भूिमका मȂ आ जाए, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से गलत तथ्यȗ क े 
ĢÎतुितकरण से समÎया होती है। इस सरकार की एक सकारात्मक दृिÍट है, इसिलए मȅ आÏवान 
करूं गा िक िवपक्ष आगे बढ़कर आए और मोदी जी क े सुशासन मȂ एक सहभागी बने।  आिर्थक रूप  
स
े सुदृढ़ बनकर इस भारत राÍटर् की संĢभुता, जो पूरे िवÌव का िसरमौर बनने क े िलए अगर्सिरत 
है, उसमȂ उसकी सहभािगता सुिनिÌचत हो। मȅ इन्
हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ अपनी वाणी को िवराम देता हूं। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे यहाँ पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है ,इसके  िलए आपका बहुत -
बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी सुखȂदु शेखर रॉय) :  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। आपका भाषण बहुत ही 
जोशीला था। Now, Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham.  
 
SHRI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala) : Sir, I thank th
e Congress Party, Congress 
President, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge ji, CPP Chairperson, Shrimati Sonia Gandhi ji, Shri 
Rahul Gandhiji and CPP leadership for giving me this opportunity to make my maiden 
speech here in this august House, especially, on the important topic of the state of 
economy of our nation.  Today, we are at  the very end of the second term of BJP 
Government.  We have had nearly ten years of BJP and Modiji's rule.  Our hon. Prime 
Minister loves to compare Congress Party's 60 years of governance with his 10 years.  
In 60 years of Congress rule led by Nehru ji to Shri Manmohan Singhji, our nation grew 
from the depth of a resource-starved economy  which the British left us with, at the 
time of Independence, in 2014 to become one of the tenth largest economies of the 
world and having built the foundation and springboard to grow further.  With this 
strong foundation laid by the Congress Party, our nation's economy has grown 
naturally since Independence and after 2014 also. However, the face of growth, which 
is claimed by BJP Government, is also un der the clouds of suspicion as several 
indicators such as poverty, unemployment , health on the ground, point to the 
contrary.  More importantly, at what co st has this growth been claimed by BJP 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
83

 
Government since BJP came to power? This is an important question for us to 
decipher the cost of this growth claimed by BJP Government that our nation has had 
to pay since BJP Government came to power.  
Sir, let me put forth a few important poin ts in this regard. First, our nation's 
debt which stood at Rs.58.60 lakh crore,  that is, 52.20 per cent of GDP as on 31 st 
March, 2014, today, is Rs.155.60 lakh crore, that is, 57.10 per cent of GDP.  It means 
that the debt on every Indian has increased by 2.53 times in the last nine plus years. 
The astronomical increase in the Governme nt's debt due to the Modinomics means 
that each Indian today has a debt, I mean, India's per capita debt today is Rs. 
1,09,373 compared to Rs.43,124 in 2014.  I very respectfully ask our Prime Minister as 
to what is your answer to adding debt of Rs.66,249 in ten years of your Government 
versus Rs.43,124 in sixty years of Congress Go vernment on to the shoulders of every 
Indian in your ten years of heading the Government.   
Secondly, our nation had an unemployme nt rate of 4.90 percentage in the 
financial year 2013-14 when Congress Party was in power.  The unemployment rate, 
this financial year, is hovering around 7.90 percentage plus. I very respectfully ask our 
Prime Minister as to what is your answer  to the unemployment rate in our nation 
almost doubling in your ten year term of heading the Government.   
Thirdly, India's ranking in Global Hunger Index was 55 in 2014.  Today, India's 
ranking in the Global Hunger Index is 111 ou t of the 125 countries with sufficient data 
to calculate Global Hunger Index scores.  I very respectfully ask our Prime Minister as 
to what is your answer to the ranking of the Global Hunger Index of our nation falling 
from 55 to 111 in your ten years term of heading the Government.   
Fourthly, India's ranking in the Worl d Economic Forum - Annual Gender Gap 
Report was 114 in 2014 and, today, India's ranking in the World Economic Forum - 
Annual Gender Gap Report is 127. I very respectfully ask our Prime Minister as to what 
is your answer to the ranking of the World Economic Forum - Annual Gender Gap 
Report of our nation falling from 114 to 117 in your te n years term of heading the 
Government.   
Fifthly, as per the World Inequality Repo rt 2022, the average household wealth 
in India today is around Rs.9,83,010. Th e bottom 50 per cent of  the nation can be 
seen to own almost nothing with an averag e wealth of Rs.66,280 per household or 6 
per cent of the total wealth of the nation.  The middle class is relatively poor with an 
average wealth of Rs.7,23,930 per household or 29.50 percentage of the total wealth 
of the nation. The top 10 per cent househol d owns 65 per cent of the nation wealth 
averaging to Rs.63,54,070 per household.  The top one per cent household owns 33 
per cent of the nation's wealth averaging Rs 3,24,49,360.  I very respectfully ask our 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Prime Minister: What is your answer to the status of our nation as one of the most 
unequal countries in the world with rising pove rty and an affluent elite in your 10 years 
term of heading the Government? Sixth, re ducing fuel prices was very dear to our 
Prime Minister during the 2014 election campaign. Obviously, fuel prices hit at the root 
of an economy and more so Indian econo my. However, from 2014 to 2023, petrol 
price increased from Rs 72.26 per litre to Rs.100 plus per litre and diesel price from Rs 
55.49 per litre to Rs.90 plus per litre betwee n 2014 and 2023.  Similar is the case with 
kerosene and LPG too. This, despite petroleum crude prices being exorbitantly high 
during 2014 versus the subsidized petroleum crude, which we are getting from Russia 
since the Ukraine war.  I very respectfully as k our Prime Minister: What is your answer 
to the huge increase in the pr ices of petrol, diesel, kero sene and LPG, in your 10 
years term of heading the Government?  Mo st importantly, Indian rupees exchange 
rate with the US dollar on 31st March 2014 was Rs 59.90.  The rupees exchange rate is 
by self-admission, a matter very close to our Prime Minister's heart. Yesterday, 
Indian rupees exchange rate with US dollar fell to Rs 83.41, the lowest ever in the 
history of our country. I respectfully ask our Prime Minister: What is your answer to 
the Indian rupee depreciating to its lowest ev er rate in your 10 years term of heading 
the Government?  Eighth, in 60 years, Congress Government built world-class 
infrastructure from effectively nothing in 1947. Today, the Government under the 
National Monetization Pipeline is selling thes e national assets valued at an estimated 
Rs 6 lakh crore in public sector one by on e to private sector, enriching the favourite 
friends of the BJP. I very respectfully ask th e Prime Minister: What is your answer to 
your Government handing over national asse ts to your favourite friends in your 10 
years term of heading the Government? I quote our first Prime Minister, Pt. 
Jawaharlal Nehruji who our present Government attacks for all issues they cannot find 
solutions for and for mistakes they cannot defend.  Pt. Jawaharlal Nehruji said, 'Facts 
are facts and will not disappear on account of  your likes'. I can go on and on about 
various factors and statistics connected to the dismal state of economy from inflation 
to price rise, to MGNREGA state to skill India to Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, and so on 
and so forth.  Of course, then my senior  colleagues from the Treasury Benches will 
ask few pointed questions. First question they ask would be, is the economy not 
growing? And our answer is serious questi ons remain on the reality of the growth 
claimed by the BJP Government as the economy is exhibiting several contra-
indicators to the claims of BJP Government. Another question which they ask would 
be is, is FDI not coming to India, and what we wish to say is that it is only natural that 
FDI come to India based on the open door liberalised regime initiated by the Congress 
Government and the reality that MNCs canno t ignore a market as large as India for 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
85

 
which the stage was set by the Congress Party. Yet another question, the chest-
thumping question would be, did we not win the recent State elections? My senior 
colleagues from the Treasury Benches, almost all of them have said that and we wish 
to say you did win. But, very few media ha s reported that more Indian citizens 
'humare deshwasi' voted for Congress party than BJ P. About 11 lakh more Indians 
voted for Congress party where BJP polled 4. 81 crores votes, Congress party polled 
4.92 crore votes. So, we the Congress Party,  has been in the heart of India for 138 
years and we, the Congress Party, is in the heart of India now despite you wishing us 
away and we, the Congress Party will remain in the heart of India despite you wishing 
for 'Congress Mukt Bharat'. We will continue to oppose your wrongdoings and we will 
continue to expose your jumlas . Our India is great, we w ill work to make her even 
greater and the greatest in the world. Jai Hind! 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : The next speaker is Shri  
Sircar; your time is five minutes. 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal) : Sir, Mr. Jethmalani, before me, has 
described 
* as big * white * and statistics. There is a fourth category of * that I would 
like to bring to your attention. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : Mr. Sircar, one minute, 
the word 
* is not allowed in the Parliament. It is expunged.  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Sir, I modify it, but to the exte nt that I would like my friends 
in the House on both sides to be aware of the realities. They keep talking about GDP 
growth. I would not contest it, because it is too complicated for many to understand. 
But what does GDP growth mean where I am concerned and you are concerned, that 
is, per capita GDP, per person GDP. The GD P of Ambani and GDP of Adani does not 
matter to me. We just had the G-20 meeting and there we made a calculation that the 
US has 63000 dollars by way of their per capita GDP, Australia has 61000 dollars, 
Indonesia has 4000 dollars plus per person and India is the lowest , I repeat India is 
lowest among the group, we have just 2085 dollars per GDP. So, look at reality, do 
not go in for bravado and bragging. When yo u talk of GDP, you must remember that 
you are taking the wealth of the upper five pe r cent to inflate your figures. I have just 
                                         
*Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
given the example of how the upper crus t has increased its wealth. The Ambani 
wealth was Rs. 1.6 lakh crores in 2014, I rep eat Rs. 1.6 lakh crores in 2014. It is Rs. 
8.6 lakh crores today, five times more. Pl ease show me an Indian who has grown his 
income in the last nine years by five times before you make further statements. 
Adani's went up from Rs. 1.2 lakh crores, this is more ph enomenal, but, I will not get 
into the details. From Rs. 1.2 lakh crores, they have gone up to Rs. 6 lakh crores plus 
which is again another five times growth. No Indian has ever grown at this rate during 
the last nine years.  So, don’t take credit for enriching the oligarchs, don’t take credit 
for enriching and fattening the capitalist cla ss and then say, "we grew as a whole".  
Now look at your reality.  World Bank's unemployment figures, I am quoting from the 
World Bank because most Indians and foreigne rs have given up on Indian statistics.  
It is so punctuated with untruths. The World Bank's 2022 unemployment rate it shows 
that in India there is 23.2 per cent unemploym ent.  Compare it with Pakistan, a failed 
state, Pakistan is 11 per cent, less than half; compare it with Bangladesh, once upon 
a time a basket case, Bangladesh is 13 pe r cent and we are 23 per cent.   Bhutan is 
14.9 per cent. So, where are the realities that you are drum drumming about GDP and 
becoming the fourth biggest and the third biggest in the world?   Come to reality.  We 
have the annual survey of industries pointing  out that we are steadily moving towards 
contractual labour. We are turning a rightful, respectful wage earner into a product 
that is at the mercy of employer so far as labour timing and everything is concerned.  I 
come to the labour participation ratio. Th e labour participation ratio - the Labour 
Minister was here, but does not seem to be  unduly interested -- the LFPR in India is 
one of the worst in the world.  I repeat at the cost of perj ury, one of the worst in the 
world.  42 to 45 per cent was the participation of labour.  That means the vast 
majority was outside the network of labour.  Mercifully, it has gone up to 50 per cent 
now. 50 per cent!  But look at the other co untries; Nepal 83 per cent. Nepal is able to 
provide labour force participation of 83 per cent; again, Bangladesh, twice more, 
China 60 per cent.  What are we talking about? ( Time-bell rings. ) This much, of 
course, relates to the female labour participation ratio, where I repeat the figure, India 
is only 20.5 per cent, Nepal 83 per cent, Bangladesh 30 plus per cent, China 60 per 
cent and even Sri Lanka that was on the verge of collapse, they have a female labour 
participation of one-and-a-ha lf times of ours.  When it comes to male and female 
combined, we have been 42 an d 45 per cent during the entire regime of the last nine 
years. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY): Please conclude, now. 
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
87

 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: I repeat 42 to 45 per cent, one of  the lowest in the world.  It 
has just gone up to 50 per cent. We look at gender gap. Jebi already mentioned 
about the gender gap.  I repeat that comp are the gender gap of India at 28 per cent 
with double that in Bangladesh.  She also mentioned about the rising debt.  I repeat 
public debt is increasing at a phenomenal ra te as we are binding future generations, 
your grandsons, your sons, my sons and my grandsons to a debt that we are not 
entitled to. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : Thank you, Mr. Sircar.  
Your time is over. 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: One more minute, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : One more minute I have 
already given to you.  ...(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Debt ratio has come to almost 90 per cent. Sir, just one last 
word, one last word on defaulters, on bank s, just one word; we were coming around 
to the banks, defaults of the banks and th ere yesterday's figures, that is why I am 
giving it to the House, is 14.5 lakh crores of rupees have been written off. Dr. Karad is 
sitting there.  He insists that writing off means nothing, but I insist that writing off is 
actually the legitimization of the destructio n of your funds, my funds kept with the 
banks. (Time-bell rings) The corporate sector .. (TIme-bell rings)...  I will give the 
calculations. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : I will have to call the next 
speaker. ...(Interruptions)..  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR : Thanks to the cooperation, th anks to the transparent reply 
given by Dr. Karad and others, the corpor ate sector alone has liquated ten lakh 
crores rupees in nine years. Sir, Rs. 10 la kh crores have gone down the drain to save 
the corporate sector!  Whereas, NREGA – ho n. Minister is sitting somewhere here 
who alone has  ...(Interruptions)...
* 
                                         
*Not recorded. 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : No, no.  Please stop.   
Mr. Wilson, please start.   
 
SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, don’t deduct it from my time. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : Mr. Wilson, please start.  
It is not being recorded. 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu) :  Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, a lot of discussion has 
taken place in this august House.  My previous speakers have talked about how 
economic condition of our country has deterior ated.  I wanted to point out a few.  
When you came to power in 2014 and re-elect ed in 2019, what did you promise?  Did 
you implement these promises?  I remind you some of the promises you have made.  
You said that you will reduce price of LPG, petrol and diesel.  You promised Rs. 15 
lakhs in bank account of each citizen of this country.  What happened to the same?  
You promised that you will link sixty rivers  with an estimated cost of Rs. 5.5 lakh 
crores.  What has happened to that?  You promised US$ 5 trillion economy in 2019 to 
win over for the second time.  What is the economy today?  In 2016, you promised 
doubling farmers’ income by 2022. What has happened to it?  You promised cleaning 
of Ganga.  You promised inland waterway  transport system.  You promised 2 crore 
jobs and controlling prices.  These have all been reduced to mere words.  Today, Sir, 
more than 10 lakh vacancies  have been registered on the National Career Service 
Portal. What steps have you taken to fill these vacancies? There is a failure in Make-
in-India, StartUp India, demonetization and GST regime.  These policies have 
weakened the institutions and the economy.  And, these are the shining examples as 
to how today’s economy is.  
Sir, Tamil Nadu is the 10
th largest State in India, is the 2 nd wealthiest State in 
terms of GDP and is the 2 nd largest contributor to India’ s GDP.  For every rupee that 
Tamil Nadu contributes to the Centre, it gets only twenty-nine paise!  This 
demonstrates the immense contribution made by  our State.  But, what is the return it 
is getting?  Today, I will dwell into the st ep-motherly treatment which my State is 
facing in the hands of the Union Government.  However, the present Government has 
been helping their corporate friends to earn humongous profits and showering non-
existent promises to the citizens of the co untry!  Sir, I wanted to ask a question. Has 
the per-capita income of every Indian citi zen increased?  Sir, villages are the worst 
affected.  There is no agriculture.  There is no industrial grow th. There are no jobs. 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
89

 
The daily-wagers, low income workers are the sufferers because of rise in prices of 
essential commodities and leading a miserable life.   
You have sold all the public sector und ertakings in the country.  The business 
owners have also been adversely affected  b y  t h e  r i s e  i n  p r i c e s  o f  e s s e n t i a l  
commodities as they have not been able to cope with the rising prices and have also 
not been able to get rise in the price of their finished good s which makes it difficult for 
them to survive in this competitive world.  Sir, first of all, I wanted to place how our 
State is meted out step-motherly treatment.  Sir, there are 17 projects floated in Tamil 
Nadu by NHAI. About eleven projects are pe nding for more than three years because 
of non-allocation of necessary funds.  The Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation had itself, on 12 th September 2023, uploaded on its website that 42 
projects in Tamil Nadu -- that too important projects, including nuclear projects – are 
delayed.   
 Sir, my friend was talking about Corona  and how it was dealt with.  In Tamil 
Nadu, we have a Vaccine Park in Chengalpattu district.  It was established at the cost 
of Rs. 2000 crores.  The Govern ment of Tamil Nadu has give n vast lands for it.  Right 
from the day one, when the Vaccine Park ca me into existence, not even one vial has 
been manufactured there because they wanted to promote some private players and 
they kept it closed for many years despit e the Chief Minister’s request during Covid 
times to hand over that to them so that  they can manufacture vaccines and supply to 
the entire country. But the Centre showed deaf ears.  They refused to budge.   
 Insofar as Railway projects are concerne d, we have a body building factory, 
that is, the Integral Coach Factory in Avadi.  Many rail coaches have been 
manufactured by this Integral Coach Factory.  But, today, the sad state of affairs is 
that they are going to other countries an d purchasing coaches, ignoring the factory 
that is already available in Tamil Nadu.  In Chennai Metro Rail Projects, Phase-II 
projects are pending with the Cabinet Committ ee of Economic Affairs.  The clearance 
is not being given for the last two years, despite repeated requests.   
So far as the Food Corporation of Indi a is concerned, the subsidy of Rs. 6,500 
crores for the PDS rice has not been disb ursed to Tamil Nadu.  Likewise, the CMR 
subsidy of Rs. 5,704.09 crores has not b een disbursed to Tamil Nadu.  In CMRL, 
50:50 equity share requested, similar to phase I, is pending with the Government of 
India for Cabinet approval.  
So far as Election Commission expenses  are concerned, Rs. 213 crores are 
pending.  Similar is the case with Home Guards.  Sir, Rs. 77.76 crores are pending.   
In Tamil Nadu, we have the highest numbe r of toll plazas.  There are about 55 
toll plazas in each and every nook and corner .  As per the Act, you should have one 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
toll plaza at every sixty kilometres.  There are about sixteen excess toll plazas in Tamil 
Nadu.  All the money, which is collected by these toll plazas, is not being utilized for 
road infrastructure in Tamil Nadu.  Still, it is  drained out.  The saddest thing is that toll 
fee is increased every year without any ap plication of mind.  There is one stretch 
about which even our Chief Minister called th e Road Highways Minister and said that 
that stretch needed immediate attention.  Bu t sadly, even after a lapse of six months, 
the stretch, which is in Vellore, is yet to be repaired. 
So far as sugarcane growers are concerne d, they are selling their yields to the 
mill owners.  But, no price has been paid for their yields for the la st five years.  The 
mill owners are getting protection.  That’s why they are not making payments to 
farmers.   
So far as spinning mills are concer ned, they are incurring heavy losses 
because of the increase in the prices of raw materials, high inflation, and slowdown in 
the global economy.  In fact, our Chief Mi nister has written a letter requesting the 
Union Government to provide financial su pport for MSMEs in textile sector, to 
restructure the existing loans under Emergency Credit Land Guarantee Scheme and 
to disburse fresh loans under ECLGS by reducing regular interest to offset losses.  
We have recently faced cyclone.  For four days we had very heavy rainfall.  
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
Even today, we are receiving heavy rainfall.   In fact, our Chief Minister has demanded 
a sum of Rs.5,000 crores as an interim fina ncial assistance.  I only request my good 
friends to see that the said financial assistance is sanctioned and disbursed 
immediately.  One thing I have to bring to yo ur attention.  Sir, you are also a learned 
Member of our fraternity. They have br ought the Insolvency and Banruptcy Code, 
2016.  This law has been legislated for th e industrial friends who want to acquire 
industry.  Under the garb of legal procedure, they are liquidating many industries.   
The principles such as waterfall mechanism, clean-slate theory, hair-cut, write off, 
wipe off the debts, are all the nomenclature s or the terms they use in order to wipe 
out the industries for a song .   The regime is nothing but a way to buy expensive 
assets at discounted rates as they are purchasing through public money and the 
public money has no real value in this nation.    Thank you very much, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY) : Thank you.  Now, Shri 
Vijay Pal Singh Tomar. आपका बोलने का समय पांच िमनट allot िकया गया है।  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
91

 
Ǜी िवजय पाल िंसह तोमर (उǄर Ģदेश) : धन्यवाद, उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय।  मȅ सबसे पहले अपने 
यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं िक उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ, िवषम 
पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा िवÌव की सबसे तीĨ गित से बढ़ने वाली अथर्ËयवÎथा है। 
हमारे देश की जीडीपी 7.6 है, जबिक चीन की जीडीपी हमसे कम रही है। इसका कारण यह है िक 
जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 2014 मȂ आए, तब उन्हȗने पािर्लयामȂट की चौखट पर िसर झुकाकर यह कहा 
था िक मेरी सरकार गरीब, वंिचत, िकसान
 और गांव को समिर्पत है। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने जो संकÊप 
िलया, उसको पूरा करने का काम भी िकया।  
 महोदय, मȅने चौधरी चरण िंसह जी क े साथ काम िकया है। वे कहा करते थे िक देश की 
समृिǉ का राÎता खेत-खिलहान, गांव और गरीब से होकर गुजरता है। जब भारत िवÌव का 
आिर्थक रूप  से सबसे सÇपन्न राÍटर् था, तब देश क े 80 फीसदी लोग खेती से जुड़े हुए थे और 82 
फीसदी लोग गांव मȂ रहते थे। आज मȅ देश पर 50 साल तक राज करने वालȗ से पूछना चाहता हूं 
िक गांव मȂ रहने वालȗ की संख्या घटकर 62 फीसदी और खेत मȂ काम करने वालȗ की संख्या 55 
फीसदी क्यȗ रही? ऐसा इसिलए क्यȗिक उनको गांव मȂ िशक्षा, सुरक्षा, ÎवाÎथ्य और सभी 
सहूिलयतȂ उपलÅध नहीं हुईं। Ģित Ëयिƪ गांव पर एक-ितहाई भी शहर क े मुकाबले मȂ खचर् नहीं 
हुआ। इसीिलए िकसान की हालत मजदूर से नीचे चली गई और हालत यह हुई िक िकसान खेती 
छोड़ने लगे।  
महोदय, म
ȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की Ģाथिमकता मȂ यह रहा िक हम िकसान 
की, मिहलाओं की, गांव की और गरीब की िंचता करȂगे। इसीिलए उन्हȗने कहा िक हर िकसी क े 
पास मकान हो, मकान मȂ शौचालय हो, मकान मȂ गैस का कनेक्शन हो, मकान मȂ िबजली का 
कनेक्शन हो और उसमȂ रहने वाले गरीब का बच्चा बीमार है, वह मर न जा
ए, उसकी बीमारी क े 
इलाज क े िलए उसके  पास आयुÍमान भारत योजन ा का काडर् हो।  आज माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े 
कारण करीब चार करोड़ घर Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना क े माध्यम से आए और उनमȂ से 60.89 
परसȂट मकान मिहलाओं क े नाम पर हȅ। इसी तरह से 9 करोड़ से अि धक उज्ज्वला गैस क े 
 कनेक्शन्स िमले हȅ और साढ़े 11 करोड़  शौचालय बने हȅ। मुझे याद है िक चौधरी साहब शाम क े 
समय हर भाषण मȂ कहा करते थे िक जब गाड़ी जाती है तब मिहलाएं सड़कȗ क े िकनारे खड़ी हो 
जाती हȅ, क्यȗिक रोशनी पड़ती थी और वे उससे बचने क े िलए खड़ी हो जाती थीं। उनके  बारे म
Ȃ 
िकसी ने सोचा नहीं था और उन्हȗने इस कायर् को करने का काम िकया। करीब 12 करोड़ लोगȗ को 
आयुÍमान भारत योजना का काडर् देने का काम िकया ग या। मुदर्ा बȅक से िजनको ऋण िमला है, 
उसमȂ भी 58 परस Ȃट से अिधक ऋण मिहलाओं को िदया गया है। महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक 
कांगर्ेस मȂ पहले एक भूतपूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी रहे थे। उन्हȗने कहा था िक हम सौ रुपय े भेजते हȅ, लेिकन 
नीचे पंदर्ह रुपय े पहुंचते हȅ, 85 रुपय े बीच मȂ खाए जाते हȅ। हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने दो ही काम 
िकए हȅ। उन्हȗने एक काम तो यह िकया है िक बीच की दलाली समाÃत कर दी। आज अगर सौ 
रुपय े भेजȂगे तो सौ क े सौ रुपय े नीचे जाएंगे। उन्हȗने दूसरा काम यह िकया है िक जो बात गाँव, 
गरीब और िकसान से संबंिधत थी, उसके  िलए वरीयता रखी। इसीिलए जब रोज़गार की बात 
आती है, तो
 रोज़गार का मतलब सरकारी नौकरी से नहीं है, रोज़गार का मतलब अन्य क्षेतर्ȗ से भी 
है। आपने देखा होगा िक माननीय मोदी जी ने इंģाÎटर्क्चर क े क्षेतर् मȂ क्या िकया है।  
 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सोनल मानिंसह) पीठासीन हुईं।] 
 
50-60 सालȗ तक राज करने वाले बताएं िक देश भर मȂ 2014 से पहले क ेवल 723 िवÌविवǏालय 
थे, परंतु आज िकतने िवÌविवǏालय हȅ? आज 1,113 िवÌविवǏालय हȅ। पहले देश भर मȂ 5,298 
िडगर्ी कॉलेजेज़ थे, आज िकतने िडगर्ी कॉलेजेज़  हȅ? ये िडगर्ी कॉलेजेज़ नौ सालȗ मȂ बढ़कर अब 
43,796 हो गए हȅ। पहले क ेवल 8 ऑल इंिडया मेिडकल इंÎटीǷूट्स थे, लेिकन आज इनकी 
संख्या 23 है। ये मेिडकल इंÎटीǷूट्स नौ वषș मȂ 15 बढ़े हȅ, जबिक 50-60 वषș म Ȃ क ेवल आठ बने 
थे। इसके  साथ ही 7 नए आईआईटीज़, 7 नए  आईआईएÇज़, 225 नये मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ और 
442 Îटाटर् अÃस थे, जो आज बढ़कर 1 लाख से ऊपर हो गए हȅ। मȅ पूछना चाहता हूं िक जो भूतल 
पिरवहन मंतर्ालय है, आपके  टाइम मȂ उसका िकतना बजट था? अगर यू.पी.ए. क े लाÎट ईयर का 
देखते हȅ, तो यह लगभग 34 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपय े है। भूतल पिरवहन मंतर्ालय का इसी साल का 
बजट 2 लाख, 70 हज़ार, 435 करोड़ रुपय े है। इसके  साथ ही Ģितिदन बहुत बड़ी संख्या मȂ रोड्स 
भी बन रही हȅ। पहले आपके  समय मȂ 12 
िकलोमीटर रोड Ģितिदन बनती थी, लेिकन अब 35 
िकलोमीटर का हाइएÎट िरकॉडर् रहा है, वैसे एवरेज़ भी 29 िकलोमीटर  पर डे की है। यह दुिनया 
का सेक ं ड लाजȃÎट रोड नेटवकर् है। क्या यह काम नहीं हो रहा है? इतना पैसा है, तो इसमȂ 
रोज़गार भी होता ही है। महोदय, इसी तरह से मेटर्ो टर्ेन की बात है। 2014 तक यह पाँच शहरȗ
 मȂ 
229 िकलोमीटर तक पहुँची थी, आज 20 शहरȗ मȂ 860 िकलोमीटर  तक पहुँच गई है। 2014 तक 
रेलवे लाइन का िवǏुतीकरण 21,413 िकलोमीटर तक हुआ था, ल
ेिकन इन नौ वषș मȂ यह 58,424 
िकलोमीटर तक हो गया है। िकसानȗ क े बजट मȂ भी 6 गुना वृिǉ की गई है।  
महोदय, आपका 2009-
10 का बजट देखा है। यह बजट यूपीए क े टाइम मȂ िकसानȗ क े 
िलए 12 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े था। अगर पाँच सालȗ का िहसाब लगाएं, तो 1 लाख, 23 हज़ार करोड़ 
रुपय े का बजट था। हमारा िपछले साल का 1 लाख, 25 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े का बजट था, 
इसीिलए हम िकसानȗ को सिÅसडी देने का काम कर पा रहे हȅ। हमने एक वषर् मȂ 2 लाख, 54 हज़ार 
करोड़ की सि
Åसडी दी है।  
महोदय, मȅ भी िकसान गाँव से ही आता हूं, कल माननीय मोदी  जी ने भी कहा है िक डीएपी 
क े एक बैग की इंटरनेशनल माकȃ ट मȂ 4,070 कीमत  है, लेिकन यह हमारे यहाँ क े िकसान को 
िकतने रुपय े मȂ िमल रहा है? यह हमारे यहाँ क े िकसान को 1,370 रुपय े मȂ िमल रहा है। एक 
यूिरया क े बैग की कीमत 2,450 है, लेिकन यह हमारे िकसान को 266 रुपय े मȂ िमल रहा है। यह 
पैसा कौन दे रहा है? यह पैसा मोदी जी की सरकार दे रही है। एनपीके , एमओपी, जो 3,200 व 
2700 रुपय े क े ह
ȅ, वे 1300, 1,700 रुपय े मȂ िमल रहे हȅ। इस तरह से िकसान को सिÅसडी देकर, 
एमएसपी को डेढ़ गुना करने का काम िकया गया है तािक उसकी लागत नहीं बढ़े। 
 महोदय, 2006 मȂ Îवामीनाथन िरपोटर् आ गई थी, िफर भी आपने उसको लागू क्यȗ नहीं 
िकया? हमारी सरकार ने सǄा मȂ आने क े बाद Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िरपोटर् लाग
ू की। हमने इस 
साल भी लागत क े डेढ़ गुना मूÊय बढ़ाया है। इस बार भी धान का मूÊय 150 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वट ल, मूंग 
का 400 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल बढ़ा है। सरकार ने एमएसपी बढ़ाने का काम िकया है, MSP पर 
अिधक खरीदारी करने का काम िकया है। मȅ इसके  साथ ही यह भी बताना चाहता हूं िक 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
93

 
इंटरनेशनल मािर्कट मȂ हमारे िकसानȗ की जो डी ए पी Ģित बैग पर बचत हुई है, वह 2,700 रुपय े 
Ģित बैग की हुई है। यूिरया पर करीब 2,450 रुपय े Ģित बैग की बचत हुई है।  
महोदय, मȅ इसके  साथ ही एक और बात कहना चाहता हूं। रक्षा क े क्षेतर् क े बारे मȂ अभी 
माननीय िदनेश जी ने बताया है िक हम 16 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े क े यंतर् िनयार्त कर रहे हȅ, जबिक 
हम पहले आयात िक
या करते थे। महोदय, ऐसे 4,100 आइटÇस हȅ, िजनका आयात बंद हो गया ह ै। 
वे Îवदेशी को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए यहीं पर िनिर्मत होने लगे हȅ। हमारे यहाँ पर 50 करोड़ से अिधक 
जन-धन खाते खोले गए हȅ, 80 करोड़ से अिधक लोगȗ को मुÄत राशन िदया गया है।  
महोदय, कोरोना महामारी मȂ दुिनया देख रही थी िक लोग कोरोना वायरस स
े मर रहे हȅ। 
हमारे िवदेश मंतर्ी से यूएनओ मȂ कहा गया था िक यूरोप मȂ तो संपन्न देश हȅ, भारत का क्या होगा? 
मोदी जी ने अपने यहाँ क
े  डॉक्टसर्, वैज्ञािनकȗ, फामार् क ंपिनयȗ को बुलाया और कहा िक हमारे यहाँ 
सबसे पहले वैक्सीन आनी चािहए। हमारे देश मȂ सबसे पहले तीन वैक्सीन्स आईं, देश मȂ  222 डोज़ 
लगाई गईं और उन्हȂ 110 
देशȗ मȂ भी भेजने का काम िकया गया। आज हम दुिनया को देने वाले हȅ, 
आज हम लेने वाले नहीं हȅ।  भारत बदला है।  यह मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ बदला हुआ भारत है।  आज 
हर घर नल से जल पहुँचाने की बात आई।   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):  Please conclude. 
 
Ǜी िवजय पा
ल िंसह तोमर : एक िमनट, मैडम।  माननीय Ģोफे सर साहब ने कहा िक मȅ गाँव मȂ 
जाता हूँ।  मȅ भी गाँव मȂ जाता हूँ।  मुझे तो कोई घर वैसा नहीं िमलता।  मȅने कहा िक अब तो जाड़े का 
सीजन आ गया, मक्के  की रोटी बनाओ और साग बनाओ।  वैसा च
ूÊहा िकसी क े यहाँ नहीं है।  आज 
हर घर मȂ गैस है और उससे रसोई चल रही ह ै।  पाइपलाइन हर गाँव मȂ िबछी हुई है।  पाइप लग 
गई है और अब उसमȂ से पानी जा रहा है।  करीब 8.5 करोड़ घरȗ मȂ नल से जल पहुँच चुका है।  मȅ 
यह भी कहना चाहता हूँ िक 9 करोड़ से अिधक उज्ज्वला गैस क े कनेक्शंस िदए गए हȅ।  कल भी 
एक बात आई थी िक िकस तरह से गरीब मिहलाओं की मदद
 करने का काम िकया गया।  27 
करोड़ को सैिनटरी पैड एक रुपए  Ģित पैड से िदए हȅ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सोनल मानिंसह) : आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है। 
 
Ǜी िवजय पाल िंसह तोमर : जी, मैडम।  हमारे करीब 10,000 जन औषिध क ेन्दर् हȅ, अब 2024 तक 
और खुलने जा रहे हȅ।  गरीब को सÎती दवा उपलÅध हो, कोई गरीब का बच्चा मर नहीं जाए, 
इसकी िचन्
ता
 करने का काम हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने िकया है।  ...(समय की घंटी)... मȅ सरकार 
को और अपने Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देता हूँ, िजन्हȗने एक ऐितहािसक काम िकया है।  िवषम 
पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ देश आज तेज गित से आगे बढ़ रहा है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 2027 तक देश को 
तीसरी बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनाने का जो संकÊप िलया है, उसे वे िनिÌचत रूप  से िसिǉ तक पहुँचाने 
का काम करȂग
े और 2047 तक भारत िवकिसत राÍटर्ȗ की Ǜेणी मȂ आ जाएगा।  आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद। 
 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सोनल मानिंसह) : धन्यवाद।  माननीय Ǜी राघव चǀा जी। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा ( पंजाब) : महोदया, अच्छे िदन का वादा करके  भारतीय जनता पाटीर् सरकार मȂ 
आयी। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सोनल मानिंसह) : अच्छे िदन तो आ गये। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा  : 2014 क े बाद आज तक शायद ही इन्हȗने इस अच्छे िदन क े जुमले का Ģयोग 
िकया होगा।  2019 क े चुनाव से पहले एक वादा जरूर  िकया, देश
 की जनता को एक और ख्वाब 
िदखाया िक हम एक 'न्यू इंिडया' बनाएँगे और 2022 मȂ जब भारत देश की आज़ादी क े 75 साल हो 
जाएँगे तो 'अमृतकाल' आएगा, 'न्यू इंिडया' आएगा और हम ये बड़ी चीजȂ करȂगे।  अब 2024 का  
चुनाव आ गया।  कम से कम 2024 क े चुनाव से पहले जो 'न्यू इंिडया' का वादा था और इन्हȗने जो 
25 बड़े वादे िकये थे िक हम 2022 तक ये हािसल कर लȂगे, उनका आकलन होना चािहए।  आज मȅ 
वादा बनाम वाÎतिवकता की, वादा बन
ाम सच्चाई की पूरी सूची लेकर आया हूँ और उसे आपके  
सामने रखना चाहूँगा।  
 महोदया, पहला वादा यह था िक 2022 तक  भारत देश 5 िटर्िलयन डॉलर की इकोनॉम ी 
बन जाएगा।  आज सच्चाई यह है िक हम उस वादे से बहुत कोसȗ दूर हȅ।  सवाल यह नहीं है िक 
पाँच िटर्िलयन डॉलर की इकोनॉमी भारत बनेगा या नहीं बनेगा।  अगर सरकार अपनी ऊ ँगली भी 
नहीं उठाए, तब भी हम बन जाएँगे, लेिकन सवाल यह है िक हम बनȂगे कब - 2037 मȂ, 2028 मȂ या 
2030 मȂ?  लेिकन यह वादा पूरा नहीं हुआ।  
 दूसरा वादा यह िकया िक 2022 तक  हर भारत
ीय क े पास एक बȅक अकाउंट, life 
insurance, accident insurance, pension और retirement planning स
ेवाएँ हȗगी।  सरकार 
की अपनी ही िरपोटर् यह बताती है, 2022 की Economic Survey की िरपोटर् सच्चाई िदखलाती है 
िक हर 100 लोगȗ मȂ मातर् 3 लोग ऐसे हȅ, िजनके  पास life insurance है और हर 100 लोगȗ मȂ मातर् 
एक आदमी या एक औरत ऐसी है, िजसके  पास life insurance छोड़ कर अितिरƪ insurance है।  
यह सच्चाई है।  'जन-धन योजना' मȂ अकाउंट्स तो खुलवा िदए, लेिकन म
ȅ पूछना चाहूँगा िक क्या 
कभी मुड़ कर उन अकाउंट्स की ओर भी देखा िक िकतने खाते खाली हȅ, िकतने अकाउंट्स 
dormant हो गए?  
 इन लोगȗ ने जो तीसरा वादा िकया था
, वह यह था िक 2022 तक  िकसानȗ की आय को 
दोगुना कर दȂगे।  मैडम, अब ये इस वादे की बात भी नहीं करते।  आय तो छोिड़ए, सरकार ने 
िपछले 5 सालȗ मȂ िकसान का कजार् दोगुना करने का काम िकया।  िपछले 18 qua rters की सबसे 
lowest growth agricultural sector मȂ इस quarter मȂ देखी जा रही है, जो िक चȚका देने वाले 
आंकड़े हȅ।  
 चौथा वादा जो िकया था, वह यह था िक 2022 तक हर भारतीय क े पास अपना घर होगा।  
सच्चाई आप जानती हȅ िक िकतने भारतीयȗ क े पास अपना घर है।  आम आदमी का घर तो 
छोिड़ए, यहाँ पर सांसदȗ तक का घर छीना जा रहा ह
ै, यह सच्चाई है।   
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
95

 
 पाँचवाँ वादा यह िकया था िक हर भारतीय क े पास 2022 तक शौचालय होगा, यानी 
access to toilet होगा।  अगर यह वादा पूरा हो गया होता, तो भारत मȂ open defecation नहीं 
बढ़ता और National Family Health Survey की िरपोटर् यह नहीं बताती िक आज लगभग 20 
Ģितशत Indian households ऐसे हȅ, जो िबना toilet facility क े जी रहे हȅ और जहाँ-जहाँ नाम क े 
वाÎते एक कमरे का टॉयलेट बना भी िदया, वहाँ पानी की सÃलाई नहीं पहुँची
, िसफर् इमारत खड़ी 
हो गयी। छठा वादा यह िकया िक 2022 तक हर भारतीय क े पास 24 घंटे , सातȗ िदन िबजली 
होगी। िदÊली मȂ अरिंवद क ेजरीवाल जी को छो ड़कर, भारत देश क े िकसी एक सूबे मȂ भी 24x7 
इलेिक्टर्िसटी आती है, तो मȅ चुनौती देता हूँ िक सरकार क े मंतर्ी मुझे आज यह बताएं। महोदया, 
24x7 इलेिक्टर्िसटी क े िलए आपको उǄर Ģदेश, िबहार, मध्य Ģदेश, राजÎथान क े गाँव मȂ जाने 
की आवÌयकता नहीं है, बिÊक नोएडा ही चले जाइए और बताइए िक क्या 2022 तक इन लोगȗ न
े 
नोएडा मȂ भी 24x7 इलेिक्टर्िसटी देने का काम पूरा िकया है! आज भी घंटȗ-घंटȗ क े पावरकट लग 
रहे हȅ। 7 वां  वादा -  Every household will have LPG cylinder. 2022 तक हर घर क े पास 
एलपीजी िसलȂडर होगा। वाÎतिवकता यह है िक एलपी
जी क े Ģाइस बढ़ गए, सिÅसडी बंद हो गई 
और जो उज्ज्वला योजना क े लाभाथीर् थे, आज एक बार िसलȂडर रीिफल कराने मȂ भी उन्हȂ नानी 
याद आ जाती है। जेब पर इतनी * डाली जा रही है। 8वां  वादा था - Every Indian in rural areas 
will have a water connection by 2022. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. सोनल मानिंसह) :  माननीय सदÎय, 
* शÅद सुबह... Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़ 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा : मȅ उसे withdraw करता हूँ। * शÅद को withdraw करता हूँ।  
 
 8 वां वादा था िक हर भारतीय क े पास, जो गर्ामीण इलाकȗ मȂ रहता है, 2022 तक अपना 
पानी का कनेक्शन होगा। सरकार क े खुद क े मंतर्ी ने अĢैल, 2023 मȂ राज्य सभा क े पटल पर 
जवाब देते हुए बताया िक 40 Ģितशत से ज्यादा गर्ामीण पिरवारȗ, रूरल  हाउसहोÊड्स क े पास 
आज भी टैप वाटर सÃलाई नहीं आती है, नलके  मȂ पानी नहीं आता है। न तो नलका है, न पानी है! 
मȅ आगे चलता हूँ।  
सरकार ने 9वां वादा िकया था िक 2022 तक भारत  देश मालन्यूटर्ीिशयन मुƪ हो जाएगा, 
यानी 2022 तक  भारत देश से क ुपोषण खत्म हो जाएगा, गायब हो जाएगा। * सच्चाई यह है िक 
आज चाइÊड मालन्यूटर्ीिशयन मȂ भारत देश दुिनया क े मुकाबले सबसे खराब िÎथित मȂ खड़ा हुआ 
है और ग्लोबल हंगर इंडेक्स बताता है िक 121 देशȗ मȂ भारत की रȅिंकग 107-108 पर ह
ै। यह िÎथित 
है िक भारत देश की 74 Ģितशत आबादी हैÊदी फ ू ड अफॉडर् नहीं कर सकती है, यानी लगभग सौ 
करोड़ क े पास इनसिफिशएंट न्यूटर्ीिशयन पहुँच रहा है। यह सच्चाई है। 10वां वादा िकया िक 2022 
आते-आते हर गर्ाम प
ंचायत क े पास अपना िफक्Îड Ĥॉडबȅड इंटरनेट कनेक्शन होगा। सच्चाई यह 
                                         
* Withdrawn by the hon. Member. 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
है िक आज तक रूरल  एिरयाज़ मȂ Ĥॉडबȅड इंटरनेट कनेक्शन की जो िÎथित है, उसका एक 
जायज़ा भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार ले ले, तो पता लग जाएगा। हमारे देश की लगभग 65 
Ģितशत आबादी गाँवȗ मȂ बसती है, लेिकन वहाँ अभी तक गर्ाम पंचायतȗ क े पास Ĥॉडबȅड इंटरनेट 
नहीं पहुंचा है। 11 वां वादा िकया था िक 2022 तक सौ Ģितशत िडिजटल िलटरेसी आ जाएगी
। 
आपको एनएसएसओ का डेटा बताएगा िक अभी आप अपना आधा लÑय भी पूरा नहीं कर पाए हȅ। 
12वां बड़ा िदलचÎप वादा - है िक 2022 तक िहन्दुÎतान की सड़कȗ पर बुल
ेट टर्ेन दौड़ेगी। अब तो 
लोगȗ ने बोलना शुरू  कर िदया है िक भाजपा का नारा है - बुलेट टर्ेन मȂ िबठाएंगे, देश की सैर 
कराएंगे, लेिकन तारीख नहीं बताएंगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... अब म ȅ आगे चलता हूँ।  
भारत सरकार ने अपनी िरपोटर् क े माध्यम से जो 13th Ģॉिमस िकया था, वह यह था िक हम 
2022 तक रेल दुघर्टना मȂ मरने वाले लोगȗ की संख्या को शून्य कर दȂगे, यानी एक भी मौत नहीं 
होगी। इसी साल हमने बालासोर, ओिडशा और आंधर् Ģदेश मȂ वह तर्ासिदयाँ देखी हȅ, िजन्हȗने 
हमारी आँखȂ खोलकर रख दीं, हमारी आत्मा को झकझोर िदया, ऐसे हालात रेल दुघर्टना से हमारे 
सामने आए। 
14वां वादा िकया था
 िक Growth rate in manufacturing sector will double by 2022. 
हम इसे लगभग 14 Ģितशत क े आस-पास लाकर खड़ा करȂगे। 14 Ģितशत तो छोिड़ए, िपछले दो 
िवǄीय वषș से हम पाँच या छ: Ģितशत पर मंडरा रहे हȅ। आरबीआई का अपना खुद का टारगेट 
साढ़े छ: परसȂट पर है।  15 वां वादा था िक 20 मे िडकल ģी जȗस बनाएंगे, to attract medical 
tourism. यह िसफर् वादा था, कोई िड
लीवरी नहीं हुई। 16वां वादा िकया  िक अंडर डेवलÃड इलाकȗ 
मȂ 100 न्यू ट ूिरÎट डेिÎटनेशंस बनȂगे।  यह िसफर् वादा था, इस पर भी कोई काम नहीं िकया गया। 
17वां वादा था िक दस नए इनोवेशन िडिÎटर्क्ट बनȂगे, जहाँ पर entrepreneurs और िडजाइनसर् 
िलव, वकर् एंड Ãले की नीित क े तहत काम कर पाएंगे। यह िसफर् वादा था, लेिकन कोई काम नहीं 
िकया गया। 18 वां वादा था िक हम 2022 तक मैनुअल Îकै वȂिंजग को शून्य पर लाकर खड़ा कर 
दȂगे। Manual scavenging will be eradicated. सच्चाई यह है िक म ंतर्ी जी खुद अपने जवाब मȂ 
सदन मȂ बताते हȅ िक िपछले पाँच सालȗ मȂ 339 डैथ्स सेिÃटक टȅक्स मȂ हुईं और वषर् 2022 मȂ  अके ले 
मैनुअल Îकै वȂिंजग की वजह से 66 िरपोट ȃड डैथ्स हुईं। इसके  अलावा न जाने िकतनी ही 
अनिरपोटȃड डैथ्स
 हȅ, िजनका आंकड़ा ही नहीं है। 19वां वादा था िक हम proportion of formally-
skilled labour to workforce को बढ़ाकर 15 Ģितशत कर दȂगे। सच्चाई यह है िक 2023 खत्म 
होने को आ रहा है, formally-skilled labour 15 परसȂट तो छो िड़ए, बिÊक हम आज पाँच परसȂट 
पर मंडरा रहे हȅ। जहाँ यूक े मȂ यह आंकड़ा 68 परसȂट है, जमर्नी मȂ 75 परस Ȃट है, यूएस मȂ 52 
परसȂट है, जापान मȂ 80 परसȂट है, वहीं भारत देश पाँच Ģितशत क े आस-पास खड़ा हुआ है। 20वाँ 
वादा यह िकया था िक नई नौकिरयां दȂग
े - 3 million jobs in health care; 40 million jobs in 
tourism; and, 5 million jobs in mines and minerals.    नौकरी की तो िजतनी बात की जाए 
उतनी कम है, िमलने की बजाय नौकिरयां जा रही हȅ।  21वाँ वादा - 2022 तक िंसगल ÃलािÎटक 
यूज़ बैन हो जाएगा। नोिटिफके शन लाकर बैन तो कर िदया, लागू िकतना हुआ, यह मȅ सरकार से 
पूछना चाहता हूं। 14 िमिलयन टन ÃलािÎटक इस साल भी िंहदुÎतान मȂ यूज़ िकया गया।  बस, अब 
म
ȅ समाÃत कर रहा हूं।  22वाँ वादा - कर्ूड ऑयल और गैस क े  जो इÇपोट्सर् हȅ, 2022 आते-आते वे 
10 Ģितशत घटा िदए जाएंगे। 10 Ģितशत तो छोिड़ए, उसके  चलते कर्ूड ऑयल का हमारा जो 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
97

 
इÇपोटर् िबल है, वह डबल हो गया। गैस, कर्ूड, इन सबका इÇपोटर् भारत देश मȂ बढ़ता जा रहा है।  
23वाँ वादा यह था िक हम नेशनल हाईवे की लȂग्थ को बढ़ाकर 2 लाख िकलोमीटर कर दȂगे। 
सच्चाई यह है िक 2 लाख िकलोमीटर तो छोिड़ए, 30 नवंबर, 2022 को गवनर्मȂट का अपना 
आ
ंकड़ा बताता है िक हम लगभग 1,44,000 िकलोमीटर क े आसपास खड़े हȅ, यानी इस वादे मȂ भी 
फ े ल हो गए। 24वां वादा - यह बड़ा िदलचÎप है, आप सुिनएगा - No crop residue burning to 
reduce air pollution and PM-2.5 levels  will come down to 50 by 2022.  यानी पीएम 2.5 
का लेवल 50 से नीचे आ जाएगा।  ... (समय की घंट ी)... सच्चाई यह है िक आज भी पूरा उǄर भारत 
गैस चȅबर बना हुआ है। क ेवल िदÊली -चंडीगढ़ ही नहीं , बिÊक लखनऊ-वाराणसी मȂ भी वायु 
Ģदूषण है। सरकार को इसका समाधान ढ ूंढना चािहए।न्हȗने 25वाँ और आिखरी वादा यह िकया था 
िक we would achieve a docto
r-population ra tio of, at least, 1:1400, and a nurse-
population ratio of, at least, 1:1500.  यह वादा पूरा करने मȂ भी यह फ े ल रही।   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):  Please conclude. 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा : सच्चाई यह है िक Ģाइमरी हेÊथ क ेयर सȂटसर् हȗ या CHCs हȗ, इन सब मȂ 
डॉक्टसर् और नसȃज़ की शॉटȃज है।  उसे बढ़ाना तो दूर, जो एिक्जिंÎटग सȂटसर् हȅ, आज उनमȂ भी 
फोसर् नहीं है। 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):  Please conclude. 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा :  म
ȅ अंत मȂ बस इतना कहूंगा िक 25 वादे सरकार ने िकए थे िक ये बड़े वादे हम 
2022 तक पूरे करȂगे।  इन 25 मȂ से एक वादा भी पूरा नहीं िकया, अब क्या म
ुंह िदखाकर ये 2024 मȂ 
लोगȗ से वोट मांगने जाएंगे? ...(समय की घंटी)... कोई साधारण आदमी अगर वादा कर 
वादािखलाफी करता है, तो उस पर कारर्वाई होती है, उस पर पचार् दजर् हो जाता है, 420 की 
धाराएं लग जाती हȅ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सोनल मानिंसह) : माननीय सांसद जी, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा :  जब सरकार वादा करके  म
ुकरती है, तो जनता की अदालत उसका फ ैसला 
करेगी।  मैडम, बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या।  जय िंहद, जय भारत! 
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK (Odisha) :  Madam, first of all, I would like to congratulate the
 
Government and the hon. Finance Minister  -- she is not here -- for the kind of 
direction that has come to the economy which was reflected in the last quarterly result 
of GDP, which grew at the rate of 7.6 pe r cent in the July-Septe mber quarter of the 
Financial Year 2023-24 beating all expectations  by all the rating agencies.  I am also 
happy by the fact that under the leadership  of our hon. Chief Minister, Shri Naveen 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Patnaik, our State also has b een beating the national growth  rate consistently for the 
last ten years.  The trajectory of growth, that has been set in motion by the 
Government during the last five or six Bu dgets with particular emphasis on capital 
expenditure, I think, is in the right direction.  The policy push has been reflected in the 
consistent economic growth.   
 Now, I would like to draw your attentio n to a few of the global economies and 
how they have fared during this period b ecause that would set the context for seeing 
how Indian economy has perfor med during this period.  If we see 2022 GDP growth 
figures, India growth rate stood at 7.2 per cent.  I am quoting th e IMF figures.  China 
was at 3 per cent; U.K. at 4.1 per cent; the U.S. at 2.1 per cent; and, Germany at 1.8 
per cent.  The IMF's projected GDP growth rate for India during 2023 is 6.3 per cent.  
If we go by what has happened today, I think, we are going in the right direction and 
would, probably, be beating that projection.   
 Now, I have heard from the Opposi tion benches here as many of my 
colleagues have talked about a number of th ings that India shou ld have been doing 
and India should have been achieving, but fo r all that, we need the GDP to grow and 
that is what is happening.  So, I think, the thrust of this current debate that we are 
having in this Short Duration Discussion is : Where are we heading as far as the Indian 
economy is concerned?  I think, we are on  a strong wicket. Having said so, I would 
also like to state that it is important to l ook into granular details of what has spurred 
this growth and what has to be done further.  What I am going to say now is that we 
are in a very nice position to bring in structural changes in the economy.  We are 
going in that direction.  Over reliance on  private consumption expenditure to shift 
towards an investment-oriented growth strategy, I think, is a step in the right 
direction but for that, the policy push has to be stable and consistent.   
Let me look at the real gross value added because that indicates the actual 
value addition that has taken place in the economy and these are the latest figures.  
Here, there are some concerns, and, th erefore, my suggestion to the Treasury 
Benches is to somehow ensure that these fa ult lines are addressed.  Firstly, on the 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing, if we look  at the figures from 2019 onwards, it has 
consistently decreased.  In the Agriculture,  Forestry and Fishing, it has consistently 
declined and it has come to 1.22 per cent in 2023.  It is a cause of worry because food 
security, whatever said and done, is one of the most important requirements for the 
growing population and growing economy.  Agriculture and Allied sector has seen this 
steady decline from 4.3 per cent it grew during the pandemic years, which made us 
survive the pandemic, to 1.2 per cent.  What it calls for is investment in agriculture, 
and, therefore, the Government came up with Agriculture Infrastructure Fund.  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
99

 
However, against the projected  one lakh crore spending in  the agriculture sector in 
this particular scheme, only  26,000 crore of rupees have been sanctioned and only 
21,000 crore of rupees have been  spent.  I think, a lot requires to be done in the rural 
sector.   
Coming to the Swaminathan Committee Report, which has been talked about 
for increasing the income of the farmers and for fixing the Minimum Support Price, it is 
yet to be done.  It has to be based on the C2 formula, that is, the composite price, 
and, it has been the consistent demand of  our Party, the Biju Janata Dal under the 
leadership of our Chief Minister, Shri Nave en Patnaik.  We have been raising this 
demand at all fora.  That is not happening  but that has to happen.  The deceleration 
in the agriculture translates into some stress in the rural sector and this has to be 
recognized.  The rural economy has to go up in case we have to maintain the growth 
momentum and the structural shift remains where it is and it does not change its 
position frequently year on year.   
If we see the services sector, the growth  rate in the services sector has come 
down to 5.8 per cent and this is a decelerat ion.  Previously, our economy was heavily 
dependent on the services sector but what happens if the services sector goes down.  
Particularly in the trade, hotels, transport, communication or broadcasting services, it 
has just grown by 4 per cent.   These ar e the sectors which provide jobs. Unless we 
grow in these sectors by consistent policy efforts by budgetary allocation, by 
increasing private investment in these s ectors, jobs will not be created and the 
unemployment problem will consistently haunt us and, therefore, this is something 
which the Government has to think about. 
 Madam, I also want to talk about the so cial sector.  In the social sector, the 
last Economic Survey mentioned that out-of -pocket expenses are 48 per cent.  This 
has to decrease, and, therefore, Governme nt's spending on health has to increase 
but this has not happened.  It has to be consistently done  given the fact that our 
economy is growing at a healthy rate.  The growth of the Indian economy depends on 
the growth of the State ec onomies and the growth of  the State economies can 
increase only when the Central allocation, by  way of devolution of funds, increases.  
What we have seen is that it has consistently decreased and currently, it is at 30 per 
cent, which is not doing good to the economi c situation in the States.  We have to 
ensure that the regional imbalance that exists between several States in terms of 
attracting foreign investment because of the infrastructure which is already there, has 
to be addressed by either declaring some of the States like Odisha or Andhra Pradesh 
as special focus States or by making infrastructure push in these sectors which will lift 
them to a level where foreign direct investment can also come into these sectors. 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Madam, there is a point that I wanted to ma ke relating to tax-to-GDP ratio.  Tax-to-
GDP ratio has shown a good trend recently.  The GST collection has increased, 
which basically means that formalization of  economy is taking place.  But, at the 
same time, 90 per cent of the people are still employed in informal economy.  This is a 
contradiction which, I think, the Government needs to address at some point of time 
because unless this is addressed, a stru ctural problem may still remain in the 
economy even as we are growing in GDP te rms.  The tax-to-GDP ratio at 11.1 per 
cent is at par with 2023 Revised Estimates, but it is less than the average of many 
emerging economies, including the OECD economies where it is 33 per cent.  So, we 
have to bring this structural change in ou r economy in terms of revenue collection tax 
as a percentage of GDP.   
The last point, Madam, which I want to  make is relating to private sector 
investment.  The investment that has al ready happened which is spurring this 
economic growth, which our economy analysts are also saying is basically backed by 
the Government capital expend iture, which is welcome.  (Time-bell rings.)  But this 
capital expenditure has to be backed by the investment from the private sector in the 
economy.  The households sector's investment in the economy is already happening, 
but the private sector's investment is not happening.  This is a cause for worry, and 
for that, I think, several more policy push have to be made because this would be 
another source in which jobs can be created, employment opportunities can be 
created and unemployment can be addressed.   
Lastly, Madam, there was a talk about female labour force participation.  There 
was a discussion as to the stark reality of our female labour for ce participation being 
very low compared to other countries.   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):  Please conclude. 
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK : Actually, there is an incr ease in female labour force 
participation, thanks to the Government, by 37 per cent in 2023.  Several such 
measures will have to be taken to bring it to a level in which we can be comparable to 
other countries.  So, in short, Madam, I would like to say that the economy is in good 
hands, but there are fault lines.  (Time-bell rings.)    These fault lines have to be 
addressed. And if that happens, then the country's growth trajectory will be more 
inclusive, more sustainable and it will benefit all sections of the society.  Thank you.  
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhra Pradesh):  At the outset, I would like to 
thank the hon. Vice-Chairman Madam for givi ng me the opportunity to speak on the 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
101

 
economic situation prevailing in the country.  I would like to emphatically state that the 
20th century belonged to China but the 21 st century belongs to India.   India has 
emerged as one of the fastest growing econo mies in the world despite challenges in 
the global environment.  Thos e challenges include the rise in geopolitical tensions, 
disruption of supply chains, global tighteni ng of monetary policies and inflationary 
pressures.  The economy is projected to grow at 6.5 to 7 per cent rate in the fiscal 
year 2024, but the country's economy expa nded 7.6 per cent in July-September 
quarter, surpassing the projections of 6.5 per cent of growth estimates by the RBI.  
India's growth rate is almost twice the av erage of emerging market economies.  What 
is really working for us?  India's econo mic progression is being powered by the 
Government's emphasis on public infrastr ucture investment, capital expenditure and 
increased bank rate growth. Government sp ending has been up by 12.4 per cent. 
Manufacturing and construction sectors have  also seen growth with the rise in 
demand for new projects.  The biggest boost in the growth came from the services 
sector which grew at 10.3 per cent in the fi rst quarter, up from 6.9 per cent in the 
previous quarter.  This can be attributed to strong growth in the financial, agriculture, 
real estate and other services sectors as we ll.   As an emerging economy, India has 
been able to control its inflation while many advanced economies are dealing with 
severe inflation and have not yet been able  to stabilize their economies.  According to 
IMF estimates, the Indian economy will emerge as the world's third largest economy 
by 2027, surpassing Japan's and Germany's GDP, as we are going to cross five 
trillion dollars. Madam, India's digital infrastructure is the best in the world.  Our digital 
infrastructure development has helped in faster delivery of financial services and 
helped make a positive impact on financia l inclusion.  According to the G-20 Policy 
Document prepared by the World Bank, In dia has achieved a remarkable 80 per cent 
financial inclusion rate in just six years --  a feat that would have taken nearly five 
decades without a digital public infras tructure approach.  Andhra Pradesh 
Government, under the able and dynamic leadership of Mr. Jagan Mohan Reddy, has 
used this digital infrastructure to transform the State to the next level.   
 Madam, I would like to mention the de velopmental statistics that Andhra 
Pradesh has given in the economic situation of our country.  Andhra Pradesh records 
5 0  p e r  c e n t  G S D P  g r o w t h  i n  f o u r  y e a r s  - -  j u m p i n g  f r o m  1 6  t o  4 .    I n  M a r c h  2 0 1 9 ,  
Andhra Pradesh ranked, in terms of growth rate, 16
th out of 28 States with GSDP of 
8.7 lakh crore rupees.  However, as pe r the latest RBI Report, 2022-23, Andhra 
Pradesh jumped to rank four in terms of the GSDP growth in the country with a GSDP 
of 13.17 lakh crore rupees.  The State reco rded 50 per cent GSDP growth in the last 
four years.   
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 There has been a significant uptick in per capita income.  Andhra Pradesh 
moves from spot 17 to 9.  In March 2019, Andhra Pradesh ranked 17 th in the country 
with a per capita income of 1.5 lakh rupees .  In just four and a half years of CM 
Jagan-led Government, the per capita income  has increased to 2.1 lakh rupees and 
currently has acquired ninth spot among othe r States.  These are all from the RBI's 
Handbook of Statistics. 
 The debt growth rate is down by 111 pe r cent -- from 169 per cent  in 2014 to 
58 per cent in 2023.  Under the Chandrababu Naidu's Government, in 2014, the debt 
growth rate of State was as high as 169 per cent. 
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR :  M a d a m ,  h e  i s  t a k i n g  t h e  n a m e .   
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH) :  Hon. Member, name should 
not be mentioned.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA :  However, after gaining power, Mr. Jagan 
Mohan Reddy not only took measures to elevate the State's economic growth but 
also ensured that the debt growth slid down.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH) :  Hon. Member, name should 
not be mentioned.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA :  Madam, after four and a half years, the debt 
growth rate has drastically co me down from 110 per cent to 58 per cent.  This is also 
as per the records available.   
 There is a record generation of gov ernment jobs.  During 2014-2019, only 
34,000 posts in government jobs could be filled.   But in the last fo ur and a half years 
of YSRCP Government, 4.93 lakh go vernment jobs have been created. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):  Hon. Member, please refrain 
from mentioning names.  
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA :  Madam, ascending agricultural growth has 
contributed to the nation's economy.  ...( Interruptions)...  My friend, you have to 
understand this.  There is ascen ding agricultural growth from second last to number 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
103

 
seven in India.  In March 2019, in terms of  agricultural sector growth, Andhra Pradesh 
was ranked 27th in the country with a negative growth  rate of 6.5 per cent.  However, 
in a significant change, the State has ascended to 7 th position in the last four and a 
half years.  Andhra Pradesh's agricultural  growth rate now has been recorded as 
+5.5 per cent.  This is again from Handbook of Statistics of the RBI.   
 We have three times growth in industri al sector performan ce.  During 2019, 
industrial growth rate was a meagre 3.2 pe r cent.  But, today, under Chief Minister 
Jagan's Government, the industrial growth rate has increased to 10.59 per cent.  
Again, this is from RBI statistics. Andhra Pradesh tops consecutively for two years in 
'ease of doing business'.  This again is  a source from the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Government of India.  There is reco rd five times growth in MSMEs in the last 
f o u r  y e a r s .   D u r i n g  2 0 1 9 ,  w h e n  m y  C M  took over, there were only 37,956 MSMEs.  
B u t ,  i n  t h e  l a s t  f o u r - a n d - a - h a l f  y e a r s ,  i t  h a s  g o n e  u p  t o  1 . 8 8  l a k h  M S M E s .  T h i s  
statistic is also available on record.  Industrialist stalwarts always look up to Andhra 
Pradesh. ...( Interruptions)...   Madam, I would like to say that Andhra Pradesh 
received the highest ever investment of Rs .13.5 lakh crore during a single global 
investor summit held in March, 2023. ...( Interruptions)...   All the top industrialists 
have invested to a huge extent and committed...(Interruptions )...  These are all as 
per the statistics available. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):  Please.  
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA : Madam, I think my colleague has to 
understand. ...( Interruptions)... Finally, Madam, there is  a revolution in school 
infrastructure. In the last four years, an amount of Rs.7,112 crore has been spent on 
Government schools. ...( Interruptions)... Introduction of Eng lish medium is one of 
the best governance inputs that has come from the Andhra Pradesh Government. 
...(Interruptions)... There is 46 per cent exponential rise in healthcare infrastructure. 
It has increased from Rs.28,000 crore to Rs.41,000 crore. The CM Jagan Government 
has developed more than 10,0 00 YSR village health clinic s which were never looked 
at.  There is Arogyasri Programme, also free  medical camps and what not. There is a 
massive infrastructure boost -- more than  four ports, ten fishing harbours, two 
airports, 17 medical colleges, three industrial corridors with five nodes, 10,778 Raythu 
Bharosa Kendras, 15,000 Gram  Sachivalayas, 10,0 00 YSR health clinics have been 
developed; all over, 31 lakh house pattas have been given to poor and another 22 lakh 
houses are under construction.  ...(Interruptions)... 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 Madam, I have a few suggestions for the Government of India. To evolve into a 
five-trillion dollar economy, India must focus on several key areas, especially new and 
emerging fields. ...( Interruptions)... Digital infrastructure and technology certainly 
need to be focussed upon; renewable ener gy needs to be focussed upon; financial 
sector reforms need to be focussed upon; international trade and relations should be 
focussed upon. ( Time-bell rings. ) Research and development initiative should be 
focussed upon; judicial sector reforms should be focussed upon; bureaucratic 
reforms should be focussed upon.  Madam, I must tell you one thing.  Under Prime 
Minister Modi's governance, this country has seen a lot of safety and security.  There 
is a lot of discipline that has come in the system.  I must tell you that. Starting from 
shareholders to the investors, to the indu stries, banking system, and all the people 
that are there in the system understand the importance of governance and everybody 
is following a disciplined route.  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH): Sir, please conclude. 
  
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA : Madam, I would like to congratulate the hon. 
Prime Minister and the Finance Minister for steering our country during huge global 
uncertainties in an effective manner while bringing the maximum benefits to the Indian 
economy through all the diplomatic outreach initiatives.  Thank you very much, 
Madam.  
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी (महाराÍटर्) : मȅ माननीय चेयरमैन साहब को शुिकर्या कहना चाहूंगी िक 
उन्हȗने हमȂ एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् सÅजेक्ट पर शॉटर् ǹूरे शन िडÎकशन करने का मौका िदया। यह 
िवपक्ष की मांग रही है िक अथर्ËयवÎथा पर चचार् हो, तो उन्हȗने इसकी परिमशन दी ह
ै, इसिलए मȅ 
उनकी आभारी हूं। मैडम, लाÎट Äयू Îपीकसर् होने का यह फायदा होता है िक हमने सबके  फ ैक्ट्स 
सुने हȅ, हमने भारतीय
 जनता पाटीर् क े सांसदȗ की तरफ से फ ैक्ट ģी िडफȂ स भी सुना है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... माइक को क्या हो गया है? क्या आवाज कम है? Madam, can you hear me? 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):  Excuse me for a second. Dr. 
John Brittas, I am sorry.  After her, please.  Thank you.   
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI :  M a d a m ,  a d d  3 0  s e c o n d s  t o  t h i s  d i s r u p t i o n .   
…(Interruptions)…  So, what I want to say here is, मुझे सबकी बातȂ सुनने का समय िमला। 
म
ुझे खासकर क ु छ सांसदȗ की बातȂ सुनने का समय िमला, जो कह रहे थे िक मनरेगा की िडमांड 
आधी हो चुकी है, unemployment क े आंकड़े आधे हो चुक े हȅ। मȅ उनसे पूछना चाहूंगी िक अगर  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
105

 
उनके  आंकड़े सही हȅ, तो मनरेगा क े बारे मȂ अखबार हमȂ जो बताते हȅ और जो िरपोट्सर् आती हȅ, 
उनके  अनुसार मनरेगा की भारी मांग क्यȗ हो गई है, यह मांग दोगुनी क्यȗ हो गई है?  
महोदया, इसके  साथ ही साथ रूरल  डेवलपमȂट िमिनÎटर्ी की भी मांग है। मनरेगा का 60 
हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े का बजट था। आने वाले बजट क े िलए उनकी ऐसी मांग है िक मनरेगा क
े  िलए 
1.1 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का बजट एलोके ट करना चािहए। अगर मनरेगा की िडमांड आधी हो गई है, 
तो िफर यह िकस वजह से हो रहा है?  
महोदया, दूसरी बात, जो मेरी समझ मȂ नहीं आई, वह यह है िक एक माननीय सांसद कह 
रहे थे, िजनकी आदत ह
ै to defend the indefensible िक unemployment और inflation से 
जनता को िकसी तरीके  का फकर् नहीं पड़ रहा है, इसिलए उनको चुनाव मȂ भारी बहुमत िमल रहा 
है। अगर उन्हȂ inflation, महंगाई को लेकर कोई दुख नहीं है या unemployment आधी हो गई ह
ै, 
तो मȅ पूछना चाहूंगी िक देश की 80 करोड़ जनता को जो राशन िमल रहा है, वह िकस वजह से 
िमल रहा है? इसका मतलब या तो उनके  पास रोज़गार है और अगर रोज़गार है तो 80 करोड़  
लोगȗ को इस राशन की जरूरत  क्यȗ आन
 पड़ी है?  
महोदया, अभी GDP की बात हो रही थी। उन्हȗने एक और चीज़ कही थी िक RBI क े 
inflation क े आंकड़े breach नहीं हुए हȅ। मȅ उन्हȂ याद िदला दूं िक January 2023 मȂ 6.52 per 
cent inflation था।, February 2023 मȂ 6.44 per cent था, January 2022 मȂ 6.01 per cent था,  
February 2022 मȂ 6.07 per cent था,  March 2022 मȂ 6.95 per cent था और April मȂ 7.79 
per cent था। यह inflation, िजसमȂ  RBI क े आंकड़ȗ  को  breach िकया है, यह 6 per cent का 
है।   
महोदया, GDP की बार-बार बात हो रही है। मȅ जीडीपी से ज्यादा per capita income पर 
ध्यान देना चाहूंगी। एक माननीय सांसद ने कहा िक मȅ अगल-बगल क े देशȗ की बात नहीं करना 
चाहूंगा, बिÊक अमरीका और यूरोिप यन यूिनयन से अपने देश का क ं पेिरज़न करना चाहूंगा। मȅ 
उनसे िरक्वेÎट करूं गी की उन देशȗ की पर क ैिपटा इनकम क े comparison मȂ इंिडया की पर 
क ैिपटा इनकम पर ध्यान दȂ। मैडम,  ये 2022 क े आंकड़े हȅ, इसमȂ यूएसए की पर एनम इनकम 
63,41,117 है और चीन की 10,51,610 है। हमारा इंिडया कहाँ पर है? इंिडया 1,98,287 पर है। 
2014 से देश क े देशवािसयȗ की जो पर क ैिपटा इनकम
 बढ़ी है, वह करीब 35 Ģितशत बढ़ी है। म ȅ 
उनसे यह कर् ेिडट नहीं छीनना चाहूंगी, पर जो उनकी महंगाई बढ़ी है, वह 123 Ģितशत बढ़ी है। 
यानी जो आमदनी चवन्नी, खचार् रुपया कहा जाता था, वह इन्हȗने आज पूरा कर िदया है। अगर 
आप कहȂगे िक मȅ दाल, चावल और अन्य सभी का दाम भी बताऊं  िक वह दाम िकतना बढ़ा है, तो 
िजन आंकड़ȗ पर पर क ैिपटा इनकम बढ़ी है, यह उससे ज्यादा ही बढ़ा है।   ( ... समय की घंटी  ..)
 
मैडम, मȅ आपके  एक-दो िमनट और लूंगी। आप भी मिहला हȅ, मȅ भी मिहला हूं, मȅ पहली  बार 
आपसे कह रही हूं।  
मैडम, रुपी  डेिĢिशएशन की बात हुई थी। मुझे याद है िक जब माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
गुजरात क े मुख्य मंतर्ी हुआ करते थे, तब वे रुपी  क े िगरने पर िकतना अफसोस जताया करते थे। 
इस बारे म
Ȃ उनके  िकतने ही भाषण उपलÅध हȅ। वे कहते थे िक पािकÎतान का रुपी  stronger हो  
रहा है, बाकी देशȗ की currency strong हो रही है, हमारे देश का ही रुपया  क्यȗ वीक हो रहा है? 
आज िदल दुखी होता है, जब पता चलता है िक हम लोग
 िहÎटोिरकल लो पर जा रहे हȅ।  आज 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Indian rupee historical low पर है, against the dollar. ऐसा िकसकी नीितयȗ की वजह से हुआ 
है? I am sure िक माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी हमȂ इसके  बारे मȂ बताएंगी - यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी..। 
जब हम यह पढ़ते हȅ िक poorest performing currency in Asia ... Madam, one last minute, 
Thank you so much.,  
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH) :  Madam, please conclude.  
…(Interruptions)…  Please conclude.  …(Interruptions)…  
  
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Madam, please one last minute.   मैडम, मȅ लाÎट 
मȂ  loan write offs क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहूंगी।   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH):   Madam, please conclude.
   
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी : बहुत बार यह बात हुई है िक गरीबȗ  पर ध्यान िदया है, गरीबȗ का 
उत्थान िकया है, लेिकन 10.6 lakh crore loan write off हुआ है, िजसमȂ से 50 Ģितशत जो लोन 
राइट ऑफ हुआ है, वह उन क ैिपटिलÎट्स का हुआ है, िजनका पूरा-पूरा समथर्न भारतीय जनता 
पाटीर् को ĢाÃत है।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH) :  Please conclude. 
 
…(Interruptions)…  
  
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी :  आज जब गरीबी की बात करते हȅ, 'सबका साथ-सबका िवकास' की 
बात करते हȅ, तो सही मायने मȂ देश मȂ 'सबका साथ-सबका िवकास' लाएं।  मैडम, आप
 ने मुझे यहाँ 
पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है ,इसके  िलए thank you so much.                                                                       
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala ):  Madam, I am a strong feminist and I need to get two 
or three minutes more from you. Mada m, see a miracle has happened after the 
speeches of Shri Rakesh Sinha and others.  When I was coming from South Avenue, 
there are some changes that have happened to the Boat Club.  Instead of water, it is 
full of honey and milk.  यह पानी शहद और दूध हो गया।  After 2014, this country has 
drastically changed.  You know  that as to how it has changed.  All the indices have 
been doled out here and I will not refer it to you, Madam, but I will specifically come to 
certain concerns of my State.   Madam, th e other day, I had asked a question to the 
hon. Finance Minster as to the borrowing limits of the State.  I got an answer from the 
Minister. She said 'that we are strict on borrowing limits because the Fifteenth 
Finance Commission has given a recommendatio n and I asked her as to what is the 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
107

 
recommendation. It is like this.  "Governments at all tiers may observe strict discipline 
by resisting any further additions to the stock of off-budget transactions." Fine, 
Madam.  It is perfectly okay.  Is not Un ion Government a Government?  Are they not 
part of the Governments which have been  referred to by the Fifteenth Finance 
Commission?  They want all the State Governments to shed the borrowing of the 
PSUs or SPVs.  When it comes to the Ce ntral Government, just see the National 
Highway Authority of India? I asked a questi on and you know as to what is the loan 
debt of NHAI, Madam.  You would be surprise d that it is Rs. 3.4 lakh crore.  There 
are other agencies also.  They want to disc ipline the State Governments.  What is the 
total debt of the Union Government?  It is  Rs. 157 lakh crore, a humongous figure.  
They are trying to blame the State Governme nt.  I come from Ke rala.  The Kerala's 
social indices are at par with the western countries. What is this economy?  Economy 
is for the society, for the pe ople.  It is just because yo u want to stack some cash in 
your house, is that an economy?  No.  It is the welfare of the people.  The average 
life-span of a Malayali is 12 years more than that from th e State of Shri Rakesh Sinha 
or other States.  What is the meaning of that?  We live more than those people who 
are at the North.  I will just come to another topic. ...(Interruptions)... I want your 
protection as it is a very serious matter.   Now, the point is that we are being 
penalized. You know, what is the new slogan?   The Prime Minister was harping over 
co-operative federalism. It is not a co-operative federalism but this is crony 
federalism. You know why? South India ha s 18 per cent of population and we 
contribute 35 per cent to the GDP.  We are being penalized for the performance.  You 
mop-up so much of resources through surc harges, Rs. 7 lakh crore in a year and 
then you bring Centrally-sponsored Scheme  which cannot be implemented in a State 
like Kerala because we have crossed the thre shold.  You want us to open schools.  
We have already schools there. ...( Time-bell rings.)...  Madam, please give me time 
as you have been liberal to everybody.  No w, what is happening?  There is a strange 
phenomenon.  Somebody was talking about selfie-corners in higher educational 
institute.  मोदी साहब तो सभी जगह पर हȅ। You want to add everywhere.  Now, one more 
thing is this.  They are contributing one -fifth for the housing scheme whereas three-
fourths is being contributed by the State of  Kerala.  They want to brand the houses 
which are built.  What about the self-respect  of the people?  Do  you want to have 
branded houses? 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH): Please conclude.  
 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, I am just winding up.  We said that there is no need of 
branding.  We should uphold the self-resp ect of the people.  Instead of that, they 
want to name everything in the name of Prime Minister. ..(Time-bell rings.)...    
Madam, my only submission to you is that  the entire credibility of this Government 
rests with the fact that, the slogan, you ne ed to have prosperous States instead of 
fleecing the States. You should allow the State Governments to have the resources. 
You should make sure that there should be equitable divisive process that is 
happening whereby resources  are given to the States .  Thank you very much, 
Madam. 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (DR. SONAL MANSINGH): Now Shri Nagendra Ray.  
 
Ǜी नगेन्दर् रॉय (पिÌचमी बंगाल) :  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ भारत की आिर्थक ËयवÎथा से 
संबंिधत क ु छ बातȂ कहना चाहता हूँ। हमȂ यह ध्यान रहे िक हमारा अतीत था, तो अब हमारा वतर्मान 
है और वतर्मान है, तो
 भिवÍय भी रहेगा। यिद हम अपनी अथर्ËयवÎथा पर एक नजर डालȂगे, तो 
पाएंगे िक हमारे देश मȂ क ु बेर धन था। हमारे देश का नाम था - रत्नपीठ, Îवणर्पीठ - अगर देखा 
जाए, तो 2014 से पहले हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा एकदम लाचार हो गई थी।  
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती फ
ू लो देवी नेतम) पीठासीन हुईं।] 
 
हमȂ अपने रत्न भंडार मȂ से सोने को िगरवी रखना पड़ता था। भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, 
माननीय नरेन्दर् दामोदरदास मोदी ने जब भारत को संभाला, तब से आज तक देखȂ, तो 2022-23 
मȂ भारत की जीडीपी वृिǉ दर 7.2 Ģितशत थी और यह िवǄीय वषर् 2022-23 मȂ दुिनया की Ģमुख 
अथर्ËयवÎथाओं मȂ सबसे तेजी से बढ़ती अथर्ËयवÎथाओं म
Ȃ थी। सभी ËयवÎथाओं मȂ भारतीय ËयवÎथा 
को दुिनया
 मȂ bright spot कहा जा रहा है। िपछले नौ वषș से भारत की आिर्थक ËयवÎथा मȂ एक 
उÊलेखनीय नीित है। दुिनया हमारी आिर्थक ËयवÎथा की सराहना करती है। महोदया, मȅ कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक अभी हमारी जो आिर्थक ËयवÎथा बनी है, इसके  क ु छ-क ु छ इलाकȗ मȂ ड ेवलपमȂट की 
कमी है। महोदया, डेवलपमȂट इस आिर्थक ËयवÎथा की गर्ोथ है, लेिकन हमारे नॉथर् बंगाल, िबहार 
क े उǄर-पूवीर् इलाके , असम, नॉथर्-ईÎट इलाके  मȂ यह एकदम नैरो है। हम गवनर्मȂट से िवनती 
करते हȅ िक जÊद-से-जÊद हमारे यहाँ की आिर्थक ËयवÎथा दुरुÎत हो। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA (Chhatishgarh): Madam, point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती फ
ू लो देवी नेतम) : अभी बोलने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... अभी बोलने दीिजए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
109

 
Ǜी नगेन्दर् रॉय : मȅ गवनर्मȂट से आगर्ह करता हूँ िक जÊद-से-जÊद हमारे उǄर-पूवर् भारत को 
डेवलप िकया जाए। ...(Ëयवधान)... हम चाहते हȅ िक हम यह लÑय पूरा करȂ िक जो जीडीपी है, वह 
सवर्ǛेÍठ Îथान पर पहुंच जाए। ...(Ëयवधान)... मैडम, म ȅ ज्यादा नहीं बोलना चाहता हूँ, इसिलए 
अपने वƪËय को िवराम देता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा : मैडम, इन्हȗने कहा िक 2014 से पहले हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा लाचार हो गई थी, 
हमȂ सोने को िगरवी रखना पड़ता था, िफर मोदी जी ने आकर उसको संभाला।  उसके  बाद तो
  
नरिसÇहा राव जी भी आए थे, उस समय मनमोहन िंसह जी िवǄ मंतर्ी थे, उन्हȗने सारी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा संभाली थी।  उन्हȗने 2005 क े  बारे मȂ यह सही बताया िक मनमोहन िंसह जी क े 
regime मȂ 7 से ऊपर जीडीपी थी, लेिकन आज भी वह जीडीपी नहीं है।  ये फ ैक्ट्स को सुधारकर 
वƪËय दȂ, यही मेरा अनुरोध है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम) : माननीय Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा। 
 
Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा (मध्य Ģदेश) : मैडम, क ृपया मेरा टाइम शुरू  से Îटाटर् करȂ। 
 मैडम, मȅ बहुत देर से सभी मेÇबसर् को सीिरयसली सुन रहा था।  मȅ सुन रहा था िक हर 
Ëयिƪ अपने तरीके  से इकोनॉमी क े बारे मȂ ĢेजȂटेशन दे रहे थे।  लोगȗ ने एÇÃलॉयमȂट की बात की, 
जीडीपी की बात की, गर्ोथ की बात की, एजुक ेशन की बात की, हेÊथ की बात की, सबकी बात 
की, लेिकन मȅ आपसे पहली चीज़ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक मȅ जब इकोनॉमी को देखता हूँ, तो उसे 
अपने शहर से देखता हूँ िक मेरे शहर की ËयवÎथा क्या है।  म
ȅ मध्य Ģदेश से आता हूँ।  मȅ वहाँ 
जबलपुर मȂ रहता था।  वहाँ पर करीब छ: ordnance factories
 हȅ, जहाँ एक लाख से ऊपर लोग 
काम करते थे।  यह 50-60 साल  की ËयवÎथा है। I am sure, यहाँ क े बहुत सारे सांसद जब 
जबलपुर गए हȗगे, तो उन्हȗने ordnance factories देखी हȗगी।  समÎया यह है िक वे ordnance 
factories
, जहाँ लाख-डेढ़ लाख लोग काम करते थे, आज वहां मुिÌकल से 10,000 लोग काम 
करते हȅ, तो मȅ यह क ै से मानूँ िक इंिडया की economy is doing well.  इकोनॉमी तब अच्छा 
करती है, जब लोगȗ को नौकरी िमलती है, इन्Äलेशन कम रहता है, चीज़Ȃ सÎती होती हȅ, जरूरत 
की चीज़Ȃ आराम से उपलÅध हो जाती ह
ȅ।  मȅ figures की बात नहीं कर रहा हूँ।  मेरे पास भी बड़े-बड़े 
figures हȅ, लेिकन मȅ देखता हूँ िक जब  ancillaries बन्द पड़ी हȅ, तब आप कहते हȅ िक इंिडया 
manufacturing hub है!  यह कौन सा manufacturing hub है? यह क ेवल थोड़ा सा digital hub 
है।  जो एक
 नया िडिजटल माकȃ ट िकर्एट हुआ है, जो आईटी का एक माकȃ ट िकर्एट हुआ है, 
उसकी क ु छ चीजȂ नोएडा आ गई हȅ।  इसके  अलावा, चीन या बाहर क े  अन्य देशȗ मȂ जो 
manufacturing हुआ करती थी, वह तो यहाँ िशÄट नहीं हुई है!  जो heavy engineering वगैरह 
की manufacturing है, वह आज भी यहाँ पर नहीं आई है।   
मैडम, मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक जब मȅ मोदी जी को सुनता हूँ या मंितर्यȗ को सुनता हूँ, 
तो वे education की बात कम करते हȅ, employment की बात नहीं करते, growth की  बात 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
hardly करते हȅ।  वे हमको middle-class क े बारे मȂ ज्यादा क ु छ बता नहीं पाते। देश मȂ जो एक 
inclusiveness होनी चािहए, उसके  बारे मȂ वे चुप रहते हȅ।  वे skill development क े बारे मȂ नहीं 
बताते।  वे जो बताते हȅ, वह बहुत थोड़ा है।   मेरा यह कहना है िक जब jobs चली गई हȅ, तो हमको 
आजकल क्या शÅद सुनने को िमलते हȅ - घमंिडया, अमृतकाल!  आप पूर
े िवपक्ष को घमंिडया 
बोलते रिहए, लेिकन उससे चीजȂ तो बदलने वाली नहीं हȅ! मेरा यह कहना है िक इस देश मȂ 
िपछले 9 सालȗ से क ेवल जुमला और empty promises िदए गए हȅ।   
मुझे आज याद आ रहा है िक अपने सनी देओल साहब
 लोक सभा क े मेÇबर हȅ।  उनकी एक 
मूवी थी, िजसमȂ वे कहते ह
ȅ- तारीख पे तारीख, तारीख पे तारीख, तारीख पे तारीख िमली, माई 
लॉडर्, पर इंसाफ नहीं िमला।  इसी तरह मȅ मोदी जी और बीजेपी से कहना चाहता हूँ िक तारीख पे 
तारीख, तारीख पे तारीख िमली, माई लॉडर्, मगर हमको िवकास नहीं िमला।  हमȂ िवकास 
actually नहीं िमला।  आपने हमको तारीखȂ दीं।  आपने 2016 दी, 2017 दी, 2018 दी, 2019 दी, 
2020 दी, 2022 दी, मगर वह िवकास कहाँ है, िजस िवकास की आप बात करते हȅ?   
मȅ आगे बताना चाहता हूँ।  िवकास क े छ: indices होते हȅ, िजनमȂ से एक है economic 
growth.  What is the economy growth? इकोनॉिमक गर्ोथ वह है, जब हम यह देखȂ िक real 
wages, यानी जो non-agricultural occupatio
n होता है, जो फामर्र होता है, उसकी wages मȂ 
क्या इजाफा हुआ?  िसतÇबर, 2017 से 2022 मȂ it has declined by 0.9 per cent.  ...(समय  की 
घंटी)... मैडम, मेरा तो 7-8 िमनट का समय है।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम) : आपका टाइम चार िमनट का ही था, जो िक पूरा हो 
गया। 
 
Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा : मैडम, मेरा टाइम 7-8 िमनट का था।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम) : ठीक है, आप दो िमनट और बोल लीिजए। 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA: Between 2017-2021, regular workers have declined from 0.7 
per cent to 1.3 per cent.  इसी तरह मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक पहले क
ु िंकग गैस 100 रुपय े की 
थी, जो अब 200 रुपय े की हो गई।  िमÊक, जो िक पहले Ģित लीटर 35 रुपय े का था, वह 65 रुपय े 
का हो गया। पÊसेज़ क े दाम 75 रुपय े थे, जो 180 हो गए, आटा 20 रुपय े Ģित िकलो था, वह 45 
रुपय े Ģित िकलो हो गया, श
ुगर 35 रुपय े मȂ थी, उसके  दाम 55 रुपय े हो गए, पेटर्ोल 70 रुपय े मȂ 
था, उसके  दाम 105 रुपय े हो गए।  
 अब इÇÃलॉयमȂट की बात की जाए तो unemployment rate is 42 per cent, labour 
force participation rate has fallen to 40 per cent from 47 per cent which is already low. 
In five years, while, the total working po pulation has gone up by 12 crores, the 
number of people wit
h jobs have gone down to 80 lakhs. इसी तरह मȅ एगर्ीकÊचर का 
failure बताना चाहता हूं। ...(समय की घंटी)... मȅ शॉटर् मȂ बोल देता हूं।  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
111

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम) : 4 िमनट का समय था। अभी अन्य वƪा भी हȅ। 
 
Ǜी िववेक क े. तन्खा : रुपया constantly decline कर रहा है। हमारी फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर कहती हȅ 
िक रुपया िगरा नहीं, बिÊक डॉलर मज़बूत हुआ है। हमारा कहना है िक 'rupee' today is worst 
performing Asian currency. मेरा
 यह कहना है िक wealth inequality है, agricultural growth 
है, रुपय े का decline है, financial scandals हȅ - आपकी गर्ोथ कहां हुई? यह गर्ोथ तो कहीं नहीं 
िदखती। मुझे िसफर् यह िदखता है िक आप लोग opposition क े against full tirade launch करते 
हȅ, opposition को एक bad name देते हȅ, कभी कह देते हȅ िक अमृतकाल है, कभी कह द ेते हȅ 
िक यह घमंिडया है। इन सब बातȗ से क ु छ फकर् नहीं पड़ने वाला है। अगर आप चाहते हȅ िक इंिडया 
की गर्ोथ हो, जो मȅ 7 इंडेक्सेज़ बोल रहा था, it has to be an inclusive growth, it has to be a 
growth of its workers,
 its agricultural s ector, its town, its youth, its women, its 
SC/STs, OBCs and everybody. 
 
SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS (West Bengal) : Madam, we are discussing the state of 
economy in India, but, anyone listening to this debate since yesterday will realise that 
when it comes to facts and figures and in sights, Members of the Opposition parties 
are giving clear arguments to make a stro ng case. On the other hand, the BJP is 
having a competition; competition of what, Madam! It is as to how many times they 
can mention the name of hon. Prime Minist er. Well, of course, we do not have any 
problem regarding that, but, I would like to know why they do not give us facts and 
figures. The previous three speakers from my party have made common points. What 
are the points; why is the wealth that is being created not being equally distributed 
and where? Firstly, equally among all the people of the country and secondly, among 
the States, irrespective of their political id eologies. Now, let me make a charge which 
I can substantiate with data. The non-BJP States like Bengal, Tamil Nadu and the 
Congress-run States are deprived. The unspo ken catchline seems to be 'support us 
politically and we will release funds', 'suppo rt us politically and we will not send CBI 
and ED behind you'. Madam, I will give  you one example about MGNREGA. I will 
raise five points about MGNREGA. Firstly, as we all know, it is an Act of Parliament. It 
is a right and not a gift depending on  the whims and fancies of the Central 
Government.  
Secondly, as per the Act, the payment to a worker wh o has worked under this 
scheme is to be made within fifteen days. So, if hundred people have worked on a 
scheme and if there is any discrepancy arising out of it, if two of them are found guilty, 
I would like to know why the rest 98 people are deprived. This is most unfortunate and 
most undesirable. But, this is what is being done. The budget of MGNREGA has 
been cut by about 30 per cent with respect to last year. But, we are not surprised as 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
in 2014, on the floor of the Parliament, hon. Prime Minister had called it ' gaddha 
khodne ka scheme' ; most unfortunately. Fourth po int, Madam, is that MGNREGA 
man days all over the country are falling, but,  the Ruling party, the BJP is celebrating 
it. Today, one of the MPs has called this an indicator of development. This is their 
way of looking at the economy, but, our approach is different. Fifth point is about job 
cards. About 7,40,000 job cards have been found to be fake in Uttar Pradesh that 
means of the total figures, about half is accounted for by Uttar Pradesh. Bengal had 
about 5,000 fake job cards.  I would like to  know whether the f unds to Uttar Pradesh 
have been stopped.  I am sure the answer is  known to all.  Now let me read from the 
BJP manifesto of 2014, I am mentioning it .  They had spoken of doubling farmers' 
income.  Did it happen in 2019? No. Again,  did it happen in 2023? No. At current 
growth estimates, the farmers' income will not double before 2030.  In Bengal in 2011, 
a promise was made by the hon. Chief Mini ster.  Most interestingly, it was about 
doubling farmers' income and I take pride as I come from Bengal in mentioning that 
as of today it is not doubled, but it has increased three-folds as in the current date. 
N o w ,  M a d a m ,  l e t  m e  c o m e  t o  p u b l i c  s e c t o r  u n d e r t a k i n g s ,  t h e  P S U s .   W e  h a v e  
withstood the shock and trauma of demonetization, but how many of us have heard 
of monetization? This is the instrument of  the NITI Aayog to sell out the people's 
assets, as the name reflects, public sector undertakings.  It belongs to the public, it is 
the asset of the public and the Government is  hell-bent upon selling it.  Madam, it is 
like selling the family's jewellery. As you can name it, rail, Air India, BHEL, BSNL, LIC 
and the list is unending. These were created  over decades but now we want to strip 
the nation of these assets.  I proudly be long to the Scheduled Caste community and 
every time this happens I am hurt and hurt dearly.  As every time a PSU is sold, a 
young SC boy or girl is deprived of his or  her right to secure a job. And worst still, 
there contractual employment engaging is taking the front seat.  However, there (in 
contractual employment) you are not going for reservations.  That is a very big 
concern. And moreover, whenever a PSU is  sold, often these people are rendered 
jobless and it creates unending miseri es for the families. Madam, now in 
understanding the condition of the curre nt economy, we have to understand the 
condition of States' economies.  So, it is very important to discuss cooperative 
federalism.  Our present hon. Prime Minister and hon. Home Minister were both Chief 
Minister and Home Minister of a State.  So, they should understand better what the 
problems of the States are. 
* But, as we all know, it is to be done as per constitutional 
guidelines which are flouted day in and day out. Madam, I appeal to you that next 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
113

 
week we should have a Short Duration Discussion on the issue of cooperative 
federalism.  Madam, if you notice the House is running so smoothly and it is so good 
for all of us.  Next week also, the o pposition should get one Short Duration 
Discussion or one Calling Attention wher ein they can express their concern as 
opposition and they can at least speak out th e pain that the States are in.  They can 
make their points so that the States are benefi ted.  But also there is a flip side to it. 
The BJP will also benefit from this as thou gh their speeches remain devoid of facts, 
figures or any reasoning, at least, their speeches will have multiple mentions of the 
name of the hon. PM.  To summarize, I would say that the way the Government is 
conducting itself, in a nutshell; we can say th at their catch-line is that rich should get 
richer and the poor should  get poorer.  Now the way the present Government is 
exploiting the financial interests of the Stat es is most deplorable and is much higher 
than during the colonial rule.  So, I expect  that there will be a change of stance. We 
should think much more about cooperative federalism and act in that direction for the 
benefit of one and all and the nation as a whole.  
Thank you, Madam.   
            
Ǜीमती सुलता देव ( ओिडशा) : जय  जगन्नाथ!  ऑनरेबल वाइस-चेयरमैन मैडम, मुझे इतने 
important topic पर बोलने का मौका देने क े िलए मȅ आपकी आभारी हूं।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम) :  आपके  पास सात िमनट का समय है।  
 
Ǜीमती स
ुलता देव :  हम 4 िटर्िलयन डॉलर इकोनॉमी तक पहुंच गए हȅ।  देखा जाए तो हम यहां 
काफी मुिÌकलȗ से पहुंचे हȅ।  चाहे रूस  और यूकर् े न का conflict हो या कोिवड हो, िफर भी हम यहां 
तक पहुंच गए हȅ।  मेरे पूवर् क े सारे वƪाओं न
े मुदर्ाÎफीित, जीडीपी गर्ोथ रेट आिद सबके  आंकड़े 
िदए।  मȅ उन आंकड़ȗ को नहीं देना चाहूंगी।  मȅ एक मिहला हूं।  सारे भारतवषर् क े  गांवȗ और रूरल  
एिरयाज़ से जो मिहलाएं belong करती है, मȅ उनकी तरफ से बोलना चाहूंगी और िदल से बोलूंगी।  
मȅ एक मिहला हूं, तो पहले मȅ िकचन से बात करूं गी।  जीडीपी आगे बढ़ रहा है, हमारा देश आगे 
बढ़ रहा है, यह हमारे िलए गवर् की बात है।  इसके  िलए मȅ देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी का तहेिदल से 
शुिकर्या अदा करूं गी िक हमारा देश बढ़ रहा है, भारत आगे बढ़ रहा है, भारत का नाम दुिनया  मȂ 
रोशन हो रहा है।   
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
मगर मȅ िफर भी िकचन क े िवषय पर आऊं गी, क्यȗिक मȅ एक मिहला हूं।  हम कहीं भी जाएं, 
मगर िकचन मȂ, एक
  गरीब की थाली मȂ सब चीज़Ȃ न हȗ, तो कहीं न कहीं, क ु छ न क ु छ अधूरा ही 
लगता है, कहीं न कहीं, क ु छ न क ु छ कमी ही खलती है।  आज सबको कहीं न कहीं लग रहा है िक 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
महंगाई क े चलते गरीब की थाली मȂ बहुत सारी चीज़Ȃ बड़ी मुिÌकल से आ रही हȅ।  िजस िदन गरीब 
की थाली भर जाएगी, उस िदन पूरा देश खुश होगा और िजतनी भी गर्ोथ होगी उस िदन जीडीपी 
की गर्ोथ भी होगी।  हम लोग क्या चाहते हȅ?  हम लोग यह चाहते हȅ िक एक pond हो, िजसमȂ बड़ी 
मछली भी रहे और छोटी मछली भी रहे।  ऐसा न हो िक बड़ी मछली सारी छोटी मछिलयȗ को 
िनगल जाए।  ऐसी अथर्ËयवÎथा होनी चािहए, िजससे कॉरपोरेट सेक्टर भी गर्ो करे और छोटे-से-
छोटे, जैसे मैकर्ो इकोनॉमी भी बढ़े और माइकर्ो इकोन
ॉमी भी बढ़े, जैसे साधारण लोगȗ क े पास हाथ 
मȂ पैसा जाएगा, तो यह पैसा देश मȂ रहेगा।  FDI investment आता है, यह बहुत अच्छी बात है।  
बड़े से बड़े कॉरपोरेट हाउस क े पास जो पैसा रहेगा, वह पैसा ज्यादातर िवदेश मȂ जाएगा।  हम 
लोग अपने देश का पैसा उन लोगȗ क े डेवलपमȂट पर खचर् करȂ, जो छोटे-से-छोटे काम करते हȅ।  
खासकर मȅ एक बात बोलूंगी िक जब unemployment की बात आती है, तो उसमȂ मȅ मिहलाओं को 
भी साथ मȂ लूंगी, क्यȗिक हमारी आबादी म
Ȃ 50 से अिधक परसȂट मिहलाएं हȅ।  मिहलाओं को क ै से 
employment िमले और मिहला वकर् र क ै से काम करȂ, इसके  बारे मȂ हमȂ ज्यादा से ज्यादा सोचना 
चािहए।  हम आंकड़े देते हȅ िक इसमȂ तो िसफर् 22 परसȂट मिहलाएं हȅ, तो हमȂ यह देखना चािहए िक 
इसको क ै से बढ़ाया जाए।  मȅ अपने माननीय मुख्य मंतर्ी, नवीन पटनायक जी का तहेिदल से 
शुिकर्या अदा करूं गी, जो 7 लाख SHGs बनाकर 70 लाख मिहलाओं को काम दे रहे हȅ, रोज़गार 
दे रहे हȅ।   अगर मिहला क े पास क ु छ पैसे हȗ, तो वह बच्चȗ को अच्छे से रख सकती है, घर को 
अच्छे से संभाल सकती है।  आज SHGs SMEs मȂ पिरविर्तत हो चुक े हȅ।  आज चूÊहा-चौका चलाने 
वाली मिहला हमारे यहां लैपटॉप चलाती
 है, Flipkart एवं Amazon मȂ िबजनेस भी करती है और 
वह entrepreneur भी बन चुकी है।  इसके  िलए हमारी गवनर्म Ȃट ने उनको काफी Ģोत्साहन िदया है 
और इस बात का भी ध्यान रखा है िक क ै से market linking की जाए, िकस तरह से उन लोगȗ को 
इंटरेÎट ģी लोन िदया जाए।  हमȂ मालूम है िक वे सारी मिहलाएं िमशन शिƪ की मिहलाएं ह ै।  वे 
ही हमारे नवीन ओिडशा की मुख्य ...(समय की घंटी)... सर, मेरा टाइम िकतना हो गया?  अभी 
चार िमनट हुए हȅ, मुझे सात िमनट का समय िमला था।  सर, मेरी िरक्वेÎट है... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Many, many more years to come. 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : सर, यह जो नवीन ओिडशा है, नवीन मतलब नया, नये ओिडशा क े गठन मȂ 
ये सभी मिहलाएं सारथी बनȂगी।  मȅ चाहत
ी हूं िक मिहलाओं को ज्यादा से ज्यादा काम मȂ िलया 
जाए, मिहलाओं क े िलए ज्यादा Îकोप िकर्एट िकये जाएं, तो बहुत अच्छा रहेगा।   
मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहती हूं।  अभी 'मनरेगा' क े बारे मȂ बात हो रही थी, तो 'मनरेगा' 
मȂ उनको ज्यादा से ज्यादा काम भी िमलना चािहए। सर, ओिडशा एक ऐसा Îटेट ह
ै, िजसके  बारे मȂ 
आपको भी मालूम है िक वहां पर नेचुरल क ै लेिमटीज़ बहुत होती हȅ और िडजाÎटसर् बहुत होते हȅ। 
हम लोग बार-बार मांग करते हȅ िक हमको Îपेशल क ै टेगरी Îटेटस दीिजए। अगर ऐसा नहीं हो 
सकता है, तो हमȂ Îपेशल फोकस Îटेट का Îटेटस दीिजए, िजससे िक सारे राज्यȗ का एक
 साथ 
िवकास हो। मान्यवर, नवीन पटनायक जी ने जब ओिडशा क े शासन का कायर्भार िलया था, तब 
11,108 करोड़ रुपए  का बजट था और अभी हमारे Îटेट का बजट  2,30,000 करोड़ रुपए  का है। 
अगर ऐसे ही यह बढ़ता
 रहेगा, तो देश भी आगे बढ़ता रहेगा। मȅ कहना चाहती हूं िक 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
115

 
unemployment को दूर करने क े िलए काम हो रहा है, िÎकल बढ़ाने क े िलए काम हो रहा है। 
ओिडशा मȂ जो िÎकल सȂटसर् हȅ, उनमȂ छोटे से छोटे बच्चे भी िÎकÊड हो रहे हȅ। उनके  िलए ऐसा 
Ģावधान होना चािहए िक वे सब जगह पर जा सकȂ, वे सारी जगहȗ पर जाकर काम कर सकȂ ।  
 जब हम इकोनॉमी की बात कर रहे हȅ, फाइव िटर्िलयन इकोन
ॉमी की बात कर रहे हȅ, तो 
इसके  िलए जरूरी है िक पूरे देश मȂ रेलवे कनेिक्टिवटी हो, नेट कनेिक्टिवटी हो, बȅक 
कनेिक्टिवटी हो, लेिकन आज भी हमारे 8 िजलȗ मȂ रेलवे कनेिक्टिवटी नहीं है। आज भी हमारे पास 
74 परसȂट नेट कनेिक्टिवटी है, जबिक देखा जाए, तो 85 परसȂट नेशनल एवरेज है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclu
de.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: सर, आज भी हमारे पास 4,549 गांवȗ मȂ नेट कनेिक्टिवटी नहीं है, बȅक की 
कनेिक्टिवटी भी नहीं है। सरकार डीबीटी की बात करती है, लेिकन जब बȅक्स ही नहीं हȗगे, तो 
डीबीटी क ै से हो सकता है! मȅ आपको डीबीटी क े बारे म
Ȃ बताना चाहती हूं िक ओिडशा ही पहली 
Îटेट है, जब 2007-08 क े फाइनȂिशयल ईयर मȂ ‘नरेगा’ Ģोजेक्ट क े दौरान गंजाम िजले मȂ, 
मुख्यमंतर्ी क े िजले मȂ, पहले िजलापाल वी.क े. पांिडयन साहब ने डीबीटी को इंटर्ोǹूस िकया था।  
यही वह ओिडशा है, जो देश को मागर् िदखाता है। इसके  बाद ही डीबीटी आया और डी
बीटी क े 
िलए बȅक की जरूरत होती है। मȅ िफर से आपको बताना चाहूंगी िक हमारे मुख्यमंतर्ी माननीय 
नवीन पटनायक जी ने ‘अमो बȅक योजना’ शुरू  की है, िजसके  कारण हर गांव मȂ बȅक होगा । 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you very much.  ...(Interrupti
ons)...  
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ कन्क्लूड कर रही ह
 ूं। सर, हमारे यहां पर एक ‘ममता 
Îकीम’ है। हम लोग चाहते हȅ िक.. 
 
Ǜी सभापित : उसका क्या नाम है ? What’s the name? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : सर, उस Îकीम का नाम ‘ममता’ है। सर, मुझे पता है िक यह नाम आपके  
बहुत करीब है।  Thank you, so much,  सर, यह ‘
ममता योजना’ है, जो हमारी ओिडशा की 
सारी मिहलाओं क े िलए है। अगर इसे देखा जाए, तो इसके  कारण डर्ािÎटकली मातृ मृत्यु दर और 
िशशु मृत्यु दर, एमएमआर और आईएमआर कम हुई है।  मȅ अभी भी बोलूंगी िक कहीं फामर्सर् 
इनकम डबल हुई हो या
 न हुई हो, िपछले दो साल से हमारे यहां क े फामर्सर् की इनकम दोगुनी हो 
रही है।  अगर हम सभी Îटेट्स को साथ मȂ ल ेकर चलȂगे, तो सारी दुिनया खुश हो जाएगी।  मȅ अभी 
यह बोलूंगी, “मȅ भारत का रहने वाला हूं, भारत की बात सुनाता हूं।”  हमारा िंहदुÎतान सबसे 
अच्छा है।  यहां सबको िमलजुलकर रहना चािहए, सबका एक  साथ डेवलपमȂट होना चािहए, तब 
भारत क े लोग भी खुश रहȂगे और सभी देशवासी खुश हȗगे।  मȅ इतना ही कहूंगी।  Thank you so 
much.  वंदे उत्कल जननी, जय जगन्नाथ!    
 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, some speakers ar e still left. We will take them 
tomorrow. I will now continue with the Special Mentions.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal):  Sir, just one point.  ...(Interruptions)... No; 
no, it is only this, nothing else.  ...(Interruptions)... Sir, yesterday you gave 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Just one second.  Actually, Derek, you started it so wholesomely 
that I have got requests from a large number of Members not to curtail their time.  We 
can’t have full say.  I told them that I have  not been very fair to the first speaker.  
...(Interruptions)... I have not been fair to the first speaker.  I gave him only twelve 
minutes.  If I were to increase the time, he  would have got more.  Okay, what do you 
want to say?  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:  Sir, the issue is that we ha d a good debate.  Yesterday was 
for three-and-a-half hours.  Today also it was for three-and-a-half hours.  Now, you 
are saying that it will continue tomorrow.   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   For half-an-hour.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:  Okay, for half-an-hour.  So, let me make my position clear.  
Otherwise, tomorrow, you will wonder why I have gone missing.  As per the rule, the 
Minister will reply and, then, that is the en d of the discussion.  So, lest you do not 
misunderstand me, tomorrow is a very important day.  I seek your indulgence.  Our 
friends in the Congress party are swearing in their Chief Minister in Telangana.  We will 
be happy to be with them.  So, I will be missin g tomorrow.  It is not any boycott.  It is 
a celebration.  That’s all, Sir.   
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Sir, I have to express my views on economic matters. But 
I won’t be here before 3 o’clock tomorrow. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We will consider, but you know the outcome.  
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH:  Tomorrow, it is for half-an-hour.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. We will consider.  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
117

 
  SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now Special Mentions.  Shri K. R.N. Rajeshkumar – Deamand for 
establishment of District Central Cooperativ e Bank in the Namakkal district of Tamil 
Nadu.  Is the hon. Member here?  Not present.  Then, Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena.  
 
Demand to declare cow as National Animal to protect our culture 
 
डा. िकरोड़ी लाल मीणा (राजÎथान) : महोदय, गाय भारतीय संÎकृ ित का अिभन्न िहÎसा है। 
भारतीय संÎकृ ित मȂ गाय को पूजा जाता है। यह समय की माँग है िक गाय को राÍटर्ीय पशु घोिषत 
िकया जाए। 
 हम जानते हȅ िक जब िकसी देश
 की संÎकृ ित और उसकी आÎथा को ठेस पहुँचती है, तो 
देश कमजोर होता है। चाणक्य ने अथर्शाÎतर् मȂ िलखा है िक िकसी देश को नÍट करना है, तो पहले 
उसकी संÎकृ ित नÍट कर दो, देश Îवत: ही नÍट हो जाएगा। इन्हीं बातȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखकर 
बहुतायत राज्यȗ मȂ गौहत्या Ģि
तबंिधत है। सनातन धमर् मȂ गाय को माता मानकर पूजा जाता है। गाय 
िहन्दू संÎकृ ित का मजबूत Ģतीक एवं आÎथा का क ेन्दर् है, इसिलए जब कोई भी गोहत्या कर देता 
ह
ै, तो सामािजक सौहादर् िबगड़ जाता है। 
गाय का मांस खाना िकसी भी Ģकार से िकसी का मौिलक अिधकार नहीं हो सकता, बिÊक 
जो लोग गाय की पूजा करते हȅ, गाय की रक्षा करना उनका परम कतर्Ëय ह ै। लोग आिर्थक रूप  से 
भी गाय पर िनभर्र हȅ। गोरक्षा िकसी धमर् से जुड़ा िवषय नहीं है। मुिÎलम शासकȗ ने भी गाय को 
भारतीय संÎकृ ित का महत्वपूणर् िहÎसा माना है। बाबर, हुमायूँ और अकबर सिहत कम-से-कम 
पाँच मुिÎलम शासकȗ ने गौहत्या पर Ģितबंध लगाया था। अत: मेरी सरकार से माँग है िक गाय को 
राÍटर्ीय पशु घोिषत करȂ। 
 
MR CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associ ated themselves with the Special 
Mention made by the hon. Member:  Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Shri Sadanand Shet Ta nawde (Goa), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
(Maharashtra), and D
r. John Brittas (Kerala). 
 
Children with Type 1 Diabetes 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala): Sir, thank you for this opportunity.  Type-1 diabetes is a 
chronic autoimmune condition that affects in dividuals of all ages but is, particularly, 
challenging for children and their families due to its early onset and lifelong impact.  It 
requires continuous ma
nagement, including regular blood glucose monitoring, insulin 
injections or pump therapy, and adherence to a strict diet and exercise regimen.  For 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
children, this can significantly disrupt their daily lives, impacting their education, social 
interactions and overall well-being. 
 Access to essential medical supplies such as insulin, glucose monitoring 
devices and other diabetic care essentials, remains a significant concern, especially 
for families from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. The high cost of these 
supplies creates a barrier to effective ma nagement and often leads to compromised 
health outcomes for these children.   
 In India, the number of children diagnosed with Type-1 diabetes is steadily 
rising. I had raised question s on this issue in the 260
th Session of Parliament. The 
Government does not have any data on chil dren with Type-1 diabetes and does not 
have any scheme for the health care of ch ildren.  Addressing the needs of children 
with Type-1 diabetes requires a multi-faceted approach involving healthcare systems, 
education, accessibility to resources, research advancements and public awareness.  
I urge the Government to take proper actio n to ensure the well-be ing of children.  I 
also urge to make available insurance and ot her health care facilities for the children  
and this matter should be taken up by the House immediately. Thank you, Sir.  
                                                                                       
MR CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Member associ ated themselves with the Special 
Mention made by the hon. Member:  Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bo nde (Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha),  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas (W est Bengal), Shri Su jeet Kumar (Odisha) 
and Shri Sandosh Kumar P. (Kerala). 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair
.) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Shri Samirul Islam, ‘Need to address the conditions 
of Tea Plantation Workers in West Bengal’. 
 
Need to address the conditions of Tea plantation workers in West Bengal 
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM (West Bengal) : Respected Sir, there are around 300 tea 
estates across Darjeeling, Alipurduar, Kurseo ng and Jalpaiguri.  More than 3 lakh 
labourers work in nearly 400 tea gardens in North Bengal, and none of them has land 
rights on estates where they have been living for generations.  The Union Government 
is responsible for securing better working conditions for the workers. It has the 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
119

 
authority to take over the management of a tea company which fails to comply with 
the Tea Act, 1953. The West Bengal Government is proactively acting against 
organisations which are not paying Provident Fund and Gratuity. Under Cha Sundari 
Scheme, the Bengal Government is buil ding over 4,000 homes for tea garden 
workers. We have already finished constr uction of 1200 houses. On the other hand, 
the ... * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have to read only the approved text.  Nothing will go 
on record.  ...(Interruptions)... You are reading which is not approved. Please.  You 
have to read only approved text, nothing other than that.  It will not go on record.   
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM: Tea estates in other parts of the country such as Assam need 
urgent attention of the Union Government.  There is no provision of ensuring or giving 
them their due Provident Fund  by the Union Government.  Moreover, there are no 
scholarships and stipends promised to tea ga rden workers’ children.  There is a dire 
need to address the conditions of tea plantation workers.   
 I urge the Government to discuss the same and work towards ensuring better 
working conditions for tea workers to promote the industry. Thank you, Sir.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Only approved text will go in the record.  The 
following hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention raised by 
the hon. Member, Shri Samirul Islam:  Dr . John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Abir Ranjan  Biswas (West Bengal), Dr . Kanimozhi N.V.N. Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdull a (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala).  
 
Concern over stray animals 
 
Ǜी अजय Ģताप िंसह (मध्य Ģदेश) :  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज सड़कȗ पर आवारा 
पशुओं की भरमार है।  इन आवारा पशुओं क े कारण Ģितवषर् 1,350 से 1,400 Ëयिƪयȗ की मृत्यु 
सड़क दुघर्टना मȂ हो रही है।  इनके  कारण Ģत्येक गाँव मȂ सैकड़ȗ एकड़ जमीन परती रह जाती है 
तथा सैकड़ȗ एकड़ जमीनȗ पर खड़ी फसलȗ को ये आवारा पशु नुकसान पहुँचाते हȅ।  मेरा सरकार 
से आगर्ह है िक पशुपालक इन पशुओं को पालने क े िलए तभी त
ैयार होगा, जब ये पशु आिर्थक रूप  
से उपयोगी हȗगे।  इसिलए इन पशुओं मȂ नर पशुओं का Ëयापक बंध्याकरण अिभयान चलाया जाये, 
िजससे इनकी वंशवृिǉ रुके  तथा मादा पशुओं क े मध्य Ëयापक नÎल सुधार का कायर्कर्म भी 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
चलाया जाये, िजससे दुधारू  नÎल क े उपयोगी पशु तैयार हो सकȂ, िजन्हȂ पालने क े िलए 
पशुपालक Ģोत्सािहत हो।   
 सरकार को बजट 2022-23 मȂ उिÊलिखत गोबरधन संयंतर्ȗ को शीघर् Îथािपत करना 
चािहए, िजससे पशुपालकȗ को गोबर और गौमूतर् का भी मूÊय ĢाÃत हो सके ।  सरकार 'पशु संरक्षण 
अिधिनयम' को कड़ाई से लाग
ू करने का िनदȃश संबंिधत पक्षȗ को दे, िजससे िजस Ëयिƪ क े पशु 
आवारा घूमȂ, फसलȗ का नुकसान करȂ अथवा िकसी क े जान-माल का नुकसान करȂ, उस 
पशुपालक को कठोर दंड देने का Ģावधान िकया जाए।  Ģत्येक पशु का गर्ाम Îतर पर रिजÎटर्ेशन 
तथा बीमाकरण अिनवाय
र् िकया जाये, िजससे ' पशु संरक्षण अिधिनयम' को Ģभावी रूप  से लागू 
िकया जा सके , धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Memb er, Shri Ajay Pratap Singh:   Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odish a) and Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas (West 
Bengal) 
 
Demand for including prime tourist sites of Odisha into Iconic Sites list 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha) : Sir, my Special Mention is to request and urge the 
Government to include prime tourist sites of Odisha into the Iconic Sites List.  
Sir, in the year 2019-20 Budget S
peech, the hon. Finance Minister declared 17 
tourist sites as iconic sites, intended for development into world-class destinations to 
set an example for other sites. The list di dn’t include any site  from the State of 
Odisha, despite the State’s robust tourism infrastructure, cultural richness, natural 
beauty and great historical significance. Odisha alone had a total tourist footfall of one 
crore 31 lakh tourists in the year 2016-17 , majorly to the five prime tourist sites - 
Konark Sun Temple, Chilika Lake, Bhitarkanika  National Park, Sim lipal National Park 
and Diamond Triangle Buddhist Circuit. Since then, the State has maintained a 
growth rate of eight per cent every year, except in 2020-21, due to the pandemic.  
The continuous efforts and initiatives of the State Government in organizing events like 
World Tourism Day - 2020, Konark Festival - 2020, Mukteshwar Dance Festival-2021 
and Men's Hockey World Cup in partnership with International Hockey Federation in 
2018 and 2022, have led to a 110 per cent growth in tourism in Odisha post the 
pandemic.  Furthermore, tourist sites like the Konark Sun Temple, a UNESCO world 
heritage site, stand out among the ten most popular centrally-protected monuments 
in India, according to the 2021-22 data of the Tourism Ministry. 
  
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
121

 
 
Sir, I would thus request the Government to formally include at least two of the 
five prime tourist sites of Odisha in the list of iconic sites, which has also been a long-
pending request of the State Government since the year 2019. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Kumar:   Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Abir Ranjan 
Biswas (West Bengal). 
 
Need for adequate Special trains to Kerala in festive seasons  
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM (Kerala) :  Sir, the Indian Railways is the lifeline of India.  In 
times of exorbitant prices being charged by airlines during the festive season, the 
railways play a pivotal role in helping ordi nary citizens travel to their hometown.  
During the recent Diwali season, it was ob served and reported that thousands of 
people were waitlisted and could not get trains back home.  The hardship caused by 
such wait-listing is significant as people  eagerly waiting to join their families to 
celebrate festivals were denied the opportunit y.  It has also come to our notice that 
this helpless plight had led several passe ngers to enter trains without confirmed 
tickets, causing overcrowding in trains.  It  is observed that despite the overcrowding, 
people travel, risking their lives at times.  Every year, thousands of Malayalis travel 
back to Kerala during the festivals of On am, Christmas and New Y ear.  Yet, many of 
them are disappointed due to the lack of trains and tickets and have to suffer.   
In this regard, I urge the hon. Railway  Minister to ensure adequate special 
trains are arranged to Kerala to meet the demands of the festive season. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri Binoy Viswam:   Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, (Kerala), 
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Kanimo zhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Exploitation of women of the country, especially the women of Punjab in 
 the Gulf countries 
 
SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH (Punjab) :  *Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, through you, we 
wish to draw the attention of the House to the serious issue that women/ girls are 
being taken to Gulf countries through trav el agents and sold there.  Through our 
efforts and with the support of the Indian  Embassy, we have brought back to India 
around 60 women from Gulf countries who were  trafficked there.  Travel agents are 
trapping very young women/ girls from poor  households and sending them on Visitor 
Visas to Gulf countries where they are being exploited.  They are tricked into working 
in homes or in restaurants and falsely assu red of salaries of Rs. 35,000 to 40,000.  
Then, those women are made to sign an agreement written in Arabic language, which 
is being taken undue advantage of.  It is a large group of people whose network is 
spread across different states of the country.  The girls who returned said that there 
were also women from Nepal, which proves that this gang is international.  It is 
surprising that these women are being sent to a country like Iraq, where it is very 
difficult to go.  We thank the Indian embassies in the Gulf countries that have helped 
to evacuate the distressed citizens in those countries. 
 Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, through you,  we request the Ministry of External 
Affairs to keep a watch on the activities of people involved in this fraudulent business 
and to give severe punishment to those trav el agents who are involved in trafficking 
women. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Sant Balbir Singh: Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharasht ra), Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas (West 
Bengal) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 
Demand to give preference to the online railway ticket holders for the parcel service 
as well 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, the world's 
fourth largest Indian Railways, which oper ates with more than 80 per cent of the 
passengers reserving online, is facing major problems in freight services.  The reason 
                                         
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Punjabi. 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
123

 
is the meagre availability of parcel services at intermediary stations.  The parcel box at 
each train is filled from the source-station an d the majority of the parcels loaded are 
to the destination station of the train.  The passengers from intermediary stations are 
suffering a lot due to these preferential parcel services and their parcels booked online 
are kept waiting at the intermediary station of  the train which is a source station of the 
passenger for more than a week or even months.  For example, if the person is 
travelling to a different location due to some  necessity and if he is sending his bike via 
railway parcel service, the bike must wait at  the booking station for more than a week 
or months and it might get damaged or ru sted.  The material loss is completely 
attributed to the poor passenger.  It is ev en more pathetic if the passengers' source 
station and destination station are intermediaries to the train.   
 Sir, the Railways are still a preferential  mode of transport for many of the 
passengers in India because of their afford ability.  Hence, I humbly request the hon. 
Railway Minister via this august House to take n ecessary steps to work on possible 
ways to track and send the parcels based on parcel booking date on a priority basis 
so that no parcels should wait longer at the railway stations.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla: Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hish am, (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
(West Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala). 
 
Rising cases of destruction by wild boar 
 
Ǜी क ैलाश सोनी (मध्य Ģदेश) : मान्यवर, देश भर मȂ जंगली सुअरȗ क े कारण गर्ामीण जनजीवन 
को संकट उपिÎथत हो गया है। इनके  ज
 ंगलȗ से िनकलकर गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ आने क े कारण आतंक 
मचा है, गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ भय ËयाÃत है।  आए िदन क ृषकȗ क े ऊपर इनके  ǎारा हमले िकए जाते हȅ, 
िजससे अनेक क ृषकȗ की जानȂ जा चुकी हȅ और अनेक गर्ामीण घायल हो चुक े हȅ।  गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
इनके  ǎारा क ृिष उपज को भी भारी नुकसान पहुंचाया जा रह
ा है।  िवशेषकर हमारे मध्य Ģदेश मȂ ये 
गन्ने की फसल को भारी नुकसान पहुंचा  रहे हȅ।  इसके  िलए मेरी भारत सरकार से मांग है िक 
सुअरȗ को मारने का कानून शीघर्ाितशीघर् बनाने की आवÌयकता है।  साथ ही, जंगली सुअरȗ से 
फसल एवं जनजीवन की सुरक्षा क े िलए क ृषकȗ को बाड़ लगाने एवं िबजली क े तार, जो मानव 
जीवन क े िल
ए नुकसानरिहत हȗ, की ËयवÎथा क े िलए कानून बनाना व अनुदान का Ģावधान िकया 
जाना जनिहत एवं खेती की सुरक्षा की दृिÍट से अित आवÌयक है।  मेरी भारत सरकार से अपेक्षा है 
िक देश मȂ िजतने भी बंदूक लाइसȂसधारी हȅ, उन्हȂ क ृिष क े समय, िवशेषकर मध्य Ģदेश म
Ȃ गन्ने क े 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
सीजन की िनिÌचत अविध क े िलए इन्हȂ मारने की अनुमित देने क े िलए िजला कलेक्टरȗ एवं 
अनुिवभागीय Îतर क े अिधकािरयȗ को अनुमित देने की ËयवÎथा की जाए।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri Kailash Soni:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 
Demand for a policy for filling up seat in National Board of Examination (NBE) in 
Medical Sciences Post-MBBS diploma seats through state-level counselling 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी (राजÎथान) : माननीय  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका आभार Ģकट करता हूं 
िक आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय को सदन मȂ रखने का अवसर Ģदान िकया।  
महोदय, National Board of Examination (NBE) ǎारा 8 िविभन्न िविशÍट
ताओं मȂ राज्य 
क े मेिडकल कॉलेजȗ एवं संबǉ िचिकत्सालयȗ क े िलए क ु ल 496 पोÎट एमबीबीएस िडÃलोमा सीटȗ 
की Îवीकृ ित Ģदान की गई ह
ȅ। NBE क े पतर् िदनांक 02.06.2022 क े अनुसार इनमȂ से 50 Ģितशत 
तक सीटȂ सेवारत डॉक्टसर् से भरे जाने का Ģावधान है। यह भी उÊलेिखत है िक काउन्सिंलग क े 
उपरान्त सेवारत डॉक्टसर् की िरƪ रही सीटȗ को भी राज्य गैर सेवारत िचिकत्सकȗ से नहीं भर 
सकȂ ग
े। शैक्षिणक सतर् 2021-22 क े िलए पोÎट एमबीबीएस िडÃलोमा क े Ģवेश क े िलए ( राज्य क े 
मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ एवं हॉिÎपटÊस) काउन्सिंलग सÇपन्न हुई है, िजनमȂ सेवारत िचिकत्सकȗ क े 
िलए आरिक्षत 248 सीट्स म
Ȃ से राजÎथान मȂ 90 सीट्स िरƪ रही हȅ। इसमȂ सीट्स का सही 
उपयोग नहीं हो सका है, िजसे रोका जाना चािहए। राज्य सरकार इन िरƪ रही सीट्स को राज्य 
क े िनवािसयȗ से भरना चाहती है, जो िक कोसर् पूणर् होने पर राज्य को सेवाएं दे सकȂ । क ेन्दर्ीकृ त 
काउन्सिंलग क े माध्यम से भरी गयी 248 सीट्स मȂ से मातर् 13 अÆयथीर् राजÎथान राज्
य क े चयिनत 
हुये, शेष सभी राज्य से बाहर क े अÆयथीर् थे। इसके  दृिÍटगत राज्य सरकार इसे उिचत नहीं मानती 
है िक Îटेट काउन्सिंलग क े िलए सीट्स की संख्या कम कर क ेन्दर्ीय कोटे को अिधक सीट्स 
आवंिटत की जायȂ। इसिलए यह अनुरोध है िक वतर्मान नीित म
Ȃ सेवारत िचिकत्सकȗ की सीट्स की 
संख्या क े Ģावधानȗ की पुन: समीक्षा की जाए तथा पीजी सीट्स की Ģिकर्यानुसार यह राज्यȗ पर 
छोड़ा जाये िक वे पोÎट एमबीबीएस िडÃलोमा सीट्स को Îटेट काउन्सिंलग क े माध्यम से भर लȂ। 
साथ ही, NBE राज्य सरकारȗ को यह अनुमित भी द
े िक वे Îटेट कोटे की सेवारत िचिकत्सकȗ की 
िरƪ सी
ट्स को गैर-सेवारत िचिकत्सकȗ से िǎतीय चरण की काउन्सिंलग क े दौरान भर लȂ।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by Shri Neeraj  Dangi: Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Abir  Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).  
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
125

 
Demand for Production-Linked Incentive Scheme 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, उǏोग जगत मȂ मोदी 
सरकार ने Production Linked Incentive Scheme लगाकर उǏोग को Ģोत्सािहत िकया है। मȅ 
मोदी सरकार का अिभनंदन करता हूँ। खेती एक ऐसा उǏोग है िजससे देश की भूख िमटाई जाती 
है, मानवीय भरण पोषण होता है तथा देश क े सकल घरेलू उत्प
ाद मȂ भी खेती तथा खेती संलग्न 
Ëयवसाय का योगदान है। लेिकन ऐसा अनुभव होता है िक िकसान का ज्यादा उत्पादन होता है, तो 
उसके  भाव कम हो जाते हȅ। यह बात  Ãयाज, टमाटर, सिÅजयȗ, अनाज, कपास अन्य क े बारे मȂ 
देखी गयी है। िकसान मेहनत करके  अपनी फसलȗ का उत्पादन बढ़ाता है। उसके  िलए उसे 
मज़दूरी, तकनीकी, खाद आिद क े इÎतेमाल मȂ पैसा खचर् करना पड़ता है, लेिकन उत्पादन बढ़ाने 
क े बाद भी उसका फायदा उसे नहीं िमल पाता
 है। िकसान िजतना उत्पादन बढ़ाता है, उतना उसे 
Ģोत्सािहत करना ज़रुरी है। 
 क ु छ राज्यȗ मे धान उत्पादन को Ģोत्सािहत करने क े िलए बोनस क े रूप  मȂ एमएसपी से 
ज्यादा रकम दी जाती है। महाराÍटर् मȂ सरकार ने भाव कम होने पर Ãयाज क े िलए 200 रुपय े Ģित 
िंक्वटल और धान क े िलए 15,000 रुपय े Ģित हेक्टेयर
 का Ģोत्साहन िदया था। इसी उपलÑय मे 
उत्पादन बढ़ाने क े िलए एमएसपी से ज्यादा Ģोत्साहन अनुदान द ेने की ज़रूरत है। इस संदभर् मȂ 
क ृिष तथा क ृिष संलग्न उत्पादȗ क े िलए उत्पादन बढ़ाओ और Ģोत्साहन रािश पाओ, ऐसी योजना 
पर सरकार िवचार करे। 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members as sociated themselves with the 
Special Mention made by Dr. Anil Sukhde orao Bonde: Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan  (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha).  
 
Demand to include unorganized workers under ESIC coverage 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P. (Kerala) :  Sir, the workers in the unorganized sector 
constitute about 93 per cent of the tota l workforce in the country.  The term 
'unorganized worker' has been defined under the Unorganized Workers' Social 
Security Act, 2008, as a home-based work er, a self-employed worker or a wage 
worker in the unorganized secto
r, and includes a worker in the organized sector who 
is not covered by any of the existing Acts.   
 As per the Economic Survey, 2021-22, total number of people working in the 
unorganized sector was around 43.99 cr ores during 2019-20.  Although they 
constitute the majority of our workforce, they are still out of th e purview of all the 
social security benefits. The ESIC applies to all factories and other establishments 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
employing 10 or more persons earning up to  Rs.21,000 a month.  The ESI Act of 1948 
does not apply to the unorganized sector now. International commitments and 
constitutional obligations bind the Government to provide social security benefits to all 
citizens. Within the context of raising medi cal costs, the lack of social security 
benefits forces the workers to fall into th e debt trap and poverty cycle.  Unorganized 
workers are compelled to spend out of their meagre incomes for all contingencies and 
remain helpless in their old age.  We must not view ill-health or malnutrition as a 
contingency but as a continuing certainty  of life for which protection must be 
arranged.  Therefore, there is an urgent need to extend the ESIC coverage to our 
unorganized sector workers as they are the p oorest of the poor in the country.  I urge 
the Government to take necessary steps in the matter. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members as sociated themselves with the 
Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Sandosh Kumar P.:  Shri Binoy 
Viswam (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed A bdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sh ri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Abir Ranjan  Biswas (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 
Demand for opening of an additional Kendriya Vidyalaya in Hapur, Uttar Pradesh 
 
Ǜीमती कान्ता कदर्म (उǄर Ģदेश) :  सभापित महोदय, मȅ आज इस सÇमािनत सदन का ध्यान 
उǄर Ģदेश क े हापुड़ िजला मȂ बच्चȗ की शैिक्षक आवÌयकताओं से संबंिधत एक महत्वपूणर् मामले 
की ओर आकिर्ष
त करना चाहती हूं।  जनसंख्या और शैिक्षक आकांक्षाओं मȂ वृिǉ करने वाले िजला 
हापुड़ को एक अितिरƪ क ेन्दर्ीय िवǏालय की सख्त जरूरत  है।   
 िपछले क ु छ वषș मȂ हापुड़ मȂ पयार्Ãत जनसांिख्यकीय वृिǉ देखी गई है और क ेन्दर्ीय 
िवǏालय की Îथापना न क ेवल Ģचिलत शैिक्षक मांगȗ को स
ंबोिधत करेगी, बिÊक क्षेतर् क े समगर् 
िवकास मȂ भी महत्वपूणर् योगदान देगी।  वतर्मान मȂ बाबूगढ़ क ȅ ट क्षेतर् मȂ क ेवल एक क ेन्दर्ीय 
िवǏालय है, जो हापुड़ की बढ़ती शैिक्षक आवÌयकताओं को पूरा करने क े िलए अपयार्Ãत ह
ै।  
इसके  अलावा, अन्य क ेन्दर्ीय िवǏालय मेरठ, गािजयाबाद और नोएडा जैसे दूर-दराज क े Îथानȗ 
मȂ िÎथत हȅ, िजससे उन छातर्ȗ क े िलए असुिवध ा होती है, िजन्हȂ लंबी दूरी की यातर्ा करनी पड़ती 
है।  इसिलए क ेन्दर्ीय िवǏालय की  Îथापना से गुणवǄापूणर् िशक्षा तक पहुंच की गारंटी होगी, 
नामांकन दर मȂ वृिǉ होगी, िविवध पृÍठभूिम क े  छातर्ȗ की जरूरतȗ को पूरा िकया जा सके गा और 
बुिनयादी ढांचे तक पहुंच Ģदान की जा सके गी।  इसके  अलावा, यह िशक्षण और गैर-िशक्षण, दोनȗ 
क्षमताओं मȂ Îथानीय िनवािसयȗ क े िलए रोजगार िदलाएगा।   
 हमारे बच्चȗ क े भिवÍय को आकार देने मȂ िशक्षा क े बढ़ते महत्व को पहचानते हुए मȅ 
माननीय िशक्षा म
ंतर्ी जी से हापुड़ मȂ एक क ेन्दर्ीय िवǏालय की Îथापना क े िलए उपाय करने का 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
127

 
अनुरोध करूं गी।  इस तरह की पहल शैिक्षक संसाधनȗ को बढ़ाने मȂ योगदान देगी और राÍटर् 
िनमार्ण Ģिकर्या मȂ इसका महत्वपूणर्  योगदान रहेगा।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members as sociated themselves with the 
Special Mention made by the hon. Member , Shrimati Kanta Kardam:   Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharas htra), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand to establish Blood Bank at Block level 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय, अगर हम गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सामुदाियक ÎवाÎ थ्य क Ȃ दर् 
(Community Health Centre) पर मोबाइल Åलड बȅक-वैन (VAN)/रƪ कोष (Blood Bank), 
िजसमȂ खून चढ़ाने और रखने की ËयवÎथा करते हȅ, तो हम ऐसे मरीजȗ को सही समय पर खून 
चढ़ा कर उच्च क Ȃ दर् (Higher Centre) भेज सकते हȅ, िजससे उनकी जान को खतरा कम रहेगा 
और उनका पूरा पिरवार स
ुरिक्षत रहेगा। 
 महोदय, मȅ सरकार से मांग करती हूं िक मातृ मृत्यु दर को और Ģभावी ढंग से रोकने हेतु 
Åलॉक Îतर पर Åलड बȅक की ËयवÎथा की जाए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Me
mbers as sociated themselves with the 
Special Mention made by the hon. Member , Shrimati Seema Dwivedi:  Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas (West Bengal).   
 Hon. Members, the remaining Special Mentions will be taken up tomorrow.   
 
 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Message from Lok Sabha, Secretary-General.  
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL:  Sir, with you kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha at its sitting held on 6
th December, 2023 passed:- 
(1) The Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Amendment) Bill, 2023; and 
(2) The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2023.  
 
I lay a copy each of the said Bills on the Table. 
 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
RESIGNATION BY MEMBER 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have to inform you that I received a letter dated 
the 6 th December, 2023, personally  submitted to me by Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena, 
Member, representing the State of Rajastha n, resigning his seat in Rajya Sabha. I 
have accepted his resignatio n with immediate effect. ...( Interruptions)...  Nothing 
will go on record, Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena. You cease to be a Member of this House with 
immediate effect.   
  The House stands adjourned to meet  at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 7 th 
December, 2023.   
 
The House then adjourned at fifty-eight minutes past five of the clock  
till eleven of the clock on Thursday, the 7th December, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 6 December, 2023 ]
129

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 