Vol. 266 
        Thursday, 
No. 8                 5th December, 2024 
14 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (page 1)
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 2 - 10) 
Reports of the Committee on Welf are of Other Backward Classes- Laid on the Table  
(2024-25) (pages 10 - 11) 
Statements by Minister- 
Status of implementation of the recomme ndations contained in the 15th, 20th 
and 22nd Reports of the Department-R elated  Parliamentary  Standing 
Committee on External Affairs-Laid on the Table (pages 11 - 12) 
Matters raised with Permission- 
Concern over suspicious and conspicuous attacks on national interest from 
abroad (pages 12 - 14) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Oral Answers to Questions (pages 15 - 42) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
Government Bill- 
The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024-Passed (pages 43 - 104) 
Special Mentions- 
Demand for restoration of Sikh reference library (page 105)  
Concern over widespread use of subs tandard and adulterated materials in 
construction projects (pages 105 - 106) 
Need for more trains in North Kerala (pages 106 - 107) 
Request to increase the frequency of 16861/62 Puducherry-Kanyakumari   
Weekly  Express to a daily service (pages 107 - 108) 
Demand for Bharat Ratna for Veer Savarkar and Rash Behari  Bose (page 108) 
Demand for setting up a dedicated cell to assist Indian citizens abroad facing 
medical emergencies or serious illness (pages 108 - 109) 
Demand to declare lightning strike as a natural calamity (pages 109 - 110) 
Demand for conferment of Bharat Ratna on  Maharaja Jagaddipendra Narayan     
Bhup Bahadur of Cooch Behar (pages 110 - 111) 
Demand for stoppage of trains at Rish abhdev and Bichiwada railway stations 
situated on Udaipur-Asarwa (Ahmedabad) railway route (page 111) 
Demand to establish a Central Agricultural University in Chandauli District, 
 Uttar Pradesh (pages 111 - 112) 
Concern over low utilisation of funds und er Project Tiger and Project Elephant 
(pages 112 - 113) 
Request to increase the number of direct flights and air routes from Jabalpur 
(page 113) 
Website : https://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

RAJYA SABHA 
Thursday, the 5th December, 2024 / 14 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am pleased to ex tend greetings to hon. Members 
of Parliament, Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil and Shri Subhash Barala, on their 
birthday today.  
Shrimati Rajni Ashokrao Patil is curre ntly serving her second term in this 
House, since September 2021. She has earlier served as Member of this House from 
2013 to 2018.  Joining electoral politics in 1992, she came to be elected to the Beed 
Zila Prishad, and later, in 1996, winning from the Beed Lok Sabha Constituency. She 
hails from a renowned family of freedom fi ghters. Her grandfather, late Shri Vishnu 
Ganesh Pingle, was a founding member of the Ghadar Movement. And, her father, 
Shri Atmaram Bapu Patil, a distinguished freedom fighter, was elected as a Member 
of the Central Legislative Assembly in 1937, and was later also elected to the 
Maharashtra Legislative Council.  
Shrimati Rajani Patil holds a BA degree in German language from the University 
of Pune. Over the years, she has represen ted India at various international fora, 
including the United Nations. Married to Shri Ashok Patil, the couple is blessed with 
sons, Aditya and Amit, and daughter, Tejasvini.  
Hon. Members, on my own and your behalf, I wish her a long, healthy and 
happy life.  
Shri Subhash Barala, in his first term in this August House, representing the 
State of Haryana since April 2024, has also represented the Tohana Constituency 
from 2014-2019 in the Haryana Legislative Assembly. Shri Ramnath Educational and 
Welfare Society, an organisation founded by him, is taking commendable initiatives in 
welfare activities in rural Haryana. Shri Barala was President of the BJP in Haryana, 
2014-2020, and also served as Chairman of Haryana Bureau of Public Enterprises 
from 2020-2023. Married to Shrimati Darshana, the couple is blessed with son, Vikas, 
and daughter, Tamanna.  
Hon. Members, on my own and your behalf, I wish him a happy, long and 
healthy life, and extend greetings to his family Members.         

PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of NNM , Nalanda, Bihar; SCZCC, Nagpur, 
Maharashtra and IBC, New Delhi and related papers 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
 
THE MINISTER OF CULTURE (SHRI GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAWAT): Sir, I 
lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i)    (a)  Annual Report of the Nava Nalanda Mahavihara (NNM), Nalanda, Bihar, 
for the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Nava Nalanda Mahavihara (NNM), Nalanda, 
Bihar, for the year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) & (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 702/18/24] 
 
(ii)   (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the South Central Zone Cultural Centre 
(SCZCC), Nagpur, Maharashtra, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 795/18/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the International Buddhist Confederation 
(IBC), New Delhi, for the year 2022- 23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Confederation. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 703/18/24] 
 
  
I.      Notification of the  Ministry of Earth Sciences 
II.   Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of   ECIL, Hyderabad;  IREL, Mumbai; 
BIRAC,  New Delhi;  UCIL, Singhbhum, Jharkhand and related papers 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

      III. Reports and Accounts (2023-24)  of various Instit ues, Centre, Council, 
Association, Academy and Foundation and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY (DR. 
JITENDRA SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table:—  
 
I. 
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Earth Sciences Notification No. 
S.O. 1437(E)., dated the July 21 – July 27, 2024 (Weekly Gazette), designating Dr. 
Aparna Shukla, Scientist, Ministry of Ea rth Sciences, New Delhi and Dr. Avinash 
Kumar, Scientist, National Centre for Po lar and Ocean Research , Goa as Inspectors 
for performing the duties and exercising th e powers of inspections in India under the 
provisions of the Indian Antarctic Act, 2022, under Section 57 of the said Act. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1005/18/24] 
 
II.   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a) Fifty-seventh Annual Report and Accounts of the Electronics Corporation 
of India Limited (ECIL), Hyderabad,  Telangana, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b)  Review by Government on th e working of the above Corporation. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1001/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Seventy-fourth Annual Report an d Accounts of the IREL (India) Limited 
(IREL), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1002/18/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Twelfth Annual Report and Accounts of the Biotechnology Industry 
Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Revised Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1003/18/24] 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
3

 
(iv) (a) Fifty-seventh Annual Report and Accounts of the Uranium Corporation of 
India Limited (UCIL), Singhbhum, Jharkhand, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1000/18/24] 
 
III.   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(i) 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Maharashtra Association for the 
Cultivation of Science (MACS) - Ag harkar Research Institute, Pune, 
Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 993/18/24] 
 
(ii) 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Bose Institute (BI), Kolkata, West 
Bengal, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 997/18/24] 
 
(iii) 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Ce ntre for Nano and Soft Matter 
Sciences (CeNS), Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 998/18/24] 
 
(iv) 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Technology Information, Forecasting 
and Assessment Council (TIFAC), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 999/18/24] 
 
(v) 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Science Congress Association 
(ISCA) Kolkata, West Bengal, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working the above Association. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 996/18/24] 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(vi) 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indi an Academy of Sciences (IASc), 
Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Academy. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 995/18/24] 
 
(vii) 
 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Anusandhan National Research 
Foundation (ANRF), New Delhi, for th e year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Foundation. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 994/18/24] 
 
(viii) 
 
(a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the Ho mi Bhabha National Institute, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b)  Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 992/18/24] 
 
I.     Various Reports of the Law Commission of India  
II.      Report and Accounts (2023-24) of  Indian Law Institute (ILI), New Delhi and 
related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (SHRI ARJUN 
RAM MEGHWAL): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the 
following Papers:- 
(i) 
Two Hundred Seventy-eighth Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
Urgent need to amend rule 14(4) of Order VII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (March, 2023). 
(ii) 
Two Hundred Seventy-ninth Report of the Law Commission of India on Usage 
of the Law of Sedition (April, 2023). 
(iii) Two Hundred Eightieth Report of the Law Commission of India on the Law on 
the Adverse Possession (May, 2023). 
(iv) Two Hundred Eighty-first Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
Compensation for damage due to installation of towers and transmission lines 
under the Indian Telegram Act, 1885 and the Electricity Act, 2003 (August, 
2023). 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
5

(v) Two Hundred Eighty-second Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
Amendment in section 154 of the Code  of Criminal procedure, 1973 for 
enabling online registration of FIR (September, 2023). 
(vi) Two Hundred Eighty-third Report of th e Law Commission of India on the Age 
of Consent under the Protection of Ch ildren from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 
(September, 2023). 
(vii) Two Hundred Eighty-fourth Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
Revisiting the Law on Prevention of Damage to Public Property (January, 
2024). 
(viii) Two Hundred Eighty-fifth Report of th e Law Commission of India on the Law 
on Criminal Defamation (January, 2024). 
(ix) Two Hundred Eighty-sixth Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
Comprehensive Review of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 (February, 2024). 
(x) Two Hundred Eighty-seventh Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
Law on Matrimonial Issues relating to  Non-Resident Indians and Overseas 
Citizens of India (February, 2024). 
(xi) Two Hundred Eighty-ninth Report of the Law Commission of India on the 
Trade Secrets and Economic Espionage (March, 2024). 
[Placed in Library. For (i) to (xi), see No. L. T. 1625/18/24] 
 
II. (a)  Sixty-seventh Annual Report an d Accounts of the Indian Law Institute 
(ILI), New Delhi, for the year 202 3-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
 (b)  Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1625/18/24] 
 
Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of SJVN Li mited, Shimla, Himachal Pradesh and 
POWERGRID, New Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF POWER (SHRI SHRIPAD YESSO 
NAIK): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (i n English and Hindi) of the following 
papers, under sub-section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:- 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the SJVN Limited, Shimla, Himachal 
Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together  with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts and the comments of the Co mptroller and Auditor General of 
India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1030/18/24] 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the  Power Grid Corporation of India 
Limited (POWERGRID), New Delhi, fo r the year 2023-24, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.    
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1026/18/24] 
 
I.    Notifications of the Ministry of Communications 
II.  Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of the ITI Limited, Bengaluru and TCIL, New 
Delhi and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (DR. 
CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
I.  (a)  
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications), under Section 37 
of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997: - 
 (1) No. RG-8/1/(9)/2021-B AND CS(1 AND 3)., dated the 8
th July, 2024, 
publishing the Telecommunication (B roadcasting and Cable) Services 
Standards of Quality of Service an d Consumer Protection (Addressable 
Systems) (Fourth Amendment) Regulations, 2024.  
 (2) No. RG-8/1/(9)/2021-B AND CS(1 AND 3)., dated the 8 th July, 2024, 
publishing the Telecommunication (B roadcasting and Cable) Services 
Interconnection (Addressable Systems) (Sixth Amendment) 
Regulations, 2024.  
 (3) No. RG-10/2/(1)/2023 [E-10742]., dated the 25
th July, 2024, publishing 
the Registration of Consumer Organisations (Amendment) Regulations, 
2024. 
 (4) No. RG-17/(3)/2022-QoS., dated the 5
th August, 2024, publishing the 
Standards of Quality of Service of  Access (Wireline and Wireless) and 
Broadband (Wireline and Wireless) Service Regulations, 2024. 
 (5) No. RG-8/1/(9)/2021-B AND CS(1 AND 3)., dated the 14 th August, 
2024, publishing a Corrigendum to the Notification No. RG-8/1(9)/2021- 
B AND CS(1 AND 3), dated the 8
th July, 2024. 
 (6) No. C-2/3/(2)/2021-QoS., dated the 28 th October, 2024, publishing the 
Rating of Properties for Digital Connectivity Regulations, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (6), see No. L. T. 1010/18/24] 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
7

 
(b)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Communications (Department of Teleco mmunications), under sub-section (3) of 
Section 56 of the Telecommunications Act, 2023:- 
 (1) G.S.R. 530(E)., dated the 30 th August, 2024, publishing the 
Telecommunications (Administration of Digital Bharat Nidhi ) Rules, 
2024. 
 (2) G.S.R. 576(E)., dated the 17 th September, 2024, publishing the 
Telecommunications (Right of Way) Rules, 2024. 
 (3) G.S.R. 674(E)., dated the 30 th October, 2024, publishing the 
Telecommunications (Commercial Radio Operator Certificate of 
Proficiency to Operate Global Mari time Distress and Safety System) 
Rules, 2024. 
 (4) G.S.R. 675(E)., dated the 30 th October, 2024, publishing the 
Telecommunications (Amateur Services) Rules, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (4), see No. L. T. 1011/18/24] 
 
(c)   A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Communications (Department 
of Telecommunications) Notification No. S.O. 3948(E)., dated the 14 th September, 
2024, publishing the Telecommunications (R emoval of Difficulties) Order, 2024, 
under sub-section (2) of Section 58 of the Telecommunications Act, 2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1012/18/24] 
 
II.   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
(i) (a)  Seventy-fourth Annual Report an d Accounts of the ITI Limited, 
Bengaluru, Karnataka, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India thereon.    
 (b) Performance Review of the above Company, for the year 2023-24. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1009/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the Telecommunications Consultants 
India Limited (TCIL), New Delhi, for the  year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India thereon.    
 (b) Performance Review of the above Company, for the year 2023-24. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1311/18/24] 
  
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

Notification of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT  
(SUSHRI SHOBHA KARANDLAJE) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and 
Hindi) of the Ministry of Labour and Employment Notification No. G.S.R. 715(E)., 
dated the 19
th November, 2024, publishing the Employees' Deposit-Linked Insurance 
(Second Amendment) Scheme 2024, under sub-section (2) of Section 7 of the 
Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1152/18/24] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table:— 
 
(i)   
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change Notification No. G.S.R. 690(E)., dated the 6 th November, 2024, publishing 
the Commission for Air Quality Management in  National Capital Region and Adjoining 
Areas (Imposition, Collection and Utilizat ion of Environmental Compensation for 
Stubble Burning) Amendment Rules, 2024,  under sub-section (3) of Section 25 of 
the Commission for Air Quality Management in  National Capital Region and Adjoining 
Areas Act, 2021. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 871/18/24] 
 
(ii)  
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mini stry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change Notification No. G.S.R. 696 (E)., dated the 11 th November, 2024, publishing 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Poll ution) (Manner of Holding Inquiry and 
Imposition of Penalty) Rules, 2024, under sub-section (3) of Section 63 of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 872/18/24] 
 
(iii)  A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mini stry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change Notification No. G.S.R. 701(E)., dated the 12 th November, 2024, publishing 
the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollu tion) (Manner of Holding Inquiry and 
Imposition of Penalty) Rules, 2024, unde r sub-section (2) of Section 53 of the Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. 
 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
9

REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON WELFARE OF OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES 
(2024-25) 
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार(मध्य Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ अन्य िपछड़े वगș क े कÊयाण संबंधी सिमित 
(2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत की गई कारर्वाई संबंधी Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा 
िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूं:- 
(iv)  A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change Notification No. G.S.R. 702(E)., dated the 12 th November, 2024, exempting 
the categories of industrial plants, as ment ioned therein, from the application of the 
provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 21 of the Air (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981, issued under the said sub-section of the said Act. 
[Placed in Library.  For (iii) and (iv), see No. L. T. 873/18/24] 
 
(v)   
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change Notification No. G.S.R. 703(E)., dated the 12 th November, 2024, exempting 
the categories of industrial plants, as ment ioned therein, from the application of the 
provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974, issued under the said sub-section of the said Act. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 872/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of LNIPE,  Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh and related 
papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS  (DR. L. MURUGAN ): Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
Shrimati Raksha Nikhil Khadse, I lay on th e Table a copy each (in English and Hindi) 
of the following papers: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Lakshmibai National Institute of 
Physical Education (LNIPE), Gwalio r, Madhya Pradesh, for the year 
2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b)  Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c)  Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1626/18/24] 
 
 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(i) First Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Measures undertaken to 
secure representation of OBCs in employ ment and for their welfare in All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)’ pe rtaining to the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare;  
( i i )  S e c o n d  R e p o r t  o n  A c t i o n  Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations containe d in the Twenty-Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Measures undertaken to 
secure representation of OBCs in empl oyment and for their welfare in Steel 
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat Niga m Limited (RINL)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Steel; 
(iii) Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Measures undertaken to 
secure representation of OBCs in empl oyment and for their welfare in various 
Departments/ Organisations/ Institutio ns under Department of Personnel and 
Training (DoPT)’ pertaining to the Mini stry of Personnel, Public Grievances 
and Pensions; and  
(iv) Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Third Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Measures undertaken to 
secure representation of OBCs in empl oyment and for their welfare in Central 
Reserve Police Force (CRPF)’ under the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
 
STATEMENTS BY MINISTER 
 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 15th, 20th and 
22nd Reports of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing committee on 
External Affairs 
 
 THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH) :  Sir, I lay the following 
statements regarding:— 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
11

(i) Status of implementation of  the recommendations contained in the 15th  Report 
of the Department-related Parliament ary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs on ‘Welfare of Indian Diaspora; Policies/ Schemes’. 
(ii) Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 20 th Report 
of the Department-related Parliament ary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs on ‘Demands for Grants for the year 2023-24’. 
(iii) Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 22 nd Report 
of the Department-related Parliament ary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs on ‘India’s Neighbourhood First Policy’. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I have received one notice under Rule 267 from 
Shri Tiruchi Siva seeking discussion over the recent Cyclone Fengal in Tamil Nadu.  
While a detailed ruling need not be reiterated, this issue has been raised earlier also 
by way of Rule 267 and otherwise in the Ho use.  Dr. Thambidurai, hon. Member, had 
also spoken to me on this on several occa sions. I will accommodate Shri Tiruchi Siva 
during the Zero Hour on this issue toda y. I will accommodate. Now, let us take up 
Zero Hour submissions.  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi. 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
Concern over suspicious and conspicuous attacks on national interest from abroad 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी ( उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, मȅ एक अत्यंत गÇभीर, महत्वपूणर् और 
िंचताजनक िवषय की ओर सदन का ध्यान आकृ Íट करना चाहूंगा। जब से भारत Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एक उभरती हुई सामिरक, आिर्थक और क ूटनीितक शिƪ बन
 कर उभरा है, तब से 
यह बहुत सहज रूप  से देखा जाने लगा है, िवशेषकर िवगत तीन वषș से, जब से भारत को 
िवकिसत भारत बनाने का लÑय रखा गया है। िवदेश की बहुत-सी ऐसी गितिविधयां हȅ, जो भारत 
की ËयवÎथा क े आिर्थक पक्ष, भारत की ËयवÎथा क े नैितक पक्ष और सामािजक पक्ष पर आकर्मण 
कर रही हȅ।  इस संदभर् मȂ एक िरसȂट जानकारी आई है, िजसे हम कह सकते हȅ - Organised 
Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP).  A French publication has recently 
publis
hed its own report based on its own investigation on Sara jevo-based OCCRP. 
This media report has claimed ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You will lay the report on the Table of the House.  
 
DR. SUDHANSHU TRIVEDI: Oka
y, Sir.  
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please go ahead. 
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: इस िरपोटर् क े अनुसार यह कहा गया है िक इस Ģोजेक्ट को फॉरेन गवर्नमȂट्स 
की फ ंिंडग है और उसका फोकस इंिडया क े ऊपर भी है। इस फॉरेन गवर्नमȂट की फ ंिंडग क े साथ-
साथ George Soros क े साथ भी इन
का कनेक्शन है। यह मȅ क ेवल िरपोटर् क े आधार पर नहीं कह 
रहा हूं।  मȅ सदन का ध्यान आकृ Íट करना चाहूंगा िक िवगत तीन वषș से क्या यह एक संयोग है िक 
िजस समय भारत की संसद का सतर् चलता है। मȅ िसफर् एक कर्म क े बारे मȂ बता रहा हूं। भारतीय 
फॉमर्सर् क े बारे मȂ 3 फरवरी, 2021 को एक िरपोटर् आती है और 29 जनवरी , 2021 से  बजट सतर् 
शुरू  हो जाता है। पेगासस की िरपोटर् 18 जुलाई, 2021 को  आती है और 19 जुलाई, 2021 से  
मानसून सतर् शुरू  होता है। उसके  बाद 31 जनवरी, 2023 से भारत की संसद का बज
ट सतर् शुरू  
होता है और 24 जनवरी, 2023 को िंहडनबगर् िरपोटर् आती है।  जनवरी, 2023 मȂ भारत की संसद 
का सतर् शुरू  होता है और 17 जनवरी, 2023 को बीबीसी की ‘India: The Modi Question’ 
डॉक्यूमȂटर्ी आती है। इससे भी गंभीर और महत्वपूणर् बात है िक 20 जु लाई, 2023 को भारत की 
संसद का सतर् शुरू  होता है और मिणपुर वॉयलȂस का वीिडयो 19 जुलाई, 2023 को ठीक एक िदन 
पहले जारी होता है। अगर हम पूरे सीक्वȂस मȂ चलȂ, तो मȅ याद िदलाना चाहूंगा िक 10 मई , 2024 
को कोिवड वैक्सीन क े बारे मȂ एक िरपोटर् छपती है, िजस समय भारत का चुनाव Ģचार अपने चरम  
पर था।  िफर अभी वतर्मान सतर् को लीिजए।  हम बताना चाहते हȅ िक मानसून सतर् 22 जुलाई से 9 
अगÎत क े बीच मȂ शुरू  होता है और 10 अगÎत को िंहडनबगर् की िरपोटर् आती है।  वतर्मान सतर् 25 
नवंबर से Ģारंभ होता है और 20 नव ंबर को िबजनेस हाउस क े संदभर् मȂ अमेिरकन कोटर् क े एक 
अटॉनीर् की िरपोटर् आती है।  मȅ िसफर् देश क े सामने यह बात रखना चाहता हूं। …(Ëयवधा
न)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Nothing will go on record excep t. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. 
Members, I will give time, please listen to me .  This is a very serious issue and we 
need to have opinion of everyone.  ...(Interruptions)...  We cannot allow the largest 
democracy to be made dysfunctional by deep state anywhere.  ...(Interruptions)...  
This House
 should be united in neutralizing an y trend, any initiative, that is pernicious 
and dangerous to our sovereignty. ...(Interruptions)... I allow Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
to continue.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: मȅ िसफर् यह बताना चाहता हूं िक िवगत चुनाव, भारत क े राजनैितक इितहास 
क े एकमातर् चुनाव थे। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will give you also time. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी: जब िवदेश मȂ कोई िरपोटर् नहीं …(Ëयवधान)… मȅ िवपक्ष क े सदÎयȗ से कहना 
चाहता हूं िक भारत क े इि
तहास का एकमातर् चुनाव था …(Ëयवधान)… जब िवदेश की एक रिशयन 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
13

गवर्नमȂट ने एक ऑिफिशयल ÎटेटमȂट दी िक भारत क े चुनावȗ मȂ िवदेशी हÎतक्षेप हो रहा है। 
…(Ëयवधान)… ऐसा भारत क े इितहास मȂ कभी नहीं हुआ।  …(Ëयवधान)… इसके  बाद दूसरी सरकार 
क े ǎारा उसका खंडन िकया गया। …( Ëयवध ान)… महोदय, मȅ अपने िवपक्ष क े सािथयȗ से पूछना 
चाहता हूं िक यह जानबूझकर हो रहा है या अनजाने मȂ हो रहा है। …(Ëयवधान)… अगर अनजाने मȂ 
हो रहा है, तो ईमानदारी से आइए और खुलकर चचार् कीिजए। यिद जानबूझकर हो रहा है, तो मȅ 
अनुरोध करना चाहूंगा िक इसके  बारे मȂ गहरी जांच होनी चािहए। …(Ëयवधा
न)… सभापित महोदय,  
मȅने कोई घटना क्वोट नहीं की है। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने क ेवल एक िरपोटर् क्वोट नहीं की है, बिÊक 
मȅने तीन वष
ș का सीक्वȂस िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... सदन मȂ बैठा हुआ हर Ëयिƪ अपने आप उसे 
साफ-साफ देख सकता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... सभापित महोदय, मȅ यह भी कहना चाहता हूं, यह बहुत 
सहज, Îवाभािवक सी-बात है िक िज न  लोगȗ क े िदल मȂ यह ख्वाब है िक वे भारत को झुका दȂगे, 
तो मȅ उनसे कहना चाहता हूं िक हम भी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िजस Ģकार से आगे बढ़ रहे 
हȅ, ...(Ëयवध ान)... आप यह मत सोिचए िक आज िवदेश से िकसी चीज़ का Ģभाव पड़ने वाला है। 
आज भारत अपने Îवािभमान क े साथ आगे बढ़ रहा है।  
 सर, मȅ उन लोगȗ क े िलए कहना चाहूंगा, जो िवदेश मȂ जाकर िवचार करते हȅ, जो यह 
कहते हȅ िक िडफȂडसर् ऑफ डेमोकर्े सी यहाँ पर क्यȗ क ु छ नहीं कर रहे हȅ। मȅ उनके  िलए कहना 
चाहता हूं िक वे िजन्हȂ िड
फȂडसर् ऑफ डेमोकर्े सी कहते थे, वे देश भी Ģध ानम ंतर्ी जी की तारीफ कर 
रहे हȅ। इसिलए िवदेश का लाभ लेकर, िवदेश की छाँव लेकर जो भारत मȂ हो रहा है, मȅ उसके  िलए 
एक पंिƪ कहना चाहूंगा, 
'अपने वतन पर सिदयȗ तक रहीं हȅ हुक ूमत ग़ैरȗ की 
लेिकन क ु छ चेहरȗ पर अब तक है धूल उनके  पैरȗ की।' 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associat
ed themselves with the matter 
raised by Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi:- Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet 
Tanavade (Goa), Shri Samik Bhattacharya  (West Bengal), Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan), Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
(Madhya Pradesh), Shri Govindbhai Laljibhai Dholakia (Gujarat), Shri Dorjee 
Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim), Shrimati Sang eeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Mission 
Ranjan Das (Assam), Shri Rameswar Te li (Assam), Shri Mithlesh Kumar (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee (Tripu ra) and Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh). Shri Derek O’Brien ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:  Sir...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The House stands adjourned to meet at 12 noon today.  
 
The House then adjourned at seventeen minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
The House reassembled at twelve of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 106. 
 
* Q. No. 106 [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Safety of nuclear power plants  
 
*106.    SHRI C. VE. SHANMUGAM: Will the PRIME MINISTER be pleased to state:- 
 
(a) whether Government is aware that nuclear power plants pose great threat to hum
an lives and property in case of leaks in the reactors etc.;  
(b) if so, the details thereof;  
(c) whether Government has taken adequate measures for the safety of the nuclear  
power plants in the country;  
(d) if so, the details thereof; and  
(e) further steps taken by Government in this regard?
 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY (DR. 
JITENDRA SINGH) (a) to (e) A statement is placed on the Table of the House.  
 
Statement
 
 
(a) and (b)  Nuclear power plants are desi gned, constructed and operated adopting 
highest safety standards and the probability of  leak of radioactivity is extremely low. 
Even in the highly unlikely event of leak  of radioactivity in the public domain, 
emergency preparedness plans are in place to ensure that no major threat is posed to 
human lives. 
 
(c) Yes 
 
(d) Highest priority is accorded to safety in  all aspects of nuclear power viz. siting, 
design, construction, commissioning, and operation. Nuclear power plants are 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
15

designed adopting safety principles of re dundancy, diversity an d provided fail-safe 
design features following an overlapping defence-in-depth approach, in line with 
codes and guides of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB). Nuclear power plants 
are constructed to highest quality stan dards and the operations are performed 
adopting well laid out procedures by highly  qualified, trained an d licensed personnel. 
There is a robust regulatory mechanism of safety reviews at multiple levels. The safety 
of nuclear power plants is continuously  monitored and reviewed by the AERB. A 
detailed emergency preparedness plan in line with the guidelines of the Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board (AERB) is put in place at each of the nuclear power plant sites 
before start of their operation. Environmen tal Survey Laboratories (ESLs) of Bhabha 
Atomic Research Centre, established at  Nuclear Power Plants (NPP) regularly 
monitor different environmental matri ces around NPP sites and demonstrate 
compliance of regulatory limits stipulated by Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, 
ensuring safe operation of NPPs. Th e methodology adopted for radiological 
assessment is at par with international standard recommended by IAEA. 
 Also, a twenty-year study, carried out by BARC, around NPP sites concluded 
that the public doses around  NPPs are considerably below the regulatory limits, 
ensuring safe, efficient operations, and stri ct regulatory compliance. The findings are 
published in “Science of Total Environment”, a reputed international journal. 
 
(e) Safety is not static and improvements / upgrades are effected in nuclear power 
plants based on evolving global stan dards, events and operating experience 
feedback. 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  S h r i  C .  V e .  S h a n m u g a m .   N o t  p resent.  Now, supplementaries.   
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. 
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA:  Through you, Sir, I request the hon. Minister to let us 
know whether the Government plans to revi ew the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
Act, 2010 to address any gaps like limited liability, ecological consequences, etc.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : Sir, although the question is  not related to the original 
question asked, nevertheless, I would like to  mention that as far as the civil nuclear 
liabilities are concerned, there is already a treaty in place.  India is a part of that and all 
the safeguards have been taken care of an d in no way will the supplier be affected, 
which was actually the apprehension in the early phases, which led to some amount 
of disenchantment on account of the foreign supply.  Let me read it out for the benefit 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

of hon. Member. The Civil Liability for Nu clear Damage Act, 2010 prescribe that in 
case of accident, the first liability is on the operator.  In case of operator proving the 
supplier's fault, then it is the second on e.  Supplier plus operator insured for Rs. 
1,500 crore and the operator, that is the NPCL, pays a premium of Rs. 120 crore 
approximately.  Beyond Rs. 1,500 crore and upto Rs. 3,000 crore, the Government of 
India pays. And, beyond that, as per the Convention on Supplementary 
Compensation for Nuclear Damage, to which India is a signatory, it is taken care of as 
far as the nuclear damage is concerned.   So, all the apprehensions have been 
addressed from time to time, and, I think, this debate is now no longer alive because 
it had been taken care of several years ago.  At the same time, I am sure that the hon. 
Member would be glad to know that in the recent few years, the Department of 
Atomic Energy, the Department of Space ha s acquired an extreme degree of esteem 
at the world platform. Just as in the case of  the space sector, in th e last three years, 
after it was open to the private sector, it  has made a quantum le ap, and, from just 
one digit startup, now, we have 300 startups. In the space sector also -- the question 
pertains to the atomic energy, I would rath er stick to that – we have certain world 
records achieved in the last few years, partic ularly, in the last 10 years, ever since 
Prime Minister Modi took over.   
 The Kaiga Generating Station, KGS-1, in Karnataka, has completed a record 
number of 962 days of continuous operation.  So, India, which was considered to be 
having a very dismal capacity as far as nucl ear energy is concerned, is now setting 
also role parameters for other countries.  Similarly, our Tarapur plant has completed 
50 years of operation, which itself is al so a record.  And, the first indigenous 
pressurized water reactor is coming up at Kakrapar, Gujarat.  All the four units have 
been made functional. The Kudankulam pl ant, which was envisaged somewhere in 
1989 and which was lying pending, is also now functional. And besides that, I think, 
living up to Homi J. Bhabha's declarat ion of using atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes, today, it is no longer confined  only to the limited functions or limited 
applications. We have atomic energy being a pplied in a large scale in agriculture, in 
food preservatives, in developing jackets for security persons, etc. So, I can go on 
and on. But having said that, I think now is the time when instead of being led, as far 
as the scientific initiatives are concerned, Indi a is also in a position to lead in certain 
ways and also offer cues to others.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Jairam Ramesh.   
 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
17

SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, I would like to remind the hon. Minister that it takes over 
10 years to commission a nuclear plant. So, if nuclear plants are being commissioned 
now, they had been set up over 10 years ago.  So, let us not get into that subject.  My 
question to the hon. Minister is very simp le. Over 40 years ago, the Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board was established to enfor ce safety standards in the functioning of 
nuclear plants. The hon. External Affairs Mi nister is here.  In one of his previous 
avatars, he has dealt with th is issue.  My question to the hon. Minister is, is the 
Government thinking of creating an independent statutory atomic energy regulator or 
will you allow the regulator to be a part of the nuclear establishment itself, which is 
somewhat unique to India?  So, the questi on is very straight. Will you bring a law in 
Parliament to set up an atomic energy regulator?  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Sir, I will give a very straight answer to that.  But before that, 
picking up from his opening remark that it takes 10 years, and that left-handed 
compliment, Chairman, Sir, I need your  protection, your indulgence and your 
permission to make one observation, precisely  replying to the first remark. The hon. 
Member often accuses the Government of  pre-celebrations. But sometimes it 
appears, in his haste to corner the Government, he tends to get the facts wrong. And 
I am carrying with me, because I knew he would ask somewhere. Only yesterday...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I greatly appreciate the rapport be tween the two of you.  He asked 
a supplementary and you have a written note. 
   
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: No, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I appreciate this synergy between you.   
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Only yesterday, he went to the media to say that the Minister 
gives contradictory figures in his replies. I am glad that he has given me an occasion 
to talk.  But in his haste to corner the Minister or the Modi Government, what he 
mistook, in spite of all his intellectual preten sions, was that in one of my questions, 
the amount mentioned was related to the construction cost of the nuclear plant and in 
the other question, it related to the cost for power generation. He had mixed up the 
two and tried to find fault. So, I don't know whether the hon. Member has done a 
very honourable job in doing so, but neverthe less, if you are in a compulsive habit of 
doing this, please try to avoid mischief with me.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Give reply to the question.   
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : And now, I come to the answer.  ...(Interruptions)... I was 
responding to his opening remark.  ...(Interruptions)...  I have a right to respond to 
his opening remark.  Now I will reply the question per se. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL : Why are you not replying to the question?  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Why did he make that opening remark then? Why did he have 
to make that under-the-cuff remark? So, I have responded to his opening remark 
and I will now respond to the question per se.  Chairman, Sir, in the Department of 
Atomic Energy, we follow the rule of safety  first, production next.  The hon. Member 
himself says that it takes 10 years to set up a plant. This Gove rnment has been in 
place for nearly 11 years.  We have not only set up new plants, but we have also made 
those plants functional which were left  unfinished by them, which includes the 
Kundankulam plant, which belongs to the District where the hon. Member, who is not 
here, has put the question.  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, it was set up during the Manmohan Singh Government. 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : It did not become functional. ...(Interruptions)... No; it did 
not become functional. You can ask anybody in Tamil Nadu. It was lying, but it was 
not made functional. Secondly, as far as safety is concerned, ...(Interruptions)...  
No, it was not made functional. It is only now. Please get your fa cts right.  You may 
indulge in this mischief with others, but please spare me because I am equally good at 
doing so. We belong to the same school of learning. Now, coming back, Sir, as far as 
the safety is concerned, for the benefit of the rest of the House ...(Interruptions)...   
because that is an important question, it is for the benefit of all.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I hope there are not many people from the same school in the 
House.  We can suffer the two of you. 
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH:  But this is important as far as  safety is concerned. I am sure 
the entire House would be eager to learn about this.   Of course, I will come to that.  
At the time of selection of site itself, the Atomic Energy Regula tory Board Guidelines 
are followed. Then every three months during the construction, there is an inspection.   
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
19

After the plant becomes functional, then it is  done every six months.  After five years, 
there is renewal of the licence. It is not lim ited only to the Atom ic Energy Regulatory 
Board which, of course, is in place as the hon. Member rightly mentioned.  We have 
international organisations also supervising it. For example, the World Association of 
Nuclear Operations (WANO) makes periodic  reviews. Similarly, for the safety 
purpose, we have evidence now which was not do ne earlier. It is done only now.  We 
have measured it. I think all of us, includin g the hon. Member, would learn not to talk 
without evidence which he did yesterda y. The measure is in microsieverts.  We have 
done a small survey in all the Indian plants. The critical value of radiation safety from 
any plant is 1,000 microsieverts. But in none  of the Indian plants , it crosses even two 
digits. In some of the plants, includin g the Kudankulam, it is 0.081. My next 
observation may not be very pleasant for the hon. Member.   
 In the last ten years, the level of radiation has gone down tremendously. For 
example, in Kudankulam itself, if it was 0. 081 microsieverts, today it is 0.002. In case 
of Kalpakkam, it was 23.140 in 2014 when you left the Department of Atomic Energy 
and now it is 15.961. I think progressively there has been a decline in radiation emitted 
which is based on evidence.  Furthermore, the safety part has also been taken care 
of. We have learned from the experience of  others. For example, if you go by the 
location, our eastern coast is located ab out 1,300 km away from the tsunami zone 
which is in Indonesia and our western coas t where we have Tara pur and other plants 
is located nearly 900 km from tsunami zo ne of Pakistan. We also follow other 
parameters. We take the highest level of flood in case of sea level and then go beyond 
that to locate the plant above. We also measure high tide levels. I think there is 
enough reason to be reassured.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you said that he gave you the opportunity which you 
were thinking of. Actually, give me the cred it I deserve. I gave yo u the opportunity by 
calling upon the hon. Member to ask the supplementary question. 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव : सर, यह सही है, जो माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने अपने written उǄर मȂ िदया है 
िक जब इसको बनाया जाता है, तो सुरक्षा का बहुत ख्याल रखा जाता है। मेरा जो सवाल है, वह 
सुरक्षा से ही संबंिधत, लेिकन दूसरी तरह का है। कलपक्कम, जो आपका Fast Breeder Nuclear 
Reacto
r है, which is the only Fast Breeder Nuclear Reactor, वह िबÊकु ल बंगाल की खाड़ी 
क े िकनारे ही है। सामने िहन्द महासागर है और एक तरफ लाल सागर है। ĢÌन यह है िक बहुत बड़े 
पैमाने पर कहीं से भी अग र दुÌमन की पनडुÅबी आकर इसको damage करे, तो इसको रोकने क े 
िलए आपने क्या ËयवÎथा की है?  वहा ँ हम लोगȗ की किमटी गई थी, तब भी हमने देखा था िक 
उसकी सीमाएँ असुरिक्षत हȅ। दूसरी तरफ आपने पेड़-पौधे लगा िदए, वहाँ क ु छ िसपाही खड़े रहते 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

हȅ। They cannot protect it. यह हो सकता है।  जयशंकर जी बैठे हुए हȅ, अब चारȗ तरफ आपके  
आसपास िमतर् देश नहीं हȅ।  मेरा सवाल यह है िक क्या आप कलपक्कम जैसे important Fast 
Breeder Nuclear Reactor को सुरिक्षत रखने क े िलए कोई naval warship या अपनी पनडुÅबी 
उसकी सुरक्षा क े िलए लगाएँगे, ता
िक वह उसकी िनगरानी करती रहे? 
 
डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह: सभापित जी, रामगोपाल यादव जी हमारे बड़े सीिनयर और विरÍठ सदÎय हȅ।  
उन्हȗने बड़ा संवेदनशील िवषय उठाया है। जहाँ तक इस Ģोजेक्ट की या इस Ãलांट की सुरक्षा का 
संबंध है, वह तो मȅ ÎपÍट कर चुका हूँ िक उसके  िलए पयार्Ãत ËयवÎथा की गई है।   
 जहाँ तक इस िवषय का संबंध है, हालाँिक यह मूलत: इस िवभाग से संबंिधत नहीं है, 
थोड़ा-बहुत िवदेश मंतर्ालय से है और थोड़ा-बहुत रक्षा मंतर्ा
लय से भी है, लेिकन यह सच है िक 
इसकी सुरक्षा ËयवÎथा मȂ नेवल गाड्सर् और अन्य सुरक्षा संÎथाओं का भी सहयोग िलया जाता है 
तथा रडार इत्यािद क े माध्
यम से भी इसके  ऊपर vigil रहता है।  यह िजतना संभव हो सके , उतना 
िकया गया है, परंतु आपका कहना भी ठीक है िक िजस Ģकार से टेक्नोलॉजी िदन-Ģितिदन बढ़ती 
जा रही है, उस Ģकार से हमȂ भी उसमȂ नए Ģावधान और नई ËयवÎथाओं की योजना भी बनानी 
पड़ती है और उसके  िल
ए सोचना भी पड़ता है। अभी तक इस Ģकार की कोई घटना हुई नहीं है। 
सीआईएसएफ भी वहां पर है और external threats क े िलए िमसाइल तथा aero crash क े िलए 
भी ËयवÎथाएं रखी गई है िक how to counter that possibility. जहां तक इसकी सुरक्षा का 
ताÊलुक है, िपछले िदनȗ समाचार पतर्ȗ मȂ आया था िक हमारे क ु छेक Ģोजेक्ट्
स क े काम रुक  गए।  
अब चूँिक सारे सदÎयगण यहाँ बैठे हȅ, तो मȅ बता देता हूँ िक राजÎथान मȂ क ु छ Ģोजेक्ट्स रुक  गए, 
कहीं और भी रुक  गए िक इससे क ȅसर फ ैलता है, इत्यािद। हमने उसके  िल
ए भी एक सवȃ िकया 
और हमारे आंकड़े यह दशार्ने लगे िक cancer और birth defects, िजनकी रेिडएशन से होने की 
अिधकतर सÇभावना रहती है, उसका prevalence 
 भाखड़ा मȂ, इन संÎथानȗ मȂ और इन Ãलांट्स मȂ 
काम करने वाले किर्मयȗ मȂ कम था, बिनÎबत जो औसतन राÍटर्ीय Îतर पर था, तो उसकी भी 
िंचता है, मुझे लगता है िक उसमȂ भी हमȂ सारे सदÎ यȗ का सहयोग रहेगा, क्यȗिक हमारे बहुत सारे 
Ãलांट्स इस कारण से रुक  जाते हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, since the hon. Member asking the question was 
not present, I will accommodate two more Members so that the number of 
supplementaries is five.  
 
Ǜी संजय राउत: सर, मȅ मंतर्ी जी से एक थोड़ा अलग सवाल पूछना चाहता हूँ। यह जो न्यूिक्लयर 
पावर Ãलांट है, यह देश क े िवकास क े िलए बहुत महत्वपूणर् होता है। इसी राÍटर्िहत की भावना से 
महाराÍटर् मȂ तार
ापुर न्यूिक्लयर पावर Ãलांट लगा है। उसके  िलए हमारे हजारȗ िकसानȗ ने अपनी 
उपजाऊ जमीन, खेत और घर छोड़ िदये। िक सानȗ क े साथ-साथ वहां समुदर् िकनारे रहने वाले जो 
मछु आरे हȅ, उनका भी Ëयवसाय, काम-धंधा बंद हो गया, उन्हȗने भी समझौता कर िलया। लेिकन 
आज भी उस एिरया क े न्यूिक्लयर Ãलांट से Ģभािवत जो 2,000 पिरवार हȅ, उनका पुनवार्स नहीं हो 
सका है। ये 2,000 से  भी ज्यादा पिरव
ार हȅ। उनके  बारे मȂ जो वायदे िकए थे िक उन पिरवारȗ को 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
21

नौकरी िमलेगी, उनको घर िमलȂगे, पक्के  मकान िमलȂगे। ऐसा एक भी वादा उन पिरवारȗ क े बारे मȂ 
पूरा नहीं हुआ।  इसकी Ģधान मंतर्ी तक िशकायत की गई है।  मंतर्ी जी आपसे भी डेलीगेशन िमला 
है। मंतर्ी जी से मेरा सवाल है िक ये जो लोग हȅ, जो अभी भी पुनवार्स क े िलए ठोकरȂ खा रहे हȅ, 
उनकी समÎया क े बारे मȂ क्या आप गÇभीरता से िव
चार करȂगे? 
 
डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह: सभापित महोदय, यह ĢÌन बड़ा मानव संवेदनशीलता से जुड़ा हुआ है और यह 
सच है िक सरकार ने भी इस िवषय पर Ãलांट Îथािपत करने क े समय से ही िवचार करना Ģारंभ 
कर िदया था। अब तो हमने इसमȂ क ु छेक िनयमावली भी Îथािपत कर दी है। उसमȂ क ु छ R&R 
provisions हȅ िक अगर उनको वहां अपनी जमीन छोड़नी पड़ेगी, जगह छोड़नी पड़ेगी या land 
vacat
e करना पड़ेगा, तो उन्हȂ पुन: कहां पर settle िकया जाए, एक बात तो यह है। उसके  
अितिरƪ हमारा जो CSR fund रहता है, उसमȂ से भी इनके  िलए ËयवÎथाएं की जाती हȅ, Îकू ल 
इत्यािद भी खोले जाते हȅ। तीसरी बात यह है िक जहाँ तक न
ौकिरयȗ का संबंध है, उसमȂ िरयायत 
भी दी जाती है। उदाहरण क े तौर पर यिद िकसी पद क े िलए 12वीं कक्षा िम िनमम  क्वािलिफके शन 
है, तो इन पिरवारȗ क े सदÎयȗ क े िलए दसवीं कक्षा कर दी गई, कहीं age relaxation कर दी गई।  
होता यह है िक साल गुजरने क े साथ-साथ पिरवार बढ़ते जाते हȅ और क्लेमȂट्स भी बढ़ते जाते हȅ, 
इसिलए उसमȂ Ģशासन को िनधार्िरत करने मȂ थोड़ा-सा समय लगता है, लेिकन यह कर्म िन रंतर 
जारी है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu; fifth Supplementary.  
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU: Mr. Chairman, Sir, through you, I would like to ask the 
Minister as to how the propos ed Away-From-Reactor Facility at Kudankulam Nuclear 
Power Plant aims to manage spent nuclear  fuel and what the safety assurances 
towards it are.  
 
DR. JITENDRA SINGH : Actually, this question arose earlier also in the context of 
Kalpakkam and the hon. Member has, I think, earlier also expressed her concern. It is 
because there was dumping of used fuel happening and some apprehension arose 
that this might create some problems. But, it is not so. Actually, this is a known 
practice. It is not even the waste as su ch. It is again used. ‘Away From Reactor’ 
means that for a certain period of time, you store it at the same location. Then, ‘Away 
From Reactor’ means a few metres away. It is  kept there for a few months. Then it is 
taken away. So, this is a normal practice and the containers are such that there is no 
room for radiation to escape out and cause any damage to the surroundings. This is 
an in-built mechanism in every plant. Somehow, this apprehension arose from 
Kalpakkam a couple of years ago. But it is, actually, being done.  And, through the 
hon. Member, because she also hails from that area, I would also like her to convey 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

to others that at one point in time, there was some news reports somewhere in the 
media last year that this re-used fuel fr om other plants would also be dumped at 
Kalpakkam which is, actually, unfounded.  Each of the plant has its own such 
mechanism. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Q. No. 107  
 
Modernization of Post Offices 
 
*107. SHRI NARHARI AMIN : Will the Minister of COMMUNICATIONS be pleased to 
state: 
(a)  whether any scheme has been contem plated upon, in order to modernize the 
post offices in the country and provide modern facilities therein; and 
(b)  if so, the details of facilities that are being commenced in post offices under 
these schemes? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (DR. 
CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI) : (a) and (b) A statement is laid on the Table of 
the House. 
 
Statement 
 
 (a) No new scheme has been contempl ated.  However, the approved schemes 
aimed at modernization of post offices an d provision of modern facilities are as 
follows: 
(i) Postal Operations  
(ii) Setting up of India Post Payments Bank 
(iii) IT Modernization Project 2.0.  
  
(b) The facilities provided under the scheme s for modernization of post offices and 
provision of modern facilities include the following.  
  
(i) For mail and parcel services, track and trace facility is available and delivery 
status is updated through the Postman Mo bile Application. E-Clearance of letter 
boxes through a mobile app has been implemented.  
                                         
 Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
23

(ii) Dakghar Niryat Kendras (DNKs) have been established to support commercial 
export through the postal channel to facilitat e online filing of postal bill of export and 
self-booking of commercial items.  
(iii) Core banking services have been provided for Post Office Savings Bank 
(POSB), with 1000 Automated Teller Machin es (ATMs) interoperable with other 
banks and online fund transfer facilities. 
(iv) The India Post Payments Bank (IPP B) has been established, which is a 
paperless and fully digital payments bank.  
(v)  The Core Insurance Solution has been implemented for Postal Life Insurance. 
 
Ǜी नरहरी अमीन: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की 
सरकार क े ǎारा 1,64,000 डाकघरȗ क े जिरए हर गांव, हर घर, हर Ëयिƪ तक citizen centric 
services दे रही हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)...  2014 से 2024 तक 5,000 से ज्यादा डाकघर खोले गए हȅ, 
1,28,000 लोगȗ को रोजगारी िमली है, 13,500 से ज्यादा डाकघरȗ मȂ आधार सेवा क Ȃ दर् बने हȅ, तीन 
करोड़ से ज्यादा सुकन्या समृिǉ खाते खोले गए और उनमȂ 1,41,000 करोड़ रुपए  िडपॉिजट हुए 
हȅ।  
 महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जान
 ना चाहता हूँ िक सरकार ǎारा 
पोÎट िडपाटर्मȂट का रेवेन्यू बढ़ाने क े िलए पोÎट िडपाटर्मȂट क े नेटवकर् क े जिरए ई-कॉमसर् और 
अन्य value added सेवाओं का िवÎतार करने क े िलए क्या कदम उठाए गए हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय सदÎय, आप मंतर्ी जी से जो पूछना चाहते हȅ, वह पूछȂ, बाकी मंतर्ी जी को 
बताने दीिज
ए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  माननीय मंतर्ी जी। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: सर, यह उनका दोष नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी पर आरोप मत लगाइए।  नए मंतर्ी हȅ, युवा मंतर्ी हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Yes, 
hon. Mini
ster. 
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI : Sir, from stamps to savings, post card to 
payment banks, letter to livelihoods, post offices have been transformed, under the 
visionary leadership of Shri Narendra Modi,  to be a backbone of financial inclusion for 
rural communities, especially, women . Sir, we provide services from post card, mail 
to savings bank, payments bank and eve rything that you can imagine in a rural 
community; more than 80 services, Government to citizen, business to citizen 
services, whether you call it paying the b ills, buying train tickets or receiving 
Government beneficiary schemes such as MGNREGA or PM-KISAN. Sir, the Post 
Office must be looked at the larger construct of what we want to do for rural 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

communities, especially, women because if you look at it, on an average the national 
banks have around 20 per cent of  women accounts. Ever since Modiji envisioned the 
development of women and the initiation of India Post Payments bank, we have 
opened more than 45 per cent of women accounts. It was never in the history. 
…(Interruptions)…. I am coming to that one-by-one. Please. …(Interruptions)… Let 
me answer, Madam. I respect all of  you. Let me answer. You can put 
supplementaries. I am happy to answer. Si r, under IT modernization, we spent 
Rs.5,700 crores and we have given 1.4 lakh mobile phones, 1.4 lakh thermal printers, 
three lakh biometric devices to make every postman a mobile ATM so that they can 
go to the doorsteps of every rural househol d and deliver banking services. What can 
we charge for this and how we can account the amount of money that we spend on 
these people! Sir, not everything that the Government provides should be considered 
as part of business. There is a moral, soci al responsibility that we make our services 
not only achievable but also affordable for everybody. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary; Shri Narhari Amin.  
 
Ǜी नरहरी अमीन: माननीय सभापित जी, सरकार ǎारा देश भर मȂ िकतने 'डाकघर िनयार्त क ेन्दर्ȗ' 
को Îथािपत िकया गया है और इन क ेन्दर्ȗ से िकन-िकन वÎतुओं को एक्सपोटर् िकया जा रहा है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now the hon. Minister.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Minister is a young 
Minister.  
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI:  I can also answer without looking at him. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He is doing a good job. Kindly lend  your ears to him. Let us have 
some positive approach.  If he reflects to  his leader, well, everyone does. It is a 
matter of pride for him also, for all of us also. Come on, go ahead!  
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI : Sir, again, the Post Offices have been there 
since 1800. No one ever imagined that ther e should be an export centre other than 
Modiji.  We have envisioned how to help our rural women, especially, self-help group 
people and we designed one product for one district. In that context, how to export 
these exceptionally well done innovative rural products across the world!  We 
designed one DNK for each district. Sir, ther e are close to 719 districts. However, the 
programme was so successful that we expanded to more than 1,000 DNKs. With that 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
25

process, we spent so much money and it is  a kind of a continuous handholding for 
these rural women so that their lives can be better. And, in that process, DNKs, what 
they have achieved is 2.2 lakh shipments an d Rs.54 crores as of today.  And, the 
beauty of this is, all they need is one-time  registration and it is integrated with the 
customs of all the countries; it is API integr ated and it can be done at the local post 
offices. When you look at the rural women,  they cannot go to the custom houses and 
all those places as it would be difficult. So, that is the beauty of these DNKs. Thank 
you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Dr. V. Sivadasan.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, the people of the country expect very good service, effective 
service from the Postal Department, but sad to say that due to shortage of employees 
in post offices, the service is very pathetic in our nation. Sir, in my district, Kannur, I 
have participated in the struggle of post al employees. They raised slogans against 
shutdown of post offices.  So, my question is this. How many post offices have been 
shut down by this Government since 2019?  And, what is the number of employees 
reduced by this Government since 2019? This  is my question.  I am expecting a very 
clear answer from our young Minister. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, first, the hon. Minister has enlightened through us, 
to everyone that post offices are virtually emerging as nerve-center for rural people.  
And, I quite appreciate, going to a custom house for anyone, particularly a rural 
woman, is a challenge. She will give up. So, we have high expectations from the 
Minister.   
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI : Sir, I am  happy to answer. To give 
background, by the time the UPA Government  came, from 2004 to 2014, -- we used 
to have 1,55,000 post offices earlier -- they reduced it to 700 post offices in their 10 
year tenure.  After we came, since the Gove rnment envisioned post office is not for 
letters, that this is for the complete upliftm ent, we have increased the number of post 
offices to about 10,500, namely, from 1,55, 000 to 1,65,000.  Out of these, 90.1 per 
cent, that is close to 1,50,000 post offices , is located in rural places and far-reached 
places.  Out of these 10,000 new post offices, more than 5,000 were created at Left-
Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas and the other post offices, approximately 
around 4,700 to 4,800, were constructed where people do not have any post office 
within five kilometer range.  So, the goal of  the Government of In dia is to have one 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

post office minimum in a three kilometer radius and in worst case, within five 
kilometers.  So, with all these 1,65,000 post offices, we connected every village.  
And, there are no post offices that were closed, as far as I know.  Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Ms. Dola Sen, fourth supplementary. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN:  Sir, through you, I want to know  from the hon. Minister, given the 
modernization process of post offices under Viksit Bharat , whether the law of the 
land, the labour laws as per the Constituti on, is being maintained by the Ministry or 
the Department. Incidentally, the citizens of  our country, that is, we the people of 
India, according to the Constitution, got service or job in post office through or by 
passing the UPSC examination. And then they are being deprived now with 
disinvestment and corporatizat ion process. I would like to ask whether this is called 
modernization. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ms. Dola Sen is a very experienced Member of this House. 
 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI: Madam, thank you for your concern. Sir, I will 
use the round figures so that  it will become easier for ev eryone to understand. In 
2013-14, the number of total employees that  we had was around 4,50,000, out of 
which Departmental employees were 2 lakhs and GDS were 2,50,000. Today also, we 
maintain the exact same number--4,50,000. So, the number of employees have not 
been downsized. Sir, when it comes to mo dernization, before 2014, recruitment of 
employees, especially the GDS (Gramin Dak Sevaks), or transfer of employees or 
compassionate appointments would be at th e discretion of the competent authority. 
Ever since we came to power, we made the whole process completely transparent 
and online. The recruitment process is merit-ba sed. I have to tell you that this is my 
first term as a Member of Parliament from  local area. A lot of people come and ask 
me, ‘can you transfer an employee in your Postal Department’? Sir, I myself cannot 
transfer even a single employee. What does that mean? It means, it is completely a 
transparent mechanism. And the process of compassionate appointment is also 
highly transparent. So, the entire modern ization process is extremely well done and 
rest can be assured. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you can respond only when the Member rises and 
ask some question. Ms. Dola Sen was sitting on her seat and, therefore, she will have 
to seek an appointment to interact. Now, last supplementary by Shri P. Wilson. 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
27

SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, from birth to death, no doub
t, Postal Department played a very 
crucial role in conveying the messages to the citizens once upon a time. Sir, now, we 
have to see how the quality of the Postal Department is affected. One of the reasons 
is not filling up of various vacancies in the Postal Department, particularly vacancies 
meant for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Trib es and OBCs which are lying vacant for 
years together. The filling up of vacancies would take care of manpower. Sir, another 
problem is that the postal Pin Codes change very often. Today, I am residing in a 
postal Pin Code of 600029, suddenly, one day they come and say your postal Pin 
Code has changed to 600030. This creates a lot of confus ion. Sir, there are other 
problems like infrastructure challenges, technological issues, high volume operations, 
bureaucratic challenges due to their ineffi ciency, budget constraints, private courier 
service challenges and lack of internet in  rural areas.  How are you going to handle 
these problems? Once these problems are so lved, then only, you can say that there 
is modernization in the Postal Department. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri P. Wilson is a distinguished lawyer, he has raised many issues 
at a time. 
DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI : Sir, you have asked multiple questions. 
Firstly, the recruitment of the people is according to the Governmental norms. As I 
said, it is according to a routine employment process. So, I cannot comment on that. 
Secondly, he has raised the issue of introduc tion of online services, the internet. Sir, 
there used to be no internet before 2014. T h e n  w i t h  I T  m o d e r n i z a t i o n ,  w e  h a v e  
provided not one, minimum two internet connections to every post office so that there 
will be some redundancy. And, number three,  as I said earlier, we bought 1.4 lakh 
mobile phones because more than 95 per cen t of all rural areas are 4G-connected. 
All these new phones are compatible with 4G and 5G.  And, most of these postal 
services are being implemented at the doorstep through mobile phones.  In addition, 
we upgraded 22,000 computers and all the ha rdware. Sir, technology upgradation is 
a continuous process. As you know, desktops  get outdated, the infrastructure has to 
be updated, cloud services will be coming. So , this will be a continuous process. If 
there are any specific one or two areas, we will be happy to address.  Please come to 
our office and tell us.  We have a mechanism to address them.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: For that, you have to invite. 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

DR. CHANDRA SEKHAR PEMMASANI: Of course, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, I think, the sense of the House would be that the honourable 
young Minister faced bouncers, but he has performed well. We must appreciate the 
level of preparation.  Q.No. 108.   
 
 
India’s Position on Palestine 
 
*108. SHRI P. P. SUNEER : Will the Minister of EXTERNAL AFFAIRS be pleased to 
state: 
 
(a) the number of resolutions concerning Palestine that came up for consideration 
in the United Nations (UN) and related bodi es since the beginning of Israel-Hamas 
conflict; 
(b)  the details of the position India took on each of such resolutions in the UN and 
other UN related bodies; 
(c)  the details of the aid India has sent to  Palestine during the period directly and 
through UN and other related bodies, yearly data since 2021; and 
(d)  whether India is considering any propos al to shape global opinion to affect a 
ceasefire in Palestine? 
 
THE MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (DR. SUBRAHMANYAM JAISHANKAR): (a) 
to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
 (a) to (d) India’s policy towards Palestin e has been long standing and we have 
always supported a negotiated two State solution, towards establishment of a 
sovereign, independent and viable State of  Palestine within secure and recognized 
borders, living side by si de in peace with Israel.  India has strongly condemned the 
terror attacks on Israel on 7 October 2023 and also the lo ss of civilian lives in the 
ongoing Israel-Hamas conflict. We remain concerned at the security situation and 
have called for a ceasefire, release of all ho stages and peaceful resolution of conflict 
through dialogue and diplomacy. We emph asized the need for safe, timely and 
sustained delivery of humanitarian assitance to  the people of Palestine. Our voting on 
UN resolutions on the issue of Israel Palestine have been in line with our stated policy.  
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
29

 
 Since the beginning of Israel- Hamas conflict, 13 resolutions concerning 
Palestine were brought in UNGA out of whic h India voted in favour in 10 resolutions 
and abstained on 3 resolutions. Details of India’s voting position in UN and other 
related bodies since Israel Hamas conflict, are placed at Annexure- I.  
 
 The Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs have spoken to several 
leaders in the region and across the globe,  including President,  Prime Minister and 
Foreign Minister of Israel and President an d Foreign Minister of Palestine. We have 
also reiterated our position in various b ilateral and multilateral forums such as UN, 
BRICS, NAM, Voice of Global South, etc. Prime Minister met Palestine President on 
the sidelines of Summit of the Future in New York on 22 September 2024 and called 
for ceasefire, release of hostages and return to path of dialogue and diplomacy. 
 
 India extends humanitarian assistan ce to the people of Palestine both 
bilaterally and through United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian 
refugees in Near East (UNRWA). Since the beginning of the conflict, we have 
provided around 70 MT of humanitarian ai d, including 16.5 MT of medicines and 
medical supplies in 2 tranches. We releas ed $ 5 million last year and we have 
disbursed another $ 5 million this year to UNRWA. Recently, we also sent 65 tonnes 
of medicines to UNRWA and Palestine Ministry of Health in October and November 
2024. Details of our aid to Palestine are at Annexure- II. 
Annexure-I 
 
Details of India’s voting position on resolutions concerning Palestine in UNGA since 
beginning of Israel-Hamas conflict 
S. N. 
Voted in 
favour-Y/ 
Abstained-
A 
Resolution 
Number Subject Date of 
resolution 
1 A A/RES/ES-10/21 Protection of civilians and 
upholding legal and humanitarian 
obligations 
27/10/2023 
2 A A/RES/78/76 Work of the Special Committee to 
Investigate Israeli Practices 
Affecting the Human Rights of the 
07/12/2023 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

Palestinian People and Other 
Arabs of the Occupied Territories 
3 Y A/RES/78/78 Israeli settlements in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory, 
including East Jerusalem, and the 
occupied Syrian Golan 
07/12/2023 
4 Y A/RES/78/77 The occupied Syrian Golan 07/12/2023 
5 Y A/RES/78/74 Assistance to Palestine refugees 07/12/2023 
6 Y A/RES/78/73 Operations of the United Nations 
Relief and Works Agency for 
Palestine Refugees in the Near 
East 
07/12/2023 
7 Y A/RES/78/75 Palestine refugees' properties 
and their revenues 
07/12/2023 
8 Y A/RES/ES-10/22 Protection of civilians and 
upholding legal and humanitarian 
obligations 
12/12/2023 
9 Y A/RES/78/170 Permanent sovereignty of the 
Palestinian people in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory, 
including East Jerusalem, and of 
the Arab population in the 
occupied Syrian Golan over their 
natural resources 
19/12/2023 
10 Y A/RES/78/192 The right of the Palestinian people 
to self-determination 
19/12/2023 
11 Y A/RES/78/251 Proposed programme budget for 
2024  Section 26, Palestine 
refugees 
22/12/2023 
12 Y A/RES/ES-10/23 Admission of new Members to the 
United Nations 
10/05/2024 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
31

13 A A/RES/ES-10/24 Advisory opinion of the 
International Court of Justice on 
the legal consequences arising 
from Israel's policies and 
practices in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory, including 
East Jerusalem, and from the 
illegality of Israel's continued 
presence in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory : resolution / 
adopted by the General Assembly 
18/09/2024 
 
Organization Session Details of resolution/ decision India’s 
position 
WHO World Health 
Assembly 77 
(WHA77), May-
June 2024 
Health conditions in the occupied 
Palestinian territory, including east 
Jerusalem 
 In Favour 
World Health 
Assembly 77 
(WHA77), May-
June 2024 
Collaboration with the UN system and 
other inter-governmental 
organization. 
In Favour 
World Health 
Assembly 77 
(WHA77), May-
June 2024 
WHO's work in Health Emergencies in 
OPT, including East Jerusalem. 
In Favour 
Human 
Rights 
Council 
(HRC) 
 
55
th Session of 
HRC, April 2024 
 
Human Rights Situation in the 
Occupied Palestinian Territory, 
including East Jerusalem, and the 
obligation to ensure accountability 
and justice 
Abstain 
55th Session of 
HRC, April 2024 
 
Right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination 
In Favour 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

55th Session of 
HRC, April 2024 
 
Israeli Settlements in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory, including East 
Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian 
Golan. 
In Favour 
ILO 352nd  Session of 
Governing 
Body, October 
2024 
Decision concerning the status of 
Palestine and its participation rights in 
ILO meetings 
Adopted 
without a 
vote. 
UNESCO 42 General 
Conference 
UNESCO (Nov 
2023) 
Agenda item: Impact and 
consequences of the current situation 
in the Gaza Strip/Palestine in all 
aspects of UNESCO’s mandate 
Abstained 
 219 Executive 
Board (March 
2024) 
 
Agenda item: Impact and 
consequences of the current situation 
in the Gaza Strip/Palestine in all 
aspects of UNESCO’s mandate 
With 
Consensus. 
The Draft 
Decision 
was 
approved by 
consensus. 
 220 Executive 
Board (October 
2024) 
 
Agenda item: Impact and 
consequences of the current situation 
in the Gaza Strip/Palestine in all 
aspects of UNESCO’s mandate 
With 
Consensus. 
The Draft 
Decision 
was 
approved by 
consensus. 
 217   Executive 
Board  (Oct 2023) 
219  Executive 
Board  (March 
2024) 
220 Executive 
Board (Oct 2024) 
Agenda item: Occupied Palestine With 
consensus. 
 217   Executive 
Board  (Oct 2023) 
Agenda item: Implementation of 42 
C/Resolution 49 and 219 EX/Decision 
With 
consensus. 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
33

219  Executive 
Board  (March 
2024) 
220 Executive 
Board (Oct 2024) 
23 concerning educational and 
cultural institutions in the occupied 
Arab territories. 
 8th Special Session 
of Executive Board 
(ExB) of UNESCO 
(25 November 
2024) 
 
Agenda item: Supporting the 
continuity of UNRWA's educational 
activities in the occupied Palestinian 
territory. 
In favour 
 
 Annexure-II 
India’s aid to Palestine  
 
 India’s developmental assistance to Pa lestine through various forms amounts 
close to USD 160 million over the years. Currently, we are actively engaged in 
developmental projects worth USD 40 million to improve the lives of the Palestinian 
people, in addition we have also provided  a total of USD 39.53 million as assistance  
to UNRWA since 2002.  
 
 In response to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza, India has also sent 70 tonnes of 
humanitarian assistance including 16.5 tonnes of medicines and medical supplies in 
two tranches on 22 October and 19 November 2023. In October and November 2024, 
we also sent close to 65 tonnes of life-saving medicines to UNRWA and Palestinian 
Ministry of Health. 
 
India’s contribution to UNRWA
 
 
2020-21 5 million 
2022-23 5 million 
2023-24 5 million 
2024- 25 5 million 
Total (2002 to 2024) 39.53 million 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI P. P. SUNEER: Sir, what is the amount of expo rts to Israel, since the beginning 
of the conflict, including equipments that aid in manufacturing weapons.  
 
SHRI S. JAISHANKAR : Sir, the supplementary asked by the hon. Member is not 
directly related to the question because the question focuses on our position on 
Palestine, our voting in the UN the aid sent to Palestine, which I will be very happy to 
share with the House.  With regard to our exports to Israel, in particular, any export 
which is related, directly or indirectly, to munitions or militarisation is not the 
information that is in the public domain.  
 
SHRI P.P. SUNEER: S i r ,  w h a t  i s  t h e  p o s i t i o n  o f  the Government of India on the 
International Court of Justice issuing warrants against Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin 
Netanyahu, former Israel Defence Minister , Yoav Gallant, and the Hamas leader for 
war crimes, in accordance with international law and rule based on global order? 
 
SHRI S. JAISHANKAR : Sir, the hon. Member would be aware that India is not a 
Member of the International Criminal Court. When the International Criminal Court was 
constituted, the question of our membership  was considered for ve ry good reasons.   
But, after a great deal of deliberations, India decided not to become a Member. So 
with regard to any decision passed by the ICC, it is not binding on us. So, it is not a 
matter on which we have taken any formal position.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, the hon. Minister is aware that India extends humanitarian 
assistance to the people of Palestine, both  bilaterally and through United Nations.  
But, a Resolution has come up on 27th of October, 2023, in the UN, that is, 
protection of civilians and upholding lega l and humanitarian obligations, on which 
India abstained.  Both are contradictory.  Why should India abstain from such a 
genuine resolution?  
 
SHRI S. JAISHANKAR : Sir, India has given assistance to the people of Palestine at 
this particular time. Through you, I would lik e to bring to the notice of the House that 
we make an annual contribution of five million dollars to the UNRWA, which is the 
main assistance providing agency. In recent ti mes, in terms of the conflict, we have 
provided 70 metric tonnes of aid, of whic h 16.5 metric tonnes was of medicines in 
2023.  We have given 65 metr ic tonnes of medicines to Palestenian authority and to 
UNRWA in 2024. We have provided 33 metric  tonnes of medicines to Lebanon.   
Now, with regard to the particular Resolu tions, which the hon. Member referred to, 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
35

we abstained.  In fact, during this period , there have been in the General Assembly a 
number of Resolutions.  We have voted in  favour of many; we  have abstained on 
some. Generally, when we abstain,  there are reasons; say, the  
Resolution is not balanced, the Resolution is more divisive, the Resolution can set a 
precedent which has consequences for us or th e Resolution has larger implications.   
In this particular case, Sir, we felt that the Resolution was not well drafted; it was not 
well considered. We had reservations on the language; our concerns were not 
accommodated; and, that is why we abstained.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And, as a matter of fact, I think, the entire House knows, India has 
been virtually first responder when there ar e issues of earthquake or requirement of 
medicines, even during COVID.  That soot hing input I get from foreign dignitaries 
calling on me or I calling on them.  So, that, I think, goes to the credit of this House 
and the Government. 
 As a matter of fact, when it comes to ev acuation, when it comes to security on 
high seas, when it comes to supplying medicines during COVID, these are the inputs.  
I am not saying this on my own, people  have expressed their gratitude to me.  
Therefore, I am sharing with the House.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, we … 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Saket Gokhale, supplementary no. 4.  ... (Interruptions)…  
Tiruchiji, I am sure, you will appreciate with yo ur experience, the hon. Minister has 
given  a very exhaustive answer, that being abstention on a resolution is driven by 
several circumstances — the script of the resolution, the consequence of the 
resolution and its long-term impact. It is not simpliciter that it expresses what you 
indicated. That, as a matter of fact, is driven by our civilization.  Wherever there is a 
need for humanity, we have been supplying and, sometimes, in toughest of situations 
diplomatic also.   Now, Shri Saket Gokhale. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, let me express gratitude to the hon. Minister for the fact 
that India has always, previous Governme nts included, been a supporter of a two 
State solution in Israel and Palestine, and fo r the aid that is being sent by the Indian 
Government.  Because the question pertains to India’s position on Palestine, I have 
two very specific questions on which I would like to know the Government of India’s 
position. Number one, the hon. Minister just said that we will be providing five million 
dollars of aid to the UNRWA. The UNRW A has now been banned by the Israeli 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

Government. So, what is our position on  the UNRWA being ba nned and how are we 
sending aid? The second point on which I want  to know the position is that India has, 
traditionally, always, including this Govern ment, supported a two State solution. In 
the United Nations, we abstained on a resolu tion against Israeli illegal settlements in 
the West Bank. What is India’s position on the illegal settlements made by Israel in the 
West Bank and Palestine? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Before the hon. Minister resp onds, the little I gathered in 
diplomacy, if you win a battle by argument, you lose it.  Now, hon. Minister. 
 
SHRI S. JAISHANKAR : Sir, regarding our support and contribution to the UNRWA, 
this is a decision which we took as a Go vernment; we continue to stand by that 
decision.  We have, in fact, just released the latest tranche of support to the UNRWA.  
So, I hope the Member is reassured on that  score.  Regarding the two State solution, 
we supported two State solution and we have been public and unambiguous about 
that. So, I think there should be no cause for confusion regarding two State solution.  
Regarding resolutions, both what the hon. Member asked and what the previous hon. 
Member also asked, again, it depends. Resolutions have implications as you noted. 
Their wording is important, for example, in the Resolution, which the previous 
Member too had referred to, Sir. There was no reference to terrorism. There was no 
reference to hostage-taking. So, in our mind , a resolution which does not reflect the 
entirety of the situation is not a balanced resolution. And a country like India, which is 
itself a victim of terrorism, if we counten ance the fact that terro rism is underplayed 
a n d  i g n o r e d ,  i t  i s  n o t  i n  o u r  i n t e r e s t  t h a t  w e  d o  s o .  S o ,  w h e n  w e  l o o k  a t  a n y  
resolution, we look at the wording, we take a very, very mature view about it, and I 
want to say, as a matter of principle, we condemn terrorism, we condemn hostage-
taking, we do believe countries have a ri ght to respond to these situations but 
countries should be mindful of civilian cas ualties, they must observe humanitarian 
law, and we would like a ceasefire and an ear ly end to violence. So, our position has 
been very, very clear but we would like this duly-reflected in well-worded resolutions 
which are balanced. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I asked about illegal settlements. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Last supplementary, Dr. John Britas. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
37

DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, the hon. Minister has got extensive experience and 
expertise. He is hands-on on all these issues. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think no one disputes that.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: No one disputes that.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay, go ahead.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, I would refer to the diplomatic facet of an issue which I hope 
that the Minister would sincerely respond to. Is it a fact that Palestinian Authority’s 
Minister of State on Foreign Affairs met our Ambassador, Ms. Renu Yadav, 
requesting to reconsider arms sales to Is rael due to their usage against Palestinian 
civilians and also the need for international pr essure on Israel to stop their violence on 
Gaza? If so, what has been the response of the Ministry?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, the hon. Member seeks sincere response.  
 
SHRI S. JAISHANKAR : Sir, the issue of India's exports, including India's exports of 
anything, which directly or in directly has any military implications, is guided by our 
national interest and by our commitments  to various regimes. So we are very 
responsible members of various internat ional regimes, including the Wassenaar 
Arrangement. We have an export control and licensing process and we take decisions 
regarding any exports which is based on what we consider to be our national interest. 
Where Israel is concerned, it is a country with which we have a strong record of 
cooperation in national security. It is also  a country that has stoo d by us at different 
moments when our national security wa s under threat. So, when we take any 
decision, we will bear in mind, obviously,  the larger circumstances but we will, 
definitely, be driven by our national interest in this matter. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 109.  
 
Retirement age of Judges 
   
*109. SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA: Will the Minister of LAW AND JUSTICE be pleased to 
state: 
 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

(a) whether Government has considered increasing the retirement age of Judges in 
High Courts and the Supreme Court to addr ess the rising pendency of cases in the 
judiciary; 
(b) the current number of pending cases ac ross various courts in the country and its 
impact on access to justice; 
(c) the measures taken by Government to  fill judicial vacancies and improve case 
disposal rates; 
(d) whether increasing the retirement age of  Judges would help retain experienced 
legal minds and reduce the backlog of cases; and 
(e) the timeline for implementing reforms to improve judicial effici ency and   reduce 
pendency? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (SHRI ARJUN 
RAM MEGHWAL): (a) to(e) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) There is no such proposal for increas ing the retirement age of Judges of the 
Supreme Court and High Courts. 
 
(b) to (e) As per information available on National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG), the 
number of pending cases in courts across the country, as on 28.11.2024, is as under: 
 
S. No. Name of court No. of pending cases 
1. Supreme Court of India 82,396 
2. High Courts  61,11,165 
3. District and Subordin ate Courts  4,55,98,240 
 
 
 Judges of the Supreme Court and High  Courts are appointed under Article 
124, 217 and 224 of the Constitution of India and according to the procedure laid 
down in the Memorandum of Procedure (MoP) prepared in 1998  pursuant to the 
Supreme Court Judgment of October 6, 1993 (Second Judges case) read with their 
Advisory Opinion of October 28, 1998 (Third Judges case). As per MoP, initiation of 
proposal for appointment of Judges in the Hi gh Courts vests with the Chief Justice of 
the concerned High Court. Chief Justice of th e High Court is required to initiate the 
proposal to fill up vacancy of a High Cour t Judge six months prior to the occurrence 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
39

of vacancy. However, this timeline is often not adhered to by the High Courts. All the 
names recommended by High Court Colleg ium are sent with the views of the 
Government to the Supreme Court Collegi um (SCC) for advice. Only those persons 
who are recommended by the SCC are appointed as Judges of the High Courts. 
Filling up of vacant positions in the case of  District and Subordinate courts is the 
responsibility of the High Courts and Stat e Governments concerned. In exercise of 
powers conferred under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution read with Articles 
233 and 234, the respective State Governments,  in consultation with the concerned 
High Courts frame the rules and regu lations regarding the appointment and 
recruitment of Judicial Officers in thei r respective State Judi cial Services. The 
Supreme Court, vide order passed in Janua ry 2007, in the Malik Mazhar Sultan case, 
has, inter-alia, stipulated certain timelines, which are to be followed by the States and 
the respective High Courts for recruitmen t of judges for District and Subordinate 
Courts. 
 Disposal of cases in courts is within  the exclusive domain of the judiciary. 
Timely disposal of cases is affected by several factors which,  inter-alia, include 
availability of physical infrastructure and supporting court staff, complexity of facts 
involved, nature of evidence, co-operation of stake-holders viz. bar, investigation 
agencies, witnesses and litigants and proper  application of rules and procedures as 
also frequent adjournments. The Government is, however, fully committed to speedy 
disposal of cases. The Government has ta ken several initiatives to provide an 
ecosystem for faster disposal of cases by  the judiciary. The National Mission for 
Justice Delivery and Legal Reforms estab lished by the Government has adopted a 
coordinated approach for phased liquidation  of arrears and pendency of judicial 
administration through various strategic init iatives, including improving infrastructure 
for courts, leveraging Information and Co mmunication Technology for better justice 
delivery, and filling up of vacant positions of Judges in High Courts and Supreme 
Court.  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा:  सर, इस सदन क े नेता रहे Îवगीर्य अरुण  जेटली जी, िजनके  साथ मेरा Ëयिƪगत 
िरÌता क ु छ खƺा-मीठा रहा है, वे कहा करते थे िक ‘Pre-retirement judgements get
  
influenced by post-retirement jobs.’ मुझे लगता है िक सदन मȂ बैठे कई सारे साथी इस कथन 
से अपनी सहमित दजर् करȂगे। सर, िपछले कई सालȗ से, एक लंबे समय से एक चलन चलता आ 
रहा है िक जजȗ की िरटायरमȂट क े बाद उन्हȂ एग्
जीक्यूिटव या पोिलिटकल रोÊस िदए जाते हȅ।  
क ु छ लोग हमारे सदन मȂ राज्य सभा सदÎय बनकर आ जाते हȅ और क ु छ लोग िरटायरमȂट क े बाद 
कई सूबȗ क े गवनर्र लग जाते हȅ। इस से जनता क े मन मȂ कई Ģकार से सवाल आते हȅ। Conflict of 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

interest का सवाल आता है, executive interference in judicial process का सवाल आता है, 
independence of Judiciary का सवाल आता है।   
 मेरा सरकार से यह सवाल है िक क ु छ सुझाव जो लगातार कई सिमितयȗ क े माध्यम से भी 
सरकार क े पास आए हȅ, उनमȂ सरकार का क्या िवचार है? पहला, जजȗ की िरटायरमȂट क े बा द 
एक क ूिंलग ऑफ पीिरयड होना चािहए िक करीब-करीब दो साल तक िकसी भी जज को 
िरटायरमȂट क े बाद कोई एग्जीक्यूिटव या पोिलिटकल रोल न िदया जाए और िकसी सिमित की 
चेयरमैनिशप भी न दी जाए। ...(Ëयवधान)... उस सुझाव पर सरकार का क्या कहना है?  मे रा 
दूसरा सुझाव... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Well, to satisfy my ve
ry dear friend, Shri Jairam Ramesh, in the 
United States, they brought in  a serious issue, conflict of interest of advocates. They 
wanted to keep lawyers away from the Congress and the Senate. It was severely 
debated. Ultimately, it was fo und that if the conflict of in terest issue has to dominate, 
then the House will be empty because someone will always have a conflict of interest. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, I was referring to Justice Hidayatullah. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Justice Hidayatullah, hon. Members, for your benefit, happens to 
be the only one in the country who was Chief Justice of India, Vice-President of India 
and also discharged the functions of President of India withou t being Vice-President 
or elected President, something very rare. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, we wish you the best. 
 
Ǜी सभापित: राघव जी, आप अपना क्वेÌचन पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, क्या मȅ िफर से शुरू  करू ँ? ...(Ëयवधान)..
 . सर, मȅ समाÃत कर रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपने एक बात कही, मुझे अजीब लगी।  आपने कहा िक अरुण  जेटली जी से आपके  
खƺे-मीठे िरÌते थे।  मुझसे भी आपके  खƺे-मीठे िरÌते हȅ।  इन खƺे-मीठे िरÌतȗ को अब आप 
छोिड़ए, िस
फर् मीठे िरÌते ही रिखए। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, आपसे तो मीठे िरÌते हȅ।  सर, मȅ सवाल तो खत्म कर लूँ।  सर, आपसे तो 
बहुत मीठे िरÌते हȅ।  परमात्मा करे आपसे हमेशा िरÌ
 ते मीठे रहȂ, खƺे न हȗ। 
 सर, मेरा जो सवाल था, वह यह था िक जो तीन सुझाव लगातार तमाम सिमितयȗ क े 
माध्यम से सरकार क े िवचाराधीन आए हȅ, उन पर सरकार का क्या कहना है? पहला िक जजȗ की 
िरटायरमȂट क े बाद उन्हȂ दो साल का cooling-off period देना चािहए, यानी िक िरटायरमȂट क े 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
41

दो साल तक िकसी executive या political role मȂ उनकी िनयुिƪ नहीं होनी चािहए। दूसरा 
सुझाव, उनकी पȂशन को इतना बढ़ा िदया जाए िक जजȗ की आिर्थक िनभर्रता िकसी भी post 
retirement jobs पर न हो, न उनके  मन मȂ क ु छ इच्छा हो िक हम िरटायरमȂट क े बाद सरकार से 
कोई पोजीशन ले लȂ। तीसरा सुझाव, जो लगातार आता रहा है िक merit-based appointment 
का एक process होना चािहए, िजसके  तहत जजȗ को िरटायरमȂट क े बाद िनयुƪ िकया जाए, न 
िक सरकार की whims and fancies क े तहत। 
 
Ǜी अजुर्न राम मेघवाल: चेयरमैन सर, माननीय सदÎय ने जो सवाल पूछा है, उसमȂ इन्हȗने 
political angle देने का Ģयास िकया है।  सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ हाई कोटर् क े जजȗ की िनयुिƪ संिवधान क े 
आिर्टकल 124, 217, 224 तथा सुĢीम कोटर् क े 1993 Second Judge case और 1998 Third 
Judge case क े आधार पर बनाए गए Memorandum of Procedure क े अनुसार की जाती है।  
यह इनको भी पता है। वतर्मान मȂ हाई कोटर् क े जजȗ की retirement age 62 years है, सुĢीम कोटर् 
क े जजȗ की retirement age 65 years है और जो district courts हȅ, उनके  जजȗ की retirement 
age 60 है।  ये िजसका िज़कर् कर रहे हȅ िक एक चीफ जिÎटस कॉन्ģȂ स हुई थी, उसमȂ एक 
resolution िलया गया िक जजेज की retirement age बढ़ानी चािहए। ये 2010 की एक 
Parliamentary Standing Committee का िज़कर् कर रहे हȅ, उसने भी अपनी 39th िरपोटर् मȂ हाई 
कोटर् क े जजȗ की उĦ 62 से 65 करन े की recommendation दी। इसका इन्हȗने िज़कर् िकया।  
लेिकन इन्हȗने इसका िज़कर् नहीं करके  एक दूसरा िवषय cooling period का रखा।  मȅ आपको 
यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक वतर्मान मȂ तो जजȗ की जो retirement age है, उसको बढ़ाने का कोई 
ĢÎताव सरकार क े पास िवचाराधीन नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी, आप पहले यह बताइए िक यह 'cooling period' क्या है?  यह मेरी समझ 
मȂ नहीं आया है। 
 
Ǜी अजुर्न राम मेघवाल: सर, आप तो संिवधान क े ज्ञाता हȅ और देश संिवधान से ही चलता है।  
संिवधान मȂ कोई 'cooling period' word है ही नहीं।  इन्हȗने मोदी जी की आलोचना करने क े िलए 
इसे ईजाद िकया है, और कोई िवषय नहीं है। मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक जहाँ तक सुĢीम कोटर् 
और हाई कोटर् क े िरटायडर् जज की बात है, तो ये जो statutory bodies बनी हȅ, क्या ये मोदी जी 
ने बनाई हȅ; ये tribunals बने हȅ, क्या ये मोदी जी ने बनाए हȅ?  ये देश मȂ पहले से ही हȅ।  आपने 
expert आदमी क े िलए योग्यताएँ तय की हुई हȅ िक हाई कोटर् का िरटायडर् जज होना चािहए या 
हाई कोटर् का चीफ जिÎटस होना चािहए या सुĢीम कोटर् का िरटायडर् जज होना चािहए।  अगर हम 
इनको भरȂगे ही नहीं, तो इनमȂ काम क ै से होगा? 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjour
ned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock,
 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
 $The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, we shall take up further consideration of the motion moved by 
Shri Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu on the 3 rd of December, 2024. On the 3 rd of 
December, 2024, Shri Raghav Chadha had concluded his speech while participating 
in the discussion. I now call upon the Members whose name s have been received for 
participation in the discussion.  Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel.  
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, मंतर्ी जी कहाँ हȅ! ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल (िबहार): मंतर्ी जी तो हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: नहीं, क ंसन्डर् मंतर्ी कहाँ हȅ! ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी सभापित: गजेन्दर् िंसह शेखावत जी िदख रहे हȅ न! ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, ये िसिवल एिवए
शन मȂ नहीं हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Government has collective responsibility. ...(Interruptions)... 
Oh my God!  What a scene!  That is great. The Minister has come from behind.  
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव (पिÌचमी बंगाल): सर, जयरामजी और रामजी मȂ अंडरÎटȅिंडग हो गई है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
$ Further discussion continued on a motion moved on 3rd December, 2024. 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
43

 
Ǜी सभापित: आज का िदन बड़ा शुभ है। जो अंडरÎटȅिंडग ऑनरेबल िमिनÎटर डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह 
की जयराम से थी, that was remarkable. And, now,  of course, we have smiling Mr. 
Naidu. Now, Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel.  
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: सर, मेरे िलए भी आज शुभ िदन है, क्यȗिक इतने िदनȗ मȂ आज पहली बार 
मुझे आपके  सामने बोलने का सौभाग्य ĢाÃत हुआ है।  इसिलए आज मेरे िलए भी शुभ िदन है। 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  So, your time is ten minut
es.   
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: सभापित महोदय, अपने मुझे वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 पर बोलने का अवसर 
िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपक ो  ǭदय से धन्यवाद देता हूँ, आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ। महोदय, यह 
िवधेयक क Ȃ दर् सरकार को िकसी भी िवमान या िवमान की Ǜेणी क े िलए िनयम बनाने और िवमान 
संचालन की सुरक्षा सुिनिÌचत करने का अिधकार देता है। इस का उǈेÌय सरकार को िकसी भी 
हवाई दुघर्टना या घटना की जाँच करने क े िलए िनयम बनाने का अिधकार देता है। इस िवधेयक मȂ 
वायुयान क े िडजाइन, िनमार्ण अनुरक्षण, अिधकार, उपयोग, संचालन, िबकर्ी, िनयार्त, आयात, 
िविनमयन और िनयंतर्ण तथा इससे संबंिधत मामलȗ का Ģावधान है।  
 महोदय, 201
4 क े बाद, जब से माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी देश की गǈी 
पर बैठे हȅ, उन्हȗने देश को संभाला है, भारत दुिनया मȂ तेजी से बढ़ ती  हुई अथर्ËयवÎथा बन गई है 
और उसी की बानगी है िक एिवएशन सेक्टर मȂ भी बहुत अभूतपूवर् िवकास हुए हȅ। 2014 क े पहले 
जहाँ पूरे भारत मȂ 74 एयरपोट्सर् थे, वहीं 2024 मȂ इनकी संख्या बढ़ कर 157 हो गयी है और 204 7 
तक, जब हमारा भारत दुिनया क े सामने िवकिसत राÍटर् क े रूप  मȂ खड़ा होगा, उस समय तक 
एयरपोट्सर् की संख्या को 350 से  400 तक  बढ़ाने का लÑय है। िपछले एक दशक मȂ घरेलू हवाई 
याितर्यȗ की संख्या दोगुनी से अि धक हो गई है तथा भारतीय एयरलाइंसेज़ ने अपने बेड़ȗ मȂ काफी 
िवÎतार िकया है। इस वृिǉ का आधार भारत सरकार की नीितयाँ और पहल हȅ। ऐसी ही एक पहल 
'क्षेतर्ीय संपकर् योजना' है। 'उड़े देश का आम नाग िरक - आरसीएस उड़ान', िजसे हमारी सरकार 
ने 2016 मȂ लाँच िकया था, िजसका उǈेÌय हवाई पिƺयȗ और हवाई अƿȗ क े पुनरुǉार क े माध्यम 
से देश क े उपेिक्षत और कम सेवा वाले हवाई अƿȗ को संपकर् Ģदा न  करना है।  
 महोदय, आज भारत मȂ 15 Ģितशत पायलट मिहलाएँ हȅ, जो िक वैिÌवक औसत से 5 
Ģितशत अिधक है। यह हमारी सरकार का नारी सशिƪकरण का एक बहुत बड़ा उदाहरण िवÌव 
क े सामने है।  
 महोदय, मोदी सरकार का एिवएशन सेक्टर पर फोकस का अंदाजा इस बात से लगाया 
जा सकता है िक भारत दुिनया का तीसरा सबसे बड़ा घरेलू एयरलाइंस माकȃ ट बन गया है। िपछले 
19 नवंबर, 2024 को देश मȂ िरकॉडर् एक िदन मȂ 4,56,910 याितर्यȗ ने घरेलू िवमान यातर्ाएं कीं, जो 
कोरोना काल क े औसत से लगभग 7.4% अिधक है। एिवएशन सेक्टर मȂ एक दशक मȂ हुई मजबूत 
गर्ोथ क े कारण अब भारत दुिनया का तीसरा सबसे बड़ा एिवएशन सेक्टर बन गया है। मौजूदा 
समय मȂ एिवएशन सेक्टर मȂ भारत िसफर् अमेिरका और चीन जैसे िवकिसत देशȗ से पीछे है। 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 महोदय, ओएजी डेटा क े मुतािबक, अĢैल, 2024 मȂ भारत 1.56 करोड़ सीटȗ की क्षमता क े 
साथ दुिनया का तीसरा बड़ा घरेलू एयरलाइंस बाजार हो गया है। अब तक 583 आरसीएस मागș 
पर पिरचालन शुरू  हो चुका है। वे 13 हेलीपोट्सर् और दो जल हवाई अƿȗ सिहत 86 हवाई अƿȗ को 
जोड़ते हȅ। इस योजना का लाभ लगभग 1.43 करोड़ से अिधक याितर्यȗ ने उठाया है। उड़ान 
योजना क े तहत अब तक 2.8 लाख से अिधक उड़ानȂ संचािलत की जा चुकी हȅ। इस योजना क े 
तहत देश मȂ हवाई अƿȗ क े िवकास क े िलए 4,500 करोड़ रुपय े आवंिटत िकए गए हȅ, िजनमȂ से 
लगभग 3,751 करोड़ रुपय े का उपयोग इसकी शुरुआत  से लेकर अब तक िकया जा चुका है। 
 महोदय, मȅ िबहार जैसे आकांक्षी राज्य से आता हूँ। वतर्मान समय मȂ Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने 
िबहार मȂ एक नया एयरपोटर् दरभंगा मȂ िदया है, िजससे उǄर िबहार क े लगभग 9 करोड़ लोगȗ को 
लाभ िमल रहा है और आने वाले समय मȂ सीमांचल का जो पूिर्णया क्षेतर् है, हमारी सरकार की 
योजना है िक वहां भी जÊद ही एक नये एयरपोटर् की  शुरुआत  की जाएगी।   
 महोदय, भारत मȂ िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ सीटȗ की संख्या 6.9% वािर्षक दर से बढ़ी है। इस 
दौरान, चीन की घरेलू एयरलाइंस सीटȗ की वृिǉ दर 6.3% रही है। अमेिरका और इंडोनेिशया क े 
घरेलू एयरलाइंस बाजार की भी लगभग यही िÎथित रही है। उड़ान 5.3 क े लॉन्च की घोषणा िंवग्स 
इंिडया, 2024 क े उǇाटन क े अवसर पर की गई है। वािणज्य, सामान्य और Ëयावसाियक िवमान 
तक फ ै ले इस कायर्कर्म का िवषय " अमृतकाल मȂ भारत को दुिनया से जोड़ना और 2047 मȂ 
भारतीय नागिरक उƿयन क े िलए मंच तैयार करना" था।  
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
महोदय, पुराने िनयम, जो िक 90 वषș से चले आ रहे हȅ, उनमȂ क ु छ पिरवतर्न करके  उन्हȂ 
समयानुरूप  बनाए जाने की आवÌयकता है, जो इस िबल क े माध्यम से होने जा रहा है। महोदय, 
िवमान अिधिनयम 1934 मȂ लाया गया था, िजसमȂ िपछले क ु छ वषș मȂ कई संशोधन िकए गए। इससे 
पहले भी कई बार इसमȂ संशोधन अिधिनयम शािमल िकए गए थे। उन संशोधनȗ ने नागिरक उƿयन 
महािनदेशालय ( डीजीसीए) और  नागिरक उƿयन सुरक्षा Åयूरो जैसे आंतिरक संगठनȗ क े 
कामकाज मȂ बहुत अिधक अÎपÍटता और िवरोधाभास पैदा िकया है, इसिलए भारतीय वायुयान 
िवधेयक आ जाने से बहुत से ĥमȗ को दूर करने मȂ मदद िमलेगी। 
 महोदय, भारत मȂ िवमानन िनयमȗ मȂ सुधार करने तथा िĤिटशकालीन वायुयान 
अिधिनयम,1934 को ĢितÎथािपत करने क े िलए भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 इस सदन मȂ 
पेश िकया गया है।  इस िबल का उǈेÌय िवमानन क्षेतर् मȂ सुरक्षा एवं िनगरानी बढ़ाने, िवकासात्मक 
जरूरतȗ को पूरा करने और अंतरराÍटर्ीय समझौतȗ क े Ģावधानȗ को Ģभावी बनाने क े िलए क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार को आवÌयक शिƪयां Ģदान करना है। महोदय, नए िबल मȂ सरकार ने िवमान की 
पिरभाषा बदल दी है, िजसमȂ गुÅबारे और ग्लाइडर को हटा िदया गया है।   
 महोदय, नए िबल मȂ िवमानन तंतर् की सुरक्षा क े िलए डीजीसीए, नागिरक उƿयन सुरक्षा 
Åयूरो एवं िवमान दुघर्टना जांच Åयूरो क े अिधकारȗ मȂ वृिǉ की गई है। इस िबल क े तहत िवमान मȂ 
रेिडयो संचार उपकरण क े उपयोग पर आयोिजत परीक्षा को डीजीसीए क े दायरे मȂ लाने का 
ĢÎताव िकया गया है। महोदय, सरकार ने एक िरलीफ क्लॉज़ भी पेश िकया है, जो यह सुिनिÌचत 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
45

करेगा िक िवमान िनयम, 1937 सिहत िपछले सभी रूÊस एंड रेगुलेशंस, जो लागू िकए गए थे, नए 
िबल क े तहत जारी िकए गए िनयमȗ क े अनुसार चलते रहȂगे, बशतȃ वे नए अिधिनयम क े साथ 
िवरोधाभास उत्पन्न न करȂ। 
 महोदय, इस िबल मȂ इंटरनेशनल िसिवल एिवएशन और िसिवल एिवएशन िसक्योिरटी से 
जुड़े अन्य मामलȗ से संबंिधत कन्वȂशन को लागू करने क े िलए िनयम बनाने हेतु क Ȃ दर् सरकार को 
शिƪयां Ģदान की गई हȅ, जैसे िशकागो कन्वȂशन, 1 944; अंतरार्Íटर्ीय दूरसंचार सÇमेलन, 1932; 
मैिडर्ड, 2022 क े नवीनतम संशोधन आिद।  
 महोदय, 90 साल की अविध मȂ िवमान अिधिनयम, 1934 मȂ अभी तक 21 बार संशोधन िकए 
गए हȅ। इन संशोधनȗ क े चलते िहतकारकȗ क े िलए उत्पन्न क ु छ ĥम और अÎपÍटताओं को दूर 
करने क े िलए अनावÌयक चीज़ȗ को हटाने और िवमान क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िविनमार्ण एवं देखभाल मȂ आसानी 
और ईज़ ऑफ ड ू इंग िबज़नेस क े िलए इस िबल को हमारी सरकार ने सदन मȂ पेश िकया है। 
महोदय, िपछले 10 वषș मȂ माननीय नरेन्दर् मो
दी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िवमानन क्षेतर् को सुदृढ़ और 
अिधक Ģभावशाली बनाया गया है। हमारी सरकार ने मेक इन इंिडया और आत्मिनभर्र भारत की 
पहल का हमेशा समथर्न िकया है और इसको ज़मीन पर उतारा है।  
 महोदय, इन शÅदȗ क े साथ मȅ पुन: इस िबल का Îवागत करते हुए अपनी वाणी को िव
राम 
देता हूं। जय-िहन्द, जय-भारत! धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shrimati Sagarika Ghose.  You have 11 minutes. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (West Bengal) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, this 
Government has a penchant for changing names. The Indian Penal Code has been 
changed to Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita. Now, the Indian Aircraft Act has been changed 
to Bhartiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024.  But there is nothing much that is new in the Bill.  
There is a change in name but nothing mu ch that is new. That is because this 
Government likes to think of itself as a ga me-changer Government.  But it is only a 
name-changer Government. Sir, why do so many laws have Hindi names?  This is 
imposition of Hindi. The mand ate of the people in 2024 wa s for the diversity dividend 
and for the federal principle. But the Government is persisting in the hindification of 
laws.  This is Hindi imposition.  ...(Interrupt
 ions)...  Sir, I refer to Article 348 of the 
Constitution.  ...(Interruptions)... ‘Any law made by Parliame nt or the Legislature of 
a State shall be in the English language.’ The Bill is actually a little too late.  The 
Government has delayed in bringing the Bill. On 21
st June, 2024, the TMC had 
pointed out the archaic nature of the Aircraft Act of 1934.  When it comes to outdated 
legislation, actually, here, I have to say something good about the Government, I am 
glad the Government is thinki ng about modernizing outdated  legislation. There are at 
least 10 to 15 Acts that need to be simila rly updated. However, the delay in bringing 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

this legislation has led to outdated regulatory frameworks, potentially jeopardized 
safety of passengers and stunted the industry's growth.   
 Sir, the first big problem with the Bill is that there is no provision for reasonable 
tariff in this Bill.  Airfares are literally sky high. What protection is there for the common 
people against relentless price rise of tickets? There is no provision for making tariff 
reasonable. The holiday season is coming. Invariably, prices of tickets will go up.  
What provision is there in the Bill to pr otect passengers from Su rge Pricing and huge 
spike in fares? I would like to know what mo dalities exist in this Bill to stop airlines 
from using their dominant market share to fleece common passengers. Today 
vegetable prices are at a 57-month high. Re tail inflation has surged by six per cent. 
Household budgets are under strain. Ho w can common citizens afford these 
exorbitant airfares? I would also like to say that the tendering process for airports and 
bidding must be made transparent. The process must not be hostage to this 
Government's characteristic of crony capitalism. One of th e top e-tendering States in 
the country today is Bengal. The Government should follow the Bengal model.  From 
ground to sky, there should be no mono polies. Today, in aviation, a state-owned 
monopoly has become a private-owned duop oly. Is this to the benefit of the 
passengers? We must ask this question.  Aviation must serve the common people, 
not just the maharaja class, not just the zamindar class.   
 Sir, this Bill gives overarching po wers to the Union Government. The 
Government has installed itself as the over seeing authority over three regulators, the 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
(BCAS) and the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB). 
 The Minister said that the Bill has changed the appeal system.  Appeals 
against an order of the DGCA or the BCAS will lie before the Central Government.  No 
further appeals will be allowed against the Central Government's orders. Therefore, 
the Government has the final word.  If all control is with the Government, who will 
check the Government's mistakes?  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आप  बैठ जाइए। 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE : These amendments should not be used as a tool by 
the Central Government to illegitimately ex pand the scope of its executive powers.  
The concentration of power raises grave co ncerns about potential misuse. The young 
Minister comes from a party which is stro ng in his State. He will understand when 
States are deprived  …(Interruptions)…  When States are deprived of a voice 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
47

…(Interruptions)…  When the Central Government is not mindful of the claims of a 
State …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Don’t disturb.  …(Interruptions)…  I will name you. Please 
sit down.   
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE:  Stop depriving States who oppose you politically.    
  
Ǜी उपसभापित : आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE : S i r ,  t h e  p r a c t i c e  o f  t h i s  G o v e r n m e n t  i s  n o t  t o  s e n d  
Bills for scrutiny to Standing Committees. The privatisation of Air India, leading to the 
transfer of its ownership in 2022, was not sent to a commi ttee for wider deliberations.  
Within private airlines, are safety norms be ing maintained? Cabin crews are made to 
share rooms on layovers and thus are not well rested for flights. This poses huge 
dangers for passenger security.  
 Sir, there are inadequate provisions  in this Bill for new technology. New 
technology like drones and issues involving the use of drones, such as aircraft 
targeting and surveillance, have not been provided in this Bill. We cannot leave 
regulation of new technology to delegated legislation.  It is important to expand the 
scope of the parent Act itself. This year , there have been 999 bomb threats, hoax 
bomb threats on Indian carriers. What provisio n is there in this Bill to deal with these 
kinds of technological threats?  The Minister spoke of pilot training.  But every year in 
winter, hundreds of flights are delayed due to fog.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, सीट पर बैठकर न बोलȂ। 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE : The main reason for flight di version is that pilots are 
not trained for operating CAT-III navigati on control system. What technology has 
been provided for in this Bill so that CAT-III can be adequately upgraded so that pilots 
can land in fog-bound airports?  Sir, there are some infrastructure issues.  More than 
56 accidents have taken place in the airline sector in the last five years until 2023. 
There have been around 11 cases of struct ural collapse and 10 cases of rainwater 
leakage across airports in India from 2019 to 2024.  For t
 he Airports Authority of India, 
civil works maintenance spending dropped from 11.9 per cent in financial year 2021 to 
8.5 per cent in financial year 2023. In GMR-led Delhi International Airport, funding on 
airport maintenance dropped from 4.9 per cen t in financial year 2022 to 4.4 per cent 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

in financial year 2023. This comes at a time when User Development Fee being 
charged from passengers is on the rise. There are 164 aeroplanes lying idle at airports 
of 15 major cities as of December 2023. This has been stated by the Government itself 
in Parliament.  The Minister said that there are 74 airports.  But how many of these 
airports are functional?  And how many airlin es do actually fly to these airports?  We 
have to ask that question. How many airports under UDAN scheme have been 
completed?   
 Sir, I want to make a point here. This  is important. It is about the moral 
economy of our country. Airlines have a public responsibility and a social 
responsibility. They must be encouraged to practise their corporate social 
responsibility. When people need to be moved for medical emergencies or for other 
emergencies, we must have flights on standby.  For example, there have been 244 
consequential train accidents between 2017 and 2022.  When there are train accidents 
or there are floods, airlines could operate more airlines at reasonable rates to fly 
people to the spot. Airlines should not seek to profit from disaster.  …(Interruptions)…  
  
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़, आप बैठ जाइए। 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE :  Airlines should not seek  t o  m a k e  p r o f i t  f r o m  t h e  
suffering of people by charging more rates, by charging higher fares, and by reducing 
capacity during a disaster. Sir, this is the moral, social, corporate and public 
responsibility of airlines.  
 Sir, I would like to say that safety  and accessibility for all must be the 
buzzwords. Air travel must be accessible to all and possess the highest safety 
standards as possibly as can be  met. Civil aviation must be people's aviation.  Not all 
of us can fly in Maharaja class. Civil avia tion must be the people's aviation; civil 
aviation must not just be for the billionaires. Thank you.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu; nine minutes.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:   माननीय  देरेक ओĤाईन जी एवं अन्य माननीय सदÎय, मȅ आप सभी क े िनवेदन 
करना चाहता हूं िक सदन की िÎथित यह है िक इधर से बोलते हȅ, तो उधर से हंगामा होता है, 
उधर से खड़े होते हȅ, तो इधर से हंगामा होता है, इसिलए मȅ आप सभी से करबǉ Ģाथर्ना करता हूं 
िक आप एक-दूसरे की बात को ध्यान से सुनȂ।  
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN (West Bengal) : Si
r, please give me only one minute. I need 
only one minute to make two quick points. We want the Chair to protect all of us, this 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
49

side and that side.  Please protect us. We want the Chair to protect us. Sitting at the 
desk, sitting in your Chair, and screaming is one. We are getting used to some new 
rules. When Zero Hour is three minutes, it is becoming six minutes. Protect us. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Nothing is going on record now.  देरेक ओĤाईन जी, आप 
बहुत विरÍठ सदÎय हȅ, मȅ आपसे कहना चाहूंगा और मȅ सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ से भी िनवेदन करता 
हूं िक इधर से खड़े होते हȅ, तो उधर से बोलते हȅ, उधर से खड़े होते हȅ, तो इधर से बोल ते हȅ। इसके  
िलए मेरा आप सभी से िनवेदन है। माननीय चेयरमैन साहब भी करते हȅ, मȅ भी आपसे बार-बार 
अनुरोध करता हूं। होता यह है िक एक Ëयिƪ खड़ा होता है, तो दूसरा Ëयिƪ बोलने क े िलए तत्पर 
है। ऐसे क ै से सदन चलेगा? चेयर िरक्
वेÎट कर सकती है and the Chair is doing that. You 
please speak. There is provision of translation.  Now, Dr. Kanimozhi. 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I require back 
my eleven minutes or whatever time it is. The Bharatiya Vayu yan Vidheyak, 2024 
seeks to replace the Aircraft Act 1934, wh ich has been amended 21 times and is 90 
years old. Before I start, I would like the Union Government to change the title of the 
Bill as Aircraft Bill, 2024. Don't try to impose Hindi on people who don't speak Hindi. I 
request the Union Government to refrain from naming the Bills in Hindi and Sanskrit. 
Sir, coming to the Bill, we do not manufact ure aircrafts; we do not own airports; we 
only own the Bill. The Bill seeks to promote aircraft manufacturing in India by 
regulating design, assembly technology an d other related aspects.  Unfortunately, 
India has not manufactured aircrafts on its own. The slogan ‘Make in India’ remains a 
slogan and ‘Stand-up India’ looks like a st and-up comedy. The last ten years of 
Modi-BJP rule has produced a lot of slogans, but a lot of them remains slogans only. 
Empty vessels make the most noise. Whatever was promised by the Union 
Government has not happened. India is st ill depending heavily on  the USA or France 
for the aviation sector.  Th e Bill gives the Union Government power to make rules for 
aircraft, secure the safety of aircraft operations and investigate air accidents.  
 Sir, from the beginning, the aviati on sector remains with the Union 
Government. The Director General of Civil Aviation, the Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India, the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security, the Airport Accident 
Investigation Bureau, the Airport Authority of India, the Pawan Hans Helicopter 
Limited and the Rajiv Gandhi National Avia tion University are already there with 
definite rules and regulations to follow. This Bill is just an old wine in the new bottle. 
The Ministr
y of Civil Aviation has lost its sheen due to the aggressive role given to 
private players. Because of this privatiz ation policy of the Government, we do not 
have a single Government carrier even toda y. Air India was sold at a throwaway price 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

and the airports are being given to the ‘A’ company. This is very unfortunate. 
Tomorrow, if there is a crisis to transport people from one destination to the other, the 
Government will have to beg with the private airliners whic h have become the 
monopoly in the aviation sector. At the mo ment, only the President of India and the 
Prime Minister are the two people who ha ve the luxury of travelling by their own 
Government aircraft. All others are dependent on private carriers for their air travels.  
Sir, drones have been included, but increased use of drones will raise new social 
concerns about privacy and surveillance.  The Bill does not provide sufficient 
safeguards. Drones are being used in se veral other areas like medicine, disaster 
management, land survey, surveillance as we ll as film and entertainment industry and 
also for general documentation. The Ministry of Civil Aviation should be able to cater 
to such a range of use of drones and technological advancements in the drone 
technology in the coming years.  
 Sir, India does not have an internationa l reputed flying school except the Rajiv 
Gandhi National Aviation University which needs a complete overhauling.  I don’t 
mean the name of the university. The shorta ge of quality pilots in the country would 
be on the rise.  The Government is using the outdated age old training methods for 
pilot training.  Advanced countries are using Virtual Reality and Simulative Technology 
to impart excellent training to pilots to know  finer details of the functioning of aircraft 
and aviation technology.  But India lags very much behind in this area.  I would 
request the hon. Minister to look into this matter of pilot training as he belongs to the 
young blood.  High-density cameras can be  fixed on the sensor s of aircraft for 
smooth landing and take-off during foggy  season.  This proposed Bill must 
incorporate a provision for regulated ai r eco-system to monitor and prevent the 
tendency of profit-making.  At the moment, we need more airports and more airlines.  
But the worrisome fact is that the monopoly is going into the hands of only two or 
three people and 80 per cent of the total ai r passenger traffic is only with the three 
companies.  We all know what the ill effect s of monopoly are.  I think the Minister 
should look into this.  
 Another important issue is the dynamic ai rfare of the airlines which makes life 
miserable for the common people who want to  book air ticket for an urgent work.  
While booking tickets, it shows one fare, by  the time we go, we get another fare.  
Such is the design of the companies in th e systems.  This does  not happen with the 
railways.  It is not like a betting game that you fix airfares. So, this betting should be 
curbed.    
 Another important problem with Indian airp orts is the exorbitant prices of food 
items including water bottles.  I request the ho n. Minister to look into this issue. One 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
51

litre water bottle costs nearly  Rs.20 outside but inside th e airport the same one costs 
around Rs.100 or Rs.150 at some airports. One plate of idli costs around Rs.50 
outside and inside the airport, it is Rs.250 or Rs.300. The food courts inside airports 
charge exorbitant prices where the common pe ople are not able to reach. They have 
to think twice or thrice even before they have to quench their thirst and their hunger.   
 Sir, as far as the State of Tamil Nadu is concerned, the Aviation Minister has 
not provided the due attention in spite of our repeated requests.  Tamil Nadu is the 
most developed State in the country which attracts international and domestic 
passengers for multi varied reasons, from  business, trade and commerce, medical 
treatment, pilgrimage and tourist interests.  At the moment, we have international 
airports operational in Chennai, Madurai,  Tiruchirapalli and Coimbatore. Domestic 
airports at Thoothukudi, the airports at Salem, Vellore, Neyveli are not utilized 
properly by the Civil Aviation Ministry to it s potential. At Tiruchirapalli, Madurai and 
Coimbatore, more connectivity is required. More so, Tiruchirapalli, which was 
recently inaugurated with such a huge space, we  require direct flig hts from Trichy to 
Delhi to connect many people. 
 Our hon. Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu , Thalapathy M.K. Stalin has announced 
the desire of Tamil Nadu Government to esta blish an International Airport at Hosur.  
The Union Government should take up th e matter immediately to take all possible 
steps to establish an International Airport at Hosur.   
 There is a huge potential in Tamil Nadu for the introduction of air taxies 
connecting the Tier 2 and 3 cities as well as  with Chennai.  Therefore, I request the 
Union Minister for Aviation to take necessary steps to oper ate the air taxi services in 
Tamil Nadu.  Thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity.         
                                    
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, दो माननीय विरÍठ सदÎयȗ की सूचना है िक उन्हȂ सिमित 
की बैठक क े िलए जाना है। माननीय सभापित ने अनुमित दी है, इसिलए पहले मȅ उन्
 हȂ बुलाता हूं। 
माननीय घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी। आपके  पास 15 िमनट हȅ। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 
2024 पर बोलना Ģारंभ करने से पहले, मȅ हमारे माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय को धन्यव
 ाद दूँगा िक वे 
Îवयं तेलुगू भाषी हȅ और उन्हȗने भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक पेश िकया है। इसके  िलए उन्हȂ बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 मȅ दूसरी बात यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक यह नाम िंहदी मȂ आना िकसी Ģकार से िकसी भाषा 
को थोपने का Ģयत्न नहीं है। हमारे संिवधान क े िनयमȗ मȂ Ģावधान है िक िंहदी मȂ पूरा कानून भी 
आए और उसक
ा ऑथराइज्ड इंिग्लश वज़र्न है, तो उसे उसी Ģकार माना जाएगा, िजस Ģकार से 
वह िंहदी मȂ है। अगर वह अंगर्ेजी मȂ आए और उसक
ा ऑथराइज्ड िंहदी वजर्न है, तो उसे भी उसी 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ģकार माना जाएगा। यह जो भावना थी, काँगर्ेस क े माननीय सदÎय, नािसर साहब इस पर बोले थे 
िक यह ‘यान’ शÅद बोला नहीं जाता है। अब यह गले मȂ क्यȗ अटक रहा है, मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आ 
रहा है, क्यȗिक यह अटकना नहीं चािहए। यह अटकना नहीं चािहए। भारत शÅद, यान शÅद का 
अटकना गुलामी की मानिसकता का पिरचायक है। इसिलए यह जो 1934 का िवधेयक था या 
उससे पहले का जो िवधेयक था, उसको हटाकर भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 लाया गया है।  
औपिनवेिशक और गुला मी  की मानिसकता क े सारे जो कानून हȅ, एनडीए सरकार उन कानूनȗ को 
बदलकर नए कानून ला रही है, उसी Ǜृंखला मȂ यह कानून लाया गया है।   उस समय जब यह 
कानून बना था, उसमȂ 20 धाराए ं थीं और अब तक इसकी 21 धाराओं मȂ 21 बार संशोधन हो चुका 
है। उस एयरकर्ाÄट एक्ट को आगे तक घसीटते रहȂ, इसका कोई मतलब नहीं था, इसिलए यह 
कानून लाया गया है।  मȅ इसका Îवाग
त करता हूं।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, वह कानून क ेवल Ģचलन क े संबंध मȂ था। यह जो कानून है, 
यह िविनमार्ण करना, रख-रखाव कर
ना, Ģोडक्शन करना, Ģचलन करना और उसको सब Ģकार 
से िनयंितर्त करने का कानून है। यह एक पूणर्त: सवार्ंगीण कानून है, िजसमȂ सब Ģकार की 
ËयवÎथाएं की गई हȅ। मेक इन इंिडया क े अंतगर्त अगर िकसी Ģक
ार का भी काम Ģारंभ करना हो, 
तो उसके  िलए कानून की आवÌयकता होती है। इसिलए उस Ģकार का कानून यहां पर बनाया 
गया है।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ एक िवषय से अपनी बात Ģारंभ करना चाहत ा हूं। जब 
इस Ģकार क े कानून आते हȅ, तो उन कानूनȗ पर बहस न करके  यहां पर अन्य मुǈȗ पर बहस की 
जाती है। मȅ उसके  संबंध मȂ क ु छ जव ाब  देना चाहता हूं। इसी सदन मȂ इसके  साथ माननीय मोदी जी 
को जोड़ा गया, मोदी जी क े नाम का बार-बार उÊलेख िकया और िकसी क े साथ िकया गया।  मȅ 
इसमȂ एक बात कहना चाहता हूं िक भारत की बढ़ती हुई िÎथित - चाहे हवाई यातायात बढ़ रहा है 
या भा
रत की आिर्थक िÎथित बढ़ रही है, िजससे भारत की जीडीपी बढ़ रही है और हम पांचवीं से 
चौथी बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा की ओर जा रहे हȅ - उस समय भारत क े बाहर इस Ģकार क े लोग भी हȅ, 
जो चाहते हȅ िक भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा नहीं बढ़े। वे चाहते हȅ िक भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ रुकावट  
पैदा की जाए।  जॉजर् सोरोस नाम का एक आदमी है, उसके  सोसȃज़ भारत मȂ भी हȅ। वह कई बार 
िंहडनबगर् क े माध्यम से हमला करता है और कई बार अमेिरका की िकसी फ ेडरल एजȂसी क े 
माध्यम से हमला करता है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित:  आप बड़े अनुभवी है।  मȅ आपसे अनुरोध करता हूं िक आप िवषय पर बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी:  मȅ अनुभव क े आधार पर ही कह रहा हूं। मȅ अनुभव क े आधार पर या जो मȅने 
सुना है, उसी पर अपनी बात कह रहा हूं।  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित:  आप रूल  110 क े तहत िबल पर बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी:  जी, मȅ आप
की  आज्ञा का पालन करूं गा। यह िकसी Ģकार से भी उिचत 
नहीं है िक डमरू  बजे अमेिरका मȂ और नाचने लगे भारत क े बाजारȗ मȂ। इसिलए मȅ चाहता हूं िक 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
53

इस Ģकार का Ģयत्न करके  कोई आदमी भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा को िगराना चाहेगा, तो वह िगरेगी 
नहीं। जब से मोदी जी आए हȅ, हमने यह देखा है िक 133.85 लाख लोगȗ ने ‘ उड़ान’ योजना क े 
अंतगर्त उड़ान भरी है। अभी वे कह रहे थे िक ‘उड़ान’ का क्या हुआ?  मȅ बताना चाहत ा हूं िक हमने 
उड़ान का पिरणाम हिरयाणा मȂ देखा और उड़ान का पिरणाम महाराÍटर् मȂ भी देखा, वहां उड़ गए 
थे, तो यह एक उड़ान ही है। यह उड़ान बहुत बड़ी हो गई है।  उड़ा न योजना मȂ हवाई अƿे भी बढ़े 
और उनकी संख्या 49 से 145 तक हो गई।    
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  आप िवषय पर बोिलए।   
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी:  यही िवषय है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  यह आप अच्छी तरह से जानते हȅ और मȅ पुन: आपसे िबल पर बोलने क े िलए 
आगर्ह करता हूं।  
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी:  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ िव
षय-वासना से िबÊकु ल दूर हूं।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  आप िबल पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी:  मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक जो यह भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक आया है, 
इसमȂ िजस Ģकार की ËयवÎथाएं की गई हȅ, िजस Ģकार की संरचना की गई है और आज तक जो 
काम हुआ है, तो मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक ऐसा कभ
ी आज तक िकसी सरकार ने तय नहीं िकया िक 
2,500 रुपय े से ज्यादा Ģित िकलोमीटर क े रूप  मȂ कोई िक राया चाजर् नहीं होगा।  इसकी भी 
ËयवÎथा की गई है। यहां पर हवाई अƿे िनमार्ण की चचार् नहीं हुई, बिÊक यह चचार् हुई िक एक 
हवाई अƿे क े बाहर का कोई िटन शेड हवा से िगर गया। िकसी ने कहा िक इंिदरा गांधी एयरपोटर् 
क े ऊपर एक िटन शेड िगर गया। क ु छ बातȂ इस Ģकार की हȅ, िजनको अगर हम ध्यान करȂगे, तो 
हम चाहȂगे िक हर कानून मȂ हमȂ इसे देखना चािहए। अभी भारतीय न्याय संिहता की बात भी आ 
गई। िजतने कानून चȂज हुए हȅ, उनमȂ 1,500 से अिधक कानून गुलामी की दाÎतान क े Ģतीक थे।  
उनको हम खींचते रहे, ढोते रहे। हो सकता है, 30-40 वषर् तक सरकार रही हो, िजसका 
Îवािभमान नहीं जगा हो, लेिकन यह राÍटर्ीय Îवािभमान की सरकार है। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े बारे मȂ 
उँगली उठाने वालȗ को सोचना चािहए िक उनका जीवन तप: पूणर् जीवन है, भारत क े सवार्ंगीण 
िवकास क े िलए उनका जीवन है और सवार्ंगीण िवकास मȂ यह भी आता है िक मध्यम वगर् क े लोग 
अत्यिधक सÎती यातर्ा, सुरिक्षत यातर्ा कर सकȂ ।  उसका भी इसके  अंदर Ģबंध िकया गया है।   
 अब कई बार कई लोगȗ को यह बात अटकती है िक मोदी-मोदी बार-बार करते हȅ, िकसी 
सभा मȂ करते हȅ। उसकी आलोचना करने से कोई फायदा नहीं है, क्यȗिक िजस Ëयिƪ ने यह दृढ़ 
िनÌचय कर रखा है िक मुझे भारत को आत्मिनभर्र बनाना है और 2047 तक भारत को िवकिसत 
राÍटर् बनाना है, उस Ëयिƪ पर इन बातȗ का कोई असर नहीं होगा।  वे अपना सीधा राÎता देख कर 
चल रहे हȅ। उसी Ģिकर्या मȂ ये सारे कानून भी आ रहे हȅ और ये िनयम भी आ रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी उपसभापित: ितवाड़ी जी, आप बोिलए। आपस मȂ बात नहीं किरए, Ãलीज़।  अभी सदन ने 
discuss िकया है िक माननीय सदÎय सीट पर बैठ कर न बोलȂ। Ãलीज़, मȅ सभी पक्षȗ से यह आगर्ह 
करता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... ितवाड़ी डी, आप इधर देख कर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी: उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपकी तरफ ही देख रहा हूँ।  उधर तो कभी 
थोड़ा-थोड़ा कटाक्ष कर देता हूं, बाकी देख आपकी तरफ ही रहा हूं। 
 इस िवधेयक मȂ अत्यिधक सावर्जिनक सुरक्षा सुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए िवधायी तंतर् Îथािपत 
करने का Ģावधान रखा गया है।  ऐसी िचन्ताओं को दूर करने का Ģावधान है। यहाँ तकलीफ इस 
बात की हो गई िक दो क ंपिनयȗ क े पास ही 70 परस Ȃट एिवएशन है, सारा काम वे करती हȅ। अब 
इंिडगो और एयर इंिडया ने 1,500 नए िवमान खरीदने का आदेश िदया है। यह बड़ी अच्छी बात है 
और बहुत खुशी की बात है। इसका सत्कार करना चािहए, इसका आदर करना चािहए, लेिकन 
वह नहीं करते!  सबसे पहले ये जो भारत क े वेÊथ िकर्एटसर् हȅ, जो भारत क े िलए संपदा का िनमार्ण 
करते हȅ, उनकी आलोचना करते हȅ। अब इंिडगो और एयर इंिडया ने अगर 1,500 िवमान खरीदने 
का आदेश िदया है, तो वे आएँगे, उनका Îवागत करना चािहए। अगर भारत की कोई क ंपनी बढ़ती 
है, िवदेश मȂ जाती है, काम करती है, उसकी संपदा बढ़ती है, तो उसका Ģयत्न करना चािहए।  
इन्हȗने इंिडगो की आलोचना की, इसिलए मȅ एक बात कहना चाहता हूं। जब हमारा बचपन था, 
उस समय कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की सरकार थी, उस समय हमको पढ़ाया जाता था िक घनÌयाम दास जी 
िबड़ला ने भारत क े औǏोिगक िनमार्ण मȂ यह काम िकया; हमको पढ़ाया जाता था िक जमशेदजी 
टाटा ने टाटा की एयर क ंपनी बनाई, उसके  बाद उसको भारत सरकार ने ले िलया, अब वह वापस 
टाटा क े पास चली गई। ये हमको पढ़ाते थे, लेिकन यहां पर आज वेÊथ िकर्एटसर् की आलोचना हो 
रही है। जो भारत क े िलए संपदा का िनमार्ण करते हȅ, उनकी आलोचना का ठेका लेने का काम 
कांगर्ेस पाटीर् ने ले िलया है, तािक िकसी Ģकार से भारत का औǏोिगक िवकास नहीं हो। आपके  
माध्यम से मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक इन्हȗने उड़ान योजना का मजाक उड़ाया।  इतने लोगȗ ने जब 
यहां पर सारा काम कर िलया, ...(Ëयवधान)... उपसभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... एयरपोट्सर् 
149 हो गए। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आपस मȂ बात न करȂ, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... आपस मȂ कोई बात नहीं करȂ।  
आप बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी: उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ एक िनवेदन यह करना चाहता हूं िक इन्हȗने िजस 
Ãलेन को 20 बार टेक ऑफ करने की कोिशश कर ली और वह टेक ऑफ नहीं होता, वापस धरती 
पर ही आ जाता है, तो वह क्या हवाई अƿे का करेगा और क्या हव ाई पƺी का करेगा! 
...(Ëयवधान)... ये जबदर्Îती उसको टेक ऑफ कर रहे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप िवषय पर बोिलए।  आप लोग आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। 
 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
55

Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी: वे अभी कह रहे थे िक गर्ाउंडेड है, तो गर्ाउंडेड है। उपसभापित महोदय, 
भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक मȂ 43 Ģावधान हȅ। इसमȂ 21 क े बजाय 43 Ģावधान हȅ और इनको अलग-
अलग िवभागȗ मȂ बांटकर बनाया गया है। इसमȂ सुरक्षा क े िलए अलग ËयवÎथा की गई है, िनमार्ण क े 
िलए अलग ËयवÎथा की गई है और याितर्यȗ की सुिवधा क े िलए अलग ËयवÎथा की गई है।  
िशकागो सÇमेलन मȂ भारत भी िहÎसेदार था और भारत हÎताक्षर कर
ने वाला था। तो अंतरर ाÍटर्ीय 
नागिरक उƿयन क े िहसाब से और िशकागो सÇमेलन क े िहसाब से अपने िनयमȗ मȂ पिरवतर्न करना 
आवÌयक था, इसिलए इस कानून क े माध्यम से उन िनयमȗ मȂ भी पिरवतर्न िकया गया है।  इसी 
Ģकार से सुरक्षा क े साधनȗ मȂ यहाँ जो संरचना थी िक जब पहले एयरपोटर् पर जाते थे तो सीधे चले 
जाते थे, लेिकन अब वह
ां पर जाने क े िलए अनेक Ģकार की आवÌयकताएं हो गई हȅ।  आम 
नागिरक को उसमȂ असुिवधा नहीं हो, उसको सुिवधा िमले, वह िडिजटल हो और इस Ģकार क े 
कानून की Ëय
वÎथा हो, उन सारे कामȗ की ËयवÎथा इस भारतीय वायुयान अिधिनयम मȂ की गई है। 
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक भारत ने जो Îपीड 
पकड़ी है, नए-नए कानून लाकर कानूनȗ मȂ पिरव
तर्न करने का जो काम िकया है, वह इस भारत 
को 2047 तक हर क्षेतर् मȂ 'िवकिसत भारत' बनाने का काम करेगा।  अगर भारत की आिर्थक िÎथित 
ठीक होगी, मध्यम वगर् का िवक ास  होगा, वे लोग अिधक से अिधक हवाई यातर्ा करȂगे, तो उनके  
िलए सारी ËयवÎथाएं करनी हȅ। अब भारत मȂ उसका िनमार्ण करना आवÌयक है, उसके  पाट्सर् का 
िनमार्ण करना आवÌयक है, उसकी सारी गितिविधयȗ का संचालन करना आवÌयक है। उन सारे 
कामȗ को संतुिलत करने क े िलए और एकीकृ त करने क े िलए तथा ËयविÎथत करने क े िलए यह 
कानून लाया गया है। मȅ इसका समथर्न करता हूं और सदन से यह Ģाथर्ना कर
ता हूं िक इस कानून 
को पास िक या जाए। मȅ मंतर्ी जी को पुन: धन्यवाद दूंगा िक इन्हȗने भारतीय वायुयान अिधिनयम 
लाने का काम िकया है।   
 जहां तक भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार की बात है, वह िकसी भाषा से ǎेष नहीं 
करती, एनडीए भी नहीं करता, भारत की िज तनी भाषाएं हȅ, हम उनको राÍटर्भाषा मानते हȅ।  
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने खुद कहा है िक Tamil is ancient language.  यह िवÌव की सबसे Ģाचीन भाषा 
है।  अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने भी यह कहा था, सभी यह कहते हȅ। तो हमारा िकसी पर भाषा 
थोपने का का
म नहीं है, िकसी भाषा को नीचा िदखाने का काम नहीं है, राÍटर्ीय भावना से ओत-
Ģोत होकर, गुलामी की िनशानी को िमटाने क े िलए कानून लाए जा रहे हȅ। मȅ इसका समथर्न 
करता हूं। आपने समय से पहले बो लने क े िलए मुझे जो समय िदया, इसके  िलए आपके  Ģित 
आभार। बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद, नमÎकार। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपको भी धन्यवाद िक आपने अपने आबंिटत समय से कम समय मȂ अपनी Îपीच 
खत्म की।  Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन। 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूँ िक आपने 
मुझे भारतीय वायुयान िव
धेयक, 2024 पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है।  
 उपसभापित जी, अभी यह कहा गया िक बहुत तेजी क े साथ नए हवाई अƿे बन रहे हȅ और 
सरकार बहुत तेजी क े सा
थ काम कर रही है।  महोदय, 2013 मȂ एक कानून बना था, इसी संसद ने 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

वह कानून बनाया था िक अगर कोई संÎथा िकसानȗ की जमीन का अिधगर्हण करती है, तो उसे 
सिर्कल रेट का चार गुना िकसानȗ को देना होगा।  महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ िदÊली से लगा हुआ 
जेवर एयरपोटर् काफी िदनȗ से बन रहा है।  मुझे बहुत तकलीफ क े साथ कहना पड़ता है िक िजन 
िकसानȗ की जमीन का अि
धगर्हण िकया गया था, उसमȂ पहले चरण का मुआवजा तो िकसानȗ को 
िमल गया, लेिकन अभी दूसरे और तीसरे चरणȗ का मुआवजा िकसानȗ को नहीं िम ला  है, वह 
िचन्ता का िवषय क्या है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन :  क्या हो गया? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... आपस मȂ बात नहीं कीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप अपनी बात बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सर, अगर ये Ëयवधान पैदा करȂगे, तो मȅ क ै से बोल सकता हूँ? 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: क ृपया आप बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: आप क्या कहना चाहते हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित : माननीय रामजी लाल सुमन जी, क ृपया आप इधर देख कर बोलȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... आपका समय खत्म हो रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... और कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं 
जा रही है, क ृपया आप अपनी बात कहȂ। 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: उपसभापित जी, मेरे कहने का मतलब यह है िक अभी िक सानȗ का 
आंदोलन चल रहा है, जगह-जगह तनाव है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय रामजी लाल सुमन जी, मȅ आपसे आगर्ह करता हूं िक आप िवषय पर 
बोलȂ।  
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करन
 ा 
चाहता हूँ िक जहाँ-जहाँ हवाई अƿȗ क े िलए िकसानȗ की जमीन अिधगृहीत की गई है, वहां-वहां 
उनको तत्काल मुआवजा िदए जाने की आवÌयकता है।   
 उपसभापित जी, अभी वायुयान की उड़ानȗ क े संबंध मȂ कह ा गया। उड़ानȗ की संख्या 
िकतनी बढ़ी है, यह तो मȅ नहीं जानता। लेिकन मȅ आगरा मȂ रहता हूँ, वहाँ से जो उड़ानȂ शुरू  की 
गई थीं, वे उड़ानȂ भी बंद हो गई हȅ। इसी तरह से भोपाल की उड़ा न बंद हो गई, लखनऊ की उड़ान 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
57

बंद हो गई। अहमदाबाद मȂ कपड़े का काम होता है, तमाम लोग अहमदाबाद जाना चाहते हȅ, 
इसिलए अहमदाबाद क े िलए उड़ान की आवÌयकता है, लेिकन वहाँ क े िलए उड़ान शुरू  नहीं हुई 
है। मेरा आपके  माफर् त माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह िनवेदन है िक जहाँ-जहाँ उड़ानȗ की आवÌयकता 
है या जहाँ पर और उड़ानȂ शुरू  करने की आवÌयकता है, वहां क े िलए उड़ानȗ की शुरुआत  की 
जाए।  इसके  साथ ही जो उड़ानȂ बंद हो गई हȅ, उनके  बारे मȂ समीक्षा की जाए और नई उड़ा नȂ शुरू  
की जाएँ। ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपका समय पूरा हो गया है, इसिलए अब आप खत्म करȂ। 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: उपसभापित जी, मȅ दो िमनट मȂ अपनी बात खत्म कर रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित: नहीं, नहीं, दो िमनट नहीं, आपके  तीन िमनट थे, जो ऑलरेडी खत्म हो गए हȅ, 
इसिलए क ृपया आप खत्म करȂ। 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: उपसभापित जी, मȅ खत्म कर रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अंितम लाइन। 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन : उपसभापित जी, मȅ आप
 के  माध्यम से यह आगर्ह करना चाहता हूं  िक यह 
सरकार बहुत तेजी से हवाई अƿे बना रही है, लेिकन यह उतनी ही तेजी से हवाई अƿȗ को बेच भी 
रही है। सरकार सरकारी उपकर्मȗ को तेजी से बेच रही है। ...(समय की घं टी)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप िवषय पर बोलȂ, वही िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा। आप रूÊस जानते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... चूँिक आपका समय ऑलरेडी खत्म हो गया है, इसिलए मȅ दूसरे सदÎय को कॉल 
कर रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सर, आधा िमनट। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: नहीं, नहीं। माननीय एस. िनरंजन रेƿी जी।   
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) :  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, before I 
commence my address, I want to congratulate the entire House because I find this 
very fruitful that we are able to sit here  and discuss this important Bill. I want to 
compliment each and every Member for enabling the House to continue. Sir, I then 
want to start congratulating the hon. Minister who comes from the same State that I 
represent. He is a dear friend and he is a young dynamic person. I wish him the best. 
I want him to contribute the best to the country and particularly to our State. Sir, I 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

have limited time, I have only seven minutes  to speak today. But, I wanted to touch 
upon one very important issue. Sir, I want to make a distinction with regard to the 
nomenclature of the Act, not on the basis that this is an imposition of Hindi language.  
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) in the Chair.] 
 
I want all my friends from the Treasury Benche s to be kindly attentive, I am making a 
very constructive suggestion. Please do not tr eat this as an opposition to Hindi or an 
imposition of Hindi. I like Hi ndi, I can speak a bit of Hindi,  but I have a very important 
point to make. Madam, the point I am making  is Article 348(1)(b) continues to exist 
in the Constitution of India, if I may just re fer to it. I thought I will start with this book, 
but, I thought my friends in  the Treasury Benches might have a problem with this 
book. So, I have kept this aside. I have br ought a different Constitution. Sir, I have 
brought a different book. I think the hon. Mi nister like the color of this book better. 
Please understand that I am coming from a very constructive space; this is not 
criticism. I just want my friends to be open to listen to a legal point. I am a lawyer by 
profession. Sir, Article 348 deals with the la nguage to be used for Acts and Bills, in 
Supreme Court and High Courts, and Article 348 (1) says, ‘Notwithstanding anything 
in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides’- 
Clause (b) says ‘the authoritative texts-  (i) of all Bills to be introduced or 
amendments thereto to be moved in either House of the Parliament or in the House of 
either House of the Legislature of a State’.  
 The last part says, ‘shall be in English la nguage’. Sir, this issue came up when 
we passed the criminal law Bills. In fact, I had supported the criminal law Bills. The 
only suggestion I had was that the titles  -- Bharatiya Nyaya Samhita, Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Samhita and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam –  should be in English, 
along with Hindi because the Constitution requires the au thoritative text to be in 
English. The Government was advised.  And,  the reason given to the House was that 
they had obtained an opinion.  And, the opinion says, the authoritative text can be in 
English language, ‘title’ will not be a part of  the authoritative text , therefore, title can 
be in Sanskrit or Hindi. 
 Madam, I have verified thereafter. I have done a lot of research. Now, 
‘authoritative text’ has been understood, both under the Constitution and subsequent 
laws made by this Parliament, to mean not what the title is. ‘Authoritative text’ means 
whatever is contained in the Bill. An English Bill will have everything in English. 
Constitution provides that this can be translated in Hindi. It specifically provides that it 
shall be translated in Hindi. Article 394A says every act, हर वह कानून, जो पािर्लयामȂट मȂ 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
59

लाया जाता है, please excuse my Hindi.  I am trying to speak; I am trying to convince 
the maximum number of people that I am not anti-Hindi. I can speak Hindi and I will 
try to speak Hindi. Every law that is brought before the Parliament, that needs to be 
translated in an authoritative te xt in Hindi. If the criminal law Bills retained IBC, or in 
this case, if the law retain ed the word ‘Aircraft Act’, तो आिर्टकल 394A मȂ जो टर्ांसलेशन 
होगा, उसमȂ "भारतीय वायुयान अिधिनयम" नाम आ सकता है।  मगर, जब तक कॉिन्ÎटǷूशन मȂ 
यह आिर्टकल है, आप इंिग्लश िबल मȂ िंहदी या संÎकृ त वड्सर् यूज़ करȂगे, we are now going to 
have the possibility of a constitutional court, a High Court or the Supreme Court, 
striking down this part, saying that this  part is unconstituti onal because Article 
348(i)B requires authoritative text to be in  English. Yes, the Parliament can have an 
authoritative text in Hindi also. Entirety of th at authoritative text can be in Hindi. In the 
‘title’, every single word, every single syllabl e can be in Hindi.  Madam, if I may just 
show this Bill, in the prelim inary section, it says, this Bill shall be called ‘Bharatiya 
Vayuyan Vidheyak’. So, it uses Hindi words. Now, this is a mistake we have made in 
the criminal laws.  Now, apart from these two articles that I have brought, originally, it 
was contemplated in the Constitution that this will be an arrangement that will be 
made only for 15 years. 15 साल मȂ िंहदी को इस िÎथित मȂ लाया जाएगा िक भारत मȂ शायद 
सब लोग िंहदी बोलना शुरू  करȂगे। ... (समय की घंटी)... मैडम, यह एक इंपॉटȄट टॉिपक है, अगर 
आप बोलȂगी िक मुझे बैठना है, तो मȅ बैठ जाता हूँ, मगर मȅ आपसे िवनती करता हूं। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  You have thirty 
seconds. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY:  Madam, I have waited for two days, I am making a very 
important contribution, but I am in your hands. If you want me to stop, I can stop, but 
I think I may be able to assist the House. I am not trying to speak for myself; I am 
trying to speak for 56 per cent of the Indian population which does not have Hindi as a 
mother tongue; of course, not to oppose. Pl ease give me four or five minutes more, I 
will not waste even one minute.   
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) :  Please conclude 
within one minute.  
 
SHRI S.  NIRANJAN REDDY: Now, 15 years was the original time stipulated. The 
Parliament realised that in 15 years, we ha ve not been able to elevate Hindi to that 
level. Now that is our fault, if we have not been able to elevate Hindi to that level 
where everybody can understand it . The Parliament then said, “We recognise this 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

fact”. In 1963, we brought the Official Lang uages Act. Very importantly, two years 
prior to 15 years coming to an end because we understood that we are not in that 
position. This Act, Madam, comes into force on 26 th of January, 1965,  exactly 15 
years after the Constitution.  In this, it was written that until law were to be made 
otherwise, the provisions with regard to th e Bills in English, being in English, will 
continue. This provided, -- apart from Hindi, which is there in 394A, that is a separate 
clause that every Bill will be translated into Hi ndi-- that it will also  be translated into 
all the official languages which are a part of  the Schedule.  So, Madam, the point that 
I am making is, बाद मȂ भी, we made one Authoritative Texts (Central Laws) Act.  
Simple converse example आप देख लीिजए। 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) : Thank you, hon. 
Member. 
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY: Madam, I will just say one last sentence. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK):  Hon. Member, 
Shri Brij Lal. 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने मुझे भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 
पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसिलए मȅ आपका आभारी हूं। हमारे यशÎ
 वी Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी ने अमृत महोत्सव की शुरुआत  करते समय कहा था, देशवािसयȗ को आÌवासन िदया था िक 
िजतने गुलामी क े िनशान हȅ, उन गुलामी क े िनशानȗ को िमटा दȂगे। इसी कर्म मȂ सबसे पहले 164 
वषर् पुराने कानून आईपीसी, 1872 का एिवडȂस एक्ट और 1898 का  जो सीआरपीसी था, उनको 
बदल कर भा
रतीय न्याय संिहता, भारतीय नागिरक सुरक्षा संिहता और भारतीय साÑय अिधिनयम 
बनाए गए, जो 1 जुलाई, 2024 से लागू हो गए हȅ।  अभी 3 िदसंबर, 2024 को हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
और गृह मंतर्ी जी चंडीगढ़ गए थे, जहां उन्हȗने इन कानूनȗ का लाइव Ģदशर्न देखा।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, इसी तरह से यह जो हमारा ए
यरकर्ाÄट एक्ट है, यह 1934 का है, 
यह 90 वष र् पहले का कानून है। महो दया , 90 वष र् पुराने अंगर्ेज़ȗ क े कानून थे, उनमȂ अब तक कई 
संशोधन हो चुक े थे। महोदया, उसी Ģकार का हमने एक सफे द पायजामा बनाया, उसे पहनȂगे, वह 
लकालक रहेगा, लेिकन उसमȂ इतने नीले, पीले और हरे पैचेज़ लग गए िक पता चला िक वह 
पहनने लायक ही नहीं रह
ा है। वह तो सकर् स क े जोकर की तरह हो गया। इसी तरह से यह 1934 
का जो एक्ट था, जहां 21 पैचेज़ लग गए थे, तो उसको बदलना बहुत ज़रूरी था। यह भारतीय 
वायुयान िवधेयक का उǈेÌय है।  हम 1934 क े एक्ट क े Îथान पर भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक को ला 
रहे हȅ, िजसका मकसद नागिरक उƿयन क्षेतर् मȂ कानूनी िविनयमन  को सरल और Ģभावी बनाना 
है। अपने कायर्काल मȂ मोदी जी ने 2000 से अिधक गुलामी क े कानूनȗ को समाÃत िकया है और 
उसी कड़ी मȂ यह जो भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 आ रहा है, इसके  आने क े बाद वह पुराना 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
61

कानून इितहास क े पन्नȗ मȂ चला जाएगा। "By streamlining the  re gulatory landscape, this 
Bill seeks to ensure effective and efficient regulation while promoting safety, security, 
and that is better suited to meet the current and future growth of aviation industry." 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, अभी मोदी जी ने कहा था िक हम चाहते हȅ िक हमारा हवाई चÃपल पहनने 
वाला देशवासी भी हवाई यातर्ा करे। देश का जो मध्यमवगीर्य नागिरक है, उसकी काफी 
महत्वाकांक्षा होती है। हवाई यातर्ा से जुड़ी उसकी तमाम िंचताएं होती थीं िक यह सुरिक्षत है या 
नहीं है, क्या िनयम-कानून है। तो यह जो िवधेयक आ रहा है, यह उस बाधा को दूर करेगा।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हम आइसोलेशन मȂ नहीं रह सकते। हम आज एिवएशन इंडÎटर्ी मȂ 
तमाम अंतरराÍटर्ीय सÇमेलनȗ मȂ, रेज़ॉÊयूशन मȂ, आईसीएओ की िसफािरशȗ क े अनुसार और 
िशकागो कन्वȂशन क े भी सदÎय हȅ, उसके  अनुसार हमȂ उन मान्यताओं और Îटȅडड्ज़र् को लागू 
करना है। हमारा यह िवधेयक हवाई सेवाओं की सुरक्षा, संचालन, क ुशल कामकाज को  सुिनिÌचत 
करने क े िलए िनयम बनाने और िविनयिमत करने क े िलए शिƪयां Ģदान करता है। उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदया, जो सबसे बड़ी शुरुआत  है, जो मोदी जी ने की है - वह है हमारी आत्मिनभर्रता।  हर क्षेतर् 
मȂ जब हम आत्मिनभर्र हो रहे हȅ, तो वािजब है िक हम िवमानन क्षेतर् मȂ भी आत्मिनभर्र हȗ। 
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
पहले सात दशक मȂ कांगर्ेस क े समय मȂ क ेवल 74 एयरपोट्सर् बने थे, आज 149 एयरपोट्सर् हȅ।  
आज जो हमारी हवाई सेवाएं हȅ और मंतर्ी जी यहां एक-दो िदन पहले वƪËय दे रहे थे िक आज 
हमारे पास जो Äलीट है, उसमȂ इंिड
गो, एयर इंिडया और जो Ģाइवेट Ãलेयसर् शािमल हȅ।  हमारा 
Äलीट 1,500 एयरकर्ाÄट का होने जा रहा है, उसके  िलए जो इन्ģाÎटर्क्च र है, उसको यह िबल 
उसको मजबूत करेगा। हम देश मȂ िवमानȗ क े िविनमार्ण, मरÇमत क्षेतर् मȂ आत्मिनभर्र होना चाहते हȅ।  
इसीिलए मोदी जी ने 20 हजार  करोड़ रुपय े का पैक े ज िदया, िजससे Îवदेशी िविनमार्ण क्षेतर् मȂ 
िवÌव
ास पैदा िकया जा सके ।  िवमान क े कलपुजș क े आयात पर जीएसटी क ेवल 5 परसȂट कर दी 
गई है, जो 1 जून, 2024 से लागू हो चुकी है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हम हर क्षेतर् मȂ, िडफȂ स क े क्षेतर् मȂ मजबूत हो रहे हȅ।  इसी क्षेतर् मȂ, 
जो मोदी जी क े कायर्काल मȂ शुरू  हुआ, हम फाइटर Ãलेन और उसके  साथ-साथ जो बाकी िवमान 
हȅ, उनके  िनमार्ण क े क्षेतर् मȂ भी आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ। अभी वडोदरा मȂ C-295 Ãलेन क े िनमार्ण का 
उǇाटन मोदी जी ने 28 अक्टूबर, 2024 को ही िकया है। यह Îपेन की C
ASA क ंपनी बनाती थी 
और अब इसको एयरबस बना रहा है। मोदी जी ने Îपेन क े Ģधान मंतर्ी पेडर्ो सांचेज़ क े सा थ  
अक्टूबर, 2022 मȂ वडोदरा मȂ फाइनल असेÇबली लाइन की आधारिशला रखी और अब 28 
अक्टूबर को इसका उǇाटन हो गया है।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, अब एयरबस और टाटा एडवांस िसÎटम िलिमटेड िमलकर C 295 
हवाई जहाज बना रहे हȅ।  इसमȂ टोटल 56 Ãलेन बन न े हȅ। Îपेन मȂ 16 बनने हȅ और मेक इन इंिडया 
नीित क े तहत बाकी Ãलेन भारत मȂ बनȂगे।  यह ऐसा Ãलेन है, जो छोटे रनवे पर भी उतर सकता है।  
यह मेक इन इंिडया और मोदी जी की आत्मिन भर्र बनाने की नीित क े तहत यह हो रहा है।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, पहले हम AN-12, AN-32, IL-76 इसी पर िनभर्र थे, लेिकन आज C-295 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

को खुद बना रहे हȅ। हम उसको एक्Îपोटर् करȂगे, आज हम आत्मिनभर्र हुए हȅ और यह जो नया 
अिधिनयम है, वह इन सबको सशƪ बनाएगा।    
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हम तेजस एमके -1 बना रहे हȅ।  आज इसकी धूम पूरी दुिनया मȂ है।  
हम उसका एडवांस वजर्न तेजस एमके -1ए बना रहे हȅ। जो हमारा तेजस एमके -1 है, यह चीन क े 
जेएफ 17, िजसको पािकÎतान भी बन
ाता है, उससे कहीं आगे है।  इसकी Îपीड 2,200 िकलोमीटर 
पर ऑवर है, जबिक जेएफ 17 की  Îपीड क ेवल मातर् 1,960 िकलोमीटर पर ऑवर है।  हम लोग 
जÊदी ही 5.5 जनरेशन क े िवमान बनाएंगे, िजसका नाम AM
CA है।  हम िवमान क े क्षेतर् मȂ इÇपोटर् 
करते थे और कांगर्ेस क े कायर्काल मȂ यह हालत थी िक जब खरीदने की बात आती थी, तो कांगर्ेस 
सरकार कहती थी िक हमारे पास पैसे नहीं हȅ।  देश की आवÌयकता थी और जब राफे ल का िनणर्य 
हुआ, तो कांगर्ेस ने ऐसा बखेड़ा िकया िक राफे ल, राफे ल, राफे ल।  उस राफे ल का नैरेिटव फज ीर् 
बना, वह ऐसा फ े ल हुआ िक कांगर्ेस भी फ े ल हो गई। आज जो OCCRP संÎथा है, यह लेिÄटÎट 
संÎथा दुिनया मȂ भारत क े िखलाफ जो डीप Îटेट्स हȅ, उससे जुड़ी हुई है। आज ही हमारे सदÎय ने 
इसका मामला उठाया और ये नहीं चाहते थे िक भारत आत्म
िनभर्र हो और जब भारत आत्मिनभर्र 
होगा, मजबूत होगा, तो िकसी आदमी की हमारे ऊपर नजर उठाने की िहÇमत नहीं होगी।  आज 
हम राफे ल भी लाए हȅ, उसका एडवांस नेवल वजर्न भी ला रहे हȅ, लेिकन जो हमारा 
manufacturing sector है, वह बहुत आगे बढ़ रहा है, िजससे िक हम न क ेवल िडफȂ स क े अन्य 
क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, बिÊक फाइटर Ãलेन्स मȂ भी आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ और हमारे फाइटर Ãलेन्स की दुिनया मȂ मांग है।  
इसके  िलए सब लाइन लगाकर खड़े हȅ िक भारत इसको उन्हȂ दे दे।  
 महोदय, यह जो िबल है। इस िबल ने Îकोप बढ़ाया है। उस Îकोप मȂ एक चीज़ Penalties 
and Dispute Resolution की है। यह हमȂ अिधकार देता है िक अगर एयरप
ोटर् क े पास कहीं कोई 
िबिंÊडग बनाएगा – पहले हमȂ ĢॉÅलम होती थी िक कोई आदमी ऊ ँची िबिंÊडग न बना ले, लेिकन 
हमारा जो िसÎटम है, इसमȂ आज एक अिधक ार क े तहत हम यह भी सुिनÌचत करȂगे िक यिद 
एयरपोटर् को कोई खतरा न हो, तो उसके  िकनारे इसे बना सकते हȅ।  
 महोदया, इसके  अलावा यह िबल भारत सरकार को िडटेन करने की पॉवर भी देता है। 
अगर भारत सरकार यह समझती है िक यह Ãलेन पैसȂज़सर् क े िलए खतरा है, तो इस अिधकार क े 
तहत – पहले हमारे पास यह अिधक
ार नहीं था, लेिकन अब हम उस Ãलेन को िडटेन कर सकते हȅ 
िक आप, आगे से अब इस Äलाइट को नहीं चलाएंगे। पहले यह अिधकार हमारे पास नहीं था, 
लेिकन अब यह अिधक
ार हमȂ िदया गया है।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, यह जो िबल है, यह comprehensive और मजबूत िबल है। यह 
भारत को 2047 तक एक पूणर् िवकिसत भारत की तरफ ले जा रहा है। मȅ इस िबल क े िल ए माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी को और देश क े Ģधानमंतर्ी जी को साधुवाद देता हूं, बधाई देता हूं। महोदया, इन्हीं शÅदȗ 
क े साथ मȅ अपनी बात समाÃत करता हूं, वंदे मातरç।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPE
RSON (SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK) : Now, hon. 
Member, Shrimati Sulata Deo. You have six minutes.  
 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
63

Ǜीमती सुलता देव  ( ओिडशा): जय Ǜी जगन्नाथ, थȅक यू वाइस चेयरमैन मैडम िक आपने मुझे 
"भारतीय  वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024" पर  बोलने का मौका िदया है। महोदया, नाम चाहे क ु छ भी 
हो, नाम बदलने से काम थोड़ा बदल जाता है। महोदया, का म नहीं बदलता, क्यȗिक आज देश की 
एक बहुत बड़ी आबादी, जो एयरकर्ाÄट यूज करती है, यह उससे भी संबंिधत है। आप उसको 
वायुयान बोिलए या पुÍप िवमान बोिलए या उड़ा हवाई जहाज बोिलए, चाहे जो क ु छ भी बोिलए, 
लेिकन फाइनली हम लो
ग उसको जहाज ही बोलȂगे, एयरकर्ाÄट ही बोलȂगे और क ु छ नहीं बोलȂगे। 
हमारी इतनी बड़ी आबादी, जो आज एयरकर्ाÄट को आने-जाने क े िलए यूज कर रही है, आज 
उससे भी बड़ी आबादी, जो सबसे बड़ ी आबादी है, वह आबादी वह है,  िजसमȂ आम आदमी हȅ। हर 
िकसी की इच्छा होती है िक मȅ भी कभी Äलाई करू ँ, मȅ भी कभी Äलाइट मȂ बैठ ूँ, मȅ भी कभी 
एयरकर्ाÄट मȂ जाऊँ ।  मैडम, यह होना भी चािहए, क्यȗिक हमारे देश क े Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने एक शÅद 
बोला था, एक वडर् बोला था िक हवाई चÃपल पहनने वालȗ को भी हम हवाई जहाज मȂ िबठाएंगे। 
अभी हवाई जहाज का क्य
ा आंकड़ा है, हवाई चÃपल पहनने वाले िकतने लोग हवाई जहाज मȂ चढ़े 
हȅ?  ...( Ëयवधान).
.. लेिकन जो सच है, वह सच है। अभी बृज लाल जी ने बोला िक हवाई चÃपल 
पहनने वालȗ को हवाई जहाज मȂ िबठाएंगे - ऐसा Ģधानमंतर्ी बोले थे। उड़ान उड़े देश का आम 
नागिरक, लेिकन  कहां गई यह 'उड़ान Îकीम'?  िकतने आम नागिरक इसमȂ उड़ रहे हȅ?  इसमȂ 
कोई नहीं उड़ रहा है। महोदया, मȅ ओिडशा क्षेतर् से आती हूं। मȅ आपको एक एग्जाÇपल देती हूं, जो 
िक एक टर्ू फ ैक्ट है। मȅने एक मीिंटग मȂ, जहां पर हज़ार मिहलाएँ बैठी थीं,  एक बार उनसे पूछा िक 
आप मȂ से कौन हȅ, िजन्हȗने Äलाइट मȂ कभी टर्ैवल िकया है, अपना हाथ ऊप
र उठाइए।  मैडम,  
2,000 मिहलाओं मȂ से क ेवल एक ही मिहला ने हाथ उठाया। मȅने पूछा, आप कहां गईं थीं? उस 
मिहला ने क्या बोला, आप वह सुिनए। उन्हȗने बोला िक हमको नवीन पटनायक जी ने एसएच
जी, 
जो िक सेÊफ हैÊप गर्ुप होता है, उनमȂ से सेलेक्ट करके  दुबई भेजा था। यह है मेरा नेता, जो क ु छ 
बोलता नहीं है। जो बोलता है, वह तो नहीं करता, लेिकन यह नहीं बोलकर भी करता है। इसको 
कहते हȅ हवा
ई चÃपल पहनने वाली मिहला को हवाई जहाज मȂ उड़ाना। मगर हवाई चÃपल पहनने 
वाले तो अभी हवाई जहाज मȂ बैठ नहीं पा रहे हȅ।  
 
[उपसभाध्य
क्ष (Ǜीमती िकरण चौधरी) पीठासीन हुईं। ] 
 
िकसको क्या बोलȂगे? क्यȗिक महंगाई की इतनी मार है िक वे महंगाई की मार से दब ही रहे हȅ, बस 
दब ही रहे हȅ। आलू देिखए, Ãयाज देिख ए, दाल देिखए, दूध देिखए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE- CHAIRPERSON  (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Please speak on the 
Bill.  
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव :  यही है न? िटकट का बोल ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ इसीिलए बोल रही हूं, मȅ िटकट 
की बात पर आ रही हूं। ...(Ëय
वधान )...  आप िकतना भी बोिलए िक चȂज हो रहा है, मगर देिखए, 
जहाँ तक हवाई िटकट की बात है, तो उसका इतना Ģाइवेटाइजेशन कर िदया गया है िक मेक 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

माय िटर्प मȂ अलग रेट्स हȅ, बामर लॉरी मȂ अलग रेट्स  हȅ, काउंटर पर अलग रेट्स हȅ, लेिकन जो 
रेट है, उस पर कोई बात नहीं है।   
 मȅ यह खुद बता रही हूँ िक मȅ भुवनेÌव र  से िदÊली तक एक नॉमर्ल इकोनॉमी क्लास मȂ 
आती हूँ, िजसके  िलए 22  तारीख को मȅने 19,000 समिंथग िकराया िदया और 16  तारीख को 
16,000 समिंथग िकराया िदया। इसमȂ कौन गरीब टर्ेवल कर सकता है? ऐसा नहीं हो सकता है। 
इसमȂ एक और बात है। दोपहर मȂ एक फ ेयर होता है और िदन और रात मȂ दूसरा फ ेयर होता है, 
सब अलग-अलग फ ेयर होते हȅ। अग
र देखा जाए, तो यह क ै से हो सकता है? ऐसा नहीं हो सकता 
है। यह इक्व ल  नहीं है। इसके  ऊपर क ंटर्ोल होना चािहए, तब जाकर आम आदमी उड़ेगा, नहीं तो 
क ै से उड़ेगा? इसके  ऊपर िकसी एजȂसी का क ंटर्ोल नहीं है। मैडम, मȅने देखा है िक ऐसे बहुत सारे 
टेिक्नकल इÌयूज़ आते हȅ। मȅ सीधे-सीधे बात कर ती हूँ। जब हम लोग Äलाइट बोडर् करते हȅ, चूंिक 
हम अभी एमपी हȅ, तो कोई ĢॉÅलम नहीं होती है, हमȂ सीआईएसएफ वाले Ģोटोकॉल मȂ ले जाते हȅ, 
अगर थोड़ा लेट भी हो जा एं, तो भी चलता है, मगर जो आम आदमी है, वह थोड़ा लेट हो जाए, तो 
उसे बोडर् करने का मौका भी नहीं िमलता है। वह कहीं टर्ैिफक मȂ फ ं स सकता है, िकसी ĢोटेÎट मȂ 
फ ं स सकता है। आप Äला इट िडले उड़ाइए,  वह  चलेगा, मगर जो पैसȂजर है, वह िडले नहीं हो 
सकता है। आपकी Äलाइट घंटे दो घंटे लेट हो रही है, तो Äलाइट मȂ हमȂ सुनने को िमलता है िक 
सॉरी फोर िद िडले। हम भी सॉरी बोल सकते हȅ। क्या उनके  सॉरी और हमारे सॉरी मȂ को ई िडफरȂस 
है? जब वडर् ही एक है, तो उनके  िलए अलग क ै से है? मैडम, कानून सबके  िलए बराबर होना 
चािहए। उनके  िलए भी और हमारे िलए भी बराबर होना चाि हए। जो एयरलाइंस Äलाइट जÊदी 
नहीं उड़ाती हȅ, उनके  साथ क्या करना चािहए?  
 अगर िसक्योिरटी क े Ãवाइंट ऑफ Ëयू से देखȂ, तो हमारे ओिडशा क े एक एक्स एमपी और 
मीिडया टायकू न, तथागत सत्पथी जी ने 26 अगÎ त , 2024 को ट्वीट िकया िक एयरपोटर् क े बाहर 
जो Ëहीकल जीपीएस tracker लगा होता है, िजसका यूज़ बȅक मȂ पैसे लाने-ले जाने क े िलए होता 
है, उस गाड़ी मȂ 80 िकलो Ãलस सोना, 200 िकलो Ãलस िसÊवर जÅत हुआ। वह कहाँ से आ रहा था 
या कहाँ जा रहा था, इस
का कोई पता नहीं चला।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Please speak on the 
Bill, Madam.   
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: मैडम, वह 80 िकलो सोना घटकर 35  िकलो हो गया। हम लोग इंसान हȅ, 
इसिलए हम वेट गेन और कम करते हȅ, मगर सोने का वेट क ै से कम हो गया, यह हमȂ नहीं पता। 
इसका आज तक नहीं पता लगा है। मȅने तो खुद बोला िक जगन्नाथ जी का रत्न भंडार खुला है 
और रत्न भंडार की िगनती भी नहीं हुई। ...(समय की घं
टी )... मैडम, मȅ अभी कन्क्लूड कर रही हूँ। 
जो हमारे एयरपोट्सर् हȅ, आप उनका Ģाइवेटाइजेशन कर रहे हȅ। यह Ģाइवेटाइजेशन क्यȗ हो रहा 
है, िकसके  िलए हो रहा है? बीजू पटनायक इंटरनेशनल एयरपोटर् को भी Ģाइवेटाइज िकया गय ा 
है। हम लोगȗ क े गांव मȂ एक बात होती है िक जो मां-बाप की संपिǄ होती है, अगर उसे बेटे संभाल 
नहीं पाते हȅ, तो उन्हȂ नालायक बोलते हȅ। हम देख रहे हȅ िक देश की सÇपिǄ का Ģा इवेटाइजेशन 
हो रहा है। ऐसा नहीं होना चािहए। जो हमारे बाद आने वाली पीढ़ी है, हम उसे क्या िदखाएंगे। उसे 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
65

िदखाने क े िलए िसफर् यही बोलȂगे िक यह हो गया, वह हो गया। अगर एक ही आदमी क े हाथ मȂ 
सारी सÇपिǄ चली जाएगी, तो आप इस Ģाइवेटाइजेशन को क्यȗ बढ़ावा दे रहे हȅ?  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON  (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Please conclude, 
Madam.   
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव: आप एयरकर्
ाÄट  का टाइटल चȂज कर रहे हȅ, वह आप कीिजए, लेिकन इसे 
चȂज कर देने से लोगȗ को सुिवधा नहीं िमलती है। अगर िसक्योिरटी क े Ãवाइंट ऑफ Ëयू से देखा 
जाए, इसके  िलए सीआईएसएफ वालȗ को टर्ेिंनग देनी चािहए। जहां पर Äलाइट्स ऑल वेदर मȂ 
लȅड नह
ीं कर पा रही है, उन पर ध्यान देना चािहए। ऐसा करने से कम-से-कम लोगȗ और Îटेट 
को अच्छे से काम करने का मौका िमलेगा। ऐसा कोई िनयम चȂज हो, तो अच्छा रहेगा, धन्यव ाद।     
                                                        
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY) : Dr. M. Thambidurai; 
not present.  Shri H.D. Devegowda.   
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka ): R e s p e c t e d  M a d a m ,  w i t h  y o u r  k i n d  
permission, I would like to sit and speak.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI KIRAN CHOUDHRY): Yes, please.    
       
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka) : Madam, I will confine my entire speech to 
Hassan Airport. This airport was sanctioned d u r i n g  m y  p e r i o d  a s  C h i e f  M i n i s t e r  o f  
Karnataka. At that time, the present ai rport, which has been named after late 
Kempegowda, was sanctioned by late Pr ime Minister Narasimha Rao and it was 
sanctioned only to carry cargo.  It is not for passengers. It is only to carry cargo.  Shri 
Ghulam Nabi Azad was Civil Aviation Minister then. At that  time, I tried my best to 
alter it so that it can be operated as a civ il airport. But, unfortunately, it could not be 
done. Only when I became Prime Minister, the present Kempegowda Airport was 
cleared by me.  This airport was also cleared by me. But,  unfortunately, during this 
period, five Chief Ministers came and left.  I don’t want to name those Chief Ministers.  
My son was also Chief Minister with two coalitions – one with BJP and one with 
Congress. What had happened then, I don’t want to narra te those stories. Today, I 
am happy to say that hon. Minister’s father, who was my friend, had worked with me.  
I remember his father. He was one of the best Ministers who held the portfolio of Rural 
Development. You are my friend’s son. I congratulate you. You are a youngster. You 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

have got bright future. You are going to come up in life.  I can understand it.  In this 
short tenure of five months, you have given your best.   
 Madam, this was the background. I would like to come back to Hassan 
Airport. During this period, five Chief Mi nisters came. I don’t want to bring politics 
here. They went on playing th eir own politics. Unfortunately, the people are suffering.  
Hassan today has got all the facilities. I wo uld like to quote them here. Hassan today 
has got all educational institutions, except an IIT . In fact, for that, I tried in the last 15 
years. But what had happened, I don’t wa nt to speak on that. Except that, all 
educational institutions are there. In addi tion to that, Hassan is economically one of 
the important players. It is important for textiles also. Hassan is in between Mangalore 
and Chennai. Two major ports are there.  A lot of traffic is there.    
 Some portion of Chennai-Be ngaluru has been declared as industrial corridor 
and work is going on. Another new decision  was taken by the present Government to 
declare Hyderabad-Bengaluru as industrial  corridor. With these developments, so 
many activities are going on there. Except IIT, Hassan has all other institutions like 
medical institutions, engineering institutions, law colleges, etc. It has all institutions 
except IIT. Now, Hassan is one of the important places with Master Controlling 
Facility, MCF, controlling all the orbiting satellites launched by the Department of 
Space, Government of India. It is located  in Hassan city. I am speaking about the 
importance and the background. Hassan has got various areas producing coffee, 
tea, gherkin, etc. and we are exporting outsid e, bringing in a lot of foreign exchange.  
I thought that this airport is going to help the farmers. There are tourist areas of Belur, 
Halebidu and Shravanabelagola, which are world-known tourist areas. Foreign 
visitors are coming there. It will not only facilitate them but also help the farmers who 
are growing commercial crops. They are also producing milk in my own district. Every 
month, farmers are earning Rs.900 crore from milk and milk products. We want to 
export.  We are providing milk and milk pr oducts to Defence. A lot of activities are 
going on there. With this background, I thought that this airport is going to be helpful 
not only to the farming community but also to the people who come from all over the 
world to visit three important tourist places of Belur, Halebidu and Shravanabelagola.   
 Madam, I had also sanctioned Light Comb at Aircraft.  During my own period, it 
was produced by HAL in Bengaluru. I also took a decision of sanctioning 65-seater 
small aircraft. I would like to bring to your kind notice what all had happened. 
Unfortunately, five Chief Ministers changed; th ey went on to play politics to suit their 
own convenience. I don’t want to drag the name of any political party.  
 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
67

(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Sir, today, in the last leg of my life, sitting in this House, I pray. You are a youngster. I 
have written all the details and I will hand ov er this paper to you, with the permission 
of the Chair. Sir, you speak so much ab out the farmers. Yesterday, I saw, your 
passing remarks on the issue of the farming community.   …(Interruptions)…  You are 
so much concerned about the farming communi ty.  I am a farmer.  The people have 
elected me seven times to Lok Sabha and seven times to the Assembly.  I am in 
public life for 66 years. I am in the last leg of my life. This Airport, which was 
sanctioned by me, has been named as Kempegowda Airport.  I do not want to have 
any difference of opinion on that. I am happy. The Prime Minister has come and 
named it after late Kempegowda, who ruled as a Palegar, or whatever you call, as a 
ruler.   
 Now, I come to the point which I woul d like to impress upon this House and 
also the hon. Minister to see that this Airport, Hassan Airport, must be completed and 
see that the farmers and the people, who are coming from all over the world for Belur, 
Halebidu and Shravanabelagola, are helped, which is going to be the need of the 
hour.  I would give all part iculars about the whole issue.  Even Air Show was first 
started during my period in Karnataka. Now,  there is a demand all over the country. I 
do not want to go into all these details because people think that Devegowda has not 
done anything. It is because people forgot  what I have done about 28 years back. I 
can quote so many issues about what I have done.  I do not want to take much time 
of the House. I do not want to go on listing what I have done during the short tenure 
of time. The hon. Prime Minister had come to Bengaluru to name the airport in the 
name of late Kempegowda. Some people also commented that it has been done by 
Devegowda. Devegowda has sanctioned this Ai rport. It is on record today and I do 
not want to say anything beyond that. I appeal to him, through you, you have come.  I 
am so happy that you here in the Chair. I have given all the details in my 
representation to the hon. Minister. He is a youngster, an upcoming leader. His father 
Shri Yerran Naidu has worked with me. He was a Rural Development Minister.  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes.    
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA :  I am supremely happy. The Prime Minister has selected 
him. Shri Chandrababu Naidu has given a good portfolio with the Prime Minister’s 
consent.  I am happy.  With your permission, if you ask me to handover, through you, 
I would send the particulars pertaining to Hassan Airport.   
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes.    
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA:  Please see that du ring your period, Hassan Airport should 
come through, that all facilities are given.   It should connect Mangalore, Bengaluru 
and Chennai.  It is worth doing.  Economically also, it will be feasible.  Please see to it 
that this work is done. With these words, Si r, I am grateful that you have come and 
you allowed me to speak today on this partic ular issue. I am grateful to you. Thank 
you very much.   
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, for the hon. Minister, thes e are words of blessing, the words 
of encouragement emanating from one of the tallest leaders of this country, reflecting 
on your lineage as well. And, I am sure; th is will help him go a long way. Reflections 
made by Devegowda ji about farmers, it is true, the issue of farmer has been put on 
centre stage, by the Prime Minister, Narendra Modi ji; every walk of life, whether 
affordable housing, whether solar house, whether ‘ Har Ghar Jal’ and technology to 
farmers. Therefore, our expectations are bound  t o  b e h i g h .  I t  is  ti m e w h en  th ere i s 
convergence to take farmer to a greater he ight. And, when the former Prime Minister, 
Shri H.D. Devegowda, makes his presence fe lt, whenever there is an occasion, we 
take it as a blessing.  So, I have no doubt what is being done at the moment, it will 
get a greater momentum, and all agencies are converging. Our expectations are high, 
but our accomplishments are also historic. Our achievements are also splendid, and 
this will go a long way for the nation. Your sentiments value greatly to us. Now, Dr. 
Fauzia Khan. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra) : Sir, the oak fought the wind and was broken, the 
willow bent when it must and survived. The intent of the young and dynamic Minister 
to bend to times is necessary and appreci ated. The modernity of yesterday is the 
tradition of today and the modernity of today is the tradition of tomorrow. But, is this 
Bill as modern as it should be? That is the question. I would like to punctuate a few 
concerns that have remained unaddressed in the Bill. Numb er one, Sir, the Bill does 
not explicitly address advanced air mortality technologies such as vertical takeoff and 
landing, aircraft or drones. Governance for unmanned aviation continues under Drone 
Rules 2021, which are not integrated into th e Bill. I understand. But, while attempting 
to modernize the existing Act, a framework for the safe and efficient integration of 
emerging technologies must not be missed. Number two, sustainability remains a 
significant gap in the Bill. The Bill does not include pr ovisions to address carbon 
emissions, promote sustainable aviation fu els, or set environmental targets for the 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
69

aviation sector. A research team at th e Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology has found that the share of Indi a in global CO2 emissions from domestic 
aviation was the third highest at 1. 5 per cent! As per a DGCA Report, the carbon 
footprint of Indian Airlines on both domestic and international operations is the 
seventh highest in the world with an approximate value of 127 lakh tonnes. 
Emphasizing sustainable practices such as  implementing stricter environmental 
regulations, promoting the use of sustai nable aviation fuels can reduce the carbon 
footprint of the sector. 
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA) in the Chair.] 
 
  Madam, yesterday, the Minister replied to my same point in the Boilers Bill that 
there is another Department for this envi ronment sector. But again, I would like to 
emphasize that unless this Bill  contains the emphasis on carbon emissions, people 
will not take it seriously in the sector.                               
 Number three is related to cyber secu rity. This remains a glaring omission. 
With our increasing reliance on digital system s, the absence of explicit protocols for 
countering cyber threats in this sect or, leaves the sector vulnerable …(Time-Bell 
rings)… Madam, could you give me half a mi nute? I would only like to relate a 
personal incident. I will leave out all this. This is important. I was at the Nanded airport 
and I was in the check-in queue when I overheard a man requesting the obliging 
person at the counter to allot him a seat next to a woman. He said, 'Any age, but let it 
be a woman.' I got angry at this and when I asked that man, 'Why are you asking for 
a seat next to a woman?', the man quietly slinked away. The person at the counter 
also got embarrassed. Since then, I have been  requesting the earlier Minister too that 
just as you have in trains and buses, you must have some seats for women who travel 
alone, seats reserved, particularly, for women. I am requesting the hon. Minister once 
again, you must look into this issue when you have this kind of tendency at airports 
and aircraft. Since my time is over, I would not be able to deliberate more on this.  
Thank you very much.      
                                                                    
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI P. T. USHA): Now Shri Sandosh Kumar P. 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala) : Madam, as pointed out by quite a number of 
learned speakers in this House, the title of this Bill needs to be amended. It is in 
contravention to the provisions of the Constitution, Article 348. So I also demand the 
same.  It is quite surprising to note that  not even a single speaker from the Treasury 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

side mentioned about the sorry plight of  our passengers. Th e passengers are the 
main stakeholders in this field. Let me gi ve you one example citing a reply which was 
furnished in this august House on 25 th of this month by the same Ministry. Sir, 25,727 
domestic operations were cancelled during a very short span of time, that is, between 
2022, January, and 2024, September. This is such a big number that 25,727 flights 
were cancelled and your Ministry says that  10,67,717 passengers were affected by 
this cancellation. More importantly, one of  the major players in this field, Indigo 
awarded only Rs.18,000 as compensation to  the passengers. This is one of the 
important areas where you have to look into . Secondly, Sir, according to the Report 
of the Airports Council International, India has the highest airfares  compared to other 
countries in Asia Pacific and Middle East re gion. The ACI studied airfares in around 
36,000 routes in the region and came to the conclusion th at Indian aviation market 
has the highest increase with 41 percentage hike in prices. It is only 34 per cent in 
UAE and 30 per cent in Singapore. Why is it happening?  Again, let me quote from an 
answer furnished in this august House on 18 th July, 2022. The question was related to 
airfare. The answer was, “It is market driven only. The Government is not establishing 
or not regulating the airfares. It is completely market driven. ” Sir, the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture has already stated that the 
so-called self-regulating mechanisms of th e current airline monitoring regime are 
inadequate to address the financial burden of the passengers.  
 So, this is one area which you have to look into. So, instead of praising the 
Government and instead of talking about one particular person and his achievements, 
you have to address the serious concerns of the passengers. And, finally, Sir, you are 
talking about starting new airports, and th e demand for starting new airports is 
increasing from various parts of the country. What is the status of our existing 
airports?  Even the former Prime Minister had to cry before you to get it established in 
a proper way. I am from Kannur. I would like to request you once again. Quite a 
number of times we made this plea regarding the Airport of Kannur, invested crores of 
rupees of people's money. But, because of your political vendetta, you are not 
allowing the Airport to operate properly. How many operations were canceled?  From 
the beginning, so far, 60 per cent of oper ations were cancelled. I don't know the 
exact number!  So, why is this happening? It  is a district which -- actually there are a 
number of passengers from other districts also – is a hub of many foreign passengers 
and tourists. Even after repeated requests , nothing is happening.  We don't know 
what our fault is. Even the hon. Chief Mi nister of Kerala met you and requested 
personally.  And, almost all our MPs joined together to request you; I mean, including 
Jyotiraditya Scindia ji. Nothing is coming out. So, ai rport should not be a center of 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
71

your political vendetta. You must have po litical differences wi th our State and our 
people.  But, it should not be a point of quarrel with our passengers. So, I request 
you to address the issue of Kannur Airpor t very seriously. And, let me know how 
many airports are profitable in our country. You are talking about starting of new 
airports, but most of our airports are not at all properly functioning, in the sense, that 
less number of passengers are ther e. So, to run an airport, it  is not that easy. Crores 
of rupees are needed.  So, this area also needs to be addressed. So, I think this Bill is 
not at all comprehensive. The title of the Bill must be changed and the concerns of the 
passengers must be addressed properly.        
                                              
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA):   Thank you Sandosh ji.  Now, 
Dr. Bhim Singh. 
 
डा. भीम िंसह ( िबहार): महोदया, मȅ भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े 
िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। माननीय मंतर्ी जी और सरकार ने इस िवधेयक को लाकर बड़ा ही सराहनीय 
कायर् िकया है। हमारी सरकार जो अनेक अच्छे काम कर रही है, उनमȂ से एक अच्छा काम यह भी 
है िक वह पुराने कानूनȗ को बदल कर नए ढंग से, नए पिरĢेÑय मȂ, नई पिरिÎथित मȂ जो अनुक ू ल 
हȗ, वैसे कानून बना रही है। पुराना जो कानून  था, पुराना जो अि
धिनयम था, िवमान अिधिनयम, 
1934 था, वह 90 साल पुराना हो चुका है और उसमȂ 21 बार संशोधन िकए जा चुक े हȅ। महोदया, 
यिद कपड़ा फट जाता है, तो उसमȂ पैबंद लगाया जाता है, रफू  िकया जाता है, बार-बार, अनेक 
बार रफू  की आवÌयकता होती है, लेिकन एक सम
य ऐसा आता है िक रफ़ू गर भी उस पर रफू  
करने मȂ असमथर्ता Ëयƪ कर देता है। यही हालत मौजूदा कानून की है, जो अभी चल रहा है। इस 
िवधेयक क े बनने क े बाद वह िÎथित बदल जाएगी। हमारे उस तरफ क े क ु छ िमतर्
ȗ ने इस िवधेयक 
क े नाम पर भी आपिǄ Ëयƪ की है और हमारे इस तरफ क े िमतर्ȗ ने उनको समझाने का Ģयास 
िकया है। हम अपने ही िम
तर्ȗ से कहना चाहȂगे िक वे समझने वाले नहीं हȅ, वे समझ नहीं सकते, 
उनको तो आपिǄ होनी ही है। भला जो पक्ष, जो Ëयिƪ, जो पाटीर् वंदेमातरç का िवरोध कर सकती 
है, वह हमारे वायुयान शÅ
द का िवरोध क्यȗ नहीं करेगी!                                                                     
 अगर हमारी सरकार इंिडया को भारत कह दे, बोडर् मȂ लगा दे, तो जो पाटीर् भारत िलखने 
पर भी  आपिǄ कर सकती है, वह पाटीर् और उसके  नेता लोग वायुयान िलखने पर िवरोध क्यȗ न 
करȂगे! इसिलए हम अपने िमतर्ȗ को कहȂगे िक उनको समझाने का Ģयास न करȂ, क्यȗिक ये समझने 
वाले नहीं हȅ। जनता इनको बार-बार चुनाव क े मैदा
न मȂ समझा रही है, लेिकन ये समझने वाले नहीं 
हȅ।  पुराने कानून को बदलकर नया कानून लाया जा रहा है। पुराना कानून क्या था? पुराना कानून 
िबÊकु ल िबखरा हुआ था।  उसमȂ मातर् 19 से क्शन्
स थे और वे भी चैÃटर मȂ बंटे हुए नहीं थे। जो 
मौजूदा िव
धेयक लाया गया है, जो कानून बनने वाला है, इसमȂ खंडȗ को चैÃटर मȂ बांटा गया है और 
बढ़ाकर 43 धाराएं इसमȂ शािमल की गई हȅ। इस कानून का उǈेÌय िडजाइन, िनमार्ण, रख-रखाव, 
कÅजा, उपयोग, संचालन, िबकर्ी, िनयार्त, आयात और उसके  मामलȗ का िविनयमन तथा िनयंतर्ण 
करना है।  यह जो उǈेÌय है, इसको भी Ëयापक िकया गया है। ये उǈेÌय पह
ले क े कानून मȂ भी थे, 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

लेिकन उस कानून मȂ िडजाइन को शािमल नहीं िकया गया था। अब िडजाइन को भी इस कानून मȂ 
शािमल िकया गया है। हम िडजाइन को भी िनयंितर्त और रेगुलेट कर सकते हȅ। पुराने कानून 
िकतने अĢासंिगक थे, यह इस बात से भी समझा जा सकता है िक उस कानून क े तहत पतंग को 
भी वायुयान समझा गया था, गुÅबारे को भी कानून क े तहत वायुयान समझा गया था। जो 
अĢासंिगक बातȂ हȅ, जो अनुक ू ल बातȂ नहीं हȅ, उनको हमारी सरकार ने हटाने का काम िकया है 
और उसको सरल, सुगम और सĢासंिगक करने का काम िक
या है।  हमारी सरकार क े समय मȂ 
जैसे अनेक क्षेतर्ȗ का िवकास हो रहा है, उसी तरह जो aviation sector है, िवमानन क्षेतर् है, 
उसका भी काफी िवकास हो रहा है। हमȂ यह बताते हुए गवर् होता है िक 2014 मȂ जब हमारी 
सरकार आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ आई, उस समय देश मȂ क ेवल 74 हवाई अƿे 
थे।  हमारे मोदी जी क े सरकार क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह दोगुने से भी ज्यादा हो चुक े हȅ।  आज देश मȂ हवाई 
अƿȗ की संख्या 157 है।  अगर हम एयरकर्ाÄट की िÎथित देखȂ, तो पहले हमारे एयरकर्ाÄट क े बेड़े 
मȂ मातर् 400 एयरकर्
ाÄट्स थे, आज वे 800 हो गए हȅ। जैसे िदन दोगुनी, रात चौगुनी कहावत है, 
इस गित से हमारा aviation sector बढ़ रहा है। इसे नए ढंग से िनयंितर्त और अिधिनयिमत करने 
की आवÌयकता थी।  यह िवधेयक सांगोपांग है। इस िवधेयक मȂ जो मौजूदा aviatio n sector मȂ 
तीन िनयामक एजȂसीज़ हȅ - DGCA, Directorate General of Civil Aviation, AAIB, Aircraft 
Accident Investigation Bureau और BCAS, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security - ये 
िनयामक एजȂिसयां, ये िनयामक िनकाय कायम रहȂगे, लेिकन पहले की अपेक्षा अब ये ज्यादा 
पावरफु ल हो गए हȅ। उनकी शिƪयȗ मȂ वृिǉ कर दी गई है।  पहले जो शिƪयां थीं, अब उनमȂ 
Ëयापक बढ़ोतरी की गई है। हमारी सरकार सुरक्षा को लेकर भी िंचितत रहती है और रही है।   
 हमारी सरकर ने इस िबल मȂ सुरक्षा का भी इंतज ाम िकया है। इसमȂ सुरक्षा मानकȗ का 
उÊलंघन करने पर शाÎती का, दंड का भी Ģावधान रखा गया है। महोदय, जो िचिड़याँ होती हȅ, 
उनकी वजह से भी एक्सीडȂट्स होते हȅ, इसिलए यह िनयम है िक हवाई अƿे क े आस-पास कोई 
बूचड़खाना नहीं हो, कोई गंदगी नहीं हो। यिद ये सब हवाई अƿे क े आस-पास होते हȅ, तो इससे 
पक्षी उड़ते  रहते हȅ और हवाई अƿे क े पास एक्सीडȂट्स का खतरा बढ़ जा
ता है। 
  महोदय, पहले क े कानून मȂ भी दंड का Ģावधान था, लेिकन इस कानून मȂ ह मारी सरकार 
ने दंड को बढ़ाकर 2 साल क़ ै द-ए-बा-मशĩक़त और 1 करोड़  रुपय े तक क े दंड का भी Ģावधान 
रखा है। इसमȂ ऐसे अन्य और भी Ģावधान रखे गए हȅ,  िजनमȂ दंड को बढ़ाया गया है।  
 महोदया, हम एकतरफा काम नहीं करȂगे। अगर कोई िनणर्य िल
या जाता है, कोई दंड िदया 
जाता है, तो पीिड़त पक्ष को भी अपील करने का अिधकार है। महोदया, पहले क े कानून मȂ भी 
अपील का Ģावधान था, लेिकन उसमȂ Ģथम अपी
ल क े बाद िǎतीय अपील और िǎतीय अपील क े 
बाद तृतीय अपील का Ģावधान नहीं था। जो पीिड़त पक्ष है, हमारी सरकार उसको भी सुनने का, 
अपनी बात कहने का मौका दे रही है। इस कानून मȂ एक अपील क े बाद दूसरी अपील और दूसरी 
अपील क े बा
द तीसरी अपील करने का भी Ģावधान रखा गया है। इन सारी चीज़ȗ को देखने से यह 
ÎपÍट होता है िक यह जो कानून है, यह बहुत ही Ģा संिगक कानून है। यह कानून िसिवल एिवएशन 
को बढ़ावा दे रहा है।  
 महोदया, मȅ एक और बात ऐड करना चाहूंगा। अभी जो िवमानȗ का रख-रखाव होता है, 
मरÇमती का काम होता है, उस काम को अिधक तर  िवदेशी क ंपिनयां करती हȅ और हमारा पैसा 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
73

डॉलर क े रूप  मȂ बाहर चला जाता है। इस कानून क े बनने क े बाद हम मरÇमती पर भी ध्यान देने 
वाले हȅ। एक अनुमान है, एक अध्ययन है िक हाल ही क े िदनȗ मȂ हमारा जो मरÇमती का खचार् है, 
वह शीघर् ही चार िबिलयन डॉलर हो जाने वाला है। यह चार िब
िलयन डॉलर िवदेश मȂ चला जाने 
वाला है। अगर यह कानून लागू हो गया, जो िक लागू होना ही है, ....(समय की घंटी)... तब हमारा 
यह चार िबिलयन डॉलर का खचर् बच जाएगा।  
 महोदया, इस िबल क े िलए यह सरकार बधाई की पातर् है और मȅ उन तमाम सदÎयȗ, जो 
हमारी तरफ से बोले हȅ, उनके  Ģित सहमित Ëयƪ करता हूं। महोदया, यह बहुत ही अच्छा कानून 
है, हम इसका समथर्न करते हȅ और सदन से भी अपील करते हȅ िक इतने अच्छे िवधेयक को पास 
करके , इस
के  कानून बनने का मागर् ĢशÎत करे।  
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala) : Thank you, Madam Vice-Chairman, for letting me 
speak on this vital Bill. I was quite impresse d with the hon. Minister in his introductory 
speech, while he introduced the Bill. I wish him all the best. But, I was quite 
disappointed.  He had a great opportunity to revise the old Act. There was a basic 
lacuna in the old Act. And, what was that  basic lacuna? Virtually all functions and 
powers were vested with the Union Governme nt. And, they were further delegated to 
another authority, called, the DGCA. Now, th is was a tried and tested thing. Despite 
all these authorities in place, you are a Mini stry of paramount public interest because 
public actually has straight intervention in your Ministry since a lot of people use the 
airlines. And, tariffs are one of the fundam ental things. The economic regulation was, 
in fact, there in the old Act and Rules. Bu t nothing was happening. No regulation was 
happening. The new Act is actually like ‘old wine in new bottle’. In the new Bill also, 
there are 13 or 14 clauses in which ever ything has further been delegated. Now, 
instead of having a provision which delegates powers further, which is tried and 
tested and which actually does not have  any regulatory capping mechanism for 
airfare, you should have actually included that as a legislative mechanism itself.  
 You should have got a provision in the ne w Bill saying that so and so authority 
will have the authority to cap the air tariff. But that is missing in this particular new Bill.  
Now, Madam, I travel from Thiruvananthapur am to Delhi for attending this Session.  
Our dear friend, Minister, Shri Suresh Gopi, was also there in the same flight. I paid 
Rs.78,000/- from Thiruvananthapuram to Delh i, which is criminal. Rs.78,000/- from 
Thiruvananthapuram to Delhi! There is n
 o logic in that. Last week, I had an 
opportunity to go to Rome from Delhi, and from Delhi to Rome, I had to pay only 
Rs.40,000/-. So, there is no l ogic in this.  Many of our pe ople are there in the Middle 
East,  in the Gulf Region. In the Gulf Re gion, the problem is that during holiday 
season, it spikes up to Rs.75,000/- and during off-season, it comes down to  
Rs.5,000/-.  Therefore, this is somethin g  which has to be regulated, and the 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

regulatory mechanism has to be there in the Act itself. It should not be delegated.  
T h i s  i s  m y fi rs t  s u b m is s i o n  t o  you .  M y s eco n d  su b m is s i o n  i s t hat  t h ere i s  t h i s  h u ge 
problem about environment concerns -- th e carbon emission as well as the noise 
pollution. There is nothing in the Act to take care of these two things. (Time-bell 
rings) I request you to please consider including these two. My third submission is, 
there have been problems about the unruly passengers, disruptive passengers.  Who 
are the unruly passengers, disruptive passeng ers, how they can be dealt with, what 
should be the penalty, that mechanism is no t there in the Act. This is a huge problem 
which is now happening – the pranksters and all.  
 Finally, I come to the MRO. The MRO thing is the future. You said about the 
MRO. If the MRO has to come in, the business has to come in, you have to have an 
arbitration system. There has to be an inst itutional arbitration, only then, foreign 
companies like Boeing and the Airbus will come  to India. That is also fundamentally 
lacking in the new Bill. Therefore, please consider that also. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA): Harisji, please conclude. 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN:  And, finally, there has to be a transparency on ‘point of call.’  
You don’t give ‘point of call’ to airports with infrastructure like Kannur and Calicut.   
You say, as a matter of policy, that you don’t give ‘point of call’, but you give point of 
call to airports whichever you want.  So, you have to have transparency on ‘point of 
call.’  These are my suggestions.  I request you to please consider these suggestions.  
Thank you. 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदया, आपने मुझे भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 
पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए बहुत-बहुत आभार।  
 माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े क ुशल नेतृत्व मȂ आज देश िवÌव की महाशिƪ बनने की ओर 
अगर्सर है। िपछले दस वषș मȂ नए भारत क े िनम
ार्ण हेतु सरकार ǎारा अनेक कदम उठाए गए हȅ, 
िजनमȂ भारत की आज की जरूरतȗ क े िहसाब से पुराने कानूनȗ को संशोिध त िकया गया है। इसी 
कर्म मȂ, इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से 90 वषर् पुराने िवमान अिधिनयम को संशोिधत िकया जा रहा है। 
महोदया, मोदी सरकार ǎारा Îवतंतर्ता से पूवर् क े समय की िन शािनयȗ को हटाने हेतु पाँच संकÊप 
तय िकए गए हȅ। इस िवधेयक से  अंगर्ेजȗ ǎारा वषर् 1934 मȂ बनाए गए कानून को पिरविर्तत कर, 
नए भारत की आवÌयकताओं क े आधार पर नए िवमानन िनयमȗ का िनमार्ण िकया जा रहा है। 
िपछले 10 वषș मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ नागिरक उƿयन क्षेतर् मȂ देश मȂ अिǎतीय 
Ģगित की गई है। 2014 की तुलना मȂ हवाई यातर्ा करने वाले याितर्
यȗ की संख्या आज दोगुनी हो 
गई है। 2014 मȂ देश मȂ हव
ाई अƿȗ की संख्या 74 थी, जो अब दोगुनी से भी अिधक बढ़कर लगभग 
157 हो गई है।  
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
75

 महोदया, मȅ उǄर Ģदेश से आती हूँ। उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 2014 मȂ क ेवल छ: हवाई अƿे थे, 
जबिक वतर्मान मȂ राज्य मȂ दस हवाई अƿे हȅ तथा राज्य क े पाँच शहरȗ मȂ हवाई अƿȗ क े िनमार्ण का 
कायर् Ģगित पर चल रहा है। नोएडा अंतरर ाÍटर्ीय हवाई अƿे का पिरचालन शुरू  होने क े पÌचात, 
उǄर Ģदेश देश का एकमातर् राज्य बन जाएगा, जहाँ पाँच अंतरराÍटर्ीय हवाई अƿे Îथािपत हȅ। 
 
4.00 P.M 
 
महोदया, िपछले 10 वषș मȂ उǄर Ģदेश मȂ भी हवाई याितर्
यȗ  की संख्या दोगुनी से अिधक हुई है।  
अगर उǄर Ģदेश की िपछले िवǄीय वषर् से तुलना की जाए, तो इस वषर् हवाई जहाज से यातर्ा 
करने वाले याितर्यȗ की संख्या मȂ भी लगभग 20 परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई है।  महोदया, सरकार की 
रीजनल कनेिक्टिवटी Îक
ीम ‘उड़ान’ क े तहत Ģदेश क े दूरगामी क्षेतर्ȗ को हवाई अƿȗ से जोड़ा गया 
है। 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) पीठासीन हुए।] 
 
मȅ इसके  िलए उǄर Ģदेश की जनता की ओर से माननीय Ģधा न मंतर्ी और माननीय मंतर्ी जी का 
बहुत-बहुत आभार Ëयƪ करती हूं।  ये आंकड़े िपछले 10 वषș मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ नागिरक उƿयन क्षेतर् मȂ हुई Ģगित को दशार्ते हȅ।  महोदय, अभी तक िवमानन क्षेतर् मȂ अिधकांश 
िनयम 1934 मȂ बनाए गए एक्ट से संचािलत िकए जा रहे थे। इस एक्ट को िपछले 90 वषș मȂ लगभ
ग 
21 बार संशोिधत िकया गया है।  आज नागिरक उƿयन क्षेतर् मȂ हो रही Ģगित एवं वतर्मा न 
पिरिÎथितयȗ को देखते हुए 90 वषर् पुराने इस कानून को बदलने की आवÌयकता है। इस िवधेयक 
क े माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार को िकसी भी िवमान या िवमान की Ǜेणी क े िडजाइन, िनमार्ण, िनयार्त 
या आयात को िनयिमत तथा सुरिक्षत करने क े िल ए अिधकार Ģदान िकया गया है।   
 महोदय, हवाई सेवाओं क े िवÎतार क े कारण हवाई क्षेतर् मȂ दुघर्टनाओं की संभावनाओं मȂ भी 
वृिǉ हुई है।  समय से पूवर् दुघर्टनाओं को रोकने तथा इससे संबंिधत िनयमȗ को बनाने क े िलए इस 
िवधेयक क े माध्यम से हवाई दुघर्टना या घटना की जांच क े िलए सरकार को िनयम बनाने का 
अिधकार Ģदा
न िकया गया है। इसके  अितिरƪ इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से सरकार ‘ मेक इन 
इंिडया’ अिभ
यान क े अंतगर्त िवमानन क्षेतर् मȂ देश को आत्मिनभर्र बनाने का Ģयास कर रही है।  इस 
िवधेयक मȂ िकए जा रहे Ģावधान से देश मȂ िवमानȗ क े िनमार्ण को बढ़ावा देने क े साथ िवमान संबंधी 
Ëयापार को Ģो
त्साहन िदया गया है।  महोदय, िवधेयक मȂ िकए गए Ģावधानȗ क े माध्यम से सरकार 
ǎारा भारत को वैिÌवक िवमानन बाजार मȂ Îथािपत करने का Ģयास िकया जा रहा है।  
अंतरराÍटर्ीय नागर िवमानन िनयमȗ तथा मानकȗ क े अनुरूप  देश मȂ हवाई क्षेतर् से संबंिध त िनयमȗ 
क े िनमार्ण पर बल िदया गया है।  हवाई क्षेतर् मȂ अंतरराÍटर्ीय मानकȗ क े अनुरूप  ËयवÎथाओं से देश 
मȂ Îवदेशी िवमान िनमार्ण एवं िवमान क्षेतर् से संबंिधत अन्य गितिविधयȗ को Ģोत्साहन ĢाÃत होगा।  
िवमानन क्षेतर् की िशक्षा Ģा
Ãत कर रहे देश क े लाखȗ युवाओं को इन ËयवÎथाओं से रोजगार ĢाÃत 
होगा। 
 महोदय, मुझे िवÌवास है िक इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से िविभन्न िवमानन कानूनȗ की बीच 
मौजूदा िवसंगितयȗ को दूर िकया जा
एगा तथा भिवÍय मȂ देश क े नागिरकȗ को और बेहतर हवाई 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

सुिवधा उपलÅध हो सके गी।  आज देश क े िवमानन क्षेतर् की Ģगित की िदशा मȂ लाए गए इस 
िवधेयक का मȅ पुरजोर समथर्न करती हूं, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Shri Milind Murli Deora; not 
present. Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil; not present. Shri A.A. Rahim.  
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala): Thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity.  Sir, first I 
would like to talk about the title of this B ill. This is the reflection of their political, 
narrow political motto, which is ‘One nation, One Language, and one Culture.’  So, 
don't undermine India's rich linguistic and cultural diversity. That is my request. So, I 
urge the Minister to rename this Bill as the Indian Aircraft Act.  Sir, while discussing 
this Bill, I would like to ask, through you, from the hon. Minister as to who is the 
custodian of the Indian aviation sector. Is it  the Minister or the Ministry? No, Sir. The 
Union Government has no control over the Indian aviation sector. 
 Our Indian aviation sector is controlle d by a 3-men army, namely, Tata, Indigo 
and Adani. This 3-men army controls the entir e aviation sector of India.  Sir, almost all 
the major airports are in Adani’s hands, while the skies are dominated by Tata and 
Indigo.  While introducing this Bill, the ho n. Minister proudly claimed that under the 
Narendra Modi Government, the number of airports and domestic air passengers has 
doubled but the hon. Minister conveniently forgot about the uncontrolled airfare hike. 
Hon. Minister, do you have any control over it?   
 Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, the private comp anies are dictating the ticket prices. 
The 356 th Report of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee, of 
which I was also a part, recommended cont rolling airfares and making air transport 
accessible to the common man. This was a long-standing demand of the entire 
country.  Sir, do you have the courage to do  this?  As a young Minister, do you have 
the courage to regulate the price mech anism? You cannot do that because de-
regulation is the fundamental mantra of neo-liberal policy.  You are making policies for 
the 3-man army. The hon. Minister claims that the number of new aircrafts purchased 
by Indigo and Tata as Government’s achie vement!  How can it be considered as 
Government’s achievement? If two companies decide to purchase new aircrafts, why 
is the Government bringing this matter to th e House?  It should be discussed in their 
own corporate board rooms. The hon. Mini ster was dreaming about making India the 
largest domestic aviation market in the wo rld, but what has the Government done for 
common people!  The Government has failed to control the sky-rocketing airfares and 
they have no control over it. The NRIs who are working abroad face unbearable 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
77

challenges. They cannot come home even if they get leave because airfares are 
exorbitant. Think about the plight of domestic passengers also.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): क ृपया समाÃत करȂ।  ...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM : Just a minute, Sir.  On festivals like Diwali, Onam and Pongal, 
they are forced to take loan just to book tickets!   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎय, आपके  बोलने का समय समाÃत हुआ। 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: I have one last point to make. 
* 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): डा. परमार जशवंतिंसह सालमिंसह। ...(Ëयवधान)... आपका 
समय समाÃत हुआ। यह अंिकत नहीं हो रहा है, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आपका समय समाÃत हुआ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... डा. परमार जशवंतिंसह सालमिंसह।   
 
DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH (Gujarat) : Thank you, hon. Vice-
Chairman, Sir, for allowing me to speak on  this important Bill, namely, the Bharatiya 
Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024. A new Bharat is be ing built and the Government is making 
unparalleled efforts to connect citizens acro ss different regions of the country. The air 
services have played a pivotal role in th is. Over the past few years, under the 
leadership of our hon. Prime Minister, Mo di ji, our Government has taken numerous 
decisions to provide seamless air services to the citizens of the country. To make air 
travel accessible and affo rdable for the common man, the UDAN scheme was 
launched on 21st October, 201 6. This scheme has played a crucial role in enhancing 
the air network in tier 2 and tier 3 cities. Today, India has become the third-largest 
domestic aviation market in the world. Ne w airports are being constructed in every 
State o
f the country. The total number of domestic air passengers in the country has 
nearly doubled as compared to 2014. 
 Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I represent the State of Gujarat in this House. 
Several efforts have been ma de by our Government under  the leadership of hon. 
Prime Minister to provide better air services to the citizens of India and Gujarat too. 
The Surat airport in Gujarat ha s been granted the status of an international airport.  
On behalf of the citizens of Gujarat, I ex tend my heartfelt gratitude to hon. Prime 
Minister and also the Minister of Civil Aviation. 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 Sir, after Ahmedabad and Rajkot, Surat has become Gujarat's third 
international airport. This will provide direct  travel facilities to the traders, passengers 
from Surat and the entire Gujarat region to the other countries. Through the UDAN 
scheme, several cities in Gujarat have been connected via air routes. New air services 
have been initiated to connect the cities of Gujarat with the major cities of the country. 
Hon. Chairman, Sir, the Bharatiya Vayuya n Vidheyak, 2024 has been introduced to 
enhance the security and oversight in the aviation sector and to meet the 
developmental needs and implement prov isions of international agreements 
effectively. Some of our colleagues in the Opposition have raised the question as to 
why this Bill is necessary. Sir, I would like to point out that the existing law in the 
aviation sector is nearly 90 years old.  Since independence, the law has been 
amended 21 times. Our respected Minist er has also mentioned such things.  
Considering the facilities for ai r passengers, it is essentia l to simplify the regulations 
with time. Due to the Government's proactive policies and schemes like UDAN, 
citizens of the country are now increasingly ab le to travel by air. The 21 amendments 
made since independence have created conf usion regarding air services and related 
rules for stakeholders in the aviation sector. To eliminate these ambiguities and 
simplify the regulations, the Government has introduced this Bill in this House. I 
extend my support to this Bill, which aims  to enhance the facility for air passengers 
and simplify regulations related to air travel.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI):  Now, Shri Ramji; not present.  
Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik; not present.  Shri Mission Ranjan Das. 
 
SHRI MISSION RANJAN DAS (Assam) :  Respected Vice-Chairman, Sir, with your 
permission, I rise to speak in support of  the Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024 and 
one new airport which is under construction. This Bill is aimed to enlarge the scope of 
civil aviation in multi dimensions. Our NDA Government, under the leadership of hon. 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, has incr eased the number of airports from 74 to 
157 since 2014. Similarly, the number of fl eets has also increased from 400 to 700. 
This Bill will help it to increase further.  Among the new airports undertaken, one is 
Doloo Airport in Cachar District of Assam.  Our area is called Barak Valley. In Barak 
Valley, one airport is already there. This is  called Silchar Airport.  But it is a military 
airport. This is why the need of one new airp ort was felt in the Barak Valley of Assam.  
Land for this was identified at Doloo Tea Es tate. By this time, compensation for land 
and other things has been disbursed to the beneficiaries. In February 2024, the 
Government of India granted site clearance approval to the Airports Authority of India.  
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
79

I request the hon. Minister, through you, to expedite the follow-up steps for its 
completion. I hope we will get a new airport in  the near future at Doloo.  Sir, our area 
needs it because many passengers are th ere. Considering this aspect, our new 
Ministry, under the leadership of Narendra Modi ji, considered it.    
 Ultimately, land was identified at Dol oo Tea Estate. For this cause, our hon. 
Chief Minister of Assam, Dr. Himanta Bisw a Sarma, and our former MP, Dr. Rajdeep 
Roy, helped a lot in identifying the land and solving the issues of compensation, etc.   
Now further work is about to start there. It is a greenfield airport. It requires 
investment from both the Government and ot hers under Public-Private Partnership. I 
request hon. Minister to take the follow-up  steps for its completion, so that we can 
find a new airport in the near future at Doloo. Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा (हिरयाणा): मान्यवर, आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवधेयक पर बोलने का मौका 
िदया, इसके  िलए आपको धन्यवाद। मेरे िलए सबसे बड़ी खुशी की बात यह है िक आप िंहदी Ģेमी 
चेयर पर बैठे हुए हȅ। अभी इस िवषय क े ऊपर काफी चचार् हुई है। हमारी एक माननीय सांसद बो
ल 
रही थीं िक क ेवल मातर् नाम बदलने क े िलए यह िवधेयक लाया गया है। इसमȂ अंगर्ेजी की बजाय 
िंहदी नाम कर िदया गया है।  
 मान्यवर, देश का दुभार्ग्य यह रहा िक आजादी क े बाद नाम ही नहीं बदल गए। 1977 तक 
िदÊली की सड़कȗ क े नाम भी इस Ģक
ार थे - यह हािडȊग लेन है, यह जॉजर् पंचम रोड है, यह 
सÃतम रोड है, यह िवक्
टोिरया रोड है, यह वेिंलगटन रोड है या यह वेिंलगटन हॉिÎपटल है, यह 
इरिवन हॉिÎपटल है। दासता क े िकसी िचन्ह को िमटाया ही नहीं गया और अंगर्ेिजयत का Ģभाव 
लगातार इतना बढ़ता रहा िक हमारी िजतनी भी ताई गुलाबो थीं, वे सारी की सारी रोज ी हो गईं, 
िजतने पजामे थे, वे Ãलाजो हो गए। मतलब इस देश मȂ अंगर्ेिजयत का Ģभाव  इतना बढ़ता रहा।  
लोिहया जी ने कहा था िक जब अंगर्ेज चले गए, तो अंगर्ेजी क्यȗ नहीं जा रही है?  महात् मा गांधी जी 
ने तो यहां तक कहा था िक अंगर्ेज चाहे दो िदन बाद चले जाएं, लेिकन अंगर्ेजी पहले चली जानी 
चािहए। भाषा की दासता भी देश की एक दासता है।  िंहदी हमारी आत्मा है, िंहदी देश का गौरव 
है, क ेवल मातर् भाषा नहीं है।  अगर हम िकसी दासता क े िच
न्ह को अपनी मातृभाषा मȂ, अपने देश 
की भाषा मȂ, राजभाषा मȂ बदलते हȅ, तो हम सबके  िलए यह गौरव का िवषय है। अब अगर हम 
गूगल पर अंगर्ेजी मȂ देखने लग जाएंगे, वह जैसा होगा, उसको मȅ एक उ दाहरण क े ǎारा बताना 
चाहता हूँ। एक जगह एक िटÃपणी आई हुई थी िक लौह पुरुष का गूगल पर अंगर्ेजी देखा गया, तो 
उसने उसको Îटील मैन कर िदया।  अब हमारी बहन सागिरक ा घोष जी बोल रही थीं, अगर गूगल 
पर सागिरका घोष का अंगर्ेजी देखȂ, तो पता नहीं कोई उसका नाम सी पैरेट कर देगा या पता नहीं, 
गूगल क्या बदल देगा। पिरवार वालȗ ने िकतना सुंदर नाम रखा है सागिरक ा घोष! बहुत ही गौरव 
का नाम है।अरिंवद घोष हमारे देश क े इतने बड़े कर्ांितकारी थे, िंचतक थे, दाशर्िनक थे, मेरी समझ 
मȂ ये उनके  वंशज हȗगी।  हमȂ िंहदी से Ģेम करना चािहए।  िंहदी हमारी आत्मा है। 
 मान्यवर, मȅ इसी बात क े साथ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक हमȂ पूरी दुिनया का नक्शा देखना 
चािहए, उसको समझना चािहए। िजस िदन गोबार्चेव काल मȂ रूस  का बँटवारा हुआ, अगले ही िदन 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

लेिननगर्ाद शहर का नाम बदलकर सȂट पीटसर्बगर् हो गया। इसमȂ एक िमनट भी नहीं लगा, लेिकन 
हम आज तक दासता क े िचन्हȗ को ढोते आ रहे हȅ। हमारे ऊपर अंगर्ेिजयत का इतना Ģभाव हो गया 
िक फटा हुआ कपड़ा, िजसको दिरदर्ता का सूचक माना जाता था, आज हमने इंग्लȅड, यूरोप की 
सारी फटी हुई पȅट्स यहां पर पहननी शुरू  कर दी हȅ। हमने उसको भी गौरव मान िलया है। यहां 
तक िक अब नई पȅट्स को भी फाड़-फाड़कर पहनना शुरू  कर िदया। पȅट िजतनी ज्यादा फटी हुई 
है, वह बाजार क े अंदर उतनी ही ज्यादा महंगी िमलती है। गुलामी का इससे बड़ा और कोई Ģतीक 
हो ही नहीं सकता, लेिकन आज भी लोग उस मानिसकता से बाहर आने की कोिशश नहीं कर रहे 
हȅ। जब मैकाले की आत्मा पािर्लयामȂट की िडबेट देखती होगी, सुनती होगी, तो वह बड़ी खुश होती 
होगी, क्यȗिक मैकाले ने िĤिटश पािर्लयामȂट मȂ यह कहा था। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎय, आप िवषय पर आ जाएँ।  
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: सर, थोड़ी सी भूिमका तो बनानी पड़ेगी, आप तो िंहदी Ģेमी हȅ! 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप इतना बड़ा Ģेम मत करो, िवषय पर आ जाओ।  
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: उन्हȗने एक बात कही थी िक अगर िकसी देश को दास बनाकर रखना है, तो 
उस देश से उसकी भाषा छीन लो।  अगर वह अपनी भाषा से कट जाएगा, तो वह अपनी संÎकृ ित 
से भी कट जाएगा और अपने सािहत्य से भी कट जाएगा। जब वह अपनी भाषा, सािहत्य और 
संÎकृ ित से कट जाएगा, तो िफर वह अपनी राÍटर्ीयता से भी कट जाएगा और तब उस देश को 
गुलाम बनाने मȂ कोई असुिवधा नहीं होगी, इसिलए सबसे पहले उसकी भाषा छीन लो।  
 सर, हमȂ बड़ा अचÇभा होता है िक हमारे अिधकतर माननीय अंगर्ेजी बोलने मȂ गौरव महसूस 
करते हȅ। अगर वे बंगाली मȂ बहस करȂ, तिमल मȂ बहस करȂ, कन्नड़ मȂ बहस करȂ, मलयालम मȂ 
बहस करȂ, तो वह सबको अच्छा लगता है और उन सबकी टर्ांसलेशन यहां पर िमल जाती है। हमȂ 
अपनी मातृभाषा से Ģेम करना चािहए। मान्यवर, इस भूिमका क े बाद अब मȅ इस िवधेयक पर आता 
हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): यह आपकी भूिमका है? 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: हिरयाणा का आदमी िवषय पर आने मȂ थोड़ा-सा टाइम ले लेता है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपकी भूिमका मȂ ही काम पूरा हो गया है।  आपका बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी रामच
ंदर् जांगड़ा: सर, क्या आप मुझे इस पर बोलने क े िलए थोड़ा और टाइम नहीं दȂगे?  देश मȂ 
नई टेक्नोलॉजी आई है।  
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
81

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपकी इतनी बड़ी भूिमका हो गई, यह पयार्Ãत है। 
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा: चिलए, आपकी मजीर् है।  जय िहन्द!  
 
डा .अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े (महाराÍटर्):  आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी 
जी एवं नागर िवमानन मंतर्ी, नायडू जी और मुरलीधर मोहोल जी का अिभनंदन करता हूँ।  मȅ 
इनका इसिलए अिभनंदन करता हूँ, क्यȗिक ये दो जवान िमिनÎटसर्, दो यंग िमिनÎटसर् इस 
मंतर्ालय को संभाले हुए हȅ और ये बड़ी तेजी और बड़ी कायर्-क्षमता क े साथ इस मंतर्ालय को चला 
रहे हȅ। मȅ इनका मन से आभारी हूँ और मन से अिभनंदन भी करता हूँ।   
 महोदय, मȅ भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 को अपना पूणर् समथर्न Ëयƪ करने क े िलए 
खड़ा हुआ हूँ। यह िवधेयक भारत क े नागर िवमानन ढांचे को आधुिनक बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक 
पिरवतर्नकारी कदम है। यह िवधेयक समयानुक ू ल, दूरदशीर् और िवमान संबंिधत उपकरणȗ क े 
िडजाइन िनमार्ण और रखरखाव जैसी महत्वपूणर् चुनौितयȗ का समाधान करता है। " अब हवाई 
चÃपल पहनने वाला भी हवाई जहाज मȂ सफर कर सके गा," Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े इस कथन को 
साकार करने की िदशा मȂ सरकार ने उÊलेखनीय कदम उठाये हȅ। आज हवाई यातर्ा क ेवल अमीरȗ 
तक ही सीिमत नहीं है, बिÊक अब आम आदमी क े सपनȗ को हकीकत मȂ बदल िदया गया है। "उड़े 
देश का आम नागिरक" योजना क े तहत छोटे शहरȗ और दूरदराज क े क्षेतर्ȗ को जोड़ा गया है।  
इस योजना क े अंतगर्त लगभग 600 से अिधक हवाई मागș पर उड़ान सेवाएं शुरू  हुई हȅ, िजनसे 
लाखȗ लोगȗ को तेज, सुरिक्षत और सÎती यातर्ा का लाभ िमल रहा है। देश मȂ चालू हवाई अƿȗ की 
संख्या 2014 मȂ 74 थी, जो अब 150 से अिधक हो गई है। मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का मन से आभारी हूँ िक 
हमारे देश मȂ इस नागर िवमानन मंतर्ालय क े माध्यम से इतना अच्छा कारोबार हो रहा है। िपछले 
एक दशक मȂ घरेलू हवाई याितर्यȗ की संख्या 60 िमिलयन से बढ़कर 350 िमिलयन से अिधक हो 
चुकी है। यह न क ेवल समय की बचत करता है, बिÊक रोजगार, िशक्षा और Ëयवसाय क े नए 
अवसर भी Ģदान करता है। यह सरकार की Ģितबǉता का Ģमाण है।  िवकास की हर ऊ ंचाई पर 
आम आदमी की िहÎसेदारी हो, इस उǈेÌय को पूरा करने क े िलए हवाई यातर्ा का यह िवÎतार 
भारत क े आत्मिनभर्र और समृǉ भिवÍय की ओर एक मजबूत कदम है।   
 आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारे एक िवǎान िमतर्, राघव चǀा जी अभी इस 
सभागृह मȂ नहीं हȅ। उन्हȗने परसȗ एयरपोटर् को बस Îटॉप कहा था, जो यही दशार्ता है िक अमीरȗ 
की क ु छ िगनी-चुनी जागीरदािरयȗ की जो जगह थी,  हमारे देश क े सामान्य तथा आम नागिरकȗ ने 
अब उसकी जगह ले ली है और गरीब आदमी भी हवाई जहाज का सफर कर रहा है।  
 आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारे एक िवǎान िमतर् राघव चǀा जी, जो अभी इस 
सभा मȂ नहीं हȅ, उन्हȗने कहा था िक समोसा महंगा हुआ है, पानी की बोतल महंगी हुई है। वे यह 
भूल गए हȅ िक अभी हर एयरपोटर् पर साउथ इंिडयन, नॉथर् इंिडयन थाली, कॉÇबो थाली, उǄपम, 
इडली, डोसा, उपमा, िमलेट की िखचड़ी, कॉफी, चाय, दूध आिद 100 रुपय े मȂ िमलता है। 
ÃलािÎटक की बोतल का पानी पीने क े बारे मȂ उनका अंगर्ेज़ी कÊचर अभी गया नहीं है। मोदी जी ने 
हाथ से बटन दबाकर या पैर से बटन दबाकर शुǉ जल मुÄत मȂ पीने क े िलए RO और  िमनरल 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

वाटर हर एयरपोटर् पर उपलÅध कराए हȅ। ये अंगर्ेज़ȗ की संÎकृ ित से बाहर आने को तैयार ही नहीं 
हȅ।  
 आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारी एक बहन भी क ु छ कह रही थी। उस बहन को मेरा 
जवाब है िक बम धमाके , हवाई जहाज़ हाईजैिंकग आिद अब मोदी जी क े ज़माने मȂ होना 
नामुमिकन है, क्यȗिक अभी िंहदुÎतान की सुरक्षा ऐसी है, जहां पिरन्दा भी पर नहीं मार सकता, 
यह मोदी जी का ज़माना है।  
 आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मेरे माता -िपता िकसान हȅ, उन्हȗने आज तक िदÊली 
नहीं देखी है और जीवन मȂ कभी हवाई जहाज़ की यातर्ा नहीं की है, क्यȗिक वे डरते थे। कांगर्ेस क े 
ज़माने मȂ हवाई जहाज़ िगरते थे, धड़Êले से उड़ जाते थे, तो वे बोलते थे िक हम उस हवाई जहाज़ 
मȂ नहीं बैठȂगे। वे 85 साल क े हȅ। मȅ खेत मȂ जाकर उनको िमला और उनसे बोला िपताजी, माता जी 
अब मोदी जी का ज़माना है, तो उन्हȗने कहा िक उन्हȗने तुझे राज्य सभा सांसद बनाया है, तो हम 
उनका धन्यवाद करने क े िलए िदÊली आएंगे। वे हवाई यातर्ा क े िलए मान गए। हमारे सारे सरदार 
लोग गुरु  गोिंवद िंसह जी को मत्था टेकने क े िलए नांदेड़ से िदÊली आते हȅ। अब हम नांदेड़ से 
िदÊली िसफर् दो घंटे मȂ आते हȅ। आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, वे िंहडन एयरपोटर् पर आते हȅ। 
हम िसफर् ढाई हज़ार रुपय े मȂ आते हȅ, नांदेड़ से िदÊली तक का िकराया ढाई हज़ार रुपय े है। वषर् 
2014 क े पहले जब कांगर्ेिसयȗ की सरकार थी, तब नांदेड़ से िदÊली आने मȂ दो िदन लगते थे। यह 
जो दो घंटे मȂ िदÊली आने का सारा Ǜेय है, वह मोदी जी को है और हमारे युवा िमिनÎटर, राम 
मोहन नायडू जी की िमिनÎटर्ी को है।  
 यहां हमारे बहुत सारे िवǎान िमतर् हȅ, मुझे यह समझ नहीं आता िक उनको िहन्दी भाषा से 
क्यȗ आपिǄ है? िहन्दी हमारी राÍटर्भाषा है, मातृभाषा है, िहन्दी हमारी मां समान है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
संÎकृ त दुिनया की सारी भाषाओं की जननी है, हमारी माता है। इसिलए इस िवधेयक का नाम 
वायुयान िवधेयक, 2024 रखा गया है।  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, I have a point of order.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): बहस मȂ क ैसा Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र? 
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े: आने वाली पीिढ़यȗ को हमारी संÎकृ ित को भूलना नहीं चािहए। 
हमारे िहन्दुÎतान की संÎकृ ित हज़ारȗ साल पुरानी है। Ģभु रामचंदर् जी क े ज़माने मȂ पुÍपक िवमान 
भी हुआ करता था। हनुमान जी, बजरंग बली हमारे वायु पुतर् कहलाते थे। हम और िकतने िदनȗ 
तक अंगर्ेज़ȗ की गुलामी मȂ जीना चाहते हȅ? मेरे िमतर्ȗ, अंगर्ेज़ȗ की गुलामी वाली मानिसकता से 
बाहर आओ। हमारे िवÍणु भगवान का जो गरुड़  वायुयान था, उसका नाम लेकर बाहर क े देशȗ ने 
गरुड़ा  एयरलाइंस तक रखा था। अभी हमारे भाई ने जो फटे कपड़ȗ मȂ रहने का और अंगर्ेज़ȗ की 
मानिसकता मȂ रहने क े बारे मȂ बताया है। क्या इसी मȂ रहने मȂ हम खुशी मानते हȅ? हमारे Ģभु 
रामचंदर् जी, हमारे Ģभु िवÍणु भगवान जी पुÍपक िवमान मȂ आए थे, इनका वाहन गरुड़  था।  
 महोदय, िवÌव मȂ हमारी संÎकृ ित का सÇमान बढ़ाने क े िलए मेरे िवÌव गौरव नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी, नायडू जी और हमारे महाराÍटर् क े मुरलीधर मोहोल जी, िजन्हȗने यह मंतर्ालय संभाला है, 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
83

इनका मȅ बहुत -बहुत अिभनन्दन इसिलए भी करता हूं िक इसका नाम ‘भारतीय वायुयान िवधेयक, 
2024’ रखा है। यह िबल बहुत समथर्नीय है, सशƪ है। यह हमारे देश की Ģगित की एक नई पहल 
है, हमारे गरीब, िकसान, गाँव का मज़दूर और सारे लोग अब हवाई जहाज़ मȂ बैठकर अपने देश 
की Ģगित को देख रहे हȅ। हमारे देश का Ëयापार बढ़ रहा है, हमारा िकसान आगे चलकर गरीबी से 
बाहर आकर देश क े िवकास मȂ …(समय की घंटी)… अपना िवÌव गौरव बना रहा है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): क ृपया अपनी बात समाÃत करȂ। 
 
डा.  अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े: मȅ माननीय मोदी जी का मन से आभार वयƪ करता हूं, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI):  Shri Praful Patel, not present.  
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi. 
  
Ǜीमती िĢयंका चतुवȃदी ( महाराÍटर्): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे इस इÇपॉटȄट िबल पर 
बोलने का मौका िदया, उसके  िलए मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देना चा
हती हूं। नायडू जी मेरे िमतर् हȅ, तो 
उनके  बारे मȂ कोई criticism नहीं होगा, बिÊक यह इस िबल को लेकर है।   
 सर, यह जो िबल आ रहा है, Ministry of Finance और नीित आयोग ने 2019 मȂ जब 
एयरपोट्सर् का privatization हो रहा था, उन्हȗने 2019 क े biddi ng process को कहा था िक 
उसमȂ बहुत किमयां हȅ। किमयां इस आधार पर बोली थीं, क्यȗिक जो 6 एयरपोट्सर् Ģाइवेटाइज़ हुए 
थे, वे सब एक ही इंसान को गए  थे, एक ही गर्ुप को गए थे, िजनके  पास कोई prior experience 
नहीं था। The Department of Economic Affairs ने यह कहा था िक कोई  भी private player, 
जो privatization मȂ भागीदारी ले रहा है, उसको दो एयरपोट्सर् से ज्यादा नहीं िमलने चा
िहए, पर 
पिर्टकु लर िवशेष industrialist को करीब सात एयरपोट्सर् िमले थे, िजसमȂ से छह एयरपोट्सर् तो 
50 साल क े िलए िमले हȅ। एक ही एयरपोटर् financially viable है, बाकी सारे losses मȂ हȅ और वे 
कौन हȅ, वह George Soros हमȂ नहीं बताएगा, वह Ministry of Finance से ही पता चल रहा है 
िक वे Adani airports हȅ। जब  macro-bill है, जहां पर हम airli
nes की बात कर रहे हȅ, airports 
की बात कर रहे हȅ, infrastructure की बात कर रहे हȅ। इन्हȗ ने कहा िक 880 नए एयरकर्ाÄटस 
आने वाले हȅ, पर यह बताना भूल गए िक पांच airlines, जो full service airlines होती थीं, 17 साल 
मȂ अब एक ही रह गई है और वह Air India है और िकसी तरीके  का fair competition, जो हम 
कहते हȅ, कोई fair competition नहीं रह गया है, क ेवल mono poly and duopoly रह गई है। दो 
एयरलाइन्स पूरे aviation sector को संभाल रही हȅ, िजसकी वजह से high tariffs, जो हम face 
करते हȅ, वह इसी वजह से फ े स करते हȅ। सर, 880 एयरकर्ाÄट्स हȅ, लेिकन िकसके  पास 
monopoly and duopoly है, वह हम सब जानते हȅ। वह In digo Airlines and Air India है। 
दूसरा, यह कहा जाता है िक जो passenger fare िनधार्िरत होता है, उसमȂ 40 Ģितशत ATF fuel 
का िहÎसा होता है। उस पर भी जो इनके  सारे Îटेट्स हȅ, िजस तरीके  से उस पर टैक्सेस लगते हȅ, 
उस पर भी िकसी तरीके  की कारर्वाई नहीं की गई है, िजससे जनता को राहत िमले। मंतर्ी जी ने 
उड़ान Îकीम क े बारे मȂ कहा था िक उड़ान Îकीम से हवाई चÃ
पल वाले हवाई यातर्ा कर रहे हȅ।  
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

अभी महाराÍटर् क े भी एक एमपी बताकर गए हȅ िक क ै से उड़ान भर रहे हȅ। सर, 870 रूट्स 
िनधार्िरत िकए थे, िजसमȂ से तीन साल क े अंदर 106 रूट्स discontinue कर िदए, तो यह कहां से 
हम कह रहे हȅ िक हम नए एयरपोट्सर् बना रहे हȅ, वे एयरपोट्सर्  भी बन रहे हȅ, लेिकन वे  
operational
 नहीं हȅ। उसमȂ से आधे से ज्यादा बंद हो रहे हȅ। Eight airports under the UDAN 
Scheme are not operational, वे कौन से हȅ – ते जपुर, पोरबंदर, िहसार, िबदर्, पुदुच्चेरी, 
पठानकोट, पाक्यȗग और क ुशीनगर हȅ और ये operationalize ही  नहीं हुए हȅ। जब राम मंिदर बना 
था, उस समय अयोध्या की भी बहुत सारी direct flights शुरू  की थीं। 16 से ज्यादा मुंबई से चल 
रही थीं और अब एक भी नहीं चल रही है। ये जो schemes announce होती  हȅ, वे कहीं न कहीं  
implementation मȂ िवफ
ल होती हȅ। …(समय की घंटी)… सर, एक last point है, क्यȗिक वह मेरे 
parliamentary question का मुझे जवाब िमला था। जनवरी, 2023 से करीब 1,100  hoax calls 
आए हȅ, hijack calls आए हȅ, िजसकी वजह से एयरलाइन्स को economic losses हो रहे हȅ और 
साथ ही साथ जो mental trauma passengers go through करते हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप समाÃत कीिजए।   
 
Ǜीमती िĢय
ंका चतुवȃदी: सर, मȅ एक सेक Ȃ ड ही लूंगी। मȅ बताना चाह रही हूं िक ये खासकर मुंबई 
और िदÊली एयरपोट्सर् को Ģभािवत करते हȅ, air line sector को Ģभािवत करते हȅ। उसका 
economic loss िकतना  है, िकस तरीके  से हम उसको handle कर Ȃगे, ये सारी चीज़Ȃ िनधार्िरत 
करना जरूरी है। इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ मȅ कहूंगी िक यह िवधेयक अच्छा है और इसको और पुख्ता 
बनाया जा सकता है।  
 
सुǛी सुिÍमत
ा देव (पिÌचमी बंगाल): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ संिक्षÃत मȂ कहूंगी। I congratulate 
hon. Minister on this Bill. I am sorry to say it is not only illegal, but it is unconstitutional 
for three reasons. One, it is in violation of the latest December 2024 Supreme Court 
Judgment, which says the Government ca nnot appoint the arbitrator unilaterally. 
Number two: How can you, through rules,  bring in criminal offences? That is 
legislature versus the executive. Policy co nfusion is there. Where you have done 
privatization, how can you now control a re gulatory body? Has it been done ever in 
telecom or energy? Look at your own history of privatization. And, last but not the 
least, this Ministry is not here only to regu late this sector. And,  if you choose to do 
that, what you need to regulate is the prices of flying across the country. Every single 
Member here has raised that, Sir, and ta ken this opportunity. Today, you have two 
options on this nation's policy issue. One is profit, which is on the left of me, and the 
other is people, which is on the right of me.  
 As All India Trinamool Congress, a voice of the people, we urge upon you, आप 
कहते थे िक चÃपल से Ãलेन मȂ चढ़Ȃगे; you will ensure security, you will ensure routes, but 
make it possible for the poor person to get o
 n  t o  t h a t  a i r c r a f t  f i r s t .  T h a t  i s  m o s t  
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
85

important.  I urge upon the hon. Minister that do not pass a law against a Supreme 
Court judgement, and Silchar क े एयरपोटर् क े बारे मȂ कहा गया है। उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ कहना 
चाहती हूं िक एयरपोटर् तो मुझे भी चािहए, but this airport, the way the land acquisition has 
been done, it has been on the blood, sweat  and homes of tea garden labourers. 150 
जेसीबी लाकर, जमीन खोदकर, एक घंटे मȂ एयरपोटर् बना रहे हȅ, लेिकन आज तक उन्हȂ 
compensation नहीं िमला है।  So,
 we are for development,  we are for good policy. We 
are for the aviation industry to move ahead.  Especially, coming from the North-East, 
we want that the people should be able  to travel from distant places into the 
mainland. But whether it is possible is what you need to think. Subsidize the tickets. It 
has been done before by DoNER and Aviation Ministry. It can be done again. We will 
support every pro-people policy, but, today,  I am sad to say, Sir, through the Chair 
to the hon. Minister, there is every possi bility of this Bill being struck down as ultra 
vires of Article 14 for Government unilaterally appointing an arbitrator. This Bill will get 
struck out for the grip you want on this regulatory body. And last but not the least, the 
Legislature and the Executive- there is a difference. This is unconstitutional to, 
through rules, make criminal offences. Thank you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Now Shri Kinjarapu 
Rammohan Naidu to reply to the discussion.  
 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION  (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU) : Sir, I 
thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. In fact, I would like to start by 
giving my thanks to all the speakers who have  participated in this important Bill right 
from Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain,  Shri Raghav Chadha, Shri  Shambhu Sharan Patel, 
Shrimati Sagarika Ghose, Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, Shri 
Ramji Lal Suman, Shri S Niranjan Reddy, Shri  Brij Lal, Shrimati Sulata Deo, former 
Prime Minister, who is also here, Shri H.D. Devegowda, Dr. Fauzia Khan, Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P, Dr. Bhim Singh, Shri Haris Beeran, Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha, Shri A. A. Rahim, Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh, Shri Mission 
Ranjan Das, Shri Ram Chander Jangra, Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade, Shrimati 
Priyanka Chaturvedi and Ms. Sushmita Dev. I thank each and everyone who has 
heartfully participated in this debate. Th rough this debate, many suggestions, which 
are very, very important for us as a Mini stry to know—some of the feedbacks are 
very, very important for us to know—have come through all the speakers and, some 
have, maybe, crossed the line a little bit an d used this debate for their own political 
purposes. I would not dwell too deep into that because that is something the 
opposition--it has a right to do it -- keep s doing it all the time, but I will keep the 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

debate very positive and I would like to comment on all the important suggestions that 
have come in. I would like to start also by  addressing the elephant in the room, which 
is about the name of the Act, that is , the Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak. I also 
understand that it might be a little difficult  thing to pronounce for a lot of people  िक 
यह गले मȂ अटकता होगा, पर इसमȂ शिमȊदा होने की ऐसी कोई बात नहीं है। This is something 
that you have to know the intention with which the Government has put this name. 
That is, यह है िक भारत की जो िवरासत है, संÎकृ ित है, पहचान है, उसको िदखाने का, दशार्ने 
का एक Ģयत्न है। अभी ये तीन वड्सर् रखने की योज ना है। इसमȂ कहीं पर भी कोई काँÎटीǷूशनल 
वॉयलेशन नहीं है। जो भी आिर्टकÊस मȂशन िकए गए हȅ, उन्हȂ कहीं पर भी क ु छ अपोज नहीं िकया 
गया है। One of them is Article, 348(1) that has been mentioned, which is about the 
authoritative text.  That is definitely in Engl ish; it is there.  Th en they mentioned about 
Article 120. But there also, there is no vi olation about it.  Then about the Official 
Language Act also, it is in accordance with it. So there is no point of Constitution, but 
there might be a feeling that some thing has been imposed.                       
And, I am also a very proud Telugu person.  I speak Telugu language.  I write Telugu 
language. And, I am proud of my cultur e and my upbringing.  So, you might be 
questioning, ‘You are a Telu gu person’, how can you allow this kind of a thing? हमारे 
तेलुगु मȂ भी भारत को भारत ही बोलते हȅ। ‘ Vayu’ is also a Telugu word.  So, Bharatiya 
Vayuyan Vidheyak becomes half Telugu for me  also.  So, it is a mixture of all the 
languages here.  It is like everyone coming  together, we want this thing.  With the 
colonialization, there has been a small coc oon that has been developed.  And it is, 
…(Interruptions)…  Let me reply, Sir.  I have caref ully listened to each and everyone.  
No matter what the allegation is, whatever  the suggestion is, I have listened to each 
and every one.  And, I will address the Chair. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
So, when this whole colonization happened,  we created a cocoon.  Now, under the 
leadership of hon. Prime Minister, Narendra Modiji, we want to break that cocoon and 
bring the butterfly out and show the colors of  true India.  And, that is what we are 
doing here.  And, this name is a small indication towards it.  The text is there in 
English.  So, there shouldn't be any prob lem for any English-speaking person to, in 
fact, get afraid that th ere are three words here. अब यहाँ पर कोपरिनकस लेन है, यह 
िकसी क े गले मȂ अटकता है, तो क्या उसे बदल दȂ?  कोपरिनकस लेन तो है ही। And, my name 
is Kinjarapu Rammohan Naidu. When som
e people say Kinjarapu, there might be 
some problem with them. They can't pronounce it the way I pronounce it.  But that 
doesn't mean I will change my name so that it becomes easier for them. यह तो मेरी 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
87

पहचान है। अभी शायद इसे दो-तीन बार बोलने से थोड़ी मुिÌकल होती होगी। But, India has 
gotten used to so many things.  Sir, I thin k, they will get used to this one also.  
Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak is just to create the identity of the languages.  On top of 
that -- I have seen. -- you are mentioning  about other languages also.  I was not 
understanding why Hindi was brought in.  In fact ‘Vayuyan’ is also a Sanskrit word.  
And, you really want to appreciate the lang uages and the culture of this country.  I 
would like the Opposition to al so appreciate that on the 3 rd October of this year, the 
Cabinet has declared five languages, Marathi, Assamese, Bengali, Pali, and Prakrit 
as Classical Languages.  If you really lo ve the languages, you should appreciate the 
decision of the Government.  And, how much this NDA Government protects and 
promotes the languages of India!  We also recently celebrated the Constitution Day 
on that day, we have proudly released the Constitution, not only in English and Hindi, 
but we have also done it in Sanskrit and Maithili.  So, you see that there is a whole 
conscious effort that all the languages sh ould be given their importance, all the 
languages should be protected, and all th e languages should be promoted. I think 
this is one point that I want to make re garding the language debate that has been 
going on, Sir.   
 And on top of that, I have already given the numbers on UDAN during my 
opening speech also on how the numbers have been doubled from 2014 to 2024. 
Now, we have gone through the numbers. We have seen all the airports coming up. 
We have seen passenger traffic being incr eased.  Sometimes when we go through it, 
when it becomes a normality, we feel that it is just a regular thing that has been 
happening, but if you have to compare it  with other developing countries or 
developed countries, then you would see that how doubling a number in 10 years is 
very, very difficult. And, that is something which has been a challenge for India also 
and that challenge has been successfully addressed. We have created, we have 
doubled the number of airports, doubled the number of passenger traffic and doubled 
the number of aircraft fleet. But, for us, I can proudly say, under the leadership of 
Modiji, aviation is not just looked upon as how many number of passengers have 
increased. I also agree to a certain point that  it is not about just about the numbers.  
Numbers I am giving to show you a pict ure on how much progress we have made. 
But if you look at, in true sense, why we want to promote aviation, why we want to 
make it one of the best sectors in the count ry, in the whole world, it is because when 
we talk about aviation, we also talk about tourism. When we talk about aviation, we 
talk about economic activity. When we talk about aviation, we talk about real estate 
growth, we talk about job creation. When we talk about aviation, we talk about 
industry. When we talk about aviation, we talk about commerce. We talk about trade.  
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

And when we talk about aviation, we talk  about culture. And when we talk about 
aviation, we talk about agriculture also. An d that is why aviation is a very important 
nodal sector that needs to be given that pu sh. And, with this idea, the whole aviation 
sector has been thoroughly and deeply und erstood on what the true potential India 
has. And, we have seen that there are multiple gaps also.Now Rs.90,000 crores 
CapEx has been put in to create airport infrastructure. 
 But, creating infrastructure itself is a challenge and when I took charge as the 
Minister of Civil Aviation, I have promised to the people of this country. Sir, she has 
always been so caring, like a mother; thank you Madam. When we look deeper, it is 
just not about creating the infrastructure, bu t, it is about connecting them also. Now 
you can spend a lot of money, you can create the infrastructure, you can create more 
airports, but, the ultimate challenge is ho w do you connect? And, that is where by 
bringing in all the aspects of the Govern ment, we created the UDAN Scheme which is 
‘Ude Desh ka Aam Naagrik’. This is a mark et-driven industry where the airlines feel 
that there might be non-viability in running  a route, the Government has taken the 
responsibility, little bit on itself, throug h the UDAN scheme, and provided the viability 
gap funding. It was the first time that it has been done at such  a large scale through 
the UDAN scheme. Now, we have started 609 ro utes in the country in a span of just 
eight years. Sir, nowhere in the world you would have seen such a scheme which has 
been run by the Government itself, so that  the airlines can come and start the non-
viable routes and facilitate the routes. We have operationalized 86 airports under 
UDAN. And out of these 86 airports, 20 we re under-served, but 66 airports were 
totally un-served. What I mean by ‘un-served’ is that not a single flight was going to 
these airports. But, the Government ha s taken up that challenge. We have 
constructed the airports, but, we have to  start the airline connectivity also. Under 
UDAN scheme, we have given the viability ga p funding and we were able to run all 
these airports. We were giving them those connections which were very much 
required by the people of that State or that region or that airport. We have 
operationalised 86 airports and we can proudly say that UDAN has been a real 
success story of the Indian aviation whic h we are showcasing to the whole world 
under the leadership of Sh ri Narendra Modi. Why I say the whole world? In 
September, we had one conference--Asia P acific Ministerial Conferenc--where 41 
countries have participated and there were  stakeholders from aviation across the 
globe and 29 countries have sent the best of  the people who represent aviation from 
their countries. I have heard all of them speaking in that conference and they have 
proudly said that the real th ing that we can pick up from India today is how it has 
improved the domestic connectivity within the country and how it has launched the 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
89

RCS UDAN scheme so that it could facilitate their regional aviation in a very big way. 
Sir, for most of the countries, aviation be comes more of an international affair. How 
do you connect your country better to anot her country? But, a lot of them could not 
crack the challenge of internal connectivit y. Now, with this UDAN scheme, we are 
showcasing it to the world that a little push, a little commitment from the Government, 
can create wonders and that is what we have done through the UDAN scheme. And 
now, through the UDAN scheme, we have addressed the issue of accessibility.  
 Now, the other thing that I have mentio ned after taking charge as Minister was 
that I want to bring in affordability also. I understand all the concerns that each and 
every Member has raised regarding air fares. I am also a citizen of this country and I 
was also a Member and, before Member, I was also a passenger. So, I know about 
the challenges that the people of this co untry face while travelling. I also understand 
the true spirit in which people would have spoken about air fares. But, you have to 
understand about the procedure of air fares regulation. This debate has been there for 
quite some time, and internationally also. Th e process that they follow is they keep 
the aviation air ticket mech anism as a very de-regulated sector because that is how 
the whole sector moves forward and that is how there is a win-win situation for 
everyone. The market plays its game and eve ryone gets facilitated in the process and 
this is an international procedure. Nowhere in the world, no country is regulating the 
air prices and seeing progress in aviation. It is a de-regularized sector. At one point of 
time, in our country also, there was a re gulation on air fares through the Air 
Corporations Act. When was th is Air Corporations Act take n out? It was in the year 
1994 that the then Government, the then leaders, thought that aviation needs a real 
push so we have to deregula te and that is when the de -regularization happened. In 
1994, the Air Corporations Act was taken aw ay in which it was mentioned that air 
fares need to be capped. Afte r that it has been a free ma rket. It has been a market 
with a dynamic air fare mechanism. I have  another report also. Many reports are 
there. I have also been thoroughly studying the air fare mechanism. I would like to tell 
the whole House and the people of this country that we, from the Ministry also 
monitor the prices. 
 We have a Tariff Monitoring Unit under our DGCA, which thoroughly looks after 
each and every fare that is happening in th e country. And, there is a liability on the 
airlines also.  Before they decide on a pri ce for a certain route or for a certain sector, 
they have to send it to us in the DGCA. No w, there was a circular in 2010.  When the 
price mechanism has to be sent to the Mi nistry, they are given a one month time 
period that for the next month what they are going to charge.  On the first day of that 
month, they have to tell the Ministry itself how much they are going to charge for, say, 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

so many seats in this bucket, so many seats in that bucket. It is a mechanism that 
they follow. But in that very circular, wh ich was released in 2010, there was also a 
condition saying that within 24 hours, they can change the prices again, that seemed 
to be a little bit favouring the airlines or favouring to dynamically change at a much 
faster pace. Now, we in this Governme nt, are committed to bring the affordability 
factor. We want to see how best we can do. So, we are removing that clause; we are 
just keeping it for one month. So, whatever fa re is there, within one month, they have 
to address it to us. And, we feel this kind  of mechanism is going to address a little bit 
about the irregularities that we see in the airfares. Many  hon. Members have spoken 
about airfares. And, I also want to mention here that the biggest chunk of the airfare 
goes to the fuel price. I do n't know how many people know that these are the fuel 
prices, the taxes on that, the VAT on the fu el price, which is decided by the States 
itself, is also responsible for high airfares. And, we, from the Ministry, are proactively 
trying to address this airfare issue.  We have constantly written to all the States.  And, 
some States have obliged too; some States realised it and have reduced it to even 1 
per cent. They have kept it below 4 per cent.  And, when they have done this, it is 
ultimately going to -- even if they lose a little bit of revenue from this taxing -- 
promote the aviation. So, it is going to be a win-win situation. And, a lot of States 
have done it. But, West Bengal, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, etc., are the States which carry 
very high VAT percentage. So, to the hon.  Members from thes e States, who might 
have raised about this airfare issue, I would once again make a very proactive 
approach that they speak to their respective State Governments.  And, if they can get 
the VAT reduced that is going to reduce the airfares because  45 per cent of the price 
of a ticket is because of the fuel prices. So, if you cut down  VAT, then, definitely, it is 
going to bring down the airfares. So, that is  one request that I would like to make to 
all the MPs who represent th ese States and they speak to their respective State 
Governments. And, as I have said, a Tari ff Monitoring Unit is  there. On one key 
observation that we have found about this ‘2 4 hour’, we want to change, we want to 
move into that direction and we are comp aring all the airfares of the last year, 
previous years because we also want to fi nd a trend. Now, because it is a market-
orientated system, whenever you see a festival or whenever you see some kind of 
huge event happening in a certain region or whenever there seems to be a huge inflow 
and outflow of passengers because of some activity that is happening there, then 
definitely the market seems to push it, the demand increases and suddenly because 
of the demand, the airfares also try to creep  up. When I was presenting this Bill in the 
Lok Sabha, this issue had been flagged over  there too. In fact, hon. Speaker of the 
Lok Sabha also mentioned and suggested that  we should speak with the airlines and 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
91

d o  i t .  A n d ,  w e  h a v e  d o n e  t h a t  a l s o  i n  the month of August. We sat down with the 
airlines; we sensitised them about this problem that this was not a Government’s 
problem, this was a people's problem. Since hon. Speaker had also mentioned about 
it, we met the airlines, we sensitised them. And, after the Diwali season, we observed 
that two days prior to the previous Diwali an d two days prior to this year’s Diwali, in 
the major sectors between the metros and the major connectivity points where huge 
traffic flows, the prices  have reduced to the tune of 2 per cent to 42 pe r cent. This is 
something done just by proactively reacting to the suggestions that you have given, 
interacting with the airlines and sensitising them that we will be thoroughly monitoring 
the airfares.  We have the rules in place and if anything happens out of the rules, then 
we can penalise them also. So, we are maki ng the Tariff Monitoring Unit more and 
more robust so that airlines can't act acco rding to their whims and fancies and they 
don’t feel that they are in a closed room and they can do whatever they want. We are 
keeping a watchful eye on them and we are moving one step at a time and we want to 
ensure हवाई चÃपल से हवाई जहाज का जो सफर है, वह अभी तक आधा तो सच हो गया है और 
पूरी तरह से इसमȂ और लोगȗ को शािमल करने का जो काम है, वह हम आगे करते रहȂगे, यह 
सरकार की तरफ से हमारा वा
दा है।   
 And, on top of this, air fares, there wa s also an issue on bomb threats also. If 
you look at the bomb threats, it was duri ng a specific period. There were multiple 
instances before also.  Once in a while these were happening.  But, from 10th October 
to 24th November, there was a sudden surge and so many threats were happening on 
the social media, especially, on the Twitter,  and some were through calls and all.   
So, the first thing I want to tell the House is that, for us, as a Ministry, safety and 
security is the topmost priority.  Now, a th reat can be a hoax threat, or it can be a 
fake threat, but, for us, once a threat is received, we have to follow the protocol 
because we cannot put any life at risk, just  based on assumption s or based on what 
we think the threat could be.  So, during th at time, we increased the security and the 
overall surveillance.  On the overall security measures that we need to take, we have 
improved. We have kept that mechanism very, very dynamic. So, we learnt a lot while 
addressing these threats. With whatever g ood feedback that came in through the 
Ministry, through the BCAS, through the MHA, through MeiTY – all these 
Departments combined together, we have tried to address this problem as a dynamic 
situation. And, of the threats that were received, only 3.24 per cent of the flights got 
diverted. This is how much of these things we were able to address.  We were trying 
to get down the inconvenience faced by the passengers to the very minimum. That 
was one dynamic approach whic h we followed during the bomb threats. But, I agree 
that this can’t keep happening all the time. Now, they can’t keep taking advantage of 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

this situation that we are going to check each and every plane wh enever a threat is 
received, and they can’t do all these hoax threats, because all the threats we received 
were hoax threats. We thoroughly followe d the process and nowhere we found that 
there was any real threat. But, as we move forward, we understand that this can’t be 
followed. So, we are making some legislativ e changes also on this. We have Aircraft 
Security Rules and through these Aircraft Secu rity Rules, what we are trying to bring 
in is a legislation change, where whoever found guilty of doing this will be put under 
no-fly list.  So, this is one approach that we are taking, so that it acts a deterrent.  In 
three instances, we have found out that there have been 11 different IDs that had been 
used through social media and the police,  especially, the Mumbai Police and the 
Delhi Police have made some attempts to catch some people also. They have found 
out that one person who was going after th is had some kind of personal grudge 
against the person who was flying on that flight. So, for that reason, he puts in a 
threat on social media that there is a bomb on the plane.  So, there are some who are 
using it for very petty pranking styles, not understanding the whole seriousness about 
the air travel and the security that we follow. We do not want people to step into the 
direction of using the aviation sector for doing such pranksters. So, to put a 
deterrent, we are changing th e Aircraft Security Rules an d making the no-fly list for 
the people who do these kinds of activities. Also, there is another Act.  Now, people 
have mentioned: Why don’t you put it in this  Act also?  But, under the Civil Aviation, 
we have another Act which is  the Swaska Act, Suppression  of Unlawful Acts against 
Safety of Civil Aviation. This is another Act which specifically deals with these offences 
and unlawful activities regarding the plane. We  found that that can be strengthened a 
little bit. So, we are going in to amend that  law. We are bringing in slightly more 
stringent laws into that Act itself, which wi ll address the concern that has been raised 
today.   So, in very quick time, we would lik e to bring it to the House also, so that the 
Amendment that is proposed  in the Swaska Act can also get passed.  That is 
regarding the bomb threats that we are facing. 
 On top of that, there are some other issues. DigiYatra and privacy concerns 
keep coming under questions also, but I have  to say that as regards the DigiYatra, 
almost three crore people have used it till now. They have found it very, very 
convenient because it takes 20 to 25 seconds through the CISF security, with the 
usage of this DigiYatra, it becomes five seconds for them to cross gate to gate. It has 
been put at multiple points. On e is at the entry of the airpor t, then, it is there at the 
security check-in and also at the boarding  gate. So, at these three points we are 
using DigiYatra system. First and foremost, DigiYatra is a totally voluntary system. It is 
not mandatory, that we are pushsing it on to the people or the passengers.  Whoever 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
93

feels that it is convenient for him or her to use the DigiYatra, only he gets to use it.   
How do we address privacy issue? There is a certain audit on this.  There is a forensic 
audit which has been done. Everyone has poin ted out that no privacy threat is being 
done by the DigiYatra.                   
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
Whatever information is stored in the Digi  Yatra system, it gets purged. Once you use 
Digi Yatra, the whole information about th e Aadhaar or whatever  details you put in 
gets stored on your phone itself. It doesn't go to any other place. Only when you put 
in the boarding card, the airport gets noti fied that you are travelling through this 
airport at this time. So, within a stipulated  time, the information goes to the airport so 
that when you reach the gate, the airport ha s that information. Once you cross it and 
once you have travelled from that airport, the data gets purged in itself. So there is no 
place which stores all your data, and if ther e is a data-threat that needs to happen, 
then all the people who use Digi Yatra, all those phones need to be hacked. So many 
phones whoever are using Digi Yatra, they  all need to be hacked consistently; 
otherwise, there is no one place where all the data of that Digi Yatra systems get 
stored. So there is no privacy concern in that.  
 Other than that, there was a mention of ‘drones and advanced air mobility.’ I 
am very happy that people are also seeing that aviation has many other sectors. 
Otherwise, people feel that we only deal wi th the airplanes. But whatever is there in 
the space, whatever utilizes the space, any kind of vehicle that utilizes the space, it all 
comes under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. We  have defined this thoroughly in the Act 
itself because this is a very robust indu stry. The rules need to be consistently 
changed. You have the air spaces and it is an inte rnational affair. If all of these things 
come together here, then, you need to ha ve a very robust mechanism. Somewhere I 
have said in the opening speech also that th e International Civil Aviation Organization, 
which has 193 member countries, contin uously recommends us on what the 
protocols need to be or what  the requirements need to be . So, once they say that, 
‘Aacha yeh karo ,’ then, every time I can't bring ev erything to the Parliament. So we 
are bringing it in the principle Act. In the principle Act itself, we are saying, let us have 
the authority to make these rules a little more stronger, and once we do that, the rules 
can follow according to the recommendations that we receive. Just like how we have 
rules for the passengers or rules for safety re quirements for the aircraft, similarly, we 
have made rules for the drones also, and we are stepping into making rules for 
advanced air mobility vehicles. You will all be very surprised and excited also that 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

within one year, this may happe n because a lot of research is going into advanced air 
mobility. This is something which is very exciting for a country like India where coming 
from the airport into the city when you are in these metro cities, everywhere you find 
this challenge. If there is a small traffic jam, you are stuck for one hour or two hours 
while coming home from the airport itself an d that is where this advanced air mobility 
vehicle, which is the electric vertical take-off and landing vehicle, is going to be a new 
invention which is happening across the world. The people are building these 
prototypes and trying to form the rules aro und it; and India is not far behind. We have 
already said, if you want to build a vertipor t from where these vehi cles need to take-
off, from the DGCA, we have already de signed the rules fo r that; and for the 
airworthiness of this aircraft that we are going to build, we have designed the rules. 
So, step-by-step whatever needs to be do ne, we are consistently speaking with the 
industry and forming the rules so that by 2026 in the beginning when the industry 
says, we have the vehicle ready so that we  can use it, we are ready with the rules 
from the Ministry of Civil Aviation. So we ar e strongly pursuing that path. We have not 
left it behind, and if you say that it is no t present there in the Act itself, according to 
the definition of the aircraft, it comes under this Act. We are forming the rules 
subsequently so that all those things get addressed.  
 Sir, a lot of people have also mentione d about the local airports or the airports 
of their regions. Some are new airports, some need to be developed, some need 
capacity augmentation and there are so many other things. Now to address each and 
every individual will be very difficult but I assure each and everyone that you can come 
and see me, you can discuss about your airp ort with me. I will be available to meet 
everyone across the tables. Our intention is not to do politics with any airport. Our 
intention is to promote aviation and do the be st to the people of this country so that 
everyone who aspires to be on the plan e has a very convenient, affordable and 
accessible air travel. That is the thing.  
 Sir, out of my respect to our ex-Prime Minister who is also here -- I should 
appreciate the commitment that at this age also, he is coming here and sitting for so 
many hours for the reply and also mentio ning about the airport that he is so 
passionate about, the Hassan airport -- I would like to say that we are going to take it 
seriously from our side. It is an airport wh ich is being developed with the help of the 
State Government of Karnataka, and I have got the details regarding it. The physical 
progress of the Hassan Airport is up to 60.2 1 per cent today. The financial progress is 
56.51 per cent, and the project completion date is April, 2025.  
 As a Minister, I would be constantly pursuing it with the State Governments, so 
that it gets done within the stipulated time.  We definitely want to make your dream of 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
95

having a very good airport in Hassan a reality as early as possible, not just for your 
vision but also for catering to the demands of the farmers there. From our side, we 
will provide all the support. This goes without saying to all the Members who have 
mentioned about airports. Our intention is to have as many airports as possible 
because now we see that the aspirations have  grown.  Earlier, it used to be one 
airport in the capital of a State. Wherev er the Capital was there, people were 
expecting one airport there, bu t now I am seeing that even though there is an airport 
within a 100 or 150 kilometres radius, people feel that they are entitled to one airport in 
their own district. इस सोच मȂ जो बदलाव आया है, वह हमारे मोदी जी से आया है िक हर िजले 
मȂ, every district can afford their own airport.  I t  i s  w i t h  t h i s  m o v e m e n t  t h a t  w e  h a v e  
gone forward. We would surely continue with it. We would accept all the requests 
that we are getting and we will do it. Now we  have to also realize that in building an 
airport, the ease with which we are doing it  today, we might not be able to do it 
tomorrow because land availability will not be so easy. So whoever wants to build an 
airport, whoever wants to see an airport bu ilt in their space, they need to actively 
pursue with the State Government. They need  to get into discussion with them, they 
need to pursue the land, they need to capture ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P:  Kunoor! 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  We are pursuing the Kunoor Airport. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  We built the airport and we are in a soup. 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  Why? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: The Kerala State has fully utilized the aviation 
sector like no other State. I appreciate all the efforts that they have made. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seat. You have already spoken. 
...(Interruptions)... He is not yielding.
 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU : No other State has three points of call. Only 
Kerala has it. And it is with respect to th e people there who travel abroad for many 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

things that we have given three points of  call. For Kunnur, we also have calls for 
international flights. There is a strong request for points of call. And like you said, we 
are not doing it by likes or dislikes. No points of call are being given like that, but we 
are thoroughly moving into that direction to see where else we have to do points of 
call. And, definitely, Kunnur is a very impo rtant airport for us too. Whatever best 
needs to be done there, we will provide all the support based on what the State 
Government is asking and consider the pe ople's demands also. We would definitely 
do the best from our side also so that the aspirations of the people are met. 
...(Interruptions)... I know it is a very important de mand, but we have to collectively 
look at all these things. There are these kinds of demands originating from other 
States also and we are looking at the country as a whole and also at how we connect 
it with international sectors because a lot of  the airports that we have built now have 
international status also. They want intern ational flights to be started. We would 
collectively look at all those things, create  India as one big aviation hub and see how 
to promote all these places. We will take a cons idered view on that. If any of you feels 
that I have not addressed any issue in partic ular, let me say that my team and myself 
have noted down all the points, and I am go ing to reach out individually to all the 
people who have spoken here. We would definitely make sure that each and every 
issue that has been mentioned through the B ill gets addressed. We are really, really 
committed to taking aviation to another level.  
 One important closing comment that we wa nt to make is, we have been talking 
a lot about air traffic connectivity and how we  bring more people into the air travel 
network, but what we are really trying to address through the Act is to improve job 
creation and economic activity also. The multiplie r effect that we have in this is, one 
rupee spent creates three rup ees of economic activity. One job that we create in the 
aviation sector creates six to 15 times jobs in the direct and indirect sectors involved in 
aviation. That is the potential we have. And how do we tap into it? We create India as 
a State of design; we create India as a State of maintenance, as a State of 
manufacture. Once we get these terms flowin g, once you get that mindset flowing, 
we will become a country where we can pr oduce our own aircraft, not only for the 
domestic demands of the country, but also promote it so that other countries also 
come to us and buy aircraft which ar e made in India. That is the real Atmanirbhar 
Bharat that we want to become and, by that, we want to create more jobs in this 
sector. That is where the core ideology of th is Bill lies. I am sure that each one of us 
appreciates this kind of mindset. And I would like to thank each and every Member for 
all the support that they have given to this  Bill. I am sure once this Bill becomes an 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
97

Act, it is going to let us really fly high an d touch the skies in aviation that India wants 
to achieve.  Thank you very much, sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The question is: 
 "That the Bill to provide for regulation  and control of the design, manufacture, 
maintenance, possession, use, operation, sale , export and import of aircraft and for 
matter connected therewith or incidental th ereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken 
into consideration." 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill. 
Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 4, ther e is one Amendment (No.5) by Dr. John 
Brittas. Are you moving the Amendment? 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Sir, under protest, I am moving the Amendment.  I 
move: 
5. That at page 3, 
for lines 13 and 14, the following be substituted, namely:- 
 
'(2) The Director General of Civil Aviation shall have the power to issue directions, 
consistent with the provisions of the Act and the rules made ther eunder, to regulate 
the tariff and shall direct every air transport undertaking to:- 
 
(a) establish tariff having regard to all relevant factors, including the cost of 
operation, characteristics of service, reas onable profit and the generally prevailing 
tariff; 
 
(b)cause to be published the tariff established by it under clause(a) on its website or 
two daily newspapers, and display such tariff in a conspicuous part of its office and in 
the office of its agent, if any, containing therein the following particulars, namely,- 
 
(i) the total amount payable by a passenger; and  
 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

(ii) a complete break-up of the total amount , indicating the fare, tax, fees or any 
other charge, if any, separately.  
 
Explanation. –For the purposes of this clause, –  
 
(i) 'tax' means the amount payable to the Government; and 
 
(ii) 'fees' means the amount payable to the service providers for provision of any 
service or facility to the passengers; 
 
(c) mention the particulars mentioned in clause(b) in every passenger ticket; and 
 
(d) maintain all records relating to tariff established by it under clause (a) in such 
manner and in such form as may be speci fied by the Director General, and on 
demand by the Director General, produce such records before the Director-General 
for inspection.  
 
(3)  Where the Director-General is satisfied that any air transport undertaking has 
established excessive or pr edatory tariff under clause (a) of sub-section (2) or has 
indulged in oligopolistic practice, he may, by  order, issue such directions to such air 
transport undertaking as may be necessary to ensure fair tariff.  
 
(4) Every order passed under the sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)  shall be complied 
with by the person to whom such order is issued.'  
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   In   Clause  5,  there  is  one  Amendment  ( No.10 )  by 
Dr.  V. Sivadasan.  Are you moving the Amendment? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Sir, I move:- 
 
10. That at page 3, line 29, 
after the words, "by any other officer or authority", the 
words, "with proven expertise in managing aviation", be inserted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
99

Clause 5 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 6 to 8 were added to the Bill.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  In  Clause  9,  there  is  one  Amendment  ( No.11 )  by 
Dr.  V. Sivadasan.  Are you moving the Amendment? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Sir, I move:- 
 
11.     That at page 4, lines 15 to 24, be 
deleted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
Clause 9 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 10, there are thr ee Amendments (Nos.2 and 3) 
by Dr.  Fauzia Khan and Amendment (No.6) by Dr.  John Brittas.  Dr. Fauzia Khan, 
are you moving the Amendments?   
 
DR.  FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Sir, I move:- 
  
2. 
That at page 5, line 29, after the word, "interference", the words, ",including 
physical and cyber security threats or breaches, with provisions for mandatory 
reporting, risk mitigation strategies, and penalties for hoax  threats or cyber-
related offenses;", be 
inserted. 
  
3. 
That at page 6, line 35, after clause (zi), the following new clauses, be 
inserted, namely:- 
 
 " (zj) the measures to reduce aviation-r elated carbon emissions, including 
setting policy targets, issuing advisories, promoting and incentivising use of 
sustainable aviation fuels and other po licy measures to promote sustainability 
and support energy-efficient operations in aviation. 
 
(zk) the rules to regulate Advanced Ai r Mobility (AAM), including Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and Electric Ve rtical Take-Off and Landing (eVTOL) 
aircraft, with provisions for safety standards, certification, and airspace 
integration." 
 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Brittas, are you moving the Amendment? 
 
DR.  JOHN  BRITTAS: Sir, I move:- 
 
6. 
That at page 6, after line 36, the following new clause be inserted, namely:– 
  
"10A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act 
or any other law or rules in force, a foreign airline 
designated under a bilateral Air Services Agreement 
with India may operate to and from a point of call 
designated airport in India, and the Central 
Government shall confer such point of call status upon 
the recommendation of th e State Government where 
the airport is situated.    
 
Provided that the airpor t is classified as an 
international airport, and such recommendation shall 
not be denied arbitrarily or without recorded reasons.  
 
Provided further that the Central Government shall 
permit the airline to tran sfer operations from a 
designated point of call airport to another non-
designated airport within the same State, upon the 
recommendation of the State Government and subject 
to adherence to the prescr ibed safety, security, and 
operational standards." 
Duties of the 
Central 
Government. 
     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  I shall  first  put  Amendmen t  (Nos.2 and 3) moved by 
Dr. Fauzia Khan to vote. 
The motion was negatived. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I shall now put Amendment (No.6) moved by Dr. John 
Brittas to vote. 
The motion was negatived. 
Clause 10 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 11 to 19 were added to the Bill.  
 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
101

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  In  Clause  20,  there  is  one  Amendment  (No.7)   by 
Dr.  John Brittas.  Are you moving the Amendment? 
 
DR.  JOHN  BRITTAS: Sir,  I move:- 
 
7. That at page 10, lines 22 to 26, be deleted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
Clause 20 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 21 and 22 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 23, there are two Amendments (Nos. 12 and 13) 
by Dr. V.Sivadasan.  Are you moving the Amendments? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I move:- 
   
12. That at page 11, line 34, for the words, "within thirty days", the words, "within 
sixty days", be substituted. 
 
13. That at page 11, line 37, for the words, "within thirty days", the words, "within 
sixty days", be substituted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived.  
Clause 23 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 24 was added to the Bill.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  In Clause 25, there is one Amendment (No.14) by Dr. V. 
Sivadasan.  Are you moving the Amendment? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I move:- 
   
14. 
That at page 12, line 13, for the words, "prohibiting the slaughter", the words, 
"prohibiting illegal slaughter", be substituted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived.  
Clause 25 was added to the Bill.  
Clauses 26 to 43 were added to the Bill.  
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : In Clause 1, there are fi ve Amendments; Amendment 
(No.1) by Shri S. Niranjan Reddy, Amendment (No.4) by Dr. John Brittas, 
Amendment (No.8) by Shri A.A. Rahim, Amendment (No.9) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, 
and  Amendment  (No.15)  by  Shri  Sandosh  Kumar  P.  Amendment  (No.1) by 
Shri S. Niranjan Reddy?  Are you moving the Amendment? 
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh):  Sir, I move:- 
 
1. That at page 1, line 5, for the words, "Bharatiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 2024", 
the words, "Indian Aircraft Act, 2024", be substituted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Then, Amendment (No.4) by Dr. John Brittas.  Are you 
moving the Amendment?  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, I move:- 
  
4. 
That at page 1, line 5, for the words, "Bharatiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 2024", 
the words, "The Aircraft Act, 2024", be substituted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Then, Amendment (No.8) by Shri A.A. Rahim Are you 
moving the Amendment?  
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala):  Sir, I move:- 
 
8. 
That at page 1, line 5, for the words, "Bharatiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 2024", 
the words, "Indian Aircraft Act, 2024", be substituted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Then, Amendment (No.9) by Dr. V. Sivadasan. Are you 
moving the Amendment?  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, I move:- 
9. That at page 1, line 5, for the words, "Bharatiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 2024", 
the words, "Indian Aircraft Act, 2024", be substituted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Then, there is  Amendment (No.15) by Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P.   Are you moving the Amendment? 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
103

 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P. (Kerala):  Sir, I move:- 
 
15. That at page 1, line 5, for the words, 'Bharatiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 2024', the 
words, 'Indian Aircraft Act, 2024', be substituted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  I shall first put Amendment (No.1) by Shri S. Niranjan 
Reddy to vote.  
The motion was negatived. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I shall now put Amendment (N o.4) by Dr. John Brittas to 
vote.  
The motion was negatived. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I shall now put Amendment (N o.8) by Shri A.A. Rahim to 
vote.  
The motion was negatived. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  I shall now put Amendment (No.9) by Dr. V. Sivadasan 
to vote.  
The motion was negatived. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  I shall now put Amendment (No.15) by Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P. to vote.  
 
The motion was negatived. 
Clause 1 was added to the Bill. 
The Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, the Minister to move that the Bill be passed. 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Sir, I move: 
 
    "That the Bill be passed". 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, please go back to your seats.  
…(Interruptions)…  Now, Special Mentions.  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu.  Demand for 
Restoration of Sikh Reference Library.  Hon. Member to speak in Punjabi.  
 
Demand for restoration of Sikh reference library 
 
SHRI SATNAM SINGH SANDHU (Nominated) :   महोदय,  मȅ  िसख  रेफरȂस  लाइĤेरी,  
Ǜी दरबार सािहब, अमृतसर से जुड़ा एक महत्वपूणर् मुǈा सदन क े समक्ष रखना चाहता हूं। 13वीं 
सदी मȂ फारसी इितहासकार िमन्हाज अल-िसराज ने नालंदा िविÌवǏालय पर बिख्तयार िखलजी 
क े हमले क े बारे मȂ िलखा है, " जब नालंदा जलाई गई थी, तो ज्ञान की एक पूरी परंपरा को भी 
जलाकर रख कर िदया गया था, जो संपूणर् मानवता का मागर्दशर्न करती थी।" 
 जून 1984 मȂ, Ǜी दरबार सािहब पर हमले क े दौरान िसख रेफरȂस लाइĤेरी की ऐितहािसक 
धरोहर को क्षितगर्Îत कर िदया ग
या। लाइĤेरी मȂ िसख गुरु  सािहबान, संतȗ और भƪȗ की अमूÊय 
रचनाएं, Ǜी गुरु  गर्ंथ सािहब जी का हÎतिलिखत, Îवरूपसिहत, िवशाल, धािर्मक और सािहित्यक 
खजाना था, जो हमले क े दौरान क्षितगर्Îत हुआ या जÅत कर िलया गया। 
 इंिडयन एक्सĢेस और एसजीपीसी क े मुतािबक, लाइĤेरी मȂ 12,613 दुलर्भ पुÎतकȂ और 512 
हÎतिलिखत बीर थे। 1984 से अब तक एसजीपीसी सिहत िसखȗ की Ģमुख संÎथाएं इस मुǈे को 
उठाती रही हȅ, लेिकन अभी तक असमंजस बना हुआ है। महोदय, मȅ मांग करता हूं िक लाइĤेरी क े 
िरकाड्सर् क े मुतािबक सारे दÎतावेजȗ को लाइĤेरी मȂ िफर से Îथािपत िकया जाए। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The  following  hon.  Members  associated  themselves 
w
ith  the  Special  Mention  made  by  hon. Member,  Shri  Satnam Singh Sandhu:  
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), and Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu).  
 Thank you. Now, Shri Sanjeev Arora.  Not present. Now, Shri Babubhai 
Jesangbhai Desai.   
 
Concern over widespread use of substandard and adulterated materials in 
construction projects 
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई (गुजरात): महोदय,  िनमार्ण सामगर्ी मȂ िमलावट की वजह से आज 
हमारे देश क े बुिनयादी ढांचे की बुिनयाद को खतरा पहुंच रहा है। अिधकतम िनमार्ण पिरयोजनाओं 
मȂ घिटया और िमलावटी सामगर्ी का Ëयापक उपयोग गंभीर पिरणाम देता है। रेत सÃलायर जो रेत 
                                         
 Hindi translation of the original speech delivered in Punjabi. 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
105

सÃलाई कर रहे हȅ, वह िटकाऊ और मजबूत न होने से िनमार्णाधीन वÎतु की लाइफ घट रही है।  
इसके  अलावा, िमलावट से भारी आिर्थक नुकसान होता है, क्यȗिक घिटया सामगर्ी से बनी इमारतȗ 
को बार-बार मरÇमत और अंततः पुनिर्नमार्ण की आवÌयकता होती है। इस स े न क ेवल करदाताओं 
पर बोझ पड़ता है, बिÊक हमारे देश की Ģगित भी Ģभािवत होती है। 
  इससे इमारतȗ, पुलȗ और सड़कȗ की सुरक्षा और Îथाियत्व को खतरा उत्पन्न हो रहा है, 
िजससे अनिगनत लोगȗ की जान जोिखम मȂ पड़ रही है। इमार तȗ और पुलȗ क े िगरने से जान-माल 
की हािन तो होती ही है, इसके  साथ-साथ, कई मासूम, िनÍपाप लोगȗ को मृत्यु का सामना भी 
करना पड़ता है।   
  मȅ सरकार से इस मुǈे को हल करने क े िलए तत्का ल कारर्वाई करने का आगर्ह करता हूँ। 
महोदय, सख्त िनयमन, बेहतर गुणवǄा िनयंतर्ण उपायȗ और िमलावट क े दोषी पाए जाने वालȗ क े 
िलए कठोर दंड करने की आवÌयकता है। यह सुिनिÌचत करना है िक हमारे देश का बुिनयादी 
ढांचा गुणवǄापूणर्, सुरिक्षत और िटकाऊ आधार पर िनिर्मत हो। धन्यवाद I  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The  following  hon.  Members associated themselves 
with the
 Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai:  
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sa smit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).                                                 
 
Need for more trains in North Kerala 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala) :  Sir, I invite your kind and urgent attention 
regarding the need to allot a new Vande Bharat train service connecting Ernakulam 
and Mangalore, and new MEMU services in North Kerala, considering overcrowding 
in the existing trains. The existing train services in North Kerala are insufficient to meet 
the travel demands of the commuters. Alth ough more people in the North Kerala 
region have taken to rail travel, there has no t been a concurrent ri se in the number of 
trains or coaches. Since the trains ar e always overcrowded, passengers often 
complain that sometimes they can’t get in to the compartments. Passengers are often 
forced to get down at nearby stations due to overcrowded compartments. There are 
also cases of passengers getting seriously injured and losing their lives after falling 
from running trains.  The problem can be addressed only through the allotment of 
more train services and an in crease in the number of general and sleeper coaches in 
the existing trains. I demand that, since there is no Vande Bharat train between 
Ernakulam and Mangalore, allotting a new Vande Bharat train on this route would 
immensely benefit the passengers in Nort h Kerala. Introducing a new MEMU service 
between Palakkad and Kasaragod would al so address the overcrowding in the 
existing train services. Thank you, Sir.           
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

                                  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Sandosh Kumar P: Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kani mozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala),  Shri  R.  Giriraja n (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham  (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).                     
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) in the Chair.] 
 
Request to increase the frequency of 16861/62 Puducherry-Kanyakumari Weekly 
Express to a daily service  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, I rise today to draw the attention 
of the House to an important issue concer ning Pudukottai Railway Station located in 
Tamil Nadu. It has achieved remarkable revenue of Rs. 5.21 cr ores in the last financial 
year, reflecting its growing importance as a transportation hub for both passengers 
and freight.  Despite this, the station still does not have a stop for many long-distance 
Northern State trains that bypass Pudukottai, and continue to neglect its strategic 
position. For instance, the train no. 2253 5, Rameswaram-Banaras train, which was 
started in 2010, has been a crucial lifeline for spiritual devotees  from the Pudukottai 
district, offering them a direct connection to  "Kasi". Initially, this train had a stop at 
Pudukottai, but this was later removed du ring Covid. Train numbers 22613 and 22614 
Rameswaram-Ayodhya Cantonment-Rames waram Weekly have yet to include 
Pudukottai as a regular halt. Since its incepti on in 2017, this trai n has not had a stop 
at Pudukottai. The absence of a stop at Pudukottai station concerns devotees from 
the region on pilgrimages.  In view of th e station's revenue potential and the needs of 
the local population, I urge the Government  to consider providing Pudukottai Railway 
Station with experimental stoppages for th ese long-distance trains, especially the 
aforementioned services. Such a step would not only benefit the people of Pudukottai 
but also facilitate better connectivity to No rthern India, promoting both travel and 
trade.   
 I request the Government to look into this matter and ensure that necessary 
steps are taken to provide these stops at the earliest. Thank you, Sir.    
                                                              
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
107

Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla: Dr. Kanimo zhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala),  Shri  R.  Girirajan (Tamil Nadu),  Dr.  Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala). 
 
Demand for Bharat Ratna for Veer Savarkar and Rash Behari Bose 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal):  Sir, the Bharat Ratna, India’s highest 
civilian award, honours exceptional contri butions to the nation. Two great freedom 
fighters, Veer Savarkar and Rash Behari Bose, deserve this recognition for their role in 
India’s struggle for independence.  Veer Savarkar was a fearless revolutionary and a 
nationalist thinker. His book, ‘Hindutva: Who is a Hindu?’, introduced the idea of 
cultural nationalism. Savarkar spent 27 years in prison, including the harsh Cellular 
Jail in Andaman, for his fight against Brit ish rule. Despite imme nse suffering, he 
remained committed to India’s freedom. His ef forts to unite Indians against colonial 
oppression deserve the nation’s highest award. 
 Rash Behari Bose was another remark able leader who fought for India’s 
independence. He played a key role in th e Ghadar Movement and later worked with 
Indian revolutionaries in Japan. He founded the Indian National Army (INA) paving the 
way for Subhas Chandra Bose to lead it in its campaigns against the British.  Bose’s 
efforts built international support for India’s freedom and showed his dedication to the 
cause. 
 Both leaders demonstrated unmatched courage and vision in their fight for 
India’s independence. Recognizing them wi th the Bharat Ratna would honor their 
sacrifices and inspire future generations to follow their ideals of patriotism and nation 
building. It is time to acknowledge their invaluable contribution s and give them the 
honour they truly deserve. I urge the Government to look into it. 
 
Demand for setting up a dedicated cell to assist Indian citizens abroad facing medical 
emergencies or serious illness 
 
SHRI P.P. SUNEER (Kerala) :  Many Indian citizens live and work overseas, far from 
their home country. A large number of these citizens belong to my home State of 
Kerala. Myself and many of my  colleagues here receive many  requests to intervene in 
cases of medical emergencies abroad.  Our ci tizens abroad are vu lnerable to health 
emergencies and illnesses that may requir e immediate medical attention and to 
address this, institutional effort is need ed. Availing healthcare systems in foreign 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

countries can be complicated, especially if language barriers or unfamiliarity with local 
healthcare procedures come into play. In th ese critical moments, a dedicated cell by 
the Government of India, specifically tasked with assisting citizens facing health crises 
abroad, would prove to be of great value.  
 This cell could offer guidance, facilit ate communication with medical facilities 
and ensure that citizens receive proper treatment without the added stress of 
unfamiliar processes. Such a specialized cell sh ould also play a role in coordinating 
medical evacuations when necessary, ensuri ng that citizens who require urgent 
treatment or specialized care that is unava ilable locally can be transported back to 
India or to another suitable h ealthcare facility. It could also provide critical information 
on health insurance, legal matters, and fi nancial assistance in case of emergencies.  
Given the growing number of Indian expatriates and the increasing frequency of global 
mobility, establishing this kind of support system would not only provide peace of 
mind for Indian citizens living or travelling abroad but also reaffirm the Government of 
India's commitment to the welfare of its citizens. 
 I urge the Government to look into it. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) : The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shri P.P. Suneer: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala),  Shri A. A. Rahim (Keral a), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) 
and Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala). 
 Shri Niranjan Bishi.  Not pres ent.  Shri Pramod Tiwari.    
 
Demand to declare lightning strike as a natural calamity 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान):  महोदय, िबजली िगरने से होने वाली मौतȗ की संख्या िपछले क ु छ 
समय से बढ़ रही है। अग
र यह दैवीय आपदाओं की सूची मȂ शािमल हो जाती है, तो पीिड़त राज्य 
आपदा Ģितिकर्या िनिध से मुआवजे क े हकदार हȗगे, िजसमȂ से 75 Ģितशत क Ȃ दर् ǎारा िवǄ पोिषत 
है। वतर्मान मȂ संबंिधत राज्य सरकारȗ ǎारा पीिड़तȗ क े पिरजनȗ को िदया जाने वाला मुआवजा 
बेहद अपयार्Ãत है।  िबजली िगरने से होने वाली उच्च मृत्यु दर को देखते हुए, अब समय आ गया है 
िक क Ȃ दर् सरकार इसे दैवी
य आपदा घोिषत करे। 
 राÍटर्ीय अपराध िरकॉडर् Åयूरो क े अनुसार 1967 और 2020 क े बीच िब जली िगरने से 
1,01,309 मौते हुई हȅ, जबिक 2010 और 2020 क े बीच हताहतȗ की संख्या मȂ तेज वृिǉ हुई है।  
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
109

 आँकड़ȗ से पता चलता है िक 1967-2002 क े दौरान औसत वािर्षक मृत्यु दर 38 से बढ़ कर 
2003-2020 क े बीच 61 हो गई है। Ģितवषर् औसतन 1,876 मौतȂ दजर् की जाती हȅ। 
 िबजली िगरने की दृिÍट से संवेदनशील अिधकांश राज्यȗ ने अभी तक राÍटर्ीय आपदा 
Ģबंधन Ģािध
करण क े िनदȃशानुसार कायर्योजना तैयार नहीं की है। देश मȂ िबजली िगरने की 
चेतावनी Ģणाली का अभाव है और इस बारे मȂ िशक्षा का भी अभाव है। िबजली िगरने की घटनाओं 
मȂ वृिǉ वनȗ की कटाई, जल िनकाय की कमी इत्यािद जैसे कारणȗ से जुड़ी है। 
 यह ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए िक आपदा मुख्य रूप  से क ृिष Ǜिमकȗ और बाहर काम करने वाले 
मजदूरȗ पर पड़ती है, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से सरकार से िबजली िगरने को दैवीय आपदा 
घोिषत करने का आगर्ह करता हूँ।    
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR K
ALITA): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Shri Pramod Tiwari: Shri A.A. Rahim (K erala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shrimati  Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Na du), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Anil 
Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri  Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Shri Ajit  Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (K erala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), 
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh (Bihar), Shri Shaktisinh Gohil (Gujarat) and Shri Neeraj 
Dangi (Rajasthan). 
 
Demand for conferment of Bharat Ratna on Maharaja Jagaddipendra Narayan Bhup 
Bahadur of Cooch Behar 
 
SHRI NAGENDRA RAY (West Bengal) : Sir, I want to bring to  notice that the valiant 
freedom fighter, Jagadipendra  Narayan Bhup Bahadur, 24
th Maharaja of Cooch 
Behar, was born on 15 th December, 1915 in Cooch Beha r. His father was Maharaja 
Jitendra Narayan and mother Maharani Indira Devi of Baroda. 
 Maharaja Jagaddipendra Narayan was honoured with 2 nd Lieutenant and took 
the charge of Army General of India. Besi des this, he was also awarded with several 
medals, that is, Burma Star, Africa Star, Pacific Star, War Medal, India Service 
medal, Indian Independence medal, etc., presented by the Dominion India for Indian 
Independence. 
 Moreover, Maharaja Jagaddipendra Nara yan unified India through accession of 
the Cooch Behar State on 9
th August, 1947 and also advised many of his 
contemporary rulers to agree accession to India.  The letter on 12 th August, 1947 from 
Maharaja Jagaddipendra Narayan to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel proves this fact.   
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 I, therefore, request the Union Governme nt to honour this great and inspiring 
leader, Maharaja Jagadipendra Narayan B hup Bahadur, by bestowing upon him the 
Bharat  Ratna.  For this token of appreciation, the people of India will remain indebted 
and his contribution would be taken note of by the countrymen. Thank you.  
 
Demand for stoppage of trains at Rishabhdev and Bichiwada railway stations situated 
on Udaipur-Asarwa (Ahmedabad) railway route 
 
Ǜी चुƐीलाल गरािसया (राजÎथान): महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और रेल मंतर्ी जी क े 
Ģयासȗ से उदयपुर-असारवा (अहमदाबाद) तक रेल आमान पिरवतर्न कर रेल मागर् शुरू  करवाया 
गया।  इस रेल मागर् पर कई टर्ेनȂ शुरू  भी की गईं, िजनमȂ टर्ेन नं. 12981, जयपुर-असारवा; टर्ेन नं. 
12982, असारव
ा-जयपुर; टर्ेन नं. 19821, कोटा-असारवा; टर्ेन नं. 19822, असारवा-कोटा भी 
Ģमुख हȅ।  
 महोदय, इस रेल मागर् पर दो Ģमुख रेलवे Îटेशंस पड़ते हȅ। इनमȂ पहला ऋषभदेव है, जह ाँ 
Ģिसǉ भगवान ऋषभदेव क े मंिदर जाने क े िलए देश भर से यातर्ी आते हȅ। दूसरा िबछीवाड़ा है, जो 
गुजरात राज्य से सटा हुआ है और नेशनल हाइवे संख्या 48 इसी उपखण्ड से गुजरता है। यहाँ 
Ģितवषर् हजारȗ की संख्या मȂ याितर्
यȗ की आवाजाही रहती है।  िबछीवाड़ा एक इण्डिÎटर्यल एिरया 
भी है और गुजरात राज्य से Ģवेश करते ही पहला बड़ा रेलवे Îटेशन है, परन्तु ऋषभदेव और 
िबछीवाड़ा रेलवे Îटेशंस पर टर्ेन संख्या 12981, 12982, 19821 और 19822 का ठहराव नहीं िदया 
गया है, िजससे Ģितिदन हजारȗ की संख्या मȂ पयर्टक, मजदूर वगर्, Ëयापारी वगर् और Îकू ली 
छातर्-छातर्ाएँ काफी परेशान रहते हȅ।  
मȅ सरकार से मांग करता हूँ िक टर्ेन संख्या 12981 जयपुर-असारवा, टर्ेन संख्या 12982 असारवा-
जयपुर, टर्ेन नÇबर 19821 कोटा-असारव
ा और टर्ेन नÇबर 19822 असारवा-कोटा का ठहराव 
ऋषभदेव एवं िबछीवाड़ा रेलवे Îटेशंस पर अितशीघर् िकया जाए, िजससे आम जनता को तुरंत 
राहत िमल सके  और रेलवे क े राजÎव मȂ बढ़ोतरी भी हो सके । 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): The following ho
n. Member 
associated himself with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Chunnilal 
Garasiya:  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 Shrimati Darshana Singh, "Demand to establish a Central Agricultural 
University in Chandauli district, Uttar Pradesh." 
 
Demand to establish a Central Agricultural University in Chandauli District, Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, चंदौली जनपद भारत सरकार ǎारा आकांक्षी िजलȗ 
मȂ िचिन्हत है। चंदौली एक क ृिष Ģधान िजला है, जहाँ क ृिष क े क्षेतर् मȂ असीम संभावनाएँ हȅ, लेिकन 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
111

साथ ही क ु छ चुनौितयाँ भी हȅ। यिद इन चुनौितयȗ का समाधान िकया जाए, तो यह िजला क ृिष, 
उǏोग और सामािजक िवकास क े मामले मȂ एक आदशर् जनपद बन सकता है। यहाँ का Ģमुख 
आिर्थक आधार क ृिष है, लेिकन िकसानȗ मȂ नई क ृिष तकन ीकȗ, जैिवक खेती और वैज्ञािनक 
िविधयȗ की जानकारी सीिमत है। चंदौली मȂ क ृिष Ëयवसाय और िकसानȗ को तकनीकी रूप  से 
समृǉ बनाना अत्यंत आवÌयक है। चंदौली क े आसपास क े Ģमुख शहरȗ मȂ वाराणसी, िमजार्पुर और 
सोनभदर् शािमल हȅ, लेिकन पूवार्ंचल मȂ अभी तक कोई Ģमुख क ेन्दर्ीय क ृिष िव
ÌविवǏालय नहीं है। 
इसिलए, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से आगर्ह करती हूँ िक चंदौली मȂ क ेन्दर्ीय क ृिष 
िवÌविवǏालय की Îथापना की जाए, तािक इस क्षेतर् मȂ क ृिष अनुसंधान, नवाचार और आधुिनक 
क ृिष िशक्षा को बढ़ावा िमल सके ।   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA) :  The hon. Member, Dr.
 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha) associated himself with the Special Mention made by hon. 
Member, Shrimati Darshana Singh.  
 Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque, "Concern over low utilisation of funds under 
Project Tiger and Elephant". 
 
Concern over low utilisation of funds under Project Tiger and Project Elephant 
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal):  Sir, I rise to raise an issue that 
demands immediate attention of the Government. There is an urgent need to address 
the critical issue of under utilisation of funds under Project Tiger and Project Elephant, 
which are pivotal for the conservation of India’s wildlife heritage.  
 Following the abysmally low utilization,  there have been no significant 
developments as one-third of funds still rema in under-utilized in 2023-24. This lack of 
fund utilization is particularly concerning given the recent mass deaths of elephants in 
Madhya Pradesh and Odisha. Such incidents highlight the urgent need for 
strengthening conservation measures and enhancing wildlife management practices. 
While Project Tiger has consistently receive d higher funding, the limited scope and 
resources under Project Elephant have sign ificantly hampered efforts to manage and 
protect our elephant population effectively. This is concerning in  light of the recent 
statistics that India has lost 528 elephant s in the last five years due to unnatural 
causes.  Thus, the merger of schemes is proving to be a poorly planned move. The 
situation demands for a speedy response by the Ministry. This includes an immediate 
action plan addressing gaps in habitat management, anti-poaching measures, and 
human-wildlife conflict mitigation.  
Therefore, I urge the Government to take decisive steps to strengthen these 
programs and safeguard our wildlife. Thank you, Sir.       
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque : Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).                                                                           
 Now, Shrimati Sumitra Balmik-request to increase the number of direct flights 
and air routes from Jabalpur. 
 
Request to increase the number of direct flights and air routes from Jabalpur 
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (मध्य Ģदेश) :  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आज इस सदन क े माध्यम से 
जबलपुर क े िलए उन्नत हवाई संपकर् की आवÌयकता पर ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहती हूँ।  
जबलपुर मध्य भारत का क Ȃ दर् और हमारे देश का ǭदय है, महाकौशल क्षेतर् का Ģवेश ǎार है और 
देश क े सबसे खूबसूरत पयर्टन Îथलȗ का क Ȃ दर् भी है।  जबलपुर क े 300 िकलोमीटर क े दायरे मȂ 
4-5 राÍटर्ीय उǏानȗ समेत अनेक पयर्टन Îथलȗ का यह क्षेतर् आिर्थक और सांÎकृ ितक दृिÍट से 
अपार संभावनाएँ रखता है।  जबलपुर जैसे महत्वपूणर् शहर क े िलए अहमदाबाद, जयपुर, 
कोलकाता, चेन्नई और कोिच्च जैसे शहरȗ क े िलए सीधी उड़ानȗ का अभाव है।  साथ ही, 
हैदराबाद, िदÊली, मुंबई, बȂगलुरु  और पुणे जैसे Ģमुख शहरȗ क े िलए सीिमत उड़ान यहाँ की 
आिर्थक, शैिक्षक और पयर्टन क्षमता पर Ģितकू ल Ģभाव डाल रही है।   
   जबलपुर क े Ģितभाशाली युवा देश क े िविभन्न िहÎसȗ मȂ अपनी सेवाएँ दे रहे हȅ और 
िनयिमत रूप  से अपने शहर आते-जाते हȅ।  इसके  अला
वा, यहाँ का पयर्टन और Ëयापािरक क्षेतर् भी 
हवाई सेवाओं की कमी से Ģभािवत हो रहा है। 
   मȅ नागिरक उƿयन मंतर्ालय से अनुरोध करती हूँ िक वह एयरलाइंस, Ëयापािरक और 
नागिरक Ģितिनिधयȗ एवं क Ȃ दर् और राज्य Ģशासन को साथ लेकर एक परामशर् बैठक आयोिजत 
करे और नए हवाई मागș की Îथापना और मौजूदा उड़ानȗ की संख्या बढ़ाने पर ठोस कदम उठाए।  
यह क ेवल हवाई संपकर् का मामला नहीं है, यह जबलपुर की सामिरक और आिर्थक महǄा को 
पहचानने का िवषय है।  अत: मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करती हूँ िक वह इस मुǈे पर कारर्वा
ई करे।       
                                                                            
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA): The following hon. 
Members associated t
hemselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, 
Shrimati Sumitra Balmik: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
 The House stands adjourned to m eet at 11 a.m. on Friday, the 6
th December 
2024. 
 
The House then adjourned at forty-nine minutes past five of the clock till eleven of the 
clock on Friday, the 6
th December 2024. 
[ 05 December, 2024 ]
113

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 