Vol. 267           Saturday,  
No. 2             1st  February, 2025 
         12  Magha,1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (pages 1 - 2) 
The Union Budget, 2025-26- Laid on the Table (page 3 ) 
Fiscal Policy Statements, 2025-26- Laid on the Table (page 3) 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI


Website : http://rajyas
abha.nic.in 
          https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

RAJYA SABHA 
Saturday, the 1st February, 2025 / 12 Magha, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at twenty minutes past one of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I take the opportunity to wish birthday 
greetings to hon. Members of Parliament, Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad, Shri Ajit Kumar 
Bhuyan, Shri Parimal Nathwani, whose birt hday falls today and Shri Sant Balbir 
Singh, whose birthday falls on the 2 nd February. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going 
on record. Please take your place.  
Hon. Members, Shri V. Vijayendra  Prasad joined the au gust House in July, 
2022 and is serving his first term. Shri Vijaye ndra Prasad is a renowned script writer, 
celebrated for his exceptional storytelling and creative prowess.  His engaging and 
relatable stories often blend rich cultural el ements with universal appeal that invokes 
emotions and thoughts of the audience. His visionary approach and mastery of 
weaving emotions with grandeur have made him a trailblazer in Indian cinema. Fellow 
Members, Indian entertainment industry ha s already emerged as a significant source 
of employment across the country.  
Hon. Members, I would like to invite your attention to an apt statement issued 
in the year 2023 by the then hon. Minister of Information and Broadcasting at 55 th 
International Film Festival of India, and I quote, “With an annual growth of 20 per cent, 
this industry is held as the fifth larg est and globalised industry in the world ”, which I 
think really makes a difference in genera ting employment in the entertainment 
industry.  
Shri Vijayendra Prasad was married to  late Shrimati Raja Nandini and is 
blessed with one son, S.S. Rajamouli.  
Hon. Members, Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan , journalist and social worker by 
profession, joined this august House in Apri l, 2020 and is serving his first term.  Shri 
Bhuyan, a prominent Assamese writer and journalist, has been associated with the 
Consultative Committee for the Ministry of Development of the North-Eastern Region. 
This amply showcases his unwavering commitment to the progress and prosperity of 
the North-Eastern Region, a cause close to  his heart. Hon. Members, he is a 

knowledge reservoir of the cultural diversity, traditions and geopolitical activities of the 
North-Eastern part of the country, who is still actively enriching his knowledge. For 
recording such deep knowledge, as a guid ing memoir, he has authored nine books 
focused on the society and policy of Assam. As a journalist, he started his journey as 
a staff reporter to become the Editor-in-Chief in North-East Television, the first 
satellite channel in North-East.  
Hon. Members, now birthday wishes to Shri Parimal Nathwani . He is a 
Member of this august House since June , 2020 and is serving his third term. His 
engagement in rural development initiatives in  several villages of Gujarat, spread over 
25 districts, has been really remarkable in improving infrastructure and quality of life in 
rural areas. Besides professional commitm ents, his passion for conservation of 
wildlife has been evident through his untirin g efforts for the conservation of the Gir 
lions, instrumental in safeguarding th eir habitat while promoting sustainable 
development in the region. He has also au thored books titled ‘Gir Lion: Pride of 
Gujarat’ and ‘Jharkhand: Meri Karmabhoomi’.  
Shri Nathwani is married to Shrimati Varsha Nathwani and the couple has been 
blessed with one son, Shri Dhanraj Nathwani.  
Hon. Members, now, I take the opportunity to extend advance Birthday 
Greetings to hon. Member, Shri Sant Balbir Singh whose birthday falls on the 2 nd 
February, that is, tomorrow.  Shri Sant Balb ir Singh, a spiritual icon, social reformer 
and environmentalist has been a Member of this august House since July, 2022. He 
has been serving tirelessly for social refo rm and rendering servi ces for the upliftment 
of the poor and downtrodden. 
He has been instrumental in cleaning the rivulet to resolve the problem of water 
scarcity by establishing Seechewal Model, method to treat and reuse wastewater for 
agricultural purposes.  Be it conserving ho ly rivulet Kali Bein; providing free education 
to the children of migrants in the State of Punjab; undertaking relief work and to 
provide food to the displaced masses at the time of natural calamities and other 
numerous social awareness campaigns are some of his works to be named. 
Hon. Members, he has been praised as  the preacher of ‘A Noble Mission’ by 
former President of India, ho n. Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam.  He has been recipient of 
Padma Shri in the year 2017 and Nirmal Gram Puraskar in 2008. 
On behalf of the House and on my ow n behalf, I extend heartfelt birthday 
greetings to all of them and wish them to be blessed with good health and happiness.   
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE UNION BUDGET, 2025-26 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Union Budget, 2025-26.  Shrimati Nirmala 
Sitharaman.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)…   
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I lay on the Table, a statement (in English 
and Hindi) of the estimated receipts an d expenditure of the Government for 
the year 2025–26.   
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 1870/18/25] 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   N o w ,  F i s c a l  P o l i c y  S tatements, 2025-26. Shrimati 
Nirmala Sitharaman.  …(Interruptions)…  
FISCAL POLICY STATEMENTS, 2025–26 
THE MIN
ISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English 
and Hindi) of the following papers, under section 3 (1) of the Fiscal Responsibility 
and Budget Management Act, 2003:- 
(i) Medium-term Fiscal Policy cum Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement;
(ii) Macro-Economic Framework Statement.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 1871/18/25] 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, the House 
stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 3rd February, 2025. 
The House then adjourned at twenty-eight minutes past one of the clock till eleven of 
the clock on Monday, the 3rd February, 2025. 
[ 01 February, 2025 ]
3

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 