Vol. 268         Monday, 
No. 16   11 August, 2025 
 20 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 5) 
Report of the Committee on Ethics- Presented (page 5) 
Report of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports- Presented 
(page 6) 
Report of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on 
Finance - Laid on 
the Table (page 6) 
Report of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs 
- Laid on the Table (page 6) 
Reports of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on 
Railways - Laid on the Table (pages 6 - 7) 
Reports of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj- Laid on the Table (page 7) 
Reports of the Department-related Par liamentary Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment- Laid on the Table (pages 7 - 8) 
©  
RAJYA 
SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Reports of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Water 
Resources - Laid on the Table (page 8) 
Statements by Ministers- 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of th e Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Energy (pages 8 - 9) 
Status of implementation of the Recommend ations contained in the First and Third  
Reports of the Department-related Par liamentary Standing Committee on Water 
Resources (2024-25) (page 9) 
Status of implementation of the Recommend ations contained in the First Report of 
the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and 
Steel (page 9) 
Status of implementation of the Reco mmendations contained in the Twenty-
second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sa bha) of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources (page 10) 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Three Hundred Thirty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture (page 10) 
Observations by the Chair (pages 10 - 11) 
The Budget (Manipur), 2025-2026- General Discussion-Concluded 
and 
Government Bills - 
The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2025- Returned 
 The Manipur Appropriation 
(No.2) Bill, 2025- Returned (pages 12 - 27) 
The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2025- Passed (pages 27 - 34) 
The Readjustment of Representation of Sche duled Tribes in Assembly Constituencies 
of the State of Goa Bill, 2025-  Passed (pages 34 - 38 and 39 - 42) 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Messages from Lok Sabha- Reported and Government Bills laid on the 
Table (pages 38 - 39)        
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 
The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
Special Mentions- 
Concern over adverse impact of excessive use of mobile phones by children in 
India (pages 42 - 43) 
Demand for detection, identification and deportation of illegal migrants from 
Manipur before the commencement of National Census and De-limitation 
process (pages 43 - 44) 
Demand for facilities for police personnel posted with Ministers/MPs outside 
Parliament House (page 44) 
Concern over constitutional and developmental invisibility of Denotified, Nomadic 
and Semi-Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) (pages 44 - 45) 
Concern over problem of adulteration in food items (pages 45 - 46) 
Demand for establishment o f a dedicated cadre for Wildlife Veterinary 
Services (page 46) 
Demand for construction of over bridges/underpasses at open railway crossings in 
Uttarakhand (page 47) 
Demand for revival of Air India’s Goa–London Gatwick flight (pages 47 - 48) 
Demand for establishment of Dak Ghar Niryat Kendra in Kalahandi, 
Odisha (pages 48 - 49) 
Demand for establishment of Employees Provident Fund Organization (EPFO) 
office in Uttarakhand (page 49) 
Concern over adulteration of animal foods and the serious health hazards caused 
by it (pages 49 - 50) 
Demand to strengthen the railway infrastructure in Lucknow and connect it to other 
parts of the country by train (pages 50 - 51) 
Concern over online harassment and stalking of women (page 51) 
Concern over increasing cases of Cyber frauds in banks (page 52) 
Demand for steps to protect children and adolescents from the ill effects of 
pornography spreading on OTT platforms and the Internet (pages 52 - 53) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 11th August, 2025/20 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, Papers to
 be laid on the Table. 
Notification of the Ministry of Power 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND  THE  MINISTER  OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY   AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik, I lay on the Tabl e, a copy (in English and Hindi) of the 
Ministry of Power Notification No. G.S.R. 414(E)., dated the 26 th June, 2025, 
publishing the Electricity (Transmission System Planning, Development and Recovery 
of Inter-State Transmission Charges) Amen dment Rules, 2025, under Section 179 of 
the Electricity Act, 2003. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3052/18/25] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Mines 
खान मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी सतीश चंदर् दूबे): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूं:-  
(i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of
Mines, under sub-section (1) of Section 28 of the Mines and Minerals (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1957: - 
(1) S.O. 1327(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2025, notifying the M/s Mining
Associates Private Limited under “Category ‘A’ Exploration Agencies”.
(2) S.O. 1328(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2025, notifying the M/s Geo Marine
Solutions Private Limited under “Category ‘
A’ Exploration Agencies”.
(3) G.S.R. 232(E)., dated the 16 th April, 2025, publishing the Mineral
Conservation and Development (Amendment) Rules, 2025.
(4) S.O. 1764(E)., dated the 16 th April, 2025, notifying M/s Hindmetal
Exploration Services
 Private Limited under “Category ‘A’ Exploration

Agencies”. 
(5) G.S.R. 255(E)., dated the 23 rd April, 2025, publishing the Mineral (Auction)
Amendment Rules, 2025.
(6) G.S.R. 382(E)., dated the 12 th June, 2025, publis hing the Minerals
(Evidence of Mineral Contents) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(7) S.O. 2744(E)., dated the 19 th June, 2025, extending the period of re-
accreditation of M/s. Natural Resources  Division-Tata Steel Limited for a
further period of three years from the date of expiry of the Principal
Notification No. G.S.R. 169(E), dated the 2 nd March, 2022 or till expiry of the
re-a
ccreditation granted or further order, whichever is earlier.
(8) S.O. 2745(E)., dated the 19 th June, 2025, extending the period of re-
accreditation of M/s. United Exploration India Private Limited for a further
period of three years from the date of expiry of the Principal Notification No.
G.S.R. 284(E), dated the 7
th April, 2022 or till expiry of the re-accreditation
granted or further order, whichever is earlier.
(9) S.O. 3326(E)., dated the 18 th July, 2025, extending the period of re-
accreditation of M/s. Gemcokati Exploration Private Limited for a further
period of three years from the date of expiry of the Principal Notification No.
G.S.R. 285(E), dated the 7
th April, 2022 or till expiry of the re-accreditation
granted or further order, whichever is earlier.
(10) S.O. 3327(E)., dated the 18 th July, 2025, extending the period of re-
accreditation of M/s. Maheshwari Mining  Private Limited for a further period
of three years from the date of expiry of the Principal Notification No. S.O.
4038(E), dated the 29 th August, 2022 or till expiry of the re-accreditation
granted or further orde
r, whichever is earlier.
(11) G.S.R. 486(E)., dated the 21 st July, 2025, publishing the Minerals (Other
than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy Minerals) Concession (Amendment)
Rules, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (11), See No. L.T. 3044/18/25] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Mines Notification No. S.O.
1806(E)., dated the 21 st April, 2025, amending the Pr incipal Notification No. S.O. 
4819(E), dated the 5th November 2024, issued under Section 10 of the Offshore Areas 
Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3045/18/25] 
(iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

of Mines, under sub-section (3) of Se ction 35 of the Offshore Areas Mineral 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 2002: - 
(1) G.S.R. 311(E)., dated the 14 th May, 2025, publishing  the Offshore Areas
Mineral (Auction) Amendment Rules, 2025.
(2) G.S.R. 468(E)., dated the 14 th July, 2025, publishing the Offshore Areas
Atomic Minerals Operating Right Rules, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), See No. L.T. 3045/18/25] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Defence 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF DEFENCE (SHRI SANJAY SETH): 
Sir, I lay on the Table— 
(i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Defence Notification No.
S.R.O.  6., dated the March 2 – March 8, 2025 (Weekly Gazette), publishing
the Ministry of Defence, Defence Research and Development Organisation,
Senior Administrative Assistant and Admi nistrative Officer (Group 'B' posts)
Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 2025,  framed under Article 309 of the
Constitution of India, along with delay statement.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3068/18/25] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Defence Notification No.
S.R.O. 4(E)., dated the 3 rd April, 2025, publishing  the Works of Defence
Rules, 2025, under sub-section (3) of Section 44 of the Works of Defence
Act, 1903.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2974/18/25] 
I. Notifications of the Mi nistry of Housing and Urban Affairs
II. Report and Accounts (2023-24)  of DDA, New Delhi and related papers
आवासन और शहरी
 कायर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी तोखन साहू): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् 
सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
I. (i)   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Affa
irs, under sub-section (2) of Section 32 of the Metro Railways
(Construction of Works) Act, 1978: -
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
3

II. (1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following papers, under Section 26
and sub-se
ction (4) of Section 25 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957: -
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reas ons for the delay in laying the
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
(1) S.O. 372(E)., dated the 22 nd January, 2025, amending two Notifications
bearing Nos. S. O. 3706(E), dated the 14 th October, 2019 and S.O.
2819(E), d
ated the 19th August, 2020, along with delay statement.
(2) S.O. 1848(E)., dated the 24 th April, 2025, notifying the alignment of Thane
Integral Ring Metro Project.
(3) S.O. 1930(E)., dated the 29 th April, 2025, notifying the alignment of
Bangalore Metro Rail Project Phase-3.
(4)
S.O. 2061(E)., dated the 9 th May, 2025, amending two Notifications bearing
Nos. S.O. 2731(E), dated the 20 th October, 2014 and S.O. 3915(E), dated
the 29th August, 2023.
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (4), See No. L.T. 2963/18/25] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
Notification No. G.S.R. 182(E)., dated the 20 th March, 2025, publishing the Delhi 
Development Authority, Chief Security Officer, Security Officer, Assistant Security 
Officer, Head Security Guard and Security Guard, (Group ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ Posts) 
Recruitment Rules, 2025, under Section 58 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3065/18/25] 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs
Notification No. G.S.R. 402(E)., dated the 23 rd June, 2025, publishing the Metro 
Railways (Procedure of Claims) Amendmen t Rules, 2025, under Section 102 of the 
Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5019/18/25] 
 (a) Annual Report of the Delhi Developmen t Authority (DDA), New Delhi, for
the year 2023-24.
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Delhi Development Authority (DDA), New Delhi, for
the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Authority.
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ETHICS 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान): महोदय, मȅ 'राज्य सभा सदÎय (आिÎतयȗ तथा देयताओं की 
घोषणा) िनयम, 2004' क े अंतगर्त घोषणा ĢÎतुत करने संबंधी Ģारूप का सरलीकरण क े संबंध मȂ 
आचार सिमित का ग्यारहवां Ģितवेदन (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) ĢÎतुत करता हूं।   
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Jal Shakti  
 
जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी राज भूषण चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ बांध सुरक्षा अिधिनयम, 
2021 की धारा 55 क े  अधीन Ģत्येक िविनिर्दÍट बांध िविनयम, 2025 क े Ëयापक बांध सुरक्षा 
मूÊयांकन क े िलए िवशेषज्ञȗ क े Îवतंतर् पैनल को Ģकािशत करने वाली, जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय (जल 
संसाधन, नदी    िवकास और गंगा संरक्षण िव
भाग) की अिधसूचना संख्या टीई-32/2/2023-
एनडीएसए-एमओडÅÊयूआर, िदनांक 2 जून, 2025 एक Ģित ( अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) क े साथ 
Ëयाख्यात्मक ज्ञापन एवं उǈेÌयȗ और कारणȗ का कथन सभा पटल पर रखता हूं।      
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2995/18/25]        
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY  OF CIVIL AVIATION (SHRI MURLIDHAR 
MOHOL): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation Notification No. G.S.R. 413(E)., dated the 25
thJune, 2025, publishing the 
Radio Telephone Operator (Restricted) Ce rtificate and Licence Rules, 2025, under 
Section 35 of the Bharatiya Vayuyan Adhi niyam, 2024, along with Explanatory 
Memorandum. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2996/18/25] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS (SHRI GEORGE 
KURIAN): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs Notification No. G.S.R. 442(E)., dated the 3 rdJuly, 2025, publishing 
the Unified Waqf Management, Empowermen t, Efficiency and Development Rules, 
2025, under sub-section (3) of Section 108B of the Unifie d Waqf Management, 
Empowerment, Efficiency and Development Act, 1995. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3046/18/25] 
 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
5

 
                                                
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान):  महोदय, मȅ “उच्चतर िशक्षा मȂ राÍटर्ीय िशक्षा नीित, 2020 का 
कायार्न्वयन” क े संबंध मȂ तीन सौ छÃपनवȂ Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ पर सरकार ǎारा की 
गई कारर्वाई संबंधी िवभाग-संबंिधत िशक्षा, मिहला, बाल, युवा और खेल संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी 
सिमित का 362वां Ģितवेदन (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) ĢÎतुत कर ता हूं।   
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश):  महोदय, मȅ 'अथर्ËयवÎथा, िवशेष रूप  से िडिजटल पिरदृÌय मȂ 
भारतीय ĢितÎपधार् आयोग की उभरती भूिमका' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत िवǄ संबंधी संसदीय 
Îथायी सिमित क े पच्चीसवȂ Ģितवेदन की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती 
हूं। 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
SHRI RATANJIT PR ATAP NARAIN SINGH (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a 
copy (in English and Hindi) of the Eigh th Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Extern al Affairs (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Evaluation of India’s Indian Ocean Strategy.’    
 
                                                                                       
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RAILWAYS 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and 
Hindi) of the following Reports of the De partment-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Railways (2024-25):- 
 (i) Fourth Report of the Committee on  ‘Construction and maintenance of Rail 
tunnels and Bridges including Road Over Bridges/Road Under Bridges’; 
and 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 (ii) Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Third 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Railways'. 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा ( उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत गर्ामीण िवकास और 
पंचायती राज संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ:- 
(i)  Eighteenth Report of the Committee on ‘Clean and Green Village: Role of 
Panchayats’ pertaining to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj; and 
(ii) Nine teenth Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fifth Report on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development), 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा ( उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत सामािजक न्याय और 
अिधकािरता संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ :- 
(i)   Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2024- 25)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Social  Justice and Empowerment (Department 
of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities); 
(ii) 
Tenth Report on the Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Third 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2024- 25)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs; and 
(iii) Eleventh Report on the Action  Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fourth 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
7

 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2024- 25)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी ( उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत जल संसाधन संबंधी संसदीय 
Îथायी सिमित (2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) 
सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ :- 
  (i)  Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its First Report on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertai ning to the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation); 
(ii)   Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Second Report on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertai ning to the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation); 
(iii)  Eighth Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Third Report on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation);  and 
(iv)  Ninth Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee cont ained in its Fourth Report on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ pertai ning to the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation).    
 
 
STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 
 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Energy 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS  (DR. L. MURUGAN) : S i r ,  o n  b e h a l f  o f  m y  c o l l e a g u e ,  
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik, I lay the statement regarding Status of implementation of 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Energy on 
Demands for Grants (2024-25) pertaining to the Ministry of Power.                                                       
[Placed in Library. See  No. L.T. 5020/18/25] 
 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the First and Third 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Water Resources (2024-25) 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF JAL SHAKTI; AND THE MINISTER 
OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF  RAILWAYS (SHRI V. SOMANNA): Sir, I lay the 
following statements regarding:- 
(i)  Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the First 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Water Resources (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) pertaining 
to the Ministry of Jal Shakti (D epartment of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation). 
[Placed in Library.  See No. L.T. 3048/18/25] 
(iii) Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in 
the Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Water Resources (2024-25) on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation). 
[Placed in Library.  See No. L.T. 3049/18/25] 
 
Status of implementation of the Recommen dations contained in the First Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel 
 
कोयला मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा खान मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी  (Ǜी सतीश चंदर् दूबे): महोदय, 
मȅ कोयला मंतर्ालय की अनुदान मांगȗ (2024-25) क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत कोयला, खान और 
इÎपात संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े पहले Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ क े कायार्न्वयन 
की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ वƪËय सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। 
[Placed in Library.  See No. L.T. 3041/18/25] 
 
 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
9

 
 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Twenty-second 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Water Resources 
 
जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी राज भूषण चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय (जल 
संसाधन, नदी िवकास और गंगा संरक्षण िवभाग) से संबंिधत 'भूजल : एक मूÊयवान िकन्तु घटता 
हुआ संसाधन' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत जल संसाधन संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े बाईसवȂ 
Ģितवेदन ( सतर्हवीं लोक सभा) मȂ अंतिर्व
Íट िसफािरशȗ क े कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ 
वƪËय सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। 
[Placed in Library.  See No. L.T. 3050/18/25] 
 
Status of implementation of Recommendations/Observations contained in the  
Three Hundred Thirty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary  
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COOPERATION; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION (SHRI MURLIDHAR 
MOHOL): Sir, I lay the statement regardin g Status of implementation of 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty-fourth 
Report of the Department-related Parliame ntary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture on Demands for Grants (2022-23) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation. 
[Placed in Library.  See No. L.T. 2958/18/25] 
 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, in the last sitting of 8 th August, 2025, 
some Members raised objections to certain  observations by the Chair in respect of 
Rule 267. I wish to clarify that it was not intended to offend any hon. Member. I leave 
it to the wisdom of hon. Members to comply with the rules and directions imparted by 
the Chair on this subject and that the precious time of the House is not lost. 
...(Interruptions)... 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 Hon. Members, 29 notices have been r eceived today on five different subjects 
under Rule 267. ...(Interruptions)...  11 notices do not contain a motion drawn in 
proper terms to obtain a decision of the House.  ...(Interruptions)... Please listen 
first. Remaining 18 notices seek discussion on matter which is sub judice and these 
notices also do not contain a proper moti on as per the requirement of Rule 267. मȅने 5 
अगÎत को दी गई रूिंलग  मȂ reiterate िकया था िक sub judice matters पर सदन मȂ discussion 
पर पाबंिदयाँ हȅ, िजनसे आप भली-भाँित पिरिचत हȅ।   
  The sub judice principle was included in the Rules of Procedure for avoiding 
undue influence of any discussion in Parlia ment on a case pending in court.  Rule 
238(5) prohibits discussion on persons in high author ity except on a substantive 
motion.  Additionally, there are precedents and relevant ru lings to say that Rule 267 
can be used to raise issues rarest of ra re in nature.  Since none of the notices 
received today are in adherence to the requirement of the rules, as enunciated above, 
I am not admitting any of the notices. …(Interruptions)… Now, ‘Matters raised with 
permission of the Chair’. …(Interruptions)… Please, hon. Members, मȅ आपको बताना 
चाहूँगा िक Zero Hour और Questi
on Hour, Members क े hours हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  Hon. 
Members, ill today, during the current Session, we had the opportunity to take up 210 
Starred Questions, 210 Zero Hour submissi ons and 210 Special Mentions on various 
important issues so far.  However, due to continuous disruptions, we have been able 
to take up only 14 Starred Questions, fi ve Zero Hour submissions and 17 Special 
Mentions. …(Interruptions)…   Because of the disruptions, we have lost 62 hours and 
25 minutes of the Session so far. …(Interruptions)… मȅ आगर्ह करू ँगा िक Zero Hour चलने 
दȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, Zero Hour चलन े दȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ माननीय सदÎयȗ से 
आगर्ह करू ँगा िक वे अपनी सीट्स पर जाएँ और सदन को चलने दȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय 
सदÎयगण, सदन मȂ badge पहन कर आना, सदन क े का
मकाज की संÎकृ ित क े अनुरूप  नहीं है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ िरक्वेÎट करू ँगा िक badge हटा कर सदन मȂ आएँ। ...( Ëयवधान)... 
Please, please. …(Interruptions)… आप सदन चलने दȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय मेÇबसर् को 
Zero Hour और  Question Hour avail करने दȂ।  ...(Ëयवधा
न)... आप जानते हȅ िक माननीय 
मेÇबसर् क े िलए ये दोनȗ ही बड़े महत्वपूणर् instruments हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... ये बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् 
instruments हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप नहीं चाहते िक इन पर discussion हो?  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m.  
 
The House then adjourned at twelve minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
 
 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
11

 
The House re-assembled at two of the clock, 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the Chair. 
 
THE BUDGET (MANIPUR) 2025-26 - GENERAL DISCUSSSION 
AND 
GOVERNMENT BILLS 
 
I. The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
II. The Manipur Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2025 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Now, we will take up the Budget 
(Manipur), 2025-26, the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (A mendment) Bill 2025, 
the Manipur Appropriation (No.2) Bill 202 5, to be discussed together. General 
Discussion on the Budget (Manipur) 202 5-26. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary to move 
Motions for consideration of the following Bills.  
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आज की कायर्सूची मȂ 
कर्म संख्या 12 पर  विर्णत बजट  ( मिणपुर), 2025-26 को आपकी अनुमित से सदन क े पटल पर 
िवचार हेतु रखत ा  हूँ।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूँ :-   
 
       "िक मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर अिधिनयम, 2017 का और संशोधन करने वाले िवधेयक पर, 
लोक सभा ǎारा पािरत रूप  मȂ, िवचार िकया जाए।" 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ यह भी ĢÎताव करता हूँ :-
   
 
       "िक िवǄीय वषर् 2025-26 की सेवाओं क े िलए मिणपुर राज्य की संिचत िनिध मȂ से कितपय 
रािशयȗ क े संदाय और िविनयोग को Ģािधकृ त करने वाले िवधेयक पर, लोक सभा ǎारा पािरत रूप  
मȂ, िवचार िकया जाए।" 
The questions were proposed. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Sir, the Budget (Manipur) 2025-26,  
the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Ame ndment) Bill 2025-26 and the Manipur  
Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2025 are up for di scussion. I, now, call upon the Members 
whose names have been received for pa rticipation. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba 
Leishemba.  
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOB A LEISHEMBA (Manipur) : Thank you, Sir, for giving 
me this opportunity to participate in the discussion on the Manipur Budget for the 
financial year 2025-2026, Manipur GST and Appropriation Bills passed in the Lok 
Sabha on 7th August, 2025. Sir, the Government of India has sanctioned a total outlay 
of Rs.30,969.44 crores, equivalent to  Rs.35,103.90 crores, proposed on 17 th March 
2025. This Budget aims to restore trust and stability in the strife-torn State of 
Manipur, with key provisions targeted to stabilise Manipur's conflict-hit economy and 
address ethnic violence and displacement. Some  of the significant allocations are in 
relief and rehabilitation sectors. The total a llocation is Rs.1,065 crores.  In security 
and infrastructure sectors, the total allocation is Rs.5,241 crores. In the social and 
development sectors, the total allocation is Rs.11,520 crores.  
Sir, with the collective efforts of the Central and State Governments, there has 
been an improvement in the law and order si tuation in the State to some extent. I am 
sure that things will improve in the State soon and peace will prevail again. But, if I 
have not mentioned a few points about the ex tension of President's Rule in the State 
for another six months, with effect from 13
th August, 2025, I may be mistaken by the 
people of Manipur. The following are th e points which I would like to mention: 
Number one: Chin-Kuki groups residing in th e hills are not allowing free movement of 
Meitei community on the two National Hi ghways of Manipur, namely, National 
Highway-2 (Imphal-Dimapur) and the Nati onal Highway-37 (Imphal-Jiribam). There 
is strict prohibition on these National High ways by these groups for the last two years 
or more. So, the Meitei community should be allowed free movement on the National 
Highways as soon as possible. Number two: The internally displaced persons (IDPs), 
numbering around 55,650, from  over 10,000 families, and taking shelter in 262 relief 
camps, are yet to return to their respective homes even after completion of two years! 
They are still facing a very unse ttled life. So, they should be  allowed to return to their 
respective homes by availing special rehabi litation packages, because they are about 
to start their lives from zero. Number three: The President's Rule in Manipur should 
ensure necessary action regarding advisory of  the Ministry of Home  Affairs (MHA) 
dated 19th May, 2025 for the detection, identification and deportation of illegal foreign 
nationals, namely,  Myanmarese, Bangladeshis and  others  within one month.  
But no concrete actions have been take n by the State Government till date.  
So, this advisory of the MHA should be expedited at the earliest, taking 1961 as the 
cut-year, before conducting the National Census and delimitatio n process. Fourth, 
the 398 kilometer long porous Indo-Myanmar border (Manipur sector) should be 
strictly monitored and checked by some neutral and dutiful Central Forces like the 
BSF, to stop cross-border infiltrations of ill egal immigrants while the entire border is 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
13

 
being fenced by the Government of India. Fifth, in a democratic country, people want 
to have a popular Government. So, my humbl e appeal is that a popular Government 
should be reinstated in Manipur as and wh en the law and order situation in the State 
is completely improved.  By doing so, the President’s Rule in th e State will be more 
meaningful and appreciated.  Last but not the least, I am thankful to the hon. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, the hon. Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah, and the hon. 
Finance Minister, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman, for the continued support given to this 
State, especially for the Sp ecial Package given in this Budget.  The Special Package 
of Rs.2,898 crores announced by the hon. Finance Minister on 7
th August, 2025, in 
the Lok Sabha, will help Manipur in its r ecovery. This support for the internally-
displaced people, asset creation for rehab ilitation efforts, security expenses, and 
prepayment of high interest loans will help  Manipur in supporting those displaced and 
also in its economic recovery. I am also grateful to all those who have put in their 
efforts while preparing this Budget and en suring that Manipur gets the support it 
needs.   
 Before concluding, Sir, I request the Central Government to continue its 
support for Manipur so that the State can recover and contribute to the growth and 
development of this country. With these fe w words, I conclude my speech on the 
Budget (Manipur) 2025-26.  Thank you, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Now, Shri Golla Baburao.  
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO (Andhra Pradesh): Sir,  I think, I cover half of the entire 
House.  I am alone in these entire rows. I thank the hon. Vice-Chairman for giving me 
the opportunity to speak in this debate  on the Manipur Goods and Services Tax 
(Amendment) Bill, 2025, and the Manipur Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2025. Frequent 
bandhs, strikes, ethnic strife and blocka des in Manipur have disrupted the 
administration, trade, education, and h ealth services, preventing the economic 
progress of the State.   
I want to pinpoint three-four points.  I wish to place on record my appreciation 
for the decisive steps taken by the Gove rnment of India for restoring peace and 
stability in Manipur. The provision of an ad ditional Rs.2,898 crore special stability and 
rebuilding package is a bold commitment to  reconstruction and healing after the 
recent unrest. The allocation of Rs.523 cr ore for the rehabilitation of Internally-
Displaced Persons ensures that our people  in relief camps receive shelter, food, 
medical care and schooling for their ch ildren. I also welcome the Rs.35 crore 
allocation for housing support to the familie s who lost their homes, the Rs.100 crore 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
flexible relief fund for the urgent crises, and the Rs.7 crore comp ensation fund for the 
victims of violence. These measures, co mbining the humanitarian concern with 
security and rebuilding, send a strong me ssage that the Government stands firmly 
with the people of Manipur and is committe d to building a future of lasting peace and 
stability.  
Now, I would like to highlight the impo rtance of economic prosperity for peace 
in Manipur.  Manipur's insurgency-related  incidents fell nearly 50 per cent from 2014-
2017 and 2018-2021, when infrastructure inve stment and economic activities such as 
road building, connectivity projects, and entrepreneurial growth increased. This 
shows high growth rates in these years we re marked by relative peace and improved 
governance.   
Development projects like the Imphal-M oreh highway and enhanced digital 
connectivity have facilitated trade, mobility and communications, fostering 
commercial activities including tourism an d small-scale enterprises. Economic 
opportunities also divert youth from vi olence towards peace which, as a result, 
weakens the ethnic divides.  For example,  growth in start-ups owned by young 
people has empirically reduced bandhs and strikes in the re gion. Entrepreneurship, 
specifically traditional handicrafts, stimulat es local pride while reducing out-migration 
and economic dependency on the Govern ment. For instance, Manipur's famous 
textile industry saw export increase in peaceful periods but suffered steep fall up to 80 
per cent during violence peaks.    
Now, I would like to come to the issue of addressing disparities between hill 
and valley population. Addressi ng disparities between hill and valley regions, as also 
between the majoritarian and tribal communi ties, is essential for sustainable peace. 
Tribal areas lag in infrastructure, schoo ling, healthcare and livelihood opportunities 
compared to valley regions, which causes extreme resentment.  To bring peace, both 
groups must be integrated through de velopment agendas and governance models 
respecting cultural identities and avoiding dominance of any majoritarian narratives.  
With regard to opening up land trade with Myanmar, through Moreh Border, I 
would like to say that Moreh border town is the principal land trading hub with 
Myanmar which needs to be developed. Land border trade through Moreh would 
enable access to large South East Asian ma rkets, cross-border movement of goods, 
facilitate employment and bring stability by in volving both valley and hill population in 
commerce.  Agricultural products, textiles, handicrafts, and essential imports can be 
extensively traded across this border. This  would boost employment through jobs for 
wage labour, transporters, traders and suppor t the rise of local markets in Moreh as 
well as Tamu and Namphalong in Myanmar.   When border trade thrives, income 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
15

 
opportunities draw youth away from militancy and reduce grievances linked to poverty 
and unemployment.  
In conclusion, I would sa y that the way forward fo r peace in Manipur lies in 
investing in shared prosperity, inclusive su pport for all communities, especially tribals 
and harnessing the State's border locati on as a gateway for trade and cultural 
integration with South East Asia. Effectiv e fund allocation and the legal enablement 
through these funds serve as the foundation for rebuilding a resilient and harmonious 
Manipur.  
With these words, I support the Bill. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Thank you. May I request the hon. 
Members to keep the volume low when the Members are speaking? Even if you need 
to talk to someone, let  us try to re duce the decibel level in the House. Next 
speaker is Shri Muzibulla Khan. 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवधेयक 
पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूं। महोदय, मȅ मिणपुर 
िविनयोग (संख्यांक 2) िव
धेयक, 2025 पर बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हूं। 
महोदय, मȅ शुरू  मȂ ही ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूं िक यह िसफर् बजट की िकताब मȂ दजर् 
संख्याओं का मामला नहीं है, बिÊक यह मिणपुर क े लोगȗ की गिरमा, सुरक्षा और अि Îतत्व का 
सवाल है। महोदय, ‘ िविनयोग’ का मतलब है- नागिरकȗ क े कÊयाण क े िलए खचर् की अनुमित 
देना। लेिकन इस िवधेयक का क्या लाभ, िजन लोगȗ क े िलए यह पैसा है, वे डर, िवÎथापन और 
अिनिÌचतता मȂ जी रहे हȗ? 
महोदय, मिणपुर िपछले एक साल से जल रहा है। उसे एक Ëयापक पुनिर्वकास योजना देने 
की बजाय हम क ेवल िदखावटी आवंटन दे रहे हȅ, िजनकी घोषणा तो ज़ोर-शोर से होती है, 
लेिकन ज़मीन पर इसका असर बहुत कम पहुंचता है। 
क Ȃ दर् सरकार डबल इंजन िवकास की बा
त अवÌय करती है, लेिकन मिणपुर मȂ दूसरा इंजन 
िबना ईंधन क े छोड़ िदया गया है। धन Îवीकृ त तो होता है, लेिकन उसका िवतरण अत्यंत धीमा है 
और िनगरानी लगभग न क े बराबर है। राहत िशिव
र अभी भी भीड़ से भरे हȅ, बच्चȗ िक िशक्षा का 
एक साल बरबाद हो गया है और Îथानीय कारोबार ठप पड़े हȅ,  िफर  भी क ेन्दर् चाहता है िक हम 
मान लȂ िक यह सब क ु छ िनयंतर्ण  मȂ है।  चलो ठीक है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हम ददर्  क े साथ कहना चाहते हȅ िक आज मिणपुर शासन की 
िवफलता का उदाहरण है। यह क ेवल कानून ËयवÎथा का मामला नहीं है, बिÊक आिर्थक पतन का 
भी है।  िकसान अपनी ज़मीन तक नहीं पहुंच पा रहे हȅ, Ëयापारी बाज़ार से कट गए हȅ और युवा 
सुरक्षा और रोजगार की तलाश मȂ पलायन कर रहे हȅ। यह िविनयोग िव
धेयक उस हकीकत को 
बदलने क े िलए क्या कर रहा है? हम क ेन्दर् सरकार से आगर्ह करȂगे िक यह जमीनी हकीकत को 
जानकार लोगȗ क े पास उनका जो हक है, वह पहुंचना चा
िहए। क ेन्दर्ीय सरकार िवकास क े 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
िवज्ञापन बहुत  तेजी से जारी कर रही है, लेिकन पयार्Ãत पुनवार्स पैक े ज जारी करने मȂ बेहद धीमी 
है। संसद मȂ रातȗ-रात कानून पािरत करने की राजनीितक इच्छा शिƪ है, लेिकन इस राज्य मȂ 
शांित बहाल करने का कोई तात्काि लक उपाय नहीं िकया जा रहा है। इस िवधेयक का समथर्न 
करने का मतलब यह है िक मिणपुर क े लोगȗ क े साथ खड़े रहना है। यह मांग करना है िक हर 
आवंिटत रुपया  अंितम Ëयिƪ तक पहुंचे और खचर् पारदशीर् तरीके  से हो, समय पर मिणपुर क े 
पुनवार्स क े िलए एक िवशेष िवǄीय पैक े ज हो, जो िनयिम
त आवंटन से अलग न हो।  इस िवधेयक 
क े अंतगर्त Ëयय की िनगरानी मȂ Îथानीय िनकाय और नागिरक समाज को भी सीधे भागीदारी देनी 
चािहए।   
 दूसरी बात यह है िक मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर िव
धेयक, जो अभी आया है, उसकी तरफ 
मȅ आपका ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं। यह सरकार राज्यȗ क े जीएसटी कानून मȂ पीछे क े 
दरवाजे से ट ुकड़े-ट ुकड़े मȂ संशोधन लाती है। िबना बुिनयादी समÎयाओं को सुलझाए, जो 
जीएसटी ने राज्यȗ क े िलए पैदा िकए हȅ। ‘एक देश, एक कर’ क े नाम पर क ेन्दर् Ëयापक तरीके  से 
राज्यȗ की िवǄीय ÎवायǄ
ता को कमजोर कर रही है। इससे छोटे राज्य सबसे ज्यादा Ģभािव त हो 
रहे हȅ। यह िवधेयक भले ही मिणपुर क े िलए हो, लेिकन समÎया सभी राज्यȗ मȂ है। मȅ एक छोटा-सा 
उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं। मेरे राज्य ओिडशा मȂ क Ȃ दू पǄा तोड़ने वाले लाखȗ आिदवासी और 
वनवासी पिरवार हȅ।  क Ȃ दू पǄा उनके  जीवन का सहारा है और क Ȃ दू पǄा क े िलए जब जीएसटी 
लगता है, तो उन पिरवारȗ क े िलए बहुत तकलीफ की बात होती है। हमारे पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी Ǜी नवीन 
पटनायक जी ने कई बार क ेन्दर् सरकार को िचƻी िलखी है िक क Ȃ दू पǄे से जीएसटी को हटा िदया 
जाए। गरीब लोग, जो पǄे तोड़ते हȅ, उनके  ऊपर जीएसटी न लगे, तािक गरीब लोग, वनवासी 
लोग, जो जंगल मȂ रहते हȅ, वे अपने पिरवार को सुचारु  रूप  से, अच्छे Îवरूप से िंजदगी दे सकȂ, 
अपने बच्चȗ का भिवÍय ठीक कर सकȂ । सर, अब िवधेयक पर लौटते हȅ। धारा 11 ( ए) का Ģावधान 
कहता है िक सामान्य Ģथा क े मामले मȂ कर वसूली नहीं की जाएगी। छोटे Ëयापारी, कारीगर और 
गर्ामीण उत्पादकȗ को सालȗ पुराने लेन-देन क े िलए नोिटस भेजे जाते हȅ। इसी तरह धारा 16 क े 
संशोधन …(Ëयवधान)… आईटीसी दा
वे की अनुमित देता है।  … ( Ëयवधान)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Let us keep the decibel levels low, 
please.  Thank you. 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान: यह सभी क े िलए लागू होगा, लेिकन हकीकत यह है िक पोटर्ल की खराबी 
और Ģिकर्यागत परेशािनयȗ से छोटे Ëयापारी इसका लाभ नहीं उठा पा रहे हȅ।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ िफर से क ेन्दर् सरकार से और हमारे फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर से, जो 
यहां मौजूद हȅ, उनसे मȅ अनुरोध करूं गा िक जो गरीब लोग क Ȃ दू पǄा तोड़ते हȅ, उनके  ऊपर से 
जीएसटी हटाया जाए।  आपका  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you. Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai; 
not present. Shri P.P. Suneer; no
t present. Shri Kanad Purkayastha. It is his maiden 
speech.  Many best wishes! 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
17

 
 
Ǜी कणाद पुरकायÎथ (असम): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आज पहली बार इस ĢितिÍठत 
सदन मȂ महत्वपूणर् िवधेयकȗ  -  ‘ मिणपुर माल और सेवा कर ( संशोधन) िवधेयक, 2025’ और 
‘मिणपुर िविनयोग ( संख्याक 2) िवधेयक, 2025’ पर हो रही चचार् मȂ भाग लेने का मौका देने क े 
िलए आपके  Ģित आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं। मȅ आदरणीय िवǄ मंतर्ी, िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को 
धन्यवाद देता हूं, िजन्
हȗने मिणपुर राज्य मȂ िवकास को जारी रखने का कदम उठाया और 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इस महत्वपूणर् िवधेयक को पािरत कराने क े 
िलए इसे सदन मȂ उपÎथािपत िकया है।  
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज हम क ेवल काग़ज़ पर दज़र् अंकȗ पर बहस नह
ीं कर 
रहे हȅ, बिÊक हम यह तय कर रहे हȅ िक मिणपुर की Ģगित क े पिहए आगे बढ़ते रहȂगे या िफर थम 
जाएंगे। मिण
पुर िविनयोग िवधेयक िसफर् Ëयय की अनुमित देने का िवषय नहीं है, बिÊक यह 
मिणपुर क े Îकू लȗ, अÎपतालȗ, सड़कȗ, िकसानȗ क े सपनȗ और युवा ओ ं की आकांक्षाओं को जीवन 
देने का भी िवषय है। यिद हम इस िवधेयक को पािरत करते हȅ, तो उन िशक्षकȗ क े हाथȗ मȂ 
तनख्वाह पहुंचेगी, जो मिणपुर क े बच्चȗ का भिवÍय सँवारते हȅ, अÎपतालȗ को आवÌयक दवाई 
िमलेगी, िकसानȗ को िंसच
ाई की वह सहायता िमलेगी, िजसका उनसे वादा िकया गया था। 
महोदय, सड़कȂ और पुल, उनके  दूरÎथ पहाड़ी क्षेतर्ȗ को, मिणपुर की अथर्ËयवÎथा से जोड़Ȃगे। 
…(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR.SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Members, if you don’t mind, can 
you settle down in your places?     
 
SHRI KANAD PURKAYASTHA: This Bill fund s education, healthcare, agriculture, 
infrastructure and social empowerment. It  supports our mothers in self-help groups, 
our youth in skill training, ou r entrepreneurs in start-up ventures and our tribal 
communities in development schemes. Let us be clear about it. Every rupee in this Bill 
is an investment in hope, an investment in a Manipur that is stronger, fairer and more 
prosperous. I urge my colleagues from all side s that this is not the time to think in 
terms of Ruling Party or Opposition. This is the time to think in terms of Manipur. The 
people who sent us here expect solutions, not stalemates. The people of M
 anipur are 
watching. They are waiting for action, not excuses. Let us pass this Bill with unity, 
with pride and with the resolve that no po litical difference will come in the way of 
Manipur's progress. Let us send a clear message that when it comes to the welfare of 
Manipur, we are one voice, one heart and one vision. With these words, I strongly 
support the Bill. Thank you, Sir.                 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार (िहमाचल Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपके  Ģित बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद और आभार Ģकट करता हूं, क्यȗिक आपने आज दो महत्पूणर् िबलȗ, जो सदन मȂ ĢÎतुत 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
हुए हȅ – The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2025 and The 
Manipur Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2025 --  मुझे उन पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, ये दोनȗ िबÊस, जो माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया ǎारा ĢÎतुत िकए 
गए हȅ, इनमȂ जो Ģोिवज़न्स िकए गए हȅ, मȅ समझता हूं िक इन Ģोिवज़न्स की वजह से मिणपुर का 
िवकास और आगे बढ़ेगा।  
            उप
सभाध्यक्ष महोदय, अगर मोदी सरकार की िपछले दस वषर् की आिर्थक नीितयȗ, 
िवǄीय Ģबंधन और आिर्थक िनयोजन को देखȂ, तो हम पाएंगे िक िपछले दस वषș मȂ भारतीय 
अथर्ËयवÎथा वÊडर् इकोनॉमी क े साथ आगे बढ़ रही है। मह ोदय, ‘Reform, Perform and 
Transform’ क े संकÊप क े साथ भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा, क ु छ क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, िवÌव की जो बेहतर 
अथर्ËयवÎथाएं हȅ, उनके  क ंपीिटशन मȂ आगे आ रही है और क ु छ क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ बहुत ही जÊदी आगे आ 
जाएगी।  
महोदय, 2014 मȂ, जहाँ हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा ग्यारहवȂ Îथान पर थी, वहीं हम वतर्मान मȂ 
िवÌव की चौथी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथ
ा बन गए हȅ। जैसािक सभी जानते हȅ िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी ने 2027 तक देश को िवÌव की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनाने का संकÊप िलया है, इस 
संबंध मȂ मȅ पूरे दावे क े साथ कह सक
ता हूं िक भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा 2027 से पहले ही िवÌव की 
तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन जाएगी। महोदय, अगर हम 2021 से 2024 क े बीच मȂ भ ारत  की 
िवकास दर देखȂ, तो आठ परसȂट की दर से आगे बढ़ना, यह बहुत बड़ी बात है। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह 
सामान्य बात नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार: कोरोना महामारी, िविभन्न वैिÌवक चुनौितयȗ क े बावजूद, 2021 से 2024 क े 
बीच मȂ आठ परसȂट की िवकास दर क े साथ आगे बढ़ना, यह बहुत बड़ी बात है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
इसके  िलए भी मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी और आदरणीय मोदी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूँ। जहाँ आज 
भारत ग्लोबल गर्ोथ रेट मȂ 15 परसȂट कॉन्टर्ीÅयूशन कर रहा है, वहीं आईएम
एफ क े एक आंकड़े क े 
अनुसार, 2028 तक भारत ग्लोबल गर्ोथ रेट मȂ अके ले 18 परसȂट कॉन्टर्ीÅयूट करेगा। मȅ इसके  िलए 
भी माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देना चाहता हूँ।  
जहाँ तक देश क े फॉरेन एक्सचȂज िरज़वर् की बात है, तो एक समय ऐसा भी था िक हमȂ 
िवÌव क े बड़े-बड़े फाइनȂिशयल इंÎटीǷूशन्स, जैसे वÊडर् बȅक, आईएमएफ, एिशयन डेवलपमȂट 
बȅक भारत को लोन देने से मना कर
ते थे। इसका कारण एक ही था िक हमारे पास फॉरेन एक्सचȂज 
िरज़वर् नहीं था। लेिकन, आज मुझे यह बताते हुए हषर् हो रहा है िक जहाँ हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा आज 
िवÌव की चौ
थी बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनी है, वहीं पूरे िवÌव मȂ भारत चौथा ऐसा देश बन गया है, 
िजसके  पास सबसे ज्यादा फॉरेन एक्सȂज िरज़वर् हȅ।  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, नोिटस का क्य
ा हुआ? 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार: मȅ मिणपुर पर बोल रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
19

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): No cross talks please! 
...(Interruptions)... Please continue. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR : Sir, as far as th e Manipur Appropriation Bill is concerned, 
which is now being placed before this august House, it seeks to revise and build upon 
Vote on Account with two key objectives. ...( Interruptions)... Firstly, to provide 
enhanced fiscal support to the State and, secondly, to bring greater transparency and 
realism in Budget making. ...( Interruptions)... Further, an additional allocation of 
Rs.2,898 crore for Manipur from Government of India is being factored in this Budget. 
...(Interruptions)... Of this amount, Rs.1,667 cror e would be spent under the Capital 
head and Rs.1,231 crore would be  spent under the Revenue head. 
...(Interruptions)... It is aimed at addressing bo th immediate needs and the long-
term financial sustainability of 
Manipur.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : One second! Hon. LoP wants to 
make a point.  
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): धन्यवाद। * 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Hon. LoP, please continue. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: 
*...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): It is not on the Bill. 
...(Interruptions)... Hon. LoP, it is not on the Bill; it cannot be allowed. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: *  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): It is not on the Bill. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  * ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : I am sorry. I will have to move on. 
...(Interruptions)... It is not on the Bill. ...(Interruptions )... I will have to move on 
back to the Bill. ...(Interruptions)... It is not on the Bill.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: *  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Sir, I have taken note of your point. 
...(Interruptions)... Now, hon. Leader of the House.  
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA) : The discussion is 
going on Manipur Bill and I think anything beyond that should not be recorded and 
should not go on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : All right. ...(Interruptions)... Please 
continue. ...( Interruptions)... That, which is not part of the Bill, should not go on 
record. ...( Interruptions)... Dr. Sikander Kumar, please continue. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR : Sir, the Government presen ted the Vote on Account in 
respect of the Manipur Budget in March, 2025. ...( Interruptions)... The Government 
had taken appropriation for six months endi ng in September, 2025. The proclamation 
of emergency declared on 13
th February, 2025, has since been extended by 
resolutions passed by both the Houses of  Parliament, which has occasioned the 
presentation of this Budget …(Interruptions)…     
     
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Pl ease, let us maintain order in the 
House.  …(Interruptions)…  Let us keep order in the House, hon. Members.   
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: Sir, the Budget Es timates in respect of Revenue Receipts 
for 2025–26 are being kept at Rs. 21,439 crore. …(Interruptions)…  
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Let the hon. Member speak.  
…(Interruptions)… Please have order in the House.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, 
please have order in the House.   
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
21

 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: In spite of the additi onal allocation, this is 21 per cent lower 
than the Vote-on-Account figures that we re presented by me in March 2025.   
…(Interruptions)… This is an achievable target if we compare the 2024-25 pre-Audited 
Actuals figures of Rs.15,471 crores.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Let us have order in the House, 
please.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: In the Manipur Appropriation Bill, 2025, the Revenue 
Expenditure has been kept at Rs.19,496 crore which is  26 per cent over the pre-
Actuals of 2024-25.  …(Interruptions)…  This is inclusive of Rs.1,231 crore revenue 
expenditure being extended as support  under the additional allocation.  
…(Interruptions)…    
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : I had allowed him on his time.  
…(Interruptions)…  I had allowed him  …(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: The Fiscal Deficit is at 3.5 per cent of GSDP as compared to 
3.4 per cent during the Vote-on-Account Bu dget and 3.7 per cent in the pre-Audited 
Actuals 2024-25.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Let us have order in the House.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR: The Government of In dia is clearly committed to the overall 
development of Manipur and meeting the as pirations of the people of Manipur.  
…(Interruptions)…  Sir, the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 
2025… …(Interruptions)…  The Manipur Cabinet issued the GST (Amendment) 
Ordinance 2025 on 9
th June, aligning State GST law with the Central CGST 
(Amendment) Act and GST Council resolutions from 2024.  …(Interruptions)…  सर, ये 
जो दोनȗ िबल हȅ – Manipur Appropriation Bill,  2025 and the Manipur Goods and 
Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2025- मȅ इनका समथर्न करता हूं और मȅ सभी से अनुरोध 
करता हूं िक वे भी इसका समथर्न करȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ मȅ अपनी बात को 
समाÃत करता हूं।       
                                                                        
Ǜी Ģमोद ित वारी : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): There is a point of order.  
…(Interruptions)…  Please, the leader is making a point.  …(Interruptions)…  Y e s ,  
please.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Member, what is the rule number?  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सर, यह रूल  261 है। मȅ इतना कहना चाहता हूं िक सदन की 
कायर्वाही आपके  िनदȃशन पर चलती है। कायर्वाही मȂ िकस शÅद को अंिकत करना है, िकसका 
भाषण अंिकत करना है, यह फ ैसला आपकी क ुसीर् से होगा, आपकी चेयर से होगा। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon
. Member, I have already given 
him the time. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Member, I will look into it.  …(Interruptions)…  
H o n .   M e m b e r ,   I   h a v e   t a k e n   n o t e   o f   y o u r   p o i n t .    …(Interruptions)…  Now, 
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman for her reply. …(Interruptions)… There is no point of order 
required.  …(Interruptions)…  You have already made your point. …(Interruptions)…  
Hon. Minister to reply.   
 
THE  MINISTER  OF FINANCE; AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, th ank you very much and I thank all the 
Members who have come here to participate in this debate.  …(Interruptions)… 
Manipur, its Budget, its tax revenue raising potential, giving amendment to the Bill of 
GST, are all very critical to the State of Manipur.  …(Interruptions)…  A full year Budget 
is what is being presented now.  …(Interruptions)…  E a r l i e r ,  w e  h a d  c o m e  w i t h  a  
Vote-on-Account. …(Interruptions)…  Now, this is the full Budget.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Members, please do not come 
into the Well.  …(Interruptions)…  Please do not come into the Well.  …(Interruptions)…  
Please continue, Madam.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Therefore,  it is important that the House takes 
this debate very seriously. …(Interruptions)… Passing a Budget is a constitutional 
responsibility for all of us.  …(Interruptions)…  A n d ,  e q u a l l y  s o ,  p a s s i n g  o f  a n  
Ordinance, which was brought in, because  the House was not in Session then.  
…(Interruptions)…  Now, I am making it as a B ill so that it becomes an Act. 
…(Interruptions)… Both are absolutely critical, a constitutional responsibility for all of 
us and, therefore, I would want this discussion.  …(Interruptions)…    
 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
23

 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please go back to your seats.  …(Interruptions)… माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी, please continue.  …(Interruptions)…   माननीय मंतर्ी जी की बातȂ ही िरकॉडर् पर जा 
रही हȅ।  Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Taking up the Manipur GST Ordinance to be 
converted into an Act and also passing the Budget are both very critical to the State 
of Manipur. …(Interruptions)… And since I am happy to see the Opposition come back 
into the House, I would expect them to participate in this and allow the Manipur 
Appropriation Bill and the Manipur GST Ordinance to be passed as a law. 
…(Interruptions)… A n d ,  r e s p e c t  t h a t  w e  h a v e  t o  have this constitutional duty 
performed. …(Interruptions)…  I would like the O pposition, which ha s taken a lot of 
interest in Manipur, otherwise, to take  interest even now and allow Manipur to 
receive its money which is its due.  …(Interruptions)… And, therefore, I would appeal 
to the Opposition to stop their protest, at least, now, and deal with the 
constitutional responsibility that we have.   …(Interruptions)… Sir, therefore, on the 
GST Bill, it is more looking at conver sion of an Ordinance into a Bill.  
…(Interruptions)…   And, therefore, the B ill is before us; we need to pass it to make it 
into an Act.  …(Interruptions)… Or else , Manipur will not be able to raise revenue 
under the GST even though, all over the country, all States have passed this 
Am
endment.  …(Interruptions)… We are waiting for the Ordi nance to become law.  
…(Interruptions)…  
Sir, the others are: Budget (Manipur), 2025-26, and the Manipur 
Appropriation (No.2) Bill 2025 which are very importan t legislations…  
…(Interruptions)…  I would like to put it on record. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Prime 
Minister Modi ji has ensured that Manipur’s development does not suffer. 
…(Interruptions)… But, at the same time, the intern ally displaced pe ople who are in 
the camps, some of them have gone back to their villages and many of them who 
are living in the camps, sh ould be given assistance. …(Interruptions)… And, that is 
why, what we have provided  for is worth-mentioning. …(Interruptions)… Rs. 2,898/- 
crores for Manipur from Government of Indi a is being factored-in, in this Budget. 
…(Interruptions)… Of this amount of Rs. 2,898/- crores, Rs. 1,667/- crores would 
be spent under Capital account which mean s assets will be created, jobs will be 
provided and, as a result, the St ate will have its economy revive. …(Interruptions)… 
And, Rs. 1,431/- crores would be  spent under Revenue Head. Sir,  I would like to 
expand on this a bit.  …(Interruptions)…   Additional allocation , which is being given, 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
will support immediate requirements such as the internally displaced persons’ 
rehabilitation will get Rs. 523 crores, so  that people in the camps can be 
rehabilitated.  …(Interruptions)…  Second, security -related expenditure will be of Rs. 
542 crores. …(Interruptions)… Deployment of the CAPF, Central Armed Police 
Force, is given another Rs. 500 crores. …(Interruptions)… So, I think, it is very 
important that these are taken on-board. …(Interruptions)… More important is the 
fact that, for long-term sustai nability of Manipur’s public finance, the Government of 
India is allowing Manipur to pr e-pay its high-interest loans. …(Interruptions)… The 
loan burden on Manipur is being reduced by asking them  to re-pay all those high-
interest loans. …(Interruptions)…  For that, Rs. 633 crores is being provided, so that 
the State doesn't sit with heavy cost loans. …(Interruptions)…  Second is: Additional 
support is being provided through the State Special Assistance for Capital 
Investment and the amount given is Rs. 700 crores. …(Interruptions)… That amount 
of Rs. 700 crores is for 50 years without interest. So, Manipur’s development will 
ramp up and speed up. Therefore, this Bu dget brings up these important matters. 
…(Interruptions)… The revenue receipts are being kept at Rs. 21,439 crores. 
…(Interruptions)… This is 21 per cent lower than the Vote on Account figures.  That is 
because it was presen ted in March, 2025. …(Interruptions)… We have a realistic 
picture now. …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : No point of order in disorder, please. …(Interruptions)…   
No point of order, please. …(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Above all, Sir, the last point I would like to say 
in conclusion is that the fisc al deficit is at 3.5 per cent of GSDP compared to 3.4 per 
cent during Vote on Account. …(Interruptions)…  It was 3.7 per cent in pre-audited 
Actuals of 2024-25. So, the to tal outstanding liab ilities are budgeted to be 37 per 
cent compared to the pre-audited 39.5 per cent of the GSDP. …(Interruptions)…    It 
is one of the progressive and confidence building Budgets. I request the House to 
pass it. Thank you, Sir.                             
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I shall now put the motion re garding consideration of the 
Manipur Goods and Services Tax (A mendment) Bill, 2025, to vote.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 The question is: 
           “That the Bill further to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, 
as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.”   
 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
25

 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please go back to your seats. ...( Interruptions)... आप 
अपनी सीट्स पर जाकर ही 'No' कहȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Please go back to your seats. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill. …(Interruptions)… माननीय सदÎयगण, आप अपनी सीट्स पर जाइए, मȅ आपकी हर 
बात सुनने को तैयार हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... परन्तु आप अपनी सीट्स पर न होकर, Well मȂ हȅ और 
आप point of order raise करने की demand कर रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  No, आप अपनी 
सीट्स पर जाकर कहȂ। ...( Ëयवधा न)... आप अपनी सीट्स पर जाकर कहȂ, Well से नहीं।  
...(Ëयवधान)... I shall now put Clauses 2 to 38 to vote. 
 
Clauses 2 to 38 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
…(Interruptions)… 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill be 
returned. …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I move:  
 
       “That the Bill be returned.” 
 
               The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please go back to your seats and say ‘No’. 
…(Interruptions)… I shall now put the motion regard ing consideration of the Manipur 
Appropriation (No. 2) Bill, 2025 to vote. The question is: 
 
             “That the Bill to authorise payment and appropriation of certain sums from and 
out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of  Manipur for the services of the financial 
year 2025-26, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़। आप अपनी सीट्स पर जाकर 'no' कह सकते हȅ, यह आपका अिधकार 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
है। ...( Ëयवधान)... We shall now take up Clause-by- Clause consideration of the Bill. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 and the Schedule were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill be 
returned.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, pl ease allow me for just one minute. 
…(Interruptions)… We have been hearing so many sympathetic and …(Interruptions)… 
Manipur’s version of things from the Opposition and from the ruling benches.  
…(Interruptions)… But when the actual Budget and Appropriation is being taken up, 
when the GST, revenue raising legislation is being taken up,…(Interruptions)… we find 
the Opposition not just protesting on something else, but al so voting against 
Manipur’s Appropriation Bill. …(Interruptions)… Voting against it!  I am sorry to say 
this. …(Interruptions)…  
Sir, I move:  
    “ That the Bill be returned.” 
 
                    The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
III.   The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2025 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2025; Shri Sarbananda 
Sonowal to move a motion for consideratio n of the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2025. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE MINISTER OF PORTS, SHIPPING  AND WATERWAYS (SHRI SARBANANDA 
SONOWAL): Respected Deputy Chairman, Sir, I am, especi ally, thankful to you for 
giving me this opportunity. Sir, I move: 
 
            “That the Bill to consolidate and amend th e law relating to merchant shipping 
to ensure compliance with India’s oblig ation under the maritime treaties and 
international instruments to which India is a party and also to ensure the development 
of Indian shipping and efficient maintenance of Indian mercantile marine in a manner 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
27

 
best suited to serve the national intere st and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
The question was proposed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Motion moved. …(Interruptions)… Now I call upon the 
Members whose names have been received for participation in the discussion. 
…(Interruptions)… Now, Shri Golla Baburao. …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO (ANDHRA PRADESH) : Sir, at the outset, I once again 
congratulate the Government for bringi ng forth the Merchant Shipping Bill. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: हाउस ऑडर्र मȂ हो, तो मȅ बोलने क े िलए समय दूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Please go 
back to your seats; only then, I will allow. …( Interruptions)… Please go back to your 
seats. …( Interruptions)… क ृपया आप बोलȂ, आपकी बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जाएगी। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : The Indian shipping industry plays a vital role in sustaining 
the country’s trade and commerce with a co
astline spanning 7,517 kilometres. 
…(Interruptions)…    
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप Well मȂ खड़े हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप Well से आवाज़ कर रहे हȅ और 
माननीय एलओपी क े बात करने की बात कर रहे हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... माननीय गोला बाबूराव, 
Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO: This industry can be broadly cat egorized into foreign-going 
and home trade shipping with inland waterw ays also contributing significantly to the 
overall economy. …( Interruptions)… Indian merchant mari ne fleet has 1,526 vessels 
registered as on 31
st December, 2023, in foreign-going and coastal operations with a 
combined gross tonnage of approximately 13.74 million tons.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आप सभी अपनी-अपनी सीट पर चले जाएँ, मȅ बोलने का मौका दूँगा। 
...(Ëयवधान)... हाउस ऑडर्र मȂ हो, I am ready to give the chance. …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : Now, the Indian foreign-going vessels operate globally, 
transporting cargo to and from International ports. …(Interruptions)…  
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please go back to your seats. …(Interruptions )… First, go 
back to your seats. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : The core competencies of th ese vessels include efficient 
cargo handling and management. The foreign-going ships require skilled personnel to 
manage cargo efficiently and ensure timely delivery. …( Interruptions)… The  
compliance with international regulations - th ese vessels must adhere to international 
maritime laws and conventions, ensuring  safe and secure operations; skilled and 
trained crew for foreign-going ships requir e experienced and trained crew from the 
members to navigate complex international roads. …(Interruptions)…  
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) in the Chair.] 
 
The foreign-going Indian merchant sh ips contribute significantly to the 
country's foreign trade, generating re venue and promoting economic growth. 
…(Interruptions)… Oceanic routes play an importan t role in the transport sector of 
India's economy. Approximately 95 per cent  of India's foreign trade by volume… 
…(Interruptions)… No, no; I will speak. …( Interruptions)… and 70 per cent by value 
moves through ocean routes.  …( Interruptions)…  As of 2022, India's foreign trade 
total US$1,230 billion, with a grow th rate of 16.4 per cent.  …( Interruptions)… As on 
31
st December, 2023, the Indi an home trade ships oper ate within the country’s 
coastal waters, transporting cargo between domestic ports. …( Interruptions)… The 
core competencies of these vessels includ e knowledge of Indian coastal routes and 
ports.  Home trade ships require expertise in navigating complex coastal routes and 
ports, efficient cargo handling and manage ment; these vessels must manage cargo 
efficiently to ensure timely delivery and reduce logistics costs. …(Time-Bell rings)…                             
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर): एलओपी। 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सर, आपने मुझे जो समय िदया, उसके  िलए मȅ आपका 
धन्यवाद करता हूँ।  £ 
 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर): क ृपया आप सÅजेक्ट पर बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  £...(Ëयवधान)... 
                                                            
£ Exupnged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
29

 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर): सर, आपका point आ गया। ...( Ëयवधान)... I will call 
next speaker. …(Interruptions)…  Shri Muzibulla Khan, not present. …(Interruptions)… 
Please. …(Interruptions)… Now, the Leader of the House. 
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सर, जैसा लीडर ऑफ िद अपोिजशन ने कहा िक डेमोकर्सी 
की रक्षा होनी चािहए, िबÊकु ल होनी चािहए, लेिकन इस हाउस को बंधक भी नहीं बनाया जा 
सकता। ...( Ëयवधान)... We cannot make it a hostage. …( Interruptions)… After all, 
Business Advisory 
Committee मȂ discuss हुआ िक Bills will be passed. 
…(Interruptions)… And, I am shocked today.  The Opposition which was talking about 
Manipur for the last two years, and when  the Bill was being passed, they were 
opposing it! …(Interruptions)… They were opposing it! Now, Shri Sonowal ji to reply to 
the discussion.  ...(Interruptions)...  He is there. Ãलीज़, शांित बनाए रखȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Please sit down.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL : Mr. Vice-Chairman Sir, I thank the hon. Member, 
Shri Golla Baburao, for his kind support to this Bill.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : No; no.  
...(Interruptions)...  Neerajji, please.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL : Respected Sir, the Merchant Shipping Bill 2024, a 
landmark legislation, is aimed at modernising India's maritime.  ...(Interruptions)... 
The Bill aims at fostering the development of the overseas and sustainable maritime 
sector. ...(Interruptions)...  This Bill represents a decisive step towards positioning 
India as a global leader. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : Please go back to your 
seats.  ...(Interruptions)...  The House is adjourned for ten minutes.   
 
The House then adjourned at fifty minutes past two of the clock.
 
 
                                The House reassembled at three of the clock, 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) in the Chair. 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
£ Exupnged as ordered by the Chair. 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, LoP.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL: Sir, LoP.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): Hon. LoP. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : 
*...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : No, no; please sit down 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: * ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर): Ãलीज़, सÅजेक्ट पर बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, िवषय पर 
बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने आपको िवषय पर बोलने क े िलए allow िकया है ...(Ëयवधान)... Sanjay 
Singhji, please sit down. …(Interruptions)…  Please sit down. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: *...(Ëयवधा
न)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर): Ãलीज़, आपका िवषय आ गया है ...(Ëयवधान)... Please sit 
down …(Interruptions)…   Now, the Leader of the House.  …(Interruptions)… Please sit 
down.   Nothing will go on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Leader of the House जो बोलȂगे, 
वही िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: सर, िबल पर discussion हो रहा है, मंतर्ी जी यहां जवाब दे रहे हȅ, मुझे 
लगता है िक इसके  बीच मȂ कोई Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र नहीं है और Leader of t
he Opposition िजस 
िवषय को उठा रहे हȅ, वह िवषय इस समय irrelevant है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर): मंतर्ी जी, आप िरÃलाई कीि जए।  
 
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL: Sir, under the dynamic leadership of our hon. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, in continuation of the series of legal reforms undertaken 
in the past 11 years by our Ministry wh ich have led to increased growth and 
development for the maritime and shipping sector, we are endeavouring to undertake 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
31

 
reforms of other major laws governing the sector. … ..(Interruptions).. I t  i s  a l s o  a  
matter of great pride that under the leadersh ip of our hon. Prime Minister, India has 
emerged as one of the largest suppliers of seafarers. …(Interruptions)… 
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
Sir, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, presently governs merchant shipping in 
India and implements certain International Maritime Organization conventions. 
However, the present Act is outdated since it  does not provide for some of the critical 
obligations under International Conventions that have been adopted by India. The Act 
is a bulky and fragmented legislation contai ning 561 sections as a result of various 
amendments carried out from time to time. The Act is no longer adequate to realize 
our developmental vision and address the contemporary challenges of the maritime 
sector. Additionally, the 1958 Act prioritize s regulation over enablement, and, as a 
result, does not adequately represent the bankability of India as a maritime trade hub. 
Aligning the domestic law with internat ional best practices and IMO Conventions 
leads to predictability in these transactio ns. Such alignment, in turn, enhances a 
country’s bankability as a maritime jurisdiction. Therefore, enablement of increasing 
India’s bankability in maritime sector is the core focus of this Bill.  
 Sir, the welfare and well being of seafar ers and the safety and security of ships 
with minimized disruption of the marine  environment are the two most prominent 
areas in the regulatory framework for mariti me sector. The Bill puts greater focus on 
e n s u r i n g  s a f e t y  i n  n a v i g a t i o n ,  s a f e t y  o f  life, protection of marine environment, 
emergency preparedness and resp onse to marine incidents. Sir, with these words, I 
extend my thankfulness to the Members wh o have expressed their, particularly, 
concern and also extended their support. Wi th these few words, I request the House 
to pass this particular Bill.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : Thank you. Now, the 
Leader of the House.  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: सर, िवपक्ष क े सदÎयȗ ने यहां िजस तरीके  की गितिविध की है, मȅ उसकी 
घोर िंनदा करता हूं, वह िंनदनीय है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इस हाउस को और हाउस क े माध्यम से 
देश को यह ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूं िक आदरणीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ चलने वाली सरकार हर 
िवषय क े बारे मȂ Ģजातांितर्क तरीके  से इस हाउ
 स मȂ और इस हाउस क े माध्यम से देश क े हर 
िवषय पर चचार् करने क े िलए हमेशा तैयार रही है, यह मȅ कहना चाहता हूं। जब 21 जुलाई को यह 
हाउस लगा था, तो उस िदन भी मȅने कहा था िक ऑपरेशन िंसदूर और पहलगाम क े िव षय की 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
एक-एक बारीिकयȗ पर हमारी सरकार चचार् करने क े िलए तैयार है और हमने चचार् की, लेिकन 
हमने देखा िक उस चचार् मȂ िकस तरीके  से िवपक्ष जवाब देने मȂ असमथर् था और िकस तरीके  से 
सरकार ने सारी बातȗ को देश क े सामने रखा।  हमारा हमेशा Ģयास रहा है िक हम Ģजातांितर्क 
तरीके  से इस हाउस को चलाने मȂ पूरा सहयोग करȂ और साथ ही साथ महत्वपूणर् िवषयȗ पर चचार् 
करȂ।   
आज मुझे दुख क े साथ ऑन िरक ॉड र् लाना पड़ता है िक जो लोग मिणपुर क े चȅिपयन बने 
हुए थे, वे आज जब मिणपुर क े िबल पर चचार् हो रही थी, तो उसमȂ ऑÅÎटर्क्शन करना एक बात है, 
उसके  िवरोध मȂ अपना वोट डालने का काम कर रहे थे।   
तीसरी बात, इनका मतलब यह है िक इनकी सुनो, नहीं तो ऑÅÎटर्क्शन होगा।  This is 
not democracy. This is anarchism and this is obstructionism. िवपक्ष को यह ध्यान रहे िक 
हम इतने सक्षम हȅ िक हम हर बात पर चचार् करने क े िलए तैयार हȅ, लेिकन हम obstructionism 
और anarchi
sm बरदाÌत नहीं करȂगे और हम हाउस  को  चलाएंगे।   
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR):  No
w, the question is:  
 
  “ That the Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to merchant shipping 
to ensure compliance with India’s oblig ation under the maritime treaties and 
international instruments to which India is a party and also to ensure the development 
of Indian shipping and efficient maintenance of Indian mercantile marine in a manner 
best suited to serve the national intere st and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : We shall now take up 
Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill.  
 
Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : In Clause 4, there is one 
Amendment (No.1) by Dr. John Brittas; not present. Amendment not moved.  
 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 5 to 14 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : In Clause 15, there is one 
Amendment (No.2) by Dr. John Brittas; not present. Amendment not moved.  
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
33

 
  
Clause 15 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 16 to 22 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): In Clause 23, there is one 
Amendment (No.3) by Dr. John Brittas; not present. Amendment not moved.  
 
Clause 23 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 24 to 58 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): In Clause 59, there is one 
Amendment (No.4) by Dr. John Brittas; not present. Amendment not moved.  
 
        Clause 59 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 60 to 299 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : In Clause 300, there is 
one Amendment (No.5) by Dr. John Brittas; not present. Amendment not moved.  
 
           Clause 300 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 301 to 305 were added to the Bill.  
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and Title were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SI NGH NAGAR): Now, Shri Sarbananda 
Sonowal to move that the Bill be passed. 
 
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL:  Sir, I move:  
 
“That the Bill be passed.” 
 
       The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
IV.    The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Tribes in Assembly 
Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2025  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SI NGH NAGAR): Now, Shri Arjun Ram 
Meghwal to move the Readjustment of Re presentation of Scheduled Tribes in 
Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2025. 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
THE  MINISTER  OF  STATE  OF  THE  MINISTRY  OF  LAW  AND  JUSTICE;  AND 
THE  MINISTER  OF  STATE  IN TH E MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS 
(SHRI ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL):  Sir, I move: 
 
     “That the Bill for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 of the 
Constitution for effective democratic part icipation of members of Scheduled Tribes 
and to provide for the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Goa, in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion of certain 
communities in the list of the Scheduled Tr ibes in the State of Goa and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto,  as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into 
consideration.”  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, क्या मुझे इस िबल पर क ु छ बोलना है? 
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) in the Chair.] 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी):  अगर आप बोलना चाहते हȅ, तो बोल सकते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी अजुर्न राम मेघवाल: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ एक बहुत ही िलिमटेड परपज़ क े िलए इस 
महान सदन क े सामने खड़
ा हुआ हूं। संिवधान का आिर्टकल 332 यह Ģोवाइड करता है िक अगर 
िकसी राज्य मȂ शेǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस की जनसंख्या है, तो िवधान सभा मȂ उनकी सीटȂ िनध ार्िरत की जा 
सकती हȅ। गोवा मȂ 2001 तक, एसटी वगर् की जो जनसंख्या थी, वह 566 िरकॉड र् की गई थी, 
लेिकन 2003 मȂ गोवा राज्य की अनुसूिचत जनजाित की सूची मȂ तीन नए समुदायȗ – क ुनबी, 
गावड़ा और वेिलप को श ािमल  करने हेतु संिवधान (अनुसूिचत जाितयाँ और जनजाितयाँ) आदेश 
संशोधन अिधिनयम, 2003 पािरत िकया गया था। इस अिधिनयम को पािरत करने क े बाद जब 
2001 मȂ जनगणना हुई, तो गोवा राज्य की 14 लाख, 58 हज़ार , 545 की क ु ल जनसंख्या मȂ से 
हमारा जो एससी वगर् है, उसकी जनसंख्या 25 हज़ार, 494 है, िजसके  िल
ए िवधान सभा मȂ 1 सीट 
िनधार्िरत है, लेिकन एसटी वगर् की जनसंख्या 1 लाख, 49 हज़ार, 275, अथार्Þ 1.5 लाख क े 
आसपास होने क े बावजूद भी एसटी समुदाय क े िलए गोवा िवधान सभा मȂ एक भी सीट िनधार्िरत 
नहीं थी, िजससे एक िवसंगित पैदा हो गई थी। मह
ोदय, मȅ इस िवसंगित को दूर करने क े िलए इस 
महाâ सदन क े समक्ष यह िबल लेकर आया हूं और चाहता हूं िक इस िबल पर चचार् करके  इसे 
सवर्सÇमित से पास िकया जाए। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
  
The question was proposed. 
 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
35

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): Motion moved. I now call 
upon Members whose names have been recei ved for participation in the discussion. 
Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade. 
 
Ǜी सदानंद महालू शेट तानवड़े (गोवा): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ गोवा राज्य सभा 
िनवार्चन-क्षेतर् अनुसूिचत जनजाित Ģितिनिधत्व का पुन: समायोजन िवधेयक, 2025 क े Ģित अपना 
पूणर् समथर्न Ëयƪ करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ।  
यह िव
धेयक एक अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् कदम है, जो सामािजक न्याय, समानता और 
लोकतांितर्क सशिƪकरण क े Ģित हमारी अटू ट Ģितबǉता को दशार्ता है। गोवा अपनी समृिǉ, 
सांÎकृ ितक िविवधता और समावेशी दृिÍटकोण क े साथ हमेशा न्यायपूणर् Ģितिनिधत्व क े िसǉांतȗ 
का पालन करता आया है। अनुसूिच
त जनजाितयाँ हमारे राज्य क े सामािजक और सांÎकृ ितक 
तानेबाने का अिभन्न िहÎसा हȅ। उन्हȗने गोवा क े इितहास, परंपराओं और िवकास मȂ महत्वपूणर् 
योगदान िदया है।  
गोवा क े गावड़ा, क ुनबी और वेिलप समाज अनेक वषș से ओबी सी मȂ िगने जाते थे। 2003 मȂ 
भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की क Ȃ दर् और राज्य सरकार मȂ भारत रत्न, अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी तथा 
मुख्य मंतर्ी, पǍǛी मनोहर पिर्रकर जी क े Ģयासȗ क े पिरणामÎवरूप, समाज क े इन घट कȗ  को 
अनुसूिचत जनजाित मȂ समािवÍट करने का ऐितहािसक िनणर्य िलया गया। आज ये समाज िशक्षा, 
उǏम, Ëयापार जैसे क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ अगर्सर होकर समाज क े मुख्य Ģवाह मȂ योगदान देकर देश क े िवकास 
मȂ योगदान दे रहे हȅ। लेिक न दशकȗ से उनके  िवचार और आवाज़ िवधायी िनणार्यक Ģिकर्या मȂ 
पयार्Ãत रूप  से Ģितिनिधत्व ĢाÃत नहीं कर पाए हȅ। यह िवधेयक उस असमानता को दूर करने को 
सुिनिÌचत करने का Ģयास करता है, तािक हमारे लोकतांितर्क संÎथान समाज क े हर वगर् की 
आकांक्षाओं को Ģितिंबिबत करȂ।  
मुझे गवर् है िक आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी, गृह मंतर्ी, अिमत शाह जी तथा 
सामािजक न्
याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ी, डा. वीरȂदर् क ुमार और अजुर्न राम मेघवाल जी ने इन 
समाजȗ की भावनाओं का सÇमान कर
ते हुए, यह िवधेयक सदन की सÇमित हेतु रखा है। इस 
िवधेयक का महत्व है - सामािजक न्याय सुिनिÌचत करना। सच्चा लोकतंतर् समावेिशता पर िनभर्र 
करता है। गोवा क े िवध ानसभा  क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ क े Ģितिनिधत्व को पुन: समायोिजत 
करके , हम ऐितहािसक असमानताओं को दूर करने की िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् कदम उठा रहे हȅ। 
यह कदम हमारी अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ को वह मंच Ģदान करेगा, िजसकी उन्हȂ जरूरत है, 
तािक वे अप
नी िंचताओं को Ëयƪ कर सकȂ, नीितयȗ को आकार दे सकȂ और गोवा क े भिवÍय को 
Ģभािवत कर सकȂ ।  
Ģितिनिधत्व क ेवल संख्या का मामला नहीं है, यह इस बात का आÌवासन है िक हािशए पर 
रहने वाले समुदायȗ से जुड़े मुǈȗ को िवधायी चचार् मȂ उिचत Îथान िमले। अनुसूिचत जनजाितयाँ 
अकसर िशक्ष
ा, ÎवाÎथ्य, आजीिवका और भूिम अिधकारȗ से संबंिधत िविशÍट चुनौितयȗ का सामना 
करती हȅ। बढ़ा हुआ Ģितिनिधत्व इन चुनौितयȗ का समाधान कर ने क े िलए लिक्षत और Ģभावी नीित 
हÎतक्षेप सुिनिÌचत करेगा। हमारा संिवधान समानता और सकारात्मक कारर्वाई क े िसǉांतȗ को 
आत्मसात करता है। यह िवधेयक उन मूÊयȗ का Ģमाण है, यह हमारे उस वादे क े साथ मेल खाता 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
है, िजसमȂ हमने िवधायी संÎथाओं मȂ अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ क े िलए आनुपाितक Ģितिनिधत्व 
सुिनिÌचत करने की Ģितबǉता जताई है, िजससे शासन मȂ समानता और न्याय की भावनाओं को 
बढ़ावा िमले। गोवा की िवकास यातर्ा तब तक अधूरी है, जब तक इसमȂ हमारी अनुसूिचत 
जनजाितयȗ की सिकर्य भागीदारी न हो। पयार्Ãत Ģितिनिधत्व यह सुिनिÌचत करेगा िक िवक
ास 
पिरयोजनाओं, संसाधनȗ क े आवंटन और उनकी सांÎकृ ितक धरोहर क े संरक्षण से संबंिधत िनणर्यȗ 
मȂ उनकी आवाज़ सुनी जाए। यह राज्य मȂ संतुिल त और समावेशी िवकास को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए 
अिनवायर् है।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह िवधेयक क ेवल संख्याओं का पुन: समायोजन नहीं है। 
यह हमारे लोकतंतर् की ताकत पर िवÌवास को पुन: Ëयƪ करने का अवसर है। आज़ादी क े बाद से 
िनरंतर उपेिक्षत जनजातीय समुदाय को देश की मुख्य धारा मȂ शािम
ल करना मोदी जी की 
सरकार की गारंटी थी, िजसे पूणर् िकया जा रहा है। यह उन लोगȗ क े साथ खड़े होने की Ģितबǉता 
है, िजन्हȂ ऐितहािसक रूप  से नज़रअंदाज़ िकया गया। यह उन्
हȂ उनके  भिवÍय को आकार और 
अिधकार देने का संकÊप है। गोवा एक छोटा राज्य है, लेिकन इसकी भावना िवशाल है। आज इस 
िवधेयक का समथर्न करके , हमारे पास यह िदखाने का अवस र है िक हम हर समुदाय, हर परंपरा 
और हर आवाज़ को महत्व देते हȅ। 
मȅ इस सदन क े सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ से इस ऐितहािसक कानून का समथर्न करने का 
अनुरोध करता हूं।  अंत्योदय िवच ारधारा  क े यशÎवी कायार्न्वयन की िदशा मȂ यह िनणर्य एक पथ-
Ģदशर्क का कायर् करेगा।   
 अंत मȂ, मȅ यह दोहराना चाहता हूं िक यह िवधेयक क ेवल एक Ģिकर्यात्मक सुधार नहीं है।  
यह गोवा की अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ क े िलए समानता और न्याय सुिनिÌचत कर ने की िदशा मȂ 
एक ऐितहािसक कदम है।  इसिलए इस िवधेयक को सवर्सÇमित से पािरत करȂ और यह संदेश दȂ 
िक हमारा लोकतंतर् समावेिशता और न्याय क े ÎतÇभȗ पर मजबूती से खड़ा है।  धन्यव ाद।          
                                                                          
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): धन्यवाद, सदानंद जी। Ǜी सुभाष चन्दर् बोस िपÊली।  
...(Ëयवधान)... उन्हȗने िवÎतृत Ëयाख्या की है।   
 
SHRI SUBHAS CHANDRA BOSE PILLI (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, I rise to discuss the 
Readjustment of Representation of Schedule d Tribes in Assembly Constituencies of 
the State of Goa Bill, 2025, a landmark pi ece of legislation aimed at addressing the 
long-standing non-representation of th e Scheduled Tribes in Goa's political 
framework.  The Bill introduces innovative le gal strategies to overcome constitutional 
constraints, ensuring that the democratic pr omise of inclusivity is fulfilled. The major 
achievement of this Bill is that it represen ts a transformative approach to political 
representation in Goa. This Bill brings fundamental changes by creating reserved 
seats in the Legislative Assembly, ensuring that the voices, concerns and aspirations 
of these communities are not just heard, but are central to the governance process. It 
is a comprehensive intervention that goe s beyond mere symbolic representation, 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
37

 
promising genuine political empowerment an d a pathway to meaningful participation 
in Goa's democratic framework.  
While the Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Tribes in Assembly 
Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2025,  is a significant milestone in addressing 
the under-representation of the Scheduled Tribes (STs), it is important to 
acknowledge and address some inherent challenges in its framework. Despite 
safeguards, such as the Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989, incidents of atrocities against the SCs and STs continue to be a 
common occurrence. In 2022 alone, 52,866 cases of atrocities were reported, 
highlighting the gap between policy intent and the ground reality.  This issue 
underscores the inefficacy of protective laws in preventing violence and the continuing 
vulnerability of marginalised communities. 
This Bill also highlights the critical need  for an updated nationwide Census to 
address the issue of accurately determining the composition of India's population. 
The last Census was conducted in 2011, and its data is now over a decade old. The 
delayed 2021 Census has cr eated a vacuum in reliable population statistics, as 
without precise data, decisions such as  constituency delimitation and resource 
allocation are at the risk of being based on  outdated figures, potentially leading to 
inequities and inefficiencies in representation. I urge upon the Government to urgently 
complete the delayed Census, as it is not merely a statistical exercise but it is also the 
foundation of governance and shaping policy decisions that affect every citizen. 
In conclusion, the Bill is a significant step towards political inclusion for the 
Scheduled Tribes in Goa. However, it s success depends on overcoming certain 
fundamental issues that require our i mmediate attention to ensure effective 
representation for all marginalised communities.  With these comments and 
suggestions, I support this Bill.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
 
MESSAGE FROM LOK SABHA 
 
I. The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 
II. The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): Now, Message from Lok 
Sabha; Secretary-General. 
 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha, at its sitting held on the 11th August, 2025, passed the following Bills: 
 (i) The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025; and 
 (ii) The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025.  
 
 I lay a copy each of the sa id Bills on the Table.  
 
 
GOVERNMENT BILLS 
 
The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Tribes in Assembly 
Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2025– Contd.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): Now, Shri Niranjan Bishi. 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha) : Thank you, hon. Vice-Chairman for giving me the 
opportunity to speak on the Readjustment of  Representation of Scheduled Tribes in 
Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2025.  Sir, Article 332 of the 
Constitution clearly provides for the reserva tion of seats for the Scheduled Tribes in 
State Assemblies based on percentage of population of Scheduled Tribe 
communities.  Sir, in Goa, the Scheduled Tribe population is 1,49,275 which 
accounts for about 10.23 percent of the State' s total population. The majority of ST 
communities in Goa are Gawda, Kunbi and Ve lip tribes and they are concentrated in 
South Goa, particularly in the Assembly  Constituencies of  Sanguem, Quepem, 
Canacona and Dharbandora.   
Sir, the total number of MLA seats is 40 . Out of 40 Assembly Constituencies, 
the Scheduled Tribes of Goa will get four  seats according to Article 332 of the 
Constitution of India.  After the passage of this Bill, out of 40 MLA seats, 4 seats will 
be reserved for Scheduled Tribes of Goa and the Scheduled Tribe communities will 
get an opportunity of democratic participation in the Goa Assembly.  
Sir, in the State of Odisha, the PESA Ac t, 1996, which has been enshrined for 
the protection, preservation and developmen t of Scheduled Tribes and also for the 
self-governance of Scheduled Tribes, ha s not yet been implemented properly.  
Secondly, Sir, Article 243D is meant to provide reservation of seats for Scheduled 
Tribes in Panchayati Raj institutions like Gram Panchayat, for the seat of Sarpanch, 
Samiti Member and Block Chairman but these have been de-rese rved!  So, I urge 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
39

 
upon the Government of India to look into this and demand that Article 243D of the 
Constitution of India should be restored.  
Sir, in our State of Odisha, as per the ANWESHA Program and the Right to 
Education Act, the poor SC, ST students are allowed to study free of cost in the 
private English medium school.  Our form er Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik ji, 
implemented this scheme under the Right to  Education Act.  As a result, the poor 
SC/ST students are studying free of cost in English medium schools but for this 
session, the admission has been stopped. So , I request the Government to allow the 
SC/ST students to continue study there.  
Sir,  there  are  around  hundred ST communities and parts of groups within 
the ST  communities,  which  were  recommen ded  by  our  former  Chief  Minister,  
Shri Naveen Patnaikji, for inclusion in the ST list.  These communities were wrongly 
left out, but they have not yet been includ ed.  So, I urge the Government to include 
the left out ST communities and parts of groups within such ST communities in the list 
of Scheduled Tribes in respect of the State of Odisha.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎय, आपके  बोलने का समय समाÃत हो गया 
है। 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI: I am concluding, Sir.  In the State of Odisha, heinous crimes 
against ST women and girl students of schools and colleges and universities are 
increasing day by day.  Thank you. 
 
THE   VICE - CHAIRMAN   ( SHRI  GHANSHYAM  TIWARI ) :  Thank   you.  Now,  
Shri Sandosh  Kumar P, not present. Now, hon. Minister, Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal to 
reply to the discussion. 
 
िविध   और  न्याय  मंतर्ालय  क े  राज्य  मंतर्ी;  तथा  संसदीय  कायर्  मंतर्ालय  मȂ  राज्य   मंतर्ी    
(Ǜी अजुर्न रा
म मेघवाल): उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे बोलने का अवसर 
िदया। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): मȅने पहले भी अवसर िदया है।  
 
Ǜी अजुर्न राम मेघवाल: आपने मुझे पह
ल े भी बोलने का अवसर िदया और आप बार-बार दȂ, यह 
अच्छा लगता है। आपने राजÎथान िवधान सभा मȂ भी बहुत शानदार काम िकया और अब यहाँ देश 
की ...(Ëयवधान)... Îटेट क े भी हȅ, लेिकन अब राज्य सभा मȂ भी आप उपसभाध्यक्ष-तािलका मȂ 
बहुत शानदार काम कर ही रहे हȅ, इसमȂ तो कोई शक ही नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 महोदय, भारत िवÌव का सबसे बड़ा और जीवन्त लोकतंतर् है। इस िबल पर अभी तीन 
माननीय सदÎयȗ, माननीय Ǜी सदानंद तानवड़े, Ǜी सुभाष चन्दर् बोस िपÊली और Ǜी िनरंजन 
िबशी जी ने अपने िवचार Ģकट िकए। क ु छ िवषय गोवा िवधान सभा से सÇबिन्धत आए और क ु छ 
इस िबल से सÇबिन्धत भी नहीं थे।  जैसा मȅने कहा, हजारȗ वषș से िंसिचत लोकतांितर्क मूÊयȗ की 
Ģेरणा से, यह िविवधतापूणर् देश आज 'लोकतंतर् की जननी' क े रूप  मȂ जाना जाता है। Îवतंतर् देश 
मȂ इसी लोकतांितर्क Ëय
वÎथा की बुिनयाद को मजबूत करने क े िलए सामािजक, आिर्थक और 
राजनीितक न्याय तथा Îवतंतर्ता, समानता व बंधुत्व क े मूÊयȗ को समािहत िकया गया। इसी  
Ǜृंखला मȂ संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 330 क े अनुसार लोक सभा मȂ और अनुच्छेद 332 क े अनुसार 
राज्यȗ की िवधान सभाओं मȂ एससी-एसटी वग
ș क े िलए, जनसंख्या क े अनुपात क े आधार पर, 
Ģितिनिधत्व देने का Ģावधान िकया गया।  लेिकन, गोवा मȂ एक िवशेष िÎथित उत्पन्न हुई।  गोवा 
िवधान सभा मȂ 40 सीटȂ हȅ। वहाँ 1 सीट अनुसूिचत जाित क े िल
ए आरिक्षत है और उनकी जनसंख्या 
25,494 है, लेिकन एसटी क े िलए एक भी सीट आरिक्षत नहीं है, क्यȗिक 2001 की जनगणना क े 
अनुसार, उनकी जनसंख्या 566 िरकॉड र् की गई ।   लेिकन, 2003 मȂ वहाँ एक िवशेष पिरिÎथित 
उत्पन्न हुई। 2003 मȂ गोवा राज्य की अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ की सूची मȂ 3 नये समुदायȗ, क ुनबी, 
गावड़ा और वेिलप को शािमल कर िलया गया।  उनको उसमȂ शािमल कर िलया गया और 2011 मȂ 
जब जनगणना हुई, तब एसटी समुदा य की जनसंख्या 1,94,275 हो गई।  ऐसी पिरिÎथित मȂ हम 
यह िबल लेकर आए हȅ, िजससे गोवा िवधान सभा मȂ जो 40 सीटȂ हȅ, उनमȂ अनुसूिचत जनजाित क े 
समुदाय Ģितिनिधत्व से वंिचत नहीं हȗ और उनको भी Ģितिनिधत्व िमले, क् यȗिक नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
की सरकार का मूल मंतर् है – " सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका Ģयास और सबका 
िवÌवास।"  अनुसूिचत जनजाित क े लोग, जो गोवा मȂ बड़ी संख्या मȂ हȅ और वहाँ उनको 
Ģितिनिधत्व नहीं िमल रहा था, इसीिल ए  मȅ यह िबल लेकर आया हूँ।  आपसे अनुरोध है िक इसको 
सवर्सÇमित से पास करȂ, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : I shall now put the motion 
moved by Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal to vote.  
   
     The question is: 
 
"That the Bill for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 
of the Constitution for effective democrat ic participation of members of Scheduled 
Tribes and to provide for the readjustment of  seats in the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Goa, in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion of certain 
communities in the list of the Scheduled Tr ibes in the State of Goa and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto, as passed by Lok Sa bha, be taken into 
consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
41

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : We shall now take up Clause-
by-Clause consideration of the Bill. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): Now, Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
to move that the Bill be passed.  
 
SHRI ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL: Sir, I move:  
 
“That the Bill be passed.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
THE  VICE - CHAIRMAN  (SHRI  GHANSHYAM  TIWARI) : Now, Special Mentions. 
Dr. Ajit Madhavrao Gopchade.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े। जो िलखा है, वही पढ़Ȃगे।   
 
Concern over adverse impact of excessive use of mobile phones by children in India 
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े (महाराÍटर्): महोदय, भारत मȂ बच्चȗ क े बीच मोबाइल फोन का 
अत्यिधक उपयोग एक गंभीर समÎया बन चुका है। इस आदत का बच्चȗ क े मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य पर 
नकारात्मक Ģभाव पड़ता है। Îमाटर्फो
न का अिधक उपयोग िंचता, अवसाद और िचड़िचड़ापन 
उत्पन्न कर सकता है।  यह कम उĦ मȂ ही डायिबटीज का कारण बन सकता है। इसके  
पिरणामÎवरूप मोटापा भी बढ़ता है। ǭदय की सेहत कमजोर हो सकती है। कम उĦ मȂ बुढ़ापे क े 
लक्षण और बालȗ का सफे द होना शुरू  हो सकता है। लड़िकयȗ मȂ हामȘनल पिरवतर्न भी हो सकते 
हȅ। बच्चȗ का ध्यान पढ़ाई से हट कर मोबाइल पर क Ȃिदर्त हो जा
ता है, िजससे उनकी सीखने की 
क्षमता मȂ कमी आती है। लंबे समय तक मोबाइल का उपयोग करने से आंखȗ मȂ समÎया, नींद की 
कमी और मा
निसक तनाव बढ़ता है। बच्चȗ क े मोबाइल उपयोग को िनयंितर्त करना अत्यंत 
आवÌयक है तािक उनका िवकास सही िदशा मȂ हो सके ।   
इस गंभीर समÎया को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए, क ेरल मȂ Îथानीय पुिलस ने डेढ़ साल पह
ले 
डी-डैड क Ȃ दर् Îथािपत िकए।  िडिजटल िड-एिडक्शन कायर्कर्म बच्चȗ को अत्यिधक मोबाइल 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
उपयोग से बचाने का Ģयास कर रहा है।  माता-िपता को यह सुिनिÌचत करना चािहए िक Îकर्ीन 
पर िबताए गए समय क े िलए िनयम बनाए जाएँ। बच्चे की ऑनलाइन गितिविधयȗ पर नज़र रखने 
और िनयंतर्ण क े िलए पढ़ाई, खेल, और अन्य गैर-िडिजटल गितिविधयȗ को बढ़ावा देना चािहए। 
बच्चȗ को सािहत्य पढ़ने क े िलए Ģेिरत करने क े िलए एक Ëयापक अिभयान शुरू  करना चािहए। 
मेरी सरकार से यह माँग है की इस िवषय पर िवÎ
तृत िदशा-िनदȃश जारी िकया जाए। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): The hon. Member, Shri Madan 
Rathore (Rajasthan), associated himself with the Special Mention raised by the hon. 
Member, Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade. 
S
h r i  K . R . N .  R a j e s h k u m a r .  H e  i s  n ot present. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba 
Leishemba.   
 
Demand for detection, identification and deportation of illegal migrants from Manipur 
before the commencement of National Census and De-limitation process 
 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA (Manipur): Sir, it will be very 
unfortunate for the indigenous people of Ma nipur if census operation is carried out 
before detection, identification and deportation of illegal Myanmarese and 
Bangladeshis who have alread y settled in different areas of Manipur. The Ministry of 
Home Affairs already asked States and Union Territories to detect, identify and deport 
illegal Myanmarese and Bangladesh is within one month w.e.f. 19
th May 2025. 
Conducting a census operation before the settlement of illegal immigrant issues will 
cause social unrest in the State and it will also be a forfeiture of constitutional rights 
for indigenous Manipuris to carry out deli mitation process based on the proposed 
census. Census data is a very important do cument for planning and implementation 
of developmental works and for future delimit ation process.   Census reports of 2001 
and 2011 were very controversial and countered  from many angles. No rectification in 
this regard has been made so far. Cens us reports of Manipur of 1991 and 2001 
showed 40 per cent abnormal increase of po pulation in seven h illy sub-divisions. 
Again, in three hilly sub-divisions of Sena pati district, Manipur, an extraordinary 
quantum jump in population growth was recorded in the Census reports of 2001 and 
2011.  
 Considering all these facts and figures,  I urge upon the Union Government to 
detect, identify and deport illegal foreign nati onals first, based on 1961 as the cut-off 
year before conducting census and delimitation process. Thank you, Sir.           
                                                                                         
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
43

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWA RI): Shri Sandosh Kumar P. He is 
not present. Shri Brij Lal.   
 
Demand for facilities for police personnel posted with Ministers/MPs outside 
Parliament House 
 
SHRI BRIJ LAL (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, police personnel posted with Ministers, MPs, 
etc. are not allowed to enter Parliament Complex as a matter of policy. These Police 
personnel keep on sitting in the open, outs ide the Parliament Complex and also have 
to face extreme weather conditions without any formal covered sitting area for them. 
They have no place to go for toilet; even du ring medical emergency, there is no relief 
arrangement for them.  
  I would urge for making some immediate arrangements for deployment of 
some AC mobile vehicles with inbuilt toilet arrangement to provide these police 
personnel some physical, mental and medi cal relief. These mobile vans can be 
deployed at all working gates on the need  based basis. These police personnel who 
protect Ministers, MPs, etc. and provide security to them need care and protection. 
There is a need to come to their rescue and provide them the said relief immediately. I 
urge the Government to look into it. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : The following hon. Members 
associated  themselves  with  the  Special  Mention  made  by  the  hon.  Member, 
Shri Brij Lal: Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Dr. Sikander Kumar (Himachal 
Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand) and 
Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai (Gujarat). 
Shri Raghav Chadha; not present. Now, Dr. K. Laxman.  
 
Concern over constitutional and developmental invisibility of Denotified, Nomadic and 
Semi-Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, I wish to draw the a ttention of the Government 
towards one of the most deprived and hi storically marginalized communities – 
Denotified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Trib es (DNTs). It is estimated that their 
population has reached 25 crore today. These communities have a long history of 
resistance against foreign invaders and Brit ish rule. However, the colonial regime 
unjustly labelled them as ‘criminal tribes’ und er a series of legislation. Though the 
Criminal Tribes Act was repealed in 1952, these communities have remained excluded 
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
from the constitutional framework ever since, with no dedicated Article, no mention in 
any Schedule and no category in reservation s. Due to their nomadic culture, these 
people have no permanent housing, education or any healthcare. 44,000 of them 
have benefited from the Scheme for Econ omic Empowerment of DNTs (SEEDS), a 
scheme of the present Government; still many of them remain at the margins and are 
systematically invisibilized. I urge the Gove rnment to include a separate column for 
DNTs in the upcoming caste-based census. This critical step will provide necessary 
data for evidence-based policymaking and help ensure justice, recognition and 
development for these long-neglected citizens of our democracy and also to consider 
to form a dedicated DNT/NT/SNT Commission, as recommended by the Dada Idate 
Commission. Thank you. 
 
THE   VICE - CHAIRMAN  ( SHRI  GHANSHYAM  TIWARI ) :  The  hon.  Member,   
Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), associated herself with the Special Mention made 
by the hon. Member, Dr. K. Laxman.                                                        
 
Concern over problem of adulteration in food items 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार ( िहमाचल Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ सरकार का ध्यान भारत मȂ खाǏ पदाथș मȂ 
िमलावट की एक गंभीर समÎया की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ।   
भारत मȂ खाǏ पदाथș मȂ िमलावट सावर्जिनक ÎवाÎथ्य,  खाǏ सुरक्षा और उपभोƪा 
अिधकारȗ क े िलये एक गंभीर खतरा बन गयी है। कोई भी खाǏ पदाथर् िमलावट क े अवैध कारोबार 
से अछू ता Ģतीत नहीं पड़ता है। आजकल बाजार मȂ हÊदी मȂ पीली िमƺी, पीला एिनिलन डाई, 
मेटािनल जैसे गैर-अनुमत रंग, काली िमचर् मȂ पपीते क े बीज, िमचर् पाउडर मȂ लाल रंग, ईंट 
पाउडर, बालू, रोडामाइन, मसालȗ मȂ बुरादा, क ȅसरकारी कीटनाशक एिथलीन ऑक्साइड,  दाल 
चावलȗ मȂ क ंकड़,  देशी घी मȂ वनÎपित तेल िमलाकर,  आइसकर्ीम मȂ ÅलािंÎटग पाउडर,  दूध और 
दूध से बनी वÎतुओं मȂ िमलावट की आम बात हो गयी है। बाजार मȂ Ëयापारी धड़Êले से िमलावटी 
खाǏ पदाथर् बेच रहे हȅ, उन्हȂ िकसी कानून का कोई डर नहीं है।  खाǏ पदाथș मȂ िमलावट, 
देशवािसयȗ क े ÎवाÎथ्य और राÍटर् को बड़ा नुकसान पहुँचाती है। 
 अतः मȅ सरकार से िवनĦ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक इस िमलावट की समÎया की 
Ģाथिमकता को देखते हुए भारतीय खाǏ सुरक्षा और मानक Ģािधकरण (FSSAI) को खाǏ सुरक्षा 
कानूनȗ को Ģभावी ढंग से लागू करने क े िलये Ëयापक उपाय करने क े िनदȃश िदए जाएँ, तािक 
देशवािसयȗ को सुरिक्षत और पौिÍटक भोजन उपलÅध हो सके । 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : The following hon. Members 
associated  themselves  with  the  Special  Mention  made  by  the  hon.  Member,  
Dr. Sikander Kumar: Shri Ram Chander Ja ngra (Haryana), Shri Naresh Bansal 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
45

 
(Uttarakhand), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odi sha), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Mad hya Pradesh), Shri Tejveer Singh (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee (Uttar Pradesh) and 
Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Maharashtra).  
Dr. John Brittas; not present. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala.   
 
Demand for establishment of a dedicated cadre for Wildlife Veterinary Services 
 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA (Gujarat): Sir, I rise to draw attention of the 
Government to a matter of urgent national importance which is the urgent need to 
establish a dedicated cadre of wildlife vete rinary professionals within the Forest 
Departments across India. 
 India is home to some of the world’s most iconic and endangered wildlife 
species including elephants, tigers, leopar ds and rhinos. Yet, despite the increasing 
frequency of human wildlife conflict and th e growing need for specialized care in 
rescue, rehabilitation and disease manage ment, there is no dedicated cadre of 
wildlife veterinarians in most states. Existi ng veterinarians are often deputed from the 
Animal Husbandry Department, leading to a loss of field experience and continuity in 
wildlife care. 
 States like Madhya Pradesh have ta ken progressive steps by creating a 
separate cadre for wildlife vets. It is imperative that other States, especially those with 
high biodiversity and conflict zones, follo w suit. A dedicated cadre would ensure: (i) 
Timely response to wildlife emergencies and conflict situations; (ii) Specialized 
training in tranquilization, rescue and re habilitation; (iii) Disease surveillance and 
outbreak prevention in forest ecosystems; and (iv) Long term conservation through 
consistent veterinary support. 
 I urge the Government to take immedi ate steps to formulate a national policy 
for the creation of a Wildlife Veterinary Serv ices Cadre, with appropriate budgetary 
support and training infrastructure.                                           
 
THE  VICE - CHAIRMAN  (SHRI GHANSH YAM TIWARI): The following hon. 
Members associated  themselves  with  the  Special  Mention  made  by  the  hon.  
Member, Shri Kesridevsinh  Jhala:  Shri  Devendra  Pratap  Singh  (Chhattisgarh),  
S h r i    M a y a n k k u m a r    N a y a k   ( G u j a r a t ) ,   S h r i   M a d a n   R a t h o r e   ( R a j a s t h a n )   a n d    
Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa).   
 
 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
Demand for construction of over bridges/underpasses at open railway crossings  
in Uttarakhand 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल ( उǄराखंड): महोदय, आज मȅ एक अत्यंत गंभीर िवषय पर सरकार का ध्यान 
आकृ Íट करना चाहता हूं।  देश मȂ रेलवे का बहुत बड़ा नेटवकर् है और आदरणीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी क े 
11 वषर् क े सफलतम कायर्काल मȂ इसके  िनरंतर सुधार, सुदृढ़ीकरण व आधुिनकीकरण का का यर् 
चल रहा है, जो Ģशंसनीय है। 
पूरे देश मȂ, िवशेषकर उǄराखंड क े देहरादून व हिरǎार िजले से बहुत सी रेलगािड़यां 
िनकलती हȅ, जो लोगȗ को उनके  गंतËय तक पहुंचाने का कायर् करती हȅ। बहुत सी रेलवे  कर्ॉिंसग्स  
आज भी खुली हȅ, जहां आम राÎता है। इनमȂ से कई पर बैिरयर सुिवधा है और कई मानवरिहत हȅ। 
यहां पर दुघर्टनाओं की संभावनाएं िनरंतर बनी रहती हȅ और समय-समय पर िविभन्न दुघर्टनाएं 
हुई भी हȅ, िजनमȂ लोगȗ की जान-माल की हािन हुई है। 
मȅ सरकार से मांग करता हूं िक ऐसे रेलवे कर्ॉिंसग्स पर एक अंडर पास या आरओबी बनाया 
जाए और देहरादून, भंडारी बाग जैसे जो आरओबी अधूरे हȅ, उन्हȂ शीघर् पूरा िकया जाए, िजससे 
लोगȗ को सुिवधा हो और भिवÍय मȂ होने वाली दुघर्टनाओं को टाला जा सके ।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TI WARI)
: The following hon. Members 
associated  themselves  with  the  Special  Mention  made  by  the  hon.  Member, 
Shri Naresh Bansal: Dr. Sumer Singh Sola nki (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Ram Chander 
Jangra (Haryana), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Utta rakhand), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh) 
and Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh).  
Dr. Fauzia Khan; not present. Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade.   
 
Demand for revival of Air India’s Goa–London Gatwick flight 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa): Sir, I rise to draw the attention 
of the Government to a matter of deep con cern affecting a large section of the Goan 
community, particularly the Goan diaspora residing in the United Kingdom.  On 21 st 
July 2023, Air India commenced a much need ed direct, nonstop flight (AI 145/146) 
between Goa’s Manohar International Airport and London Gatwick Airport. This 
service was the first regular international ro ute out of Goa and offered seamless direct 
connectivity to the United Kingdom. This direct link significantly eased travel for 
thousands of Goans living in the United  Kingdom, including students, working 
professionals, senior citizens, and families. The Air India flight saved time and money 
by avoiding long and costly stopovers.   However, since 21 st June 2025, this crucial 
service has been suspended due to operational adjustments following the unfortunate 
Air India Flight 171 incident. 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
47

 
While safety-driven  decisions are both necess ary and commendable, the 
prolonged suspension, now extending beyo nd a month, has se verely disrupted 
travel plans and caused widespread hard ships among Goan passengers regularly 
travelling to the United Kingdom. Goans tr avelling to and from the United Kingdom 
are now left with limited and costly alte rnatives, often involving multiple-transits,  
high-fares and long-delays. Goa is not just a premier tourist-destination; it is a 
State with deep ties with the Europe. This flight is not me rely a convenience, it is a 
lifeline that connects Goan families, enab les economic and cultural-exchange, and 
supports both diaspora  and inbound-tourism. 
I earnestly appeal to the Government to  take steps to resume the direct Air 
India service between Goa and London-Gatwick at  the earliest. Thank you, Sir.                                
 
THE  VICE - CHAIRMAN  ( SHRI  GHANSHYAM  TIWARI ) :  The  hon.  Member,   
Shri Rameswar Teli (Assam), associated hi mself with the Special Mention made by 
the hon. Member, Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade. 
Shri Sujeet Kumar. 
 
Demand for establishment of  Dak Ghar Niryat Kend ra in Kalahandi, Odisha 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha) : Sir, I rise to draw the attention of the Government 
to the need for establishing a Dak Ghar  Niryat Kendra (DNK) in the Kalahandi 
district of Odisha. I would li ke to commend the Indian Po st for their Dak Ghar Niryat 
Kendra (DNKs) initiative wh ich has been opened in 1000 locations across India to 
facilitate international expo rts through its vast network. Approximately, 18,000 
exporters have been on-boarded on DNK portal. As per 2011 ce nsus, Kalahandi has 
28.5 per cent tribal population accounting for more than a qu arter of the total district 
population, who are largely dependent on traditional and micro-enterprises for 
livelihood, yet they remain largely untapped in terms of access to wider markets. 
While Odisha currently has 35 operational Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras, including 2 in 
the undivided KBK (Kalahandi-Balangir-Kora put) region, Kalahandi is yet to have 
even a single DNK which hampers their ac cess to internationa l market. Kalahandi 
records an average of  around 70 new MSME regist rations annually. Since 2007 to 
2015, 549 MSMEs have been established in the district  which will keep growing. 
Establishing a DNK in Kalahandi would di rectly support local artisans, SHGs, and 
small producers by giving them access to  national and inte rnational markets. 
  Sir, I, therefore, urge the Governme nt to prioritize Ka lahandi for the next 
phase of DNK expansion, ensuring that the district’s potential is not left untapped in 
the evolving export ecosy stem. Thank you, Sir.  
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
THE   VICE - CHAIRMAN  (SHRI  GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : The hon. Member, 
Shrimati Sumitra Balmik, (Madhya Pradesh)  associated herself with the Special 
Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Kumar.  
Shri Sant Balbir Si ngh; not present. Sh ri Mahendra Bhatt. 
 
Demand for establishment of  Employees Provident Fund  Organization (EPFO) 
office in Uttarakhand 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड): महोदय, मȅ सरकार से उǄराखंड मȂ कमर्चारी भिवÍय िनिध संगठन क े 
Ǜम एवं रोजगार मंतर्ालय भारत सरकार क े सीिमत कायार्लय होने से राज्य क े लाखȗ Ǜिमकȗ एवं 
भिवÍय िनिध सदÎयȗ को हो रही किठनाइयȗ की ओर ध्यान आकृ Íट करना चाहता हूं। 
 राज्य मȂ गढ़वाल एवं क ुमाऊँ  मंडल क े कमर्चा
री भिवÍय िनिध संगठन क े मातर् दो ही क्षेतर्ीय 
कायार्लय Îथािपत हȅ। ये देहरादून, हÊǎानी मȂ िÎथत हȅ। अपनी सेवाओं को आिखरी Ëयिƪ तक 
पहुंचाने क े उǈेÌय से भिवÍय िनिध संगठन ǎारा देश क े िविभ
न्न राज्यȗ मȂ क्षेतर्ीय कायार्लयȗ क े 
अितिरƪ िजला कायार्लय भी Îथािपत िकए गए हȅ, िंकतु राज्य मȂ वतर्मान मȂ एक भी िजला 
कायार्लय नहीं है। 
 महोदय, मȅ आपको बताना चाहूंगा िक अके ले हिरǎार जनपद मȂ भिवÍय िनिध सदÎयȗ की 
क ु ल संख्या लगभग 20 लाख है, िज
समȂ से तीन लाख से अिधक वतर्मान मȂ अंशदाई एवं सिकर्य हȅ। 
उƪ तथ्य का संज्ञान लेते हुए पूवर् मȂ कमर्चारी भिवÍय िनिध की क्षेतर्ीय सिमित िजसकी अध्यक्षता 
सिचव, Ǜम उǄराखंड ǎारा की जाती है, उƪ बैठक मȂ हिरǎार सेवा क Ȃ दर् को िजला कायार्लय मȂ 
अिधकृ त करने हेतु ĢÎत
ािवत हो चुक े हȅ। हालांिक उƪ संबंध मȂ अभी तक कोई ठोस Ģगित नहीं 
हुई है। 
 अतः महोदय उƪ संबंध मȂ मȅ भारत सरकार से मांग करता हूं िक इन कायार्लयȗ क े खोलने 
हेतु संबंिधतȗ को िनदȃिशत करȂगे। 
 
THE  VICE - CHAIRMAN  (SHRI  GHANSHYAM TIWARI):  The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shri Mahendra Bhatt: Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand) and Shri Naresh Bansal 
(Uttarakhand).  
Now, Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai. 
 
Concern over adulteration  of animal foods and  the serious health hazards 
 caused by it 
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई ( गुजरात): महोदय, मȅ सरकार का ध्यान एक अत्यंत गंभीर और 
िंचताजनक िवषय की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं। 
आज देशभर मȂ पशुओं क े चारे एवं पशु आहार मȂ िमलावट की जा रही है। यह िमलावट न 
क ेवल पशुओं को बीमार कर रही है, बिÊक उस दूध को पीने वाले लाखȗ लोगȗ क े जीवन को भी 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
49

 
खतरे मȂ डाल रही है। महोदय, िमलावटी पशु आहार मȂ ऐसे रसायनȗ का Ģयोग िकया जा रहा है, 
िजनका सीधा असर मानव ÎवाÎथ्य पर हो रहा है, क ȅसर जैसी गंभीर बीमािरयाँ और अन्य 
खतरनाक रोग फ ै ल रहे हȅ। यह क ेवल उपभोƪा सुरक्षा का ही एक िवषय नहीं, बिÊक देश की 
जनÎवाÎथ्य सुरक्षा, पशुधन की रक्षा और खाǏ सुरक्षा का मुǈा भी है।   
  महोदय, मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करता हूँ िक इस मामले की तत्काल गंभीरता से जांच 
करवाई जाए, पशु आहार बनाने वाली क ंपिनयȗ पर सख्त िनगरानी रखी जाए, िमलावट करने 
वालȗ क े िखलाफ कठोर दंडात्मक कायर्वाही की जाए एवं पशुओं को शुǉ, पौिÍ
टक और 
रसायनमुƪ चारा उपलÅध कराने की Ģभावी ËयवÎथा सुिनिÌचत की जाए। मानव जीवन की रक्षा 
क े िलए यह अत्यंत आवÌयक है िक इस िवषय मȂ सरकार हÎतक्षेप करे और ठोस कदम उठाए। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : The following hon. Member
s 
associated  themselves  with  the  Special  Mention  made  by  the  hon.  Member, 
S h r i   B a b u b h a i   J e s a n g b h a i   D e s a i   ( G u jarat) :  Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand),  
Shri  Mokariya  Rambhai  (Gujarat), Sh ri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), 
Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), and Shri Mayankkumar Nayak (Gujarat).  
 
Demand to strengthen the railway infrastructure in Lucknow and connect it to other 
parts of the country by train 
 
डा. िदनेश शमार् (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश की राजधानी लखनऊ क े ऐितहािसक एवं 
सांÎकृ ितक महत्व को देखते हुए तथा देश क े सभी भागȗ मȂ यहाँ क े लोगȗ क े आने-जाने हेतु, 
वतर्मान मȂ जो रेल आधारभूत संरचना उपलÅध  है, लखनऊ से जो गािड़याँ चल रही हȅ, वे अपयार्Ã
त 
हȅ, अतः लखनऊ की जनता तथा आस-पास क े लोगȗ को बेहतर यातर् ी सुिवधा  कराने हेतु तत्काल 
क ु छ कदम उठाने की जरुरत  है, जो िनÇनवÞ हȅ - 
 1. लखनऊ से माता वैÍणो देवी क े िलए एक टर्ेन चलायी जाये। 
 2. लखनऊ से Ǜी खाटूÌयाम क े िलए एक टर्ेन चलायी जा ये। 
 3. लखनऊ से उज्जैन ǛीमहाकालेÌवर धाम हेतु टर्ेन चलायी जाये। 
 4. लखनऊ ( वाया महोबा) से खजुराहो, मध्य Ģदेश तक सुपर-फाÎट टर्ेन चलायी जाये। 
इसको चलाने हेतु तथा भिवÍय की जरूरतȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए एक नया कोिंचग टिर्मनल 
िवकिसत िक
या जाये, तािक अगले 20-25 सालȗ की जरुरत पूरी हो सके , 2047 मȂ िवकिसत 
भारत क े संकÊप को पूरा िकया जा सके  एवं लखनऊ मȂ िवÌव Îतरीय रेल सुिवधाओं को Ģदान 
िकया जा सके ।  
   महोदय, इससे न िसफर् लखनऊ की जरूरत Ȃ पूरी हȗगी, बिÊक उǄर Ģदेश क े कई 
िजलȗ को भी लाभ िमलेगा। मȅ सरकार से मांग की गय
ी टर्ेनȗ का संचालन तथा रेल यातर्ी सुिवधाओं 
का िव Îतार  करने का िनवेदन करता हूँ, िजससे उǄर Ģदेश,उǄम Ģदेश बनकर राÍटर् सेवा कर 
सके । 
  
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): The hon. Member, Shri Brij Lal 
(Uttar Pradesh), associated himself with the Special Mention made by the hon. 
Member, Dr. Dinesh Sharma.  
Now Shrimati Rekha Sharma.  
 
Concern over online harassment and stalking of women 
  
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA (Haryana) : Mr. Vice-Chairman Sir, I rise to draw 
attention of the Government to a matter of growing concern, the increasing 
vulnerability of women in digital spaces. While the rapid digitization of our daily lives 
has brought with it new avenues for learning, employment and social engagement, it 
has also exposed women to unprecedented levels of online abuse and harassment. 
According to the National Crime Records Bureau, cybercrime cases in India rose from 
50,035 in 2020 to 65,893 in 2022. Alarmingly, the National Commission for Women 
received 339 complaints of cybercrime and 345 cases of stalking in just the first half of 
2024.  
 These figures reflect a worrying trend, one where the digital world, instead of 
being an enabler of opportunity, becomes a source of fear and harm for women. 
While the Government has made substa ntial investments in anti-cybercrime 
infrastructure, significant challenges remain at the local level. Many police units still 
lack the technical skills to handle online cr imes effectively. Moreover, the gendered 
nature of cyber harassment is too often overlooked, with incidents like cyberstalking 
or image-based abuse not receiving the ur gent attention they deserve. To address 
this, I urge the Government to strengthen institutional coordination and ensure that 
cybercrimes targeting women are addre ssed with urgency and seriousness. 
Furthermore, digital literacy initiatives must  be scaled up. The NCW’s Digital Shakti 
program is a commendable start. The Government should partner with schools, 
colleges, civil society, and the private sector to equip young women with the tools to 
identify, resist and report online abuse. 
 
THE  VICE - CHAIRMAN  (SHRI  GHANSHYAM TIWARI):  The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shrimati Rekha Sharma: Shri Madan Rathor e (Rajasthan), Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
(Uttar Pradesh), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha) and
 Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya 
Pradesh). 
 
 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
51

Concern over increasing cases of Cyber frauds in banks 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ सरकार का ध्यान बȅकȗ मȂ हो रहे साइबर 
ģॉड्स की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ। हाल क े िदनȗ मȂ बȅकȗ मȂ जमा पैसे क े गायब होने की 
तमाम खबरȂ आ रही हȅ और ये घटना एं िदन-Ģितिदन बढ़ती जा रही हȅ। इस तरह क े ज्यादातर 
मामलȗ मȂ बȅककमीर् िलÃत पाए गए हȅ और उनके  ǎारा धोखाधड़ी करने की बात सामने आ रही है।  
हाल मȂ ही राजÎथान क े कोटा िÎथत एक बȅक शाखा मȂ एक कमर्चारी ने शेयर बाज़ार मȂ 
मुनाफ़े  क े लालच मȂ बȅक मȂ बड़ा फजीर्वाड़ा िकया है। इस कमर्चारी
 ने 2020 से 2023 क े बीच 41 
बुज़ुगर् गर्ाहकȗ क े 110 खातȗ से अवैध रूप  से 4.58 करोड़ रुपय े  की िनकासी की। उसने िबना 
गर्ाहकȗ की अनुमित उन
की एफ.डी. तोड़ी, ओवरडर्ाÄट सुिवधा चालू की और धनरािश को शेयर 
बाज़ार मȂ िनवेश कर गंवा िदया। दूसरे मामले मȂ, हनुमानगढ़ िज़ले मȂ एक बȅक शाखा मȂ तैनात 
कमर्चारी ने बȅक मȂ जमा गर्ाहकȗ क े सोने क े जेवरात चुराकर  नकली सोना जमा कर फजीर् 
दÎतावेज़ȗ क े आधार पर करीब 54 लाख रुपय े की धोखाधड़ी की। आरोपी ने यह रकम अपने 
सािथयȗ क े साथ िमलकर िकर्के ट सƺे मȂ उड़ा दी।  
सावधानी क े ǎारा आप अपने को साइबर ģॉड से बचा सकते हȅ, परंतु अगर  बȅक  कमर्चारी 
ही साइबर ģॉड मȂ िलÃत पाए जाएंगे, तो आप कहाँ जाएंगे! मेरी सरकार से यह माँग है िक 
आरबीआई को बȅिंकग िसÎटम की इन खािमयȗ को दूर करने क े िलए कड़े क़दम उठाने चािहए। 
साइबर ģॉड को रोकने क
े  िलए बȅकȗ को अपने िनगरानी तंतर् को मज़बूत करना चािहए।     
THE  VICE - CHAIRMAN  (SHRI  GHANSHYAM TIWARI): The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with Speci al Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee: Shri Madan Rathor e (Rajasthan), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik 
(Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Dr. Sikander Kumar (Himachal 
Pradesh), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (C hhattisgarh), Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet 
Tanavade (Goa), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pr adesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh) and Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha).               
Demand for steps to protect children and adolescents from the ill effects of 
pornography spreading on OTT platforms and the Internet 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ सरकार से आगर्ह करना चाहती हूं िक ओटीटी 
Ãलेटफ़ॉमर् और इंटरनेट पर फ ै ल रही अÌलीलता पर Ģभावी अंक ु श लगाने हेतु ठोस और िनणार्यक 
कदम उठाए जाएं। हाल ही मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार ǎारा 25 ओटीटी एÃलीके शन पर आपिǄजनक  सामगर्ी 
क े कारण लगाया गया Ģितबंध Îवागतयोग्य है, िंकतु यह समÎया की Ëयापकता को देखते हुए 
अपयार्Ãत है। ऑनलाइन अÌलीलता बच्चȗ और िकशोरȗ क े मानिसक ÎवाÎथ्य, नैितक िवकास और 
सामािजक Ëयवहार पर गंभीर Ģभाव डाल रही है। इंटरनेट की आसान पहुंच क े कारण कम उĦ क े 
बच्चे भी वयÎक सामगर्ी तक पहुंच पा रहे हȅ, िजससे उनमȂ यौन िजज्ञासा, आकर्ामकता, अवसाद 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

और आत्मघाती ĢवृिǄयाँ बढ़ रही हȅ। अÌलीलता की संकीणर् कानूनी पिरभाषा, न्याियक Ģिकर्या की 
धीमी गित और Ģवतर्न एजȂिसयȗ की सीिमत कारर्वाई क े कारण यह ĢवृिǄ तेजी से फ ै ल रही है।  
अत: मȅ क Ȃ दर् सरकार से आगर्ह करती हूँ िक वह ऑÎटर्ेिलया सरकार की तज़र् पर एक 
कठोर अिधिनयम लाए, िजसमȂ बच्चȗ और िकशोरȗ क े िलए वयÎक सामगर्ी तक पहुंच को तकनीकी 
रूप  से Ģितबंिधत िकया जाए। अमेिरका क े "कॉमÎटॉक
 अिधिनयम" जैसा नया अिधिनयम तैयार 
करे, साथ ही आईटी अिधिनयम की धा रा 230 मȂ संशोधन िकया जाए, अÌलील सामगर्ी को 
कॉपीराइट संरक्षण से वंिचत िकया जाए और अिभयोजन की शीघर् अनुमित की Ģिकर्या सुिनिÌचत 
की जाए। इससे हमारे बच्चȗ और िकशोरȗ को िडिजटल अÌलीलता क े दुÍĢभाव से बचाया जा 
सके गा और समाज मȂ ÎवÎथ िडिजटल संÎकृ ित को बढ़ावा िमलेगा। 
THE  VICE-CHAIRMAN   (SHRI   GHANSHYAM  TI
WARI):  T h e   f o l l o w i n g   h o n .  
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav: Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), Shrimati Darshana Singh 
(Uttar Pradesh) and Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa). 
 Thank you! 
The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 12 th 
August, 2025. 
The House then adjourned at five minutes past four of the clock till  
eleven of the clock on Tuesday, the 12th August, 2025. 
[ 11 August, 2025 ]
53

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 