Vol. 268      Tuesday, 
No.1 7 12thAugust, 2025 
     21 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 -6) 
Announcements  by the Chair (page 6  and pages 13 - 14) 
Messages from Lok Sabha – Reported and Government Bills laid on the Table (page 7, 
page 17, page 44 and page 67) 
The Income-tax Bill, 2025  (page 7) 
The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025 (page 7) 
The Indian Ports Bill, 2025; and (page 44) 
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025. 
(page 67) 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Commerce–Presented (page 7) 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports– Presented (page 8) 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Coal, Mines 
and Steel– Laid on the Table (page 8) 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Petroleum and 
Natural Gas– Laid on the Table (pages 8 - 9) 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Report of the Committee on Public Accounts– Laid on the Table (page 9)  
Motion for Election to the Tea Board– Adopted (page 9) 
Motion for Election to the Coffee Board– Adopted (page 10) 
Motion for Election to the Spices Board– Adopted (page 10) 
Report of the Committee on Public Undertakings– Laid on the Table (page 15)
Statements by Ministers- 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Forty-sixth, Fifty-
ninth and Sixty-sixth Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Finance– Laid on the Table (pages 10 - 11) 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Third and Tenth 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
 Finance– Laid on the Table (pages 11 - 12) 
Status of implementation of the Recommend ations/Observations contained in the 
Sixth, Eighth and Fortieth Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution – Laid on 
the Table (pages 12 - 13) 
Government Bills – 
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025– Passed (pages 16 - 17 and pages 17 - 44 
and pages 45 - 59) 
The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025– Passed (pages 16 - 17 and pages 
17 - 44 and pages 45 - 59) 
The Income-tax Bill, 2025– Returned (pages 59 - 67 and pages 67 - 79) 
The  Taxation  Laws  (Amendment)  Bill,  2025 –  Returned  ( pages  59 - 67  and 
pages 67 - 79) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are available 
as Part –
 I to this Debate, published electr onically on the Rajya Sabha website under the 
link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
Website:    http://rajyas abha.nic.in 
  https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail:    rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 12th August, 2025/21Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Papers to be laid on the Table. 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Finance
II. Reports and Accounts (2024-25) of t he EXIM bank, Mumbai; the National Bank
for Financing Infrastructure and Development, Mumbai and other related papers
III. Statement (2024-25) of Market Borrowings by Central Government
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; THE MINISTER OF  STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, on behalf of Shri Pankaj 
Chaudhary, I lay on the Table — 
I. (i)  A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) Notification No. IFSCA/GN/2024/012., dated the 13th February,
2025, publishing a Corrigendum to the Notification No. IFSCA/GN/2024/012, dated
the 18th November, 2024, along with delay statement.
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) Notification No. IFSCA/GN/2025/001., dated the 13th February, 
2025, publishing the International Financ ial Services Centres Authority (Bullion 
Market) Regulations, 2025, under Section 29 of the International Financial Services 
Centres Authority Act, 2019, sub-section (3) of Section 31 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 and Section 27 of the Depositories Act, 1996, along with delay 
statement. 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) Notification No. IFSCA/ GN/2025/002., dated the 13th February, 
2025, publishing the International Fina ncial Services Centres Authority (Fund 
Management) Regulations, 2025, under S ection 29 of the International Financial 

Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 and Section 31 of the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India Act, 1992, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) to (iii), See No. L.T. 2985/18/25] 
(iv) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) Notification No. IRDA I/RI/6/213/2025., dated the 27th February, 
2025, notifying the Obligatory Cession fo r the financial year 2025-26, under sub-
section (6) of Section 101A of the Insurance Act, 1938, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3095/18/25] 
(v) A copy (in English and Hind i) of the Ministry of Finance (Departm ent of
Financial Services) Notification No. OP & SP/SK/2025-26/04, dated the 28th April, 
2025, publishing the State Bank of Indi a General (Amendment) Regulations, 2025, 
under sub-section (4) of Section 50 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3097/18/25] 
(vi) A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following Notifications of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Econom ic Affairs), under Section 25 of the 
Coinage Act, 2011: - 
(1) G.S.R. 493(E)., dated the 24th July, 2025, publishing the Coinage
(Issue of Commemorative Coin on the occasion of 105th Birth Anniversary of
Acharya Shri Mahapragya) Rules, 2025.
(2) G.S.R. 494(E)., dated the 24th July, 2025, publishing the Coinage
(Issue of Commemorative Coin on the occasion of 1000 Years of Naval
Expedition of Emperor Rajendra Chola -I) Rules, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), See No. L.T. 3093/18/25] 
(vii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) Notification No. S.O. 3470(E)., dated the 28 th July, 2025, 
publishing the General Insurance (Emp loyees’) Pension (Amendment) Scheme, 
2025, under sub-section (5) of Section 17A of the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3096/18/25] 
(viii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) Notification No. G.S.R. 503(E)., da ted the 28th July, 2025, publishing the 
Income-tax (Twentieth Amendment) Rules,  2025, under Section 296 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3097/18/25] 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

II. (i)   A copy each (in English and 
Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (5) of Section 19 and sub-section (5) of Section 24 of the Export-Import
Bank of India Act, 1981: -
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM
bank), Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 2024-25, together with   the Auditor's
Report on the Accounts.
(b) Report on the Performance of th e above Bank, for the year 2024-25.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3096/18/25] 
(ii)
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (5) of Section 26 of the National  Bank for Financing Infrastructure and 
Development Act, 2021: -  
(a) Fourth Annual Report of the Nation al Bank for Financing Infrastructure
and Development, Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 2024-25.
(b) Summary of the working of the above Bank.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3094/18/25] 
III. A statement (in English and Hind i) of Market Borrowings by Central
Government, during th
e year 2024-25.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5020A/18/25] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA PATEL):  Sir, I  lay on the Table—  
(i) A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following Notifications of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare (Departmen t of Health and Family Welfare), under 
Section 58 of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019: - 
(1) No. CDN-19012/5/2023-Coord-NM C., dated the 1st January, 2023,
publishing the Post-Graduate Medical Educat ion Regulations, 2023, along with delay 
statement. 
(2) No. R-12013/01/2022/Ethics., da ted the 3rd August, 2023, publishing
the National Medical Commission Register ed Medical Practitioner (Professional 
Conduct) Regulations, 2023, along with delay statement. 
(3) No. U.11022/312023-UGMEB., dated the 16th August, 2023, publishing
the Guidelines for Under Graduate Cour ses under Establishment of New Medical 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
3

Institutions, Starting of New Medical Course s, Increase of Seats for Existing Courses 
& Assessment and Rating Regulations, 2023, along with delay statement. 
(4) No. R-12013/01/2022/Ethics., date d the 24th August, 2025, publishing
the National Medical Commission Register ed Medical Practitioners (Professional 
Conduct) (Amendment) Regulations, 2023, along with delay statement. 
(5) No. N-P016/1/2023-PGMEB-NMC ., dated the 21st September, 2023,
publishing the Maintenance of Standards of Medical Education Regulations, 2023, 
along with delay statement. 
(6) No. CDN-19012/5/2023-Coord-NM C(i)., dated the 1st January, 2024,
publishing the National Medical Commission  (Recognition of Medical Qualification) 
Regulations, 2023, along with delay statement. 
(7) No. N-P051(12)/18/2024-PGM EB-NMC., dated the 30th June, 2025,
publishing the Medical Institutions (Qualifications of Faculty) Regulations, 2025. 
(8) No.CDN-19012/2/2025-Coordinati on-NMC, dated the 4th July, 2025,
amending the Guidelines under Regulation 10 of the Establishment of New Medical 
Institutions, Starting of New Medical Course s, Increase of Seats for Existing Courses 
& Assessment and Rating Regulation 20 23 and Regulation 19 of the Graduate 
Medical Education Regulations 2023. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (8), See No. L.T. 3066/18/25] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of Healt
h and Family Welfare)  Notification No. G.S.R. 513(E)., dated 
the 29th July, 2025, publishing the Cosm etics (Amendment) Rules, 2025, under 
Section 38 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5021/18/25] 
Notification of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतर
ण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜीमती िनमुबेन 
जयंतीभाई बांभिणया): महोदय, मȅ आवÌयक वÎतु अिधिनयम, 1955 की धारा 3 की उप-धारा (6) 
क े अधीन लिÑयत सावर्जिनक िवतरण Ģणाली (िनयंतर्ण) संशोधन आदेश, 2025 को Ģकािशत 
करने वाली उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय ( खाǏ और सावर्जिनक 
िवतरण िवभा
ग) की अिधसूचना सं. सा.का.िन. 488 ( अ)., िदनांक 22 जुलाई, 2025 की एक Ģित 
(अंगर्ेजी और िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 4097/18/25] 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Reports and Accounts of the Comptroller a nd Auditor General of  India of various 
Ministries for various years 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Laying of CAG Reports; Dr. L Murugan. 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, on behalf of Shri Pankaj 
Chaudhary, I lay on the Table— 
 
       A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Reports, under clause (1) of 
article 151 of the Constitution:- 
 
(a) Report of the Comptroller and Audito r General of India on Accounts of the 
Union Government for the year 2022-23 – Union Government - Ministry of Finance - 
Report No.4 of 2025 (Financial Audit); 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5022/18/25] 
 
(b) Report of the Comptroller and Audito r General of India for the year ended 
March 2022 – Union Government - Economic  and Service Ministries - Report No. 7 
of 2025 (Compliance Audit - Civil);  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5023/18/25] 
 
(c) Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
March 2023 – Union Government – Ministry of Railways – Repo rt No. 9 of 2025 
(Railway Finances); 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5024/18/25] 
 
(d) Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on the Activities of 
Indian National Centre for Ocean Informat ion Services - Union Government - Ministry 
of Earth Sciences - Report No.8 of 2025 (Compliance Audit-Civil); 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5025/18/25] 
 
(e) Union Government Appropriation Acco unts of the Defence Services for the 
year 2023-24; 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5026/18/25] 
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
5

(f) Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
March 2022 - Union Government - Depart ment of Revenue (Indirect Taxes- 
Customs) - Report No.11 of 2025 (Compliance Audit);  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5027/18/25] 
 
(g) Indian Railways Appropriation Account s Part I – Review, Part II – Detailed 
Appropriation Accounts and Part – II Detailed Appropriation Accounts (Annexure-G) 
for the year 2023-24 – Ministry of Railways; 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5028/18/25] 
 
(h) Report of the Comptroller and Audito r General of India for the year ended 
March 2024 - Performance Audit on E- Way Bill System under GST – Union 
Government – Department of Revenue (I ndirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
– Report No. 12 of 2025; 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5029/18/25] 
 
(i) Report of the Comptroller and Audito r General of India on Accounts of the 
Union Government for the year 2023-24 – Union Government – Ministry of Finance – 
Report No. 16 of 2025 (Financial Audit); and 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5030/18/25] 
 
(j) Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Solar Parks and Ultra 
Mega Solar Power Projects – Union Govern ment – Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy – Report No. 13 of 2025 (Performance Audit). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5031/18/25] 
 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, in the revised List of Business for today, 
the National Sports Governance Bill, 2025, and the National Anti-Doping 
(Amendment) Bill, 2025, both as passed by  Lok Sabha, have been included. The 
topics of both the Bills were circulated through Members’ portal yesterday evening 
around 5.00 p.m. As reasonable time wa s not available to the Members to submit 
Amendments to these Bills, under the releva nt rules, those who desire to submit 
Amendments may do so till 12.00 noon. No w, Message from Lok Sabha; Secretary-
General.
 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA 
 
(i) The Income Tax Bill, 2025; and 
(ii) The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha at its sitting held on the 11th August, 2025, passed the following Bills:- 
(i) The Income-Tax  Bill, 2025; and 
(ii) The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025. 
 
             The Speaker has certified that these Bills are Money Bills within the meaning 
of Article 110 of the Constitution.  
             I lay a copy each of the said Bills on the Table. 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COMMERCE 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu): Sir,  I  present the following Reports (in 
English and Hindi) of the Department Rela ted Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Commerce:- 
 
(i) 191st Report on Action Taken by  Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee containe d in its One Hundred and Eighty 
Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) (Demand No. 10) of 
Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce and Industry; 
(ii) 192nd Report on Action Taken by  Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Ninetieth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2025-26) (Demand No. 11)  of 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry; 
(iii) 193rd Report  on 'Indian Leathe r Industry: Current Analysis and Future 
Prospects'; and 
(iv) 194th Report on 'Performance Evaluation and Review of some Commodity 
Boards'. 
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
7

 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND 
SPORTS 
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ "अनुसंधान आधािरत िशक्षा तथा िवज्ञान और 
संबंिधत क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ अनुसंधान पिरदृÌय" क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत िशक्षा, मिहला, बाल, युवा और 
खेल संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े तीन सौ अƻावनवȂ Ģित वेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ पर 
सरकार ǎारा की गई कारर्वाई संबंधी 367वां Ģितवेदन (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) ĢÎतुत करती हूँ। 
 
  
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON COAL, MINES AND STEEL 
 
Ǜी आिदत्य Ģसाद ( झारखंड): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत कोयला, खान और इÎपात संबंधी 
संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
 
     (i) Ninth Report on Action Take n by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Coal; 
(ii) Tenth Report on Action Taken by  the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Second Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Mines; and 
(iii) Eleventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee containe d in its Third Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Steel. 
 
  
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
 
Ǜी मयंककु मार नायक ( गुजरात): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत पेटर्ोिलयम और Ģाकृ ितक गैस 
संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी 
तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:— 
 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE TEA BOARD 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA): Sir, I move the following Motion: 
 
 “That in pursuance of clause (f) of su b-section (3) of Section 4 of the Tea 
Act, 1953 (No. 29 of 1953) read with clause  (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 4 and sub-
rule (1) of Rule 5 of the Tea Rules, 1954 , this House do proceed to elect, in such 
manner as directed by the Chairman, one Member from amongst the Members of the 
House to be a member of the Tea Board.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
(i) Third Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee (2024-25) on ‘Dem ands for Grants (2024-25)’ pertaining 
to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas; 
(ii) Fourth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2023-24) on ‘Litigations Involving Oil 
PSUs’ pertaining to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas; and 
(iii) Fifth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its Twenty-third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of th e Committee (2023-24) on ‘Review of Policy 
on Import of Crude Oil’ pertaining to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
 
S H R I  T I R U C H I  S I V A  ( T a m i l  N a d u ) :   S i r ,  I  l a y  o n  t h e  T a b l e ,  a  c o p y  ( i n  E n g l i s h  a n d  
Hindi) of the Thirty-third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Public 
Accounts (2025-26) on ‘Levy an d regulation of fees, tariff s, user charges etc. on 
public infrastructure and other public utilities’ pertaining to the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) and National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). 
 
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
9

MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE COFFEE BOARD 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA): Sir, I move the following Motion: 
 
  “ That in pursuance of clause (b) of su b-section (2) of  Section  4  of the 
Coffee Act, 1942 (VII of 1942), read with sub-rule (1) of Rule 4 of the Coffee Rules, 
1955, this House do proceed to elect,  in such manner as directed by the Chairman,  
one Member from  amongst the Members of the House, to be a member of the Coffee 
Board.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE SPICES BOARD 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA): Sir, I move the following Motion: 
 
 “ That in pursuance of clause (b) of sub- section (3) of Section 3 of the Spices 
Board Act, 1986 (No.10 of 1986) read with clause (b) of sub-rule  (1) of Rule 4 and 
sub-rule (1) of Rule 5 of the  Spices Board Rules, 1987, this House do proceed to 
elect, in the manner as directed by the Chairman, one Member from amongst the 
Members of the House to be a member of the Spices Board.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 
 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Forty-sixth, Fifty-
ninth and Sixty-sixth Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Finance  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
Shri Pankaj Chaudhary, I lay the following statements regarding:- 
 
(a) Status of implementation of th e Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-sixth Report of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Finance (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Strengthening 
Credit Flows to the MSME Sector’ pe rtaining to the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) and Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5032/18/25] 
 
(b) Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Fifty-
ninth Report of the Department-r elated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Finance (Seventeenth Lo k Sabha) on ‘Cyber Security and 
Rising Incidence of Cyber/White Collar Crimes’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Finance(Department of Financial Services),Ministry of Home Affairs 
and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5033/18/25] 
 
(c) Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Sixty-
sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Finance (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) on ‘Performance 
Review and Regulation of Insurance Se ctor’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Finance(Department of Financial Services). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 5034/18/25] 
 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Third and Tenth 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND  
HIGHWAYS (SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA):  Sir,  I lay the following statements 
regarding:- 
(a) Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Third 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
11

Finance (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3073/18/25] 
 
(b) Status of implementation of the Recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Finance (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3074/18/25] 
 
 
Status of implementation of the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Sixth, Eighth and Fortieth Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary  
Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜीमती िनमुबेन 
जयंतीभाई बांभिणया): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत क े संबंध मȂ िववरण सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ:- 
 
(a) Status of implementation of  the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Consumer Affair s, Food and Public Distribution 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 4088/18/25] 
 
(b) Status of implementation of  the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Consumer Affair s, Food and Public Distribution 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’pertaining to 
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 4089/18/25] 
 
(c) Status of implementation of  the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Consumer Affair s, Food and Public Distribution 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Transforming Fair Price Shops’ pertaining to 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
(Department of Food and Public Distribution).  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 4091/18/25] 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE CHAIR– Contd. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, a Supplementary List of Business for 
consideration and return of Income Tax Bill, 2025 and the Taxation Laws 
(Amendment) Bill, 2025, both  as passed by Lok Sabha, has been issued now and 
uploaded on multi-media devices and Member s’ portal. The copies  of both the Bills 
were circulated through Members’ portal yesterday evening after 6 p.m.  Members 
who desire to submit Amendments to these Bills may do so latest  by 1 p.m. If the 
House agrees, both these Bills may be taken up together. 
Hon. Members, 21 notices have been re ceived today on four different subjects 
under Rule 267. None of these 21 notices contain a motion drawn in proper terms as 
per the requirement of Rule 267 to obtain a decision of the House. 
...(Interruptions)... Further, out of these, 11 noti ces Seek discussion on a matter 
which is sub judice. ...(Interruptions)... Please! Since none of these notices received 
today are in adherence to the requirement of the rules as enunciated above, I am not 
admitting any of the notices. Yes, Mr. Tiruchi Siva. ...(Interruptions)... Which rule?  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA ( Tamil Nadu ): Sir, Rule 266, not Rule 267. I read Rule 266 
“Residuary Powers’: “All matters not specifically provided for in these rules and all 
questions relating to the detailed working of  these rules shall be regulated in such 
manner as the Chairman may, from time to time direct. ” Sir, the problem is, even the 
Constitution is not static. It is subject to  amendments. So also with regard to Rule 
267, some ruling has been given earlier. Now you are in the Chair, Sir. You can give a 
direction which will become a ruling. We are taking up a very important subject which 
is burning the country. Why don’t you allo w Rule 267 notices? I think the learned 
Leader of the House will not have any objection to it. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: ितरुची  जी, मȅने रूÊस को ही follow िकया है।...(Ëयवधान)... I followed the 
rules only. ...(Interruptions)... Please, let us move on. ...(Interruptions)... I am 
reading out… ...(Interruptions)...  Since  none  of  these  notices  received  today  are 
in  adherence  to  the re quirement of the ru les as enunciated above, I am not 
admitting any of the notices. ...(Interruptions)... N o w ,  M a t t e r s  R a i s e d  W i t h  
Permission, Dr. Fauzia Khan. ...(Interruptions)... Yes, Derekji. ...(Interruptions)...  
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
13

 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, I am on a ... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, all of you. ...(Interruptions)... Please take your 
seats. ...(Interruptions)... देरेक जी, क ृपया आप बोलȂ।  Which rule?  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Page 12, Rule 29, ‘Lis t of Business’. Sir, Bills which have 500 
clauses are being listed now in Supplementa ry Business, like, the I.T. and others. 
These are serious Bills, Sir. This is not a £ Let us not list these Bills at 11 o'clock in the 
morning. ...(Interruptions)... One minute, Sir. Let me finish. ...(Interruptions)... I 
am making two points.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  Please, please. ...(Interruptions)... आप बोलȂ।   
 
Ǜी देरेक ओĤाईन: सर, आप मुझे chance तो दीिजए। I am making two points on the List of 
Business. I told you, Page 12, Rule 29. One, Supplementary List of Business on these 
very crucial Bills like I.T. is a £ of Parliament. Two, Sir,… ...(Interruptions)... Let me 
finish.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:  * ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please! No, no.  ...(Interruptions)...  This is not going on 
record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN:*...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Derekji, the Chair has already given detailed ruling on this. 
...(Interruptions)... आपने जो point of order उठाया, the Chair has already given 
detailed ruling. ...(Interruptions)... Please, please. I will not allow.  
...(Interruptions)... The Chair goes by rules only. ...(Interruptions)...  No, please. 
...(Interruptions)... सदन की कायर्वाही दोपहर 2 बजे तक क े िलए Îथिगत की जाती है। The 
House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
 
The House then adjourned at fourteen minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
* Not recorded. 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the Chair.] 
 
REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Now, laying of Reports of the 
Committee on Public Undertakings; Shri Arun Singh …(Interruptions)… Shri Neeraj 
Dangi… …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI NEERAJ DANGI (RAJASTHAN):  Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English 
and Hindi) of the following Reports of  the Committee on Public Undertakings 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha):- 
(i) Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Audit Report(s)/Para(s) referred 
to Committee on Public Undertakings for final decision related to Shipping 
Corporation of India (SCI) Limited pe rtaining to the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Public En terprises) and  Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways; 
(ii) Fourteenth Report of the Committe e on Audit Based examination of Para 
No. 4.2 of Report No.16 of 2023 on setti ng up of 25,000 Wi-Fi Hotspots in 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) Rural Telephone Exchanges 
pertaining to the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications);   
(iii) Fifteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
pertaining to the Ministry of Communications; 
(iv) Sixteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited(BHEL) pertaining to the Ministry of Heavy Industries; and 
( v )  S e v e n t e e n t h  R e p o r t  o n  A c t i o n  T a k e n  b y  t h e  G o v e r n m e n t  o n  t h e  
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Indian Railway Finance Corporation 
Limited(lRFC) pertaining to the Ministry of Railways.  
 
…(Interruptions)… 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
15

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Now, the National sports Governance 
Bill, 2025 and the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill,  2025, to be discussed 
together. …(Interruptions)…  Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya to  move motions for the 
consideration of the following Bills, the National Sp orts Governance Bill, 2025 and 
the National Anti -Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025. … (Interruptions)… 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT BILLS 
 
I. αThe National Sports Governance Bill, 2025; and 
II. αThe National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025; 
 
Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ी; तथा युवक कायर्कर्म और खेल मंतर्ी ( डा. मनसुख मांडिवया) :  महोदय, 
मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूँ:- 
 
      "िक खेलȗ क े िवकास और संवधर्न, िखलािड़यȗ क े िलए कÊयाणकारी उपायȗ, सुशासन क े 
बुिनयादी सावर्भौिमक िसǉांतȗ, ओलंिपक और खेल संचलन की नैितकता और िनÍपक्षता, 
ओलंिपक चाटर्र, पैरािंलिपक चाटर्र, अंतरार्Íटर्ीय सवȘǄम Ģथाओं और Îथािपत िविधक मानकȗ का 
उपबंध करने और एक एकीकृ त, साÇयपूणर् और Ģभावी रीित से खेल िशकायतȗ और खेल िवव ादȗ 
क े समाधान का उपबंध करने और उससे संबǉ या उसके  आनुषंिगक मामलȗ वाले िवधेयक पर, 
लोक सभा ǎारा पािरत रूप  मȂ, िवचार िकया जाए।" 
  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
       महोदय, मȅ यह भी ĢÎताव करता हूँ:-  
 
       “िक राÍटर्ीय डोिंपग रोध
ी अिधिनयम, 2022 का संशोधन करने वाले िवधेयक पर, लोक सभा 
ǎारा पािरत रूप  मȂ, िवचार िकया जाए। ’’    
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
महोदय, इस िबल का motion तो moved है ही, now I am explaining it. …(Ëयवधान)... 
सर, यह बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् िबल है। …(Ëयवधान)... 
                                                            
α    Discussed together. 
 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Let us have order in the House. 
…(Interruptions)… Let us have orde r in the House. …(Interruptions)… The House 
stands adjourned to meet  at 3.00 p.m. today. 
 
The House then adjourned at two minutes past two of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at three of the clock, 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the Chair. 
 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA– Contd. 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Message from Lok Sabha; Secretary-
General. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL:  Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha at its sitting held on the 12
th of August, 2025 has adop ted the following Motion 
regarding extension of time for presentation  of the Report of the Joint Committee of 
the Houses on the Constitution (One Hu ndred and Twenty-Ninth Amendment) Bill, 
2024 and the Union Territory Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024: 
 
“That this House do extend time for the presentation of the Report of the Joint 
Committee on the Constitution (One Hund red and Twenty-Ninth Amendment) Bill, 
2024 and the Union Territory Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024 up to the first day of last 
week of the Winter Session, 2025.”  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Minister, Dr Mansukh Mandaviya 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
 
GOVERNMENT BILLS– Contd. 
 
I. The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025; and 
II. The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
17

Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ी; तथा युवक कायर्कर्म और खेल मंतर्ी ( डा. मनसुख  
मांडिवया): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज ‘The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025’ और 
‘The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025’, इन दोनȗ Bills पर मȅ एक साथ अपने 
िवचार ĢÎतुत करता हूं और जैसा िक हम सब लोग जानते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): One minute, hon. Minister. 
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Leader of the Opposition ...(Interruptions)...  
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): 
*...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. LoP, that is not part of the Bill. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: * ...(Ëयवधान)...  
   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. LoP, I have given you time. 
...(Interruptions)...  This is not going on record. ...(Interruptions)...  This is not part 
of the Bill. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. LoP, it is not part of the Bill. ...(Interruptions)...  
It is not going on record. Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... Definitely 
...(Interruptions)...  Hon. LoP, it has already b een decided, about the Rule 267 
notices. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: * ...(Ëयवधान)...  
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. LoP, it has been decided. I will 
have to move on. It is not  part of the Bill. ...(Interruptions)... It is not part of the Bill.  
Thank you, hon. LoP. It is not going on record. ...(Interruptions)...  It is not  part of 
the Bill. ...(Interruptions)...  I will have to move on . I have given you time. 
…(Interruptions)… Order in the House, please. …(Interruptions)… Please sit down. 
…(Interruptions)… Let us have order in the House, please. …(Interruptions)…. If you 
want to leave, leave quietly. …(Interruptions)… Please leave quietly. …(Interruptions)…  
There is no point of order on the Bill.  
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber) 
 
                                                            
* Not recorded.  
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Hon. LoH, please. …(Interruptions)…  Let us have order in the House. 
…(Interruptions)… Yes, hon. LoH.  
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सर, मȅने पहले कहा था …(Ëयवधान)… यह जो  अपोिज़शन 
का Ëयवहार है, वह smooth functioning of the Parliament को obstruct करने की एक सोची-
समझी चाल है।  इनको healthy democracy मȂ कोई िवÌवास नहीं है।  हमने शुरू  मȂ कहा था और 
मȅ आज िफर िरपीट करता हूं िक 21 जुलाई को हमने कहा था िक यह गवनर्मȂट िकसी भी िवषय पर 
चचार् करने क े िलए तैयार है, लेिकन वह संिवधान सÇमत होना चािहए और वह िनयमȗ क े अनुसार 
होना चािहए
।  अभी लीडर ऑफ िद अपोिज़शन ने Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र का िवषय उठाया और 
Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र क े िव
षय मȂ उन्हȗने कोई चचार् नहीं की, बिÊक  उन्हȗने  SIR क े बारे मȂ चचार् 
शुरू  कर दी और एक political statement ले कर आए। मȅ िनवेदन करूं गा िक उसको हाउस की 
proceedings से expunge  िकया जाए, क्यȗिक that is not in accordance with the rules and 
regulations of the Parliament. िज
स बात क े िलए उन्हȗने परिमशन मांगी थी, उस बात को 
छोड़कर वे पोिलिटकल ÎटेटमȂट देने लगे और  time and again वे Rule 267 क े तहत हर िदन 
इस पर िडमांड करते हȅ और उनको हर िदन यह जवाब िदया जाता है िक इसकी चचार् नहीं हो 
सकती है।  यह जो आज हम िबल पर चचार् कर रहे हȅ, यह िबज़नेस एडवाइज़
री कमेटी मȂ 
िडसाइड होने क े बाद कर रहे हȅ। इसको obstruct करना, एक तरीके  से Ģजातंतर् को, पािर्लयामȂट 
को बंधक बनाने क े बराबर है, िजसके  बारे मȂ मȅने कल भी कहा था।  यह हम परिम
ट नहीं करȂगे।  
We will not allow obstructionism . We will not allow anarchism और गवनर्मȂट का जो 
िबज़नेस है, वह पूरा पािरत होगा और यह संसद चलेगी, पूरे तर ीक े  से चलेगी, िनयमावली क े तहत 
चलेगी और आपके  संरक्षण मȂ चलेगी।  
  
Ǜी उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा):  ऑनरेबल मेÇबसर् ... 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: सर, लगभग, they have wasted about 64 hours and 25 minutes of 
the working time of Rajya Sabha, जब से पािर्लयामȂट शुरू  हुई है। आप बताइए िक यह हाउ
 स 
को बंधक बनाने क े बराबर है या नहीं है।  यह एक तरीके  से public money को waste करने का 
सवाल है या नहीं है और इनको कोई इंटर्Îट नहीं है िक िडबेट हो, इनको कोई इंटर्Îट नहीं है िक 
िडÎकशन हो।  इनको इंटर्Îट यह है िक िसफर् मीिडया मȂ क ु छ लाइन्स आ जाएं और उसके  िलए 
Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र क े माध्यम से ये बात को कहना चाहते हȅ। मȅ िफर कहूंगा िक t
hat should be 
expunged.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Members, regarding the notices 
under Rule 267, the hon. Deputy Chairman , in the morning, has already given his 
ruling. Therefore, those matters, raised  under Rule 267 notices, are not held 
cognizable.   As regards the matters raised, which were not a part of the Bill, the Bill 
has already been introduced by the hon. Minister and he had started his introductory 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
19

remarks. Therefore, any matters that do no t pertain to the specific Bill under 
consideration of this House do not form part  of the record.  I have given my ruling.  
Now, the hon. Minister. 
  
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज राज्य सभा मȂ the National Sports 
Governance Bill and the National  Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill दो िवषय पर हम एक-
साथ चचार् करना चाहȂगे।  सर, sports एक  public movement है और sports क े िलए 3 
stakeholder हȅ। पहला- athlete, दूसरा-Federation और तीसरा-Government है। इन तीनȗ क े 
बीच मȂ तालमेल हो, इन तीनȗ का काम सुिनिÌचत हो, transparency से हो, देश क े हर युवा मȂ 
sports क े talent को medal मȂ convert करने की opportunity िमले। Sports, एक national 
pride होता है। Sports, State subject भी है, sports, एक national subject भी है और 
sports, international subject भी है।  सालȗ से देश मȂ एक law क े रूप  मȂ एक Sports Bill आए 
और  Sports Bill  पािरत करके  अच्छा लॉ बनाएं, जो नेशनल और इंटरनेशनल Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ 
और दुिनया मȂ भारत की एक अच्छी छिव बनाए।   
          उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह िवषय बहुत पुराना है। देश मȂ Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ good 
governance होना चािहए, देश मȂ Îपोट्सर् को आगे बढ़ाना चािहए। इस के  िलए बातȂ तो बहुत हुईं, 
लेिकन काम नहीं हुआ था। काम नहीं होने का कारण भी इच्छाशिƪ का अभाव था, उसमȂ अपने-
अपने िहत समािहत थे। Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ कई ऐसी पोिलिटक्स भी हुईं, िजनकी वजह से हम 
Îपोट्सर् मȂ good govern
ance नहीं ला पाए।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इस देश मȂ क्षमता की कमी नहीं है, इस देश मȂ brain power भी है 
और manpower भी  है। देश की 65 परसȂट पॉÃयुलेशन below 35 है, यानी यह देश युवाओं का 
देश है। लेिकन आज हम ओलंिपक्स मȂ मेडल टैली मȂ पीछे जा रहे हȅ, हमȂ मेडल टैली और 
इंटरनेशनल Îपोट्सर् मȂ जो परफॉरमȂस देनी चािहए, वह नहीं दे पा रहे हȅ। इसके  िलए देश मȂ एक 
लॉ लाना बहुत आवÌयक है। महोदय, हम यह िबल क्यȗ लेकर आए हȅ? देश मȂ फ ेडरेशन का 
इलेक्शन, फ ेडरेशन मȂ एथलीट का सेलेक्शन, फ ेडरेशन मȂ मिहलाओं का Ģितिनिधत्व, फ ेडरेशन 
मȂ नए लोगȗ को opportunity देना जैसे कई तरह क े िवषय हȅ, िजनके  िलए टर्ांसपेरȂसी होनी बहुत 
आवÌयक है।  
महोदय, आज मȅ देखता हूं िक देश मȂ 350 से अिधक कोटर् क े सेज हȅ। फ ेडरेशन मȂ इलेक्श न 
हुआ, कोई कोटर् मȂ चला गया और कोटर् ने उसमȂ administrator रख िदया। जब फ ेडरेशन मȂ 
िडÎÃयूट होता है, तब एथलीट का भिवÍय अिनिÌचत हो जाता है, उस पर बुरा Ģभाव पड़ता है। जब 
ऐसे 350 से अिधक क े सेज हȗ, तब क ै से इलेक्शन होगा! इलेक्शन Îटेज पर, िरज़Êट्
स Îटेज पर, 
इलेक्शन की Ģारंिभक Îटेज पर बार-बार कोटर् का मैटर हो जाता है। महोदय, मȅ िपछले एक साल 
से भारत सरकार क े Îपोट्सर् िमिनÎटर मे रूप  मȂ देख रहा हूं िक यहाँ legal paralysis की िÎथित 
है। देश मȂ िवǏमान बॉडी मȂ िकतने मेÇबसर् हȗगे? कभी-कभी िकसी फ ेडरेशन मȂ कहीं पर ज्यादा 
मेÇबसर् हो जाते हȅ, कहीं पर कम मेÇबसर् हो जाते हȅ। महोदय, 50 परसȂट एथलीट्स हमारी मिहला एँ 
हȅ और मिहलाओं को Ģितिनिधत्व देना बहुत आवÌयक है। यिद मिहला कहीं पर खेलती है, उसका 
कोई ĢÌन होता है, उसका कोई इÌयू होता है, तो उसे एडर्ेस करने क े िलए एथलीट कमीशन मȂ 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

मिहलाओं का Ģितिनिधत्व होना बहुत आवÌयक है। आज हमारे सामने ऐसी कई तरह की 
िसचुएशन्स हȅ, िजनकी वजह से हमȂ Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ आगे बढ़ने मȂ बाधाएँ आ रही हȅ।  
महोदय, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा था िक हमȂ आने वाले दस सालȗ मȂ देश क े Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर 
को दुिनया मȂ 1 से 10 कर्म मȂ लाना है। जब देश आज़ाद
ी का शताÅदी वषर् मनाता हो, यानी जब देश 
आज़ादी क े सौ वषर् मनाए, तब तक हमȂ िवकिसत भारत बनाना है। महोदय, मोदी जी ने िवकिसत 
भारत क ेवल infrastruct
ure development क े िलए नहीं कहा है, बिÊक मोदी जी ने कहा है िक 
देश सवार्ंगीण क्षेतर् मȂ उन्नित करे। हम Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ भी दुिनया की 1-5  मेडल टैली मȂ आना 
चाहते हȅ। उसके  िलए Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ गुड गवनȄस होना बहुत आवÌयक है। मोदी जी ने दुिनया मȂ 
कहा है िक हमȂ हर िÎथित मȂ वÊडर् क्लास बनना है, दुिनया मȂ जो rules a
nd regulations हȅ, 
दुिनया मȂ िज स  टाइप की गवनȄस है, वैसी गवनȄस हमारे देश मȂ भी होनी चािहए। आज दुिनया क े 
बीस देशȗ मȂ Îपोट्सर् लॉ है, जो िक हमारे देश मȂ नहीं है। मȅ संसद क े इस सदन मȂ उप िÎथत  सभी 
माननीय सांसदȗ से िरक्वेÎट करूं गा िक यह िबल लोक सभा ने पािरत िकया है, अतः आप भी इसे 
पािरत कर दीिजए, क्यȗिक जब राज्य सभा इस िबल को पािरत कर देगी, तो हम भी एक ऐसी 
िवÌव क ंटर्ी बनȂगे, िजसमȂ Îपोट्सर् लॉ होगा और लॉ क े मुतािबक हमारे देश मȂ गुड गवनȄस चलेगा।    
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, जैसा िक मȅने बताया है िक इसको करने क े िलए बातȂ तो 
होती रहीं, लेिकन इच्छ
ाशिƪ क े अभाव क े कारण हमने िबल को लॉ मȂ क ंवटर् नहीं िकया। इस देश 
मȂ 1975 मȂ सबसे पह
ले Îपोट्सर् क े िलए एक गाइडलाइन बनाई गई और इस गाइडलाइन क े 
मुतािबक Îपोट्सर् गवनर् होता रहा। महोदय, 1985 मȂ पहली बार, यानी आज से 30 साल पहले एक 
Ģयास हुआ, एक Îपोट्सर् िबल का डर्ाÄट बना, लेिकन वह आगे नहीं बढ़ पाया।  
महोदय, 2011 मȂ  एक Sports Code बनाया गय
ा, लेिकन वह भी कोटर् मȂ चैलȂज हो गया 
और उसका भी कोई नतीजा नहीं िनकला। 2011 मȂ उस िबल क े िलए कोिशश की गई िक हम 
Îपोट्सर् िबल क ेिबनेट मȂ लाएं। लेिकन वह क ैिबनेट तक नहीं पहुंचा पाया था। यहाँ माननीय 
सदÎय, अजय माकन जी नहीं बैठे हȅ, लेिकन मȅ उन
का उÊलेख इसिलए करू ँगा, क्यȗिक उन्हȗने 
2013 मȂ Îपोट्सर् िबल लाने की कोिश श  की थी। उन्हȗने मेहनत की थी। वे उसे क ैिबनेट तक ले गए, 
लेिकन क ैिबनेट मȂ कई सदÎयȗ ने उसका सहयोग नहीं िकया और क ैिबनेट से िबल को डेफर होना 
पड़ा। Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर से जुड़े हुए लोग और उन की दरिमयानिगरी से वह िबल क ैिबनेट से पािरत 
नहीं हो पाया था। इसके  बाद, 2017 मȂ एक नये Îपोट्सर् कोड को डर्ाÄट िकया गया। उसे भी कोटर् मȂ 
चैलȂज िकया गया। 2019 मȂ कोटर् की एक किमटी ने उस पर िडटेÊड अध्ययन करने क े िलए कहा, 
लेिकन वह आगे नहीं बढ़ पाया। अंतत: 2022 मȂ कोटर् की दरिमयानिग
री से 13 Ãवाइंट का एक 
Îपोट्सर् कोड तैयार िकया गया। इस Îपोट्सर् कोड क े तहत, आज Îपोट्सर् गवनर् हो रहा है। यह 
मोदी जी की इच्छाशि
ƪ का पिरणाम है। मोदी जी ने कहा िक हमȂ Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ आगे बढ़ने क े 
िलए Îटर्क्चरल िरफॉमर् करने की आवÌयकता है। हमȂ Îटर्क्चरल िरफॉमर् करने चािहए, सीक्वȂस मȂ 
करने चािहए। 
आज से 11 साल पहले, जब मोदी जी ने देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ का म करना शुरू  
िकया, तब वे Îपोट्सर् का इको-िसÎटम िकर्एट करने क े िलए देश मȂ ‘ खेलो इंिडया’ नीित लेकर 
आए। ‘ खेलो इंिडया’ कायर्कर्म से आज देश मȂ Îपो ट्सर् एक मूवमȂट बना है। ‘ खेलो इंिडया’ Îकू ल 
गेÇस, ‘ खेलो इंिडया’ यूिनविर्सटी गेÇस, ‘खेलो इंिडया’ पारा गेÇस, ‘ खेलो इंिडया’ िंवटर गेÇस, 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
21

‘खेलो इंिडया’ टर्ाइबल गेÇस, ‘ खेलो इंिडया’ नॉथर्-ईÎट गेÇस, ‘खेलो इंिडया’ Îवदेशी गेÇस - 
‘खेलो इंिडया’ क े अÇĤेला क े नीचे ऐसे कई टाइÃस क े Îपोट्सर् मूवमȂट होने लगे। देश मȂ एक Îपोट्सर् 
का माहौल बना। माहौल बनने क े बाद, उसे मेडल टैली मȂ कनवटर् करने क े िलए मोदी जी ने 
टारगेटेड ओलंिपक पोिडयम Îक
ीम चलाई। देश क े वे एथलीट, िजनमȂ क्षमता है, िजनमȂ टैलȂट है, 
ऐसे एथलीट्स को आिर्थक संसाधन की कमी नहीं रहनी चा िहए। उसे िवदेश मȂ खेलना है, तो वह 
वहाँ जा सके । िवदेश मȂ टर्ेिंनग करनी है, तो टर्ेिंनग कर सके । उसे बेÎट कोच चािहए, तो कोच लगा 
सके । िवदेश का कोच चा िहए , तो िवदेश का कोच लगा सके । उसे िवदेश मȂ िकसी अकादमी मȂ 
टर्ेिंनग क े िलए जाना है, तो वहाँ जा सके । उसके  िलए िजस भी खचर् की आवÌयकता हो, वह भारत 
सरकार की ओर से िकया जाए - यह मोदी जी ने सुिनिÌचत िकया। 
महोदय, तीसरे िरफॉमर् क े रूप  मȂ देश मȂ एक Îपोट्सर् पॉिलसी होनी चा
िहए। हमȂ देश को 
Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ आगे क ै से ले जाना है, उसकी कायर्योजना क ैसी होगी, उसके  Îटेक होÊडर क ै से 
हȗगे, उसमȂ गुड गवनȄस क ै से आएगी, इसके  िलए मोदी जी ने खेलो भारत Îपोट्सर् नीित िडक्लेयर 
की। खेलो भारत Îपोट्सर् नीित से देश मȂ एक िवज़न तैयार िक
या गया। िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, िरफॉमर् 
क े तीसरे सीक्वȂस मȂ खेलो भारत नीित मȂ कहा गया िक हमȂ गुड गवनȄस भी लाना है, तो गुड 
गवनȄस Îपोट्सर् िबल क े रूप  मȂ लाने क े िलए मȅ आपके  सामने आय
ा हूँ। इसके  अलावा, जैसे ही यह 
िबल पािरत हो जाएगा, इसके  बाद पाँच साल की Îटर्ेटजी और दस सा
ल की Îपोट्सर् मेडल 
Îटर्ेटजी तैयार की जाएगी। मुझे पूरा िवÌवास है िक मोदी जी ने जो Îवपन देखा है िक भारत 2047 
मȂ मेडल टैली मȂ टॉप फाइव नेशन्स मȂ होना चािहए, इस उǈेÌय को िसǉ कर ने क े िलए आज हम 
यह िबल लेकर आए हȅ।  
इस िबल मȂ नेशनल Îपोट्सर् बोडर् होगा, िजस बोडर् मȂ देश क े सभी फ ेडरेशन्स का 
रिजÎटर्ेशन होगा। जब कोई िडÎÃयूट होता है, तब कोटर् मȂ जाने क े अला
वा, नेशनल Îपोट्सर् 
िटर्Åयूनल की रचना की जाएगी। नेशनल Îपोट्सर् िटर्Åयूनल मȂ सभी क े स दजर् िकए जाएंगे और 
इसके  ऊपर क ेवल सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ ही जा पाएंगे। सुĢीम कोटर् और हाई कोटर् क े िरट ायडर् जज 
उसका नेतृत्व करȂगे। एकदम टर्ांसपेरȂसी की अपेक्षा है। सरकार Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ, Îपोट्सर् 
फ ेडरेशन गवनȄस मȂ कोई दरिमयानिगरी नहीं करना चाहती है।                       
यह बोडर् है और यह बोडर् भी ÎवायǄ तौ
र पर काम करेगा।  उसमȂ सरकार की क ु छ भी 
दरिमयानिगरी नहीं रहेगी।   िकसी फ ेडरेशन का इलेक्शन कौन करवाएगा?  िजसको इलेक्शन 
का अनुभव है, िजन्हȗने कभी न कभी कोई न कोई इलेक्शन करवाया है, ऐसे लोगȗ को 
आईडȂिटफाई करके  नेशनल Îपोट्सर् इलेक्शन पैनल बनाया जाएगा।  इस नेशनल Îपोट्सर् 
इलेक्शन पैनल मȂ से ही िकसी को नॉिमनेट करके  कोई भी फ ेडरेशन अपना पारदशीर् इलेक्शन 
करवा पाएगा और उसमȂ सरकार की कोई दरिम
यानिगरी नहीं रहेगी। इलेक्शन कमीशन क े तजर् 
पर ही यह नेशनल Îपोट्सर् इलेक्शन पैनल रहेगा।  उसके  अलावा आज सभी फ ेडरेशन्स मȂ अलग-
अलग सदÎय संख्या है।  िकसी फ ेडरेशन का बोडर् 15 लोगȗ का होता है, 17 लोगȗ का होता है, 25 
लोगȗ का होता है, इसमȂ कोई िलिमटेशन नहीं है।  हमने इस िबल मȂ Ģावधान िकया है िक Îपोट्सर् 
की गविनȊग बॉडी की संख्या 15 रहेगी या 15 से कम रहेगी।   उसके  अलावा Îपोट्सर् मȂ, एिथक्स 
कमेटी मȂ मिहलाओं का Ģितिन
िध रहेगा, एथलीट का Ģितिनिधत्व रहेगा।  फ ेडरेशन मȂ गवर्िंनग बोडर् 
मȂ भी दो एथलीट रहȂगे।  िमिनमम 4 मिहलाए ं इस बोडर् मȂ रहȂगी, तािक इस बोडर् मȂ मिहलाओं का 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

भी Ģितिनिधत्व हो।  एकदम पारदिर्शता क े साथ देश क े सभी एथलीट्स को जिÎटस िमले, अपनी 
क्षमता क े आधार पर परफॉमȄस करने की अपॉचुर्िनटी िमले, गुड गवनȄस हो, सरकार सपोिर्टव रोल 
मȂ रहे, ओलंिपक चाटर्र का पालन हो, अच्छी तरह से गुड गव न Ȅस हो और देश Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ 
आगे बढ़े, इन उǈेÌयȗ क े साथ यह िबल लाया गया है।   
उसके  अलावा, हम नेशनल एंटी-डोिंपग ( अमȂडमȂट) िबल को वाडा कोड से अलाइन 
करने क े िलए लाए हȅ।  उसमȂ टर्ांसपेरȂसी हो, नाडा को ÎवायǄा िमले, उसमȂ कोई conflict of 
interest न हो और देश मȂ डोिंपग क े िखलाफ हम अच्छी तरह से मूवमȂट कर सकȂ, इस उǈेÌय को 
िसǉ करने क े िलए नेशनल एंटी-डोिंपग (अमȂडमȂट) िबल भी लाया गय ा है।  इन दोनȗ िबलȗ पर 
माननीय सदÎयगण िवचार करȂ और इन्हȂ पािरत करȂ, यही मेरी अपेक्षा है। धन्यवाद।   
     
The questions were proposed. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Motions have been moved.  The 
National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 an d the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) 
Bill, 2025 are now open for combined discus sion.  I will now call upon the Members 
whose names have been received for particip ation in the discussion.  Shri Narhari 
Amin. 
 
SHRI NARHARI AMIN (Gujarat):  
&“Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I extend my heartfelt 
gratitude to the hon. Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, and the hon. 
Minister of Sports, Shri Mansukh Mandaviya, for introducing th e National Sports 
Governance Bill, 2025, in this esteemed Hous e. I offer my earnest congratulations for 
this landmark initiative. 
After 77 years of independence, the Mi nistry of Sports has presented this 
historic Bill, a significant step towards tr ansforming the sports landscape in India. 
With a population exceeding 140 crore, India is unique in having 65% of its citizens 
aged 35 or younger. This vibrant youth dem ography is not only contributing to the 
nation’s progress but also shaping its fu ture. However, until now, neither State 
Governments nor the Union Government have adequately prioritized sports 
development for this vast young population. For the past 11 years, under the 
leadership of hon. Prime Minister, Shri Na rendra Modi, significant strides have been 
made in this direction. As Chief Minister of Gujarat in 2001, Shri Modi launched the 
visionary “Khelo Gujarat” initiative, which focused on integrating around 50,000 rural, 
tribal, and forest-dwelling youth into spor ts through diverse games and events. This 
pioneering effort laid a strong foundation for sports development. 
                                                            
& English translation of original speech delivered in Gujarati. 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
23

The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025, aims to ensure integrity and 
transparency in National Sports Federation s. As highlighted by hon. Minister, Shri 
Mansukh Mandaviya, numerous disputes and over 350 pending court cases in various 
High Courts and Supreme Court have plag ued sports federations across the country. 
These legal battles have stalled election s in many federations, and even when 
elections are scheduled after prolonged delays, they are often disrupted by stay 
orders.  
  Mr. Vice Chairman Sir, our country, currently, has approximately 36 sports 
federations operating at various levels. This  Bill Seeks to unify all State and National 
Sports Federations under a single framewor k. By doing so, it will ensure regular, 
time-bound elections within these federations, promoting transparency and 
accountability. 
The Bill introduces several commendable provisions. Notably, it addresses the 
lack of representation for women in many sports federations. Upon enactment, this 
legislation will mandate adequate represen tation for women in National Sports 
Federations, fostering gender equality. Addi tionally, it ensures that sportspersons, 
who have often been excluded from lead ership roles, will now have meaningful 
positions within these federations, empo wering athletes to contribute to the 
governance of their sports. 
Sir, India supports 36 diverse sports , and with the goal of elevating our 
athletes' performance on global stages  like the Olympics, the Government has 
allocated a substantial budget worth crores  of rupees. This funding will enhance 
sports infrastructure, improve training facilities, and provide comprehensive support 
to athletes, ensuring they have the resources needed to excel. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, please conclude.  
 
SHRI NARHARI AMIN: Among all sports federations in India, the Board of Control for 
Cricket in India (BCCI) stands out as the on ly financially robust organization. Most 
other federations face fina ncial constraints, which lim it their ability to provide 
competitive salaries for coaches, adequate facilities for athletes, and proper nutrition 
for players. This Bill aims to address these disparities, fostering a stronger, more 
equitable sports ecosystem across the nation.  
Through you, Sir, I wish to highlight that the Ministry of Sports has submitted 
bids to host the 2036 Olympics, the 2030 Commonwealth Games, and the 2029 World 
Police and Fire Games. These prestigious events are proposed to be held in 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, and Kevadia in  Gujarat, with preparations already 
underway. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Hon. Member, we will have to 
conclude.  
 
SHRI NARHARI AMIN : During Shri Amitbhai Shah’s tenure as Chairperson of the 
Gujarat Cricket Association, the Narendra Modi Stadium, the world’s largest stadium 
with a seating capacity of 1.3 lakhs spectators, was constructed in the Sardar Patel 
Enclave, Motera, Ahmedabad at the cost of Rs. 800 crore. Additionally, the Veer 
Savarkar Sports Complex has been developed in Naranpura, Ahmedabad, which falls 
in the Lok Sabha constituency of the hon. Home Minister, Shri Amitbhai Shah. Built at 
a cost of ₹734 crore under the “ Khelo India” initiative, this state-of-the-art complex 
underscores our commitment to promoting sports.  This Bill aims to provide 
comprehensive facilities to our athletes, and I extend my full support to it. Through 
this legislation, the Government will further enhance support for India’s athletes in the 
coming years. 
Furthermore, I would like to note that the budgetary allocation for sports has 
significantly increased from ₹1,643 crore in 2014 to ₹3,794 crore in 2024-25. This 
enhanced funding will greatly benefit our athletes in the future. Thank you, Sir.”   
                                                             
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Now, Shri R. Girirajan; not present.  
Then, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla. 
  
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, the National Sports 
Governance Bill, 2025 and the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
represent a good start in much-needed refo rms for our hard working sportsmen and 
athletes.  If implemented in true spirit, th ese two Bills can bring in an era defined by 
transparency, inclusion and fair play.   
First is the National Sports Governance Bill, 2025.  This Bill acknowledges what 
we have to achieve - to be recognized as a global player in the sp orts field.  As the 
hon. Minister said, by 2047, if we have to be among the top four-five global players in 
the sports field, we, certainly, need a strate gy to bring in at the Government of India 
level.  Also, at every Stat e and every district, we need to work out and create a 
strategy and do structuring of implementati on of those models to make our athletes 
the best in the world. I am happy to note that for the first time, our Olympic and 
Paralympic Committees, our national and regi onal sports federations, all will operate 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
25

under a single, clear legal framework.  What do es this Bill bring in?  This Bill brings in 
clarity for every State and district affiliate.  They know where it stands today and every 
athlete knows that their voic e will be heard.  Also, each national body will have an 
executive committee of up to 15 members wi th, at least, two outstanding sportsmen 
and four women among them. This is not just  a token, it is a promise that those who 
have felt unheard at the decision-making ta ble would now say that they can be heard 
firmly.  Also, our National Sports Board would issue ethics guidelines, audit fund 
usage and step in when international reco gnition falters.  No longer would these 
federations operate in shadows or avoid crit ical accountability.  When disputes arise, 
whether over selection controversies or  governance question s, our specialized 
National Sports Tribunal, chaired by a sitti ng or former Supreme Court Judge, would 
deliver speedy justice, and athletes woul d not have to wait years for a courtroom 
decision.  They would receive resolution and return to their training.   
Next is the National Anti-Doping Amendm ent Bill, 2025.  We all agree that the 
spirit of our sports is a clean competition. Yet, without robust checks, that spirit can 
be compromised.  The Amendment empowers the Central Government to constitute 
the appeal panel and insulates it from undue  influences. It shields NADA’s leadership 
from pressure from any federation, committ ee or department and that independence 
is vital.  We strengthen our laboratories  by mandating WADA acc reditation for every 
testing facility. We also align ourselves lawfully with the World Anti-Doping Code.  We 
also clarify who may appeal to the Court of  Arbitration in Sport so that when our 
domestic system cannot resolve a matter, the global body can step in. Yet, Mr. Vice-
Chairman, Sir, our athletes, as of now and the coming ones, would need a lot more.  
We must build in, at the federal level what  we have to do and State level what we 
have to do. Especially, at the State level,  which is going to be the implementation, 
taking the strategy and structuring inputs from the Government of India, we must 
build a State level capacity. A national framework is only as strong as its weakest 
affiliate. I urge the Government to pair re cognition with targeted grants and training 
for State Sports Councils. We  must also guard against Central overre ach. If the 
Sports Board grants an exemption, let us require a public explanation and 
parliamentary review. We mu st nurture the talent from  the ground up. I propose 
district-level grassroots spor ts councils, so that every village cricketer and school-
level runners See a clear pa th to national trails.  
Also, Sir, on anti-doping, strong penalties must be matched by strong 
education. Let us f und strong workshops and counselli ng for our athletes who make 
a first-time mistake.  As we expand test ing powers, let us enshrine data privacy 
safeguards: secure storage, limited retentio n, and strict access controls. When we 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

shift the Appeal Panel to the Central Government, let us demand speed, 60 days 
maximum for both constitution and decisi on. Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, these Bills 
have the potential to improve governan ce and fairness in Indian sport.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Please conclude.  
 
SHRI AYODHYA RAMI REDDY ALLA: Addressing these concerns will ensure that the 
legislation is balanced, transparent and ef fective at every level. From YSR Congress 
Party and our leader, Shri Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, we su pport this B ill.  Subject 
to the amendments, we urge the House to consider this Bill. We support it. Thank 
you.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Now, hon. Shri Subhasish Khuntia. 
 
Ǜी शुभाशीष खुंिटया ( ओिडशा): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, सबसे पहले एक नेशनल 
िखलाड़ी को 'राÍटर्ीय खेल शासन िवधेयक, 2025' और 'राÍटर्ीय डोिंपग रोधी (संशोधन) िवधेयक, 
2025' पर बोलने का मौका देने क े िलए मȅ आपका आभार करता हूँ।  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदय, इन दोनȗ िबÊस मȂ क ु छ कॉ
मन िंचताएँ भी हȅ।  सबसे बड़ी िंचता अत्यिधक क Ȃदर्ीकरण की 
है। 'Îपोट्सर् रेगुलेटरी बोडर् ऑफ इंिडया' और 'नेशनल एंटी- डोिंपग एजȂसी' तथा 'िड िसिÃलनरी 
पैनÊस' की शिƪयाँ सȂटर्लाइज़ होती िदख रही हȅ।  इससे राज्यȗ की भूिमका सीिमत हो सकती है, 
जो संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 246 क े अनुसार भारत क े फ ेडरल Îटर्क्चर क े अनुक ू ल नहीं है।  
 सर, दूसरी िंच ता  खेल संघȗ की ऑटोनॉमी को लेकर है।  यिद िबÊस मȂ अत्यिधक सरकारी 
हÎतक्षेप की गुंजाइश रह गई, तो सेलेक्शन, टर्ेिंनग और मैनेजमȂट मȂ राजनीितक Ģभाव की 
आशंका बढ़ सकती है।  डोिंपग रोधी पैनÊस की िनयुिƪ मȂ यिद क Ȃ दर् सर कार की सीधी भूिमका 
होगी, तो उनकी िनÍपक्षता और Îवतंतर् िनणर्य क्षमता पर भी सवाल उठ सकते हȅ।   
सर, दोनȗ िबÊस मȂ तीसरी कमी गर्ास रूट  Îतर को लेकर िदखाई देती है।  ' खेल शासन 
िवधेयक' मȂ िजला और Åलॉक Îतर पर ' Îपोट्सर् एक्सीलȂस सȂटर' Îथािपत करने, Îथानीय खेल 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर को मजबूत करने तथा आिदवासी और गर्ामीण Ģितभाओं को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए कोई 
ठोस रूपर ेखा नहीं है।  साथ ही, आजकल बढ़ते हुए जुआ और सƺेबाजी का सीधा असर 
िखलािड़यȗ पर पड़ रहा है, जो कई बार डोिंपग जैसे गलत राÎ
ते की ओर धके ल देते हȅ।  इनमȂ इसे 
रोकने की कोई ÎपÍट दृिÍट नहीं है। इन िवधेयकȗ मȂ िखलािड़यȗ क े िलए एजुक ेशनल  अवेयरनेस 
और िरहैिबिलटेशन जैसे मानवीय पह
लुओं को नजरअंदाज िकया गया है।   
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ इस अवसर पर ओिडशा क े उदाहरण को सामने रखना 
चाहूँगा।  जहाँ हमारे िĢय नेता और पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी Ǜी नवीन प टनायक जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ खेलȗ को 
लेकर एक exemplary model तैयार िकया गया।  वषर् 2017 मȂ जब अन्य राज्यȗ ने ' एिशयन 
एथलेिटक्स चȅिपयनिशप' आयोिजत करने मȂ असमथर्ता जताई थी, तब ओिडशा सरकार ने मातर् 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
27

90 िदनȗ मȂ उसे सफलतापूवर्क आयोिजत िकया था।  इसके  पÌचाÞ दो बार पुरुष हॉकी वÊडर् कप 
का आयोजन करके  ओिडशा ने िवÌव खेल मानिचतर् पर अपनी मजबूत उपिÎथित दजर् करायी।  
सर, किंलगा Îटेिडयम, राउरके ला का नया Îटेिडयम और गाँव-गाँव तक पहुँचता खेल 
इन्ģाÎटर्क्चर इस Ģयास का Ģत्यक्ष Ģमाण है। सर, ओिडशा मॉडल यह दशार्ता है िक जब राज्य 
सरकार को खेल नीित और आयोजन मȂ अटॉनमी िमलती है, तो वह न क ेवल नेशनल, बिÊक 
इंटरनेशनल Îतर पर भी एक्सीलȂस िदखा सकती है, इसीिलए यह जरूरी है िक इन िबÊस मȂ राज्य 
सरकार को बराबर की साझेदार क े रूप  मȂ मान्यता दी जाए।   
सर, पुरी क े समुदर् तट पर िÎथत, Ǜी जगन्नाथ Îटेिडयम भी खेल िवकास का महत्वपूणर् 
क Ȃ दर् बन सकता है, जहाँ रणजी टर्ॉफी जैसे िकर्के ट आयोजन करने हेतु क Ȃ दर् सरकार को 
बीसीसीआई से समन्वय करना चािहए।  साथ ही, पुरी की पारंपिरक मÊल युǉ रेसिंलग परंपरा को 
इसी आधुिनक खेल ढांचे क े साथ िवकिसत िकया जाए, क्यȗिक हाल ही मȂ इसका हॉÎटल कटक 
टर्ांसफर कर िदया गया है, िजससे िखलािड़यȗ की Îथानीय पहुंच Ģभािवत हो रही है।   इसी तरह, 
नेशनल एंटी डोिंपग एजȂसी मȂ टेिंÎटग लैÅस क े अंतगर्त राज्यȗ मȂ टेिंÎटग लैब अवेयरनेस डर्ाइËस 
और िरहैिबिलटेशन Ģोगर्ाÇस का िवÎतार जरूरी  है।  
सर, मेरी यह िसफािरश रहेगी िक इन दोनȗ िबÊस को िनयंतर्ण की दृिÍट से नहीं, बिÊक 
सशिƪकरण की दृिÍट से लागू िकया जाए।  खेल का उǈेÌय क ेवल पदक जीतना नहीं, बिÊक एक 
ऐसा समाज बनाना है, जहाँ हर बच्चे को खेलने का अवसर िमले, हर िखलाड़ी को सÇमान िमले 
और हर नागिरक को गवर् का अनुभव हो।  जय जगन्नाथ!  वन्दे उत्कल जननी!                                                    
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Now Shri Praful Patel.  
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL (Maharashtra): Mr. Vice-Chairman Sir, we are discussing the 
National Sports Governance Bill, 2025, and I compliment the Minister for having 
brought this Bill to both the Houses for pa ssage because this is a very longstanding 
legislation which was required. I have been  a part of the sports ecosystem. I have 
been the President of the A ll India Football Federation. I have also represented India 
as the Senior Vice-President  at the Asian Football Confederation and also had the 
privilege of being the first Indian to be on the FIFA Governing Council. As a person 
having been in sports administration at th e national and the international level, I do 
have some first-hand knowledge and I can fully appreciate the sentiments and views 
expressed by the Minister and what the nece ssity of bringing this National Sports 
Governance Bill is.  The hon. Minister rightl y mentioned that in 2013, a genuine effort 
was made and it has been going on much be fore that since 1985, for 40 years. We 
have had a sports code. It has been a very  loose code, it has been a very informal 
code and it never stood any legal scrutiny. That is why there was a need for a 
comprehensive legislation. The hon. Minister has rightly pointed out, in 2013, when 
this was being sought to be passed, I was also a part of the Government and I do 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

recall some of the instances which the hon. Minister did mention. I will not go into the 
further details except to say that what is happening today and what is being 
discussed today, is the need of the hour. Sir, all the sports federations—we must 
admit one thing—have many difficulties, incl uding financial. The biggest sport in our 
country is cricket, undoubtedly, and, for that, the BCCI is a very self-sustained and 
self-sufficient body and one of the reasons is—we cannot also just say that the BCCI 
has got money—BCCI has worked hard to wards it. The BCCI became what it is 
today only when we won the first World Cup in 1983 and then India really got the rise 
in international cricket. Therefore, the BCCI became such a supreme body. The same 
way, until and unless any sport does not do well at the international level, it cannot 
happen. Everybody wants to See the Indian flag and the Indian team winning a world 
title whether it is hockey, whether it is badminton or any other sport. That is the 
defining moment and that is why the Minister  is trying is to See that all the sports 
federations do well and move in a direction which will bring glory to the country at the 
international level. Sir, the biggest advantage of this Bill is …(Time-bell)… Sir, please 
allow me to speak. I am probably the on e person who needs to speak two-three 
minutes and the time is available from this  side. So, I would request you, please do 
not stop me to express my view.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): That was the time given. But anyway, 
carry on. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL : No; I am just telling you very honestly, Sir. This is important. 
Somebody who has some authority on the subject should be allowed to speak. 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Please continue.   
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL : And, Sir, I am speaking with full knowledge of what the hon. 
Minister is trying to achieve through this Bill. The hon. Prime Minister has a vision. We 
are hoping to win the bid for the 2036 Olympi cs, which would itself be a redefining 
moment for Indian sports. We talk of Viksit Bharat . The hon. Minister said that by 
2047, India should be a global sporting power. All this is very laudable and necessary. 
However, for that, we need a framework. Tod ay, every federation - he is right about 
‘350 court cases’ - every single federation, right from the All India Football Federation, 
where I was involved, is mired in a legal case where the Constitution has not been 
finalized for many years. Courts take thei r own time because they have many other 
cases. Here, we are bringing in a tribunal, headed by a High Court Judge, which can 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
29

only be challenged in the Supreme Court. It will be focused, and such matters of 
dispute will be settled there. 
The other important part is that sp ortsmen and sportswomen should get 
representation in the National Sports Federations, which is now being made 
mandatory by this Bill. This is the most im portant aspect. We all talk, and all the PILs 
that get filed talk about other vested inte rests being in sports bodies, but not the 
sportsmen themselves. This Bill gives them  a mandatory opportunity to represent 
sports bodies. Therefore, I feel that this Bill is absolutely in the right direction. 
We need to have this if sports in this country are to achieve glory far beyond 
cricket. Today, we have individual achie vements, but we have very few collective 
achievements. That is why, Vice-Chairman Sir,  this Bill is very important. The other 
Bill about doping is also very important. As a nation, we compete in international 
events, and we have to bring our laws and regulations at par with the rest of the 
world. Therefore, it is imperative that th is Bill be passed with the fullest support of 
everyone present here.   
Sir, I compliment the hon. Prime Minister  for having this vision to have a 
National Sports Governance Bill, and I am also very happy that we have a Minister, 
Mansukh Bhai, who understands and takes pa ins.  It is not just about being a 
Minister, उन्हȗने इस िवधेयक क े संबंध मȂ बहुत लोगȗ से Ëयिƪगत रूप  से बातचीत की, लोगȗ क े 
साथ मंथन िकया, Îपोट्सर्मैन से मंथन िकया और अलग-अलग ÎटेकहोÊडसर् से बातचीत करने क े 
बाद यह comprehensive Bill लाने का काम डा. मनसुख मांडिवया जी ने िकया है। मȅ आपका, 
सरकार का और Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का अि
भनंदन करता हूं और आप सभी से मेरा िनवेदन है िक इस 
आवÌयक िब
ल को हम सब साथ मȂ िमलकर पास कराएं। 
 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, एक किव ने िलखा है:-  
 
"पत्थर सी हो मांसपेिशयां, लोहे से भुजदंड अभय, 
नस-नस मȂ हो लहर आग की,तभी जवानी पाती जय।" 
 
महोदय, इसी मंशा क े साथ हमारे खेल मंतर्ी जी ये दोनȗ िव
धेयक लेकर आए हȅ। ये दोनȗ ही 
पेश िकए गए िवधेयक शानदार हȅ, लेिकन मȅ अपनी बात को राÍटर्ीय खेल शासन िवधेयक तक ही 
सीिमत रखूंगा
। 
महोदय, मȅ इस िवधेयक क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। यह िवधेयक काफी 
सोच-िवचार क े बाद लाया गया है। सभी ÎटेकहोÊडसर् से Ëयापक चचार् की गई है। िवधेयक मȂ खेल 
से संबंिधत िविभन्न पहलुओं पर िवचार कर उन्हȂ शािमल िकया गया है, इसिलए यह अभूतपूवर् है। 
यह अभूतपूवर् इसिलए भी है, क्यȗिक इसके  पहले न क ेवल हमारे देश मȂ, बिÊक दुिनया मȂ भी खेल 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

से संबंिधत कोई कानून मौजूद नहीं था। जहां मोदी सरकार कई क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ चौका और छक्का मार 
रही है, वहीं आज खेल की दुिनया मȂ भी िसक्सर मारने का काम िकया है। 
महोदय, एक जमाना था जब कहा जाता था, "खेलोगे-क ूदोगे होगे खराब, और पढ़ोगे-
िलखोगे तो होगे नवाब", लेिकन अब वह जमाना नहीं रहा। आज खेल एक शिƪ क े रूप  मȂ 
Îथािपत है। जैसा िक हम जानते हȅ, खेल की दुिनया मȂ हमारा Îथान अभी थोड़ा नीचे है, लेिकन 
मोदी सरकार चाहती है िक इस खेल की दुिनया मȂ भी हम और ऊ ं चे Îथान पर पहुंचȂ। इसिलए 
आज पिरवार का नज़िरया बदल गया है, Ëयिƪ का नज़िरया बदल गया है और सरकार का तो 
पूरा ही नज़िरया बदल गया है। जब कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की सरकार थी, उस समय Commonwealth 
Games हुए थे। माननीय सदÎयȗ को पता होगा िक CW Games मȂ िकतना बड़ा Ëयापक घोटाला 
हुआ था। 70 हजार करोड़ रुपय े का घोटाला हुआ था और वह िकसने िकया? सुरेश कलमा ड़ी , जो 
कांगर्ेस पाटीर् क े नेता हुआ करते थे, उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ इतना बड़ा घोटाला हुआ था। खेल शरीर को 
मजबूत करता है और शरीर सभी धमș का पालन करने मȂ हमारी सहायता करता है।  ‘ शरीरमाǏं 
खलु धमर्साधनç’ यानी िक शरीर से ही हम सभी धमș का पालन करते हȅ। धमș, यानी कतर्Ëयȗ का 
पालन करते हȅ। सर, ऐसी ही पिरिÎथित मȂ जो मौजूदा िबल पेश िकया गया है …(Ëयवध
ान)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Please conclude. 
 
डा. भीम िंसह : जी सर।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): आप कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  आपका समय समाÃत हो रहा है।  
 
डा. भीम िंसह : मेरा सम
य समाÃत हो गया है।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): आप कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  आपके  पास 30 सेक Ȃ ड का समय है।  
  
डा. भीम िंसह: ठीक है। सर, एक िवधेयक आया, दूसरा िव
 धेयक आया, मȅने कभी नहीं बोला, 
लेिकन आज बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ, तो समय समाÃत हो गया, धन्यवाद। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): आपकी पाटीर् ने ही इतना समय िदया है। Shri Satnam Singh 
Sandhu;  you have three minutes. 
 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू (नामिनदȃिशत): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे बहुत ही ऐित हािसक मौके  
पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है। सर, हमारा देश भारत िवÌव का youngest nation है और यह िबल 
हमारे देश क े करोड़ȗ नौजवानȗ की भावनाओं से जुड़ा हुआ है। मȅ इसके  िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी क े Ģित आभार Ģकट करना चाहूंगा, िजनके  बारे मȂ यह माना जाता है िक देश को बड़े सपने 
देखने माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िसखाए। जब हम इस िबल क े माध्यम से Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी क े vision को समझने की कोिशश कर रहे थे, जब माननीय मंतर्ी जी इसके  बारे मȂ िवÎतार से 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
31

बता रहे थे, तो तीन बड़े सपने आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने हमारे nation क े िलए हमारे सामने रखे 
हȅ। वषर् 2036 मȂ Olympics की मेजबानी करना एक बड़ा सपना है, जो आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
देश क े सामने रखा है और दूसरा बड़ा सपना यह है िक world क े top five nations मȂ sports मȂ 
भारत को लेकर आना है। तीसर
ा बड़ा सपना और बहुत ही अहम सपना, जो आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी ने हमारे देश को िदया है, वह women-led sports का सपना है। यह पहली बार होगा िक 
sports management मȂ हमारे देश की बेिटयȗ को, हमारे देश की बहनȗ को बराबर का मौका 
िदया जाएगा। मȅ समझता हूं िक आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने देश को िसफर् बड़े सपने देखना नहीं 
िसखाया, बिÊक उनको हकीकत मȂ ĢाÃत क ै से करना है, achi eve क ै से करना है, वह इस िबल क े 
माध्यम से बता िदया है िक बड़े सपने देखकर क ै से achieve करने हȅ और मुझे लगता है िक ये 
तीनȗ बड़े सपने, जो हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने हमȂ िदए हȅ, इस िबल क े माध्यम से वे पूरे 
हȗगे। खासकर मȅ पंजाब की धरती से आया हूं। पंजाब की वह धरती, िज
सने हमेशा ही देश क े 
sports का गौरव बढ़ाने मȂ सबसे बड़ा योगदान िदया है, तो मȅ अपनी ओर से और पूरे पंजािबयȗ क े 
तरफ से इस िबल का समथर्न करता हूं। आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): Ǜी जयंत चौध
री।   
 
कौशल िवकास और उǏमशीलता मंतर्ालय क े राज्य मं तर्ी; तथा िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य  
मंतर्ी ( Ǜी जयंत चौधरी):  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ खेल मंतर्ी, भारत सरकार मȂ मनसुख मांडिवया 
जी को, खास तौर से जो उन्हȗने एक साहसी पहल और Ģयास िकया है और इस सदन मȂ एक 
Ëयापक मसौदा तैयार िकया है, उसके  िलए धन्यव ाद देता हूं। देश की युवा शिƪ की तरफ से भारत 
सरकार को एक आभार भी Ëयƪ करना चाहता हूं। मȅ भी एक मंतर्ी क े नाते उस सरकार मȂ िहÎसा 
हूं। हमने कई बार इस सद न मȂ देखा है िक कानूनी सुधार की दृिÍट से जो पुराने कानून हȅ, उसमȂ 
हम संशोधन लाते हȅ। यह कोई piecemeal change या पिरवतर्न नहीं है, बिÊक यह wholesale 
revolutionary है। एक नई कर्ांित लाने वाले कानून का मसौदा तैयार िकया गया है और जैसा िक 
अभी Ģफु Êल पटेल जी कह रहे थे िक इसमȂ कई तकनीकी पहलू हȅ। कई कारण हȅ, िजनकी वजह 
से यह बात यहाँ तक पहुँची है। एसोिसएशन्स मȂ जो िमस गवनȄस हो रहा था, लीगल लाँग Îटȅिंडग 
इÌयूज़ चल रहे थे और िजस कारण से खेल का िवकास रुक  रहा था, िज
स कारण से युवा भारत 
मȂ, िजसमȂ युवा एक सामथ्यर् है, एक Ģितभा है, एक मेहनत है, वह िवÌव पट ल पर िनखरकर नहीं 
पहुंच पा रही थी, उसमȂ सुधार लाने क े िलए यह कानून लाया गया है।  
महोदय, मȅ मानता हूं िक अभी तक कई एसोिसशन्स मȂ देश का जो अनुभव रहा है िक नेता 
आधािरत ए
सोिसएशन्स, िजन्हȂ आम जनता क ु छ नेताओं की एिÇबशन्स क े इदर्-िगदर् रहने वाले 
संगठन क े रुप मȂ देखने लगी थी, वे अब नेता से हटकर िनयम और नीित आधािरत हȗगी और 
उनका पूरा िनयंतर्ण और नेतृत्व िखलािड़यȗ और पूवर् िखलािड़यȗ क े हाथ मȂ होगा।  
 महोदय, इसके  साथ ही हमारे जो पैरा एथलीट्स हȅ, जो Îपेशल ओलंिपक्स मȂ भाग लेते हȅ, 
हमारी जो वूमेन एथलीट्
स हȅ - जो िक हमारी आधी आबादी है, उनके  सÇमान मȂ कानून का यह 
ĢÎताव लाया गया है।  
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

महोदय, मȅ अपनी तरफ से क ु छ कहना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक मȅ िजस राज्य से इस सदन मȂ 
पहुँचा हूँ, उस उǄर Ģदेश राज्य मȂ मȅने महसूस िकया है िक गाँव-गाँव मȂ बहुत Ģितभा है और इस 
बात की आवÌयकता है िक हम उन्हȂ कम उĦ मȂ पहचानȂ, उन्हȂ वह अवसर दȂ, जो मूलभूत सुिवध
ाएँ 
हȅ, जो ढाँचे हȅ, जो संरचना खेल क े िवकास क े िलए गाँव मȂ, गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ होनी चािहए, िजसकी 
ओर आज तक िकसी ने ध्यान नहीं िदया, वे सभी उन्हȂ उपलÅध कराएं। महोदय, ‘खेलो इंिडया’ क े 
माध्यम से और Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का जो Îव
यं का, Ëयिƪगत लगाव है, उस कारण से ये चीज़Ȃ बदलने 
लगीं। मȅ मानता हूं िक आज कोई भी ऐसा ÎपोिटȊग िडिसÃलीन हो, भारत का एथलीट – जै सा िक 
Ģफु Êल जी कह रहे थे िक जब कोई जीत कर आत
ा है और भारत का झंडा वहाँ फहराया जाता है, 
तो देशवािसयȗ क े रȗगटे खड़े हो जाते हȅ - आज कोई भी एथलीट हो, जब वह जी तता है, तो 
शायद सबसे पहला बधाई देने वाला ट्वीट देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी Îवयं देते हȅ। युवाओं की पीठ 
थपथपाना, युवाओं का सÇमान करना इस िबल का उǈेÌय है।  
 महोदय, मȅ कौशल िवक ास मȂ भी देखता हूं और हमारी भी कोिशश है िक जो एक िÎकल 
काउंिसल है, जो Îपोट्सर् क े िलए डेिडके िटड है, वहाँ हमȂ Îपोट्सर् क े पूरे ईको िसÎटम का िवकास 
करना है और यह कानून उसमȂ मददग ार सािबत होगा।   
महोदय, मेरठ का एक िजला और एक पंजाब राज्य का, अगर आप इन दोनȗ को कÇबाइन 
करȂगे, तो Îपोट्सर् गुड्स इंडÎटर्ी, जो देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ बहुत मजबूती से योगदान देती है, 
जो एक्सपोिटȊग इंडÎटर्ी है, वह लाख ȗ लोगȗ को रोजगार देती है,  लगभग 80 परसȂट उत्पादन 
अके ले मेरठ और पंजाब क े एक शहर मȂ है।  
महोदय, अब भारत सरकार और यूक े ने एफटीए कर िदया है। उस ģी टर्ेड एिगर्मȂट क े 
माध्यम से हमारी Îपोट्सर् गुड्स इंडÎ
टर्ी का भी बहुत Ģबल और तेज गित से िवकास होने जा रहा 
है। महोदय, इन सारी चीज़ȗ का समावेश करते हुए देश क े युवाओं क े सÇमान मȂ, िखलािड़यȗ क े 
सÇमान मȂ, िखलािड़यȗ को समाज मȂ वह ओहदा देने क े िलए, उनकी जीिवका क े िनम ार्ण क े िलए, 
उसके  कौशल क े िवकास क े िलए इस सदन मȂ कानून का यह मसौदा चचार् क े िलए उपिÎथत है 
और मȅ इस ĢÎतािवत िबल को अपना पूणर् समथर्न देता हूं।                                                                                   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Shrimati Sudha Murty.  Yo
u have five 
minutes, Madam.  
 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY (Nominated):  Thank you, Sir, for giving me an 
opportunity to talk about sports, and I am goi ng to talk particularly on anti-doping. 
When Buddha was meditating, he became so thin that he did not care for his body; 
Sujata came and gave him a glass of milk and said, “To achieve something in life, you 
require good health. ” Buddha drank that. Later Siddhartha became Gautama 
Buddha, and today he represents peace everywhere in the world. He is a global 
leader in terms of peace, etc. But the main reason was Sujata, who told him, 
"शरीरमाǏं खलु धमर्साधनç।" ‘Body is the mediator.’ Through our body, we can do 
many better things. So, we have to look after the body to have good health.  
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
33

India is very fortunate. We have a majo rity of youth in our country, and the 
wealth of a youth is good health. So, to have a good health, you require to play 
sports. Playing outside, playing games, is on e of the essential things in life. Even in 
terms of psychology, endorphins get rel eased through it. So ‘sports’ plays an 
important role. I am extremely happy that  the Government of India, under the 
leadership of Mr. Modi and Mansukhji, our Sports Minister, has come up with a Bill, a 
law, a sports law, which is very, very esse ntial. Now we are at par with other global 
institutions like WADA. We have NADA, we  h a v e  o u r  o w n  l a b ,  e t c .   B u t  t h i s  
Amendment will bring us at par, remo ving the erroneous part, making us 
internationally, globally competitive.  
         
4.00 P.M. 
I wish to touch upon just one part here. In  villages, in rural ar eas, there are a lot of 
people, particularly children who are very good at sports with no connection to the 
high-level, international level,  or even national level, ga mes or facilities. Apart from 
that, they may not even know what doping  is, which my subject  today is. They may 
not understand what doping is and what is not. They may consume many food items, 
intentionally or unintentionally, without kn owing, which may result in doping, and 
once the person is found to have taken dope, then, we know the consequences.  
They may be barred from sports for ma ny months or years depending on the 
seriousness of the charge. Many of the athl etes may not even know about it. Hence, 
along with this Bill, we should have aw areness programmes, particularly in rural 
areas, where we have bright children, -- with Khelo India, they are getting a lot of 
facilities to help them come up to the national level --  making them aware of doping, 
which is a bad habit; without knowing this, they may land up somewhere else.  
 Sir, these are a few things which I wa nted to mention. There should be an 
awareness camp to tell children what doping is and what they should not be doing.  
Secondly, it should be taught in regional languages. Thirdly, we should also give them 
mental counseling. Fourthly, we should make all these things mandatory so that there 
is a lot more awareness about doping. Fifthly,  we should give them the best food and 
also tell them which food could fall under do ping so that they do not touch it. These 
are a few things which we could add to this  fantastic Bill, which Seeks to make our 
Bharat internationally at par with any other nation, and make us competent enough to 
take part in the Olympic Games. Hope, on e day, we would host Olympic Games in 
our country, following all the rules. 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 I wish to once again congratulate people involved in this, officers, our Minister 
and our Prime Minister, for bringing the Anti-Doping Bill, Seeking to make us very 
proud international level players. धन्यवाद! 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Shri Kesridevisinh Jhala; you have 
three minutes. 
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला (गुजरात): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िबल पर 
बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ। 
महोदय, जब 2014 मȂ इस देश का नेतृत्व मोदी साहब ने सÇभाला, तब उन्हȗने देश क े 
Äयूचर रोडमैप को तैयार करते हुए, हरेक वगर्, हरेक िवÎतार, हरेक िवषय क े िलए Ãलािंनग की। 
हमारे देश क े अंदर पूवर् की सरकारȗ ने कभी भी खेल की दुिन
या मȂ डेवलपमȂट कर ने का िवचार 
नहीं िकया। पॉिलसी पैरािलिसस से लेकर कोई िवज़न न होने क े कारण, फ ंड्स का एलोके शन 
नहीं हो पाया और इन्ģाÎटर्क्चर डेवलपमȂट नहीं हो पाया - भारत देश मȂ Îपोट्सर् की पिरिÎथित 
इस Ģकार की थी। उससे बाहर िनकालने क े िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी साहब क े नेतृत्व मȂ, 
हमारे माननीय मंतर्ी, डा. मनसुख मांडिवया जी क े िवज़न क े तहत, िजस ‘ िद Îपोट्सर् गवनȄस 
िबल, 2025’ पर आज िडÎकशन हो रहा है, यह एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् िबल है। भारत देश, जो हरेक 
िवÎतार, हरेक वगर्, हरेक िवषय क े अंदर अपना िवकास कर रहा है, उसे आने वाले सम
य मȂ एक 
खेल महासǄा बनाने की तरफ यह िबल ले जा रहा है।  
महोदय, इस िबल क े अंदर Îपोट्सर् रेगुलेटरी बोडर् बनाने का Ģावधान है, जो हमारे नेशनल 
Îपोट्सर् फ ेडरेशन्स को ओवरसी करȂगे, एक Îटर्क्चरल ģ ेमवकर् तैयार करȂगे। काफी समय से 
पॉिलसी क े क ु छ Åलȅक Îपॉट्स थे, उन्हȂ भरने क े िलए लीगल ģ ेमवकर् बनाए हȅ, मȅ उससे संबंिधत 
क ु छ मुǈे रखना चाहता हूँ। इस िबल क े माध्यम से नेशनल ओलंिपक किम
टी बनेगी, पैरालंिपक 
किमटी बनेगी, नेशनल Îपोट्सर् फ ेडरेशन्स का िन मार्ण िकया जाएगा। इन सब क े माध्यम से, देश 
क े Îपोट्सर् का िवषय आगे बढ़ेगा। क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने खेलो भारत नीित क े माध्यम से, 2047 तक 
भारत देश को टॉप फाइव नेशन्स मȂ लाने का रोडमैप रखा है। इसके  मूल िवचार मȂ यह है िक 
अंतरर
ाÍटर्ीय Îतर पर भारत आगे आए। गर्ासरूट लेवÊस पर हमारा टैलȂट Îपॉिंटग हो, वहां से 
चालू करके  मजबूत कोिंचग और टर्ेिंनग िसÎटÇस क े माध्यम से हमारे Îपोट्सर्मैन आगे बढ़Ȃ, 
क ंिपिटिटव लीग्स मȂ भा
ग लȂ और सरकार जो इंģाÎटर्क्चर बना रही है, उसके  माध्यम से देश का 
नाम रोशन करȂ। आने वाले समय मȂ Îपोट्सर् एक इकोनॉिमक गर्ोथ इंजन भी बनने जा रहा है।  
Îपोट्सर् ट ूिरज्म मȂ हम देख रहे हȅ िक हमारे भ ारत देश क े अंदर िपछले 10 साल  क े अंदर मेजर 
इवȂट्स हुए हȅ, जैसे िक Men's Hockey Champions Trop hy, Under-17 Men's Hockey 
World Cup, FIDE Chess Olympiad, MotoGP Bharat, इस Ģकार क े इंटरनेशनल लेवल क े 
Îपोट्सर् हमारे देश क े अंदर आयोिज त हुए हȅ। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please conclude. 
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
35

Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: महोदय, आपने िसफर् तीन िमनट का समय िदया है। 
    
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा): यह समय मȅने नहीं िदया है, आपकी पाटीर् ने िदया है। 
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: महोदय, मȅ ज्यादा नहीं कहूंगा।  इसमȂ मंतर्ालय की तरफ से महत्वपूणर् 
बजट भी िदया गया है। एक समय मȂ 2014 मȂ 1,640 करोड़ का बजट था, आज वह बजट 3,800 
करोड़ क े आसपास हो गया है। खेलो इंिडया क े माध्यम से इस देश क े अंदर बहुत सारा 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर खड़ा िकया जा रहा है।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Pl
ease conclude. 
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: महोदय, हमारे देश क े अंदर, आज घर-घर क े अंदर सब लोग हमारे 
ओलंिपक मेडिलÎट्स क े नाम जानते हȅ, जो भारत का नाम रोशन कर रहे हȅ।  मȅ सबका नाम न 
लेते हुए, क ेवल एक नाम आज लेना चाहूंगा। हमारे जÇमू-कÌमीर िवÎत
ार से एक 18 साल की 
world's first female armless archer शीतल देवी जी को हम सब ने भारत का नाम रोशन करते 
हुए देखा है।  यह भारत की एक िवकास गाथा का एक एग्जांपल है। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): You have to conclude, hon. Member.  
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: महोदय, यह हमारी न
ारी शिƪ का एक एग्जांपल है।  जÇमू-कÌमीर क े 
संबंध मȂ िवपक्ष क े नेता कहते हȅ िक जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ क्या हुआ है। मȅ कह ता  हूं िक आप यह एक 
िमसाल देिखए।  
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please conclude. You have to 
conclude.  We have to move on.  
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: 17 साल की हमारी बेटी भारत का नाम पूरी दुिनया क े अंदर रोशन 
करके  आई है।  इस Ģकार का काम आगे बढ़ता रहे और भारत िवÌव क े अंदर खेल मȂ एक महासǄा 
बने।  इस Ģकार का माह
ौल खड़ा हो रहा है।   
महोदय, मȅ िसफर् इतना कहूंगा िक आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी साहब का िवकिसत भारत 
2047 का जो िवज़न है, उसमȂ सभी िवभागȗ का िवकास होना चािहए। खेल एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय है।  
इस िबल क े माध्यम से भारत खेल की एक महासǄा बनेगा। मȅ इस िबल का समथर्न करते हुए 
अपनी बात को शॉटर् मȂ खत्म करता हूं।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you.  Shrim
ati P.T. Usha. 
 
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRIMATI P.T. USHA (Nominated): Hon. Vi ce-Chairman, Sir, I am grateful to you 
for giving me this opportunity to express my  thoughts in this au gust House about this 
landmark legislation which is close to my heart.  
Sir, today is a day of immense personal  and national significance, with deep 
emotion, pride and a sense of nearing toward s historic justice. We, as a nation and a 
civilisational continuity, have always been invested in sports. As  our Prime Minister, 
Narendra Modi ji, had mentioned in his speech during the 141 st IOC session in 
Mumbai, and I quote, “We Indians are not only sport lovers but we live our lives in 
sports and the evidence of sporting histo ry in archaeological remains, including one 
site where the remains of a 10,000-seater st adium were found, signifies that this was 
not just India's heritage but that of the entire world.”  We, the Bharatiyas, are hence 
the holders of historic and civ ilisational legacy in sports, not just to ourselves, but to 
the world. Our past is evidence of our greater role in sports.   
As an athlete, as a sportsperson, who has worn the Tricolour closer to the 
heart, and now as the President of the In dian Olympic Association and a Member of 
this House, I have long awaited this mo ment, a moment that has remained a dream 
since 1985.  
Let me take you back to 1984. It was Los Angeles Olympics. I was just 20 years 
old when I missed an Olympic bronze meda l in 400-metre hurdles by one hundredth 
of a second. That day my heart broke, not ju st for myself but for an entire generation 
of Indian athletes who had the strength, th e will, the courage bu t not the system, not 
the apparatus to hand-hold us efficien tly through our journey. There was no 
comprehensive sports law to support th e dreams we carried in our hearts, no 
institutional mechanism to protect the athlet e, to promote transparency, or to ensure 
fair play in governance. Since then, four  decades have passed, with nothing much 
changing in terms of addressing the stagnant status quo. For 40 years, many of us in 
the sporting fraternity have hoped, prayed  and worked tirelessly for promulgating a 
legislation that would place the athlete at the very centre of India's sporting 
ecosystem; that is rightful, natural and ju stified. Today, that hope has transformed 
into action and legislation. I congratulate  the hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra 
Modi, the Sports Minister, Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya, and the Government for 
presenting a visionary and long-overdue fram ework in the form of the National Sports 
Governance Bill, 2025. 
This Bill will usher in accountability, tr ansparency, gender parity and a merit-
based approach to how sports federations function in our country. It will empower 
athletes, make governance athlete-centric  and build confidence among sponsors, 
federations, and international partners. This Bill is not beyond governance; it is about 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
37

justice and fair play. It is about ensuring that every young girl from a village in Kerala or 
a boy from the mountains of Himachal, dreami ng of participating in the Olympics, will 
have a system that believes in them, enco uraging and supporting them as much as 
they believe in themselves. This legislation comes at a time when India is dreaming big 
for the Olympics, dreaming for its rightful share in the global sporting fraternity.  Under 
the visionary leadership of the hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, India has set 
its sights on hosting the 2036 Olympic Games. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Now, you have to conclude.  
 
SHRIMATI P.T. USHA: Just one more minute, Sir. I would again quote the hon. Prime 
Minister.  He stated and I quote, "Sport is not the medium of winning medals, but it is 
a medium to win people's hearts. Sport belo ngs to everyone. It is for everyone. Sport 
not only creates champions; it also pr omotes peace, progress and wellness and a 
very strong and empowered medium for connecting the world.” 
For Bharat, this is not just a bid; it is a declaration of her capabilities and a 
clarion call for diplomacy through sports. Our Olympics bid is also an emphatic 
declaration that Bharat is r eady, capable and determined to  take its rightful place on 
the global sporting stage. This Bill is a critical pillar of that grand vision. Without 
robust governance and well-laid-out statutes, the dream of hosting the Olympics and 
emerging as a global sporting powerhouse  would remain incomplete. It is this 
Government's commitment to a Viksit Bharat  - a developed India - that truly reflects 
in this legislation. 
Let us not See this only as a legal fr amework. Let us See this as a moral 
promise - a promise that athletes will no lo nger be let down by  opaque systems or 
internal politics, that talent will be celebra ted and not sidelined, that India will not just 
participate but will compete, win and lead . As someone who once ran barefoot on 
clay tracks and who now stands here in th e Parliament with the responsibility of 
representing both athletes and citizens, I can say with full conviction  that this Bill will 
change the lives.   
Let me also bring out the need for th e most critical segment in sports 
administration and fair conduct, that is, the need for a very strong and resolute 
legislation on anti-doping mechanisms. Th e National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 
2025, has assured NADA's "operational independence" and the creation of a 
National Board for Anti-Dopin g in Sports with powers to  overSee NADA and advise 
the Government on Anti-Doping Rules. 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

We have entered a new era where effect ive curbing of the menace of doping 
can be independently addressed. Let me also  state that it is through such effective 
legislation that we can improve our image and evolve as a sporting superpower by 
bringing in a new culture of clean sports and our commitment to clean athletics can 
be achieved by adhering to stringent regula tions. I would also like to point out that 
stringent measures are now taken to ensu re dope-free athletes and a dope-free 
Bharat so that our dream of hosting the Ol ympics is paved smoothly by cleaning up 
the sports sector by these landmark legislations. In conclusion, I thank hon. Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi; hon. Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, Shri Mansukh 
Mandaviya and the Government of India for lis tening to the voice of athletes, past and 
present. I thank my fellow Members for the overwhelming support this Bill has 
received. And I say to every young athlete, आपका समय आ गया है; your time has 
come.  देश बदल गया है और आपका सपना तेजी से साकार होगा, क्यȗिक मोदी सरकार आपके  
साथ है, हर कदम, हर मोड़ पर और हर क्षण।   
Sir, I would conclude by saying to all the young Indians, waiting to fulfil their 
dreams to become successful in sports and athl etics, that this Bill will illuminate their 
path with clarity and purpose. The nation stands with you, for you, and because of 
you.  Let this be the beginning of India's sporting golden age and खेल कर्ीड़ा अमृत 
काल। जय िहन्द! जय भारत! 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Th
ank you. Now, Dr. Parmar 
Jashvantsinh Salamsinh. 
 
DR. PARMAR JASHVANTSINH SALAMSINH (Gujarat) : Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I 
would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on the National Sports 
Governance Bill, 2025, a landmark step in India's journey towards transparent, 
accountable and athlete-centric sports governance. Sir, under the visionary 
leadership of hon. Prime Minister, Shri Nare ndra Modi, last eleven  years have Seen a 
revolution in India's sports ecosystem from state-of-the-art infrastructure, increased 
budgetary commitment, and talent grooming from the remotest corners, preparing 
India for hosting mega-events like the up coming Under-20 Athletics Championship 
and potentially the 2036 Olympics. 
Sir, why is this Bill necessary? The exis ting National Sports Code of 2011 was 
only a set of guidelines, not a binding law. Many national  sports federations ignored 
its mandates, delaying elections, excludin g sportspersons from decision-making and 
failing to submit audited accounts. This open ed the door to political interference and 
financial opacity. Sir, we must not forget the painful lessons of the past. In 2012, 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
39

under the Congress-led Government, the Indian Olympic Association was suspended 
by the International Olympic Committee for violating the Olympic Charter. Indian 
athletes had to compete under a neutral flag, a moment of deep shame for the nation. 
Scandals like the 2010 Commonwealth Games further tarnished our global reputation.   
Coming to the salient features of the Bill, the Bill creates a National Sports 
Board to overSee governance of all recogniz ed sports bodies, including the BCCI for 
the first time, ensuring uniformity, transp arency and accountability. It empowers the 
Board to suspend or de-recognize anybody that fails to publish audited accounts, 
misuse public funds or neglect timely elections.  
Importantly, Clause 15(2) designates recognized sports organizations as 
public authorities under the RTI Act 2005, enabling citizens to hold them accountable.  
Sir, the Bill mandates every national sports federation to form the Athletes Committee 
so that the sportspersons have a legi timate voice in governance with the 
representation on Executive Committees. Another historic feature is the establishment 
of a National Sports Tribunal for swiftly re solving sports disputes, clearing nearly 350 
pending cases from our courts and building a robust body of sports jurisprudence in 
India. 
In conclusion, the Bill is not just ab out rules and structures, it is about 
protecting our athletes, restoring public trus t and positioning India as a global sports 
powerhouse. While wholeheartedly supporting this timely and far-sighted legislation, I 
congratulate hon. Prime Minister and hon. Sports Minister. In the end, I urge the 
House to pass it with unanimity for the bright future of Indian sports. Thank you.                                 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. Now, Shri Sana Sathish 
Babu.   
 
SHRI SANA SATHISH BABU (Andhra Pradesh): Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I stand here 
to support the National Sports Governance  Bill, 2025 on behalf of the Telugu Desam 
Party and on behalf of our hon. Chief Mi nister, Nara Chandrababu Naidu Garu, under 
whose leadership, we formed the Sports Policy, 2024-29, which is placed in Andhra 
Pradesh. As a sportsman and as the Secret ary of the Andhra Cricket Association, I 
know that real champions are made at grassr oots level. This Bill is a big step towards 
building a complete system – from finding ta lent in rural villages to ensuring fair 
governance and athlete care. Th is landmark Bill is a game-c hanger for Indian sports, 
giving a clear legal framework to run national sports federations with honesty, fairness 
and transparency. For the first time, athlete protection is at the centre with safe sport 
rules, quick grievance systems and fair selection processes. It establishes the 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

National Sports Tribunal, modelled on the world-famous Court of Arbitration for Sport 
to resolve disputes swiftly and fairly. And,  Sir, age limit between 25 years to 70 years 
will give a balance of youth and experience  in the governance which is good for the 
governing councils. Through a national panel of electoral officers, there will be fair 
elections leading to clean governance. Clause  30 of this Bill empowers the Centre to 
adopt international best practices, perfectl y aligning with our State’s roadmap under 
the hon. Chief Minister Nara Chandrabab u Naidu Garu, from hosting the national 
events to improving rural facilities and in tegrating artificial intelligence and data 
analytics in athlete training. Sir, here I would like to make a me ntion of the parent 
body of the Andhra Cricket Association, the BCCI, which is the clear benchmark for 
all the sports bodies. They can follow its mode l to excel, as it is the most successful 
example in sports management. Since 2019,  it has grown in professionalism and 
global respect. With cricket returning to the Olympics in 2028, India has a golden 
chance to shine on the world stage. 
   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please conclude.  
 
SHRI SANA SATHISH BABU : Sir, as India is aiming to host the 2036 Summer 
Olympics, this Bill will prepare our sports governance for the world stage. Under the 
strong leadership of our hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, it will build better 
systems, nurture the champions and make  India proud and bigger in the world 
sports. I congratulate the hon. Sports Mini ster, Dr. Mansukh Mand aviya, for bringing 
this Bill. Thank you.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. Shrimati Dharmshila 
Gupta.   
 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा (िबहार): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् 
िबल पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभार Ëयƪ करती हूँ।  आज जब मȅ 
'राÍटर्ीय खेल शासन िव
धेयक, 2025' पर चचार् क े िलए खड़ी हूँ, तो मुझे गवर् है िक यह िवधेयक 
हमारे देश क े खेल इितहास मȂ एक नए युग की शुरुआत  करने जा रहा है।  मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी क े Ģित आभार Ëयƪ करना चाहत
ी हूँ िक यह िबल आधी आबादी क े सÇमान मȂ लाया गया है।  
मȅ माननीय खेल मंतर्ी आदरणीय मनसुख मांडिवया जी क े Ģित भी आभार Ëयƪ करना चाहती हूँ 
िक उनके  Ģ
यास से यह िबल लाया गया है और उन्हȗने अपने सÇबोधन मȂ कहा है िक ' नेशनल 
Îपोट्सर् कमीशन' मȂ चार मिहला Ģितिनिध भी रहȂगी।  यह क ेवल खेलȗ क े Ģशासिनक सुधार का 
Ģयास नहीं है, बिÊक यह एक ऐसी ËयवÎथा की Îथापना का संकÊप है, िजसमȂ पारदिर्शता, 
जवाबदेही और नैितकता सवȘच्च हो। इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से िखलािड़यȗ क े अिधकारȗ की रक्षा, 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
41

खेल क े िवकास का ÎपÍट रोडमैप और िशकायतȗ क े समयबǉ समाधान की ठोस ËयवÎथा 
सुिनिÌचत होगी।   
महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ बीते वषș मȂ खेलȗ का Îवरूप 
ही बदल गया है। पूवर् की सरकार ने खेल पर कोई ध्यान नहीं िदया था और युवाओं की Ģितभा को 
आगे बढ़ने नहीं िदया था, लेिकन आज खेल क ेवल मनोरंजन का माध्यम नहीं, बिÊक राÍटर्-िनमार्ण 
का एक सशƪ साधन बन चुक े हȅ। "खेलो इंिडया" ने गांव-गांव मȂ खेल की संÎकृ ित को पुनजीर्िवत 
िकया, "Target Olympic Podium Scheme" ने िखलािड़यȗ को िवÌवÎतरीय Ģिशक्षण और 
संसाधन उपलÅध कराए और "Fit India Movement" ने पूरे देश को ÎवाÎथ्य तथा खेल क े महत्व 
क े Ģित जागरूक  िकया। टोक्यो ओलंिपक और पैरा-ओलंिपक मȂ भारत का अब तक का सवर्ǛेÍठ 
Ģदशर्न, एिशयाई खेलȗ और कॉमनवेÊथ मȂ लगातार बढ़ती पदक संख्या इस सरकार की दूरदशीर् 
नीितयȗ और िखलािड़यȗ क े Ģित उसकी Ģितबǉता क े Ģमाण हȅ। यह माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, 
आदरणीय मोदी जी की सोच है। एक मिहला सांसद होने क े नाते मȅ यह भली-भांित समझती हूँ िक 
खेलȗ मȂ मिहलाओं की भागीदारी और सुरिक्षत माहौल िकतना महत्वपूणर् है। यह िवधेयक हर 
िखलाड़ी, चाहे वह पुरुष हो या मिहला, को समान अवसर और िनÍपक्ष ËयवÎथा का भरोसा देता है।  
यह सुिनिÌचत करेगा िक खेलȗ मȂ क ेवल Ģितभा और मेहनत का मूÊयांकन हो न िक िकसी अन्य 
आधार पर भेदभाव हो।   
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, you have to conclude 
now. 
 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा: सर, आज हमारे देश मȂ खेल महज एक Ģितयोिगता नहीं, बिÊक 
सामािजक पिरवतर्न का माध्यम बन रहे हȅ। इस िवधेयक क े जिरए हम खेलȗ मȂ न क ेवल सुशासन 
की नई परंपरा Îथािपत करȂगे, बिÊक एक ऐसी पीढ़ी तैयार करȂगे, जो अनुशासन, ईमानदारी और 
देशभिƪ को जीवन क े हर क्षेतर् मȂ अपनाएगी।  
मȅ पूरे िवÌवास क े साथ कहती हूँ िक " राÍटर्ीय खेल शासन िवधेयक, 2025" भारत को 
खेल महाशिƪ बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक िनणार्यक कदम है और आने वाले वषș मȂ हमारे देश की 
खेल Ģितभाओं को यह िवÌव क े िशखर तक पहुँचाएगा, इसिलए मȅ इस िवधेयक का पूणर् समथर्न 
करती हूँ, धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRI RAVI CHANDRA VADDIRAJU (Telangana): 
&“Hon. Vice-Chairman Sir, I thank 
you for giving me the opportunity to participate in the debate on The National Sports 
Governance Bill, 2025 and The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025. 
Sir, these Bills, introduced by the Minist er of Youth Affairs and Sports, reflect 
the Central Government’s commitment to strengthening sports in India by making it 
more transparent, fair, and aligned with  international standards like the Olympic 
                                                            
& English translation of original speech delivered in Telugu. 
 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Charter. On behalf of the Bh arat Rashtra Samithi Party, I express our full support for 
these important legislations. 
Sir, this Bill aims to develop sports, protect athletes, and ensure good 
governance. Clause 3 creates important bo dies like the National Olympic Committee, 
National Paralympic Committee, National Sp orts Federations, and Regional Sports 
Federations, with proper recognition rules so Indian athletes can compete 
internationally. Clause 4 explains how these bodies should be run - equal 
representation, outstanding sportspe rsons in decision-making, women’s 
representation, term limits, and committees for ethics, disputes, and athletes. This 
will reduce favoritism and bring fairness. Clau se 6 gives it powers to grant or cancel 
recognition, maintain registers, issue ethi cs guidelines, and cr eate a Safe Sports 
P o l i c y .  C l a u s e  1 2  r e q u i r e s  a  C o d e  o f  E thics, and Clause 13 sets up grievance 
systems. Clause 17 forms a National Spor ts Tribunal led by a former Supreme Court 
Judge or High Court Chief Justice to settl e disputes quickly. Clause 16 creates a 
Sports Election Panel for fair elections in  sports bodies. Clause 14 says only 
recognized bodies will get government funds. 
Turning to Telangana, under the visionary leadership of our first Chief Minister, 
Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao,  the State has invested ₹300 to ₹400 crores in sports 
infrastructure over the past decade. We have built 36 stadiums nearing completion 
and indoor facilities across all 33 distri cts. Telangana has produced over 50 
Olympians, including distinguished athletes  like Pullela Gopichand, Sania Mirza, P.V. 
Sindhu, Mohammad Sirajuddin, Ishant Singh, and Nikhat Zareen, a two-time world 
boxing champion. From my own district, Sadula Meghana has earned medals in 25-
meter range shooting at the Junior ASEAN  Championship and Junior World Cup. 
Sreeja Akula is another proud sportsperson from Telangana. 
However, some hockey stadiums still lack modern astro turf, and athletes in 
hockey, football, basketball, and swimming  face shortages of coaching centers and 
basic resources. Despite Telangana’s signifi cant contributions to Indian sports, the 
State received only ₹17.77 crores from the nati onal sports budget of ₹2,161 crores. 
Meanwhile, States like Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh, with fewer athletes, received nearly 
40% of the funds. This disparity must  be addressed to ensure equitable 
development. 
Regarding the National Anti-Doping (Ame ndment) Bill, 2025, I urge that the 
list of banned substances be made available in regional languages such as Telugu, to 
increase awareness and compliance. Telangan a currently depends on labs in other 
states for testing, which causes delays that can hamper athletes’ careers. Grassroots  
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
43

 
athletes often lack adequate nutrition, medi cal care, and training facilities, increasing 
their vulnerability to unsafe practices. 
Therefore, I suggest organizing anti-d oping awareness campaigns in Telugu 
and other local languages, especially targeting rural and semi-urban areas. A WADA-
accredited dope-testing laboratory should be  established in Hyderabad to facilitate 
timely and accessible testing. Furthermore, NADA must be strengthened with more 
resources and trained personnel to m eet growing demands. Provision of 
comprehensive nutrition, medical, and training support for grassroots athletes is 
crucial. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Please conclude. 
 
SHRI RAVI CHANDRA VADDIRAJU : In conclusion, the Nation al Sports Governance 
Bill, 2025 offers a progressive framework th at balances the independence of sports 
bodies with necessary accountability. With some adjustments for fair resource 
distribution, it can benefit all states equita bly. The Bharat Rashtra Samithi Party firmly 
believes that these Bills, introduced by ho n. Minister Shri Mansukh Mandaviya, will 
significantly advance sports development in Telangana and across India. I, therefore, 
express my wholehearted support for the Bills. Thank you, Sir.” 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Now, Message from the Lok Sabha; 
Secretary-General. 
 
 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA– Contd. 
 
The Indian Ports Bill, 2025 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha, at its sitting held on 12th August, 2025, passed the Indian Ports Bill, 2025. 
 I lay a copy of the sa id Bill on the Table. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Now, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita. 
 
 
 
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

     GOVERNMENT BILLS– Contd. 
 
I. The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025; and 
II. The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA (Assam) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I thank you for 
giving me the opportunity to speak a few words on the National  Sports Governance 
Bill, 2025. Other speakers have already spoken  about this Bill. I would only pick up 
and raise a few points for the benefit of the hon. Minister.   
Sir, as we all know, India is a young nation; 65 per cent of our population is 
below 35 years of age. So, sports and yout h welfare is one of the very important 
components of our society and, very righ tly, our hon. Prime Minister has given 
importance to this segment of the societ y. The Modi Government has prioritized 
sports and youth affairs, boosting the ec osystem with comprehensive support. The 
Budget allocation for the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has risen significantly 
from Rs. 1,219 crore in 2013-14 to Rs. 3,794  crore in 2025-26, marking a rise of 211.2 
per cent. A major portion of this, that is, Rs. 2,191 crore has been allocated for 
Central Sector Schemes with flagship sc heme Khelo India programme receiving Rs. 
1,000 crore. With increased investment, stra tegic planning and world-class talent, 
India’s sporting transformation under the dynamic leadership of Shri Narendra Modi is 
no longer a vision, but an unfolding reality. As the country eyes the 2036 Olympics, its 
journey towards becoming top 10 sporting na tion is firmly on track. If India has to 
become a developed country by 2047, we have to develop in all areas of the society 
and in all sectors of the nation. Sports is an important sector because without being in 
top ten or top three in Olympics or any ot her games, you cannot te ll yourself that you 
have developed in sports. So, the Nati onal Sports Governance Bill, 2025 is an 
important step towards that. I would only say a few more words on this.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA ): Hon. Member, you will have to 
conclude.   
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Sir, the visionary policies of the Modi Government 
have undertaken a strategic shift to transform sports from a recreational activity into a 
professionalized sector moving beyond the pa st era of limited institutional support.   
This transformation is spearheaded by th e Khelo India Programme which focuses on 
developing infrastructure and fostering a national sports culture. Further, to counter 
doping, whose root-cause is low level of awareness among athletes and which 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
45

presents a major obstacle to fair competitio n, Khelo Bharat Niti 2025 was introduced 
as an educational policy designed to inform future athletes about doping risks and 
prevent inadvertent doping. 
   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Please conclude.   
    
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: The policy is complemented by legislative effort 
through this 2025 Bill which would provide a robust legal framework to support the 
anti-doping initiatives.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Hon. Member, thank you.  
      
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA:  Sir, there was a case which I want to cite here.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): You will have to wrap up.  You are 
aware that the time is over. 
          
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: It is not the allopathic medicines alone which athletes 
take. They take ayurvedic medicines also because it depends on the coach. In the 
coaching, if the coach gives a proper medicine which does not amount to doping, the 
doping cases would reduce. So, it is very important that in coaching and among the 
coaches, the awareness should be ma de. Then, the awareness would be 
automatically made to the athletes. 
Thank you very much, Sir.                                                               
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. Now, Shrimati Seema 
Dwivedi. 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज आपने राÍटर्ीय खेल Ģशासन 
िवधेयक, 2025 पर मुझे बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपके  Ģित बहुत आभारी हूं। 
महोदय, यह िवधेयक मिहलाओं क े सÇमान का िवधेयक है। मिहलाओं क े िलए खेल क े क्षेतर् मȂ आगे 
बढ़कर बराब
री करने का िवधेयक है और युवाओं क े उत्थान का िवधेयक है।  
महोदय, खेल एक ऐसी चीज़ है, िजसके  माध्यम से हम अपने Ëयिƪगत Ģयास को िदखाने 
का काम करते हȅ। खेल का Ģांगण - चाहे कोई भी खेल हो, वहां पर जब िखलाड़ी खेलता है, जब 
कोई हमारा Ãलेयर खेलता है, तब वह
ां पर उसकी अपनी Ëयिƪगत Ģितभा िदखती है िक फलां 
िखलाड़ी की Ģितभा क्या है? मȅ माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी की बहुत आभारी हूं िक िजन्हȗने खेल का 
बजट दुगन
ा िकया। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी की भी बहुत आभारी हूं िक आपने खेल जगत मȂ क ु छ नया 
करने क े बारे मȂ सोचा। महोदय, आज मȅ यह आपके  साम ने कहना चाहूंगी िक जो हमारा खेल 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

िवधेयक है, यह बहुत सारी खािमयȗ को दूर करने वाला िवधेयक है। आपको याद होगा, जब 
राÍटर्मंडल खेल घोटाला हुआ था, उसके  चेयरमैन सुरेश कलमाड़ी जी थे। आज मेरे सामने क े 
साथी यहां पर नहीं बैठे हȅ, अगर वे होते, तो मȅ इसके  बारे मȂ िव Îतार से चचार् करती। वषर् 2014 क े 
बाद लगातार खेलȗ क े बारे मȂ हमारे Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने सोचा और यह सोच ऊपर से नहीं, बिÊक 
गांवȗ से िखलािड़यȗ को क ै से लेकर आएं, गांव से िखलाड़ी क ै से पैदा िक ए जाएं, उनका क ै से 
उत्थान िकया जाए, वषर् 2014 से लेकर आज वषर् 2025 तक िकसी Ģकार का कोई घोटाला ना होने 
क े बावजूद, आज जब ओलंिपक मȂ हमȂ कोई भी मेडल ĢाÃत होता है, उसमȂ भारत का Îथा न बड़े 
अच्छे शÅदȗ मȂ पाया जाता है। सर, पी.टी. उषा जी यहां पर बैठी हȅ। इनको हम लोग उड़नपरी कहा 
करते थे और पी.टी. उषा जी का राज्यसभा मȂ चयन इस बात को दशार्ता है िक Ģधानमंतर्ी जी की 
खेलȗ क े बारे मȂ िकतनी बड़ी कÊपना है। वे चाहते हȅ िक पी.टी. उषा जैसी हमारी बहुत सी बेिटयां 
खेल क े क्षेतर् मȂ आगे बढ़Ȃ।  
महोदय, मȅ आपसे यह कहना चाहूंगी िक जब आदम ी मैदान मȂ खेलने क े िलए जाता है, तो 
यह सोचता है िक हम िकतना अच्छा Ģदशर्न करके  िदखाएं। लेिकन महोदय, पहले क्या होता था? 
पहले यह होता था िक खेल मȂ जो हमारे िखलाड़ी हो ते थे, उनका चयन उनकी योग्यता क े आधार 
पर नहीं होता था। महोदय, पहले िखलाड़ी का चयन उसकी योग्यता क े आधार पर न होकर, 
उसके  सोसर् क े आधार पर होता था। जब आप सोसर् से िकसी चीज को लाएंगे, तो वह उतना अच्छा 
िरÎपॉन्स नहीं दे पाएगा, िजत
ना उसको देना चािहए। 
महोदय, यह ĢÌन उठ सकता है िक यह खेल िवधेयक क्या है? मȅ इस खेल िवधेयक क े 
बारे मȂ बताना चाहती हूं। यह खेल िवधेयक खेल िनकायȗ मȂ िनÍपक्ष, नैितक और पारदशीर् 
कायार्न्व
यन सुिनिÌचत करता है, यह िखलािड़यȗ क े अिधकारȗ और कÊयाण की रक्षा करता है, 
भारत मȂ खेलȗ का संवधर्न और िवकास करता है, खेलȗ मȂ उत्पन्न िववादȗ और िशकायतȗ क े 
समाधान क े िलए ÎपÍट िनयम िनधार्िरत करता है एवं भारतीय खेल Ģशासन को ओलंिपक और 
पैरा ओलंिपक चाटर्र जैसे वैिÌवक मा
नकȗ क े अनुरूप  बनाता है। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Please conclude. 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: महोदय, अब हम यह भी पूछ सकते हȅ िक इस िवधेयक की आवÌयकता क्य ा  
है? मȅ इस िवधेयक की आवÌयकता बताना चाहती हूं। अत्यिधक अदालती मामलȗ, 350 से अिधक 
अदालती मामलȗ और एनएसएफ चुनाव पर लगातार रोक लगाए जाने क े कारण खेल िनकायȗ क े 
सुचारू  संचालन मȂ समÎया उत्पन्न हो रही है। 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Please conclude. 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: इस समÎया का हल करने क े िलए यह िव
धेयक लाना बहुत जरूरी था।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Please conclude.  
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
47

Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: महोदय, एनएसएफ मȂ पारदिर्शता और जवाबदेही क े मामले, खेल पिरसंघȗ 
और धनरािशयȗ एवं पदȗ क े दुरुपयोग , एथलीटȗ क े उत्पीड़न आिद जैसी समÎयाओं का भी सामना 
करना पड़ता है। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: महोदय, मȅ आिखरी बात कहना चाह
 ती हूं। Ģशासन मȂ मिहलाओं का सीिमत 
Ģितिनिधत्व है, मिहलाओं को िनणर्य लेने का पयार्Ãत अिधकार नहीं िमलता है, जबिक मिहला 
एथलीटȗ की संख्या अब क ु ल एथलीटȗ की लगभग आधी संख्या है। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: महोदय, अगर एक िमनट का समय और िमल जाता, तो मȅ क ु छ और बात 
कहना चाहती हूं।  
 
THE
 VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Please.  You will ha ve to conclude.   
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: मȅ अंत मȂ यही कहना चाहूंगी िक मȅ इस िवधेयक का बहुत समथर्न करती हूं। 
महोदय, मȅ मिहला जगत की तरफ से भी इस िबल का समथर्न करती हूं और भारत देश युवाओं 
का देश है, इस
िलए मȅ युवाओं की तरफ से भी इस िबल का समथर्न करती हूं। महोदय, मȅ इस िबल 
का समथर्न इसिलए भी करना चाहती हूं िक क्यȗिक हमारा यह जो खेल िव धेयक आया है, यह 
तमाम किमयȗ को दूर करने वाला िवधेयक है। 
महोदय, मȅ इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से Ǜǉेय Ģधानमंतर्ी जी क े Ģित आभार Ëयƪ करना 
चाहूंगी और माननीय मंतर्ी जी को धन्
यवाद देना चाहूंगी। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. Now, Shri Dhananjay 
Bhimrao Mahadik; three minutes. 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक (महाराÍटर्):  धन्यवाद उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आपने मुझे  The National 
Sports Governance Bill, 2025 और The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025 
पर बोलने का मौका िदया है। मȅ हमारे िवज़नरी Ģधानमंतर्ी आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का, हमारे 
खेल मंतर्ी मनसुख मांडि
वया जी का और हमारे राज्य से खेल राज्य मंतर्ी रक्षा खाडसे जी का 
अिभनंदन करता हूं िक वे यह िवधेयक लेकर आए हȅ। 
महोदय, 2014 क े बाद से हमारे देश मȂ खेल की िÎथित मȂ बहुत सुधार आया है। हमारे 
Ģधानमंतर्ी जी की लीडरिशप मȂ जो नीितयां बनी हȅ, उनसे िनिÌचत ही हमारे देश मȂ ओलंिपक क े 
मेडÊस तो बढ़े हȅ, लेिकन िखलािड़यȗ क े िलए और Ëयापक काम करने की जरूरत है और इसके  
िलए यह िव
धेयक बहुत जरूरी है। 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

महोदय, हमारे देश मȂ सभी जो Îपोट्सर् एिक्टिवटीज हȅ, वे फ ेडरेशन क े माध्यम से होती हȅ 
और फ ेडरेशन्स की राजनीित की वजह से जो कोटर् मैटसर् चल रहे हȅ, उनकी वजह से हमारे देश 
क े िखलािड़यȗ का बहुत बड़ा नुकसा न हो रहा था। इस समÎया का उपाय करने क े िलए यह िबल 
लाना बहुत जरूरी है। 
महोदय, इस िबल का सबसे महत्वपूणर् अंग यह है िक इसमȂ राÍटर्ीय खेल बोडर् का गठन 
िकया गया है। अब आगे से यह बोडर् तय करेगा िक फ ेडरेशन की जो मान्यता है, वह मान् यता इसी 
बोडर् क े माध्यम से फ ेडरेशन को िमलेगी। फ ेडरेशन का जो चुनाव होगा, उसकी देखरेख करने का 
काम भी यह नेशनल Îपोट्सर् बोडर् करेगा। महोदय, अगर इस मȂ धन का दुरुपयोग  हो रहा है या 
कोई घोटाले हो रहे हȅ, तो उन पर िनयंतर्ण करना, उनका आचरण िनधार्िरत करना और उनकी 
जांच करने क े काम भी नेशनल Îपोट्सर् बोडर् करेगा। महोदय, एक आदशर् आचार संिहता लागू 
करने का का
म भी इस बोडर् क े माध्यम से होगा, िजससे िखलािड़यȗ का जो उत्पीड़न होता है, 
उसमȂ कमी आएगी।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, जो फ ेडरेशन्स बनते थे, उनमȂ बहुत पॉिलिटकल इन्Äलुएंस होता था, 
लेिकन आगे चलकर इसमȂ जो Ģितिनिधत्व होगा, उस फ ेडरेशन की जो कमेटी बनेगी, उसको 
िडसाइड करने का या उसका चुनाव क
राने का काम भी यह बोडर् करेगा। 
महोदय, इसमȂ सबसे महत्वपूणर् बात यह है िक इसमȂ दो िखलाड़ी आवÌयक हȅ और चार 
मिहलाओं का Ģितिनिधत्व भी आवÌयक है। इस िबल की सबसे महत्वपूणर् बा
त यही है।  
महोदय, इससे पहले, वह िखलाड़ी, िजसने हाथ मȂ कभी बैट नहीं पकड़ा था, वह िकर्के ट 
बोडर् का चेयरमैन होता था, जो कभी गर्ाउंड मȂ नह ीं  गया, वह कबƿी का चेयरमैन होता था, जो 
कभी पानी मȂ नहीं उतरा, वह िÎविंमग का चेयरमैन बन जाता था। इसमȂ आगे चलकर जो भी चयन 
होगा, उसमȂ िखलािड़यȗ का समथर्न रहेगा, मिहलाएं भी शािमल रहȂगी। इसके  साथ ही, कायर्काल 
और आयु की सीमा भी तय की जा
एगी। यह अतीत से एक बड़ा बदलाव है। सर, िखलािड़यȗ, 
िवशेषकर मिहलाओं की िनणर्य Ģिकर्या मȂ अकसर महत्वपूणर् भूिमका होती है, उसमȂ इसकी मदद 
िमलेगी। जो मैटसर् कोटर् मȂ Ģलंिबत हȅ, आगे चलकर उनके  िलए भी कोटर् मȂ जाने की जरूरत नहीं 
है। अदालत क े सामने जो भी मैटसर् Ģलंिबत हȅ, वे अब बोडर् क े पास जाएंगे और उनका िनणर्य भी 
यह बोडर् लेगा।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Pl
ease conclude. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी धन
ंजय भीमराव महािदक: यह िवधेयक राÍटर्ीय खेल न्यायािधकरण की Îथापना करता है, 
िजसके  अध्यक्ष सवȘच्च न्यायालय क े सेवािनवृǄ न्यायाधीश हȗगे। इस वजह से इसमȂ बहुत 
पारदिर्शता आएगी और लिÇबत मामलȗ मȂ त्विरत फ ैसले होने मȂ मदद होगी। यह चुनाव मȂ 
पारदिर्शता भी लाएगा और इससे िखलािड़यȗ क े परफॉरमȂस पर भी असर होगा।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you. 
  
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
49

Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक: Îपोट्सर् क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत की वैिÌवक िÎथित को मजबूत करने क े 
िलए यह िबल बहुत महत्वपूणर् है।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Let us start concluding.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक: सर, मȅ आधा िमनट और लूँगा।  
भारत 2036 ओलंिपक की बोली लगाने और अन्य बड़े आयोज
 नȗ की मेजबानी की तैयारी 
कर रहा है। यह िवधेयक हमारे खेल शासन को वैिÌवक मानकȗ और ओलंिपक चाटर्र क े अनुरूप  
लाता है। सर, मेरा समय समाÃत हो रहा है। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से एक िरक्वेÎट करना चाहूँगा। 
हमारे यहाँ पर खेलो इंिड
या की योजना बनी थी, िजससे हजारȗ-लाखȗ बच्चे खेल क्षेतर् मȂ आए हȅ। 
सामान्य पिरवारȗ से बच्चे आते हȅ, िजनकी आिर्थक िÎथित अच्छी नहीं होती है।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Pl
ease conclude. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक: लेिकन क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े खेलो इंिडया कायर्कर्म की वजह से उनकी 
आिर्थक िÎथित अच्छी बनती है, िजसकी वजह से बच्चे और आकिर्षत होते हȅ। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी 
से आगर्ह करू ँगा िक इसे और कायम िकया जा
 ए।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you.  
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक: इसके  साथ ही, जो खेलो भारत नीित ला रहे हȅ, उससे भी इस क्षेतर् 
मȂ बहुत बड़ा पिरवतर्न और बदलाव आएगा। मȅ इन दोनȗ िबलȗ का पूरी तरह से समथर्न करता हूँ, 
धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):
 Now Shrimati Maya Naroliya. 
  
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया (मध्य Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे इस 
महत्वपूणर् िबल पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया।  
राÍटर्ीय खेल शासन िवधेयक, 2025 एवं राÍटर्ीय डोिंपग रोधी (संशोधन) िवधेयक, 2025 - 
ये िबल खेल ढाँचे को पारदशीर्, जवाबदेह और िखलाड़ी क Ȃिदर्त बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक कर्ांितक ारी 
कदम हȅ। मȅ इन िबलȗ का समथर्न करती हूँ।  
इन समावेशी िवधेयकȗ क े माध्यम से, Ģत्येक नेशनल Îपोट्सर् फ ेडरेशन, िजनमȂ 
बीसीसीआई भी शािमल है, की 15 सदÎयीय कायर्कारी सिमित मȂ कम-से-कम दो िविश Íट 
िखलाड़ी और चार मिहलाएँ अिनवायर् हȗगी। इसके  िलए हम Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का बहुत-
बहुत अिभनन्दन करते हȅ, बहुत-बहुत सराहना करते हȅ। 
 
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

“कोई चलता पद िचƚȗ पर, कोई पद िचƚ बनाता है, 
है वही सूरमा इस जग मȂ, दुिनया मȂ पूजा जाता है।” 
 
महोदय, मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜीमान नरेन्दर् मोदी और क Ȃदर्ीय खेल मंतर्ी, सÇमाननीय मनसुख 
मांडिवया जी क े दूरदशीर् नेतृत्व की स राहना करती हूँ, िजन्हȗने िहतधारकȗ और वैिÌवक मानकȗ 
क े साथ िवचार-िवमशर् कर, इस िखलाड़ी क Ȃिदर्त िवधेयक को तैयार िकया। यह क ेवल एक कानून 
ही नहीं है, बिÊक Ģत्येक युवा िखलाड़ी क े िलए एक वादा है, जो खेलो इंिडया जैसे कायर्कर्मȗ से 
Ģेिरत होकर भारत को गौरवािन्व
त करेगा। यह िवधेयक हमारी Ģमुख योजनाओं, जैसे खेलो 
इंिडया, जो जमीनी Îतर पर Ģितभाओं को पोिषत करता है, िफट इंिडया मूवमȂट, जो राÍटर्Ëयापी 
िफटनेस को Ģोत्सािहत करता है और टारगेट ओलंिपक पोिडयम Îकीम (टॉÃस), जो वैिÌ
वक मंच 
पर िखलािड़यȗ को तैयार करती है, क े साथ तालमेल िबठाता है। यह 2028 ओलंिपक मȂ िकर्के ट की 
वापसी क े िलए भी महत्वपूणर् है, िजसमȂ बीसीसीआई को जवाबदेही क े दायरे मȂ लाया गया है।  
महोदय, मȅ इस िव
धेयक की Ģमुख िवशेषताओं क े क ु छ संिक्षÃत पहलू यहाँ पर ĢÎतुत 
करू ँगी। यह िवधेयक महत्वपूणर् संÎथानȗ की Îथापना करता है। राÍटर्ीय खेल बोडर्, जो फ ेडरेशन्स 
को पारदिर्श
ता क े साथ िनयंितर्त करेगा; नेशनल Îपोट्सर् िटर्Åयूनल (एनएसटी), जो एक ĢितिÍठत 
न्यायाधीश क े नेतृत्व मȂ 350 से अिधक लिÇबत अदालती मामलȗ को शीघर् हल करेगा और राÍटर्ीय 
खेल िनवार्चन पैनल, जो िनÍपक्ष और समयबǉ चुनाव सुिनिÌ चत करेगा, िजससे पुराने नेतृत्व का 
एकािधकार समाÃत होगा। 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर) पीठासीन हुए।] 
 
मȅ इस िबल क े माध्यम से हमारे देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मो दी  जी का बहुत-बहुत 
अिभनंदन करती हूं और हमारे खेल मंतर्ी जी मनसुख मांडिवया जी का भी बहुत-बहुत अिभनंदन 
करती हूं, जो इस महत्वपूणर् िबल को इस सदन मȂ लाए हȅ, जो बहुत समय से लंिबत था।  यह िबल 
लोक सभा मȂ पािरत होकर अब यहां राज्य सभा मȂ भी पािरत हो रहा है।  
मȅ पुन: उनका बहुत-बहुत अिभनंदन करती हूं और इस सदन से इस िवधेयक को पािरत 
करने की अपी ल  करती हूं, तािक हम भारत को खेल महाशिƪ बनाने की िदशा मȂ एकजुट हो 
सकȂ, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya 
to reply to the discussion. 
 
Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ी; तथा युवक कायर्कर्म और खेल मंतर्ी ( डा. मनसुख मांडिवया):  वाइस-
चेयरमैन सर, नेशनल Îपोट्सर् गवनȄस िबल, 2025 और नेशनल एंटी-डोिंपग ( अमȂडमȂट) िबल, 
2025 की चचार् मȂ क ु ल 18 मȂबसर् ने भाग िलया। उन्हȗने महत्वपूणर् सुझाव भी िदए और अपना िवषय 
भी रखा। इस
से पहले, जब हम िबल बना रहे थे, उस वƪ हमने देश क े सभी Îपोट्सर् फ ेडरेशन्स क े 
साथ क ंसÊटेशन िकया, एथलीट्स क े साथ क ंसÊटेशन िकया, कोच क े साथ क ंसÊटेशन िकया 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
51

और सभी राज्यȗ क े साथ बातचीत भी की। एक िंचतन िशिवर मȂ सभी राज्यȗ क े Îपोट्सर् िमिनÎटर 
और Îपोट्सर् सेकर् ेटरीज़ थे, उनके  साथ भी िडटेÊड िडÎकशन हुआ।   
इसके  अलावा, Îपोट्सर् एक अंतरराÍटर्ीय सेक्टर भी है और इंटरनेशनल ओलंिपक 
काउंिसल उसका एक चाटर्र है। उसको एलाइन होना बहुत आवÌयक है। इसिलए इस िबल क े 
िलए हमने इंटरनेशनल ओलंिपक काउंिसल से भी बात की। हमने भारत की ओलंिपक 
एसोिसएशन से भी बात की। हमने फीफा फ ेडरेशन से भी बात की और एक कॉिÇĢहेिन्सव और 
वÊडर् मȂ दो-तीन बेÎट क ंटर्ीज़ का जो लॉ है, इस टाइप का िबल तैयार करने क े िलए एक्सरसाइज 
की थी। उसके  अलावा हमने िबल को पिÅलक क ंसÊटेशन मȂ रखा। उसमȂ 600 से  अिधक सुझाव 
आए। उनमȂ जो महत्वपूणर् सुझाव थे, उनकी हमारे िबल को दुरुÎत कर
ने मȂ महत्वपूणर् भूिमका रही।  
क ु ल िमलाकर  यह Îपोट्सर् िबल एक रोबÎट िबल क े रूप  मȂ आया है। यहां सभी सÇमाननीय 
सदÎयȗ ने इस िबल की सराहना भी की है और इस िबल क े समथर्न मȂ अपनी बात भी रखी है। 
 इस िबल से लǈाख से लेकर तिमलना
डु तक, गुजरात से लेकर कोिहमा तक Îपोट्सर् को 
गर्ाउंड से ग्लोरी तक ले जाने का हमारा सपना अव Ìय साकार होगा। हमारे अयोध्या रामी रेƿी जी 
ने यहां अच्छी तरह से अपनी बात रखी िक हमारे देश मȂ बहुत डायविर्सटी है। यहां हमारे टर्ाइबल 
बच्चे हȅ, िजनमȂ क्षमता है। आचर्री उनकी नॉलेज है। आचर्री उनका टैलȂट है। हमारे देश क े ऐसे 
टर्ाइबल युवाओं को भी अपॉ
चुर्िनटी िमले।  हमारे देश मȂ 7 हज़ार से अिधक िकलोमीटर की कोÎटल 
लाइन है। िÎविंमग हमारे कोÎटल लाइन क े यूथ मȂ टैलȂट क े रूप  मȂ है और यह उसका नेचर है।  
उसको भी अपॉ
चुर्िनटी िमले।  हमारे देश की मिहला हमारी बराबरी की संख्या मȂ है और उनमȂ भी 
टैलȂट है। उनको भी आगे बढ़ने का अवसर िमले। अगर आज हमारे िवपक्ष क े सािथयȗ ने भी इस 
िबल की चचार् मȂ पािर्टिसपेट िकया होता, तो अच्छा होता। जो लोग मिहलाओं की बात करते हȅ, जो 
लोग टर्ाइबल लोगȗ की बात करते हȅ, जो लोग मछु आरȗ की बात करते हȅ, वे क ेवल बात करते हȅ, 
लेिकन इस िबल से िजसका िहत को, िजसको राइट्स िमलȂ, िजसके  टैलȂट को अपॉचुर्िनटी िमले, 
इसके  िलए इस िबल पर जब िडबेट हो रही है, तो वे इस वƪ उपिÎथत नहीं हȅ। यह दुभार्ग्य की 
बात है। उन्हȗने इसमȂ भाग लेकर अप ना सुझाव िदया होता, तो हमȂ अच्छा लगता। हमारे शुभाशीष 
खुंिटया जी ने अपनी बात को रखते हुए कहा िक उसमȂ पावर सȂटर्लाइज होगी और सरकार क े 
पास होगी। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूं िक इस िबल से हम ज्यादा पारदिर्शता 
ला रहे हȅ। इस िबल मȂ सरकार को
ई पावर क ै च-अप करना नहीं चाहती है। सरकार िकसी 
फ ेडरेशन मȂ हÎतक्षेप नहीं करना चाहती है। सरकार िकसी िसÎटम को क ंटर्ोल नहीं करना चाहती 
है।  सभी मȂ पारदिर्शता सुिनिÌचत हो और यह पारदिर्शता सुिनिÌच
त करने क े िलए हम उसके  
सहयोगी होने की कोिशश करȂगे। उसके  िलए हम Îटर्क्चर  दȂगे और उसके  िलए हम ËयवÎथा दȂगे, 
तािक एक टर्ांसपेरȂट तरीके  से हमारे एथलीट्स को अपॉचुर्िनटी िमले। हमारी पी.टी. उषा जी यहां 
उपिÎथत हȅ। जब उन्हȗने अपनी बात कही, तब उन्
हȗने कहा िक जब मȅ Olympics मȂ खेली थी, 
उसके  बाद मुझे लग रहा था िक हमारा सपना साकार नहीं हो रहा है। अप नी  ऐसी िकसी मिहला 
का ÎवÃन ड ू बे नहीं, उसका ÎवÃन साकार हो; िजन्हȗने ÎवÃन सोचा हो; इस िबल से हमारे देश क े 
ऐसे सभी youths क े ÎवÃनȗ को साकार करने की opportunity अवÌय िमलेगी। 
 माननीय वाइस-चेयरमैन सर, इस देश मȂ sports कोई नई बात नहीं है। सिदयȗ से इस 
देश मȂ sports Ģचिलत है। Sports हमारी जी
वन शैली है। मȅ तो कहूंगा िक हमारे यहां ऋग्वेद मȂ 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

archery और क ुÌती की बात कही गई है, यजुवȃद मȂ physical training की बात कही गई है; 
अथवर्वेद मȂ healthy शरीर को समाज का backbone माना  गया है। मȅ गुजरात से आता हूं, 
गुजरात मȂ धोलावीरा है। धोलावीरा आज से 5 हजार साल पह ल े Indus Valley Civilization का 
नगर है। आज वहां ऐसा ही अवशेष िमला है। इस नगर मȂ 10 हजार लोग एक साथ, इकƻा बैठ कर 
खेल को देख सकȂ, ऐसी ËयवÎथा थी। यह बताता है िक हमारा root sports क े साथ जुड़ा हुआ है।  
हमारे पास क्षमता है। सव ाल इतना ही है िक उसको एक ecosystem िदया जाए, उसको अवसर 
िदया जाए।  मोदी जी ने यही काम िकया है। इसिलए 'Khelo India' क े ǎारा, 'Fit India' क े ǎारा 
हमारे देश मȂ sports का ecosystem create करने की कोिशश की गई है। उसका पिरणाम आज 
हमारे सामने है। ये हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी हȅ, िजन्हȗने क ेवल कहा ही नहीं है, बिÊक करके  िदखाया 
है। एक दश
क पहले देश मȂ क ेवल 1,200 करोड़ का sports का बजट था। आज मुझे बताते हुए 
खुशी हो रही है िक लगभग 4,000 करोड़ क े नजदीक बजट खचर् करके  हम अपने देश क े युवा 
athletes को Ģोत्सािहत कर रहे हȅ। Sports Devel
opment Fund क े िलए पहले क ेवल 28 करोड़ 
रुपए  का खचर् िकया जाता था, जबिक आज sports development क े िलए 187 करोड़ रुपए  का 
खचर् िकया जाता है। हम ारे देश क े athletes, िजनमȂ talent है, जो competition मȂ जीते हȅ, वे 
international competition मȂ participate करȂ, ऐसे elite athletes की सूची तैयार करके  उनको 
Target Olympic Podium Scheme मȂ शािमल िकया जा रहा है, तािक उनको हर तरह का 
exposure िमले। उनके  िलए यह सुिनिÌचत िकया जाता है िक इसके  िलए संसाधन की कोई कम ी 
न हो।  हमारे देश क े टर्ाइबल क्षेतर् से िनकलने वाले युवा हȗ, athletes हȗ, िजनके  पास क्षमता है, 
लेिकन आिर्थक संसाधन नहीं है, उनके  िलए मोदी जी ने कहा है िक आपको रुकना  नहीं है, 
आपको आगे बढ़ना है। इसके  िलए देश क े 4 हज
ार से अिधक athletes को आिर्थक संसाधन 
उपलÅध कराके  उनको Centre of Excellence मȂ, Institute of National Importance मȂ और 
Institute of State Importance मȂ रख कर इसकी ËयवÎथा की जा रही है। पहले cash award क े 
िलए हमारे देश क े athletes भटकत े रहते थे। वे award क े िलए application करते थे। कोई 
Asean Games खेल कर आ रहा है, हम सब लोगȗ ने देखा िक वे Asean Games जीते हȅ, 
Olympics Games जीते हȅ, उनको क ैसी application देनी है! ऐसे िखलािड़यȗ को यहां सरकारी 
कचहरी मȂ धक्का खाना पड़ता था। आज वे यहां land होते हȅ और तुरंत ही भारत सरकार क े मंतर्ी 
उनको सÇमान पतर् देते हȅ, उनको cash award देते हȅ। इसके  िलए कोई फॉमर् वगैरह भरने की 
आवÌयकता नहीं है। इतना ही नहीं, मोदी जी ने कहा िक मेरे at hletes, मȅ देश का Ģधान मंतर्ी तो 
हूं ही, लेिकन मȅ अपने athletes का िमतर् हूं। इसिलए हमारा कोई athlete Paralympics Games 
खेल कर आया या Special Olympics Games खेल कर आया या Olympics Games खेल कर 
आया, तो Ģधान मंतर्ी जी Îवयं उसके  साथ बातचीत करते हȅ, उसके  साथ िम लते हȅ, एक घंटे-डेढ़ 
घंटे उसके  साथ िबताते हȅ। यह देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की commitment है। 
 दोÎतो, Khelo India ASMITA League को Ģारंभ िकया गया है, तािक देश की मिहला 
sports मȂ आगे आए। Khelo India ASMITA League
 क े ǎारा specially मिहलाओं क े िलए 
National Level, State Level, District Level, Block Level का competition हो रहा है। आज 
तक 1,31,000 मिहलाएं इस competition मȂ participate कर चुकी हȅ। उनमȂ से िनकला हुआ 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
53

talent, हमारी मिहलाएं आज National और International sports मȂ खेल रही हȅ। यह हमारे िलए 
गौरव का िवषय है।  
 माननीय वाइस-चेयरमैन सर, मȅ बताना चाहूंगा िक Olympics मȂ देश की आजादी क े बाद 
एक दशक पहले तक, यानी 2014 तक हमȂ क ेवल 21 Olympics medals िमले थे, जबिक last दो 
Olympics मȂ भारत को 15 medals िम
ले हȅ। 
   
5.00 P.M. 
 
Paralympics मȂ हमȂ 8 मेडÊस िमले थे, last 2 Paralympics मȂ हमȂ 52 medals िमले हȅ। हम आगे 
बढ़ रहे हȅ। Asian Games मȂ हमȂ 57 medals िमलते थे और last 2023 Asian Games मȂ 107 
medals हािसल करके  हमारे युवाओं ने performance  िदखाया है। Pa
 ra World Championship 
मȂ हमारा performance  अच्छा रहा है।  हर सेक्टर मȂ हम आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ। Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर बदल 
रहा है, Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर आगे बढ़ रहा है और उसके  साथ reforms भी आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ। यहां अच्छी 
बात यह हुई है िक हमारे एथलीट्स का सेलेक्शन पारदशीर् होना चा िहए, इसके  िलए हमने 
सुिनिÌचत िकया है िक िकसी भी competition क े िलए, international competition मȂ 
participation करने जाने क े िलए, कोई भी competition देश मȂ आयोिजत की जा रही हो, तो वह 
competition on camera हो, with observer हो और open games हȗ। Open competition, 
with camera, with observer –
 यह trend चालू िकया है, यह system बनाया है।  
वाइस चेयरमैन सर, देश मȂ आज तक एथलीट्स की कोई repository नहीं थी। National 
Sports Repository System मȂ आज देश मȂ, हमारे देश क े 4 लाख, 25 हजार एथलीट्स का 
रिजÎटर्ेशन हुआ है। यह बहुत इंपॉटȄट चीज है, क्यȗिक यिद कोई एथलीट है और उसका इितहास 
चािहए िक उसने क्या खेला है, िकतना खेला है, उसे कौन सा medal िमल
ा है, इसके  बारे मȂ कोई 
information national level पर नहीं था। आज का हरेक एथलीट, जहां वह खेलता है, वहां 
National Sports Reposi
tory System मȂ उसका रिजÎटर्ेशन होगा और उसके  आधार पर उसका 
सारा इितहास, उसकी सारी information एक platform पर रहेगी। हमारे देश मȂ सभी पारदिर्शता 
क े साथ खेलȂ, उसके  िलए सारी ËयवÎथा को सुिनिÌचत करने का काम िकया है।   
सर, हमने 'खेलो भारत' नीित क े तह त देश मȂ एक vision िदया और इस vision क े आधार 
पर हम आपके  सामने National Sports Governance Bill लाए हȅ, िजसमȂ मिहलाओं को 
opportunity िमले और िजसमȂ हमने leadership role भी define िकया है। हमने 70 साल की age 
सुिनिÌचत की है। लेिकन international federation मȂ हमारे देश क े sports leader को 
opportunity
 िमले, इसके  िलए international federation मȂ उसको काम करना है और यिद वह 
वहां पर िकसी position पर है, तो उसके  िलए 70 साल  की आयु limited नहीं होगी, तािक वह 
वहां long-time तक survive करे और भारत का Ģितिनिधत्व करे। वैसे ही िकसी भी fe deration मȂ 
कोई भी Ëयिƪ 3 terms तक रहेगा। उसमȂ खासकर federation क े President, Treasurer और  
Vice-President क े िलए 3 terms सुिनिÌचत की हȅ। उसके  बाद उसको cooling करना आवÌयक 
हो जाता है। हम सारे federations को RTI क े regime मȂ भी लाये हȅ, तािक यिद कोई भी एथलीट 
संबंधी information चािहए, तो वह उसमȂ िमल सके । 
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

वाइस चेयरमैन सर, उसके  साथ हम National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill भी  
लाए हȅ। यहां जो पारदिर्शता की बात की गई, तो इसे ज्यादा पारदशीर् करने क े िलए और ज्यादा 
ÎवायǄता देने क े िलए, हम इसे लाए हȅ। हम UNESCO  Convention क े signatory हȅ। इसिलए 
International Convention क े साथ align करना, W ADA  code क े साथ, हमारे देश क े NADA, 
National Anti-Doping Act को align करना आवÌयक होता है। समय-समय पर, बदलते समय 
मȂ, बदलती पिरिÎथित मȂ, जो World Anti-Doping code है, उसमȂ बदलाव होता है और उस 
बदलाव क े आधार पर देश मȂ भी बदलाव करने की आवÌयकता होती है। वह बदला व  करने क े 
िलए और िवशेष ÎवायǄता देने क े िलए, हम National Anti-Doping Bill मȂ amendment लेकर 
आए हȅ। 
सर, सारे माननीय सदÎयȗ ने बहुत उत्साहपूवर्क इसमȂ भाग िलया। मȅ उन सभी का 
अिभनंदन करता हूं। साथ ही, िजन्हȗने सुझाव िदये हȅ, मȅ उनका भी अिभनंदन करता हूं और 
िजन्हȗने इस िबल पर अपने-अपने inputs बाहर िदये हȅ, मȅ उनका भी अिभनंदन करता हूं। इस 
िबल क े पाि
रत होने से देश क े Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर मȂ एक नए युग की शुरुआत  होगी। मȅ सभी 
सÇमाननीय सदÎयȗ से िरक्वेÎट करूं गा िक सवर्सÇम
ित से दोनȗ िबÊस को पािरत करȂ और देश क े 
Îपोट्सर् सेक्टर को आगे बढ़ाएं।                                                
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर): धन्यवाद, मंतर्ी जी।  Now, the question is: 
 
   “That the Bill to pr ovide for the development and promotion of sports, welfare 
measures for sportspersons, ethical practi ces based on basic  universal principles 
of good governance, ethics and fair play  of the Olympic and sports movement, the 
Olympic Charter, the Paralympic Charte r, international best practices and 
established legal standards and to provide for the resolution of sports grievances 
and sports disputes in a unified, equitable and effective manner and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into 
consideration. ” 
The motion was adopted.  
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : We shall now take up 
Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill.  In Clause 2, there is one Amendment 
(No. 8) by Shri Tiruchi Siva; not present. Amendment not moved.  
 
Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : In Clause 4, there are 
four Amendments; Amendment (No.1) by  Shri A.A. Rahim, not present; 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
55

Amendments (Nos. 9 and 10)  by Sh ri Tiruchi Siva, not present; and 
Amendment(No. 13) by Dr. Fauzia Khan, not present.  Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : In Clause 5, there are 
four Amendments; Amendment(No. 2) by  Shri A.A. Rahim, not present; 
Amendment(No. 11) by Shri Tiruchi Siva, not present; and Amendments(Nos. 16 and 
17) by Sandosh Kumar P, not present. Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 5 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 6 to 10 were added to the Bill. 
  
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): In Clause 11, there is one 
Amendment (No. 3) by Shri A.A. Rahim; not present. Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 11 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 12 was added to the Bill.  
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): In Clause 13, there is one 
Amendment (No. 4) by Shri A.A. Rahim; not present. Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 13 was added to the Bill.  
Clauses 14 and 15 were added to the Bill.  
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : Now, there are two 
Amendments for insertion of a New Clause  15A. Amendment(No.14) by Dr. Fauzia 
Khan, not present and Amendment(No.18) by  Shri Sandosh Kumar P and Shri P.P. 
Suneer, who are also not present.  Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 16 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : In Clause 17, there are 
two Amendments; Amendment( No. 12) by Shri Tiruchi Siva, not present and 
Amendment(No. 19) by Shri Sandosh Ku mar P, who is also not present. 
Amendments not moved. 
 
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Clause 17 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 18 to 26 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): Now there is one 
Amendment for insertion of a new Clause 26A (No. 15) by Dr . Fauzia Khan; not 
present. Amendment not moved. 
 
Clauses 27 to 29 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR):  In Clause 30, there is 
one Amendment (No. 5) by Shri A.A. Rahim, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 30 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 31 to 33 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): In Clause 34, there is 
one Amendment (No. 6) by Shri A.A. Rahim, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 34 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SING H NAGAR): In Clause 35, there is 
one Amendment (No. 7) by Shri A.A. Rahim, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 35 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 36 to 38 were added to the Bill. 
The Preamble, Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): Now, Dr. Mansukh 
Mandaviya to move that the Bill be passed.  
 
DR. MANSUKH MANDAVIYA:  Sir, I move: 
 
“That the Bill be passed.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
57

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SING H NAGAR):  We shall now take up 
the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025.  
 
   The question is: 
 
      “That the Bill to amend th e National Anti-Doping Act, 2022, as passed by Lok 
Sabha, be taken into consideration. ” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SI NGH NAGAR): We shall now take up 
Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill. 
 
Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR):  In Clause 3, there is one 
Amendment (No. 4) by Shri A.A. Rahim, not present.  Amendment is not moved. 
 
Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR):  In Clause 5, there is one 
Amendment (No. 1) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present.  Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 5 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 6 to 8 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR):  In Clause 9, there is one 
Amendment (No. 2) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present. Amendment not moved. 
 
Clause 9 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 10 to 15 were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): In Clause 16, there is one 
Amendment (No.3) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present. Amendment not moved.  
 
Clause 16 was added to the Bill. 
58
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Clauses 17 to 22 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : Hon. Minister to move 
that the Bill be passed. 
 
DR. MANSUKH MANDAVIYA: Sir, I move: 
 
                        “That the Bill be passed.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): Now, we will take up the 
Income Tax Bill, 2025 and the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill 2025. Shrimati 
Nirmala Sitharaman to move the motions for consideration of the Bills. 
 
III.  αThe Income-tax Bill, 2025; and 
IV.  αThe Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE ; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE  
AFFAIRS (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, I move: 
“That the Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to income-tax, as 
passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
 Sir, I also move:  
 
 “ That the Bill further to amend the In come-tax Act, 1961 and to amend the 
Finance Act, 2025, as passe d by Lok Sabha, be ta ken into consideration. ” 
 
The questions were proposed. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : The Income Tax Bill, 
2025 and the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025 are now open for combined 
                                                            
α    Discussed together. 
 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
59

discussion. I now call upon the hon. Memb ers whose names have been received for 
the participation in the discussion. 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल ( उǄराखंड): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे आयकर िवधेयक, 2025 और 
कराधान िविध (संशोधन) िवधेयक, 2025 पर बोलने का अवसर िदया। मȅ अपने नेतृत्व को इसके  
िलए धन्यवाद देता हूं िक उन्हȗने मुझे इन पर अपने िवचार रखने का अवसर िदया।   
 सर, िपछले 11 वषș मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार ने यह करके  िदखाया िक 
िकस Ģकार से देशिहत मȂ चुनौितयȗ क े बाद भी reform, perfo
rm और transform िकया जा 
सकता है। हमने डेढ़ हजार से ऊपर पुराने कानूनȗ को समाÃत िकया। देश की Ģगित क े िलए 204 7 
क े संकÊप को पूरा करने क े िलए जो-जो चुनौितयां आईं, हम उन सबको धीरे-धीरे समाÃत करते 
जा रहे हȅ। उसी मȂ यह 19 61 का  इन्कम टैक्स एक्ट भी है, िजसमȂ आज संशोधन लाया गया है। मȅ 
इसके  िलए माननीय मंतर्ी जी का भी आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं िक उन्हȗने Ëयापार जगत मȂ, आिर्थक 
जगत मȂ ईज़ ऑफ ड ू ईंग िबजनेस की एक परÇपरा खड़ी की है। पुराने कानून मȂ जो इन्कम टैक्स 
एक्ट, 1961 था, उसमȂ 47 अध्याय और 819 धाराएं थीं, उनकी जगह अब 23 अध्याय और 536 
धाराएं ही रह जाएंगी। िडिजटल टैक्स, िवव
ाद, िनपटान और डाटा एनािलिटक्स मȂ टैक्स बेस 
बढ़ाने जैसे Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ। नई कर ËयवÎथा मȂ बेिसक छू ट सीमा 3 लाख की जगह 4 लाख 
होगी। Secti
on 87(A) क े तहत कर छू ट की सीमा 25 हजार से 60 हजार, 75 हजार क े 
Standard Deduction क े साथ 12 लाख तक आयकर मुƪ है। इससे जहां individual taxpayer 
को सुिवधा होगी, वहीं Ëयापार जगत मȂ भी Ëयापार मȂ आसानी होगी। िवǄ मंतर्ी जी जो नया आयकर 
कानून लाई हȅ, उससे Ëयापार करने मȂ आसानी होगी। िनवेश का नया और सरल राÎता खुलेगा।  
आयकर मामले मȂ सरकार सख्ती की जगह सहयोग बढ़ाने का इरादा रखती है। नए आयकर िबल 
की समीक्षा करने वाली Ģवर सिमित ने अपनी 4,575 पन्नȗ की िरपोटर् मȂ 2,085 िसफािरशȂ की थीं, 
तो इसमȂ सभी को Îवीकार कर िलया गया है। इस Ģकार Ëयापक रूप  से …( समय की घं
टी)… 
जनता क े िवचारȗ को इसमȂ समावेश िकया गया है। यह आिर्थक जगत मȂ जहां 12 लाख रुपय े तक 
की छू ट िमली है, वहीं िजनकी और कोई आय नहीं है, क ेवल rental income है , उनकी 17 ला
ख 
तक की आय पर कोई टैक्स नहीं है। मȅ रेखांिकत करना चाहता हूं िक जब retirement age मȂ होते 
हȅ और आवÌयकता भी रहत
ी है। अनेक Ģकार की छू ट िमली है, लेिकन मेरा समय बहुत कम है। मȅ 
इसके  िलए आगे क े अपने सारे िवषयȗ को न बोलते हुए क ेवल इस िबल का Ëयापक रूप  से अपने 
ǭदय क े साथ समथर्न करता हूं, क्यȗिक यह 2047 की चुनौितयȗ का एक रोडमैप है, िजसमȂ हमȂ 
िवकिसत भारत का संकÊप पूरा करना है, उसमȂ यह सहयोगी होगा।  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यव
ाद 
करता हूं।   
 
 THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR): The next speaker is Shri 
S. Niranjan Reddy.  
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, I rise to support this Bill because 
this Amendment of the Income-Tax Act has been one of the mo
 st awaited pieces of 
60
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

legislation that the country has been waiting for. In fact, we would illustratively refer to 
the complexity of the Income-Tax Act an d the Amendments that were made, which 
ran into sub-sections (z), (za), (zb), and we were all waiting to See how a simplified 
legislation could be made to overcome a complex legislation like this.  
 I think I am one of the first speakers to speak on this subject. If it has to go on 
record, I find that the text in this particular Act has been reduced from 5.12 lakh words 
to 2.6 lakh words. The size has been halv ed. The proposed Act uses straightforward 
language. It uses short sentences and it uses the reference to  many tables. It 
replaces a lot of proviso and explanations wi th sub-sections and clauses. It replaces 
the words ‘Previous Year’ and ‘Assessment Year’ with simplified term like ‘Tax Year’.  
This Act also has a sort of continuity with transition because it has taken care of all the 
Amendments, including the one in the last  Finance Act up till this particular 
enactment. It also retains a lot of judicially -interpreted expressions. This would mean 
that when this Act starts, it would start on  a foot of certainty because many of the 
expressions have already been interpreted.   
 Having said this, I must say two or th ree other things. I think the proposed Act 
has certain limitations in relation to what it Seeks to achieve, and that is the nature of 
the enactment. The Act can only provide a scaffolding of  a structure. This is not an 
enactment for the purpose of enforcemen t which will have to happen through the 
officers enabled under the Act. I find that on e of the biggest challenges facing India is 
that we have a very minimal tax base. Only 2.2 per cent of the persons living in India 
are income-tax payers. Just for the people to have an idea, I would like to highlight 
that a country like France has 78 per cent taxpayers, the U.S. has 48 per cent 
taxpayers and Germany has 61.3 per cent. Ev en by comparable standards, when we 
look at countries which are similarly placed  along with us in BRICS, Brazil has 20 per 
cent taxpayers. South Africa has 28 per cent taxpayers while Malaysia has 22 per cent 
taxpayers.  A country like Indonesia also has 7.8 per cent taxpayers. Sir, I think, the 
Act will possibly give an impe tus to ensure that India somehow manages to ensure 
that more people become tax compliant and we have a larger base of tax payers so 
that the burden does not fall harshly on th is one or two per cent of middle class or 
upper class people who are paying income ta x. Sir, the Act may in future need to 
address the requirements of gig and platform workforce because this workforce is 
expected to reach a strength of 2.35 cr ore by 2030. We are in the process of 
formalizing the economy. The digital paymen ts, the increased banking transactions 
and the GST reforms show that India is movi ng towards this formalization of economy 
but gig and platform workforce is going to be a large part of our system.    
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
61

Sir, I have one other concern about the Act now providing for the digital 
overreach and the erosion of privacy safegu ards. Some concerns are being raised in 
this regard. The Bill adopts digital system  for assessments and appeals, which is 
welcome but clause 247 grants tax author ities sweeping surveillance powers. Sir, I 
understand where this is coming from. While we want more people come forward and 
pay taxes, we need to ensure  that our officers are properly empowered. I understand 
that if people are not coming forward, we need to ensure that the officers have all 
means and measures for the purpose of ensuring that there is maximum tax 
compliance but while providing for it, while enabling the officers, giving them a large 
liberty with regard to their dealing with the gadgets, cloud storage space, social 
media accounts or any electronic data of citizens -- while it may be for the purpose of 
enabling the tax enforcement of ficers to ensure that there is no tax evasion -- there 
don't Seem to be sufficient safeguards or guar drails with regard to ensuring that this 
thing is protected properly. It must be used only for income tax purposes. The 
Department or the Ministry ma y  h a v e  t o  c o m e  u p  w i t h  c irculars or guidelines with 
regard to how these provisions are going to be activated. 
Sir, I have another suggestion for the hon. Finance Minister. While we are 
ensuring that there is a gr eater compliance and we would work towards that, we may 
have to incentivize the honest taxpayers. Let me share a personal experience.  Many 
years back, in one of the initial years, when I paid my tax, I got a Certificate of 
Appreciation from Income Tax Department . Just because of one Certificate of 
Appreciation, every time when my Chartere d Accountant would tell me that we could 
save some money here or there, I would say, ‘no, let us pay the tax because it is 
going for a good purpose’. Sir, a large part of the reason was the fact that I felt 
appreciated.  I felt my country cared that I paid income tax.  
S i r ,  w e  c a n  c o m e  u p  w i t h  s o m e  s chemes for the purpose of providing 
appreciation for our taxpayers. We could co me up with one preferred taxpayer card 
or something like that where honest taxpay ers, who have been paying tax regularly 
over a period of time, are recognized by the Government. Maybe they could be given 
priority access at airports or maybe they could be give n some priority access for 
public services. I want the Government to ensure the people who are paying tax are 
appreciated and the Government actually recognizes them. If a pe r s o n  s t a n d s  i n  a  
priority queue, it is not that he wants to just jump the queue and move forward, but if 
any other person, going to an  airport or a railway statio n, Sees that there is the 
priority access for people who are paying in come tax honestly, he would also want to 
be in that queue because he would want to show to the world that he is an honest 
taxpayer. It is not about them saving five minutes or ten minutes, the people who are 
62
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

in that queue will feel appr eciated and will feel  their country cares for these honest 
taxpayers. 
Sir, it could be any other scheme. This is just a suggestion that I am making. 
The Government can come up with many better suggestions. In fact, I compliment 
the Government that when this particul ar enactment was undertaken, there was a 
wide consultative exercise. They sent th is to a select committee. I compliment the 
hon. Finance Minister for this exercise. I am only suggesting and requesting the hon. 
Minister and the Government to come up wi th something like this. I have Seen many 
things having behavioral impact. When we came up with the Swachh Bharat scheme, 
it was just a nudge from the Government that  resulted in many people adapting to it .                       
There was just one nudge when the Governme n t  s a i d  t o  g i v e  u p  s u b s i d y  o n  L P G .   
That was sufficient for people to give up LPG subsidies on their own. If there is a 
nudge from the Government asking people, they are doing it. I am not saying that 
they are not doing it. But we might need something on the ground visible for people to 
understand that they are appr eciated by the income tax an d the Government if they 
pay taxes. It may make more people move towards this tax compliance. Sir, I look at 
this as a first step of legislative simplificat ion. I realize that income tax is something 
that needs iterations from time to time . Madam, you have been a part of the 
Insolvency Bankruptcy Code. I kept referring to that example when I was speaking on 
the Criminal Law Bills, which said that th ere is an Insolvency Bankruptcy Committee 
which, on a regular basis, makes recommendations for amendments to that particular 
law. And the Government has been very quic k in making those amendments that has 
made the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code very workable. I had made the 
suggestion, Sir, when I spoke on the crimin al law amendments, that we need to have 
a committee like that. I would only suggest that in  relation to the income tax, if this is 
treated as the first step at simplification, I think the simplification does not end here. 
The simplification exercise needs to continue. When once the Income Tax Act was, 
for us, an illustration of the complexity of law,  I look at this Income Tax Act of 2025, in 
future, becoming an illustration of how laws can be simple, lucid and short. I 
compliment the Government. My party supports the Bill entirely, Sir. Thank you.                                 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : Thank you. The next 
speaker is Shri Debashish Samantaray; not present. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha.  
 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA (Bihar) : Sir, I compliment the Finance Minister for 
bringing this Bill. The 2025 Income Tax Bill  modernizes India's 1961 tax framework.  
Tax officials can now access digital devices al ongside traditional records, addressing 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
63

litigation gaps. Salary earners up to Rs. 12.75 lakhs are tax-exempt and can file 
simplified forms via Form 26AS. Undisclosed income definitions expand to include 
virtual digital assets. The faceless assessme nt system is strengthened, eliminating 
taxpayer-official interaction through tec hnology and team-based evaluation with 
dynamic jurisdiction to reduce corruptio n. Dispute resolution panels must now 
provide detailed reasoning for decisions. Tax treaty interp retation is enhanced by 
allowing undefined terms to derive meanings  from other federal legislation, improving 
clarity in international tax agreements. The Bill primarily aims to simplify the language 
and remove redundant provisions of the In come Tax Act, 1961. The current Income 
Tax Act, 1961 lacks specific provisions for di gital devices, creating litigation disputes.  
The 2025 Income Tax Bill explicitly authorises  tax officials to access digital devices 
alongside traditional paper records like acc ounts, books and ledgers that contain 
income and expenditure information. Re cent tax regime changes exempt salary 
earners up to Rs. 12.75 lakhs from tax liabili ty. According to the provisions of the Bill, 
these individuals can submit simplified claim fo rm instead of full in come tax returns.  
This process integrates with Form 26AS, which provides a comprehensive record of 
taxes deducted and collected at source s. The 1961 Income Tax Act defines 
undisclosed income in search cases as cash, gold, jewelle ry and other valuables.  
The new Income Tax Bill broadens this defini tion to encompass virtual digital assets 
as well. Under the IT Act, 1961, there is a provision for faceless tax information 
collection. This provision aims to eliminat e direct interaction between taxpayers and 
tax authorities by leveraging technol ogy, reducing corruption and optimising 
administrative resources. It empowers the Central Government to establish a digital, 
team-based system for collecting tax information with dynamic jurisdiction, ensuring 
transparency and effi ciency while maintaining parlia mentary oversight. On dispute 
resolution mechanism, the Act of 1961 perm its qualified taxpayers, including those in 
transfer pricing cases, non-residents and foreign companies, to submit draft tax 
assessments to a dispute resolution panel for guidance. The draft Bill maintains these 
provisions but now requires the panel to provide detailed reasoning and determining 
factors with their decisions. 
The law enables the Central Government to create international agreements 
preventing double taxation. When treaty terms lack definition in the agreement or Act, 
the Government provides meanings through notifications. The Bill adds that undefined 
terms may also derive meanings from other federal legislation. 
The Act establishes anon ymous information gathering and tax assessment 
procedures, which the Bill preserves. …( Time-bell rings. )… Additionally, the Bill 
64
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

grants the Central Government new powers  to develop schemes aimed at improving 
operational efficiency, transparency and accountability in tax administration. 
The Bill has pared down the number of words in the law to around 2.59 lakh 
from the 5.12 lakh in the Income Tax Act 1961 which is almost half. The number of 
sections too has been slashed to 536 from 819.  In order to provide greater clarity, the 
new Bill has increased the number of tables it incorporates to 57 from 18, and the 
number of formulae to 46 from 6. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR):  Please conclude. 
 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR JHA: One minute, Sir.  The above provisions have enabled the 
consolidation of scattered clauses and simplified the complex language of Income Tax 
principles. 
The I.T. Bill Seeks to transform the Act into a concise, lucid and accessible 
legal instrument, more so for the normal income-tax payer. One suggestion to the 
hon. Finance Minister is this. The definiti on of "computer system" is wide and also 
includes virtual digital space. The above te rminology is an attempt to modernize tax 
enforcement. Issuing clear SO Ps/guidelines in this regard and conducting regular 
sensitizing/training programmes in this re gard would serve as a confidence building 
measure.  You can increase the scope of mobile and computer devices.                                              
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ ( उǄर Ģदेश): सर, सबसे पहले मȅ इस ऐितहािसक सुधार क े िलए माननीय 
यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का धन्
यवाद  देता हूं और माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी Ǜीमती 
िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को भी धन्यवाद देता हूं। यह िबल िवकिसत भारत क े संकÊप की िदशा को 
पूरा करने क े िलए एक मजबूत कदम है।  इस इनकम टैक्स क े िबल क े िलए बहुत से लोगȗ ने बहुत 
क ु छ बताया है। मȅ इससे पहले क ु छ कहना चाहता हूं। अभी क ु छ िदनȗ पहले अमेिरका क े राÍटर्पित 
ने हमारे भारत को डेड इकोनॉमी बताया है और िजसका हमारे लोक सभा क े एलओपी ने भी 
समथर्न िकया है। मȅ उस
के  बारे मȂ उनको जानकारी देना चाहता हूं और पूरे िवÌव को जानकारी 
देना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक जो हमारे आंकड़े हȅ, वे असत्य नहीं बोलते हȅ। 2024-25 मȂ भारत की 
जीडीपी की गर्ोथ रेट 6.5 रहा, जो जी-20 इकोनॉमीज़ मȂ सबसे ऊपर है। मई, 2025 मȂ इनÄलेशन 
रेट िगरकर 2.82 परसȂट आ गया, जो िक 2019 क े बाद सबसे िनचला Îत
र है। टोटल एक्सपोट्सर् 
2024-25 मȂ िरकॉडर् 824.9 िबिलयन पर पहुंचा है। भारत की न ॉिमनल जीडीपी, जो 2014-15 मȂ 
106.57 लाख करोड़ थी, वह 2024-25 मȂ बढ़कर 331.03 लाख करोड़ हो गई है। परचेिंसग पावर 
पैिरटी क े िहसाब से हम 14.59 िटर्िलयन डॉलर जीडीपी क े साथ तीसरे नंबर पर हȅ। भारत की 
अथर्ËयवÎथा हर साल औसतन 6 से 8 Ģितशत की रÄतार से आगे बढ़ने का अनुमान है और अगले 
15 सालȗ मȂ औसत लगभ
ग 7 परसȂट रह जाएगी। वहीं अमेिरका की जो अथर्ËयवÎथा है, उसके  
औसतन 2 Ģितशत की दर से बढ़ने का अनुमान है, िजससे पता चलता है िक िपछले 15 सालȗ से 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
65

उसकी रÄतार बराबर चल रही है। आज हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा िवÌव मȂ पांचवȂ नंबर पर है और हमने 
संकÊप िलया है िक 2027 तक हम इसको तीसरी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनाएंगे। 2014 मȂ हमारा Direct Tax 
का collection 6.3 लाख करोड़ था, जो अब बढ़ कर 19.60 लाख करोड़ हो गया है। इसमȂ जो 
सबसे ज्यादा contribute कर रहे हȅ, वे मध्यम वगर् और नौकरी-पेशा लोग हȅ।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, 1961 क े बाद हमारे पुराने आय कर कानून को पहली बार Direct
 
Tax System की Ëयापकता और आधुिनक दृिÍट से नया रूप  िदया जा रहा है। हमारी सर कार का 
उǈेÌय ÎपÍट है - भाषा को सरल करना, अनावÌयक Ģावधानȗ को हटाना, Ģिकर्याओं को पारदशीर् 
बनाना और हर नागिरक क े िलए कानून को सुलभ करना। इस िबल क े ǎारा 536 Sections बना  
कर उनको 16 Schedules मȂ ËयविÎथत िकया गया है, तािक एक आम आदमी इसे आसानी से 
समझ सके ।   
 महोदय, चूंिक मेरा समय खत्म हो रहा है, इसिलए मȅ इस िबल का समथर्न करता हूं और 
मȅ िफर से म
ाननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देता हूं।  
धन्यवाद। 
       
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर) : धन्यवाद।  Next speaker is Shri G.K. Vasan. 
   
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu): Sir, the IT Bill has been introduced in the Parliament 
to ease compliance burden. This Bill is a re form to promote a transparent tax system 
in the nation. Flexibility has been provided in  the new IT Bill for allowing refund claims 
in cases where IT return is not filed on time. This is a big boon and a major relief to the 
taxpayers. Unfortunately, when such an im portant Bill is under consideration today, 
we find that there is nobody in the Opposition Benches. Such a relief to the 
taxpayers, and Opposition Benches are not bothered about it! They should have 
been here in the House to discuss, deliberate and debate on this  Bill. Unfortunately, 
they do not bother about the taxpayers of this country. I am sure that the taxpayers 
will be aware of the Opposition parties. Likewise, the previous Bill was for sports, for 
students in schools and colleges. Sports is a favourite subject. They are not bothered 
about the students in schools and colleges.  I am sure the parents in this country, 
students in colleges and schools, and the people, who are interested in sports, will 
know the real face of the Opposition today.  
 Coming to the Bill, Sir, the original Bill raised concerns on house property 
taxation, pension, deduction and also rene wal of delayed filing. The revised Bill has 
addressed these gaps to reduce disputes an d simplify interpretati on, which will pave 
the way forward for fairness. In this Bill, reforms are expected to ease compliance for 
individual companies, especially MSMEs,  and promote a stable, predictable and 
transparent tax system which will pave the way for key factors for sustaining domestic 
consumption, attracting foreign investment, etc., which will lead support for growth.  
66
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

This important Bill has opted for simplified language to make the law more accessible, 
and has removed obsolete and redundant provisions for greater clarity in the Bill.   
Sir, to conclude, this Bill by the Finance Minister displays the forwardness, that 
is, the clarity of our tax administration. This kind of base in the tax system will support 
the economic growth in the country. With these words, my Party, Tamil Maanila 
Congress (Moopanar), supports the IT Bill, 2025. Thank you.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR):  Now, message from Lok 
Sabha, Secretary-General. 
 
 
 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA– Contd. 
 
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
S a b h a ,  a t  i t s  s i t t i n g  h e l d  o n  t h e  1 2th August, 2025, passed the  
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025. 
 I lay a copy of the sa id Bill on the Table. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR ):  The next speaker is Dr. 
Bhagwat Karad.   
 
 
GOVERNMENT BILLS– Contd. 
 
III.  The Income- tax Bill, 2025; and 
IV.  The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025. 
 
डा. भागवत कराड़ (महाराÍटर्): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय और माननीय सदÎयगण, आज 
मुझे Income Tax Bill, 2025 क े ऊपर बोलने क े िलए जो अवसर िदया गया है, इसके  िलए मȅ 
आपका और हमारे हाउस लीडर, माननीय जे.पी. नƿा जी का आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ।  
महोदय, आज भारत देश की economy पूरी दुिनया मȂ चौथे नंबर पर है और जÊदी ही 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह ती
सरी economy बनेगी। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ जैसे यह तीसरी economy बनने वाली है, वैसे ही हमारी Finance Minister Madam की 
policy भी महत्व
पूणर् है। यह Bill, Income Tax Act, 1961 को replace करेगा। यह जो Act है, यह 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
67

64 साल पुराना Act है। इसमȂ बहुत सारे amendments हुए थे और language भी बहुत complex 
हो गई थी, इसीिलए taxpayers, administrators और practitioners ǎारा concern raise करने 
क े बाद, यह Bill 13th February, 2025 को लोक सभा मȂ लाया गया था और उसी वƪ उसे Select 
Committee को refer िकया गया था। Select Committee क े जो recommendations हȅ, उनको 
लेने क े बाद, 21 जुलाई को यह वापस लोक सभा मȂ आया। इसमȂ अलग-अलग stakeholders का 
opinion लेने क े बाद यह Bill आज हमारे सामने आय ा  है।   
महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ जनभागीदारी को बहुत importance दी 
जाती है। िकसी भी Îकीम को यशÎवी करना है, तो उसमȂ जनभागीदारी होना जरूरी  है, इसीिलए 
इस िबल को final करत े समय, taxpayers, industries, professional associates, field level 
officers, इन सबकी opinion ली गयी है। इतन ा  ही नहीं, इस िबल को बनाते समय, दूसरे देश मȂ 
Income Tax Act क ैसा है, इसके  ऊपर भी ध्यान देते हुए Ģावधान बनाए गए हȅ। इसमȂ काम करते 
समय more than 60,000 hours dedicate िकये गए हȅ और यह िबल बहुत ही simple और legal 
language मȂ बनाया गया है। जैसा पूवर् वƪा ने बताया, पहले का जो Incom e Tax Act है, उसमȂ 
47 chapters थे, जबिक इस िबल मȂ िसफर् 23 chapters हȅ; पहले 819 Sections थे, जबिक अभी 
536 Sections हȅ और अगर words देखȂ, तो 5.12 लाख words की जगह िसफर् 2.60 लाख 
words हȅ।  
महोदय, यह िबल बहुत महत्वपूणर् है। जैसे हम देखȂ, तो हमारी economy बढ़ रही है और 
economy बढ़ते समय Direct Tax
es and Indirect Taxes मȂ जो reforms हमारी Finance 
Minister Madam क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ आए हȅ, वे बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् हȅ। अगर हम इसी का impact 
देखȂ, तो Income Tax returns मȂ 141 per cent  की वृिǉ हुई है। 2013-14 मȂ िसफर् 3.8 करोड़ 
income taxpayers थे, जबिक 2024-25 मȂ 9.19 करोड़ income taxpayers हो गए हȅ। अगर हम 
revenue देखȂ, तो 2013-14 मȂ 7,21,000 करोड़ revenue था, जबिक अभी वह revenue 27 लाख 
करोड़ से भी ज्यादा बढ़ चुका है।  ...(समय की घंटी)... 
महोदय, मȅ इतना ही बत ाना चाहता हूँ िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ नया 
'िवकिसत भारत' बनाने का हमारा जो संकÊप है, उसमȂ हमारी नयी नीित और इस नये Income 
Tax Act क े माध्यम से हमारा भारत एक 'िवकिसत राÍटर्' बनेगा। इस संकÊ प  क े साथ, मȅ अपनी 
वाणी को िवराम देता हूँ, धन्यवाद।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR ): The next speaker is Shri 
Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha. 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, on behalf of Telugu 
Desam Party and our leader, Shri Nara Chan drababu Naidu Garu, I rise to speak on 
the Income Tax Bill, 2025 and the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025. The new 
Income Tax Bill is a piece of legislation that marks a turnin g point in India’s direct tax 
history. This Bill is not merely a replacemen t of the Income Tax Act, 1961; it is the 
result of over a decade of reforms aimed at making out tax system simpler, fairer and 
68
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

more predictable. When the NDA Government came to power in 2014, we inherited a 
tax system weighed down by complexity, de lays and mistrust. Over the last eleven 
years, under the leadership of the hon. Pr ime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi and hon. 
Finance Minister, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharam an, we have pursued a clear vision, to 
create a tax administration that is seamle ss, painless and faceless. Technology has 
been at the heart of this transformati on. The results speak for themselves. The 
a v e r a g e  I T R  p r o c e s s i n g  t i m e  h a s  d r o p p e d  f r o m  9 3  d a y s  i n  2 0 1 3  t o  j u s t  1 0  d a y s  i n  
2023-24, with nearly 25 per cent processed in a single day. IT R filings, including 
updated returns, have risen by 141 per ce nt--from 3.8 crore in  Financial Year 2013-
14 to 9.19 crore in Fina ncial Year 2024-25. Gross direct tax collections have 
increased by 274 per cent from Rs. 7.21 lakh crore to Rs . 27.02 lakh crore in the 
same period. From simplifying the tax stru cture to creating a conducive environment 
for voluntary compliance, the reforms implem ented by the Government over the last 
11 years were done to ma ke the tax process simple, efficient and transparent. 
  Now, I would like to say something ab out key features of the Bill. The Bill 
reflects three guiding princi ples of any good legislatio n: trust, transparency and 
simplification. Number one:  A Simpler Tax Regime. The new Bill removes redundant 
provisions, consolidates overlapping Clauses, and introduces plain, clear 
definitions. Number two: New Tax Regime Under Clause  202(1). This Regime sets 
out straightforward slab rates. Number three: Enhanced Taxpayer Services. A 
dedicated Directorate of Ta xpayer Services now overSe es grievance redressal and 
service delivery. It ensures that most grieva nces are resolved with in 15 to 30 days. 
Number four: Expanded Reliefs and Exempt ions. There are clear provisions for the 
commuted pension deductions, extending benefits to individuals outside the formal 
employment framework. There is removal of alternate minimum tax for LLPs, eased 
compliance for charitable trusts.  
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) :  Please conclude.  
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA : Yes, Sir. Number five:  Modern Dispute 
Resolution. This legislation reflects the maturity of tax administration. It replaces 
complexity with clarity, confrontation with cooperation, and suspension with trust.  
With this, on behalf of our Telugu De sam Party, we, whol eheartedly support 
the Income Tax Bill and we compliment our hon. Finance Minister , Shrimati Nirmala 
Sitharaman.         
                                                
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
69

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR) : The next speaker is 
Shri Mokariya Rambhai; not present. Now, Shri Mahendra Bhatt. 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपका आभारी हूँ िक आपने मुझे 
देश की माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी आदरणीय िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ǎारा 'आयकर िवधेयक, 2025' क े 
समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए अवसर Ģदान िकया है। भाजपा शासन क े िपछले 11 वषș मȂ अĢत्य क्ष और 
Ģत्यक्ष, दोनȗ कर क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ काफी सुधार िकए गए हȅ और ये सुधार तब होते हȅ, जब नेतृत्व सुधार की 
िदशा मȂ पहल करता है। यह देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा को 2047 तक एक िवक िसत राÍटर् क े रूप  मȂ 
Îथािपत करने की िदशा मȂ पहल है। 'आयकर अिधिनयम, 1961' को ĢितÎथािपत करने वाला यह 
आयकर िवधेयक इस यातर्ा मȂ मील का पत्थर सािबत होगा। 
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए। ) 
 
 महोदय, इस िवधायक मȂ 2014 मȂ सरकार बनने क े बाद ईमानदारी से करदाताओं की 
महत्वपूणर् भूिमका को रेखांिकत करने वाले Ģावधान िकये गये हȅ और ये कायर् लगातार चल रहे हȅ।  
बीच क े कालखंड मȂ भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा लाइसȂस पर आधािरत अथर्ËयवÎथा रही। इस अविध मȂ 
कर Ģशासन भी अिवÌ
वास और टकराव क Ȃिदर्त रहा, िजसको आज िवÌवसनीय और पारदशीर् 
बनाने का Ģयास जारी है। महोदय, उसी का पिरणाम है िक आईटीआर की दािखलȂ अब 141 
Ģितशत बढ़ी हȅ।  इसी Ģकार, सकल Ģत्यक्ष कर संगर्ह मȂ 274  परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई है। यह अपने 
आपमȂ बहुत सराहनीय Ģयास है। अब मȅ यह कह सकता हूँ िक इस िबल क े आने क े बाद िनिÌचत 
रूप  से इसमȂ और गुणात्मक वृिǉ होगी। 
महोदय, इस पहल से कर Ģशासन तेज, अिधक पारदशीर् और करदाताओं क े अनुक ू ल 
होगा। डेटा का उपयोग कर िरटनर् भरने का जो अिधकार िद
या गया है, उससे बहुत लाभ होने 
वाला है। सीपीसी ने औसत Ģोसेिंसग समय 201 4 क े 93 िदनȗ से घटा कर 10 िदन कर िदया है।  
इस अिधिनयम क े बाद कर Ģणाली अिधक न्याय संगत और सरल होगी।  सुधार का उǈेÌय लोगȗ 
और Ëयवसायȗ को िÎथरता का भरोसा िदलाना है। इसके  अंतगर्त आकलन मȂ लगने वाले समय 
तथा उसको पुनः खोलने मȂ लगने वाले समय को कम िक
या गया है। इस िवधेयक मȂ अपीलȗ की 
मौिदर्क सीमाएँ बढ़ाकर अनावÌयक िववाद को कम करने का Ģावधान िकया गया है। इसमȂ 
Ëयिƪयȗ क े िलए करमुƪ आय 12 लाख  रुपय े तक बढ़ाई गई और Îलैब दरȗ का भी युिƪक रण 
िकया गया, जो िक एक सकारात्मक पहल है।  
 महोदय, चूंिक समय कम है, इसिलए मȅ इस िवषय को संक्षेप मȂ रखूँगा। इसके  अंतगर्त 
करदाता सेवाएँ एवं अनुपालन मȂ सुगम ता  का Ģावधान िकया गया है। इसमȂ िशकायतȗ क े िनवारण 
का तंतर् बहाल िकया गया है। इसमȂ करदाता चाटर्र Îथािपत िकया गया है। मȅ सारे िवषयȗ की चचार् 
न कर आपके  सामने उन्हȂ संक्षेप मȂ रख रहा हूँ। मेरे से पूवर् वƪाओं ने कर ढांचे और आईटीआर क े 
सरलीकरण क े िवषय को सदन मȂ रखा है। इसमȂ एक बहुत अच्छा Ģा
वधान िकया गया है। इसके  
अंतगर्त नया कर शासन, उसकी कम दरȂ, सीिमत कटौितयाँ और अनेक Ģकार की सुिवधाएँ दी 
गई हȅ।  
70
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

  
Ǜी उपसभापित : अब आप खत्म करȂ, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है। 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ: जी, सर। यिद मȅ करदाता चाटर्र की दृिÍट से कहूँ, तो 19 अगÎत, 2020 को िविधक 
रूप  से अिधसूिचत इनकम टैक्स ऐक्ट की धारा 119A क े तहत इसमȂ अनेक Ģावधान िक ए गए हȅ, 
इसिलए मȅ कह सकता हूँ िक माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ǎारा जो यह िवधेयक लाया गया है, इसका मȅ 
समथर्न करता हूँ। यह िवधेयक देश को िवकिसत राÍटर् क े रूप  मȂ Îथािपत करने मȂ सहायक िसǉ 
होगा।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No
w the hon. Minister, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to 
reply to the discussion.  
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE  
AFFAIRS (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN) : Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, in the 
July, 2024 Budget, a comprehensive review  of the Income Tax Act was mentioned 
and that announcement is the trigger which has led to reviewing the Income Tax Act, 
1961, which, since its passing in 1961, ha s, over the decades, accumulated a lot of 
newer features such as the TDS, the MAT, the transfer pricing rules, advance pricing, 
which has several agreements and several dispute resolution rules. Each of these has 
served a purpose but has made the law itself  very complex. So it was very tough to 
navigate for an ordinary citizen who wants to file his returns. But the largely dense and 
complex structure of that Income Tax Act, 1961, presented in various interpretations 
and several avoidable disputes kept mountin g. Not so much for the rate, but for the 
l a n g u a g e  o f  t h a t ,  w e  w e r e  s u b j e c t  t o  too many litigations. The density and the 
complexity of that and the verbose way in  which that got written over the decades, 
with different styles dominating it, made th e Act very, very tedious for anyone to use. 
In fact, many of the provisions of the Act reached the sunset clauses. You were given 
a tax benefit for up to a certain number of years, and nearer the closure, some of 
them were not even reviewed . So, the sunset clause existed and at that time more 
reviews had to happen whether the sunset sh ould continue or you should close it. 
These kind of things have also made it sound as though, it has become outdated in 
parts; not the whole thing, but in some parts. Therefore, we needed a new law and, 
that is why, in July, 2024 Budget, I ha d announced that we will come with a 
comprehensive review of the Income Tax Act, 1961, to make it concise, lucid, easy to 
read and easy to understand. That is the ma in objective with which we started this. It 
was the review and the new Income Tax Bill, which is now the subject of our 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
71

discussion, were completed in record six months’ time and introduced in the Budget 
Session of February, 2025. We introduced it in this year’s Budget Session. 
 
6.00 P.M. 
 
The drafting of the new Bill itself involved 75 ,000 person hours.  That is the extent to 
which we… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, just a minute. Hon. Members, it is now 6 
p.m. If the House agrees, we will sit beyond  6 p.m. today till the disposal of the 
Income Tax Bill, 2025 and the Taxation Laws  (Amendment) Bill, 202 5. Do I have the 
leave of the House to extend the sitting beyond 6 p.m.?  
 
HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Hon. Minister, please continue. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, I must appreciate the CBDT and also the 
Department of Revenue, which to gether did drafting of the new Bill, as I said, taking 
75,000 man hours with a team of dedicated officers. So, the Income Tax Department 
worked very earnestly and repeatedly went through for any overlaps or errors in the 
language and kept itself co nstantly reviewing and correcting, reiterating and so on. 
So, before I get into the features of the Bill, and I wouldn't take lo ng to give the data, 
this is a Bill which is going to be very consequential. In the Income Tax Act, every 
year, some amendments are made through the Finance Bill. We all pay a lot of 
attention to these changes— go into th e details, what it will mean, what the 
implication on me is, how many people will end up paying more and how many people 
will end up paying less, what the other prov isions are with which action will be taken 
on me and so on. All of us are quite aware of that.  So, for even one little amendment 
to the Income Tax Act, there is so much at tention given for the Finance Bill during the 
Budget Session every year. This is conseq uential act. In that, we are changing the 
1961 Act itself and, in a way, removing it and bringing a new Act. We won't remove it 
in total, because there will still be some cases or some incidents which relate to that 
period and, therefore, that 1961 Act will co ntinue in some form, only to the limited 
purpose of attending relevant matters to that period. So, if this is the seriousness with 
which this country is looking at bringing an  assesSee-friendly, taxpayer-friendly Act, 
replacing the 1961 Act and it is a mileston e which this country's financial system will 
72
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

face, I am shocked that the Opposition doesn' t want to participate in it. And, let me 
tell you, Sir, initially, understanding the importance and the consequential nature of 
this, the Opposition Parties agreed in th e Business Advisory Committee that they will 
indeed participate in this Bill, in the Lo k Sabha and also in the Rajya Sabha, and 
debate it. And, they were allotted 16 hours of debate in the Lok Sabha and 16 hours of 
debate in the Rajya Sabha. Mo st often, the Opposition says, ‘Well, you don't want to 
discuss anything. We are asking for pub lic care, people's interest, public's 
interest. We want to have charcha on this matter.’ We agreed for 16 hours of charcha 
-- 16 hours of charcha in the Lok Sabha and 16 hours of charcha here. Okay, you had 
some protest! You want to march to th e Election Commission! You went! But, you 
came back; now, you participate. You agr eed to give 16 hours time for this 
discussion. Why have they walked out, Sir,  today? And, when we  talk about tax and 
tax related matters, they will say, ‘No, you are imposing tax burden on the people.’  
Let me tell you, even prior to COVID, from 2019 onwards, hon. Prime Minister, Modiji, 
has given clear instructions, ‘COVID or no COVID, we shall not increase the tax 
burden on people.’  Not one paisa has been increased. And, in fact, the new Income 
Tax Regime, was brought in so that people  who still want to enjoy the benefits of 
some kind of deductions can remain in the Old Regime. But, people who want to be 
paying less tax with or without deductions, we came up with a user-friendly New 
Regime.  And there, consequentially, every year, we have been reducing both the rate 
and widening the income slabs. This year, historically, as a big milestone, hon. Prime 
Minister Modiji said, at least, up to 12 lakhs of income, no tax should be paid by any 
Indian citizen, which means up to 1 lakh per month's salary, no one will have to pay 
any tax. The structure was made simple, rates were reduced, re bates were given. 
So, no tax for up to 12 lakhs income!  And further, for others, in a different income 
bracket, rates were reduced. So, that is the way in which every Budget, we are 
making it easier for the taxpayer. 
Now, the point that I wanted to highlight is this. If there is so much concern, 
and rightly so, as Opposition parties, they should have the concern for taxpayers that 
they should not be burdened, the rate was brought down till Rs. 12 lakhs in the 
Finance Bill of February 2025. Now, as prom ised in the July Budget 2024, we are 
simplifying the whole tax law itself, so that compliance will be easy. Even that is a very 
big step. And for that, when allocation of time also had been made, Opposition is 
failing its duty in serving the people of India th at they do not want to participate in this 
discussion, neither in the Lok Sabha nor here. 
So, having said all this, I want to say, to remove any confusion in the minds of 
anybody, this Amendment -- bringing in a new law in pl ace of the old 1961 law -- 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
73

aims at simplifying the language, the luci dity which is required for anyone to 
understand it, no anomalies or any ov erlapping language that leads to 
misinterpretations. So, this aims at only that. There are no new rates being brought in 
here, no tax issues which are being brought in here. That will come every year as it 
does in the Finance Bill. This is purely for making the documents simpler. 
Sir, today, the Insolvency and Bankru ptcy Code, where we are bringing the 
next generation of IBC, a bigger reform, also has gone to the Select Committee. It 
was introduced in the Lok Sabha today. And, it has been sent to a Select Committee. 
Even this Bill, when it was introduced in  July, then itself, I did say that wide 
consultations will be held. This Bill, when it was brought in, was sent to a Select 
Committee. And, I must thank and put on re cord my gratitude for the extensive work 
that the Select Committee, under the Chairmanship of Shri Baijayant Panda, MP from 
Lok Sabha, and his entire team, which consisted of Members from all parties 
represented in the Parliament. They all did extensive work, they consulted, they went 
around the country, they met with experts,  domain experts, and tax experts. They 
met with so many people and took intensive inputs from these people. 
So, the Committee consisted of 31 Members, as I said, from across the political 
spectrum. The Committee held 36 meetings, engaging extensively with Government 
officials, stakeholders, and experts, and received 334 memoranda, containing a 
wealth of valuable inputs and suggestions. So, if we did that many number of person-
hours, 75,000 person-hours from the de partment, the Committee had 36 meetings 
and took 334 memoranda from the public. No w, after all that, the Select Committee, 
in its Report, which was submitted to the Lok Sabha Speaker, has put forward 566 
recommendations. The intensity and the grav ity of the work are what I want to 
highlight before you, hon. Vice-Chairman Sir. Of these 566 recommendations, the 
Committee itself agreed to the department 's view in response. The suggestions 
came; the department gave its resp onse. The Committee agreed with the 
department's view on about 370 cases. So, 566 suggestions were given. In 370 
cases, the Committee accepted the clauses as were proposed. Further, Sir, not 
going into too much details, but it is so impo rtant that I want to give a few information 
to you. Redundant provisions were removed. Archaic languages were also removed. 
We have reduced the number of Sections, which many hon. Members spoke about. 
The total number of Sections were 819 in th e 1961 Act. They have now come down to 
536 Sections -- complete cutting down. The number of Chapters wa s 47 in the 1961 
Act. We have cut it down to 23 only. Then, number of words -- many Members 
spoke about it. About 5.12 lakh words were there in the 1961 Act. It has been now 
brought down to 2.6 lakh, literally half th e size of what it was before. Also, Sir, 
74
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

because we are talking of 21st Century, people are very used to having a lot of graphs, 
pictorial depictions, tables and metrics been given to them so that they can easily 
understand things. So, people have got used to that. Normally, our laws do not have 
any of these. They go very staid in language, very staid in the way the language is 
used and only text will follow, text will follo w, further text. Whereas we thought, since 
we are working in this Century, we should  h a v e  t a b l e s  t o  m a k e  p e o p l e  u n d e r s t a n d  
how the law functions where possible. And, we are also showing through 
formulations as to how it will function. So, for the first time, in this Act, we have 
brought 39 new tables and 40 new formul ae to replace textual narration.  When 
people See numbers, when they See comparison s, or when they Se e it laid out in a 
simpler format, it is easy for them. So we ha ve adopted this novel method in a law, in 
a Bill which is going to be passed by th e Parliament, which normally does not 
happen. So, the changes are not just merely superficial, they reflect a new simplified 
approach for tax administration. This, ‘Learn a More Focussed Law’ is designed to 
make it easy to read, understand and impl ement. So, as we are going through this 
exercise, Sir, the officers of the CBDT are actively engaged in redrafting the rules, the 
subordinate legislations, with the same objective, of simplifying both the provisions 
and the associated forms. So, when the law is simple, you are able to read it easily 
and there is no interpretation problem. Bu t what happens to th e assesSee when he 
gets the form in front of him in the comput er? Even that is being simplified. So, as I 
said, in the Act itself, if everything goes well and if we are able to pass it, -- I am sure 
there will be Members watching it very ke enly -- then, the co mputer systems which 
run our income tax will all have to be reboot ed for the newer law. But the time is very 
short. Between now and 1
stof April 2026, we need to ha ve all the computers reset for 
the way in which this Act has been made, su bject to the approval of the Parliament.  
Therefore, if, from 1 st April, 2026, we want to effect th is, it is greatly appreciated that 
the Parliament is taking the initiative to pass it well in time so that between the period 
of September and 31
st of March, we will get the syst ems also cleared. Why do I say 
that? I say that because not only the computer systems will have to be  kept ready for 
the assesSee to file his own returns, but we are also planning to issue  a lot of SOPs 
and also frequently asked questions to be put up, so that people understand what the 
changes are.  If they go to the domain, they  will get from the income tax portal all the 
details of what it is going to be like. Further, not so much getting into that detail, I just 
w a n t  t o  r e a s s u r e  t h a t  s o  m u c h  t h o u g h t  h as gone into making this law and it is not 
going to be confined to only what the law says. We also want to come up with some 
kind of an information memorandum, so that people who are dealing with the new Act 
sometimes can get this thing, because you ar e so used to the 1961 Act which ran the 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
75

country for 50 years, and suddenly you say, ‘W here was this? In that  Act, it used to 
be like this. Where is this here now?’ Fo r that, a separate information memorandum 
will also be issued, so that people can refer that and then say, “Oh then, in this Act, it 
will be here”, so that it will be like a guidance material . Even that is being prepared. 
That is not part of what is being circulat ed in the Parliament, but I just want to 
reassure that a lot of thought has gone into this, a lot of hard work has gone into it; 
more from the point of view of what will the taxpayer th ink about it, materials have 
been prepared. So that is about the New In come Tax Act, replacing the 1961 Act, the 
Income Tax 2025 Act, if passed from the Parliament. So that is about that one Bill.  
On the second Bill which you have allowe d me to take up si multaneously, I will 
just say a few words on that. Sir, it is a Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, the second 
one. Normally taxation amendments are do ne during the Finance Bill, but in some 
extraordinary situations, we do come up wi th corrections. There ar e four things this 
time which we want to bring in here. We could have wait ed for the Finance Bill, but 
because the economy, people, everybody want s to have very quickly a look at how 
these are developing, we have just done four things. One is giving tax exemption on 
dividend interest and also long-term capit al gains to sovereign wealth funds and 
pension funds, investing in infrastructu re between 1-4-2020 and 31-3-2030, subject 
to notification. The Public Investment Fund and its largely wholly-owned subsidiaries 
will be named directly in the Section for exemption. PIF is from Saudi Arabia. So that 
fund is being given, like the way we have given earlier for other sovereign funds. That 
is one. Second, ‘abatement of all assessmen ts for block periods, in such cases, until 
block assessment order’, which will be a ma jor reform and ease of doing business 
step. So they can treat the entire block; even if, in-between, one of the years there 
was a search, they didn't have to have confusion. Then there was this 75,000 rupees 
deduction, standard deduction offered for the income tax. People had a confusion 
saying, “Is this available for salari ed people? What will happen? ” So we have given a 
clarification there. So it is hardly about three of them. And fourth relate to the unified 
pension-related things, where there is a conf usion on deduction, if  there is a parity 
with NPS and so on. So, for that, we have br ought in three points, which will be part 
of the taxation law, which is here. So ab ove four changes are there. This is a very 
important line. I want the hon. Members to concentrate on this. The above four 
changes which are coming through this Tax Amendment are for the Income Tax Act of 
1961. We are talking about Income Tax B ill, which is getting replaced because of 
language and other things and bringing  2025 Bill. But the old and the current 
prevailing Act, 1961 requires these amendments, but these have also been 
incorporated in the New Income Tax Bill. This is where I want the attention of the hon. 
76
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Members. So these Amendments  are coming into the 1961 Act, but these have also 
been incorporated in the New Income Ta x Bill. So we need not worry about the 
confusion. We have not overlooked any of this.  
Sir, before concluding, one or two Memb ers had raised certain points, I just 
want to answer them. The first one is abou t a point which Niranjan Reddyji raised. He 
is not here. He had raised this point that  there need to be sufficient safeguards, 
guardrails for protecting privacy in searches . I want to tell the Member that search 
provisions have been rationalized in this Bill. These have been done to adequately 
cover the cases where there could be some  technological challenges. However, I 
want to underline the fact, no  new power has been given to the officials through this 
law. There is no new power assigned to the tax authorities. However, as I said earlier, 
to allay the apprehensions of the hon. Me mber and other taxpayers, CBDT will come 
out with an SOP as to how to deal with  the personal information seized during 
searches, because most often when searches happen and the computers are seized, 
people get panicky and they do not know what  to do with it. So, there will be an SOP 
issued for the assesSee to know how to deal with search related matter.  
The second point that Niranjan Reddy ji had made was about some kind of 
appreciation for the honest taxpayer. We al so give certificates to honest regular 
taxpayers. I hope he has not missed out on that. I just want to inform him about that. 
The other hon. Member who spoke was Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha, who had raised this 
issue of computer systems used in search provisions, saying that the definition was 
too wide. I just want to say that all of us would appreciate that the definition of 
computer system has to be wide enough . Today, the computer systems are of so 
m a n y  d i f f e r e n t  v a r i e t i e s .  T e c h n o l o g y  i s  m a k i n g  i t  w i d e r ;  t e c h n o l o g y  i s  c h a n g i n g  
rapidly. So, by keeping it wide r, we are giving an option fo r the taxpayer also that the 
computer, the technology that you are us ing, is also covered under definition. 
Otherwise, normally what happens is they lo ok at the narrow definition and say, ‘you 
can't touch my computer because this is not defined by you’. So, we have kept that 
wider. With fast changing technology, most of the data is now stored in sophisticated 
digital devices. Therefore, for access to such data, there has been some 
rationalization in the search provisions, pa rticularly where there is cooperation from 
taxpayers. Sometimes taxpayers don't c ooperate. Recently, most of our hon. 
Members would have read in  the newspapers that when they went for doing the 
search, they completely refused to give ac cess to the computers. They said we don't 
have the password, and the password according  to them is kept in the country from 
where they have come. So, they are making money in this country and when 
wrongdoings are suspected and we go to sear ch them, they refuse to give access to 
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
77

their computers; they refuse to give the password. So, how do you at all do? But you 
are governed by the law of the land here. Such things happen when technology is 
actively used in running a business. So, to allay the apprehensions again, CBDT will 
bring out detailed SOP for handling digital data. With these words, I request that the 
Bill be returned. Thank you very much.        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I shall now put the motion regarding consideration of the 
Income Tax Bill, 2025 to vote. The question is:  
“That the Bill to consolidate and amen d th e law relating to Income-Tax, as 
passed by Lok Sabh a, be taken into consideration. ” 
         The motion was a dopted. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill.  
Clauses 2 to 246 were added to the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 247, there are 19 Amendments, Amendments 
(Nos. 1-19) by Dr. John Brittas; not present.  Amendments not moved. 
Clause 247 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 248-536 and Schedule 1 to Schedule 16 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill be 
returned. 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, I move: 
    “That the Bill be returned.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I shall now put the motion regarding consideration of the 
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025, to vote.   
78
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

The question is:  
        “That  the Bill further to amend the In come-tax Act, 1961 and to amend the 
Finance Act, 2025, as passe d by Lok Sabha, be ta ken into consideration. ” 
The motion was adopted. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, we shall take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill.   
Clauses 2 to 5 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill be 
returned. 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I move: 
      “ That the Bill be returned.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the House stands adjourned to meet at 
11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 18th August, 2025. 
The House then adjourned at twenty seven minutes past six of the clock till  
eleven of the clock on Monday, the 18th August, 2025.  
[ 12 August, 2025 ]
79

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 