Vol. 266 
Wednesday, 
No. 2                  27 November, 2024 
              6 Agrahayana,1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART -II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (pages 1 - 2) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 2 - 6) 
Observations by the Chair (pages 6 -7) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
 
 https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Wednesday, the 27th November, 2024 /6 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I am pleased to extend greetings to hon'ble 
Members of Parliament - Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya, Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
and Shrimati Dharmshila Gupta - on their Birthday today. 
Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya is a Member of this House since April 2020, 
representing the State of West Bengal. He is currently the floor leader of his party 
Communist Party of India (Marxist).   
Shri Bhattacharyya, a designated Se nior Advocate, had earlier served with 
great distinction as Advocate General of Tripura from 1998 to 2003. He had also 
served as Mayor of Kolkata from 2005 to 2010 . Shri Bhattacharyya’s contribution to 
the field of theatre is equally praiseworthy . He had acted in several acclaimed plays, 
both in India and abroad. His remarkable performance in the play "Natibinodini" 
performed at Rashtrapati Bhavan, before the then President, Shri K.R. Narayanan. 
This is remembered till this day by his frie nds and admirers.  I have the honour to be 
one.  He is married to Shrimati Ibha Bhattacharyya and the couple is blessed with son 
Rithik. 
On behalf of this House, I wish him a long, healthy and happy life and extend 
greetings to his family members.  
Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi, a distinguishe d Member of this august House since 
June 2020, has had a remarkable career as a teacher, educationist and social worker. 
Dr. Kharlukhi served in the State of Me ghalaya in various capacities, including 
as Chairman of Forest Development Corp oration, Tourism Development Corporation 
and Deputy Chairman of the State Planning Board. His leadership was pivotal in the 
formation of the Meghalaya Students’ Union and the National Peoples’ Party, of which 
he served as State President. He also served as Presiden t of Jaintia Students' Union 
from 1980 to 1983. He is married to Shri mati Corina Lyngdoh and the couple is 
blessed with daughters Adrialli Mary Lyngdoh and Ininaki Naomi Lyngdoh. 
On behalf of this House, I wish him a long, healthy and happy life and extend 
greetings to his family members. 

Shrimati Dharmshila Gupta, a Member of this House since April 2024, 
representing the State of Bihar, i
s a Doctorate in Botany and has been teaching at 
Mahila Vidyalaya in Darbhanga.  
A grassroots leader, an ardent advo cate of women empowerment, Dr. Gupta 
was a two-time Municipal Councilor in Darbhanga and served as an Independent 
Director on the Board of Eastern Coalfields. She currently serves as the State 
President of BJP Mahila Morcha in Bihar. 
She is married to Shri Parshuram Gupta,  and the couple is blessed with sons 
Kumar and Kumud and daughters Kajal and Komal.  
On behalf of this house, I wish her a long, healthy and happy life, and extend 
greetings to her family members.    
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Now, Papers to be laid on the Table.  
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Home Affairs
II. Report and Account
s   (2021-22) of CITCO, Chandigarh and related papers
गृह मं तर्ालय  मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ : - 
I. (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following Notifications of the Ministry
of Home Affairs, unde
r sub-section (3) of  Section 18 of the Central Reserve Police
Force Act, 1949: -
(1) G.S.R. 535(E)., dated the 4 th September, 2024, publishing the the
Central Reserve Police Force, Trades men Cadre, Group 'C' Band posts
Recruitment Rules, 2024.
(2) G.S.R. 597(E)., dated the 27 th Se ptember, 2024, publishing the Ministry
of Home Affairs, Central Reserve Po lice Force, Ministerial Cadre, Head
Constable (Daftry), Head Constable (Peon), Head Constable (Farash)
and Head Constable (Safai Karamcha ri Ministerial), Group 'C' Posts
Recruitment Rules, 2024.
(3) G.S.R. 634(E)., dated the 14th Oc tober, 2024, publishing the Ministry of
Home Affairs, Central Reserve Po lice Force, Assistant Commandant
(Pharmacist), Group ‘A’ post, Recruitment Rules,2024.
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (3), see No. L. T. 906/18/24] 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. S.O.
4391(E)., dated the 10 th October, 2024, amending the First Schedule to the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, by inserting “ 45. 'Hizb-Ut-Tahrir (HuT)' and all its
manifestations and front organisations”  in that Schedule, under sub-section (5) of
Section 35 of the said Act.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 912/18/24] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: -
(a) Forty-eighth Annual Report and Acco unts of the Chandigarh Industrial and
Tourism Development Corporation Limited (CITCO), Chandigarh, for the
year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above report.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 908/18/24] 
Reports and Accounts (2021-22, 2022- 23 and 2023-24) of various Universities and 
Institutes and related papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION (SHRI SUKANTA 
MAJUMDAR):   Sir, I lay on the Table:— 
(A) (1) A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following papers under the sub-
section (3) of Section 30 and sub-section (4) of Section 31 of the Central Universities
Act, 2009: -
(i) (a) Annual Report of the Guru  Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur,
Chhattisgarh, for the year 2022-23. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Guru Gh asidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur,
Chhattisgarh, for the year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Vishwavidyalaya.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 883/18/24] 
(ii) (a)  Fourteenth Annual Report of the Central University of Rajasthan, Ajmer,
Rajasthan for the year 2022-23. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Central Univer sity of Rajasthan, Ajmer, Rajasthan
for the year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon.
[ 27 November, 2024 ]
3

(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 1610/18/24] 
(iii)  (a)  Annual Report of the Centra l University of Ha ryana, Mahendergarh,
Haryana, for the year 2022-23. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Central Univ ersity of Haryana, Mahendergarh,
Haryana, for the year 2022-23 and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 752/18/24] 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Cent ral University of Andhra Pradesh,
Ananthapuramu, Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, together with the
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above University.
(2) Statements (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers
mentioned at (1) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 881/18/24] 
(B) (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (5) of Section 30 and sub-section (3) of Section 39 of the Indian Institutes of
Information Technology Act, 2014: -
(a) Annual Report of the Atal Bihari Va jpayee - Indian Institute of Information
Technology and Management (ABV-IIITM), Gwalior, for the year 2023-24.
(b) Annual Accounts of the Atal Bihari Vajpayee-Indian Institute of Information
Technology and Management (ABV-IIITM), Gwalior, for the year 2023-24,
and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by the Government on the working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 875/18/24] 
(ii) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section
(3) of Section 31 and sub-section (4) of Section 32 of the University of Allahabad
Act, 2005: -
(a) Eighteenth Annual Report of the Univ ersity of Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh, for
the year 2022-23.
(b) Annual Accounts of the University of Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh, for the year
2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University.
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the
papers mentioned at (1) (a) and (b) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 754/18/24] 
(iii) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 29 of the Pondicherry University Act, 1985:-
(a) Thirty-sixth Annual Report of th e Pondicherry University, Puducherry, for
the year 2021-22.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above University.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers
mentioned at (1) (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 880/18/24] 
(iv) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section
(5) of Section 28 and sub-section (3) of Section 37 of the Indian Institutes of
Information Technology (Public-Private Partnership) Act, 2017:-
(a) Annual Report of the Indian Instit ute of Information Technology (IIIT),
Senapati, Manipur, for the year 2023-24.
(b) Annual Accounts of the Indian Instit ute of Information Technology(IIIT),
Senapati, Manipur, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 874/18/24] 
(v) (1) A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 28 and sub-section 4 of Section 29 of the University of
Hyderabad Act, 1974: -
(a) Forty-eighth Annual Report of the University of Hyderabad, for the year
2022-23.
(b) Annual Accounts of the University of  Hyderabad, for the year 2022-23, and
the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by the Government on the working of the above University.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers
mentioned at (1) (a) and (b) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 753/18/24] 
[ 27 November, 2024 ]
5

 
(vi) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-section 
(2) of Section 38 and sub-section (3) of Section 39 of the Delhi University Act, 
1922:- 
(a)  One-hundredth Annual Report (Part I,  II & III) of the University of Delhi, 
for the year 2022-23. 
(b)  Annual Accounts of the University of Delhi, for the year 2022-23, and the 
Audit Report thereon. 
(c)  Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) (a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 870/18/24] 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon'ble  Members,  I  have recei ved 18 notices under Rule 267.  
Shri Sanjay Singh  has  demanded  discussion  over  increase  in  crimes  in  Delhi. 
Ms. Sushmita Dev, Shri Tiruchi Siva, Shri Raghav Chadha and Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
have sought discussion on alarming and continuing violence in the State of Manipur. 
Dr. John Brittas, Shri A. A. Rahim, Pr of. Ram Gopal Yadav an d Shri Abdul Wahab 
have sought discussion over recent violen ce in Sambhal, Uttar Pradesh. The notices 
from Shri G. C. Chandrashe khar, Shri Randeep Singh Su rjewala, Dr. Syed Naseer 
Hussain,  Shri  Neeraj  Dangi,  Shrimati  R enuka  Choudhury,  Shri Rajeev Shukla, 
Shri Pramod Tiwari, Shri Akhilesh Prasad  Singh and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
have demanded constitution of JPC to in vestigate the alleged misconduct, including 
corruption, bribery and financial irregularities of Adani group in connivance with other 
authorities.  
 Hon'ble Members, as I have reiterated on several occasions, I thought it wise 
to bestow focused attention given the situation that we are entering the last quarter of 
the century of adoption of the Constitution of India. We had the great occasion to 
celebrate it yesterday. And, therefore, I emphasized that this House, the House of 
Elders, the Upper House, the Council of St ates, needs to reflect and follow well-
established traditions that a ruling of the Chair requires deferenc e, and not cause of 
differences. I have, in detail, given out as to why in these situat ions the notices are 
not being accepted. As a matter of fact, I took the House in confidence in making the 
House aware that if you look at the journey of this House with reference to Rule 267, 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

even for the last 30 years, where we ha ve had various political dispensations in 
authority, in governance, the number was never beyond a single digit. And, the 
background every time reflected a cons ensual approach, a dialogue between the 
parties. Keeping everything in mind, while not being able to lend my concurrence to 
these notices, I would appeal to the Members of this House, this being a historic day, 
the very first day of the fourth quarter of  the century of adop tion of the Indian 
Constitution, let us raise the productivity ba r, let us generate an atmosphere that we 
exemplify by discussion, dialogue, deliberation and adherence to rules.  
All these issues, Hon'ble Members, there will be an occasion to raise, in 
accordance with rules.  Since there is a prov ision in the rules to raise these issues in 
one form or the other by motions that are provided, these notices are being declined. 
…(Interruptions).. 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI (Rajasthan): Sir, …(Interruptions).. 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN (Karnataka): Sir, Rule 267. …(Interruptions)… 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please sit down.  … (Interruptions).. Nothing will go on record. 
…(Interruptions)…
  Hon'ble Members, take your seats. …(Interruptions)…  Nothing will 
go on record. … (Interruptions)…  Nothing will go on record. … (Interruptions)…  T h e  
House is adjourned to meet at 11.30 a.m. today.  
The House then adjourned at eleven minutes past eleven of the clock. 
The House reassembled at thirty minutes past eleven of the Clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let the House be in order. ...(Interruptions)... Let the House be in 
order, which means, let everyone be on his or her seat. Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
Allow me to proceed with the listed Business of the House and ...(Interruptions)... 
Jairamji, let me make two assertions. You are very good when you use your pen. 
...(Interruptions)... Here also, do the same thing. ...(Interruptions)...  Your vocal 
cords are fine when you get a legitimate platform to speak. ...(Interruptions)... It is 
legitimate, but with permission of the Chair.  So, please ...(Interruptions)... I know it 
is difficult to give up these habits, but every time you make . ..(Interruptions)... That 
is not appropriate. Please, please. ...(Interruptions)... Pramod Tiwariji, 
...(Interruptions)... One minute ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. 
[ 27 November, 2024 ]
7

...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... Do you have a 
point of order? ...(Interruptions)... You can't raise a point of order when 
...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, there can be no point of order when the House 
is in disorder. ...(Interruptions)...  The House is in disorder. ...(Interruptions)...  
The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 28 th  November, 
2024. 
The House then adjourned at thirty-two minutes past eleven of the clock till eleven of 
the clock on Thursday, the 28th November, 2024. 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 