Vol. 265 Wednesday, 
No. 8 31st July, 2024 
 9 Srava na, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTE
NTS 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 10) 
Statement by Minister- 
S
tatus of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 342nd Report of 
the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture - Laid on the Table (page 10) 
Motion for Election to the Committee on Official Language - Adopted 
(pages 10 - 11) 
Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee (page 11) 
Panel of Vice-Chairpersons (pages 11 - 12) 
Announcements by the Chair (page 12) 
Regarding various matters raised in the House (pages 12 - 15) 
Matters raised with permission - 
Demand to increase the compensation amount for the victims affected by natural 
disaster (pages 15 - 16) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Demand for the provision of separate baby berth in every train in the country  
(pages 17 - 18) 
Demand for new railway line between Manam adurai to Vilathikulam in Tamil Nadu 
(page 18) 
Demand to convert Yavatmal -Murtizapur-Achalpur railway line in Maharashtra into 
a broad gauge (pages 18 - 19) 
Demand to start a superfast train from Manikpur Junction in Uttar Pradesh to Delhi 
(pages 19 - 20) 
Demand to extend the benefit of the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (Ayushman Card) to the people Below the Poverty Line (pages 20 - 21) 
Demand for conservation, propagation and restoration of Sanskrit language in the 
country (pages 21 -22) 
Concern over rising cases of suicides among students (pages 22 - 23) 
Demand to elevate Udaipur Passport Seva Kendra to Regional Passport Office 
status (pages 23 - 24) 
Concern over the financial crisis of the All India Fair Price Shop dealers 
(pages 24 - 25) 
Demand to enhance the availability of sports infrastructure in the country 
(pages 25 - 26) 
Demand to provide hostel and canteen facilities to the students in Delhi (page 26) 
Concern over increasing incidents of train accidents in the country (pages 27 - 28) 
Demand to introduce a scheme for the welfare of Himalayan forest dwellers  
(pages 28 - 29) 
Demand to provide free education to the children of widows across the country  
(pages 29 - 30) 
Yamuna flood water in parts of Rajasthan (pages 30 - 31) 
Concern over the attempt to challenge the Writ of the Parliament by executive 
authority (pages 31 - 32) 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 32 - 46 and pages 48 - 59) 
[An
swers to Starred and Un -starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi)  are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
      https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Observation by the Chair (pages 46 - 47) 
Calling Attention to Matter of Urgent Public Importance - 
The situation arising out of devastating landslide in Wayanad district in the State of 
Kerala (pages 59 - 80) 
Special Mentions- 
Demand to declare extreme heat as a natural disaster (page 81) 
Concern over Ayushman Bharat Scheme (pages 81 - 82) 
Inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ (Non-Violence) in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution 
(pages 82 - 83) 
Demand for establishment of CGHS Wellness Centre in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh 
(pages 83 - 84) 
Concern over development work in Punjab (page 84) 
Demand t o establish full- fledged AIIMS in Koraput, Sambalpur and Balasore 
(pages 84 - 85) 
Demand to start Maharishi Valmiki Scholarship (pages 85 - 86) 
Need for more doppler weather radars in Bihar (pages 86 - 87) 
Demand for inclusion of Gojri language in the 8th Schedul e of the Constitution  
(page 87) 
Demand for setting up a Government Industrial Park in Chandauli District 
(pages 87 - 88) 
Request to resolve issues related to Jal Jeevan Mission in Odisha (page 88) 
Demand for direct train services from Pune to Nashik (pages 88 - 89) 
Demand to increase supply of Fertilizers to Odisha (pages 89 - 90) 
Concern over increase in Anti-microbial resistance in India (page 90) 
Demand for implemention of Vajjar model across the country (page 91) 
Demand for 2nd Central University at Puri in Odisha (pages 91 - 92) 
Need to allocate funds to various Labour Welfare Boards whose funding was 
stopped due to repeal of various labour laws (pages 92 - 93) 
Demand for establishment of virtual High Court Bench in Udaipur Division 
(page 93) 
Demand to convert Salem to Chengapalli NH- 544 from 4 lanes to 6 lanes in Tamil 
Nadu (pages 93 - 94) 
Concern over wrong prescriptions being issued to patients (page 94) 
Request for starting a Sainik School in Puducherry (page 95) 
Concern over flood affected people in Kirandul of Dantewada (pages 95 - 96) 

Demand to increase the bed strength at ESIC Medical College and PGIMSR, K.K. 
Nagar, Chennai to 1,200 (pages 96 - 97) 
Demand for proposed Military Academy at Sri Anandpur Sahib (page 97) 
Demand to complete approval process of Bongaigaon Refinery (BGR), project 
expansion in Assam (pages 97 - 98) 
Demand to abolish GST on Assistive Products for persons with disabilities and 
ensuring adequate budgetary support (pages 98 - 99) 
Concern over aviation safety incident at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International 
Airport (CSMI Airport) Mumbai (page 99) 
Request for establishment of Industrial Model Township (IMT) in Ambala 
(page 100) 
Demand to teach traffic rules subject in country from primary level in schools 
(pages 100 - 101) 
Concern over critical railways safety staffing issues amidst tragic mishaps 
(pages 101 - 102) 
Demand for Mailani-Farrukhabad new railway line project (pages 172 - 173) 
Demand for directions for mandatory display of the Preamble of Constitution of  
India in all the Government institutions (pages 173 - 174) 
Demand for direct train services from Lucknow to various other railway stations  
(pages 174) 
Demand for further improvement of facilities of Bharat Sanchar Nigam (BSNL) in 
Uttarakhand (pages 174 - 175) 
Demand for Giving ST Status to 11 left out castes of Gorkha Community and giving 
exemption to Gorkha brothers of the whole country in paramilitary forces 
(page 175)  
Concern over water scarcity in Marathwada region (pages 175 - 176) 
General Discussion - Concluded 
The Union Budget, 2024-25 (pages 102 - 135) 
The Budget of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, 2024-25 (pages 102 - 135) 
Motion for Suspension of Rule 272-Adopted (page 135) 
Resignation by Member -Accepted (page 136) 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs - Not  
concluded (Pages 136 - 172) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Wednesday, the 31st July, 2024 / 9 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Papers to be laid on the Table.  
Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of the Samagra Shiksha Programmes in Haryana, 
Madhya Pradesh and Punjab and related papers 
िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी जयंत चौधरी) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित 
(अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ : 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Samagra Shiksha Programme,
Haryana, for the year 2022-23, togeth er with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Programme.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 431/18/24] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report of the Samagra Shiksha Programme, Madhya Pradesh,
for the year 2022-23. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Programme.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 435/18/24] 
(iii) (a) Annual Report of the Samagra Shik sha Programme, Punjab, for the
year 2022-23. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Programme.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 432/18/24] 

I. Notifications of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
II.     Annual Assessment Report (2022-23) of the Department of Official Language 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ को सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ :- 
 
I.  (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, under sub-section (3) of  Section 156 of the Indo-Tibetan Border 
Police Force Act, 1992:- 
 
(1) G.S.R. 136(E)., dated the 26th Februa ry, 2024, publishing the Indo-Tibetan 
Border Police Force, Armourer Cadre (Group 'A' posts) Recruitment 
(Amendment) Rules, 2024. 
(2) G.S.R. 137(E)., dated 26th February, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Deputy Commandant (Official 
Language) and Assistant Commandant (Official Language), Group 'A'  
Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(3) G.S.R. 284(E)., dated the 20th May, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Fo rce, Judge Attorney General (Deputy 
Inspector General) and Deputy Judge Attorney General (Deputy 
Commandant) Group 'A'  Posts, Recruitment Rules, 2024.  
(4) G.S.R. 288(E)., dated the 22nd May, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Fo rce, General Duty Cadre (Group 'B' 
Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2024.  
(5) G.S.R. 318(E)., dated the 10th June, 2024, publishing the Indo-Tibetan 
Border Police Force, Combatant Ministerial and Combatant Stenographer 
Cadre (Group 'B' Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(6) G.S.R. 319(E)., dated the 10th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Education and Stress Counsellor 
Cadre, Inspector (Education and St ress Counsellor) and Sub-Inspector 
(Education and Stress Counsellor), Group 'B' Posts, Recruitment Rules, 
2024. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (6) See No. L. T. 515/18/24] 
 
(ii)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, framed under Article 309 of the Constitution:- 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

Report and Accounts (2022- 2023 and 2023-2024) of various Institutes, Societies, 
Institution, Organizations, Associations, Council and Centres and related papers 
 
सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी बी.एल. वमार्): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ :- 
(1) G.S.R. 41., dated the 6th April, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
National Fire Service College, Nagp ur, Stenographer Grade I (Group 'B' 
Post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(2) G.S.R. 43., in the Weekly Gazette  dated the April 7 – April 13, 2024, 
publishing the National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Multi Tasking Staff 
Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(3) G.S.R. 44., dated the 6th April, 2024 , publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Lower Division Clerk, (Group 
'C' post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(4) G.S.R. 48., in the Weekly Gazette dated the April 21 – April 27,  2024, 
publishing the Ministry of Home Affa irs, National Fire Service College, 
Nagpur, Radio Mechanic (Group 'C' Post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(5) G.S.R. 86., dated the 29th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Electrician, (Group ‘C’ Post) 
Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(6) G.S.R. 87., dated the 29th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College , Nagpur, Leading Fireman, (Group 'C' 
Post) Recruitment Rules, 2024. 
(7) G.S.R. 88., dated the 29th June, 2024, publishing the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Lower Division Clerk, (Group 
'C' Post) Recruitment (amendment) Rules, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (7) See No. L. T. 514/18/24] 
 
II. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Fi fty-fourth Annual Assessment Report of the 
Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs, re garding Programme for 
accelerating the spread and development of Hindi and its progressive use for various 
official purposes of the Union and its implementation, for the year 2022-23. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 308/18/24] 
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
3

(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Siri Institute for the Mentally 
   Handicapped Kakinada, East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh, for the 
  year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.  
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 313/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e Spurthy Welfare Society, Prakasam  
  District, Andhra Pradesh, for th e year 2022-23, together with the   
  Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Society. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at  
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 314/18/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e Al Shifa Minority Institutions for  
  Mentally Retarded and Old Aged, Kadapa District, Andhra Pradesh, for  
  the year 2022-23, together with th e Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institution. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at  
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 315/18/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of  the J&J Karunodaya Institute for  
  Mentally Handicapped, Eluru, An dhra Pradesh, for the year 2022-23,  
  together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.  
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at  
  (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 316/18/24] 
 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of  the North Bengal Handicapped  
  Rehabilitation Society, Siliguri, West Bengal, for the year 2023-24,  
  together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Society. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 317/18/24] 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

(vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Social and Health Development
Organization, Imphal, Manipur, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Organization.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 318/18/24] 
(vii) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of th e Surya Kiran Parents Association for
the Welfare of Mentally Handi capped Children, Guntur, Andhra 
Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, togeth er with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 319/18/24] 
(viii) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Sneha Soci ety for Rural
Reconstruction, Nizamabad, Telangana, for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.    
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Society.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 320/18/24] 
(ix) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of Council for Development of Poor and
Labourers, Imphal West, Manipur, for the year 2023-24, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 321/18/24] 
(x) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Kachajuli Physically Handicapped
(Deaf & Dumb) School & Training Centre, Lakhimpur, Assam, for the 
year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 322/18/24] 
(xi) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the Pragathi Charities, Nellore, Andhra
Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, togeth er with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
5

 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Organization. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 323/18/24] 
 
(xii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of  the Friends of Handicapped-India  
  Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, for the year  2023-24, together with the Auditor's  
  Report on the Accounts. 
 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Organization . 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 324/18/24] 
 
(xiii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for Disabled Children,  
  Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, for th e year 2023-24, together with the  
  Auditor's Report on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 325/18/24] 
 
(xiv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the PAWMENCAP (Parents Association  
  for the Welfare of Mentally Handicapped Persons), Telangana, for the  
  year 2023-24, together with the Audi tor's Report on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 326/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of Nati onal Forensic Sciences University, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat and related papers 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी बंिड संजय क ुमार) :  महोदय, मȅ राÍटर्ीय न्याया लियक िवज्ञान 
िवÌविवǏालय अिधिनयम, 2020 की धारा 36 की  उप-धारा (4) और  धारा 38 की उप-धारा (3) 
क े अधीन िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ : - 
 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Forensic Sciences 
University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 328/18/24] 
 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

I. Notification of the  Ministry of Education 
II. Report and accounts (2022-23) of SLBSNSU, New Delhi and related papers 
III. Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of various institutes and related papers 
IV.Report and Accounts (2022-23) of AMU, Aligarh and related papers 
V. Report  and Accounts (2021-22) of the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION  (SHRI SUKANTA 
MAJUMDAR): Sir, I lay on the Table—  
 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Education (Department of Higher 
Education) Notification No. G.S.R. 324(E)., dated the 14 th June, 2024, publishing 
the Ministry of Education, Auroville Foundation, Deputy Secretary, Recruitment Rules, 
2024, under Section 33 of the Auroville Foundation Act, 1988. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 264/18/24] 
 
II.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (3) 
of Sections 31 and sub-section (4) of Sect ion 32 of the Central Sanskrit Universities 
Act, 2020:- 
 (a) Annual Report of the Shri Lal Baha dur Shastri National Sanskrit 
University (SLBSNSU), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit 
University (SLBSNSU), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23,  
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a)and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 266/18/24] 
 
III. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (4) 
of Section 22 of the National Institute of Technology, Science Education & Research 
Act, 2007:- 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional Institute of Technology 
(NIT) Mizoram, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report 
on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
7

 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 625/18/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional Institute of Technology 
(NIT) Andhra Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s 
Report on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 268/18/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional Institute of Technology 
(NIT) Manipur, for the year 2022-23, t ogether with the Auditor’s Report 
on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 270/18/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional Institute of Technology 
(NIT) Rourkela, Odisha, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 269/18/24] 
 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Ma laviya National Institute of 
Technology (MNIT) Jaipur, Rajastha n, for the year 2022-23, together 
with the Auditor’s Report on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 267/18/24] 
 
(vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Visvesvaraya National Institute of 
Technology (VNIT) Nagpur, Maharashtra, for the year 2022-23, together 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

with the Auditor’s Report on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 271/18/24] 
 
IV. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (3) 
of Section 34 and sub-section (4) of Sectio n 35 of the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 
1920:- 
 
 (a) Annual Report of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh, for the 
year 2022-23. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh, for the 
year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 484/18/24] 
 
V.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (3) 
of Section 29 and sub-section (4) of Section 30 of the Babasaheb Bhimrao 
Ambedkar University Act, 1994:- 
 
 (a) Annual Report of the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Babasaheb Bh imrao Ambedkar University, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, for the ye ar 2021-22, and the Audit Report 
thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 483/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of NHAI, New Delhi and related papers 
 
सड़क पिरवहन और राजमागर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा) : महोदय, मȅ  भारतीय 
राÍटर्ीय राजमागर् Ģािधकरण अिधिनयम, 1988 की धारा 24 क े अधीन िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
9

  
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 342nd Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY  OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
(SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA) : Sir, I lay a statement regarding Status of implementation 
of recommendations contained in the 342 nd Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transp ort, Tourism and Culture on Demands for 
Grants 2023-24 pertaining to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 204/18/24] 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE COMMITTEE ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Nityanand Rai to move a motion for election of six Members to 
the Committee on Official Languages. 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत ĢÎताव उपिÎथत  
करता हूँ :— 
''िक राजभाषा अिधिनयम, 1963 (1963 का 19) की धारा 4 की धारा (2)  क े अनुसरण मȂ यह 
सभा, उस रीित से, जैसा सभापित िनदेश दȂ,  राज्य सभा की सदÎयता से सदÎयȗ क े 
सेवािनवृिǄ क े कारण िरƪ  हुए छ: Îथानȗ को भरने क े िलए राज्य सभा क े सदÎयȗ मȂ से छ: 
सदÎयȗ को राजभाषा सिमित क े सदÎय होने क े िलए िनवार्िचत करने  की कायर्वाही करȂ।" 
एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ :- 
 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nati onal Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI), New Delhi, for the year 20 22-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Authority. 
 (c) Statements giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 626/18/24] 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have to inform hon. Members that the Business Advisory Committee 
in its meeting held on 30th July, 2024 recommended the following Ministries for 
discussion on their working along with the part ies that will initiate the discussion during 
the current Session:  
 
1. Housing and Urban Affairs -- Bhartiya Janata Party 
2. Agriculture and Farmers Welfare -- Indian National Congress 
 
              Further the Committee recomme nded that two more Ministries, to be taken up 
for discussion during the Session, may be finalized by the Chairman after having 
consultations in due course.  It was also recommended that All India Trinamool 
Congress and DMK may initiate the discussion on the remaining Ministries.  
 The Committee has also recommended that each Ministry will be allocated a 
discussion time of four hours.  The Co mmittee further recommended that four hours 
may be allotted for the discussion on co nsideration and passing of the Bhartiya 
Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024, after it is introduced, considered and passed by Lok Sabha.  
 
  
PANEL OF VICE-CHAIRPERSONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I have to inform Members that Panel of Vice-
Chairpersons has been reconstituted with the following Members: 
1. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
2. Dr. Fauzia Khan 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
5. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy 
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
7. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
8. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
11

 Hon. Members, we continue to maintain gender parity in the matter of 
Chairpersons.  
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, if the House so agrees, the lunch hour may be 
dispensed with to take up the permitted Sp ecial Mentions and the House may also sit 
late today to complete the listed Business in today's List of Business.  Do I have the 
leave of the House to dispense with the lu nch hour and sit late today as indicated 
accordingly? 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I am indeed grateful to the ho n. Members for this extension 
because this enables a large number of Members to utilise the time and I have 
developed the practice if any Member seeks some time more, I am enabling it.   
 Hon. Members, a large number of Memb ers of the House from both sides, 
including the hon. Minister, have expresse d their deep concern over the unfortunate 
event, a massive landslide and loss of lives in Wayanad district of Kerala during the 
early hours of July 30, 2024.  Precious lives  have been lost and the number is still 
being counted.  All agencies have converged to render assistance. I deem it 
appropriate taking into consideration the sentiments of the House to have a Calling 
Attention Motion on this under Rule 180 an d the same shall be today at 1.00 p.m. as 
there will be no lunch recess hour.   
 
 
REGARDING VARIOUS MATTERS RAISED IN THE HOUSE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, is not here.  I have received one notice 
under Rule 267 from Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy.  Surprisingly, in spite of my directive, the 
notice was given yesterday while the House was in Session.  All of you are aware, if 
the House is in Session, the matter can be raised during the House.  This kind of 
disregard of the rules is wholly unacceptabl e.  The notice was given at 3.16 p.m. 
yesterday.  This indicates in what manner we are taking employment of this rule.  This 
requires a little more attention and consideration as indicated by me earlier. 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 I am constrained that I cannot accord my acceptance when the irregularities 
are so severe.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seat.  I will go as per the list.  
...(Interruptions)...  I know ...(Interruptions)...  And, she is very experienced and 
she is not the only one doing it.  She has do ne it very decorously.  She has abided by 
the Chair and she has great  experience, unlike some Members who engage into 
disturbance.   
Now, we will take up the matters to be ra ised with the permission of the Chair.  
Shri Mahendra Bhatt to speak on demand for increasing the compensation amount 
for victims affected from natural disaster. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड): महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार का ध्यान राÍटर्ीय आपदा Ģबंधन 
Ģािधकरण क े तहत बाढ़, भूÎखलन और भूक ं प मȂ हुई हािन पर आवÌयक Ģितपूिर्त मȂ वृिǉ करने 
तथा भवन क्षि
त एवं क ृिष भूिम क े भूÎखलन तथा बाढ़ से क्षित होने पर...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) : सर,... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Member, one minute ...(Interruptions)... आप एक बार बैठ 
जाइए। मेरी बात सुिनए। मȅ आपसे हाथ जोड़कर Ģाथर्ना करता हूं िक आप हाथ उठाते हȅ, लेिकन 
पीछे से कोरस होता है, I don’t appreciate it.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्
न खरगे : सर, मȅ आपकी तरफ भी देखता हूं। मȅ खुद ही देखता हूं। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Would you please hear me?  आप एक बार बैठ जाइए I  I had called the 
hon. Member.  I have, having respect for you, asked the hon. Member to take seat, 
but I will appeal to you that when the Leader of the Opposition raises hand, it is bound 
to have my utmost consideration.  Why should your Members be in chorus?  Sir, I 
plead with you.  Whenever you raise hand ...(Interruptions)... We will not have 
dialogue.  Whenever you raise your hand, it will receive my highest consideration.  I 
only look the other way round when they en gage into a chorus.  Kindly have some 
kind of direction for them.  Now, the hon. Leader of the Opposition.  Please state the 
issue that you wish to raise.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE :  Sir, the issue is that कल मȅ यहां लाÎट मूमȂट मȂ हाउस 
adjourn होने से पहले नहीं था। उस वƪ एक माननीय सदÎय, घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी ने यहां इस 
सदन मȂ एक समÎया उठाई। उनके  मन मȂ क्या था, वह शायद मुझे मालूम है। पोिलिटक्स मȂ मȅ 
पहली जेनरेशन से हूं। मȅ अके ले ही पॉिलिटक्स
 मȂ आया था, मेरे पीछे पॉिलिटक्स मȂ मेरे मां-बाप 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
13

नहीं थे, उनका देहांत हो गया था। मां क े देहांत क े बाद अके ले मेरे िपता जी ही बचे थे।  मेरे िपता 
जी ने मुझे पाला, पोसा ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please lend your ears to the hon. Leader of the Opposition.   And, I 
will not bear this from either side.  Hon. Leader of the House, please keep them under 
control.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : मȅ यहां तक उनके  आशीवार्द से पहुंचा हूं। At the age of 85, वे गुज़र गए 
थे।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : सर, मȅ चाहता हूं िक आप 95 की age से भी ज्यादा िजएं।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : मȅ इस माहौल म
 Ȃ और ज्यादा जीना नहीं चाहता। इस माहौल मȂ मȅ और 
ज्यादा िदन नहीं रहना चाहता। मुझे बुरा लगा िक ितवाड़ी जी ने कहा िक खरगे जी का नाम 
मिÊलकाजुर्न है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : क्या है? 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मिÊलकाजुर्न है, यह िशव का नाम है। 12 ज्योितिलȊग क े नामȗ मȂ से 
एक नाम मेरा रखा गया। म
ेरा नाम मेरे िपता जी ने सोच-समझ कर रखा था िक 12 ज्योितिलȊग मȂ 
से एक नाम मेरे बेटे का है, लेिकन मȅ अपने पिरवार से अके ले ही पॉिलिटक्स मȂ आया था, student 
movement मȂ आया था, labour movement मȂ आया, िफर कांगर्ेस का Åलॉक Ģ
ेिज़डȂट बन कर at 
the age of 25 आया था।  
 मȅ पूछना चाहता हूं िक इनको क्या िदक्कत है िक मेरे बारे मȂ उन्हȗ ने कहा िक उनका नाम 
मिÊलकाजुर्न है और िशव का नाम भी है।  इनका पूरा खानदान पॉिलिटक्स मȂ है।  उन्हȗने 
पिरवारवाद क े बारे मȂ टीका-िटÃपणी की।  अगर मȅ पिरवारवाद की बात िनकालूंगा, तो बताऊं गा 
िक िकतने यहां पिरवारवाद वाले बैठे हȅ, उन सबका नाम बोलूंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित :  माननीय खरगे जी, माननीय खरगे जी... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्
न खरगे: मेरी आंखȗ क े सामने है, मेरे बाजू मȂ है, मेरे पीछे है, सब जगह 
है।...(Ëयवधान)... सर, म
ȅ आपसे िवनती करता हूं िक उसको एक्सपंज करना चािहए।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय सदÎयगण, सदन का हर सदÎय सÇमािनत है और माननीय खरगे जी का 
जीवन करीब छह दशक तक सावर्जिनक जीवन का है।  यह मȅ सदन मȂ कई बार कह चुका हूं और 
इधर भी बहुत सÇमािनत सदÎय हȅ। कोई भी ऐसा शÅद, जो माननीय खरगे जी को आहत करता है, 
वह िरकॉडर् मȂ नहीं रहेगा।  मȅ एक बात आपको कहना चाहूंगा िक उस समय मȅ क ुसीर् पर था।  मȅ इस 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

बारे मȂ आपसे चचार् करूं गा।  माननीय घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी का भी सावर्जिनक जीवन काफी लंबा 
है।  वे करीब चार दशक से राजनीित मȂ हȅ और संसदीय ËयवÎथा मȂ हȅ, उनका ऐसा मानक हो 
सके , मȅ नहीं मानता हूं, िफर भी मȅ बारीकी से अध्ययन करूं गा और कोई भी ऐसी चीज़, पर म ȅ एक 
बात आपको आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूं िक उस समय जब हाउस मȂ बोला गया, तब मȅ चेयर पर 
था, तो ऐसा महसूस नहीं हुआ िक आपके  बारे मȂ क ु छ अपशÅद कहे गए हȗ।  िफर भी मȅ देखूंगा।   
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश :  सर, ...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
Ǜी सभापित: जयराम जी, ...(Ëयवधान)... खरगे जी, आपके  सदÎय क ुसीर् मȂ बैठे-बैठे िडÎटबर् करते 
हȅ।  इतना गंभीर मामला है, यिद कोई बात खरगे जी को छू  गई, उस बात का मȅ बारीकी से 
अध्ययन ही नहीं कर पाऊं गा।  मेरा Ģयास रहेगा, क्यȗिक सदन, this is not a battle ground.  
We are not enemies of each other. हम कोई िवरोध
ी नहीं हȅ।  सदन मȂ पक्ष और Ģितपक्ष है, 
अनुभवी लोगȗ की कमी नहीं है और मȅ खुद Ëयिƪगत रूप  से जानता हूं और मेरे वातार्लाप मȂ भी 
सदन क े नेता, माननीय नƿा जी ने आपके  बारे मȂ िकतनी बातȂ कहीं ह
ȅ।  आपका जीवन है, यह बात 
मȅ कई बार बोल चुका हूं।  आपकी वकालत की शुरुआत  कहां हुई,  िजन महानुभाव ने Ëयिƪगत 
रूप  स
े चचार् की, वे सुĢीम कोटर् क े जज बने।  जब मȅ कणार्टक गया, तो उन्हȗने कहा िक आपने मेरे 
सामने वकालत की है।  राजÎथान हाई कोटर् मȂ की है, सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ की है।  मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे 
जी, जो राज्य सभा और लोक सभा म
Ȃ रहे हȅ, मेरा सौभाग्य है िक क ु छ समय तक उन्हȗने मेरे यहां 
शुरुआत  की थी। आपको आहत करने की कोई भी सदÎय सोचे, तो मुझे ऐसा नहीं लगता है।  मुझे 
भी क ु छ मामलȗ मȂ देखकर पीड़ा हुई थी।  माननीय एच.डी.देवेगौड़ा जी ने कभी नहीं कहा, पर 
इनके  बारे मȂ भी जब कहा गया, मुझे बुरा लगा।  तब मȅ इसिलए नहीं बोला िक हाउस उǎेिलत था। 
माननीय एच.डी.देवेगौड़ा जी, पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी और आप उन लोगȗ मȂ से हȅ, जो इस हाउस को 
सुशोिभत करते ह
ȅ,  उन लोगȗ मȂ से हȅ, जो हमारी Ģेरणा क े ǣोत हȅ।  मȅ गंभीरता से देखूंगा और 
चूंिक इसिलए मȅ ज्यादा कह रहा ह
ूं िक मुझे 1993 से 1998 तक माननीय घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी क े 
साथ िवधान सभा का सदÎय रहने का सौभाग्य िमला है।   उनके  मन मȂ यह बात नहीं आ सकती है, 
मȅ कह रहा हूं, िफर भी मȅ इसको बारीक
ी से देखूंगा।  Now, Shri Mahendra Bhatt.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION 
 
Demand to increase the compensation amount for the victims affected by natural 
disaster 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड) :  महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार का ध्यान राÍटर्ीय आपदा 
Ģबंधन Ģािधकरण क े तहत बाढ़, भूÎखलन और भूक ं प मȂ हुई हािन पर आवÌयक Ģितपूिर्त मȂ वृिǉ 
करने तथा ... (Ëयवधान)...  
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
15

MR. CHAIRMAN:  If you show off paper, I will not allow it.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ :  भवन क्षित एवं क ृिष भूिम क े भूÎखलन तथा बाढ़ मȂ क्षित होने पर िमलने वाले 
मुआवजे मȂ वृिǉ करने की ओर िदलाना चाहता हूं। महोदय ,आपदा Ģबंधन Ģािधकरण राज्य एवं 
जनपदȗ मȂ गिठत है , परंतु क Ȃदर्ीय राÍटर्ीय Ģबंधन Ģािधकरण क े मानकȗ क े िदशा िनदȃश मȂ ही 
मुआवजा की रािश देने का राज्यȗ को अिधकार है।   
 महोदय ,मȅ उǄराखंड राज्य का Ģितिनिधत्व करता ह
ूं ,वहां पर दैवी आपदा क े बार -बार 
आने से जहां लोगȗ को िव Îथािपत करना हमारे िलए चुनौती होता है ,वहीं आपदा मȂ क्षितपूिर्त की 
दर इतनी कम होती है िक Ģभािवतȗ को न्यायोिचत आिर्थक रािश नहीं िमल पाती है।   
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 महोदय , पहाड़ȗ मȂ िमƺी और पत्थर से बने पहाड़ी शैली क े मकान होते हȅ , इन्हȂ पक्के  
मकान की Ǜेणी मȂ नहीं माना जाता है और ये पिरवार मुआवजे से वंिचत रह जाते हȅ।  महोदय ,
क ु छ मकान भूÎखलन क्षेतर् मȂ पूरी तरह धराशाई नहीं होते ,परंत ु उन मकानȗ पर रहना बहुत ही 
खतरे क े दायरे मȂ रहता है।  आपदा का मानक है िक जब तक मकान पूणर्तया धराशाई न हो जाए ,
उन्हȂ मुआवजा Ǜेणी मȂ नहीं िलया जाता ह ै ,िजससे इन पिरवारȗ को िमलने वाले मुआवजे से वंिचत 
रहना पड़ता है।   
 महोदय , उǄराखंड मȂ छोटी जोत क े खेत होते हȅ तथा बाढ़ एवं भूÎखलन से ये खेत 
पूणर्तया क्षितगर्Îत हो जाते हȅ ,परंतु आपदा मानकȗ क े अनुसार इन खेतȗ को िमलने वाला मुआवजा 
इतना कम हो
ता है िक उन्हȂ अपने खेतȗ को िफर से खेती योग्य करना संभव ही नहीं होता है और 
अच्छे खेत बंजर हो जाते हȅ।   
 अत: इस लोक महत्व क े िवषय पर मȅ सरकार का ध्यान आकिर्ष
त करते हुए मांग करता हूं 
िक राÍटर्ीय आपदा Ģबंधन Ģािधकरण क े तहत आपदा Ģवािहत क्षेतर् क े िलए मुआवजे की धनरािश 
मȂ वृिǉ की जाए तथा मानकȗ मȂ भौगोिलक पिरिÎथितयȗ को ध्यान म Ȃ रखते हुए संशोधन करने का 
अिधकार राज्य सरकारȗ को Ģदान िकया जाए। 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Mahendra Bhatt : Shri Madan Rathore 
(Rajasthan), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Gujarat), Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
(West Bengal), Shri Subhash Barala (Har yana), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), 
Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhan d), Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu (Tamil Nadu).  
     
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand for the provision of separate baby berth in every train in the country 
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार ( मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन का ध्यान एक बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर आकिर्षत करना 
चाहूंगी। आज हमारे देश मȂ लाखȗ लोग टर्ेन से सफर करते हȅ और उनमȂ हम ारी क ु छ धातर्ी माताएं 
यानी lactating mothers भी सफर करती हȅ। अक्सर देखने मȂ यह आता है िक उनको सफर क े 
दौरान अपने बच्चे को साथ मȂ सुलाने मȂ, उसको फीिंडग करवाने मȂ क ु छ परेशािनयȗ का सामना 
करना पड़ता है।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज माननीय Ģध
ान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारतीय रेल नये 
कीिर्तमान Îथािपत कर रही है। िनत नये Ģयोगȗ और अिवÍकारȗ क े ǎारा ये कीिर्तमान Îथािपत िकए 
जा रहे हȅ। उस Ģगित की कड़ी मȂ माननी य रेल मंतर्ी जी ने क ु छ चयिनत टर्ेनȗ मȂ एक बेबी बथर् की 
शुरुआत  मदसर् डे पर की थी, िजसमȂ माताओं को बच्चȗ क े िलए एक अितिरƪ बथर् का Îथान िदया 
जाता है, जो िक फोÊडेबल होता है। जब आवÌयकता हो, तो उसका इÎतेमाल िकया जाता है और 
जब आवÌयकता नहीं हो, तो उसको फोÊड कर िदया जाता है। हमारे राज्य सभा क े सांसद डा. 
सुमेर िंसह सोलंकी जी ने भी रेल मंतर्ी जी से इसके  िलए आगर्ह िकया था। म ेरा आपसे यह िनवेदन 
है िक हमȂ समÎत टर्ेनȗ मȂ इस बेबी बथर् की शुरुआत  करनी चािहए, इसका Ģावधान करना चािहए। 
इसके  साथ ही एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय यह है िक जब टर्ेन चलती है, तो समÎत टर्ेनȗ मȂ सभी िडÅबे 
आपस मȂ िमले हुए होते हȅ, तब उसमȂ कोई ऐसा Îथान या कक्ष माता और िशशु क े िलए होना 
चािहए, जहां पर माता को अपने बच्चे को फीिंडग करवाने क े िलए Ģाइवेसी िमल सके । सर, यह 
मेरा भावनात्मक ĢÌन ह ै और मुझे लगता है िक भारतीय टर्ेन की सुिवधाओं मȂ इससे इजाफा होगा। 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh): Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Maya  Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati 
Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Na resh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Dr. Kalpana 
Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Dhananjay Bh imrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri Sa nt Balbir Singh (Punjab), Dr. Radha 
Mohan Das Agrawal (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (U ttar Pradesh), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharas htra), Shri Banshilal Gurjar (Madhya 
Pradesh), Ms. Indu Bala Goswami (Him achal Pradesh), Dr. Sikander Kumar 
(Himachal Pradesh), Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Maharashtra), Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Deve ndra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri 
Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), Sh ri Krishan Lal Panwar (Haryana), Shri 
Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), 
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shrimati  S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Mahua Maji 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
17

(Jharkhand), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odish a) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu (Tamil 
Nadu).                             
 
Demand for new railway line between Manamadurai to Vilathikulam in Tamil Nadu 
 
SHRI R. DHARMAR (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, the distance of the existing railway line from 
Chennai to Thoothukudi via Trichy, Madurai, Kovilpatti is 652 km, and the distance of 
the new railway project to be laid from Ar uppukkottai Vilathikulam to Thoothukudi is 
660 km.  Both these routes pass through the busy Madurai and Trichy junctions and 
the distance is not short.   But instead of going through Madurai Junction, an 
alternative railway line can be made from Ch ennai to Tuticorin which is very much less 
than 587 km, i.e. 65 km less.  For this, a new railway line of only 83 km from 
Manamadurai to Vilathikulam via Pasumbon, Kamudi, Perunali is enough.   The new 
Thoothukudi-Aruppukkottai link up to Vilathik ulam is nearing completion.  Apart from 
Manamadurai Junction, Karaikud i Junction will also be connected to this route, so 
there will be another connection from Chennai to Thoothukudi via Pattukottai, 
Trivarur. So, if a small new ra ilway line of 83 kilometres is built, Chennai to Tuticorin 
can get two more rail links apart from the ex isting Madurai-Kovilpatti route -- one via 
Trichy-Pudukkottai-Manamadurai-Kamudi-Vilathikulam and one via Viluppuram-
Tiruvarur-Pattukkottai-Karaikudi-Manamadurai.  You can al so get Pondicherry link. 
The benefits of this programme are numerous.   This route will become an alternative 
to the costly East Coast route due to th e availability of a ra ilway connecting the 
districts along the East Coast. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri  R. Dharmar: Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri S. Selvaganabathy (Puducherry), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and  
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand to convert Yavatmal-Murtizapur-Achalpur railway line in Maharashtra  
into a broad gauge 
 
डा.अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्) : उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ 
आपके  समक्ष बहुĢतीिक्षत यवतमाल-मुिर्तजापुर-अचलपुर नैरो गेज शकुं तला एक्सĢेस का रूपा ंतर 
Ĥॉड गेज मȂ करने की बाबत जीरो ऑवर मȂ बोल रहा हूं। 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 महोदय, िवदभर् Îवतंतर्पूणर् काल से ही कपास क े िलए Ģिसǉ है। मैनचेÎटर क े कपड़ा 
उǏोग क े िलए िवदभर् का कपास िनयार्त िकया जाता था। उस वƪ कपास ले जाने क े िलए 
यवतमाल- मुिर्तजापुर-अचलपुर नैरो गेज शकुं तला एक्सĢेस शुरू  की गई थी। इस टर्ेन क े साथ यु. 
िक क ेिलक नेक्सन क ंपनी उनके  करार क े अनुसार चल रही थी। 1952 मȂ सभी रेल यंतर्णा का 
राÍटर्ीयकरण िकया गया था। इस राÍटर्ीयकरण मȂ उपरोƪ रेल रूट  और शकुं तला एक्सĢेस रेलवे 
क े राÍटर्ीयकरण से वंिचत रही। दस साल पहले यह करार भी समाÃत हो गया और इस क ंपनी ने 
इस नैरो गेज को चलाना बंद कर िदया। उपसभापित महोदय, *"मȅने ऐसी छ ु क छ ु क नैरो गेज 
रेलवे मȂ यातर्ा करने का आनंद िलया है। इस टर्ेन क े बंद होने पर पूरा िवदभर् दुखी हुआ था और 
उनके  पुनरुǉार की मांग पूरे िवदभर् से आ रही है। शकुं तला रेलवे िवकास सिमित और कई रेलवे 
संगठन इसके  िलए आंदोलन कर रहे हȅ, इसिलए रेल मंतर्ालय ǎारा इस नैरो गेज रेल मागर् को 
Ĥॉड गेज मȂ पिरविर्तत करना आवÌयक है।" 
 महोदय, यवतमाल, अकोला और अमरावती िजलȗ क े महत्वपूणर् Ëयापारी तथा गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ 
को जोड़ने वाली इस नैरो गेज रेलवे का रूपा ंतर Ĥॉड गेज मȂ करना सवार्ंगीण िवकास करने की 
दृिÍट से महत्वपूणर् है। इन तीन िजलȗ क े रेलवे से जुड़ जाने क े बाद औǏोिगक िवकास तथा क ृ िष 
उपज का पिरवहन सुलभ हो जाएगा। अचलपुर आिदवासी बेÊट मेलघाट और यवतमाल अभी तक 
रेलवे से जुड़ी नहीं है। इसके  बाद  यह पुन: मुंबई और िदÊली से डायरेक्ट्ली कनेक्ट हो जाएगी। 
महोदय, कांगर्ेस शासन मȂ अनेक Ģयासȗ तथा जनता की मांग क
े  बाद भी इसे दुलर्िक्षत िकया गया। 
इस नैरो गेज का Ĥॉड गेज मȂ रूपा ंतरण करने क े  िलए भू संपादन करने की कोई जरूरत नहीं है, 
क्यȗिक रेल क े पास ही पयार्Ãत जमीन उपलÅध है। इसमȂ क ु छ कानूनी िदक्कतȂ थीं, लेिकन अब वे 
दूर हो गई हȅ, इसिलए मेरी आपके  माध्यम से रेल मंतर्ी जी से नĦ िवनती ह ै िक बहुĢतीिक्षत 
यवतमाल-मुिर्तजापुर-अचलपुर नैरो गेज शकुं तला एक्सĢेस का रूपा ंतर Ĥॉड गेज मȂ तीĨ गित से 
शुरू  करȂ और पिÌचम िवदभर् की शान रहने वाली शकुं तला एक्सĢेस का श ुरू  होना मागास संभाग 
क े िवकास क े िलए महत्वपूणर् घटना रहेगी। महोदय, सरकार यह कदम उठाएगी - मȅ ऐसी उÇमीद 
करता हूं, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Me mber, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde : Shri Dhananjay 
Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauz ia Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha).  
   
Demand to start a superfast train from Manikpur Junction in Uttar Pradesh to Delhi 
 
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद (उǄर Ģदेश) : उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। म
 ȅ सदन 
क े समक्ष बुंदेलखंड क े िचतर्कू ट धाम से एक नई टर्ेन चलाने की िडमांड करता हूं, क्यȗिक लाखȗ 
लोगȗ का वहाँ पर आवागमन होता है और आज तक िचतर्कू ट से कोई सीधी टर्ेन नहीं चली है। 
                                         
* Hindi translation of the original speech delivered in Marathi. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
19

महोदय, मȅ मािनकपुर जंक्शन से नई िदÊली वाया िचतर्कू ट, बाँदा, खैरादा जंक्शन, सुमेरपुर, 
हमीरपुर रोड, घाटमपुर, भीमसेन, कानपुर सȅटर्ल से होते हुए एक सुपरफाÎट टर्ेन Ģितिदन चलाए 
जाने क े संबंध मȂ आपसे अनुरोध करना चाहता हूं।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ उǄर Ģदेश क े बुंदेलखंड क े िपछड़े जनपद हमीरपुर का रहने 
वाला हूं। जनपद हमीरपुर अपनी Îथापना क
े  200 वष र् पूणर् कर चुका है, लेिकन आज भी रेलवे 
पिरवहन से संबंिधत तमाम समÎयाओं से गर्िसत है। जनपद हमीरपुर मȂ एकमातर् रेलवे टर्ैक 
मािनकपुर जंक्शन से कानपुर सȅटर्ल क े मध्य िÎथत है। इसमȂ बहुत सीिमत टर्ेन्स का आवागमन है। 
इतना ही नहीं जनपद हमीरपुर से िनकलने वाले एकमातर् र ेलवे टर्ैक खैरादा जंक्शन, सुमेरपुर, 
हमीरपुर रोड, घाटमपुर, भीमसेन, कानपुर सȅटर्ल से होते हुए नई िदÊली क े िलए कोई भी टर्ेन 
उपलÅध नहीं है।  
 संत तुलसीदास जी की तपोभूिम, िचतर्कू ट धाम सनातन धमर् की आÎथा का Ģतीक है, 
धािर्मक Îथल है। यहाँ देश भर से लाखȗ की संख्या मȂ Ǜǉालु भगव
ान कामतानाथ जी क े दशर्न क े 
िलए आते-जाते हȅ। इस रूट  से Ģितिदन एक सुपरफाÎट टर्ेन चलने से Ǜǉालुओं को यातायात की 
किठनाइयȗ से िनजात िमलेगी। अत: सदन क े माध्यम से, मȅ माननीय रेल मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करता
 
हूँ िक उƪ रूट  पर नई सुपरफाÎट टर्ेन चलाने का कÍट करȂ, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by t
he hon. Member, Shri  Baburam Nishad:   Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao 
Bonde (Maharashtra), Shrimati S. Phangn on Konyak (Nagaland), Shri Banshilal 
Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Sa ini (Uttarakhand), Shri Naresh Bansal 
(Uttarakhand), Shrimati Geeta alias Ch andraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati 
Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati  Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Prad esh), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Aditya Prasad 
(Jharkhand), Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai De sai (Gujarat), Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
(Haryana), Shri Devendra Pratap Sing h (Chhattisgarh), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri S. Selvaganabathy (Puducherry), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha),  Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel (Bihar) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
माननीय Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार जी। 'Demand for extending the benefit of Ayushman 
Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (Ayushman Card) to people Below Poverty 
Line.'    
 
Demand to extend the benefit of the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (Ayushman Card) to the people Below the Poverty Line 
 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय,  मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से सरकार का ध्यान आयुÍमान 
भारत - Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना ( आयुÍमान काडर्) की तरफ आकृ Íट कराना चाहता हूँ, 
िजसमȂ ऐसे लोग, िजनके  पिरवार मȂ छ: सदÎय से कम, अथार्त एक पिरवार मȂ चार सदÎय ही हȅ, 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

उनको आयुÍमान भारत - Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना का लाभ नहीं िमल रहा है। ऐसे मȂ, जो 
गरीब पिरवार, िवधवा मिहलाएं हȅ, वे क Ȃ दर् सरकार की महत्वाकांक्षी योजना, िजसमȂ पाँच लाख 
रुपय े तक िन:शुÊक ÎवाÎथ्य की ËयवÎथा की गई है, िजससे वे उससे वंिचत हो रहे हȅ। माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने हर गरीब को िन:शुÊक ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाएं उपलÅध कराने क े िलए 2018 मȂ आयुÍमान 
भारत - Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना Ģारंभ की थी, िजसके  तहत गरीबी रेखा क े नीचे 
जीवनयापन करने वाले पिरवारȗ को इस
 योजना मȂ आच्छािदत िकया गया था। इसमȂ यह भी िनदȃश 
िकया गया था िक िजन लोगȗ का नाम वषर् 2011 की जनगणना मȂ गरीबी की रेखा क े नीचे 
जीवनयापन करने वाले पिरवारȗ क े रूप  मȂ शािमल है, उन्हीं पातर् पिरवारȗ को ही योज ना का लाभ 
िदया जाएगा। सरकार की ओर जारी इस गाइडलाइन क े चलते देश क े करोड़ȗ पिरवार योजना का 
लाभ पाने से वंिचत रह गए थे। इसे देखते हुए, एक बार िफर से नवीन आयुÍमान भारत - 
Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना 02 लागू की गई है। इस योजना को चलाने क े िलए, अिधक-से-
अिधक लोगȗ का आयुÍमान काडर् जारी करने क े िलए सरकार युǉ Îतर पर Ģयास कर रही ह
ै, 
लेिकन उन लोगȗ को समÎया आ रही है, िजनके  पिरवार मȂ छ: से कम सदÎय ह ȅ। अत: सदन क े 
माध्यम से, माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करना चाहता हूँ िक जनिहत मȂ आयुÍमान भारत - 
Ģधानमंतर्ी जन आरोग्य योजना का लाभ गरीबी रेखा क े नीचे जीवनयापन करने वाले सभी पातर् 
पिरवारȗ को िदया
 जाए, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Mithlesh Kumar:    Shri Sanjeev Arora 
(Punjab), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punj ab), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Na du), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 Hon. Dr. Dinesh Sharma, 'Demand for conservation, propagation and 
restoration of Sanskrit language in the country.'    
 
Demand for conservation, propagation and restoration of Sanskrit language in  
the country 
 
डा. िदनेश शमार् ( उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय  सभापित महोदय, संÎकृ त भाषा क े संरक्षण, Ģचार-
Ģसार, पुनÎथार्पन एवं अिनवायर् िवषय बनाए जाने वाले िवषय को उठाने की अनुमित देने क े िलए 
मȅ आपका आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ। मȅ सदन का ध्यान एक महत्वपूण
र् िवषय की ओर आकृ Íट करना 
चाहूँगा। संÎकृ त भाषा की महǄा और उसकी वतर्मान िÎथित पर िवचार रखते हुए, मȅ इस भाषा क े 
पुनÎथार्पना की अित आवÌ
यकता पर बल देना चाहता हूँ। संÎकृ त भाषा हमारी सांÎकृ ितक धरोहर 
और अिǎतीय Îतर्ोत है। संÎकृ त भाषा का सािहत्य अत्यंत समृǉ और िविवधतापूणर् है। वेद, 
उपिनषद, महाभारत, रामायण, योगशोध, आयुव ȃद, वाÎतुशाÎतर्, खगोलशाÎतर्, गणशाÎतर् आिद 
अनेक गर्ंथ संÎकृ त मȂ ही िलखे गए हȅ, िजनका अध्ययन आज भी वैज्ञािनक दृिÍटकोण से महत्वपूणर् 
है। ये सभी गर्ंथ हमारे पुरातन ज्ञान और िवज्ञान क े महत्वपूणर् Îतर्ोत हȅ और उनमȂ िनिहत ज्ञान आज 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
21

भी Ģासंिगक है। भारतवषर् मȂ आिदकाल से संÎकृ त ही बोलचाल की भाषा रही है। तमाम भाषाएं 
संÎकृ त भाषा से ही उत्पन्न हुई हȅ। संÎकृ त अनेक भाषाओं की जननी मानी जाती है और यह 
संÎकृ त भाषा भारतीय भाषाओं की रीढ़ है। वतर्मान समय मȂ क ु छ Ģदेशȗ मȂ संÎकृ त की उपेक्षा बहुत 
ही िंचताजनक ह
ै। आधुिनक िशक्षा Ģणाली और पिÌचमी Ģभाव क े कारण संÎकृ त भाषा का अध्ययन 
िदन-Ģितिदन Ģचलन से घटता जा रहा है। वतर्मान मȂ नई िशक्षा  नीित एक आधारिंबदु बनकर, 
एक आशा की िकरण लेकर हमारे सामने आई है। िवǏालयȗ और िवÌविवǏालयȗ मȂ संÎकृ त क े Ģित 
रूिच  कम होती जा रही है, िजसके  पिरणामÎवरूप आज हमारी युवा पीढ़ी अपने Ģाचीन ज्ञान से 
वंिचत हो रही है। हमारी नई िशक्षा नीित मȂ संÎकृ त भाषा क े उन्नयन का उÊलेख Ģसन्न
ता का 
िवषय है।  संÎकृ त भाषा की उपेक्षा की िÎथित को सुधारने क े िलए मȅ क ु छ सुझाव आपको संĢेिक्षत 
करना चाहता हूं।  Ģाथिमक और माध्यिमक िशक्षा मȂ संÎकृ त को अिनवायर् िवषय क े रूप  मȂ शािमल 
िकया जाना चािहए।  िवÌव
िवǏालयȗ मȂ संÎकृ त क े पाǸकर्म को बढ़ावा िदया जाए और शोध क े 
िलए िवशेष अनुदान Ģदान िकया जाना चािहए।  देश भर मȂ संÎकृ त व मा ध्यिमक िवǏालयȗ की 
Îथापना की जाए, जहां संÎकृ त क े साथ अन्य िवषय भी पढ़ाए जाएं।  इससे िवǏािर्थयȗ मȂ संÎकृ त 
क े Ģित रुिच  बढ़ेगी और उन्हȂ इस भाषा का Ëयापक ज्ञान ĢाÃत हो सके गा।  संÎकृ त सािहत्य का 
िडिजटल
 रूप  मȂ अनुवाद और Ģसार िकया जाए, तािक यह आसानी से उपलÅध हो सके ।  संÎकृ त 
गर्ंथȗ क े ऑनलाइन कोसर् और वेिबनार भी आयोिजत िकए जाने चािहए।  संÎकृ त मȂ नाटकȗ, 
किवताओं और संगीत कायर्कर्मȗ का आयोजन िकया जाए, तािक लोगȗ मȂ संÎकृ त क े Ģित Ģेम और 
सÇमान बढ़ सके ।  ...(समय की घंट
ी)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  धन्यवाद, माननीय िदनेश जी, अब आपकी बात िरकॉडर् मȂ नहीं जा रही है। इसमȂ 
तीन िमनट का ही समय है।   
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Dr. Dinesh Sharma : Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhatt
isgarh), 
Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Ra m Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shrimati 
Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Maharaja Sa najaoba Leishemba 
(Manipur), Shri Madan Rath ore (Rajasthan), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), and Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand).  
Now Shrimati Mausam Noor ; concern over rising cases of suicides among 
students.  
 
Concern over rising cases of suicides among students 
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR (West Bengal) : Sir, I thank you for giving me an 
opportunity to raise such an important is sue. According to the latest data from 
NCRB, students account for 8 per cent of the total suicide victims equating to more 
than 13,000 lives lost in a year. This is a crisis that needs immediate attention and 
action. 35 per cent of all suicides are commi tted by those within the age group of 18 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

to 30 years of age. The failure of our ex amination and admission system is starkly 
evident.  1,123 children under 18 ended thei r lives due to exam failure in 2022, while 
1,445 young adults took their lives over unemployment. The recent figures highlight 
the brutal competition students endure. Th is year, over 23 lakh  candidates appeared 
for NEET (UG), but only 1.8 lakh MBBS seat s were available. Similarly, 12.3 lakh 
students appeared for JEE-Mains, vying fo r a mere 39,767 seats. The disparity is 
crushing. Sir, students' worth is wrongly  tied to exam results. The intense media 
hype, societal shame, lack of adequate  academic counselling and unemployment are 
pushing them to the edge. The future of lakhs of students, who prepared for NEET, 
UGC-NET, CSIR NET and NEET PG this y ear, hangs in the balance. The state of 
education in our country has reached a crit ical stage. Each student suicide is a 
national tragedy starkly reflecting the Gove rnment's failure to support its youth.  
Therefore, the Government must urgently undertake concrete measures to reform the 
country's education and examination system.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri mati Mausam Noor:   Prof. Manoj Kumar 
Jha (Bihar), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West 
Bengal), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab),  Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), , Shri Haris  Beeran  (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharasht ra), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri 
Samirul Islam (West Bengal), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri Niranjan 
Bishi  (Odisha), Shrimati Phulo Devi Neta m (Chhattisgarh), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra ), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),  Shri 
Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (A ssam), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sant Balb ir Singh (Punjab) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  
Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
 Now, Shri Chunnilal Garasiya; demand  to elevate Udaipur Passport Seva 
Kendra to Regional Passport Office status. 
 
Demand to elevate Udaipur Passport Seva Kendra to Regional Passport Office status 
 
Ǜी चुƐीलाल गरािसया ( राजÎथान):  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, राजÎथान का उदयपुर 
संभाग एक जनजातीय बाहुÊय संभाग है।  भारत सरकार क े शैǹूल  V मȂ टीएसपी क्षेतर् घोिषत है।  
यहां क े रहवािसयȗ को पासपोटर् बनाने की सुिवधा आसानी से उपलÅध हो सके , इसके  िलए वषर् 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
23

2017 मȂ यहां पासपोटर् सेवा क Ȃ दर् खोला गया था।  तब तत्कालीन िवदेश मंतर्ी Îवगीर्य आदरणीय 
सुषमा Îवराज जी ने जनता को भरोसा िदया था िक पांच वषर् बाद उदयपुर पासपोटर् सेवा क Ȃ दर् को 
क्षेतर्ीय पासपोटर् कायार्लय मȂ अपगर्ेड कर िदया जाए गा, लेिकन आज लगभग 7 वषर् बाद भी इसे 
अपगर्ेड नहीं िकया गया।  वतर्मान मȂ उदयपुर सेवा क Ȃ दर् पर Ģितिदन लगभग 300 से 350 पासपोटर् 
आवेदन Ģोसेस हो रहे हȅ।  इसी तरह Ģित वषर् लगभग 50 से 60 हज़ार आवेदन Ģोसेस हो रहे हȅ। 
 अत: मȅ आपके  माध्यम से भारत सरकार से माँग करता हूँ िक उदयपुर पासपोटर् सेवा क ेन्दर् 
को क्षेतर्ीय पासपोटर् कायार्लय मȂ पिरवतर्न करवाने का Ǜम कराएँ, िजससे उदयपुर संभाग क े इस 
जनजाित बाहुÊय वाले ड ूंगरपुर, बांसवाड़ा, Ģतापगढ़, िचǄौड़गढ़, भीलवाड़ा, राजसमंद, पाली 
और िसरोही िजले क े िनवािसयȗ को लाभ िमल सके ।  धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Chunnilal Garasiya:  Shri Kesridevsinh 
Jhala (Gujarat), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
(Chhattisgarh). 
 धन्यवाद, माननीय चुन्नीलाल जी।  Now, Dr. K. Laxman; 'Concern over the 
financial crisis of the All India Fair Price Shop dealers'. 
 
Concern over the financial crisis of the All India Fair Price Shop dealers 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN (Uttar Pradesh):   S i r ,  t h i s  i s  a n  i s s u e  related to fair price shop 
dealers throughout the country, wherein lakhs of people are relied on it. So, the PDS 
and supply of essential commodities through fair price shops is the only time-tested 
network to arrest the spiralling open market  prices and ensure relief to consumers. 
The financial viability of operating these fair  price shops is a concern of nearly 5.50 
lakh fair price shop dealers.  Many fair price shop dealers suff er from inadequate 
infrastructure, including poor storage facilit ies, which leads to spoilage and wastage 
of stocks. And, also they are being put to  loss because of this weight loss during 
transportation. To ensure viability of this fair price shop dealers, I suggest that the 
Bharat Brand commodity supplied by the Government of India may be directly 
supplied to these ration shops, wherein 81  crore people, who are getting free ration 
by virtue of Modi ji's decision, these 81 crore people  are being benefited.  So, even 
instead of supplying these commodities throug h plastic bags, let it be ensured to be 
supplied through jute bags so that these FPS dealers can even sell through jute bags.  
And, during COVID-19, we have witnessed how migrant labourers have suffered for 
want of ration. So, our Prime Minister Modiji has introduced this 'One Nation, one 
Ration'.  Now, lakhs of migrant labourers are being benefited.  They are getting ration 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

at their respective working places.  Now, fi nally, I also suggest, let there be 'one 
nation, one ration and one commission'. Let there not be any difference in the 
commission.  Let them not depend on the St ate Governments.  So, even that weight 
loss during transportation also be cut down .  I request the Government to look into 
this seriously and help wherein 5.50 lakhs FPC dealers are suffering from it.  Thank 
you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member , Dr. K. Laxman: Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh).  
 Thank You Dr. K. Laxman.  Now, Shri Sanjay Yadav; 'Demand to enhance the 
availability of sports infrastructure in the country'. 
 
Demand to enhance the availability of sports infrastructure in the country 
 
SHRI SANJAY YADAV (BIHAR) :  Sir, sports infrastructure is the backbone of our 
performance and excellence at glob al level and in the Olympics.  महोदय, जब पोिडयम 
पर हमारे िवजेता िखलाड़ी ितरंगे क े साथ मेडल लेने जाते हȅ और background मȂ जब राÍटर्गान 
बजता है, तो हम सबका सीना चौड़ा हो जाता है, लेिकन िवÌव म
 Ȃ जनसंख्या मȂ दूसरे नंबर का देश 
होने क े बावजूद दुभार्ग्यवश हम बहुत कम संख्या मȂ पदक जीत पाते हȅ।  W e  n e e d  t o  
understand the causes of under-development of sports in the country and lack of 
sports facilities for the sportsmen and n eed to count the reasons for absence of 
proper sports infrastructure and facilities in the country.  So, Sir, I demand to increase 
the Budget allocation for sports and sports infrastructure in the country.  Thank you, 
Sir.     
                                                                                        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sanjay Yadav:  Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Dh ananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), 
Shri Prakas
h Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shri Saket 
Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West 
Bengal), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri  Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Dr. John Brittas 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
25

(Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Na du), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala) , Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Ashok 
Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri A. A. Rahi m (Kerala) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu 
(Tamil Nadu). 
      Thank you Sanjay ji.  Now, Shrimati Seema Dwived i, 'Demand to provide hostel 
and canteen facilities to the students in Delhi'.  
 
Demand to provide hostel and canteen facilities to the students in Delhi 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी (उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ एक बहुत ही ज्वलंत मुǈे 
पर सदन का ध्यान आकृ Íट करना चाहती हूँ, जो िक छातर्ȗ से जुड़ा हुआ है।  भारत युवाओं का देश 
है।  हमारी सरकार युवाओं क े भिवÍय को लेकर Ģयासरत और िंचितत है।  मȅ सरकार का ध्यान 
आकृ Íट करते हुए यह िनवेदन करना चाहती हूँ िक राÍटर्ीय राजधानी, िदÊली मȂ देश क े अलग-
अलग राज्यȗ से जो बच्चे यहाँ पढ़ने व  तैयारी करने क े िलए आते हȅ, उन गाँव-िगराँव व कमजोर 
तबके  से आने वाले बच्चȗ की िरहाइश क े िलए Ģदेशȗ ǎारा िनिर्मत राज्य अितिथ गृहȗ क े तजर् पर 
छातर्ȗ क े िलए भी हॉÎटल व क ȅटीन का िनमार्ण करा कर उन्हȂ यह सुिवधा िदÊली व सभी राज्यȗ की 
राजधानी मȂ मुहैया कराए जाने क े िलए क ेन्दर् व राज्य सरकार ǎारा इनका बहुतायत िनमार्ण कराए 
जाने व इनसे न्यूनतम सरकारी दरȗ पर इन छातर्ȗ को आवंिटत िकए जाने क े बारे मȂ िवचार करȂ, 
तािक करोड़ȗ-करोड़ युवाओं को आगे बढ़ने का मौका िमले और साथ ही साथ उनकी Ģितभा का 
बेहतर Ģदशर्न हो सके । 
 महोदय, अभी िदÊली मȂ एक घटना घटी है, आप सबने उसको देखा होगा।  मेरा सरकार 
से िनवेदन है िक जो बच्चे पढ़ना चाहते हȅ, िजनके  अंदर टैलȂट है, लेिकन उनके  माँ-बाप की 
आिर्थक िÎथित अच्छी नहीं ह
ै, इसिलए वे उनके  िलए अच्छा नहीं कर सकते हȅ, ऐसे बच्चȗ को 
Ģोत्साहन देने क े िलए अगर सरकार िवचार करती है, तो मȅ समझती हूँ िक इससे युवाओं की 
Ģितभा मȂ बहुत िनखार आएगा और इससे उनका भिवÍय अच्छा होगा।  म ȅ सरकार से यह िनवेदन 
करना चाहती हूँ।                                                                  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi :   Shri Ramji (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr . Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab) and Shrimati Maya Naroliya 
(Madhya Pradesh).                                                                           
 Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury; Concern over increasing incidents of train 
accidents in the country. 
 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

Concern over increasing incidents of train accidents in the country 
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY (Telangana): Sir, at the very outset, when we are 
talking about train accidents, let us pleas e pass a condolence motion for the people 
who have died in the unfortunate accident  where eighteen coaches of Howrah-CSMT 
Express derailed at Jharkhand. I think the Ho use should take cognizance of that. It is 
a terrible tragedy where citizens have passed aw ay and it is in the right sense that we 
take up the issue while dealing with this.  
Now, the other issue is that a number of train accidents is rising across the 
country. If you go to see in the last ten years, there has been a surfeit of these 
accidents that have taken place whether it is technical or human; we have got to look 
at it. Sir, Indian Railways is the fourth larg est in the world. And it is incredible that 
lakhs of passengers have confidence in In dian Railways. Their bookings would be 
done, they would go to the Railway Station;  given the kind of population that we 
have, they would have their seats reserved an d they could travel safely, the key word 
being 'safety'.  
In such a situation, in the last ten years, we have seen an  extreme decline in 
the safety measures and the so-called kavach which was propagated and applied has 
not happened. The corruption has come about in the Railways' safety and in the 
products that are being used. I have first-ha nd knowledge if the Minister so wants. I 
can sit with him and give him access to all th is information. Even if you conduct an 
inquiry today, you will get a sample which w ill pass the test, but, the actual reality of 
what is being supplied is completely mala fide and it is distressing because today I am 
a person, whether I am a Member of Parliament or not, I lo ve travelling by train. I do 
believe that India is reflected in her trai n journeys, her people, her cultures and the 
various Railway Stations we pass through. But, today, do we have the concept of 
safety? Are we not afraid to board a train? Are we sure that we are going to reach the 
destination? And what are the facilities we have? What is the train passengers' 
insurance? Is there anything to protect a tr aveller? So, why the d ecline in train safety 
happened? It has shaken the confidence of  lakhs of Indians because today you get 
scared, you get terrified to board a train because you do not know if you will reach 
your destination or not.  
The Sealdah-bound Kanchanjunga Express collided with a goods train in June 
and Chandigarh-Dibrugarh Express also derailed near Gonda district in Uttar Pradesh 
in July. These derailments have occurred with such frequency. ...(Time Bell rings)... 
We must as people's representatives take cognizance of this.        
                                
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
27

MR.   DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury:   Shri Anil Kumar 
Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Ramj i (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Neeraj Dangi 
(Rajasthan), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jhakh and), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Mausam Noor (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Samirul Islam (West Bengal), Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odi sha), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Ass am), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P.  Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chha ttisgarh) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu 
(Tamil Nadu). 
 Shri Ghulam Ali; Demand to introduce scheme for the welfare of Himalayan 
forest dwellers.  
 
Demand to introduce a scheme for the welfare of Himalayan forest dwellers 
 
Ǜी गुलाम अली (नामिनदȃिशत): िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, आपने मुझे एक बहुत ही गंभीर इÌयू को 
उठाने का मौका िदया है।  भारत क े वजीरेआज़म, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने देश क े िलए, जंगलात क े 
िलए, गर्ीनरी क े िलए तथा हमारा जो ग्लेिशयर मेÊट हो रहा था, उसके  िलए जो Ģोगर्ा
Çस लाए हȅ, 
उससे हमारा गर्ीन कवर भी बढ़ा है।  इसके  साथ-साथ जंगल मȂ जो Îटर्ॉ होता ह ै, पौधे का पǄा 
िगरता है, गर्ास भी होता है और ये सब डर्ाय भी होते हȅ।  हमारे पास दुिनया का फाÎटेÎट मशीन है, 
जो िक natural manure बनाती है।  वह चलती-िफरती मशीन है और वह सिदयȗ से है।  उस 
मशीन का नाम ह
ै गाय, भȅस, बकरी, भेड़, आिद।  वह जानवर, िजसके  िलए हमने िरसचर् की है 
और अभी साइंस ने इस पर नई िरसचर् भी की है।   
 सर, वे पǄे या तो natural manure बनाएंगे या वे आग का जिरया बनȂगे।  हम करोड़ȗ रुपय े 
फायर गैप पर लगाते हȅ।  जो forest dwellers हȅ, वे जंगलात क े िलए बहुत जरूरी हȅ, क्यȗिक 
उनका जानवर natural manure देता है।  राजÎथान मȂ जब रेिगÎतान था, तो
 िपछली सरकारȗ मȂ 
वहां हेलीकॉÃटर से बीज डाले गए थे, लेिकन हमारे पास जो जानवर हȅ, वे क ुदरती खजाना हȅ, 
क्यȗिक वे seed transportation करते हȅ।  आज बदिकÎमती यह है िक जब natural calamity 
आती है तो forest dwellers की भेड़, बकरी, गाय, भȅस मर जाती हȅ।  उनके  िलए कोई इंÌयोरȂस 
नहीं है, उनका कोई ख्याल रखने वाला नहीं है।  हमारी जो िहमालयन Îटेट्स ह ȅ, वहां ये टर्ाइÅस 3 
महीने क े िलए ऊपर जाते हȅ, 3 महीने वहां Îटे करते हȅ, िफर 3 महीने क े िलए नीचे आते हȅ और 3 
महीने Ãलेन मȂ रहते हȅ।   सर, अगर हम ए.सी. मȂ बैठकर इसके  िलए टर्ांसपोटȃशन की बात करȂगे, 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

तो यह बड़ी दुभार्ग्यपूणर् बात है िक इस पर हमारा इतना पैसा लगता है।  जो जानवर 45 िडगर्ी मȂ 
रहने वाले हȅ, अगर हम उनको 5 िडगर्ी वाले Îथान पर ले जाकर छोड़Ȃगे, तो यह नेचर क े िलए 
अच्छा नहीं होगा।  हम नेचर क े साथ िखलवाड़ नहीं कर सकते।  
 सर, जहां तक ट ूिरज्म की बात है, तो जो NHAI, BRO या PMGSY है, उसमȂ इनको 
जंगल मȂ fo
rest dwellers क े िलए infrastructure बनाना चािहए, पगडंडी बनानी चािहए, क्यȗिक 
वे जंगल मȂ पैदल चलते हȅ।  इनके  नेचर क े साथ हमȂ िखलवाड़ नहीं करना चािहए।  जंगल क े िलए 
जानवर बहुत जरूरी हȅ, नहीं तो हमȂ मनरेगा क े तहत straw pick करवानी पड़ेगी, जबिक हमारे 
पास अभी मनरेगा की इतनी ल
ेबरसर् नहीं हȅ।  इसिलए आपके  माध्यम से मेरा सरकार को सुझाव है 
िक सिदयȗ से हमारा जो टर्ाइबल... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Gulam Ali : Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
(Haryana) and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Ma hadik (Maharashtra). Shri P. Wilso
n 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mamata Mohanta (O disha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagalan d), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) 
and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                                                                  
 
Demand to provide free education to the children of widows across the country 
 
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर् (उǄर Ģदेश) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार 
का ध्यान देश भर मȂ िवधवा मिहलाओं क े बच्चȗ की संपूणर् िशक्षा िनःशुÊक करने की ओर आकिर्षत 
करना चाहता ह
ूँ। 
 महोदय, देश भर मȂ ऐसी माताएं-बहनȂ हȅ, िजनके  जीवन मȂ ऐसी अनेक घटनाएं घिटत हो 
जाती हȅ, िजनकी भरपाई करना नामुमिकन हो जाता है।  उस मां-बहन क े जीवन मȂ अंधकार तब 
छा जाता है, जब उसका पित कभी बीमारी क े कारण, कभी दुघर्टना क े कारण अकÎमाÞ ही इस 
संसार से चला जाता है और कभी उसकी Îवाभािवक म
ृत्यु हो जाती है।  महोदय, उस पिरवार पर 
क्या बीतता होगा?  उसके  पीछे उसके  छोटे बच्चȗ एवं ब
ुजुगर् माता -िपता क े जीवन मȂ अंधकार छा 
जाता है।  सरकार क े ǎारा कई Îतरȗ पर, चाहे वह क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े ǎारा या राज्य सरकारȗ क े 
ǎारा कई Ģकार की सुिवधाएं, जैसे पȂशन या दुघर्टना बीमा क े तहत दुघर्टना से हुई मृत्यु पर क ु छ 
रािश मुहैया करा दी जाती है, पर उनके  बच्चȗ का जीवन संरिक्षत
 नहीं हो पाता है, उन बच्चȗ का 
जीवन अंधकारमय ही
 रह जाता है।  उन बच्चȗ को भी अपने जीवन मȂ सपने संजोने की भरपूर 
इच्छा होती है।  जब िपता की छतर्छाया रहती है तो वे सपने संजोते हȅ और अपने मन मȂ सपने गढ़ते 
हȅ, उन बुलंिदयȗ को पाने का आत्मिव Ìवास रखते हȅ और उसे पूरा करते हȅ।  
महोदय, मेरा सरकार से िनवेदन है िक ऐसे पिरवार क े बच्चȗ को िनःशुÊक िशक्षा की 
ËयवÎथा अवÌय होनी चािहए।  देश मȂ कोई भी िशक्षण संÎथान हो, चाहे वह उच्च िशक्षा  हो या 
िनÇन िशक्षा हो, आईआईटी हो, मेिडकल कॉलेज हो या िटर्पल आईटी हो, मȅ िडमांड करता हूँ िक 
िकसी भी Ģकार की िशक्षा Ģदान करने वाले इन संÎथानȗ मȂ उन पिरवारȗ क े बच्चȗ को भी उनकी 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
29

योग्यता क े अनुसार िनःशुÊक एडिमशन देने की ËयवÎथा की जाए।  िनिÌचत ही, िवकिसत भारत 
क े भिवÍय मȂ इन बच्चȗ की िहÎसेदारी तभी संभव हो पाएगी, जब इस ËयवÎथा क े Ģित हमारी 
सरकारȗ का ध्यान आकिर्षत होगा।  िपताजी क े िलए समाज मȂ बहुत Ģकार से लोगȗ ने बहुत क ु छ 
कहा है।  मȅ क ु छ पंिƪयȗ क े माध्यम से अपनी बात समाÃत करना चाहूंगा: 
 
"
कभी अिभमान है तो कभी Îवािभमान है िपता, 
कभी धरती तो कभी आसमान है िपता 
जन्म िदया है अगर मां ने जानेगा जग िजसे, 
वह पहचान है िपता, 
कभी क ं धे पर िबठाकर मेला िदखाता है िपता, 
कभी बनकर घोड़ा घुमाता है िपता... 
 
अगर मां पैरȗ पर चलना िसखाती ह
ै, तो पैरȗ पर खड़ा होना िसखाता है, िपता। महोदय, मȅ आपसे 
िनवेदन करता हूं िक ऐसे बच्चȗ की िन:शुÊक िशक्षा की ËयवÎथा सरकार क
े  ǎारा की जाए।    
                       
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  The following Members associated themselves with the 
Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Memb er, Shri Amar Pal Maurya: Shri Dhananjay 
Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia  Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Banshilal 
Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Ajeet Madh avrao Gopchade (Maharashtra), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Na du), Shrimati Mamata Mohanta (Odisha), 
Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shrimati Jaya  Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Ramji (U ttar Pradesh), Dr. Sasmita Patra (Odisha), 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab).        
                                                   
Yamuna flood water in parts of Rajasthan 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी ( राजÎथान) : माननीय  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना 
चाहता हूं िक 1994 मȂ 5 राज्यȗ क े बीच यमुना जल क े  बंटवारे क े बारे मȂ समझ ौता हुआ था, वषर् 
1994 से लेकर अब तक वह 30 वषș तक यूं ही पड़ा रहा। मȅ िपछली बार राज्य सभा मȂ जब आया 
था, तब माननीय सभापित महोदय ने मुझे दो बार इस िवषय को उठाने का अवसर िदया  था, मȅ 
उनको धन्यवाद दूंगा और मȅ तत्कालीन जल संसाधन मंतर्ी, Ǜी गजेन्दर् िंसह शेखावत को भी 
धन्यवाद दूंगा। हिरयाणा, राजÎथान और भारत सरकार ने िमल कर यह समझौता कराया िक यह 
जो यमुना का सरÃलस Äलड वाटर ह
ै - जो लगातार हिरयाणा को िमलता है, उससे कोई संबंध 
नहीं है, लेिकन जो Äलड वाटर है, उस Äलड वाटर को िवभािजत िकया जाए और इसमȂ दोनȗ 
राज्यȗ क े बीच मȂ एक समझौता हो गया, िजसमȂ राजÎथान को चा र महीने, जुलाई, अगÎत, 
िसतÇबर और अक्टूबर तक 1917 क्यूसेक Äलड वाटर िमलेगा। मुझे इस बात की खुशी है िक 
राजÎथान सरकार ने इस बार बजट मȂ नई डीपीआर बनाने क े िलए 60 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

िकया है और हिरयाणा सरकार ने भी अपने बजट मȂ इसकी घोषणा की है। इसमȂ चार लाइन 
पड़Ȃगी, तीन राजÎथान क े िलए जाएंगी, िजससे राजÎथान क े चार िडिÎटर्क्ट्स, सीकर, झुन्झुनु, 
चूरु  और नीम का थाना मȂ वह पानी सÃलाई होगा और 1917 क्यूसेक पानी इतना है िक हमारे यहां 
राजÎथान मȂ बनास नदी जो सबसे बड़ा बांध बीसलपुर पीने क े पानी क े िलए
 बना है, उससे पांच 
गुना पानी होगा। इससे पूरा शेखावाटी, जो वीरȗ की धरती है, इसके  बारे मȂ मȅने एक बार कहा था 
िक - 
"शेखा जी की शेखावाटी, टीबा ड ूंगर बालू माटी, 
जन्मȂ जाट, जंगला जांटी, बुिǉ री धूल बािणया बांटी।।" 
 
 ऐसी जो शेखाव
ाटी है, उस शेखावाटी क े िलए यह अमृत का काम करेगा। इसके  िलए दोनȗ 
सरकारȗ न
े समझौता िकया है और भारत सरकार ने इसमȂ 80 Ģितशत धन देने क े िलए तय िकया 
है। इस कारण से माननयी मोदी जी और माननीय अिमत शाह जी ने इसमȂ हÎतक्षेप िकया था। 
इनके  कारण ही तीनȗ का समझौता हुआ है, जो 30 साल तक पȂिंडग रहा। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह 
मांग करना चाहूंगा ...(समय की
 घंटी)...             
                                                
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   The hon. Member, Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), associated himself with the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. 
Member, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari.                 
  धन्यवाद, घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी। माननीय Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर्। 
 
Concern over the attempt to challenge the Writ of the Parliament by executive 
authority 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA (West Bengal) :  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I am 
grateful to you for giving me this opportunity to speak here.   
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 Sir, having passed by both t
he Houses of Parliament and signed by the hon. 
President of India, three new criminal laws, namely, the Bharatiya Nayaya Sanhita, 
the Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, and the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, what is 
happening in West Bengal?  यह दोनȗ सदनȗ मȂ पािरत होने क े बाद, जब राÍटर्पित जी क े 
हÎताक्षर हो गए, तो West Bengal Government complete ly challenged this procedure. 
गवनर्मȂट का कहना है िक िजस तरीके  से ये तीनȗ िबल संसद मȂ पास कराए गए, वह 
unconstitutional है। And, they have formed a seven-member  Committee, headed by a 
retired Chief Justice. सर, यह पूरा सदन ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
31

MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, an issue can be  raised provided it lies in the domain 
of the Rajya Sabha. Please. Nothing is going on record. Now, Question Hour.  
…(Interruptions)…      
 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
Excise duty shared with rural local bodies 
 
*91.  SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI : Will the Minister of PANCHAYATI RAJ be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether any share of Excise Duty received by Government is also shared with 
the rural local bodies; 
(b) if so, the details thereof, State-Wise; and 
(c) if not, the reasons therefor? 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PANCHAYATI RAJ (PROF. S. P. 
SINGH
 BAGHEL): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
  
(a) to (c) Sir, the Finance Commission has the mandate under article 280 (3) (bb), 
of the Constitution of India, to recommend “the measures needed  to augment the 
Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats.” 
      As per recommendations of Cent ral Finance Commission, the Union Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj recommends to the Union Fi nance Ministry for release of grants to 
Rural Local Bodies of various States. These recommendations are based on eligibility 
conditions fixed by the current Finance Commission and are placed as Annexure A.       
  The State-wise allocation of the Fi fteenth Finance Commission grants (2021-
26) to Rural Local Bodies is at Annexure B. 
  The Central Finance Commission is co nstituted by the Union Finance Ministry 
and its recommendations are also made to the Finance Ministry. The Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj receives recommendations wi th regard to funds allocated for Rural 
Local Bodies.    
 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

Annexure-A 
 
Eligibility criteria for release of Fifteenth Central Finance Commission Grants to Rural 
Local Bodies by Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
 
The following conditions have been stipulated in the guidelines  for the release of 
installments of Basic (Untied) grants for FY 2024-25. 
i. RLBs shall be deemed to be  eligible for the grants, if  they are duly constituted 
i.e if duly elected bodies are in place except for States/ Areas where Part IX of 
the Constitution does not apply. In  case, all the bodies are not duly 
constituted grants shall be released to  the State on actual allocation / pro-
rata basis for duly constituted only. 
ii.  Uploading of GPDPs/BPDPs/ DPDP s of the RLBs in  eGramSwaraj 
iii.  RLBs have to mandatorily onboard on eGramSwaraj – PFMS for XV FC 
Grants’ transactions. 
iv.  RLBs to mandatorily prepare and ma ke available online both provisional 
account of previous year and audited accounts of year before previous year to 
avail the grants 
v.  Unspent Balance of XIV FC Grants with the State should not be more than 10 
% of the instalment under consideration. 
vi.  At least 50 % of the Untied grants re leased during the previous year have 
been utilized (valid only for release of 2nd installment of the FY). 
vii. All states which have not done so, must constitute State Finance Commission 
(SFC), act upon their recommendations and lay the explanatory 
memorandum as to the action taken thereon before the State legislature on or 
before March 2024. After Ma rch 2024, no grants shall be released to State 
that has not complied with the Constituti onal provisions in respect of the SFC 
and these conditions. 
  
Annexure-B 
 
The State-wise allocation of the Fifteenth Finance Commission grants (2020-21 to 
2025-26) to Rural Local Bodies 
Sr. No States Allocati on (2020-21 to 2025-26)* 
(Rs. in Cr) 
1.   Andhra Pradesh 12856 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
33

2.   Arunachal Pradesh 1131 
3.   Assam 7857 
4.   Bihar 24579 
5.   Chhattisgarh 7123 
6.   Goa 368 
7.   Gujarat 15650 
8.   Haryana 6193 
9.   Himachal Pradesh 2102 
10.   Jharkhand 8274 
11.   Karnataka 15756 
12.   Kerala 7972 
13.   Madhya Pradesh 19511 
14.   Maharashtra 28540 
15.   Manipur 867 
16.   Meghalaya 893 
17.   Mizoram 455 
18.   Nagaland 611 
19.   Odisha 11058 
20.   Punjab 6798 
21.   Rajasthan 18915 
22.   Sikkim 207 
23.   Tamil Nadu 17666 
24.   Telangana 9048 
25.   Tripura 937 
26.   Uttar Pradesh 47764 
27.   Uttarakhand 2813 
28.   West Bengal 21611 
  Total 297555 
* Note: This includes the grant of Rs.60750 Crore for the interim award period of 2020-21.  
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : सभापित महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी को िवÎतृत उǄर देने क े िलए 
धन्यवाद, लेिकन उन्हȗने बड़ी सफाई से मेरे ĢÌन का, एकितर्त क Ȃदर्ीय उत्पाद शुÊक मȂ गर्ामीण 
िनकायȗ को िकतना शेयर िदया जाता है, उसका जवाब नहीं िदया है।  इन्हȗने िवǄ आयोग की 
िसफािरश ǎारा हर राज्य
 को िदए जाने वाले अनुदान की बात की है, लेिकन क Ȃदर्ीय उत्पाद शुÊक 
का Åयौरा...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Put your supplementary.  
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : सर, मȅ पहला सÃलीमȂटरी पूछ रहा हूं। िकतना िहÎसा Îथानीय गर्ामीण 
िनकाय को िदया जाता है, उस पर खामोश हȅ।  अगर डेटा उपलÅध हो, तो क ृपया सदन क े पटल 
पर रखȂ और अगर न उपलÅध हो, तो उपलÅध कराने की क ृपा करȂ।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
 Ģो. एस.पी. िंसह बघेल : महोदय , यǏिप यह ĢÌन पूरी तरह िवǄ िवभाग से संबंिधत है,  इसके  
बावजूद हम लोगȗ ने इसको take up िकया है और मȅ उसका जवाब देने क े िलए और माननीय 
सदÎय को पूरी तरह संतुÍट करने का काम करूं गा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप माइक को थोड़ा अपने नजदीक कीिजए और आवाज को 
थोड़ा ऊ ंचा कीिजए।  
 
Ģो. एस.पी. िंसह बघेल : महोदय , specific su
pplementary, जो उत्पाद शुÊक क े िलए 
...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मंतर्ी जी, आप माइक को िबÊकु ल पास मȂ रिखए, तब आवाज आएगी। 
 
Ģो. एस.पी. िंसह बघेल : तो िवभाग क े जो घटक हȅ, अलग-अलग टैक्सेज़ हȅ - िनगम कर, आय 
कर, संपिǄ कर, सीमा शुÊक, क Ȃदर्ीय उत्पाद शुÊक, सेवा कर, वÎतु कर, स
 ंघ राज्य क्षेतर्ȗ क े कर, 
लेिकन जहां तक specific सवाल पूछा गया है िक क Ȃदर्ीय उत्पाद शुÊक का, तो 2023-24 मȂ 13 
परसȂट गर्ामीण Îथानीय िनकायȗ को िदया गया है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Second supplementary, Shri Imran Pratapgarhi. 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : महोदय, क Ȃ दर् Îथानीय िनकायȗ
  को धन आवंिटत करता है, तो उसे लोकल 
बॉडीज़ िकन-िकन कायș पर खचर् कर रही है। यह पहली बात है।  दूसरा, उसकी िनगरानी क े िलए 
मंतर्ालय क े पास क्या mechanism है, क्यȗिक कौन-कौन से ऐसे राज्य हȅ, िजन्हȗने आवंिटत रािश 
का पूणर् और सही उपयोग िकया है और कौन से राज्य
 हȅ, जहां घोटाले की बात सामने आई है, 
क्यȗिक क Ȃ दर् सरकार की िविभन्न योजनाएं जैसे पीएम आवास योजना...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have put your question. Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : सर, क्वेÌचन पूरा करने दȂ।  आंगनवाड़ी मȂ बड़े पैमाने पर धांधली की 
िशकायतȂ हȅ।  क्या मंतर्ालय क े पास कोई ऐसा mechanism है, जो इन चीजȗ की िनगरानी कर 
सके ।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
35

Ǜी सभापित : माननीय सदÎय, आपने क्वेÌचन पूछ िलया है।   
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी : सर, ĢÌन तो पूरा कर लेने दीिजए।  बड़ी मुिÌकल से कई महीनȗ मȂ तो 
ĢÌन आता है, तो उसे पूरा पूछने दीिजए।  
 
पंचायती राज मंतर्ी (Ǜी राजीव रंजन िंसह उफर् ललन िंसह) : सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय 
ने कहा है िक फाइनȂस कमीशन से हमȂ पंचायतȗ क े िलए जो अनुशंसा ĢाÃत होती है, उसको हम 
राज्यवार पंचायतȗ को जारी कर द
ेते हȅ।  उसके  मापदंड बने हुए हȅ िक िकन-िकन मापदंडȗ पर हम 
राज्यȗ को पैसा देते हȅ।  उसके  अलावा हम सीधे, जो लोकल बॉडीज़ हȅ,  उनको  पैसा टर्ांसफर 
करते हȅ।  उनके  िलए भी मापदंड बना ह
ुआ है िक िजन-िजन राज्यȗ मȂ पैसे का खचर् िकन-िकन 
आधार पर होना है, वह अगर राज्य नहीं करते हȅ, तो िफर अगली िकÌत हम उनको जारी नहीं 
करते हȅ।  उसकी सारी गाइडलाइन्स उपलÅध हȅ।  माननीय सदÎय कहȂग
े िक बहुत लंबी 
गाइडलाइन है।  अगर माननीय सदÎय कहȂगे, तो हम एक-एक गाइडलाइन को पढ़कर बता दȂगे, 
लेिकन सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक जो नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार है, उसने फाइनȂस कमीशन क े 
िरकमंडेशन को Ģितवषर् बढ़ाने का काम िकया है, क्यȗिक मोदी जी की सरकार का यह संकÊप है 
िक जब तक गांव का िवकास नहीं होगा, तब तक देश का िवकास नहीं होगा। मȅ आपको
 यह 
बताना चाहता हूं िक 54 रुपय े से बढ़कर मोदी जी क े शासन-काल मȂ इस बार Ģित Ëयिƪ 674 
रुपय े हम पंचायतȗ को आवंिटत कर रहे ह ȅ। यह हमारी उपलÅधता है और इसके  आधार पर हम 
काम करते हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary; Shri Kartikeya Sharma.  
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:   Hon. Chairman, Sir, I would like to thank the 
Government for releasing more than Rs. 6, 000 crores for the Rural Local Bodies in 
Haryana.  But my question is this. I would like to ask the hon. Minister whether any 
flexibility in use and d ovetailing of different funds is allowe d to RLBs to achieve higher 
efficiency and utilization percentage. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
Ģो. एस.पी. िंसह बघेल:  सर, कोई ऐसा लÑय नहीं है, मोदी जी का एक समदशीर् कायर् ह
 ै, चाहे 
भाजपा शािसत राज्य हȗ, एनडीए क े राज्य हȗ या गैर भाजपा शािसत राज्य हȗ, सभी को 
िनयमानुसार िदया जाता है। एक िनयम है, िजसमȂ 90 परस Ȃट जनसंख्या और 10 परस Ȃट क्षेतर् का 
पिरमाप होता है। उसके  अनुसार राज्य िवǄ आयोग क े न्दर्ीय िवǄ आयोग से  मांग करता है। हम 
लोग क ेन्दर्ीय िवǄ आयोग की िरकमंडेशन को िवǄ मंतर्ालय को भेजते हȅ और उसके  अनुसार वह 
धन आवंिटत होता है।  
 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी राजीव रंजन िंसह उफर् ललन िंसह:  सभापित महोदय, मȅ इसमȂ एक बात और ऐड करना 
चाहता हूं। जो उन्हȗने खचर् करने क े लचीलेपन क े बारे मȂ कहा है, जो हम पंचायतȗ को पैसा िरलीज 
करते हȅ, उसमȂ से 30 Ģितशत पेयजल पर खचर् होता  है, रैन वाटर क े क ंजरवेशन क े िलए और 
जल पुनचर्कर्ण क े िलए हम 30 परसȂट खचर् करने की अनुमित पंचायतȗ को देते हȅ। उसके  अितिरƪ 
कचरा Ģबंधन, सफाई क े काम क े िलए, 30 Ģितशत खचर् करने की अनुमित हमने पंचायतȗ को 
गाइडलाइन मȂ दे रखी है। इसले 30-30 Ģितशत हम उस पर खचर् करने का काम करते हȅ। इसके  
अलावा कोई लचीलापन नहीं है, जैसा िक माननीय सदÎय ने कहा है, इसके  िलए भारत सरकार 
की जो गाइड
लाइन है, उस गाइडलाइन क े अनुसार पंचायतȗ को रािश खचर् करनी पड़ती है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fourth supplementary; Shrimati Seema Dwivedi. 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी: सभापित महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी ǎारा अपने िलिखत उǄर मȂ गर्ामीण 
Îथानीय िनकायȗ को 15 वȂ िवǄ आयोग ǎारा 2020-21 से 2025-26  तक का राज्यवार आवंटन 
दशार्या गया है। इसमȂ उǄर Ģदेश को 47,764 करोड़ रुपय े आवंिटत िकए गए हȅ। मान्यवर, इसके  
िलए मȅ भारत सरकार को बहुत बधाई देना चाहती ह
ूं िक उन्हȗने हमारे उǄर Ģदेश को बहुत 
ज्यादा धन िदया है। मान्यवर, मेरी खाली िजज्ञासा यह है िक जो पैसा Ģदेशȗ को जाता है, वह पैसा 
Ģदेश मȂ सभी िजलȗ को बराबरी पर िमलत
ा है अथवा जो िजला खचर् करके  अपनी िरपोटर् देता है, 
उसको िमलता है।  िजले मȂ उसको आवंिटत करने का क्या मानक है, यह मȅ सरकार से जानना 
चाहती हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, यह आपके  Ģांत का ĢÌन है।  
 
Ģो. एस.पी. िंसह बघेल:  माननीय सभ
ापित जी, मȅ बताना चाहूंगा िक उǄर Ģदेश आबादी क े  
अनुसार देश का बड़ा सूबा है, तो Îवाभािवक बात है िक वहां पर ज्यादा धन आएगा और क्षेतर् क े 
मामले मȂ भी आपसे छोटा है, लेिकन िफर भी बड़ा है। हम लोग यहां से जो पैसा भेजते हȅ, अब वह 
सीधे राज्य क े अकाउंट मȂ जाता है, वहां से िजले क े अकाउंट मȂ जाता है और िजले क े अकाउंट से 
सीधे गर्ामीण Îथानीय िनकायȗ
 को भेजते हȅ। यह िडपȂड करता है िक उस पंचायत की जनसंख्या 
िकतनी है, आपने देखा होगा िक कोई गर्ाम पंचायत
 हजार लोगȗ की संख्या पर होती है, क ु छ 8 
हजार, 10 हजार पर भी होती है, तो यह जनसंख्या क े अनुसार और क्षेतर्  क े अनुसार 90 और 10 
क े अनुपात से िदया जाता है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary No. 5; Sh
ri M. Shanmugam.  
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM : Sir, I want to ask a supplem entary question through you. 
What measures are taken by the Ministry of  Panchayati Raj to ensure transparency 
and accountability in Panchayati Raj Institutions?  
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
37

MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
Ģो. एस.पी. िंसह बघेल:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, इसमȂ जो उपाय िकए जा रहे हȅ, पहले तो यह 
होता है िक िपछला वषर् 14 वȂ िवǄ आयोग का जो अंितम है, उसमȂ 10 परस Ȃट से ज्यादा वहां 
अनुपयोगी बजट नहीं होना चािहए। जो दूसरी िकÌत जाती है, उसमȂ जब 50 परसȂट उपयोग हो 
जाएगा, उसके  बाद द
ूसरी िकÌत जारी की जाएगी। इसके  िलए ऑिडट भी होता है। उसके  बाद, 
जब उसके  पोटर्ल पर ऑनलाइन िरपोटर् भेजी जाती है, तो हम उसके  अनुसार पैसा जारी करते हȅ।  
 
 Ǜी राजीव रंज
न िंसह उफर् ललन िंसह : सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े जवाब मȂ एक 
बात ऐड करना चाहता हूं। उसका एक सबसे बड़ा कर्ाइटीिरया, जो टर्ांसपेरȂसी क े िलए है, वह यह 
है िक जो वतर्मान िवǄीय वषर् है, इससे पहले वाला िवǄीय वषर् - जैसे िक यह 2024-25 िवǄीय वषर् 
ह
ै, तो उस पंचायत की 2023-24 क े िवǄीय वषर् की एकाउंिंटग कÇÃलीट होनी चािहए और उसके  
पहले वाले िवǄीय वषर् का ऑिडिटड एकाउंट ई-गर्ाम  Îवराज पोटर्ल पर अपलोड होना चािहए। 
उसके  बाद ही
 हम पारदिर्शता क े आधार पर उन्हȂ अगली िकÎत जारी करते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : ĢÌन संख्या 92. 
 
Poor handling of entrance exams by NTA 
 
*92. SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI : Will the Minister of EDUCATION be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a) the action taken against NTA for its p oor handling of recent entrance exams 
including NEET-UG 2024 and UGC-NET; 
(b) whether NTA was set up, without the approval of Parliament of India, under 
the Societies Registration Act only by a decision of Cabinet, if so, the reasons 
therefor; and 
(c) the steps taken to make NTA accountable  and answerable to the Parliament 
for its work? 
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN) : (a) to (c)  
A Statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c)
 After the conduct of NEET(UG) 2024 Examination by the National Testing 
Agency (NTA) on 5 th May, 2024, certain cases of alleged irregularities/cheating/ 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

malpractices were reported. The Ministry of  Education asked the Central Bureau of 
Investigation to conduct a comprehensive investigation into the entire gamut of 
alleged irregularities including conspiracy, cheating, breach of trust etc. w.r.t. the 
NEET (UG) 2024 Examination. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in WP(Civil) 335/2024 
and connected matters vide Order dated 23
rd July, 2024 said that “At the present 
stage, there is an absence of material on the record to lead  to the conclusion that the 
entire result of the examination stands vitiated or  that there was a systemic breach in 
the sanctity of the examination.”  Further, in compliance of the aforementioned order, 
the revised result of NEET (UG) 2024 Exam ination has been declared on 26th July, 
2024. 
The matter relating to UGC NET June 2024 examination, which was cancelled 
on receipt of inputs on the integrity of th e examination, had also been entrusted to 
CBI for thorough investigation on 19th June , 2024, in order to ensure the highest level 
of transparency and sanctity of the examination process. 
 Further, in order to suggest effective measures for transparent, smooth and 
fair conduct of examinations by NTA, th e Ministry of Education has constituted a 
High-Level Committee of Experts on 22.06 .2024 for making recommendations on 
Reforms in mechanism of examination pr ocess, Improvement in Data Security 
protocols and Structure and functioning of  National Testing Agency. The Committee 
comprises of the following experts: 
 
1 Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Former Chairman, ISRO and 
Chairman BoG, IIT Kanpur. 
Chairman 
2 Dr. Randeep Guleria, Former Director, AIIMS Delhi. Member 
3 Prof. B J Rao, Vice Chancellor, Central University of 
Hyderabad. 
Member 
4 Prof. Ramamurthy K, Prof essor Emeritus, Department 
of Civil Engineering,  IIT Madras. 
Member 
5 Shri Pankaj Bansal, Co-Founder, People Strong and 
Board Member- Karmayogi Bharat. 
Member 
6 Prof. Aditya Mittal, Dean Stud ent Affairs, IIT Delhi Member 
7 Shri Govind Jaiswal , Joint Secretary, Ministry of 
Education, Govt. of  India 
Member Secretary 
 
The Committee has also co-opted two more members i.e., Prof. Amey 
Karkare, Professor of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur and Dr. 
Debapriya Roy, Assistant Professor, IIT Kanpur. The Terms of  Reference of the 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
39

Committee is attached as Annexure. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in WPC 335/2024 
and connected matters, Order dated July 23rd, 2024, para 23,  has said that “the 
committee will abide by such furt her directions as may be issued by this Court in its 
final judgement and order in regard to areas wh ich should be enquired into by it so as 
to ensure that (i) the process of cond ucting NEET(UG) and other examinations 
falling within the remit of NTA is duly stre ngthened; and (ii) the instances which came 
to light during the course of present year are not repeated in future.”  
With prior approval of Union Cabinet dated 10 th November, 2017, NTA was set 
up as an Autonomous Body of Government  of India under the aegis of the then 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (whi ch has been renamed later as Ministry 
of Education). NTA has been registered on 15 May 2018 as a Society under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 as a legal entity. The Central Government has 
enacted the Public Examination (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act 2024. Stringent 
provisions have been made in this Act to address unfair means practices in conduct 
of public examinations. It is pertinent to  mention that NTA is a Public Examination 
Authority as specified in the Schedule of the said Act, thereby bringing any 
examination conducted by it under the purview of the Act. 
 
Annexure 
 
Terms of Reference of the High Level Committee of Experts 
 
(i) Reform in mechanism of examination process 
 
(a) To analyse the end-to-end examination process and suggest measures to 
improve efficiency of the system and to forestall any possible breach. 
(b) To conduct a thorough review of the Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs)/Protocols of the NTA, and su ggest measures to strengthen these 
procedures/protocols along with monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance 
at every level. 
 
(ii) Improvement in Data Security protocols 
 
(a) To evaluate the existing data securi ty processes and protocols of NTA and 
recommend measures for its improvement.  
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

(b) To examine existing security protocols related to the paper-setting and other 
processes for different examinations and make recommendations to enhance 
robustness of system. 
 
(iii) Structure & Functioning of National Testing Agency 
 
(a) To make recommendations on the organizational structure and functioning of 
the National Testing Agency (NTA) fo r implementation of recommendations 
given under point 3(i) and 3(ii) an d clearly defining the roles and 
responsibilities of functionaries at every level. 
(b)  Assess the current Grieva nce Redressal Mechanism of the NTA, identify areas 
of improvement and make recommendations for enhancing its efficiency. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI : Sir, my question was regarding the 
accountability and NTA being answerable to the Parliament of India.  I haven't got the 
answer but the question that I want to as k as my first supplem entary is this.  The 
NEP-2020 specifies the NTA will work to offer a high-quality common aptitude test 
which shall aim to eliminate the need for ta king coaching for these exams.  Is the 
Government aware that the Common Univer sity Entrance Test, as designed in 
consonance with NEP, has led to the croppi ng of more coaching centres all over the 
country?  What measures are being take n against such coaching centres which 
contradict the aim of the exam? 
 
 Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान :  सभापित महोदय, आदरणीय सदÎया का एक मूल ĢÌन है, िजसमȂ उन्हȗने यह 
बात शुरू  की है िक क्या एनटीए पािर्लयामȂट क े Ģित एकाउंटेबल है या नहीं है। सभापित महोदय, 
आपने ĢÌन प
ूछने की अनुमित दी है, मȅ उǄर दे रहा हूं, यही पािर्लयामȂटरी एकाउंटेिबिलटी है। 
इसी Ģकार से एनटीए भी पािर्लयामȂट क े Ģित िविभन्न Îतर पर एकाउंटेबल है।  
 महोदय, दूसरी बात यह है िक एनईपी मȂ इस बात का सुझाव िदया गया था देश क े 
िवǏािर्थयȗ क े अंदर धीरे-धीरे परीक्षा
 क े सुधार क े िलए, उसकी गुणवǄा बढ़ाने क े िलए एनटीए 
कई Ģकार  की परीक्षाएं  िवǏािर्थयȗ क
े  िलए  िवशेष कर ले।  उसी तथ्य क े आधार पर एनटीए ने 
2017 से शुरू  होकर 2018 मȂ एक आकार िलया। िपछले लगभग छह सालȗ मȂ 5 करोड़ से ज्यादा 
िवǏाथीर् िविभन्न परीक्षाओं मȂ सफलता क े साथ अिपयर हुए हȅ, उǄीणर् हुए हȅ और िविभन्न 
इ
ंÎटीǷूशन्स मȂ उनके  एडिमशन्स भी हुए हȅ। महोदय, 250 तक परीक्षाएं आयोिजत की गई हȅ। मȅ 
आपकी अनुमित से सदन क े सामने एक बात रखना चाहूंगा िक आज देश क े युवाओं, िवशेषकर जो 
aspirational society का तबका है - neo middle class - द
ेश मȂ 25 करोड़ लोग गरीबी रेखा से 
उठकर ऊपर आ रहे हȅ। सबके  मन मȂ यह priority है  और आगे बढ़ने क े िलए एजुक ेशन उसका 
माध्यम है।  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
41

 सर, मȅ आपकी अनुमित से एक ही उदाहरण दूंगा। जब Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने 
िजÇमेवारी ली थी, तब देश मȂ मेिडकल सीट्स की संख्या 50,000-51,000 थी, लेिकन हमने 
िपछले दस सालȗ मȂ उसे बढ़ाकर आज 1 लाख, 10 हजार तक पहुँचाया है। महोदय, िवǏािर्थयȗ मȂ, 
नौजवानȗ मȂ अच्छा करने की जो Îपधार् है, उसमȂ कोिंचग सȅटर हमारी Ģितबǉता है। सरकार की 
ओर से कोिंचग सȅटर न हो - मुझे यह बात कहने मȂ कोई िझझक नहीं ह
ै िक इसमȂ सबकी 
सहायता, सबक
ी मदद चािहए। िशक्षा की गुणवǄा इतनी बिढ़या हो, सरकारी Îकू Êस पर फोकस 
िकया जाए - आज हमारे सȅटर्ल Îकू Êस और नवोदय िवǏालय इसकी िमसाल हȅ। अनेक राज्यȗ मȂ, 
आपके  राज्य, अच्छी पढ़ाई होती है। िपछले िदनȗ हाउस मȂ तकर् उठा था िक सीकर ने क्यȗ अच्छा 
िकया? सभाप
ित महोदय, मȅने   बाद   मȂ सीकर  जाकर सामािजक Ëयिƪत्वȗ से बात की।  आप 
सीकर क े बारे मȂ मुझसे ज्यादा जानते हȗगे िक पुराने समय से ही सीकर पढ़ाई-िलखाई का एक 
क Ȃ दर् रहा है। ऐसे ही Îटेट बोड्सर् पर आधािरत अनेक क Ȃ दर् हȅ, जहाँ पर पढ़ाई को अच्छी Ģॉयिरटी 
दी गई है। हमȂ सभी की सहमित बनाते हुए देश क े िवǏािर्थयȗ को धीरे-धीरे कोिंचग सȂटर की 
दुिनया से बाहर लाना पड़ेगा। हमȂ उन्हȂ कानूनी तरीके  स े, सामािजक तरीके  से बाहर लाना पड़ेगा 
और इसके  िलए हमȂ सभी का सहयोग चािहए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think िक िĢयंका जी ने बहुत अच्छा सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन पूछा, िजससे इतना 
िवÎतृत जवाब आया है। िĢयंका जी, आप अपना दूसरा सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन पूिछए।    
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI : But I am not satisfied with the answer that he 
has given. Very nice t
hat he said accountability तय कर रहे हȅ, तो इसिलए पािर्लयामȂट मȂ 
जवाब दे रहे हȅ। मȅ उÇमीद करती हूं िक भिवÍय मȂ जो भी एनटीए चेयर पसर्न बनȂगे, वे इस 
पािर्लयामȂटरी Îटȅिंडग कमेटी मȂ आकर इन सारे सवालȗ का िवÎतृत रूप  मȂ जवाब दȂगे।  
 Now, I come to my second supplementary. सर, क्या सरकार क
े  पास कोई डेटा है, 
जो बता रहा है िक the students  are  moving abroad  to pursue medical degrees due to 
irregularities in NEET testing, usage of unfair means in examination and low number of 
seats in the Government medical colleges?  What measure has the Government taken 
to avoid this ‘brain drain’? 
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : सभापित महोदय, मȅने आदरणीय िĢयंका जी को कहा िक एनटीए और सरकार 
क े कोई भी इंÎटर्ूमȂट की पािर्लयामȂट क े अंदर, पािर्लयामȂट क े बाहर अपटु सीएजी ऑिडट सभी 
Ģकार की अकाउंट
ेिबिलटी है। इस सरकार क े पास छ ुपाने क े िलए क ु छ नहीं है। हम यह ज़ीरो 
वाली थ्योरी पर... िपछले िदनȗ मȂ जो िमतर् सरकारȗ मȂ रहे हȅ, इन्हȗने सीएजी ऑिडट का जीरो क े 
बराबर िहसाब िकया था, सर, हम उस िबरादरी क े नहीं हȅ। हस सभी Ģकार की अकाउंटेिबिलटी 
क े साथ, Ģितबǉता क े साथ कहते हȅ। मȅने अभी-अभी उनकी पहली सÃलीमȂटर्ी मȂ उǄर िदया िक 
2014 मȂ देश मȂ मेिडकल िशक्षा म
Ȃ 51,000 सीट्स थीं, Today, the number of seats is 
1,10,000.  Our Government is committed to open a medical college gradually in each 
district of the country, इसिलए यह हमारे ऊपर बेबुिनयाद आरोप है। यह बात सही है िक आज 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

िजतने नंबसर् मȂ िवǏाथीर् पढ़ना चाहते हȅ, क्या उतनी सीट्स होनी चािहए, तो होनी चािहए। इस 
िवषय को लेकर मेरी सरकार को कहना िक आपने squeeze कर िदया, कम कर िदया, तो मȅने तो 
िहसाब िदया है। आपके  सामने तथ्य िदए हȅ। सभापित जी, तथ् य को सबको Îवीकार कर लेना 
चािहए।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary no.3 - Shri Manoj Kumar Jha.  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा : माननीय सभापित महोदय, मेरा सवाल सरल और सहज है। मȅ 
िवÌविवǏालय से आता हूँ। मेरे िवभाग मȂ भी सीयूईटी क े थर्ू एडिमशन होता है। सर, एनटीए की 
इवेÊयूएशन का क्या कोई mechanism है?  िवभागȗ का एक चिरतर् होता है, कोसर् का एक चिरतर् 
होता
 है और एनटीए की जो पूरी वÎतुिनÍठ ĢÌनावली होती है - ऑÅजेिक्टव, िजसमȂ subject-
specific inclination का अभाव होता है। इस िदशा मȂ एनटीए क े मॉǹ ूल की मॉिनटिंरग की कोई 
लगातार ËयवÎथा है या नहीं?  
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी, मनोज झा जी ने हाथ जोड़कर सÃलीमȂटर्ी पूछी है।   
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : सभापित महोदय, मनोज झा जी इस सदन क े बड़े आदरणीय और िवǎान 
सदÎय भी हȅ। वे खुद Ģाध्यापक भी ह ȅ। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से, उन्हȂ आÌवÎत करना चाहूँगा िक 
एनटीए एक ËयवÎथा है, जो परीक्षा करवाती है, लेिकन उन्हȗने एक अच्छा िवषय उठाया है। जो 
ĢÌन आता है, वह ऑÅजेिक्टव ĢÌन क े नाते आता है, तो क्या यह totality of  subject capture 
कर पाता है, यह उनका ĢÌन है। मȅ इसे Îवीकार करता हूँ, लेिकन ĢÌन को बनाने वाला Ëयिƪ भी 
मनोज झा जी जैसा कोई िवǎान Ģध्यापक ही हȅ। सर, समय-समय से परीक्षा की अĢोच क ैसी हो, 
पैटनर् क ैसा हो, यह एक evolutionary Ģिकर्या मȂ एक डायनेिमक सÅजेक्ट है। जो मनोज झा जी की 
िबरादरी परामशर् करती है, वैसे ही क्वेÌचन को सेट िकया जाता है और आगे भी िकया जाएगा।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: So
, Professor, NTA is not an NPA.  It is very much functional. Now, 
supplementary No. 4 - Shri P. Wilson.  
 
SHRI P. WILSON : Sir, they are against Emergency. Prior to the 42
nd Constitution 
Amendment, ‘Education’ was in List-II.  Wh y don’t you think of restoring ‘Education’ 
to List-II, as the State will take localised, contextual, responsible, educational policies 
that cater to diverse needs of our count ry, including conducting exams for its 
students?  Education should  be about nurturing minds, fostering creativity and 
promoting critical thinking, not about surviving a barrage of exams.  
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN :  Hon. Chairman, Sir, when you respectfully called 
the name of Shri P. Wilson, I was expecting exactly this question from him.   
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
43

MR. CHAIRMAN:  I thought only our Meteorological  Department was very accurate in 
anticipation!  There must be some very good equation between two of you.  
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN : He is a good friend of mine.  He has raised a very 
pertinent question.  There are two parts of this question.  One is  political  because  it  
is  the  political  will  and authority which created this arrangement whether this will be 
put in the State List or not, whether this should go to the Concurrent List and what 
should be the responsibility of which Government. 
 Part two of the question is about the quality of the examination and standard of 
the students.  Are they competit ive enough to appear in all India tests?  I will answer 
part two of the question first.  He has a point but it is a fact that now-a-days, the way 
examination is conducted, this Government is very much careful  about the standards 
and capacity of State Boards.  We respect, we believe th at the State Boards have 
their own competency and they are qualitative.  Last year only, a girl student from the 
hon. Member's State, from the rural area, stood first in the NEET All-India Entrance 
Examination.  This shows that in the entire country, students have accepted a model 
which has been practiced by last seven decades.  Part one of the question is, when it 
did come to the Concurrent List.  Mr. Wilson, you are a seasoned politician.  Your 
Party, DMK was part of the ruling alliance for decades in the Centre.  Why didn't you 
correct it, which, according to you, is an anomaly?  According to me, it is a good 
practice. Education should be in the Concurrent list and both the Governments 
should be answerable and accountable to students of the country and both have 
respective roles.The leadership, at one stage,  did this. I think, Madam Indira Gandhi, 
when she was the Prime Minister, starte d this practice. The then Government 
amended the law and put it in the Concurrent List.   It is a good practice till date.  Due 
to this practice, the nature of education is of all India level and there is compatibility in 
the entire country.  Who stopped you not to pursue this with the Congress 
Government to go back to the old system  when you were in power during 2004-
2014?  Why are you raising this question now in front of us? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary number 5.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman. 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन : सभापित जी, अभी नीट की परीक्षा हुई।  वह परीक्षा एनटीए ने कराई थी। 
*...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member...  ...(Interruptions)... No, no.   
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन : सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Member, you have to put your supplementary.  
...(Interruptions)... You have no basis for...  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन :  
*...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 Hon. Member,  I have asserted in the House that the organization has 
unimpeachable credentials.  ...(Interruptions)...  We cannot go in a manner... 
...(Interruptions)...  I take exception to it.  It will not go on record.  
...(Interruptions)... I have said so on the floor of the House.  ...(Interruptions)... We 
cannot go in a manner to make it political.  Please put your pointed supplementary.  
...(Interruptions)...  Nothing else will go on record.    ...(Interruptions)...   Priyanka 
ji. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record.   Please put your supplementary.   
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन :  सर, मȅ पूछ रहा हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:    Take your seat ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर , मȅ आपकी बहुत इज्जत करता हूँ, क्यȗिक आप इस सदन क े 
guardian हȅ, लेिकन जो सदÎय कानून क े तहत बोल रहा ह
ै, रूÊस क े तहत बोल रहा है, जब तक 
वह रूÊस violate नहीं करता, तब तक उसको यह कहना िक यह बात मत करो, वह बात मत 
करो, यह कहना ठीक नहीं है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Your point is taken. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : वे जो कह रहे हȅ, वह सच कह रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवध
ान)...  जब सच कहते हȅ, 
...(Ëयवधान)...  जब सच कहते हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)...  वे सच कह रहे हȅ, उसका वे उǄर दȂगे। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  नहीं, तो यह अच्छा नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Sir, please take your seat.  You have made your point.
  
…(Interruptions)… 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
45

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : वे आपका दुरुपयोग  कर रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You have made your point.  Please  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : यह अच्छा नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह अच्छा नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... वे जो 
बोल रहे हȅ, वह सच बोल रहे हȅ और उसमȂ क ु छ गलत नहीं है। ...(Ëयवध
 ान)...  
 
 
OBSERVATION BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, take your seat.  …( Interruptions)… He has raised 
an issue.  Allow me to speak. …(Interruptions)… What is this?  …(Interruptions)… Take 
your seat.  Hon. Members, the Leader of the Opposition, …( Interruptions)…   Allow 
the Chair to speak.    He has raised the point related to me.  The Leader of the 
Opposition has, in a sense, indicated to the Chair that I have transgressed the rules 
by objecting to the Member.  I am, th erefore, obliged to respond to it.  
…(Interruptions)…  Take your seat.  Hon. Leader of the Opposition says that I can 
intervene when there is transgression of rule s, but if a Member is  speaking within the 
rules, I should not intervene.  I agree with that.  But here, the Member was not 
transgressing the rules.  He was trampling the Constitution of India.  I say it, for this 
reason. …( Interruptions)…  An organisation, I have said, is fully entitled. 
…(Interruptions)…  RSS is an organisation which is  a global think tank of the highest 
order.  …( Interruptions)… I will not permit hon. Member to single out an organisation 
which is doing national service.  I will not countenance it.  …( Interruptions)… No, hon. 
Members.  …(Interruptions)… This is violation of the Constitution.  We have to believe 
in the Constitution.  Every organisation has a right to it.  Under our Fundamental 
Rights, under Part III of the Constitution, organisations have rights.  …(Interruptions)… 
No.  Nothing will go on record.  …(Interruptions )… I declare here that the hon. 
Member raised the issue which is not only ag ainst the rules, but which is also against 
the Constitution of India.  Hon. Me mber may confine to the rules.  …( Interruptions)…  
Please.  This will not happen.  …( Interruptions)… Nothing will go on record.  You may 
make it a political issue.  Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. 
Members, I object.  It is expunged.  Under Part III of the Constitution, this 
organisation, RSS, has all the rights to co ntribute for national growth, for national 
development. …(Interruptions)… Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

Hon. Members, I had the occasion from this Chair …(Interruptions)…  E i t h e r  
take your seat or take recourse.  Hon. Members, I hereby rule that RSS is an 
organisation that has full constitutional rights to participate in the development journey 
of this nation.  This organisation bear s unimpeachable credentials, comprises of 
people who are deeply committed to serving the nation selflessly. To take exception 
that a member of this organisation cannot participate in the development journey of 
the nation is not only unconstitutional but also beyond the rules.  Our rules prescribe a 
methodology.  I, therefore, do not allow th e hon. Member to raise this issue.  The 
hon. Member has chosen not to ask further supplementary.   
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Sir,...(Interruptions)..  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, take your seat.  I don't want to name you.  Take 
your seat.  I have said this and this is not fo r the first time.  I am only reiterating this.  
The nation needs to get benefit ...(Interruptions)...  Would you take your seat?  Or 
should I name you?  ...(Interruptions)...   Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi.  Hon. 
Members, 1.4 billion people have to make cont ribution for the growth of this nation.  
Every organisation associated with the development of the nation should come 
forward.  It is soothing to note, it is  wholesome to note that the RSS as an 
organisation has been contributing for nati onal welfare and our culture.  Everyone 
should, as a matter of fact, take pride in any organisation which is acting in this 
manner.  Now, Question No.93.  But before that, let me tell you, hon. Members, if we 
take exception like this, it is indicative of unde mocratic situations.  It is antithetical to 
the Preamble of our Constitution.  We are doing great disservice to the nation and the 
Constitution by taking such divisive stan ce.  I find that pe ople are increasingly 
engaging in divisive activities.  This is a pernicious design, a sinister mechanism to run 
down the growth of the country.  I have re flected on several occasions that attempts 
are being made within the country and outs ide to taint, tarnish and demean our 
institutions, constitutional institutions.  It needs to be deprecated by all of us.  If we 
fail to do it, our silence on this occasion w ill resonate in our ears in years to come.  
After thoughtfully taking into consideration co nstitutional essence, constitutional spirit 
and rules of the House, I rule that any such  observation is not only offensive to the 
Constitution but offensive to the growth tr ajectory of the nation.  Any organisation, 
including the RSS, is duly entitled to contribute to the journey of this nation.  
Now, Question No.93.  Shri Samik Bhattacharya. 
 
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
47

Progress of expressways in West Bengal 
  
*93.  SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: Will the Minister of ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current status of the Khar agpur-Burdwan-Moregram Expressway, 
Gorakhpur-Siliguri Expressway, Varana si-Kolkata Expressway and Raxual-
Haldia Expressway passing through West Bengal; 
(b) whether the land acquisition process has been completed for the West Bengal 
stretch of these expressways; 
(c) the percentage of work completed for each of these four expressways in West 
Bengal; and 
(d) whether there are any other expressw ays planned for development in West 
Bengal? 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS (SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table 
of the House.  
  
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) DPRs for Kharagpur – Burd wan - Moregram, Gorakhpur - Siliguri, 
Varanasi - Kolkata  and Raxaul - Haldia High Speed Corridors have been awarded. 
The award of civil work can be after the co mpletion of DPR, statutory clearances and 
pre-construction activities depending upon  projected traffic, techno - economic 
viability, availability of funds and inter-se-priority. 
  
(d) Development of National Highways is a continuous process. Ministry keeps on 
receiving proposals from various State Governments including West Bengal for 
declaration/upgradation/development of  NHs/Expressways. Decisions are taken 
based on the fulfilment of the criteria, requirement of connectivity, inter-se priority and 
availability of funds and synergy with PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan. 
  
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA:   S i r ,  t h r o u g h  y o u ,  I  w a n t  t o  k n o w  t h i s  f r o m  t h e  
Minister.  My question is regarding progres s of four proposed expressways in West 
Bengal.  Can the Ministry provide projected timelines for the completion of the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR), statutory cl earances and pre-construction activities 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

for the four expressways in West Bengal?  And are there any land acquisition 
challenges related to their construction?   
 
Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा: सभापित महोदय, इसका उǄर िदया गया है। ये जो चारȗ राÍटर्ीय राजमागर् हȅ, ये 
अभी डीपीआर Îटेज पर हȅ।  इसमȂ alignment आने और Îटेट गवनर्मȂट से क ु छ clearances आने 
मȂ समय लगता है।  इसके  साथ-साथ डीपीआर का भी काम
  चल रहा है।  डीपीआर का काम 
समाÃत होने क े बाद इसकी जो detailed projections है, वह आपको दे दी जाएगी।     
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA :  Sir, the Varanasi-Kolkata Expressway currently 
terminates at Uluberia in Howrah district.   क्या सरकार की तरफ से ऐसा कोई Ģयास िकया 
गया है िक इसको हावड़ा तक ही नहीं, बिÊक इसको कोलकाता तक ले जाया जाए?  इसके  साथ 
ही मȅ यह भी जानना चाहता हूँ िक पिÌचमी बंगाल की तरफ से इसमȂ िकतना सहयोग िमल रहा है?  
पिÌचमी बंगाल क े ये जो चार एक्सĢेसवे Ģपोįड हȅ, इनमȂ पिÌचमी बंगाल सरकार की क्या भूिमका 
ह
ै?  खास  करके  वाराणसी से कोलकाता एक्सĢेसवे मȂ पिÌचमी बंगाल सरकार की क्या भूिमका 
है?लȅड एिक्विजशन को लेकर पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ बड़ी समÎ या है।  The West Bengal 
Government is not ready to acquire land. ...(Interruptions)...   So, I want to know: 
What is the actual reality of this project?  
 
Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा : सभापित महोदय, जो वाराणसी-कोलकाता नेशनल हाईवे है, उसमȂ वाराणसी 
से झारखंड क े बोकारो तक वकर् अवाडर् हो चुका है, क्यȗिक वहां क े राज्य की क्लीयरȂसेज़ समय 
पर आ गई थीं।  उसे आगे कोलकाता तक जाना है, लेिकन उसमȂ एलाइनमȂट आने मȂ देरी हुई है 
और अब एलाइनमȂट आ गया ह
ै।  अभी यह डीपीआर Îटेज पर है और सरकार से इसकी नेसेसरी 
एपर्ुवÊस आने क े बाद इसका काम Ģारंभ हो पाएगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Su
pplementary no.3; Ms. Dola Sen.  
 
सुǛी दोला सेन  :  चेयरमैन सर, हम पहले यह बोलना चाहȂगे िक पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ लȅड 
एिक्विजशन को लेकर कोई ĢॉÅलम नहीं है।...(Ëयवधान)...   
  
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please. ...(Interruptions)... H o n .  M e m b e r  i s  a s k i n g  a  
supplementary. Please listen to her.  
 
सुǛी दोला सेन: हमारी लीडर ममता बनजीर् जी ने लȅड एिक्विजशन को लेकर 26 डेज तक 
फािंÎटग मूवमȂट भी िकया था।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Madam, please ask your supplementary.  
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
49

सुǛी दोला सेन  : इस पािर्लयामȂट मȂ दो बार ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, she is asking her supplementary.  
 
सुǛी दोला सेन  : इसी क े कारण दो बार colonial Land Acquisition Act का अमȂडमȂट भी हुआ।   
We are grateful to her.  Sir, through you, I want to ask the Minister: Is the Central 
Government following and obeying federal st ructure in coordination with the State 
Government, especially regarding land acquisition process over there?  I also want to 
know whether the unorganised workers under these projects are getting minimum 
Central wage according to the law of the land.  
 
Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा :  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, लȅड एिक्विजशन नेशनल हाईवेज एक्ट क े 
अंतगर्त Ģारंभ होता है। इसके  िलए क Ȃ दर् की तरफ स
े " भूिम रािश" एक ऑनलाइन पोटर्ल है, 
िजसके  कारण लȅड एिक्विजशन ईज़ी होना शुरू  हुआ है, जो पाटर् क Ȃ दर्  को  करना  होता है।  
CALA अपॉइंटमȂट जरूर  सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट करती है, पर वह राज्य  क े अिधकारी होते हȅ और उसके  
बाद ही बाकी सारा Ģोसेस राज्य क े अिधकािरयȗ को, CALAs को करना होता है, इसिलए लȅड 
एिक्विजशन क े majority of the part पर  राज्य सरकार का दाियत्व रहता है।  हां, "भूिम रािश" 
पोटर्ल शुरू  करने क े बाद, लȅड एिक्विजशन मȂ जो पाटर् सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट को करना है, उसको हम 
एक्सपेडाइट कर पाते हȅ।  पहले लȅड एिक्विजशन मȂ लगभग जो एक-डेढ़ साल लग जाया करता 
था,  अब "भूिम रािश" पोटर्ल क े कारण उसमȂ बहुत कम समय लगता है।  उसमȂ सेक्शन  3a  से  
लेकर जो disbursement of amount है, वह हम " भूिम रािश" पोटर्ल क े कारण करते हȅ। इसमȂ 
majority of the part Îटेट गवनर्मȂट को करना होता है।  All workers are provided minimum 
wages as per the State labour laws.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Su
pplementary no.4; Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha.  
 
Ǜी संजय क ुमार झा : माननीय सभापित महोदय, इसमȂ एक इंपॉटȄट एक्सĢेसवे है, जो गोरखपुर 
से सीतामढ़ी, मधुबनी, पटना, िकशनगंज होते हुए िसलीगुड़ी तक जाती है।  िवभाग क े ǎारा 31 
मई को पतर् िदया गया, िजसमȂ बताया गया िक यह हाई Îपीड कॉिरडोर है।  मȅ आपके  माध्य
 म से 
मंतर्ी जी से यह पूछना चाहता हूँ िक इसका डीपीआर कब तक बनेगा, इसका िनमार्ण कब तक 
होगा?  उस लेटर मȂ यह भी बताया गया था िक इस काम को लेकर िडपाटर्मȂट की तरफ स े एक 
नोडल ऑिफसर भी बनाया जाएगा।  क ृपया माननीय मंतर्ी जी इस पर क ु छ हाईलाइट करȂ।  
 
Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा : आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आदरणीय सदÎय महोदय को इसकी िवÎतृत 
जानकारी दे दूंगा।  वैसे, इसकी जो डीपीआर है, वह अभी Ģारंभ हुई है। डीपीआर पहला Îटेज 
होता है, िफर
 एलाइनमȂट और उसके  बाद लȅड एक्वीिजशन होता है, तो  इस Îटेज क े आगे जाने 
पर जानकारी दी जाएगी। 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary, Shrimati Sulata Deo. 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : धन्यवाद सर। सर, िदया हुआ ĢÌन पिÌचमी बंगाल क े िलए है, मगर मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ पूछना चाहती हूं िक हमारे कटक-अनगुल नेशलन हाईवे -55 की 
बहुत िदन से िडमांड है। इसका काम क्यȗ क ंÃलीट नहीं हो पा रहा है? यह एक death trap बन 
चुका है। हमारे ओिडशा क े लगभग सभी सांसद ĢÌन उठा चुक े हȅ, कब तक यह National 
Highway-55 क ंÃलीट होगा? इस death trap स
े लोगȗ को कब छ ुटकारा िमलेगा? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा : सभापित महोदय, यह आज क े ĢÌन क े purview मȂ नहीं है,  इसके  बारे मȂ मȅ 
माननीय सदÎय को िवÎतृत जानकारी ल
ेकर दूंगा।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Q.No.94, Dr. John Brittas.  
 
“Professors of Practice” in higher educational institutions 
 
*94. DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Will the Minister of EDUCATION be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether reservation policy is applicable for engagements as “Professors of 
Practice” in the higher educational institutio ns recently introduced by UGC as 
per National Education Policy 2020; 
(b) if not, the reasons therefor; 
(c) the number of persons belonging to  SC, ST and OBC categories engaged as 
“Professors of Practice ” till date or still being engaged in various higher 
educational institutions; and 
(d) the State-wise details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN) : (a) to (d)  
A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) The National Education Policy 2020 seeks to transform higher education by 
focusing on skill-based education to me et the needs of the industry and the 
economy. Further, the NEP also recommends integrating vocational education with 
general education and strengthening indu stry-academia collaboration in Higher 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
51

Education Institutes (HEIs).   Towards this end, the Un iversity Grants Commission 
(UGC) has taken a new initiative to bring the industry and other professional expertise 
into the academic institutions through “ Professor of Practice ”. UGC has framed 
Guidelines for engaging Professor of Pr actice in Universities and Colleges on 
30.09.2022. 
 The post of Professor of Practice is a temporary post, exclusive of sanctioned 
post. Further, candidates who have proven expertise in their specific profession or 
role with at least 15 years of service /exp erience, preferably at  a senior level, are 
eligible for Professor of Practice. For en gaging industry experts and professionals, 
HEIs may collaborate with the industries to support these positions. It also provides 
an opportunity, to those in leadership po sitions in different fields, to come on 
honorary basis as Professor of Practice so as to give back to the society and 
contribute towards nation building.  
 In order to bring in distinguished experts from various fields of engineering, 
science, technology, entrepreneurship etc. and to develop courses and curriculum to 
meet the industry and societal needs and to enable the HEIs to work with industry 
experts on joint research project, concept of Professor of Practice has been adopted, 
and thereby provide exposure and mentorship to students by domain experts. 
 The maximum duration of service of Prof essor of Practice at a given institution 
should not exceed three years and is extendable by one year in exceptional cases and 
the total service should not exceed four years under any circumstances. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Sir, this is a very important question.  We all know the hon. 
Minister.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  A Professor is sitting next to you.   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  Yes, Sir.  I am influenced and inspired by him.  We all know 
that Dharmendraji is very intelligent, sensible and also part of the global think tank.  
But I do not know why he is so evasive to wards my question.  My question has been 
very simple.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Would you ask your supplementary?    
  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  This is just to formulate it.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No, please ask supplementary.   
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

DR. JOHN BRITTAS :  It is of interest to you also .  UGC has started "Professors of 
Practice". 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member! 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : My question was that there should  be social inclusivity, social 
orientation for the academics.  Is it a fact that when you are reserving ten per cent of 
the academic posts for "Professors of Practi ce", will you not bring in the content of 
reservation for SC/ST and OBC? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Brittas.  
  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir,that is the question.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, good.  Hon. Minister, he paid a compliment and then partly 
withdrew it.  Now, see that it is restored.   
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : सर, यह Ģजातंतर् है, िवपक्ष क े क ु छ अिधकार हȅ। यह Îवाभािवक है िक वे सारे 
िवषयȗ मȂ सहमत नहीं हȗगे, उनका िवषय रखने का एक तरीका भी रहता है। िवरोधी पक्ष क
 े  सदÎय 
िकसी भी तरह से िवषय रखȂ, हमȂ कोई आपिǄ नही है, हम पािर्लयामȂटरी Ģैिक्टस मȂ उǄर देना 
चाहते हȅ।  
 सभापित महोदय, "Professors of Practice", National Education Policy, की एक 
Ģमुख िरकमȂडेशन है। हमारे देश मȂ आज क े समय म Ȃ सभी क े अंदर एक सहमित बनी है िक हमȂ 
िडगर्ी क े साथ-साथ competency को भी महत्व देना पड़ेगा। Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी यह कहते हȅ 
िक हमारे िलए िडगर्ी िजतनी महत्वपूणर् है, competency भी उतनी ही महत्वपूणर् है। िशक्षा को 
employability की ओर ले जाना, entrepreneursh
ip की ओर ले जाना - इसीिलए हमारे देश मȂ 
industry और academia का एक अच्छा संबंध और अच्छा नेटवकर् बने, यह मूल foundational 
चीज़ है। "Professors of Practice" कोई Îथायी post नहीं है, यह tenure-based post है, 
कोई 10 per cent reservation नहीं है। कोई Ëयिƪ need-based - जैसे जॉन िĤटास साहब 
Mass Communication की एक authority 
हȅ, उनकी एक िवǎता है, वे House मȂ यहां पहुंचे, 
यहां भी अपनी बात रखने का उन्हȗने तरीका बनाया है, िजससे सब Ģभािवत होते हȅ। क्या वे चाहȂगे 
िक क ेरल की कोई university या देश की कोई university चाहे िक जॉन िĤटास साहब  यहां आएं,  
credit rating system पर 6 credit point, पर साल मȂ तीन महीने पढ़ा कर जाएं। सर, क्या उन 
िवǏािर्थयȗ को जॉन िĤटास साहब की िवǎता और उनके  अनुभव का फायदा नहीं िमलना चािहए? 
यह "Professors of Practice", की मूल अवधारणा है। इसमȂ कोई  permanent posting नहीं है, 
tenure-based, है। सर, िपछले िदनȗ म
Ȃ ये बातȂ उठीं िक "Professors of Practice" मȂ िकन 
लोगȗ की िनयुिƪ की गई है। सर, मेरे पास एक जानकारी है।  ओिडशा की  एक university ने दस  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
53

tribal लोगȗ को, जो अनुभवी हȅ, 15, 20 और 25 साल का िजनका सामािजक जीवन है, इन सारे 
tribal लोगȗ को उन्हȗने Professor of Practice की िनयुिƪ दी है।  हमȂ थोड़ा देश को आगे ले 
जाने क े िलए, भले ही मेरी बहन िĢयंका जी को मेरी िवǎता पर ह ंसी आए और मȅ उनकी हंसी का 
पातर् बनूं, लेिकन हम सब िमलकर इस िवषय पर आएं, िĢयंका जी, आप...(ËयËधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी..., 
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : मȅ आपकी हंसी का पातर् बनूं, लेिकन इस देश मȂ गुणवǄा की ओर consensus 
बनाना पड़ेगा िक सारे हा
उस क े लोग university, college मȂ जाकर  public policy की  पढ़ाई 
अपने कॉलेज मȂ जाकर कराएंगे।  मेरे िमतर् सिÎमत पातर्ा जी, आजकल मेरा नमÎकार भी नहीं लेते 
हȅ।  ये एक professor हȅ।  मȅ उनको बार-बार समझाता हूं ...(ËयËधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आपने मौसम बदल िदया।  
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : सर, मȅ इनसे बार-बार आगर्ह करता हूं िक आप जाकर पढ़ाएं।  इस राज्य सभा 
की िवǎता को िकसी भी यूिनविर्सटी मȂ जा कर साझा करȂ। उनकी पाटीर् क े सदÎय सुिजत क ुमार 
पढ़ाते हȅ, वे Professor of Practice  हȅ।  जॉन िĤटास साहब ने reservation की बात कही, तो 
कई बार हम अखबार म
Ȃ पढ़ते हȅ, Indian Express मȂ पढ़ते हȅ िक  CPI(M)  Politburo मȂ भी 
reservation नहीं है।  जॉन िĤटास साहब, सारी चीजȗ मȂ िरजवȃशन नहीं िदखता है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary; Dr. John Brittas. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, he has made some political statements. I do not kno
w 
because, he is a very honourable... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I urge you to ask your supplementary so that we 
can...(Interruptions)... Go ahead. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, he has made a political statement. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Priyankaji, my problem is that the hon. Minister, instead of looking 
at the Chair, was looking at you.   I am the person who should be taking exception. 
...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. Dr. John Brittas, ask your 
supplementary. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, Priyankaji is coming between hon. Minister and myself, that 
is very unfortunate.  Sir, my second supp lementary is this. Hon. Minister should 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

understand that even as per the scheme of  UGC, there is a provision for bringing 
expertise to the campus. There are visiting faculties.  You can bring the experts for 
lectures. Even earlier, UGC used to fund such things. So I would say, उसके  िलए कमी 
नहीं है। Now the point is that almost 26 per ce nt of the academic posts are vacant and 
46 per cent of other posts are vacant now.   Now you are reserving another ten per 
cent.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is your supplementary? 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, my supplementary is: Wh en there is unemployment 
amongst the educated youth an d vacancies still exist, don't you think that it is going 
to create a havoc?  Second thing is that there are prov isions for internships in 
industry. 
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : महोदय, जॉन िĤटास साहब क े तथ्य सही नहीं है िक  कोई existing posts को 
occupy करȂ।  यह तो अनुभव को accommodate करने की बात है।  जहां तक vacancy भरने की 
बात है, यह एक separate ĢÌन है, लेिकन आपकी अनुमित हो, तो मȅ एक शÅद मȂ कहना चाहूंगा 
िक यह continuous process है।  इन िदनȗ  भारत सरकार ने िपछले चार-पांच सालȗ मȂ िशक्षा 
िवभाग मȂ लगभ
ग 40 हजार िरƪ पदȗ पर िनयुिƪ की है।  IITs मȂ अनुभवी लोगȗ को लेकर आना, 
higher research institutions की  देश मȂ परंपरा रही है। इसको
 और Ëयापक करने क े िलए यह 
Professor of Practice एक िवनĦ Ģयास है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Supplementary No. 3. Shri Sa njeev Arora; not present. 
Supplementary No. 4; Dr. Fauzia Khan. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN :  Sir, as the hon. Minister ha s said that these professors of 
practice bring valuable expertise from releva nt industries into the classroom, I agree 
with that.  But, I would like to ask ho w many women professors of practice are 
currently employed across Government edu cational institutions compared to their 
male counterparts.  What mechanisms are in place to ensure that more women are 
inducted into these positions, particularly, in STEM education sectors, and 
additionally, are there any guidelines or initiatives in place to encourage the 
recruitment of professors of practice to fill existing vacancies? 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN :  Sir, to fill up the vacancies through Professor of 
Practice as you have appreciated, to bring expertise all together , bring experience,
 
b r i n g  n e w  i d e a s ,  w e  h a v e  t o  g o  b y  t h e  Professor of Practice route.  Regarding 
quantum of women, I have an information of 10 personalities, 10 Professor of Practice 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
55

that out of the 10, 5 are from women category.   S o ,  t h i s  i s  u p  t o  t h e  n e e d  o f  t h a t  
particular institution, seeing the apti tude and capacity of  the person.  The 
Government has no interference, whethe r there should be any quantum of any 
gender.  It is open.  This is a policy guidance given by UGC.  The local universities are 
competent enough to do that. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary; Shri Jawhar Sircar. 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR :  Sir, through you, I would like to ask the Minister, a  very 
pertinent question relating to education.   As you know, the UGC rules have been 
made to apply to every organisation that is  deemed to be a university.  The problem 
arises when we get non-academic univers ities like those teaching theatres, those 
teaching dances and other forms. उसमȂ क्या होता है, there are people who are 
specialized in say, electric lighting, in various trades, who are absolutely less 
qualified.  But, throughout the lives, they will  be  treated  in  a  demeaning  manner. 
Can they  avail  of  this opportunity to be upgraded and deserve the respect of a 
Professor of Practice? Those  technician  who have more virtue and more experience 
in dealing with cultural subjects, can  they please be accommodated under such 
scheme?  उन्हȂ सÇमान िदया जाए। 
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान: सभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े आदरणीय सदÎय जवाहर सरकार का आभार 
Ģकट करता हूं, उन्हȗने अपने सुझाव मȂ और सÃलीमȂटरी क्वेÌचन क े माध्यम से professor of 
practice की डेिफनेशन को re
iterate िकया, यही उǈेÌय है। सामािजक जीवन मȂ अनेक Ģकार की 
पढ़ाई मȂ, जो एÃलाईड पाटर् रहता है, जो Ģेिक्टकल पाटर् रहता है, िजनके  बारे मȂ मȅने शुरू  मȂ कहा 
िक हमारे देश की िशक्षा
 ËयवÎथा िडगर्ी सȂिटर्क हो गया है, कािÇपिंटसी बेÎड नहीं हुआ है। उन्हȗने 
कहा िक क्या उन कािÇपटȂट लोगȗ को भी आप सामािजक मयार्दा दोगे, एक्जेक्टली सरकार साहब 
हमारा यही उǈेÌय है। ऐसे सारे अनुभवी लोगȗ को एक सामािजक  मयार्दा की ओर हम ले जायȂ। 
इसी Professor of Practice क े उǈेÌय मȂ वह भी एक Ģमुख उǈेÌय है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No. 95. 
 
Capacity building and training of investigators 
 
†*95. SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR : Will the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be pleased to 
state:  
 
                                         
† Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

(a) whether there is any provision fo r capacity building and training of 
investigators and prosecutors handlin g cases of sexual assault against 
women and children under the Women Safety Schemes; 
(b) if so, the details of the number of  investigators and prosecutors trained 
therefore; and 
(c) the category of persons who would be trained under this provision? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHRI BANDI 
SANJAY KUMAR): (a) to (c) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) Yes sir. In order to addre ss the necessity for capacity building of 
manpower in forensic sciences, MHA is undertaking training for Investigating Officers, 
Prosecutors, and Medical Officers from St ates/UTs in collection, storage and 
handling of DNA evidence and use of Sexual  Assault Evidence Collection Kits. So far 
32,177 Investigating Officers, Prosecutors an d Medical Officers have been trained by 
the Bureau of Police Resear ch and Development (BPR&D) and the LNJN National 
Institute of Criminology and Forensic Scie nces (now Delhi campus of the National 
Forensic Sciences University). The Ministry of Home Affairs has also distributed 18020 
Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits to the States/UTs as part of this training. 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहूंगा िक 
मिहला सुरक्षा Ģभाग क े िलए वतर्मान मȂ चलाई जा रही सभी योजनाओं का क ु ल पिरËयय क्या है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  
 
Ǜी बंि
ड संजय क ुमार: सभापित महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक मिहला सुरक्षा एक बहुत 
महत्वपूणर् िवषय है। इसिलए हमारे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े िनदȃशानुसार, हमारे माननीय गृह 
मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ गृह मंतर्ालय ǎारा अब तक क ु ल 13,412 करोड़  रुपय े मिहला सुरक्षा Ģभाग 
की सभी योजनाओं, पिरयोजनाओं को  implement करने क े िलए यहां पर outlay िदया है। 
सभापित महोदय, इसका िववरण इस Ģकार ह
ै - interoperabl e criminal justice system क े 
िलए Rs.3,375 crores; emergency response support system क े िलए Rs.531.24 crores 
है। Scheme for modernisation of Forensics, क े िलए 2,080 करोड़ , modernisation of 
prisons क े िलए 950 करोड़ , strengthening of State Forensics Science Laboratories क े  
िलए 106.75 करोड़ , upgradation of Centra l Forensic Science laboratories and forensic 
data centres  including  six  national  cy ber  forensics laboratories and residential 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
57

buildings क े िलए 354.25 करोड़, safe city project क े िलए 2,840 करोड़, training and 
capacity building क े िलए 76.5 करोड़, Scheme for poor prisoners क े िलए 60 करोड़, Anti-
human trafficking unit क े िलए 113.76 करोड़, women help desk क े िलए 164.2 करोड़, 
Establishment of DNA labs in Chandigarh क े िलए 42.84 करोड़, Cyber Crime Prevention 
against Women and Children (CCPWC) क े  िलए 224.76 करोड़, central victim 
compensation fund क े िलए 200 करोड़, Delhi police scheme for providing facility of 
social workers, counsellors, new building with women-centric facilities, special unit 
for women and children क े िलए 38.80 करोड़ , national forensic infrastructure 
investment scheme क े िलए 2,254 करोड़ हȅ।. .(Ëयवधान).. 
 
एक माननीय सदÎय : आप सुन लीिजए। ..  .( Ëयवध ान)....इसका उǄर तो देना ही पड़ेगा।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, please, observe order. 
 
Ǜी बंिड संजय क ुमार:  सभापित महोदय, इस तरह गृह मंतर्ी जी क े अनुमोदन से गृह मंतर्ालय ने 
िवभन्न योजाओं को 13, 412 करोड़ रुपय े हमारी  माताओं, बहनȗ, बेिटयȗ क े िलए, तािक व
 े 
सुरिक्षत रहȂ, इससे संबंिधत योजनाओं क े िलए फ ं ड एलोके ट िकया गया है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित  : Ǜी नीरज शेखर, आप अपना सेक ं ड सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन पूिछए।  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी का आभार Ëयƪ करना चाहूंगा िक 
इन्हȗने हमȂ बहुत िवÎ
तृत जवाब िदया है।  
 महोदय, मेरा दूसरा ĢÌन है िक िपछले दस सालȗ से मिहला सुरक्षा क े िलए फोरȂिसक 
िवज्ञान िवभाग मȂ क्या Ģमुख िवकास हुआ है? 
 
Ǜी बंि
ड संजय क ुमार:  सभापित  महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ सरकार ǎारा 
िपछले दस सालȗ मȂ मिहला सुरक्षा क े िलए फोरȂिसक िवज्ञान िवभाग मȂ िवशेष िवकास िकया गया 
है। इसका िववरण इस Ģकार से है :- 617 mobile forensics units हȅ, 32 State FS Ls हȅ, 97 
regional forensic science laboratories हȅ। महोदय, तीन CFSLs  - पुणे, भोपाल और असम मȂ 
Îथािपत की गई हȅ। चंडीगढ़, कोलकाता और हैदराबाद CFSLs को  upgrade िकया गया है। 
Criminal Law Amendment, 2018 अिधिनयम मȂ बलात्कार क े मामले मȂ दो महीने क े अंदर जाँच 
पूरी करना और चाजर्शीट दािखल करना अिनवायर् ह ै।  827 anti-human trafficking unit की 
Îथापना की गई है, training and capacity building  क े अंतगर्त 32,177 Investigation officers, 
prosecution officers,  medical officers को टर्ेिंनग दी गई है।  National Forensic Science 
Universities  गाँधी नगर, िदÊली तथा 5 नए क ȅपस गोवा, ितर्पुरा, धारवाड़, गुवाहाटी और भोपाल 
मȂ Îथापना की गई है। National Automated fingerprint identification system  क े अंतगर्त 1 
करोड़ िंफगर िंĢट इकƻे िकए  गए   हȅ।   w o
m e n   h e l p   d e s k   1 3 , 9 3 9   पुिलस  Îटेशन्स मȂ  
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

women help desk Îथािपत िकए गए हȅ। सभापित महोदय, women help desk की Îथापना से 
पुिलस Îटेशन मिहलाओं क े िलए अिधक अनुक ू ल बन गए हȅ। अब यह पुिलस Îटेशन मȂ आने वाली 
मिहला क े िलए संपकर् का पहला और एकल िंबदु है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He is giving information. 
 
Ǜी बंि
ड संजय क ुमार :  इससे 13,939 वूमेन हेÊप डेÎक पुिलस Îटेशन मȂ   .(Ëयवधान).... 
 
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन : सभापित जी, .(Ëयवधान)...... 
 
Ǜी सभापित  : आप बैिठए। माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी बंिड संजय क ुमार :  महोदय,  law enforcement agencies, पुिलस, आईबी, एनआईए, ईडी 
आिद से जाँच मȂ सहायता िमलती है।  
 सेक्शुअल असॉÊट एिवडȂस कलेक्शन िकट्स का उप
योग यौन अपराध मȂ साÑयȗ को संगर्ह 
करने क े िलए िकया जा रहा है। इंटर-ऑपरेबल िकर्िमनल जिÎटस िसÎटम Îथािपत िकया गया, 
िजससे पुिलस, कोट्सर्, जेÊस, फोरȂिसक लैÅस एंड Ģॉसीक्यूशन को कनेक्ट िकया गया है और ये 
सभी िवभाग आपस मȂ डेटा शेयर करते हȅ। अगÎत, 2022 से... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question Hour is over. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
[Answers to Sta
rred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published el ectronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials  ] 
 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
CALLING ATTENTION TO MATTER OF URGENT PUBLIC IMPORTANCE 
 
The situation arising out of devastating landslide in Wayanad district in the 
 State of Kerala 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, now, we will take up the Calling Attention to Matter 
of Urgent Public Importance.  Shri Ar un Singh and Dr. John Brittas to call the 
attention of the Minister of Home Affairs to the situation arising out of devastating 
landslide in Wayanad district in the State of Kerala. Shri Arun Singh. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
59

 
Ǜी अरुण  िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय, मȅ क ेरल राज्य क े वायनाड िजले मȂ िवनाशकारी 
भूÎखलन से उत्पन्न िÎथित की ओर गृह मंतर्ी का ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Arun Singhji, as per practice and rules, first, you only have to draw 
the attention of the hon. Minister. You have drawn that attention.  Hon. Minister of 
State in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Shri Nityanand Rai, to make the statement. 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय) : सभापित जी, कई माननीय सदÎयȗ ने अपने 
िवचार Ëयƪ करने क
े  िलए आपसे अनुरोध िकया है, उनके  िवचार सुनने क े बाद इस संबंध मȂ मȅ 
बताऊं गा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will, now, call upon the Members to make their contributions.  Shri 
Arun Singh may continue now. 
 
Ǜी अरुण िंसह :  महोदय, क ेरल क े वायनाड िडिÎटर्क्ट मȂ जो चार गाँव हȅ, वे लȅडÎलाइड क
 े  
कारण पूरे तरीके  से बह गए हȅ। यह बहुत ही ǭदय िवदारक घटना है। जो लोग मरे हȅ, हम उनके  
Ģित शोक संवेदना Ëयƪ करते हȅ और जो घायल हȅ, वे शीघर् ठीक हȗ, ऐसी Ģभु से Ģाथर्ना करते हȅ। 
सर, यह घटना दो बजे से लेकर छ: बजे, सुबह-सुबह की घटना है और मंगलवार की घटना है। 
जैसे ही इस लȅडÎलाइड की घटना का पता चला, माननीय Ģधान म ंतर्ी जी ने क ेरल क े मुख्य मंतर्ी, 
िपनाराई िवजयन जी से तुरंत बात की। उन्हȂ एंÌयोर िकया िक क Ȃ दर् से जो भी सहायता होगी, वह 
सहायता हम Ģदान करȂगे। जो लोग मारे गए हȅ, उनके  िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने दो लाख 
रुपय े क
े  अनुदान की घोषणा की है।   सर, जो मारे गए हȅ, उनके  िलए दो लाख रुपय े क े अनुदान 
की घोषणा की गई है और जो घायल हȅ, उनके  िलए भी 50,000 रुपय े क े अनुदान की घोषणा की 
गई है। इसके  साथ-साथ, जो एनडीआरएफ की टीम है, वह भी बचाव दल मȂ लगी है और जो सेना 
क े हेलीकॉÃटसर् हȅ, वे भी बचाव दल मȂ लगे हुए हȅ। सेना क े जवान भी इस काम मȂ लगे हुए हȅ। 
मान्यवर, Ģधा
न मंतर्ी जी का पीएमओ कायार्लय लगातार इसकी मॉिनटिंरग कर रहा है और 
माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी इस काम क े िलए बचाव दल क े साथ लगातार बात कर रहे हȅ और Ģदेश की 
जो सरकार है, उससे भी लगातार बात कर रहे हȅ िक जो फ ं से हुए लोग हȅ, उनकी जान बचाने का 
काम क ै से िकया जाए
। मान्यवर, मȅ बताना चाहूँगा िक जो यह घटना है, जो एकाएक सुबह-सुबह 
आई, इसके  बाद तुरंत बचा व दल का काम शुरू  हुआ। इसमȂ 400 से अिधक लोगȗ को बचाया गया 
है और अभी भी बचाने का काम चल रहा है। अभी थोड़ी देर पहले मȅने भी हमारी पाटीर् क े क ेरल क े 
जो अध्यक्ष हȅ, उनसे बात की, तो  उन्हȗने बताया िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने हमारे मंतर्ी, 
क ुिरयन जी को वहाँ भेज िदया है। हमारी पाटीर् क े Ģदेश यूिनट क े अध्यक्ष, क े. सुरȂदर्न जी, वे भी 
इस काम मȂ लगे हȅ। उनके  साथ-साथ बहुत सारे वॉलंिटयसर् इस काम मȂ लगे हुए हȅ। सेवा भारती क े 
लोग भी इस काम मȂ लगे हुए हȅ। मान्यवर, मȅ बताना चाहूँगा िक Ģदेशȗ क े पास एसडीआरएफ का 
पयार्Ãत फ ं ड होता है। 2005-06 से 2013-14 तक जो एसडीआरएफ का फ
ं ड था, वह 35,858 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

करोड़ रुपय े था, वह ऐसी आपदाओं से िनपटने क े िलए था। इसी क े क ं पेिरज़न मȂ, अगर नौ साल 
का कायर्काल देखȂगे, 2014-15 से 2022-23 का comparatively देखȂगे, तो माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
क े नेतृत्व मȂ एसडीआरएफ मȂ तीन गुना अिधक, 1,04,704 करोड़ रुपय े की बढ़ोतरी हुई है। 
 एनडीआरएफ क े संबंध मȂ अगर िपछले 9 सालȗ म
Ȃ देखȂगे, तो 2005-06 से लेकर 2014-15 
तक 25,036 करोड़ रुपय े का ही फ ं ड एनडीआरएफ को एलोके ट हुआ था।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इस फ ं ड क े िलए 77,731 करोड़ रुपय े की घोषणा ह ुई, मतलब तीन गुना अिधक 
फ ं ड की घोषणा हुई, िजससे की अिधक से अिधक लोगȗ को िकस Ģकार से राहत दी जाए, इसका 
ध्यान रखा गया है।  12 जुलाई, 2023 को क Ȃदर्ीय सरकार ने 7,532 करोड़  रुपय े की घोषणा 
एसडीआरएफ क े िलए की और उसको िरलीज िकया, िजससे अगर ऐसी आपदा आए, तो
 Ģदेश 
त्विरत कारर्वाई करते हुए लोगȗ का बचाव कर सके ।  इसमȂ क ेरल क े िलए भी एक बड़ी रािश की 
घोषणा की गई है।  यहां तक िक 15वȂ िवǄ आयोग ने भी यह कहा ह
ै िक ऐसी घटनाओं को रोकने 
क े िलए अिधक पैसा चािहए, इसिलए 2021-22 से लेकर 2025-26 तक 1 लाख, 28 हज़ार करोड़ 
रुपय े क Ȃ दर् सरकार sanction करेगी, िजससे अिधक से अिधक लोगȗ को इस Ģकार से बचाया जा 
सके ।   
 मान्यवर, मȅ बताना चाहूंगा िक मानन
ीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने जून 2016 मȂ राÍटर्ीय आपदा 
Ģबंधन योजना की घोषणा की और राÍटर्ीय आपदा Ģबंधन योजना मȂ एनडीएमए को बनाने का 
काम िकया है।  इसका उǈेÌय है िक चाहे क Ȃ दर् की एजेन्सीज़ हȗ या Ģदेश की एजेन्सीज़ हȗ, सारी 
एजेन्सीज़ का एकीकरण करके , एक
 साथ िमलकर ऐसे समय मȂ क ै से करȂ।  इसी क े साथ-साथ 13 
जून, 2023 को राज्य और यूटी क े आपदा Ģबंधन की हमारे गृह मंतर्ी जी ने बैठक की।  ...(समय की 
घंट
ी)... इसमȂ 8 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े की घोषणा की।  इसके  साथ-साथ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
और क Ȃ दर् सरकार की ओर से ऐसी अनेकȗ घोषणाएं की गई हȅ, तािक ऐसी िÎथित स े िनपटा जाए।  
यही मȅ सदन क े समक्ष रखना चाहता हूं।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Next, Dr. John Brittas.  You have three minutes.  But, I give you 
five minutes. Go ahead!   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) :  Sir, I express my profound gratitude for allowing this 
Calling Attention Motion. With profound grief, I am participating in this discussion.  
Given the magnitude of the disaster, which Wayanad has witnessed, it is necessary to 
declare this tragedy as a ‘national disaster’.   
 Sir, the other day, I listened to the response of the hon. Minister.  And, the 
response is that there is no provision to d eclare it as a ‘national disaster’.  I would 
plead with the hon. Home Minister to please understand the extent of this tragedy.  It 
is the worst landslide that has occurred in  Kerala. The Kerala Government, with the 
cooperation of the agencies of the Union Go vernment, is doing everything possible to 
give relief to the people. As you would ap preciate, there are three stages – rescue, 
relief, and rehabilitation.  Now, the focus is on ‘rescue’.  The death toll has gone up 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
61

to 157.  And, we fear more deaths.  There are many people who have gone missing.  I 
would submit that some of the dead bodies were found in neighbouring district. So, 
the radius of this tragedy is huge.  So, we  have to deploy all sorts of devices to 
ensure that the rescue operation has got a magnitude of covering areas, which are 
beyond this district.  Sir, we have been  pleading with the Government of India to 
provide relief to the State of Kerala.  For th e information of the House, during the last 
seven years, 3,782 landslides occurred in the country. And, out of that, 2,239 were in 
Kerala alone.  
 About 60 per cent of the landslides happe ned in Kerala. That is why, when I 
was participating in the Budget discussion , I had expressed my reservation to the 
propositions of the Finance Minister when  she mentioned only a few names of the 
States.   I would urge upon the hon. Home Minister to see that there is ample 
assistance provided at this need of hour . We have opened up  45 relief camps in 
Wayanad.  There are around  4,000 people in the camps. Various agencies, I would 
say, the people, cutting across all the politic al affiliations, are extending their support 
to give relief to the people.  Two tempor ary hospitals have been set up in Wayanad 
alone.  Forces including fire force, the NDRF and police are working together in 
tandem.  I would also compliment and also  express my gratitude to the Central 
Government for providing the help of the Ar my, the Navy and the Air Force, which are 
being utilized for these rescue operations.   About 163 people have been officially 
declared as dead.  But, as I told you in the beginning, we feel that the number will go 
up.  Almost 250 people are still missing.  It is very difficult to take out the bodies 
because of the debris that has heaped on these places.  Sir, I have a request to you.  
Last time, in 2018, we had a flood, very bad fl ood, the worst flood in this Century.  At 
that time, the Union Government had provided  relief but even for the relief, the Union 
Government had charged Kerala State the money which was spent by the Air Force 
and also the money which was provided for rice, were demanded from Kerala 
Government.  I would urge upon the hon. Ho me Minister that such things should not 
happen.  Please consider this is the disast er of this nation.  Please extend your 
helping hand. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you, hon. Member. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Members whose names have been received for 
seeking their intervention.   Members may restrict their speech to three minutes each 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

while raising the situation.   Now, Shri mati Jebi Mather Hisham, you have three 
minutes. 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir, for giving 
me an opportunity to speak on the catastrophic Wayanad landslide.  As I stepped into 
the Parliament now, I received a phone call.  All I could hear was the cries and 
screams and the tears of Shobhna Soman.   She lost her mother, her brother, 
Sudevan, brother’s wife and their two childre n.   Five members from one family, the 
home and the hopes and  everything ha s swept away. The magnitude of this 
catastrophe is again, I reiterate, beyond measurable.  I implore the Government to 
declare this as a national disaster.  Why do I say so?  That is because this is 
something which has affected the villages, the bridges, the roads, the houses and the 
families. They have to start their lives fr om zero.  Earlier, we have had instances 
where Sikkim earthquake and Ladakh floods have all been under national disaster. 
Also, we have to have a mapping of that. It is also important that we prevent such 
instances from happening by having early warning system, early alerting system and 
mapping of such areas.  The compensation  of Rupees two lakhs, which has been 
provided, is very less. We should provid e a compensation of Rs. 25 lakhs.  I 
appreciate all the efforts of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and all other authorities 
who are working there tirelessly, doing everything possible, whatever it takes, to bring 
back Wayanad to normalcy and save people.  But, it is also important to say: Do we 
have a warning system? Do we have an alert system? Do we have a system of 
coordinated efforts?  The fact is, we do not have a warning system.   We are living in 
the age of NASA – the IPCC Report – we are living in the age of Artificial Intelligence, 
but when such heavy rains happen, the mud becomes weak.  Do we have a system?  
The Opposition, one-and-a-half years ago, brought a Resolution in Kerala Assembly 
demanding all this.   But, unf ortunately, we have not learnt  from the Ockhi, we have 
not learnt from Tsunami and we have not learnt from floods. 
 The fact is, we have to have coordinated efforts to have alarm system, the 
warning signals and coordinated efforts of all Departments.  ...(Time-bell rings)...  
But from the bottom of my heart, I again say, please declare this as a national disaster 
and provide adequate compensation to the families who have lost everything. Thank 
you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Raghav Chadha; three minutes.  
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
63

SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab): Sir, I stand before you today with a heavy heart to 
mourn the tragic loss of lives due to th e catastrophic landslide in Wayanad.  
Yesterday, nature unleashed its fury, and, in an instant, several families were torn 
apart. The serene hills of Wayanad whic h once brought joy and peace now echo with 
the cries of those who have lost their love d ones. To the people of Wayanad, I, on 
behalf of my party, offer our deepest co ndolences. Your pain is immeasurable and 
your loss is shared by every citizen of this nation. As we grapple with the enormity of 
this disaster, let us stand in unwavering so lidarity with the affected families. Let us 
assure them that they are not alone in th is grief and we are with them and we will 
support them through this darkest hour.   
 Sir, it is imperative that we respond to this disaster with the urgency and the 
compassion it demands.  I call the atte ntion of the hon. Minister towards the 
desperate need to allocate an  appropriate relief package to the State of Kerala. This 
package should not only provide immediat e financial assistance to the affected 
families but also support the long-term rehab ilitation and reconstruction efforts.  We 
must ensure that the survivors have ac cess to safe housing, medical care and 
psychological support to help them rebuild their lives.  
 Sir, I also seek the attention of the Government towards some suggestions to 
prepare ourselves for such unfo rtunate incidents in the future. First, strengthen early 
warning systems; second, improve infrastructure resilience; third, conduct 
community training; fourth, enhance inter- agency coordination; and fifth, provide 
comprehensive rehabilitation.  
 Sir, I feel that this is certainly not the time for political differences or regional 
biases.  This is a moment for unity, for comi ng together as one nation to protect and 
support our citizens.  We owe it to those who have perished and to those who have 
lost their homes and loved ones to create a system that minimizes the impact of such 
disasters in future.  
 And lastly, Sir, let us honour the memory of those who lost in Wayanad by 
committing ourselves to building a safer and a more resilient India. Let their sacrifice 
not go in vain and let it be a catalyst for change. Thank you.        
                                                                     
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Saket Gokhale.  
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal): Sir, I first wish to thank you for constructively 
taking the suggestion of the Opposition an d allowing this Calling Attention Motion. 
This week we have had one Calling Attention, we have had one Short Duration 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

Discussion and I fervently hope that this positive trend continues in the weeks to 
come.  
 Sir, first, I would like to start by paying my condolences to the families of all 
those who have been affected by this horrible disaster in Wayanad and prayers for the 
ones who are still trapped, who are still bein g rescued.  I also wish to extend my 
prayers to our brave security forces who ar e working in extremely difficult conditions 
and trying to save lives.  
 Sir, I have three very specific questions for the hon. Home Minister to respond 
to in the context of this horrendous natu ral disaster which has happened in Kerala, 
which we have also seen happening in othe r States in the past.  Sir, for the State 
Disaster Relief Fund, the SDRF, the quota of allocation is that 25 per cent of the funds 
are contributed by the State Governme nt. However, unfortunately, the State 
Government has discretion on spending only 10 per cent of those funds if the Ministry 
of Home Affairs has not declared it as a natural disaster.  
Sir, my specific question is: Will the Government consider and approve a 
proposal for allowing States, at least, 25 per cent of discretion on the SDRF funds? 
They are contributing 25 per cent. It is the money of the people of the State. Can the 
State use it for the State itself?  That sh ould be allowed. That is question number 
one. Question No. 2, in this Union Budget, we saw the Finance Minister talk about 
five States in terms of flood relief.  West Bengal, my State, was very specifically 
excluded from that despite the fact that  we have had devastating floods in West 
Bengal. But nothing was given to West Bengal.  Sir, this disaster has now happened 
in Kerala which, as a lot of hon. Members have said before me, should be considered 
a natural disaster. Since the Union Budget is still under consideration right now, my 
specific question is: Will the Union Governme nt, at least, now think about adding 
West Bengal and Kerala to the list of States that should be getting flood relief?  
 My third point is that in the last several years we have stopped seeing the 
Prime Minister doing aerial surveys.  He used to do that once upon a time.  He 
doesn't do it anymore, be it Assam, Bengal  or Kerala.  When the Prime Minister does 
an aerial survey, it sends a lot of confidence to the people and it makes them feel that 
they are being cared about. Will the Prime Minister, at least, now stop posing for 
happy photos and actually come out and go to the disaster area and do an aerial 
survey there in Kerala?     
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा) : सर, कल वायनाड मȂ जो घटना घटी, उसमȂ िजन लोगȗ की जानȂ 
गईं, उनके  िलए हम सब िदल से दुखी हȅ और अपनी स
 ंवेदना Ëयƪ करते हȅ।  उसमȂ हमारे ओिडशा 
क े दो डॉक्टसर् भी नहीं िमल रहे हȅ, िजनको ढ ूंढ़ा जा रहा है।  ओिडशा मȂ हर वƪ िडजाÎटर होता 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
65

है, तूफान आता है, बाढ़ आती है।  ओिडशा मȂ िडजाÎटर मैनेजमȂट क ै से िकया जाए, उसके  बारे मȂ 
तत्कालीन मुख्य मंतर्ी नवीन पटनायक जी ने जो Ãलान एंड Ģोगर्ाÇस शुरू  िकए थे, वे लाँग टमर् 
Ģोगर्ाÇस थे।  इसी क े कारण, ओिडशा मȂ जान और माल की बहुत रक्षा होती थी।  अगर क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार भी उसको फॉलो करती िक नवीन पटनायक जी ने िकस तरीके  से िडजाÎटर मैनेजमȂट 
को मैनेज िकया
 था, तो मȅ सोचता हूँ िक उससे बहुत से लोगȗ की जानȂ बचने की उÇमीद बढ़ जाती। 
  महोदय, ऐसी घटनाएं बार-बार हो रही हȅ।  आज यह क ेरल मȂ हुआ, लेिकन असम और 
उǄराखंड जैसे हमारे अलग-अलग राज्यȗ मȂ भी ऐसा हो रहा है।  वहां बािरश की वजह स े िमƺी 
धंसने की घटनाएं हो रही हȅ।  उसके  बारे मȂ एक िफÊम भी बनी थी िक क ै से पानी आ गया और 
उसमȂ बहुत से लोग बह गए।  इसके  बारे मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार को गंभीरता से सोचना होगा।  मान्यवर, 
आज होम िमिनÎटर जी यहां मौजूद हȅ।  मȅ उÇमीद करता
 हूँ िक इसको तत्काल राÍटर्ीय आपदा 
घोिषत करनी चािहए, क्यȗिक वहां 100 से ज्यादा लोगȗ की जानȂ जा चुकी हȅ।  ऐसी घटनाएं जो 
बार-बार घट रही हȅ, इनको क ै से  रोका जाए, उसके  िलए मȅ क Ȃ दर् सरकार से जानना चाहता हूँ िक 
Îपेिशयली इसके  बारे मȂ िकतने फ ं ड की ËयवÎथा की गई है? िडजाÎटर मैनेजमȂट क े िलए अलग से 
क ु छ Îपेशल फ ं ड की ËयवÎथा करनी भी चािहए।  भले ही कोई भी राज्य मȂ घटन ा क्यȗ न घटे, क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार को ज्यादा हेÊप करनी चािहए, मȅ यह उÇमीद करूं गा।  सर, आज क ेरल मȂ हुआ, कल 
असम मȂ होगा, परसȗ उǄराखंड मȂ होगा, कहीं न कहीं ऐसी घटनाएं घटती ही रहȂगी। ...(समय की 
घंटी)...   
अतः मȅ क Ȃ दर् सरकार से िफर से गुजािरश करूं गा िक हम लोग िडजाÎटर मैनेजमȂट को 
मैनेज करने क े िलए क ु छ अच्छे कदम उठाएँ और फ ं ड की ËयवÎथा जरूर  करȂ।  आपका बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, we are at loss of words to express our grief.  
Everyone in
 this world plans to live long , but such things happen suddenly and takes 
away the precious lives of human bein gs.  They might have had too many 
responsibilities; they might have had dreams but all could have shattered and sunk in 
the soil.  I thank you for admitting this Ca lling Attention.  What should be done in 
future is the question now be fore us.  Some said that it  was a cloud burst, but the 
Kerala Meteorological Department has said that it is not so.  Whenever we come 
across organisations who are in dulged in maintaining glob al warming, I have been 
repeatedly telling them in many of our meetings to tackle and combat global warming.  
Afforestation is one of the things but, be fore that, deforestation should be stopped.
 The main reason for landslides and such  flash floods is deforestation.  Many 
areas are suffering.  Those hill stations, wh ich used to attract us because of their 
greenery, now appear tonsured .  This should not happen.  We came to know that 
one environment scientist, Mr. Madhav Ga dgil, had given a warning a few months 
before to take precautionary measures ex pecting that such things might happen in 
the very near future.  Anybody cannot say these things.  Only those who have very 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

good research can predict these, and they give very good suggestions also, but they 
are all ignored as if they are nobody.  So, I would urge the Government to take note of 
all these things.  Scientists and so many people have advised on  how to address the 
issue of global warming.  We come acro ss many such suggestio ns, but how far are 
these implemented?  Only the Government can do this.  Had Mr. Madhav Gadgil’s 
suggestion been taken seriously, this tragedy could have been avoided.   
 So, I would urge the Government again to avoid such happenings in future, like 
flash floods or cloudbursts.  Even then, th ese can occur because it is part of the 
nature, but we have to take some precauti onary measures.  Deforestation should be 
stopped at any cost, and, at the same time , release the disaster relief funds at the 
right time and to the needed level of those people and the State Governments.  Thank 
you, Sir.            
                                                                         
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar) :   Thank you, hon. Chairman , Sir, for having this 
Calling Attention on this issue.  Last time we heard that the death toll has arisen to 
163.  Dr. John Brittas told me about this.  First of all, our condolences to those 
families who have lost their near and dear ones , as also our all kind of solidarity to the 
Central Government and the State Governme nt.  Everybody is vulnerable in such 
disasters.  But, the people and communities  on the margins are more vulnerable than 
others.  In this case, if you look at th e locale, they are the locale occupied by 
vulnerable people and communities.  I think that should be first priority.  With so much 
of technology at our command, can we broadbase our disaster preparedness, 
disaster prevention, disaster signals and di saster mitigation?  I come from a State 
which is prone to such disasters, whether it is flood or even landslides in some areas.  
Finally, I would reiterate that such massive tr agedies must unite us.  It should not be 
seen through the prism of who is governing Kerala and who is governing Delhi.  Thank 
you very much, Sir.              
                               
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) :  Sir, the Wayanad District of Kerala has suffered 
devastating landslide which ha s wiped out villages and habi tations.  The very painful 
incident has happened and there is massive destruction and many people have lost 
their lives.  The exact number of  deaths is not yet known.  This is not a time to score 
political points.  This is the time for rescue and rehabilitation.  So, together, we 
should work for rehabilitation and rescue act ivities.  The Government of Kerala is 
trying to co-ordinate with a ll the agencies for rescue and rehabilitation.  I have some 
reservations about the statement of one of the Members in this House, which was, I 
think, for scoring political gain.  The entire nation should work together.  If a person, 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
67

or a political party, is trying to make some political gain in such a situation, that means 
they don’t have any idea of politics of humanity.   
 This disaster has caused huge loss to th e economy of the State and there is a 
need to give special assistance to the State Government.  Wayanad District in Kerala 
State needs huge support from the Union Government.  So, the Union Government 
should provide a special package to the State Government.  The affected people of 
Wayanad District are requesting for help fr om the entire nation.  The landslide in 
Mundakkai village, Chooralmala and other areas is one of the biggest calamities in the 
State of Kerala.  So, I request the Government that it should be declared as a national 
calamity and my humble request to the Union Government is to take a special step to 
address this kind of climate change.                                                                 
 It is the climate change which is result ing in increase in landslides and other 
calamities.  Sir, your intervention is also very necessary in this matter.  Thank you.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  Now, Shri Iranna Kadadi.  
 
SHRI IRANNA KADADI (Karnataka): 
*"Mr. Chairman Sir, due to the devastating 
landslide incident in the Wayanad region of Kerala, hundreds of people have lost their 
lives. I express my deepest condolences and I sympathize with the bereaved families 
who have lost their near and dear ones.  
Sir, due to heavy rainfall in the Western Ghats region, some parts of Karnataka 
have also been grappling with a similar situation. In Karnataka, five people have lost 
their lives. I would like to express my deep est condolences. Due to the record high 
rainfall, the rivers Krishna and Ghataprabha are flowing with 3 lakh  cusecs of excess 
water.  As a result, 232 v illages have been inundated and 44 bridges have been 
submerged, resulting in severely damage d transport and communication facilities. 
Sir, more than 800 families have been affe cted and more than 4 000 affected people 
are taking shelter in the rehabilitation fac ilities.  Hundreds of cattle are also dead. 
More than 46,700 hectares of  agricultural land has be en submerged and the crops 
have been destroyed; roads and bridges ha ve been damaged.  Due to the inundation 
caused by the rivers, crocodiles, snakes, fish and other aquatic creatures have swum 
out and have entered the villages. People are frightened there. Drinking water has 
been contaminated due to the floods, causin g its acute shortage. Sir, there is a 
possibility of widespread water-borne dis eases among the people after the flood 
water recedes. There is a looming possibility of  many other related calamities as well.  
                                         
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Kannada. 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

The difficulties and hardships faced by the pe ople living in the river basin have been a 
common affair every year during the mo nsoon season. However, the Karnataka 
Government has opened only a few porridge centers. The State Government is 
shirking off its responsibilities. So, I would like to draw your kind attention to this 
problem of natural calamities being faced by the people of Karnataka, and request the 
Central Government to help the people of Karnataka by taking appropriate measures 
under the National Disaster Management Authority.”        
                                                                                 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri A.A. Rahim. 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala): Sir, first of all, I would requ est the hon. Home Minister to 
declare this incident as a national disaster.  Sir, so many friends of mine have spoken 
here regarding the forecasting system with regard to the calamities.  It is said, 
prevention is better than cure.  I would like to bring forward an important point in this 
august House.  Sir, Kerala does not ha ve a properly functioning advanced radar-
based weather forecasting system.  
Sir, cyclone Ockhi hit us in 2017.  Th ere were floods in 2019.  Comrade Dr. 
Brittas has already mentioned it here.  Kerala has been demanding a modern Doppler 
Radar since 2013.  What is the position there?  In Kochi, there is radar system but it is 
not properly functioning most of the times and it is an old system which does not 
provide data in digital format to be used for decision making and the support system.  
The radar at Thiruvananthapuram is under ISRO and cannot be used all the time for 
this purpose. 
 In northern Kerala -- Wayanad is a part of the northern Kerala -- I would like to 
say here that there is not even a single radar in northern Kerala.  Sir, Kerala has been 
demanding modern Doppler radars since 2013.  I would like to bring to your attention 
that I raised this matter in this august Ho use as a Special Mention, but unfortunately, 
the Union Government has neglected that.  Sir, please listen to us.  (Time-bell rings.) 
Prevention is better than cure.  Kindly ensure that a proper weather forecasting 
system is placed in Kerala without further delay.  This is my prayer.  
 
Ǜी सभापित: Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर।  
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर (उǄर Ģदेश): सभापित महोदय, क ेरल क े वायनाड मȂ भूÎखलन क े कारण 
जो दुखद हादसा हुआ, उसमȂ मȅ अपनी संवेदना Ëयƪ करता हूं। इस घटना क े बाद इस देश क े 
Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने लगातार राज्य क े मुख्य मंतर्ी जी से बात की और देश क े गृह 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
69

मंतर्ी लगातार राज्य सरकार क े सÇपकर् मȂ रहकर, जो भी क ेन्दर् से सहायता उपलÅध करवाई जा 
सकती है, वह लगातार सÇपकर् मȂ रहकर, वह सहायता क ेन्दर् सरकार उपलÅध करा रही है।  
माननीय सभापित जी, इसी सदन मȂ अभी कहा गया िक सबसे ज्यादा अगर कहीं पर लȅड 
Îलाइिंडग की घटनाएं हुई हȅ, तो 50 परस Ȃट से ज्यादा क ेरल मȂ हुई हȅ। अगर क ेरल मȂ इतनी 
घटनाएं हुई हȅ, तो उसके  बारे मȂ क्या राज्य सरकार ने इस तरह की घटनाएं न हȗ, उसके  बारे म
Ȃ 
क ु छ सोचा, क ु छ िवचार िकया
 िक आिखर क्या कारण है, क्यȗ इतनी घटनाएं क ेरल मȂ हो रही हȅ, 
क्यȗ वायनाड मȂ ऐसी घटनाएं हुईं? इसका एक बड़ा कारण है, मȅ राजनीित मȂ नहीं जाना चाहता 
हूं, लेिकन मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता  हूं िक इसका एक बड़ा कारण और है, जहां अित बािरश 
इसका कारण है। इसके  साथ-साथ अभी हमारे माननीय सदÎय ितरुची  िशवा जी ने कहा िक 
deforesting एक बड़ा कारण है, लेिकन वहां पर जो अवैध कÅजे और अितकर्मण उस क्षेतर् मȂ हुआ 
है, अगर उस पर समय से कारर्वाई की जाती
, अगर राज्य सरकार उस पर कारर्वाई करती, तो 
इस घटना से बचा जा सकता था। अभी हमारे एक साथी ने ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने आपको िडÎटबर् नहीं 
िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Jo
hn, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Let us converge on something 
positive.   
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: मȅ उसी पर आ रहा हूं िक इतनी जानȗ को बचाया जा सकता था। इसके  
साथ-साथ अभी हमारे एक साथी ने रडार और अन्य चीजȗ क े बारे मȂ बात कही। सभापित जी, देश 
मȂ एक ËयवÎथा है। हर लोक सभा क्षेतर् से सांसद चुना जाता है। िपछले 5 वषș मȂ, क्यȗिक रहीम 
साहब ने घटना पुरानी बताई। 5 वषș
 तक लगातार वायनाड ने भी अपना सांसद चुनकर भेजा। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, ये क्या कह रहे हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान
 )... 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  I allowed everyone to say. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, मȅने िकसी का नाम तो नहीं िलया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One minute.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI SURENDRA SINGH NAGAR:  I am not naming anyone.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : P l e a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   H o n .  Members, suggestions have been 
made from every side.  The hon. Memb er, Shri Rahim, made very important 
suggestions.  All these suggestions are indicative so that such kind of situations do 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

not arise.  So, if the hon. Member is sayi ng something, he is entitled to say so.  
Please go ahead.  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  He is making a political statement, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Sir, again you are sitting and talking.  Sorry, I take serious note of 
it. Please, hon. Member, go ahead. 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सभापित जी, सांसद होने क े नाते, जो वायनाड क े सांसद रहे, हालांिक 
उन्हȗने ...(Ëयवधान)... जब वायनाड की जनता को ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: 
* 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM:  
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Will you take your seat?  Nothing will go on record.  Hon. Member, 
continue.    
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: बेहतर होता िक उन 5 वषș मȂ सांसद रहते हुए, जो वायनाड की किमयां थीं 
- लेिकन पूरे देश मȂ तो उन्हȗने घूम-घूमकर अन्य बातȂ कहीं - लेिकन वायनाड की जनता की जो 
समÎयाएं थीं, उनको सदन मȂ उठाने का काम व
े करते, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी से िमलते, तो इन 143 
जानȗ को बचाया जा सकता था। ...(Ëयवधान)... दुभार्ग्य देिखए, वायनाड की जनता ने बहुत 
िवÌवास क े साथ एक सांसद को चुनकर भेजा िक वह हमारे सुख और दुख मȂ, जब कोई घटना 
होगी, वह हमारे साथ खड़ा होगा। वहाँ से इÎतीफा देकर भागने का तो काम िकया, लेिकन आज 
इस दुखद समय मȂ, घटना क
े  तीन िदन होने क े बाद भी उन्हȗने वायनाड की जनता क े बीच जाने 
का काम नहीं िकया। महोदय, व
े आज तक भी वहाँ नहीं गए हȅ। आज वे दूसरे िवषयȗ मȂ तो इंटेरेÎट 
ले रहे हȅ, लेिकन वायनाड की जनता क े पास जाकर उनका दुख बाँटने का काम नहीं कर पा रहे 
हȅ। 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर :  महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इतना कहना चाहता
 हूं िक यह जाँच भी 
होनी चािहए िक इस घटना का कारण क्या था।                
  
                                         
* Not recorded. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
71

MR. CHAIRMAN :  N o w ,  S h r i  R a m j i.  ...(Interruptions)...   P l e a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   
...(Interruptions)...     Nothing is going on record.  ...( Interruptions)..  I will reflect 
on this.  Tiruchi ji, I will reflect on this. ...(Interruptions)...   The Member has started 
speaking. ...(Interruptions)... I take note of your voice.  Don't bother.  
...(Interruptions)...  Yes, Shri Ramji.   
 
Ǜी रामजी (उǄर Ģदेश) :  माननीय सभापित जी, आपने मुझे यहाँ पर बोलने का अवसर िदया है, 
इसके  िलए आपका बहुत -बहुत धन्यवाद। महोदय, मȅ और मेरी पाटीर् वायनाड मȂ जो लȅड 
Îलाइिंडग हुई है और िजन लोगȗ की मौतȂ हुई हȅ, उनके  Ģित गहरी संवेदना Ëयƪ करती है। इसके  
साथ ही हम क ुदरत से यह Ģाथर्ना भी करते हȅ िक जो लोग घायल हुए हȅ, वे जÊदी से जÊदी ठीक 
हो जाएं। मान्यवर, साइंस ने देश क े अंदर हमȂ लȅड Îलाइिंडग का एक पिर्टकु लर एिरया दे रखा है। 
इनमȂ क ेरल, गोवा, महाराÍटर् क े साथ ही उǄर पूवीर् एिरया है, जो िहमाचल Ģदेश और उǄराखंड 
से लगा हुआ है और आंधर् Ģदेश का जो अरकू  एिरया है, वह भी इस एिरया मȂ पहले से ही िडफाइन 
िकया हुआ है िक यह लȅड Îलाइड संवेदनशील एिरया है। हमȂ उसके  रीज़न पर बात करनी चािहए 
िक हम इस गंभीर मुǈे पर आगे की तरफ क ै से बढ़Ȃ, हम इसको क ै से रोकȂ - क्यȗिक यह हर साल हो 
रहा है। लाÎट ईयर 22 जुलाई, 2023 मȂ महाराÍटर् क े इशालवाड़ी मȂ हुआ, पूरा गाँव लȅड Îलाइड मȂ 
दब गया और 30 से 40 लोगȗ की मौत हो गई। इससे पहले 1998 मȂ उǄराखंड क े मालपा मȂ हुआ, 
380 लोगȗ की जान चली गई। आिखर ये घटनाएं क ै से रोकी जाएं - इसको लेकर हमȂ गंभीर होना 
चािहए।  
मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार को क ु छ सजेशन्स देना चाहता हूं िक इसमȂ दो चीज़Ȃ 
हȅ। इसमȂ एक तो नेचुरल रीजन है और दूसरा मानवजिनत रीजन ह
ै। महोदय, हम नेचुरल रीजन्स 
को नहीं रोक सकते हȅ। हम ज्वालामुखी नहीं रोक सकते हȅ, भारी बािरश नहीं रोक सकते हȅ, हम 
इन चीजȗ को नहीं रोक सकते हȅ, लेिकन जो चीजȂ मानवजिनत हȅ, उनको रोक सकते हȅ। महोदय, 
हम हाई लेवल पर माइन्स का जो काम कर रहे ह
ȅ, उत्खनन का काम कर रहे हȅ, उसको रोकने 
की जरूरत
 है। जलवायु पिरवतर्न मȂ जो काम हो रहा है, उसको रोकना चािहए। आपने देखा है िक 
िकतनी भयंकर गरमी हुई और अभी जो वायनाड मȂ घटना हुई, उसके  बारे मȂ साइंस कह रहा है 
िक वहाँ पर अरब सागर क े अचानक गरम हो जाने की वजह से ज्यादा भारी बािरश पड़ी। महोदय, 
यह जलवायु पिरवतर्न ह
ै और इस घटना मȂ क्लाइमेट चȂज ही एक बड़ा रीजन िदखाई पड़ रहा है। 
हमȂ भिवÍय को लेकर इसके  Ģित सावधान रहना चािहए।  ..(Ëयवधान)..मान्यवर, मȅ बस खत्म कर 
रहा हूं। महोदय, डेवलपमȂट क े नाम पर जो पेड़ काटे जा रहे हȅ, बड़े-बड़े जंगल काट रहे हȅ, 
हाईवेज़ बना रहे हȅ, इन्हȂ बचाने क े िलए हमȂ यह Ģावधान डालना पड़ेगा िक ड ेवलपमȂट क े नाम पर 
िजतने जंगल काटे जाएंगे, पेड़ काटे जाएंगे, उतने ही पेड़ वहाँ पर लगाने की ËयवÎथा भी की 
जाए, तािक हम इस तरह की नैचुरल िडजाÎटर से आगे लड़ सकȂ । महोदय, मȅ आपसे यही कहना 
चाहता हूं। ..(समय की घंट
ी).. 
मान्यवर, िसफर् 20 सेक ंड्स दे दीिजए। इसके  साथ ही मȅ सरकार से यह भी िनवेदन करना 
चाहता हूं िक िसफर् 2 लाख रुपय े देने से काम नहीं बनेगा, क्यȗिक इसमȂ बहुत बड़ा नुकसान हुआ 
है, पूरे-पूरे घर तबाह हो गए हȅ, पूरा का पूरा पिरवार खत्म हो गया है। वहाँ पर इतने घायल लोग हȅ 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

िक 2 लाख रुपय े मȂ तो दवा भी नहीं आएगी। मȅ आपसे िरक्वेÎट करना चाहता हूं िक इस रािश को 
बढ़ाया जाए ..(Ëयवधान)... कम से कम 25 से  50 लाख तक की रािश की जाए।  महोदय, आपने 
यहाँ मुझे अपनी बात रखने का अवसर िदया है, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत -बहुत धन्यवाद। 
                                                                                      
Ǜी लहर िंसह िसरोया (कणार्टक) : सभापित जी, आपने मुझे इस बहुत संवेदनशील मुǈे पर 
बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। कल से हम बहुत दुखी हȅ। चूँिक 
क ेरल हमारा पड़ोसी राज्य है, तो मȅ कनार्टक की जनता की तरफ से भी उन पिरवारȗ क े Ģित, 
िजन्हȗने अपने पिरवार क े लोगȗ को खोया है, संवेदना Ģकट करता हूँ। इसके  साथ ही, मȅ 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, आदरणीय गृह मंतर्ी जी और रक्षा मंतर्ी जी का भी धन्यवाद करता ह
ूँ िक 
जैसे ही कल हमȂ समाचार पतर्ȗ से मालूम पड़ा, तब तक वहाँ पर राहत की ËयवÎथा पहुंच चुकी थी 
और राहत कायर् Ģारंभ हो चुक े थे। मȅ उनका धन्यवाद करना चाहता हूँ।  
 सभापित जी, मȅ मानता हूँ िक यह Ģाकृ ितक आपदा है, लेिकन साथ-ही-साथ यह 
मानवकृ त भी है। जैसा िक अभी हमारे माननीय सदÎय ने कहा िक Gadgil की िरपोटर् की 
अवेहलना की गई, उसे लागू नहीं िकया गया। उसमȂ ÎपÍट कहा गया था िक यह बहुत सȂिसिटव 
जोन है। उस सȂिसिटव जोन म
Ȃ िसफर् चाय बगान ही थे। वहाँ पर िरज़ॉटर् बने, कई फॉÊस लेक बनीं 
और इस तरह से वहाँ पर पहाड़ȗ की कटाई हुई। मȅ समझता हूँ िक पहाड़
ȗ की कटाई करना, 
निदयȗ क े राÎतȗ का अवरोध करना, यह बहुत बड़ा कारण रहा है। मȅ इसमȂ िकसी सरकार को दोष 
नहीं देना चाहूँगा, लेिकन वहाँ जो सरकारȂ रहीं, उन्हȗने लगात ार इस बात की अवेहलना की है 
और वहाँ सुिनयोिजत काम नहीं हुए हȅ। वहाँ जो िवकास कायर् हुए, वे इस तरह से हुए िक वहाँ 
पयार्वरण का बड़ा नुकसान हुआ। ...(समय की घंटी)... सभापित जी, मȅ भी राजनीित मȂ नहीं पढ़ना 
चाहता हूँ, मगर राहुल गाँधी जी ने जो पद यातर्ा की थी, उस पद यातर्ा मȂ उन्हȗने उन अितकर्मणȗ 
को देखा होता, वहाँ उन पहाड़ȗ क े साथ-साथ क्या-क्या अनथर् हो रहा ह
ै, अगर यह भी देखा 
होता, तो आज यह िÎथित नहीं आती। जब हम ऐसी िÎथित म
Ȃ सैकड़ȗ भाई खो देते हȅ, हम उसके  
बाद जागते हȅ, चाहे वह जहरीली शराब क े कारण हो, तो मेरा एक और िनवेदन है िक कभी न 
कभी राज्य सभा को यह सोचना चािहए
 िक समय रहते हुए, हमȂ इस पर कदम उठाने चािहए और 
क Ȃ दर् सरकार जो योजना लागू करती है, उनका पालन करना चािहए। 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala) : Sir, I pay homage to all the victims who have lost 
their lives in this horrendous tragedy in Wayanad. My party leader, Shri Abdul Wahab, 
is already there in Wayanad and trying to coordinate efforts for rescue and 
rehabilitation. This is the monsoon season in  Kerala. It has been raining in Kerala for 
quite some time. Now, when it rains over th ere, the soil gets weak. That is a natural 
phenomenon. But if there is a cloudburst ki nd of a situation -- like, 200 mm of rain 
happened on two consecutive days, which is, 400 mm of rain happened over there – 
then, the soil gets completely weak and th is leads to the collapse of the mountain 
itself.  The whole of the mountain has collaps ed. Therefore, there has to be a system 
that pre-warns you about this particular ki nd of a disaster an d catastrophe. I would 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
73

s u g g e s t  t h a t  t h i s  p a r t i c u l a r  k i n d  o f  p r e -warning system should be installed in the 
entire West Ghats, which is an ecologically fragile area.  We need specialised system 
for these vulnerable areas.  A whole ta sk force which includes meteorological, 
oceanographic, geological and hydrological teams should be constituted and then 
this should be given to a specialised instit ute like Indian Institute of Technology. You 
should have a system comprising of all th ese four departments. Only then you can 
pre-warn this kind of cloudburst or you can  pre-warn this kind of massive landslide 
which can happen.  Landslide happened at 2 in the morning but it was not very grave 
but the gravest happened at 4  o'clock which shook all the villagers. Three villages are 
still under the debris. We do not know the number of people who are there under the 
debris. So, the magnitude of this is unimagina ble. Secondly, this has to be treated as 
a national calamity, as my friends suggested  over here. Thirdly, there has to be a 
special financial package for Kerala for th is Wayanad disaster.  Lastly, Kerala was 
excluded in the Union Budget from the Disaster Management Fund. Through this 
platform, I appeal to the Government to reconsider the decision. Thank you.       
                                                   
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu): Sir, a very unfortunate incident happened in Kerala. 
With great sorrow, all of us join with the bereaved families for their rehabilitation in 
future. We all know that the Prime Minister's  Office has immediately sent the Minister 
there as a representative and the people, wh o lost utensils, cattle, etc. have been 
given immediate relief; an amount of Rs.2 lakh for the kin of the deceased and 
Rs.50,000 to the injured which has given a little hope. At the same time, the Home 
Minister and his Ministry is pr oactive there 24X7 with NDRF, and all other help is still 
going on in Wayanad region of Kerala.  No doubt, it is a natural disaster; at the same 
time, we have to ponder over certain sa feguards for this. First, proper safety 
measures should be taken on mountain and hilly areas.   
 Be it any Government, CPM is there; it may be Congress, it may be BJP or any 
other Government.  I would only insist here that the local representatives, who have 
been elected by the people from the panchaya t level, from the legislative level, from 
the Parliament level, should be more responsible to see that encroachments are not 
there in the hilly areas.  The Government shou ld take more concern of this so that we 
can save more lives in these kinds of disasters. 
 To conclude, I would like to say that  the Central Government has given 
immediate assistance, help and hope to th e disturbed people there.  At the same 
time, the Central Government would be wi th the rehabilitation measures, with the 
people of Wayanad, Kerala. Thank you, Sir.     
                                                                                       
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu):  Hon. Chairman, Sir, yesterday, you were kind 
enough to bring this to the notice of the Ho use.  You yourself voluntarily told as to 
what happened and what steps the Government has taken.  On behalf of 
A.I.A.D.M.K. Party, I pay my condolences to the affected people of Wayanad.  
Landslides have affected most  of the Wayanad District in Kerala State.  Many hon. 
Members had requested and, yesterday also , MoS in the Ministry of Home Affairs 
came and gave the statement from the side of the Home Ministry about what actions 
the Government is taking.  As you also told, the Central Government and the State 
Government, both are taking action.  At  the same time, we request to provide 
rehabilitation programme for th e people of Wayanad immediat ely. Also, it has to be 
declared -- as other Members are also aski ng -- as a national disaster.  A special 
package must also be given to the affected people in Wayanad.  All Kerala MPs, like 
Dr. Brittas, have raised this issue.  Therefor e, I also join them on behalf of my Party. 
The Home Minister is here.  All requests have been made by the Kerala MPs and we 
also request to see to it that a special pa ckage is given, and it is declared as a 
national calamity, which we are expecting.  Thank you very much, Sir.   
          
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL (Maharashtra):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, with a heavy heart, all of us 
have mourned and condoled the loss of lives  in this horrible tragedy in Waynad.  I 
associate with all my colleagues and I also wish that the Government of India and the 
Government of Kerala, both work hand-in- hand to help the bereaved families to 
resettle and start a life afresh again.  It is also worth noting that the hon. Prime 
Minister, the hon. Home Minister and also th e Chief Minister of Kerala, all have been 
seized of this very tragic moment and have done everything possible to bring relief 
and succour to the people in this hour of grie f.  It is also important to note that the 
Armed Forces -- the Army, Navy, Air Force an d including all other paramilitary forces 
-- have also joined in the re scue and relief efforts in this very difficult terrain and the 
conditions prevailing as of now.  It is also  important that many social organizations, 
political parties also, so also my political  Party in Kerala, all are associated in 
whichever way they can to help the people in th is hour of need.  I also feel that it is a 
very big tragedy.  Therefore,  even if it is a demand that it should be a national 
disaster, it should be helped in that fashio n.  I would also like to associate that this 
tragedy may be considered a national tragedy.   Finally, as we all now, this is not the 
first, but we do not want that it should ev er happen again in any part of the country.  
Natural disasters are prone to happen, es pecially, in eco-sensitive zones like the 
entire Western Ghats also. Right from Kerala up to Maharashtra, including the 
Konkan region, we have the Western Ghats.   We have sometimes even some such 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
75

tragedies, hopefully ever not of the scal e which has happened in  Wayanad, in our 
Konkan region also in Maharashtra. 
 Therefore, I would urge upon the Gove rnment and the hon. Minister--because 
the technologies are much better than in the past--to try to get some kind of mapping 
of the entire ecologically sensitive zones, especially, where there is so much heavy 
rainfall,--Western Ghats receive the highest rainfall probably in the country--even in 
the hills like Uttarakhand, Himachal Prad esh and many other parts of the country 
where we have heavy rains.  At one time , you will have to balance the needs of 
humanity, growing needs of aspirational nation and the developmental needs. 
Everybody talks about trying to protect natu re. Yes, the nature has to be protected, 
but we will also have to balance the n eeds of development an d growth. For that, I 
think, proper approach, a humane approach and a practical approach will have to be 
adopted.            
                                                                 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now the hon. Home Minister. 
 
गृह मंतर्ी (Ǜी अिमत शाह) : सभापित महोदय, भारत सरकार का जो ÎटेटमȂट है, वह िनत्यानन्द 
राय जी ही बताएँगे, मगर मȅ क ु छ चीजȗ की ÎपÍटता करने क े िलए आपकी अनुमित से इस सदन 
क े सामने खड़ा हुआ हूँ।  सबसे पहले इस घटना मȂ िजतने भी लोग हताहत हुए हȅ, जो घायल हुए 
हȅ, उन सभी क े पिरवारजनȗ क े साथ मȅ अपनी संवेदना Ëयƪ करना चाहता हूँ और बड़े दुख क े 
साथ आज मȅ उनके  Ģित अपार संवेदना क े साथ इस सदन मȂ खड़ा हुआ हूँ।  जैसा मȅने पहले कहा, 
सरकार की ओर से जवाब िनत्यानन्द राय जी ही देने वाले हȅ।  जब यहाँ पर एक घंटे की चचार् 
अपने अनुमोिदत की, तब मुझे यह लगा था िक आज का िदन शायद राजनीित से परे रहेगा, इस 
पर राजनीितक टीका-िटÃपिणयाँ नहीं हȗगी।  ख़ैर, उǈेÌय से या जानकारी क े अभाव से क ु छ 
िटÃपिणयाँ भी हुईं और सदन को पूरा देश देखता है, इसिलए देश क े सामने कोई गलतफहमी न 
हो जाए, इसिलए मȅ ÎपÍटता करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ।  दोषारोपण हुआ या जानकारी क े अभाव 
मȂ, मुझे मालूम नहीं है, मगर माननीय महोदय, मुझे ÎपÍटता करनी है, आप क े माध्यम से इस 
सदन को और सदन क े माध्यम से पूरे देश को िक यहाँ लोग 'early warning', 'early warning' 
बोलते ही गए, अंगर्ेजी मȂ िजतने भी गंभीर Ģकार क े शÅद हȅ, अपने भाषण मȂ डाल कर इसको 
बताया गया।  मȅ सदन क े सामने ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूँ िक 23 जुलाई को क ेरल सरकार को भारत 
सरकार की ओर से early warning दे दी गई थी।  7 िदन थे, िफर 24 को गई, िफर 25 को  गई।  
मान्यवर, 26 तारीख  को यह कहा गया िक 20 सȂटीमीटर से ज्यादा वषार् होगी, भारी वषार् होगी, 
landslide होने की संभावना है, mud भी rush होकर आ सकता है और लोग इसके  अंदर दब कर 
मर भी सकते हȅ।  मान्यवर, मȅ क ु छ कहना नहीं चाहता था, मगर भारत सरकार क े early warning 
system पर सवाल िकए गए, इसिलए मȅ कहता हूँ िक "Please listen us", "Please listen us" 
मत िचÊलाइए, "Please read it."   जो warning भेजा है, उसको पिढ़ए ज़रा।  इस देश मȂ कई 
राज्य सरकारȂ ऐसी हȅ, िजन्हȗने इस Ģकार की warning का उपयोग करके  zero casualty 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

disaster management िकया है।  मȅ ओिडशा राज्य सरकार क े िलए भी कहना चाहता हूँ, उस 
वƪ हमारी सरकार नहीं थी, नवीन बाबू की थी, हमने 7 िदन पहले cyclone का alert भेजा, िसफर् 
एक Ëयिƪ मारा गया, वह भी गलती से मारा गया।  सर, गुजरात सरकार को हमने cyclone का 
alert 3 िदन पहले भेजा, एक पशु भी नहीं मरा।  मगर मȅ बड़ी िवनĦता क े साथ कहना चाहता हूँ िक 
आप जो िघसे-िपटे शÅद यहाँ लेकर आए हȅ और demand ही करते जा रहे हȅ, early warning 
system है।  भारत सरकार ने 2014 क े बाद early warning system क े िलए 2 हजार करोड़ रुपए  
खचर् िकए हȅ।  मान्यवर, इसको साझा िकया जाता है।  7 िदन पहले हर राज्य को सूचना भेजी 
जाती है और वह सूचना साइट पर सबके  िलए उपलÅध भी है, माननीय सांसदȗ क े िलए भी 
उपलÅध है।  
 
2.00 P.M 
 
मगर क ु छ लोगȗ को है िक वे यहाँ की साइटȂ खोलते ही नहीं हȅ, िवदेश की ही खोलते हȅ।  अब 
िवदेश की साइट पर इसका अलीर् वािनȊग िसÎटम आएगा नहीं, इसके  िलए तो हमारी साइट देखनी 
पड़ेगी।...(Ëयवधान)...  चूँिक मȅने आपको ध्यान स
 े सुना है, इसिलए आप भी 
सुिनए।...(Ëयवधान)...  इस तरह से नहीं चलेगा। यह सदन है।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Brittas, please.  I will not allow.  Facts, figures and details 
are being imparted.  Hon. Minister, please continue. 
 
Ǜी अिमत शाह : मान्यवर, मȅ तो उसी उǈेÌय से ही कहता हूँ िक इसको सुन कर सभी राज्य अलटर् 
हȗ, अलीर् अलटर् हो जाए।  म
ेरा िकसी पर ताना मारने का आशय नहीं है।   
 अलीर् वािनȊग िसÎटम वषार् क े िलए है, हीट वेव क े िलए है, तूफान क े िलए है, चकर्वात क े 
िलए है, यहाँ तक िक िबजली क े  िलए भी अलीर् वािनȊग िसÎटम है, जो 10 िमनट पहले िबजली 
अक्षांश रेखांक क े साथ कहाँ िगरेगी, वह सीधा कलेक्टर को इन्फॉमर् करती है।  मगर ये इसका 
कोई िजकर् नहीं कर रहे हȅ।  मȅ तो मानता हूँ िक जानकारी का अभाव होगा।  अगर जानकारी का 
अभाव
 है, तो भी ठीक नहीं है और अगर राजनीित है, तो यह बहुत दुखद है। 
 मान्यवर, कई सारे राज्यȗ ने इसका उपयोग भी िकया है और उसके  पिरणाम भी आए हȅ।  
मȅ आज सदन को बताना चाहता हूँ िक इस अलीर् वािनȊग िसÎटम क
े  तहत 23 तारीख को ही मेरे ही 
अनुमोदन से 9 एनडीआरएफ की टीमȂ क ेरल क े िलए रवाना हो गई थीं िक वहाँ लȅड Îलाइड हो 
सकता है।  भारत सरकार ने 9 एनडीआरएफ की टीमȂ िवमान से वहाँ भेजीं।  मान्यवर, सारे लोग 
मुझसे इतना पूछते हȅ, लेिकन क्या मȅ यह पूछ सकता हूँ िक क ेरल सरकार ने क्या िक
या?  
अनिधकृ त लोग रह रहे थे, नहीं रह रहे थे, मगर vulnerable situation तो थी।  क्या उन को िशÄट 
िकया गया है?  उनको  िशÄट क्यȗ नहीं िकया गया? कौन रोकता था? अगर िशÄट िकया गया, 
तो मरे क ै से?...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
डा. जॉन िĤटास :  िशÄट िकया है।...(Ëयवधान)...   
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
77

Ǜी अिमत शाह : िशÄट पहले नहीं िकया गया है, बाद मȂ िकया गया है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. जॉन िĤटास :  नहीं, नहीं।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी अिमत शाह : िजतना बोिलएगा, उतना नुकसान होगा।...(Ëयवधान)...  मȅ बोलना नहीं 
चाहता, परंतु जब आप आरोपात्मक तरीके  से बात करȂगे, तो मȅ यहाँ पर शांित से बैठ कर सुनने 
नहीं आया हूँ।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
डा. जॉन िĤटास :  कोई आरोप नहीं है।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN
:  Take your seat, Dr. John Brittas.  Why are you interrupting? You 
have raised your points. Please. 
 
Ǜी अिमत शाह : मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना चाहता हूँ िक नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 2014 मȂ Ģधान 
मंतर्ी बने और 2016 से अलीर् वािनȊग िसÎटम का Ģोजेक्ट चालू ह
ुआ और 2023 तक दुिनया की 
सबसे आधुिनक अलीर् वािनȊग िसÎटम कहीं पर है, तो वह भारत मȂ है।  इसका सात िदन पहले 
अनुमान देने वाले चार ही देश हȅ, उनमȂ से एक भारत भी है, मगर उसको पढ़ना पड़ता ह ै।  िडमांड 
करने से क ु छ नहीं होता है।   
 मान्यवर, उन्हȗने कहा िक िडजाÎटर क े पैसे को िरलीज़ करने का अिधकार राज्य क े पास 
नहीं है। वह गलत है, मान्यवर।  मȅ इसकी  भी ÎपÍटता करना चाहता हूँ, क्यȗिक सदन का िरकॉडर् 
साफ रहना चािहए। एसडीआरएफ मȂ 10 परस Ȃट रािश कोई भी राज्य सरकार अपने िहसाब से 
अपनी गाइडलाइन से इÌयू कर सकती है और 100 परसȂट रािश भारत सरकार क े ǎारा जारी की 
गई गाइडलाइन क े िहसाब से िबना भारत सरकार क े परिमशन से खचर् कर सकती है।  इसके  िलए 
भारत सरकार की िकसी भी परिमशन की जरूरत  नहीं है, िसफर् गाइडलाइन को फॉलो करना ह
ै।  
मगर िडजाÎटर का जो पैसा है, वह िकसी और हेड क े अंदर तो खचर् नहीं हो सकता, हमȂ इतना तो 
चेक एंड बैलȂस रखना पड़ेगा।  िफर भी आप 10 Ģितशत खचर् िडजाÎटर क े नाम पर क ु छ भी करȂ, 
उसके  िलए कोई नहीं पूछता है।  आपको गाइड
लाइन क े िहसाब से िडजाÎटर क े िलए  90 परस Ȃट 
खचर् करने क े िलए भारत सरकार की कोई परिमशन लेने की जरूरत नहीं है।   
 मान्यवर, िडटेÊड ÎटेटमȂट िनत्यानन्द जी पढ़Ȃगे।  मȅ Îटर्क्चडर् ÎटेटमȂट नहीं दे रहा हूँ, िसफर् 
ÎपÍटता ही कर रहा हूँ।  पिÌचमी बंगाल क े बारे मȂ भी कहा गया।  हमने 6,244 करोड़ रुपए  2014 
स
े 2024 तक पिÌचमी बंगाल क े िलए अपर्ूव िकया है और िजस Ģकार से खचर् का िहसाब आता है, 
उस िहसाब से रािश िरलीज़ की जाती है।   उसमȂ से 4,619 करोड़ रुपए  हमने reimburse कर 
िदया
 है।  मगर वहाँ थोड़ी ĢॉÅलम है िहसाब भेजने मȂ।  अब वह तो मȅ अच्छे से नहीं कर सकता, 
उसको तो पिÌचमी बंगाल सरकार को ही करना पड़ेगा।  अकाउंट देना पड़ता है, क्यȗिक यह 
सरकार है, कोई पोिलिटकल पाटीर् नहीं है।  सरकार क े क ु छ रूÊस, रेग्युलेशन्स होते हȅ, 
accounting system होता है, एजी का ऑिडट होता है।  हम िकसी को नहीं मानȂगे, तो थोड़ी 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

तकलीफ आएगी।  मगर धीरे-धीरे आदत पड़ रही है, इÇपर्ूवमȂट आया है, इसिलए इनका 6,244 
करोड़ रुपए  मȂ से 4,619 करोड़ रुपया  िरलीज़ हो चुका है।  
 मान्यवर, मȅ िफर से कहना चाहता हूँ िक early warning दी गई थी और इसीिलए 23 
तारीख को हमने वहां पर एनडीआरएफ की 9 बटािलयंस भेज दी थीं और 3 बटािलयंस कल 
रवाना की हȅ।  अगर
 वे वहां एनडीआरएफ की बटािलयंस उतरने से भी अलटर् हो जाते, तो काफी 
क ु छ बच जाता, मगर मȅ िकसी पर दोषारोपण नहीं करना चाहता हूँ।  यह समय क ेरल की सरकार 
क े साथ खड़े रहने का है, क ेरल की जनता क
े  साथ खड़े रहने का है और िजन लोगȗ की हािन हुई 
है, उनके  साथ खड़े रहने का है।  
 मȅ सदन को िवÌवास िदलाना चाहता हूँ िक irrespective of party politics, नर ेन्दर्  मोदी 
सरकार क ेरल की जनता और क ेरल की सरकार, दोनȗ क े साथ चƺान की तरह खड़ी रहेगी, 
इसमȂ िकसी को संशय नहीं रखना चािहए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs, Shri 
Nityanand Rai, may now reply. 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय) : सभापित महोदय, जैसा िक मȅने कल सदन मȂ 
अपने बयान मȂ बताया था िक क ेरल राज्य क े वायना
ड िजले मȂ कल सुबह क े शुरुआती  घंटȗ मȂ 
भूÎखलन की एक दुभार्ग्यपूणर् घटना घटी।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी को 
जैसे ही इस घटना की जानकारी ĢाÃत ह
ुई, उन दोनȗ ने तत्परता क े साथ उसी समय राज्य 
सरकारȗ से संपकर् िकया और क Ȃ दर् सरकार िजतनी सहायता कर सकती थी, वह उन सारी 
सहायताओं मȂ जुट गई।   
सर, मुझे दुःख क े साथ यह कहना पड़ रहा है िक जो नवीनतम जानकारी है, उसमȂ 
राहतकिर्मयȗ क े ǎारा अब तक 133 शवȗ को िनकाल िलया गया है।  सर, मृतकȗ की यह संख्या बढ़ 
सकती है।  हमȂ राज्य सरकार से जो आंकड़े उपलÅध कराए जाते हȅ, उन्हीं क े आधार पर हम लोग 
आंकड़े देते हȅ।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी िÎथित पर लगातार नजर रखे हुए हȅ।  उनके  आदेश से 
राज्य मंतर्ी, जॉजर् क ुिरयन जी िÎथित का जायजा ल
ेने क े िलए कल रात ही Ģभािवत क्षेतर् मȂ पहुंच 
गए हȅ।  वहां की जो पिरिÎथित थी, उसमȂ वहां पहुंचना दुलर्भ लग रहा था, िफर भी वे वहां पहुंचे 
और गृह मंतर्ी जी से संपकर् कर उनको लगातार वहां की िÎथित की ज ानकारी देते रहे।  माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी भी उनसे अपडेट लेते रहे।  माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी ने कल ही क ेरल क े माननीय 
मुख्य मंतर्ी जी से भी बात की।  आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ǎारा भी उन्हȂ यह आÌवासन िदया 
गया िक भारत सरकार से हर Ģकार की सहायता Ģदान की जाएगी और की जा भी रही है।  इस 
घटना क े तुरंत बाद एनडीआरएफ, वायु सेना, भारतीय सेना, नौसेना और तटरक्षक बल
 की टीमȂ 
वहां खोज और बचाव अिभयान मȂ जुट गईं और वहां लगातार तत्परता से काम कर रही हȅ। वहां 
तीन बेली पुलȗ क े िनमार्ण क े िलए सेना क े मदर्ास इंजीिनयिंरग गर्ुप क े columns तैनात िकए गए हȅ। 
 एनडीआरएफ की चार टीमȂ, स े ना क े चार columns, नौसेना की एक टीम, तटरक्षक बल की तीन 
यूिनट्स, राज्य सरकार की अिग्नशमन सेवा, नागिरक सुरक्षा, पुिलस और Îथानीय Emergency 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
79

Response Team क े लगभग 1,200 बचावकमीर् बचाव और राहत अिभयान मȂ 24 घंटे कायर् कर 
रहे हȅ।   
वहां खोज और बचाव अिभयान क े िलए dog squad को भी तैनात िकया गया है। वहां सेना 
की DSC centre, Kannur की  दो ट ुकिड़याँ भी तैनात की गई हȅ। Trivandrum की 91 Infantry 
Brigade की दो ट ुकिड़यȗ को वहां रवाना कर िदया गया है।  भारतीय सेना क े दो हेलीकॉÃटसर् और 
नौसेना क े एक हेलीकॉÃटर बचाव कायर् मȂ िवशेष रूप  से लगे हȅ।  सेना की मेिडकल टीमȂ घायलȗ 
को िच
िकत्सा Ģदान कर रही हȅ।  वहां Ǜिमक भूिम मागर् से आवाजाही कर सकȂ, इसके  िलए वहां 
मागर् Îथािपत करने एवं बचाव कायर् म
Ȃ सहायता Ģदान करने क े िलए भारतीय नौसेना क े जहाज 
INS Zamorin को क्षितगर्Îत पुल क े दूसरी ओर तैनात कर िदया गया है।  
 आवÌयकता क े आधार पर अितिरƪ संसाधन भेजे जा रहे है। उच्चतम Îतर पर क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार ǎारा िÎथित की िनगरानी की जा रही है। गृह मंतर्ालय क े दोनȗ िनयंतर्ण कक्ष, एक जो 
NDRF का आपदा Ģबंधन का और दूसरा गृह मंतर्ालय का है, दोनȗ ही गृह मंतर्ालय क े अंतगर्त 
आते हȅ। वे 24X7 िÎथित की िनगरानी कर रहे हȅ और राज्य
 को हर संभव मदद Ģदान की जा रही 
है। आज ही State Disaster Response Fund से 145 करोड़ रुपय े की रािश वहां की राज्य 
सरकार को Ģदान कराई गई है। महोद
य, वहां पहले ही SDRF क े तहत 394 करोड़ रुपय े की 
बैलȂस रािश - सारे िवषयȗ पर माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी ने ÎपÍट रूप  से जानकारी दी है, लेिकन मȅ 
एक बात कहना चाहूंगा िक पहले Super Cyclone आया था, उसमȂ करीब 10 हज़ार लोगȗ की मौत 
ह
ुई थी, आज हम मौत क े मामले मȂ ज़ीरो की संख्या पर पहुंच गए हȅ। यह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े Ģेरणा 
नेतृत्व मȂ disaster management क े िलए िकया जा रहा काम, तकनीिक का अिधक उपयोग, 
आपदा Ģबंधन मȂ दी जा रही रािश और माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ िविभन्न Ģकार क
े  
पहलुओं पर काम हो रहा है। पयार्वरण की बात हुई - गृह मंतर्ालय ने और भारत सरकार क े  बहुत 
सारे लȗगȗ ने और भारत सरकार की Ģेरणा मȂ बहुत सारी संÎथाओं न
े पेड़ लगाने का काम िकया है 
और माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी क े मागर्दशर्न मȂ पैरािमिलटर्ी फोसȃज़ ने भी िरकॉडर् Îतर पर पेड़ लगाने 
का काम िक
या है। सर, तकनीक का उपयोग िबÊकु ल िकया जा रहा है। अब भारत का आपदा 
Ģबंधन ऐसा है, िजस पर देश क े साथ-साथ िवदेशȗ को भी भरोसा है। कई देशȗ मȂ आपदा क े 
समय, चाहे वह भूक ं प हो या अन्य आपदा हो, उस समय भी भारत बढ़-चढ़
 कर उनके  सहयोग क े 
िलए आगे गया है। यहां इसके  कई उदाहरण हȅ। मȅ यही कहना चाहूंगा िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
तत्परता क े साथ लगातार िनगरानी रख रहे हȅ। सर, कहने मȂ अितशयोिƪ नहीं होगी िक माननीय 
Ģधान म
ंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारे गृह मंतर्ी जी िदन-रात लगातार राज्यȗ को सहयोग भी कर रहे 
हȅ, बचाव और राहत कायर् की िनगरानी भी कर रहे हȅ। जैसे-जैसे आवÌयकता होती है, वैसे-वैसे 
क Ȃ दर् सरकार राज्य को सह
ायता पहुंचा रही है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, we will take up Special Mentions.  Shri Sanjay Seth. 
 
 
 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
Demand to declare extreme heat as a natural disaster 
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ (उǄर Ģदेश) :  सर, भारत मȂ  इस वषर् भीषण गमीर् का सबसे लंबा दौर िरकॉडर् 
िकया गया है और देश मȂ 536 heat-wave days रहे हȅ, जो 14 सालȗ मȂ सबसे įयादा हȅ। इस वषर् 
भारत मȂ भीषण गमीर् क े कारण 100 से अिधक लोगȗ की मृत्यु हुई है और heat stroke क े  40,000 
से संिदग्ध मामले report िकये गए हȅ, जो एक िंचताजनक आंकड़ा है। भीषण गमीर् क े कारण हो रहे 
नुकसान का संज्ञान संयुƪ राÍटर् ने भी िलया है और इसे महामारी का रूप  भी बताया है, िजसके  
कारण पूरे िवÌव म
Ȃ हर वषर् 5 लाख से अिधक लोगो की मृत्यु हो रही है, जो बाढ़ और तूफ़ान जैसी 
Ģाकृ ितक आपदा से होने वाली मृत्यु से भी įयादा है। संयुƪ राÍटर् क े महासिचव ने भी सभी देशȗ 
को इसके  Ģित जागरूक  होकर कायर् करने का िनवेदन िकया ह
ै। RBI क े  अनुसार Global 
warming और भीषण गमीर् क े कारण देश की GDP को 2.8 Ģितशत तक का नुकसान होने का 
अनुमान है। भारत मȂ Ģाकृ ितक आपदाओं क े िनयंतर्ण क े िलए the Disaster Manageme nt Act है, 
लेिकन इस कानून क े अंतगर्त अभी तक भीषण गमीर् या heat-wave को natural disaster नहीं 
घोिषत िकया गया है। 
 
(Mr. Deputy Chairman in the Chair.) 
  
मेरा सरकार से िनवेदन है िक भीषण गमीर् क े बढ़ते मामलȗ को देखते हुए इसे natural disaster 
घोिषत िकया जाए, िजससे सरकार भीषण गमीर् से हो रही क्षित क े Ģबंधन मȂ और बेहतर ढंग से 
कायर् कर सके । 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Spetial Mention ra
ised by hon. Memb er, Shri Sanjay Seth: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Prof. Manoj 
Kumar Jha (Bihar) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).                                                                                
 
Concern over Ayushman Bharat Scheme 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब) : महोदय , ÎवाÎथ्य क े क्षेतर् मȂ सरकार ǎारा आयुÍमान भारत 
योजना सबसे महत्वपूणर् योजना है। आयुÍमान भारत योजना, िजसके  अंतगर्त अभी तक 55 crore 
नागिरकȗ और 12.34 cror
e पिरवारȗ को 5 लाख का ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा िदया गया है,  इस योजना क े 
माध्यम से गरीबी रेखा क े नीचे वाले पिरवारȗ को बीमा की स ुिवधा दी जाती है।  हमारे देश मȂ क ȅसर 
cases की बढ़ोतरी हो रही है और यह अनुमान है िक 2025 तक हर वषर् भारत मȂ 16 लाख  क ȅसर 
cases हȗगे और economic survey ने यह कहा है िक India’s out-of-pocket expenses on 
healthcare are over 50
 per cent of the total health expenses, जो एक िंचता का िवषय है, 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
81

क्यȗिक cancer हो, heart disease हो, road accidents हȗ, Lifestyle diseases हȗ, इन सभी 
क े उपचार का खचार् बहुत įयादा है, जो 5 लाख की रािश मȂ नहीं हो सकता।  आज की महंगाई 
और cost of treatment देखते हुए यह अत्यंत ज़रूरी  है िक one-size-fits-all approach को  
बदलना होगा। हमारे देश का जो बुज़ुगर् या विरÍठ नागिरकȗ का वगर् है, उन्हȂ आज भी िकसी Ģकार 
का बीमा या
 social security नहीं दी जाती है।  बीमा क ंपनी भी विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को बीमा देने से 
मना कर देती है। मेरी मांग है िक सरकार सबसे पहले आयुÍमान भारत मȂ िदए जाने वाले बीमा को 
disease-specific करे और बीमा की रािश को बढ़ाया जाए और इसके  अितिरƪ विरÍठ नागिरकȗ 
को भी आयुÍमान भारत क
े  अंतगर्त शािमल करके  उन्हȂ social security net क े अंतगर्त लाया जाए।      
                                             
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :   The following hon.  associ ated themselves with the 
Special Mention raised by the hon. Member,  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal: Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha),  Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr.  Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha) , Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hi sham (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri R.  Giriraj an (Tamil Nadu), and Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal).    
 
Inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ (Non-Violence) in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I rise to seek the inclusion 
of ‘Ahimsa’ (non-violence) in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.  Former hon. 
Chief Minister of Odisha, in May 2018, du ring the first meeting of the National 
Committee for 150
th Birth Anniversary Celebrations of Mahatma Gandhi, had 
requested for inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.  He had 
again, in December 2019, reiterated this de mand in second meeting of the National 
Committee for celebrations of 150 th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.  On 23 rd 
March, 2021, Odisha Vidhan Sabha passed a unanimous resolution for inclusion of 
‘Ahimsa’ in the Preamble of the Indian Cons titution.  On the same day, the Odisha 
Assembly also had a three-hour  special discussion on Gandhi ji’s visit to Odisha 
exactly 100 years back on 23 rd March, 1921.  Apart from hon. Chief Minister of 
Odisha’s iteration and Odisha Vidhan Sa bha’s resolution, signature campaign across 
the State for inclusion of ‘Ahimsa’ in the Pr eamble of the Constitution of India also 
took place. On the occasion of 75 years of India’s Independence, hon. former Chief 
Minister of Odisha also flagged off the Ahimsa Rath, whose sole objective was to 
spread the Gandhian doctrine of ‘Ahimsa’  (non-violence)across the cross-sections 
of the people and commemorating Gandhi ji’s special relation with Odisha.  Placing 
these initiatives on record, I reiterate the request that the Government of India may 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

kindly initiate steps to ensure that ‘Ahimsa’ (non-violence)is included in the Preamble 
of the Indian Constitution, as requested by former hon. Chief Minister of Odisha, and 
passed through a unanimous resolution by Odisha Vidhan Sabha.       
      
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. associated themselves with the Special 
Mention raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu),  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo  (Odisha) , Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Prof. 
Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
(Karnataka), Shri Subhasish Khuntia (Odisha) ,   Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), 
and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).       
                                                                             
Demand for establishment of CGHS Wellness Centre in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh 
 
सुǛी इंदु बाला गोÎवामी (िहमाचल Ģदेश):  महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी 
जी का ध्यान िजला काँगड़ा, िहमाचल Ģदेश मȂ CGHS वैलनेस क Ȃ दर् की आवÌयकता की ओर 
आकृ Íट करना चाहती हूँ I 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (
डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा) पीठासीन हुए I] 
 
 काँगड़ा, हमीरपुर व चंबा मȂ CGHS क े अंतगर्त इलाज कराने वाले लोगȗ को चंडीगढ़ व 
िशमला जाना पड़ता है तथा पहाड़ी क्षेतर् होने क े कारण, आवागमन मȂ बहुत समय लगता हैI  
बच्चȗ, मिहलाओं और बुजुगर् मरीजȗ को इलाज क े िलए एक अटȂडȂट क े साथ रुकन े की ËयवÎथा 
करनी पड़ती है,  जो खचीर्ला भी होता है I काँगड़ा से हमीरपुर 90 िकलोमीटर है तथा चंबा से 120 
िकलोमीटर है, इसिलए लोग वहां से एक िदन मȂ ही आना जाना कर सकते हȅ I  
 िजला काँगड़ा म
Ȃ लगभग 20 से ज्यादा क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े कायार्लय धमर्शाला और उसके  
आस पास क े क्षेतर् मȂ हȅ, िजनमȂ लगभग दस हजार से अिधक CGHS का लाभ लेने वाले क ेन्दर्ीय 
कमर्चारी कायर्रत हȅ।  इसके  अलावा आमीर् व अन्य पैरा िमिलटर्ी फ़ोसर् मȂ सेवा दे रहे जवान व उनके  
पिरवार क े सदÎय भी रहते हȅ, िजनमȂ बुजुगș, मिहलाओं और बच्चȗ की संख्या अिधक है I इन  
िजलȗ मȂ लगभग हर घर का एक सदÎय आमीर् या प
ैरा िमिलटर्ी फ़ोसर् मȂ कायर्रत है, इसिलए वहां 
पर CGHS सȂटर की अत्यंत आवÌयकता है I  अतः मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी जी से अनुरोध है िक काँगड़ा 
मȂ CGHS वेलनेस सȂटर बनाने क े िलए िवभाग को िनदȃिशत करने की क ृपा करȂ, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Shrimat
i 
Indu Bala Goswami:  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
83

Shri Raghav Chadha. 
 
Concern over development work in Punjab 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab): Thank you, Sir, for permitting me to speak on the 
Special Mention on a subject that concerns  my State. The topic is, concern over 
development works in Punjab. महोदय, आज मȅ पंजाब का Ģितिनिध होने क े नाते, मेरे सूबे 
पंजाब क े हक़ȗ क े िलए, बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ। पंजाब वह सूबा है िजसने देश क े िलए सबसे 
ज्यादा क ुबार्िनयाँ दीं। पंजाब न
े देश को हिरत कर्ांित दी और देश क े मुिÌकल दौर मȂ पेट पाला। देश 
की आजादी से लेकर आज तक पंजाब और पंजािबयȗ ने देश क े िलए बहुत क ु छ िकया ह ै। पंजाब 
भारत का Ĥेड बाÎके ट कहलाता है और हमारे िकसान, िजन्हȗने अपना सब क ु छ देश क े नाम कर 
िदया, आज मȅ उस िकसान की आवाज बनकर यहाँ खड़ा हुआ हूँ। 
आज पंजाब की अलग-अलग योजनाओं क े हजारȗ करोड़ रुपए, जो क Ȃ दर् ने हमȂ देने थे, वे 
रुके  हुए हȅ। लंिबत रूरल  डेवलपमȂट फ ं ड क े 5,600 
करोड़ रुपय े, लंिबत मंडी डेवलपमȂट फ ं ड क े 
1,100 करोड़ रुपय े, लंिबत नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन क े 1,100 करोड़ रुपय े, लंिबत समगर् िशक्षा  क े 180 
करोड़ रुपय े, Îपेशल Assistance for Capital Creation क े 1,800 करोड़ रुपय े हȅ। हमने बार-बार 
इस फ ं ड को जारी करने की मांग रखी है। आज मȅ एक बार िफर 3 करोड़ पंजािबयȗ की तरफ से 
क Ȃ दर् सरकार से अपील करता हूँ िक हमारा फ ं ड हमȂ जारी िकया
 जाए, िजससे पंजाब मȂ िवकास 
कायर् पूरे हो सकȂ, धन्यवाद।          
                                                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : Thank you. The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the Special Mention Made by the hon. Member, 
Shri Raghav Chadha:  Shri Jaggesh (Karna taka), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal),  Dr. 
Ashok Kumar Mittal (Punjab),  Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri  M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab).                                           
Now, Shri Muzibulla Khan. 
 
Demand to establish full-fledged AIIMS in Koraput, Sambalpur and Balasore 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): महोदय, कोरापुट, संबलपुर और बालासोर मȂ समिर्पत एÇस 
(अिखल भारतीय आयुिर्वज्ञान संÎथान) की Îथापना की सख्त जरूरत  है। इस कदम का उǈेÌय 
राज्य की ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा Ģणाल
ी का िवÎतार और सुधार करना है, तािक इसे ओिडशा क े िनवािसयȗ 
क े िलए अिधक सुलभ और Ģभावी बनाया जा सके । ओिडशा ने ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा मȂ उÊलेखनीय Ģग
ित 
की है, िवशेष रूप  से बीजू ÎवाÎथ्य कÊयाण योजना (बीएसके वाई) क े माध्यम से, िजसने अपनी 
उत्कृ Íटता क े िलए राÍटर्ीय मान्यता ĢाÃत की है। बीएसके वाई ने पूरे राज्य मȂ Ëयापक Îवा Îथ्य सेवा 
कवरेज Ģदान करने और ÎवाÎथ्य पिरणामȗ मȂ सुधार करने मȂ नए मानक Îथािपत िकए हȅ।  
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 राज्य क े नेतृत्व वाली यह पहल समान ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा िवतरण और मजबूत ÎवाÎथ्य बुिनयादी 
ढांचे क े िलए ओिडशा की मजबूत Ģितबǉता को दशार्ती है। कोरापुट, संबलपुर और बालासोर मȂ 
पूणर् िवकिसत एÇस सुिवधाओं की Îथापना ओिडशा की ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा क्षमताओं को बढ़ाने की िदशा 
मȂ एक महत्वपूण
र् कदम होगा। ये संÎथान िवशेष िचिकत्सा सेवाएं, उन्नत अनुसंधान सुिवधाएं और 
ÎवाÎथ्य पेशेवरȗ क े िलए Ģिशक्षण Ģदान करȂगे। इस Ģकार इन क्षेतर्ȗ की ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा 
आवÌयकताओं को अिधक Ģभावी ढंग से संबोिधत करȂगे। भुवनेÌवर मȂ एÇस की सफलता को देखते 
हुए इस मॉडल को कोरापुट, संबलपुर और बालासोर तक िवÎत
ािरत करने से यह सुिनिÌचत होगा 
िक उन्नत िचिकत्सा देखभाल क े लाभ पूरे राज्य मȂ समान रूप  से िवतिरत िकए जा सकȂ । महोदय, 
मौजूदा ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा अंतराल को पाटने और ÎवाÎथ्य बुिनयादी ढांचे मȂ समान िवकास को बढ़ावा 
देने क े िलए यह िवÎतार महत्वपूण
र् है। 
                                 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा .सिÎमत पातर्ा) : आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। The foll owing hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri 
Muzibulla Khan:  Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odi sha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri 
Subhasish Khuntia (Odisha), Shri A.A. Ra him (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) 
and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).  
 Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक, आप बोिलए।  
 
Demand to start Maharishi Valmiki Scholarship 
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (मध्य Ģदेश)  : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार का ध्यान इस ओर िदलाना चाहती हूं िक वाÊमीिक जी का 
जीवन हमȂ यह Ģ
ेरणा देता है िक किठन पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ भी अिडग रहकर, समाज क े कÊयाण क े 
िलए कायर् करना चािहए। वे एक आदशर् उदाहरण हȅ िक क ै से एक सामान्य Ëयिƪ भी अपने कमș 
और ज्ञान से महानता ĢाÃत कर सकता है। उनके  िवचार और िशक्षाएँ आज भी Ģासंिगक हȅ, 
िवशेषकर जब हम समाज मȂ समानता और न्याय की बात करते हȅ। िपछड़े समाज से आने वाले 
छातर् आज प
ूरी दुिनया मȂ भारत का नाम रोशन कर रहे हȅ। कई सारी िवपरीत पिरिÎ थितयȗ क े 
बावजूद वे पढ़ाई करके  उन मुकामȗ को हािसल कर रहे हȅ जो अभी तक मुमिकन न थे। इन छातर्ȗ 
को उत्सािहत करने और पढ़ाई क े िलए पैसे की कमी को दूर करने क े िलए मेरा सरकार से 
अनुरोध है की Ģितवषर् कक्षा 5 से कक्षा 12वीं  तक क े छातर्ȗ क े िलए Ģाइवेट Îकू लȗ मȂ 10,000 रुपए  
Ģितवषर् की महिर्ष वाÊमीिक Îकॉलरिशप शुरू  की जाए। इसके  साथ ही मेिडकल और इंजीिनयिंरग 
कॉलेज क े एंटर्Ȃस एग्जाम क े िलए ऑनलाइन कोिंचग  की भी िदलाई जाए। 
 इस छातर्वृिǄ का मुख्य उǈेÌय छातर्ȗ को उच्च िशक्षा क े माध्यम से सशƪ बनाना और समाज 
मȂ सकारात्मक पिरवतर्न लाना है। हमȂ िवÌवास है िक इस छातर्वृिǄ क े माध्यम से अनेक िवǏाथीर् 
महािर्ष वाÊमीिक क
े  आदशș पर चलते हुए अपने जीवन मȂ सफलता ĢाÃत करȂगे और समाज मȂ एक 
बेहतर भिवÍय की Îथापना करȂगे। महोदय, मेरा सरकार से अनुरोध है िक वह इस पर िवचार करे। 
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
85

उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा .सिÎमत पातर्ा) : आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Ment ion raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati 
Sumitra Balmik:  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha).  
 Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा, आप बोिलए।  
 
Need for more doppler weather radars in Bihar 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार) : माननीय वाइस चेयरमैन साहब, आपका बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या। मȅ 
एक आपदा Ģभािवत क्षेतर् से आता हूं। िबहार मȂ अक़सर साल क े क ु छ महीनȗ मȂ कहीं न कहीं आपदा 
होती है, उसी संदभर् मȂ मेरा यह Îपेशल मȂशन है।  
Mr. Vice-Ch
airman, Sir, I rise today to address a critical issue affecting the 
State of Bihar, which have borne testamen t since years on and will bear the same 
especially as we move on to this monsoon season as well. 
It is the issue of floods in the St ate. Despite the Ministry of Finance 
acknowledging the State's vulnerability to floods in its recent Budget Speech, there 
remains an acute shortage of Doppler radar installations in Bihar. Currently, there is 
only one operational Doppler radar in the enti re State, which is grossly insufficient to 
provide accurate and timely weather forecasts and warnings. 
Bihar's geographical location allows for rivers like Kosi, Bagmati, and Gandak 
to flow through it, making it particularly susceptible to severe flooding. As such, 73.63 
per cent of the geographical area of North Bihar is considered to be prone to floods. 
 Out of 38 districts, 28 districts get flooded, of which 15 are worst affected, 
causing huge loss of property, lives, farmla nds and infrastructure. The inadequacy of 
Doppler radar installations significantly hampers the state's ability to predict and 
manage flood situations effectively.  Accura te weather forecasting is crucial for timely 
evacuation, disaster preparedness, and reducing the impact of floods on the 
population. The existing Doppler radar system alone cannot cover the vast and 
diverse topography of Bihar.  This insu fficiency leads to delayed and sometimes 
inaccurate weather predictions, putting millions of lives at risk. Therefo
 re, I urge the 
Government to prioritise the installation of  additional Doppler radar system in Bihar. 
Thank you so much. Jai Hind! 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Prof. 
Manoj Kumar Jha:  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu ), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri 
Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shri Haris Beeran  (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Ms. 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala).        
  Shri Abdul Wahab; not present. Shri Gulam Ali. 
 
Demand for inclusion of Gojri language in the 8th Schedule of the Constitution. 
 
SHRI GULAM ALI (Nominated) :  Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, as per Articles 
344 and 351, the Eighth Schedule was inte nded to promote the progressive use of 
Hindi and for the enrichment and promotion of  other languages. Initially, 14 languages 
were added and later on in 1967, 1992 and 2004, few other comparatively lesser 
spoken languages were added. And as on today, there are 22 languages in the Eighth 
Schedule of the Constitution of India. Th e inclusion of the languages in the Eighth 
Schedule has not been on the basis of them being widely spoken. Even Sindhi, which 
is spoken by only 0.003 per cent of people is included in a Eighth Schedule and so is 
Manipuri, Bodo, and Nepali. However, the Go jri language, which is spoken by more 
than 3 per cent of Indians, is not included in Eighth Sc hedule, even though spoken 
across all the northern States of India. Th is has resulted in d eep-seated resentment 
and discontentment among the Gujjars residing in Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, 
UP, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir. Although through 
various committees, criteria was tried to be fixed for inclusion of the languages in the 
Eighth Schedule, but no uniform criteria co uld be agreed upon. The only one criterion 
which should prevail in inclusion of a lang uage in Eighth Schedule should be its 
widespread use like the Gojri which is spoken in almost half of India in the northern 
States and even Arab, Euro pe, Afghanistan and Pakistan  and such. I demand that 
Gojri should be included in the Eighth Schedule of the Co nstitution of India. Thank 
you.    
                                                       
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Gulam Ali:  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),and Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha).        
                               
Demand for setting up a Government Industrial Park in Chandauli District 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से माननीय उǏोग मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान 
आकृ Íट कराना चाहती हूं िक मेरा गृहजन
 पद चंदौली क Ȃ दर् सरकार ǎारा ‘आकांक्षी िज़ला’ िचिन्हत 
है िजसका िवकास िकया जाना अित आवÌयक है। जनपद चंदौली सड़क एवं रेल दोनȗ क े माध्यम 
से पूरे देश से जुड़ा हुआ है अतः अगर जनपद च ंदौली मȂ एक िवशाल सरकारी औǏोिगक पाकर् 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
87

Îथािपत िकया जाए तो जनपद क े िवकास क े साथ साथ अन्य पूवार्ंचल क े अन्य जनपदȗ को भी 
इसका फायदा िमलेगा। 
 जनपद चंदौली मȂ सरकारी औǏोिगक पाकर् क े Îथापना से जनपद चंदौली क े आम नागिरकȗ 
हेतु रोजगार क े सृजन क े साथ साथ बहुत सारे उǏोगपितओं को भी फायदा होगा जो वतर्मान मȂ 
सरकारी औǏ
ोिगक पाकर् उपलÅध ना होने क े कारण दूसरे Ģदेशȗ मȂ जातȂ है।  अत: माननीय मंतर्ी 
महोदय आपसे आगर्ह है िक जनमानस की मांग एवं रोजगार को ध्यान मȂ रखते ह ुए जनपद चंदौली 
मȂ िवशाल सरकारी औǏोिगक पाकर् Îथािपत कराने का िवचार करȂ। 
 
Request to resolve issues related to Jal Jeevan Mission in Odisha 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha):  Sir, a recent study in Od isha revealed that 40.55 
per cent of the surveyed households lack acce ss to safe drinking water.  This poses 
serious health risks and causes waterborne diseases due to contamination.  Despite 
the State Government's BASUDHA Scheme, which aims to provide clean water to 
both rural and urban areas, there remain s a pressing need for increased Central 
Assistance.  The challenges faced by Odisha  in implementing the Jal Jeevan Mission 
deserve compassionate attention and collabora tive solutions for the well-being of its 
residents.  The Central Government must  investigate and address the challenges 
hindering the Jal Jeevan Mission in Odisha.  Collaboratively, the Union and State 
Governments can identify areas lacking safe water access and implement tailored 
schemes.  Sir, through you, I urge the Ce ntral Government to promptly resolve these 
issues. Thank you.  Jai Jagannath. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by Shrimati Sulata Deo:  Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri Muzibulla Khan  (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Subhasish 
Khuntia (Odisha) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).      
 
Demand for direct train services from Pune to Nashik 
 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI (Maharashtra) :  Sir, I rise today to draw the 
attention of this august House to the urge nt need for a direct train service between 
Pune Junction and Nashik, prim arily to facilitate the travel of devotees visiting the 
Kalamandir, a revered temple of Lord Ram in Nashik. 
Nashik holds profound significance in  Hindu mythology as the place where 
Lord Ram had spent part of his exile.  The Kalamandir attracts thousands of devotees 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

from across India.  However, the absence of a direct train link from Pune, a major 
urban center, poses significant inconvenience.   Currently, travellers from Pune must 
either change trains at Manmad or rely on bus services to reach Nashik.  This indirect 
route not only extends the journey time but also increases costs and discomfort, 
especially for elderly devotees and economically weaker sections. 
Introducing direct train service between  Pune and Nashik would significantly 
improve access to the Kalamandir, thereby b oosting religious tourism in the region.  
This initiative would reflect the Gove rnment's commitment to preserving and 
promoting India's rich cultural heritage. 
Furthermore, establishing this tr ain route would create employment 
opportunities and spur economic development in the local areas.  It would also stand 
as a testament to the Government's dedication to facilitating the spiritual and cultural 
journeys of its citizens. 
Therefore, I urge hon. Railway Minister to consider the immediate initiation of 
direct train services from Pune Junction to  Nashik.  This move would not only meet 
the needs of the devotees but also und erscore the government's commitment to 
upholding cultural values and ensuring public welfare.  Thank you, Sir.      
      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special  Mention made by Dr. Medha Vishram 
Kulkarni: Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).   
  
Demand to increase the supply of Fertilizers to Odisha 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha) :  Sir, fertilizers are integral to sustaining agricultural 
productivity by supplying essential nutrients crucial for crop growth. Timely availability 
is imperative for successful agricultural practices as it directly impacts crop quality. 
 Last year, hon. former Chief Minister of Odisha, Shri Naveen Patnaik ji, 
formally communicated with the Union Mi nister of Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
emphasizing the fertilizer shortage and requested for a larger allocation of Di-
ammonium Phosphate (DAP) and Muriate of Potash (MOP). 
In response to the fertilizer scarcity, the then Odisha Government led by our 
former Chief Minister, Shri Naveen Patnaik ji, implemented measures such as the 
Krushak Assistance of Livelihood and Inco me Augmentation (KALIA) and BALARAM 
Scheme, etc., to support the farming community of Odisha.  Despite these efforts, 
the persistent unavailability of fertilizers poses a significant challenge to crop 
production quality.  It is crucial for the Central Government to intervene promptly in 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
89

addressing this issue. Theref ore, Sir, through you, I respectfully request the Central 
Government to take requisite measures expeditiously to supply fertilizers to Odisha. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following Members associated 
themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri Niranjan Bishi: 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Moha med Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Muzibulla Kh an (Odisha) and Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
(Odisha).  
 
Concern over increase in Anti-microbial resistance in India 
 
SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, the  Antimicrobial Resistance 
(AMR) is a growing problem in India with an increase of 5 to 10 percent in resistance 
levels for broad-spectrum antibiotics.   Factors such as indiscriminate use of 
antibiotics, easy over-the-counter availabili ty and the misuse of strong antibiotic-
based treatment for common infections are exacerbating the AMR crisis. Treatment of 
infectious diseases like E.Coli and K.pneumonia has become exceptionally 
challenging due to the resistance to anti biotics like Imipenem.  According to a WHO 
report, India ranks high in multidrug-re sistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) and drug-
resistant typhoid cases, posing immense diffic ulties in effective treatment due to the 
emergence of AMR.  The ICMR Report also flags this as a major concern. 
The new Action Plan 2.0 for AMR is pending finalisation and may have to be 
unveiled expeditiously to tackle this problem. Prominent medical professionals have 
warned that AMR in India has the potential to trigger the next epidemic.  Failure to 
address this issue urgently will result in  severe consequences, including prolonged 
hospital stays, escalated treatment expens es, heightened post-treatment healthcare 
costs, and, most importantly, a grave threat to human life. Thus, I request the Central 
Government to swiftly prioritize and impl ement decisive measur es to combat AMR 
with utmost urgency.           
                                                   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following Members associated 
themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri S. Niranjan Reddy: 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr . V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu).        
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

                         Demand for implemention of Vajjar model across the country 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्) : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, पूरे भारतवषर् मȂ गितमंद तथा 
मितमंद बालकȗ-युवाओं का पालन-पोषण उनके  माता -िपता ǎारा िकया जाता है। इन िदËयांगजनȗ 
का िनवर्हन पूणर्त: उनके  पालकȗ क े अधीन रहता है, लेिकन समाज का एक बड़ा िहÎसा, िजसमȂ 
मितमंद, गितमंद बालक, बेसहारा, बेवारस शािमल हȅ, वे पालनकतार् न होते हुए गुजारा करते हȅ।  
िनसगर्ता पीिड़त इन बालकȗ को असामािजक तत्वȗ से जूझना पड़ता है।   
 ऐसे ही बच्चȗ क े पालन-पोषण और पुनवार्स क े िलए महाराÍटर् क े अमरावती िजले क े वझ्झर 
गर्ाम मȂ शंकर बाबा पापलकर ने लोक िनिध क े आधार पर बच्चȗ क े पालन-पोषण और पुनवार्स का 
िनमार्ण िकया है।  उनके  इसी कायर् क े िलए उन्हȂ इस साल माननीय राÍटर्पित, दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी ने 
पǍǛी पुरÎकार से भी सÇमािनत िकया है।  आदरणीय शंकर बाबा पापलकर ने इन गितमंद और 
मितमंद युवाओं को जीवन Ģदान िकया है।  इसिलए मेरा आगर्ह है िक मितमंद, गितमंद, बेसहारा, 
बेवारस क े पुनवार्स क े िलए वझ्झर मॉडल का अवलोकन िदËयांग िवभाग क े सिचव करȂ। 
 उĦ 82 साल  क े शंकरबाबा की मनोकामना तथा मेरी आपसे नĦ िवनती है िक आǛम क े 
अवलोकन क े साथ ही गितमंद-मितमंद क े िलए 18 साल  क े उĦ क े बाद भी पयार्Ãत पुनवार्स की 
योजना क Ȃ दर् तथा राज्य ǎारा कायार्िन्व
त हो। इसके  िलए संबंिधत िवभाग को शीघर्ताशीघर् िनवेदन 
जारी करȂ। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): The hon. Member, Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) associated himself wi th the Special Mention made by hon. 
Member, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde.                    
 
Demand for 2nd Central University at Puri in Odisha 
 
SHRI SUBHASISH KHUNTIA (Odisha): Sir, I would like to thank you for giving me the 
opportunity to draw the attention of th e Government to establish a new Central 
University in Puri, Odisha. Sir, there is only  one Central University in Odisha out of 56 
Central Universities in India. Students fr om Odisha desiring quality education and 
research opportunities go to other States fo r higher education. Most of the gifted 
students, deprived of getting opportunity in Central University, Koraput, are forced to 
choose other universities outside Odisha. Many  meritorious students dare not pursue 
higher studies outside the State due to their poor socio-economic conditions. The 
important reason for demanding another Cent ral University in Puri, Odisha is the 
demographic picture that we have. Sir, Od isha has a youth population of over 1.7 
crore people, aged from 14 to 34 years in 2020, which is about 35 per cent of the 
State's population. Dreams of students will  come true with a low-budget quality 
higher education with the establishment of second Central University in Puri, Odisha. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
91

Therefore, Puri is the be st place to establish the 2 nd Central University because of its 
geographical location, the cultural, historical  and spiritual significance of the abode of 
Lord Shree Jagannath and an international tour ist place. I, on behalf of the people of 
Odisha, through you, Sir, urge upon the Minister of Education, who is also from 
Odisha, to consider and establish the 2 nd Central University at Puri, Odisha, and the 
long-cherished desire of the people of Odisha will be fulfilled.  Thank you.          
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special  Mention made by hon. Member, Shri 
Subhasish Khuntia : Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Kani mozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), and Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala).         
                                                                              
Need to allocate funds to various Labour Welfare Boards whose funding was stopped 
due to repeal of various labour laws 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, there were various Labour Welfare Acts 
through which excise duties were collected , like Limestone, Dolomite Mines Labour 
Welfare Fund, Cine Workers Welfare Fund, etc., and the funds were being transferred 
to various Labour Boards. After the introduc tion of the GST regime, these Acts were 
repealed and the collection of excise was stopped. Similarly, after passing legislations 
on the four Labour Codes, certain labour welfare Acts relating to collection of cess 
like Iron, Manganese, Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, Beedi Workers 
Welfare Cess Act, Tea Cess, Salt Cess Act were repealed. So, here also, collection 
of cess, which used to be transferred to  the respective Labour Welfare Boards, was 
stopped. As mentioned, Labour Welfare Boards like Mines Labour Welfare Board, 
Beedi Workers Welfare Board were spending money on the welfare of workers and 
their families relating to health, educatio n, maternity benefits, hospital treatment, 
group insurance, housing assistance, deat h-cum-retirement benefits, etc. Now, 
these Welfare Boards do not have funds to carry out their activities for the welfare of 
workers, and the workers are suffering. I woul d, therefore, demand that the Ministry 
of Labour should recommend to the Ministry of Finance to take necessary action to 
allocate funds for various Labour Welfare Boar ds for continuing the activities of these 
Labour Welfare Boards, for the welfare of workers.  Thank you.       
                                                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shri M. 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

Shanmugam: Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odi sha), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal).             
                                                               
Demand for establishment of virtual High Court Bench in Udaipur division 
 
Ǜी चुƐीलाल गरािसया ( राजÎथान) : महोदय , राजÎथान का उदयपुर संभाग एक जनजातीय 
बाहुÊय क्षेतर् है और भारत सरकार क े शेǹूÊड-V
th मȂ T.S.P. क्षेतर् घोिषत है। मȅ माननीय िविध 
मंतर्ी जी क े संज्ञान मȂ लाना चाहता हूँ िक उदयपुर संभाग मुख्यालय पर कई वषș से राजÎथान हाई 
कोटर् की बȂच Îथािपत करने की मांग चल रही है।  यह मांग उदयपुर संभाग की आम जनता और 
बार काउंिसल ǎारा लगभग 37 वषș से लगातार की जा रही है।  वतर्मान मȂ उदयपुर संभाग क े 
लोगȗ को अपने न्याय क े िलए जोधपुर हाई कोटर् जाना पड़ता है, जो िक काफी दूर पड़ता है। 
जनजातीय वगर् क े लोगȗ क े िलए वहां जाना काफी खचीर्ला है और उसमȂ उनको काफी समय 
लगता
 है। 
  अतः  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से इस िवषय को लेकर िविध मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करना चाहता हूँ 
और अपनी मांग रखना चाहता हूँ िक बदलते िडिजटल युग मȂ उदयपुर संभाग मुख्यालय पर 
वचुर्अल हाई कोटर् बȂच की तत्काल Îथापना की जाए, िजससे उदयपुर संभाग की आम जनता को 
अितशीघर् लाभ
 िमल सके  तथा न्याय और हक ĢाÃत करने मȂ उनका समय और खचर् बचाया जा 
सके , धन्यवाद।      
 
Demand to convert Salem to Chengapalli NH-544 from
 4 lanes to 6 lanes in Tamil 
Nadu 
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR (Tamil Nadu) :  Sir, I bring to your kind notice that the 
Salem-Chengapalli stretch (103 km) is part of the Salem-Kochi Highway (NH 544) in 
South India. It connects Salem (Tamil Nadu ) to Kochi (Kerala) and major hubs like 
Coimbatore, Erode and Namakkal. It's an essential route for domestic agricultural and 
poultry exports. Over 20,000 commercial ve hicles and many domestic vehicles use 
this route daily. The highway also serves 15-plus academic institutions, which operate 
their own transport vehicles. 
 Sir, in light of this, I raised a question regarding the same to the Minister of 
Road Transport and Highways for which I received a reply that the Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) has been awarded.  I submit that  this project is feasible.  Traffic in this 
route needs to be managed.  On a day-to-day basis, traffic on this route is increasing 
and vehicle jam has become more frequent due to various reasons including minor 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
93

and major accidents. On an average, every vehicle additionally spends minimum 30 
minutes to 45 minutes daily to reach the dest ination, spending 3-5 litres of additional 
fuel per trip and polluting the environment. 
 Therefore, I humbly request the Minist er of Road Transpor t and Highways via 
this august House to convert the 103 km st retch of NH - 544 from 4 lanes to 6 lanes 
considering the needs and necessity. This initiative not only reduces the pollution, but 
also saves approximately one lakh litres of fuel wasted by the vehicles stuck in traffic. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri  
K.R.N. Rajeshkumar: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu).   
                                  
Concern over wrong prescriptions being issued to patients 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal):   Sir, I would like to express the concern of 
citizens to the fact that several doctors are reported to be giving wrong prescriptions. 
 In fact, one of the nation’s highest medical bodies, the Indian Council of 
Medical Research (ICMR), has published th e report of its study at 13 medical 
institutions including AIIMS and Safdarjung, and stated that around 45 per cent of the 
doctors are writing incomplete prescriptions. This report has also stated that ten per 
cent of prescriptions had 'unacceptable deviat ions' like inappropriate prescription of 
medications or more than one diagnosis. There are several other worrisome findings 
that require to be addressed. Through this Council, I would request the Health 
Minister to kindly elucidate what are the st eps that the Government is taking on this 
report not only in the hospitals where th e ICMR study was conducted but elsewhere 
across other hospitals as well. Thank you.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Jawhar Sircar: Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal ), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri 
Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
(Assam).    
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

                     Request for starting a Sainik School in Puducherry 
 
SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY (Kerala) : Sir, Sainik Schools ar e a system of public 
school in India established and managed by the Sainik School Society under the 
Ministry of Defence. The primary objective of  Sainik Schools is to prepare students 
academically, mentally and physically for entry into the Nation al Defence Academy 
(NDA), the Indian Naval Ac ademy (INA) and the Air Forc e Academy. There are 33 
Sainik Schools in the country and the Minist ry of Defence has proposed to establish 
100 more boarding Sainik Schools with the help of public private partnership (PPP) 
mode. Puducherry, being a Union Territory, ha s a rich population of young children. 
But nowadays, they are diverted from disc iplined life towards narcotics. It is now 
imperative that they should be brought back to make them better citizens of India. If a 
residential Sainik School is established in Puducherry, it would be a great opportunity 
to contribute to national defence also. The Puducherry Government will come forward 
to provide facilities like land, infrastructure, etc., for running the school. With the 
opening of the Sainik School, it would also  uphold the reservation policy which mainly 
caters to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, residents of Puducherry and 
the wards of Armed Forces employees and ex-servicemen, who had served this 
country. Therefore, I urge the Central Gove rnment to start one residential Sainik 
School in the interests of the people of Puducherry. Thank you.                                                   
                                                              
Concern over flood affected people in Kirandul of Dantewada 
 
Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम (छǄीसगढ़): महोदय, राÍटर्ीय खिनज िवकास िनगम (NMDC), इÎपात 
मंतर्ालय का नवरत्न सावर्जिनक क्षेतर् का उǏम है, जो भारत मȂ लौह अयÎक का सबसे बड़ा 
उत्पादक है। छǄीसगढ़ क े दंतेवाड़ा मȂ बैलाडीला की पहाड़ी पर NMDC की खदान से भारी मातर्ा 
मȂ पानी आने से िकरंदुल शहर मȂ तबाही मची हुई है। गरीब आिदवािसयȗ की जीवन भर की पूंजी 
बह गई, सȅकड़ȗ लोग
 घायल हो गए, कई लोग िवकलांग हो गए, मकान-दुकान ढह गए, सड़कȂ - 
गािड़यां बह गईं। राज्य सरकार ǎारा चेक डैम की दीवार ट ूटने की बात कही गई है और पीिड़तȗ 
को मातर् 20 हज़ार रूपए  की आिर्थक सहायता दी गई है।  
 महोदय, NMDC ने पहाड़ी पर कई एकड़ मȂ 11 अÎथाई चेक डैम बना रखे हȅ। इनकी कोई 
मज़बूत Îथाई दीवार नहीं है। ज्यादा बािरश होने पर NMDC ǎारा िमƺी की मेड़ को हटाया गया, 
िजससे िकरंदुल शहर मȂ बाढ़ आई है।  
अत: आपके  माध्यम से मेरा िनवेदन है िक इस Ģकरण की उच्च Îतरीय जांच कराई जाए। 
 
 
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
95

3.00 P.M. 
  
 NMDC ǎारा पीिड़तȗ को हुए नुकसान की पूरी भरपाई की जाए।  घायलȗ को नौकरी दी 
जाए और अÎथाई चेक डैम को पक्का िकया जाए, िजससे भिवÍय मȂ अनहोनी को रोका जाए।      
                         
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam:  Shrimati Jebi Mather  Hisham (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri A. A. 
Rahim (Kerala).  
             
Demand to increase the bed strength at ESIC Medical College and PGIMSR,  
K.K. Nagar, Chennai to 1,200 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu) :  S i r ,  t h e  E S I C  M e d i c a l  C o l l e g e  &  
PGIMSR, Kalaignar Karunanidhi Nagar, Chenna i is one of the most important centres 
for health care services especia lly to lakhs of people in Chennai.  This hospital was 
initially commissioned as a 250 bedded hosp ital in the year 1979 and was under the 
control of Tamil Nadu State Government till 1991.  To open a Zonal Occupational 
Diseases Centre in So
uth India, the hospital was taken over and is being run by the 
ESI Corporation, New Delhi from 1991.  Pres ently, this hospital is functioning as a 
Model Hospital with multi-specialty treat ment facility and Occupational Diseases 
Centre. The Hospital is catering to referral cases from 15 ESI dispensaries and other 
hospitals in Chennai covering an insured population of over 5 Lakhs.  There are 
several lakh employees in and around Chennai needing quality medical care. 
Providing social security to insured worker s, bringing more workers from unorganised 
sector under the ambit of ESI Scheme, serv ice delivery augmentation is the need of 
the hour service. For this the current stre ngth of specialist doctors needs to be 
increased adequately. There are several issues pertaining to the medical, paramedical 
and non medical staff in this hospital which needs to be addressed immediately.   
I urge the union Government to increas e the bed strength at ESIC Medical 
College & PGIMSR, K.K. Nagar, Chennai to  1,200 and to develop a state-of-the-art 
cath lab and a separate oncology block to  cater the needs of millions of workers 
population in Greater Chennai Region.  Thank you.       
                                                          
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by th e hon. Member, Dr. 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

Kanimozhi NVN Somu:  Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Ms. Dola Sen (West Be ngal), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu).    
 Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu, to speak in Punjabi. 
 
Demand for proposed Military Academy at Sri Anandpur Sahib 
 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू ( नामिनदȃिशत) : महोदय, Ǜी आनंदपुर सािहब शहर क े पंजाबी समुदाय 
और िसख सÇĢदाय क े िलए ऐितहािसक महत्व रखता है।  यह 'Holy City of Bliss' िसखȗ क े िलए 
अमृतसर क े बाद सबसे पिवतर् Îथानȗ मȂ से एक है।  यह िसख धमर् की धािर्मक परंपराओं और 
इितहास स
े करीब से जुड़ा हुआ है और िसखȗ क े पांच सबसे महत्वपूणर् धािर्मक Îथानȗ मȂ से एक है।   
 यह खालसा पंथ की जन्मÎथली भी है।  यहीं पर गुरु  गोिबन्द िंसह ने 1699 मȂ बैसाखी क े 
िदन खालसा पंथ की Îथापना की थी।  हर साल दुिनया भर से लाखȗ Ǜǉालु Ǜी क ेशगढ़ सािहब मȂ 
माथा टेकने आते हȅ।  Ǜी आनंदपुर सािहब का होला मोहÊला त्यौहार भी दुिनया भर मȂ Ģिसǉ है।  
1999 मȂ, Ǜी खालसा का 300वा ं जन्मिदन समारोह पूरे भारत और दुिनया भर मȂ मनाया गया।  
समारोह क े दौरान, तत्कालीन Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने 8 अĢैल, 1999 को 
आनंदपुर सािहब
 मȂ समारोह का उदघाटन िकया और पिवतर् शहर को एक सैन्य अकादमी का 
उपहार िदया।  हालांिक, बाद मȂ यह मुǈा ठंडा पड़ गया और सैन्य अकादमी की Îथापना अभी भी 
ल
ंिबत है।   
 जैसा हम सब जानते हȅ िक यह सरकार राÍटर् Ģथम  क े आदशर्  वाक्य पर काम करती ह ै, 
इसिलए इस संबंध मȂ, मȅ सरकार से मांग करता हूं िक क ृपया वह इस मामले पर गौर करे और Ǜी 
आनंदपुर सािहब को सैन्य अकादमी का अिधकार देने पर िवचार करे।           
                                                        
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Me
mbers 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Satnam Singh Sandhu:  Shri Sanjeev Aror a (Punjab) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
(Punjab).    
                               
Demand to complete approval process of Bongaigaon Refinery (BGR), project 
expansion in Assam 
 
SHRI RWNGWRA NARZARY (Assam) : Sir, Bongaigaon Refinery (BGR) located in 
the district of Chirang, Bodoland Territori al Region has tirelessly served this nation 
since 1974 and has been fuelling the grow th engine of the province of Assam and 
state of India.  Under the Hydro carbon Vi sion 2030 then MoS for the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas announced Government of India's decision to finance and 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
97

support BGR expansion from 2.7 MMTPA to 5 MMTPA on 17 th November, 2021 at 
BGR auditorium during the celebration of Azadi Ki Amrit Mahotsav.  
 This declaration was well-received and wa s applauded by the people of Assam. 
Accordingly, we were hopeful that the pr ocess of approval of the BGR expansion 
project would be completed without dela y and the foundation laying ceremony for 
BGR also would be done along with the fo undation of Digboi Refinery on the last 9 th 
March, 2024.  So, BTC Government expedited land allotment process and allotment 
letter issued to IOCL for 532 bigha land and propose to offer additional 300 bigha land 
and requested IOCL for consent.  But it is a matter of concern that till now the 
approval process after MoS st atement has not completed. BGR’s sustainability will 
depend on the timely intervention by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. As 
the financial year, 2023-24, was fixed as outlook for completion of expansion of BGR, 
I request the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas to intervene immediately on 
approval process and save a famous and leg acy refinery from ending for the interest 
of the people of Assam. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), associated himself with the Sp ecial Mention made by the hon. Member, 
Shri Rwngwra Narzary.                     
 
Demand to abolish GST on Assistive Products for persons with disabilities and 
ensuring adequate budgetary support 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala) : Sir, there is an urgent n eed to address the problems 
endured by millions of persons with disab ilities. Imposition of 5 per cent GST on 
essential aids like prosthetic limbs, wheelchairs, braillers, etc. is a financial burden. 
These devices are not luxury items; they  are essential lifelines enabling their 
independence, mobility, education, and employment. 2011 Census reported 
approximately 2.68 crore individuals with disabilities, a number that is likely to have 
increased significantly since then. The Artificial Limb Manufacturing Corporation of 
India, the premier Government agency supplying assistive living equipments 
nationwide, has been of great assistance. Nevertheless, its budgetary allocation has 
been significantly reduced over the years,  compounding the challenges.  I urge the 
Government to initiate immediate discu ssions with GST Council to abolish GST on 
assistive products for persons with disab ilities and to allocate increased budgetary 
support for their well being.   
 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Dr. John 
Brittas: Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Anil Kumar 
Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala),  Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan (Assam), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West 
Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).          
                                                     
Concern over aviation safety incident at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International 
Airport (CSMI Airport) Mumbai 
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA (Maharashtra) : S i r ,  o n  J u n e  8
th, an IndiGo aircraft 
touched down at Mumbai’s Chhatrapati Shiv aji Maharaj International Airport merely 
seconds after an Air India aircraft took of f. At the time, the di stance between the two 
aircrafts was barely 2,000 feet . This was one of the closes t and scariest air traffic 
incidents in recent history. In response  to my letter, the DGCA assured an 
investigation and corrective action for the in cident.  Mumbai’s airport is one of the 
world’s busiest single-runway airports, handlin g nearly 1,000 flight s daily, with up to 
46 arrivals and departures per hour. Last year, the airport handled almost 4.4 crore 
passengers with flight operations rising fr om 1,86,000 in the financial year, 2022 to 
2,90,000 in the financial year 2023.  De spite the Civil Aviation Ministry’s 14 th February, 
2024, directive to reduce flight numbers, the summer schedule saw an 8 per cent 
increase in weekly flight movement, clearly indicating the need for a permanent 
solution to decongest CSMIA.  The only long-term solution is the timely completion of 
the Navi Mumbai International Airport in Ulwe. I urge upon the Government at both the 
Centre and in Maharashtra for acceleratin g its development and targeting commercial 
operations by 31
st March, 2025 and ensuring that every effort be made to prevent any 
further delays in its operationalization.  A dditionally, I urge upon the Civil Aviation 
Ministry to invest in developing indigenous  AI technology to assist ATC towers in 
managing traffic more efficiently. Embracing innovative technology will not only 
enhance safety, but also position us as leaders in aviation management.           
                                                         
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) : The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Milind Murli Deora : Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala).                                        
 Now Shri Kartikeya Sharma. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
99

  Request for establishment of Industr ial Model Township (IMT) in Ambala 
 
Ǜी कािर्तके य शमार् ( हिरयाणा) :  महोदय, अंबाला मȂ औǏोिगक मॉडल टाउनिशप (IMT) की 
Îथापना िपछले 14 -15 सालȗ से जनता की मांग रही है, जो इस क्षेतर् की आिर्थक क्षमता और 
औǏोिगक बुिनयादी ढांचे को मजबूत करने की आवÌयकता से Ģेिरत है। अंबाला राÍटर्ीय राजमागर् 
नेटवकर् पर िÎथत होने क े कारण िदÊली और चंडीगढ़ जैसे बड़े शहरȗ से बेहतरीन कनेिक्टिवटी 
का आनंद लेता है। हालांिक, अंबाला का वतर्मान औǏोिगक सेट-अप अभी भी अिवकिसत है, 
िजससे क्षेतर् की आिर्थक वृिǉ बािधत होती है और रोजगार क े अवसर सीिमत हो जाते हȅ। 
 महोदय, अंबाला मȂ IMT की Îथापना न क ेवल वहां की बेरोजगारी की दर को कम करेगा, 
बिÊक वहां की आिर्थक िÎथरता को भी मजबूत करेगा। IMT से जुड़े बुिनयादी ढांचे का िवकास, 
िजसमȂ बेहतर सड़कȂ, नागिरक सुिवधाए
ं और लॉिजिÎटक्स सुिवधाएं शािमल हȅ, कनेिक्टिवटी और 
रहने की गुणवǄा को बढ़ाएगा, िजससे न क ेवल औǏोिगक संचालन बिÊक िनवािसयȗ क े दैिनक 
जीवन को भी लाभ होगा। इसी तरह कालका की एचएमटी फ ैक्टर्ी क े बंद होने से अंबाला संसदीय 
क्ष
ेतर् क े आसपास क े क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ इंडÎटर्ीज पर भी बेहद Ģभाव पड़ा है, हालांिक इसका कारण शहर मȂ 
बुिनयादी िवकास, रोड कनेिक्टिवटी इत्यािद की कमी थी, लेिकन इससे अंबाला संसदीय क्ष ेतर् का 
समगर् िवकास धीमा हो गया है। इसीिलए मȅ भारत सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूं िक वे कालका क े 
िवकास क े िलए शीघर् ही एक उिचत उǏोग वहां Îथािपत करे।  
 महोदय, अंबाला मȂ IMT की Îथापना से न क ेवल अंबाला बिÊक पूरे हिरयाणा और आस-
पास क े क्षेतर्ȗ क े लोगȗ का िवकास सुिनिÌचत हो। 
 
Demand to teach traffic rules subject in the country from
 primary level in schools 
 
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर् (उǄर Ģदेश) : महोदय, जब कोई Ëयिƪ िकसी कायर् को अपना कतर्Ëय 
समझकर करता है, तो वह उसके  जीवन का एक अिभन्न अंग बन जाता है। जब कोई बच्चा छोटा 
होता है तो उसके  माता-िपता उसे बताते हȅ िक यह मां है, भाई है और यह बहन है। वे बच्चे को 
इसका बोध कराते हȅ और वह बच्चा जब बड़ा होता है तो उसे अपने माता िपता क े Ģित क्या कǄर्Ëय 
होने चािहए, पता चलते हȅ। वह जैसे-जैसे बड़ा होता है, वैसे-वैसे उसे उसका बोध होता है एवं 
उसके  पÌचाÞ जीवन भर अपने दाियत्वȗ का िनवर्हन करता है ।  
 महोदय, इसी Ģकार से यातायात िनयमȗ को भी इस Ģकार की भावनाओं से सीखने की 
आवÌयकता है। आज Ëयिƪ Ģशासन क े डर क े कारण हेलमेट लगाता है िक कहीं उसका चालान 
न कट जाए, कार मȂ सीट बेÊट भी इसिलए ही लगाता है। आज ऐसी भावनाओं को बदलने की 
आवÌयकता है। टर्ैिफक पुिलस भी चालान इसीिलए काटती ह
ै िक राजÎव इकƻा करना है और 
सरकारȗ मȂ ऐसी ËयवÎथा भी है िक इतने चालान साल भर मȂ काटने हȅ। 
महोदय आज इन दोनȗ ËयवÎथाओं मȂ सुधार करने की अित आवÌयकता है िजससे जन 
और धन दोनȗ की हािन से बचा जा सकता है। अतः म
ेरा सरकार से िनवेदन है िक Îकू ल Îतर हो 
या िफर कॉलेज, अपने जीवन मȂ सभी Ģकार क े  संÎथानȗ मȂ और नौकरी करने वाली सभी संÎथाओं 
मȂ यातर्ा िनयमȗ क े पालन क े िवषय की पढ़ाई और सड़क पर जाकर Ģत्यक्ष रूप  से संचालन अपना 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

कतर्Ëय समझकर करना है, न िक डर क े कारण करना है, यही आज की आवÌयकता है।  
  महोदय, आपने मुझे यहाँ अपनी बात रखने का अवसर िदया है, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद।  
                                                    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) :  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Amar Pal Maurya: Shri Madan Rathore (Raj asthan), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai 
Nayak (Gujarat), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Mahendra Bhatt 
(Uttarakhand). 
 
Concern over critical railways safety staffing issues amidst tragic mishaps 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN (KARNATAKA):  Sir, I bring to the House’s attention a  
critical issue affectin g the safety of the Indian Railw ays. As of March 2024, over 1.5 
lakh safety positions remain vacant, constituting more than 15% of sanctioned roles. 
This shortage is especially severe in crucia l positions like train drivers and inspectors.  
Recent train mishaps highlight the urgent need for action.  Since the tragic Odisha rail 
accident last year, which claimed over 290 lives, India has witnessed numerous 
derailments.         
                
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair
.) 
 
 Notably, in the past six weeks alone,  three passenger tr ain accidents have 
resulted in 17 deaths and over 100 in juries. The most recent incident near 
Barabamboo in Jharkhand, where 18 coaches of the Howrah-Mumbai Mail derailed, 
has already claimed two lives and injured over 20 passengers. 
It is reported that 14,429 loco pilot posts are vacant out of 70,093, and 4,337 
assistant driver positions are unfilled out of 57,551 posts. Immediate action is 
required. I urge the hon. Mini ster of Railways to prioritize filling these safety-critical 
positions to ensure the safety of millions who depend on our Railways daily.        
                   
MR. CHAIRMAN :  The following hon. Members associated themselves with the 
Special Mention raised by the hon. Member , Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain:   Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Shri A. A. Rahim (Keral a), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu). 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
101

 Rest of the Special Mentions w ill be taken up later in the day. 
 
 
GENERAL DISCUSSION 
 
The Union Budget, 2024-25  
and  
*The Budget of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 2024-25 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  All the Members who had given their names to participate in the 
General Discussion on the Union Budget 2024-25 and the Budget of Union Territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir 2024-25 have already part icipated. Now, the hon. Minister of 
Finance will reply to the discussion; hon. Minister of Finance. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN) : Thank you very much, hon. Chairman Sir. 
There has been a very robust discussion  on the Budget. I understand 83 speakers 
have participated in the discussion that actually shows the interest that hon. Members 
have taken on the topic. After a brief introd uction which I would like to begin with, I 
would go by issues clubbing several Member s who have spoken on a particular issue 
and so on for various different issues. I will also try to refer to the names of the hon. 
Members who have raised these issues while answering.  
Sir, this Budget of 2024-25, is actua lly a continuation of the Interim Budget. 
So, the features, the critical aspects of the Interim Budget are naturally subsumed 
into this regular Budget. Since, 2014, the pr inciple which has guided us is the 'Sabka 
Sath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas and Sabka Prayas' which continues in this Budget 
as well and hopefully will guide for the next five  years, this set of five years being very 
critical in taking the first steps towards bu ilding a 'Viksit Bharat' by 2047. This Budget 
strikes a fine balance amongst several ov erriding priorities; growth, employment, 
welfare spending, capital investments and fi scal consolidation are all equally given a 
place and we have tried balancing all of them.  
Sir, I had promised in this House in 2021-22, the Government would endeavour 
to attain a fiscal deficit to the GDP level below 4.5 per cent by  the year 2025-26. We 
                                         
 Further general discussion continued from 30.07.2024. 
 Discussed together. 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

had reached an unprecedented high number of 9.2 per cent in the year 2020-21 and 
we are well on track to attain that target. 
According to the IMF, India's share in the global growth is 16 per cent and it is 
also rising. While this Budget seeks to consolidate our earlier  accomplishments, I 
have announced a slew of measures aime d at providing renewed impetus to the 
manufacturing sector.  
 I would just like to take a few minutes on expanding on this. The aim is to 
boost domestic employment, create employme nt opportunities and ensure high and 
sustained increase in India’s share in the global GDP over the next five years.  Several 
measures have been taken.  In this Budg et, in particular, we had mentioned about 
the Basic Customs Duty which has been reduced on speci fic items.  Together with 
the Production Linked Incentives given for mo biles, India, now, already produces 97 
per cent of all total mobile phones in demand in the country.  And, 30 per cent of total 
production in India, in the year 2024, has gone for exports, exclusively. So, India’s 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme stands  out as a successful scheme. Taking this 
one example, and in the other thirteen sectors also, – there are fourteen altogether – 
we see a lot of interest in investing and producing, so that India becomes a 
manufacturing hub.  The PLI Scheme which was brought in because we wanted to 
attract a lot of investment into India is seei ng a lot of interest and continues to see a 
lot of interest in investors. 
 Further, in this Budget, we have also  set up a critical mineral mission for 
domestic production and for recycling of cr itical minerals.  We are also envisaging 
overseas acquisitions of cr itical mineral assets.  Further, we fully exempted the 
Customs Duty on 25 critical minerals and reduced the Basic Customs Duty on two of 
them.  The two were differentiated from the rest for particular reasons.  So, there is 
reduction in two and full exemption for 25 other critical minerals. 
 I have also announced the development of investment ready plug-and-play 
industrial parks in and around 100 cities of India. That would immediately be a big 
attraction for people to come and set up bu sinesses. Being closer to cities, it will 
enable them to have good skilled workfo rce to be employed.  We are working 
towards establishing three Centres of Excellence in top educational institutions for 
realising the vision of ‘Make AI in India and Make AI work for India.’ That was 
mentioned in the Budget 2022-23.  We are further strengthening the AI Excellence 
Centres being built in top educational institutions. 
Sir, in March, 2024, the Government approved e-Vehicle Policy to promote 
India as a manufacturing destination, so that  e-vehicles, with the latest technology, 
can be manufactured in our country.  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
103

Furthermore, I go back to the point I had made in 2021 Bu dget about the new 
Public Sector Enterprises Policy which clearly opened up all sectors in India for private 
participation also.  Public sector will continue in critical core sector and strategically 
important sectors. But, private sector has now been allowed into every sector; none 
of which is reserved for public sector alone.   I take the example of space sector here.  
Opening up of this sector has helped and, today, space sector StartUps are receiving 
funds and India is now becoming a big hu b for space sector innovation and space 
sector StartUps. The recent newspaper anno uncements have clearly been stating the 
kind of investment interest being generated. The figures ar e not readily available with 
me. But, I know that US$ 126 million funding was received by StartUps in 2023.  But, 
the flow continues.  Further, both in the last year’s Budget and this year, we have 
allocated resources for the National Re search Foundation under the National 
Research Foundation Act, 2023. 
 This time also, the Anusandhan Res earch Foundation has had allocation we 
made.  Last year itself, we declared Rs. 50,000 crores for over five years for research, 
along with private sector. So, in these ways , we have tried making India an attractive 
manufacturing destination and given good incentives and impetus for manufacturing 
to set up business in India.  
 Now, a brief look at some highlights  of the numbers that I want to speak 
about.  The total expenditure in the Un ion Government’s Budget Statement 2024-25 
is Rs. 48.21 lakh crores.  The total expenditure in the regular Budget, 2024-25, is Rs. 
54,744 crores more than that of the Interim Budget, which was presented in 
February, this year. The highlight, which I wo uld like to draw the attention of the hon. 
Members, is that the capital expenditure is pegged at Rs. 11 lakh crores.  And, this is 
one of the biggest-ever allocation made for capital expenditure.  And, this shows a 17 
per cent increase over the provisional actua ls of Financial Year 2023-24.  Seventeen 
per cent increase over the last year! But, in this context, I would like to highlight one 
important fact about the capital expenditur e, which happened during the UPA era.  
The CapEx allocation was Rs. 13.19 lakh crores from 2004-05 to  2013-14.  The ten 
years of UPA saw Rs. 13.19 lakh crores; whereas, during our tenure, ending 2024, the 
allocation for capital expenditure is Rs. 43. 82 lakh crores.  So, the emphasis that we 
have given, particularly after COVID, is th at the capital expenditure, being one of the 
very important routes through which the economic revival can be planned, has 
actually shown results, but the actual numbers are these.   
There is also interest among Members to know if the transfer to the States has 
been proper and as has been recommend ed by the Finance Commissions. I would 
like to underline an unflinching commitment to cooperative federalism.  The total 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

resources proposed to be transferred to the States this year, that is, 2024-25 is 
estimated to be Rs. 22.91 lakh crores.  Th is actually entails an increase of about Rs. 
2.49 lakh crores over 2023-24.  Even compared to last year, it is an increase of about 
Rs. 2.49 lakh crores. Similarly, the outlays for all Union Territories have also increased 
from Rs. 61,118 crores in 2023-24 to Rs. 68,660 crores in 2024-25.  So, the States 
and the Union Territories are clearly getting, and getting in time, the resources which 
are expected to be released for them.   
Although the Budget documents have details of different schemes, yet I am 
moving over to this point about sectoral alloca tions.  So, there is this interest to know 
if the allocations for certain particular s ectors have increased or decreased, I would 
like to just give a comparative picture.  Agricultural and allied sectors, in 2024-25, 
received Rs. 1.52 lakh crores, which is Rs. 8,000 crores more than the last year; there 
is no reduction.  Just for comparison, in  2013-14, when the UPA term was over, they 
had given only Rs. 30,000 crores; Rs. 30,0 00 crores then and Rs. 1.52 lakh crores 
now!                                                              
 Sir, in the 2024-25 Budget, the allocation for education, employment and 
skilling is Rs.1.48 lakh crores; it is Rs.28,0 00 crores more than the last year whereas, 
again, in 2013-14, it was only Rs.85,000 crores.  For women and girls,  the allocation 
in the current Budget is Rs.3.27 lakh crores , which is 41 per cent,  that is, Rs.96,000 
crores more allocation compared to the prev ious year.   It was Rs.96,000 crores  in 
2013-14.   Similarly, for rural developmen t, in 2024-25, the current Budget gives 
Rs.2.66 lakh crores, Rs.28,000 crores more as  compared to last year and it was just 
Rs.87,000 crores in 2013-14 .   For urban development, the allocation is Rs.83,000 
crores.  It is Rs.7,000 crores more than th e last year.  It was Rs.12,000 crores in 
2013-14.  For health and social welfare, the allocation is Rs.1.46 lakh crores.  
Compared to last year, it is Rs.3,000 cror es more than the last year and it is 
Rs.72,000 crores more than 2013-14.   I have already mentioned about the fiscal 
deficit.  I just want to highlight that we  had projected 5.1 per cent of the GDP as the 
fiscal deficit in the Interim Budget, whereas now, when we have presented the regular 
Budget for this year, it has been brought do wn further to 4.9 per cent and we aim to 
reach the deficit below 4.5 per cent next year, sticking to the glide path given in 2020-
21.   It was also said in the Budget speech that from 2026-27 onwards, our endeavour 
will be to adhere to a path that ensures that the Central Government’s debt, as a 
percentage of GDP, is on the declining trend.  Our focus will be on that.   
 Sir, I would like to mention in this august House that th e weighted average 
yield, which is broadly the one which corresponds to the average cost of borrowing of 
the Central Government’s securities issued du ring the ten years  pe riod of 2014-15 to 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
105

2023-24, is lower by about 60 basis points than the period between 2004-05 to 2013-
14.  I am giving a very notional idea but it help s to put all  things in perspective.  If the  
borrowings in UPA-I and UPA-II were near  th e rates obtained by us, -- I know it is 
determined  by so many other factors, mark et and so on -   which could have been 
possible if they had our policies and our kind of credibility, it would have resulted in 
notional interest savings of approximately Rs.35,000 crores for the Government.  Just 
to bring in the perspective, -- you can always be questioned saying, oh! how can you 
bring a notional -- this points to recognitio n of this Government’s fiscal management.  
And, this observation, the Government’s  fiscal management prowess, is an 
observation of global observers, domain experts and, of course, dispassionate 
economists that the fiscal management of this Government, which is a typical good 
feature, which the then hon. CM of Guja rat  and now the PM of country has always 
maintained, namely, fiscal prudence, is  one of the very important governance 
principles.   Hon. Members would, therefore,  be pleased to know that with all these 
macro-economic stability related features, the IMF has rece ntly  upgraded India’s  
gross domestic product growth in the year 2024-25 to seven per cent.  So, from an 
exceptionally low hit GDP growth   during Covid, within a fe w years to rise to be the 
fastest growing economy in the world, I th ink could not have been possible without 
the hard work and toil of all Indians…. -- i rrespective of the sectors in which they are, 
whether farmers, workers, informal sect or workers, construction workers, the 
entrepreneurs, the MSMEs an d so on -- and the visionary leadership, which has a 
futuristic vision, because from the front,  the Prime Minister leads the economy, and 
we are able to achieve this. 
Sir, I also presented the Budget for the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. 
I  j u s t  w a n t  t o  h i g h l i g h t  a  f e w  i m p o r t a n t  f e a t u r e s  b e f o r e  I  m o v e  o n  t o  r e s p o n d i n g  t o  
hon. Members' issues which they had rais ed on the Budget. I am happy to inform 
about the concrete steps that have been taken by the Union Territory Administration 
to free itself from the legacy fiscal dist ress-related issues whic h they had inherited 
from the erstwhile State, and this has bo rne good results. With substantial financial 
support given by the Government of India, Rs. 17,000 crores have  been provided as 
support in the Union Budget of  UT this year. The fiscal deficit to GSTP ratio of the 
Union Territory of J&K is estimated at 3 per cent for the Financial Year, 2024-25. 
There is clearly a sign that public finances of UT of Ja mmu and Kashmir is now back 
on the rails. The Government has worked very hard, unhindered, towards fulfilling the 
development aspirations of the people of  Jammu and Kashmir with great sense of 
fiscal responsibility. Because I am dealin g with Jammu and Kashmir Budget now and 
later I go to the General Budget, there are issues which have b een raised about J&K 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

Budget which has been tabled in this House, both inside and outside of this august 
House.  
Now, I take this opportunity with your permission, Sir, to address issues which 
have been raised in this House and equa lly because of import ance given of those 
issues which have been raised  outside as well. Sir, the fi rst issue is, borrowings have 
risen from Rs. 12,000 crores to Rs. 24,000 crores in the last two years and it is 
unprecedented, and it shows fiscal mismanagement. This is an allegation. I would like 
to respond, Sir. Unlike other States an d Union territories, J&K has been plagued 
with pressures from externally -sponsored terrorism. This is not a secret. All of us 
know it. In addition, historical legacy of poor governance -- and I reiterate this point, 
Sir, historical legacy of poor governan ce -- and low-revenue base had created a 
situation of near-perpetual distress and dependence on the Union Government, just 
no way in which the State co uld have run without the Union helping them, and that is 
how the main feature of J&K's State's Bu dget was and also the economy was.  
Given this kind of a legacy, inheritance that w e  h a v e  g o t ,  a s  p a r t  o f  t h e  e f f o r t s  t o  
correct lingering fiscal distortions and for enabling transparent disclosure of the fiscal 
situation, the Union Territory Administration  has brought off-budget borrowings onto 
its books. This has been done within the borrowing ceiling allowed to the Union 
Territory in each of the years which have gon e by. So this is something which I have 
to state with conviction that the UT was permitted to undertake additional borrowings 
against unutilized borrowing space from the previous years to take off-budget 
borrowings on the Budget and finance its expenditure commitments.  
Sir, the questions also, or the allegati ons also, were that fiscal deficit was 
pegged at 1.6 per cent and it has turned to 5.36 in FY '24, more than three times the 
original estimate, and also that the Cape x has been slashed by 10 per cent.  The 
question, therefore was, will the Central Go vernment take blame for fiscal profligacy 
at the State level? I would like to dispel any confusion in the mi nds of people. Along 
with the special support of Rs. 17,000 crore which has been announced in this Budget 
from the Union Government, several other things are happening along with the efforts 
in recent past would reduce the fiscal deficit, and I hope it will reduce the fiscal deficit 
to 3.3 per cent actually in 2024-25. 
 So, it is not just the Rs.17,000 crores that has been given as a special support, 
but also because of the efforts which have b een put in the last few years.   I think 
fiscal deficit will be back at 3 per cent .  While tax revenue has seen impressive 
growth, efforts on metering has improved building and collection efficiency in the 
power sector and that has also resulted in non-tax revenues increasing from Rs.5,148 
crores in 2022-23 to Rs.6,500 crores in 2023-24 . It is a big reform step that has been 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
107

taken, well received by the people, and as a result of which we  are able to have 
collection efficiency in the power sector and I appreciate the J&K Administration for 
having taken this effort which is showing results for its own benefit. The Union 
Territory has other very important points -- th is is a point which I submit to your 
consideration and for the august House to recognise -- that it discontinued the earlier 
practices of running Hundis and overdrafts from J&K Ba nk for its day-to-day cash 
management. This was a feature. Every year, this would literally be a burden on J&K 
Bank, and equally, a lazy comfort for the administration, that they could do this 
operation with the J&K Bank and get away  with being transparent in the way in 
which they handled their accounts. I am  glad that this practice has been 
discontinued. During the last four year s, the J&K Bank has made a remarkable 
turnaround.  From a loss-making bank of Rs.1,139 crores of rupees in 2019-20, the 
bank has now made a profit of Rs.1,700 crores in the y ear 2023-24.  So, that is the 
kind of turnaround and that is the kind of efficiency with which the bank is now 
performing, being run profe ssionally since after 2019. Capital expenditure for the 
Union Territory has also increased from Rs .10,634 crore rupees in 2022- 23, to 
Rs.12,101 crore in 2023-24, recording a 13 .8% growth.  So, J&K, Union territory 
and their situation is in a healthy fiscal si tuation being able to meet the development 
aspirations of the State.  One other point of  criticism, if I may say so, has been that 
the State's tax to GDP ratio increased from  5 per cent to 8 per cent in three years. 
Does this mean the people of J&K are subject to heavy taxation without any 
corresponding increase in their welfare? This  is one of the questi ons asked. I like to 
highlight that J&K's higher tax to GDP rati o is due to better compliance and effective 
monitoring of the taxation system. I would  like to mention that with the introduction of 
GST, the tax rate across the country is the same on all GST prod ucts. The rate of 
taxation on non-GST items are either at pa r with other States or only lower and not 
higher in J&K. Revenues from GST, motor spirit tax, excise, stamp duties were 
Rs.9,467 crores in 2019-20.  It has increased to Rs.13,903 crores in the year 2023-24. 
So the administration is showing efficiency  in collecting from non-GST tax also. And 
as a result, the fiscal health of the State is also improving. So the UT has also given 
care to expand the dealer registrations, im proved GST return compliances, initiated a 
lot of e-stamping systems and conducted transparent excise auctions, very 
important, Sir, transparent excise auctions.            
 So, that itself gives a lot of confidence about the way in which J&K 
Administration is moving.  On the employme n t  r a t e s ,  f o r  1 5  t o  5 9  y e a r  o l d s ,  t h e  
unemployment rate has come down from 6.4 per cent in 2020-21, gradually to 5.7 per 
cent in 2021-22, and to 4.4 per cent in 20 22-23.  This has become possible because 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

of substantial public investments that have  led to creation of avenues of employment 
opportunities.  
I would like the hon. Members and yourself, the hon. Chairman, Sir, to listen to 
the next issue, for which I will give my response.  But I am a bit concerned about the 
way this kind of a charge has been made on the Union Government.  The allegation 
is, and I read it, “Perhaps the most worrying development is the FM's announcement 
that the Union Government has agreed to ta ke the entire burden of the budget of 
police in J&K by spending Rs.12,000 crores.  It further goes to say, “This was earlier 
being done by the Union Government as  part of the security reimbursement 
expenditure.  Why has that been rep ackaged from a reimbursement situation? ” That 
is the question.  Further, “ Has the police salary liability b een taken over by the Union 
Government in perpetuity is also a question.”  To add to it, and this is the most 
interesting part, “Does it reflect the Government's intention to rule the State from 
Delhi in perpetuity by retaining Home Af fairs of J&K with the Union Government?  
Will the FM commit in the House that taking ov er police salary liability is not a Trojan 
horse?”  I would like to respond to this. 
 The scheme on reimbursement of security-related expenditure continues even 
today. So it has not been discontinued.  Ha d it been discontinued, you will have the 
suspicion.  But when it ha s not been, why would you have  the suspicion in the first 
place?  Or, is it being not cared for, or if you want to put it in the side and still 
generate a conversation based on just your apprehensions, I am not sure if it is a 
responsible way to approach this issue.  Second, I am saying this with a bit of a 
hesitation, but I want to say this.  If at a ll there was a Trojan horse as regards J&K, it 
is Article 35A and Article 370, which were th e real Trojan horse,  because it was not 
even made as a part of the Constitution Am endment.  It was just put in the Appendix, 
as though that is also part of the Cons titution, but it was not duly brought as a 
Constitution Amendment.  But, for th ose who are carrying that Constitution 
nowadays and showing it, they should expl ain to us whether that was not a deceit.  
And, is that not a Trojan horse to keep J&K not integrated with  India?  With that 
done, with that kind of a Trojan horse a pproach, you are asking us that whether we 
take the burden of J&K Police expenditure, so that the J&K Administration will have 
more money to do developmental activity an d the Centre can take the salary of the 
J&K Police to insinuate that th is is being done with an in tention of perpetuity, I am 
sorry, this entire approach is  making me wonder if this is being done deliberately so 
that there can be a kind of a atmosphere of doubt created about India, about India’s 
governance and about India’s federal structure.   This approach, I am sorry to say, is 
not healthy.  And, you just put it out to say this is how we perceive it.  You have been 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
109

in governance for more than 70 years, not 70,  b u t  5 0  o r  4 0  y e a r s .   I  a m  s u r e  y o u  
understand the significance of what is going  on and the way in which that State is 
being restored back to be a part of India.  We belong to a Party which firmly believed 
from the beginning, from 1947, “ एक देश, एक िनशान, एक िवधान”, unlike the Congress 
Party.                              
 Sir, I am afraid to say, separatists, who are self-proclaimed, are coming into 
the Congress Party with red carpets thrown  for them to come in.  They are the 
separatists, who were the ones, who caused permanent and perpetual problem 
there.  Now, post-2019, we are, at least, being able to develop the State even as we 
are containing terrorism whereas now, like earlier, terrorists, self-proclaimed 
terrorists, are also being welcomed in the Congress Party, Sir. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA (Rajasthan): Sir, I would like to say something. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: She is not yielding.  ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Randeep Surjewala, 
she is not yielding.   ...(Interruptions)...  Please go ahead.  ...(Interruptions)...  Let 
us not make it a practice.  ...(Interruptions)...   This side also.  ...(Interruptions)...  
Please go ahead, hon. Minister.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Threat to cooperative federalism is a topic on 
which there has been a lot of discussion an d it was based only on the fact that the 
Budget speech mentioned only two States and it did not mention the others.   
 Yesterday, in the Lok Sabha too, I addre ssed this matter.  I wanted to highlight 
the fact that total resources allocated to 'T ransfer to the States' in BE 2024-25 is Rs. 
22,91,182 crore, and, it is an increase of Rs . 4,93,645 crores over the last year.   So, 
'Transfer to the States' are going unhind ered as per the recommendation of the 
Finance Commission and I will further elaborate on that when I come to some of the 
members who have raised question in part icular on that topic.  The threat to 
cooperative federalism issue has been raised  by several hon. members, inclusive of 
former Finance Minister Shri P. Chidambaram, Shri Jawhar Sircar, Shri N.R. Elango, 
Shri Shanmugam, Shri C.Ve. Shanmugam and also Shri Mohamed Abdulla.  So, 
there are many Members who have raised this.  If the inference is that I have spoken 
about only two States and left the others out, monies are not even going to those 
States is the immediate propaganda after the Budget was presented in the House, 
which was taken up in a big way by the INDI Alliances. ...(Interruptions)... It can't be 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

INDIA alliance. It is INDI alliance. ...(Interruptions)...  I.N.D.I. Alliance.  
...(Interruptions)... What is the last 'A' for? How can it be INDIA alliance?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Chidambaram, not while sitting.  ...(Interruptions)... Please.  
You are a very senior Member.  Please ma intain order. She is not yielding. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, if only two States were named and others 
were not, I just want to highlight what happened in the earlier Budgets which were 
presented by Congress-led UPA. Sir, in the Interim Budget of 2009-10, only Bihar and 
Uttar Pradesh were mentioned.  All right.  They came back to power in 2009-10.  Did 
they increase it? Yes, they increased it. To how many? To eight. Rest twenty States 
were not even mentioned. Are they clearly going to admit now that they did not send 
any money to 20 States because they didn't mention it in the speech? I went back to 
reading every one of them. 2004-05, only 11 States were mentioned, 17 were not; 10 
were mentioned in the next on e, 18 were not.  So, like th at, I can go on.  Does that 
mean during their time, for those States, which they did not mention, they didn't send 
anything? No, even that was not true. They sent money to all States, but only chose 
to speak about some States.                                 
 That is true for them, but it can’t be  true for me, is it? Protest outside the 
Parliament saying other States are being ignored. What a deliberate attempt to 
mislead people! And I condemn that. I will ju st highlight this point on agriculture 
allocations.  ‘Agriculture allocation has co me down’, was the allegation, and also a 
statement was made. Several Members have  spoken on that -- Randeep Surjewala 
ji, Raghav Chadha ji, Rajani Patil ji, Sanjay Yadav ji and Manoj Kumar Jha ji. I want to 
highlight that the Budget allocation in 201 3-14 for agriculture and farmers welfare was 
only Rs. 21,934 crores, whereas in 2024-25, it has increased to Rs. 1. 23 lakh crores, 
over 5.5 times in a decade. In P.M. Kisan, about which I will also mention a bit later, 
more than Rs. 3.24 lakh crores has b een disbursed to over 11 crore farmers. 
Institutional credit, as a target for agricu lture, has increased more than 2.5 times 
since 2014-15 from Rs. 8 lakh crores to Rs. 20  lakh crores.  Interest subsidy, which is 
given to farmers through Kisan Credit Ca rd, has increased 2.4 times since 2014-15, 
from Rs. 6,000 crores to Rs. 14,252 cror es. KCC now covers animal husbandry and 
fisheries also. In case of small and marg inal farmers, the number of accounts which 
are opened for them, and they  avail agricultural loan, ha s grown from 57 per cent in 
2014-15 to 76 per cent in 2023-24. Sir, Pradhan Mantri Fasa l Bima Yojana was 
launched in 2016 to provide crop insurance coverage to farmers and an amount of 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
111

more than Rs. 1.5 lakh crores has been disb ursed till today to the farmers.  Agri-Infra 
Fund was launched under Aatmanirbhar Bh arat package to address existing 
infrastructure gaps and mobilize investments. More than Rs. 35,200 crores have been 
sanctioned for 48,000 projects under the Agri-Infra Fund. So, the money collected, 
although as a cess, much ag ainst the allegation which is levied on us, saying cess 
money you retain, it is getting spent, here in this case, for agriculture infrastructure 
creation.  More than 23 crore soil health car ds have been distributed to farmers which 
provide farmers with a nutrient status of their soil and its composition. Around 1.8 
crore farmers and 2.53 lakh traders have been registered on the E-NAM portal, which 
is a national agriculture marketing place. In the last 10 years, more than Rs. 11 lakh 
crore have been spent to provide fertil izers to farmers at affordable prices. 
Government has also formulated agricultural  export policy in 2018 in the country for 
the first time. This has led to agricultural ex ports reaching up to four lakh crores of 
rupees. A separate Department of Fisheries has been set up in 2019, assisting farmers 
with schemes worth more than Rs. 38,000 crores which have been implemented in 
the fisheries sector due to which fish prod uction has increased from 95 lakh metric 
tons to 175 lakh metric tons, almost double in  the last 10 years. Si r, this is where this 
insurance-related point, whic h I said earlier, I have to repeat. In its 2004 election 
manifesto, the Congress Party promised to implement a comprehensive crop 
insurance scheme. 
 
4:00 P.M. 
 
However, it was not till the NDA came to  power under Prime Minister Modi that Fasal 
Bima Yojana was implemented. They co uld have done it during their time.  But no, it 
waited for a manifesto. But that was the manifesto of 2004, and they had ten years 
after that. They did not do anything on th at. The Congress said it would examine the 
feasibility of direct income support to farm ers.  However, it was not till 2019 when 
Prime Minister Modi gave PM- Kisan Samman Nidhi .  They state things in their 
manifesto.  It lies in their manifesto.   Bu t they don't implement that when they come 
to power.   It is the failure of their flagsh ip scheme which is the loan waiver scheme of 
2008.   I have mentioned this several times.  I am not taking time of the august House.  
The loan waiver scheme was not even fully implemented. In fact, many farmers were 
not given certificate stating that they have cleared their dues and everything, so that 
after that they can go and procure loan  from the banks.  Because without the 
certificates, bank wouldn't give it.  Thirty -eight per cent farmers hadn't been given 
the certificate, and they are sitting.  Loan waiver gaya; loan naheen mila abhi.  That is 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

the halaat, careless and laid back fashion with which a sensitive subject like loan 
waiver had been handled by the Congress Party.  
 Sir, on health and education, hon. Me mbers Shri Sanjeev Arora, Shri Sujeet 
Kumar and Shrimati Sagarika Ghose had rais ed question saying that the National 
Health Policy of the NDA targeted only 2. 5 per cent of the GDP on health sector.  
Total allocation under health increased from Rs.88,000 crore in  2023-24 to Rs.89,287 
crore in 2024-25. Under the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana , 15 new All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences have be en approved.  Out of that, nine projects 
have been completed starting from 2014. In ten years, nine new All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences have been completed while a total of 15 have been given sanction. 
Similarly, 17 Government medical colleges/ institutes have been approved.  Out of 
that, 10 projects have been completed. This is the attention given to health in different 
forms.  This is what I want to place before you for the consideration of the House.  
 Sir, under Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana , 34.28 crore Ayushman Bharat 
Cards were issued and Rs.94,225 crore have been authorized for hospital 
admissions. So the out-of-pocket expens e of patients is being brought down 
because of the various measures which have been taken.  
 Under Mission Indradhanush, cumulative  total number of children vaccinated is 
5.42 crores and cumulative total number of pregnant women vaccinated is 1.31 crore. 
Pradhan Mantri National Dialysis Programme has been implemented in 748 districts at 
1,485 centres and it deploys 10,077 hemodi alysis machines. A total of 23.33 lakh 
patients have availed of this facility of dialysis and  2.7 crore hemodialysis sessions 
have been held as of 30 th April 2024.  Sir, 10,000 PM  Jan Aushadhi Kendras have 
been opened and they provide 30-80 pe r cent cheaper medicines and medical 
equipment are also being made available. 
 Sir, on unemployment, several hon.  Members have spoken.  They are: 
Randeep Singh Surjewala ji, Raghav Chadha ji, Sanjay Yadav ji, P. Chidambaram ji, 
Jawhar Sircar ji, Sujeet Kumar ji and Sagarika Ghose ji.  First of all, I would like to 
present before you that our policy is to make youth competent, saksham.  For that, 
we also have brought in this time a packag e of five schemes providing employment in 
three and one for skilling and one for internship. 
 We hope that with this package, toge ther with 48 crore Mudra loans worth  
Rs. 29 lakh crore which have been disbur sed, where we now want to increase the 
limit of Rs.10 lakh to Rs.20 lakh for tar un category, and all these put together, there 
will be a big difference in skilling, internship and job creation.  But the UPA era jobless 
growth is something which we cannot forget .  It hurt India's youth the most because 
RBI's KLEMS data showed that total employment declined from 47.2 crore in 2012-13 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
113

to 47 crore in 2013-14.  And that remains to  be the only period of decline recorded 
since 1981-82. So, when it declined there,  to recover from there, even during the 
period, not much was done. Formal employment was also badly hit during UPA, 
especially in the formal manufacturing sect or.  The Annual Survey of Industries which 
is issued by the Ministry of Statistics  and Programme Implementation showed a 
sharper percentage decline th an ever seen during the worst of covid pandemic. So, 
even during covid pandemic, it was not the kind of decline as was seen during UPA's 
time. So, on employment, our facts, whic h are given by Periodic Labour Force 
Survey, PLFS, show that the labour market indicators for persons of age 15 years and 
above have steadily improved from 2017-18  to 2022-23. Labour force participation 
has also increased from 49.8 per cent in  2017-18 to 57.9 per cent in 2022-23.  
Women's labour force participation has ri sen to 37 per cent in 2022-23 from 23.3 per 
cent in 2017-18.  The unemployment rate has declined from six per cent in 2017-18 to 
a low of 3.2 per cent in 2022-23.  Youth une mployment, that is, the age between 15-
29 years, has declined sharply from 17.8 per cent in 2017-18 to 10 per cent in 2022-
23.  ...(Interruptions)...   This is the Annual Periodic  Labour Force Survey report 
which has given this.  Further to reinforce the fact, the SBI research report released in 
July, 2024, says that India created 12.5 crore jobs during 2014-2023 compared to 2.9 
crore created between 2004 and 2014. So, th e distinct increase in the jobs created 
during the ten years under Prime Minister Modi 's leadership has to be highlighted. In 
the last decade, the employab ility of Indian youth has increased sharply, rising from 
less than 34 per cent in 2014 to over 51 pe r cent in 2024, and we will further improve it 
through the PM's package on employment and skilling.  
 Sir, now, I come to inflation.  There has been a lot of discussion on that. I 
would like to give the data and also diffe rentiate between the inflation which was 
present during UPA and our approach toward s dealing with inflation now so that we 
can see how inflation has been handled bo th under UPA and NDA.  We saw double 
digit high inflation period under UPA because policies were reckless and inappropriate 
policies were taken on the one hand, and inept measures were taken to control 
inflation on the other.  Domestic inflation --  this is a very important statement -- used 
to be higher than the global average.  That is very signif icant to be noticed.  Post the 
global financial crisis of 2008, UPA Governme nt took stimulus measures to boost the 
economy.  
 The problem arose and I am sorry I have to say this.  When economists, who 
are repeatedly quoted to us saying "Rep uted economists; you are not that.", when 
leaders of that stature did not know when  and how to withdraw the stimulus -- the 
stimulus which was brought in after the global financial crisis -- it led to a high double 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

digit inflation between 2009 and 2013, high fiscal deficit as a result and debt, as a 
result, crowding out private investment.  Between January, 2012 and April, 2014, 
retail inflation was more than 9 per cent in 22 out of the 28 months.  So, let us 
understand the gravity of this inflation whic h we have noticed during that time.  No 
supply side measures were effectively taken in those days.  As a result, relief, even 
partial relief, was not available for the consumers. UPA inherited a very stable 
macroeconomic environment.  Atalji, when his term was over in 2004, had left behind 
a very strong Indian economy.  Inflation was only at 3.8 per cent from 1999 to 2000 
and to 2003-04.  Comparatively, average annual inflation rose to 8.1 per cent between 
2004-05 and 2013-14.  Where is 3.8 per cent an d where is 8.1 per cent?  That is their 
record on inflation handling - high fiscal de ficit, decreased prioritization of Capital 
Expenditure.   That contributed to sustaine d high inflation averaging double digits.  
Take for example, India's inflation averaged  at 10.1 per cent January to April, 2013 
compared to the average of 3.9 per cent across all the emerging markets.  If 
emerging markets are countries where we can  compare ourselves, they were only at 
3.9 per cent where as you had UPA keeping our inflation at 10.1 per cent.  Whereas to 
contrast this with our period over the last  decade, India's average inflation was only 
5.1 per cent lower than the 5.8 per cent average among the emerging economies.  
So, we are close to it and even lesser than  the average of the emerging economies' 
inflation.  That is the difference betw een UPA's handling of inflation and NDA's 
handling of inflation.  Sir, Congress means mehangai is something the common man 
knows as well because the common man's sl ogan used to be and continues to be: 
"कांगर्ेस आई, महंगाई लाई".
  …(Interruptions)…  This has been the parlance of the 
normal people.  …(Interruptions)…  So, कांगर्ेस मतलब महंगाई। …(Interruptions)…  Sir, I 
want to..…(Interruptions)… 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे) :  सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... आपको क्या बोलना है, आपकी 
क्या अचीवमȂट है, आपका िफिजकल अचीवमȂट क्या है, आपका फाइनȂिशयल अचीवमȂट क्या है, 
आपने िकतनी Ģोगर्ेस की है, इस पर बोिलए ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Ok
ay.  …(Interruptions)… Please. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. 
Finance Minister.  …(Interruptions)…    
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  जब बात खुद पर आई, तो कांगर्ेस ने ऐसा िकया ...(Ëयवधान)....  
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
115

MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Finance Minister, please.  …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition.  …(Interruptions)… नहीं-नहीं, Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)...  …(Interruptions)…  
She is not yielding.  …(Interruptions)…  
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Okay, I yield.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Okay, she has yielded. …(Interruptions)…Yes. …(Interruptions)…  
रुिकए , रुिकए ,  I hope that there will be peace, calm and camaraderie in the House. 
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा) : माननीय  सभापित जी, अभी एलओपी साहब ने जो िवषय 
उठाया िक आप अपनी बात किरए और कांगर्ेस क े जमाने की बात न किरए, जब भी बजट पर चचार् 
होती है, तो वह हमेशा comparative terms मȂ होती है। ...(Ëयवध
ान)...  हमेशा हमको बताना 
पड़ता है ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please. ...(Interruptions)... No.  You had all the right to say so. 
...(Interruptions)... You had all the right...  ...(Interruptions)... Please.  
...(Interruptions)...No, I do not appreciate it.  ...(Interruptions)... Sorry, I don't 
appreciate. ...(Interruptions)... What is this?  ...(Interruptions)... Forget about it. 
Nothing is going on record; why are you saying so? 
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा : राज्य सभा मȂ आने वाले लोगȗ क े बारे मȂ भी कांगर्ेस पाटीर् को सोचना 
चािहए िक इस हाउस मȂ चचार् की गिरम
ा और चचार् को क ै से आगे बढ़ाना है।  मȅ यहाँ पर िसफर् 
माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी जो बात कह रही थीं, उनके  पक्ष मȂ हाउस को 
यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक बजट relative और co
mparative terms मȂ बताया जाता है।  अगर हमȂ 
िवकास बताना है, तो हमको बताना है िक हम कहाँ से चले और कहाँ पहुँचे।  हमको यह भी बताना 
होता है िक हम िकस गित से चले और हमको यह भी बताना पड़ता है िक हमने एक  long leap ली 
है, एक लंबी छलांग ली है।  जब हम यह लंबी छलांग लेने की बात करते हȅ, तो हम अँधकार से 
उजाले की ओर जाते हȅ।  जब हम उसका  पयार्यवाची ढ ूँढ़Ȃगे, तो 2014 क े पहले अँधकार िदखता है 
और 2014 क े बाद उजाला िदखता है।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister, no ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on record.   
...(Interruptions)...  Not, you. I am asking another Minister. Please take your seat. 
...(Interruptions)...  Only Finance Minister will address.  Please. ...(Interruptions)...I 
cannot open the debate. The debate is over. No, Sir....(Interruptions)...  Only the 
hon. Finance Minister will speak.  We have to maintain some decorum in the House, 
and I am glad, we are improving a lot.  
 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Thank you very much, Sir. I do take what the 
hon. Leader of Opposition suggested. What  w e  d o  t o d a y  i s  w h a t  I  a m  h i g h l i g h t i n g  
and, therefore, also saying, something simi lar of this kind did not happen then. He 
may refute it, but it is a matter of fact an d I am grateful for the intervention of the 
Leader of the House to state it in his nice Hindi which I cannot speak as well, to say 
what exactly it was, getting out of andhakaar to go into अच्छी रोशनी वाला and that is 
what is happening now. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister, but your Hindi is not bad. Please go ahead. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : T h a n k  y o u ,  S i r .  S i r ,  i t  i s  n o t  j u s t  m e  w h o  i s  
talking about what had not happened then an d it is not just me who is talking about 
what kind of things that happened then.  I am saying what not happened then and 
what kind of things happened then based on eminent people an d their words. Take 
for example, what one former Governor of Reserve Bank had to say.  I am quoting, I 
am not taking his name. I do not know if it is permitted because I think people who are 
not Members of this House, we should not name and so on. So I will just say, 'the 
former Governor of Reserve Bank'. In his book, he says and I quote, "The Finance 
Ministry used to pressurize the RBI to soft en the interest rates and present a rosier 
picture of the growth to shore up sentimen ts." You were not able to perform in the 
economy, managing the inflation, giving stimulus to growth and leading the country to 
have better growth, but you are asking the RBI to give a rosy picture so that the 
sentiments don't get affected  because that sentiment and the kind of impact it was 
having on the economy, is where we went to being fragile five. And fragile five 
economy is a fact which is before then. But they could not act on it, instead they put 
pressure on Reserve Bank.                                               
 So, what you need to do constructively , you don't do; on the contrary, you do 
such things.  And I am not saying it, but a reputed, respected, former bureaucrat who 
was also the Governor of the Reserve Bank has written it.  So, I want to just highlight, 
S i r ,  w h a t  k i n d  o f  e f f o r t s  w e  h a v e  m a d e  t o  k e e p  i n f l a t i o n  u n d e r  c o n t r o l .   T h i s  i s  
something which I want to say now, for Me mbers who have been very keen to know 
what is happening today.  I am telling you what is happening today.  Please make a 
note of it.  Sir, we implemented measures leading to a reduced average inflation of 
4.5 per cent in 2014-15 to 2018-19, well within the RBI's target range of 2 to 6 per 
cent.  Moreover, India's inflation between 2020 and 2023 was much lower than the 
global average.  So, I want to highlig ht, why it was so, because competent and 
proactive measures were undertaken by the Government to control inflation.  And, we 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
117

managed to contain inflation at 5.7 per cent from 2019-20 to 2023-24 despite 
challenges which were unforeseen, and th e size and the magnitude of COVID was 
something which all over the world, even  today, has tarnished the economies and 
they are not able to come out of it, wher eas we have managed to be closer to the 
tolerance brand given by RBI.  Many co untries faced three-to-four-decade-high 
double digit inflation after the COVID pandem ic.  So, I just want to list out the five-
year terms and the inflation rates which have prevailed.  These are numbers which are 
already in public domain.  But it is useful for us to compare so that we know what our 
policy induced internal factors is which drov e UPA's inflation, as different from NDA's 
inflation, which is largely driven by a pandem ic and because of the global disruptions.  
So, the difference between the inflation then  and the inflation now, are very clearly 
before us.  NDA's period, five years be tween 1999 and 2004, the retail inflation was 
only 3.8 per cent.  UPA-I, five years, it was 6 percent;  UPA-II, 10.2 per cent.  So, if 
you were to take 10 years of UPA-I and U PA-II, it was 8.1 per cent.  NDA-I, between 
2014 and 2019, 4.5 per cent and NDA-II, 5.7 per cent.  NDA- I and II put together, in 
10 years, 5.1 percent inflation.  Where is 5.1 and where is 8.1, of the 10 years then and 
10 years now?  So, we need to understand  that even when very important steps were 
taken like cutting down on the excise duty of petrol and diesel by the hon. Prime 
Minister twice, once in November and once in June of 2023, No vember of 2022.  
Every State tried to reduce.  But for political scoring of a point, Congress-ruled States 
did not even then and now, and the inflation in those States, even if the change of the 
Government has happened, continues to be higher, and efforts to contain them are 
being taken now also.  They just didn't want to cut down.  On the contrary, if I 
remember correctly, -- our party president and the Leader of the House here, is from 
Himachal Pradesh -- the first thing the Government did there, after being elected, 
was to increase the price of petrol and diesel.  Now, the cry for inflation in this House, 
questions on what action you are taking to  contain inflation. Congress Government in 
Himachal Pradesh, a small State, increases the price.  And, here, the lecture is about 
contain the prices and bring it down!  Congress can do that.  Was it in Karnataka!  
So, on inflation and containment measures, there may be questions on us and we are 
willing to answer.  But, wh at about those States which are being governed by 
Congress?  The steps that we have taken to control inflation, the strategic policies for 
targeting inflation have been taken.  PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana is to make sure 
that the bottom most layer poorest people get their grains, at least, so that they can 
have some kind of an assurance that they have something to feed their family with.                
 The Government  continuously offloads wheat and rice from the central pool 
under the Open Market Sale Scheme (OMSS)  to increase availab ility in the market. 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

These are the steps that we are taking . To prevent hoarding and unscrupulous 
speculations, traders and wholesalers, bi g chain retailers and processors were 
required to disclose their stock positions of wheat and rice. We follow them; we 
pursue with them and then ensure that stocks are coming into the market.  
Under the price stabilisation funds, Sir, a dynamic buffer stock of pulses is 
maintained and calibrated release of stocks  contain the price and we keep procuring 
to increase the buffer stock. The basic duty on crude palm oil, crude soyabean oil and 
crude sunflower oil was cut from 2.5 per cent to nil so that edible crude oil can come 
into India and that can be refined creating jobs at the same time making edible oil 
available in the country. The agri-cess on oils was reduced from 20 per cent to 5 per 
cent. So, we are reducing the revenues that  we are earning, but making sure that 
people get affordable price on commodities which are important. This duty structure 
has been extended from January 15 th, 2024 to 31st March, 2025 so that the edible oils 
can be distributed with affordable prices.  
We have also taken measures to make sure basic items like atta, rice, chana 
dal and moong dal are distributed as bran d Bharat Atta, Bharat Rice and Bharat 
Chana Dal and Moong Dal so that they can be sold at affo rdable prices. Sir, per kg 
cost of atta is Rs. 27.50, per kg cost of rice is Rs. 27.50, per kg cost of chana dal is 
Rs. 60 and per kg cost of moong dal is Rs. 107 and Rs. 93 for sabut moong dal. 
These are been sold; 14.7 lakh tonnes of atta, 13.98 lakh tonnes of rice, 11.52 lakh 
tonnes of chana dal and 2984.37 tonnes of moong dal, both put together, sabut and 
dhula, are sold. It means people are benefitting from the wholesale distribution under 
the brand 'Bharat'. Therefore, Sir, I want to  make sure that the efforts taken by the 
Government to contain inflation are informed to the hon. Members and they know that 
we are taking the necessary steps.  
Sir, quickly on POSHAN Abhiyan and Saksham Anganwadi, the question about 
which Sujeet Kumarji from BJD had asked. The allocation for POSHAN and Saksham 
Anganwadi's have only increased and not come down. It was Rs. 20,554 crores in 
2023-24 to Rs.21,200 crores in 2024-25.  
One RJD MP Shri Sanjay Yadav asked about the per capita income. Sir, per 
capita income at constant prices grew at an average rate of four per cent during 2012-
13 to 2013-14. Subsequent to those two years, except in 2019- 20 and 2020-21 which 
were the pandemic years, the growth in pe r capita income at constant prices was 
higher than 2012-13 and 2013-14. I can just r ead it out at constant  prices. In 2012-13, 
it was 3.3 per cent, in 2013-14, it was 4.6 per cent and so on except when in 2020-21, 
it was minus 8.9; it has recovered to be  5.7 per cent now. So, per capita income 
issue is also something which I wanted to address.  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
119

 Sir, this is a very important issue which has been raised that arbitrarily we have 
been cutting the borrowing ceilings of non- BJP states. Sir, I want to completely 
dispel this baseless argument.  The Cent ral Government follows the recommendation 
of the Fifteenth Finance Commission for issuing borrowing consent, financial year-
wise, uniformly, to all States.  Net borrowi ng ceilings of 3 per cent GSDP have been 
fixed for the financial year 2024-25.  Borrowi ng consent is issued to all States by 
adopting uniform parameters as per borro wing guidelines. There is no difference 
here.  All of them are treated the same.  Moreover, the Fifteenth Finance Commission 
has also recommended performance-based additional borrowing space of 0.5 per 
cent of GSDP. This is linked to the performa nce in power sector reforms. I would like 
to present before you the list of States which have fulfilled the requisite criteria related 
to power sector reforms and availed addi tional borrowing space of 0.5 per cent of 
GSDP.   
 Sir, I will give example of 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24.  For example, West 
Bengal got Rs. 6,911 crores for 2021-22. Th ese are additional borrowing – over and 
above 3 per cent given unconditionally. Sir, it was Rs. 8,352 crores for 2022-23. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Is it in crores? Are these figures in crores? 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : It is in crores. Thank you, Sir.  And, Rs. 7,276 
crores for 2023-24.  This is relating to West Bengal. 
 I come to Tamil Nadu.  Sir, for 2021-22,  it is Rs. 7,054 crores; Rs. 5,775 crores 
in 2022-23 and Rs. 9,656 crores  in 2023-24 are addition al borrowings allowed each 
year, because of power sector reforms. This  is about Tamil Nadu.  I come to Kerala 
now.  It is Rs. 4,060 crores for 2021- 22; Rs. 4,263 crores for 2022-23 and Rs. 4,866 
crores in 2023-24.  These are additional bo rrowing permission, and they have availed 
these amounts are on record. The Government in Himachal Pradesh is formed just 
now.  So, I cannot give the figures straight away. Sir, Rs. 251 crores was allowed in 
2021-22.  But, we have not ha d any claim after that.  I can read that for other States 
as well. So, there is no arbitrariness here.   
 I come to the issue relating to Kerala .  I cannot find hon. Member, Dr. John 
Brittas, because he did raise this issue in  between when I was sp eaking.  He is not 
here.  But, never mind, I will reply to that .  Hon. Supreme Court has also mentioned 
to the State to resolve the matter amicably wi th the Centre.  It implicitly supported the 
stand of the Centre. It did not say that the Centre is wrong.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Madam, he has come.  
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Thank you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Take your seat, Dr. John Brittas.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala):  Sir, I am here. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You are here; but not to interrupt. ...(Interruptions)...You listen. 
...(Interruptions)... Sit down. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
 DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, since hon. Minister referred my name, it is my right to reply. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No.  Your name was referred because you were absent.  Now that 
you are present, you will follow the decorous conduct, please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, the point is... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no.  It is not done. You are an experienced Member.  Please sit 
down.  Hon. Minister, a word of suggestion.   Next time, be careful while naming Dr. 
John Brittas, because if you name him, he claims a right. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Oh! Right, Sir. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Hon. Minister has already named, Sir. I have a right. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, I don’t want to name anyone. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : So, on the Kerala issue, hon. Supreme Court 
has, actually, mentioned that the State sh ould amicably settle the matter as regards 
borrowing.  The Supreme Court did not imply that there is a wrong doing or mala fide.  
If I can infer it, Sir, it implicitly supported the stand of the Centre.  I will quote just one 
small paragraph.  It said, "The Plaintiff St ate - Kerala - has failed to establish the 
three prongs of proving prima facie  case - balance of convenience and irreparable 
injury.  The State of Kerala is not entitled to the interim injunction, as prayed." 
 So, the subject of Article 293, whether the Centre should do it, should take an 
oversight mechanism, all this may... ...(Interruptions)...  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
121

MR. CHAIRMAN : No; no.  Please maintain decorum.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please 
take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Finance Minister, please continue.  
...(Interruptions)... Dr. John Brittas, don’t make it a habit.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I want to just pick on the words he uttered. I 
wanted to refer to Hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas, because he was not here.  You are 
gracious enough to say, "Oh! He has come, you talk about it."  Then, there is a little 
banter.  I don’t know whether he gets a ri ght to it.  I have not mentioned anything 
about him till now. But, he would, in th e interest of his State, want to speak 
something.  But to imply that I am picking and choosing to my convenience is 
because he has not heard what I said earli er, or, not even was here to hear what 
additional borrowing over and above the three per cent, which is given 
unconditionally, has been given to Kerala over the three ye ars. He was not even here 
to hear it.  And, then, it is not fair to say, "she is picking and choosing".  No, I have 
given a comprehensive pictur e of what the additional borrowing is, which is a 
conditional borrowing.  Earlier, the three pe r cent was completely given was all said.  
But, unfortunately, hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas, was not here.  Now, he says that 
I am picking and choosing.  I have give n the whole story and I am picking and 
choosing one line, which is important fo r establishing Centre’s credibility.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One minute, hon. Finance Minister.  What I find is Dr. John Brittas 
makes impact when he is absent; he make s impact when he is present.  Hon. 
Finance Minister, please continue. ...(Interruptions)... No; no.  It is never done; you 
know it more than I do.  ...(Interruptions)... Please go ahead, hon. Finance Minister.  
...(Interruptions)... I can’t restart the debate.  ...(Interruptions)... Okay! Normally 
when I ask the speaker to look at me, I thin k, it is best to have eye contact also. 
...(Interruptions)... Please go ahead, hon. Finance Minister. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :   I am following the rules, Sir.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Leader of the Oppositi on has appreciated you.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Thank you, Sir. Based on the constitutional 
provisions, the Government of India adopts a rule-based syst em.  This ensures 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

fairness to all States.  And, no deviation is entertained because of presumed 
entitlements or presumed prejudices that  may prevail.  No, we follow as per the 
Finance Commission’s recommendations.   
Sir, related somewhat to this was the question on tax devolution to States, that 
it is less than what is recommended by the Finance Commission, a point that Shri 
N.R. Elango from DMK had raised. He is present here.  We also have senior Member, 
Shri Tiruchi Siva. I want to take a minut e on this point. We have heard Members 
raising this voice that Centre does not actua lly devolve 42 per cent or the 41 per cent, 
post J&K becoming a Union Territory.  I want  to clarify on this point.  The Finance 
Commission recommends devolution of taxes as a percentage of net proceeds, as 
defined in Article 279 of the Constitution. ‘N et proceeds’ is calculated after deducting 
cesses, surcharges, and cost of collection from the Gross Tax Receipts (GTR).  So, 
the first matter is the Gross Tax Receipts.  From there, you remove cesses, 
surcharges, and the cost of collection. And, then, you arrive at net proceeds.  And, it 
is from the net proceeds the devolution of 41  per cent or 42 per cent is.  It is wrong to 
calculate devolution, based on Gross Tax Receipts and, then, claim that the Centre is 
devolving less to the States than what is suggested by the Finance Commission 
because the mandated amount, which is 41 per cent, is based on net proceeds, and 
not the Gross Tax Receipts.  So, it should be noted, the devolution is not the 
percentage of GTR, but it is a percentage of the net proceeds.                                                              
 So, it should be noted that devolution is  not the percentage of GTR but it is a 
percentage of the net proceeds. The Centre  has always given the percentage from 
the net proceeds without fail to the States.  And, who arrives at the net proceeds?  
Does the Centre decide the amount? No.  The net proceeds are certified by the CAG.  
It is that amount, which the CAG gives you.  The CAG gives that that net proceeds is 
this much, and, on this, you will devolve 41 per cent to the States.  So, I cannot 
choose saying net proceeds is only this much and not another; that is done by the 
CAG. Every year, it does. It is not as if it is done one year.   Net proceeds is decided 
by the CAG every year.  I also  want to highlight this point because I want to elaborate 
on that for one minute.  This is decided by the CAG every year.   If there are any dues 
pending to the States,  it is also immediately released.    
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Now, having said that, I want to highlight  and draw your attention to this fact, 
Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir.  I want to in form the Members that our Government has 
devolved Rs.82,000 crores as a part of th e tax devolution after obtaining the CAG’s 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
123

certificate in March 2022.  So, what is special  about it?  I am claiming that every year, 
I am giving it in time.   So, why am I mentioning only this Rs.82,000 crores?   Sir, from 
1996-97 to 2014 when Prime Minister Modi  comes in, between 1996 and 2014, there 
was an accumulated due of Rs.82,000 cror es on tax devolution; this was not 
devolved, and no Government in between had taken a call on it.  We cleared it after 
the CAG gave the certificate in March,  2022-23.   Rs.82,000 crores  had been 
pending since 1996. ...(Interruptions)...  No;  you are not giving me 42 per cent; you 
go on a wrong calculation, not on net pro ceeds but on GTR, and also not recognize 
the fact that 1996 से जो पȂिंडग है, उसको भी हम 2022 मȂ िक्लयर कर रहे हȅ।  मोदी जी, Îटेट्स 
को अलग तरीके  से डील नहीं करते हȅ, क्यȗिक वे भी चीफ िमिनÎटर रहे हȅ और उन्हȂ Îटेट्स की 
िदक्कत मालूम है।  हम हर पैसा समय पर द
े रहे हȅ।  82 हजार करोड़ रुपय े, जो 1996 से पȂिंडग 
था,  उसको भी हमने ही िक्लयर िकया है।      
Sir, I am almost, at the end.  The fo rmer Finance Minister, probably, in the 
concluding stage of his speech, -- I was also here hearing him – had said,  “I have 
got five questions for which I want the Finance Minister to answer. ”   Those five 
questions pertained to minimum wages, le gal guarantee, education loan waiver, 
abolition of Agniveer and scrapping of NEET.  I just want to give a very quick response 
to each one of these points.  Minimum wages of Rs.400/- a day - I am referring to the 
hon. former Finance Minister who had raised five questions and wanted us to answer.    
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The best that has happened is, the hon. Finance Minister has not 
taken the ... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी राम दास अठावले (महाराÍटर्):  सर, एक िमनट
। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no; the hon. Minister is also a poet, but not on this occasion. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, can I? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes; that was not to you; there is another hon. Minister behind you.   
My problem is, I will have to find some mechanism where when there are two hon. 
Ministers and the second one rises, then, when I tell one, the other one 
misunderstands it. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Minister, please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Yes, Sir, I am just responding. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, I am not addressing the hon. Finance Minister. 
...(Interruptions)... Mr. Athawale, please. ...(Interruptions)... चलो, कम से कम आपने 
ऐसी चचार् तो की, जो थोड़ी-सी हंसी मजाक की हुई।  Otherwise, you are very serious when 
you make an observation. ...(Interruptions)... Please, hon. Minister. 
...(Interruptions)... No, I will not allow. ...(Interruptions)... If I had to allow, I would 
have allowed the Leader of Opposition. I will not allow anyone.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, he had raised five questions on which he 
said, why can't 400 rupees be  declared as the minimum wa ges per day.  Sir, I think 
he is talking about MNREGA Act, and, thro ugh which, to declare a minimum wage of 
Rs. 400. I just want to highlight the MNREGA Act of 2005 on that presumption. 
Section 6(1) of the Act says, ‘Notwithstan ding anything contained in the Minimum 
Wages Act 1948, the Central Government may,  by notification, specify the wage rate 
for the purposes of the Act.’ It says that. An d it further says in the proviso, ‘Provided 
that different rates of wages may be specified for different areas.’ I also think probably 
because it was mentioned in the Congress Ma nifesto. I am a bit hazy on it, but his 
demand was when it is 400 rupees per da y minimum wage, why we do not want to 
declare it. So I want to highlight, Sir, th at the Rural Development Ministry which deals 
with MNREGA since UPA time has been declaring the minimum wage, and these are 
decided based on changes in the CPI-AL, th at is, Consumer Price Index Agricultural 
Labour, which reflects inflation in rural area s. It is based on that, that every year, 
some kind of a notification comes. This has been the practice since 2005 to 2014. Our 
Government has also followed the same principle. I don't know if I can use this saying 
in the English language. ‘What is sauce fo r goose is the sauce fo r gander as well.’ 
One is therefore tempted, Sir, to ask th e former FM, what prevented the UPA from 
notifying a uniform wage rate under the MNRE GA when it was in power? They didn't 
do it then. But now if he is quoting the MNREGA Act and demanding that Government 
of India declare 400 rupees as minimum wa ge, I would want to also highlig
 ht, and I 
am sure being a legal mind he would be aware of this nuance, that the Minimum 
Wages Act of 1948 also empowers the Stat es to fix minimum wages with respect to 
categories, various categories of employme nt, unskilled employment, and so on. So, 
in the States, minimum wages are again fi xed differently for different States. So, 
minimum wages are fixed by States for different kinds of employment, just as 
Government of India also fixes minimum wa ges for railways or the mines or many 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
125

other things which come under its subject. For example -- I am taking the example of 
Karnataka – the State Government notifies four different zones to fix minimum wages 
for unskilled workers. Zone one is for Beng aluru city and the City Corporation area. 
Zone two is for district headquarters and there are various districts, and so on. 
 I would like to draw your attention that in the State of Himachal Pradesh, as 
per the latest notification, latest in this subject, which was issued in May, 2023, which 
was issued by the State Government, unskilled wage earners will get Rs.375 minimum 
wage.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Just a minute. I must appreciate your fairness.  You touch the State 
of the Leader of the Opposition and next yo u are touching the State of the Leader of 
the House. So, that even balancing ha s taken place and I am privileged to be 
Chairman at a time when this House has pr esidents of the two leading parties in the 
country, the largest democracy. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: So, if wages are to be fixed by different States at 
different levels and, even within a State, for different zones, it is difficult to think of 
how the Central Government can fix a wage of Rs.400 and also say, therefore, you 
know, it should be done for th e entire country.  Also, it mi ght have been a slip of the 
tongue. I don't want to pick on it, but I am very tempted. In hi s speech, I think, he 
claimed that he travels 500,000 kilometers by road every month.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : We can overlook it. This does ha ppen sometimes. I tell you. The 
Leader of the House made a mention of seve n crore and he quickly corrected that it 
was seven lakhs.  So, we can ignore it.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  So, education loans, he  had a question to ask 
on education loans. So, we have already announced measures for education loans in 
this Budget for helping our youth who have  not been eligible for any benefit under 
Government schemes or policies. We have  announced a financial support of Rs.10 
lakh for higher education within the country.  E-vouchers for this purpose will be given 
directly to one lakh students every year for an annual inte rest subvention of 3 per cent 
of the loan amounts.  He also asked a ques tion about Agniveer Scheme.  I wanted to 
highlight that the former Finance Minister ha s also served as the Home Minister. I am 
sure he understands the nuance involved in national security. Agniveer is a very 
reformative step to enhance the capabilit ies and battle readiness of our Armed 
Forces. It ensures actually that we have fit soldiers who are on the front line.  So, one 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

of the expected outcomes of the Scheme  is that Armed Forces will have much 
younger force by recruiting those in the age group of 17.5 years to 21 years and 
retaining only 25 per cent, thus reducing th e average age of the Indian soldier. Why 
should we do it?  In countri es like the US and the UK, sold iers are required to render 
only two of six years in service because th ey want to keep the young, fit and agile 
person at the borders. I hope  on matters related to the fi tness and battle readiness of 
the Indian Army or the Armed Forces, we don't do politics because it is something 
which is going to be critical for this co untry.  We need young, fit and battle-ready 
young people who are going to be trained. In  fact, I was going to bring in here one of 
the news items which had come in the recen t last two days about how in terms of 
fitness and in terms of skills acquired, which are so required at the borders, Agniveer 
people have come out with flying colours.  Studies have proved it. So, this is a 
scheme which is very important,  and we need to have great er sense of looking at the 
national interest, rather than just take policies on some other consideration. 
 Sir, I would like to remind that in 2014, the hon. Prime Minister Modi reviewed 
the situation.  I got into Defence only la t e r ,  i n  2 0 1 7 ,  a n d ,  t herefore, with some 
interest, I went back to look at the earlie r periods also.  In 2014, the Indian Armed 
Forces, particularly the Army, did not even have the bulletproof vests.  We had to 
panic-buy and give them.  And in that, there was the role of Manohar Parikarji and 
Arun Jaitleyji, to make quick procurements, and we had to procure it from elsewhere.  
But today, in our country, we produce bulletproof vests, which are good enough for 
our Army, and they feel that it has given them the sense of security.  Not just the 
bulletproof vests, it is also a truth that in India, at that time, for 10 years, major 
defence procurements did not happen.  And, th is is not a fiction that I am telling you.  
In the House, the Defence Minister then had said, “We cannot procure it because we 
don't have the money. ”  So, Agniveer is a scheme wh ich we brought in with a great 
sense of commitment to keep our Armed Fo rces battle ready and to see that young 
and fit people get into the Army.  I do not think there is a need for us to unnecessarily 
worry that this is causing some kind of a distortion; not at all.  It is with the 
acceptance of the Armed Forces th at it has been brought in. ...(Interruptions)... I 
think I have addressed the four issues that he had raised. The fifth one is about NEET.  
The hon. former Minister is a lawyer.  Pr obably, he spoke one day before the final 
judgment came from the Supreme Court on  the NEET exam, an d, therefore, the 
verdict which was given by the Supreme Co urt, he probably would not have been 
aware.  The Supreme Court did not scrap the NEET exam.  It observed that there is 
no material at the present stage to indicat e any systemic leak.  That is about the 
NEET exam leakages. But, abolition of NEET , I am afraid to say,  was triggered even 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
127

before the leak issue came up.  So, I want to highlight some of the features.  When 
was the NEET exam notified?  For the benefi t of all our hon. Members, I would like to 
inform that NEET was notified in Decembe r 2010, with its implementation.  Who was 
leading the implementation at that time ? It was led by the then DMK Minister 
Gandhiselvan, who served as the MoS for Heal th and Family Welfare, as part of the 
Congress-led UPA-II Government.  So , it was brought at that time. 
...(Interruptions)... The Supreme Court, while talkin g about the NEET, didn't take 
care of it. ...(Interruptions)... Thank you, Mr. Wilson. ...(Interruptions)... And, that 
is why it is running even now with a stay. ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, I want him to not 
interrupt me and misunderstand. This is not done.  In 2012, the UPA-2.0 introduced 
NEET Undergraduate Examination for medical  admissions.  And in 2013, the first 
exam took place.  All this happened during the UPA.  In 2013, the exam took place.  
When the Gazette notification of 20 th December, 2010, was challenged in the 
Supreme Court, both the lawyers of the Medical Council of India and UPA's Additional 
Solicitor General of India defended NEET.  December '20 was the time when Gazette 
notification was issued, and that Gazette wa s challenged in the Supreme Court.  At 
that time, both the lawyers of the Medical  Council of India and the ASG of the UPA 
Government defended NEET, saying this wa s an effort to streamline the admission 
process. ...(Interruptions)... Sir, the ASG then stated that the earlier system of 
multiple examinations was neither in the na tional interest, nor in the interest of 
maintaining the standards of medical education, nor did it  serve the interest of the 
poor middle-class students who had to buy and fill forms of several examinations and 
travel across the country to appear in the examinations. 
 
5:00 P.M. 
  
They had to take multiple examinations . NEET does not cause disadvantage to 
anyone. Sir, NEET does not cause disadvantage to anyone. It expands opportunities. 
Tamil Nadu students secure 85 per cent of the seats with 69 per cent reservation, 
which is upheld in Tamil Nadu .  With that reservation intact  and with this process of 
NEET, with 85 per cent of the seats within Tamil Nadu and 15 per cent of all seats 
from all States put together, they can go for the 15 per cent seats to any State that 
they want. So, Tamil students benefit from all-India quota in othe r States also.  The 
former Finance Minister talked about NEET. I also want to underline this fact that in 
2011, when the DMK rule concluded, Tam il Nadu had just 1,945 medical seats. 
Presently, there are 10,425 medical seats, a remarkable surge of 8,480 seats in the 
past 11 years. 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

Sir, NEET has ensured cost-effective me dical education for families. Certainly, 
it has hurt some vested interests, particul arly those in the medical education field 
because, no longer, selling of medical seats is possible. And, therefore, it has hurt a 
lot of people. That is why, a particular lo bby was actively against NEET even before 
this NEET leak issue has come up. Sir, in the year 2022-23, 12,997 Tamil Nadu 
Government school students wrote the N EET exam, and, of them 3,982 students 
passed it. It is noteworthy that the pass pe rcentage has increased from 27 per cent in 
the last year to 31 per cent. So, I want to say, before NEET came in, only a few 
students from few schools in selected regions of Tamil Nadu could get medical seats.  
Now, it is across the board.  I don't know if you will permit me, I want to mention 
names of a few Government school studen ts from Tamil Nadu, belonging to very 
humble backgrounds and rural areas, who ha ve passed the NEET examination over 
the last few years.  Please allow me to mention the names.   
Young girl, Kanimozhi from Needur, Mayiladuthurai got in 2023.  She is the 
daughter of a labourer, kuli thozhilali, who is a temporary taxi driver.  He also works 
as a temporary taxi driver.  Annapoorani from a place called Singampunari, Sivaganga 
District, the District from where our former Finance Minister  hails.  That girl has also 
managed to get in.  She is the daughter of  a construction worker.  It was again in 
2023.  Next is Arivunithi.  Viralimalai is th e place from where he qualified.  It is in 
Pudukkottai District.  He is son of a labourer, who is also a kooli thozhilali.  He also 
got in 2023.   Divyabarathi got in from a place called Thalavadi in Erode District.  She 
is daughter of a labourer, again, a kooli thozhilali .  Again, it was in 2023.  Next is 
Kaviarasan from Karambakkudi  in Pudukkottai District.  He is the son of a farm 
labourer.  Jeevith Kumar from Periyakulam, Theni, and, he is the son of a goat rearer, 
shepherd.  He got in 2020.  Next is Kavipr iya from Cheyyar.  Daughter of a farmer, 
she got in 2022.  Santhanam from Dharmapuri.  Son of a farm labourer, he got in 
2022.  Ramya from Karamadai in Coimbatore.  She is a Scheduled Tribe.  A particular 
tribe which is very disadvantaged in Tamil Nadu is called Irular. She is an Irular 
candidate and daughter of a labourer. …(Interruptions)… Y e s ,  i t  i s  o n  t h e  B u d g e t .   
Because the former Finance Minister asked about it, I am duty bound to answer it. 
 I may get the name wrong of the last can didate who I want to name here.  She 
is from Karamadai, Coimbatore.  Pirusica, I may be wrong with the name.  She is the 
daughter of a tailor.  Now, are these not success stories of NEET? Are these not 
students from rural areas?  Are these not st udents who belong to  the lowest strata? 
Construction workers, coolie workers, farmer s, taxi drivers, their children are coming 
through NEET.   
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
129

SHRI G.K. VASAN:* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Nothing will go on record, Mr . Vasan.  You are a very senior 
Member. …(Interruptions)… No, nothing will go on record. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I come to the last point and I will conclude.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:
* 
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO:
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please, please.  …(Interruptions)… Please take your seat.  
…(Interruptions)… Nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, I 
am extremely indulgent when you speak.  But when Finance Minister speaks, 
…(Interruptions)… No, she is not yielding. …(Interruptions)… No, no; please take your 
seat.  …(Interruptions)… Mr. Tiruchi Siva has done the right thing.  Please take your 
seat.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, the debate has happened.  All Members 
have spoken.  Whoever was allowed by the Chair, spoke. Five questions were asked 
specifically by the former Finance Minister. I am giving him answers.  I wish, with your 
support, all Members can, at least, listen to the answers that I want to give. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, Madam. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, the last point.  The former Finance Minister 
asked a couple of questions.  Again, most Members are saying: What has this got to 
do with the Budget?  Why do you want to  a n s w e r  o n  t h i s ?  W h y  d o  y o u  w a n t  t o  
answer on that?  But these were the questions raised.  I don’t know if they are related 
to Budget, but because these were raised during the Budget debate, I am answering.  
Questions were raised, and I am quoting the former Finance Minister from the 
YouTube.  I quote, “I ask: Why does the UPSC have to pl ay a role in the appointment 
of the DGP of a State?  Why should a State Government not appoint the Vice-
Chancellor of State Universities? ” Of course, people can say why you are answering 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

these questions; these are not on Budg et.  But because he was asking, I am 
answering them here.  Sir, I am indeed  appalled that a very respected senior 
advocate, I am not an advocate, but with due respect... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  All senior advocates are respectable.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Yes, Sir.  So, he has raised a question saying 
... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  And you may not be aware, hon.  Finance Minister, I am a senior 
advocate under suspension.  …(Interruptions)…  No, no; Mr. Praful Patel, I am a 
senior advocate, and Mr. Bhupendra Yada v knows, under suspension, because if 
you hold an office like this, your sanad is suspended during that period.  So, I 
suffered, I would tell the Leader of the Opposition, two things in 2019.  When 
President issued warrant -- imagine warrant to a senior advocate -- appointing me as 
Governor, this lead to suspension of my sanad also.  So, you have respect, I am 
sure, for all senior advocates, whether under  suspension like me, and not otherwise.  
Please, go ahead.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  This is the reason you suspended us! …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I am actually appalled because... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  But the hon. former Finance Mi nister had raised two very valid 
questions.  One, why should, in the a ppointment of DGP, the UPSC come into 
picture?  And the same he said about Vi ce-Chancellors.  You say that you want to 
respond.  
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: I would want to respond, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please go ahead. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Sir, hon. former Finance Minister has used this 
platform of vibrant democracy.  I think he  has misrepresented the situation to an 
extent that it goes to contradict the judici al verdict of the Supreme Court itself.  On 
both counts, the guidelines, which have em anated from the hon. Supreme Court, are 
very clear. On this issue of appointment of DGP, as to why the UPSC has to play a 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
131

role, I just want to highlight that it was in this case of Prakash Singh and Others 
versus the Union of India, 2006. 
 This case was decided by the Supreme Court on 22
nd September 2006 and it 
directed in the following words.  "The Dire ctor General of Police of the State shall be 
selected by the State Government from amon gst the three senior-most officers of the 
Department who have been empanelled for promotion to that rank by the Union 
Public Service Commission."  The State fixe s up on three candidates and sends the 
panel.  It is the UPSC which decides that.  This is the ve rdict of the Supreme Court in 
Police reform related case in which policeman Prakash Singh and others have gone to 
the Supreme Court.  And in that, it clearly says that it is the UPSC.  This is one.   
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA:  Sir, I have a point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What is your point of order?  Come to the point of order.  Don't 
make a speech. 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA:   Sir, if the Supreme Court decided that 
yardstick is the criterion, why has the Go vernment not followed it in the case of 
Election Commission of India when there was a clear-cut directive?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Everything you say Mr. Randeep Singh Surjewala is irrelevant. 
Everyone is aware of the judgment.  ...(Interruptions)...   No; not like this.  He had to 
speak.  ...(Interruptions)...  Look here, I take it as a very serious situation.  Has the 
former Finance Minister while asserting, 'W hy are you having role of UPSC in the 
appointment of DGP' misrepresented the situation?  According to the present 
Finance Minister, the former Finance Minister totally misrepresented it.  But there is a 
categorical judgment of the Supreme Cour t in the case of Prakash Singh and the 
directive is categorical. The State Government  will select the DGP only out of a panel 
that is approved by the UPSC.  This is a settled issue.  Everyone knows about it.  I am 
sure as and when former Finance Minister will be there ...(Interruptions)...  I take a 
very serious view of it.  ...(Interruptions)...  No.  ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. 
Members, I take a very serious view of it , because I have indicated that this House 
cannot be used to emanate information by way of misrepresentation, particularly a 
Supreme Court judgment which is known to one and all by and large and that too by a 
senior advocate.  I take note of it.  You kindly put the judgment on the Table of the 
House.  ...(Interruptions)...   Nothing is going on record, Digvijaya Singh ji.  
...(Interruptions)...  She is not yielding.   
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: महोदय, माननीय िचदÇबरम जी भी काफी ĢितिÍठत वकील हȅ।  वे होम 
िमिनÎटर भी रह चुक े हȅ।  तो जब वे यहाँ पर उपिÎथत रहȂ, क्या आप उन्हȂ अपना ÎपÍटीकरण देने 
का मौका दȂगे? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: िबÊकु ल ठीक है।  माननीय सदÎयगण, िदिग्वजय िंसह जी न
 े बहुत महत्वपूणर् बात 
कही है।  यह एक charge है िक पूवर् िवǄ मंतर्ी ने सदन क े समक्ष महत्वपूणर् तरीके  से यह कहा है 
िक DGP बनाने का अिधकार राज्य सरकारȗ का ही है और आप Union Public Service 
Commission
 को क्यȗ बीच मȂ ला रहे हȅ? उनका direction साफ है िक you are doing this 
because you want to control States. Imputation यही है। The present Finance Minister 
says that this is being done not by any ex ecutive order.  This is emanating from a 
judgment of the Supreme Court that was imparted in 2006 and the judgment is 
categorical.  I am sure every lawyer knows it that appointment can take place only out 
of a panel approved by the UPSC.   
 I agree to your suggestion, and we will put it to former Finance Minister in what 
circumstances, while being Senior Advocate, he could misrepresent the situation so 
gravely to misinform the nation at large.  We will put it to him.  I agree to your 
suggestion.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, just to be sure, I want to re-read the verdict 
of the court. On 22
nd September, 2006, the Supreme Co urt directs thus, and I quote, 
"The Director-General of Police of the State shall be selected by the State 
Government from amongst the three seni or-most officers of the Department who 
have been empanelled for promotion to th at rank by the Union Public Service 
Commission."  Sir, that is about DGP. Now,  I come to the issue of Vice-Chancellors 
of State Universities.  The Supreme Court of India again in a judgment in State of 
West Bengal versus Anindya Sundar Das an d others in 2022, asserted and I quote, 
"Regulation 7.3 of UGC (Minimum Qualifi cations for appointment of Teachers and 
Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance 
of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations 2018... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Is it UGC or UPSC?  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, it is UGC, Univer sity Grants Commission. 
...(Interruptions)... Regulation 7.3 of UGC (Minimum Qualifications for appointment 
of Teachers and Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for 
the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations 2018 provides for the 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
133

minimum qualifications of a VC, selection procedure and the appointment procedure. 
In case of a conflict between the State legisl ation and the Central legislation, Central 
legislation shall prevail by applying the rule /principle of repugnancy as enunciated in 
Article 254 of the Constitution. ...(Interruptions)...   Sir, you are a senior advocate. 
...(Interruptions)...   Even though I am not an advocate, I am sure you are going to 
be conscious of what I am talking of. ...(Interruptions)...   I t  i s  v e r y  w e l l  f o r  t h e  
Members to be conscious of, but don't they have trust in you? ...(Interruptions)...   
You are the Chairman of the House. ...(Interruptions)...   More importantly, you are 
a senior advocate of the Supreme Court who is also the Chairman of the House. I 
wish the Members give you that much of trust and faith in what they are saying. 
...(Interruptions)...  Therefore, any appointment as a Vice-Chancellor contrary to the 
provisions of the UGC Regulations can be sa id to be in violation of the statutory 
provisions, warranting a writ of quo warranto. ...(Interruptions)...   Sir, how do we, 
therefore, countenance a former Finance Mini ster coming to the people at large and 
talking about dilution of federalism when it  is clear that when there is a conflict 
between the two, the Central legislation is  the one which is going to prevail under 
Article 254?  Therefore, I just want to hi ghlight a field which is occupied by the 
judgment of the Supreme Court in these matters  to which, by virtue of being a Senior 
Advocate, the hon. former Finance Minist er should be more aligned with the 
judgment. I wish to indicate to the House th at these judgments and the spirit which is 
caught in these judgments are very important. Therefore, when he is referring as to 
why the DGP should be appointed by U PSC, why the Vice-Chancellor should be 
appointed by the UGC and so on, so much of legal material is available.  Even if the 
hon. Members are suggesting that contradictory judgments are there or Judges are 
reconsidering it, all that apart, when even those are taken on board, when it is sub 
judice before a different bench, when it is so clearly being legally scrutinised, how can 
we come here and say no, it has to be done and why should the State not do it?  No, 
Sir.                                                                       
 These are matters being taken up as the hon. Member, Wilson is highlighting.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I appreciate. …(Interruptions)…  Yes, hon. Finance Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN :  Yes, these are being taken up by the courts.  
But, here to come and assert a final word is amazing.  Thank you very much, Sir.  
 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN :  N o w ,  D r .  L .  M u r u g a n .   …(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on 
record.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
 
MOTION FOR SUSPENSION OF RULE 272 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. L. Murugan to move the following motion: 
 
"That the Rule 272 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct of  Business in the 
Council of States in its application to consideration of the Demands for Grants 
of the related Ministries/Departments  for the year 2024-25 by Department 
Related Standing Committees during the current Session of Rajya Sabha, be 
suspended." 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN):  Sir, I move: 
 
"That the Rule 272 of the Rules of Pr ocedure and Conduct of Business in the 
Council of States in its application to consideration of the Demands for Grants 
of the related Ministries/Departments fo  the year 2024-25 by Department 
Related Standing Committees during the current Session of Rajya Sabha, be 
suspended." 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka):  Sir, why are you moving this?  
…(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal) :  Sir, I have a point of clarification.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Now, 'Discussion on the working of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs.'  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari to raise a discussion.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
135

SHRI SAKET GOKHALE:   Sir, she did not answer. …(Interruptions)…  A white paper 
on West Bengal..…(Interruptions)…   
MR. CHAIRMAN :  M r .  S a k e t ,  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   …(Interruptions)…  One minute. 
…(Interruptions)…  If the hon. Minister has not responded to something which you 
specifically argued, there is a mechanism.  …(Interruptions)…  Come to my Chamber, 
I will tell you the mechanism but for the last time.  …(Interruptions)…  N o w ,  S h r i  
Ghanshyam Tiwari.  …(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record except what Mr. 
Tiwari says.  …(Interruptions)…  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari to raise a discussion on the 
working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.   
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी : माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ क ेन्दर्ीय...  
MR. CHAIRMAN :  G h a n s h y a mji, one minute.  …(Interruptions)…  Mr. Tiruchi Siva. 
…(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, I have to make an announcement.    
RESIGNATION BY MEMBER 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I h
ave to inform Members that I have received a letter today, the 
31st of July, 2024, from Shrimati Mamata Mohanta, Member, representing the State of 
Odisha, resigning her seat in the Rajya Sabha.   Hon. Members, she has resigned her 
seat by writing to the Chairman under her hand and handed pers onally to me.  The 
same I find to be constitutionally in order.  I have accepted the resignation of Shrimati 
Mamata Mohanta, Member representing the State of Odisha with immediate effect. 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN 
AFFAIRS 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari to start.   
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी (राजÎथान): माननीय सभापित महोदय, िवǄ वषर् 2 024-25 के कȂ दर्ीय 
बजट मȂ आवास और शहरी मामलȗ से संबंिधत िवषय पर हम चचार् Ģारंभ कर रहे हȅ।  
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक इस साल क े बजट मȂ शहरी 
िवकास और आवास पर भारत सरकार ने िजतना बड़ा ध्यान िदया है, ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  सदन मȂ शांित रखȂ। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी : उसके  पहले इस Ģकार का वणर्न नहीं िकया गया था।  यह बजट 
"िवकिसत भारत, 2047" क े िलए है और इसकी जीवन रेखा भारतीय शहरȗ क े  बीच मȂ से होकर 
गुजरती है। अगर हम 2047 मȂ िवकिसत भारत बनाना चाहते हȅ, तो िवकिसत भारत क े िलए हमको 
िवकिसत शहर भी बनाने हȗगे, क्यȗिक माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, हम देख रहे हȅ िक आज़ादी 
क े समय ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  माननीय सदÎयगण, please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  B e  
silent, please.  …(Interruptions)…  माननीय ितवाड़ी जी। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, िवकिसत भारत क े िलए हम 2047 को 
ध्यान मȂ रख कर चलते हȅ, तो शहरȗ का िवकास Ģाथिमक आवÌयकता है। महोदय, बजट पेश 
होने क े बाद नीित आयोग की बैठक हुई और नीित आयोग की बैठक मȂ यह तय िकया गया िक 
अगर भारत
 को वषर् 2047 तक िवकिसत भारत का लÑय ĢाÃत करना है, 30 िटर्िलयन अमेिरकी 
डॉलर की अथर्ËयवÎथा हािसल करनी है और 18,000 से 20,000 अमेिरकी डॉलर की Ģित Ëयिƪ 
आय करनी है, तो शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िवÌव  Îतरीय बुिनयादी ढांचे और सुिवधाओं का िनमार्ण करना 
होगा। इस सरकार ने जो अपना काम ĢारÇभ िकया ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, हाउस ऑडर्र मȂ नहीं है।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Memb ers, please take your seats. 
...(Interruptions)... आप अपनी बात बोलȂ। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, जब भारत सरकार ने यह तय िकया  और 
नीित आयोग ने तय िकया िक िवकिसत भारत क े िलए भारत क े शहरȗ का िवकिसत होना ज़रूरी  
है, तो सरकार ने 2024-25 क े बजट मȂ जो Ģावधान िकए हȅ, वे Ģावधान उसी Ģकार से हȅ। महोदय, 
हम देखते हȅ िक भारत की आज़ादी क े  समय 80 Ģितशत आबादी गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िनवास करती 
थी, 20 Ģितशत लोग शहरȗ मȂ रहते थे। आज िÎथित यह है िक 35 परस Ȃट से अिधक और क ु छ 
राज्यȗ मȂ तो 40 परसȂट से अिधक आबादी शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ रह रही है और क ु छ शहरȗ मȂ िनरंतर जो 
बाहर से आने जाने वाले लोग हȅ, उस आबादी को देखते हुए शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ बहुत Ģकार की 
समÎयाएं उत्पन्न हो गई हȅ। शहरȗ मȂ मकान की समÎयाएं हȅ, लोग इतनी महंगी ज़मीन लेकर 
मकान बना कर नहीं रह सकते, शहरȗ मȂ टर्ांसपोटर् की समÎया है, शहरȗ मȂ पेयजल की समÎया है, 
शहरȗ मȂ पािकȊ ग की समÎया उत्पन्न हो रही है, शहरȗ मȂ आवागमन क े साथ-साथ पिÅलक 
टर्ांसपोटर् की बहुत बड़ी
 समÎयाएं पैदा हो रही हȅ। जब तक उन सारी समÎयाओं का समाधान नहीं 
करȂगे, तब तक शहर िवकिसत नहीं हȗगे और वे िवकिसत शहर भारत क े िवकास की जीवन रेखा 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
137

नहीं बन सकȂ गे। भारत सरकार ने इन बातȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखकर जो बजट पेश िकया है, उसमȂ 
पहला काम िकया है - िनयोिजत शहरी िवकास पर िवशेष ध्यान। शहरȗ का जो िवकास है, वह 
िनयोिजत तरीके  से होना चािहए और उस िनयोिजत शहरी िवकास क े  िलए भारत सरकार ने इस 
बार क े अपने बजट मȂ 82,576.57 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करने का Ģावधान िकया है - जबिक 2013-14 
मȂ 1,468.20 करोड़ था - जो िक उस िनवेश का 55 परसȂट ज्यादा है। भारत सरकार ने अपने बजट 
मȂ शहरी आवास-िवकास क े िलए इस Ģकार का काम िकया है, उसके  अंतगर्त इस Ģकार की 
योजनाएं बनाई जाएंगी िक शहरȗ का एक कर्मबǉ रूप  से िवकास हो। आज शहरȗ का िवकास 
ब
ेतरतीब तरीके  से हो रहा है। शहरȗ का िवकास िजस Ģकार से हो रहा है और एक शहर न बनकर 
शहर म
Ȃ उप-शहर बनते जा रहे हȅ। शहरȗ का जो िवकास होना चािहए, वह िवकास उस तरीके  से 
नहीं हो रहा है, इसिलए भारत सरकार ने 82,576 करोड़ रुपए  इस साल करने का तय िकया है, 
तािक  14  बड़े शहर, जो 30 लाख से अिधक जनसंख्या क े हȅ, उनका और 100 अन्य शहरȗ का 
समुिचत रूप  से िवकास हो, उसके  िलए इस बात का Ģावधान िकया गया ह
ै। दूसरा बड़ा काम यह 
िकया गया है िक शहरी पिरवहन ËयवÎथा और िवकास क े पैमाने पर िवशेष ध्यान िदया गया है। 
आज सबसे बड़ी समÎया शहरȗ मȂ पिरवहन की है।  जो बसȂ चलती हȅ, उन सारी बसȗ मȂ बहुत भीड़ 
होती है, सुबह ऑिफस टाइम पर आने और जाने क
े  समय इतनी सारी समÎयाओं का सामना 
करना पड़ता है, उनको बैठने क े िलए Îथान भी नहीं िमलता। उसी Ģकार िजन शहरȗ मȂ मेटर्ो है, 
उन मेटर्ो मȂ भी यही िÎथित रहती है, इसी Ģकार आसपास क े गांवȗ से या छोटे शहरȗ से जो लोग 
बड़े शहरȗ
 मȂ आते हȅ...उनके  िलए इस Ģकार की समÎया रहती  है।  उसको दूर करने क े िलए 
भारत सरकार ने तय िकया है िक 30 लाख से अिधक 14 शहरȗ मȂ टर्ांिजट उन्मुƪ, टर्ांसिशप 
उन्मुƪ िवकास योजनाओं को शुरू  करȂगे। इसमȂ ई-बसेज़ क े िलए 1,300 करोड़ रुपयȗ का Ģावधान 
िकया गया है, िजसमȂ इन शहरȗ मȂ 1,300 ई- बसेज का भारत सरकार Ģाव
धान करेगी।  उसी 
Ģकार मेटर्ो क े िलए, जो िपछला Ģावधान 20 हजार 950 करोड़  रुपय े का था, उसको बढ़ाकर 
21,247.94 रुपय े कर िदया गया है।  इसका मतलब यह ह ै िक भारत सरकार यह चाहती है िक 
शहरȗ मȂ उनका िवकास इस ढंग से हो िक transit system क े माध्यम से ठीक Ģकार से िवकास हो 
जाए।  मेटर्ो का िवकास हो, ऐसे ही यातायात का िवकास हो, पॉÊयूशन न हो, इसिलए ई-बसेज़ 
की ओर ध्यान िदया गया है।  ई-बसȗ क
े  िलए भारत सरकार ने Ģधानमंतर्ी ई-बस योजना क े 
अंतगर्त 1,300 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया है और इस Ģकार से यह काम करके  उन्हȗने 20 
हजार 950 करोड़ रुपय े क े बजाय मेटर्ो क े िलए 21,247.94 करोड़ रुपय े तय िकए हȅ।   
महोदय, इसके  साथ-साथ शहरी
 जीवन क े िवकास को आरामदायक बनाने क े िलए और 
लोगȗ की पहुंच तक बढ़ाने क े िलए सरकार ने तीन योजनाओं का Ģावधान िकया है।  पहला, 
रेन्टल- इस Ģकार क े भवनȗ का िन मार्ण िकया जाए, उनको Ģोत्साहन िदया जाए िक जो लोग 
मकान नहीं खरीद सकते, जो ज्यादा िकराया देकर नहीं रह सकते, तो जो सरकार ने रेन्टल 
Îकीम तय की है, उसके  अंतगर्त वे अपना मकान लȂ और मकान लेकर रह सकȂ ।  पहली बार भारत 
सरकार ने rental hospitality scheme चालू की है।  मȅ इसका Îवागत करता हूं।  इसी Ģकार से दो 
काम और िकए हȅ।  साÃतािहक हाट लगाने का काम िकया है।  एक क्षेतर् से इतनी दूर जाक
र आप 
सामान नहीं ला सकते, ले जा नहीं सकते।  इस सुिवधा क े िलए साÃतािहक हाट लगाने का काम 
सरकार न
े िकया है और सौ शहरȗ मȂ इस Ģकार क े हाट क े कायर्कर्म हȗगे, तो लोगȗ को एक Îथान 
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

पर यह सुिवधा िमलेगी।  तीसरी बात यह है िक  सड़को पर Ëयापार करने वाले लोग, ठेला लगाने 
वाले लोग हȅ, तो हम जगह-जगह देखते हȅ और यहां तक िक क्नॉट Ãलेस मȂ देखते हȅ और सारे 
शहरȗ मȂ देखते हȅ िक िकस Ģकार से चाट का ठेला लगाते हȅ, कई कचौड़ी क े  ठेले लगाते हȅ, कई 
फलȗ क े ठेले लगाते हȅ, उन सब लोगȗ को सड़कȗ पर सुिवधाजनक Ëयापार करने की सुिवधा ĢाÃत 
हो सके  और एक सामान्य आदमी कम पूंजी लगाकर शहर मȂ अपनी कमाई कर सके  और शहर मȂ 
जो लोग हȅ, वे सÎती चीजȂ और स
ुिवधापूवर्क चीज़ सड़क पर जाकर ĢाÃत सक सकȂ, इसके  िलए 
यह तीसरी योजना भारत सरकार ने Ģारंभ की है और सरकार ने इसके  िलए तीन हजा र करोड़ 
रुपय े तय िकए हȅ।  शहरी कायाकÊप और सतत िवकास की अमृत योजना क े अंतगर्त 5 हजार 200 
करोड़ रुपय े से बढ़ाकर 8 हजार करोड़ रुपय े का िनणर्य िकया है।  इस Ģकार लगातार पैसा बढ़ 
रहा है और यह िंचतन क े साथ बढ़ रहा है िक शहरȗ मȂ जो िÎथित है और उसमȂ आवास और 
िवकास की जो िÎथित है।  
महोदय, मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक सरकार ने दो Ģकार क े लोगȗ क े िलए, 1 करोड़  
लोगȗ क े िलए आवास की ËयवÎथा करने का काम तय िकया है।  उनमȂ 3 हजार करोड़ रुपय े, जो 
अÊप आय वगर् क े लोग हȅ, उन लोगȗ को सÎता मका
न िमल सके , इसके  िलए, और 1 हजार करोड़ 
रुपय े मध्यम वगर् क े लोगȗ क े िलए मकान िमल सके , इसके  िलए तय िकया ह ै, तो आवास क े िलए 
तीन ÎकीÇस हो गईं।  पहली रेन्टल Îकीम है, िजसको सरकार बढ़ावा देगी िक कोई िकराए का 
मकान देने क े िलए मकान बनाए, उसके  िलए सहायता देगी, मकान को एक िनधार्िरत रेट पर 
िकराए पर दे, उसके  िलए Îथान देगी, तो जो कम आय वगर् वाले लोग हȅ, जो शहर मȂ आकर 
अपनी रोजी-रोटी कमाना चाहते हȅ और िजनके  कारण जीडीपी बढ़ती है, तो वे लोग यहां पर 
आकर काम कर सके , उनके  िलए यह Îकीम है।   
 दूसरा, बड़े-बड़े शहरȗ मȂ आम आदमी क े िलए मकान लेना, मध्यम वगर् क े िलए लेना, अÊप 
आय वगर् क े िलए लेना बहुत मुिÌकल काम है, इसिल
ए सरकार ने दो Îकीम, एक 3 हजार करोड़ 
की और दूसरी 1 हजार करोड़ की, 1 करोड़  मकान क े िलए तय की है। मȅ समझता हूं िक पहली 
बार इतना बड़ा कदम भारत सरका
र ने उठाया है। इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय को 
धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं, हमारे जो िवǄ मंतर्ी जी और हमारे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, िजनके  
नेतृत्व मȂ काम चल रहा है, उनको भी मȅ बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, शहरी कायाकÊप और सतत िवका
स – शहरȗ मȂ सीवरेज की 
समÎया है, शहरȗ मȂ पानी की समÎया है, शहरȗ मȂ पानी िनकासी की समÎया ह ै, शहरȗ मȂ पेयजल 
की समÎया है, शहरȗ मȂ िबजली क े कनेक्शन्स की समÎया है, इन समÎयाओं क े समाधान क े िलए 
अमृत योजना सरकार ने ĢारÇभ की है। हम अमृत काल मȂ हȅ, तो इस अमृत योजना क े िलए भी 
सरकार ने इतना बड़ा Ģावधान िकया
 है, िजससे िक सामान्य जो काम की चीजȂ हȅ, जो आम 
आदमी क े उपभोग की चीजȂ हȅ, उनमȂ उनको िदक्कत नहीं हो, ईज़ ऑफ िलिंवग हो, उसकी 
लाइफ, उसका जीवन सुखद Ģकार से चले, उसके  िलए ËयवÎथा की गई है।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने शपथ गर्हण की थी, उसके  बाद उन्हȗने Îवच्छ 
भारत िमशन का आगाज़ िकया था। आज हम देखते हȅ, पहले हम रेलवे मȂ जाते थे और सुबह-सुबह 
रेल जब शहरȗ क
े  बीच मȂ से या गांवȗ क े बीच मȂ से गुजरती थी, तो रेल की पटिरयȗ क े दोनȗ तरफ 
लोग बैठे हुए िदखाई देते हȅ। अब हम जाते हȅ, तो लोग िदखाई नहीं देते हȅ। जब हम सड़कȗ पर 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
139

जाते थे, तो कई लोग गाड़ी सड़क क े िकनारे खड़ी करके  खड़े हुए िदखाई देते थे, लेिकन अब वे 
िदखाई नहीं देते हȅ। अब लोगȗ मȂ एक संÎकार भी आया है, लोगȗ मȂ एक भावना भी आई है, लोगȗ मȂ 
एक Ģेरणा भी आई है। उसी क े अनुरूप  सरकार ने शहरȗ मȂ इस Ģकार का काम शुरू  िकया है, 
िजसमȂ उनको अमृत योजना का लाभ िमल सके । उपसभापित महोदय, इसके  िलए 5,000 करोड़ 
रुपय े आवंिटत िकए गए हȅ। िवǄ वषर् 2023-24 मȂ संशोिधत अनुमािनत 555 करोड़ की तुलना मȂ 95 
Ģितशत की वृिǉ की गई है। सरकार ने इसमȂ बहुत बड़ा काम िकया ह
ै। इसी Ģकार से शहरी गरीबȗ 
क े िलए आजीिवका क े िनमार्ण क े िलए बहुत बड़ा काम िकया है। इसके  िलए करीब 300 करोड़ 
रुपय े िदए गए हȅ। Îवयं सह
ायता समूह क े िनमार्ण क े माध्यम से 78 लाख शहरी गरीब पिरवारȗ को 
आिर्थक रूप  से सशƪ बनाया है। कौशल Ģिशक्षण और उǏिमता क े माध्यम से 38 लाख से अिधक 
आजीिवकाएं बनाई हȅ। साथ ही शहरȗ मȂ 2 हजार Îथाई आǛय Îथलȗ का िनमार्ण िकया है। मोदी 
सरकार यह िवÌवास िदलाती
 है िक इस योजना क े तहत शहरी गरीबȗ क े िलए िवǄीय और 
सामािजक समावेशन का उच्चतम Îतर सुिनÌचत करने क े िलए िनरन्तर काम करेगी। सरकार ने 
तय िकया ह
ै िक िजनके  पास रहने क े िलए मकान नहीं हȅ, तो 2 हजार आǛय Îथल बनाए जाएंगे, 
जहां पर लोग जाकर रह सकते हȅ। लोगȗ को पटरी पर सोने की आवÌयकता नहीं है, लोगȗ को 
रेलवे Ãलेट फामर् पर सोने की आवÌयकता नहीं है, लोगȗ को अब सड़क क े िकनारे िकसी पेड़ क े 
नीचे सोने की आवÌयकता नहीं है। भारत सरकार शहरȗ मȂ आǛय Îथल
 बनाएगी िक आप काम 
करो, वहां से सुबह नहा-धोकर जाओ, काम पर आओ, िफर वापस आकर, इन आǛय Îथलȗ मȂ 
आकर आप रुक  सकते हȅ, इस तरह की ËयवÎथा भारत सरकार ने की है। यह अनोखी ËयवÎथा है। 
इससे पहले इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा करने की बात िकसी सरकार न
े सोची नहीं थी। उपसभापित 
महोदय, इसिलए मȅ कहना चाहता हूं  िक िबना शहरी िवक ास क े काम नहीं होगा। जो सबसे बड़ी 
समÎया शहरȗ मȂ है, वह भूिम संबंधी िववाद की समÎया है।  
 उसने जीरो सेट बैक पर मकान बनाया है या पीछे बनाया है, आपने एन्कर्ोचमȂट की है या 
नहीं की है, आपने नगर िनगम से, नगर पिरषद से, िवकास Ģािधकरणȗ स
े अनुमित ĢाÃत की है या 
नहीं की है,  आपका पƺे का मकान है या कÅज़े का मकान है, आपका नाप सही है या नहीं है, इन 
सब बातȗ की बहुत बड़ी समÎया ह ै। उन समÎयाओं को दूर करने क े िलए सरकार ने शहरी भूिम क े 
अंतगर्त एक नीित िनधार्िरत करना तय िकया है। इसके  अंतगर्त सरकार मकानȗ का, जमीनȗ का 
जीपीएस िसÎटम से िडिजटलाइजेशन करके  एक नक्शा बनाएगी, उनका नाप करेगी और उनके  
Îवािमत्व
 का िनधार्रण करेगी। वह सारा िडिजटल होगा और उस आदमी को कहते ही यह सूचना 
ĢाÃत हो जाएगी िक यह मकान िकस Ģकार का है।  
महोदय, यह जो शहरȗ मȂ रोज-रोज तोड़-फोड़ होती है, रोज-रोज एन्कर्ोचमȂट की 
समÎयाएं होती हȅ, उन सारी समÎयाओं का समाधान करने क े िलए सरकार ने यह कदम उठाया 
ह
ै। उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक सरकार ने पहली बार क ेवल सोचना 
और सोचने क े बाद उस पर काम करना करके  िदखाया  है।  
महोदय, हम सब जानते हȅ िक आज शहरȗ मȂ िकस Ģकार की समÎयाएं पैदा हो रही हȅ। 
हम िदÊली मȂ भी जानते हȅ िक यहाँ पॉÊयुशन की समÎया है, हम अन्य शहरȗ क े बारे मȂ भी जानते 
हȅ िक वहाँ सीवरेज की समÎया है, हम जानते हȅ िक टर्ांसपोटर् की समÎया है, हम जानते हȅ िक 
सÎता टर्ांसपोटर् उपलÅध नहीं होता है, हम जानते हȅ िक जो लोग काम करने क े िलए शहर म
Ȃ आते 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

हȅ, उनके  िलए शौचालय की समÎया है, उनके  सामने पेय जल की समÎया है। महोदय, कोई गरीब 
आदमी मकान नहीं खरीद सकता है, इसिलए अगर सरकार का यह िवचार है िक 2047 तक 
िवकिसत भारत बनाना है, तो इसके  िलए िवकिसत शहर बनाने हȗगे। यǏिप शहरȗ क े िवकास की 
सारी िजÇमेदारी राज्य सरकारȗ की है, लेिकन भारत सरकार ने पहल करके , नीित आयोग से एक 
िनणर्य लेकर िक अगर
 हमȂ 2047 तक िवकिसत भारत बनाना है, तो िवकिसत भारत की जीवन 
रेखा भारत क े िवकिसत शहरȗ क े बीच मȂ से होकर िनकलेगी, इसिलए उस जीवन र ेखा को इतना 
मजबूत करो, इतना िवÌवÎत करो, इतना आयकर देने वाला करो, इतना रोजगार देने वाला करो 
िक ईज़ ऑफ डुइंग लाइफ मȂ आदमी आराम से जीवन जी सके , इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा करो िक 
वह कमा सके ।  
महोदय, इसमȂ इस चीज़ का भी ध्यान रखा गया है िक शहरȗ मȂ जनसंख्या बढ़ेगी, इसिलए 
शहरȗ
 का िवÎतार िकस Ģकार से हो और शहरȗ मȂ टर्ांसपोटर् िकस Ģकार से हो, शहरȗ मȂ लोगȗ को 
मकान िकस Ģकार क े िमलȂ और रोज
गार क ै से िमले। भारत सरकार ने इन सब बातȗ को ध्यान मȂ 
रखकर शहरी आवास और िवकास क े िलए 2024-25 क े बजट मȂ इनका िनधार्रण िकया है, उसमȂ 
क ु छ Ãवाइंट्स तय िकए गए हȅ, क ु छ मुǈे तय िकए हȅ, िजस पर आम जनता को जो तकलीफ होती 
ह
ै, उस तकलीफ को दूर करके  एक समगर् शहरी िवकास हो।  
उपसभापित महोदय, सरकार का िंचतन एक Ģकार का नहीं, बिÊक समगर् है। उन्हȗने कहा 
है, नीित आयोग ने कहा है िक गर्ामीण क्ष े तर्ȗ का िवकास हो, लेिकन गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ क े साथ-साथ 
शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ का समगर्, समुिचत और संतुिलत िवकास होना भी जरूरी है। उन शहरȗ का संतुिलत, 
समुिचत और समगर् िवकास करने क े िलए िकन-िकन चीजȗ की आवÌयकता है -  वे सभी उन्हȗने 
िनधार्िरत की हȅ और 2024-25 क े बजट म
Ȃ भारत सरकार क े शहरी िवकास मंतर्ालय ने उनके  िलए 
मापदंड तय िकए हȅ, उनके  िलए काम करने का तरीका भी तय िकया है। इस Ģकार से शहरȗ क े 
िलए एक संजीवनी देने का काम हुआ है। शहरी जीवन म Ȃ जो दुिवधाएं हȅ, जो तकलीफȂ हȅ, उन्हȂ दूर 
करके  एक संजीवनी देने का काम िकया गया है, तािक उसमȂ आने वाले लोग रोजगार कर सकȂ । 
महोदय, िकसी ने कÊपना नहीं की होगी िक छोटा सा काम है, सड़क पर खड़ा होकर ठेले लगाने 
वाला जो फर्ूट बेचता है, फर्ूट चाट बेचता है, कचौ
ड़ी बेचता है, समोसा बेचता है, चाट-चटनी 
बेचता है, वह भी उस काम को ठीक Ģकार से खड़े होकर कर सके , अपनी कमाई कर सके , अपने 
पिरवार का प
ेट भर सके  और रात को जाकर सरकार ने जो िवǛामालय बनाए हȅ, उन िवǛामालयȗ 
मȂ जाकर रह सके  - यह भी बहुत महत्वपूणर् बात है। वह सुबह Îनान करके , इज्जतपूवर्क बाहर 
िनकले और अपना काम करे।  
 यह िंचतन का एक तरीका ह
ै। अंत्योदय से लेकर अÆयुदय तक का तरीका है। अंत मȂ जो 
आदमी खड़ा है और जो शहर मȂ िकसी काम से आ रहा है, उसका अÆयुदय होना है, तो इसके  
िलए मȅ मनोहल लाल साहब
 को धन्यवाद दूँगा, क्यȗिक वे शहरी िवकास मंतर्ी हȅ। उनके  पास जो 
अपना गाँव का घर था, वह घर तो उन्हȗने डोनेट कर िदया। अब वे शहर मȂ आ गए हȅ। वैसे भी 
शहर मȂ ही रहते थे। वे पहले मुख्यमंतर्ी बनने से पहले भी शहर मȂ ही थे। शहर मȂ रहने वाले लोगȗ 
को जो िदक्कत है, जो दुिवधाएं हȅ, उन िदक्कतȗ और दुिवधाओं को स ुिवधाओं मȂ क ै से बदल सकते 
हȅ, इस Ģकार क े आठ सूतर्ी कायर्कर्म क े साथ शहरी िवकास योजना का भारत सरकार ने Ģावधान 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
141

िकया है। वह Ģावधान छोटे शहरȗ और 30 लाख की आबादी से बड़े शहरȗ क े िलए है। इसके  बाद 
इसका िवÎतार होगा।  
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय से एक िनवेदन करना चाहूँगा। उन्हȂ बड़ा 
अनुभव है। वे दस साल तक, चिलए, सवा नौ साल तक ही सही, मुख्यमंतर्ी रहे हȅ। उससे पहले 
स
ंगठन मंतर्ी भी रहे हȅ, तो उन्हȂ सारी बातȗ का ध्यान है। जब तक इसके  िलए नगरपािलकाएं, नगर 
पिरषद और िवकास Ģािधकरण, इनके  कानूनȗ मȂ संशोधन नहीं हȗगे और राज्य सरकारȗ और 
भारत सरकार का आपस मȂ समन्वय नहीं होगा, तब तक यह सारा पैसा एकदम समुिचत रूप  से 
लगकर 2047 तक की अमृत योजना क े अंतगर्त हम िवकिसत करȂ, यह म
ुिÌकल होगा। मȅ माननीय 
मंतर्ी महोदय से िनवेदन करना चाहूँगा िक वे क ृपया शहरी िवकास, िजन्हȂ अलग-अलग शहरȗ मȂ 
Îथानीय िनकाय
 कहते हȅ या क ु छ और कहते हȅ, उन सारे मंितर्यȗ को बुलाकर, एक बार सभा की 
जाए िक हम इतना बड़ा पैसा - 86,000 करोड़ रुपय े दे रहे हȅ, तो उनका समुिचत िवकास हो। 
 म
ȅ दूसरी बात कहना चाहूँगा िक शहरȗ मȂ भूिम अिधगर्हण का काम बहुत मुिÌकल काम है। 
शहरȗ क े आसपास जो िकसान रहते हȅ, उन िकसानȗ की भूिम पर ये कॉओपरेिटव सोसाइटीज़ 
िमलकर, पƺे काटकर, छोटी-छोटी गिलयाँ बनाकर, उनमȂ मकान बनाने स
े समÎयाएं पैदा हो रही 
हȅ। उनमȂ नाली की ËयवÎथा नहीं है। उनमȂ डर्ेनेज की ËयवÎथा नहीं है। अभी हम देखȂ, तो औसत से 
कम बरसात है, लेिकन टेलीिवजन पर रोज िकसी-न-िकसी शहर को िदखा देते हȅ िक 15 िमनट 
की बािरश मȂ सड़क पर पानी आ गया। यह पानी िनकासी की ËयवÎथा, डर्ेनेज की ËयवÎथा होनी 
चािहए।  
तीसरी बात, ये बड़े शहर िवÎतृत होते जा रहे हȅ, ये सीधे खड़े नहीं हो रहे हȅ। जब तक 
शहर सीधा खड़ा नहीं होगा, तब तक एक शहर क े रूप  मȂ उसकी इकाई नहीं बढ़ेगी, िफर वह 
उपनगरȗ म
Ȃ बन जाएगी। उपनगरȗ क े कारण से शहरी क्षेतर् का समुिचत िवकास संभव नहीं होगा, 
इसिलए मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय से िनवेदन करू ँगा िक राज्य सरकारȗ से बात कर। जब तक हम 
इस सारी योजना को कायार्िन्वत करने क
े  िलए एक Ëयापक कायर्-योजना Ģारंभ नहीं करȂगे, तब 
तक यह काम संभव नहीं होगा। मुझे आशा है, क्यȗिक माननीय मंतर्ी जी खूब अनुभवशील हȅ। वे इस 
तरफ Ģयत्न करȂगे। जो इन्हȂ इतना पैसा िमला है, मȅ तो समझता हूँ िक शायद ही िकसी शहरी 
िवकास मंतर्ी को इतना सारा पैसा िमला है, तो इतना सारा पैसा िमलने क े कारण से वे इस काम 
को आगे बढ़ाएंगे। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, भारत सरकार का िंचतन देिखए। वे एक िदन 
बजट पेश करते हȅ, दो िदन क े बाद नीित आयोग की मीिंटग होती
 है। नीित आयोग की मीिंटग क े 
बाद सारे काम तय हो जाते हȅ। इस Ģकार की मीिंटग, जो 25 साल तक भारत का िवकास करके , 
अÆयुदय की ओर ले जाएगी और हम वैभव की तरफ राÍटर् को ले जाने की कोिशश करȂगे, मुझे 
दुभार्ग्य से यह कहना पड़ता है िक उसका भी हमारे Ģितपक्ष क े  लोगȗ ने बिहÍकार कर िदया। यह 
सबसे बड़ी दुिवधा की बात है। वे हार को पचा नहीं पा रहे हȅ, हार को हजम नहीं कर पा रहे हȅ। हार 
तो हज़म करनी पड़ती है। माननीय जयराम जी, जब तक हार को पचाएंगे नहीं, तब तक 
िबलिबलाते रहȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी जयराम
 रमेश : हार िकसकी हुई है? हार 400 पार की हुई है। 
 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी धनÌयाम ितवाड़ी :  हार उनकी हुई है, जो यहां बजट पेश नहीं कर सके ।  हार उनकी हुई है, 
जो Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े बोलने मȂ बाधा Ģकट करते हȅ।  हार उनकी हुई, जो Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े बोलने 
क े समय वॉक आउट करके  जाते हȅ।  उपसभापित महोदय, हार उनकी हुई है।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  आप िवषय पर बोलȂ। 
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी :  इसिलए थोड़ा स
ंतुलन बनाए रखȂ।  लोकतंतर् मȂ जय और पराजय एक 
िसक्के  क े दो पहलू हȅ।  इसिलए शहरी िवकास मȂ नीित  आयोग मȂ आप इस Ģकार की अड़चन नहीं 
डालȂ और उसमȂ सरकार का सहयोग करने की कोिशश करȂ।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने बार-बार 
कहा है िक हम अब एक दल क े िलए नहीं हȅ, हम देश क े िलए हȅ।  जब माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी आपको 
बार-बार अपील कर रहे हȅ िक हम दल क े िलए नहीं, बिÊक द
ेश क े िलए हȅ, तो आप दलदल से 
ऊपर उिठए और कमल की तरह िखिलए।  ऐसा िखलȂगे, तो भारत क े शहर भी िखलȂगे और भारत 
क े शहर भी िखलȂगे, तो भारत क े िवकास की जीवन रेखा भी िखलेगी।  जब जीवन र
ेखा िखलेगी, 
तो भारत क े शहर दौड़Ȃगे और भारत क े शहर दौड़Ȃगे, तो भारत का िवकास दोड़ेगा।  जब भारत का 
िवकास दौड़ेगा, तो दुिनया
 देखेगी और भारत की जीडीपी इसी Ģकार बढ़ती रहेगी।  2047 तक  
शहरȗ की जीवन रेखा क े माध्यम से हम भारत को एक िवकिसत और समृǉ भारत की ओर ले 
जाएंगे।  इसमȂ  हमारे शहरȗ का योगदान होगा।  इसी िहसाब से इस बजट मȂ Ģावधान िकए गए ह ȅ।  
इसी बात क े साथ मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी को उसके  िलए धन्यवाद देता हूं और अपनी बात समाÃत 
करता हूं।  धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  धन्यवाद, माननीय Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी।  माननीय Ǜी अजय माकन जी।   
 
Ǜी अजय माकन (कनार्टक) :  धन्यवाद
, उपसभापित महोदय।  शहरी िवकास मंतर्ालय से मेरा 
बड़ा पुराना नाता रहा है। मȅ यूपीए 1 मȂ शुरू  क े तीन वषर् एमओएस क े तौर पर और आिखर क े दो 
वषर् बतौर क ैिबनेट िमिनÎटर रहा।  मेरी कोिशश रहेगी िक जो मȅने पांच वषर् मȂ सीखा है - मȅ तथ्यȗ 
क े आधार पर क ु छ क ंÎटर्िक्टव स
ुझाव और िकर्िटकल एनािलिसस करूं ।   Purely मेरी कोिशश 
होगी िक पोिलिटकल लाइन से ऊपर उठकर शहरȗ का िकस तरीके  से समुिचत िवकास हो सके , 
उसके  बारे म
Ȃ मȅ क ु छ बातȂ यहां पर रख सकूं । 
 उपसभापित महोदय, हमारा देश बहुत तेजी से शहरीकृ त हो रहा है।  जब हम तेजी से 
शहरीकृ त कहते हȅ, तो यहां पर छोटे शहरȗ की संख्या बढ़ती जा रही है और बड़े शहरȗ क े अंदर 
आबादी तेजी से और आती जा रही है।  ये दोनȗ चीज़Ȃ साथ-साथ हो रही ह
ȅ।  जब हम यह कहते हȅ 
िक छोटे शहरȗ की संख्या बढ़ती जा रही है, तो 2001 मȂ हमारे देश मȂ 5,161 शहर थ े और 2011 क े 
सȂसेस मȂ ये 7,939 शहर बन गए।  यानी सȂसेस क े अनुसार 10 वषर् मȂ हमारे देश क े अंदर 4,000 नए 
शहर आ गए, तो जहां पर हमारे नए शहर बन रहे हȅ, वहां पर पुराने शहर िदÊली, म ुÇबई और 
बड़े-बड़े टीयर 1 टीयर 2 शहरȗ क े अंदर आबादी बढ़ती जा रही है, लेिकन जब हम तेजी से 
शहरीकृ त हो रहे हȅ, तो हमारे सामने इन शहरȗ को मैनेज करने की चुनौितयां सबसे बड़ी हȅ।  जब 
चुनौितयां सबसे बड़ी हȅ, तो हमȂ यह समझना पड़ेगा िक हमȂ िकस वगर् क े िलए काम करने की 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
143

जरूरत है और हम िकसके  िलए काम करȂ।  यह हमȂ सबसे पहले समझने की जरूरत है, जो िक मȅ 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी को कहना चाहता हूं।  कई बार हम इन सब चीज़ȗ मȂ भूल जाते हȅ और कई बार 
हमारे सामने ये सब चीज़Ȃ धुंधली हो जाती हȅ।     
 उपसभापित महोदय, अगर
 सही मायने मȂ देखȂ, तो हमारे शहर की आत्मा वे लोग हȅ, जो 
शहर क े िनमार्णकतार् हȅ, शहर क े मजदूर हȅ, शहर मȂ काम करने वाले, फ ैक्टरीज़ मȂ काम करने 
वाले लोग हȅ।  वे सुबह घर से िनकलते हȅ और शाम को जो कमाते हȅ, वह खाते हȅ।  वे हमारे शहर 
को बनाते हȅ।  शहर क े अंदर यही लोग गरीब हȅ।  यही लोग शहर क े अंदर झुिग्गयȗ मȂ रहते हȅ, 
unauthorized colonies मȂ रहते हȅ, ÎलÇस मȂ रहते हȅ।  गांव क े अंदर गरीब तो शायद एक बार 
मरता है, लेिकन शहर क े अंदर रहने वाले ये गरीब रोज मरते ह
ȅ।  क्यȗ रोज मरते हȅ, क्यȗिक वे 
देखते हȅ िक यहां पर शहर क े अंदर वे गरीबी की हालत मȂ हȅ और सबसे अमीर लोग भी उनके  
सामने वहां पर रहते हȅ।  जब वे अपने आप को शहर मȂ रहने वाले सबसे अमीर लोगȗ से कÇपेयर 
करते हȅ, तो शहर क े अंदर गरीब और िनÇन वगर् क े जो लोग हȅ, वे रोज एक तरीके  से मृत्यु को पाते 
हȅ।  ऐसा हम लोगȗ का मानना है और इसिलए हमȂ यह सबसे ज्यादा समझने की जरूरत  है।   
  उपसभापित महोदय, मुझे बीच मȂ 2009 मȂ Home Affairs क े अंदर MoS क े रूप  मȂ 
census operations को देखने का मौका िमला।  जब वे census operations खत्म हो गए, उसके  
बाद जब मȅ वापस Housing Ministry क े अंदर आया, तो house listing और housing का जो 
census है, वह मेरे सामने लाया गया।  जब रिजÎटर्ार जनरल ने इसके  बारे मȂ बताया, तो उन्हȗने 
कहा िक हमारे देश क े अंदर अलग-अलग तरीके  क े शहर हȅ।  हमने कहा िक अलग-अलग तरीके  
क े क्या शहर हुए?  हमन े पूछा िक क्या ये population क े आधार पर हȅ?  उन्हȗने कहा िक ये 
population क े आधार पर नहीं है, ये census towns हȅ, ये statutory towns हȅ, ये urban 
agglomerations हȅ, ये urban extensions हȅ।  ये चार अलग-अलग िकÎम क े towns हȅ।  मȅने 
पूछा िक ये चार अलग-अलग िकÎम क े towns क ै से हो गए?  मȅने पूछा िक आप तो यह कह रहे हȅ 
िक हमारे देश क े अंदर 7,939 क ु ल शहर हȅ, तो ये अलग-अलग क ै से हो गए?  उन्हȗने कहा िक 
इन 7,939 मȂ से मातर् 4,000 towns statutory towns हȅ।  यानी 7,939 towns मȂ से मातर् 4,000 
क े अंदर urban local bodies हȅ, बाकी सारे शहरȗ क े अंदर urban local bodies नहीं हȅ, गर्ाम 
पंचायतȂ हȅ।  हमने कहा िक ये गर्ाम पंचायतȂ िकसिलए हȅ?  हमने Housing Ministry वालȗ से बात 
की िक ये गर्ाम पंचायतȂ िकसिलए हȅ, यहाँ पर urban local bodies िकसिलए हȅ, यहाँ 
नगरपािलकाएँ िकसिलए हȅ, क्यȗिक कई ऐसे शहर हȅ, िजनकी population 5-5 लाख है, िफर भी 
वहाँ पर नगरपािलका नहीं है, वहाँ पर गर्ाम पंचायत है।  पता चला िक कहीं पर, िकसी शहर क े 
अंदर उनको सूट नहीं करता िक वे urban local bodies क े अंदर shift हो जाएँ, क्यȗिक urban 
local bodies मȂ आने क े बाद property tax लगेगा, urban local bodies मȂ आने क े बाद आपको 
building byelaws को follow करके  मकान planned तरीके  से बनाना पड़ेगा, आपको पानी का 
भी पैसा देना पड़ सकता है।  उसके  अंदर सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक urban local bodies क े अंदर 
आने क े बाद सȂटर की जो grants हȅ, Îटेट की जो grants हȅ, उनमȂ एकदम से कटौती हो जाती 
है, उनमȂ कोई पैसा नहीं िमलता।  यहाँ पर आकर मुझे हैरानी होती है िक हमारे देश क े अंदर जहाँ 
सबसे ज्यादा जरूरी है, वहाँ पर हमारा पैसा नहीं पहुँचता, हमारा पैसा नहीं आ पाता।  जब हम 
लोगȗ ने 2011-12 मȂ Empowered Committee बनाई, तो उसने कहा िक हमारे देश क े अंदर 
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

शहरȗ मȂ 2021-22 तक 38 लाख करोड़ की जरूरत  है और 38 लाख करोड़ की जो जरूरत है, हमȂ 
GDP का 1.1 परसȂट शहरȗ क े िलए देना पड़ेगा।  उस वƪ, 2011-12 मȂ यह 0.7 परसȂट था।  आज 
वह जरूर  बढ़ा है, जैसा अभी कहा, लेिकन अभी भी 0.7 परस Ȃट है।  GDP बढ़ा, तो उसके  0.7 
परसȂट क े िहसाब से वह बढ़ता गया, लेिकन वहाँ पर 0.7 परसȂट से जब तक वह 1.1 परसȂट तक 
नहीं जाएगा, उसके  अंदर हम लोग और पैसा नहीं डालȂगे, हमारे ये शहर और तेजी से िवकिसत 
नहीं हो पाएँगे।   
 अब बात इस पर आती है िक हमारे शहर क े अंदर क्यȗ ऐसा मेरा मानना है िक हमारी आँखȂ 
धुँधली हो जाती हȅ।  हम सब लोग यह मानȂगे िक हमारे शहरȗ क े अंदर सबसे बड़ी समÎया आवास 
की है।  यहाँ पर गरीब लोग िकस तरीके  से रहȂ, यह सबसे बड़ी समÎया है।  उसके  बाद transport 
भी है, सफाई भी है, sewage की भी है, सब चीजȗ की समÎया है, लेिकन आवास को मȅ सबसे 
Ģमुख मानता हूँ।  वही रिजÎटर्ार जनरल जब presentation दे रहे थे, तो उन्हȗने कहा िक हमारे 
पूरे देश क े अंदर urban areas मȂ 11 करोड़ census houses हȅ।  11 करोड़ census houses मȂ से 
1.11 करोड़, यानी 111 लाख घर urban areas मȂ खाली हȅ और हमारे देश क े अंदर 1 करोड़ 37 
लाख slums हȅ।  मुझे यह समझ मȂ नहीं आता िक हमारे urban areas क े अंदर 1 करोड़ 11 लाख 
मकान खाली हȅ और 1 करोड़ 37 लाख slums वहीं पर, उसी जगह क े ऊपर बने हुए हȅ, तो इसका 
मतलब क्या है!  इसका मतलब यह है िक हमारी सरकारȗ की priorities, Ģाथिमकताएँ सही नहीं 
हȅ। 
 
6:00 P.M. 
 
इसका मतलब यह है िक हम लोगȗ क े यहाँ पर - यह अभी की बात नहीं है, यह लगातार चलती आ 
रही चीज है, जो िक लगातार हो रही है। इसिलए हमारा यह मानना है िक हमारी सरकारȗ को - 
राज्य सरकारȗ को या क ेन्दर् सरकार को इसकी Ģाथि
 मकता देखनी पड़ेगी िक िकस तरीके  से, 
हमारे जो पैसे हȅ, उनका इÎतेमाल सही जगह पर हो भी रहा है या नहीं;  हम जो जमीनȂ दे रहे हȅ, 
वे कहीं िबÊडसर् की जेबȗ मȂ तो नहीं जा रही हȅ और उनका इÎतेमाल ÎलÇस को रोकने क े िलए हो 
रहा है या नहीं हो रहा है।   इस चीज को देखने की जरूरत है।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, लगभग 10 वष र् पहले यहाँ पर 'Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना' की जो 
शुरुआत  की गई है, उसके  बारे मȂ मȅ आगे बात करना चाहूँगा और मȅ यह भी बताना चाहूँगा िक 
िकस Ģकार से इसको और बेहतर बनाया जा सकता था।  मȅने अपने समय मȂ ' राजीव आवास 
योजना' का पूरा Ģारूप तैयार िकया
 था।  उसमȂ इन्हȗने क ु छ बदलाव िकए हȅ, उसका नुकसान 
िकस तर
ीके  से शहर क े अन्दर गरीब लोगȗ को हुआ है, वह मȅ बताना चाहूँगा।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, ' Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना' क े 4 verticals हȅ।   इनमȂ जो सबसे 
पहला vertical है, वह सबसे महत्वपूणर् है - In-situ slum rehabilitation.  यानी जहाँ पर Îलम है, 
यह वहीं पर बनाया जाना चािहए।  हमारा यह मानना ह
ै िक जहाँ पर ÎलÇस हȅ, जहाँ पर हमारे 1 
करोड़, 37-38 लाख ÎलÇस 2011 क े census मȂ थे, अब यह अनुमान लगाया जा रहा है िक वे बढ़ 
कर 1 करोड़, 88 लाख हो गए हȗगे।  इसिलए यह सबसे महत्
वपूणर् vertical है।  जहाँ पर हमारे In-
situ slum rehabilitation है, वहाँ पर जो Îकीम लागू िक गई है, उसमȂ मातर् 1 लाख रुपय े सȂटर 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
145

की गर्ांट जाती है।  दूसरा vertical  credit-linked subsidy scheme है।  यह bank loan subsidy 
है, जो िक interest पर िदया जाता है।  तीसरा है - affordable housing in partnership, िजसमȂ 
private players को , builders को सीधे-सीधे डेढ़ लाख रुपय े िदये जाते हȅ।  चौथा है - 
beneficiary-led construction, िजसमȂ beneficiary को डेढ़ लाख रुपय े िदये जाते हȅ।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, जब हमने 'राजीव आवास योजना' लागू की थी, उसके  अन्दर हम 
लोगȗ ने सारे ÎटेकहोÊडसर् से बात की थी।  तब उन्हȗने सबसे पहले यह कहा था िक आप जो 1 
लाख
 रुपय े देते हȅ, उससे क्या होता है?  आप जो 1 लाख रुपय े शहर क े अन्दर मकान बनाने क े 
िलए दे रहे हȅ, उस 1 लाख रुपय े स
े शहर क े अन्दर कौन मकान बना पाएगा?  1 लाख रुपय े से तो 
एक कमरे का फशर् भी नहीं डाला जा सकता है।  इस तरीके  से यह एक मजाक है।  उस वƪ 
हमारी Îकीम यह थी -  whole-slum, whole city.  यानी िक हम प
ूरे क े पूरे Îलम को एक साथ 
लȂगे, पूरे शहर को एक साथ लȂगे।  पहले slum-free city plan बनाया जाएगा, उसको approve 
कराया जाएगा और उसके  बाद पूरे क े पूरे ÎलÇस को िकस तरीके  से improve िकया जाए, उस 
िहसाब से काम होगा।  हम लोगȗ ने हरेक क े िलए Central Assistance कम
 से कम ढाई लाख 
रुपए  बड़े शहरȗ क े अन्दर रखे थे, 3 लाख रुपय े छोटे शहरȗ क े अन्दर रखे थे और नॉथर्-ईÎट क े 
अन्दर और hilly areas क े अन्दर कम से कम 4 लाख रुपय े रखे थे।  यह मȅ 2013 की बात कर रहा 
हूँ।  आज से पहले गरीब लोगȗ की मदद करने की हम लोगȗ की यह सोच और यह पहल थी।  
दुभार्ग्य से अब वह बढ़ने की जगह कम हो गया है।  'राजीव आवास योजना' मȂ उस वƪ हम लोगȗ 
ने जो ढाई
 लाख से 4 लाख रुपय े रखे थे, अब वह कम होकर 1 से डेढ़ लाख रुपय े रह गया है।  मȅ 
यह अनुरोध करना चाहूँगा िक मंतर्ी जी को इसे देखना चािहए।  अगर सही मायने मȂ आप गरीबȗ 
की मदद करना चाहते हȅ और 1 लाख रुपय े देकर आप यह सोचȂ िक 1 लाख रुपय े क े अन्दर एक 
मकान बन गया, तो उतने रुपय े मȂ तो एक नया मकान बनाने की बात तो  दूर रही, एक मकान का 
िरपेयर भी नहीं हो सकता है, तो इन्हȂ गरीब लोगȗ और ÎलÇस को मदद करनी चािहए।  
 दूसरा फकर् यह है िक पहले हम लोगȗ क े समय मȂ Îटेट गवनर्मȂट्स को िमिनमम िकतना 
परसȂट द
ेना है और िकतना परसȂट urban local bodies को देना है, यह हम लोग तय करते थे।  
25 परसȂट Îटेट गवनर्मȂट्स को देना है, 10 परसȂट urban local bodies को देना है, यह हम तय 
करते थे।  दुभार्ग्य से वे पूरे क े पूरे क ंडीशंस हटा िदए गए।   इससे यह हो रहा है िक जो पैसा सȂटर 
से जाता है, वही पैसा उसके  पास जाता है, उसके  अलावा उसको कोई और पैसा नहीं िमलता ह
ै।  
तो हम यह जो कहते हȅ िक कागजȗ क े  अन्दर हमारे मकान बन रहे हȅ, तो सही मायने मȂ वे मकान 
नहीं बन रहे हȅ।  मȅ यह क ै से कहता हूँ, यह मȅ आपको अभी बताता हूँ और अभी क्वेÌचंस क े इनके  
जो रेÎपȗस िमले हȅ, मȅ उनके  आधार पर बताना चाहूँगा।  
 इनका यह कहना है िक लगभग 1 करोड़ 8 लाख
 मकान sanction िकए गए हȅ, िजनमȂ से 
लगभग 83 या 85 लाख मकान बन चुक े हȅ।  उस 83 या 85 लाख मȂ से िसफर् 1.63 लाख मकान in-
situ slum rehabilitation क े तहत ÎलÇस को िमले हȅ। जो दो परसȂट स
े कम, यानी मुिÌकल से डेढ़ 
परसȂट ÎलÇस क े िलए गया है।  Department-Related Par liamentary Standing Committee 
क े सामने िमिनÎटर्ी ने एक पैरा बोला, िजसको मȅ पढ़ कर सुनाना चाहता हूँ। “In written reply 
submitted to the Com
mittee about the housing shortage, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs has stated that the housing shortage estimated by the Technical Group 
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

is 1.88 crore over a period of 2012-2017.  It  had further submitted that in India, slum 
decadal growth rate is 34 per cent.”  यह िमिनÎटर्ी खुद कह रही है।  हर 10 वषर् मȂ 34 परसȂट 
Îलम बढ़ रहे हȅ, लेिकन यहाँ पर in-situ slum rehabilitation मȂ टोटल का मातर् 1.63 परसȂट खचर् 
िकया गया है, जो िक गलत है।  आगे कहा है, “Also, two million non-slum urban poor 
households are proposed to be covered under this Mission.  Hence, the total housing 
shortage, envisaged to be addressed through the new Mission, is 20 million. ” यह उस 
वƪ Department-Related Parli
amentary Standing Committee को कहा।  मȅने कहा िक in-
situ slum rehabilitation क े िलए टोटल का 1.63 परस Ȃट है, तो पैसा कहाँ जा रहा है?  िकसके  
पास जा रहा है? Beneficiary-Led Construction (BLC) का जो vertical है, उसमȂ 60 परस Ȃट 
जा रहा है।  अब जो Beneficiary-Led Construction है, उसमȂ जो सबसे महत्वपूणर् क ं डीशन है, 
िजसको फ ुलिफल करना है, वह यह है िक जमीन उसकी अपनी होनी चािहए।  अब मुझे यह 
बताइए िक अगर शहर मȂ िजसकी जमीन है, वह गरीब क ै से हो गया?  
शहर मȂ जमीन को own 
करने वाला शहरी गरीब क ै से हो गया और 60 परस Ȃट उसके  पास क ै से जा रहा है?  दू सरी तरफ 
शहर क े अंदर िजसके  पास अपनी जमीन नहीं ह
ै और वह सरकारी जमीन पर जबदर्Îती कहीं पर 
कÅजा करके  अपनी पन्नी डाल कर झुग्गी बना कर रह रहा है और अगर उसको इसका फायदा 
नहीं िमल रहा ह
ै, तो िफर िकसी और को क ै से िमलेगा?  आज  सबसे बड़ा ĢÌन यह उठता है।  
इसिलए मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक आप पैसे खचर् कर रहे हȅ, लेिकन आप सबसे पहले पर-यूिनट 
कम पैसा खचर् कर रहे हȅ और वह मोिनटर नहीं हो रहा है, िजसके  कारण स
े वह सही मायने मȂ 
उसको नहीं िमल रहा है।  इसमȂ दूसरी सबसे बड़ी कमी यह है िक िजसको सही मायने मȂ 
beneficiary होना चािहए, जो असल मȂ ÎलÇस हȅ, वहाँ पर प
ैसा नहीं जा रहा है।  इसमȂ 60 परसȂट 
वही beneficiary हȅ, िजनके  पास अपनी जमीन है।  अगर 60 परस Ȃट ऐसे beneficiaries को पैसा 
िमलेगा, तो आप समझ सकते हȅ िक िकस तरीके  से यह Tier-I, Tier-II, Tier-III िसटीज़, जहाँ पर 
मैिक्समम ÎलÇस हȅ, उनको इसका फायदा िमलेगा?  वहाँ पर कहीं पर भी इसका पैसा नहीं जा 
रहा है।   
 इसके  अलावा Credit-Linked Incentive Scheme क े अंतगर्त 30 परस Ȃट लाभाथीर् हȅ, 
लेिकन उनको भी बȅक लोन्स मȂ interest subsidy िमलती है।  उसको अपना मकान बनाने क े िलए 
नहीं िमलता है, बिÊक बȅक लोन सिÅसडी तब िमलती है, जब उसको बȅक लोन िमलेगा।  उसको 
ब
ȅक लोन तो तब िमलेगा, जब उसकी अपनी जमीन होगी।  उसको बȅक लोन तब िमलेगा, जब वह 
िकसी Ģाइवेट िबÊडर से खरीदेगा।  इसके  अंदर चौथा है AHP.  इसके  अंतगर्त Housing in 
Partnership Scheme Îकीम है, उसमȂ बाकी क े जो 8-9 परसȂट हȅ, वे Housing in
 Partnership 
Scheme क े तहत Ģाइवेट िबÊडसर् को जाते हȅ।  सरकार सीधे-सीधे Ģाइवेट िबÊडसर् को पैसा देती 
है और वे मकान बनाते हȅ तथा लाभाथीर् उनसे खरीदता है।  इससे या तो Ģाइवेट िबÊडसर् को 
फायदा हो रहा है या एमआईजी या उससे ऊपर क
े  क्लास क े लोगȗ को फायदा हो रहा है।  सȂसस 
क े अनुसार िजनके  1 करोड़  11 लाख मकान ऑलरेडी खाली पड़े हȅ, उन्हीं लोगȗ क े िलए  मकान 
बनाए जा रहे हȅ।  इसिलए जो सही मायने मȂ शहरी गरीब है, िजसको टारगेट िकया जाना चािहए, 
जो शहर की आत्मा है, जैसा िक मȅने पहले कहा, िजनको सही मायने मȂ मदद िमलनी चािहए, 
उनको कोई मदद नहीं िमल रही है और इससे उनको कोई फायदा नहीं हो रहा है।  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
147

 अब मȅ एक बात इसी क े संदभर् मȂ िदÊली क े मसले पर कहना चाहूँगा।  मȅने पूरी िलÎट देखी, 
अभी जैसा िक मȅने बताया िक इसके  अंतगर्त करीब 1 करोड़ 8 लाख मकान sanction हुए हȅ और 
उनमȂ से लगभग 83 या 85 लाख मकान बन चुक े हȅ, लेिकन  िपछले 10 वषș मȂ िदÊली को मातर् 29 
हजार मकान िमले हȅ। अब या तो यह हो सकता है िक िकसी कारणवश इन्हȗने िदया नहीं या यह 
हो सकता है िक िदÊली वालȗ ने मांगा ही नहीं।  खƺर साहब जब इसका जवाब दȂ, तो मȅ यह 
चाहूंगा िक वे बताएं िक क्या िदÊली वालȗ न
े मांगा ही नहीं या इन्हȗने िदया नहीं और उन्हȗने मांगा, 
िफर भी नहीं िमला? 
 उपसभापित महोदय, अब मȅ शहरी गरीब मȂ जो सबसे महत्वपूणर्, रेहड़ी पटरी वाले हȅ, 
उनके  बारे मȂ कहना चाहूंगा।  यह बहुत महत्वपूणर् है।  मȅ आपको बताना चाहूंगा िक रेहड़ी पटरी 
आजीिवका संरक्षण कानून मेरे ǎारा बन
ाया गया था और मȅने इसे क ैिबनेट से पास कराया, िजसको 
आज पूरे देश क े अंदर इंÃलीमȂट िकया
 जा रहा है।  दुःख की बात यह है िक एक तरफ जब 
"Ģधानमंतर्ी Îविनिध योजना" क े तहत रेहड़ी पटरी वालȗ को पैसे िदए जा रहे हȅ, वहीं दूसरी तरफ 
िजनको "Ģधा
नमंतर्ी Îविनिध योजना" क े तहत लोन से पैसे िमले हȅ, उन्हीं को उजाड़ा जा रहा है।  
उससे भी ज्यादा दुःख की बात यह है िक मेरे पास यह पूरी िलÎट है, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की 
कांÎटीǷूएंसी से उनको हटाया जा रहा है।  वाराणसी क े अंदर, राम नगर, शीतला घाट, लंका, 
सारनाथ, िभखारीपुर, य
े पांच माकȃट्स हȅ, जहां पर माकȃ ट क े अंदर "Ģधानमंतर्ी Îविनिध योजना" 
क े तहत पैसे िमले।  वह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की कांÎटीǷूए ंसी है और वहीं पर पैसे िमलने क े बाद 
उनको हटाया जा रहा है, जबिक रेहड़ी पटरी आजीिवका संरक्षण कानून की धारा 3, उप धारा 3, 
दोनȗ क े दोनȗ यह कहते हȅ िक िकसी को हटाया नहीं जा सकता, जब उसको सिर्टिफके ट ऑफ 
व
Ȃिंडग िमल जाए। जब सिर्टिफके ट्स ऑफ वȂिंडग िमल गए, तो Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की कांÎटीǷूएंसी 
से ही उन लोगȗ को क ै से हटाया गया, मȅ उÇमीद करूं गा िक खƺर साहब इस चीज़ पर भी Ģकाश 
डालȂग
े, क्यȗिक यह Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का मामला है, िजसे मȅ यहां पर उठा रहा हूँ। 
िदÊली क े अंदर दिक्षणपुरी पानी की टंकी, पीपल चौक, िवराट चौक, पुÍप िवहार 
मदनगीर, यह मȅ उन जगहȗ क े नाम ले रहा हूँ, जहां पर "Ģधानमंतर्ी Îविनिध योजना" क े तहत 
लोगȗ को लोन िमल गया, सिर्टिफके ट्स ऑफ वȂिंडग िमल गए, लेिकन बावजूद उसके  उन लोगȗ 
को वहां से हटाया जा रहा है।  डाबरी रोड माकȃ ट, मंगलापुरी माकȃ ट, करोल बाग, अजमल खान 
रोड और लाजपत नगर क े अंदर से भी उन लोगȗ को हटाया जा रहा है। कोलकाता क े अंदर 
बेरटर्ाम Îटर्ीट, बेहाला टेक्नोपोिलस, सेक्टर 3 न्यू टाउन, साÊट लेक; भोपाल क े अंदर िमसरोद 
एÎटेट, बरखेड़ा, पठानी
 बाजार; उǄराखंड क े अंदर गांधी पाकर्, बस अƿा माकȃ ट, समोसा 
माकȃ ट, िनरंजनपुर मंडी, क्लेमȂट टाउन, भंडारी बाग, मȅ ये सब नाम इसिल
ए ले रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक 
देश भर क े अंदर ऐसा हो रहा है।  मȅने इन सारी माकȃट्स क े नाम कल से इकƻे करने शुरू  िकए हȅ।  
देश भर क े अंदर लोगȗ का यह कहना है िक हमȂ पैसे नहीं चािहए, हमȂ सुरक्षा चािहए, जो सुरक्षा 
रेहड़ी पटरी वालȗ को हमारे कानून ने दी है।   
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक जो आदमी रेहड़ी पटर
ी 
लगाता है, उससे हर रोज क े िहसाब से पुिलस पैसे लेती है, उससे लोकल बॉडी पैसे लेती है, वह 
िजसकी जगह क
े  ऊपर होता है, वह पैसे लेता है और माकȃ ट क े अंदर जो Ģधान होता है, वह पैसे 
लेता है।  अगर "Ģधानमंतर्ी Îविनिध योजना" का बैज लगाने क े बाद भी उसको पैसे देने पड़े, नहीं 
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

तो उसको उठा िदया जाएगा, तो इससे ज्यादा * की बात नहीं है।  आज ये लोग सुरक्षा मांगते हȅ।  
इनको पैसे की ज्यादा जरूरत  नहीं है।  10,000 रुपए  लोन क े तहत िमल गए, ठीक है, लेिकन रोज़ 
ये चार-चार एजȂसीज़ को जो पैसा देते हȅ, अगर वह पैसा िदलवाना बंद करा िदया जाए, तो इनकी 
फ
ै िमलीज़ ज्यादा खुश हȗगी और ये ज्यादा संतुÍट हȗगे, बिनÎबत इनको लोन पर पैसे िमलȂ और 
उसके  बाद यह पैसा सरकार को वे वापस दȂ।  इसिलए, रेहड़ी पटरी आजीिवका संरक्षण कानून, 
जो हम लोगȗ क े ǎारा लाया गया था, मȅ खƺर साहब से अनुरोध करना चाहूंगा िक वे सभी Îटेट्स 
क े िमिनÎटसर् को बुलाएं और उनको बुलाकर यह सुिनिÌचत करȂ िक उसका पालन िकया जाए।  
अगर उसका पालन होगा तो हमारे देश क े अंदर गरीब लोग सही तरीके  से उसका लाभ उठा 
पाएंग
े।  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  मेरा समय खत्म होने वाला है।  मȅ समय का पाबंद रहना 
चाहता हूँ।  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : अभी 1 िमनट, 22 सेक ंड्स हȅ, आप बोल सकते ह ȅ।  
 
Ǜी अजय माकन : उपसभापित महोदय, मȅने अभी रेहड़ी पटरी आजीिवका संरक्षण कानून क े बारे 
मȂ बात कही।  हमारे देश क े अंदर इस कानून का सही तौर पर पालन नहीं हो रहा है। हमने इसमȂ 
Ģावधान रखा
 है िक टाउन वȂिंडग किमटी बनेगी। टाउन वȂिंडग किमटी की रेगुलर मीिंटग्स हȗगी 
और जो सवȃ होगा, वह टाउन वȂिंडग किमटी करेगी। 
 दुख की बात यह है िक पूरे देश मȂ अबर्न लोकल बॉडीज़ और Îटेट गवनर्म Ȃट्स इसका 
पालन नहीं कर रहीं और सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट इसको monitor करने मȂ बहुत िदलचÎपी नहीं िदखा 
रही। अभी मेरे से पूवर् भाजपा क े वƪा ने भी कहा था िक Îटेट क े िमिनÎटसर् को बुलाकर भी बात 
करनी चािहए। इस िवषय पर और Town Vending Committee पर भी बात करनी चािहए। 
गवनर्म
Ȃट को अपनी Ģाथिमकताओं क े बारे मȂ भी बात करनी चािहए िक हमारी Ģाथिमकता ÎलÇस 
क े अंदर रहने वाले और गरीब लोग, जो शहरȗ मȂ रहने वाले हȅ, उनकी तरफ ध्यान द ेने की ज्यादा 
ज़रूरत है। हमारा मुख्य िंबदु होना चािहए िक जो लोग हमारी तरफ और हमारी सरकारȗ की तरफ 
देख रहे हȅ, उनकी हम मदद क ै से कर सकते हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद माननीय अजय माक
 न जी। माननीय सदÎयगण, दो माननीय सदÎयȗ 
ने आगर्ह िकया है िक उन्हȂ आवÌयक काम से कहीं बाहर जाना है, यिद आपकी अनुमित हो, तो मȅ 
उन्हȂ पहले बोलने का अवसर दूं।  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal): Sir, it is our time.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Yes, It is your time. इसिलए मȅ हाउस से consent ले रहा हूं। 
अगर आपकी अनुमित हो, तो उनसे मȅ आगर्ह कर सकता हूं। 
 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
149

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : मȅ माननीय वƪाओं से आगर्ह करूं गा िक आप अपने िवचार बहुत संक्षेप मȂ और 
कम समय मȂ रखȂ। Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा।   
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा (उǄर Ģदेश) : आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत 
आभार िक आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर सदन क े समक्ष अपने िवचार Ëयƪ करने की 
अनुमित Ģदान की।  
महोदय, स
ंयुƪ राÍटर् की एक िरपोटर् क े अनुसार वषर् 2050 तक  भारत की आधी आबादी 
महानगरȗ एवं शहरȗ मȂ िनवास करेगी। गांव क े साथ-साथ वषर् 2047 तक िवकि सत भारत क े 
संकÊप को पूरा करने क े िलए हमȂ शहरी क्षेतर् मȂ अनेकȗ सुधारȗ की आवÌयकता है। देश क े शहरी 
क्षेतर् क े िवकास क े िलए इस बजट मȂ 12 परस Ȃट की वृिǉ क े साथ 1,77,000 करोड़ रुपए  का 
आवंटन हुआ है। मȅ इसके  िलए आदरण
ीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का बहुत-बहुत आभार Ëयƪ करती हूं। 
महोदय, शहरी क्षेतर् मȂ िनवास करने वाले गरीब एवं मध्यम वगीर्य लोगȗ को आवास उपलÅध कराने 
क े िलए 'Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना - शहरी' क े अंतगर्त एक करोड़ नए घर
 बनाने का लÑय रखा 
गया। इस बजट मȂ 30 लाख से अिधक आबादी वाले 14 बड़े शहरȗ क े िवकास क े िलए सरकार ǎारा 
िवशेष योजना की घोषणा की गई है। शहरी क्षेतर् मȂ रहने वाले रेहड़ी-पटरी वालȗ क े िलए भी हाट 
बाज़ार बनाने की ËयवÎथा की जा रही है। देश क े शहरȗ म
Ȃ मेटर्ो की सुिवधा ĢाÃत हो सके , इसके  
िलए बजट मȂ लगभग 25,000 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया गया।  
महोदय, आज आपसे एक बात कहना चाहती हूं िक जब मȅ आज अपने घर से सदन क े 
िलए िनकली थी, तो रोड क े िकनारे मȅने कांगर्ेस पाटीर् क े ǎारा लगा एक पोÎटर देखा, िजसमȂ 
िलखा था िक मिहला आरक्षण तत्काल लागू िकया जाए और मिहला आरक्षण मȂ ओबीसी मिहलाओं 
को 33 परस Ȃट आरक्षण की मांग की गई। मȅ कांगर्ेस से पूछना चाहती हूं िक Shri R.K. Chetty स
े 
लेकर Ǜी पी. िचदÇबरम तक 19 िवǄ मंितर्यȗ मȂ से कांगर्ेस ने अपने पूरे शासनकाल देश मȂ िकसी 
भी मिहला को क्या िवǄ मंतर्ी लायक नहीं समझा? 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप िवषय पर बोिलए। अबर्न ड
ेवलपमȂट क े िवषय पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : सर, िवषय पर ही बोल रही हूं। कांगर्ेस क े शासनका
 ल मȂ  इंिदरा गांधी 
जी क े Ģधान मंतर्ी रहते हुए क ेवल उनके  पास ही यह िवभाग था। आज मुझे गवर् है िक माननीय 
Ģधानमंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ और भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की नीित पर उन्ह ȗने पहली बार िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी को यह मंतर्ालय िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : अन्य कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, आप िवषय पर 
बोिलए।   
 
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : आप जब बोलते हȅ, तो हम लोग सुनते हȅ। इसिलए आप सुनने की भी 
क्षमता रिखए। महोदय, आदरणीय िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी को पूणर् कािलक रूप  मȂ यह मंतर्ालय 
िदया है। मȅ क ु छ आंकड़े आपके  समक्ष रखना चाहती ह ूं। वषर् 1947 मȂ एक, वषर् 1952 मȂ दो, 1957 मȂ 
एक - यह नेहरू  जी क े Ģथम तीन कायर्काल की मिहला मंितर्यȗ की संख्या है। मȅ कांगर्ेस पाटीर् से 
पूछना चाहती हूं... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय सदÎय, अबर्न डेवलपमȂट का िवषय है। 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्
Ģभा : इस देश मȂ मिहलाओं ने Îवतंतर्ता आंदोलन मȂ िनणार्यक भूिमका 
िनभाई है। क्या सरकार क े गठन मȂ आपने मिहलाओं को इस लायक नहीं समझा? मȅ इसिलए 
कहती हूं, क्यȗिक मȅ सुन रही थी।  ये लोग िवषय पर नहीं बोलते हȅ।  मȅ इतने िदन से ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : आप िवषय पर बोलȂ।   
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : मȅ एक चीज़ और बताना चाहती हूं िक िजस तरीके  से, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
मȅ यह बोलूंगी, क्यȗिक मुझे ठेस लगी है।  मेरे घर क े सामने यह बड़ा पोÎटर लगा, मȅने देखा तो मुझे 
बहुत खराब लगा। ...(Ëयवधान
)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  यहां पर िवषय यह है। 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : मȅ कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की पीड़ा को समझ रही ह ूं और क ु छ पंिƪयȗ क े 
माध्यम से मȅ बताना चाहती हूं िक क ै से एक आिदवासी मिहला क े िसर पर राÍटर्पित का ताज है 
और क ै से एक मिहला िवǄ मंतर्ी पर पूरे देश को नाज़ है और क ै से आज मिहलाएं संसद मȂ 
...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़, Ãलीज। आप िवषय पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : सर , मȅ िवषय पर ही आ रही हूं।  देश मȂ ओबीसी वगर् क े लगभग 78 
परसȂट लोग गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ रहते हȅ, िजन
की क्षमता नहीं थी, िजनको कोई सुिवधाएं नहीं थीं िक वे 
शहरȗ मȂ रहȂ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  आप याद रखȂ िक आपको कम समय मȂ बोलना है।  
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : ऐसे अनेकȗ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : मैडम, Ãलीज़।   
 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
151

Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : ऐसे सामािजक कारणȗ क े कारण...(समय की घंटी)...िपछड़े वगर् देश 
क े शहरȗ मȂ िनवास नहीं कर पा रहे हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  मैडम, Ãलीज़। एक िमनट, एक िमनट, Ãलीज़। एक तो मȅने आगर्ह िकया िक कम 
समय मȂ बोलना है और आप िवषय पर बोलȂ। आपका  समय क ु छ देर मȂ पूरा हो जाएगा, तो आप 
जÊदी बोलȂ।  
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : सर, यह आवास वाला िवषय ही था।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आवास वाले िवषय पर बोलकर अपनी बात खत्म करȂ।   
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्
Ģभा : िकस  तरीके  से गांव से शहरȗ मȂ आने वाले लोगȗ की आिर्थक क्षमता 
नहीं होती थी िक वे शहरȗ मȂ आवास बना पाएं और वे कहीं न कहीं िकसी तरीके  से िकराए पर 
रहकर अपना गुजारा करते थे।  आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार ने ऐसे लोगȗ 
को भी आवास देने का जो काम िकया है, वह बहुत ही सराहनीय कदम है।  आप िनिÌचत तौर से 
देिखए िक एससी, एसटी और ओबीसी क े लोग ही इन कारण ȗ से िनिÌचत तौर से शहरȗ की 
सुिवधाएं नहीं ले पाते थे, आज आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी और आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी क े कारण वे शहरȗ 
मȂ िनवास करने क े िलए खुश हȅ िक िकस तरीके  से हमारे देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने हम लोगȗ की 
िंचता की है।  सर, मȅ एक चीज और बोलूंगी।  क ु छ िदन पूवर् एक संसद सदÎय Ǜी स
ंजय िंसह जी ने 
यहां एक िवषय उठाया था।  उन्हȗने कहा था िक उǄर Ģदेश मȂ कांवड़ मागर् पर दुकानȗ पर न ेम 
Ãलेट लगाने...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  आपको िवषय पर बोलना है। 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : मȅ यह कहूंगी।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप अपनी बात खत्म कीिजए।   
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : मȅ कहूंगी िक आिर्थक आधार पर जब आम उपयोग की वÎतुओं पर 
हलाल Ģमाणीकरण क े िलए क ै से बाध्य िकया जाता है और उǄर Ģदेश मȂ बरेली मȂ िंहदुओं का धमर् 
पिरवतर्न कर उनका सामूिहक िववाह कराने का Ģयास िकया जाता
 है...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : आप िवषय पर बोिलए। आपका समय खत्म। 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा : मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूं िक उनको यह सोचना चािहए।  माना आपको 
एक जाित से ज्यादा लगाव है, ...(समय की घंटी)...लेिकन िंहदुओं की आÎथा पर भी क ुठाराघात 
नहीं करना चािहए।...(Ëयवधान)... 
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी उपसभापित : आप िवषय पर बोिलए Ãलीज…  Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक। पांच िमनट क े अंदर 
अपनी बात कहȂ और िवषय पर बोलȂ। अगर आप िवषय पर बोलȂगी, तो ही िरकॉडर् पर जाएगा।  
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक (मध्य Ģदेश) : उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे इस ऐितहािसक बज ट 
पर बोलने का ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : यह बजट नहीं है, यह िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ हाउिंसग एंड अबर्न अफे यसर् पर िडÎकशन 
है।   
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक : शहरी िवकास पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, मȅ ǭदय की गहराई से 
आपका धन्यवाद ĢÎतुत करती हूं।  महोदय, 2024 और 2025 मȂ िफर एक और गवर्भरा अध्याय 
जोड़ िदया गया है िक यह बजट जो तमा
म िवशेषताओं और हर वगर् की  राहतȗ क े िलए भरा हुआ 
है। इस बजट मȂ खास कर क े Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना ( पीएमएवाई) क े माध्यम से शहरी 
िवशेषता क े िवकास पर जोर िदया गया है।  सर, 79 हजार  करोड़ रुपय े की भारी रािश क े साथ 
यह पहल लाखȗ लोगȗ को सुरिक्षत
 और सÎते आवास Ģदान करती है।  हम तीन करोड़ अितिरƪ 
घर बनाने की बात कर रहे हȅ, िजसमȂ एक करोड़ शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ क े हȗगे।  आप कÊपना कीिजए िक 
एक
 करोड़ से अिधक पिरवारȗ को आिखरकार एक Îथान ऐसा िमलेगा, िजसमȂ वे सच मȂ समझȂगे 
िक हमȂ शहर मȂ कोई िसर छ ुपाने क े िलए आवास िमला। 
 महोदय, 2015 से  पीएमएवाई िसफर् एक आवास योजना, पिरयोजना से कहीं अिधक रही 
है। यह घरȗ को आवÌयक सुिवधाएं, जैसे घरेलू शौचालय, एलपीजी कनेक्शन, िबजली और Îवच्छ 
पानी उपलÅध कराने क
े  बारे मȂ है। यह महत्वपूणर् रूप  से मिहलाओं को सशƪ बनाने वाली योजना 
ह
ै। यह पिरवार की मिहला को मािलक एवं सह-मािलक भी बनाती है। शहर की जो ËयवÎथा है, जो 
लोग पहले शहरȗ मȂ, झुग्गी-झोपड़ी मȂ रहते थे, जब वे िकसी गांव से शहरȗ मȂ पलायन करके  आते 
थे, तो उन्हȂ कहीं िसर छ ुपाने क े िलए जगह नहीं िमल
ती थी। वे पन्नी लगाकर िकसी एक Îथान पर 
रहते थे और शहर की कॉरपोरेशन आकर उनकी झुग्गी की पन्नी उखाड़ देती थी  तथा उनकी 
झȗपड़ी से उनको बेदखल कर देती थी। मȅ माननीय Ģध ान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगी िक 
2014 क े बाद, उन्हȗने शहरȗ मȂ गरीबȗ की पीड़ा को समझा। उन्हȗने  शहरȗ क े िवकास को देखते 
हुए, गरीबȗ को पक्के  मकान मȂ रहने की सुिवधा दी, उनमȂ शौचालय बनाकर भी िदए। सबसे ज्यादा 
मिहलाओं की ĢॉÅलम थी िक वे शहर मȂ रहने क े बावजूद भी खुले मȂ शौच क े िलए जाती थीं। 2004
 
क े पहले की यिद मध्य Ģदेश की तÎवीर देखी जाय, तो शहर क े लोग भी रेलवे पटरी क े िकनारे 
बैठकर शौच क े िलए जाया करते थे, ये शहरȗ की िÎथित थी। पहले हमारे जो मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, 
उन्हȗने यह दुदर्शा कर रखी थी। 2004 क े  बाद मȂ हमारी सरकार आई और उसने शहरȗ का 
िवकास िकया। आज आप देखȂगे िक मध्य Ģदेश िकस तरह स े आगे बढ़ रहा है।  
 महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहूंगी की शहरȗ की बढ़ती हुई आबादी को देखते हुए, उनकी 
आवÌयकताओं को देखते हुए, िकफायती िकराये क े आवास उपलÅध कराकर उनकी समÎया का 
समाधान िकया
 है। इसमȂ औǏोिगक Ǜिमकȗ क े िलए डॉरमेटर्ी टाइप क े आवास शािमल िकए गए हȅ। 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
153

यह योजना न क ेवल हमारे कायर् का समथर्न करती है, बिÊक िनÍपक्ष और पारदशीर् िकराये क े 
बाजारȗ को भी Ģोत्सािहत करती है।  
 महोदय, हम यह भी देख रहे हȅ िक शहरȗ को आिर्थक िवकास क ेन्दर् क े रूप  मȂ िवकिसत 
करने मȂ हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का बहुत बड़ा योगदान है। राज्यȗ क े साथ टर्ांिजट Ãलािंनग, पेरी 
अबर्न एिरया क े तहत ËयविÎथत तरीके  से िवकास करके , वे यह सुिनिÌचत कर रहे हȅ िक हमारे 
शहर Îथाई रूप  से और क ुशलता क े साथ आगे बढ़Ȃ।  
 महोदय, 14 Ģमुख शहरȗ मȂ टर्ांिजट ओिरएंटेड डेवलपमȂट योजना शहरी जीवन को और 
अिधक सुिवधाजनक बनाएगी। इसमȂ जल आपूिर्त और Îवच्छता को भी आवÌयक Îथान िमल रहा 
है। 100 बड़े शहरȗ मȂ सेवाओं म
Ȃ सुधार लाने की योजना ह ै। महोदय, यह पिरयाजना न क ेवल जीवन 
की िÎथितयȗ को बढ़ाएगी, बिÊक Îथानीय टȅकȗ को भरने और िंसचाई क े िलए उपयोगी पानी क े 
िलए Îथाई ËयवÎथा करेगी तथा उनमȂ रहने वाले शहर वािसयȗ को Ģोत्सािहत करेगी। इसके  
अलावा, मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगी िक अगले 5 वषș क े िलए, Ģत्येक शहर मȂ  Ģत्येक वषर् 100 
साÃतािहक हाट या Îटर्ीट फ ू ड हब क े िवकास की श
ुरुआत  की गई है। जो Îटर्ीट वȂडर है, वह 
Îथानीय अथर् ËयवÎथा को बढ़ावा देता है। इन लोगȗ क े िलए, जो पहल की गई है, जो लोग इन 
पहलȗ पर संदेह करते हȅ, मȅ उनको याद िदलाना चाहती हूं िक हमेशा से इस सरकार ने आम 
आदमी को क ेन्दर् मȂ रखा है। इसकी Ģितबǉता यह दशार्ती है िक सरकार शहरȗ और नगरȗ को 
सुधारना चाहती
 है, उनमȂ रहने वालȗ क े िलए और काम करने वालȗ क े िलए बेहतर ËयवÎथा करना 
चाहती है।  
 महोदय, पीएम Îविनिध योजना क े तहत शुरुआत  मȂ 10 हजार रुपय े तक का िकफायती 
कायर्शील पूंजी ऋण Ģदान करने की शुरुआत  की गई है। बाद मȂ अिधक ऋण की आवÌयकता को 
ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए, 20 हजार रुपय े तक का दूसरा ऋण िदनांक 9.4.2021 स
े और 50 हजार तक 
का तीसरा ऋण 1.06.2022 से िदया जाने लगा है।           
   महोदय, आवासन और शहरी
 िवकास कायर् मंतर्ालय ने  1  जून , 2020 को ' Ģधान मंतर्ी 
Îटर्ीट वȂडसर् आत्मिनभर्र िनिध', 'पीएम Îविनिध योजना'  शुरू  की है। इस योजना का उǈेÌय Îटर्ीट 
वȂडसर् को, कोिवड 19 महामारी से बुरी तरह से Ģभािवत हो चुक े उन Ëयवसायȗ को िफर  से शुरू  
करने क े िलए िबना िकसी गारंटी क े कायर्शील पूंजी ऋण की सुिवधा Ģदान करना है। सरकार ने 
पहली बार रेहड़ी, पटरी और ठेले वालȗ व समान बेचने वालȗ क े रोजगा र क े िलए लोन की ËयवÎथा 
की गई है। महोदय, इस योजना क े अंतगर्त अभी तक लगभग  40 लाख लाभािर्थयȗ को लाभ 
पहुँचाया जा चुका है। मȅ मोदी जी और िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया को भी धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगी िक उन्हȗने 
पूरे भारत मȂ समानता की दृिÍट से इस योजना को कायर् रूप  मȂ पिरिणत िकया
 है।    ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : क ृपया समाÃत कीिजए।  
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक :  महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहूंगी िक  40 लाख लाभािर्थयȗ तक लाभ पहुँचाया 
जा चुका है, िजसकी क ु ल कीमत  4,000 करोड़ रूपय े है। महोदय, 'पीएम Îविनिध योजना' क े 
िलए कौन-कौन पातर् हȅ -  मȅ इसको भी थोड़ा िचिÏ
नत करना चाहूंगी। जैसे हमारे यहाँ पर पहले 
नाई कहते थे, लेिकन माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इसको सुधार करके  उन्हȂ क े श िशÊपीकार कहा 
154
[RAJYA SABHA]

है। महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने उन्हȂ िकतना सÇमान िदया है। उन्हȂ पहले िकस तरह से 
बुलाया जाता था और अब आप देखȂगे िक उन्हȂ, क े श िशÊपी की दुकानȗ क े िलए िकतना सÇमान 
िदया गया है। 
 महोदय, एक और बात यह है िक जूता काटने वालȗ क े िलए और पान की दुकान वालȗ क े 
िलए आज शहरी आवास योजना क े अंतगर्त मȅने आपके  समक्ष जो िवचार रखे हȅ, उसके  िलए मȅ 
अपनी सरकार, अपने Ģधा
न मंतर्ी जी और अपनी िवǄ मंतर्ी मह ोदया को धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगी। 
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपको भी धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगी, क्यȗिक आपने मुझे यहाँ अपनी बात 
रखने का अवसर िदया है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। Ǜी जवाहर सरकार, आप बोिलए।  
 
SHRI JAWH
AR SIRCAR (West Bengal) :  Sir, I have listene d to you.  We have 
permitted them.  I will make one special request to you because  while the hon. 
Finance Minister was there, we raised a poin t.  The point is very simple, it should be 
noted. * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  
…(Interruptions)…     
 
Ǜी जवाहर सरकार : सर, एक िमनट क े िलए बोलने दीिजए।  ..(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  No, no.  …(Interruptions)…  Y o u  h a v e  t o  s p e a k  o n  t h e  
subject please.  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR:  Okay, Sir.  But this was our request and we will have to put 
it in some other manner.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak on the subject.  Only that will go on record.   
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR :  Okay.  Now, we start on Ur ban Development.  I still call it 
Urban Development because 'Affairs' sounds a little odd.  The immediate picture that 
comes to our mind is that this monsoon ha s been disastrous where constructions are 
concerned.  Roofs have collapsed in seven airports. That is not their responsibility. 
There have been leakages everywhere. But, what is their responsibility is unnatural 
flooding of Delhi and that has happened.  Thanks to their intervention, I am not 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
155

referring to the present Minister, he is a very well-experienced person, I  am  referring 
to the past incidents.  In trying to enfo rce a new plan on Delhi; I would give one 
example of Pragati Maidan tunnel.  I am sure it has hit the water table.  Under the city, 
as you know, there are water channels, water tables and others and we need to go in 
for hydrographic studies before we enforc e our will through, before we put our 
egotistical schemes through, and the flood ing of the Pragati Maidan tunnel would 
continue.  It would continue and you cannot stop it like that.  The flooding of Rajpath; 
-- I do not know what name they have gi ven, this was completely unrequired -- 
Rs.670 crores spent on Rajpath for a few bu lbs and lights and all you get is perennial 
flooding because you have tampered with th e water system.  Now, two days ago, an 
hon. Member asked this question about what is your role, to which the Urban Affairs 
Minister's reply was:  "Urban local bo dies are responsibility of the State 
Government."              
 That way, we cannot wash our hands away  from this problem; otherwise, we 
need to scrap the Ministry. It has a centralizing role, we have accepted it. It has to 
use its integrative power, its guidelines. They have mentioned that they have PFI 
guidelines, SOP for urban flood s. The CPWD code; there ha s to be some amount of 
stringent standards on which buildings are ma de.  Sir, as you know,   in one State, 
known to you, nine bridges have collapsed. This cannot go on with public funds. The 
second part of their reply goes into saying that urban planning is river-centric. That 
we are sure about it. I do not know whether you have seen the video by Deshbhakt 
Akash Banerjee, where he has compared Delhi with Venice. As I said, all of it, much 
of it is due to the rather ego-pushed plan of the Central Vista.  
We have to tackle the hydrographic imba lance that we have created in this. 
When we talk of the Central Vista, I come to two points. With your indulgence, I will 
mention both the points. One relates to this Parliament building about which, I will not 
get into any unnecessary criticism because it is all a matter of taste, whether 
something is nouveau riche, something is classical, these are defined. I would like to 
raise on behalf of all the Members that the two main Members' gates, Makar Dwar  
and Shardul Dwar, have no protection. They are ex posed to the elements, they are 
exposed to the rain, whereas, the three gate s of the three VIPs, have what you call 
porticos. This is completely unfair because  we are all exposed, even their Members 
are exposed to the rain, heat and this blaz i n g  s u n .   W e  h a v e  t o  d o ,  r e d e s i g n  t h e  
building in such a manner that it  is covered. There are other things within it, but I will 
not take time in this debate to mention ab out these flaws. Then the galleries; I would 
submit, Sir, it was the plan in the last regime; the galleries are the most useless things 
we have seen. Those spaces could be frui tfully utilized. As a net result of the 
156
[RAJYA SABHA]

disturbance in Delhi,--I am concentrating on Delhi because that is your direct charge, 
the rest, you can say, the States look afte r,-- we had 207 hotspots in water-logging. 
This year alone, we have added 101. So it makes 308 hotspots as they call it, for 
water-logging. Different names have come up for them, they call them Modi talab, 
Modi fuwarah , all sorts of names; the speaker before me had mentioned. Now 
coming to the schemes of the Ministry, this  year, I believe the allocation is Rs.86,000 
crores, which is an improvement over last year. But then, this same Budget was over 
Rs.1 lakh crores three or fo ur years ago. There is a constant slide down of the money 
allotted to the scheme.  
But let us come to some of the more factual issues, some of the more glaring 
shortfalls, glaring failures. The PMAY, Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana,  takes one-third 
of the Budget and all the States are forced  to put the word 'PM' before the name, 
though the contribution of the Centre is  only 60 per cent. We may like to seek 
permission whether we can put '60 per cent PM Awas Yojana';  whether you can 
qualify the words '60 per cent' to make it very clear.  The implementation has been 
extremely slow and components like the credit-linked subsidy have taken it into deep, 
deep complications. The Ministry is aware of it. Most of the houses that are built for 
the poor are in the peripheral areas of the town from which transport becomes a 
problem. So before we impose the top-down scheme of the poor people of India, we 
need to rethink. The in-situ slum scheme has been mentioned by Mr. Maken, though, 
I think, he had come over  and made some remarks on WB, which we consider 
unnecessary, about some issues, say, the hawker  scheme and all. When it comes to 
Awas Yojana, we are reminded of the Gramin Awas Yojana,  where Bengal has been 
completely deprived.  
 We have sent eleven lakhs thirty-six th ousand proposals to the Centre.  And, 
God knows, what is going to happen!  Mayb e the minister will be able to explain.  
Eleven lakhs thirty-six thousand proposals for housing lying here in the Centre!  And, 
where the second part of the Ministry's main  expenditure goes into is metro rail, but 
we will not comment about it because our metro was by slaughtering the city of 
Kolkata. यहां की मैटर्ो तो नीचे से जाती है, िकसी को िडÎटबर् नहीं करती है।  कोई बात नहीं, 
there are some supplements that have to
 be done for the Calcutta Metro. 
The next big failure, I would like to poin t out is AMRUT. That was supposed to 
give tap water, gardens to end pollution control. Even now, most of India is still 
without tap water, whatever be the statements we make from this side or from, हर घर 
जल, and all that.  And, pollution was an inte gral part of the scheme.  But, two days 
ago, the Health Ministry replied to my qu estion, which the Lancet, the world's most 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
157

famous medical body, says that seven pe rcent of the deaths and maybe more per 
centage happens because of urban pollution.  They have completely denied it.  
 The Ministry or the Government has completely denied it and said very 
ludicrously that it depends on your food ha bits.  I mean, I have it and this would be 
one of the biggest jokes.  Now, there again if you go in, you will find that they have 
achieved like 15 lakh taps, 37 lakh sewers.  But,  it covers practically nothing, it is just 
tokenism.  Compared to the size of the pr oblem, 31 per cent of the urban population 
has no pipe water even now.  Sixty-seve n per cent has no sewerage arrangement as 
of now.  But, we go in for all sorts of stat ements.  Now, having said this, I will come 
to the last one, which is a de mand of our State Government, aid memoir, if I may put 
it, on the pending dues that pertained to Mr. Manohar Lal ji's Ministry.  Million Plus 
cities, we have Fifteenth Finance Commission grants of Rs.1,445 crores, just held up.  
I would ask the hon. Minister to take a look at it.  We are being deprived of the rural 
development side; kindly do not slaughter us on the urban development side now.  
We have what is called the Shelter fo r Urban Homeless under the NULM Scheme, 
which is 60:40. Again, the O&M cost is not being given.  I would like to raise this 
issue to him.  
The last point I will make is on Smart City. The Smart City sc heme is one of the 
most classic failures of the last 10 years.  You can take measurements by whichever 
method you feel.  You are supposed to create hundreds of Smart Cities; there are 
about 50 going around, and, maybe Madurai is the only one that has done 
something.  And, our new town of Kolkat a has done something about it.  But as a 
scheme, as a hype, as a fund allocation, it is one of the most classic cases of mal-
administration, top-down administration .  Right now, the Secretary of the 
Department made a submission before  the Parliamentary Committee, almost 
admitting that we are wi nding up the scheme;  हम हार मान गए।  I do not know how 
much of it is true. The Minister can ascertain  it.  I can give him the details.  But, you 
need to focus on schemes that are oriented  to the people who will actually use them.  
This top-down method, of de-linking yourse lf to the people and their direct needs, 
needs to go away. Urban development or Housing and Urban Affairs is a very 
important Ministry that can actually go a long way to alleviate the problems of the city 
in terms of housing, in terms of water su pply, in terms of sewerage, in terms of 
amenities.  The way, it has been dealt in the past, Sir, I would beseech upon you to 
take a fresh look at it because you have a wealth of experience.  It has been badly 
dealt with and badly executed in the past.  Thank you.     
                                             
158
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Thank you, Jawhar Sircar ji.   N o w ,  S h r i  M e d a  
Raghunadha Reddy. 
 
SHRI MEDA RAGHUNADHA REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : The Union Budget for the 
year 2024-25 has allocated a total of Rs. 82,576 crores to the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs. This marks an increase of  approximately eight per cent from the 
previous year's allocation of Rs. 76,431 crores. 
 
[THE VICE CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA) in the Chair.] 
 
In this discussion pertaining to the working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, I rise to highlight the following issues :  Sir, there is drainage issue.  In every 
monsoon, we see widespread waterlogging and flooding due to the collapse of 
drainage system across the country. This occu rs due to construction of buildings and 
planning of cities, not considering flood prevention, illegal dumping of waste into 
drainage system which has reduced their effectiveness. Drainage systems are not 
built to handle the increasing volume and th e changing patterns of rainfall. I appeal, 
through you, Sir, that because there is drai nage problem in all metropolitan cities, I 
request the Central Government to work with the States to resolve all these issues.  
Sir, steps which can be taken to reso lve these issues are pending drainage 
projects. It must be expedited to prevent water-logging, establishing a routine 
maintenance schedule for drains and st orm water systems, integrated urban 
planning- a comprehensive approach to ur ban planning that includes flood risk 
assessments and sustainable drainage soluti on is essential for long-term resilience 
against flooding. 
There are some concerns regarding the PM Awas Yojana. Sir, PM Awas Yojana 
had promised homes for 1.18 crore familie s by December, 2024, but, met just 67.4 
per cent of its target so far. An overwhel ming majority of homes, about 83 per cent 
that are to be constructed under the PM Awas Yojana, do not target the landless 
urban poor at all. A majori ty of the homes about 83 per cent constructed under the 
PM Awas Yojana are for families that have access to capital  or land. I appeal to the 
Government to look into the allocations an d ensure that they are given to the most 
marginalized and needy.  
About Smart Cities Mission- Sir, there is Smart Cities Mission in Andhra 
Pradesh. I appreciate the Government for in troducing the Smart Cities Mission aimed 
to promote sustainable cities that provide core infrastructure and give a decent quality 
of life to their citizens. However, data fu rnished by the Ministry has shown that 59 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
159

projects amounting to Rs. 2000 crores in expenditure are pending from the 
Government side. I urge the Ministry to ex pedite the completion of the four smart 
cities selected in Andhra Pradesh and to deliver urbanization of the people of the 
State. Thank you, Sir.  
           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri R. Girirajan. 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu): Thank you, hon. Vice Chairman, Sir. I express my 
thanks for allowing me to speak. Sir, the Bu dget allocation for the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs in this year's Budget, 2024-25, the Revenue Expenditure stands at 
Rs. 59,948 crores, Capital Expenditure stands at Rs. 28,628 crores, total allocation is 
Rs. 82,576 crores. Out of which, Rs. 24,931  crores are allotted for MRTS and metro 
projects across the country. But it seems the Union Government does not treat Tamil 
Nadu as one of the States in India. The in terest of people of Tamil Nadu is totally 
neglected by the Union Government. This is unconstitutional and undemocratic.  
I would like to bring to the notice of the august House that Rs. 63,246 crores 
worth of Chennai Metro Rail Phase II proj ect is currently under progress. The 
Government of India has permitted the Government of Tamil Nadu to proceed with the 
project. Since then, the Government of Ta mil Nadu has been funding the project 
expecting that the Centre would release th eir share of funds. So far, the Union 
Government did not release the share of Tamil Nadu. Now, Tamil Nadu has spent 
over Rs. 30,000 crores, but, no funds ha s been released till now by the Union 
Government to Chennai Metro Phase II project.                                                                     
 The Government of Tamil Nadu is executing the project in spite of not receiving 
any funds from the Union Government as  promised.  This has caused a heavy 
financial burden on the Government of Tam il Nadu.  This step-motherly treatment by 
the Union Government is really unjustifiable and gross injustice to the people of Tamil 
Nadu. 
 Sir, Chennai Metro Rail Phase-II project  is a very important infrastructure 
project envisaged to build three corridors with a length of 118.9 kms entails building of 
128 stations throughout the length and breadth  of Chennai to ease traffic.  In spite of 
the Union Government not providing its share of funds, the project is ongoing due to 
the efforts of the Government of Tamil Nadu . But, it may hit a roadblock if the Union 
Government continues to fail to release its share of funds and also loan assistance 
from bilateral and multilateral agencies on time.  Sir, there is apprehension in the 
minds of the people of Tamil Nadu that the Union Government is purposefully delaying 
release of its share of funds for the executi on of a very important Chennai Metro Rail 
160
[RAJYA SABHA]

Phase-II project.  With Rs. 63,246 crores, it  was announced as a Union Government 
scheme. 
 Sir, the hon. Prime Minister, in his sp eech at Chennai, on 14th February, 2021, 
said that his Government has sanctioned Rs. 63,000 crores for the Chennai Metro Rail 
Phase-II project.  I ask: Can the hon.  Fi nance Minister deny it?  The foundation-
stone for the project was laid by the hon. Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah.  Will the 
hon. Finance Minister deny it?  Then, wh y even in July, 2024, the Government has 
not released even a single rupee for ex ecution of Chennai Metro Rail Phase-II 
project?  We, the people of Tamil Nadu, de mand an answer from the hon. Finance 
Minister.  Sir, our hon. Chief Minister, Thalapathy M.K. Stalin, has asked the 
Government to initiate Metro Rail Projec t in Coimbatore and Madurai.  But, the 
Government is silent on this.  While the Union Government is keen only in collecting 
maximum GST and other taxes from Tamil Nadu to fill its coffers, they do not have the 
courtesy to repay the people of Tamil Nadu what they actually deserve.  Sir, in this 
scenario, I urge the Union Government to release our share of funds immediately and 
expedite the disbursement of loan assistan ce from JICA and ADB on time for smooth 
progress of Chennai Metro Rail Project Phase-II.  
 Sir, under the Centrally Sponsored Sche mes, the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(Urban), the total amount allotted is Rs . 30,170 crores.  Of this, States and UTs 
component accounts to Rs. 23,712 crores.  Th e Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme-I for 
the economically weaker section and the lo wer income group stands at Rs. 3,000 
cores and for middle income group it is Rs . 1,000 crores.  At this snail’s pace, the 
housing for all cannot be achieved even by 2047.  The Government of India has to 
allocate more funds for the scheme. 
 Sir, the Union Government has allo tted Rs. 10,400 crores for the Urban 
Rejuvenation Mission – AMRUT – and the Smart Cities Mission. This is not adequate 
and cannot cater the needs of the people of  this country.  For the National Urban 
Digital Mission, a meagre sum of Rs. 1,150 cr ores is only allotted. This is absolutely 
not enough considering the vast urban areas to be covered in this country.  Under the 
Swachh Bharat Mission, Rs. 5,000 crores only has been allotted and, again, it is 
inadequate. With a goal to ameliorate the li ving conditions of urban slums within a 
timeframe to provide affordab le housing for them and im prove the living standards, 
Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board was es tablished by our leader, Dr. Kalaignar 
K a r u n a n i d h i  i n  1 9 7 0  –  5 4  y e a r s  a g o .   A s  t he primary role of this organisation is to 
improve urban slums and to make them habi table, the hon. Chief Minister changed 
the name of Tamil Nadu Slum Clearan ce Board to Tamil Nadu Urban Habitat 
Development Board w.e.f. 01-09-2021. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
161

 Sir, at present, in Tamil Nadu almost 50 per cent of its total population lives in 
urban areas.  At the current pace, by 2030,  Tamil Nadu will be the most urbanized 
State in India with almost 67 per cent of its total population living in urban areas. 
 Sir, as the guideline value of land in urban areas in Tamil Nadu is high, the cost 
incurred for the land provided by the Govern ment of Tamil Nadu for the construction 
of the houses under PMAY - Urban is th e major expenditure.  But, the Union 
Government, per house, is providing a sum of Rs. 1.5 lakh only; whereas, the 
Government of Tamil Nadu is spending around Rs. 7.5 to  Rs. 13 lakhs per house.  
Our hon. Chief Minister Thalapathy, M.K. Stalin, has requested the Union 
Government to increase its funding for co nstruction of houses under the PMAY - 
Urban Scheme.  But, the Union Government has not increased its share of funds for 
the construction of houses under the PM AY – Urban Scheme.  The World Bank has 
provided financial assistance of Rs. 3,038 cr ore to the Government of Tamil Nadu to 
strengthen the housing sector through policy reforms enabling private sector 
participation in affordable urban housing projects.  
 The Tamil Nadu Infrastructure and Fu nd Management Corporation Limited to 
provide industrial housing and working wo men hostels for low income and migrant 
workers and to create 500 beds for workin g women and 5,000 beds for industrial 
workers through PPP mode under the Tam il Nadu Shelter Fund. Sir, to ensure 
balanced and equitable development of Chennai city, a new programme, namely, 
Vada Chennai Valarchi Thittam , North Chennai Welfare Scheme, at a cost of Rs. 
4,000 crore, programmed for implementation  over the next three years has been 
announced by the Government of Tamil Na du.  Under this scheme, infrastructure 
deficit and gaps in development will be iden tified and schemes will be implemented to 
fulfil gaps.  Besides, Tamil Nadu Urban Habitat Development Board proposed to 
reconstruct 1,336 dilapidated te nements in North Chennai at a cost of Rs. 215 crore 
d u r i n g  t h e  p e r i o d  2 0 2 4 - 2 6 .   T h e r e  i s  one more scheme, 'Iyothee Thass Pandithar 
habitation development scheme'.  The Ta mil Nadu Urban Habitation Development 
Board has been implementing the infrastructure development, like, roads, bore wells, 
water supply lines, river basement of tenement blocks, conveniences, improvement 
of sewer network, etc. at a cost of Rs. 50 crores.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Hon. Member, please conclude.  
   
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN :  Thirty-two tenement schemes in  Chennai and in other towns 
comprising 12,465 tenements.  Sir, the produc tive skill training is imparted in various 
trades in coordination with Tamil Nadu Skill Development Corporation, Tamil Nadu 
162
[RAJYA SABHA]

Urban Livelihood Mission, Tamil Nadu Adi Dravidar Housing Development Corporation 
through empanelled training providers and N GOs.   To attain slum-free Tamil Nadu, 
the housing & infrastructure will be provided  to all the remaining slum families before 
2030.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):   Hon. Member, please conclude.   
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN:   Livelihood activities will be incr eased and their living standards 
will be raised to realise the dream of Drav idian model of Government ; as the Tamil 
saying goes, "we shall see God in the smile of the poor. " Thank you, Sir.      
                                             
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY (Punjab) :  Mr. Vice-Chairman Sir, at the outset, I 
congratulate the hon. Minister Shri Manoharlal Khattar  on taking over as the Minister 
of Housing and Urban Affairs. People of this country have great expectations from 
you.  I have no doubt that you will deliver beyond their expectations, being risen from 
grassroot worker and having spearheaded as the head of a State.   
 We are witnessing rapid urbanisation  with the massive increase in urban 
mobility in India.  The Finance Minister has announced PM Awas Yojana too in the 
Budget, under which one crore houses will be  constructed with an investment of Rs. 
10 lakh crores.  The slum households are projected to go up to 18 million and 2 million 
non-slum urban poor households.  Total housing shortage envisaged is 20 million. 
आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी, मȅ आपका ध्यान िदलाना चाहूँगा िक Punjab is one among the unique 
States where urban poverty is higher than th e rural poverty.  As informal sector is 
rapidly expanding, as a source of employ ment in cities, like Ludhiana, Jalandhar, 
Amritsar, Firozpur, which are witnessing rapid increase in informal settlement, इसिलए 
इन शहरȗ बसे लाखȗ वकर् सर्, जो रोजगार क े िलए शहर मȂ आए हȅ, उनके  रहने क े िलए मकानȗ की 
ËयवÎथा करनी होगी।   
 महोदय, देश की राजधा
नी िदÊली की जहाँ तक बात है, िदÊली को 2022 तक 48 लाख 
घरȗ की आवÌयकता थी, लेिकन आज दो साल बाद भी हम लÑय से काफी दूर हȅ। 
 
7:00 P.M 
 
सर, आपको सुनकर हैरानी होगी िक िदÊली, जो िक भारत की राजधानी है, इसकी 32 Ģितशत 
जनसंख्या एक कमरे क े मकान मȂ रहती है, िजनमȂ 700 झुिग्गयां, 1,800 unauthorised colonies 
वगैरह हȅ, तो मȅ कहूंगा: 
"दर-ब-दर ठोकरȂ खाईं तो यह मालूम हुआ, 
घर िकसे कहते हȅ और क्या चीज़ है बेघर होना।" 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
163

  
आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी, िदÊली मȂ 2 लाख से भी अिधक लोग बेघर हȅ और हमारे पास िसफर् 
200 रैन बसेरे हȅ, जहां क ेवल 17,000 लोग ही रह सकते हȅ, बाकी 1 लाख से ऊपर लोग भीषण 
गमीर् और कड़कती सदीर् मȂ खुले आसमान क े नीचे बसर करते हȅ, इसिलए सरकार से िनवेदन है 
िक war-footing पर shelter homes  बनान े क े िलए जगह दी जाए, क्यȗिक जो land है , वह 
Centre  subject  है।  मȅ वह बात, जो हमारे colleagues  ने, hon. MPs ने कही, जैसे, water 
logging in Delhi, 302 hot-spots, new und erground passes being flooded with the 
water, which speaks high volumes,  I do no t want to repeat, but I would like to flag 
these issues. चूंिक िदÊली हमारी राजधानी है, हमारा मुक ु ट है, इसिलए हमȂ िमल-जुल कर इसे 
सजाने और संवारने का Ģयास करना चािहए।  
जहां तक migration की बात है, 60 crores Indians  almost migrate within the 
country annually in order to release pressure on the ex
isting mega cities.  I think we 
will have to create more am enities in Tier-II and III cities of the country.  गवनर्मȂट ने 
अनाउंस िकया था, पहले Îमाटर् िसटीज की बात हो रही थी िक 100 Îमाटर् िसटीज बनाई जाएंगी, 
पर जैसी यहां सदन मȂ चचार् हुई िक िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ progress is very minuscule. अब सुनने 
को िमल रहा है िक शायद उसका Ģोजेक्ट बंद िकया जा रहा है। 32 smart cities have 
completed the projects but remaining 68 smart cities  ने अपने  targets achieve नहीं 
िकए।  I request the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development िक वह उसको 
rigorously pursue करे िक जो 100 Îमाटर् िसटीज announce की गईं, उनको कम से कम पूरा 
िकया जाए।  मȅ अभी पढ़ रहा था िक इस साल का बजट, जो 8,000 करोड़ था, वह भी 70 परसȂट 
काटकर 2,700 करोड़  रखा गया है, तो यह एक िंचताजनक िवषय है।  मȅ उÇमीद करता हूँ िक 
फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर इस पर ध्यान दȂगी और सÃलीमȂटर्ी गर्ांट मȂ यह पूरा िकया जाएगा।  
सर, अगर हम पंजाब की बात करȂ, जहां से मȅ आता हूँ, तो वहां 72 work orders, 5 
Ģोजेक्ट्स ही हुए। Smart City Mission which requires special attention and मȅ मंतर्ी महोदय 
से िरक्वेÎट करूं गा िक वे खुद अमृतसर, जालंधर और लुिधयाना मȂ जाकर देखȂ, क्यȗिक 100 
शहरȗ मȂ ये भी शािमल थे।  वहां लगता है िक वे दूर-दूर तक Îमाटर् िसटीज नहीं हȅ।   
अब यिद हम मेटर्ो की बात करȂ, तो 27 शहरȗ मȂ मेटर्ो मैप है और 830 िकलोमीटर  
ऑपरेशनल भी हुआ है, but, unfortunately,  a big city like Chandigarh, which is closely 
connected with Mohali and Panchkula, वहां बहुत हेवी टर्ैिफक रहता है।   वह एक industrial 
city भी है और capital भी है, लेिकन वहां मेटर्ो का कोई Ģोजेक्ट नहीं है। लुिधयाना, जो 
Manchester of India कहलाता है, उसके  िलए मȅ through Chair मंतर्ी महोदय और इस 
िमिनÎटर्ी से आगर्ह करूं गा, to consider and provide budgetary provision and su
pport for 
metro connectivity in Chandigarh  and Ludhiana.  On property, जो heritage city का  
proposal, HRIDAY है, उसमȂ अमृतसर एक heritage city है, जहां दरबार साहब, Ǜी अमृतसर 
सािहब हȅ। वहां लाखȗ Ǜǉालु नतमÎतक होते हȅ। मȅ मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करूं गा िक आपको अकाल 
पुरख वाहेगुरु  संगत की भरपूर Åलेिंसग्स िमलȂगी, क्यȗिक जब हम दरबार साहब जाते हȅ, जहां 
खƺर साहब भी कई बार गए हȗगे, वहां जो गिलयारा ģी िकया गया है, उसमȂ बहुत congestion 
164
[RAJYA SABHA]

है।  Approach is very congested.  वहां िपछले 10-12 साल से अंडरगर्ाउंड मÊटी लेवल पािकȊ ग 
क े Ãलांस बन रहे हȅ, इसको इस साल जरूर  करना चािहए।  यहां मंतर्ी साहब और िमिनÎटर ऑफ़ 
Îटेट बैठे हȅ।  उनसे यह मेरी हाथ जोड़कर िवनती है िक दरबार साहब अमृतसर, जहां सारी 
दुिनया नतमÎतक होने आती है, जो िक ईÌवर का Îथान है, वहां मÊटी लेवल अंडरगर्ाउंड पािकȊ ग 
और उसकी जो मÊटीलेवल टनल है, वह बननी चािहए।    
अब हम "Îवच्छ भारत अिभयान" की बात करȂ, तो उसमȂ कोई physical and financial 
टारगेट्स नहीं हȅ।  िजस तरह से AMRUT, Smart City या पीएम आवास योजना जैसे other 
missions of Ministry क े टारगेट्स हȅ, उसी तरह "Îवच्छ भारत अिभयान" क े भी deliverables 
होने चािहए।  आज मȅने पढ़ा िक यह 5 साल की Îकीम है, लेिकन deliverables नहीं है, इसिलए 
आप उसे डर्ॉ करȂ।   अगर हम पंजाब की बात करȂ, तो वहां अमृतसर, लुिधयाना और जालंधर जैसे 
शहर काफी बड़े मेटर्ो िसटीज़ हȅ।  आप जाकर देिखए िक क्या वहां कहीं पर Îवच्छता है?  अगर 
इन जैसे बड़े शहरȗ मȂ हम "Îवच्छ भारत अिभयान" को टारगेट्स या deliverables क े साथ लागू 
नहीं करȂगे तो इस Îकीम का कोई फायदा नहीं  होगा, िजसे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने खुद लाँज िकया था। 
मȅ भी उसका brand ambassador, उसका पाटर् रहा, लेिकन वह कहीं न कहीं अब dilute हो रही 
है।  
 अंत मȂ मȅ आपका ध्यान बहुत महत्वपूणर् और संवेदनशील मुǈे की ओर आकिर्षत करता हूं। 
वषर् 1984 मȂ िदÊली मȂ हुए िनदȘष िसखȗ क े नरसंहार क े बारे मȂ सदन मȂ सबको पता है िक उनके  
ऊपर इतना ज़
ुÊम हुआ। मȅ इस पिवतर् सदन मȂ पहले उस घटना की कड़े शÅदȗ मȂ िंनदा करता हूं 
और मȅ कहना चाहता ह
ूं िक कोई भी मुआवज़ा, घर या Äलैट उनके  घावȗ को पूरी तरह से नहीं भर 
सकता। िदÊली अबर्न शेÊटर बोडर्, जो 1985 मȂ सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट का पाटर् था, उसने िसख नरसंहार 
पीिड़तȗ को Äलैट दे िदए, िजसका मूÊय 27,000 रुपय े था, इन्हȗने 3,000 
रुपय े िदए, बाकी िकÎतȗ 
पर Åयाज दर Åयाज, चकर्वतीर् Åयाज लगा िदया। वे बेचारे ितलक िवहार और मंगोलपुरी मȂ बैठे हȅ।  
मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी जी से और मंतर्ालय से हाथ जोड़कर िवनती करत
ा हूं िक उनका कज़ार् 
माफ करके  िदÊली सरकार को - क्यȗिक अब The Delhi Urban Shel ter Improvement Board 
सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट से िदÊली गवनर्मȂट क े under है और आपको पता है िक िदÊली पूरी statehood 
नहीं है, तो िमलजुल कर ही काम हो सकता है। उन बेचारȗ को इसके  बीच मȂ न उलझाएं। अब 
1984 riot victim की तीसरी
 जेनरेशन है। आज तक ये Äलैट इनके  नाम नहीं हुए। मȅ 1 नव ंबर को 
ितलक िवहार गया था, मुझे रोना आ गया। हमारे पिरवार क
े  भी पांच सदÎय शहीद हो गए थे। 
उनके  Äलैट्स की रिजÎटर्ी करा कर, उन्हȂ मकान देकर, उनका इंटरेÎट वेवर कर िदया जाए। मȅ 
आपसे इसमȂ suitably budgetary provision की गुज़ािरश करता हूं। इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ मȅ अपनी 
बात समाÃत करता हूं। जय-िहन्द! 
 
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Thank you. Now Shri Muzibulla Khan.  
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान ( ओिडशा) : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, शहरी िवकास म
ंतर्ालय क े बारे मȂ जो 
िडÎकशन हो रहा है, उसके  बारे मȂ मȅ अपना पक्ष रखना चाहता हूं। ओिडशा मȂ जब नवीन बाबू की 
सरकार थी, तब Îमाटर् िसटी बनाने क े िलए भुवनेÌवर, कटक
, राउरके ला, संबलपुर और ĤǨपुर 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
165

को चुना गया था और काम भी उसी तरह आगे बढ़ा। कई साल पहले लोगȗ ने िजस भुवनेÌवर को 
देखा था और अभी का भुवनेÌवर देखने क े बाद कोई भी कह सकता है िक भुवनेÌवर क ैसी Îमाटर् 
िसटी बनायी गयी है! इसी कारण से सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट का जो अबर्न िडपाटर्मȂट है, वह Îमाटर् िसटी 
क े िहसाब स
े भुवनेÌवर को कई बार पुरÎकृ त कर चुका है और अवाडर् भी दे चुका है। यह काम 
करने क े तरीके  क े ऊपर िनभर्र करता ह
ै िक शहरी िवकास को िकस तरीके  से करना चािहए। 
उसके  साथ-साथ Îपोट्सर् का भी डेवलपमȂट िकया गया है, ओिडशा मȂ हॉकी वÊडर् कप आयोजन 
भी िकया गया है। जब दूसरी बार ओिडशा मȂ हॉकी वÊडर् कप का आयोजन िकया गया, तो 
राउरके ला मȂ िबरसा मुंडा जी क े नाम पर एक Îटेिडयम बनाया गया, िजसे बहुत कम समय म
Ȃ, डेढ़ 
साल से भी कम समय मȂ बनाया गया और वÊडर् कप का आयोजन िकया गया। इस तरीके  स े अबर्न 
सेक्टर को, शहरȗ को िकस तरीके  से डेवलप िकया जाता है, वह हमारे नेता Ǜी नवीन पटनायक 
जी, उनके  मुख्यमंतर्ी काल मȂ कर चुक े हȅ। अबर्न सेक्टर को डेवलप करने क े िलए सबसे बड़ी चीज 
होती है, कनेिक्टिवटी - राÎता अच्छा होना चािहए, लोग
 उस राÎते से ठीक से सुिवधापूवर्क जा 
सकȂ, ठीक से अपनी जगह पर पहुंच सकȂ । इसी कारण राज्य सरकार अपने फ ं ड से एक मेटर्ो 
Ģोजेक्ट लेकर आई, िजसकी foundati
on नवीन बाबू ने अĢैल, 2023 मȂ रखी। 
वह मेटर्ो भुवनेÌवर, पुरी और कटक को कनेक्ट करने क े िलए दी गई थी।  इसका कारण 
यह था िक पुरी मȂ भगवान जगन्नाथ का मंिदर है और हजारȗ Ǜǉालु हर रोज भगवान क े दशर्न 
करने पुरी आते हȅ।  जब रथ यातर्ा का समय आता है, तब तो बहुत ही असुिवधा की िÎथित मȂ लोग 
आ जाते हȅ, बहुत भीड़ हो जाती है।  इसी क े कारण बहुत जरूरी  है िक एक  मेटर्ो Ģोजेक्ट पुरी, 
भुवनेÌवर और कटक तक होना चािहए, तािक लोगȗ को आने-जाने की सुिवधा हो सके ।  मान्यवर, 
अभी सदÎयगण जो िडÎकशन कर रहे थे िक शहर मȂ क ैसा आवास तैयार करना चािहए, क ै से 
लोगȗ की हेÊप करनी चािहए।  हमारी राज्य सरकार, उस टाइम की राज्
य सरकार माननीय मुख्य 
मंतर्ी नवीन पटनायक जी ने 'जागा िमशन'  की घोषणा की।  अथार्त ÎलÇस मȂ जो लोग रहते हȅ, 
उनको अपनी जगह का अिधकार देना, उनको जगह का पƺा देना, तो यह िमशन इसी क े िलए 
िकया गया था।  उसके  साथ-साथ उन लोगȗ को पक्का घर द
ेना, घर बनाकर देना।  आप लोग 
जाकर देख भी सकते हȅ िक ÎलÇस क े लोगȗ को रहने क े िलए पक्के  मकान राज्य सरकार ने बना 
कर िदए हȅ।  लेिकन अभी (पीएमएवाई) Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना क े बारे मȂ जो िडÎकशन हो 
रहा था, तो शहर मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना का जो फ ं ड है, यह सुनने मȂ आया िक वहां पर 
लाख-डेढ़ लाख रुपय े हȅ।  डेढ़ लाख रुपय े मȂ तो घर नहीं बन सकता है।  क ै से एक घर बनेगा? 
इसके  बारे जरूर  क Ȃ दर् सरकार को सोचना पड़ेगा िक इतने कम पैसे मȂ घर नहीं बन सकता।  अगर
 
वे सोचते हȅ िक इतने कम पैसे मȂ घर बनता है, तो मेरा उनसे अनुरोध है िक वे Îलमवालȗ को घर 
बनाकर ही दे दȂ, तािक उनको तकलीफ न हो।  अभी तो ओिडशा मȂ उन
की सरकार भी बन गई है 
और मȅ समझता हूं िक कोई असुिवधा भी नहीं होगी, क्यȗिक  हर बार हम लोग सुनते थे िक डबल 
इंजन की सरकार होगी, तो हम लोग सब करȂगे, तो अच्छी बात है।  अब डबल इंजन सरकार हो 
गई है, तो सब काम जरूर  हȗगे, यह हम उÇमीद करते हȅ।  जो गरीब लोग, जो गांव से शहर की 
तरफ आते हȅ क ु छ काम-काज क े िलए आते हȅ, अपने बच्चȗ को पढ़ाने क े िलए आते हȅ, ये सब धीरे-
धीरे ÎलÇस मȂ रहने कोिशश
 करते हȅ और भीड़ जम जाती है।  सरकार को इस पर ध्यान देना होगा 
और उनके  रहने की ËयवÎथा करनी होगी।  Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना क े फ
ं ड को बढ़ाना होगा, 
166
[RAJYA SABHA]

तभी लोगȗ को सारी सुिवधा िमल सकती है।  लाÎट मȂ मȅ डर्ेनेज िसÎटम क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहता हूं।  
भुवनेÌवर मȂ भी डर्ेनेज की समÎया है, ĢॉÅलम है, क्यȗिक जब बािरश होती है, तूफान आता है, तो 
पानी जम जाता है, लोगȗ को बहुत तकलीफ होती है।  न क ेवल भुवनेÌवर, देश क े बड़े-बड़े शहरȗ 
मȂ, वह शा
यद चेन्नई मȂ हो, िदÊली मȂ हो, मुंबई मȂ हो, आप जब टीवी मȂ बािरश क े मौसम मȂ देखते 
हȅ, तो वही िदखता है िक कोई घर स
े िनकल नहीं सकता, कोई पानी मȂ ड ू ब रहा है, िकसी की कार 
बहती जा रही है।  इसका मतलब अबर्न सेक्टर मȂ सही तरीके  से जो डेवलपमȂट होना चािहए, वह 
अभी तक नहीं हुआ है।  मȅ क Ȃ दर् सराकर से अनुरोध करूं गा  और यह मेरी गुजािरश भी है िक इन 
सब चीजȗ को देखना होगा, वरना, जो घटनाएं घटती हȅ, क ु छ लोगȗ की जान चली गई, क ु छ 
Îटू डȂट्स की जान चली गई, जैसा अभी दो-तीन िदन पह ली िदÊली मȂ हादसा हुआ, वह बहुत 
दुखद हादसा था।  इन सब चीजȗ को रोकने क े िलए जो नेचुरल सोसȃज से पानी जाने की सुिवधा 
थी, Ģबंध था बहुत पहले, उसको बहुत जगह बंद कर िदया गया और उसके  ऊपर जबरदÎती घर 
बना िदए गए, तो इसको हटाना होगा, इसको िक्लयर करना होगा।  जब तक पानी जाने की 
स
ुिवधा नहीं होगी, तब तक देश मȂ पानी जमा होने की जो समÎया है, यह खत्म नहीं होगी।  इसके  
ऊपर आप लोगȗ को ध्यान देना होगा।   मȅ उÇमीद करूं गा िक कम से कम क Ȃ दर् सरकार हर बड़े 
शहर मȂ पानी को िक्लयर करने की ËयवÎथा करे।   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA): Hon. Member, please conclude.  
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान : त
ािक हम लोग जो Îमाटर् िसटी बनाने का सपना देख रहे हȅ, वह पूरा हो सके ।  
इस उÇमीद क े साथ मȅ िफर एक बार गुजािरश करूं गा िक आप लोग इसको ध्यान म
Ȃ रखȂ और 
Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना मȂ भी लोगȗ क े जो डेढ़ लाख रुपय े हȅ, उसको बढ़ाकर ज्यादा िक या 
जाए।        
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. SASMIT PATRA):  Now, Dr. M. Thambidurai.  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :   Sir, on behalf of the AIADMK Party, and also 
my leader, Edappadi K. Palaniswami, I am  participating in the discussion on the 
Working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.  I am very happy to see that our 
Minister, who has come from Haryana, has done a lot of work there as the Chief 
Minister.  Now, he has come here. I hope that under his leadership, most of these 
problems of urban development can be solved. 
Sir, just now, my colleague from Tamil Nadu spoke.  They want a lot of money 
for development of Tamil Nadu cities.  Firs t of all, Tamil Nadu is one of the most 
urbanised States in the country.  Many prob lems, such as lack of  drinking water and 
lack of sanitation facilities, are being faced there. The residents of Chennai and other 
cities face innumerable issues on a daily ba sis, right from bad roads, poor quality of 
water, power cuts, safety and connectivity.    
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
167

(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
The present Government of Tamil Nadu is  paying very scant attention to these 
issues, even though it is collecting a lot of money by way of increasing property tax 
and increase in bus fare.  It is collecting revenue in whichever way it is possible, but 
the Government is not providing any amenit ies to the public.  The Government of 
Tamil Nadu did not learn from the past mist akes and added to the woes of the people 
of Tamil Nadu.  Then, he mentioned abou t the Metro project.  Metro project was 
initiated at the time when our Amma was th e Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu.  Edappadi 
K. Palaniswami, as the Chief Minister, also took a lot of efforts to see that Metro
project came to Tamil Nadu.  The present DMK Government keeps on boasting about
itself that they are bringing these kinds of projects, but, at the same time, they keep
on telling that the Central Government is no t giving funds.  Bu t whatever funds are
given, they are not properly utilized.  There are a lot of accusation s in this regard.
Whatever budget is given, that is misuse d by the DMK Government, but they always
put the blame on the Central Government. That  is the main problem.  Even on small
houses, the property tax has been increased. Our AIADMK Party leader, Edappadi K.
Palaniswami, staged a lot of agitation. We have demonstrated that DMK Government
is not at all caring about the urban ci ties. The projects are not being properly
completed.
Regarding smart city, I would request th e hon. Minister, through you, Sir, 
especially about Hosur, whic h is the industrial corridor. Our leader, Edappadi K. 
Palaniswami, declared a corporation of that area.  We need to s ee that this city can 
be declared as a smart city.   I was a Member  of Lok Sabha from Karur.  Karur is also 
a textile city.  The city is exporting a lot of garments throughout the world and getting 
a lot of foreign exchange for our country.  But, the DMK Govern ment is not paying 
any attention to these kinds of cities to be developed as smart cities. Therefore, I 
request the hon. Minister that Karur and Hosur must be developed because I belong 
to this area.  I have represented Karur Lok Sabha constituency many times.  And 
Hosur is also my native place, which is in Krishnagiri district of Tamil Nadu. Therefore, 
I request the hon. Minister to give a lot of money to declare these cities as smart 
cities.  The DMK Government has requested for a lot of money, but I want to see 
whether they are properly utilizing that mo ney or not.  Once they said they would 
spend Rs.4,000 crores, but when the flood came in Madras city, it became clear that 
they had not at all spent the money.   They  only keep on boasting about themselves. 
They are spending that, but a lot of corrupt ion is taking place.  That is what Tamil 
Nadu people are facing.  That  is why, I request the Centra l Government to interfere in 
168
[RAJYA SABHA]

this matter to take necessary action.  The co rruption is taking place.  Especially the 
DMK Government is not for the people.  They are only for the families they are 
running.  Therefore, it is high time to take  necessary action.  I request, through you, 
Sir, and also thank you very much for giving me time.  You are a senior Member 
sitting there. 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I am not senior to you.  You are very senior Dr. M. Thambidurai.  
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Sir, you are an excellent lawyer.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: When I was a new Member of Parliament... 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI : Sir, you are a senior lawyer.   You are defender of this 
country.  You are defending our rights.  You are sitting in a high place.  Therefore, I 
request, through you, to the Minister to take necessary action.  The DMK government 
is misusing the funds as they are not at all spending the same for the urban 
development, due to which poor people are facing a lot of problems.  Thank you very 
much.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Now, Shri Mithlesh Kumar.  You have ten minutes. 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार (उǄर Ģदेश):  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, आज आपने मुझे आवासन और 
शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय क े कायर्करण क े संबंध मȂ हो रही चचार् मȂ भाग लेने का अवसर िदया है, इसके
िलए मȅ आपका बहुत -बहुत आभारी हूं। मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े
लगातार ती
सरे कायर्काल क े Ģथम बजट क े समथर्न मȂ आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय क े
कायर्करण पर बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं और आपको पुन: बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देता हूं।  
महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ǎारा िवकिसत भारत क े दृिÍटकोण को आगे बढ़ाने क
े  
िलए नौ Ģाथिमकताओं पर ध्यान क
Ȃिदर्त करके  इस बजट का लÑय अथर्ËयवÎथा क े भीतर पयार्Ãत 
अवसर पैदा करना है। मुझे आपको यह बताते हुए खुशी हो रही है िक एनडीए सरकार क े तहत 
िविभन्न क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ भारत क े िवकास क े िलए िनरंतर Ģयास िकए जा रहे हȅ। इन Ģयासȗ मȂ उत्पादकता 
बढ़ाना, नौकिरयाँ पैदा करना ,िव
िनमार्ण को बढ़ावा देना, सामािजक न्याय को बढ़ावा देना, शहरी 
िवकास को आगे बढ़ाना, ऊजार् सुरक्षा सुिनिÌचत करना, बुिनयादी ढाँचȗ का िवÎतार करना, 
नवाचार को बढ़ावा देना और साथर्क सुधार लागू करना शािमल ह
ȅ। इनमȂ से Ģत्येक Ģाथिमकता 
सभी क े िलए एक अिधक मजबूत समृǉ राÍटर् बनाने की हमारी Ģितबǉता को दशार्ती है। हमारी 
माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी ǎारा घोिषत बजट का लÑय राजÎव सृजन को बढ़ाना है।  
महोदय, 2024-25क े बजट मȂ दीघर्कािलक पूंजीगत लाभ को 10 Ģितशत से बढ़ाकर  12.
5 
Ģितशत तक कर िदया गया है। महोदय, इस वषर् सरकार ने िवशेषकर िविनमार्ण क्षेतर् मȂ रोजगार 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
169

सृजन पर जोर िदया है। एनडीए सरकार 5 वषș की अविध मȂ िनयोƪाओं और कायर्बल मȂ Ģवेश 
करने वाले 30 लाख युवाओं - दोनȗ क े िलए महत्वपूणर् रोजगार क े अवसर पैदा करने क े िलए 
Ģितबǉ है।  
महोदय, कमर्चारी भिवÍय िनिध संगठन क े योगदान क े िलए लिक्षत Ģोत्साहन Ģदान करके
इसको हािसल िकया जा रहा ह
ै, जो हमारी तेजी से िवकिसत हो रही अथर्ËयवÎथा क े िलए 
रोजगार की जरूरतȗ को पूरा करने क े िलए एक रणनीितकार दृिÍटकोण को भी दशार्ता है।  
महोदय, बजट मȂ  30 लाख से अिधक आबादी वाले  14 बड़े शहरȗ क े िलए पारागमन उन्मुख 
िवकास योजना का ĢÎताव रखा गया है। इस बजट म
Ȃ इस बात पर जोर िदया गया है िक क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार शहरȗ को िवकास क Ȃ दर् क े रूप  मȂ िवकिसत करने क े िलए राज्यȗ क े साथ िमलकर काम 
करेगी। इन आिर्थक और पारागमन िनयोजन तथा नगर िनयोजन योजनाओं का उपयोग करके  
पेरी अरबन क्षेतर्ȗ क े ËयविÎथत िवकास  को ĢाÃत िकया जाए
गा। माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने अपने बजट 
भाषण मȂ कहा है िक  30 लाख से अिधक आबादी वाले  14 बड़े शहरȗ क े िलए उन्मुƪ िवकास 
योजनाएं त
ैयार की जाएंगी। इसके  साथ ही कायार्न्वयन और िवǄ पोषण रणनीित भी बनाई 
जाएगी।  
महोदय, बजट मȂ अगले पाँच वषș क े िलए  'पीएम आवास योजना शहरी  2.0' क े तहत  1  
करोड़ शहरी गरीब और मध्यम वगीर्य पिरवारȗ क े  आवासȗ की जरूरतȗ को पूरा िकया जाएगा  
इसके  िलए 'पीएम आवास योजना शहरी  2.0' की घोषणा की गई है, िजसमȂ 1  करोड़ से अितिरƪ 
घरȗ क े िनमार्ण क े िलए पाँच वषș मȂ  2.2 लाख करोड़ रुपय े की क Ȃदर्ीय सहायता शािमल है।  
मान्यवर, मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की सोच है िक गाँव मȂ ही 
नहीं, बिÊक शहरȗ पर भी ध्यान िदया जाए। जब से हमारी सरकार आई है ,तब से ही शहरȗ क े 
अंदर गरीबȗ क े िलए और मध्यम वगीर्य लोगȗ क े िलए  आवास बनाए गए हȅ। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी को 
इस बात क े िलए बधाई देता हूं िक उनके  ǎारा 1 करोड़ आवास बनाने क े िलए ' पीएम आवास 
योजना शहरी  2.0' क े तहत 10 लाख करोड़ रुपय े क े िनवेश से 1 करोड़ शहरी गरीब और मध्मम 
वगर् क
े  पिरवारȗ की आवास संबंधी जरूरतȗ को पूरा िकया जाएगा।        
 अगले पाँच वषș मȂ 2.2 लाख करोड़ रुपए  की क Ȃदर्ीय सहायता शािमल होगी। िकफायती 
दरȗ पर ऋण की सुिवधा क े िलए Åयाज सिÅसडी का Ģावधान भी िकया गया है। इसके  अलावा, बड़ी 
उपलÅधता क े साथ, क ुशल और पारदशीर् िकराए क े आवास, बाजारȗ क े िलए सक्षम नीितयाँ और 
िनगम भी लागू िकए जाएंगे। माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने चुिंनदा शहरȗ मȂ 100 साÃतािहक हाट या 
Îटर्ीट फ ू ड हब क े िवकास का समथर्न करने क े िलए एक योजना का ĢÎताव रखा ह ै। माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी ने कहा है िक औǏोिगक Ǜिमकȗ क े िलए छातर्ावास Ģकार क े आवास क े साथ िकराए क े 
आवास को बीजीएफ समथर्न और Ģमुख उǏोगȗ क े Ģितबǉता क े साथ पीपी मोड पर सुगम बनाया 
जाएगा ,क्यȗिक शहरȗ मȂ काम करने क े िलए जब जहाज से लोग जाते हȅ, तो उनको िकराए पर 
मकान बहुत महंगा िमलता है ,इसिलए बेहतरता क े साथ क ुशल और पारदशीर् िकराए क े आवास 
बाजारȗ क े िलए सक्षम नीितयाँ और िनगम िनयम भी लागू िकए जाएंगे। बजट मȂ पीएमजेएवाई 
शहरी
 योजना क े तहत, दस लाख करोड़ रुपए  का िवशाल आवंटन, िजसका लÑय 3 करोड़ घर 
बनाना , साथ ही, 12 औǏोिगक  पाकș को मंजूरी देना, शहरी िवकास क े िलए सरकार की 
Ģितबǉता को िदखाता है। मान्यवर, वतर्मान मȂ देश क े 27 शहरȗ मȂ मेटर्ो रेल चालू है या 
170
[RAJYA SABHA]

िनमार्णाधीन है। 2002 मȂ िदÊली मȂ पहली आधुिनक मेटर्ो लाइन क े उǇाटन क े साथ , आज 21 
िविभन्न शहरȗ मȂ ,अथार्त िदÊली और सात एनसीआर शहरȗ - बȂगलुरु  ,हैदराबाद, कोलकाता मȂ 
लगभग 945 िकलोमीटर रेल लाइनȂ, 34 िकलोमीटर िदÊली मेरठ आरटीएस चालू है। चेन्नई ,
जयपुर, कोिच्च, लखनऊ, आगरा, म
ुंबई, अहमदाबाद, नागपुर, कानपुर और पुणे, इन लाइनȗ पर 
रोजाना करीब एक करोड़ यातर्ी सफर करते हȅ। 2014 से पहले मातर् पाँच शहरȗ मȂ 248 िकलोमीटर 
का मेटर्ो नेटवकर् चालू था। िपछले दस वषș मȂ लगभग 700 िकलोमीटर रूट  ल ंबाई की मेटर्ो लाइन 
चालू हो गई है। इसके  अलावा , देश भर क े िविभन्न शहरȗ मȂ, जैसे िदÊली, गुड़गांव, बȂगलुरु , 
कोलकाता, चेन्नई, कोिच्च, मुंबई, नागपुर, अहमदाबाद, गांधीनगर, पुणे, कानपुर मȂ लगभग 939 
िकलोमीटर लंबी मेटर्ो रेल पिरयोजना
एं िनमार्णाधीन हȅ। आगरा, भोपाल, इंदौर, पटना, सूरत और 
मेरठ - मान्यवर ,मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक िदÊली और मेरठ क े बीच जो 82 िकलोमीटर की 
लंबाई थी ,वह पहले ढाई से तीन घंटे मȂ पूरी की जाती थी, लेिकन हमारे देश क े यशÎवी माननीय 
Ģधान म
ंतर्ी, माननीय Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े ǎारा इस योजना को क्षेतर्ीय रैिपड टर्ांिजट िसÎटम को 
2019 मȂ 30, 274 करोड़ रुपए  की लागत से मंजूरी दी गई थी। सािहबाबाद और दुहाई क े बीच 
Ģाथिमकता खंड का उǇाटन 2023 मȂ हुआ। दुहाई और मोदीनगर उǄर क े बीच एक खंड का 
उǇाटन माचर्, 2024 मȂ िकया गया है। वतर्मान मȂ, 34 िकलोमीटर आरआरटीएस नेटवकर् लाग
ू है। 
भौितक रूप  से शुरू  की गई 352 पिरयोजनाओ ं क े मुकाबले पयार्वरण अनुक ू ल पिरवहन और 
ब
ुिनयादी ढांचे को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए 320 गर्ीन मोिबिलटी पिरयोजनाएं पूरी हो चुकी हȅ। ऊजार् 
संरक्षण को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए 101 लाख पहचाने गए पारंपिरक Îटर्ीट लाइट्स मȂ से 99 लाख को 
ऊजार् क ुशल एलईडी से बदल िदया गया है, िजसके  पिरणाम Îवरूप Ģितवषर् 665.84 करोड़ 
य
ूिनट की अनुमािनत ऊजार् बचत हुई है और काबर्न डाइऑक्साइड उत्सजर्न मȂ Ģित वषर् 45.94 
लाख टन की कमी आई है। शहरȗ को कर् ेिडट बनाने क े िलए 468 शहरȗ मȂ कर् ेिडट रेिंटग का काम 
पूरा हो चुका है। 
 162 शहरȗ को िनव
ेश योग्य गर्ेड रेिंटग, आईजीआर ĢाÃत हुई है।  िजसमȂ ' ए' या उससे 
ऊपर की रेिंटग वाले 34 शहर  शािमल ह ȅ।  अहमदाबाद, अमरावती, भोपाल, गािजयाबाद, 
हैदराबाद, इंदौर, लखनऊ, पुणे, सूरत, वडोदरा, िवशाखापटनम और िंपपरी, िंचचवाड...(समय 
की घंटी)... नगरपािलका बॉन्ड क े माध्यम से 4,684 करोड़ रुपय े जुटाए गए हȅ।  बॉन्ड जारी करने 
क े िलए  Ģोत्साहन क े रूप  मȂ 315.83 करोड़ जारी िकए हȅ।  िनमार्ण परिमट को ऑनलाइन जारी 
करने की सुिवधा क े िलए 449 अमृत शहरȗ सिहत 3,599 ...(समय की घं
टी)... सर, एक िमनट मȂ 
समाÃत कर दूंगा। ऑनलाइन िबिंलग परिमशन िसÎटम को चालू िकया गया है।    
जल आपूिर्त और Îवच्छता क े बारे मȂ माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने घोषणा की है िक क Ȃ दर्, 
राज्य सरकारȗ व िवकास ब
ȅकȗ क े साथ साझेदारी मȂ बȅक योग्य पिरयोजना क े माध्यम से 100 बड़े 
शहरȗ को जल आपूिर्त, सीवेज, उपचार और ठोस अपिशÍट Ģबंधन पिरयोजनȗ मȂ सेवाओं को बढ़ा 
िदया गया है।   
MR. CHAIRMAN : Thank you, Mithlesh ji. 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
171

Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार :  साहब, बस एक िमनट और दे दȂ। शहरȗ का िवकास क्यȗ जरूरी  है?  सर, 
बस आधे िमनट मȂ मȅ अपनी बात खत्म कर दूंगा।  हम लोग नगर िनगम मȂ छोटे शहरȗ मȂ रहते हȅ, 
तो वहां क े बच्चȗ को जब Îकू िंलग करनी होती है, चाहे इंजीिनयिंरग की पढ़ाई हो, चाहे म ेिडकल 
की पढ़ाई हो, चाहे मैनेजमȂट की पढ़ाई हो, उसके  िलए उनको बड़े शहरȗ की तरफ देखना पड़ता 
है।  जब वे नौकरी ĢाÃत करने जाते हȅ, तो कहा जाता है िक छोटे शहर से पढ़कर आए हȅ, तो 
इंजीिनयर लोग
ȗ को वे लोग पीछे बैठा देते हȅ।  इसिलए मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी जी से िनवेदन है िक 
शहरȗ को बढ़ावा दȂ और शाहजहांपुर, जहां से मȅ आता हूं, वह नगर िनगम हो गया है, अगर हो 
सके , तो वहां क े िलए नगर िनगम की क ु छ ËयवÎथा कर दȂ।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, if the Ho
use agrees, the remaining discussion on 
the working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs will be resumed at 1.00 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Yes, Sir. 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, we had taken up permitted Special Mentions 
earlier in the day.  All Members up to Sl.N o. 31, except the hon. Member at Sl. No. 9 
who was absent, had made their respectiv e Special Mentions.  I will now call the 
remaining Members starting with serial number 32.  Shri Mithlesh Kumar.   
SPECIAL MENTIONS - Contd. 
Demand for Mailani-F
arrukhabad new railway line project 
Ǜी िमथलेश क ुमार (उǄर Ģदेश) :  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से सरकार 
का ध्यान मैलानी-फरुर्खाबाद नई रेल लाइन पिरयोजना क े तरफ आकृ Íट कराना चाहता हूँ।  
मैलानी-फरुर्खाबाद नई रेलवे लाइन िबछाने हेतु सवȃ का कायर् पूणर् हो चुका है, परंतु इस 
पिरयोजना पर अभी तक कायर् Ģारंभ नहीं हो सका हैI  
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए I) 
लगभग 150 िकलोमीटर लंबी इस रेल पिरयोजना क
े  पूरा होने क े बाद इस क्षेतर् मȂ िनवास करने 
वाले लाखȗ लोगȗ क े िलए वरदान सािबत होगा तथा इस िपछड़े क्षेतर् मȂ Ëयवसाय तथा रोजगार क े 
नए अवसर सृिजत हȗगे तथा रेलवे की आय मȂ वृिǉ होगी I  
  यह नई रेल लाइन िवकास क े नए आयाम Îथािपत करने क े साथ-साथ सामिरक 
दृिÍटकोण से भी उपयोगी बन सके गी।  सैन्य छाविनयȗ क े कारण शाहजहांपुर और फतेहगढ़ जैसे 
172
[RAJYA SABHA]

सुरक्षा की दृिÍट से सामिरक क Ȃदर्ȗ का जुड़ाव सीधे मथुरा, आगरा, ग्वािलयर, झांसी तथा टनकपुर 
िÎथत छाविनयȗ से होने से संवेदनशील रहने वाली उǄरी सीमा को मजबूती िमल सके गी। 
अत: मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय रेल मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करना चाहूंगा िक इस जनिहत 
की पिरयोजना मैलानी-फरुर्खाबाद नई रेल लाइन पर इसी वतर्मान बजट मȂ  धन अवमुƪ करके  
यथाशीघर् कायर् का श
ुभारंभ कराने की क ृपा करȂ, िजससे इस पिरयोजना क े पूरा होने क े बाद क्षेतर् 
क े िवकास क े साथ-साथ देश को सामिरक मजबूती िमलेगी I             
Ǜी उपसभापित :  माननीय Ǜी स
ंजय राउत जी, present नहीं हȅ।  माननीय डा. राधा मोहन दास 
अगर्वाल जी, मौजूद नहीं हȅ।  माननीय Ǜी नीरज डांगी जी।  
Demand for directions for mandatory display of the Preamble of C
onstitution of India 
in all the Government institutions 
SHRI NEERAJ DANGI (Rajasthan) : Sir, the Government of India has mandated the 
display of Mahatma Gandhi's portrait in all Government offices, public institutions and 
courts, as a mark of respect and to inspire citizens. All Government institutions have 
been directed to display Dr. Ambedkar's portrait also, recognizing his contributions to 
social justice, equality and the Constituti on of India. This mandate is based on 
Supreme Court directives and various Gove rnment notifications and circulars from 
2013 to 2019. Compulsory displaying these portraits serves as a reminder of their 
contributions to India's freedom, social justice and constitutional values.  
In year 2019, the Supreme Court directed all educational institutions to display 
the Preamble of the Constitution of India in their premises. Displaying the Preamble 
acknowledges its significance as an integral  part of the Constitution and India's 
governance framework. Like all schools and educational institutions, all Government 
institutions should also display the Prea mble prominently, fostering a sense of 
national unity, values and constitutional re sponsibility. The display of Preamble of the 
Constitution of India in all Government institutions will: firstly, promote national 
integration, reflecting the country's commitment to sovereignty, socialism, secularism 
and democracy; secondly, embody the fundam ental values and principles enshrined 
in the Constitution, serving as a reminder to public servants; thirdly, inspire and 
educate citizens about India's constitution al heritage and core values; fourthly, 
symbolize the national pride and identity, reflecting the co untry's history, philosophy 
and aspirations. 
Therefore, Sir, I urge the Government of  India to issue appropriate direction to 
all Government institutions for mandatory di splaying the Preamble of the Constitution 
of India in their premises. Thank you.  
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
173

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special
 Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri Neeraj Dangi: Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala).     
      Shri Sanjay Singh; not present. Now, Dr. Dinesh Sharma.  माननीय िदनेश जी, आप 
approved text ही पढ़ सकते हȅ। 
Demand for direct train services from Lucknow to various other railway stations 
डा. िदनेश शमार् (उǄर Ģदेश) : उपसभापित महोदय, लखनऊ की जनता की महत्वपूणर् माँग को 
उठाने की अनुमित देने क े िलए आपका कोिटश: धन्यवाद। 
 लखनऊ, उǄर Ģदेश की राजधा नी, अपने सांÎकृ ितक और धािर्मक महत्व क े िलए Ģिसǉ है।  
यहाँ क े नागिरकȗ की Ģबल इच्छा है िक लखनऊ से Ǜीमाता वैÍणो देवी मंिदर (कटरा), Ǜी खाटू 
Ìयाम मंिदर ( िंरगस रेलवे Îटेशन, सीकर, राजÎथान), Ǜी महाकालेÌवर मंिदर ( उज्जैन) और 
िशरडी साई मंिदर (महाराÍटर्) क े िलए सीधी टर्ेन सेवाएँ शुरू  की जाएँ।  ये Îथल Ģमुख िहन्दू तीथर् 
Îथान हȅ।  लखनऊ से लाखȗ Ǜǉालु इन Îथलȗ की यातर्ा करते ह
ȅ।  सीधी टर्ेन सेवाओं क े अभाव मȂ 
याितर्यȗ को कई बार टर्
ेन बदलनी पड़ती है, िजससे यातर्ा किठन और समयसाध्य हो जाती है।  
सीधी टर्ेन सेवाएँ यातर्ा को सरल और सुिवधाजनक बनाएँगी।  सीधी टर्ेन सेवाओं से पयर्टन को 
बढ़ावा िमलेगा।  अिधक Ǜǉालु और पयर्टक लखनऊ से यातर्ा करȂगे, िजससे शहर क े होटल और 
पयर्टन उǏोग को आिर्थक लाभ होगा और रोजगार क े नए अवसर सृिजत हȗगे।  वतर्मान मȂ 
लखनऊ से इन Îथलȗ तक पहुँचने क े िलए याितर्यȗ को कई चरणȗ मȂ यातर्ा करनी पड़ती है, 
िजससे समय और ऊजार् Ëयथर् होती ह
ै।  सीधी टर्ेन सेवाओं से समय की बचत होगी और यातर्ा 
आरामदायक हो जाएगी।  लखनऊ से इन Îथलȗ क े िलए सीधी टर्ेन सेवा शुरू  करना रेलवे की इस 
पहल का महत्वपूणर् कदम होगा। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से मȅ माननीय रेल मंतर्ी जी से माँग करना 
चाहता हूँ िक लोक महत्व क े इस िवषय को देखते हुए लखनऊ से इन Ģमुख तीथर् Îथलȗ क े िलए 
सीधी टर्ेन चलाई जाए।            
Demand for furthe
r improvement of facilities of Bharat Sanchar Nigam (BSNL) in 
Uttarakhand 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड): महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार का ध्यान उǄराखंड क े अंदर 
भारतीय संचार िनगम ǎारा दी जाने वाली मोबाइल एवं इंटरनेट सुिवधाओं मȂ और अिधक सुधार 
करने की ओर िदलाना चाहता  हूं। 
 महोदय, पहाड़ी राज्य होने क े कारण दूर-दराज क े गांवȗ को आज की संचार कर्ांित से 
जोड़ने क े उǈेÌय से, राज्य क े 6,000 अितिरƪ गांवȗ को संचार सुिवधा से जोड़ने का िनÌचय िकया 
गया था, परंतु मेरी जानकारी क े अनुसार अभी तक लगभग 2,000 गा ंवȗ को ही इस सुिवधा से 
174
[RAJYA SABHA]

जोड़ा जा सका है। 
  बीएसएनएल ǎारा 1,206 नए टावसर् लगाने क े लÑय को भी अभी तक पूणर् नहीं िकया गया 
है और दूर-दराज क े क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ जो टावसर् लगे हȅ, उनके  ǎारा मोबाइल कनेिक्टिवटी सुचारू  रूप  से 
नहीं चल पा रही है।  
  महोदय, आज क े संचार युग मȂ िशक्षा, ÎवाÎथ्य एवं आवागमन भी दूरसंचार
 एवं इंटरनेट 
नेटविकȊ ग पर सवार्िधक िनभर्र हो गया है।  मेरे राज्य मȂ जहां भारतीय Îटेट बȅक क े एटीएम को 
संचालन क े िलए बीएसएनएल कनेिक्टिवटी पर िनभर्र रहना पड़ता है, वहीं सीमा पर तैनात 
आइटीबीपी को भी आज इन्टरनेट एवं फोन की आवÌयकता रहती है।  अतः मȅ लोक-महत्व क े 
िवषय पर सरकार का ध्यान आकिर्षत करते हुए उǄराखंड राज्य क े दूर-दराज क े गांवȗ मȂ 
बीएसएनएल मोबाइल सुिवधा को दुरुÎत करने एवं उपभोƪाओं को 4G कनेिक्टिवटी का लाभ देने 
की मांग करता हूं। 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यव
ाद, माननीय महȂदर् भƺ जी।  माननीय Ǜी संजीव अरोड़ा, अनुपिÎथत।   
माननीय डा. क े. लÑमण, अनुपिÎथत।  माननीय Ǜी Ģकाश िचक बाराईक।  
Demand for giving ST Status to 11 left out castes of Gorkha Comm
unity and giving 
exemption to Gorkha brothers of the whole country in paramilitary forces 
Ǜी Ģकाश िचक बाराईक ( पिÌचमी बंगाल) :  महोदय, मȅ आज गोरखा समुदाय क े 11 छू टे हुए 
उप-समूहȗ से संबंिधत एक लंबे समय से चले आ रहे मुǈे पर ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ।   
 पूरे देश मȂ 1.25 करोड़ गोरखाओं की महत्वपूणर् आबादी होने क े बावजूद, वे अनुसूिचत 
जनजाित क े दजȃ और इसके  लाभ से वंिचत
 हȅ। हम गोरखा समुदाय की समृǉ सांÎकृ ितक िवरासत 
और हमारे राÍटर् मȂ उनके  योगदान से पिरिचत हȅ।  मȅ सरकार से इन 11 छू टे हुए उप-समूहȗ  जैसे- 
Rai, Limbu, Tamang, Gurung, Mangar, S unuwar, Thami, Bhujel, Newar, Jogi एवं 
Dewan को एसटी का दजार् द
ेने क े  िलए आवÌयक कदम उठाने का आगर्ह करता हूं।  इसके  साथ 
ही,  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से Gorkhaland Territorial Administration (GTA) की तरह पूरे देश मȂ, 
भारत-भर मȂ रहने वाले गोरखाओं क े िलए, अǉर्-सैिनक बलȗ की भतीर् मȂ उनको लंबाई मȂ छू ट देने 
क े िलए उिचत कदम उठाने का आगर्ह करता हूँ । 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद
, माननीय Ǜी Ģकाश िचक बाराईक जी।   माननीय डा. भागवत कराड़ 
जी। 
Concern over water scarcity in Marathwada Region 
DR. BHAGWAT KARAD (Maharashtra) :  Sir, in my constituency of Maharashtra, the 
Marathwada region is a drought prone area of the State, facing a problem of water 
scarcity each year.  The Marathwada regi on has only 1,688 Cubic Meter of water per 
[ 31 July, 2024 ]
175

Hectare, which is much more below the normal value of 3,000 Cubic Meter per 
Hectare. This necessitates the transfer of  nearly 260 TMC of water resource from 
other regions to Marathwada.  The Water Resources Department (WRD) of 
Government of Maharashtra has decided by re solution dated 19.9.2019 to transfer of 
155 TMC (168.75 TMC) water to Marathwada region.  However, no action has been 
initiated on this resolution in the last 5 year s.   In addition, the water of about 51 TMC 
will have to be transferred from Krishna basin.  Similarly, the water of 34 TMC is to be 
diverted from new scheme planned from the Wainganga-Nalganga dam by pipeline, 
to meet the shortage of Yeldari and Peng a n g a  d a m  o f  M a r a t h w a d a .   A s  s u c h  t h e  
overall deficit of 260 TMC of water for Marathwada can be met with by transfer of 
(155+51+34) 240 TMC of water from various regions at the first stage. 
It is thereby requested that the Central Government take initiatives and include 
the said schemes in River Link Project by providing necessary budgetary provision to 
overcome the water deficit of Marathwada region.  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Ajit Kumar B huyan; not present. Dr. M. Thambidurai; 
not present.   
Hon. Members, the House stands ad journed to meet at 11.00 a.m., on 
Thursday, the 1
st August, 2024. 
The House then adjourned at forty-five minutes past seven of the clock  
till eleven of the clock on Thursday, the 1st August, 2024. 
176
[RAJYA SABHA]

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 