Vol. 265               Friday, 
No. 15            9th August, 2024 
18  Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (pages 1 - 2) 
 Reference by the Chair - 
82nd Anniversary of the Quit India Movement(page 2) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 3 - 9) 
Statements by Ministers- 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 48th Report 
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Communications and Information Technology (page 9) 
Status of implementation of Recommenda tions/ Observations contained in the 
27th and 47th Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
C
ommittee on Communications and Information Technology (page 10) 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Status of implementation of 67th Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (page 10) 
Motion for Election to the Tobacco Board-Adopted (pages 10 -11) 
Motion for Election to the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority (APEDA) -Adopted (page 11) 
Motion for Election to the National Jute Board (NJB)-Adopted (pages 11-12) 
Leave of Absence - Granted (page 12) 
Regarding Notice received under rule 267(pages 12 - 13) 
Matters Raised With Permission- 
Demand to estab lish the Narayani Infantry Regiment to protect territorial 
integrity (pages 13 - 14) 
Demand for a unif ied counselling system for CUET UG admissions 
(pages 14 -15) 
Concern over devastation caused by cloud burst in Himachal Pradesh 
(pages 15 - 16) 
Demand for Government intervention to bail-out dedicated Ethanol Plants in 
India (pages 16 - 17) 
Demand for immediate action to close the existing gaps in the curriculum at 
IITs and other reputed institutions of the country (pages 18 - 19) 
Demand to include twins under the two children policy for Garib Kalyan Yojana 
and other Government sponsored schemes (pages 19 - 20) 
Demand to create a climate resilient infrastructure in Himachal Pradesh and 
announce a comprehensive rehabilitation package (pages 20 - 22) 
Demand to address the problem of pollution in Yamuna river (pages 22 - 23) 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Request for prioritization and  funding of the Itarsi-Tuticorin Railway
 Corridor  Scheme (page 24) 
Demand to design new electrical grids and sufficient charging points
 for  electrical vehicles (pages 24 - 26) 
Concern over violations of the Contract Labour Regulation Act (pages 26 - 27) 
Demand for provision of stoppage for Ernakulam-Pune Express train
 (No.22149/22150) at Thivim Station in Goa (pages 27 - 28)  
Demand to address the problem of begging in the country (pages 28 - 29) 
Demand to include fire  incid ents in the Himalayan states occurring
 during  summer season as natural disaster (pages 29 - 30) 
Demand to grant industry status to the Real Estate Sector (pages 30 - 31) 
Demand to include Gauriganj-Chitrako ot highway under Bharatmala
 project (page 31) 
Regarding few points raised in the House (pages 31 - 38) 
Observations by the Chair (pages 38 - 50) 
Message from Lok Sabha -Reported (pages 50 - 52) 
Motion for Nomination to the Joint Committee on the Waqf (Amendment), Bill, 2024 
-Adopted (page 52)
Valedictory Remarks (pages 53 - 54) 
National Song (page 54) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 

RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 9th August, 2024/18 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am pleased to extend greetings to hon. Members 
of Parliament, Shri Sandosh Kumar P, whos e birthday is today, and to Shri Golla 
Baburao and Shri Nabam Rebia whose birthdays are tomorrow, the 10th August.  
Shri Sandosh Kumar, a Member of this august House since April, 2022, hails 
from a family of freedom fighters in the northern Malabar region. Rising through the 
ranks of youth politics, he became All India Youth Federation (AIYF)’s General 
Secretary, which is topmost in  that outfit. He currently se rves as a National Executive 
Member of Communist Party of India. He has widely travelled across the globe. His 
parliamentary contributions are marked  by grace and decorum with exemplary 
preparedness of the issue being raised. Endowed with amiabl e temperament, he 
bears a pleasant personality. He is married to Shrimati Lalitha M. and the couple is 
blessed with a son, Hrithik, and a daughter, Hridya. 
Hon. Members, on behalf of this Ho use and on my own behalf, I wish him a 
long, healthy and happy life and extend greetings to his family members.  
Shri Golla Baburao, a three-time Memb er of the Legislative Assembly of 
Andhra Pradesh (2009-2012; 2012-2014 and 2019-24), is a Member of this august 
House since April 2024. Prior to entering politics, Shri Baburao had an extensive 
career in public service, holding various se nior administrative positions in Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana Governments.  He is noted for his contributions in rural 
development and employment generation befo re his voluntary retirement from service 
in 2009. He is also a Law graduate from Osmania University. He is married to Shrimati 
Golla Vasantha Kumari; and the couple is bl essed with son, Golla Sai Karthikeya, and 
daughter, Golla Naga Sowmya. 
Hon. Members, on behalf of this House and on my own, I wish him a long, 
healthy and happy life and extend greetings to his family members.   
...(Interruptions)... What a smile! Great smile – bewitching and captivating!     

Shri Nabam Rebia, a prominent political  personality from Arunachal Pradesh 
with a vast political experience, is, current ly, serving his third term in this august 
House since June, 2020.  A Member of Arunachal Prades h Legislative Assembly for 
two terms (2009-14 and 2014-19), Shri Rebi a has also served as the Speaker of the 
Assembly (2014-2016) and as a Cabinet Mi nister in the Government of Arunachal 
Pradesh (2017-2019). He had also been the Political and Legal Advisor to the Chief 
Minister of Arunachal Pradesh (1992-95). 
He is married to Shrimati Nabam Dumsap and the couple is blessed with sons, 
Nabam Takar and Nabam Legia and daughters, Nabam Kasmin and Nabam Ninung. 
H o n .  M e m b e r s ,  o n  b e h a l f  o f  t h i s  H ouse and on my own wish him a long, 
healthy and happy life and extend greetings to his family members. 
REFERENCE BY THE CHAIR 
82nd Annive
rsary of the Quit India Movement 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, today marks the 82nd anniversary of the historic day 
when Mahatma Gandhi launched the ‘Quit India Movement’ in 1942.  His clarion call of 
‘Do or Die’ ignited the nation, and, ultimately led Bharat gaining Independence from 
colonial rule. Eight decades later, the significance of the ‘Quit India Movement’ 
continues to resonate strongly among us. This Movement stands as a testament to 
the power of will of the people and their de termination to overcome any challenge. As 
we enter the 75 th year of adoption of our Consti tution, its foundational principles 
remain fundamental in shapin g the destiny of world’s largest vibrantly functional 
democracy. Upholding these ideals stand as th e greatest tribute to the martyrs of the 
Quit India Movement.    
Hon. Members, on this solemn occasio n, let us bow our heads in respectful 
homage to the courageous martyrs who made  the ultimate sacrifice in our fight and 
attainment of freedom.  I request all the Members to stand and observe silence to pay 
our tribute to their sacred memory. 
(Hon. Members then stood in silence for one minute.) 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
 
(B)   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry (Department fo r Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade), issued under Section 16 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016:- 
(1) S.O. 5293(E)., dated the 12th Decembe r, 2023, publishing  the Safes, Safe 
Deposit Locker Cabinets and key locks (Quality Control) Order, 2023, along 
with delay statement. 
(2) S.O. 5294(E)., dated the 12th December, 2023, publishing the Hinges 
(Quality Control) Order, 2023, along with delay statement. 
(3) S.O. 43(E)., dated the 3rd January, 2024, publishing the Electrical 
Accessories (Quality Control) Order, 2023, along with delay statement. 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (SHRI 
JITIN PRASADA): Sir, I lay on the Table:— 
 
(A)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry (Department for Prom otion of Industry and Internal Trade), 
issued under Section 16, Section 17 and su b-section (3) of Section 25 of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016:- 
(1) S.O. 1018(E), dated the 5 th March, 2024, publishing the Resin Treated 
Compressed Wood Laminates (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(2) S.O. 1071(E), dated the 6 th March, 2024, publishing the Potable Water Bottles 
(Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(3) S.O. 1072(E), dated the 6 th March, 2024, publishing the Insulated Flask, 
Bottles and Containers for Domestic Use (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(4) S.O. 1307(E), dated the 12 th March, 2024, publishing the Wood Based Boards 
(Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(5) S.O. 1365(E), dated the 15 th March, 2024, publishing the Cookware, Utensils 
and Cans for foods and beverages (Quality Control) Order 2024. 
(6) S.O. 1377(E), dated the 15 th March, 2024, publishing the Plywood and 
Wooden flush door shutters (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (6) See No. L.T. 500/18/24] 
 
[9 August, 2024]
3

(4) S.O. 44(E)., dated the 3rd January, 2024, publishing the Laboratory 
Glassware (Quality Control) Order, 2023, along with delay statement. 
(5) S.O. 1114(E)., dated the 6th March, 2024, publishing the Air Cooler and Air 
Filters (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(6) S.O. 1124(E)., dated the 7th March, 2024, publishing the Electrical appliance 
fans (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(7) S.O. 1125(E)., dated the 7th March, 20 24, publishing the Electrical Appliances 
for Skin or Hair care (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(8) S.O. 1126(E)., dated the 7th March, 2024, publishing the Electrical appliance 
for domestic clothes washing (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(9) S.O. 1128(E)., dated the 7th March, 20 24, publishing the Electrical Appliances 
for Kitchen (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(10) S.O. 1142(E)., dated the 7th March, 2024,  publishing the Water meters and 
accessories (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(11)  S.O. 1152(E)., dated the 7th March, 2024, publishing the Asbestos or Fibre 
Cement based Products (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(12) S.O. 1153(E)., dated the 7th Marc h, 2024, publishing the Gypsum based 
Building Materials (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(13) S.O. 1252(E)., dated the 11th March, 2024, publis hing the V-Belt (Quality 
Control) Order, 2024. 
(14)S.O. 1253(E)., dated the 11th March, 2024, publishing the Electrical Appliances 
for domestic water heating (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(15) S.O. 1512(E)., dated the 22nd March, 2024, publishing the Aluminium and 
Aluminium Alloy Products (Quality Control) Amendment Order, 2024. 
(16) S.O. 1801(E)., dated the 26th Apr il, 2024, publishing the Copper Products 
(Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(17) S.O. 1962(E)., dated the 8th May, 202 4, publishing the Telescopic Ball Bearing 
Drawer Slide (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(18) S.O. 2007(E)., dated the 17th May, 2024, publishing the Corrigendum to the 
Notification No. S.O. 1153(E)., dated the 6th March, 2024. 
(19) S.O. 2112(E)., dated the 28th May,  2024, publishing the Self-Contained 
Drinking Water Cooler (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(20) S.O. 2173(E)., dated the 4th Ju ne, 2024, publishing the Bottled Water 
Dispensers (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(21) S.O. 2174(E)., dated the 4th June, 2024, publishing the Precision Roller and 
Bush Chains, attachments and associated  Chains sprockets (Quality Control) 
Order, 2024. 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

(22) S.O. 2287(E)., dated the 21st June, 2024, publishing the Cast Iron Products 
(Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
(23) S.O. 2581(E)., dated the 4th July, 2024 , publishing the Steel Wires or Strands, 
Nylon or Wire Ropes and Wire mesh (Quality Control) Order, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (23) See No. L.T. 500/18/24] 
 
(E) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(Department of Commerce) Notification No. S.O. 2644(E).,dated the 5 th July, 2024, 
amending import policy condition for items under ITC (HS) code 07019000 of Chapter 
07 of ITC (HS), 2022, Schedule - I (Imp ort Policy), issued under Section 3 and 
Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992. 
(C)  A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) Notification No. S.O. 
32(E)., dated the 2 nd January, 2024, publishing the Air Conditioner and its related 
Parts, Hermetic Compressor and Temperature Sensing Controls (Quality Control) 
Amendment Order, 2023, issued under Section 16 and sub-section (3) of Section 25 
of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 500/18/24] 
 
(D) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) Notification No. G.S.R. 
312(E)., dated the 5 th June, 2024, publishing the Calcium Carbide (Amendment) 
Rules, 2024, under sub-section (4) of Section 29 of the Petroleum Act, 1934.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 502/18/24] 
 
(F) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(Department of Commerce) Notification No. S.O. 2754(E)., dated the 15 th July, 
2024, amending policy condition of Sl. No. 55 & 57, Chapter 10 Schedule-2, ITC 
(HS) Export Policy, 2018, issued under Se ction 3 of the Foreign Trade (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1992. 
[Placed in Library.  For (E) and (F) See No. L.T. 503/18/24] 
 
(G) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry (Department for Prom otion of Industry and Internal Trade), 
under sub-section (2) of Section 40 of the National Institutes of Design Act, 2014:- 
(1) NIDJ/2024-25/Senate., dated the 24 th July, 2024, publishing the National 
Institute of Design, Assam First Ordinance, 2024. 
[9 August, 2024]
5

Notifications of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
 
(2) Senate – 20/07/2023., dated the 26 th July, 2024, publishing the National 
Institute of Design, Andhra Pradesh Ordinances, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No. L.T. 501/18/24] 
 
(H) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) Notification No. G.S.R. 
339(E)., dated the 21 st June, 2024, publishing the Boiler (Inquiry, Adjudication and 
Appeal) Rules, 2024, under sub-section (2) of Section 28A of the Boilers Act, 1923. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 504/18/24] 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(A) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers We lfare) Notification No. S.O. 5389(E)., 
dated the 20th December, 2023, publishing the Plant Quarantine (Regulation of Import 
into India) (Fifteenth Amendment) Order, 2003, issued under sub-section (1) of 
Section 3 of the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 504 A/18/24] 
 
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Departmen t of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare), 
under sub-section (6) of Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955:- 
 (1) S.O. 795(E)., dated the 20 th February, 2024, publishing the Fertiliser (Inorganic, 
Organic or Mixed) (Control) Amendment Order, 2024. 
(2) S.O. 1202(E)., dated the 11 th March, 2024, notifying the specifications, as 
mentioned therein, in respect of Nano Ur ea fertilizer (liquid) to be manufactured 
by M/s IFFCO in India for a period of three years from the date of publication of 
this order in the Official Gazette. 
(3) S.O. 1366(E)., dated the 15
th March, 2024, authorising the manufacturers, as 
mentioned therein, of Fermented Organic Manure and Liquid Fermented Organic 
Manure to sell in bulk directly to farmers for a period of three years from the date 
of publication of the notification in the Official Gazette. 
(4) S.O. 1718(E)., dated the 16
th April, 2024, notifying the specifications, as 
mentioned therein, in respect  of Nano Urea (liquid) 16 to be manufactured by 
M/s IFFCO in India for a period of three years from the date of publication in the 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

(8) S.O. 1786(E)., dated the 22nd April,  2024, notifying the specifications, as 
mentioned therein, in respect of Nano Zi nc (liquid) to be manufactured by M/s 
Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limite d in India for a period of three years 
from the date of publication of this Order in the Official Gazette. 
(9) S.O. 1787(E)., dated the 22nd April,  2024, notifying the specifications, as 
mentioned therein, in respect of Nano Copper (liquid) to be manufactured by 
M/s Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited in India for a period of three 
years from the date of publication of this Order in the Official Gazette. 
(10) S.O. 1781(E)., dated the 24th April, 2024, publishing the  Fertiliser (Inorganic, 
Organic or Mixed) (Control) Second Amendment Order, 2024. 
(11) S.O. 1782(E)., dated the 24th April, 2024, notifying the specifications in respect 
of customised fertilizers, as mentioned therein, for a period of three year from 
the date of publication of this Order in the Official Gazette. 
(12) S.O. 1963(E)., dated the 8th May, 2024, publishing the Fertiliser (Inorganic, 
Organic or Mixed) (Control) (Third) Amendment Order, 2024. 
[Placed in Library.  For (8) to (12) See No. L.T. 513/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of the Veterinary Council of India, New Delhi and 
related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND DAIRYING (PROF. S. P. SINGH BAGHEL) : Sir, I lay on the Table, under sub- 
 Official Gazette. 
(5) S.O. 1783(E)., dated the 22 nd April, 2024, notifying the specifications, as 
mentioned therein, in respect of Nano Ur ea fertilizer (liquid) to be manufactured 
by M/s Corromandel International Limited in India for a period of three years from 
the date of publication of this Order in the Official Gazette. 
(6) S.O. 1784(E)., dated the 22 nd April, 2024, notifying the specifications, as 
mentioned therein, in respect of Nano Ur ea fertilizer (liquid) to be manufactured 
by M/s Natural Plant Protection Limited in  India for a period of three years from 
the date of publication of this Order in the Official Gazette. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (6) See No. L.T. 513/18/24] 
 
(7) S.O. 1785(E)., dated the 22 nd April, 2024, notifying the specifications, as 
mentioned therein, in respect of Nano Di  Ammonium Phosphate fertilizer (liquid) 
to be manufactured by M/s Natural Plant Protection Limited in India for a period 
of three years from the date of publication of this Order in the Official Gazette. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 512/18/24] 
 
[9 August, 2024]
7

section (4) of Section 62 of the Indian Ve terinary Council Act, 1984, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Railways 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (SHRI RAVNEET 
SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and Hindi) of Ministry of Railways 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Veterinary Council of India, New Delhi, for 
the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Council. 
 
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers  mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 520/18/24] 
 
Report (2022-23) of MGNREGA, New Delhi and related papers 
 
गर्ामीण िवकास मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी कमलेश पासवान): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ 
की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
(a) Annual Report of the Mahatma Gandhi  National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Act (MGNREGA), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23. 
(b) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 700/18/24] 
 
Report of (2023-24) ICAR, New Delhi and related papers 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी भागीरथ चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
(a) Annual Report of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), New 
Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 330/18/24] 
 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

Notification No. G.S.R. 409(E)., dated the 16 th July, 2024, publishing the Railway 
Servants (Discipline and Appeal) (Second Amendment) Rules, 2024.,  framed under 
Article 309 of the Constitution of India. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 548/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of BIC, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh and related papers 
 
STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 
 
Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 48th Report 
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Communications and Information Technology 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; 
AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA) : S i r ,  I  w i s h  t o  m a k e  a  
statement regarding Status of implementati on of recommendations contained in the 
48th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology  on ‘Citizen’s Data Security and 
Privacy’. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 522/18/24] 
 
िवदेश मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पिबतर् मागȃिरटा): महोदय, मȅ क ंपनी अिधिनयम, 2013 की धारा 
394 की उप-धारा (1) ( ख) क े अधीन िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की  एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िंहदी 
मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
 
(a) One-hundred-second Annual Report and Accounts of the British India 
Corporation Limited (BIC), Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India thereon. 
(b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Company and its 
subsidiary companies. 
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above.     
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 701/18/24] 
 
 
[9 August, 2024]
9

Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the 27th  
and 47th Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS  (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, I wish to lay the following 
statements regarding:— 
 
(a) Status of implementation of recommendations/ observations contained in the 
27
th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technol ogy on ‘Ethical Standards in Media 
Coverage’. 
(b) Status of implementation of recomme ndations/ observations contained in the 
47th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology on ‘Review of functioning of Central 
Board of Film Certification (CBFC)’. 
 
Status of implementation of 67th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES; 
ANDTHE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF RAILWAYS (SHRI RAVNEET 
SINGH): I wish to lay a statement regardin g Status of implementation of 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 67 th Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing on ‘Scheme for Creatio n/Expansion of Food Processing and 
Preservation Capacities – An Evaluation’. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Jitin Prasada to move a Motion  for election of one member to 
the Tobacco Board.  
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE TOBACCO BOARD 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; 
AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA) : Sir, I move the following 
Motion:— 
 “That in pursuance of clause (b) of sub-section (4) of Section 4 of the 
Tobacco Board Act, 1975, read with sub-ru le (1) of Rule 4 of the Tobacco Board 
Rules, 1976, this House do proceed to el ect, in such manner as directed by the 
Chairman, one Member from amongst the Members of the House to serve as a 
member of the Tobacco Board constituted under the said Act.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Jitin Prasada to move a Motion  for election of one member to 
the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority.  
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSED FOOD 
PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (APEDA) 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA): Sir, I move the following Motion:— 
       “That in pursuance of clause (d) of sub-section (4) of Section 4 of the 
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985 
(No.2 of 1986), read with Rule 3 of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Authority Rules, 1986, this House do proceed to elect, in such 
manner as directed by the Chairman, one Member from amongst the Members of the 
House, to be a member of the Agricultur al and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Authority.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Giriraj Singh to move a Motion for election of one member to 
the National Jute Board. 
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE NATIONAL JUTE BOARD (NJB) 
 
वÎतर् मंतर्ी (Ǜी िगिरराज िंसह): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत ĢÎताव उपिÎथत करता हूं:- 
[9 August, 2024]
11

       "िक राÍटर्ीय पटसन बोडर् िनयम, 2010 क े िनयम 6 क े उप-िनयम (2) क े साथ पिठत राÍटर्ीय 
पटसन बोडर् अिधिनयम, 2008 (2009 का संख्यांक 12) की धारा 3 की उप-धारा (4) क े खंड 
(ख) क े अनुसरण मȂ, यह सभा, उस रीित से, जैसे सभापित िनदेश दȂ, 2 अĢैल, 2024 से  राज्य 
सभा की सदÎयता से सुǛी सरोज पाण्डेय की स
ेवािनवृिǄ क े कारण िरƪ हुए Îथान पर, सभा क े 
सदÎयȗ मȂ से एक सदÎय को राÍटर्ीय पटसन बोडर् का सदÎय होने क े िलए िनवार्िचत करने की 
कायर्वाही करे।" 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, I have to inform that a communication has been 
received from Shri Ilaiyaraaja, Member statin g that he is unable to attend the sittings 
of the current (265th) Session of Rajya Sabha from 22nd July to 10th August, 2024, due 
to his prior committed engagements.   
Does he have the permission of the House for remaining absent from 22 nd July 
to 10th August, 2024 during the current (265th) Session of the Rajya Sabha? 
 
(No Hon. Member dissented.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Permission to remain absent is granted. 
 
 
REGARDING NOTICE RECEIVED UNDER RULE 267 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the notice under Rule 267 received from Shri 
Mohammed Nadimul Haque, seeking discu ssion on circumstances surrounding 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal) : Sir, please allow... 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Would you please take your seat ? Shri Nadimul Haque, I tried to 
reach you. My office got in touch with you.  You expressed your helplessness. I have 
talked to your leader. Please get in touch wi th him. For a change, I am doing it in the 
House. I have urged the hon. Members that all such notices will receive my 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

consideration because the deadline is 10 a.m. I will be al ways present in my chamber 
at 10.30 a.m. to take a call on them. Today , I have made an exception because your 
floor leader has made a suggestion.  "On circumstances surrounding the 
disqualification of wrestler, Vinesh Phogat, at Paris Olympics", this not being in 
accordance with the rules is not accorded sanction.  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE: 
*  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No. Please bear with the House. No thing is going on record. I have 
spoken about it. Shri Nagendra Ray, de mand to establish the Narayani Infantry 
Regiment to protect the territorial integrity. 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION 
 
Demand to establish the Narayani Infantry Regiment to protect territorial integrity 
 
SHRI NAGENDRA RAY (West Bengal) : Sir, Narayani Sena of  the then Cooch Behar 
State has a glorious historical past for unique warfare techniques and courage. It 
basically comprises mainly Kshatriyo Rajbanshi people who are known for their valiant 
and exemplary acts of defence and counter attack.   
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
I must bring to your notice that the Narayani Sena participated in the Second World 
War in the year 1939 and heroically contribu ted to save and protect the land of our 
country, India, from the invasion of foreigners. The enemies could not stand in front of 
the Narayani Sena due to super natural stra tegy of Narayani Sena in the battlefield 
during the reign of Mahara ja Jagaddipendra Narayan Bhup Bahadur. The enemy 
soldiers got frightened at the entry of the Narayani Sena in the battlefield for super 
natural power of Cooch Behar Kshatriyo Narayani Sena. Bu t it is very sad that the 
glorious history of Narayani Sena accomplished with exemplary power is little known 
to the people of India as well as the whole world. This makes the people of the Cooch 
Behar State feel sorry for their ancestors. Go vernment of India assured at that time 
that "Government will endeavour to asso ciate the name "Narayan" with the Cooch 
                                         
* Not recorded. 
[9 August, 2024]
13

Behar State forces even after their absorption in The Indian  Army" through letter No. 
F.l5 (19)-1/49, dated 30th August, 1949 in the Agreement An nexure 'A' between 
India and Cooch Behar made on 30th August, 1949, unfortunately this is still to be 
seen. 
 The Central Government is humbly requested to consider formation of the 
Narayani Infantry Regiment to protect the terri torial integrity from any hostile external 
misadventure in the country. Thank you, Sir.    
                                                                       
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Shri Nagendra Ray:  Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri   
Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Sh ri Kesridevsinh Jhala (Gujarat), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra ), Shri Balyogi Umeshnath (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Pradip Kuma r Varma (Jharkhand), Shri Dorjee Tshering Lepcha 
(Sikkim), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil  Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. 
Parmar Jasvantsinh Salamsinh (Gujarat), Sh ri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan), Shri 
Naveen Jain (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Lahar Singh Siroya (Karnataka) and Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha).    
                                                 
Demand for a unified counselling system for CUET UG admissions 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu): Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, 
for permitting to speak on an important is sue in the Zero Hour. The National Testing 
Agency (NTA) conducted the CUET-UG ex aminations, where computer-based and 
pen-and-paper format was adop ted, from May 15 to May 29, 2024. A total of 13.48 
lakh students appeared for the exams. Unfortunately, technical issues impacted 
several students, prompting a re-examinati on on July 19, 2024. The NTA published 
the result on July 28, 2024, which caused significant stress to the students due to the 
delay.   
 The centralised nature of exam and its result has not been beneficial for the 
students. Specifically, the Tamil ques tion paper was translated using Google 
Translate, which raises concern about transl ation accuracy. Despite the claim of 
single window opportunity for admission across various universities and institutions, 
the process has proven to be a financial burden on the st udents. Universities charge 
additional fees for counselling, further co mplicating the admission process. Students 
initially selected their preferred unive rsities and courses during the CUET-UG 
application process, but now, face the n eed to apply separately to different 
institutions. For instance, Gandhigram Rural Institute closed its application process 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

on July 31, 2024, while the University of De lhi had completed registration even before 
the result was published. After the result was released, the University of Delhi re-
opened the applications causing confusion and inconvenience to the students.   
 I call upon this Union Government to  implement a unified counselling system 
for CUET-UG administration akin to the Anna  University model. This would ensure a 
more streamlined process and prevent st udents from missing opportunities.  
Additionally, I request the Government to consider compensation for the undue stress 
caused due to the delay in result publication. Thank you, Sir.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Sh ri M. Mohamed Abdulla : Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (T elangana), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Sh ri S. Selvaganabathy  (Puducherry), Sant 
Balbir Singh (Punjab), Dr. Fauzia Khan (M aharashtra), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West 
Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Sh ri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri P.P. S uneer (Kerala), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
(West Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West 
Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala).  
                                                            
Concern over devastation caused by cloud burst in Himachal Pradesh 
 
SHRI HARSH MAHAJAN (Himachal Pradesh) : Sir, I would like to draw your attention 
to the recurring and ongoing devastation in the State of Himachal Pradesh, caused by 
extreme weather due to the climate change and unsustainable development. This has 
led to flash floods and landslides which have caused damage worth thousands of 
crores to infrastructure and public as well as private property. Several kilometres of 
roads have been severely damaged and completely washed away . A number of dams 
have also been overflowing. Sadly, the loss of lives has been significant. About 400 
people died last year. This year, so far, the loss of human lives stands at 55, and 50 
people are still missing. Entire communities have been displaced and livelihoods have 
been completely lost.   
 I would like to thank the hon. Prime Mi nister for the assistance given by the 
Central Government after the devastation last year. The Central Government provided 
Rs.1,800 crores under the NDRF and the SDRF to the State. Further, the Government 
gave 11,000 houses for the State. Rs.2,700 crores were given under the PMGSY, and 
the NHAI spent about Rs.3,500 crores for repa ir of roads. After the devastation this 
[9 August, 2024]
15

year, there is an urgent need for continue d relief and rehabilitation in the State. The 
Central Government has already released Rs.6 1 crores for relief and aid. I would also 
like to thank the hon. Finance Minister, who,  in this year’s Budget Speech, included 
Himachal Pradesh for infrastructure deve lopment. Further development has to be 
sustainable keeping in mind the fragile ecological state of the mountains. 
All the dams of Himachal must have strict regular safety checks. Historic and 
scientific solutions should be implemented to check muck dumping, dams and roads. 
Road construction by the NHAI needs to be redesigned, keeping in mind the unique 
mountain terrain. Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, this is a serious matter which requires 
urgent and continued Government support. Thank you.  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Harsh Mahajan : Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Devendra Pratap Si ngh (Chhattisgarh), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) , Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra).                                                                      
 Thank you, Harsh Mahajan ji. Now, Shri  B. Parthasaradhi Reddy. Demand for 
Government intervention to bail out dedicated ethanol plants in India.  
 
Demand for Government intervention to bail-out dedicated Ethanol Plants in India 
 
SHRI B. PARTHASARADHI REDDY (Telangana): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I wish to 
draw the attention of this esteemed House towards the burning issue pertaining to the 
131 dedicated ethanol plants and the sign ing of the long-term agreement with the 
Central Government to set up plants for ma nufacture and supply of ethanol as a part 
of the National Policy on Bio-fuels. Sir, it has the investment of about 25,000 crores of 
rupees, which generated the employment po tential to the extent of about 2 lakh 
people directly and indirectly. Sir, I would like to give a brief background on grain 
ethanol industry. 
Prior to 2018, the Government of In dia was dependent solely on ethanol 
derived from molasses to meet the fuel blen ding needs. Realizing that ethanol supply 
from sugarcane will not be adequate to m eet the ambitious E20 blending target by 
2025, in June, 2018, the Government introduced a new bio-fuel policy and 
encouraged using damaged food grains. Sir,  the Government also introduced at the 
same time a policy to supply surplus rice from  FCI at a fixed price to DEPs and linked 
it to price paid by the oil marketing companies for supply of ethanol.  
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

Government needs around 1,000 crore liters of ethanol to meet the E20 
blending target by 2025. Inspired by the Go vernment of India Biofuel policy, in the 
past four years, nearly about 131 new grain-based DEPs were set up across the 
country to meet the surging demand for the production of the ethanol, with an 
investment of about, as I mentioned, Rs. 25,000 crores with the capacity of 600 crore 
litres meeting the 60 percent of the overall requirement of the country.  
In July, 2023, the Government has abruptly stopped supply of surplus rice from 
FCA to DEPs and encouraged the entire industry to move to maize at the primary 
feedstock. This has created a shockwave in  the DEP industry while another blow was 
price increase of the broken rice and the da maged rice from 21 rupees to 29 rupees, 
and, also at the same time, maize price increased from 21 ru pees to 29 rupees. 
Though the Government has taken care of th e price hike of maize and broken rice 
while fixing the ethanol price, it is not prop ortional to the actual price hike resulting in 
the industry as unviable. The Government has permitted import of maize under the 
Tariff Relief Quota (TRF) by another industry,  the feed industry but not for use by fuel 
ethanol units. Sir, shortage of the feedstoc k is threatening the entire DEP industry, 
but also adversely impacts the Government's  ambitious E20 bio-fuel blending target. 
I, therefore, urge the Government to (i) re store supply of the broken rice and surplus 
rice through FCI, which was abruptly stoppe d, (ii) allow the DEP industry to import 
maize under the Tariff Relief Quota as applicab le for other feed industry, and, (iii) fix 
the ethanol price in proportion to the pr evailing prices of broken rice and maize. 
...(Time-bell rings.)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Time is over. Please take your seat. 
          The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with the matter raised by 
hon. Member, Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy : Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri M. Mo hamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and Shri 
Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal).         
 Hon. Member, Shri Samirul Islam. De mand for immediate action to close the 
existing gaps in the curriculum at IITs and other reputed institutions of the country. 
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM: Sir, with your permission, I would like to speak in my mother 
tongue, Bengali.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. 
[9 August, 2024]
17

Demand for immediate action to close the existing gaps in the curriculum at  
IITs and other reputed institutions of the country 
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM (West Bengal) : * "Sir, Shri Narendra Modi's 74th birthday is 
on the forthcoming 17th September. I wo uld like to convey greetings to him in 
advance through you. But the funny thing is that IIT Kharagpur asked their students to 
partake in essay-writing prior to the occas ion of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's 
birthday. The topic was decided, "How Prim e Minister Narendra Modi strengthened 
India's global relations". I myself am an  IIT alumni. I would like to raise a few 
questions before the Indian Government an d Prime Minister Narendra Modi through 
you. Firstly, 14 years ago, when I came to study at IIT Delhi, the admission fees were 
low and thus many students from poor an d agricultural background like me could 
afford to study here. Since the Modi Go vernment came into power, they have 
repeatedly increased the fees of IITs and many such institutions. Many reports say 
that there has been an in crease of 300% in the fees. Hence many meritorious 
students from rural India who aspired to  study in the IIT are right now having 
nightmares doubting whether they have ad equate resources to study at an IIT. We 
saw a decrease of 10000 Crore ru pees for Higher Education in  this year's budget as 
compared to the previous year. Not only th at, Indian Government  is imposing taxes 
on the chemicals that scientists use in th e laboratory. Many su ch funds that were 
allotted for the researchers has also been discontinued and thus many scientists are 
not being able to continue their research. The management of institutions like IITs are 
being filled with people who are party loyalist and extremists. As a result, 
superstitions are increasing in the IITs, and, unscientific thinking is being inducted into 
the student's mind. Discourses around Ve g and Non-Veg food preferences are being 
encouraged. If we can't maintain a supers tition-absolved atmosphere in the IITs, 
India can never progress. We all are aware that institutions like IIT, IISc, IACS have 
created many great scientists who are now working around the globe. I will read out a 
notification to you from the year 2020 whic h was issued from an  IIT, "The panel of 
foreign examiner for PhD theses' evaluation shall consist of at least three examiners 
from non-Indian origin". ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Nothing else is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
                                         
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali. 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM : " Sir, the Indian scientists are being demeaned. The Party 
loyalists from the IITs are doing this. Through you, I want to convey this to Indian 
Government and Prime Minister, that if we keep reiterating the motto "Viksit Bharat" 
and if we really want this to be realised, th en, we need to create IITs which are free of 
all prejudices. " 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Samirul Islam: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Ms. 
Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri Muzi bulla Khan (Odisha), Shri Debashish 
Samantaray (Odisha), Shri Saket Gokhal e (West Bengal), Shri Mohammed Nadimul 
Haque (West Bengal), Shri Prakash Chik Ba raik (West Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika 
Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Jose K. Mani  (Kerala), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), 
Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Dr. Fauz ia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Sh ri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Ajeet 
Madhavrao Gopchade (Maharashtra) and Shri P.P. Suneer (Kerala).  
  Now, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde, ‘Demand to Include Tw ins under the Two 
Children Policy for Garib Kalyan Yojana and other Government Sponsored Schemes’. 
 
Demand to include twins under the two children policy for Garib Kalyan 
Yojana and other Government sponsored schemes 
  
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे (महाराÍटर्): आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ "Ģधानमंतर्ी गरीब 
कÊयाण योजना" तथा अनेक लाभदायी योजना क े िलए एक क ु ट ुंब मȂ दूसरी बार होने वाले जुड़वा 
बच्चे का अपवाद करके  दो अपत्य की पातर्ता रखने क े बारे मȂ यह िवषय रख रहा हूँ। 
उपसभापित महोदय, 2014 से Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ गरीब कÊयाण 
योजना कायार्िन्वत है, िजसमȂ 80 करोड़ लोगȗ को मुÄत राशन, साढ़े चार करोड़ लोगȗ को घर 
और अभी 3 करोड़ से ज्यादा लोगȗ को घर, शौचालय तथा आयुÍमान भारत योजना का लाभ
 िमल 
रहा है। भारत की जनसंख्या मȂ िदन ब िदन बढ़ोतरी हो रही है। भारत की जनसंख्या िनयंतर्ण क े 
िलए एक पिरवार मȂ दो बच्चȗ का रहना अपेिक्षत है, लेिकन यह दुभार्ग्यपूणर् बात है िक क ु छ 
पिरवारȗ मȂ दो से ज्यादा 5 से लेकर 8, 10 तक  बच्चȗ को जन्म िदया जाता है। उसके  िलए न तो 
कोई बंधन माना जाता ह
ै और न ही जनसंख्या िनयंतर्ण का ख्याल रखा जाता है। गरीब कÊयाण 
योजना तथा अनेक लाभ
दायी योजना क े िलए एक पिरवार मȂ दूसरी बार होने वाले जुड़वा बच्चȗ 
का अपवाद करके  इसकी पातर्ता रखना जरूरी है। राशन जैसी योजना मȂ Ģित Ëयिƪ 5 िकलो 
अनाज िदया जाता है। यिद दो बच्चे रहȂ तो 10 िकलो अनाज ही िमलता है, लेिकन यिद 8 बच्चे रहȂ, 
तो हÎबȅड-वाइफ और उनके  8 बच्चȗ क े िलए 50 िकलो अनाज िदया जा
ता है। जब वे बच्चे बड़े हो 
जाते हȅ, तो िफर उनके  भी क ु ट ुंब बनते हȅ और िफर  ज्यादा क ु ट ुंब क े िलए " Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास 
योजना" क े अंतगर्त ज्यादा घर बनते ह
ȅ। यानी, यह दो अपत्य को जन्म देने वाले सवर् साधारण 
[9 August, 2024]
19

गरीब क ु ट ुंब क े ऊपर अन्याय है। जो संिवधान को मानता है और कानून क े अनुसार देश की भलाई 
क े िलए दो अपत्य को जन्म देता है, उसको कम लाभ िमलता है। इसिलए गरीब कÊयाण योजना 
तथा अन्य लाभदायी योजनाओं की पातर्ता क े िलए दो अपत्य क े क ु ट ुंब को ही पातर् िकया जाना 
चािहए, तािक गरीब कÊयाण क े साथ-साथ जनसंख्या िनयंतर्ण का कायर् भी द
ेश क े िहत मȂ संभव 
हो सके । अतः आपके  माध्यम से मȅ सभी सÇमािनत सदÎयȗ का इस िवषय पर समथर्न चाहता हूँ 
और उनसे एसोिसएट करने की िवनती करता हूँ, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde: Shri Devendra Prat
ap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri Dorjee Tshering  Lepcha (Sikkim), Shri Jose K. Mani 
(Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Gujar at), Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
(Gujarat), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadi k (Maharashtra), Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala 
(Gujarat), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Mad hya Pradesh), Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
(Haryana), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
(Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solank i (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini 
(Uttarakhand), Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (U ttar Pradesh), Shrimati S. Phangnon 
Konyak (Nagaland), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
(Madhya Pradesh), Shri Sanjay Seth (U ttar Pradesh), Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
(Himachal Pradesh), Shrimati Darshana  Singh (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Laxmikant 
Bajpayee (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Lahar Singh Siroya (Karnataka), Shri Krishan Lal 
Panwar (Haryana), Shri Baburam Nishad  (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Mithlesh (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan ), Dr. Parmar Jasvantsinh Salamsinh 
(Gujarat), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri Balyogi Umeshnath (Madhya Pradesh), Shri 
Subhash Barala (Haryana), Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Maharaja 
Sanajaoba Leishemba (Manipur), Dr. Bh agwat Karad (Maharashtra), Shrimati 
Dharmshila Gupta (Bihar), Dr. Sikander Kumar (Himachal Pradesh), Shri Deepak 
Prakash (Jharkhand), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pr adesh), Shri Aditya Prasad (Jharkhand), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat). 
 Now, Shri Rajeev Shukla, ‘Demand to Create a Climate Resilient Infrastructure 
in Himachal Pradesh and Announce a Comprehensive Rehabilitation Package.’ 
 
Demand to create a climate resilient infrastructure in Himachal Pradesh and 
announce a comprehensive rehabilitation package 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा (छǄीसगढ़): उपसभापित महोदय, िहमाचल Ģदेश म
 Ȃ लगातार - आपको पता है 
 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 िक िपछले साल भी आपदा से िकतना भारी नुकसान हुआ था, िपछली बार करीब 12 हज़ार करोड़ 
रुपय े का नुकसान हुआ था और इस बार अब तक अनुमान क े िहसाब से करीब 780 करोड़ रुपय े 
का नुकसान हो चुका है, जो ज्यादा भी हो सकता है, करीब हज़ार करोड़ क े आसपास हो सकता 
है। िपछली बार 230 लोगȗ की जान गई थी, इस सम
य भी वहां बादल फटने से तमाम घर और गाँव 
तबाह हो गए हȅ। यह एक बहुत बड़ी समÎया है, इसके  समाधान क े िलए राज्य सरकार पूरा Ģयास 
कर रही है, पहले 7 लाख रुपय े Ģित घर िदया था और इस बार उन्हȗने 50 हज़ार
 रुपय े की 
तत्काल राहत की घोषणा की है, लेिकन समÎया बड़ी है और यह हाल की समÎया नहीं है। राज्य 
सरकार अके ले इसका long-term समाधान नहीं कर सकती है। िपछले वषर् इस अविध क े दौरान 
िजन लोगȗ की जान गई थी, उनको compensation 
क े साथ-साथ -- कम से कम 1,300 सड़कȂ 
बंद हो गई थीं। उस भयावहता की कÊपना मातर् से ही ǭदय िवदारक हो जाता है। 
 िहमाचल Ģदेश Ģाकृ ितक पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ भूÎखलन क े Ģित अत्यिधक sensitive है। 
इसिलए भूÎखलन Ģबंधन की उिचत रूप  से िवकिसत रणनीित की आवÌयकता है। गÇभीर रूप  स
े 
Ģभािवत पिरवारȗ को राहत पहुंचाना भी आवÌयक है। िजन्हȗने अपने घर खो िदए हȅ, चूंिक अब 
सदीर् आने वाली है, तो उनके  िलए भी क ु छ उपाय करने हȗगे। खेती, बागवानी, आजीिवका, पयर्टन 
और उनका रोज़गार आिद सब क ु छ तबाह हो रहा है। उसके  िलए ध्यान द
ेने की आवÌयकता है। 
 इस सन्दभर् मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने िहमाचल Ģदेश को जो आिर्थक सहायता दी है, वह ऊ ं ट क े 
मुंह मȂ ज़ीरा है, 12 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े तब मांगे थे और अब हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े मांग रहे हȅ 
...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
Ǜी हषर् महाजन (िहमाचल Ģदेश): सर... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। 
 
Ǜी राजीव श
ुƛा: िसफर् गडकरी जी ऐसे हȅ, िजन्हȗने रोड क े िलए मदद की है।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr. Mahajan, please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा: मुख्य मंतर्ी जी िमल कर गए हȅ, उन्हȗने Ģधान मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह िकया है और 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने आÌवासन िदया
 है, तो मेरा मानना है िक वह आÌवासन पूरा हो। इसमȂ long-
term measures की ज़रुरत  है, वहां climate resilient infrastructure बनाने की ज़रुरत है, और 
इसके  िलए पयार्Ãत धन की आवÌयकता है। 
मȅ इस सन्दभर् मȂ Fourteenth Finance Commission की  recommendation को quote 
करूं गा। What has the Fourteenth Finance Commi ssion said? It said, "A large forest 
cover provides huge ecological b
enefits, but there is also an opportunity cost in terms 
of area not available for other economic activ ities and this also serves as an important 
indicator of fiscal disability." The Commission recommended for 'compensation 
 
[9 August, 2024]
21

mechanism' and 'incentive mechanism.' मेरा सरकार से आगर्ह है िक वह िहमाचल Ģदेश क े 
िलए compensation  दे - यह कोई सरकार की बात नहीं है - िपछली बार 12 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े 
की मांग थी, कम से कम उसे पूरा करȂ और अभी जो नुकसान हुआ है, उसकी क्षितपूिर्त करȂ। यह 
सबके  िहत मȂ है, देश क े िहत मȂ है। इसिलए मȅ मांग करता हूं िक पयार्वरण संरक्षण आिद क े िलए 
िहमाचल सरकार को जो मुआवज़ा देना है, वह िदया जाए। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और गृह मंतर्ी जी ने 
आÌवासन िदया है। मुझे उÇमीद है िक वे इस िदशा मȂ िनिÌचत रूप  से सहायता करȂगे।        
                                         
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shri Rajeev Shukla :  Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Moham
ed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Prakash Chik 
Baraik (West Bengal), Shrimati Phulo Devi  Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri Sant Balbir 
Singh (Punjab), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha),  and Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana). 
 
Demand to address the problem of pollution in Yamuna river 
 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL (National Capital Territory of Delhi) : Sir, I thank you for giving 
me an opportunity to speak. सर, िदÊली वाले बहुत सौभाग्यशाली है िक यहां से यमुना नदी 
गुज़रती है, िजसका वणर्न हमारे वेदȗ मȂ और महाभारत मȂ भी है, पर आज बहुत दुख की बात है िक 
यह नदी हमारी नाकामी की वजह से एक तरीके  स
े नाला बन गई है। इस नदी की सिदयȗ से पूजा 
होती आई है, पर आज िदÊली मȂ 22 नाले इस नदी मȂ िगरते हȅ, यमुना नदी मȂ िगरते हȅ और हर 
िदन
 इस नदी क े अंदर 238 million gallon untreated sewage डाला जा रहा है। सर, हालात यह 
हो गए हȅ िक यह नदी ज़हरीला झाग ज्यादा िदखती है और पानी कम। इस नदी का बहुत छोटा सा 
अंश िदÊली स
े गुज़रता है, लेिकन उसी अंश मȂ 76 per cent of the Yamuna gets polluted. 
हालात बहुत खराब हȅ। 55 sewage treatment plants की  urgently ज़रूरत  है, िजनमȂ से िदÊली 
मȂ िसफर् 35 हȅ, उनमȂ से 22 तो standards भी meet नहीं करते। िदÊली मȂ हर िदन illegal तरीके  से 
कई industries 
और factories इस नदी मȂ heavy metals, toxic chemicals बहाती हȅ, उसकी 
वजह से हमारी िज़न्दगी मȂ ज़हर घोला जा रहा है, िजसके  ऊपर कोई कायर्वाही नहीं हो रही है। 
सर, 2021 मȂ िदÊली सरकार ने यह वादा िकया था िक वह यमुना नदी को 2025 से पहले इतना 
साफ़ कर देगी िक वे खुद उसमȂ डुबकी लगाएंगे, पर हज़ारȗ करोड़ रुपए  खचर् होने क े बावजूद 
आज भी िÎथित वैसी की वैसी ही है।  
 सर, हालात बहुत खराब हȅ। यमुना नदी हमारी मां है और वह आज वȂिटलेटर पर है। अब 
बस राजनीित हो रही ह
ै। सर, मȅ कहना चाहती हूं िक ये खोखले बयानबाजी, * वादे, ये Åलेम गेम 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

करने से िदÊली की दशा नहीं बदलेगी। मȅ िदÊली सरकार को कहना चाहती हूं िक जब तक उनकी 
नीयत साफ नहीं होगी, तब तक यमुना का पानी साफ नहीं हो सकता। महोदय, मेरा यह कहना है 
िक िदÊली मȂ सीवेज टर्ीटमȂट Ãलान्ट्स को हमȂ युǉ Îतर पर बनाना ही होगा, नहीं तो यमुना नदी 
का यही हाल रहेगा और इसके  िलए हमȂ क ेन्दर् सरकार क े सहयोग की भी पूरी जरूरत  है। सर, मȅने 
क ु छ पंिƪयां िलखी हȅ और मȅ उनको बोलना चाहती हूं। 
 
"यमुना क े िकनारे बैठी अब भी वो िचिड़या कहती है 
सपने हसीन िदखाए थे सरकार ने 
पर आज भी मेरी यमुना जहर पीकर बहती है।" 
 
 सर, वादा था यमुना को शुǉ बनाएंगे, पहली डुबकी खुद लगाएंगे। डुबकी चाहे अब मत 
लगाओ, अहंकार छोड़ो, काम पर लग जाओ।...(समय की घंटी)...     
                
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Ms. Swati Maliwal: Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Ms. Indu Bala Goswami (Himach al Pradesh), Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
(Punjab), Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Neeraj Shekhar (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakh and), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Beng al), Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
(Manipur), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
(Nagaland), Shri Ram Chander Jangra  (Haryana), Shri Deepak Prakash 
(Jharkhand), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Ma hadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Krishan Lal Panwar (Haryana), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), 
Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Ka lpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Madan 
Rathore (Rajasthan), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Laxmikant 
Bajpayee (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Mithlesh Kumar (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Dharmshila 
Gupta (Bihar), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhy a Pradesh), Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Pradip Kumar Varma (Jhark hand), Shri Balyogi Umeshnath (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Mayankbhai Ja ydevbhai (Gujarat), Shri Surendra Singh Nagar (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi (Uttar Pr adesh), Dr
. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri 
Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), Shri  Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai (Gujarat), 
Shri Baburam Nishad (Uttar Pradesh), Shri  Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), 
Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala),  Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Maharashtra).   
 
 
[9 August, 2024]
23

Request for prioritization and funding of the Itarsi-Tuticorin 
 Railway Corridor Scheme 
 
SHRI N. CHANDRASEGHARAN (Tamil Nadu) : Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I would  
like to bring to the attention of the hon. Mi nister of Railways the need for a separate 
railway corridor to transport manufacturin g goods and raw materials from Itarsi in 
Madhya Pradesh to Tuticorin in Tamil Nadu via Vijayawada. The scheme was 
announced by the former Railway Minister , Shri Lalu Prasad , on the floor of 
Parliament. Along with this, two other schemes were also announced and completed 
with the help of the World Bank and the Ba nk of Japan. However, the corridor from 
Itarsi to Vijayawada, which should extend up  to Tuticorin, has not yet been started. 
Tamil Nadu is a major manufacturing State and including the scheme in the Budget 
would greatly benefit its industrial developm ent. This scheme has been assured. I do 
not understand why it is bein g delayed. Our former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu and 
the present State Assembly Opposition Leader, hon. Edapaddi Palaniswami, has also 
consistently urged the Cent ral Government to extend this scheme. Therefore, I 
request the hon. Minister of Railways to line up this scheme, allocate sufficient funds, 
expedite its implementation and support the industrial development of Tamil Nadu. I 
thank you for giving me the opportunity to sp eak on the funding of the Itarsi-Tuticorin 
Railway Corridor scheme.  Thank you.   
                                                  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri N. Chandrasegharan: Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed A bdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha) and Shri S. Selvaganabathy (Puducherry).                                                          
 
Demand to design new electrical grids and sufficient charging points  
for electrical vehicles 
 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY (NOMINATED): Sir, I thank you for giving me a chance to 
speak. There is a saying, शुभाÎते पन्थान: सन्तु। It means, 'Oh traveler, when you are 
traveling, everything should go well'. With beautiful roads from the Department of 
Transport under Mr. Nitin Gadkari, we are a ll enjoying the great network of India. But 
there is a small problem in that. He himsel f said that 40 per cen t of pollution comes 
from road transportation. So, this is time for us that we though t about pollution and 
ways to reduce it. There are many ways to  reduce it, but I want to take one way, 
which is known as electrical vehicles. We ca ll it EV in general. When you have electric 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

vehicle, things will be better, pollution will be reduced, greenhouse gas emission will 
be less, carbon dioxide will be less and it will be fine. But to ha ve that, we require 
following things. That is my suggestion. If we follow that, it will be really great. First is, 
there is a new word by the name 'range an xiety'. It has come into the picture. It 
means that if you have electric vehicle, yo u are always under anxiety as to when the 
charged battery will run down. So, you have to  always look as to when I will get a 
charging station. And when you get a char ging station, you have to think about 
following things. There will be a big queue. Second is, in winters, it doesn't charge 
very well because the battery cannot take it. Th ird is, how much time  it will take to 
charge my battery! To do all these thin gs, we should have good electricity 
production.  
 Normally, State produces electricity either  by hydel or by th ermal, maybe, by 
nuclear by some. The kind of electricity we  produce, it may be  enough for our own 
State. In that case, where will I bring the extra electricity? I may have 10 charging 
points, but if I do not have electricity, th ey are null and void. So, this is the main 
concern, the production and distribution of electricity for the charging points for level-
2 to reduce the range anxiety.  
Second thing, like heart is to the body, for electrical vehicle, the heart is the 
battery. There should be a good BMS, that is, Battery Management System, and 
there should be a cell which should also be of very good qua lity. Then only the 
batteries can work very well and efficiently. Recently in Rajasthan, we have found out 
that Lithium is available. So, it will be a great idea if, in India, we can manufacture our 
own batteries. That would make us indepe ndent, self-dependent and not dependent 
like oil. Then, we can produce better design  batteries, which will help us for the EV 
vehicles in the long way.  There is a third point about technician training. Without that, 
it will be really incomplete, because there is no good technical training or there are 
people who do not understand this technology. (Time-bell rings.)  Thank you, Sir.   
                                                                                          
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Me mber, Shrimati Sudha Murty : Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Maharaja 
Sanajaoba Leishemba (Manipur), Shri Ramb hai Harjibhai Mokariya (Gujarat), Shri 
Mithlesh Kumar (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati 
S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Shri Gu lam Ali (Nominated), Shrimati Sumitra 
Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Maya  Naroliya (Madhya Pr adesh), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati  Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (M aharashtra), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shri 
[9 August, 2024]
25

Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Dr. John Britta s (Kerala), Shri M.  Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati  Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu).                                                                             
 Thank you, Shrimati Sudha Murty. Now,  Shri M. Shanmugam, "Concern over 
violations of Contract Labour Regulation Act." 
 
Concern over violations of the Contract Labour Regulation Act 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, there is need to take serious view of the 
violations of the provision of Contract Labour Regulation Act and to ensure all 
contract workmen are paid on par with the regular workman in the organization.  
Section 10 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, speaks about 
prohibition of employment of contract labour by considering relevant factors, such as, 
first, whether the process, operation or ot her work is incidental to, or necessary for 
the industry, trade, business, manufacture or  occupation that is  carried on in the 
establishment. Second, whether it is of peren n i a l  n a t u r e ,  t h a t  i s  t o  s a y ,  i t  i s  o f  
sufficient duration having regard to th e nature of industry, trade, business, 
manufacture or occupation that is carried on . Third, whether it is done ordinarily 
through regular workmen in that establishm ent. Fourth, whether it is sufficient to 
employ considerable number of whole-time workmen. 
 These are the factors prohibiting engagement of contract labour. If the 
contractor takes license as per the Central rules notified under Contract Labour Act, 
Rule 25 (2) (iv) says, the rates of wages payable to the workmen by the contractor 
shall not be less than the rates prescribed  under the Minimum Wa ges Act, for such 
employment where applicable and where th e rates have been fixed by agreement, 
settlement, or award, not less than the ra tes so fixed. But the minimum wages are 
fixed only in Schedule of Employment declared by Rules in the State and Centre. The 
Government companies like Railways, Defen ce and all the public sector undertakings 
do not come under the purview of Schedu le of Employment. So, if the contract 
workmen are to be engaged in those organiza tions, they should be paid the minimum 
wages of the concerned industrial work er. But this is not happening in the 
Government organisation. And the Act and Rules are violated in the Government 
organisation itself. So, it leads to private organisation also doing the same.   
 I would, therefore, urge upon the hon. Labour Minister to view this violation 
seriously and he should take necessary actio n to ensure payment to all the contract 
workmen on par with the permanent workers similarly placed. For addressing all these 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

issues, I request the hon. Minister, thro ugh you, to convene the Indian Labour 
Conference as early as possible. Thank you very much, Sir. 
                                                                             
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri M. Shanmugam :  Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Sh ri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Ms. Dola Sen 
(West Bengal), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh) , Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sand osh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri 
P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu).     
 Thank you, Shanmugamji. Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade, "Demand for 
provision of stoppage of Ernakulam-Pune Express train at Thivim Station in Goa." 
 
Demand for provision of stoppage for Ernakulam-Pune Express train 
(No.22149/22150) at Thivim Station in Goa 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa) : Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, Sir, for giving me an opportunity  for raising an impo rtant issue regarding 
the Ernakulam-Pune Express which currently  halts only at Margaon in South Goa 
district. There has been a long-standing reques t to add an halt for this train at Thivim 
Station in North Goa district. Despite numerous appeals to the Railway Ministry, these 
requests remain unaddressed.                                                         
 Currently, there is no direct rail service  connecting North Goa District to Pune, 
which forces thousands of passengers to travel to Madgaon in South Goa District to 
board this train. This situation leads to longer travel times and higher costs.  
Passengers from North Goa often have to choose between taking a direct bus to 
Pune or travelling to Madgaon in South Goa District first, both of which are 
inconvenient and expensive. During peak seasons, bus fares increase significantly, 
adding financial burden on passengers.  
 Without a direct train connection, Nort h Goa residents must make a trip to 
Madgaon in South Goa District before cont inuing their journey to Pune, which adds 
considerable time and increases fatigue. Alternative transport like buses or taxi further 
increases passengers' budgets.  Students, professionals, and even patients travelling 
between North Goa District and Pune face significant inconvenience. Adding a  halt at 
Thivim station in North Goa District wo uld greatly benefit students, employees, 
tourists, businessmen and patients travelling to Pune for medical treatment by 
[9 August, 2024]
27

providing a more accessible and cost-effecti ve travel option. North Goa is a popular 
tourist district, and many visitors would find it easier to travel if they could catch the 
train at Thivim in North Goa District. This additional halt at Thivim station in North Goa 
District would reduce the financial strain on passengers who currently use expensive 
alternative modes of transport. 
 Sir, creating a halt at Thivim station would make travel more manageable for 
students and professionals with a bette r connectivity and overall accessibility for 
passengers travelling between Goa and Pune . I appeal to the hon. Minister of 
Railways to consider this request favourably  and take promote action to address this 
crucial transportation need. Thank you, Sir. 
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member , Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade : Shri S. 
Selvaganabathy (Puducherry), Shrimati S.  Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao  Mahadik, (Maharashtra), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), and 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
  Shri Madan Rathore; 'Demand to a ddress the problem of begging in the 
country.' 
 
Demand to address the problem of begging in the country 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़ (राजÎथान): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से एक ऐसे िवषय की ओर 
ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहूंगा, जो िदखने मȂ तो बहुत सामान्य लगता है, लेिकन बहुत गंभीर है।  
हम मȂ से अनेक माननीय सदÎयȗ ने यह महसूस िकया होगा िक िकसी भी शहर क े चौराहे पर जब 
िसग्नल बंद होता है, तब हम देखते हȅ िक कई िभखारी आकर भीख मांगने लग जाते हȅ। इनमȂ कई 
मिहलाएं छोटे-छोटे बच्चȗ को गोद मȂ लेकर आ जाती हȅ। ऐसा लगता है िक उस बच्चे को डर्ग िदया 
हुआ हो। वह बच्चा लटका हुआ होता है और उसकी गदर्न भी लटकी हुई होती है। ये बच्चे सब 
गायब िकए हुए होते हȅ या िकसी से िकराए पर िलए हुए होते हȅ। हम दया करके  उनको भीख दे देते 
हȅ। देश मȂ कई बच्चे गायब हो रहे हȅ, जो अभी तक पकड़े नहीं गए हȅ। ऐसे िगरोह पनप गए हȅ और 
िगरोह का सरगना कहीं और बैठा होता है और इस तरह से िभखािरयȗ से िभक्षा मंगवाता है। अब 
वह बच्चा िजसे बचपन मȂ ही डर्ग िदया जा रहा है, वह बच्चा बड़ा होकर क्या बनेगा, इसकी 
कÊपना की जा सकती है। यही नहीं, वह मिहला जो है, वह ǭÍट पुÍट होती है। मȅ यह िनवेदन 
करना चाहूंगा िक इस संबंध मȂ छानबीन करनी चािहए। उस िगरोह का जो सरगना होता है, 
िजतना पैसा वह चाहता है, अगर उतना पैसा वे मिहलाएं भीख मांग कर जमा नहीं करवाती हȅ, तो 
उनकी िपटाई होती है, उनको खाना भी कम देते हȅ और यह लगातार यह Ģिकर्या चलती जाती है।  
कई मिहलाओं का भी अपहरण करके  इस Ģकार का क ृत्य करवाया जाता है। 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

मȅ एक िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक इनकी छानबीन की जानी चािहए और छानबीन करके  
ऐसे िगरोह को पकड़ा जाना चािहए। उन मिहलाओं को काम पर लगाया जाना चािहए और उन 
बच्चȗ को बाल संरक्षण गृह मȂ भेज कर सामािजक न्याय िवभाग क े माध्यम से उनका संरक्षण िकया 
जाना चािहए। हम यह भी महसूस करते हȅ िक कई िवदेशी मेहमान भी आते हȅ और वह सब ये दृÌय 
देखते हȅ, तो हमारे देश की छिव भी खराब होती है। इसके  िलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िनवेदन करना 
चाहूंगा िक सरकार इस Ģिकर्या को रोकने क े िलए पयार्Ãत कदम उठाए, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Madan Rathore: Shrimati Ramilaben 
Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Shri Amar  Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Anil 
Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Shri Mahendra Bhatt (Uttarakhand), Shrimati 
Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), 
Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad (Jharkhand), Shri 
Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri  Banshilal Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. 
Bhim Singh (Bihar), Dr. Fauzia Khan (M aharashtra), Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
(Haryana), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakh and), Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
(Manipur), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Gujarat), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri M. Mohame d Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jaya 
Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pr adesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Maya Naroliya (M adhya Pradesh) and Shri Sanjeev Arora 
(Punjab). 
 Shri Mahendra Bhatt; 'Demand to include fire incidents in the Himalayan States 
occurring during summer season as natural disaster.' 
 
Demand to include fire incidents in the Himalayan states occurring 
 during summer season as natural disaster 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड): माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ िजस क्षेतर् से आता हूं, उǄराखंड, वहां 
अनेकȗ आपदाएं आती हȅ। वहां िपछले िदनȗ अिग्न की आपदाएं बड़ी संख्या मȂ हुई हȅ। उǄराखंड मȂ 
जब इस िवषय की चचार् होती है, तो उसको मानव जिनत अिग्न िदखाया जाता है, जबिक सत्य 
यह है िक जो राज्य वृक्षारोपण मȂ Ģथम Îथान रखता हो, िजसका बहुत बड़ा भूभाग वृक्षȗ से लदा 
मूल कारण है, वह पहाड़ी क्षेतर् है, वहां अनेकȗ जंगली जानवर होते हȅ।    
 गर्ीÍमकाल मȂ जब वे चलते हȅ, तो पत्थर क े टकराने से अनेक अिग्न की घटनाएँ होती हȅ।  
महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहूँगा िक पहाड़ मȂ िपरूल , जो चीड़ की पǄी का होता है, उसके  कारण बड़ी 
घटनाएँ होती हȅ। हमारी राज्य सरकार ने Ģयास भी िकया है और िपरूल  की दृिÍट से हमने वहाँ 
[9 August, 2024]
29

िपरूल  संगर्ह क Ȃ दर् बनाए हȅ। वहाँ 50 रुपए  Ģित िकलो क े िहसाब से िपरूल  खरीदने का काम हो रहा 
है।  लेिकन मȅ चाहूँगा िक क Ȃ दर् सरकार भी इसमȂ मदद करे। 
 महोदय, अगर मȅ घटनाओं की चचार् करू ँ, तो उǄराखंड राज्य मȂ 53,483 वगर् िकलोमीटर 
वन क्षेतर् है, िजसमȂ से वन िवभाग क े Îवािमत्व मȂ 37,999 वगर् िकलोमीटर का क्षेतर् है। इसी Ģकार 
राजÎव िवभाग मȂ 4,768.7 वगर् िकलोमीटर क्षेतर् आता है। अभी तक, अगर मȅ 2018 की चचार् करू ँ, 
तो 2,186 घटनाएँ हुई हȅ और इसमȂ 3,425 हेक्टेयर खेत जला है। महोदय, 2022 से 30 जून तक 
747 घटनाएँ हुई हȅ, 8,997.6 हेक्टेयर भूिम नÍट हुई हȅ और 3 लोगȗ की मौत हुई है। महोदय, 
नवंबर, 2013 से 13 जून, 2023 की मȅ चचार् करू ँ, तो 1,220 घटनाएँ हुई हȅ; 1,657.67 हेक्टेयर भूिम 
नÍट हुई है और 10 लोगȗ की मृत्यु हुई है। महोदय, एक Ģकार से मȅ कह सकता हूँ िक िजस राज्य 
क े अंदर हम पेड़ लगा रहे हȅ, पेड़ की रक्षा कर रहे हȅ, पूरे भारतवषर् को जो ऑक्सीजन देने वाला 
राज्य बन रहा है, अभी तक इसको हमने दैवी आपदा की Ǜेणी मȂ नहीं िलया है।   
 महोदय, मȅ सरकार से माँग करू ँगा िक वह कम से कम िहमालयी राज्य, खास कर 
उǄराखंड की दृिÍट से मȅ चचार् करू ँ, तो इन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ वनािग्न क े क्षेतर् को भी दैवी आपदा की Ǜेणी मȂ 
ले।                                  
                                         
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Mahendra Bhatt : Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Madan Ra thore (Rajasthan), Dr. Kalpana Saini 
(Uttarakhand), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharasht ra), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Maya 
Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh) and Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Gujarat).  
  Shri Sanjay Seth; demand to grant in dustry status to the real estate sector. 
 
Demand to grant industry status to the Real Estate Sector 
 
Ǜी संजय सेठ (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, जो िरयल एÎटेट सेक्टर है, वह जीडीपी का एक बहुत बड़ा 
contributor होता है। मȅ सरकार से आज यह अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ िक िरयल एÎटेट को 
इंडÎटर्ी का Îटेटस िदया जाए। मेरी माँग क े पीछे यह वजह है िक िरयल एÎटेट क े इसमȂ शािमल 
होने क े बाद िरयल एÎटेट डेवलपसर् को सÎते ऋण, महत्वपूणर् िनवेशकȗ क े साथ साझेदारी और 
इिक्वटी मȂ िनवेश क े लाभ िमल सकȂ गे, िजससे पिरयोजनाओं की क ु ल लागत कम होगी और ये 
लाभ सीधे आम नागिरकȗ तक पहुँचȂगे। इसिलए मȅ सरकार से अनुरोध करता हूँ िक वह िरयल 
एÎटेट को इंडÎटर्ी Îटेटस देने क े िलए आवÌयक कदम उठाए, तािक हमारे देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा 
को और मजबूत बनाया जा सके । धन्यवाद।                                                                     
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shri Sanjay Seth : Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson  (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Sanjeev Arora 
(Punjab).                                           
 Now Shri Pramod Tiwari; demand to include Gauriganj-Chitrakoot Highway 
under Bharatmala Project. 
 
Demand to include Gauriganj-Chitrakoot highway under Bharatmala project 
 
अमेठी, गौरीगंज से एक राÎता सीधा Ģतापगढ़ होकर, आलापुर होकर िचतर्कू ट जाता है, जो 
अयोध्या और िचतर्कू ट का सबसे आसान राÎता होगा। गौरीगंज िडिÎटर्क्ट हेडक्वाटर्र है, इसमȂ 
Ģतापगढ़ का एक बड़ा िहÎसा पड़ता है और उसके  साथ ही साथ यह िचतर्कू ट और अयोध्या को 
जोड़ने वाला सबसे सुगम मागर् है। 
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
इस संबंध मȂ मȅ बहुत ही िवनĦता से आगर्ह करना चाहता हूँ िक तकनीकी रूप  से यह Îवीकृ त भी 
हो गया है, इसकी सूचना भी िमल गई है, लेिकन इसके  बावजूद अभी तक इसकी formal 
sanction नहीं आई है। 
 इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ िक इस मागर् को राÍटर्ीय राजमागर् 
घोिषत कर िदया जाए, क्यȗिक यह तीन राÍटर्ीय राजमागș को भी जोड़ेगा। एक तो जगदीशपुर से 
लेकर Ģतापगढ़ होते हुए जौनपुर की सीमा तक; दूसरा, रायबरेली से लेकर जौनपुर तक क े हाईवे 
को और तीसरा, लखनऊ और इलाहाबाद हाईवे को। इस तरह यह एक बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् राÍटर्ीय 
राजमागर् है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से बहुत ही िवनĦता क े साथ कहना चाहता हूँ िक इसे राÍटर्ीय 
राजमागर् घोिषत िकया जाए - गौरीगंज से िचतर्कू ट वाया लालगंज, आलापुर और सैनी। धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Pramod Tiwari: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).  
 
 
REGARDING FEW POINTS RAISED IN THE HOUSE 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी ने एलओपी क े बारे मȂ क ु छ आपिǄजनक 
बातȂ कही थीं। एलओपी ने भी इस बात को उठाया था और आपने कहा था िक आप अपनी रूिंलग  
दȂगे। सर, वह रूिंलग  क्या है? 
 
[9 August, 2024]
31

Ǜी सभापित: सुिनए, बैिठए। माननीय एलओपी, Ǜीमान मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी और घनÌयाम 
ितवाड़ी जी, दोनȗ ने मेरे िनवेदन को Îवीकार िकया, हमने पूरी चचार् की।  
 
12.00 P.M. 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी ने एलओपी क े बारे मȂ क ु छ आपिǄजनक बातȂ कही 
थीं। एलओपी ने भी इस बात को उठाया था और आपने कहा था िक आप अपनी रूिंलग  दȂगे। सर, 
वह रूिंलग  क्या है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: सुिनए, बैिठए। माननीय एलओपी, Ǜीमान मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी और घनÌयाम 
ितवाड़ी जी, दोनȗ ने मेरे िनवेदन को Îवीकार िकया, हमने पूरी चचार् की। एक-एक शÅद देखा गया 
और अंत मȂ यह पाया गया िक Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी ने मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी की जो Ģशंसा 
की, वह ǛेÍठतम थी और इसमȂ कोई आपिǄ नहीं हो सकती थी। यह उस समय समझ मȂ नहीं 
आया। Ghanshyam Tiwari ji had appreciated Mallikarjun Kharge ji  और चेÇबर मȂ कहा िक 
अगर मुझसे कोई भी गलती हुई है, तो मȅ सदन मȂ माफी माँगूंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपको पता नहीं है।  
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: परन्तु उन्हȗने सदन मȂ अपमान िकया है। ...( Ëयवधान)... उन्हȗने सदन मȂ 
अपमान िकया है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I take strong exception to what Jairam Ramesh ji is 
saying. What I am indicating is that, at my request, Mallikarjun Khadge ji and 
Ghanshyam Tiwari ji, both were good enough to co me to my Chamber. I had the 
occasion to go through each word of that. Hon. Members can go through that. 
Ghanshyam Tiwariji had appreciated the Leader of the Opposition to a very high level 
and Mallikarjun Khargeji, ...(Interruptions)...  We have regard for you. He has raised 
it! I hope, he has not raised it. Again, we will interact. Now, Question hour. 
...(Interruptions)... No, no. ...( Interruptions)...  Okay. ...( Interruptions)... One 
minute, Leader of the House. ...(Interruptions)...  And, before that, one thing.  Even 
after that meeting, I myself read every word of it. And, then I found that there was 
nothing objectionable. I had also pleaded with the Leader of the Opposition that if he 
finds something objectionable, he may indicate please.  
 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE) : No, Sir, I have 
not seen that because you told. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have seen.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : You told that you will go through the records that if 
anything is there, you will come back.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. 
 
SHRI MALLIAKARJUN KHARGE : I even told Ghanshyam ji, it is better that the same 
things, what you have explained to me in Chamber, you say in the House...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will do that.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: So that everybody knows.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Actually, Ghanshyamji has raised  the status of Mallikarjun Khargeji  
to a level of a God. That is what he has said and that is what he  has spoken. And that 
is what I have seen. I am indeed grateful to the Leader of the Opposition, Mallikarjun 
Khargeji and Ghanshyam Tiwari ji. Both of them are hon. Members, one with 
experience of more than five decades, the other with experience of more than four 
decades. But I am trying to put the House in order. Why a Member of this side, 
without making a reference, without getting permission of the LoP should... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, I have the permission of the Chair. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Chair has not given you permission.   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: You have allowed me to speak. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, I thought you were supporting Pramod Tiwari ji on that rail link.  
So, I thought you are associating yourself. And, I thought it is a good thing. If a 
Member associates with someone, I encourage it. Can you in any case... 
...(Interruptions)... Pramod ji, all you are saying is that Ghanshyamji praised 
Mallikarjun Khargeji to a very high level that he shou ld again praise him!  He should 
again do it!  ...( Interruptions)... This is not done. Hon. Members, I give quietus to 
[9 August, 2024]
33

this discussion, with compliments to Ghanshyam Tiwari ji for using parliamentary 
language, respecting the Leader of the Oppo sition in the highes t of traditions and 
expressing to me that he is prepared to  apologize if he has transgressed in any 
manner. I have read it carefully. Not on ly was there any transgression by Shri 
Ghansham Tiwari but he ha s embellished the well-deser ved reputation of Shri 
Mallikarjun Kharge. Therefore, if  a Member of this House, with about four decades of 
parliamentary experience, praises another Member with five decades of experience, it 
is a joyous moment for us; thus giving quietus to the issue. I need not come back to 
the House on this issue. Question Hour. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: What is this, Sir? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Apology for what? 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: You said that he has apologized.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : He has not. ...( Interruptions)... Absolutely not. People do not 
apologise when they praise. If I praise the Leader of the House, if I express gratitude 
to the senior leadership... Ghanshyam Tiwari ji has praised Shri Mallikarjun Kharge ji. 
Would any Member of this House, including Pramod Tiwariji, point out a single word 
from the address of Ghanshyam Tiwari ji to which exception can be taken; any word, 
any word? ...(Interruptions)... 
 No, I will not give floor to you; otherwise, there will be disturbance.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी ( राजÎथान): सर, उन्हȗने एलओपी का िजकर् करके  जो कहा था, मȅ उसे 
दोहराना नहीं चाहता हूँ, परंतु इतना जरूर  कहना चाहता हूँ िक उनकी जो टोन थी, िजस ढंग से 
उन्हȗने कहा था और जो शÅद कहे थे... ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, no disturbance, we are discussing something. 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, उन्हȗने िजस ढ
ंग से कहा था और जो शÅद कहे थे, वह िन:संदेह एलओपी 
ऑिफस का जो डेकोरम होता है, उसके  मǈेनजर उिचत नहीं था। टोन और वडर्, दोनȗ क े संदभर् मȂ 
मȅ कह रहा हूँ िक वह उिचत नहीं था।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: सुिनए, मȅ बताता हूँ।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, यह िलख कर दे भी िदया
 गया था। 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी सभापित: Ģमोद जी, घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी was speaking in Sanskrit. Now, Sanskrit is a 
l an g u ag e t h at  req u i res  s o m e k i nd  o f o ri entation. Since, you were not present here, 
you are not... ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, I will come to one issue. 
...(Interruptions)... Mr. Jairam Ramesh, I am not giving floor to you. 
...(Interruptions)... No, nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)... Again, you 
are... ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Jairam Ramesh, I am about to name you. 
...(Interruptions)... Take your seat Rajeev ji. Yes, Ajay Makan ji, do you want to say 
something? 
 
Ǜी अजय माकन (कनार्टक): सर, मȅ यह इसिलए कह रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक यह बात लीडर ऑफ िद 
अपोिज़शन क े साथ हुई है और यह सब लोगȗ क े सामने हुई है। वे उसके  बारे मȂ आपके  संज्ञान मȂ 
ला रहे हȅ, इसिलए आप उनको नेम कर दȂगे! 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, नहीं, अजय माकन जी।  ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Ǜी अजय माकन: सर, मȅ हाथ जोड़ कर कहता हूँ, आप कभी कहते हȅ िक आप हँस क्यȗ रहे हȅ?  
आप कहते ह
ȅ िक आप मुÎकु रा क्यȗ रहे हȅ, आप बैठे क्यȗ हुए हȅ?  
 
Ǜी सभापित: सुिनए, सुिनए। 
 
Ǜी अजय माकन: सर, Ãलीज़, ऐसा मत कीिजए।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: अजय माकन जी, क ृपया सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... राजीव जी, क ृपया आप बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा
 (छǄीसगढ़): सर ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: राजीव जी, क ृपया आप बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... नहीं, नहीं, सुिनए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... Rajeev ji, take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Take yo
ur seat,  
...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record, now take your seat. Hon. Members, 
would any hon. Member of the House please point out to me?  Read from the text 
what Ghanshyam ji said. Would any Member of the House say so? How can a 
Member of this House take the floor without telling me that he takes exception to this 
part of Ghanshyamji's statement? I can understand. My  perception may be different. 
Mallikarjunji's perception may be different. A Memb er rises; he does not know what 
he is saying. ...(Interruptions)... 
[9 August, 2024]
35

SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I have not allowed you now, Jairam ji. I will appeal to the senior 
leadership. Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)...  T a k e  y o u r  s e a t .  
...(Interruptions)... Take your seat. Nothing is going  on record. I request the senior 
members of Congress party, the hon. Me mber, totally ignorant of what was 
spoken,... ...(Interruptions)... Can someone ask him to keep quiet? 
...(Interruptions)... Can you ask him to keep quiet first? ...(Interruptions)... Can the 
Leader of the Opposition ask their Member to keep quiet? ...(Interruptions)...  No, 
nothing. Now, Question Hour. . ...(Interruptions)... No, no, no, Sir, 
...(Interruptions)... we cannot have a running discussion on this.  
 Give me in writing, if there is an issue. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing, absolutely 
nothing. ...(Interruptions)... Question Hour; Question No. 196...  
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please, nothing ...(Interruptions)...  Because I have not given 
permission, ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... It 
will be only if I give permission It will not.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक (राजÎथान): सभापित महोदय,  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: क्यȗ? ...(Ëयवधान)... ज्यादा नहीं करनी चािहए। ...( Ëयवधान)...एक बार कर दी, 
िफर खत्म होनी चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Please take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Let us 
proceed with the Question Hour. ...(Interruptions)...  Only Mr. Tiruchi Siva will 
speak, no one else. ...(Interruptions)...Yes, Mr. Tiruchi Siva.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, I have a small observation to make. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is your observation, Mr. Tiruchi Siva? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, firstly, kindly, whenever th e hon. Leader of the Opposition 
gets up, give him the floor and listen to wh a t  h e  w a n t s  t o  s a y .  T h a t  i s  m y  f i r s t  
                                         
* Not Recorded. 
 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

request...(Interruptions)... Secondly, as Mr. Pramod Tiwa ri said – this I inferred 
from interpretation of Hindi – I recall that one day Mr. Chidambaram asked you, ‘How 
rule 267 notice was preceded by another mo tion? How can you do that?’ And, you 
were agitated. You said, ‘How can you ask? How can you do that?’ Sir, I told then, it 
i s  n o t  ‘ H o w  c a n  y o u  d o  t h a t ? ’  I t  i s  ‘ H o w  y o u  c a n  d o  t h a t ? ’  I t  i s  o n l y  t h e  t o n e  t h a t  
matters. When something happens, the same will also apply to the hon. LoP. 
 
SHRI IMRAN PRATAPGARHI (Maharashtra): May I say something, Sir? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, Smt. Jaya Amitab h Bachchan is the last speaker 
on this point. Please, Madam. 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, मȅ जया अिमताभ बच्चन यह बोलना चाहती हूँ 
िक मȅ कलाकार हूँ, body language समझती  हूँ, expression समझती हूँ। सर, मुझे माफ 
कीिजएगा, मगर आपका tone जो है, is not acceptable. We are colleagues, Sir. You may 
be sitting on the Chair. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Jayaji, take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... T a k e  y o u
 r  s e a t .  
...(Interruptions)... One minute.  ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, no. बैिठए, 
बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... I know how to deal with it. ...(Interruptions)... Jayaji, you have 
earned a great reputation. You know, an  actor is subject to the director. 
...(Interruptions)... You have not seen what I see from here.  ...(Interruptions)... I 
don’t want to repeat; I don’t want schoolin g. I am a person who has gone out of the 
way and you say, ‘My tone!’ ...(Interruptions)... No, no. Sit down. 
...(Interruptions)... No. You don’t have the floor now. ...(Interruptions)... No, 
enough of it. You cannot have it. ...(Interruptions)... You may be anybody. You may 
be a celebrity. ...(Interruptions)... You have to underst and the decorum. 
...(Interruptions)...No; nothing doing . ...(Interruptions)... Nothing. 
...(Interruptions)... No, no. Not at all. ...(Interruptions)...  I will not bear it. 
...(Interruptions)... Please sit down. Please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)... 
No, no. Never carry an impression that only  you build reputation. We come here to 
build reputation. We live up to reputation. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing doing. 
...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)... Question No. 196, Ms. Sushmita Dev. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
[9 August, 2024]
37

SHRIMATI SUSHMITA DEV (West Bengal) : Sir, she is a Memb er of Parliament. 
...(Interruptions)...How can you call her a celebrity, Sir? ...(Interruptions)...She is a 
senior Member of Parliament. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Okay. And, has the senior Memb er of Parliament got a licence? 
...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... Has a senior 
Member of Parliament got a licence to r un down the reputation of the Chair? 
...(Interruptions)... To question the tone and tenor! ...(Interruptions)... Yes; I have 
to be in a reaction mode to take care of the situation. ...(Interruptions)... I have the 
highest respect. But, to make it a habit to say, my tone, my language and my 
temper... ...(Interruptions)... I don’t go by the script of others. ...(Interruptions)...                          
 I have my own script.  ...(Interruptions)... I am not operated by anyone else.  
...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will happen, Khargeji.  ...(Interruptions)... Thinking has 
to be from within.  ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will happen.  ...(Interruptions)...   
No, Jaya ji, take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Jayaji, take your seat.  
...(Interruptions)... No, it is misconduct.  ...(Interruptions)... It is misconduct.  
...(Interruptions)... I know you want to destabilise the entire nation.  
...(Interruptions)... Yes, you are out to create chaos in the House.  
...(Interruptions)... Nothing else is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)... I shall not 
be a party to this House being converted, Mr. Kharge, as an epicentre of 
disturbance.  ...(Interruptions)... You are determined to have your way at the cost of 
the Constitution.  ...(Interruptions)... You are doing it.  ...(Interruptions)...  It is lack 
of decorum and disrespect to democracy; disrespect to the Constitution.  
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
They are walking away from their obligations . They are walking away from their duty.  
Hon. Members, they don’t want to participate. They know only how to create chaos. I 
am surprised! The nation is a priority. The nation is always first.  
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, what a sad day! 9
th August, 1942 – call of 
Mahatma Gandhi ‘Quit India’, and this Hous e paid tribute to the martyrs because we 
got freedom. They are quitting Parliament. They are quitting their duty. They are 
quitting the road to Constitu tion. They are showing their b ack, not to the Chair or to 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

the House, but to the Constitution and to th e sense of their duty. How can we suffer!  
Leading lights of the ruling party, ultimate co ntrollers of the Opposition - look at the 
difference! We are in the making of Bharat into a Viksit Bharat . The world is 
recognising us. Accolades are pouring in fr om all quarters – the World Bank and the 
IMF. The rise is incremental. People are witnessing the rise and the infrastructure 
growth. We are on a way to a development journey. These people want to impede. I 
use this platform with all sense of responsibility to state that India is a peaceful 
country; India is a stable country; Indi a has the most functional and vibrant 
democracy; India has leadership continually in  its third term. A history is in making 
after six decades. India has a l eadership in Prime Minister that has global recognition. 
The nation is proud of it. And, some pe ople, taking note of happenings in the 
neighbouring country, are engaging in inflammatory and condemnable narrative.   
 And, the ideology to which they subscribe is in silence. It has become a habit -
- the Leader of the Opposition, with some of them -- that a segment will speak out 
against the nation; a segment will set af loat a narrative which tarnishes our 
institutions, demeans our democratic cult ure, weakens our progress. And they will 
expel the gentleman and take back! I make an  appeal to all right-thinking people in 
the country, it is time for them not to ob serve silence. Such narratives have to be 
ambushed at the threshold. Can you see reason today? Last time, they walked out 
with one slogan – LoP, LoP! Today, for what have they walked out? One of the most 
experienced Members of this House, Ganshyam Tiwari ji, who has four decades of 
experience, his only transgression was, he praised Mallikarjun Kharge ji. The praise 
was in Sanskrit. Malikkarjun Kharge ji was invited to my Chamber, along with 
Ghanshyam Tiwari ji. Threadbare, the matter was di scussed. It was understood. 
There was quietus. But as a design, as a st rategy, as a well-planned orchestration to 
find an alibi to walk out from the House, they st aged it. I want the leave of the House 
that if such misdemeanour takes place, ev en at the stage of the Leader of the 
Opposition, I will try to avoid to an extreme degree taking a recourse which, 
otherwise, is unavoidable. I have been avoiding  it virtually every da y. I do not want to 
make it routine. And, today, the top br ass was here. What I saw was failure of 
commitment to nationalism, failure of belief in our country, disregard of our 
Constitution, and that is why I say, two good things have happened in the last 
decade. One, we started having Constitu tion Day because that Constitution was 
ravaged in the 1975 Emergency. Nowhere in the history of the world! Emergency was 
clamped because a Judge in Allahabad High Court, Shri J.M.L Sinha, had held the 
election of Shrimati Indira Nehru Gandhi, th en Prime Minister, as void. That was the 
time we witnessed every misdeed of the Emergency, every wrongdoing of the 
[9 August, 2024]
39

Emergency. During the Emergency, lakhs of  people were put behind the bars; they 
were ill treated and tortured. Nine High Cour ts in the country upheld the right of the 
citizens to have recourse to law. The  Supreme Court then and  the ADM Jabalpur, 
reversed  the ruling of the nine High Cour ts and held, 'During Emergency, there will 
be no fundamental rights, no right to access to justice system, and Emergency can 
last as long as the Government wants. ' What a travesty! Emergency was clamped 
because a conscientious Judge had decl ared the election void. Emergency was 
wrongfully sanctified by another court. Th e present court has regretted the decision. 
The present Court has reversed the decision using very strong language.                   
 And, that is why, ‘ Samvidhan Hatya Diwas' has a significance. It is very timely; 
2025 will be the 50 th Anniversary of that. I want ev ery young man in the country to 
know the dangers of these activities. Thes e are not ordinary disruptions, let me tell 
you. These are not ordinary disturbances. Th ey are a mechanism to throttle debates, 
a mechanism to insult democratic values. And, I, therefore, appeal, through you, to 
everyone in the country, let the message go th at what they have done is trivializing 
democracy and institutions, for just a petty ga in, at the cost of the nation. That will 
not be countenanced. ...(Interruptions)... Yes, Leader of the House. 
 
सभा क े नेता  ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपसे क्षमा चाहता हूं िक 
ĢÌनोǄर था, इसिलए मȅ लोक सभा मȂ था। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN : I must appreciate the gesture because I got a written 
communication of preoccupation of the Lead er of the House in the House of the 
People. I got that communication.  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: महोदय, मȅ इस कारण से यहाँ पर उपिÎथत नहीं था, लेिकन मȅने यहाँ पर 
आने क े बाद जो देखा और आपने जो कहा है, उस संबंध मȂ यह कहता हूं िक आपने जो कहा है, 
आपकी उस बात क े साथ िसफर् सǄाधारी दल ही नहीं, बिÊक पूरा द
ेश खड़ा है। महोदय, िजस 
तरीके  का Ëयवहार उस तरफ से हुआ है, वह बहुत ही अशोभनीय है और बहुत ही गैर िजÇमेदाराना 
है। मुझे बहुत ÎपÍट िदख रहा िक वे राजनीितक Îतर से धरातल पर इतना नीचे आ गए हȅ िक पाटीर् 
का िवरोध कर
ते-करते, Ëयिƪ का िवरोध करते-करते अब देश का िवरोध करने लगे हȅ। देश मȂ वे 
िवघटनकारी शिƪयाँ, जो देश को खंिडत करना चाहती हȅ, िवभािजत करना चाहती हȅ, तकलीफ 
मȂ डालना चाहती हȅ, उनके  साथ जब Ģत्यक्ष और परोक्ष म
Ȃ हमȂ िवपक्ष की आवाज़ िदखती है, तो 
मुझे यह संशय होता है िक वे जो राÍटर्ीय पािर्टयाँ, Ģादेिशक पािर्टयाँ हȅ, क्या उनका एजȂडा देश को 
कमजोर करना बन गया है? आज िजस तरीके  का Ëयवहार हुआ, आपने जो टॉप Ĥास  कहा है, 
वह इस बात को इंिगत करता है िक सारी लीडरिशप इस बात स
े सहमत है िक िकसी भी कारण से 
हाउस न चले और वे पािर्टयाँ इसके  िलए Ģेिरत होती हȅ।  
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 सभापित महोदय, आज का जो Ëयवहार है, उसके  िलए मुझे लगता है िक उन्हȂ इसके  िलए 
माफी मांगनी चािहए और सदन की मयार्दा, सदन की गिरमा - िजसके  बारे मȂ वे यहाँ बैठकर बार-
बार दुहाई देते रहे हȅ, उसको अपने आचरण मȂ लाना चािहए, क्यȗिक आचरण मȂ लाने का वƪ आ 
गया है। मȅ इतना ही कहूंगा िक जहाँ मȅ इस घटना की िंनदा कर
ता हूं, वहीं उनके  ǎारा माफी मांगने 
की बात भी कहता हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय िशवराज िंसह चौहान जी, आप अपनी बात सदन मȂ रिखए। 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्
ी; तथा गर्ामीण िवकास मंतर्ी (Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान): माननीय 
सभापित महोदय, यह सदन क ेवल ईंट और गारȗ का भवन नहीं है, बिÊक लोकतंतर् का पिवतर् 
मंिदर है। मȅ छह बार लोक सभा का और छह बार िवधान सभा का सदÎय रहा हूं। मȅ बारह बार या 
तो िवधान सभा मȂ या लोक सभा मȂ आया हूं, लेिकन मȅने अपने जीवन म
Ȃ Ģितपक्ष का ऐसा 
अमयार्िदत, अशोभनीय Ëयवहार कभी नहीं देखा। मेरा मन आज Ëयिथत है और वेदना से भरा हुआ 
है। यह क ेवल आसंदी का अपमान नहीं है, बिÊक देश क े लोकतांितर्क मूÊयȗ का अपमान है, 
लोकतंतर् का अपमान है।    
 यह संिवधान का अपमान है। आज यह िसǉ हो गया है िक गैर-िजÇमेदार िवपक्ष देश को 
अराजकता मȂ झȗकने का Ģयास कर रहा है। माननीय सभापित महोदय, हम लोग उǄर क े िलए 
आते हȅ, तो क ेवल ĢÌनकतार् का जवाब नहीं देत
े हȅ, हम वह जवाब जनता क े िलए भी देते हȅ। आज 
ĢÌनकाल मȂ जो Ëयवहार िकया है, सचमुच उसका कोई दूसरा उदाहरण नहीं िमलता है। जैसा िक 
आदरणीय सदन क े नेता ने कहा ह
ै, इसके  िलए Ģितपक्ष को माफी माँगनी चािहए। उन्हȗने सारे 
सदन को शमर्सार िकया है, देश को शमर्सार िकया है।  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka) : Sir, I am speaking here with my vast 
experience, seven terms as an MLA, five  terms as a Lok Sabha Member and two 
terms as a Member of this House. You tried to solve the problem between Shri 
Ghanshyam Tiwari and the Leader of the Opposition. You called both the leaders to 
your Chamber and then tried to see that the matter is sorted out. I was watching that 
the Leader of the Opposition, Kharge ji, was almost reconciled. But one or two 
Members tried to provoke him when your good-self made an appeal to cond
uct the 
Business as per the schedule and start the Business of Question Hour. I was closely 
watching it. This is a habit. Every day, it happens. Yesterday, I watched it. This is an 
exalted Chair. Everybody should accept the ruling or the appeal made by the hon. 
Chair which is an exalted Chair. This sh ould not happen like this every day. The 
country is watching how the recognised Opposition is behaving; the country is 
watching that they are not going to succee d to destabilise Modi's Government of the 
third term. I will tell you, in this old age of 92, I am here and I am watching it every 
day. Your appeal has not given any result. One or two Members tried to provoke, and 
[9 August, 2024]
41

they walked out. Let them go. I do not want to make any comment on them. Let them 
continue this habit. The country will watch it and the country will teach them a lesson 
like what happened in the Emergency when  the Allahabad High  Court gave the 
judgment. I was also one of the persons who su ffered in those days who went to jail.  
This should stop. I appeal to both sides. Our leaders make so much appeal every day 
to the Opposition. But they are not yielding . What to do? Let them continue, but they 
cannot destabilise the Government for the third time that Modiji is heading. He will rule 
the country for the full term till 2029. There is no doubt about that. Your appeal is 
heart-touching for us. You are a great man, si tting on this exalted Chair. If they have 
not heard you, what to do? We can leave it  at that stage and the Business of the 
House can proceed. With these words, I conclude.  
 
कौशल िवकास और उǏमशीलता मंतर्ालय क े राज्य मंतर्ी
; तथा िशक्षा मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी  
(Ǜी जयंत चौधरी): सर, आपने यहाँ पर अपनी बात रखी है, तो यह बात आपकी नहीं है, बिÊक 
इस सदन की है। नेता सदन; माननीय मंतर्ी, िशवराज िंसह चौहान जी और हमारे देश क े पूवर् 
Ģधान मंतर्ी, इस सदन क े सीिनयर मोÎट सदÎय, देवेगौड़ा जी की बात मȂ अपने आपको भी 
शािमल करता
 हूँ। सर, सीिनयर मेÇबर ने आपको एक colleague describe िकया।  आप िजस 
पदभार को संभाल रहे हȅ, उसकी अपनी एक मयार्दा है। We may be all colleagues here, and 
even friends outside this House, but it goes against the traditions of the House to refer 
to someone sitting in the Chair as a colleague. We must all abide by your decisions.   
 सर, आप खुला संवाद करते हȅ। चेयर पर बैठकर आप सदÎयȗ को मौका देते हȅ, अवसर 
देते हȅ। आपने यहां जो बातȂ रखी हȅ, खासतौर से इमरजȂसी, वह देश क े िलए काला दौर था। सभी 
नौजवान और पूरे देश क े लोग इस बात को देखȂ।  इससे हमȂ सबक सीखना चािहए। भारत सरकार 
ने पहल की है िक ये ची
ज इितहास मȂ दजर् होनी चािहए। हम रीिवज़न नहीं कर सकते हȅ। यह देश 
क े इितहास का िहÎसा है, लेिकन उस इितहास को अगर हम नहीं जानȂगे, तो हम बार -बार ऐसी 
गलती दोहराने क े िलए मजबूर हȗगे। आपका जो भी फ ैसला या िनणर्य होगा, मȅ तो यह अपील 
करता हूं िक सख्ती होनी ही चािहए। एक बार कोई गलती करता है, तो मानी जाती है। बार-बार 
संयोिजत तर
ीके  से सदन मȂ खलल डालना, तािक हम देश क े एजȂडा को देश क े सामने पेश न कर 
पाएं, इसके  िखलाफ भी कारर्वाई होनी चािहए।  
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ा लय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र): सभापित महोदय, मȅने  
11 वषș मȂ राज्य सभा मȂ बहुत क ु छ देखा है, लेिकन आज मुझे बहुत तकलीफ हुई है। आसन क े 
िलए, सभापित जी क े िलए, िजन्हȂ सभी राज्यȗ का िवÌवास ĢाÃत है, इस तरह की बात कहना 
लोकतंतर् क े िवरुǉ ह
ै। इस संबंध मȂ हम जनता से अपील करते हȅ और आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहते 
हȅ िक जो आपातकाल लगाने वाले लोग हȅ, जो लोकतंतर् क े िवरोधी लोग ह ȅ, उन पर आप सख्त से 
सख्त कारर्वाई करȂ। जनता ने Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को तीसरी बार शिƪ दी है और आशीवार्द िदया 
है।  उस शिƪ और आशीवार्द को आप क ुचलना चाहते हȅ, यह लोकतंतर् मȂ नहीं चलेगा। जो सजग 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ģहरी है, जो लोकतंतर् का सजग आदमी है, उस आदमी क े साथ िवरोधी दल क े लोग इस तरह का 
Ëयवहार करȂगे, यह लोकतंतर् क े Ģित आघात है। हम अपनी तरफ से और अपने दल की तरफ से 
यह िनवेदन करना चाहते हȅ िक आपमȂ जो शिƪ है, उस शिƪ का इÎतेमाल कीिजए और लोकतंतर् 
को बचाइए। सदन की मयार्दा को रखते हुए आप सख्त से सख्त कारर्वाई करने की कोिशश 
कीिजए।   
 मȅ भी 36 वषș स
े संसदीय जीवन मȂ रहा हूं, लेिकन इस तरह का Ëयवहार! बड़ी उÇमीद क े 
साथ लोग यहां आते हȅ िक नई िदÊली मȂ लोक सभा
 और राज्य सभा की जो मयार्दा है, उस मयार्दा 
को रखने का काम करȂगे और जनता की आवाज को मुखर होकर उठाने का काम करȂगे। इस 
आवाज को क ुचलने की जो सािजश चल रही हȅ, उस सािजश क े िवरुǉ आपको कारर्वाई करनी 
चािहए। जय िंहद! जय भारत! 
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN (Tamil Nadu) : Respected Chairman, Sir, this is my sixteenth year 
in this august House. I have seen four Chairmen in this House.  A settled issue from 
the highest forum of the House was restar ted today because you graciously gave a 
chance to the Opposition for their clari
fication. Unfortunately, instead of getting 
clarification on the subject, they decided to  do politics on the subject and disturbed 
the House. I think, this was their plan for the day. That is number one.  
   Secondly, they started talking on the issue, and when you clarified the issue 
again and again, they were not ready to lis ten to you and your explanation. Instead, 
they were changing topics, Member to Memb er, to satisfy their leaders. Finally, their 
core subject has been diversified and they walked out for the reason which they did 
not stood up for. Crores and crores of peop le in the country are watching this august 
House. It is a very painful day, a very unfor tunate situation, which the Opposition has 
given to the House and the nation.   
 
सेशन देखने क े िलए िमला। िबहार क े हाउस मȂ हम लोग 10-12 साल रहे। मȅ खुद देखता था िक 
आप ऑपोिज़शन को मौका देने मȂ ज्यादा accommodate करते रहते थे। यहाँ ज्यादा लोगȗ की 
आवाज बंद करवाते थे, उधर से आवाज आती थी। िजतना हो सकता था, आपने accommodate 
करने की कोिशश की। आज मȅने देखा, मेरे िलए यह एक बड़ा surprise था, कांगर्ेस की जो 
highest leader हȅ, आप तो सबको बोलते हȅ िक खड़े होकर बोिलए, बैठे-बैठे मत बोिलए, वे बैठे-
बैठे वहाँ से instruction दे रही थीं। सारी चीज वहीं से instigate हुई है। उन्हȗने बैठ कर सारे 
माहौल को instigate िकया, उसके  बाद कांगर्ेस क े सारे लोग वहाँ पर इकƻा हुए। वे आपकी तरफ 
बार-बार इशारा करके  बैठे-बैठे क ु छ बोल रही थीं।  मȅ तो यही कहूँगा िक जो हमारे हाउस क े नेता 
हȅ, आदरणीय जे.पी. नƿा साहब और िजतने सीिनयर लोग हȅ, उन्हȗने अपनी भावना Ëयƪ की है। 
ये जो बैठी हुई थीं, मȅने देखा िक सबसे पहले उपसभापित जी ने एक बार उनका नाम िलया, 
उन्हȗने उसका protest िकया। आपने इस चीज को clarify िकया िक आप जो nomination मȂ 
[9 August, 2024]
43

कागज देते हȅ, जो आता है, वही नाम िलया जाता है और उसको change करने का process है, 
आप नाम change कर सकते हȅ। आज िफर वे बैठ कर वही objection कर रही थीं। अगले िदन 
वह अखबार मȂ छपता है, न्यूज़ बनती है, हेडलाइन बनता है, मȅ देखता हूँ िक digital channel पर 
चलता रहता है। इसिलए मुझे यह लगता है िक इन लोगȗ को नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का तीसरी बार आना 
पच ही नहीं रहा है िक यह चीज क ै से हो गई! सच्चाई यह है, और कोई वजह नहीं है। इसीिलए 
हम सब लोग चाहते हȅ िक आपकी चेयर, आपका institution, -- जो जयंत जी कह रहे थे, 
colleague क ै से हो गए! -- इस चेयर का अपना सÇमान है।  आप वहाँ से direction देते हȅ, आप 
वहाँ से रूिंलग  देते हȅ।   
 इसिलए मȅ अपनी तरफ से, अपनी पाटीर् की तरफ से यही िनवेदन करू ँगा िक यह बार बार 
होता रहेगा। सर, आप थोड़ा soft मत होइए, आप थोड़ा डंडा चलाइए, नहीं तो हमेशा यह िदक्कत 
होती रहेगी। आपको एक बार देखना पड़ेगा। मȅ देखता हूँ, आप बहुत accommodate करते हȅ।  
Normally, ऐसा होता नहीं है। मȅ देखता हूँ िक वे लोग मजाक भी करते रहते हȅ, लेिकन आप तब 
भी, सब बात समझते हुए भी, उनकी बात को, उनकी भावना को accommodate करते हȅ, उनको 
ज्यादा मौका देते हȅ, लेिकन वे उस चीज को कहीं से appreciate नहीं करते हȅ। मुझे यही लगता है 
िक हाउस क े लीडर ने जो भावना Ëयƪ की है, हम सब उस भावना क े साथ हȅ और कोई न कोई 
कड़ी कारर्वाई होनी चािहए। उनको तो माफी माँगनी ही चािहए। मȅ िफर कह रहा हूँ िक आज यहाँ 
पर जो भी instigate हुआ है, जो उनकी सवȘच्च नेता हȅ, उन्हȗने बैठ कर यह िकया है।   
                                                 
सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी रामदास अठावले): चेयरमैन सर, 
आज का िदन हमारे िलए एक बहुत बड़ा काला िदन है। लोकतंतर् का इस तरह से मजाक उड़ाना, 
संसद का मजाक उड़ाना, सभापित का मजाक उड़ाना - आपने तो उनको बहुत बार टोका, 
लेिकन बहुत बार इन्हȗने दे िदया आपको ही *। आप बहुत बार इनको बहुत बड़ा चांस देते रहे।   
आपकी जो चेयर है - चाहे अपोिजशन हो या सǄाधारी हो, वह तो सबके  िलए है। सǄाधारी पाटीर् 
क े माध्यम से आप चुनकर आए हȅ, यह बात सही है। अपोिजशन को भी अपनी बात रखने का 
अिधकार है, लेिकन उसके  भी िनयम होते हȅ। ये िनयमȗ की बात करने वाले, हमेशा िनयम तोड़ते 
रहे हȅ। आज उन्हȗने बहुत ही गलत काम िकया है। मȅने तो एक बार यह माँग की थी िक जो लोग 
रोज गड़बड़ करते हȅ - दो-तीन बार गड़बड़ िकया, तो ठीक है, लेिकन अगर चौथी बार गड़बड़ 
करȂ, तो उनको सÎपȂड करना ही चािहए। अगर उनको यहाँ का काम नहीं करना है, बात नहीं 
करनी है, बात नहीं सुननी है, चेयरमैन का भी क ु छ नहीं सुनना है, तो ऐसे लोगȗ को इधर रहने का 
क्या अिधकार है?   
 इन लोगȗ को ऐसा लग रहा है िक मोदी जी तीसरी बार Ģधान मंतर्ी बन गए हȅ, तो लोगȗ ने 
उनको माना है, लोगȗ ने उनको मौका िदया है, लेिकन इनके  मन मȂ बहुत बड़ी जलन है। हमारा तो 
मोदी जी क े साथ िमलन है, लेिकन उनको मोदी जी क े बारे मȂ जलन है। इसिलए ये लोग और 
िकतनी भी कोिशश करȂ, अगली बार भी, 2029 मȂ भी हमारी सरकार आएगी, 2034 मȂ भी हमारी 
सरकार आएगी और 2039 मȂ भी हमारी सरकार आएगी। क्यȗ नहीं सरकार आएगी? हम काम 
                                         
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

करते रहȂगे और आप भी वहाँ रहȂगे। जब तक आप रहȂगे, तब तक - आप तो तगड़े चेयरमैन हȅ, 
सभापित हȅ। आप हमारा भी सुनते हȅ, उनका भी सुनते हȅ, लेिकन हमसे  ज्यादा उनका सुनते हȅ। 
लेिकन उसके  बावजूद भी उनके  ǎारा आपका ऐसा अपमान करना ठीक नहीं है। इसिलए, मȅ आज 
की पाटीर् है। बाबा साहेब ने संिवधान बनाने मȂ बहुत बड़ा योगदान िदया है, संसद को अपने 
अिधकार िदए हȅ, अपोिजशन को अिधकार िदए हȅ, सǄा पक्ष को अिधकार िदए हȅ, लेिकन इसका 
उÊलंघन करना ठीक नहीं है। इसिलए इनके  ऊपर कारर्वाई होनी चािहए। हर बार ये जो बाहर 
जाते हȅ, तो मȅ अपेक्षा करता हूँ िक ये हमेशा बाहर रहȂ और हम हमेशा अन्दर रहȂ। यही हमारी 
अपेक्षा है। इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ, यह जो क ु छ भी हुआ है, यह ठीक नहीं है। इसका मȅ िनषेध करता 
हूँ, िधक्कार करता हूँ। धन्यवाद, चेयरमैन, सर। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy.    
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH  REDDY (Telangana) : Hon. Chairman, Sir, the incidents which 
took place in the House today are unfort unate. Agreeing to most of the views 
expressed by the senior hon. Members, when  we come to the House, the first thing 
we do is we bend and do our namaste to the Chair. The idea behi nd that is this. It is 
not who sits in the Chair; it is, we thank the people of our respective areas for sending 
us here and for giving us an opportunity to  present and debate on the grievances that 
they are going through. Especially for Me mbers like us who represent the regional 
parties, the happenings over the last few days have really been very painful to us. You 
have expressed yourself in a very, very elaborate way. You have given us ample 
opportunities.  But in spite of that, we have  seen that there are some deadlocks. And 
with your kind permission, one suggestion is that if there are more meetings with all 
the floor leaders in your Chamber, probably, it could bring down the tension. And you 
have been doing it very graciously, Sir. In sp ite of the best of your efforts, we are not 
able to end these deadlocks. But having sa id this, the Chair is what gives us the 
authority, the power, to debate public is sues. And when the Chair gets helpless, the 
House gets helpless, which is not good for any parliamentary demo cracy. As far as 
we are concerned, we would extend our full  support to the Chair. We have the full 
confidence, Sir. Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Praful Patel.   
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL(Maharashtra) : Chairman, Sir, sorry, th ough I was not in the 
House, I was watching the proceedings on television, and, therefore, I immediately 
rushed in here because I also wanted to first express my deep concern and, I would 
[9 August, 2024]
45

also say, a sense of sorrow for the way proceedings in the House are happening 
every day. Some new events are unfolding. I have been privileged to be a Member of 
both the Houses of Parliament for almost more than three decades.  
 I recall the days, my early days as a par liamentarian, when stalwarts from both 
the sides would be present in the House. Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji, Advani ji, Indrajit ji, 
Basu sahib, Somnath Chatterjee ji, Chandra Shekhar ji, Narasimha Rao ji, Arjun Singh 
ji,  Sharad Pawar ji, and many others stalwarts were there. I recall the level of debate, 
the level of engagement and healthy respect for each other.  That was visible in the 
House. Now we are seeing standards of pa rliamentary democracy falling every day. It 
i s  v e r y  p a i n f u l .  A s  s o m e  o f  m y  c o l l e a g u e s  h a v e  s a i d ,  w e  c o m e  t o  P a r l i a m e n t  t o  
represent the voice of the people. We come  here to discuss issues which are very 
important for the well-being of our nation and for the future of  our nation. We are 
seeing challenges of every kind in this  country. We need to have a meaningful 
dialogue between the Ruling side and the Opposition side. I must say that I have seen 
both sides of the House. Having been on  the Ruling side, the Treasury Benches, and 
on the Opposition Benches, I cannot unde rstand why we cannot have it. We may 
have differences outside. I remember the 50 th anniversary celebrations when all the 
parties, including the people who are sitting in this very House, all of us, actually took 
an oath and said that we will ensure th at Parliament functions, parliamentary 
democracy thrives and it becomes robust in this country. These were the same 
people. Many of them took the pledge, including myself. I thin k all these are empty 
promises which we make, not just to ourselves but to th e country as well. I would 
just…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. Not just on the 50
th, but on the 60th and the 70th also. I 
had the pain of going through each word of it yesterday. Everyone agreed to that. 
What about the conduct here? You do not ha ve the benefit of seeing it from here. 
One Member has reacted to it. I saw every ph ysical movement. It was as if they were 
in a battleground. It was a concerted move ment. The physically charged movement 
was aimed at destroying an institution. A sacrilege was taking place before my own 
eyes. Only one hon. Member has spoken . Never spare any effort when you see 
before your own eyes how those who sh ould be responsible are instigating 
irresponsibility. I go back to emergency da ys. We need to learn our lessons. If we 
don't do it well in time, this virus will destroy democracy. I know they are not targeting 
me. They find it indigestible that a Governme nt is in place for a third time continually.  
Hon. Members, that is not emanating from me. It is emanating from the will of the 
people. And in democracy, if you do not ho nour the verdict of the people -- that 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

verdict has to be honoured primarily in  this theatre -- would any child, any 
impressionable mind, any of their younger family members, approve of it? You cannot 
imagine it. Let me tell you, hon. Members,  I screen everything. But when I reach 
home, I have a 360-degree view of it. I find what we have here. I must work more to 
get them for reconciliation. But beyond a limit, even Lord Krishna could not avoid it.  
 I am not Lord Krishna. I am not a shade of His. I need support of the House. 
What has to be done is not for this section or  that section. What has to be done is for 
the future of our country. Can you imagin e the input which I get every day as a 
structured manner and the activities? I woul d appeal to the hon. Members, let us 
informed. Things have started as a narrative. It is said, "Oh! Neighboring country; we 
are next!" Then comes wiser counsel. The gentleman says, "What I say is not in 
private but in public." And he unfort unately belongs to a lineage and to a 
distinguished noble profession. The other one,  with experience of external affairs, 
does it. The challenge I know is not to me  at all. In the en tire mechanism, the 
challenge is to the elected Government that they want to start here. And I share it with 
anguish, anxiety, pain and concern. Virtua lly, I avoided fist fight in the House by 
adjournments. I avoided fist fight here. I am so surprised, and yesterday I had the 
occasion in the meeting of the leaders, one of the senior-most Members of this 
House -- I don't want to name -- for whom I have the highest regard and who always 
claim that his party never came to the Well, gave his signature that my action was 
unprecedented and unilateral. In my Chamber,  he was present; I could not hold my 
tears. A man only next to Devegowdaji in th is House! If Devegowdaji writes a single 
sentence that your action is unbecoming of Chairman, my entire life is at stake. I put a 
question to him before all the leaders present there: How could you give your 
signature here? I was only a phone call aw ay. I don't want to become party and, 
therefore, I was digesting this. But enou gh is enough. They want to put the 
democracy in peril. They want to sacrilege this temple of democracy and they want to 
do it in a vengeful manner in the presence of the top leadership. When I looked for 
sanity, what did I find? Outrageous shreddi ng of sanctity! I have seen much more 
than all of you have seen. And, therefore, this is an occasion. History will remember 
what everyone has spoken here. It is not just for the sake of it. Therefore, we had the 
very wise counsel from very senior-most people including former Prime Minister, Shri 
H.D. Devegowda. I need guidance from the L eader of the House that on an occasion 
like this, we need to take steps. If not take n, we will regret. Now, the Leader of the 
House. 
 
[9 August, 2024]
47

Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: माननीय सभापित महोदय, जैसा मȅने अपने पहले वƪËय मȂ कहा,  आज  
की जो घटना है, वह बहुत ही िंनदनीय और िंचताजनक है तथा Ģजातंतर् क े मूÊयȗ का एक तरीके  
से हनन है। मȅ चाहूंगा िक यह सदन इस बारे मȂ एक िंनदा ĢÎताव जरूर  पािरत करे।  
 
1:00 P.M. 
 
आज जो घटना घटी है और िजस तरह का िवपक्ष का Ëयवहार रहा है, वह बहुत ही असंसदीय, 
अमयार्िदत और अनुशासनहीनता वाला Ëयवहार रहा है। िवपक्ष चचार् की दृिÍट से मुǈािव
 हीन हो गया 
है और मयार्दािवहीन Ëयवहार करना, उनकी आदत सी हो गई है। Ģजातांितर्क मूÊयȗ का हनन 
होना, यह सदन कभी बदार्Ìत नहीं करेगा। Ģजातंतर् क े मूÊयȗ की रक्षा करना इस सदन का कतर्Ëय 
है, इसिलए यह सदन आज की घटना की सवर्सÇमित से िंनदा करता है और ĢÎतािवत करता ह
ै 
िक ऐसी घटनाओं की घोर िंनदा की जाए और मȅने पहले भी कहा िक िकसी पाटीर् का िवरोध करते-
करते देश का िवरोध करना और देश की िवघटनकारी शिƪयȗ का समथर्न करना अित िंनदनीय 
है, इसिलए मȅ सवर्सÇमित स
े आज की घटना क े िलए  िंनदा ĢÎतािवत करता हूं।      
        
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 P.M. today.   
 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one minute past one of the clock. 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the House is adjourned till 2.30 p.m. 
today. 
The House then adjourned at two of the clock. 
 
The House reassembled at thirty minutes past two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the House will meet again at 3.00 p.m., 
today. हम सब पुन: तीन बजे यहीं पर एकतर् हȗगे।  
 
The House then adjourned at thirty minutes past two of the clock. 
 
The House reassembled at three of the clock,
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the House is adjourned to meet at 3.30 
p.m., today.  
The House then adjourned at three of the clock. 
 
The House reassembled at thirty minutes past three of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, after the lunch recess, the House was adjourned 
thrice, with the hope and expectation that  the Opposition Members who walked out 
on an issue, that had been cordially re solved in my chamber in the presence of 
Leader of the Opposition, Mallikarjun Khargeji and hon. Member, Ghanshyam Tiwariji, 
would come back. Both the Members in my presence, in my Chamber, had the 
occasion with their experience of decades in  Parliamentary theatres, parted company 
as friends. I, obviously, entertained the idea that the issue had been amicably brought 
to a quietus and no longer required furthe r reflection. Nothing happened the following 
day or thereafter. After a gap, suddenly toda y, just before the Question Hour was to 
be taken up, the issue came to be raised by Shri Jairam Ramesh, without being so 
allowed. I then indicated if there be an issue still, I would have the matter further taken 
up in my Chamber. This led to a scenar io to which the enti re House has been a 
witness. And very senior members, includin g the former Prime Minister, Shri H. D. 
Devegowda, had the occasion to express f eelings, anguish. I adjourned the House 
with this in mind, that this House function s optimally when all segments of the House 
are present. Every Member of the House has taken an oath under the Constitution 
and is ordained to serve the people at la rge. The three adjournments, unfortunately, 
did not evoke expected response. I woul d continue to work towards securing 
participation of the Members so that they get an opportunity, perform their 
constitutional duty, use their energy, expert ise and exposure to serve people at large 
for welfare of Bharat, home to one sixth of humanity. 
 I appeal to the Members, who are not present here, by their walkout, on a 
decision taken and reflected in the House, to deeply introspect and deliberate within 
themselves, taking into consideration, the glorious tradition that the Upper House, the 
House of Elders, has had all throughout an d the expectation the people have, for the 
imprint the Members of this House have to leave, for the development trajectory of the 
nation.   
While the House was being adjourned, I had the occasion to see the reaction 
of the Members outside on various TV channels.  I wish to inform the people, at large, 
that, out of respect for this institution, ou t of respect for the dignity of every Member 
[9 August, 2024]
49

of this House, I have taken due care and ca ution to ensure that our behaviour, our 
conduct that is not becoming of a Member of Parliament does not get traction beyond 
the temple of democracy. And, therefore, the Sansad TV, which has with it, all that 
happens in this House, was being subjected by me to self-regulation. Finding that 
narratives are sought to be set afloat and something which cannot be sanctified, 
something which cannot be based on fact is spoken by Members who have some 
experience, I would be taking recourse to ensure people of the country come to know 
of the reality. 
While I hold every Member in high rega rd and have no personal issue with 
anyone, I am deeply hurt at the intemper ate language without any premise and going 
to media getting traction. And, I am sure, everyone in the country will focus on what 
will be made available. My Chamber, Chamber of Chairman of the Council of States, 
the House of Elders, the Upper House, has been labelled that something that 
happens there is ‘closed door.’ A disinfor mation, which I discussed with Mr. Tiwari, 
was only with him. If truth take wings, nation blossoms.  
 If it is untruth, something which is far dist ant from truth, destruction, then, it is 
bothersome.  Our resolve is to ensure that the sacred precincts of Rajya Sabha be not 
allowed to be a ground for destabilising demo cracy.  This has been expressed by all 
the Members and is welcome. I have, theref ore, no doubt that my appeal to the 
Members, who are not present today, will pe rsuade them to soul-search, engage in 
introspection, think about the duty to the nation, take into consideration their oath 
under the Constitution, and prepare for vi gorous participation in a constructive 
manner in the forthcoming session. During off Session, I would continue working, 
trying to reach out to every Member, ignoring the deep hurt I have suffered, as call of 
duty is above any personal injury or feelin gs. I would urge each one of you also to 
please reach out the Members of this House w h o m  y o u  c a n  s o  t h a t  w e  a l l ,  i n  t h i s  
House, on certain issues, on issues of nati onal importance, get bipartisan, rise above 
party interests, and send a message to th e country and the world at large that this 
country, having the most vibrant functional  democracy, a country that is mother of 
democracy, a country that is the oldest and the largest democracy will continue to be 
hope for the entire world. With these word s of expectation, request, pleading, and 
urging, I will take up the essential agenda.    
 
 
MESSAGE FROM LOK SABHA 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Message from Lok Sabha.  
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha, at its sitting held on 9th August, 2024, adopted the following motion: 
"That the Bill further to amend the Wakf  (Amendment) Act, 1995, be referred 
to a Joint Committee of the Houses consisting  of the following 21 Members from this 
House, namely:- 
 
1.  Shri Jagdambika Pal 
2.  Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
3.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
4.  Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi 
5.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6.  Shri Dilip Saikia 
7.  Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
8.  Shrimati D.K. Aruna 
9.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
10.   Shri Imran Masood 
11.  Dr. Mohammad Jawed 
12.  Shri Mohibbullah 
13.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
14.  Shri A. Raja 
15.  Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
17.  Shri Arvind Sawant 
18.  Shri Mahtre Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath 
19.  Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
20.       Shri Arun Bharti 
21.        Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
 
And 10 Members from the Rajya Sabha; 
 
that in order to constitute a sitting of the Joint Committee the quorum shall be one-
third of the total number of Members of the Joint Committee; 
that the Committee shall make a report to this  House by the last day of the first week 
of the next Session; 
[9 August, 2024]
51

that in other respects, the Rules of Procedur e of this House relating to Parliamentary 
committee shall apply with such variations and modifications as the Speaker may 
make; and 
that this House recommends to the Rajya Sabha that the Rajya Sabha do join the said 
Joint Committee and communicate to this House names of the Members to be 
appointed by the Rajya Sabha to the Joint Committee.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Kiren Rijiju to move a motion for nomination of Members to the 
Joint Committee on Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024. 
 
 
MOTION FOR NOMINATION TO THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE WAQF 
(AMENDMENT), BILL, 2024 
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIR S; AND THE MINISTER OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS (SHRI KIREN RIJIJU): Sir, I rise to move the following Motion: 
“That this House concurs in the recomme ndation of the Lok Sabha that this 
House do join in the Joint Committee of th e Houses on the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 
2024, and resolves that the following Members of the Rajya Sabha be nominated to 
serve on the said Joint Committee:- 
 
1. Shri Brij lal 
2. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
3. Shri Gulam Ali 
4. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal 
5. Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain 
6. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy 
8. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
9. Shri Sanjay Singh 
10. Dr. Dharmasthala Veerendra Heggade.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

VALEDICTORY REMARKS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, the House had the rare distinction in its 265 th 
Session of Rajya Sabha to have seventh Budget in a row from the first full-fledged 
woman Finance Minister of the country,  Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman, for a 
Government that is continually in its third term after six decades. There was insightful 
discussion on the Union Budget, 2024-25, that lasted for 21 hours and 48 minutes. 
There was effective participatory discussion as regards th ree important Ministries, the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welf are, the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs and the Ministry of New and Renewa ble Energy. The Minister of External 
Affairs, Shri S. Jaishankar, made a Statem ent in the House on the situation in our 
neighbouring country, Bangladesh. Overall, the House functioned for 90 hours and 35 
minutes. It is, I am reiterating, with deep  concern, I urge Members of the House to 
engage in introspection so that we use this  platform for furthering public cause and 
are able to contribute optimally for nation al welfare. I am sure the Members of the 
House, with their huge experience, exposure, talent and intellect, will expend their 
energies in the upcoming sessions for la rger public good, exemplifying discipline 
worth emulation by people at large. To earn admiration of the people for our 
contributions in the House should be our sole objective rising above non-partisan 
interests. My efforts to reach out to each one of you so that ev ery Member is enabled 
to fully contribute in the sacred temple of  democracy would continue. My efforts have 
borne fruits but not on the expected lines so  far. I would continue to strive in this 
direction notwithstanding the setback or hur tful comments to seek co-operation of 
Members and secure their participation in the House constructively and meaningfully 
in the service of the nation to which all are committed and committed by Oath under 
the Constitution. 
 I extend my appreciation to the hon. Deputy Chairman, Harivanshji, who has 
always been around with his real co unsel, advice, suggestions and impactful 
contributions. He has majorly devoted his time , even while not sitting on the Chair, to 
ensure qualitative, greater productivity, bo th in the Panel of Vice-Chairpersons and 
the Secretariat.   
A sense of gratitude for panel of Vice Chairpersons that continues to have 
gender-equity for assisting the Chair in co nducting the proceedings of the House, 
thereby enabling many new Members to get a novel experience. 
I also thank the Leader of the House, the Leader of th e Opposition, the 
Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, the lead ers of various parties and groups, and the 
hon. Members for the cooperation extended by them.  
[9 August, 2024]
53

I wish to dispel the perception. The House proceedings being contrary, our 
interaction in my Chamber was one of cooperation, involvement and effective 
exchange where I had the occasion to take into consideration the varied requests they 
made on various issues enabling Members for wider participation to their great 
satisfaction. 
 I acknowledge the untiring efforts of the Secretary-General, who, while the 
Session is there, works virtually 24x7, giving me no occasion to remind him even once 
what I have told him to perform. His team of dedicated officers and staff has ensured 
that the Session runs smoothly, and a word of appreciation from the Chair for all of 
them. 
I thank the Media for covering the pro ceedings of the Hous e and keeping the 
people informed.  
I would like to extend my good wishes  to all the Members of the House, 
present and not present, for the upcoming festivals. I look forward with hope, 
expectation and confidence that the next  Session would be rewarding for every 
Member of the House and for the benefit of the entire nation.  
 
 
NATIONAL SONG 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, the National Song.  
 
(The National Song, ‘Vande Mataram’ was then played.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned sine die.  
 
The House then adjourned sine die at fifty-five minutes past three of the clock. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 