Vol. 265         Thursday, 
No. 9  1st August, 2024 
10 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II)
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (page 1 ) 
Welcome to Parliamentary delegation from Japan (page 1) 
Papers Laid on the Table ( Pages 1 - 10) 
Statements by Minister- 
Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 327th, 332nd, 
339th, 344th, 351st and 357th Reports of Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports (pages 
11 - 12) 
Announcements by the Chair (page 12 and pages 63 - 64) 
Regarding the Ruling of the Chair (pages 12 - 14) 
Matters raised with Permission - 
Concern over non-functional status of Ek lavya Model Residential Schools in Bihar 
(pages 14 -15) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Demand for construction of a tunnel on NH- 75, at Shiradi Ghat, Karnataka 
(page 16) 
Demand to ease the Credit Card closure process across the country (page 17) 
Demand to expedite the notification process for new Land Custom Station 
between India and Bangladesh (pages 17 - 18) 
Demand to accelerate the work related to the construction of tunnel between 
Bangna and Dhaneta in Himachal Pradesh (pages 18 - 19) 
Demand for intervention of Central Government to resolve the problems faced by 
farmers of Madhya Pradesh in selling Moong crop (pages 19 - 20) 
Demand for allocation of funds under the 'Khelo India Scheme' in proportion to the 
players' participation in International tournaments from respective States 
(pages 21 - 22) 
Depletion of water bodies  and ponds in the country due to illegal encroachment 
and construction (pages 22 - 23) 
Non-compliance of Right to Education Act by some private schools in Bihar 
(page 23) 
Concern over depriving the minorities from the benefits of the grant available for the 
marriage of daughters of poor people belonging to Other Backward Classes 
(pages 24 - 26) 
Devastation caused by floods during rainy season in the district of Haridwar 
(page 26) 
Demand to include of Assam's Charaideo Moidams, the old mound -burial system 
of Ahom dynasty in UNESCO world heritage list (pages 27 -28) 
Demand for restoration and conservation of water bodies in Mithila region of Bihar 
(page 28 - 29) 
Demand to financially support and encourage indigenous sports, like Kabaddi, 
Wrestling, Badminton, etc. in the country (pages 29 - 30) 
We
bsite : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs 
E
-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Need
 to make AIIMS, Raebareli fully functional (pages 30 - 31) 
Demand to construct foot over bridge at NH- 19 in Chandauli district of Uttar 
Pradesh (pages 31 -32) 
Need for reducing the age for contesting elections in India (pages 32 - 34) 
Oral An
swers to Questions (pages 34 - 63) 
[Answers to Starred and Un -starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials   ] 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs - Concluded 
(pages  64 - 91)
Disc
ussion on the Working of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
- Not Concluded (pages 91 - 166)

RAJYA SABHA 
Thursday, the 1st August, 2024/10 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am pleased to ex tend greetings to hon. Member 
of Parliament, Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla on his birthday today. A Member of this 
august House since  June 2020, Shri Reddy holds a Masters degree in Civil 
engineering from Osmania University and has more than 24 years of experience in the 
engineering field.  He received “Engineer of the year award ” from Government of 
Andhra Pradesh and Institution of Engineers in 2005. His interests include Kabaddi, 
cricket and boxing. He is married to  Shrimati Dakshayani A lla and the couple is 
blessed with Sons - A. Sharan Reddy and A. Ishaan Reddy.   
Hon. Members, on behalf of this House, and on my own, I  wish him a long, 
healthy and happy life and extend greetings to the family Members. 
WELCOME TO THE PARLIAMEN
TARY DELEGATION FROM JAPAN 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, on behalf of this august House, I have great 
pleasure in welcoming  H.E.Mr. Nukaga Fukushiro,  hon. Speaker of the House of 
Representatives, Japan along with the Memb ers of his Delegation who are on a visit 
to India as our honoured guest.  The Delegation arrived in Delhi from Bengaluru 
on Wednesday, 31st July, 2024. They are now seated in the Special Box.  They are 
scheduled to have various meetings in Delhi before their departure for Japan on  2nd 
August, 2024.  We wish them a fruitful and pleasant stay in our country.  Through 
them, we convey our greetings and best wi shes to the Members of Parliament of 
Japan, the Government and the friendly people of Japan. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 

Report and Accounts (2021-22 and 2022-23) of various organizations and related 
papers 
THE MINISTER OF CULTURE (SHRI GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAWAT): Sir, I to lay 
on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional School of Drama (NSD),
New Delhi, for the year 2022-22, togeth er with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above School.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 228/18/24] 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Sa ngeet Natak Akademi, New Delhi,
for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Akademi.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 229/18/24] 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Sout h Zone Cultural Centre (SZCC),
Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, for the year 2022-23, togeth er with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 227/18/24] 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of theCentral Institute of Himalayan Culture
Studies (CIHCS), Dahung, Arunachal Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 231/18/24] 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Cent re for Buddhist Cultural Studies
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

(CBCS), Tawang Monastery, Tawang, Arunachal Pradesh, for the year 
2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 235/18/24] 
(vi) (a) Annual Report of the Nava Nalanda Ma havihara (NNM), Nalanda, Bihar,
for the year 2021-22. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the Nava Naland a Mahavihara (NNM), Nalanda,
Bihar, for the year 2021-22, and the Audit Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre.
(d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) and (b) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 230/18/24] 
(vii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Gaden Rabgyeling Monastic School,
Bomdila, Arunachal Pradesh, for th e year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above School.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 234/18/24] 
(viii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav
Sangrahalaya (IGRMS), Bhopal, Madh ya Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Sangrahalaya.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 423/18/24] 
(ix) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of
Asian Studies (MAKAIAS), Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
3

(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 426/18/24] 
(x) (a) Forty-eighth Annual Report and Acco unts of the Rampur Raza Library,
Rampur, Uttar Pradesh, fo r the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts.     
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Library.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 430/18/24] 
(xi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the A llahabad Museum, Prayagraj, Uttar
Pradesh for the year 2022-23, together  with the Auditor’s Report on the 
Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Museum.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 424/18/24] 
(xii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Vrindavan Research Institute, Mathura,
Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, toge ther with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 425/18/24] 
I. Notification of the Ministry of Science and Technology
II. Notification of the Ministry  of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
III. Report (2022-23) of UPSC, New Delhi and related papers
IV. Report and Accounts (2022-23) of Grih Kalyan Kendra Board, New Delhi; and
NRA, New Delhi and related papers
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC 
GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS (DR. JITENDRA SINGH):  Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Science and Technology
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

(Department of Science and Technology) Notification No. G.S.R. 353(E)., dated the 
28th June, 2024, publishing the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Rules, 
2024, under Section 25 of the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Act, 2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 359/18/24] 
II. (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry
of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and
Training), under sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the All-India Services Act, 1951:-
(1) G.S.R. 251(E)., dated the 22 nd April, 2024, publishing the Indian Police
Service (Fixation of cadre Strength) Amendment Regulations, 2024.
(2) G.S.R. 252(E)., dated the 22 nd April, 2024, publishing the Indian Police
Service (Pay) Amendment Rules, 2024.
(3) G.S.R. 367(E)., dated the 4 th July, 2024, publishing the Indian
Administrative Service (Fixation of Cadre Strength) Amendment
Regulations, 2024.
(4) G.S.R. 368(E)., dated the 4 th July, 2024, publishing the Indian
Administrative Service (Pay) Amendment Rules, 2024.
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (4) See No. L. T. 357/18/24] 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions (Department of Personnel and Tr aining) Notification No. G.S.R. 203(E).,
dated the 15 th March, 2024, publishing the Union Public Service Commission
(Exemption from Consultation) Amendment Regulations, 2024, framed under clause
(5) of Article 320 of the Constitution of India.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 527/18/24] 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions (Department of Personnel and Tr aining) Notification No. G.S.R. 342(E).,
dated the 24 th June, 2024, publishing the Public Ex aminations (Prevention of Unfair
Means) Rules, 2024, under Section 17 of the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair
Means) Act, 2024.
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 360/18/24] 
III. A copy each (in Eng lish and Hindi) of the following papers, under clause (1) of
article 323 of the Constitution: -
(a) Seventy-third Annual Repo rt of the Union Public Service Commission
(UPSC), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23.
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
5

 (b) Memorandum explaining the reason s for non-acceptance of the advice 
tendered by the Union Public Service Commission in respect of five cases 
referred to in Chapter 9 of the above Report. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 627/18/24] 
 
IV. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Grih Kalyan Kendra Board, New Delhi, 
for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Annual Report and Accounts of the National 
Recruitment Agency (NRA), New Delhi, for the year, 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) and (ii) See No. L. T. 355/18/24] 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Labour and Employment  
II. Financial Estimates and Performance Budge t (2024-25) of the ESIC, New Delhi 
and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
(SUSHRI SHOBHA KARANDLAJE): Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
 
I .  ( i )     A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Notification No. S.O. 3215(E)., dated the 2 nd July, 2018, amendi ng the Principal 
Notification No. S.O. 615(E), dated the 23 rd March, 2011, issued under clause (b) of 
Section 45-I of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, along with delay statement.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 628/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment, issued under clause  (b) of Section 45-I of the Employees’ 
State Insurance Act, 1948, along with delay statement: - 
 (1) S.O. 3216(E)., dated the 2 nd July, 2018, authorisin g certain officers to 
exercise the powers of Re covery Officer under the sa id Act on and from the 
date of publication of this notification in the Official Gazette for the area, as 
mentioned therein, in relation to all factories and establishments covered 
under the provisions of the Act. 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 (2) S.O. 2059(E)., dated the 24 th June, 2019, amending the Principal 
Notification No. S.O. 615(E), dated the 23rd March, 2011. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No. L. T. 629/18/24] 
 
(iii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment, i ssued under sub-section (1 ) of Section 97 of the 
Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, along with delay statement:- 
 (1) N-12/13/1/2016-P&D, dated the 15 th February, 2019, notifying ATAL 
BIMIT VYAKTI KALYAN YOJNA. 
 (2) 12/13/1/2019-P&D., dated the 22 nd July, 2019, notifying the rate of user 
charges and other details of the scheme referred to in Section 73D of the 
said Act. 
 (3) U-11/13/2/2019.-Medical I., dated the 13th January, 2021, notifying the rate 
of user charges and other details for providing medical services under 
Ayushman Bharat/Pradhan Mantri – Jan Arogya Yojna. 
 (4) (N-12011/01/2023-P&D) New Delhi, 2023., dated the 12 th September, 
2023, extending Atal Beemit Vyakti Kalyan Yojana for a period 01.07.2022 
to 30.06.2024 with enhanced rate of relief and relaxed eligibility conditions. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (4) See No. L. T. 630/18/24] 
 
(iv) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Notification No. N-12/13/1/2016-P&D., 2 nd December, 2019, amending Rajiv Gandhi 
Shramik Kalyan Yojana, which was notified on 26.03.2005 as per decision of ESI 
Corporation in its 169 th meeting held on 06.09.2016., i ssued under Section 19 of the 
Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, along with delay statement.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 631/18/24] 
 
(v) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Notification No. N-12/13/01/2019-P&D., dated 16 th November, 2021, notifying the 
resolution passed by the Employees’ State In surance Corporation at its meeting held 
on 10th September, 2021, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 632/18/24] 
 
(vi) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Notification No. Z-24/14/1/2020-DPC (E.I)., dated the 19th June, 2023, publishing the 
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (Staff and Conditio ns of Service) 
Regulations, 2023, under sub-section (4 ) of Section 97 of the Employees’ State 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
7

 
Insurance Act, 1948, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 633/18/24] 
 
II.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 (a) Financial Estimates and Performance Budget of the Employees’ State 
Insurance Corporation (ESIC), New De lhi, for the year 2024-25, under 
Section 36 of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948. 
 (b) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 257/18/24] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH): Sir, I  lay on the Table, a copy 
(in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
Notification No. G.S.R. 895(E)., dated the 15 th December, 2023, publishing the 
Environment (Protection) Sixth Amendmen t Rules, 2023, under Section 26 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, along with delay statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 261/18/24] 
Reports and Accounts of NSU, Imphal; and SAI,  New Delhi for various years and 
related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIS TRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS  
(SHRIMATI RAKSHA NIKHIL KHADSE): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
(A) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 28 and sub-sect ion 4 of Section 29 of the National 
Sports University Act, 2018:- 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nati onal Sports University (NSU), 
Imphal, for the year 2017 -18, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nati onal Sports University (NSU), 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

Imphal, for the year 2018 -19, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nati onal Sports University (NSU), 
Imphal, for the year 2019-20, together  with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nati onal Sports University (NSU), 
Imphal, for the year 2020-21, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nati onal Sports University (NSU), 
Imphal, for the year 2021-22, together  with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) to (v) See No. L. T. 262/18/24] 
 
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Sports Authority of India (SAI), New 
Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together  with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Authority. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 263/18/24] 
 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of NERAMAC, Guwahati, Assam and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
9

[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 378/18/24] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Finance 
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ालय (राजÎव िवभाग) की 
िनÇनिलिखत अिधसूचनाओं तथा Ëयाख्यात्मक ज्ञापनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) 
सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
(1) Notification No. 19/2024-Central Excise  dated 31.07.2024 seeking to amend 
Notification No. 18/2022-Central Excise, dated the 19th July, 2022 to reduce 
the Special Additional Excise Duty on production of Petroleum Crude from Rs. 
7000/MT to Rs. 4600/MT, under sub-sect ion (2) of Section 38 of the Central 
Excise Act, 1944.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 395/18/24] 
 
(2) Notification No. 41/2024-Customs da ted 31.07.2022 seeking to amend 
Notification No. 50/2017-Customs date d the 30th June, 2017 to reduce the 
applicable BCD rate with effect from 1st August 2024, Laboratory chemicals 
(excluding undenatured) ethyl alcohol of  any alcoholic strength), falling under 
HS 9802 00 00, for use in laboratory or for use in Resear ch and Development 
purpose from 150% to 10%, subject  to prescribed undertaking from 
concerned importer, under Section 159 of the Customs Act, 1962.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 396/18/24] 
 
 
 
EASTERN REGION (SHRI SUKANTA MAJUMDAR) : Sir, I lay on the Table, under 
sub-section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Nort h Eastern Regional Agricultural 
Marketing Corporation Limited (NERAMAC), Guwahati, Assam, for the 
year 2021-22, together with the Au ditor's Report on the Accounts and 
the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

STATEMENTS BY MINISTER  
 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 327th, 332nd, 339th,  
344th, 351st and 357th Reports of Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS 
(SHRIMATI RAKSHA NIKHIL KHADSE): Si r, I lay the following Statements 
regarding:- 
(a) Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 327 th Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations contained in the 317 th Report of the Committee on 
"Preparation for Olympic Games, 2021". 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 220/18/24] 
 
(b) Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 332nd Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 325 th R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
Committee on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs 
and Sports. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 221/18/24] 
 
(c) Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 339 th Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports on  Demands for Grants (2022-23) of 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 222/18/24] 
 
(d) Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 344 th Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 339 th R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
Committee on Demands for Grants (2022- 23) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs 
and Sports. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 223/18/24] 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
11

(e) Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 351 st Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 224/18/24] 
 
(f) Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 357 th Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 351 st R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
Committee on Demands for Grants (2023- 24) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs 
and Sports. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 225/18/24] 
 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, on conclusion of discussion and Minister's reply on 
working of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, the discussion on the working of 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfar e will commence. After all the speakers for 
the discussion on the Ministry have spok en today, the reply of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers' Welf are will be taken up tomorro w at 1 p.m. Now, Matters 
Raised with Permission. 
 
 
REGARDING RULING OF THE CHAIR 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (MADHYA PRADESH): Sir, I have a very important point to 
raise before the House. Yesterday, you ma de certain observations, we are violating 
the Constitution of India... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You are raising it under which rule? 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, I am raising it  under Rule 238; my right to raise a point 
of order. 
 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Just a minute...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, you have stat ed, you have given a ruling. Sir, I am 
agitating against your ruling. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am giving you the floor, bu t, let me have Rule 238 before me. You 
also have Rule 238 before you. Yes, Digvijayaji. 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, yesterday... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Which part, Digvijaya Singhji, are you referring to? 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, my right to raise a point of order. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: That is there, your right to raise a point of order is there. But, under 
which rule are you raising? 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: On the basis of your yesterday's ruling, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The ruling cannot be challenged. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: 
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, the ruling cannot be challenged. ...(Interruptions)... No, 
nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. 
...(Interruptions)...No.  Sit down. ...(Interruptions)... Take your seat, Digvijaya 
Singhji. ...(Interruptions)... Digvijaya Singhji, nothing is going on record. 
...(Interruptions)... I am afraid, I cannot allow a Member to challenge the ruling of the 
Chair. ...(Interruptions)... I am so sorry. ...(Interruptions)... You may hold your 
views. ...(Interruptions)... We cannot make it an akhada . ...(Interruptions)... .  
Would you take your seat? ...(Interruptions)... Digvijayaji, you are a very senior 
Member. ...(Interruptions)...You are making a speech which has no consequence. 
...(Interruptions)... I have respect for you. If you have to raise a point of order, you 
can raise it. ...(Interruptions)...  You have to quote the rule. And, you say that your 
point of order is related to my ruling. ...(Interruptions)...  Take   your   seat,   please. 
                                                            
* Not recorded 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
13

I have read it. ...(Interruptions)... You had raised it before also. All I am saying is that 
there can be no challenge to the ruling of the Chair.  
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Zero Hour .  Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. It is relating to Concern 
over non-functional status of Ekalavya Model Residential Schools of Bihar. 
...(Interruptions)...Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... Do you wish to 
avail your Zero Hour submission, Shri Jha? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA: Sir, let the hon. Member sit. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I know the hon. Member will sit down. ...(Interruptions)... 
Digvijayaji, please bear with me. ...(Interruptions)... I have studied it. 
...(Interruptions)... Digvijayaji, nothing is going on record. You know it. 
...(Interruptions)... All you have spoken is going down the drain. 
...(Interruptions)... Don’t do it. You ar e a senior Member. ...(Interruptions)... I will 
not allow. ...(Interruptions)... Please. Take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Please, I 
plead with you as a senior Member. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Sir, the point is. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have seen it. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मुझे पढ़ लेने दीिजए।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Are you taking cue from him? ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going 
on record. ...(Interruptions)...May I have Mr. Manoj Kumar Jha? 
...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Saket 
Gokhale, take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. It is about 
Concern over non-functional status of Ek lavya Model Residential Schools in Bihar. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Concern over non-functional status of Eklavya Model Residential Schools in Bihar 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार): माननीय सभापित महोदय, मेरा
  वƪ 20 सेक Ȃ ड ऐसे ही चला गया 
है। 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: I will adjust it. You go ahead.  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से पहले तो धन्यवाद करूं  िक एकलËय मॉडल 
आवासीय िवǏालय क े संदभर् मȂ, जो िबहार मȂ है, उनके  िलए आपने वƪ िदया, उसके  िलए 
आपका बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या। जब इसकी Îथापना हुई थी, conceptualisation हुआ था, तो उसमȂ 
इस बात की एक कोिशश थी िक गैर आिदवासी बच्चȗ क े समकक्ष इनको भी वो तमाम ग
ुणवǄापूणर् 
िशक्षा क े अवसर िदए जाए, हर तरह की सामगर्ी उपलÅध कराई जाए, तािक गैर आिदवासी बच्चȗ 
और इनके  बीच का जो गैप है, वह खत्म हो सके । सबलीकरण इसका एक दूसरा िहÎसा था। हमारे 
यहां झाझा, बेलाटांडी रामनगर, पिÌचमी चंपारण, अगौड़ा, खामखुदर्  क ै मूर मȂ तीन Îकू Êस हȅ। मȅ 
आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक इन तीनȗ Îकू Êस की हालत, तो मौिलक  और आधारभूत संरचना नहीं 
है, शैक्षिणक और Îटाफ की कमी है, शैक्षिणक सामिगर्यȗ की कमी है और उसके  बगैर गुणवǄापूणर् 
िशक्षा संभव नहीं है। हािशये क े वगș क े िलए अगर हम कोई पहल कर भी लेते हȅ, तो उसमȂ हमारी 
कथनी और करनी मȂ फकर् नहीं होना चािहए। सर, एक छोटी िटÃपणी करूं गा।  इस सदन मȂ पहले 
भी कहा है एकल
Ëय जब नाम रखा गया, तो थोड़ा अĢीितकर लगा।  एकलËय की िंजदगी बहुत बुरी 
गुज़री थी, बहुत दंश झेलना पड़ा था और आज क े िदन मȂ मȅ कहूं, तो आज क े एकलËय से अंगूठा 
नहीं मांगा जा रहा है, उसको एनएफएस (NFS) करार िदया जा रहा है। मȅ समझता हूं िक हम सब 
एक सामूिहक िंचता क े आधार पर हम ारी कोिशश होना चािहए िक अगर हमने कोई ऐसी ËयवÎथा 
िवकिसत की है, तो उस ËयवÎथा मȂ हमारे सरोकार पिरलिक्षत हȗ। क्यȗिक जब तक हािशये क े 
समूहȗ, वगș को लेकर हमारी िंचता जमीन पर नहीं उतरेगी, तब तक हवा-हवाई बातȂ हȗगी। हमारा 
बजट, हमारी नीितयां िबÊकु ल rhetorical अ
ंदाज मȂ लोगȗ क े समक्ष जाएंगी। यह इस सदन की 
responsibility है िक एक संदेश दे िक चाहे आिदवासी हȗ, िपछड़े हȗ, दिलत हȗ, उन सबके  िलए 
िक आपकी िशक्षा, आपके  अवसर पर कोई compromise नहीं होगा। इसके  िलए आवÌयक हो, तो 
गणना भी कराई जाए। आपका बहुत-बहुत श
ुिकर्या। जय िहन्द!         
                                                         
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the issue 
raised by the hon. Member, Prof. Mano j Kumar Jha: Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
(Maharashtra), Ms. Dola Sen (West Beng al), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), 
Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
(Punjab), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Na du), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) , 
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu),  Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati 
Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Javed Ali Khan (Uttar Pradesh),  Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala)  and Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad 
(Jharkhand).    
Now, Shri Narayana Koragappa – Dema nd for construction of a tunnel on 
National Highway – 75 at Shiradi Ghat, Karnataka. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
15

Demand for construction of a tunnel on NH-75, at Shiradi Ghat, Karnataka 
 
Ǜी नारायण कोरागÃपा (कनार्टक): धन्यवाद सभापित महोदय, मेरा िवषय कनार्टक से संबंिधत 
है, इसिलए मȅ कन्नड़ मȂ बात करता हूं। हमारे कनार्टक मȂ मंगलुरु  से बȂगलुरु  एनएच-75 का 
िडÎटȂस 350 िकलोमीटर का है। *"The 350 km long stretch of the  NH-75 at Shiradi Ghat 
area, connecting Mangaluru to Bengaluru, ge ts disrupted every year during the rainy 
season. For the last one month, the people of this region have been facing road 
connectivity issues.  
Mangaluru, which is the second largest ci ty in Karnataka, is famous as Tulu 
Nadu. The city of Mangaluru has various pilgrim centers and holy places along with an 
International Airport and a major sea-port and also well known industries like MRPL 
and MCF. The city is also a center for va rious educational institutions.  Everyday 
thousands of buses enter the city of Mangal uru, including those carrying the pilgrims 
under the State Government's relevant scheme .  But there is no guarantee that these 
buses would reach their destination safely. 
Last week, i.e. on 26th July, one of the buses traveling from Mangaluru to 
Bengaluru, which had to go via Kerala, t o o k  a  1 0 0 0  k m  l o n g  d i v e r s i o n  a n d  w a s  
delayed by 24 hours. There is a 237 km long 4-lane highway from Bengaluru to 
Mangaluru. On this highway, there should be a 23 km long tunnel just like the Pune-
Mumbai tunnel. This would be a permanent solution to the problem. Only then the 
public there would travel safely between these two cities.  Nowadays, there is no 
guarantee that one would reach Mangaluru sa fely after starting from Bengaluru and 
the duration of the journey is also unpredictable. ‘Shiradi, Sampaje Charmady’ are the 
three areas between Bengaluru, and Mangaluru that get disconnected every year due 
to landslides. Therefore, I would like to request the Government to provide the tunnel 
and road connectivity to this area.  Thank you, Sir.                                
             
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the issue 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Narayana Koragappa: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Now, Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel – De mand to ease the cr edit card closure 
process across the country.  
 
 
                                                            
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Kannada. 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand to ease the Credit Card closure process across the country 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल (िबहार): धन्यवाद सभापित महोदय। आपने मुझे बȅिंकग कर् ेिडट काडर् की 
सिर्वस क े संबंध मȂ बोलने का मौका िदया है। महोदय, कर् ेिडट काडर् रखना आज एक Îटेटस िंसबल 
बन गया है, उसके  जहां फायदे हȅ, वहीं बहुत नुकसान  भी ह ȅ। कर् ेिडट काडर् िमल तो बहुत आसानी 
से जाता है, लेिकन अगर उसे बंद करना हो, तो बहुत लोगȗ को मुिÌकल का सामना करना पड़ता 
है, इसिलए मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से आपसे आगर्ह करना चा हता हूं िक बȅक की सभी शाखाओं मȂ 
कर् ेिडट काडर् संबंधी एक हेÊप डेÎक होनी चािहए। वहां पर कÎटमर जाए और अगर उसको अपना 
कर् ेिडट काडर् बंद करवाना हो, तो सारे ǹूज़ िक्लयर करके  वह उसको बंद करवा सके ।  
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
महोदय, ऐसा हो नहीं पा रहा है। लोगȗ को कर् ेिडट काडर् तो आसान
ी से िमल जाता है, लेिकन जब 
बंद करवाना होता है, तो बोला जाता है िक आप ऑनलाइन सÇपकर् कीिजए। ऑनलाइन जाने पर 
कभी कहता है िक 1 दबाइए, 2 दबाइए, 5 दबाइए, वह दबाता रह जाता है, लेिकन उसका कर् ेिडट 
काडर् बंद नहीं होता
 है, िजसके  कारण उसका िसिबल रेिंटग पर इफे क्ट पड़ता है और जब वह 
िकसी दूसरे लोन क े िलए एÃलाई करता है, तो उस समय कर् ेिडट काडर् का ǹूज िदखाई देता है।  
 मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से अनुरोध करना चा
हता हूं िक बȅक की Ģत्येक 
शाखा मȂ कर् ेिडट काडर् को बंद करने या कर् ेिडट काडर् को देने संबंधी एक हेÊप डेÎक हो, जहां पर 
कÎटमर जाकर आसानी से अपना कर् ेिडट काडर् बंद करवा सके  या ले सके , धन्यवाद।   
                                     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by th
e hon. Member, Shri  Shambhu Sharan Pate l: Dr. Kalpana Saini 
(Uttarakhand), Shrimati Geeta alias Chan draprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Neeraj 
Shekhar (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Baburam Nish ad (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai (Gujarat), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu),   Shri M. Mohamed A bdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale (W est Bengal), Shri Naresh Bansal 
(Uttarakha
nd), Shri Ram Chander Jangra (H aryana), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
(Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Keral a),  Shri Dhananja y Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) , Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo, (Odisha) and Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand). 
 
Demand to expedite the notification process for new Land Custom Station between 
India and Bangladesh 
 
DR. WANWEIROY KHARLUKHI (Meghalaya): Thank you, hon. Deputy Chairman, 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
17

Sir, for giving me this opportunity. In one of my Zero Hour mentions, I spoke on the 
Look South Policy for my State, Meghalaya.   The Look East or Act East Policy for 
Meghalaya is too far a distance, approximat ely 500 kilometres. South of Meghalaya is 
Bangladesh, and we have a common boundary of 400 kilometres. To facilitate this 
Look South Policy, I would request the Go vernment to open up New Land Custom 
Station between India and Bangladesh. I, strongly, believe that the establishment of 
New Land Custom Station will significantl y benefit both our State and also our 
country. The introduction of New Land Custom Station will provide substantial 
employment and will also greatly enhance the economic growth of my people in 
Meghalaya. This will also facilitate trade and strengthen economic ties between India 
and Bangladesh. It will contribute positively to the overall economic growth of not only 
my State but also our country, India. Sir, inspections and report s have already been 
done by the State of Meghalaya and al so by the Customs Department of the 
Government of India. Hence, through you, Sir, I would like to request the Government 
to expedite the notification process for th e New Land Custom Station in my State. 
Thank you.         
                                                                                        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you Dr. Wanw eiroy Kharlukhi. The following hon. 
Members associated themselves with the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. 
Wanweiroy Kharlukhi: Shri Madan Rathor e (Rajasthan) Shri Samik Bhattacharya 
(West Bengal), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
 
Demand to accelerate the work related to the construction of tunnel between 
 Bangna and Dhaneta in Himachal Pradesh 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार ( िहमाचल Ģदेश): उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे िहमाचल Ģदेश मȂ 
नेशनल हाइवे क े कायर् मȂ तेजी लाने व बंगाणा से धनेटा क े बीच टनल का िनमार्ण करने जैसे एक 
बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय को सभा मȂ रखने का अवसर िदया
 है, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।  
 महोदय, एक पहाड़ी राज्य होने क े नाते िहमाचल Ģदेश मȂ सड़क िनमार्ण करने का कायर् 
िकसी चुनौती से कम नहीं है। क Ȃ दर् सरकार का क Ȃदर्ीय सड़क पिरवहन एवं राजमागर् म
ंतर्ालय िजस 
Ģकार से फोर लेन और हाइवे का िनमार्ण कर दूिरयȗ को पाटने का काम कर रहा है, वह 
सराहनीय है। महोदय, िहमाचल Ģदेश म
Ȃ क Ȃ दर् सरकार ǎारा Îवीकृ त व पोिषत दो फोर लेन 
परवाणु-िशमला व मटौर-िशमला का कायर् Ģगित पर है। इन फोर लेन्स क े बनने से जहाँ िहमाचल 
Ģदेश मȂ पयर्टन को और बढ़ावा िमलेगा, वहीं लोगȗ क े िलए भी Ģगित क े ǎार खुलȂग े।  
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

महोदय, मȅ इस संबंध मȂ िहमाचल Ģदेश मȂ जनिहत से जुड़ी दो बातȗ को आपके  ध्यान मȂ 
लाना चाहता हूं। महोदय, नंबर वन बात तो यह है िक ऊना से हमीरपुर वाया बंगाणा, धनेटा, 
कांगू, हमीरपुर सड़क क े मध्य बंगाणा से धनेटा क े बीच टनल का िनमार्ण हो ने से ऊना से हमीरपुर 
क े बीच की दूरी 15-20 िकलोमीटर कम हो जाएगी। महोदय, इन Îथानȗ पर लोग दूर-दूर से बाबा 
बालकनाथ मंिदर, िहमाचल Ģदेश क े Ģिसǉ शिƪ पीठ माता ज्वाला जी मंिदर व बाबा बालकरूपी  
क े दशर्नȗ क े िलए आते हȅ। इस टनल क े िनमार्ण से Ǜǉालु व आम जनमानस कम सम
य मȂ बेहतर 
यातर्ा सुिवधा का लाभ उठा सकȂ गे।  
 महोदय, दूसरी बात यह है िक वतर्मान समय मȂ क Ȃ दर् ǎा रा पोिषत मटौर ( धमर्शाला)-
िशमला और परवाणु से िशमला से फोर लेन का कायर् Ģगित पर है। इन फोर लेन क े बनने से 
धमर्शाला-िशमला व परवाणु-िशमला की दूरी तो कम होगी ही, इसके  साथ ही पयर्टन कारोबार 
को भी बढ़ावा िमलेगा। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃदर्ीय सड़क पिरवहन व राजम
ागर् मंतर्ालय से आगर्ह 
करना चाहता हूं िक इस फोर लेन्स क े िनमार्ण कायर् मȂ तेजी लाई जाए और इससे संबंिधत 
अिधकािरयȗ को उिचत िदशा-िनदȃश िदए जाएं, तािक इन फोर लेन्स का कायर् जÊद से जÊद पूणर् 
हो तथा बंगाणा से धनेटा क े बीच टनल का िनमार्ण भी शीघर्ताशीघर् िकया जाए।                                           
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Dr. Sikandar Kumar. The following hon.
 
Members associated themselves with the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. 
Sikandar Kumar: Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pr adesh), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Ms. Kavita Patidar, (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Amar Pal Maurya  (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. 
Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shri  Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Ms. Indu 
Bala Goswami, (Himachal Pradesh), Dr. Bhagwat Karad, (Maharashtra), Shrimati 
Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Shri  Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), 
Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Sanjay Seth, (Uttar Prades
 h), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra) and Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha).                                    
 
Demand for intervention of Central Government to resolve the problems faced 
by farmers of Madhya Pradesh in selling Moong crop 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह (मध्य Ģदेश): महोदय, मध्य Ģदेश मȂ मूँग का उत्पादन िपछले पाँच वषर् मȂ तेजी 
से बढ़ा है। सरकार िकसानȗ ǎारा पैदा िकए जाने वाले मूँग क े न्यूनतम समथर्न मूÊय पर खरीदी ई-
उपाजन पोटर्ल पर पंजन क े माध्यम से करती है। इस साल मध्य Ģदेश मȂ मूँग की फसल खरीदने 
क े िलए जो पंजन िकसानȗ ǎारा िक
ए गए थे, उनके  िलए Îलॉट बुिंकग जून क े अंितम सÃताह से 
Ģारंभ करके , अंितम ितिथ 31 जु लाई तक रखी गई थी। िवगत वषर्, िकसानȗ से Ģित हेक्टेयर दस 
िंक्वटल की खरीदी सरकार ǎा
रा की गई थी, िजसे इस साल Ģित हेक्टेयर आठ िंक्वटल कर िदया 
[1 August, 2024]
19

गया है। िकसानȗ ǎारा धरना Ģदशर्न क े बाद, इसे बढ़ाकर 12 िंक्वटल Ģित हेक्टेयर िकया गया है। 
अिधकतर समय सवर्र डाउन है। तकनीकी खराबी या िकसी अन्य वजह से पोटर्ल बंद रहा तथा 
अिधकांश िकसान अपनी मूँग की फसल को बेचने क े िलए Îलॉट बुक नहीं कर पाए। इस बीच 22 
जुलाई को िकसानȗ क े िलए ऑनलाइ
न Îलॉट की बुिंकग अचानक बंद कर दी गई, िजससे हजारȗ 
िकसान Îलॉट बुिंकग से वंिचत रह गए। इस बीच मȂ, परसो क े रोज, चूँिक बुदनी मȂ चुनाव-
उपचुनाव होने वाला है, तो चार घंट
े क े िलए Îलॉट खोला गया। िजन िकसानȗ ने अपना Îलॉट बुक 
करा िदया था, उन्हȂ भी या तो बोरा समाÃत होने की बात कही जा रही है या उनकी फसल की 
तुलाई नहीं हो पा रही है। लोगȗ क े हजारȗ टर्ेक्टर खड़े हुए हȅ। पोटर्ल पर रिजÎटर हो जाने क े बाद 
भी तुलाई नहीं हो रही है। गोदाम क
े  सामने हजारȗ टर्ेक्टरȗ की कतारȂ लगी हुई हȅ। बािरश क े कारण 
मूँग भीगने से अंक ुिरत हो रही है। ĢाÃत जानकारी क े अनुसार, अभी तक क ु ल अनुमािनत उत्पादन 
का क ेवल 18 Ģितशत ही उपािर्जत हो सका है। पिरणामÎवरूप, या तो िकसानȗ की फसल नÍट हो 
रही है या िफर िकसान अपनी मूँग की फसल को Ëयापािरयȗ को कम दाम पर बेचने को मजबूर हो 
रहे हȅ। मध्य Ģदेश मȂ इसे लेकर िकसान आंदोिलत हȅ। उनके  ǎारा पोटर्ल पर Îलॉट बुिंकग की 
तारीख बढ़ाने, िजनके  Îलॉट्स ब
ुक हो गए, उनकी फसल की तत्काल तुलाई कराने की माँग की 
जा रही है। राज्य सरकार पूरी तरह से इस मामले की अनदेखी कर रही है। मȅ मध्य Ģदेश क े 
िकसानȗ क
े  िहत मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार से इस मामले मȂ हÎतक्षेप करने तथा िकसानȗ की समÎया का 
समाधान करने का िनवेदन करता हूँ। सहयोग से, हमारे मध्य Ģदेश क े पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी िकसान मंतर्ी 
हȅ और उन्हीं क
े  क्षेतर् मȂ यह सब-क ु छ हो रहा है। जब मȅने यह जीरो ऑवर पुट अप िकया, तो कल 
शाम को छ: बजे उन्हȗने यह आदेश िनकाला है िक एक िदन क े िलए, यानी एक अगÎत को पोटर्ल 
खोला जाएगा, लेिकन जब हजारȗ िक
सान अपना रिजÎटर्ेशन कराना चाहते हȅ, तो उस पोटर्ल पर 
हजारȗ िकसान यह क ै से कर पाएंगे? यह पूरा-पूरा खेल है िक Ëयापािरयȗ को सÎता बेचने क े िलए 
िकसानȗ को मजबूर करȂ और Ëयापािरयȗ से महंगा तुलवा कर खरीद लȂ। …(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Nothing else is going on record.  
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
hon. Member, Shri Digvijaya Singh:  Sh ri
 Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), 
Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Jawhar Si
rcar (West Bengal), Ms. Dola 
Sen (West Bengal), Ms. Sushmita Dev (W est Bengal), Shri Samirul Islam (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Na du), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Na du), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Dr.  V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (K erala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),  Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand) and Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh) 
 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand for allocation of funds under the 'Khelo India Scheme' in proportion to the 
players' participation in International tournaments from respective States 
SHRI VIKRAMJIT SINGH SAHNEY (PUNJAB): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, first of all, I 
would like to congratulate Sarabjot Singh and Manu Bhaker, two athletes from Punjab 
and Haryana, for bringing laurels to the co untry by winning two medals in shooting for 
India in the Paris Olympics, 2024. 
Sir, I stand in this august House to bring to your kind attention a matter of 
significant concern, regarding judicious allocation under the Khelo India Scheme. As 
we celebrate the achievements and potential of our athletes on the global stage, it is 
crucial to address the disparities that co uld undermine our efforts in nurturing and 
promoting sports excellence.  In the ongoing Paris Olympics, States like Punjab, for 
example, have demonstrated remarkable prowess and commitment. Out of the 117-
strong national contingent that was sent to  Paris, Punjab has contributed 19 athletes 
and Haryana has contributed 24, which re presents about 20 per cent each of our 
Olympic participants.  This achievement underscores these States' dedication to 
sports and its capacity to produce top-tier talent. However, you will be astonished to 
note that there is concerning imbalance when we examine the allocation of funds 
under Khelo India Scheme.  Punjab has been allocat ed a meager sum of just Rs. 78 
crore, which is 3.5 per cent of the allocation. कहाँ वे 117 मȂ 20 और 24 एथलीट्स भेज रहे 
हȅ। पंजाब, हिरयाणा को 78 या 60 करोड़ िमला। कई Îटेट्स को 428 करोड़ िमले हȅ। िजनको 428 
करोड़ िमले हȅ, साहब, उन्हȗने दो एथलीट्स भेजे हȅ। शायद खेल म ंतर्ी जी हȅ, जो हो गया सो हो 
गया, अब आप इस पर आज ही सुधार कीिजए। मेिरट भी कोई चीज़ है, डेमोकर्े सी है, िकसी 
िनज़ाम से चिलए। जो Îटेट ज्यादा कॉिंन्टजȂट भेजती है, जो Îटेट ज्यादा मेडल जीतती है, उनको 
pro-rata पर फ ंड्स एलोके ट होने चािहए।  Hon. Finance Minister is also here. She is 
musing it. I think fair and equi
table distribution होना चािहए। Adequate funding is 
essential for our athletes, क्यȗिक हमारा जो यूथ है, demographic dividend है, we must 
engage our youth in pursuits like sports, to keep them fit and not to let them fall prey 
to any vices like drugs. तभी हम कह सकȂ गे - चक दे इिडया।  जय िंहद!
Ǜी उपसभापित:  धन्यवाद, माननीय िवकर्मजीत िंसह जी।   
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Shri Vikramjit Singh Sahney: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tam
il 
Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), 
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Shri Niranjan Bishi
 
[1 August, 2024]
21

(Odisha), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasm it Patra (Odisha), Sh ri Jawhar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharasht ra), Shrimati Sulata Deo, (Odisha) and 
Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab). 
 
Depletion of water bodies and ponds in the country due to illegal encroachment and 
construction 
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपने मुझे तालाब क े संरक्षण क े 
अवसर पर बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभार Ģकट करती हूं और आपके  
माध्यम से सदन को Ģणाम करती हूं। आज मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से आप सभी लोगȗ का ध्यान 
एक बहुत ही संवेदनशील मुǈे की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहती हूं। हम सभी जानते हȅ िक जल ही 
जीवन है, लेिकन वतर्मान िÎथित क्या है? आज गांव और तहसील पर तालाबȗ को पाटकर घर 
बनाए जा रहे हȅ। यह Ģिकर्या प
ूरे देश मȂ जारी है। तालाबȗ पर लगातार कÅजा होने से न क ेवल 
मानव, बिÊक जीव-जंतु और हमारे पयार्वरण को भी बहुत ही हािन पहुंच रही है। वषार् का जल 
तालाब मȂ इकƻा होना था, लेिकन अब तालाबȗ क े अभाव मȂ जल भराव की समÎया जगह-जगह हो 
रही है। तालाबȗ पर कÅजा करने मȂ भूम
ािफया भी शािमल है, हालांिक क Ȃ दर् और राज्य सरकारȗ ने 
समय-समय पर इसमȂ कई कठोर िनयम बनाए हȅ।  इसके  बावजूद भी तालाबȗ पर अवैध कÅजा 
लगातार
 जारी है। जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय क े डेटा क े मुतािबक देश मȂ मौजूद वाटर बॉडीज़ मȂ सबसे 
ज्यादा हमारे तालाब हȅ, िजनका िहÎसा करीब 59.5 फीसदी है, यानी आधे स े ज्यादा हȅ। तालाब 
पहले भी पानी का एक बहुत बड़ा ǣोत था और आज भी बना हुआ है, िजसकी अनदेखी हो रही है। 
मȅ एक मीिडया की खबर भी यहां पर बताना चाहूंगी। नोएडा मȂ 211 तालाब थ े, िजनमȂ भूमािफयाओं 
ने कÅजा िकया है। 24 अĢैल, 2024 की एक मीिडया खबर मȂ यह बताया गया है िक देश मȂ लगभग 
2.5 लाख तालाब गायब हो चुक े हȅ।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃदर्ीय और राज्य दोनȗ सरकारȗ से िनवेदन 
करना चाहती हूं िक हर तहसील मȂ तालाबȗ की सूची बनाकर उनकी जांच कराई जाए और उस 
सूची को आम जन क े िलए पिÅलक Ãलेटफॉमर् पर उपलÅध कराया जाए। जब मȅ चौरी-चौरा मȂ 
िवधायक थी
, तब मȅने इस पर काम भी िकया था और यह काफी सफल भी रहा था। मȅ सरकार से 
यह भी अनुरोध करना चाहूंगी िक भूमािफयाओं पर सख्त िनयम बनाकर उन पर कारर्वा
ई की जाए 
और जल संरक्षण कर, देश को पयार्वरणीय संकट से बचाया जा ए।                                   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  धन्यवाद, माननीया संगीता यादव।   
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Shrimati Sangeeta Yada v: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Devendra 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha) and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra). 
 
Non-compliance of Right to Education Act by some private schools in Bihar 
 
डा. भीम िंसह ( िबहार): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ एक सामािजक समÎया की ओर 
आपका, सदन का और सरकार का ध्यान आकृ Íट करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। महोदय, भारत 
रत्न Ǜǉेय अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार ने 6-14 वष र् क े बच्चȗ को अिनव ायर् एवं 
िन:शुÊक िशक्षा ĢाÃत हो, इस संबंध मȂ जो Ģावधान था, वह संिवधान मȂ नीित िनदȃशक तत्व क े 
अंतगर्त था। वहां से िनकालकर अनुच्छेद 21 'ए' क े रूप  मȂ मौिलक अिधकार मȂ शािमल िकया। इस 
अनुच्छेद क े िकयार्न्वयन क े िलए 2009 मȂ राइट ट ु एजुक ेशन एक्ट, िशक्षा का अिधकार अिधिनयम 
पािरत ह
ुआ।  इस अिधिनयम मȂ Ģावधान है िक जो भी िनजी िवǏालय हȅ, वे िवǏालय भी अपनी 
सीट्स की 25 Ģितशत सीट्स पर गरीब बच्चȗ का नामांकन कराएंगे, लेिकन िबहार मȂ और 
खासकर िक जो िमशनरी Îकू Êस हȅ, उनके  ǎारा इसका धड़Êले से उÊलंघन हो रहा है। ये िमशनरी 
Îकू ल एक तरह से िशक्षा मािफया क े रूप  मȂ उभर गए हȅ। मȅ िबहार की बात कर रहा हूँ, देश की 
अन्य जगहȗ क े बारे मȂ हमȂ जानकारी नहीं है, लेिकन मȅ िबहार की बात करू ँ, तो वे िवǏालय, जो 
िमशनरी Îकू Êस हȅ, वे नामांकन नहीं ले रहे हȅ। हमने एक िवǏालय क े Ģाचायर् से इसके  िलए बात 
की - संत माइकल Îकू ल, दीघा, पटना। Ģाचायर् ने साफ कह िदया िक हम अपने िनयम से चलȂगे, 
सरकार क े िनयम से नहीं चलȂगे। हमने उन्हȂ समझाने क े िलए, उनसे िमलने क े िलए समय माँगा, 
उन्हȗने समय देने से भी इनकार िकया। मेरा सरकार से, आपसे और सदन से िनवेदन है िक ये जो 
इस तरह क े Îकू Êस हȅ, जो िनजी िवǏालय हȅ, जो िमशनरी Îकू Êस हȅ, जो सरकार से तरह-तरह 
क े लाभ उठा रहे हȅ, जमीन का आवंटन तक सरकार का है, ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please; not allowed. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
डा. भीम िंसह: वे िवǏालय 25 परसȂट सीटȗ पर नामांकन नहीं कर रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  इसिलए 
ऐसे िमशनरी Îकू लȗ क े िखलाफ सरकार को कारर्वाई करनी चािहए और सदन ǎारा पािरत 'िशक्षा 
का अिधकार अिधिनयम, 2009' क े तहत जो Ģावधान है िक 25 परस Ȃट गरीब बच्चȗ का नामांकन 
हो, इसको सुिनिÌचत िकया जाना चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)...        
                                          
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by Dr. Bhim Singh: Shri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan), Shri 
Banshilal Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Brij 
Lal (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
and Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh).  
                                 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
23

Concern over depriving the minorities from the benefits of the grant available for the 
marriage of daughters of poor people belonging to Other Backward Classes 
 
Ǜी जावेद अली खान (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित जी, संिवधान क े अनुसार भारत एक 
कÊयाणकारी राज्य है और संिवधान क े अनुसार भारत एक धमर्िनरपेक्ष राÍटर् है। कÊयाणकारी 
राज्य से हमारा आशय यह है िक गरीब लोगȗ क े िलए, खास तौर से दिलतȗ और िपछड़ȗ क े िलए 
राज्य उनके  upliftment क े िलए, उनके  उत्थान क े िलए कायर् करेगा और धमर्िनरपेक्ष राÍटर् से 
हमारा आशय यह है िक धमर् क े नाम पर िकसी Ëयिƪ या िकसी समुदाय क े साथ भारत क े अंदर 
कोई भेदभाव या पक्षपात नहीं िकया जाएगा। मेरे हाथ मȂ एक बैठक की सूचना का पिरपतर् है, जो 
िजलािधकारी, संभल से मुझे ĢाÃत हुआ था। सर, एक बैठक थी और वह बैठक थी - अन्य िपछड़े 
वगș क े िनधर्न Ëयिƪयȗ की पुितर्यȗ की शादी क े िलए अनुदान योजना की समीक्षा और Îवीकृ ित। 
उस बैठक क े पिरपतर् का जो मजमून है, उसकी पहली लाइन मȅ आपके  सामने पढ़ रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप यह document यहाँ रख दȂ। 
 
Ǜी जावेद अली खान: उǄर Ģदेश सरकार ǎारा संचािलत अन्य िपछड़ा वगर् (अÊपसंख्यक, 
िपछड़ा वगर् छोड़ कर) क े गरीब Ëयिƪयȗ की पुितर्यȗ की शादी की अनुदान योजना क े अंतगर्त 
फलाँ-फलाँ तारीख को बैठक है और आप इसमȂ आमंितर्त हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय जावेद जी, आप यह document यहाँ दे दȂ। 
 
Ǜी जावेद अली खान: सर, मȅ दे दूँगा। मȅने इसे मंतर्ी जी को पहले ही दे रखा है। मंतर्ी जी बैठे हȅ, 
उनके  पास document है।    
 सर, ĢÌन यह है िक अन्य िपछड़े वगș की अपनी एक सूची मंडल आयोग ने और िविभन्न 
राज्य सरकारȗ ने तैयार की हुई है। अन्य िपछड़ा वगर् एक ऐसा वगर् है, िजसके  अंदर धमर् क े नाम पर 
selection नहीं होता। उसमȂ मुसलमान भी हȅ, िहन्दू भी हȅ, ईसाई भी हȅ, िसख भी हȅ, लेिकन िकसी 
योजना का कायार्न्वयन करते वƪ उससे मुसलमानȗ को या अÊपसंख्यकȗ को छोड़ कर पिरपतर् 
जारी करना, मुझे लगता है िक यह पक्षपात है, यह ǎेष की भावना से िकया जा रहा है। सर, मȅने 
इस बैठक का बिहÍकार िकया और मȅने उǄर Ģदेश क े समाज कÊयाण मंतर्ी को तुरंत फोन िकया। 
वे राज्य सभा मȂ रहे हȅ - नरȂदर् कÌयप साहब। उन्हȗने मुझे जो जवाब िदया, उनसे मेरे िमतर्वत संबंध 
हȅ, मȅ उसे आपके  चȅबर मȂ आकर बता सकता हूँ, यहाँ नहीं बता सकता। उसके  बाद मȅ िदÊली 
आया, तो मȅने माननीय सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ी, डा. वीरȂदर् क ुमार जी से संपकर् 
िकया और उनको यह पिरपतर् िदया। उन्हȗने क ु छ िकया।  मेरे पास उनके  सिचव का फोन आया िक 
क्या मसला है। मȅने पूरा मसला बताया िक इस Ģकार से यह िÎथित है। 
  सर, मȅ चाहता हूँ िक इस तरीके  की योजना मȂ अÊपसंख्यकȗ को शािमल िकया जाए।  
...(समय की घंटी)...         
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

ﺟﻨﺎﺏ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺪ ﻋﻠﯽ ﺧﺎﻥ) ﺍﺗﺮﭘﺮﺩﻳﺶ(: ﺍُپ ﺳﺒﻬﺎﭘﺘﯽ ﺟﯽ، ﺳﻤﻮﺩﻫﺎﻥ ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺕ ﺍﻳﮏ ﮐﻠﻴﺎﻧﮑﺎﺭی ﺭﺍﺟﻴہ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ 
ﺳﻤﻮﺩﻫﺎﻥ ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺕ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺩﻫﺮﻡ ﻧِﺮﭘﻴﮑﺶ ﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﮨﮯ۔ ﮐﻠﻴﺎﻥ ﮐﺎﺭی ﺭﺍﺟﻴہ ﺳﮯ ﮨﻤﺎﺭﺍ ﺍٓﺷﻴہ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﻏﺮﻳﺐ 
ﻟﻮﮔﻮں ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ، ﺧﺎﺹ ﻁﻮﺭ ﺳﮯ ﺩﻟﺘﻮں ﺍﻭﺭ ﭘﭽﻬﮍﻭں ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺭﺍﺟﻴہ ﺍﻥ ﮐﮯupliftment ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ، ﺍﻥ ﮐﮯ ﺍُﺗﺘﻬﺎﻥ 
ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮐﺎﺭﺋﻴﮯ ﮐﺮﻳﮕﺎ۔ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺩﻫﺮﻡ ﻧﺮﭘﻴﮑﺶ ﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﺳﮯ ﮨﻤﺎﺭﺍ ﺍٓﺷﻴہ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺩﻫﺮﻡ ﮐﮯ ﻧﺎﻡ ﭘﺮ ﮐﺴﯽ ﺷﺨﺺ ﻳﺎ ﮐﺴﯽ 
ﺳﻤﻮﺩﺍﺋﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺕ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻧﺪﺭ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﺑﻬﻴﺪ ﺑﻬﺎﺅ ﻳﺎ ﭘﮑﺶ ﭘﺎﺕ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ ﮔﺎ۔ ﻣﻴﺮے ﮨﺎﺗﻬ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺑﻴﭩﻬﮏ ﮐﯽ 
ﺳﻮﭼﻨﺎ ﮐﺎ ﭘﺮی ﭘﺘﺮ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻮ ﺿﻠﻊ ی،
ﺍﺩﻫﻴﮑﺎﺭ ﺳﻨﺒﻬﻞ ﺳﮯ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﺣﺎﺻﻞ ﮨﻮﺍ ﺗﻬﺎ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﺍﻳﮏ ﺑﻴﭩﻬﮏ ﺗﻬﯽ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻭﻩ ﺑﻴﭩﻬﮏ 
ﺗﻬﯽ، ﺩﻭﺳﺮے ﭘﭽﻬﮍے ﻭﺭﮔﻮں ﮐﮯ ﻧﺮﺩﻫﻦ ﻭﻳﮑﺘﻴﻮں ﮐﯽ ﭘُﺘﺮﻳﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺷﺎﺩی ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺍﻧﻮﺩﺍﻥ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮐﯽ ﺳﻤﻴﮑﺸﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ 
ﺳﻮﻳﮑﺮﺗﯽ۔ ﺍﺱ ﺑﻴﭩﻬﮏ ﮐﮯ ﭘﺮی ﭘﺘﺮ ﮐﺎ ﺟﻮ ﻀﻤﻮﻥ
ﻣ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﯽ ﭘﮩﻠﯽ ﻻﺋﻦ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓپ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﻣﻨﮯ ﭘﮍﻫ ﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﻮں۔  
ﺷﺮی ﺍُپ ﺳﺒﻬﺎﭘﺘﯽ: ﺍٓپ ﻳہ ڈﺍﮐﻴﻮﻣﻴﻨﭧ ﻳﮩﺎں ﺭﮐﻬ ﺩﻳﮟ۔  
ﺟﻨﺎﺏ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺪ ﻋﻠﯽ ﺧﺎﻥ: ﺍﺗﺮﭘﺮﺩﻳﺶ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﺩُﻭﺍﺭﺍ ﺳﻨﭽﺎﻟِﺖ ﺩﻭﺳﺮے ﭘﭽﻬﮍے ﻭﺭگ) ﺍﻗﻠﻴﺘﻴﮟ، ﭘﭽﻬﮍﺍ ﻭﺭگ ﭼﻬﻮڑ ﮐﺮ( ﮐﮯ 
ﻏﺮﻳﺐ ﻟﻮﮔﻮں ﮐﯽ ﭘُﺘﺮﻳﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺷﺎﺩی ﮐﯽ ﺍﻧﻮﺩﺍﻥ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻧﺘﺮﮔﺖ ﻓﻼں ﻓﻼں ﺗﺎﺭﻳﺦ ﮐﻮ ﭩﻬﮏ
ﺑﻴ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍٓپ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﺍٓﻣﻨﺘﺮﺕ ﮨﻴﮟ۔  
ﺷﺮی ﺍُپ ﺳﺒﻬﺎﭘﺘﯽ: ﻣﺎﻧﻴﺌﮯ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺪ ﺟﯽ، ﺍٓپ ﻳہ ڈﺍﮐﻴﻮﻣﻴﻨﭧ ﻳﮩﺎں ﺩے ﺩﻳﮟ۔  
ﺟﻨﺎﺏ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺪ ﻋﻠﯽ ﺧﺎﻥ: ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﺩے ﺩﻭﻧﮕﺎ۔ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﮯ ﺍﺳﮯ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﺟﯽ ﮐﻮ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﮨﯽ ﺩے ﺭﮐﻬﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی  ﺟﯽ ﺑﻴﭩﻬﮯ 
ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺍﻥ ﮐﮯ ﭘﺎﺱ ڈﺍﮐﻴﻮﻣﻴﻨﭧ ﮨﻴﮟ۔  
  ﺳﺮ، ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺩﻭﺳﺮے ﭘﭽﻬﮍے ﻭﺭﮔﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺳﻮﭼﯽ ﻣﻨﮉﻝ ﺍٓﻳﻮگ ﻧﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻣﺨﺘﻠﻒ ﺭﺍﺟﻴہ 
ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭﻭں ﻧﮯ ﺗﻴﺎﺭ ﮐﯽ ﮨﻮﺋﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺩﻭﺳﺮے ﭘﭽﻬﮍے ﻭﺭگ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺍﻳﺴﺎ ﻭﺭگ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﺲ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻧﺪﺭ ﺩﻫﺮﻡ ﮐﮯ ﻧﺎﻡ ﭘﺮ 
ﺳﻠﻴﮑﺸﻦ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺗﺎ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻣﺴﻠﻤﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﮨﻨﺪﻭ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮟ،
ﮨﻴ ﻋﻴﺴﺎﺋﯽ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺳﮑﻬ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﮐﺴﯽ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮐﺎ 
ﮐﺎﺭﻳﺎﻧﻮﻳﻦ ﮐﺮﺗﻬﮯ ﻭﻗﺖ ﺍﺱ ﺳﮯ ﻣﺴﻠﻤﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﻮ ﻳﺎ ﺍﻗﻠﻴﺘﻮں ﮐﻮ ﭼﻬﻮڑ ﮐﺮ ﭘﺮﻳﭙﺘﺮ ﺟﺎﺭی ﮐﺮﻧﺎ، ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﻟﮕﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﻳہ ﭘﮑﺶ 
ﭘﺎﺕ ﮨﮯ، ﻳہ ﻧﻔﺮﺕ ﮐﯽ ﺑﻬﺎﺅﻧﺎ ﺳﮯ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﮯ ﺍﺱ ﺑﻴﭩﻬ ﮐﺎ ﺸﮑﺎﺭ
ﺑﮩ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﮯ ﺍﺗﺮﭘﺮﺩﻳﺶ ﮐﮯ ﺳﻤﺎﺝ 
ﮐﻠﻴﺎﻥ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﮐﻮ ﻓﻮﺭﺍً  ﻓﻮﻥ ﮐﻴﺎ۔ ﻭﻩ ﺭﺍﺟﻴہ ﺳﺒﻬﺎ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﻧﺮﻳﻨﺪﺭ ﮐﺸﻴﭗ ﺻﺎﺣﺐ۔ ﺍﻧﮩﻮں ﻧﮯ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﺟﻮﺍﺏ ﺩﻳﺎ، ﺍﻥ 
ﺳﮯ ﻣﻴﺮے ﺩﻭﺳﺘﺎﻧہ ﺗﻌﻠﻘﺎﺕ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺳﮯ ﺍٓپ ﮐﮯ ﭼﻴﻤﺒﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓﮐﺮ ﺑﺘﺎ ﺳﮑﺘﺎ ﮨﻮں، ﻳﮩﺎں ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺑﺘﺎﺳﮑﺘﺎ۔ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﺩﮨﻠﯽ ﺍٓﻳﺎ، ﺗﻮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﮯ ﻣﺎﻧﻴﺌﮯ ﺎﻣﺎﺟﮏ
ﺳ ﻧﻴﺎﺋﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﺩﻫﻴﮑﺎﺭﻳﺘﺎ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی، ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮ ﻭﻳﺮﻳﻨﺪﺭ ﮐﻤﺎﺭ ﺟﯽ ﺳﮯ ﺳﻤﭙﺮک ﮐﻴﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﻥ 
ﮐﻮ ﻳہ ﭘﺮﻳﭙﺘﺮ ﺩﻳﺎ۔ ﺍﻧﮩﻮں ﻧﮯ ﮐﭽﻬ ﮐﻴﺎ۔ ﻣﻴﺮے ﭘﺎﺱ ﺍﻥ ﮐﮯ ﺳﮑﺮﻳﭩﺮی ﮐﺎ ﻓﻮﻥ ﺍٓﻳﺎ ﮐہ ﮐﻴﺎ ﻣﺴﺌﻠہ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﮯ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﻣﺴﺌﻠہ  
ﺑﺘﺎﻳﺎ ﮐہ ﺍﺱ ﻁﺮﺡ ﺳﮯ ﻳہ ﺍﺳﺘﻬﺘﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﺎ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ ﺍﺱ ﻁﺮﻳﻘﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻗﻠﻴﺘﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺷﺎﻣﻞ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ۔ 
۔۔۔)ﻭﻗﺖ ﮐﯽ ﮔﻬﻨﭩﯽ(۔۔۔  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप वह पिरपतर् यहाँ रख दीिजए।  
The followi
ng hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
Shri Javed Ali Khan:  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tam il Nadu), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Mausam Noor (West Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri  Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), 
Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Muzibulla Khan 
(Odisha), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri 
Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad (Jharkhand), Shri mati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
(Maharashtra), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri 
Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri Ramji Lal Suman (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Jaya 
                                                            
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
25

Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (K erala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati 
Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shri Digvijaya Singh (Madhya Pradesh). 
           
Devastation caused by floods during rainy season in the district of Haridwar  
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी (उǄराखंड): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, िजला हिरǎार मȂ वषार् ऋतु क े 
दौरान बहने वाली निदयȗ मȂ बाढ़ आना एक गÇभीर और पुनरावृिǄमूलक समÎया है। यह बाढ़, वहाँ 
लोक सभा क्षेतर् क े तीन िवधान सभा क्षेतर्ȗ को Ëयापक रूप  से Ģभािवत करती है। इस बाढ़ क े कारण 
हर साल हजारȗ लोग
 बेघर हो जाते हȅ, फसलȂ नÍट हो जाती हȅ और आिर्थक नुकसान होता है। 
वहाँ िंसचाई िवभाग ǎारा वतर्मान मȂ जो तटबंध िनिर्मत है, वह क ेवल िजला हिरǎार क े गर्ाम मथाना 
तक ही सीिमत ह
ै।  इस तटबंध की लंबाई क ेवल 8 िकलोमीटर है। यिद इस तटबंध को जोगावाला-
दÊलावाला होते हुए, उǄर Ģदेश की सीमा तक 12 िकलोमीटर और बढ़ा िदया जाए, तो बाढ़ से 
क्षेतर् की जनता की रक्षा सुिनिÌचत हो सके गी। इस िवÎतार से लोगȗ को सीधे लाभ होगा और 
उनकी सÇपिǄयȗ की सुरक्षा भी सुिनिÌचत हो सके गी।   
 आदरणीय उपसभापित जी, यहाँ पर हर वषर् बाढ़ क े कारण काफी आिर्थक न
ुकसान होता 
है, िजनमȂ फसलȂ, मकान और आधारभूत संरचनाएँ भी शािमल ह ȅ।  बाढ़ से Ģभािवत अिधकांश गाँव 
अत्यंत िपछड़े हȅ, जो िक क ृिष और पशुपालन पर िनभर्र हȅ। गर्ाम मथाना से जोगावाला-दÊलावाला 
होते हुए उǄर Ģदेश की सीमा तक तटबंध का िनमार्ण नहीं होने क े कारण लक्सर Åलॉक क े 
अिधकांश गाँव बरसात क े दौरान Ģत्येक वषर् जलमग्न हो जाते हȅ, िजससे गर्ामीणȗ की फसलȗ की 
हािन होने क े साथ-साथ जनहािन, धनहािन तथा गर्ामीणȗ क
े  पालतु पशुओं को भी हािन पहुँचती है 
और िजसके  कारण क्षेतर् का जनमानस Ģभािवत रहता है तथा क्षेतर्वािसयȗ का सामािजक और 
आिर्थक िवकास नहीं हो पा रहा ह
ै। 
 अतः मȅ क ेन्दर् सरकार क े जल शिƪ िवभाग से इस कायर् को Ģाथिमकता से करवाने का 
िवनĦ अनुरोध करती हूँ, तािक मेरे क्षेतर् क े लोग सुरिक्षत रह सकȂ और उनके  जीवन मȂ िÎथरता आ 
सके , धन्यवाद।                                          
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, डा. कÊपना सैनी।   
The followi
ng hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
Dr. Kalpana Saini: Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Prad esh), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), 
Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shri  M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), and Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha). 
 
 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand to include Assam's Charaideo Moidams, the old mound-burial system of 
Ahom dynasty in UNESCO world heritage list 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam): Sir, I am grateful to you for giving me 
this opportunity. It is the proud moment fo r every Assamese and ev ery Indian that on 
26th July, 2024, UNESCO declared 700-years old Charaideo Moidams site as the 
World Heritage Centre. Earlier, Manas Nati onal Park and Kaziranga National Park 
were also listed in the UNESCO list.  But this  is the first time that a historical site has 
been listed by the UNESCO. The Charaideo Moidams is the old mound-burial system 
of great Ahom dynasty. Charaideo was the capital of Ahom kingdom, which was built 
by Chaolung Sukaphaa 700 years ago.  A ccording to the Arch aeological Survey of 
India, at the site Charaideo Moidams, a total of 386 burials with 90 royal burials have 
been explored. From 18
th century, the Ahom Kingdom decided to adopt Hindu system 
in their burial system.   
Sir, when NDA came to power in Assam in the year 2014, the then Minister, 
Mr. Keshab Mahanta, approached the Archaeological Survey of India in this regard. 
Then, the Chief Minister of Assam, Dr. Himanta Biswa Sarma, in 2019-20, wrote a 
letter to the hon. Prime Minister regarding this issue. Hon. Prime Minister took the 
initiative and on the recommendation of hon. Prime Minister, the Archaeological 
Survey of India sent the dossiers to UNESCO, and, on 26th July, 2024, the UNESCO 
declared Charaideo Moidams as the UNESCO World Heritage site. 
Sir, earlier, the burial system of Ahom kingdom was different. From 18
th 
Century, the Ahom kingdom adopted th e new Hindu system. It was the Ahom 
kingdom who defeated Mughals 17 times. It is the only kingdom in India who defeated 
Mughals 17 times.                         
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Time is over. Than k you, Birendra Prasad Baishya ji.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA:
 * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Nothing is going on record. You associate with him.  
…(Interruptions)… 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
27

  The following hon. Members associated  themselves with the matter raised by 
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya: Shri Maha raja Sanajaoba Leishemba (Manipur), Shri 
N.R. Elango (Tamil Nadu), Shri Bhubanes war Kalita (Assam), Shri M. Shanmugam 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odish a), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu).                                                               
 
Demand for restoration and conservation of water bodies in Mithila region of Bihar 
 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा (िबहार):  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मुझे सदन मे बोलने का अवसर 
देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ िबहार क े माता सीता की नगरी िमिथलांचल से आती 
हूँ।  िमिथला की एक कहावत है : 
'पग-पग पोखर, माछ, मखान, 
सरस बोल मुÎकी मुख पान, 
इ थीक िमिथलाक पहचान'। 
महोदय, म
ैिथली भाषा की यह कहावत इस क्षेतर् क े संपन्न Ģाकृ ितक वातावरण और यहाँ 
क े लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ तालाब क े महत्व को रेखांिकत करती है। कहावत की पहली पंिƪ का आशय 
है िक िबहार क े िमिथला क्षेतर् मȂ कदम-कदम पर तालाब होने की परंपरा रही ह
ै। इन तालाबȗ मȂ 
मखाना, मछली और पान का उत्पादन होता रहा है। इसके  बावजूद भी ये तालाब संकट मȂ आ गए 
ह
ȅ। इस तरह से रोजगार क े कई साधन समािÃत क े कगार पर जा रहे हȅ। 
 महोदय, Îथानीय जीवन मȂ इतनी महत्वपूणर् भूिमका होने क े बावजूद भी िमिथला क े 
तालाबȗ को िवकास की नजर लग गई है और ये िव
लुÃत होने लगे हȅ। ऐसा कहना अितशयोिƪ नहीं 
होगी िक िपछली सरकारȗ मȂ जंगल राज क े चलते मध्यम और छोटे तालाब दो-तीन दशक पहले 
ही समाÃत हो गए थे। तालाबȗ क े िवलुÃत होने क े कारण पेयजल की िकÊलत शहरȗ मȂ होने लगी है। 
िÎथित यह हो गई है िक हȅडपÇप सूखने लगे हȅ। यहाँ क
े  तालाब भूजल को िरचाजर् करते थे और 
कभी पेयजल कम नहीं पड़ता था। एक-एक कर तालाब खत्म होते गए और िमिथला मȂ पेयजल की 
िकÊलत हो गई ह
ै।   
 महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से हमारी सरकार से अनुरोध करना चाहती हूँ िक िवलुÃत हुए 
तालाबȗ को अपनी पुरानी िÎथित मȂ लौटाने हेतु हर संभव Ģयास िकया जाए और बचे हुए तालाबȗ 
क े जीणȘǉार पर काम िकया जाए, िजससे िबहार सिहत िमिथलांचल मȂ भूजल Îतर म
Ȃ सुधार हो 
और पेयजल की समÎया का समाधान हो सके , बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                                                               
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shrimati Dharmshila Gupta: Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odish
a), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (T amil Nadu), Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

(Puducherry), Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Le ishemba (Manipur), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha) and Shri Rambhai Harjibhai Mokariya (Gujarat).         
धन्यवाद,  धमर्शीला जी।  माननीया Ǜीमती रजनी अशोकराव पािटल।  
 
Demand to financially support and encourage indigenous sports, like Kabaddi, 
Wrestling, Badminton, etc. in the country 
 
Ǜीमती रजनी अशोकराव पािटल (महाराÍटर्):  महोदय, चूँिक मȅ खेल क े िवषय पर बोल रही हूँ, 
इसिलए पहले मȅ इस सदन मȂ मनु भाकर, जो एक मिहला है, उनका अिभनन्दन करना चाहती हूँ, 
िजन्हȗने 100 साल मȂ पहली बार दो बार Ĥाउंज मेडल िदलाये हȅ।  
 सर, खेल सभी लोगȗ क े िलए एक आÎथा का िवषय है और इस देश मȂ क ुÌती हो, कबƿी 
हो, ह
ू-तू-तू हो, सभी खेल वषș से खेले जा रहे हȅ।  क ुÌती मȂ जो सवȘच्च सÇमान है, वह 1958 मȂ 
शुरू  हुआ था, िजसका नाम 'िहन्द क ेसरी' था। महाराÍटर् म
Ȃ 'िहन्द क ेसरी' मÊलȗ को 25 साल पहले 
6 हजार रुपए मानदेय िदया जाता था। सरकार ने एक साल पहले उसको बढ़ा कर 15 रुपए  करने 
की घोषणा कर दी, लेिकन 11 साल से हमारे पहलवान, हमारे मÊल, िजनको  'िहन्द क ेसरी' ĢाÃत 
हुआ है, वे बेचारे आज भी इंतजार कर रहे हȅ। उनको न मानदेय िमला, न उसमȂ बढ़ावा िमला। 
इसके  िलए मȅ बोलना चाहती हूँ िक आज जो मेिडकल की ËयवÎथा है, वह बहुत महंगी हो गई है, 
इसिलए इसके  िलए उन
 लोगȗ की थोड़ी देखभाल करने की जरूरत  है। 
 सर, हाल ही हमने िकर्के ट का 'िवÌव कप' जीता, िजसके  िलए पैसȗ की बहुत बौछार हुई।  
उसमȂ 125 करोड़ रुपए  सरकार ने िदए, हमारी महाराÍटर् सरकार ने 11 करोड़  रुपए  िदए। यह 
उनको िमला, इसके  िलए हमȂ दुख नहीं है, लेिकन जो बाकी भारतीय िखलाड़ी हȅ, िजनको दुलर्Ñय 
िकया जाता ह
ै, उनको दुलर्Ñय नहीं करना चािहए। इतना ही मुझे यहाँ पर कहना है। हाल ही म Ȃ, हम 
सभी क े चहेते, किपल देव जी ने भी अपील की थी। Ǜी अंशुमन गायकवाड़, जो परदेस मȂ क ȅसर का 
इलाज करा रहे थे, दुभार्ग्य से वे बेचारे कल चल बसे, उनको इलाज क े  िलए पैसे चािहए थे, 
िजसके  िलए किपल देव जी ने भी िरक्वेÎट की थी।  मेरी मांग यही है िक िखलाड़ी चाहे कोई भी हो, 
उनके  भिवÍय और वतर्मान को सुरिक्षत करना जरूरी  है, तभी हमारे यहां जो "खेलो इंिडया" का 
नारा िदया जात
ा है, वह सही मायने मȂ सच होगा। सभी िखलािड़यȗ क े िलए एक लांग टमर् पॉिलसी 
होनी चािहए और उनके  इलाज क े खचर् आिद सब बातȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखकर सरकार को योजना 
बनानी चािहए।  िखलािड़यȗ को नौकरी मȂ जो कोटा  िदया जाता है, उसमȂ पारदिर्शता होनी चािहए।   
सर, सबसे ज्यादा और सबसे इंपॉटȄट बात यह है िक जो मिहला िखलाड़ी हȅ या हमारे जो 
पुरुष िखलाड़ी हȅ, उनकी सुरक्षा पर ध्यान देना बहुत आवÌयक है। हमने क ु छ समय पहले देखा था 
िक जंतर-मंतर पर हमारी मिहला पहलवा
नȗ को अपनी सुरक्षा क े िलए राÎते पर आना पड़ा और 
खुद क े हक क े िलए लड़ना पड़ा, िजसमȂ उनको घसीटकर ले जाया गया। अगर हम िखलािड़यȗ 
का सÇमान और आÏवान इस तरह से करȂगे तो हमारा खेल आगे क ै से बढ़ेगा और "खेलो इंिडया" 
कहां-कहां होगा? इसिल
ए यहां पर Îपोट्सर् क े िलए एक Îपेशल रेगुलेटरी बॉडी होनी चािहए, 
इतना ही मेरा कहना है।  
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
29

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil: Shri Anil Kumar 
Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Imran Pr atapgarhi (Maharashtra), Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri  Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (O disha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Prakash Chik Baraik 
(West Bengal),  Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal ), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Dr. V. Si vadasan (Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo, 
(Odisha) Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal) and Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal). 
 
Need to make AIIMS, Raebareli fully functional 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): महोदय, लगभग 10 वषर् पूवर् एÇस, रायबरेली की Îथापना यूपीए-II 
की चेयरपसर्न सोिनया गांधी जी ǎारा की गई थी, परंतु 10 साल बीत जाने पर भी वह अभी तक 
अपनी पूणर् क्षमता क े साथ जनता की सेवा नहीं कर पा रहा ह
ै, जबिक इसके  साथ िजन एÇस की 
आधारिशला रखी गई थी, वे अपनी पूणर् क्षमता क े साथ जनता को समिर्पत हो गए हȅ। उǄर Ģदेश 
क े मध्यांचल क े लगभग 40 िजलȗ क े िलए एकमातर् एÇस रायबरेली है, जो िबहार, मध्य Ģदेश क े 
कई िहÎसȗ और उǄर Ģदेश क े मध्यांचल क े लोगȗ को लाभािन्वत करता है। एÇस रायबरेली मȂ 
पयार्Ãत सुिवधा न होने क े कारण वहां जन-सामान्य को काफी किठनाई उठानी पड़ रही है।   
अतः इस सदन क
े  माध्यम से अनुरोध है िक जनिहत को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए करोड़ȗ की 
आबादी को लाभािन्वत करने क े िलए Ģाथिमकता क े आधार पर सोिनया जी ǎारा Ģारंभ कराए गए 
एÇस रायबरेली को पूणर् क्षमता क े साथ उǄर Ģदेश मȂ संचािलत िकया जाए, क्यȗिक इसके  बाद क े 
िजतने एÇस थे, व
े भी चल गए, इसके  पहले क े िजतने एÇस थे, वे भी चल गए, पर इसका दोष 
शायद इतना है िक यह रायबरेली मȂ है और आदरणीय सोिनया जी ने इसको Ģारंभ िक या था। यह 
जनिहत का मुǈा है, इस पर राजनीित नहीं होनी चािहए। इससे लाखȗ-करोड़ȗ लोगȗ को फायदा 
होगा। मȅ बहुत ही िवनĦतापूवर्क आगर्ह करना चाहता हूँ िक राजनैितक पूवार्गर्ह समाÃत करके  एÇस 
रायबरेली, जहां अभी िसफर् ओपीडी चल रही है, उसका पूणर् भवन बनवाया जाए और उसमȂ 
मरीजȗ क े रुकन े की सुिवधा दी जाए। अभी क ु छ िद
न पहले जब वहां राहुल गांधी जी गए थे, तो 
मरीजȗ ने बताया िक वहां रात मȂ डॉक्टसर् रुकत े ही
 नहीं, जबिक पूरी की पूरी चीनी िमल, शुगर 
िमल उस एÇस क े िलए दे दी गई है। इस तरह, भूिम उपलÅध है, जरूरत भी है और यह एक 
मानवीय मसला है। ÎवाÎथ्य का जो मसला होता ह
ै, उसमȂ कोई जरूरी नहीं िक कांगर्ेस क े लोग ही 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

बीमार पड़ते हȅ, बिÊक रायबरेली मȂ भाजपा वाले ज्यादा बीमार पड़ते हȅ।  इसिलए, मेरा कहना है 
िक इसको तुरंत Ģारंभ िकया जाए। 
मान्यवर, अब मȅ एक ही बात कहकर अपनी बात समाÃत कर दूंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅ 
कल देख रहा था िक चूंिक मकर ǎार पर पोिर्टको नहीं बना है, तो सारे सदÎय पानी मȂ िकस तरह 
से गए हȅ, आप इनसे पूछ लीिजए, मिहलाएं...(Ëयवधान)... इसि
लए वहां पर पोिर्टको बनना चािहए। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: थȅक यू, आपका सÅजैक्ट खत्म हो गया। ...( Ëयवधान)... Please speak on the 
subject. Thank you.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ित
वारी: अब इस सरकार मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shri Pramod Tiwari : Shri Anil Kumar Yadav 
Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Mahar ashtra), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri  Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed A bdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                                                                                 
   
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Demand to construct foot over bridge at NH-19 in Chandauli district of Uttar Pradesh 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, आपने मुझे ज़ीरो ऑवर मȂ बोलने का मौका िदया, 
इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। मȅ आज अपने गृह जनपद चंदौली मȂ फ ु ट ओवर िĤज क े िनमार्ण को 
ल
ेकर अपना िवषय रखना चाहती हूँ। महोदय, मȅ आपको अवगत कराना चाहती हूं िक जनपद 
चंदौली मȂ नेशनल हाईवे-19 होकर गुज़रता है, जो भारत क े सबसे ËयÎततम राÍटर्ीय राजमागș मȂ 
से एक है। सभापित महोदय, चंदौली मȂ नविनिर्म
त मेिडकल कॉलेज नौबतपुर और िजलािधकारी 
कायार्लय मȂ आने जाने क े िलए पैदल याितर्यȗ को इस हाईवे क े six lane सड़क को पार करने 
जाना पड़ता है, िजससे लोगȗ को बहुत असुिवधा होती  है, िजसके  कारण सड़क को पार करते 
समय अकसर दुघर्टनाएं होती रहती है और हमेशा दुघर्टनाओं का डर बना रहता है।  
 अत: मȅ आपके  माध्यम से अनुरोध करना चाहती हूं िक जनपद चंदौली मȂ दो Ģमुख जगहȗ, 
मेिडकल कॉलेज नौबतपुर क े सामने और िजलािधकारी
 कायार्लय क े सामने नेशनल हाईवे-19 पर 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
31

फ ु ट ओवर िĤज का िनमार्ण िकया जाना अत्यंत आवÌयक है, िजससे नेशनल हाईवे-19 पर हो रही 
दुघर्टनाएं कम हȗगी और जनपदवािसयȗ को राहत िमलेगी, धन्यवाद।                                        
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member, Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba (Manipur), 
associated himself with the Zero Hour ma tter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati 
Darshana Singh.  
Now, Shri Raghav Chadda. 
 
Need for reducing the age for contesting elections in India 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा  (पंजाब): सर, आज मȅ िजस मुǈे पर बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं, वह मेरे िदल क े 
बड़े करीब है। It pertains to participation of youth in Indian politics.  
 
Ǜी सभापित: क्या आप इससे भी पहले आना चाहते थे? 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, मȅ बताता हूं िक मȅ यह मुǈा क्यȗ उठा रहा हूं। सर, भारत
 देश इस दुिनया क े 
सबसे युवा देशȗ मȂ आता है, We are one of the younges t countries in the world. हमारे देश 
की औसत उĦ मातर् 29 साल है, हमारे देश की 65 Ģितशत आबादी 35 साल से कम आयु की है, 
हमारे देश की आधी आबादी, 50 Ģितशत स
े ज्यादा आबादी 25 साल से कम आयु की है, लेिकन 
क्या हमारे नेतागण और हमारे चुने हुए Ģितिनिध भी इतने युवा हȅ, यह सवाल मȅ आज आपके  
सामने रखना चाहता हूं।  
सर, आपको जानकर अचÇभा होगा िक जब देश आज़ाद ह
ुआ, पहली बार लोक सभा का 
चुनाव हुआ, जब इस इस देश की पहली लोक सभी चुनी गई थी, तब उस लोक सभा मȂ 26 
Ģितशत लोग 40 साल  क े कम आयु क े थे और अभी 70वीं लोक सभा - जो दो-ढाई महीने पहले 
समाÃत हुई - उस लोक सभा मȂ मातर् 12 Ģितशत लोग
 40 साल से कम आयु क े थे। जैसे-जैसे देश 
जवान हो रहा है, हमारे चुने हुए Ģितिनिध उस जवानी से काफी दूर होते जा रहे हȅ। We are a 
young country with ol
d politicians. We must aspire to become a young country with 
young politicians.   सर, यह क्यȗ हो रहा है? यह इसिल
ए हो रहा है, क्यȗिक politics is 
considered to be a bad profession. जब  बच्चा बड़ा होता है, तो  मां-बाप कहते हȅ िक बेटा, 
बड़े होकर डॉक्टर बनना, इंजीिनयर बनना, Îपोट्सर् पसर्न बनना, साइंिटÎट बनना, चाटर्डर् 
अकाउन्टȂट बनना, कोई यह नहीं कहता िक बड़े होकर नेता बनना, राजनीित मȂ जाना, तो मुझे 
लगता
 है िक आज हमȂ युवाओं को incentivise करने की ज़रूरत  है, तािक वे भारत की मुख्य धारा 
की राजनीित मȂ आएं। इसके  िलए मȅ ये सुझाव लाया हूं और मेरा आपके  माध्यम से भारत सरकार स े 
यह िनवेदन है िक इस देश मȂ चुनाव लड़ने की उĦ 25 साल है, लोक सभा का चुनाव हो या िवधान 
सभा का चुनाव हो, वह चुनाव लड़ने क े िलए आपकी उĦ कम से कम  25 साल  होनी चािहए। मȅ 
आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक सरकार उस उĦ को 25 से घटाकर 21 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

साल करे और 21 साल  का युवा हमारी मुख्य धारा की राजनीित मȂ अगर आना चाहता है, चुनाव 
लड़ना चाहता है, तो उसे अनुमित िमलनी चािहए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You made your point.  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, जब देश का युवा 18 साल  की उĦ मȂ वोट डाल कर अपनी सरकार चुन 
सकता है, देश का भिवÍय चुन सकता है, तो 21 साल की उĦ मȂ चुनाव भी ज़रूर  लड़ सक
ता है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I want to take up one more matter.  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, मȅ आिखरी बात यह कहना चाहता हूं िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the Zero 
Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Raghav Chadha: Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal (Punjab ) and Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana). 
Now, Shri Tiruchi Siva; Demand to sa feguard gig and platform workers from 
exploitative practices. ...(Interruptions)... I want to take up one more. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, mine  is a very important issue. I will renew 
the notice. Please allow it for tomorrow. In one minute, I cannot do it. It is a very 
important issue.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yo
u can read the subject.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: No, Sir, kindly allow me tomorrow. I will renew the notice.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. This will be taken up tomorrow as a first item.   
 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA:  Sir, question... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Still 35 seconds are there. Someone may raise a point of order, it 
has to be known.  …(Interruptions)…  I tried to expedite so that you could make your 
point. I can tell you that the contribution of the House is going up very decorously. 
 
[1 August, 2024]
33

This is a good practice. We must maintain it. This will take us a long way. A good 
point was raised by Shri Pramod Tiwari in a very decorous manner.  
 
 
12.00 Noon 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question Hour.   
 
Measures for control of population of wild animals 
 
*106. SHRI  KESRIDEVSINH JHALA: Will the Minister of ENVIRONMENT, FOREST 
AND CLIMATE CHANGE  be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that the population  o f  f o u r  s p e c i e s  o f  w i l d  a n i m a l s ,  v i z . ,  
elephants, monkeys, street dogs and nilg ai is increasing rapidly in the country, 
if so, the details thereof; 
(b) whether Government has initiated any pr oject to take preventive contraceptive 
measures animal-wise, for population management of the afore-cited four 
species; 
(c) if so, the details of such project, including cost and expenditure involved; and 
(d) if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI 
BHUPENDER YADAV: (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) Elephant, Nilgai and several species of Monkeys are protected under the Wild 
Life (Protection) Act, 1972. The conservation efforts taken over the years have led to 
an increase in the population of several sp ecies of wild animals. Periodic population 
estimation of flagship species like Asian Elephant, Tiger, Leopard and Asiatic Lion 
are being undertaken. The details of population assessment of Asian Elephant are as 
follows: 
 
Year 2007 2012 2017 
Asian Elephant (Population/ Population 27,669- 29,391-30,711 29,964 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

Range) 27,719 
 
 The population assessment of Nilgai  and Monkeys are not being undertaken 
at pan-India level. 
 The street dogs are not protected und er the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 
1972.The management of street dogs are under the purview of the Department of 
Animal husbandry and Dairying, Ministry of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries. 
 
 As per the Livestock Census, the popula tion of street dogs are as follows: 
 
Year (2012) (2019) 
Stray dog population 1,71,38,349 1,53,09,355 
 
 
(b) to (d) The Wildlife Institute of In dia has been assigned a study on “Population 
Management of Species involv ed in Human-Wildlife conflict ” to develop a range of 
mitigation strategies including the applicability of immuno-contraceptive measures to 
manage populations of Elephants, Nilgais, Rhesus Macaque and Wild pigs. 
 The management of stray dog population are carried out by the respective 
local bodies/municipalities/Municipal Corporations and Panchayats. Accordingly, 
the Central Government under the Minist ry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & 
Dairying has notified the Animal Birth Control Rules, 2023 which enables the local 
authority to conduct the Animal Birth Control Program.  
 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA: Sir, I would like to ask the hon. Minister:  "Is any kind 
of assistance, training and support being pr ovided to State and local administration 
through the Ministry in cases of man-animal conflict involving elephants, blue bull and 
wild boars entering into farms and villages?" 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सभािपत महोदय, वाइÊड लाइफ एक्ट क े अंतगर्त हम लोगȗ ने जो man-animal 
conflict  है, उसके  िलए समय-समय पर एडवाइजरी जारी की है। उस एडवाइजरी क े साथ-साथ 
हम लोगȗ ने, जो conflict  हुए हȅ, िजन लोगȗ की दुघर्टना मȂ मृत्यु होती है या िकसी की फसल का 
नुकसान होता है, उसके  िलए compensation रािश  भी तय की गई है। तीसरा, एडिमिनÎटर्ेशन 
को अलटर् करने की दृिÍट से, लोकल एडिमिनÎटर्ेशन और फॉरेÎट ऑिफससर् क े साथ हमने ज्वाइंट 
क
ै पेिसटी िबिंÊडग Ģोगर्ाम और अवेयरनेस Ģोगर्ाम भी शुरू  िकए हȅ। पांचवां, इस िवषय मȂ 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
35

टैक्नोलॉजी इंटरवेन्शन क े साथ जो पहले अलटर् हो जाएं, उन लोगȗ को जानकारी हो जाए, उसके  
िलए भी हमने कारर्वाई शुरू  की है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala. 
 
SHRI KESRIDEVSINH JHALA: Sir, I would also  like to know from the hon. Minister:  
"Have requests from different States been  received regarding d eclaring any animal 
species as vermin? Also, does any State authority such as the Chief Wild Life Warden 
have the authority to do so?" 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: महोदय, जहां तक िकसी जानवर क े ǎारा िकसी क्षेतर् मȂ इस बात का खतरा 
होता है िक उससे िकसी Ëयिƪ क े जीवन की हािन हो सकती है या वह खतरनाक हो गया है, तो 
यह पावर हमने वाइÊड लाइफ एक्ट क े अंतगर्त State Chief Wild Life Warden को Ģदान की ह
ै 
और समय-समय पर वे इसका उपयोग करते हȅ।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil. 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: महोदय, मȅ माननीय म
ंतर्ी जी से आपके  जिरए जानना चाहता हूं िक 
िकसानȗ क े िलए बहुत बड़ी िदक्कत होती है, जब ये human-animal conflict  की बात आती है। 
सर, नील गाय, गाय वंश का नहीं है, वह िहरण वंश का है, पर वह िजतना नुकसान करता ह ै, 
आप गुजरात मȂ आकर देिखए िक इतना इसका िवकास हुआ है, नुकसान करने वालȗ का गुजरात 
मȂ बहुत िवकास हुआ है।  इस नील गाय को रोकने और खत्म करने क े िलए क्या concrete steps 
हȅ, सȂटर्ल गवर्मȂट इसका Ãलान बनाकर करना चाहती है या नहीं? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी भूप
ेन्दर् यादव: महोदय, िनिÌचत रूप  से यह अिधकार राज्यȗ क े Wild Life Warden क े पास 
वाइÊड लाइफ एक्ट क े अंतगर्त है और वे इसका Ģयोग कर सकते हȅ, लेिकन उनको यह स ंतुिÍट 
करनी पड़ेगी िक क्या वह क्षेतर् िकसानȗ क े जीवन और संपिǄ क े िलए नुकसान पहुंचा रहे हȅ। इसके  
अिधकार उनके  पास हȅ और कई राज्य इसका उपयोग कर रहे हȅ।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fourth supplementary, Dr
. Bhagwat Karad. 
 
डा. भागवत कराड़: सभापित महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी जी को पूछना चाहता हूं िक 
leopard जैसा Ģाणी आजकल नगरीय बÎती मȂ, शहरȗ मȂ आता है और शहरȗ क े सीसीटीवी क ैमरा 
मȂ क ै द होता है। राज्य सरकार क े माध्यम से उसको पकड़ने की कोिशश हमारे शहर संभाजी नगर, 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

महाराÍटर् मȂ की है, तो भी नहीं िमला है। क्या क ेन्दर् सरकार की कोई टाÎक फोसर् है, जो राज्य 
सरकार को मदद करे और leopard जैसे जानवर को क ै द िमले?  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सभापित महोदय, अगर इस Ģकार क े कोई वन्य जीव शहरी क्षेतर् मȂ आते हȅ, तो 
वह Îथानीय Îतर पर जो हमारे फॉरेÎट ऑिफसर हȅ, उनको सूिचत करते हȅ और Îथानीय Îतर पर 
हमारे फॉर
ेÎट ऑिफससर् क े ǎारा पूरी ËयवÎथा की जाती है। इनको पकड़कर वापस जंगली क्षेतर् मȂ 
छोड़ा जाता है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Fifth supplementary, Shri
 Tiruchi Siva. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, in th e Statement laid by the Mini stry, the population of the 
Asian elephants has been updated only up to 2017 and the stray dogs up to 2019. The 
drastic increase in the stray dogs is in the recent days only. It has to be updated. My 
pointed question is: "Considering the long-term impact and the ethical concerns of 
using immuno-contraceptives on the social complex species, which has resulted in 
the human and wild animal conflict, along wi th the injunction issued by the Supreme 
Court about the usage of this immuno-contr aceptive, what are the other alternatives 
the Ministry has to contain the population? 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सर, यह बात सच है िक देश क े कई भागȗ मȂ जो वन्य जीव है, उनका जो 
conflict है, कई species क े कारण हम लोगȗ ने WII को एक िरपोटर् बनाने क े िलए कहा है। WII ने 
अपनी िरपोटर् मȂ human contraceptive 
क े साथ-साथ यह कहा है िक इसको फ ू ड आइटम क े 
अंतगर्त भी हम दे सकते हȅ। उन्हȗने अन्य और भी सुझाव िदए हȅ, उनकी interim report हमार े 
मंतर्ालय क े पास है। हम उसका अध्ययन कर रहे हȅ।  
 जहां तक आपने सड़क क े आवारा क ुǄȗ क े बारे मȂ बात कही ह
ै, वे जंगली जीव क े अंतगर्त 
नहीं आते हȅ, वे न एिनमल क े अंतगर्त आते हȅ, न हमारे शैǹूल  क े अंतगर्त आते हȅ। Îथानीय 
नगरपािलकाओं क े ǎारा उसका Ģबंधन िकया जाता ह
ै। ...(Ëयवधान)... जो लाइव डेटा है, उसे 
अन्य मंतर्ालय देखता है, क्यȗिक वह उसके  अंतगर्त आता है।  
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: िदÊली क
 े  बंदरȗ क े बारे मȂ भी बताइए। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: मȅ वही पूछ रहा हूं। सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से पूछना चाहता हूं िक... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. ...(Interruptions)... You will have to define बंदर िकसको कहते 
हȅ? That may be a serious problem.   
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
37

Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िदÊली की एक समÎया है, उसके  बारे मȂ सवाल 
पूछना चाहता हूं। मȅ इसमȂ नहीं जाता हूं िक वे वाइÊड हȅ या पालतू हȅ। मȅ इनके  िलए दूसरा शÅद तो 
इÎतेमाल नहीं कर सकता हूं, लेिकन बंदरȗ की वजह से एक आतंक प ैदा हो गया है, िजसके  
कारण रहना मुिÌकल हो गया है। क्या सरकार इसके  संबंध मȂ कोई सुरक्षात्मक कदम उठाएगी? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय की िंचता जायज है। मȅ उनके  साथ 
सहानुभूित रखता हूं। जह
ां तक बंदरȗ क े िवषय मȂ आपने कहा है िक िदÊली क े अंदर बंदर पाए 
जाते हȅ और इनके  संबंध मȂ आपने ĢÌन पूछा है। वह वन्य जीव क े  शैǹूल  वन और ट ू क े अंतगर्त 
नहीं है, क्यȗिक जयराम जी को ज्यादा पता है, क्यȗिक जो बाकी 11 िकÎम क े बंदर हȅ, जो  
Assamese Macaque, Arunachal Macaque, Bonnet Macaque, Lion-Tailed Macaque, 
Nicobar Long-tailed Macaque, Northern Pig-tailed Macaque, Sela Macaque and 
Hanuman Langur है, इनको हम लोगȗ ने वन्य जीव मȂ रखा है। यह जयराम जी की कमेटी की 
िरकमंडेशन थी, इसिलए हमने इसको वन्य जीव स
े िनकाला है, लेिकन उसके  sterilization 
Ģोगर्ाम को लेकर िदÊली क े हाई कोटर् का एक ऑडर्र भी है। हमने ओखला और आसपास दो-तीन 
क्षेतर् भी डेवलप िकए हȅ। वहां पर हमने िवशेष कारर्वाई भी की है, इनको पकड़ने क े िल
ए, इनको 
sterilization करने मȂ भी समÎया आती है, तो इनके  फ ू ड मȂ भी हम क ु छ कर सकते हȅ। उसके  संबंध 
मȂ िरपोटर् हमारे पास आ गई है। हम सब इसको िमलकर करȂगे। म
ȅ यहां पर कोई आरोप नहीं लगाना 
चाहता हूं, ...(Ëयवधान)... लेिकन मेरा यह मानना है िक  जॉन िĤटास और इनसे हम कहȂगे 
...(Ëयवधान)... सर, ये स
ुनȂ तो सही। ...(Ëयवधान)... लगातार िदÊली सरकार को ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. John Brittas, it is Question Hour and you rise there.  
...(Interruptions)...  You are a very senior Member.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: लगातार िदÊली सरकार और िदÊली एडिमिनÎटर्ेशन को हम क ै पेिसटी िबिंÊडग 
से लेकर, उच्च न्यायालय क े िनदȃश का पालन करने क े िलए कहते रहे हȅ, लेिकन उनकी, िदÊली 
सरकार की कोई मजबूरी होगी िक उनको इस पर िजतना ध्यान देना था, नहीं िदया ह
ै, लेिकन 
उनको देना चािहए।  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, ये उन पर रोक लगा दȂ, लोग क ेला िखलाकर उनको और आकिर्षत कर 
रहे ह
ȅ। टमाटर तो आजकल कोई नहीं िखला रहा है। उसके  बाद क ु छ संगठन िवरोध करते हȅ।      
                                  
Ǜी सभापित: ितवारी जी, मुझे तो यह बताइए िक कौन सी पाचन ËयवÎथा िनदȃिशत करूं  िक 
हाउस ऑडर्र मȂ चले!                   
Question No. 107.  
 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

Waste management in the country 
 
*107. SHRI B. PARTHASARADHI REDDY: Will the Minister of ENVIRONMENT, 
FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that out of 62 million tonnes (MT) of municipal solid waste 
generated per annum in the country, only  43 MT is collected, out of which, 
only 11.9 MT is treated and the rest is dumped in landfill sites;  
(b) if so, the reasons for low waste treatment in the country; 
(c)  whether Government is planning to  introduce any adva nced technological 
solution to improve waste management in the country; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof, if not, in what manner Government is planning to deal 
with the issue? 
 
THE MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI 
BHUPENDER YADAV): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b)  The Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, provide the statutory 
framework for management of solid waste in the country. The local authorities are 
mandatedfor solid waste management under  Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
As per Swachh Bharat Mission Urban 2.0 da shboard, the solid waste generated is 
approximately 1.59 lakh TPD, of which 1. 24 lakh TPD is processed.As per Solid 
Waste Management Rules, 2016, local bo dies are mandated to allow only non-
recyclable, non-biodegradable, non-comb ustible and non-reactive waste to go to 
sanitary landfills and every effort shall be made to achieve the desired objective of 
zero waste going to landfill. 
Separately, Central Pollution Control Boar d has issued Guidelines for Disposal 
of Legacy Waste (Old Municipal Solid Waste). Directions under Section 5 of 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, to a ll State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution 
Control Committees for enforcement of provisions of Solid Waste Management Rules, 
2016, regarding bio-mining of legacy waste. 
 
(c) and (d) As per Solid Wast e Management Rules, 2016, local bodies shall facilitate 
construction, operation and maintenance of  solid waste processing facilities and 
associated infrastructure using suitable tech nology adhering to the guidelines issued 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
39

by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affa irs from time to time and standards 
prescribed by the Central Pollution Control Board.  
Central Public Health Engineering Organization under Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs, Government of India, ha s published Municipal Solid Waste Manual, 
which inter alia covers technical aspects segregation, collection, transportation, 
processing and treatment of municipal solid waste.  
Further, CPCB has also constituted Standing Committee on Technology for 
Waste Management for assessment of indigenous technologies and innovative waste 
management practices. The Committee has pr epared a Protocol for Evaluation of 
Technology for Waste Management, wh ich is available on CPCB website 
(https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/Technology_WM_1.pdf). 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: First Supplementary; Shri B. Parthasaradhi.  
 
SHRI B. PARTHASARADHI: Sir, thank you ve ry much for giving me the opportunity 
because this is my first question.  After several attempts, I got the opportunity. I need 
all of your blessings. Thank you very much . In the reply to my question, the hon. 
Minister emphasised and highlighted only on amending rules, issuing protocols, 
making committees and further amending gu idelines. Sir, through you, I want to 
know, after 2016 policy implementation, is th ere any authentic data  of increasing or 
decreasing the quantity of solid waste material, which is not treated in the country and 
details of allocation of State-wise funds for solid waste management and targeted 
timelines to achieve zero solid waste landfill status. 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सभापित महोदय, CPCB की जो  Annual Report है, उस िरपोटर् क े अंतगर्त 
2020-21 तक जो solid waste generate होता था, वह 1,60,038 TPD होता था और उसका 
landfill, जो treated है, वह CPCB की website पर उपलÅध है।  
महोदय, जहाँ तक इसके  Ģबंधन का िवषय है, यह local bodies क े ǎारा िकया जाता है। 
हमारे मंतर्ा
लय क े ǎारा समय-समय पर जो guidelines जारी की गई हȅ, उसमȂ िवशेष रूप  से 
2016 क े Solid Waste Management Rules, Plastic Waste Management Rules, 
Biomedical Waste Management Rules,  Construction and Demolition Waste 
Management Rules, Hazardous and Other Waste Management Rules, and E-Waste 
Management Rules इसके  मुख्य regulatory norms हȅ, िजनको local bodies क े ǎारा control 
िकया जाता है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supple
mentary; Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy. 
 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI B. PARTHASARADHI REDDY: Sir, my second question is this. According to the 
recent studies, despite the complete plastic waste import ban in 2019, around five 
lakh tonnes of the plastic waste is smuggled  into India which is highly hazardous and 
contaminating, mainly, the water resources. What steps are being taken by the 
Government to ensure that the solid waste generated in other countries is not being 
smuggled into our country?  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने िबÊकु ल सही बात कही है िक single-use plastic 
की समÎया सबसे बड़ी चुनौती है। महोदय, हमने उसको बैन भी िकया है, लेिकन उसका नीचे 
execution, State Government क े ǎारा होता है। महोदय, single-use plastic क े अितिरƪ जो 
अन्य plastic package ह
ȅ, हमने उनके  िलए एक EPR platform बनाया है और extended 
producer's liability इस platform क े अंतगर्त आती है। हमने उसकी पूरी जानकारी portal क े 
ǎारा देने का भी पूरा Ģबंध िकया है। इसके  साथ ही साथ हमȂ यह भी पता है िक Extended 
Producer's Responsibility म
Ȃ waste tyre का भी िवषय आता है और plastic packaging का भी 
िवषय आता है। महोदय, एक और जो बड़ी चुनौती है, वह waste battery की है और अभी जो एक 
सबसे बड़ा िवषय हमारे सÇमुख है, वह e-waste का है। जो used oil है , वह भी काफी ज्यादा 
मातर्ा मȂ Ģदूषण को फ ैलाता है, हमने इसके  िलए पूरी guidelines और  रूÊस बनाए हȅ, जो 
िमिनÎटर्ी की वेबसाइट पर भी उपलÅध हȅ। हमने ये रूÊस 2022 और 2023 मȂ जारी िकए हȅ।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary; Shri
 Jairam Ramesh. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, for the last fe w years, the country has been trying to 
grapple with the issue of chemical contamination. There are a large number of 
contaminated sites across the country. And I am  glad that the hon. Health Minister is 
also here because these contaminated sites are grave public heal th hazards. Two of 
the worst sites in the country are in New Delhi alone. One is in Ghazipur and the other 
one is in Bhalaswa. I would like to ask the hon. Minister as to what specific steps will 
be taken to deal with these contaminated si tes which are posing severe public health 
hazards. 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सभापित महोदय, मȅ बताना चाहता ह
ूं िक इस पर लगातार कदम उठाए गए हȅ। 
महोदय, जो िवषय लंबे समय से pending पड़ा था, िजस पर सुĢीम कोटर् का भोपाल का यूिनयन 
काबार्इड से संबंिधत जजमȂट था, उस िवषय को लेकर भी मंतर्ालय की गाइडलाइन्स दी गई हȅ 
और हम उसको हटाने क े संबंध मȂ पूरे Ģयास कर रहे हȅ।  
महोदय, जो बाकी specific sites ह
ȅ, िजन्हȂ जयराम जी ध्यान मȂ लेकर आए हȅ, उनके  िलए 
हम सभी जगह advisory भी..(Ëयवधान)..  
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
41

Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी, ये साइट्स सभी क े ध्यान मȂ हȅ।  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव:  महोदय, सब जगह नहीं हȅ, ये site-specific हȅ, इसिलए site-specific क े 
िहसाब से directions िदए जाते हȅ। उन्हȗने specific उदाहरण िदए हȅ और मȅने specific उदाहरण 
क े साथ काम िकया है, क्यȗिक जो site-specific होत े हȅ, उनका जो िवषय आता है, उसके  
directions accordingly rules क े अंतगर्त जारी िकए जाते हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary number four; Ms. Swati Maliwal.  
 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL: Sir, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to speak. आज 
िदÊली वालȗ
 को गिर्मयȗ की छ ुिƺयȗ मȂ िहल Îटेशन जाने की जरूरत ही नहीं है। सर, एमसीडी क े 
सौजन्य से हम सबको िदÊली मȂ ही क ू ड़े क े तीन बड़े-बड़े पहाड़ िमले हुए हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please ask yo
ur supplementary.  
 
MS. SWATI MALIWAL: I am coming to it. सर, एक माउंट भलÎवा है, एक माउंट गाजीपुर है 
और एक माउंट ओखला है। सर, उन लȅडिफल साइट्स पर जो लोग रह रहे हȅ, उनकी हालत 
बहुत खराब है। वहाँ पर हर िदन उन्हȂ बदबू, गंदगी और बीमािरयȗ से जूझना पड़ता है। कभी आग 
लग जाती है, तो उससे Ģदूषण होता है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is your supplementary? 
 
स
ुǛी Îवाित मािलवाल: सर, मेरी माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह िरक्वेÎट है, मȅ उनसे यह जानना 
चाहती हूँ िक क्या आपको एमसीडी क े ǎारा कोई भी Ģपोजल िदया गया है िक इन क ू ड़
े क े पहाड़ȗ 
से क ै से िनजात पाई जा सकती है? सर, अगर Ģपोजल िदया गया है, तो उस पर क्या काम हुआ है 
और क्या क Ȃ दर् सरकार एमसीडी की िजÇमेदारी इस मामले म
Ȃ तय कर सकती है? 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सर, यह िदÊली सरकार की िजÇमेदारी है और िदÊली सरकार से कहȂगे, तो  
अच्छा होगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary number five, Shrimati
  Jaya Bachchan. 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, सबसे पहले मुझे बड़ा दुख है िक भूपेन्दर् जी दूसरे हाउस चले 
गए हȅ। यहाँ रहते थे, तो अच्छा लगता था। Anyway. सर, अभी िदÊली सरकार की बागडोर 
आपके  हाथ मȂ है। आप अपनी responsibility िशÄट मत किरए।  
दूसरी बात,
 is the Government going to do something to move this kind of waste 
into an area, which is not close to human habitat? 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

   
MR. CHAIRMAN: And, Madam, he is a silent worker with global impact also. He will 
take care of your sentiment. He will do all he can. It does not matter whether he is in 
this House or that House. 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: आप उनको वेिलडेट मत किरए। जो उनका काम है, that is 
enough validation for all of us. We have been his colleagues for many years. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सÇमाननीय जया जी को कहना चाहता हूँ िक मȅने अपने 
ĢÌन क े उǄर क े Ģारंभ मȂ भी यह कहा था िक हमने 2016 म
 Ȃ रूÊस एंड रेगुलेशंस बनाए थे और 
उसके  बाद जैसे-जैसे ई-वेÎट लेकर बाकी चुनौितयाँ आई हȅ, हमने रेगुलेशंस बनाए हȅ, लेिकन जो 
इसकी execution एजȂसी है, वह Îटेट गवनर्मȂट है। हम एनकै प क े अंतगर्त पैसा भी Ģदान करते हȅ, 
िजसमȂ हम वायु Ģदूषण क े साथ-साथ सॉिलड वेÎट मैनेजमȂट, वॉटर पॉÊयूशन क े िलए
 ही पैसा 
देते हȅ। चूँिक हमारे देश मȂ संघीय Ģणाली है, क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े ǎारा राज्य
 सरकारȗ को पैसा िदया 
जाता है, तो यह राज्य सरकारȗ की िजÇमेदारी होती है। जहाँ तक उन्हȗने दूसरे िवषय क े बारे मȂ 
कहा है िक यह मानवीय बिÎतयȗ क े पास मȂ न हो, इसके  िलए िसटी का मैनेजमȂट Ãलान हमेशा 
होता है। क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने भी अपने बजट क
े  माध्यम से वेÎट ट ु वैÊथ क े िलए जो बजट अनाउंसमȂट 
2023 मȂ भी की थी, उसमȂ भी 500 नए वेÎट ट ु वेÊथ Ãलांट बनाए थे, जो िवशेष रूप  से बायो-वेÎट 
क े िडÎपोज़ल क े िलए िकया था। मȅ आपको यह कहना चाहता
 हूँ िक हम मानते हȅ िक इस 
िंचताजनक िÎथित मȂ देश मȂ जो Çयूिनिसपल सॉिलड वेÎट होती है, उसका 35 परसȂट क ेवल डर्ाई 
वेÎट है, 45 परसȂट बायोिडगर्ेड
ेबल वेÎट है और जो 20 परसȂट है, वह क ंÎटर्क्शन और demolition 
क े कारण आता है। Îथानीय Îतर पर जो इसका िनयोजन है, इसके  िलए हम एनकै प का मूमȂट 
चलाते हȅ और जो िजले या जो नगर अच्छा काम करते हȅ, उन्हȂ पुरुÎकृ त भी करते हȅ, क्यȗिक हम 
इसमȂ हेÊदी काँपीिटशन चाहते हȅ। हमारी िसिवक सोसायटी क े िलए Îवच्छ शहर होना, जो व ेÎट 
है, उसका सही िडÎपोज़ल होना, यह आवÌयक है। हम इसे मानते हȅ और राज्यȗ क े साथ सहयोग 
करके , इस पर काम करना है।                                  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No. 108. 
 
Decline in forest cover  
 
†*108.  DR. SUMER SINGH SOLANKI: Will the Minister of ENVIRONMENT, FOREST 
AND CLIMATE CHANGE be pleased to state: 
                                                            
† Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
43

 
(a) the details of the measures being taken by Government to check the 
continuous decline in forest cover; 
 
(b) whether any schemes have been formulated by Government for the same; and 
 
(c) the details of the budget allocated for the purpose during the last three years, 
scheme- wise? 
 
THE MINISTER OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI 
BHUPENDER YADAV): (a) to (c) The statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) Forest Survey of India (FSI), Dehradun,  an organization under the Ministry, 
carries out the assessment of forest cover of the country biennially since 1987 and the 
findings are published in the India State of  Forest Report (ISFR). The forest cover 
assessment is a wall-to-wall mapping exerci se based on remote sensing supported 
by intensive ground verification and field da ta from the National Forest Inventory. As 
per the latest ISFR 2021, the total forest  cover of the country is 7,13,789 square 
kilometre which is 21.71% of the geographical area of the country. Theforest cover of 
the country continuously increased in past  decade. An increase of 21,762 square 
kilometer in forest cover has been recorded in the assessment of ISFR 2021 compared 
to ISFR 2011. 
 
(b) and (c) To further increase the forest co ver in the country, the Government has 
provided funds under various schemes and programmessuch as National Mission for 
a Green India (GIM), Integrated Develo pment of Wildlife Habitats, Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA), Nagar Van Yojana 
(NVY) and Eco-Task Force (ETF)etc. These funds support the efforts of the States 
and UTs for ecological restoration through a fforestation in and outside forest areas, 
forest landscape restoration, habitat im provement, soil and water conservation 
measures, and protection etc. The funds re leased by the Ministry for this purpose 
during the last three years under the Gr een India Mission, CAMPA, Development of 
Wildlife Habitats, Nagar Van Yojanaand Eco-task Force are enclosed at Annexure. 
 
 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

Annexure 
 
Details of funds released under various schemes for the last three years for 
increasing the forest cover 
(Rs. In Crores) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Schemes  2021-22  2022-23  2023-24 
1 National Mission for a Green India 
(GIM) 156.46 137.29 112.28 
2 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and 
PlanningAuthority (CAMPA) 
9161.15 8481.34 7293.23 
3 Developmentof Wildlife 
Habitats(DWH) 87.56 56.49 95.89 
4 Nagar Van Yojana (NVY) 112.41 93.25 93.90 
5 Eco- Task Force (ETF) 110.00 80.00 64.34 
Total 9627.58 8848.37 7659.64 
 
डा. सुमेर िंसह सोलंकी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, नमर्दे हर! माननीय सभापित महोदय, 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने िवÎतार से जो जवाब िदया है, मȅ उसे लेकर माननीय मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद 
देना चाहता हूँ। वनाच्छािदत क्षेतर् 21,762 वगर् िकलोमीटर बढ़ा है। इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी को और माननीय मंतर्ी जी को बधाई भी देता हूँ, धन्यवाद भी कर
ता हूँ और अिभनंदन भी 
करता हूँ। मȅ मध्य Ģदेश क े िनमाड़ क्षेतर् से आता हूँ। मालवा और िनमाड़ मȂ नमर्दा जी क े दोनȗ तरफ 
सतपुड़ा और िंवध्याचल क े पहाड़ हȅ और इन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ आिदवासी िजले हȅ। बड़वानी, धार, झाबुआ, 
अलीराजपुर, खरगौन, खंडवा और बुरहानपुर, यहाँ पर सतपुड़ा क े पहाड़ȗ मȂ हिरयाली से 
वनाच्छािदत करने क े िलए
 क्या सरकार कोई योजना पर काम कर रही है?  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय का ĢÌन है िक नमर्दा जी क े क्षेतर् 
का जो एिरया है, उस क्षेतर् मȂ क्या वनȗ को बढ़ाए जाने क े िलए कोई कायर् िकया जा रहा है। 
िनिÌचत रूप  से भारत मȂ Green India Mission क े अंतगर्त यह कायर् िकया जाता ह
ै। नमर्दा जी 
और उसके  आसपास की जो लगभग 30-32 से ज्यादा निदयां हȅ, वे उन्हीं वन क्षेतर्ȗ से िनकलती हȅ।  
वहां सघन वन बनाने क े िलए काफी कायर् िकया जाता
 है। िदिग्वजय जी को ज्यादा अनुभव है और 
वे नमर्दा यातर्ी भी रहे हȅ।    
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
45

MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki. 
...(Interruptions)... First, he has a right of putting  two supplementary questions and 
then the other supplementary questions can be asked. 
 
डा. सुमेर िंसह सोलंकी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी को 
िफर से धन्यवाद दूंगा िक Îवगीर्य अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार जब हमारे देश मȂ थी, तो 
करोड़ȗ आिदवासी भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को वनािधकार क े पƺȗ का िवतरण िकया गया। 2006 क े  
अिधिनयम क े अंतगर्त, जो िचिन्हत िकसान या आिदवासी बंधु या जंगलȗ मȂ रहने वाले गरीब बंधु 
बच गए हȅ, क्या सरकार उनको िचिन्हत करके  िफर से वनािधकार क े पƺे देने पर िवचार कर रही 
है? 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: सभापित महोदय, वनािधकार क े पƺȗ क
े  िलए एक िनिÌचत Ģिकर्या है और 
वनािधकार क े पƺȗ क े िनÎतारण का काम हम कर रहे हȅ और मȅ यह भी कहना चाहूंगा िक मध्य 
Ģदेश सरकार और छǄीसगढ़ मȂ जब भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार थी, तो इन्हȗने भी बहुत 
उत्कृ Íट दृिÍट से इस पर कायर् िक
या।    
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY: Sir, through you, I want to ask the Minister that a 
CAMPA fund was constituted. Allegedly, it was to help the reforestation. But, the 
policies and the implementation of these funds, बड़े-बड़े पेड़ȗ का नाश करके  इतना छोटा 
सा पौधा नसर्री से लाकर वहां बो देते हȅ। Same thing is happening while constructing the 
National Highways where they are choppi ng down massive trees and due to this, 
there is clim
ate change which is impacting us. रोज  कहीं बाढ़ और सूखा पड़ जाता है, तो 
क्या आप CAMPA funds की State-wise details पेश करȂगे और इसका audit करवा दȂगे िक 
िकतने पेड़ पौधे हȅ, जो replacement मȂ डाले हȅ, वे िंजदा भी हȅ? क्लाइमेट चȂज क े नाते आप इस 
पर क्या... 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय रेणुका जी ने आपके  माध्यम से एक अच्छा 
ĢÌन पूछा है। संयोग से आज सुबह 9 बजे CAMPA की Annual General Meeting हुई थी। 
CAMPA क े जो 45 Ģो
जेक्ट्स अभी चल रहे हȅ, उनकी भी समीक्षा की गई थी। प ेड़ तो बड़ा कटता 
है और छोटा ही लगता है, लेिकन बाद मȂ बड़ा होता है। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Let him complete. ...(Interruptions)... Your point is well taken. 
...(Interruptions)... Madam, you have put your supplem entary, let the hon. Minister 
answer now.  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीया रेणुका जी क े ĢÌन क े पहले भाग का 
उǄर िदया है। छोटे पेड़ का अथर् है, मतलब आकार मȂ तो छोटा लगता है, लेिकन जब हम पेड़ 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

लगाते हȅ और िजन पेड़ȗ को हम लगातार लगाने क े िलए कहते हȅ - हम िनिÌचत रूप  से पीपल, 
बड़, ढाक, आंवला, बहेड़ा, नीम - ये जो बड़े पेड़ हȅ, ये हमारी native species हȅ।   
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना चाहूंगा िक हमने क्षेतर् क े अनुसार 
िजले क े िहसाब से इसका वगीर्करण िकया है। हम जो 'एक पेड़ मां क े नाम' अिभयान चला रहे हȅ, 
उस अिभयान मȂ भी मȅने अपने संसद क े सभी सािथयȗ को पतर् िलखा है और local species की 
जानकारी भी उनको उपलÅध कराई है। मȅ आपको भी आज प
ूरे सदन की तरफ से बधाई देना 
चाहता हूं िक आपने भी दो िदन पहले 'एक पेड़ मां क े नाम' अिभयान क े अंतगर्त एक पेड़ लगाया 
है। हम आपका भी अिभनंदन करना चाहते ह
ȅ।     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 4, Shri Saket Gokhale. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, this is following up from a conversation that happened in 
this House about two or three days ago with the hon. Minister dismissing something I 
had asked in a question. So, my question is very specific. Will the Minister answer 
whether it is true that the Supreme Court of India in February, 2024 passed an Interim 
order stating that the definition of 'Forest' will continue as per its 1996 judgement and 
not according to the Forest Conservation Amendment Act that was brought by this 
Government last year. If yes, what was the reason behind the Government choosing 
to change the definition and expand the definition of 'Forest' in the Forest 
Conservation Amendment Act which was brought in last year? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, firstly, is it so? 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, साके त गोखले जी ने आज जो ĢÌन िकया, उस िदन 
इन्हȗने एक different ĢÌन िकया था।  इन्हȗने उस िदन जो ĢÌन िकया था, उसका उǄर भी मȅने 
इनको भेज िदया था और मुझे लगता है इनको िरपोटर् भी िमल गई होगी, िजसमȂ इनका कहना था 
िक forest cover कम हुआ है। उस समय मȅने उǄर मȂ िलखा था िक जो FSI का assessment है, 
वह यह show करता है िक हमारा जो net increase है, वह 1,540 िकलोमीटर है। इन्हȗने जो 
दूसरा ĢÌन िकया है, 1980 का जो Forest Conservation Act हमने amend िकया है, उसकी 
petition सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ फाइल हुई है। सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ 12 िदसंबर, 1996 का एक जजमȂट पास 
हुआ, िजसमȂ उसने कहा िक ‘Forest’ means, dictionary meaning of forest. 1980 क े Forest 
Conservation Act मȂ dictionary meaning of forest मȂ जो कई िवकास की पिरयोजनाएँ रुक  
जाती थीं, तो 1980 क े एक्ट मȂ जो पिरवतर्न िकया गया है, उसमȂ क्या फॉरेÎट नहीं है, वे clauses 
हमने डाले हȅ। जब हमारे देश को आजादी िमली, तो 'Forest' राज्य का िवषय था।  बाद मȂ कांगर्ेस 
क े समय मȂ जो amendment हुआ, उससे 'Forest' को  Concurrent List मȂ डाला गया और 1980 
मȂ उसी क े कारण Forest Conservation Act आया।  मȅ आपके  सामने यह भी कहना चाहता हूँ िक 
हमारे देश मȂ अगर हम देखȂ, 1950 से पहले जब Forest Conservation Act नहीं आया था और 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
47

यह Concurrent List मȂ नहीं आया था, तब देश मȂ जो forest का  नुकसान हुआ था, लगभग 20 
Ģितशत हुआ था।  सरकार उस समय की sensitivity को जान कर इसको Forest Conservation 
Act क े अंतगर्त लाई, लेिकन 12.12.1996 का जो dictionary meaning of forest का सुĢीम कोटर् 
का िवषय था, उसके  कारण कई तरह क े अवरोध खड़े हुए और clarity नहीं थी।  उस clarity क े 
िलए हम Forest Conservation Act मȂ forest क्या नहीं है, वह लेकर आए हȅ।  यह मामला अभी 
sub judice है। हम पूरा िवषय सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ भी रखने वाले हȅ।  Definition पर  कोई question 
नहीं उठा है।  Naturally, Act क े ऊपर कोई चैलȂज होगा, तो उसका जवाब सरकार क े ǎारा िदया 
जाएगा। लेिकन आपके  माध्यम से मȅ यह भी कहना चाहता हूँ िक हमारे देश का जो total forest 
area है, वह 23.5 परसȂट है, 7.75 करोड़  हेक्टेयर। इसमȂ िपछले 10 वषș मȂ जो िवकास की 
गितिविध हुई है, compensatory afforestation क े अंतगर्त जो जमीन आई है, वह more than 10 
लाख हेक्टेयर है, जो यह बताती है िक सरकार forest क े conservation और preservation क े 
िलए पूरे तरीके  से Ģितबǉ है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fifth supplementary.  Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan. 
 
Ǜीमती रं जीत रं जन: सभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी साहब से पूछना चाहती हूँ िक क ृपया 
एक तो State-wise Åयोरा दȂ िक िकन-िकन Ģदेशȗ मȂ िकतनी forest land को अन्य purpose क े 
िलए divert िकया गया है? साथ ही, आपने यहाँ उǄर मȂ िदया है िक 2011 की तुलना मȂ 2021 क े 
आकलन मȂ जो वनाच्छािदत क्षेतर् है, वह बढ़ा है। इसका क्या िववरण है, कहाँ पर बढ़ा है और 
उसकी क्या situation है?  िदÊली देश की राजधानी है और उसका यहाँ कोई अपना वन क्षेतर् नहीं 
है। यमुना क े िकनारे बहुत सारी जो जमीन है, उस पर unnecessary बहुत अवैध कÅजे लगातार 
हो रहे हȅ। क्या सरकार की ऐसी कोई योजना है िक यमुना क े िकनारे जो जमीन ऐसे ही पड़ी है, 
वहाँ पीपल जैसे वृक्ष लगा कर एक वन िदÊली मȂ भी बसाया जाए, क्यȗिक हमारा जो सबसे 
polluted Ģदेश है, वह िदÊली है? 
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎया ने एक अच्छे िवषय क े ऊपर ध्यान 
िदलाया है िक यमुना क े िकनारे जमीन पर encroachment होता है। वहीं पर हमने पेड़ लगाने का 
काम शुरू  िकया है। माननीय सभापित महोदय जी भी वहीं पर पेड़ लगा कर आए हȅ। मȅ तो यह 
कहूँगा िक िपछले वषर् भी उस जगह पर हम लोगȗ ने पेड़ लगाने का काम िकया। िवशेष रूप  से जो 
यमुना का encroachment area है, उसको खाली कराते हुए हम लगातार पेड़ लगा रहे हȅ। 
माननीय सदÎया भी लगाना चाहȂ, तो उनका भी Îवागत है। Forest Survey मȂ िकस क्षेतर् मȂ forest 
बढ़ा है और िकस मȂ नहीं बढ़ा है, इसकी जो पूरी िरपोटर् है, वह हमारी िǎवािर्षक िरपोटर् आती है, 
जो 1987 से इस देश मȂ Ģारंभ हुई है। उस िरपोटर् क े अंतगर्त यह सारा िवषय िदया जाता है। उसमȂ 
यह भी िवÌलेषण िकया जाता है िक dense forest, medium forest and open forest की क्या 
िÎथित है। यह FSI की िरपोटर् मȂ उपलÅध है, मȅ माननीय सदÎया को भी उपलÅध करा दूँगा, िजसमȂ 
पूरी िडटेल है।  
 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Satisfied? मȅ इसिलए बोल रहा हूँ िक मȅ खुद वहाँ गया था और 2 घंटे तक 
रहा। वहाँ काया-पलट जारी है। वहाँ बड़े Ëयापक Îतर पर काम हो रहा है और ऐसे तरीके  से हो 
रहा है िक वह िबÊकु ल नैचुरल हो। It is turning out to be a great habitat for all species. The 
Lt. Governor of Delhi has devoted a lot of  time for it and the transformation is 
amazing! I will request all the hon. Members to make a visit. And, if my office 
assistance is required for that purpose, I will be more than willing.  
Now, Question No. 109. 
 
Implications of low female LFPR 
 
*109. SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK: Will the Minister of LABOUR AND 
EMPLOYMENT be  pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that according to the latest Periodic Labour Force Survey 
(PLFS)Report, India’s female Labour Fo rce Participation Rate (LFPR) is 28 
percentage points lower than the male LFPR; 
(b) if so, the details thereof and its implications in terms of employment and 
economy; 
(c) whether any steps have been taken to boost the female LFPR as well as the 
overall LFPR; 
(d) if so, the d
etails thereof; and 
(e) if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT (DR. MANSUKH MANDAVIYA): 
(a) to (e) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (e) The data on Employment and Un employment is collected through Periodic 
Labour Force Survey (PLFS) which is cond ucted by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MoSPI) since 2017-18. The survey period is July to June 
every year.  As per the latest available Annual PLFS Reports, the estimated Labour 
Force Participation Rate (LFP R) on usual status for females of age 15 years and 
above during the years 2017-18 to 2022-23 is having an increasing trend, as per table 
below: 
 
 
[1 August, 2024]
49

 Source: PLFS, MoSPI 
 
The data indicates that the female part icipation in labour force is regularly 
increasing during last six years.  
Employment generation coupled with impr oving employability is the priority of 
the Government. The Government has taken various initiatives/measures to promote 
and increase the participation of women in workforce. 
Government has incorporated a number of provisions in the labour laws for 
equal opportunity and congenial work en vironment for women workers like paid 
maternity leave, child care leave, creche facility, equal wages etc. 
Government is implementing various schemes to boost the female LFPR as 
well as the overall LFPR  like Pradhan Mant ri Mudra Yojana (PMMY), Stand-UP India 
Scheme, Startup India, Prime Minister ’s Employment Generation Programme 
(PMEGP), Women in Science and Engi neering- KIRAN (WISE-KIRAN), SERB-
POWER (Promoting Opportunities for Wome n in Exploratory Research), Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Pt. Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY), Rural Self Employment and 
Training Institutes (RSETIs),  Deen Dayal Antodaya Yoja na-National Urban 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NULM), Production Linked Incentive,  etc. The details of 
various employment generation schemes/  programmes being implemented by the 
Government of India may be seen at 
https://dge.gov.in/dge/schemes_programmes. 
To enhance the employability of female workers, the Government is providing 
training to them through a network of Wome n Industrial Training institutes, National 
Vocational Training Institutes and Regional Vocational Training Institutes. 
Further, Government announced in the Budget 2024-25, the Prime Minister’s 
package of 5 schemes and initiatives to  facilitate employment, skilling and other 
Survey year Labour Force Participation Rate (LFPR) (%) 
Female All persons 
2017-18 23.3 49.8 
2018-19 24.5 50.2 
2019-20 30.0 53.5 
2020-21 32.5 54.9 
2021-22 32.8 55.2 
2022-23 37.0 57.9 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

opportunities for 4.1 crore yout h over a 5-year period with a central outlay of Rs. 2 
lakh crore. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: First supplementary, Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik. 
 
SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK: Sir, the hon. Minister has made an elaborate 
reply but I am afraid that the fundamental issue has not been addressed at all. I would 
like to state here that the UNDP's Huma n Development Report 2023-24 places India 
at the 108
th position out of 193 countries on Ge nder Inequality Index. The National 
Crime Records Bureau in its latest repo rt reveals that crime against women has 
increased by 13 per cent.  In 2022, on an av erage, on every single day, 172 girls went 
missing, 170 girls were kidnapped and 90 wo men were raped. Kidnapping, abduction 
and rape are strong factors that adversely influence women's willingness and ability to 
step out and work. Women's right for safe working environment is a fundamental and 
social justice issue. May I, therefore, request the hon. Minister to kindly let us know 
what the Government is trying to do to provide a safe working environment for women 
in India because without safe working environment, women will not be coming 
forward? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: चेयरमैन सर, माननीय सदÎय ने मिहलाओं का employment बढ़े, उनको 
सुरिक्षत काम करने की opportunity िमले, उसके  बारे मȂ ĢÌन उठाया है।   
माननीय चेयरमैन सर, मȅ आपके  ǎारा माननीय सदÎय को यह अवगत कराना चाहत
 ा हूँ 
िक हमारी सरकार मिहलाओं का employment बढ़ े, मिहलाओं की सुरक्षा बढ़े, उसकी 
सुिनिÌचतता क े िलए हमेशा आगे बढ़ रही है। मȅ आपको यह अवगत कराना चाहता हूँ िक हमारी 
सरकार ने जो efforts िकए हȅ, उनके  म ु तािबक गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ और Ëयवसाियक 
क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ मिहलाओं को सुरक्षा क े साथ उनको employment की opportunity उपलÅध हो, उसके  
बारे मȂ मȅ आपको data क े ǎारा बताना चाहूँगा। 2017 क े बाद भारत मȂ LAPR data generate 
करने की एक ËयवÎथा की गई है, जो यह िक्लयर करता है िक employment कहाँ बढ़ा, िकतना 
बढ़ा और उसमȂ मिहलाओं की भी िकतनी भागीदारी हुई। मȅ आपके  ǎारा माननीय सदÎय को यह 
अवगत कराना चाहूँगा िक 2017-18 मȂ रूरल  क्षेतर् मȂ मिहलाओं की भागीदारी, उनका जो Labour 
Force Participation Rate है, वह 24 परसȂट था,  जो  बढ़कर 41 परसȂट हुआ है, यानी िक 
मिहलाओं को रोजगार क े अवसर ज्यादा उपलÅध हुए हȅ। दूसरा, जो Work Population Ratio है, 
उसमȂ क ु ल िमलाकर िजतने कामगार हȅ, उनमȂ मिहलाओं की भागीदारी िकतनी है? अगर हम इस  
ratio पर जाते हȅ, तो रूरल क्षेतर् मȂ 2017-18 मȂ मिहलाओं का Work Population Ratio 27 परसȂट 
था, जो बढ़कर 40 परसȂट हुआ है। वैसे ही शहरी क्षेतर् मȂ भी वह 43 परस Ȃट था, जो बढ़कर 47 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
51

परसȂट हुआ है। यह यही बताता है िक मिहलाएँ सुरक्षा क े साथ कामकाज मȂ शािमल हो रही हȅ और 
मिहलाएँ अपनी आजीिवका सुिनिÌचत कर रही हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik. 
 
Ǜी मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक: सर, यह बड़ा ही दुभार्ग्यपूणर् है िक माननीय मंतर्ी एक इस तरह का 
िचतर् देश क े सामने रखने की कोिशश कर रहे हȅ िक सब क ु छ अच्छा चल रहा है। अगर दुिनया क े 
Îतर पर देखा जाए, तो हम इस मामले मȂ कई मुÊकȗ से पीछे हȅ और देश क े भीतर भी काम क े 
मामले मȂ पुरुषȗ की तुलना मȂ मिहलाएँ करीब-करीब 44 फीसदी  पीछे ह
ȅ। मȅ बहस मȂ नहीं पड़ना 
चाहता हूँ, लेिकन एक सवाल पूछना चाहता हूँ। हमारे समाज मȂ परंपरागत पित और पत्नी को एक 
Îटीिरयो टाइप रोल मȂ देखा गया है। पित Ĥेड िवनर है और पत्नी होम मेकर है। पह
ले क े मुकाबले 
िपछले क ु छ दशकȗ मȂ िÎथित िनिÌचत तौर
 पर बेहतर हुई है, लेिकन और भी अिधक सुधार करने 
की आवÌयकता है। पुरुष और मिहलाओं क े लेबर फोसर् पािर्टिसपेशन रेट की तफावत को देखते 
हुए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय से यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक क्या सर कार पुरुषȗ 
और मिहलाओं को घर और काम पर बराबरी क े अवसर योजनाबǉ तरीके  से देने पर िवचार कर 
रही है? अगर कर रही है, तो क ै से और नहीं, तो क्यȗ नहीं? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवय
ा: चेयरमैन सर, हमको जो िवरासत िमली थी, हम उस िवरासत को बदलना 
चाहते हȅ और इसिलए ही मिहलाओं को सभी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ employment क े िलए... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी, एक बार बैिठए।  
 माननीय सदÎयगण, जब मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक जी बोल रहे थे, तब Ģितपक्ष क
 े  नेता 
ने इनको कर्ॉस नहीं िकया और वे उस सीट पर ही बैठ गए। यह संसदीय परंपरा है। 1960 मȂ अटल 
िबहारी वाजपेयी जी, जब अध्यक्ष आए, तो वे जहाँ थे, वहीं खड़े रह गए। इस पर क ु छ लोगȗ ने 
आपिǄ की िक जब अध्यक्ष आए, तो आप वहीं खड़े क्यȗ रह गए? तब तत्कालीन ËयवÎथा दी गई 
िक जब अध्यक्ष आते ह
ȅ, तब आप जहाँ हȅ, वहीं खड़े रहȂ। I greatly appreciate your gesture; 
and, I am sure, it will be followed by ev eryone that such a senior Member has re-
stated it.  
 
AN HON. MEMBER: Sir, sixty years of experience! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: More than that, Sir. 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: चेयरमैन सर, मि
हलाओं को पुरुष क े बराबर अवसर िमले, इसके  िलए 
अगर मिहला िकसी सेक्टर मȂ पीछे है, तो उसको उस सेक्टर मȂ आगे आने का ऑपचुर्िनटी िमले, 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

इसके  िलए हमारी सरकार Ģितबǉ है।  इसी सदन, यानी राज्य सभा मȂ मȅने यह भी सुना है िक हम 
मिहलाओं को पािर्लयामȂट मȂ भी ऑपचुर्िनटी दȂगे, असैÇबली मȂ भी ऑपचुर्िनटी दȂगे।  वषș तक यह 
चलता रहा, लेिकन 60 साल मȂ नहीं हुआ। यह मोदी गवनर्मȂट ने पािर्लयामȂट और असैÇबली मȂ 
मिहलाओं को 33 परसȂट ऑपचुर्िनटी देने का भी िबल पािरत िकया है। यह बताता है िक मिहलाओं 
क े Ģित, मिहलाओं क े िवकास क े Ģित, मिहलाएँ सामािजक क्षेतर् मȂ अपना दाियत्व लȂ, मिहलाएँ 
पॉिलिटकल क्षेतर् मȂ अपना दाियत्व लȂ तथा मिहलाओं की रोजगारी स
ुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए हमारी 
सरकार Ģितबǉ है। अगर मिहला कहीं बाहर जाकर कामकाज करना चाहती है, तो इसी बजट मȂ 
उसके  िलए हॉÎटल की ËयवÎथा करना सुिनिÌचत िकया गया है। मिहला सावर्जिनक क्षेतर् मȂ आगे 
आए, खेल क्षेतर् मȂ आगे आए, इसके  िलए भी काम िकया गया है। भूतकाल मȂ कभी मिहल
ाओं की 
Îपेशल लीग नहीं हुआ करती थी। मȅ Îपोट्सर् िमिनÎटर भी हूँ, इसिलए मȅ यह बता रहा हूँ िक आज 
मिहलाओं क े िलए भी मोदी गवनर्मȂट ने Îपेशल लीग करा कर उसको ऑपचुर्िनटी देने का काम 
िकया है। मिहलाओं को बराबरी का हक िमले, इसके  िलए हमारी सरकार की Ģितबǉता है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी, मुक ु ल बालकृ Íण वासिनक जी ने कहा था िक मिहल
ा पिरवार मȂ गृह मंतर्ी 
है।  क्या आप इसको Îवीकार करते हȅ?  मेरे यहाँ Mahila is all in all. …(Interruptions)... No, 
no; in my family, Dr.  Sudesh Dhankhar is in full command. ...(Interruptions)...  मुक ु ल 
जी, सब क ु छ बदल गया है। आपने जो कहा, वह पुरानी बातȂ हȅ।  
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवय
ा: चेयरमैन सर, मȅ कहूँगा िक मिहला हमारे पिरवार की  सÇमाननीय सदÎय 
होती है और हमारे पिरवार की रखेवाल होती है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 3, Shri Milind Murli Deora.  
 
Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवड़ा: सर, मȅ सबसे पहले आपकी अनुमित से यह कहना चाहूँगा िक इस सदन 
क े सभी पुरुष  सांसदȗ का यह कǄर्Ëय बनता है िक भारत की सभी आकांक्षी आवाजहीन मिहलाओं 
की जो समÎया है, हम उनका इस सदन मȂ Ģितिनिधत्व करȂ।  
The Minister, in his reply, has mentioned a very important statistic which I 
would like to highlight through you, Sir. That  is the Female Labour Force Participation 
Rate, which is known as FLFPR. Firstly, I wish to congratulate this Government that i
n 
the last eight years, the number of women in the workforce has increased from 23 per 
cent to 37 per cent. That is something whic h, I think, everyone in this House can 
appreciate. A lot of progress has been made. My limited question, out of concern, is 
that the highest increase of women in the workforce has happened in rural areas 
where in the same period it has gone up from 25 per cent to 42 per cent. Although 
this does not pertain directly to only his Mi nistry but it also entails the role of many 
other ministries, like the Skills Ministry, my question to the hon. Minister, is this: What 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
53

is the Government planning to do to upskill women so that mo re women in urban 
areas enter the workforce? 
 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: चेयरमैन सर, एंÃलॉयमȂट क े िलए समय-समय पर क्षेतर् बदलता रहता है।  
एक समय था जब एगर्ीकÊचर सेक्टर एंÃलॉयमȂट का सबसे बड़ा सेक्टर था। उसमȂ पुरुष और 
मिहला दोनȗ काम करते थे और वहां वे अपनी-अपनी िजÇमेवारी से उत्पादन करके  अपना गुजारा 
चलाते थे। बाद मȂ, services sector डे वलप हुआ, manufacturing sector डेवलप हुआ।  
Manufacturing sector मȂ भी मिहलाओं की भागीदारी सुिनिÌचत होने लगी है और अच्छी तरह से 
आगे बढ़ रही है।  आज देश मȂ क ु ल िमलाकर 30 परसȂट सिर्वस सेक्टर की गर्ोथ है। जब सिर्वस 
सेक्टर 30 परस Ȃट की गर्ोथ से आगे बढ़ी है, तो उसमȂ मिहलाओं की भागीदारी पुरुषȗ क े लगभग 
बराबर जैसी है, क्यȗिक सिर्वस सेक्टर मȂ क ंÃयूटर वेब पर बैठकर काम करना होता है, ऑिफस मȂ 
जाकर बैठ कर काम करना होता है। हम िदÊली और पूरे देश मȂ देखते हȅ िक Ģाइवेट सेक्टर और 
क ंसिंÊटग सेक्टर मȂ मिहलाओं की भागीदारी डे बाय डे बढ़ रही है। जहां वे कामकाज क े िलए 
जाती हȅ, वहां उनको सभी टाइप की सुरक्षा दी जाती है और भारत सरकार की ओर से भी 
मिहलाओं को अपनी आजीिवका और अपने कामकाज क े िलए कई अवसर उपलÅध कराए जाते हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No.4, Ms. Dola Sen. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Thank you, Chairman Sir. मंतर्ी जी, बुरा मत मािनएगा। आपने अभी मुक ु ल 
जी क े सवाल क े जवाब मȂ कहा है िक मोदी जी की गवनर्मȂट मȂ आपने 33 परसȂट आरक्षण क े िलए 
Women Reservation Bill भी पास िकया, लेिकन अभी आप देिखए, बीजेपी की तरफ से 13 
परसȂट मिहलाएं ही एमपीज़ हȅ, जबिक तृणमूल कांगर्ेस की तरफ से 38 परस Ȃट हȅ। बुरा मत 
मािनएगा। Through you, Sir, I want to know from the hon. Minister the details of the 
schemes initiated -- मनसुख जी, िसफर् hypothetical statement से काम नहीं चलेगा -- to 
address India's Female Labour  Force Participation Rate and the State-wise details of 
India's Female Labour Force Participation Rate. हम एक और सवाल जानना चाहते हȅ, जो 
िक बहुत महत्वपूणर् है। कल जब हमने रोड टर्ांसपोटर् िमिनÎटर्ी क े MoS से पूछा, तो उन्हȗने बताया 
िक इधर contractual workers को Îटेट minimum wage िमलती है, लेिकन the law of the 
land ह
ै िक अगर Central Government concerns, like rail, airport, coal, bank, BSNL, oil 
and gas, tower security, National Highway, toll plaza, SAIL हȅ, तो इन सब जगहȗ पर 
Central minimum wage िमलनी चािहए।  
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Put your supplementary. 
 
सुǛी दोला सेन: अगर संसद मȂ बैठकर male labour force क े बारे मȂ Îटेट िमिनमम वेज िमलने 
की बात कोई MoS बोलȂगे, जबिक फीमेÊस को तो अकसर कम ही िमलती है, तो हम चाहते हȅ िक 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

लेबर िमिनÎटर की तरफ से यह एन्Ìयोर िकया जाए िक Central Government concerns मȂ मेल 
या फीमेल, दोनȗ labour force को Central minimum wage िमले।  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. It is a suggestion. 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: चेयरमैन सर, िमिनमम वेज सबसे महत्वपूणर् है।  कोई भी  अपनी 
आजीिवका क े िलए चाहे िजस काम मȂ भी जाता हो, उसमȂ उसके  पिरवार और उसका अच्छी तरह 
से भरण-पोषण हो, िजसके  िलए एक मेक ैिनज्म है जो िमिनमम वेज तय करता है िक उसको 
िकतना िमिनमम
 वेतन िमलना चािहए। इसमȂ कई टाइÃस क े पैरामीटसर् हȅ। उसको िकतना कपड़ा 
चािहए, उसको िकतनी क ैलोरीज़ चािहए, उसको अपने घर चला ने क े िलए िबजली जलानी होती 
है तो उसमȂ िकतनी िबजली लगती है, इन सारे पैरामीटसर् को तय करके  समय-समय पर गवनर्मȂट 
िमिनमम वेज तय करती है और उसका इÇÃलीमȂटेशन हो रहा है। 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Sir, there is a
 silent and indirect discrimination existing in India's 
private job sector, particularly in the IT s ector and service sector.  It has come to my 
attention that during job recruitment, the ma rital status of women is often used as a 
significant criterion. Women who are about to get married frequently lose their job 
prospects. Additionally, women who take maternity leave or other legally ensured 
leave after securing a job face the risk of losing their employment. This discrimination 
contributes to the disparity between the increasing number of educated women and 
their representation in the labour force. Whether the Government has taken notice of 
these discriminatory practices? If not, whether the Government is ready to 
appointment a special commission or committee to study this issue? 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: महोदय, माननीय सदÎय का जो ĢÌन है, उसमȂ दो िवषय हȅ। एक िवषय है 
मिहलाओं को वेतन िमले, और िकतना वेतन िमले। मिहलाओं और पुरुषȗ को वेतन िमलना, 
minimum wage is one thing, दूसरा उसकी िÎकल क े आध
 ार पर होता है। हर Ëयिƪ का वेतन 
एक समान हो, यह ज़रूरी  नहीं है, वैसे ही हर मिहला को एक समान वेतन िमले, यह भी संभव 
नहीं है ...(Ëयवधान)...  
Ǜी सभापित: आप माइक क े ऊपर से पेपर हटा लीिजए, आवाज़ साफ आएगी। 
डा. मनसुख मांडिवया: ठीक है, सर। मिहलाओं को जब काम करना ह
ै, तो उनकी िÎकल क े 
आधार पर उनको वेतन िमले, यह एक बात है। दूसरा यह िक उसके  पार एक round reply नहीं हो 
सकता, जैसे कोई मिहला Ģेग्नȂट  हो, तो उसका काम करने का अिधकार है, ल ेिकन वह कौन से 
यूिनट मȂ काम कर रही है, िकसी इंडिÎटर्यल यूिनट मȂ काम कर रही है, िकसी सिर्वस सेक्टर मȂ 
काम कर रही है, या कोई अन्य काम कर रही है, उसके  काम का Îपेिसिफके शन बहुत आवÌयक 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
55

को उसकी pregnancy क े दरिमयान कोई नुकसान हो, यिद ऐसे िकसी Îथान पर उसे काम करना हो, तो 
वह वहां काम नहीं कर सकती है। कोई सिर्वस सेक्टर है, तो वहां उसे काम करने क े िलए कोई िदक्कत 
नहीं होनी चािहए। इसमȂ अगर िकसी जगह पर कोई issue create होता है, तो सरकार उसमȂ मध्यÎथता 
करती है और मदद भी करती है।                                                                                      
 
Ǜी सभापित: क्वेÌचन नंबर 110. Shri Sandosh Kumar P; not present. Supplementaries, please. 
 
*Q. No. 110. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Vacancies of Judges in courts of Kerala 
 
*110.  SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: Will the Minister of LAW AND JUSTICE be pleased to 
state: 
  
(a) the number of vacancies of Ju dges in the High Court of Kerala, District Courts and Sub-
ordinate Courts as of 31st March, 2024; 
(b) whether Government has taken any steps to fill the vacant posts in the judiciary in Kerala; 
(c) if so, the details thereof; and 
(d) if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (SHRI ARJUN RAM 
MEGHWAL): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) The Status of vacancies of Judges in Kerala is as under: 
S. No. Name of Court Vacancy as on 31.03.2024 
1 High Court 06 
2 District and Subordinate Courts  55* 
*Excludes 3 non – judicial deputation posts in the cad re of District and Sessions Judge based on the new 
policy of High Court restricting deputation to such posts. 
 
(b) to (d) The Judges of High Courts are appointed under Article 217 and 224 of the 
Constitution of India and according to the pr ocedure laid down in the Memorandum of 
Procedure (MoP) prepared in 1998 pursua nt to Supreme Court Judgement of  
October 6, 1993 (Second Judges case) read with their Advisory Opinion of October 28, 1998 
(Third Judges case). 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

October 6, 1993 (Second Judges case) read with their Advisory Opinion of October 
28, 1998 (Third Judges case). 
 As per the MoP, the responsibility for in itiation of proposals for appointment of 
Judges in the High Court vests with the Chie f Justice of the concerned High Court, in 
consultation with two senior-most puisne Judges of the High Court. For 
appointments of judge to the High Court,  under the MoP, the views of concerned 
State Government is also obtained. The recommendations also have to be considered 
in the light of such other reports as may be  available to the Government in respect of 
the names under consideration. The recomme ndations of the High Court Collegium, 
the State Government and the Government  of India are then forwarded to the 
Supreme Court Collegium (SCC) for advice. Only those persons are appointed as 
Judge of High Courts whose names have been recommended by the SCC. 
Appointment of Judges in Supreme Cour t and High Courts is a continuous, 
integrated and collaborative process betw een the Executive and the Judiciary. It 
requires consultation and a pproval from various constitu tional authorities both at 
State and Central level. While every effort is made to fill up the existing vacancies 
expeditiously, vacancies of Judges in High Courts do keep on arising on account of 
retirement, resignation or elevation of Judges and also due to increase in the strength 
of Judges.  
The filling up of vacant positions in th e District Courts of  the country is the 
responsibility of the High Courts and State Governments concerned. As per the 
Constitutional framework, in exercise of powers conferred under proviso to Article 309 
read with Articles 233 and 234 of the Constitution, the respective State Government in 
consultation with the High Court frames the rules and regulations regarding the issues 
of appointment and recruitment of Judicial Officers in the respec tive State Judicial 
Service. In some States, the respectiv e High Court undertakes the recruitment 
process, whereas in other States, the High Court does it in consultation with the 
State Public Service Commission. The Hon’ ble Supreme Court vide judicial order 
passed in January 2007 in the Malik Mazhar Sultan case, has stipulated certain 
timelines which are to be followed by the States and the respective High Courts for 
initiating the recruitment process of judges in subordinate courts.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No.3, Dr. John Brittas. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, my supplementary to the Ministry is that  Kerala Assembly 
has passed unanimous resolution twice for a Bench of the High Court in Trivandrum. 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
57

That is the capital city of Kerala. The neighbouring States like Tamil Nadu and 
Karnataka... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, focus on the question. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: So, my questi on is this. As there are multiple Benches, even in 
neighbouring States, the capital city is deprived of a High Court Bench.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have made your point. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Will the Government take initiative in ensuring that? 
 
Ǜी अजुर्न राम मेघवाल: सभापित महोदय, यह जो ĢÌन संख्या 110 है। यह क ेरल हाई कोटर् मȂ 
िकतनी वैक Ȃसी है और क ेरल Îटेट मȂ Subordinate Courts मȂ िकतनी वैक Ȃसीज़ हȅ, उससे संबंिधत 
है। िफर भी इन्हȗने पूछा िक क्या क ेरल मȂ िंĢिसपल बȂच क े अलावा कोई और बȂच Îथािपत हो 
सकती है? इस मामले मȂ सर आपको भी पता है िक संबंिधत हाई कोटर् जब इसमȂ exercise करता 
है, िफर राज्यपाल की राय, मुख्य म
ंतर्ी की राय और सबकी राय आती है, उसके  बाद इसे सुĢीम 
कोटर् तय करता है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Su
pplementary No.4; Shri Haris Beeran. 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN: Sir, the question is about the appointment of Judges in the 
High Court and the Subordinate Court. As per the Supreme Court ruling in 1993 in the 
Second Judge's Case, it is a Collegium System which appoints the Judges. Now, 
when the recommendation of the High Co urt comes to the Supreme Court, the 
Supreme Court Collegium recommends it to the Central Government and the Central 
Government appoints the judges . Now, the Central Government can send the 
recommendation back to the Supreme Court collegium. But, the judgment specifically 
states that once it is sent back and the Supreme Court reiterates it back to the Central 
Government, then it is mandatory that you have to appoint. Sir, you have been a 
lawyer, and I am also a lawyer.  I have se en you as a senior lawyer in the Supreme 
Court running from one court to another. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please ask the supplementary.   
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN: Yes, Sir. There are si x vacancies in the High Court as per the 
statement of the hon. Minister. There are two cases of recommendations, which were 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

made by the High Court, and the Supreme Court Collegium also had approved those 
particular recommendations and sent it to the Central Government. * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What is your supplementary? 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN: These two recommendat ions have already been made to the 
Central Government. The Union Government is not appointing those judges.  Not only 
that, those… 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please be brief. You have asked your question. 
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN: Just 30 seconds. 
* another Judge, another gentleman who 
has been reiterated, also has not been appoin ted. My question is: What is the reason 
for non-appointment of Judges despite the recommendation?   
 
Ǜी अजुर्न राम मेघवाल: उपसभापित महोदय, यह क ेरल हाई कोटर् से संबंिधत ĢÌन था। माननीय 
सदÎय ने ĢÌन िकया है, तो मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक हाई कोटर् की टोटल sanctioned strength 
है, वह 1,114 है।   उसमȂ से 754 वैक े न्सीज़ भरी हुई हȅ। अब जो खाली वैक ेन्सीज़ हȅ,  माननीय 
सदÎय हाई कोटर् जजेज़ की बात कर रहे हȅ, तो 360 है।   205 नाम अलग-अलग हाई कोट्सर् 
collegium से हमारे पास आए हȅ और वे िवचाराधीन ह
ȅ और 155 वैक ेन्सीज़ क े िलए अभी तक हाई 
कोटर् स
े नाम ही नहीं आए हȅ। वैसे ही ये िकसी जज का नाम नहीं ले सकते, िफर क ेरल मȂ इन्हȗने 
जो कहा है, जो वैक ेन्सी है, उसके  तहत हमारे पास जो Ģपोजल पȂिंडग है, proposal for 
appointment of four Judicial Officers as Ju d
g e s  o f  K e r a l a   H i g h  C o u r t  r e c e i v e d  i n  
Department of Justice on 4 th June, 2024. And, the second proposal has two names, 
one advocate and one judicial officer, recommended by the Supreme Court Collegium 
on 10.10.2023 and 16.04.2024 respectively. वह अंडर क ंसीडरेशन है। एक Ģपोजल, जो 
क ेरल हाई कोटर् से संबंिधत है, for appointment of Chief Justice of Kerala High Court, 
recommended by the Supreme Court Collegium of India on 11th July, 2024. ये सब अंडर 
क ंसीडरेशन हȅ, जÊदी इसमȂ िनणर्य िलए जाएंगे।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎय ने जो जज का नाम िलया है, वह िरकॉडर् मȂ नहीं जाएगा। Dr. 
Sasmit Patraji; fifth and last supplementary. 
                                                            
* Expunged  as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
59

DR. SASMIT PATRA: Sir, my specific question to hon. Minister is that Supreme Court 
collegium and its workings, which he has referred to in his reply... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Question is on vacancy of Judges in High Courts in 
Kerala.  
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA: Absolutely, Sir. So, I am  referring to primarily appointment of 
Judges in High Courts specifically. It was felt that the Supreme Court and its 
appointments at the Supreme Court throug h the Collegium has been 100 per cent. 
There are no vacancies.  But, when it co mes to High Courts, the Collegium, though 
sits several times, it is seen that regardin g appointment of Judges in the High Courts, 
the disposal rate is not so much as compar ed to that which is taken up. So, is this 
matter being taken up with the Collegium, th rough the hon. Chief Justice, at times, 
with the Government to see expeditious appointment of High Court Judges, where as 
compared to the Supreme Court, 100 per cent filling of vacancy has been done? 
 
Ǜी अजुर्न राम मेघवाल: महोदय, यह क्वेÌचन से ज्यादा सुझाव है। जैसा मȅने पहले का िक 1,114 
sacntioned strength है, िजसमȂ 754 वैक ेन्सीज हमारी भरी हुई हȅ।  360 हाई कोट्सर् मȂ जो 
वैक ेन्सीज़ हȅ, उसमȂ हमारे पास 205 नाम आए हȅ और 155 क े नाम नहीं आए हȅ। इनका सुझाव
 यह 
है िक High Court collegium जब नाम भेजȂ, तो एक Ģिकर्या है िक वैक ेन्सी होने क े छह महीने 
पहले भेजȂ, तो वह िवषय हम सुĢीम कोटर् क े सामने कन्सÊटेशन क े िलए ले जाएंगे। आपका सुझाव 
अच्छा है।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Five supplementaries are over.
 Now, Q.No.111. Shri C.Ve. 
Shanmugam - not present. Any supplementaries?  
 
*Q. No. 111. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Allocation of budget for North East 
 
*111. Shri C. Ve. Shanmugam: Will the Minister of DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH 
EASTERN  REGION be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether it is a fact that 10 per cent  of every Ministry’s budget is allocated to 
this Ministry;  
(b)  if so, the details of such allocation for the current year; and 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

(c)  the details of the f unds spent on the development of North-Eastern Region 
during the last three years? 
 
THE MINISTER OF DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN REGION (SHRI 
JYOTIRADITYA M. SCINDIA): (a) to (c) A Statement is placed on the Table of the 
House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) The expenditure of 10 per cen t of Gross Budgetary Support of Central 
Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes fo r North Eastern Region is monitored by 
the Ministry of Development of North Ea stern Region. The Budget Estimate for 
financial year 2024-25 for 55 non-exempted Ministries/ Departments is Rs. 100893.20 
crore. The details of funds spent on the development of North-Eastern Region during 
last three years is at Annexure. 
 
Annexure 
 
Details of the funds spent on the development of North Eastern Region during the last 
three years is tabulated below: 
 (Rs. in Crore) 
Sl. Financial Year Revised 
Estimate Actual Expenditure 
1 2021-22 68,440 70,874 
2 2022-23 72,540 82,691 
3 2023-24 91,802 1,02,749 
 Total 232,782 256,314 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: First supplementary. Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba.  
 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA: Si r, my supplementary question to the 
hon. Minister is: How many development wo rks or projects have been taken up by 
the DoNER Ministry in the last three years in the North East region and details of 
works or projects thereof.    
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
61

SHRI JYOTIRADITYA M. SCINDIA: Sir, I woul d like to thank the hon. Member for this 
question.  Most importantly, Sir, the North- East Region was always seen as the last 
point of India. The Prime Minister, over the last decade, has turned this concept on its 
head and made the North-East Region the first point of India. The North East, and 
especially, Arunachal Pradesh, along with  all the other states, occupies a very 
important part of India's historical, cultural, and now economic agenda going 
forward. And with that notion in mind, th rough you, I would like to place some facts 
before the House. Our cumulative expendit ure in the North East over the last ten 
years has been 5.22 lakh crore of rupees against an allocation of 5.15 lakh crore of 
rupees. Never before in the history of in dependent India over the last 75 years has 
such a large allocation been made to the North East. Even in the tenure of this 
Government, the Revised Estimates, from 2014- 2015, from 27,53 9 crore of rupees, 
last year, this has been increased to 91, 802 crore of rupees, which is an increase of 
almost 3.5 times over a ten year period. And so has the actual expenditure gone up to 
3.5 times. The last three years have seen an exceptional expenditure rate in India. 
These figures are 103 per cent in 2021-22, 113 per cent in 2022-23, and 112 per cent in 
2023-24. Sir, last year has been historical because over one lakh crore of rupees has 
been spent purely in the North-East by Go vernment of India. That is the importance 
that the Government of India attaches to the development in the North-East. As far as 
DoNER is concerned, we have 271 projects that have been sanctioned in the North-
East under our five schemes, with a total allocation of close to about 5,666 crore of 
rupees in the last year, and almost 20,500 cror e of rupees over the last 10 years in the 
North-East Region.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Next supplementary. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak. 
 
SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK: Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, through you, I 
would like to ask the hon. Minister as to when and why the North-East Special 
Infrastructure Development Scheme was started and the amount allocated to 
Nagaland under NESIDS, NEC and PM-DevINE for the current year.  
 
SHRI JYOTIRADITYA M. SCINDIA: Sir, the hon. Member ha s touched upon an 
important topic. NESIDS has two parts.  There is NESIDS-Roads, and there is 
NESIDS-Other Than Road Infrastructure. So, there is NESIDS-Roads and NESIDS-
OTRI. Nagaland has had 19 projects under NESIDS- OTRI that have been sanctioned 
at a cost of 410 crore of rupees and 15 projects under NESIDS-Roads that have been 
sanctioned at a cost of 801.6 crore of ru pees. It comes to a total of 34 projects 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

totalling close to 1,211 crore of rupees under  NESIDS. In addition to that, under PM-
DevINE, an additional two projects worth Rs. 312 crores have been sanctioned. And a 
total allocation has been done to Nagaland  of close to 201 projects totalling almost 
Rs. 2,200 crores over the last ten years.    
                           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, the Question Hour is over. Hon. Members, 
the House will be adjourned for lunch today from 1.00 p.m. to 2.00 p.m. 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
] 
 
The House then adjourned for lunch at one of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled after lunch at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.  
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, on the basi s of the views expressed by leaders of 
various parties in the Business Advisory Commi ttee, one of the Ministries out of the 
remaining two to be selected for discu ssion would be the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy.  Discussion will be initia ted by All India Trinamool Congress. This 
discussion would commence on conclusion of discussion on the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare. 
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: Sir...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes.  Mr. Derek. 
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: Sir, we have taken up two Ministries.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We will discuss that in the Chamber.   
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: Sir, just one point.  
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
63

MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay.  
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: It is about my party. I cannot speak for others. Home Ministry 
is something we must be discussing, Sir.  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Got your point. We will discuss it.   
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: Sir, I will make a request to you. We are Council of States.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Got your point. 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: Sir, please allow a discussion on the Home Ministry to be 
taken up. 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING  
AND URBAN AFFAIRS - Contd. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Further discussion on the Working of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs. I will now call upon the Memb ers whose names have been received for 
participation in the discussion. 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश( कनार्टक): सर, क ैिबनेट मंतर्ी कहाँ हȅ? 
Ǜी सभापित: आप यह नहीं कह रहे हȅ िक वे absent हȅ, बिÊक कह रहे हȅ िक वे कहाँ हȅ। I will find 
out.   
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, that is the convention.   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy. He is not present.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Dr. Fauzia Khan. Not present. 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra):  Sir, I am present. 
 Further discussion continued from 31.07.2024. 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: I was also surprised becaus e normally you are present. I am so 
sorry.   Dr. Fauzia Khan, you have always adhered to the best of decorum. You have 
five minutes. 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, the tradition is that a Cabinet Minister should be 
present. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have noted your point.  And it is a well-placed point. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, Urban Development in the Budget Speech was kept in the 
fifth priority. However, given the crumbling na ture of existing urban infrastructure, the 
need of the hour is a complete urban reva mp. There has been significant increase in 
the large cities in India, with 53 cities now boasting of populations exceeding one 
million. Hype and projections of progress is one thing and realities on the ground is 
another. The Government hasn't been able  to handle this dramatic increase as 
evidenced by the increasingly failing urban infrastructure threatening public safety. 
Despite an almost 58 per cent increase in th e budget of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs since 2019-20, urban areas, partic ularly tier 2 cities, continue to grapple 
with issues such as shortages in ho using, encroachments increasing, slums 
expanding, environment degrading, garbage disposal missing, electricity hiccuping, 
sanitation sighing, healthcare weeping, water supply wailing, traffic sobbing, pollution 
choking, dust flying, stray animals prowlin g and substandard infrastructure collapsing 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, Cabinet Minister! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have taken serious note of it.   
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, these are the issues that we are grappling with. 
Consequently, the common city citizen is in  anguish and despair. Implementation of 
policy decisions by the local self-government bodies also is an issue. For instance, 
rainwater harvesting was ma de mandatory while giving permission for new 
construction, considering the rapidly deplet ing groundwater. Implementation is zero. 
Why don't we have a mechanism to audi t this before certification of building 
completion? This is not done. Many have spoken about Smart Cities Mission, which 
is a failed mission. Reduction in allocation by 70 per cent is a clear  reflection of its 
pathetic performance. There are eight citi es from Maharashtra under the scheme. Till 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
65

February 23, seven of these eight cities ha d not been completed, with the lowest 
completions being in Pune, which is 26 per cent; in Nagpur, it is 15 per cent; in 
Kalyan-Dombivli, it is ten per cent. Rather  than being transformed into models of 
modern urban living, these cities continue to grapple with basic issues, failing to live 
up to the smart city labels. The AMRUT scheme was aimed to provide critical 
infrastructure like drainage facilities. Near ly a decade later, our cities are far from 
regenerated. Instead, they are in a worse state than ever before.  
Sir, the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana is also a failed scheme. Mass rail transit 
systems and metro projects constitute abou t 30 per cent of the Budget. According to 
the 18th Standing Committee report, the progress of metro projects in many cities is 
alarmingly slow, both physically and fina ncially. The Committee has noted a troubling 
trend of announcing metro projects without proper feasibility studies, resulting in poor 
ridership and a wasteful expenditure of va luable resources. The Nagpur Metro is a 
prime example of these failings. A CAG report  has highlighted several irregularities, 
including lack of transparen cy in tender evaluations. Contracts were awarded to 
bidders who did not submit essential documents, and rates were increased after 
contracts were awarded. Major works were  handed out as additional tasks to 
contractors already involved in other projects, bypassing proper tendering processes. 
In a glaring instance of poor planning, th e location of the new airport station was 
chosen despite sparse population and poor accessibility, resulting in an average daily 
ridership of only 47 passeng ers over 18 months against 5,474. Sir, these instances 
point out to a failure.  Sir, as my time is r unning out, at the end, I will only say that the 
Ministry has to write the destinies of cities. 
 
"िलखना नहीं आता तो मेरी जान पढ़ा कर, 
हो जाएगी तेरी मुिÌकल आसान पढ़ा कर, 
पढ़ने क े िलए तुझको अगर क ु छ न िमले,  
तो चेहरȗ पर िलखे ददर् क े उन्वान पढ़ा कर"। 
ﻟﮑﻬﻨﺎ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺍٓﺗﺎ ﺗﻮ ﻣﻴﺮی ﺟﺎﻥ ﭘﮍﻫﺎﮐﺮ،  
ﮨﻮﺟﺎﺋﯽ ﮔﯽ ﺗﻴﺮی ﻣﺸﮑﻞ ﺍٓﺳﺎﻥ ﭘﮍﻫﺎﮐﺮ،  
ﭘﮍﻫﻨﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺗﺠﻬ ﮐﻮ ﺍﮔﺮ ﮐﭽﻬ ﻧہ ﻣﻠﮯ،  
ﺗﻮ ﭼﮩﺮﻭں ﭘﺮ ﻟﮑﻬﮯ ﺩﺭﺩ ﮐﮯ ﻋﻨﻮﺍﻥ ۔ﭘﮍﻫﺎﮐﺮ  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel; five minutes.  
 
                                                            
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल (िबहार):  आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ हाउिंसग 
एंड अबर्न अफे यसर् पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका ǭदय से आभार Ëयƪ करता 
हूं।  महोदय, देश अभी अमृतकाल से गुजर रहा है। इस अमृत काल क े समय मȂ आदरणीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी, Ǜǉेय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश िवकास की नई ऊ ंचाइयȗ को छू  रहा है। वह िदन दूर 
नहीं जब क ु छ ही वषș मȂ भारत िवÌव की तीस री बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन जाएगा।   
 महोदय, वैसे तो इस बजट मȂ माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने देश क े सभी क्षेतर्ȗ रेलवे, िशक्षा, 
ÎवाÎथ्य, क ृिष, रक्षा एवं अन्य सभी िवभागȗ क े िलए उिचत रािश की ËयवÎथा की है, लेिकन उन्हȗने 
शहरी िवकास क े िलए भी इस बजट मȂ बहुत से Ģाव
धान िकए हȅ। महोदय, मȅ िबहार जैसे िपछड़े 
राज्य से आता हूं।  भारत की अिधकांश आबादी गांव मȂ रहती है। महोदय, अभी क े समय मȂ लोग 
गांव मȂ तो रहते हȅ, लेिकन उनकी इच्छा
 होती है, आकांक्षा होती है िक उनका एक आवास शहरȗ मȂ 
भी हो।  इसके  पीछे की वजह है, लोगȗ मȂ जागरूकता  लाना।   
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 महोदय, आज क े समय मȂ सभी गरीब, िकसान, मजदूर चाह ते हȅ िक वे अपने बच्चȗ की 
पढ़ाई शहरȗ मȂ करȂ, िजससे िक िडिÎटर्क्ट टाउन मȂ आबादी बढ़ती जा रही है। इसिलए मैटर्ो िसटी 
क े साथ-साथ छोटे शहरȗ की बुिनयादी सुिवधाओं मȂ सुधार करने की जरूरत  ह ै और छोटे शहरȗ 
का िवÎतारीकरण िकया जाना भी अपेिक्षत है। महोदय, इन्हीं सब चीज़ȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए 
हमारे क Ȃ दर् की नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने बड़े शहरȗ क े साथ-साथ छोटे शहरȗ क े 
इन्ģाÎटर्क्चर को भी दुरुÎत करने की िदशा मȂ Ëयापक पहल की है।   
महोदय, देश क े िवका
स क े िलए िबहार क े सÇपूणर् िवकास हेतु क Ȃ दर् सरकार की ओर से 
बजट मȂ िबहार को िविभन्न योजनाओं क े तहत 58,900 करोड़ रुपय े की बड़ी सौगात िमली है, 
इसके  िलए मȅ पूरे िबहार की जनता की ओर से माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को ǭदय 
से धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं। उनकी वजह से भागलपुर क े पीरपȅती पावर Ģोजेक्ट क े िलए िबहार क े 
िलए 21 हजार करोड़ का आवंटन हुआ है।  िबहार मȂ सड़क Ģोजेक्ट्स क े िलए 26 हजार करोड़ क े 
पैक े ज का ऐलान हुआ है। इसमȂ पटना-पूिर्णया क े िलए एक्सĢेसवे बनेगा, बक्सर-भागलपुर क े िलए 
एक्सĢेसवे बनेगा, बोध गया-वैशाली क े िलए एक्सĢेसवे बनेगा, बक्सर मȂ गंगा नदी पर दो लेन का 
अितिरƪ पुल बनेगा, िजससे हमारे िबहार की जो गर्ेड-2 और गर्ेड-3 िसटीज़ हȅ, वहाँ का बहुत 
िवकास होगा।  महोदय, इतना ही नहीं, िबहार मȂ नए मेिडकल कॉलेज, िजनमȂ मुख्य रूप  से दो 
एÇस, एक पटना और एक दरभंगा मȂ बन रहे हȅ। कई एयरपोट्सर् का भी िवकास होगा, जैसे दरभंगा 
मȂ नया एयरपोटर् बन कर तैयार हो चुका है। महोदय, अब िबहार मȂ नए Îटेिडयमȗ की भी Îथापना 
होगी।  इस बजट क े माध्यम से हमारी सरकार िबहार, झारखंड, पिÌचमी बंगाल और ओिडशा क े 
सवार्ंगीण िवकास क े िलए 'पूवȘदय योजना' तैयार करेगी। अमृतसर-कोलकाता कॉिरडोर क े िलए 
गया हेड ऑिफस होगा।  िबहार मȂ पयर्टन को बढ़ाने पर जोर िदया गया है।  काशी िवÌवनाथ की 
तज़र् पर िबहार मȂ महाबोिध कॉिरडोर, नालंदा का सÃतऋिष कॉिरडोर और उसके  साथ ही 
राजगीर बड़े ट ूिरÎट सȂटसर् बनȂगे। महोदय, नालंदा मȂ पयर्टन का िवकास होगा। नालंदा यूिनविर्सटी 
क े िवकास क े िलए भी बजट मȂ Ģावधान है और दुिनया की सबसे पुरानी यूिनविर्सटी, नालंदा का 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
67

पूणर् िवकास करने से िबहार शरीफ और उसके  आसपास क े शहरȗ का िवकास होने वाला है। 
सीतामढ़ी शहर, जो माँ जानकी की जन्मÎथली है, वहाँ भी डेवलपमȂट िकया जाएगा।  
 महोदय, क Ȃदर्ीय िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी ने क Ȃदर्ीय बजट 2024-25 पेश 
िकया, िजसमȂ देश को ठोस िवकास और Ëयापक समृिǉ की ओर ले जाने क े िलए सरकार की 
Ģितबǉता पर जोर िदया गया है। इस बजट का Ģमुख क Ȃ दर् िंबदु शहरी िवकास है, िजसमȂ आवास, 
िकराए की सुिवधा, जल आपूिर्त, सुरक्षा, रेहड़ी-पटरी वालȗ क े िलए सहायता मȂ सुधार क े उǈेÌय 
से िविभन्न पहलȗ क े माध्यम से ध्यान िदया गया है। क Ȃदर्ीय बजट 2024-25 मȂ गर्ामीण और शहरी, 
दोनȗ क्षेतर्ȗ को शािमल करते हुए पीएम आवास योजना क े तहत 3 करोड़ अितिरƪ घरȗ क े िनमार्ण 
क े िलए फ ं ड आवंटन की घोषणा की गई है।  इसमȂ पीएम आवास (शहरी) योजना 2.0 भी शािमल 
है, िजसका उǈेÌय 10 लाख करोड़ क े िनवेश क े साथ-साथ एक करोड़ शहरी गरीब और मध्यम 
वगर् क े पिरवारȗ क े आवास की जरूरतȗ को पूरा करना है। सरकार की इस पहल मȂ मदद करने क े 
िलए अगले 5 वषș मȂ 2.2 लाख करोड़ रुपए  की क Ȃदर्ीय सहायता रािश Ģदान की जाएगी। इसके  
अितिरƪ इस योजना मȂ िकफायती दरȗ पर ऋण सुिवधा क े िलए Åयाज सिÅसडी Ģदान की जाएगी। 
अमृत 2.0 योजना क े अंतगर्त िबहार मȂ 64 पिरयोजनाओं को अनुमोिदत िकया गया है। ...(समय की 
घंटी)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप conclude करȂ। 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: सर, बस 30 सेक ं ड मȂ मȅ conclude करता हूँ।  
 इसमȂ 8,481 करोड़ रुपए  की रािश Ģदान की गई है, िजससे मुख्य रूप  से िबहार क े अमृत 
शहर औरंगाबाद, बेगूसराय, भागलपुर, भोजपुर, बक्सर, दरभंगा, गया, जहानाबाद, किटहार, 
िकशनगंज ... ...(समय की घंटी)... बस, 30 सेक ं ड दे दीिजए, सर। बड़ी मुिÌकल से समय िमलता 
है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, शंभू जी। माननीय चेयरमैन ने इतना ही समय िदया है। Please 
conclude. 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: सर, मȅ 30 सेक ं ड मȂ conclude कर रहा हूँ। आज मुझे समय नहीं िमल पाया, 
लेिकन मȅ इतना कहना चाहूँगा िक इस बजट मȂ हमारे िबहार क े शहरी िवकास क े िलए जो Ģावधान 
हमारी क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने िकया है, मȅ उसके  िलए धन्यवाद देता हूँ। आज उसकी वजह से िबहार मȂ 
Îमाटर् िसटीज़ डेवलप हो रही हȅ और आने वाले समय मȂ िबहार भी एक िवकिसत Ģांत बनेगा। जय 
िहन्द! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy, you have five minutes. 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, I would like to bring to the notice 
of the hon. Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs, through your good self, four 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

important issues.  I would confine only to the subject.  The first issue is, the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh headed by Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy Garu in the last 
five years has decided to construct a state- of-the-art 76.9 kilometres light metro rail 
facility in Visakhapatnam as per the provisions of the A.P. Re-organization Act, which 
has been drafted by Jairam Ramesh ji, who is busy in…  Derek ji, please do not disturb 
him. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please address the Chair. He is listening.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY:  Sir, he has au thored the A.P. Re-o rganization Act and 
he has stipulated in the Act that metro ra il has to be constructed in Visakhapatnam. 
And, when he has drafted th e Act, he has loosely drafted in such a manner that he 
has used the words, 'May', and 'If possibl e'. I have not seen an Act where the Act 
says, 'If possible' and 'May'. It has al ways been 'Shall' or 'Should'. But, 
unfortunately, he has drafted and then that is being taken advantage of.   
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN: Who drafted it? 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: He has drafted it. That is what he has claimed.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He has already taken the name. Derekji, वे नाम ले चुक े हȅ। 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir, Rs. 24,000 crores was allotted for metro rail projects 
by the Central Government in the recent Budget. Unfortunately, no allocation has 
been made and no approvals have been  granted for Visakhapatnam Metro Rail 
Project. In fact, we are welcoming the me tro rail project in Lucknow. At the same 
time, our request is to consider, as per the A.P. Reorganization Act, the construction 
of metro rail project. In fact, I request my fr iend not to commit this type of errors in 
drafting the Act.   
 The second issue which I would like to bring to your notice is that urban 
housing shortage across India was at 1.8 crore houses for the period  2012-2017, 
according to the Ministry data, 95 per cent of  this shortage was felt in the lower 
income households.  What is the impact of this? The impact of this is the growth of 
slum. In fact, it is very unfortunate for the Union Government because the last Census 
was in 2011 and it is long over-due.  I request the hon. Minister, Yadav ji, to 
immediately take it up and then start by enumeration. As per the 2011 Census, there 
are one lakh-plus slums in the country, home to 1.3 crore households. Slum 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
69

households constitute 17 per cent of the urban population. I request the hon. Minister 
of Housing and Urban Affairs to immediately address these problems and strengthen 
the Slum Clearance Boards by giving adeq uate funds to the Clearance Boards and 
build multi-storied buildings in the slum ar eas so that the problem of slums can be 
addressed.   
 Then, Sir, waterlogging. Why is this wa terlogging there? In fact, when you had 
adjourned the House at 7.30 p.m. yesterday, and when I went out, there was knee-
deep water in the Parliament itself and ...(Interruptions)... This is because de-silting 
has not taken place and the infrastructure that has been created about hundred years 
back, we are still using it and we have not made any improvements. I request the 
hon. Minister to immediately address the pr oblem of drainage and infrastructure right 
now. In fact, centuries back, even during  the period of Indus civilization, five 
thousand years back, there was a very g ood infrastructure, very good drainage 
infrastructure. When we had that type of infrastructure, I really don't understand as to 
why the infrastructure, particularly, in respect  of drainage is much inferior than what 
we had. I appeal to the Government to impr ove the urban planning of major cities in 
India.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  (Time-bell rings.) 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY: Sir, I will come to  the last point. Now, the DAY-National 
Urban Livelihoods Mission provid es shelter with essential services to the homeless in 
urban areas. The allocation has been reduce d to Rs. 300 crores from Rs. 523 crores 
in the Revised Estimates. I request the hon. Minister to kindly look into the issues of 
housing, particularly, slum areas where poor and downtrodden are living and address 
it immediately. Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Vijayasai Reddy ji. माननीय Ǜी रामजी। आपके  5 
िमनट हȅ। 
 
Ǜी रामजी (उǄर Ģदेश): मान्यवर, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे इस important issue पर 
बोलने का अवसर िदया। साथ ही, मȅ अपनी पाटीर् की मुिखया बहन क ुमारी मायावती जी का भी 
धन्यवाद और आभार Ëयƪ करता ह
ूँ।  
 मान्यवर, आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय अपने आप मȂ एक बहुत बड़ा Ģािधकरण है।   
1992 से पहले इसके  पास बहुत सारे संवैधािनक पॉवसर् थे। पूरे देश क े अंदर Îवच्छता, हाउिंसग 
डेवलपमȂट, आिद सारे काम इन्हीं क े पास था। जलापूिर्त भी इन्हीं क े पास था, ल
ेिकन 1992 मȂ 74वȂ 
संिवधान संशोधन क े बाद कई सारी पावसर् इनके  हाथ से िनकल गईं और इनके  हाथ मȂ Ãलािंनग 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

की पावर आई। Îवच्छता, जलापूिर्त, हाउिंसग, आिद की Ãलािंनग की पावर आई। इन सबका 
िनगरानी करने का काम तथा इनमȂ समन्वय Îथािपत करने का काम इनके  पास आया।   
 मान्यवर, अभी सरकार इसमȂ तमाम तरह की योजनाएँ लेकर आईं, िजनमȂ ' Ģधान मंतर्ी 
आवास योजना', 'अमृत 2.0', 'Îवच्छ भारत अिभयान', आिद तमाम तरह की योजनाएँ ह ȅ, लेिकन 
इन चीजȗ मȂ एक खास बात देखने को िमली। मȅ िदÊली क े संदभर् मȂ बताना चाहता हूँ। जब 74वाँ 
संिवधान संशोधन हुआ, तब िदÊली राजधानी पिरक्षेतर् और यूिनयन टेिरटरीज़ मȂ यह पावर इसी 
िवभाग क े पास रही तथा अन्य राज्यȗ म
Ȃ यह अिधकार राज्य को दे दी गई िक नगर िनगम, नगर 
िनकाय और नगर पािलकाओं क े पास ही सारी Ãलािंनग की जाएगी। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक अभी िदÊली मȂ जो टर्ेजडी हुई, वह भी आपके  सामने है, क ु छ िछपा नहीं है। कल भी 
रात मȂ बािरश हुई है। कल की बािरश क े बाद िदÊल
ी समुंदर की तरह बन गया और आज भी एक 
न्यूज़ मȂ आया िक नाले मȂ िगरने से एक माँ और बेटे की मौत हो गई। इस तरह से तमाम तरह की 
िदक्कतȂ हȅ। मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक सरकार जो Ãलािंनग बनाती ह
ै, उसको इिÇÃलमȂट करना 
जरूरी है। जमीनी Îतर पर उसका इिÇÃलमȂट ेशन हो रहा है या नहीं हो रहा है - यह देखना भी 
जरूरी है। इसमȂ कोई संदेह नहीं है िक सरकार Ãलािंनग बना कर भेजती है, लेिकन उस Ãलािंनग 
को वहाँ पर अमली  जामा पहनाया जा रहा है या नहीं - इस चीज की िनगरानी  भी करना है और 
उसके  िलए ठोस कदम भी उठाने हȅ। जो भी राज्य, नगर पािलका, नगर िनगम, आिद उसका 
पालन न करे, उस पर कठोर-से-कठोर कारर्वाई करना सुिनिÌचत िकया जाए।   
 मान्यवर, मȅ 'Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना' को िकर्िटसाइज नहीं कर रहा ह ूँ, लेिकन इसमȂ 
भी सुधार की जरूरत है। जब मȅ भोपाल गया, तब वहाँ कई लोग मेरे पास आए और उन्हȗने कहा 
िक मेरे पास पक्का घर नहीं है, कच्चा मकान है।  इस पर मȅने उससे पूछा िक आपको इसके  िलए 
'Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना' क
े  तहत पैसा िमलता होगा? उसने बताया िक मȅने िपछले दस सालȗ 
से इसके  िलए अÃलाई कर रखा है और मȅ इसके  िलए कई बार गया, लेिकन मुझे यह नहीं िमला, 
हर बार टाल िदया जात
ा है। मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक इसमȂ भी कहीं-न-कहीं transparency की 
जरूरत है। इसमȂ कहीं ऐसा तो नहीं है िक जो needy लोग हȅ, उन्हȂ नहीं िमल रहा है और िजनको 
नीड नहीं है, उनको िमल रहा है। इसके  साथ ही मȅ सरकार से यह भी कहना चाहता हूँ िक िदÊली 
क े अंदर लगभग 675 झु ग्गी-झȗपड़ी बिÎतयाँ हȅ, िजनमȂ लगभग
 3.5 लाख यूिनट्स हȅ और उनमȂ 
लगभग 15.5 लाख लोग रहते हȅ।  कल क े आँकड़े मȂ यह भी आया िक करीब-करीब 13 लाख लोगȗ 
क े पास आवास नहीं है, घर नहीं है।  इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक िजस तरह स
े उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 2007 से  2012 क े बीच मȂ आदरणीय बहन जी ने 
'मान्यवर Ǜी कांशीराम जी शहरी आवास योजना' बनाई और गरीबȗ को दो कम
रे क े लाखȗ 
Äलैट्स ģी मȂ देने का काम िकया। आप भी इस तरह की योजना लेकर आएँ और उसको लागू 
करने का भी काम करȂ। 
मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम मȂ लखीमपुर क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहता ह
ूँ। मȅ लखीमपुर खीरी का 
रहने वाला हूँ। वहाँ पर जब भी बािरश होती है, तो सड़कȗ पर कमर तक पानी भर जाता है। 
लखीमपुर खीरी क े आसपास जो तालाब थ े, उन तालाबȗ पर भूमािफयाओं ने कÅजा कर िलया। 
उन्हȗने उन तालाबȗ को पाट कर वहाँ पर buildings और complexes बना कर खड़े कर िदए हȅ। 
मान्यवर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक वह इस पर भी ध्यान दे िक इस 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
71

तरह की चीजȂ पूरे देश क े अंदर कहीं न होने पाएँ, क्यȗिक हमȂ पानी क े ǣोत को भी बचाने की 
जरूरत है। इसके  साथ ही हाउिंसग Ãलािंनग क े िलए जो Ãलॉट काटे जा रहे हȅ, उसके  िलए बड़ी-
बड़ी क ंपिनयाँ आ रही हȅ।  कई बार यह देखने को िमला िक कागजȗ पर rain water harvesting 
का जो िसÎट
म बना कर िदया गया, वह कागजȗ मȂ ही सीिमत है। उसको इिÇÃलमȂट नहीं िकया जा 
रहा है। गमीर् मȂ पूरे देश क े अंदर पानी की कमी रही, लेिकन इस कमी को दूर करने क े िलए 
सरकार को अपनी योज
नाओं को ठोस अमलीजामा पहनाना पड़ेगा। िबना उस िसÎटम क े नहीं 
बनेगा। वहाँ पर गर्ीन बेÊट होनी चािहए, गर्ीन पाकर् होना चािहए और rain water harvesting का 
जो िसÎटम बना कर िदया जा रहा है, उसको पूरी तरह से इिÇÃलमȂट िकया जाए, तभी हम एक 
बड़ी उपलिÅध की तरफ आगे बढ़ सकते हȅ।  
मान्यवर, मȅ 30 स
ेक ं ड मȂ Îवच्छता क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहता हूँ। अभी मȅ वसंत क ुं ज से आ 
रहा था, तो वहाँ पर देखा िक वहाँ आज नाले की सफाई हो रही है और लोग नाले मȂ नीचे जाकर 
सफाई
 कर रहे हȅ। उनके  पास न तो कोई equipment है, न कोई माÎक है। वे बेचारे गरीब लोग हȅ। 
वे 300 से 400 रुपए  क े िलए नाले क े अंदर जाकर वहाँ की गंदगी साफ करते हȅ। मȅ आपके  माध्यम 
स
े माननीय मंतर्ी जी से कहना चाहता हूँ िक जब हम इतना high-tech हो गए हȅ, हम चन्दर्मा पर 
पहुँच गए हȅ, मंगल पर अपना यान भेज  िदए हȅ, सब क ु छ कर िलया, तो क्या हम उस नाले से िमƺी 
एवं गंदगी िनकालने क े िलए कोई equipment नहीं  बना सकते हȅ?...(समय की घंटी)...  मȅ 
इतना ही कहना चाहता हूँ िक सरकार इस पर भी िवशेष ध्यान दे, धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय रामजी।  माननीय Ǜी सदानंद महालू सेट तानवड़े। कȗकण
ी।  
     
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa): * Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I 
rise to support the demands on Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. Sir, today in 
this august House, I would like to speak in a language that is mentioned in the Eighth 
Schedule to the Constitution and is also the Official Language of Goa, that is, 
Konkani.  After coming to power in 2014, the Modi Government has taken several 
important steps in the Urban Development and Housing sector. The main aim of the 
Scheme is to improve quality of life, with people’s participation. Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana (PMAY) was started in the year 2014. Everyone has a dream of having her/his 
own house; now, under PMAY, 1 crore 12 lakh houses ha ve been constructed, and 
the lives of many people have been changed. It is a matter of immense pride that 
under PMAY 2.0, within the last 5 years, 10 lakh crore rupees have been spent to 
provide housing to 1 crore of the poor and middle class people.  
 With an allocation of Rs.12,192 crore, the Swachh Bharat Mission is the 
largest ever and also a revolutionary Mission of the Independent India. This Mission 
was strengthened by the construction of  12 crore household toilets and 2,33,000 
                                                            
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Konkani. 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

public toilets. This initiative has positively  impacted the lives of my sisters living in 
villages and the cities. Peop le of all age groups are now aware of the cleanliness 
around them. 
Sir, I would like to talk about the Smart City Mission. With the aim of making 
our existing cities better and creating ne w world class cities, the Modi Government 
has started developing 100 smart cities, under the Smart City Mission. This initiative of 
the Government is crucial in realizing the dream of developed India by 2047. 
Then, I would like to talk about the At al Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT). The objective of  the AMRUT scheme is to improve the 
lifestyle of the people living in the ci ties, and address the issues related to 
urbanization. Under this Scheme, improvemen t is being brought about with regard to 
water availability, solid waste management and the transportation system in 500 cities 
of the country. 
Now, I would like to talk about public tr ansport and infrastructure. In order to 
strengthen public transport and infrastruc ture, the Modi Government has rolled out 
various schemes. This is visible in the worl d-class metro services in various cities like 
Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru and Ahmedaba d. The public commute has become 
comfortable and at the same time, less pollut ing, with the introduction of trains like 
Namo-Bharat, Vande-Bharat and Metro. 
Sir, I want to talk about the Real Estate Regulation and Development Act 
(RERA) now.  This act has brought transparency in the real es tate sector and has 
boosted the confidence of customers in the housing projects.  There has been a 
decline in the number of buyer-seller lit igation and housing projects are being 
completed before the stipulated time. I would like to thank the Central Government for 
making our Chief Minister Dr. Pramod Savant the conv ener of the Real Estate 
Committee established under the GST council. 
 I would also like to mention about the development of the urban poor. Sir, 
under the Modi Government, special importance is being given to urban poor for the 
development and welfare of the poor section of society. Various schemes are being 
rolled out for this purpose. For instance,  under the PM SWANidhi Scheme, 76 lakh 
street vendors have received credit assi stance and 62,36,000 urban street vendors 
have received collateral free loans worth Rs. 19,000 crore. Sir, the aim of this Scheme 
is to take urban India to new heights and im prove the quality of life of the people. The 
achievements of the Modi Government have changed the image of the entire nation at 
the International level. मुझे मालूम है िक "Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना" का िकस तरह से फायदा 
हुआ है।  मेरे पास एक क ु क है, वह उǄराखंड से आता है। उस क ु क को मȅने पहले बताया िक 6 
महीने क े बाद तुÇहारी सैलरी बढ़ाऊं गा और आज 1 तारीख को उसके  6 महीने हो गए। आज सुबह 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
73

जब मȅने उसको पगार दी, तो थोड़ी ज्यादा पगार दी, क्यȗिक उसे बढ़ाना था। ...( समय की घंटी)... 
आज जब मȅ खाना खाने गया तो मȅने उसे जो ज्यादा पैसे िदए थे, उसको उसने मुझे वापस कर 
िदया।  
   Thank you, Sir. वह बोला िक आप मोदी जी की पाटीर् क े हȅ, उसको पहले मालूम नहीं 
था िक मȅ बीजेपी से हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद। Please conclude. 
 
Ǜी सदानंद महालू शेट तानवड़े: इससे फायदा हुआ है। मȅ आपको बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देता हूं।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय Ǜी ए.ए. रहीम।  
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala): T
hank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity. The 
actions of the Ministry of Housing and Ur ban Affairs are deeply regrettable. The 
Ministry continues the Union Government's general policy of neglecting Kerala in 
terms of projects and development. This attitu de is treating the citizens of Kerala as 
second class. This is highly objectionabl e. LIFE mission, a pioneer project by the 
Kerala Government, is a visionary project of the Kerala Government providing place to 
rest for the poor who are struggling to make ends to meet. I am very proud to state 
that now we have completed 4,67,068 houses and above 1,063,000 houses are under 
progress. So, the number of beneficiaries who executed their agreement are more 
than 5,00,000. Sir, we are going to fulfil a dream and we will achieve that. But I would 
like to bring your attention to the Union Government's contribution to the LIFE 
scheme, LIFE mission, is merely 1,50,000. I would like to appeal to the Government to 
kindly enhance the share of the Union Gove rnment. And also, I would like to bring to 
your attention that the Union Government has introduced an unusual requirement. 
The Union Government suggested that the logo of the PMAY, the branding process, 
should be there. Sir, what is the requirement of such a logo instruction from the Union 
Government? They are insisting for a logo. Th is is unfortunate, and this is breach of 
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution which provides dignified life for all. You must avoid 
this branding, this is a suggestion. Sir, it is truly unfortunate to  the common people. If 
guests or friends visit their homes, the bene ficiaries have to live in a manner that 
undermines their dignity. So a dignified life is a fundamental right under Article 21 of 
the Constitution of India. The Government should immediately withdraw this decision, 
which adversely affects the dignity of the common people. 
For the migrant workers in the country,  the Union Government has launched a 
program called affordable rental housing comp lex. But, the result is regrettable. I 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

would like to question the Minister what they  have done in Kerala regarding affordable 
rental housing complexes. That is one of my questions. Moreover, due to the 
privatization of the public sector, unemplo yment in the country is increasing. As a 
result, the number of youths fleeing from villa ges to cities is rising day by day. They 
have to work in the private sector for ve ry low wages and do not even have access to 
affordable accommodation. Furthermore, many  are denied residency on the grounds 
of caste and religion. Sir, I urge upon the Government to  ensure lower rent for the 
migrant workers and ensure housing for all such migrant youths, irrespective of caste 
and religion. 
Sir, the Government has started destructing the houses, bulldozing the 
houses. There is a term called 'Bulldozer Raj'. Sir, quietly, if there is an illegal 
construction, you have a lega l way. But, in the name of illegal construction, the 
Government is trying to bulldoze the houses of the common people. This is not a 
good way. The housing should be our mant ra, bulldozing should not be our mantra. 
The housing is the need of the hour, not bu lldozing, Sir. So, I would like to urge the 
Government that the Government must end this 'Bulldozer Raj' and a white paper 
should be tabled on the house regarding th e details of the brut al 'Bulldozer Raj'. 
Thank you, Sir.                                                                                           
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Rahim ji. Now, Shri Haris Beeran. You have 
five minutes.  
 
SHRI HARIS BEERAN (Kerala): Sir, in India,  over 35 per cent of population lives in 
urban areas, which is increasing by 2.35 pe r cent every year. And, by 2030, over 50 
per cent of India's population is expected to live in urba n areas. Public utilities like 
housing, sanitation, transport, electricity , water, health, and education are under 
heavy pressure because of this urbanizati on. However, urbanization has been an 
instrument of social, economic and political  progress. It has led to serious socio-
economic problems like poverty, unemplo yment and under-employment among the 
rural immigrants, thefts, dacoities, burglaries, beggars and other social evils.  
Now, the outlay for the Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs was around 
82,000 crores in the Budget. There is an increase when compared to last year. The 
affordability of the transparent rental hous ing market is an important step and a 
regulator needs to be appointed to monitor the scheme so as to  ensure affordability 
for the industrial workers, migrant workers and also for students who come to Delhi 
and other centers for their education.  
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
75

Sir, as far as the PM Awaz  Yojana is concerned, this Flagship program of the 
Government has failed to meet the demand and the slogan of the Government ‘Pukka 
Ghar to All by 2022’ remained only as a slogan. There are no trace s of implementation 
of the said project in my State of Kera la. Homelessness and inadequate housing has 
further burdened public services, impactin g healthcare, infrastructure and escalating 
environmental degradation issues, such as urban heat islands, pollution, drainage 
problems and water crisis.  
An important issue which needs to be ad dressed, Sir, is the urban flooding.  
By 2050, at least, 30 Indian cities will face a grave risk of water scarcity, according to 
the various studies conducted by the WWF. In dia's urban population growth in water 
scarce regions is expected to surpass that  of the other countries, rising from 222 
million to 550 million people by 2050. This will represent 26.7 per cent of the world's 
urban population facing water scarcity. Fl ooding in India's urba n areas has become 
increasingly frequent. These urban floods re sult in significant loss of life and 
livelihoods. In July, a State Bank of India Report estimated that economic loss due to 
the 2023 North Indian floods and Cyclone Bipa rjoy in Gujarat amounted to Rs. 15,000 
crores. 
Sir, urban areas are the centers of econo mic activities with vital infrastructure 
which need to be protected 24X7. In most of  the cities, damage to vital infrastructure 
has a bearing not only for the State and th e country, but it could also have global 
implications. Major cities in India have witnessed loss of life and property, disruption 
in power and transport. Therefore, management of urban flooding has to be accorded 
a top priority. 
There is a concern over the dearth of  affordable rental  housing options, 
particularly to student population in Indian cities. It is a matter of great concern. The 
dearth of hostel facilities in Central Universi ties and other national institutes located in 
metropolitan cities compels students to pay hefty rent due to no control or policies 
over rents charged by private individual landlords who monopolize the urban housing 
in Indian cities. I, therefore, urge the hon. Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs to 
build affordable rental housin g facility, particularly in ma jor cities like Delhi, Bombay, 
Bangalore, Hyderabad, Chennai for poor students, lower income groups and other 
needful categories.  
Now, Sir, there is a need to revise th e rent control laws which are completely 
outdated. You have to modernize the rent control legislation to protect both landlords 
and tenants, encouraging landlords to rent out vacant houses. 
As far as reduction in allocation of  funds for Smart City Projects and 
metropolitan transportation projects are concerned, the Government had initially 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

planned for completion of the smart city  project by 2020, but could not complete. 
And, now, it has been extended twice up to March 2025.  Now, it is seeing 70 per 
cent decrease in allocation of funds. An d as far as funding for metropolitan 
transportation projects is concerned, the a llocation for urban transit system has been 
reduced by 46.9 per cent, fr om Rs. 2,051 crores to Rs . 1,090 crores. Therefore, I 
urge that whatever has been reduced in this  particular budget may be reallocated to 
the Ministry. The particular concern which I ha ve raised has to be particularly looked 
at. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Haris Beeran ji. Now, Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharasht ra):  Sir, Working of Housing and 
Urban Development की अगर चचार् की शुरुआत  करȂ, तो कल रात को जब बािरश हुई थी और 
जो पािर्लयामȂट एक साल पहले  inaugurate हुई है और िजस तरह से पानी का जल भराव हुआ 
था और लीके ज हो रही थी, उसी से विकȊ ग समझ म
 Ȃ आ गई है िक क्या चल रहा है। सर, मȅ 
महाराÍटर् से आती हूं, जहां पर सबसे ज्यादा अबर्न पॉपुलेशन है और Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना क े 
अंतगर्त जो-जो पैसा वहां पर आवंिटत िकया गया है, अगर उसकी Ģोगर्ेस देखȂ, तो 20.72  Ģोगर्ेस 
हुई है in situ slum redevelopment का। In projects under affo
rdable housing in 
partnership, िसफर्  8.65 परस Ȃट हुआ है।  Beneficiary-led individual house constructions, 
16.92 परसȂट।  
 सर, जैसा िक मȅने कहा है महाराÍटर् मȂ अबर्न सȂटर है, अबर्न पॉपुलेशन है, क्या िकसी तरह 
की अकाउंटेिबिलटी अबर्न अफे यसर् िमिनÎटर्ी देखती है िक काम हो रहा है या नहीं हो रहा है?  
सर, ग्लोबल िंथक टȅक है, उसका नागपुर मȂ हैडक्वाटर्र ह
ै। ग्लोबल िंथक टȅक सैÊफलेस 
सिर्वस कर रहा है और उÇमीद थी िक जब नागपुर को Îमाटर् िसटी घोिषत िकया
 जाएगा, तो Îमाटर् 
िसटी बनायी भी जाएगी, क्यȗिक ग्लोबल िंथक टȅक का हैडक्वाटर्र है। सर, मȅ देख रही हूं िक वहां 
पर Îमाटर् िसटी क े  िलए जो फ ं ड अलोके ट हुआ था, उसका इिÇÃलमȂटेशन जो हुआ है, वह िसफर् 15 
परसȂट हुआ है यानी Îटेट गवनर्मȂट ने 85 परसȂट फ ं ड तो ले िलया है,काम िसफर् 15 परसȂट हुआ है। 
क्या कोई उसकी अकाउंट
ेिबिलटी लेगा, क्यȗिक वहां पर ग्लोबल िंथक टȅक का हैड क्वाटर्र है। 
...(Ëयवधान)..  सर, मȅ मुÇबई से आती हूं। मुÇबई एक कोÎटल िसटी है और अगर उसका िकसी 
तरीके  से िवÎतार करन ा है, तो या तो हम सी िर-क्लेम कर सकते हȅ। हम क्लाइमȂट चȂज तो देख 
ही रहे हȅ, उसका Ģभाव क्या हो रहा है, यह हमने क ेरल मȂ देखा है। हम सी िर-क्लेम नहीं कर 
सकते हȅ। एक बहुत बड़ा Ģोजेक्ट 2022 मȂ, धारावी िर-डेवलपमȂट Ģोजेक्ट को 2022 मȂ एक 
पिर्टकु लर इंडिÎटर्यिलÎट को िदया गया था। सर, वह 590 एकड़ का Ģोजेक्ट है, िजसमȂ 300 
एकड़ का िर-डेवलपमȂट होना है, िजसमȂ एक
 नेचर पाकर् भी आता है, एक पावर Ãलांट भी आता है 
और एक पिंÇपग Îटेशन भी आता है। वह पूरा 590 एकड़ टȂडर क े अनुसार उनको दे िदया गया था 
िक उसमȂ आप transit camps बना लीिजए, आप उसमȂ िरहैिबिलटेशन कर लीिजए। वह टȂडर क े 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
77

अनुसार उनको दे िदया गया। वह कांटर्ेक्ट ले लेने क े बाद, िजनको यह कांटर्ेक्ट िदया गया है, वे 
आकर कहते हȅ िक हमȂ और लȅड चािहए। िरहैिबिलटेशन क े िलए उन्हȗने 540 एकड़ और मुÇबई की 
लȅड मांगी है, िजसे राज्य सरकार उन्हȂ  ģी  मȂ दे रही  है। आप मुझे बताइए िक देश क े इितहास मȂ 
जो भी िर-ड
ेवलपमȂट क े Ģोजेक्ट टȂडर क े अनुसार िमले हȅ क्या उनको तीन गुना लȅड िमली है? 
इनको तीन गुना लȅड चािहए और 300 एकड़ का िर-ड
ेवलपमȂट है, परन्तु वे 1,100 एकड़ की मांग 
कर रहे हȅ यानी मुÇबई मȂ तो खुली * मची हुई है िक िकस तरीके  से लȅड को grab िकया जाए। यह 
जो  लȅड िलया जा रहा है, वह ऐसी जगहȗ पर िलया जा रहा है, जहां पर environmental 
hazards भी हो सकते हȅ, चाहे Salt Pans Land लȅड की बात करȂ, Salt Pans Land उनको हȅड 
ओवर कर िदया।  
 सर, Mahim Nature Park है, उसको भी उठाकर उनके  हȅड ओवर कर िदया गया है। 
सर, मुÇबई मȂ ओपन Îपेस की बहुत कमी है। मुÇबई महालÑमी रेस कोसर् एक बहुत इÇपॉटȄट और 
एक आईकोिनक जगह है, िजसको िरडेवलपमȂट, Åयूिटिफके शन क े अंतगर्त उसको Ģाइव ेट 
कांटर्ेक्टर क े हȅड ओवर करने वाले हȅ। 
 सर, दुख इस बात का होता है िक िरडेवलपमȂट, अबर्न हाउिंसग और अबर्न Åयूिटिफके शन 
क े आधार पर अन-Ãलान्ड डेवलपमȂट हो रहा है। उसका एक जीता-जागता उदाहरण हमारा 
पािर्लयामȂट भी है। देिखए, हम वह पुराना पािर्लयामȂट छोड़कर
 आए, यह कहकर िक पुराना हो 
गया है, हȅडल नहीं कर पा रहा है, देश ने िकतनी Ģगित की है, परंतु उसमȂ एक बार भी लीके ज 
नहीं हुई। कल तो हमने यहां पर नेचुरल िÎविंमग पूल भी देखा, जहां अंदर ही लीके ज हो रही है। 
अगर हम अबर्न डेवलपमȂट की बात करȂ, हाउिंसग अफे यसर् की बात करȂ, ज्यादा से ज्यादा 
पापुलेशन अब अबर्न सȂटसर् मȂ आ रही है, क्यȗिक जॉÅस क े Ģावधान वहां पर होते हȅ। So, we will 
have to plan our structures in such a way िक वह िसफर् 20 सा
ल नहीं, दो साल क े 
इनॉगरेशन क े बाद नहीं, एयरपोटर् क े जो रूफ  ट ू ट रहे हȅ, एक साल क े अंदर-अंदर वे खराब हो 
जाते हȅ, हमȂ तो 20 साल , 25 साल, 100 साल आगे की Ãलािंनग करनी होगी। वह कहीं न कहीं 
ल
ैिंकग है, इन्टȂट लैिंकग है। सर, मȅ इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ अपनी बात खत्म करना चाहूंगी।                                       
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद माननीय िĢयंका जी। माननीय डा. वी. िशवा
दासन।  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Respected Chair, thank you for the opportunity. As 
one goes through the Budget, one finds that this Budget is the Budget of 
contradictions. Here, the Government is ta lking about smart cities, but what is the 
reality? Urban development is not possible without the development of rural India. A 
comprehensive approach of development is very necessary for urban development. 
Day-by-day, a huge number of youths are shifting from the villages to the cities. What 
is the reason for this shifting ? It should be addressed. The real reason of shifting is 
not addressed by this Government. This is  because of rural di stress. What is the 
                                                            
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

reason of rural distress? It is because of the policy of the Government. Sir, the 
employment opportunities in rural India are very less. Why? The policy of the 
Government is creating a lot of problems in front of youngsters, in  front of the entire 
nation. In rural India, educational instit utions are not sufficient, and also the 
infrastructure facility and the academic quality of the majority of the institutions are 
very pathetic. Till now, majority of Indian s are depending on agricultural sector, but 
this main employer, that is, the agricultur al sector, has been disconnected in this 
Budget. So, automatically, the reflection will come in urban areas also.  
Sir, the Union Government has reduced  the allocation of MGNREGA. That 
means, it will increase the rural distress. Au tomatically, the shifting of the youngsters 
from the villages to the urban areas will happen. The increasing rural distress and the 
shifting of the youngsters from villages to the cities should be addressed by the 
Government. In the cities, what is the status of the common people?  
Sir, day-by-day, the expenditure of the co nstruction of a residential building is 
increasing. The Government does not have a proper mechanism for providing 
residential areas for those working in th e cities. So, a huge number of families are 
slum- dwellers.  Millions of people are livin g in the cities without decent homes. But, 
in this Budget, the allocation for housing has been reduced.  Take P.M. Awas 
Yojana.  Look at the pathetic condition of PM Awas Yojana. How can the problem be 
solved? They are not discussing the real issue of the common people. The share of 
the amount which has been given by the PM Awas Yojana scheme is not sufficient to 
construct even a proper toilet in the city. The PM Awas Yojana share is not sufficient 
to create a toilet in the city. However, the Government is very conscious about the 
branding. They are conscious about the branding. They are asking the State, ‘put the 
emblem, put the emblem’, and they are sayi ng, to put the photo also; you know the 
person who told us, his birth is not a biological one.  
 Sir, they are not ready to provide hous es to the poorest of the poor in the 
cities, in urban areas. But they are saying that our cities are very smart. They are 
talking about smart cities. But in the cities, including the Capital city, the capital of the 
nation, Delhi, scarcity of water is here. Sc arcity of the water is existing here. When 
will you provide proper drinking water to the common people of the nation? ...(Time-
bell rings.)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please conclude.  
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
79

DR. V. SIVADASAN: So, respected Chair, I also request the Government to please 
address the drainage system. Three people were killed in Delhi. So kindly address the 
drainage system, the housing system, the entire system.  
Thank you, Sir, for the opportunity given to me.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Dr. V. Sivadasan. Shri Manoj Kumar Jha; five 
minutes.  
माननीय Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा। 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार): उपसभापित महोदय, जब आप पाँच िमनट या तीन िमनट कहते 
हȅ, तो लगता है िक जैसे फांसी देने से पहले अंितम इच्छा पूछी जा रही हो। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: यह समय आप ही लोग तय करते ह
ȅ। चेयर नहीं करती है।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: सर, आपका दोष थोड़े ही है, लेिकन दुखड़ा भी कहाँ रोएं?  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आप बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: महोदय, मुझे बड़ी खुशी हुई िक माननीय मंतर्ी जी यहाँ हȅ। अभी नविनयुƪ 
मंतर्ी जी हȅ, हिरयाणा का बड़ा अनुभव है, अच्छा िवभाग भी िमला है और चुनौितयाँ भी बहुत ह
ȅ। 
फोटो-वोटो तो अपनी जगह है।  
 सर, मȅ Îमाटर् िसटी से अपनी बात शुरू  करू ँगा। सर, यह Îमाटर् िसटी सरकार भी बहुत 
बोल नहीं रही है। इनकी एक बात मुझे अच्छी लगती है - अच्छा सा नाम रखो, उस नाम क े पीछे 
काम न हो, तो उसके  बाद धीरे-धीरे बोलना कम कर दो। अभी हाल मȂ राÍटर्पित भवन मȂ गणतंतर् 
मंडप बना। साहब
, गणतंतर् का मंडपीकरण नहीं होना चािहए। यह उिचत नहीं लगता है। 
उपसभापित महोदय, बहरहाल, िव. िवजयसाई रेƿी जी, िĢयंका जी, पािर्लयामȂट की िबिंÊडग मȂ 
कल जो हुआ या िपछले वषर् जो हुआ, उसे लेकर इन लोगȗ ने बड़ी िंचता Ëयƪ की। मȅ कहता हूँ िक 
* लोग हȅ। यह तो िवशुǉ भारतीयता का एहसास कराता है। जब बाÊटी से पानी टपक रहा हो... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: 
*  शÅद चेक कर लीिजएगा।  
 
पयार्वरण, वन और जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ी ( Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव):  सर, पािर्लयामȂट क े िकसी साथी 
को 
*  कहना derogatory है। 
 
                                                            
* Withdrawn by Hon. Member. 
 
 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: अच्छा, मȅ वापस लेता हूँ। भूपेन्दर् जी, इसिलए आपको यहाँ रहना चािहए।  मȅ 
यह कहना चाह रहा था िक शायद मेरे सािथयȗ ने इसके  ममर् को नहीं समझा िक छत टपक रही है, 
बाÊटी लगी हुई है, पूरा िहन्दुÎतानी िफÊमȗ का सीन ह ै। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ इसिलए उसके  िलए 
िशकायत ही नहीं करू ँगा।  
साहब, मेरी दूसरी िंचता है िक हम Îवच्छ भारत अिभयान मȂ गाँधी जी क े चÌमे को टांग देते 
हȅ। Îवच्छता की ओर गाँधी जी का चÌमा, जबिक जरूरत  थी चÌमा पहनने की, चÌमा वहाँ रख देने 
की नहीं। गाँधी का चÌमा नहीं पहन सकते हȅ, क्यȗिक दो परÎपर िवरोधाभासी चीज़Ȃ हȅ - एक गाँधी 
और दूसरा मȂ नाम नहीं लूँगा। यह एक साथ नहीं चल सकती हȅ, क्यȗिक मुझ को नाम लेना भी बुरा 
लग रहा है। 
सर, तीसरी बात मȅ मंतर्ी जी को कहूँगा। Îटर्ीट वȂडसर् शहरȗ की रीढ़ होते हȅ। उनके  साथ
 
न्याय कीिजए। उनके  साथ नाइंसाफी हो रही है। आपकी नीितयाँ क ु छ बनती हȅ, पुिलस Ģशासन 
िकसी और तरीके  से एक्ट करता है। उस मद मȂ, िजसे हम पीएम Îविनिध कहते हȅ, आपका 
एलोके शन भी 30 Ģितशत कम हो गया है, तो मȅ आपसे आगर्ह करू ँगा िक उसको देिखए। आईईसी 
Îवच्छता का महत्वपूणर् पहलू ह
ै। आईईसी मȂ एलोके शन कम हो गया है। AMRUT मȂ आधा काम भी 
नहीं हुआ है। ĢोपेगȂडा अपनी जगह पर है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी को एक बात 
कहूँगा। सर, शहरीकरण की जरूरतȗ को गाँव को समझे बगैर नहीं िकया जा सकता है। जब तक 
गर्ामीण पलाय
न, गर्ामीण अथर्ËयवÎथा, उन पर आपकी नजर नहीं होगी, आपकी पकड़ नहीं होगी, 
तब तक शहरȗ मȂ लोग आएंगे, आप एकोमोडेट करने मȂ फ े ल करȂगे। आपके  बदले कल को हम हȗ, 
तब भी वे िदक्कतȂ हȗगी। मȅ इसमȂ एक और बात कहूँगा। संपिǄ
 का असंतुलन भी शहरȗ मȂ बहुत 
िदखता है। सर, एक बात और कहूँगा। जब हमारे शहर बनते हȅ, कोई िबिंÊडग बनती है, तो 
आपको Ǜिमक लगातार चािहए, मजदूर लगातार चािहए।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
  
वह मजदूर जब आपको िबिंÊडग बनाकर देता है, उसके  बाद वह आपको भारी लगने 
लगता है। वे जहाँ रहते हȅ, उसे आप Îलम कहते हȅ और उस Îलम को अपनी नजरȗ स े दूर करना 
चाहते हȅ। Îलम हमारी नीितयाँ पैदा करता है। Îलम मȂ रहने वाले हमारी-आपकी तरह क े लोग हȅ। 
उनके  बारे मȂ दृिÍटकोण साफ होना चािहए। यह सेटेलाइट/मेटर्ोपोिलस नहीं िक एक Îलम 
िरहेिबिलटेशन िकया, िदÊली से 40  िकलोमीटर दूर जाकर रख िदया। क ै से काम करȂगे, क ै से 
रोजगार चलेगा? सीवर डर्ेनेज क े बारे मȂ कई साथी बोल चुक े हȅ। मुझे तो अकसर याद आता ह ै  िक 
िवǏाथीर् जीवन मȂ हड़Ãपा-मोहनजोदड़ो क े डर्ेनेज िसÎटम की तारीफ सुनता था। सर, अगर टाइम 
मशीन हो, तो वापस चला जाए।  वह ज्यादा बेहतर था। सर, मȅ एक आिखरी बात कहूंगा। आजादी 
क े बाद हमारे देश मȂ multi-caste, multi-community housing society बननी शुरू  हुई थी।  
...(समय की घंट
ी)... सर, बस आिखरी 30 सेक ंड। आज वे सारी चीज़Ȃ खत्म हो गई हȅ। जाितयȗ क े 
नाम पर हाउिंसग सोसाइटी है, समुदायȗ क े नाम पर हाउिंसग सोसाइटी है और क ु छ समुदाय क े 
लोग िकसी भी सोसाइटी मȂ नहीं रह सकते हȅ। यह हमारी राजनीित और नीित ने तय कर िदया है। 
...(समय की घंट
ी)... शुिकर्या सर,  जय िंहद! 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
81

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan; not present.  The next speaker is 
Shrimati Mahua Maji.  
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी (झारखंड):  सभापित महोदय, Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना िजसके  आने पर 
गरीबȗ क े चेहरे पर हंसी आई थी, लेिकन हमारे राज्य मȂ 8 लाख Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास की कमी पड़ 
गई और बार-बार गुहार लगाने पर भी वह नहीं पहुंची। बाध्य होकर राज्य सरकार अबुआ आवास 
योजना लाई है और वह कह रही ह
ै िक हम उससे भी बड़ा और तीन कमरȗ वाला घर बनाएंगे, 
क्यȗिक Ģधान मंतर्ी आवासȗ मȂ जो पुराने आवास हȅ, उनकी िÎथित इतनी जजर्र हो गई है िक वहां 
क े लोग अब उसमȂ रहने मȂ भी डर रहे हȅ। कहीं उसके  बरामदे ट ू ट कर िगर रहे हȅ, कहीं कमरे की 
छत टपक रही है।  इस पर भी ध्यान िदया जाए िक एक बार आवास बना द
ेने क े बाद उसकी Ģॉपर 
मॉिनटिंरग हो। यहां से ही उसकी मॉिनटिंरग हो, न िक उसे Îटेट क े िजÇमे छोड़ा जाए। म
ȅने अभी 
हाल क े िदनȗ मȂ जाकर देखा था, वहां क े टॉयलेट्स की हालत भी बहुत खराब है। सीवर डर्ेनेज की 
हालत भी खराब है। वहां जो चैÇबर है, उसमȂ गंदगी उभर कर आ रही है, जहां चलने क े राÎतȗ से 
लोग गुजर नहीं पा रहे हȅ।  पूजा करने जाते हȅ, तो मिहलाएं कहती हȅ िक हम इसके  ऊपर से 
चलकर क ै से पूजा करने जाएं।  वहां पानी की बहुत कमी है। वे लोग पानी क े िलए तरस रहे हȅ। जल 
िनकासी की ËयवÎथा नहीं है। इस तरह से िसफर् आवास बना देन
े से नहीं होता है। मȅ चाहूंगी िक 
इसकी Ģॉपर मॉिनटिंरग हो और समय-समय पर उनकी िरपेयिंरग का काम भी होता ही रहे। 
 हर घर जल योजना आने से लोगȗ को बहुत खुशी हुई थी, लेिकन अभी तक हमारे शहरी 
क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ हम कहीं भी उसे नहीं द
ेखते हȅ। रांची पठारी इलाका है, पहले जल की कमी नहीं होती थी, 
लेिकन अब कई इलाकȗ मȂ 600-700 मीटर नीचे भी पानी नहीं िमल रहा है, िजसकी वजह से वहां 
पर अब हर घर जल योजना की बहुत आवÌयकता हो गई है, क्यȗिक गमीर् नलकू प सूख जाते हȅ, 
क ु एं भी सूख जाते हȅ।   
 मान्यवर, हमारे यहां Îमाटर् िसटी Ģोगर्ाम एचईसी की जमीन लेकर आरंभ ह
ुआ था, लेिकन 
अभी तक वह अधूरा ही है।  लोगȗ को बहुत उÇमीदȂ हȅ िक रांची मȂ भी इस तरह की कोई िसटी हो 
और बहुत लोग इस उÇमीद मȂ हȅ िक वह जÊद से जÊद पूरा हो सके । वहां पर आजकल यह हुआ 
िक जब सरकारी पैसे से भी सड़क बनती है, तो वे लोग नीचे का जो मलबा होता है, उसको वे ठीक 
से फ Ȃकते नहीं हȅ। ठेक ेदार उसके  ऊपर सड़क ढालते जाते हȅ और कई वषș क े बाद उसमȂ ऐसा 
देखा जाता है िक सड़क क े दोनȗ तरफ जो मकान होते हȅ, वे मकान नीचे हो जाते हȅ और सड़क 
ऊपर हो जाती है।  इससे नािलयȗ का पानी, गंदा पानी और बािरश का पानी लोगȗ क े घरȗ
 क े अंदर 
घुस जाता है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... इसके  िलए बहुत जरूरी  ह ै िक िफर से कोई बड़ी योजना लाकर इसे 
ठीक िकया जाए, क्यȗिक जो मकान नीचे हो गए हȅ और सड़क ऊपर...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No disburtance, please. 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी: कई-कई जगहȗ पर तो सड़कȂ 5-6 फीट ऊ ंची हो गई हȅ। उनको या तो घर 
छोड़कर जाना पड़ेगा या इसके  िलए मȅ कहूंगी िक सरकार को कोई योजना लानी चािहए। पहले 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

लोग ध्यान नहीं देते थे और जहां-तहां घर बना लेते थे। अब जो नािलयां भी गुजरती हȅ, कहीं 
उसके  ऊपर दुकानȂ बन गई हȅ िकसी ने ऊपर क ु छ ढाल िदया है। कोई एक foolproof plan लाकर 
उसको अच्छे से िकया जाए, क्यȗिक रांची शहर राजधानी है, हम अपने शहर की भी बात करȂ, तो 
वह पठारी इलाका है, पहले पानी नीचे उतर जाता था, वहां पर अब मैदानी इलाकȗ
 की तरह 
बािरश मȂ इतना पानी इकƻा हो जाता है िक लोग बाहर नहीं िनकल पाते हȅ।  इसके  िलए मुझे 
लगता है िक क Ȃ दर् को िकसी आधुिनक तकनीक क े माध्यम से नई योजना लानी चािहए और इस 
तरह से जहां-जहां ĢॉÅलÇस िकर्एट हुई हȅ, उसे ठीक करना चािहए, क्यȗिक ग
ंदे नाले का पानी भी 
घर मȂ घुस जाता है और जनता परेशान हो जाती ह
ै।   
मान्यवर, मȅ पािर्लयामȂट िबिंÊडग क े बारे मȂ यह कहना चाहूंगी िक पुरानी िबिंÊडग मȂ जो 
सेन्टर्ल हॉल था, उसमȂ हम सभी लोग लोक सभा, राज्य सभा क े तमाम लोग साथ मȂ बैठते थे।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Is it part of the debate ? Focus on the subject and use the time 
gainfully for the public. 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी:
 जी, सर। मेरी िरक्वेÎट थी िक वह यहां पर होता। ठीक है, सर। थȅक यू।  
          
3.00 P.M. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister of Housin g and Urban Affairs, Shri Manohar Lal, 
may now reply to the Discussion.  
 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा िवǏुत मंतर्ी ( Ǜी मनोहर लाल): माननीय सभापित महोदय, 
लगभग 4 घंटे आवासन एवं शहरी मामलȗ क े मंतर्ालय की कायर् पǉित और बजट संबंधी बातȗ पर 
भी चचार् हुई है। सबसे पहले मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूँ िक इस िवभाग की चचार् क े िलए आपने 
अच्छा समय िदया और संख्या तो मुझे मालूम नहीं, लेिकन पयार्Ãत माननीय सदÎयȗ को बोलने का 
मौका िमला। इसमȂ बहुत िवषयȗ क े ऊपर अपेक्षाएँ की गई हȅ, इसमȂ बहुत आलोचनाएँ भी की गई हȅ 
और िपछले 10 साल  मȂ इसको आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का जो दृिÍटकोण, जो 
िवज़न है, उसके  ऊपर भी चचार् हुई है। सबसे पहले तो मȅ इस चचार् को साथर्क इस नाते से मानता 
हूँ िक भले ही आलोचनाएँ हुई हȗ, भले ही अपेक्षाएँ की गई हȗ, मȅ मानता हूँ िक अपेक्षाएँ तभी की 
जाती हȅ, जब कोई काम करने की गित को बल Ģदान करता है और उसी से अपेक्षा की जाती है 
िक और काम िकया जाए।  जब काम न िकया जाए, तो उसके  बाद अपेक्षाएँ भी मर जाती हȅ िक जो 
काम नहीं करते हȅ, उनसे क्या अपेक्षा की जाए। 2014 से  पहले की िÎथित पर शहरी िवकास क े 
नाते से कभी इतनी बड़ी मातर्ा मȂ ध्यान नहीं िदया गया, िजतना नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार आने 
क े बाद, 2014 onwards इन 10 सालȗ मȂ िवचार िकया गया। उनकी तीसरी टमर् का जो 11वाँ साल 
है, इसमȂ भी एक बड़ा बजट,  82 हजार करोड़ रुपए  से ऊपर इस िवभाग क े िलए आवंिटत िकया 
गया, इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का बहुत-बहुत आभार 
Ģकट करता हूँ। िपछले 10 वषș मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ऊपर िकए गए भरोसे को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
83

और उनको इस िवषय मȂ जो िंचता है, उसके  कारण पहले ही िदन मंितर्मंडल क े गठन क े बाद 
क ैिबनेट की जो पहली बैठक हुई, उस पहले एजȂडे मȂ ही एक Ģकार से  Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना 
क े अंतगर्त 3 करोड़ मकानȗ की Îवीकृ ित दी गई, िजसमȂ 2 करोड़ गर्ामीण क्षेतर् क े और एक करोड़ 
शहरी क्षेतर् क े आवास बनाने की बात की गई।   
 मान्यवर, आज चुनौती जरूर  है, क्यȗिक शहरीकरण लगातार बढ़ रहा है। 2011 क े सȂसस 
क े अनुसार क ु ल आबादी का लगभग 31.2 Ģितशत शहरȗ मȂ िनवास करता था और अभी जो आगे 
अनुमान लगाए जा रहे हȅ, 2030 तक शहरȗ मȂ यह आबादी 40 Ģितशत हो जाएगी। उसका भी 
इसके  ऊपर िनरंतर जो दबाव रहेगा, उसमȂ हमȂ अपने आधुिनक इंģाÎटर्क्चर को भी बढ़ाना होगा 
और उसको मȂटेन भी रखना होगा, उसका रखरखाव भी करना होगा। कई बार िनमार्ण क े काम पर 
पूरा ध्यान होता है, उसमȂ क ैिपटल एक्सपȂसेज़ होते हȅ, लेिकन उसका िनमार्ण एक पक्ष है, बाद मȂ 
उसका जो रखरखाव है, वह Ģदेश सरकारȗ और urban local bodies क े िजÇमे होता है। उसका 
भी िनरंतर ध्यान रखना होता है।  यिद वह ध्यान नहीं रखा जाता, तो उसके  अंदर बाद मȂ कई 
Ģकार की किठनाइयाँ भी आती हȅ। संिवधान मȂ इसके  िलए संशोधन करके  urban local bodies क े 
अंतगर्त इसका Ģावधान िकया गया। 1992 मȂ संिवधान मȂ जो 14वाँ संशोधन हुआ, उसमȂ कहा गया 
िक शहरी िवकास राज्य का िवषय है और उसके  अंतगर्त Îथानीय िनकायȗ को 12वीं अनुसूची क े 
अंतगर्त कई काम सȚपे गए हȅ। जब िनमार्ण का काम पूरा हो जाता है, तो उसके  बाद रखरखाव क े 
नाते Ģदेश सरकारȗ और urban local bodies को जरूर  ध्यान देना चािहए। कल वƪाओं ने जो 
सुझाव िदए, उनके  अन्दर यह िवषय आया िक राज्य सरकारȗ क े िजतने भी ULB Ministers हȅ, 
उनके  साथ मीिंटग की जाए। तो मȅ सबसे पहला आÌवासन यही देता हूँ िक िवभाग की ओर से 
िनिÌचत रूप  से उन सब मंितर्यȗ को बुलाकर, उनसे बातचीत करके  इस िवषय को आगे बढ़ाया 
जाएगा।    
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, कल क े साथ ही साथ आज तक की चचार् मȂ िजन Ģमुख 
लोगȗ ने िहÎसा िलया, मȅ उन सबका धन्यवाद करता हूँ। िवशेष तौर पर Ǜी Ǜी अजय माकन जी, 
Ǜी जवाहर सरकार जी, Ǜी आर. िगिरराजन जी, रेƿी जी, िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी जी, 
मुजीबुÊला खान जी, तंबी दुरै जी - इन सब ने जो अपने िवचार रखे हȅ, इन सब ने जो िवषय उठाए 
हȅ, उनके  ऊपर अपनी बात जरूर  रखूँगा।   
 मान्यवर, सबसे पहले तो िजस बात पर सबसे ज्यादा िंचता की गई, वह है - शहरी आवास।  
Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना क े अंतगर्त यह जो िवषय रखा गया है, उसके  ऊपर जरूर  मȅ अपनी 
बात रखना चाहता हूँ। अजय माकन जी ने िवशेष तौर पर क ु छ िवषय उठाए थे। उन्हीं िवषयȗ क े 
अंदर आगे कई और सदÎयȗ ने भी अपने िवचार रखे थे।  Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना क े अंतगर्त 
डीएमके  पाटीर् से Ǜी आर. िगिरराजन जी, ऑनरेबल मुजीबुÊला खान जी, ऑनरेबल जवाहर 
सरकार जी, Ǜी मेदा रघुनाधा रेƿी जी ने अपने िवषय रखे हȅ।  उनके  अन्दर एक िवषय िदÊली क े 
बारे मȂ आया िक िदÊली मȂ जो 29,000 घर हȅ, ये योजना क े अंदर Îवीकृ त िकए गए थे, लेिकन यह 
संख्या बहुत कम है। उसके  आगे या तो सरकार ने मांगे नहीं या उन्हȂ घर कम िदए गए। मȅ इसमȂ यह 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

िवषय ÎपÍट करना चाहता हूँ िक जब  PMAY-Urban योजना क े िलए सभी राज्य सरकारȗ को 
िलखा गया और उसके  अंदर एक Memorandum of Agreement िदÊली सरकार क े साथ हुआ। 
उसने Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योजना को 2017 मȂ लागू करने क े ऊपर एगर्ीमȂट िकया था, लेिकन  बȅकȗ 
क े माध्यम से िजतने भी beneficiaries ने applications दीं, उनमȂ से ऐसे 29,976 लोग थे, िजनको 
interest subsidy क े नाते 692 करोड़  रुपय े िदए गए, िदÊली क े beneficiaries  को िदए गए।  
बािक कोई भी जो योजना है, क्यȗिक चार Ģकार क े verticals हȅ, उन चारȗ Ģकार क े verticals क े 
अंदर िदÊली सरकार ने बाद मȂ िकसी Ģकार का कोई response नहीं िदया। अगर वह मांग करती, 
तो िनिÌचत रूप  से उसको और allotment हो सकती थी।  उसको इसके  िलए आगे MHUA क े 
साथ जो agreement करना  चािहए था, वह नहीं िकया, बिÊक िदÊली सरकार ने अपनी Delhi 
Slum and JJ Rehabilitation and Relocation Policy क े अंतगर्त 2019 मȂ अपनी एक योजना, 
'मुख्य मंतर्ी आवास योजना चलाई। उसमȂ भी िकसी भी Ģकार की कोई जानकारी अथवा कोई 
िडमांड 'Ģधानमंतर्ी आवास योजना' क े अंतगर्त क ेन्दर्ीय सहायता क े िलए अÃलाई ही नहीं िकया। 
इसिलए उनको िकसी Ģकार की सहायता देना शायद उिचत नहीं था।   
  जहां तक उन्हȗने देश भर की बात की और उन्हȗने राÍटर्ीय राजीव ऋण योजना से इस 
योजना की तुलना की है, तो उसमȂ मेरा िनवेदन यही है िक पूरे देश मȂ राजीव ऋण योजना क े 
अंतगर्त 15,000 लोगȗ को ही सहायता दी गई, जबिक िपछले 10 सालȗ क े अन्दर इस योजना को 
देश भर मȂ लागू करने क े बाद 29 लाख लोगȗ को, Îलम बिÎतयȗ क े लोगȗ को इसका लाभ िमला। 
तो एक तरफ ये 15,000 लोगȗ की बात कह रहे हȅ, चाहे इसमȂ रािश कम दी हो, ज्यादा दी हो, 
लेिकन जो टोटल बजट है, इसके  अंदर हमȂ उस बजट का भी जरूर  ध्यान रखना चािहए। योजना 
मȂ 13 लाख लोगȗ को बजट का जो िहÎसा िमला, वह बहुत कम िमला, लेिकन हम लोगȗ ने उनसे 
13 गुना ज्यादा बजट इस योजना मȂ िदया है, 12,885 करोड़ रुपय े िदये हȅ, िजससे ÎलÇस क े लोगȗ 
को इस योजना का लाभ हुआ है। जहाँ तक बाकी लोगȗ की, यानी ÎलÇस क े ही लोगȗ की बात क्यȗ 
नहीं की गई, बाकी और अन्य यानी जो क ैिटगरीज़ हȅ, उनको लाभ क्यȗ िदया गया, तो मेरा कहना 
है िक इसमȂ क ु ल िमलाकर बजट का जो साइज है, उस समय, 2004 से 14 तक, क ु ल िमलाकर क े 
सभी Ģोजेक्ट्स क े अंदर 38,000 करोड़ रुपय े का ही बजट खचर् िकया गया। अगर उन 38,000 
करोड़ रुपयȗ को ÎलÇस मȂ लगाया भी गया हो, तो हमारे 10 साल क े अन्दर उससे ज्यादा,  50,000 
करोड़ रुपय े से ज्यादा उसी एक योजना मȂ खचर् िकये गये। टोटल हाउिंसग क े इस Ģोजेक्ट क े 
ऊपर, अगर योजना मȂ बताया जाए, तो 8 लाख करोड़ रुपए  से भी ज्यादा 10 साल मȂ लगाए गए हȅ। 
तो कहां 38,000 करोड़ और कहां 8 लाख करोड़ रुपए ! वे िजस एक विर्टकल की बात कर रहे हȅ, 
ऐसा नहीं है िक हम उसमȂ पैसा खचर् नहीं कर रहे हȅ। हम उसमȂ भी पैसा खचर् कर रहे हȅ। उसके  
अंदर Îटेट्स अपनी योजनाओं क े  बारे मȂ िजतना िडमांड करती हȅ, वे सारे उसमȂ िदए जाते हȅ। 
बहुत ऐसे पिरवार हȅ, जो गांव मȂ थे, बाद मȂ शहरीकरण क े नाते उन्हȂ शहरȗ क े अंदर सिÇमिलत 
कर िलया गया। उनके  पास अपने पुराने घर, कच्चे घर या क ु छ Ãलॉट्स उपलÅध थे। अब मान 
लीिजए िक िकसी क े पास Ãलॉट है और उस पर मकान बनाने का पैसा उसके  पास होता नहीं है, 
तो उसके  िलए नई योजना बनाई गई है और उसका लाभ उसको िदया गय ा है। इसके  तहत 
उसको भी डेढ़ लाख रुपए  का लाभ िदया जा रहा है। क ु छ ऐसे लोग हȅ, जो बȅकȗ से ऋण ले सकते 
हȅ, लेिकन Åयाज देने क े कारण उन पर जो दबाव पड़ता है, उसको वे सहन नहीं कर पाते हȅ, 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
85

इसिलए Åयाज क े िलए जो Îकीम बनाई गई है, उसके  तहत उस Åयाज को देने क े िलए उनसे बȅकȗ  
क े माध्यम से एÃलीके शन मांगी जाती है और इस योजना क े तहत उसका लाभ उनको िदया जाता 
है।   
इसी Ģकार अफॉडȃबल हाउिंसग Îकीम है। कीमत को कम रखने क े िलए जो विर्टकल 
Ģोजेक्ट्स हȅ, उनके  तहत कम
 पैसे मȂ लोगȗ को मकान का लाभ िमल जाए, इसके  िलए इस योजना 
क े तहत उनको लाभ िदया जाता है। क ु ल िमलाकर इन सब योजनाओं का लाभ ऐसे लोगȗ को 
िदया जाता है, िजनके  िसर पर छत नहीं है। मȅ 'हाउिंसग फॉर ऑल' क े संबंध मे कहना चाहता हूँ 
िक  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने आÏवान
 िकया िक हर िकसी क े िसर पर छत होनी चािहए। गरीबȗ क े िसर 
पर भी होनी चािहए, मध्यम वगीर्य पिरवार क े िसर पर भी छत होनी चािहए, तो इस नाते से इन 
चार योजनाओं को इस Ģकार से बन
ाया गया है। हमने इनमȂ िकसी क े साथ भी भेदभाव नहीं िकया 
है। हमने घर बनाते समय यह भी ध्यान िदया िक क ेवल घर बना कर दे देने से बात नहीं बनती, 
बिÊक घर मȂ रहने क े िलए जो सुिवधाएं चािहए
, वे भी साथ-साथ िविभन्न योजनाओं क े माध्यम से 
दी गईं। उस घर क े अंदर गैस का चूÊहा भी हो, िबजली का बÊब भी लगा हो, पानी की ËयवÎथा भी 
होनी चािहए, पानी का नल भी होना चािहए।  घर
 क े पिरवार क े लोगȗ क े िलए राशन की ËयवÎथा 
भी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने की है।  इस Ģकार से घर क े साथ-साथ घर मȂ रहने लायक बनाने क े िलए 
िविभन्न योजनाओं क े माध्यम से िविभन्न सुिवधाएं भी म
ुहैया कराने की ËयवÎथा की गई है।   
अजय माकन जी ने  2004 से  2014 का जो उÊलेख िकया, उसके  अनुसार अगर मȅ नंबर 
आफ िसटीज की बात करूं , तो वे नंबर आफ िसटीज का भी अपना उÊलेख कर रहे थ े िक नंबर 
ऑफ िसटीज़ बढ़ गए, यह ठीक है िक उसके  बाद बढ़े भी हȅ। उन्हȗने अपने आप ही उसका जवाब 
िदया िक अब शहरȗ की संख्या 5,000 नहीं है, 7,000 से ऊपर है। क ु छ शहर तो ऐसे भी हȅ, जहाँ 
की आबादी 5-5 लाख हो गई है। उनको भी शहर का दजार् नहीं िदया गया। जैसे उन्हȗने जवाब 
िदया की लोकल रेिजडȂट्स को  लगता है िक अगर हम शहर की Ǜेणी मȂ आएंगे, तो हमȂ हाउस 
टैक्स लग जाएगा, अन्य Ģकार क े क ु छ Ãलािंनग
 मȂ, डर्ाÄट Ãलािंनग मȂ िरिÎटर्क्शन लग जाएंगे - 
ऐसी क ु छ चीजȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए वे लोग अपने आप को शहरीकरण से दूर रखते हȅ। 
शहरीकरण करने क े िलए जब तक उनकी सहमित न हो, तब तक यह नहीं िकया जा सकता ह
ै। 
With the consent of residents, िकसी को शहर मȂ बदला जा सकता है। मȅ समझता हूँ िक 
उन्हȗने यह जवाब तो अपने आप िदया है। उस समय क े भी जो शहर थे, चाहे वे हाउिंसग की 
योजनाओं क े बारे मȂ बता रहे थे, वे क ु ल िमलाकर 115 शहरȗ मȂ ही उन योजनाओं को लागू कर 
सके ।  उन्हȗने झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी बÎती, यानी गरीब बिÎतयȗ
 और ÎलÇस मȂ सुधार करने की बात कही। 
आज हम लोगȗ ने इन योजनाओं को सब शहरȗ क े िलए, यानी 4,900 शहरȗ क े िलए खोला है। उन 
सब शहरȗ मȂ जो-जो आवÌयकताएँ हȅ, उनके  िलए संबंिधत Ģदेश सरकार हमȂ भेज रही है। क ु ल 
िमलाकर मȅ यही कहूंगा िक Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने जो योजनाएँ चलाई हȅ, उनका सभी ओर Îवाग त हो 
रहा है और Ģशंसा हो रही है।  हाँ, आलोचना करने वाले जरूर  आलोचना करȂगे। उनको लगता है 
िक इतना सब हो रहा है, तब हमारे हाथ से गाड़ी िनकल गई है, इसिलए उनका यह दृिÍटकोण  है 
िक कोई भी अच्छा काम हो, तो उसकी भी आलोचना करनी चािहए। मȅ तो यही कहूँगा िक अगर ये 
लोग समय पर संभल जाते और समय रहते संभालने की इनमȂ कला होती, तो न उनका कारवां 
लुटता, न उनकी यह दशा होती।  इनको उस समय संभलना चािहए था।   
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

जवाहर सरकार जी ने जल क े संबंध मȂ िवषय उठाया तथा हमारे क ु छ सािथयȗ ने पानी 
िनकासी और पेयजल की भी बात की। Ǜी मेदा रघुनाधा रेƿी जी ने भी Ģदूषण क े िवषय मȂ क ु छ बातȂ 
उठाईं।  इसी तरह, जवाहर सरकार जी जैसे सब लोगȗ ने इस िवषय को उठाया है। मȅ संक्षेप मȂ 
इतना ही कहूंगा िक नल से पानी देने का जो कनेक्शन है, 2014 मȂ इसकी 44 Ģितशत Ģोगर्ेस थी, 
जो अब बढ़कर 70 परसȂट तक हो गई है। इस नाते से यह काम अमृत योजना क े अंतगर्त लगातार 
आगे चल रहा है।  जो अमृत ट ू की योजना है, उसके  अंदर 1 करोड़, 80 लाख नए नल कनेक्शंस 
देने की योजनाओं को मंजूरी दी गई है। हमने इस जल क े शोधन की ËयवÎथा भी की है, िजसके  
िलए 70,000 िकलोमीटर जलापूिर्त लाइनȗ की और मंजूरी दी गई है, िजसमȂ 63,471 िकलोमीटर 
लाइनȂ पहले िबछाई जा चुकी हȅ। इस तरह से इसका िकर्यान्वयन हो रहा है।   
जहां तक जल शोधन का िवषय है, तो अमृत पिरयोजनाओं क े माध्यम से 6,123 एमएलडी 
जल शोधन क्षमता िवकिसत की जा रही है, िजसमȂ 4,489 एमएलडी जल शोधन क्षमता सृिजत की 
जा चुकी है। आमतौर पर अंितम मील कनेिक्टिवटी मȂ जो Ģदूषण, खराब संचालन, रख-रखाव की 
बात है, वह Îथानीय िनकायȗ ǎारा Ģदान करने वाली जो अनुपयुƪ आपूिर्त है, उसके  कारण से 
होता है।  जैसा मȅने कहा िक जो रख-रखाव है, वह Ģदेश सरकारȗ और Îथानीय िनकायȗ क े ऊपर 
ही िनभर्र करता है। 
 जहां तक अमृत शहरȗ की बात उठाई गई, तो उसमȂ जो नल कनेक्शन की सावर्भौिमक 
कवरेज और 500 अमृत शहरȗ मȂ सावर्जिनक सीवरेज कवर Ģदान करना है, तो Îवच्छ भारत 
िमशन क े तहत छोटे शहरȗ को भी इसमȂ शािमल िकया गया है। जैसा मȅने पहले बताया, अमृत क े 
4,900 शहरȗ को इन सबके  िलए ओपन िकया गया है।  3,300 शहरȗ की योजनाएं आ चुकी हȅ और 
इन सबको अमृत ट ू क े अंदर कवर िकया जा रहा है। 
 एयर पॉÊयूशन की भी बात आई। हालांिक एयर पॉÊयूशन एनवायरमȂट क े िवषय मȂ 
सिÇमिलत है, िफर भी पानी Ģदूषण को लेकर जो िवषय है, उसमȂ यह बताया गया िक इसके  अंदर 
7 परसȂट डेथ्स हुई हȅ।  जहां तक जल Ģदूषण का िवषय है, अमृत िमशन क े अंतगर्त 34,400 करोड़ 
रुपए  की लागत वाली सीवरेज और सेिÃटक पिरयोजनाएं शुरू  की गई हȅ। 1.47 करोड़ सीवरेज 
सेिÃटक कनेक्शंस Îथािपत िकए गए हȅ। जल िनकायȗ मȂ गैर शोिधत अपिशÍट जल क े Ģवाह को 
कम करने क े िलए अमृत पिरयोजनाओं क े माध्यम से 6,232 एमएलडी एसटीपी क्षमता िवकिसत 
की जा रही है, िजसमȂ 4,174 एमएलडी  सीवरेज क्षमता बनाई गई है।  इस Ģकार, क ु ल िमलाकर 
अमृत ट ू क े तहत भी 126 लाख सीवर कनेक्शंस Ģदान िकए जा रहे हȅ। इस अमृत योजना क े अंदर 
जब पेयजल और पानी शोधन की ËयवÎथा होगी तो िनिÌचत रूप  से Ģदूषण मȂ भी कमी आएगी।   
 अभी-अभी बाढ़ क े जोिखम पर चचार् हो रही थी।  यह बात िनिÌचत रूप  से ठीक है िक 
पहले ये ËयवÎथाएं एक िनिÌचत आबादी क े िलए बनाई गई थीं, लेिकन लगातार आबादी बढ़ने क े 
कारण ये ËयवÎथाएं कम पड़ती हȅ। िकसी भी शहर क े अंदर जो ËयवÎथा की जाती है, वह 6 इंच 
वषार्, यानी आधा घंटा या एक घंटा वषार् को ध्यान मȂ रखकर की जाती है, लेिकन तीन-तीन, चार-
चार घंटे लगातार भारी वषार् होने क े बाद वह ËयवÎथा कम पड़ जाती है। िदÊली क े अंदर कल जो 
वषार् हुई, वह क ु छ इलाकȗ मȂ 8 सȂटीमीटर, यानी 2 इंच से ऊपर नापी गई है। जब 2 इंच से ऊपर 
वषार् का पानी एक साथ िगरता है, तो ËयवÎथाओं मȂ इस Ģकार की कमी Îवाभािवक रूप  से आती 
है। इसके  ऊपर अध्ययन िकया जा रहा है िक कौन से इलाके  मȂ वषार् ज्यादा है, कौन से इलाके  मȂ 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
87

कम है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसमȂ सब लोगȗ का सहयोग जरूरी  है।  जैसा मȅने बताया िक यह ËयवÎथा 
वाÎतव मȂ राज्य सरकारȗ की ज्यादा होती है और उसमȂ जहां-जहां िजसकी िजÇमेवारी है, हम 
जरूर  उनके  साथ क ंसÊट करके  योजनाओं का Ģारूप बनाएंगे। उसमȂ यिद िकसी Ģकार की 
आवÌयकता का िवषय उनकी ओर से रखा जाएगा, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से हम आगे बढ़ने वाले हȅ।  
आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, िदÊली शहर क े बारे मȂ जैसा पहले भी मȅने बताया िक 
राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली सरकार ǎारा जल िनकासी माÎट
र Ãलान लागू नहीं िकया गया। 
अगर इसको ठीक से लागू करते, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से िदÊली सरकार और एमसीडी ǎारा नालȗ की 
सफाई और गाद िनकालने का काम पूणर् कर पाते। उन्हȗने इस काम को पूरा नहीं िकया। परसो भी 
मȅने इस िवषय पर बात रखी थी िक िदÊली की िÎथित को देखते हुए ज़रूर  िदÊली सरकार और 
एमसीडी को आगे बढ़ना चा
िहए। महोदय, इसमȂ भवन िनमार्ण की जो अनुमित है, उसमȂ जो 
Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ, उसमȂ यिद कोई पिरवतर्न करता
 है, तो उसके  ऊपर जब तक सख्त 
कायर्वाही नहीं करȂगे, तब तक इस समÎया का समाधान नहीं होगा।  
महोदय, वȂिंडग माकȃ ट का एक िवषय आया। जो Îटर्ीट वȂडसर् हȅ, वे बड़े शहरȗ मȂ अिधक 
मातर्ा मȂ होते हȅ। उनको Îथायी रूप  स
े कोई ऐसा Îथान, जहां वे अपना करोबार कर सकȂ, वह 
िकसी भी कारण से जब उनको नहीं िमलता है, तो ऐसे Îटर्ीट वȂडसर् की, खासकर कोिवड क े समय 
मȂ बहुत बुरी िÎथित हो गई। उनकी Ģितिदन की आमदनी रुक  गई। उनको सहायता देने क े  िलए  
'Îविनिध योजना' को लागू िकया गया। 'Îविनिध योजना' का जो मुख्य उǈेÌय है, वह यह है िक 
उनको उनकी रोज़ी-रोटी क े िलए आवÌयक पूंजी िमले। पहले चरण मȂ 10,000 रुपय े, उसको 
वापस करने पर 20,000 रुपय े, िफर उसको वापस करने पर 50,000 रुपय े दे कर उनकी सहायता 
की जाती है। यह ठीक है िक उनका certificate of vending भी बनाया जाता है और certificate 
of vending क े अलावा Ģदेश सरकारȗ
 को vending zone और vending market भी बनाने 
चािहए। बड़े शहरȗ मȂ बहुत Îथानȗ पर ऐसी वȂिंडग माकȃ ट नहीं बनाई गई, िजसके  कारण वȂडसर् 
अपने काम को चलाने क े िलए मुहÊलȗ मȂ, बाजारȗ या जगह-जगह छोटी-मोटी रेहड़़ी लगाकर 
काम करते ह
ȅ। वे ĢारÇभ मȂ शायद Îविनिध से वंिचत रह जाते, लेिकन Îविनिध की enability क े  
िलए Ģावधान िकया गया है िक उनके  पास certificate of vending नहीं  भी है, तो letter of 
recommendation क े आधार पर उनको ऋण िमल जाए। यह भी एक Ģावधान िकया गया है। ऐसे 
लोगȗ क े पास certificate of vending न होने क े कारण से उनको Îथान तो उपलÅध नहीं कराया 
जा रहा है, ल
ेिकन उन सबको ऋण देने की सुिवधा की गई है। Ģदेश सरकारȂ बहुत सी ऐसी 
योजनाएं बनाती हȅ िक ऐसे लोग, िजनको Çयुिनिसपैिलटी मȂ पƺे पर ज़मीन दी है या उनको Îथायी 
रूप  से वȂिंडग
 ज़ोन मȂ बैठाया गया है, यानी उनको Îवािमत्व दे कर भी क ु छ सरकारȂ योजनाएं बना 
रही है, खास तौर से मȅ हिरयाणा का उÊलेख करता हूं। हिरयाणा मȂ एक ऐसी ही छोटी माकȃ ट थी, 
उनके  टȂट्स या उनकी जो लकड़ी की दुकाने बनी हुई थीं, उनमȂ अचानक आग
 लग गई। हमने 
उनको हिरयाणा िवकास शहरी Ģािधकरण (एचएसवीपी) की ज़मीन allot की, allot करने क े बाद 
थोड़ा पैसा उनसे िलया, क ु छ पैसे सरकार की ओर से िदए गए। ऐसे बड़े शहरȗ मȂ उनको तीन 
माकȃट्स दी गईं। क ु छ ऐसे एिरयाज़ थे, जहां 20-20 साल से लोग पƺे पर भ
ूिम लेकर बैठे हुए थे, 
अब उनका िकराया बहुत कम था, Çयुिनिसपैिलटी को भी बहुत लाभ नहीं होता था, उनको उठा भी 
नहीं सकते थे, इसिलए उनके  िलए 'शहरी Îवािम
त्व योजना' बनाकर 20 साल से पुराने िजतने भी 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

लोग हȅ, जो अपने Îथान पर बैठे हȅ, उनसे थोड़ा एक partial पैसा लेकर उनके  नाम अलॉटमȂट कर 
दी गई। ' शहरी Îवािमत्व योजना' क े अंतगर्त 5,000 लोगȗ को अलॉटमȂट दे दी गई हȅ, अभी वह 
Îकीम चालू है। इन सब बातȗ को Îटेट्स क े िमिनÎट सर् क े सामने भी इस िवषय मȂ उठाएंगे िक ऐसे 
लोगȗ को काम करने क े िलए Îथायी माकȃ ट िमले। नए बजट मȂ इन पांच वषș मȂ 500 हाट बाज़ार 
बनाएंगे। उसके  िलए Ģदेश सरकारȗ को सुिवधा दी जाएगी। जो अपने यहां बाज़ार बनना चाहȂगे, 
उनको 500 बाजारȗ क े िलए इस योजना क े अंतगर्त पैसा िदया
 जाएगा। वषर् 2014 से लेकर अब तक 
अन्य-अन्य Îथानȗ पर 1410 वȂिंडग माकȃट्स, बाजारȗ का िनमार्ण िकया जा चुका है। इसमȂ आगे 
और Ģगित होग
ी। क ु छ Îथानȗ पर ऐसा भी पाया गया िक इन लोगȗ को, जो unauthorized तरीके  
से दुकानȂ, आǛय Îथल बने हुए थे, क्यȗिक कोटर् क े भी ऑडर्र कई जगहȗ पर आ जाते हȅ, कहीं 
उनका मािलकाना हक नहीं होता है। जब Ģदेश सरकार योजना नहीं बनाती है, तो ऐसे उनको 
हटाने क े िलए भी िकया
 गया है। इसमȂ खास कर आम आदमी पाटीर् क े हमारे माननीय सदÎय Ǜी 
िवकर्मजीत िंसह साहनी जी 1984, Sikh riots victims, ितलक िवहार क े बारे मȂ ĢÌन उठाया और 
उनको वहां से हटा िदया गया है, तो उसमȂ जो िरपोटर् वहीं से आई है, "It is submitted that this 
Department has allotted 978 number of flats at Tilak Vihar to  1984 riots victims and no
 
allotment has been made at Mangolpuri. Th e cost of flat is different as per the 
location. The cost of flat at Tilak Naga r at various blocks are 45,000 per unit, यहा ं 
यूिनट नहीं िलखा है, लेिकन square metre, square foot हो सकता है। Ground Floor - 
83,900; First Floor/Second Floor - 72,600. Th e simple interest is being charged on 
outstanding pending dues. There is no policy for waiver of cost of flats and interest 
thereon. However, there is a policy for co nverting the said leasehold grants to 
freehold vide order of Minist ry of Urban Affairs.  This Department grants freehold 
rights on the basis of applications received  which gets registered  with the concerned 
sub-registarar office." क ु छ लोगȗ ने िजन्हȗने, पैसे जमा कराए, तो उनको allotment हुई है, 
लेिकन बहुत लोगȗ ने इसमȂ प
ैसे जमा नहीं कराए, इस कारण से वह illegal encroachment इस 
पर मानी जा रही है। महोदय, शहरी Îमाटर् िमशन क े बजट क े ऊपर एक िवषय आया, जो हमारे 
माननीय सदÎय जवाहर सरकार जी ने उठाया। इस बार िसफर् Rs. 2,400 cror e, Smart City 
Mission को िदया गया है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सदÎय को बताना चाहूंगा िक यह 48 
हजार करोड़ रुपय े, जो Îमाटर् िसटी िमशन क े िलए पहले आवंिटत िकया गया था, उसमȂ 2024 
तक 100 शहरȗ क े िलए 45 हजार  600 करोड़  रुपय े पहले ही जारी िकए गए हȅ। शेष बचा 2,400 
करोड़ रुपय े को 25 माच र्, 2025 तक खचर् करना है, जो बचे हुए Ģोजेक्ट्स हȅ, क्यȗिक यह उसी 
Îकीम का िहÎसा है, जो पहले घोषणा की गई थी,  यह उसी का िहÎसा है।  इसमȂ अलग से कोई 
बड़ा बजट घोिषत नहीं िकया गया है।  उस योजना क े अंतगर्त 90 परस Ȃट पिरयोजना
एं पूरी हो 
चुकी हȅ, जो शेष दस परसȂट बची हȅ, उनके  िलए ही इस बजट को िरलीज िकया गया है। Îमाटर् 
िसटी िमशन मȂ फ ु ल पैसा 1,64,223 crore रुपय े की लागत से 8,016 पिरयोजनाओं क े कायार्न्वय
न 
पर खचर् हुए हȅ।  महोदय, पिरवहन क े नाते से मȅ एक उǄर िवशेष तौर पर चैन्नई मेटर्ो रेल 
पिरयोजना क े बारे मȂ देना चाहता हूं। इसके  बारे मȂ हमारे माननीय सासंद Ǜी आर. िगिरराजन जी, 
I am answering your question. सर , इस बारे मȂ वैसे तो एक पतर् क े माध्यम से तिमलनाडु 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
89

सरकार को 22 जुलाई को सारे िवषय क े बारे मȂ अवगत करा चुका हूं, िफर भी 2018 से यह िवषय 
चल रहा है और 2018 मȂ यह योजना बनी।  यह पूरी योजना लगभग 60 हजार करोड़ रुपय े से 
ऊपर की यह योजना थी, लेिकन हमȂ इसमȂ ताली बजाने की आवÌयकता नहीं है िक इस योजना 
को जब आगे भारत सरकार से MoHUA क े साथ इन्हȗने उठाया था, तो साथ मȂ यह िवषय था िक 
20 परसȂट पैसा तिमलनाडु सरकार लगाएगी, 20 परसȂट क ेन्दर् सरकार का िहÎसा होगा और बाकी 
ऋण क े माध्यम से यह िलया जाएगा और उसमȂ ऋण क े  नाते से JICA और ADB को ऋण देना था। 
Ģिकर्या यह है िक ये ऋण क ेन्दर् सरकार की गारंटी क े ऊपर िदया जाता है। अभी क ेन्दर् सरकार की 
गारंटी क े िलए इन्हȗने िलखा है, तो वहां क े उस समय क े Ǜी टी.वी. सोमानाथन, सेकर् ेटरी, 
तिमलनाडु मȂ थे, Principal Secretary to Government (Planning & Devel
opment), 
Government of Tamil Nadu. उन्हȗने जो िलखा, उसमȂ से जो िरलेवȂट है, उसको मȅ पढ़कर सुना 
रहा हूं, "This is without prejudice to the furt her consideration of the project by the 
Government of India for its financial assistance after  following due procedure of 
approvals at PIB and Cabinet le vels.  For further processing  of the project for getting 
sanction from the JICA's Modified STEP  loan, I am to request you to kindly 
recommend the Phase-II of the Chennai Metr o Rail Project to the Department of 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance for facilitating earlier sanction of loans by JICA."  
अब इन्हȗने अलीर् लोन क े सȅक्शन क े िलए कहा था, "The State Government is also sending 
the 'Debt Sustainability Certifi cate' to the DE
A with a copy  to the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs." जब इन्हȗने यह वायदा िकया िक हमको यह अनुमित दे दी जाये, तो हमने 
इनको इस Ģकार से "In view of the foregoing, the request to the Govern ment of Japan, 
for the Modified STEP loan need not be construed as approval for Government of 
India's financial commitment which may come  only after following Government of 
India's financial procedure.  In view of  the foregoing, it is requested that the 
Government of India may kindly send..." यह िंĢिसपल सेकर् ेटरी ने िरक्वेÎट क े िलए कहा 
था, हमने उǄर मȂ formally िलखा, "With rega
 rd to your specific query of funding from 
JICA and ADB, it is further informed that the Central Government has already 
recommended that proposal of Governme nt of Tamil Nadu for funding from 
Bilateral/Multilateral agencies like JICA, ADB, NDB and AIIB. Chennai Metro Rail 
Corporation, the implementing agency of the present project, is already receiving 
funding from above agencies.  I am enclosing the details."   
िडटेÊस मȂ उनकी करȂसी क े िहसाब से रािश िलखी है, यह लगभग 9 हजार करोड़ रुपय े 
बैठती है और ये 9 हजार करोड़ रुपय े ले चुक े हȅ और बाकी भी सȅक्शन हो चुका है, िजसे वहां से ले 
सकते हȅ। इसिलए कहीं भी गवनर्मȂट ऑफ इंिडया का कोई िवषय बाकी बचा नहीं है। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You had already pu t the query, and he has answered it. 
...(Interruptions)... Please, no cross-talking.  ..(Interruptions)...   
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, जो मोटी-मोटी क्वेरीज़ की गई थीं, बताई गई 
थीं, उनका मȅने जबाव िदया है। िफर भी हम Ģदेशȗ को लगातार इसमȂ सहायता कर रहे हȅ। क ु ल 
िमलाकर यह िवषय तो Ģदेश सरकारȗ का ही होता है, शहरȗ क े िवकास क े नाते, नये शहर बसाने 
क े नाते। िफर भी, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की सोच है िक हमारे शहर अच्छे तर
ीके  से िवकिसत होने चािहए 
और उन अच्छे िवकिसत शहरȗ क े िलए क ेन्दर् सरकार की ओर से िजतनी ज्यादा से ज्यादा 
सहायता की जा सके , वह सȂटर्ल अिसÎटȂस दी जाती है। इसमȂ आगे भी िनरंतर
 मदद की जाएगी 
और यह लगातार चलने वाला कायर्कर्म है, यह रुकन े वाला नहीं है। इस साल क े बजट मȂ हम 
पयार्Ãत सहायता दे रहे हȅ और आगे भी इसी Ģकार से जारी रखȂगे, धन्यवाद।                                                
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित: धन्यवाद माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े जबाव क े साथ discussion on 
the working of the Ministry of  Housing and Urban Affairs खत्म हुआ।  Now, we will take 
up Discussion on the working of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare. Shri 
Randeep Singh Surjewala to raise a discu ssion on the working of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare.    
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
 AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला (राजÎथान): शुिकर्या उपसभापित जी। क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण 
शÅद तो बहुत अच्छे लगते हȅ, पर 10 साल से भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार ने क ृिष एवं िकसान 
कÊयाण को शकु िन क े चौपड़ का मोहरा बना रखा है। वƪ की मांग है िक 72 करोड़  देश क े 
अन्नदाता िकसानȗ और खेत मजदूरȗ को कौरवȗ क
े  इस चकर्Ëयूह से अब िनजात िदलवाई जाए। 
िकसान की आय दोगुनी करने, िकसान को लागत पर 50 Ģितशत मुनाफा देने, िकसान का ददर् 
बांटने क े 10 साल  मȂ अनेकȗ जुमले गढ़े गए, पर िकसान को िमला क्या, क ेवल सरकार की 
दुत्कार, िदÊली की सीमाओं पर नÌतरȗ और लािठयȗ
 की मार और आत्महत्या की हार। महोदय, ये 
िदखावे क े िलए िकसानȗ की आरती तो उतारते हȅ, पर असिलयत मȂ ये वे लोग हȅ, जो िकसान की 
राह मȂ कील, काँट
े और नÌतर िबछवाते हȅ। काश! इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी और क ृिष मंतर्ी ने राÍटर् 
किव रामधारी िंसह िदनकर जी को पढ़ा होता। And I will quote only four lines.  
  'आरती िलये तू िकसे ढ ूंढ़ता है मूरख,  
    मिन्दरȗ, राजĢासादȗ मȂ, तहखानȗ मȂ?  
   देवता कहीं सड़कȗ पर िगƺी तोड़ रहे,  
देवता िमलȂगे खेतȗ मȂ, खिलहानȗ मȂ। '      
   
 सर, िकसानȗ की यह दुदर्शा क्यȗ हुई, िकसानȗ की दशा क ै से सुधारी जा सकती है - हम 
इन दोनȗ पक्षȗ पर चचार् करȂगे। महोदय, नंबर 1 िंबदु तो यह है िक िकसान की आय दुगुनी करने का 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
91

वादा जुमला सािबत हुआ। 28 फरवरी, 2016 को उǄर Ģदेश क े बरेली मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने यह 
वादा था िकया िक 2022 तक िकसान की आय दुगुनी हो जाएगी। ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
पयार्वरण, वन और जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ी (Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव): .... िखलाफ िलखी थी, 
आपातकाल को हटाने क े िलए।   
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: देिखए, वÎतुिÎथित यह है िक यह आपके  ऊपर िबÊकु ल ठीक लागू 
होती है।  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा: आपातकाल वाली यह चीज़ नहीं थी।  
 
Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव: यह थी आपातकाल वाली। 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: महोदय, ये भाजपाई ऐसे सÅज़बाग िदखाते हȅ िक िकसान 27 रुपय े 
रोज कमाता है। क ेवल 27 रुपय े! आप Îवयं िकसान की एक ऐसी गर्ामीण पृÍठभूिम से आते हȅ, आप 
अंदाजा लगाइए, लेिकन Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और उनके  क ृिष मंतर्ी जी उसे दुगुनी आमदनी बताते हȅ। 
महोदय, यह मȅ िसफर् कह ही नहीं रहा हूं, मȅ NSSO की 2021 की िरपोटर् लेकर आया हूं, यिद आप 
कहȂगे, तो उसे सदन क े पटल पर रख दूंगा।  
 महोदय, इतना ही नहीं, 24 माचर्, 2022 को  - ये कहते थे िक 2022 तक  आय दुगुनी 
होगी, लेिकन इनकी 37th Standing Committee on Agriculture की जो िरपोटर् है, उसने यह 
Îवीकार िकया है िक िकसान की आय दुगुनी होने की बजाय कम हो गई है।   Sir, with your 
permission, I would like to read a line from th at Report.  Para 1.35 says, "But there is 
no denial that major task for doubling of income of farmers lies with the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare. It a ppears from the reply furnished by the 
Department that the Department is far from doubling the income of farmers; rather, in 
some States, it has come down."  सर, मȅ एक और पहलू आपके  संज्ञान मȂ लाऊं गा। कल 
खेती का लंबा-चौड़ा बजट पेश करने की शेखी बघारी गई, पर 5 सालȗ की वाÎतिवकता क्या है? 
इन्हȗने 5 सालȗ मȂ खेती क े बजट से 1 लाख करोड़ रुपय े सरȂडर कर िदए।   
सर, मȅ आपके  संज्ञान मȂ दो पहलू लाऊं गा। साल 2020-21 मȂ देश मȂ क ृिष का बजट क ु ल 
क Ȃदर्ीय बजट का 4.47 Ģितशत था, लेिकन आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी, साल 2024-25 मȂ क ृिष का बजट 
देश क
े  क ु ल बजट का 2.74 परसȂट रह गया है, यानी आधा कम कर िदया गया है- यह * की बात 
है।  महोदय, जब आपने मुझे बजट 2024-25 की चचार् मȂ भाग लेने का मौका िदया, तब मȅने 
खुलासा िकया था िक आपने 10 सालȗ मȂ खेती की छह बड़ी Îकीमȗ क े 3 लाख करोड़ रुपय े काट 
िदए। महोदय, मȅ आज एक और खुलासा लेकर आया हूं। िपछले वाले  ĢÌन का न तो क ृिष मंतर्ी ने 
                                                            
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

जवाब िदया और न ही िवǄ मंतर्ी महोदया ने जवाब िदया है, मȅ अब एक और नया खुलासा लेकर 
आया हूं, जो इनकी खेती िवरोधी मानिसकता को िदखाता है।  
महोदय, 5 सालȗ मȂ मोदी सरकार ने - िजसके  आंकड़े अब बजट मȂ उपलÅध हȅ, मोदी 
सरकार ने खेती क े िवभाग का 1 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का बजट सरȂडर कर िदया। महोदय, यह * की 
बात है। आपने 2018-19 मȂ 21,043 करोड़ रुपय े सरȂडर िकए, 2019-20 मȂ 34,518 करोड़ रुपय े 
सरȂडर िकए, 2020-21 मȂ 23,825 करोड़ रुपय े सरȂडर िकए, 2021-22 मȂ 429 करोड़ रुपय े सरȂडर 
िकए और 2022-23 मȂ 19,762 करोड़ रुपय े सरȂडर िकए। महोदय, आप 1 लाख करोड़ रुपय े 
सरȂडर करते हȅ और िकसान क े कÊयाण की बात भी करते हȅ!    
 सर, मȅ अगला एक और पहलू आपके  समक्ष रखूंगा जो पीएम
-क ु सुम ( Ģधान मंतर्ी 
िकसान ऊजार् सुरक्षा एवं उत्थान महािभयान) है। इसका बड़ा ढोल पीटा गया, पर क ु सुम की जगह 
आपने िकसान क े राÎते म
Ȃ कांटे िबछा िदए। सर, साल 2019 मȂ बजट मȂ इसी सरकार ने दस हजार 
मेगावॉट िरन्यूएबल एनजीर् लगाने क े िलए पीएम क ु सुम योजना की शुरुआत  की। दो टारगेट्स और 
िदए। कहा गया िक साढ़े 17 लाख सोलर एगर्ीकÊचर पंप लगाए जाएंगे। यह भी कहा गया िक दस 
लाख िकसानȗ क े िबजली Ƿूबव ेल को भी सोलर Ƿूबव ेल मȂ बदल िदया जाएगा। आदरणीय मंतर्ी 
जी, कल मȅने आपकी वेबसाइट देखी और पीएम क ु सुम क े आंकड़े िनकाले। आप भी चȚक जाए ंगे। 
इनकी वेबसाइट पर कल शाम तक जो िलखा था, मȅ उसकी कॉपी लेकर आया हूँ। आप कहȂगे तो 
ऑथȂिटके ट कर दूंगा। साल 2019 से 30 जून, 2024 तक , पाँच साल मȂ िसफर् 1,61,640 
इंिडिवजुअल सोलर पंप सȅक्शन िकए। और लगाए िकतने – 2,644 पंप। 2,644 पंप लगाक
र कहते 
हȅ िक देश क े िकसान की हालात बदल जाएगी, वो भी 72 करोड़ िकसानȗ की!  
दूसरा कहा था िक साढ़े 17 लाख सोलर एगर्ीकÊचर पंप लगाएंगे, 13,54,315 सȅक्शन िकए 
और लगाए िकतने – 3,97,437, क
े वल 22 Ģितशत! 72 करोड़ िकसानȗ क े िलए चार लाख सोलर 
पंप लगाकर अपनी पीठ थपथपा रहे हȅ।  
तीसरा, बोलते हȅ िक दस हजार मेगावॉट सोलर क ै पेिसटी लगाएंगे। सȅक्शन की 8,112 
मेगावॉट और लगाई िकतनी 256 मेगावॉट! यह अपने आप मȂ िकसान से कर्ूर मजाक है। यह क ु सुम 
की जगह कांटे बोना नहीं, तो क्या ह
ै? एक और पहलू - कल िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने एगर्ीकÊचर 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर फ ं ड को लेकर बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ कीं। उसके  ढोल की पोल भी खुली हुई है। बजट 2020 
मȂ 15 मई, 2020 को पहली बार आपकी सरकार न
े एक लाख करोड़ क े एगर्ीकÊचर इंģाÎटर्क्चर 
फ ं ड की घोषणा की, बड़ी-बड़ी Ģेस वातार्एं कीं, अखबार मȂ इÌतहार िदए, खबर छपी। िवǄ मंतर्ी 
जी ने कल क्या कहा? खुद मान िलया िक पाँच साल मȂ 35,000 करोड़ क े Ģोजेक्ट एगर्ीकÊचर 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर फ ं ड से सȅक्शन िकए हȅ, यानी 65,000 करोड़ तो पहले िदन ही छोड़ िदए। पाँच साल 
मȂ क ेवल 35000 करोड़! क्यȗिक उन्हȗने वहां सȅक्शन शÅद इÎतेमाल िकया था, इसिलए मȅने जाकर 
िफर चेक िकया
, तो पता चला िक वे यहाँ भी हमȂ असत्य बोलकर चली गईं। उन्हȗने यह िछपा िलया 
िक उस 35,000 करोड़ क े सȅक्शन Ģोजेक्ट मȂ क ेवल 25,504 करोड़ ही जारी िकए हȅ। एगर्ीकÊचर 
इंģाÎटर्क्चर फ ं ड क े नाम पर पाँच साल मȂ 5,000 करोड़ जारी करते हȅ और 72 करोड़ िकसानȗ क े 
कÊयाण की बात करते हȅ, इससे कर्ूर मजाक क्या कोई हो सकता है?  
                                                            
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
93

एक और पहलू - कल पीएम फसल बीमा योजना क े बारे मȂ बड़े-बड़े कसीदे पढ़े गए। 
उपसभापित जी, पीएम फसल बीमा योजना इस देश की सबसे बड़ी Ģाइवेट इंÌयोरȂस क ंपनी 
मुनाफा योजना है, इसिलए मȅ इनकी एगर्ीकÊचर िमिनÎटर्ी का आंकड़ा ले आया हूँ। मंतर्ी जी, साल 
2016-17 से 30 जून, 2024 तक पीएम फसल बीमा योजना का Ģीिमयम िकतना िदया – 
2,29,789 करोड़ या 2,30,000 करोड़ मान लीिजए। बीमा क
ं पिनयȗ को मुनाफा िकतना हुआ – 
63,648 करोड़, यानी िकसान को क्लेम कम और बीमा क ंपनी को मुनाफा ज्यादा। बीमा क ंपिनयां 
63,648 करोड़ कमाती हȅ और मोदी सरकार अपनी पीठ थपथपा आती है, यह िकस Ģकार की 
Îकीम है? 
सर, एक और पहलू - मोदी सरकार खेती को बंधक बनाने क े िलए पहले तीन खेती िवरोधी 
काले कानून लाई और िफ
र एमएसपी पर खरीद ही नहीं करवाई। यहाँ एमएसपी की बड़ी चचार् ह ुई। 
एक सवाल क े जवाब मȂ आपदा को अवसर मȂ तÅदील करने क े िलए यही सरकार तीन क ृिष िवरोधी 
काले कानून लाई। लाखȗ िकसान िदÊली क े दरवाजे पर एक साल से ज्यादा पड़े रहे - धूप मȂ, गमीर् 
मȂ, बािरश मȂ। आपने भी उनकी Ëयथा महसूस की होगी, उनका ददर् जरूर  महसूस िकया होगा। 
700 िकसान शहीद हो गए। उनकी शहादत पर स
ंसद क े अंदर संवेदना Ģकट करने से इंकार कर 
िदया गया।  िकसान तड़प-तड़प कर क ेवल न्याय मांगने आया था, िदÊली क े दरवाजे पर दÎतक 
देकर हक मांगने आया था, लाल िकले पर कÅजा करने नहीं आया था।  कानून तो वािपस िलए, 
लेिकन एमएसपी की गारंटी का जो वायदा िकया था, वह आज तक पूरा नहीं हुआ। आज मȅ आपसे 
यह कहूंगा िक िकसान एमएसपी की गारंटी क्यȗ मांगता है, एमएसपी की गारंटी की क्या जरूरत  
है? कारण बड़ा साफ है, क्यȗिक मोदी सरकार, भाजपा सरकार, एनडी
ए सरकार घोिषत 
एमएसपी पर, जो एमएसपी आप िनधार्िरत करते हȅ, उस पर फसल खरीदते ही नहीं हȅ।  यह इस 
देश का दुभार्ग्य है। एमएसपी का क्या फायदा है? यह मȅ नहीं कहा रहा हूं, मȅने सदन क े पटल पर 
सवाल पूछा और 6 िदन पहले राज्य सभा मȂ उस सवाल का जवाब आया। उस जवाब ने इस ढोल 
की पोल खोल दी।  सर, यह वह जवाब है, this is Unstarred Question No. 483 answered on 
26th July, 2024 by the hon. Agriculture Minister. मȅने पूछा था िक 2023-24 मȂ रबी की 
िकतनी फसल पैदा हुई और उसमȂ से आपने िकतनी फसल को एमएसपी पर खरीदा? सर, मȅ यह 
पढ़कर बताना चाहता हूं। गेहूं, 2023-24 रबी मȂ, 1,129 लाख मीिटर्क टन पैदा हुआ। आपने 
खरीदी, यह आपका जवाब है - 262 लाख टन, यानी 23 परस Ȃट, तो बाकी कहां जाएं? आप 
एमएसपी पर खरीदते ही नहीं हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप रखते हȗगे, आप बहुत बड़े िकसान हȅ। जौ 
की फसल द
ेखȂ - 16 लाख, 53 हज़ार टन पैदा हुई, यह मंतर्ी जी ने बताया।  एमएसपी पर िकतना 
खरीदा - ज़ीरो।  एक दाना नहीं खरीदा।  यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूं, यह आपका जवाब ह
ै।  चना - जो 
आप भी उगाते हȅ, मȅ भी उगाता हूं, यहां और भी लोग कहीं न कहीं क ृिष की पृÍठभूिम से जुड़े हुए हȅ 
- 115 लाख, 76 हज़ार टन पैदा हुआ।  यह आपने बताया और खरीदा िकतना - 43 हज़ार टन, 
0.37 परसȂट एमएसपी पर खरीदा।  यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा ह
ूं, यह आपका ही 6 िदन पुराना जवाब है।  
मसूर - 17 लाख, 54 हज़ार टन पैदा हुई, यह रबी मȂ आपने खरीदी िकतनी - 2 लाख, 47 हज़ार 
टन, जो िक 14 परसȂट है।  सरसȗ क े संबंध मȂ आपने बताया िक यह 131 लाख, 61 हज़ार टन पैदा 
हुई और खरीदी िकतनी - 12 लाख, 9 हज़ार  टन, जो िक 9.19 परसȂट है। सूरजमुखी - आपके  
मुतािबक 51 हज़ार टन पैदा हुई और ज़ीरो परसȂट एमएसपी पर खरीदी। यह आपका जवाब है, जो 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

6 िदन पहले इसी सदन मȂ आपने मुझे िदया था। जब आप एमएसपी पर मेरी फसल खरीदȂगे ही 
नहीं, तो उस एमएसपी को खत्म किरए। उस एमएसपी को बुलडोजर क े नीचे क ुचिलए। सवाल 
बड़ा सीधा है िक उसका लाभ क्या है?  
सर, इतना ही नहीं एक और घोर अन्याय  िकसान क े साथ हुआ। क ृिष मूÊय आयोग से बड़ी 
तो कोई िरपोटर् नहीं है। मȅ उनकी ताजी िरपोटर् लेकर आया हूं। क ृिष मूÊय आयोग ने खुद Îवीकारा 
िक एमएसपी का मूÊयांकन Ģांत की लागत क े मुतािब क सही नहीं है।  राज्यȗ मȂ फसल क े उत्पादन 
की लागत एमएसपी से अिधक है। यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूं, यह क ृिष मूÊय आयोग की जो िरपोटर् 
2024-25 है, जो इन्हȗने अपलोड की हुई है, वह मȅ लेकर आया हूं। सर, इसी िरपोटर् मȂ सीएसीपी ने 
2022-23 की लागत का 2024 की िरपोटर् मȂ वाÎति
वक मूÊयांकन िकया - 'C2 plus 50 per cent' 
पर भी नहीं, 'A2 plus FL' पर। मंतर्ी जी, उसके  आधार पर उन्हȗने िलखा है, मȅ उसे पढ़ देता हूं। 
रागी मȂ पूरे देश मȂ िकसान को 1,167 रुपया Ģित हेक्टेयर का नुकसान हुआ।  यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा 
हूं, यह सीएस
ीपी कह रहा है।  धान मȂ - महाराÍटर् मȂ, महाराÍटर् क े मेरे साथी यहां बैठे हȅ - िकसान 
को 31.4 Ģितशत का नुकसान हुआ है।  राजÎथान मȂ, राजÎथान क े साथी यहां बैठे हȅ, िबÊकु ल मेरे 
सामने आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी, ज्वार मȂ 718 रुपया Ģित हेक्टेयर का नुकसान हुआ। उड़द मȂ - 
गुजरात क े मेरे साथी बैठे हȅ - 475 रुपय े हेक्टेयर का नुकसान हुआ। सोयाबीन मȂ गुजरात मȂ 4,749 
रुपए  का नुकसान हुआ।  िफर ऐसे MSP का औिचत्य क्या!  यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूँ, यह इनकी 
िरपोटर् कह रही है। 
 सर, एक और Market Intervention Scheme  and Price Support Scheme, यह 
सबसे महत्वपूणर् है, क्यȗिक 23 फसलȗ पर MSP देते हȅ, िजन पर नहीं देते, अगर कीमत िगर 
जाए, तो उन पर यह Market Intervention Scheme है , उस पर आपने ताला लगा िदया। यह 
Îकीम िकसके  िलए है?  आलू क े िलए, टमाटर क े िलए, Ãयाज क े िलए, सेब-संतरे क े िलए, कीनू 
क े िलए, नािरयल, िमचर् और अदरक क े िलए।  मंतर्ी जी, 2022-23 मȂ इसका बजट था 4,007 
करोड़, 2023-24 मȂ आपने बजट काट कर 40 करोड़  कर िदया और इस साल िकतना िकया, 
ज़ीरो!  इस साल इसका बजट है ज़ीरो!  
 सर, इतना ही नहीं, खेती, खाद और डेयरी क्षेतर्ȗ से जुड़ी िजतनी ÎकीÇस हȅ, उनमȂ 
माननीय क ृिष मंतर्ी जी ने भयंकर कटौती कर दी।  पीएम फसल बीमा योजना 2023-24 मȂ 15 
हजार करोड़, 2024-25 मȂ 14,600 करोड़;  distribution of pulses to States for welfare 
schemes 2023-24 मȂ 446 करोड़, 2024-25 मȂ काट कर 300 करोड़; पीएम िकसान मानधन 
योजना 2023-24 मȂ 138 करोड़, 2024-25 मȂ 100 करोड़; payment for indigenous Urea 
2023-24 मȂ 1 लाख 2 हजार करोड़, 2024-25 मȂ एक लाख करोड़; payment for import of 
Urea 2023-24 मȂ 30 हजार करोड़, 2024-25 मȂ 22,634 करोड़; payment for indigenous 
P&K Fertilizer 2023-24 मȂ 32,370 करोड़, अब 26,500 करोड़; payment for imported 
P&K Fertilizer 2023-24 मȂ 27,930 करोड़, अब 18,500 करोड़; dairy development मȂ 2023-
24 मȂ 371 करोड़, अब ज़ीरो; राÍटर्ीय गोकु ल िमशन, कम से कम गाय का तो सोच लेते! उसमȂ 
2023-24 मȂ 869 करोड़, अब 700 करोड़;  dairying through co-operatives, बड़ी -बड़ी बातȂ 
होती हȅ, 2023-24 मȂ 166 करोड़, अब ज़ीरो; पीएम िकसान संपदा योजना 2023-24 मȂ 745 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
95

करोड़, अब 729 करोड़। अके ले 25,711 करोड़ तो आप फिर्टलाइजर की सिÅसडी खा गए, आपने 
काट दी।   
 सर, मोदी सरकार मȂ 9 साल मȂ एक लाख िकसानȗ ने आत्महत्या की है। NCRB यह 
बोलता है - 1,00,449.  यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा, मȅ आपकी NCRB की िरपोटर् लेकर आया हूँ। हर 
रोज इस देश क े 31 अन्नदाता आत्महत्या का फ ंदा चूमने को मजबूर हȅ। आपको नींद क ै से आती 
है? आपकी आत्मा आपको क्यȗ नहीं झकझोरती? आपकी आत्मा आपको कचोटती क्यȗ नहीं? 
सवाल यह है, एक देशवासी क े तौर पर मȅ यह पूछना चाहता हूँ। सर, एक तरफ फसल की कीमत 
नहीं और दूसरी तरफ यह हाल! इसीिलए राहुल जी ने, खरगे जी ने यह कहा है िक MSP की 
कानूनी गारंटी इसी सदन से िदलाएँगे, खेती पर गÅबर िंसह टैक्स से पीछा छ ुड़ाएँगे और िकसान 
को कजर् मुिƪ भी िदलाएँगे।  हम यह करके  िदखाएँगे।   
 सर, हालात क्या हȅ? जब लोक सभा मȂ िवपक्ष क े नेता, मेरे नेता, राहुल गाँधी दिलतȗ, 
िकसानȗ और मजदूरȗ क े िहतȗ की बात उठाते हȅ, तो ये हमारी जाित पुछवाते हȅ!  ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप यहाँ की चचार् कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... उस सदन की चचार् नहीं कीिजए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  आप यहाँ की बात कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: सर, जाित जाननी है, तो सोनीपत क े खेतȗ मȂ िचलिचलाती गमीर् मȂ 
राहुल गाँधी जी क े साथ धान की पौध लगाते िकसान से हमारी जाित पूिछए। जाित पूछनी है, तो 
आजादपुर मंडी मȂ आँसू बहाते हुए सÅजी वाले रामेÌवर भाई से पूिछए, िजसकी कड़ी मेहनत की 
िंजदगी का एक िहÎसा बाँटने मेरे नेता वहाँ गए थे। जाित पूछनी है, तो सुÊतानपुर क े जूती गाँठने 
वाले हमारे मेहनतकश रामचेत भाई से पूिछए, िजसके  साथ बैठ कर उसकी मेहनत का पसीना 
बाँटा था मेरे नेता ने। जाित पूछनी है, तो अंबाला और चंडीगढ़ क े टर्क डर्ाइवरȗ से पूिछए, िजनकी 
मुिÌकल िंजदगी का सुख और दुख बाँटा था हमने। हमारी जाित पूछनी है, तो कीिर्त नगर क े हमारे 
बढ़ई भाइयȗ से पूिछए, करोल बाग क े मैक ेिनक भाइयȗ से पूिछए, िजनकी मेहनत का आकलन 
महसूस करने और समझने गए थे हमारे नेता। सǄा क े अहंकार की ऊ ँची अƺािलकाओं मȂ बैठे हुए, 
आपको िकसान, मजदूर, दिलत, गरीब की आवाज़ सुनाई नहीं देती। मȅ िफर इनको कहूँगा, तब 
मेरे बड़े भाई मंतर्ी जी िफर कहȂगे।  य े िदनकर जी की ही बात सुन लेते।  दोबारा याद िदलाता हूँ 
िक:   
 
"मूल जानना बड़ा किठन है निदयȗ का वीरȗ का, 
धनुष छोड़कर और गोतर् क्या होता है रणधीरȗ का, 
पाते हȅ सÇमान तपोबल से भूतल पर शूर 
शोर मचा रहे हȅ क ेवल कायर और कर्ूर। " 
  
 उपसभापित महोदय, समय आ गया है िक अहंकार की रुई  को अपने कानȗ से 
िनकािलए, सǄा क े घमंड क े परदȗ को आंखȗ से हटाइए, िदल पर पड़े पत्थरȗ को दूर किरए, 
थोड़ा सा िकसान
 और मजदूर की टीस को समझने लग जाइए, तािक आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी, 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

िकसान, गरीब, मजदूर, दिलत, िपछड़ȗ की Ëयथा, उनकी चीत्कार आपको सुनाई देने लगे। 
वरना, हम भी संकÊप लेते हȅ िक "चलो संघषर् आठȗ याम तुमसे.." उपसभापित जी, याम Ģहर को 
कहते हȅ। एक िदन मȂ आठ Ģहर होते हȅ। 
   " चलो संघषर् आठȗ याम तुमसे  
   करȂगे अंत तक संगर्ाम तुमसे..। "  
  
 िकसान क े िलए हमारी जो कÊपना है, इस देश क े मजदूर क े िलए जो कÊपना है: 
   " हमारी कÊपना साकार होगी,  
   िकसानȗ की िफर जय-जयकार होगी ।"   
 
 जय जवान, जय िकसान!  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सुरजेवाला जी, आपका धन्यवाद। आपने अपनी तकर
ीर मȂ एक-दो 
अनपािर्लयामȂटर्ी शÅद इÎतेमाल िकये हȅ, वे िरकॉडर् से हट जाएँगे। माननीय Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर। 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित जी, आज क ृिष जैसे महत्वपूणर् बजट पर चचार् 
मȂ मुझे ...(Ëयवध
ान)... अभी Îटाटर् हुआ है, माइक ऑन हो जाएगा।  थोड़ा वेट कीिजए। आपने मुझे 
बोलने का मौका िदया ...(Ëयवध ान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: बगल मȂ आपका माइक ऑन है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: माननीय उपसभापित जी, देश की आजादी क े बाद, इस देश मȂ अगर कोई 
सामान्य Ëयिƪ दो रोटी खाता था, तो एक रोटी का अनाज बाहर का होता था। वह आयात िकया 
जाता था।  मȅ इस देश क े िकसानȗ का अिभनंदन करना चाहता ह
ूँ िक उन्हȗने अपनी कड़ी मेहनत 
से इस देश को खाǏान्न क े मामले मȂ आत्मिनभर्र बनाया।  यह उसी का पिरणाम है िक आज हमारी 
मोदी सरकार क े ǎारा देश क े 80 करोड़ लोगȗ को मुÄत मȂ अनाज देना संभव हो पाया। इसिलए मȅ 
इस देश क े िकसानȗ का अिभनंदन करता हूँ। 
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, चूँिक यह बजट की चचार् है और िकसी भी बजट का जो 
एलोके शन है, वह उस क्षेतर् क े िवकास क े िलए सरकार की Ģितबǉता Ģदिर्शत करता है। यह जो 
हमारा बजट है, अगर मȅ उसमȂ देखूँ, तो चूँिक 2014 मȂ नरȂदर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश मȂ सरकार 
बनी और अगर म
ȅ उससे पहले 2014 मȂ जो यूपीए की सरकार थी, उसकी बात करू ँ.. 
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
जहां  2014 तक 21,933 करोड़ रुपए  का बजट था , वहीं 2023-24 मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व 
वाली सरकार ने इस बजट को बढ़ा कर लगभग 1,52,000 करोड़ रुपए  करने का काम िकया है ,
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
97

जो साढ़े पांच गुना से अिधक की वृिǉ है। यह मोदी सरकार की िकसानȗ क े Ģित Ģितबǉता को 
Ģदिर्शत करता है।   
माननीय उपसभापित जी ,अब यह सरकर िकसानȗ को लेकर िकतनी गंभीर है ,इसके  बारे 
मȂ बताता हूँ। मुझे 2009 से 2014 क े बीच इस देश क े लोकसभा का सदÎय रहने का भी मौका िमला। 
उस दरÇयान मुझे तीन वषर् एगर्ीकÊचर कमेटी का भी सदÎय रहने का मौका िमला।  उस 
एगर्ीकÊचर कमेटी क े चेयरमैन वासुदेव आचायर् जी थे, जो कÇयुिनÎट पाटीर् क े थे। म ȅ उस कमेटी मȂ 
सदÎय था और मेरा सौभाग्य है िक मुझे उस कमेटी मȂ Îवामीनाथन जी क े साथ काम करने का 
अवसर िमला। लगातार 3 वषș तक उस कमेटी ने यह िरकमȂड िकया िक Îवामीनाथन आयोग की 
िरपोटर् को लागू िकया जाए।  उस समय की तत्कालीन सरकार, जो य
ूपीए की सरकार थी, 
मनमोहन िंसह जी क े नेतृत्व वाली जो सरकार थी, उसने तीनȗ वषर् एगर्ीकÊचर कमेटी क े उस 
िरकमȂडȂशन को अÎवीकायर् कर िदया और उसको लागू नहीं िकया।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Sir, point of order. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी स
ुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, मȅ नहीं बोला हूँ।...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने बीच मȂ नहीं बोला।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Sir, point of order. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He has point of order. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, ये िडÎटबर् करने क े िलए बात करȂगे।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सुरजेवाला जी, आपका Ãव
ाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र िकस रूल  क े तहत है? 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: सर, रूल  20 और 267 क े तहत मेरा Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र है, क्यȗिक 
उन्हȗने िमथ्या कहा है।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No point of order in it.  Please sit down. 
...(Interruptions)... No counter argument, please. ...(Interruptions)... माननीय नागर 
जी, क ृपया आप बोलȂ।...(
Ëयवधान)... आपकी ही बात िरकॉडर् पर जाएगी।...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय 
सदÎय, जब आप बोल रहे थे, तो सबने ध्यान से सुना।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला:  
* 
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी उपसभापित: जब आप बोल रहे थे, तब सबने ध्यान से सुना।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है।...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सुरजेवाला जी, जब 
आप बोल रहे थे, तब सबने ध्यान से सुना।...(Ëयवधान)... Please accept other views also. 
Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, यह बीमारी है, इसमȂ हम क्या कर सकते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह स
ुरजेवाला:  * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please don’t do it. ...(Interruptions)... No, I had not 
permitted you.  Please. ...(Interruptions)... There was no point of order.  
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: माननीय उपसभापित जी, हम सौभाग्यशाली हȅ, इस देश का िकसान 
सौभाग्यशाली है िक इस देश को नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े रूप  मȂ एक Ģधान मंतर्ी िमला।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No comment. माननीय जयराम जी, Ãलीज़। No comments. 
Please.  
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, सच सुनना तो थोड़ा मुिÌकल होता ह
 ै। 
जब देश मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी Ģधान मंतर्ी बने, तो नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने एक लंबे 
समय से इस देश क े िकसानȗ की जो माँग थी Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िरपोटर् को लाग ू करने की, 
उस लाँग पȂिंडग िडमांड को अगर िकसी सरकार ने लागू करने का काम िकया, तो वह नरेन्दर् मोदी 
की सरकार ने करने का काम िकया। उपसभापित जी, इतना ही नहीं िकया, बिÊक इस देश मȂ 
िकसान नेताओं को सÇमान नहीं िदया
 गया, अगर िकसी ने िकसान नेता चौधरी चरण िंसह जी और 
Îवामीनाथन जी को 'भारत रत्न' देने का काम िकया, तो वह नरेन्दर् मोदी की सरकार ने िकया।  
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहूंगा। जहां देश मȂ  Ģधान मंतर्ी 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार िकसानȗ क े िहत का काम कर रही ह
ै, वहीं हमारा यह सौभाग्य है िक 
हमȂ क ृिष मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ िशवराज जी िमले हȅ। अगर हम क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ िवकास दर की दृिÍट स े देखȂ 
तो इस देश क े अगर्णी राज्यȗ मȂ अगर कोई है तो वह मध्य Ģदेश है और आज ऐसे Ģदेश क े हमारे 
क ृिष मंतर्ी हȅ, यह भी हमारे िलए सौभाग्य की बात है।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी, देश
 मȂ इस क्षेतर् मȂ हॉिलिÎटक डेवलपमȂट हो, इसके  िलए मोदी 
सरकार Ģितबǉ है। इस देश मȂ जो इंपोटर् िबल है, अगर मȅ उसकी बात करूं  तो पाम ऑयल से 
हमारा इंपोटर् िबल बहुत ज्यादा बढ़ता है, िजससे देश क े ऊपर आिर्थक बोझ पड़ता है। नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व वाली सरकार देश की पहली ऐसी सरकार है, िजसने न क ेवल ितलहन क े दाम  
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[1 August, 2024]
99

बढ़ाकर िकसानȗ को Ģोत्सािहत करने का काम िकया, बिÊक देश ितलहन क े मामले मȂ, खाǏ 
तेलȗ क े मामले मȂ आत्मिनभर्र बने, इसके  िलए "पाम आयल िमशन" की शुरुआत  भी की।   
माननीय उपसभापित जी, इस देश मȂ आजादी क े बाद देश का िकसान कजȃ मȂ जकड़ा 
रहा।  आजादी क े बाद इस देश का िकसान गांवȗ मȂ जो Ģाइवेट लȂडसर् होते थे, उनके  जाल मȂ फ
ं सा 
रहा, िफर सरकारी बȅक आए। उस समय की जो सरकारȂ थीं, उनकी नीयत भी यही थी िक िकसान 
पर कजर् बढ़ जाए। उस समय की सरकार की ऐसी नीितयां थीं िक उन नीितयȗ क े कारण इस देश 
क
े  िकसान का कजार् लगातार बढ़ता रहा और वह कजȃ मȂ ड ूबता रहा। महोदय, जब बुआई का 
समय आता है तो िकसान को खाद की भी जरूरत  होती है। उस समय वह दबाव मȂ आ जात ा था, 
उसे ऋण लेना पड़ता था। इस देश क े िकसान की इस पीड़ा को अगर िकसी ने समझने का काम 
िकया, तो वह इस सरकार ने िकया। एक तरफ जहां ऐसी सरकारȂ थीं, िजनकी खराब नीितयȗ क े 
कारण िकसानȗ पर कजार् बढ़ता
 था।  वे वोट लेने क े िलए कजार् माफी का नारा देते थे और उसे भी 
पूरा नहीं करते थे। दूसरी तरफ, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व वाली सरकार िकसान का सÇमान बढ़ाने 
क
े  िलए "िकसान सÇमान िनिध" लेकर आई। ये बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ करते थे और यह कहते िक हमने 
70,000 करोड़ रुपय े का ऋण माफ कर िदया। इन्हȗने कागज पर 51,000 करोड़ िकया और कहा 
िक 70,000 करोड़ माफ करȂगे। वहीं, इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी ने "िकसान सÇमान िनिध" से इस 
देश क े िकसानȗ को 3 लाख करोड़ से ज्यादा पैसा सीधे उनके  खाते म
Ȃ देने का काम िकया। इसमȂ 
कोई िबचौिलया भी नहीं है, सीधे िकसान क े खाते मȂ जा रहा है।   िकसान का सÇमान अगर िकसी 
ने बढ़ाने का काम िकया, िकसान को कजȃ से म
ुƪ करने का काम िकया, तो इस देश क े Ģधान 
मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने "िकसान सÇमान िनिध" क े माध्यम से करने का काम िकया है।   
उपसभापित जी, मुझे राजÎथान जाने का मौका िमला। राजÎथान म
Ȃ जाने क े बाद मȅने देखा 
िक एक पाटीर् क े नेता वहां गये और उन्हȗने घोषणा की िक सरकार बनने क े 10 िदन क े अंदर 
िकसानȗ का कजार् माफ हो जाएगा। मुझे जब वहां िकसानȗ क े बीच जाने का अवसर िमला तो पता 
चला िक िकसानȗ क े िल
ए वह क ेवल एक झुंझुना सािबत हुआ, िकसानȗ का कजार् राजÎथान मȂ 
माफ नहीं हुआ। उन्हȗने 10 िदन नहीं, 5 साल  इंतजार िकया और िफर उस Ģदेश क े िकसानȗ ने 
िमलकर वहां से कांगर्ेस की सरकार को भगाने का काम िकया।                                              
 उपसभापित महोदय, यहां ' फसल बीमा योजना' की चचार् हुई।
 यहां बीमा की िविभन्न 
योजनाएं हȅ, लेिकन देश मȂ लÇबे समय से एक मांग थी िक िकसानȗ की फसल बीमा योजना भी 
आनी चा
िहए। उस मांग को पूरा करने का काम - महोदय, इस योजना मȂ एक परेशानी थी िक 
अगर िकसान बȅक से लोन लेता था, तो वह बȅक automatic िकसान की फसल का बीमा करा देता 
था, िजस कारण उसके  खाते से automatic िकÎ
त का पैसा कट जाता था, मजबूरी मȂ उस िकसान 
को फसल बीमा कराना पड़ता था, उसमȂ सुधार करते हुए हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने नेतृत्व मȂ जहां 
इस फसल बीमा योजना को लागू करने का काम िकया गया, वहीं इस फसल बीमा ËयवÎथा को 
व
ैकिÊपक करने का भी काम िकया गया, अब िकसान की मज़ीर् है िक वह अगर लोन लेगा तो उसे 
बीमा कराना है तो कराए, यिद नहीं कराना है तो न कराए। यह वैकिÊपक ËयवÎथा देने का काम 
इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िकया है। ...(
Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस योजना पर ĢÌन उठाए गए थे। अगर मȅ 
'फसल बीमा योजना' मȂ आंकड़े की बात करूं , तो िकसान ने अगर 100 रुपय े िकÎत दी, तो उसको 
क्लेम िकतना िमला। अगर िकसान ने 100 रुपय े Ģीिमयम िदया, तो इस देश क े िकसान को दावे क े 
रूप  मȂ 498 रुपय े क्लेम िमला है। यह 'फसल बीमा योजना' की सफलता है। ...(Ëयवधान).
..  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, बैठकर आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: इसके  अलावा अगर मȅ ऋण की बात करूं , तो आप देिखए िक वषर् 2014-15 
से मोदी जी की सरकार ने ऋण की मद लगभग ढाई गुना बढ़ाई है। आज इस बजट मȂ िकसानȗ क े 
िलए इसमȂ 20 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िक
या गया है। इसमȂ भी एक ËयवÎथा की गई है िक 
िकसान अगर अपनी िकÎत का भ
ुगतान समय पर करेगा, तो उसका interest rate भी घटेगा, वह 
7 परसȂट से घटकर 4 परसȂट हो जाएगा।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह  नागर जी, पाटीर् ने आपको 15 िमनट का समय िदया है। 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, मुझे दो िमनट और द
े दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अब आप जो भी बोलȂगे, तो पाटीर् का समय जाएगा। 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, मुझे 5 िमनट का समय और दे दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अब आप जो भी बोलȂगे, पाटीर् का समय जाएगा। 
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: सर, पाटीर् का समय ले लीिजएगा। माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस देश 
मȂ िकसान िक दुदर्शा की बहुत बात हुई, लेिकन आिखर ऐसा हुआ क्यȗ, वह ऐसी िÎथित मȂ पहुंचा 
क ै से? महोदय, वषर् 1947 से भारत GATT का  सदÎय ह
ै, िजससे भारत ने Ëयापार क े िलए एक 
टर्ीटी साइन की। इसके  बाद इसको WTO मȂ convert कर  िदया गया, इसको िरÃलेस कर िदया 
गया। आजकल एक बड़ी मांग है िक जो WTO से समझौता ह ुआ है, उससे बाहर िनकला जाए। एक 
बड़े नेता हȅ, उनसे िकसान िमले, उन्हȗने अपनी बात भी कही, लेिकन इस WTO से हुए समझौते 
पर साइन करने वाला कौन था, WTO से हुए समझौते पर िकसने साइन िकए, यह समझौता 
िकसने िकया? यह िकसी और ने नहीं, बिÊक उस समय क े तत्कालनी Ģधान म
ंतर्ी, राजीव गांधी 
जी की सरकार ने करने का काम िकया था। उपसभापित महोदय, यह समझौता ही नहीं िकया, 
इस एगर्ीमȂट मȂ एक काम और हुआ िक जो इसका base year था - यह समझौता 1995 मȂ हुआ, 
लेिकन दुभार्ग्य से इस देश क े िकसान क े साथ क्या धोखा हुआ, वह देिखए। जो सिÅसडी का base 
year माना गया - समझौता
 1995 मȂ हुआ और base year 1986-87 को माना गया। इस बात को 
बताएं िक आिखर जब समझौता 1995 मȂ कर रहे हȅ, तो  बेस ईयर आप क्यȗ मा न रहे हȅ, िजससे 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
101

इस देश क े िकसानȗ को सिÅसडी न िमल पाए।  महोदय,  2013 मȂ WTO की बैठक हुई और Ǜी 
आनन्द शमार्, उस समय क े तत्कालीन वािणज्य मंतर्ी, समझौता करके  आए और temporary 
period तीन वषर् का करके  आए िक हम तीन वषर् मȂ कर लȂगे।  तीन वषर् मȂ हम सब ËयवÎथा कर 
लȂगे, लेिकन मȅ इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, नेरन्दर् मोदी जी को बधाई देना चाहता हूं िक उन्हȗने, जो ये 
2013 से 2016 क े  बीच का जो समझौता िक
या था, उसको अÎवीकार िकया और इस देश क े 
िकसानȗ की सिÅसडी जो खत्म होनी थी, उस सिÅसडी को बचाने का काम अगर िकसी ने िकया, 
तो
 नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िकया। माननीय उपसभापित जी, समय नहीं है, लेिकन 
आत्महत्या की भी बात कही गई है। िकसानȗ की ...(Ëयवधान)...  
  
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय नागर जी, द
ूसरे वƪाओं का पाटीर् का समय ले रहे हȅ।   
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: यहां िकसानȗ की आत्महत्या की बात हुई। सुरजेवाला जी ने िकसानȗ की 
आत्महत्या की बात कही। सुरजेवाला जी, शायद आप तो कनार्टक क े Ģभारी भी रहे हȅ और अभी 
भी हȅ। तो अच्छा होता िक कम से कम जो िपछले पंदर्ह महीने मȂ इस देश मȂ लगभग 1,200 िकसानȗ 
ने कनार्टक मȂ आत्महत्या की है, आप और आपके  नेता कभी जाकर उनसे िमल तो लेते। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  उनके  आंसू तो
 पȗछ देते।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please listen.  ...(Interruptions)...  माननीय नागर जी। 
Nothing will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seat.  
...(Interruptions)...  It is not going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: महोदय, इससे भी आगे की हद देिखए आप। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ यह बात 
करूं गा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  I will. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सुर
ेन्दर् िंसह नागर: कनार्टक क े जो क ृिष मंतर्ी हȅ, यहां तो िकसानȗ को बुला कर बात कर रहे 
हȅ, जहां आत्महत्याएं हो रही हȅ, वहां जाने क े िलए फ ु सर्त नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... दूसरी तरफ 
कनार्टक क े क ृिष मंतर्ी कह रहे हȅ...(Ëयवधान)...      
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... आप िबना 
permission बोल रहे हȅ। Surjewalaji, please tak
e your seat. Nothing is going on record. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी सुरेन्दर् िंसह नागर: कावेरी िजले क े Ģभारी मंतर्ी पािटल ने कहा िक मौजूदा सरकार, िजसने दो 
लाख से बढ़ाकर पांच लाख मुआवजा िकया है, क्यȗिक सरकार ने जो दो लाख से पांच लाख 
मुआवजा िकया है, िकसान
 इस पांच लाख को पाने क े िलए आत्महत्या कर रहे हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... ये 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

कनार्टक क े एगर्ीकÊचर िमिनÎटर हȅ। यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूं, बिÊक कनार्टक क े एगर्ीकÊचर 
िमिनÎटर यह बात कह रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज सुरजेवाला जी यूिरया क े बारे मȂ बात कर रहे 
थे। मȅ एक बात कहकर अपनी बात समाÃत करना चाहूंगा। य ूिरया की बात हो रही थी। यह नरेन्दर् 
मोदी सरकार है, िजसने यूिरया की िदक्कत दूर करने का काम िकया है। मȅ मध्य Ģदेश की एक 
घटना का िजकर् करना चाहूंगा।  मध्य Ģदेश क े मुलतई मȂ आिदवासी िकसान आए। वे बेचारे 
आिदवासी थे और उनको यूिरया चािहए
 था।...(Ëयवधान)... उनको यूिरया तो नहीं िमला, लेिकन 
24 से ज्यादा िकसानȗ की गोली मारकर हत्या कर दी गई।  ...(Ëयवधान)... तब मध्य Ģदेश मȂ 
कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी। ये हमसे आत्महत्या की बात करते हȅ। ...(समय की घंट ी)... ये हमसे 
आत्महत्या क े बारे मȂ पूछते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)...  ...(समय की घंटी)... महोदय, क ृिष मंतर्ी जी ने जो 
बजट रखा है, मोदी सरकार 3.0 का  पहला क ृिष बजट है, मȅ इसका समथर्न करता हूं और इस 
िवÌवास क
े  साथ समथर्न करता हूं िक इस बजट क े माध्यम से इस देश मȂ खुशहाली आएगी, देश 
और आगे बढ़ेगा और देश का िकसान िनयार्त करेगा। वह आत्मिनभर्रता क े साथ-साथ उत्पाद 
िनयार्त करने म
Ȃ भी सक्षम होगा।  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                                 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, Shrimati Mamata Thakur. Maiden speech. Hon. 
Member will speak in Bengali.  
 
SHRIMATI MAMATA THAKUR (West Bengal): 
* "Respected Deputy Chairman, Sir, 
thank you for allowing me to speak on the Working of the Minist ry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare. This is my maiden speech in the Rajya Sabha, though I have been a 
Member of the Lok Sabha once.  I dedicate this speech to Sri Harichand Thakur and 
Sri Guruchand Thakur. I was not allowed to take their names during the swearing-in, 
so, I would like to mention their names today.  I dedicate this speech to all my Matua 
brothers and sisters. And I dedicate this  speech to our hon. Chief Minister, Ms. 
Mamata Banerjee, who has always fought fo r the rights of Matuas. She has always 
fought for women's rights. And Sir, no one fought for farmers' rights better than 
Madam Mamata Banerjee and our party Tr inamool Congress which was founded 26 
years ago on January 1, 1998. I am proud to be a member of such a party which 
stands by farmers at every step. 
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा) पीठासीन हुए।] 
 
Sir, we fought against the forcible acquisition of agricultural land in Singur in 
2006.  Madam Mamata Ba nerjee risked her life by going on a 26-day hunger strike in 
                                                            
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
103

protest.  When the Land Acquisition Bill ca me up in the Lok Sabha in 2013, it was 
supported by parties on both sides of the House. We alone opposed it. In 2020, when 
the farmers were protesting against the thr ee farm Bills, at that time, our party MPs 
went to meet the farmers at Singhu bord er. Madam Mamata Ba nerjee personally 
spoke to them over phone. 700 farmers died while protesting that black law. 
You talk about doubling farmers' inco me, but you have failed. Learn from 
Bengal. Under Ms. Mamata Banerjee, the in come of farmers in Bengal not only 
doubled, but has tripled. It has gone up from Rs. 90,000 to 2.9 lakh rupees. 
Sir, it was promised in BJP's manifesto in 2014 that they w ill increase farmers' 
profits by up to 50% over in put costs within three years.' It has been 10 years now.  
Kindly accept the Swaminathan Committee's recommendation for this, which is C.2 
+ 50. Make it a legal guarantee. Nineteen farmers have died this year while raising 
this demand. Sir, why is it that farmer s should pay 12% GST on water pumps and 
18% GST for pesticides? This is when the total outstanding debt has increased from 
Rs 10 lakh crores in 2014 to Rs 23 lakh crores in 2022. Sir, in the last four years, the 
real income of an ag ricultural labourer has increase d by only 3 rupees per annum. 
Retail food inflation rose by more than 9 per cent a year during this period. 
You are talking about Pradhan Mantri Kishan Samman Nidhi. What is reality? 
Rs. 3,000 crores have been tran sferred to 42 lakh fraudule nt beneficiaries under this 
scheme. The Government has managed to recover only one-tenth of this amount. 
The highest amount of Rs 550 crore will be co llected from ineligible farmers in Assam, 
followed by Rs. 440 crore fr om Punjab, Rs. 360 crore fr om Maharashtra, Rs. 340 
crore from Tamil Nadu and Rs . 260 crore from Uttar Pradesh. But then you target 
opposition-run states and cut off their funding.  Sir, kindly stop this political vendetta, 
release Rs.15,000 crore to Bengal under MGNREGA and Awas Yojana. 
Sir I have five or six questions, and I ho pe hon. Minister will respond to those. 
(i) Is adequate attention being given to agricultural research? Indian Agricultural 
Research Institute needs to be modernized . We need to modernize many more IARIs 
and Agricultural Research Institutes.  (ii)  What is the long-term plan for crops and 
land use? (iii) What are the plans for fertile  land and specific crop performance in the 
face of climate change? (iv) How will farmers be motivated in agriculture?  (v) What 
is being done to attract lateral entry in agriculture? (vi) Wh at is being done to protect 
farmers from volatile weather every year? 
Sir, our party always believes in giving constructive suggestions. Hon. Minister 
may consider these five suggestions to im prove the agro industry and the quality of 
life of farmers. (i) Implementing financial literacy programs with a focus on digital 
tools for agricultural financing, crop insu rance, and efficient market linkages. (ii) 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

Reducing wastage in use of water, fertilizers and other inputs. (iii) Creation of a single 
nodal agency at the national level to deal with climate change issues. (iv) Facilitating 
agriculture credit and increasing subsidie s. (v) Complete farm loan waiver and 
introduction of pension scheme for the farmers.  
Sir, I have two points for Bengal. West  Bengal is the second largest potato 
producer of the country where more than 5 lakh hectares of land is under potato 
cultivation and annual output is 148 lakh metric tonnes. Potato  farmers of Bengal 
prefer to use N.P.K 10:26:26 as fertilizer becau se it is cost effective and soil friendly. 
During the potato growing season between November and February,  we have 5 lakh 
metric tonnes of NPK. 10:26:26 is required. Supply of this fertilizer to the cooperative 
sector in West Bengal has declined steadily from 4.5 lakh metric tonnes in 2021 to 2.3 
lakh metric tonnes last year. Th is is putting a lot of pressure on the farmers. I request 
the Minister to look into this matter quickly. 
Secondly Sir, Bengal produces high quality varieties of rice such as 
Govindobhog, Tulaipanji, Kaluniya, Kata ribhog, Badshabhog etc. They are the 
fragrant rice of ethnic Bengal and have been cultivated for ages. Govindobhog, 
Tulaipanji got G.I status. A large number of farmers are involved in the cultivation of 
aromatic rice in Bengal. I request the Minister of Agriculture and Minister of 
Commerce to consider lifting the ban on export of basmati rice equivalent to ensure 
that farmers get fair price for Govindobhog, Tulaipanji and other varieties of rice. 
I hope the Hon. Minister will give me assurance on these two issues. 
Sir as we are in Bengal, I want to mention with utmost humility that you can 
learn from Bengal. (i) The budget for agriculture and allied households has increased 
tenfold, from Rs. 2300 crore in 2011 to Rs. 23000 crore in 202 4. (ii) Under the 
Krishakbandhu Scheme, more than 1 crore small and marginal farmers are given 
annual financial assistance of Rs. 10,000 per year. (iii) 70 lakh farmers are benefiting 
from the crop under the Beng al Crop Insurance Scheme, the insurance coverage of 
which is borne entirely by the State Go vernment. (iv) Under 'Joy Bangla', 76 
thousand farmers are getting pension of Rs .1000 per month. (v) In case of death of a 
farmer aged 18-60 years, the family gets a grant of Rs 2 lakh. 
Sir, please consider these examples, implement them nationally. Learn the 
best practice from not only Bengal but from all states.  Through you, Sir, I humbly 
request the Government, please don't be arr ogant. Talk to the farmers. Engage with 
them, don't just talk big. The sad reality is that 30 farmers commit suicide every day in 
India under the Modi Government. Thank you Sir. Jai Bangla." 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
105

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  Thank you, Mamata ji. The next 
speaker is Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy. Not pres ent. After him, Shri M. Shanmugam. Mr. 
Shanmugam, you have got nine minutes to speak. 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu): Thank you, Vice-Chairman, Sir, for giving me 
an opportunity. Food, cloth and shelter are very necessary for all. I want to quote one 
Thirukkural. The English translation of it is: “They only live who live by the plough. The 
rest must stoop and trail behind. ” Food is based on agriculture and agriculture 
encompasses crop and livestock production, aqua culture, fisheries and forestry for 
food and non-food products. Agriculture was a key development in the rise of 
physical activities in human civilization whereby farming of domesticated species 
created food surplus that enabled people to live in cities.  What are the needs of the 
farmers? No one in the corridors of powe r, particularly the NDA Government, is 
bothered to take care of their issues.  
 Water is a very important resource for farming. India is blessed with many 
number of rivers which are both perennial  and seasonal. However, in some areas, 
there is scarcity of drinking water and, in  some areas, there is drought. So, with the 
available resources, the farmers are develo ping their cultivation. Everyone knows 
about the Chola Emperor, Karikala Cholan , in Tamil Nadu who constructed Kallanai 
Dam on the Cauvery river 2,000 years ago. This  is the fourth oldest dam in the world. 
The purpose of this dam was to divert the Cauvery water across the fertile Thanjavur 
Delta region for irrigation via canals. The scheme, first conceived by the Central Water 
Commission, was designed to link all the ma jor rivers of India - the Ganges, the 
Brahmaputra, the Narmada, the Tapti, the Godavari, the Krishna, the Pennar and the 
Cauvery by means of a 3,000 km long canal. But so far no action has been taken. 
Water pollution is also spoiling the farming sector. Pesticides ar e one of the reasons 
for water pollution by which fishery is al so affected. With all these struggles, the 
farmers are producing commodities. So, they  request for the Minimum Support Price 
with legal guarantee which should be fi xed. It was recommended by the Expert 
Committee headed by Dr. Swaminathan, Agricu ltural Scientist. After the sacrifice of 
thousands of farmers, still the Union Government is not conceding their demands.  
 The Plantation Associations want valu e-added benefits of tea and coffee by 
means of fixing MSP for tea and coffee whic h are essential for pe ople all over the 
country. The cotton growers are demanding to  fix MSP after consultation with the 
cotton growers.  
 Sugar is an essential item. The Govern ment is increasing the sugarcane price 
every year. But that is no t sufficient. Sugar price is  under the control of the 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

Government.  While fixing the sugar price, it is not compared with the sugarcane price 
and there is no scientific calculation. Very often this resulted in closure of sugar mills. 
 Sir, we have a lot of potential in o ilseeds production.  But we are importing 
palm oil for someone's benefit which is injurious to health.  
 Due to shortage of agriculture labourer s, there is compulsion for the farmers 
to go for modernisation. But the machiner ies available now are too costly and the 
poor farmers cannot afford them. Hence, the Government should spend some money 
for R&D to innovate small machineries suit able for small and medium farmers. The 
crop insurance system should be such th at there is adequate transparency and 
accountability.   There are various sche mes like PM Kisan Samman Nidhi, Crop 
Insurance Scheme, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, etc., which are being implemented 
as Centrally Sponsored Schemes. On peru sal of the Demands, it is noted that 
average spending or fund utilization by th e Ministry of Agriculture is around 86 per 
cent as compared to the Budget Estimates.  When there is so much demand from 
farmers and schemes have been formulated, why is there slackness in their 
implementation by the Government?  
 Under the MGNREGA, the number of wo rking days should be increased to 
150 days for rural labourers. In this, farm ac tivities should also be included with the 
approval of Panchayat President and the cost  can also be shared on 50:50 basis, so 
that the agricultural labourers would get mo re number of days of employment in the 
rural areas. Sir, our late leader, Dr. Kala ignar, evolved a scheme through the Social 
Security Board for the poor agricultural labour. Tamil Nadu pr ovided comprehensive 
social security for ensuring well-being of landless agricultural labourers and farmers 
who engaged themselves in direct cultiv ation. The benefits of the scheme are 
accident relief and death injury, natural death, funeral expenses, education of 
children, marriage, delivery of miscarriag e and termination of pregnancy, old-age 
pension, etc. The Government of Tamil Na du is funding for all the social sector 
schemes by their own funds.  
Sir, I request the Union Government to constitute a social security board for 
agricultural labourers like other labourers' welfare board with a corpus fund so that 
this board will take care of the requirements of healthca re compensation in case of 
injury, education of children, marriage expe nses and for providing old-age pension. 
ESI benefits should also be extended to th e agricultural labourers so that it will be 
registered in the board and token contributi on can be taken from the board. In the 
employment of agriculture, while the shar e of cultivation is reduced, the share of 
agricultural labour has increa sed from 46 per cent in 2001 to 55 per cent in 2011. For 
agricultural labourers, we have been dema nding that Kisan Credit Cards should be 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
107

issued so that they can avail the benefits . Agricultural labourers are among the most 
vulnerable sections of the society with hi gh incidence of poverty. They should be 
given training and skill development for im proving their conditions and ensuring 
equitable opportunities.  
Before I conclude, I request the hon. Mini ster to waive off all the farmers' loan, 
fix MSP with a legal guarantee and allocat e more subsidy to fertilizers, and the 
Government should procure all the produce from the farmers. Thank you, Sir.  
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, I have a point of order.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Wh at is your point of order? First, 
tell me the rule. 
 
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN: Sir, Rule 29(3). It is  on List of Business. I don't want to 
disturb. We are having a very meaningful discussion. Yesterday was on working of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs whic h is completed today. Today, it is on 
working of the Ministry of Agri culture. My point of order is  that 15 Opposition parties 
welcome this discussion; all of us want a di scussion on the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
That is why it is my appeal to the Chair. On behalf of all of us, please let us not shy 
away from having a discussion whenever, tomorrow, day after or next week, on the 
Union Home Ministry, which is a top priority  because this is the Council of States. So 
many of our States are having to deal wi th the Home Ministry. All Ministries are 
important, but 15 Opposition parties toge ther have appealed to the Chairman to 
consider this.  The first motion was moved by BJP. They are the largest party. They 
wanted Ministry of Urban Development. Second one was by the Congress, the 
largest opposition party. They moved for Ur ban Development. Third one is coming to 
Trinamool but this is not ab out Trinamool. Sixteen opposition parties have written to 
the Chairman requesting him to kindly accep t our request to include the Union Home 
Ministry. We want to see the Home Minister here. We want to talk to him; we would 
listen to him. Thank you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Mr. Derek, I got your point of view. 
But, normally, the practice is that Busi ness is decided in the Business Advisory 
Committee. There, some Ministries have been decided. After that, it has been left to 
the Chairman. So let the Chairman take a call and we will let you know. I will forward 
your request to him and, after that, it will be told to you. Now, Mr. Vijayasai Reddy; 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

the practice is that if somebody misses the opportunity, then, he gets the last turn. 
Since you are a senior Member, you can now speak for five minutes.  
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, through you, I rise to highlight 
some important issues to the hon. Minist er. The current population in India is 
estimated to be 145 crore. And it will rise up  or is estimated to go up to 166 crore by 
2050. Forty-three per cent of our children ar e undernourished. This is very alarming. 
The next is, India is ranked 111 out of 125 co untries in 2023 Global Hunger Index. This 
is also very alarming. This Global Hunger Index is calculated based on 
undernourishment, child stunting, and child mo rtality.  I request the hon. Minister to 
find out the causative forces .  What exactly is the reas on? Why is the population 
going up? How to control the population? If the population continues to go up in the 
same manner as it is going now, by 2050, what would be the food shortage? What 
would be the food scarcity? The way the urbanization is going on, the way the 
agricultural lands are being converted for non-agricultural use, if the same trend 
continues, what would be fate  of the mankind in the world, particularly in India? 
Therefore, I appeal to the hon. Minister to take appropriate remedial measures to 
ensure that there would be adequate food for all the Indian citizens, even including 
the population which is expected to go up by 2050.  
The second important issue, which I wo uld like to bring to the notice of the 
hon. Minister, through you, is increasing po st-harvest losses. In 2022, India has lost 
15 per cent of its fruits, 12 per cent of the vegetables, and 6 per cent of the cereals 
post-harvest. What is the r eason? The reason is lack of  infrastructure, lack of 
godowns, lack of cold st orage facilities, and lack  of adequate marketing 
arrangements. In Andhra Pradesh, in last  December, crop sown in 10 lakh acres 
across the State was damaged by cyclone Michaung. In our country, even when 
there is a bumper harvest, even the years when the bumper harvest comes, it causes 
loss to the farmers because we do not have  adequate storage facilities, as I have 
already told you, and there are no adeq uate processing facilities, processing 
capacities to preserve the harv est. These are all forced to throw the harvest out. Last 
year, in September, farmers in Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, were also forced to dump 
tomatoes on the road because it did no t command adequate prices. It could not 
cover even the transportation costs. I woul d, therefore, appeal to the Government 
and the hon. Minister to optimize the supply  chain. Hon. Minister, Sir, kindly listen. 
So I request the hon. Minister to kindly optimize the supply chain and ensure that 
losses are prevented and they are below the acceptable mark of 2 per cent.   
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
109

The next issue, which I would like to bring to the notice of the Minister, through 
you, is ending the production and consum ption of Genetically Modified Organisms, 
GMOs. I urge the Minister to reduce th e dependence on GMO and increase the 
production of organically de veloped seeds which is better for the health of all. GMO 
legally approved imports into India include soya bean, canola and corn. Our own 
varieties of hybrid BT cotton, BT brinjal have been commercialized already and 
mustard is also on the way. So, I urge the Government and I urge the Minister to take 
cognizance of the side effects of consum ing these GMOs, --  of course, I mean, the 
production will increase, food security will go  up -- as some people believe that they 
result in cancer, allergies and other long ailments. So, I appreciate the initiative of the 
Government to focus on the development of agricultural research.   
The last point which I would like to bring to the notice of the hon. Minister is 
that the Budget for the Department of Ag ricultural Research -- this is very, very 
important -- and education on agricultural  research, has been raised very, very 
marginally to Rs.9,941 crores from Rs.9,877 crores.  ( Time-bell rings.)  I request the 
hon. Minister to increase the budget allo cation for the research and education on 
agricultural research. Thank you, Vice Chairman, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Now, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal; after 
that, Shri H.D. Devegowda.   
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब): महोदय, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने क ृिष और िकसान 
कÊयाण मंतर्ालय पर हो रही चचार् मȂ अपनी बात रखने का अवसर िदया है। 
 महोदय, आज इस सदन क े िलए यह एक बहुत ही शुभ अवसर है िक हमारे माननीय 
सभापित एवं उपराÍटर्पित Ǜी जगदीप धनखड़ जी एक
 िकसान क े बेटे हȅ और इसके  साथ-साथ 
हमारे माननीय क ृिष मंतर्ी, Ǜी िशवराज चौहान जी भी एक िकसान क े  बेटे हȅ। वे अपने Ģदेश मȂ 
मुख्य मंतर्ी क े तौर पर 'मामा' क े नाम से मशहूर थे और मȅ आज उÇमीद करूं गा िक वे जो मध्य 
Ģदेश क े 'मामाजी'  थे, वह िकसानȗ क े 'मामाजी' बन कर िकसानȗ का ध्यान रखȂगे और उनको 
आगे ले जाने मȂ मदद करȂगे।  
 सर, एक पुरानी मशहूर कहावत रही है -  
 
"उǄम खेती, मध्यम बान, िनकृ ǝ चाकरी, भीख िनदान।" 
 
 सर, एक समय था, जब क ृिष को सबसे उǄम Ëयवसाय माना जाता था, सबसे उǄम 
क ृत्य माना जाता था। आज हम िजस िकसान क े बारे मȂ चचार् कर रहे हȅ, हम िजस 'आत्मिनभर्र 
भारत' की चचार् करते हȅ, हम ' िवकिसत भारत' की चचार् करते ह
ȅ, तो ' आत्मिनभर्र भारत', 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

आत्मिनभर्र िकसान क े साथ ही हो सकता है और 'िवकिसत भारत', िवकिसत िकसान क े साथ ही 
हो सकता है।   
 सर, बचपन मȂ सुनते थे, िकसी मूवी का एक गाना था -  
 
  " मेरे देश की धरती सोना उगले, उगले हीरे-मोती.."  
 
 अगर आप पुरानी मूवीज़ देखȂगे, तो उनमȂ िकतनी ही मूवीज़ ऐसी थीं, िजनमȂ िकसान 
हीरो का रोल अदा करता था। हम लोग समाज क े होते ह
ुए अपने आप को उससे जोड़ते थे, परन्तु 
आज क्या हुआ है? आज बॉलीवुड तो िकसान को भूल ही गया है। मुिÌकल से उसको कोई एक्Îटर्ा 
का रोल िम
लता है, लेिकन हमारी सरकारȂ भी िकसानȗ को लगातार भूलती जा रही हȅ। सर, मȅ 
उसी िकसान की पीड़ा.. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BAC HCHAN: There is no Bollywood. It is an Indian Film 
Industry. Please correct your grammar.  
 
DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL: Thank you very much, Jaya ji. सर, इंिडयन िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी 
िकसान को शायद सेक ं ड रोल पर ला रही है।    
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN: Thank you. 
 
DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL: My pleasure. सरकार भी शायद िकसानȗ को भ
ूलती जा रही 
है।  यह इस बात से नजर मȂ आता है िक भारत का हमारा जो पूरा बजट था.. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): जया जी, क्या Indian Fil m Industry िकसानȗ को भूल गई है? 
क्या वह सचमुच भूल गई है?   
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, मेरा टाइम बढ़ा दीिजएगा, इतना ही िनवेदन है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): इनके  िहसाब से Indian Film Industry िकसानȗ को भूल गई है।  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: यह िफÊम
 इंडÎटर्ी का काम नहीं है, िकसानȗ को  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, मेरे टाइम मȂ 2 िमनट add कर दीिजएगा।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): दो सेक ं ड ही तो हुए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बोिलए। 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
111

डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, भारत सरकार का इस बार क ु ल बजट तकरीबन 48 लाख करोड़ 
का है, िजसमȂ क ृिष मंतर्ालय क े िलए िसफर् 2.74 परसȂट रािश रखी गई है, जबिक 2022-23 मȂ यह 
3.36 परसȂट थी। मतलब यह रािश कम होती जा रही है। मȅने इसी वजह से मȅने बोला िक हमारी 
सरकार भी िकसान को भूलती जा रही है। 
 सर, अपनी बात को आगे बढ़ाते हुए, जो एक सबसे महत्वपूणर् िवषय िकसानȗ क े िलए 
रहता ह
ै, हमारे िलए रहता है, इस सदन क े िलए रहता है, वह है - िकसानȗ को एमएसपी द ेने का। 
िकतने ही समय से इस पर बात हो रही है िक िकसानȗ को एमएसपी की लीगल गारंटी दी जाए। 
सैकड़ȗ िकसान और िवशेष तौर पर मȅ पंजाब से आता हूं, मेरे पंजाब क े िकसानȗ ने शहादत दी है, 
ल
ेिकन अभी तक उस िवषय पर कोई कायर् नहीं हुआ। मȅ मंतर्ी जी से, भारत सरकार से पुरज़ोर 
िनवेदन करूं गा िक एमएसपी को कानूनी गारंटी देने क े िलए कायर् करȂ और इसको जÊदी अनाउंस 
करȂ और िकसानȗ को एक खुशी का मौका दȂ। जब एमएसपी की बात होती ह
ै, यह तकरीबन 60 वषर् 
पुरानी परंपरा है। उस टाइम क ु छ सालȗ क े अंदर ही 23 कर्ॉÃस को हमने एमएसपी मȂ शािमल कर 
िलया था। िपछले कई वषș से 23 की 23 कर्ॉÃस ही चली आ रही हȅ। पीछे कॉफी को भी इसमȂ लाने 
की बात हो रही थी, हमारे िकसी सदÎय ने इसमȂ चाय
 को लाने क े िलए िनवेदन िकया। इनके  
अलावा भारत मȂ और िकतनी ही फसलȂ हȅ, स ȅकड़ȗ फसलȂ हȅ, जबिक हम 23 फसलȗ पर ही रुके  
हुए हȅ। क्या बाकी िकसान नहीं हȅ, क्या बाकी मȂ उनको एमएसपी  की जरूरत  नहीं है? मȅ चाहूंगा 
िक इस पर थोड़ा िवचार िकया जाए।  
सर, सरकार कहती है िक हमने 18 लाख करोड़ रुपए  एमएसपी पर िदया है। िजस तरीके  
से यह Ģोजेक्ट िकया जाता है, उससे ऐसा लगता है िक इन्हȗने उनको गर्ांट दी है। यह तो आपने 
उनका खरीद मूÊय िदया है। उन्हȗने अपना सामान बेचा और आपने उसकी कीमत दी। इसिल ए 
आप इसको उस तरीके  से Ģोजेक्ट न करȂ िक हमने िकसानȗ को 18 लाख करोड़ रुपए  की गर्ांट दी 
है।   
सर, मȅ आगे कहना चाहूंगा िक एक तरफ हम यह कहते हȅ िक 54 Ģितशत लोग अभी भी 
एगर्ीकÊचर पर िनभर्र हȅ, लेिकन आज भी हमȂ दाल इंपोटर् करनी पड़ रही है। इस बार दाल की जो 
इंपोटर् हुई है, वह सात वषș मȂ सबसे ज्यादा ह
ै। Pulses का import डबल हो गया है, जो 45 लाख 
टन है। Pulses inflation 17 Ģितशत हो गया है। बात हम िरकॉडर् कर्ॉप की करते हȅ, लेिकन हमȂ 
इंपोटर् करना पड़ रहा है। मुझे यह बात समझ मȂ नहीं आती है। सर, pulses का growing area भी 
कम हो गया है, जो 307 लाख हैक्टेयर था, वह आज कम हो कर 257 लाख हैक्टेयर रह गया है। 
यह क्यȗ हो रहा है? क्यȗ िकसान िकसानी छोड़ते जा रहे हȅ? यह बात भी मुझ
े समझ मȂ नहीं आती 
है। 
सर, अब मȅ थोड़ा irrigation की तरफ बढ़ू ँगा। हमारे देश मȂ पानी की कमी है, जो बढ़ती जा 
रही है। इसके  िलए मȅ सरकार से िनवेदन करू ँगा िक जो modern methods ह
ȅ, जैसे drip 
irrigation, step farming है, क ृिष डर्ोन्स वगैरह से जो हम कर सकते हȅ, उसके  िलए खुले िदल से 
अनुदान या subsidy दȂ तािक िकस ान उसका Ģयोग कर सके । सर, इसी मȂ आगे बढ़ते हुए अब मȅ 
water management क े िवषय मȂ कहना चाहूंगा िक यिद हम बािरश क े पानी की बात करȂ, तो 48 
Ģितशत बािरश का पानी हमारे यहां Ëयथर् चला जाता है। िजसे हम बेहतर तरीके  से मैनेज करके , 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

cost effective way से क ृिष क े िलए इÎतेमाल कर सकते हȅ और इस तरह से क ृिष को बचा सकते 
हȅ।  
सर, मȅ पंजाब से आता हूं। पंजाब की निदयȗ का पानी पािकÎतान मȂ जा रहा है और हम 
पानी क े िलए आपस मȂ लड़ते हȅ।  हम दूसरे देश मȂ अपना पानी भेज रहे हȅ। उसको क ै से रोका 
जाए?  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से भारत सरकार से कहूँगा िक वह इसके  बारे मȂ भी िवचा
र करे। सर, जब 
2014 मȂ बीजेपी की नई सरक
ार बनी थी, तब शायद निदयȗ को interconnect करने क े िलए एक 
कमेटी बनी थी और माननीय सुरेश Ģभु जी उसके  चेयरमैन थे। उसका क्या हुआ? क्या आज तक 
उसका कोई िरजÊट आया? जब उसका िरजÊट ही नहीं बताया जा रहा है, तो उस पर क्या काम 
होगा।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह िनवेदन करू ँगा िक उस पर कायर् िकया जाए और भारत मȂ निदयȗ 
को एक-दूसरे से जोड़Ȃ, तािक उनका पानी अच्छे तरीके  से नई नहरȗ क े माध्यम से क ृिष क े िलए 
िमल सके ।   
सर, अगर िपछले वषș म
Ȃ देखȂ तो िकतनी नहरȂ बनी हȅ, 1950 मȂ बनीं, 1960 मȂ बनीं, 1970 मȂ 
बनीं, लेिकन िपछले 10-20 वषș से कोई नहर ही नहीं बन रही है। हम क ै से वाटर मैनेजमȂट को 
बैटर करȂगे?  हम अपने िकसानȗ को सÎते और नेचुरल तरीके  स
े पानी क ै से पहुंचा पाएँगे?  
सर, अब मȅ storage facilities पर आता हूं। भारत मȂ तकरीबन 40 Ģितशत क ृिष उत्पाद 
Ëयथर् चला जाता है। ऐसा क्यȗ? ऐसा इसिलए िक हमारे पास storage facilities नहीं हȅ, cold 
storage नहीं ह
ै, food processing facilities नहीं हȅ। हमारे देश मȂ 74 िमिलयन टन्स फ ू ड बरबाद 
होता है, जो िवÌव का 8 Ģितशत है। नाबाडर् की अपनी िरपोटर् क े मुतािबक हमारे यहां इन facilities 
क े न होने क े कारण 18.5 िबिलयन डॉलसर् की फसल वेÎट हो जाती है।  
सर, हमने cooperative development श
ुरू  िकया था, उसके  अच्छे नतीजे भी आए, 
लेिकन वह भी रुक  गया। जो cooperative society बन गई, वह बन गई, लेिकन उसमȂ आगे उस 
तरीके  से बढ़ावा नहीं हो रहा है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम  से माननीय मंतर्ी जी यह िनवेदन करू ँगा िक वे 
उसमȂ भी ध्यान दȂ और उसको आगे बढ़ाएँ।   
सर, हम organic farming की बात करते हȅ, पर organic products को यह certify करने 
क े िलए हमारे पास लैब ही नहीं है िक यह genuinely organic ह ै या नहीं।  कÎटमर को इसका 
पता नहीं लगता है, इसिलए उसको उस पर िवÌवास नहीं होता है। आप इस िदशा मȂ भी क ु छ 
कदम उठाएँ। 
सर, हमारा agricultural export 8.8 परसȂट कम हो गया है। GDP growth मȂ एगर्ीकÊचर 
का िहÎसा िसफर् 0.7 परसȂट है, जो िक 2023-24 मȂ 4.7 परसȂट था। इस Ģका र से वह भी कम हो 
गया है।...(समय की घंटी)... सर, मेरे जो दो िमनट समय उस समय बरबाद हो गए थे, वे मुझे दे 
िदए जाएं। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): दो िमनट नहीं हुए थे, दो सेक ं ड हुए थे।  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, ऐसा न करȂ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): ठीक है, आप जÊदी कीिजए, wrap up कीिजए। 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
113

 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, कहने को तो बहुत क ु छ है, लेिकन आप मुझे कहने नहीं दȂगे, तो मȅ 
एक किवता क े माध्यम से अपनी बात खत्म करना चाहूंगा। उससे पहले मȅ एक और बात कहना 
चाहता हूँ।   
 सर, फिर्टलाइजर का बैग पहले 50 िकलो का होता था, जब उसकी कीमत बढ़ गई तो 
सरकार न
े उसको 45 िकलो का कर िदया, तािक िकसानȗ को यह कन्Äयूजन रहे िक वही कीमत 
है।  इसिलए थोड़ा इस बात पर भी ध्यान दȂ।  सर, मेरे हजारȗ िकसान भाई...(Ëयवध ान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): मंतर्ी जी, आप क ु छ कह रहे थे? 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, Ãलीज़। िफर मेरा टाइम कम हो जाएगा।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): एक िमनट। आपका समय कम नहीं होगा। 
 
Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ी; तथा युवक कायर्कर्म और ख
 ेल मंतर्ी  ( डा. मनसुख मांडिवया): सर, अगर 
फिर्टलाजर 5 िकलो कम हुआ है, तो उसकी कीमत भी 5 िकलो कम क े िहसाब से ही है।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): अशोक जी, आप बोिलए। 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, थȅक यू।   
 सर, हमारे हजारȗ-लाखȗ िकसान भाई लोन क े बोझ क े तले हर साल आत्महत्याएं करते 
हȅ।  मȅ भारत
 सरकार से िनवेदन करूं गा िक वह उनका संज्ञान ले और उनको िकसी भी अमाउंट 
तक एकमुÌत लोन की माफी दे, तािक उन हजारȗ-लाखȗ जानȗ को हम बचा सकȂ ।  
 सर, मȅ आिखर मȂ िकसान की तरफ से ये चार पंिƪ
यां कहता हूँ: 
 
"मȅ हूँ भारत की शान, मॉनसून की बाट जोहता िकसान, 
कभी मुआवजे क े इंतजार मȂ गरीब िकसान, 
तो
 राजनीित मȂ एक वोट बȅक का नाम, 
जी, मȅ हूँ िकसान, मȅ हूँ िकसान। 
मेरा रोना है, उÇमीद से उठना, 
पर िनराशा संग सोना है। 
मानसून ǎारा मेरी मेहनत को धोना है, 
सरकार क े िलए मेरा जीवन एक िखलौना है।" 
 
 धन्यवाद, सर।                                                                              
 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): धन्यवाद, अशोक जी।  आप एक किव भी हȅ, यह हमȂ पता नहीं  
था।  Well, we have got three or four other names in the list.  But, our senior Member, 
former Prime Minister, Devegowda ji, has requested to speak early. So, I will request 
him to take the floor. 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka): Thank yo u very much, Sir.  I have spoken on 
the General Budget about four days back. At the outset, I would like to congratulate 
the hon. Agricultural Minister, who has got better experience, which I have already 
said, when I was a member of the Standing Committee on Agriculture. I have seen 
the progress, what has been done in Madhya Pradesh. I once again congratulate 
you. The hon. Prime Minister has selected  you as one of the best Agricultural 
Ministers. Sir, I don't desire to take extra benefit of time from you, and hence I am not 
going to quote facts and figures.  I do not want to take much time on that issue. In 
Karnataka, some of our friends on this side criticized bitterly. They have got the right 
to criticize the Budget, as we are going to praise what we think. In Karnataka, tomato 
is a perishable item. Mangoes and Grapes are one of the most important products, 
horticultural product, exporting from Karnataka to various countries. And, the farmers 
are getting much benefit.  Even the rice is going to be exported.  I can quote so many 
other issues.  
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
The point is, why is the youth coming from villages to cities? Sir, please think over 
that in the last ten years, the hon. Prime Minister, Narendra Modi ji has introduced 
several programmes, so many  programmes are there, I  am not going to go on and 
list those things, but the point is, even today, why educated youths come from 
villages to towns. They have two acres, three acres or five acres of  dry land, still they 
cannot get a livelihood. There are vagaries of monsoons. Sometimes, there will be 
excess monsoons, sometimes, there will be no monsoons at all and the farmers, 
those who depend only on monsoons, will suffer. This is a major issue where we have 
to apply our mind. Sir, there are five Departments- Agriculture, Horticulture, 
Sericulture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries;  I know there are five Ministers who are 
handling these Departments. These are the Departments which are going to help the 
poor who are suffering on account of the vagaries of monsoon. That is why these four 
or five Departments should work in coordi nation and see that the poor people, who 
are suffering on account of vagaries of monsoons, should not su ffer because the Rain 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
115

God is not under our control. Sometimes, there will be excess, sometimes, there will 
be no rainfall. This is a major issue in this country where the farmers are suffering.  
Why are the educated youth coming to cities? They can get a livelihood by 
working with some private people and get Rs. 20,000. Nowadays, Sir, contract 
labour is everywhere. Even in Government  hospitals, all the supporting staff like 
nurses and midwifes are appointed throug h contract. Though they have passed 
nursing courses, still they get Rs. 20,000 or Rs. 15,000. This is the prevailing situation 
in the country. How should we avoid this? I do agree that hon. Prime Minister has 
taken several steps, but the p r o b l e m  i s  s o  e n o r m o u s  a n d ,  t h a t  i s  w h y ,  I  h a v e  
mentioned this. 
Availability of labour is the biggest ch allenge in farming today. There is a 
continuous migration of youth from rural areas to urban areas. Skilled youth in various 
forms becomes essential to sustain farm productivity. Hence, we should give 
attention to train youth in various skill-based farm mech anised operations. It is 
essential to take up timely farm operat ions. Attracting and Retaining of Youth in 
Agriculture (ARYA), which is  
implemented by ICAR, may be expanded to  all the 731 KVKs across the country to 
train and to retain the skilled youth in farm ing. This is one of the most important 
factors which I would like to bring to the notice of the hon. Agriculture Minister.   
 The other point is this. The other da y I mentioned about jackfruit. Sir, 
jackfruit can be grown on any dry land. And, on ce it is planted, the life of jackfruit, as 
you know, is hundreds of year s. I will quote just one paragr aph. It says that ‘jackfruit 
has been grown for centuries and is well adopted. The greatest advantage of this 
wonderful tree is that once it is planted, it can take care of generations due to its hard 
nature which requires minimu m care and considered to be  truly organic fruit which 
can be grown as economically viable fruit cr op when compared to other fruit crops. 
Considering the variety of benefits, in the r ecent years, the jackfruit is being taken up 
as pure-crop, mono-crop not only in India but also in Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam 
and Sri Lanka. Out of jackfruit-growing co untries, it has become a money-spinning 
crop today in Vietnam, Malaysia, Philippine s, China and Mexico.’ Why not in India? 
Sir, I will give you a note.  I have prepared a note on th is issue. You are one of the 
persons committed to the farming sector. I don’t want to read all this. I have prepared 
full notes. I will hand it over  to your goodself. Kindly co nsider this. This does not 
require more water, give more benefits an d got all types of Vitamins. This has been 
established by experts. With your kind permission, I will hand it over to you. 
 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Sir, you can give it to the Table 
Office. They will hand it over to the hon. Minister. 
 
SHIR H.D. DEVEGOWDA: Okay. Thank you very much. Sir, the other important issue 
is about loans. We have the National Co-ope rative Policy. Government said that ‘Our 
Government will bring out a National Co-operative Policy for a systematic, orderly and 
all-round development of co-operative sect or, fast-tracking growth of rural economy 
and generation of employment opportunities  on a large-scale and this will be the 
policy of the Government.’ I appreciate it, Sir. If you mention any State, immediately 
those States wanted to destroy the working system of the co-operative societies. The 
National Co-operative Policy was brough t in during the hon. Prime Minister 
Vajpayee’s period. At that time, if my me mory is correct, Chowd hury Ajit Singhji was 
the co-operative Minister. Sir, my point is about the addition of more members. 
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes, Back ward Class are already there with the 
Government nominees. Three nominees are al ready there. They want to add another 
three members to demolish these institutio ns which are working without any amount 
o f  f r a u d .  T h e y  w a n t  t o  t a k e  o v e r  t h e  i n s titutions which were not doing any type of 
fraud. They are working with absolutely no  a m o u n t  o f  f r a u d .  T o  t a k e  o v e r  s u c h  
institutions, they are adding more members by bringing in an amendment. Why, Sir? 
Sir, you have got a better experience. You have worked in various fields. I know you 
are a good friend of mine. I have got high  regards for you.   Why to add those 
institutions, dairy cooperatives, which are not doing any mistake, which are 
absolutely doing well? Tell me, Sir. In my own district, today,… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Deve Gowdaji, now, the Ministry of 
Cooperatives has been taken away from the Ministry of Agriculture. 
 
SHRI H. D. DEVE GOWDA: Today, they ear n thousands of crores through milk 
cooperative societies in my own district. I do not want to take the name of Kurien. 
When I was the Prime Minister, I saw this . In the whole country, only Gujarat and 
Karnataka have Milk Federation. Today, Rs.5,000 crores is coming out of milk 
production. Our farmers are happy. Why do you want to disturb them? By adding 
another three or four members, you want to  take them over. Why, Sir? You are the 
presiding officer, sitting at high exalted Chai r. I have got highest regard for you. Such 
things are going to happen. You should  not allow such things to happen. 
…(Interruptions).. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
117

SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Sir, I have a point of order. …(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI H. D. DEVEGOWDA: Please see that a suitable amendment is brought by your 
goodself, with your vast experience. …(Interruptions).. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  What is your point of order? 
…(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI H. D. DEVEGOWDA: Do not allow thes e cooperatives, which are functioning, 
by amending the Central Act.  I am requesting your goodself. …(Interruptions)..   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): One minute, Gowdaji.  
…(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI H. D.  DEVEGOWDA: I know my friend……(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RA JEEV SHUKLA): The point of order is allowed. 
…(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: It was because of the Congress Party, which 
was in Opposition then …(Interruptions)… otherwise, Nandini would have gone, and 
the hon. former Prime Minister would appr eciate that. It is because of the Congress 
that Nandini lives today as also all other cooperatives. … (Interruptions).. Do you want 
Nandini to be shut down? ..(Interruptions).. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Devegowdaji, you have raised two 
points. One, the objection is about the St ate Government and secondly, Mr. Shivraj 
Singh is only the Agriculture Minister. He is not the Cooperatives Minister. So, 
whenever there is a discussion about the Ministry of Cooperatives in the House, then, 
you can raise these points.  
 
SHRI H. D. DEVE GOWDA: I am reading only what is there in the Budget. I am 
reading that, Sir, nothing beyond that.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  Budget covers everything. But we 
are having a discussion on the Ministry of Agriculture.  
 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI H. D. DEVE GOWDA: It is within the ambit of the National Cooperative Policy.      
                                                           
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): But that is a different Ministry; not 
under it.  
 
SHRI H. D. DEVEGOWDA: I am requesting the hon. Agriculture Minister within the 
ambit of that policy. When Shri Vajpayee was there, ther e was the first amendment. I 
was there; I spoke on that. Today, again,  I am reminding your goodself to do 
whatever is necessary not to allow such things to happen. That is all what I would like 
to say. I don't want to make any observation against anybody.  
Sir, one is the jackfruit, and the othe r one is tamarind, which I have already 
mentioned. On that also, I have prepared a note. With your kind permission … 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Yes, you can give it to the Table 
Office, and they will hand it over to the Minister.  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: Sir, tamarind seed is one of the best seeds available for 
various products, not only in India, not only  in Karnataka, but outside Karnataka also. 
I would like to give this also because my friends should not feel that I am going to take 
more time. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Thank you, Sir.  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: If you permit me, I will read it. Otherwise, I will give it.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  No, you can give the note to the 
Table Office, and they will hand it over to  the Minister. He can study it and do the 
needful.  
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: Okay, Sir.  I don't want to consume more time.  
Sir, tamarind is one of the issues whic h I have already brought to your kind 
notice. And I have a detailed note on that. Through the Table Office, it may come to 
your kind notice. The other one is, coconut water.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Sir, time is 13 minutes extra.  
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
119

SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: With Copra purchase in Karnataka, we are not satisfied. 
But when we approached the hon. Prime Minister, he ordered to purchase the 
Copra. But, unfortunately, the entire production of what Karnataka is producing, they 
were unable to procure. 
That's why I am appealing to the hon. Agriculture Minister for 
it. Even 60 per cent has not been procured. Though the Pr ime Minister has ordered,
 
only middleman again is exploiting the situation. That is why, I appeal to your goodself 
to see that … …(Time-bell rings.)…  I will stop, Sir. I don’t disobey. As a senior leader 
of this House, as a senior Member …  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): We have given the time.  
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: No, I am not a senior leader.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Okay, now you finish.   
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA: I will stop. I only app eal to see to it that  the entire copra, 
which is now not taken by the Government ag ency, that should be taken. All should 
be purchased, and the farmers should be saved.  
With these words, I conclude. I am gratef ul to you, Sir, for the o pportunity. 
Thank you very much.         
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  Thank you. You have made very 
valuable suggestions. Thank you, Devegowdaji. Now, the next speaker, Shri 
Subhashish Khuntia. 
SHRI SUB
HASISH KHUNTIA (Odisha): Hon. Vice Chairman, Sir, thank you for giving 
me the opportunity to 
speak on the topic, ‘Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.’ I rise 
today to draw attention to several critical issues impacting our agriculture sector and 
our farmers.  
Sir, I am shocked and disappointed to find that a sector which plays a 
dominant role in the economy of our count ry, its budgetary allocation stands at a 
mere three per cent of the total Budget, and I must say, this is inadequate for such a 
crucial sector. Despite the Finance Minister's emphasis on productivity and reliance in 
agriculture, the proposals lack substantial innovation. In this Budget, I find that 
initiatives such as introducing one-crore farmers to natural farming and developing 
digital public infrastructure for agriculture are repetitive, with no new commitments or 
strategies.                                                                
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

       It is a really sorry state of affairs that though the 2018-19 Budget promised 
large-scale vegetable clusters under Operation Greens, its implementation remains 
stag
nant. The strength of our nation is our federal system. In this system, both the 
Central and State Governments have specific areas of authority. They work together 
to address the nation's challenges.  The coordination between States and the 
Centre will strengthen our progress.  In this context, Sir, I would like to draw the 
attention of the hon. Agriculture Minister to the potato crisis in my State, Odisha. 
Odisha is a grappling with a persistent crisis, heavily reliant on West Bengal for 
supply. Our State needs over 13,000,000 metric tons of potatoes annually, but 
produces less than 3,000,000 metric tons. This significant supply gap affects both 
production 
and pricing, causing an artificial price hike. We need the Central 
Government's intervention and cooperation with West Bengal to resolve the supply 
chain disruption 
to support our potato farmers. We thank our Party leader, 
Naveen Patnaikji, for resolving the potato crisis by communicating with the Chief 
Minister of West Bengal. 
Sir, here is another issue related to my State. Odisha's coastal districts, 
particularly, Puri 
and Jagatsinhpur, suffered massive losses due to the destruction of 
coconut trees during the 1999 cyclone. Thousands of trees were destroyed and the 
size and quality of coconuts have declined since. Despite this, the Coconut Board 
has not taken steps to restore the quality of coconut and the Union Budget has failed 
to address this long-standing issue of farmers.  
Sir, at a time when the United Nations declared 2023 as the 'International Year 
of Millets', the role played by the State of Odisha 
 cannot be undermined. There is 
need for establishing a 'Centre of Excellence' and Research Institute for Millets in 
Odisha. Odisha has made significant strides in millet production, expanding from 
3,340 hectares in 2017-18 to 52,230 hectares in 2021-22.  Despite cultivating six of the 
eleven millet varieties, the State lacks dedicated research facilities and a Centre of 
Excellence 
for millets. With the international year of millets and India's goal to lead in 
millet production, establishing a Center of Excellence and Research Institute, 
especially in Western Odisha, is crucial to advance research and to support our 
farmers. 
Sir, my Party, BJD, has been the champion of furthering the cause of farmers, 
and we have been demanding an increase in the Minimum Support Price for paddy. 
Our demand for a higher MSP for paddy has been ignored. The recent increase of 
Rs. 117 per quintal to Rs. 2,300 for the year 2024-25 for kharif marketing 
season 
is insufficient. We need a legal framework to ensure stability, security and 
guaranteeing fair prices for our farmers' crops. 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
121

Sir, we need support for agriculture inpu ts and production costs. There is no 
provision to subsidize fertilizers, seeds, and pesticides leading to shortage and 
impacting crop yields. The lack of rational ized urea prices and inadequate support for 
agricultural implements and machinery further strains ou r farmers. Fertilizer price 
increase and GST imposition have added to the burden. The hon. Minister must 
ensure timely and adequate supply of fe rtilizers and provide subsidies to boost 
agricultural productivity. 
Sir, greater investment in research is necessary for long-term agriculture 
advancement, enhancing productivity and deve loping climate-resilient varieties. It is, 
therefore, urged upon the Minister of Finance that she may think again to increase the 
agriculture research budget appropriately. The budget of agricultural research has 
only marginally increased to Rs. 9,941 crore from Rs. 9,877 crore the previous year. 
 To bring prosperity in the agriculture sector and in the life of farmers, we 
need to have a long-term agricultural vision. With India's population expected to peak 
at 1.7 billion, we need a long-term agriculture strategy. Historical investments during 
the Green Revolution were pivotal. We re quire a similar forward-thinking strategy 
today, which the current Budget lacks. I, once again, reiterate our demand for 
implementation of Swaminathan Committ ee's recommendations. The Swaminathan 
Committee's recommendation of MSP to be 50 per cent above the cost of production 
remains unimplemented. Reduced import duties on some crops may harm our 
farmers. The hon. Minister must implement the Swaminathan Committee's 
recommendation to enhance agricultural prod uctivity and support our farmers.  The 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana is grappling with many lacunae. The Pradhan 
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana has faced delays in payments causing significant hardship 
for farmers in Odisha. These delays are du e to Central Government's oversight and 
issues with the insurance companies. The scheme has been ineffective, benefiting 
insurance companies more than farmers. The hon. Minister must improve the 
implementation of Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana, ensuring timely claims, 
processing and direct payments to the farm er's bank account within 30 days of crop 
loss. For a State like Odisha, which is an ag ricultural-dependent State, when majority 
of people earn their livelihood from agricult ure, it is a big disappointment. The Budget 
is silent on the actual problem faced by agriculturists for marketing their products, 
getting their fair price for all agriculture products, including floriculture and vegetables. 
Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, these issues are critical to the well-being of our farmers and 
the future of our agricultur e. I urge the hon. Minist er to take immediate and 
comprehensive action to address these conc erns. Thank you. Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan. 
Bande Utkal Janani.   
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

            
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव जी की िरक्वेÎट है िक उनको Äलाइट 
पकड़नी है। Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव जी, आपका टाइम 5 िमनट है, आप बोिलए। 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय,  आपको बहुत धन्यवाद।  समय पांच िमनट का है 
और मंतर्ालय बहुत बड़ा
 है। मंतर्ालय क े कायर्करण पर चचार् है। ...(Ëयवधान)... अलग से नहीं 
चािहए, मȅ शॉटर् मȂ ही कहूंगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा):  िगिरराज जी आपको अपना टाइम दे रहे हȅ।  
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: म
ुझे 2004 से 2008 तक, एगर्ीकÊचर कमेटी का चेयरमैन होने का भी 
सौभाग्य ĢाÃत हुआ था। क ु छ िदनȗ क े िलए माननीय मौजूदा मंतर्ी जी उस वƪ उस कमेटी क े 
चेयरमैन भी थे और Îवािमनाथन साहब तो थे ही, वे बाद मȂ आ गए थे। िकसान का दुभार्ग्य यह है 
िक उसे क ुदरत पर िनभर्र रहना पड़ता है। कभी-कभी फसल पकने को होती ह
ै, गेहूं पकने को 
खड़ा होता है, ओले पड़ जाते हȅ और फसल खत्म हो जाती  है।  कभी बाढ़ आ जाती है, तो धान 
और अन्य फसल भी चली जाती हȅ।  यह िकसी क े हाथ मȂ नहीं है, लेिकन इन आपदाओं से बचने क े 
िलए जो Ģयास गवनर्मȂट को करने चािहए, इसके  िलए क्या िकया  जा सकता है, इस पर अवÌय 
िवचार होना चािहए। अब की बार इतनी ज्यादा गमीर् पड़ी िक जब गेहूं का दाना पड़ रहा था, उस 
वƪ अत्यिधक गमीर् पड़ने की वजह से उसकी उपज 20 से 25 परसȂट कम हो गई। आलू क े फल मȂ 
जब गर्ोथ होने को थी, तो
 अिधक गमीर् की वजह से वह ज्यादा बढ़ ही नहीं पाया। अगर थोड़ा सा 
और बढ़ जाता, तो सवा गुना ज्यादा पैदावार होती। मȅ उसका भुƪभोगी हूं, मȅ अपनी खेती को खुद 
देखता हूं, इसिलए जानता हूं। िपछले साल हमारी िजतनी जमीन मȂ 4,000 बैग आलू हुआ था, इस 
बार 3,200 हुआ, क ेवल अिधक गमीर् की वजह से।  अब इसको न तो सरकार रोक सकती है, न 
और कोई रोक सकता है। लेिकन ऐसी िÎथित मȂ जो भाव िमलना चािहए, वह भाव नहीं िमल पाता 
है। इस बार आलू की पैदावार कम हुई, तो भाव बढ़ गया है और घाटा नहीं हुआ। लेिकन इस वƪ 
हमारे इलाके  मȂ मक्का बड़े पैमाने पर हुई है। हमारी मक्का रखी हुई है, कोई खरीदने वाला नहीं है। 
MSP की बात छोिड़ए, आपने 2,200 रुपए  क े आसपास MSP कर िदया है, लेिकन उसको लेने 
वाला कोई नहीं है, हम िकसको दȂ। वह घर पर रखी हुई है। डर यह लगा रहता है िक यह अिधक 
पानी बरसने पर भीग जाएगी, तो और खराब हो जाएगी, तब िफर आगे चल कर और कोई नहीं 
लेगा।  इसिलए ये िदक्कतȂ हȅ।   
 महोदय, मेरा एक सुझाव यह है िक आज भी आजादी क े इतने िदनȗ बाद जो खेती है, 
उसमȂ जो जोतने योग्य या खेती करने योग्य जमीन है, लगभग उतनी ही जमीन ऐसी है, जो बंजर 
या ravines क े रूप  मȂ पड़ी हुई है। उसको खेती योग्य जमीन मȂ convert करन े क े िलए Ģयास 
िकया जाए िक उसमȂ खेती हो सके , अगर उसमȂ खेती की जाए, तो बहुत बड़े पैमाने पर िकसानȗ 
को लाभ हो सकता है। जो खेत जोती भी जाती है, बोई जाती है, उसमȂ जो irrigated है, वह 
िजतनी बोई जाती है, उसका लगभग 55 परस Ȃट irrigated है। क ेवल 55 परस Ȃट। अगर वह पूरी 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
123

irrigated हो जाए, तब भी हमारी पैदावार और ज्यादा हो सकती है और िकसान की आमदनी 
वाÎतव मȂ बढ़ सकती है। इसिलए इसके  िलए Ģयास होने चािहए। 
 दूसरा, जो देवेगौड़ा साहब ने कहा था, actually खेती, animal husbandry, fisheries, 
ये सब एक-दूसरे से अिभन्न रूप  से जुड़े हुए हȅ।  Agriculture की हमारी जो Ģमुख फसलȂ हȅ - गेहूँ 
और धान, इससे िजतना revenue receipt होता है, उससे ज्यादा दूध, माँस और मछली से पैदा 
होता है, लेिकन उसकी तरफ उतना ध्यान जाता नहीं।  उससे भी ज्यादा खराब िÎथित food 
processing की है। अब तो मंतर्ालय ही अलग हो गया, लेिकन उसको िजतना महत्व िदया जाना 
चािहए, नहीं िदया जा रहा है। अभी भी दुिनया मȂ सबसे ज्यादा food processing Ĥाजील मȂ होती 
है, 80 फीसदी क े आसपास।  क ु छ साल पहले जब मȅ इस किमटी का चेयरमैन था, जब मȅने पता 
िकया, तब िंहदुÎतान मȂ यह क ेवल एक परसȂट थी। हमारे जो फल हȅ या सिÅजयाँ हȅ, जो 
perishable vegetables हȅ, हर साल लगभग 60 हजार करोड़ रुपए  की नÍट हो जाती हȅ, क्यȗिक 
food processing का कोई भी proper इंतजाम नहीं है।  क ेवल आलू क े िलए कोÊड Îटोरेज है, 
और िकसी क े िलए नहीं है। जब मȅ संभल से लोक सभा का सदÎय था, तो उस इलाके  मȂ टमाटर 
बहुत होता था। एक िदन मȅ एक क्षेतर् मȂ जा रहा था, तो सड़क क े िकनारे टर्ैक्टरȗ से लोग टमाटर 
को फ Ȃ क रहे थे, िनकाल रहे थे।  मȅने पूछा िक ऐसा क्यȗ कर रहे हो, तो उन्हȗने कहा िक साहब, 
कोई खरीदने वाला ही नहीं है और दो िदन बाद ये सड़ जाएँगे।  अगर food processing का 
इंतजाम सही हो जाए, तब भी िकसानȗ का बहुत भला हो सकता है। खाद क े जिरए या इनके  
जिरए agriculture की एक limit है िक आप इससे ज्यादा पर हेक्टेयर पैदा कर ही नहीं सकते हȅ। 
अगर ज्यादा खाद डाल दȂगे, तो जमीन और बंजर हो जाएगी। लेिकन animal husbandry मȂ कोई 
limit नहीं है। एक आदमी क े पास 10 गाय Ȃ हो सकती है, भȅसȂ हो सकती हȅ, 100 भी हो सकती हȅ, 
इसमȂ तो कोई limit है ही नहीं। जहाँ पैदावार बढ़ सकती है, आमदनी बढ़ सकती है, उस पर 
ज्यादा ध्यान देने की आवÌयकता है। यूिरया वगैरह ये जो खादȂ हȅ, इनका जो standard use है िक 
इतना Ģयोग िकया जाना चािहए, उससे बहुत ज्यादा Ģयोग होने लगा है। आगे चल कर खेती बंजर 
हो सकती है। और यही नहीं, एक बार पंजाब क े िकसानȗ का Åलड सȅपल िलया गया, तो उसमȂ 
permissible limit से ज्यादा यूिरया का अंश था, क्यȗिक बहुत ज्यादा manure, खाद का Ģयोग 
िकया जा रहा था। इन सब का संतुलन बनाए रखने की आवÌयकता है। सबसे बड़ा खतरा तो यह 
है िक जमीन क े अन्दर पानी का Îतर इतना नीचे जा रहा है िक अगर इसको नीचे जाने से नहीं 
रोका गया, तो यहाँ क ु छ भी पैदा नहीं हो सकता है, क ु छ भी नहीं हो सकता है। तब फसल क े िलए 
पानी नहीं िमलेगा, पीने क
े  िलए पानी नहीं िमलेगा। िदÊली मȂ तो पीने क े पानी क े िलए टȅकसर् यूज़ 
करने पड़ रहे हȅ। िजतने तालाब थे, सब पर कÅजा हो गया। जो पोखरȂ थीं, उन पर मकान बन गए, 
कॉलोनीज़ बना ली गईं। जमीन क े अ
ंदर का जो वाटर है, वह िरचाजर् नहीं हो पा रहा है। जहां पानी 
भरता था, जहाँ बड़े बड़े तालाब थे, लोगȗ ने उनसे नाले िनकाल क े निदयȗ मȂ डाल िदये। इससे 
पानी जो बरसता है, वह सीधा निदयȗ से होता हुआ समुदर् मȂ चला जाता है, वह कहीं रुकता ही 
नहीं है। माननीय क ृिष मंतर्ी जी, आप इसका इंतजाम किरए। अगर अभी क ृिष मंतर्ी यहाँ नहीं ह ै, तो 
लेबर िमिनÎटर बैठे हुए हȅ। आप जमीन क े अन्दर पानी को िरचाजर् करने का इंतजाम कीिजए, 
वरना सारे Ƿूबव ेÊस फ े ल हो जाएंगे।  तब खेती की िंसचाई की ËयवÎथा नहीं हो सके गी और पीने 
क े पानी िलए ये जो हȅड पंप लगते हȅ, इनमȂ से पानी िनकलना बंद हो जाएगा, आदमी Ãयास से मर 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

जाएगा, उसे पानी नहीं िमलेगा।  ...(समय की घंटी)... मेरा आपसे अनुरोध है िक एमएसपी क े 
बारे मȂ इन्हȗने जो कहा है, उससे मȅ सहमत हूँ।  उन्हȗने बहुत तथ्यात्मक बातȂ कही हȅ। आलोचना 
की दृिÍट से नहीं, लेिकन उन्हȗने जो चचार् Ģारंभ की थी, वह उसमȂ िजतनी तथ्यात्मक बातȂ थीं, 
उनका कोई जवाब आप लोगȗ क
े  पास नहीं है। आप चाहे उनकी क ु छ भी आलोचना कीिजए, 
लेिकन वे तथ्य क े साथ कह रहे हȅ, तो उसका खंडन तो कीिजए।  खंडन करने क े बाद इधर-उधर 
से आलोचना करने से कोई फायदा नहीं होता है।  
 मȅ तो ज्यादा क
ु छ नहीं बोल रहा हूँ।  मȅ िसफर् यही कहता हूं िक िकसान को बचाने क े 
िलए, जमीन क े पानी को िरचाजर् करने की ËयवÎथा को ठीक कीिजए। जो ता लाब बह रहा है, उस 
पर कÅजा हो रहा है - मȅने जल शिƪ मंतर्ालय को िचƻी िलखी थी। उस वƪ शेखावत जी उसके  
मंतर्ी थे। हमारे यहां बहुत बड़े-बड़े तालाब थे।  जाने कहां-कहां से सिर्दयȗ मȂ िचिड़याँ आती थीं, 
वहां बैठती थीं। सब पर लोगȗ न
े कÅजा कर िलया है। मȅने िलखा िक इसको रोिकए। डीएम, मैनपुरी 
को कहा। अब िडिजटल होने से, क्या आपको मालूम है िक अब क्या हो गया है? अब कोई भी 
लेखपाल क ंÃयूटर से हमारी जमीन राजीव शुक्ला क े नाम कर द
े, राजीव शुक्ला की जमीन 
मांडिवया साहब क े नाम कर दे।   अब ऐसा िसÎटम हो गया है िक वह क ु छ भी कर सकता है।  
तालाबȗ क े िलए उन्हȗने यह िलख िदया िक ये िकसान की पैतृक संपिǄ है। वह इतनी कीमती 
जमीन हो गई िक उन
 सब तालाबȗ पर कÅजे हो गए।  उसको कोई रोकने वाला नहीं है। िंसह 
साहब, मȅने डीएम, मैनपुरी से बार-बार कहा, िफर  मȅने शेखावत जी को िलखा, शेखावत जी ने 
Îटेट गवनर्मȂट को िलखा, Îटेट गवनर्मȂट की तरफ से आया, बिÊक इन्हीं क े पास मेरे पास जवाब 
गया िक यह उǄर Ģदेश क े िंसचाई िवभाग का काम ह ै। तो मȅ िकस से Ģाथर्ना करूं ? जब तालाब 
नहीं रहȂगे, तब पानी नहीं िमलेगा। राजÎथान वालȗ ने बहुत अच्छा काम िकया है। पुराने सारे 
तालाबȗ को ठीक कर िलया है, इसिलए हमारे यहां तो पानी खत्म होता जा रहा है, लेिकन 
राजÎथान मȂ उपलÅध हो रहा है। ...( समय की घंट
ी)... वहाँ बािरश का पानी रुक  जाता है, 
लेिकन हमारे यहां बािरश क े पानी को रोकने का कोई इंतजाम नहीं है। इसिलए मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी से अनुरोध करूं गा िक एक तो तालाबȗ को पुनजीर्िवत करȂ, पानी को रोकने की कोिशश करȂ, 
अच्छे बीज सÎते दामȗ पर िमलȂ। मȅने मक्का
 का बीज 580 रुपय े Ģित िकलो िलया। दुकानदार बोला 
िक यह कनार्टक से आता है। उसका कोई बीज है, िजसका नाम है। वह बीज बहुत महंगा आता है। 
आलू रखने जाओ, तो बीज इतना महंगा आता है िक अगर आलू सÎता हो जाए आलू, तो आलू क े 
बीज की कीमत क े बराबर भी आलू नहीं होता। अबकी बार तो आलू कम पैदा हुआ, तो आलू महँगा 
हो गया।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): धन्यवाद। 
 
Ģो. राम गोप
ाल यादव: इसिलए मेरा आपसे अनुरोध है िक ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
एक माननीय सदÎय: सर, ये अच्छा बोल रहे हȅ, बोलने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान).
 .. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
125

उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): क्या आप इनको अपना टाइम दȂगे? ...(Ëयवधान)... क्या आप 
अपना टाइम दȂगे? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: िकसान जो क ेवल आकाश पर िनभर्र रहता है, उसका कोई अÊटरनेिटव 
भी सोिचए, क्यȗिक उसको बहुत िदक्कत होती है। कोई ऐसी नई फसल िनकािलए, कोई ऐसे नए 
बीज िनकािलए। मȅने तो
 उसे वƪ भी आईसीएआर से कहा था, जब आपके  जमाने मȂ ही, जब आप 
वहाँ थे, तब मंगला राय साहब उसके  डायरेक्टर जनरल थे, िक जहाँ पानी कम है, तो गेहूं की 
ऐसी नÎल िनकािलए, िजससे कम पानी मȂ भी गेहूं की पैदावार सही हो सके ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): धन्यवाद।    
 
Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव: बहुत सारी खोजȂ की गई हȅ, late varieties भी िनकाली हȅ।  माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी, आप अभी नहीं थे, हमने कहा िक हमारी मक्का रखी हुई है, कोई खरीद ही नहीं रहा है। 
 महोदय, आपने बहुत टाइम िदया, इसके  िलए आपको बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): वाइस च
ेयरमैन पैनल मȂ फौिजया खान जी भी हȅ और उनको 
चेयर पर आना है तथा उनको इस िवषय पर बोलना भी है, इसिलए मȅ उनसे अनुरोध करता हूँ िक 
वे अपना भाषण शुरू  करȂ। डा. फौिजया खान जी।    
 
डा. फौिजया खान (महाराÍटर्): वाइस चेयरमैन सर, िकसी ने कहा : 
 
'
लहरȗ क े साथ तो लाशȂ बहा करती हȅ। 
अगर तू िजन्दा है, तो उठ, खड़ा हो और सवाल कर, 
क्यȗिक तेरे सवाल ही तुझे िजन्दा करते हȅ।' 
 
 सर, आज मȅ सरकार स
े यह सवाल करने क े िलए खड़ी हूँ िक िवकास तथा िवकिसत 
भारत और िवÌव गुरु  बनने क े सपने की ओर बढ़ते-बढ़ते हमारा जो अन्नदाता देश क े पोषण का 
िजÇमेवार है, वे क्यȗ दुलर्Ñय थे? महोदय, सरकार क े िलए  हमारे िकसान भाइयȗ की पीड़ा क्यȗ 
अदृÌय हो गई है? यह िव
षय सरकार को िंचितत क्यȗ नहीं कर पा रहा है िक महाराÍटर् क े िकसान 
भाइयȗ की आत्महत्या का Ģमाण इस देश मȂ सबसे ज्यादा है? एनसीआरबी क े आँकड़ȗ क े अनुसार 
इस देश मȂ 2022 मȂ िकसान भाइयȗ की िजतनी आत्महत्या हुई ह
ै, उनमȂ से 37 Ģितशत आत्महत्या 
महाराÍटर् मȂ हुई है;  िजसका अथर् यह है िक हर रोज 11 िकसानȗ ǎारा आत्महत्या महाराÍटर् मȂ हो 
रही है। इसका कारण यह है िक िकसान भाइयȗ क े असल िवषयȗ को एडर्ेस करने मȂ सरकार 
असफल रही है। ऐसा क्यȗ?  िकसान क े उत्पादन की उसको योग्य कीमत नहीं िमलना, फसल क े 
िलए िलया गया कजर् अदा न कर पाना, न
ैसिर्गक आपदा आती है, तो फसल बीमा का नहीं िमलना, 
बरसात पर िनभर्र रहना, कभी सूखे से, कभी तूफान से पीिड़त हो जाना, िबजली क े ĢÌन से बेहाल 
हो जाना या जंगली जानवरȗ क
े  ĢÌन से परेशान हो जाना - आपको िकसानȗ की यह पीड़ा क्यȗ 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

नहीं िदख रही है? महाराÍटर् मȂ नवंबर, 2021 से मई, 2022 तक लगभग 2.71 लाख हेक्टेयर क्षेतर् 
unseasonal rains, hailstorms और windstorms से तबाह हो गये। सर, जब भी मȅ महाराÍटर् क े 
िकसी देहात मȂ जाती हूँ, तो 'Ģधान मंतर्ी फसल बीमा योजना' क े सवाल को लेकर सब िकसान घेर 
लेते हȅ और अपनी समÎयाएँ बयान करते हȅ िक हमȂ अपना फसल बीमा नहीं िमल रहा है। अगर 
सरकार इन िशकायतȗ को अनदेखा और अनसुना करेगी, तो िकसान भाइयȗ की आत्महत्या की 
संख्या बढ़ने का अंदेशा हमेशा रहेगा।   
सर, महाराÍटर् एक
 Ģमुख Ãयाज उत्पादक राज्य है। देश का 43 Ģितशत Åयाज का उत्पादन 
महाराÍटर् मȂ होता है। महाराÍटर् का Ãयाज उत्पादक िकसान आज िनराश और हतबल हो गया है, 
क्यȗिक चार महीने क े िनयार्त िनबȊध क े पÌचाÞ अब 40 Ģितशत िनयार्त शुÊक िलया जा रहा है। 
इससे अंतरार्Íटर्ीय बाजार म
Ȃ Ãयाज कहीं दूर Îपधार् मȂ रह गया है। पिरणामत: राÍटर्ीय बाजार मȂ 
ओवर सÃलाई और कम कीमत क े कारण िकसान आज इतना मजबूर है िक उसका उत्पादन खचर् 
भी उसे नहीं िमल पा रहा है। सर, आज नुकसान गर्Îत िकसान भारी िनराशा म Ȃ ड ूबा हुआ है।  
सरकार िकसानȗ की जरूरतȗ का हल िनकालने मȂ नाकाम हो गई है, इस कारण से न Ãयाज की 
कीमतȗ मȂ िÎथरता आ पा रही है और न िकसानȗ को उसका उिच त भाव िमल रहा है। सरकार ǎारा 
Ãयाज उत्पादक िकसानȗ की समÎयाओं को पूरी तरह से नजरअंदाज िकया गया है और ये िकसान 
पूरी तरह बेसहारा ही रह गए हȅ।  सर, इससे िवपरीत इन िनयार्त िनबȊधȗ से सÃलाई चेन पर 
िवपरीत पिरणाम हो रहा है, िजससे Ëयापारी, एक्सपोटर्स
र् भी Ģभािवत हो रहे हȅ। आज इन Ãयाज 
उत्पादक िकसानȗ क े िलए सरकार की ओर से तुरंत कोई पॉिलसी तय िकए जाने की आवÌयकता 
है, तािक इनको राहत िमल सके ।  इसी तरह, नागपुर क े संतरा उत्पादक िकसान और मराठवाड़ा 
क े कपास एवं सोयाबीन उत्पादक िकसानȗ की भी इसी तरह की समÎयाएं हȅ।   
सर, मȅ आपका ध्यान क ु छ और िवषयȗ
 की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहती हूँ। " नमो डर्ोन 
दीदी Îकीम" क े िलए 500 करोड़ रुपए  का Ģावधान िकया गया है और कहा गया है िक मिहलाओ ं 
को सशƪ करने क े िलए यह योजना है। यह बहुत अच्छी बात है, परंतु इस िवषय की एक बात को 
मȅ समझ नहीं पा रही हूँ िक एक ओर तो टेक्नोलॉजी का यूज़ करके  हम लोग क ेिमकल 
फिर्टलाइजसर् और पेिÎटसाइड्स का उपयोग कर रहे हȅ, दूसरी ओर "नेशनल िमशन ऑन नैचुरल 
फािमȊग" का उǈेÌय क ेिमकल का उपयोग कम
 करके  सÎटेनेबल Ģैिक्टसेज की वृिǉ करना ह ै  और 
इसके  Ģावधान मȂ 459 करोड़ रुपए  से 465 करोड़ कम िकए गए हȅ। यानी, रािश यहां तक आ गई 
है, िजसमȂ िपछले वषर् िनिध का उपयोग क ेवल 21 Ģितशत हुआ है। सर, हमारी Ģाथिमकता क्या है, 
क ेिमकल फािमȊग या नैचुरल फािमȊग? मंतर्ी महोदय क ृपा करके  इसको ÎपÍट करȂ।  
ﻣﺤﺘﺮﻣہ ﻓﻮﺯﻳہ ﺧﺎﻥ) ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ: (ﻭﺍﺋﺲ ﭼﻴﺌﺮﻣﻴﻦ ﺳﺮ ﮐﺴﯽ ﻧﮯ ﮐﮩﺎ ؎ﮨﮯ 
ﻟﮩﺮﻭں ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ ﺗﻮ ﻻﺷﻴﮟ ﺑﮩﺎ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ،  
ﺍﮔﺮ  ﺗﻮ ﺯﻧﺪﻩ ﮨﮯ ,ﺗﻮ ﺍﭨﻬ، ﮐﻬﮍﺍﮨﻮ، ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﮐﺮ، 
ﮐﻴﻮﻧﮑہ  ﺗﻴﺮے ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﮨﯽ ﺗﺠﻬﮯ ﺯﻧﺪﻩ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ 
ﺳﺮ، ﺍٓﺝ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﺳﮯ ﻳﮩﺎں ﻳہ ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮐﻬﮍی ﮨﻮں ﮐہ ﻭﮐﺎﺱ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻭِﮐﺴﺖ ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺕ ﺍﻭﺭ  ﻭِﺷﻮ 
ﮔﺮﻭ ﺑﻨﻨﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺳﭙﻨﮯ ﮐﯽ ﻁﺮﻑ ﺑﮍﻫﺘﮯ ﺑﮍﻫﺘﮯ ﮨﻤﺎﺭﺍ ﺟﻮ ﺍﻥّ  ﺩﺍﺗﺎ ﺩﻳﺶ ﮐﮯ ﭘﻮﺷﻦ ﮐﺎ ﺫﻣہ ﺩﺍﺭ ﮨﮯ ﻭﻩ ﮐﻴﻮں ﺩﺭﻟﮑﺶ 
ﺗﻬﮯ؟ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮨﻤﺎﺭے ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﺎﺋﻴﻮں ﮐﯽ ﭘﻴﮍﺍ ﮐﻴﻮں ﺍﺩﺷﮯ ﮨﻮ ﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﮯ؟ ﻳہ ﻭِﺷﮯ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﻮ ﭼﻨﺘﺖ 
ﮐﻴﻮں ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﺮ ﺭﮨﺎ
ﭘﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﮐﮯ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﺎﺋﻴﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺧﻮﺩﮐﺸﯽ ﮐﺎ ﭘﺮﻣﺎﻥ ﺍﺱ ﺩﻳﺶ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﺐ ﺳﮯ ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﮨﮯ .ﺍﻳﻦ 
                                                            
 †Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
127

ﺳﯽ ﺍﺭ ﺑﯽ ﮐﮯ ﺍٓﻧﮑﮍﻭں ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ ﺍﺱ ﺩﻳﺶ ﻣﻴﮟ2022 ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﺎﺋﻴﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺟﺘﻨﯽ ﺧﻮﺩﮐﺸﻴﺎں ﮨﻮﺋﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ ﺍﻥ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﮯ 
37 ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﺧﻮﺩﮐﺸﯽ ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺋﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺟﺲ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻄﻠﺐ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﮨﺮ ﺭﻭﺯ11 ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺧﻮﺩﮐﺸﻴﺎں ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﮨﻮ ﺭﮨﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ ﺍﺱ ﮐﯽ ﻭﺟہ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﺎﺋﻴﻮں ﮐﮯ ﺍﺻﻞ ﻭِﺷﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺍﻳﮉﺭﻳﺲ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ  ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﻧﺎﮐﺎﻡ ﺭﮨﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﻳﺴﺎ 
ﮐﻴﻮں؟ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﮐﯽ ﭘﻴﺪﺍﻭﺍﺭ ﮐﯽ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ ﻗﻴﻤﺖ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ، ﻣﻠﻨﺎ ﻓﺼﻞ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻟﻴﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﻗﺮﺽ ﺍﺩﺍ ﻧہ ﮐﺮﭘﺎﻧﺎ ﻧﻴﺴﺮﮔِﮏ ﺍٓﭘﺪﻩ 
ﺍٓﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ ﺗﻮ ﻓﺼﻞ ﺑﻴﻤﺎ ﮐﺎ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻣﻠﻨﺎ ﺑﺮﺳﺎﺕ ﭘﺮ ﻣﻨﺤﺼﺮ ﺭﮨﻨﺎ ﮐﺒﻬﯽ ﺳﻮﮐﻬﮯ ﺳﮯ ﮐﺒﻬﯽ ﻁﻮﻓﺎﻧﻮں ﺳﮯ ﭘﻴﮍﺕ ﮨﻮ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ، ﺑﺠﻠﯽ 
ﮐﮯ ﻮﺍﻝ
ﺳ ﺳﮯ ﺑﮯ ﺣﺎﻝ ﮨﻮ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ ﻳﺎ ﺟﻨﮕﻠﯽ ﺟﺎﻧﻮﺭ ﮐﮯ ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﺳﮯ ﭘﺮﻳﺸﺎﻥ ﮨﻮ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ ﺍٓپ ﮐﻮ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﻳہ ﭘﻴﮍﺍ ﮐﻴﻮں ﻧﮩﻴﮟ 
ﺩﮐﻬ ﺭﮨﯽ ﮨﮯ؟ ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﻮﻣﺒﺮ2021 ﺳﮯ ﻣﺌﯽ2022 ﺗﮏ ﻟﮓ ﺑﻬﮓ ﺩﻭ ﺍٓﺷﺎﺭﻳہ71 ﻻﮐﻬ ﮨﻴﮑﭩﺮ ﺭﻗﺒﮯ 
unseasonal rains, hailstorms ﺍﻭﺭwindstorms ﺳﮯ ﺗﺒﺎﻩ ﮨﻮ ﮔﺌﮯ۔ 
 ﺳﺮ ﺟﺐ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﮐﮯ ﮐﺴﯽ ﺩﻳﮩﺎﺕ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺟﺎﺗﯽ ﮨﻮں ﺗﻮ ﭘﺮﺩﻫﺎﻥ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﻓﺼﻞ ﺑﻴﻤﺎ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮐﮯ ﻮﺍﻝ
ﺳ ﮐﻮ 
ﻟﮯ ﮐﺮ ﺳﺐ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﮔﻬﻴﺮ ﻟﻴﺘﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﺳﻤﺴﻴﺎﺋﻴﮟ ﺑﻴﺎﻥ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﮐہ ﮨﻤﻴﮟ ﺍﭘﻨﺎ ﻓﺼﻞ ﺑﻴﻤﺎ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻣﻞ ﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺍﮔﺮ 
ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﺍﻥ ﺷﮑﺎﻳﺘﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺍﻧﺪﻳﮑﻬﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﻧﺴﻨﺎ ﮐﺮے ﮔﯽ ﺗﻮ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﺎﺋﻴﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺩﮐﺸﯽ
ﺧﻮ ﮐﯽ ﺗﻌﺪﺍﺩ ﺑﮍﻫﻨﮯ ﮐﺎ ﺍﻧﺪﻳﺸہ ﮨﻤﻴﺸہ 
ﺑﻨﮯ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮔﺎ۔ 
ﺳﺮ، ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ  ﺍﻳﮏ  ﭘﺮﻣﮑﻬ  ﭘﻴﺎﺯ ﭘﻴﺪﺍ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﻭﺍﻟﯽ ﺭﻳﺎﺳﺖ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺩﻳﺶ ﮐﯽ45 ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﭘﻴﺎﺯ ﮐﯽ ﭘﻴﺪﺍﻭﺍﺭ ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ 
ﻣﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ ﮐﺎ ﭘﻴﺎﺯ ﮐﯽ ﭘﻴﺪﺍﻭﺍﺭ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﻭﺍﻻ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺍٓﺝ ﻧﺮﺍﺵ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮨﺘﺒﻞ ﮨﻮ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﮐﻴﻮﻧﮑہ ﭼﺎﺭ ﻣﮩﻴﻨﮯ ﮐﮯ 
ﻧِﺮﻳﺎﺕ ﺑﺮﺑﻨﺪﻫ ﮐﮯ ﭘﺸﭽﺎﺕ ﺍﺏ40 ﺼﺪ
ﻓﻴ ﻧِﺮﻳﺎﺕ ﺷُﻠﮏ ﻟﻴﺎ ﺟﺎ ﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﺳﮯ ﺑﻴﻦ ﺍﻻﻗﻮﺍﻣﯽ ﺑﺎﺯﺍﺭ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﻴﺎﺯ ﮐﮩﻴﮟ ﺩﻭﺭ 
ﺍﺳﭙﺮﺩﻩ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﻩ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ ﭘﺮﻳﻨﺎﻣﺖ ﺑﻴﻦ ﺍﻻﻗﻮﺍﻣﯽ ﺑﺎﺯﺍﺭ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻭﻭﺭ ﺳﭙﻼﺋﯽ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﻢ ﻗﻴﻤﺖ ﮐﯽ ﻭﺟہ ﺳﮯ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺍٓﺝ ﺍﺗﻨﺎ ﻣﺠﺒﻮﺭ 
ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺍﺱ ﮐﯽ ﺍﻭﺍﺭ
ﭘﻴﺪ ﮐﺎ ﺧﺮچ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍﺳﮯ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻣﻞ ﭘﺎ ﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ 
ﺳﺮ، ﺍٓﺝ ﻧﻘﺼﺎﻥ ﺯﺩﻩ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﺎﺭی ﻧﺮﺍﺷہ ﻣﻴﮟ ڈﻭﺑﺎ ﮨﻮﺍ ﮨﮯ، ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺿﺮﻭﺭﺗﻮں ﮐﺎ ﺣﻞ ﻧﮑﺎﻟﻨﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﻧﺎﮐﺎﻡ ﮨﻮ ﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﮯ ﺍﺱ ﻭﺟہ ﺳﮯ ﻧہ ﭘﻴﺎﺱ ﮐﯽ ﻗﻴﻤﺘﻮں ﻣﻴﮟ ﭨﻬﮩﺮﺍﺅ ﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻧہ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎ ﻭﺍﺟﺐ ﺩﺍﻡ ﻣﻞ ﺭﮨﺎ 
ﮨﮯ۔ 
ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﮯ ﺫﺭﻳﻌﮯ ﭘﻴﺎﺯ ﭘﻴﺪﺍ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﻭﺍﻟﮯ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﻴﻮں
ﭘﺮﻳﺸﺎﻧ ﮐﻮ ﭘﻮﺭی ﻁﺮﺡ ﺳﮯ ﻧﻈﺮ ﺍﻧﺪﺍﺯ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ 
ﺍﻭﺭ ﻳہ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﭘﻮﺭی ﻁﺮﺡ ﺑﮯ ﺳﮩﺎﺭﺍ ﮨﻮ ﮐﺮ ﺭﻩ ﮔﺌﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﺳﺮ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﻋﮑﺲﺑﺮ ﺍﻥ ﻧِﺮﻳﺎﺕ ﻧِﺮﺑﻨﺪﻭں ﺳﮯ ﺳﭙﻼﺋﯽ ﭼﻴﻦ ﭘﺮ 
ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺑﺮﻋﮑﺲ ﻧﺘﺎﺋﺞ ﺑﺮﺍٓﻣﺪ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺟﺲ ﺳﮯ ﻭﻳﺎﭘﺎﺭی ﺍﻳﮑﺴﭙﻮﺭﭨﺮﺯ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻣﺘﺎﺛﺮ ﮨﻮ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺍٓﺝ ﺍﻥ ﭘﻴﺎﺯ ﭘﻴﺪﺍ 
ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﻭﺍﻟﮯ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﯽ ﻁﺮﻑ ﺳﮯ ﻓﻮﺭی ﻁﻮﺭ ﭘﺮ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﭘﺎﻟﻴﺴﯽ ﻁﮯ ﮐﻴﮯ ﺟﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺿﺮﻭﺭﺕ ﮨﮯ 
ﺗﺎﮐہ ﺍﻥ ﮐﻮ ﺭﺍﺣﺖ ﻣﻞ ﺳﮑﮯ۔ ﺍﺳﯽ ﻁﺮﺡ ﻧﺎﮔﭙﻮﺭ ﮐﮯ ﺳﻨﺘﺮﻩ ﭘﻴﺪﺍ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﻭﺍﻟﮯ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻣﺮﺍﭨﻬﻮﺍڑﻩ ﮐﮯ ﮐﭙﺎﺱ ﻭﺭ
ﺍ 
ﺳﻮﻳﺎﺑﻴﻦ ﭘﻴﺪﺍ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﻭﺍﻟﮯ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍﺳﯽ ﻁﺮﺡ ﮐﯽ ﺷﮑﺎﻳﺎﺕ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ 
   ﺳﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓپ ﮐﯽ ﺗﻮﺟہ ﮐﭽﻬ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺎﺕ
ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋ ﮐﯽ ﻁﺮﻑ ﻣﺒﺬﻭﻝ ﮐﺮﺍﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﯽ ﮨﻮں۔ ﻧﻤﻮ ڈﺭﻭﻥ ﺩﻳﺪی ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﮐﮯ 
ﻟﻴﮯ500 ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﺭﻭﭘﻴﮯ ﮐﺎ ﺩﻫﺎﻥ
ﭘﺮﺍﺅ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﮩﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﻣﮩﻴﻼﺅں ﮐﻮ ﺳﺸﮑﺖ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻳہ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﮨﮯ۔ 
ﻳہ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺍﭼﻬﯽ ﺑﺎﺕ ﮨﮯ ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﺍﺱ ﻭِﺷﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺑﺎﺕ ﮐﻮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﻤﺠﻬ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﭘﺎ ﺭﮨﯽ ﮨﻮں، ﮐہ ﺍﻳﮏ ﻁﺮﻑ ﺗﻮ ﭨﻴﮑﻨﺎﻟﻮﺟﯽ ﮐﺎ 
ﺍﺳﺘﻌﻤﺎﻝ ﮐﺮ ﮐﮯ ﮨﻢ ﻟﻮگ ﮐﻴﻤﻴﮑﻞ ﻓﺮﭨﻴﻼﺋﺰﺭﺯﺱ ﺍﻭﺭ ﭘﻴﺴﭩﻴﺴﺎﺋﻴﮉﺯ ﮐﺎ ﺍﺳﺘﻌﻤﺎﻝ ﮐﺮ ﺭﮨﮯ ﺩﻭﺳﺮی ﮨﻴﮟ،  ﻁﺮﻑ ﻧﻴﺸﻨﻞ ﻣِﺸﻦ 
ﺍٓﻥ ﻧﻴﭽﺮﻝ ﻨﮓ
ﻓﺎﺭﻣ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻘﺼﺪ ﮐﻴﻤﻴﮑﻞ ﮐﺎ ﺍﺳﺘﻌﻤﺎﻝ ﮐﻢ ﮐﺮ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺴﭩﻴﻨﻴﺒﻞ ﭘﺮﻳﮑﭩﺴﺰ ﮐﯽ ﻭِﺭﺩی ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﭘﺮﺍﺅ 
ﺩﻫﺎﻥ ﻣﻴﮟ459 ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﺳﮯ465 ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﮐﻢ ﮐﻴﮯ ﮔﺌﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﻳﻌﻨﯽ ﺭﻗﻢ ﻳﮩﺎں ﺗﮏ ﺍٓﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺟﺲ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﭽﻬﻠﮯ ﺳﺎﻝ ﻧﺪﻫﯽ ﮐﺎ 
ﺍﺳﺘﻌﻤﺎﻝ ﺻﺮﻑ21 ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﮨﻮﺍ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ ﮨﻤﺎﺭی ﻭﻟﻴﻦ
ﺍ ﺗﺮﺟﻴﺢ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐﻴﻤﻴﮑﻞ ﻓﺎﺭﻣﻨﮓ ﻳﺎ ﻧﻴﭽﺮﻝ ﻓﺎﺭﻣﻨﮓ؟ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﻣﮩﻮ ﺩے 
ﺑﺮﺍﺋﮯ ﻣﮩﺮﺑﺎﻧﯽ ﺍﺱ ﮐﻮ ﻭﺍﺿﺢ ۔ ﮐﺮﻳﮟ  
The procurement of nutri and coarse grai ns in Maharashtra was 135.94 thousand 
tonne in 2020-21 which later significantly decreased to 40.70 thousand tonne in 2021-
22. In 2022-23, there was a major dip wh en it was just 2,000 tonne indicating a 
decrease of 38,000 tonne. The procurement of oilseeds, pulses and copra at MSP 
under PM-AASHA in Maharashtra was 57 per cent in 2019-20 which dipped to 51 per 
cent in 2021-22.  सर, इस बजट मȂ इनमȂ से िकसी का जवाब मुझे नजर नहीं आया। सरकार को 
जागना होगा और क
ृ िष क्षेतर् को अपनी Ģाथिमकता बनानी होगी। ...(समय की घंटी)... क ेवल यह 
कहना पयार्Ãत नहीं है िक  
ﺳﺮ ﺍﺱ ﺑﺠﭧ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻥ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﮯ ﮐﺴﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺟﻮﺍﺏ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﻧﻈﺮ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺍٓﻳﺎ۔ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﻮ ﺟﮕﺎﻧﺎ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ  ﺯﺭﺍﻋﺖ ﮐﮯ 
ﺷﻌﺒﮯ ﮐﻮ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﺍﻭﻟﻴﻦ ﺗﺮﺟﻴﺢ ﺑﻨﺎﻧﯽ ﮨﻮﮔﯽ۔ ۔۔۔)ﻭﻗﺖ ﮐﯽ ﮔﻬﻨﭩﯽ(۔۔۔ ﺻﺮﻑ ﻳہ ﮐﮩﻨﺎ ﭘﺮﻳﺎﭘﺖ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ   
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

productivity and resilience in agriculture ar e number one priority in the Budget. Thank 
you, Sir.                 
                                                                                               
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): Ǜी िबकास रंजन भƺाचायर् जी। आपने बड़ा पेशȂस रखा, उसके  
िलए आपको बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA (West Bengal):  Sir, when I rise to speak 
on agriculture, I cannot forget that the country had witnessed, why the country, I 
would say, the entire world, had witnessed how the kisans fought back the pro-
corporate three agricultural laws which we re made by the hon. Prime Minister, Mr. 
Modi. And he was very much happy with th at. The kisans fought for more than one 
year ignoring the vagaries of weather cond ition. Many had died.  Before we discuss 
agriculture, we must pay respect to th em. And what had happened after one year? 
The hon. Prime Minister beyond the House of Parliament said, "मेरी तपÎया मȂ कोई कमी 
थी, इसीिलए मȅ तीनȗ िबल वापस ले रहा हूँ।" It was violation of constitutional provision, 
violation of the honour of Parliament by the hon. Prime Minister. And what was the 
commitment made? The commitment made was that he will ensure Minimum Support 
Price. Mini
mum Support Price must have to be ensured by a statutory protection for 
which the kisans of the country have been fighting. They had fought a huge battle.  
We awarded Bharat Ratna to Dr. Swaminathan. It is welcome. But awarding Bharat 
Ratna and ignoring his recommendations is nothing but really showing disrespect to 
that particular person and his formula.  Ev en today, the MSP in accordance with the 
formula of Bharat Ratna Dr. Swaminathan has not been followed.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN) in the Chair.] 
 
 The kisans are again trying to orga nize their movement to demand MSP. 
What is the necessity of MSP having statutory protection? Now, undersell is going on 
in the country. Kisans are not getting back the remuneration. If kisans do not get back 
the remuneration and maintain  their families, there will be  absolute erosion in the 
working field of agricultural economy. Now,  India is suffering from unemployment.  
Unemployment can be very well taken care of if we have labour-intensive productive 
field. Agriculture should be the best way of labour-intensive productive field which will 
have huge opportunities for unemployed people to get employed. As he was 
speaking, we have to think of having orga nic mechanism, organic fertilizers, etc. so 
that we can have better healthy production of foodgrains. If you have to have this 
organic cultivation, then there will be mu ch more labour inte nsive programme which 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
129

will employ huge number of people and take care of unemployment situation.  We are 
not doing that. If we do not secure the minimum support price, I am told by kisan 
leaders, who have been workin g in the field and living with kisans, that they will leave 
this field. That will be a danger for the count ry if kisans gradually go out of agricultural 
economy and try to be a part  of service economy. In ef fect, we have seen that 
involvement of the working force in the ag ricultural economy is gradually coming 
down. We talk of Atmanirbhar Bharat but even  in the field of fertilizers, we always 
depend on import of fertilizers. Instead of  developing our own fe rtilizer corporation, 
which initially was there, we really depend  on import and that import factor again 
affects the agricultural economy. That is why,  there is lower growth rate in the crop 
sector. If we have to control the lower growth  rate, then we have to be more attentive 
to the agricultural field. Invest money. Mere allocation of funds would not fetch 
benefits. You are allocating funds but these funds are not properly utilized. That is the 
report. The share of crop production in Gross Agriculture Value Added at current 
prices has decreased from 65 per cent 2011-12 to 55 per cent in 2022-23. Production 
of cereals, fruits and vegetables account ed for about 50 per cent of the total crop 
production in 2023. Cereals, such as paddy, wheat, maize an d bajra, have the 
highest output. Now, the question comes: If  we have better food production which is 
perishable in nature, what would be your next responsibility?  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Sir, now, you have to wind up.  
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA: Your responsibility would be to have food 
processing industries. You encourage them ; you encourage cooperative societies to 
build up and go for food processing to s ecure country's economy. That is not being 
done. On the contrary, we find  that total allotment for agricultural products has been 
reduced gradually.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Thank you, Sir.  
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA: As far as international trade is 
concerned, again, you are depending on im port, not on export. If we have a better 
production, we could have export-oriente d food products and earn huge foreign 
exchange. We have seen that there are...(Time-bell rings.).  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Sir, your time is over. 
 
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA: I will just appeal to you. Having seen the 
functioning of the Government, one partic ular film comes to my mind. I believe 
Satyajit Ray is known to everybody in the wo rld. He is one of the best filmmakers and 
internationally famed. I believe my friends on the other side also have heard his name. 
He produced a film called 'Hirak Rajar De sh'. In the kingdom of Hirark Raja, the 
diamond king used to please his associates by distributing diamond necklace, but the 
diamond workers were not getting their f ood. Madam, I would request you to please 
make an arrangement to exhibit that film to the Benches on the other side so that they 
can learn what the reality in life is and how th ey have to be ultimately treated. In that 
film, there was a magical singer. He invite s the king to come down, go out of his 
room. Go to the field and listen to them. I would invite the hon. Ministers. Let us go 
out of this Chamber. Let us go to the fields.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Your time is up.  …(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA: Let us hear these kisans who have been 
demonstrating throughout the year and th en come to conclusion and make your 
budget. With this, I conclude. I am sure  you will go and see Hirak Rajar Desh and 
then come back.                  
                                                          
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Madam, there ha s been so much of discussion about 
increasing the income of th e farmers. I would invite the attention of the hon. 
Agriculture Minister. He just came from  Madhya Pradesh but he knows what the 
ground realities are. In 2016, the Prime Mini ster declared that th e farm income will be 
doubled in 2022. That was hi s statement. Fair enough! यह  बात सही है न, सही है। In 
2018, the Inter-Ministerial Committee submitte d a report to the Government of India - 
How the farm income can be doubled. भूल गए। Nobody knows where the report is. 
Now, the Economic Survey says that we have to undertake comprehensive reforms to 
revive the agriculture sector. िमिनÎटर साहब आपकी Inter-Ministerial Committee का क्या 
हुआ, आपकी कमेटी की िरपोटर् का क्या ह
ुआ ? What has happened? Have you forgotten 
about that? …(Interruptions)…  Have you forgotten? Now, two names are being taken 
by the BJP Members every time - Dr. Swam inathan. They do not know that Dr. 
Swaminathan is a product of Kerala. ये मलयाली हȅ, brought up in the neighboring 
State of Tamil Nadu. We contributed the talent called Dr. M.S. Swaminathan. Dr. 
M.S. Swaminathan must be turn ing in his grave hearing their *  Is it not a fact that he 
                                                            
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
131

proposed a formula on how to save the fa rmers of this country? Now, every time, मेरे 
दोÎत अगर्वाल जी और नागर जी, they are blaming the Congress. Did you do it? Did you 
believe in the report of M.S. Sw aminathan? That is the question. उनसे क्यȗ पूछना? 
आपको दस साल िमल गए हȅ  How long will you continue to blame the Congress?  
…(Interruptions)…  How long?  …(Interruptions)…  िकतने साल और आप लोग उसको Åलेम 
करȂगे?...(Ëयवधान)... I have a request. Please make sure that the Treasury Benches do 
not look at the Congress Members hereafter. Let them look at themselves, what they 
were doing for 10 years. िकतने साल और आपको चािहए, आप बताइए। हम आपको एक साल 
और दȂगे, इससे ज्यादा नहीं दȂगे।   
Madam, second thing is about Bharat Ratna  to Charan Sing
hji. एक तरफ 
िकसानȗ को गोली मार रहे हȅ, दूसरी तरफ चरण िंसह जी को भारत रत्न िदया। 
…(Interruptions)…  That was the only intention.  …(Interruptions)…  I f  t h e y  w e r e  
genuine..…(Interruptions)…     
मैडम, मेरा टाइम जा रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... That was the only intention.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Please be seated.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: No, no.  …(Interruptions)…  I will not yield.  …(Interruptions)…  
मैडम, मेरा टाइम जा रहा है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHA N): Ho
n. Members, please sit down.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, please. …(Interruptions)… Please sit down.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Please be seated.  
…(Interruptions)…  Hon. Members, please sit down.  …(Interruptions)…  I request you, 
please sit down.  …(Interruptions)…  Dr. John Brittas, please look here. Please look at 
me and speak.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, please pause my time. …(Interruptions)…  They are 
taking my time.  …(Interruptions)…    
 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Please sit down. …(Interruptions)…  
Please be seated.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, the Economic Surv ey said that 78.5 lakh jobs have to 
be created because the agriculture sector is fading off. …(Interruptions)…   
 
6.00 P.M. 
 
And, now, the Economic Survey says 'that we have to go to the roots.' These were 
the same people... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHA N): Dr. John Brittas, I just want to 
make an announcement please. Hon. Memb ers, it is 6.00 p.m. now and hon. 
Chairman had already announced today morn ing that after all the speakers in the 
discussion on the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare have spoken today, the 
Minister will give the reply tomorrow at 1.00 p.m. As we are in the midst of the 
discussion, if the House agrees, we may sit late today to complete the list of 
speakers.  Do I have the leave of the House to sit late today? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Thank you.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Please sit down, everyone. ...(Interruptions)... Please make order in the House.  
...(Interruptions)... Sit down, please.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, now, all of a sudden, the Finance Minister has come 
up to the House saying, natural farming.  अरे, िकतने सालȗ से तो क ेरल मȂ ऑगȃिनक फािमȊग 
हो रही है।  You know what is the hypocrisy! I will expose you. In the last year's 
Budget, they had allocated Rs. 459 crores for natural farming. How much did they 
spend? It is Rs. 100 crores. They spent Rs. 100 crores. That is the difference between 
their words and deeds. Now, Madam, only  two demands are there. One is legalise 
the MSP. Don't blame the Congress.  That is  why, they have been punished and put 
here. You are in the ruling party. You legalize the MSP; second, widen the base of the 
M S P .  F r o m  D e l h i ,  w e  w e r e  a s k e d  t o  g o  for cash crops. Keralite farmers went for 
farming. They produce.... ...(Interruptions)...   
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
133

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN):  Dr. John Brittas, kindly wind up.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: No, Madam; I was disturbed. ...(Interruptions)...  They went 
for rubber. Now they say, "No, no; MSP is limited to certain crops and only because 
of Delhi's intention and instigation and inspir ation, we went for cash crops. What is 
happening within the cash crop s in Kerala? They are impo rting. The prices of the 
cash crops are crashing in Kerala. We have  been craving, we have been demanding 
and requesting to kindly increase the import duty of rubber and other things.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): You will have to wind up. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, please. They have... ...(Interruptions)... Without 
fertilizers, you can't do farmin g.  They are all farmers.  I will give you a statistics. 
There is a massive decline in the allocation of the fertilizer subsidy to the tune of 25 
per cent.  Whatever they say in the Budg et propositions, whatever they say, the 
actual statistics are different.  ...(Interruptions)... Now, again, there is a new 
revolution that has been brought to the floor of the House.  What is the new 
revolution? ( Time-bell rings. )  It is co-operative initiati ve.  What is a co-operative 
initiative?  It is to usurp into the powers of the States.  What is the business of the 
Central Government to get into the co-operative sector? They want to wean away the 
powers of the States. They want to finish it off, and even the allocation for the co-
operative sector which they have done last time, they didn't utilize it.  These are the 
same people who allocated amount bu t they will not utilize that amount.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA  K H A N ) :   Y o u r  t i m e  i s  u p .   
...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: I am winding up.   Why people are shifting away from 
agriculture? ...(Interruptions)... Agriculture is not remunerative. They are not getting 
the wages.  The Finance Minister conv eniently forgets an aspect that -- िमिनÎटर 
साहब, आप सुिनए -- just before the Interim Budget, Madam came with a review report. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

T H E  V I C E - C H A I R P E R S O N  ( D R .  F A U Z I A  K H A N ) :   Y o u  w i n d  u p  n o w .  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Madam, thirty seconds. ...(Interruptions)...She said that there 
is a tectonic shift that is happening. Wo men are going into the agriculture sector. 
Now, what is it? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Now, I will call out the next 
speaker. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Twelve per cent of the women who are working in the 
agriculture sector do not have a wage...          
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Now, Shri Madan Rathore ji.  
...(Interruptions)...                                   
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़ (राजÎथान): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक 
आपने मुझे जॉन िĤटास जी क े बाद बोलने का मौका िदया है। मुझे तो आÌचयर् इस बात का हो रहा 
है िक ये सभी िवपक्ष क े लोग एम.एस.Îवामीनाथन की बात कर रहे थे, लेिकन इनको यह नहीं पता 
है िक Îवामीनाथन
 आयोग का िवरोध िकसने िकया था ? और आप उन्हीं क े साथ बैठे हो। मȅ 
आपको बताना चाहूंगा...(Ëयवधान) ... 2007 म Ȃ Ǜी कांितलाल भूिरया कांगर्ेस क े मंतर्ी थे। उन्हȗने 
लोक सभा मȂ सदन क े अंदर जवाब िदया था िक Îवामीनाथन आयोग की बात नहीं मानी जा 
सकती। उन्हȗने यह कहा था िक इससे बाज़ार िवकृ त हो सकता है। उन्हȗने 28 जु लाई, 2007 मȂ 
कांगर्ेस क े क ैिबनेट नोट मȂ भी यह बात कही थी िक लागत कम करने से वृिǉ िनधार्िरत
 करना 
बाजार को िवकृ त कर सकता है। यही नहीं 2008 मȂ, जब मनमोहन िंसह जी की सरकार थी, तब 
उन्हȗने भी यह कहा था िक औसत लागत से कम 50 Ģितशत अिधक होना चािहए। हालांिक, इस 
िसफािरश को सरकार ने Îवीकार नहीं िकया, क्यȗिक एमएसपी की िसफािरश सी.ए.सी.पी क े 
ǎारा की जाती है, जो अन्य बातȗ से संबंिधत है। महोदय,  उन्हȗने मना िकया था। यही नहीं, 
माननीय राज्य
 मंतर्ी क े.वी, थॉमस जी ने 2010 मȂ कांगर्ेस क े राज मȂ यह जवाब िदया था िक िकसी 
भी कीमत पर Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िसफािरश लागू नहीं की जा सकती है। ...(Ëयवधान)...इसे 
अंतरार्Íटर्ीय मानदंडȗ क े आधार पर Ģासंिगक कारकȗ की िविव धता पर िवचार करते हुए िनरÎत 
िकया गया। यही नहीं, कांगर्ेस क े राज्य मंतर्ी Ǜी तािरक अनवर ने 10 िदसÇबर, 2013 को  जवाब 
िदया था और कहा था िक Îवामीनाथन की मांग को इसीिलए Îवीकार नहीं िकया जा सकता और 
50 Ģितशत वृिǉ से बाज
ार िवकृ त हो सकता है। उन्हȗने इस Ģकार की बात कही थी। 
...(Ëयवधान)...मȅ आपको एक बात बताना चाहूंगा, और सुिनए...(Ëयवधान)...आप सुिनए िक 
Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िसफािरश कब लागू हुई। महोदया, 2018 मȂ Îवामीनाथन आयोग की 
एमएसपी नीित िसफािरश लागू की गई थी। मानन
ीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपको बताना 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
135

चाहूंगा िक ये कांगर्ेस क े नेता थर्ो एंड रन - बोलो और भाग जाओ करते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...मतलब, 
यह क्या बात हो गई? आप सुनो तो सही। महोदया, आप देिखए िक बाजरा का मूÊय 2013 मȂ 
1,250 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल था, पर हमने 2024-25 मȂ 2,625 Ģित िंक्वटल िकया , जौ का मूÊय 
1,100 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल था, पर हमने 1,850 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल िकया। महोदया, आप ज्वार और 
धान को भी देिखए। महोदया, धान का मूÊय 1,345 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल था, पर नरेन्दर्भाई मोदी जी 
ने इसको 2,320  रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल िकया। आप इस बात को मत भूिलए िक 2013-14 मȂ गेहूँ का 
मूÊय 1,400 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल था, पर हमने 2,275 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल िकया।  
महोदया, मȅ आपको अभी 2024
-25 की बात बता रहा हूं। सुरजेवाला जी बहुत बोल रहे थे, 
पर मȅ उन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक मसूर का भाव, जो 2,950 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल था, वह अभी 6,425 
रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल कर िदया है। िकतना गुना िकया
 है - आप इसका िहसाब तो कीिजए। आप 
क ेवल बातȂ करते हȅ और उनके  साथ मȂ बैठते हȅ। आप क ेवल घिड़याली आँसूँ मत बहाइए, यिद 
वाÎतव मȂ ही
 िकसान क े िहतैषी हȅ और िहÇमत है, तो इधर आकर बैिठए, आप उधर िकसान क े 
िहतैषी नहीं हȅ।   
महोदया, मȅ आपको िकस-िकस की बात बताऊं ? मȅ आपके  सामने कई बातȂ रख सकता हूं। 
वे अभी खरीद की बात कर रहे थे। महोदया, 2004 से  2014 तक दलहन की खरीद क ेवल 6.29 
लाख मीिटर्क टन की थी, लेिकन हमने िकतनी खरीद की? हमने 1.70 करोड़ मीिटर्क टन खरीद 
की। आप िकसकी तुलना कर रहे ह
ȅ? ये आंकड़े कपोल किÊपत नहीं हȅ। यिद माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदया चाहȂगी, तो म
ȅ इन्हȂ भी बता सकता हूं। महोदया, आप धान की खरीद देिखए। आपने धान 
की खरीद 45.90  करोड़  मीिटर्क टन की थी, हमने 69.18 करोड़ मीिटर्क टन खरीद की। यही 
नहीं, अगर मȅ गेहूँ की बात कहूँ, तो आपने गेहूँ की  21.40 करोड़ मीिटर्क टन की खरीद की थी, 
पर हमने 33.39 करोड़ मीिटर्क टन खरीद की, आपने 2014 तक ितलहन
 की 50. 64 लाख मीिटर्क 
टन खरीद की, पर हमने 87 लाख मीिटर्क टन खरीद की थी। आप खरीद की बात करते हȅ! आप 
ऐसी बातȂ मत बोिलए, आप सही बात बोिलए। आप जो फसल बीमा की बात करते हो, तो काँगर्ेस 
क े समय मȂ तहसील को ही इकाई माना गया था। हमने क्या िकया - हमने इंडीिवजुअल िकसान 
की फसल को बीिमत करने का काम िकया। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, यही नहीं, िकसान फसल बोता 
है, तब बीमा होता ह
ै। फसल खड़ी हो जाए और बेमौसम बरसात हो जाए, तब भी बीिमत है। 
िकसान की फसल तैयार हो जाए, तब भी बीिमत है। मंडी तक ले जाए, बीच मȂ कोई दुघर्टना हो 
जाए, तब भी िकसान की फसल बीिमत है। यह हमने िकया, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की हमारी सरकार न
े 
िकया। आपने यह िबÊकु ल नहीं िकया था। यही नहीं, हमने खेतȗ क े पास मȂ बुिनयादी ढांचे क े 
िवकास क े िलए भी िकया है। हमने 48,352 
पिरयोजनाओं क े िलए 35,262 करोड़ रुपया  मंजूर 
िकया। यही नहीं, 11,165 गोदाम बनाए। आपको मालूम है िक हमारे यहाँ पर िकसान मानसून पर 
िनभर्र करता है। मानसून की फसल एक साथ माकȃ ट मȂ आती है और बाजार मȂ भाव घट जाते हȅ। 
यह नेशनल एगर्ीकÊचर माकȃ ट िकसने दी है? िकसान अपनी फसल गोदाम मȂ रख सकता है, 
उसकी कीमत का 80 Ģितशत उधार बȅक
 से ले सकता है और अपने साहुकारȗ का पैसा चुका 
सकता है। जहाँ कहीं भी माकȃ ट िमले, वहाँ पर मंडी मȂ अपना रिजÎटर्ेशन कराने क े बाद मȂ अपना 
माल कहीं भी बेच सकता है, इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा दी है। िकसान की िंचता हमने की है। आपने 
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

मृदा परीक्षण क े बारे मȂ कभी भी नहीं सोचा। अभी समाजवादी पाटीर् क े राम गोपाल जी बोल रहे 
थे... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. फौिजया खान): आपको wind up करना पड़ेगा। आपका टाइम समाÃत हो रहा 
है।  
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: मȅ समाजवादी पाटीर् क े सांसद से एक िनवेदन करता हूँ िक उन्हȗने कहा था िक 
ऐसा कोई गेहूं ईजाद करो, जो कम पानी मȂ पैदा हो सके । यह िंचता िकसने की? मृदा परीक्षण का 
काम नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी जी न
े िकया। यही नहीं, िंसिचत क्षेतर् क े िलए भी िदया। मȅ आपको बताऊँ  िक 
पहले 2013-14 मȂ क ृिष मंतर्ालय मȂ सहकािरता, पशुपालन, डेयरी, मत्Îय और क ृिष मȂ क ेवल 
30,232 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान था, जबिक अब मंतर्ी जी ने क ेवल क ृिष मंतर्ालय मȂ 1,25,035 
करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया
 है। यह कोई कम बात नहीं है। यही नहीं, आप एक बात को 
समिझए... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. फौि
जया खान): आप बैठ जाइए। अब आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: आपने उनको तो समय िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप ऐसा मत किरए। मुझे मेरी बात 
को रखने दीिजए। यही नहीं, मȅ आपसे एक िनवेदन और करना चाहूँगा। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिज
या खान): आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: िकसान सÇमान िनिध - क्या आपने कभी िदया, कजार् माफ िकया? हमने िकतना 
िकया - िकसानȗ को 68,000 करोड़ रुपया
 दे िदया। यह बात आप क ै से कह सकते हȅ। िकसान की 
िंचता अब नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी जी की सरकार कर रही है। आप मȂ से कोई नहीं कर रहा है। क ेवल *  
बनाने क े िलए... माफ कीिजएगा, * शÅद नहीं कहना चािहए। क ेवल बरगलाने क े िलए असत्य 
बोलकर... मȅने कह िदया, मȅने माफी माँग ली। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): It will be removed.   
 
Ǜी मदन राठौड़: यही नहीं, आप देिखए िक नमो डर्ोन दीदी योजना की शुरुआत  की। 
...(Ëयवधान)... यही नहीं, आपके  समय मȂ यूिरया कारखानȗ
  मȂ काम आता था और हमने नीम 
कोटेड यूिरया िदया, जो क ेवल िकसान क े काम मȂ आता है। आप यह बात समिझए िक यह कोई 
कम बात नहीं है। आप टमाटर और Ãयाज की बात करते हȅ, तो ĢसंÎकरण करने का काम िकसने 
                                                            
* Withdrawn by Hon. Member. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
137

िकया - हमारी सरकार ने िकया। आपने कभी भी उसकी िंचता नहीं की। मȅ एक िनवेदन करके , 
अपनी बात को समाÃत करू ँगा। ये काँगर्ेस क े लोग इतने मतलबी हȅ िक जो बैलȗ की जोड़ी पहले 
इनका चुनाव िनशान था, उसे इन्हȗने हटा िदया। िफर लाए गाय बछड़ा, लेिकन गो-हत्यारे इनके  
साथ मȂ जुड़ते गए और ये हाथ का पंजा लेकर आए। हमारी भावनाओं से खेलते हȅ।             
                                                    
Ǜी क ुँव
र रतनजीत Ģताप नारायण िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपको  
धन्यवाद देता हूँ िक उǄर Ģदेश
 क े पूवार्ंचल क े एक िकसान को आज आपने क ृिष पर बोलने का 
एक मौका    िदया। मुझे बड़ा गवर् है िक आज भी मȅ िकसानी करता हूँ और खुद खेती करता हूँ। 
बाकी लोगȗ क े खेत भले ही हो सकते हȅ, लेिकन वे खेत पर नहीं जाते हȅ। मȅ जब भी पडरौना मȂ 
रहता हूँ, तो अपने खेत पर जरूर  जाता हूँ और मेरे पिरवार का कोई Ëयिƪ रोजाना खेती करवाता 
है। आज आपने पूवार्ंचल क े एक Ëयिƪ को एगर्ीकÊचर पर बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ 
आपको ǭदय स
े धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं। हमने िवपक्ष क े बारे मȂ बहुत बातȂ सुनीं।  मȅ िसफर् क ु छ चंद 
बातȂ कहना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक आंकड़े जो मदन राठौड़ जी ने िदए ह
ȅ, वे मुंह बंद करने क े िलए 
बहुत हȅ, तो आंकड़ȗ क े बारे मȂ मȅ ज्यादा क ु छ कहना नहीं चाहता हूं। मȅ समझना चाहता हूं और 
आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक तीसरी बार हारने क े बाद अब हम तीन चार ची
ज़ȗ की बात ही िवपक्ष 
से सुनते हȅ। जैसे ही तीसरी बार नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार बनी है, तो अब इनको अन्नदाता भी 
याद आता है, क्यȗिक अन्नदाताओं ने ही इनको तीन बार िवपक्ष मȂ रखा ह
ै। आज िपछड़ȗ की बात 
इनको याद आती है। इनको एमएसपी की बात याद आती है।  तीसरी बार हारने क े बाद आज 
अन्नदाता हो, िपछड़ा वगर् हो, एमएसपी हो, ये सभी बातȂ इनको आज ही याद आ रही हȅ, क्यȗिक 
इन्हीं लोगȗ ने, अन्नदाताओं न
े, िपछड़ȗ ने, दिलतȗ ने, टर्ाइबÊस ने इनको तीसरी बार िवपक्ष मȂ 
बैठाया है। मȅ िसफर् एक आंकड़ा देना चाहता हूं। िवपक्ष ने बड़े-बड़े िफगसर् बताए िक इतना कम हो 
गया, उतना ज्यादा बढ़ गया और ऐसा हो गया। 2013 और 2014 म
Ȃ खेती क े िलए बजट एलोके शन 
िकतना था, इस पर कोई चचार् नहीं थी ...(Ëयवधान)... इसीिलए तो मȅ यहां हूं।  खेती, ओबीसी और 
बाकी लोगȗ की जो आप लोगȗ पर कारर्वाई है, इसकी वजह से मȅ यहां उपिÎथत ह ूं, समझे!  
...(Ëयवधान)... आप सुिनए, सुनते जाइए ...(Ëयवधान)... मैडम, 2013-14 मȂ एलोके शन िकतना था 
- 21,934 करोड़, चिलए 22,000 करोड़ मान लेते हȅ - इन्हȗने 22,000 करोड़ खेती क े िलए 
आवंटन िकया था और इस बार िक
तना िकया गया है - 1.5 लाख करोड़ से ज्यादा, जो िक पांच 
गुना है। आपको सुनाई िदया िक िकतना है! जयराम रमेश जी, िकतना है?...(Ëयवधान)... पांच 
गुना। वे लोग िकसानी पर बात कर रहे हȅ, िजनको तोरा और तोरी मȂ फकर् पता नहीं चलत ा है।  
...(Ëयवधान)... िकसानी पर वे बात कर रहे हȅ िक तोरा और तोरी का रंग क्या होता है, वे बातचीत 
नहीं कर पाएंगे। हिरयाणा क े एक नेता कह रहे थे िक एमएसपी का क्या हुआ हमारी सरकार ने 
िसफर् 23 परसȂट गेहूं खरीदा। अगर य
े गेहूं की खेती करते, तो जो सबसे गरीब िकसान भी होता है, 
जो गेहूं बोता है, तो साल भर क े िलए अपना गेहूं घैले मȂ रख लेता है। अब इन्हȗने गेहूं कभी बोए हȗ, 
तब तो
 जानȂ!  ...(Ëयवधान)...  तो सारा एमएसपी क ै से दे दȂगे! छोटा िकसान हो, बड़ा िकसान हो - 
चौधरी साहब, जो िकसान हȅ, खेती करते हȅ, तो गेहूं क े क ु छ दाने घर पर भी रखे जाते हȅ, न िक 
सारा एमएसपी पर बांट िदए जाते ह
ȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... कमाल की बात है िक क ै से एमएसपी मȂ 23 
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

परसȂट उठाया या उतना नहीं उठाया! मȅ तो पूवार्ंचल से आता हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ खुद गन्ना 
िकसान हूं। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN):  Please …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी क ुँव र रतनजीत Ģताप नारायण िंसह: आज जब से क Ȃ दर् और Ģदेश मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... हां जी, 
मेरे िपताजी राजा थ े, अब कोई राजा नहीं है। आप अपने आपको राजा बनाते रहो।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Hon. Members …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी क ुँव र रतनजीत Ģताप नारायण िंसह: मȅ आपको साफ तौर से बताना चाहता हूं िक ये ĥम की 
राजनीित करना चाहते हȅ। इनको भारतीय जनता पाटीर् से नफरत हो
  सकती है, तो हो, बहुत 
अच्छी चीज़ है िक इनको नफरत है। अब तो ये कमल को भी गाली देने लग गए हȅ।  इनको मालूम 
नहीं है िक कमल िकसका िंसहासन है - मां सरÎवती का है।  मां सरÎवती क्या देती - सǊुिǉ और 
ज्ञान। अगर उसकी कमी रहेगी, तो इसकी वजह से आज ये बात नहीं कर पाते ह
ȅ। ये सǊुिǉ वाली 
बात नहीं करȂगे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... अगर आज गन्ना िकसान क ुशीनगर मȂ वƪ पर गन्ना िगराता है, 
सही मूÊय िमलता ह
ै और 15 िदन क े अंदर पेमȂट गन्ना िकसान को िमलती है। उसके  बारे मȂ ये चचार् 
नहीं करȂगे। मैडम, तमाम और मुǈे थे, पर तमाम लोगȗ ने, हमारे नागर साहब ने भी बहुत िवÎतृत 
जानकारी दी। फसल बीमा योजना की बात ह
ुई, ये उस पर चचार् नहीं करȂगे।  ये कहȂगे िक किमयाँ 
हȅ, िफर आपने ही फसल बीमा योजना शुरू  कर दी होती! आपने फसल बीमा योजना क्यȗ नहीं 
शुरू  की? आपने िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् मȂ िकतने पैसे िदए? आपने Soil Health Cards िकत ने 
िदए? अच्छा, आपके  टाइम मȂ Soil Health Card तो होता ही नहीं था, क्यȗिक खेती से क्या 
मतलब है, भाषण देते रहना है। आज 30 लाख से ज्यादा लोगȗ क े पास Soil Health Cards हȅ।  
िकसान सÇमान िनिध क े बारे मȂ तो इन्हȗने चचार् ही नहीं की।  यह अच्छा कायर्कर्म ह
ै या खराब 
कायर्कर्म है, िवपक्ष ने इस पर कोई चचार् नहीं की।  11 करोड़  िकसानȗ को 3.20 लाख करोड़ से 
ज्यादा पैसे िमले हȅ। यह अच्छा कायर्कर्म है या खराब, यह कौन सा कायर्कर्म ह ै, इस पर कोई चचार् 
नहीं है, क्यȗिक इनको िकसानȗ से मतलब नहीं है। अगर इनको िसफर् मतलब है, ...(समय की 
घंटी)... मैडम, मेरा समय खत्म हो गया है। अंत मȂ, मȅ माननीय क ृिष मंतर्ी जी से कहना चाहूँगा िक 
हमȂ पूरा भरोसा है, िजस तरह से आप मध्य Ģदेश की खेती को बदल कर पंजाब से आगे ले गए थे, 
इसी आने वाले समय मȂ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े 10 सालȗ मȂ उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ ... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिज
या खान):  धन्यवाद, माननीय सदÎय। 
 
Ǜी क ुँव र रतनजीत Ģताप नारायण िंसह: पूरे देश की खेती को आप आगे ले जाने का काम करȂगे।  
माननीय मंतर्ी जी, मुझे पूणर् िवÌवास ह
 ै।   
 मैडम, मȅ एक माँग करना चाहता हूँ। मȅ पूवार्ंचल से आता हूँ, हमȂ एक जमाने मȂ चीनी की 
कटोरी कहा जाता था। गन्ने की सारी फ ैक्टिरयाँ हमारे यहाँ थीं और गन्ना हमारे यहाँ होता था। 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
139

अगर इस बजट मȂ या आगे चल कर आने वाले बजट मȂ इसके  िलए कोई Îकीम लाई जाए, तो 
बहुत अच्छा होगा। ...(समय की घंटी)... अगर ज्यादा से ज्यादा गन्ने की फ ैक्टिरयाँ पडरौना मȂ 
लगȂ, क ुशीनगर मȂ लगȂ, महाराजगंज मȂ लगȂ, देविरया मȂ लगȂ, गोरखपुर मȂ लगȂ।   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Thank you very muc
h, hon. 
Member, your allotted time is over. 
 
Ǜी क ुँव र रतनजीत Ģताप नारायण िंसह: अगर इन इलाकȗ मȂ और फ ैक्टिरयाँ लगȂगी, तो गन्ना 
िकसान और खुशहाल होगा।   
 मैडम, आपने मुझे मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका ǭदय से धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KH AN): Hon. Member, Ms. Dola Sen has 
to go somewhere. So, if I have permission of the House, I will permit her to speak. 
Thank you. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN (West
 Bengal): Thank you, Ma dam. On behalf of my Party, All India 
Trinamool Congress, I demand that 18 pe r cent GST on life and health insurance 
premium imposed by the hon. Finance Minist er should be withdrawn immediately; I 
support hon. Minister, Shri Nitin Gadkari’s a ppeal to the hon. Finance Minister. Either 
withdraw it or resign.  
* "Madam, I take the floor to speak on beha lf of All India Trinamool Congress on the 
Working of the Ministry of Agriculture in Bengali, which is my mother tongue. I am 
grateful that my leader, Smt. Mamata Bandyopadhyay, had been on hunger strike for 
26 days to protest against the colonial Land  Acquisition Act and fo r the rights of the 
farmers. 
  Madam, first of all, we have to sp are a thought for the poorest of the poor 
farmers. The Union Government does not do  that. In the last eight years, in the 
agriculture sector, the wages of farm labourers have incr eased by Rs. 3.00 only per 
annum whereas the food inflation is touching 9 per cent now. How will these people 
survive? They are our ‘Annadatas’.  
 Madam, the funds of MGNREGA, which is due to Bengal is not being paid 
since last 3 years, that is, since 2021. Leaving aside political vendetta, return the hard 
earned money of the common people.  
 Madam, Shri Nadda Ji yesterday talk ed about many schemes like PM Kisan 
Samman Nidhi Yojana. I would just like to gi ve some references from Bengal. Under 
                                                            
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Bangla. 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

Krishak Bandhu Scheme, for agricultur e, our Chief Minister, Ms. Mamata 
Bandyopadhyay, provides an assistance of Rs. 10,000 in two instalments of Rs. 5000 
each, twice a year. This huge amount is no t paid under the PM KIsan Samman Nidhi 
Yojana. Under Krishak Bandhu Scheme, the loans of all farmers including 
sharecroppers have been waiv ed off by Ms. Mamata Bandyo padhyay. This is not the 
case with PM KIsan Samman Nidhi Yojana. Those who get crop insurance coverage, 
on their behalf, the entire premium amount  is borne by the Mamata Bandyopadhyay-
led State Government. This doesn’t happ en in PM Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana. 
Under Krishak Bandhu Scheme, farmers who a ttain 60 years of age are paid monthly 
pension, which is not the case with th e central scheme PM Kisan Samman Nidhi 
Yojana. If any farmer aged 18-60 dies, State Government pays a compensation of Rs. 
2 lakhs to the family. This also is not the case with PM KIsan Samman Nidhi Yojana.  
 If the Union Government follows the schemes of Bengal, farmers of the entire 
country will be benefitted. Tell them to do so, madam. 
Much have been talked about potato pr oduction and supply to Odisha in Rajya 
Sabha but from 2021 till date we have observ ed that since the supply of the fertilizer 
NPK 10:26:26 has come down from 4.5 lakh metric tonnes to 2.3 lakh metric tonnes, 
there is immense pressure on the farming co mmunity. If excess quantity of potato is 
produced in Bengal, we would be happy to share it with our neighbouring states. But 
excess production is not there because of  much less supply of fertilizer. The Union 
Government should look into this and Odis ha should also talk to Union Government 
about this.  
And while taking back the farm laws, Prime Minister had made certain 
promises. It was assured that the Minimum Support Price would be  enhanced by 50 
per cent.. Kindly do that. Stand by the ‘Annadatas’, the farmers. 
Madam, farmers, workers, poor people, da ily wagers travel by trains daily. So 
railways are our lifeline. Please save the ra ilways. Every day, accidents are taking 
place. So look into that. Save the railways, save the farmers. Thank you, Madam.                              
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KH AN): Thank you, Madam. The next 
speaker is Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Madam, on behalf of my Party and my Leader, 
Edapaddi Palaniswami, I rise to participate in the discussion on the functioning of the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfar e. We know very well that our Agriculture 
Minister is very famous in Madhya Pradesh.  He has done a lot of work and promoted 
agricultural activities, especially, by constructing more irrigation projects. Now, I want 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
141

to bring to his kind notice the problem wh ich our Tamil Nadu farmers are facing. As 
you know, Madam, Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu produces maximum rice and it is rightly 
called as the Rice Bowl of Tamil Nadu because  of its agricultural activities in the delta 
region of the Cauvery river. The delta farmer s suffer for want of sufficient water for 
agricultural activities. They depend on water from the Cauvery river. Since the 
Karnataka Government refused to release wa ter, the dispute went to the Tribunal, 
which gave an award. But the Karnataka Go vernment continues to refuse to release 
water into Cauvery, as mandated by th e Tribunal on the dates mentioned by the 
Tribunal.  Whenever there are floods in Ka rnataka and it cannot store water, then, 
only it releases water into Cauvery. I re quest the Centre and the Union Agriculture 
Minister to prevail upon the Government of Karnataka to adhere and abide by the 
award of the Tribunal.  
Secondly, Madam, there is a proposal  by the Karnataka Government to 
construct Mekedatu dam over  Cauvery river. As regard s drinking water, 18 TMC 
water was awarded. We are not against the drinking water award but they can take 
drinking water from Krishna Ra jasagara Dam.  It is not necessary to construct a new 
dam.  If a new dam is constructed, it will affect the Tamil Nadu farmers.  
 My next point is this. We have b een urging the Central Government to 
implement the Inter-linking of Rivers of  Godavari-Krishna-Cauvery-Palar, which 
would solve the total water problem of Ta mil Nadu. Our Edapaddi Palaniswami when 
he was the Chief Minister went on insisting to implement this programme. The Central 
Minister also came and our present Transport Minister, Mr. Gadkari, promised that he 
is going to implement this programme.  I wo uld request the hon. Minister to consider 
this.  
 Another important issue is this. It is related to my area. There is one South 
Pennaru River which comes from Karnataka to Tamil Nadu. The water is coming.  
Sometimes, because of the already silted dams, one new dam is required to be 
constructed. Anekal, podur is one place in Krishnagiri district near Hosur. Venniyode 
is another place where two hills are there. Water is coming from the Pennaru river 
there.   If, over Pennar, you construct a new dam, then, water can be saved for 
agricultural activities. In Krishnagiri district, one part is very fertile and another part is 
not that fertile.  Therefore,  when you are implementing these kinds of programmes, 
this new dam, if constructed in Venniyode  in Krishnagiri district, it will irrigate most of 
the areas like Vepanappalli, Mekalachinnamp alli, then Vardanapalli, Bargur, Mattoor, 
in Krishnagiri district.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Please take your seat. 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Therefore, after getting water, it would not only irrigate this 
area, but this water can also be taken to th e Vellore district. In Vellore district, they 
are demanding this. This water can be taken there. Therefore, Madam, this project is 
very important and we have gone on insisting about this. I have raised it many times in 
Parliament also because this is an inter-linke d river. Pennaru starts with Karnataka. It 
comes to Tamil Nadu, then, it reaches Pondicherry also. Therefore, this inter-linking 
of rivers is important. That is why I am insisting here that the Central Government 
should come forward to implement this plan  by constructing a new dam. When they 
construct the dam, as I said, the whole Krishna giri district and Vellore district will be 
irrigated and the farmers will benefit from that. This is what I am requesting.  
Another thing is, …  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Please wind up.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: We are producing a lot of rice in Tamil Nadu, but 
procurement is very less. However, in P unjab, Haryana, etc., you are procuring and 
giving it to ration shops. What about ou r area? In Thanjavur area alone, they are 
procuring, but in other parts they are not procuring. …(Time-bell rings.)…  
Therefore, to save the farmers, we have to procure uniformly. In Uttar 
Pradesh, once they procured rice from all the areas, but, in Tamil Nadu, they are 
procuring from just one regi on. Therefore, to save the farmers, I request the hon. 
Minister to give instructions that all the ri ce that they are producing must be procured 
and given to the other regions.  Only then the farmers can be safeguarded.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Thank you.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: I have raised three i ssues, Madam. One, we have to get the 
water from the Cauvery to the delta area. Secondly, Mekedatu is not necessary. They 
can give drinking water taking water from  the Krishnaraj Sagar dam. We have no 
objection at all. We are not objecting to the Tribunal awarding drinking water to 
Bangalore.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Thank you, your time is up, Sir.  
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
143

DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: Therefore, that ca n be done, and a new dam, which as I 
requested in South Pennar, can be constructed. That will solve our Tamil Nadu’s 
farmers’ problem. Thank you very much.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHA N): Thank you. Shrimati Maya Narolia. 
Seven minutes.  
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया ( मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपका धन्यवाद 
ज्ञािपत करती हूँ िक आपने मुझे क ृिष बजट पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया। मȅ भारत क े ǭदय 
Îथल मध्य Ģदेश क े नमर्दापुरम नगर से आती हूँ, जहाँ पावन पिवतर् माँ नमर्दा मैया कल-कल 
बहती है। पुराणȗ मȂ िकवदंती है िक गंगा मैया क े Îनान और नमर्दा मैया क े दशर्न का महत्व है।   
 महोदया, भारत क े लोगȗ ने Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व वाली सरकार मȂ 
अपना िवÌव
ास Ëयƪ िकया है और उनके  नेतृत्व वाली इस सरकार को ऐितहािसक तीसरे 
कायर्काल क े िलए पुन: चुना है। हम Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का अिभनंदन करते हȅ और उनके  Ģित बहुत-
बहुत क ृतज्ञता ज्ञािपत करते हȅ।   
 महोदया, आपने आज मुझ
े क ृिष बजट क े ऊपर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया है। मȅ 
सबसे पहले अपने िवपक्षी सदÎयȗ से यह कहना चाहूँगी िक जब आप लोग बोल रहे थे, तब हम 
लोग स
ुन रहे थे, इसिलए आप भी जरूर  सुिनए। सबसे पहले मȅ एक िवकासशील, 
जनकÊयाणकारी और समावेशी बजट पेश करने क े िलए हमारे यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜीमान नरेन्दर् 
मोदी एवं माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी, िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी का अिभनंदन करती हूँ । िजन्हȗने इस अमृत 
काल मȂ एक लोक कÊयाणकारी और 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास' पर खड़ा उतरने वाला बजट 
पेश िकया है। Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ मातृ शिƪ का गौरव हमारी िवǄ मंतर्ी िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी ǎारा सातवीं बार बजट ĢÎतुत करने क े िलए उनका अिभनंदन इसिलए करती ह
ूँ 
िक उन्हȗने बड़ी िजÇमेदारी, जवाबदेही एवं तथ्यात्मक आँकड़ȗ क े साथ हमारे िवपक्षी सदÎयȗ का 
भी जवाब िदया। मोदी सरकार क े  िपछले दशक क े कायर्काल मȂ यह सुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए 
िनरंतर Ģयास िकए गए हȅ। िकसान राÍटर् क े िवकास क े क ेन्दर् िबन्दु बने रहे - इस Ģितबǉता का 
Ģमाण सरकार का यह वादा है िक सभी Ģमुख फसलȗ क े िलए एमएसपी बढ़ा कर इनपुट लागत 
पर 1.5 ग
ुना िरटनर् िदया जाए। बजट मȂ क ृिष अनुसंधान क े िलए िवǄ पोषण का Ģावधान िकया गया 
है, जो जलवायु सहनशील फसल िकÎमȗ की पहचान क े िलए िनजी क्षेतर् तक भी िवÎतािरत है।   
 माननीय महोदया, इसके  अलावा बजट मȂ Ģाकृ ितक खेती मȂ लगभग 1 करोड़  िकसानȗ 
क े िलए वैज्ञािनक संÎथानȗ स
े Ģमाणन कायर्कर्मȗ क े माध्यम से संÎथागत समथर्न पर भी जोर िदया 
गया है। आत्मिनभर्रता की भावना को आगे बढ़ाते हुए " आत्मिनभर्र ितलहन अिभयान" का 
उत्पादन, भंडारण और िवपणन को मजबूत करने और ितलहन उत्पादन म
Ȃ आत्मिनभर्रता ĢाÃत 
करने क े िलए तैयार िकया गया है। क ृिष क्षेतर् की ĢितÎपधार्त्मक भावना को बढ़ाने की अपनी 
Ģितबǉता क े Ģित सच्चे रहते हुए बजट मȂ उत्पादन, समथर्न और कर् े िडट Ģोत्साहनȗ क े माध्यम से 
सÅजी आपूिर्त Ǜृंखलाओं और झींगा िनयार्त को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए पहल की रूपर ेखा तैयार की 
गई है।   
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

"िडिजटल इंिडया" पहल क े तहत बजट मȂ िडिजटल फसल सवȃक्षण करने और िकसान 
एवं भूिम रिजÎटर्ी क े तहत 6 करोड़ िकसानȗ की भूिम क े एकीकरण क े संदभर् मȂ िडिजटल, 
सावर्जिनक बुिनयादी ढांचे क े कायार्न्वयन की शुरुआत  की गई है। सहकारी क्षेतर् क े ËयविÎथत और 
िनयिमत िवकास को स
ुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए एक राÍटर्ीय सहकारी नीित की भी घोषणा की गई 
है। हम मध्य Ģदेश क े पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी और क ृिष मंतर्ी, माननीय िशवराज िंसह चौहान जी को भी 
धन्यवाद देते हȅ, िजन्हȗने खेती को लाभ का ध
ंधा बनाया ही नहीं है, बिÊक उसको कायर्रूप  मȂ 
पिरणत करने का काम भी िकया है और मध्य Ģदेश क े िकसानȗ की तकदीर और तÎवीर बदलने 
का काम िकया है। हम अपने ऐसे क ृिष मंतर्ी जी का धन्यवाद ज्ञािपत करते ह ȅ।  
 िंसचाई सुिवधा बढ़ने से क ृिष उत्पादन मȂ वृिǉ हुई है। खेतȗ मȂ लहलहाती फसल िकसानȗ 
की आशाओं का मूल होती है। हमारी सरकार िकसानȗ की आय दोगुनी करने, उत्पादकता की 
लागत कम
 करने, योग्य भाव िदलाने, क ृिष आधािरत जोिखमȗ को कम करने तथा नुकसान की 
भरपाई करने की िदशा मȂ िनरंतर कायर् कर रही है। िकसान पिरवार अपने पिरǛम से देश की 
जनता को खाǏान्न उपलÅध कराते हȅ।  उनके  समपर्ण क े  Ģित हमारी सरकार पूरी संवेदना व 
सÇमान रखती है।  
 
"कल क े नए सवेरे हम हȅ, धरती की संतान हȅ, 
Îवयं से हम तकदीर बदलते, मानवता क े अिभमान हȅ।" 
 
 हमारी सरकार िकसान िहतैषी सरकार ह ै।  िकसानȗ की आय बढ़ाने क े िलए हमारी 
सरकार ने " Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान सÇमान िनिध," क ृषकȗ को उनकी उपज का बेहतर मूÊय िमले, 
इसके  िलए समथर्न मूÊय पर खरीदी, "Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान मानधन योजना," "Ģधानमंतर्ी फसल 
बीमा योजना," "Åयाज सहायता योजना," एगर्ीकÊचर फ ं ड, परंपरागत क ृिष ऋण, नए 10,000 
एफपीओज़ का गठन एवं संवधर्न जैसी अनेक िकसा
न िहतकारी योजनाओं से क ृषक लाभािन्वत हो 
रहे हȅ।  हमारे गृह Ģदेश, मध्य Ģदेश की सरकार एवं मुख्य मंतर्ी डा. मोहन यादव जी की सरकार 
"
िकसान सÇमान िनिध" मȂ बराबरी की िहÎसेदारी क Ȃ दर् की मोदी सरकार क े साथ कर रही है और 
िकसानȗ का मान-सÇमान बढ़ाने का काम कर रही है। हमारे गृह संसदीय क्षेतर्, नमर्दापुरम, 
नरिंसहपुर, रायसेन मȂ िकसान गेहूं, धान, मूंग और गन्ना का उत्पादन बहुतायत  मȂ करते हȅ। उनके  
उत्पादन का उिचत मूÊय िदलाने मȂ भी क Ȃ दर् सरकार मȂ मध्य Ģदेश की सरकार का अतुÊय योगदान 
है। महोदया, मȅ आपके  एवं सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय क ृ िष मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान इस ओर आकिर्षत 
करना चाहूंगी िक आप Ģाकृ ितक एवं जैिवक खेती को बढ़ावा तो दे रहे हȅ, लेिकन इसे और ज्यादा 
बढ़ावा िदया जाए। यह मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से और आपके  माध्यम से माननीय क ृिष मंतर्ी जी से 
आगर्ह करती हूँ।   
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने अन्नदाताओं क े सशिƪकरण पर िवशेष ध्यान द
ेते हुए इस बार 
अन्नदाता क े िलए एक महीने पहले ही सभी मुख्य फसलȗ क े िलए उच्चतर न्यूनतम समथर्न मूÊयȗ 
की घोषणा करके  लागत पर कम से कम 50 Ģितशत मािर्जन देने का वायदा पूरा िकया है। 
...(समय की घंट
ी)...  
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
145

उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): मैडम, अब आप कन्क्लूड कीिजए। 
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया: "Ģधानमंतर्ी गरीब कÊयाण अन्न योजना" को 5 वषर् की अविध क े िलए 
बढ़ा िदया गया है, िजससे 80 करोड़ से अिधक लोगȗ को लाभ होगा। क ृिष मȂ उत्पादकता और 
अनुक ूलनीयता पर Ģाथिमकता से जोर िदया गया है।  हमारी सरकार उत्पादकता बढ़ाने और 
जलवायु क े अनुक ू ल िकÎमȗ क े िवक
ास पर जोर देने क े िलए क ृिष अनुसंधान ËयवÎथा की Ëयापक 
समीक्षा करेगी।  िकसानो की खेती-बाड़ी क े िलए 32 क ृिष और बागबानी फसलȗ की नई 109 उच्च 
पैदावार वाली और जलवायु अनुक ू ल िकÎमȂ जारी की जाएंगी।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान):
 धन्यवाद, मैडम। 
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया: अगले दो वषș मȂ पूरे देश मȂ एक करोड़ िकसानȗ को Ģाकृ ितक क ृिष क े 
िलए सहायता दी जाएगी, िजसमȂ Ģमाण-पतर् और Ĥांिंडग ËयवÎथा भी शािमल होगी।...(समय की 
घं
टी)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): मैडम, आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है।  
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया: माननीया, मुझे पहली बार बोलने का मौका िमला है, इसिलए मȅ आपकी 
अनुमित चाहूंगी िक आप मुझे थोड़ा और समय दे दȂ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. फौिजया खान): ऑनरेबल मȂबर, समय
 की मयार्दा है। अब मȅ अगले सदÎय का 
नाम लूंगी।   
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया: इसका िकर्यान्वयन वैज्ञािनक संÎथाओं और इच्छु क गर्ाम पंचायतȗ क े 
माध्यम
 से िकया जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): Ǜी Ģदीप क ुमार वमार् जी।  
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया: माननीय, मȅ ये सब क ेवल जानती ही नहीं हूँ, बिÊक यथाथर् रूप  से मानती 
भी हूँ, क्यȗिक मȅ Îवयं एक िकसान हूँ एवं जैिवक व Ģाकृ ितक खेती को बढ़ावा देने का काम करती 
हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)..
. आपने मुझे बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी Ģदीप क ुमार वमार् (झारखंड): आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण 
िवभाग क े कायर् पर आयोिज
त इस चचार् क े सतर् मȂ आपने मुझे भाग लेने का अवसर िदया है, मȅ 
आपके  Ģित आभारी हूं। आज की चचार् का शुभारंभ करते हुए कांगर्ेस क े रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला 
जी ने क ु छ तुलनात्मक आंकड़े ĢÎतुत िकये। उन आंकड़ȗ मȂ उन्हȗने एनडीए सरकार क े आ
ंकड़ȗ की 
तुलना एनडीए सरकार क े आंकड़ȗ से की। शायद उन्हȂ याद नहीं था िक आज से क ु छ समय पहले, 
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

करीब 10 साल पहले उनकी सरकार थी और 10 साल तक उन्हȗने शासन िकया। अगर वे उस 
समय क े आंकड़ȗ से एनडीए सरकार क े आंकड़ȗ की तुलना करते, तो यह बेहतर होता, उन लोगȗ 
ने उसके  पहले भी 50-60 साल तक देश मȂ शासन िकया, उस समय क े भी आंकड़े थे, तो एनडीए 
सरकार क े आंकड़े से एनडीए सरकार क े आंकड़े की तुलना करके  उन्हȗने चचार् की श
ुरुआत  की 
और चचार् एक गलत िदशा मȂ आगे बढ़ा दी।  
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, कांगर्ेस पाटीर् ने इस देश पर आज़ादी क े बाद सवार्िधक समय तक 
शासन िकया है और हमȂ िकसानȗ की ढेर सारी समÎयाएं िवरासत म
Ȃ िमली हȅ। क ृिष का कायर् िबना 
पानी क े हो नहीं सकता, भारत मȂ क ृिष मानसून और जलवायु पर िनभर्र है। अगर िवगत 50-60 
वषș म
Ȃ कांगर्ेस िंसचाई क े साधन िवकिसत कर पाती, तो िकसानȗ की बहुत सारी समÎयाओं का 
समाधान शायद बहुत पहले हो चुका होता। हमारे देश मȂ िकसानȗ की मुख्य समÎयाएं - ज़मीन क े 
क्षेतर्फल की तुलना मȂ उत्पादन का कम होना, िमƺी म Ȃ पोषक तत्वȗ की कमी, िमƺी मȂ िकन पोषक 
तत्वȗ की कमी है, उसकी जांच की ËयवÎथा नहीं होना, क ृिष उत्पादȗ का िवपणन, भंडारण, 
टर्ांसपोटȃशन, क ृिष कायș मȂ आधुिनक तकनीकी क े Ģयोग का अभाव, ये सारी चीज़Ȃ िपछले 50-60 
वषș म
Ȃ कांगर्ेस ने दी हȅ और ये समÎयाएं हमȂ िवरासत मȂ िमली हȅ, िजसके  समाधान का कायर् िवगत 
10 वषș से आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारतीय जनता पाटीर् और एनडीए की सरकार ने 
करने का Ģयास िकया ह
ै। वषर् 2024-25 का जो बजट ĢÎतुत हुआ है, उसमȂ भी इन समÎयाओं को 
एडर्ेस िकया गया है। िकसानȗ को उनके  उत्पाद का उिचत मूÊय िमले, उनके  उत्पाद की काÎट का 
कम से कम 50 Ģितशत अिधक मूÊय िमले, इसके  िलए Ģयास िकया गया है। महोदया, अभी जून मȂ 
खरीफ की फसल की जो एमएसपी घोिषत हुई है, उसमȂ कई फसलȗ क े उत्पादन का जो मूÊय है, 
काÎट है, जो खचर् है, उससे 80 से 100 परसȂट तक अिधक मूÊय पर एमएसपी मȂ घोिषत की गई है। 
सरकार ने बजट मȂ िजन 9 Ģाथिमकताओं की बात कही है, उनमȂ क ृिष मȂ उत्पादकता और 
अनुक ूलनीयता की बात Ģथम Îथान पर की गई है। उसी क े अनुक ू ल Ģावधान भी िकए गए हȅ। पूरी 
दुिनया की जलवायु बदल रही है, उस जलवायु मȂ उपज को बढ़ा सकȂ, ऐसे उन्नत बीज चािहए, 
उसके  िलए बजट
 मȂ कहा गया है िक 32 क ृिष और 109 बागवानी फसलȗ की - आज की जलवायु 
मȂ जो उपयुƪ हो, आज की जलवायु क े िहसाब से जो उत्पादन दे सके  - ऐसी उच्च पैदावार वाली 
नई िकÎमȗ क े अनुसंधान क े िलए इस बजट मȂ Ģावधान िकया गया ह
ै। अगले दो वषș मȂ एक करोड़ 
िकसानȗ को Ģाकृ ितक क ृिष अपने क े िलए सहायता दी जाएगी, इसका Ģावधान िकया  गया है। 
Ģाकृ ितक क ृिष क े जो उत्पाद हȗगे, उनके  Ģमाण पतर् उन्हȂ िदए जाएंगे, तािक जो खरीदार है, वह 
पूरे िवÌवास क े साथ उन उत्पादȗ को खरीद सके । दलहन और ितलहन क े जो उत्पाद हȅ...  इसमȂ 
देश आत्मिनभर्र बन सके , इस िदशा म
Ȃ भी बजट मȂ बहुत सारे Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ।  सरसȗ, 
मूंगफली, ितल, सोयाबीन, सूरजमुखी आिद क े उत्पादन मȂ आत्मिनभर्र बनने का लÑय भी इस 
बजट मȂ िलया गया है।  सÅजी उत्पादन की एक Ģमुख समÎया यह है िक उसका भंडारण, िवपणन 
और उसका टर्ांसपोटȃशन ठीक से न हो पाने क े कारण िकसान को अक्सर घाटा सहना पड़ता है। 
अभी एक माननीय सदÎय कह रहे थे िक िकसानȗ को टमाटर को फ Ȃकना पड़ता ह ै। यह इसिलए 
होता है िक भंडारण की उिचत ËयवÎथा हम इतने वषș मȂ नहीं कर पाए। उनका िवपणन ठीक से 
नहीं हुआ, इस िदशा मȂ भी हमारी सरकार ने िवगत दस वषș मȂ काफी काम िकया है। e-NAM 
portal क े माध्यम से आज िकसान का एक्सेस सीधे क ृिष बाजारȗ क
े  साथ हुआ है। जहां मांग है, 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
147

वहां वह अपने सामान को सीधे भेज सकता है और इससे िबचौिलयȗ से उसे मुिƪ िमली है।  
िबचौिलये अक्सर िकसानȗ को िमलने वाले लाभ का बड़ा िहÎसा खा जाते हȅ। इस पोटर्ल पर 
रिजÎटडर् होकर आज देश का िकसान, देश क े िकसी भी िहÎसे मȂ अपने उत्पाद को भ ेज सकता 
है।...(समय की घंटी)... कहने क े िलए बहुत सारी बातȂ हȅ, लेिकन समय समाÃत हो रहा है। 
सुरजेवाला जी, िदनकर जी की किवता पढ़ रहे थे। रामधारी िंसह िदनकर जी को आजकल 
कांगर्ेस क े लोग
 पढ़ने लगे हȅ, यह देखकर बहुत अच्छा लगता है। उन्हȗने एक किवता पढ़ी थी। 
शायद कांगर्ेस क े लोगȗ पर इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी जी का असर है, तभी वे आजकल किवता पढ़ने लगे 
हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौि
जया खान): आप समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी Ģदीप क ुमार वमार्:  
"देवता कहीं सड़कȗ पर िगƺी तोड़ रहे, 
देवता िमलȂगे खेतȗ मȂ, खिलहानȗ मȂ।" 
 
उन्हȗने उसके  आगे की पंिƪयां नहीं पढ़ी। 
 
"फावड़े और हल राजदण्ड बनने को हȅ" 
 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने वह राजदण्ड लोक सभा मȂ Îथािपत िकया है।   
 
"फावड़े और हल राजदण्ड बनने को हȅ, 
धूसरता सोने से Ǜृंगार सजाती है 
दो राह, समय क े रथ का घघर्र नाद सुनो 
िसहांसन खाली करो िक जनता आती है।" 
 
यह रामधारी जी ने िलखी थी।...(समय की घंटी)...सुरजेवाला जी क े जो नेता हȅ, उनकी दादी जी, 
उस समय की Ģधान मंतर्ी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): क ृपया समाÃत करȂ।  आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है।   
 
Ǜी Ģदीप क ुमार वमार्: इंिदरा गांधी जी को गǈी खाली करनी पड़ी थी, यह भी याद रखना चािहए।  
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।             
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी: उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, इन्हȗने म
ेरा नाम िलया है।   
 
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KH AN): Now, Shri Beedha Masthan Rao 
Yadav. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI BEEDHA MASTHAN RAO YADAV (A ndhra Pradesh): Thank you, Madam 
Deputy Chairman, for giving me an opportuni ty to speak on this important Ministry. 
Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan has been very su itably made the Minister of Agriculture 
because the kind of work he has done in Madhya Pradesh in the agriculture sector 
needs to be replicated all across the country. We are proud of him. As a son of the 
soil and a farmer, I am proud of him. It sha ll be important to mention that over 60 per 
cent of India's workforce is still engaged in agriculture and, therefore, for India to 
become a developed nation, agriculture shou ld be made a profitable profession, in 
which a farmer wants his son to be a farm er. The YSR Congress Party’s vision of 
agriculture is that it should be modernized.  Second, it should be  made profitable for 
the farmer and fulfilling for the people engaged in it. 
Talking about the positive side of this Budget, it has provided support for PM-
Kisan Scheme. The allocation for Pradhan Mantri-Kisan Samman Nidhi remains 
consistent at Rs.60,000 crores ensuring co ntinued financial support to farmers. This 
scheme has been running for five years now and the amount that is  being credited is 
still Rs.6,000. This amount needs to be revised to, at least, Rs.9,000 keeping in mind 
the inflation. A new scheme, namely, Namo Drone Didi, has been introduced with an 
allocation of Rs.500 crores. It aims to prov ide drones to women self-help groups for 
agriculture purposes, promoting technologi cal adoption in farming. This is an 
important scheme for bringing in the right ki nd of modernization to agriculture. Next 
is, Focus on Natural Farming. The Nation al Mission on Natural Farming receives 
365.64 crore of rupees promoting sustai nable and climate-resilient agriculture 
practices. The problem is that the farmers ha ve two issues - whether their crop will 
grow or not and whether they will be able to  sell their crop or not. This hesitation of 
farmer shall persist. Therefore would the ho n. Minister brief as to what steps are 
being taken to make sure that the farmers overcome this fear of  theirs when they 
adopt natural farming?  The House is well aware how in Sr i Lanka, the rapid move to 
natural farming caused the farmers dearly an d crop production dropped. Therefore, 
how does the Minister plan on instilling th is confidence in our farmers? Next is, 
Support for Agriculture Marketing. With allocations towards agriculture schemes, the 
Budget aims to develop agriculture and allied sectors comprehensively. I am sure that 
this allocation will help in increasing the in come of farmers by enhancing production 
and productivity and better returns on produce.  
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
149

 Now, negatives. Inconsistent Support for Market Intervention Scheme. The 
Market Intervention Scheme and Price Su pport Scheme (MISPSS) see fluctuating 
allocation from Rs. 4,007 crores in 2022- 23 to mere Rs. 40 crores in Revised 
Estimates of 2023-24, which indicates in adequate and inconsistent support. 
Consistent and adequate fund ing is crucial to ensure that the scheme can operative 
effectively and provide timely support to farmers in need. This year, there has been no 
allocation for Market Intervention Sche me and Price Support Scheme (MISPSS), 
which is crucial.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Kindly wind up now. 
 
SHRI BEEDHA MASTHAN RAO YADAV: One minute, Madam.  ...(Interruptions)... In 
between, someone was talking, Madam. So, Minimum Support Price is not declared 
by the Government. The primary object of this intervention is to protect the growers of 
these commodities in the event of bumper cr op during the peak arrival period when 
prices tend to fall below economic levels or the cost of production.  (Time-bell rings.)  
Inadequate support for Coconut Development Board. The allocation for the 
Coconut Development Board remains constant  at only 35 crores of rupees, which 
may not be sufficient for the integrated development of coconut cultivation and 
industry.  South Indian States such as Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra 
Pradesh have a significant share in the country's coconut production.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHA N): Thank you, hon. Member.  Next 
speaker is Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya. 
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam): Madam, the economic growth of the 
country is dependent upon three sectors, namely, agriculture sector, manufacturing 
sector and services sector. Under the leadership of hon. Prime Minister who 
succeeded to become the Prim e Minister continuously for the third term, this 
Government has given equal importance to agriculture sector, manufacturing sector 
and services sector. So, continuously, India is  able to maintain economic growth at 7 
percent, and, within the Indian economy , agriculture factor has given fantastic 
contribution.  During last ten years under the leadership of Narendra Modi, agriculture 
sector has seen transformation and revolution in agriculture sector. 
Madam, in this Budget, in the agriculture sector, very, very, very humble focus 
has been there on comprehensive plan to boost the research, pr omote the national 
farming and sustainable farming and enha nce the oilseeds and pulse production.  
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

India is always short of these things and in this Budget, the Government has 
proposed 100 new varieties of crops, wh ich can face any climate change. These 
climate-resilient varieties are going to increa se production in our country, and, it will 
definitely boost our economy. Madam, the hon. Finance Minister, in her Budget 
announcement said that the farmers of   our country will soon have access to 109 new 
high-yielding climate-resistant varieties acros s 34 fields and horticulture crops of our 
country. It will boost self-sufficiency in the crucial crops, including the dal production 
of our country. In the Budget, the hon. Fi nance Minister has proposed allocation of 
Rs. 1.52 lakh crore in agriculture farmers’ we lfare and its allied services, which is five 
times more when we compare it with the U PA Government’s allocation. I think giving 
sufficient money for the development and welf are of the farmers will definitely boost 
our economy because the farmer is the backbone of our economy. Farmers are doing 
their job. They feed us.  So, it is the resp onsibility of the Government to look after the 
farmers.  
Madam, I would like to draw your attent ion towards two important things. I am 
coming from the North-eastern region. Due to recent flood in Assam, out of 35 
districts, 34 have been badly damaged. More than 7,279 villages have been badly 
damaged and more than 20,814 hectares of crops have been totally damaged, 
including paddy. Not only this, our animals were also very badly affected during the 
recent floods. Animals were af fected in all the 35 district s due to the flood. A total 
number of 155 villages were the critically-affected and more than 800 big animals were 
washed away in the flood water. Madam,  through you, I would like to draw the 
attention of the hon. Minister to the fact that four veterinary hospitals in Cachar and 
Hozhai Districts in Assam have been ve ry badly affected. I request the hon. 
Agriculture Minister to look into this and give adequate help to  the flood affected 
districts. Assam is the only State where we operated mobile hospitals not only for 
humans but also for the animals during the flood time.   
One more thing where I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Minister, 
through you, is fish cultivation. India is at  number eight position in the world. India is 
self-sufficient in the production of fish. So, I believe with this boost given by the 
Government, our economy will grow up.  I woul d again like to thank the hon. Minister 
for this.  
I would like to draw the attention of th e Government towards one more thing.  
You know that Assam is a tea-producing State. Now, due to certain reasons, 
Assam’s tea industry is facing serious prob lems. They have a very serious problem 
with tea production coming from Kenya, Sri Lanka, etc. There are a lot of problems 
which they are facing.  (Time-bell rings.)  So, I would like to request the hon. 
 
[1 August, 2024]
151

Minister to look after the tea industry and help it grow. It will boost our economy. With 
your permission, Madam, I would like to say that unemployment is a big issue in our 
country. Assam is also facing the same problem.  Small tea growers in Assam play a 
very important role in somehow resolvin g the unemployment issue. They are self-
employed, but these small tea growers ar e facing very, very  serious problems 
because they do not have any testing unit and, without that, they cannot sell their 
product... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Thank you, hon. Member.  
 
7.00 P.M.  
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA: I would request hon. Agriculture Minister to look 
into these issues very seri ously and help us in rescui ng Assam tea industry. The 
Assam Government is doing all the needful. But we need the assistance of the Central 
Government. With the assistance of the Ce ntral Government, I hope tea industry of 
Assam will repeat its glorious past performance.  Thank you, Madam. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): The next speaker is Shri Subhash 
Barala.  You have seven minutes. 
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला (हिरयाणा): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने मुझे इस क ृिष क े िवषय क े ऊपर 
बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। 
 इस सभा क े अंदर जब चचार् शुरू  हुई, तब काँगर्ेस पाटीर् क े बहुत विरÍठ नेता, जो हमारे 
ही Ģदेश से आते हȅ, आदरणीय रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला जी ने इस Ģकार की बातȂ उठा
ईं, जैसे 
आजादी क े बाद से लेकर अब तक ज्यादा समय भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरक ार रही हो और उन 
लोगȗ ने हमेशा से िवपक्ष मȂ बैठकर राजनीित की हो। शायद वे बात करते वƪ, इस बात को भूल 
गए िक आजादी क े बाद से लेकर और 2014 मȂ जब आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार आई, 
तब तक ज्यादा समय उन्हȗने देश क े ऊपर राज िकया। जब देश क े ऊपर आप लोगȗ ने राज 
िकया, तो आप लोगȗ की िजÇमेवारी बनती थी। हम तो छोटे-छोटे अपने खेतȗ म
Ȃ जाते थे और जब 
थोड़े से बड़े हुए, छातर् राजनीित से आगे कदम रखा, तो देखा। चूँिक हिरयाणा संघषर् की धरती 
रही है, हिरयाणा Ģदेश क े अंदर लगातार िकसानȗ क े संघषर् होते थ
े, हिरयाणा Ģदेश क े िकसान 
िदÊली मȂ आकर भी संघषर् करते थे िक वह िदन कब आएगा, जब िकसान को उसकी फसल का 
लाभकारी मूÊय िमलेगा। देश क े करोड़ȗ िकसानȗ का दुभार्ग्य है िक इस देश क े ऊपर राज करने 
वाली पाटीर्, सबसे ज्यादा राज करने वाली पाटीर् आज भारतीय जनता पाटीर् और नरेन्दर् मोदी जी, 
इनके  ऊपर उंगली उठाती है िक िकसान को उसकी फसल का लाभकारी मूÊय नहीं िमलत
ा है, 
िकसान की फसल क े िलए डा. Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िरपोटर् लागू नहीं होती है। मȅ उनसे पूछना 
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

चाहूँगा, रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला पहले नरवाना िवधानसभा क्षेतर् से चुनाव लड़ते थे, पड़ोस मȂ मेरा 
िवधानसभा क्षेतर् टोहाना मȂ इनकी सरकार क े अंदर िकसानȗ क े ऊपर गोिलयाँ चली थीं, लािठयाँ 
चली थीं, तब ये लोग कहाँ थे? हिरयाणा क े अंदर टोहाना कांड हुआ, हिरयाणा क े अंदर मंिदयाली 
कांड हुआ, फरीदाबाद मȂ िपरथला कांड हुआ, करनाल क े िनिंसग मȂ, दादरी क े बादडा म
Ȃ, 
महेन्दर्गढ़ क े सतनाली मȂ, िकतने ही कांड हुए, तब आप लोग हिरयाणा क े अंदर सǄा मȂ रहे, तो 
तब आप लोग कहाँ थ
े? आपकी िवधानसभा क्षेतर् क े िबÊकु ल बराबर मȂ जो टोहाना कांड हुआ था, 
मȅ उसका Ģत्यक्षदशीर् गवाह हूँ। हमने घायल िकसानȗ को उठा-उठाकर हॉिÎपटल ले जाने का 
काम िकया था। महोदया, उन
 िकसानȗ का क ेवल इतना कसूर था िक अपनी धान की फसल की 
उिचत िबकर्ी की माँग कर रहे थे, उिचत मूÊय की माँग कर रहे थे, लेिकन दुभार्ग्य है िक िकसान क े 
नाम पर आज ये घिड़याली आंसू बहाने वालȗ को िकसानȗ क े  ऊपर लाठी और गोली चलाते हुए 
जरा भी दया नहीं आई थी। इतना ही नहीं, इनकी सरकारȗ मȂ िकतने ही ऐसे उदाहरण उठाकर 
देख लीिजए, इसी Ģकार से िकसान क े साथ Ëयवहार होता था, लेिकन सौभाग्य से, जब देश क े 
अंदर Ǜीमान अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी
 जी की सरकार बनी, उस समय से िकसान की िंचता करनी 
शुरू  हुई थी। एक तरफ िकसान को लाभकारी मूÊय िमले, दूसरी तरफ िकसान की लागत मूÊय 
कम करने क े िलए, चाहे उसे िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् देकर सÎते Åयाज पर ऋण उपलÅध करवाने की 
बात हो, चाहे समय क
े  ऊपर, कम रेट क े ऊपर डीएपी और यूिरया उपलÅध कराने की बात हो, 
यह अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी की सरकार क े समय से शुरू  हुआ था। अब यह नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की 
सरकार क े समय मȂ इसके  ऊपर काम आगे बढ़ रहा ह
ै।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, अगर हम इस सरकार की बात करȂ, मुझे याद है िक हम भी 
िकसान मोचȃ का कायर्कतार् होने क े नाते गांव-गांव मȂ जाते थे, िकसानȗ क े  बीच कायर्शाला करते थे 
और िकसान को Ģिशिक्षत करते थे िक सरकारȗ से मांग करो, लागत क े आधार पर 50 Ģितशत 
मूÊय उसमȂ लाभ क े रूप  मȂ जोड़कर िकसान को िमलना चािह ए।  अगर उस सपने को साकार 
करने का काम िकया गया, तो देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िकया गया।   
 2014 क े बाद से अब तक हमारी सरकार ने डेढ़ गुना से लेकर ढाई गुना तक अलग-
अलग फसलȗ क े रेट बढ़ाकर देने का काम िकया।  मुझसे पहले बहुत से वƪाओं ने बताया िक 
िकस Ģकार से कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की सरक
ार जब इस देश क े अंदर थी, क ैिबनेट क े नोट भी रǈी  की 
टोकरी मȂ डाल िदए जाते थे और यह कह िदया जाता था िक अगर िकसान को 50 Ģितशत 
लाभकारी मूÊय लागत क े अंदर जोड़कर दे िदया गया, तो बाजार िवचिलत हो जाएगा। इन लोगȗ 
को उस बाजार की िंचता थी और िकसान की िंचत ा नहीं थी, िजस िकसान की िंचता करने का 
काम आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िकया है।   
 मुझसे पहले क े वƪा बहुत सारी बातȂ ऑन िरकॉडर् लेकर आए िक िकस-िकस फसल का 
रेट िकतना बढ़ाकर िदया, मȅ उसकी डीटेल मȂ नहीं जाऊं गा, ल ेिकन मȅ इसके  साथ-साथ दूसरी 
बात कहना चाहूंगा।  ...(समय की घंटी)... हमारी सरकार ने एक तरफ जहां िकसान की फसल का 
उसको लाभकारी मूÊय िमले, तो दूसरी तरफ उसकी लागत िकस Ģकार से कम हो, इसके  ऊपर 
काम करने का काम िकया। िकस Ģका
र से अंतरराÍटर्ीय Îतर पर खाद क े दाम बढ़ने क े बावजूद भी 
देश क े अंदर सिÅसडी बढ़ाकर िकसान की फसल क े लागत मूÊय को क ंटर्ोल करने का काम 
िकया।   
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
153

उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान):  ऑनरेबल मेÇबर, समाÃत करȂ।    
  
Ǜी सुभाष बराला: हमारे िकसान को नैनो यूिरया उपलÅध करवाकर और हमारी डर्ोन दीदी, हमारी 
बहनȗ को Ģिशिक्षत करके  8 लाख रुपय े से लेकर 10.5 लाख रुपय े तक का डर्ोन, उनको टर्ेिंनग 
करवाकर, ģी मȂ देने का काम हमारी सरकार कर रही है।  ...(समय की घंटी)... उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदया, मुझ
े पहली बार बोलने का मौका िमला है, क ृपया मुझे दो िमनट का समय दे दीिजए, मȅ 
कन्क्लूड करता हूं।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान):  नहीं, आपको समाÃत करना होगा।  Please stop now.  
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला: इसी Ģकार से नरेन्दर्
 मोदी जी की सरकार ने हमारे िकसान को 6,000 रुपय े 
सÇमान िनिध देने का काम िकया और आज देश क े िकसान को 3 लाख, 20 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपय े 
सÇमान िनिध क े रूप  मȂ िदए गए।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): ऑनरेबल
 मेÇबर, अब आपका समय समाÃत हो गया है।   
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला: सोलर ऊजार् का Ƿू बवैल देकर 35 परसȂट सिÅसडी हमारी क Ȃ दर् की सरकार ने 
देने का काम िकया है।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): अगली Îपीकर हȅ, ऑनरेबल Ǜीमती एस. फान्गनॉन कोन्याक।   
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ हिरयाणा सरकार का उÊलेख करना चाहूंगा, क्यȗिक 
यहां सोलर ऊजार् की बड़ी चचार् और िंचता ह
ुई थी। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला: मȅ क ेवल एक बात कहकर अपनी बात को समाÃत करूं गा।   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. फौिजया खान): नहीं, अब आपका समय समाÃत हो गया ह
ै। मैडम, आप अपनी 
Îपीच शुरू  कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला: हमारी हिरयाणा की सरकार ने 35 से 40 परसȂट सिÅसडी देकर... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. फौिजया खान):  ऑनरेबल मेÇबर, आप श
ुरू  कीिजए। Please begin. आपका 
समय जा रहा है।   
 
154
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK (Nagaland): Thank you, Madam, for giving me 
the opportunity to participate in the disc ussion on the Working of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare in hon. Prime Minister Narendra Modi's historic third 
term. Key priorities of the Ministry have be en the focus on facing challenges to the 
agricultural sector, challenges of climate change, increasing income for farmers and 
sustainability. The Ministry of Agriculture an d Farmers' Welfare play s a crucial role in 
India's agriculture sector, impacting economi c stability, food secu rity, research and 
rural development. Its efforts are essential for fostering a productive, sustainable and 
equitable agriculture system, particularly  as it addresses the sector's various 
challenges. Given that 51 per cent of our country's cultivated area  relies on rainfall, 
agriculture is highly vulnerable to climatic variations. Frequent extreme weather events 
have led to significant losses in crop yield and farmer income. The Ministry has 
identified and addressed these challenges by  focusing on climate change impacts on 
crop diseases and the durability of agricultur al products. The initiative of the Ministry 
to create pest-resistant water efficient cr ops significantly benefits all the States 
including Nagaland, where over 70 per cent of the population depends on agriculture. 
The release of 109 high yielding and clim atic resilient varieties of 32 field and 
horticulture crops will greatly benefit Nagaland farmers who have faced crop failure 
due to water scarcity. The Ministry has also been promoting organic farming by 
implementing two dedicated schemes: Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana and Mission 
Organic Value Chain for North Eastern Re gion since 2015. As per information 
available, about 13,000 hectares in 241 villages covering 13,500 farmers are involved in 
organic farming in Nagaland. Nagaland ha s abundant organic resources and organic 
certification has already been taken up by  the Department and more areas will be 
covered for organic farming. The plan to  set up 10,000 need-based bio-resource 
input centers will ensure that  the technological and scie ntific intervention will be 
available for the farmers whenever they need it within a short span of time. This also 
implies an increase of research associates being employed in the agriculture research 
sector. The Ministry also provides farmers with insurance to safeguard their yields 
from non-preventable risks through sche mes like the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima 
Yojana and the restructured weather-base d crop insurance scheme. These schemes 
offer affordable crop  insurance covering risks from  the pre-sowing to the post-
harvest stage.  Cultivation requires seve ral inputs, including seeds, fertilizers, 
pesticides, and reliable irrigation. Overuse an d imbalance use of fertilizers have led to 
significant soil health degradation. To ad dress these issues, the Indian Farmers 
Fertilizer Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) ha s developed 'Nano Urea' fertilizer using 
nanotechnology. This is a first in the worl d. This innovation aims to mitigate the 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
155

problems associated with excessive and im balanced use of conventional urea.  The 
Ministry has incorporated 'Nano Urea' into  the monthly supply plan issued by the 
Department of Fertilizers, and it is being made available through PM Kisan Samriddhi 
Kendras, which are designed to provide farmers with access to this advanced and 
more efficient fertilizer. As of 2019-20, about 53 per cent of the total crop area 
depended on irrigation with agriculture be ing the largest consumer of groundwater, 
accounting for 87 per cent of annual extracti on. To enhance irrigation coverage, the 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinc hai Yojana was launched in  2015. The Ministry also 
provides financial assistance for micro i rrigation systems covering 55 per cent of 
installation costs for some and 45 per cen t for others. Despite these efforts, water-
intensive crops like paddy and sugarcane are grown in water-scarce districts. I 
commend the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare for addressing this through 
the Crop Diversification Programme unde r the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, 
promoting alternative crops such as pulses, oil seeds, corn cereals, nutri cereals and 
cotton.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN):  Madam, you will have to wind up 
now.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK: I still have two minutes.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHA N): No, please. Every Member will get 
five minutes now onwards.  …(Interruptions)…    
 
SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK: I have two minutes.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN):  We have too many Members.  
 
SHRIMATI S. PHANGNON KONYAK: Agricultur e is vital to the development of our 
country, and as half of our workforce is engaged in it, its significance is clearly evident 
from the emphasis given to productivity and resilience to agri culture as priority 
number one in the Union Budget of 2024-25.  ( Time-bell rings. ) The Ministry's 
strategic focus on climate re silience, sustainability and innovation is commendable 
and crucial for ensuring the future stab ility and prosperity of our agricultural 
landscape. From introducing climate resilient crop variet ies to enhance irrigation, 
infrastructure and advancing bio and food technologies, these initiatives underscore a 
156
[RAJYA SABHA]

strong commitment to improving farmers' liv elihood and strengthen ing food security.  
As we move forward, it is imperative that we continue to support…                      
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHA N): Next speaker is Shri Ramji.  
…(Interruptions)…  You have five minutes.   
 
Ǜी रामजी (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे क ृिष एवं 
िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय क े कायर्करण क े ऊपर चचार् पर बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया। साथ ही 
मȅ अपनी पाटीर् की मुिखया, आदरणीया बहन क ुमारी मायावती जी का भी आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ।   
 महोदया, देश मȂ 65 परसȂट लोग
 directly or indirectly क ृिष पर िनभर्र करते हȅ, िजनमȂ 
िकसान भी हȅ और क ृिष मजदूर भी हȅ। क ृिष हमारे िलए िसफर् profit-making company की तरह 
नहीं होना चािहए। क ृिष इस देश मȂ लोगȗ का पेट भरने का काम करती है। इसीिलए मȅ एक आँकड़ा 
पेश करना चाहता हूँ, क्यȗिक िकसान और िकसान कÊयाण क
े  बारे मȂ यहाँ चचार् हो रही है। 
महोदया, 2022 का NCRB का िरकॉडर् है िक 11,290 लोगȗ न े क ृिष से जुड़े लोगȗ ने, आत्महत्या 
की। इनमȂ 5,207 िकसान और 6,083 खेितहर मजदूर थे। मȅ उसके  दुखȗ क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहता 
हूं। हम उनको लोन तो देते हȅ, लेिकन लोन िनकालने क े िलए हम उनके  साथ कोई िरयायत नहीं 
करते हȅ। िकसान न
े फसल बोया और वह फसल सूखे की वजह से, heavy rain की वजह से, बाढ़ 
की वजह से या ओले की वजह से destroy हो गयी, उसे इनकम नहीं हुई, लेिकन बȅक उसका 
लोन वापस लेती है। अगर वह लोन वापस नहीं दे पाता, तब बȅक उस पर दबाव बनाती है और, 
ultimately, suicide करनी पड़ती है। उसे बीमा का पैसा वगैरह नहीं िमलता। यह कहने वाली बात 
है, फाइली बात है िक बीमा हो गया ह ै , उनको पैसा िमलता है।  अगर बीमा का पैसा उसको िमल 
रहा होता, तो िकसान आत्महत्या नहीं करता। यह सोचने वाली बात है।  
 इसके  साथ ही मȅ िकसानȗ क े िलए कहना चाहता हूं िक बीज क े दाम आसमान पर हȅ। 
अगर 500 रुपय े Ģित िकलो मक्के  क े  बीज का दाम है, 150-200 रुपय े Ģित िकलो धान क े बीज का 
दाम है, तो इसको रोकना पड़ेगा। इसमȂ Ģाइवेट सेक्टर की जो monopoly है, उसे खत्म करना 
पड़ेगा और इसमȂ हमȂ पिÅलक सेक्टर को भी इंटर्ोǹूस करना पड़ेगा, तािक वह बीज को लेकर क े 
आए, क्यȗिक हम 65 परस Ȃट लोग क ृिष पर ही िडपȂड करते हȅ। साथ ही जीएसटी पर भी सोचना 
पड़ेगा।  क ृिष से िरलेटेड िजतन
ा भी जीएसटी है, उसको खत्म करना पड़ेगा। चाहे पेिÎटसाइड्स 
हȗ, हिर्बसाइड्स हȗ या खाद हो, टर्ैक्टर हो, टर्ॉली हो या कोई अन्य इिक्व
पमȂट हो - क ृिष से 
िरलेटेड  जो भी चीजȂ हȅ, उन पर जीएसटी को खत्म करना पड़ेगा। पेिÎटसाइड्स क े दाम आसमान 
की तरफ हȅ। 5,000 रुपय े, 10,000 रुपय े की दवाइयां एक एकड़ म Ȃ पड़ रही हȅ।  इसके  िलए एक 
रेगुलेटरी बॉडी बनानी पड़ेगी िक आिखर इनका दाम जो आसमान छू  रहे हȅ, उनको क ै से बढ़ने से 
रोका जाए।  उसको लेकर भी हमȂ सोचना पड़ेगा, क्यȗिक हमने कई देशȗ को बैन कर िदया। 
पेिÎटसाइड मȂ जो साÊट आता है, वह बाहर से आना बंद हो गया है। उसकी वजह स
े जो इंिडयन 
एमएनसीज़ थीं, उन्हȗने दाम बढ़ा िदए।  ultimately, फकर् तो िकसानȗ पर ही पड़ने वाला है, तो 
इसको भी देखते हुए हमȂ इस पर ध्यान देना पड़ेगा।  साथ ही, पेिÎटसाइड्स पर िडपȂडȂसी खत्म 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
157

हो, इसके  िलए हमȂ biological predators पर बढ़ावा देना पड़ेगा, हमȂ कर्ॉप रोटेशन को Ģमोट 
करना पड़ेगा।  इसको लेकर भी मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से कहना चाहूंगा।   
 माननीय क ृिष मंतर्ी जी यहां पर बैठे हुए हȅ। मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक मध्य Ģदेश  मȂ 
ये 'मामा जी' क े नाम से बहुत फ ेमस थे। मȅ चाहता हूं िक वे िकसानȗ क े िलए भी 'मामा जी' बनकर 
रहȂ।  िकसानȗ क े साथ ही, मȅ क ृिष मजदूरȗ क े िलए भी िरक्वेÎट करूं गा िक उनको भी सÇमान िनिध 
देन
े का भी काम करȂ। साथ ही, आम जनता की ओर से एक क्वेÌचन है िक आजकल क ेला, अंगूर, 
आम तथा अन्य तमाम जो फल हȅ, उनको पकाने क े िलए पेिÎटसाइड्स, हिर्बसाइड्स एवं 
फ ंगीसाड्स का य
ूज़ िकया जा रहा है। अंगूर को फ ंगीसाइड मȂ डुबोकर बाहर िनकाला जाता है 
तािक अंगूर लॉन्ग टाइम तक अच्छा बना रहे। इसको पूरी तरह से बैन करना पड़ेगा, क्यȗिक, 
ultimately, यह हमȂ ही हामर् करने वाला है।   
 इसके  साथ ही, पानी को लेकर हमारे कई सदÎयȗ ने बात कही िक हर साल गमीर् मȂ 
पानी का लेवल नीचे की तरफ जा रहा है।  एक
 बड़ा रीजन यह भी है िक हम पानी वाली फसलȗ 
को ज्यादा use करते हȅ, मतलब माचर्, अĢैल, मई और जून - इन 4 महीनȗ मȂ हम धान की खेती 
कर रहे हȅ।  कई Ģदेशȗ मȂ, जैसे हमारे उǄर Ģदेश मȂ - मȅ लखीमपुर का रहने वाला हूं।  ...(
समय 
की घंटी)...  महोदया, म
ȅ अपनी बात खत्म कर रहा हूं। मȅ लखीमपुर रहने वाला हूं। वहाँ पर धान 
की खेती की जाती है, िजसमȂ बहुत पानी खचर् होता है। तो उसकी जगह पर दूसरी फसलȗ को वहां 
पर Ģमोट करना चािहए और धान की फसल को वहां पर रोकने का काम करना चािहए।  
 महोदया, अब मȅ लाÎट पॉइंट कह कर अपनी बात खत्म कर रह
ा हूं। हमारे उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 
िकसान गन्ने की खेती करता है, बहुत बड़े Îतर पर खेती करता है। लेिकन गन्ने की फसल का जो 
पैसा है, वह िमल-मािलक
 उनको टाइम पर नहीं दे रहे हȅ। माननीय मंतर्ी जी इस बात को संज्ञान मȂ 
लȂ और िकसानȗ क े गन्ने का जो रेट होता है, उसका पैसा है, वह कम  से कम एक हÄते क े अंदर 
िदलाने का काम करȂ।  मȅ आपसे यही आगर्ह करता हूं, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Now, Shri S. Selvaganabathy; five 
minutes.  
 
SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY (Puducherry): Vice-Chairman, Madam, our hon. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modiji, has entered into the record book of creating history by 
forming the Government for the third consecu tive time. He is very confident and said 
that 'Confidence of farmers is the key streng th of the country' which is referred to as 
'Annadatas', referring to the overall empowermen t and prosperity of the country. The 
Government's effort to uplift the agri cultural segment of society warrants 
commendation and recognition by the peop le. In a strong growing economy like 
India, role of the agricultural sector hold s equal importance with the transformation of 
industries and digital infrastructure. In th e present scenario, the farmers in India are 
sensing economic security and assurance. Th e Budget focuses on farmers' interest, 
protecting natural resources and increasing productivity. It includes the creation of 
158
[RAJYA SABHA]

109 high-yielding and climate resilient crop  varieties moving our farming community 
towards resilience and productivity, thereby, increasing farmers' income. Focusing on 
agri-research and development is crucial as  the marginal returns on investment in 
agri-regional and research development ar e over ten times. The Government will 
undertake a comprehensive review of the ag riculture research set-up to focus on 
raising productivity and developing climate resilient varieties. This is essential to 
ensure food security and co ntrol food inflation. The Go vernment aims to transform 
agriculture into an engine of growth th rough farming practices that benefit both 
farmers and the planet. Over the next two years, one crore farmers will be initiated 
into natural farming supported by certificatio n and branding. The Budget also aims at 
value in agriculture, boost farmers' income and create opportunities for food 
processing and exports. Increasing the mi nimum support prices a month ago for all 
major crops, ensuring at least 50 percent margin over cost, is a welcome step to 
increase farmers' income. The Government's efforts in achieving nutritional security 
apart from food security are also laudable. The Budget aims for self-sufficiency in 
pulses and oilseeds centering their producti on, storage and marketing. A strategy is 
being put in place to achieve self-suffici ency for oil seeds such as mustard, 
groundnut, soya bean and sunflower. To walk the talk, the Government has 
increased the MSP for oilseeds on pulses, wh ich is the highest increase in absolute 
terms. Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) for agriculture will enab le inclusive farmer-
centric solution. It will provide relevant information for crop planning and help improve 
access to farm inputs, credit and insurance, assist in crop estimation and offer 
market intelligence. DPI will give farmers easy access to Government schemes and 
services like MSP-based procurement, crop insurance and crop loans. It will also 
provide customized advisory services base d on crops, land, soil and agro-climatic 
conditions. Madam, the first Krishi Vigyan Kendra  (KVK) in the country was 
established in Puducherry and that KVK is going to celebrate the Golden Jubilee year. 
I would like to bring to the attention of th e hon. Minister that Puducherry has an 
agriculture college and a veterinary college . In South India, we do not have any 
Central Agricultural University. The Agriculture College in Puducherry has got all the 
sufficient infrastructure to develop a Central Agricultural University. So I would request 
our hon. Minister to grant permission to  start Central Agriculture University in 
Puducherry. Thank you.     
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): The next sp eaker is Shri Banshilal 
Gurjar. You have five minutes. 
 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
159

Ǜी बंशीलाल गुजर्र (मध्य Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, ऐसे तो यह मेरी maiden speech है।  
अगर आप अनुमित दȂगे, तो मȅ बोलूँगा।  मेरा माइक ऑन नहीं हुआ है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): आप इधर से बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी बंशीलाल गुजर्र: महोदया, भारत की जनता ने हमारे देश  क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
को िफर से तीसरी बार इस देश का नेतृत्व करने का मौका िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ देश की जनता 
को धन्यवाद देता हूँ। माननीया िनमर्ला जी ने सातवां बजट  पेश िकया है,  इसके  िलए भी मȅ उनको 
बधाई देता हूँ। 
 महोदया, मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक जब हम क ृिष पर बात कर रहे हȅ, तो आज से 
20-25 साल पहले हम मांग करते थे िक क ृिष को उǏोग का दजार् िदया जाए। क ृिष को उǏोग का 
दजार् क्यȗ िद
या जाए, तो तीन बातȂ मुख्य रूप  से ध्यान मȂ आती थीं िक उǏोग मȂ पूंजी का Ģवाह 
बहुत अच्छे तरीके  से होता है, िरÎक मैनेजमȂट अच्छे तरीके  से होता है और बाजार की ËयवÎथा 
उसमȂ अच्छ
े तरीके  से होती है। इसीिलए िकसानȗ का अटर्ैक्शन था िक क ृिष को उǏोग का दजार् 
िदया जाए। मुझे Ģसन्नता है िक माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने जब से इस देश की बागडोर संभाली, 
उन्हȗने क ृिष को उǏोग क े दजȃ को समझने की कोिशश की और उसी आधार पर उन्हȗने काम 
िकया। क ृिष मȂ सबसे पहले जो आवÌयकता होती है, वह पानी की आवÌयकता होती है, तो पानी 
को Ģाथिमकता देते हुए उन्हȗने Ģधानमंतर्ी िंसचाई योजना Ģारंभ की। जब मȅ आज बात कर रहा ह
ूँ, 
तो मुझे यह कहते हुए खुशी है िक Ģधानमंतर्ी िंसचाई योजना ने सूÑम इिरगेशन मȂ देश मȂ 90 लाख 
हेक्टेयर िंसिचत भूिम बढ़ाने का काम िकया है। इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद 
देता हूँ। इस वषर् क े बजट मȂ इस योजना मȂ 9 हजार करोड़ रुपए  का Ģावधान िकया गय
ा है, इसके  
िलए भी मȅ माननीया िवǄ म
ंतर्ी जी और Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देता हूँ। 
 दूसरा, मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक क ृिष मȂ पूंजी का Ģवाह तेज नहीं था। आज से 20-
25 साल पहले िकसान साहूकारȗ क े कजर् मȂ ड ूबा हुआ होता था और साहूकार मनमाने तरीके  से 
उनसे Åयाज की दरȂ वसूल करते थे। लेिकन जब से अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने िकसा
न कर् ेिडट 
योजना Ģारंभ की और माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी जब देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बने, तो उन्हȗने इस 
समÎया का समाधान करने क े िलए लगातार बजट Ģावधान करते हुए बȅकȗ क े दरवाजे िकसानȗ क े 
िलए खोलने का काम िकया है। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, पहले तो
 िकसान बȅक मȂ जाते हुए भी डरते 
थे।  उनको यह लगता था
 िक जो बȅक है, यह बड़े लोगȗ क े िलए बनाया गया है, पैसे वाले लोगȗ क े 
िलए बनाया गया है, पैसा रखने क े िलए बनाया गया है, लेिकन जब से Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
ने ËयवÎथा की और िकसानȗ को बȅकȗ से कजर् द
ेना Ģारंभ िकया, तो िकसानȗ को समझ मȂ आया िक 
बȅक िकसानȗ क े िलए भी होता है। मुझे इस बात को कहते हुए खुशी हो रही है िक आज इस बजट 
मȂ हमारे क ृिष क
े  क्षेतर् मȂ िकसानȗ क े िलए 20 लाख करोड़ रुपए  का Ģावधान माननीया िनमर्ला जी 
ने िकया है, इसके  िलए मȅ उनको धन्यवाद देता हूँ।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक अगर उत्पादन को बेचने की 
ËयवÎथा करनी पड़े, तो
 बेचने क े िलए िकसान को मंिडयȗ मȂ जाना पड़ता है। जब िकसान मंिडयȗ मȂ 
जाता है, तो मंिडयȗ मȂ जाने पर िकसानȗ की उपज की पूरी कीमतȂ उसको िमलनी चािहए। मȅ 
160
[RAJYA SABHA]

माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को इसके  िलए धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ िक उन्हȗने राÍटर्ीय क ृिष बाजार 
पोटर्ल Îथािपत करके , तािक पूरे िवÌव क े भाव िकसानȗ को िमल जाएँ, उसकी ËयवÎथा की है, 
देश की सभी मंिडयȗ क े भाव िकसानȗ को िमल जाए, उसकी ËयवÎथा की है और एक हजार से 
ज्यादा मंिडयȗ को इससे जोड़ा गया ह
ै। ...(समय की घंटी)... एक हजार से ज्यादा जो मंिडयां 
जोड़ी गई हȅ, उनमȂ हमारे मध्य Ģदेश की 139 मंिडयाँ जोड़ी गई है। मध्य Ģदेश की मंिडयȗ मȂ िबना 
िकसी कटौती क े, िबना िकसी कमीशन क े िकसानȗ को भुगतान िकया जाता है। यह हमारी बड़ी 
उपलिÅध है। माननीय क ृिष मंतर्ी जी हमारे बीच मȂ बैठे हȅ। िकसानȗ को शोषण स
े मुिƪ िदलाने का 
काम अगर सबसे अच्छा कहीं हुआ है, तो मध्य Ģदेश मȂ हुआ है। मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक 
िकसानȗ को शोषण से मुिƪ िदलाने क े िलए जो e-NAM पोटर्ल है, वह िकसानȗ का मागर्दशर्न कर 
रहा है, उनको िवÌव  बाजारȗ की ËयवÎथा बता रहा है और िवÌव क े बाजार की ËयवÎथा बताने क े 
साथ ही उिचत भाव और उिचत Ëयापारी उसको िमले, उसकी ËयवÎथा बनाए जाने का काम िकया 
जा रहा है।   
 अभी मेरा समय समाÃत होने जा रहा है, पर मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहता ह ूँ िक माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने फसल बीमा योजना मȂ भी िकसानȗ को िसक्योिरटी देने का काम 
िकया है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): माननीय सदÎय, आप समाÃत करȂ। 
 
Ǜी बंशीलाल गुजर्र: मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को और मानन
 ीय क ृिष मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देता 
हूँ िक उन्हȗने िकसानȗ को बेहतर सुिवधाएँ और बेहतर ËयवÎथाएँ देने का काम िकया है। बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी (उǄराखंड): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आज मȅ संसद मȂ 2024-2025 क े 
िलए क Ȃदर्ीय बजट पर क ृिष पर चचार् करते हुए गवर् महसूस कर रही हूँ, क्यȗिक यह म
ेरे गौरव का 
िवषय है िक Îवतंतर् युग क े मेरे Îवािभमानी देश मȂ संकÊप से िसिǉ का संकÊप िलए मुझे एक सक्षम 
नेतृत्व ǎारा, िजनका आधार वसुधैव क ु ट ुÇबकम है एवç िजनका िवÌवास 'सवȃ भवन्तु सुिखन: सवȃ 
सन्तु िनराम
या:' पर हो, ऐसे लोकिĢय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार मȂ हमारी मिहला 
सशƪीकरण की Ģचारक द
ेश की िवǄ मंतर्ी िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी क े ǎारा ĢÎतुत बजट, क ृिष 
मंतर्ालय पर अपने िवचार को इस सदन मȂ रखने का सौभाग्य ĢाÃत हुआ है। 
 यह बजट हमारी सरकार क े 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका िवÌवास' क े  मंतर् को 
मज़बूत करने क े िलए तैयार िकया गया है। इस बजट का उǈेÌय आिर्थक िवकास को बढ़ावा देना 
है। 
 महोदया, जैसे िक हम भारतीय मानते हȅ िक - " मेरे देश की धरती सोना उगले, उगले 
हीरे मोती, म
ेरे देश की धरती," उसी को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से अपनी बात सदन 
मȂ रखना चाहूंगी। 
 राÍटर्ीय नमूना सवȃक्षण कायार्लय (NSSO) क े अनुसार, 2019-20 मȂ भारत मȂ लगभग 
42.6 परसȂट कायर्बल क ृिष और संबंिधत गितिविधयȗ मȂ संलग्न था। भारत एक क ृिष Ģधान देश है, 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
161

और क ृिष भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा मȂ महत्वपूणर् भूिमका िनभाती है। क ृिष और संबंिधत गितिविधयाँ 
(जैसे पशुपालन, मछली पालन) भारत की GDP का लगभग 15-17 Ģितशत िहÎसा है। उसी को 
ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए मोदी सरकार ने क ृिष मȂ अगले दो वषș मȂ देश  भर मȂ 1 करोड़  िकसानȗ को 
Ģमाणीकरण और Ĥांिंडग क े माध्यम से Ģाकृ ितक खेती की शुरुआत  करने की घोषणा ĢÎतुत बजट 
मȂ की है। कायार्न्वयन वैज्ञािनक संÎथानȗ और इच्छु क गर्ाम पंचायतȗ क े माध्यम से िकया जाएगा। 
दस हज़ार आवÌयकता आधािरत जैव-इनपुट संसाधन क Ȃ दर् Îथािपत िकए जाएंगे। पायलट 
Ģोजेक्ट की सफलता से उत्सािहत होकर, हमारी सरकार राज्यȗ क े साथ साझेदारी मȂ, 3 
वषș मȂ 
िकसानȗ और उनकी भूिम को कवर करने क े िलए क ृिष मȂ िडिजटल पिÅलक इंģाÎटर्क्च र (DPI) 
क े कायार्न्वयन की सुिवधा Ģदान करेगी। इस वषर् क े दौरान, DPI का उपयोग करके  खरीफ फसल 
क े िलए िडिजटल फसल सवȃक्षण 400 िजलȗ मȂ िकया जाएगा। 6 करोड़ िकसानȗ और उनकी भूिम 
का िववरण िकसान और भूिम रिजÎटर्ी मȂ लाया जाएगा। इसके  अलावा, 5 राज्यȗ मȂ जनसमथर् 
आधािरत िक
सान कर् ेिडट काडर् जारी कर िकसानȗ को सक्षम िकया जाएगा। दलहन और ितलहन मȂ 
आत्मिनभर्रता हािसल करने क े िलए ĢÎतुत बजट मȂ उनके  उत्पादन, भंडारण और िवपणन को 
मज़बूत करने की बात अंिकत है। अंतिरम बजट मȂ की गई घोषणा क े अनुसार सरसȗ, मूंगफली, 
ितल, सोयाबीन और सूरजमुखी जैसे ितलहनȗ क े िलए हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े मूल मंतर् 
आत्मिनभर्र भारत को 'आत्मिनभर्रता' हािसल करने की रणनीित बनाई जा रही है। क ृिष क े  िलए 
1.52 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का आवंटन बजट मȂ अंिकत है, िजसका मȅ िदल से Îवागत करती हूँ। 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िवपक्ष से यह सवाल भी करना चाहती हूं िक 
बजट मȂ सभी क ृिष  क े िलए महत्वपूण
र् Ģावधान है, िफर ĥम फ ैलाने क े िलए असत्य वचन क्यȗ? 
क्यȗ नहीं राÍटर्िहत धारक िवपक्ष की भूिमका का िनवर्हन करते। महोदया, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से 
सदन मȂ एक सुझाव भी ĢÎतुत करना चाहती हूं । अंतिरक्ष िवज्ञान, नैनो टेक्नोलॉजी, जेनेिटक्स, 
आिर्टफीिशयल इंटेिलजȂस, इनफॉमȃशन टेक्नोलॉजी और अन्य क्षेतर्ȗ से जुड़े वैज्ञािनकȗ को यिद 
एक Ãलेटफॉमर् पर लाया जाए, तो क ृिष क्षेतर् क े िलये बेहतरीन शोध हो सकते हȅ, िजससे क ृिष क े 
तकनीकीकरण, बाजारीकरण, िडिजटलीकरण और औǏोिगकरण को बल िमलेगा और युवा क
ृ िष 
से जुड़ाव महसूस करेगा। 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, िजस तरह से क ृिष को उन्नत, सक्षम और समृǉ बनाने क े उǈेÌय 
से दृढ़ Ģितबǎता दशार्ते हुए अनेक योजनाएं, जो 2014 से पूवर् मȂ कभी हमारी सोच व कायर् शैली का 
िहÎसा नहीं बनीं, आज धरातल पर हȅ, व
े क ृिष व िकसान को मज़बूती Ģदान कर रही हȅ, जैसे 
'Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान सÇमान िनिध', िकसान को पȂशन, अब 70 वषर् स े ऊपर क े Ģत्येक नागिरक को 
पांच लाख वाली आयुÍमान योजना, मृदा परीक्षण, ' नमो डर्ोन दीदी', ' फसल बीमा योजना', 
ितलहन व दलहन पर भी एम.एस.पी और ' राÍटर्ीय क ृिष बाजार' (e-NAM) आिद  अन्य अनेक 
योजनाओं क े माध्यम से हम इस िदशा मȂ ठोस कदम उठाने क े िलए Ģितबǉ हȅ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): ध
न्यवाद मैडम। 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी:
 और पूणर् िवÌवास है िक हमारे Ģयासȗ से एक सशƪ और समृǉ भारत का 
िनमार्ण हो रहा है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
162
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान):  अगली Îपीकर Ǜीमती साधना िंसह जी।   
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी: मैडम, मुझे एक िमनट का समय दीिजए।...(Ëयवधान)... आप मुझे दो लाइन 
बोलने दीिजए।                 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): I am sorry, Madam. साधना जी, आप 
बोिलए। साधना जी, आप शुरू  करȂ, आपका समय जा रहा है।  
 
Ǜीमती साधना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आज मȅ सदन मȂ बजट 2024-25 पर 
अपनी बात रखने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका आभार Ëयƪ करती
 हूं। महोदया, देश क े यशÎवी 
Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी: मैडम, मुझे एक िमनट का समय दीिजए।...(Ëयव धान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KH AN): Madam, nothing is going on 
record. 
 
Ǜीमती साधना िंसह: महोदया, देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
लगातार तीसरी बार गिठत सरकार का बजट सवर्जन िहताय, सवर्जन सुखाय क े संकÊप को 
दशार्ता है।  माननीय मोदी जी को ढेर सारी बधाई देते हȅ, िवǄ म
ंतर्ी जी को बधाई देते हȅ और क ृिष 
मंतर्ी जी को बधाई देते हȅ। िनÌचय ही यह बजट देश क े अमृतकाल का है और गरीबȗ क े कÊयाण 
का बजट है। जो Ģधा
न मंतर्ी जी का दूरदिर्शता और िवकिसत भारत क े संकÊप को समिर्पत है। 
सही मायने मȂ यह बजट िवकास क े क ृतसंकिÊपत Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े ǎारा िकसानȗ, युवाओं, 
मिहलाओं, गरीबȗ, वंिचतȗ क े िवकास का राÎता तय करता  है। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े इसी संकÊप का 
पिरणाम है िक जनता ने तीसरी बार Ģधान मंतर्ी जी पर भरोसा कर समथर्न मȂ ऐितहािसक जनादेश 
िदया है। क ृिष एवं िवकास क े साथ ही इस बजट मȂ गर्ामीण िवकास क े िलए बड़े िनणर्य हȅ। क ृिष क े 
क्षेतर् मȂ िकसानȗ क े लाभ वृिǉ हेतु कÊ
याणकारी िनणर्य िलए गए हȅ, िजनमȂ उत्पादन की वृिǉ, 
िवपणन ËयवÎथा, सुरिक्षत भंडारण और अनेकȗ Ëयावसाियक ǎार खुले हȅ। बहनȗ क े  जीवन मȂ 
बदलाव लाने क े िलए तीन करोड़ लखपित दीदी बनाने का लÑय िनधार्िरत करना और उनके  
जीवन कर्ांितकारी पिरवतर्न होगा और गर्ामीण मिहलाएं भी आत्मिनभर्र बनȂगी। इस बजट मȂ 2047 
मȂ िवकिसत भारत का जो रोडमैप है, मȅ कहना चाहती हूं िक भारतीय अथर्ËयवÎथा सही िदशा मȂ 
चल रही है और सुनहरे भिवÍय की ओर अगर्सर है। कोरोना जैसी महामारी का दंश झेलने क े बाद 
भी भारत
 दुिनया की पांचवीं सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन गया है और आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ हम दुिनया 
की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बनने की ओर अगर्सर ह
ȅ। महोदय, देश की अन्नदाता िकसानȗ 
क े िलए क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ उत्पादनकतार् और आय की वृिǉ क े िलए उन्नत और वातावरण मȂ अनुक ू ल 
क ृिष बागवानी क े 32 फसलȗ की 109 Ģकार की िकÎमȂ लाने क े िलए फ ैसले का Îवागत
 करती हूं। 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
163

इसके  अितिरƪ िकसानȗ क े िलए क्लÎटर बनाकर भंडारण की आपूिर्त, ढ ुलाई और आसान बाजार 
का अवसर देने क े िलए मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और क ेन्दर्ीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी की सराहना करती हूं।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मेरी पािरवािरक पृÍठभूिम भी िकसान की है, इसिलए मȅ Îवयं और 
देश क े िकसानȗ की तरफ से यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, क ेन्दर्ीय िवǄ म
ंतर्ी जी और क ृिष मंतर्ी जी का 
आभार Ëयƪ करती हूं। मȅ, उǄर Ģदेश क े जनपद चंदौली की िनवासी हूं, िजसकी सीमा, देश क े 
यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, वाराणसी, जहां से वे लड़ते हȅ, उससे जुड़ा हुआ चंदौली है और िबहार का 
बॉडर्र भी है और नक्सल क्षेतर् जनपद भी है। अब तो नक्सल दस साल से खत्म हो गया है। चंदौली 
को धान क े कटोरे क े नाम स
े भी जाना जाता है। यह सावर्भौिमक है और धान क े कटोरे क े नाम से 
चिर्चत है। चंदौली बड़ी संख्या मȂ िकसानȗ की आय और जीवन Îतर को संचािलत करती है। Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी क
े  क ृिष क े क्षेतर् मȂ पूवर् मȂ िकए गए Ģयासȗ और उदारीकरण का Ģमाण है िक मेरे...(समय 
की घंटी)... क्या मैडम, मेरे बोलने का समय समाÃत हो गया है? 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. फौिजया खान): आपका समय समाÃत हो रहा ह
ै। आपके  पास पांच िमनट का 
समय है।   
 
Ǜीमती साधना िंसह: और युवाओं क े ǎारा फ ूलȗ और सिÅजयȗ की खेती मȂ बढ़कर िहÎसा िलया जा 
रहा है। महोदया, मȅ आपको बता देना चाहती हूं िक 2019-2020 मȂ चंदौली की मातर् 25 िकसानȗ 
ǎारा काले चावल की खेती, िजसको Åलैक राइस कहते हȅ, Ģारंभ हुई, िजसका लÑय िसफर् क ृिष 
कायर् क े िलए बीज की मातर्
ा बढ़ाना था। इसका पिरणाम हुआ िक 2020-21 मȂ 1,400 िंक्वटल और 
2021-22 मȂ 2,800 िंक्वटल की पैदावार ह
ुई। इस काले चावल का िनयार्त कतर, आÎटर्ेिलया, 
इग्लȅड सिहत कई देशȗ मȂ हुआ ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): मैडम, आप समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
Ǜीमती साधना िंसह: इसे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा एक्सीलȂस पुरÎकार िदया गया। इस चावल 
को जब लैब मȂ ट
ेÎट करवाया गया, तो पता चला िक यह चावल उǄम पोषक तत्वȗ से भरपूर है। 
...(समय की घंटी)... वतर्मान मȂ यह िडिजटल...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. फौिजया खान): आपके  बोलने का समय समाÃत हो गया है।  
 
Ǜीमती साधना िंसह: महोदया, आपने सभी को एक
-दो िमनट का समय िदया है, मुझे भी एक 
िमनट का समय दे दीिजए।            
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. फौिजया खान): अगले Îपीकर हȅ माननीय Ǜी क े. आर. सुरेश रेƿी जी। Ãलीज, 
आप बैठ जाइए। Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy; five minutes. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
164
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी क े. आर. सुरेश रेƿी (तेलंगाना): धन्यवाद मैडम। मȅ पहले तो िशवराज जी को बधाई देता हूं 
because he has taken up the responsibility of a very cha llenging Agriculture Ministry. 
हाउस मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को तो काफी बधाइयां िमली हȅ, मगर मȅ समझता हूं िक िशवराज जी को 
भी बधाई िमलनी चािहए
 और सारे हाउस की भी, he needs the encouragement. Why I said, 
a right man for the challenging job, यह मȅ इसिलए कह रहा हूं, क्यȗिक he is a proven 
horse. वे पहले जब मध्य Ģदेश क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे - हम दूर रहते थे, मगर करीब से उनका वकर् 
कÊचर देखा है - िजस तरह से तेलंगाना और मध्य Ģदेश मȂ एगर्ीकÊचर को डेवलपमȂट हुआ, मȅ 
समझता हूं िक सारे देश क े िलए एक glaring example है। 2014 मȂ तेलंगाना बना, वहां पर िसफर् 
60 lakh tonn
es of production of paddy होती थी और 10 साल  मȂ 30-40 हजार से बढ़कर 
एकदम साढ़े तीन करोड़ का Ģो
डक्शन हुआ है। उसी तरह से सोया और दूसरी तरह की, जो 
कर्ॉÃस होती हȅ, we take a good example of Shi vraj Ji from Madhya Pradesh. मȅ 
challenging इसिलए कहता हूं, क्यȗिक challenge आज िशवराज जी क े िलए यह होगा िक 
िजतना पैसा एगर्ीकÊचर िमिनÎटर्ी को िदया गया है, वह खचर् करना है। िरकॉडर् यह बता ता है िक 
िपछले दो-तीन साल मȂ, जो एलॉटमȂट एगर्ीकÊचर िमिनÎटर्ी क े िलए हुआ है, वह खचर् हुआ ही नहीं 
है। इसिलए पहला challenge तो जो अलोके शन है, उसे खचर् करने का है। मुझे पूरी उÇमीद है िक 
आपकी लीडरिशप मȂ, definitely, th
e Agriculture and the farmers of the country will 
prosper. 
 Second suggestion, यह बहुत इÇपॉटȄट सजेशन है, क्यȗिक आपको बुिनयादी अनुभव 
है, ground level का अनुभव है, तो क्यȗ न मनरेगा और एगर्ीकÊचर को िंलक कर िदया जाए। कल 
ही फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर ने बजट Îपीच क े माध्यम से industry मȂ employment-linked incentives 
का अनाउन्समȂट िकया ह
ै। अगर इंडिÎटर्यिलÎट्स कोई एÇÃलॉयमȂट िकर्एट करते हȅ, तो िजस 
तरीके  से वह incentive वहां िदया गया, उसी तरीके  से आप सोिचए िक यह मनरेगा मȂ भी रखा 
जाए। जब हम मनरेगा का अलोके शन देखते हȅ, तो गवनर्मȂट  बहुत tight-fisted है। दो साल से 60 
हजार करोड़ रुपय े ही अनाउ
न्स करती आ रही है, मगर खचर् होता है करीबन 90 हजार करोड़। 
इसिलए आप िकतने भी tight-fisted हो, the pressure of work रूरल  एिरया मȂ, जो Ģेशर बढ़ 
रहा है, उससे आपको ज्यादा खचर् करना पड़
 रहा है। So, this way, if you link up both, there 
will be a saving for the Government, th ere will be a saving for the farmer, क्यȗिक 
िकसान को मजदूर भी िमलता है। मनरेगा मȂ आप िसफर् जो लेबर कÇपोनȂट है, उसको आप 
एगर्ीकÊचर से िंलक कीिजए।  So, that way, the farmer tends to benefit and then also the 
Government tends to save some money. This is a suggestion.  
 Second यह होता है िक आप एगर्ीकÊचर मȂ दो मुǈे अच्छी तरह से जानते हȅ, एक तो 
input cost, जो फामर्र की हो रही है, उसमȂ आप लोग और Îटेट गवनर्मȂट काफी काम कर रही है, 
डैÇस बना रहे हȅ, सिÅसडीज़ दे रहे हȅ, उसके  बावजूद भी there is still a dearth. उसमȂ काफी 
कमी है। आप उसको कट करने क े बारे मȂ सोिचए। एगर्ीकÊचर क
े  िलए, जो mechanical 
products िकसान खरीदता है, जैसे टर्ैक्टर हो या और क ु छ हो, उस पर अभी भी जीएसटी लगती 
है। Try to see if you can give a 10-year GST holiday for the kisan. मैडम, अब रही बात 
आउटपुट की, तो आउटपुट मȂ कहा जाता है िक इंिडया नÇबर वन इसमȂ, इसमȂ, इसमȂ है, मगर 
[ 1 August, 2024 ]
165

Ģोडिक्टिवटी मȂ नहीं है। अगर चाइना मȂ एक एकड़ मȂ 50 बै ग्स चावल िनकलता है, तो इंिडया मȂ 
िसफर् 30 बैग ही िनकलते हȅ। At least 30-50 per cent productivity loss हो रहा है। महोदया, मȅ 
एक छोटा example देता हूं। ...(समय की घंटी)..मैडम, दो िमनट दे दीिजए। मȅ बीआरएस पाटीर् 
का हूँ, Äलोर लीडर हूं, चार लोग
 हȅ, िसफर् दो िमनट से क ु छ नहीं होता है, क्यȗिक सभी क ु छ 
इÇपॉटȄट है। For example, मȅने इनपुट कॉÎट की बात कही है। मैडम, जब Ģॉडिक्टिवटी की बात 
करते हȅ, तो मȅ आपको पÊसस क े बारे मȂ एक example देता हूं। मैडम, छोटी-मोटी क ु छ िफगसर् 
इधर-उधर हो सकती हȅ, For example, the enti
re world मȂ 100 lakh hectares मȂ पÊसेस कर्ॉप 
गर्ो की जाती है और उसका आउटपुट करीबन 100 lakh tons आ रहा है। इस Ģकार से उसकी 
एवरेज करीबन 1,000 क े.जी. पर हेक्टेयर होती है। महोदया, यह वÊडर् की एवरेज है, लेिकन जब 
इसी को इंिडया से क
ं पेयर करते हȅ, तो पÊसेस मȂ कहा जाता है िक इंिडया नंबर वन है एकरेज मȂ, 
इंिडया का नंबर वन है Ģोडक्शन मȂ, मगर Ģोडिक्टिवटी म
Ȃ अगर दुिनया की एवरेज 1015 है, तो 
िंहदुÎतान की िसफर् 700 है। So, a lot needs to be done. 
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): You have to wind up, Sir. 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY: Madam, let me conclude with one suggestion. The 
suggestion is, अगर आप एिगर्कÊचर को इंकर्ीज़ करना चाह रहे हȅ, एिगर्कÊचर Ģोडिक्टिवटी 
बढ़ाना चाह रहे हȅ, तो thrust should be on irrigation and link-up. ज ैसे एिगर्कÊचर िमिनÎटर्ी 
है, आपकी अलग-अलग िमिनÎटर्ीज़ हȅ, उनमȂ there is lack of coordination. हमार े िजले 
िनजामाबाद मȂ -- I would conclude with this -- आपन े हमȂ Turmeric Board िदए  हȅ। मैडम, 
करीबन आठ महीने हुए हȅ, लेिकन आज तक उसका क ु छ पता नहीं है, क ु छ िनशानी नहीं है। एक 
तरफ Turmeric Board ह
ै और दूसरी तरफ Turmeric Research Centre है। उसी कमरपÊली 
िजले मȂ एक जगह पर Turmeric Research Centre बना है और एक और जगह पर Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी ने आकर Turmeric Board एनाउंस िकया है, तो  Why don't you link them up and start 
it? ...( Time-bell rings .)... वƪ की कमी है। Madam, thank you very much for the 
opportunity.             
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (DR. FAUZIA KHAN): Thank you very much, hon. 
Member. The next speaker is Shri Sanjay Yadav. He is not present. 
The House stands adjourned to m eet at 11.00 a.
m. on Friday, the 2 nd 
August, 2024. 
The House then adjourned at forty-seven minutes past seven of the clock 
 till eleven of the clock on Friday, the 2nd August, 2024. 
166
[RAJYA SABHA]

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 