Vol. 260 Thursday , 
No. 6  27 th July, 2023 
5 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Birthday Greetings (page 1) 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 3) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Finance -
Laid on the Table (page 4) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj - Laid on the Table (page 5) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Par liamentary Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment - Laid on the Table (pages 5 - 6) 
 
Statements by Ministers- 
Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the 351st 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports - Laid on the Table (page 6) 
 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the 126th 
and 127 th Reports of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice - Laid on the 
Table (pages 6 - 7) 
Status of implementation of recommend ations/observations contained in the 
367th, 369 th and 374 th Reports of the Departme nt-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Science and Technology Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change - Laid on the Table (page 7) 
Status of implementation of recommend ations/observations contained in the 
340
th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture - Laid on the Table (page 8) 
Status of implementation of recommend ations/observations contained in the 
243rd report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs - Laid on the Table (page 8) 
Status of implementation of recommend ations/observations contained in the 46 th 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology - Laid on the Table (page  8) 
 
Suo-moto Statement by Minister- 
Latest Developments in India’s Foreign Policy (pages 8 - 17) 
 
Announcement by the Chair (pages 18 - 20) 
 
Recommendations of the Business Advisory Committee –Laid on the Table  (pages 
20 - 22) 
 
Government Bill - 
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023 - Passed (pages 22 - 63) 
 
Special Mentions- 
Safety on Railway premises –Laid on the Table (pages 63 - 64) 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
      http://parliamentofindia.nic.in  
E-mail   : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

Demand to rename the country as Bharat  by amending Article-1 of the Indian 
Constitution (pages 64 -65) 
Demand for enhancement of amount under MPLAD Scheme (page 65) 
Need for development of National Strategy for optimizing Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
for Accelerating India (AI) (pages 65 - 66) 
Demand to ban the online sale of Medicines and to regulate e-pharmacies in India 
with stringent law – Laid on the table (pages  66 - 67) 
Demand to consider railway recruitmen t of Course Completed Act Apprentices 
(CCAAs) (pages 67 - 68) 
 
 
 
 [Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise
] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
Thursday, the 27th July, 2023/5 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Birthday Greetings, ...(Interruptions)... I take the opportunity to 
wish birthday greetings to hon. Member of Parliament, Dr. Amee Yajnik. 
DR. AMEE YAJNIK (Gujarat): Thank you, Sir. 
MR. CHAIRMAN: She is a Member of this august House since April, 2018. She came 
to be elected from the State of Gujarat (unopposed). Like many others in this House, 
as also myself, she comes from the legal fr aternity. A Doctorate in Law from Stanford 
University, Shrimati Yajnik has authored books pertaining to electricity and power 
sector reforms. Her books, 'Electricity Re forms in India' and 'India's Power Sector 
Reforms' came to be published by the Institute for International studies at Stanford 
University. She is a founding Member of All India Federation of Women Lawyers. She 
has consistently espoused gender justice and advocated legal rights awareness at 
ground level.  
On my own and on your behalf, I wish her a long, healthy and happy life. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Papers to be l
aid on the Table. 
I. Notification of the Ministry of Pers onnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
II. Report and Accounts (2021-22) of the NRA, New Delhi and related papers
कािर्मक, लोक िशकायत और पȂशन मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( डा. िजतेन्दर् िंसह): महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ   : -      
I.
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) Notification No. G.S.R. 487 

(E), dated the 6 th July, 2023, publishing the A ll India Services (Death-cum-
Retirement Benefits) Rules, 2023, under sub-section (2) of Section 3  of the All India 
Services Act, 1951. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9845/17/23] 
 
       II. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the First Annual Report and Accounts of the 
National Recruitment Agency (NRA), New Delhi, for the year 2021-22, together with 
the Auditor's Report on  the Accounts.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9705/17/23] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
 
पयार्वरण, वन और जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी अिǚनी क ुमार चौबे):  महोदय, 
मȅ राÍटर्ीय राजधानी और िनकटवतीर् क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ वायु क्वािलटी Ģबंध आयोग अिधिनयम, 2021 की  
धारा 25 की उप धारा (3) क े अधीन राÍटर्ीय राजधानी और िनकटवतीर् क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ वायु क्वािलटी Ģबंध 
आयोग (पराली जलाने पर पयार्व
रणीय Ģितकर का अिधरोपण, संगर्ह और उपयोग) िनयम, 2023 
को Ģकािशत करने वाली पयार्वरण, वन और जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ालय, अिधसूचना 
सं.सा.का.िन.  322 (अ ), िदनांक 28 अĢैल, 2023 की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूँ। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9757/17/23] 
 
Reports and Accounts (2020-21 and 2021-22) of IBC, New Delhi; CIHTS, Varanasi 
and related papers 
   
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE (SHRIMATI 
MEENAKASHI LEKHI): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each  (in English and Hindi) of 
the following papers:— 
 
(i) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the  International Buddhist Confederation 
(IBC), New Delhi,  for the year 2020-21 , together with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Confederation. 
 (c) Statement  giving  reason s  for  the  delay  in  laying  the  papers  mentioned 
at (a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9669/17/23] 
 
 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

(ii) (a) Annual Report of the Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies (CIHTS), 
Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies (CIHTS), 
Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2021-22, and the Audit 
Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9670/17/23] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Labour and Employment,  
 
Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी रामेǚर तेली):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूँ   :-  
 
(i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Labour and Employment, 
Notification No. S.O. 2060 (E), dated the 3 rd May, 2023, issued under sub-
section (3) of Section 1 of the Code on Social Security, 2020, appointing, the 3rd 
day of May, 2023, as the date on which certain provisions of the Code on Social 
Security, 2020 shall come into force, 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9771/17/23] 
  
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Labour and Employment, 
Notification No. S.O. 2061 (E), dated the 3
rd May, 2023, issued under sub-
section (1) of Section 16 of the Code on  Social Security, 2020, for notifying the 
increase in employers' contribution fo r eligible members under the Employees' 
Pension Scheme, 1995. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9772/17/23] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and 
Hindi) of the Ministry of Information an d Broadcasting Notification No. G.S.R. 451 
(E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, publishing the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting 
Corporation of India) Stenographer Posts (Amendment) Recruitment Rules, 2023, 
under Section 34 of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. 
                                                                            
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9693/17/23] 
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
3

REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
   
Ǜी सुशील क ुमार मोदी (िबहार): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग -संबंिधत िवǄ संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित 
क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक -एक Ģित  (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं   : - 
 
(i) Fifty-ninth Report on ‘Cyber security an d rising incidence of cyber/white collar 
crimes’ of the Ministry of Finance (Depar tment of Financial Services), Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology and Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(ii) Sixtieth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-third Report of the 
Committee on ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big-Tech Companies’ of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs; 
(iii) Sixty-first Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the 
Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24)' of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expe nditure, Financial Se rvices, Investment 
& Public Asset Management and Public Enterprises); 
(iv) Sixty-second Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report of the 
Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24)' of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue); 
(v) Sixty-third Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of the 
Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24)' of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs; 
(vi) Sixty-fourth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-seventh Report of the 
Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24)' of the Ministry of Planning; and 
(vii) Sixty-fifth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report of the 
Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24 )' of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation.
 
 
 
 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ  
 
SHRIMATI SHANTA CHHETRI (West Bengal): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj:- 
 
(i) Thirty-second Report on Pradhan Mantri  Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) of the 
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development); 
(ii) Thirty-third Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-ninth report of  the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Rura l Development (Department of Rural 
Development); 
(iii) Thirty-fourth Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirtieth report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-
24)’ of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Land Resources); and 
(iv) Thirty-fifth Report on action ta ken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-first report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
 
SHRIMATI MAMATA MOHANTA (O disha): Sir, I lay on th e Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following Report s of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (2022-23):- 
 
(i) Forty-eighth Report on the actio n taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the Commi ttee contained in their Thirty-Fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Rev iew of the Functioning of the National 
Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of 
Minority Affairs; 
(ii) Forty-ninth Report on the actio n taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report of the 
Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘R eview of the functioning of National 
Institutes established for different types of disabilities’ of the Department of 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
5

Empowerment of Persons with Disabilit ies (Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment); and 
(iii) Fiftieth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the Co mmittee contained in their Forty-Fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘D emands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment). 
 
       
STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 
 
 Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the 351st 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports 
 
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING; AND  THE MINISTER OF 
YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS (SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR): Sir, I lay a 
statement regarding Status of implemen tation of recommendations/observations 
contained in the 351st Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Education, Women, Childre n, Youth and Sports on Demands for 
Grants (2023-24) pertaining to the Department of Youth Affairs, Ministry of Youth 
Affairs and Sports.                                                                                                     
 
 
Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the  
126th and 127th Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
 Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY; 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE PRIME MINISTER'S OFFICE; THE MINISTER OF 
STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PERSONNE L, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS; 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE DEPARTMEN T OF SPACE (DR. JITENDRA SINGH): 
Sir, I lay the following statements regarding:— 
 
(a) Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in 
the  126
th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grie vances, Law and Justice on Demands 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

for Grants (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions. 
(b) Status of implementation of reco mmendations/observations contained in 
the   127 th Report of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Personnel, Public Grie vances, Law and Justice on Demands 
for Grants (2023-24) pertaining to the Department of Administrative 
Reforms and Public Grievances and Department of Pension and Pensioners' 
Welfare, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.  
 
Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the 367th, 
369th and 374th Reports of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
  
DR. JITENDRA SINGH: Sir, I lay the following statements regarding:— 
 
(a) Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in 
t h e      3 6 7 th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in its 359
th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23)  pertaining to the Department of 
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology.  
(b) Status of implementation of reco mmendations/observations contained in 
the 369 th Report of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change on the action taken   by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in its 361 st 
Report on Demands for Grants (2022-23)  pertaining to the Department of 
Science and Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology. 
(c) Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in 
the 374 th Report of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Climate 
Change on Demands for Grants (2023-24 ) pertaining to the Department of 
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology.  
 
 
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
7

Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the  
340th  Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
 Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE; THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE (SHRI ARJUN RAM 
MEGHWAL): Sir, I lay  a statement regarding Status of implementation of 
recommendations/observations contained in the 340 th Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) pertaining to the Ministry of Culture. 
 
Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the  
243rd  report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee on Home Affairs 
 
उǄर पूवीर् क्षेतर् िवकास मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी; तथा सहकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी 
बी.एल. वमार्): महोदय, मȅ उǄर पूवीर् क्षेतर् िवकास मंतर्ालय की अनुदान मांगȗ (2023-24) क े 
संबंध मȂ िवभाग संबंिधत गृह कायर् संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े 243वȂ Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट 
िसफािरशȗ/समुिƪयȗ क े कायार्न्व यन  की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ वƪËय सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ।     
                                                                             
Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the 46th  
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee  
on Communications and Information Technology 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND DAIRYING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING (DR. L.  MURUGAN): Sir, I lay a statement 
regarding Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in 
the 46 th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technol ogy on Demands for Grants (2023-24) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.   
 
 
SUO-MOTO STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
 
Latest Developments in India’s Foreign Policy 
 
THE MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (SHRI S. JAISHANKAR): Mr. Chairman, Sir, 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

I rise to apprise this august House of the key foreign policy engagements and 
initiatives taken by India since the Budget Session, which ended on 6th April, 2023. 
    This period witnessed several cr ucial high level diplomatic engagements 
including interactions by the hon. Presid ent, hon. Vice-President and hon. Prime 
Minister with foreign counterparts, in Indi a and abroad. I myself visited a number of 
nations, as did our Ministers of State.  And we received many of our foreign 
colleagues here in India. Through these efforts at multiple levels, we were able to 
advance our national objectives and intere sts in a volatile and uncertain world. 
...(Interruptions)... 
  In terms of the diplomatic engagements of hon. President, she hosted the King 
of Cambodia from May 29-31 on his State Vi sit. This marked the celebrations of the 
70th anniversary of the establishment of di plomatic relations between our countries. 
Hon. President was the Chief Guest of the celebrations commemorating the 150 years 
of the arrival of Indians in Suriname in June. She was conferred Suriname's highest 
distinction - "Grand Order of the Chain of  the Yellow Star." Hon. President also 
visited Serbia in the same month. ...(Interruptions)... 
    Hon. Vice-President visited the United Kingdom on May 5-6 to attend the 
coronation ceremony of King Charles III. He interacted with various leaders, including 
the Presidents of Germany, Israel and Braz il. He also met with Indian students and 
members of the diaspora. In June, the hon.  Vice-President engaged his counterparts 
from Zimbabwe and Gambia in New Delhi an d received the Deputy Prime Minister of 
Democratic Republic of the Congo. ...(Interruptions)... 
    During this period, hon. Prime Minist er visited seven countries. Bilateral visits 
were made to Australia, the United States , Egypt, France and the U.A.E. The Prime 
Minister participated in the Quad and G7 meetings in Japan and co-chaired the 3rd 
FIPIC Summit in Papa New Guinea. He also  hosted the Prime Minister of Nepal and 
the President of Sri Lanka in New Delhi. ...(Interruptions)... 
The official State Visit to the USA of the Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi 
from June 20-23, 2023 was only the second by an Indian Prime Minister. He was also 
accorded the rare privilege of addressing the Joint Session of the US Congress for a 
second time. In Washington DC, Prime Mini ster was given a formal State welcome at 
the White House. As a special gesture, the US Government invited nearly 8,000 
members of the Indian Diaspora to witnes s the ceremony. The Prime Minister held 
bilateral talks with the US President on J une 22. President Biden hosted both a State 
Dinner and a private dinner at the White Hous e. The Prime Minister also interacted 
with several CEOs of tech companies indivi dually, as also in a round-table that was 
co-chaired with President Biden. He invited them to strengthen their presence and 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
9

operations in India. The Prime Minist er addressed young entrepreneurs and 
participated in a skill and innovation meet ing along with First Lady, Dr. Jill Biden. 
...(Interruptions)... 
The key outcomes of the visit were refl ected in a Joint Statement, as follows: 
(i) Both sides agreed to augment technology cooperation, especially through the 
initiative for Critical and Emerging Tec hnologies (iCET) focussing on artificial 
intelligence, semiconductors, space, quantum, and telecom. India was included as a 
member in the Mineral Security Partne rship, which aims to accelerate the 
development of sustainable global crit ical energy minerals supply chains. 
...(Interruptions)... (ii) Under a Defence Industri al Cooperation Roadmap, the 
defence industries and startups of both count ries announced their intent to engage in 
co-production and other activities. A US company, GE Aerospace, announced that 
they would manufacture jet engines in India th rough transfer of technology to HAL for 
our Light Combat Aircrafts indigenous production. ...(Interruptions)... (iii) Indian 
Space Research Organisation (ISRO) signed the Artemis Accords with the US 
National Aeronautics and Space Administra tion (NASA) for cooperation in civil 
exploration of outer space for peaceful pu rposes. NASA and ISRO announced that 
they would cooperate in human space flig ht and launch a joint effort to the 
International Space Station in 2024. ...(Interruptions)... (iv) 
Both countries 
resolved six outstanding bilateral trade disputes in WTO -- Mr. Chairman, 
Sir, I stress, this is very, very ex traordinary -- through mutually agreed 
solutions. ...(Interruptions)... They agreed to strengthen collaboration 
between the respective SMEs and boost innovation linkages. 
...(Interruptions)...  Mr. Chairman, Sir, this too is a very important step. It 
will take forward the semi-conductor mi ssion.  And, the Prime Minister is 
very deeply committed to it. (v) In  the semiconductor domain, three US 
companies made announcements for building a semiconductor assembly 
and test facility in India; and, for tr aining Indian engineers and workforce. 
...(Interruptions)... (vi) In the telecommunication sector, both sides 
agreed to collaborate towards a b ilateral "Trusted Network/Trusted 
Sources" framework; enable participation of Indian companies in the U.S. 
Rip and Replace Program; and undertake ORAN reciprocal pilot projects. 
...(Interruptions)... India and USA also agreed to accelerate cooperation 
in green hydrogen and other emerging technologies. ...(Interruptions)... 
(vii) To deepen the people-to-people ties which are anchored in a 4.4 
million Indian Diaspora in USA, the U. S. announced its decision to open 
two new consulates in Bengaluru and Ahmedabad. ...(Interruptions)...  
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

India will take steps to operationalize it s consulate in Seattle later this year 
and identify locations for two more new Consulates in USA. 
...(Interruptions)... (viii) Both countries agreed to further strengthen 
higher education partnerships. ...(Interruptions)... After the Official State 
visit, the U.S. Government has also returned to the Government of India 
105 cultural antiquities that were illegally trafficked. ...(Interruptions)... 
(ix) Given their shared vision of a fr ee, open and inclusive Indo- Pacific, 
both countries agreed to commence an Indian Ocean Dialogue and USA 
announced that it would join the Indo -Pacific Ocean Initiative that was 
announced by India in 2019. ...(Interruptions)... (x) India and USA will 
work together for development of Digital Public Infrastructure and 
strengthen Multilateral Development Banks to address global challenges. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Hon. Members would also be in terested to know that Prime 
Minister led the Ninth International Yoga Day on 21 st J u n e  a t  t h e  U N  
Headquarters in New York, which involved 135 nationalities and set a 
Guinness World Record. ...(Interruptions)...  
Earlier, hon. Prime Minister had participated in the G7 Summit and 
the Quad Leaders' Meeting in Hiroshima on 20 th May, 2023. 
...(Interruptions)... At the Quad meeting, the leaders reviewed recent 
developments in the Indo-Pacific an d discussed opportunities for Quad 
to work further on its priorities.  ...(Interruptions)... They released the 
Quad Leaders' Vision Statement - Enduring Partners for the Indo-Pacific. 
They also announced a new Clean Energy Supply Chains Initiative, a 
QUAD Infrastructure Fellowships Program and a new QUAD Partnership 
for Cable Connectivity and Resilience. ...(Interruptions)... To take 
forward QUAD's commitment to collabor ate for vendor diversification of 
telecom networks in the Indo-Pacific, leaders announced cooperation 
with Palau to establish the first ORAN deployment in the Pacific. 
...(Interruptions)... The leaders also released a QUAD statement on 
critical and emerging technology standards, apart from reviewing the 
progress made under the Indo-Pacific Maritime Partnership for Maritime 
Domain Awareness. ...(Interruptions)... Leaders also launched a Quad 
Investors' Network. ...(Interruptions)... The Prime Minister has invited 
Quad Leaders to India for th e next Quad Summit in 2024. 
...(Interruptions)...  
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
11

Hon. Prime Minister participated in the outreach session of the G-7 
Summit on 20th May, 2023. ...(Interruptions)...  He held interactions with 
Presidents of Indonesia, South Korea, France, Ukraine, and Brazil; the 
Presidents of the EU Commission and the European Council; Prime 
Ministers of Japan, Vietnam, UK, Cook Islands; the Chancellor of 
Germany; and the UN Secretary-General. ...(Interruptions)...   
Mr. Chairman, Sir, the Prime Minister made his landmark visit to Australia, 
thereafter, holding a bilate ral meeting with his Australian counterpart on May 24.  
…(Interruptions)… Signing a Migration and Mobility Partnership Arrangement was one 
of the highlights of the visit, signifying  our commitment to support students and 
explore the global workplace.  …(Interruptions)… During his stay, the hon. Prime 
Minister interacted with prominent public  figures, participated in a Business 
Roundtable with Australian CEOs and addre ssed the Indian community in Sydney.  
…(Interruptions)…  He joined his Australian counterpa rt to lay the foundation of the 
‘Little India Gateway’ at Harris Park, Sydney. The Prime Minister also announced our 
intention to establish a new Consulate in Brisbane, which will, definitely, help the NRIs 
in Australia.  …(Interruptions)… 
 From July 13-14, 2023, the hon. Prime Mi nister visited France at the invitation 
of their President.  …(Interruptions)… He was the Guest of Honour at the Bastille Day 
Parade where a tri-services Indian armed forces contingent, participated in the 
parade. …(Interruptions)… This included soldiers of the Punjab Regiment that had 
defended Paris 107 years ago in World War-I.  In a rare honour, the Prime Minister 
was also conferred with the Grand Cross of  the Legion of Honour, France’s highest 
civilian award. …(Interruptions)… Mr. Chairman, Sir, I think it should be a matter of 
pride for all Indians.  He held meetings wi th the President as well as the French Prime 
Minister and Presidents of the Senate and the National Assembly. …(Interruptions)…  
The Prime Minister separately interacted with  the Indian diaspora, the CEOs of Indian 
and French companies, and prominent French  personalities.  He also announced the 
setting up of an Indian Consulate in Marseille. …(Interruptions)…  India and France 
released a vision document: “Horizon 2047:  25th Anniversary of India-France 
Strategic Partnership, Towards a cen tury of India-France relations. ” 
…(Interruptions)… 
 On his way back, the hon. Prime Minister  visited the United Arab Emirates on 
July 15.  In Abu Dhabi, the Prime Minister held talks with the President of the UAE. 
…(Interruptions)… The visit resulted in concluding agreements on trade settlement in 
national currencies and inter-linking  of payments of Central Banks. …(Interruptions)… 
An MoU was signed for the establishment of an IIT-Delhi Campus in Abu Dhabi. This, 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

Sir, is a part of our initiative of ta king Indian Universities out of country . 
…(Interruptions)… The Prime Minister also receive d the President-designate of COP-
28. …(Interruptions)… 
  The month before, the hon. Prime Minist er paid a State visit to Egypt on 24-25 
June, 2023.  It was the first bilateral visit by an Indian P.M. to Egypt in 26 years.  On 
June 25, the Prime Minister held talks wi th the President of Egypt and signed an 
agreement to elevate India-Egypt bilateral ties to “Strategic Partnership. ” 
…(Interruptions)… Agreements were signed in the fiel ds of agriculture, protection and 
preservation of monuments and archaeological sites and competition laws. 
…(Interruptions)…  Additionally, direct flights betw een Delhi-Cairo sector and setting 
up of a Centre of Excellence of IT in Ca iro were announced. In  a special ceremony, 
the Prime Minister was conferred with the ‘Order of the Nile’, the highest State honour 
of Egypt. …(Interruptions)… 
 Another notable development in this pe riod was India’s co-hosting of the 3 rd 
Summit of the Forum for India-Pacific Isla nds Cooperation (FIPIC) jointly with the 
Papua New Guinea on 22 nd May, 2023 at Port Moresby. …(Interruptions)… The Prime 
Minister was received with exceptional wa rmth and courtesy by Pacific leaders, 
starting with his arrival. …(Interruptions)… And, Sir, all the hon. Members had an 
opportunity to see that arrival fo r themselves on the television. …(Interruptions)… He 
was conferred with the Grand Companion of  the Order of Logohu by the Governor-
General of Papua New Guinea, the Compan ion of the Order of Fiji by the Prime 
Minister of Fiji, which are the highest civilian awards of the two nations.  
…(Interruptions)… He was also presented with Ebak l, a symbol of leadership and 
wisdom, by the President of Palau. …(Interruptions)… 
 The main outcomes of the FIPIC Su mmit were: (i) Launch of Sustainable 
Coastal and Ocean Research Institute (SCORI) housed in Suva, Fiji. 
…(Interruptions)… (ii) Launch of the Data Warehous e for Empowering Pacific Island 
countries (DWEPIC), which hosts geo-spat ial data and has b een developed by 
ISRO. …(Interruptions)… (iii) The Prime Minister also  announced an action plan to 
strengthen the India-PIC partnership.  Th is includes, a 100-bedded regional super 
speciality hospital in Fiji; setting up of regional IT and cyber security training hub in 
Papua New Guinea; Sagar Amrit Scholarshi ps; Jaipur Foot Camp; SME development 
project; solarisation project for Government  buildings; desalination units for drinking 
water; supply of sea ambulances; setting up of dialysis units; creation of 24x7 
emergency helpline; setting up of a Jan Aushadhi Kendra abroad, to make cost-
effective and efficient pharmaceuticals avai lable; and setting up of yoga centers. 
…(Interruptions)… 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
13

     For the first time since joining the or ganization as a full member state, Sir, the 
hon. Prime Minister hosted the SCO Summit, the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization, of  Heads of State in a virtual format on 4th July, 2023. 
...(Interruptions)... The Summit adopted the New Delh i Declaration and two Joint 
Statements on Countering Radicalization and Cooperation in Digital Transformation. 
...(Interruptions)... During the course of India's Pr esidency, we successfully hosted 
15 Ministerial-level meetings, over 130 regular instit utional meetings and socio-cultural 
events with a key focus on SECURE, whic h is, Security, Economic development, 
Connectivity, Unity, Respect for Sovereignt y & territorial integrity and Environmental 
protection.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 Mr. Chairman, Sir, as part of the Neighbourhood First policy, engagements 
with immediate neighbours have been  prioritized over the last decade. 
...(Interruptions)... Two prominent visits that hon. Members should note are those of 
the Prime Minister of Nepal an d the President of Sri Lanka. ...(Interruptions)...  The 
Prime Minister of Nepal paid an official visit to India from May 31 to June 3. 
...(Interruptions)... After bilateral talks, the two Prime Ministers participated in virtual 
ground-breaking ceremonies of six project s, including integrated check-posts, 
railway lines, petroleum pipeline f acilities and transmission lines. ...(Interruptions)... 
The leaders virtually witnessed the handing ov er of the Kurtha-Bijalpura section of the 
railway line. ...(Interruptions)... Understandings reached incl uded that on electricity 
imports from Nepal as well as allowing expo rt of Nepal's electricity to Bangladesh 
using the Indian grid. ...(Interruptions)... India also committed to expand cross-
border petroleum pipeline infrastructure.  ...(Interruptions)... 
      Mr. Chairman, Sir, the President of Sri Lanka paid an official visit to India on 21 
July 2023, his first in his capacity as President. ...(Interruptions)... The Prime 
Minister and the President had productive  discussions and agreed on a vision 
document to promote connectivity and catalyse prosperity. ...(Interruptions)... This 
covered multiple facets including maritime, air, energy and power, trade, economic 
and financial, as well as pe ople-to-people connectivity. ...(Interruptions)... 
Agreements were concluded on developmen t projects in Trincomalee district, on 
animal husbandry & dairying, on rene wable energy, and on UPI interface. 
...(Interruptions)...  The Prime Minister discussed the issues related to the Tamil 
community in Sri Lanka and reiterated th e need to fulfil their aspirations. 
...(Interruptions)... He underlined the importance of implementing the 13th 
amendment and conducting provincial council elections. ...(Interruptions)... The 
Prime Minister also took up the issues of  Indian fishermen and requested Sri Lankan 
side to approach it on a humanitarian basis. ...(Interruptions)... 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

     Allow me, Sir, to briefly turn now to the subject of G20. During our Presidency, 
we have been able to focus attention on the most pressing challenges of humanity, 
especially faced by developing countries. ...(Interruptions)... This includes Mission 
LiFE for empowering climate-friendly lifesty les and the popularization of Millets to 
address the challenge of food security. ...(Interruptions)... We have also advocated 
an inclusive human-centric approach to climate action and development, as well as 
use of technology to transform the lives of people. ...(Interruptions)... 
      Since April 6, we have hosted the G20 Development Ministers' 
Meeting in Varanasi, the Agriculture Mi nisters' Meeting in Hyderabad, the 
Tourism Ministers' Meeting in Goa, the Education Ministers' Meeting in 
Pune and the Finance Ministers' arid Central Bank Governors' Meeting in 
Gandhinagar, ...(Interruptions)... Labour 
& Employment Ministers' 
Meeting in Indore, Energy Minister s' Meeting in Goa, Environment & 
Climate Sustainability Ministers' Meet ing in Chennai, and the Ministerial 
Meeting on Women Empowerment in Ga ndhinagar. As envisaged, we are 
realizing our intent to showcase India to the world. ...(Interruptions)... 
I would also like to share with the House that the Ministers of MEA 
have been equally active during this period.  
M y  o f f i c i a l  v i s i t s  w e r e  t o  U ganda, Ethiopia, Mo zambique, South 
Africa, Namibia and Tanzania in Afri ca, to Guyana, Panama, Colombia and 
Dominican Republic in Latin America,  apart from visiting Bangladesh, 
Sweden and Belgium. The visit to Latin America in cluded co-chairing the 
India-CARICOM and India-SICA Minister ial Meetings. Many of these visits 
were the first ever by an External Affairs Minister. ...(Interruptions)... 
   I also visited Indonesia for the Foreign Ministers' Meeting under the 
ASEAN-India format, East Asia Summit  and ASEAN Regional Forum. This 
also saw particip ation in the 2 nd India-Australia-Indone sia trilateral. After 
Jakarta, I travelled to Th ailand to co-chair the 12 th Foreign Ministers' 
Meeting of Mekong Ganga Cooperatio n Mechanism, while also attending 
the BIMSTEC. ...(Interruptions)... 
    In Sweden, I participated in the second EU Indo-Pacific  
Ministerial Forum and the inaugural session of the India- Europe-US 
Trilateral Forum. Along with my esteemed colleagues, the Commerce & 
Industries Minister and the Minister of  State for Electronics and Information 
Technology, we attended the first Mini sterial meeting of the India-EU Trade 
and Technology Council at Brussels. ...(Interruptions)...  
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
15

   In South Africa, I had the opportunity to take part in the  
BRICS Foreign Ministers' Meetin g and the Friends of BRICS  
Meeting. ...(Interruptions)... 
    In the same period, I have had the privilege to host my  
counterparts from the Republic of Korea, Israel, Philippines,  
Maldives and Japan apart from th e Deputy Prime Minister of  
Russia, and chairing the SCO Council of Foreign Mi nisters in Goa and the 
G20 Development Ministers' meeting in Varanasi. ...(Interruptions)... 
Our Ministers of State also activ ely engaged in promoting India's 
interests.  Shri Muraleedharan oversa w 'Operation Kaveri' from Jeddah in 
April, and paid official visits to Sa udi Arabia, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, 
Malaysia, Maldives and Syria.  Shrimati Meenakashi Lekhi ji visited Croatia, 
Slovenia and North Macedonia. Dr. Rajkumar Ranjan Singh ji visited 
Singapore and Fiji. ...(Interruptions)... 
   During our interlocutions, we noticed a growing interest  
among partners and business leaders to be part of India's growth story 
and engaged in developmen t partnerships. India's undertaking of greater 
responsibilities was widely welcomed and our views on ke y global issues 
taken very seriously. ...(Interruptions)... We aim to realize the Prime 
Minister's vision to make India a le ader in democratizing technology, a 
trusted geography and an important part of global supply chains. 
...(Interruptions)... 
   In our travels abroad, I am glad to report that we are now seen as a 
credible and effective development pa rtner. Our development partnership 
portfolio now spans 78 count ries and the hallmark of  these projects is that 
they are demand-driven, transp arent, empowerment oriented, 
environment friendly and rely on a consultative approach. 
...(Interruptions)... We have also been spearheading promotion of Digital 
Public Infrastructure and sharing be st practices in digital governance 
especially in the Global South. ...(Interruptions)... 
Hon. Members should also know that as part of India's 
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster  Relief (HADR) operations, India 
provided medical supplies and relief materials for the people of Myanmar 
affected by Cyclone Mocha . ...(Interruptions)... India also donated 25 
tons of medical aid to the people of Sudan. India supplied the first tranche 
(2500 MT) of the total 10 ,000 MT wheat to Afghanistan through Chabahar 
Port. Subsequent shipments are underway. ...(Interruptions)... Essential 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

and anti-cancer medicines were supp lied to Malawi, anti-TB drugs to 
Central African Republic, Fiji, Maldives, Sao Tome & Principe, and 
Tuvalu; and anti-Retrovi ral drugs to Fiji. Ten Haemodialysis chairs, 
operation theatre accessories and medi cines were also sent to Palau. 
...(Interruptions)... 
   Let me, Sir, take the opportun ity to mention an important rescue 
operation that took place a few months  ago. On 15 April, 2023, an armed 
conflict broke out between Sudane se Armed Forces (SAF) and Rapid 
Support Forces (RSF). ...(Interruptions)... In order to protect and 
evacuate the Indian ci tizens from Sudan, Operation Kaveri  was launched 
on 24 April, 2023. Indian nationals were brought to Port Sudan from 
different conflict zones an d then ferried to Jeddah,  using Indian Air Force 
aircraft and Indian Naval ships. ...(Interruptions)... During Operation 
Kaveri, like Operation Ganga, we not only evacu ated thousands of 
Indians, but also assisted in the evacuation of citizens from other 
countries. 4,075 Indian nationals were safely evacuated. 
...(Interruptions)... Our diplomats and our ar med forces displayed 
exemplary courage. I must mention,  Sir, to the House that many 
movements took place amidst firing an d one particular aircraft landing 
was very challenging. So, I would like  to underline that we have proven 
once again that India will never leave its people behind during a crisis, be 
it in Ukraine last year, or in Sudan in this one. ...(Interruptions)... 
We have also made consistent effort s to secure the release of Indian 
fishermen and civilians from our neighb ouring countries, in particular, 74 
from Sri Lanka and 398 from Pakistan.  
  In conclusion, Sir, at a time when international relations have 
become unprecedented and complex , our people-centric foreign policy, 
which is guided by the demands and as pirations of our society, has 
shown that India speaks as the voice of peace, of security, and of 
prosperity for all  as a force of global prudence and stability. 
...(Interruptions)... We have also vigorously defended our national 
interests. In 2022, at the beginning of the Amrit Kaal, India assumed the 
landmark G-20 Presidency. ...(Interruptions)... We will host the Summit 
this September. Our Presidency has invigorated our foreign policy and 
given more force to realize the Prime Minister's vision of an Atmanirbhar 
and Viksit Bharat that regains its rightful  place in the world.  
...(Interruptions)... Thank you. 
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
17

 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members ...(Interruptions)... Why are you having 
this poster? ...(Interruptions)... Why can't you take your seat? 
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, we must never forget that the 
decade belongs to India; the decade belongs to our country. The rise of 
our country is unstoppable. The century belongs to us. 
...(Interruptions)... I appeal to you to careful ly go through the historic 
achievements that have been reflect ed in the address by the Foreign 
Minister. ...(Interruptions)... I have noticed during my three visits abroad 
that being a citizen of this country is a great honour.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Hon. Members, can you take your seats? ...(Interruptions)... Remember 
your duties before telling me my duties. ...(Interruptions)... Please listen 
to what I am saying. ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, as per Rule 
251, no clarifications are permitted at the time of statement.  But because 
there has been a convention, we need to follow it.  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka): Sir, what about Rule 267? 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Would you please take your seat? ...(Interruptions)... 
You don't believe in the growth of the country. ...(Interruptions)... You 
don't believe in the historic growth. ...(Interruptions)... You don't believe 
in rise in our reputation all over. ...(Interruptions)... You don't believe in 
all achievements of the hon. Minister ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, 
though the Rule 251 does not allo w it, having seen  the importance, 
momentous developments and great ri se of this country in global 
scenario, I would allow clarificat ions and, after clarifications 
...(Interruptions)... Don't you want clarifications? ...(Interruptions)... 
Do you want clarifications or not? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी पीयूष गोयल) : महोदय, यह बहुत दुभार्ग्य की बात है िक इतने गÇभीर िवषय क े 
ऊपर भी आज राजनीित की जा रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह भारत की अिÎमता का सवाल है। यह 
आज अंतरराÍटर्ीय पटल पर भारत की बढ़ती हुई छिव है, ...(Ëय वधान)... िजसके  बारे मȂ आज 
हमारे माननीय िवदेश मंतर्ी जी ने ÎपÍटीकरण िदया है, पूरे देश को अवगत कराया है।  
 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ समझता हूं िक ये काले कपड़े पहने हुए लोग समझ नहीं पा रहे हȅ िक आज देश 
की बढ़ती हुई ताकत क्या है। ...(Ëयवधान)... िजनके  मन मȂ काला है, िजनके  तन मȂ भी आज काला 
है ...(Ëय वधान )... क्या िछपा है इनके  िदल मȂ, क्या िदल मȂ काला है, क्या शÅदȗ क े बोल मȂ काला है, 
क्या काला धन िछपाये हȅ, ये अपने इन कपड़ȗ मȂ! क्या कारनामे हȅ इनके , जो िदखाना नहीं चाहते, 
बिÊक िछपाना चाहते हȅ! ...( Ëयवध ान )... वैसे तो आजकल काले कौवे भी इन पर आकिर्षत होने 
लगे हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... माननीय सभापित महोदय, इनका कल भी काला था, आज भी काला है 
और भिवÍय भी काला रहेगा।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 महोदय, हम नकारात्मक सोच क े लोग नहीं हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... हमारा पूरा िवÌ वास है िक 
इनके  जीवन मȂ अंधेरा छंटेगा, इनको भी सूरज की रोशनी िदखेगी, इनके  िदल का*  खत्म होगा 
और इनको भी एक िवकिसत, समृǉ भारत क े िलए कमल िखलता िदखेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, 
काला कपड़ा, काला धन, नहीं सहेगा िहन्दुÎतान।  कोई िहन्दुÎतानी इनके  काले काम को नहीं 
सहेगा।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please.  ...(Interruptions)... Please take your 
seats.  ...(Interruptions)... Leader of the House, please ask your Members to be in 
order.  ...(Interruptions)... Please take your seats.  ...(Interruptions)... All of you 
please take your seats.  ...(Interruptions)... The Leader of the House has spoken.  
Now, I will allow the L eader of the Opposition. ...(Interruptions)...   I want order    in 
the House.  ...(Interruptions)... No one
 will speak before the Leader of the 
Opposition has spoken. ...(Interruptions)... Please take your seats.  
...(Interruptions)...  Ask your Members to take their seats.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Hon. Members, please. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on record. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 Hon. Members, the Minister of Ex ternal Affairs has imparted a speech 
indicating our historic achievements. We co uld never dream of those achievements.  
...(Interruptions)...  He has taken us comprehensively to the respect India, Bharat, 
its leadership, commands all over. He has indicated to all of us that the most powerful 
democracy, the largest democracy leader, was so favourably treated.  It is a defining 
moment in international polity for our count ry. Rise of our country, relevance of our 
country and its importance has been considered by one and all.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Hon. Members, please seek clarifi cations from the hon. Minister.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, they are not allowing. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
19

MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Siva, when the hon. Minister was on his legs and he was 
reflecting on our country's achievements, no one was prepared to listen to him.  
...(Interruptions)... As Chairman, you tell me, ho w do I enforce discipline?  
...(Interruptions)... I want to give the floor to th e Leader of the Opposition.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, if he ventures to speak... ...(Interruptions)... Hon. 
Minister of External Affairs was also speaking ...(Interruptions)... On such an 
important issue, he also spoke. ...(Interruptions)...  So, he can also speak.  
...(Interruptions)... Go ahead.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please.  ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on 
record.  ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)...Hon. 
Minister of External Affairs has delivered very objectively a historic address 
encompassing our formidable achievements and the position India enjoys in the world 
at large.  These are the achievements for ev ery Indian to feel proud.  These are the 
achievements for every Bhartiya to feel proud.  The rise of this country is on account 
of 1.4 billion people. ...(Interruptions)...  
 The House is adjourned till 12.00 noon.   
 
The House then adjourned at forty five minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at twelve of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I will give th e floor to the Leader of the Opposition. 
Please take your seats. And, before that , I will make one announcement. I have to 
inform hon. Members that the Business Advisory Committee in its meeting held 
today, i.e., on 27 th July 2023, has allotted time for the Government Legislative 
Business and the Report is laid on the Table of the House. 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

I have to inform hon. Members that the Business Advisory Committee in its 
meeting held today, i.e. , on the 27 th of July 2023, has allotted time for the 
Government Legislative Business as follows:- 
 
         BUSINESS       TIME ALLOTTED 
 
1. Consideration and passing of the Mediation Bill,   Four Hours  
 2021.  
2. Consideration and passin g of the Press and    Two Hours 
 Registration of Periodicals Bill, 2023, after its  
 introduction.  
3. Consideration and passing of the Jammu and    Two Hours 
 Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill,  
 2023, after it is considered  and passed by Lok Sabha.  
4. Consideration and passing of the Indian Institutes  Four Hours 
 of Management (Amendme nt) Bill, 2023, after it 
 is introduced, considered and passed by Lok Sabha.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Leader of the Opposition.  ...(Interruptions)... Please take 
your seats.  ...(Interruptions)...  Hon. Members, I understand ...(Interruptions)...  
Hon. Leader of the Opposition.   
 
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE): Sir, I have to 
speak...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Leader of the Opposition. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go 
on record.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
S H R I  M A L L I K A R J U N  K H A R G E :  S i r ,  I  h a v e  t o  t e l l  t h e  p u b l i c  o f  I n d i a .   
...(Interruptions)...  They are obstructing.  ...(Interruptions)...  I have not seen 
Members of ruling party obstructing a speaker , who is the Leader of the Opposition.  
...(Interruptions)... This is very bad. ...(Interruptions)... It is undemocratic.  
...(Interruptions)...  I think the Government itself...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sit down. ...(Interruptions)... Take your seats.  
...(Interruptions)... I am on my legs.  ...(Interruptions)... Have the minimum respect 
for the Chairperson. ...(Interruptions)... Please take your seats.  
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
21

...(Interruptions)...   Hon. Members, I had the occa sion a while ago to see reaction 
from one section and I have the occasion no w. Hon. Foreign Mini ster was making a 
speech. His statement carried a lot of things. I expected th e Opposition also to raise 
issues. I allowed you by rela xing Rule 251. Now, imagine a scenario when we did not 
listen to the hon. Foreign Minister who was traversing our historic achievements.  You 
are entitled to ask questions.  ...(Interruptions)...  Unless there will be order in the 
House...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on record unle ss the House is in order.  
...(Interruptions)...  The House is adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. today. 
 
    The House then adjourned at four minutes past twelve of the clock.  
 
 
The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
 
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Cinema tograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023. 
...(Interruptions)... Shri Anurag Singh Thakur to move a motion for consideration of 
the Cinematograph (Ame ndment) Bill, 2023. ...(Interruptions)... Please.  
...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record except what Shri Anurag Singh says.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF 
YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS (SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR): Sir, I move:  
That the Bill further to amend the Cine matograph Act, 1952, be taken into 
consideration.  
 
 आदरणीय िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ िक आपने िसनेमैटोगर्ाफ 
(अमȂडमȂट) िबल, 2023 पर आज चचार् करने की अनुमित दी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... आदरणीय 
उपसभापित जी, यह चलिचतर् ( संशोधन) िवधेयक, 2023 अपने आप मȂ बहुत महत्वपूणर् है, 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... क्यȗिक िसनेमैटोगर्ाफ एक्ट, 1952 क े बाद अगर कोई बड़ा संशोधन हुआ, तो 1984 
मȂ लाÎट बड़ा संशोधन हुआ था। ...(Ëयवधान)... लगभग चार दशक बीत गए, इन चा र दशकȗ मȂ 
टेक्नोलॉजी मȂ बहुत सारा बदलाव भी आया है, ...(Ëयवधान)... देखने वालȗ की संख्या भी बहुत बढ़ी 
है और ...(Ëयवधान)... दुिनया भर मȂ भारतीय िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी की साख भी बढ़ी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

आज अगर दुिनया मȂ सबसे ज्यादा िफÊमȂ बनाने वाला कोई देश है, ...(Ëयवधान)... तो हमारा भारत 
आज दुिनया मȂ सबसे ज्यादा िफÊमȂ बनाने वाला देश है। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय उपसभापित जी, 
यही नहीं, अगर मȅ इसी साल की बात करू ँ, तो भारतीय िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी ने ऑÎकर मȂ भी, 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... Îमॉल डॉक्युमȂटरी मȂ ' िद एिलफȅ ट िËहÎपरसर्' और ' आरआरआर' िफÊम ने पूरी 
दुिनया मȂ धूम मचाई और भारत क े िलए ऑÎकर जीतने का भी काम िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह 
भारतीय िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी की एक बहुत बड़ी काम याबी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... जब हम 40 वषș क े बाद 
कोई बड़ा संशोधन ला रहे हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... और मȅ एक तरह से कहूँ िक िबल को एक बड़े नए रूप  
मȂ पेश कर रहे हȅ, ...(Ëय वधान)...  तो िवपक्ष का यह रवैया देख कर लगता है िक न ये िफÊम जगत 
क े पक्ष मȂ हȅ, न भारत क े सॉÄट पावर क े रूप  मȂ उभरने क े पक्ष मȂ हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... ये खुद तो 
अपने वषș मȂ क ु छ नहीं कर पाए, लेिकन आज जब इस िबल पर चचार् होगी, तो माननीय 
उपसभापित जी, देखने को िमलेगा िक यह िबल क ेवल िकसी Ģोǹूसर, डायरेक्टर तक सीिमत 
नहीं है, ...(Ëयव
धान)... बिÊक यह एक छोटे से छोटे Îपॉट Åवॉय से लेकर, मेकअप मैन से लेकर, 
एक Îटंट आिर्टÎट से लेकर कोिरयोगर्ाफर तक ...(Ëयवध
ान)... और लाइट्स टेिक्निशयन या 
साउंड आिर्टÎट क े रूप  मȂ, ...(Ëयवधान)... साउंड इंजीिनयर से लेकर टेिक्निशयन, जूिनयर 
आिर्टÎट तक ...(Ëयवधान)... सबके  जीवन मȂ बहुत फकर् ला सकता है, क्यȗिक माननीय 
उपसभापित जी, पाइरेसी एक ऐसा दी
मक है, जो िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी को खा रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
जब चलिचतर् मȂ बहुत लोगȗ की वषș की उनकी बहुत अच्छी मेहनत िदख रही हो, ...(Ëय वधान )... 
अच्छी िफÊम आनी हो, तो उसके  चलते भी उनके  हक खाने का काम पाइरेसी करने वाले लोग 
करते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज जब मȅ िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी क े लोगȗ की बात यहाँ पर उठाता हूँ, तो 
उनका हक खाने का काम भी ये लोग करना चा हते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... हम सदन क े सदÎयȗ से 
चचार् करना चाहते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 सर, मȅ इतना ही कहना चाहता हूँ, मȅ बाद मȂ िवÎतार मȂ जरूर  बोलूँगा, लेिकन अगर मȅ इस 
िबल क े िलए तीन Ģमुख बा तȂ कहूँ िक इस अमȂडमȂट को क्यȗ लाना पड़ा, ...(Ëयवधान)... तो पहला, 
जो अनऑथराइज्ड िरकॉिडȊग होती थी, वह वषș पहले क ैमकॉडर्र क े साथ होती थी, लेिकन समय 
क े साथ वीिडयो िरकॉिडȊग भी आई, मोबाइल फोन्स भी आए और अलग-अलग तरीके  आए। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... इंटरनेट क े जमाने मȂ आज इसका दुरुपयोग  करके  पाइरेसी को और बढ़ावा िदया 
जाता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसिलए पाइरेसी को रोकने क े िलए हम इसको लाए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
दूसरा, इस िबल क े माध्य म से लाइसȂिंसग क े Ģोसीजर को और सरल करने क े िलए बल िमलेगा। 
...(Ëयवधान)... तीसरा, जो हाई कोट्सर् और सुĢीम कोटर् क े जजमȂट्स हȅ, हमने इसके  माध्यम से 
उनके  साथ हामȘनाइज़ करने का काम िकया है। ...(Ëयवध ान )... मȅ िवÎतार मȂ इस पर पूरी बात 
कहूँगा, लेिकन एक और बात जरूर  कहूँगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... धारा 370 और 35ए को 70 साल  मȂ 
िकसी ने हटाने का Ģयास नहीं िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)...  धारा-370 और 35ए को सदा-सदा क े िलए 
समाÃत करने का काम भी, 2019 मȂ मोदी सरकार ने िकया था।...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय उपसभापित 
जी, पहले धारा-370 और 35ए क े कारण इस ऐक्ट पर भी Ģभाव आता था, ...(Ëयवधान)...  लेिकन 
अब हमने उस सेक्शन को भी ओिमट करने का काम िकया है।...(Ëयवध
ान)...  इससे हमारे जÇमू-
कÌमीर क े भाई-बहनȗ और वहां क े कलाकारȗ को लाभ िम
लेगा।...(Ëयवधान)... सर, आपने मुझे 
बोलने का अवसर िदया, मȅ बेताबी से सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ को सुनने का इंतज़ार कर रहा 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
23

हूं।...(Ëयवधान)...  मुझे पूणर् िवÌवास है िक िसनेमा जगत क े पक्ष मȂ, िसनेमा जगत से जुड़े सभी 
लोगȗ को इससे लाभ िमलेगा।...(Ëयवधान)...   िडिÎटर्Åयूटर से लेकर िफÊम बनाने वाले तक, Îपॉट 
Åवॉय से लेकर आिर्टÎट तक, हर िकसी क े िहत मȂ हम यह िबल लेकर आए हȅ।...(Ëयवध ान)...  मुझे 
इस िबल पर पूरे सदन का समथर्न िमलेगा, इतना ही िनवेदन मȅ आपसे करता हूं, धन्यवाद।                                   
 
The question was proposed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Members, whose names have been 
received, for participation in the discussion. …(Interruptions)…  Shri Sushil Kumar 
Gupta.  …(Interruptions)…  One minute.  …(Interruptions)…  Please take your seats.  
…(Interruptions)… माननीय सदÎयगण, Ãलीज़।...(Ëयवधान) ...   
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, माननीय एलओपी बोलना चाहते हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, आप जानते हȅ िक सदन क े रूÊस और Ģोसीजर क े तहत 
हम िसनेमैटोगर्ाफ िबल पर िडÎकशन कर रहे हȅ। अगर इस पर माननीय एलओपी बोलना चाहते 
हȅ, तभी मȅ इजाज़त दूंगा। अदरवाइज़, िजस इÌयू को माननीय चेयरमैन डील करके  ÎपÍट कर 
चुक े हȅ, उस पर बोलने की इजाज़त मȅ नहीं दे सकता हूं, यह बा
त बहुत क्लीयर है।...(Ëयवधान)...   
माननीय Ǜी सुशील क ुमार गुÃता।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश
: सर, माननीय एलओपी बोलना चाहते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
एक माननीय सदÎय: सदन क े कानून सबके  िलए बराबर हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Ǜी उपसभापित
: अगर माननीय एलओपी इस िबल पर बोलȂगे, तभी मȅ इजाज़त दूंगा। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश
: सर, माननीय एलओपी इस िबल पर बोलȂगे। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित
: क्या माननीय एलओपी िसनेमैटोगर्ाफी क े िबल पर बोलȂगे? ...(Ëयवधान)...   क्या 
माननीय एलओपी इस िबल पर बोलना चाहते हȅ? 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश
: जी हां, सर।...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Ǜी उपसभापित
:  माननीय एलओपी, Ãलीज़।...(Ëयवधान)...   माननीय एलओपी इस िबल पर बोल 
रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   माननीय एलओपी को इस िबल पर बोलने दीिजए।...(Ëयवधान)...   
माननीय एलओपी, आप बोिलए।...(Ëयवधान)...    
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ िबल की बात भी करना चाहता हूं 
और िदल की बात भी करना चाहता हूं।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, no.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  
डा. Ģशांत नन्दा।...(Ëयवधान)...  डा. Ģशांत नन्दा।...(Ëयवधान)...    अभी यहां इस िबल पर बहस 
हो रही है।...(Ëयवधान)... क ेवल डा. Ģशांत नन्दा जी की बात ही िरक
 ॉडर् पर जाएगी।...(Ëयवधान)...   
डा. Ģशांत नन्दा, आप बोिलए। िसफर् आपकी बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
DR. PRASHANTA NANDA (Odisha): Than k you, Deputy Chairman, Sir.  
…(Interruptions)…   Sir, the Amendment Bill was first introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 
12th February, 2019.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:डा. Ģशांत नन्दा, आप बोिलए। िसफर् आपकी बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जा रही 
है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
DR. PRASHANTA NANDA: Sir, it was referred to the Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  …(Interruptions)…  The Standing Committee submitted its 
report on 16
th March, 2020.  …(Interruptions)…  The Cinematograph (Amendment) 
Bill, 2023, was prepared afte r several rounds of stakeholder consultations.   
…(Interruptions)…  It was introduced in the Parliament which proposes to amend the 
Cinematograph Act of 1952.   …(Interruptions)…  It has provisions for harsher penal 
provisions for film piracy.  …(Interruptions)…   It is very, very important to kill piracy. 
…(Interruptions)…  I agree with the hon. Minister. …(Interruptions)…  It is like a 
deemak and it takes away all the rights... …(Interruptions)…  The film industry of India, 
which is economically viable, is becoming unviable.. …(Interruptions)… I thank the 
hon. Minister. …(Interruptions)… It introduces new sub-age categories for films.  
…(Interruptions)…  I am not very much interested in this category.  …(Interruptions)… 
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please speak.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Sir, we are walking out.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
DR. PRASHANTA NANDA: Sir, it introduces..…(Interruptions)…      
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
25

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र: सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... शोर क े कारण एक िमनट तक माननीय सदÎय 
की बातȂ सुनने का अवसर नहीं िमला है।   ...(Ëयवधान)...  अगर ये शुरू  से अपनी बात कह सकȂ, 
तो अच्छा रहेगा।  सर, यह बहुत महत्वपूणर् िबल है।  यह पूरे िसनेमा जगत क े िलए है।  इसमȂ एक-
एक शÅद बहुत महत्वपूणर् रहेगा।  इनक
ो सब सुनȂगे।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित
:डा. Ģशांत नन्दा जी, आप शुरू  से बोलȂ। माननीय मंतर्ी जी आपको सुनना चाहते 
हȅ।  Ãलीज़।  
 
DR. PRASHANTA NANDA: Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I thank the hon. Minister. Sir, I 
would like to tell you that this is a subject ve ry close to my heart. It is because I have 
been in the film industry for the last 60 years.  I have made films; I have seen films; I 
have seen my films selling, and I have also  faced the problems of Censor Board. I 
have also suffered due to piracy. This is wh at I am who has seen all these, and it was 
1952 and afterwards, everybody forgot it. Pir acy is such a thing that after mobile or 
anything, or by conspiracy with the exhibi tors, the print of these were being taken 
away. I have seen Hindi film released today and it is shown in Dubai the next day. For 
that, actually, we are losing, as I have hear d, around Rs. 18,000 crores per year, and 
60,000 people are becoming jobless. I am r eally sad. But, I am happy, today, that a 
new Bill has come which has taken care of a ll these things. It has taken care of so 
many things. Out of which, th e stringent law against piracy is very much in favour of 
the whole film industry of India. It includ es imprisonment for three years and Rs. 10 
lakh penalty for those found involved in piracy. The act of piracy will be a legal offence 
and even transmitting pirated content will be punishable. सब  ठीक है। Then, I am 
talking about the most important thing which is that it will classify films on the basis of 
age group, instead of rating them 'U'. I don't think that if the Government has thought 
about it, but my experience is that it is  not necessary. When a filmmaker starts to 
make a film, he decides as to who are his targeted audience. If his targeted audience 
is the entire people of this country, then, he  will make his film in such a way which will 
attract only 'U'. But, when he thinks 'that, no, my film is for a certain group of people, 
and I don't need children to see my film, then , I will make an adult film.'  So, 'U' and 
'A', those t
wo things are pre-decided by the script-writer and by the director also.  In 
that procedure, it was there, the UA certificate means children in age-group of 12 
years or less cannot see it. But, that do esn't happen and, again, you have given 
another category which will be there, and in that age group of children, below 7 years 
will not see it. These are all good things. But, the most  important thing is that 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

whenever we have made films,  we have seen that if th e Censor Board has passed it, 
it is limited to ten years only, but now you have made it perpetual. It is a fantastic 
thing. It means that I do not have to go to them again after ten years. Once it is 
decided that it is a good film, like Mother India was a good film, but its producer also 
went after ten years to renew it. Can you think of it? A film which attracted everybody, 
and even today, they have to go again afte r every ten years, and by this time, they 
must have gone five times. So, this is a very good thing that you have done.  
Everything is good. I accept this Bill. Bu t I have some sugge stions. I am very 
sorry that a lot of my hon. friends are not he re. They should have heard it. I will tell 
you what is happening. The Censor Board which gives us the certificate, for them, 
'adult' is a related term, for them not to grant becomes a relative term. I have my own 
experience in one film when my films were  being censored in Bengal.  My film was 
rejected. They said, "No, no, it is total violence." I said, "What is violence? I have 
made a film for everybody, there is no vi olence."  So I had to come to the Tribunal 
and the Tribunal said that it was a clean pi cture. Why it happened?  It was because 
there was a 12 year kid who was killed by somebody. The Chairman, who was there in 
Bengal, his 12 year son was killed some time. So he thought, "No, I cannot see".  If 
he cannot see, nobody should see; that was the reason. Do you know that I have lost 
so much of money because my film got delayed for two years? Now you have said 
that there is no tribunal and only the Ce nsor Board people will see again. Let them 
see, but the members should change. The sa me members should not be there. If the 
same Members will not be there, then only  the correct judgement will come. Number 
two, the Government is so conscious that no one below 12 years should see and even 
they are categorizing that below seven years will not see. But what is happening in 
our country? You can see that everyone has got a mobile, everyone has got television 
and above all OTT has also come and what language they use! We cannot sit with our 
children and see that. The scenes that are being given are absolutely not acceptable. 
Something should be done for that also. This is number two. Then number three is 
most important. There are certain sequences where the Producer or a Director thinks 
that if he will put a virulent or a rape sc ene, then people will come and see; that 
becomes a part of the entertainment. No! There are so many great Directors who 
have come and gone like Satyajit Ray and Mrinal Sen. They have showed how you 
can make 'freeze, still and then symbolize'. Wit hout going into the entire details of it, 
with only symbol, only one frame, only tw o frames or only one suggestion is enough 
for that. The content of the film should not be a rape. If the rape scene is inevitable, 
then show it in symbol, not in  an exhaustive way. That is not the situation and that is 
what you are also thinking. If there will be a symbolic shot, then the children of 12 and 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
27

seven years of age can also see the film, there is no problem. There are so many 
things which have to be discussed and decide d. But, as on today, after 1952, if the 
Government has thought to change it, to  amend it, it is very good. They have 
discussed with many people, I know. What ever was necessary ha s been done, but I 
think some more discussion is needed. Gone  are the days when we used to sit with 
our son and daughter. Now the time has come  to sit with our grandchildren. But I 
cannot see those OTT films which have got  very good content, but very shabbily 
depicted and very shabbily done to which I say that the first thing is, the Censor 
Board should understand--leave aside th e content--how the content has to be 
projected in the film, that has to be taken care of.   
Number two is regarding the dialogues. They should not use any word which is 
unparliamentary. Can this be done? If  that is done, it is all right. ओटीटी पर इतनी 
गािलयाँ हȅ िक उन्हȂ आप सुन नहीं सकते हȅ। आज वे सारी गािलयाँ ओटीटी पर आ रही हȅ और यह 
free for everybody to see it है। So, my request will be, when we are going for any 
amendment today, in 2023; when we have already given a thought that we are going 
to change, if certain more changes that people think, then, we should not need 
another 20 years to think about it.  Let us not  do it for this year and then go on adding 
after two years or three years.  It is not the thing.  When you are thinking, please think 
in a big way, and I request th at my suggestions are to be taken seriously. Thank you 
very much.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Prashanta Nandaji. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN  Somu; 
not present. Shri Jawhar Sircar; not present. Now, Dr. Ashok Bajpai. डा. अशोक 
बाजपेयी, आपके  पास चार िमनट हȅ।   
 
डा. अशोक बाजपेयी (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, चार िमनट मȂ क ै से काम चलेगा? 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपके  12 वƪा हȅ और आपके  दल क े पास 46 िमनट हȅ, तो मȅने अिधक ही कहा 
है। आपके  पास चार िमनट हȅ।  
 
डा. अशोक बाजपेयी: उपसभापित महोदय, भारत दुिनया का सबसे बड़ा िफÊम उत्पादक देश है। 
हमारे देश मȂ सबसे बड़ी संख्या मȂ िफ ÊमȂ बनाई जाती हȅ। हमारे यहाँ िसनेमा जगत मनोरंजन और 
संगीत की दृिÍट से सबसे सÎता आधार है। मान्यवर, अगर देखा जाए, तो हमारा िसनेमा जगत का 
इितहास बहुत पुराना है। भारतीय िस न ेमा का इितहास 19वीं सदी क े उǄराधर् से Ģारंभ होता है। वषर् 
1896 मȂ बॉÇबे मȂ लुिमयर Ĥदसर् की िफÊमȗ की Îकर्ीिंनग की गई। दादासाहेब फालके  को भारतीय 
िसनेमा का जनक कहा जाता है। मान्यवर, भारतीय िनिर्मत िफÊम राजा हिरÌचंदर् वषर् 1913 मȂ 
िरलीज़ हुई थी और वहाँ से भारतीय िसनेमा की शुरुआत  हुई थी। इसके  साथ ही, पहली भारतीय 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

टाकीज़ 'आलमआरा' 1931 मȂ िरलीज़ हुई थी, िजसने भारतीय िसनेमा क े नए युग की शुरुआत  की 
थी और इस तरह से भारतीय िसनेमा की िनरंतर Ģगित हुई है। अगर देखा जाए, तो आज 
टेक्नोलॉजी क े माध्यम से भारतीय िसनेमा ने बहुत Ģगित की है और इसने बड़े पैमाने पर लोगȗ को 
रोजगार उप
लÅध कराने का काम िकया है। चाहे कलाकार हȗ, िनदȃशक हȗ, Ģोǹूसर हȗ, कर्ू 
मेÇबसर् हȗ या बाकी तमाम लोग हȗ, इन्हȂ उस िसनेमा क े माध्यम से रोज़गार िमलता है और बड़े 
पैमाने पर राजÎव का अजर्न भी होता है, लेिकन दुभार्ग्य की बात यह है िक िसनेमा की पाइरेसी क े 
कारण बहुत बड़े राजÎव की क्षित होती है। मȅ सम
झता हूँ िक इससे लगभ ग एक वषर् मȂ 150 अरब 
रुपय े से ज्यादा का िसनेमा का राजÎव घाटा हो जाता है। अगर इस तरीके  से देखा जाए, तो इस 
िवधेयक को संशोिधत करने की आवÌयकता थी।  
महोदय, पहली बार 1952 मȂ यह िसनेमैटोगर्ाफी एक्ट आया था, िजसके  माध्यम से सȂसर 
बोडर् की Îथापना हुई थी और सोचा गया था िक िफÊमȂ ऐसी होनी चािहए, जो सम
ाज की 
सहनशीलता क े अनुरूप  हȗ और ऐसी िफÊमȂ ही Ģदिर्शत की जानी चािहए। अगर इसके  अितिरƪ 
क ु छ िकया जाता है, तो सȂसर बोडर् उन पर रोक लगा सकता है, लेिकन धीरे-धीरे इसका 
दुरुपयोग  होता ग
या। पहले सȂसर बोडर् को यह अिधकार था िक वह दस साल क े िलए Ģमाणन 
सिर्टिफके ट दे सकता था, लेिकन आज हम जो संशोधन लेकर आए हȅ, उसके  अनुसार, एक बार 
िदया गया Ģम
ाण पतर् हमेशा क े िलए होगा, यानी उसकी कोई समय-सीमा नहीं रखी गई है। 
हालांिक, इसके  िलए तमाम िनयम िनधार्िरत िकए गए हȅ, जैसे  बच्चȗ  की  आयु सीमा  क े  िलए  जो 
अलग-अलग Ģमाण पतर् हȗगे, उनमȂ सात वषर् तक की आयु क े बच्चȗ, 13  वष र् तक की आयु क े 
बच्चȗ और 16 वषर् तक की आयु क े बच्चȗ क े िलए जो िफÊमȂ Ģदिर्शत हȗगी, उन्हȂ 'यूए सिर्टिफके ट' 
देने का काम िकया जाएगा। यह इस तरीके  से िकया जा एगा िक हमारे बच्चȗ पर इसका कोई 
दुÍĢभाव न पड़े। िसनेमा ने हमारे देश क े िवकास मȂ बड़ी भूिमका अदा की है। अगर हम मिहलाओं 
क े सशिƪकरण क े सवाल को देखȂ, तो आज जो तमाम िफÊमȂ आती हȅ, उनमȂ मिहलाओं ने अपने 
को मजबूत पातर् क े रूप  मȂ Îथािपत करने का काम िक
या है और तमाम सामािजक बुराइयȗ क े 
िवरुǉ भी अपने को Îथािपत करने का काम िकया है।   
माननीय उपसभापित जी, अगर आप देखȂ तो हमारे देश मȂ, चाहे िहन्दी क े Ģचार-Ģसार 
की बात हो,  भाषा क े Ģचार-Ģसार की बात हो अथ
वा संÎकृ ित क े Ģचार-Ģसार की बात हो, िफÊमȂ 
एक बड़ा माध्यम बनी हȅ।  देश क े सुदूर अंचल मȂ जहां िहन्दी भाषा-भाषी लोग नहीं थे, आज िफÊमȗ 
क े Ģचार-Ģसार से वहां भी लोगȗ ने िहन्दी मȂ पढ़ना-िलखना या िहन्दी को समझना Ģारंभ िकया है।  
इस Ģकार से यह एक बहुत बड़ा योग
दान है।  हमारी सांÎकृ ितक एकता को बनाए रखने मȂ भी 
िसनेमा की एक बहुत बड़
ी भूिमका रही है - लेिकन अच्छी िफÊमȗ की।  राÍटर्वाद को भी देश मȂ 
संरिक्षत करने मȂ िफÊमȗ की बड़ी भूिमका रही है।  लेिकन वहीं पर क ु छ ऐसी िफÊमȂ भी हȅ जो क ेवल 
शुǉ Ëयावसाियक दृि
Íट से बनाई गईं। वहां मयार्दाओं क े साथ समझौता करके  िफÊमȗ को घिटया 
Îतर का बनाकर समाज को गलत सामगर्ी परोसने का काम िकया गया। उन पर िनिÌचत रूप  से 
यह नया िनयम अंक ु श लगाने का काम करेगा।   
  महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी बड़ी सूझ-बूझ क े साथ यह अिधिनयम लेकर आए हȅ।  वे जो 
यह संशोधन लेकर आए हȅ, यह बड़ी सूझ-बूझ क े साथ लेकर आए हȅ।   1
952 क े बाद आवÌयकता 
थी िक िसनेमैटोगर्ाफी एक्ट मȂ नया संशोधन आता, लेिकन िपछले 60-70 सा लȗ तक इस पर िंचतन 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
29

नहीं हुआ।  ...(समय की घंटी)... आज िसनेमा हमारे गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ से लेकर नगरीय क्षेतर्ȗ तक सारे 
देश मȂ देखा जाता है।  िसनेमा क े माध्यम से बहुत बड़ा संदेश जाता है।  मान्यवर, अगर अभी आपने 
'कÌमीर फाइÊस' िफÊम देखी होगी, तो उसमȂ वहां की उस िÎ
थित का िचतर्ण है, जो समाज कभी 
जान नहीं पाता।  अभी एक 'द क ेरल Îटोरी' िफÊम बनी है, िजसमȂ िदखाया गया है िक िकस तरह 
से धमार्ंतरण करने का काम िकया गया।  आज देश ने इन िफÊम ȗ क े माध्यम से जाना िक इस देश 
मȂ क्या-क्या होता है।  इस तरह से िफÊमȂ संवाद, संदेश, सांÎकृ ितक एकता और सांÎकृ ितक 
एकरूपता का एक सशƪ माध्यम हȅ और इसिलए उनको बहुत सबल होना चा िहए। ...(समय की 
घंटी)... 
 मान्यवर, इस संशोधन मȂ जो Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ, उनके  अनुसार हमारा जो सȂसर बोडर् 
होगा, उसका अिधकार भी बढ़ाने का काम िकया गया है, तािक वह इस तरीके  क े सीन्स पर रोक 
लगाने का काम कर सके ।  साथ ही, मान्यवर, .... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: धन्यवाद, डा. अशोक बाजपेयी जी। 
 
डा. अशोक बाजपेयी : आपका धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, दो माननीय सदÎयȗ ने यह सूचना दी है िक उनको तीन 
बजे की मीिंटग मȂ शािमल होना है। अगर सदन की अनुमित हो, तो उन्हȂ पहले बोलने का मौका 
िदया जा सकता है। The next speaker is Dr. M.
 Thambidurai.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu): Thank you, Deputy Chairman, Sir, for giving 
me this opportunity.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please be brief. 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: I will be brief, Sir,  I am not taking much of the time. I 
welcome the Amendment Bill introduced by hon. Minister. As other Members have 
rightly said that introduction of this B ill is a historical thing. The Bill was first 
introduced in the year 1952 an d after that it has been in troduced now. After a long 
time, our young man has taken an initiative; he is a young man, to see what kinds of 
amendments are required in the present scenario. I welcome that.  
Sir, first of all, as our hon. Member said , I am also involved in the film industry. 
I have also produced and distributed certain movies. I have distributed nearly hundred 
movies in my area. So, I have some knowle dge about it and that is why I wanted to 
say something on this Bill. Sir, piracy is  a major problem due to which producers are 
facing a lot of issues. They are investin g crores of rupees. Many producers are 
committing suicide also. In the film in dustry, producers are not big people. 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

Sometimes, they are in the highlight and at times, they live a miserable life. Sir, same 
thing happens with heroes of the films also. At times, they are very popular and then 
later they live in a poor condition. The film  industry is like that. They are serving the 
people by entertaining them, but, afterwards they suffer a lot. That is the problem.  
Sir, it is rightly mentioned by some ho n. Members that the films are meant not 
only for entertainment but to highlight the social problems and as to how to solve 
them. The films can be based on family problems also. They should give some 
message to the people as to how to bear it and how to come forward to solve them. 
That is another way as to how the films should be produced.  
For example, at the time of our freed om, most of the films were based on 
patriotism, to arouse the feeling of patrio tism among the people of the country and to 
fight for it. For that, many people devote d their time and money to get freedom and 
for that many films were produced those days. 
Sir, I come from a move ment called the Dravadia n Movement. The former 
Chief Minister, Shri Annadurai, who was also a Member of Rajya Sabha -- we call him 
also Anna -- he made so many films.  He made especially historical films and films on 
social problems. He made the famous movie Velaikkaran which got so many 
repetitions.  Afterwards, another Chief Mini ster, my mentor, Puratchi MGR, was also 
an actor. Amma was also an actress. Our party became popular because of our 
raising social problems. At that time, no media platforms or political platforms were 
available to raise social problems.  But social and political problems were highlighted 
through films. In this way, a message has gone to the society how to solve the 
problem of disparity and casteism, etc. Th ese were the ways how the films came.  
Now a different situation is going on.  Some kind of violence is seen, violence is there, 
but all are following the same formula. The same formula of fighting and fighting is 
seen in every movie.  He becomes dada, then police officer, he shoots film officer and 
kills the people. All these repetitions are ta king place. You have to somewhere advise 
these people, or, the Censor Board should take care of these th ings. We must not 
feed such things in the minds of young people who go in some other way. The 
second thing, as our friend has said, the piracy has to be controlled. Age 
classification would not work out. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude. There are two more speakers in this 
category.  Please conclude.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: As our Member said, it would not work out. I request the 
hon. Minister to see that film piracy is co ntrolled. As our hon. Member said, if in due 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
31

course of time, any amendment is required , you can bring it now and not necessarily 
in the end because you have started a ne w concept how to bring some kind of 
amendments for this kind of industry also . I welcome the Bill brought forward by the 
hon. Minister. I hope that in future also, if  required, you can bring it and we will give 
our support to that Bill also. Thank you.        
         
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल ( उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका आभारी हूं। 
महोदय, िवशेष रूप  से सामने उपिÎथत जो लोग हȅ, मȅ उनके  चिरतर् क े अनुरूप  उन्हȂ समझता हूं। 
 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎय, आप िवषय पर बोिलए। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: महोदय, मȅ िवषय पर ही आऊं गा। वषर् 1952 से  लेकर आज तक 
यह काला धन का ही िवषय था।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎय, यह िफÊम का िवषय है। 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल: यह काले धन का ही पाइरेसी का िवषय है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित: माननीय सदÎय, यह िफÊम का िवषय है। हमने आपको रूÊस बताए हȅ। आप 
रूÊस जानते हȅ, क ृपया िफÊम पर बोिलए।  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल : मȅ आपका आभारी हूं। हम गवर् का एहसास कर सकते हȅ िक जबसे 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की ज़ीरो टॉलरȂस की सरकार आई है, तब से हमने हाउिंसग ÎकीÇस की 
पाइरेसी रोक
ी है, हमने राशन काडर् की पाइरेसी रोकी है, हमने गैस की सÃलाई की पाइरेसी रोकी 
है और मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी को बधाई दूंगा िक आज उन्हȗने बहुत ही महत्व पूणर् िवषय पर पाइरेसी 
रोकने क े िलए इस कानून को लाने का काम िकया है।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, इसी क े साथ मȅ जनĢितिनिध होने क े नाते माननीय मंतर्ी जी से एक 
और आगर्ह करना चाहूंगा। आज बहुत सी ऐसी िफÊमȂ आ रही हȅ, िजन्हȂ हम लोग साथ बैठकर नहीं 
देख पाते, जैसे 'आिदपुरुष ' है, िजस Ģकार का राम और हनुमान का संवा
द उसमȂ िदया गया; जैसे 
'पीके ' है, िजसमȂ भगवान िशव को एक एिलयन से डर कर शौचालय की तरफ भागते हुए िदखाया 
गया; ' ĤǨाÎ
तर्' मूवी मȂ रणबीर जूता पहन कर मंिदर मȂ चले जाते हȅ; ' तांडव' मूवी मȂ उसका 
अिभनेता भगवान शंकर का रोल करते हुए गािल या ं देता है; जैसे 'काली' है, िजसके  एक हाथ मȂ 
एलजीबीटी का बोडर् िदखाया जाता है और एक जगह मुंह मȂ िसगरेट पीते हुए िदखाया जाता है; 
जैसे 'ओएमजी-1' थी और 'ओएमजी-2' अभी आने वाली है; जैसे 'अतरंगी रे' है, िजसमȂ िशव और 
हनुमान का अपमान िक
या गया और हीरोइन ने यहां तक कहा िक, ' हमको तुमने हनुमान का 
                   
 Not recorded. 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ģसाद समझ रखा है िक जो भी मांग लोगे, हम तुमको आकर दे दȂगे'; जैसे 'A Suitable Boy' आने 
वाली है और ' लूडो' आई है। महोदय, ऐसी ढेर सारी मूवीज़ हȅ, जो कहीं न कहीं सȂसर बोडर् की 
किमयȗ क े नाते इस समाज मȂ परोसी जा रही हȅ। अभी मेरे िम तर् कह रहे थे िक ये िफÊमȂ नक्सलाइट 
आंदोलन को हीरो वरिशप क े रूप  मȂ Ģोǹूस कर रही हȅ। वषर् 2015 मȂ आई.आई.एम., अहमदाबाद 
का एक अध्ययन हुआ था।  
महोदय, 62 Ģितशत िफÊमȗ मȂ बिनए बेईमान िदखाए गए, 74 परसȂट िफÊमȗ मȂ िसखȗ का 
मजाक उड़ाया गया, 78 परस Ȃट िफÊमȗ मȂ मिहलाओं को बदचलन िदखाया गया और उन्हȂ ईसाई 
बता िदया गय
ा और ठीक उसका उलटा 84 परस Ȃट िफÊमȗ मȂ यिद कोई एक िवशेष मजहब का 
Ëयिƪ बड़े से बड़ा आतंकवादी है, तो उसको िदखाया गया िक वह नमाज़ क े समय गोली खा 
सकता है, लेिकन नमाज़ की पोिज़शन से हटने को तैयार नहीं है, उसको पक्का मुसलम
ान िदखा 
िदया गया।  ऐसा क्यȗ हो रहा है? िसनेमैटोगर्ाफ एक्ट, 1952 की धा रा 5बी है, िजसमȂ सȂसर बोडर् 
को क ु छ िवशेष Ģकार की िफÊमȗ को संÎतुित न देने की अनुमित दी गई, िजसमȂ ‘action films 
against the sovereignty and integrity of India, against the security of the State, against 
friendly relations with foreign States, agains t public order, against decency or against 
morality, against defamation or contempt of court’ और आÌचयर् की बात यह है िक 
against defamation or contempt of court तो है, defamation of religion  और लोगȗ की 
धािर्मक भावनाओं को भड़काने वाली ऐसी िफÊमȗ क े िखलाफ कोई भी कानूनी Ģावधान नहीं िकया 
गया है।  इसिलए मȅ पूरे िदल से माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े इस िवधेयक का समथर्न करता हूं और उनसे 
आगर्ह करता हूं िक मȅ जन भावनाओं को उनके  बीच मȂ रख रहा हूं, वे उस पर भी िवचार करȂ।   
 
                   
डा. सोनल मानिंसह (नामिनदȃिशत): उपसभापित जी, आपने मुझे बोलने का अवसर िदया, उसके  
िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करती हूं।  मेरे क ेवल दो-तीन ही Ãवाइंट्स हȅ, िजनको मȅ उजागर करन ा 
चाहूंगी। सर, सबसे पहले मȅ यह कहना चाहती हूं िक  पाइरेसी शÅद, एक नेगेिटव शÅद है। It is a 
bad word,  क्यȗिक उसमȂ immaturity  िदखती है, lack of intelligence िदखता है और 
आइिडयाज़ की चोरी क े साथ-साथ पूरा का पूरा जो Ģोड्क्शन है, उसकी चोरी का ĢÌन भी उठता 
है। िकसी भी Ģकार की piracy को बंद करने क े िलए इस िबल मȂ अमȂडमȂट लाया जा रहा है। 
महोदय, मुझसे पहले सभी सदÎयȗ ने कहा है िक आज क े ज़माने मȂ हरेक बच्चे क े हाथ मȂ मोबाइल 
फोन है, लैपटॉप है और पूरा सोशल मीिडया, इंटर
नेट - सब उनकी मुƻी मȂ है।  ऐसी पिरिÎथित मȂ 
इस अमȂडमȂट क े ǎारा क ै से और कहां-कहां इसको रोक सकȂ गे, यह ĢÌन मेरे मन मȂ उठता है।  
माननीय मंतर्ी जी उसका िनराकरण करȂगे, तो अच्छा होगा।  अभी राधा मोहन जी बोल रहे थे िक 
बहुत सारी morality, religion वगैरह क े ĢÌन उठते हȅ।  मȅ चाहती हूं िक ऐसे जो शÅद हȅ, the key 
words for morality,  उसकी कोई definition दी जाए, क्यȗिक morality शÅद अलग-अलग 
कÊचरल कÇयुिनटीज़ मȂ अलग-अलग धमș क े अंतगर्त बहुत अलग होता है।  मुझे Sanskrit 
scholars क े ǎारा कहा गया है, भारतीय धमर्शाÎतर् क े scholars हȅ िक हमारे यहां morality शÅद 
का कोई टर्ांसलेशन ही नहीं है। It is being understood in a very different context, इसिलए मȅ 
चाहूंगी िक हमारे धमर्शाÎतर्ȗ क े अनुसार, हमारी भाषाओं क े अनुसार, हमारे टर्ेिडशन्स, िवचारȗ क े 
अनुसार यिद िंहदी मȂ इसका टर्ांसलेशन िमल जाए, तो बहुत ही सहायता िमलेगी।  मȅने बचपन से 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
33

क ु छ िफÊमȂ देखी हȅ, मȅ बहुत ज्यादा िफÊमȂ तो नहीं देख पाती हूं, क्यȗिक मुझे मेरा अपना काम 
मसरूफ़  रखता है, लेिकन मुझे याद है िक जेल िरफॉÇसर् क े िलए वी. शांताराम की ' दो बीघा 
ज़मीन' अǌुत िफÊम थी।  
'मदर इंिडया' - हम जो नारी शिƪ, सशिƪकरण की बात कर रहे हȅ, इस संबंध मȂ उससे 
बिढ़या िफÊम मȅ नहीं सोचती हूं िक आज तक बनी हो। नृत्य, संगीत और हमारी जो कलाएं हȅ, 
हमारी धरोहर हȅ, जीवंत धरोहर हȅ - ' झनक-झनक पायल बाजे' और ऐसी क ु छ िफÊमȂ हमारे 
सामने थीं। बच्चȗ क े िलए 'जागृित' िफÊम आई थी, िजसमȂ यह गाना था -  
 
"आओ बƳो तुÇहȂ िदखाएं झांकी िंहदुÎतान की, 
इस िमƺी से ितलक करो ये धरती है बिलदान की।" 
 
आज तक ऐसे गाने कान मȂ गूंजते हȅ और ऐसे दृÌय हमारी आंखȗ क े सामने नाचते हȅ। कल दोपहर 
मȂ जनजाितयȗ, टर्ाइबÊस क े बारे मȂ जो बहस हो रही थी, उसे मȅने सुना था। मुझे नहीं लगता है िक 
हमारी टर्ाइबल कÇयुिनटीज़ और इंिडजनस लोगȗ क े दशर्न मȂ, यानी उनको िदखाने मȂ हमारी 
िफÊमȂ आज तक सक्षम हो पाई हȅ।  शायद इसीिलए भी मुझे लगता है िक हम उन्हȂ नहीं समझ पाए 
हȅ और आज तक उन्हȂ टर्ाइबÊस कहते आए हȅ। We  have not understood what their 
traditions are; what their festivals are; what  their mind says; what their philosophy is.   
उनका िजस तरीके  से िफÊमȗ मȂ िनरूपण  होता रहा है, वह बहुत ही आपिǄजनक रहा है।  उनको 
हमेशा ऐसी अवÎथा मȂ िदखाया जाता है िक they are to be used and thrown away. मȅ चाहूंगी 
िक इस पर थोड़ा िवचार हो। जब आप सिर्टिफके शन दे रहे हȅ या इसके  िलए Ģावधान कर रहे हȅ, 
तो ऐसी िफÊम या ऐसे कन्टȂट क े बारे मȂ भी जागर्त रूप  से सोचा जाए। 7 वषर्, 10 वषर्, 13 वषर् - यह 
जो अलग-अलग आयु है, इसका मुझे कोई मतलब समझ मȂ नहीं आता है, क्यȗिक जैसा मȅने कहा 
िक आजकल सबके  पास मोबाइल होते हȅ।  इस पर आप कहां तक रोक लगा सकȂ गे, यह सोचने 
की बात है।   
महोदय, मȅ इस िबल का समथर्न करती हूं, धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRI S NIR
ANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh): Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir.  
Before I start speaking, I must confess that I have an abiding interest in films.  I have 
been creatively involved in films.  I have also produced some films. So, it is my duty to 
first inform the august House about my interest, before I speak.   
 Sir, I rise to support the Bill on behalf  of my party. There are four important 
features of this Bill. Why we feel that this Bill is commendatory and needs to be 
supported.  First, the Government reduces its control because it has taken away one 
round of revision power that it had und er Section 6. So, there is now lesser 
Government control on the creative aspect. Second, the certification period has been 
increased from ten years to perpetuity. It is also a very welcome step. One of the hon. 
Members has already spoken about it. Third,  age-appropriateness is required to be 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

mentioned in the certification now. This would give the viewers an informed choice 
when they are taking their children along with  them to view films.  When the films are 
certified as UA, they would know what age would be the appropriate age to take their 
children along with them to view the film. So , this gives that viewers’ choice to the 
audience and informs them better. So, this is a very salutary feature.  Fourth, which is 
the most important feature of the Bill, is the anti-piracy provision that has been made.  
Sir, I would only wish to state that the Government has done a good job in providing 
for this feature now. But, it may need to consider whether this may be a case of doing 
too little too late. And, I would like to give  the reasons for that. The provision, which 
has now been made for ensuring that if someone is carrying an audio-visual recording 
device into a cinema theatre has been made puni shable.  And, it is very creditable.  It 
does not go sufficiently far because this is possibly inspired by the Anti-Camcorder 
legislation that was in place in USA from 2005. South Korea and the Philippines had it 
in 2009 and 2011. At that time, that kind of provision possibly had a greater effect. I 
am not saying that it is not useful now. It is useful. I commend the Government. I am 
only trying to say that maybe there is a li ttle more that can be added. Earlier, when 
those laws were available in 2005, 2009 an d 201 what would happen is, someone had 
to carry a camcorder into the theatre for the purpose of recording a film.   
It was easier to detect, it was easier to arrest and it was easier to implement.   
Possibly, now, because of the proliferatio n of mobile phones, where everybody has a 
recording device in their pocket, giving teeth to the law today, in terms of 
implementing it, may be a little difficult. So, I would want the Government to go a little 
further. I am commending the Government for what they have done because this 
bridges a gap. Earlier, Sir, when only a co py was made and a copy was exhibited, it 
would result in what is called as an infrin gement under the Copyright Act. Once it is 
infringed, Section 63 would come in, and wh oever aided or abetted the infringement, 
including someone who may have recorded this movie in a cinema theatre would also 
become guilty, and he would also be punish ed. But, now, the very fact that someone 
is recording it in the theatre by taking an audio-visual recording device, by itself is 
sufficient to make it punishable. So, it will  have a larger deterrent effect. But, as I 
mentioned, Sir, it may be difficult for th e implementing agencies to ensure this 
because everybody has a mobile phone. If there are thousand people in an auditorium 
or five hundred people, each of them have  a recording device. So, the suggestion I 
have for the Government, therefore, is th is. Now the most common way in which this 
film is being shown is by it being streamed on these pirated sites. We have the 
provisions, thankfully, Sir, through all the three laws which enable the Government to 
stop this. One is the IT Act;  the second is the Copyrigh t Act; and the third is the 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
35

Cinematography Act. All are under the Centra l legislative sphere. So, it is the Central 
Government…   Sir, I am requesting for two more minutes.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Your party has one more speaker.  
 
SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY: I know, Sir.  Please give me two more minutes; 
otherwise, I can stop. I just have two important suggestions. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude in one minute. There is one more 
speaker.  
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY: Sir, what is happe ning now is that as and when there is 
an illegal streaming that is happening, the st reaming would have to be blocked.  So, 
the instructions would have to go from a la wful authority or a court.  We have found 
that it is very difficult to obtain these kinds of instructions on a film to film basis and on 
a site to site basis.  So, maybe, the Government may have to co me up with some 
scheme which will make it easier to give effe ct to what the Government itself seeks to 
achieve under the Piracy Act.  
 Sir, then, I have another important subm ission. It is now well documented that 
piracy is costing the Indian economy, wh ich is 2.8 billion dollars, and it roughly 
translates to Rs. 20,000 crores. This is only going to increase. I am, therefore, 
suggesting that if piracy is stopped, it woul d result in the power of the Indian cinema 
reaching larger audiences. As regards the so ft power of cinema. Just to give an 
example, the Korean cinema, it has someho w managed to reach every corner of the 
world. This has resulted in increased tourism.  Indian cinema is just on the frontiers of 
stepping outside the traditional areas of Indian film viewing. Sir,  I would request the 
Government to look at the piracy related i ssues a little more seriously. I commend the 
Government; I support the Bill but with a hope that with a young Minister in charge, 
we may have more proactive steps from the Government for protecting the film 
industry. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Ni ranjan Reddyji. Now, Shri Pabitra 
Margherita. 
 
SHRI PABITRA MARGHERITA (Assam): Sir, I thank you for giving me the opportunity 
to speak on the Cinematograph (Amendme nt) Bill, 2023. I support the Bill. Sir, 
almost all the points which I had prepar ed have already been spoken by my 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

colleagues. Yes, fortunately, I am from a State which has a very glorious history in film 
industry. Shri Jyoti Prasad Agarwala, the first film maker of Assam, produced and 
directed the first movie way back in 1935; it is called Jo y Murti. So, after 12 years, we 
are celebrating the 100 years of Assamese ci nema. The ‘Joy Murti’, the first movie, to 
the best of my information, it is the first dubb ed or really recorded movie in India. It is 
amongst the first 10 talkies of India. The main character, the protagonist, is female 
protagonist. I think during those days, this was the first film having a female character 
in the centre stage. So, I also had the opport unity to serve the film industry as a film 
worker. I am from the film fraternity. I have an experience of 25 years in Assamese film 
industry. 
I used to produce, direct and assist  the Directors as well. So, I had the 
experience as a member of Film Censoring Boards, and I served the first Government 
studio of India, that is, Jyoti Chitraban in Assam. It was established 60 years ago. I 
had the opportunity to serve as the Chairm an of the Film Studio, Government Film 
Studio. So, having these experiences, I really appreciate the moves taken by our hon. 
Minister. Because of the practical knowledg e or experience, with  the experience and 
knowledge, I do appreciate our hon. Minist er and our Government for taking this 
Amendment Bill.  
 Sir, the main focus in this Bill from my side is the piracy, and, yes, for a film-
maker or a member of the film fraternity, pi racy is like cancer of film industry. It not 
only affects the producer or the producti on-house but the entire ecosystem, right 
from the spot boy, the junior artists, dancers, to the Director, to the Writer. The entire 
ecosystem of film industry gets affected becau se of piracy, and I really, not only as a 
Member of this Parliament or a Member of BJP but as a film fraternity member also, 
congratulate and thank Anurag Thakurji for this Amendment.  
 Another important point which has alread y been spoken is the categorization of 
age-bar of certification, that is, UA category into three age-based categories, 
namely, UA 7+, UA 13+ and UA 16+. Earlier, it was a wide range because it was only 
UA, the movies, which can be seen even by  children with parental guidance; but it 
was a wide range, up to 18 years. But now, as it is UA 7+, UA 13+ and UA 16+, it will 
help the Censor Board, the guardians and the society. So, this categorization is 
welcomed by us, and the main thing is the piracy. My friends have already mentioned 
that our film industry has a great potentia lity. The revenue-generation is almost 2 
billion USD equaling Rs. 16,000  crore or something more. But it will be doubled if 
piracy is stopped. 
So, as a film fraternity member, as a member of BJP, I again congratulate, 
thank and support our hon. Minister and the Bill. Thank you.  
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
37

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Pabitraji. Within four minutes' time, you have 
given good inputs. माननीय Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक। 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक (महाराÍटर्): माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् 
िबल 'The Cinematograph (A mendment) Bill, 2023' पर बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। सर, माननीय मंतर्ी, Ǜी अनुराग ठाकु र जी इस िबल को लेकर आए हȅ और मȅ 
इस िबल क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं।  
सर, इसमȂ दो-तीन बहुत महत्वपूणर् चीज़Ȃ आई हȅ। एक तो इस िबल मȂ, ' The 
Cinematograph Act, 1952' मȂ संशोधन का ĢÎताव है; दूसरा, पायरेसी मȂ कठोर दंड का 
Ģावधान है, और तीसरा, हर आयु वगर् क े िलए अलग-अलग Ǜेिणयां बनाने का Ģावधान है।  
सर, जैसे हमारे Îकू ल और कॉलेज की पढ़ाई हम पर Ģभाव डालती है, हमारे गुरु  का ज्ञान 
और Ģिशक्षण हम पर Ģभाव डालता है, उसी तरह िसनेमा भी हमारी लाइफ पर Ģभाव डालता है। 
कई माननीय सांसदȗ ने यहां पर बताया भी है िक िसनेमा हमारे देश की इको
नॉमी मȂ बहुत इÇपॉटȄट 
रोल Ãले करता है। इसमȂ जॉब िकर्एश
न की भी बहुत महत्वपूणर् क्षमता है।  
सर, मȅ महाराÍटर् से आता हूं, जहां बॉलीवुड का हब है। मȅ महाराÍटर् क े कोÊहापुर से आता 
हूं। तकरीबन सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ ने िजन दादासाहेब फाÊके  जी का नाम िलया है, िजन्हȂ िफÊम 
इंडÎटर्ी क े जगत का जनक कहा जाता है, वे भी कोÊहापुर से ही थे। कोÊहापुर से िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी मȂ 
और भी बहुत बड़ी-बड़ी हिÎतयां थीं, जैसे वी. शांताराम जी, माÎटर िवनायक जी, भालज ी 
पȂढारकर जी - इन सबने इंिडयन िसनेमा को इंटरनेशनल रेकिग्नशन िदलवाने की कोिशश की है 
और उसे वह िमला भी है। भालजी पȂढारकर तो वह नाम है, िजन्हȗने हमारे देश मȂ तकरीब न  100 
साल पहले िफÊम वाला क ैमरा बनाया था। वह काम हमारे कोÊहापुर क े भालजी पȂढारकर जी ने 
िकया था।   
 सर, मȅ महाराÍटर् क े बारे मȂ बोलना चाहूँगा, मराठी िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी क े बारे मȂ बोलना चाहूँगा।  
मराठी िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी भी अभी बॉलीवुड को टक्क र दे रही है।  हमारी कई िफÊमȂ अभी 100 करोड़ 
क े Îलॉट मȂ जा चुकी हȅ, लेिकन मȅ मंतर्ी जी से कहना चाहता हूँ िक उनकी भी क ु छ दुिवधाएँ हȅ।  
जैसे - Îटेट गवनर्मȂट उनको मराठी िफÊमȂ बनाने क े िलए क ु छ अनुदान देती है, वैसे ही मȅ चाहूँगा 
िक देश की िजत
नी भी रीजनल लȅग्वेजेज़ मȂ िफÊमȂ बनȂ, उनमȂ क Ȃ दर् का थोड़ा सहयोग होना चािहए।  
अगर उनको हम थोड़ा सहयोग दȂगे, तो रीजनल लȅग्वेजेज़ मȂ कई िफÊमȂ बन सकती हȅ।   
सर, एक दूसरी दुिवधा यह है िक इन रीजनल लȅग्वेजेज़ की िफÊमȗ को िथएटर अवेलेबल 
नहीं होते हȅ। इसिलए रीजनल लȅग्वेजेज़ की मूवी ज़ क े िलए एक Ģावधान िकया जाए िक फलां 
िथएटर मȂ उनको िदखाया जाएगा या हरेक क े िलए कोई कोटा अलॉट िकया जाए। सर, इसी मȂ 
तीसरा िनवेदन यह है िक जो िंसगल Îकर्ीन िथएटसर् हȅ, जो पुराने समय से चले आ रहे थे, उनके  
िलए बहुत सख्
त Ģावधान है। उनको नया बनाने क े िलए बहुत सारे कड़े Ģावधान हȅ। पुराने िंसगल 
Îकर्ीन िथएटसर् को िगराकर वहाँ पर मÊटीÃलेक्स बनाना हो या और भी कई चीज़Ȃ, जैसे वहाँ पर 
मॉÊस बनाने हȗ, वे जगहȂ बहुत सारी Ģा
इम लोके शंस पर होती हȅ। मȅ मंतर्ी जी से माँग करता हूँ िक 
इसमȂ अगर हम उनकी मदद करȂगे, तो नए तरीके  क े िडिजटल िथएटसर् वहाँ पर बन सकते हȅ।   
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 सर, यहाँ पर दूसरी बात पाइरेसी की कही गई। इसकी बात यहाँ पर सभी सांसदȗ ने की।  
जैसे इंिडयन इकोनॉमी मȂ हमारी िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी की गर्ोथ हो रही है, वैसे पाइरेसी की भी गर्ोथ हो 
रही है। बहुत बड़े पैमाने पर पाइरेसी हो रही है। मȅ मंतर्ी जी का आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ िक इन्हȗने 
अलग-अलग आयु वगर् क े िलए अलग-अलग Ǜेिणयाँ बनाई हȅ, जैसे - U/A 7+, U/A 13+, U/
A 
16+.  अलग-अलग आयु वगर् क े िलए ये Ǜेिणयाँ बनाई हȅ, लेिकन उस पर इंटरनेट का क ंटर्ो ल 
ज्यादा है और इंटरनेट मȂ कई सारे Ģाइवेट Ãलेयसर् हȅ।  मȅ सरकार से यह भी माँग करू ँगा िक देश 
भर मȂ सरकार का इंटरनेट Ĥॉडबȅड हर हाउसहोÊड मȂ होना चािहए। इसके  िलए भी हमȂ कोिशश 
करनी चािह
ए, क्यȗिक इस पर हमारा क ंटर्ोल नहीं है। अभी मैडम ने कहा िक हमारे बॉलीवुड की 
जो िफÊÇस हȅ या हमारा जो संगीत है, वह िवÌव मȂ Ģिसǉ है। " झनक-झनक पायल बाजे" सौ 
साल पहले, पचास साल पहले बना था, हम आज भी उसे सुन रहे हȅ। "आओ बच्चो तुÇहȂ िदखाएँ 
झाँकी िहन्दुÎतान की" जैसे गाने आज कहाँ हȅ?  अभी की िफÊमȗ मȂ गाने आ रहे हȅ - "चा र बोतल 
वोडका, काम मेरा रोज़ का",  "रात भर पाटीर् करो", "अभी सुबह नहीं हुई है।" इस पर भी क ु छ 
क ंटर्ोल होना चािहए, क्यȗिक ...(समय की घंटी)... सर, मȅ अब खत्म करू ँगा। सर, मेरा कहना है 
िक इस पर भी हमारा थोड़ा क ंटर्ोल होना चािहए। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से अनुरोध करू ँगा 
िक िजस तरह उǄर Ģदेश मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: नहीं, Ãलीज़।  आपस मȂ बात नहीं करȂ। 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक: सर, उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 1,000 करोड़ की लागत से बहुत बड़
ी िफÊम 
इंडÎटर्ी बन रही है। मȅ सरकार से अनुरोध करू ँगा िक हरेक राज्य मȂ, िवशेषकर महाराÍटर् मȂ, 
क्यȗिक महाराÍटर् का बॉलीवुड िवÌव Ģिसǉ है, इसिलए महाराÍटर् मȂ भी इसका एक िफÊम Îटूिडयो 
बने, िजसमȂ सरकार की मदद हो। हमारे महाराÍटर् मȂ कोÊहापुर मȂ भी बहुत से कलाकार हȅ, उनक ो 
इससे फायदा होगा, उनको इसका योगदान िमलेगा।  ...(समय की घंटी)... उनको मज़बूत करने 
क े िलए सरकार ÎटेÃस उठाए। मȅ इस िबल का पूरी तरह से समथर्न करता हूँ, बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।                                  
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार (मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उ
पसभापित महोदय, आपने इस िवधेयक पर मुझे 
अपना वƪËय रखने का जो अवसर Ģदान िकया है, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।   
 महोदय, सवर्Ģथम मȅ इस सदी क े राÍटर् नायक, इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, माननीय मोदी जी 
एवं सूचना और Ģसारण मंतर्ी, माननीय अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र जी क े इस संशोधन िवधेयक क े िलए 
बधाई Ģेिषत करती हूँ।   
 महोदय, हम सभी जा
नते हȅ िक कला हमारी संÎकृ ित का एक अहम िहÎसा है। हम यह भी 
मानते हȅ िक पिरवतर्न इस सृिÍट का िनयम है। िस
नेमा जगत मȂ भी उसके  माध्यम मȂ, साधन मȂ, 
उससे संबǉ ĢौǏोिगकी मȂ दशकȗ मȂ समय क े साथ पिरवतर्न आया है, इसिलए इसकी Ģमाणन 
Ģणाली मȂ भी पिरवतर्न होना आवÌयक है, जो इसे समकालीन होने की तर
फ आगे बढ़ाता है। हम 
सब जानते हȅ िक यह संशोधन िवधेयक समय क े अनुक ू ल Ģमाणन Ģिकर्या को और अिधक Ģभावी 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
39

बनाने, समगर् रूप  से िफÊम चोरी पर रोक लगाने और इस क्षेतर् मȂ नौकिरयȗ क े सृजन को बढ़ावा 
देने क े िलए एक महत्वपूणर् िवधेयक है।   
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, चलिचतर् मनुÍय की एक अǌुत उपलिÅध है। हम जानते हȅ 
िक इसके  माध्यम से मानव समाज क े िविभन्न पहलुओं का सजीव िच
तर्ांकन होता है। 
 
 3.00 P.M. 
 
यह भावȗ की अिभËयिƪ का एक मजबूत आधार है। मुझे खुशी है िक इस सदन मȂ इस क्षेतर् से जुड़े 
हुए हमारे साथी सदÎय भी मौजूद हȅ। मȅ उनकी कला को Ģणाम करती हूँ और मȅ यह मा
 नती हूँ िक 
वे भी मेरी इस बात से सहमत हȗगे िक नई िडिजटल ĢौǏोिगकी क े आगमन से, िथयेटर मȂ जाने 
वाले लोगȗ की संख्या मȂ कमी क े कारण एवं इंटरनेट या सोशल मीिडया क े माध्यम से िफÊमȗ की 
चोर
ी क े कारण िफÊम जगत को बहुत नुकसान हुआ है। यह संशोधन िफÊम पाइरेसी क े खतरे को 
Ëयापक रूप  से अंक ु श लगाने और िसनेमा जगत क े सृजन ात्मक उǏोग की सुरक्षा करने क े 
Ģाथिमक उǈेÌय से लाया गया है, िजसमȂ उÊलंघन पर कठोर सजा का भी Ģावधान है, जो तीन 
माह से लेकर तीन साल तक भी है और इसमȂ अथर् दंड का भी Ģावधान िकया गया है।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, हम सब जानते हȅ िक ऑनलाइन िफÊमȗ की पाइरेसी से 
ओटीटी Ãलैटफ
ॉमर् को 2022 मȂ 24.63 हजार करोड़ रुपए  का नुकसान हुआ है। अनȃÎट एंड यंग की 
एक िरपोटर् क े मुतािबक पाइरेसी से 2019 मȂ भारतीय िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी को करीब 18 हजार  करोड़ 
रुपए  का नुकसान हुआ है। इससे िसफर् पैसȗ का ही नुकसान नहीं होता है, बिÊक इस
के  कारण 
परफॉरमȂस लॉस, िकर्एिटिवटी लॉस, जॉब लॉस आिद भी होते हȅ।  
माननीय उ
पसभापित महोदय, चलिचतर् संशोधन िवधेयक, 2023 िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी एवं 
सृजनात्मक उǏोगȗ को न क ेवल पाइरेसी की महामारी से िनजात िदलाने का काम करेगा, बिÊक 
िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी क े तीĨ िवकास मȂ भी मदद करेगा। अभी हमारे एक सदÎय माननीय राधा मोहन 
दास जी ने भी कहा था िक कई िफÊ
मȂ ऐसी हȅ, िजनमȂ हमारी संÎकृ ित का गलत िचतर्ांकण िकया 
गया है। वैसे भी कहा गया है िक जैसा िचतर् होगा, वैसा ही िचǄ होगा। क्या िदखाना है, क ै से 
िदखाना है, कहाँ िदखाना है और िक
सको िदखाना है - इस िवधेयक क े ǎारा इसको भी िनयंितर्त 
करने का काम िकया जाएगा। मȅ सरकार की इस पहल का खुले िदल से Îवागत करती हूँ।  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, िफÊम पाइरेसी को रोकने क े िल ए अिधिनयम मȂ ĢÎतािवत 
संशोधन, भारत क े कानून को संयुƪ राज्य अमेिरका, कनाडा, जमर्नी, इटली और िफलीपींस जैसे 
न्याियक क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ वैिÌवक सवȘǄम Ģभाव क े साथ संरेिखत करेगा - यह हमारे िलए एक बड़ी 
उपलिÅध है।  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, चचार्
धीन संशोधन िवधेयक, 2023 मȂ वैसे तो कई Ģशंसनीय 
Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ, लेिकन सबसे Îवागत योग्य कदम Ģमाण पतर् की सतत वैधता का ĢÎताव है, 
िजसका हम Îवागत करते हȅ। हम सब जानते हȅ िक यह िवधेयक िव िभन्न Ãलैटफॉमș पर िफÊमȗ 
और सामगर्ी क े वगीर्करण मȂ एकरूपता तो लाएगा ही, लेिकन इसके  साथ-साथ िफÊमȗ को बढ़ावा 
देने और Îथानीय सामगर्ी को वैिÌवक बनाने मȂ मदद करने की िदशा मȂ एक कर्ांितकारी कदम 
होगा, क्यȗिक सबसे ज्य ादा  िफÊमȂ हमारे भारत मȂ ही बनती हȅ, िविभन्न भाषाओं मȂ बनती हȅ। हमारी 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

इस कला को अब िवदेशȗ मȂ भी Ģोत्साहन और पुरÎकार िमला है। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की सोच 
हमेशा सृजनात्मक रही है। उन्हȗने िविभन्न कला और कला से जुड़े हुए क्षेतर् क े लोगȗ क े िहतȗ को 
संरिक्षत करने का सदा ही Ģयास िकया है।  
 माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, मुझे इस बात का गवर् एवं सुखद अनुभूित है िक माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश जहाँ िवकास की ओर आगे बढ़ रहा है, िविभन्न 
कÊयाणकारी योजनाओं क े माध्यम से Ģत्येक Ëयिƪ  की Ģग
ित को सुरिक्षत कर रहा है, वहीं कला 
क े क्षेतर् मȂ भी उनके  िहतȗ को संरिक्षत करते हुए, गंभीर संवेदना का पिरचय देते हुए इस िवधेयक 
को लाने का काम िकया गया है। ... (समय की घं
टी)... मȅ पुनः माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और 
माननीय अनुराग जी को धन्यवाद देती हूँ। बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Abdul Wahab, not present. Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha. 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चन्दर्Ģभा (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ आपका बहुत आभार Ëयƪ करत
 ी हूँ िक 
आपने मुझे चलिचतर् (संशोधन) िवधेयक जैसे महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर सदन क े समक्ष अपने िवचार 
ĢÎतुत करने का अवसर Ģदान िकया।  
 महोदय, िकसी भी देश की िफÊमȂ उस देश की सामािजक एवं सांÎकृ ितक जीवन का दपर्ण 
होती हȅ। हमारे देश मȂ 1913 मȂ मूक िफÊम, राज
ा हिरÌचंदर् से लेकर आज तक बन रही िफÊमȗ ǎारा 
देश क े सामािजक एवं सांÎकृ ितक पहलुओं को दशार्या जा रहा है। इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से 
सरकार ǎा
रा भारतीय िफÊम उǏोग क े िहत मȂ अनेकȗ Ģावधान िकए जा रहे हȅ। आज भारतीय 
िफÊम उǏोग क्षेतर् मȂ िफÊम सामगर्ी की चोरी एक बड़ी समÎया क े रूप  मȂ उभरी है। Ģत्येक वषर् 
िफÊम सामगर्ी की चोरी से भारतीय िफ Êम  उǏोग को लगभग 20 हजार करोड़ रुपए  का नुकसान 
हो रहा है। 
महोदय, इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से सरकार ǎारा िफÊम की सामगर्ी की चोरी को रोकने 
हेतु कठोर Ģावधान िकए जा रहे हȅ। इसके  अितिरƪ यह िवधेयक भारतीय िफÊमȗ को बढ़ावा देने 
तथा Îथानीय सामगर्ी को वैिÌ
वक बनाने की िदशा मȂ एक सकारात्मक कदम है। वतर्मान मȂ सȂसर 
बोडर् क े िनयमȗ क े अनुसार िफÊमȗ को िविभन्न Ǜेिणयȗ मȂ वगीर्कृ त िकया जाता है, परंतु इस 
िवधेयक क े माध्यम से Ǜेिणयȗ मȂ वगीर्कृ त करने क े बजाए, िफÊमȗ को उĦ समूह क े आधार पर 
वगीर्कृ त करने का Ģावधान िकया जा रहा है। मȅ इसके  िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी एवं माननीय 
मंतर्ी, आदरणीय अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र जी को बधाई देती हूँ िक उनके  ǎारा इस गंभीर िवषय पर 
िंचतन िकया गया है। जैसा िक मȅने पहले भी कहा है िक िकसी भी देश की सांÎकृ ितक एवं 
सामािजक Ëय
वÎथाओं को िफÊमȗ ǎारा दशार्या जाता है, परंतु आज भारतीय िफÊमȗ की सामगर्ी 
का पिÌचमीकरण िकया जा रहा है। अनेक िफÊमȂ ऐसी होती थीं, िजनकी सामगर्ी को आप पिरवार 
क े साथ नहीं देख सकते थे। इन िफÊ
मȗ का भारतीय संÎकृ ित एवं सामािजक ËयवÎथाओं से कोई 
मतलब नहीं होता था। इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथाओं को िनयंितर्त करने हेतु िफÊमȗ को उĦ समूह क े 
आधार पर वगीर्
कृ त करने का िनणर्य सरकार ǎारा एक सकारात्मक कदम है।  
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
41

 महोदय, एक समय ऐसा था, जब हम पिरवार क े साथ बैठकर िफÊमȂ देखते थे। तब कई 
अिभनेताओं ǎारा भारतीय रीित-िरवाज़ क े साथ ऐसे गानȗ को ĢÎतुत िकया जाता था, िजन्हȂ 
देखकर मन खुश होता था और अच्छा लगता था िक मेरा भारत महान है। परंतु िजस Ģक ार से 
भारतीय िफÊमȗ का पिÌचमीकरण िकया गया है, उसी Ģकार से देश की सांÎकृ ितक िवरासत को 
िमटाने क े िलए बॉलीवुड मȂ अनेक अन्य ËयवÎथाएं Îथािपत करने का षǹ ंतर् भी रचा गय ा  है। कई 
सिदयȗ तक देश की सांÎकृ ितक िवरासत को िफÊमȗ क े माध्यम से िमटाने क े िलए षǹ ंतर् होते रहे 
हȅ और हमारी पहले की सरकारȂ मूक दशर्क बनकर देखती रही हȅ। महोदय, िÎथित यह थी िक 
िफÊमȗ मȂ म ािफयाओ ं का इतना भय था िक िफÊमȗ क े िनदȃशक, िनमार्ता और अिभनेता चाहते हुए 
भी भारत की संÎकृ ित का बखान नहीं कर सकते थे। आज िफÊमȗ क े िनदȃशक, िनमार्ता िबना िकसी 
भय क े देश क े िहत मȂ, देश की संÎकृ ित क े िहत मȂ िफÊमȗ का िनमार्ण कर रहे हȅ। भारतीय िसनेमा 
जनक दादासाहेब फालके  िजस कÊपना क े साथ िफÊम जग
त की Îथापना करके  गए थे, आज 
भारतीय िफÊम जगत पुन: उसी Îविर्णम काल की तरफ जा रहा है। ...(समय की घं टी)...  
महोदय, मȅ इन सभी ËयवÎथाओं क े िलए देश क े माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई और शुभकामनाएं देती हूँ। आज सदन मȂ यह िवधेयक भारतीय 
िफÊम जगत क े िलए अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् िवधेयक है, क्यȗिक िवÌ व मȂ सबसे ज्यादा िफÊमȂ बनाने का 
िरकॉडर् भारत क े नाम है। सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ समाÃत करती हूँ। भारतीय िफÊम जगत को िफÊमȗ 
की सामगर्ी की चोरी जैसी अनेक समÎयाओं का सामना करन ा पड़ रहा है। माननीय सरकार और 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी ǎारा िफÊम उǏोग की समÎयाओं का िनÎतारण करने क े िलए िवधेयक लाने का 
जो िवशेष कदम उठाया गया है, जो पहल की गई है, मȅ उसका Îवागत करती हूँ और पुरजोर 
समथर्न करती हूँ, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी िबơब क ुमार देब (ितर्
पुरा): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, सबसे पहले मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी को धन्यवाद दूँगा िक उन्हȗने मेरे सामने बैठे एक ऐसे नौजवान को मंतर्ी बनाया - और वे 
नौजवान हȅ, यह उन्हȗने इस िबल को लाकर सािबत कर िदया है। ' िसनेमैटोगर्ाफ ( संशोधन) 
िवधेयक, 2023' पर बोलने से पह
ले मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक मȅ िजस ितर्पुरा की धरती से आता हूँ, 
वह सिचन देव बमर्न की भूिम है, राहुल देव बमर्न की भूिम है। मȅ उस भूिम से आता हूँ, तो 
Îवाभािवक तौर पर, हालाँिक मȅने पह
ले सोचा था िक मȅ नहीं बोलूँगा, लेिकन उनके  Ģित मेरी जो 
Ǜǉा और िव
Ìवास है, उसे देखते हुए मȅ आपके  सामने बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ। सर, मȅ गाऊं गा 
- "ओ मांझी रे..." यह एस. डी. बमर्न का मेन गाना है।   
महोदय, हमारे सा मन े आज िजनको रहना चािहए था, जो हर बार आवाज़ उठाते रहते हȅ 
िक मोदी जी ने सरकार मȂ आने क े बाद रोज़गार क े िलए क्या िकया, कहां-कहां काम िकया। जब 
रोज़गार से संबंिधत कोई िबल या अमȂडमȂट आता है, तब वे यह ां नहीं रहते हȅ, बोलते भी नहीं हȅ। वे 
बाहर जाकर मीिडया मȂ बोलȂगे िक रोज़गार कहां से आएगा। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप िवषय पर बोिलए। 
 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी िबơब क ुमार देब: मȅ िवषय पर आता हूं। मȅ मीिडया और मनोरंजन क्षेतर् को sun rise sector 
मानता हूं। इस िवधेयक मȂ जो संशोधन आया है, मȅ इसको सपोटर् भी करता हूं और साथ ही साथ 
यह भी कहना चाहता हूं िक इसमȂ अनुमानतः वषर् 2025 तक 4 लाख करोड़ का रोज़ग ार आएगा 
और वषर् 2030 तक यह लगभग साढ़े सात लाख करोड़ का रोज़गार हो सकता है, िंकतु यह सुनने 
वाले यहां नहीं हȅ। अब रोज़गार कहां से आएगा? जब यह िबल लाया गया है, इसमȂ संशोधन लाया 
गया है, तो इससे चोर
ी रोकी गई है, पाइरेसी रोकी गई है और इसमȂ Îलॉट बना िदया गया है।  
इसके  साथ-साथ, इसके  माध्यम से सȂसर की ËयवÎथा की गई है, ओटीटी मȂ रोक लगाने की 
ËयवÎथा की गई है, लेिक
न वे लोग यहां नहीं हȅ। मुझे दु:ख है िक डेमोकर्े सी का जो सबसे बड़ा 
फोरम हेÊदी अपोिज़शन होता है, वह आज यहाँ नहीं है। मȅ तो राज्य सभा मȂ नया आया हूं, िंकतु मȅ 
जब से यहाँ आया हूं, तब से इनका जो रोल देखता हूं, वह मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आता िक वे देश क े 
िलए सोचते हȅ या अपने िलए सोचते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: आप िबल पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी िबơब क ुमार देब: यह जो िव
धेयक लाया गया है, मȅ इसका सपोटर् करता हूं और साथ ही साथ 
अनुराग जी को धन्यवाद भी देता हूं और माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को भी धन्यवाद देता हूं। मȅ इस 
पर िडटेल मȂ इसिलए नहीं बोलूंगा, क्यȗिक इस सभा मȂ बैठे इसी क्षेतर् मȂ काम करने वाले लोगȗ ने 
इस पर बहुत िडटेल मȂ चचार् की है। मȅ बार-बार माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को बधाई दूंगा िक इसके  
माध्यम से आपने चोरी रोकी। आपने िजस तरह से अलग-अलग ËयवÎथा की है, उसी तरह से 
इसमȂ भी यह ËयवÎथा की गई है। इस
से जो रोज़गार सृजन होगा, उससे यंग जनरेशन को लाभ 
िमलने वाला है।  अनुराग जी यह िबल लेकर आए हȅ, यह अमȂडमȂट लेकर आए हȅ। ये नौजवान हȅ 
और इन्हȗने िहÇमत की है।  अनुराग जी, आप आगे भी िहÇमत कीिजए, हम लोग आपके  साथ हȅ।  
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRI G.K. VASAN (T
amil Nadu): Sir, films give powerful message to the society and 
films are watched by crores and crores of  people in various languages in various 
States in the country. This particular Bill,  which is a very impo rtant Bill, has been 
drafted by the Ministry very clearly and it is the need of the hour for the industry. 
 Last time, around four decades ago,  in 1984, certain amendments were 
brought forward, and, now, after forty year s, a lot of amendments and changes have 
been brought. It means that it is really going to help the industry and the people 
associated with the industry. It is surely going to impact the fu ture of all of them, 
namely, heroes, heroines, producers, techni cians or light boys. Sir, the important 
issues being talked about are piracy and unauthorized recording. Simple licensing, no 
renewals, lifelong certificates, censorshi p, powers of the Tribunal are certain 
important aspects in the Bill.   
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
43

I am sure, this Bill introduced today w ill go a long way in the film industry and 
the industry will run without problems.  Changes proposed by the hon. Members who 
are associated with the industry and are here in this august Hous e may be considered 
by the hon. Minister. With these words, I support the Bill. Thank you very much.   
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (ANDHRA PRADESH): Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, Sir. I, on behalf of my party and my leader, Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy 
Garu, rise to support the Bill. I would like to bring only three points for your kind 
consideration and the consideration of the hon. Minister.   
The first point is that India's population  has crossed 140 crores, which is more 
than China's population, and in China, there are about 80,000 theatres, whereas in 
India, there are only 8,000 th eatres. Therefore, it is impe rative on the part of the 
Government to encourage theatre construc tion by taking appropriate measures 
because cinema is the cheapest industry for many grass-root level workers.   
The second point which I would like to bring to your kind notice is regarding the 
immunity after the Censor Board Certificat e is issued. What is the meaning of the 
Censor Board Certificate, Sir? It means that it is perfectly in order. The Act does not 
envisage or does not say anything about the immunity that is granted to the producer 
or to the Director after the Certificate is issued. Once the Certif icate is issued, it 
means that there should be immunity for the director and producer against any 
criminal cases that are likely to be filed. The Bill does not contain any such provision.   
The third point, the last point, is a ve ry important point. Through you, I would 
like the hon. Minister to take note of it. Pr esuming that the total cost of production of 
a Hindi movie with top stardom is about Rs. 400 crores, the big hero, like Salman 
Khan, will charge about Rs. 250 crores, which is about 70 to 75 per cent of the total 
production cost.  Even though the cinema industry has got about two lakh workers, 
the real beneficiaries are only the heroes who are hardly 50 or 60 in number in India.  
Therefore, my suggestion to the hon. Minister is that there has to be an appropriate 
legislation to ensure that the benefits are distributed evenly because they are charging 
from the grass-root level people, from the villagers, whose hard-earned money is 
spent on watching the movies. Therefore, appropriate provisions have to be brought 
in for equitable distribution of the benefi ts to all the workers because hero alone 
cannot produce the movie. There are hundre ds of workers who are working day in 
and day out to produce a movie.   
Apart from this, one import ant feature is that hero's son will become hero, but 
hero's daughter will not become heroine. Wh y? Your goodself is aware of the reason 
for that. Is the hero's son only the hand some personality? No . There are so many 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

handsome personalities in India. Why are heroes' sons becoming heroes? I request 
the hon. Minister to consider this point also. Thank you very much, Sir.   
 
Ǜी अजय Ģताप िंसह ( मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आज इस सदन मȂ जो 
िसनेमैटोगर्ाफ ( अमȂडमȂट) िबल, 2023 ĢÎतुत हुआ है, मȅ इसका समथर्न करता हूं। इस िबल क े 
Ģावधानȗ क े संदभर् मȂ मेरे पूवर् वƪाओं ने बहुत अच्छी तरह से सदन मȂ उपिÎथत सािथयȗ को 
अवगत कर
ाया है। मȅ संक्षेप मȂ इस िबल क े फलीताथर् क े संदभर् मȂ सदन का ध्यान आकृ Íट करना 
चाहता हूँ। इस िबल मȂ Ģमुख रूप  से तीन संशोधन हुए हȅ। पहला संशोधन दशर्क वगर् क े संदभर् मȂ है। 
जो यू.ए. क ै टेगरी ट्वेÊव Ãलस थी, उसको हटाकर यू.ए. क ै टेगरी तीन वग
ș मȂ कर दी गई है। मȅ 
समझता हूँ िक यह संशोधन आने क े कारण िफÊ
मȗ मȂ दशर्क वगर् की वृिǉ होगी। इसके  साथ ही 
आज भारत एक िज़Çमेदार देश है, भारत का समाज िज़Çमेदार है और इस िज़Çमेदारी को देखते 
हुए सरकार ने भारतीय समाज को एक अवसर िदया है िक वह तय करे िक उनके  पिरवार को, 
उनके  बच्चȗ को क्या देखना है, क्या नहीं देखना है। यह िज़Çमेदारी सरकार क े ऊपर नहीं है, यह 
िज़Çमेदारी पिरवार क े ऊपर है। सरकार की यह पहल िनिÌचत रूप  से Îवागतयोग्य है।  
 जो दूसरा Ģमुख संशोधन है, वह पाइरेसी क े संदभर् मȂ है। पाइरेसी क े संदभर् मȂ न क ेवल 
िफÊमȗ की चोर
ी, अिपतु उसके  Ģचार-Ģसार, उसके  Ģसारण को भी इसके  दायरे मȂ रखा गया है। 
जो इस काम मȂ संलग्न होगा, उसका भी क ृत्य आपरािधक माना जाएगा, उस पर भी जुमार्ना 
लगेगा, उसके  ऊपर भी मुकदमा चलेगा, उसको भी सजा होगी और यह जो Piracy का संशोधन 
हुआ है, इसके  कारण िफÊम उǏोग को बहुत लाभ होगा। अभी मेरे अनेक सािथयȗ ने उÊलेख िकया 
है िक यह ऐसा उǏोग है, जो भारत क े कोष मȂ 18 हजार करोड़ रुपय े का योगदान देता है।  अगर 
यह िफÊम Piracy रुक  गई, तो िफÊम उǏोग की आमदनी बढ़ेगी और िफÊम उǏोग की आमदनी 
बढ़ने का अथर् है िक भारत क े कोष मȂ िफÊम उǏोग क े ǎारा ज्यादा योगदान िदया जाएगा। अभी 
यहां पर अनेक सािथयȗ ने इस बात का उÊलेख िकया है िक अभी हमारा िफÊम उǏोग थोड़ा सहमा 
हुआ है, एक जकड़न मȂ रहता है, पेटर्ोडॉलर क े Ģभाव मȂ रहता है।  यह पेटर्ोडॉलर का Ģभाव है, जो 
हमारी सÆयता और संÎकृ ित को Ģभािवत करता है, िफÊमȗ क े िचतर्ण को भी Ģभािवत करता है। 
अगर यह Piracy रुक  गई, तो हमारा िफÊम उǏोग अपने पांव पर खड़ा हो जाएगा, खुद सक्षम हो 
जाएगा, िफर उसको िकसी भी पेटर्ोडॉलर या इÎलािमक डॉलर क े सहयोग की आवÌयकता नहीं 
पडे़गी।   
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूं िक राजनैितक क्षेतर् का कायर्कतार् होने क े 
नाते - आप सब भी राजनैितक क्षेतर् क े कायर्कतार् हȅ - हम लोगȗ को एक महारत हािसल है िक हम 
िलफाफा देखकर उसके  अंदर का मजमून समझ िलया करते हȅ। इसमȂ वषर् 1952 से चला आ रहा 
था िक दस साल बाद िकसी िफÊम को Ģमाणन क े िलए, उसके  सिर्टिफके ट को हािसल करने क े 
िलए दोबारा आना पड़ेगा। क्यȗ आना पड़ेगा, इसके  पीछे क्या राज़ है? इसके  पीछे यह राज है िक  
*  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
                   
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
45

Ǜी उपसभापित: अजय जी, जो बात आप िवषय पर बोलȂगे, वही िरकॉडर् मȂ जाएगी। 
 
Ǜी अजय Ģताप िंसह: सर, मȅ िबल पर ही बोल रहा हूं। Åलैक मनी जेनरेट होती थी।  एक बार दस 
साल क े िलए Ģमाण पतर् िदया, िफर दोबारा दस साल क े िलए आओ, िफर उसके  िलए अंडर िद 
टेबल बहुत सारी डीÊस होती हȅ, वह डील करो और यह जो डील है, यही Åलैक मनी जेनरेशन 
होता है। यह Åलैक मनी का जो जेनरेशन होता था, इसमȂ Ģावधान िदया है िक एक बार Ģमाण पतर् 
ले िलया, अब यह शाÌवत है, तो दोबारा आने की जरूरत नहीं है। ...(समय की घं
टी)... इससे 
Åलैक मनी का जेनरेशन भी समाÃत होगा और उसके  माध्यम से िफÊम िनमार्ता और िफÊम उǏोग 
जगत क े लोग िनभर्य होकर अपना काम कर सकȂ गे, इसके  माध्यम से लाखȗ-करोड़ȗ लोगȗ को 
रोज़गार िम
ल रहा है और जैसा बताया गया है िक यह expected है  िक जैसे-जैसे िफÊम उǏोग 
गर्ो करेगा, एंटरटेनमȂट इंडÎटर्ी गर्ो करेगी, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद अजय जी।   
 
 Ǜी अजय Ģताप िंसह: तो इससे न क ेवल देश की आमदनी बढे़गी, बिÊक लोगȗ को रोज़गार क े 
अवसर भी िमलȂगे। आपने मुझे इस िबल पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको 
धन्यवाद देता हूं। मȅ एक बार िफर Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी को और अपने सूचना और Ģसारण मंतर्ी जी 
को भी बहुत साधुवाद देता हूं िक वे साथर्क िबल लेकर आए हȅ, िजसके  माध्यम से वाइĤȂट इंडÎटर्ी 
को आगे बढ़ने का अवसर िमलेगा।  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यव ाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Shri Kanakamedala  Ravindra Kumar. Topic is films.  
Please speak on films only.   
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMA R (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, a Chief 
Minister's son can become a Chief Minister.   
 Sir, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. The Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill aims to comprehensively address the issues relating to film 
certification. It aims to address the issue of unauthorized recording and exhibition of 
films and curb the menace of film piracy by transmission of unauthorized copies on 
the internet. It aims to improve the proced ure for certification of films for public 
exhibition by the Central Board of Film Certification as well as to improve the 
categorizations of the certification of films. It also aims to harmonise the law with 
extant executive orders, judicial decisions and other relevant legislations.   
 The Act, which is in place for more than seven decades, is being amended 
now in 2023. I welcome the proposal and suppo rt the Bill. The Bill aims to substitute 
Section 4 of the Act, relating to examinat ion of films, so as to introduce the age-
based certification in UA category into three age-based categories, namely, UA 7+, 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

UA 13+ and UA 16+, and also to empower the Board to sanction the film with a 
separate certificate for its exhibition on television or such other media as may be 
prescribed; second, to amend sub-section (3) of Section 5A of the Act so as to give 
perpetual validity to the certificate of Central Board of Film Certification; third, omit 
sub-section (1) of Section 6 of the Act rela ting to revisional powers of the Central 
Government in the light of the Supreme Court judgment; insert new Sections 6AA and 
6AB relating to prohibition of unauthorize d recording and prohibition of unauthorized 
exhibition of films respectively. The ab ove offences will be punishable with 
imprisonment between three months and three years, and a fine between three lakh 
rupees and five per cent of the audited gross production cost. The Bill prohibits 
carrying out or abetting the unauthorized recording and unauthorized exhibition of 
films.  
 Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, a Censor Certificate issued by the Censor Board 
was valid for 10 years. The Government, through this amendment Bill, makes the 
Certificate issued by the Censor Board as a perpetual one. I welcome this proposal 
because it avoids the repeated work of seeking censorship for the film which was 
already censored. It will reduce the hardship and unnecessary bu rden of the film 
producers.  
 Sir, the Act empowers the Central Government to examine and make orders in 
relation to films that have been certified  or are pending certification. The Board is 
required to dispose of the matters in conf ormance of the order. The Bill removes this 
power of the Central Government. Likewise, th e hon. Minister has to look into the Bill 
to remove the power of the State Governme nt in respect of certain areas including 
interfering with the fixation of cinema tick ets by respective State Governments like in 
Andhra Pradesh. With regard to the Telugu film industry, the hon. Minister is fully 
aware that it is the second largest industry in the country. Recently, the hon. Minister 
is also aware that Oscar award was given to ' Naatu Naatu' song in a Telugu film. It 
has international fame. (Time-bell rings.) This picture is the result of the work culture 
developed in the Telugu film industry which is known for its perfection. So, I request 
the hon. Minister to encourage the Telugu  film industry and take necessary steps to 
promote the Telugu film industry in the coun try because it is getting worldwide fame.  
Finally, in Andhra Pradesh, recently, to take  them into their fold, the cinema stars are 
called and they are...(Interruptions)...  (Time-bell rings.) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.   
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
47

SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Th ey are influencing the people. That 
has to be curbed by invoking the power of the Central Government.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please confine to the subject.   
 
SHRI KANAKAMEDALA RAVINDRA KUMAR: Th e Central Government has to do it.  
Thank you very much.  
 
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपने आज मुझे इस िबल पर 
बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए आपका आभार और धन्यवाद। िनिÌचत रूप  से आज जो यह 
िबल माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े ǎारा ĢÎतुत िकया गया है, यह बहुत ही ऐितहािसक िबल है। आदरणीय 
मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमने लगातार देशËयापी िविभन्न क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ बहुत कायर् िकए हȅ और चलिचतर् क े 
माध्यम से भी कई क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सीखने का काम हुआ है। हमारी िफÊमȂ गर्ामीण क्षेतर् से लेकर देश की 
आम जनता जनादर्न की पाठशाला बनती हȅ और िनिÌचत रूप  से जब हमारी िफÊमȂ पाठशाला 
बनती हȅ, तो हमारी िफÊ
मȗ को चाहे अिशिक्षत हो, िशिक्षत हो, Ģबुǉ हो, कोई भी हो, सब पसंद 
करते हȅ।  हमारे देश मȂ ढेर सारी िफÊमȂ आईं, िज
नसे समाज ने बहुत सीखने का काम िकया है।  
पािरवािरक परंपरा, हमारा रहन-सहन, हमारा खान-पान और सामािजक रूप  से हमȂ क ै से रहना 
है - इनके  िलए िफÊमȂ ह मारा  आधार बनी हȅ। आज जब मȅ इस िबल क े समथर्न मȂ बोलने क े िलए 
खड़ा हुआ हूं, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से इस िबल का समथर्न करता हूं, लेिकन इसमȂ एक सुझाव जरूर  
Ģेिषत करता हूं। जब िफÊमȂ हमारे समाज का आधार बनती हȅ, तो जो भी कहानी, कथा या पटकथा 
होती है, उस कहानी, कथा और पटकथा मȂ िजस तर
ीके  से हीरो का रोल Ãले होता है, वह िनिÌचत 
रूप  से उस िपक्चर क े अंतगर्त, उस कहानी क े अंतगर्त अच्छा रोल Ãले करता है, वह अच्छी-सी 
कहानी का Ģमुख पातर् होता है और सराहा जाता है, लेिकन जब उसका कोई नेगेिटव पातर् होता 
है, तो उसके  Ģित जो भी भाव होते हȅ, एक्टसर् का जो नेगेिटव रोल Ãले होता है, मार-धाड़ करके  
अपने आपक
ो Ģेिषत कर देना, अपने आपको खड़ा करना - यह पाटर् भी िपक्चर क े अंदर आता है 
और मुझे लगता है िक इसको बढ़ावा नहीं देना चािहए। अगर उसमȂ कोई भी कहानी है और उस 
पातर् क े ǎारा कोई गलत क ृत्य हो रहा है, तो उसमȂ पूरी न्याियक Ģिकर्या का समावेश होना चा
िहए। 
'बंदूक चलती है','तलवार चलती है' - यह शÅद ĢÎतुितकरण नहीं होना चािहए। आज क े दौर मȂ 
जो सȂसर बोडर् है, हमȂ उस सȂसर बोडर् को और भी िव Îतार देना होगा, तािक वह समय रहते जो 
हमारी िफÊमȂ आती हȅ, उनका बहुत बारीकी से अध्ययन करे और तभी उनको आगे ĢÎतुत करे। 
िजस भारतीय परंपरा और भारतीय रीित-नीित की ËयवÎथा को सराहा जाता है - देश भर मȂ नहीं, 
बिÊक पूरे िव
Ìव मȂ हमारे कÊचर, हमारी ËयवÎथा ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  माननीय बाबू राम जी, आप अपनी Îपीच को कन्क्लूड कीिजए, अभी आपके  दल 
क े दो और Îपीकसर् हȅ।  
 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद: उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  आदेश का पालन करता हूं और आपको बहुत-
बहुत धन्यवाद देते हुए अपनी वाणी को िवराम देता हूं। आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।   
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, I rise to support the Bill. Many 
members of the film fraternity, film industry supported the Bill as soon as hon. Minister 
announced it, after the passage by the Cabinet. Some Members, while speaking, 
said that they do not watch many films. I would confess that I am a very avid movie 
watcher and I find that there is a lot to learn from everyone in films. It is not just for 
entertainment. There is a lot to learn ab out society and projection of reality. The 
creativity of Indian film industry is appreciated all over th e world. I would like to make 
two or three significant points. 
 
One, apart from theatres -- watching movies, feature films in theatres has 
been not just a family experience, it has been a community experience for us for 
decades -- with the rise of OTT platforms, with the massive explosion of digital 
revolution, digital streaming, I think, watchi ng movies in theatres is becoming almost 
extinct. The footfalls in film theatres have  been on the wane.  While there are about 
estimated 9,000 odd theatres in the country, in my home State alone, there are nearly 
1,100 theatres. So, the threat from the OTT revolution is, actually, a disruptive 
experience. Though it falls possibly in th e State domain, I would request the hon. 
Minister to somehow try and see that wa tching movies in the theatres and the 
experience survives and does not beco mes extinct because it has a lot of 
connotations for our community experiences as well. To watch a movie in a multiplex, 
in a place like Delhi, you spend Rs.500 per ticket. It is Rs.450-500 on an average 
practically in most of the theatres while you can buy an OTT subscription for an entire 
year for, maybe, Rs.300-400. So, it is becoming unaffordable for people to go and 
watch movies in theatres. Therefore, th is is a matter which, certainly, needs 
discussion with the industry and evolving  policies in conjunction with the State 
Governments so that we can protect our industry because a lot of earnings for the 
industry come from theatres, theatre ticket sales.     
Sir, secondly, we are truly a pan-Indian cinema because we don't have today 
Hindi cinema and regional cinema. It is because, practically, every film made in 
Southern Indian languages is automatically dubbed into Hindi and other languages 
and I find many films on YouTube have thre e crore, four crore views. Today, on OTT 
platforms, you have simultaneous option to watch movies in multiple languages. 
While all this is welcome, we need to ensu re that our film indu stry not only survives 
and thrives... (Time-bell rings.)  Sir, I just have a couple of points to make. I would 
like the hon. Minister to dwell upon the kind of regulations that exist today with regard 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
49

to regulating OTT content. If there are no su ch regulations, I would like to know as to 
why a Cable Television Networks Act, which controls content on television, does not 
relate even to the OTT content. That is number one. Number tw o is, films that are 
screened on OTT platforms, what if a f ilm which is censored puts censored content 
also on the OTT. It is because if you are not able to control content on OTT, how are 
you able to restrict censored content being shown as a part of OTT film industry?  If 
there is no regulation in place, can we ha ve a dialogue with the OTT industry to have 
self-regulation on OTT content? I would request hon. Minister to dwell on these 
points. Thank you, Sir. 
 
सामािजक न्याय और अिधकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी रामदास अठावले): सर, 
"िसनेमा का बहुत ही अच्छा आ गया है िबल, 
िसनेमा मȂ पिरवतर्न करने का बहुत ही अच्छा आ गया है िबल, 
लेिकन हमारे मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे, जो इस हाउस क े ...(Ëयवधान)... 
वे यहां नहीं हȅ, इसिलए मुझे हो रहा है फील।" 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय अठावले जी, हमारा िवषय िफÊम है, उसी पर किवता किहए।  
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: यह िबल बहुत इÇपॉटȄट है, 
"हमारे िवरोधी दलȗ की सब सीटȂ मुझे िदख रही हȅ खाली, 
लेिकन नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ही हȅ भारत देश क े वाली।" 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय अठावले जी, हमारा िवषय िफÊम है। आप िव
षय पर बोलȂगे, तभी 
िरकॉडर् पर जाता है। Ãलीज़, आप िवषय पर बोलȂ। 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: * 
इसिलए मȅ अनुराग ठाकु र जी को देता हूं इस िबल क े िलए ताली। 
िसनेमा पिरवतर्न क े िवधेयक क े िलए मȅ अनुराग ठाकु र जी को बधाई देता हूं, 
और हाउस मȂ हंगामा करने वालȗ का मȅ बदला लेता हूं, 
यह िबल पास हुआ है, यह बताने क े िलए मȅ मुÇबई जाता हूं, 
और कांगर्ेस का सामना करने क े िलए िफर जÊद ही वापस आता हूं।" 
 
महोदय, िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी एक बहुत इÇपॉटȄट इंडÎटर्ी है। समाज मȂ बहुत बड़े पिरवतर्न करने 
क े िवषयȗ पर िफÊमȂ िनकलती हȅ। आजकल बहुत सारी िफÊमȂ ऐसी आ रही हȅ िक हमारे नौजवान 
                   
*Not recorded. 
 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

आत्महत्या करते हȅ। िकसी िफÊम मȂ अगर आत्महत्या करने का कोई सीन होता है, तो उस पर भी 
सȅसर बोडर् को ध्यान देने की आवÌयकता है। पहले बहुत सारी आिर्टिÎटक िफÊमȂ आती थीं। हमारे 
दादासाहेब फाÊके  जी ने महाराÍटर् मȂ ही नहीं, देश भर मȂ बहुत अच्छी िफÊमȗ की शुरुआत  की । 
हमारी मुÇबई मȂ बॉलीवुड का एक बहुत इÇपॉटȄट Ãलेस है। अिमताभ बच्चन जी इलाहाबाद से मुÇबई 
आए। पूरे देश से बहुत सारे कलाकार मुÇबई आते हȅ, क्यȗिक उनको िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी मȂ काम िमलता 
है। मȅने भी एक-दो िफÊम
ȗ मȂ काम िकया है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
एक माननीय सदÎय: उनके  क्या नाम हȅ, बता दीिजए। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप उनके  नाम बता 
दीिजए। हम उन्हȂ देखȂगे। ...(Ëयवध ान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: "अन्यायाचा Ģितकार" नाम की एक मराठी िफÊम थी, उसमȂ मȅने टाइटल 
रोल िकया है। "जोशी की कांबले" नाम की एक िफÊम है, उसमȂ भी मȅने थोड़ा सा काम िकया है।  
मȅ अगर उधर ज्यादा का
म  करता, तो इधर नहीं आता।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय अठावले जी, आप िवषय पर बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: मुझे वहाँ ही रहना पड़ता था। मȅ जब कॉलेज मȂ था, तब मȅ हर िफÊम देखता 
था।  मȅ भी एक कलाकार हूँ।  ...(समय की घं
 टी)... हमारी Îमृित ईरानी जी ने भी इस क्षेतर् मȂ काम 
िकया है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपका समय पूरा हो रहा है।  
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: "सास भी कभी बहू थी" मȂ बहू ही रूह  थी।  ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसे बहुत सारे 
लोग यहाँ हȅ। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... हम वहाँ िथएटर मȂ िफÊम देखते थे।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: लेिकन जैसा हमारे मȂबर साहब ने बताया िक आजकल मॉल मȂ 100 सीटȗ 
क े, 150 सीटȗ क े छोटे-छोटे िथएटसर् हȅ। पहले 1,000 सीटȗ क े, 1,500 सीटȗ क े बड़े-बड़े िथएटसर् 
होते थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... हम वहाँ 10 रुपय े, 20 रुपय े की िटकट लेकर िफÊम देखने क े िलए 
जाते थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Athawale ji, now please conclude. You have taken four 
minutes. Please concl
ude.  
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
51

Ǜी रामदास अठावले: हम वहाँ कम पैसȗ मȂ िफÊम देखने क े िलए जाते थे, लेिकन आजकल 
इंटरनेट आ गया है, िफÊमȗ की चोरी होती है, बहुत सारी िफÊमȂ घर मȂ देखी जाती हȅ, इसिलए 
इसकी इनकम मȂ भारी ट ू ट आयी है।  हमारे िडपाटर्मȂट को भी पैसा िमलना चािहए। इसि लए इसमȂ 
पिरवतर्न करने क े िलए यह बहुत इÇपॉटȄट िबल आया है।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  ...(Interruptions)...अब आप कन्क्लूड 
करȂ।  
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: इसीिलए मुझे लगता है िक इस िबल का सपोटर् करने क े िलए मȅ यहाँ खड़ा 
हूँ। मȅ इतना बताना चाहता हूँ िक ये जो "इंिडया-इंिडया" बोल रहे हȅ, लेिकन इंिडया, िसफर् इनका 
इंिडया नहीं है, हमारा है, इंिडया तो सबका है।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude now.   
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले : * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please conclude.  ...(Interruptions)... जो सÅजेक्ट से 
relevant नहीं है, वह िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
Thank you.  
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: मतलब उनका इसी तरह का alliance है, तो ठीक बात है।  मȅ इस िबल का 
सपोटर् करने क े िलए यहाँ खड़ा हूँ। मेरी जो िरपिÅलकन पाटीर् ऑफ इंिडया है, इस पाटीर् की तरफ 
से मȅ इस िवधेयक का सपोटर् करता हूँ और इसमȂ जो पिरव
तर्न हो रहा है, मȅ उसका सपोटर् करता 
हूँ। हमारी िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी आगे और भी ज्यादा अच्छी तरह से एिक्टव हो।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: मȅ बीच मȂ अमेिरका गया था।  ...(Ëयवधा
न)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. मȅ अब दूसरे Îपीकर को बुलाऊँ गा।   
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: मȅ अमेिरका गया था, वहाँ लॉस एंिजÊस है।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
                   
*Not recorded. 
 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now I will call the next speaker. 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: सर, एक िमनट।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: मȅ वहाँ लॉस एंिजÊस गया था।  ...(Ëयवधान)... बॉलीवुड तो मुÇबई मȂ है, 
लेिकन हॉलीवुड लॉस एंिजÊस मȂ है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
Ǜी रामदास अठावले: मȅ लॉस एंिजÊस मȂ जाकर हॉलीवुड देख कर आया हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Your mic is off now. ...(Interruptions)... Tha
nk you. 
...(Interruptions)... Please, please. ...(Interruptions)...  Now Shri Bhubaneswar 
Kalita.  
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA (Assam): Sir, I thank you for giving me the 
opportunity to speak on this Bill. I congratula te the hon. Minister for bringing this Bill 
at an opportune and appropriate time and,  particularly, the significant amendments 
that have come. As we all know that the original Bill, the Cinematograph Act was 
passed in the year 1952 and th at was the only Bill at that time. It was enacted to 
ensure that the films are exhibited within the limits of Indian societal tolerance which is 
Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constituti on. The provision of the Central Board of 
Film Certification was made in that Bill. But the present Bill which has been brought 
by the hon. Minister has brought revolutionar y Amendments in that Bill. Particularly, it 
has four tenets. They are prohibition of unauthorized recording and exhibition. Then 
another is related to age-based certification.  
Another most important point is the perp etual validity of ce rtification and the 
revised power of the Central Government on this Bill. Sir, while discussing on this Bill, 
particularly, regarding the perpetual validity of certification, I would like to highlight 
one point for the consideration of the Minist er so that while replying, he can touch 
upon this that this Bill of 2023 ensures th e appropriateness of films contents for 
different age groups and what measures w ill be taken to enforce this classification 
effectively. The matter is of  enforcement. The provision is good. Then, the second 
thing that I want to raise is  this. Many speakers also ha ve mentioned this; there is 
decline in cinema theatres. And regardin g the OTT platforms, my colleagues have 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
53

already raised it. I will not go into the details  of it but I endorse those views. I would 
like to give more attention on the growth of  film industry which is contributing to the 
present society and also Indian society is based more or less on the film society and it 
has played a very significant role. It has mentioned about the job creation and revenue 
generation. I want to know a little more detail about how this Bill, as amended, will 
bring job creation and revenue generation. Another important thing that has been 
brought in this Amendment Bill is unauthorize d film recording. How the Bill will tackle 
the unauthorized film recordings and exhibition, especially, considering the 
prevalence of large pirated media network worldwide and the challenges posed by 
digital platforms facilitating free distribution ? I would like the hon. Minister to throw 
some more light on these points during his reply. Finally, Sir, regarding the perpetual 
certification, I would like to know as to ho w the Bill will maintain continuous oversight 
to ensure that films still meet the required  standards even after they are certified 
without burdening the certification process. Thank you, Sir. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय भुबनेÌवर कािलता जी। अब माननीय मंतर्ी जी जवाब दȂ। 
 
Ǜी अनुराग िंसह ठाकु र: धन्यवाद, उपसभापित जी। मȅ सबसे पहले सदन क े सभी सदÎयȗ - 
Ģशांत नन्दा जी, अशोक बाजपेयी जी, डा. मु. तंबी दुरै जी, डा. राध
 ा मोहन दास अगर्वाल जी, 
डा. सोनल मानिंसह जी, एस. िनरंजन रेƿी जी, पिबतर् मागȃिरटा जी, धनंजय भीमराव महािदक 
जी, किवता पाटीदार जी, गीता उफर् चंदर्Ģभा जी, िबÃलब क ुमार देब जी, जी. क े. वासन जी, िव. 
िवजयसाई रेƿी जी, अज
य Ģताप िंसह जी, कनकमेदला रवींदर् क ुमार जी, बाबू राम िनषाद जी, 
जी.वी.एल. नरिंसहा राव जी, रामदास अठावले जी और भुबनेÌवर कािलता जी - आप सबका 
आभार Ģकट करता हूँ िक आपने बहुमूÊय सुझाव भी िदए और सबने िब ल का समथर्न िकया है। 
इसके  िलए मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत अिभनंदन करता हूँ।  
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ ने िबÊकु ल सही कहा िक यह जो 'The 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023' है, इसको आने मȂ बहुत लंबा समय लगा। 1952 क े 
बाद 1981 और 1984 मȂ जब बड़ा संशो
धन हुआ, उसके  बाद लगभग चार दशक बीत गए। इन चार 
दशकȗ मȂ बहुत क ु छ बदला है। िफÊम बनाने का तरीका भी और िफÊमȗ को पाइरेसी क े माध्यम से 
चुराने का तरीका भी बदला है। इसके  साथ ही िदखाने का तरी
का भी बदला है। जहाँ एक ओर बात 
चल रही है िक बड़े पदȃ पर, बड़ी Îकर्ीन पर number of screens बढ़े, वहीं इंटरनेट क े माध्यम से 
आज within few seconds पाइरेटेड क ं टȂट को दुिनया क े िकस ी भी िहÎसे मȂ पहुँचाया जा सकता 
है। इसको क ु छ सेक ंड्स मȂ भेजा जा सकता है, लेिकन इससे िकसी की सालȗ की मेहनत पर पानी 
िफर जाता है - िजसने इसको बनाने मȂ अपना खून-पसीना बहाया है, उसक ी सारी मेहनत पर 
पानी िफर जाता है। इसिलए 'The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023' बहुत महत्वपूणर् 
है। एक तरह से आज आप िफÊम जगत से जुड़े हुए, Îकर्ीन पर या Îकर्ीन क े पीछे छोटे-से-छोटा 
िकरदार िनभाने वाले को संरक्षण देने वाले हȅ, उनके  िहतȗ क े िलए बहुत बड़ा कदम उठाने वाले हȅ। 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

इसके  िलए पूरा सदन एकजुट होकर साथ आया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आपकी बहुत Ģशंसा भी करता 
हूँ और धन्यवाद भी देता हूँ।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी, िकसी ने खलनायक की बात की, तो िकसी ने Îपॉट Åवॉय से 
लेकर साउंड इंजीिनयर, मेकअप आिर्टÎट, िÎकर्Ã ट राइटर, कोिरयोगर्ाģर, सबकी बात की। िकसी 
ने सही कहा िक िफÊम क े पदȃ पर बड़े हीरो, हीरोइन िदखते हȅ, लेिकन उनके  पीछे सैकड़ȗ लोगȗ 
की मेहनत लगी होती है और उनके  साथ करोड़ȗ दशर्कȗ की भावनाएं जुड़ी होती हȅ। देश क े क ु छ 
िहÎसȗ मȂ तो इतना िफतूर रहता है िक िफÊम आठ बजे भी लगनी होती है, तो वे सुबह पाँच बजे ही 
िथएटर क े बाहर जाकर बैठ जाते हȅ।   
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती पी. टी. उषा) पीठासीन हुईं।] 
 
  महोदया, 1913 से  लेकर 2023 तक , ' राजा हिरÌचंदर्' से लेकर आज 2023 तक की 
भारतीय िफ
Êम जगत की इस यातर्ा मȂ हमारी बहुत सारी उपलिÅधयाँ हȅ। मȅ आप सबसे एक बात 
जरूर  साझा करना चाहता हूँ। मȅ यह बात आप सबसे इसिलए साझा कर रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक िपछले 
वषर् जब मȅने सȂटर्ल एिशया क े क ु छ यूथ लीडसर् का एक डेलीगेशन होÎट िकया, तब हमने उन्
हȂ 
िदÊली मȂ अपने कÊचरल आइटÇस िदखाने का Ģयास िक या।  जब भारत क े कÊचरल आइटÇस 
िदखाए गए, िजनमȂ हमारे बहुत से टर्ेिडशनल डांसेज़ से लेकर कÊचर तक िदखाया गया था, तब 
उन पाँचȗ देशȗ क े Ģितिनिधयȗ, जैसे तुक र् मेिनÎतान, कजािकÎतान, उįबेिकÎतान, इन सबने कहा 
िक हम भी अपना क ु छ करके  िदखाना चाहते हȅ। हमने कहा िक ये अि तिथ हȅ, इसिलए हमȂ इन्हȂ 
अवसर देना चािहए। जब ये लोग मंच पर आए, तब इन्हȗने अपने देश का कोई गाना नहीं बजाया, 
बिÊक भारतीय िफÊमȗ क े गानȗ को अपनी आवाज़ मȂ गाया भी और संगीत भी िदया। मुझे खुशी इस 
बात की है िक उन्हȗने गा
ने भी आजकल क े नहीं गाए, बिÊक िमथुन चकर्वतीर् जी क े जमाने का 
'िजÇमी िजÇमी िजÇमी, आजा आजा आजा' गाना गाया। आप कÊपना कीिजए िक आज की पीढ़ी, 
िजसका उस समय जन्म भी नहीं हुआ होगा, वह आज भी ' िजÇमी िजÇम
ी िजÇमी, आजा आजा 
आजा' गा रही है। इसके  बाद अगला कौन सा गाना गाया गया - 'आई एम अ िडÎको डान्सर' - यह 
सब िदखाता है िक भारत की सॉÄट पावर की ताकत क्या है और आज यह महान सदन इसे और 
ताकत देने का काम कर रहा है। इसके  िलए मȅ आप सबका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद करना चाहता हूँ।  
 महोदया, आप आईओए की अध्यक्ष भी हȅ और हमारी ' उड़न परी' क े नाम से भी जानी 
जाती हȅ। एक बार मȅ 2018 मȂ फ ु टबॉल िवÌव कप देखने क े िलए रूस  गया था, तो मȅ आप
को बताना 
चाहूँगा िक वहाँ पर एक इंिडयन को देखते ही राज कपूर क े जमाने की 'मेरा नाम जोकर' से बात 
शुरू  करते हȅ। यह हमा
री िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी का इÇपैक्ट है। यह हमारे देश की कला, संÎकृ ित, 
सािहत्य और यहाँ क े समाज का िचतर्ण दुिनया भर मȂ करती है। हमȂ अपनी इस ताकत को समझना 
होगा and India being a country of story-t
ellers has all the ingredients, I will say, to 
become a content hub of the world and India should emerge as the content hub of the 
world.  
िमÎटर रेƿी, िमÎटर नन्दा और जी.वी.एल. नरिंसहा राव जी ने कहा िक हमारे क ु छ क्षेतर्ȗ 
मȂ, िवशेष तौर पर साउथ इंिडया मȂ टेक्नोलॉजी का उपयोग करके  िफÊमȗ का बहुत िवशाल Îतर 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
55

िकया गया है। क ेवल यही नहीं, बिÊक आज िवÌव की बड़ी से बड़ी िफÊमȗ का post-production 
का काम िहन्दुÎतान मȂ होता है। AVGC sector, i.e., Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and 
Comics, यह सेक्टर बहुत गर्ो कर रहा है। इसिलए तो क ु ल-िमलाकर हमȂ िफÊम जगत को एक 
बहुत बड़े अवसर क े रूप  मȂ देखना चाि हए और एक बहुत बड़ी ताकत क े रूप  मȂ देखना चािहए।  
मैडम चेयरपसर्न, मȅ क ेवल इतना ही कहना चाहूँगा िक जब यह िबल 2019 मȂ लाया गया, 
तब इसमȂ क ेवल छोटा सा संशोधन था और उससे आपने जो आज की समÎया की बात कही, 
उसका हल नहीं हो पाता। इसको वापस Îटȅिंडग किमटी मȂ भेजा गया, Îटȅिंडग किमटी क े सभी 
सदÎयȗ ने अपने सुझाव िदए और उसके  बाद वषर् 2021 और 2022 मȂ हमने इस िबल को पिÅल क  क े 
सामने एक नये रूप  मȂ रखा, िजसके  बाद उनके  कई सारे सुझाव आए।  हमने पूरी इंडÎटर्ी क े साथ 
उनके  सुझाव भी िलए और अब आप सबके  सामने एक नये रूप  मȂ हम The Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 लेकर आए हȅ।  
 इसमȂ अमȂडमȂट्स क े िल
ए मेजर क ंसन्सर् क्या थे? अगर क ु ल िमलाकर देखा जाए तो जो 
एक िलिटगेशन चल रही थी, वह कणार्टक हाई कोटर् से लेकर सुĢीम कोटर् तक गई। उसमȂ कहा 
गया था िक सȂटर्ल बो ड र् ऑफ िफÊम सिर्टिफके शन ( सीबीएफसी) क े Ģोसीजसर् क्या हȅ, उसकी 
पावसर् क्या हȅ।  आपमȂ से क ु छ लोगȗ ने कहा िक िरिवज़न पावसर् िकसके  पास हȗ।  Ģशांत नन्दा जी 
ने कहा िक उनको भी एक बार अपने रीजनल पैनल क े सामने एक िपक्चर क े िलए िदक्कत आई, 
क्यȗिक जो चेयरपसर्न था, उसके  अपने बच्चे की ही डेथ 12 साल की उĦ मȂ हुई थी और वह उस 
िपक्चर को नहीं देख सकता था। ऐसा कोई एक क े स हो सकता है, लेिकन हमारा Ģयास होता है 
िक जÊद से जÊद सिर्टिफके शन िमल सके । It's a statutory body. सरकार और सीबीएफसी, 
िजसको आप आम भाषा मȂ सȂसर बोडर् कहते हȅ, उन
के  बीच मȂ एक तरह से काफी िडÎटȂस है। मȅ 
िडÎटȂस इसिलए कहता हूँ, क्यȗिक वह एक statutory बॉडी है और उसकी अपनी एक ताकत है। 
इस िबल क े बाद सरकार क े पास िरवीज़न पावर भी नहीं रहेगी। सीबीएफसी की वह ऑटािनिमटी 
बनी रहेगी जो आप चाहते हȅ और हम भी यही चाहते हȅ िक उसकी वह ऑटोनोिमटी बनी रहे। 
उसका ऑटानमस रोल बरकरार रहेगा
। दूसरा, नन्दा जी ने कहा िक जब वह िरवीज़न करने क े 
िलए जाए तो उसमȂ सेम मेÇबसर् न हȗ। इसमȂ यह Ģावधान पहले भी था और हम यह अब भी करȂगे।  
िरवीज़न क े िलए सेम पैनल नहीं बैठेगा। उसमȂ सभी पाँचȗ नाम नये ही हȗगे और वही देखȂगे, यह मȅ 
आपको कहना चाहता हूँ। 
 दूसरा, जैसा मȅने कहा िक हमारी जो िलिटगेशन चल रही थी, वह कनार्ट
क हाई कोटर् से 
लेकर सुĢीम कोटर् तक आई। हमने उसको लेकर भी Ģोसीजसर् को आसान कर िदया है और सुĢीम 
कोटर् तथा हाई कोटर् क े ऑडर्सर् को देखते हुए इस िबल को हामȘनाइज़ िक
या है, तािक भिवÍय मȂ 
इस तरह की कोई िदक्कत न आए।  
 पूरे सदन ने जो एक सबसे बड़ी समÎया कही, वह unaut
horized recording and 
exhibition of films है, जो िक िफÊम पायरेसी से जुड़ी हुई है। मȅ देख रहा था िक Ģशांत नन्दा जी 
ने जब 18,000 करोड़ से शुरू  िकया तो बात-बात मȂ वह 22,000 करोड़ तक पहुँच गया िक इतने 
की पायरेसी होती है। पायरेसी िकतने की होती है, यह िकसी को नहीं पता, लेिकन इतना जरूर  
पता है िक उससे कलाकारȗ की वषș की मेहनत पर पानी फ ेरने का का म  होता है। हमने यहाँ पर 
ऐसे दंड का Ģावधान रखा है िक अगर उनकी मेहनत क े साथ कोई िखलवाड़ करेगा तो उसको 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

तीन लाख रुपय े तक का जुमार्ना हो सकता है और उसको और बढ़ाने का भी इसमȂ Ģावधान है।  
यह जुमार्ना उसकी िफÊम बनाने की कॉÎट क े पाँच परसȂट तक िकया जा सकता है। Five per 
cent of audited gross produc tion cost of the film, इतना उसको फाइन हो सकता है।  मान 
लीिजए, 1,000 करोड़ की िपक्चर बनी तो 50 करोड़ दंड हो सकता है। यह दंड 3 लाख रुपय े से 
लेकर इतने तक हो सकता है। दूसरा, जहाँ तक उसको सज़ा देने की बात है तो हमारी सरकार ने 
offences
 को िडिकर्िमनलाइज़ करने का काम िक या है। यहाँ पर इस िबल क े माध्यम से भी ease 
of doing business और ease of living को बढ़ावा िदया जा रहा है। लेिकन अगर कोई िकसी क े 
जीवन को बरबाद करने पर आ जाए, िकसी की मेहनत को बरबाद करने पर आ जाए तो उसके  
िलए तीन साल की सज़ा का Ģावधान भी इस िबल मȂ िकया गया है, ता िक िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी को 
बचाया जा सके । इसके  अलावा, ऐसी बहुत सारी बातȂ हȅ और मȅ एक क े बाद दूसरी पर आऊँ गा।   
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
यह जो पाइरेसी का धंधा है, इसको दूर करने क े िलए पहले हम िजतने िबल लेकर आते 
थे, तो एक मजबूरी होती थी िक आिर्टकल 370 और 35ए क े कारण जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ हमारे बहुत 
सारे कानून लागू ही नहीं होते थे। लेिकन 5 अगÎत, 2019 को इस देश मȂ एक ऐसा ऐितहािसक 
िदन आया, जब इस महान संसद ने धारा 370 और  35ए को सदा-सदा क े िलए खत्म कर िदया। 
इसमȂ िबल क े साथ जुड़ा हुआ जो Ģोिवज़न है, हमने इसके  माध्यम से उसको ओिमट करने का 
काम िक
या है। यह मȅ इसिलए कह रहा हूं, क्यȗिक धारा 370 और  35ए क े हटने क े बाद जÇमू-
कÌमीर मȂ एक तरह से शांित आई है, आतंकवादी घटनाओं मȂ कमी आई है, पथराव की घटनाएं 
भी बंद हुई हȅ। वहां अब हमारे िसनेमा हॉल भी बढ़कर सात होने वाले हȅ, िजनमȂ से बांदीपोरा, 
गांदरबल और क ुलगाम िडिÎटर्क्ट मȂ अगले एक-दो महीनȗ मȂ नए िसनेमा हॉÊस खुल जाएंगे। 
इसिलए कÌमीर मȂ जहां पहले कभी पथराव की घटनाएं होती थीं, आज हमारी िफÊमȗ को Ģदिर्शत 
करने का काम ज़ोर-शोर से होगा। वहां शूिंटग भी होती है, पूवर् मȂ बहुत सारी िफÊमȗ की शूिंटग 
हुई, अब उसको भी बल िदया जा रहा है। माननीय एलजी महोदय ने उस िद शा मȂ बहुत सारे कदम 
उठाए हȅ।  
मैडम, हमारी िफÊमȗ क े बारे मȂ क ु छ लोगȗ ने कहा िक क्या हुआ - अगर आप देखȂगी तो 
बाÄटा की बात करूं  या ऑÎकर की बात करूं , अंतरराÍटर्ीय मंचȗ पर भार तीय  िफÊमȗ ने बहुत 
बड़े-बड़े मुकाम हािसल िकये और अवॉडर् भी जीते हȅ। मुझे Ģसन्नता इस बात की है, क्यȗिक 
िबज़नेस करना एक अलग बात है िक एक िफÊम ने इतना िबज़नेस िकया -  देश क े िलए दूसर ा  
बड़ा सÇमान होता है िक िरकिग्नशन कहां जाकर िमलेगी। बाÄटा और ऑÎकर मȂ ' िद एिलफȅ ट 
िËहÎपरसर्' को डाक्युमȂटरी की Ǜेणी मȂ और हमारी 'आरआरआर' मूवी को भी वहां ऑÎकर अवॉडर् 
िमला, तो यह देश क े िलए गौरवशाली पल था, िजसकी हमȂ खुशी होनी चािहए। हमारे देश की 
इंडÎटर्ी आज इतनी बड़ी है िक हम सेक ं ड ओÊडेÎट िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी तो हȅ, साथ ही लाजȃÎट िफÊम 
Ģोǹूसर भी हȅ, यानी दुिनया की सबसे ज्यादा िफÊमȂ िहन्दुÎतान मȂ बनती हȅ और मȅ कहूंगा िक हम 
बहुत कॉÎट-इफे िक्टव भी हȅ, इसीि
लए दुिनया भर क े लोग यहां आना चाहते हȅ। हम बहुत सारी 
योजनाएं भी लाए हȅ िक इंिडया मȂ शूट करोगे, तो आपको इन्सȂिटËस िमलȂगे, उस िदशा मȂ काम 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
57

िकया गया है। मध्य Ģदेश और उǄर Ģदेश जैसे अन्य राज्यȗ ने इन्सȂिटव देना शुरू  िकया है, जहां 
िफÊमȗ की शूिंटग क े िलए 2 करोड़ रुपय े तक की धनरािश भी िमलती है। हमने उस िदशा मȂ ऐसे 
बहुत सारे कदम भी उठाए हȅ।  
मैडम, एवीजीसी क े िल
ए हम बहुत जÊदी इंÎटीǷूट्स खोलने वाले हȅ, तािक एवीजीसी 
सेक्टर मȂ हमारे हज़ारȗ िवǏाथीर् Ģिशक्षण ले सकȂ, उनको िÎकÊस िमलȂ और िफÊम जगत को बल 
िमल सके । भारत ने टेिक्निशयन से लेकर टेक्नोलॉजी तक बहुत Ģगित की है। जैसा िक मȅने कहा 
िक इसमȂ हमारा क ंसÊटेिटव Ģोसेस बहुत बड़ा था, इसमȂ हमने लगभग 2 साल का समय िलया। 
हमने लग
भग हर वगर् से इसमȂ सुझाव िलए हȅ, उसके  बाद ही हम इस िबल को लेकर आए हȅ। अगर 
हम भारतीय िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी की गर्ोथ को देखȂ, तो उसको पाइरेसी से सबसे बड़ा थर्ेट आता है, 
िजसके  बारे मȂ मȅ आपके  सामने क ु छ आंकड़ȗ को रखना चाहता हूं। अगर आप देखȂगे िक पैन्डेिमक 
क े बाद जो िरपोटर् आई, एक ही महीने मȂ िफÊÇस की ऑनलाइन िडिजटल पाइरेसी मȂ 62 Ģितशत 
वृिǉ हुई है और एĢॉिक्
समेटली भारत की 70 परसȂट पॉपुलेशन यह जानती भी है िक इÊलीगल 
िरकॉडर् करना क्या होता है, पाइरेसी क्या होती है और पाइरेटेड क ं टȂट को शेयर करने से दंड भी 
िमल सकता है, लेिकन उसमȂ बहुत िमिनमल सज़ा क े Ģावधान थे, इसीिलए हमने यह Ģयास िकया 
है। मान लीि
जए िक आप िथएटर मȂ अपना फोन लेकर गए और आपने एक िमनट का कोई शॉट 
िरकॉडर् िकया, क ु छ समय क े िलए ही िरकॉडर् िकया, लेिकन उसको कहीं एक्ज़ीिबट नहीं कर रहे 
हȅ, तो इस बारे मȂ िकसी ने पूछा िक क्या उसको भी सज़ा दȂगे, तो हमने कहा िक उसके  िलए दंड 
का Ģावधान नहीं है। हमने उसके  िल
ए सज़ा का Ģावधान नहीं रखा है, लेिकन अगर आप पूरी 
िफÊम िरकॉडर् करते हȅ और उसको कहीं एक्ज़ीिबट करते हȅ, तो उसके  िलए इसमȂ 6एए क े अंतगर्त 
सज़ा का Ģावधान है। वह हमने इसके  अंदर रखा है।  
मैडम, हम जन िवÌवास िबल लेकर आए, उसमȂ भी काफी provisions हȅ। उसमȂ हम
ने 
िकर्िमनैिलटी को कम करने का Ģयास िकया है। इसमȂ आप मȂ से क ु छ सदÎ यȗ ने एज गर्ुप की बात 
पूछी थी। इस संबंध मȂ, मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक जैसे ओटीटी पर है, आप घर पर बैठते हȅ, Cable 
Television Network क े रूल  क े अनुसार एक Ģोगर्ाम कोड होता है और उसी क े अनुसार ही 
आपको टेिलिवजन पर Ģोगर्ाम देखने को िमलते हȅ।  अगर उसका कोई उÊलंघन करेगा, तो उसमȂ 
क ेबल टेलीिवज़न नेटवकर् क े अंदर अलग सजा है। ओटीटी Ãलैटफॉमर् पर िजतने भी Over the Top 
players हȅ, उनके  िलए s
elf-regulation का एक तरीका रखा है।  उसमȂ भी एज गर्ुÃस को अलग-
अलग रखा है और दुिनया भर मȂ ऐसा ही चलता है। उसमȂ भी कोई िकसी को सजा नहीं दे रहा है। 
यह जागरू
कता क े िलए है िक यूए 7+ है , तो इसका मतलब यह है िक सात साल से बड़ी उĦ 
वाला देख सकता है और छोटे वाले क े िलए मां-बाप तय करȂ िक जाना है या नहीं जाना है। क ु छ 
िजÇमेदारी समाज को या पिरवार को भी अपने ऊपर लेनी ही पडे़गी। इसी तरह से यूए 13+ है, यूए 
16+ है। यह उसी िदशा मȂ िकया गया है, तािक उसको अवेयरनेस क े िलए, जागरूकता  क े िलए 
िकया जाए, न िक दंड क े िलए िकया जाए। Change of category of film for television इसिलए 
महत्वपूणर् है - जी.वी.एल. नरिंसहा राव जी ने कहा िक अगर पांच सौ रुपय े की िटकट खरीदते हȅ 
और पिरवार क े चा
र लोग चले गए, तो दो हज़ार रुपय े िसनेमा की िटकट मȂ लग जाएंगे। वहां पर 
क ु छ खाओगे, तो हज़ार रुपया और लग जाएगा। एक िमिडल क्लास पिरवार क े तीन हज़ार रुपय े 
एक िपक्चर देखने मȂ चले गए, तो उसका पूरा बजट िहल जाता है। उनके  िलए िफÊम देखने का 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

एक साधन टेलीिवज़न रह जाता है। अगर कोई ए-क ै टेगरी की िफÊम है, एस-क ै टेगरी की िफÊम 
है और उसमȂ अमȂडमȂट करके  अगर वह वािपस टेलीिवज़न पर िदखाना चाहता है, तो हमने इसमȂ 
वह Ģावधान भी कर िदया है, ता िक  वह ऐसा वहां पर कर सके । पहले यह िनयम का िहÎसा नहीं 
था, हम ऑिफस ऑडर्र से करते थे, लेिकन अब इसमȂ ही वह Ģावधान कर िदया है। अब ज्यादा से 
ज्यादा लोगȗ को टेलीिवज़न पर िफÊमȂ देखने का अवसर िमलेगा और आपके  िलए सरल हो 
जाएगा। Vali
dity of certificate की बात कही गई, जो sub-section (3) of Section 5A मȂ आता 
है। अब जो हाउस मȂ नहीं हȅ, वे तो  इन्Îपेक्टर राज क े समय क े हȅ। उनका मकसद होता था िक 
िजतनी बार जनता इनके  पास आए, उतना ही उनको सताया जाए। हमारे समय मȂ 40,000 
compliances को कम करने का काम नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िपछले नौ सालȗ मȂ िकया है।  
हमारा Ģयास है िक कम से कम अिध
कािरयȗ क े पास आपको जाना पड़े। हम यह चाहते हȅ िक कभी 
आपसे कोई गलती हो भी गई, तो आप मानकर कह दीिजए िक गलती हो गई, तो आपको दंड 
नहीं देना पड़ेगा, हम इस िदशा मȂ जाने का काम कर रहे हȅ। आिखरकार हम देश क े लोगȗ क े िलए 
कानून बना रहे हȅ। इसमȂ भी दस साल क े बाद आपको वापस िरवीज़न क े िलए, सिर्टिफके ट लेने क े 
िलए आना पड़
ता था, वह अब आपको perpetual िमल जाएगा, आपको सारी उĦ क े िलए िमल 
जाएगा, आपको वापस आने की जरूरत  नहीं है। पहले उसको executive order से िकया। आपने 
Central Go
vernment की revision power क े बारे मȂ कहा, वह हमने िबÊकु ल खत्म कर दी है।  
सेन्टर्ल गवनर्मȂट िरवीज़न पावर का इÎतेमाल नहीं करेगी, सेक्शन 6 क े सब-सेक्शन(1), िजसको 
K.M. Shankarappa Vs. Union of India क े  जजमȂट मȂ कणार्टक हाई कोटर् और िफर सुĢीम 
कोटर् ने उनके  ऑडर्र को upheld िकया था, तो हमने क Ȃ दर् सरकार की िरव
ीज़न पावसर् को खत्म 
कर िदया है। इस बारे मȂ िकसी का क्वेÌचन आया था िक जो Copyright Act है, उस कॉपीराइट 
एक्ट का क्या होगा। देिखए, इस कानून क े अंतगर्त, िसनेमैटोगर्ाफ अमȂडमȂट िबल क े अंतगर्त तीन 
साल की सजा है। वह अलग है, कॉपीराइट एक्ट क े अंतगर्त, मȅ आपके  िलए Ģोिवज़न को पढ़ भी 
देता हूं, "Any person who commits an act that has been prohibite
d under Section 6AA 
or Section 6AB will be liable to be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than three months but may be  extended to three years under Clause 
7(1)(a) of the 2023 Bill. Additionally, the person will be liable to pay a fine not 
exceeding three lakh rupees which may extend to 5 per cent of the audited gross 
production cost of the film." It further cl arifies that certain acts as provided under 
Section 52 of the Copyright Act, 1957, will not be punishable under this provision.  
Section 52 lays down a list of certain types of works such as literary works, film artistic 
works, etc., and the types of action wh ich would not be considered copyright
 
infringement.  
But, I have to read a couple of more lines for the knowledge of the House.  
Clause 7(1)(b) of the 2023 Bill also provides that any person who is holder of the 
copyright of a film may, and whose cop yright has been infringed in the manner 
provided under Section 6AA and 6AB, can, in addition to actions taken under the 
Cinematograph Act, take suitable action for infringement of his copyright in the film 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
59

under Section 51 of the Copyright Act, 1 957, or take suitable action for computer-
related offences under Section 66 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, or any 
other relevant laws for the time being in fo rce. Further, appropriate Government or its 
agencies shall not be prevented from taking  suitable action against an intermediary 
under sub-Section 3 of Section 79 of the Information Technology Act.   
 While inserting clauses for piracy, the 2023 Bill aims to harmonise the 
Cinematograph Act with the existing laws which address the issues of piracy vis-a-vis 
the Copyright Act, 1957, and the Information Technology Act, 2000. So, I think, this 
makes the things very clear. 
 There are a couple of more things wh ich were asked by our hon. Members.  
Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy asked about the imm unity to be given to the producer or to 
the director, and he also talked about the distribution of the profits to the various 
stakeholders. He mentioned one more thing th at son of a hero should not be a hero.  
...(Interruptions)...  That is a hereditary practice. So, I think let us leave a few things 
to the industry.  Let us not restrict it.   
We have given more freedom in the O TT sector, but many hon. Members have 
raised some issues related to the OTT sector . Let me say this here that the rules for 
the OTT platforms are a little different and these come under the Code of Ethics under 
the Information Technology Act, which give s self-regulatory powers. I have noted the 
complaints made by the hon. Members ab out the language, vulgarity or nudity.  
These kinds of things are of concern for any Indian family. I would like to tell the 
House that about seven days back, I had ca lled a meeting with all the big and other 
OTT players in Delhi. मȅ चेयर क े सामने कहना चाहता हूं िक सात िदन पहले जब मȅने यह 
मीिंटग बुलाई थी, तो इन सारे ओटीटी Ãलैटफॉमर् वालȗ को मȅने कहा िक सेÊफ-रेगुलेशन का 
मतलब यह है िक िजÇमेदारी आपके  क ंधȗ पर है। अगर आप अपनी िजÇमेदारी ढंग से नहीं 
िनभाओगे, तो आप कोई न कोई और कदम उठाने क े िलए मजबूर करोगे।  आपको िकर्ए िटिवटी क े 
िलए उनको थोड़ा Îपेस तो देना ही पड़ेगा। यह नया Ãलैटफॉमर् है, हो सकता है िक इसमȂ थोड़ा 
समय लगे।  आप लोगȗ ने बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय उठाए हȅ। वे जब अपनी िरपोटर् दȂगे िक वे क्या-क्या 
कदम उठाने वाले हȅ, तब हम उनके  सामने इस हाउस की बातȗ को अवÌ
य रखȂगे। कािलता जी ने 
पेरȂट्स क े बारे मȂ क ु छ बात कही, मȅने पहले ही उसका उÊलेख कर िदया है िक हम उसका ध्यान 
क ै से रख सकते हȅ।  नन्दा जी की सभी बातȗ का मȅने जवाब दे िदया है। डा. अशोक बाजपेजी जी ने 
तो राजा हिरÌचंदर् से लेकर बाकी सब तक अपनी बात कही है। डा. मु. तंबी दुरै जी ने ति मल िफÊम 
इंडÎटर्ी और रेƿी जी ने तेलुगु िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी क े योगदान क े बारे मȂ कहा है। दोनȗ िफÊम इंडÎटर्ीज़ 
का बहुत बड़ा योगदान है, इसमȂ कोई दो राय नहीं है।   
ओिड़या िफÊ
म इंडÎटर्ी का भी हमने कह िदया है। मȅ चाहता था िक यिद पिÌचमी बंगाल क े 
सांसद भी यहाँ उपिÎथत होते और पिÌचमी बंगाल िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी की भी बात करते, तो अच्छा 
होता। क्यȗिक सत्यजीत रे से लेकर Mrinal Sen जैसे अन्य कई बड़े नाम हȅ और िबÃलब देब जी ने 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

तो एस.डी. बमर्न से लेकर आर.डी. बमर्न तक को याद िकया है, जो िक महान संगीतकार थे। 
बािकयȗ ने भी अपने-अपने क्षेतर् क े लोगȗ क े बारे मȂ बोला है। डा. सोनल मानिंसह जी तो कला, 
सािहत्य, संÎकृ ित क े क्षेतर् मȂ अपने आप मȂ एक बहुत बड़ा नाम हȅ। मȅ आप सभी क े सुझावȗ को 
सुझाव क े रूप  मȂ ले रहा हूं। आपके  जो क ंसनर् वाले इÌयूज़ थे, उन अिधक
तर इÌयूज़ का मȅने यहाँ 
पर जवाब दे िदया है। यिद इनके  अलावा भी आपके  मन मȂ कोई और सवाल है, तो किहए। आपके  
मन मȂ रीज
नल लȅग्वेज को लेकर एक सवाल था। रीजनल लȅग्वेज मȂ मराठी को लेकर धनंजय 
महािदक जी ने पहले बात कही है। म
राठी िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी का सभी मȂ - िंहदी िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी और 
मराठी िफÊम इंडÎटर्ी मȂ एक बहुत बड़ा योगदान है। मȅ इतना ही कहूंगा िक एनएफडीसी क े माध्यम 
से हमारे Ģावधान हȅ। हमारी जो Development, Communication and  Dissemination of 
Filmic Content  Scheme है - हम industry को एनएफडीसी क े माध्यम से सपोटर् करते हȅ। यिद 
आपके  ध्यान मȂ मराठी िफÊम जगत क े ऐसे कोई भी लोग हȗ, िजनको सहायता की आवÌयकता है, 
वे एनएफडीसी मȂ अÃलाई कर सकते हȅ।  
 Madam, I would like to  conclude by saying िक  पायरेसी क े कारण हमारा जो 20 
हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े का लॉस होता है, हमȂ उससे बचाने क े िलए यह िबल लाया गया है। इसके  सा
थ 
ही साथ हमारे िफÊम जगत की एक बहुत लंबे समय की मांग थी, उसको पूरा करने का कायर् भी 
इसमȂ िकया गया है। जो age-based certi
fication है, हमने उसको  भी इसके  माध्यम से िकया है। 
जो offence हȅ - एक ओर से जहाँ  Ease of Doing Business और Ease of Living को बढ़ावा 
िदया है, वहीं पर पायरेसी को बढ़ावा देने वालȗ क े िखलाफ़ कड़ी कायर्वाही की है। हमने सुĢीम 
कोटर्, हाई कोटर् क े जजमȂट क े बाद इसे लॉ की दृि
Íट से इसको  harmonise करने का काम िकया 
है। Certification क े िलए एक सरल Ģिकर्या को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए भी इसके  अंदर कदम रखे गए 
हȅ। आपने जो  content create िकया है, आपको एक लंबे समय तक उसके  perpetual अिधकार 
िमल सकȂ, उस
के  भी इसमȂ Ģावधान हȅ। क ु ल िमलाकर िजतनी भी मांगȂ आई थीं, हमने इसमȂ सबको 
आधार रखा है। पहले जो यह कहा गया िक िसनेमा क े माध्यम से समाज की क ुरीितयȗ, समाज मȂ 
िकए गए अच्
छे कायș और ऐसे लोग, िजनके  जीवन से लोग बहुत क ु छ सीख सकते हȅ, उनके  ऊपर 
भी बहुत सारी िफÊमȂ और क ं टȂट बना है। मुझे पूणर् आशा है िक हमारे िफÊ म जगत क े कलाकार, 
Ģोǹूससर्, डायरेक्टसर् और िफÊम जगत से जुड़े ऐसे सभी लोग अपनी ओर से पूरा Ģयास करȂगे 
िक भारतीय िफÊम जगत न क ेवल दुिनया की सबसे ज्यादा िफÊमȂ बनाने वाली इंडÎटर्ी बने - वह 
तो है ही, बिÊक हम दुिनया का ऐसा क ं टȂट भी बना रहे हȅ जो regional
 नहीं, बिÊक बहुत जÊदी 
national और international हो जाता है। यह आज हमारी ताकत बनी है। आज कोई क ं टȂट, 
लोकल नहीं, बिÊक बहुत जÊदी ग्लोबल भी हो रहा है। हम टेक्नोलॉजी का उ पयोग भी करȂगे और 
नई सुिवधाएँ भी दȂगे। 
महोदया, पायरेसी एक क ȅसर की तरह है और इस क ȅसर को जड़ से खत्म करने का काम 
हम इस िबल क े माध्यम से करने का Ģयास कर रहे हȅ। इसमȂ आप सभी ने अपना जो सहयोग िदया 
है, उसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्
यवाद करता हूं। जहाँ तक आपने  State-level Film Cities की बात 
कही है, मȅ चाहता हूं िक हर राज्य - क्यȗिक 140 करोड़ की जनता इतनी ज्यादा है िक यिद आप 
पूरे यूरोप, रिशया और सबक
ो जोड़ लȂगे, तो हम ऐसे कई देशȗ से अके ले ज्यादा हȅ, हमारा क ं टȂट 
भी रिशया से लेकर सȅटर्ल एिशया, यूरोप से लेकर चाइना, कोिरया सभी जगह पर जा रहा है, यह 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
61

एिशयन क ंटर्ीज़ तक जाता है। भारत का क ं टȂट यूएई से लेकर अरब वÊडर् मȂ बहुत ज्यादा क ंįयूम 
होता है। मेरा िनवेदन इतना ही है िक आइए इस िबल को पास करȂ, िजसमȂ आप सभी ने अपना 
सहयोग िदया, समथर्न िदया, सुझाव भी िदए - इन सभी सुझावȗ को हमने इसमȂ शािमल िकया है - 
इसके  िलए मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत आभार Ģकट कर
ता हूं और धन्यवाद देता हूं।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA):  The question is: 
 That the Bill further to amend the Ci nematograph Act, 1952, be taken into 
consideration. 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA ): We shall now take up Clause-by-
Clause consideration of the Bill.   
 
Clauses 2 and 3 were added to the Bill.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. US HA): In Clause 4, there is one 
Amendment (No. 1) by Dr. John Brittas.  Hon. Member is absent.  Amendment not 
moved. 
 
Clause 4 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA ): In Clause 5, there are three 
Amendments (Nos. 2 to 4) by Dr. Joh
n Brittas.  Hon. Member is absent.  
Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 5 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 6 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA): In Clause 7, there is one 
Amendment (No. 5) by Dr. John Brittas.  Hon. Member is absent.  Amendment not 
moved. 
 
Clause 7 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 8 was added to the Bill. 
 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. US HA): In Clause 9, there are two 
Amendments (Nos. 6 and 7) by Dr. John Brittas. Hon. Member is absent.  
Amendments not moved. 
 
Clause 9 was added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. US HA): In Clause 10, there is one 
Amendment (No. 8) by Dr. John Brittas.  Hon. Member is absent.  Amendment not 
moved. 
 
Clause 10 was added to the Bill. 
Clause1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA): Now, the Minister to move that the 
Bill be passed.   
 
SHRI ANURAG SINGH THAKUR:  Madam, I move: 
     That the Bill be passed. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA):   We shall now take up the Special 
Mentions.   
 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
Safety on Railway premises 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Madam, on 25
th June, 2023, a 34-year old 
woman, on her way to board a train to Ch andigarh with her family, was electrocuted 
to death near Gate Number 1 of New Delhi Railway Station after coming into contact 
with an exposed live wire on an electricity pole at the Railway Station complex, in the 
midst of heavy rain.   
                   
 Laid on the Table.  
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
63

 Northern Railways claimed that the acci dent occurred due to an insulation 
failure and not because of any deficiency in the railway's working system. Power 
distribution companies are responsible for electricity supply only to a certain portion of 
the New Delhi Railway Station, which excludes  the leakages from the high mast lights 
that caused her death. 
 The incident took place on Railway property and the Railways should take 
responsibility for the maintenance of all electrical installations in its premises. But even 
after this sad tragedy, at various entry points, parking sites and exits of New Delhi 
Railway Station, exposed wires, shoddy and makeshift methods employed to manage 
open electric poles and junction boxes ar e witnessed. This ne gligence of Railway 
safety gains special importance post-Balasore accident.    
 I urge the Government to launch separa te investigation into this death and 
immediately employ related prevention and safety measures. I also urge the 
Government and the Ministry of Railways to take prompt action and conduct a safety 
audit of all electric poles and electricity infr astructure to prevent any such incident in 
the future. 
 
Demand to rename the country as Bharat by amending Article-1 of the  
Indian Constitution 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड): महोदया, आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िवगत 15 
अगÎत को लाल िकले से देश क े नाम संबोधन मȂ साफ कहा था िक दासता क े Ģतीक िचन्हȗ से देश 
को मुिƪ िद
लाना जरूरी  है। पीएम, Ǜी मोदी ने अपने भाषण मȂ आज़ादी क े अमृत काल क े िलए 
अपने बताए पाँच Ģणȗ मȂ से एक Ģण औपिनवेिशक माइंडसेट से देश को मुƪ कराने का भी िज़कर् 
िकया था। िव
गत नौ सालȗ मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने अनेक कदम उठाए हȅ, बिÊक कई 
मौकȗ पर उन्हȗने औपिनवेिशक िवरासत, औपिनवेिशक Ģतीक िचन्हȗ को हटाने और उनकी जगह 
परंपरागत भारतीय मूÊयȗ और सोच को लागू करने की वक ालत की है। अंगर्ेज़ȗ ने देश का नाम 
'भारत' से बदलकर 'इंिडया' कर िदया। भारत क े Îवतंतर्ता सेनािनयȗ की मेहनत और बिलदानȗ क े 
कारण 1947 मȂ देश आज़ाद हुआ और संिवधान मȂ 1950 मȂ हम भारतीयȗ ने िलख िदया-"इंिडया, 
दैट इज़ भारत।" हमारे देश का नाम हजारȗ सालȗ से 'भारत' ही रहा है और भारत को 'भारत' ही 
बोला जाना चािहए, लेिकन इसके  बजाय िलखा गया-"इंिडया, दैट इज़ भारत।"  ' भारत' या 
'भारतवषर्' इस देश का वाÎतिवक नाम है। देश का अंगर्ेज़ी नाम 'इंिडया' शÅद गुलामी की िनशानी 
है।  देश को मूल और Ģामािणक नाम 'भारत' से ही मान्यता दी जानी चािहए
। 
 अत: आज़ादी क े अमृत काल मȂ अंगर्ेज़ी गुलामी क े Ģतीक को हटाकर, इस पुण्य, पावन 
धरा का नाम संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद एक मȂ संशोधन कर पुन: 'भारत' रखा जाए तथा भारत माता 
को दासता की इस नाम रूपी  बेिड़यȗ से आज़ादी दी जाए। 
 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी सकलदीप राजभर (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदया, मȅ Îवयं को इस िवषय क े साथ संबǉ करता हूँ। 
 
डा. अिनल अगर्वाल (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदया, मȅ भी Îवयं को इस िवषय क े साथ संबǉ करता हूँ। 
                
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA ): Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque.  
Hon. Member is not there. Dr. K. Laxman . Hon. Member is not there. Shri A.D. 
Singh. Hon. Member is not there. Shri Iranna Kadadi.     
 
Demand for enhancement of amount under MPLAD Scheme 
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कड
ाडी  (कनार्टक): महोदया, सांसद Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास योजना (MPLADS) 1993 
मȂ पहली बार शुरू  की गयी थी, िजसका उǈेÌय Ëयिƪगत सांसदȗ ǎारा अनुशंिसत िवकासात्मक 
कायș क े िलए रािश उपलÅध कराना है। इस िनिध क े माध्यम से सांसद अपने िनवार्चन क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
पेयजल, Ģाथिमक िशक्षा, सावर्जिनक ÎवाÎथ्
य, Îवच्छता और सड़कȗ आिद क े क्षेतर् मȂ सामुदाियक 
संपिǄ क े िनमार्ण हेतु िवकास कायș की िसफािरश कर सकते हȅ। एक राज्य सभा सांसद अपने 
राज्य का Ģितिनिधत्व करता है और उसका चुनाव उस राज् य क े िवधायक करते हȅ और इसी 
कारण एक राज्य सभा सांसद पर पूरे राज्य क े िवकास की महत्वपूणर् िजÇमेदारी होती है। 
एमपीलैड्स िनिध िजला Ģािधकरण को जारी की जाती है और सांसदȗ क े पास क ेवल िवकास 
कायș की िस
फािरश करने की शिƪ होती है। इस िनिध क े माध्यम से संसद सदÎयȗ को Ģत्येक वषर् 
2.5 करोड़ रुपय े की दो िकÌतȗ मȂ 5 करोड़ रुपय े की रािश िवतिरत की जाती है। इस रािश मȂ से 18 
Ģितशत जीएसटी, 2 Ģितशत भवन और अन्य सिन्नमार्ण कमर्कार कÊयाण उपक र और 2 Ģितशत 
Ģशासिनक Ëयय काटा जाता है, िजसके  कारण िवकास कायș क े िलए उपलÅध रािश िसफर् 3.5 से 
4 करोड़ तक िमलती है। यह रािश एक िजले क े हर गाँव मȂ िवकास कायर् करने क े िलए पयार्Ãत नहीं 
है और सरकारी कर कटने क े कारण इसमȂ और िदक्कत आती है। सांसद Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवक
ास 
योजना (MPLADS) एकमातर् िनिध है, िजससे एक सांसद Ëयिƪगत Îतर पर अपने क्षेतर् मȂ 
िवकास कायर् को गित दे सकता है।   
 अत: मेरा सरकार से िन वेदन है िक सांसद Îथानीय क्षेतर् िवकास योजना क े अंतगर्त दी 
जाने वाली िनिध को बढ़ाकर 10 करोड़ िकया जाए और इस िनिध क े माध्यम से जो भी सामुदाियक 
संपिǄ का िनमार्ण होता है, उसे कर मुƪ िकया जाए। 
 
Need for development of National Strategy for opt
imizing Artificial  
Intelligence (AI) for Accelerating India (AI) 
 
Ǜी िबơब क ुमार देब (ितर्पुरा): महोदया, िपछले एक साल मȂ दुिनया भर मȂ आिर्टिफिशयल 
इंटेिलजȂस से जुड़ी टेक्नोलॉजी एवं संबंिधत Ģणािलयȗ का तेजी से िवÎतार हुआ है। 
 
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
65

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA) : Your text is in English and you are 
reading in Hindi. 
 
Ǜी िबơब क ुमार देब: महोदया, क्या मȅ इंिग्लश मȂ बोलूँ? 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती पी. टी. उषा): जी हाँ। The text is in English. 
 
SHRI BIPLAB KUMAR DEB: Madam, a rapid expansion of Artificial Intelligence (Al) 
technologies and related systems has take n place over the last one year across the 
globe. Artificial Intelligence has the potential to act as a kinetic enabler of the digital 
economy and innovation ecosystem in India. The optimal harnessing of the potential 
of Artificial Intelligence can al so lead to more efficient delivery of personalized and 
interactive citizen-centric services through Digital Public Platforms to our 1.4 billion 
citizens. 
The Union Government must develop a Nati onal Strategy with the objective of 
optimizing 'Artificial Intelligence (Al) for Accelerating India (Al)'. Efforts must be 
made to develop comprehensive programmes and schemes for leveraging Artificial 
Intelligence (Al) related transformative techno logies to foster inclusion, innovation 
and adoption for social impact in the count ry. These initiatives will strengthen India's 
capabilities as a global leader in creating digital public infrastructure through the 
development of a robust ecosystem ensuring  'Responsible Artificial Intelligence (Al) 
for All'. 
I urge the Government to look into it.                                          
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA ): Dr. V. Sivadasan; absent. Shri 
Manas Ranjan Mangaraj; absent. Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham; absent. Now, Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu. 
 
Demand to ban the online sale of Medicines and to regulate e-pharmacies in India 
with stringent law 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tam il Nadu): Madam, online sale of medicines is 
currently not regulated and their existence will lead to a catastr ophe since the online 
sale of drugs and medicines could not be checked and verified. There are no legal 
provisions on the use of online sale and distribution of drugs. Unregulated and 
                   
 Laid on the Table.  
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

unlicensed sale of medicines will increase the risk of spurious, misbranded and sub-
standard drugs being sold. People get a ddicted to drugs and are habitual of 
consuming them without a valid prescription which may lead to chronic disorders. In 
December, 2018, the Delhi High Court ordere d the ban on online sale of medicines in 
India. Since then, multiple Court orders including those from Bombay, Madras and 
Patna High Courts have called for regulating e-pharmacies. The Ministry of Health 
pulled up twenty companies by issuing them a show-cause notice, for selling 
medicines online. Several online pharmacies  sell prescription medicines without a 
valid prescription from a medical doctor, which can put safety and health of the 
consumers at risk. E-commerce websites ha ve been caught on numerous occasions 
for selling fake products. Drugs are extremely potent substances and consuming 
wrong dose or fake medicine can have fatal consequences on  the patient. The 
Government should find out the websites which are distributing and selling drugs in 
the country and impose a ban on the online sa le and purchase of medicines and take 
stringent action against such pharmacies se lling drugs online. Therefore, I urge upon 
the Government to ban the online sale of medicines and to regulate e-pharmacies 
with stringent law. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA):  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde; absent. 
Shri Binoy Viswam; absent. Shri Elamaram  Kareem, absent. Shri Sandosh Kumar P, 
absent. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy.   
 
Demand to consider railway recruitment of Course Completed Act Apprentices 
(CCAAs) 
 
SHRI V. VIJAYASAI REDDY (Andhra Pradesh) : Madam, it is very concerning that 
hundreds of eligible candida tes, mostly from Andhra Pradesh, are being denied 
railway recruitment due to an unfair technicality. 
 In 2019, a notification was issued to fill one lakh vacancies,  of which around 
20,000 posts were reserved for Course Completed Act Apprentices (CCAAs).  
Accordingly, candidates completed their co urse by December, 2018 and also cleared 
the exam and got their National Apprentice ship Certificate. These candidates belong 
to Batch-109 of Apprentices trained in South Central Railway, mostly hailing from 
Andhra Pradesh. 
 Now, their candidature is being reject ed because they did not clear the exam 
before the cut-off date of 12
th April, 2019. But this is no t the fault of the candidates 
since the exam was postponed from April, 2019 to July, 2019 due to general elections.  
[ 27 July, 2023 ]
67

It is unfair to penalize the candidates, if the exam was po stponed because of 
circumstances beyond their control. Even the certificate issued to the apprentices 
indicates April, 2019 as the date of qualification.   
It is disheartening that Railways is applying this technicality and leaving 
hundreds of candidates in lurch. Even pr eviously, appointment was given to Batch-
108 candidates whose exam was also conducted after the cut-off date.  
The largeness of the affected candidate s merits a speedy resolution to this 
issue. I urge the hon. Railway Minister fo r his swift intervention, which will provide 
justice to these candidates who have been  waiting for appointment for the past 4 
years. Thank you very much, Madam. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI P.T. USHA ): The House stands adjourned to 
meet at 1100 a.m. on Friday, the 28th July, 2023. 
The House then adjourned at thirty-seven minutes past four of the clock  
till eleven of the clock on Friday, the 28th July, 2023. 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 