Vol. 267          Friday, 
No. 26    4 April, 2025 
              14 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (pages 1 - 3) 
Farewell to the Retiring
 Members (pages 3 - 4) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 5 - 10) 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Housing and 
Urban Affairs – Laid on the table (Page 10) 
Statements by Minister  
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the Second Report 
 of the Department-related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing – Laid on the table (Page 11) 
Withdrawal of funds from the Contingency Fund of In dia for release of funds 
towards 19th instalment of ‘PM-KISAN Scheme – Laid on the 
table (Page 11) 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
     NEW DELHI 


Regarding Recruitment of T
eaching  and  Non-Teaching Staff in West 
Bengal (pages 11 - 14) 
    Valedictory Remarks (pages 14 - 15) 
    National Song (page 16) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Ra jya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in
-15 )

RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 4th  April, 2025/14 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Hon. Members, the entire House must rejoice and share the joy of 
those whose birthday is today or tomorrow.  Pleased to extend birthday greetings to 
hon. Members of Parliament, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil, Shri Arun Singh , -- what a 
coincidence   the   two   veterans   having  their  birthdays  on  the same   date  -- 
Shri  Sukhendu Sekhar Ray and Shri R. Dharmar.  Their birthdays are tomorrow - 
April 5.  …(Interruptions)…   
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (karnataka):  Si r, what about those Members, whose 
birthday fall next week? 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, when the House is not in Session, I have the 
extreme pleasure and satisfaction to directly talk to those hon. Members and greet 
them.    
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  represents -- can I say, ‘the glorious State of Gujarat’ -- 
in this august House since June, 2020.  Prior to this, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil has served 
four terms as a Member of the Gujarat Legislative Assembly, from 1990-95, a period I 
share with you, -- you were in the Assemb ly, I was in the Parliament -- then, from 
1995-98, 2007-2012, and 2014-201 7. He held key positions, including Minister of 
State for Finance, Education, and Health in the Government of Gujarat, and he also 
hailed the position of the Leader of Opposi tion in the Gujarat Legislative Assembly 
when the Leader of the House, the then Ch ief Minister, now the Prime Minister of the 
country, was in his third term.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil   has represented India at various 
international conferences.  More is coming.  …(Interruptions)…  
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH:  Sir, marital status क्या है? 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Well, he shares it with very distin guished people.  Shri Shaktisinh 
Gohil has represented India at various in ternational conferences valuably 

strengthening democratic dialogue and par liamentary governance worldwide.  He is 
an extremely involved Member of this House, making sharp incisive and well thought 
out contributions.  He happens to be a di stinguished advocate and agriculturist.  He 
has keen interest in regional languages and fo lk music.  An avid sports enthusiast, he 
has led local cricket clubs an d has been actively engaged in cricket, volleyball, and 
chess.  On your birthday, my suggestion is, take parliamentary work also sportingly.   
Shri Arun Singh  is representing the State of Uttar Pradesh in this august 
House, for a second term (2019-2020 an d 2020-present).  A Chartered Accountant 
by profession, Shri Singh believes in auditi ng himself before auditing others in his 
organizational duties.  He has made significan t contributions in public life, in the field 
of finance and management.  His tenure as Director of the State Bank of India and the 
Union Bank for seven years is remembered for the pivotal ro le he played in bringing 
about transparency and accountability.  
Shri Arun Singh had worked on key pr ojects with the World Bank and the 
United Nations. Shri Singh plays a critical role in his organization as the National 
General Secretary of BJP. Shri Singh also has the distinction of being Secretary of the 
Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Research Foundation. 
Married to Shrimati Meenakshi Singh, the couple is blessed with 
daughters, Ikshita Singh and Ashmita Singh and son Akshit Singh. 
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray  – a picture of politeness and grace – who always 
believes in rule-based regime, is also an  advocate like me and currently serving his 
third term in this august House,  continually from 2011, namely , first time from 2011 to 
2017, then from 2017 to 2023 and from 2023  still counting.  He is a veteran leader of 
the All India Trinamool Congress, consistent ly working at the grassroots with sublime 
commitment to public service. He has al ways been participant in parliamentary 
debates, exhibiting due diligence and highest consideration to the Chair. 
His nomination to the Panel of Vice -Chairpersons for seven times (July 
2014,  April 2018,   July 2020,  July 2022,  December 2022,  July  2023  and June 2024) 
reflects his keen interest in parliament ary decorum and knowledge of procedure. 
Beyond his legislative role, Shri Ray was Member of the National Jute Board (2015-
2020) and that incidentally takes care of  about four million farmers.  The hon. 
Agriculture Minister is here.  He served as  the Vice-President of the Calcutta High 
Court Bar Association from 2009 to 2011.  A prolific writer, Sh ri Ray has authored 
several notable books, including Chayatarini (2009) and Pranab Mukherjee – The 
All-Season Man (2010) and has also served as the editor of Jago Bangla, a Bengali 
daily. 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Married to the late Shrimati Mahashweta Ray, the couple is blessed with 
daughter, Saswati Ray. 
Shri R. Dharmar  is representing the State of Tamil Nadu in this august House 
as a Member of Parliament since June 2022, serving his first term. 
An agriculturist by profession, Shri Dharmar holds a B.A. degree and, as a 
dedicated member of the AIADMK party, continues to serve the people of Tamil Nadu 
in all earnestness and commitment.  Widely  respected as a local leader, he has 
earned a strong reputation as a grassroots representative tirelessly addressing the 
needs and aspirations of his communi ty and others. He was married to  late Shrimati 
Sivakami; the couple is blesses with daughters — Anandi and Indupriya. 
Hon. Members, on my own and on behalf of this House, I wish them a long, 
healthy and happy life and extend greetings to their family members and friends.  
FAREWELL TO THE RETIRING MEMBERS 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, ...(Interruptions)...  One minute, equally 
important is Farewell.  Hon. Members, reception of Members in this House and 
farewell are very touching moments.  Fare well is not a disconnect. It is only their 
absence from the House and sometimes, for the Members of this House, more often 
than not, their presence is as impactful as their absen ce.  Two of our esteemed 
colleagues, Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya an d Shri Mission Ranjan Das, representing 
the State of Assam, will retire from this Hous e in their present term on June 14, 2025. 
All of us will miss their presence as thei r dedicated service and contributions have 
enriched the deliberations and their informed discourse has been enlightening.  
Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya , a senior parliamentarian and an experienced 
leader, has served as a Member of the Elev enth Lok Sabha and, now, in his second 
term in the Rajya Sabha. He has also held the office of the Union Minister of Steel and 
Mines, from 1996 to 1998.  Shri Baishya has been a distinguished voice in this House, 
actively engaging in discussions on key i ssues concerning Assam’s development and 
the welfare of its people. He has been ever alert to seek attention of the Chair.  His 
keen insights and unwavering commitmen t to societal upliftment are truly 
commendable. Notably, his dedication to pu blic causes, particularly in promoting 
sports and youth development, has been remarkable. His contributions to policy 
discussions, especially in infrastructure, in dustrial growth and social justice, will be 
[ 04 April, 2025 ]
3

remembered with great appreciation by this  House. He has advocated and strongly 
appreciated the phenomenal development in the North-East.  
Shri Mission Ranjan Das , a dedicated public servant and a staunch advocate 
for the rights of the people of Assam, br ings with him vast legislative experience, 
having served four terms as a Member of  the Assam Legislativ e Assembly. He has 
also held key positions as Chairman of the Assam Industrial Development Corporation 
and the Assam State Transport Corporation, contributing significantly to the State’s 
economic and infrastructural growth.  His act ive participation in legislative debates 
and his unwavering commitment to the progress of the State have been praiseworthy. 
He has worked tirelessly to address the con cerns of the people, particularly those in 
rural areas, in the field of education, and self-employment generation. His efforts to 
strengthen democratic values, improve admi nistration and governance have been of 
immense value to the proceedings of this Ho use. Hon. Members, I place it on record 
my heartfelt appreciation for the contributions and service rendered by both the 
Members to parliamentary democracy and to society at large. Their dedication, 
wisdom, and experience have enriched the functioning of this House.   
On behalf of the entire House, I extend my best wishes to Shri Birendra Prasad 
Baishya and Shri Mission Ranjan Das for good health, happiness, and long, fulfilling 
years ahead. The House shall always cheris h their association.  Hon. Members, I 
need to inform, for ex-Members, my office ha s a dedicated service. If they inform my 
office, they are taken care of for logistics and transport so that they should have no 
such difficulty.  
डा. लÑमी
कान्त बाजपेयी (उǄरĢदेश): माननीय सभापित जी, आपकी अनुमित से मȅ एक 
महत्वपूणर् िवषय उठाना चाहता हूँ।   ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute.  …(Interruptions)… It will be difficult for me to grant any 
permission. I have to take up the listed Business. ...(Interruptions)... One minute. 
...(Interruptions)...Under which rule are you raising the issue? ...(Interruptions)... 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी : महोदय, मȅने Zero Hour का नोिटस िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी सभापित: तो Zero Hour आने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Shri Piyush Goyal. 
...(Interruptions)... स
ुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Mr. Piyush Goyal, you are familiar with the 
rules. If you yourself say that you want to  raise it in Zero Ho ur, let the Zero Hour 
come.  
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
I. Report and Accounts (2021-22) of  HML, T hiruvananthapuram, Kerala  and
related papers
II. Report and Accounts (2023-24) of PGIMER, Chandigarh and related papers
III. Report and Accounts (2023-24) of RIMS, Imphal, Manipur and related papers
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार  कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव):  महोदय, मȅ 
िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
I. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:-
(a)
Annual Report and Accounts of the HLL Medipark Limited (HML),
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, a subsidiary of HLL Lifecare Limited, for
the year 2021-22, together with   the Auditor's Report on the Accounts
and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
thereon.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the
papers mentioned at (1) above
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2656/18/25] 
II. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section
(4) of Section 18 and Section 19 of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical,
Education and Research Chandig
arh, Act, 1966:-
(a) Fifty-seventh Annual Report an d Accounts of the Post-Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh,
for the year 2023-24, together with  the Auditor's Report on the
Accounts.
(b)
Review by the Government on the working of the above Institute.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the
papers mentioned at (1) above
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2657/18/25] 
[ 04 April, 2025 ]
5

III. A copy each (in English and Hi
ndi) of the following papers:-
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Regional Institute of Medical
Sciences (RIMS), Imphal, Manipur, for the year 2023-24, together with
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2658/18/25] 
Report and Accounts (2023-24
) of IICCL, New Delhi and related papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
Shri Jitin Prasada, I lay on the Table— 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1)
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:-
(a) Seventh Annual Report and A ccounts of the India International
Convention and Exhibition Centre Limited (IICCL), New Delhi, for the
year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and
the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report.
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers
mentioned   at (1) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2510/18/25] 
Report and Account
s (2023-24) of National Medical Commission , New Delhi and 
related papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA PATEL): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and 
Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Medical Commission, New Delhi,
for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Commission.
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2659/18/25] 
Report and Accounts (2022-23)  of NIRDPR, Hyderabad , Telangana and related 
papers
 
गर्ामीण िवकास मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी कमलेश पासवान): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की 
एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
(a) Annual Report of the National Instit ute of Rural Development and Panchayati
Raj (NIRDPR), Hyderabad, Telangana, for the year 2022-23.
(b) Annual Accounts of the National Instit ute of Rural Development and Panchayati
Raj (NIRDPR), Hyderabad, Telangana, for the year 2022-23, and the Audit
Report thereon.
(c) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute.
(d) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at (a)
and (b) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2660/18/25] 
Report and Accounts (2023-24
) of CRIS, New Delhi and related papers 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (SHRI RAVNEET 
SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy ea ch (in English and Hindi) of the following 
papers:- 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Centre for Railway Information Systems
(CRIS), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, together with   the Auditor's Report
on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Centre.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at (a)
above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2522/18/25] 
Reports and Accounts
 (2023-24) of various Councils and related paper 
वÎतर् मं तर्ालय  मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पिबतर् मागȃिरटा):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
(c) Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at (a)
above.
[ 04 April, 2025 ]
7

(i)
(a)  Annual  Report  and  Accounts  of  the  Wool  Industry  Export   Promotion
Council (WOOLTEXPRO), Mumbai, Ma harashtra, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2517/18/25] 
(ii)
(a)  Fourteenth Annual Report  and Accounts of the Jute Products
Development & Export Promotion Council (JPDEPC), Kolkata, West 
Bengal, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2661/18/25] 
(iii) (a)  Thirty-eighth Annual Report and Accounts of Export Promotion Council
for Handicrafts (EPCH), New Delhi, fo r the year 2023-24, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2518/18/25] 
(iv) (a)  Seventieth Annual Report and Accounts of the Manmade and Technical
Textiles Export Promotion Council (MATEXIL) ( formerly SRTEPC), 
Mumbai, Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Account 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at
(a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2662/18/25] 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, on behalf of Shri Pankaj 
Chaudhary, I lay on the Table:- 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Reports, under clause (1) of
Article 151 of the Constitution:-
(a) R eport of the Comptroller an d Au ditor General of India  – on
Compliance of the Fis
cal Responsibility and Budget Management Act,
2003 for the year 2022 -23 – Union Government – Department of
Economic Affairs (Ministry of Finance) – Report No. 3 of 2025; and
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2662A/18/25] 
(b)
Report of the Comptroller and Au ditor General of India for the period
ended March 2023 – Union Government – Ministry of Railways – Report
No. 5 of 2025 (Compliance Audit – Railways)
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2662B/18/25] 
(2) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India – General Purpose Financial Rep
orts of Central Public Sector
Enterprises for the period ended March 2022 – Union Governme nt (Commercial) –
Report No. 6 of 2025 (Compliance Audit), und er clause (2) of Section 19A of the
Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Services) Act,
1971.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2662C/18/25] 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. L. Murugan, you also have to  l
ay one Paper.  It was listed at 
Item No. 4. 
Notification of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and 
Hindi) of the Ministry of Information an d Broadcasting Notification No. G.S.R. 
65(E)., dated the 17 th January, 2025, publishing the Cable Television Networks 
[ 04 April, 2025 ]
9

(Amendment) Rules, 2025, under sub-sect ion (3) of Section 22 of the Cable 
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2521/18/25] 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Now, Shri Murlidhar Mohol. 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23 and 2023-24) of RGNAU, Amethi, Uttar Pradesh and 
related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION (SHRI MURLIDHAR 
MOHOL):  Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(3) of Section 30 and sub-section (4) of Section 31 of the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Aviation University Act, 2013:- 
 (i)  (a)   Annual   Accounts   of   the   Rajiv   Gandhi   National   Aviation   University  
(RGNAU), Amethi, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, and the Audit 
Report thereon. 
(b)  Statement by Government accepting the Accounts. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2531/18/25] 
 
(ii) (a)  Annual  Report  and  Accounts   of   the   Rajiv   Gandhi   National   Aviation  
University (RGNAU), Amethi, Utta r Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government accepting the above Report. 
(2) Statements (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned   at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 2663/18/25] 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
DR. MEDHA VISHRAM KULKARNI ( Maharashtra): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in 
English and Hindi) of the Fifth Report (E ighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2024-25) 
on ‘Regional Rapid Transit System and Role of NCRTC’. 
 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

STATEMENTS BY MINISTER 
Status of implementation of the recommen dations contained in the Second Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary St anding Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing. 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र): महोदय, मȅ क ृिष 
अनुसंधान और िशक्षा िवभाग, क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय की ‘अनुदान मांगȗ (2024-25)’ क े 
संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत क ृ िष, पशुपालन और खाǏ ĢसंÎकरण संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े 
दूसरे Ģितवेदन मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ क े कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ एक िववरण सभा पटल 
पर रखता हूँ। 
Withdrawal of funds from t he Contingency Fund of India for release of funds
 towards 
19th installment of ‘PM-KISAN Scheme’ 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र):  महोदय, मȅ ‘पीएम-
िकसान योजना’ क े अधीन भारत की आकिÎमकता िनिध से धनरािश आहिरत करने क े संबंध मȂ एक 
िववरण (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ। 
REGARDING RECRUITMENT OF TEACHING AND NON-TEACHING STAFF IN 
WEST BEN
GAL 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Now, matters raised with the permission of the Chair. 
…(Interruptions)… Hon. Members, if all of you shout… …( Interruptions)… Mr. Piyush 
Goyal, if Members shout, I can’t make out what are they saying. …( Interruptions)… 
Shivrajji Chouhanji, you are a senior Minister.  I can’t make out what they are saying! 
…(Interruptions)…   What are you saying? …(Interruptions )… आप क्या कह रहे हȅ?  
...(Ëयवधान)...  
डा. लÑमी कान्त  बाजपेयी (उǄरĢदेश): महोदय, हाई कोटर् ने भिर्तयȗ को िनरÎत िकया था। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी सभापित : आप क्या कह रहे ह ȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 04 April, 2025 ]
11

डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी: महोदय, माननीय सवȘच्च न्यायालय ने भी हाई कोटर् क े िनणर्य को 
यथावÞ बरकरार रखा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜी सभापित : आप ब ैिठए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप शालीनता से बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
डा. लÑमी कान्त बाजपेयी: और यह कहा है िक ... 
Ǜी सभापित: आप म ेरी बात सुिनए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... एक बार रुिकए।   ...(Ëयवधान)...  एक 
बार रुिकए।   आप शालीनता से बैिठए।  लÑमीकान्त जी, आपको क्या कहना है?  आप िवषय 
बताइए िक आप क्या कहना चाहते हȅ? 
डा. लÑमी कान्त  बाजपेयी: सभापित महोदय, वषर् 2016 मȂ पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ 25,000 िशक्षक और 
गैर-िशक्षक कमर्चािरयȗ की भतीर् हुई थी।  उन भिर्तयȗ मȂ िनधार्िरत मानदंडȗ का उÊलंघन हुआ था।  
माननीय उच्च न्यायालय, पिÌचमी बंगाल ने उस पर िनणर्य िदया था और सारी भिर्तयां िनरÎत कर 
दी थीं, cancel कर दी थीं।   उसके  िवरुǉ पिÌचमी बंगाल की सरकार सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ गई।  सुĢीम 
कोटर् मȂ भी चीफ जिÎटस की बȂच ने हाई कोटर् क े उस िनणर्य को यथावÞ बरकरार रखा
 है।  उसने 
िसफर् एक बात कही है िक इन भिर्तयȗ मȂ िजन कमर्चािरयȗ को नौकरी मȂ रखा गया था, उनको 
नौकरी से िनकाला जाए
, उनकी तनख्वाह की recovery नहीं की जाए।  
मान्यवर, राज्य सरकार ने सारी भतीर् Ģिकर्या को tainted िकया है, वहाँ क े जो Rules and 
Regulations हȅ, उनका उÊलंघन िकया है।  यह हाई कोटर् और सुĢीम कोटर् क े लेवल पर सािबत 
हो चुका है।  मेरा क ेवल इतना कहना है। ...(Ëयवधान)... साथ ही, OBCs क े साथ अन्याय िकया
 
है। ...(Ëयवधान)... OBC क े कोटे को पूरा नहीं िकया है। यह हमारा िवषय  है । यह सदन Ģिकर्या 
का संरक्षक है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One minute, a point of order? One minute, Shri Derek O’ Brien has 
a point of order.  ...(Interruptions)...  
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal):  Si r, give me a chance.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have given floor to Shri Derek O’Brien.  ...(Interruptions)...   
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Thank you, Sir, for giving me the f loor. The people of India are 
seeing that the Treasury Benches are disrupting the Parliament.  ...(Interruptions)... 
They are disrupting Parliament.  They are raising slogans. ...(Interruptions)...  They 
are not allowing me to make my point.  ...(Interruptions)...   Sir, please protect me 
and allow me to make my point. ...(Interruptions)...  Please protect me.   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have given the floor to Shri Derek O'Brien.  
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Yes, Sir.  I seek your indulgence.   Please keep the House in 
order. ...(Interruptions)...  The BJP MPs are on their feet. ...(Interruptions)... Sir, 
the BJP MPs are on their feet. The BJP is disrupting the Parliament. 
...(Interruptions)... We were not allowed to raise a single issue in the Parliament. 
...(Interruptions)...  We were not allowed to raise a single issue… 
...(Interruptions)...  
MR. CHAIRMAN : The House is not in order. ...(Int erruptions)...  The House is 
adjourned to meet at 12 noon.  
The House then adjourned at twenty-six minutes past el even of the clock. 
The House reassembled at twelve of the clock. 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.)  
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Pramod Tiwari. …(Interruptio ns)… Are you raising a point of 
order?   
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान ): सर, राÍटर्पित पद की अवमानना हो रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... अभी 
यहाँ पर िवधेयक पािरत हुआ, हÎताक्षिरत नहीं हुआ और उǄर Ģदेश मȂ यह आदेश िदया जा रहा 
है िक वक्फ की जमीनȗ पर कÅजा करो। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House is not in order.  ...(Interrutpions)... 
Ǜी Ģमोद ित वारी : जो 69,000 टीचरȗ की िनयुिƪ हुई थी, उस पर ...(Ëयवधान)... 
MR. CHAIRMAN: T he House is in disorder. ...(Interruptions)... The  House stands 
adjourned to meet at 1.00 p.m. today.  
The House then adjourned at twelve of the clock.  
The House reassembled at one of the clock, 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, before I make observations about this Session, I 
would personally express my gratitude to  the hon. Members who felt concerned 
[ 04 April, 2025 ]
13

yesterday while I was sitting. There wa s a direct intervention by Soniaji that I must 
have water. There was intervention from Nadda ji, Health Minister, by a slip, that I 
must have water.  This convergence for health of the Chairman, I am ever indebted.  
VALEDICTORY REM
ARKS 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, we have  come to the conclusion of a very 
productive 267th Session of Rajya Sabha.  As  we conclude the sitting of this Session, 
-- technically this Session ends when the hon. President ta kes the constitutional step 
-- I extend my gratitude to each one of you for your active participation and valuable 
contributions to the enriched discussions and soothing deliberations. The debate and 
discourse in the House were exemplified by  enlightened inputs and varying opinion 
shades.  After a long gap, the House witnessed welcome wit, humour, satire, 
sarcasm and repartee apart from intellect ual fusion, while ensuring parliamentary 
decorum, cross-party collaboration and le gislative rigour. The House engaged in 
insightful debate on the Motion of Than ks to the hon. Pres ident for the Address 
rendered by her, spanning three days with  active participation of 73 hon. Members. 
The deliberations on the Union Budget  2025-26 were equally incisive and 
comprehensive, lasting over three days, an d drawing the considered contribution of 
89 hon. Members.  Besides, the House held substantive discussion on the working of 
four key Ministries of the Government. On  the Union Budget 2025-26, we had lively 
interaction between the hon. Finance Minist er and the former Finance Minister that 
was absolutely soothing to us. As usual, th ey agreed to disagree. The introduction of 
as many as 49 Private Members’ Bills in  this House needs special mention.  The 
concern of the hon. Members fo r Private Members’ Bills is taken note of by me and I 
will be in touch with the Leader of the Hous e and Leader of the Opposition to see that 
we act more diligently in this direction. Over all, the House functioned for a total of 159 
hours, including more than four hours after midnight. The productivity of this Session 
stood at 119 per cent.   
On April 3, 2025, the Rajya Sabha bega n proceedings and etched its name in 
the annals of legislative history with an unprecedented sitting from 11.00 a.m. on that 
day until 4.02 a.m. the following day, that is, this day -- the long est in its history.       
This would send a very great message to the people at large and enhance belief in 
this great institution.  During this marathon sitting, the House passed the 
transformative Waqf (Amendment) B ill 2025, bringing transparency and 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

accountability to work property management , while modernising legacy systems and 
upholding principles of equity and justice. 
I extend my sincere gratitude to the ho n. Deputy Chairman, Shri Harivansh. 
His wise counsel has always been a great asset to me.  I extend gratitude also to the 
Vice-Chairpersons, the Leader of the Hous e, the Leader of the Opposition, the 
Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, the part y leaders and all the hon. Members for their 
invaluable assistance and co-operation in conducting these proceedings.  
I greatly recognise and acknowledge th e diligent efforts of the Secretary-
General and the staff for having engaged in smooth functioning of the House, working 
long hours.  The House also had the occasio n to see the presence of the hon. Prime 
Minister in this House. …(Interruptions)… Only what I say is going on record so that 
we do not have a traction otherwise.   
The Session will be remembered for its historic legislativ e accomplishments 
and the spirit of unity that prevailed.  It  stands as a defining moment in India's 
parliamentary journey, a powerful remi nder of what can be achieved through 
dialogue, perseverance and shared purpose.   
The Rajya Sabha has once again set the democratic standards worth 
emulation   by others.  Hon'ble   Members,    our    future    sittings   will    see 
enhancement of these democratic values getting blossomed.  Jai Hind!  Now, our 
National Song. 
NATIONAL SONG  
 (The National Song, "Vande Mat aram", was then played.)  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned sine die.  
The House then adjourned sine die at nine minutes past one of the clock.  
[ 04 April, 2025 ]
15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 