Vol. 267              Tuesday, 
No. 14 18 March, 2025 
            27 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 6) 
Motion for Election to the Central Advi sory Committee for the National Cadet 
Corps (NCC)  (page 7) 
Regarding Notices Received under Rule 267 (pages 7 - 8) 
Matters raised with Permission – 
Demand to Restart UPSC Residential Coaching Centre at Haj House, 
Mumbai (pages 9 – 10) 
Concerns over the dilution of employment guarantee under MGNREGA (pages 10 - 11) 
Need for enhancement of honorarium for ASHA Workers (pages 12 - 13) 
Demand for conferring the Bharat Ratna Awa rd posthumously on the late Shri T.N. 
Seshan,  Former  Chief Election  Commissioner  (pages 13 - 15) 
Demand to increase effectiveness of One-Stop Centers and its numbers in Madhya 
Pradesh (pages 15 - 16) 
Concern over crashing of Indian Stock Market and its impact on 
investors (pages 16 - 17) 
Demand for Special Category status for Odisha (pages 17 - 18) 
Concern over the incidence of fire incident in the Textile Market of Surat, 
Gujarat  (pages 18 - 20) 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Demand to strengthen the sports infrastructu re in Uttarakhand and to develop it as 
a hub for international sports events (pages 20 - 21) 
Concern over poor implementation of th e Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)-UDAN 
(Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik) (pages 21 - 22) 
Demand to lift ban on PoP idols imposed by the Central Pollution Control 
Board (pages 22 - 23) 
Need to address the problems faced by Bank employees (pages 23 - 24) 
Demand to establish an Indian Institute of Management (IIM) in Hyderabad, Telangana 
(pages 24 - 25) 
Demand for construction of an underpass between Janghai-Pratapgarh Block and 
Janghai-Nibhapur Railway Station of Uttar Pradesh (pages 25 - 26) 
Demand to open new Kendriya Vidyalayas and Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas in 
Bihar (pages 26 - 27) 
Demand to take steps to restor e and upgrade CPRI's testing 
infrastructure (pages 27 - 28) 
Concern over the increasing problem of unsolicited spam, fraudulent audio and video Calls 
via WhatsApp and other social media platforms (pages 29 - 30) 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 30 - 70) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are available 
as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha website under the 
link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
The Budget (Manipur), 2025-26- General Discussion- Replied and Government Bills-Returned 
     (pages 71 - 91) 
The Appropriation Bill, 2025; 
The Appropriation (No .2) Bill, 2025; 
The Manipur Appropriation (Vote on Account) Bill, 2025; and 
The Manipur Appropriation Bill, 2025. 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (pages
 91 – 124 and 
pages 125 - 157) 
Felicitations by the Chair (pages 124 - 125) 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

RAJYA SABHA 
Tuesday, the 18th March, 2025 /27 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON TABLE 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Papers to be laid on the Table. 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of AYUSH
II. Report and Accounts (2023-24) of the RAV, (National Academy of Ayurveda),
New Delhi and related papers
आयुष मंतर्ालय के  राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूँ : - 
I. (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry
of AYUSH, under Section 56 of the National Commission for Indian System of
Medicine Act, 2020: -
(1) No. 18-12/2021-BUSS (SID-UG-MES), dated the 27
th August, 2024,
publishing the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum
Essential Standards, Assessment an d Rating for Undergraduate Siddha
Colleges and Attached Teaching Hospit als) Amendment Regulations, 2024,
along with delay statement.
(2) No. BOA/2-C/2024, dated the 27 th August, 2024, publishing the National
Commission for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum Essential Standards,
Assessment And Rating For Undergradu ate Ayurveda Colleges and Attached
Teaching Hospitals) Amendment Regulations, 2024, along with delay
statement.
(3) No. BUSS/MES (UNANI-UG-Regl.)/2023, dated the 27
th August, 2024,
publishing the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (Minimum
Essential Standards, Assessment an d Rating for Undergraduate Unani
Colleges and Attached Teaching Hospit als) Amendment Regulations, 2024,
along with delay statement.
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (3), see No. L.T.2374/18/25] 

(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of
AYUSH, under Section 56 of the Nati onal Commission for Homoeopathy
Act, 2020:-
(1) No. 3-34/2023/NCH/HEB/C.C/Pt.I., dated the 6 th January, 2025, publishing
the National Commission for Homoeopathy (Homoeopathy Graduate Degree
Course – Bachelor of Homoeopathic  Medicine and Surgery (B.H.M.S.)
Amendment Regulations 2025.
(2) No. 3-42/2024/NCH/HEB/PG Reg. Pt. I, dated the 14 th February, 2025,
publishing the National Commission for Homoeopathy (Homoeopathy Post-
Graduate Degree Course- Doctor of Me dicine in Homoeopathy) Amendment
Regulations, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2), see  No.L.T.2376/18/25] 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of AYUSH Notification No. S.O.
5285(E)., dated the 9th December, 2024, amending First and Second Schedule of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, issued und er Section 33-O and sub-section (2) of
Section 16 of the said Act.
(iv) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of AYUSH Notification No. S.O.
28(E)., dated the 13th January, 2025, publishing the Drugs (First Amendment) Rules,
2025, under Section 38 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
[Placed in Library. For (iii) and (iv), see  No.L.T.2375/18/25] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:-
(a) Thirty-third Annual Report and Accounts of the Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth
(RAV), (National Academy of Ayurveda ), New Delhi,
 for the year 2023-24,
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Vidyapeeth.
(c)
Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at (a)
above.
 [Placed in Library. see No. L.T. 2372/18/25] 
Notifications of the Ministry of Finance 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. MURUGAN) : Sir, on behalf of my colleague, 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Shri Pankaj  Chaudhary, I  lay on the Table- 
(i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Service) Notification No. S2275/01.01.013/2024-25, dated the 3 rd February, 
2025, publishing the Deposit Insurance an d Credit Guarantee Corporation General 
(Amendment) Regulations, 2024, under sub-section (4) of Section 50 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act 1961. 
[Placed in Library. see No. L.T. 2298/18/25] 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), under Section 31 of the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992:- 
(1) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2024/215, dated the 5 th December, 2024, publishing the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (P rohibition of Insider Trading) (Third
Amendment) Regulations, 2024.
(2) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2024/219., dated the 16 th December, 2024, publishing
the Securities and Exchange Board of  India (Investment Advisers) (Second
Amendment) Regulations, 2024.
(3) SEBI/LAD-NRO/ GN/2024/220., dated the 16 th December, 2024, publishing
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Research Analysts) (Third
Amendment) Regulations, 2024.
(4) SEBI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/226., dated the 10 th February, 2025, publishing the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Intermediar ies) (Amendment)
Regulations, 2025.
[Placed in Library. For (1)  to (4), see No. L.T. 2295/18/25] 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) Notification No. SE BI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/223., dated the 3 rd 
January, 2025, regarding obtaining of requisite certifications by an individual 
investment adviser or principal officer of a non-individual investment adviser, persons 
associated with investment advice and the partners of an investment adviser being a 
partnership firm, who are engaged in provid ing investment advice and also rescinding 
of two Notifications bearing Nos. LAD-NRO/GN/13/2013-14/6109, dated the 19 th 
June, 2013 and LAD-NRO/GN/2013-14/42/118, dated the 27th January, 2014, framed 
under Regulation 3 of the Securities & Ex change Board of India (Certification of 
Associated Persons in the Securities Mark ets) Regulations, 2007 and sub-regulation 
(2) of Regulation 7 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Investment
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
3

Advisers) Regulations, 2013.       
(iv) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) Notification No. SE BI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/225., dated the 10 th 
February, 2025, publishing the Securities an d Exchange Board of India (Depositories 
and Participants) (Amendment) Regulati ons, 2025, under Section 31 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,  1992 and Section 27 of the Depositories 
Act, 1996. 
         [Placed in Library.  For (iii) and (iv), see No. L.T. 2295/18/25] 
(v) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) Notification No. SE BI/LAD-NRO/GN/2025/227., dated the 10 th 
February, 2025, publishing the Securities Contracts (Regulation) (Stock Exchanges 
and Clearing Corporations) (Amendment) Re gulations, 2025, under sub-section (3) 
of Section 31 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and Section 31 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992. 
[Placed in Library.  see No. L.T. 2296/18/25] 
(vi) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) Notification No. SE BI/LAD-NRO/ GN/2025/228., dated the 10 th 
February, 2025, publishing the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Investor 
Charter) (Amendment) Regulations, 2025, under sub-section (3) of Section 31 of 
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,  1956, Section 31 of the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 and Section 27 of the Depositories Act, 1996. 
[Placed in Library. see No. L.T. 2297/18/25] 
(vii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue), under Section 296 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, 
along with Explanatory Memoranda: - 
(1) G.S.R. 67(E)., dated the 21 st January, 2025, publishing the Income-tax (First
Amendment) Rules, 2025.
(2) G.S.R. 76(E)., dated the 27 th January, 2025, publishing the Income-tax
(Second Amendment) Rules, 2025.
(3) G.S.R. 121(E)., dated the 7 th February, 2025, publishing the Income-tax
(Third Amendment) Rules, 2025.
(4) G.S.R. 125(E)., dated the 9 th February, 2025, publishing the Income-tax
(Fourth Amendment) Rules, 2025.
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 (5) G.S.R. 145(E)., dated the 24 th February, 2025, publishing the Income-tax 
(Fifth Amendment) Rules, 2025. 
[Placed in Library. For (1)  to (5), see No.L.T.2301/18/25] 
 
  (viii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) Notification No. G.S.R. 136(E)., dated the 13 th February, 2025, amending 
the Principal Notification No. G.S.R. 69(E), dated the 1 st February, 2021, under 
Section 159 of the Customs Act, 1962, along with Explanatory Memorandum. 
 
  (ix) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) Notification No. G.S.R. 141(E)., dated the 20 th February, 2025, amending 
the Principal Notification No. G.S.R. 785(E), dated the 30 th June, 2017, issued under 
sub-section (1) of Section 25 of the Cust oms Act, 1962 and sub-section (12) of 
Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, along with Explanatory Memorandum. 
 
  (x) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) Notification No. G.S.R. 146(E)., dated the 25 th February, 2025, levying of 
countervailing duty on imports of ‘Saccharin in all its forms’ originating in or exported 
from China PR, for 5 years pursuant to Sunset Review Final Findings issued by DGTR, 
under sub-section (7) of Section 9A of th e Customs Tariff Act, 1975, along with 
Explanatory Memorandum. 
 
  (xi)   
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue),  under Section 159 of the Customs 
 Act, 1962: - 
 (1) S.O. 590(E)., dated the 31 st January, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R. 748(E), dated the 3 rd August, 2001, along with 
Explanatory Memorandum and delay statement. 
 (2) S.O. 817(E)., dated the 14 th February, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R. 748(E), dated the 3 rd August, 2001, along with 
Explanatory Memorandum. 
 (3) S.O. 1065(E)., dated the 28 th February, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No. G.S.R. 748(E), dated the 3 rd August, 2001, along with 
Explanatory Memorandum. 
   
   (xii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) Notification No. G.S.R. 35(E)., dated the 15
th January, 2025, publishing 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
5

 
 
the Sea Cargo Manifest and Transshipment (First Amendment) Regulations, 2025, 
under Section 159 of the Customs Act, 1962, along with Explanatory Memorandum. 
[Placed in Library. For (viii)  to (xii), see No.L.T.2299/18/25] 
 
Report and Accounts (2023-24) of the Chennai Port Authority and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND 
WATERWAYS (SHRI SHANTANU THAKUR):  Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
  (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(4) of Section 44 of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021: - 
      (a) 
(b) 
Administration Report and Accounts of the Chennai Port Authority, for the 
year 2023-24, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
Review by Government of the Annual Accounts of the above Port Authority. 
   (2)   Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. see No. L.T. 2388/18/25] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
कारपोरे
ट कायर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी हषर् मÊहोतर्ा): महोदय, मȅ क ंपनी अिधिनयम, 2013 की 
धारा 469 की उप-धारा (4) क े अधीन क ंपनी (ĢोÎपेक्टस और Ģितभूितयȗ का आबंटन) संशोधन 
िनयम, 2025 का Ģकाशन करने वाली कारपोरेट कायर् मंतर्ालय की अिधसूचना संख्या सा.का.िन. 
131(अ), िदनांक 12 फरवरी, 2025 की एक Ģित ( अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िह न्दी मȂ) सभा पटल  
पर रखता हूँ।                                                            [Placed in Library. see No. L.T. 2320/18/25] 
  
Notification of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution                  
 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜीमती िनमुबेन 
जयंतीभाई बांभिणया): महोदय, मȅ आधार ( िवǄीय और अन्य सहाियिकयȗ, Ģसुिवधाओं और 
सेवाओं का लिÑयत पिरदान) अिधिनयम, 2016 की धारा 7 क े अधीन जारी मूल अिधसूचना संख्या 
का.आ. 371(अ), िदनांक 8 फरवरी, 2017 का संशोधन करने वाली उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और 
सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय ( खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िव तरण िवभाग) की अिधसूचना संख्या 
का.आ. 5506(अ), िदनांक 19 िदसंबर, 2024 की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर 
रखती हूँ।  
[Placed in Library. see No. L.T. 2565/18/25] 
 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE CENTRAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR  
THE NATIONAL CADET CORPS (NCC) 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (SHRI SANJAY SETH) : 
Sir, I  move the following Motion:— 
 
“That in pursuance of clause (i) of sub- section (1) of Section 12 read with sub-
section (1A) of Section 12 of the Nati onal Cadet Corps Act, 1948 (XXXI of 
1948), this House do proceed to elect , in such manner as directed by the 
Chairman, one Member from amongst th e Members of the House, to be a 
member of the Central Advisory Committee for the National Cadet Corps.” 
 
  The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
REGARDING NOTICES RECEIVED UNDER RULE 267 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I have received notices under Rule 267.  The notice 
of Shri Sanjay Singh dema nds discussion over the alleged lapse of Election 
Commission in issuance of multiple duplic ate Electoral Photo Identity Cards across 
the country.  Shri… …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Chairman, Sir, … 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, Mr. Siva. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, we have given notice for a Short Duration Discussion on 
Delimitation.  You can allow it.  It is becau se we have already raised it in the Zero 
Hour.  Kindly give permission for a Short Duration Discussion. We will be very 
pleased.  Please, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The notice of Shri Samik Bhatt acharya demands discussion on 
non-implementation of the Pradhan Mantri  Janjati Adivasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan in 
West Bengal.  One communication received, not in accordance with rules, is not 
being considered.     
Hon. Members are fully aware of the contours – an element – that are 
required for consideration of these notices .  Having carefully gone through that and 
taking note of a detailed ruling imparted earlier, in spite of best intentions at my level, I 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
7

 
 
have not been able to persuade myself to  accord acceptance as these issues can be 
easily, effectively and impactfully raised under the listed Business during the course of 
the Session. 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, I would like to say something. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, Mr. Derek O’Brien. 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN : Sir, I am on Rule 29 with a request to you.  Sir, during the 
period you were unwell – we are happy to see you back – there was a broad 
consensus, even at the BAC, that a Short Duration Discussion would be taken up and 
one of the subjects, as my colleague had said, was the EPIC duplication of Voters 
Cards.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: And also Delimitation of Constituencies. 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN : I will say that; let me finish speaking.  It is on the duplication 
of EPIC Cards and the Election Commission.   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, there needs to be two Short Duration Discussions. One is on 
EPIC Cards and the other one is on Delimitation of Constituencies. 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN : Sir, it is not anyone’s intention to disrupt this House.  There 
was no disruption even when the hon.  Mi nister was replying to the Working of the 
Ministry of Railways.  So, we want the Ho use to run.  Members have very important 
issues to raise during the Zero Hour.  So, your kind consideratio n is needed for Short 
Duration Discussion on this issue.  Thank you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, it is very soothing because, if the House is in order, 
the productivity goes up, expectations of th e people are fulfilled and deliberations, in 
accordance with rules, go a long way in helping the Government also and making 
people aware of the ground reality. I will confer with the leaders of the parties and 
come back to the House at the earliest. Now, Matters raised with permission, 
popularly known as Zero Hour.  I recollect my days, when I star ted my parliamentary 
career in 1989, when we used to have heroes  of Zero Hour.  Zero Hour then was not 
very regulated. Fortunately, over the years,  this has developed as an institution and 
evolved as a structured mechanism.  No w, Shri Imran Pratapgarhi – Demand to 
restart UPSC residential coaching centre at Haj House, Mumbai. 
 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
Demand to restart UPSC Residential Coaching Centre at Haj House, Mumbai 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी (महाराÍटर्): सभापित महोदय, मȅ आज इस सदन मȂ खड़ा होकर हािशए पर 
मौजूद देश क े लाखȗ एससी, एसटी और माइनॉिरटी क े छातर्ȗ की तरफ से यूपीए की चेयरपसर्न 
रहीं Ǜीमती सोिनया गांधी जी और पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी डा. मनमोहन िंसह साहब को सैÊयूट करूं गा, 
िजनकी कोिशशȗ से सच्
चर कमेटी की िसफािरशȗ क े बाद 2009 मȂ कोिंचगȗ क े अभाव मȂ Ģितयोगी 
परीक्षाओं मȂ िहÎसा न ले पाने वाले एससी, एसटी और माइनॉिरटी क े छातर्ȗ क े िलए रेिजडȂिशयल 
कोिंचग एके डमी शुरू  की गई थी। डा. भीमराव अंबेडकर यूिनविर्सटी, MANUU,
 हैदराबाद, 
AMU, अलीगढ़, जािमया हमददर् और जािमया िमिलया यूिनविर्सटी मȂ दूरदराज क े गांवȗ से आने 
वाले बच्चȗ ने मंहगी यूपीएससी कोिंचगȗ क े बजाय भारत सरकार की रेिजडȂिशयल कोिंचग 
एके डिमयȗ मȂ एडिमशन लेना शुरू  िकया और Ģ
ितयोगी परीक्षाओं मȂ जाने क े उनके  सपने पूरे होने 
लगे।  इसी से Ģभािवत होकर मुंबई क े हज हाउस मȂ 2009 मȂ एक कोिंचग सȂटर शुरू  िकया गया, 
िजसके  िलए सरकार से कोई फ ं ड नहीं िलया गया, बिÊक हािजयȗ क े रिजÎटर्ेशन फीस और 
सिर्वस चाजȃज़ से बनने वाले हज कमेटी क े कॉपर्स क े एक िहÎसे से इसे शुरू  िकया गया।  
तकरीबन 10 साल  तक शानदार त
रीके  से चलने वाले इस कोिंचग सȂटर क े िरजÊट्स भी बिढ़या 
रहे। उसने कई आईएएस िदए, कई आईपीएस िदए और मह
ाराÍटर् की Îटेट सिर्वसेज़ मȂ भी बच्चे 
सेलेक्ट होने लगे।  इसके  बाद कोिवड आया।  तब पहले सीटȂ घटाई गईं और िफर तत्कालीन 
अÊपसंख्यक मंतर्ी महोदया को मौका िमला और उन्हȗने 2023 मȂ इस को
िंचग सȂटर को बंद कर 
िदया।  वे सȅकड़ȗ छातर् जो हर साल इस कोिंचग सȂटर से फायदा उठा रहे थे, एक झटके  मȂ उनके  
सपने चकनाचूर कर िदए गए। 
सभापित महोदय, मȅ जब देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को Ģोटोकॉल तोड़ कर कतर क े अम
ीर 
शेख तमीम को िरसीव करते हुए देखता हूँ, जब मȅ सऊदी क े कर्ाउन िंĢस मोहÇमद सलमान को 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को गले लगाते हुए देखता हूँ, तो सोचता हूँ िक काश Ģध ान मंतर्ी जी अपने देश क े 
गरीब भारतीय मोहÇमद सलमान और मोहÇमद तमीम को इसी तरह से अपनेपन का एहसास िदला 
पाते।  कभी जब मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को शेख हसीना जी को Ģोटोकॉल तोड़ कर िरसीव करते हुए 
देखता हूँ, तो मȅ सोचता हूँ िक कभी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी अपने देश की बेटी िबलिकस को भी इसी तर
ह 
से अपनेपन का एहसास िदला पाते।  कभी क ै फ़ भोपाली ने कहा था : 
 
'ये दिढ़याँ ये ितलक धािरयाँ नहीं चल
तीं, 
हमारे अहद मȂ मƩािरयाँ नहीं चलतीं, 
क़बीले वालȗ क े िदल जोिड़ए िमरे सरदार, 
सरȗ को काट कर सरदािरयाँ नहीं चलतीं।'  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
9

 
 
सभापित महोदय, मेरा अÊपसंख्यक मंतर्ालय से अनुरोध है िक हािजयȗ क े पैसे से चलने 
वाले हज हाउस क े कोिंचग सȂटर को िफर से शुरू  िकया जाए। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसको न िसफर् 
शुरू  िकया जाए, बिÊक उसकी सीटȂ भी बढ़ाई जाएँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... जब पैसा सरकार को नहीं 
देना है, बिÊ
क हािजयȗ का जो corpus सैकड़ȗ करोड़ रुपए क े रूप  मȂ इकƻा है, उससे इस 
कोिंचग सȂटर को चलना है, तो िफर इस कोिंचग सȂटर को चलाने मȂ और देश क े बाकी हज 
हाउसेज़ मȂ इसे शुरू  करने मȂ सरकार को क्या परेशानी है?..
.(समय की घंटी)... सर, यहाँ पर 
अÊपसंख्यक मंतर्ी महोदय बैठे हȅ, उनसे मेरा अनुरोध है िक वे क ृपया इसका संज्ञान लȂ, क्यȗिक 
देश क े लाखȗ छातर् आपसे गुजािरश कर रहे हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter
 
raised by the hon. Member, Shri Imran Pratapgarhi :  Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra  (Odisha), Shri Anil Kumar 
Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Mo hammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pr adesh), Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
(Maharashtra), Shri Sanjay  Yadav (Bihar), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Haris 
Beeran (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odi sha) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
Nadu). 
Now, Shrimati Sonia Gandhi; Concerns  over the dilution of employment 
guarantee under MGNREGA. 
 
Concerns over the dilution of employment guarantee under MGNREGA 
 
SHRIMATI SONIA GA NDHI (Rajasthan): Hon. Chairman, Sir, I thank you for giving 
me the opportunity to speak on a very important issue.  I wish to draw the attention of 
this House to an issue of urgent national importance.  The right to employment under 
the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Empl oyment Guarantee Act, Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA, also known as MGNREGA, was en acted by the then UPA Government in 
2005 under the leadership of Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh .  This landmark 
legislation has been a crucial safety net for millions of rural poor. However, it is deeply 
concerning that the present BJP Govern ment has systematically undermined the 
scheme. The Budget allocation remains stagna nt at Rs.86,000 crore, a ten year low 
as percentage of GDP. When adjusted for inflation, the effective Budget has been 
declined by Rs.4,000 crores. Moreover, estimates suggest th at nearly 20 per cent of 
the allocated funds will be used to clear  pending dues from previous years. 
Additionally, the scheme faces multiple  challenges, includ ing the exclusionary 
Aadhaar Based Payment System and the National Mobile Monitoring System, 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
persistent delays in wage payments and wa ge rates not adequate to compensate for 
inflation. In the light of these pressing concerns, the Congress Party demands the 
following: One, adequate financial provisio n to sustain and expand the scheme; two, 
an increase in the minimum wage of Rs.400 per day; three, timely disbursement of 
wages; four, the removal of mandatory ABPS and NMMS requirements; five, an 
increase in the number of guaranteed work  days from 100 to 150 per year. These 
measures, Sir, are essential to ensure  that Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides 
dignified employment and financial security. Thank you.    
                                                                                  
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sonia Gandhi : Shri Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), 
Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), 
Ms. Dola Sen  (West Bengal), Shri Sanjay  Yadav (Bihar), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shri Derek O' Brien  (West Bengal), Shri mati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil (Maharashtra ), Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh (Bihar), 
Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala  (Rajas than), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri  Prem Chand Gupta (Bihar),  Shri Anil 
Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana),  Ms. Su shmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri N.R. 
Elango (Tamil Nadu),  Shrimati Renuka  Chowdhury (Telangana), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Shri K.R.N. Rajesh kumar (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra),  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra  (Odisha), Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli (Andhra 
Pradesh),  Shri  Jose  K. Mani (Kerala) , Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar (Karnataka), 
Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), 
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil (Gujarat), Shri As hok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Meda 
Raghunadha Reddy (Andhra Pradesh), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri P. P. 
Suneer  (Kerala), Shrimati Mausam B Noor  (West Bengal), Shri Mukul Balkrishna 
Wasnik (Rajasthan), Shri Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan),  Shri Mallikarjun Kharge  
(Karnataka), Shri Sanjay Singh (National Capital Territory of Delhi), Shri Muzibulla 
Khan (Odisha), Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  (W est Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shri  Ravi  Chandra  Vaddiraju  (Telangana),  Shri  Ajit  Kumar  Bhuyan  (Assam), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).                                                 
Now, Shri Manoj Kumar Jha; Need fo r enhancement of honorarium for ASHA 
workers. So you want asha for ASHA workers. 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
11

 
 
Need for enhancement of honorarium for ASHA Workers 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार) : माननीय  सभापित महोदय, सबसे पहले आपको सकु शल सदन 
वापसी की बहुत-बहुत शुभकामनाएं!  सभापित महोदय, यह महत्वपूणर् है िक नेता सदन और 
ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी भी हमारे समक्ष हȅ।  ये जो Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) हȅ, 
िजनको हम popularly आशा कहते हȅ, ये तकरी बन 20 वषș से हमारी तमाम ÎकीÇस को अपने उन 
क ंधȗ पर ढो रही हȅ, जो कई दफा मजबूत क ं धे नहीं होते और उन क ंधȗ पर वजन तब और बढ़ 
जाता है, जब उनके  समक्ष अिनिÌचतताएं हȗ।  
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ यहां मूलतः आशाकिर्मयȗ क े िलए बात रख रहा हूँ,  ले िकन 
इस देश क े तमाम Îकीम वकर् सर्, जो अलग-अलग योज
नाओं मȂ संलग्न हȅ, उनके  समक्ष भी 
अिनिÌचतता का ऐसा ही माहौल है और िसफर् तािलयां बजाकर, उनको gratitude देकर इसकी 
भरपाई कतई संभव नहीं है।  जैसा मȅने कहा, बीते 20 वषș मȂ तमाम राज्
यȗ की सारी योजनाएं, 
खासकर ÎवाÎथ्य और पोषण क े क्षेतर् मȂ इन्हीं वकर् सर् ǎारा चलाई जा रही हȅ।  सर, एक gender 
notion भी है िक चूंिक ये मूलतः मि हलाएं हȅ, तो यह care giver हȅ।  अगर इनका शोषण भी हो 
जाए, तो care giver क े नाम पर इनको रख िलया जाए। ये 2005 से NRHM का िहÎसा थीं।   
सर, मुझे दुःख क े साथ कहना पड़ रहा है िक इनके  िलए राज्यवार पिरिÎथितयां बहुत 
िवपरीत हȅ। हाल ही मȂ इनकी एक हड़ताल भी हुई थी। एक तरफ क ेरल जैसा राज्
य है, जहां सबसे 
ज्यादा honorarium है, दूसरी तरफ मेरा अपना गृह राज्य, िबहार है, जहां मातर् 2,000 रुपय े 
honorarium है।  सर, यह पूरे देश क े समक्ष एक चुनौती है।  मेरी यह मांग पूरे देश क े िलए होगी।  
अगर आप इनको वकर् सर् कह रहे हȅ, activists
 कह रहे हȅ, तो honorarium थोड़ा  demeaning 
लगता है।  अगर हम इसको कोई बेहतर नाम दȂ, तो अच्छ ा  होगा।   इनके  िलए  21,000 रुपय े 
cutting across States का Ģावधान िकया जाए और one-time retirement benefit 5 लाख 
रुपय े िदया जाए।  सर, 2020 मȂ यह Îटȅिंडग कमेटी का भी आगर्ह था िक इनके  काम को formalize 
िकया जाए।   
सभापित जी, अंत मȂ, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करूं गा िक 
अगर आपने सकारात्मक पहलक
दमी ली, तो इसकी गूंज दूर तक जाएगी और हम बेहतर Ģदशर्न 
कर पाएंगे। इसी क े साथ, मȅ जोर से कहना चाहता हूँ, जय िंहद! 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS  (Kerala):  Si r, we support this. …( Interruptions)… Sir, both the 
hon. Finance Minister and Health the Minister are here.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Brittas, such a pious sentiment was expressed.  Let the 
House run according to rules. …(Interruptions)… No, no.  He knows how to handle his 
affairs.   We can co
mplement the Leader  of the House for exemplifying decorous 
conduct all throughout. 
 The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the  hon.  Member,  Shri  Manoj  Kumar Jha : Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Imran Pratapga rhi (Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale  
(West  Bengal),  Dr. Sasmit Patra  (Odish a), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sanjay 
Yadav (Bihar), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Jose K. Mani  
(Kerala),  Shri  A.  A.  Rahim  (Kerala) , Ms. Dola Sen  (West Bengal),  Shrimati 
Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Mo hammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal),  
Shri  R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati  Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Prem 
Chand Gupta (Bihar),  Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mausam B Noor (W est Bengal), Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  
(West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala),  Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
(Telangana),  Shri  Ajit  Kumar  Bhuyan  (Assam),  Shri  Haris  Beeran  (Kerala),  
Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Shri P. P. Suneer  (Kerala), Shrimati Ranjeet Ranjan 
(Chhattisgarh),  Dr.  Radha  Mohan  Das  Ag rawal  (Uttar  Pradesh)  and   Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
Now, Shri Saket Gokhale on ‘Demand fo r conferring the Bharat Ratna Award 
posthumously on the late Shri T.N. Seshan, former Chief Election Commissioner.’  
  
Demand for conferring the Bharat Ratna Award posthumously on the late Shri T.N. 
Seshan, former Chief Election Commissioner 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal):  Sir, Shri T.N. Seshan was the 10
th Chief 
Election Commissioner of India and he re defined the way in which the Election 
Commissioner of India functions.  Mr. Se shan was a fiercely independent Election 
Commissioner.  His famous quote, ‘I eat po liticians for breakfast,’ showed that he 
worked without fear or favour and uphe ld the independence and dignity of the 
Election Commission. Sir, I will state a few reasons as to why it is extremely important 
that  our  country  honour  Shri  T. N.  Seshan  with  the Bharat Ratna.   First reason 
is: Shri T.N. Seshan's independence gave a strong image to the ECI, which is the 
constitutional body.  Sir, today, Election Commissioners are appointed directly by the 
Government with a majority vote of P.M. Shri Modi and hon. Home Minister, Shri Amit 
Shah on the selection panel.  Neither the Chie f Justice of India, which is the judiciary, 
nor the Leader of the Opposition, which is  the legislature, have any say in the 
appointments.  The ECI has now become a Government-appointed body.  Shri T.N. 
Seshan would not approve of this.   Second  reason is, Shri T.N. Seshan strictly 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
13

 
 
enforced the Model Code of Conduct and ma de it a powerful tool for free and fair 
elections.  £ 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
*…(Interruptions)…  Sir, the third reason and this  is the most important reason.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, please sit down. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Sir, Shri T.N. Seshan -- this  is important for everyone to 
know, in the Government especially, -- …(Interruptions)…   Shri T.N. Seshan created 
the EPI Cards.  The voter ID Cards were  envisaged by Shri T.N. Seshan. He 
envisaged them as being a unique electoral ID for every Indian. *  The unique voter ID 
envisaged by Shri T.N. Seshan is no longer unique. …(Interruptions)…  *  
Under Shri T.N. Seshan, the EC was indepe ndent and we need to give him Bharat 
Ratna to remind *…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : No allegations on Election Commission, please. 
…(Interruptions)…   Election Commission is a constitutional body. …(Interruptions)…  
Mr. Gokhale,  Election Commission is a constitutional body; no allegations on Election 
Commission, please. …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE:  And, Sir, * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Saket Gokhale : Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mausam B Noor (West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala),  Shri Ritabrata Banerjee  (West Bengal), Shri Debashish Samantaray 
(Odisha), Ms. Dola Sen  (West Bengal),  Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), 
Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shri Hari s Beeran (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam 
(Tamil  Nadu),  Shri  Niranjan  Bishi (Odisha), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), 
Shri Prem Chand Gupta (Bihar),  Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
                                                            
£ Exupnged as ordered by the Chair. 
* Not recorded. 
 
 
 
 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
(Maharashtra),  Shri  Jose  K.  Mani   (Kerala),   Dr.  Sasmit   Patra    (Odisha),   
Shri  Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala),  Shrimati  Priyanka  Chaturvedi  (Maharashtra), 
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West 
Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu),  Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu).  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, Shrimati Maya Naroliya - Demand to increase 
effectiveness of One-Stop Centers and its numbers in Madhya Pradesh. 
 
Demand to increase effectiveness of One-Stop Centers and its numbers  
in Madhya Pradesh 
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया (मध्य Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करती 
हूं िक आपने इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने क े िलए मुझे अवसर Ģदान िकया।  
 माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय मिह ला एवं बाल 
िवकास मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान ‘ वन Îटॉप सȂटर’ की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहती हूं। महोदय, पूरे 
भारत देश मȂ अभी तक 878 वन  Îटॉप सȂटर खोले गए हȅ, िजनमȂ से वतर्मान मȂ 802 कायर्रत हȅ। 
मध्य Ģदेश मȂ 64 वन Îटॉप सȂटर खोले गए हȅ, िजनमȂ से वतर्मान मȂ 57 कायर्रत हȅ।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह िनवेदन करती हूं 
िक हॉिÎपटल, पुिलस Îटेशन, रेलवे Îटेशन एवं अन्य सावर्जिनक Îथानȗ पर ये वन Îटॉप सȂटसर् 
रणनीितक रूप  से िÎथत हȗ, तािक आसान पहुंच सुिनिÌचत हो सके । महोदय, इन क Ȃदर्ȗ क े 
कमर्चािरयȗ और ज़रूरतम ंद मिहलाओं को Ģभावी सहायता करने क े िल
ए पयार्Ã त Ģिशक्षण की 
बहुत आवÌयकता है, उन्हȂ Ģिशक्षण िमलना बहुत ज़रूरी है। इसके  अलावा, इन क Ȃदर्ȗ की पहुंच 
बढ़ाने क े िलए एक Ëयापक जागरूकता  कायर्कर्म लागू करने की तत्काल आवÌयकता है। ऐसी 
पहलȗ से जनता को वन Îटॉप सȂटर (OSC) ǎारा दी जा ने वाली सेवाओं क े बारे मȂ िशिक्षत िकया 
जाए, िजससे अिधक से अिधक मिहलाएं इन आवÌयक सेवाओं का उपयोग करने क े िलए 
Ģोत्सािहत हȗगी। इससे उनकी सुरक्षा और कÊयाण मȂ महत्वपूणर् योगदान िमलेगा।  
 मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह कर ती हूं िक वे मध्य Ģदेश मȂ ‘ वन Îटॉप सȂटर’ की 
Ģभावकािरता और नÇबर बढ़ाने क े िलए इन उपायȗ पर िवचार करȂ। हालांिक, हमारी भारतीय 
जनता पाटीर् की मध्य Ģदेश सरकार, सरकार क े माध्यम से और मिहला बाल िवकास मंतर्ालय क े 
माध्यम से बहुत अच्छा कायर् कर रही है, लेिक
न इसको और बेहतर और Ģभावी बनाने क े िलए 
िनिÌचत रूप  से Ģिशक्षण और मिहलाओं को Ģिशिक्षत िकए जाने की बहुत आवÌयकता है, 
धन्यवाद।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh rimati Maya Naroliya: Shri M. Mohamed 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
15

 
 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Gujarat), Shri Mahendra 
Bhatt  (Uttarakhand), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and Dr. Sasmit Patra  (Odisha). 
Now, Shri Pramod Tiwari, “Concern over crashing of Indian Stock Market and 
its impact on investors. 
 
Concern over Crashing of Indian Stock Market and its impact on investors 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान) : उपसभापित महोदय, दलाल Îटर्ीट रƪ रंिजत हो गया है। चारȗ 
तरफ तबाही मची हुई है। शेयर मािर्कट मȂ तीस साल की िरकॉडर् िगरावट दजर् की गई है।  िपछले 
पांच महीने मȂ 95 लाख करोड़ रुपय े Îवाहा हो गए हȅ।  िवदेशी िनवेशकȗ को भारतीय बाजार अब 
आकषर्क नहीं लग रहा है।  इसिलए छह महीने मȂ 1.67 लाख करोड़ रुपय े बाजार से िनकाले गए 
हȅ।  इन िवदेशी िनवेशकȗ को अमरीका और चीन का बाजार ज्यादा आकषर्क नज़र आ रहा है, तभी 
तो िपछले छह महीने मȂ चीन क े बाजार मȂ 17 Ģितशत की उछाल दजर् की गई है, जबिक इसके  
एवज मȂ भारतीय बाजार मȂ 12 Ģितशत की िगराव
ट दजर् की गई है।  इस तबाही क े बीच  सरकार 
मौन साधे हुए हȅ।  भारतीय शेयर बाजार, िवÌव मȂ सबसे खराब Ģदशर्न करने वाले बाजारȗ मȂ 
शािमल हो गया है।  बड़े-बड़े शेयर धड़ाधड़ िगर रहे हȅ।  बाजार की इस िगरावट का सबसे ज्यादा 
नुकसान छोटे िनवेशकȗ को हो रहा है।  वैिÌव क बाजारȗ की कमज़ोरी, िवदेशी िनवेशकȗ की 
िबकवाली और अमरीका क े नए टैिरफ से जुड़ी िंचताओं क े चलते बाजार मȂ यह िगरावट देखी जा 
रही है, लेिकन इस िगरावट मȂ घरेलू कारण भी शािमल हȅ।  देश मȂ आिर्थक मंदी की िंचता, उÇमीद 
से कम कमाई,  रुपय े की लगातार कमज़ोरी और कम उपभोग क े कारण कॉरपोरेट कमाई भी 
शािमल है।  भारत की जीडीपी मȂ िगरावट आई है।  अथर्शािÎतर्यȗ  का कहना है िक िवǄ वषर् 202
5 
की जीडीपी वृिǉ दर, आरबीआई और एनएसओ क े पूवार्नुमान से कम रहेगी,  क्यȗिक िवǄीय वषर् 
की पहली ितमािहयȗ मȂ आिर्थक िवक
ास तुलनात्मक रूप  से धीमा है।  सर, रुपय े  की कमज़ोरी ने 
िवदेशी पूंजी िनकास को बढ़ा िदया है, िजससे बाजार की धारण ा  पर और दबाव पड़ा है। िदसंबर-
जनवरी महीने मȂ एक करोड़ से ज्यादा लोगȗ ने एसआईपी बंद कर िदए।  भारतीय शेयर बाजार 
अकसर देश की आिर्थक सेहत का पैमाना माना जाता रहा है।  सरकार से शेयर बाजारȗ मȂ िगरावट 
को रोकने  क े िलए दख
ल  देने की मांग बढ़ गई है।  मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से सरकार से आगर्ह 
करता हूं  िक िनयोजकȗ को राहत पहुंचाने क े िलए कोई  ठोस कदम उठाए। इस सरकार की 
आिर्थक नीित देश को तबाही और बरबादी की ओर ले जा रही है।   सरकार को सुधार  करने की 
जरूरत  है।  जो क ु छ लोग िवÌव गुरु  बन रहे हȅ, िवÌव गुरु  कम से कम आिर्थ
क नीित को छोड़ दो, 
इसिलए छोड़ दो, क्यȗिक उसमȂ आपने देश को तबाह और बरबाद िकया है।  मȅ इन शÅदȗ क े साथ 
सरकार से दखल की मांग करता हूं,  धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Pramod Tiwari :  Shri Mallikarjun Kharge
  
(Karnataka), Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tamil Nadu ), Shri Sanjay Singh (National Capital 
Territory of Delhi), Shri P. P. Suneer  (Ker ala), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Haris 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Beeran  (Kerala),  Shri  Neeraj  Dangi  (R ajasthan),  Shri  Niranjan  Bishi (Odisha), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra ), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharasht ra), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), 
Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit  Patra  (Odisha), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav 
Mandadi (Telangana),  Shrimati Jebi Ma ther Hisham (Kerala), Shri Ashok Singh 
(Madhya  Pradesh),  Shri  Meda  Raghuna dha  Reddy  (Andhra  Pradesh), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu).                 
Now, Dr. Sasmit Patra, “Demand for Special Category Status for Odisha. 
 
Demand for Special Category status for Odisha 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha) : Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I rise to demand Special 
Category Status for the State of Odisha .  Today, I do not rise merely as a 
representative of the State of Odisha.  I ri se as the conscience of a State that has 
powered India's progress, borne nature's fu ry and stood tall, time and again, without 
ever faltering.  Odisha does not seek sympathy. It is demanding justice, justice long 
overdue.  
 For over two decades under the indo mitable leadership of Shri Naveen 
Patnaik, Odisha has made a dignified, consistent and rightful demand for Special 
Category Status. We have not raised our voice in  anger.  We have raised it in reason.  
But reason, when ignored for too long, must thunder.  Odisha is the pillar of India's 
growth, the shield against nature's wrath.  Odisha is the engine room of India's 
economy. Our coal powers industries.  Our minerals build India's infrastructure.  Our 
ports connect India to the world.  Yet Odisha stands vulnerable, hon. Deputy 
Chairman, Sir, year after year, storm afte r storm.  Super Cyclone, Phailin, Fani, 
Amphan, Yaas, the names change, but the destruction continues of Odisha.   
While Odisha fuels India's rise, Odisha alone bears the brunt of devastation.  Is 
this the federal vision enshrined in our Cons titution?  Is this the idea of cooperative 
federalism we speak of?  Fair ness is not a favour. Recognition is not a request.  
Special Category Status for Odisha is not an in dulgence.  It is a rightful recognition of 
Odisha's dual responsibility as the economic backbone of India and as the perennial 
front line against natural disasters.  Odisha 's fiscal health is strained because of 
factors beyond its control -- rebuilding infr astructure, rehabilitating millions, securing 
lives, all of these while contributing billions to the national exchequer.  No other State 
is asked to sacrifice as much, contribute as  much and yet to receive so little national 
assistance.  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
17

 
 
This House must ask itself: Should Odis ha forever remain the silent sentinel 
expected to give but not to get?  Hon. Deputy  Chairman, Sir, this is a national test of 
fairness.  This is no longer a routine demand .  This is a test, a test of our nation’s 
commitment to justice, equity and fede ral responsibility.  Odisha has shown 
resilience.  Odisha has shown contribution, and I firmly demand that Odisha must be 
given Special Category status. Vande Utkal Janani! Jai Odisha! Jai Hind! 
 
SHRIMATI  RENUKA CHOWDHURY (Telangana):  We all associate. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Pa tra:  Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli (Andhra 
Pradesh),  Shri  Saket  Gokhale (West Be ngal), Shri Prem Chand Gupta (Bihar), 
Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Muzibulla 
Khan (Odisha), Shri Debashish Samantaray  (Odisha), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu),  Shri Subhasish Khuntia (Odisha) and 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha). 
Shri Shaktisinh Gohil – ‘Concern over the in cidence of fire in the textile market 
of Surat, Gujarat’. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, give me a minute...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, please.  I ha ve given the floor to the next speaker. 
...(Interruptions)... I have not given permission to you. Please...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu):  Since we  are not being heard, we stage a walk 
out ...(Interruptions)... 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
Concern over the incidence of fire incident in the Textile Market of Surat, Gujarat 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल (गुजरात):  माननीय  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ एक बहुत गंभीर हादसे क े 
बारे मȂ आपके  ज़िरये इस गृह और सरकार का ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चा हता हूं। महोदय, गुजरात 
क े सूरत मȂ िशवशिƪ टैक्सटाइल मािर्कट है। उसमȂ बुरी तरह से आग लगी। महोदय, टैक्सटाइल 
उǏोग से छोटे-छोटे Ëयापारी जुड़े होते हȅ और आज कल  टैक्सटाइल मȂ मंदी का माहौल होने की 
वजह से सभी क े पास Îटॉक भी था। महोदय, जो आग लगी, उसमȂ 900 दु कानȂ जलकर राख हो 
गईं और सबसे दुख भरी बात तो यह है िक उन्हȂ कोई मुआवज़ा नहीं िमला। महोदय, क्यȗिक वे 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
छोटे-छोटे Ëयापारी हȅ, उनके  पास इंÌयोरȂस की कोई सुिवधा नहीं है, इसिलए उनके  पास नेशनल 
िडजाÎटर िरलीफ फ ं ड से  सहायता पहुंचनी चािहए।  
महोदय, एक हकीकत यह भी है िक वहाँ पर िकस तरह से लापहवाही की गई। वहाँ 
दोपहर मȂ 1.30 बजे आग लगती है, फायर िĤगेड आती है, पुिलस क े ऑिफससर् आते हȅ और ‘आग 
क ंटर्ोल मȂ आ गई है’ - ऐसा कहकर शाम को चले जाते हȅ, लेिकन वहाँ धुआँ िनकल रहा होता है। 
लोग कहते हȅ िक ‘सर, देिखए अभी भी धुआँ िनकल रहा है’, लेिकन वे चले गए और रात को 1 बजे 
िफर से आग लगी और बहुत बड़े पैमाने पर लगी। अगर वह लापरवाही नहीं की गई होती, और वे 
ऑिफससर्, जो दोपहर मȂ 1.30 बजे आए थे, वे Ëय वÎथा ठीक करके  जाते, तो इतना बड़ा नुकसान 
नहीं होता।  
महोदय, इससे पहले 2020 मȂ भी इसी तरह से एक टैक्सटाइल मािर्कट मȂ बुरी तरह से 
हादसा हुआ था। वहाँ से सरकार को सीख लेनी चािहए थी िक दोबारा ऐसे हादसे नहीं हȗ। 
उपसभापित महोदय, मेरा आपके  ज़िरये सरकार से अनुरोध है िक गुजरात मȂ दोबारा ऐसे हाद
से 
न हȗ, इसके  िलए िĢकॉशन्स िलए जाएं।  
महोदय, फायर िवभाग से जुड़े एक अिधकारी से मेरी बात हुई थी। वे कहते हȅ िक 
तक्षिशला मȂ जो पहले हुआ, उसके  बाद यह भी हुआ और यहाँ पर यह कहूंगा िक फायर क े वƪ 
जब िंसथेिटक चीज़Ȃ होती हȅ, तो उसके  िलए एक Îपेशल क ेिमकल आता है, जो पानी मȂ िमलाकर 
लगाना चािहए, लेिकन उस
का पूरा Îटॉक हमारे पास नहीं था। महोदय, यह जरूरी है िक सूरत 
जैसा शहर, हमारी आिर्थक राजधानी जैसा शहर, जो देश क े िलए फॉरेन एक्सचȂज कमाने मȂ भी 
काम करता है और बहुत टैक्स देता है, उस सूरत शहर क े िलए हमारी ज्यादा िंचता होनी चािहए। 
मȅने पसर्नली फोन पर तो नहीं कहा - क्यȗिक िमल
ना मुिÌकल है, लेिकन सोशल मीिडया पर मोदी 
जी को टैग करके  कहा था िक आप सूरत जा रहे हȅ, इसिलए उस मािर्कट मȂ जरूर  िविज़ट 
कीिजएगा, तािक आप
को पता चल सके  िक गुजरात मȂ िकस तरह क े हालात हȅ। लेिकन 
बदिकÎमती से वहाँ पर रोड शो हुआ, वे वहाँ गए भी, लेिकन उन्हȗने उस टैक्स टाइल  मािर्कट को 
देखा नहीं है। मȅ आपके  ज़िरये सरकार से गुज़ािरश करता हूं िक ये छोटे Ëयापारी हȅ, इसिलए 
उनकी िंचता की जाए और उन्हȂ मुआवज़ा िदया जाए। महोदय, मुझे आपनी बात रखने का अवसर 
देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यव ाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member Shri Shaktisinh Go hil: Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Mukul Balkri shna Wasnik (Rajasthan), Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Ma ndadi (Telangana), Shri Sanjay Singh 
(National   Capital  Territory  of  Delhi),  Shrimati  Jebi  Mather  Hisham  (Kerala),  
Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh), Shri A.  A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu),  Shri  Neeraj  Dangi  (Rajasthan),  Shri  Niranjan  Bishi  (Odisha),   
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge (Karnataka), Shri Pr amod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Digvijaya 
Singh (Madhya Pradesh),  Dr. Fauzia Kh an (Maharashtra), Imran Pratapgarhi 
(Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                                                                                       
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
19

 
 
Dr. Kalpana Saini - ‘Demand to strengthen sports infrastructure in Uttarakhand 
and to develop it as a hub for international sports events’. 
 
Demand to strengthen the sports infrastructure in Uttarakhand and to develop it as  
a hub for international sports events 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी ( उǄराखंड) :  उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। महोदय, 
उǄराखंड अपनी Ģाकृ ितक सुंदरता, आध्याित्मक महत्व और वीरता क े िलए पूरे भारत मȂ Ģिसǉ 
है। कई Ģमुख तीथर् Îथल और मंिदर होने क े कारण इसे देवभूिम भी कहा जाता है। हाल मȂ 
राÍटर्मंडल खेलȗ क े सफल आयोजन क े बाद उǄराखंड की पूरे देश मȂ सराहना हो रही है। 
महोदय, िखलािड़यȗ क े शानदार Ģदशर्न, इको ģ Ȃडली आयोजन और मजबूत इंģाÎटर्क्चर ने 
सािबत कर िदया है िक उǄराखंड िसफर् देवभूिम ही नहीं, बिÊक खेलभूिम बनने की ओर भी 
अगर्सर है। मह
ोदय, यहाँ क े युवाओं मȂ खेलȗ क े Ģित उत्साह और क्षमता देखते हुए यह आवÌयक 
हो गया है िक उǄराखंड राज्य को अंतरार्
Íटर्ीय खेल आयोजन क े क Ȃ दर् क े रूप  मȂ िवकिसत िकया 
जाए। राÍटर्ीय खेलȗ का आयोजन ‘ एक भारत-ǛेÍठ भारत’ की अवधारणा को मजबूत करते हुए 
भारत की संÎकृ ित, परंपराओं और खेल Ģितभा का उत्सव मनाने का एक Ģभा वी मंच है।  
भारत तेजी से दुिनया की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी आिर्थक शिƪ बनने की ओर अगर्सर है।  इस 
लÑय मȂ खेल अथर्ËयवÎथा एक Ģभावी भूिमका िनभा रही है।   भारत को वषर् 2047 तक िवकिसत 
भारत बनाने क े िलए खेलȗ क े Ģित एक सुËयविÎथत और सहयोगात्मक दृिÍट
कोण की आवÌयकता 
है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एनडीए सरकार 2036 ओलिÇपक क े मेजबानी क े 
अिधकार ĢाÃत करने क े िलए पूरी Ģितबǉता और ऊजार् क े साथ इच्छा रखती है।  यह ऐितहािसक 
पहल न क ेवल भारतीय खेल जगत को वैिÌवक जगत पर नई ऊ ंचाइयȗ तक ले जाएगी, बिÊक 
इससे बुिनयादी ढांचे, पयर्टन, रोजगार और आिर्थक Ģगित क े िलए असीम संभावनाएं भी उत्पन्न 
हȗगी।  साथ ही यह आयोजन देश क े लाखȗ युवाओं क े िलए Ģेरणा का ǣोत भी बनेगा।  उǄराखंड 
की भौग
ोिलक िÎथित और जलवायु इसे पवर्तीय खेलȗ, एथलेिटक्स, फ ु टबॉल, िकर्के ट और 
एडवȂचर Îपोट्सर् क े िलए िवशेष रूप  से अनुक ू ल बनाती है।  यिद यहां अंतरर ाÍटर्ीय खेलȗ की 
Ģितयोिगता का आयोजन िकया जाता है, तो इससे न क ेवल राज्य की ख्याित बढ़ेगी, बिÊक 
पयर्टन, रोजगार और आिर्थक िवकास को भी बल िमलेगा।  उǄराखंड को वैिÌवक खेल मानिचतर् 
मȂ Îथािपत करने क े िल
ए अंतरराÍटर्ीय मानकȗ क े अनुरूप  िवकिसत करने की आवÌयकता है।  
इसके  तहत िवÌव Îतरीय Îटेिडयम, अत्याधुिनक टर्ेिंनग सȂटर और मÊटी Îपोट्सर् कॉÇÃलेक्स की 
Îथापना को Ģाथिमकता दी जानी चािहए।  िवशेष रूप  से ऋिषके श, नैनीताल, देहरादून, औली 
और मसूरी जैसे पयर्टन Îथलȗ को एडवȂचर Îपो
ट्सर् हब क े रूप  मȂ िवकिसत िकया जाए।  
उǄराखंड पहले से ही टर्ैिंकग, रािंÄटग और पवर्तारोहण जैसे साहिसक खेलȗ क े िलए Ģिसǉ है, 
लेिकन उन्हȂ अंतरर
ाÍटर्ीय Îतर पर संगिठत और संरिक्षत करने की आवÌयकता है।  इसके  िलए 
िवशेष िवÌव Îतरीय खेल Ģितयोिगताओं का आयोजन कर राज्य को अंतरराÍटर्ीय खेल आयोजनȗ 
की सफल …समय की घंटी)…         
                                                                                           
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the  matter raised  by hon. Member Dr. Kalpana Saini: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri  Niranjan  Bishi (Odisha),  Dr.   Sume r   Singh   Solanki  (Madhya  Pradesh),  
Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
(Gujarat), Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal 
(Uttarakhand), Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu) and Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh). 
Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan - Concern over poor implementation of the Regional 
Connectivity Scheme (RCS)-UDAN (Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik). 
 
Concern over poor implementation of the Regional Connectivity Scheme  
(RCS)-UDAN (Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik) 
 
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन (छǄीसगढ़) : उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से एक महत्वपूणर् मुǈा 
उठाना चाहती हूं।  ‘ उड़ान’ योजना 2016 मȂ आपकी सरकार ने शुरू  की थी।  आम नागिरकȗ को 
कहा गया था - ‘ उड़ान’ योजना, यान ी ‘उड़े देश का आम नागिरक’, लेिकन अभी यह हो रहा है 
िक अंधाधुंध िकराए बढ़ रहे हȅ, िवमान मािलकȗ की अपनी मनमानी चल रही है, मोनोपॉली चल 
रही है, कोई भी जवाबदेही नहीं है, बहुत सारे लोगȗ की बहुत तरीके  की हरासमȂट हो रही है और 
कोई सुनने वा
ला नहीं है।   सरकार ने घोषणा मȂ यह कहा था िक हम बाटा की चÃपल पहनने वालȗ 
को िवमान का सफर कराएंगे।  बाटा की चÃपल सÎती है।  मȅ सरकार को याद िदलाना चाहूंगी िक 
जो 20 रुपय े की चाय है, वह चाय Ãलेन मȂ 200 रुपय े की िमल
ती है।  जब हमारी सरकार थी, मȅ 
िनिÌचत रूप  से कहूंगी िक हमने हवाई जहाज मȂ 2,200 रुपय े मȂ भी सफर िकया, 3,300 रुपय े मȂ 
भी सफर िक
या है। मȅ िबजनेस क्लास का िकराए क े संबंध मȂ 2022 का एक डेटा देना चाहती हूं।   
2022 से िदÊली-पटना का िकराया लगभग तीन गुना बढ़ गया है और लगभग 15,000 हो गया है।  
अक्टूबर 2022 मȂ एयर इंिडया की पुणे-िदÊली की जो उड़ान है, उसमȂ इकोनॉम ी क्लास का 
िकराया 27,000 हो गया है।  िबजनेस क्लास का जो िकराया था, वह 24,000 था।  इस तरह की 
बहुत सारी अन्य घटनाएं भी हȅ।   अभी िरसȂटली एक शुगर पेशȂट था, उसने Ģी बुिंकग मील बुक 
करायी और वह बहुत िडले हुई।  उसे बहुत ज्यादा हाइपरटȂशन हो गई और वह सीिरयस हो गया।  
ऐसी बहुत सारी घटनाएं आई हȅ।  खराब फ ू ड - खराब क्वािलट
ी का खाना परोसा जाता है।  सीटȗ 
की क्वािलटी – कई बार ट ूटी सीट्स पर लोगȗ को बैठना पड़ता है।   कई बार रन वे पर घंटȗ-घंटȗ 
तक Ãलेन को खड़ा रखा जाता है।  कई बार ए.सी. बंद हो जाते हȅ और पैसȂजसर् वहां पर पसीने-
पसीने हो रहे होते हȅ।  कई बार कई पैसȂजसर् को िवमान से िनकालना पड़ता है, क्यȗिक उनक ी 
तबीयत खराब हो जाती है।  मȅ यह जानना चाहती हूं िक क्या इसकी कोई जवाबदेही तय होगी?  
आप िकराया कम करने क े बात कर रहे हȅ।  मȅ आपको क ुÇभ का एक एग् जाÇपल दूंगी।  अपने 50 
परसȂट का िडÎकाउंट भी िदया, उसके  बाद भी 30,000 से लेकर 1,00,000 तक वसूले जा रहे थे।  
मȅ पूछना चाहती हूं िक यह िकसकी उड़ान है?  क्या यह िवमान मािलकȗ की उड़ान है या आम 
नागिरकȗ की उड़ान है? 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
21

 
 
मȅ सरकार से यह पूछना चाहती हूँ िक जो िवमान मािलक हȅ, उनकी कोई जवाबदेही तय 
होगी िक नहीं?  साथ  ही, मȅ एक और चीज जोड़ना चाह रही हूँ िक हमारे players जाते हȅ, 
except Cricket, बहुत सारे बच्चे जाते हȅ, जो नेशनल खेल रहे होते हȅ, Îटेट से जा रहे होते हȅ।  
िकराया ऑनलाइन िदखता है 4 हजार, लेिकन जब आप बुिंकग कराने जाइए, तो सीधे 4 हजार  
बढ़ जाता है।  मȅ यह पूछना चाहती हूँ िक क्या सर
कार िवमान मािलकȗ को सिÅसडी दे रही है? 
...(समय की घं
टी)...                 
                                           
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member Shrimati Ranjeet  Ranjan: Shri Manoj Kumar Jha 
(Bihar), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Sh ri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), 
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sant 
Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
(Maharashtra), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhy a Pradesh), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu)  and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala). 
Now, Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil - Dema nd to lift ban on POP idols imposed 
by the Central Pollution Control Board.  
 
Demand to lift ban on PoP idols imposed by the Central Pollution Control Board 
 
Ǜी धैयर्शील मोहन पािटल (महाराÍटर्) : आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, महाराÍटर् मȂ गणेश 
उत्सव बड़े भिƪ भाव से मनाया जाता है।  इस राज्य मȂ गणेश जी की लाखȗ मूिर्तयाँ बनती हȅ।  ये न 
क ेवल पूजन क े िलए उपयोग मȂ आती हȅ, बिÊक इनसे बहुत बड़
ा रोजगार भी िमलता है।  महाराÍटर् 
मȂ मूिर्त बनाने वालȗ क े 20 हजार कारखाने हȅ, िजनमȂ 2- 3 लाख कलाकार/मूिर्तकार काम करते हȅ।  
अब क ेन्दर्ीय Ģदूषण िनयंतर्ण मंडल ने ÃलाÎटर ऑफ पेिरस की मूिर्त पर Ģितबंध लगाया है।  इस 
िनणर्य से कई हजारȗ-लाखȗ मेहनतकश मूिर्तकारȗ का रोजगार संकट मȂ आया है।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, गणेश जी की मूिर्त मुख्य रूप  से ÃलाÎटर ऑफ पेिरस से ही बनती है।  
यह वही ÃलाÎटर ऑफ पेिरस है, िजसे हम यहाँ दीवार पर Ãला
Îटर क े िलए लगाते हȅ।  पीओपी से 
बनी हुई मूिर्तयाँ अत्यंत सुगिठत, सुंदर, मजबूत और यातायात करने क े िलए बहुत ही हÊकी होती 
हȅ।  उप
सभापित महोदय, NPCB ने यह तकर् िदया है िक पीओपी की मूिर्त से Ģदूषण होता है, 
लेिकन कई वैज्ञािनक यह दावा करते हȅ िक यहाँ पर िबÊकु ल Ģदूषण नह ीं होता है।  पीओपी एक 
खिनज है, जो Ģाकृ ितक रूप  मȂ पाया जाता है, िजसे िजÃसम बोलते हȅ।  क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ भू-सुधारक क े 
रूप  मȂ भी इसका उपयोग होता है।  अगर ÃलाÎटर ऑफ पेिरस से क ु छ हद तक Ģदूषण होता भी है, 
तो Ģदूषण का िन
यंतर्ण करना चािहए, Ģितबंध नहीं होना चािहए।  यहाँ पर पयार्वरण और रोजगार 
िनमार्ण क े बीच balance बनाना बहुत जरूरी है।  जब हम Ģगित की ओर बढ़ते हȅ, तो क िठनाइयाँ 
तो आती हȅ, लेिकन आधुिनकीकरण क े उपायȗ से उसका उपचार करना चािहए।  उपसभापित 
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
महोदय, 30-40 साल पहले 40-50 िकलोमीटर Ģित घंटे क े िहसाब से गािड़याँ चलती थीं।  उस 
वƪ भी accidents होते थे, लेिकन गाड़ी पर Ģितबंध नहीं लगाया गया।  Technology मȂ सुधार 
लाया गया, राÎते अच्छे िकए गए, डर्ाइवरȗ को Ģिशक्षण िदया गया और technology क े सहारे 
गाड़ी पर Ģितबंध न लगाते हुए सुधार करने की कोिशश की गई।  उपसभापित महोदय, मूिर्तकारȗ 
पर Ģितबंध लगा कर उनका रोजगार नÍट नहीं करना चा
िहए।  मȅ यह बोलूँगा िक हम मूिर्तयȗ की 
िवसजर्न Ģिकर्या मȂ सुधार ला सकते हȅ, पीओपी का biological disintegration क ैसा हो, हम यह 
देख सकते हȅ।  इसके  िलए अनेक उपाय िकए जा सकते हȅ, िज
नसे यहाँ पर थोड़ा-बहुत होने वाला 
Ģदूषण control मȂ लाया जा सके ।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ यही िवनती करता हूँ िक जो रोजगार मूिर्तक ारȗ ने अपने खुद क े 
बलबूते पैदा िकया है, मेहनतकश लोगȗ ने महाराÍटर् मȂ जो 4-5 लाख लोगȗ का रोजगार बनाया है, 
वह नÍट नहीं होना चािहए।  मȅ इस सदन से यही िवनती करता हूँ िक अलग-अलग तरीके  सोचे 
जाएँ, िजनसे Ģदूषण पर िनयंतर्ण हो और Ģितबंध को हटाया जाए।  मूिर्तकारȗ ने खुद क े बलबूते 
यहाँ पर जो Ëयवस
ाय develop िकया है, उसको यह सदन संरक्षण दे, यह मेरी िवनती है। ...(समय 
की घंटी)...        
                                                                                        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Mah arashtra) and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra). 
  Now, Shri Sandosh Kumar P. - Need to address the problems faced by the 
bank employees.  
 
Need to address the problems faced by Bank employees 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala):  Sir, the United Forum of Bank Unions, an 
umbrella organisation consisting nine union s, has given a call for 48-hour bank strike 
on the 24 th and 25 th of this month.   These organisations jointly represent more than 
eight lakh employees and officers in the bankin g sector.  So, it is going to affect the 
banking sector, and I take this opportunity to request, through you, Sir, the Finance 
Minister to very seriously look into this  matter and address the genuine concerns 
raised by these unions.  The banks’ nation alisation of 1969 was one of the landmark 
legislations in India’s history.  Now, coming to the point, the bank employees, 
especially in the public sector banks, are facing a lot of problems.  The number one 
issue is the shortage of adeq uate number of staff in the public sector banks.  At 
present, it is estimated that more than 2,11,000 posts are lying vacant in staff cadre 
only. This adversely affects the mental health of the workers also. They get 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
23

 
 
overburdened with the work, which leads to stress and suicide.  I do not think there is 
any need of explaining it further. 
Sir, as far as customer-employee rati o in the PSBs is concerned, for 2,000 
customers, there is one employee.  It needs to be enhanced.  Another issue is related 
to the five-day working for the bank em ployees.  It was a de mand by the bank 
employees and there is a consensus also. The Indian Banks Association has also 
agreed to the same.  At present, this requ est is pending in the Ministry of Finance.  
Sir, I take this opportunity to request, through you, that the Union Finance Minister 
should take a serious look into this matter.  In all other finance-re lated sectors, it is 
five-day working.  In RBI also, it is five-d ay working.  In insurance companies also, it 
is five-day working.  It is a request that it should be a pplicable to the banking sector 
also. 
Sir, there are many other genuine demands made by these Unions, and I take 
this opportunity to once again submit that  these genuine demands must be seriously 
considered by the hon. Finance Minister and there must be a genuine attempt to 
settle the issues of the bank employees. Thank you. 
  
                            
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri Sandosh Kumar P: Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra),  Dr.  John  Brittas  (Ker ala),  Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), 
Shri  Ritabrata  Banerjee (West  Bengal),  Shri  Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), 
Shri P. P. Suneer (Kerala), Shri Manoj Ku mar Jha (Bihar), Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan 
(Assam), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Bikash 
Ranjan Bhattacharyya (West Be ngal), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri Sanjay Yadav 
(Bihar) and Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala). 
Now, Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi - Demand to establish an Indian Institute 
of Management in Hyderabad, Telangana. 
 
Demand to etablish an Indian Institute of Management (IIM) in Hyderabad, Telangana 
 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR YADAV MANDADI (Telangana):  Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I 
would like to draw your kind attention to a long-pending demand of establishment of 
Indian Institute of Management (IIM) in Hyderabad, Telangana. 
Sir, I come from the city of Hyderabad,  which is the capita l of India's youngest 
State, Telangana.  Hyderabad is also calle d mini-India due to its diverse population 
representing India’s different States, lang uages and religions.  The Andhra Pradesh 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Reorganization Act says that the Central Government shall take up all necessary 
measures to ensure establishment of IIM in the State of Telangana. 
Sir, Hyderabad is home to prestigious institutions such as IIT, ISB, NALSAR, 
IIIT and Central Universities making it an ideal ecosystem for IIM. The city has strong 
industrial sectors like IT, pharmaceutical, biotech and finance which could greatly 
benefit from IIM through research, collaborative start-up and leadership development. 
Sir, India currently has 21 IIM institutions  that have produced some of the finest 
leaders in business, finance and policy making. 
However, despite being a major economic and educational hub, Telangana still 
does not have an IIM.  This is significant oversight in national educational planning. 
Sir, the absence of IIM in Telangana fo rces many students especially from 
economically weaker and rural background s to migrate to other States, which 
increases their financial burden.  Additi onally, Telangana loses out on economical 
opportunities, jobs and industry partnerships that such an institution would generate.  
Sir, Telangana deserves the chance to nurture young leaders and drive 
innovations in business and governance. The State of Telangana has given many 
representations to the Central Government  but, unfortunately, the Government is 
neither looking into the matter nor respondi ng.  Hence, I urge upon the Government 
to take immediate steps to set up Indian In stitute of Management (IIM) in the State of 
Telangana. Thank you.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi: Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala),    Dr.  John  Brittas  (Kerala),  Shri  Imran  Pratapgarhi  (Maharashtra),   
Shri  Subhas  Chandra  Bose  Pilli  (A ndhra Pradesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Pramod  Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Ravi Chandra 
Vaddiraju (Telangana), Shri A. A. Rahi m (Kerala), Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya Pradesh).                                
Now, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi  - Demand  for construction of an underpass 
between Janghi-Pratapgarh block and Jang hi-Nibhapur Railway Station of Uttar 
Pradesh. 
 
Demand for construction of an underpass between Janghai-Pratapgarh Block and 
Janghai-Nibhapur Railway Station of Uttar Pradesh 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी (उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मेरा िनवेदन जंघई-Ģतापगढ़ 
खंड पर िनभापुर-जंघई रेलवे Îटेशंस क े मध्य िकलोमीटर 854/01 पर समपार अथवा अंडरपास 
को बनवाए जाने क े संबंध मȂ है।  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
25

 
 
 महोदय, जंघई-Ģतापगढ़ रेलवे लाइन का दोहरीकरण िनकट भिवÍय मȂ होना है।  रेल 
लाइन क े उǄरी एवं दिक्षणी छोर पर गर्ामवािसयȗ का िनवास है।  बीच मȂ pitch road होन े क े 
कारण कई गाँवȗ को यह मागर् जोड़ता है।  इसी मागर् से कई गाँवȗ मȂ आना-जाना पड़ता है।  इस 
Îथान तक क ृिष कायर् हेतु आने-जाने क े िलए कोई साधन नहीं है, िजससे बहुत सी िदक्कतȗ का 
सामना करना पड़ता है।  यहाँ तक िक कोई भी कायर् करने क े िलए गर्ाम वािस यȗ को 10 िकलोमीटर 
का चक्कर लगाना पड़ता है, िजससे कोई भी क ृिष कायर् करने मȂ बहुत िदक्कतȗ का सामना करना 
पड़ता है।  अगर कोई Ëयिƪ बीमार हो गया, तो उसे उस टर्ैक को बार-बार कर्ॉस करना पड़ता है, 
िजससे आए िदन दुघर्टना होती रहती है। 
 महोदय, अत
ः मȅ सरकार का ध्यानाकषर्ण करना चाहती हूँ िक गर्ामसभा नराड़ मȂ 854/0-
01 पर अंडरपास बनवाने की क ृपा करȂ तािक जनमानस को सुिवधा िमले, धन्यवाद।     
                                                                            
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Mad hya Pradesh), Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala) and Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra). 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  माननीय Ǜी संजय यादव जी।  ‘Demand to Open New K endriya 
Vidyalayas and Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas in the State of Bihar’. 
 
Demand to open new Kendriya Vidyalayas and Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas  
in Bihar 
 
Ǜी संजय यादव ( िबहार) : उपसभापित  महोदय, हाल ही मȂ भारत सरकार ǎारा देश भर क े 
िविभन्न राज्यȗ और क Ȃ दर् शािसत Ģदेशȗ मȂ 85 क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय और 28 जवाहर नवोदय िवǏालयȗ 
की Îथापना की Îवीकृ ित दी गई है।  मȅ सदन का ध्यान इस ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ िक इन 
85 क Ȃदर्ीय िव
Ǐालयȗ और 28 जवाहर नवोदय िवǏालयȗ मȂ से िबहार को एक भी क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय 
और जवाहर नवोदय िवǏालय नहीं िदया गया है।  जनसंख्या क े आधार पर िबहार तीसरे नंबर पर 
है।  देश की लगभग 10 फीसदी आबादी िबहार मȂ रहती है, यानी हर दसवां भारतीय िब
हार से है, 
लेिकन इसके  बावजूद भी िबहार की अनदेखी करना कहीं से वािजब Ģतीत नहीं होता है। 
 महोदय, अगर ऐसे राज्यȗ की सूची बनाई जाए, जहाँ Ģित एक लाख Ëयिƪ क े अनुपात मȂ 
सबसे कम क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय हȅ, तो वह िबहार मȂ है।  िबहार मȂ पटना िजला को छोड़ कर बाकी 
िजले मȂ एक से अिधक क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏाल
य नहीं है।  पूिर्णया मȂ तो क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय की अपनी िबिंÊडग 
तक नहीं है।  
उपसभापित महोदय, िबहार देश क े सबसे िपछड़े राज्यȗ मȂ से एक है।  देश मȂ सबसे कम 
साक्षरता दर िबहार मȂ है।  मिहला
ओं की साक्षरता दर मȂ भी िबहार सबसे नीचे है।  Multi-
dimensiona
l poverty index मȂ िबहार सबसे नीचे है, नीित आयोग क े SDG Index मȂ िबहार 
सबसे नीचे है, gross enrolment ratio मȂ िबहार सबसे नीचे है, गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सबसे कम 
26
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
साक्षरता दर िबहार मȂ है, देश मȂ सवार्िधक िनरक्षरता िबहार मȂ है, school dropout rate सबसे 
अिधक िबहार मȂ है, तो महोदय, समुिचत िवकास एवं औǏोगीकरण क े अभाव मȂ िशक्षा ही एकमातर्  
ऐसा साधन है, ऐसा राÎता है, िजससे हम िबहार जैसे राज्य को िपछड़ेपन और गरीबी क े दुÍचकर् से 
िनकाल कर Ģगित पथ पर ले जा सकते हȅ।  कम खचर् पर गुणवǄापूणर् िशक्षा सुिनिÌ
चत करने क े 
िलए िबहार मȂ क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय और जवाहर नवोदय िवǏालयȗ की अिधक-से-अिधक आवÌयकता 
है। 
 महोदय, हम जानना चाहते हȅ िक जवाहर नवोदय िव
Ǐालय और क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय 
Îथािपत करने का criteria क्या है?  िबहार मȂ सबसे कम साक्षरता दर है, सबसे कम मिहला 
साक्षरता दर है, सवार्िधक िनरक्षरता दर है, सबसे अिधक Îकू ल डर्ॉप आउट रेट है, सबसे कम 
gross enrol
ment ratio िबहार मȂ है, अगर यह पैमाना माना जाए, तो सबसे अिधक क Ȃदर्ीय 
िवǏालय और जवाहर नवोदय िवǏालय िबहार को िमलना चािहए, लेिकन यहाँ उÊटा हो रहा है।  
हर दसवां भारतीय िबहारी है, तीसरी सबसे अिधक जनसंख्या िबहार की है, िफर भी आप िबहार 
को ही क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय और जवाहर नवोदय िवǏालय नहीं देना चाहते हȅ।  
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से पूछना चा
हता हूँ िक िबहार को इसमȂ 
उपेिक्षत क्यȗ रखा गया?  महोदय , मȅ सरकार से माँग करता हूँ िक िबहार मȂ अिधक-से-अिधक 
क Ȃदर्ीय िवǏालय और जव
ाहर नवोदय िवǏालय की Îथापना की जाए।  आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।          
                            
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member Shri Sanjay Yadav: Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), 
Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Prem Chand Gupta (Bihar), Shri Saket 
Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturve di (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sh ri Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Dr. Faiyaz 
Ahmad (Bihar), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha). 
माननीय Ǜी मुजीबुÊला खान। ‘Demand to take Steps to Restore and Upgrade 
CPRI's Testing Infrastructure’. 
 
Demand to take steps to restore and upgrade CPRI's testing infrastructure 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा):  उपसभापित महोदय,  आज  मȅ देश क े एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय को 
उठाना चाहत
ा हूँ।  माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी भी यहाँ मौजूद हȅ, यह मेरे िलए बहुत खुशनसीबी है िक 
उनको भी यह पता चले िक वे जो रुपया sanction करती हȅ, उसका क ैसा दुरुपयोग  हो रहा है।  
Central Power Research Institute
 (CPRI)  1960 मȂ बनी थी।  हमारे देश मȂ जो electrical 
equipment बनते हȅ, वहाँ पर उनकी  टेिंÎटग की जाती है और certificate िदया जाता है।  उनका 
certification िकया जाता है तािक उनको उपयोग मȂ लाया जाए, लेिकन िपछले 15 साल से उस 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
27

 
 
institute का जो synthetic testing laboratory mission है, जो functioning होना चािहए, वह 
नहीं हो रहा है और वह बंद पड़ा है।  वह खराब हो गया है।  जब हम लोग ऊजार् संबंधी संसदीय 
Îथाई सिमित की तरफ से उस सȂटर पर गए थे, तो हम लोगȗ ने यह जान ना  चाहा िक वहाँ पर 
िरपेयर का काम क्यȗ नहीं हो रहा है? जब हम लोगȗ ने यह जानना चाहा िक वह िरपेयर क्यȗ नहीं 
हो रहा है, तो उन लोगȗ ने कहा िक उसको िरपेयर करने क े िलए कोई मैक ेिनक नहीं िमल रहा है।  
इस पर मȅने कहा िक भाई, हमारा देश चांद पर पहुंच गया और तुमको मैक ेिनक नहीं िमल रहा है!  
महोदय, उसका असली कारण यह है िक उस इंिÎटǷूट का को
ई अिधकारी वहां से नौकरी 
छोड़कर िवदेश मȂ जाकर दूसरी क ंपनी मȂ नौकरी कर रहा है, इसीिलए हमारे छोटे-छोटे 
एंटरĢेन्योसर् को टेिंÎटग क े िलए िवदेश जाना पड़ता है।  उनको अपनी इलेिक्टर्कल ईिक्वपमȂट्स 
को टेÎट करवाने क े िलए िवदेश लेकर जाना पड़ता है।  इसके  िल
ए वे नीदरलȅड, साउथ कोिरया 
और इटली जाते हȅ और जब वे वहां से सिर्टिफके ट ले आते हȅ, तब जाकर उनकी िबकर्ी होती है।  
सर, क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने उसक
ो िरपेयर करने क े िलए वषर् 2021 मȂ 40 करोड़  रुपय े सȅक्शन 
िकया था। िवǄ मंतर्ी जी यहां पर मौजूद हȅ, मȅ उन का ध्यान इस बात की ओर आकिर्षत करना 
चाहता हूँ िक िरपेयर करने क े िलए वषर् 2021 मȂ 40 करोड़ रुपय े िदए जा चुक े हȅ, लेिकन आज तक 
िरपेयर नहीं हो पाया।  इसका असली कारण यह है िक जो अिधकारी यहां की नौकरी छोड़कर 
बाहर की Ģाइवेट क ंपनी मȂ नौकरी कर रहा है, वह उनको वहां बुलाकर कमीशन देता है और लेता 
है, इसी क े कारण आज तक इसको िरपेयर नहीं िकया जा रहा है।  
सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सर कार  से अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ, मȅ िडमांड करना 
चाहता हूँ िक उसको जÊद से जÊद िरपेयर िकया जाए और हमारे देश क े जो पिÅलक 
इंटरĢाइजेज़ हȅ, िजन्हȗने इलेिक्टर्क ईिक्वपमȂट्स की छोटी-छोटी इंडÎटर्ीज़ Î थािपत  की हȅ, उन 
लोगȗ को मौका िदया जाए, तािक वे देश मȂ ही टेिंÎटग कराएं और खचȃ से बचȂ।  क्या वे टेÎट 
कराने क े िलए िवदेश जाएंगे, इटली जाएंगे, नीदरलȅड जाएंगे कोिरया जाएंगे? उपसभापित 
महोदय, यह क्या है?  माननीय मंतर्ी जी यहां हȅ, मȅ उनसे अनुरोध करूं गा िक आपने 2021 मȂ जो 
40 करोड़ रुपय े िदए हȅ, उसको उन लोगȗ ने अभी तक िरपेयर क े िलए यूज़ नहीं िकया है।  वे उस 
पैसे का क्या कर रहे हȅ, यह पता नहीं है। आप उस की जानकारी लीिजए, इसके  िलए मȅ आपसे 
बहुत-बहुत अनुरोध करता हूँ, धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Muzibulla Khan: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra),  Dr.  John  Brittas  (Kerala) ,   S h r i   J o s e   K .   M a n i    ( K e r a l a ) ,   
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Subhas ish Khuntia (Odisha), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odish a), Shri Debashish Samantaray (Odisha) 
and Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar). 
  Now, Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade; ‘Concern over increasing 
problem of unsolicited spam, fraudulent  audio and video calls via WhatsApp and 
other social media platforms.’ 
28
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Concern over the increasing problem of unsolicited spam, fraudulent audio and video 
calls via WhatsApp and other social media platforms 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa):   Sir, I rise to draw the attention 
of this august House to the growing mena ce of spam and fraudulent calls, phishing 
attempts and cyber scams that have become a serious threat to the privacy, security 
and financial well-being of Indian citizens.  In recent times, there has been a sharp 
increase in unsolicited spam calls, fraudule nt audio and video calls via WhatsApp and 
other social media platforms and deceptive messages sent through emails, SMS and 
phishing websites.  These fraudulent activ ities are being carried out by individuals 
falsely representing themselves as legiti mate financial institutions, Government 
agencies and law enforcement authorities.  As a result, thousands of innocent citizens 
have lost their hard-earned money and many continue to fall victim to these digital 
frauds. 
 A particularly alarming aspect of thes e scams is that fraudsters often possess 
extensive personal details of their victims befo re initiating contact.  This raises serious 
concerns about data privacy, unauthorized access and sale of personal information 
by data brokers and telemarketers.  Ci tizens, especially those who are not well-
versed in advanced digital technology, are at  a higher risk of being duped.  The fear 
and anxiety caused by such fraudulent act ivities have created an environment of 
insecurity for mobile phone an d internet users.  A primary factor contributing to this 
growing menace is the unauthorized access and misuse of personal data.  Spammers 
and fraudsters illegally obtain phone numbe rs and personal details through various 
means, including data harvesting, data mining or purchasing ready-made data from 
third parties or companies maintaining data banks.  This blatant misuse of data raises 
serious concerns about the privacy and secu rity of Indian citizens.  Although the 
Government has introduced mechanisms su ch as the Do-Not-Dis turb Registry along 
with various laws and TRAI’s efforts to re gulate telemarketing practices, unauthorized 
data sales and privacy breaches remain rampant, leavin g citizens vulnerable to 
exploitation. 
 Sir, the right to privacy and data secu rity is a fundamental right, and it is 
imperative that the Government takes decisive action to safeguard its citizens from 
data misuse and unsolicited ca lls.  I urge urgent intervention to ensure protection of 
personal data and to put an end to this growing nuisance.  Thank you, Sir.         
               
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade: Dr. Sasmit 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
29

 
 
Patra  (Odisha),  Shri  A.  A.  Rahim  (Kerala),   Shri   Niranjan  Bishi  (Odisha),   
Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West Bengal), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya 
Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Dh ananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), 
Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand) and Shri mati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar 
Pradesh).                                                                            
Shri Tejveer Singh, ‘Need to develop new spiritual tourism circuits in the State 
of Uttar Pradesh to tap tourism potential.  Not present.  Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee.’ 
 
Ǜी राजीब भƺाचाजीर् (ितर्पुरा) : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे ज़ीरो आवर मȂ बोलने 
का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूं। हम लोग जानते हȅ िक उǄर पूवार्ंचल मȂ 
ितर्पुरा ऐसा राज्य है, जो पहाड़ी राज्य है, जहां पाइनएÃपल की खेती होती है। वषर् 2018 मȂ हमारी 
सरकार बनने क े बाद माननीय राÍटर्
पित ǎारा क्वीन पाइनएÃपल को Îटेट फ ू ड डेक्लेयर िकया 
गया है...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is time for Question Hour.  We will give you the opportunity again.  
 
 
12.00 Noon  
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
Cancer Care Accessibility in Rural Areas 
 
* 181. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
*181. SHRI SANJEEV ARORA: Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the number of cancer care centres, chem otherapy facilities and palliative 
care services available in rural areas of the country, State-wise; 
(b) the percentage of rural cancer patients who have access to advanced 
treatments such as targeted therapies, immunotherapy, etc., compared to 
urban patients; and 
(c)    the plan of the Ministry to impr ove cancer care access in underserved rural 
areas? 
 
30
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY  
WELFARE (SHRI PRATAPRAO JADHAV): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table 
of the House. 
Statement 
 
  (a) Under National Programme fo r Prevention and Control of Non-
Communicable Diseases (NP-NCD), 770 Di strict NCD Clinics, 233 Cardiac Care 
Units, 372 District Day Care Centres, an d 6,410 NCD clinics at Community Health 
Centres have been set up. 
Moreover, 19 State Cancer Institutes  (SCIs) and 20 Tertiary Cancer Care 
Centers (TCCCs) have been set up in di fferent parts of the country to provide 
advanced cancer care.  Also, cancer treatment facilities have been approved in all 22 
new AIIMS with diagnostic, medical and surgi cal facilities. Moreover National Cancer 
Institute (NCI) at Jhajjar, Haryana with  1,460 patient care beds and the second 
campus of Chittranjan National Cancer Inst itute in Kolkata with  460 beds provides 
advanced diagnostic and treatment facilities.  
Further there are 372 District Day Ca re Centres providing Chemotherapy 
across the country. Under the National Programme for Palliative Care (NPPC) 
services like Out Patient Department (OPD), In Patient Department (IPD), referral, 
home based palliative care are be ing provided at District le vel. The State wise details 
are at Annexure. 
Under the Department of Atomic Energy, Tata Memorial Centre has two units/ 
hospitals in rural / semi-urban locations  – the Homi Bhabha Cancer Hospital 
(HBCH) in Sangrur in Punjab and the Homi Bhabha Cancer Hospital in Muzzafarpur 
in Bihar. 
 
  (b) & (c) A population-based initia tive for screening, management and 
prevention of Non Communicable Diseases, including cancer has been rolled out in 
the country as a part of a Comprehensive Pr imary Health Care under National Health 
Mission. Prevention and screening service s are delivered through public health 
facilities by Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) & Auxilia ry Nurse and Midwife 
(ANM) workers.  
Teleconsultation facility is available fo r seeking expert opinion from District 
Hospitals and Tertiary care Hospitals for those patients who are suspected for any 
cancer related ailments after screening. Continuum of care is ensured through referral 
to Tertiary care facilities and Medical hosp itals empaneled under Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana (PMJAY). In PM-JAY, cancer related treatment including breast, oral 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
31

 
 
and cervical cancer is provided under more than 200 packages having more than 500 
procedures of Medical Oncology, Surgical Oncology, Radiation Oncology and 
Palliative Medicine in the national Heal th Benefit Package (HBP) master. Among 
these, 37 packages are specifically relate d to targeted therapies for cancer care, 
including chemotherapy (CT) for CA Brea st, CT for Metastatic Melanoma, CT for 
Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia, CT for Burkitt's Lymphoma, CT for CA Lung, and 
others.  
Under PMJAY more than 68 lakh cancer treatments worth over Rs 13,000 crore 
have been undertaken under the scheme. As per centrally available data, 75.81% of 
these treatments were availed by beneficiaries from rural areas. 
With regard to targeted therapies fo r cancer care, more than 4.5 lakh 
treatments worth over ₹985 crore have been undertaken for targeted therapies of 
cancer care. Of these, 76.32% were availed by rural beneficiaries under PM-JAY. 
One-time financial assistance upto ₹15 lakh is provided  under the Health 
Minister's Cancer Patient Fund (HMCPF) for treatment of poor patients living below 
poverty lines and suffering from cancer. Besi des, quality generic medicines including 
cancer drugs are made available at 50%  to 80% cheaper rates than branded 
medicines through Janaushadhi Stores and through the 217 AMRIT Pharmacies, 289 
Oncology drugs are given at a significant discount upto 50% of market rate.  
Budget announcement of opening of 200 Day Care Cancer Centers (DCCCs) 
at District Hospitals in 2025-26 and saturati on of remaining District Hospitals with 
DCCCs in the next three years has been made this year. 
Annexure 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of State TCCC & 
SCI 
No. of Day 
Care Centre 
No. of District Hospitals 
providing Palliative Care 
services 
1 Andaman & Nicobar - - - 
2 Andhra Pradesh 1 9 9 
3 Arunachal Pradesh - - 15 
4 Assam 1 7 5 
5 Bihar 1 - 6 
6 Chandigarh - - 1 
7 Chhattisgarh 1 23 16 
8 Daman & Diu & DNH - 3 3 
9 Delhi 1 5 1 
32
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
10 Goa 1 2 2 
11 Gujarat 1 35 33 
12 Haryana 1 5 22 
13 Himachal Pradesh 2 11 12 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 2 20 11 
15 Jharkhand 1 - 18 
16 Karnataka 2 - 31 
17 Kerala 2 25 14 
18 Ladakh - 2 2 
19 Lakshadweep - - 1 
20 Madhya Pradesh 2 52 51 
21 Maharashtra 3 12 34 
22 Manipur - 9 16 
23 Meghalaya - 2 11 
24 Mizoram 1 2 9 
25 Nagaland 1 - 4 
26 Odisha 1 30 30 
27 Puducherry - - 1 
28 Punjab 2 1 8 
29 Rajasthan 3 33 33 
30 Sikkim 1 1 4 
31 Tamil Nadu 1 38 38 
32 Telangana 1 5 32 
33 Tripura 1 - 8 
34 Uttar Pradesh 1 4 13 
35 Uttarakhand 1 10 13 
36 West Bengal 3 26 27 
  India 39 372 534 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  The questioner not present. Supplementaries,  Dr. Laxmikant 
Bajpayee.  
 
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मंतर्ी जी ने क ȅसर जैसी भयावह बीमारी क े 
संदभर् मȂ िवÎतृत उǄर गर्ामीण क्षेतर् क े संबंध मȂ िदया है, लेिकन गभार्शय क ȅसर एक िवकराल 
समÎया है, िजस पर समय-समय पर िंचता भी Ëयƪ की गई है। क्या सरकार अपनी इस ËयवÎथा 
क े  अंतगर्त गभार्
शय क ȅसर वैक्सीन को कोरोना वैक्सीन की तरह से आम जनता को लगाने क े बारे 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
33

 
 
मȂ कोई िवचार करेगी? दूसरा, यह िक मेरठ मेिडकल कॉलेज मȂ क ȅसर ईकाई की Îथापना क े संबंध 
मȂ भी मेरा िनवेदन है, क्या सरकार इस पर िवचार करेगी? 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister. 
 
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने सवार्इकल क ȅसर क े संबंध मȂ 
जो ĢÌन पूछा है, तो िनिÌ
चत रूप  से इसकी वैक्सीन बाज़ार मȂ उपलÅध है और हमारी सरकार ने 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और हमारे ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी, आदरणीय जे.पी. नƿा जी क े 
मागर्दशर्न मȂ िनिÌचत रूप  से क ȅसर की रोकथाम क े िलए बहुत सारे उपाय िक
ए हȅ और बहुत सारी 
योजनाएं भी लागू की हȅ। माननीय सदÎय ने ĢÌन पूछा िक क ȅसर का जो Ģादुभार्व है, उसके  
रोकथाम क े िलए हमारे सब-सȂटर, पीएचसी, सीएचसी आि
द सभी जगह पर Îकर्ीिंनग करके  
क ȅसर क े रोिगयȗ को पहली ही Îटेज मȂ िनिÌचत रूप  से ढ ूंढा जाता है या उपचार शुरू  होता है, तो 
उनके  दुरुÎत होने की įयादा संभावना होती है, लेिकन जब थडर् Îटेज क े क ȅसर क े रोगी उपचार 
कराने आते हȅ, तब उनका उपचार करने मȂ और उनको बचाने मȂ बहुत िदक्कत होती है। मह
ोदय, 
क ȅसर क े बारे मȂ जागरूकता  िदवस भी मनाया जा ता  है और हमारे मंतर्ालय क े ǎारा जागरूकता  
कायर्कर्म क े माध्यम से लोगȗ मȂ अवेयरनेस पैदा करने की कोिशश भी की जाती है और क ȅसर जैसी 
बीमारी क े रोकथाम और उसको कम करने क े िलए हमारे िवभाग क े माध्यम से अन्य बहुत सा रे 
उपाय िकये जा रहे हȅ।  
 
SHRI PRAFUL PATEL : Mr. Chairman, Sir, cancer is a very dreaded disease. Of 
course, it requires specialized treatment an d long gestation treatment.  Many people 
go to Mumbai, Delhi and bigger centres  like AIIMS and other places where 
Government has now done a gr eat job of increasing the reach of all the specialized 
medical facilities.  However, there needs to be some sub-centres. I will just give one 
example. In Maharashtra, we have many pr ivate hospitals having extended facilities 
for targeted immune therapy and all in many districts.  Similarly, through the private as 
well as some of the Government institutions, the Government can reach out to 
virtually every district.  There are about 600 districts   in    the country.   All   need not   
be covered; maybe, 300 or so districts which are very backward.  These kinds of 
centres can come up there.  Once the main  treatment is done in the bigger centres, 
the sub-centres can do the rest of the treatme nt so that time is saved for the person 
by not having to go again to the bigger centre s.  Cost is involved.  Staying facilities 
are a big problem.  So, may I request the Mi nister to have a view and let us know 
what he thinks?   
 
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव: सभापित महोदय, सÇमाननीय सदÎय Ģफु Êल पटेल जी ने जो ĢÌन पूछा है, 
मȅ आपके  माध्यम से बताना चाहता हूं िक िनिÌचत रूप  से हमारे ÎवाÎथ्य  िवभाग क े माध्यम से NP-
NCD क े तहत 770 िजलȗ मȂ NCD cli
nics हȅ, 223 ǭदय पिरचयार् इकाईयां हȅ और 372 िजला  डे 
34
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
क ेयर सȂटसर् भी चलाए जाते हȅ।  सामुदाियक ÎवाÎथ्य क ेन्दर्ȗ पर 6,410 NCD clinics भी Îथािपत 
िकए गए हȅ।  इसके  अितिरƪ 19 राज्यȗ  मȂ क ȅसर संÎथान और 20 िविशÍट क ȅसर पिरचयार् क ेन्दर्ȗ 
का भी कायर् चल रहा है।   सर, सदÎय ने जो िंचता Ëयƪ की है, िनिÌचत रूप  से मȅने पहले ही 
जवाब मȂ बताया था िक सब-सȂटसर् मȂ क ȅसर की Îकर्ीिंनग शुरू  की गई है। हमारी आशा वकर् सर् हȅ, 
गांव मȂ काम करने वाली हȅ, वे घर-घर जाकर लोगȗ से फॉमर् को भरवाकर लाती हȅ और उसमȂ यिद 
शंका होती है िक क ȅसर क े िलए इनकी जांच होनी  चािहए, Îकर्ीिंनग होनी चा
िहए, तो उप-क ेन्दर् मȂ 
भी उनकी Îकर्ीिंनग होती है।  अगर उनको रेफर करना होता है, तो िडिÎटर्क्ट हॉिÎपटल मȂ उनको 
रेफर िकया जा सकता है।    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Su
b-centre is a very important suggestion.  Hon. Minister. 
 
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ी (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सभापित महोदय, जहां तक क ȅसर 
का सवाल है और यह ĢÌन है, तो इस ĢÌन से एक ध्विन आती है िक रूरल  एिरया क े लोगȗ को 
क ȅसर से बचाने क े िलए और उसकी Îकर्ीिंनग क े िलए क्या ËयवÎथा है? सर, मȅ सबसे पहले हाउस 
को यह अवगत कराना चाहता हूं िक बहुत ही exhaustive screening की ËयवÎथा भारत सरकार 
क े ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ालय ने की है।  हमारे 1 लाख, 75 हजार  आयुÍमान आरोग्य मंिदर हȅ।  आयुÍमा न 
आरोग्य मंिदर क े तहत हम Îकर्ीिंनग कर रहे हȅ और ओरल क ȅसर, ĤेÎट क ȅसर और सिर्वक्स 
क ȅसर, इन तीनȗ की Îकर्ीिंनग की जा रही है। अगर हम Îकर्ीिंनग की दृिÍट से देखȂ, तो लगभ ग 
29.32 करोड़ ओरल क ȅसर की Îकर्ीिंनग हुई है, उसमȂ 1 लाख, 63 हजार  िडटेक्ट हुए  हȅ।  उसी  
तरीके  से 15  करोड़ , 60 लाख ĤेÎट क ȅसर की Îकर्ीिंनग हुई है और 57 हजार डायग्नोज़ हुए हȅ।  
उसी तरीके  9 करोड़, 48 हजार सिर्वक्स क ȅसर की Îकर्ीिंनग हुई है और 97 हजार डायग् नोज़ हुए 
हȅ।  यानी you can understand the number.  मȅ ये नंबर इसिलए बता रहा हूं िक crores मȂ 
Îकर्ीिंनग की गई है और thousands, lakhs, screened लोग िनकले हȅ, उनका हम इलाज कर 
रहे हȅ।  जहां तक आपने कहा िक लोगȗ को फ ै सेिलटी  िमलनी  चािहए,  तािक   उनको  कोई 
नेशनल लेवल क े या Îटेट लेवल क े हॉिÎपटÊस मȂ न आना पड़े।  इसके  िलए Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी 
ने बहुत ही अच्छी योजना को आगे बढ़ाया है और अभी हमारे 372 िडिÎटर्क्ट डे क ेयर सȂटसर् हȅ, जो 
chemotherapy across the country दे रहे हȅ।  इस बार हमारी माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी िनमर्ला 
सीतारमण जी ने बजट मȂ घोषणा की है िक हम आने वाले समय मȂ, every district w
ould have a 
day care cancer centre.  This year, we have  decided to open 20 0 and, within next 
three years, all districts woul d have cancer day care centres.  …(Interruptions)…  
Chemotherapy and radiotherapy also.   
   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shrimati Mausam B Noor. 
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM B NOOR:  Sir, it is great  to have you back.  The hon. Minister 
has already given an elaborate answer but my qu estion, if he can kindly reply, is this.  
Is the Ministry considering expanding te le-medicine services and mobile cancer 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
35

 
 
screening units to improve early detection and treatment accessibility in rural areas?  
If yes, please provide the details.    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister.  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA:  Th is is a very good question. जैसा मȅने कहा िक हम 
Îकर्ीिंनग पर बहुत ध्यान दे रहे हȅ।  इसिलए हम tele-medicine को भी बहुत तवज्जो दे रहे हȅ।  
We have developed hub-and-spoke model.  And, under hub-and-spoke model, we 
are giving training to the Community Health Officers who can detect what looks like 
cancer.  And, patients through telemedicine are connected to the district hospitals, to 
the State hospitals and also to the national institutes, so that we decide whether this 
patient has to be brought and at what level to save time.  And, I would also like to 
share with the House the Lancet Study.   Lancet की एक Îटडी आई है, िजसमȂ they have 
said that the timely cancer treatment initiation has improved in India and 90 per cent 
rise in the access of timely treatment. This  has been said by La ncet about the cancer 
treatment. So, all this has been possible b ecause the screening is exhaustive and the 
moment a person is confirmed that he has got cancer, where he has to be treated is 
also advised at that very point of time.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Many hon. Members, quite a large number, wanted to ask 
supplementaries. Since there will
 be a discu ssion on the Health Ministry, those hon. 
Members who will not get an opportunity otherwise to ask supplementaries, I will 
accommodate all of them during the discussi on. Now, Q. No. 182. Shrimati Sunetra 
Ajit Pawar; she had sought my leave. Sh e was part of a delegation to Mexico 
representing the Parliament.   Now, supplementaries. 
 
Food Storage Infrastructure 
 
* 182. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
*182. SHRIMATI SUNETRA AJIT PAWAR: Will  the Minister of CONSUMER 
AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether there is a need for modernis ation and expansion of food storage 
infrastructure;  
(b)  if so, the initiatives being taken by Government in this regard;  
36
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
(c) the manner in which Government is addressing the problem of 
spoilage and loss of food grains during storage;  
(d) the  strategies being adopted by Government to ensure the 
management of food storages and price stability; and  
(e) the manner in which Government is leveraging technology to  
improve food grain management and distribution? 
  
THE MINISTER OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC 
 DISTRIBUTION (SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI): (a) to (e) A statement is laid on the Table 
of the House. 
 
  Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Government of India through Food Corporation of India (FCI) stores 
wheat and rice after procurement for Public Distribution System (PDS) operation and 
to maintain buffer stock. As on 01.02.20 25, total covered storage capacity available 
with FCI and State agencies throughout the country for storage of Central Pool 
foodgrains stock is 806.94 Lakh MT. 
  The requirement of Storage capacity  in FCI depends upon the level of 
procurement, requirement of buffer norms and PDS operations for mainly Rice and 
Wheat. FCI continuously assesses and moni tors the storage capacity and based on 
the storage gap assessment, storage capaci ties are created/hired through following 
schemes:- 
1. Construction of Silos under Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode 
2. Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme under PPP mode 
3. Central Sector Scheme (CSS) “Storage & Godowns ” focus on North 
East 
4. Hiring of godown from Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC)/ State 
Warehousing Corporations (SWCs)/State Agencies  
5. Private Warehousing Scheme (PWS) 
6. Creation of godowns under Asset Monetization. 
 
   (c) Guidelines followed to address the problem of losses of food grains during 
storage are at Annexure-I. 
   (d) Government of India auctions  surplus food grai ns (Wheat & Rice), 
beyond the public Distribution System  (PDS) and Other Welfare Schemes (OWS) 
requirements, through open sale under Open Market Sales Scheme (Domestic) 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
37

 
 
[OMMSS(D)]. This helps to increase the av ailability of foodgrains in the market, 
control inflation, ensure food security an d make foodgrains more affordable for the 
general population. In addition, Bharat Atta and Bharat Rice were launched on 
6.11.2023 and 6.02.2024, respectively, with a view to provide atta (wheat flour) and 
rice to general consumers at subsidized rates under Open Market Sale Scheme 
(Domestic) [OMSS(D)] policy. 
   (e) In order to keep its storage infras tructure robust and updated, FCI is taking 
various steps of ModernizationThe details are at Annexure-II. 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Guidelines followed by FCI to address t he problem of losses of food grains during 
storage: 
 
A. Periodical maintenance of Scientific Storage structure:  
 
Dedicated Engineering wing of FCI carries out periodical maintenance of all 
storage structures 
 
(a) Identifying & repairing of all the leakage points in the roof. 
  (b) Cleaning of drainages in  the godown premises ensured. 
  (c)  Ensuring that no seepage inside the godowns so that no clogging up of  
   water. 
  (d)  Ensuring all the repairing works are attended on priority before the  
   onset of monsoon season. 
 
    B. Scientific storage and preservation of stocks: 
 
i.          Foodgrains are stored by ad opting proper scientific code of storage 
practices. 
ii.  Adequate dunnage materials such  as wooden crates, bamboo mats, 
polythene sheets are used to check mi gration of moisture from the floor 
to the foodgrains. 
iii.  Fumigation covers, nylon ropes, nets and insecticides for control of 
stored grain insect pests are provided in all the godowns. 
iv.  Prophylactic (spraying of ins ecticides) and curative treatments 
(fumigation) are carried out regula rly and timely in godowns for the 
38
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
control of stored grain insect pests. 
v.  Regular periodic inspections of the stocks/godowns are undertaken by 
qualified and trained technical staff and senior officers. The health of the 
foodgrains is monitored at regular in tervals by a system of checks and 
super checks at different levels. 
vi.  The principle of “First in First Out ” (FIFO) is followed to the extent 
possible so as to avoid longer st orage of foodgrai ns in godowns. 
However, stocks lying at vulnerable  plinths and procured under relaxed 
specifications are issued on overriding priority to avoid any damage to 
stocks in storage. 
vii.  Only covered rail wagons are used for movement of foodgrains so as to 
avoid damage during transit. 
viii.  While movement, Polythene Sheets are spread on the floor of railway 
wagons to retrieve the spilled-over grains to avoid contamination to 
stocks. 
ix.  Damage Monitoring Cells have been set up at District, Regional and Zonal 
levels to regularly monitor accrual of stocks and reduce damages. Each 
case of damage is thoroughly investig ated and disciplinary action in case 
of negligence is invariably taken against the delinquents. 
 
   C.  Capacity Building for additional modern storage structure. 
 
  Steel Silo bins are being constructed as a measure of mode rn capacity building 
which ensures better preservation of foodgrains and enhances its shelf life. 
 
Annexure-II 
  
Modernization steps taken by FCI to keep its storage infrastructure  
robust and updated: 
 
1. Construction of Silos under PPP Mode: 
     Steel Silo storage with bulk ha ndling facility is highly mechanized and 
modernized way of storing food grains in bu lk. It ensures better preservation of food 
grains and enhances its shelf life. If food gr ains are stored in S ilos and transported in 
bulk, losses due to theft, pilferage and tran sportation would be negligible compared 
to food grains storage in bags in co nventional warehouses. Steel Silos are 
constructed under Public Private Partnership Mode. 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
39

 
 
2.   Third party assessment of wareho uses by FCI from Quality Council of  
India (QCI) 
Third party assessment of all warehous es operated by FCI was undertaken 
through QCI covering areas like Physical in frastructure, Compliance to SoPs, Safety 
standards and Benchmarking with best practices. Accordingly, grading of all 
warehouses was done in six categories namely “Excellent, 5 Star, 4 Star, 3 Star, 2 
Star and 1 Star”. 
Based on QCI feedback, FCI has re-visit ed/ revised SOPs. An action plan was 
prepared for upgradation of warehouses. The short and medium term deficiencies 
were rectified by FCI. Again second roun d of assessment was un dertaken by QCI. 
FCI has further upgraded the warehouses. The summary of 556 FCI owned 
warehouses is as under: - 
No. of Depots with 5 Star and above category 
First QCI Assessment Second QCI Assessment After Up-gradation 
102 382 479 
  
After up-gradation 479 FCI owned depots  falls in 5 star and above category 
which were 102 in the first assessment done by QCI. 
Further Depot self-assessment portal  is being developed to monitor 
infrastructural efficiency (Grading of th e Depot) and a mobile app is also being 
developed for the same. 
3.  Mechanization of Warehouse operations: 
The provision of mandatory mechanized handling has been introduced in the 
revised handling and transport tenders applicable w.e.f. 11.04.2023 for new 
contracts, to encourage innovation and modernization of operations. As per the 
Model Tender Form (MTF) provision the Contractor shall mandatorily bring in modern 
technology for loading and unloading operations  at the same quoted price at its own 
cost. The contractor has to provide mandatorily mechanized loading/unloading points 
as under: 
Capacity of Godown Mandatorily mechanized loading/ unloading points 
to be provided by Contractor (minimum requirement) 
Up to 20000 MT 1 
20000 to 40000 MT 2 
Above 40000 MT 3 
 
40
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
In addition to above the Contractor sha ll have the option to bring in modern 
technology for all the loading and unloading po ints of operations in Depot at the same 
quoted price at its own cost.   In case the contractor do esn’t provide mechanized 
solution as per mandate given above, penalt y as stipulated in the tender document 
shall be levied. 
4.   Computerizati on of depot operations 
 
i. The operation of depots was digitize d through Depot Online System (DOS) 
making all transactions digitally verifiable  and traceable. This also provides real 
time visibility of data and transactions happening in depots across the country.  
ii. DOS captures weight from weighbridges directly ensuring transparency and 
accuracy of weighment of stocks.  
 
5. Monitoring of Depot Efficiency:   
In order to improve Operational and Fina ncial efficiency at Depot level, an 
initiative has been taken to develop a model for rating of the depots getting the data 
from Financial Accounting Package.  The oper ational efficiency of the depots is rated 
based on the cost parameters viz., Storage loss in Rice, Transit loss in rice, Transit 
loss in Wheat, Demurrage charges, Handling cost of the depot, Establishment cost of 
staff, Overtime Allowances (OTA) for staff, across different types of godowns, labour 
type [Departmental/Direct Payment System (DPS)/ No Work No Pay 
(NWNP)/Contract]. A Business Analytics Tool has also been deployed to capture 
the information as well as to provide an interactive platform with data visualization.  
This can be accessed at all levels of  hierarchy to assess and compare the 
performance of the depots. 
Now, Depot efficiency grading is bein g integrated with Depot Self-Assessment 
Portal-DSAP (Depot Darpan) & a mobile app is also being developed for the same 
(for rating/grading infrastructural facilities and operational efficiency). 
Ǜी रतनजीत Ģताप नारायन िंसह : सभापित महोदय, मȅ मंतर्ी जी को बताना चाहता हूं िक पूरे देश 
मȂ Îटोरेज क े िलए बहुत फ ै िसिलटीज बनाई गई हȅ। मȅ पूवार्ंचल क े क ुशीनगर से आता हूं, हमारे यहाँ 
पर बहुत आम, लीची, क े ले आिद की खेती होती है। हम सभी को मालूम है िक लीची एक बहुत ही 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
41

 
 
पैिरशेबल फल है, इसिलए मȅ मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूं िक क्या सरकार फलȗ क े िलए Îटोरेज 
बनाने की कोई Îकीम लाँच कर रही है या इस पर िवचार कर रही है? क्या सरकार ǎारा देश भर 
मȂ फलȗ की यूिटिलटीज़ क े िलए को ई Îटोरेज, खास तौर पर ईÎटनर् पाटर्, यानी पूवार्ंचल मȂ बनाई 
जाएगी? 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल:  बहुत सोबर हो गए हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: क्या आपका सोबर होने का इरादा है? 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल:  हमारा पुराना नाता है।  
 
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI : Sir, this is regarding the f
ood storage, that is, of the 
foodgrains that we, mainly, deal with.  As Food Ministry, we deal with paddy and, of 
course, after conversion as rice and wheat.  But, as far as overall food storage is 
concerned and, of course, as far as my Ministry is concerned, my Department is 
concerned, we are continuously increasin g the overall storage capacity since the 
procurement of the foodgrains, whether paddy or wheat, is continuously increasing. If 
I can quote the figures   from   2004 to 201 4,  total quantity procured was 459 lakh 
metric tons. Whereas, from 2014 to 2024, we  have procured almost 700 lakh metric 
tons; that is, there is almost more than 50 per cent procurement. And also, the total 
value for that from 2004 to 2014 is Rs. 4,40,498 crores. Whereas from 2014 to 2024, it 
is Rs. 12,51,403.58 crores. That is 184 per cent increase. It is because of this more 
procurement, storage has to be  arranged. For that, we are taking many steps.  I do 
not want to go into those details.  But, for fruits, it is for the Cooperation Minister. 
And other storage facility, it is either dealt with by Agriculture or Cooperation Ministry.  
We only deal with the foodgrains. That is the situation. Our department deals only 
with the foodgrains.  
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA: Sir, reports indi cate that India loses millions of metric 
tons of foodgrains annually due to inadequate  storage. My very pertinent, but straight 
question to the hon. Minister is this. Ha s the Government conducted any audits on 
storage losses and what penalties are imposed on agencies responsible for 
mismanagement? 
 
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI : Sir, I can say that storage improvement is the major  
concern, but in the last ten years, we have  taken a lot of measures and, by that, the 
overall spoilage, either it is because of st orage or transportation, all put together, is 
42
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
0.022 per cent. However, using the technol ogy, we are taking a lot of measures and 
those measures have reduced the spoilage. It  is not a question of taking actions, we 
are trying to introduce more and more te chnologies and, because of that, it has 
considerably come down.  Foodgrains are st ored by adopting proper scientific code 
of storage practices. Adequate dunnage ma terials such as w ooden crates, bamboo 
mats, polythene sheets are used and fumi gation covers, nylon ropes, nets and 
insecticides for control of stored grain in sect pests are provided. We are doing many 
such things. Now I can say that it has come  down to the lowest level. Further, we 
want to see that it comes to almost zero level.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: As my colleague Pr of. Jha said, I want to add the same 
thing. In Tamil Nadu, food procurement is taking place and the farmers are suffering a 
lot. Recently, my leader, Edappadi Pala niswami gave a statement. Due to the 
carelessness of the State Government, whatev er is procured and stored, was spoiled 
by rain.  But they are not taking action. I n  t h e  s a m e  w a y ,  I  w a n t  t o  k n o w  a s  t o  
whether the   Government   is   aware of these things and gives any assistance or 
takes any penal action. As they are taking  penal actions, are they taking actions 
against the State Government which fail ed to protect the farmers and all the 
foodgrains thus stored were spoiled?  Wh at are they doing for this loss? There are 
many such instances in the flood areas, et c.  The present Government is careless in 
protecting the farmers and the storage of fo odgrains. What actions are you going to 
take against this? 
 
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI : Sir, it is already mentioned here as far as Central pool 
storage is concerned. The State Government stores for its own consumption.   We 
provide five kg. of rice or wheat free of co st under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna 
Yojana for 80 crore people in the entire country. The rice or wheat under PDS is 
stored in the State.  We take  care of that.  Out of that, as I have already mentioned, 
0.022 per cent is lost because of various re asons. We have decided to further reduce 
it. At the same time, I can say in 2022-23 and 2021-22, when the movement was fast 
as in Covid, we supplied more grains free of cost, at that time, because of that and 
for some other reasons, it was 0.022 per cent. So, it is not right to say that spoilage is 
more.  As far as Central pool of foodgrain storage is concerned, that storage is very, 
very negligible. However, even to reduce that 0.022 per cent loss, many actions are 
being initiated.  Whether they are priv ate godowns, FCI-owned godowns or State-
owned godowns, if any human-led mistake ha ppens, definitely, actions are going to 
be initiated.  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
43

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now Q. No. 183.  
 
Janani  Shishu Suraksha Karyakram  
 
*183.  SHRI SAKET GOKHALE:  Will the Minister of  HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the total limit per beneficiary allowed on  nutrition expenses under the Janani  
Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK); 
(b) whether beneficiaries under the JSSK  need to bear out-of-pocket  
expenses on diagnostics, ceasarean deliveries and ambulance services; and 
(c)    if so, the steps taken by Government to reduce these expenses ? 
           
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY  
WELFARE (SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA PATEL):  (a) to (c): A Statement is laid on the 
Table of the House. 
Statement  
(a) to (c) Under Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) , pregnant 
Women (PW) are entitled to free diet (thr ee days for normal delivery and seven days 
for caesarean section) during their stay in public healthcare institutions.  
Under JSSK, the Scheme entitles all pregnant women to absolutely free and no-
expense delivery, including caesarean sectio n. This also encompasses the provision 
of free transportation and diagnostic services.  
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE :  Sir, firstly, I would like to commend the hon. Minister for 
greatly reducing our maternal and infant mortality rates.  I would, definitely, like to 
congratulate the Ministry for that.   Sir, in th e answer that is given, it is true that the 
Government does provide hot meals under the Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram.  
The thing is that these are provided in th e main, general health centers and the ones 
which are accessible.  But the problem is in  the peripheral heal th centers.  In a 
number of States, allowance is given for, maybe, milk and biscuits, and that has been 
the tradition.  But it is not possible to provide them the hot meals.  So, in that 
particular area, I want to ask the hon. Mi nister whether there is any plan by the 
Ministry to provide allowance or maybe extend it in places where hot meals cannot be 
provided to women.  
44
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA PATEL : Sir, Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram was 
introduced in the year 2011, primarily to bring down the out of pocket expenses for the 
women and children who are seeking health treatment services at the public health 
facilities.  This is a scheme under which we do not provide any financial incentive.  We 
provide in kind services to the pregnant wo men, whether it is free diet, drugs,   
diagnostics, consumables,  transport or fr ee blood transfusion services.   So, these 
are the facilities which are being provided a ll over the country to different States and 
the out of pocket expenses have come down because of many schemes but primarily 
because of this scheme.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Second supplementary, Shri Saket Gokhale. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE:  Sir, unfortunately, my question was not answered because I 
said there are peripheral health centers wher e it is not possible for the Government to 
provide hot meals.  What do we do in areas  like those?  But, nevertheless, the other 
issue that people are facing is again in peripheral areas.  A lot of times, there is a 
shortage of ambulances and they cannot r each.  So, they have to take referral 
transport. Or, in a lot of peripheral health areas, advanced ultrasound facilities are not 
available. So, these are the areas where out of pocket expenses do happen.  I mean, 
the Government does not reimburse, but women do end up paying from their 
pockets.  So, I am talking specifically about these remote areas, be it in terms of diet 
or be it terms of ultrasound. Is the Gove rnment considering providing reimbursement 
in areas where the Government is not able to, for logistical reasons, provide those 
services?  Thank you. 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE ( SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH 
NADDA):  Sir, there is a provision under the Na tional Health Mission which we call as 
PIP, Program Implementation Plan.  So, how do we unfold the program has to be 
decided at the grass-root leve l.  The suggestions which you have given,  if it  comes 
under the Programme Implementation Plan,  we can think about it because they sit, 
they will have discussion,  the  meeting takes place  and we  discuss  the nitty-gritties 
of it.  So, the suggestion is good.  But I would advise the hon. Member that the Chief 
Medical Officer and the Block Medical Officer should come up with some plan as to 
what they need and at which place.  And,  the National Health Mission, the Standing 
Committee, the Steering Group, is always very conscious about all these things and 
the annual meeting takes place and we also monitor it.  So, we will see accordingly.   
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
45

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Third supplementary,  Ms. Dola Sen. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN:   Sir, you are most welcome back.  Hope you are in good health and 
spirit!  Somehow, nowadays, the price of the general medicines needed for the 
pregnant women, general medicines needed  for the newborn children, which is very 
much related  for Janani Shishu Suraksha, the life saving drugs for the mother and 
child, for the cancer patients,  for   the   high   blood    pressure   diabetes   patients 
also  are increasing day by day.  Crores  of common, downtrodden people, mothers 
and children are suffering always for this reason.  Through you, Sir, I want to know 
what measure is being taken by the Unio n Government to address these people's 
issues so that the price of medicines may be reduced.  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to enlighten the 
House through the question that the hon. Member has asked. As the hon. Member, 
Shri Saket Gokhale, also said, the MMR, IMR, and under-five mortality have been 
declining. The decline has been  more than double that of the global decline. This has 
been possible only because of the interven tions we have made. Through you, Sir, I 
would like to enlighten the House that people  should also know that we have a very 
exhaustive mother and child treatment pr ogramme, and reproductive healthcare is 
also being taken care of.  As far as moth er and child healthcar e is concerned, we 
should know that from the moment any wo man conceives, there are four compulsory 
antenatal check-ups. Additionally, there are three more check-ups for high-risk 
patients.  We also provide financial support of up to 1,400 rupees in rural areas and 
1,000 rupees in urban areas. ASHA worker s are also given incentives. Moreover, 
more than 88.6 per cent of deliveries are in stitutional, for which no expense is borne 
by the patient. The Government takes care of transportation and the delivery, whether 
normal or caesarean, is free. We provide free diagnosis, free drugs, and everything 
else is given free.  As Shri Saket Gokhale asked, meals are also provided free for 
three days in case of normal deliveries,  and seven days in case of C-section 
deliveries. I would also like to share that all vaccinations – 12 vaccinations in 27 
sessions – are given free to mothers and children until the child turns 18.  इस तरह पूरे 
हेÊथ Ģोगर्ाम मȂ उनका check up करते हुए, एक healthy born child िकस तरीके  से grow 
करता है, तब तक हेÊथ िडपाटर्मȂट उस
की िंचता करता है।  And, all this has taken care about 
the health of the India. One thing more, what you are talking about, मȅने आपके  
previous question क े answer मȂ cancer क े बारे मȂ कहा था और मȅने िफगसर् भी िदए थे िक 
िकतने करोड़ cervix cancer की, िकतने करोड़ oral cancer की और िकतने करोड़ breast 
46
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
cancer की screening हो चुकी है तथा िकतने thousand suspected cases को हम treat कर 
रहे हȅ।   तो हमारा Ģोगर्ाम बहुत exhaustive है। What I need is your support in ensuring  that  
every  Member,  from all sides, contacts th e Chief Medical Officer and discusses with 
him the programme and its implementation.  इससे हमारा भी भला होगा, पेशȂट्स का भी 
भला होगा और आपका भी ज्ञानवधर्न होगा िक हेÊथ िडपाटर्मȂट िकस तरीके  से काम कर रहा है।  
 
SHRI G.C. CHANDRASHEKHAR:  S
i r ,  i s  t h e  M i n i s t r y  aware that cancer among 
women is increasing every year? Accord ing to the Indian Council of Medical 
Research, breast cancer accounts for aro und 14.8 per cent and cervical cancer 
accounts for around 5.4 per cent of cancers  in women. What initiatives has the 
Government taken to enhance early sc reening and diagnosis of cancer among 
women, and what specialized oncology facilit ies are available in district hospitals, 
particularly in rural areas? 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : Sir, the question relates to maternal health. He is 
asking about cancer, but I will answer accordingly.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Sometimes you have to overlook certain situations. It is a good 
question.  
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA: Yes, Sir, I understand. We have the National Cancer 
Institute in Jhajjar, which has come up ve ry well. With over 1,400 beds dedicated to 
cancer prevention, care, and re search, it offers world-cla ss facilities. Similarly, the 
Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute in Kolkata is also providing excellent care. 
Then, the Homi Bhabha  Institutes, which are there at two places,  and the 22 All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences have got a fu ll-fledged Oncology  Department, which is 
being developed.  This is how we are goi ng.  As you have asked about the rural 
areas, I have answered in my previous question that 1,75,000 Ayushman Arogya 
Mandirs are there. There, there is a CHO, the Community Health Officer.  They do the 
screening work and they are also connected to the hub-and-spoke model for 
telemedicine.  They advice accordingly, whic h patient has to go where.  But, I repeat 
again, that up to  16
th March, 2025,  29.32 crore oral  cancer patients have been 
screened and 1,63,000 diagnosed.  In the same way, for breast cancer, 15,60,000,00 
have been screened and 57,000 diagnosed as patients of breast cancer.  And, 
9,48,000,00 patients have been screened  for cervix cancer and 97,000 diagnosed.  
So, you can understand the volume and you can understand the level at which we are 
screening, diagnosing and treating them. 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
47

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : It was a supplementary to Question No. 181, as a matter of fact.    
Now, supplementary five, Shri A. A. Rahim.  
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Sir, I thank you for having given me this opportunity.   My question 
is regarding JSSK.  I want to know, partic ularly, regarding the non-adult mothers in 
tribal areas.   Sir, I have a bitter experience in this august  House.   When I had asked 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, on March 12, about the number of non-adult mothers, 
the hon. Minister gave an evasive answer.  That is why, I am asking again on the 
floor.    I now ask the Minister directly:   How many non-adult mothers are there in 
tribal areas?  How many of them have received the benefit under the JSSK?  What is 
the Infant Mortality Rate, particularly, in tribal areas? 
 
SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA : Sir, the question is rega rding teenage pregnancy.  
At this point of time, I do not have the exact  figures about it. If he can ask separately, 
we will, certainly, answer this question.  We keep the register accordingly. The ASHA 
workers note down the age.  So, we will co me out if a separate question is asked. 
  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q, No. 184. 
 
CGHS Wellness Centre in North Eastern Region 
*184. SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Will the Minister of HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the total number of CGHS Wellness Centres located in, Assam and other 
parts of North Eastern Region and the total numbers of CGHS Wellness 
Centres in Guwahati; 
(b) the total number of sanctioned posts of doctors and paramedical staff in 
these CGHS Wellness Centres of North Eastern Region and number of 
vacant posts, CGHS Wellness Centres-wise; 
(c) whether any action has been taken for filling up these vacant posts of 
doctors and paramedical staffs; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
 WELFARE (SHRI PRATAPRAO JADHAV):   (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the 
Table of the House. 
48
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Statement  
 
  (a) to (d) The CGHS in North Easter n region is headed by two Additional 
Directors (AD) with their offices at Guwahati and Shillong. 
There are 07 CGHS Allopathic Wellness Centers (Guwahati-05, Dibrugarh-01, 
Silchar-01) and 01 CGHS  Ayush Wellness Center (Guwahati-01) under the 
jurisdiction of AD Guwahati and  07 CGHS  Allopathic Wellness Centers (Itanagar-01, 
Kohima-01, Shillong-02, Agartala-0 1, Aizawl-01, Imphal-01) and 05   CGHS Ayush 
Wellness Centers  (Itanagar-01, Shillong-01, Agartala-01, Aizawl-01, Imphal-01)  
under the jurisdiction of AD Shillong. 
The details of total number of sancti oned and vacant posts of Doctors and 
paramedical staffs Wellness Center wise in respect of Wellness Centers under AD, 
Guwahati and AD, Shillong are at Annexure-I and Annexure-II respectively. 
For filling up the post of General Duty Medical Officers (GDMOs), the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare submits requ isition of vacancies every year to Union 
Public Service Commission (UPSC). La st year, UPSC has recommended 165 
candidates through Combined Medical Services Examination (CMSE), 2024. 
Accordingly, offers of appointment/ postin g orders are issued, for their posting at 
several CGHS Wellness Centres including North Eastern region. A requisition of 
subsequent 226 vacancies have been subm itted to UPSC for filling through CMSE, 
2025. Similarly, in respect of vacancies of paramedical posts/clerical posts, these 
vacancies are filled through Staff Selection Commission (SSC).  
 
Annexure-I 
TOTAL NUMBER OF SANCTIONED AND VACANT POSTS OF DOCTORS AND        
PARAMEDICAL STAFFS IN R/O CGHS WELLNESS CENTERS UNDER  
ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR, GUWAHATI. 
 
S. 
No.  
CGHS WC Name  Name of Post  No. of 
sanctioned 
posts 
No. of 
vacant 
posts 
1. CGHS Guwahati WC No.I, 
Hengrabari (Allopathy) 
GDMOs 3 2 
Paramedics 4 0 
2. CGHS Guwahati WC No.I, 
Hengrabari (Homeopathic unit) 
GDMOs 1 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
49

 
 
3. CGHS Guwahati WC No.I, 
Hengrabari (Ayurvedic unit) 
GDMOs 1 1 
Paramedics 1 0 
4. CGHS Guwahati WC No.II. Narengi 
(Allopathy) 
GDMOs 3 1 
Paramedics  4 1 
5. CGHS Guwahati WC No.II. Narengi 
(Homeopathic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics  0 0 
6. CGHS Guwahati WC No.II. Narengi 
(Ayurvedic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics  0 0 
7.  CGHS Guwahati WC No.III, 
Gotanagar (Allopathy) 
GDMOs 2 1 
Paramedics 4 2 
8. CGHS Guwahati WC No.III, 
Gotanagar (Homeopathic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
9. CGHS Guwahati WC No.III, 
Gotanagar (Ayurvedic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
10. CGHS Guwahati WC No.IV, 
Panbazar (Allopathy) 
GDMOs 2 0 
Paramedics 6 4 
11. CGHS Guwahati WC No.IV, 
Panbazar (Homeopathic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
12. CGHS Guwahati WC No.IV, 
Panbazar (Ayurvedic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
13. CGHS Guwahati WC No.V, 
Beharbari (Allopathy) 
GDMOs 2 1 
Paramedics 4 1 
14. CGHS Guwahati WC No.V, 
Beharbari (Homeopathic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
15. CGHS Guwahati WC No.V, 
Beharbari (Ayurvedic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
16. CGHS Dibrugarh WC (Allopathy) GDMOs 2 2 
Paramedics 3 2 
17. CGHS Dibrugarh WC 
(Homeopathic unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
18. CGHS Dibrugarh WC (Ayurvedic 
unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
19. CGHS Silchar WC (Allopathy) GDMOs 2 1 
Paramedics 4 4 
20. CGHS Silchar WC (Homeopathic 
unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
50
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
21. CGHS Silchar WC (Ayurvedic unit) GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
22. CGHS Kohima WC (Allopathy) GDMOs 1 0 
Paramedics 2 1 
23. CGHS Kohima WC (Homeopathic 
unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
24. CGHS Kohima WC (Ayurvedic 
unit) 
GDMOs 0 0 
Paramedics 0 0 
25. CGHS Aizawl WC (Allopathy) GDMOs 1 0 
Paramedics 2 0 
26. CGHS Aizawl WC (Homeopathic 
unit) 
GDMOs 1 0 
Paramedics 1 1 
27. CGHS Aizawl WC (Ayurvedic unit) GDMOs 1 1 
Paramedics 1 1 
28. CGHS Itanagar WC (Allopathy) GDMOs 1 1 
Paramedics 2 0 
29. CGHS Itanagar WC (Homeopathic 
unit) 
GDMOs 1 0 
Paramedics 1 1 
30. CGHS Itanagar WC (Ayurvedic 
unit) 
GDMOs 1 1 
Paramedics 1 1 
Total 65 31 
 
Annexure-II 
Total number of sanctioned and vacant posts of doctors and paramedical staffs  
     in r/o CGHS Wellness centers under Additional Director, Shillong 
 
S. 
No.  
CGHS WC Name  Name  of Post  No. of 
sanctioned 
posts  
No. of 
vacant 
posts  
1. CGHS WC No.1, 
Laitumkhrah Shillong  
(Allopathic) 
GDMOs  
(Allo)  
2 0 
Paramedics 6 2 
2. CGHS WC No.2, Opp. Raj 
Bhawan Shillong (Allopathic) 
GDMOs 
(Allo.)       
3 0 
Paramedics 7 2 
3. CGHS WC unit, Opp. Raj Medical Officer  1 0 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
51

 
 
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Mr. Chairman, Sir, I join the entire House to wish you 
quick recovery, good health and long life.  Since we all are beneficiaries of CGHS, my 
supplementary relates to only CGHS Wellne ss Centres, particularly, in the North 
Eastern Region.  During a visit to the CGHS  Wellness Centre, we found that in many 
of the Wellness Centres, regular doctors ar e not there. Only the doctors who are on 
Bhawan Shillong 
(Homeopathic unit) 
Paramedics 1 1 
4. CGHS WC, Shillong 
(Ayurvedic unit) 
Medical Officer  1 0 
Pharmacist  1 0 
5. CGHS WC Agartala, Lake 
view road, Shibnagar, Near 
Modern Club, Agartala 
(Allopathic)  
GDMOs    2 1 
Paramedics 3 0 
6. CGHS WC Agartala, Lake 
view road, Shibnagar, Near 
Modern Club, Agartala  
(Homeopathic unit) 
Medical Officer  1 0 
Paramedics 1 0 
7. CGHS WC  Agartala, Lake 
view road, Shibnagar, Near 
Modern Club, Agartala  
(Ayurveda) 
Medical Officer  1 1 
Paramedics 1 1 
8. CGHS WC Imphal, Ground 
floor, MVHA Building, 
Wangkhei Ningthem Pukhri 
Mapan, Imphal (Allopathy)  
GDMOs    2 0 
Paramedics 2 1 
9. CGHS WC Imphal, MVHA 
Building, Wangkhei 
Ningthem Pukhri Mapan, 
Imphal  
(Homoeopathic unit) 
Medical Officer  1 0 
Paramedics 1 1 
10. CGHS WC  CGHS WC 
Imphal, MVHA Building, 
Wangkhei Ningthem Pukhri 
Mapan, Imphal  
 (Ayurvedic unit) 
Medical Officer  1 1 
Paramedics 1 1 
Total 39 12 
52
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
contract basis are working.  There was a comp laint from them that there is no parity,  
is the Minister considering bringing pa rity in the salary and pension for these 
contractual doctors? 
 
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय क े ǎारा पूवȘǄर क्षेतर् क े सीजीएचएस क े 
बारे मȂ जो पूरक ĢÌन पूछा गया है, उसके  संबंध मȂ मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक सीजीएचएस क े तहत 
पूवȘǄर क्षेतर् मȂ 33 ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा संगठनȗ को भी सूचीबǉ िकया गया है तािक वहाँ पर हमारे 
ज्यादा-से-ज्
यादा क ेन्दर्ीय कमर्चािरयȗ और पȂशनर लोगȗ का उपचार िकया जाए।  वैसे ही 
सीजीएचएस लाभािर्थयȗ क े िलए नकदरिहत सुिवधा Ģदान करने क े िलए भी एÇस, गुवाहटी क े 
साथ भी एक समझौता और ज्ञापन पर हÎताक्षर पर िकये गए हȅ।       
सर, सीजीएचएस मȂ सीजीएचएस पȂशनभोगी लाभािर्थयȗ को नकद रिहत उपचार क े िलए 
12 नवंबर, 2024 को क्षेतर्ीय आयुिर्वज्ञ
ान संÎथान, RIMS, इÇफाल तथा 25 फरवरी , 2025 को 
पूवȘǄर इंिदरा गांधी क्षेतर्ी य ÎवाÎथ्य एवं िचिकत्सा िवज्ञान संÎथान, NEIGRIHMS, िशलांग क े 
साथ समझौता ज्ञापन पर हÎताक्षर िकए गए हȅ।  यह कहा गया है िक इसके  बजट को ज्यादा से 
ज्यादा िकया जाए।  िपछली बार, इसका बजट लगभग 7,500 करोड़ का था, जो इस साल 1,000 
करोड़ बढ़कर लगभग 8,500 करोड़ तक होने का अनुमान है।  क Ȃदर्ीय कमर्चािरयȗ क े Îव ाÎथ्य क े 
िलए सीजीएचएस सȂटसर् मȂ जो भी सुिवधा दी जाती है, उसके  िलए ÎवाÎथ्य िवभाग की ओर से 
िनिÌचत रूप  से पूरे Ģयास िकये जा रहे हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Su
pplementary No. 2, Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita.  
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Sir, the hon. Minister’s reply is already in the written 
answer. My question was different. That was about the parity in...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He is just one metre away from you.  
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: My question wa s regarding parity in pension for the 
contractual doctors. Anyway, Sir, my second supplementary is this.  During our visits 
to the CGHS Wellness Centres, we have noticed that these doctors scantily prescribe 
generic medicines. While we visited some of the beneficiaries in the Kendras, the 
reply from the Kendras was that there is lack or shortage of generic medicines for 
rampant diseases like diabetes, kidney di seases or blood pressure. So, in these 
areas, there is shortage of generic medicines in the Kendras, Jan Aushadhi Kendras. I 
want to know whether the hon. Minister will look into it so that generic medicines are 
made available for these rampant diseases. Thank you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
53

 
 
Ǜी Ģतापराव जाधव: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने जन औषिध आपूिर्त क े बारे मȂ पूछा है, 
तो मंतर्ालय क े माध्यम से गुणवǄा और खरीद मȂ सुधार क े िलए भी बहुत सारी पहल वहां पर की 
गई हȅ।  दर अनुबंधन िवÎ तार  क े माध्यम से जन औषिध आपूिर्त Ǜृंखला को मजबूत करने का काम 
भी िनिÌचत रूप  से मंतर्ालय ǎारा सीजीएचएस मȂ िकया जा रहा है।  उसमȂ सामान्य मूÊय िनधार्रण 
क े िलए सीधी बातचीत और Îवतंतर् तृतीय पक्ष गुणवǄा का भी आÌवासन िदया गया है।  माननीय 
सदÎय ने यहां पर जो यह िंचता Ëयƪ की है िक सी
जीएचएस मȂ ज्यादातर जन औषिधयां नहीं 
िलखी जाती हȅ, तो िनिÌचत रूप  से उसकी भी पड़ताल की जाएगी।  लोगȗ को सÎती दवाइयां 
ज्यादा से ज्यादा क ै से उपलÅध हȗ, इस के  िलए भी िनिÌचत रूप  से ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ालय की ओर से 
ध्यान रखा जाएगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 3; Dr. Parmar Jashvantsinh Salamsinh.  
 
डा. परमार जशवंतिंसह सालमिंसह: सर, मेरा क्वेÌचन, क्वेÌचन नं. 183 और 184, इन दोनȗ का 
combination है।  मȅ सबसे पहले ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी को बधाई देना चाहता हूँ िक िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ 
हमने अपने देश मȂ MMR और Infant Mortality Rate (IMR), इन दोनȗ पर का
फी हद तक 
क ंटर्ोल कर िलया है, लेिकन जो नॉथर्-ईÎटनर् रीजन्स, जैसे असम, मेघालय और मिणपुर हȅ, वहां 
का जो MMR और IMR है, ये दोनȗ नेशनल एवरेज़ से काफी ऊपर हȅ।   
अतः मेरा मंतर्ी जी से यह क्वेÌचन है िक नॉथर्-ईÎटनर् रीजन्स क े िलए क्या आपका कोई 
specific plan है , िजससे उसको नेशनल एवरेज़ क े करीब लेकर आया जाए, ताि
क हमारा 
आंकड़ा और भी अच्छा िदखे?  क्या इसमȂ सीजीएचएस का कोई रोल बन
ता है या आप उसको 
कोई िमशन मोड पर लगा सकते हȅ, तािक इसको हम जÊदी improve कर सकȂ? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
ÎवाÎथ्य और पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ी (Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): महोदय, यह बहुत महत्वपूणर् ĢÌन 
है। हम लोग region-wise, State- wise, district-wise an
d block-wise वकर् करते हȅ। हम 
देखते हȅ िक कौन से States weak हȅ, उन Îटेट्स मȂ क्या weak Ãवाइंट्स हȅ, उसको strategize 
करते हȅ। उसी तरह से िकसी Îटेट मȂ उसके  पैरामीटसर् अच्छे हȗगे, but कोई िज़ला है या कोई 
Åलॉक है, तो उसको भी हम prioritize करते हȅ। इस दृिÍट से माननीय सदÎय ने जो ĢÌन पूछा है, 
Ministry act
s accordingly. हमारा ज़ोन-वाइज़ होता है। िसफर् नॉथर्-ईÎट ही नहीं, बिÊक बहुत 
से टर्ाइबल एिरयाज़ हमारे सȂटर्ल इंिडया मȂ भी हȅ, िजनको हम prioritize करके  और उन पर 
special focus करके  उन एिरयाज़ को address
 करते हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary No. 4, Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain. 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN:  Sir, my supplementary is for Question No. 185. 
 
54
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  So, Supplementary No. 4, Ms. Sushmita Dev. 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV:  Thank you, Sir, for the opportunity.  I have gone through the 
list of sanctioned posts and the vacancies.  There are three units in Silcher, but the 
figure against sanctioned posts is zero.  Therefore, they have not been able to fill it.  
My question to the hon. Minister is this:  A posting in the North East is seen in the 
country as a hardship posting sometimes.  So, does the Health Minister have any 
provision to, maybe, hire doctors, parame dics on a contractual basis rather than 
filling up these permanent posts, which may help in better human resource?  सर, नƿा 
जी सदन मȂ हȅ। मȅ एक बात कहना चाहती हूं िक NHM क े जो employees हȅ, वे असम मȂ बहुत 
िदनȗ से strike कर रहे हȅ, for equal pay, equal work. आपकी बड़ी मेहरबानी होगी िक अगर 
आप उनकी िडमांड को लेकर िंचता करȂ, धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा: महोदय, जहां तक डॉक्टसर् क े लगाने का सवाल है, तो मȅ बताना चाहूंगा 
िक हमारे यहां Combined Medical Services ex
ams होते हȅ और जैसे UPSC लेता है, वह year 
by year लेता है, िपछले वषर् उन्हȗने 165 पोÎट्स भरी थीं। हम priority पर नॉथर्-ईÎट मȂ ही भेजते 
हȅ। इस बार हमने 225 पोÎट्स की requisition भेजी है।  जब examination होगा, तब we will 
appoint them acco
rdingly.  आपने लोकल लोगȗ को contractual basis पर रखने का सजेशन 
िदया है, the suggestion is good. मȅ देखता हूं िक मंतर्ालय मȂ इसका क्या िनÍकषर् िनकलता है।   
आपने NHM क े लोगȗ क े equal pay वाला िवषय उठाया, तो वह हमारे ध्यान मȂ नहीं है, लेिकन 
आप मुझे चैÇबर मȂ इसके  बारे मȂ कोई particular detail दȂगी, तो I will certainly look into it.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I called out the name of Dr. Syed N
aseer Hussain because he was 
trying to catch my attention.  So, I sent th e Marshal to find out what he wanted.  He 
came and told me that he wanted to ask a supplementary question  on Question No. 
184.  Therefore, I said, we will try to acco mmodate him in Question No. 185.  But the 
best is, we must send the slips.  Now, Q. No. 185. 
 
Recovery of Loans by Nationalised Banks  
*185. SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE: Will the Minister of FINANCE be pleased to 
state: 
(a)     whether the nationalised banks ha ve recovered a considerable amount of 
the loans that were written off in the last three years; 
(b)      i
f so, the details thereof, year-wise and bank-wise; and 
(c)      if not, the reasons therefor? 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
55

 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (SHRI PANKAJ 
CHAUDHARY):  (a) to (c): A Statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
  (a) to (c) Banks write-off non-pe rforming assets (NPAs), including, inter-
alia, those in respect of which full provisioni ng has been made on completion of four 
years, as per the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) guidelines and policy approved by 
banks’ Boards. Such write-off does not result  in waiver of liabilities of borrowers and 
therefore, it does not benefit the borrower.  
Further, recovery in written-off loans is  an ongoing process. Banks continue 
pursuing their recovery actions initiated against borrowers under the various recovery 
mechanism available to them, such as filing of a suit in civil courts or in Debts 
Recovery Tribunals, action under the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial 
Assets and Enforcement of Security Intere st Act, filing of cases in the National 
Company Law Tribunal under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, etc.  
Bank-wise and year-wise details of amount  recovered from wr itten-off loans by 
nationalised banks, including State Bank of India, during the last three financial years 
and the current financial year up to December 2024 are at Annexure. 
Annexure 
Recovery from written-off loans by nationalised banks, including State Bank of India   
(Amounts in crore Rs.) 
Bank FY 2021-22 FY 2022-23 FY 2023-24 FY 2024-25 
(till 31.12.2024) 
Bank of Baroda          2,510           3,277           3,943  3,800  
Bank of India          1,097           1,207           1,467  1,222 
Bank of Maharashtra             642              943              985  1,032  
Canara Bank          2,747           5,110           6,032  4,428  
Central Bank of India             332           1,283           1,433  1,067  
Indian Bank          1,612           2,177           1,879  1,784  
Indian Overseas Bank               19                90           2,430  1,967  
Punjab and Sind Bank             261              512              691  181  
56
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Punjab National Bank          3,441           6,508           6,101  3,097  
State Bank of India          7,782           7,097           6,934  5,627  
UCO Bank          1,546           1,624           1,487  1,659  
Union Bank of India          2,750           5,549           3,987  3,395  
Source: RBI (provisional data for FY2024-25) 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE:  Sir, roughly,  loans worth around Rs. 12 lakh crore 
have been written off by the nationalized banks.  From the answer, we gather that the 
amount of recovered loans is Rs. 1,26,0 00-plus, that is, roughly ten per cent.  
Through you, Sir, I would like to know if the hon. Minister could provide the House 
with the details of the top 20 wilful defaulters  in India as on date and state specifically 
what action has been taken to recover th e outstanding amounts from these wilful 
defaulters.  It will be greatly appreciated if the hon. Minister could furnish a written 
response on this with details. 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी : सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने एनपीए की बात की है। अगर देखȂ, तो 
बȅक, आरबीआई की गाइडलाइन्स क े अनुरूप  और अपने बोड्सर् की अपर्ूËड पॉिलसी क े अनुसार 
एनपीए लोन को Write-off करती है।  इसके  साथ ही साथ अगर देखȂ, तो  Write-off करने से 
पहले 100 परसȂट का Ģोिवजन िकया जाता है, तािक जमाकतार्ओं को कोई भी नुकसान न हो।  
सर, Write-off करने का मतलब यह नहीं होता है िक वह पैसा माफ कर िदया गया है।   िजस 
Ģकार से बȅक reco
very करता है और यथाव त करता रहता है और बȅक यह अंतरराÍटर्ीय मानकȗ 
क े आधार पर करता है।  जहां  तक माननीय सदÎय का सवाल है िक एनपीए बहुत बढ़ा है, तो मȅ 
बताना चाहता हूं िक अगर आप देखȂ,  तो एनपीए लगातार गित से घट रहा है और 2024 -25 मȂ 
देखȂ, तो 2.42 परसȂट रह गया है।   
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE: Sir, my specifi c question was about the nationalised 
banks.  Overall, Rs.16.35 lakh  crores have been written off.  Out of this amount, 
Rs.12 lakh crores were of na tionalised banks.  The answer given by the Government 
shows that the recovery is of Rs.1,26,000 crore, that is, merely 10 per cent. So, 90 
per cent of the loans is not recovered. No w, my second supplementary, through you, 
is this. Could the Minister state the deta ils of the cases where the Government has 
taken recapitalisation measures for public s ector banks facing a high volume of Non-
Performing Assets? Please also state the details of the funds for recapitalisation 
released to these banks in the last five year s. I will urge, through you, that I need a 
specific answer. The earlier answer was not at all specific.  
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी : सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने recapitalisation क े िलए जो ĢÌन पूछा 
है, तो मȅ िनिÌचत तौर से बताना चाहता हूं िक जब से मोदी जी की सरकार बनी है, तब से 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
57

 
 
आरबीआई और सरकार ने िमलकर कहीं न कहीं एक सुदृढ़ ËयवÎथा बनाई है, तािक बȅकȗ को 
मजबूती ĢाÃत हो सके ।  आज हमारे देश मȂ सभी बȅक robust तरीके  से काम कर रहे हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister is responding. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, I just want to 
add a few more things to what the hon. Minister of State has said.  On the recovery of 
written-off loans, first of all, I am sure th e hon. Member realises that when we say, a 
loan is written off, it is not as if it has been completely waived off. The defaulter does 
not escape consequences.  Action is take n through courts; action is  taken through 
the IBC process and recovered moneys are restored to the banks and that record of 
how much has been restituted to the bank s has been periodically answered when 
questions are asked in the Parliament. We ha ve done that.  But, I just want to say 
that, because the hon. Member kept on saying he wants specific details, the 
numbers that he mentioned are probably old. I want to give the latest numbers. 
Actually speaking, recovery in written-off loans by banks had reached a peak, in the 
sense, that by about 2022-23, recovery of written off loans by public sector banks has 
gone up to the level of Rs.35,378 crores.  Cu mulatively, the public sector banks have 
recovered written-off loans of  Rs.2,27,288 crores. Now, private sector banks, on 
their own, are also recovering, and they  have recovered something like Rs.55,598 
crores.  Recovery is an ongoi ng process. Every year, it  adds to the total money 
recovered. Now, as a whole, there is Rs. 2,27,288 crores which are recovered by just 
the public sector banks.  That is on the recovery of written-off loans.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, this is the first time I am speaking after you have come back 
fit as a fiddle. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It must have been very difficult for you.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Yes, Sir.  Without you, I feel like an orphan.    Through you, Sir, 
I thank the hon. Finance Minister for her kind gesture of going over to Kerala House to 
have breakfast with my Chief Minister.  Having said this, there is an impression that all 
the sectors are equal in this default of loan s.  In this context,  I would ask a specific 
question here.  First, what could be the sector-wise NPA for industry, service and 
agriculture - write-off and the recovery th ereof?  I want to know these details 
sectors-wise.  Second, there is a grow ing concern that education loans are 
becoming NPAs on account of growing une mployment.  Will the Minister be kind 
58
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
enough to give the statistics of amount of NPAs on this account - the write-off and 
the recovery?   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAM AN:  The specific details, which are being asked 
about, let us say, for the agriculture or the manufacturing and the services, and also 
on the student loans, I may have to obtain these.  I do not have the figures ready in 
my hands.  I will get it, share it in the House and also share it with the hon. Member.  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is a difficult choice. I t ilt in favour of Shri  Digvijaya Singh for 
supplementary no. 4  at the cost of Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, he can ask.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  No, if I call out someone, there has to be compliance.  I have 
acceded to your request.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, I will be very happy to withdraw in his favour. 
   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It does not matter.  I have taken a call.   
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपका आभारी हूं िक आपने मुझे सवाल पूछने 
का अवसर िदया है। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी महोदया से पूछना चाहता हूं िक एनसीएलटी क े Ģक
 रणȗ मȂ 
Committee of Creditors जब तक हेयरकट एक्सेÃट नहीं करता है, तब तक एनसीएलटी आदेश 
नहीं देता है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीया मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहता हूं िक एसबीआई को हेयरकट 
की वजह से लगभग 65 Ģितशत लोन का नुकसान हुआ। इसी Ģकार से दो और Ģकरणȗ मȂ उसके  
कर् ेिडटसर् का िजतना एमाउंट था, उसका क ेवल 4 परसȂट रहा और 96 पर
सȂट हेयरकट हुआ है। 
महोदय, एक तो यह रेिडयस एÎटेट क े िलए हुआ है और दूसरा वीिडयोकॉन इंडÎटर्ी क े िलए हुआ 
है। वहाँ क े ला
भाथीर् कौन थे, मुझे उनके  बारे मȂ बताने की जरूरत  नहीं हȅ। वे Adani Goodhomes 
थे। सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से पूछना चाहता हूं िक आपने अपने उǄर मȂ जो बताया है, 
िजतना लोन राइट ऑफ हुआ है, उसमȂ हेयरकट की जो िफग
र है, क्या वह उसमȂ शािमल है और 
क्या उसे Committee of Creditors ने मंजूरी दी है?  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:   Sir, the Committee of Creditors will have to give 
approval.  It is not as if there is any one liquidation process or a resolution process.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, is that binding for the CoC to give approval?  
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
59

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Finance Minister is on her legs.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:   Sir, th e very senior Member sometimes is in a 
hurry to get the reply just as he is in a hurry to also arrive  at the numbers, like 34 per 
cent haircut and all that.  It is on the basis of what cl aims have come through.  
Liquidation and the calculation of haircut is being done by one section in one way, but 
the laid down procedures talk about liquida tion value, the liquidation value on the 
basis of which you have recovered and that is what is counted when you are talking in 
terms of the IBC resolution process.  So , the same number, as per the laid down 
rules approved by this Parliament throug h the IBC law, shows that 169 per cent has 
been realised.  And, therefore, looking at it from the value of claims alone does not 
count for what I will perceive as a haircu t, or, somebody else will perceive as a 
haircut. Haircut is when you already have s een what the liquidation value is, and, if 
you are realizing 169 per cent of the liquidation value, hon. Member, Digvijaya Singh ji, 
will probably have to look at these figures also and then take inference as to how the 
system works.   Moreover, this is the kind  of number that we are talking about for 
those cases where the claims are more than  1,000 crores of rup ees each.  Sir, 164 
corporate debtors, whose cases were admitted,  have realized 169 per cent.  It is an 
important thing.  If you are talking about pa rticular cases, I do not want to get into 
who the beneficiary is, who is  the bidder is, who came to claim it, who is now taking 
over that defaulted company, whether th e company’s defaulting promoter coming 
through backdoor, which the law does not pe rmit.  All these thin gs, I am sure the 
hon. Member knows.  But since he talked  about ‘prominent cases’, I will take the 
liberty of taking one minute extra to tell the Ho use, through you, Sir, that in case of S 
R Steel India Limited, realization, as percentage of admitted claims, is 77 per cent, 
a n d ,  n u m b e r  o f  d a y s  t h a t  i t  t o o k  f o r  r e s olution is, of course, protracted long one 
which goes beyond what we wanted.  It had taken 583 days.  In the case of Binani 
Cements Limited, 99 per cent has been the r ealization.  In case of  MBL Infrastructure 
Limited, it is 120 per cent realization, and, in case of IVRCL Chengapalli Tollways 
Limited, there has been 100 per cent re alization.  There are instances where 
realization is in this order and to talk abou t haircut mentioning that 15 per cent, 30 per 
cent or 90 per cent has been given away, I am sorry to say, and, if you allow me some 
indulgence, ‘exaggerated’.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: In the last Session, hon. Finance Minister was graceful to enlighten 
me about phone-banking, and, this time, about haircut. 
 
60
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Ǜीमती संगीता यादव:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे ĢÌन पूछने का अवसर िदया, 
इसके  िलए आपका आभार।  यहां बȅकȗ क े एनपीए और write-off की चचार् हो रही है, लेिकन इस 
समय िडिजटल ģॉड की एक बहुत बड़ी समÎया चल रही है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी से जानना चाहती हूं िक क्या सरकार इस िÎ
थित से िनपटने क े िलए कोई Ģयास कर रही है? 
 
Ǜी पंकज चौधरी:  सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सदÎया को बताना चाहता हूं 
िक सरकार जब से आई है, वह आरबीआई क े साथ िमलकर लगातार बȅकȗ क े शुिǉकरण क े िलए 
काम कर रह
ी है।  जहां तक िडिजटल ģॉड का मामला है, तो इस संबंध मȂ भारतीय साइबर कर्ाइम 
समन्वय क Ȃ दर् (आई4सी) की Îथापना की गई।  रीयल-टाइम िरपोिटȊग क े िलए The Citizen  
Financial Cyber Frauds Reporting and Management System (CFCFRMS) को Îटाटर् 
करके  इसे NPCI से इिन्टगर्ेट िकया गया।  1930 का एक toll-free नÇबर चलाया गया।  दूर संचार 
िवभाग क े ‘Chakshu’ portal पर Call and SMS क े संभािवत ģॉड्स पर िनगरानी रखी जा रही 
है।  पीएम मन की बात का संदेश, जो Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने सदन मȂ िकया था िक रुको , सो चो, एक्शन 
लो क े Ģयासȗ से पिरणाम आता है। अगर 2014-15 मȂ देखȂ, तो वािणिज्यक बȅकȗ और एआईएफआई  
मȂ  Ģत्येक  मामले  मȂ  1 लाख  रुपय े  और  उससे  अिधक  की  अंतगर्र्Îत  रािश वाली  धोखाधिड़यȗ 
की  रािश( घटना की  तारीख  क े आध
ार पर) 56,215 करोड़ थी , जो 2023-24 मȂ घटकर 4,224 
करोड़ रह गई है। इसिलए सरकार कहीं न कहीं उस पर लगातार Ģयास कर रही है और इसका 
मुख्य उǈेÌय है िक हम सबको िमलकर उसकी पिÅलिसटी करने की बहुत आवÌयकता है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No. 186. 
 
Procurement and Storage of Food Grains 
 
*186. SHRI NEERAJ SHEKHAR: Will the Minister of CONSUMER AFFAIRS,  
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION be pleased to state:  
 
(a)  the details of food grains procured by Government from each State 
and the price paid to the farmers for each item during the last three 
years, State-wise;  
(b) whether FCI has sufficient storage capacity as on date to store the 
food grains and other perishable items procured every year;  
(c) if so, thedetails thereof, State
-wise and if not, the reasons 
therefor;and  
(d) the details of increase in the storage capacity in each State during the 
last three years and the current year, year-wise and State-wise? 
 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
61

 
 
THE MINISTER OF CONSUMER A FFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC  
DISTRIBUTION (SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table 
of the House. 
Statement 
 
           (a) State-wise quantity of  Wheat and Paddy procured by State Government 
agencies & Food Corporation of India (FCI ) for Central Pool and MSP value paid to 
farmers during last three years is at Annexure-I & Annexure-II respectively. 
 Details of Coarsegrains procured and M SP paid during the last three years is at 
Annexure-III. 
  (b) and (c)  FCI mainly stores wheat & rice after procurement for Public 
Distribution System (PDS) operation and to maintain buffer stock. As on 01.02.2025, 
total Covered Storage Capacity available with FCI and State agencies throughout the 
country for storage of Central Pool foodgrain stock is 806.94 Lakh MT against stored 
stock of 496.40 LMT. The State-wise details are at Annexure-IV 
 
Requirement of Storage capacity in FCI de pends upon the level of procurement, 
requirement of buffer norms and PDS operat ions for food grains (Rice and Wheat). 
FCI continuously assesses and monitors the storage capacity and based on the 
requirement and storage gap assessment, storage capacities are created/hired 
through following schemes at a Pan India level:- 
1. Construction of Silos under Public Private Partnership(PPP) mode 
2. Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme 
3. Central Sector Scheme “Storage & Godowns” 
4. Hiring of godown from Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC)/ State 
Warehousing Corporations (SWCs)/State Agencies  
5. Private Warehousing Scheme (PWS) 
6. Creation of godowns under Asset Monetization 
 
(d) The details of storage capacity created  by FCI in each State during the 
last three years and the current year, year-wise and State-wise, are at Annexure-V. 
 
62
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
Annexure-I 
PROCUREMENT OF WHEAT WITH MSP VALUE FOR CENTRAL POOL 
 
Fig. in LMT , MSP Value in Rs. Crores 
SL 
No 
STATES/ 
UTs 
RMS  2022-23 RMS  2023-24 RMS  2024-25 
Procurement Estimated 
MSP 
Value  
(@Rs 
2015/Qtl)  
Procurement Estimated 
MSP 
Value  
(@Rs 
2125/Qtl)  
Procurement Estimated 
MSP 
Value 
(@Rs 
2275/Qtl)  
1 Punjab 96.45 19434.68 121.17 25748.63 124.56 28337.40 
2 Haryana 41.86 8434.79 63.17 13423.63 71.50 16266.25 
3 UP 3.36 677.04 2.20 467.50 9.31 2118.03 
4 M.P. 46.03 9275.05 70.97 15081.13 48.39 11008.73 
5 Bihar 0.04 8.06 0.01 2.13 0.10 22.75 
6 Rajasthan 0.10 20.15 4.38 930.75 12.06 2743.65 
7 Uttrakhand 0.02 4.03 0.00 0.00 0.02 4.55 
8 Chandigarh 0.03 6.05 0.09 19.13 0.08 18.20 
9 H.P. 0.03 6.05 0.03 6.38 0.03 6.83 
TOTAL 187.92 37865.88 262.02 55679.25 266.05 60526.38 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
63

 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
 PROCUREMENT OF PADDY WITH MSP VALUE FOR CENTRAL POOL 
 Fig. in LMT , MSP Value in Rs. Crores 
STATES KMS 2021-22 KMS 2022-23 KMS 2023-24 
Procurement Estimated 
MSP Value  
(@Rs 
1960/Qtl) 
Procurement Estimated 
MSP Value 
(@Rs 
2060/Qtl) 
Procurement Estimated 
MSP Value  
(@Rs 
2203/Qtl) 
A.P.  66.58 13049.68 41.12 8470.72 30.43 6703.73 
TELANGANA 110.35 21628.60 131.86 27163.16 95.32 20999.00 
ASSAM 5.66 1109.36 5.98 1231.88 3.94 867.98 
BIHAR 44.90 8800.40 42.05 8662.30 30.80 6785.24 
CHANDIGARH 0.27 52.92 0.19 39.14 0.25 55.08 
CHHATISGARH 92.01 18033.96 87.53 18031.18 123.88 27290.76 
GUJARAT 1.22 239.12 1.77 364.62 0.85 187.26 
HARYANA 55.32 10842.72 59.36 12228.16 58.94 12984.48 
H. P. 0.28 54.88 0.14 28.84 0.23 50.67 
JHARKHAND 7.53 1475.88 1.72 354.32 0.74 163.02 
J&K  0.41 80.36 0.34 70.04 0.24 52.87 
KARNATAKA 2.19 429.24 0.21 43.26 0.00 0.00 
KERALA 7.48 1466.08 7.31 1505.86 5.59 1231.48 
M. P 45.83 8982.68 46.30 9537.80 42.16 9287.85 
MAHARASHTRA 18.32 3590.72 18.48 3806.88 11.64 2564.29 
ODISHA 71.04 13923.84 79.16 16306.96 70.89 15617.07 
PUNJAB 187.28 36706.88 182.10 37512.60 185.28 40817.18 
RAJASTHAN 0.07 13.72 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
NEF (Tripura) 0.58 113.68 0.45 92.70 0.32 70.50 
TAMIL NADU 27.58 5405.68 33.84 6971.04 34.96 7701.69 
UTTAR 
PRADESH 
65.53 12843.88 65.50 13493.00 53.80 11852.14 
UTTRAKHAND 11.56 2265.76 8.96 1845.76 7.30 1608.19 
WEST BENGAL 35.31 6920.76 32.08 6608.48 24.69 5439.21 
PUDUCHERRY 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
TOTAL 857.30 168030.80 846.45 174368.70 782.25 172329.68 
64
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Annexure-III 
 
STATEMENT SHOWING PROCUREMENT OF COARSEGRAINS  
Position as on- 05.03.2025  
             Fig in Metric Tons  
KMS COMMODITY A.P. GUJ HAR KAR M.P. MAH. U.P Odisha U.Khand TN HP Tel Chh TOTAL 
PROC 
(MT) 
MSP 
(Rs./qtl) 
MSP 
Value  
(in crore) 
2021-
22  
JOWAR(Kharif) - - - 103920 32393 20262 0 - - -       156575 2738 428.70 
JOWAR(Rabi) - - - 0 0 0 0 - - -       0 2738 0.00 
BAJRA - 7284 - 0 5400 567 0 - - -       13251 2250 29.81 
MAIZE(Kharif) - 389 - 0 0 19615 2763 - - -       22767 1870 42.57 
MAIZE(Rabi) - - - 0 0 0 0 - - -       0 1870 0.00 
RAGI - - - 404784 0 253 0 32302 - -       437339 3377 1476.89 
Total - 7673 - 508703 37793 40697 2763 32302 - -       629931   1977.98 
2022-
23 
JOWAR - 0 - 76897 258 1378 0 - - -       78533 2970 233.24 
JOWAR(Rabi) 3621 685 - 0 0 2358 0 - - -       6664 2970 19.79 
BAJRA - 766 81147 0 0 10 43437 - - -       125360 2350 294.60 
BAJRA(Rabi) - 56645 - 0 0 0 0 - - -       56645 2350 133.12 
MAIZE - 0 - 0 0 48 0 - - -       48 1962 0.10 
MAIZE(Rabi) - 197 - 0 0 12877 0 - - -       13074 1962 25.65 
RAGI 4 0 - 454404 0 636 0 - 1186 515       456745 3578 1634.23 
Total 3625 58293 81147 531301 258 17308 43437 - 1186 515       737069   2340.73 
2023-
24 
JOWAR 24466     85402   462 13340             123670 3180 393.27 
JOWAR(Rabi) 4903 2946   105019   86624.9               199493 3180 634.39 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
65

 
 
BAJRA   33359 231334       355038             619731 2500 1549.33 
BAJRA(Rabi)   76726                       76726 2500 191.82 
MAIZE           25 4451             4476 2090 9.35 
MAIZE(Rabi)           56               56 2090 0.12 
RAGI 376 0.75   226576   189 0.7   1889 1889       230920 3846 888.12 
Total 29745 113032 231334 416997   87357 372830   1889 1889       1255073   3666.39 
Annexure- IV 
Central Pool Storage Capacity with FCI and State Govt.Agencies as on 01.02.2025                    
             (Figures in LMT) 
Zone 
Sl. No. 
Region/U.T.  
Total Storage Capacity with FCI (Owned/Hired ) 
(Covered & CAP)  
Total 
(Owned 
+Hired) 
Total Storage Capacity 
with State Agencies 
including SWCs  
(excluding capacities 
given to FCI) for storage of 
foodgrains  
Grand Total 
Covered  CAP Total Cov.& 
CAP 
State Agencies Cov. CAP Cov. & 
 CAP 
Owned Hired Owned Hired Cov. CAP Cov. CAP Total 
EAST 
1 BIHAR 3.45 8.03 0.00 0.00 11.47 0.00 11.47 10.13 0.00 10.13 21.60 0.00 21.60 
2 JHARKHAND 0.89 3.82 0.00 0.00 4.71 0.00 4.71 1.78 0 1.78 6.49 0.00 6.49 
3 ORISSA 3.65 2.82 0.00 0.00 6.47 0.00 6.47 6.12 0 6.12 12.59 0.00 12.59 
4 WEST BENGAL 9.53 0.92 0.00 0.00 10.45 0.00 10.45 9.66 0 9.66 20.11 0.00 20.11 
5 SIKKIM 0.11 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.00 0.11 0.11 0 0.11 0.23 0.00 0.23 
Total East Zone 17.63 15.58 0.00 0.00 33.21 0.00 33.21 27.80 0 27.80 61.01 0.00 61.01 
66
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
N.E. 
6 ASSAM  3.74 1.57 0.00 0.00 5.31 0.00 5.31 0.00 0 0.00 5.31 0.00 5.31 
7 ARUNACHAL PD 0.41 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.42 0.00 0.42 0.00 0 0.00 0.42 0.00 0.42 
8 MEGHALAYA 0.20 0.25 0.00 0.00 0.44 0.00 0.44 0.00 0 0.00 0.44 0.00 0.44 
9 MIZORAM 0.32 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.32 0.00 0.32 0.41 0 0.41 0.73 0.00 0.73 
10 TRIPURA 0.44 0.19 0.00 0.00 0.62 0.00 0.62 0.68 0 0.68 1.30 0.00 1.30 
11 MANIPUR 0.65 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.65 0.00 0.65 0.00 0 0.00 0.65 0.00 0.65 
12 NAGALAND 0.42 0.16 0.00 0.00 0.57 0.00 0.57 0.08 0 0.08 0.65 0.00 0.65 
Total North East Zone 6.16 2.17 0.00 0.00 8.33 0.00 8.33 1.17 0 1.17 9.50 0.00 9.50 
NORTH 
13 DELHI  3.28 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.28 0.00 3.28 0.00 0 0.00 3.28 0.00 3.28 
14 HARYANA 8.75 51.37 2.88 0.00 60.12 2.88 63.00 42.91 8.46 51.37 103.03 11.34 114.37 
15 HIMACHAL PD. 0.27 0.73 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 
16 J  & K  0.95 1.53 0.00 0.00 2.48 0.00 2.48 0.00 0 0.00 2.48 0.00 2.48 
17 LADAKH 0.25 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.31 0.00 0.31 0.00 0 0.00 0.31 0.00 0.31 
18 PUNJAB  27.17 106.53 3.31 0.00 133.70 3.31 137.01 48.62 41.61 90.23 182.32 44.92 227.24 
19 CHANDIGARH 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.09 0.00 0 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.09 
20 RAJASTHAN 8.52 8.94 0.60 0.00 17.45 0.60 18.05 0.00 0 0.00 17.45 0.60 18.05 
21 UTTAR PRADESH 15.68 38.91 0.00 0.00 54.59 0.00 54.59 0.00 0 0.00 54.59 0.00 54.59 
22 UTTARAKHAND 0.73 1.25 0.00 0.00 1.98 0.00 1.98 1.88 0 1.88 3.86 0.00 3.86 
Total North Zone 65.59 209.41 6.79 0.00 275.00 6.79 281.79 93.41 50.07 143.48 368.41 56.86 425.27 
SOUTH 
23 ANDHRA PRADESH 8.64 2.90 0.00 0.00 11.54 0.00 11.54 17.16 0 17.16 28.70 0.00 28.70 
24 ANDMAN NIKOBAR 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.07 0.16 0 0.16 0.23 0.00 0.23 
25 TELANGANA 6.68 14.09 0.00 0.00 20.77 0.00 20.77 7.80 0 7.80 28.57 0.00 28.57 
26 KERALA 5.89 0.09 0.00 0.00 5.98 0.00 5.98 1.89 0 1.89 7.87 0.00 7.87 
27 KARNATAKA 4.60 5.53 0.00 0.00 10.13 0.00 10.13 0.00 0 0.00 10.13 0.00 10.13 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
67

 
 
28 LAKSHDWEEP 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.03 0.00 0 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.03 
29 TAMIL NADU  6.46 6.02 0.00 0.00 12.48 0.00 12.48 8.92 0 8.92 21.40 0.00 21.40 
30 PUDDUCHERI 0.51 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.51 0.00 0.51 0.00 0 0.00 0.51 0.00 0.51 
Total South Zone 32.87 28.63 0.00 0.00 61.50 0.00 61.50 35.93 0 35.93 97.43 0.00 97.43 
WEST 
31 GUJARAT 4.93 4.41 0.00 0.00 9.34 0.00 9.34 0.56 0 0.56 9.90 0.00 9.90 
32 DADAR NAGAR 
HAVELI 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
33 MAHARASHTRA  9.23 8.99 0.00 0.00 18.22 0.00 18.22 6.98 0 6.98 25.20 0.00 25.20 
34 GOA 0.19 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.00 0 0.00 0.25 0.00 0.25 
35 MADHYA 
PRADESH 4.18 6.90 0.00 0.00 11.08 0.00 11.08 189.16 0.00 189.16 200.24 0.00 200.24 
36 CHHATTISGARH 6.32 13.30 0.00 0.00 19.61 0.00 19.61 15.39 0 15.39 35.00 0.00 35.00 
Total West Zone 24.85 33.65 0.00 0.00 58.50 0.00 58.50 212.09 0.00 212.09 270.59 0.00 270.59 
Grand Total 147.10 289.44 6.79 0.00 436.54 6.79 443.33 370.40 50.07 420.47 806.94 56.86 863.80 
 
68
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Annexure-V 
 
State-wise and year-wise details of the Storage capacity created by FCI  
During last three year and current year under various schemes: 
 
(a) Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee (PEG) Scheme: 
(Fig. in LMT)     
Sl.No. State 2021-22 2022-23 2023- 24 2024-25 
1 Haryana - - - 0.17 
2 Himachal Pradesh 0.03 - -  
3 Jammu & Kashmir - - - 0.17 
4 Jharkhand 0.15 0.13 0.37 - 
5 Telengana - 0.2 - - 
6 Uttar Pradesh 0.3 1.1 0.15 0.45 
7 Meghalaya - 0.05 0.1 - 
 Total 0.48 1.48 0.62 0.79 
   
(b) Silos: 
(Fig. in LMT) 
Sl.no. State 2021-22 2022-23 2023- 24 2024-25 
1 Punjab - 0.5 1.0 1.5 
2 Haryana 1.0 0.5 1.0 - 
3 Gujarat 0.5 - 0.5 0.5 
4 Assam 0.5 - - - 
5 Bihar 0.5 - 0.5 0.5 
6 Uttar Pradesh - 1.0 - 0.5 
  Total 2.5 2.0 3.0 3.0 
                         
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
69

 
 
 
(c) Central Sector Scheme “Storage & Godowns” 2017-25: 
 (Fig. in LMT) 
Sl.no. State 2021-22 2022-23 2023- 24 2024-25 
1 Assam 20,000 - - - 
2 Himachal Pradesh - 2,240 640 - 
3 Arunachal Pradesh - 1,670 1,120 - 
4 Manipur - 4,730 - - 
5 Meghalaya - 2,500 - - 
6 Jharkhand - - - 10,000 
  Total 20,000 11,140 1,760 10,000 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर:  सर, सबसे पहले तो मȅ भगवान से आपके  ÎवाÎथ्य लाभ की कामना करता हूं।  मȅ 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी को बधाई देना चाहूंगा िक उन्हȗने िवÎतृत उǄर िदया है।  िवशेषकर पूवार्ंचल, 
जहां से मȅ आता हूं - बिलया, गाजीपुर, मऊ मȂ अनाज क े भंडारण की बहुत समÎया है।   आज 
िकसान ज्यादा उगा देता है, तो उसकी उपज का भंडारण नहीं हो पाता है।  क ु छ िदनȗ पहले 
सरकार ने कहा था िक Îटील silos बनाए जाएंगे।  ऐसा हम लोगȗ ने भी सुना था िक वे पूवार्ंचल मȂ 
गाजीपुर, बिलया मȂ बनȂगे।   मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहत
ा हूं िक क्या सरकार उस पर 
िवचार कर रही है और क्या Îटील silos बिलया, गाजीपुर मȂ बनȂगे? 
 
Ǜी Ģहलाद जोशी: सर, देश मȂ overall storage 
capacity बढ़ाने क े िलए बहुत से Ģयास जारी हȅ।  
इनमȂ construction of silos under public private partnership mode हमने शुरू  िकया है, 
Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee Scheme PPP mode पर है, Central Sector Scheme 
“Storage &Godowns ” (Focus on North-East) है और Hiring Godowns from the 
Central Warehousing Corporation है।  ऐसी बहुत सी ÎकीÇस क े ǎारा हम इसको चला रहे हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question hour is over.
  Happy!  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: सर, जयराम रमेश जी को कÍट है िक बिलया-गाजीपुर क े बारे मȂ जवाब िदया 
जा रहा है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: जयराम रमेश जी बहुत particular थे िक जवाब पूरा न हो।   
 
 
 
70
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
1.00 P.M. 
 
       $THE BUDGET (MANIPUR), 2025-26 
AND 
$GOVERNMENT BILLS 
 
I. The Appropriation Bill, 2025 
II. The Appropriation (No .2) Bill, 2025 
III. The Manipur Appropriation (Vote on Account) Bill, 2025 
IV. The Manipur Appropriation Bill, 2025 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, reply to the Discussion on the Budget (Manipur), 2025-26 
and the Motions regarding Appropriation B ills moved by Shri Pankaj Chaudhary on 
17th March, 2025. The Discussion was conclude d yesterday and the hon. Minister to 
reply now.  Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman. 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (SHRIMATI NI RMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, thank you 
very much for giving me this opportunity to respond to the discussion which has 
happened on the four Bills which we laid. The four Bills relate to the second and final 
Supplementary Demand for Grants 2024-25;  Excess Demand for Grants 2021-22 of 
the Union Government; Budget of Manipur, 2025-26; and Supplementary Demand for 
Grants, 2024-25 of Manipur. I think more than 20 hon. Members spoke. I was a bit 
disappointed, Sir, if you will allow me to sa y it, that the discussion was more on the 
situation and also the political viewpoints on Manipur, which is very important, very 
sensitive and much needed to hear that , but less on the Budget, both on the 
Supplementary Demands for Grants and also on the Manipur Budget itself.  However, 
Sir, I will give a broad picture of the Budg et and the four Bills, and also respond to 
some of the questions and worries which the hon. Members have raised, both on 
Manipur and the General Budget.  Sir, this  final Supplementary Demand for Grants is 
the second. Although we are allowed to come up with up to three Supplementary 
Demands, we have chosen to have only two Supplementary Demands, and hence the 
second is the final Supplementary for this year. It has 52 Demands. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Finance Minister, it is alwa ys a pleasure to listen to you, but 
for a few days, I am subject to certain medical prescriptions.  
                                                            
$ Further discussion continued from the 17th March, 2025. 
$ Further consideration continued on a motion moved on the 17th march, 2025. 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
71

 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Thank yo u, Sir. Sir, I did have a word of 
message conveyed to you, and I welcome you.  My prayer is that your health remains 
good and recovery is fast. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:   Mr. De puty Chairman, Sir, I commenced my 
response with stating what the four Bills are which are before us, and I will try to 
respond.  First of all, let me talk on the contents of the Budget.  It has 52 Demands 
and three Appropriations.  I will take a minute to explai n about the elements of the 
Supplementary Demand. There is a technical supplementary which the 
Supplementary Demands for Grants include. It  is more as a matter of information for 
the House. It is required for using savings from one section to another section, within 
or within the given or between grants, an d also when additional expenditure is 
matched by concurrent receipts or re coveries. For example, the technical 
supplementary of Rs. 750 crores is being so ught for transfer to Senior Citizens' 
Welfare Fund in the DEA demand.  
So, it is only a transfer over there.  The token supplementary on the other hand 
is a provision of one lakh rupees made to seek prior approval of Parliament on specific 
items attracting the financial limits of the ne w service or new instrument of service.  It 
enables the Department to re-appropriate re sources within the same section of the 
grant.  So, the grant of one lakh rupees is a token supplementary. Later on, more can 
be added.  But we created that window by providing one lakh rupees.  A token 
supplementary is being sought for school ed ucation to meet additional expenditure 
under the grants for creation of capital assets in the Sa magra Shiksha Abhiyan from 
savings within the same section of the grant.  That is a new instrument which is 
coming in new idea for creation of capital assets.  So, we have created a token and 
then it will get expanded.  Finally, ther e is the cash supplementary which we have 
explained.  The cash supplementary entails cash outgo.  It increases the B.E. of the 
year by an equivalent amount  when provided.  It is given when adequate savings are 
not available to meet the additional fund requirements through re-appropriation.  For 
example, the cash supplementary in this particular Supplementary Demand for Grants 
of Rs.2,500 crore is being sought for urea and P&K subsidy this year.  That is a cash 
supplementary.  Token, cash and technical ar e three headings under which we come 
for appropriation-based approval.  That is  what has been explained.  The net cash 
outgo or cash supplementar y is Rs. 51,463 crore in this Budget.  Technical 
supplementary is Rs.6,27,045 crore.  It is unusually a big amount.  Normally, you do 
72
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
not Fhave this kind of a large technical supp lementary.  But this is being matched by 
savings  from  different  sections  from  the same grant or among the same grants 
and, therefore, it does not recover newe r payments.  Token supplementary is only 
Rs.0.67 crore (Rs.67 lakh).  I just want to highlight that. This batch of Supplementary 
Demands for Grants provide for recoupme nt of contingency fund advance of 
Rs.19,765 crore.  Even recoupment is ment ioned here.  As I wa s saying earlier, the 
cash supplementary pertains largely to  the fertilizers and Oil and Industry 
Development Fund (OIDF).  It is of Rs.11, 600 crore.  This is a transfer from the 
Consolidated Fund of India to the OIDF ma intained in public acco unt.  There is also 
urea and P&K fertilizer subsidy of Rs.2,500 cr ore.  The other is related to additional 
allowance being made of Rs.2,186 crore for the PM-Kisan.  This is an additional 
amount being provided over and above the budget supplementary for the current year 
itself.   
I am not getting into the technical su pplementary which has been explained in 
detail in the Budget document itself.  The excess demand for the year 2021-22 
amounts to Rs.1,291 crore.  Again, that year’s excess demand goes towards the 
Department of Fertilizers and Pensio n -- it is a civil pension -- and two 
appropriations, namely for Defence Ministry.  Civil is a charged section.  And the 
Ministry of Railways is again a charged section.   
Now I come to the Manipur Budget and also the Manipur Supplementary 
Demands.  I will first deal with the Su pplementary Demands for Manipur.  This 
Supplementary Demand is for Rs.1,861 cr ore.  It covers 20 Demands and one 
Appropriation.  An amount of Rs.948 crore supplementary is being sought for revenue 
expenditure itself. These include, and very importantly, interest payment and debt 
services, additional requirement of pay and allowances, relief measures and security 
expenditure on account of law and order situation and taking over the DISCOM losses 
for the State.  That is one heading.  An  amount of Rs. 913 crore is sought as 
supplementary for capital expenditure also. We gave the revenue expenditure and the 
items under it. Now comes the capital expenditure.  I would like to say that for 
Manipur, we have already given the special assistance for State’s capital investment 
which is a 50-year interest free.  All States get that. However, because of the 
disturbance and the administration being focu sed on that, for the last two years, they 
had not claimed fully under the 50-year inte rest free scheme.  Manipur needed it. So, 
an amount of Rs. 913 crore has been given under the special assistance for State’s 
capital investment. That is for 2024-25, th e current running year. Other than this, 
Manipur, as a State, has never had Contingency Fund created for itself, which is very 
important; most States create and have Contingency Fund arrangement because that 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
73

 
 
helps them to meet emergent situations.  So, now, we have created a Contingency 
Fund for Manipur with Rs. 500 crore being given to that.  So, that is about the 
Supplementary Demands for 2024-25 of Manipu r Budget. For the forthcoming year of 
2025-26, the Budget is also presented here and I would like to remind hon. Members, 
particularly hon. Member, Ms. Sushmita De v. Because of her concern about Manipur 
and its requirement for funds given the situat ion they are in, she had asked as to why 
we were not announcing a package. Sir, through you, I would like to tell the hon. 
Member that this is a Vote on Account Budget for Manipur.  We are presenting a Vote 
on Account for six months, so that the Go vernment runs and its immediate emerging 
expenditure can be taken care of, and when a Government comes into place, it will 
obviously make provisions for whatever they  want.  That is the Budget which is the 
year-long Budget.  So, this is a Vote on Ac count Budget for six months.  This is for 
Rs. 17,947 crore.  The total receipts proj ected are Rs. 35,368 crore; revenue receipts 
are estimated to be Rs. 27,231 crore.  Stat e’s own tax is Rs. 2,634 crore as receipts 
and non-tax is Rs. 400 crore.  So, at this  stage, we are looking at giving all the 
assistance which I have committed. I said this in Lok Sabha; I am repeating it here.  
We extend the fullest support from the Mini stry of Finance so that the recovery of 
Manipur will be sooner rather than later.  We have absolutely extended all assistance 
and, in the meanwhile, making sure that public finance and fiscal situation of Manipur 
is well assessed.  The Central Government would be of full support to the State.   
 Sir, other than that, there are some  points.  I am going by individual 
observations made by hon. Members and t rying to respond to them.  Commencing 
from Manipur Budget and the law and order issues in Manipur, several Members have 
spoken about it.  All the hon. Members, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil, Shri Bikash Ranjan 
Bhattacharyya, Ms. Sushmita Dev, Shri Sanj ay Singh, Shrimati Sulata Deo, Shri 
Manoj Kumar Jha, Shri P. Wilson, Shri Va iko, Shri Sandosh Kumar P, etc., have 
spoken about it.  So, I will broadly explai n the context. I want to understand and 
equally state some facts before the House.   
 Sir, Manipur is a border State.  At l east, all of us know , since some decades, 
Manipur has gone through quite a crisis, and every time there is a recovery, it goes 
back to some other situation.  So, eve ry Government has handled it with that 
sensitivity.  I am not differentiating between this Government and that Government.  
There have been situations much, much more in terms of human loss, asset loss and 
so on.  
So, when we speak about the State, I will say that every voice, which has been 
voiced in this House, has the same sensitivity as much as all of us have.  There is no 
way any one of us will be doing any help to Manipur by pointing a finger at one 
74
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
another.  But even with that said, I will defi nitely try to remind some passionate voices 
which speak as if everything was calm and ne ver has there been a situation like this 
ever before in Manipur.  I have he ard quite a few Members speak about: “ओह, डबल 
इंजन सरकार, सȂटर मȂ भी बीजेपी, Îटेट मȂ भी बीजेपी ! ” There have been double-engine 
sarkars of Congress earlier. सȂटर मȂ भी कांगर्ेस, मिणपुर मȂ भी कांगर्ेस। And what kind of 
agitations and loss of lives have happened!  So, your double engine did not do 
anything.  In fact, it worsened the situation, if I have to get into that kind of a talk.  We 
are, all of us here, committed to get that State back to some normalcy and we want 
that State to grow and prosper as much as  any other State.  There cannot be, even 
for a moment, a mockery of kind of things th at we want to state when that State is 
suffering and all of us will have to be working towards …(Interruptions)…     
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat, Mr. Gokhale. …(Interruptions)…    
Nothing is going on record. Please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  Take your seat.    
Nothing is going on record. …(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAM
AN:  Sir, I will not get distracted -- now, I take the 
name – by the TMC’s technique of shouting Members down.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  िसफर् माननीय फाइनȂस िमिनÎटर की बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  Sushmitaji, I have not allowed you. …(Interruptions)… I have not allowed 
you.  …(Interruptions)…       
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Every ti me somebody tries to answer the 
concern they raise, they shout them down.  …(Interruptions)…   
        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Gokhal e, I have not allowed you.  …(Interruptions)…  
Please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…     
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  That kind of a thing will not work in this House. 
…(Interruptions)… I am sorry to say this, Sir. …(Interruptions)…  We are trying to 
answer the questions that have been raised here. …(Interruptions)…  Then, there is no 
need to shout me down here. …(Interruptions)… I will continue my answer. 
…(Interruptions)…    
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…   
   
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
75

 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, in 1990s, डबल इंजन, कांगर्ेस सरकार क े समय, 
how many people died?  …(Interruptions)… I want to ask:  Why, in 1990s, the then 
Prime Minister did not visit, the th en Home Minister did not visit?  …(Interruptions)…    
I would like to ask that question as much as. …(Interruptions)…   
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seats.  I have not allowed putting any 
questions. …(Interruptions)…  Nothing is going on record, Sushmitaji.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I am  now saying the name, this tactic of 
Trinamool Congress to shout down Ministers when they speak would not be allowed.  
…(Interruptions)… It would not be entertained.  We  are giving answers.  You should 
have the strength of your conviction to hear the answers here.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Please listen to the answers.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  I am comi ng point by point for every one of the 
questions that they have raised. …(Interruptions)… If they do not have the conviction 
to sit and listen to it, they can choose whatever they want but it is not appropriate to 
shout the Ministers down when they are answering your questions.  Have patience.  I 
will remind you that from 2002 to 2017, Manipur had a Congress Government.  There 
was Central Government till 2014  run by the Congress Party. …(Interruptions)… 
Manipur witnessed 628 bandhs.  Hon. Member, Ms. Sushmita Dev, has reasons to 
be worried about Manipur.   
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
She said and I agree.  She comes from an  area which is close to Manipur and she 
knows so much about what is happening ther e. She raised a lot of  questions.  I am 
trying to answer each one of them.  If it is an attempt to shout me down, it means that 
her allegations are not right.  If she has got the strength of her conviction, she should 
hear my answers.  And after that, I will sit down, welcome if you permit her to ask any 
number of questions.   But what is the poin t in shouting me down if there are other 
Members who can also benefit from the answer  that I am giving? She has raised valid 
questions. I want to answer them. No; they  have run out.  That is because their 
tactics always is not to allow a Minister to  answer, do all mudslinging and go away.  I 
know they are watching on the television. …(Interruptions)… I am giving you the 
answer.  I am giving the answer.  …(Interruptions)…  Yes, they have to register to their 
76
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Chief Minister that they have protested but this House is not a street of Bengal, not 
any street of Kolkata.  Order prevails; you run the House as per the rule and we obey 
the rule.  It is not any street in Kolkata where they can scream, shout, pelt stones and 
run away.   
Between the time when Congress was ruling at the Centre and in Manipur, 628 
bandhs had happened,  several blockades had happened during those 15 years and 
also costs huge loss. The State Exchequer had lost nearly Rs. 2,828 crore. It was 
assessed that Rs. 2,828 crore was lost during that  period.  And, the worst economic 
blockade had happened at that time. It occurred in 2011, lasting for over 120 days and 
causing severe shortages. Petrol price was 200 rupees per litre! LPG cylinder cost 
2000 rupees per cylinder!  Petrol price is 200 per litre, and LPG cylinder Rs. 2000 per 
cylinder. What is the current situation?  Th e situation when this problem started! The 
Union Home Minister visited the State and went to one camp after another belonging 
to different communities, spent four days in Manipur. The Home Minister of India, at 
the time when it was really peaking with the problem, went and spent time at camp 
after camp. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA (West Bengal): That is not the issue… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sorry! 
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA : You are giving instances of earlier years 
of 2011 when Congress was in power.  I am not supporting it.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat. …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA : But the question is that this sort of 
communal violence is unique in Manipur which was never there before. 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Never before!  I am reading out all before. 
…(Interruptions)… Interestingly, I am sure the ho n. Members will know that hon. 
Member is from CPM.  …(Interruptions)…  Yes, I would like to say it again.  No doubt 
in my mind about it.  But, I am sure, you do not have a doubt about yourself.   Hon. 
Member is from CPM.  West Bengal saw the worst riots ever in history under the CPM 
rule. Tripura suffered under the CPM rule. …(Interruptions)… Kerala is not able to 
recover because of the horrible policy of industrialization that they had. To the extent, 
Sir, …(Interruptions)… 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
77

 
 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Sir, …  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sandosh Kumar ji, please sit down. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seats . …(Interruptions)… Only Madam 
Finance Minister की बात िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है।  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: To the extent, Sir, today, Kerala’s Minister gives 
an interview in the paper saying ‘Nokku Kooli’ is not there anymore in Kerala. 
…(Interruptions)…  Can I say what ‘Nokku Kooli’ was?  ‘Nokku Kooli’ happens when 
workers are all sitting together looking if there can be some work.  You and me or 
anybody going to Kerala get off the bus. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: Why are you dragging Kerala?  
 
SHRI BIKASH RANJAN BHATTACHARYYA : You are not speaking on the Budget, on 
the current situation. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Yes, I will talk because you came up with a lot of 
things.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please sit down.  Let her reply.  …(Interruptions)… Please 
take your seats.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : You get off the bus. …(Interruptions)… Hon. 
Members will find this interesting. Nowhere else you  will find it. …(Interruptions)… 
From the bus, you have to remove your lu ggage. People are sitting on the ground.  
You will say, please help me. िकतना देना है? He will say to some coolie and then you 
will have to bring the luggage down.  Assume he has to be paid 50 rupees. You will 
actually have to pay 50 plus  another 50. You will ask why? The other 50 is ‘Nokku 
Kooli’. What is ‘Nokku’ in Malayalam? ‘No kku’ means look. Meaning, I will be sitting 
and watching here, I may be a CPM card holder.  I will be  sitting and watching and 
actually coolie goes and brings t
he luggage  down, he gets 50 rupees. But for me, 
being a card holder member, watching that act itself, I need to get 50 rupees. 
…(Interruptions)… That is ‘Nokku Kooli’ for you.  …(Interruptions)…  So, it is  that kind 
78
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
of communism that has killed industry in Ke rala, that kind of communism which has 
killed industry in Bengal, that kind of communism …(Interruptions)… Santosh Kumarji, 
listen to me.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Sandosh Kumarji, you have no permission from the Chair 
to …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, with your permission …(Interruptions)…    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, I have not given permission to them.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: I want to say if he is trying to tell me that no such 
practice exists, two days ago, hon. Chief Minister of Kerala, I think, gave an 
interview, in which he says there is no ‘N okku Kooli’ nowadays, which means it was 
there before.  Am I bluffing?  …(Interruptions)… Sandoshji, it is alright.  You are doing 
alright.  Don't deny what I am saying. I am  also from that region; I may not be from 
any particular city in Kerala.  Therefore, I want to say that Home Minister went to 
Manipur, spent four days moving from one camp to another of affected people 
belonging to all communities, irrespectiv e of communities. That happened under 
Prime Minister Modi; Home Minister Amit Shah went there. The number of times since 
1990 till 2014 when Congress was ruling in Ce ntre and Congress was in power, there 
was double engine Congress, but not a minister went, when there was this 120 days 
of blockade. Tell me which minister went? No one went. But today, they will mock 
‘your double engine’, ‘double engine’!  Of  course, double engine. That is why the 
Home Minister went. That is why Shri Nityanand Rai was there for more than 23 days. 
The MoS for Home was there for 23 days . So, please do not compare how you 
handled Manipur and how this Government is handling Manipur. We have greater 
sensitivity. We care for Mani pur and every State of this country. Nowhere do we stay 
back. Prime Minister himself went to Waya nad.  Prime Minister himself went to 
Wayanad, has he not? Theref ore, we should not speak th at we treated it better and 
you are not, whereas, we are handling the legacy of 60 years of mishandling of 
States.  And that is why the problems are so  compounded today.  It was not like this 
before. Did he go to Wayanad or not? …(Interruptions)… Of course, that is what I am 
saying.  You do not agree to it.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Sandoshji, please.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
79

 
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : You are putting words in my mouth. 
…(Interruptions)… You are putting words into my mouth, Sandosh Kumar.  I said, “He 
also went to Kerala. ” Don't you try that communist tactic on me; put your words into 
my mouth! I will not take it.  …(Interruptions)… No, do not give me that tactics.  Now 
the special assistance scheme …(Interruptions)… Again, the same culture has been 
inherited by TMC. Shout people down! …(Interruptions)… That is communist. TMC 
has inherited it. That is it.  …(Interruptions)…  Sir, contingency funds have been 
created for Rs.500 crores and that will help the States so that if there is an 
emergency, they can handle it. Sir, in 1 993, Rajkumar Dorendra  Singh of Congress 
was Chief Minister of Manipur. A major flare-up happened between Kukis and Nagas 
during April and December, 1993. Unfortuna tely, 750 deaths happened at that time 
and 350 villages were completely burned down. A grave situation! Neither did the 
then Prime Minister, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao nor the Home Minister, Shri 
Shankarrao Chavan went to Manipur. An d these are the peop le now questioning 
when both the Home Minister has gone, Mo S for Home has gone, and we are trying 
to quickly recover the State. So I am sorry to say, Sir -- even in the debate here, the 
Home Minister came and gave a statemen t--what kind of noise was created then 
saying “Prime Minister reply”.  The Prime Minister took it as a part of his reply when he 
replied in the House. No, you would not want to hear him like the way they do now. 
They all came to the Well, shouted the Prime Minister down so that they do not hear 
him. But the Prime Minister is made of a different stuff. He continued answering and 
spoke about how he is handling Manipur and did not relent.  So, on Manipur, I would 
submit to the House, go into the details of what work is happening, how restoration is 
happening. It is our Manipur and your Manipur. Deal with it with a sense of ownership 
rather than saying, “You are doing that ”.  It does not work. It is a very sensitive issue 
and all of us will have to support one another so that we give a proper support to that 
State. Even in 1997- 98, when Shri I.K. Gu jral was the Prime Minister, even at that 
time, there was a major clash. 350 lives were lost at that time also. Even I.K. Gujral ji 
did not go to Manipur. So I want to ha ve questions asked of the Opposition 
Members, to contemplate, to introspect and then stand up and speak.  I am here to 
hear it. A lot of us are here to hear it, ju st don't throw mud and run away.  But, throw 
mud if you think you want to, but st and here to equally face the music. 
…(Interruptions)… Yeah, yeah, play some. You are from Kerala, right?  Sir, about 
Manipur law and order, I want to put it on record and also inform the Ministers and the 
Members of Parliament as to what steps we are taking to restore normalcy.  Both the 
Centre and State’s collective efforts have b een put so that there will be improvement 
in the law and order.  Except for some spor adic incidents in the fringe areas and the 
80
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
unfortunate incident of 8 th March 2025 in Kangpokpi, there has been a decreasing 
trend in cases of death, injuries, arson, firing, incidents and protests.  Currently, 
there are 286 companies of CAPF and 137 columns of Army and Assam Rifles; both 
are deployed along with the State police to  maintain law and order in the State.  
Recovery of looted arms and ammunition are being recovered and it is underway.  
Public notice made by the hon.  Governor on 20 th February 2025; the recovery has 
also seen an increase.   Steps are also being taken to ensure free movement along 
the national highways.  Convoy moveme nt carrying essential commodities are 
continuing to ensure availability of essent ial commodities in the State.  Helicopter 
service has resumed so that most district  headquarters are connected for ease of 
travel for the public.  Various measures have been taken up for the persons displaced 
in the violence, which is very important, Sir.  About 60,000 persons are currently 
residing in relief camps.  About 7,000 pers ons have returned to their homes.  About 
400 crores of rupees have been provided under the MHA special package for relief 
camp operations and support to those aff ected in this lawlessness, riot and 
everything else.  More support will also be provided.  Under PM Awas Yojana-
Gramin, 7,000 houses have been approved recently to provide for housing to those 
who are displaced.  Various other supports have also been given to those relief 
camps such as health care, including mental  health support, skill, livelihood training 
and also education.  Engagement with the civil society is underway from the level of 
the Governor down to the level of the district administration.  There is a clear step 
towards bringing peace in the State.  Pend ing issues of the pu blic are also being 
resolved quickly on a top priority mode.  Sir, for Centrally Sponsored Schemes, 
priority is being given to clear up all the dues and nothing is kept pending at all.  Major 
critical projects are monitored and reviewed regularly for timely completion, including 
tying up of required funds for national highway projects, railway projects, civil 
secretariat, Churachandpur Medical College , Manipur water supply project, IIIT at 
Mayangkhang and Government residential acco mmodation is also being provided.  I 
have given the pictures of revenue expenditure and also about the capital expenditure 
that we are giving through special assistance.  There was a concern expressed on the 
GSDP being stagnant.  The unrest has led to reduction in economic activity.  There is 
no denying of that.  With improvement in law and order and consequent improvement 
in economic activity, I expect the GSDP to show some recovery this year onwards.  
Sir, I have already told about the amount that we have given for relief and 
rehabilitation.  Rs.15 crores have been give n for temporary shelter.  This is the final 
installment payment with addi tional funds for extra works which are being provided.  
Permanent housing gets Rs.30 crores.  This is provided for works already taken up.  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
81

 
 
And, in addition to that, we are prov iding 7,000 PMAY-Gramin houses which has 
been approved already.  For relief operations, Rs.100 crores have been given.  That is 
specifically shown also under the new De mand for 2025-26. And, for internally 
displaced persons, requirements in the relief camp are itemized and being serviced. 
So, for relief under natural disasters, Rs. 200 crores is being allocated under the 
NDRF; Rs. 68 crores has been allocated under the SDRF and for mitigation purposes, 
as per the recommendations of the 15th Finance Commission. So, that was regarding 
Manipur. 
Hon. Member, Shri Shaktisinh Gohil,  raised a questi on about fiscal 
consolidation at the cost of cutting public spending. He said that better financial 
discipline is required. Funds for MGNREGA are not being released. I would like to 
take a minute to explain this, Sir. The Union Budget's total expenditure is Rs. 50.65 
lakh crores, which is higher by about Rs. 2.44 lakh crores and Rs. 3.49 lakh crores 
compared to 2024-25 and 2024-25.  The firs t figure pertains to BE and the second 
one to RE. So, the capital expenditure targ et itself is Rs. 11.21 lakh crores. The 
effective capital expenditure is actually Rs. 15.48 lakh crores, not Rs. 11 lakh crores, 
because you are looking at the actual money being given to States, which is used for 
asset building. Though they may count it as revenue for me, but for the States, it will 
be considered capital expenditure. So, the effective capital expenditure is Rs. 15.48 
lakh crores. But all this is being done without any reduction in social welfare 
measures. The social welfare Budget, Sir, has increased from Rs. 56,501 crores in 
2024-25 to Rs. 60,052 crores in 2025-26.  So , it has actually increased.  We are not 
doing any fiscal consolidation at the cost of cutting down on social welfare. Education 
has also increased from Rs. 1.26 lakh crores  in 2024-25 to Rs. 1.29 lakh crores for 
2025-26. Similarly, health expenditure has increased from Rs. 89,287 crores to Rs. 
98,311 crores in the BE of 2025-26. So, th ere is no reduction in social sector 
spending. I also want  to draw the attention of hon. Members to Statement 4AA, 
which has been provided in Annexure C for my reference, and in the Budget 
documents, it is provided as a separate document. I want to highlight the fact, and 
request hon. Members to take a look at that statement; it comes as a part of the 
expenditure profile and shows how unspent ba lances of more than Rs. 1 lakh crore 
are lying with the States as of December 31, 2024.  They are for various Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes. So, our money has already been allocated, but it is lying 
unutilized. Now, we also borrow money and se nd it for these schemes. They should 
be utilized appropriately and speedily.  
Sir, regarding the question of Bengal funds not being released, hon. Members 
are not present here. Probably, they do no t want an answer from me because they 
82
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
know many inappropriate actions that ha ve happened. Many ghost accounts have 
been given money, and when the realiz ation had to happen from those ghost 
accounts, the State Government chose to pa y that amount, which was supposed to 
be recovered from the ghost accounts.  They  gave that money from their own State’s 
treasury. So, first, you give money to non- existent individuals, and second, when it 
has to be recovered, you again give it from taxpayers’ money an d say that you have 
recovered it. You have not recovered it from people who did not deserve or, 
probably, who do not even exist. Such blatant misuse has happened, and therefore, I 
can understand Bengal's anxiety when they scream and shout at me, but they should 
follow the rules and be transparent in their use of funds.  
There are two matters that I would like to bring up, which were not properly 
discussed in this House but are related to the economy. There is a lot of discussion 
about household debt increasing, and what th e Government is doing about it. This is 
a very appropriate forum.  I want to high light and want the hon. Members to know 
that one of the long-term impacts of COVID-19 has affected the nature of work itself. 
People have either chosen to work from home  or they do not want to work full time.  
So, I want to state before this House that, one, the factors of production are being 
reset.  Industry is also looking at using ro botics and industry is also looking at Web3 
driven production.  Therefore, there is, definitely, a lot of churn. There was this feeling 
that compensation for employees is not going up.  I would like to highlight the 
National Accounts Statistics -- Compensa tion of employees at current prices 
achieved a compound average gr owth rate of 11.1 per cent  from 2014-15 to 2022-23.  
So, during the first 10 years of Prime Minister Modi’s rule, you had the wages going 
u p  b y  1 1 . 1  p e r  c e n t ,  a n d  t h a t  i s  t h e  d a t a  g i v e n .  T h i s  i s  u p  t o  2 0 2 2 - 2 3 ,  w h i c h  i s  
inclusive of the Covid years as well.  So, post-Covid as well, increase has happened.  
However, I would also like to say that India’s household debt is relatively low 
compared to the other emerging market  economies as well as some developed 
countries. Sir, except for Brazil, where it is  35 per cent, ours being higher than them 
at 39 per cent.  So, household debt, loans and debt securities, as a percentage of 
GDP, for India, it is 39 whereas for Brazil, it is 35.  But all other countries which are 
comparable with us have like this:  Malaysia- it is 69 per cent; Greece – it is 42 per 
cent; Canada – it is 102 per cent; Hong Kong – it is 93 per cent; Australia – it is 110 
per cent;  Israel – it is 42 per cent; and  France – it is 63 per cent.  So, if people are 
saying that India’s household debt is high  because of the way in which we handled 
Covid, I am sorry, they are wrong.  Our household debt to GDP is far lower compared 
to our peer group and compared to some of the advanced economies.  So, the stock 
of financial liabilities of the household as a percentage of GDP has increased  from 38 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
83

 
 
per cent in March 2023 to 40.2 per cent in March, 2024, which is Reserve Bank of 
India’s number.  Stocks of financial assets of households, as a percentage of GDP, 
increased from 103.5 per cent in March 2023 to 108.3 per cent in March, 2024, which 
is given by the Reserve Bank of India.  So, I want to put before this hon. House, India 
and its assets and liabilities figures are very much better than very many of our 
comparable emerging market economies, and even some of the developed 
economies.  Outside, again, Sir, discussion on inequality prevailin g in India.  I just 
want to highlight the fact that consumptio n inequality in rural and urban areas has 
declined significantly, as reflected by the significant improvement in the Gini 
coefficient, which is a key measure of income  inequality.  I am stating the number for 
2011-12, 2022-23 and 2023-24, in this order. For rural areas, in 2011-12, it was 0.283, 
whereas today it is 0.237 only, which means the situation is improving, it is doing 
better rather than widening; the inequality is  not widening.   In urban areas, it was 
0.363 in 2011-12; in 2022-23, it improved to 0.314, whereas now in 2023-24, for which 
the latest data is available, it is 0.284.  There is a drastic change, improvement in the 
inequality index.  So, the inequality is not wi dening, it is only narrowing.  So, I want 
t h a t  t o  b e  l a i d  i n  t h e  H o u s e ,  S i r .    Approximately, 25 crore people escaped multi-
dimensional poverty in the last nine years.  Th is is due to the signif icant initiatives that 
the Government has taken up and this data has come from NITI Aayog.  Sir, one of 
the data which is important for talking abou t inequality in that debate, a paper, which 
has been put out and which has been remark ably, I was surprised,  written in ‘The 
Economist’ magazine, says that inequality declined over the last decade. 
For the first time since 1990s in India, inequality has declined in the last 
decade. This has come out through that Article in The Economist, which draws on the 
Paper written after extensive research by Dr. Surjit Bhalla and Shri Karan Bhasin.  The 
Economist also says, “Poverty has declined across all possible poverty lines. ” The 
Economist doesn't write about our Government in favourable terms, but you have 
them saying this means, it is in your  face, you cannot deny it. Third, Sir, “extreme 
poverty has been eliminated.”  T h a t  i s  w h a t  i t  s a y s .  “In India, under Prime Minister 
Modi, extreme poverty has been eliminated. Poverty at 15 per cent, for World Bank's 
higher poverty line of 3.2 dollars of PP P, down from 52 per cent in 2011-12.”  So, from 
52 per cent in 2011-12, it has come down to 15 per cent. So on the inequality debate, I 
honourably request all the hon. Members to please go through the data that we are 
giving you here. And then, of course, we have all ears to listen to your comments. But 
without the data, please let us have a considered debate.  
Sir, there was also this noise about how India's ‘Make in India’ is failing. In 
fact, hon. Member, Shri Jairam Ramesh ha d tweeted about it. He has incidentally 
84
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
gone out. But I would like to respond to him. ‘Make in India’ has not failed at all. On 
the contrary, it has given a great moment um for manufacturing in India. India's 
manufacturing sector has faced significant challenges due to externalities rather than 
to do anything with India. We have take n short-term and long-term measures. Hon. 
Prime Minister, Modiji, has prioritised national interest in economic policy-making. He 
has spoken about it even yesterday in a po dcast which is being received all over the 
world for extensive and comprehensive viewpo int on how this Government deals with 
very many issues -- India's own domestic gr owth, India's cultural rootedness, India's 
foreign policy. He has given extensively his thoughts on all these subjects. So has he 
prioritised national interest in economic policy-making also.  
Sir, in order to curb dumping of goods into this country, several measures 
have been taken up. Anti-dumping duties have been imposed. Strengthening of our 
trade defence mechanism has been taken up. I wa nt to highlight how Atmanirbhar 
Bharat and related policies have  brought in defence sector today to become an 
exporter, net exporter. They are able to ear n more than Rs. 30,000 crores, and, as a 
result, you see what ‘Make in India’ has achieved for defence production in this 
country. And I see enthusiastic Congress Members, I am sorry to say, taking 
vicarious pleasure in saying, “Oh, Make in India is dead’,  ‘ R I P  - -  M a k e  i n  I n d i a ’ .  
‘Make in India’ made defence to become  net exporter and earn Rs. 30,000 crores. 
Don't be too quick. And, above all, Co ngress has had absolutely a hypocritic 
approach to ‘Make in India.’ They had remained in power from 2004 till 2011, when 
they came up with a National Manufacturing Policy. In 2014, of course, they went 
away. It took them seven long years just to make a policy rather than implement it. 
Now, that National Manufacturing Policy was there, which said, we will achieve 25 per 
cent in manufacturing contribution to GDP. They said that. But even before moving 
that Paper, the people sent them out. So  when Prime Minister Modiji in 2014 brings 
‘Make in India’, see the kind of statemen ts which have been made by Congress 
Members. One eminent Member, at that time, said, “The objective of ‘Make in India’ 
plan to attract investment and technology and promotion of exports cannot be part of 
a partisan narrative.” Do you want manufacturing to grow in this country or not? And 
having brought out this National Manufacturin g Policy, they also said, when ‘Make in 
India’ was announced,  -- I don't know  being hypocritical or confused -- “Make in 
India is just a revamped version of National Manufacturing Policy.”  
You claim that Make-in-India is not wo rking. Does that not mean that the 
National Manufacturing Policy itself was flawed ?  Are you suggesting that?  It is your 
policy.  But it remained a policy; it did not find an action ground.  And, when we make 
it an actionable policy, we bring in Make -in-India, we take several steps towards 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
85

 
 
improving it.  They have this problem of not knowing whether they should accept it or 
reject it, because it also has their own National Manufacturing Policy in it. They 
claimed that the contribution of manufacturing would reach 25 per cent of the GDP. 
No, they did not move an inch, whereas Ma ke-in-India today is showing how we are 
making strides. For example, in the defence industry, we are able to export.  
Sir, I would also like to highlight that  the National Manufacturing Policy guided 
them to set up national investment and manufacturing zones in several parts of the 
country. They called it NIMS in short. NIMS also remained where they were. They 
w e r e  i n  f a r - f l u n g  a r e a s ,  w i t h  n o  r a i l w a y  s t a t i o n  o r  p o r t  n e x t  t o  i t .  T h e y  w e r e  o n  
patronage basis.  It was not until Prime Minister, Modiji, brought the PM Gatishakti, 
that all this got integrated into that, wh ere a scheme of things was understood, like 
whether it had a port next to it, whether it had a railway station next to it, is a coal 
mining area or a raw material supply area next to it; bring all that together and do 
something to improve logistics there.  It is  only after the PM Gatishakti came that 
NIMS found the light of the da y; otherwise, they were in desolate and isolated places 
all over the country with no semblan ce of any make-in-India. Of course, 
manufacturing was just a policy for them. There was no implementation on it. 
Similarly, Sir, they also had a lot of quick-fix FTAs, which actually killed many 
of our manufacturers. Today, the Commerce Minister is struggling to have those FTAs 
hurriedly done, during their period, reviewed  because countries have realised it now. 
It was so loosely worded; it had so many things which were ready giveaways for our 
partner countries.  It is good; if you want to give, give them market access for many 
of the things, but we did not get anything  for ourselves on equal terms.  So, the 
Commerce Ministry today is sitting and aski ng those countries to review the FTAs 
signed during UPA regime. So , that hurried rushing into FTAs, hurried bringing into 
some kind of a manufacturing policy has not delivered. On the contrary, it has hurt us. 
Believe in Make-in-India. It is giving re sults. I have already quoted how defence 
exports are flourishing under Make-in-Indi a.  Of course, everybody called growth 
during UPA time as jobless growth, which is right. The 69
th report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance itself said that.  
Sir, I would like to highlight the fact that Make-in-India has actually given us 
good result. We took step after step to strengthen manufacturing in this country. 
Corporate tax rate was brought down to 15  per cent for new capacities in February, 
2019. Production linked incentives have been given for critical key starting materials - 
KPI, drug intermediaries and active ph armaceutical ingredient manufacturers. 
Manufacturing of medical devices has happe ned. Automobiles and auto components 
get PLI. Pharmaceutical drugs get PLI. Sp eciality steel gets PLI. Telecom network 
86
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
products, electronic technology produc ts, white goods, ACs and LEDs, food 
products, textile products, MMF segment of technical textiles, high efficiency solar PV 
modules, advanced chemistry cells and drones and drone components, all get PLI. I 
just want to highlight one data point, Sir. I am not just listing PL Is. Some of the most 
notable achievements of PLI schemes are, they attracted investments exceeding Rs. 
1.5 lakh crores. Because of PLI, Rs. 1.5 la k h  c r o r e s  h a v e  c o m e  i n t o  t h i s  c o u n t r y .  
Employment generation has happened to the extent of 9.5 lakh people. It has also led 
to exports surpassing 4 lakh crores.  
Electronics, pharmaceutical and food pro cessing sectors are also contributing 
to the export. 99.2 per cent of mobile ph ones now sold in the country are made in 
India.  325 million to 330 mi llion mobile phones are bein g manufactured in India every 
year. Mobile phone exports reached 15.6 billi on US dollars in 2023-24 from 0.2 billion 
in 2014-15. There is a significant reduction in the import of raw materials in the pharma 
sector. Thanks to PLI! There is a considerable improvemen t in domestic sourcing of 
raw materials in food processing, agai n because of PLI. Telecom equipment 
manufacturing surpassed Rs.50,000 crores in sales under the Production-Linked 
Incentive Scheme. The automobile sector al so got a considerable boost with the PLI 
directly generating sales worth Rs. 2.25 lakh  crores and creating 1.5 lakh jobs in that 
sector.  When our Congress Members talk ab out ‘Make in India’, thinking that they 
c a n  s i n g  a  r e q u i e m ,  I  a m  s o r r y ,  n o ,  i t  i s live, kicking, flourishing and making our 
economy absolutely stronger.  
Now, I would like to highlight the last on e point. As a result of this concerted 
effort, our domestic defence production reached Rs.1.27 lakh crores marking a 
record high with an impressive increase of approximately 174 per cent from Rs.46,429 
crores in 2014-15. So, defence is a cla ssic example. In that, I will just put one 
example forward. Sir, you ar e from Bihar.  It is a ve ry good example to show how 
every State of India is contributing for ‘Mak e in India’.  ‘Made in Bihar’ boots are now 
part of the Russian Army's equipment. So, Bihar is contributing for manufacturing and 
boots manufactured there are going for the Russian Army as well. So, the number of 
companies registered has also increased.  There is 13 per cent increase in the number 
of establishments. Employment has mark ed over 10 per cent rise and the 
manufacturing sector has reported the highest wage growth of 16 per cent.   
Sir, without elaborating more, I thank the hon. Members who are waiting for a 
long time.  I do not want to take more of your time.  I thank every one of the Members 
who have spoken on the four Bills which ar e before this House for consideration and 
returning to the Lok Sabha. Thank you. 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
87

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I shall now put the motion regarding consideration of the 
Appropriation Bill 2025 to vote. …( Interruptions)… It is over.  …( Interruptions)… Yes; 
tell me.  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: Sir, my point of order is und er Rule 238A. Hon. Finance 
Minister, in an attempt to justify the stand taken by her Government, I can understand 
that, made a lot of allegations and… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please be brief and put your point of order. 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: I am coming to the point. While talking about the hon. 
Member, Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya,  who is a senior Member, her reference 
was like this, ‘Whether he doubts his CPI (M) membership.’ There was a passing 
comment by her.  So, that is qu ite defamatory and she should be …( Interruptions)…  
Kindly go through this verbatim document. Th at reference could have been avoided.  
The reference was, ‘Whether he himself doubts his CPI (M) membership.’  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. There is no point of order. …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P: It should be expunged. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I shall now put the motion regarding consideration of the 
Appropriation Bill, 2025 to vote. 
The question is:  
"That the Bill to provide for the authorisat ion of appropriation of moneys out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India to meet the amounts spent on certain 
services during the financial year ended on the 31st day of March, 2022, in 
excess of the amounts granted for those services and for that year, as 
passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration." 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill.  
 
Clauses 2, 3 and the Schedule were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
88
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shrimati Ni rmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill 
be returned.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I move: 
 
That the Bill be returned. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, I shall put the motion regarding consideration of the 
Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2025, to vote. 
The question is:- 
 
“That the Bill to authorise payment and appropriation of certain further sums 
from and out of the Consolidated Fund  of India for the services of the 
financial year 2024-25, as passed by Lok Sabha,  
 be taken into consideration. ” 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill.  
 
Clauses 2, 3 and the Schedule were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shrimati Ni rmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill 
be returned.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I move: 
 
That the Bill be returned. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, I shall put the motion regarding consideration of the 
Manipur Appropriation (Vote on Account) Bill, 2025, to vote.  The question is: 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
89

 
 
“That the Bill to provide for the withdrawal of certain sums from and out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the State of Mani pur for the services of a part of 
the financial year 2025 26, as passe d by Lok Sabha, be taken into 
consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up the Clause-by-Clause consideration 
of the Bill.  
 
Clauses 2 to 4 and the Schedule were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shrimati Ni rmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill 
be returned.  
 
SHRIMATI  NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I move: 
 
“That the Bill be returned.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, I shall put the motion regarding consideration of the 
Manipur Appropriation Bill, 2025, to vote.  The question is: 
 
“That the Bill to authorise payment and appropriation of certain further sums 
from and out of the Consolidated Fund  of the State of Manipur for the 
services of the financial year 2024 25, as passed by Lok Sabha, be 
taken into consideration.”  
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up the Clause-by-Clause consideration 
of the Bill.  
 
Clauses 2, 3 and the Schedule were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
 
90
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shrimati Ni rmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill 
be returned.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:  Sir, I move: 
 
“That the Bill be returned.” 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, we shall take up the Discussion on the Working of 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.   Shri Tiruchi Siva to raise the Discussion on 
the Working of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  माननीय मंतर्ी जी चेयर से 
परिमशन लेकर गए हȅ, वे अभी तुरंत आ जाएंगे।  His two State Ministers are here.  He has 
taken permission from the Chair to go.  Please take your seats.   Yes, I have already 
informed. …(Interruptions)…  Ãलीज़ आप सभी अपनी-अपनी सीट पर बैठ जाएं।  
…(Interruptions)… We are now taking up Discussion on the Working of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare.  …(Interruptions)… Please take your seats.  Hon. Tiruchi 
Siva ji, please start the discussion.    
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu):  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir for this 
opportunity.  I am really very thankful that  the DMK Party has been asked to initiate 
the discussion on the Working of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 Sir, though ‘health’ is not very explicit ly mentioned in our Constitution but it 
was interpreted by the Supreme Court th at Article 21, which guarantees the 
fundamental right to life and personal liber ty, involves ‘health’ also.  So, health 
becomes a fundamental right.  Sir, ‘health’ is a State subject.  As per the Concurrent 
List, there are certain respon sibilities of the Union Govern ment also with regard to 
issues like medical education, population control, family planning and all other things.    
 
Sir, in this situation, the Union Govern ment has a very important role to take 
care of the States also by way of funding an d financing them.  But, in India, though 
health is a fundamental right as per the Su preme Court’s verdict, it is a privilege 
available to people depending on their ge ographical location and wealth.  As far as 
quality healthcare is concerned, millions of people are not able to access as per their 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
91

 
 
need.  It is available according to two things - the place where they live and how 
much they can afford to pay for it.  The Government that understands this reality must 
invest in public health, both in its vision and commitment.   
Sir, let us see the actual allocation for health under the Union Budget.  Sir, in 
2017-18, it was 2.5 per cent of the GDP, and,  instead of going up, it has come down 
to 1.9 per cent!  How is it possible in a co untry with a population of 142 crore in which 
30 crore people are living below the poverty line and 40 crore people belong to middle 
class?  Taking into consideration the need s of those people, th e Government should 
have allocated more funds towards health, bu t it has not been done.   If we compare 
it with other countries, the United States  has allocated 9.7 per cent of its GDP on 
public health.  China has spent 2.9 per cent on health and even Sri Lanka has 
surpassed us as it spends 1.9 per cent.  It is very sad that even a small country like Sri 
Lanka has surpassed us. 
 So, even if you want to take care of people’s health, the Budget allocation is 
so less and the saddest part is that the amount allocated for research is only Rs. 
3,900 crores.  It does not match with the standards set by the World Health 
Organization (WHO).  Though the Union Government plays a significant role, it does 
not take all these things into consideration.   
Just 4.4 per cent of the Ministry’s Budget  is spent towards health research!  
Do you know how much it is of our GDP?  It is 0.02 per cent of our GDP!  As per the 
World Health Organization, it should be, at  least, one per cent.  Even the Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare ha s recommended that it should be, at 
least, 0.1 per cent, while actually it is 0. 02 per cent.  The United Kingdom spends 
0.65 per cent and the United States spends 0.44 per cent. 
  Sir, the Standing Committee’s r ecommendations are not taken into 
consideration.  Research is very important as far as health is concerned.   But the 
Budget allocation is very less for this sect or.  It is less than 2 per cent.  And the 
spending on research is much  lesser.  It is 0.02 per cent.   Take the example of the 
State Governments.  The State Government of Tamil Nadu has allocated 4.9 per cent 
of its total expenditure towards health care.  It must be taken as a cue.  Let me tell 
you the Government health expenditure as a share of the GDP in other countries.  
When I am speaking in the Parliament, it will go across the world. I am very sorry to 
depict my nation in such a sad situatio n, but the Government has to take the 
responsibility. It is our responsibility to point out the issues.  When compared to other 
countries, even in Thailand, it is 3.6 per ce nt; in Brazil, it is 4.3 per cent; in South 
Korea, it is 5.4 per cent, but it is so sad to say that in our country, the Government's 
expenditure towards health is only 1.4 pe r cent.  So, they have to take into 
92
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
consideration that it is not something th at should be overlooked.  Sir, medical 
education is vested with the Union Government.  Instead of controlling population, for 
example, we are raising the issue of deli mitation, that we may have a very bad 
consequence if delimitation is done on the ba sis of population.  Why, Sir? In 1976, an 
amendment was brought to the Constitution that birth control will be implemented 
across the country uniformly, and then only  delimitation can be done, and it was 
deferred to 25 years.  Even in 2001, when Vajpayee ji was the Prime Minister, he also 
deferred it to 25 years, since the population has not come to a certain level. The same 
situation prevails now also.  In 2001, the population was 100 crores; in 2011, it became 
120 crores; and now it is 142 crores.  The southern States have controlled population, 
whereas the northern States have not. So, the Government should have seen that the 
population should have been controlled uni formly, and family planning should also 
have been implemented.  But it is not so.  When it comes to medical education, they 
bring an examination, NEET, which is common all across the country.  Sir, one-size-
fits-all will not suit for education.  Tamil Nadu has got 79 medical colleges, the highest 
in the country. We give very good education.  Everyone is appreciating. That is all 
apart.  You introduced NEET, which does no t suit one part of the country. A student 
studies night and day up to 12 th standard and scores very high  marks.  It is all thrown 
to the dustbin and an examination is conducted for three hours, which may be totally 
new.  But they are compelled to go through a crash course, spending a lot of money 
going to private institutions, so that they can appear in NEET and pass the 
examination.  So, this NEET examination must  suit the States.   And with the powers 
of the State Government, we have passed legi slation in the State.  But even after the 
consent of the Governor, it is lying with th e Union Government.  You have to take it 
into consideration.  A State has got its own ri ght. Health is a right of the States as per 
the Constitution, but since medical edu cation comes under the Concurrent List, 
which is with the Union Government, in stead of concentrating on controlling 
population and implementing family planni ng programme, considering the future of 
this nation, you are compelling all ot her States to go and accept only NEET 
examination, which has bothered the students so much all across.  Now, the Finance 
Minister has announced in th e Budget that 10,000 medical  seats will be increased. 
That will be done only by the State Govern ments. Only the AIIMS is with the Union 
Government.  Only the State Governments have to increase the medical seats.  
Without giving them enough supply, without giving them any facility which they need, 
how can you expect them to increase the nu mber of seats? Sir, the WHO standards 
say that the patient-doctor population must be 1:1000. That is what the WHO 
recommends. It is very, very important.   
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
93

 
 
Let me tell you what the situation in Indi a is. The average is, 1:1,272.  I will go 
State-wise.  Uttar Pradesh is having 3,767 patients per doctor.  Jharkhand is having 
8,180 patients per doctor.  Haryana is ha ving 6,037 patients per doctor. Chhattisgarh 
is having 4,338 patients per doctor.  Consider ing the limited time, I will just rush it up.  
Kerala is having 535 patien ts per doctor.  But Tamil Nadu stands No.1 with 253 
patients per doctor.  Sir, how is it possible?  
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI MAYA NAROLIYA) in the Chair.] 
 
 In one part of the country, you have 4,000 patients dependent on one doctor 
and you are not increasing the number of h ealth workers.  They are not being taken 
care of as they should have been.  But actually it is not so.  Another very important 
thing is non-communicable diseases.  No n-communicable diseases are: diabetes, 
cancer, pulmonary diseases, etc.  What is happening is that a 30-year-old person 
dies before the age of 70 due to non-communicable diseases.  In Japan, it is only 
eight per cent out of the total deaths.  In UK, it  is 11 per cent.  In the USA, it is 14 per 
cent.  In Brazil, it is 15 per cent.  In China, it is 16 per cent.  In Bangladesh, it is 18 per 
cent.  In Vietnam, it is 20 per cent.  In Malaysia, it is 22 per cent.  In India, it is 24 per 
cent.  Again, I feel sad and sorry to say all this.  Non-communicable diseases are not 
brought under control.   
 What Tamil Nadu has done is this.  I will rush up with bullet points.  Tamil Nadu 
has Diabetic Foot Care Programme becau se it is one of the non-communicable 
diseases.  Next is mental health and wellness.   In India, we have 0.7 psychiatrists per 
one lakh population.  They are not taken care of.  Mental health and wellness is very 
important.  In Tamil Nadu, we have got Natpudan Ungalodu Mananala Sevai. We are 
taking care of those who are mentally ill.  Punnagai Scheme is about dental health.  
Punnagai means smiling.  It aims to ensure de ntal health of students by providing 
dental treatment and creatin g awareness about it.  Anaem ia is spreading at an 
alarming level in India in pregnant women and children.  What has been done for 
that?  I will tell you what the Tamil Nadu Go vernment did.  It started from Tamil Nadu 
and now it is being implemented all over the country.  It is the Mid-Day Meal Scheme.  
In Tamil Nadu, we give breakfast also to th e students of primary school because they 
should not suffer from anaemia.  This is being followed by other States.  Kerala also 
does it.  Southern States always stand first.   That is why we are victimised.  That is 
why we are penalised.  For everything, we  are not taken care of.  We are being 
ignored.  We are performing very well.  We have never heard that an outstanding 
student is punished anywhere.  It is happeni ng only in our country.  This Government 
94
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
is showing step-motherly attitude and partia lity.  We have a strong public health 
infrastructure.  Our focus is on preventive care and community health services.  As far 
as PHCs across the country are concerned, wh at the Union Government should do is 
that it should focus on those States where the things are getting worse.  But we are 
doing very well.  The PHCs are more in number.  The community health centres are 
more in number.  The secondary and tertiary hospitals are providing best health care.  
We go to the people where they live and give  service.  The States are doing their job 
with responsibility and performing very we ll.  But the Union Government is not 
focussing on the States that are not performing  well.  Rather they tried to punish us.  
That is what I would say.  Whoever is responsible in the Union Government, they 
should say that first you in crease the Budget.  With that Budget allocation, you have 
to do the needful.  But that is not done.  So, there is no research. Without research, 
medical advancement cannot happen.  You cannot depend on other countries for 
technology development.  Sir, I got very important concerns.  You have to give me 
one minute or two minutes more.   
For health insurance, you have got one scheme, that is, Ayushman Bharat and 
the State Government has a different scheme, that is, Chief Minister’s Health 
Scheme, which gives Rs. 5 lakh to people. Th at is all different.  But the saddest part 
is this. The hon. Minister should take it in to consideration.  Excuse me! Only MoS is 
here; please don't disturb them. Madam, pleas e take care of it. We are talking much 
about insurances. But, term insurance, h ealth insurance and life insurance premiums 
are taxed at a steep 18 per cent GST; it is the highest, treating them as luxury rather 
than necessity. How sad it is!  Health in surance premium is charged at 18 per cent 
GST!  Then, there is out-of-pocket expenditure. The middle class people are too rich 
to get any aid from the Government and too poor to spend out from their own pocket. 
Madam, another thing is toxic air. Indi a has some of the world's highest rates 
of lung disease in population. TFR is increa sing alarmingly and enormously this side. 
But in Southern States, the Total Fertility Rate  is under control. I would urge the hon. 
Health Minister, who is here, to take into consideration two things . One is that this 
insurance premium should no t be charged at 18 per cen t GST. Another is about 
paraquat poison. It is available very freely.  If anyone consumes that, even medical 
intervention cannot save him or her. I think the Ministers are very much aware of it. 
Already, the European Unio n, China and the UK have banned that. Only India is 
having that.  The poor people, when they get frustrated in life and cannot resort to 
anything, try to commit suicide; at least, to frighten their family or anyone else, they 
resort to something. So, they get rat poison  or this paraquat poison, which is very 
easily available, and they are not at all ab l e  t o  b e  r e s c u e d .  T h e y  g e t  w o r s e .  T h e y  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
95

 
 
cannot be saved on the one ha nd and, on the other, they deteriorate in the worst 
manner that no patient should suffer. So, I urge the Ministry to ban this paraquat 
poison and rat poison in the interest of  the people, the common man, the poor man 
of this country and whoever is attempting to  commit suicide. It is a herbicide and is 
very easily available. This is not just a suggestion to the ruling party side.  I am 
speaking on behalf of the people who are suffering at the hospitals because of 
committing suicide.  
Madam, the most important point is abou t AIIMS at Madurai in Tamil Nadu. It 
was announced in 2018 with a proposed completion by 2022. The project remains in 
limbo with only excuses and shifting deadlines. At the same time, some AIIMS were 
announced in various other States; all have been completed and have become 
functional. That is why I say that please do not look at States with a partisan eye.  You 
have to look at all the States as one. I have repeatedly said that we consider ourselves 
as a part of India and the Union Government  also has to consider the State of Tamil 
Nadu as a part of India.  
Healthcare is not a very easy thing. Many  are suffering and are not able to get 
access to quality care because of lack of hospitals. In Tamil Nadu, 50 per cent are 
Government hospitals and 48 per cent are pr ivate whereas in other parts, like Uttar 
Pradesh and all, only 26 per cent are Govern ment hospitals. So, making Government 
hospitals is not very easy. Anyone who ge ts an opportunity must come and see the 
Government hospitals in Tamil Nadu. They are the best. Nobody will go to a private 
hospital if they enter into a Government hospital.  It is so with all the schemes that we 
are implementing. Prevention is better than  cure. That is the policy that we are 
following. Kindly take a cue from Tamil Nadu and implement it across the nation. I 
urge the Ministry to increase the Budget, and GST on insurance premium must be 
reduced. Thank you very much.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRIMATI MAYA NAROLIYA):  Now, I call upon the 
Members  whose  names  have  been  receiv ed  for participation in the discussion.  
Dr. Bhagwat Karad.  
 
डा. भागवत कराड़ (महाराÍटर्): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपका और हमारे हाउस 
लीडर माननीय जे.पी. नƿा जी का आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं िक मुझे इस हेÊथ सÅजेक्ट पर बोलने क े 
िलए वƪ िदया है।  
महोदया, संÎकृ त मȂ एक सुभािषत है – " सवȃ सन्तु िनरामया:।" इसका मत लब यह होता 
है िक “May we all be free from diseases.”  इंिग्लश मȂ भी एक कहावत है िक “May we all be 
free from diseases. ”  That is, if you have ability to lo ve, love yourself.  First love your 
96
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
health, love your character  and love your nation.  मȅ इस बजट क े ऊपर बात करते समय 
यह बताना चाहता हूं िक 1947 से लेकर अभी तक 43 Health Ministers हो चुक े हȅ और अलग-
अलग Health Ministers ने  अलग-अलग schemes क े माध्यम से Health क े  क्षेतर् मȂ 
improvement लाने की कोिशश की है।  लेिकन Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ जो हेÊथ 
सुिवधाएँ दी गई हȅ, माननीय हेÊथ िमिनÎटर क े गाइडȂस मȂ जो भी काम हुआ है, बहुत ही अच्छा 
हुआ है और इसमȂ बहुत ही अच्छी तथा लंबी छलांग लगाई गई है।  अगर हम averag e age of 
Indians देखȂ, तो 1951 मȂ average age of Indians was 37.2 years.   2006 से 2014 मȂ इंिडयंस 
की यह age बढ़कर 67 years हुई थी और 2014 से 2024 तक , अभी तक इंिडयन की average 
age 70.7 years हो चुकी है।  अगर हम Global Life Expectancy देखȂ तो यह 71.7 years हुई है।  
यानी हम इस मामले मȂ Global Expectancy क े पास जा चुक े हȅ।  अग
र हमारी periphery क े देशȗ 
की िÎथित देखȂ, तो पािकÎतान की average expectancy of the life is 66.43 years.  नेपाल की 
कम है और Ǜीलंका की भी कम है।   
हेÊथ क े क्षेतर् मȂ दूसरा महत्वपूणर् indication Maternal Mortality Rate रहता है। यानी 
after delivery, mother की जो death होती है, उसको National Health Policy क े माध्यम से 
count िकया जाता है।  1
997 मȂ Maternal Mortality Rate 398 था।   अगर हम Global Maternal 
Mortality Rate देखȂ, तो यह 223 per lakh live birth है।  लेिकन मȅ आपको सदन मȂ बताना 
चाहता हूं की इंिडया की Maternal Mortality Rate 97 per one lakh live birth है, यानी इन क ु छ 
सालȗ मȂ इस
मȂ 83 per cent reduction हो चुकी है।   
Third important indication for health is Infant Mortality Rate. मȅ  इसके  बारे मȂ 
ज्यादा िडÎकशन नहीं करते हुए इतना ही बताना चाहता हूं िक Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
िपछले 10 सालȗ मȂ Infant Mortality Rate कम होती गई है।  2014 मȂ Infant Mortality R ate was 
28 per one thousand live births.  यह 2022 मȂ 27.5 और 2024-25 मȂ 25 रही।   So, it is 
decreasing every year.  अगर हम doctors क े population ratio की  बात करȂ, तो जैसा हमारे 
ितरुची  िशवा जी ने बताया, अगर हम country मȂ overall doctors का  ratio देखȂ, तो it is 1.2 
doctor per one thousand population and िवकिसत देशȗ मȂ यह ratio 2.5 to 4.5 है।  हम इस 
मामले मȂ जरूर  कम हȅ, लेिकन माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी की नेतृत्व मȂ medical education मȂ 
बहुत improvement हो चुकी है।  जैसे, new medical colleg
e की starting हो, new nursing 
college की starting हो और paramedical college की starting हो - बहुत सारे काम हो चुक े हȅ।  
मȅ इसका example बताना चाहता हूं।  अगर हम medical colleges की संख्या देखȂ, तो 2014 तक  
383 थे और 2025 मȂ 780 हो गये;  MBBS seats
 2014 मȂ 54,348 थीं और अभी 2025 मȂ 1,18,109 
हुई हȅ; अगर हम PG seats (Post Graduate seats) को  भी देखȂ, तो 2014 मȂ ये 31,185 थीं और 
अभी 2025 मȂ 72,727 हो चुकी हȅ।  तो PG seats मȂ भी 133 per cent rise हो चुका है।  इस साल 
क े बजट मȂ, इस साल क े हेÊथ क े बजट मȂ जो total increase हुई है, वह मȅ बताना चाहता हूं।  
अगर वह भी देखȂ, तो the share of the health budget incr
eased marginally from 1.9 per 
cent to 1.97 per cent.  This was the budget.This year  Th e total budget is Rs. 50.65 
lakh crore.  Out of which the health budget is Rs. 99,858 crores. जबिक 2015 मȂ यह 
बजट 34,286 करोड़ रुपए का था।  इसमȂ भी 191 परस Ȃट की वृिǉ हुई है।  इस बजट मȂ हेÊथ क े 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
97

 
 
िलए बहुत सारी सुिवधाओं का Ģावधान िकया गया है, जैसे िगग वकर् सर् क े िलए 'आयुÍमान भारत 
योजना' है, जीवन रक्षक दवा, जो हम इंपोटर् करते हȅ, उसमȂ बॉडर्र कÎटम ǹूटी  कम िकया गया 
है।  उसी तरह हेÊथ इंģाÎटर्क्चर एंड मैन पावर क े िलए 4,200 करोड़ रुपए  की रािश रखी गई है।  
पीएलआई Îकीम क े िलए 2,445 क
रोड़ रुपया रखा गया है, िजसके  माध्यम से हम medicines 
बना कर, उनका एक्सपोटर् कर सकते हȅ।  आयुष वीज़ा (Visa), यानी अगर मेिडकल ट ूिरįम क े 
िलए वीज़
ा करना है, तो उसके  िलए भी इसमȂ Ģावधान रखा गया है।  अगर हम health facilities मȂ 
बेड्स की बात करȂ, तो भारत देश मȂ around 70,000 हॉिÎपटÊस हȅ, िजनमȂ 44,000 Ģाइवेट 
हॉिÎपटÊस हȅ और 26,000 गवनर्मȂट हॉिÎपटÊस हȅ। अभी भारत मȂ bed ratio 1.3 per 1,000 
population है, जबिक WHO का recommendation है िक यह 3 per 1, 000 population होना 
चािहए।  इस तरह से इसमȂ 1.7 per 1,000 population का deficit है।  इसको बढ़ाने की कोिशश 
हो रही है।  मȅ इतना ही बताना चाहता हूँ िक हेÊथ सिर्वस बढ़ानी है, इसिलए technology and  
critical element to enhance healthcare delivery का िसÎटम बनाया गया है।  इंिडया एक 
बहुत ही लाजर् क ंटर्ी है, यहाँ popula tion ज्यादा है, इसीिलए telemedicine, tele-consulting, 
tele-diagnosis और  Medical Mobile Health Platform क े माध्यम से क ु छ सुिवधाएँ भी दी गई 
हȅ।  मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक primary healthcare, secondary healthcare, tertiary healthcare 
जैसे अलग-अलग सेक्टसर् मȂ काम हो रहा है।  Primary Health Centres मȂ Sub-Centres हȅ, 
इनमȂ से एक सȂटर 30,000 लोगȗ क े िलए रहता है।  Remote area मȂ Ģा इमरी हेÊथ सȂटसर् हȅ, 
remote मȂ  एक सȂटर 20,000 लोगȗ क े िलए रहता है।  अगर हम कÇयुिनटी हेÊथ सȂटसर् को देखȂ, 
तो एक सȂटर 1,20,000 लोगȗ क े िलए होता है।  सेक Ȃडरी हेÊथ care मȂ सब-िडिÎटर्क्ट हॉिÎपटÊस, 
तालुका हॉिÎ
पटÊस हȅ।  इसमȂ भी राइज़ हो रहा है, जहाँ speciality doctors available रहते हȅ।  
िडिÎटर्क्ट हॉिÎपटÊस हȗ, मेिडकल कॉलेज क े हॉिÎपटÊस हȗ, post-graduate, super-
speciality hospitals हȗ, इनमȂ बढ़ावा िदख रहा है।  मȅ इतना ही बताना चाहत ा हूँ िक remote 
places पर डॉक्टर की availability होनी चािहए।  इसके  िलए Îटेट क े माध्यम से डॉक्टसर् से 
negotiations करके  ज्यादा पेमȂट, यानी ‘You Quote, We Pay’ Îकीम क े माध्यम से सैलरी दी 
जाती है।  अगर डॉक्टर ने िरमोट एिरया मȂ काम िकया हो, तो उनको पीजी मȂ एडिमश न भी िदया 
जाता है।  ऐसी अलग-अलग ÎकीÇस डॉक्टसर् क े िलए हȅ, िजनके  माध्यम से rural area मȂ काम हो 
रहा है।  सब-सȂटर हो, Ģाइमरी हेÊथ सȂटर हो, कॉमन हेÊथ सȂटर हो, िडवीजनल हॉिÎपटल हो या 
िडिÎटर्क्ट हॉ िÎपटल  हो - यहां 14 से लेकर 318 अलग-अलग laboratory tests िकए जाते हȅ और 
patient की क ेयर की जाती है।   
अगर हम बीमारी की बात करȂ, तो cancer is one of the la rgest killing diseases.  
इसमȂ मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक इस बीमारी को कम करने क े िलए screening of the cancer का 
काम हो रहा है, जैसे ओरल क ȅसर हो, ĤेÎट क ȅसर हो, सवार्इकल क ȅसर हो - इनकी Îकर्ीिंनग 
अलग-अलग क ȅ प क े माध्
यम से इन्वेिÎटगेशन क े माध्यम से हो रही है।   जैसे आज ĢÌन काल मȂ 
माननीय आरोग्य मंतर्ी जी ने बताया िक क ȅसर की Îकर्ीिंनग कर ने क े बाद 1 लाख से ज्यादा लोगȗ 
का diagnosis हो गया और उनका टर्ीटमȂट भी हो रहा है।  मȅ इतना ही बताना चाहता हूँ िक 
अलग-अलग ÎकीÇस क े माध्यम से लोगȗ को फायदा िमल रहा है, जैसे इंÌयोरȂस सेक्टर मȂ 'पीएम 
आयुÍमान भारत Îकीम' है, 'पीएम जन सुरक्षा बीमा योजना' है, 'पीएम जीवन ज्योित बीमा योजना' 
98
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
है या ' लाइफ इंÌयोरȂस' है।  ' पीएम आयुÍमान भारत' बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् Îकीम है, िजसकी 
शुरुआत  25 िसतंबर, 2018 को हुई।  पं. दीनदयाल उपाध्याय जी की जयंती क े िदन इस Îकीम को 
चालू िकया गया।  जब वÊडर् हेÊथ असȂबली मȂ यूिन वस र्ल हेÊथ कवरेज़ की चचार् हो रही थी, उसमȂ 
भी इस Îकीम क े बारे मȂ चचार् हुई..इस scheme  को सभी 80 दे शȗ क े लोगȗ ने मान िदया।  
आयुÍमान भारत क े माध्यम से 5 लाख रुपय े का इंÌयोरȂस िदया जाता है।  अगर हम देखȂ, तो टोटल 
55 करोड़ लोगȗ को इस
का फायदा िमलता है।  इतना ही नहीं, यह Îकीम टर्ांसफरेबल है।  अगर 
एक पेशȂट िकसी एक Îटेट मȂ रहता है और यिद वह दूसरे Îटेट मȂ चला गया, तब भी वह इस 
Îकीम का फ
ायदा ले सकता है।  इस Îकीम क े िलए वषर् 2024-25 क े बजट मȂ 6,606 करोड़ रुपय े 
रखे गए थे और अब 2025-26 क े बजट मȂ 9,406 करोड़ रुपय े रखे गए हȅ।  इसमȂ अभी तक 29,000 
हॉिÎपटÊस का एनरोलमȂट हो चुका है, लेिकन दुभार्ग्यवश इस Îकीम को वैÎट बंगाल, तेलंगाना, 
ओिडशा और िदÊली की सरकारȗ ने चालू नहीं िकया था।  अब ओिडशा और िदÊली मȂ हमारी 
सरकार है, तो मुझे लगता है िक वहां यह Îकीम जÊद ही चालू हो जाएगी और इससे गरीब लोगȗ 
को फायदा िमलेगा।   
इसके  साथ ही, हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ वैक्सीनेशन एक बहुत ही इंपॉटȄट चीज है।  वैक्सीनेशन क े 
बारे मȂ मȅ बताना चाहत
ा हूँ िक first vaccine on this earth was invented by Edward Jenner 
and the first vaccine in India was given in  1802 to a three year old girl who was 
suffering from smallpox.  Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी की सरकार आते ही तत्कालीन हेÊथ िमिनÎटर, 
माननीय नƿा साहब ने एक इंदर्धनुष नामक Îकीम चालू की, िजसके  माध्यम से सात अलग-अलग 
बीमािरयȗ क े िलए वैक्सीनेशन शुरू  िकया गया था
।  इस वैक्सीनेशन क े माध्यम से 2.53 करो ड़  
िचÊडर्न तथा 68 लाख Ģेग्नȂट िवमेन को वैक्सींस दी गई हȅ और अलग-अलग diseases से उनको 
Ģोटेक्शन िमली है।   
मȅ इस सदन को एक और बात यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक इस गवनर्मȂट क े माध्यम से जन 
औषिध पिरयोजना की शुरुआत  की गई है।  जन औषिध पिरयोजना क े माध् यम से 25,000 करोड़ 
जन औषिध क Ȃदर्ȗ की शुरुआत  की गई है, िजनके  माध्यम से जेनेिरक मेिडिंसस गरीब लोगȗ को 
िमलती है।  इन मेिडिंसस की कीमत 50 से 80 Ģितशत कम रहती है। मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ िक 2,047 
medicines are available in Jan Arogya Kendras and 300 surgical it
ems are available in 
these medical centres.  इतना  ही नहीं, अगर हम िपछले 6 साल की बात करȂ, तो इन जन 
औषिध क Ȃदर्ȗ क े माध्यम से गरीब लोगȗ को 30,000 करोड़ का फायदा हो चुका है।  
During Covid-19, there was a very bad situation all over the country. मȅ बताना 
चाहता हूँ िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ उस वƪ हेÊथ िडपाटर्मȂट क े माध्यम से दो 
वैक्सींस इन्नोवेट की गईं, िजनकी 220 करोड़ डोजेज़ इंिडयंस को िमलीं। This was the fastest 
and largest vaccinatio
n programme by Modi Government to all the citizens. इतना ही 
नहीं, 70 से 80 क ंटर्ीज़ को हम वैक्सींस सÃलाई भी कर सके ।  ऐसा का म हर क्षेतर् मȂ हो रहा है।  
भारत देश मȂ अब तक चार वायरल इंिÎटǷूट्स Îथािपत हो चुक े हȅ।  संक्षेप मȂ, मȅ इतना ही बताना 
चाहता हूँ िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एक तो आयुÍमान बढ़ चुका है, वैक्सीनेशन 
पर काम हो रहा है, pandemic पर काम हो रहा है, prevent
ive diseases पर काम हो रहा है, 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
99

 
 
मेिडकल Îटू डȂट्स, पीजी Îटू डȂट्स क े िहतȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ अच्छा काम हो 
रहा है।  
 अंत मȂ, मȅ अपना वƪËय िंहदी किवता की क ु छ पंिƪयȗ क े साथ समाÃत करता हूँ।  इस 
किवता क े मा
ध्यम से किव ने ÎवाÎथ्य को दुिनया का सबसे बड़ा धन बताया है। यह किवता सरल 
और ÎपÍट शÅदȗ मȂ समाज को बेहतर ÎवाÎथ्य क े िलए Ģेिरत करती है।   
 
ÎवाÎथ्य ही सबसे बड़ा धन, इससे बड़ा क ु छ नहीं, 
रोगमुƪ रहना सƳा सुख, यह सच है इसमȂ शक नहीं, 
धन दौलत का क्या मतलब, जब शरीर हो रोग से भरा, 
सुख-शांित की खोज मȂ हम, ÎवाÎथ्य ही है सƳी धरा। 
 
 इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ, मȅ अपनी वाणी को िव
राम देता हूँ और आ रोग्य मंतर्ी जी का अिभनंदन 
करते हुए अपनी बात को खत्म करता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह (िबहार): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने मुझे अपनी पाटीर् की ओर से 
बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद। 
 महोदया, यह संयोग की बात है िक Îव
ाÎथ्य िवभाग से मेरा बहुत पुराना िरÌता रहा है। यहां 
ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी नहीं हȅ, लेिकन वषर् 2000 मȂ... 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर (उǄर Ģदेश): यहां दो-दो मंतर्ी बैठे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : दोनȗ राज्य मंतर्ी हȅ। मȅने ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी की बात की। 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : आप भी राज्य मंतर्ी थे।  
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह: मȅ यही बोल रहा हूं। आप आगे मेरी बात सुिनए। नीरज जी, मȅ यह 
बोलना चाह रहा हूं िक मȅ वषर् 2000 मȂ िबहार का Îव
ाÎथ्य मंतर्ी था और नƿा साहब भी िहमाचल 
Ģदेश क े ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी थे। अब लगता है िक िसÇपल हो गया होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  इसिलए हेÊथ 
सेक्टर से मेरा पुराना िरÌता रहा है।  इस सरकार क े लगभग 11 साल पूरे होने को हȅ।  मȅ बहुत 
ज्यादा आंकड़
ȗ मȂ नहीं जाऊं गा, लेिकन हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ इस सरकार की क ैसी performance रही 
है, उसको दशार्ने क े िलए क ु छ Ĥॉड इंिडके टर की बात करूं गा। साल, 2017 मȂ यह सरकार 
‘राÍटर्ीय ÎवाÎथ्य नीित’ लेकर आई थी और उसमȂ कहा गया था िक वषर् 2025 तक हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ 
जीडीपी का 2.5 परसȂट खचर् िकया जा जाएगा, हालांिक WHO क े अनुसार हेÊथ पर जीडीपी का 
कम से कम पांच परसȂट खचर् होना चािहए। अगर इस साल क े बजट को देखȂ, तो हेÊथ पर इस 
सरकार का टोटल खचर् जीडीपी का 1.28 परसȂट है,  यह आपकी पहली उपलिÅध है।  दूसरा, एक 
आंकड़ा, जो बहुत चȚका
ने वाला है।  अगर हम 2025 को  2010 से कÇपेयर करȂ, तो non-
communicable disease से होने वाली मौतȗ की संख्या िपछले 15 सालȗ मȂ भारत मȂ लगभग 12 
100
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Ģितशत तक बढ़ गई है।  इसका सबसे बड़ा कारण यह है िक िजस तेजी से हमारे देश मȂ लोग 
जीवनशैली आधािरत रोगȗ क े िशकार हो रहे हȅ, वह दुिनया मȂ सबसे ज्यादा है।  Communicable 
disease की बात करȂ, तो टीबी को खत्म करने क े िलए आपने राÍटर्ीय तपेिदक उन्मूलन कायर्कर्म 
का लÑय रखा था िक वषर् 2025 तक देश मȂ टीबी का पूरी तरह से उन्मूलन कर िदया जाएगा।  
टीबी को समाÃत कर िदया जाएगा, लेिकन अभी भी दुिनया क े 25 परस Ȃट टीबी रोग ी  भारत मȂ हȅ।  
साल 2023 मȂ क ु ल 25 लाख, 37 हजार तपेिदक क े मामले सामने आए थे, जो वषर् 2022 की तुलना 
मȂ 1 लाख, 15 हज़ार से įयादा थे। तपेिदक से होने वाली मौतȗ क े मामले मȂ भारत की िÎथित अन्य 
देशȗ की तुलना मȂ सबसे ज्यादा खर
ाब है। इसके  अलावा, हर साल बरसात क े बाद पूरे देश मȂ डȂगू 
का आतंक फ ैलता है, और िपछले 10-12 वषș मȂ यह ĢवृिǄ और ÎपÍट रूप  से देखने को िमली है। 
िंचता की बात यह है िक डȂगू की रोकथाम क े िलए सरकारी Îतर पर को
ई बृहद कायर्कर्म मेरी 
जानकारी मȂ नहीं है। हालांिक, रूटीन  तौर पर ‘नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन’ मȂ इसका िजकर् जरूर  आता 
है। 
 महोदय, जहां तक क ुपोषण की बात है, तो क ु छ मामलȗ मȂ हमारी िÎथित हमारे पड़ोसी 
मुÊकȗ - बांग्लादेश, नेपा
ल और पािकÎतान - से भी खराब है। 17 जुलाई, 2023 को इंिडया ट ु डे ने 
एक न्यूज़ िरपोटर् Ģकािशत की थी, िजसमȂ कहा गया था िक यूिनसेफ और डÅÊयूएचओ की ज्वाइंट 
Îटडी क े अनुसार, भारत मȂ चार मȂ से तीन Ëयिƪयȗ को हेÊदी फ ू ड मय
Îसर नहीं है। ज़ािहर सी 
बात है िक जब एक साधारण आदमी रोज़मरार् क े खचȃ क े िलए संघषर् कर रहा है, तो वह हेÊदी फ ू ड 
क े बारे मȂ क ै से सोच पाएगा? 
आज आप चेयर पर बैठी हȅ, तो मȅ बताना चाहूंगा िक मिहलाओं मȂ एनीिमया अभी भी एक 
गंभीर समÎया बनी हुई है। मेरी जान कारी  क े अनुसार, आज भी 45 परसȂट मिहलाएं एनीिमया से 
गर्िसत हȅ। आप लोग िदन-रात Ģधानमंतर्ी आयुÍमान भारत योजना की चचार् करते रहते हȅ, लेिकन 
उसमȂ जमीनी हकीकत क्या है?  Ģाइवेट हॉिÎपटल मȂ इलाज करने मȂ आयुÍमान काडर्धारक को 
िदन मȂ तारे नज़र आ रहे हȅ।  कहीं हॉिÎपटल लाभाथीर् को परेशान करता है, तो कहीं डेटा िमसमैच 
होता है।  हम लोगȗ क े सामने लगातार ऐसे मामले आते ही रहते हȅ, लेिकन यह पता नहीं िक मंतर्ी 
जी और सरकार की जानकारी मȂ यह बात आती है िक नहीं।  इसी तरह जन औषिध क ेन्दर् मȂ जो 
जेनेिरक दवाइयां िमलती हȅ, उनकी क्या िÎथित है, यह भी िकसी से िछ
पा नहीं है।  जेनेिरक 
दवाइयां खाते जाइए और बीमारी वैसी की वैसी बनी रहती है।  पीछे इस Ģकार की कई िरपोट्सर् 
आई हȅ िक जन औषिध क ेन्दर्ȗ मȂ सही तर
ीके  से दवाओं का भंडारण नहीं होता है और कई बार तो 
एक्Îपायरी वाली दवाइयां भी दे दी जाती हȅ।  दरअसल, Ģधान मंतर्ी जन औष िध क ेन्दर् का जो पूरा 
कॉन्सेÃट है, हालांिक यह यूपीए क े टाइम मȂ  शुरू  हुआ था, लेिकन अभी ऐसा लगता है िक इसमȂ 
सारा जोर इस बात पर है िक दवाई की क्वािलटी चाहे जो भी हो, उसे सÎती कीमत पर उपलÅ ध 
कराया जाए।  मेरे िहसाब से हेÊथ का जो बेिसक कॉन्सेÃट है,  वही   इसके  िखलाफ है।  हेÊथ 
सेक्टर मȂ एक और चीज़ है, जो आज क े समय मȂ बहुत िंचताज नक रूप  से बढ़ रही है।  मȅ मेन्टल 
हेÊथ इÌयू की बात कर रहा हूं।  WHO की इस िरपोटर् क े बारे मȂ जो बातȂ सामने आई हȅ, उनके  
अनुसार भारत मȂ  लगभग 14 Ģितशत लोग मानिसक समÎयाओं क े िशकार हȅ और मेन्टल हेÊथ 
Ģोफे शनÊस की संख्या Ģित एक लाख लोगȗ पर क ेवल 0.3 है।  मȅ मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करूं गा िक 
इस समÎया की गंभीरता को देखते हुए मेन्टल हेÊथ पर एक नेशनल Ģोगर्ाम बनाने क े बारे मȂ 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
101

 
 
िवचार िकया जाए और इसको उिचत priority दी जाए।  मȅ िबहार से आता हूं, तो िबहार की बात 
करना चाहूंगा।  यह तो सबको जानकारी मȂ है िक हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ  िबहार की दुदर्शा है।  मȅ क ु छ 
Îपेिसिफक आंकड़े देकर बताना चाहता हूं िक  अलग-अलग सȂटर्ल ÎकीÇस मȂ िबहार मȂ क्या हाल 
है, उसके  बारे मȂ सदन को अवगत कराना चाहता हूं।  क ै ग ने नवंबर, 2024 मȂ िबहार क े पिÅलक 
हेÊथ इन्ģाÎ
टर्क्चर क े बारे मȂ जो ऑिडट िरपोटर् दी है, मȅ क ेवल उसी क े आधार पर अपनी बात 
यहां रखूंगा।  इस िरपोटर् मȂ बताया गया है िक िबहार मȂ हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ क ु ल िमलाकर 49 परस Ȃट 
पद खाली पड़े हुए हȅ।  मतलब यह है िक आधे पद खाली हȅ।  राज् य मȂ 1 लाख, 25 हजार  
एलोपैिथक डॉक्टरȗ की आवÌयकता है और डॉक्टरȗ की उपलÅधता क ेवल 58 हजार है।  इसका 
मतलब यह है िक आधे से भी कम है।  इस तरह से नसș की भी घोर कमी है।  अिधकांश सब-
िडिÎटर्क्ट हॉिÎपटÊस मȂ ऑपरेशन िथएटर नहीं हȅ।  इतना ही नह
ीं, िरपोटर् मȂ यह भी पाया गया है 
िक अÎपतालȗ क े पास जो एÇबुलȂस है, उनमȂ equipment नहीं है।  िकसी भी कÇयुिनटी हेÊथ सȂटर 
क े पास Åलड Îटोरेज यूिनट नहीं है और जहां Åलड Îटोरेज यूिनट है, वहां उसके  िलए मैन पावर 
नहीं है।  िजला अÎपतालȗ मȂ आवÌयक और जीवन रक्षक दवाओं का घोर अभाव है, क्यȗिक 
अÎपतालȗ मȂ टैक्नीिशयन नहीं हȅ, इसिलए जो वȅिटलेटर हȅ, वे भी ऐसे ही इधर-उधर खराब पड़े 
हुए हȅ।  ये सब बातȂ मȅ कोई अपनी ओर से नहीं कह रहा हूं।  ये सारी चीज़Ȃ क ै ग की िरपोटर् का 
िहÎसा है।  Ģित Ëयिƪ हॉिÎपटल क े बेड्स की बात करȂ, तो िबहार मȂ एक लाख की आबा दी पर 25 
हॉिÎपटल बैड्स हȅ, जबिक नेशनल एवरेज 141 है।  हर Åलॉक मȂ ÎवाÎथ्य क ेन्दर्ȗ क े भवन बनकर 
खड़े हȅ, लेिकन कहीं डॉक्टर या Îटाफ का अता-पता नहीं है।  मȅने खुद क ु छ ÎवाÎथ्य क ेन्दर्ȗ का 
जायजा  िलया,  तो पता चला िक डॉक्टरȗ की पोिंÎटग ही नहीं हुई, तो कोई कहां से आएगा।  
िवभागीय क्षमता का हाल यह है िक हेÊथ बजट का 30 परसȂट से ज्यादा खचर् ही नहीं हो पा रहा है।  
िबहार मȂ मातृ मृत्यु दर, जो एमएमआर है और िशशु मृत्यु दर, आईएमआर है, वह राÍटर्ीय औसत 
से कहीं ज्यादा है।  वषर् 2023 की राÍ
टर्ीय  ÎवाÎथ्य िरपोटर् क े अनुसार िबहार मȂ मातृ मृत्यु दर 174 
Ģित एक लाख लाइफ बथर् है, जबिक राÍटर्ीय औसत 100 क े आसपास है।  िशशु मृत्यु दर भी 34   
Ģित एक हजार जन्म क े करीब है, जो यह दशार्ता है िक राज्य मȂ, गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िचिकत्सा 
सुिवधाओं की भारी कमी है और अÎपतालȗ की अपयार्Ãतता इन समÎयाओं का मुख्य कारण है।  
िबहार मȂ टीकाकरण दर 75 परसȂट से भी कम है, जो राÍटर्ीय औसत से काफी कम है।  इसी तरह 
औसत आयु क े मामले मȂ भी िबहार नेशनल एवरेज से पीछे है।  जब इÇयुनाइज़ेशन की बात करते 
हȅ, तो यिद वहां कोई आपकी तर फ से सही मȂ Îटडी करेगा, तो पता चलेगा िक रूटीन  
इÇयुनाइज़ेशन का भी काम ठीक से नहीं हो पाता है।  िबहार मȂ ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ालय की जो योजनाएं 
हȅ, उनका भी ढंग से िकर्यान्वयन नहीं हो पाता है। महोदया, उ दाहरण क े िलए बताना चाहूंगा िक 
जो ‘Ģधानमंतर्ी मातृ वंदना योजना’ है, उसमȂ िबहार मȂ क ेवल 25 परस Ȃट आवेदकȗ को ही उसका 
लाभ िमलता है, बाकी 75 परसȂट एिÃलके शन्स िकसी न िकसी गर्ाउंड पर िरजेक्ट कर दी जाती हȅ 
और उस गर्ाउंड का कोई कारण नहीं बताया जाता है। ज़ािहर है िक िबहार मȂ जानकारी का अभाव 
है और लोग उतनी पूछताछ भी नहीं कर
ते हȅ।  
महोदया, हमारे सǄा पक्ष क े िमतर् हमेशा आंकड़ȗ की बात करते रहते हȅ, लेिकन ऐसा 
करते हुए आप यहाँ पर यह भूल जाते हȅ िक हर आंकड़े का को
ई न कोई संदभर् होता है। मȅ आपको 
हेÊथ सेक्टर का एक संदभर् देना चाहता हूं। महोदया, जब यूपीए सरकार 2004 मȂ पावर मȂ आई 
102
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
थी, तो Îवगीर्य डा. मनमोहन िंसह जी Ģधान मंतर्ी बने थे और सरकार ने हेÊथ पर 7 हज़ार, 500 
करोड़ रुपय े का टोटल खचर् िकया था। हम उसे दस साल मȂ लगभग चार गुना बढ़ाकर 27 हज़ार, 
500 करोड़ रुपय े तक ले गए। यिद आपके  11 साल की हमारे 10 साल से परसȂटवाइज़ तुलना करȂ, 
तो आपके  हेÊथ क े बजट का इन्कर्ीज़ लगभग 350 परसȂट है, जब
िक हमारा 10 साल मȂ 400 परसȂट 
का इन्कर्ीज़ था।  
महोदया, हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ हमारी सबसे बड़ी उपलिÅध देश को पोिलयोमुƪ बनाना थी।  एक 
समय था, जब भारत दुिनया मȂ भारत का एिपसȂटर हुआ करता था, लेिकन यूपीए सरकार ने अपने 
10 साल क े कायर्काल मȂ देश को सफलत
ापूवर्क पोिलयोमुƪ बनाने का लÑय पूरा िकया था। आप 
यूपीए क े टाइम का क ु छ और आंकड़ा देख लीिजए, 2004 मȂ, जब यूपीए सरकार आई थी, तो  
MMR  301 Ģित 1 लाख  live births था,  और जब 2014 मȂ हमने सरकार छोड़ी, तो हम  MMR
  
135 Ģित 1 लाख live births तक नीचे ले आये थे। यानी 10 सालȗ मȂ MMR मȂ 55 परस Ȃट की 
ऐितहािसक कमी आई, जो आपके  10 साल क े कायर्काल की तुलना मȂ बहुत ही बेहतर Ģदशर्न था । 
इस तरह से हमारे कायर्काल मȂ  IMR मȂ िजतनी कमी आई, वह भी आपकी तुलना मȂ बहुत ज्यादा 
है। महोदया, कांगर्ेस पाटीर् क े नेतृत्व वाली सरकार की उपलिÅधयाँ अभूतपूवर् थीं। उसके  पीछे का 
मूल कारण यह था िक  health infrastructure को बढ़ाने क े िलए हमारे नेतृत्व ने 2005 मȂ एक 
दूरदशीर् कदम उठाया था और  Natio
nal Rural Health Mission की शुरुआत  की थी। महोदया, 
National Rural Health Mission  क े बारे मȂ World Bank और  WHO ने कहा था िक यह भारत 
क े  health infrastructure की तÎ
वीर बदलने वाला  transformative step है और आज भी, 
आपके  समÎत  rural health programme का framework यही  NRHM है। आप खुद ही फ ैसला 
कर लीिजए की काम तब ज्यादा हो रहा था या अब ज्यादा हो रहा है।  
महोदया, एक और मुǈा medical education का है। Ģधान मंतर्ी जी से लेकर सभी मंतर्ी 
अपनी पीठ थपथपाते हȅ िक हमने 10 सालȗ मȂ 300 से  ज्यादा मेिडकल कॉलेज खोल िदए, इतन
ी 
मेिडकल सीट्स बढ़ा दीं आिद-आिद। महोदया, ये इस तरह क े दावे करते हȅ, लेिकन इस दावे की 
हकीकत क्या है? आज हमारे लगभग सारे मेिडकल कॉलेज फ ैकÊटी की भारी कमी से जूझ रहे हȅ। 
महोदया, खुद नƿा साहब जी एक िदन यहीं पर, सदन मȂ बत
ा चुक े हȅ िक देश भर क े  All India 
Institutes of
 Medical Sciences,   AIIMS मȂ  faculty की भारी कमी है। इसमȂ एÇस नई िदÊली मȂ 
34  परसȂट, एÇस भोपाल मȂ 24 परसȂट, एÇस भुवनेÌवर मȂ 25 परसȂट, एÇस जोधपुर मȂ 28 परसȂट, 
एÇस रायपुर मȂ 38 परसȂट, एÇस पटना मȂ 27 परसȂट और एÇस ऋिषके श मȂ 39 परसȂट की कमी है 
और बाकी क े कॉलेज मȂ फ ैकÊटी की 50 परसȂट तक कमी है।  
महोदया, फ ैकÊटी की कमी क्यȗ नहीं होगी? फ ैकÊटी क े िलए पी
जी की िडगर्ी चािहए। देश 
मȂ पीजी सीट्स की िडमांड 2 लाख है, लेिकन सीट की उपलÅधता क ेवल 68 हज़ार है। महोदया, मȅ 
अंत मȂ यही कहना चाहता हूं िक देश मȂ  health sector की िÎ
थित बीजेपी सरकार क े िपछले 11 
साल क े कायर्काल मȂ पहले से और ज्यादा खराब हुई है, लेिकन यह सरकार न तो अपन ी गलितयȗ 
से सीखने क े िलए तैयार है और न ही सच्चाई को मानने क े िलए तैयार है। इनको िदन-रात पानी 
पी-पीकर क ेवल कांगर्ेस पाटीर् को कोसना है, तािक इनकी िव फलता  से देश का ध्यान भटका रहे।  
मुझे उÇमीद है िक मȅने आज हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ यूपीए की उपलिÅधयȗ क े जो Ģमािणक आंकड़े ĢÎतुत 
िकए हȅ, उनसे ये लोग अपनी आत्ममुग्धता छोड़कर आत्मिनरीक्षण करȂगे और आगे थोड़ा ठोस 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
103

 
 
कोसर् करेक्शन करके  भी Ģयास करȂगे।  मैडम, मȅ इन्हीं बातȗ क े साथ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूं िक 
आपने मुझे बोलने का मौका िदया।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया) :  Ǜी सुखȂदु शेखर रॉय। 
 
Ǜी सुखȂदु शेखर रॉय (पिÌचमी बंगाल) :  धन्यवाद, वाइस चेयरपसर्न मैडम
।  हम मां दुगार् की पूजा 
करते समय िजन मंतर्ȗ से Ģाथर्ना करते हȅ, उनमȂ एक मंतर् यह भी है:  
 देिह सौभाग्यं आरोग्यं देिह मȂ परं सुखç। 
   रूप ं देिह जयं देिह यशो देिह िǎषो जिह।।  
   
यह जीवन का मंतर् है।  But when I, as an old man, l ook at the healt
h sector of the 
country, I feel utter shock and desperation.  Why has this feeling crept in my mind?   
Madam, according to Global Cancer Ob servatory estimates, there were 19.3 
million cancer cases worldwide in 2020, and India ranked third after China and USA. 
GLOBOCON, 2022 Report also predicted that cancer cases in India would increase to 
2.08 million, accounting for a rise of 57.5 per cent in 2040 from 2020. यानी िपछले 5 
सालȗ मȂ 28 Ģितशत इन्कर्ीज हो चुका है।  
Madam, apart from cancer, the major diseases which cause deaths in India are 
ischemic heart diseases, cardiovascular dis eases, respiratory diseases, tuberculosis, 
diabetes, liver, kidney and asthma diseases , indicated by World Health Organization 
data published in May, 2024.  Even the hon. Prime Minister, on the other day, 
expressed his serious concern about the steep rise in obesity. 
Madam, with the mushroom growth of private nursing homes and clinics, the 
sale of spurious and substandard medici nes is skyrocketing. The Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organisation also found more  t han 50 products as ‘not of standard 
quality.’ This finding of CDSCO came even after banning of 344 drugs in 2016 and 156 
FDC drugs last year by the Government. अभी तो नƿा जी नहीं हȅ, लेिकन अनुिĢया जी और 
दूसरे आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी हȅ, उन दोनȗ को मȅ िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक please consider 
setting up a Combined Combat Force with  personnel from the Central and State 
Governments to initiate a nationwide crackdo wn on the units and agents  engaged in 
manufacturing and sale of spurious and banned medicines.  They are the real 
enemies within the country who ar e destroying people's health. देशी और िवदेशी दवाई 
कÇपिनयȗ क े िलए भारत एक बहुत बड़ ा बाजार बन गया है।  हमने कोरोना काल मȂ देखा, जब 
हजारȗ-लाखȗ की संख्या मȂ एमएसएमई थक गए, तब दवाई कÇपिनयȗ और दूसरी बड़ी कÇपिनयȗ 
का मुनाफा गगन तक पहुंच गया।  Government is greasing the oily heads.  
Madam, the Government has allocated Rs. 95,957 crores to the health sector 
for Fiscal Year, 2026, that is, 9.46 per ce nt increase from the 2025 Budget. But it 
104
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
does little to address the long-standing reso urce gap in public health infrastructure 
because the healthcare sector accounts fo r 1.94 per cent of the total Budget 
reflecting a declining trend compared to previous years.  
Madam, despite the rising cost of medicines and treatment, there was a 
legitimate expectation among the people across the nation, particularly, the senior 
citizens, missing middle class families and th e workers from the informal sector that 
there would be reduction of GST on health insurance premiums from 18 per cent to 5 
per cent and the TDS limit under Section 80 of the IT Act will increase from Rs. 25,000 
to Rs. 50,000 but in vain. 
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
Now, let me talk about my State, West Bengal, for a while.  The hon. Chief 
Minister of West Bengal, Mamata Didi, had introduced Swasthya Sathi in December, 
2016, long before the introduction of Ayushman Bharat by the Government of India. 
The Swasthya Sathi was acclaimed worldwide like many other welfare schemes 
undertaken under the aegis of didi.  Today, 2914 hospitals in Bengal are empanelled 
in Swasthya Sathi.  In 2021-22, the spending on account of Swasthya Sathi was Rs. 
2,263 crore, which went up to Rs. 2,694 crore in 2023-24, immensely benefiting over 
8.72 crore people till February this year.  We are happy that the Government of India 
and some other States are following th e innovative healthcare measures of didi .  Let 
there be healthy competition to ensu re welfare of the common people, the 
marginalised and the backward classes who have been suffering for centuries in the 
absence of proper nutrition and healthcare. 
 Madam, at the same time, I am putting a question to myself as to why there 
should be a step-motherly attitude by the Centre towards Bengal.  West Bengal is an 
integral part of India, that is, Bharat, whic h is a Union of States, as envisaged in the 
first Article of the Constitution of India.  It was never and can never be a unitary state.  
The history of 190-year British rule is witn ess to the valiant liberation war launched by 
the people of Bengal, from the Battle of Pl assey in 1757 by Nawab Siraj-ud-daula to 
the Sepoy Mutiny in 1857 at Barrackpo re, led by Mangal Pandey, from the 
revolutionary upsurge organized by Shri Au tobindo, Khudiram, Bagha Jatin, Master 
Da Surja Sen, Rash Behari Bose and ma ny others, which culminated into ‘war’ 
declared by the Supreme Commander of Indian National Army, Netaji Subhas 
Chandra Bose against the British on October 21, 1943 and unfurled  the National Flag 
on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands as well as in Mairang, now in Meghalaya.  More 
than three million Bengalis died of manmad e famine in 1943.  To add salt to our 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
105

 
 
injuries, Bengal was partitioned and millions of people became refugees overnight.  It 
continued and it took three generations to settle down and to live with human dignity. 
Why should we be discriminated against even after 75 years of Independence? 
 Let me quickly refer to the funding under the National Health Mission and 
PMMYV of the Central Government. No fund under NHM has been released by the 
Government of India since August, 2023 in spite of fulfilment of all conditions.  
Similarly, no fund has been released by the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development  since November, 2022 under the Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana 
Yojana, not to speak of Rs. two lakh cror e, which is due and payable by the 
Government of India on account of MNRE GA, Awas Yojana and other Centrally-
sponsored schemes compelling the Bengal Government to continue with the 
schemes out of its own fund.  I had never witnessed such an  inimical attitude by the 
Centre towards the poor people of Bengal in the 58 years of my political life.  This is 
going too far. अगले साल पिÌचमी बंगाल की आम जनता इस आिर्थक भेदभाव क े िखलाफ 
मुँहमाँगा जवाब देगी।  
Before I conclude, I would u r g e  u p o n  t h e  G o v e r n m e n t  t o  t a k e  c a r e  o f  t h e  
increasing environmental hazards, rampant use of dangerous chemical components 
in fertilizers, insecticides and pesticides us ed in farming.  Organic farming continues 
to be a myth. हम जहर पी रहे हȅ।  पानी मȂ जहर, पवन मȂ जहर, खाǏ मȂ जहर, क्यȗिक यह 
अमृत काल नहीं है, जहर काल है।  सरकारी पक्ष क े नेता लोग हमȂ वेद, उपिनषद, शाÎतर् क े बारे मȂ 
हमेशा बोलते हȅ।  आप ऋग्
वेद क े Ģथम मंडल क े सूƪ 90 को क ै से भूल गए, िजसमȂ इसके  बारे मȂ 
बताया गया है?   हमारे पूवर्ज, िजन्हȗने ऋग्वेद को जन्म िद
या था, उसे िलखा था, उसमȂ कहा 
गया है:  
 
 मधु वाता ऋतायते मधुं क्षरिन्त िसन्धव:। 
माध्वीनर्: सन्त्वोषधी:।। 
मधु नƪमुतोषसो मधुमत्पािर्थवं रज:। 
मधु ǏौरÎ
तु न: िपता।। 
मधुमाƐो वनÎपितमर्धुमाâ अÎतु सूयर्:। 
माध्वीगार्वो भवन्तु न:।। 
ऊ ँ शािन्त:, शािन्त:, शािन्त:। 
 
May the winds blow sweetly, 
May the rivers flow sweetly, 
May the herbs be to us sweet and beneficial, 
May there be sweetness during the day and night, 
May the heaven be sweet to us, 
106
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
May the fruit bearing trees be sweet to us, 
May the sun be sweet and benevolent to us. 
 
ऊ ँ शांित:। ...(Ëयवधान)... अगर िहÇमत है, तो गवनर्मȂट को बोिलए िक वह पयार्वरण की 
रक्षा करे, नहीं तो िकसी दवा से क ु छ नहीं होने वाला है। ...(समय की घंटी)... यह बीमारू  देश 
...(Ëयवधान)... मैडम, मंतर्ी बाधा डाल रहे हȅ। ...(Ëय वधान)... मंतर्ी बाधा डाल रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
यहाँ यह हो रहा है, मंतर्ी बाधा डाल रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... अगर िहÇमत है, तो पयार्वरण की रक्षा 
कीिजए, नहीं तो इस बीमारू देश को कोई नहीं बचा सकता।  धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक (पंजाब) :
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आज मुझे हेÊथ एंड फ ैिमली 
वेलफे यर िडपाटर्मȂट क े िवषय मȂ चचार् पर भाग लेने का जो मौका िदया गया है, इसके  िलए मȅ सदन 
का और आपका आभारी हूँ। 
मैडम, हेÊथ का िवषय, एक ऐसा िवष
य है, िजसको अगर हम राज्य सरकार क े मैटर और 
क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े मैटर मȂ बांटकर देखȂगे, तो इसे यह देश कभी बदार्Ìत नहीं कर पाएगा तथा हमारे 
बच्चे और हमारे पिरव
ार क े लोग इस भावना से Ģतािड़त होते रहȂगे, इसिलए यह िवषय िकसी 
राज्य का नहीं है या यह िवषय िसफर् क Ȃ दर् का नहीं है, बिÊक यह िवषय इस पूरे देश का है।  
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस.  िनर ंजन  रेƿी) पीठासीन हुए। ] 
 
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इससे पहले िक मȅ आगे की बातȂ रखूं, मȅ दो-तीन चीजȂ 
आपके  समक्ष लाना चाहता हूं।  2014 मȂ छǄीसगढ़ मȂ Government-run mass sterilization 
Campaign चलाया गया।  उसमȂ 10 मिहलाओ ं की मौत हो जाती है।  पहले िदन वे सजर्री कराके  
जाती हȅ, लेिकन घर पहुंचने क े बाद उनकी मौत हो जाती है। गोरखपुर क े बीआरडी मेिडकल 
कॉलेज मȂ 63 बच्चȗ की मौत हो जाती है।  इसका कारण क्य
ा था?  उसका कारण यह था िक 
ऑक्सीजन की जो सÃल ाई  है, वह बंद पड़ जाती है और ऑक्सीजन कम पड़ जाती है।  इसी 
हॉिÎपटल मȂ 2016 मȂ 5,000 से ज्यादा बच्चȗ की मौत होती है और इसी अÎपताल मȂ 1 साल पहले, 
2014 मȂ 6,000 से ज्यादा बच्चȗ की मौत होती है।  सर, अगर आप नांदेड़ क े सरकारी हॉिÎपटल मȂ 
देखȂ, तो वहाँ एक िदन मȂ 33 लोगȗ की मृत्यु होती है और उनमȂ से 12 बच्चे होते हȅ।  इस
का कारण 
क्या था - कारण यह था िक वहाँ sufficient medical staff नहीं थे, doctors available नहीं थे, 
दूसरे िडिÎटर्क्ट से rush आ गया था।   
सर, यह भारत देश की हेÊथ ËयवÎथा या िसÎटम का आज का एक िपक्चर है, जो हम 
सबके  सामने है।  इससे मुझे यह लगता है िक हम सबको अपराध बोध से गर्िसत हो जा
ना चािहए।  
अगर हमȂ अभी भी इस बात क े िलए दुख नहीं हो रहा है, तो मुझे नहीं लगता है िक हम इस कािबल 
हȅ िक इस देश को एक अच्छा ÎवाÎथ्य और एक अच्
छा पिरवार दे पाएँ। 
सर, िनिÌचत रूप  से इन पिरिÎथितयȗ से िनपटने क े िलए सरकार ने कोई टारगेट बनाया 
होगा, अगर इसने टारगेट बनाया है, तो उसकी कोई Ãलािंन
ग की होगी और अगर Ãलािंनग की 
होगी, तो उसके  िलए क ु छ बजट िदया होगा और अगर बजट िदया होगा, तो उसका एग्जीक्यूशन 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
107

 
 
करने की Ģिकर्या शुरू  की होगी।  क्या वह टारगेट सिफिशएंट है, क्या वह Ãलािंनग सिफिशएंट है, 
क्या वह बजट सिफिशएंट है और क्या उसका एग्जीक्यूशन सिफिशएंट है- ये ऐसे ĢÌन हȅ, िजनके  
बारे मȂ आज हम सब िडÎकस कर रहे हȅ।  मȅ िफर से यह कहना चाहता हूं िक आज का यह 
िडÎकशन पक्ष या िवपक्ष क े िĢज्म पर न होकर, देश क े पक्ष मȂ होना चा
िहए।   
सर, 2017 मȂ सरकार एक नेशनल हेÊथ पॉिलसी लेकर आती है।  इस पॉिलसी मȂ यह 
बताया जाता है िक इस देश मȂ रहने वाले हरेक Ëयिƪ को अच्छी और क्वािलटी वाली हेÊथ 
िमलेगी।  इसमȂ यही ģ ेमवकर् था।  अगर आप देखȂगे, तो पाएँगे िक सरकार ने एक Ãलान बनाई और 
इस Ãलान मȂ दो Ģमुख पैरामीटसर् थे - पहला,  'ने शनल हेÊथ िमशन' है और दूसरा, ' आयुÍमान 
भारत Îकीम' है।  ' नेशन
ल हेÊथ िमशन' का क्या आईिडया था?  ' नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन' का 
आईिडया यह था िक क Ȃ दर् सरकार 'नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन' क े माध्यम से सरकारȗ को इंģाÎटर्क्चर 
डेवलपमȂट करने क े िलए पैसे देगी और यह पैसा Ģाइमरी हेÊथ सȂटर और सेक Ȃडरी हेÊथ सȂटर, जो 
िजला अÎपताल होती है, उनके  इंपर्ूवमȂट मȂ लगनी चािहए।  आज िÎथित क्या है?  अग र आज की 
िÎथित देखȂ, आप िकसी भी पिÅलक हॉिÎपटल मȂ चले जाएँ, िजला मȂ या Ģाइमरी हेÊथ सȂटर मȂ, 
वहाँ या तो हॉिÎपटल ही नहीं है, अगर हॉिÎपटल है, तो डॉक्टर नहीं है।  अगर डॉक्टर है, तो 
दवाई नहीं है।  अगर दवाई है, तो टेिंÎ टग नहीं है और अगर ये सारी चीजȂ उपलÅध हȅ, तो वहाँ भतीर् 
करने क े िलए बेड available नहीं है।  यह िकसी एक राज्य की िÎथित नहीं है, बिÊक यह पूरे देश 
की िÎथित है।   
ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, मȅ ज्यादा नंबसर् नहीं देना चाहूँगा।  अग
र मȅ इस पूरी पिरिÎथित को 
simplify तरीके  से quantify करना चाहूँ, तो quantify करने क े िलए एक ही चीज कह सकता हूँ 
िक सरकार ने अपने खुद का एक सवȃ कराया।  इस सवȃ मȂ सभी health institutions को यह कहा 
गया िक आप अपना सेÊफ असेसमȂट कीिजए।  जब सेÊफ असेसमȂट िकया गया, तो यह पाया गया 
िक 80 Ģितशत से ज्याद
ा जो छोटे-बड़े पिÅलक सȂटसर् थे, हॉिÎपटÊस थे, वे अनिफट थे और सब-
Îटȅडडर् थे।  80 Ģितशत से ज्यादा सब-Îटȅडडर् इंģाÎटर्क्चर क े पिÅलक सȂटसर् और हॉिÎपटÊस क े 
साथ यह नेशनल हेÊथ पॉिलसी चल रही है।  
 ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, सरकार की एक अच्छी बात रही िक सरकार ने IPHS  और NQS  
लाई, जो standardise देने या रेिंटग देने का एक पैमाना है।  सरकार इसको लेकर आई है।  पहली 
सरकार इसको दूसरे नाम से चलाती थी, इस सरकार ने इसको refine की है - यह अच्छी बात है।   
अच्छी बात यह है िक यह standardisation का Ģोसेस लेकर आई है, लेिक न दुभार्ग्य की बात यह 
है िक इनके  इस standardisation मȂ, इतने साल सरकार चलाने क े बाद भी दुदर्शा जस-की-तस 
है।  
 ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, एक ऑनरेबल मȂबर ने यह कहा िक डॉक्टर और patient का ratio 
काफी अच्छा है।  मȅ बता दूँ िक इंिडया मȂ 10,000 मरीज क े पीछे 10 डॉक्ट
सर् हȅ और अगर आप 
डेवलÃड क ंटर्ीज़ - इंग्लȅड या और िकसी क ंटर्ी का देखȂगे, तो वहाँ वही 26 और 30 क े आसपास है।  
लेिकन आपको यह समझना पड़ेगा िक आप डेवलÃड क ंटर्ीज़ क े डॉक्टर और patient क े ratio
 को 
compare नहीं कर सकते, क्यȗिक वहां पर uniformity है, मतलब शहर मȂ भी यही ratio है और 
गांव मȂ भी यही ratio है।  हमारे देश मȂ िÎथित यह है िक शहर मȂ तो डॉक्टसर् overcrowded हȅ और 
गांवȗ मȂ डॉक्टर की scarcity है।   वहां पर डॉक्टर नहीं है।  आप िसफर् इस नंबर को उठा कर 
108
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
compare करके  यह नहीं कह सकते।  आपको थोड़ी संजीदगी से देखना पड़ेगा िक िÎथित क्या है। 
मȅ गांव से आता हूँ और मȅने देखा है, मȅने िजया है, मेरे साथ, मेरे आसपास रहने वाले लोगȗ को मȅने 
देखा है िक गांव का एक आदमी क्या-क्या बेच कर अपना इला
ज कराता है। 
 ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, यह तो ' नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन' की िÎथित है।  अगर मȅ ' आयुÍमान 
भारत योजना' की बात करू ँ, तो 'आयुÍमान भारत योजना' मȂ design fault है।  सरकार की तरफ 
से मंतर्ी महोदय यहाँ बैठे हुए हȅ।  मȅ यह िकसी दुभार्वना से नहीं कह रहा हूँ।  मȅ अच्छी भावना से 
कह रहा हूँ।  इसमȂ desi
gn fault है।  क्या design fault है ?  यह  क्य ा  मेथड है?  इस मेथड क े 
तहत 40 परस Ȃट Below Poverty Line, नीचे क े तबके  क े लोगȗ का इंÌयोरȂस िकया जाएगा और 
उनको हर साल पूरे पिरवार क े िलए 5 लाख रुपए  का कवर िदया जाएगा।  इसमȂ सबसे बड़ी 
िदक्कत की बात यह है िक जो beneficiary identi fication है, वहीं से ĢॉÅलम शुरू  हो जाती है।  ये 
जो 10 करोड़  क े आसपास beneficiaries enlist िकए हȅ, अगर उनको Below Poverty Line से 
मैच करते हȅ, इसको सरकार ने ही िकया है, यह अच्छी बात है।  मȅ इसकी deficiency बता रहा हूँ।  
इस कर्म मȂ िसफर् दो करोड़ ऐसे लोग िमले, जो actually Below Poverty Line मȂ आते थे, बाकी 
का मैच नहीं हुआ।  िफर सरकार ने पॉिलसी िडसीज़न िलया िक मैिंचग क े चक्कर मȂ न पड़ा जाए, 
क्यȗिक इस
से काम िबगड़ जाएगा, इसिलए जो आते जा रहे हȅ, उनको करते जाया जा ए।  इसमȂ 
सबसे पहली िदक्कत तो यहीं पर है।  
ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, सीएजी की िरपोटर् मȂ lakhs of faulty and fraudulent names इसमȂ 
िमले।  इसमȂ दूसरी सबसे बड़ी खामी hospital empanelment की है।  यह इस देश का ही नहीं, 
पूरे िवÌव का एक ऐसा अजूबा इंÌयोरȂस Îकीम है, जो मरीज को ध्यान मȂ रख कर नहीं बनाया गया 
है, बिÊक अÎपत
ाल को ध्यान मȂ रख कर बनाया गया है।  यह क ै से है?  मȅ यह आपको बताता हूँ, 
ज्यादातर िÎथित मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, seriousness ले आते हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... ऑनरेबल 
वाइस चेयरमैन सर, यह अजूबा Îकीम है।  आज तक क े िजतने भी इंÌयोरȂस ÎकीÇस हȅ, उनको 
आप उठा ली
िजए, सारी इंÌयोरȂस ÎकीÇस ऐसी होती हȅ िक इंÌयोरȂस हॉिÎपटल को देखकर िकया 
जाता है, लेिकन यह एक ऐसी Îकीम है, िजसमȂ बीमारी पर empanelment होती है। मतलब, कोई 
अÎपताल यह कह सक
ता है िक मȅ िसफर् आंख का करूं गा, बाकी चीज का नहीं करूं गा।  कोई 
हॉिÎपटल यह कह सकता है िक मȅ पेट का करूं गा, मȅ हाथ-पैर का नहीं करूं गा।  इसमȂ जो 
empanelment है, वह बीमारी क े आधार पर है।  आप CGHS को ही ले लीिजए, इसमȂ हॉिÎपटल 
क े िहसाब से होता है।  आप Ģाइवेट इंÌयोरȂस को ले लीिजए, इसमȂ भी हॉिÎपटल क े आधार पर 
होता है।  अगर िकसी हॉिÎपटल मȂ एक आदमी का पेट सजर्री क े िलए खुला पड़ा है और उसकी 
आंख मȂ अचानक कोई Ģॉ
Åलम आ गई और जब वह कहेगा िक मेरे पास 5 लाख पड़े हȅ, इसको 
ठीक कर दो, तो उसको बोला जाएगा िक भाई साहब, इसमȂ नहीं होता है।  आप अभी अपना पेट 
बंद करवाओ, िसलवाओ और दूसरे ह
ॉिÎपटल जाओ या Ģाइवेट मȂ पैसे लाओ।  माननीय वाइस 
चेयरमैन सर, इसको out-of-pocket कहते हȅ।  इसमȂ बड़ा िडजाइन फॉÊट है।   
इसके  अलावा, इसमȂ एक और इंटर्ेिंÎट
ग चीज आप देखȂगे िक इसमȂ हॉिÎपटल क े संबंध मȂ 
एक और ĢॉÅलम है।  जो मैच्योर िसÎटम होता है, उसमȂ ऑपरेशन या बड़ी सजर्री तब तक नहीं 
करते, जब तक जरूरी न हो।  इसमȂ छोटे-छोटे सब Îटȅडडर् हॉिÎपटÊस का जो empanelment 
हुआ है, वहां पर भा
वना यह होती है िक क ै से भी करके  मरीज पकड़ो, ऑपरेशन कर दो और 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
109

 
 
आयुÍमान का पैसा ले लो।  मȅ यह सही कह रहा हूँ।  मȅ गांव का आदमी हूँ, मȅने यह देखा है।  यह 
संभव है िक शहर मȂ रहने वाले लोगȗ को यह पता नहीं होगा।  सर, इसमȂ 8,000 रुपय े मȂ एक 
सजर्री होती है, तो हाटर् आिद से िरलेटेड जो इंपॉटȄट सजर्री है, वह हो नहीं सकती है।  िजस 
मरीज को आप दवाई से ठीक कर सकते हȅ, उसको वहां पर खींच कर ऑपरेट कर िदया जाता है। 
ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, मȅ Ã
लािंनग और क्लैिरटी क े बारे मȂ एक चीज कहना चाहूंगा िक आप 
इस देश क े पूरे सोशल-इकोनॉिमक िसÎटम को तीन चरणȗ मȂ बांट सकते हȅ - लोअर इनकम गर्ुप, 
िमडल इनकम गर्ुप और ह ायर  इनकम गर्ुप।  लोअर इनकम गर्ुप क े िलए आप नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन 
लेकर आए। अभी मȅ िसफर् Ãलािंनग और आपके  आइिडया की बात कर रहा हूँ, क्या हुआ है, वह 
अलग बात है।  नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन मȂ सरकारी अÎपत ाल को आप ठीक करना चाह रहे हȅ, वह 
िकसको क ैटर करेगा, वह लो इनकम गर्ुप वालȗ को करेगा।  उसके  बाद, आप आयुÍमान इंÌयोरȂस 
Îकीम लेकर आए, वह िकसको क ैटर कर रही है, वह लो इनकम गर्ुप वालȗ को क ैटर कर रही है।  
िमिडल क्ला
स का क्या होगा?  इतना  बड़ा िमिडल क्लास का जो सेक्शन है, न वह सरकारी 
अÎपताल अवेल कर रहा है, न वह इंÌयोरȂस की क ै टेगरी मȂ आ रहा है, तो जब वह ये दोनȗ अवेल 
नहीं कर रहा है, तो िफर सरकार क े पूरे मेथड मȂ यह िडजाइन फॉÊट है। सरकार को पत
ा ही नहीं 
है िक उसकी डायरेक्शन क्या है।  अगर आपको आपकी डायरेक्शन पता नहीं है, तो आप क्या 
एग्जीक्यूट करȂगे?  
 सर, इसके  अलावा, मȅ एक और चीज कहना चाहूंगा।  आप िमिडल क्लास से टैक्स लेते 
हȅ।  आपके  खचȃ क े िलए कहां से पैसे आ रहे हȅ, कोई अपनी जेब से तो नहीं दे रहा है! िमिडल 
क्लास से पैसा आ रहा है।  पैसा िमिड ल क्लास से आ रहा है, लेिकन उसकी सुिवधा क े िलए आपने 
क ु छ भी नहीं िकया।  एक और चीज यह है िक इसमȂ अंडर ÎपȂिंडग है।  इसका क्या कारण है?  
क Ȃ दर् सरकार दो चीजȂ लेकर आई - नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन और दूसरा आयुÍमान, इन दोनȗ मȂ ही 
मȅने आपको िडजाइ
न फॉÊट बता िदया, इंसिफिशएंट बता िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसा क्यȗ हो रहा 
है? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी) : नीरज जी, Ãली ज़।  
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: ऐसा होने का कारण क्या है? ...(Ëयवधान)... यही कारण है, ऐसी 
राजनीित क े कारण ही देश यहां पहुंचा है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  आपके  पास पैसा है, आप इलाज करा 
सकते हȅ, गरीब आदमी क े पास पैसा नहीं है, वह इलाज नहीं करा सकता। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस. िन
रंजन रेƿी) : नीरज जी, Ãलीज़। 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: आपकी भावना का अंदाजा आपके  बजट से ही लगता है।  आपने बजट मȂ 
टोटल जीडीपी का 1.4 परसȂट एलोके ट िकया है, आप कहते हȅ िक मािर्जनल इंकर्ीज हुआ है।  
भाई, जीडीप
ी मȂ िजस तरह से गर्ोथ हो रही है, उसमȂ मािर्जनल इंकर्ीज तो होना ही होना है!  
आपको with respect to the GDP और with respect to the inflation लेना पड़ेगा।  अगर आप 
ये सारे account for करते हȅ, तो यह नीचे आ जा रहा है।  आप जो भी Ãलािंनग कर लीिजए, जब 
110
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
पैसा ही नहीं डालȂगे, तो होगा क्या? यह आपका hidden agenda है िक भाषण दो, इस तरीके  से 
disrupt करो, देश को गुमराह करो और िफर पैसा मत दो।   
सर, अब मȅ एक बहुत ही इंपॉटȄट चीज कह रहा हूँ।  इस देश मȂ अÎपताल नहीं हȅ, क्यȗ, 
क्यȗिक पैसा नहीं है, अंडर बजट है।  देश मȂ डॉक्
टसर् नहीं हȅ, क्यȗ, क्यȗिक मेिडकल कॉलेज मȂ 
सीट्स नहीं हȅ, क्यȗ, क्यȗिक बजट नहीं है।  देश क े हॉिÎपटÊस मȂ मेिडिंसस कम पड़ रह ी  हȅ, क्यȗ, 
क्यȗिक बजट कम पड़ रहा है।  िसÎटम खराब है, क्यȗ, क्यȗिक बजिंटग ठीक नहीं है।  बजट एक 
महत्वपूणर् कारण है, लेिकन क्या यह एक अके ला कारण है?  यह  अके ला कारण नहीं है।  मȅ 
बताता हूँ िक इसका महत्वपूणर् कारण क्या है।  इस देश का दुभार्ग्य है िक यहां पर जो राजनीित 
है, वह राजनीित misplaced राजनीित है। वह क ै से misplaced राजनीित है? मȅ पूरी पॉिलिटकल 
क्लास को यह कह रहा हूँ।  पूरी पॉिलिटकल क्ल
ास यह समझती है िक हेÊथ और एजुक ेशन, 
इनसे चुनाव मȂ वोट नहीं िमलते। िजस िदन पॉिलिटक क्लास यह समझ जाएगा िक हेÊथ और 
राजनीित को चुनाव की अपनी गंदी राजनीित से दूर रख कर देश क े िलए काम करोगे, उस िदन 
यह देश आगे बढ़ जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान).
.. हमने िदÊली मȂ काम िकया। आप पूछो िक हमारी 
राजनीितक ideology क्या है, तो मȅ बताना चाहूंगा िक हमारी ideology हॉिÎपटल और Îकू ल है। 
आप ऐसी राजनीित करȂगे, तो क ै से काम चलेगा। पंजाब मȂ National Health Mission का  पैसा 
रोक देते हȅ। आज िदÊली मȂ जो मोहÊला क्लीिनक बने हȅ, आप उनका नाम बदल रहे हȅ। आप 251 
मोहÊला क्लीिनक्स को बदल रहे हो। क्या आप इस भावना क े साथ देश चलाएंगे? 
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, ...(Ëय
वधान)...   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY ): Sandeep ji,
 one minute.  Can I 
request everybody to please let him finish his speech?  You will have an opportunity 
to reply.  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: सर, ये बताएं िक गोरखपुर क े कौन से हॉिÎपटल की बात कर रहे हȅ। आप 
उनको authenticate करने को बोिलए।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी) : नीरज जी, जब आपको मौका िमलेगा, तब आप बता 
दीिजएगा। Let the hon. Member have the freedom to speak.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर : सर, ये असत्य बोल रहे हȅ। आप इनसे किहए िक ये authenticate करȂ। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी एस. िनर
ंजन रेƿी) : नीरज जी, मेरी आपसे िवनती है िक जब आपको मौका 
िमलेगा, तब आप बता दीिजएगा िक सच क्या है। आप उनको बात करने दीिजए। Sandeep ji, 
please con
tinue.  …(Interruptions)… Please, let the hon. Member finish.  You are all 
senior to me.  I am looking at you to he lp me do this programme better.  Let the 
speaker continue. 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
111

 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: सर, इसका कारण क्या है, तो मȅ बताना चाहूंगा िक एक तो पॉिलिटकल 
है और दूसरा इच्छाशिƪ है। सर, मोदी जी ने एक बार कहा था :- 
माना िक अंधेरा घना है,  
पर दीया जलाना कहां मना है। 
 
 आप दीया जलाओ न, आप दीया क्यȗ नहीं जला रहे? आप दी
या जलाओ। हम उस दीया 
को protect करȂगे। हम सबको िमलकर दीया जलाना है। आप दीया जलाओ, आिखर दीया क्यȗ 
नहीं जलाते? मेरा एक बहुत important suggestion है। Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, it is 
important.  …(Interruptions)… I have a suggestion.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY ): Sandeep ji, please conclude in 
30 seconds.  Because I stopped you in between, please conclude in 30 seconds. 
  
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK:  I am concluding, Sir.  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, 
इस देश मȂ 7
78 – let us consider 800 क े आसपास िजला अÎपताल हȅ। मेरी सरकार से हाथ 
जोड़कर यह िवनती है िक 778 िजला अÎपताल हȅ। अगर Ģधान मंतर्ी जी, उनकी सारी क ैिबनेट, 
सभी पािर्टयां, सारा िवपक्ष और पूरा देश इकƻा हो जाए, तो क्या इन 800 क े आसपा स िजला 
अÎपताल को ठीक करना difficult है? Difficult नहीं है।  
 मेरा एक और submission है,  Do not make multiple parallel schemes. आपकी 
ÎकीÇस तब तक सफल नहीं हȗगी, जब तक उनको execute करन े क े िलए units ready नहीं 
हȗगे। आप पहले capacity build कीिजए, पहले छोटे district hospitals को ठीक कीिजए, 
Primary Health Centres को ठीक कीिजए, िफर आप ÎकीÇ स बनाइए। Thank you very much, 
Sir.       
                                    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY ): Thank you, Sandeep ji. The 
next speaker is Shri Golla Baburao.  You have ten minutes.  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: सर, इन्हȗने बोला िक गोरखपुर क े एक अÎपताल मȂ 5,000 मौतȂ हुईं। आप इनसे 
बोिलए िक ये authenticate करȂ।  
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO (Andhra Pradesh): Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, it is a wonderful 
opportunity to speak on the subject of health  today.  Everybody knows that health is 
wealth.  Even peace and prosperity comes second.  Health is most important to every 
h u m a n  b e i n g .   C o m i n g  t o  o u r  N a t i o n a l  H e a l t h  P o l i c y ,  i t  w a s  f o r m u l a t e d  i n  2 0 1 7 .   I t  
talks about preventive and promotive ca re to every citizen and free access to 
healthcare in entire India.  There are three stages of ou r National Health Policy.  
Primary health needs much improvement. If poor people  go to any Primary Health 
112
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Centre, I know of many hospitals where th ere are no medicines for even snakebite. 
There are no medicines for diabetes.  There are not sufficient doctors.  There are not 
sufficient health workers. I will give you the example of my own State of Andhra 
Pradesh.  In Andhra Pradesh, until the former Chief Minister, Shri Jagan Mohan 
Reddy, came to power, the situation was like this.  After he became the Chief 
Minister, he took revolutionary measur es.  He started a new programme called 
Andariki Vaidyam.  It means Health for Everybody.   Anyone who needs medical help, 
a vehicle will come and it will take the patient to the hospital and do everything that 
needs to be done.  He also started a beautiful scheme called Family Doctor 
Programme.  One doctor will visit every ho usehold once in three-four days and sit 
with the family members an d advice precautions and medicines.  The doctor may 
advise if the patient needs care in a bigge r hospital.  They take care of all these 
things.   
 Coming to health needs of patients who need care in district hospitals, most of 
the district hospitals are situated everywhere .  In every district, there is a District 
Headquarters Hospital.  But ther e are no research f acilities in District Hospitals.   In 
Visakhapatnam, we have King George Hospital.  It was constructed by the British.  I 
think many Members of Parliament from Odis ha and Chhattisgarh also know that this 
is the biggest hospital situated in the north coastal region of Andhra Pradesh.  It 
caters to the needs of lakhs and lakhs of pe ople.  What we want is availability of 
doctors and basic minimum facilities in hosp itals.  I want to congratulate medical 
staff, aaya and other workers who did a marvellous job during Covid.  I still 
remember, I was an MLA, eve rybody did a marvellous job to save the lives of lakhs of 
people.  Medical care is very important.   
Now I come to tertiary-level hospitals.   I congratulate the Union Government 
on starting AIIMS Hospitals.   These AIIMS Hospitals are being built in every State.   
AIIMS Mangalagiri in Andhra Pradesh is just  like a foreign hospital.  Foreign doctors 
cannot do anything like that.  Our AIIMS Mang alagiri doctors are experts.  They take 
pains in examining patients.  I request th e Government of India to start more and 
more tertiary-level hospitals like AIIMS Hospital.  It should be One Region, One 
Hospital.  In Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, we can construct one AIIMS Hospital.  
At Tirupati, you can start one AIIMS Hospital .  Another we have in Amaravati which is 
near Vijayawada.  People can go and take care of their health needs.   
Now I come to research avenues.  The Government of India has granted nearly 
R s . 1 , 0 0 , 0 0 0  c r o r e .  A  f u n d  o f  R s . 1  l a k h  c rore is not an ordinary fund.  We can do 
miracles with this amount.  I request the Go vernment to utilize this fund properly for 
the use of all the patients.   
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
113

 
 
 Now, I come to the most important pr ogramme, that is, Ayushman Bharat.  It 
is a wonderful health scheme.  Under Ay ushman Bharat, so many diseases like 
cancer, kidney ailments, etc., are being taken care of.  They are giving an amount up 
to Rs.5 lakh as insurance coverage.  Wh at I request the Union Government is to 
extend this insurance coverage to more than  Rs.5 lakh.  Some diseases require even 
Rs.10 lakh or Rs.25 lakh.  Jagan Mohan Re ddyji in Andhra Pradesh gave an amount 
up to Rs.25 lakh.  If a poor man has any disease, an amount of Rs.25 lakh will be 
given to provide healthcare to that patient.  That is why this is the most important 
Department.  All other Departme nts are secondary, in my opinion. That is why, I am 
making this request.  Under Ayushman Bharat, so far, I th ink, nine crore people are 
c o v e r e d .   O u r  p o p u l a t i o n  i s  1 4 2  c r o r e .   P l e a s e  i n c r e a s e  y o u r  c o v e r a g e  t o  a s  m a n y  
people as possible.   
 Sir, I also congratulate the Union Government for eradicating most dreaded 
communicable diseases like AIDS and so ma ny other diseases.  These are very, very 
dangerous.  You please improve research  in respect of communicable diseases. 
People are still facing these communicable diseases in our country.  Leprosy is there.  
Of course, in South India, in cidence of leprosy is more.  I have seen in my childhood 
days that leprosy is very dangerous.  I th ink that leprosy is 99 per cent eradicated.  
...(Time-bell rings.)... To my wonder, even AIDS is also mostly eradicated.  Other 
diseases like diabetes, cancer, kidney problems and coronary diseases should be 
taken care of.  Lakhs of people are losing their lives.  We should also take care of 
these.  The Ministry of Health  should take utmost care and give value to every human 
being in the society.  I thank you so much for giving me an opportunity to speak on 
this subject. Sir, I congratulate you for oc cupying the seat as Vice-Chairman.  From 
my Party and on behalf of this House, I congratulate you once again.  Thank you.  
   
                                                              
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY) : Thank you so much.  Now, I 
would call upon the next speaker. Shrimati Sulata Deo; you have ten minutes.  
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव  ( ओिडशा) :  जय Ǜी जगन्नाथ। महोदय, ÎवाÎथ्य ही संपदा है, Health is 
Wealth. हमारी ओिड़या मȂ ÎवाÎथ्य ही संपदा है बोलते हȅ। हम अभी डा. भागवत कराड़ जी को 
सुन रहे थे, जो बीजेपी पाटीर् की तरफ से बोल रहे थे, उन्हȗने एक बात बोली िक ओिडशा ने 
‘आयुÍमान भारत योजना’ लागू नहीं की। मȅ िक्लर कर देना चा
हती हूं िक बीएसके वाई, जो हमारी 
‘बीजू ÎवाÎथ्य कÊयाण योजना है’, यह ओिडशा मȂ अगÎत 15, 2018 से  Îटाटर् हुई थी। आयुÍमान 
भारत Îकीम को 20 िसतÇबर, 2018 मȂ लॉन्च िक या गया।  हमारी Îकीम पहले से चल रही थी।  मȅ 
तो बोलूंगी िक हमको देखकर क ेन्दर् सरकार ने आयुÍमान योजना चालू की।  मȅ ममता योजना क े 
बारे मȂ बताना चाहती हूं।  हमारे यहां ममता योजन ा  भी है और ऐसे ही यहां Ģधानमंतर्ी मातृ वंदना 
114
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
योजना शुरू  की गई। हमारे वहां संपूणर् पुिÍट योजना को देखकर, Ģधानमंतर्ी Ģसूित योजना भी 
बनाई बनाई गई। 
अब मȅ हेÊथ क े िवषय पर आती हूं।  Oxfam की 2024 मȂ एक report आई थी िक भारतवषर् 
मȂ GDP का 1.9 परसȂट ही हेÊथ मȂ एलोके शन हो रहा है।  यह एलोके शन कम से कम 3 परसȂट 
होना चािहए।  हमारा एलोके शन कम है और हम बोल रहे हȅ िक हम िवकिसत भारत बन
ा रहे हȅ!  
ÎवाÎथ्य तो ठीक नहीं है, िशक्षा तो ठीक नहीं  है, तो िफर यह भारत क ै से िवकिसत हो!  अमेिरक ा 
ÎवाÎथ्य पर 10 परसȂट खचर् कर रहा है।  मेरे पास top 20 countries का क ु छ डेटा है, जो हेÊथ क े 
ऊपर ज्यादा खचर् कर रही हȅ।  United States, Switzerland, Germany, Norway, Austria, 
Netherlands, France, Belgium, Sweden, Luxembourg, Australia, Canada, Denmark, 
New Zealand, Ireland, Finland, United Kingdom, Iceland, Japan, South Korea – ये 20 
देश हȅ।  मगर हमारे भारत का हेÊथ का बजट नीचे से 4 नÇबर पर है।   
हम जब Human Development Index की बात करते हȅ, तो उसमȂ इंिडया का नÇबर 13
4 
है।  जहां हेÊथ क े बजट मȂ कम पैसा िदया जा रहा है और जो पैसा िदया जा रहा है, वह कम खचर् 
हो रहा है, तो ऐसे मȂ कभ
ी डेवलपमȂट नहीं हो सकता है।  इसमȂ मानव संबल का िवकास नहीं हो 
सकता है। इसीिलए हम लोग Human Development Index मȂ आज 134 नÇबर पर हȅ।  पहले 
Human Development Index मȂ भारत का नÇबर 112 था, लेिकन आज हम और भी नीचे आ गए 
हȅ।  पता नहीं िक ऐसा क्यȗ हो रहा है।  Oxfam और क ु छ organizations ने सुĢीम को
टर् मȂ एक 
पीआईएल फाइल की थी िक क ुपोषण मȂ भारतवषर् मȂ सबसे ज्यादा बच्चे मर रहे हȅ।  सुĢीम कोटर् ने 
Government of India से तथ्यȗ क े संबंध मȂ written मȂ affidavi
t देने क े िलए कहा था।  इसमȂ जो 
तथ्य िमला, यह मंतर्ालय का तथ्य है।  भारत मȂ  5 साल मȂ 0 - 5 साल क े 69 परसȂट बच्चȗ की डेथ 
क ुपोषण से हुई है।  हम ÎवाÎथ्य क े बारे मȂ क ै से बोल रहे हȅ?  हम ÎवाÎथ्य क े बारे मȂ क्य ा बोल रहे 
हȅ?  हम क्या यह िवकिसत भारत क े बारे मȂ बोल रहे हȅ?  क्या यह िवकिसत भारत है?  हम लोग 
अपने आपक
ो िवÌव गुरु  बोलते हȅ, लेिकन िवÌव गुरु  बोलने से कोई िवÌव गुरु  नहीं हो जाता है।  
िवÌव गुरु  होने क े िलए काम करना पड़ता है, जो हमारे नवीन पटनायक जी ने िकया है।  मȅ गवर् क े 
साथ कहती हूं िक जो MMR है – जब  हमारे नवीन पटनायक जी ने charge िलया था - तब 
MMR three digit मȂ था और आज भारतवषर् मȂ ओिडशा MMR को decline करने मȂ second 
highest State है।  अब मȅ Infant Mortality Rate (IMR
) क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहती हूं।   यह भी 
बहुत ज्यादा था।  मान्यवर, नवीन पटनायक जी जब मुख्य मंतर्ी बने, तब क ैिबनेट मȂ पहला 
िडसीजन यह था िक बच्चे और मां की मृत्यु दर को कम कर
ना चािहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... इसीिलए 
आज भारतवषर् मȂ ओिडशा क े अंदर IMR मȂ highest decline हुआ है, मȅ यह गवर् क े साथ कहती हूं।  
बात कीिजए कोई बात नहीं है, लेिकन हमारा काम अपनी बात करे, जैसे मेरे नेता का काम बात 
कर रहा है। 
आप institutional birth देिखए, जो 2019 और 2021 मȂ 22 परसȂट था, वह ओिडशा मȂ 92 
परसȂट हो गया है।  Vaccination 44 परसȂट से बढ़ कर 2019 और 2021 मȂ देखȂ, तो hi ghest हो 
गया है, 91 परसȂट हो गया है।  यह है ओिडशा, िवकिसत ओिडशा!  िकतनी िरपोट्सर् आएँगी, 
िकतनी िरपोट्सर् जाएँगी।  मȅ यह नहीं बोल रही हूँ, मगर देिखए, भारत मȂ सबसे ज्यादा क ुपोिषत 
बच्चे बढ़ रहे हȅ।  यह मȅ नहीं कह रही हूँ, यह NFHS-5 की िरपोटर् कह रही है।  As per NFHS 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
115

 
 
Reprot, Stunting, height for age, is 35.5 pe r cent. Wasting, weight for height, is 19.3 
per cent.  Underweight is 32.1 per cent.  यह क ुपोषण का parameter होता है, indicator 
होता है।  इसकी वजह से जो बच्चे मर रहे हȅ, सरकार इसके  बारे मȂ क्या कर रही है?   
 मȅ एक और बात बोलूँगी।  देिखए, यहाँ BSKY क े बारे मȂ बात हो रही थी, आयुÍमान भ ारत  
क े बारे मȂ भी बात हो रही थी।  मȅ इसके  बारे मȂ आपको एक बात बोलूँगी।  ओिडशा मȂ हमारी जो 
BSKY Îकीम है, उसमȂ एक साल मȂ 6,500 करोड़ का budget allocation है, जबिक आयुÍमान 
भारत मȂ समगर् भारतवषर् मȂ देखȂ, तो यह 7,000 करोड़ का बज ट था।  देिखए, एक Îटेट मȂ 6,500 
करोड़ और पूरे भारतवषर् मȂ 7,000 करोड़!  इसमȂ हमारे िहÎसे करीब 300 करोड़ आ रहा था।  यह 
अच्छा है या हमारा अच्छा है!  ये तो वहाँ अपनी Îकीम लगाने क े िलए बोल रहे थे, अब लगा लȂगे।  
अब तो वहाँ डबल इंजन हो गया, अब ये लगा लȂगे।  मगर जब यह Îकीम नहीं लगी थी, तो लोग 
िंजदा थे, लेिक
न अब जब ये यह Îकीम लगा लȂगे, तो लोग भी मर जाएँगे।  यह है इनकी Îकीम!  
पैसा तो है ही नहीं।  यह एक insurance scheme है।   पहले सामान बेचो, insurance मȂ जाओ, 
िफर पैसा दे, तो दे और अगर न दे, तो न दे।  मगर हमारी BSKY एक as
surance scheme थी।  
पहले इसकी वजह से वहाँ पर िकतने लोग treatment होकर अच्छे हुए हȅ, इसको भी देखना 
चािहए।   
 मȅ एक और बात बोलती हूँ।  वे आयुÍम
ान भारत क े बारे मȂ बोल रहे हȅ।   £...(Ëयवधान)... 
देिखए, मȅ एक और बात बोलती हूँ िक ...(Ëयवधान)... देिखए, जो बोल रहे हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
देिखए, हम अभी बोलते हȅ िक भारत मȂ pandemic हुई।  हम सबने देखा िक pandemic हुई।  
...(Ëयवधान)... भारत मȂ pandemic हुई, तब पता चला और भारत क े ÎवाÎथ् य की नग्न छिव सबके  
सामने आई।  आप देिखए िक ऑक्सीजन की कमी क े कारण लोग मर रहे थे।  ऑक्सीजन नहीं 
िमला, बेड नहीं िमल रहा था।  आप एक बात सुिनए िक हमारे Îटेट, ओिडशा क े नवीन पटनायक 
जी ने 18 Îटेट्स को ऑक्
सीजन भेजा और जानȂ बचाईं।  ...(समय की घंटी)... यह है ओिडशा!  
अभी आप medicine का दाम कम कीिजए, cervical cancer क े िलए लोगȗ का vaccination 
कीिजए, सबको ÎवाÎथ्य कÊयाण मȂ शािमल कीिजए, ...(समय की घंटी)... तब पता चलेगा िक 
health क्या है।  मगर जो PM CARES fund है, उसमȂ health नहीं है।  PM CARES fund तो ऐसे 
गायब हो रहा है, जैसे घो
ड़े क े िसर से सींग गायब हो रहा है।  मȅ demand करू ँगी िक यह जो 
pandemic क े चलते हमȂ इतनी सीख िमली, आपको PM CARES fund से कम से कम ऐसा 
हॉिÎपटल और infrastructure बनाना चािहए, िजसको लेकर अग
र भारत मȂ आगे ऐसा हो, तो इस 
तरह से कोई जान-माल का नुकसान नहीं हो।  Thank you so much.  वंदे उत्कल जननी!        
                                                                                       
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY) : Now Shri Manoj Kumar Jha. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार): वाइस चेयरमैन साहब, आपका शुिकर्या।  ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, 
यह एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् िवषय है।  मेरे दल से ...( Ëयवधान)... Sir, my time should be 
paused. …(Interruptions)…  
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
116
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY): Manoj Jha ji, one minute.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल (उǄर  Ģदेश ): सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... इसको authenticate िकया 
जाना चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
एक माननीय सदÎय: सर, इसको authenticate कराइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल : सर, मȅ आपसे आगर्ह करू ँगा िक आप क ृपया इसके  िलए िनदȃश 
दȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी एस. िनर
ंजन रेƿी): आपको िकस issue पर authentication चािहए? 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल : सर, उन्हȗने जो गुजरात मȂ आयुÍमान भारत योजना मȂ ĥÍटाचार 
को लेकर कहा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी): एक िमनट, एक िमनट। ...( Ëयवधान)... एक िमनट, 
मैडम। ...(Ëय
वधान)... नहीं, नहीं। ...(Ëयवधान)... Hon. Member is speaking. I just want 
to understand…(Interruptions)…  
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल : सर, उन्हȗने जो गुजरात मȂ आयुÍमान भारत योजना मȂ ĥÍटाचार 
को लेकर कहा है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी): एक िमनट।  मȅ आपको भी मौका दूँगा।  I am requesting 
the other M
embers to sit. …(Interruptions)…   
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल : माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इसमȂ बहुत ÎपÍट Ģणाली है।  यहाँ 
कोई जनरल आरोप लगाया जा सकता है, लेिकन अगर कोई सदÎय इस Ģकार क े ĥÍटाचार का 
आरोप लगाता है, तो उसको authenticate करना चािहए।  यह तो बड़ा simple सा िनयम है और 
आपने देखा होगा िक उस Chair से माननीय सभापित महो
दय सारे विरÍठ नेताओं से भी 
authenticate करने को कहते हȅ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी): आप िजस चीज का authentication माँग रहे हȅ, वह जो 
ĥÍटाचार का allegation है.. 
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
117

 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल : सर, उन्हȗने जो गुजरात मȂ आयुÍमान भारत योजना पर इन्हȗने 
specific आरोप लगाए हȅ, उनको ये  authenticate करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी):  ठीक है। 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY):  Sulataji, one minute. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎ
व ेदी ( उǄर Ģदेश):  सर, ...( Ëयवधान)... उन्हȗने वहाँ क े hospital का नाम 
िलया और बताया िक वहाँ पर दो पेशȂट्स क े साथ ऐसा हुआ और 15 िमनट मȂ िकतने फजीर् 
आयुÍमान काड्सर् बन गए।  सर, यह तो बहुत बड़ी बात है।  इस का पता लगवाइए िक यह क्या है?  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती सुलता देव : सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY): Sulata ji, one minute. 
…(Interruptions)…  Sulataji, you have heard the objection that was raised by some of 
the Members.  …(Interruptions)… No, please hear me fully. They are saying that 
certain allegations made by yo u are not correct. This will n eed to be examined by the 
Chair, but from your side, you please furnish whatever information you relied on. This 
will be examined by the Chair for the purpose of taking a decision.  You may not have 
to respond now. …(Interruptions)… See, there are two issues.  …(Interruptions)… 
सुलता जी, एक िमनट। ...( Ëयवधान)... सुलता जी, एक िमनट। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप Ãलीज़ 
मेरी बात सुिनए।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
डा.  राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल : सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस. िनर
ंजन रेƿी):  सुलता जी, दो  issues हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  एक िमनट। 
...(Ëयवधान)... मैडम, मȅ issue को deal कर रहा हूँ।  आप Ãलीज़ एक िमनट बैठ जाइए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... आप क ृपया 2 िमनट क े िलए शािन्त बनाकर रिखए। सुलता जी, मेरी बात सुन 
लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  Sushmitaji, please. …
(Interruptions)… The Chair will examine, 
but I am just indicating to Sulata ji. Sulataji, as a parliamentarian, we have complete 
liberty to speak, but it has been a convention that while you have the freedom to 
speak, if you are speaking on some issu e which is being seriously contested,  आपने   
िजस बुिनयाद पर या िजस basis पर अपनी speech मȂ उसका िजकर् िकया था, उसकी  
118
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
information भेज दीिजए।  The office will examine it an d then take an appropriate 
decision. …(Interruptions)…  
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Sir, …(Interruptions)… I am not yielding 
…(Interruptions)… You have taken …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY):  Sasmitji, I have not permitted  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA: I am not yielding, Sir. …(Interruptions)…   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY):   Sasmitji, I have not permitted 
you to speak. …(Interruptions)… So you will not say that you are not yielding. It is only 
when the Chair permits.  …(Interruptions)… No, sorry.  …(Interruptions)… Sasmitji, I 
have not permitted anybody else to speak. …(Interruptions)… Sasmitji, one minute. 
…(Interruptions)… Please.  No, I have not permitted you.  …(Interruptions)… I have not 
permitted anyone to speak.  …(Interruptions)… One minute.  …(Interruptions)… 
Sasmitji, please. …(Interruptions)… नीरज जी, आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Sasmitji, now 
please listen to me for one minute.  …(Interruptions)… Just give me one minute.  
…(Interruptions)… No, I have not permitted anybody to speak.  So the question 
of…(Interruptions)… One minute . I gave an opportunity …(Interruptions)… Sasmitji, 
please listen to me. …(Interruptions)… No, you hear what I am saying if you want to 
speak. …(Interruptions)… Manoj Kumar Jha ji.  Please start the clock once again.  
…(Interruptions)… I have heard.  I am sorry …(Interruptions)… Manoj
  Kumar Jhaji, your 
time will start now.  Please start. …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar) :  How can I speak in this kind of situation? 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY):  Sasmit ji, one minute. Please 
sit. …( Interruptions)… Please allow the Chair to deal with it. …( Interruptions)… 
Sasmitji, I will not be giving you 30 seconds because you are demanding it. 
…(Interruptions)… No, please listen to the Chair. …( Interruptions)… As a senior 
Member, you want to make a point, I am allowing you. …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  Sir, you are not even allowing me. …( Interruptions)…  Allow me 
to respond. …(Interruptions)…   
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
119

 
 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY):  Sasmitji, one minute. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) :  You heard them.  We have no objection.  Let the 
speaker makes clarification because she want s to do so.  Give her the floor. please. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  Sir, I am only requesting you to let me respond. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJ AN REDDY): I have heard you… 
…(Interruptions)… Neeraj ji, please. …( Interruptions)… Sasmit ji, please. 
…(Interruptions)… I have heard you. Neeraj ji, one minute. …( Interruptions)… I have 
permitted you to speak. …( Interruptions)… I just want to ex plain why I asked Sulata ji 
to give whatever basis she has, is only one reason. Can I please request? 
…(Interruptions)… Can I request you all to sit just for one minute? Please sit. 
…(Interruptions)…  No, I have not allowed them to speak, like I have not allowed 
Sasmitji to speak.  I have asked you to speak because you are a senior Member.  All 
that I am saying is, someone objected.  They asked her to authenticate. 
…(Interruptions)… One minute. Sasmit ji, please. I am not concluding it. I am just 
responding to what the hon. Member said.  I said, when certain objections were 
taken with regard to factual in accuracies, I have told Sulata ji that, as a Member of 
Parliament, every Member of Parliament, will have the freedom to speak. 
…(Interruptions)… One minute. Now, wh en a Member of Parliament speaks, if I ask 
the Member to respond to an allegation, I will be demeaning the Member because I 
respect the Member.  I would think the Member knows what she speaks and I respect 
the Member to think that she has done her research before she spoke.  Now, if 
someone makes an allegation, if I ask the Member, ‘please respond’, I am demeaning 
Sulataji. I don't want to demean a Member of  this House. So, what I have said, 
please, …( Interruptions)… Sasmit ji, I have told only one thing.  Sulata ji, as a 
responsible Member, you have spoken.  Yo u have the freedom to speak. There have 
been some complaints made about inaccu racies.  Because this House is now 
following convention of asking Members to  authenticate, I did not even ask her to 
authenticate. I asked the hon. Member, आप िजस basis पर, िजस बुिनयाद पर अपन
 ी 
Îपीच मȂ बोलीं, मȅ allegations भी नहीं बोल रहा हूँ, उसको आप चेयर को सिÅमट कर दीिजए। 
The House will take a decision.  After taking its decision …( Interruptions)…  It is very 
fair. I think, it concludes this issue. I want Manoj Kumar Jha ji to take it over.  I am not 
120
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
letting any Member hijack the House.  I am running the House.  Manoj Kumar Jhaji will 
speak and the time will start once again now.  
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA (Bihar):  Th ank you hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir. पूरा तारतÇय 
ही ट ू ट गया हेÊथ और फ ैिमली वेलफे यर की बहस मȂ।  कहाँ तो हम यह सोच रहे थे िक शुरुआत ... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी) : इनका टाइम अभी से शुरू  कर दीिजए।  आप यहां से शुरू  
कर लीिजए।  
 
Ǜी  मनोज क ुमार झा :  ठीक है, सर।  सर, कहते हȅ :  
'क ु छ कटी िहÇमत-ए-सवाल मȂ उĦ, 
क ु छ उÇमीद-ए-जवाब मȂ गुज़री।' 
 
यहां पर दो मंतर्ी महोदय थे, इसिलए मȅ अपनी बात वहाँ से रख ना  चाहता था।   
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ एक बहुत ही unusual चीज  से अपनी बातचीत शुरू  
करू ँगा।  मȅने हाल क े िदनȗ मȂ एक िकताब पढ़ी, वह बड़ी Ãयारी िकताब है।  एक पतर्कार हȅ 
उÊलेख, वे क ेरल क े हȅ।  उन्हȗने िलखा है, ‘Mad About Cuba’. क्यूबा हम सबके  बचपन से ही 
एक attracti
on का point हुआ करता था, िजसमȂ खास तौर पर क्यूबन पिÅलक हेÊथ िसÎटम 
सबसे महत्वपूणर् था।  एक बड़े साĦाज्य से लड़ने क े बावजूद क्यूबा ने यह सुिनिÌचत िकया िक 
उनके  लोगȗ का जीवन-Îतर मानवीय सूचकांक की हर चीज़ मȂ ऊपर जाए।  यह क्यूबा ने िकया।  
सर, मȅ एक छोटा-सा उ
दाहरण दूंगा, िजसमȂ मȅ एक-दो िमनट ले लूं, तो मुझे माफ कर दीिजएगा।  
सर, सहजन, िजसको मोिंरगा भी कहते हȅ, वह क्यूबा मȂ नहीं होता था, लेिक न क्यूबन डॉक्टसर् ने 
िरसचर् करके  बताया िक यह malnutrition को  address करने का बहुत महत्वपूणर् साधन है और 
इसमȂ कई तरह क े रोग िनरोधक तत्व मौजूद हȅ।  उसके  बाद, क्यूबा से एक टीम क ेरल आई, िफर 
वह तिमलना
डु गई और मोिंरगा क े बेÎट सीड्स लेकर क्यूबा वापस गई।  आज क्यूबा मȂ दजर्नȗ 
िरसचर् इंÎटीǷूट्स हȅ। मȅ यह इसिलए कह रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक आज हमारे हेÊथ सेक्टर की जो 
िदक्कतȂ हȅ, वे  crisis of capitalism से  भी पैदा हुई हȅ।  सर, मȅ क ैिपटिलज्म का घनघोर िवरोधी 
नहीं हूँ,  ले िकन मȅ देख रहा हूँ िक सरकार की अपनी कमेटी कह रही है िक eighty per cent
 
reliance is on private sector.  
सर, एक नई ËयवÎथा का जन्म हो रहा है, िजसका नाम मेिडकल पॉवटीर् है। लोग मेिडकल 
एक्सपȂस क े कारण गरीब होते जा रहे हȅ और इसका ददर् इस सद
न मȂ मुझसे बेहतर और कोई नहीं 
समझ सकता।  सर, िबहार क े सांसदȗ को Ģितिदन दो काम होते हȅ - एक, रेलवे पीएनआ र क ंफमर् 
कराना और दूसरा, लोग हमारे पास आकर कहते हȅ िक िकसी भी तरह एÇस मȂ भतीर् करवा दो।  
सर, ऐसी ËयवÎथा क्यȗ हो रही है? माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी आ गए।  मȅ हाथ जोड़कर कहूंगा िक 
अगर हमारा public healt
h infrastructure ट ू ट गया, तो इस देश का सपना ट ू टेगा, इस देश क े 
करोड़ȗ लोग क ु छ नहीं सोच पाएंगे, क्यȗिक हर कोई बड़े-बड़े पांच िसतारा अÎपताल मȂ जाने की 
िहÇमत नहीं करता है और अगर वह करता भी है, तो जमीन बेचकर करता है।  Sir, violence  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
121

 
 
against healthcare professionals, ऐसी खबरȂ पूरे देश से आ रही हȅ।  यह भी इसी ËयवÎथा का 
पिरणाम है।  इसी पूंजीवादी समाज की वजह से फामार् इंडÎटर्ी का क ंटर्ोल, फामार् इंडÎटर्ी का िगर्प 
इतना जबरदÎत है िक कई जगह पर तो वे सरकार बनाने-िबगाड़ने भी लगे हȅ।  उस संदभर् मȂ मȅ 
यह बात रख
ना चाहता हूँ।  
सर, हमारे अपने सरोकार मȂ एनएमसी को लेकर Îटȅिंडग कमेटी की एक िरपोटर् आई थी। 
उसमȂ जो िंचताएं Ëयƪ की गई थीं, मȅ चाहूंगा िक उस पर िवÎतार मȂ न जाऊँ ।  आप खुद उसक ा 
संज्ञान लȂ, क्यȗिक वह िरपोटर् आपके  पास है।  सर, contractuality of healthcare professionals 
की वजह से भी यह हो रहा है िक public healthcare professionals, चाहे वे डॉक्टसर् हȗ, 
एक्सपट्सर् हȗ, टेिक्निशयंस हȗ या नसȃज़ हȗ, वे आज Ģाइवेट सेक्टर की ओर मूव कर रहे हȅ और 
ऐसा लग रहा है िक यह िकसी क े इश
ारे पर हो रहा है, िकसी क े इरादे से हो रहा है। यह एक िंचता 
का िवषय है। जैसा िक मȅने पहले भी कहा िक गवनर्मȂट का preventive p ublic health से एक 
disconnect है और उसमȂ भी फामार् इंडÎटर्ी का िगर्प देिखए।  फामार् इंडÎटर्ी क े िलए वे रोग 
महत्वपूणर् हȅ, िजनकी दवाइयां महंगी हȅ। िजनसे पैसे इकƻे होते हȅ, धन इकƻा होता है, उन पर 
ज्यादा जोर है। 
सर, अब मȅ दो-तीन छोटी-छोटी ची
जȂ कहूँगा। बजट को लेकर और बजट एलोके शन को 
लेकर हमारे तमाम साथी बोल चुक े हȅ, मȅ उस पर वƪ नहीं लूंगा। कोिवड वाले पीिरयड मȂ हमारा 
जो budgetary allo
cation बढ़ा था, उसको episodic न रहने िदया जाए, उसको एक िनरंतरता 
Ģदान की जाए और budgetary allocation बढ़ाया जाए।  सर, medical goods and services 
पर 5 per cent uniform GST की बात हुई थी, उस पर िवचार कीिजए।  मȅ यह सलाह दे रहा हूँ।  
आज सुबह संयोगवश मȅने जीरो ऑवर मȂ एक िवषय उठाया था, तब माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप भी 
उपिÎथत थे।  आशा वकर् सर् और बाकी Îकीम वकर् सर्, जो इस देश की योजनाओं को अपने क ंधȗ पर 
ढोती हȅ और गांव, गली, क ू चे मȂ पहुंचा
ती हȅ, मȅ समझता हूँ िक उनका मानदेय peanuts क े बराबर 
भी नहीं है।  हालांिक मȅ मूंगफली की भी तौहीन नहीं करना चाह
ता हूँ, लेिकन मȅ यह कहता हूँ िक 
आपको उसे बढ़ाना होगा और उनका िरटायरमȂट बेनेिफट तय करना होगा।  खासकर, टाइप 2 
और टाइप 3 िसटीज़ मȂ मेिडकल एजुक ेशन क े मसले पर पिÅलक Ģाइवेट पाटर्नरिशप को लेकर भी 
कोई मेजर अना
उंसमȂट नहीं है।   
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी) : आपका बोलने का समय खत्म हो रहा है।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा:  महोदय, आर एंड डी फ ं ड को लेकर बात हो रही है। सर, मȅने पहले भी 
कहा है िक मȅ िबहार से आता हूं। हम लोगȗ का एÇस से बहुत बड़ा ताÊलुक है। इससे पह
ल े िक मȅ 
क ु छ भूल जाऊं , मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक देश मȂ कई नए एÇस बने हȅ - क ु छ िपछली सरकारȗ ने 
बनाए, क ु छ आपकी सरकार ने बनाए। सर, मȅ माफी क े साथ एक बात कहना चाहता हूं िक िदÊल ी  
क े एÇस की एक िविशÍट संÎकृ ित है - Culture of All India Inst itute of Medical Science. 
122
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
कÊचर surgically implanted नहीं हो सकता; इसे ऑगȃिनक रूप  से िवकिसत करना होगा। कहीं 
न कहीं क ु छ किमयां रह गई हȅ। 
 सर, आपने सभी राज्यȗ को कहा िक ÎवाÎथ्य पर 8 परसȂट खचर् करो, लेिकन िबहार मȂ यह 
मातर् 5.7 परसȂट है। इसके  अलावा, राÍटर्ीय Îव ाÎथ्य  िमशन (NHM) क े तहत िबहार को lowest 
per capita grant िमल रही है। हम बजट मȂ मुÄत मȂ बदनाम हुए। सब लोगȗ ने कहा, "िबहार को 
दे िदया, िबहार को दे िदया", लेिकन असल मȂ िबहार हमेशा "मुÄत हुए बदनाम" वाली क ै टेगरी 
मȂ आ जाता है। हमारे per capita grant क ेवल 217 रुपय े है, जो देश मȂ सबसे कम है। सर, 
Communicable diseases का prevalence और उनसे होने वाल
ी मौतȗ मȂ भी िबहार शीषर् पर है। 
आप लोग अक्सर देखते हȗगे िक देश मȂ कहीं भी कोई मौ त होगी, तो आपको उसमȂ एक िबहारी 
ज़रूर  िमल जाएगा। हमारी deaths prevalence इतनी įयादा है, चाहे रोग का मामला हो, मौत 
का मामला हो, इन सारी चीज़ȗ पर हमारी िंचता भी है।   
सर, आपके  िनदȃशानुसार, हर Ģाथिमक ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃ दर् (PHC) मȂ कम से कम 4 से 6 बेड 
होने चािहए, लेिकन िबहार मȂ क ेवल 38 Ģितशत PHC क े पास ये हालात हȅ। ...(समय की घं
टी)... 
सर, मȅ एक िमनट का समय और लूंगा।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, िबहार मȂ सामुदाियक ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃदर्ȗ (CHC) की भारी 
कमी है - िब हार  मȂ इनका शॉटर्फॉल 71 Ģितशत है। बीच मȂ एक छोटी अविध क े िलए हमारे नेता 
Ģितपक्ष िबहार क े ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी बने थे। उन्हȗने कई ËयवÎथाएं बदलीं, िजससे अÎपतालȗ मȂ एक 
नई रौनक आई और "वेलकिंमग एिटǷ ूड" बहाल हुआ। 
सर, यहां संदीप जी ने भी एक महत्वपूणर् िटÃपणी की थी। पहले हम जीवन बीमा क ंपिनयȗ 
का एक Îलोगन पढ़ते थे - " जीवन क े साथ भी, जीवन क े बाद भी"। लेिकन आज इसके  मायने 
बदल गए हȅ। अब यह नारा बीमा क ंपिनयȗ क े िलए लागू हो गया है -हम उनके  जीवन बीमा कर रहे 
हȅ, "उनके  जीवन क े साथ भी, उनके  जीवन क े बाद भी"।  उसके  मायने बदल गए हȅ, यह एक 
गÇभीर िंचता का िवषय है। ...(समय की घं
टी)... सर, मȅ एक छोटी िटÃप णी करके  अपनी बात 
समाÃत करूं गा। सर, Community Health Centre का शॉटर्फॉल 71 Ģितशत हुआ है। अगर 
रीजन क े िहसाब से मेिडकल सीट्स देखȂ, तो िबहार की मेिडकल सीट्स महाराÍटर् की तुलना मȂ 
क ेवल 30 परसȂट हȅ।  
सर, अक्सर िबहार क े िल ए एक नए एÇस की मांग उठती है। हमने एक बार मांगा था, तो 
माननीय ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी जी ने कहा था िक दरभंगा मȂ एक एÇस ĢÎतािवत है। लेिकन मȅ िवशेष रूप  
से कोसी क्षेतर् क े िलए एक अनुरोध करना चाहत ा हूं िक वहां एक  PGI type institute की अत्यंत 
आवÌयकता है। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY): Please wind up. You had 
asked for two minutes more and I have given you two-and-a-half minutes. 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा:  महोदय, मुझे 30 सेक ं ड का समय दे दीिजए। मȅ आपको पहली बार यहां 
बैठा हुआ देख रहा हूं, तो मुझे अच्छा लग रहा है। मȅ िसफर् यह कह रहा हूं िक सहरसा मȂ एक PGI 
type institute होना चािह
ए। 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
123

 
 
अंत मȂ, मȅ अपने Ģोफे शन क े बारे मȂ एक छोटी, लेिकन महत्वपूणर् बात कहना चाहता हूं। मȅ 
Îवयं सोशल वकर् क े क्षेतर् से आता हूं। There is a position in ho spitals called Medical Social 
Worker. सर, इसकी pay parity नहीं है। उसको एक बार िदखवा लीिजएगा। कई ऐसे एÇस हȅ, 
उदाहरण क े िलए, भुवनेÌवर एÇस, जो DU क े हमारे िडपाटर्मȂट की िडगर्ी को मान्यता नहीं देते। 
यह िÎथित क ै से चलेगी? सर, इसे सुधारने की ज़रूर
त है।  अगर छोटी-मोटी िटÃपणी से िकसी को 
कÍट हुआ हो, तो मȅ मा फी चाहता हूं।    
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 सर, आप अच्छे वƪ मȂ आए हȅ, जय-िहन्द!   
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Any time is good time.  Hon. Members, I am indeed honoured and 
so would the Members of this august House with the felicitation, I am indicating from 
the Chair. 
 
 
FELICITATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, it is a privilege to honour Shri Ilaiyaraaja, the 
legendary composer whose musi c has shaped Indian Cinema  for over five decades.  
Revered as Isaignani, the musical genius, his extraordinary mastery of blending 
classical traditions with contemporary sounds has given rise to timeless melodies that 
transcend generations and borders. His compositions are much beyond songs. 
These are deeply felt emotions that have touched millions.  
He has composed over 8,600 songs besi des being the only composer in the 
world to have composed music for about 1,523 feature films and in over nine 
languages. 
Shri Ilaiyaraaja’s unparalleled contributi ons to music have been accoladed and 
recognized with numerous honours, includin g five National Film Awards -- three for 
the Best Music Direction and two for Best  Background Score. A gold medallist in 
classical guitar from Trinity College of Music, London, he has elevated Indian music to 
global recognition. In 2010, he was conferred the Padma Bhushan,  followed by 
Padma Vibhushan in 2018, and, in 2022, he was awarded an honorary doctorate by 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modiji, in recognition of his remarkable legacy.  
Hon. Members, I join you in proudly announ cing that Shri Ilaiyaraaja is the first 
Indian to compose, record and perform liv e, a full English Classical Symphony Music 
titled ‘Valiant’ this month, in London with  the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra on March 
124
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
8, 2025. This symphony was composed by  him in 34 days which is a very unique 
achievement, and the whole nation and pe ople beyond are proud of this. The 
achievement is yet another testament to his enduring brilliance and global appeal.  
Beyond his musical achievements, Shri Ilaiyaraaja’s presence in this august 
House since July 2022 as a nominated Member  enriches our collective discourse. On 
behalf of this House, I extend my heartf elt felicitations to him.  May his legacy 
continue to inspire, motivate, and ma y his melodies captivate the world for 
generations to come! 
I will now revert to continuation of the debate.  It is on these occasions the 
world recognizes the sublimity and depth of Bharat.  And, in the same line, with equal 
recognition, I now invite Jayaji to take th e floor.  What a pleasant coincidence, after 
Ilaiyaraajaji’s felicitation, we have Jayaji here contributing! 
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND  
FAMILY WELFARE – Contd. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN (Utta r Pradesh): Sir, we wish you good 
health.  Vanakkam periyanna, Ilaiyaraajaji.  I have had the oppo rtunity of spending a 
lot of time with him.  In fact, we have ha d the opportunity to work with his son as one 
of the composers in one of our films.  I am very happy and thankful to the Government 
for bringing such illustrious people from this  industry into this House.  They are truly 
the representatives of the Upper House, th e House of intellectuals.  It makes me 
extremely happy.  I congratulate the Government for doing so. आपको शारीिरक ÎवाÎथ्य 
क े िलए शुभकामनाएं। सर, सÅजेक्ट बहुत अच्छा है – वैसे  तो Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव जी को 
बोलना चािहए था, क्यȗिक वे हेÊथ कमेटी क े चेयरमैन हȅ, लेिकन मȅने हाइजेक कर िलया है।  
महोदय, िकतना अच्छा लगता है, जब इस हाउस मȂ खड़े होकर एमपीज़ अपने Îटेट की 
उन्नित क े बा
रे मȂ बात करते हȅ, बड़ाई करते हȅ, लेिकन दुभार्ग्यवश हम ये नहीं कर सकते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... सर, अगर डायलॉग बोल भी दूंगी, तो अच्छा ही बोलूंगी, आप लोगȗ से तो अच्छा ही 
बोलूंगी।  
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI) in the Chair.] 
 
Sir, respecting the lives of people who br ing us to this position is a very, very 
important duty.  Let us togeth er give them that respect that they have given us, to 
speak for them, to speak on behalf of them and to take care of them.  I am sure that 
for any Government that comes to power,  the basic interest is to provide good 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
125

 
 
healthcare. िपछली बार, जब आप ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी थे, तो आपके  साथ वातार्लाप करने का मौका 
िमला था और साथ मȂ काम करने का भी मौका िमला था। सभी ने बहुत क ु छ कह िदया है,  I would 
just bring in some emotional points.  Technical data वगैरह ये सभी बोल रहे हȅ, लेिकन मȅ 
दो-तीन बहुत छोटी-छोटी चीज़Ȃ कहूंगी। First, how can we cl aim progress in medical 
facilities w
hen mothers bleed to death in transit and children starve?  Our Infant 
Mortality Rate is higher than countries lik e Sri Lanka and China.  And we also rank 
highest in wasted and stunted children under five years.  I will not elaborate on it, 
क्यȗिक इस हाउस मȂ िजतने लोग बैठे हȅ, मȅ उÇमीद करती हूं िक most of them are above 
intellectual level.  They would understand what I am trying to say. 
The next target or the next set of popula tion that I would like to speak about is 
the elderly people, the senior citizens of th is country, especially those senior citizens 
who live alone in urban cities. They are grossly neglected.  छोटे शहरȗ मȂ पिरवार इकƻा 
रहता है और पेरेन्ट्स की देखभाल हो जाती है।  मगर बड़े शहरȗ मȂ पेरेन्ट्स जब सीिनयर 
िसटीजन्स हो जाते हȅ, उनके  बच्चे या तो काम कर
ने क े िलए बाहर चले जाते हȅ या वे अपनी 
उन्नित क े िलए, अपनी Ģगित क े िलए उस शहर से कहीं और चले जाते हȅ।  इसमȂ कोई बुरी बात 
नहीं है।  But parents who live alone in flats an d in houses, are co
mpletely ignored by 
the society, by all of us. अगर िकसी िबिंÊडग मȂ कोई एÊडलीर् कपल रहता हो, तो हम लोगȗ मȂ 
से िकतने लोग ऐसे हȅ, जो उनके  पास जाकर पता करते हȅ िक आप क ै से हȅ, आपने क ु छ खाया, 
क्या आपको िकसी चीज़ की जरूरत है?  इस तर
ह की भावनाएं अब हमारे यहां से खत्म हो गई हȅ।  
...(समय की घंटी)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI):  You can continue, if you want, for 
a minute.  
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN: May I?  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI):  Yes. आज तो सेलेिĤटीज का िदन है।  
आप बोिलए। 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Thank you; you consider me to be a 
celebrity. I thought I was ‘maybe’.  सर, अबर्न एिरयाज़ मȂ जो सीिनयर िसटीजन्
 स रहते हȅ, 
they suffer from undetected dementia and Alzheimer's. There is need to conduct 
Census of such elderly people so that ti mely healthcare can be given and dignity 
upheld during the twilights of their lives.   
Next is organ donation.  सर, हमारे देश मȂ अवेयरनेस की कमी है और  religious 
beliefs और strict laws की वजह से more than 1,12,000 Indians are waiting for transplant 
and a new name is added to the national transplant waiting list every 10 minutes.  This 
126
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
requires urgent attention. हम  िफिजकल हेÊथ क े बारे मȂ बात करते हȅ िक िकसी को क्या 
बीमारी है और बड़ी-बड़ी बीमािरयȗ क े बारे मȂ बात करते हȅ, लेिकन एक छोटी सी ailment है , 
िजसके  बारे मȂ हम लोग बात तो करते हȅ, लेिकन उतना ध्यान नहीं देते हȅ and that is mental 
ailments. India allocat
es less than 1 per cent of its total health Budget to mental health 
while developed countries allocate 5 per cent to 10 per cent.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी) :  आप किन्टन्यू करȂ और 1 िमनट मȂ अपनी बात खत्म करȂ।   
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Nearly 15 per cent of Indians suffer from 
mental health disorders and there is only on e psychiatrist per 100,000 people.  It is a 
very sad situation and is completely ignored.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): Thank you, Jaya ji.  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन :  सर, क्या मȅ कन्क्लूड नहीं करूं ? 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी):  मȅ तो आपसे यही कह रहा हूं िक आप कन्क्लूड कीिजए।  
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
डा. राधा मोहन दास अगर्वाल ( उǄर Ģदेश):  सर, उन्हȂ बोलने दीिजए, वह सेलेिĤटी हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन :  राधा मोहन जी िसफािरश कर रहे हȅ।  यह तो बहुत बड़
ी  बात है।   
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी):  अगर सेलेिĤटीज़ को बुलवाया, तो आपको िफर 10 िमनट 
बुलवाना पड़ेगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन : सर, मुझे याद है, जब मेरे पित बहुत बीमार थे और अÎपताल मȂ थे।  
वे मुÇबई मȂ नहीं थे।  उन
को 24 आवस र् ऑक्सीजन की बहुत जरूरत थी।   He was in the ICCU 
and I was personally supervising. There were no nurses available.  िसलȂडर खत्म हो गया 
and he was gasping for breath. We got cylin ders in the middle of the night and they 
were empty.  Can you imagine the conditio n of the patient and the family? Anyway, I 
think, someone was kind and we managed to get them. This is very important and 
this comes under the category of medicines as well. You get spurious medicines.  In 
fact, a simple thing like Vicks is full of vax an d scent.  It is very  bad.  These things 
need to be controlled and taken care of.  I do not want to say too much.  I would like 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
127

 
 
to conclude by saying that the Government should consider bringing a unified 
healthcare law which will ease various aspects of healthcare services for the Indian 
citizens.  Thank you, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI):   N o w ,  S h r i  I r a n n a  K a d a d i .   Y o u  
have ten minutes.  
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी (कनार्टक ): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ कणार्टक से आया हूँ, इसिलए मȅ कन्नड़ 
मȂ बोलना चाहता हूँ। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): Yes, you had requested.    
 
SHRI IRANNA KADADI:  
& Thank you, hon. Vice- Chairman, Sir, for giving me the 
opportunity to speak on the Discussion of th e Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of 
the Central Government.  I wholeheartedly congratulate the beloved Prime Minister of 
this country, the globally respected leader, hon. Shri Narendra Modi, for 
implementing numerous schemes that extend healthcare services to the last person in 
the society and for bringing historic improvements to India’s healthcare sector. I also 
extend my heartfelt congratulations to the Leader of the Rajya Sabha and the 
esteemed Minister of Health, hon. Sh ri Jagat Prakash Nadda, who has been 
delivering excellent service as the Union Health Minister. 
Today, India’s health policy is not limited  to just treatment. Instead, it focuses 
on disease prevention, the expansion of modern medical facilities, revolutionary 
changes in medical education and prioritizi ng digital healthcare, which is highly 
commendable. This shift from reactive to proactive healthcare has transformed the 
way we approach public health, ensuring th at prevention and early diagnosis become 
key pillars of our strategy. 
In this year’s Budget, the Central Government has made a historic allocation of 
₹99,858.56 crore for the healthcare sector , which is a 191% increase compared to 
the Budget ten years ago. This Budget no t only expands healthcare services but also 
modernizes medical facilities, ensuring that  even the poorest sections of society can 
access treatment more easily. The vision behi nd this significant allocation is to 
strengthen our healthcare infrastructure, equip hospitals with advanced medical 
technologies and ensure that rural areas receive the same level of care as urban 
centers.  Notably, initiatives like the Ayus hman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Kannada.  
128
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Janaushadhi Kendras, the National Health Mission, the 
expansion of medical colleges, the exempt ion of taxes on life-saving medicines, 
cancer care centers, and digital health protect ion serve as milestones in making India 
a healthier and more empowered nation. Th is Budget not only enhances access to 
healthcare services but also ensures that treatments beco me more affordable and 
effective through these initiatives. 
Sir, under the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana, ₹9,406 
crore has been allocated, providing free health insurance coverage of up to ₹5 lakh for 
12 crore poor and underprivileged families. Under this scheme, 55 crore citizens have 
received healthcare benefits, and 8.39 cror e people have been allowed hospital 
admissions, delivering medical treatments worth ₹1.16 lakh crore to the ordinary 
people. This scheme financially empowers  the poor and protects them from the 
necessity of having to take loans for medi cal treatment. Moreover, this initiative has 
significantly reduced the burden on Government hospitals by enabling beneficiaries to 
seek treatment in private hospitals, ensuri ng quality healthcare for all.  Under the 
Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya Jan Aushadhi Kend ra Yojana, over the past 11 years, this 
scheme has successfully saved around ₹30,000 crore for the common man by 
distributing more than 2,000  types of medicines and ov er 300 types of surgical 
equipments. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the Government 
is reducing healthcare costs for the poor  by providing medicines at 50% to 80% 
lower prices than branded medicines. The availability of afford able and high-quality 
medicines through Jan Aushadhi Kendras has been a game-changer in public health.  
More than 15,000 Jan Aushadhi Kendras ha ve already been established across the 
country, and in the next two years, an addi tional 10,000 centers will be set up to 
further reduce the financial burden on ou r citizens. This scheme has changed the 
public perception that cheaper medicines might be of inferior quality. These generic 
medicines are certified by the World Health Organization (WHO), ensuring safety and 
efficacy. People suffering from heart dis ease, diabetes, and high blood pressure—
who spend money daily on essential medicine s—have been able to make significant 
monthly savings through this scheme, providing substantial financial relief to the poor. 
To strengthen digital healthcare services, priority is being given to digital 
infrastructure in primary h ealthcare centers. Through the e-Shram Portal, daily wage 
workers can register themselves and avail h ealth insurance benefits. This initiative 
provides social security to millions of wo rkers in the unorganized sector and ensures 
access to better healthcare services. The integr ation of telemedicine services through 
the e-Sanjeevani initiative has also played a crucial role in bridging the healthcare 
accessibility gap, especially in remote areas. 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
129

 
 
In the next three years, day-care cancer  centers will be established in all 
district hospitals across the country. By 2025-26, 200 new centers will be set up. This 
initiative will help provide advanced cancer  treatment in patients’ own districts, 
reducing overcrowding in major hospitals. Additionally, investments in research and 
development for cancer treatments are being encouraged to ensure India remains at 
the forefront of medical advancements.  Thirty-six life-saving medicines are now 
exempt from Basic Customs Duty (BCD), offe ring financial relief to patients suffering 
from cancer, rare diseases, and other se vere illnesses. This move reduces the 
economic burden on patients who rely on expensive medicines, making essential 
treatments more accessible. Furthermore, the Government has initiated steps to 
regulate the prices of critical drugs to prevent exploitation and ensure affordability. 
Sir, the budget allocation of ₹37,227 crore has been made for the National 
Health Mission, which plays a key role in strengthening primary and secondary 
healthcare services in rural and urban area s. The expansion of health and wellness 
centers under this mission is making qua lity healthcare services available at the 
grassroots level. 
As I come from the State of Karnataka, I would like to bring some of the issues 
to the notice of this august House. The St ate Government of Karnataka has failed to 
implement the healthcare schemes started by the Central Government. In the last 19 
months, over 736 mothers, post-natal, and mo re than 1,100 newborns have died in 
Karnataka. The failure to adequately implement maternal and child healthcare 
programs is deeply concerning.  The St ate Government has failed to properly 
implement Central Government schemes su ch as Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana 
Yojana and Mission Indradhanush, which ar e meant for the welfare of mothers and 
newborns. Furthermore, the funds allocated  by the Central Government for these 
schemes are being misused. I urge the Stat e authorities to take immediate corrective 
measures and ensure that these vital programmes reach the intended beneficiaries. 
Sir, in February 2023, the Central Government approved the establishment of a 
new 100-bed ESI hospital in Belagavi. I would like to brin g it to the notice of this 
House that the State Governme nt has deliberately delaye d land allocation for this 
hospital, betraying the people of Karnataka.  The unnecessary delays in such critical 
infrastructure projects hamper progress and deprive citizens of essential healthcare 
services. 
Sir, under the National Tuberculosis Eradication Mission, the TB incidence rate 
has been reduced from 237 per lakh popula tion in 2015 to 195 per lakh in 2023. 
Between 2021 and 2023, malaria cases decr eased by 13.28%, and malaria-related 
deaths declined by 7.77%. Despite thes e advancements, treatments for cardiac 
130
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
diseases, cancer and kidney transplants remain expensive. The Government is 
committed to ensuring that financial barri ers do not prevent people from accessing 
life-saving treatments.  To assist such pati ents, the Prime Minister’s National Relief 
Fund (PMNRF) provides financial aid for me dical treatment. The Government has set 
up a system to disburse financial assist ance quickly, benefiting common citizens. 
Additionally, efforts are underway to enhance organ donation awareness and 
streamline the transplant process. 
Sir, the Budget presented by the Government is a visionary budget that 
strengthens the foundation of our healthcare  system. It ensures that quality medical 
facilities reach every citize n, making healthcare more accessible, affordable and 
efficient. I welcome this Budget on behalf of  all the people of our country.  With this, I 
conclude my speech. Namaskar!      
                            
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, while 
participating in the discussi on on the Working of Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, I wish to speak on ten points. As I am from Kerala, my first three points 
would be on Kerala. The first point is on ASHA workers, the silent pillars of public 
health.  Let me start with a story, not of ce lebration, but of suffering. Sir, in Kerala, 
there are about 27,000 ASHA workers.  Thes e ASHA workers have been on indefinite 
strike for the past 37 days in torrentia l rain and scorching sun in the steps of 
Secretariat of Kerala . And now the ASHA workers have  announced that they will go 
for an indefinite hunger strike from the day after tomorrow. Why, Sir? Because the 
honorariums remain unpaid, their wages ha ve not been revised and their demands 
are met with silence. Neither the Government of Kerala nor the Centre has had the 
willingness to even listen to the concerns of ASHA workers. On International 
Women's Day, when the world celebrated, the ASHA workers in Kerala stood in 
darkness of neglect. Currently, an ASHA work er in Kerala receives Rs. 7,000 per 
month.  That is equivalent to Rs. 233 per day. Even this meagre sum is delayed. Can 
a family survive on Rs. 233 a day? And even for this meagre amount, Kerala 
Government had brought a circular which they had to withdraw under pressure 
yesterday because of the ongoing protest of ASHA workers. Twenty years ago, under 
NRHM, when ASHA workers became scheme workers, they worked as voluntary 
part-time service.  Today, they are the firs t-time responders to our most pressing 
health issue.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी) : Ãलीज़, आप लोग बैठे-बैठे बात न करȂ।  आप मेहरबानी करȂ।  
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
131

 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM : During COVID-19, like angels, ASHA workers 
went from door to door, identifying patients who were quarantined, giving them 
medicine, PPE kits, etc. Not just for COVID, they have been at the frontline of battle, 
whether it is dengue, malaria, tuberculosis , cholera, leprosy, Nipah, even taking 
pregnant women to hospitals and giving vacci nation.  Sir, as a three-term Municipal 
Councillor, I have had first-hand experien ce.  I have watched them from close 
quarters.  This is not a part-time job.  It  is, undoubtedly, a full-time job. But their 
shifts are endless. Even after going home , they have to do the data entry and 
reporting. So, their responsibilities are boundless, yet their compensation remains 
disgracefully inadequate. And, Sir, they work over 12 hours a day without social 
security, without job benefit, without a pe nsion and they retire with nothing.  'आशा ' 
अब िनराश हो गई। This is not just a policy failure. This is discrimination; this is 
exploitation; this is violation of human rights . Can a nation that prides itself in women 
empowerment justify this exploitation? Mean while, the Government of Kerala and the 
Central Government are engaged in a bl ame game regarding funds. The Finance 
Minister of Kerala claims that Centre has to give Rs. 100 crores. The Health Minister of 
Kerala claims that Rs. 636 crores have to  be given and it is pending. Whereas the 
Union Health Minister, on the floor of the Ho use says, nothing is pending. What is the 
truth? And why should ASHA workers su ffer? Sir, the recen t announcement of 
considering enhancement of remuneration by  the Union Minister in the House is a 
solace, but that is not enough.  I am glad  that J.P. Nadda ji is here. ASHA workers 
must be institutionalized as Government em ployees.  Refusal to do so is a deliberate 
systematic undervaluing of wo men labour.  Therefore, mo st respectfully, I urge the 
Central Government to regularise ASH A workers as employees; implement a 
structured pay-scale of Rs.21,000 per mo nth; ensure a retirement benefit of 
Rs.5,00,000; and ensure social security, EPF an d pension.   I raised  this issue in this 
House on 6th February 2024 and I will continue to raise it.   
 Sir, I now move on to my second point.  Anganwadi workers and helpers are 
the backbone of child nutrition.  Like ASHA workers, Anganwadi workers in Kerala are 
around 66,100 and they are also on an indefi nite strike since yesterday.  Their wages 
have not seen meaningful revision in eight years but their workload has increased 
exponentially.  An Anganwadi worker earns only Rs.12,500 per month and a helper 
earns Rs.8,700 per month.  Often, they pay for the daily expenses and they have to 
crave for their reimbursement.  This is a State-sanctioned injustice.   I urge the 
Central Government to treat Anganwadi wo rkers as Government employees in line 
with the Supreme Court Observation; impl ement a minimum wage of Rs.21,000 per 
month; and increase the retirement benefit to  Rs.5,00,000.  I had raised this issue 
132
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
also in the House on 5 th December 2023 and I will continue to raise it.  The protest 
staged by ASHA workers and Anganwadi worker s in Kerala is a show of strength of 
perseverance of women power.   
 
&” The woman power will rise and shine.  Ke rala will awake and point fingers at the 
injustice of State and Central Governments. ” I started Mahila Saahas Kerala Yatra 
from January 4 covering 1,474 Mandalams, 941 Panchayats, 87 Municipalities and six 
corporations.  I want to share here my experi ence.  In 40 days, when I travelled to 30 
Panchayats, in every Panchayat, ASHA workers and Anganwadi teachers and helpers 
came and narrated their sad stories.  Kera la under different successive Governments 
stayed ahead in public  health.  If this is the plight o f  K e r a l a ’ s  A S H A  w o r k e r s  a n d  
Anganwadi workers, then, what will be thei r plight across the nation?  I urge the 
Government that this has to end and both ASHA workers and Anganwadi workers will 
have to be treated as Government employees and benefits should be given to them.  
 Sir, my third point is Kerala’s fight for AIIMS and the tale of step-motherly 
treatment.  Kerala has done ever ything whatever is required for AIIMS.  Initially, four 
locations were identified.  Thereafter, 150 acres of land was acquired and transferred 
to the Directorate of Medical Education in Kinalur in Kozhikode only for the purpose of 
establishment of AIIMS.  But in spite of doing all that, the Unio n Government turned 
deaf ears to Kerala for AIIMS.  I want to  k n o w  t h i s  f r o m  t h e  U n i o n  M i n i s t e r  v e r y  
respectfully.  Why does not Kerala deserve an  AIIMS?  Why is there delay when other 
States are given AIIMS?  This discriminati on should end and Kerala should get an 
AIIMS.   
 Sir, I am now moving on to the national picture.  My fourth point is the tale of 
two eras -- before 2014 and after 2014.  Be fore 2014, across different Governments, 
from Jawaharlal Nehru ji to Manmohan Singh ji -- yes, of course, Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
ji was also Prime Minister -- there was a common priority.  The common priority was 
building of a robust healthcar e system in India.  The fo cus was on infrastructure, 
inclusivity and accessibility.  Priority was to provide health care.  From Achhe Din to 
Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas, Sabka  Prayaas to Amrit Kaal  to Viksit 
Bharat, there is no substance.  There are only slogans. When the WHO recommends 
five per cent of the GDP, India barely allo cates 1.9 per cent.  This is embarrassingly 
low when compared to giants.   My fifth poin t is that the public health care system is 
in ruins.  I wish to say about Ayushman Bharat .   Through Ayushman Bharat, the 
health care shifted responsibility to private players ensuring free and accessible health 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Malayalam. 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
133

 
 
to the needy, which is not there. The Comp troller and Auditor General itself has said 
that there are fake claims and there is to tal fraud. My sixth po int is about violence 
against doctors and health professionals.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): Please conclude.  
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM : India has become a place like that.  Rising 
violence against doctors is a big issue and the Centre is not doing anything. My 
seventh point is about NEET catastrophe.  The Government promised 10,000 medical 
seats but it can’t conduct even the NEET exam!  I hope Naddaji has seen Mr. Jairam 
Ramesh’s tweet as to what has happened to Post Graduate exam. My eighth point is 
about unacceptable 18 per cent GS T on health insurance. That has to be revoked.  
That is much, much higher than what people pay in the USA, the UK and South 
Africa.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): Please conclude.  
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM:  My ninth point is about drug quality concerns.  
Our drugs were used in Gamb ia and Uzbekistan. People have lost their lives. In the 
USA, people are turning blind.  So, that is a big concern.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): Please!  
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM: Sir, now, my final point.   If I don’t say it, it will be 
a big loss to the nation.  My final point is about India and the WHO.  Silence is not an 
option. WHO plays an important role; even  during Covid time, we know what WHO 
did.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): Thank you very much.   
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM : President Trump has unilaterally announced a 
decision to withdraw from the WHO. Th is is a time when the self-proclaimed 
Vishwaguru and hon. Prime Minister must step up and support the WHO.  I urge the 
hon. Prime Minister.  I do not speak today merely to criticize; I speak to warn. Our 
healthcare system is dismantled before our eyes. The Government’s policies are 
misplaced, flawed and dangerous.  
 
134
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): Thank you.   
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM : Sir, I conclude.  People of India deserve better.  
There are a lot of slogans but we need act ion; not just speeches and podcasts, but 
we need solutions; not just promises but we need justice.  Jai Hind! Thank you.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI):  Thank you.  Mr. Brittas, what is 
your point of order?  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, my point of order is under Rule 239.  Rule 239 
says, “When, for the purposes of explanation during discussion or for any other 
sufficient reason, any member has occasion to ask a question of another member on 
any matter then under the consideration of  the Council, he shall ask the question 
through the Chairman.” So, I am using your good office. Is it not a fact, as Shri Manoj 
Kumar Jha stated in the morn ing during Zero Hour, that  Kerala gives the highest 
honorarium to ASHA workers? Secondly, is it not a fact that Congress is hand-in-
glove with BJP in Kerala to distort the LDF administration there?  Thirdly, will they 
have the guts to take on BJP?  …(Interruptions)… Will they come to Delhi and fight 
BJP?  …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (S HRI PRAMOD TIWARI):  This is not a point of order.  
…(Interruptions)… Please!  …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, it is under Rule 239.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI):  No point of order! Now, Mr. Abdul 
Wahab.  
 
सुǛी दोला सेन (पिÌचमी बंगाल) : सर, बार-बार यही हो रहा है। बीजेपी क े बाद कांगर्ेस का टनर् 
आता है और कांगर्ेस क े बाद तृणमूल कांगर्ेस का टनर् आता है, पर आपने कल भी यह परÇपरा तोड़ी  
थी, आज भी तोड़ दी।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI):  It i
s Chairman’s discretion.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN:  Sir, it is Chairman’s discretion but please maintain the convention.  
 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
135

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI): If I am sitting in the Chair, I am also 
bound by Chairman’s discretion. Please!  Now, Mr. Abdul Wahab.  
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB (Kerala): Respected Vice-Chairman, Sir, when we tell the 
truth about the Kerala Government, then, thes e people start making points of order.  
About ASHA workers, already my colleague has explained. I don’t want to explain 
more about that. Both the Kerala Gove rnment and the Central Government are 
playing  politics.  We don’t know who is right and who is wrong.  …( Interruptions)… 
Dr. John Brittas is blaming the Centre and we ar e saying that both are culprits in this.  
The case of ASHA workers is that a minimum of Rs. 21,000 be given. If I am starting 
business, then only this minimum wage come into picture but, in the Kerala 
Government, there is no minimum wage. Rs. 21,000 is given from Kerala Government 
either with the help of Centre  or otherwise. That should be Rs.21,000.  At the time of 
retirement, they need Rs. 5 la kh, they are fighting for that.  And how many times the 
demand for AIIMS has been made, I do not know.  We are asking Naddaji to just 
make an AIIMS in Kerala, wherever it is.  Th en, coming to national institute status for 
Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal, you all know about Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal.  It 
should have a national status.  Kottakkal ba gged all India third rank in Quality Council 
of India ratings.  The Government  should elevate the status of Arya Vaidya Sala, 
Kottakkal to National Institute of Ayurveda status, like the one in Jaipur.  A memorial 
in honour of late Shri P.K. Warrier, who took ayurveda to masses, also needs to be 
set up.  Now, my request to Nadda ji is to increase the seats for MBBS.  As you all 
know, because of not much seats, everyb ody is going outside to countries like 
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan.  They are going to so many places and I do not know what 
they are getting enrolled into.  A lot of money is spent by our students there.  So, 
increase our MBBS seats to a level as you told that this many doctors we need for this 
many people.  The quality of examination for practising in India is a great entry barrier 
for many students coming back.  We need to ease the entry of foreign educated 
medical students by giving them license to practice in India.  Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham already spoke about increasing att acks against medical practitioners.  The 
medical practitioners and doctors are having  a lot of problems from the families and 
people who come for the medica l care.  So, the medical frat ernity feels that they are 
being unfairly targeted and being treated unju stly.  Increased sensitization and strict 
laws need to be formulated.  Then, there are pathetic working conditions of nurses 
and other medical staff in India.  Nurses  have been one of the most exploited 
communities by private hospitals in India.  The minimum wages for nurses in all 
private hospitals should also be kept, at least, Rs.21,000.  The Union Government 
136
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
should intervene to make their working conditions better and ensure that these 
communities are not exploited any more in the hands of private hospitals.  There is 
one more request about CGHS facility for us  and the Government employees.  It is 
not there so much in Kerala.  From our di stricts of Malappuram and Palakkad and all, 
we have to go all the way to Calicut to get the CGHS facility.  So, please include 
Malappuram also in that one. 
 
Ǜी मोहÇमद नदीमुल हक ( पिÌचमी बंगाल): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ अपनी पाटीर् ऑल इंिडया 
तृणमूल कांगर्ेस और हमारी लीडर ममता बनजीर् का तहेिदल से शुिकर्या अदा करता हूं िक आज 
मुझे यहां बोलने का मौका िदया।  सर, कहते हȅ िक जान है, तो जहान है और यही सेहत का राज 
है। मकर्ज़ी हुक ूमत आवामी सेहत को मजबूत बना
ने क े बड़े-बड़े दावे करती है, लेिकन हकीकत 
िबÊकु ल मुख्तिलफ है।  मुÊक मȂ सेहत आमा की इंतहाई अबतर हालत को उजागर करती है।  मेरी 
पाटीर् ने बार-बार लाइफ और मेिडकल इंÌयोरȂस क े Ģीिमयम क े बारे मȂ कहा है िक उस पर से 18 
परȂसट जीएसटी  को हटाया जाए,  ले िकन अभी तक इस पर कोई अमल नहीं हुआ है।  सर, 
हुक ूमत नेशनल हेÊथ पॉिलसी क े तहत पिÅलक हेÊथ क े इख़राजात को जीडीपी क े ढाई परसȂट 
का दावा करती थी, लेिकन जब बजट पेश हुआ, तो हम लोग देख रहे हȅ िक जीडीपी का .28 
परसȂट िहÎसा हेÊथ क े िलए मुख्तसर िकया गया है, उसके  िलए िरजवर् िकया  गया है, जबिक 
वÊडर् एवरेज कम से कम 6 परसȂट होती है और यह हुक ूमत क े  यूिनवसर्ल हेÊथके यर पर एक बहुत 
बड़ा धÅबा है।  सर, मुÊक मȂ बहुत सारे Ģीिमयर मेिडकल इंÎटीǷूशन्स हȅ, िजसमȂ से एÇस भी है।  
अगर उसकी हालत देखȂ, तो एÇस मȂ आज क े िदन मȂ 18,256 आसािमयां खाली हȅ और कÊयाणी 
एÇस मȂ 151 फ ैकÊटी और 812 नॉन फ ैकÊटी मेÇब
सर् की भी आसािमयां खाली हȅ।  क ै से यह हुक ूमत 
हेÊथ क े  िलए सहुिलयत फराहम करेगी,  अगर हॉिÎपटल मȂ जो जगह खाली हȅ, वहीं भतीर् नहीं 
होगी।  अगर मेन्टल हेÊथ देखȂ, िजसको जे़हनी सेहत भी कहते हȅ, उसमȂ भी हेÊथ क े बजट का 1 
परसȂट खचर् िकया जाता है, लेिकन उससे भी कम खचर् िकया जाता है।  इसमȂ भी इंसाफ नहीं हो 
रहा है। इस नाकामी क े बरअकस अग र हम बंगाल मȂ जाएं, तो ममता बनजीर्, हमारी दीदी ने 2010-
11 मȂ कमान संभाली थी, जबिक वहां बजट 2,885 करोड़  रुपय े था। महोदय, आज क े िदन हेÊथ 
का बजट बढ़कर 20 हज़ार , 200 करोड़  रुपय े हो गया है। एमबीबीएस सीट्स, जो 1,355 थीं, वे 
आज क े िदन मȂ 5,650 हो  गई हȅ। महोदय, पोÎट गर्ेज्युएट, पोÎट डॉक्टरेट की तादाद दुगुनी हो 
चुकी है और निसȊग सीट्स भी आज क े िदन 10
 गुना हो चुकी हȅ। सर, इंģाÎटर्चर क े िलहाज़ से 
पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ अÎपताल क े बेड्स की तादाद दुगुनी हो गई है और कई Îपेिशयिलटी अÎपताल, 
ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃ दर् भी कायम िकए गए हȅ।  
सर, कौमी खानदानी सेहत सवȃ, NFHS-5 क े मुतािबक इस अक़दाम से, इस कदम से 
आज पूरे पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ 88 परसȂट वैिक्सनेशन हो रहा है। महोदय, natio nal average िसफर् 77 
परसȂट है, यहाँ तक िक पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ ख्वातीन की िग़ज़ाई सूरतेहाल क े िफगर भी कौमी 
औसत से बढ़कर आगे हो गए हȅ। These achievements reflect West Bengal’s commitment 
to accessible and quality healthcare for all. इस कामयाबी की बुिनयाद ‘ ÎवÎथ साथी 
योजना’ है। यह मग़रीबी बंगाल की एक  f
lagship सेहत इंÌयोरȂस Îकीम है, जो मुकÇमल तौर पर 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
137

 
 
िरयासती हुक ूमत क े ज़िरये माली हालत फराहम करती है। इस Îकीम मȂ िरयासत भर मȂ 2 करोड़, 
45 लाख फ ैिमलीज़ और 8 करोड़, 50 लाख फदर् हȅ। उनको बेिनिफट िदया जाता है और वे सभी 
लोग इसके  अंदर कवर हȅ। इस Îकीम क े तहत 2,879 अÎपताल और निसȊग होम भी रिजÎटडर् हȅ। 
सर, 85 ला
ख से ज्यादा beneficiaries ने 11 हज़ार  करोड़ रुपय े से ज्यादा की िख़दमात हािसल 
की है।  
महोदय, िसफर् 2023-24 मȂ इस Îकीम क े तहत 2 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े से ज्यादा खचर् िकये 
गये हȅ और रोज़ाना तक रीबन 6 हज़ार मरीज़ इस सहूिलयत से फायदा उठा रहे हȅ। सर, अगर हम 
लोग ‘ ÎवÎथ साथी योजना’ और ‘ पीएम जन आरोग्य योजना’ को compare करȂ, तो यह देखा 
जाएगा िक सबसे पहले ‘ पीएम जन आरोग्य योजना’ socio-economic और काÎट पर मुबनी 
मरदुम शुमारी की िमयाद तक महदूद है, जबिक ‘ÎवÎथ साथी  योजना’ मग़िरबी बंगाल क े तमाम 
permanent residents को कवर करती है, िसव
ाय उनके  जो पहले से बीमाशुदा हȅ।  
सर, क्यȗिक यह पुराने डेटा पर इनहेसार करती है,  PMJAY मȂ बड़े पैमाने पर अखराज 
की गलितयाँ होती हȅ, जबि
क ‘ ÎवÎथ साथी योजना’ बुजुगर् खातूनेखाना क े नाम पर एक Îमाटर् 
काडर् जारी करती है, जो शनाख्ती अमल को आसान बनाती है। सर, पीएमजेएवाई एक  
insurance model है, जहाँ पर अकसर insurance claim reject भी िकए जाते हȅ, जबिक ‘ÎवÎथ 
साथी योजना’ एक  assurance model है , जहाँ पर िकसी को महरूम  नह
ीं िकया जाता है। सर, 
मज़ीद आगे बढ़Ȃ, तो कौमी सेहत िमशन, मायने National Health Mission मरकज़ी  हुक ूमत की 
जािनब से  funding मȂ एक बहुत बड़ा £ िकया जा रहा है।  सर, इस scheme  का 60:40 का शेयर 
होना चािहए, लेिकन बंगाल को जुलाई, 2023 मȂ िपछले 280 करोड़ रुपय े िमले थे और 2023 से लेकर 2025 तक 1 
रुपया भी हम लोगȗ को कहीं पर भी नहीं िदया गया है। अपनी  pocket से अभी जो 2,720 करोड़ 
रुपय े बकाया हो गये हȅ, इसकी वजह से बहुत बड़ी ĢॉÅलम हो रही है और Îटेट गवमȄट पर पूरे 
अखराजात का बोझ पड़ रहा है। …(Ëयव धान)… सर, मरकज़ी हुक ूमत फȻ से दावा करती है िक 
डॉक्टर और आबादी का जो रेÌयो है,  वह  1:811  है , जबिक डÅÊयूएचओ का Îटȅडडर् 1:1000 है, 
लेिकन इसमȂ 6 लाख, 14 हज़ार आयुष डॉक्टसर् को जोड़ िलया गया है। ...सर, मुझे एक िमनट दे 
दीिजए।  
 
† ﺟﻨﺎﺏ ﷴ ﻧﺪﻳﻢ ﺍﻟﺤﻖ)ﻣﻐﺮﺑﯽ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ(:ﺍُپ ﺳﺒﻬﺎ ﺍﺩﻫﻴﮑﺶ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﭘﺎﺭﭨﯽ ﺍٓﻝ ﺍﻧﮉﻳﺎ ﺗﺮﻳﻨﻤﻮﻝ ﮐﺎﻧﮕﺮﻳﺲ ﺍﻭﺭ  
ﻮﻟﻨﮯ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ ﺩﻳﺎ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﮐﮩﺘﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﮐہ ﮨﻤﺎﺭی ﻟﻴﮉﺭ ﻣﻤﺘﺎ ﺑﻨﺮﺟﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺗہ ﺩﻝ ﺳﮯ ﺷﮑﺮﻳہ ﺍﺩﺍ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ ﺍٓﺝ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﻳﮩﺎں ﺑ 
؎ﺟﺎﻥ ﮨﮯ ﺗﻮ ﺟﮩﺎﻥ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻳﮩﯽ ﺻﺤﺖ ﮐﺎ ﺭﺍﺯ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻣﺮﮐﺰی ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﻋﻮﺍﻣﯽ ﺻﺤﺖ ﮐﻮ ﻣﻀﺒﻮﻁ ﺑﻨﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺑﮍے ﺑﮍے 
ﺩﻋﻮے ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﺣﻘﻴﻘﺖ ﺑﻠﮑﻞ ﻣﺨﺘﻠﻒ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻣﻠﮏ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺻﺤﺖ ﻋﺎﻣہ ﮐہ ﺍﻧﺘﮩﺎﺋﯽ ﺍﺑﺘﺮ ﺣﺎﻟﺖ ﮐﻮ ﺍﺟﺎﮔﺮ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ 
ﻞ ﺍﻧﺸﻮﺭﻳﻨﺲ ﮐﮯ ﭘﺮﻳﻤﻴﻢ ﮐﮯ ﺑﺎﺭے ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﮩﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺍﺱ ﭘﺮ ﺳﮯ ﺍﭨﻬﺎﺭﻩ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﻣﻴﺮی ﭘﺎﺭﭨﯽ ﻧﮯ ﺑﺎﺭ ﺑﺎﺭ ﻻﺋﻒ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻣﻴﮉﻳﮑ 
ﺟﯽ ﺍﻳﺲ ﭨﯽ ﮐﻮ ﮨﭩﺎﻳﺎ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﺍﺑﻬﯽ ﺗﮏ ﺍﺱ ﭘﺮ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﻋﻤﻞ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺍ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﻧﻴﺸﻨﻞ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﭘﺎﻟﻴﺴﯽ ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ 
ﮨﻢ ﻟﻮگ ﭘﺒﻠﮏ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﮐﮯ ﺍﺧﺮﺍﺟﺎﺕ ﮐﻮ ﺟﯽ ڈی ﭘﯽ ﮐﮯ ڈﻫﺎﺋﯽ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﮐﺎ ﺩﻋﻮی ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﺗﻬﯽ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﺟﺐ ﺑﺠﭧ ﭘﻴﺶ ﮨﻮﺍ، ﺗﻮ 
ﺩﻳﮑﻬ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﮐہ ﺟﯽ ڈی ﭘﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺍﭨﻬﺎﺋﻴﺲ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﺣﺼہ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻣﺨﺘﺺ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺭﻳﺰﺭﻭ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ 
ﮨﮯ۔ ﺟﺐ ﮐہ ﻭﺭﻟﮉ ﺍﻳﻮﺭﻳﺞ ﮐﻢ ﺳﮯ ﮐﻢ ﭼﻬ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻳہ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﮐﮯ ﻳﻮﻧﻴﻮﺭﺳﻞ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﮐﺌﻴﺮ ﭘﺮ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﮍﺍ 
ﻴﻮﺷﻨﺲ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺟﺲ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﮯ ﺍﻳﻤﺲ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﮔﺮ ﺍﺱ ﮐﯽ ﺩﻫﺒہ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻠﮏ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺳﺎﺭے ﭘﺮﻳﻤﺌﻴﺮ ﻣﻴﮉﻳﮑﻞ ﺍﻧﺴﭩﯽ ﭨ
ﺣﺎﻟﺖ ﺩﻳﮑﻬﻴﮟ، ﺗﻮ ﺍﻳﻤﺲ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﮯ ﺩﻥ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﭨﻬﺎﺭﻩ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﺩﻭ ﺳﻮ ﭼﻬﭙﻦ ﺍٓﺳﺎﻣﻴﺎں ﺧﺎﻟﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﻠﻴﺎﻧﯽ ﺍﻳﻤﺲ ﻣﻴﮟ 151  
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
138
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
ﻓﻴﮑﻠﭩﯽ ﺍﻭﺭ812ﻧﺎﻥ ﻓﻴﮑﻠﭩﯽ ﻣﻤﺒﺮﺱ ﮐﯽ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍٓﺳﺎﻣﻴﺎں ﺧﺎﻟﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﮐﻴﺴﮯ ﻳہ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺳﮩﻮﻟﻴﺖ ﻓﺮﺍﮨﻢ ﮐﺮﻳﮕﯽ۔
ﺮ ﮨﺎﺳﭙﭩﻞ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺟﻮ ﺟﮕہ ﺧﺎﻟﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﻭﮨﻴﮟ ﺑﻬﺮﺗﯽ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﮔﯽ۔ ﺍﮔﺮ ﻣﻴﻨﭩﻞ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﺩﻳﮑﻬﻴﮟ، ﺟﺲ ﮐﻮ ﺫﮨﻨﯽ ﺻﺤﺖ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮐﮩﺘﮯ ﺍﮔ 
ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﮐﮯ ﺑﺠﭧ ﮐﺎ ﺍﻳﮏ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﺧﺮچ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺟﺎﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﺍﺱ ﺳﮯ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮐﻢ ﺧﺮچ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺟﺎﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﻣﻴﮟ ﺟﺎﺋﻴﮟ ﺗﻮ ﻣﻤﺘﺎ ﺑﻨﺮﺟﯽ، ﮨﻤﺎﺭی ﺩﻳﺪی ﻧﮯ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍﻧﺼﺎﻑ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻧﺎﮐﺎﻣﯽ ﮐﮯ ﺑﺮﻋﮑﺲ ﺍﮔﺮ ﮨﻢ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ 2010-
11ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﻤﺎﻥ ﺳﻨﺒﻬﺎﻟﯽ ﺗﻬﯽ، ﺟﺐ ﮐہ ﻭﮨﺎں ﺑﺠﭧ2,885ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﺭﻭﭘﮯ ﺗﻬﺎ۔  
ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﮯ ﺩﻥ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﮐﺎ ﺑﺠﭧ ﺑﮍﻫ ﮐﺮ ﺑﻴﺲ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ، ﺩﻭ ﺳﻮ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﺭﻭﭘﮯ ﮨﻮﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﻳﻢ ﺑﯽ ﺑﯽ ﺍﻳﺲ ﺳﻴﭧ، ﺟﻮ ﺍﻳﮏ 
ﭼﻬ ﺳﻮ ﭘﭽﺎﺱ ﮨﻮﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﭘﻮﺳﭧ ﮔﺮﻳﺠﻮﻳﭧ، ﭘﻮﺳﭧ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﺗﻴﻦ ﺳﻮ ﭘﭽﭙﻦ ﺗﻬﻴﮟ، ﻭﻩ ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﮯ ﺩﻥ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﺎﻧﭻ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ 
ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮﻳﭧ ﮐﯽ ﺗﻌﺪﺍﺩ ﺩﻭﮔﻨﯽ ﮨﻮﭼﮑﯽ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻧﺮﺳﻨﮓ ﺳﻴﭩﺲ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﮯ ﺩﻥ ﺩﺱ ﮔﻨﺎ ﮨﻮﭼﮑﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﺍﻧﻔﺮﺍﺳﭩﺮﮐﭽﺮ ﮐﮯ 
ﻟﺤﺎﻅ ﺳﮯ ﻣﻐﺮﺑﯽ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺳﭙﺘﺎﻝ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻴﮉﺱ ﮐﯽ ﺗﻌﺪﺍﺩ ﺩﻭﮔﻨﯽ ﮨﻮﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﺌﯽ ﺍﺳﭙﻴﺸﻴﻠﭩﯽ ﺍﺳﭙﺘﺎﻝ، ﺳﻮﺍﺳﺘﻬ ﮐﻴﻨﺪﺭ 
ﮐﻴﮯ ﮔﺌﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻗﺎﺋﻢ  
  ﺳﺮ، ﻗﻮﻣﯽ ﺧﺎﻧﺪﺍﻧﯽ ﺻﺤﺖ ﺳﺮﻭے، NFHS-5ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ ﺍﺱ ﺍﻗﺪﺍﻡ ﺳﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﻗﺪﻡ ﺳﮯ ﺍٓﺝ ﭘﻮﺭے ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ ﻣﻴﮟ
ﺍﭨﻬﺎﺳﯽ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﻭﻳﮑﺴﯽ ﻧﻴﺸﻦ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻧﻴﺸﻨﻞ ﺍﻳﻮﺭﻳﺞ ﺻﺮﻑ 77ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﻳﮩﺎں ﺗﮏ ﮐہ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﺧﻮﺍﺗﻴﻦ ﮐﯽ ﻏﺬﺍﺋﯽ ﺻﻮﺭﺗﺤﺎﻝ ﮐﮯ ﻓﮕﺮ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻗﻮﻣﯽ ﺍﻭﺳﻂ ﺳﮯ ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﮨﻴﮟThese achievements reflects West 
Bengal’s commitment to accessible and quality healthcare for all.ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎﻣﻴﺎﺑﯽ ﮐﯽ ﺑﻨﻴﺎﺩ 
ﺳﻮﺳﺘﻬ ﺳﺎﺗﻬﯽ ﮐﯽ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻳہ ﻣﻐﺮﺑﯽ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ ﮐﯽ ﺍﻳﮏ ﻓﻠﻴﮓ ﺷﭗ ﺻﺤﺖ ﺍﻧﺸﻮﺭﻳﻨﺲ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻮ ﻣﮑﻤﻞ ﻁﻮﺭ ﭘﺮ 
ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﻳﺎﺳﺖ ﺑﻬﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺩﻭ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﭘﻨﺘﺎﻟﻴﺲ ﻻﮐﻬ ﻓﻴﻤﻠﻴﺰ  ﺭﻳﺎﺳﺘﯽ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﮐﮯ ﺫﺭﻳﻌہ ﻣﺎﻟﯽ ﻣﺪﺩ ﻓﺮﺍﮨﻢ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ
ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍٓﭨﻬ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﭘﭽﺎﺱ ﻻﮐﻬ ﻓﺮﺩ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺍﻥ ﮐﻮ ﻓﺎﺋﺪﻩ ﺩﻳﺎ ﺟﺎﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻭﻩ ﺳﺒﻬﯽ ﻟﻮگ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻧﺪﺭ ﮐﻮﺭ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺍﺱ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﮐﮯ 
ﻧﮯ ﮔﻴﺎﺭﻩ ﺗﺤﺖ ﺩﻭ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﺍٓﭨﻬ ﺳﻮ ﺍﻧﺎﺳﯽ ﺍﺳﭙﺘﺎﻝ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻧﺮﺳﻨﮓ ﮨﻮﻡ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺭﺟﺴﭩﺮڈ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﭘﭽﻴﺎﺳﯽ ﻻﮐﻬ ﺳﮯ ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﺑﻴﻨﻔﺸﺮﻳﺰ 
ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﺭﻭﭘﮯ ﺳﮯ ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﮐﯽ ﺧﺪﻣﺎﺕ ﺣﺎﺻﻞ ﮐﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ۔  
  ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﺻﺮﻑ 2023-24ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺱ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ ﺩﻭ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﺭﻭﭘﮯ ﺳﮯ ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﺧﺮچ ﮐﺌﮯ ﮔﺌﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ
ﺍﻭﺭ ﺭﻭﺯﺍﻧہ ﺗﻘﺮﻳﺒﺎً ﭼﻬ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﻣﺮﻳﺾ ﺍﺱ ﺳﮩﻮﻟﻴﺖ ﺳﮯ ﻓﺎﺋﺪﻩ ﺍﭨﻬﺎ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﺍﮔﺮ ﮨﻢ ﻟﻮگ ﺳﻮﺳﺘﻬ ﺳﺎﺗﻬﯽ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ ﭘﯽ 
ﻴہ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮐﻮ ﮐﻤﭙﺌﻴﺮ ﮐﺮﻳﮟ، ﺗﻮ ﻳہ ﺩﻳﮑﻬﺎ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ ﮔﺎ ﮐہ ﺳﺐ ﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﭘﯽ ﺍﻳﻢ ﺍٓﺭﻭﮔﻴہ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﺍﻳﻢ ﺟﻦ ﺍٓﺭﻭﮔ socio-
economic ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﺎﺳﭧ ﭘﺮ ﻣﺒﻨﯽ ﻣﺮﺩﻡ ﺷﻤﺎﺭی ﮐﯽ ﻣﻴﻌﺎﺩ ﺗﮏ ﻣﺤﺪﻭﺩ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﺐ ﮐہ ﺳﻮﺳﺘﻬ ﺳﺎﺗﻬﯽ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ، ﻣﻐﺮﺑﯽ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ 
ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﮐﮯ ﺗﻤﺎﻡ ﭘﺮﻣﺎﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﺭﻳﺰﻳﮉﻳﻨﭩﺲ ﮐﻮ ﮐﻮﺭ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﺳﻮﺍﺋﮯ ﺍﻥ ﮐﮯ ﺟﻮ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﺳﮯ ﺑﻴﻤﺎﺷﺪﻩ  
   
ﺳﺮ ﮐﻴﻮں ﮐہ ﻳہ ﭘﺮﺍﻧﮯ ڈﻳﭩﺎ ﭘﺮ ﺍﻧﺤﺼﺎﺭ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، PMJAY ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﮍے ﭘﻴﻤﺎﻧﮯ ﭘﺮ ﺍﺧﺮﺍﺝ ﮐﯽ ﻏﻠﻄﻴﺎں ﮨﻮﺗﯽ
ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺟﺐ ﮐہ ﺳﻮﺳﺘﻬ ﺳﺎﺗﻬﯽ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﺑﺰﺭگ ﺧﺎﺗﻮﻥ ﺧﺎﻧہ ﮐﮯ ﻧﺎﻡ ﭘﺮ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺍﺳﻤﺎﺭٹ ﮐﺎﺭڈ ﺟﺎﺭی ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻮ ﺷﻨﺎﺧﺘﯽ ﻋﻤﻞ 
ﮨﮯ، ﺟﮩﺎں ﭘﺮ ﺍﮐﺜﺮ ﺍﻧﺸﻮﺭﻳﻨﺲ ﮐﻠﻴﻢ ﺭﻳﺠﻴﮑﭧ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮐﻮ ﺍٓﺳﺎﻥ ﺑﻨﺎﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﭘﯽ ﺍﻳﻢ ﺟﮯ ﺍے ﻭﺍﺋﯽ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺍﻧﺸﻮﺭﻳﻨﺲ ﻣﺎڈﻝ 
 ﮨﮯ۔ﮐﻴﮯ ﺟﺎﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺟﺐ ﮐہ ﺳﻮﺳﺘﻬ ﺳﺎﺗﻬﯽ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺍﻳﺸﻮﺭﻳﻨﺲ ﻣﺎڈﻝ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﮩﺎں ﭘﺮﮐﺴﯽ ﮐﻮ ﻣﺤﺮﻭﻡ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺟﺎﺗﺎ 
 ﺍﻳﮏ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻓﻨﮉﻧﮓ ﺳﮯ ﺟﺎﻧﺐ ﮐﯽ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﻣﺮﮐﺰی ﻣﺸﻦ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﻧﻴﺸﻨﻞ ﻣﻌﻨﯽ ﻣﺸﻦ، ﺻﺤﺖ ﻗﻮﻣﯽ ﺗﻮ ﺑﮍﻫﻴﮟ، ﺍٓﮔﮯ ﻣﺰﻳﺪ ﺳﺮ، 
 ﮐﺎ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﺍﺱ ﺳﺮ، ﮨﮯ۔ ﺭﮨﺎﺟﺎ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺩﻫﻮﮐہ ﺑﮍﺍ ﺑﮩﺖ60:40ﺟﻮﻻﺋﯽ ﮐﻮ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﭼﺎﮨﺌﮯ، ﮨﻮﻧﺎ ﺷﺌﻴﺮ ﮐﺎ2023 ﻣﻴﮟ ، 
 ﭘﭽﻬﻠﮯ280 ﺍﻭﺭ ﺗﻬﮯ ﻣﻠﮯ ﺭﻭﭘﮯ ﮐﺮﻭڑ2023 ﻟﻴﮑﺮ ﺳﮯ2025ﻴہ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺗﮏ
 ﺑﻬﯽ ﭘﺮ ﮐﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﻮ ﻟﻮﮔﻮں ﮨﻢ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺭﻭﭘ
 ﺟﻮ ﺍﺑﻬﯽ ﺳﮯ ﭘﺎﮐﻴﭧ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﮔﻴﺎ ﺩﻳﺎ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ2,720 ﭘﺮﺍﺑﻠﻢ ﺑﮍی ﺑﮩﺖ ﺳﮯ ﺟہﻭ ﮐﯽ ﺍﺱ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﮨﻮﮔﺌﮯ ﺑﻘﺎﻳہ ﺭﻭﭘﮯ ﮐﺮﻭڑ 
ﮨﮯ۔۔۔ ﺭﮨﺎ ﭘﮍ ﺑﻮﺟﻬ ﮐﺎ ﺍﺧﺮﺍﺟﺎﺕ ﭘﻮﺭے ﭘﺮ ﮔﻮﺭﻧﻤﻨﭧ ﺍﺳﭩﻴﭧ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮨﮯ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﯽ)ﻣﺪﺍﺧﻠﺖ( ﺳﮯ ﻓﺨﺮ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﻣﺮﮐﺰی ﺳﺮ ۔۔۔
ﻭﻩ ﮨﮯ، ﺭﻳﺸﻮ ﺟﻮ ﮐﺎ ﺍٓﺑﺎﺩی ﺍﻭﺭ ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮ ﮐہ ﮨﮯ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﺩﻋﻮی 1:811  ﮐﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﻳﭻ ڈﺑﻠﻴﻮ ﮐہ ﺟﺐ ﮨﮯ،1:1000ﺭڈ
 ﺍﺳﭩﻴﻨﮉ
ﺩﻳﺠﻴﺌﮯ۔ ﺩے ﻣﻨﭧ ﺍﻳﮏ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﺳﺮ ﮨﮯ۔ ﮔﻴﺎ ﻟﻴﺎ ﺟﻮڑ ﮐﻮ ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮﺱ ﻳﻮﺵﺍٓ  ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﭼﻮﺩﻩ ﻻﮐﻬ ﭼﻬ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺱ ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﮨﮯ،   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी) : हाँ, एक िमनट ले लीिजए।  
 
Ǜी मोहÇमद नदीमुल हक: महोदय, आयुष और एलोपेथी डॉक्टसर् को एक साथ िगनने से 
एक्चुअल रेÌयो मȂ बहुत फकर् आता है। आयुष की जो दवाएं हȅ, उनमȂ भी बहुत हैवी मेटÊस हȅ। 
पिÅलक मȂ उसे इंटर्ोǹूस करने क े िल ए उनकी जाँच होनी बहुत जरूरी है।  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
139

 
 
सर, आपने समय िदया, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या, अब मȅ आिखरी बात पर 
आता हूं। सर, पिÅलक हेÊथ कोई िरयायत नहीं, बिÊक एक बुिनयादी हक है और इस हुक ूमत की 
नाकामी करोड़ȗ अफरात को उनके  बुिनयादी हुक ू क से महरूम  कर रही है। हुक ूमत क े दा वȗ, वादȗ 
और उनकी अमली कारकरिदगी क े दरÇयान फकर् पहले से कहीं ज्यादा बढ़ चुका है। जैसा िक मȅने 
आज बयान िकया है िक मरकज़ी Îकीमȗ क े िलए फ ंिंडग नाकाफी है, अÎपताल अÇले की शदी द 
कमी का िशकार है, ज़ेहनी सेहत को नजरअंदाज िकया जा रहा है और अहम ÎकीमȂ बदनįमी की 
वजह से मुतािसर हो रही हȅ। हमȂ असत्य वादे और गुमराहकु न डेटा नहीं, बिÊक अमली एकदमात 
दरकार है। मȅ मरकज़ी हुक ूमत से गुजािरश करत ा हूं िक वह बंगाल मॉडल से सबक हािसल करे 
और मुÊक की आवाम क े िलए पिÅलक हेÊथ क े बुिनयादी ढांचे को बेहतर बनाने क े िलए फ़ौरी 
कदम उठाए।  सर, बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
 ﺍﻟﺤﻖ ﻧﺪﻳﻢ ﷴ ﺟﻨﺎﺏ : ﻓﺮﻕ ﺑﮩﺖ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﻳﺸﻮ ﺍﻳﮑﭽﻮﻝ ﺳﮯ ﮔﻨﻨﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ ﺍﻳﮏ ﮐﻮ ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮﺱ ﺍﻳﻠﻮﭘﻴﺘﻬﯽ ﻭﺭﺍ ﺍٓﻳﻮﺵ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، 
 ﮐﯽ ﺍﻥ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮐﮯ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﺍﻧﭩﺮڈﻳﻮﺱ ﺍﺳﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﺒﻠﮏ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﻣﻴﭩﻠﺲ ﮨﻴﻮی ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻥ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺩﻭﺍﺋﻴﮟ ﺟﻮ ﮐﯽ ﺍٓﻳﻮﺵ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍٓﺗﺎ 
ﮨﮯ۔ ﺿﺮﻭﺭی ﺑﮩﺖ ﮨﻮﻧﯽ ﺟﺎﻧﭻ  
  ﻗﺖ ﻧﮯ ﺍٓپ ﺳﺮ، 
 ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﭘﺒﻠﮏ ﺳﺮ، ﮨﻮں۔ ﺍٓﺗﺎ ﭘﺮ ﺑﺎﺕ یﺍٓﺧﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺏ ﺷﮑﺮﻳہ، ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﮩﺖ ﮐﺎ ﺍٓپ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺍﺱ ﺩﻳﺎ، ﻭ 
 ﺳﮯ ﺣﻘﻮﻕ ﺑﻨﻴﺎﺩی ﮐﮯ ﺍﻥ ﮐﻮ ﺍﻓﺮﺍﺩ ﮐﺮﻭڑﻭں ﻧﺎﮐﺎﻣﯽ ﮐﯽ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﺍﺱ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮨﮯ ﺣﻖ ﺑﻨﻴﺎﺩی ﺍﻳﮏ ﺑﻠﮑہ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ، ﺭﻳﺎﺳﺖ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ
 ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﮐﮩﻴﮟ ﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﻓﺮﻕ ﺩﺭﻣﻴﺎﻥ ﮐﮯ ﮐﺎﺭﮐﺮﺩﮔﯽ ﻋﻤﻠﯽ ﮐﯽ ﺍﻥ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻭﻋﺪﻭں ﺩﻋﻮﻭں، ﮐﮯ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﮨﮯ۔ ﮐﺮﺭﮨﯽ ﻣﺤﺮﻭﻡ 
ﮨﮯ۔ ﭼﮑﺎ ﺑﮍﻫ  
 ﺷﺪﻳﺪ ﮐﯽ ﻋﻤﻠﮯ ﺍﺳﭙﺘﺎﻝ ﮨﮯ، ﻧﺎﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﻓﻨﮉﻧﮓ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻤﻮں ﻣﺮﮐﺰی ﮐہ ﮨﮯ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺑﻴﺎﻥ ﺝﺍٓ  ﻧﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐہ ﺟﻴﺴﺎ 
 ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﯽ ﻣﺘﺎﺛﺮ ﺳﮯ ﻭﺟہ ﮐﯽ ﺑﺪﻧﻈﻤﯽ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻤﻴﮟ ﺍﮨﻢ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮨﮯ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﺎ ﮐﻴﺎ ﻧﻈﺮﺍﻧﺪﺍﺯ ﮐﻮ ﺻﺤﺖ ﺫﮨﻨﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﺷﮑﺎﺭ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻤﯽ
ﻋﺪے  ﺍﺳﺘﻴہ ﮨﻤﻴﮟ
 ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮔﺰﺍﺭﺵ ﺳﮯ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﻣﺮﮐﺰی ﻣﻴﮟ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺩﺭﮐﺎﺭ ﺍﻗﺪﺍﻣﺎﺕ ﻋﻤﻠﯽ ﺑﻠﮑہ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ، ڈﻳﭩﺎ ﮐﻦ ﮔﻤﺮﺍﻩ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻭ 
 ﺑﮩﺘﺮ ﮐﻮ ڈﻫﺎﻧﭽﮯ ﺑﻨﻴﺎﺩی ﮐﮯ ﮨﻴﻠﺘﻬ ﭘﺒﻠﮏ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻋﻮﺍﻡ ﮐﯽ ﻣﻠﮏ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﺮے ﺣﺎﺻﻞ ﺳﺒﻖ ﺳﮯ ﻣﺎڈﻝ ﺑﻨﮕﺎﻝ ﻭﻩ ﮐہ ﮨﻮں
۔۔۔ﺷﮑﺮﻳہ۔ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺳﺮ، ﺍﭨﻬﺎﺋﮯ۔ ﻗﺪﻡ ﻓﻮﺭی ﻟﻴﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻨﺎﻧﮯ)ﻣﺪﺍﺧﻠﺖ( ۔۔۔
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI):   Thank you.  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप 
अभी तक कहां थे?  Shri Praful Patel; not present. Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara. 
 
Ǜीमती रिमलाबेन बेचारभाई बारा (गुजरात) :  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इस सदन मȂ बहुत 
महत्वपूणर् सÅजेक्ट ÎवाÎथ्य एवं पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय क े कायर्करण पर चचार् करने का मुझे 
मौका िमला है, इसके  िलए आपका धन्यवाद।  आपके  माध्यम से और आपको Ģणाम कर ते हुए मȅ 
हमारे देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय मोदी जी, हमारे िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को और हमारे 
कÊयाणकारी आरोग्य मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहती हूं।  उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मोदी जी की 
सरकार गरीबȗ को समिर्पत सरकार है और वह सरकार अंत्योद य की भावना से काम कर रही है।  
मोदी जी ने 2014 से Ģधान मंतर्ी पद संभाला है।  तब से लगातार बजट की बढ़ोतरी ही रही है।  
2014 से पहले - ये जो सामने बैठे बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ कर रहे हȅ, उनका बजट पहले िक तना था?  
उनका बजट 37,330  करोड़ था। मोदी जी ने जब देश की कमान संभाली, तो लगातार बजट 
बढ़ता गया।   इस साल 2025-26 का जो बजट है, वह 99,858.56 करोड़ है ।  इसका मतलब यह 
हुआ िक यह सतत बढ़ता बजट है।  इत ना  ही नहीं, इस बजट क े जिरए आरोग्य का कवच Ģत्येक 
देशवासी को भी िमल रहा है।   
                                                            
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
140
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, समगर् देशवासी इस बजट का लाभ भी उठा रहे हȅ। हमारे Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी दूरगामी दृिÍट से काम कर रहे हȅ।  हमारे कई माननीय सदÎय क ुपोषण क े बारे मȂ बोल रहे 
थे, मातृ मृत्यु दर क े बारे मȂ भी बोल रहे थे, नवजात िशशु क े बा रे मȂ भी बोल रहे थे, लेिकन क्या 
िकसी ने भी कोई ठोस उपाय सोचा?  मȅ आज इस सदन मȂ गवर् से कहना चाहती हूं िक हमारे देश 
क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, वे Ģध ान मंतर्ी बनने से पहले गुजरात क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, तब से वह इस िवषय को 
लेकर िंचितत थे और वे गुजरात मȂ भी काम कर रहे थे।  गभर् मȂ रहने वाला बच्चा और मा ता  दोनȗ 
सुरिक्षत रहȂ, बच्चा सुरिक्षत जन्मȂ और साथ ही साथ सशƪ भी जन्मȂ, इसके  िलए हमारी आशा 
बहनȂ, आंगनबाड़ी कायर्कतार् और female health workers िदन रात मेहनत कर रहे हȅ, तािक 
हमारी आने वाली पीढ़ी, हमारे आने वाले बच्चे सशƪ जन्मȂ, ÎवाÎथ्यमय जन्मȂ।  इन सभी की िंचता 
हमारे आरोग्
य िमिनÎटर और हमारी सरकार कर रही है। 
 
5.00 P.M. 
   
साथ ही साथ, िमशन वात्सÊय योजना क े अंतगर्त मोदी सरकार ने अनेक कदम उठाए हȅ।  
िमशन इंदर्धनुष योजना क े तहत 12 करोड़ बच्चȗ का टीकाकरण िकया गया है।   
 माननीय उप
सभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ गुजरात से आती हूं।  2014 मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने राÍटर्ीय बाल 
ÎवाÎथ्य का एक कायर्कर्म जारी िकया था।  यह देश क े  
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी पी. िवÊसन) पीठासीन हुए।] 
 
सभी राज्यȗ क े िलए जारी िकया गया था। यह बच्चȗ की care करने क े िलए, उनकी health की 
िंचता करने क े िलए िकया गया था।  इसमȂ हमारी गुजरात सरकार ने जो काम िकए हȅ और हमारे 
देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बच्चȗ क े Ģित िक
तना समिर्पत हȅ, इसके  थोड़े आंकड़े मȅ आपके  सामने सदन मȂ 
रखना चाहती हूं।  गुजरात सरकार ने नवजात िश
शु और आंगनवाड़ी से लेकर 18 साल  क े बच्चȗ 
की, जो Îकू ल जाते थे या नहीं जाते थे, पाठशाला मȂ पढ़ते थे, मदरसा मȂ पढ़ते थे, कहीं भी पढ़ते 
थे, उन लोगȗ की health checkup करवाई।  आज गुजरात सरकार इसे Ģित वषर् कर रही है।  
उन्हȗने गवनर्मȂट की mobile health team क े माध्यम से बच्चȗ की screeni
ng कराई।  माननीय 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, उनकी checkup क े जो आंकड़े थे, उसमȂ लगभग एक करोड़ 61 लाख बच्चȗ की 
screening कराई गई और screeni
ng क े बाद जो आंकड़े हमȂ आए, उसके  अनुसार बच्चे Îकू ल 
जाते थे, हƺे-कƺे थे, उनमȂ कोई तकलीफ नहीं थी, मां-बाप को भी उनमȂ कोई िदक्कत नहीं 
िदखाई दी थी, लेिकन जब screening की गई, health checkup की गई और जो आंकड़े आए, 
उनमȂ हमȂ जो disease िदखाई दी, वह बहुत िंचताजनक है।  उस
मȂ िजन बच्चȗ की checkup की 
गई, मȅ उनका आंकड़ा यहां रखना चाहती हूं।  उनमȂ 206 बच्चȗ मȂ िकडनी की बीमारी िदखाई दी, 
तो उनकी िकडनी का transplant करने का काम िकया गया;  37 बच् चȗ मȂ लीवर की बीमारी 
सामने आई, तो उनका transplant िकया गया, 3,260 Cochlear Implant की तकलीफ िदखाई 
दी; 211 bone marrow transplant; 20,981 kidney related treatment; 11,215 cancer 
related treatment और 1,67,379 ǭदय related बीमारी सामने आई।  हम यह बता सकते हȅ िक 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
141

 
 
ये बच्चे िबÊकु ल healthy िदखाई देते थे।  यहाँ Centre से देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने सभी 
राज्यȗ मȂ यह काम करने का िनदȃश भेजा है, लेिकन गुजरात ने जो अित Ģशंसनीय काम िकया, 
उसके  िलए Central Government ने गुजरात को राÍटर्ीय अवाडर् भी िदया है।   
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, इसके  साथ ही, हमारी मोदी सरकार जो का
म कर रही है, मȅ 
उसके  बारे मȂ बताना चाहती हूं।  मȅ टर्ाइबल एिरया से आती हूं, मȅ क ु छ िंबदु रखना चाहती हूं।  मȅ 
Sickle Cell Anemia क े बारे मȂ बताना चाहत
ी हूँ।  हमारे यशÎवी हेÊथ िमिनÎटर यहां बैठे हȅ।  यह 
जो Sickle Cell Anemia है, यह ज्यादातर टर्ाइबल लोगȗ मȂ िदखाई देता है।  देश आजाद हुआ, ये 
जो बीमािरयां हȅ, कई सर कार Ȃ आईं, लेिकन उन्हȗने अनदेखी की और ये बीमािरयां बढ़ती गईं।  
लेिकन हमारे देश मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने और हमारे आरोग्य िमिनÎटर, माननीय नƿा जी ने जो 
टर्ाइबल बहुल राज्य हȅ, ऐसी बÎती वाले जो राज्य हȅ, उनको िच िÏनत करके  Sickle Cell Anemia 
Mission क े तहत उनकी testing करवाई।  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, लगभग 5 करोड़ लोगȗ की 
screening हुई।  आपको यह जान कर हैरानी होगी िक checkup कराने क े बाद, testing कराने 
क े बाद उनमȂ िकतने लोग affected पाए गए!  इसमȂ दो करोड़ आिदवासी लोग affected पाए गए।  
यिद उनकी screening नहीं होती, उनकी testing नहीं करवाई गई होती, तो यह पता नहीं 
चलता।  वैसे यह रोग genetic है, यह वंशानुगत है, यह चेपी रोग नहीं है, लेिकन इसकी रोकथाम 
अित आवÌयक है।  इसिलए उनको यह काडर् जारी िकया गया है।  आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ उन लोगȗ क े 
साथ सहानुभूितपूवर्क कारर्वाई की जाएगी।  यह Ģशंसनीय काम हमारे हेÊथ िडपाटर्मȂट ने िक
या है, 
इसके  िलए आपके  माध्यम से मȅ देश क े Ģधान को धन्यवाद देना चाहती हूं।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आज सुबह मȂ क ȅसर िरलेटेड एक क्वेÌचन भी आया था।  क ȅसर 
एक असाध्य रोग है।  िजसको क ȅसर होता है, वह मान लेता है िक अब मेरी िंजद
गी खत्म हो 
जाएगी, लेिकन उसका उपाय क्या है?  गर्ामीण क्षेतर् क े लोग क ȅसर को नहीं जानते, उसे नह ीं 
मानते।  पहले वहां सुिवधा भी नहीं थी।  मȅ तो धन्यवाद करूं गी िक आज वेलनेस सȂटर गांव-गांव मȂ, 
हरेक एिरया मȂ बन गया है।  उनको नज दीक  मȂ सुशर्ुषा ĢाÃत हो, उनको दवाइयाँ ĢाÃत हȗ, उनको 
टेÎट की सुिवधा हो।  Ģत्येक अÎपताल मȂ क ȅसर क ेयर यूिनट की जो Îथापना करने वाले हȅ, 
लगभग 372 अÎपतालȗ मȂ तो यह काम हो गया है, लेिकन आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ उसके  िलए बजट मȂ 
िजकर् है िक Ģत्येक िजला क े हॉिÎपट
ल मȂ क ȅसर क े टर्ीटमȂट की सुिवधा ĢाÃत होगी, कीमोथेरेपी की 
सुिवधा ĢाÃत होगी।  इससे मȅ मानती हूं िक Ģत्येक गरीब Ëयिƪ को यह सुिव धा  ĢाÃत होगी।  इतना 
ही नहीं, हमारे जो जन औषिध क Ȃ दर् हȅ, उन क Ȃदर्ȗ क े माध्यम से सÎती दवाइयाँ भी ĢाÃत हȗ, यह 
सुिवधा इस बजट मȂ की गई है।   
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, देश क े माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी गरीबȗ क े Ģित इतना समिर्पत हȅ 
िक गरीबȗ को सÎती दव
ाएँ ĢाÃत हȗ, सुलभता से ĢाÃत हȗ, जन औषिध क Ȃदर्ȗ से ĢाÃत हȗ, 
...(समय की घंटी)... इसीिलए उन्हȗने 7 माचर् को 'जन औषिध िदवस' क े रूप  मȂ सेिलĤेट िकया 
और साथ-साथ यह जानकारी भी दी तािक सभी लोगȗ को मालूम हो जाए िक जन औष िध क Ȃदर्ȗ से 
िमलने वाली दवाएं गुणवǄापूणर् हȅ और सÎती भी हȅ, िजससे सभी लोग वहां से दवाएं खरीदȂ।  
उसके  िलए इस बजट मȂ भी Ģोिवजन िकया है और जानकारी भी दी गई है।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, बोलने क े िलए तो बहुत क ु छ है। आरोग्य क े क्षेतर् मȂ सरकार ने 
बहुत काम िकये हȅ। उसने गरीबȗ क े िलए भी का
म िकया है। आयुÍमान काडर् - ना भूतो ना 
142
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
भिवÍयित।  यह गरीबȗ क े िलए बहुत उपयोगी है।  इसमȂ सीिनयर िसटीजन क े िलए भी Ģोिवजन 
िकया गया है, िगग Ǜिमकȗ िलए भी Ģोिवजन िकया गया है।  हमारे आरोग्य िमिनÎटर नƿा जी यहाँ 
बैठे हȅ, मȅ इसके  िलए उनको बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देती हूं। हमारा भारत देश आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ 
हेÊथ क े क्षेतर् मȂ जरूर  आत्मिनभर्र बनेगा।  यह बात कहकर, मȅ अपनी वाणी को िव
राम देती हूं, 
धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी (राजÎथान): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपका आभारी हूं िक आपने मुझे ÎवाÎथ्य 
एवं पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय क े कामकाज पर सदन मȂ चल रह
ी चचार् मȂ बोलने का अवसर Ģदान 
िकया है। 
 महोदय, ÎवाÎथ्य िवभाग एक बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् िवभाग है और हम सबकी यही मान्यता है 
िक एक ÎवाÎथ्य, हजार िनयामत, अथार् Þ ÎवाÎथ्य मनुÍय की पूंजी है। आदमी चाहे लाख दौलतमंद 
हो जाए, धनी हो जाए, अगर वह तंदुरुÎत नहीं है, तो उसके  िलए क ु छ भी नहीं है और वह ÎवाÎथ्य 
है, तो उसके  िलए सब क ु छ है।  मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगा िक तंदुरुÎती से बढ़कर कोई आशीव ार्द, कोई 
दौलत, उसके  मुकाबले मȂ नहीं है।  इसीिलए जब ÎवाÎथ्य बजट पर चचार् होती है, तो सरकार का 
ध्यान पूरे तरीके  से देश को ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा Ģदान करने क े िलए ही होना चा िहए।   
महोदय, ÎवाÎथ्य िवभाग मȂ कई सुधार लाने की भी आवÌयकता है। हम सभी लोग जानते हȅ 
िक जो दवाइयां और जीवन रक्षक औषिधयाँ हȅ, वे आज की तारीख मȂ बहुत ज्यादा महंगी हो गई हȅ 
तथा वे आम आदमी और गरीब लोगȗ क े पहुंच से बाहर हो गई हȅ।  इस वजह से गरीब लोगȗ को 
ÎवाÎथ्य लाभ नहीं िमल पाता।  इस पर िवशेष रूप  से ध्यान देने की आवÌयकता है।  िसफर् बज
ट 
वृिǉ ही Ģणालीगत सुधार नहीं ला सकती।  ÎवाÎथ्य बजट मȂ 11 Ģितशत की वृिǉ की गई है और 
इसे 1,03,851 करोड़ रुपए  कर िदया गया है, िजसमȂ आयुÍमान भारत PM-JAY
 का Ëयय भी 
शािमल है।  इसिलए जब हम समायोिजत करते हȅ, तो यह वाÎतिवक वृिǉ लगभग 9 Ģितशत है 
और यह 140 करोड़ लोगȗ क े देश क े िलए पयार्Ãत नहीं है, ऐसा मेरा मानना है।  इस वृिǉ क े 
बावजूद सकल घरेलू उत्पाद क े Ģितशत मȂ, िजस रूप  मȂ ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा आबंटन है, वह 2 Ģितश
त 
से भी नीचे रह गया है।  यह जो 2017 की राÍटर्ीय ÎवाÎथ्य नीित है, इसका लÑय जो 2.5 परस Ȃट 
िनधार्िरत िक
या गया है, यह उस लÑय से बहुत दूर है। इसिलए मȅ यह कहूँगा िक यह बजट भी 
ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा को Ģाथिमकता देने मȂ िवफल हुआ है।  जब हम क Ȃ दर् सरकार की योजन ाओं क े संबंध 
मȂ 2024-25 की बात करते हȅ, तो पाते हȅ  िक उनकी Ëयय मȂ भी 11 Ģितशत की िगरावट आई है।  
उस िगरावट की वजह से ÎवाÎथ्य क े जो Ģमुख कायर्कर्म हȅ, उनमȂ अक्षमता और धी मी कायार्न्वयन 
उजागर हुआ है।  मȅ इसमȂ कहना चाहूँगा िक ÎवाÎथ्य क े क्षेतर् मȂ उपलिÅधयȗ क े साथ-साथ 
अनिगनत चुनौितयाँ भी शािमल हȅ और देश क े सामने जो सबसे बड़ी चुनौती है, वह गर्ामीण और 
शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ क े अंदर Îव
ाÎथ्य सेवाओं मȂ बहुत बड़ी खाई, बहुत बड़ा अंतर है।  उस अंतर को पाटने 
की आवÌयकता है।  देश मȂ जो 65 Ģितशत अÎपताल हȅ, वे शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ क े अंदर हȅ, जबिक देश की 
70 Ģितशत आबादी गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ रहत
ी है।  गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ डॉक्टर और नसș की बहुत अिधक 
कमी है, उस कमी को दूर करने की आवÌयकता है, उस पर ध्यान देने की आवÌयकता है।  अगर 
हम WHO क े अनुसार भी देखते हȅ, तो डॉक्टर और जनसंख्या का जो अनुपात है, वह 1:1456 है, 
जबिक वैिÌ
वक मानक 1:1,000 है।  इसको ध्यान मȂ रखने की जरूरत  है।  गर्ामीण भारत की 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
143

 
 
आबादी 70 Ģितशत है और अगर हम वहाँ अÎपतालȗ मȂ बेड की संख्या को देखते हȅ, तो पाते हȅ िक 
गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 40 Ģितशत बेड्स हȅ।  अगर हम इसमȂ मानक देखते हȅ, जो जरूरत है, वह 1,000 
Ëयिƪयȗ पर साढ़े तीन बेड्स की है।  इस Ģकार से अगर हम देश मȂ ओवरऑल बेड्स की कमी 
देखते हȅ, तो वह कमी लगभग ढा
ई िमिलयन बेड्स की है।  वह क ै से पूरी हो, इस पर ध्यान देने की 
जरूरत है।  
महोदय, मȅ समझता हूँ िक जब बज ट मȂ एÇस और शहर क Ȃिदर्त िचिकत्सा संÎथाओं क े 
िवÎतार को Ģाथिमकता दी गई हो, तो ऐसे मȂ गर्ामीण भारत मȂ जो Ģाथिमक ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃ दर् 
(पीएचसी) और सामुदाियक ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃ दर् (सीएचसी) हȅ, उनके  िलए पयार्Ãत धन का Ģावधान नहीं 
िकया गया है।  आज सीएचसी और पीएचसी की यह पिरिÎथित हो गई है िक वहाँ डॉक्टसर् नहीं हȅ, 
एंबुलȂस नहीं है, Ģिशिक्षत Îटाफ नहीं है, नसȃज़ नहीं हȅ, बेड्स नहीं हȅ, सोनोगर्ाफी मशीन नहीं है, 
एक्सरे मशीन नहीं है।  अगर ऐसी प िरिÎथितयाँ हȅ, तो एमआरआई जैसे लाभ गर्ामीण क्षेतर् को क ै से 
िमल सकते हȅ - यह सोचने की आवÌयकता है।  आज देश बड़ी िविचतर् पिरिÎथितयȗ से गुजर रहा 
है।  ऐसे मȂ जब हम ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा और ÎवाÎथ्य लाभ क े िलए जेब से खचर् होने वाली Ëयय को देखते 
हȅ, तो पाते हȅ िक भारत क े क ु ल Îव
ाÎथ्य देखभाल Ëयय का 62.6 Ģितशत Ëयय Îवयं से करनी 
पड़ती है।  ऐसी पिरिÎथितयȗ मȂ देखा गया है िक िच िकत्सा िबलȗ को भरते-भरते ही आदमी गरीबी 
की ओर बढ़ता है।  पूवर् वƪाओं ने भी इसका िजकर् िकया िक गरीबी ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाएँ लेने की वजह 
से भी बढ़ रही है।  ऐसे मȂ बजट मȂ नीितगत हÎतक्षेपȗ की जो जरूरत थीं, उनको पूरा नहीं िकया 
गया।  उनको नजरअंदाज िकया गया है, अन्यथा यह जो बोझ था, इसे िकसी-न-िकसी रूप  मȂ 
कम िकया जा सकता था।  अगर Îव
ाÎथ्य बीमा Ģीिमयम पर जीएसटी को 18 Ģितशत से 5 Ģितशत 
िकया जाता, तो इससे कवरेज िवÎतार हो सकता था।  इसमȂ  यह चूक रही है।  इस संदभर् मȂ मȅने 
िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को एक पतर् भी िलखा है।  मȅ समझता हूँ िक अगर सरकार इस पर ध्यान देगी, तो 
इससे देश को बहुत बड़ा लाभ होगा।  धारा 80(डी) क े अंतगर्त भी जो कटौती 25,000 से 50,000  
की जानी चािहए थी, वह बढ़ावा भी, मेरे ख्याल से, एक खोया हुआ अवसर क े रूप  मȂ ही देखा जा 
सकता है।  अगर हम लोग 'आयुÍमान भारत' मȂ PMJAY की बात करते हȅ, तो इसके  बजट मȂ 28.9  
Ģितशत की वृिǉ हुई है।  उसका Îवागत है, लेिकन िनजी अÎपताल reimbursement की कमी की 
वजह से मरीजȗ को दािखल करने से ही मना कर देते हȅ और इसके  कारण गरीब मरीजȗ को 
इसका लाभ नहीं िमल पाता है।  अगर वाÎतव मȂ Îव ाÎथ्य क े क्षेतर् मȂ क ु छ काम करना है, तो वैसा 
काम करके  िदखाना होगा, जो राजÎथान क े अंदर कांगर्ेस की सरकार ने िकया।  जब अशोक 
गहलोत जी वहाँ क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे, उस समय उन्हȗने यह करके  िदखाया।  'िचरंजी वी योजना' का 
लाभ गरीब जनता को िमला।  गरीब जरूरतम ंद मरीज को 25 लाख रुपए  का मुÄत इलाज मुहैया 
कराने का काम कांगर्ेस की सरकार ने उस समय िकया।  यही नहीं, बिÊक कोिवड Ģबंधन भी ऐसा 
था िक Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने एक digital conference मȂ उसके  िलए मुख्य मंतर्ी की भूरी-भूरी 
Ģशंसा की है।  उस समय अशोक गहलोत जी वहाँ क े मुख्य मंतर्ी थे। 
सर, मȅ कहना चाहूंगा िक कोिवड Ģबंधन राजÎ थान  मȂ हुआ, लेिकन िंहदुÎतान मȂ कोिवड 
Ģबंधन मȂ कहीं न कहीं खािमयां रहीं, कहीं न कहीं चूक रही, वरना हालात इस तरह क े नहीं होते।  
सर, मȅ पिÌचमी राजÎथान की उन जगहȗ का िजकर् करना चाहूंगा, जहां से मȅ आता हूँ।  
जालौर, िसरोही, पाली, यहां की ÎवाÎथ्य सेवाओं को अगर देखा जाए तो उन क्षेतर्ȗ की ÎवाÎथ्
य 
144
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
की दृिÍट से बहुत ही िंचताजनक हालात हȅ।  वहां अगर िकसी को कोई बड़ी बीमारी होती है, तो 
उसे पास क े क्षेतर् मȂ, गुजरात क े अहमदाबाद, पालनपुर और डीसा मȂ जाना पड़ता है, जहां Ģाइवेट 
हॉिÎपटÊस मȂ बड़े लंबे-चौड़े िबÊस बनते हȅ और उन िबलȗ की पूिर्त करते-करते इंसा न अपने 
खेत-खिलहान, अपनी जमीन-जायदाद को बेचने पर मजबूर होता है या उसे बड़ा ऋण लेना 
पड़ता है।  ऐसे हालात वहां पर हȅ, जहां हम 25 वषș क े बाद आजादी क े अमृत का ल की बात करते 
हȅ।  अगर अमृत नहीं दे सकते हȅ, तो कम से कम जहर बरसाने का काम भी नहीं होना चािहए।  
सरकार को देखना चािहए िक ऐसे क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ, जहां गरीबी ज्यादा है, वहां हालात िकस तरह क े बने 
हुए हȅ।  जहां िपछड़ापन, गरीबी  है और जहां िशक्ष
ा का अभाव है, वहां क े लोग उन बड़े-बड़े िबलȗ 
को भरने क े िलए कहां से पैसे लाएंगे?   
सर, मȅ यही कहना चाहूंगा िक जब हम ऐसे मȂ बा त करते हȅ, तो हम 70 सालȗ की बात 
करते हȅ।  10 साल आपको िमले, तीन टमर् आपको िमले, 11वां साल चल रहा है।  अगर आप उन 
70 सालȗ की बात करते हȅ, तो 10 साल  मȂ उन किमयȗ को आप पूरी कर देते।  ÎवाÎथ्य क्षेतर् का 
बुिनयादी ढांचा अगर िक
सी ने बनाकर िदया है, तो वह कांगर्ेस ने बनाकर िदया है।  आज हम उसी 
बुिनयादी ढांचे पर खड़े होकर आने वाले कल की बात कर रहे हȅ।  मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगा िक 
जालौर, िसरोही और पाली, जो िक िपछड़े हुए क्षेतर् हȅ, जहां गरीबी बहुत ज्य
ादा है और जहां िशक्षा 
का भी अभाव है, वहां सुिवधाओं से लैश अत्याधुिनक टर्ॉमा क ेयर सȂटर नहीं है।  सर, मेरा आपके  
माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार से अनुरोध है िक वह िसरोही, जालौर, पाली क्षेतर् मȂ तत्काल आध
ार पर 
एÇस जैसे अत्याधुिनक क Ȃदर्ीय उत्कृ Íटता वाले संÎथान की Îवीकृ ित Ģदान करे और उसके  िलए 
बजट क े आवंटन की भी Îवीकृ ित दे।  मȅ समझता हूँ िक इस
से उस क्षेतर् को बहुत बड़ा लाभ 
पहुंचेगा।  
सर, अगर हम िचिकत्सा िशक्षा की बात करते हȅ, तो मेिडकल सीटȂ बढ़ाना भी  
समÎयाजनक है।  10,000 सीटȂ इस वषर् और उसको बढ़ाकर पांच सालȗ क े अंदर 75,000 सीटȂ 
करने का जो दावा है, मȅ समझता हूँ िक यह ÎपÍट नहीं है िक सरकार और मेिडकल कॉ
लेजेज़ 
खोलने जा रही है या इसमȂ िनजी मेिडकल कॉलेजȗ को भी  अनुमित िमलेगी?  यह ÎपÍट करने की 
जरूरत है, वरना 75,000 सीटȂ बढ़ तो जाएंगी, लेिकन जो ÎवाÎथ्य लाभ की पूिर्त है, वो पूणर् होना 
संभव नहीं है। जब हम िचिकत्सा िशक्षा की बात करते हȅ, तो वह दिक्षण भारत की तरफ क Ȃिदर्त है।  
यिद हम पूवȘǄर भारत की बात करȂ, तो वहां आज भी कई सुिव
धाओं की किमयां हȅ।  जब क्षेतर्ीय 
असमानता की बात आएगी, तो ÎवाÎथ्य सेवा की यह असमानता और ज्यादा गहराती चली 
जाएगी।  ऐसे मȂ, मेिडकल Îटू डȂट्स क े िलए भी कोई स हायता इसमȂ दी जानी चािहए थी।  
मेिडकल िशक्षा को लेकर भी ऋण-मुƪ बजट की बात होती है, लेिकन सिÅसडी भी नहीं दी गई 
है, जबिक िनजी मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ की हालत यह है िक वहां 60 लाख से एक करोड़ या इससे 
भी ज्यादा की फीस वसूली जाती है।  ऐसे मȂ कोई गरीब Ëयिƪ कहां से मेिडकल की पढ़ाई कर 
पाएगा?  
सर, अगर हम क ȅसर क े उपचार की बात करȂ, तो िवकȂदर्ीकरण करने क े िलए िज ला 
Îतरीय क ȅसर देखभाल क Ȃदर्ȗ की घोषणा तो की गई है, लेिकन Ģिशिक्षत िवशेषज्ञȗ और दवा 
आपूिर्त Ǜृंखलाओं और िनदान क्षमता क े िबना ये क Ȃ दर् बेकार रहȂगे, इसिलए इस पर ध्यान देने की 
आवÌयकता है।  जब हम यहां क ȅसर की बात करते हȅ, तो ती न दवाओं पर कर कटौती करने की 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
145

 
 
बात की जाती है।  कर कटौती से ही सब क ु छ नहीं होगा।  क ȅसर का पता ही कई बार ऐन वƪ पर 
चलता है और मȅ समझता हूँ िक उसके  िलए देश का कोई भी अÎपताल सक्षम नहीं है।  अÎपताल 
िĢपेयडर् ही नहीं है।  ऐन वƪ पर हाथ खड़े कर िद ए जाते हȅ और क ȅसर का मरीज धीरे-धीरे मौत 
को गले लगाता है।  ऐसे हालात क ȅसर पेशȂट क े बन जाते हȅ।  इसके  िलए यह होना चािहए िक 
Ģारंिभक चरण मȂ ही क ȅसर क े िनदान का पता क ै से लगे, उस पर अिधक बज टीय आवंटन िकया 
जाना चािहए, तािक क ȅसर रोिगयȗ को मौत क े मुंह मȂ जाने से बचाया जा सके ।  हम लोग बात 
करते हȅ िक िजला अÎपतालȗ क े िलए कोई पीपीपी मॉडल होना चा िहए था, लेिकन िकसी बड़ी 
सावर्जिनक-िनजी भागीदारी की घोषणा भी नहीं की गई है, इसमȂ यह भी एक कमी रही है। मȅ 
समझता हूं िक ऐसे मȂ हम कई एÇस की बात करते हȅ, जहां अनिगनत िरƪ पद पड़े हुए हȅ। अगर 
आज एÇस मȂ पदȗ की बात करȂ, तो िदÊली मȂ संकाय क े 34 परस Ȃट पद अभी भी िरƪ हȅ। यही 
िÎथित पूणर् रूप  से संचािलत अन्य एÇस और एÇस जैसी संÎथाओं की भी है। लगभ ग 60-60 
Ģितशत तक संकाय क े पद िरƪ पड़े हुए हȅ, िजन पर ध्यान देने की आवÌयकता है।  
 मȅ िवशेष रूप  से यह कहना चाहूंगा िक एनटीए और सीयूईटी जैसी राÍटर्ीय Îतर की Ģवेश 
परीक्षाओं क े आयोजन की Ëयापक िजÇमेदारी है। लेिकन एनटीए Îवयं एक छोटा संगठ न है और 
इस कमज़ोर संगठन क े अिधकांश कायर् आउटसोसर् िकए जाते हȅ। ऐसे मȂ नीट पेपर लीक का जो 
ज्वलंत उदाहरण है, उसके  िलए भी यही कारण है। जैसी घटनाएं सामने आती हȅ। सरकार को 
अपनी संÎथाओं मȂ Ģवेश क े िलए परीक्षाओं को सीिमत करना चा
िहए और उन संÎथानȗ को 
िवकȂिदर्त करना चािहए। िजन संÎथानȗ मȂ राज्य बोडर् परीक्षाओं क े अंकȗ क े आधार पर Ģवेश िदया 
जा सकता है। 
 इसिलए, उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार से मेरा िनवेदन रहेगा िक 
नीट जैसी परीक्षाओं का आयोजन ही बंद कर देना चािहए और िवकȂदर्ीकृ त परीक्षा Ģणाली को 
अपनाया जाना चा
िहए। सरकार को Îवयं इस कायर् क े िलए सक्षम होना चा िहए। 
 अंत मȂ, मȅ क ु छ सुधारात्मक सुझाव देना चाहूंगा। ÎवाÎथ्य बजट को जीडीपी का ढाई 
Ģितशत तक बढ़ाया जाना चािहए। सीएसआर फ ंड्स का उपयोग गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ िकया जाए। 
िचिकत्सा आयोग को Ģोत्सािहत िकया जाए िक वह संसाधनȗ क े माध्यम से नए मेिडकल कॉलेज 
Îथािपत करे। गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ डॉक्टरȗ और नसș की अिधक से अिधक भत
ीर् हो, उनको अच्छी 
सैलरी दी जाए तािक शहरी क्षेतर्ȗ से उनका लगाव कम हो, वे गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सेवाएं देने क े िलए 
Ģेिरत हȗ। Ģाथिमक ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃदर्ȗ तक ‘ आयुÍमान भारत’ का िडिजटल िमशन पहुंचाना चािहए। 
…(समय की घं
टी)… सर, मȅ दो िमनट मȂ conclude करूं गा। 
 इसी तरह, ई-संजीवनी जैसे ÃलेटफॉÇसर् का उपयोग बढ़ाकर टेलीमेिडिसन सुिवधाओं का 
िवÎतार िक
या जाना चािहए। मȅ समझता हूं िक इन तमाम Ģयासȗ से हम देश को एक बेहतर 
ÎवाÎथ्य Ģणाली दे पाएंगे। 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, अंत मȂ मȅ कहना चाहूंगा, “Health is a balance of body, mind 
and soul.” ÎवाÎथ्य तन, मन और आत्मा का संतुलन है। हमȂ इस संतुलन को िबगड़ने नहीं देना 
है। यही देश मȂ ÎवाÎथ्य की जीत होगी। 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। जय िंहद! 
 
146
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON): The next speaker is Shri Milind Murli 
Deora.  You have eight minutes. 
 
Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवरा (महाराÍटर्) : सर, मȅ सबसे पहले सरकार को बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देना 
चाहता हूं िक इस बजट मȂ हमारे क Ȃदर्ीय हेÊथके यर बजट मȂ 11 परसȂट की वृिǉ की गई है। इसके  
िलए मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी और हमारे अत्यंत डायनेिमक मंतर्ी नƿा जी, उनकी पूरी टीम, साथ ही 
Ģतापराव जाधव जी और अनुिĢया जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई एवं धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूं। 
 
Sir, there are a few things in the Budget which I am very pleased about.  One is 
the commitment to increase medical seats, 10,000 medical seats, next year and 
75,000 medical seats over five years, wh ich I think will significantly improve the 
healthcare infrastructure in our country. मȅ मुंबई से आता हूं, जहां fast commerce एक बड़ा 
टर्Ȃड बन चुका है। फाÎट कॉमसर् क े क
ारण gig workers की संख्या मȂ तेजी से वृिǉ हो रही है। नƿा 
जी, आपने ‘आयुÍमान भारत योजना’ को gig workers तक extend िकया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको 
हािर्दक धन्यवाद एवं बधाई देता हूं।  
सर, मȅ अपने बजट भाषण को एक ही िवषय पर क Ȃिदर्त करना चाहत
ा हूं। मुझसे पहले कई 
माननीय सांसदȗ ने communicable diseases पर ज़ोर िदया।  Prevention is certainly better 
than cure.  मȅ अपने बजट भाषण मȂ एक ही non-communicable disease पर focus करना 
चाहता हूं। 
 
Sir, recently, the Prime Minister la unched a very, very positive campaign to 
spread awareness about the growing trend of ob esity in India.  I am very grateful to 
the Government for doing that. I think one th ing, that we have to be extremely aware 
of, is obesity.  आज यिद हम अमरीका का उदाहरण लȂ, तो अमरीका मȂ obesity क ेवल ÎवाÎथ्य 
की समÎया नहीं है।  मȅ मानता हूं िक अमरीका मȂ एक बहुत ही बड़ा आिर्थक crisis है और भारत क े 
िलए अमरीका से क्या लेसन्स हȅ, तो मȅ क ु छ statistics हाइलाईट करना चाहूंगा।  आज अमरीका 
staggering 42 per cent of adults and 20 per cent of child
ren in the US are obese.  This 
is a sharp rise of 30 per cent from just tw o decades ago.  Obesity-related illnesses in 
the US, today, are accounting for 1.4 trillion dollars annually, which is 7 per cent of 
the country’s GDP.  In fact, 1 in 3 deaths in the US, if you take all deaths on account 
of accidents and diseases, can be linked to obesity-driven diseases like diabetes and 
heart disease.  It is very clear for India, if we do not act now, we could potentially 
have an obesity crisis in our count ry. There are a few statistics, Nadda ji, I would like 
to highlight.  In just five years, in India,  obesity among men has risen from 19 per cent 
t o  2 3  p e r  c e n t ;  a m o n g  w o m e n ,  f r o m  2 1  p e r  c e n t  t o  2 4  p e r  c e n t .  T h i s  i s  a s  p e r  t h e  
National Family Health Survey data.  कई लोगȗ ने mal-nourishment क े बारे मȂ बात की। To 
diminish mal-nourishment, the Government is  doing an exceptional  job. That is one 
extreme.  We get to see that primarily in rural areas, where almost a third of children 
under the age of five, have stunted growth , are underweight. But the other extreme, 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
147

 
 
which we see in cities especially, is obesity among children. Today, overweight 
children have increased by 60 per cent in th e last 10 years.  In America, obesity-
related healthcare costs is 7 per cent of its GDP. In India, by 2030, that number could 
be as high as 1.6 per cent of our GD P or Rs. 7 lakh crore rupees annually. इसिलए मȅ 
मानता हूं िक obesity एक ÎवाÎथ्य की समÎया नहीं है, बिÊक एक बहुत ही गंभीर, आिर्थक 
चुनौती है और अगर इसे रोका नहीं गया, तो बढ़ते हेÊथ क ेयर की जो cost है और घटती 
productivity भारत की  long-term आिर्थक Ģगित को affect कर सकती है। अमरीका  का 
उदाहरण मȅने इसिलए िदया, क्यȗिक अमरीका ने कई सालȗ से, कई दशकȗ से obesity को एक 
Ģकार से इग्
नोर िकया और आज मȅ  दो देशȗ का उदाहरण देना चाहता हूं। Singapore and 
Japan are proactively fighting obesity and ensuring that nobody in their country is 
obese.  I would like to share some in itiatives that they have launched. सबस े पहले 
यू.एस. मȂ जो नई सरकार है- नƿा जी, जो हेÊथ सेकर् ेटरी रॉबटर् एफ. क ै नेडी जूिनयर हȅ, िजनको 
क ु छ समय पह
ले कन्फमर् िकया गया।  उन्हȗने सावर्जिनक रूप  से कई बार कहा िक his mandate 
is to prevent obesity in America.  They have a slogan called MA GA -- Make America 
Great Again. His campaign is called MAHA  -- Make America Healthy Again. A few 
initiatives that they have announced are: One is to impose hefty taxes on sugary 
drinks; second is, calorie labelling in re staurants to help consumers make more 
informed and healthier choices.  In their school nutrition programmes, very, very 
stringent audits are being implemented. But Japan has some very interesting policies. 
जापान मȂ एक कानून Metabolism Law है।   उस कानून मȂ 40 वषर् से अिधक उĦ क े लोगȗ क े िलए 
रेग्युलर कमर माप करना अिनवायर् बनाया है।  Can you imagine? For people forty years and 
above, reg
ular waistline measurements have become mandatory. They are mandating 
that companies in the workplace must implement healthier choices.  Japan has 
another big problem. They have an agei ng population. So, the Government has 
massive lifestyle interventions to ensure that people get married and have children and 
that workplaces are healthier. But, I think,  the most stringent regulations are from a 
small country, Singapore. Singapore has re cently completely banned advertisements 
on high-sugar products that are targetin g children.  If Naddaji remembers, once, 
during a question, I had raised a point that their organisation, which is equivalent to 
our FSSAI, उन्हȗने एक nutri-grade labelling system  Îथािपत िकया है।  For parents, जब वे 
convenience store मȂ जाते हȅ, िकराना Îटोर मȂ जा ते हȅ, super market मȂ जाते हȅ, 
sometimes, they do not know what is a healthy product and what is an unhealthy 
product.  They think that a fruit juice, wh ich is actually a sugary drink, is a healthy 
drink for their child.  Singapore has mandated a nutri-labelling simply like A,B,C and 
D.   For example, a cola drink will be labelle d ‘D’.  Very large ‘D’ letter will be printed 
so that the parent will know in one second th at it is an unhealthy product.   A freshly-
squeezed juice, which is squeezed that morning itself, will be labelled ‘A’ and the 
148
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
parent will know that it is a healthy product.  And, in be tween, ‘B’ and ‘C’ labels will 
be there.  Therefore, my su ggestion would be that very fe w bold reforms are required 
to align with hon. Prime Minister’s vision to ensure that India is obesity free in the 
coming years to ensure that we do not have th e health crisis that we  see in the U.S.   
One is, I think, an increase in taxes on sugary drinks, ultra-processed foods to curb 
and to reduce consumption.   The second is getting FSSAI to have mandatory front-
of-pack warning labels on high-sugar, hi gh-salt and trans-fat foods which cause 
obesity.  Thirdly, in Primary Healthcare Centres, ro utine Body Mass Index and 
metabolic health screenings should be done to know if a child is developing obesity at 
an early age.  Fourthly, I think, the time has come that we must consider a complete 
ban on advertisements of high-fat and high-s ugar foods that are targeting children.  I 
feel that this is something which the entire House can agree on.  सर, आज िवÌव मȂ लोग 
क्या कह रहे हȅ? वे कह रहे हȅ िक sugar is the new tobacco. िजस Ģकार से बीस साल, तीस 
साल पहले टोबेको क ंपनीज़ used to target young people to sell them cigarettes, today, 
the same thing is happening with sugary foods.   
 Coming to my last point, the Mid Day M eal scheme is doing exceptionally well.  
The Government of India is ensuring that it is implemented well.  Perhaps, we can 
also do regular audits to ensure that the nutritional content is effective.   
 I would only like to say one last point that भारत का जो सबसे बड़ा asset
 है, वह 
हमारी young work force है।  Europe, U.S., China, Japan - all these countries are 
facing an aging population.  Just like ed ucation is very important, skilling is very 
important, making sure that they are health y, the next generation is not stunted, they 
are not malnourished, they are not obese, this, in my opinio n, is very critical.  I have 
no objection to importing the best American technologies that help our workforce, but 
I am against importing American lifestyles an d their obesity epidemic.  And, that is 
something we have to be very careful about.  I think, if these st eps are implemented, 
these will align with hon. Prime Minister’s vision and ensure that our future generation 
is healthy for the years to come.  Thank you, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON):  No w, Dr. Fauzia Khan.  You have three 
minutes.  
 
डा. फौिजया खान (महाराÍटर्):  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ मिहलाओं 
क े ÎवाÎथ्य तक अपनी बात को सीिमत रखना चाहूंगी। सर, भारतीय संÎकृ ित मȂ िदËय नारी शि
ƪ  
पर Ǜǉा अटू ट तरीके  से रची बसी है। सरकार अकसर इसको संबोिधत करती है, संदिर्भत करती 
है। जहाँ नारी की पूजा अनेक िदËय रूपȗ मȂ की जाती है, वहीं पर मिहलाओं की इंसान क े रूप  मȂ 
उपेक्षा ही की जाती है। नारी शिƪ है, जननी है, लÑमी है, अन्नपूणार् है और षÍठी है, लेिक न आज 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
149

 
 
नारी और शिƪ एक-दूसरे क े िनकट तो कहीं भी नज़र नहीं आते हȅ। इनका साथर्क संगम तत्काल 
आवÌयक है। मिहला ÎवाÎथ्य क े संबंध मȂ कई मौिलक समÎयाएं इस वषर् क े अथर्संकÊप मȂ भी 
दुलर्िक्षत हȅ, शिƪ क े रूप  मȂ नारी दुलर्िक्षत है।  
 
 ﺧﺎﻥ ﻓﻮﺯﻳہ ﺍﮐﭩﺮڈ )ﻣﮩﺎﺭﺍﺷﭩﺮ(: ﺗﮏ ﺳﻮﺍﺳﺘﻬ ﮐﮯ ﻣﮩﻴﻼﺅں ﻣﻴﮟ ﺩﻫﻨﻴﻮﺍﺩ۔ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﮩﺖ ﮐﺎ ﺍٓپ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﺍﺩﻫﻴﮑﺶ ﺳﺒﻬﺎ ﺍُپ 
 ﺭﭼﯽ ﺳﮯ ﻁﺮﻳﻘﮯ ﺍﭨﻮٹ ﺷﺮﺩﻫﺎ ﭘﺮ ﺷﮑﺘﯽ ﻧﺎﺭی ﺩﻭﻳہ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﻨﺴﮑﺮﺗﯽ ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺗﻴہ ﺳﺮ، ﭼﺎﮨﻮﻧﮕﯽ۔ ﺭﮐﻬﻨﺎ ﺳﻴﻤِﺖ ﮐﻮ ﺑﺎﺕ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ 
 ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﻭﭘﻮں ﺩِﻭﻳہ ﺍﻧﻴﮏ ﭘﻮﺟﺎ ﮐﯽ ﻧﺎﺭی ﺟﮩﺎں ۔ﮨﮯ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﺳﻨﺪﺑﻬﺮﺕ ﮨﮯ، ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﺳﻤﺒﻬﻮﺩِﺕ ﮐﻮ ﺍﺱ ﺍﮐﺜﺮ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺑﺴﯽ 
ﺅں ﭘﺮ ﻭﮨﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﺎﺗﯽ ﮐﯽ
 ﻟﮑﺸﻤﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻨﻨﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﺷﮑﺘﯽ ﻧﺎﺭی ﮨﮯ۔ ﺟﺎﺗﯽ ﮐﯽ ﮨﯽ ﺍُﭘﻴﮑﺸﺎ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﻭپ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻧﺴﺎﻥ ﮐﯽ ﻣﮩﻴﻼ 
 ﺍﻥ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺍٓﺗﮯ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻧﻈﺮ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮐﮩﻴﮟ ﺗﻮ ﻧﮑﭧ ﮐﮯ ﺩﻭﺳﺮے ﺍﻳﮏ ﺷﮑﺘﯽ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻧﺎﺭی ﺍٓﺝ ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﮨﮯ، ﺷﺎﺳﯽ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻧّﺎﭘﻮﺭﻧہ ﮨﮯ، 
 ﺳﻨﮑﻠﭗ ﺍﺭﺗﻬ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﻝ ﺍﺱ ﺳﻤﺴﻴﺎﺋﻴﮟ ﻣﻮﻟﮏ ﮐﺌﯽ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﻤﺒﻨﺪﻫ ﮐﮯ ﺳﻮﺍﺳﺘﻬ ﻣﮩﻴﻼ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍٓﻭﺷﮏ ﺗﺘﮑﺎﻝ ﻨﮕﻢﺳ ﺳﺎﺭﺗﻬﮏ ﮐﺎ 
ﮨﮯ۔ ﺩُﺭﻟﮑﺸِﺖ ﻧﺎﺭی ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﻭپ ﮐﮯ ﺷﮑﺘﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺩﺭﻟﮑﺸﺖ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻣﻴﮟ   
 
Violence against healthcare professionals, es pecially women, remain alarmingly high 
and compromise health services.  सर, जननी क े रूप  मȂ नारी की सुरक्ष ा क े सशिƪकरण का 
सरकार दावा करती है,  इससे इंकार नहीं िकया जा सकता िक एमएमआर जरूर  कम हुआ है, 
परंतु क ु छ राज्यȗ मȂ यह संख्या काफी िंचताजनक है। महोदय, जैसे मध्य Ģदेश मȂ 173 है, असम मȂ 
195 है। अगर हम अलग-अलग राज्यȗ क े आंकड़े देखȂगे, तो वे िंच
ताजनक हȅ।  माता क े ÎवाÎथ्य की 
पिरिÎथित मȂ सुधार नहीं हुआ है।  
 
  † ﮐﻴﺎ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺍﻧﮑﺎﺭ ﺳﮯ ﺍﺱ ﮨﮯ، ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﺩﻋﻮی ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﺎ ﮐﺮﻥ ﺳﺸﮑﺘﯽ ﮐﮯ ﺳُﺮﮐﺸﺎ ﮐﯽ ﻧﺎﺭی ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﻭپ ﮐﮯ ﺟﻨﻨﯽ ﺳﺮ، 
 ﻣﺪﻫﻴہ ﺟﻴﺴﮯ ﻣﮩﻮﺩے، ﮨﮯ۔ ﻓﮑﺮﺍﻧﮕﻴﺰ ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﺗﻌﺪﺍﺩ ﻳہ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﺍﺟﻴﻮں ﮐﭽﻬ ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﮨﮯ، ﮨﻮﺍ ﮐﻢ ﺿﺮﻭﺭ ﺍٓﺭ ﺍﻳﻢ ﺍﻳﻢ ﮐہ ﺟﺎﺳﮑﺘﺎ 
 ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﺮﺩﻳﺶ 173 ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓﺳﺎﻡ ﮨﮯ، 195 ﮨﮯ . 
ﮑﻬﻴﮟ ﺍٓﻧﮑﮍے ﮐﮯ ﺭﺍﺟﻴﻮں ﺍﻟﮓ ﺍﻟﮓ ﮨﻢ ﺍﮔﺮ 
 ﺳﺪﻫﺎﺭ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﺮﺳﺘﻬﺘﯽ ﮐﯽ ﺳﻮﺍﺳﺘﻬ ﮐﮯ ﻣﺎﺗﺎ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺟﻨﮏ ﭼﻨﺘﺎ ﻭﻩ ﺗﻮ ﮔﮯ، ﺩﻳ 
ﮨﮯ۔ ﮨﻮﺍ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ  
Emergency medical transport in rural and tribal areas is a serious issue.  Mental health 
post child-birth, particularly, postpartum  depression, remains largely unaddressed 
exasperated by limited policy focus.  Sir, in the National Tele Mental Health 
Programme, there are cuts in the Budget.  
 अथर् संकÊप ने लÑमी को जो दुलर्िक्षत िकया है, तब सब दुलर्िक्षत हो रहा है।  
  †ﮨﮯ۔ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﺎ ﺩُﺭﻟﮑﺸﺖ ﺳﺐ ﺗﺐ ﮨﮯ، ﮐﻴﺎ ﺩﺭﻟﮑﺸﺖ ﺟﻮ ﮐﻮ ﻟﮑﺸﻤﯽ ﻧﮯ ﺳﻨﮑﻠﭗ ﺍﺭﺗﻬ  
 
Insufficient budgetary allocations continue to be the trend.  The National Health Policy 
of 2017 recommended a combined health expe nditure of 2.5 per cent of GDP by 2025 
yet the current allocation stands at 0. 27 per cent of the GDP.  Moreover, the 
allocations, as percentage of GDP and to tal Budget, have steadily declined since 
2022 undermining health infrastructure and service delivery. 
       अन्नपूणार् भी दुलर्िक्षत है। 14 से 49 years क े बीच मȂ एनीिमया मȂ बढ़ोतरी हो रही है। 
                                                            
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
150
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
  † ﮨﮯ۔ ﺩُﺭﻟﮑﺸﺖ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍﻧّﺎﭘﻮﺭﻧہ 14 ﺳﮯ49ﮨﮯ۔ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﯽ ﺑﮍﻫﻮﺗﺮی ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻳﻨﻴﻤﻴﺎ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﻴﭻ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﻟﻮں  
 
From 51 per cent in 2015-16, it has risen to 57 per cent in 2021.  … (Time-bell rings)…  
Sir, please give me one minute. 
 Sir,  Shashthi - Protector of Children भी  दुलर्िक्षत हȅ। Malnutrition under five year 
stunted children is increasing from 35.5 per cent in 2021 to 37 per cent in 2024.  In 
2024, six per cent children were wasted and 17 per cent were  underweight.  Although 
HPV vaccine was a highlight in pre-election Budget, there has been no follow-up 
action.  Indigenously-developed HPV vaccine remains outs ide the Universal 
Immunization Programme with no clarity on  dedicated funding for its nationwide roll 
out. 
 In the end, I will only read out my suggestions and recommendations - 
increase budgetary commitment to reach the target of 2.5 per cent of the GDP in 
2025, strengthen health infrastructure, im prove ante-natal and post-natal services 
and swift action on HPV vaccine rollout.  Indi a needs to strengthen its nursing care to 
match global standards.  Medical colleges are increasing but what  about specialists’ 
faculty.  They are not there.  We are compromising on the quality of medical 
education and we have to focus on that.  Our commitment to Nari Shakti must reflect 
in robust budgetary provision.  Communi ties and countries, and, ultimately, the 
world, will be as strong as the health of their women.  Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON):  T h a n k  y o u .   N o w ,  S h r i m a t i   S u d h a  
Murty.  You have three minutes.  
 
SHRIMATI SUDHA MURTY (Nominated): Sir, I thank you for giving me the 
opportunity to speak.  I want to congratulate hon. Health Minister, Nadda ji and the 
hon. Prime Minister for Jan Aushadhi scheme.  Sir, I work in rural areas and citi
 es also 
and I can say that it has helped the poorest of the poor people.  My only request is 
that this scheme should be extended to remote and rural areas also. 
 Sir, one may have money, robust health , beauty and everything but if one is 
not mentally sound, then, he or she can never enjoy life.  Mental illness is one of the 
major factors today, which is prevailing in the lives of our people at different stages of 
life.  When children are young, they have  digital devices addiction; when women 
become mother, they have post-deliver y depression; in old-age, they have 
depression due to loneliness; and, in be tween, in the middle age, there are some 
                                                            
† Transliteration in Urdu script. 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
151

 
 
other forms of depressions.  Sir, people look down upon mental illness, and their 
awareness is very poor.   Because of that, there are many people who suffer from it 
but they do not ever express.  In Jan Aushadhi  stores, I found out that even the 
tablets for depression have become extrem ely cheap.  During my work, I found out 
that it helped a lot as it costs less than a cup of coffee.  
 Sir, the National Institute of Mental  Health and Neuro-Sciences (NIMHANS), 
Bangalore is extremely well known.  Many patients from our neighbouring countries 
like Pakistan, Bangladesh or Nepal come to th is institute to take treatment.  It is the 
finest institute but we require many more in stitutes in India because our population is 
very large. One NIMHANS or two NIMHANSs w ill not be sufficient.  We should have 
many more NIMHANSs, mental education instit ute and hospitals in India.  I want to 
request the Government, please look into this matter.  Number one, make awareness 
programmes.  Second, give little more money for such hospitals.  My third request is 
for research. Research in West is so differ ent from research in India.  Our cultural 
conditions are different; our way of thinki ng is different; our family situations are 
different.  So, our problems are different.  So, I request that we should look into Jan 
Aushadhi in rural and distant areas.  A lot mo re money should be spent on mental 
illness.  We can have a lot of awareness programmes.  Such a programme was there 
about 20-30 years ago.  Somebody who is  my age or even younger may remember 
the programme, ‘Jara Sochiye’.  It was a very nice programme by DD.  It was only 30 
seconds’ programme.  It will make you to rea lly think.  I would request, particularly 
Nadda ji, that we should introd uce such programmes as Jara Sochiye  on mental 
illness, particularly for women because wo men are not very expressive.  They think 
that it is a taboo to talk about it, something is  wrong in it.  If they put me into a mental 
hospital, what will happen to my children!  ( Time-bell rings. )  So, please see that 
there should be Jara Sochiye kind of a programme.  I will take one more minute, Sir.  
And that programme should be made compulsory for all the channels, not on the 
Government channels only.  All the chan nels should introduce such programmes 
where it is a curable disease.  Mental illness is a curable disease.  You have to 
express yourself.  Take medicine.  Like, when you have fever, you take medicine; 
when you have headache, you take medicine; when your mind is ill, take medicine.  
Be normal.  Lead a normal life.  Don’t get in to taboo.  These things should come out.  
Thank you very much for giving me time on behalf of all those patients with whom I 
work.  They cannot express their gratitud e to our Prime Minister and Nadda ji who 
have made depression tablets so cheap. Ma ny people have gone back to the normal 
way of living, without anybod y knowing that they had a mental depression.  Thank 
you.  Jai Hind.   
152
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

 
 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON): The ne xt speaker is Shri Praful Patel.  He 
is not present. The next speaker is Shri Deepak Prakash.  You have ten minutes.   
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश (झारखंड) : उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे 
इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने का अवसर िदया।  साथ ही, मȅ अपने सदन क े नेता और ÎवाÎथ्य 
एवं पिरवार कÊयाण मंतर्ालय क े मंतर्ी, सÇमािनत नƿा जी को िदल की गहराई से साधुवाद देना 
चाहता हूं िक उन्हȗने मुझे इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने क े िलए अवस
र िदया।  इसके  िलए मȅ 
िदल की गहराई से उनका अिभनंदन करना चाहता हूं।   
 महोदय, हमारे शाÎतर्ȗ क े अनुसार आरोग्यं परमं भाग्यं ÎवाÎथ्यं सवार्थर्साधनç, अथार्Þ 
ÎवाÎथ्य परम धन है और अच्छे ÎवाÎथ्य से हर अच्छे काम को पूरा िक
या जा सकता है।  अगर 
इसको धरातल पर िकसी ने उतारने का काम िकया है, तो दुिनया क े सवार्िधक लोकिĢय नेता, 
Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜीमाâ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िकया है।  महोदय, इस ÎवाÎथ्
य एवं पिरवार कÊयाण 
मंतर्ालय का तो उपलिÅधयȗ का भंडार है, अगर चचार् की जाए, तो तीन-चार िदन तक यह चचार् 
चल सकती है।  इसिलए मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक चाहे कोरोना का कालखंड हो, अगर सबसे अच्छा 
मैनेजमȂट दुिन
या मȂ िकसी देश ने िदखाने का काम िकया, तो वह भारतवषर् था और वह Ģधान 
मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िदखाया गया।  चाहे vaccination का सवाल हो, चा हे घर मȂ बैठे 
हुए लोगȗ की देखरेख का सवाल हो, हमारे राÍटर्ीय अध्यक्ष क े रूप  मȂ नƿा जी ने पाटीर् क े एक-एक 
कायर्कतार् को 'सेवा ही संगठन' क े माध्यम से 'नर सेवा नारायण सेवा' का संकÊप िदलाने का काम 
िकया।  पाटीर् क े एक-एक कायर्कतार् ने उस जमीन तक पहुंचने का काम िक
या और उनके  िलए 
सेवा का संकÊप लेकर काम िकया।  महोदय, चाहे मेिडकल क्षेतर् मȂ आधारभूत संरचन ा बढ़ाने का 
काम हो, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह आगे बढ़ता चला गया।  चाहे डॉक्टर हो, चाहे ÎवाÎथ्य 
कमीर्, उसकी गुणवǄा को बढ़ाने का काम अगर िकसी ने िकया, तो हमारे मंतर्ी, Ǜीमाâ जगत 
Ģकाश नƿा जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह काम बढ़ता चला गया।  
महोदय, चा
हे इस बजट क े अंदर मेिडकल ट ूिरįम की बात हो, आज दुिनया क े 
िवकासशील देशȗ क े बीमािरयȗ से जो गर्िसत लोग हȅ, वे भारत की ओर मुखाितब हो रहे हȅ।  
महोदय, चा
हे वह बजट बढ़ाने की बात हो, 2014 मȂ जब उनकी सरकार थी, इस सरकार ने उससे 
167 Ģितशत बढ़ा करके , गरीब और मध्यम वगर् क े Ģित संकÊप दशार्ने का काम िकया।  इसके  िलए 
मȅ िवशेष रूप  से अपने मंतर्ी जी और िन म र्ला सीतारमण जी को बधाई देना चाहता हूं। 
महोदय, चाहे मिहलाओं क े िलए उनके  Ģसव काल क े समय हेतु योजनाएँ बनाने का 
सवाल हो या चाहे एÇस बढ़ाने का सवाल हो, पहले क े समय मȂ देश क े िविभन्न िजलȗ से, िविभन्न 
Îथानȗ से मरीज एÇस मȂ इलाज कराने क े िलए सांसदȗ क े घर मȂ आते थे।  आज Ģधान मंतर्ी नरȂदर् 
मोदी क े नेतृत्व मȂ और Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा जी की देखरेख मȂ 23 एÇस आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ।  यह है 
कमाल, यह है मोदी मैिजक!   महोदय, आज 259 िजलȗ मȂ मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ कायर्रत हȅ, यह 
कोई छो
टी बात नहीं है।  आज मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ बढ़ रहे हȅ और साथ ही साथ मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ 
मȂ छातर्
ȗ की संख्या भी बढ़ रही है।  इसके  िलए मȅ िवशेष रूप  से माननीय मंतर्ी, Ǜी जगत Ģकाश 
नƿा जी को बधाई देना चाहता हूं, उनकी सराहना करना चाहता हूं।  
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
153

 
 
महोदय, डÅÊयूएचओ की जो िरपोटर् है और दुिनया भर क े बड़े-बड़े अखबारȗ मȂ, जनर्Êस मȂ 
जो लेख आ रहे हȅ, उनमȂ आज भारत को हेÊथ सेक्टर मȂ एक मॉडल क े रूप  मȂ देखा जा रहा है।  
हमारी ऐसी कई उपलिÅधयां है।  अभ
ी उनको बताने मȂ समय का अभाव है।  ये हमारी उपलिÅधयां 
नहीं, बिÊक ये देश की उपलिÅधयां हȅ।  जब हमारे क ु छ िमतर्, कांगर्ेस क े लोग, टीएमसी क े लोग, 
हमारे िवपक्ष क े लोग इस देश की उप लिÅधयȗ की आलोचना करते हȅ, तो मȅ ईÌवर से Ģाथर्ना करता 
हूं िक वे उनको सǊुिǉ देने का काम करȂ।  महोदय, मȅ 23 िसत ंबर, 2018 का वह िदन भूल नहीं 
सकता हूं, जो देश क े इितहास मȂ वह Îव िर्णम  काल था, Îविर्णम िदन था।  भगवान िबरसा मुंडा क े 
जन्म Îथान और िसǉू-कान्हू की कमर्भूिम, ितलका मांझी की कमर्भूिम मȂ आयुÍमान भारत PM-
JAY  को अगर िकसी ने लांच िकया, तो Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी ने रांची की धरती पर िकया।  यह 
काम उन्हȗने भगवान िबरसा मुंडा की धरती पर कर
ने का काम िकया।  मुझे बोलने मȂ बहुत हषर् हो 
रहा है, फȻ भी हो रहा है िक उस वƪ क े कायर्काल क े हमारे ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी, Ǜी जगत Ģकाश 
नƿा जी आज यहाँ पर उपि
Îथत हȅ।  
महोदय, पहले क्या होता था? पहले जब िकसी गरीब क े घर मȂ बीमारी आती थी,  तो जैसे 
उसके  यहाँ आपदा आ जाती थी। तब वह अपनी जमीन को, अपने घर को, अपने मकान को िगरव ी 
रखता था और अगर उसके  पास सोना-चांदी है, तो उसे भी वह िगरवी रखता था।  उतनी बात तो 
छोड़ दीिजए, उसके  यहां क े जो बतर्न हȅ, वे भी िगरवी मȂ चले जाते थे।  लेिकन आज वह जब फȻ 
क े साथ आयुÍमान काडर् लेकर हॉिÎपटल मȂ जाता है, तो वह मोदी काडर् कहलाता है।  यह है मोदी 
का कमाल!  दोÎतो, उसे हमारी दीदी मोदी मैिजक कह रही हȅ।  महो
दय, सौभाग्य से यह भारत 
क े 50 करोड़  से अिधक लोगȗ को हर साल 5 ला ख की गारंटी देता है।  वह अब तो देता ही है, 
लेिकन साथ-साथ अब एक नई घोषणा हमारे भारत की सरकार ने की है, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने की 
है, िजसमȂ हमारे मंतर्ी जी का बहुत बड़ा योगदान है, इसिलए मȅ उनको भी अंतरात्मा से बहुत बधाई 
देना चाहता हूं।  अब 70 वष र् क े जो बुजुगर् हȅ, वे बेसहारा नहीं हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... अब वे बेसहारा 
नहीं है, क्यȗिक उनको सहारा देने क े िलए देश क े यशÎव ी Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... अब उनको भी वह 5 लाख की गारंटी िमलेगी।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  हां, 70 साल क े 
ऊपर क े बुजुगș को भी िमलेगी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  साथ ही साथ, हमारे जो िगग वकर् सर् हȅ, उनको 
भी उसमȂ शािमल िकया गय
ा है।  अगर मजदूरȗ की भी िंचता करने वाली कोई सरकार है, तो Ģधान 
मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की भारत की सरकार है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
महोदय, अब हमारे कांगर्ेस क े लोग आलोचना कर रहे हȅ, वे हमारी उपलिÅधयȗ से ईÍ यार् 
कर रहे हȅ।  मȅ उनको अपनी अंतरात्मा मȂ झाँकने की  नसीहत देता हूँ।  1975 मȂ क्या हुआ था?  जब 
देश मȂ आपातकाल लगा था, तो चाहे वह 14 साल का बच्चा हो, चाहे 14 साल की बच्ची हो, चाहे 
वह 80 साल  का बूढ़ा-बुजुगर् हो, उसकी नसबंदी कराने का काम अगर िकसी ने िकया, तो वह 
कांगर्ेस क े लो
गȗ ने िकया था।  यह उनकी उपलिÅध थी।  उस समय नौजवानȗ, बेरोजगारȗ, बूढ़ȗ,  
बुजुगș, माताओं और बहनȗ को अगर कोई जबरदÎती नसबंदी कराने का काम िकया, तो वह 
कांगर्ेस क े लो
गȗ ने िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)...  हम तो बच गए, आप अपनी क ुसीर् देिखए।  Ģमोद जी, 
आज आप कहाँ बैठे हȅ और हम कहाँ बैठे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, जब कोरोना का
लखंड मȂ वैक्सीन का िनमार्ण हुआ, तब इन्हȗने देश 
को ĥिमत करने का काम िकया था।  कभी इसको सैģॉन वैक्सीन क े नाम से, कभी मोदी वैक्सीन 
154
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

क े नाम से जनता को ĥिमत करने का काम िकया था।  इन्हȗने ĥिमत ही करने का काम नहीं िकया 
था, बिÊक सुबह Ģेस मȂ अलग बातȂ कहते थे और रात मȂ जाकर चुपचाप चादर या क ंबल ओढ़ कर 
वही वैक्सीन लेते थे।  अब टीएमसी की दीदी बैठी हुई हȅ।  पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ क्या हुआ?  वहाँ एक 
हॉिÎपटल मȂ हमारी मिहल
ा बहन डॉक्टर क े साथ िकस Ģकार से Ëयवहार िकया गया और िकस 
Ģकार से उनकी हत्या की गई, उसको पूरा देश ने देखा है। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप मत बोिलए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...महोदय, मȅ इतना ही कहना चाहता हूँ िक छǄीसगढ़ मȂ जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार 
थी, £ आज ये बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ कह रहे हȅ, ऊ ँची-ऊ ँची आवाज़ मȂ बातȂ कह रहे हȅ।  महोदय, इनको 
अपने चेहरे को थोड़ा आईने मȂ देखना चािहए।   
महोदय, आज भारत फामार् सेक्टर मȂ सुपर पावर बन चुका है। अमेिरका मȂ िजतन ी दवाओं 
की, टेबलेट्स की खपत होती हȅ, उनमȂ से हर तीसरा टैबलेट भारत मȂ बनता है। ...( समय की 
घंटी)... अमेिरका मȂ िजतनी generic दवाओं की खपत होती हȅ, उनमȂ से 40 Ģितशत generic 
दवाएँ भारत मȂ बनी होती हȅ।  1969 मȂ दुिनया क े बाजार मȂ फामार् उǏोग मȂ भारत की जो िहÎसेदारी 
थी, वह 5 Ģितशत थी और आज 2024 म
Ȃ 85 Ģितशत िहÎसेदारी भारत की है।  
महोदय, इसमȂ मेिडकल ट ूिरįम को बढ़ावा देने का उÊलेख िकया गया है।  यह कोई छोटी 
बात नहीं है।  आज देश क े िवकासशील देश भारत की ओर मुखाितब हो रहे हȅ और भारत सरकार 
उनको दोनȗ हाथȗ से बुला रही है तथा उनको िचिकत्सा उपलÅध कराने का काम कर रही है।  
महोदय, भारत मȂ मेिडकल ट ूिरįम को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए मोदी सरकार ने 'हील इंिडया' कायर्कर्म 
लेकर आई है।  इसके  तहत कई Îतरȗ पर काम िकए जा रहे हȅ।  एक तरफ तो िवदेश मंतर्ालय क े 
साथ िमल कर वीजा िनयमȗ मȂ आसानी लाई जा रही है तािक भारत मȂ इलाज  कराने आ रहे लोगȗ 
को िकसी Ģकार की िदक्कतȗ का सामना न करना पड़े, वहीं दूसरी तरफ दुिनया क े अन्य देशȗ से 
जो मरीज इलाज कराने क े िलए भारत आ रहे हȅ, उनके  िलए िवदेशी मुदर्ा लेकर आने क े िनयमȗ मȂ 
भी सरलता लाई गई है।   
महोदय, मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ भारत सरकार ǎारा
 मेिडकल िशक्षा मȂ ऊ ँची छलांग लगाने 
का काम हुआ है।  2014 मȂ मातर् 143 िजलȗ मȂ मेिडकल कॉलेज थे और आज हम सीना तान कर 
बोलते हȅ िक 2024 मȂ 259 िजलȗ मȂ मेिडकल कॉलेज हȅ।  इतना ही नहीं, आगे की योजनाएँ भी 
बहुत अच्छी ह
ȅ। ...(समय की घंटी)...  
महोदय, इस िवतीय वषर् मȂ देश भर क े कॉलेजȗ और अÎपतालȗ मȂ 10,000 मेिडकल सीटȗ 
को जोड़ने का भी ĢÎताव है।  अगले पाच वषș मȂ क ु ल 75,000 सीटȂ जोड़ी जाएँगी।  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON): Please con clude. 
Ǜी दीपक  Ģकाश:  महोदय, यह है मोदी का मैिजक, िजसको दुिनया सराहने का काम कर रही 
है।  महोदय,  आपने मुझे बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए आपको बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON ):  N ext speaker is Dr. Thambidurai.  You 
have five minutes.   
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
155

DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, on behalf of my Party, AIADMK Party, and 
my leader Edappadi Palaniswami, I rise to participate in the discussion on the 
functioning of the Ministry of Health and Fa mily Welfare.  I am happy to see that 
Naddaji is heading the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare under the leadership of 
Modiji.  He already served previously when I was the Deputy Speaker and I have seen 
him as the Health Minister.  Now, I am once again seeing the Leader of the House 
heading this Ministry.  Hon. Prime Minister  announced during his period to increase 
the MBBS seats to 1,20,000 in the country and it was also expressed that another 
75,000 are going to be increased during the period.  I appreciate that the Government 
has come forward to increase it.  At the same  time, I want to say that apart from the 
MBBS, we have to see that for PG course  also seats must be increased equally. 
…(Interruptions)… Sir, I want to say that when the hon. Member initiated this, he said 
that Tamil Nadu is one of the leading States in  family welfare.  Sir, this is due to the 
efforts of the AIADMK Party and the AIADMK Government. …(Interruptions)…   
Especially, when Madam Jayalalithaa was h eading that, she intr oduced the Cradle 
Baby Scheme to save the female children. That is the thing.  Then, there was also the 
Amma Baby Care Kit -- when the pregnancy takes place -- to  give all the facilities to 
the patient at that time; protection to the child and protection to the mother.  Then, 
there was also the Amma Insurance Scheme, which she introduced for the health 
sector.   She started many programme s like Amma Pharmacy.  But the DMK 
Government closed all the programmes wh ich were brought by our hon. Amma.   
…(Interruptions)…    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON):   Dr. Thambidurai, please speak on the 
Ministry. …(Interruptions)…
    
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  During his period , Edappadi K. Pal aniswami brought 23 
medical colleges. …(Interruptions)… We are for the AIIMS, Madurai.  It has to come. * 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON):  Nothing will go on record except wha t 
you speak on the Ministry. …(Interruptions)… Dr. Thambidurai, nothing will go on 
record. …(Interruptions)…    
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  There are so many things.  …(Interruptions)…   No, no; I am 
telling you.  They are disturbing, Sir. …(Interruptions)…  I want to say that the NEET 
* Not recorded.
156
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

examination was introduced by the DMK and the Congress Government. 
…(Interruptions)… They introduced the examination  but they are campaigning to 
abolish the ...  …(Interruptions)…    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON):   Dr. Thambidurai, please speak on the 
Ministry.  …(Interruptions)…    
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  *  It is going on.  …(Interruptions)… That is why protection is 
necessary for that.  …(Interruptions)…    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON):   You please speak on the Ministry. 
…(Interruptions)…    
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  This is a fact. …(Interruptions)… *Therefore, I request the 
hon. Minister to take care of this seriou s thing and protect our ho
spitals which are 
functioning. …(Interruptions)… Most of the hospitals have come in the private sector 
during the MGR period.  Medical cover was also started.  …(Interruptions)…    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON): Kindly speak on the Ministry. 
…(Interruptions)…    
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  They have sa id that, but they have failed. …(Interruptions)…   
W
e are proud.   The AIADMK Government is proud that it brought all the schemes. 
Medical revolution has taken place. …(Interruptions)… And also, the Central 
Government, under Modiji, had co-operate d and given 11 medical colleges to Tamil 
Nadu.  …(Interruptions)…  I am thankful for that. 
6.00 P.M.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI P. WILSON): Ho n. Members, the discussio
 n will be 
continued tomorrow.  The remaining sp eakers will have the chance to speak 
tomorrow and the reply will also be given by the hon. Minister tomorrow.   
The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 19 th 
March, 2025.  
The House then adjourned at six of the clock till eleven of the clock on Wednesday, 
the 19th March, 2025. 
* Not recorded.
[ 18 March, 2025 ]
157

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 