Vol. 265    Monday, 
No. 11  5th August, 2024 
14 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II)
CO
NTENTS 
B
irthday Greetings (page 1) 
Pap
ers Laid on the Table (page 1 and page 78) 
A
nnouncements by the Chair (page 6) 
M
atters raised with permission - 
Demand to bring down airfare from Gulf Countries (pages 7 - 8) 
Concern over death of children due to fall in open borewell (pages 8 - 9) 
Concern over the costly treatment of Cancer in the country (pages 9 - 10) 
Demand to declare the Ema Keithel (Women Market) of Manipur as a living 
cultural heritage site (pages 10 - 11) 
Need to address the issues faced by Journalists and Media professionals 
(pages 11 - 12) 
© 
R
AJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Concern over delays in completion of National Highway projects in Odisha 
(pages 12 - 13) 
Demand for a new tourist circuit to promote tourism in Udaipur, Mewar and 
surrounding tribal areas (pages 13 - 14) 
Demand to check and curb the menace of Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN) 
in the state of West Bengal (pages 14 - 16) 
Demand for the Bharat Ratna Award to noted litterateur late Annabhau Sahu 
(pages 17 - 18) 
Demand to name a road in Delhi after Lakhi Shah Banjara (pages 18 - 19) 
Demand to address huge pendency of cases before the Commissioner of 
Income Tax (Appeals) (pages 19 - 20) 
Demand to reduce the rate of GST on health and insurance policies  
(pages 20 - 21) 
Demand to restart the Sugar Mills at Nandganj in Ghazipur District of Uttar 
Pradesh (pages 21 - 22) 
Demand to facilitate issuance  of Credit Card to Senior Citizens of the Country 
(pages 23 - 24) 
Demand to build elevated road in the section of Desuri Naal connecting Pali, 
Jaisalmer and Jodhpur areas (pages 24 - 25) 
Demand for occupational safety measures and facility of insurance for Stunt 
Artists of Indian Film Industry (pages 25 - 26) 
Need to conduct archaeological exploration located in the State of Jharkhand 
(pages 26 - 27) 
Demand to abolish the practice of using colonial era titles in the working of 
judiciary (pages 27 - 28) 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 
 
 

Oral Answers to Questions (pages 28-) 
 [Answers to Starred and Un -starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024  — Introduced 
(page 67) 
 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry  of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare-  
Concluded (pages 67) 
 
Rulings by the Chair (pages 81 - 83) 
 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (pages  83 
and pages 141) 
 
Special Mentions- 
 
Demand for Railway Over Bridge at Samsi Railway Crossing, Malda, West 
Bengal (pages 118 - 119) 
Demand for Mental Health Helpline to Reduce Farmer Suicide  
(pages 119 -  120) 
Demand for restoration and support for Khazan Land in Goa (page 120) 
Demand to give benefit to villagers by putting closed and abandoned coal 
mines in use (page 121) 
Request for establishment of Aviation Varsity in Hyderabad (pages 121 - 122) 
Demand for Structural Audit in the Country (pages 122 - 123) 
Demand for central assistance for the revival of agricultural sector in the state 
of Kerala (pages 123 - 124) 
Concern over quality of food and hygiene provided by R ailways during Travel 
(pages 124 - 125) 
Demand for establishment of five medical colleges of RAJMES (Rajasthan 
Medical Education Society) and MDRUs of Bharatpur, Bhilwara, Churu, Pali 
and Dungarpur (pages 125-126) 
Demand for compensation for horticultural crops damaged due to natural 
calamities (pages 126-127) 

Concern over cruelty against animals (pages 127) 
Need to address the problems faced by the Kannur International Airport  
(pages 127-128) 
Demand for infrastructure development, regular staffing and digitisation of post 
offices in Odisha (pages 128 -1 29) 
Demand for establishment of Extremely Backward Classes Finance and 
Development Corporation (pages 130 - 131) 
Concern over drug/alcohol menace (page 130) 
Concern over issue of fake caste certificates (page 131) 
Dumping of cheap Chinese fabrics and Duty-Free import of man-made fabrics 
from Bangladesh (page 132) 
Demand for special assistance by the Central Government to the public 
libraries of Maharashtra (pages 132 - 133) 
Demand for strict enforcement of ban on Single use plastic (pages 133 - 134) 
Demand for running the KV School JIPMER  on fulltime instead of shift  basis 
(pages 134 - 135) 
Need to Address  the issues faced by the people during the construction of 
National Highways (pages 135 - 136) 
Demand for direct regular train service connecting Pratapgrah, U.P. to Mumbai 
(page 136) 
Demand for amendment in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for 
State Owned Discoms (pages 136 - 137) 
Concern over Drug Menace in the Country (pages 137 - 138) 
Demand to develop and use l ocal Servers and Cloud Systems in the Country 
(pages 138 - 139) 
Concern over difficulties being faced by Kerala candidates for the upcoming 
NEET  PG Examination by the National Board of Examinations in Medical 
Sciences (NBEMS) owing to the allotment of examination centres in Andhra 
Pradesh (pages 139 - 140) 
Demand for starting of Mhow-Indore-Manmad Railway Project (page 140) 
Demand for increasing  Hunar Se Rozgar Tak Training Institutes for Tourism in 
Odisha (pages 140 - 141) 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
Monday, the 5th August, 2024 /14 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I am please d to extend birthday greetings to hon. 
Members of Parliament, Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha and Shri Venkataramana Rao 
Mopidevi. Their birthdays are today.   
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, serving his second term in Rajya Sabha since April this 
year, is a well-known name, both in academic s as well as in public life. He headed 
the Department of Social Work in Delhi University and continues to be active in 
guiding research scholars in social work. He serves as a national spokesperson of 
Rastriya Janata Dal. Prof. Jha’s oratory sk ills and poetic prowess are nothing short of 
extraordinary. We all are frequent witn ess to his wit and wisdom, humour, and 
sarcasm in this Chamber. His bipartisan stance on critical issues of national interest is 
greatly appreciated as well as his well-resear ched contributions inside the House. He 
is married to Shrimati Namrata Jha, and the couple is blessed with daughters, 
Moulishree and Maitreyi. Hon. Members, on behalf of this house and my own, we 
wish him a long, healthy and happy life, and extend greetings to his family members. 
Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi is a distinguished Member of Parliament 
who has been serving in this august Hous e since June 2020. As a four-term Member 
in Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly and as a Minister in the State Cabinet, Shri 
Mopidevi is known for his significant cont ributions in socio-political landscape of 
Andhra Pradesh. Shri Mopidevi has the hono ur of being the first politician from the 
fishermen community in Andhra Pradesh to be elected in the Rajya Sabha. He is 
married to Shrimati Aruna Mopidevi, and th ey are blessed with a son, Rajiv, and a 
daughter, Dr. Sai Jasmeetha. Ho n. Members, on behalf of this House, I wish him a 
long, healthy and happy life, and extend greetings to family members.   
 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
M R .  C H A I R M A N :   P a p e r s  t o  b e  L a i d  o n  the Table, Shri Shripad Yesso Naik; not 
there. Shri Suresh Gopi. 

 
Notifications of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(SHRI SURESH GOPI):  Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Notification No. G.S.R. 154(E)., dated the 4th March, 2024, publishing the 
Petroleum (Amendment) Rule s, 2024, under sub-section (4) of Section 29 of the 
Petroleum Act, 1934. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 386/18/24] 
 
II.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, under sub-section (6) of Section 3 of the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955:- 
Statements showing action taken by the Government on the various assurances, 
promises and undertakings 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (DR. L. 
MURUGAN): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the 
following Statements showing action take n by the Government on the various 
assurances, promises and undertakings given during the Session shown against 
each:- 
1. Statement No.   
XXXVII Two Hundred Twentieth, 2010 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 638/18/24] 
 
(1) G.S.R. 176(E)., dated the 12 th March, 2024, publishing the Lubricating Oils 
and Greases (Processing, Supply and Di stribution Regulation) Amendment 
Order, 2024. 
(2) G.S.R. 208(E)., dated the 15 th March, 2024, publishing the Motor Spirit and 
High Speed Diesel (Regulation of Suppl y, Distribution and Prevention of 
Malpractices) Amendment Order, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (2) See No. L. T. 387/18/24] 
 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

2. Statement No.  XXX Two Hundred Twenty Seventh, 2012 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 639/18/24] 
 
3. Statement No. XXVII Two Hundred Thirty Third, 2014 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 640/18/24] 
 
4. Statement No. XXVII Two Hundred Thirty Eighth, 2016 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 641/18/24] 
 
5. Statement No. XXII Two Hundred Forty Second, 2017 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 642/18/24] 
 
6. Statement No. XXII Two Hundred Forty Sixth, 2018 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 643/18/24] 
 
7. Statement No. XII Two Hundred Forty Eighth, 2019 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 644/18/24] 
 
8. Statement No. XII Two Hundred Fifty Sixth, 2022 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 645/18/24] 
 
9. Statement No. VII Two Hundred Fifty Seventh, 2022 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 646/18/24] 
 
10. Statement No. VII Two Hundred Fifty Eighth, 2022 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 647/18/24] 
 
11. Statement No. VI Two Hundred Fifty Ninth, 2023 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 648/18/24] 
 
12. Statement No. IV Two Hundred Sixtieth, 2023 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 649/18/24] 
 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
3

13. Statement No. III Two Hundred Sixty Second, 2023-24 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 650/18/24] 
 
14. 
 
Statement No. II 
 
Two Hundred Sixty Third, 2024 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 651/18/24] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Coal 
 
कोयला मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी सतीश चंदर् दूबे): महोदय, मȅ कोयला खान भिवÍय िनिध और 
Ģकीणर् उपबंध अिधिनयम, 1948 की धारा 7क क े अधीन कोयला खान पȂशन (संशोधन) Îकीम, 
2024 को Ģकािशत करने वाली कोयला मंतर्ालय की अिधसूचना सं. सा.का.िन. 165 ( अ)., 
िदनांक 8 माचर्, 2024 की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभ
ा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 547/18/24] 
 
Report and accounts (2023-24) of Centre for Land Warfare Studies, New Delhi and 
related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF DEFENCE (SHRI SANJAY SETH):  
Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:-   
 
(a)  Annual Report and Accounts of Centre  for Land Warfare Studies, New Delhi, 
for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 
(b)  Review by Government on the working of the above Centre. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 417/18/24] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी तोखन साहू): महोदय, मȅ िदÊली िवकास 
अिधिनयम, 1957 की धारा 58 क े अधीन िदÊली िवकास Ģािधकरण, िनदेशक ( मंतर्ालयी), भतीर् 
िनयम, 2023 को Ģकािशत करने वाली आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय की अिधसूचना सं. 
सा.का.िन. 635 (अ)., िदनांक 29 अग
 Îत, 2023 तथा िवलंब संबंधी िववरण की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी 
तथी िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 211/18/24] 
 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of the AI E ngineering Services Li mited, New Delhi; 
and the  Hotel Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi and related papers 
 
नागर िवमानन मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी मुरलीधर मोहोल): महोदय, क ंपनी अिधिनयम, 2013 
की धारा 394 की उप-धारा (1) (ख) क े अधीन िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा 
िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 
(SHRI SURESH GOPI): Sir, I lay on the Table, under sub-section (2) of section 19A 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971, a copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India on Information Systems Au dit of selected Central Public Secto
 r 
Enterprises – Union Government (Commercia l) – Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas No. 2 of 2024 (Compliance Audit Observations). 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 652/18/24] 
 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the AI Engineering Services Limited, New 
Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together  with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
thereon.  
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
(ii) (a) 
Annual   Report   and   Accounts   of   the    Hotel Corporation of India 
Limited, New Delhi, for the year 2022- 23, together with   the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon. 
(b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
(c) Statements giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) and (ii) See No. L. T. 394/18/24] 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
5

 
ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as anno unced in the House on Friday, the 2 nd 
August 2024, the hon. Minister of Agricult ure and Farmers' Welfare and Minister of 
Rural Development, Shri Shivraj Singh Ch ouhan, will continue his reply to the 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of  Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare at 1.00 
p.m. today.  Accordingly, there will be no lunch recess today.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, I have been waiting for your reply to 
my letter written to you.   What about my point of order?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will respond to it.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: When, Sir?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... I can speak only when 
you take your seat. It is under my serious consideration. The House will come to 
know about it.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  What about me, Sir? When are you going to tell me?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Before adverting to the same in the House, I will take steps to 
inform Shri Digvijaya Singh that, at this pa rticular time, this point of order is being 
determined.  It will be done.   
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Matters raised with  Permission. Dr. Sangeeta Balwant.  
Demand to restart Sugar Mill at Nandganj in  Ghazipur District of Uttar Pradesh. Not 
there. Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham. De mand to bring down airfare from Gulf 
Countries. 
 
 
 
 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand to bring down airfare from Gulf Countries 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala):  Sir, I would like to bring on record the 
organized loot by airlines, specifically to the Gulf countries. June, July, August and 
September are the months of school holidays. It is a holiday season.  But now it is not 
a holiday season. Now it has become a horror season due to the exorbitant, 
exploitative and extortionist airfare charged by the airlines. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair) 
 
Sir, we call it an organized loot because  it is not just double or triple or 
quadruple. But the rate has b een increased by more than five times. We call it an 
organized loot. If a poor labourer wants to travel from a Gulf country to India, 
ordinarily he has to pay Rs. 8,000, and 'to and fro' it would be Rs. 16,000. But now 
the present average rate from a Gulf country to  Kerala or India is Rs.46,000. It means 
that for him it would be close to one lakh rupees. How will a poor labourer pay for it? 
If a middle class family of four wants to tr avel, ordinarily, they have to pay around 
Rs.36,000. Now it would come up to Rs.3,64, 000. This is the rate and how a hole is 
being burnt in the pockets of poor labour ers and middle class in the Gulf, who are 
toiling hard to bring in remittances into our country! We call it an organized loot 
because airlines are very much invariably to gether coordinating high fares, and they 
play a role to stand united in this aspect . We call it an organized loot because the 
Government gives the standard reply that it is market driven and also that IATA 
decides it.  By washing of their hands, th e Government is actually a partner-in-crime 
in this organized loot. We call it an organised loot. We alwa ys say that it is they who 
are bringing remittances and foreign exchange into our country. India has received 
USD 120 billion in the last year, 2023, and Kerala accounts for 19 per cent of it. So, we 
call them the backbone of our remittance economy. But, actually, we are breaking 
their backs.  
So, I honestly request the Central Government, the hon. Prime Minister and 
the Civil Aviation Minister to in tervene and stop this organized loot. I urge the Central 
Government to negotiate for bilateral in crease of seats, and also to ensure ( Time-bell 
rings) chartered flights and put a cap on fares.         
                                                  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham: Ms. 
Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri Ramji 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
7

(Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha 
(Bihar), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharas htra), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
(Maharashtra), Shri Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri Sandos h Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Javed Ali Khan 
(Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jha rkhand), Shri Digvijaya Singh (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury (Telan gana), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri R. Giri rajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Neeraj Dangi, 
(Rajasthan), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odish a), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Beng al)  and Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
(Telangana).         
                                                                    
Concern over death of children due to fall in open borewell 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह ( उǄर Ģदेश): धन्यवाद, उपसभापित महोदय।  आपने मुझे जीरȗ ऑवर मȂ 
बोलने का मौका िदया। मȅ आज इस सदन मȂ देशभर  मȂ खुले बोरवेल से आए िदन होने वा
 ली 
घटनाओं को लेकर अपना िवषय रखना चाहती हूं। महोदय, मȅ आपको अवगत कराना चाहती हूं 
िक देशभर मȂ खुले बोरवेल से आए िदन होने वाली घटनाएं काफी िंचताजनक हȅ।  Ģाय: देखने मȂ 
आया है िक लोगȗ क े ǎा रा खराब Ƿूबव ैल को उखाड़ कर अन्य Îथानȗ पर िशÄट कर िदया जाता 
है और Ƿूबव ैल को िशÄट करने क े उपरांत बोरवेल को खुला छोड़ िदया जाता है और उसमȂ िमƺी 
भरकर समतल नहीं िकया जाता है। इस लापरवाही क े क ारण बोरवेल मȂ बच्चȗ क े िगरने की 
घटनाएं देशभर मȂ अकसर होती रहती हȅ, िजससे जान-माल का नुकसान होने क े साथ-साथ 
बहुत मुिÌकलȗ का सामना करना पड़ता है। इसके  िलए Ģदेशȗ की सरकार ǎारा भी समय-सम य  
पर खराब बोरवेल को बंद करके  भूिम समतल करने क े बारे मȂ आदेश िदया जाता है, पर इसके  
बावजूद इसमȂ कोई खास पिरवतर्न नहीं हुआ। आज से एक दशक पहले 2009 मȂ सुĢीम कोटर् ने 
Îवत: संज्ञान लेते हुए बोरवेल मȂ िगरक र होने वाली मौतȗ पर एक गाइडलाइन जारी की थी। परंतु 
एक दशक क े अंतराल क े बाद भी Ģदेश सरकारȗ ने सुĢीम कोटर् की गाइडलाइन का पालन नहीं 
िकया, िजसकी वजह से बोरवेल मȂ िगरकर बच्चȗ की मौत होती रही। अत: महोदय, मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से अनुरोध करना चाहती हूं िक देशभर मȂ खराब पड़े खुले बोरवेल को बंद करने क े िलए 
समुिचत कदम उठाने की अत्यंत आवÌयकता है, िजससे लापरवाही क े कारण बच्चȗ क े बोरवेल मȂ 
िगरने की घट
नाओं को रोका जा सके , धन्यवाद।               
                                                    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Darshana Singh: Prof. 
Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Jose K. 
Mani (Kerala), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jhark hand), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

Pradesh), Shri Krishan Lal Panwar (Harya na), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik, 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) Sh rimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Su lata Deo (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar 
(Odisha)  and Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya Pradesh).   
                                       
Concern over the costly treatment of Cancer in the country 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह ( राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): धन्यवाद, उपसभापित महोदय।  आपने एक 
बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर मुझे अपनी बात कहने का मौका िदया। मान्यवर, क ȅसर की बीमारी 
बहुत बड़ी और गंभीर बीमारी है।  इसमȂ आदमी दो तर
 ीके  से ट ूटता है। िजस Ëयिƪ को क ȅसर होता 
है, वह शारीिरक रूप  से ट ूटता है और उसका पिरवार आिर्थक रूप  से ट ूटता है।  इसके  आंकड़े 
चȚकाने वाले हȅ।  िजतनी तेजी क े साथ िंहदुÎतान मȂ क ȅसर की बीमारी बढ़ रही है, उस पर हम 
सबको, पूरे सदन को और सरकार को िंचता करने की और कदम उठाने की आवÌयकता है।  
महोदय, WHO की िरपोटर् क े मुतािबक िपछले तीन साल मȂ 22 लाख लोगȗ की मौत क ȅसर से हुई 
है।  अके ले 2022 मȂ 9 ला
ख लोगȗ की मौत क ȅसर से हुई है।  हमारे देश मȂ क ȅसर से इतने लोगȗ की 
जान चली जा रही है, िजतनी िकसी देश की आबादी नहीं है।  मȅ देशȗ की आबादी देख रहा था, तो 
भूटान की आबादी 7 लाख, 80 हजा
र है, गुयाना की आबादी 8 लाख है, लक्ज़मबगर् की आबादी 6 
लाख 53 हजार है। मालदीव की आबादी 5 लाख, 24 हज़ार है।  
महोदय, िजतनी िकसी देश की आबादी नहीं है, उससे ज्यादा लोग हमारे देश मȂ क ȅसर से 
मर रहे हȅ।  
 मान्यवर, इसके  बारे मȂ पािर्लयामȂटरी Îटȅिंडग कमेटी की एक िरपोटर् है, जो इस सरकार क े 
सामने िवचाराध
ीन है। उसके  अध्यक्ष, Ģो. राम गोपाल यादव जी यहाँ पर मौजूद हȅ। वह िरपोटर् 
पिÅलक डोमेन मȂ है। महोदय, उसकी क ु छ िरकमंडेशन्स हȅ, िजनको देश क े अंदर लागू करना 
बहुत आवÌयक है। वह िरपोटर् साफ तौर पर यह कहत
ी है िक इस देश क े अंदर 25 Ģितशत लोगȗ 
क े िलए Ģाइवेट हॉिÎपटÊस मȂ ģी इलाज कराने की ËयवÎथा की जा ए। सरकार क े ǎारा ऐसा 
कानून बनाया जाए िक 25 परस Ȃट ģी इलाज क ȅसर क े मरीजȗ को Ģाइवेट हॉिÎपटÊस क े अंदर 
िमले।  
मान्यवर, दूसरी बात यह है िक छोटे-छोटे बच्चȗ मȂ जो क ȅसर  हो रहा है,  उनको देखकर 
पिरवार पीिड़
त होता है, क्यȗिक बचने की कोई उÇमीद नहीं होती है। वे अपना घर बेचकर, जमीन 
बेचकर उनका इलाज कराते हȅ, इसिलए अगर िकसी बच्चे को क ȅसर की बीमारी होती है, तो इस 
तरह क े बच्चȗ का इला
ज पूरे तरीके  से ģी िकया जाए। महोदय, यह दूसरी िसफािरश उसमȂ की 
गई है।  
 मान्यवर, बड़े दुभार्ग्य की बात है िक हैजा, मलेिरया और मेिनन्जाइिटस जैसी तमाम 
बीमािरयाँ सरकार ǎारा नोिटफाई की गई हȅ, लेिकन क ȅसर जैसी गंभीर बीमारी अिधसूिचत नहीं 
की गई है, न
ोिटफाई नहीं की गई है, इसिलए यह भी एक िंचता का िवषय है।  
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
9

मान्यवर, मȅ अंत मȂ िसफर् इतना कहूंगा िक इस बीमारी को नोिटफाई िकया जाए।…(समय 
की घंटी).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member,  Sh ri Sanjay Singh:  Shri Sanjeev Arora 
(Punjab), Shri Digvijaya Singh (Madhya Prad esh), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), 
Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri Pr amod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Ramji 
(Uttar Pradesh), Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddira ju (Telangana), Shri Javed Ali Khan 
(Uttar Pradesh), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jh a (Bihar), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Mahua Maji (J harkhand), Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
(Telangana), Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chha ttisgarh), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shrimati 
Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Sh rimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar 
Pradesh) Shrimati Sudha Murty (Nominated), Shri Derek O'Brien (West Bengal), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri 
Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shrimati Sulata 
Deo (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri 
R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bi shi (Odisha), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), 
Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra).                            
                    
Ǜी उपसभापित:  धन्यवाद, संजय जी।  Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba, "Demand to 
declare the Ema Keithel (Women Market) of Manipur as a Living Cultural Heritage 
Site." 
 
Demand to declare the Ema Keithel (Women Market) of Manipur as a living cultural 
heritage site 
 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJAOBA LEISHEMBA  (Manipur): Sir, my Zero Hour 
submission is 'Demand to declare the Ema Keithel (Women Market) of Mani
 pur as a 
Living Cultural Heritage Site.  In Manipuri, 'Ima' means Mother and 'Keithel' means 
Market, that is, 'Mother's Market'.  It is also popularly known as Khwairamband Ima 
Keithel, situated at the heart of Imphal city, Manipur. It is one of the oldest women 
markets in Asia, run only by women folks, and no male traders are allowed to open 
stalls or shop there.  It has a very long mythological story about its establishment.  It 
is not only a commercial hub but it also oc cupies a vital socio-economic space in the 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

history of Manipur. The two women uprising s of Manipur, known as the "Nupi Lan of 
1904 and 1939", against the British colonial  rule, were initiated, organized by the 
women leaders of this market. This market  is a unique symbol of women's economic 
empowerment and it may be described as "A great example of Nari Shakti." 
Because of its unique nature, its hist orical significance and its value of 
women's empowerment, I urge upon the Union Government to declare the Ema 
Keithel or Khwairamband Ema Ke ithel as a Living Cultural Heritage Site under Article 
51A and to preserve it as a place of histor ic interest and national importance under 
Article 49 of Indian Constitution. Thank you, Sir.                
                                                  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba:  Prof. 
Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha) and Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra).        
                    Dr. V. Sivadasan, "Need to address the issues faced by journalists and 
media professionals."    
 
Need to address the issues faced by Journalists and Media professionals 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala):  Sir, the histo ry of our world teaches us that journalism 
is the integral part of the liberation move ment. The world-renowned personalities like 
Gandhiji, Bhagat Singh, Karl Marx and Lenin used media as a tool for struggle.  Many 
of freedom fighters were active in journalism.  I am sorry to say that India, the land of 
Periyar, Ambedkar and Ravindranath Tagore , is in the 159th position out of 180 
countries in Press Freedom Index. The jour nalists are facing police cases including 
UAPA, arrest and imprisonment. Journalis ts like Prabir Purkayastha and Siddique 
Kappan were in jail because they  were speaking truth to power. In India, in the last 10 
years, more than 100 journalists were k illed in different places, including the noted 
editor and writer, Gauri Lankesh.  
The communal fanatics target the journa lists, who are standing with people.  
The journalists, who are trying to expose the anti-people policies of the rulers, are 
targeted by the forces of the Union Government. Working journalists are one of the 
most exploited groups in India. Thousands of brilliant youngsters are working in media 
but the Government is not ready to protect  them, and the Government is not taking 
initiative to ensure proper wages to the journalists. After the implementation of neo-
liberal economic policy, the number of permanent employees has been reduced.  The 
journalists have no social security. There are no proper welfare and pension schemes.  
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
11

The Majithia Commission was appointed to study the issues of journalists and it has 
suggested a minimum wage to the media persons. But, till now, the majority of the 
journalists are not getting the suggested salary.  
 The Government is not bothered abou t the journalists. The journalists are 
working in most in-human conditions. Basic amenities are not there. Human rights 
are violated in their work places. Journalists  have no proper work time.  Legally, the 
working time is eight hours per day. But, th ey are working for 14 to 17 hours. When 
the journalists are raising issues pertaining  to them, they are not getting any legal 
protection from the Government. They are unable to form their associations as trade 
unions in their media institutions.   
 At present, the real news journalists have been degraded. The journalists have 
been treated as only column fillers between the advertisements. Some of the media 
have given more importance to advertisements than to the news.       
                            
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Dr. V. Sivadasan.   
 The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Dr. V. Sivadasan: Prof . Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shri Ravi 
Chandra Vaddiraju (Telangana), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Ms. Dola 
Sen (West Bengal), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jha rkhand), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), 
Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) , Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri R. Giri rajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Sh ri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal),  Shri 
Haris Beeran (Kerala) Shri Saket Gokhal e (West Bengal) and Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha).                                                                                   
Now, Shri Muzibulla Khan; 'Concern over  delays in completion of National 
Highway projects in Odisha'. 
 
Concern over delays in completion of National Highway projects in Odisha 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): उपसभापित महोदय, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे सदन को 
एक गंभीर िवषय से अवगत कराने का मौका िदया। 
 उपसभापित महोदय, ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ, खास करके  नेशनल हाईवे क े Ģोजेक्ट क े बारे 
मȂ, मȅ क ु छ बो
लना चाहता हूँ। ओिडशा राज्य सरकार का जो राÎता है, जो Îटेट हाईवे है, हमारे 
तत्कालीन मुख्य मंतर्ी, नवीन बाबू ने जो Îटेट हाईवेज़ बनाए हȅ, इसिलए ओिड शा क े हर गाँव, हर 
गली, हर क ूँ चे मȂ राÎता बहुत ही खुबसूरत है। जब तक कोई इंसान नहीं िदखेगा, तब तक वह 
समझ नहीं पाएगा। अगर Îटेट हाईवे और नेशनल हाईवे का compar ison िकया जाए, तो सोिचए 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

मत! जब कोई घर से िनकलता है, तो घरवाले पूछते हȅ िक कौन से राÎते पर जा रहे हो। अगर वह 
नेशनल हाईवे पर जा रहा होता है, तो घरवाले ऊपरवाले से दुआ करते हȅ, पूजा करते हȅ िक वह 
सही-सलामत वा
पस आ जाए। मȅ आपको हमारे ओिडशा क े नेशनल हाईवे की हालत बताना 
चाहता हूँ। Duburi-Chandikhole, नेशनल हाईवे 53 फोरल ेन होने वाला है, वह क ंपलीट नहीं 
हुआ है। Rajamunda to Barkote नेशनल हाईवे, जो नेशनल हाईवे 23 पर  है, वह भी क ंपलीट 
नहीं हुआ है। Barg
arh to Barpali और Barpali to Balangir, नेशनल हाईवे 26 का  फोरलेन 
होना, वह भी क ंपलीट नहीं हुआ है। Angul-Sambalpur, एनएच 55, Cuttack-Angul, एनएच 
55, वह भी क ंपलीट नहीं हुआ है। Bhadrak-Balasore, एनएच-16, वह भी क ंपलीट नहीं हुआ है 
और Jharsuguda to Bhojpur, एनएच 49 पर  जो वाइडिंनग का काम है, वह भी क ंपली ट नहीं 
हुआ है।  
उपसभापित महोदय, नेशनल हाईवेज़ की हालत बहुत ही बुरी है, इसिलए मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से, चाहे राज्य सरकार की तरफ से बोिलए या सांसद क े िहसाब से भी बोिलए, पूछना 
चाहता हूँ िक नेशनल हाईवेज़ की हालत ओिडशा मȂ इतनी बुरी क्यȗ है? िकस कारण से, िकस 
वजह से नेशन
ल हाईवे की हालत ऐसी हुई है? वह काम इतने-इतने सालȗ से क ंपलीट क्यȗ नहीं 
हो रहा है? एक-दो क ंपल ीट  नहीं होते हȅ, वह अलग बात है, लेिकन करीब-करीब छ:-सात ऐसे 
बड़े-बड़े Ģोजेक्ट हȅ, जो क ंपलीट नहीं हुए हȅ और काम भी धीमा चल रहा है। वह काम भी अच्छी 
क्वािलटी का नहीं है, क्यȗिक इधर एक साइड मȂ क ंपलीट होता है, तो दूसरे साइड का राÎता 
खराब हो जा
ता है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से अनुरोध करू ँगा िक आप सरकार को िनदȃश दीिजए िक 
नेशनल हाईवेज़ की जो हालत है, िजतना जÊदी हो सके , उन्हȂ ठीक करȂ और लोगȗ क े जान-मा ल 
की रक्षा करȂ, क्यȗिक कई एक्सीडȂट्स होते हȅ। आप हर एक-दो िदन मȂ सुनȂगे िक नेशनल हाईवे मȂ 
कहीं मोटर साइिकल एक्सीडȂट हो गया, कहीं कार एक्सीडȂट हो गया, कहीं टर्क एक्सी ड Ȃट हो 
गया। ऐसे बहुत सी कीमती जानȂ जा चुकी हȅ, इसिलए मȅ आपके  माध्यम से अनुरोध करू ँगा िक 
िजतनी जÊदी हो सके , ओिडशा क े नेशनल हाईवेज़ को िरपेयर िकया जाए, क ंपलीट िकया जाए 
और लोगȗ क े जान-माल को बचाया जा ए, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Muzibulla Khan:  Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hish am (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha).                                                                 
Shri Chunnilal Garasiya; demand for a new tourist circ uit to promote tourism in 
Udaipur, Mewar and surrounding tribal areas.  
 
Demand for a new tourist circuit to promote tourism in Udaipur, Mewar and 
surrounding tribal areas 
 
Ǜी चुƐीलाल गरािसया (राजÎथान): उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे Zero Hour मȂ बोलने का 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
13

 मौका िदया है, इसके  िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत आभार।  मȅ राजÎथान क े पयर्टन सिर्कटȗ मȂ नए 
Îथलȗ क े समावेश हेतु सवȃक्षण की मांग कर रहा हूं।  महोदय, मȅ राजÎथान वीर िशरोमिण, जो 
वीरता, शौयर्, त्याग, पराकर्म एवं दृढ़ िनÌचय क े िलए जाने जाने वाले वीर योǉ ा महाराणा Ģताप 
और उनके  सेनापित राणा पूंजा भील की धरती मेवाड़, उदयपुर से आता हȅ।  उदयपुर एक िवÌव 
Ģिसǉ पयर्टक Îथल है।  इसे झीलȗ की नगरी भी कहा जाता है।  यह उǄर ी  भारत का सबसे 
आकषर्क पयर्टक शहर भी माना जाता है।  उदयपुर को हाल ही मȂ िवÌव का सबसे खूबसूरत शहर 
भी घोिषत िकया गया है।   
महोदय, वतर्मान मȂ राजÎथान मȂ चार पयर्टन संभाग हȅ - जोधपुर, जयपुर, अजमेर और 
कोटा।  इसी तरह राजÎथान मȂ लगभग 10 पयर्टन सिर्कट हȅ।  इनमȂ Ģमुख हȅ - मरू सिर्कट, िजसमȂ 
जैसलमेर, बीकानेर, जोधपुर, बाड़मेर िजले आते हȅ; शेखावटी सिर्कट, िजसमȂ सीकर, झुंझुनू, 
चूरू  िजले आते हȅ; ढ ूंढाड़ सिर्कट, िजसमȂ जयपुर, दौसा, आमेर िजले आते हȅ; Ĥज मेवात सिर् कट, 
इसमȂ भरतपुर, सवाई माधोपुर, टȗक िजले आते हȅ; हाड़ौती सिर्कट िजसमȂ कोटा, बूंदी, बारा, 
झालावाड़ िजले आते हȅ; मेवाड़ सिर्कट, िजसमȂ उदयपुर, राजसमंद, िचतौड़गढ़ और भीलवाड़ा 
िजले आते हȅ; मेरवाड़ सिर्कट, िजसमȂ अजमेर, पुÍकर, मेड़ता और नागौर िजले आते हȅ।  गौड़वाड़ 
सिर्कट िजसमȂ पाली, िसरोही, जालौर िजले आते हȅ।   
महोदय, वतर्मान पिरĢेÑय मȂ इन पयर्टन सिर्कटȗ मȂ ऐसे कई पयर्टन Îथल हȅ, जो अभी तक 
इन पयर्टन सिर्कटȗ मȂ शािमल नहीं िकए गए हȅ।  अत: मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से मांग करता 
हूं िक राजÎ
थान मȂ इन सभी पयर्टन सिर्कटȗ सिहत बांसवाड़ा, ड ूंगरपुर, राजसमंद, िचǄौड़गढ़, 
भीलवाड़ा, उदयपुर मȂ नए पयर्टक Îथलȗ का सवȃक्षण करवाकर ...(समय की घं
टी)... इन Îथलȗ 
को....     
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Chunnilal Garasiya:   Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odish a), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), and Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chha ttisgarh).                       
 धन्यवाद माननीय चुन्नीलाल जी । माननीय Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर्; ‘Demand to Check 
and Curb the Menace of Fake Indian Cu rrency Notes (FICN) in the State of West 
Bengal’. 
 
Demand to check and curb the menace of Fake Indian Currency Notes (FICN) in the 
State of West Bengal 
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् (पिÌचमी बंगाल): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, यह बहुत गंभीर िवषय है।  
िपछले दो दशकȗ से िंहदुÎतान मȂ िक
सी भी जगह कोई फ े क करेन्सी पकड़ी गई, िकसी आदमी को  
  
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

अरेÎट कर िलया गया, तो उसके  संबंध सीधे कािलयाचक, मालदा से जुड़े हुए होते हȅ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal): Authenticate...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: I do authenticate. ..(Interruptions)... सर, Reserve 
Bank की िरपोटर् है िक सारे िंहदुÎतान मȂ िजतनी सारी फ े क करेन्सीज़ हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर्: उनमȂ 80 per cen
 t are coming from West Bengal. 
...(Interruptions)... Sir, we are living in a border district. ...(Interruptions)... We 
have 2,200 kms. of internatio nal border with Bangladesh.  ...(Interruptions)... We 
are facing a silent demographic invasion. ...(Interruptions)... 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seats...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: Not only that, the entire demographic design of the 
West Bengal in the border areas have been totally changed. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No cross talks ...(Interruptions)... आपस मȂ बात नहीं करȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर्: सर, आज जो फ े क करेन्सी है, यह िसफर् पिÌचमी बंगाल की बीमारी नहीं है, 
बिÊक िंहदुÎतान मȂ बहुत जगहȗ पर जो फ े क करेन्सी चल रही है, इसी कारण आज पिÌचमी बंगाल 
का migrant labour भी खतरे मȂ आ गया है।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित:   Ãलीज़, आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप बैठ 
जाएं, Ãलीज़ ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बोलȂ ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: Our democrac y, our economy, our integrity, our 
internal security is under threat. ...(Interrupt
ions)...सर, इस िवषय क े ऊपर गंभीरता से 
िवचार करना चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  मालदा, मुिर्शदाबाद और नािदया, इन तीन िजलȗ मȂ और 
...(Ëयवधान)...  नया शुरू  हुआ, उǄर 24 परगना मȂ बारासात नामक एक जगह है, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
not only fake currency, Sir, fa ke Aadhaar card, fake PAN card, सदन मȂ ये जो सारे 
सदÎय बैठे हुए हȅ, ...(Ëय
वधान)... सभी का State  देिखए, ...(Ëयवधान)...  सभी जगह पकड़े जाते 
हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  बंगलादेश से जो migrant labours यहाँ पहुँचते हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)...  सर, जो 
लोग एक बार इस देश को नापाक बोल कर चले गए थे, जो यह िडमांड उठाते हȅ िक minority 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
15

has a right to self-determination, ...(Interruptions)... हमको अलग Îटेट चािहए, 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: सािमक जी, आप सÅजेक्ट पर बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर्: सर, ये इसी क े साथ जुड़े हुए हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  यह रुपया पिÌचमी बंगाल 
मȂ तैयार नहीं होता है, बंगलादेश से आ रहा है। ...(Ëयव धान)...   हम िकसी भी एक एजȂसी क े 
माध्यम से इसको बंद नहीं कर सकते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  अगर NIA, Border Security Force 
and West Bengal police एक साथ काम करȂ, उसके  साथ-साथ सभी राजनीितक दल सहमत 
हȗ और इस िवषय मȂ हम जनता क े भी तर  जागरूकता  पैदा करȂ, तभी हम इसको रोक सकते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  सर, यह एक serious threat है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  जैसे हमारे डा. मनमोहन िंसह 
जी ने Ģधान मंतर्ी रहते हुए बोला था िक Maoists is the biggest threat to internal 
democracy, हम भी आज बोल रहे हȅ िक changing of demography in the border States, 
...(Interruptions)... they have th
ese kinds of fake currency notes; these kinds of 
Bangladeshi infiltrators, they are the bi ggest threat and challenges to India. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Samik Bhattacharya:  Dr. Parmar 
Jasvantsinh Salamsinh (Gujarat), Shri Deepak Prakash (Jharkhand), Shrimati 
Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri 
Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), 
Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak 
(Gujarat), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharasht ra), Shrimati Maya Naroliya (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan),  Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini 
(Uttarakhand), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Pradip Kumar Varma 
(Jharkhand), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakh and), Shri Aditya Prasad (Jharkhand), 
Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala (Gujarat), Shri Krishan Lal Panwar (Haryana), Shri Ram 
Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shri Banshila l Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Neeraj 
Shekhar (Uttar Pradesh) and Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh). 
  Now, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque on 'Demand to streamline the process 
of issuing of notices by Income Tax Department'.  Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque; 
not present.  Now, Shri Dhananjay Bhim rao Mahadik on 'Demand for the Bharat 
Ratna Award to noted litterateur late Annabhau Sathe'. 
 
 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand for the Bharat Ratna Award to noted litterateur late Annabhau Sathe 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक (महाराÍटर्): उपसभापित जी, मȅ अपनी मातृभाषा मराठी मȂ बोलने 
की अनुमित चाहता हूं। 
*"सािहत्यरत्न ,महाराÍटर् भूषण तथा लोकगायक अन्नाभाऊ साठे दिलत सािहत्य क े 
संÎथापक क े रूप  मȂ जाने जाते हȅ। उनके  सािहित्यक कायर् क े कारण समाज क े शोिषत तथा वंिचत 
वगर् को आवाज़  िमली ,तथा सामािजक न्याय की मुिहम और मजबूत हुई । उन्हȗने  अप ने लेखन से 
दिलत समाज की Ëयथा तथा उसके  संघषर् को अिभËयिƪ दी, उनके  सािहत्य ने दिलत समाज को 
उसकी अिÎमता से पिरचय कराया तथा उसमȂ आत्मसÇमान की भावना पैदा की। उनके  सािहत्य मȂ 
 सामािजक न्याय ,समता की बात होती थी तथा अन् याय पर कठोर Ģहार होता था।  ” मेरी रिशया 
की यातर्ा“ नामक अपने यातर्ा-वृǄान्त मȂ उन्हȗने रूस  की  समाजवादी ËयवÎथा का वणर्न िकया है ,
तथा  ” िचतर्ा“ नामक उपन्यास मȂ मिहलाओं क े सशािƪकरण का िवषय उठाया है। उनके  सािहत्य 
मȂ बाल िववाह ,दहेज Ģथा पर पाबंदी तथा अंधǛǉ
ा जैसे िवषय उठाए गए हȅ  ,समाज मȂ अन्याय ,
जाितगत भेदभाव का िवरोध िकया गया है और साथ ही Ǜिमकȗ का संघषर् भी िदखाई देता है। 
उन्हȗने  35  उपन्यास ,10 लोक -नाटक , 24  लघुकथाएं  ,10 जीवनी  ,1  नाटक तथा  1  यातर्ा -वृǄान्त 
  िलखा है। उनके  ” फ़कीरा “  नामक उपन्यास को राज्य सरकार ǎारा पुरÎकृ त िकया गया था। 
अन्नाभाऊ साठे जी क े सािहत्य ने भारतीय सािहत्य तथा समाज पर  गहरा Ģभाव छोड़ा है। उनके  
सािहत्य से अनेक िव
चारकȗ  तथा लेखकȗ को Ģेरणा िमली है। उनके  सािहत्य का रूसी  , चेक ,
पोिलश तथा जमर्न भाषा मȂ अनुवाद हुआ है। शाहू महाराज ,महात्मा फ ु ले तथा अंबेडकर जी क े 
िवचारȗ से Ģेिरत  हो कर  मि हला ,दिलत तथा वंिचत समाज क े उत्थान क े िलए उन्हȗने अथक 
Ģयास िकए। अन्नाभाऊ साठे जी का सािहत्य , क ेवल सािहत्य क े रूप  मȂ ही नहीं जाना जाता ,
अिपतु वह सामािजक पिरवतर्न का एक सशƪ माध्यम बना। इसिलए ,मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार से िनवेदन करता हूँ िक सािहत्य रत्न ,महाराÍटर् भूषण तथा लोकगायक अन्नाभाऊ साठे 
जी को भारत क े सवȘच्च नागिरक पुरÎकार ” भ
ारत रत्न“ से सÇमािनत िकया जाए,  धन्यवाद।"      
            
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Dhananja y Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra):  Dr. Sasmit Patra (O disha), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh 
(Chhattisgarh), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri  Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Dorjee Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim), Shri Govi ndbhai Laljibhai Dholakia (Gujarat), Dr. 
Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. 
Bhagwat Karad (Maharashtra), Shri Banshilal Gurjar (Madhya Pradesh), Shri 
Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan), Shrimati  Maya Naroliya (Mad hya Pradesh), Shri 
Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Geeta 
alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh) and Dr. Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand).                                        
                                                           
* Hindi translation of the original speech delivered in Marathi. 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
17

Thank you, Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik ji.  Now, Shri Brij Lal on 'Demand to 
Name a Road in Delhi after Lakhi Shah Banjara'. 
 
Demand to name a road in Delhi after Lakhi Shah Banjara 
 
Ǜी बृजलाल (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ िदÊली मȂ िकसी सड़क का नाम लखीशाह 
बंजारा, उफर् लाखा बंजारा क े नाम पर रखने की माँग करने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूँ।  महोदय, 
लखीशाह बंजारा 17वीं शताÅदी क े सबसे बड़े टर्ांसपोटर्र थे।  उनके  पास एक लाख से ज्यादा बैल 
थे, िजससे वे टर्ांसपोटर् का काम करते थे।  1675 मȂ वे रायसीना िहल मȂ क ȅ प कर रहे थे।  उसी 
दौरान, 1675 मȂ गुरु  तेग बहादुर जी आनंदपुर सािहब मȂ थे और वहाँ पर पंिडत क ृपा राम, कÌमीरी 
ĤाǨण भी थे, उनका जत्था आया।  उन्हȗने कहा िक महाराज जी बचाइए, औरंगजेब हम लोगȗ को 
इÎलाम Îवीकार करने क े िलए बाध्य कर रहा है। वह वही पीिरयड है, जब िहन्दुओं को इÎलाम 
Îवीकार कराने का अिभयान चलाया जा रहा था।  उसी दौरान मेरे पुरखे - हम लोग कोरी और 
कोली समाज क े हȅ, कपड़ा बुनना हमारा काम था।  उस समय औरंगजेब ने कहा िक या तो इÎलाम 
Îवीकार करो या पेशा छोड़ो
।  हमारे समाज क े पास कपड़ा बुनने क े अलावा कोई पेशा नहीं था।  
उस समय जो कन्वटर् हो गए, वे 'जुलाहे' कहलाए, उसके  बाद वे 'अंसारी' कहलाए जाते हȅ।  आज 
पूवीर् उǄर Ģदेश मȂ गोरखपुर, मऊ, आजमगढ़, बनारस मȂ ये जो 'अंसारी' हȅ, वे हमारे समाज क े 
हȅ, िजनको औरंगजेब ने कन्वटर् िकया था।  हमारी िबरादरी, जो िहन्दु रह गई, इसके  पास न पेशा 
है और न ही खेती है।   
 महोदय,  अब मȅ लाखा बंजारा पर आत
ा हूँ। उस समय पंिडत क ृपाराम जी आए। गुरु  तेग 
बहादुर जी ने आÌवासन िदया िक मȅ आपकी मदद करूं गा। उसके  बाद गुरु  जी अपने िशÍयȗ क े 
साथ आगरा मȂ 'गुरु  का ताल' आ गए।  वहां से औरंगजेब ने उनको उठवा िलया।  उनको चांदनी 
चौक लाया गया, इÎलाम Îवीकार करने क े िलए बाध्य िकया गया। 9 नवंबर, 1675 को उन
के  िशÍय 
मती दास जी को आरे से चीर िदया ग या।   दूसरे िदन, 10 नवंबर को उनके  िशÍय सती दास को रुई  
मȂ लपेट करके  जला िदया गया। भाई दयाल दास को हाथ-पैर बांध करके , कड़ाहे मȂ डाल करके , 
उबाल िदया गया।  जब गुरु  जी को टॉचर्र िकया गय ा , बाध्य िकया गया, लेिकन जब वे तैयार नहीं 
हुए, तो 24 नवंबर, 1675 को उनका िसर कलम कर िदया गया। उसके  बाद वे लोग लाश क े साथ 
भेद भी करते थे। लाखा बंजारा ने अपने सैकड़ȗ बैलȗ क े साथ हÊला बोल िदया।  उन्हȗने उनकी 
बॉडी को उठ
ाया और उसे ले जाकर, उसका जो अपना घर था, उसमȂ उसे रख करके  आग लगा 
दी और गुरु  जी का cremation िकया।  आज, जहां िसर काटा गया था, वहां 'गुरुǎारा शीशगंज' 
है, जहां उन्हȗने cremate िकया, वह है - 'गुरुǎारा रकाबगंज'।  
 महोदय, मेरी एक िडमांड है िक लाखा बंजारा वे हȅ, िजन्हȗने सरोवर बनाए, उनक
ा उसमȂ 
बहुत रोल है, तो मेरा कहना है िक यहां िदÊली मȂ तमाम िवदेशी आकर्मणकािरयȗ क े नाम पर 
रोड्स हȅ, एक रोड पर से उनका नाम हटा करके , उस पर लाखा बंजारा का नाम रखा जाए, 
उनके  नाम पर एक रोड िकया जाए, िजनका िंहदुत्व की रक्षा क े िलए बहुत बड़ा योगदान है।       
          
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Br ij Lal:   Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak (Gujarat), Dr. Sikander 
Kumar (Himachal Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Sa ina (Uttrakhand), Ms. Kavita Patidar 
(Madhya Pradesh), Shri Ra m Chander Jangra (Rajasthan), Shri Madan Rathore 
(Rajasthan), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttrakhand), Dr. Bhagwat Karad (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
(Uttar Pradesh), Shri Deepak Prakash (Jharkhand), Shri Aditya Prasad 
(Jharkhand), Dr. Bhim Singh (Bihar), Shri  Pradip Kumar Varma (Jharkhand), Shri 
Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa),  Shri Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai (Gujarat), Sh rimati Darshana Singh (Uttar Pradesh), 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar (Haryana), Shri Neeraj Shekhar (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati 
Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
(Maharashtra) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab).         
                                                       
Demand to address huge pendency of cases before the Commissioner of Income Tax 
(Appeals) 
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA (PUNJAB): Thank you, Deputy Chairman Sir, for giving me 
an opportunity to speak on the appeals which are pending with Commissioners of 
Income Tax Appeals.  I would like to express my deep concern regarding the 
significant backlog of appeals pending be fore Commissioner of Income Tax Appeals 
in India. The current situation is worrisome  because as of April 2024, a staggering 
number of five lakh appeals remain unresolve d with CIT, with the majority of these 
lodged within the recent implemented faceless appellate system.  This immense 
backlog not only contradicts the commitmen t to timely decisions outlined in the 
Taxpayers Charter, but, also raises serious questions about equity and fairness within 
the tax system. Sir, in last financial year, only 61,311, around 10 per cent cases, were 
resolved, which is around 10 per cent and I am sure equal number must have been 
filed also. To address the critical situation, I urge the hon. Minister, through you, to 
consider the following measures in the upcoming time. 
 First is budget; but the budget is alr eady there.  So, the following aspects can 
be considered in the budget also. (i ) Strengthening lega l framework - enact 
appropriate legislations to enforce strict er time limits on CIT appeals for appeal 
disposal. The current advisory li mit of one year is insufficien t. Sir, it is an advisory 
limit, but it is not being adhered to. (ii) Taxpayer relief me asures - introduce 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
19

measures to provide relief to taxpayers, waiving the requirement of 20 per cent pre-
payment before filing appeal, refundin g excess tax collected/recovered during 
prolonged delays, granting automatic stay on penalties and prosecution for appeals 
exceeding the specific timeframe, accountability for delays, establishing a system of 
accountability to address the root causes of delays within the system. The current 
pendency crisis discourages taxpayer comp liance and undermines the integrity of the 
tax system. Taking swift action through thes e proposed measures will ensure a more 
efficient, fair and transparent appellate syst em. Sir, I urge, the hon. Finance Minster, 
through you, to give this suggestion her thoughtful consideration. Thank you.                     
                                                                                
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by hon. Member, Shri Sanj ay Arora: Shri Nira njan Bishi (Odisha), 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra ), Shri K.T.S. Tulsi (Chhattisgarh), Shri 
Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra). 
 
Demand to reduce the rate of GST on health and insurance policies 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, the demand is straightforward – Reduce 
18 per cent GST on medical and health insura nce.  Reduce it.  Sir, in three minutes, 
let me make four quick points.  This has been there since July, 2017, and it has gone 
unnoticed!  Why should we reduce it?  We sh ould reduce it, because this is an issue 
which is burdening the people, mainly the midd l e  c l a s s .   T h a t  i s  w h y  t h i s  i s  t o  b e  
reduced.  The high tax rate of 18 per cent is a burden.   
Insurance penetration is low in India.  In ternationally it is more than 7 per cent 
and in India it is just about 4 per cent. That  is why GST should be reduced.  Sir, there 
is an imbalance in the insurance sector where 75 per cent is life insurance and only 25 
per cent is medical insurance! How can this be done?  Who has raised this?  Two of 
our MPs here – Shri Saket Gokhale and Ms . Dola Sen – have raised it. My hon. 
Chief Minister has written a letter to the hon. Finance Minister to reduce it.  They 
wouldn’t listen to us.  Okay.  At least, listen to the Union Cabinet Minister from her 
own BJP party who has also recently written to the hon. Finance Mi nister.  He is the 
hon. Minister of Road Transport and Highways. He is from the BJP.  They could listen 
to him.  But, when we write, the hon. Fina nce Minister will say, ‘No, no.  I cannot do 
anything.  The GST Council will change it.’  This is a flawed argument.  The ratio in 
the GST Council is: NDA-2 and INDIA-1.  Th e GST Council, as said by the Supreme 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

Court, is an advisory body.  So, Sir, we must not allow the hon. Finance Minister to 
hide behind curtain of the GST Council. We must not allow it. 
Sir, this is a middle class issue.  This is not a political issue. Mr. Chidambaram, 
– he has a lot of experience – a few days ago, said that the hon. Finance Minister 
should ‘listen.'  I appeal – I know all the INDIA parties are together in this – to the 
BJD also to please associate itself with this  issue.  You must associate yourself with 
this issue, because it is touching the middl e class.  And, I request the hon. Finance 
Minister to come in the next 3-4 days and say on the floor of this House that this is not 
working.  Sir, there is a GST Council meeting going to happen;  if this doesn’t happen 
in the next 3-4 days, इसके  िलए आंदोलन चालू रहेगा। The people of India cannot have 
medical insurance for GST.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by hon. Member, Shri  Derek O’brien: Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharasht ra), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sanjay Ra ut (Maharashtra), Shri Neeraj Dangi 
(Rajasthan), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Ms. Sushmita De v (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju 
(Telangana), Shrimati Mausam Noor (West Bengal), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi  (Maharashtra), Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar), Shri Sant 
Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shrimati Phulo Devi  Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri Saket Gokh ale (West Bengal), Shri Jawar Sircar 
(West Bengal), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Pramod 
Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Sanjay Singh(Na tional Capital Territory of Delhi), Shri 
Samirul Islam (West Bengal), Shri Suje et Kumar (Odisha), Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Sharad Pawar (Maharashtra) and Shrimati 
Mahua Maji (Jharkhand). थȅक यू।  माननीया डा. संगीता बलवन्त। 
                                                            
Demand to restart the Sugar Mills at Nandganj in Ghazipur district of Uttar Pradesh 
 
डा. संगीता बलवन्त ( उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उप
 सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे एक गंभीर और 
लोक कÊयाणकारी िवषय पर बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको हािर्दक धन्यवाद 
Ģेिषत करती हूँ।   
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
21

महोदय, मȅ उǄर Ģदेश क े गाजीपुर िजले से हूँ और क ेन्दर् सरकार का ध्यान वहाँ बंद पड़ी 
चीनी िमल की तरफ आकृ Íट करना चाहती हूँ।  पटेल आयोग की संÎतुित क े बाद 1978 मȂ मेरे 
गाजीपुर जनपद क े नंदगंज िसहोरी मȂ एक चीनी िमल की Îथापना हुई थी और यह ची नी िमल 19 
साल तक लगातार चली।  जब यह चीनी िमल चलती थी, तो वहाँ जनपद मȂ Ģित वषर् लगभग 12 
लाख िक्वन्टल गन्ने से चीनी बनाई जाती थी, िजससे वहाँ क े िकसानȗ मȂ एक खुशहाली थी और 
हजारȗ हाथȗ को रोजग
ार िमला था। क ेवल गाजीपुर जनपद मȂ ही नहीं, बिÊक आस-पास क े 
जनपद क े गन्ना िकसानȗ मȂ भी एक खुशहाली थी और वे समृǉ थे, लेिकन 1997 आते-आते यह 
चीनी िमल बंद पड़ गई।   
महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से क ेन्दर् सरकार से आगर्ह करना चाहत
ी हूँ िक उǄर 
Ģदेश मȂ गाजीपुर क े नंदगंज मȂ बंद पड़ी चीनी िमल को पुनः Îथािपत िकया जाए या िफर वहां पर 
कोई ऐसा बड़ा उǏोग लगाया जाए, िजससे उस जनपद का िव कास हो सके , साथ ही, हजारȗ 
हाथȗ को पुनः रोजगार िमल सके । इस िनवेदन क े साथ, अब मȅ दो Îवरिचत पंिƪयȗ क े साथ अपनी 
वाणी को िवराम देना चाहूंगी।  चूंिक राÍटर्ीय पवर्, Îवतंतर्त ा  िदवस आ रहा है, इसिलए मȅ कहना 
चाहूंगी... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपका िवषय नंदगंज पर है। 
 
डा. संगीता बलवन्त: जी, िबÊकु ल, नंदगंज देश मȂ ही आता है।  मेरा समय अभी बचा हुआ है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: उसमȂ कोई और िवष
 य न बोलȂ।  
 
डा. संगीता बलवन्त: सर, मȅ कहना चाहती हूँ:  
"वतन क े िचराग हो तो उजाला करो, 
िदल मȂ मुÊक से मोहÅबत भी पाला करो, 
ये जमीं, ये आसमां मेरा भी है और तेरा भी है, 
गैर देशȗ की जयकार लगाकर अपना मुंह मत काला करो।" 
 
 जय िहन्द, जय भारत!
             
                         
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the ho n. Member, Dr. Sangeeta Balwant: Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and Shri Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).                                                                 
माननीया Ǜीमती रेणुका चौधरी जी। ...(Ëयवधान)... No, nothing else.  
...(Interruptions)...  Ãलीज़, आपस मȂ बात न करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...   माननीया Ǜीमती रेणुका 
चौधरी जी, आप बोलȂ।  
 
 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand to facilitate issuance of credit card to senior citizens of the country 
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY (Telangana):  Sir, there is an issue which is 
contra-indicatory to what we are experienci ng.  The RBI has given guidelines to our 
banks saying that persons above sixty years of age are not credit-worthy, and hence 
they cannot access a credit card. But, they  will use our money which is kept with 
them, the savings and they make money on that. But, they will issue a debit card.  
This is a bizarre concept b ecause a credit card is not ju st about getting immediate 
credit, but it has several social impli cations and access under emergencies. Sixty-
years-plus is not really a liability because pe ople’s longevity has raised in India.  We 
must make sure that the senior citizens can book a flight ticket; can book a hotel; can 
make online transactions for paying bills.  On the one hand, you want cashless India; 
on the other hand, you will not give credit cards to the people who are sixty years and 
above.  I am sure, here, a lot of my colleagues have got it because we are a privileged 
lot of people. But, an average middle class citizen who has substantial savings in the 
bank, and the banks come to look at their faces whether they are alive. They want 
proof of living. They come home and check whether you are alive or dead, while they 
are talking to you! And, they tell you that this  is for proof of life.  And, after that, they 
don’t give you a credit card!  Internationa l banks, which do not have an upper age 
limit, which are functioning in India are also submitted to the RBI guidelines here.  So, 
what they practice in their countries, this does not affect the seniors. But, when 
international banks come here and you bank  with them, you have a limitation on the 
credit. And, you will not get a credit card. So, this is a kind of discriminatory behavior. 
And, when you are trying to facilitate the elders, there are a lot of  active and perfectly 
alright seniors who are functioning and contri buting to the economy of this nation.  
This kind of discriminatory attitude has to be removed at once.  Failing which, we are 
going to have only debit card.   
 Sir, India has capital flight.  We have written off unsecured loans.  You have 
given away unsecured loans of commercial bank s to the tune of Rs. 21 lakh crores.  
This Government has waived off loans of selected corporates to the magnitude of 
Rs.16 lakh crores.  But they cannot give th e basic facility of credit card to our law-
abiding and tax-paying citizens.  Multiple scams have happened. The Punjab National 
Bank and the State Bank of India have give n unsecured loans to people.  We are all 
aware about Mehul Choksi, Neerav Modi, Jati n Mehta, etc.  Thousands of crores of 
rupees has fled from the country.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury:  Dr. 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
23

Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Ms . Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shrimati 
Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shrimati Phulo 
Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), and Shrimati Sudha Murty (Karnataka).  
माननीय Ǜी नीरज डांगी जी।  
 
Demand to build elevated road in the section of Desuri Naal connecting Pali, 
Jaisalmer and Jodhpur areas 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी (राजÎथान): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, राजÎथान क े Ģमुख नगर उदयपुर 
को पाली, जैसलमेर व जोधपुर क्षेतर् से जोड़ने वाले मुख्य राजमागर् एस.एच. 16 का एक घाट 
सेक्शन िहÎसा, जो राज समन्द  िजले क े गढ़बोर से देसूरी क े मध्य िÎथत है; लगभग 8 िकलोमीटर 
क े इस घाट सेक्शन को देसूरी की नाल क े नाम से भी जाना जाता है। 
 यह मागर् राजÎथान क े महत्वपूणर् Ëयवसाय माबर्ल, गर्ेनाइट क े Ģमुख नगरȗ उदयपुर व 
राजसमन्द से पाली, जोधपुर, जालौर, िसरोही, भीनमाल, सांचौ
र व माऊं ट आबू तक जाने का 
मुख्य मागर् है, जो कम दूरी व कम समय मȂ Ëयापार को बढ़ावा देता है एवं यह मागर् गोमती-
चारभुजा-देसूरी होकर आगे गंतËय तक जाता है। 
 इसके  अितिरƪ देसूरी की नाल उदयपुर को भारत
ीय सेना क े अंतरार्Íटर्ीय बॉडर्र जैसलमेर 
से भी जोड़ता है। अत: इस मागर् का इÎतेमाल भारतीय सेना क े वाहन भी उदयपुर-जैसलमेर क े 
मध्य आने-जाने क े िलए करते हȅ। 
 देसूरी की ना
ल घाट सेक्शन ऐितहािसक " Ǜी राणकपुर मंिदर, Ǜी परशुराम महादेव 
मंिदर, Ǜी चारभुजा नाथ जी मंिदर, एवं Ǜीनाथजी मंिदर नाथǎारा' जैसे धािर्मक आÎथा एवं 
अत्यंत मान्यता वा
ले Îथानȗ को जोड़ता है। 
 " हÊदी घाटी" जहां महाराणा Ģताप ने अपनी ताकत का लोहा मनवाया था, वहीं हÊदी 
घाटी युǉ हुआ था। यह Ģिसǉ Îथल "हÊदी घाटी" भी इसी क्षेतर् मȂ मौजूद है। 
 अरावली पवर्त Ǜृंखलाओं क े समीप UNESCO World Heri
tage Site िवÌव Ģख्यात 
क ुÇभलगढ़ दुगर् भी यहीं िÎथत है, िजसकी दीवार The Great Wall of India िवÌव मȂ The Great 
Wall of China क े बाद दूसरी सबसे बड़ी दीवार है। 
 उपसभापित महोदय, एक ददर्नाक हादसे का भी िज़कर् करना चाहूंगा। देश ही नहीं, अिपतु 
पूरे िवÌव का सबसे बड़ा हादसा (देसूरी दुखांितक
ा) इसी Îथान पर िदनांक 07 िसतÇबर, 2007 
को हुआ था, िजसमȂ मौके  पर ही 108 लोगȗ की मौत हो गयी थी। वहीं भारतीय सेना क े वाहनȗ 
सिहत हादसȗ का अनुमान लगाया जाये, तो Ģितवषर् यहां औसतन 100 से अिधक लोगȗ को हादसे 
मȂ अपनी जान गंवानी पड़ती है। इन हादसȗ मȂ माबर्ल व अन्य सामान की क्षित होने से Ģितवषर् 
Ëयापािरयȗ को करोड़ȗ रुपयȗ का नुकसान भी होता है। 
 देसूरी - च
ारभुजा क े मध्य इस घाट सेक्शन मȂ 12 खतरनाक S और L सेक्शन क े मोड हȅ 
और 5 संकरी पुिलयाओं पर खतरनाक ढलान हȅ, िजसमȂ वाह
नȗ की सांस हांफ जाती है और कभी 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

वे चƺानȗ से टकराते हȅ, तो कभी पास की 40 फीट गहरी खाई मȂ िगरते हȅ। देसूरी की नाल मȂ 1952 
से अब तक लगभग 1000 से ज्यादा मौतȂ हो चुकी हȅ। 
 देसूरी की नाल मȂ लगातार होती जनहािन क े मǈेनज़र अगर वहां एिलवेटेड रोड बना यी 
जाती है, तो वषș से चला आ रहा मौतȗ का िसलिसला खत्म होगा एवं आसपास क े क्षेतर् क े आमजन 
और Ëयापािरयȗ को भी लाभ होगा। 
 अत: उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से भारत सरकार से आगर्ह है िक देसूरी की 
नाल क्षेतर् मȂ एिलवेटेड रोड बनाने पर गंभीरता से िवच
ार करे, धन्यवाद।                             
                                                    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shri Neeraj Dangi: Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shrimati 
Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala). 
Thank you, Dangiji.  Now, Shri Tiruchi Siva – Demand for occupational safety 
measures and facilities of insurance for stunt artists of Indian film industry.  
 
Demand for occupational safety measures and facility of insurance for Stunt Artists of 
Indian Film Industry 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu):  Thank yo u, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for giving 
me an opportunity to speak on a serious is sue, which has long been overlooked by 
everyone. In the vibrant film industry of In dia, there are some stunt artists. They 
display their indispensable efficiency and talents to bring thrilling action sequences on 
the screen, but they are tota lly neglected. Recently, in Tamil Nadu, a senior stunt 
actor, who had an experience of 30 years, fell down from the rostrum and had to face 
a fatal end. It is all because of what they call a safety rope, whic h snapped and he fell 
down. Maybe, it is an isolated incident, but all the time, these very important stunt 
artists are totally, financially and physically, neglected.  Despite their critical role as 
stunt artists, they often work without the sa fety nets, that other professionals take for 
granted.  The absence of stringent safe ty standards on cinema-sets leads to 
preventable accidents, leaving artists vuln erable to life-altering injuries. This 
jeopardizes their physical well-being and im poses a heavy financial burden on them 
and their families.  It is imperative to implement comprehensive safety protocols on 
film sets such as regular inspections, mandatory high-quality safety gear and rigorous 
training for both, artists and crew members.   The Government must collaborate with 
industry stakeholders to incentivize compliance and nudge them towards 
implementing and enforcing these standards effectively. Looking at global standards, 
film indust
ries have detailed safety gu idelines and dedicated union for stunt 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
25

performers, India should adopt similar m easures including the establishment of a 
stunt artists’ safety board to oversee compliance with safety regulations and advocate 
for artists’ rights. Furthermore, one must recognize the financial insecurities faced by 
the stunt artists, and many of them l ack access to basic insurance coverage as 
private sector insurance companies of ten deem their work too unsafe to 
accommodate.  
So, the Government should come forward for their security under public sector 
insurance schemes so that they receive ad equate compensation and medical care for 
work-related injuries, and, very important, the Stunt Artists Safety Board has to be 
constituted.  
Thank you very much.             
                    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Tiruchi ji.  
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Shri Tiruchi Siva: Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (K erala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Nira njan Bishi (Odisha), Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (Wes t Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal),  Shri Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), and 
Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh).  
Shri Vikramjit Singh Sahney; not present. Now, Shrimati Mahua Maji.  
 
Need to conduct archaeological exploration located in the State of Jharkhand 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी ( झारखंड):  उपसभापित  महोदय, हमारे झारखंड मȂ एक ऐसा Ģाचीन 
इलाका है, िजसका आिर्कयोलॉिजकल और िजयोलॉिजकल महत्व है, िजसके  बारे मȂ दुिनया क े 
अत्यंत ĢितिÍठत जरनल ‘Proceedings of the N
ational Academy of Sciences’ मȂ कई वषș 
क े िरसचर् क े बाद इस बात को सत्यािपत िकया गया है िक झारखंड का िंसहभूम क्षेतर् समुदर् से बाहर 
आने वाला दुिनया का पहला जमीनी िहÎसा है।  इससे पहले जमीन का अि Îतत्व समुदर् क े अंदर 
था।  धरती क े 50 िकलोमीटर  भीरत ज्वालामुखी िवÎफोट क े कारण िंसहभूम क्षेतर् समुदर् से बाहर 
आया था और यह पहला इलाका है।  पोलȅड से एक Îटडी िरपोटर् आई थी िक दुिनया की पहली 
सूनामी झा
रखंड मȂ आई थी।  रांची यूिनविर्सटी क े िजयोलॉजी िडपाटर्मȂट से इसकी पुिÍट हेतु उस 
समय िदÊली से संपकर् भी िकया गया था।  हजारीबाग से मांड ू थाना अंतगर्त दूधीनाला नदी मȂ 
डायनासोर युग क े पहले क े अवशेष िमले हȅ, िहमयुग क े अवशेष िमले हȅ, करोड़ȗ साल पहले क े 
पुराताित्वक अवशेष िमले हȅ।  रांची यूिनविर्सटी क े िजयोलॉजी िडपाटर्मȂट क े Ģोफे सर Îटू डȂट्स को  
फीÊडटर्ीप करवाने हर साल यहां ले जाते हȅ, मगर फ ं ड क े अभा व मȂ छोटी-मोटी Îटडी ही कर पाते 
हȅ।  िंसहभूम तथा हजारीबाग क्षेतर् मȂ ढेर सारी आÌचयर्जनक पुराताित्वक महत्व की चीज़Ȃ िबखरी 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

पड़ी हȅ, िजनकी Ëयापक खुदाई तथा खोज की आवÌयकता है। क ेन्दर् सरकार को बड़ा बजट 
बनाकर  इस क्षेतर् मȂ िजयोलॉिजकल तथा आिर्कयोलॉिजकल सवȃ कराना चािहए, इससे िजयो 
ट ूिरज्म को भी बढ़ावा िमलेगा और पूरी दुिनया क े िरसचर्र यहां आएंगे, धन्यवाद।               
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you Shrimati Mahua Maji Ji.  
 
The following Members associated them selves with the matter raised by the 
hon. Member, Shrimati Mahua Maji: Dr. Jo hn Brittas (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha), Shri Samik Bhatt acharya (West Bengal), Shri Sanjay Yadav (Bihar) and 
Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha (Bihar) 
Now Shri Raghav Chadha; not present. Shri Pradip Kumar Varma; not present. 
Dr. Sikandar Kumar.  
 
Demand to abolish the practice of using colonial era titles in the working of judiciary 
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR (Himachal Pradesh): Thank you, Sir, for giving me the 
opportunity to speak on a very important issue, ‘Need to do away with the colonial era 
practice of referring to the Judges of the Hon. Courts of Bharat, especially, that of the 
Hon. High Courts of Bharat and the Hon. Supreme Court of Bharat as Your Lordship, 
Your Ladyship, or My Lords.’  
Sir, the passing of Bhartiya Nyaya Sahinta, Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sahinta  
and Bhartiya Suraksha Sahinta to replace the three colonial era criminal laws, namely, 
the Indian Penal Code, 1860, Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973, the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872, being one of the many recent steps taken by th e Government to rightfully 
restructure the foundations of the judicial system of Bharat for the welfare of its 
people, has given me hope and a renewed sense of purpose.  
Sir, we are a part of the Indian legal system, which in its language, colour, and 
delivery was never meant to serve justice to the people of this nation. In many years of 
practice, we too have become a part and victim of the same system. The language, 
mannerism, and the code of conduct taught to the practitioner of law chips away at 
our very basic root, that is, identity. When we are inducted into a legal profession, 
like, many young people today, we are taught to address the hon. Judges of the 
Courts of India, especially, the Judges of  the hon. High Courts and hon. Supreme 
Court as ‘Your Lordship’, ‘Your Ladyship’, or  ‘My Lords’. This colonial era practice is 
not proposed or mandated by law, but due to its customary nature, it is still followed 
till date and has done more harm than go od to the esteem an d identity of young 
practitioner of law, because in its use, it pr oposes a separation of the ruled and ruler, 
and, at the outset, proposes or indicates no sense of justice. 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
27

(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
The Bar Council of India had taken a step in the right direction wherein in its 
rules as enshrined in Chapter IIIA on ‘To a ddress the Court to Part VI, added in 2006, 
it is stated, ‘Consistent with the obligatio n of the Bar to show a respectful attitude 
towards the court and bearing in mind …    
 
12.00 Noon 
         
           ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
                    
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question Hour. 
 
Viksit Bharat 2047  
 
*136. SHRI BRIJ LAL: Will the Minister of PLANNING be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the policy steps taken in the infrastructure and connectivity sector to boost  
 growth   and development;  
(b) whether financial assistance has been provided to States for Viksit Bharat  
 projects; and  
(c) if so, the details thereof?  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINI STRY OF PLANNING (RAO INDERJIT 
SINGH): (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement  
 
Government firmly believes infrastructure  and connectivity sector to be growth 
engines towards Viksit Bharat. Infrastructure development is an ongoing priority of the 
Government to boost growth and development.  
Ministries are taking various policy st eps to promote the infrastructure and 
connectivity sector in India. All these policies are aimed at expanding quality 
infrastructure with focus on inclusive ge ographies and empowering the users through 
digital and other initiatives. All the proj ects, programmes and sc hemes are aligned to 
the policy of ramping up infr astructure and connectivity. PM GatiShakti National 
Master Plan (NMP),  launched by the Hon’ble PM on 13
th October, 2021, is a 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

transformative approach for integrated planning of mu ltimodal connectivity to various 
economic zones, using technology and innovation. Its comprehensive focus has 
improved multimodal connectivity infrastructure in economic zones.  It aims to 
combine infrastructure schemes like Bhar atmala, Sagarmala, and UDAN on a digital 
platform and reduce logistic costs, increase cargo handling capacity, and shorten 
turnaround times. PM GatiSh akti’s twin framework incl uding an inter-ministerial 
institutional mechanism at the Centre and State levels, and a GIS-data-based 
decision support system for integrated pla nning in the logistics and infra sector, is 
aimed at building Next Generation Infrastructure that improves Ease of Living as well 
as Ease of Doing Business.  
INR 111 lakh crore National Infrastructu re Pipeline (NIP), launched 2019, has 
since expanded to over 9,288 projects ac ross 34 sub-sectors and included both 
brownfield and greenfield in frastructure projects. Nati onal Monetisation Pipeline 
(NMP) announced August 2021, is based on the principle of ‘asset creation through 
monetization’.   
Many policy steps have been taken by  the Government for promotion of 
infrastructure and connectivity sector. An indicative list of major policy, projects, 
programmes and schemes related to infrastructure and connectivity sector are placed 
at Annexure A.  
Viksit Bharat, is not a project per se, but it is a vision document that is under 
preparation as growth trajectory for India by 2047. As Viksit Bharat is not a project, 
therefore, provision of financial assistance to states does not arise.  
 
Annexure A
 
  
Policy Initiatives has taken by the ministries: 
(i)  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways: 
 
The Ministry is primarily responsible for development and maintenance of 
National Highways (NHs). NH networ k in the country has increased from 
about 91,287 km in March, 2014 to about 1,46,145 km at present.  
National Road Safety Policy:  This policy aims to reduce road accidents, 
injuries, and fatalities by raising awar eness, establishing a road safety 
information database, ensuring safe r vehicles, and improving driver 
training and licensing. 
Green Highways Policy: This policy focuses on the development of green 
corridors along national highways by  planting trees and shrubs, which 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
29

helps in environmental conserva tion and provides employment 
opportunities. 
Vehicle Scrappage Policy : This policy encourages the scrapping of old, 
polluting vehicles to promote the use of newer, more efficient, and less 
polluting vehicles. 
Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) : This policy promotes the use of FASTag 
for electronic toll collection to reduce congestion and improve efficiency 
at toll plazas. 
Road Transport and Safety Bill: This bill aims to provide a framework for 
safer, faster, cost-effective, and in clusive movement of passengers and 
freight in the country. 
Setu Bharatam: Launched to ensure the constr uction of bridges for safe 
and seamless travel on national highways. 
National Highways Development Project (NHDP) : Continued expansion 
and improvement of the national highways network. 
Highway Advisory Services: Implemented to provide real-time information 
to highway users on traffic condit ions, weather updates, and other 
relevant information. 
Logistics Efficiency Enhancement Program (LEEP): Aimed at improving 
the efficiency of freight movement across the country. 
Integrated Road Accident Database (iRAD) : to create a comprehensive 
database of road accidents to help in analyzing and formulating policies 
for road safety. 
FASTAG: Made mandatory for all vehicles to ensure seamless toll 
collection and reduce waiting times at toll plazas. 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) InvIT : Launched to monetize 
completed national highway projects and attract private investment. 
Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM) : Introduced for the de velopment of highway 
projects, combining the benefits of both EPC (Engineering, Procurement, 
and Construction) and BOT (Build, Operate, Transfer) models. 
Bharat Mala Pariyojana : An umbrella program for the development of 
highways, including economic corridors, inter-corridor and feeder routes, 
national corridor efficiency improvement, border and international 
connectivity roads, coastal and port connectivity roads, and 
expressways. The additional initiatives of the Ministry are: 
 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 Promoting Contractor’s Ecosystem by rationalising the projects 
and contract documentsfor EPC and PPT projects.  
 Simplification of land acquisition notification through BhoomiRashi 
portal 
 Project planning on PM Gatishakti principles through NMP portal 
with Comprehensive guidelin es regarding procurement, 
preparation, review and approval s of DPRs and also mandated 
preparation of DPR  
 Focus on development of High Speed Access controlled NHs for 
improving the logistics efficiency of the country. Also adopted a 
policy to improve all NHs to minimum Two Lane with paved 
shoulders standards except for eco logically sensitive Himalayan 
region where development plan is finalised considering the 
geological, environmental factors etc. 
 Relaxations in contract provisions under "Atmanirbhar Bharat" to 
improve liquidity of funds.  
 Revamped dispute resolution mechanism.  
 Portal based project monitoring leading to early resolution of 
issues. 
 Periodic reviews of projects at various levels 
 Raising resources from innovative financing models like 
monetization  
 Increased toll collection through Fastag 
 Resolving the inherited stalled projects (stalled projects till 2013-
14) by close monitoring at the highest levels and also by suitable 
policy interventions like one time  fund infusion, substitution, 
termination & repackaging etc.  
 Award for ropeways projects for connecting remote, religious and 
tourist places 
 
(ii) Ministry of Railways:
  As on 01.04.2024, across Indian Railways, 
488 Railway Infrastructure pr ojects (187 New Line, 40 Gauge 
Conversion and 261 Doubling) of total length 44,488 Km, costing 
approx. Rs.17.44 lakh crore are in  planning/approval/construction 
stage, out of which, Ra.12,045 Km length has been commissioned, 
an expenditure of approximately Rs. 12.92 lakh crore has been 
incurred upto March, 2024. 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
31

 
Steps taken by the Railways  for effective and speedy implementation of 
rail projects (i) substantial increase in allocation of funds, (ii) delegation 
of powers at field level, (iii) close monitoring of progress of project at 
various levels (iv) regular follow up with State Governments and 
concerned authorities for expeditiou s land acquisition, forestry and 
Wildlife. Railways implement infr astructure projects under the  PM Gati 
Shakti Mission with corridor appro ach namely Energy, Mineral, and 
Cement (192 Projects), Port Connectivity Corridors (42 Projects), High 
Traffic Density Corridors (200 Project s). Indian Railways have prepared 
a National Rail Plan (NRP) for India – 2030. The Plan is to create a 
‘future ready’ Railway system by 2030,  which in turn would also cater to 
future growth in demand right up to 2050. This is a strategic initiative to 
promote growth and development in the country. 
 
(iii) Ministry of Civil Aviation
 To promote Air infrastructure, Ministry took 
many policy steps and the major one is The National Civil Aviation 
Policy, 2016 which aims to establish an integrated eco-system which 
will lead to significant growth of civil aviation sector, which in turn would 
promote tourism, increase employment and lead to a balanced regional 
growth.  
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (UDAN), 2016. UDAN scheme was 
launched in 2016 with the objective of enhancing remote and regional 
connectivity through expansion of aviati on infrastructure in the country. 
The scheme envisages revival / upgradation of unserved & 
underserved airports on its identification through valid bid & award to 
the SAO (Selected Airline Operator) to operate the route connecting the 
identified airport. Based on their assessment of demand on particular 
routes, interested airlines submit th eir proposals at the time of bidding 
under UDAN. An airport which is included in the awarded routes of 
UDAN and requires upgradation/de velopment for commencement of 
UDAN operations, is developed under  the 'Revival of unserved and 
underserved airports' scheme. As of now, 85 RCS airports, including 2 
water aerodromes & 13 heliports ha ve been operationalized under the 
UDAN scheme and more than 142 lakh s passengers benefited from the 
UDAN flights. 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Policy on Airport Infrastructure, 2015  The objectives of the policy are to 
provide a boost to international trad e and tourism; to augment airport 
capacity for handling  an increasing volume of air traffic to enhance 
airport facilities ; to ensure total safety and security of aircraft 
operations; to provide multi-modal linkages; to foster the development 
of a strong airport infrastructure and to lay special emphasis on the 
development of infrastructure for remote and inaccessible areas, 
especially the North East, the hilly and island regions. 
Upgradation/ Modernisation of airpor ts is a continuous process and is 
undertaken by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and other Airport 
Operators from time to time depe nding on the availability of land, 
commercial viability, socio-economic considerations, traffic demand / 
willingness of airlines to operate to/from such airports. 
AAI and other Airport Operators ha ve targeted capital outlay of 
approximately Rs. 90000 crore in Airp ort Sector for a period from FY-
2019-20 to FY-2024-25. Till FY 2 023-24, more than 72000 crore capex 
has been incurred by various airport developers across the country for 
development of new airports and ex pansion/upgradation of existing 
airports. 
Recent Expansion work completed at PPP & AAI airports include 
construction/upgradation/expansion of Terminal Buildings at Delhi, 
Hyderabad, Bangalore, Lucknow, Che nnai, Kanpur, Port Blair, Tezu, 
Surat, Trichy, Bhuvaneshwar, Dehradun, Kolhapur, Gwalior, Jabalpur, 
Aligarh, Azamgarh, Chitrakoot, Moradabad, Shravasti, Adampur etc. In 
addition airport at Ayodhya has also been developed and 
operationalized. 
With the concerted efforts from all th e stakeholders, the total number of 
operational airports in the country ha s increased to 157 with capacity to 
handle more than 530 Millions Passengers Per Anum (MPPA). 
 
(iv) Ports, Shipping & Waterways
: To promote Port Connectivity in India 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Wa terways has taken holistic approach 
through Sagarmala programme, as part of the program, a National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) for the comp rehensive development of India’s 
coastline and maritime sector. Sagarmala Program  aims to reduce 
logistics cost for EXIM and domestic  trade with minimal infrastructure 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
33

investment and to promote port-led development in the country through 
harnessing India’s 7,500 km long co astline, 14,500 km of potentially 
navigable waterways and strategic location on key international maritime 
trade routes. The vision of Sagarmala is to reduce logistics cost with 
minimal infrastructure investment , thereby improving the overall 
efficiency of the economy and increasing competitiveness of exports. 
The projects under Sagarmala Progra mme are categorized into five 
pillars – port modernization, port connectivity, port-led 
industrialization, coastal community  development and coastal shipping 
& inland water transport. 
Under the budget head of Sagarmala, 130 projects worth Rs. 9,600 
crores have been sanctioned with funding support of Rs. 3,700 crores. 
Out of total 130 projects sanctioned under Sagarmala, 62 projects worth 
Rs. 4,000 cores have been complete d and 52 projects worth Rs. 5,200 
crores have been awarded and ar e under implementation. Remaining 
projects are under development stages. These projects are focusing on 
various critical aspects of maritime sector such as capacity 
enhancement at Indian ports, improving connectivity infrastructure, RO-
RO, and tourism jetties along with urban water transportation, fishing 
harbor and skill development of coastal community. Major projects 
which have been completed in 202 3-24 includes Bunker Berth at 
Bharathi Dock in Chennai Port, Breakwater in North and South side of 
entrance channel & Capital Dredging at Cuddalore Port, Capital 
Dredging for Puducherry  Port, Ro-Pax Facility at Hazira, 12 m wide 
concrete road connecting berth 5 6 7 8 & 9 to new entry / exit road at 
Mormugao Port, and improvement of road connectivity to facilitate trade 
and port users at Kolkata Dock, Phase-2. 
Based on consultation with Major Po rts and state maritime boards, 107 
last mile road and rail connectivit y infrastructure gaps have been 
identified and included in the Co mprehensive Port Connectivity Plan 
(CPCP) prepared by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade (DPIIT) in September 2022. State Multimodal Committees have 
been formed which has representatives from Major Ports, State 
Maritime Boards, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways / National 
Highway Authority of India, and Ministry of Railways to review the 
projects periodically.  
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

The Major Port Authorities Act, 2021, has granted major ports increased 
autonomy and introduced market-b ased tariffs for public private 
partnership (PPP) operators. Fo rmulation of Model Concession 
Agreement, 2021 have led to improvem ents in infrastructure, efficiency, 
and service quality through private participation at major ports across 
India. 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल: सर, िवकिसत भारत पिरयोजना क े अंतगर्त राज्यȗ को Ģदान की जाने वाली 
आिर्थक सहायता क े िनधार्िरत मापदंड क्या हȅ? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ने सवाल दो भागȗ मȂ पूछा है। एक तो 
कनेिक्टिवटी और इन्ģ
ाÎटर्क्चर सैक्टर क े अंतगर्त भारत सरकार ने क्या िकया है और दूसरा िक 
िवकिसत भारत Ģोजेक्ट्स क े तहत Ģांतȗ को िकतना फाइनȂिशयल अिससटȂस मुहैया कराया गया 
है। सर, इसके  पहले भाग का जवाब मȅ पहले देना चाहूंगा। भारत सरकार की तरफ से एक माÎटर 
Ãलान तैयार िकया गया है, िजसका नाम गित शिƪ है। उस गित शिƪ क े तहत चार विर्ट
कÊस हȅ, 
िजसके  अंदर एक आता airways का, दूसरा आता है waterways का, तीसर ा आता है highways 
का और चौथा आता है railways का। सर, जो पहला है airways का, िजसमȂ उड़ान क े नाम से 
कनेिक्टिवटी की जानी जाती है, उसमȂ 2014 मȂ क ु ल िमलाकर 74 एयरपोट्सर् भारतवषर् क े अंदर 
हुआ करते थे और 2024 मȂ 10 साल बा द , यह बढ़कर  157 एयरपोट्सर् आज क े िदन हमारे देश मȂ 
हȅ, िजसमȂ  85 ऐसे हȅ, जो िक Regional Connectivity Scheme क े तहत हȅ, दो aerodromes 
पानी क े ऊपर भी हȅ। इसके  अलावा 13-14 क े करीब helipads हȅ।   
सर, दूसरी बात ports से  संबंिधत है। पोट् स र् मȂ सागरमाला क े तहत तरक्की को साधा 
जाता है, क ु ल िमलाकर 130 Ģोजेक्ट्स भारत सरकार ने तजवीज़ िकए हȅ और इनके  िलए 9,600 
करोड़ रुपया सȅक्शन िकया गया है। हमारी साढ़े सात हजार िकलोमीटर की कोÎटलाइन है, 
14,500 िकलोमीटर navigable waterways हȅ। इस सबके  ऊपर कनेिक्टिवटी क े तहत यह पैसा 
तजवीज़ िक
या गया है।  
 तीसरा, सर, मȅ highways की चचार् करना चाहता हूं। 2014 क े अंदर highways क ु ल 
िमलाकर देश क े अंदर 91,287 िकलोमीटर हुआ करते थे, जो बढ़कर 2024 क े अंदर 1 लाख, 46 
हजार, 145 िकलोमीटर बन गए हȅ, यानी िक 10 साल क े अंदर 54 हजार  िकलोमीटर क े करीब 
भारत सरकार की तरफ से highway
s बना िदए गए हȅ।  
 सर, railways  क े अंदर corridor project एĢोच अपनाया है माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने और 
इनके  महकमे ने और इसके  अंदर mineral corridors की संख्या 192 है और high-density 
corridors
 की संख्या 200 क े करीब है और port connectivity corridor की संख्या 42 है।  इस 
Ģकार से क ु ल िमलाकर अपनी कनेिक्टिवटी और इन्ģाÎटर्क्चर क े तहत भारत सरकार ने काम 
िकए हȅ।  
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
35

 इसके  अलावा माननीय सदÎय ने पूछा है िक िवकिसत भारत क े तहत Ģदेशȗ को िकतना 
पैसा मुहैया कराया गया है। इसके  िवषय मȂ मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूं िक िवकिसत भारत एक योजना 
नहीं है, बिÊक एक ऐसा पेपर है, जो आगे की 24-25 साल की देश की तरक्की को साधता है। सर, 
यह एक िवज़न डाक्युमȂट है। जब हम िवकिसत भारत क े िव
ज़न डाक्युमȂट की बात करते हȅ, तो मȅ 
एक िवज़न डाक्युमȂट आपकी अनुमित से पढ़ना चाहता हूं, जो िक हमारे देश को िवकिसत बनाने 
मȂ मȅ समझता हूं िक योगदान देगी। सर, मȅ यह पढ़ना चाहत
ा हूँ। "I have travelled across the 
length and breadth of India and I have not seen one person who is a beggar, who is a 
thief. Such wealth I have seen in this count ry, such high moral values, people of such 
calibre that I do not think that we would ever conquer this country unless we break the 
very backbone of this nation, which is he r spiritual and cultural heritage. And, 
therefore, I propose that we replace her old and ancient educational system, her 
culture, for if the Indians think that foreig n and English is good and greater than their 
own, they will lose their self-esteem, their native culture, and they will become what 
we want them to be, a truly dominated nation." ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister, if relevant, lay it on the Table of the House. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सर, मȅ यह पढ़ नहीं रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ पढ़ चुका हूँ। ...(Ëयवधा
 न)... अब 
मȅ िवकिसत भारत का जवाब तो दूँगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Go ahead. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सर, मȅ िवकिसत भारत का जवाब तो दे दूँ, जो उनका दूसरा क्वेÌचन है। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Go ahead, please. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सर, ये जवाब ही नहीं देने दे रहे हȅ, इन्हȂ संभािलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
   
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, please go ahead. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सर, मȅ इस िलटरेसी क े बारे मȂ कहना चाहता हूँ, िवकिसत भारत बनाने की 
योजना क े बा
रे मȂ कहना चाहता हूँ। जब सन 1947 मȂ भारत आजाद हुआ था, उस टाइम पर यहाँ 
12 परसȂट िलटरेसी रेट थी और आज क े िदन 77 फीसदी िलटरेसी रेट है। 1,168 यूिनविर्सटीज़ हȅ, 
45,000 कॉलेजेज़ हȅ और 1,200 stand-alone institutions  हȅ। भारत िवकिसत देश बनने क े तौर 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

पर अगर्सर है, क्यȗिक जब यह देश आजाद हुआ था, तब यहाँ पर लाइफ एक्सपेक्टȂसी क ेवल 32 
साल हुआ करती थी और आज क े िदन यह 71 साल होने लगी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Sitting in the chair, you are intervening. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सर, यह िवकिसत भारत का जो हमारा िव ज़न है... ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, take your seat. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: मȅ बैठ जाऊँ  क्या? …(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon Members, if yo u have heard the question, the first 
supplementary of Shri Birj La l, the answer is relevant. I am understanding every word 
of it. ...( Interruptions)... The first supplementary is very  focused by Shri Birj Lal and 
let the hon. Minister conclude. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सर, मȅ माननीय सदÎय को दूसरी बात यह समझाना चाह रहा था, यह 
िवकिसत भारत ऐसा डॉक्यूमȂट है, जो िवज़न डॉक्यूमȂट है। यह Ģोजेक्ट नहीं है। Ģोजेक्ट्स क े अंदर 
पैसा मुहैया कराया जाता है, लेिकन िवज़न डॉक्यूमȂट क े तह
त नहीं कराया जाता है। िफर भी 
माननीय सदÎय चाहते हȅ, तो जो हमारी भ ारत  सरकार की तरफ से यूपी क े िलए पैसा तजवीज़ 
हुआ है, उसे मȅ बताने क े िलए तैयार हूँ। सर, मȅ बता देता हूँ। सर, भारत सरकार ने यूपी क े िलए जो 
पैसा िवतिरत िकया है, उसके  भी पाँच विर्टकÊस हȅ। एक है - शेयर इन सȂटर्ल टैक्सेज़। दूसरा - 
गर्ांट्स ऑफ फाइनȂस कम
ीशन। तीसरा - सȂटर्ली Îपाँसडर् ÎकीÇस। चौथा - सȂटर्ल सेक्टर ÎकीÇस 
और पाँचवां है - scheme for special assistance as loans to States for capital 
expenditure. 2021-22 मȂ 2,59,158 करोड़ रुपय े यूपी को िदए गए थे। 2022-23 मȂ इन्हȂ 29 ला ख 
कर िदया गया, मतलब 2,99,647 करोड़ रुपय े िदए गए और 2022-23 मȂ उन्हȂ क ु ल सȂटर्ल  
टर्ान्सफर 3,45,003 करोड़ रुपया है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary - Shri Brij Lal. 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल: सभापित महोदय, मȅ जो सवाल पूछना चाहता था िक िवकिसत भारत पिरयोजना क े 
अंतगर्त उǄर Ģदेश को तीन वषș मȂ िकत
नी िवǄीय सहायता Ģदान की गई है, इसके  संबंध मȂ मȅ 
समझता हूं िक माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने उसका जवाब दे िदया है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: So, are you satisfied? 
 
SHRI BRIJ LAL: Yes, Sir, I am satisfied.  
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
37

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary no.3 - Shri Vivek K. Tankha. 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA:  Sir, one part of the Annexure talks about Electronic Toll 
Collection, which is now for an unlimited period. I know for fact that there is a law on 
toll which says that toll is a compensatory imposition. मतलब आप टोल तब तक कलेक्ट 
करȂगे, जब तक आपका road’s cost plus profit gets r ecovered, but this is not happening 
in India. All tolls continue indefinitely, whic h is not in public inte rest. It is, basically, 
* 
on the public. Does NHAI plan to review th is unlimited toll collection policy which is 
against the public interest?   
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH:  Sir, this question  might better have been addressed to the 
Road Transport and Highways Ministry.  Neve rtheless, I would like to suggest that all 
tolls are given for a specific period.  If ther e is any toll which, as he says, has been 
given over that period and still continuing, we will have it looked into.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Vivekji, I think you should be satisfied.  If you will name one toll 
where your good thought has been violated  and the statute has been ignored, the 
Minister has assured that he will look into it. And, the Minister is known to act fast, 
and he responded while, primarily, it concerned the NHAI. So, you must appreciate.  
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA : Sir, I appreciate.  I only put a question based on the 
Annexure.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Good enough.  Now, Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha. On your birthday, I 
am sure you will seek something very important.   
 
PROF. MANOJ KUMAR JHA:  Thank you, Sir.  First, I would congratulate the Minister 
for clarifying that Viksit Bharat is not a project but a kind of commitment for the growth 
trajectory till 2047. Having said that, thro ugh you, Sir, I would like to ask the hon. 
Minister: In the recent Budgetary allocatio n in Bihar, what is the quantum, as 
compared to what was going on in Bharat mala as well as regarding the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways, and what is new component in that? Thank you, Sir.   
 
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.  
  
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

RAO INDERJIT SINGH: Sir, I don’t have a ll the answers regarding all the States.  
There are so many States and Union Territories. If he asks me a specific question next 
time around on Bihar, I will give it to him. But, I must, nevertheless, assure the 
House, through you, Sir, if I can be give n the permission, that  India, becoming a 
developed nation, has a vision document. I want to reiterate that this is not a project.  
I want to refer to Prof. Magnus Andersso n, who is a Professor Emeritus at the 
University of Groningen in Netherlands. This Professor has published a paper OECD 
Publications, called ‘The World Economy’.  In this publication, he has chalked out the 
economies of the various countries from 0 AD to 1998, and this is what he has to say 
about India in that particular publication.  It says that in 0 AD, India had 39.2 per cent 
of world’s economy. Our share in the worl d economy was 39 per cent. In 600 AD, it 
became 22.6 per cent. In 1700, it was 24.4 per cent. In 1947, when India was finally 
freed from the yoke of British empire, it was only left with 4 per cent. So, India, 
historically, had been a developed country, a developed nation. This vision for 2047 is 
not something that cannot be achieved, and we need the co-operation of all sectors 
of all the people of this country, and, I think, this is achievable by 2047.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, as a birthday gesture for Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, 
please send his question or inquiry to the Minister concerned and the Minister 
concerned will be good enough to respon d directly to the hon. Member. Fifth 
supplementary, Ms. Dola Sen. 
 
MS. DOLA SEN: Thank you, Chairman Sir. हमने िवकिसत भारत Ģोजेक्ट क े बारे मȂ 
इलेक्शन क े टाइम मȂ Model Code of Conduct को defy करते हुए अपने मोबाइल पर बहुत बार 
मेसेज आते हुए देखा। कोई बात नहीं।  
 अभी इधर Treasury Benches की तरफ से हमको अक्सर सुनाई दे रहा है िक ये लो
ग 
जब पावर मȂ थे, तब तक, यानी 2014 तक क ु छ काम नहीं हुआ और 2014 से  आगे Treasury 
Benches की तरफ से िवकिसत भारत की ओर हम आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ। कोई ĢॉÅलम नहीं है।   
 
We just want to know, through you, Sir, from the Minister and from the Union 
Government िक अगर ऐसा है, तो Farm Bills, िजस े बाद मȂ revoke करना पड़ा, उसको कौन 
लाया? हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी । ये Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िरपोटर् क े बारे मȂ बार-बार refer करते 
हȅ, तो उसको लागू करने से इनको िकसने मना िकया? इसको लागू करके  Minimum Support  
Price िकसान को दे िदया जाए, तब बात खत्म होगी। इसके  िलए दोष देने मȂ क्या फायदा है, आप 
इसको implement किरए। करके  िदखाइये। सर, हमȂ लगता है िक िवकिसत भारत Projects मȂ 
the natural
 farming, organi c farming, agriculture and agro-based industry, the 
relationship between Union and Stat e Government is very important.  I want to know, 
what is the serious planning or central polic y of natural farming,  organic farming or 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
39

overall  agriculture or agro-b ased industry like jute, tea, cotton industries under Viksit 
Bharat project, especially how long the relationship between the States and the Union 
Government will remain quasi-federal, Sir, through you, I want to know this from 
them. 
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH: Sir, the question pe rtains to connectivity and infrastructure 
under Viksit Bharat project. I have already cl arified it. This is a question that might 
better be put to the Minister of Agriculture.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: There is a good occasion fo r the Agriculture Minister to respond 
today. He will be responding to the debate today at 1 p.m.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question No. 137.  
 
Status of the Shoonya Campaign 
 
 *137. SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Will the Minister of PLANNING be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the status of implementation of the Shoonya Campaign (improve air quality in 
India by accelerating the deployment of electric vehicles (EVs) for ride hailing and 
delivery services) by NITI Aayog;  
(b) the number of States with which NITI Aayog has partnered to implement the 
campaign;  
(c) the total amount sanctioned and released in this regard;  
(d) whether Government has collaborated with any International Agency/ Bank to 
promote EVs under the campaign; and  
(e) if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING (RAO INDERJIT 
SINGH): (a) to (e) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
‘Shoonya’ – Zero Pollution Mobility Campaign was launched on 15th Sept., 2021. It is 
a Pan India consumer awareness campaign administered by NITI Aayog in partnership 
with leading companies working in the electric vehicle (EV) ecosystem in India. 
The campaign has 3 major components: 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

i. Corporate Branding Program : To recognise the efforts made by industry 
partners towards EVs; parcels, vehicles, and driver uniforms for electric deliveries and 
rides are branded with the Shoonya logo. 
ii. Consumer Awareness Drive: To highlight the health and environmental benefits 
of EVs and solidify Shoonya as a slogan in ev ery household in India, NITI Aayog uses 
both traditional and digital media channels. 
iii. Resource Toolkit : To allow EV users to understand the cost and emission 
benefits of switching to EVs, financing option s, and existing policies, the toolkits are 
hosted on the Shoonya website (https://shoonya.info/toolkit). 
         Since its inception, Shoonya Campaign has nudged delivery systems and ride 
hailing towards clean mobility. It has positive ly impacted de-carbonization of the ride 
hailing and delivery segment of mobility. So far, approximately 200+ corporate 
partners have collaborated together in  this initiative and have completed 
approximately 574 Mn rides and deliveries up to April, 2024 on Electric Vehicles. It has 
helped in reduction of particulate matter  pollution by approximately 11.5 tonnes, 
Nitrogen Oxide pollution by approximately 408 tonnes, Carbon Dioxide pollution by 
approximately 61,000 tonnes. This is equivale nt to fuel savings of approximately INR 
597 Cr at current retail prices and planting of approximately1.1 Million trees. 
         Shoonya forum has also enga ged approximately 100 Mn citizens through 
multiple channels and created awareness among them in favour of pollution-free 
delivery. 3 brand films have been released on 25 thJanuary 2022, 19 July 2023 and 04 
April, 2024 that has been viewed by approximately 70 Mn people. 
 
 This is not state specific but a PAN India campaign across several states.  
There has been no government funding for this campaign. The funding of campaign, 
so far, has been an industry initiative. So far, 200+ corporate partners (Domestic and 
global) have collaborated together in this campaign initiative. The details are enclosed 
at Annexure. 
Annexure 
Shoonya Partners as of 29th July 2024 
1 Akasa Finance  
2 Alektrify Private Limited 
3 Alt Mobility 
4 Altigreen Propulsion Labs 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
41

5 Amazon 
6 Ampere Electric Vehicles  
7 AMU Leasing Pvt. Ltd. 
8 Areon Mobility 
9 Ashnni Motors 
10 Augmentaa 
11 Baayu 
12 Bacancy Systems LLP 
13 Battery Smart 
14 Battwheelz 
15 Belectriq 
16 Bigbasket 
17 Bijli Wheels 
18 Bike Bazaar 
19 Bikozee 
20 Biliti Electric 
21 Blowhorn  
22 Blue Dart Express 
23 Blu-Smart 
24 Bolt  
25 Boltlyelectric 
26 Bounce 
27 CABT Elektra 
28 Chara 
29 Charge+Zone 
30 ChargeGrid (Magenta Power) 
31 Chargemiles (chargemesh technologies private limited) 
32 Chargeup 
33 Chartered Bike 
34 City Link 
35 ckers Finance  
36 CocaCola 
37 CPO Assist 
38 Crayon Motors (UP Tele Links) 
39 Dandera Electric 
40 Deepfleet 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

41 Delta  
42 DOT 
43 Earthride 
44 eBikeGo 
45 Eco Drive 
46 EEE Taxi 
47 Efill 
48 Eicher  
49 Eka Mobility (Pinnacle Mobility Solutions) 
50 ElectricPe 
51 Eleride 
52 ELOCITY 
53 EMFA (Electric Mobility Financiers Association) 
54 E-Motorad 
55 E-Savari Rentals  
56 ETM Bikes 
57 ETO Motors 
58 Etrio Automobiles Pvt. Ltd 
59 Euler Motors 
60 EV Plug (Techilogy Solution) 
61 EV Urjaa 
62 EVage 
63 Evaride 
64 evbooth 
65 EVCFinder 
66 Evegah Mobility Pvt Ltd 
67 Evera (E-Prakriti) 
68 Evet 
69 Evify Logitech Private Limited 
70 EVPE 
71 EVRE 
72 Exa Mobility 
73 Exponent Energy 
74 Exter 
75 Fery Rides 
76 Finocorp/ Finayo 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
43

77 Fortum  
78 Gentari 
79 Go Bykes (MS Qube) 
80 Go EVC (Vmatic Global Technologies Private Limited) 
81 Go GreenEOT Pvt Ltd 
82 Go4Green (AGRYUJ ITSERV PRIVATE LIMITED) 
83 GoElectrify 
84 Gogoro 
85 Grab (Subsidary of Reliance) 
86 Greaves Electric Mobility 
87 Green Drive Mobility 
88 GreenCell Mobility 
89 Greenifit 
90 Griden 
91 Grip Invest 
92 Hala Mobility 
93 Hero Electric 
94 Hero Lectro 
95 HopCharge 
96 Howdyy 
97 IBSA (India Battery Swapping Association) 
98 Igowise 
99 Indus Motors Green Private Limited 
100 Inspacco 
101 Insta EV bikes 
102 Intuions 
103 Ionage Mobility 
104 Jeev Mobility 
105 JPS/Jaidka 
106 Just Electric 
107 Kazam 
108 Kinetic Green 
109 Kurier EV 
110 Kurrent Charge 
111 Kwik Mobility 
112 Kwik Swap 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

113 Lectrix (SAR Group) 
114 Lightning Logistics (Micelio) 
115 Lithion Power Private Limited 
116 LoadExx 
117 Log9 
118 Lohia Auto 
119 Lordfincap 
120 Magenta 
121 Mahindra Electric 
122 Matter 
123 Metro Ride 
124 MG Motors 
125 Micelio 
126 Mini Mines 
127 moEVing 
128 MOJO Green  
129 Mooving (SAR Group) 
130 Moveinsync 
131 Mufin 
132 NammaYatri 
133 NammaYatri 
134 Nesh LIVE 
135 Numocity 
136 Nunam 
137 Omega Seiki Mobility 
138 OneFT 
139 Ontrack Mobility 
140 Orient eCom EV (Shigan) 
141 Park+ 
142 Perpetuity Capital 
143 Piaggio Vehicles Pvt Ltd 
144 Piqyu (Quiqup Innovations India Private Limited ) 
145 Pixey 
146 Planet Electric 
147 Porter 
148 Prime Ride 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
45

149 Procurabl 
150 Pulse Energy  
151 QYK (eMatrixmile India Pvt Ltd) 
152 QYK Bike 
153 RacEnergy 
154 Raft Motors 
155 REEP /Power Gear Limited 
156 ReNew Power 
157 Revampmoto 
158 Revfin 
159 Revolt Motors 
160 Rhyno 
161 RMI 
162 Saera Keto Pvt Ltd 
163 Sahy Electric ( Hykli Sky line Electric Private Limited) 
164  SankulDesing Studio 
165 Savy (save Electric Vehicles) 
166 Shadowfaxx 
167 Sheru 
168 ShiganEvoltz 
169 Shoffr 
170 Simple Energy 
171 Singham 
172 SMEV 
173 SMV Green Solutions 
174 Sonae EV 
175 Spock 
176 Srivaru Motors 
177 Statiq 
178 Stella 
179 Stride Green  
180 Sun Mobility 
181 Svitch Energy Pvt. Ltd 
182 Swiggy 
183 Tata Motors 
184 Tata Power 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

185 The Sustainer 
186 Threewheels United 
187 Thunderr/Labourin 
188 TOCAL 
189 Turtle Mobility (Electrev Mobility Pvt. Ltd.) 
190 TVS Motor 
191 Uber 
192 Urban Sphere 
193 UrjaBolt 
194 Usha Financial Services Limited 
195 Vaara 
196 Vaultus 
197 VA-YU 
198 Verde Mobility (slscorp) 
199 Virtus Motors  
200 Vmatic Global 
201 Volt 14 
202 Volt Up 
203 WilderMart 
204 Wings EV 
205 YoCharge (Yellow Haze Sustainable) 
206 Yulu Bikes 
207 Zeway Mobility Pvt Ltd 
208 Zomato 
209 Zuink 
210 Zyngo 
211 Zypp Electric  
212 HopElectric 
213 Stride Green 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:  Sir, Shoonya is a pan-India consumer awareness campaign, 
which was launched in 2021. I would like to know from the hon. Minister whether the 
effectiveness of this campa ign has been monitored and evaluated. What are the 
matrices which have been used to ev aluate and monitor the success of this 
campaign?   
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
47

RAO INDERJIT SINGH: Sir, this is a campaign monitored by NITI Aayog.  इसके  अंतगर्त 
नीित आयोग की तरफ से कोई पैसा खचर् नहीं हुआ है। इसके  अंतगर्त सारा का सारा जो पैसा खचर् 
हुआ है, वह corporate partners क े माध्यम से खचर् हुआ है। इसका जो फायदा हुआ है, मȅ आपको 
उसके  बारे मȂ बता देता हूँ िक िफलहाल इस initiative क े साथ क ु ल िमला कर देश भर क े अंदर 
approximately 574 million rides and deliveries
 have taken place by electric vehicles up 
to April 2024.  It has helped in reduction of particulate matter and pollution by 11.5 
tonnes. Nitrogen oxide pollution has been  reduced by approximately 408 tonnes. 
Carbon dioxide pollution has been reduced by approximately 61,000 tonnes. Sir, if I 
may inform the Member, through you, th is has equalled the fuel saving of 
approximately Rs. 597 crores of rupees at  current prices and approximately equals 
the planting of 1.1 million trees.  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary. Shri Sujeet Kumar. 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: Sir, currently, the campaign is focused on ride-hailing and 
delivery services, as was arti culated by the hon. Minister. I would like to know why 
this campaign is not extended to all kinds of public and commercial transport because 
we all know that commercial transport is a big source of emission.  
 
राव इन्दर्जीत िंसह: सर, जो भी आइिडया होता है, वह छोटे से शुरू  होता है और िफर वह बढ़ता 
जाता है। तो हमारा यह जो ' शून्य' क ैÇपेन है, इस पर हमने 2021 क े आिखर मȂ सोचा था और 
इसको मॉिन
टर करना शुरू  िकया था। आगे जैसे-जैसे इसका िवÎतार होता जाएगा, हम और भी 
electri
c vehicles बनाने का Ģयास करवाएँगे, चाहे वह normal transport का हो या िकसी और 
Ģकार का साधन हो।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary number three, Dr. Bhagwat Karad. 
 
डा. भागवत कराड़: ऑनरेबल सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहता हूं िक टर्ांसपोटर् 
सेक्शन मȂ अभी शून्य Ģदूषण क े बारे मȂ बात हो रही है।  Is the Government planning to have 
zero emission in the   section? क्या Ģोडक्शन सेक्शन मȂ भी 'शून्य' क ैÇपेन क े बारे मȂ गवनर्मȂट 
का कोई Ãलान है? 
 
R
A O  I N D E R J I T  S I N G H :   S i r ,  s o  f a r ,  i t  i s  only limited to delivery system and to this 
ride-hailing. But, like I said earlier, we will  be expanding it as time goes by, and all 
suggestions are most welcome. We will ta ke them on board and whenever we can 
implement them for the betterment of the environment, we will do so.  
 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary number four, Shri Sanjeev Arora. 
 
SHRI SANJEEV ARORA:  Sir, through you, I would like to ask the hon. Minister: Does 
the campaign also aid support research in EV sector to reduce high initial cost of EV, 
which has been a demotivating factor for general public to switch to electric mobility? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And mind you, this supple mentary has a perfect nod from Shrimati 
Renuka Chowdhury also.  
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH:  Yes, Sir. This, like I said, is a campaign, if I may call it, driven 
by the industry, and the NITI Ayog itself do es not spend any funds on this as such. 
Whatever has so far taken place has taken pl ace with the help of the industry.  And 
there are 200 plus national and international companies that have aided in this 
endeavour. All told, this is the progress so far, but as things progress, as I said, we 
will take other things on board as well and see that EVs are more readily available to 
people that desire to have them at a lower cost.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Fifth supplementary, Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury. 
 
SHRIMATI RENUKA CHOWDHURY:  We have seen that there has been a significant 
growth in EVs in 2023. You have almost 41.08 lakh units an d it has registered a 50 per 
cent jump in the markets, which is all very well. But you need to have other 
infrastructure, and if you don't, then it is a huge setback. You have an inadequate 
power grid.  And rural charging stations are going to have different requirements from 
urban stations as well as there is a lack  of public EV charging stations. So, unless 
these issues are sorted out, it is going to ge t very difficult. And it is a myth and fallacy 
that electric vehicles are going to resolve your emission problems. No. They have a 
whole different category of problems in EV itself. The kind of batteries and power 
grids that they need are going to be cont aminating the environment in a much more 
serious way. So, I want to know what steps you are taking for setting up EV charging 
stations in public spaces. What are you going  to do about the inadequate power grid 
which will not be able to charge the vehicles, contribute to the vehicles, and the cost 
price per unit goes up? And looking at the geographical vastness and diversity that 
India has, do you have specific plans for public EV charging stations in these areas?  
 
RAO INDERJIT SINGH:  Sir, the hon. Memb er is welcome to her opinion. Whether 
there is electric supply in adequate quantiti es or not is a thing that I would dissent 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
49

upon. Nevertheless, Sir, one feels that elec tric vehicles are the future. Whether it 
contributes enough to save the environmen t, I cannot debate on that because I am 
not qualified to do so. I can only say that  Rome was not built in a day. We have 
started this whole project. And we are going to enhance it.  If she has any particular 
suggestion to give, we will take that on board. This is something for the whole country 
to pull together.  
                                                           
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question No.138.  
 
Urban Planning Strategy 
 
*138. DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL:  Will the Minister of HOUSING AND URBAN 
AFFAIRS be pleased to state:- 
(a) Whether Government has a comprehe nsive urban planning strategy to 
accommodate the projected population growth as per The World Population 
Prospects 2024 Report; 
(b) If so, the details thereof; 
(c) the details of plans of Government to provide affordable housing to the 
increasing population under schemes lik e Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Urban 
(PMAY-U);  
(d) whether there have been any delays in allocation of fund to State 
Governments for PMAY–U; and 
(e) if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF HOUSING AND U RBAN AFFAIRS (SHRI MANOHAR LAL): 
(a) to (e) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement
 
(a) and (b)  ‘The World Population Prospects’ 2024 report highlights that the 
world’s population is likely to peak with in the current century and is expected to 
reach a peak of around 10.3  billion people in the mid-2080s , up from 8.2 billion in 
2024. As per the report, India has been ra nked the most populous country in the 
world with a population of 145 Cr. In 2024, 169 Cr. In 2054 and 150 Cr. In 2100 
As per the 12 th Schedule of Indian Constitution, Urban Planning including Town 
Planning is the responsibility of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/ Urban Development 
Authorities. Government of India supplem ents the efforts of the States through 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

schematic interventions/ advisories. It provides financial and technical support to 
the States. 
 The Ministry supports the states in strengthening urban planning eco-
system.In order to incentivize States to undertake urban planning reforms, 
Schemes for Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment of Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance was in itiated. The scheme aims to promote 
efficiency in land-use, sustainable development, affordability, and revenue 
generation using urban planning as a tool. 
i. Scheme for Special Assistance to Stat es for Capital Investment 2022-23 – 
Part – VI (Urban Planning Reforms)  with an allocation of Rs. 6,000 Cr - The 
reform components included  Modernization of Building Bylaws by removing 
contradictions and optimizing land use, Adoption of modern urban planning tools 
like Transferrable Development Rights (T DR), Implementation of Local Area 
Plans (LAP) and Town Planning Schemes (TPS), Implementation of Transit-
oriented Development (ToD). Further Stat es were incentivized for Creation of 
Sponge Cities, Removing Taxation for running the Buses for Public Transport. 
 
ii. Scheme for Special Assistance to States for Capital Investment 2023-24 – 
Part – III (Urban Planning Reforms) with an allocation of Rs. 15,000 Cr - The 
reform components included  Augmentation of human resources by hiring of 
qualified urban planners, Implementati on of Town Planning Scheme (TPS)/ 
Land Pooling Scheme, Modernization of Building Bylaws, promoting Affordable 
Housing and in-situ slum rehabilitation,  Transit-Oriented Development (TOD), 
Transferable Development Rights as planning tool, Strengthening natural 
ecosystems of urban areas through urban planning, development of waterfronts 
etc. 
Further, reform component included providing of incentives to the States for 
creating enabling byelaw/ policies for private sector participation in Affordable 
Housing projects.  
 A sub-Scheme under AMRUT on Form ulation of GIS based Master plans 
for 500 AMRUT cities is at implementation  stage. The Sub-Scheme aims at geo 
database creation and formulation of GIS based Master Plans. At present 461 
AMRUT Cities in 35 States are on boarded under the scheme. Draft GIS based 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
51

Master Plan has been formulated for 355 towns, out of which Master Plans for 208 
towns have been finalized.  
 Further, a Pilot Sub-Schemefor capac ity building of municipal officials 
under AMRUT for preparation of Town Pl anning Scheme (TPS) and Local Area 
Plans was launched in 2018. The Scheme ai ms to build capacity in order to bring 
about planned urban development throug h adjustment of land parcels and 
retrofitting of the old city centers. 
 Under AMRUT 2.0,  Scheme for Formulation of GIS based Master Plans 
has been extended to cover Class-II Towns  with population of 50,000 - 99,999. 
MoU has been signed with National Remote Sensing Centre and Survey of India 
for creation of geo database. 
 Considering the fast pace of urba nization & population growth, the 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA), Government of India has issued 
following guidelines/byelaws/ advisory: 
i.  Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation and Implementation 
(URDPFI)  Guidelines, 2014 
ii. Model Building Bye-laws (MBBL), 2016 
iii. Advisory on “Transit-oriented Development (ToD) 2023”  for all States to 
develop pedestrian friendly cities for residents and to promote development along 
important transit corridors/ nodes 
The Ministry has undertaken several know ledge exchange and capacity-building 
programs: 
i.For developing India specific knowledge in urban planning/design and providing 
specific trainings to the Municipal Offi cials/Planners, four existing academic 
institutions in different regions have be en designated as Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) (in 2023-24) and are entitled to an endowment fund of ₹250 crore each. 
In addition, six academic institutions ha ve been designated as AMRUT-funded 
Centres of Capacity Building to support the States. 
ii. The Ministry has undertaken capacity building programs for formulation of 
Local Area Plans (LAP) and Town Planning Schemes (TPS), for Town Planners 
working in State Town and Country Planni ng Departments, Urban Local Bodies, 
and Urban Development Authorities. Si x such programs were conducted by 
CEPT University, Ahmedabad in collabo ration with Town and Country Planning 
Organisation between August to No vember, 2019, under which 210 Town 
Planners were trained from 25 LAP/ TPS cities. 
iii. Under AMRUT/ AMRUT 2.0, around 3250  officials have been trained for 
using geo-spatial technology tools for preparation of master plans.  
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(c) to (e) ‘Land’ and ‘Colonisation’ are State subjects. Therefore, schemes 
related to affordable housing are implemented by States/Union Territories (UTs). 
However, Ministry of Housing and Ur ban Affairs (MoHUA) supplements the 
efforts of States/UTs by providing Central Assistance under Pradhan 
MantriAwasYojana – Urban (PMAY-U) si nce June 25, 2015 to provide pucca 
house in urban areas across the country th rough four verticals i.e., Beneficiary 
Led Construction (BLC), Affordable Hous ing in Partnership (AHP), In-Situ Slum 
Redevelopment (ISSR) and Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS). 
 Based on project proposals submi tted by the State/UT Governments 
under PMAY-U, a total of 118.64 lakh ho uses have been sanctioned by the 
Ministry, out of which 114.40 lakh have  been grounded and 85.43 lakh are 
completed/delivered to the beneficiaries in urban areas as on  29.07.2024.  The 
implementation period of PMAY-U scheme which was earlier up to 31.03.2022, 
has since been extended up to 31.12.20 24, except for CLSS vertical, to complete 
all the houses sanctioned under the scheme without changing the funding pattern 
and implementation methodology.  
 The Union Cabinet on 10.06.2024 has resolved to provide assistance to 3 
crore additional rural and urban househol ds for the constructi on of houses, to 
meet the housing requirements arising out of the increase in the number of eligible 
families. As per the budget announcement, PMAY-Urban 2.0 aims to address the 
housing needs of 1 crore urban poor and middle-class families with an investment 
of ₹10 lakh crore and Central Assistance of ₹2.20 lakh crore in the next 5 years.   
 Under PMAY-U, the Central Assistance is  released in three instalments in 
40%, 40% and 20% to the States/UTs fo r construction of houses, based on 
the compliances submitted by States/UTs  as per scheme guidelines. Out of 
sanction Central Assistance of ₹2 lakh crore, ₹1.64 lakh crore have been released 
as on 29.07.2024.  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे ĢÌन पूछने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए 
आपका धन्यवाद।  
 महोदय, 2024 क े बजट मȂ माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने एक करोड़ आवास अबर्न एिरयाज़ मȂ 
बनाने की घोषणा की, िजसका हम Îवागत करते हȅ।  सरकार का कहना है 1 करोड़ 19 लाख घर 
सȅक्शन्ड हुए हȅ, लेिकन ' Ģधान मंतर्ी आवास योज
ना' का सबसे महत्वपूणर् क ंपोनȂट है In-Situ 
Slum Redevelopment (ISSR). उसमȂ िसफर् तीन लाख, यानी तकरीबन ती
न परसȂट 
Îलमवािसयȗ क े िलए ही घर बनाया जाना योजना का िहÎसा है। सर, यह आँकड़ा दशार्ता है िक 
योजना क े तहत Îलमवािसयȗ को शहर की औपचािरक बिÎतयȗ मȂ लाने क े लÑय मȂ हम सफल नहीं 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
53

हो पा रहे हȅ। Îलम क े बढ़ने से सरकारी जमीन पर एन्कर्ोचमȂट भी होता है तथा unauthorised 
constructions भी होते हȅ।   मेरा आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से ĢÌन है िक चूँिक Îलम की 
बढ़ती हुई संख्या को कम करने मȂ यह योजना अस फल हुई है, तो क्या सरकार इसको िरËयू करके  
कोई िरवाइįड पॉिलसी लाने पर िवचार कर रही है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।      
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, मुझे यह बताते हुए खुशी हो रही है िक इस टमर् मȂ Ģध
 ान मंतर्ी 
महोदय ने पहली क ेिबनेट बैठक मȂ अगर कोई सबसे पहला एजȂडा िलया, तो वह 3 करोड़ नए घर 
बनाने का एजȂडा िलया।  इसमȂ 2 करोड़ घर गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ और 1 करोड़ घर शहरी क्षेतर् मȂ बनाने 
का एजȂडा है। पहले से भी यह योजना चल रही है और उस योजना क े अंतगर्त चार विर्टकÊस हȅ।  
उनमȂ से एक विर्टकल की चचार् माननीय सदÎय ने की है और वह In-Situ Slum
 
Redevelopment है। इससे पहले जब इनकी सरकार थी, तो इन्हȗने भी 'राजीव आवास योजना' 
मȂ...(Ëयवधा
न)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, इनकी तो कभी सरकार नहीं थी।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, काँगर्ेस की, िवपक्ष की सरकार थी और ये कहीं-कहीं उनके  
साथ गलिबहयाँ डालते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: सुमन जी, आप बहुत सीिनयर आदमी हȅ, Ãलीज़।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभाप
ित महोदय, ये कहीं-कहीं उनके  साथ गलिबहयाँ डालते हȅ, कहीं-कहीं 
आमने-सामने खड़े होकर गािलयाँ भी देते हȅ। इसिलए जो िवपक्ष बैठा है, मȅ यह मान कर चल रहा 
हूँ िक जो क ु छ िकया गया, वह उनकी देखरेख मȂ िकया गया होगा। ऐसा नहीं है िक उनका इससे 
िबÊकु ल संबंध नहीं रहा होगा।  लेिक
न िफर भी मȅ बताना चाहूँगा िक 2004 से 2014 की जो सरकार 
थी, उसमȂ यह योजना ' राजीव आवास योजना' क े नाम से चली थी।  उसके  तहत पूरे 10 वष र् मȂ 
लगभग 38 हजार करोड़ रुपए  की रकम खचर् की गई थी, जब िक अभी 10 साल  मȂ जो मकान 
बनाए गए हȅ, 80 लाख से अिधक मकान बना कर िवतरीत िकए जा चुक े हȅ, उस पूरी योजना मȂ 
क ेवल In-Situ Slum Redevelopment क े िलए 50 हजार करोड़ रुपए  क े मकान बना कर िदए जा 
चुक े हȅ तथा अन्य तीन विर्टकÊस उसके  अितिरƪ हȅ। अब इसका अथर् यह नहीं है िक हम झुग्गी-
झȗपड़ी वा
लȗ की िंच ता नहीं करते है, बिÊक हमȂ उनकी बहुत िंचता है, क्यȗिक हम अंत्योदय की 
भावना से काम करते हȅ, यानी जो सबसे गरीब है, उसको पहले लाभ िमलना चािहए।  लेिकन 
िजतनी योजना Ģदेश सरकार बना कर भेजती है, हम इसको Ģदेशȗ क े ऊपर छोड़ते हȅ िक उसकी 
जो गाइडलाइन है, उसके  आधार पर Ģदेश से जो िडमांड आता है, हम उसको अपर्ूव करते हȅ। 
अपर्ूवल देने मȂ सबसे बड़ी किठनाई यह आती है िक ऐसे झुग्गी-झȗपड़ी क े जो लोग हȅ, वे ज्यादातर 
सरकारी जम
ीन पर कÅजा िकए होते हȅ और उनकी अपनी जमीन होती नहीं है।  हमारी योजना मȂ 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

यह है िक अगर उसके  पास अपनी जमीन है, तो उसको भी Ģाथिमकता दी जाए, तािक अगर ऐसे 
लोगȗ क े पास एक छोटा-सा Ãलॉट है, तो अगर पहले चरण मȂ उनको दे िदया जाता है, तो वे अपने 
Ãलॉट पर थोड़े पैसे मȂ भी अपना मकान बना सकते हȅ।   
इसी Ģकार, क ु छ सरकारȗ ने ऐसा भी िकया िक उन्हȗने जमीनȗ का Ģबंध अपने आप िकया 
और हमारी इस ISSR
 योजना मȂ उन्हȗने हमसे लाभ उठाया है। Ģदेश सरकारȂ क ैसी योजनाएं 
बनाती हȅ, यह उन पर िनभर्र करता है, लेिकन इसका अथर् यह नहीं है िक जो मध्यम वगीर्य है और 
उसके  पास भी अगर अप
ना मकान नहीं है, तो हम उसके  मकान की योजना न बनाएं। हमारे Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी का लÑय है - Housing for All, यानी सबको मकान होना चा िहए।  कोई भी Ëयिƪ िजसके  
िसर क े ऊपर छत न हो, ऐसा नहीं रहना चािहए। अगर कहीं भी Ģदेश से -- क्यȗिक नई योजना मȂ 
यह एक करोड़ मकानȗ क े ऑफसर् Ģदेशȗ को िदए जाएंगे और अगर वे इस नई योजना मȂ झुग्गी-
झȗपड़ी की योजना ज्यादा बड़ी बनाकर देते हȅ तो हम उसकी एलोके शन करने मȂ उनक
ो 
Ģाथिमकता दȂगे।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: सेक ं ड सÃलीमȂटर्ी, डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल। 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक मेरी सर
कार  ने क ु छ नहीं िकया। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, वह बात तो ओवर हो गई, उसको छोिड़ए। आप सÃलीमȂटर्ी पूिछए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, मंतर्ी जी ने इÊजाम लगाया। मȅ इसका िजकर् नहीं करना चाहता, 
पर मंतर्ी जी ने Îपेिसिफकली बोला है।  मुझे ÎपÍटीकरण का तो हक दȂगे न, सर! 
 
Ǜी सभापित: अशोक जी, िजन्दगी मȂ छोटी बात से रुकना  नहीं है। वह बात ओवर हो गई, आप 
सेक ं ड सÃली
मȂटर्ी पूिछए। पहले सÃलीमȂटर्ी का जवाब आ गया है। सेक ं ड सÃल ीमȂटर्ी, डा. अशोक 
क ुमार िमǄल। 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: जब माननीय मंतर्ी जी बोल सकते हȅ, तो मुझे भी बोलने का हक 
दीिजएगा न, सर!  
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं।  मȅ सेक ं ड सÃलीमȂटर्ी पूछने का हक तो दे रह
 ा हूँ न, पूरा अिधकार है।  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, मȅ पोिलिटक्स मȂ 2022 मȂ आया हूँ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, नहीं। इसके  िलए मनोहर लाल जी तो िजÇमेवार नहीं हȅ! ...(Ëयवधान)...डा. 
अशोक क ुमार िमǄल। ...(Ëयवधान)
 ... 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
55

 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, धन्यवाद। अबर्न Ãलािंनग क े िलए सरकार ने 2015 मȂ Smart Cities 
Mission शुरू  िकया था और सरकार क े मुतािबक इस िमशन क े अंतगर्त 90 Ģितशत काम हो चुका 
है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN:  Sir, how can he say this? 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please. ...(Interruptions)...  Dr. Ashok Kumar 
Mittal, please ask your supplementary.  ...(Interruptions)...    
 
DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL: Thank you for supporting me, Madam. सर, अबर्न 
Ãलािंनग िम
शन मȂ सरकार ने 2015 मȂ Smart Cities Mission शुरू  िकया था और सरकार क े 
मुतािबक Îमाटर् िसटी िमशन मȂ 90 Ģितशत काम पूरा हो चुका है, परंतु जब हम Îमाटर् िसटी की 
िरयेिलटी को देखते हȅ, तो देश मȂ एक भी िसटी Îम ाटर् िसटी नजर नहीं आती है, 
जबिक...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: डा. िमǄल, आप अपना ĢÌन पूिछए।  
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल: सर, यह मेरा क्वेÌचन ही है। सरकार 47,000 करोड़ रुपय े खचर् कर 
चुकी है, जो िक टैक्सपेयसर् का मनी है। सरकार अपने ǎारा जो 90 Ģितशत काम पूरा करने का 
दावा कर रह
ी है, क्या वह उसको authenticate करने क े िलए कोई third party audit कराएगी 
और उसकी िरपोटर् यहां पेश करेगी? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, ...(Ëयवधान)... Please. ...(Interruptions)...  What is this? 
...(Interruptions)...  सुिनए। ...(Ëय
वधान )...   No interference in the House. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, हम जानते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, एक िमनट।  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह अकसर देखा गया है िक Smart 
Cities का जो concept है, उसमȂ smartness देखते हȅ। Smart Cities क े जो contours हȅ, 
िजनका एक बहुत बड़ा उǈेÌय है, उसके  बारे मȂ अगर आप िवÎत
 ार से िववरण दȂगे तो माननीय 
सदÎय की पूरी ĥांित दूर हो जाएगी।  Smart Cities have several facets, जो invisible हȅ।  वे 
ऐसे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय मंतर्ी जी। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, कभी-कभी तो चेयरमैन को बोलने 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

दीिजए। िबकास जी, िवकास की बात हो रही है, िवकास की बात होने दीिजए। िबकास रंजन 
भƺाचायर् जी, िवकास क े बीच मȂ मत आइए। 
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, संिवधान क े 12 वȂ शेǹूल  मȂ ÎपÍट िलखा है िक urban 
planning including town planning is responsibility of Urban Local Bodies/Urban 
Development Authorities. Government of In dia supplements the efforts of the State 
through schematic interventions/advisories.  It provides financial and technical 
support to the States. पहला िवषय यह है िक Îम ाटर् िसटीज़ क े जो भी Ģोजेक्ट्स हȅ, हमने उन 
Ģोजेक्ट्स को अनाउंस करके  एक Ģोगर्ाम बनाया िक देश भर की 100 िसटीज़ मȂ टेक्नोलॉजी से 
आधािरत ease of living system को बनाने क े िलए Ģोजेक्ट्स की एक सूची हमने सभी Îटेट्स को 
दी। यिद िक
सी Îटेट को अपने शहर को Îमाटर् िसटी क े अंतगर्त लाना है, तो उसके  िलए Ģेज़Ȃटेशन 
करने क े बाद चार फ े ज़ेज़ मȂ 100 शहरȗ का चुनाव हुआ, लगभग 500 करोड़ रुपए  हर शहर को देने 
की बात थी और हमारी ओर से लग
भग 8,300 Ģोजेक्ट्स अपर्ूव हुए और अपर्ूवल मȂ 48 हज़ार 
करोड़ रुपय े को लगाने क े िलए Îटेट्स मȂ अथॉिरटी बनाई गई, वह हर Îटेट मȂ बनी, िजलȗ मȂ बनी 
या उस कॉपȘरेशन मȂ या शहर मȂ, जो Îमाटर् िसटी बननी थी, वहां अथॉिरटीज़ बनाई गईं। 
Ģोजेक्ट्स का अपर्ूवल और उनको िरËयू करने का काम अथॉिरटीज़ का है। हमने तो उसको भेजने 
क े बाद - वे जो यूिटलाइज़ेशन सिर्टिफके ट दे देते हȅ - पहले पैसा जारी करते हȅ, िफर वे 
यूिटलाइजेशन सिर्टिफके ट देते हȅ, उसके  बाद बचा हुआ पैसा और दे देते हȅ। हमारा का
म उनको 
assist करना है, उनको assist करने क े बाद कहीं particular कोई िशकायत िमलती है, तो हमारे 
यहां िडपाटर्मȂट की एक किमटी बनी हुई है, वह उसकी िरपोटर् Ģदेश की अथॉिरटी को भेजती है 
और हमȂ भी िकसी किमट
ी मȂ जाकर कोई िरËयू करना होता है, तो वह हम करते हȅ, अन्यथा यह 
सारी िज़Çमेदारी Îटेट्स की है। ये 100 Îमाटर् िसटीज़ इसिलए बनाए गए थे, तािक ये मॉडल 
िसटीज़ बनȂ और उनके  आधार पर उसका रेिÃल
के ट करके  अन्य शहरȗ मȂ भी Îमाटर् िसटीज़ का 
काम िकया जाए। अन्यथा शहर तो करीब 5,000 हȅ और 5,000 शहरȗ मȂ 100 शहरȗ को Îम ाटर् 
िसटीज़ बनाने की Îकीम है, यह सारे शहरȗ को बनाने की Îकीम नहीं है। यह क ेवल one time 
scheme थी, िजस पर अभी तक लगभग 46,000 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् हो चुक े हȅ और करीब 2,400 
करोड़ रुपए  इस बार जारी करके  माचर्, 2025 तक यह Ģोजेक्ट पूरा कर िदया जाएगा।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Su
pplementary number three, Shri Pramod Tiwari. 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी: सर, युवाओं को भी मौका दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: Ģमोद ितवारी जी युवा ही हȅ। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, इनकी Îमाटर् योजना मȂ 100 िजले िचिन्हत हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... 100 
शहर... 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
57

MR. CHAIRMAN:  One minute, please let him.. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Minister, से 
जवाब चाहȂगे। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: मान्यवर, ये िकन्हीं पांच शहरȗ क े नाम बता दȂ, towns क े नाम बता दȂ, जो 
इनके  अनुसार िवकिसत हो चुक े हȅ या Îमाटर् िसटीज़ बन चुक े हȅ। उसके  बाद सभी पाटीर् क े मȂबर 
ऑफ पािर्लयामȂट्स की एक किमटी बना दीिजए, वे वहां जाकर देख लȂ िक क्या एक टाउन भी 
िवकिसत हुआ है या नहीं हुआ है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: उलझाने की कोिशश कर रहे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ित
वारी: मान्यवर, मेरा यह कहना है िक यह * का अƿा बन गया है, * की Îकीम बन गई 
है, इसमȂ क ु छ काम नहीं हो रहा है, िसफर् कहा जा रहा है। सर, मȅ चाहता हूं िक ये िसफर् पांच नाम 
बता दȂ, क्यȗिक यह पैसा * का एक ज़िरया बन गया है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपको Ģमोद ितवारी जी चकर्Ëयूह मȂ फ ंसा रहे हȅ।  
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, मȅ चकर्Ëयूह मȂ फ ंसने वाला नहीं हूं। सौ शहरȗ क े बारे मȂ सबको 
पता है िक िकस शहर मȂ क्या-क्या Ģोजेक्ट्स बना ए जा रहे हȅ, ये अपर्ूव हुए हȅ और अपर्ूवल क े बाद 
उन 100 शहरȗ मȂ िजतने Ģोजेक्ट्स िकसी एक शहर मȂ बने हȅ और उनका क ंÃलीशन हो गया है - 
अभी लगभग 12 शहर  ऐसे हȅ, जो लगभग क ंÃलीट हो चुक े हȅ, अन्य काम चल रहे हȅ और यह 
completion वषर् 2025 तक होना है। इसकी सूची माननीय सदÎय को उपलÅध करा दी जाएगी,  
पिर्टकु लर शहर क े बारे मȂ बता िदया जाएगा। अन्
यथा मȅ क ु छ Ģोजेक्ट्स क े बारे मȂ बता रहा हूं जो 
आपके  आसप
ास क े शहर मȂ है, जो उÊलेखनीय िकये जा सकते हȅ, बताए जा सकते हȅ, मȅ क ेवल 
बेÎट Ģैिक्टसेज़ क े नाते बता रहा हूं। उसमȂ सबसे पहले चंडीगढ़ का ICCC है। अब यह Integrat ed 
Command and Control Centres काफी शहरȗ मȂ बने हȅ।  आप जाकर देख सकते हȅ।  मेरे यहां 
करनाल मȂ, फरीदाबाद मȂ भी बने हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: इसका मतलब यह है िक आपका पूरा देश है।   
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: यह मȅ Îमाटर् िसटी िमशन क े Ģोजेक्ट्स क े बारे मȂ बता रह
ा हूं। दूसरा Ģोजेक्ट है 
-  अगर Ǜीनगर कभी आपका जाना हो जाए, वहां ठंडी हवाएं चल रही हȅ, आप जाकर देिखए िक 
लाल चौक पर और झेलम िरवर का जो ģ ं ट है, वह इस समय देखते ही बनता है। वह इस योजना 
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
  
 
 
  
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

क े अंतगर्त बनाया गया है। इसी Ģकार उज्जैन मȂ Mahakkal Corridor Redevelopment िकया 
गया है, वह देखते ही बनता है। आप जाकर वहां का कॉिरडोर देखकर आइए। हमारे मध्य Ģदेश क े 
पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी जी भी पीछे बैठे हȅ। इंदौर मȂ सरÎवती और कहा न लाइफलाइन Ģोजेक्ट जाकर देख 
सकते हȅ। आप देखकर आइए और उसकी फोटो लाकर हमȂ दीिजए। इसी कोयÇबटू र मȂ 
Revitalization of Seven Lakes यह, South मȂ, आप कोयÇबटू र मȂ जाकर देख सकते हȅ। 
वडोदरा मȂ Health and Emergency systems देख सकते हȅ, one of the best projects. सूरत 
मȂ Restorati
on and Reuse of Historic Castle, अगरतला (नॉथर्-ईÎट) मȂ  Flood Emergency 
Response System वहां जाकर देख सकते हȅ। इसी Ģकार Davanagere मȂ Resolution of 
Urban Flooding इस Ģकार से जो क ु छ Ģोजेक्ट ऐसे worth-mentioning िकए हȅ, यह तो क ेवल 
एक सूची है। अगर आप अपने शहर मȂ जाकर देखȂगे, क्यȗिक पूरा शहर Îमा टर् का अथर् नहीं है,  
टेक्नोलॉजी को सपोटर् करते हुए हम Ease of Living क े नाते उस शहर क ै से ठीक कर सकते हȅ,  
these are some models और इन मॉड्Êस क े आधार पर Ģदेश सरकारȗ का काम ULBs का 
काम है िक वे अपने-अपने शहरȗ मȂ उसको repli
cate बनाएं।  क ु ल िमलाकर एक सहायता का 
कायर्कर्म है। यही इसमȂ Îमाटर् िमशन का सारे देश की 4,900 शहरȗ को Îमाटर् करने का अभी कोई 
Ģोगर्ाम भारत सरकार का नहीं है, बिÊक 100 शहरȗ मȂ इस काम को पूरा करके  कÇÃलीट िक या जा 
रहा है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 4, Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बच्चन।  
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Thank you, Sir.  सर, आपको अिमताभ का 
मतलब पता है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप नाम बदल दीिजए, मȅ बदलवा दूंगा।   
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN:  Sir, I am very proud of the association of 
marriage and my husband. I am just saying. 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मैडम, एक सेक Ȃड।  माननीय सदÎयगण, जो ना
 म इलैक्शन सिर्टिफके ट मȂ आता है 
और जो यहां सबिमट िकया जाता है, उसके  अंदर बदलाव की Ģिकर्या है और इस Ģिकर्या का लाभ 
मȅने खुद 1989 मȂ उठाया था। वह बदवाल की Ģिकर्या हमने हर सदÎय को दी है। 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN: No; Sir. I am very proud.  I am very proud of
 
my name and my husband and hi s achievements. It signifies आभा जो िमट नहीं सकती। 
...(Ëयवधान)...   Sir, I am very happy.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... One minute. 
...(Interruptions)...   
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
59

 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN:  So, don't worry....(Ëयवधान)...    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One minute. ...(Interruptions)...   माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ आपको 
बताना चाहता हूं।...(Ëयवधान)...    माननीय सदÎयगण,  I had the occasion  to go to 
France and I went to a hotel in Normandy. And, it was informed to me by the 
management that every global icon, the ph otograph is shown there. I went through 
the staircase, photographs were shown and Shri Amitabh Bachchan's photograph 
was there. I certified and that was in 2004 or so. So, Jayaji, the entire nation is proud.  
Now, your Supplementary No. 4 to Shri Manohar Lal.  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, इनके  नाम क े आगे इनकी पत्नी का नाम भी लगा दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: मȅ आपको बताता हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN:  Sir, I am not against this. 
...(Interruptions)...   I am not against this but this is incorrect.  It is incorrect because 
before this subject came... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: नीरज जी, आप बोल लीिजए या मȅ बोल लेती हूं।...(Ëय
वधान)...   
  
Ǜी नीरज शेखर: मȅने क ु छ नहीं बोला है। ...(Ëयवधान)...    
 
Ǜी सभापित: नीरज जी।  मȅ बता रहा हूं िक इस चीज़ का िनणर्य मȅ करता हूं और मȅने आपको नाम 
से पुकारा था िक आप अपने सÃलीमȂटरी चा
र पूछ सकȂ ।   
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BA CHCHAN: Thank you, Sir. Anyway, I will not prolong 
this whole discussion.  
 
Ǜी सभापित: जहां तक आपने कहा िक िकसका नाम साथ मȂ जोड़Ȃ, तो कई बार मȅने अपना 
इंटर्ोडक्शन डा. सुदेश पित क े नाम से िदया है। मȅने हमेशा आपकी भावना का आदर िकया है, आप 
देख लीिजए। सुदेश मेरी वाइफ का नाम है।  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: अच्छा, अच्छा
।  Sorry, Sir, I did not know.  
 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी सभापित: डा. सुदेश पित मȅने कई बार कहा है। यह रोचक तरीके  से कह रहा हूं तािक नीरज 
जी क े और आप दोनȗ क े संबंध बहुत शानदार हȅ, क्यȗिक आप एक ही Ģांत से आते हȅ और दोनȗ 
की lineage बहुत जबरदÎत है। बहुत जबरदÎत lineage है। दोनȗ तरफ देखȂ, nation is proud. 
Jayaji, please. Supplementary number four.  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, हिरयाणा क े पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी जी यहां पर बैठे हुए हȅ। मȅ सोचती हूं 
िक गुरुगर्ाम को Îमाटर् िसटी िडक्लेयर कर िदया गया था। अभी हाल ही मȂ जो बािरश हुई, वहां 
कमर तक पानी था। मȅ वहां पर िकसी काम से जाना चाहती थी, मगर नहीं जा सकी। अगर Îमाटर् 
िसटी की िÎ
थित ऐसी होगी, तो क्या होगा? आप गुरुगर्ाम को छोड़ दीिज ए, मȅ आपसे जानना 
चाहती हूं िक इस देश की िकतनी capitals Îमाटर् िसटीज़ मȂ िगनी जाएंगी, यह आप बता दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सर, पहले तो आपने उनको बताया िक नाम क्या है। उन्हȗने िफर सजेशन दे 
िदया िक मेरे नाम क े साथ क ु छ जोड़ा जाए। अगर आप कहȂ, तो मȅ उसका जबा
 व दे दूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, वह बहुत मुिÌकल है। वह मुिÌकल है।  
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सर, मुझे इस काम क े िलए अगले जन्म का इंतजा र  करना पड़ेगा। उससे पहले 
तो संभव है नहीं।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, there is an Assurance Committee here. आपने 
assurance िदया है। अगले जन्म मȂ भी आपने संसदीय परÇपरा क े दायरे मȂ अपने आपको डाल 
िदया है। जया जी ने बहुत महत्वपूणर् सवाल पूछा है।   
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सर, जहां तक गुरुगर्ाम का िवषय है, मȅ आदरणीय सदÎया को यह बताना 
चाहता हूं िक गुरुगर्ाम उस 100 िसटीज़ मȂ नहीं है। हिरयाणा मȂ दो ही िसटीज़ हȅ - एक फरीदाबाद 
है और एक करनाल है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: एक सेक ं ड, माननीय सद
 Îया का आशय था िक गुरुगर्ाम showcase करता है भारत 
की Ģगित को। वहां पर दुिनया की बड़ी कÇपिनयां हȅ और अपने अनुभव क े आधार पर माननीय 
सदÎया ने बताया है िक वहां पर पानी का बहाव शायद ËयविÎथत नहीं है। इसिलए आपसे आगर् ह 
दो तरीके  से िकया गया है िक एक तो आप हिरयाणा क े मुख्य मंतर्ी रह चुक े हȅ और अब आपके  हाथ 
मȂ िवकास है, िवकास की डोरी आपके  हाथ मȂ है। आप उस समÎया का िन दान कब तक कर दȂगे?  
आशा क े साथ आपसे पूछा गया है।  
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: आदरणीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ सदन को बताना चाहता हूं िक मȅ साढ़े 9 वषर् 
हिरयाणा का मुख्य मंतर्ी रहा हूं। जब मȅ  2014 मȂ हिरयाणा का मुख्य मंतर्ी बना था, मुझे उस समय 
क े दृÌय IFF
CO Chowk क े भी ध्यान मȂ हȅ, Signature Tower क े भी ध्यान मȂ हȅ, Rajiv Chowk क े 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
61

भी ध्यान मȂ हȅ, Honda Chowk क े भी ध्यान मȂ हȅ, ये tips पर हȅ और उन chowks को parallel 
road है, समतल तो जा ही रही है, flyover भी जा रहे हȅ, underpass भी िदया है, तीन मंिजला 
सड़कȂ बनी हȅ। आज वहां पानी िकसी Ģकार का रुकता नहीं है, ...(Ëयवध ान)... हां,  जब  वषार् 
ज्यादा होती है...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपकी बात मान रहे हȅ, आपकी बात मान रहे हȅ।  
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: जब बािरश ज्यादा होती है, क्यȗिक सभी शहरȗ की जो रचना बनी है, ये एक 
समय मȂ एक आधा इंच वषार्, यानी दो सȂटीमीटर तक वषार् होती हो, एक समय मȂ, तब तो उसका 
पानी खींचा जाता है। अभी हमने देखा, िपछले तीन िदन पहले देखा िक 8 सȂटीमीटर, साढ़े 8 
सȂटीमीटर वषार् हुई है िदÊली मȂ, गुरुगर्ाम मȂ और सब जगह, तो इस Ģकार से जो ढाई से तीन इंच 
वषार् होती है, उसके  िलए अभी िकसी शहर मȂ इसके  िलए Ãलािंनग नहीं है। हां, इन Îथानȗ पर जैसा 
िक मौसम मȂ बदलाव हो रहा है, आगे चलकर इस
की आवÌयकता पड़ती है, अगर हमȂ कोई सुझा व 
िमलेगा, तो हम उस पर िवचार करȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... क ु ल िमलाकर इस Ģकार की वषार् हिरयाणा, 
िदÊली, आसपास क े और शहर, देशभर मȂ जहां-जहां वषार् हो रही है – जो  चीजȂ Ģाकृ ितक 
कारणȗ से होती हȅ, उनके  कारण थोड़े समय क े िलए टर्ैिफक भी जाम होता है, सब होता है, इसके  
िलए क्या हो सकता है, इसके  संबंध मȂ माननीय सदÎय सुझाव दȂगे, तो उन पर हम िवचार भी 
करȂगे।  
जहां तक गुरुगर्ाम का िव षय है। गुरुगर्ाम आज हमारा icon city है, इसे आप हमारे उǄर 
भारत का कह लȂ, भारत का कह लȂ, हिरयाणा का कह लȂ, यह  
एक icon city बना है और इसके  ऊपर हमȂ proud है। आज िवदेश की Fortune 500 companies 
मȂ से 300 कÇपनीज़ क े offices  गुरुगर्ाम मȂ हȅ। आज िवदेश क े लोगȗ की इन्वेÎटमȂट मȂ जो  सबसे 
बेÎट च्वाइस है, वह उǄर भारत क े गुरुगर्ाम िजले की है। उस शहर मȂ क ु छ न क ु छ सुधार है, तभी 
यह सब क ु छ हो रहा है, अन्यथा नहीं होता।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Su
pplementary number five, Shri Sandosh Kumar P.  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P:  Sir, when we talk about this comprehensive urban 
policy, the first pre-requirement is data on population. So, I would like to ask the hon. 
Minister: Is there any plan to conduct censu s in the coming years? Or what about the 
estimated data on population in Indian cities by 2034?  
 
Ǜी मनोहर लाल: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय ǎारा बहुत अच्छा ĢÌन पूछा गया है। अपने 
देश और दुिनया की आबादी खूब बढ़ती चली जा रही है। इस आबादी क े आकलन,  िडफरȂट 
एजȂसीज़ और िडफरȂट कमेटीज़ ने बताए हȅ। उनके  िहसाब से हमारे यहाँ का 2011 क े सȂसस का 
एक डेटा उपलÅध है। देश का डेटा, जो पॉÃयुलेशन का है, उसके  िहसाब से उस समय 121 करोड़ 
जनसंख्या थी, िजसमȂ शहर
ी जनसंख्या 37 करोड़  थी, जो लगभग 31 परस Ȃट बनती है। महोदय, 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

उसके  बाद जो अनुमान लगाए जा रहे हȅ - क्यȗिक अभी सȂसस हुआ नहीं है, लेिकन जो Ģोजेक्टेड 
अनुमान है, उसमȂ जो 2023 का  डेटा था, वह 140 करोड़  पॉÃयुलेशन का था। महोदय, उसमȂ 
लगभग 50 करोड़ अरबन पॉÃयुलेशन आंकी गई है, जो िक 36 परस Ȃट बनती है, यानी 2011 से 
2023 तक यिद शहरȗ की पॉÃयुलेशन गर्ोथ 5 परसȂट बढ़ी है, तो Îव
ाभािवक है िक गर्ामीण क्षेतर् की 
गर्ोथ कम हुई है। महोदय, इसी तरह का 2036 का  एक आंकड़ा, िजसके  बारे मȂ यह अनुमा न 
लगाया जा रहा है िक देश की लगभग 150 करोड़ की पॉÃयुलेशन होगी, िजसमȂ से 60 करोड़, यानी 
लगभग 40 परसȂट urban population हो जाएगी, जो इस समय से भी 4 परसȂट और बढ़ेगी।  
महोदय, इसी तरह से 2054 तक  देश की पॉÃयुलेशन 169 करोड़ तक होगी, िजसमȂ 90 
करोड़ शहरी पॉÃयुलेशन हो जाएगी और  m
o r e  t h a n  5 0  p e r  c e n t ,  यानी 52 परस Ȃट शहरी 
आबादी हो जाएगी। हमारे पास इस Ģकार का एक डेटा आया हुआ है।  
महोदय, यह न क ेवल अपने देश का, बिÊक दुिनया का भी जो डेटा है, उसके  बारे मȂ 
अनुमान है। अगर 2024 को देखा जाए, तो 820 करोड़ की अनुमािनत पॉÃयुलेशन है और 2080 तक 
1,030 करोड़ की आबादी पूरी दुिनया भर मȂ हो जाएगी - यह अनुमान है। महोदय, यह ठीक है िक 
बहुत देशȗ की जो आबादी है,  वह घटने क े trend की तरफ भी आ गई है। अभी हमारे देश की जो 
आबादी है, वह 2080 तक बढ़ने क े टर्Ȃड पर है। ऐसा माना जाता है िक उसके  बाद इस देश की 
आबादी भी घटने की ओर आएगी। िजस Ģकार का यह आबादी का बढ़ता हुआ टर्Ȃड है, हमारा 
िवभाग और हमारी सरकार उस Ģोजेक्शन को लेकर सारी Ãल
ािंनग बना रहे हȅ। महोदय, हम सारी 
चीजȂ कर रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक इन 10 वषș मȂ  urban development क े िजतने काम हुए हȅ, उन्हȂ देखकर 
मुझे नहीं लगता िक िक
सी ने ऐसा सोचा भी होगा। महोदय, इतनी ÎकीÇस बनाई गई हȅ और हर 
Îकीम की, Ģदेश की सहायता करना,  ULB की सहायता करना, नई technique देना, नई-नई 
technology क े माध्यम से इन चीज़ȗ को आगे बढ़ाना, ease of living क े िसÎटम को आगे करना 
आिद सारे कायर् करने हȅ। महोदय, जैसा मȅने बताया है िक ultimately क Ȃ दर् सरकार की ओर से, 
हमारे िवभाग की ओर से सहायता दी जा
ती है। उसमȂ Ģदेश सरकारȗ को और ULBs को 
strengthen करना होगा। उनकी  strengthening
 क े िलए अगर माननीय सदÎयȗ क े क ु छ सुझाव 
हȗगे, तो हम वे सुझाव आगे Îटेट्स को forward कर दȂगे।                  
                                   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Question No. 139. 
 
Affirmative action plan for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
 
†*139.   SHRI NEERAJ DANGI: Will the Minister of CIVIL AVIATION be pleased to 
state:- 
(a) whether any 'Affirmative Action' Plan  has been formulated to secure the 
employment and interests of Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) 
after privatisation of Air India; and 
                                                           
† Original Notice of the Question was received in Hindi. 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
63

(b) if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF CIVIL AVIATION (SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU): (a) 
and (b) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) The Share Purchase Agreemen t (SPA) signed amongst Government of 
India, the Strategic Partner (SP) i.e. M/s Talace Pvt. Ltd. and Air India provides that, 
the SP shall, for a period of 1 (one) y ear post the closing date, use its best 
endeavours to provide adequate job oppo rtunities to scheduled caste / scheduled 
tribe, persons with disability and socially disadvantaged categories of the society and 
to ensure that in the event of reduction in the strength of the employees of the 
company, scheduled castes / scheduled tribes, persons with disability and socially 
disadvantaged categories of the society, will be retrenched/ terminated last.  
 The SPA also provides that the comp any and or AIXL shall not remove or 
retrench any part of the empl oyees for a period of 1 (one) year  from the closing date 
other than termination or dismissal of th e employees for cause in accordance with 
applicable staff regulations and standing orders or applicable Law. 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी: सभापित जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी महोदय से पूछना चाहूंगा िक क्या यह सही है 
िक एयर इंिडया क े िनज
 ीकरण क े बाद आरिक्षत Ǜेिणयȗ क े कमर्चािरयȗ क े िहतȗ को सुरिक्षत रखने 
क े िलए एक सिमित का गठन िकया गया था? यिद इसका उǄर हाँ है तो अनुसूिचत जाित और 
अनुसूिचत जनजाित क े कमर्चािरयȗ सिहत सभी Îथायी कमर्चािरयȗ की सेवा िनवृिǄ, अवकाश 
नगदीकरण, गर्ेच्युटी, कमर्चार
ी आवास, पदोन्नित और भतीर् क े िलए आरक्षण क े संबंध मȂ क्या 
सुझाव िदए गए हȅ? मȅ यह भी पूछना चाहता हूं िक क्या इस सिमित ǎारा िदए गए सुझावȗ पर 
अमल िकया जा रहा है? यिद इसका उǄर हाँ है, तो इस संदभर् मȂ क्या नीित
गत िनणर्य िलए गए 
हȅ? 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Hon.  Chairman, Sir, the Air India was 
privatized in the year 2022 and the Share Purchase Agreement happened between the 
Government of India, which is Air India at that point of time, and also the strategic 
partner which came out to be Talace, whic h was wholly owned subsidiary by Tata 
Group. So, when that agreement was made, especially, in the sense that some of the 
rights have to be protected for the SCs and STs, the Government has mentioned, Sir, 
in the share purchase agreement that for a period of one year before the closing date, 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

to use its best endeavours to provide ad equate job opportunities to SCs, STs, 
Persons with Disability and Socially-Disad vantaged categories of the society. To 
ensure that in the event of reduction in the strength of employ ees of the company, 
SCs, STs, Persons with Disability and So cially-Disadvantaged categories of the 
society will be terminated last. This wa s the clause which was put in the share 
purchase agreement at the time of the sale of Air India. Other than this, there was no 
committee that was formed. But I would like to draw the attention of this House to a 
specific affirmative Action Plan Committee,  which was actually formed in 2006 with 
the intention as to how the private sector deals with the reservations. It was formed in 
2006. And, at that point of time, the Co mmittee was constituted and its Chairman 
was Principal Secretary to the PM then, in  2006. And there were Secretaries from 
other Ministries which were involved, just  like Social Justice and Empowerment, 
DOPT, Tribal Affairs and Industry, Policy an d Promotion. And in the first meeting, -- 
this was in the time of 2006 -- it was ob served, -- these are the comments from the 
first committee meeting that was held -- that  the best course for achieving progress 
on the issue of affirmative action is through voluntary action by the industry itself. This 
was thought about at that time itself. So, th e point of getting into the discussion of 
private sector and the reservations does not arise with this question, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary; Shri Neeraj Dangi. 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी: सर, मेरा दूसरा ĢÌन है, वषर् 2007 मȂ एअर इंिडया और इंिडयन एयरलाइंस का 
िवलय हुआ था, िजसके  बाद एक नई क ंपनी, नेशनल एिवएशन क ंपनी ऑफ इंिडया िलिमटेड 
बनाई गई और उस वƪ अनुसूिचत जाित को 15 Ģि
तशत और अनुसूिचत जनजाित को साढ़े सात 
Ģितशत का आरक्षण िदया जाता था। देश भर मȂ एअर इंिडया क े अंतगर्त, गर्ुप ए से लेकर गर्ुप डी मȂ 
लगभग 6,1
27 अनुसूिचत जाित क े कमर्चारी एवं 2,055 अनुसूिचत जनजाित क े कमर्चारी थे। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से, मंतर्ी महोदय से पूछना चाहूँगा िक एअर इंिडया 
क े िनजीकरण क े पÌचात, वतर्मा न  मȂ अनुसूिचत जाित और अनुसूिचत जनजाित क े िकतने 
अिधकारी और कमर्चारी एअर इंिडया मȂ कायर्रत हȅ एवं एअर िनजीकरण क े पÌचात, अनुसूिचत 
जाित और अनुसूिचत जनजाित की सामािजक सुरक्षा और उनके  रोजगार क े संरक्षण क े िलए 
सरकार ने क्य
ा कदम उठाए हȅ? 
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: Sir, once the Air India has been sold, it 
comes under the private sector. And no priv ate sector has any kind of reservation 
policy which the Government is looking at, at the moment.  ...(Interruptions)...  So, 
the question... 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
65

Ǜी नीरज डांगी: सर, उनका क्या होगा? उन्हȂ Ģाइवेटाइज़ेशन क े बाद हटा दȂगे? …(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Neeraj, please wait for the answer. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU: So the question that the hon. Member has 
raised right now is something related to the private sector and the company itself. 
And if he wants some figures while Air India was under the Government, we can, 
definitely, give those statistics. And we have  tried every single thing to maintain the 
percentage within this. We have followed a ll the rules. I want to mention one more 
thing. This House also has to know why the Air India had gone for privatization. I will 
take you back to 2003- 2004. In  2003-2004, Air India including Indian Airlines also, it 
was under the profit of Rs. 136 crores. In  2004-05, the profit was Rs.160 crore. But 
once there was a change in Government, ...(Interruptions)... Sir, they have to listen. 
Now, they have to listen.  ...(Interruptions)... सर, एअर इंिडया की बात हो रही है, तो 
उसका Ģॉिफट और लॉस तो देना पड़ेगा। ...(Ëयवधान).. Let me answer it.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon.
 Minister, ...(Interruptions)... One minute.  
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Member, would you listen to me? Hon. Minister has 
categorically stated in the House that  when there was a share transfer agreement, 
there was a specific stipulation. Is it your case that that stipulation is being violated? If 
we get into historical background, it is di fferent. When transfer has taken place; there 
is a share transfer agreement. The stipulation, the relevant one, has been read by the 
Minister. 
 
SHRI NEERAJ DANGI: What is the present status then? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You are allowe d only two supplementaries.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Please. Hon. Members, any disturbance w ill come in the way of hon. Member and 
the reply by the hon. Minister.  
 
SHRI KINJARAPU RAMMOHAN NAIDU:  Sir, I would like to continue and complete 
my statement. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Question Hour is over. 
 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials   ] 
 
 
1.00 P.M. 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
  
The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Bill, 2024 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Bill for introduction. Shri Hardeep Singh Puri. 
 
THE MINISTER OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS (SHRI HARDEEP SINGH 
PURI):  Sir, I move for leave to  introduce a Bill further to amend the Oilfields 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI HARDEEP SINGH PURI: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
 
†DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS WELFARE– (Contd.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, further discussion on the Working of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare raised by Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala on 1
st 
August, 2024. Hon. Minister of Agricultur e and Farmers Welfare, Shri Shivraj Singh 
Chouhan, to continue his reply. 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA (Rajasthan ) :  S i r ,  I  w i s h  t o  m a k e  a  p o i n t .  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान) माननीय सभापित महोदय, 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
                                                           
† Discussion continued from 2.8.2024. 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
67

MR. CHAIRMAN: No, Mr. Randeep. ...(Interruptions)... I will not allow.  This has 
become a habit. ...(Interruptions)... Let the Minister complete his reply. 
...(Interruptions)... No. I will not. ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing will go on record.  
...(Interruptions)... Forget about it. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Randeep, take recourse 
to rules. ...(Interruptions)... Please, I will not allow. ...(Interruptions)... Don’t create 
such kind of disturbance. ...(Interruptions)...  It leaves a very bad precedent. 
...(Interruptions)... Please, why don’t you read rules? ...(Interruptions)...There is a 
provision under rules. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Deputy Leader, Mr. Pramod Tiwari, 
please,… ...(Interruptions)... Please sit down. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, 
the issue raised by Shri Randeep Singh Su rjewala is that the hon. Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare Minister, while addressing , had taken his name .  Names are taken 
numerous times.  You take recourse to rule s. I have nothing befo re me.  I cannot put 
the House in chaos.  Study the rules. I am very liberal.  I will protect everyone’s 
reputation.  So, please send a co mmunication to me. Hon. Minister. 
...(Interruptions)...Nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)...Hon. Minister. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला:  
* ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)...Nothing is going on 
record. ...(Interruptions)...What is this? ...(Interruptions)... I will name you. 
...(Interruptions)...Please, don’t show the papers. ...(Interruptions)...Why are you 
showing the paper? ...(Interruptions)...Why are you showing this paper? 
...(Interruptions)...I am very close to naming you. ...(Interruptions)... Why are you 
showing this paper? ...(Interruptions)...Mr. Randeep Surjewala, don’t show the 
paper. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, I hereby name...  ...(Interruptions)...  
Don’t show it, please. ...(Interruptions)... Don’t embarrass me. ...(Interruptions)... 
You don’t understand such a simple thing! What is this?  Hon. Minister, you 
continue. ...(Interruptions)...Nothing will go on record.  Take your seat. 
...(Interruptions)...Hon. Minister, Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan’s reply alone will go on 
record. ...(Interruptions)... देरेक जी, देरेक जी ...( Ëयवधान)... Mr. Derek, let the 
House settle down. ...(Interruptions)...Let the House be in order. 
                                                           
* Not recorded. 
 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

...(Interruptions)...Please, अच्छा अब आपको भी बोलना है।  नागर साहब, बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... मंतर्ी जी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  मंतर्ी जी, मȅने आपका भाषण सुना भी और पढ़ा भी। मȅ उत्सुक हूं, आप बोलȂ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... Nothing is going on record. ...(Interrupti ons)... 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  माननीय सभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have no right to address the Chair like this. 
...(Interruptions)... You are committing a misc onduct that I deprecate. 
...(Interruptions)...I expect the leadership to give you a refresher course. 
...(Interruptions)...No.  I will not allow. Shri Digvijaya Singh, I will not allow. 
...(Interruptions)...Five Members behind you are standing.  I will not allow, please. 
Sorry. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Minister, please continue.  ...(Interruptions)... It has 
never happened.  ...(Interruptions)...  No; no.  ...(Interruptions)... One second, 
please.  िदिग्वजय िंसह जी, आप सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  सुिनए, सुिनए।  ये क्या बात कर रहे हȅ? 
...(Ëयवधान)...  Nothing is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on 
record. ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please 
...(Interruptions)... Can I ask Members to take their respective seats?  
...(Interruptions)... T a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   ...(Interruptions)... Your Minister is replying.  
...(Interruptions)... If there is misconduct, I will deal with it.  ...(Interruptions)...  मुझे 
पता है। ...(Ëयव
धान)...  Nothing is going on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  Nothing is 
going on record. ...(Interruptions)...   Nothing is going on record.  
...(Interruptions)... Take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... T a k e  y o u r  s e a t ;  b e  
comfortable.   ...(Interruptions)...  T h i s  m a n ,  S h r i  R andeep Singh Surjewala, 
belonging to the main Opposition party does  not know how to conduct himself in the 
House. ...(Interruptions)...  Why are you forcing me to name him?  
...(Interruptions)... Why are you forcing ...(Interruptions)...  Okay, gentlemen.  
...(Interruptions)...  बैिठए, बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  It is my most unpleasant duty.  If I see 
any disturbance now --  I seek full cooperation of the leadership – I will have to name 
the hon. Member.  ...(Interruptions)...   One second.  ...(Interruptions)...  Why are 
you ...(Interruptions)...  Again, Sir?  ...(Interruptions)... I am standing.  The 
Chairman stands in the House when he finds the Member, whom I have come close 
to naming thrice, is not listening to me.  If  you have a grievance, please take recourse 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
69

to rules.   ...(Interruptions)...  Not now.  But, write to me. I will deal with it and give 
you ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, यह ठीक नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: If you show this paper ag ain you may be out of the House for a 
very, very long time, Randeep.  ...(Interruptions)... You do not want a discussion on 
farmers! आप िकसान की बात नहीं सुनना चाहते हȅ! ...(Ëयवधान)... िकसान क े बारे मȂ नहीं 
सुनना चाहते हȅ! ...(Ëयवधान)... िकसान क े िहत की बात नहीं सुनना चाहते हȅ! ...(Ëयव धान)... 
िकसान क े िवकास की बात नहीं सुनना चाहते हȅ! ...(Ëयवधान)...  ऐसा क्यȗ कर रहे हȅ? 
...(Ëयवधान)... No, nothing.  ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Minister, please continue. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, हम उस िदन पीएम िकसान सÇमान िनिध 
पर चचार् कर रहे थे। ...(Ëयवधान)...  मुझे कहते हुए गवर् है, ...(Ëय
 वधान)... माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, कांगर्ेस ने िकसान को Ģत्यक्ष सहायता की बात तो की, लेिकन कभी Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान 
सÇमान िनिध जैसी योजना कांगर्ेस ने नहीं बनाई। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह बनाई, तो हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी, 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने। ...(Ëय
वधान)... माननीय सभापित महोदय, िकसान सÇमान िनिध मȂ रािश भले 
ही 6 हजार रुपए  हȗ, ...(Ëयवधान)... ये नहीं समझȂगे, लेिकन जो लघु िकसान, सीमांत िकसान, 
छोटे िकसान हȅ, उनके  िलए 6 हजार रुपए  मायने रखते हȅ। ...(Ëय वधान)... माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, कई बार िकसान को आदान क े िलए, छोटी-छोटी जरूरत Ȃ पूरी करने क े िलए छोटी रािश 
की जरूरत  पड़ती थी। ...(Ëयवधान)... जब पैसा नहीं होता था, तो उसको ऊ ँची Åयाज की दरȗ पर 
ऋण लेना पड़ता था। ...(Ëयवधान).. . इस िकसान सÇमान िनिध क े कारण िकसान Îवावलंबी भी 
हुआ है, िकसान सशƪ भी हुआ है और िकसान का सÇमान भी बढ़ा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय 
सभापित महोदय, ये िकसान का सÇमान देख नहीं सकते! ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, एक िरपोटर्, यह हमारी नहीं है, अंतर ार्Íटर्ीय खाǏ नीित अनुसंधान संÎथान की है, एक 
Îवतंतर् अध्ययन क े अनुसार पीएम िकसान योजना क े तहत िवतिरत धनरािश ने गर्ामीण आिर्थक 
िवकास मȂ उत्Ģेरक का काम िकया है,  ...( Ëयवधान)... िकसानȗ को ऋण संबंधी बाधाओं से मुƪ 
िकया है और क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ िनवेश को बढ़ाया है। ...(Ëयव
धान)... इस योजना ने िकसान की जोिखम 
लेने की क्षमता को भी बढ़ाया है, ...(Ëयवधान)... िजससे वे क ृिष क्षेतर् मȂ संभािवत रूप  से अिधक 
उत्पादक िनवेश करने मȂ सक्षम हुए हȅ।  ...(Ëय
वधान)... माननीय सभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅने कहा था िक मुझे छेड़ो मत, अगर छेड़ोगे, तो छोड़ूँगा नहीं। 
...(Ëयवधान)... ये िकसान और गोिलयȗ की बात कर रहे हȅ! ...(Ëयवध ान)... माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, इस कांगर्ेस की सरकार मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)...  जब इनकी, कांगर्ेस की अलग-अलग राज्यȗ मȂ 
सरकार थी, ...(Ëयवधान)...  और ये गोली चलने की बात करते हȅ! ...(Ëयवधान)... 24-24 िकसानȗ 
को मारा गया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 माननीय सभापित महोदय, ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ क ेवल िवषय पर बोलना चाहता था 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, नहीं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप चुप रिहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... नहीं।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आप मंतर्ी जी को सुिनए। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  अब इन्हȗने छेड़ा है, ...(Ëयवधान)... अब इन्हȗने छेड़ा है, तो ये सुन लȂ। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 1986 मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 1986 मȂ जब िबहार मȂ कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, तो  इनकी 
सरकार मȂ 23 िकसानȗ की मौत गोलीबारी से हुई थी।   
...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय सभापित महोदय, 1988 मȂ िदÊली मȂ Ǜीमती इंिद रा गांधी जी की पुण्य 
ितिथ पर िकसानȗ पर गोिलयाँ चलाई गईं। ...(Ëयवधान)... उसमȂ 2 िकसान मारे गए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 1988 मȂ इन्हȗने मेरठ मȂ िकसानȗ पर फायिंरग की, 5 िकसान मारे गए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... 23 अगÎत, 1995 को ...(Ëयवधान)... सुनते जाइए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... दम है, तो सुनते 
जाइए।  ...(Ëयव
धान)... दम है, तो सुनते जाइए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी,  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  महोदय, 23 अगÎत, 1995 को हिरयाणा मȂ गोिलयाँ चलाईं, वहाँ 6 
िकसान मारे गए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 12 जनवरी, 1998 को मुÊताई मȂ िकसानȗ पर गोिलयाँ चलीं, तब 
कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, 2
4 िकसान मारे गए।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी,  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  आंधर् Ģदेश मȂ 2010 मȂ 2 िकसान मारे गए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी,  ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय मंतर्ी जी,  ...(Ëयवधान).
 .. 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  उǄर Ģदेश मȂ 4 िकसानȗ की गोली से ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी.. 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित जी, मȅने कहा था िक मȅ शालीनता से बात करना 
चाहता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: एक िमनट।  आप बैिठए।  आप Îथान गर्हण कीिजए।   
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
71

 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: लेिकन अगर ये छेड़Ȃगे, तो मȅ छोड़ूँगा नहीं, यह मȅने पहले ही कह िदया 
था।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप Îथान गर्हण कीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप Îथान गर्हण 
कीिजए।   
 माननीय सदÎयगण, यह दुभार्ग्यपूणर् भी है और ददर्नाक भी है।  िकसान वगर्, देश का 
सबसे महत्वपूणर् वगर् है।  जब उस वगर् क े बारे मȂ चचार् हो रही है, तो हर सदÎय का यह मौिलक 
कतर्Ëय है िक वह चचार् मȂ गंभीरता से भाग ले।  मȅने इस िवषय पर चचार् मȂ िजसने िजतना समय 
मांगा, उतना िदया और मुझे उÇमीद थी िक सरकार का पक्ष सुनकर, यिद कोई बात िनक
लेगी, तो 
कानून क े तहत मुǈा उठाया जाएगा।   
 यह जो Ëयवधान पैदा िकया गया है, वह िनयमȗ क े िवपरीत है।  मेरे िनदȃश क े बाद जो 
Ëयवधान पैदा िक
या गया है, वह इस आसन की अवहेलना है।  यह अत्यंत गÇभीर है।  माननीय 
सदÎय, रणदीप सुरजेवाला जी ने, िजन्हȗने चचार् की शुरुआत  की थी, आज मुझे दुखी मन से यह 
कहना पड़ रहा है िक उन्हȗने िकसान क े िहत को ित
लांजिल देते हुए, संजीदगी का पिरत्याग करते 
हुए, माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े भाषण मȂ अवरोध पैदा करने का जो Ģयास िकया, उसका मȅ खंडन 
करता हूं, Ģितकार कर
ता हूं, िंनदा करता हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
  दूसरा, मȅ सदन क े सभी सदÎयȗ से आगर्ह भी करूं गा िक जब एक कोने से कोई Ëयवधान 
पैदा होता है, तो िबना मेरी तरफ देखे हुए, िबना आसन की ËयवÎथा का इंतजा र िकए हुए, दूसरे 
कोने से Ëयवधान हो जाता है।  जब इधर से कोई बोल रहा है, तो उधर Ëयवधान हो जाता है और 
उधर से कोई बोल रहा है, तो इधर से भी हो जाता है।  मेरा आपसे आगर्ह रहेगा िक सदन मȂ चचार् 
को साथर्क बन
ाइए, जन कÊयाण क े िलए बनाइए।  यही हमारा उǄरदाियत्व है।  लोग हमको देख 
रहे हȅ।  सदन की कायर्वाही मȂ, गुणवǄा मȂ जो िनरंतर कमी आ रही है, उससे लोग हमारी तरफ 
अब आदर की दृिÍट से नहीं देखते, लोग यह नहीं देखते िक सदन मȂ क्या चचार् हो रही है।   मेरा 
आपसे हाथ जोड़कर आगर्ह है िक इस सदन को, इसकी पिवतर्ता को संरक्षण दȂ। सृजन बाद मȂ 
होगा, जब एक बार संरक्ष
ण दȂगे। माननीय मंतर्ी जी, अपना बयान जारी रखȂ। 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, इस सदन मȂ िकसानȗ पर चचार् हो रही है 
और िकसान भी इसको ध्यान से सुनते हȅ। मȅ पूरी गंभीरता से अपनी बात पूरी करना चाहता हूँ।   
महोदय, जब मȅ क ृिष मंतर्ी बना, तो मुझे लगा िक आज तक भारत मȂ िज
तने Ģधानमंतर्ी हुए हȅ, मुझे 
उन सब क े भाषणȗ को पढ़ना चािहए और सबसे महत्वपूणर् भाषण होता है 15 अगÎत का, Îवतंतर्त ा 
िदवस का लाल िकले की Ģाचीर से।  मȅने सोचा िक िकसानȗ क े िलए िकस Ģधानमंतर्ी जी ने क्या 
कहा, उसको मȅ पढ़ू ँ।  आज मȅ दुख क े साथ यह तथ्य उǇािटत कर रहा हूँ। जब मȅने वह भाषण 
पढ़ा, तो मȅ हैरत मȂ रह गया, हैरान हो गया।  मȅने जो उस िदन कहा था काँगर्ेस की Ģाथिमकता 
िकसान नहीं है।  Îवगीर्य पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी, मȅ उनका आदर करता हूँ, लेिक न मȅने 15 
अगÎत क े उनके  सारे भाषण पढ़े।  उन्हȗने िकसान का नाम 1947 मȂ एक बार भी नहीं िलया,  1948 
मȂ एक बार िलया, 1949 मȂ नहीं िलया,  1950 मȂ नहीं िलया,  1951 मȂ नहीं िलया,  1952 मȂ नहीं 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

िलया, 1953 मȂ नहीं िलया, 1954 मȂ नहीं िलया, 1955 मȂ नहीं िलया, 1956 मȂ नहीं िलया, 1957 मȂ 
नहीं िलया, 1958 मȂ नहीं िलया, 1959 मȂ नहीं िलया, 1960 मȂ नहीं िलया, 1961 मȂ नहीं िलया, उनमȂ 
िकसान शÅद नहीं आया। यह मȅ पढ़ कर कह रहा हूँ। उनमȂ िकसान शÅद नहीं आया।  यह आपकी 
Ģाथिमकताएँ हȅ।   
माननीय सभापित महोदय, Îवगीर्य इंिदरा गांधी जी, मȅ हर एक की गिरमा का सÇमा
न 
करता हूँ, कभी िकसी क े सÇमान को ठेस पहुँचाने वाली भाषा बोलने का मȅ आदी नहीं हूँ, लेिकन 
मȅने उनके  भाषण भी पढ़े।  उन्हȗने िकसान का नाम 1966 मȂ दो बा र िलया, 1967 मȂ एक बार िलया, 
1968 मȂ तीन बार िलया, 1969 मȂ तीन बार िलया, 1970 मȂ एक बार िलया, 1971 और 1972 मȂ नहीं 
िलया, 1973 मȂ दो बार नाम िलया, लेिकन वह भी क ै जुअली नाम िलया, कोई नीित की बात नहीं 
की, कोई पॉिलसी की बात नहीं की।  19
75, 1976 और 1980 मȂ एक-दो बार क ै जुअली नाम िलया। 
Îवगीर्य राजीव जी, उनकी Ģाथिमकता भी कभी िकसान नहीं रही। काँगर्ेस की Ģाथिमकता 
कभी िकसान नहीं रही।  लेिकन जब से हमारे नेता नरेन्दर् मोदी भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बने, मȅने 
उनके  भाषण पढ़े,  तो उन्हȗने 2014 मȂ छह बार, 2015 मȂ 23 बार, 2016 मȂ 31 बार, 2017 मȂ 20 बार, 
2018 मȂ 17 बार , 2019 मȂ 17 बार, 1920 मȂ 17 बार, 1921 मȂ 15 बार िकसान का ना
म िलया।  आप 
भाषण उठा कर देख लीिजए।  उन्हȗने िकसान का नाम िलया और खेती को Ģाथिमकता दी।   
माननीय सभापित महोदय, जो बात िदल मȂ होती है, जुबान पर वही आती है। इनके  िदल 
मȂ िकसान नहीं था, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े िदल मȂ िकसान था, इसिलए जुबान पर िकसान बार-बार 
आता है। मȅ एक और बात कह कर अपनी बात िफर िकसान पर ही  क Ȃिदर्त करू ँगा। मुझे िकसी को 
गाली देना अच्छा नहीं लगता, मȅ कभी आलो
चनाओं मȂ िवÌवास नहीं करता, लेिकन नाटक से 
िकसान की िंजदगी नहीं बदलेगी। म ाननीय  सभापित महोदय, एक नेता, िजन्हȗने बड़ी यातर्ाएँ 
िनकालीं, बड़ी-बड़ी यातर्ाएँ िनकालीं। उस यातर्ा क े दौरान हिरयाणा क े सोनीपत मȂ िरयल िदखाने 
क े िलए रील बनाई। मȅ एक पुराना वीिडयो देख रहा था, वह 2023 का वीिडयो है सोनीपत का। वे 
अचानक एक खेत मȂ पहुँच जाते हȅ, वहाँ पर िकसान ȗ से ज्यादा क ैमरामैन थे। क ैमरे पहले से िफक्स 
थे, कहाँ फोकस िकए जाएँगे, यह तय था। उनको दो लोग पकड़ कर खेत मȂ ले जा रहे हȅ, खेत मȂ 
पहुँचने क े बाद उनको पता नहीं िक खेत मȂ करना क्या है, तो वहाँ वे क ैमरामैन से यह पूछ रहे हȅ 
िक क ै से खड़े होना, क्या करना है। माननीय सभापित महोदय, मेरे पास उसकी यह पूरी-की-पूरी 
वीिडयोगर्
ाफी की सीडी है। मȅ इसको सभा क े पटल पर रखना चाहता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  आप उसको authenticate कीिजए और सदन क े पटल पर रिखए। 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ इसको authenticate करके  सदन क े 
पटल पर रखता हूँ।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: During course of the day आप इसको रख दीिजए। 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  जी हाँ, सभ
ापित महोदय। 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
73

  माननीय सभापित महोदय, ये िकसान क े नाम पर नाटक करते हȅ िक कहां खड़ा होना है, 
क ैमरे लगाओ, लोग देख लȂ िक हम िकसान हȅ। जब इनको हल भȂट िकया जाता है, तो ये पूछते हȅ 
िक यह क्या है। यहां से एक Îवगीर्य Ģधानमंतर्ी जी हुए हȅ, िजन्हȗने जब देखा िक लाल िम चर् क े दाम 
हरी िमचर् से ज्यादा है, तो उन्हȗने कहा िक िकसानȗ, आप यह लाल िमचर् क्यȗ नहीं उगाते। 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, ये खेती की बात करȂगे, ये िकसान ी की बात करȂगे!  जहां चचार् 
करनी हो, कर लȂ। मȅ िकसान का बेटा भी हूँ और खुद भी िकसान हूँ,  खे ती करता हूँ। मȅ कह रहा 
था िक िकसानȗ क े बारे मȂ भाजपा ने सोचा, हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने सोचा। माननीय 
सभापित महोदय, आप खुद िकसान हȅ, हम समझते हȅ। टोडरमल जी क े जमाने से िक
सानȗ क े 
सारे अिभलेख Ëयिƪ संधािरत करता था - पटवारी, रेवेन्यू का अमला। अंगर्ेज आए, उन्हȗने वह 
Ģथा जारी रखी, कांगर्ेस मȂ वह Ģथा जारी रही। मȅ सबको  *  नहीं कहता। सब पटवारी खराब नहीं 
हȅ, लेिकन अगर िकसी क े मन मȂ आ जाए िक िरकॉडर् मȂ* करनी है, तो कई बार हमने देखा िक 
धन्ना क े नाम की जमीन पन्ना क े नाम चली गई। बेचारा राम लाल खेती कर रहा था, बरसȗ बाद 
पता चला िक यह जमीन तो Ìयाम लाल की हो गई!  एक नहीं, अनेकȗ घोटाले होते थे, िंजदगी भर 
कोटर् मȂ मामले चलते थे। अब ये चीज़Ȃ कांगर्ेस को समझ मȂ नहीं आ सकतीं। माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, अगर िकसान की फसल खरा
ब   हो जाए और  राहत की  रािश क े िलए सवȃ करना हो तो 
वह कौन करता था? वह नजरी आकलन रेवेन्यू का आदमी करत ा था और कई बार उसके  मन मȂ 
* आ जाती थी। महोदय, मȅ मुख्य मंतर्ी रहते हुए नरिंसहपुर िजले मȂ गया और हमने राहत की 
पयार्Ãत रािश दी। वहां क े िकसानȗ ने मुझसे यह िशकायत की िक मुख्य मंतर्ी जी, िजसने गन्ना बोया 
था, उसको ओले पड़ने क े बाद गेहूँ की फसल खराब होने का मुआवजा दे िदया ग या। अगर 
पटवारी क े मन मȂ आ गया तो उसने इधर का उधर िलख िदया।   
माननीय सभापित महोदय, हर एक राज्य मȂ कई सारी िशकायतȂ आती हȅ। इस ËयवÎथा को 
ठीक करने की जरूरत थी। मȅ भारत क े िकसानȗ की ओर से अपने िवज़नरी Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜीमान 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को ǭदय से धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा िक उन्हȗने "िडिजटल क ृिष िमशन" शुरू  करने 
का संकÊप िलया। माननीय सभापित जी, मुझे यह कहते हुए गवर् है िक िक सानȗ को "आधार" की 
तरह िडिजटल पहचान देने क े िलए एक िकसान आईडी बनाई जा रही है, िजसको िकसान की 
पहचान क े रूप  मȂ जाना जाएगा। इस िकसान आईडी को राज्य की भूिम क े िरकॉडर् क े साथ जोड़ा 
जाएगा।  माननीय सभाप
ित जी, अब अगर िकसान कोई भी फसल बोएगा, तो उसके  िरकॉडर् मȂ 
हेराफे री नहीं हो सकती, क्यȗिक वह िडिजटल है और कोई आदमी गड़बड़ नहीं कर सकता। अगर 
फसल बोई गई है तो बोने क े बाद जैसी फसल आती है, मोबाइल से वीिडयोगर्ाफी कर के  उसको 
सुरिक्षत कर िदया जाएगा, तािक कौन-सी फसल बोई गई है, उसमȂ कोई गड़बड़ न कर सके । 
िकसानȗ क े नुकसान क े आकलन क े िलए अब हम यह ËयवÎथा बना रहे हȅ िक उसका आकलन 
कोई आदमी नहीं करेगा, बिÊक वह  सीधे  िरमोट  सȂिंसग क े  माध्यम  से  होगा। उसका  जैसा 
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
  
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

नुकसान होगा, वह उसमȂ 100 फीसदी वैसा ही आ जाएगा और जो पातर् िकसान है, उसको पूरी 
राहत दी जाएगी। हम इस िडिजटल क ृिष िमशन का Ģारंभ कर रहे हȅ।  
माननीय सभापित महोदय, अगर खेती क े लाभ को बढ़ाना है, तो हॉिलिÎटक दृिÍटकोण 
अपनाना पड़ेगा। हमारे Ģध
ान मंतर्ी जी ने मुझे िनदȃश िदया िक बैठकर सोचो िक खेती और खेती से 
संबंिधत सारे िवभाग एक िदशा मȂ क ै से सोचȂ। सभापित जी, िवभाग अलग-अलग हो सकते हȅ और 
हम जानते हȅ िक क ेिमकल एंड फिर्टलाइजर िवभ
ाग अलग है, लेिकन उसका खेती से संबंध है। 
जल शिƪ िवभाग अलग है, लेिकन उसका खेती से संबंध है।  इसिलए सरकार यह Ģयास कर रही 
है िक अलग-अलग िवभाग, चाहे वह Animal Husbandry हो, Fisheries हो या हॉिर्टकÊचर हो, वे 
िमलकर Ãलािंनग करȂ, एक िदशा मȂ चलȂ, ता
िक हम खेती मȂ लाभ को और ज्यादा बढ़ाने का काम 
कर सकȂ । यह सरकार एकीकृ त दृिÍटकोण अपनाएगी। महोदय, मोदी है, तो मुमिकन है। हम क ृिष 
का िविवधीक
रण कर रहे हȅ। महोदय, हम क ेवल अनाज की खेती ही नहीं कर रहे हȅ, बिÊक फलȗ 
की खेती, फ ूलȗ की खेती, सिÅजयȗ की खेती, औषिध की खेती, agro-forestry और उसके  साथ-
साथ पशुपालन, मधुमक्खी पालन, अनेकȗ Ģकार क े काम को जोड़कर छो टे और सीमांत िकसानȗ 
को ज्यादा लाभ क ै से िमल सके , उसकी योजना यह सरकार बना रही है।  
माननीय सभापित महोदय, मुझे कहते हुए यह खुशी है िक आईसीआर ने अलग-अलग 
agro-climatic zone क े आधार पर िविभन्न जलवायु क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 74 एकीकृ त क ृिष Ģणाली िवकिसत 
की हȅ। महोदय, हमारे देश मȂ जो
त क े आकार काफी छोटे हȅ, इसिलए हम यह Ģयत्न कर रहे हȅ िक 
छोटे िकसान, एक हेक्टेयर क े िकसान क ै से लाभ कमा पाएं। वे क ेवल अनाज ही नहीं, बाकी फस ल 
की उगाएं, उसके  साथ सहायक काम भी चलाएं। इसका हम एक मॉडल फामर् बना रहे हȅ, इसके  
माध्यम से हम िकसान को एजुक े ट करȂगे िक वह एक हेक्टेयर मȂ भी फायदे की खेती कर सकता 
है। यह एक मॉडल है। सर, िकसान इसे देखकर सीखेगा।  
महोदय, एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं िक क ेिमकल फिर्टलाइज़र का उपयोग हमारे 
अन्न क े भंडारȗ को भरने क े िलए एक वरदान सािब
त हुआ है, लेिकन आज मȅ आपके  माध्यम से 
कहना चाहता हूं िक क ेिमकल फिर्टला
इज़र का उपयोग अंधाधुंध हो रहा है, िजसके  कारण फसलȗ 
पर उसका क ुĢभाव पड़ रहा है। महोदय, मȅ एक बात तकलीफ क े साथ कहना चाहता हूं िक 
क ेिमकल फिर्टलाइज़र ज़रूरी है, लेिकन एक सीमा से अिधक उपयोग हमारी फसलȗ को खराब 
करता है - कई राज्य ऐसे हȅ, जहां क ȅसर एक्सĢेस जैसी कई टर्ेन चल जाती हȅ - वह हमारी भूिम 
क े ÎवाÎथ्य को भी खराब कर रहा है, उवर्रा शिƪ कम हो रही है, िमतर् कीट मारे जा रहे हȅ। 
महोदय, हम एक जमाने मȂ गांव मȂ बरसात क े समय मȂ देखते थे िक वहां िकत
ने क Ȃ चुए आते थे। वे 
क े चुए सबसे बड़े उवर्रक हȅ, वे धरती मȂ नीचे जाते थे, ऊपर आते थे, उवर्र बनाते थे। वे िमƺी खाते 
थे और जब िमƺी ही बाहर देते थे, तो वह भी खाद का का
म करती थी। अब क े चुए समाÃत हो चुक े 
हȅ। मȅ Ģाकृ ितक खेती क े िवÎत
ार मȂ नहीं जाऊं गा, लेिकन अब समय आ गया है िक हमको उत्पादन 
बनाए रखते हुए, उत्पादन बढ़ाते हुए हमको Ģाकृ ितक खेती क े बारे मȂ सोचना पड़ेगा। मȅ Ģधान 
मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की तड़प जानता हूं। मȅ आप
से थोड़ा सा और समय लूंगा। सभापित महोदय, 
जब मȅ मुख्यमंतर्ी था, तब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने एक िदन मुझे फोन िकया था। वे मध्य Ģदेश क े रीवा 
िजले मȂ आने वाले थे, उन्हȗने मुझे फोन करके  कह
ा िक एक छोटी नािटका बने, िजसमȂ एक बेटी 
धरती बने और अिधक क ेिमकल फ़िर्टलाइज़र क े उपयोग क े कारण वह धरती कहे िक मȅ तुÇहारी 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
75

मां हूं, आिखर तुम िकतना क ेिमकल फिर्टलाइज़र मुझ पर डालोगे। उनकी एक तड़प थी, इसिलए 
मुझे कहते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक हम Ģाकृ ितक खेती को भी Ģारंभ कर रहे हȅ। इस सरकार ने 
Ģाकृ ितक खेती िमशन बनाया है। Ģाकृ ितक खेती का अथर् यह नहीं है िक सारी की सारी ज़म ीन पर 
िकसान Ģाकृ ितक खेती करे। Ģाकृ ितक खेती क े कई सफल Ģयोग हुए हȅ। गुजरात क े राज्यपाल, 
देवĨत जी ने अनेकȗ Ģयोग िकए हȅ। कई राज्यȗ मȂ िकसान Ģाकृ ित क खेती कर रहे हȅ। इसिलए हम 
धीरे-धीरे एक करोड़ िकसानȗ को सȂिसटाइज़ करȂगे, जागृत करȂगे, उनमȂ से 18 लाख , 75 हज़ार  
िकसान, जो टर्Ȃड हȗगे, उनको Ģाकृ ितक खेती मȂ लाएंगे और साढ़े सात लाख हैक्टेयर ज़मीन मȂ 
Ģारंभ करȂगे, पूरी जम
ीन मȂ नहीं करȂगे। मȅ िकसानȗ से आÏवान करना चाहता हूं िक धरती मां क े 
ÎवाÎथ्य को बनाए रखने क े िलए पूरी ज़मीन मȂ Ģाकृ ितक खेती करना आवÌयक नहीं है, बिÊक 
अगर 5 एक
ड़ ज़मीन है, तो एक एकड़ मȂ करȂगे, आधी एकड़ मȂ करके  देखȂ। वैज्ञािनक यह िसǉ 
कर रहे हȅ िक Ģाकृ ितक खेती से पैदा हुए उत्पाद बहुत पोषक होते हȅ, पोषण भी देते हȅ और धरती 
क े ÎवाÎथ्य को भी ठीक करते हȅ और उत्पादन भी नहीं घटता है - वैÊयु ऐिडशन होती है - इसिलए 
माननीय सभापित महोदय, Ģाकृ ितक खेती की तर
फ हम ध्यान दȂगे। 
सभापित महोदय, हमȂ क ृिष मȂ िनयार्त को बढ़ाना है। अभी भारत का िनयार्त लगभग 2 
Ģितशत है। यह लगातार दस साल मȂ बढ़ा है और मुझे कहते हुए गवर् है िक मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 
यह लगातार बढ़ा है। दस साल मȂ चावल का िनयार्त 17,749 करोड़ रुपय े से बढ़कर 51,096 करोड़ 
रुपय े हो गया है। मसालȗ का िनयार्त 15,14 6 करोड़ रुपय े था, वह बढ़कर 30,418 करोड़ रुपय े हो 
गया है, मूंगफली का िनयार्त 3,187 करोड़ रुपय े से बढ़कर 6,735 करोड़  रुपय े हो गया है। चीनी 
का िनयार्त 7,178 करोड़ रुपय े से बढ़कर 46,310 करोड़ रुपय े हो गया है।  इसिलए िनयार्त की 
अपार संभावनाएं हȅ। यह सरकार उनको दोहन करेगी और हमारे िकसानȗ को ज् यादा लाभ िमले, 
इसमȂ कोई कसर नहीं छोड़ेगी। महोदय, क ृिष िवज्ञान क ेन्दर्, िकसान और िवज्ञान को जोड़ने क े 
िलए बना है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा, सारे माननीय सांसदȗ से  चाहे लोक सभा 
क े हȗ या राज्य सभा क े हȗ, वे एक बार क ृिष िवज्ञ
ान क ेन्दर् जरूर  जाएं। वहां क े काम मȂ भागीदारी 
करȂ, िहÎसेदारी करȂ। आिखर साइंिटÎट्स लैब मȂ जो िरसचर् करते हȅ, उस लैब क े िरसचर् को लȅड 
तक िकसान क े बीच मȂ ले जाना पडे़गा और उसी की भाषा मȂ ले जाना पड़ेगा, इसिलए क ृिष िवज्ञान 
क ेन्दर् अत्यंत महत्वपूणर् है। महोदय, मȅ बहुत संक्षेप मȂ इस सरकार क े िवजन को रखना चाहत ा हूं। 
िसफर् हंगामा खड़ा करना मेरा मकसद नहीं, मेरी तो हसरत है िक यह सूरत बदलनी चािहए। मोदी 
जी इस िवजन से काम करते हȅ, इसिलए उस िवजन को Ģकट करना जरूरी है, क्यȗिक सामने 
वालȗ को िवजन से कोई मतलब नहीं है और वे यहां हȅ भी नहीं।  वे खेती मȂ कभी नहीं हȗगे। सर, 
अलगे पांच साल मȂ हमारा लÑय जलव
ायु अनुक ू ल क्लाइमȂट चȂज क े इस दौर मȂ हमȂ जलवायु 
अनुक ू ल bio-fortified की नई फसलȗ की िक
ÎमȂ तैयार करनी पड़Ȃगी, हम 1,500 नई िकÎमȂ तैयार 
करने जा रहे हȅ। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क ु छ िदनȗ मȂ 109 नई िकÎमȗ को िकसानȗ को समिर्पत 
करने वाले हȅ, तािक बढ़ते हुए तापमान क े बाद भी क ृिष मȂ उत्पादन लगातार बढ़ता रहे। महोदय, 
Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की   ‘One Health’ approach है। एक ही चेतना सब मȂ है। वह Ģािणयȗ 
मȂ है, मनुÍय मȂ भी है, जीव-जन्तुओं मȂ, पशु-पिक्षयȗ मȂ भी है।...(Ëयवधान).. . मुझे थोड़ा-सा समय 
और दे दीिजए।  
 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, बहुत लंबा जवाब हो गया है और आपने सभी Ãवाइंट्स कवर कर 
िलए हȅ।   
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: सर, थोड़े से और बचे हȅ, जो िकसानȗ क े िलए बहुत उपयोगी हȅ।  मȅ 
जÊदी ही अपनी बात खत्म करता हूं। जल, जमीन, जलवायु, जंगल,जानवर, जीवन, जनता, 
सबको एक सूतर् मȂ बांधना पड़ेगा। अगर पौधे और पशु ÎवÎथ हȅ, तो मनुÍय भी ÎवÎथ होगा। इस 
भाव को अग
र जाना, तो नरेन्दर् मोदी और भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार ने जाना है। हम सबके  
िहत परÎपर जुड़े हȅ। इस
िलए भारत क े Ģािणयȗ मȂ सǌावना हो और िवÌव का कÊयाण हो, इस 
एĢोच को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए हम हमारी  15 Advanced Disease Diagnostic Kits िवकिसत कर 
रहे हȅ। पांच साल मȂ हम 18 हजार करोड़ रुपय े की लागत से 100 export-ori ented बागबानी 
cluster बनाएंगे। आधुिनक post-harvest infrastructure क े िवकास क े िलए 1 लाख 40 हजार 
करोड़ रुपय े का अभूतपूवर् िनवेश हम कर रहे हȅ। िकसानȗ की पहुंच मंडी तक  बेहतर बनाने क े िलए 
1,500 अितिरƪ मंिडयȗ का एकीकरण िकया जाएगा। मȅ बहुत जÊदी अपनी बात समाÃत कर रहा 
हूं। हम 6,800 करोड़ रुपय े की पयार्Ãत िनवेश क े माध्य
म से ितलहन िमशन की शुरुआत  कर रहे हȅ, 
तािक ितलहन मȂ आत्मिनभर्रता ĢाÃत कर सकȂ । सभापित महोदय, कीटनाशक अिधिनयम मȂ भी 
हम महत्वपूणर् संशोधन करने जा रहे हȅ, तािक उच्च गुणवǄा का कीटनाशक िकसान को िमल 
सके । हम 50 हजार गांवȗ को जलवायु अनुक ू ल गांवȗ क े रूप  मȂ  िवकिसत करने जा रहे हȅ और 
सूÑम िसचांई क े तहत 1. 21 लाख हेक्टेयर को कवर करने की Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी 
योजना है। महोदय, मȅ बहुत िवÎतार मȂ नहीं जाऊं गा, क्यȗिक मȅ जानता हूं िक समय की सीमा 
होती है। लेिकन मȅ क्या करूं , मेरी तो हर सांस िक सानȗ क े िलए चलती है, खेती क े िलए चलती है। 
िदन और रात खेती क े बारे मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हम सोचते हȅ, इसिलए िवÎतार 
से चचार् का कभी अवसर िमलेगा, तो मȅ िफर करूं गा। मȅ क ेवल एक िनवेदन आपके  माध्यम से और 
करना चाहता हूं। मȅ सभी राजनैितक दलȗ से यह िन
वेदन करना चाहता हूं िक िकसान को वोट बȅक 
न समझȂ, िकसान को इन्सान मानकर Ëयवहार करȂ। इसमȂ राज् य सरकारȗ का सहयोग जरूरी है, 
क्यȗिक िबना राज्य सरकारȗ क े सहयोग क े क ेन्दर् काम नहीं कर सकता और जो हमारा सहकारी 
संघवाद है, उस भावना का आदर करते हुए, मȅने अलग-अलग राज्यȗ क े क ृिष मंितर्यȗ को बुलाया, 
चाहे वे िकस
ी भी पाटीर् क े हȗ, हमने पाटीर् क े आधार पर भेद नहीं िकया और वहां की क ृिष की 
समÎयाओं पर चचार् करके , उनके  समाधान का Ģयास िकया है। हम राज्यȗ क े साथ िमलकर काम 
करȂगे। 
 माननीय सभ ापित महोदय, Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜीमाâ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का िवज़न है िक आने वाले 
2047 तक भारत न क ेवल अपनी जनता क े िलए पोषण युƪ, पयार्Ãत अन्न, फल और सिÅजयां पैदा 
करेगा, बिÊक दुिनया का फ ू ड बॉÎके ट भी भारत बनकर उभरेगा। क ृिष मȂ समÎयाएं हȅ, लेिकन 
उनका समाधान भी है। 
 माननीय स
भापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना चाहता हूं िक हम िकसानȗ से 
जाकर बात करȂगे, िकसान संगठनȗ से भी बात करȂगे, हम संवाद से समाधान की तरफ बढ़Ȃगे और 
सबको साथ लेकर आगे चलȂगे।  
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
77

"कौन कहता है िक आसमान मȂ सुराख नहीं होता, 
एक पत्थर तो तिबयत से उछालो यारो।" 
 
हम पिरǛम की पराकाÍठा और Ģयत्नȗ की पिरसीमा करके , इस देश की क ृिष और िकसान 
क े कÊयाण मȂ कोई कसर नहीं छोड़Ȃगे। बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, िक
सान क े िदल मȂ घुस जाइए और जो भी समाधान बाकी है 
अिवलÇब उसका िनराकरण हो। यह देश क े िहत मȂ है, देश क े िवकास मȂ बहुत सहायक होगा। मȅ 
यह मानकर चलता हूं िक आप अपने मंतर्ालय मȂ पहली बार शुरुआत  कर रहे हȅ, इससे बड़ी 
Ģाथिमकता देश क े िलए और कोई हो नहीं सकती। 
माननीय सदÎयगण, माननीय िदिग्
वजय िंसह जी ने मुझे एक पतर् भेजा है। Ãलीज़,  
...(Ëयवधान)... Hon. Members, I have received these communications from Digvijaya 
Singh ji, Sanjay Singh ji, Randeep Singh Surjew ala ji, and, again, Digvijaya Singh ji.  I 
will give my ruling on these.  I will give my ruling.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Prades
h): Sir, the fact remains... 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): सर, आपने कहा था िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing is going on record, Digvijaya Singh ji.  ...(Interruptions)....   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Digvijaya Singh ji, . ..(Interruptions)... There are two things.  
...(Interruptions)...   Digvijaya Singh ji, please listen to me.  . ..(Interruptions)... 
Please listen to me.  ...(Interruptions)... Okay.  Papers to be laid on the Table. 
 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE  - (Contd.) 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Power 
 
                                                           
* Not recorded. 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTR Y OF POWER (SHRI SHRIPAD 
YESSO NAIK): Sir, I lay on the Table:-  
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

(A). A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Power, issued under clause (a) of Sect ion 14 of the Energy Conservation Act, 
2001:- 
(1) S.O. 2784(E)., dated the 16 th July, 2024, amending the Principal Notification 
No. S.O. 1897(E), dated the 26th May, 2016. 
(2) S.O. 2785(E)., dated the 16 th July, 2024, amending the Principal Notification 
No. S.O. 1221(E), dated the 14th March, 2023. 
(3) S.O. 2794(E)., dated the 18 th July, 2024, amending the Principal Notification 
No. S.O. 2528(E), dated the 8th August, 2017. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (3) See No. L. T. 553/18/24] 
 
(B). A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Power, under Section 179 of the Electricity Act, 2003:- 
(1) JERC-JKL/Reg/2023/16., dated the 11 th December, 2023, publishing the 
"Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu and Kashmir 
and the UT of Ladakh (Demand Side Management) Regulations, 2023 ", along 
with delay statement. 
(2) JERC-JKL/Reg/2023/17., dated the 11th December, 2023, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Transmission Performance Standards) Regulations, 2023, along 
with delay statement. 
(3) JERC-JKL/Reg/2023/18., dated the 11th December, 2023, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Distribution Code) Regulations, 2023, along with delay statement. 
(4) JERC-JKL/Reg/2023/19., dated the 12 th December, 2023, publishing the 
"Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and 
the UT of Ladakh (State Gr id Code) Regulations, 2023 ", along with delay 
statement. 
(5) JERC:-01/2009., dated the 3 rd January, 2024, publishing the Joint Electricity 
Regulatory Commission for the State of Go a and Union Territories (Conduct of 
Business)(6th Amendment) Regulations, 2023. 
(6) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/01., dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
79

of Ladakh (Micro-Grid Renewable Energy Generation and Supply) 
Regulations, 2024. 
(7) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/02., dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Green Energy Open Access), Regulations, 2024. 
(8) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/03, dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Treatment of Income fr om Other Business of Transmission 
Licensees and Distribution Licensees) Regulations, 2024. 
(9) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/4., dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Grant of Connectivity and Open Access in Intra-State Transmission 
& Distribution and related matters) Regulations, 2024. 
(10) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/05., dated the 28th February, 2024,  publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Renewable Purchase Oblig ation & its Compliance) Regulations, 
2024. 
(11) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/6., dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Licensee’s Power to Reco ver Expenditure incurred in providing 
supply and other miscellaneous charges) Regulations, 2024. 
(12) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/7., dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Smart Grid) Regulations, 2024. 
(13) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/08., dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Deviation Settlement Mechanism and other Related Matters) 
Regulations, 2024. 
(14) JERC-JKL/Reg/2024/9, dated the 28 th February, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT 
of Ladakh (Terms and Conditions for Ta riff Determination for grid-interactive 
Renewable Energy Sources) Regulations, 2024. 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
RULINGS BY THE CHAIR 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदƥी): सर, आपने खुद कहा था िक ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला: ...(Ëयवधान)...: सर, आपने कहा िक िलख कर दो, हमने िलख कर 
दे िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप कर क्या रहे हो? आप मेरी बात सुिनए। आप कर क्या रहे हो? चिलए, मȅ अभी  
dispose of कर देता हूं। आप मेरी बात सुिनए।  िदिग्वजय िंसह जी, आप अपने Îथान पर बैिठए।  
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिह
ल (गुजरात): सर, इनका नाम िलया है, इसिलए ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
(15) JERC-14/2010., dated the 6 th June, 2024, publishing the Joint Electricity 
Regulatory Commission for the State of Goa & Union Territories (Procurement 
of Renewable Energy) (Fifth Amendment), Regulations 2024. 
(16) 19/20/2015-JERC/1680-, dated the 12 th June, 2024, publishing the Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission for th e State of Goa and Union Territories 
(Standard of Performance for Distribu tion Licensees) (First Amendment) 
Regulations, 2024. 
(17) L-1/268/2022/CERC., dated the 1 st July, 2024, publishing the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and Conditions of Tariff) 
Regulations, 2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (17) See No. L. T. 384/18/24] 
 
C. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Power Notification No. L-
1/261/2021/CERC., dated the 12 th July, 2024, notifying the commencement of the 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Connectivity and General Network Access 
to the inter-State Transmission System) (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2024 
with effect from 15.07.2024. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 385/18/24] 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
81

MR. CHAIRMAN: Would you take your seat?  ...(Interruptions).. .  Would you take 
your seat?  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सर, नाम िलया है। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप क्या कर रहे हȅ?   ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सर, इतना इÇपॉटȄट है   ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, ...(Ëयवधान)...  Sanjay, I am dealing with your 
communication. 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह:  सर, आपने खुद कहा था िक  ...(Ëयव
धान )...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: मȅ जबाव दे रहा हूं।  आप एक बार रुिकए। मȅ बता रहा हूं।  आप मेरी बात को ध्यान से 
सुिनए। उसके  बाद आप लोगȗ को क ु छ कहना है, तो किहएगा। आप सुिनए। मुझे माननीय 
िदिग्वजय िंसह जी का  एक पतर् िमला है। पह
ले Îथान गर्हण कीिजए Ãलीज I  I expect Members 
to show decorum.  Please.  इन्हȗने मुझे यह पतर् िदया है रूल  238 (2) क े तहत। क्यȗिक सदन 
का संचालन िनयमानुसार होता है और इन्हȗने गुजािरश की है िक, ‘I want to avail right to 
reply.’ आपका यही है? इन्हȗने इसमȂ दो आधार बनाए हȅ। इन का पहला आधार है िक माननीय 
क ृिष मंतर्ी जी ने उस समय की चचार् की, जब सÇमाननीय िदिग्वजय िंसह जी उस Ģांत क े मुख्य 
मंतर्ी हȅ, िजसके  िशवराज िंसह चौहान जी भी रह चुक े हȅ। इन्हȗने दूसरा आधार यह कहा है िक, 
‘loan waiver scheme for farmers’ in  मध्य Ģदेश। उन्हȗने इस
के  बारे मȂ िटÃपणी की। माननीय 
िदिग्वजय िंसह जी, आपके  इस पूरे पतर् को ध्यान से देखने क े पÌचात और िनयमȗ क े दायरे मȂ 
रहते हुए मȅ यहाँ पर यह रूिंलग  देता हूं िक  under Rule 238 (ii), there is no right of reply. 
...(Interruptions)...  Will you please sit down?  No, sorry. आप एक बार बैठ जाइए।  I
 
rule, there is no right to reply under Rule 238 (ii).  If a member feels aggrieved, he has 
to take recourse to the rule in a differ ent format, I am putting it on record, not 
according to this. Number two, I have received another communication today in 
relation to the address being imparted by the hon. Minister of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare. This communication is, again, from Shri Digvijaya Singh, Shri Sanjay Singh 
and Shri Randeep Surjewala.  Their assertion in this communication is that 'hon. 
Agriculture Minister has named the undersign ed and cast aspersions indicating facts 
in the course of Discussion on the Depart ment of Agriculture; please grant us an 
opportunity under Rule 238'. So, three di stinguished hon. Members, who are very 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

senior Members of the House, want to in voke Rule 238 to seek an opportunity to 
reflect in the matter.  Hon. Members, I ha ve given careful, thoughtful consideration. 
Hon. Members do have a right if another Me mber or a Minister casts aspersions or 
makes a statement that may not be factually correct in the assessment of the hon. 
Members. There is a mechanism and th e hon. Members need to avail that 
mechanism. As and when the hon. Members will avail that mechanism, I will consider 
it and take all actions in accordance with law. I am extremely serious and conscious 
that any statement made in th e House by a Minister or a Member has to be factually 
sanctified. And if anyone is aggrieved, pl ease take recourse to rules. These two 
communications seek to avail Rule 238 for this purpose.  I am  afraid, they have 
invoked the wrong rule. Thank you. Shri Dere k O'Brien, to raise a Discussion on the 
Working of the Ministry ...(Interrupt ions)... Nothing will go in record. 
...(Interruptions)... Take recourse to ru les.  ...(Interruptions)... Please take 
recourse to rules.  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: 
*     
 
Ǜी सभापित : संजय जी, एक बार बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...   Nothing is going on record.  एक 
बार बैिठए। You are a Member in this House for the second term.  I would strongly 
suggest and urge you to please go through the rules and procedure.  When a Minister 
makes a reply, he is making a reply. If you are not satisfied with the reply, there can't 
be question-answer wrestling here. नहीं हो सकता।  ...(Ëयवधान)...    Take recourse to 
rules.  Now, Shri Derek O'Brien.  It is a very important Ministry, Derek. And we have a 
distinguished Member to initiate the Discu ssion on the Working of the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy.  
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF 
NEW AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal):  Sir, we will be a constructive Opposition, and 
initiate this Discussion on New and Re newable Energy. All the Ministries are 
important.  But on this one in particular , what we do today, say today and act on 
today will have an effect on our children's children.  We will offer some constructive 
                                                           
* Not recorded. 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
83

suggestions. But before I come to the details of the Ministry, I have to place on record 
the '4-56 effect.'    
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
'4-56 इफे क्ट' क्या होता है? It was 4th of June and '56.'  It was on the 4th of June 
and that is why we are discus sing this Ministry. On the 4 th of June, '56' got cut down 
to size. That is why, in spite of 15 opposition parties requesting this Government to 
discuss the Home Ministry, this Government is nervous to discuss the Home Ministry. 
Despite all of us here in the Opposition wanting to discuss the Defence Ministry -- we 
read that picnics are happening on the bord er and they are coming over from China -
- this Government does not want to di scuss the Home Ministry or the Defence 
Ministry.   We discussed all this in the Business Advisory Committee, but it was not 
brought here. But in the spirit of our constr uctive opposition, we will still initiate this 
discussion and we will still give you some suggestions. 
 Sir, I have three specific points. The firs t one is to the Minister. I am suggesting 
a mantra for your Ministry. 'Think nationally, act locally.' Consult with four 
stakeholders. These are: Local government s, State Governments, communities and 
the private sector. Consult with them in the spirit of cooperation. Unfortunately, this 
spirit of consultation is antithetical to yo ur thinking -- not yours, Sir, but theirs -- 
because they know everything about every subject.  My second suggestion is this.  At 
least after the '4-56 effect,' stop these grand announcements:  'International Solar 
Alliance,' 'One Sun, one World,' etc. Th ese are all big announcements.  But zero 
action!  Let me give you only one exam ple.  There is PM-KUSUM.  It is a 
decentralised programme for small farmers.  Through you, Sir, I ask the Minister this 
question.  This programme for 10,000 mw wa s announced in 2019 by this Ministry.  
What have they achieved of the target?  Ten percent?  No.  Five percent?  No.  The 
target they have achieved is below thr ee per cent. Same is the problem with the 
Green Hydrogen Mission.  Big announcements. Our suggestion to you is this.  
Reduce dependency on these countries:  Chin a, Thailand and Vietnam.  Discuss and 
come up with policy decisions.  You are not running the Gujarat Gymkhana. You are 
running the nation -- India.   
 Sir, these are our constructive suggestio ns. We want this Government to come 
back sometime here to discuss Home and Defence. If not in this Session, come in the 
next Session. If you don't want to discus s them, no problem, we will discuss Home 
and we will discuss Defence when we will be  sitting there next year and you will be 
sitting here next year.  Thank you, Sir.                       
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

        
डा. लÑमीकान्त बाजपेयी (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपका इस बात क े िलए आभारी हूँ 
िक एक ऐसे महत्वपूणर् िवभाग और िवषय पर, जो संसार की मानवता क े भिवÍय की दृिÍट से 
महत्वपूणर् िवषय है, मुझे बोलने का अवसर Ģदान िकया है।  
 मȅ अपने आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का इस बात क े िलए आभार Ëयƪ 
करना चाहता हूँ िक उनकी Ëयिƪगत िंचता इस मानव जाित क े भिवÍय को सुरिक्षत रखने क े Ģित 
है। तीसरी बार वे इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बने हȅ, इस के  िलए भी मȅ उनको बधाई देना चाहता हूँ। 
िबजली भी िमले और काबर्न का उत्सजर्न भी जीरो हो, इस Ģाथिमकता को ध्यान मȂ रखकर इस 
िवभाग की योजनाएं काम कर रही हȅ। 
वषर् 2018 मȂ अंतरर
ाÍटर्ीय सौर गठबंधन की पहली सभा क े उǇाटन क े अवसर पर भारत 
एक लीडर क े रूप  मȂ, Ģणेता क े रूप  मȂ उभरा था और उस समय एक Îलोगन िदया गया था - एक 
िवÌव, एक सूयर् और एक िगर्ड का नारा िदया था।  उस समय 100 करोड़ रुपय े क े बजटीय 
Ģावधान क े बाद इस काम को Ģारंभ िकया था।  सौर ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ हम 26 गु ना तक सौर ऊजार् 
की वृिǉ पर पहुंच रहे हȅ, यह बात भी इसमȂ शािम
ल हो रही है।  इस सरकार ने इस बात का लÑय 
रखा है िक 2070 तक नेट ज़ीरो काबर्न उत्सजर्न होगा, 8 लाख करोड़ रुपय े का िनवेश भी आएग
ा 
और 6 लाख लोगȗ को रोजगार भी िमलेगा।  हाइडर्ोजन, सौर ऊजार् और तटीय पवन ऊजार् क े 
माध्यम से नेट ज़ीरो उत्सजर्न पर सरकार ले जाना चाहती है।  कोयला, तेल और गैस क े आधार 
पर ऊजार् क े उत्पादन को सरकार कम करना चाहती है।   
मान्यवर, यह सरकार 2030 तक  50 लाख टन वािर्षक हिरत हाइडर्ोजन की क्षमता को 
हािसल करने का लÑय लेकर काम कर रही है और 125 गीगावॉट ऊजार्  हाइडर्ोजन ऊजार् क े 
माध्यम से पैदा करना चाहत
ी है।  इसके  साथ ही 60 से 100 गीगावॉट electrolyzer यानी पानी को 
मशीन मȂ ले जाकर तोड़कर हाइडर्ोजन को अलग करके  वह 60-100 गीगावॉट  िबजली का 
उत्पादन करना चाहती है।  इसमȂ 1 लाख करोड़ की बचत होगी और 50 लाख टन वािर्षक काबर्न 
उत्सजर्न मȂ भी कमी आएगी।  मȅ यह बा
त बड़े गवर् क े साथ कहना चहता हूं िक नवीकरणीय ऊजार् 
क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत आज िवÌव मȂ यूरोप, अमेिरका, ऑÎटर्ेिलया और कोिरया की समकक्ष Ǜेणी मȂ है।  
भारत मȂ 4 लाख, 12 हज़ार  टन का टȂडर भी अव
ॉडर् कर िदया गया है और मशीनȂ भी आ गई हȅ।  
वतर्मान की भारत सरकार 2027 तक 40 हज़ार  करोड़ से 10 हज़ार  टन अमोिनया बनाकर इस 
िदशा मȂ महत्वपूणर् कदम Îथािपत करना चाहती है, भारत की जनता को बचाना चाह ती है और 
िवÌव की जनता को मानवता का यह संदेश देना चाहती है िक इस नेट ज़ीरो काबर्न उत्सजर्न 
करके  पयार्वरण की रक्षा करके  मानवता को बचाने का काम भारत सरकार पहल करके  करना 
चाहती है।   
अभी माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने घोषणा की है िक मकानȗ पर रूफटॉप  सौर ऊजार् -
 300 
यूिनट िबजली का िबल िजन घरȗ मȂ आता है, सरकार ने उन घरȗ को रूफटॉप  सौर ऊजार् का 
साधन देने क े िलए कहा है। 15 हज़ार  से लेकर 18 हज़ार  रुपय े तक Ģत् येक पिरवार की वािर्षक 
बचत होगी और रूफटॉप  ऊजार् से वह अपने घर की तो िबजली चलाएगा ही और इसके  साथ 
आवÌयक िबजली से अिधक िबजली जो उत्पािदत होगी, वह िगर्ड मȂ जाएगी और उसका पैसा भी 
उसको िमलेगा। यानी आजकल िन:शुÊक देने का जो फ ैशन चला हुआ है, तो हम िन:शुÊक भी 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
85

दȂगे, लेिकन उसके  ǎारा Îवयं सौर ऊजार् मȂ िकए गए इन्वेÎटमȂट क े आधार पर उत्पािदत िबजली 
भी दȂगे।   
मȅ इस बारे मȂ एक और िवषय कहना चाहता हूं। 2030 तक 5 MMT हाइडर्ोजन क्षमता, 50 
लाख टन वािर्षक हिरत हाइडर्ोजन उत्पादन करने का लÑय लेकर सरकार काम कर रही है।  1 25 
गीगावॉट की संबǉ नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क्षमता ĢाÃत होगी। मान्यवर, green hydrogen और उसके  
derivatives क े उत्पादन क े िनयार्त से एक वैिÌवक क Ȃ दर् बनाने की दृिÍट से हिरत हाइडर्ोजन िमशन 
को शुरू  िकया गया है। गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ िकसानȗ क े िलए भारत सरकार ने आ दरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
क े नेतृत्व मȂ पीएम-क ु सुम योजना लागू की है। पीएम-क ु सुम योजना, जो माचर् 2019 मȂ शुरू  की गई 
थी, उसके  माध्यम से सौर ऊजार् क े पÇप stand-alone, यानी अपनी सौर ऊजार् से अप ने ही पÇप 
को चलाना, stand-alone pump की योजना सरकार ने Ģारंभ की थी।  क ृिष पÇपȗ का सौरीकरण 
और उसके  िलए िवǄीय सहायता Ģदान करना। एक और महत्वपूणर् बात सरकार ने की है, गांव मȂ 
जो बंजर, पर ती  भूिम है और क ृिष भूिम से अितिरƪ खेतȗ की जो भूिम है, उस पर सौर ऊजार् क े 
संयतर् लगाकर िकसान को सौर उǏमी बनाने का भी सरकार ने जो लÑय रखा है, उससे दो फायदे 
हȅ। इससे सौर ऊजार् पैदा होगी, यह िडÎकॉम क े िलए फायदेमंद होगी और गाँव क े अंितम छोर पर 
िडÎकॉम को िबजली िमलेगी, तो िडÎकॉम का पारेषण और िवतरण का घाटा भी कम होगा।   
 मान्यवर, इस योजना क े तीन घटक हȅ - 10 हजार मेगावॉट क े िवकȂदर्ीकृ त गर्ाउंड माउंटेड 
िगर्ड से जुड़े सौर ऊजार् संयंतर्, 20 लाख Îटȅड-अलोन सौर ऊजार् संचािलत क ृिष पंपȗ की Îथापना 
और 15 लाख िगर्ड से जुड़े हुए क ृिष पंपȗ का सौर ऊजार्करण करना। इसके  कायार्न्वयन एजȂिसयȗ 
को पातर् सीएफए पर दो Ģितशत का सेवा शुÊक सिहत क ु ल 34,422 करोड़ रुपए  को क ेन्दर्ीय िवǄ 
मȂ शािमल करने और उसके  कायार्न्वयन की समय सीमा को 31.3.2026 तक बढ़ाने का काम 
सरकार क े ǎारा िकया गया है। इससे िडÎकॉम िकसानȗ क े Ƿूबव ेल पर जो क ृिष सिÅसडी देता है, 
वह सिÅसडी देना कम होगा, यानी आिर्थक नुकसान या आिर्थक सिÅसडी देने क े कारण जो 
िडÎकॉम को घाटा होता था, इससे वह कम होगा और िदन क े समय िकसान को खेत पर मुÄत 
िबजली उपलÅध होगी। पहले यह हुआ करता था िक िकसान को अपने खेत को पानी देने क े िलए 
रात मȂ उठ कर घर से जाना पड़ता था। सौर ऊजार् क े कारण िकसान को खेत पर िबजली िदन मȂ 
िमलेगी और िदन मȂ िकसान खेत पर काम करेगा। इसके  िलए 70 Ģितशत िकसान ǎारा Ëयय िकया 
जाएगा और सरकार ने 30 Ģितशत क ेन्दर्ीय सहायता की योजना बनाई है। मई, 2024 तक लगभग 
209 मेगावॉट क्षमता Îथािपत हो गई थी और 12,247 पंपȗ को सौर ऊजार् से संचािलत िकया गया 
था। पीएम क ु सुम योजना क े माध्यम से गर्ामीण क्षेतर् मȂ िकसानȗ को नवीकरणीय ऊजार् का उपयोग 
करने क े िलए Ģेिरत िकया जाएगा। इससे नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े उपयोग क े माध्यम से िकसान काम 
करȂगे।   
 मȅने चचार् की थी िक 13 फरवरी, 2024 को माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने सूयर् घर योजना की 
घोषणा की थी।  इससे Ģत्येक वह Ëयिƪ अपने छत पर सौर ऊजार् का पैनल लगा कर अपने घर की 
भी िबजली लेगा और घर की िबजली क े साथ-साथ िगर्ड को भी िबजली देने का काम करेगा।  
इससे िबजली क े िबल मȂ भी बचत होगी। इसमȂ सोलर पैनल लगाने क े िलए बȅकȗ से 7 Ģितशत 
Åयाज पर collateral security से मुƪ Åयाज पर सामान्य Ëयिƪ को ऋण देने का भी काम िकया 
गया है। सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक सरकारी तंतर् क े झंझटȗ से मुिƪ िदलाने की दृिÍट से 'जनसमथर्' 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

पोटर्ल िवकिसत िकया गया है, जहाँ पर Ëयिƪ अपना रिजÎटर्ेशन भी कराएगा और अपने यहाँ सौर 
ऊजार् का पैनल लगाने क े िलए वȂडर को भी उसी पोटर्ल पर तलाशेगा और िजस वȂडर से चाहेगा, 
उससे वह अपना काम कराएगा। इस पर 430 करोड़ रुपए  की सिÅसडी सीधे लाभाथीर् क े खाते मȂ 
जाएगी।  मान्यवर, जुलाई, 2024 तक 1,30,000 Ëयिƪयȗ ने इसके  िलए पंजीकरण कराया, 15 
लाख से अिधक उपभोƪाओं क े आवेदन ĢाÃत हुए हȅ और 12,30,000 सौर रूफटॉप  Ģणािलयाँ भी 
Îथािपत हुई हȅ।  इससे एक लाख करोड़ यूिनट्स िबजली पैदा होने की संभावना है और 25 वषर् क े 
जीवन काल मȂ काबर्न उत्सजर्न मȂ 720 एमएमटी की कमी आने वाली है। इसके  माध्यम से 17 लाख 
Ģत्यक्ष नौकिरयाँ ĢाÃत हȗगी। सौर ऊजार् पिरयोजनाओं क े िलए सरकार ने 10 हजार करोड़ रुपए  
का िनधार्रण िकया है और पीएम सूयर् घर योजना क े माध्यम से सूयर् क े माध्यम से िबजली को ĢाÃत 
करने का काम िकया जाएगा।   
 मान्यवर, 2030 तक गैर-जीवाÌम (Non-fossil/नवीनीकरण, हिरत और न्यूिक्लयर) 
ǣोतȗ से 500 गीगावॉट िबजली की Îथािपत क्षमता की ओर देश बढ़ रहा है। मान्यवर, यह 
महत्वपूणर् बात मȅ िनवेदन कर रहा हूँ, 2030 तक ऊजार् की 50 Ģितशत आवÌयकता नवीकरणीय 
ऊजार् से पूरी होगी। िवज़न 2047 क े बारे मȂ जैसा िक आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा है, 2047 
तक संसार मȂ भारत को िवकिसत राÍटर् की Ǜेणी मȂ खड़ा करना है, तो नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् 
मȂ भी 2047 तक भारत अपना एक Îथान बनाएगा, उसका िवज़न भी आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
िवकिसत भारत क े साथ िदया है। इसमȂ 1800 गीगावॉट Îथािपत गैर-जीवाÌम क्षमता, गैर-जीवाÌम 
ईंधन िबजली उत्पादन का 77 Ģितशत िहÎसा, 25 एमएमटी गर्ीन हाइडर्ोजन का उत्पादन, 200 
Ãलस गीगावॉट आरई उपकरण िविनमार्ण, 25 गीगावॉट  इलेक्टर्ोलाइजर िविनमार्ण शािमल हȅ।  
इलेक्टर्ोलाइजर ǎारा पानी को तोड़ कर हाइडर्ोजन िनकाला जाएगा और उस हाइडर्ोजन का 
उपयोग िकया जाएगा। मान्यवर, अब तो हाइडर्ोजन से कारȂ भी चलने लगी हȅ। नवीकरणीय ऊजार् 
क े क्षेतर् मȂ 1 करोड़ नौकिरयȗ क े िवषय और 2070 तक नेट ज़ीरो काबर्न उत्सजर्न का लÑय हािसल 
करना है।  इसके  साथ-साथ टैिरफ मȂ भी कमी आने वाली है।   
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
मान्यवर, अब मȅ एक और अिन्तम बात कहना चाहता हूँ।  सौर ऊजार् क े साथ-साथ समुदर्ी तटȗ पर 
अपतटीय पवन ऊजार् की उपलिÅधयाँ भी नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् आयाम है।  
भारत मȂ लगभग 7,600 िकलोमीटर भूिम पर समुदर् तट है, गुजरात और तिमलनाडु मȂ उसको 
िचिन्हत िक
या गया है। गुजरात और तिमलनाडु क े तट पर Ģत्येक क्षेतर् की पहचान हुई है। 7,453 
करोड़ रुपय े क े पिरËयय क े साथ अपतटीय ऊजार् पिरयोजनाओं क े िलए अंतरिवǄपोषण की 
योजना भी Ģा र ंभ की गई है। 1 गीगावॉट  की ऐसी पिरयोजना की Îथापना, किमशिंनग क े िलए 
6,853 करोड़ रुपय े की ËयवÎथा की गई है। अपतटीय पवन ऊजार् से जो िबजली ĢाÃत होगी, 
उसको 4 रुपए  Ģित यूिनट की दर पर सरकार खरीदेगी। मंतर्ालय ने भारतीय ऊजार् सौर िनगम क े 
माध्यम से ऑफ-शोर पवन रणनीित क े अनुरूप  क ैिÃटव मोड, िǎपक्षीय समझौतȗ और ओपन 
एक्सेस मोड क े तहत समुदर् क े िकनारे सी-बेड पर जमीन पƺे पर देने क े िलए िनिवदा भी जारी की 
है।   
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
87

 मान्यवर, नवीकरणीय ऊजार् उत्पादन की क्षमता मȂ भारत एक िवÌव गुरु  क े रूप  मȂ धीरे-
धीरे Îथािपत हो रहा है। जहां सौर ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ 26 Ģितशत की वृिǉ हो चुकी है और हम इसमȂ 
शत-Ģितशत वृिǉ करना चाहते हȅ, वहीं आज भारत पवन ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ भी दोगुनी क्षमत ा को 
ĢाÃत कर चुका है। आज पवन नवीकरणीय ऊजार् की आवÌयकता क्यȗ है?  कोयले से, तेल से और 
गैस से ऊजार् बनाने वाले िजतने Ãलांट्स हȅ, इनसे काबर्न का उत्सजर्न होता है। काबर्न क े उत्सजर्न 
क े कारण, वा
तावरण और पयार्वरण Ģभािवत होता है, पयार्वरण Ģभािवत होने क े कारण, मानवता 
तर्Îत होती है।  इसीिलए इस नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े माध्यम से जहां हम िबजली का अपना काम पूरा 
करȂगे, वहीं हम मानवता की भी रक्ष
ा करने का काम करȂगे, पयार्वरण की भी रक्षा करने का काम 
कर रहे हȅ।   
 मान्यवर, क ु ल िमलाकर मुझे इस बात पर यह कहना है िक मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी को और 
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को धन्यव ाद देना चाहता हूँ।  इस नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ, इस 
Ãलेटफामर् से, राज्यसभा क े माध्यम से, देश की जनता से भी अपील करना चाहता हूं िक अिधकतम 
अपनी छतȗ पर सरकारी सहायता लेकर रूफ -टॉप पर सौर ऊजार् क े पैनल लगाएँ, अपनी भी 
िबजली बनाएं और अ
ितिरƪ िबजली को बेचȂ और उसके  कारण तेल, गैस और कोयल पर 
आधािरत िबजली की खपत को कम करȂ, िजससे िक अगर उसकी खपत काम होगी, उसकी 
आवÌयकता कम होगी, तो धीरे-धीरे वे Ãलांट्स बंद हȗगे और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े ऊपर देश 
काम करेगा।  मुझे इसमȂ इतना ही कह
ना था, धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय बाजपेयी जी। Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन। 
 
Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन (छǄीसगढ़): उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से अपनी पाटीर्, कांगर्ेस की 
तरफ से िडमांड फॉर गर्ांट्स नवीकरणीय ऊजार्, रीन्युएबल क े ऊपर बोलने वाली हूँ। 
 आज हम एक महत्वपूणर् िंबदु पर खड़े हȅ, जहां Îथा
ई और नवीकरणीय ऊजार्  ǣोतȗ की 
आवÌयता कभी भी अिधक दबाव वाली नहीं रही है।जब हम नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊज ार् मंतर्ालय 
क े कामकाज की चचार् करते हȅ, तो मुझे इस साल जनवरी मȂ एनएसीआईएन क े उदघाटन का 
Îमरण हो जाता है, जहाँ हमारे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने Îवामी तुलसीदास ǎारा राम-राज् य मȂ 
कर Ģणाली, टैक्सेशन क े िववरण का उÊलेख िकया था। मȅ समझती हूं िक मेरा भाषण नवीकरणीय 
ऊजार् मंतर्ालय क े कामकाज तक ही सीिमत होगा और मȅ ऐसा करने का आपको वचन देती हूं।  
  उपसभापित महोदय, पहले मȅ अप न े माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा Ģितपािदत टैक्सेशन 
की राम-राज्य  Ģणाली क े दावे की जांच करवाना चाहती हूं। इससे पहले जैव गैस संयंतर्, सौर-
ऊजार् आधािरत उपकरण, सौर-ऊजार् जनरेटर, पवन िमल, पवन-संचािलत िबजली जनरेटर 
उपकरण, सौर लालटेन, सौर लȅप, महासागर तरंग वाली संयंतर्, फोटो-वोिÊटक कोि
शकाओं 
जैसे िजतने भी नवीकरणीय ऊजार् उपकरण थे, उन पर मातर् 5 परसȂट जीएसटी लगती थी। 
हालांिक जीएसटी पिरषद और सरकार माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी क े दावȗ का पालन करने मȂ िवफल 
रही है।  ऐसा क ै से हुआ, यह मुझे सम
झ मȂ नहीं आ रहा है, क्यȗिक अक्षय ऊजार् उपकरणȗ पर 
जीएसटी की दर को िपछले 5 Ģितशत से बढ़ाकर अब 12 Ģितशत कर िदया गया है।  
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

इन तथ्यȗ से, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी िजस भारत रामराज्य संगर्ह कर Ģणाली का पालन 
करवाना चाहते हȅ, वह वाÎतिवकता क े बजाय एक जुमला Ģतीत होता है। राम राज्य मȂ जब लोगȗ 
पर कर लगाया जाता था, चूँिक राम राज्य की बहुत बात की जाती है, इसिलए मȅ उस इि तहास मȂ 
ले जाना चाहूँगी, तो लोगȗ को कभी भी को यह नहीं लगता था िक उन पर कर लगाया जा रहा है, 
क्यȗिक कर उसी तरह एकतर् िकया जाता था, जैसे सूयर् पृथ्वी से जल-आदर्ता एकतर् करता है और 
िफर उसकी भलाई और समृिǉ क े िलए उसी पर वषार् कर देता है। भग
वान राम का िवचार 
करदाताओं को और लोगȗ को यह महसूस कराना था िक सरकार उनके  कÊयाण क े िलए काम 
कर रही है। हालाँिक आपकी सरकार, कलयुग की सरकार उन लोगȗ पर कर लगा रही है, जो 
सूरज से आने वाली ऊजार् को संगर्िहत करने और उसका उपयोग करने का साहस करते हȅ।  
इसके  अलावा सरकार ǎारा, आप ही लोगȗ ने कहा है, अभी भाजपा क े Îपीकर भी बोल रहे थे िक 
2070 तक शुǉ शून्य काबर्न उत्सजर्न  ĢाÃत करने क े िलए िनधार्िरत लÑय ĢाÃत करना है, लेिकन 
िजस तरह से कर की रÄतार बढ़ रही है, हमȂ नहीं लगता है िक आप इस लÑय को ĢाÃत कर 
पाएँगे। भारत सरकार ने िबजली की खपत क े िलए सौर ऊजार् का उपयोग करने क े उǈेÌय से 
गुरुगर्ाम मȂ 2015 मȂ ही अंतरार्Íटर्ीय सौर गठबंधन की Îथापना की, हालाँिक अगर हम इलेिक्टर्क 
वाहनȗ पर ध्यान क Ȃिदर्त करते हȅ, िजन्हȂ सरकार ǎारा बढ़ावा िदया जा रहा है, तो वह अपनी ऊजार् 
का एक बड़ा िहÎसा कोयले से ĢाÃत करता है। आप ही की िरपोटर् मȂ कहा गया है िक आज भी 
अपनी ऊजार् का, जो Ģॉप
र इलेिक्टर्क की िजतनी चीजȂ चल रही हȅ, वे लगभग 55 Ģितशत ऊजार् 
कोयले से ले रही हȅ और दूसरी तरफ हम गर्ीन एनजीर् की बात कर रहे हȅ।   
महोदय, िरकॉडर् मȂ तो यह 55 Ģितशत है और सौर, िंवड, हाइडर्ोजन - इन सबको 
िमलकर भी हम जो 40-45 Ģितशत िबजली ĢाÃत करने की बात कर रहे हȅ, सच्चाई मȂ तो यह मातर् 
15 से 20 Ģितशत ही है, क्यȗिक हमारे पास भंडारण की सुिव
धा नहीं होने और क्लाइमेट क े कारण 
शाम मȂ इसमȂ िदक्कत आती है। मेरा यह कहना है िक इसको उजागर करना चािहए था।   
महोदय, यह आÌचयर् की बात है िक एनडीए सरकार पयार्वरण को बचाने क े िलए आम 
जनता की वका
लत करती है, लेिकन दूसरी तरफ जो सुनने मȂ आया, िजसका ऑथȂिटके शन मȅ 
लेकर आई हूँ िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी साहब क े िवशेष सुरक्षा समूह, एसपीजी ने ती न िवशेष 
बख्तरबंद वाहनȗ क े पंजीकरण की अविध बढ़ाने क े िलए एनजीटी क े समक्ष एक आवेदन दायर 
िकया था, िजसको बाद मȂ एसपीवी क े िलए िरजेक्ट कर िदया गया। एनजीटी ǎारा आवेदन को 
खािरज कर िदया गया, लेिकन यह सरकार क े असली रंग को दशार्ता है और मȅ आपसे और अपने 
आप से तब से एक सवाल पूछ रही हूँ िक अगर माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी इलेिक्टर्क वाहन मȂ 
सुरिक्षत महसूस नहीं कर रहे हȅ, तो क्या हम ऐसे वाहनȗ मȂ नागिरकȗ से सुरिक्षत महसूस करने की 
उÇमीद कर सकते हȅ?  मȅ यह पूछना चाहती हूँ िक यह दोहरीकरण िकस िलए हो रहा है?  यह  
दोहरापन िकस िलए है?  
महोदय, बकर् ल िवÌ विवǏालय  मȂ भारत ऊजार् और जलवायु क Ȃ दर् क े शोध क े अनुसार भारत 
को 2027 तक शाम को िबजली कटौती का सामना करना पड़ सकता है और इधर नवीकरणीय 
ऊजार् मȂ वृिǉ क े िलए आपने क ेवल सौर ऊजार् पर ध्यान क Ȃिदर्त िकया है, हाइडर्ो और पवन ऊजार् 
क े बजट को भी इस बजट मȂ बहुत कम कर िदया गया है।   
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
89

महोदय, अब मȅ ' पीएम सूयर् घर मुÄत िबजली योजना' पर आती हूँ।  इसके  तहत 10 
िमिलयन घरȗ तक िबजली पहुँचाने का लÑय है।  िवशेषज्ञ का संशय है िक 1.5 िकलोवाट क े िलए 
जो लगभग 52 हजार करोड़ रुपए  की ÎटािटȊग लागत िदखायी जा रही है, उसमȂ जो मौजूदा 
सिÅसडी संरचना है, उसके  अनुसार वह Ģारंिभक लागत का लगभग 50 Ģि
तशत ही पूरा करता है।  
इसमȂ यह ÎपÍट नहीं है िक बाकी कौन Ëयय करेगा?  क्या इसको उपभोƪा Ëयय करेगा?   आग े 
इस पर 7 Ģितशत Åयाज िदखा रहा है, यानी ' हाथी क े दांत िदखाने क े क ु छ और खाने क े क ु छ 
और'।  आपने लंबी-लंबी बातȂ कीं िक करȂगे, करȂगे, लेिकन होगा क ै से, इसका कोई भी उदाहर
ण 
यहां पर नहीं है।  आप छत पर सौर ऊजार्, 'पीएम सूयर् मुÄत िबजली घर योजना' की बात करते हȅ, 
लेिकन छत पर सौर ऊजार् पहल 2022 क े लÑय से 40 Ģितशत कम रही। 
आपने मुÄत िबजली का वा
दा िकया है, िजसमȂ आप सबसे ज्यादा फोकस रूफटॉप  पर कर 
रहे हȅ। पीएम सूयर् घर मुÄत िबजली योजना - इसमȂ लगभग 1.5 िकलोवाट मȂ आपको 50-
60 हजार 
रुपय े लग रहे हȅ। आप डेढ़ लाख रुपय े मȂ लगभग 78,000 रुपय े सिÅसडी दे रहे हȅ। जो उपभोƪा है, 
उसको लगभग 72,000 से 73,000 पर  7 परसȂट, जो िक माकȃ ट Åयाज है, उस पर आप उनसे 
Åयाज ले रहे हȅ, तो आप सबसे पहले यह बताइए िक क्य
ा यह मुÄत योजना है?  यह तो मुÄत 
योजना नहीं है! आप उनसे 7% Åयाज ले रहे हȅ। िफर, आप कह रहे हȅ िक अगर 300 यूिनट्स से 
ज्यादा िबज
ली उत्पादन हो रही है या आपकी 300 यूिनट्स भी नहीं लग रही है, तो आप िडÎकॉम 
को जमा करȂ। Ģधान मंतर्ी ने कहा िक इससे उपभोƪा को फायदा होगा।  अभी आपके  Îपीकर भी 
कह रहे थे िक 15,000 का फायदा हो गा। क्या िडÎकॉम उपभोƪा को क ै श मȂ पैसे दे रहा है? नहीं दे 
रहा है न, तो उसको फायदा िकस तरह से हो रहा है? दूसरा, िफर से  * !  ऊपर से िडÎकॉम की 
मीटिंरग का जो पैसा है, वह लोगȗ को अलग से देना है, तो िफर यह जुमला नहीं तो क्या है?   
महोदय, " सूयर् घर िबजली योजना" मȂ बहुत सारी खािमयां हȅ, िजनके  बारे मȂ मेरे क ु छ 
सवाल हȅ। मेरा पहला सवाल है, एक गरीब आदमी क े िलए सोलर पैनल महंगे हȅ। मान लीिजए, तब 
भी वह अगर डेढ़ लाख का पैनल लगव
ा भी लेता है - ये बहुत बारीक चीजȂ हȅ - तो छत पर उसकी 
क्षित होने या चो
री होने पर क्या सरकार उसका बीमा देगी, क्यȗिक अभी यह खचर् गरीब आदमी 
को भुगतना पड़ रहा है। उदाहरण क े िलए, कई चोरी की घटनाएं सामने आई हȅ। कल ही मेरी 
दोÎत क े चाचा ने 2 लाख का सोलर पैनल छत पर लगवाया था। वह बैटरी वाला था, िजसकी 
65,000 रुपय े की बैटरी चोर
ी हो गई। क्या सरकार उसकी बैटरी वापस देगी? 
मेरा दूसरा Ãवाइंट यह है िक हमारे पास िविभन्न मानकȗ की सौर गुणवǄा Ģणाली हȅ। कौन 
तय करेगा िक कौन अच् छा है और कौन खराब है? उसकी क्वॉिलटी कौन तय करेगा िक िकसका 
बेहतर है?  आप मानक क ै से सेट कर रहे हȅ? आज की तारीख मȂ हम पूरी तरह से सच्चाई मȂ चीन 
को लाल आंख िदखाने की बात करते हȅ, लेिकन आप तो चीन पर ही िन भर्र हȅ! क्या ऐसी कोई 
िरपोटर् है, िजसमȂ इंÎटॉल करने की तकनीक जो भारत मȂ है, उसका उÊलेख हो - नहीं है।  
मेरा चौथा सवाल है िक क्या सरकार ने ऐसी कोई सरकारी अनुमोिदत एजȂसी, ओईए म 
(ओिरिजनल इिक्वपमȂट मैन्युफ ैक्चरर) Îथािपत की है, जो गरीबȗ और िमडल क्लास को मुÄत 
मरÇमत और रख-रखाव का भरोसा कम से कम पहले 4-5 साल तक दे सके ? इसकी कोई 
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

ऑथȂिटके शन नहीं है। आप कह रहे हȅ िक अगर िकसान ने ज्यादा िबजली ली, तो उसको आप 
िडÎकॉम मȂ दȂ। मȅ एक सलाह देना चाहती हूँ िक क्यȗ न पंचायत की जमीन पर पंचायती राज क े 
लोग सोलर पैनल लगाएं और जो ज्यादा िबजली होती है, उसको िडÎकॉम और सरकार उनसे 
खरीदे, उपभोƪा क्यȗ सरकार को देने जाए? उससे पंचायतȗ को फायदा होगा, उनको क ै श 
िमलेगा। वाÎ
तिवकता यह है िक "सूयर् घर िबजली योजना" एक लॉलीपॉप है, जो वाÎतिवकता को 
छ ुपाती है। यह आम भारतीयȗ क े िलए Ëयावहािरक नहीं है, क्यȗिक 7 परसȂट Åयाज क े साथ-साथ 
आप मीटिंरग िडÎकॉम शुÊक भी जारी रख रहे हȅ। मेरी मांग है िक कम से कम मुÄत क े नाम पर जो 
7 परसȂट का Åयाज माकȃ ट दर पर है, उसे आपको ज़ीरो कर ना चािहए।  
अब हम बात करते हȅ - भाजपा-चीनी भाई-भाई, मोदी-चीनी भाई-भाई! एक तरफ हम 
आत्मिनभर्र भारत की बात करते हȅ और दूसरी तरफ चीन को लाल आंख िदखाने की बात करते 
हȅ, लेिकन मुझे मालूम है िक "दो िदल िमल रहे हȅ, मगर चुपके - चुपके ।" एक तरफ आत्मिनभर्र 
की बात, दूसरी तरफ पीएम सूयर् घर मुÄत िबजली योजन
ा का बुिनयादी सौर मॉǹ ूल और बैटरी 
क े िलए क्य ा  आप टोटली चीनी आयात पर िनभर्र नहीं हȅ? क्या आप इसको न कहȂगे? जबिक सौर 
मॉǹ ूल और बैटिरयȗ क े िनमार्ण को मजबूत करने क े िलए घरेलू िनमार्ताओं को समथर्न देने की 
आवÌयकता थी, जो अभी तक नहीं िम ली  है। यह है भाजपा का आत्मिनभर्र भारत, िजसमȂ भरपूर 
मुनाफा िकसको हो रहा है - चीन को हो रहा है और दूसरी तरफ आप आंख िदखाने की बात कर 
रहे हȅ, तो क्यȗ नहीं हम कहȂ िक मोदी-चीनी भाई-भाई?   
महोदय, अब मȅ पेिरस समझौते पर आती हूँ। पेिरस समझौता, 2015 क े तहत 2030 तक 
अपना लÑय अक्षय ऊजार् क े उत्पादन को  500 गीगावाट तक पहुंचाना है।  अभी तक हम 200 
गीगावाट तक पहुंचे हȅ। वषर् 2030 तक 500 गीगावाट क े लÑय तक पहुंचने क े िलए आपको हर 
साल 50 गीगावाट बनाना है, लेिकन हकीकत मȂ सौर, गर्ीन, हाइडर्ो और बायो गैस िमलाने क े बा
द 
आप मातर् 15 गीगावाट  बना रहे हȅ। इसका क ु छ भी answer authentication नहीं है िक आप 50 
गीगावाट तक क ै से पहुंचȂगे।  
  अब मȅ DISCOM पर आती हूं। DISCOM डेवलपसर् क े िलए सबसे बड़ी समÎ
या बन रहा है। 
एक तरफ 300 गीगावाट का लÑय पूरा करने क े िलए - मȅ आपको सलाह दे रही हूं िक सरकार, 
DISCOM, डेवलपसर्, उपभोƪा - यानी गरीब, आम आदमी और िमिडल क्ला स  - इनका आपस मȂ 
समन्वय होना अित आवÌयक है, जो अभी िदख नहीं रहा है। उदाहरण - हर राज्य मȂ DISCOM 
अपने तरीके  से काम कर रहा है। अगर एक डेवलपर को 25 साल क े िलए सौर ऊजार् बनाने क े िलए 
अनुमित देते हȅ, तो वह अपना Ãलांट खरीदता है, आप हर 5 साल क े बाद दोबारा डेवलपर  का 
renew करते हȅ। आप उसको पहले पांच साल क े िलए कह देते हȅ िक आपक
ो 100 मेगावाट िबजली 
बनाने की अनुमित दी है, लेिकन ऐसी बहुत complaints आई हȅ िक 5 साल क े बाद जब वह 
renew कराने क े िलए जाता है, तो उसको कह िदया जाता है िक अब आपको 50 मेगावाट ही 
बनानी है। आप यह बताइए िक िजस डेवलपर ने सौ या डेढ़ सौ मेगावाट का Ãलांट लगाया है, वह 
अगर 50 मेगावाट पर आ जाता है, उसक
ो आप 25 साल क े िलए पूरे मेगावाट की गारंटी नहीं देते 
हȅ, तो डेवलपर भागेगा नहीं तो क्या करेगा? मुझे शक है िक यह छोटे डेवलपसर् क े साथ हो रहा है। 
क्या बड़े लेवलपसर् को यह िबज़नेस सȚपने क े िलए छोटे िबज़नेस वालȗ को जानबूझ कर तंग िकया 
जा रहा है? अभी यू.पी. क े भाजपा क े Îपीकर बोल रहे थे, यू.पी. की ही घटना है, मȅ डेवलपसर् का 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
91

नाम नहीं लेना चाहूंगी। मेरा कहना है िक 25 साल की िÎथरता ज़रूरी  है, िजनको आप पहले 5 
साल मȂ सौ, डेढ़ सौ मेगावाट की या जो भी बात करते हȅ, 25 साल  तक उसी िÎथरता क े साथ 
उसको उतने मेगावाट बनाने की अनुमित देते रहना चािहए। उसे बढ़ाना चािहए, न िक घटान ा 
चािहए।   
 दूसरी तरफ हम DISCOM की समÎया अच्छी तरह से जानते हȅ िक उसका रेवेन्यू कोयला 
से ज्यादा आता है, उसको कोयला िबजली ज्यादा महंगी पड़ती है, तो वह गर्ीन एनजीर् और अक्षय 
ऊजार् की तरफ क्यȗ जा
एगा और उसकी सÃलाई पर क्यȗ ज्यादा ध्यान देगा? आपकी डबल इंजन 
की सरकार है, तो आपकी सरकार DISCOM की सही िनगरानी क्यȗ नहीं रख पा रही है? या 
आपकी िनगरानी का ही नतीजा है िक DISCOM इस तरह की हरकतȂ कर रहा है। मȅ िफर कहूंगी 
िक आप गर्ाफ बनाएं, यिद Îटेट गवनर्मȂट, िडÎकॉम, डेवलपसर् और उपभोƪा मȂ समन्वय नहीं है, 
तो हम 2030 तक 6 साल का 300 गीगावाट का लÑय िबÊकु ल भी पूरा नहीं कर पाएंगे।  
 महोदय, मȅ ज़मीन अिधगर्हण की बा त  करती हूं, जो सबसे जिटल है। लÑय ĢािÃत क े िलए 
समय से ज़मीन अिधगर्हण, टȂडर, िडÎटर्ीÅयूशन क ंपनी और DISCOM का वƪ पर सौर िबजली 
को खरीदना अिनवायर् है, इसके  िबना हल नहीं है, जबिक टȂडर होने मȂ लगभग 6 महीने का समय, 
जमीन अिधगर्हण मȂ 2 से 3 साल का समय - तो 2030 मȂ 300 गीगावाट क े लÑय क ै से पूरा करȂगे? 
मंतर्ी जी, टȂडर होगा, तो आप कह दȂगे िक टȂडर हुआ है तो हो जाएगा, लेिकन ज़मीन अिधगर्हण मȂ 
आपको दो-तीन साल लगȂगे, तो हम लÑय तक कब पहुंचȂगे? जबिक राजÎथान, गुजरात, 
तिमलनाडु, कणार्टक, आंधर् Ģदेश सौर ऊजार् बनाने क े िलए सबसे įयादा पोटȂिशयल रखते हȅ। 
यहाँ मȅ एक सलाह देना चाहती हूं िक इन Ģदेशȗ मȂ भी टर्ांसि मशन लाइन बननी चािहए। अभी 
आपकी सरकार राजÎथान और गुजरात मȂ है, िसफर् पिÌचम राजÎथान मȂ इतनी बंजर ज़मीन है िक 
400-500 गीगावाट तो वहीं बन सकती है। वहाँ टर्ांसिमशन बन रहा है, राजÎथान  और गुजरात मȂ  
भी टर्ांसिमशन बन रहा है, लेिकन िज
स Îपीड से बन रहा है, वह बहुत धीमी है। इस तरह से हम 
target को achieve नहीं कर पाएंगे। मȅ िबहार से आती हूं और छǄीसगढ़ को represent कर रही 
हूं।  िबहार और छǄीसगढ़ मȂ ऊजार् क े िलए काफी पोटȂिशयल है। वहां भी सौर ऊजार् डेवलपसर् को 
बढ़ावा देना चािहए। आपने छǄीसगढ़ मȂ तो थोड़ा-बहुत िकया है, लेिकन िबहार मȂ िबÊकु ल नहीं 
कर रहे हȅ।  
 अब मȅ 'पीएम क ु सुम योज ना ' की बात करती हȅ, िजसके  बारे मȂ देरेक साहब भी बोल रहे थे। 
कहने को तो यह िकसान, ऊजार्, सुरक्षा एवं उत्थान महाअिभयान है। इस महाअिभयान की सच्चाई 
यह है िक " िदखाया पहाड़, िनकली चुिहया"। वषर् 2019 तक 10 हज़ार मेगावाट का लÑय था, 
िजसमȂ से 2.56 पूरा हुआ, यानी 3 परसȂट से भी नीचे। 14 लाख पÇप क े लÑय थे, लेिकन 7.12 लाख 
ही Îथािपत हुए। िजसमȂ 52 परसȂट िसफर् 3 Îटेट्स - राजÎथान, छǄीसगढ़, महाराÍटर् मȂ है। िबहार 
क्यȗ नहीं, झ
ारखंड क्यȗ नहीं, मध्य Ģदेश क्यȗ नहीं और यू.पी. क्यȗ नहीं? आपको 35 लाख क ृिष 
पÇपस को स
ोलोराइज्ड करना था, लेिकन अभी तक 13,562 को िकया है और इनमȂ भी जीएसटी 
लग रही है। क्या  इस तरह से हम लÑय को ĢाÃत करȂगे? एक बार िफर आप िकसान को * दे रहे 
हȅ। आप िसफर् बड़ी-बड़ी बातȂ कर रहे हȅ। उदाहरण मुझे याद है। मुझे िवǄ मंतर्ी जी याद  आ रही हȅ, 
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

उनका जुमला याद आ रहा है। रेलवे सौर टर्ैक - फरवरी 2020, मȅ िवǄ मंतर्ी जी क े जुमले को  
कोट करती हूं। उन्हȗने कहा था िक large solar panel capacity alongside rail track to be set 
up उन्हȗने क्या कहा था -51,000 हेक्टेयर जमीन, जो िबना उपयोग क े रेलवे की जमीन, रेलवे 
टर्ैक क े साइड मȂ होती है, वहां कम से कम 10 गीगावॉट  क्लीन ऊजार् उत्पन्न करने की क्षमता 
रखते हȅ। कहां गया वह Ģोजेक्ट? क्या िरÃलाई करȂगे िक 10
 छोिड़ए, दो गीगावॉट भी रेलवे टर्ैक क े 
आसपास बना है क्या? यह जुमला नहीं है, तो क्या है? इसके  साथ पवन ऊजार्, िज सको आपने 
आज इस बजट से गायब कर िदया है। माना पवन ऊजार्, सौर ऊजार् से महंगी है, पर इसमȂ मातर् 2-
3 Ãलेयरȗ की मोनोपोली है। क्यȗ है, क्यȗ महंगी है? अगर आप Ãलेयरȗ क े क ंÃटी शन बढ़ाएंगे, उनकी 
मोनोपोली कम होगी, तो नैचुरली है िक पवन ऊजार् भी सÎती होगी। क्या यहां पर भी सरकार का 
कोई * है? सर, इसके  साथ मȅ डेटा सȂटर की बात करती हूं। आपको सलाह दे रही हूं िक डेटा 
सȂटर बहुत बड़ा उभरता हुआ सेक्टर है। दुिनया की बड़ी-बड़ी क ंपनीज अमेजन, माइकर्ोसॉÄट सब 
जुड़ी हुई हȅ। वे भी चाहते हȅ िक grid energy से जुड़ा जाए, लेिकन ऐसा नहीं हो पा रहा है।  
हालांिक आपके  Ministr
y of Information and Broadcasting ने डेटा सȂटर क े िलए नीित बनाई 
है, लेिकन Ministry of New and Renewable Energy ने कोई भी पॉिलसी नहीं बनाई है। क्या 
िसफर् जो आपक ा event management है, उससे काम होगा। आप अपना RPO ठीक क्यȗ नहीं 
करते हȅ?  
 महोदय, मȅ ई-वाहन पर आती हूं। िजसकी बात अभी क्वेÌचन ऑवर मȂ भी चल रही थी।    
अक्षय ऊजार् का िवषय है, िजसमȂ हम वातावरण को Îवच्छ करने क े िलए ये सारे Ģयास कर  हȅ।   
इलैक्टर्ॉिनक्स, अविशÍट, उत्पादन और उपचार क े बारे मȂ उÊलेख करना अिनवायर् हो जाता है।  
सर, नवंबर, 2023 मȂ एक आरटीआई क े जवाब मȂ क Ȃदर्ीय Ģदूषण िनयंतर्ण बोडर् ǎारा दी गई 
जानकारी क े अनुसार वषर् 2021 -22 मȂ देश मȂ लगभग 16,01,155 मीिटर्क टन से अिधक 
इलैक्टर्ॉिनक कचरे का उत्पादन हुआ है और सरकार ई-कचरा Ģबंधन िनयमȗ को पूरा करने मȂ 
िवफल रही है। िविभन्न आईआईटी क े शोध क े अनुसार ई-कचरे मȂ सीसा, क ैडिमयम, कर्ोिम यम, 
Ĥोिमनेटेड Äलेम िरटाडȄट्स, पॉिलक्लोिरनेटेड, बाइफे नाइल जैसे कई जहरीले पदाथर् होते हȅ, जो 
ई-कचरा लȅडिफल मȂ िमƺी और जलाशयȗ को दूिषत करते हȅ और साथ ही खाद आपूिर्त Ģणाली 
और जल ǣोतȗ को खतरे मȂ डालते हȅ। इसके  बारे मȂ Renewable Energy Ministry क्या कर रही 
है?  इस authentic quote का मेरे पास authentication है।  एक तरफ देश की अि
निÌचत िÎथित 
को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए NGT को हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश क े इलैक्टर्ॉिनक कचरे क े गैर-
पुनचर्कर्ण क े मुǈे का संज्ञान लेना पड़ा, लेिकन हम
ारे Ģधान मंतर्ी सेÊफी लेने मȂ खुश हȅ। सर, मȅ 
कन्क्लूड कर रही हूं, मȅ सरकार से अनुरोध करती हूं िक अच्छे ऊजार् उपकरणȗ को जीएसटी क े 
दायरे से छू ट दी जा
नी चािहए, तािक लोगȗ को सौर ऊजार् क े िलए Ģोत्सािहत िकया जाए। इसके  
साथ ही माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी दावे की पुिÍट करȂ िक सरकार का जो कर संगर्ह है, वह रामराज्य 
Ģणाली का पालन करता है। महोदय, सरकार को यह Îवीकार करना होगा िक अक्षय ऊजार् क े 
भंडारण की समÎया है और वह सब क ु छ गर
ीब लोगȗ पर आप नहीं छोड़ सकते िक आपको 
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
93

िडÎकॉम को जमा करना है और िडÎकॉम सÃलाई नहीं करेगा, बिÊक उसे अच्छी ऊजार् की 
Îथापना, भंडारण, channelization  मȂ सिकर्य भूिमका िनभानी पड़ेगी। इससे ही आप अक्षय ऊजार् 
मȂ रोजगार की बात करते हȅ, तो अभी तक ऐसा कोई रोजगार का उत्पादन अक्षय ऊजार् ने नहीं 
िकया है। इससे रोजगार पैदा होगा, जब उसको channelizatio
n करȂगे और भंडारण करȂगे। मȅ यह 
भी बताना चाहती हूं िक 300 गीगावॉट, 2030 बजट की लागत िकतनी आ रही है? मेरा जो 
अनुमान है, 12 से 13 लाख करोड़ आ रही है और इसका ǣोत क्य ा है, कहां से लेकर आएंगे? क्या 
यह सही है या नहीं,  2030 तक िकतनी लागत लगने वाली है? मुझे उÇमीद है िक माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी और उनका मंतर्ी पिरषद मौजूदा अक्षय ऊजार् मȂ आ रही समÎयाओं को हल करेगा।  न िक  
समÎयाओं को पैदा करने का काम करेगा। मȅ आपको अपनी पाटीर् की तरफ से आÌवÎत करती हूं 
िक हमारे एलओपी माननीय खरगे साहब, माननीय सोिनया गांधी जी, हमारे लोक सभा क े 
एलओपी राहुल गांधी जी, जो सत्य क े Ģतीक और न्याय क े समथर्क हȅ, सरकार को लोगȗ क े 
कÊयाण क े िलए काम करने पर, हम हर संभव सहायता देने का वायदा कर
ते हȅ।  
 मȅ माननीय नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ी जी से िरक्वेÎट करना चाहूंगी, क्यȗिक 
बहुत बातȂ हो रही हȅ िक रेन्यूएबल एनजीर् मȂ बहुत सारा रोजगार िमलेगा, लेिकन मȅने बहुत खोजा, 
लेिकन मुझे इसमȂ रोजग
ार उत्पन्न होता हुआ िदखाई नहीं िदया। मȅ आपसे िरक्वेÎट करती हूं और 
मेरा नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ी जी से अनुरोध है िक मंतर्ालय और उसके  तहत काम कर
ने 
वाले उपकर्मȗ क े तहत मिहलाओं को कम से कम 33 परसȂट आरक्षण देने क े िलए अपनी िमिनÎटर्ी 
मȂ ही उिचत कदम उठा दीिजए।  
 माननीय मंतर्ी जी, मुझे उÇम
ीद है िक अक्षय ऊजार् क्षेतर् भारत क े हाथ मȂ रहेगा, भारते क े 
जेन्युइन लोगȗ क े हाथ मȂ रहेगा, इसमȂ छोटे डेवलपसर् को भी मौका िमलेगा। इसे आप ए-वन, ए-ट ू 
जैसे िनजी कारोबािरयȗ को संभालने की पेशकश नहीं करȂगे, इसकी मȅ उÇ
मीद रखती हूं। आपका 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक आपने बोलने क े िलए इतना समय िदया।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, माननीय Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन जी। माननीय Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी जी। 
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN R
EDDY (Andhra Prades h):  Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, 
S i r .  A s  I  r i s e  t o  s p e a k ,  I  t h i n k ,  i t  i s  m y privilege to address this House on what, I 
believe, might be the most important Ministry in the coming few years. First, from the 
point of complimenting the Government for what they have done, I commend the 
Government for increasing the allocation from  Rs. 7, 623 crores of last year to Rs. 
18,852 crores this year. This is a jump of  147.29 per cent. This jump of Rs. 18,852 
crores from Rs. 7,623 crores seems as a la rge jump. But, as hon. Member, Shrimati 
Ranjeet Ranjan has mentioned, the total investments, which India would need for the 
purpose of achieving the nationally determined  contribution of reaching the target in 
2030, is estimated to be Rs. 30 lakh crores. We have six years left and we need Rs. 
30 lakh crores for achieving this nationally  determined contribution of 2030 to which 
India has pledged. This money cannot come from Government alone. World over, in 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

terms of green climate finance,  it is accepted that Government  acts as a facilitator. It 
has to ensure that private green finance co mes in for the purpose of achieving these 
objects. When you look at the large amou nts, which are needed, it is Rs. 30 lakh 
crores till 2030. And, if India wants to stay on its target of achieving ‘net zero’ by 
2070, Niti Aayog has stated that India would need  an investment of ten trillion US 
Dollars. A majority of this, almost ninety pe r cent of this, needs to come from private 
sector. They would need to come and inve st in green energy sector. Government 
needs to play a facilitator.   
 The Budget Speech commendably speak s about increased focus on pump 
storage and nuclear energy. But, these are small steps. These are going to be big 
help in terms of achieving our targets. I think, the Government’s focus may need to be 
on ensuring that an eco system is created  for more people, on the private side, to 
come and make investments. This would happen if the tariffs are reasonable and if the 
amounts are paid on time. So, this is wh ere I feel, since we are speaking in the 
Council of States, it may not be the only re sponsibility of Union Government.  I think, 
all the States, which we represent here, ha ve to go hand-in-hand with the Central 
Government for ensuring that we give that  confidence to private people who would 
come and invest in green finance because if we have to get there, then, private 
finance would come in only when it feels th at the atmosphere is secure for them to 
come in and make investments. Then only, it would have certain returns in terms of 
the investments made by it. Sir, I would, then, move on to the next issue of the 
projected digital guzzling of energy. The mo dern data centres that are needed to 
support Artificial Intelligence centres need a lot of energy. So, while it would be 
advisable that we insist on green data centres  -- it is going to be too expensive -- it 
would mean that people would be lured to come in and make investments in India in 
the emerging technologies because power is going to be then unviable. So, India 
would have to walk a delicate path where it may need to nudge most of these modern 
digital power consuming agencies towards green energy consumption. We have a 
frame created under the Energy Conservation Act. In the Energy Conservation Act, 
there is a provision which says that it can be made mandatory that a particular 
percentage of power may need  to be procured from green energy sources. Sir, I 
would request the hon. Minister, through you, to look at these digital data centres 
which are using a lot of power as a separate  category. They need to be given certain 
milestones under the Energy Conservation Act possibly for ensuring that they start 
incrementally increasing the procurement of  their power requirement from the green 
energy sources, so that it does not become  unviable, the innovation does not stop 
and India does not cease to be an investment-friendly destination in terms of the 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
95

emerging technology. But, we need to balance it out with this huge power 
consumption that is going to come in the wake of this digital transformation.  
 Sir, the next issue that I want to presen t for the hon. Minister’s consideration is 
the Research and Development Budget. Th e allocation has increased from Rs.4/- 
crores to Rs.46/- crores. It is almost el even-and-a-half times increase, an 11.5 per 
cent increase, but, in actual terms, it is still less than .5 per cent of the Ministry’s 
overall Budget. The green energy source s that we are using today are the old 
photovoltaic cells, the traditional silicon, et c. Because of the Artificial Intelligence, 
there is a transformation that is happeni ng on the technology side. In the new 
emerging technologies like black silicon, instead of having the hard board kind of 
energy capturing panels, we now have thinne r filaments that are coming in. We have 
to focus on research and development. Possibly, for the same amount that we are 
spending in terms of the technological brea kthroughs that are expected in the next 
two or three years, the requirement of ou r funding may come down drastically. What 
India has achieved in terms of digital ph ones, where we skipped one generation and 
moved directly to the mobile technology, is, we may be able to save a lot of money if 
we are able to look at these modern tec hnologies that are emerging.  India possibly 
may need to take a part in this research  and development. So, while I appreciate the 
Government for increasing this allocation from  Rs.4/- crores to Rs.46/- crores, it is 
still very trivial when compared to the overall outlay and the requir ements that we will 
have. Then, in terms of what can be done  very quickly for the purpose of increasing 
India’s procurement from green energy, mayb e, the Government may have to look at 
bio-fuel and bio-gas more intently. While we have a National Bio Energy Programme, 
the advantage with the bio energy is that it can be localised, it can be smart and it can 
be done by involving the local bodies and the State Government. As I said, the task is 
too huge for just the Union Government to achieve this singularly, it will need all 
stakeholders to come together. Sir, I am imploring that the Government may consider 
involving the lowest level of governan ce, of panchayats, through the State 
Governments also, where it is possible in terms of  bio-fuel and bio-gas related 
focus. One of the things the Government coul d also look at is, when it is offering a 
Minimum Support Price for rice and wheat, it could consider offering an incentivised 
Minimum Support Price in relation to anythi ng that would contribute to bio-fuel. If 
farmers  know that instead of cultivating  pa ddy or rice, if they can cultivate bio-fuel 
which will give them a comparable revenue or  return, that might result in a larger 
harnessing of bio-fuel, which may be used for India’s benefit. 
Sir, the next point I have in terms of consideration is that we need to step up 
efforts for smart management. We have a Smar t Grid Policy of 2015. Sir, we are also 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

using AI solutions. This was the answer given by the Ministry of Power to one of my 
questions on 22nd July in this House. Sir, I am only saying that since there is going to 
be a greater outlay and Indi a would not be able to match the huge amounts that are 
required for achieving the targets, we ma y have to be smart in how we use these 
amounts that are spent. Maybe, we may need to use this for using a larger part of the 
allocations for smart management.  
Sir, I would conclude by saying that this is possibly the most important Ministry 
in the next few years. I would say, as we are speaking in a Council of States that it is 
for all the State Governments along with the Central Government to look at this with 
singular focus, I don't think we, as States, can think that it is the Union's 
responsibility and Union will do something. We, as States also, need to come forward 
and work in tandem with the Central Govern ment. So, I hope all of us work seriously 
for achieving this because this is going to be a huge factor in several things, including, 
in terms of global warming, in terms of our energy requirement. Thank you, Sir, for 
granting me this opportunity for addressing the House.                       
                                    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, hon. Shri S. Niranjan Reddyji. Now, Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN, Somu.  
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu): Than k you, Mr. Vice Chairman, Sir, for 
giving me the opportunity. The new and rene wable energy is going to be very crucial 
for saving the Earth and for the safe journey of human beings on this planet Earth. It is 
just not power generated from non-fossilized  energy sources like the Sun or the wind 
or the biodegradable waste, but it is a life -saving mechanism that is indispensable to 
renew our Mother Earth. It is the only way to free our next generation from the 
clutches of the ill-effects of the greenhouse gases and depl etion of the ozone in the 
atmosphere. The rising Sun is always in dispensable for the development of our 
country.  
Wind power in India has a strong manufacturing base with 20 manufacturers of 
15 different wind turbine models of internat ional quality up to three megawatt in size 
with exports to Europe, United States, an d other countries. Tamil Nadu and Gujarat 
are the two champion States in hastening the wind energy. Maharashtra, Karnataka, 
Rajasthan and Andhra Pradesh contribute substantial energy generated from wind 
mills. At the moment, Tamil Nadu contri butes 11,000 megawatt energy out of 45,000 
megawatt wind energy produced in the country.  
Sir, the primary objective for developing renewable energy in India is to 
advance economic development, improve en ergy security, improve access to energy 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
97

and mitigate climate change. India is resp onsible for nearly seven per cent of the 
global carbon emissions ranked fourth next to China, that is, 26.83, the USA 14.36, 
and the Europe 9.66, causing climate ch ange and also severe damages to the 
ecological balance in the world.   
Sir, we have imported hundreds of millio ns of tonnes of coal and continue to 
import several million tonnes for our domestic need. It is very important for our 
country to reduce the reliance on coal and oil in the coming years. There is an urgent 
need to find alternate sources for generating electricity. Our country must have a 
rapid and global transition to renewable energy technologies to achieve sustainable 
growth and avoid catastrophic climate ch ange. Renewable energy sources play a 
pivotal role in securing sustainable energy with lower carbon emissions.  
The Union Government has to develop and design more proactive policies, 
programmes and a liberal environment to attr act foreign investments to upscale India 
in the renewable energy market at a rapi d rate. One of the other advantages of 
renewable energy sector is that it is ex pected to create a large number of domestic 
jobs over the following years. Given the numerous potential of renewable energy in 
the country, coherent policy measures and an  investor-friendly administration might 
be the key dividers of India to become a global leader.  
Sir, Tamil Nadu under the Dravidian Model Rule, spearheaded by our hon. 
Chief Minister Thalapathy M.K. Stalin, is pi oneer in the adoption of clean energy and 
has positioned itself at the forefront of India's transition towards clean energy 
sources. To achieve energy self-suffici ency, the State Government has made 
significant efforts in solar, wind and ot her renewable energy sources. Tamil Nadu’s 
contribution to climate action has gained international recognition.  
The Government of Tamil Nadu, on 24.01.2024, has accorded approval for 
the formation of a Green Energy Company in  the name of Tamil Nadu Green Energy  
Corporation Limited (TNGECL) to take over  the green energy activities, like the 
hydro, wind and solar of TANGEDCO and to take over functions of the Tamil  
Nadu Energy Development Agency (TEDA). The main objectives are to fast track 
the energy transition from 22 per cent of renewable energy mix to 50 per cent, 
promoting hydro generation, operation and maintenance of existing hydro 
generating stations, promoting hydro projects and pumped storage projects, 
promoting large-scale solar and wind energy projects, promoting roof-top 
installations for the residential sector, promoting other non-fossil fuel-based 
generation sources such as biomass, etc., a new RE hybrid poli cy to increase RE 
penetration, effective utilization of existing  transmission and distribution infra by 
maximizing the technical limitation to get Green funds at a lower cost. Sir , with an 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

installed capacity of 19,628 MW, Tamil Nadu holds third position in India in the 
renewable energy installed capacity. Tamil Nadu is the first State in country towards 
implementing re-powering of old wind mills owned by private wind power generators 
and, so far, 96 old wind mills with 26 MW have been repowered. As on date, about 
1,368 wind mills having a capacity 961.98 MW are to be benefited by the repowering. 
Tamil Nadu has harnessed 11,033 million units of solar energy from the installed solar 
power plants of the State Transmission Utility during the year 2023-24.  
 Sir, I would like to suggest a few pertin ent points which I am  sure will ensure 
the overall growth of renewable energy sector in India. The Union Government 
should fund generously from the financial arms, the REC Limited and the  
Power Finance Corporation PFC Limited. The Government should insist RBI and 
banks to designate Renewable Energy projects under "priority sector lending".  The 
Union Government should collaborate with State Governments and private 
institutions to establish land banks with fu lly ready-made lands for establishing solar 
and wind power plants. They should also  create a dedicated Green energy corridor 
grid connectivity. They should also have a multi- ministerial agreement to create a 
dedicated transport channel. 
Sir, the Union Government has allocated Rs. 19,100 crore for the Ministry of 
New And Renewable Energy for the year  2024-25. The Union Government is 
expected to add 15-18 GW power this year . For the kind of acceleration that our 
country wants to achieve, this allocation seems to be highly inadequate. The 
execution timelines of capacity addition would continue to hinge on the regulatory 
stance towards import duties on cell and modules, support towards domestic cells 
and modules manufacturing and indigenisati on push towards domestic equipment 
sourcing.  
Sir, the ambitious Pradhan Mantri Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojna , which aims at 
providing subsidised rooftop solar installa tions to one crore households, has been 
allocated nearly Rs. 10,000 crore this year. The Government gives Rs. 30,000 as 
subsidy for installing One KWH rooftop sola r, Rs. 60,000 for two KWH rooftop solar 
and Rs. 78,000 for three KWH and above.  To generate 300 units of power per 
month a three KWH rooftop solar system has to be installed.  Now, if a person 
wants to install three KWH rooftop solar system in his house, the maximum subsidy 
that he can get is Rs. 78,000. He has to spend an additional am ount Rs. 2 lakh to 
achieve this. But the Government still has th e audacity to boast that they provide 
300 units of free power every month. 
Another such project is the PM-KUSUM. The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja 
Suraksha evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan  Scheme has been launched by the Ministry of 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
99

New and Renewable Energy for setting up subsidized solar pumps and distributing 
solar power plants across the country. It is one of the biggest initiatives through 
which, they say, framers wo uld be benefited. But it sets CFA of 30 per cent as the 
benchmark cost or the tender cost, whic hever is lower. The State Government 
subsidy is 30 per cent. The re maining 40 per cent has to be borne by the farmer.  
For the Government to call a scheme as free it needs to spend the whole amount, 
but asking the people to spend Rs. 2 lakh  under these schemes and calling it free is 
totally unjustifiable. There is a saying in Tamil: *"The Government says, 'You bring 
the rice. Government would bring the husk.  You mix both. Take away the husk and 
b o t h  o f  u s  w o u l d  e a t  t h e  r i c e ' .  T h i s  i s  n o t  j u s t i c e ,  S i r .   M o s t  o f  t h e  c e n t r a l l y  
sponsored schemes are like that. There ar e several pertinent questions about the 
financial assistance provided by PFC Limite d and REC Limited. There is a saying in 
Tamil, 
* "It is like hiding a big pumpkin in the rice thali."  It is a warning bell for the 
Union Government which needs to change this attitude. Otherwise the people of 
India will show them the exit gate. Thank you, Sir.      
                         
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक (पंजाब): िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, भारत का जो Solar Mission है और 
overall Renewable Energy का जो Mission है, Programme Implementation है, इसमȂ जो 
vision है, उसको देख कर मुझे और मेरे जैसे अनिगनत लोगȗ को, जो इस पर बहुत िवÌव ास करते 
हȅ, बहुत दुख होता है और बहुत de-motivating   सा   feel   आता   है। मȅ इसका   कारण  आपको 
बताता हूँ। ऑनरेबल िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, हमारे देश क े पास renewable energy क े सेक्टर मȂ 
इतनी संभावनाएँ हȅ, संभवत: इस पूरे िवÌव मȂ िक सी भी और देश क े पास वे संभावनाएँ न हȗ। अगर 
मȅ अके ले सोलर की बात करू ँ, तो हमारे देश मȂ 300 ऐसे िदन हȅ, जो sunny हȅ, सूरज की िकरणȂ 
वहाँ पर पड़ती हȅ। िजस देश मȂ 300 sunny days you have, आप अपनी एनजीर् की जो सारी 
आवÌयकताएँ हȅ, उन्हȂ िसफर् सोलर से पूरा कर सकते हȅ। िफर कहाँ गड़बड़ी हो रही है, कहाँ 
िदक्कत हो रही है, यह समझने की बात है। ऑनरेबल िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, हमारे देश की बात 
शुरू  करने से पहले एक बार मȅ चीन को बीच मȂ लाना चाहता हूँ, क्यȗिक चीन आज वह देश है, 
िजसने ज़ीरो से हीरो तक का सफर लगभग 10 से 15 सालȗ मȂ पूरा िकया है। ऑनरेबल िडÃटी 
चेयरमैन सर, आप देिखए िक चीन का solar missi
on या renewable energy मȂ motivation क्या 
है। चीन का motivation है growth, चीन  का motivation है job creation और इंिडया का क्या 
motivation है, इंिडया का motivation है िक CO2 का जो emission है, उसको कम करना; 
इंिडया का vision क्या है, इंिडया का vision यह है िक हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी international 
pressure मȂ आकर commitment दे रहे हȅ। ऑनरेबल िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, यह vision मȂ जो 
अंतर है, यह
ी आपके  growth क े trajectory को define करता है।  जब तक आपको believe नहीं 
                                                           
*English translation of the portion of speech originally delievered in Tamil. 
 
 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

होगा िक solar energy और renewable energy से क ु छ होना है और future यह है, तब तक तक 
आप क ु छ बड़ा नहीं कर सकते। जब तक आपके  सीने मȂ जलन नहीं होगी िक इसको energy मȂ 
implement करना है, आपको सवर्-सक्षम बनना है और पूरे िवÌव को lead करना है, तब तक यह 
होने वाला नहीं है। ऑनरेबल िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, आप देिखए भारत ने, हम
ारे देश ने 2022 तक 
100 गीगावॉट का टारगेट रखा था, जो हम miss कर  गए। हमने 2030 तक 500 गीगावॉट  का 
टारगेट रखा है, मतलब हमारी पूरी ऊजार् की लगभग 50 Ģितशत आवÌयकता re newable 
energy से आनी है। अब आज हम िजस िÎथित मȂ खड़े हȅ, वहाँ से वहाँ तक पहुँचने क े िलए हमको 
इसका लगभग 70 Ģितशत achieve करना पड़ेगा। हम क ै से करȂगे, कहाँ से होगा? क्या हमारी 
policies सही हȅ? क्या हम
ारे पास उतनी financial stability है? क्या हमारे पास vision है? क्या 
Îटेट गवनर्मȂट क े साथ आपके  cooperations हȅ?  Overall, आप क ै से execute कर रहे हȅ? आप 
अपने सारे Ģोगर्ाÇस को उठा कर देख लीिजए, मȅ पूरी संजीदगी क े साथ कहना चाहता हूँ, एक-
एक Ģोगर्ाम जो आपने पहले शुरू  िकया है, नाम याद नहीं रह
ता, क्यȗिक हर िदन Îलोगन चȂज हो 
जाता है। आप सारे Ģोगर्ाÇस उठा कर देख लीिजए, सारे Ģोगर्ाÇस फ े ल हो रहे हȅ।   
 ऑनरेबल िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, सबसे पहले मȅ पॉिलसी को लूँगा।  अगर पॉिलसी मȂ देखȂगे, 
तो तीन महत्त्वपूणर् चीजȂ िनकल कर आती हȅ, --  यह बहुत गंभीर िवषय है, ध्यान दीिजएगा -- 
Lack of cl
arity in vision, de layed entry and inconsistent po licies. Lack of clarity in 
vision क े बारे मȂ जैसा मȅने पहले बताया िक अग र आपका vision िसफर् CO2 emission कम करना 
है, तब तो हम कभी नहीं कर सकते, just time pass होता रहेगा, चलता रहेगा। अगर आपका 
vision है िक पूरी दुिनया को lead करना है, अगर आपका vision है िक हमȂ fossil fuel से  
dependency खत्म करना है, तब जाकर आप क ु छ कर सकते हȅ।  हमȂ यही नहीं पता है िक हमको 
फोकस िकस पर करना है!  क्या आप manufacturing पर फोकस करना चाह
ते हȅ या आप 
installation पर फोकस करना चाहते हȅ? अगर आपको फोकस पता होगा, तब वहाँ आप सिÅसडी 
डालȂगे। क्या आपको सिÅसडी manuf acturing मȂ डालना है, क्या आपको सिÅसडी installation मȂ 
डालना है, आपको पता ही नहीं है। आपकी inconsistent policies पूरे सेक्टर को cost कर रही 
हȅ। थोड़े समय पहले आपने import duty ǹूटी  बढ़ा दी। आपको लगा िक import duty बढ़ाएँगे, 
तो manufacturing बढ़ जाएगी। आपको पता ही नहीं है िक आप manufacture करने क े 
situation पर नहीं हȅ। आपने िफर वाप
स एक साल बाद उसको घटा िदया। ऐसे policy decisions 
एक साल मȂ fluctuate हो रहे हȅ। अब कोई Ëयिƪ नया Ģोजेक्ट बनाता है, तो नए Ģोजेक्ट को 
materialize होने मȂ ही दो साल लगते हȅ। एक Ģोजेक्ट दो साल मȂ materiali ze हो रहा है, realize 
हो रहा है और आप एक साल मȂ अपने िनयम बदल दे रहे हȅ। यह instability, inconsistency 
आपको कहीं लेकर नहीं जाएगी।    
 ऑनरेबल िडÃटी चेयरमैन सर, आप एक चीज और देिखए। मȅ एक उदाहरण देता हूँ।  मेरे 
पास समय कम है, मȅ आपसे चाहूँगा िक आप मुझे थोड़ा और समय extra दे दीिजएगा। यूरोप और 
अमेिरका मȂ देिखए, यूरोप और अमेिरका ने अप
ना सारा पैसा installation पर लगाया। उन्हȗने 
यूरोप मȂ सिÅसडी पर सिÅसडी, सिÅसडी पर सिÅसडी दी।  
 
(सभापित मह
ोदयपीठासीन हुए।) 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
101

  ऑनरेबल चेयरमैन सर, चीन ने क्या िकया, चीन ने अपना सारा पैसा manufacturing मȂ 
लगाया। चीन ने manufacturing मȂ लगाया, यूरोप और अमेिरका ने installation पर लगाया। 
चाइना का सारा माल यूएस मȂ लगता गया। यूरोप क े और अमेिरका की सारी इंडÎटर्ीज़, क ंपनीज़ 
बȅकरÃट हो गईं और चीन ने अपनी गर्ोथ मÊटीपल ऑडर्र कर िलए, जॉÅस िकर्एट कर िलए, तो इस 
तरीके  से आपक
ा िवजन बहुत िक्लयर होना चािहए। 
 जैसे मȅ इंिडया की बात करू ँ, एक छोटी सी चीज है िक इंिडया मȂ आपको िकस पर 
सिÅसडी देनी है, क्या आपको मालूम है िक िकस पर सिÅसडी देनी है, क्या आपको पूरे panel को 
इंपोटर् करना है या िसफर् िसिलकॉन को? ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, िसफर् silicon wafer जो है, वह हम 
नहीं बना सकते, उसमȂ पीछे हȅ, लेिकन उसके  अलावा बाकी सारी चीजȂ हम कर सकते हȅ। तो हमȂ 
यह करना चािहए िक जो चीज हम कर सकते हȅ,  उस पर आप I
mport Duty  लगाइए, ज्यादा 
लगाइए, तािक वह िडसकरेज हो और उसकी अपनी क ंटर्ी मȂ गर्ोथ हो और िजसको आज हम नह ीं 
कर सकते हȅ, उस पर माथा-फोड़ी करने क े बजाय, उसकी manufacturing का  long-term 
vision बनाइए। Silicon wafer मȂ जो Import Duty  है, उसको reduce किरए। तो आपको पता 
होना चािहए िक आपकी strength कहां है और कहां पर आपको अपनी subsidies को लगाना है।  
अगर inconsistent policies  रहȂ, तो ये investor को  discourage करती हȅ, developer को 
discourage  करती हȅ और consume
r को भी discourage करती हȅ।   
 Hon. Chairman, Sir, financing एक बहुत important  चीज है।  इसमȂ अगर आपको 
अपना target achieve करना है, तो आपको लगभग 300 billion USD की जरूरत पड़ेगी, लेिकन 
हम आज िकतना कर पा रहे हȅ - 75 billion USD.  We need three times more.  Where will 
the money come from?  The money will come from the public participation.  What can 
we do for that?  There are several things th at different parts of the world have already 
activated and they have achieved a great success, like green deposits, green bonds, 
etc.    सरकार अगर िक सी  क ंपनी को bank loan देती है, तो payment  को वहां तक पहुंचने मȂ 
इतना delay है की market fluctuate  हो जाता है।  Project delay in this country is the 
biggest challenge for any industry to grow.  Bankruptcy क े बहुत सारे क े सेज़ हȅ।  आपके  
इस सेक्टर मȂ जो आते हȅ, तो चूंिक यह new entry है, new technology-based है, तो वे 
bankrupt  हो जाते हȅ, तो इसमȂ आपक
ो handholding  करनी पड़ेगी।  Do we have a plan?  
Do we have concise, comprehensive plan?  We do not have a plan.   
 ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, आप एक example ले लीिजए - discoms का।  अगर आपने 
discoms को और अपने distribution channel को strengthen नहीं िकया,  no matter how 
good policy we make, we are not going to succeed.  Discoms मȂ िदक्कत क्या है - 
Discoms मȂ आज इस पूरे देश मȂ, मȅ पूरी संजीदगी क े साथ कह रहा हूं िक पूरे देश मȂ लगभग सभी 
distributing
 companies losses मȂ चल रही हȅ, क्यȗिक उन्हȗने technology improvise नहीं 
िकया, technology मȂ improvement नहीं  िकया, पैसे technology पर नहीं डाले। अब सरकार 
को उनकी technology improve करने पर भी ध्यान देना पड़ेगा, उनको वहां subsidi se करना 
पड़ेगा, वहां incentivise करना पड़ेगा। उनके  िजतने dues हȅ - कई discoms companies कहती 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

हȅ िक मेरी उधारी सरकार क े पास पड़ी है, मेरी उधारी दोगे, तब तो टेक्नोलॉजी - तो हमȂ 
discoms को regularise करना पड़ेगा। 
 Now, I come to the issue of skilled workforce. Proliferage of low-quality 
services is going to be a bigger challenge. हम  जो सोलर पैनल लगाने वाले हȅ, अगर आपके  
पास skilled workforce नहीं है तो उसका maintenance - आपने technology तो लगा दी, जैसे 
आप मोबाइल खरीद लेते हȅ, मोबाइल सÎते मȂ िमलती है, आप खरीद लेते हȅ, जब वह खराब हो 
जाता है, तो जाकर बनवा लेते हȅ, लेिकन सोलर पैनल लगा िदए और अग
र वह 10 िदन मȂ खराब 
हो जाएगा, तो आप कह ा ं जाएँगे? आपके  पास skilled workforce नहीं है, थोड़े िदन मȂ वह 
discard कर देगा, तो आपके  कागज मȂ ये सारी चीजȂ रह जाएँगी। You need a skilled 
workforce, and for that, you need to have a separate plan.   
 Now, let us talk about the consumer. आप कहते हȅ िक क ंज्यूमर को 8 रुपए  मȂ 
िबजली खरीदनी पड़ती है और आप उसको कहते हȅ िक आप हमȂ यह 2.5 रुपय े मȂ बेचो। यह क ै से 
पॉिसबल है, यह पॉिसबल नहीं है। आपको सवȃ करना पड़ेगा, क ंज्यूमर से पूछना पड़ेगा िक आपको 
क्या चािहए, आपने क्यȗ discontinue िकया और मȅ क ै से आपकी हेÊप कर सक ता  हूं। You should 
have a continuous survey mechanism so that you have a real-time feedback on this.   
Allied industries - ऑनरेबल चेयर सर, जब तक आप बैटरी पर पैसा नहीं लगाएँगे, तो मȅ 
आज यह कह रहा हूं और 10 साल बाद आप इस पर िडबेट करȂगे। आज आप सोलर पर पैसा डाल 
रहे हȅ, िंवड पर पैसा डाल रहे हȅ, लेिकन जब तक आप बैटरी पर पैसा नहीं डालȂगे, बैटरी पर 
advancement नहीं लाएँगे, तब तक आपकी sola
r industry or renewable energy grow नहीं 
करेगी। बैटरी क े िलए आपको िलिथयम चािहए और िलिथयम आपको dig out करना पड़ेगा, 
उसके  िलए R&D करने पड़Ȃगे, research करने पड़Ȃगे। मेरे कहने का मतलब यह है िक बहुत सारी 
इंडÎटर्ीज़ एक साथ िमलकर एक गर्ुप को आगे बढ़ाते हȅ। तो बैटरी वाला जो segment है, क्या 
आपने कभी उसको renewable energy से match िकया है,  क्या disco
ms क े जो issues हȅ, 
उनको इससे  match िकया है?  इन सारी चीजȗ को holistic way मȂ लेना पड़ेगा।  
 I will just summarise by saying one thing.  देश मȂ कई सारी पॉिलसीज़ हȅ। हमारे देश 
मȂ लगभग 90 players हȅ, िसफर् 90 pla
yers हȅ और चीन मȂ लगभग 2,000 bigger players हȅ, जो 
िक manufacturing  मȂ काम करते हȅ। तो आप इंिडया मȂ एक तरफ 5-10 बड़े players ले लीिजए 
और दूसरी तरफ 2,000 players ची
न मȂ हȅ, तो  ऐसे मȂ आपको उनकी handholding  करनी 
पड़ेगी। हमारे देश मȂ unfortunately  दो तीन players ही हȅ। जैसे, आप देिखए, जो अडाणी क ंपनी 
है, उसने गुजरात मȂ 50-70 billion dollars  invest िकये हȅ। उनके  अलावा इस फीÊड मȂ दूसरा 
कोई भी नहीं है। तो आप क ै से चलाएँगे? आप एक इंडÎटर्ी क े भरोसे रहकर भारत क े इस पूरे 
सेगमȂट की trajecto
ry नहीं कर सकते।  वैसे ही copper purification  मȂ आप देिखए िक गुजरात 
क े कच्छ मȂ again 1.2 billion dollar का investment िसफर् अडाणी ने िकया है और दूसरा कोई 
Ãलेयर नहीं है। W
e  n e e d  t o  h a v e  p l a y e r s .  W e  need to have many players. Hon. 
Chairman, Sir, through you, I would requ est the Government to please increase the 
horizon of your friends. Make 1.4 billion peop le your friends. Make the entire country 
your friends. The policy paralysis, policy de lays and late entry, all these things put 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
103

together, are making the task tough for th e Government. I still wish the Government 
luck. We are all here to support the Govern ment provided it is on the right track.  
Thank you very much. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Any suggestions? . ..(Interruptions)... Any suggestions?  Why are 
there not more players? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: In this field, Sir?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes. 
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: It's very interesting.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: You have made a point, a very important point. Why are there not 
more players?  
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: Sir, I will tell you.  There are two things.  You may 
not like what I am going to say.  But some friends... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Say what is likeable.  
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: Some friends may...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no.  Say something which is likeable.  
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: Okay.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Or alternativel y, what you can do is... . ..(Interruptions)... No, no. 
What you can do is, have a small note. We will discuss it. 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: सर, मȅ यह कह रहा हूँ...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will tell you why because our country has the Competition 
Commission Act. Now the Act is very categor ical and that Act does not create an 
ecosystem that is monopolistic.  Now, when  such an important point is being made -
- a very important point -- someone who is doing something, has to be appreciated, 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

and, if there are impediments where others are not making an entry, on that, you give 
me a small paper. I will go through that. It has to be likeable. 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ िबना िकसी का नाम िलए, िबना िकसी को ओफȂ ड 
िकए इसका उǄर देता हूँ। सर, जैसे हमने अभी सोलर पैनÊस मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग क े िलए जो बड़े 
मशीनȂ होती हȅ, उनके  िलए इÇपोटर् और कÎटम ǹूटी  को absolutely zero कर िदया है। अब आप 
बताइए िक आज की तारीख मȂ इस देश मȂ िक
तनी ऐसी क ंपिनयाँ हȅ, जो उन मशीनȗ को यूज़ 
करȂगी? There is only one company, which is going to use these big machines and he 
is going to make thousands and thousands of crores of rupees. Now, what can the 
Government do? The Government will have to bring new players. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Have a positive mind, Mr. Pa thak. Give a note to me also on what 
is coming in the way of a new player ge tting into it. We have a very functional 
Competition Commission Act. 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: सर, सरकार को hand hold  करना पड़ेगा।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is a good suggestion. 
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: सर, दो-तीन दोÎतȗ क े अलावा, 
* क े अलावा दूसरे से दोÎती करनी 
पड़ेगी। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Deleted. There has always  been a demand.  Regarding those who 
are not members of the House, of course, my ruling is already there. Now, Shri 
Niranjan Bishi. You have eight minutes. 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha): Thank you, hon. Chairman Sir. The Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy has shortcomings with the aim and ambition, and mission and 
vision like Insufficient Funding for Emer ging Technologies. Despite increased 
allocation, the Budget may still fall short in supporting the full spectrum of emerging 
renewable energy technology, such as tidal energy and wave energy.   
Lack of focus on local manufacturing - limited emphasis on boosting local 
manufacturing of renewable energy equipmen ts could hinder self -reliance and make 
India dependent on imports.  इससे आत्मिनभर्र भारत की जो बात है, वह सक्सेस नहीं होगा।  
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.  
  
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
105

Delayed implementation - Delays in project implementation and funds disbursement 
may continue affecting timely execution of renewable energy projects.  
Underestimation of infrastructure needs - there is insufficient allocation for 
upgrading transmission and distribution infr astructure to handle the increased load 
from renewable energy sources. Inadequate  support for small scale projects - Small 
scale and community based renewable ener gy projects may not receive adequate 
attention or funding limiting their potential impact.   
 
(THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. SUSHMITA DEV) in the Chair.) 
 
It has some loopholes also.  First is, Land Acquisition issue. Land acquisition 
for large-scale renewable energy projects  can cause significan t delays and cost 
overruns. Grid integration challenges. In tegration of renewable energy into the 
national grid remains a technical and oper ational challenge, requiring more robust 
solutions for grid stability and management.  
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
Limited private sector incentive- while  there are incentives for renewable 
energy projects, they may not be sufficien t to attract substantial private sector 
participation, especially in high-risk area s like offshore wind energy. Monitoring and 
accountability -There is lack of robust monitoring and accountability mechanism to 
ensure that funds are used efficiently and projects are completed on time and within 
budget. Rural electrification gap - Despit e efforts towards decentralized renewable 
energy solution, gaps remain in achievi ng comprehensive rural electrification and 
ensuring renewable energy supply in re mote areas. Environmental and social 
concerns - renewable energy projects, pa rticularly large scale ones may face 
environmental and social concerns, such as displacement of communities and impact 
on local ecosystem, which needs to be addressed more comprehensively. In 
renewable energy, solar energy, wind ener gy, tidal energy, hydrothermal energy, 
wave energy, geothermal energy and bi omass energy are there. This new and 
renewable energy will generate, distribute  and transmit energy. It is a matter of 
satisfaction that this Department will fo cus on energy security and employment 
generation.  
मैडम, यह ठीक है िक employment generation करȂगे, लेिकन अभी-अभी जो creamy 
layer की बात सामने आ रही है, उससे देश भर क े 35 करोड़ से ज्यादा शेǹूÊड काÎट्स और 
शेǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस क े मन मȂ दुःख है। उन सब क े िदलȗ मȂ ददर् भरा है िक transmission,
 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

generation and distribution मȂ एससी-एसटी क ȅिडडेट्स को employment िमलेगी या नहीं, 
New and Renewable Energy Department मȂ शेǹूÊड काÎट्स को 16.6 परसȂट और एसटीज़ 
को 8.6 परसȂट - क्यȗिक बाबा साहेब डा. बी.आर. अÇबेडकर का जो सपना था, उसे मȅ यहां क्वोट 
कर रहा हूँ, "Reservation in education and employ ment is essential to break the age-
old shackles of caste and give everyone an equal opportunity. Justice is another 
name of liberty, equality, and fraternity. Rese rvation is a tool to achieve justice for the 
oppressed section of society. Social and eco nomic democracy is the real cornerstone 
of any true democracy. Reservation helps in achieving this social democracy. The 
backward classes have been left out of  the social and economic mainstream for 
centuries. Reservation is a way to ensure their inclusion."   
मैडम, शेǹूÊड काÎट्स-शेǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस को सभी Ģोजेक्ट्स और ÎकीÇस मȂ  100 परसȂट 
सिÅसडी, 100 परसȂट िरलैक्सेशन िमलती है, लेिकन जो rooftop solar energy होगा, उसमȂ 
जनरल क ंज्यूमसर् को भी 50 परस Ȃट सिÅसडी िमलती है और एससीज़-एसटीज़ को भी 50 परसȂट 
सिÅसडी िमलती है। एससीज़-एसटीज़, जो इस देश मȂ poorest of the poor people हȅ,  बैकवडर् 
हȅ,  वे  लोग 75,000-80,000 रुपय े पह
ले कहां से िडपॉिजट करȂगे, िजसके  बाद उनको सोलर 
एनजीर् क े िलए रूफटॉप  िमलेगा?   
"पीएम-सूयर् घर: मुÄत िबजली योजना" मȂ 300 यूिनट्स िबजली ģी िमलेगी, लेिकन अभी 
तक िकसी को मुÄत िबजली नहीं िमली है। मȅ कहता हूँ िक चाहे एससी-एसटी हो, पुअर हो या 
बैकवडर् हो, िकसी को भी मुÄत िबज
ली अभी तक नहीं िमली है। रही बात, 300 यूिन ट्स मुÄत 
िबजली िमलने की, तो ओिडशा मȂ इलेक्शन क े पहले लोगȗ मȂ बहुत आशा और िवÌवास था िक 300 
यूिनट्स िबजली मुÄत िमलेगी, लेिकन अभी तक िकसी को मुÄत िबजली 300 यूिनट्स तो क्या, 
तीन यूिनट्स भी नहीं िम ली है। यह कहा गया था िक डबल इंजन की सरकार होगी, तो लोगȗ ने 
खुशी मȂ अपने वोट्स दे िदए। डबल इंजन तो हो गया, लेिकन वह 300 यूिनट्स मुÄत िबजली कहां 
गई और यह कब होगा? गरीबȗ क े िल ए, शेǹूÊड काÎट्स क े िलए, शेǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस क े िलए यह 
कब होगा? 
हमारा New and Renewable Energy Department है, िमिनÎटर्ी है। सह, distribution 
company (DisCom) आएगी, तो वह अपने Ģॉिफट क े िलए काम करेगी, वह social service क े 
िलए नहीं आते हȅ, वे जब outsourcing appointment करȂगी, contractual appointment 
करȂगी, तब िकसी भी SC/ST को नौकरी नहीं िम लेगी, job opportunity नहीं िमलेगी। बाबा साहेब 
अÇबेडकर जी का ambition था  की सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट िकसी भी department और institution मȂ 
SC/ST को reservation िमल ेगा। सर, Article 15 मȂ educational institutions  मȂ reservation 
था। Article 16 मȂ equality of opportunity in matters of public employment था। Article 335 
मȂ claim of SC/ST to services and posts था। Article 330 मȂ  reservation of seats for 
SC/ST in House of People था। सर, बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी ने भ ारत  क े संिवधान मȂ ये सब 
reservation का Ģावधान िकया है। अगर सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट या Îटेट गवनर्मȂट चलाएगी, तब हमारे 
SC/ST को job opportunity िमलेगी।   
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
107

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (MS. SUSHMITA DEV):  I request the hon. Member to 
finish it.   
 
Ǜी िनरंजन िबशी: अगर कोई distribution company या private company को ये सब 
departments िदए जाएंगे, चाहे वह generation हो, transmission हो, distribution हो या LPG 
(Liberalisation, Privatisation and Globalisation ) क े हाथ मȂ जाएगा, तो देश क े 35 करोड़ से 
ज्यादा SC/ST को कोई भी job opportunity नहीं  िमलेगी और हमारी community क े लोग और 
पीछे हो जाएंगे।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRPER
SON (MS. SUSHMITA DEV): Please finish it. Your time is over. 
 
Ǜी िनरंजन िबशी: अभी जो कर्ीमी लेयर की बात हुई, िजससे भारत क े SC/ST community क े 
लोग बहुत दुख मȂ हȅ। उसको लागू नहीं करना चािहए, वह देश क े िलए खतरा है और SC/ST 
community क े िलए खतरा है, धन्यवाद।  
 
S H R I  A . D .  S I N G H  ( B i h a r ) :  T h a n k  y o u ,  M a d a m ,  f o r  a l l o w i n g  m e  t o  s p e a k  o n  t h i s  
issue.  Before I speak on the points on new and renewable energy, I will say this.  It is 
very unfortunate that in spite of the reques t of the 15 parties, the ruling side did not 
agree to a discussion on Home, Chines e aggression, Foreign Ministry and mos
 t 
importantly, Manipur. I don't know why th e ruling side always escapes it at some 
point or the other as if Manipur is not part  of India. On the un fortunate happenings 
and what corrective measures the Government  is going to take, none of us knows 
anything about it. 
 Coming to renewable energy, I want to  bring it to the notice of the ruling 
dispensation that we do not have one Mi nistry to deal with the energy sector. 
Currently, separate Ministries are managing  fossil fuels and renewable energy.  There 
is the lack of coordination. As far as expans ion of coal mining is concerned, what is 
the Coal Ministry doing? The Ministry of Coal might contradict renewable energy 
target set by the Ministry of  New and Renewable Energy. Th ere is the lack of energy 
storage capacity. Energy storage solutions like pumped hydro and battery storage are 
still in the early stages in In dia. This limits the ability to store excess renewable energy 
for later use, thereby hindering the effectiveness in meeting peak demand. There is no 
research and development in the renewable sector. Research and development is of 
great significance in the rene wable energy sector with a view to reduce the cost of 
disposing waste generated by technology and recycling. What are the efforts the 
Government is making in research and de velopment? What are the allocations for 
research and development in the last three years? What are the important 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

breakthroughs in this?  India has plans to  achieve 500 gw of non-fossil fuel-based 
energy by 2030.  But there are financial constraints. I do not know how we will achieve 
this.  If we look at the last two years -- the amount of budget which was allocated 
and the amount of spending which took place -- even the budget is not properly 
utilized.   So far as this Ministry is concerned, it is not even using the budget allocated 
to it. Plus, there is vulner ability in green technology. India's dependence on imported 
green technology, particularly with China's dominance in solar panels, wind turbines 
and critical minerals, creates  vulnerability. About 70 per cent of India's solar power 
generation capacity is built on Chines e-made solar equipment. Access to raw 
materials and rare earth materials is one of the major challenges that are faced by the 
renewable energy sector. There is low manufacturing of silicon panels in India and it 
heavily relies on importing solar panels and modules mainly fr om China and Vietnam 
to meet its solar energy requirement. This  reliance exposes India to potential supply 
chain disruptions and price hacks in geopolit ical situations. So, basically, what I want 
to bring to the notice is that we should have a clear-cut policy as to how to implement 
it to achieve the targets set by the Government in the next few years. Thank you very 
much.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) : Respected Vice-Chairperson, in the context of the 
Wayanad tragedy, the discussion on rene wable energy is very relevant. In the 
backdrop of climate change challenges, the world is bracing for a fast energy 
transition towards renewable energy sources . The Government has a historic role to 
play in this transition. The new and renewabl e energy is the source of energy of today 
and tomorrow. The conception of energy is one of the indicators of the Human 
Development Index, but I am sorry to say that the Union Government is failing to 
deliver this historic responsibi lity in an effective, just and equitable manner. In India, 
per capita energy consumption is only 1,002 kilowatt per hour. Madam, it is very lower 
than per capita consumption of countries like America, where it is 12,100 kilowatt per 
hour; in France, it is 6,934 kilowatt per hour ; in Iceland, it is 54,000 kilowatt per hour; 
and in China, it is 6,400 kilowatt per ho ur. The world average per capita consumption 
is 3,200 kilowatt per hour. The consumption of energy is very less in India. Even then, 
power cut and load shedding is happening. In India, the per capita generation is also 
very less than the per capita generation of countries like the US and China. The Union 
Government has failed to achieve its own goals. Respected Madam, the renewable 
energy target of the Ministry was 175 gigawatt by 2022. But even today, the 
achievement is only146 gigawatt. The target  was to have 100 gigawatt from solar, 60 
gigawatt from wind, 10 gigawatt from biomass, and five gigawatt from small hydro by 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
109

2022. But what has happened here? Respect ed Madam, to cover up this colossal 
failure, the Government now projects a ne w target of 500 gigawatt. On renewable 
capacity addition by 2030, the Government is posing as a gl obal champion in the fight 
against climate change despite the colossal failure. The failure is the result of crony 
capitalist policy pursued by this Government. They have entirely depended upon their 
corporate friends. The Government has given huge subsidies to their corporate 
friends in various forms like land, viabilit y gap funding and free access to country's 
transmission lines. As of now,  97 per cent, that is, 142 gi gawatt, out of a total of 146 
gigawatt of renewable energy is  owned by private players. Madam, this blind push of 
crony capitalists has resulted in huge failure of achieving our national goal. 
The misguided orientation of the Government resulted in pushing away our 
public companies like NTPC, NHPC and THPC  from the mainstream of renewable 
energy development.  In Kerala, solar po wer rooftop project was implemented.  In 
this project, 1.5 lakh houses are in the scheme and 1,000 megawatt electricity is 
generated. But, in this scheme, the gene ration of entire co untry is only 11,000 
megawatt. It is a matter of shame. The promotion of renewable energy is possible 
only through the development of a proper power storage facility. In general, the 
lithium-ion battery is used.  The investment for the research in sodium-ion battery is 
necessity of the time.  But, the Gove rnment is neglecting the research and 
development activities.  The Government  should provide proper money for the 
research and development activities.  At pr esent, the generation of renewable energy 
is not viable for the downtrodden of the societ y.  It is proved by the prices of solar 
panel and e-vehicles.  (Time-bell rings.)  Madam, only one minute. I urge the 
Government to protect the interest of th e downtrodden, and the Government should 
provide more financial allocation for th e research and development sector of 
universities and institutions to promote new battery system and new storage facilities. 
Till now, the Government has not given proper attention to the research and 
development in solar and renewable energy sector.  Thank you, Madam.                  
                        
डा. सुमेर िंसह सोलंकी (मध्य Ģदेश):  धन्यवाद माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया। नमर्दे हर! आज 
एक ऐसे िवष
य पर चचार् हो रही है, जो भारत का नहीं, बिÊक दुिनया का भिवÍय है। आपने मुझे 
नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ालय क े कायर्करण पर चचार् करने की अनुमित Ģदान की है, 
इसके  िलए मȅ आपका आभारी हूं। िनिÌ चत   रूप  से आज का िदन - यहां संसद मȂ जो चचार् हो रही 
है, यह चचार् धरातल पर जब पहुंचेगी, तो देश क े 140 करोड़ भाइयȗ और बहनȗ की नहीं, बिÊक 
दुिनया क े आठ अरब लोगȗ का भला करने का  काम करेगी।  
माननीय उप
सभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आज नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ालय क े िलए 
माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ǎारा िपछले वािर्षक वषर् से अिधक बजट पेश िकया गया है। ग्लोबल वािमȊग 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

की चुनौितयȗ का सामना करने क े साथ-साथ, िवकास को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए अपनी Ģितबǉता 
िदखाई है।  यह कदम नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ कर्ांितकारी पिरवतर्न लाएगा भारत इस क्षेतर् मȂ 
आत्मिनभर्र तो होगा ही, दुिनया को भी सहयोग कर ने की िÎथित मȂ आएगा। नवीकरणीय ऊजार् जो 
Ģाकृ ितक ǣोत या साधनȗ पर िनभर्र करती है, उसमȂ सौर ऊजार् , भूतापीय ऊजार्, पवन ऊजार्, 
ज्वार ऊजार्, जल ऊजार् और बायोमास क े िविभन्न Ģकारȗ को शािमल िकया जाता है और यह कभी 
भी समाÃत नहीं हो सकती है और इसे लगातार नवीकृ त िक या जाता है।  यह न क ेवल पयार्वरण क े 
अनुक ू ल है, बिÊक इनके  साथ कई Ģकार क े आिर्थक लाभ भी जुड़े हुए हȅ।  Îवच्छ पृथ्वी क े िलए 
िजÇमेदारी को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए, भारत ने यह संकÊप िलया है िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िक वषर् 2030 तक िबजली उत्पादन की हमारी 40 फीसदी क्षमता ऊजार् क े 
Îवच्छ ǣोतȗ पर आधािरत होगी। माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ इस 
महत्वाकांक्षी लÑय को हािसल करने क े साथ ही, भारत िवÌव क े सबसे बड़े Îवच्छ ऊजार् उत्पादकȗ 
की कतार मȂ शािमल हो जाएगा। यहां तक िक वह कई िवक
िसत देशȗ से भी आगे िनकल जाएगा।  
यही मोदी जी की सरकार का Ģयास है। मुझे पूणर् िव Ìवास है िक हमȂ कामयाबी िमलने जा रही है 
और इस कामयाबी को ĢाÃत करना हमारा संकÊप है। 
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया ,नवीकरणीय ऊजार् को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए हमारी सरकार 
क े जो Ģयास हȅ ,वे िनरंतर धरातल पर पहुंच रहे हȅ और गांव क े अंितम Ëयिƪ की झȗ पड़ी पर भी, 
अगर पहली बार सोलर लगा है , तो नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ लगा है। माननीय Ģधानमंतर्ी ,
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने ‘Ģधान मंतर्ी सूयर् घर योजना’ लाकर ,उन लाखȗ भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को ,िजनके  
पहाड़ȗ पर घर हȅ ,िजनके  दूरÎथ अंचलȗ  मȂ घर हȅ ,िजनके  मकानȗ पर आज तक िबजली क े बÊब 
का लƺू तक नहीं टांग पाई , कांगर्ेस ने इस देश मȂ 60 साल तक राज िक या , लेिकन िचमनी मȂ 
घासलेट भी उपलÅध नहीं कराया। पहली बार हमारे देश की सरकार ने Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ पक्के  मकान  4  करोड़ 10 लाख िदए और 11 करोड़ शौचालय बनवाकर िदए हȅ। 11 करोड़ 
शौचालय  िदए, 9 करोड़  गैस क े चूÊहे िदए, िकसानȗ को सÇमान िनिध दी और अब, जब उनका 
घर रोशन कर
ने की बारी आई, तो िवपक्ष क े पेट मȂ मरोड़Ȃ उठने लगी हȅ। उन्हȗने तमाम नाकािमयाँ 
िगनाईं, लेिकन िवपक्ष क े उन भाइयȗ और बहनȗ से मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक renewable energy, 
यानी न
वीकरणीय ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ िंहदुÎतान पूरी दुिनया मȂ इस ऊजार् क े नाम से जाना जाएगा। 
महोदया, नवीकरणीय ऊजार् भारत क े घरȗ को तो रोशन करेगी ही, साथ ही लेिकन पड़ोसी देशȗ 
को भी रोशन करने का का
म हमारा देश करेगा। ..) Ëयवधान...( महोदया,  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदया, 13 फरवरी,  2024 को 1 करोड़  घरȗ मȂ छत पर सौर ऊजार् Îथािपत करने क े िलए 
75,000 करोड़ रुपए  क े क ु ल पिरËयय क े साथ ' Ģधानमंतर्ी सूयर्घर मुÄत िबजली योजना'  शुरू  
करने की घोषणा की गई है और इस पर कायर् Ģारंभ भी कर िदया गय
ा है। महोदया,  कांगर्ेस क े 
शासनकाल मȂ  सुन भी लीिजए   )...  Ëयवधान)... आप सुन भी िलया कीिजए। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( सुǛी सुिÍमता देव): आप इस तरफ देखकर अपनी बात किहए। Please.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
111

डा. सुमेर िंसह सोलंकी:  अभी यहां पर हमारी एक बहन बोल रही थी िक कांगर्ेस क े शासन काल 
मȂ जो बÊब जलता था, वह िचमनी की भाँित जलता था। तार को पकड़ लो, तो करंट नहीं आता था 
और हमारी बहनȂ और बेिटयां रात- रात भर घर क े बाहर पÊले से झाड़कर अपनी रातȂ ि बताती थीं। 
महोदया, वह कांगर्ेस का शासनकाल था, लेिकन मȅ उनसे कहना चाहता हूं िक हमारे यहां पर 
िबजली का बÊब बंद नहीं होता है। 
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅने वे िदन भी देखे हȅ, जब हम िचमनी मȂ पढ़ते थे, 
क्यȗिक रात भर तक िबजली नहीं आती थी, गांव क े लोग, माताएँ और बहनȂ परेशान होती थीं। 
लेिकन तब तत्कालीन सरकार कांगर्ेस की थी, उन्हȂ कभी इसकी िंचता नहीं हुई। महोदया, एक 
बार िवǏािर्थ
यȗ क े आंदोलन क े दौरान रात भर लाइट नहीं आई। उस समय परीक्षा का समय था 
और हमने मोमबिǄयां जलाकर पढ़ाई की थी। तब कांगर्ेस क े उन लोगȗ ǎारा उस समय की एनजीर्, 
उस समय की िबजली सÃलाई करने की िÎथित क्य ा थी - इसके  बारȂ मȂ वे खुद जानते हȅ।  
महोदया,  मȅ इस वƪ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं िक गरीब भाइयȗ और बहनȗ क े 
मकानȗ तक िबजली पहुंचाने क े िलए कभी काम नहीं हुआ। वे अंधेरे मȂ काम करते थे, वे खेतȗ मȂ 
जाकर मसाल जलाकर काम करते थे। यिद उन्हȂ कहीं पैदल जाना होता था, तो वे मसा
ल जलाकर 
पैदल जाया करते थे। उनके  घर क े अंदर िचमनी क े िलए घासलेट नहीं होता था। वे सोसाइटीज 
मȂ, लाइन मȂ लगकर घासलेट का इंतजार कर
ते थे, लेिकन कांगर्ेस ने उस समय िबजली क े िलए 
कोई ËयवÎथा नहीं की। आज देश क े यशÎवी Ģधानमंतर्ी, माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने जब 1 करोड़ 
से अिधक घरȗ मȂ 'Ģधान मंतर्ी सूयर्घर योजना' लाकर 75,000 करोड़ रुपए  की ËयवÎथा की है, तो 
उसमȂ भी इनको तकलीफ हो रही है। अब ये उन गरीब भाइयȗ और बहनȗ क े आंगन मȂ, उनके  घरȗ 
मȂ बÊब जलते हुए नहीं देख सकते हȅ। कांगर्ेस वषș तक इस देश क े अंदर यह का म पूरा नहीं कर 
पाई। 
महोदया, छत पर सौर ऊजार् को बड़े पैमाने पर अपनाने की सुिवधा क े िलए क Ȃदर्ीय 
मंितर्मंडल ने 29 फरवरी 2024 को 'Ģधानमंतर्ी सूयर्घर मुÄत िबज ली योजना'   को मंजूरी दी है। इस 
योजना क े माध्यम से पिरवार िबजली क े िबलȗ पर बचत करने क े साथ-साथ िडसकाम को 
अिधशेष िबजली बेचकर अितिरƪ आय अिर्जत करने मȂ सक्षम हȗगे।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आज 3 िकलोवाट Ģणाली एक घर क े िलए औसतन एक 
महीने मȂ 300 से अिधक यूिनट उत्पन्न करने मȂ सक्षम होगी। इस योजन
ा क े माध्यम से मेरे उन 
आिदवासी भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को, मेरे उन गरीब भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को, िजनके  घरȗ तक आज 
तक िबजली की लाइन नहीं पहुंच पाई,  अग र ऐसे घरȗ तक भी रोशनी आती है, तो यह माननीय 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ ही संभव हो सकता है, और िकसी क े नेतृत्व मȂ संभव नहीं हो सकता 
है। 
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, 430 करोड़ रुपए  की सिÅसडी रािश सीधे ला भाथीर् आवास 
पिरवारȗ क े बȅक खातȗ मȂ Îथानांतिरत कर दी गई है और इस योजना से 17 लाख Ģत्यक्ष रोजगार 
क े िनमार्ण भी हȗगे। अभी मुझे एक बहन बोल रही थी  िक रोजगार क े िनमार्ण नहीं हȗगे। मेरे गांव क े 
िकसान भाइयȗ और बहनȗ ने अभी  ' Ģधानमंतर्ी क ु सुम योज
ना'  क े तहत 10 एकड़ मȂ एक Ãलांट 
लगाया है।  िपछले छ महीनȗ से वहां पर 50 मजदूर काम कर रहे हȅ और जब यह Ãलांट Îथािपत हो 
जाएगा, तो 10 लोगȗ को िनरंतर 25 सालȗ तक रोज
गार िमलेगा। महोदया,  ऐसे ही पूरे देश भर क े 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

अंदर िजतने Ãलांट Îथािपत हȗगे, उन सारे Ãलांट्स मȂ रोजगार की ËयवÎथा, नवीकरणीय ऊजार् को 
Îथािपत करने क े साथ ही होगी। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, ĢÎतािवत योजना क े 
पिरणामÎवरूप आवासीय क्षेतर् मȂ रूफटॉप  सोलर क े माध्यम से 30 गीगावाट्स सौर क्षमता बढ़ेगी, 
िजससे 1 लाख करोड़ यूिनट िबजली पैदा होगी और रूफटॉप  िसÎटम क े 25 साल क े जीवन काल 
मȂ 720 एमएमटी CO2 समतुÊय उत्स
जर्न मȂ कमी आएगी।                                                                   
इस योजना से िविनमार्ण, रसद, आपूिर्त Ǜृंखला, िबकर्ी, Îथापना, ओएंडएम और अन्य 
सेवाओं से लगभग 17 लाख से अिधक भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को रोजगार िमलेगा। माननीय 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मुझे यह जा
नकर Ģसन्नता हो रही है िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ, माननीय नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश मȂ नॉन फोिसल 
िवǏुत Îथािप
त क्षमता 200 गीगावाट से अिधक हो चुकी है, जो देश मȂ Îथािपत क ु ल िवǏुत क्षमता 
का लगभग 45 Ģितशत है। िपछले दस वषș क े दौरान, नॉन-फोिसल िवǏुत की यह Îथािपत क्षमता 
दोगुनी हो चुकी है। सौर ऊजार् क्षमता मȂ उपलिÅध िवशेष रूप  से उÊलेखनीय रही है, जो वषर् 201 4 
की तुलना मȂ 30 गुना से अिधक बढ़कर, अब लगभग 85 गीगावाट तक पहुंच गई है। िवǏुत क्षेतर्ȗ क े 
आंकड़ȗ से पता चलता है िक िपछले तीन वषș क े द ौरान पारंपिरक क्षेतर् की तुलना मȂ अक्षय ऊजार् 
क्षेतर् मȂ महत्वपूणर् रूप  से क ु ल क्षमता वृिǉ हुई है। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, एक दशक पूवर् 
अक्षय ऊजार् को पारंपिरक ǣोतȗ का पूरक माना जाता था तथा अब यह ऊजार् िमǛण का एक 
महत्वपूणर् िहÎसा है। भारत की िवǏुत क्षमता मȂ सौर और पवन ऊजार् की िहÎसेदारी मȂ अभूतपूवर् 
वृिǉ हुई है। ĢौǏोिगकी िवकास, सतत नीित समथर्न और जीवंत Ģा
इवेट सेक्टर क े कारण, भारत 
वैिÌवक Îवच्
छ ऊजार् िनवेशकȗ क े िलए एक अगर्णी िनवेश गंतËय बन चुका है। माननीय 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ मंतर्ालय को, माननीय मंतर्ी जी को नागिरक उन्मुक पीएम सूयर् घर मुÄत 
िबजली योजना, िजसके  तहत एक करोड़ घरȗ मȂ रूफ  टॉप सोलर लगाया जाएगा और िकसानȗ क े 
लाभ क े िलए चलाई गई पी
एम क ु सुम योजना की शुरुआत  करने क े िलए बधाई देता हूँ। मȅ माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को भी बधाई देना चाहता हूँ िक अब िकसानȗ को डीजल की क ुÃपी लेकर बाजार से 
डीजल-पेटर्ो
ल नहीं लाना पड़ेगा, बिÊक उनके  क ु एं पर, उनकी Ƿूबव ेल पर अब सोलर िसÎटम 
लगाया जाएगा, सोलर पंप लगाया जाएगा और अपनी मजीर् से वे िदन मȂ उठȂगे और अपने खेतȗ क े 
अंदर पानी देने का का
म करȂगे। यह भी कभी काँगर्ेस को नहीं िदखाई िदया िक िकसान परेशान हो 
रहे हȅ। अभी िकसान भाइयȗ-बहनȗ की चचार् हो रही थी। हमारे माननीय मंतर्ी, िशवराज िंसह चौहान 
जी जब जवाब दे रहे थे, तो काँगर्ेस को िकसान भाइयȗ-बहनȗ की चचार् सुनने की भी आदत नहीं है। 
वे बाहर चले गए। ये िकसान िवरोधी हȅ।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ यह भी बो
लना चाहता हूँ िक Ģधान मंतर्ी क ु सुम योजना क े 
अंतगर्त िकस ान भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को बȅक ऋण देकर, उनके  िलए क ु सुम सोलर Ãलांट Îथािपत 
करने की िदशा मȂ काम िकया जा रहा है।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
मध्य Ģदेश सरकार ने पावर परचेिंसग एगर्ीमȂट क े माध्यम से, क ु सुम ‘अ’ योजना क े अंदर पावर 
परचेिंसग एगर्ी
मȂट िकया और 3 रुपय े, 60 पैसे Ģित यूिनट िबजनी खरीदने का काम भी मध्य Ģदेश 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
113

की सरकार ने Ģारंभ कर िदया है। मेरे गाँव क े ही एक िकसान ने यह पावर परचेिंसग एगर्ीमȂट िकया 
है। यह संतोष का िवषय भी है िक सरकार क े िविभन्न नीितगत हÎतक्षेपȗ क े कारण सौर िवǏुत 
सÎती हुई है, क्यȗिक 2010-11 मȂ सौर ऊजार् शुÊक 10 रुपय े, 95 पैसे  था, वहीं अब 2023-24 मȂ 
Ģित यूिनट से घटकर दो रुपय े, 60 पैसे हो गया है। यह हमारे देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, 
माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ ही संभव हो सकता था। मȅ पुन: माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी और मान
नीय नवीन और नवीकणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ी, Ǜी Ģहलाद जोशी जी क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ भारत सरकार को अक्षय ऊजार् क्षेतर् मȂ सकारात्मक बदलाव क े िलए धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा। मȅ 
नवीन और नवीकणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ालय की अहम भूिमका की सराहना करता हूँ। माननीय सभापित 
महोदय, साथ मȂ, मȅ एक बात जरूर  बताना चाहत
ा हूँ। मȅ िकसान का बेटा हूँ, खेती करता रहा हूँ। 
मȅ जब क ु एं पर जाता था, तो वहाँ पर िबजली का बÊब जलता था । जब मȅ मोटर चालू करके , खेत 
तक आता था, तब िबजली चली जाती थी। एक बार नहीं, रात भर ऐसा होता था – िबजली जाना-
आना। जब िबजली का वॉÊटेज कम हो जाता था, तो िकसान भाइयȗ और बहनȗ की मोटरȂ जल 
जाती थीं। एक बार मोटर नहीं जलती थी, दो बार नहीं जलती थी, बिÊक तीन बार जल जाती थी। 
अगर िकसान भाइयȗ और बहनȗ की मोटर िबजली क े कारण तीन बार जल जाती है, तो साल भर 
मȂ उसे खेती मȂ िकसी भी िÎथित मȂ लाभ नहीं िमलता था। मान नीय सभापित महोदय, मȅने खुद 13 
साल तक मोटर बाइंिंडग की है। मुझे पता है िकसान भाइयो और बहनȗ का ददर्, क्यȗिक मेरे 
िपताजी आज भी खेतȗ मȂ काम करते हȅ। मȅने यह देखा िक काँगर्ेस सरकार क े समय मȂ जब वॉÊटेज 
नहीं िमलती थी, तो लोगȗ क े घरȗ की रोशनी का लƺू ही नहीं जलता था। िकसानȗ की मोटरȂ दो-
तीन िदन तक िबजली नहीं आने क े कारण नहीं चलती थीं और खेतȗ मȂ गेहूं की फसलȂ सूख जाती 
थीं।  आज देश क े यशÎ
वी Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमȂ घरȗ मȂ 24 घंटे  
िमलती है और खेतȗ मȂ कम से कम 18 घंटे िबजली िमलती है।  यह भारत क े Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने करके  िदखाया है।  जब नवीकरणीय ऊजार् की बात चल रही है, तो नवीकरणीय 
ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत ने इितहास रचते हुए वे काम िकए हȅ िक हमȂ अब कभी भी िब जली का बÊब 
बुझते हुए देखने को नहीं िमलता है और यह काम िनरंतर देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ िकया जा रहा है।   
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ अपनी बात खत्म करूं गा।  यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारे देश मȂ नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मȂ िरकॉडर् इज
ाफा हुआ है, जो िक 21 
Ģितशत है।  िवǄीय वषर् 2022-23 मȂ 15.27 गीगावॉट का इज ाफा हुआ है।  िवǄीय वषर् 2023-24 क े 
दौरान 18.48 गीगावॉट का इजाफा हुआ है और माचर् 2024 तक नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क्षमता बढ़कर 
143.64 गीगावॉट हुई है और 2030 तक हम ऊजार् क्षमता का िरकॉडर् 500 गीगावॉट तक ĢाÃत 
करȂगे।  यह हम देश क े यशÎवी Ģध ान मंतर्ी माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ ĢाÃत करȂगे।  इस 
िदशा मȂ हमारी सरकार िनरंतर कायर् कर रही है।  मुझे पूरा भरोसा है और देश क े 140 करोड़ 
भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को भी भरोसा है िक मोदी जी हȅ, तो मुमिकन है।  नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मȂ भारत 
िवÌव का नेतृत्व करेगा और िवÌ
व का नेतृत्व करते हुए नवीकरणीय ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ एक इितहास 
रचेगा। ये ऐितहािसक कदम िनरंतर चलते रहȂगे।  कांगर्ेस क े साथी भले ही * रहȂ, क ु छ भी कहते 
                                                           
* Not recorded. 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

रहȂ, लेिकन मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह नवीकरणीय ऊजार् का काम रुकन े वाला नहीं है।  यही 
ऐितहािसक काम देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े...  
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  The word * is not going on record.  Hon. Member, the word * is 
not going on record.  Okay, you have conc luded.  Very good!  Hon. Members, after 
the conclusion of address of Shri H.D. Devegowda, it is proposed to take Special 
Mentions and then resume the discussion.  Does the House agree to this? 
 
HON. MEMBERS:  Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri H. D. Devegowda. 
 
SHRI H.D. DEVEGOWDA (Karnataka):  Sir, at the outset, I would like to express my 
sincere gratitude for the Chair for having a l l o w e d  m e  t o  s p e a k  o n  t h i s  r e n e w a b l e  
energy. I have got a bitter experience in my  political career as Chief Minister of 
Karnataka, the amount of problems faced by the farmers, by the consumers. I do not 
want to allow such a thing to happen. In the then Government, whichever party, I do 
not want to mention, a former Chief Mini ster has written a book, 'Karnataka in 
Darkness'. My colleague is sitting here. In such a circumstance, I would like to just 
draw the attention of the hon. Members on both sides. I am not going to make any 
comment on anybody who is not now the Members of the House, either this House or 
the other House. The book written by former  Chief Minister, 'Karnataka in Darkness', 
today, in discussion on Agriculture Mini stry, when he was on your direction, 
concluding his speech... 
 Sir, being a farmer, I felt very bad. I have not come here to praise anybody. 
Yes, on the day when I spoke on agricultur e, I spoke a few words on the Agriculture 
Minister. Having known as a Member of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
when we reviewed what Madhya Pradesh has done. I do no t want to go into all those 
details. Sir, so as not to allow a single fa rmer to suffer, me, as Chief Minister, has 
introduced the Ganga Kalyan Yojana to prov ide the irrigation fac ilities. There was no 
flow irrigation, there was no dam, there was no tank, to provide borewell to draw the 
groundwater for Scheduled Castes, Schedule d Tribes and all those people. Sir, the 
power, everything was met by the Government when I was Chief Minister.  I know the 
difficulty; what are the problems of the po wer sector. Sir, I went to the extent of 
                                                           
* Not recorded. 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
115

meeting Shri Balasaheb Thackeray to get power for Karnataka and not to allow the 
farmers to suffer, and he issued instruct ions. The late Manohar Joshi, who was the 
Chief Minister, then, had given 500 megawatts. Whichever party he may belong, I do 
not want to allow my farmers to suffer. I went there. When I was the Prime Minister, 
the matter was discussed on this very same issue. My colleague is sitting here. I am 
not going to object, anybody. I am just telling as to how I had suffered; that is all. Sir, 
I can debate a lot on this issue.  
Why I held the Power portfolio as Prim e Minister? It is because I know the 
problems of the Power sector. I would like to say only one word. I can speak volumes 
on this issue, on this subject. Irrigation , power, are one of my pet subjects as a 
farmer. 
Sir, Modiji had come in last ten years. What is the development and how much 
progress has been made! I can quote facts and figures. But one thin g is that there is 
no corruption charge in the last ten years. I can boldly say this. I can boldly say this 
because I have got the bitter experience in  the past. I can quote several instances, 
but I do not want to hurt the feelings of any party, any leader, whichever party they 
may belong, but in the last 10  years, there is no corruptio n in the Power sector or any 
other sector. With these words, I would like to  give some facts and figures. Over the 
years, the importance of rene wable energy in India has only grown upwards. In a 
country of 1.4 billion people, we cannot secure  our future if we do not adopt a model 
of sustainable development. And Sir, for sustainable development, green and clean 
energy is a very important factor. 
 Earlier, we focussed on hydel power. Then, we came to solar power and then 
to wind energy.  Now, the most important f actor is renewable energy.  Sir, now, in 
our country, 1.4 billion people cannot secure their future if you do not adopt a model 
of sustainable development. For sustainable development, green and clean energy is 
a very important factor. That is why we have to progress in this regard. There are also 
so many international commitments.   
 S i r ,  w i t h  y o u r  k i n d  p e r m i s s i o n ,  I  m u s t  a d m i t  h e r e  t h a t  s o  m u c h  o f  w o r k  h a s  
been done in the last ten years under the hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, for 
promotion of renewable energy in this coun try. Let me place some data on record.  
India’s installed non-fossil fuel capacity has increased by 396 per cent in the last nine 
years and stands at more than 203.19 GW.  Today, in solar energy alone, the installed 
capacity has increased by 30 times in the last  nine years and stands at 85.4 GW as of 
June, 2024. So, there is no doubt that a lot of work has been done on this front.  
However, there are still many areas of concern in the renewable energy and we need 
to address some core challenges.  Accordin g to TERI Report, India is, currently, the 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

3rd largest energy consuming country in the world. But, 80 per cent of our energy 
demand is still being met by fossil fuel! It means, renewable energy share is only 20 
per cent. I learnt that the Government of India has set an ambitious target of achieving 
50 per cent of its installed cap acity for renewable energy by  2030.  I find no special 
package for this sector in the current ye ar’s Budget. The TERI Energy Report has 
estimated that by 2050, in the Vikasit Bhar at, the energy demand will be 400 per cent 
more than the present demand. Therefore,  the Ministry will have to speed up its 
efforts in this regard. This will also require a huge capital investment in this sector. I 
hope the hon. Minister will throw some light on this aspect in hi s reply. Secondly, for 
speedy growth in the renewable energy sector , you will also have to address regional 
disparities. The States which are laggi ng behind need proper hand-holding. 
Addressing the regional disparity is also im portant, because it cau ses strain on those 
States which have not done good work. 
Sir, now, if we talk about Karnataka, it is touted to be the leader in renewable 
energy. But, as of today, we have tapped on ly 11 per cent of our potential harnessing 
renewable energy. Moreover, in recent years,  our growth in this sector has slowed 
down; while the national average growth is 14 per cent in renewable energy, in 
Karnataka it is only two 2.58 pe r cent! My friends should take  note of that.  If you are 
serious about harnessing the true potential of the State in renewable energy, I would 
like to suggest some measures for your kind consideration. Firstly, you will have to 
have local supply chain and logistic support for utilizing off-shore wind’s full potential 
for energy generation. Secondly, you will have  to provide proper storage facilities for 
the energy that will be genera ted from the renewable sources.  At present, we do not 
have sufficient storage facilities. Thirdly, a major challenge with regard to solar power 
cells and battery storage and their disposal.  The shelf life of solar panels is just 25 
years and, at present, the country does not have any disposal policy for solar panels.  
So, this is going to cause a huge problem in  future. Moreover, we also need to see 
that hurried transition to renewable ener gy should not impact our bio-diversity 
because about 85 per cent of renewable energy plants are installed on agricultural 
and eco-sensitive lands. So, I suggest that  the policy should incorporate this, that 
only degraded land will be utilized for this purpose. 
 Sir, before concluding, I would like to  say that renewable energy is important 
not only from the point of view of sust ainable development but it also has huge 
potential of job creation at the rural level.  Therefore, the Government must make a 
holistic policy intervention in this regard . With warm regards, thank you very much for 
having allowed me to speak on this very important subject, which is in my heart. I also 
thank the Leader of the House for having come when I was speaking. Thank you very 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
117

much, Sir.                   
 
      
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: As already indicated to th e hon. Members, we  will now take up 
Special Mentions, and, then, resume the di scussion.  Now, Ms. Kavita Patidar -  
Demand for starting of Mhow-Indore-Manmad Railway Project; not present. 
 
(THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) in the Chair.) 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Shri Sujeet Kumar; not present. 
Now, Dr. Bhim Singh.  Is he there?  Not present. 
 
संसदीय कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा अÊपसंख्यक कायर् मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु): सर, चूँिक संबंिधत 
माननीय सदÎय को शायद यह जानकारी नहीं है िक अभी Îपेशल मȂशन िलया जाएगा, इसिलए 
माननीय सदÎय अभी उपिÎथत नहीं है।        
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Special Mentions can come up any 
time, you know. So, they will have to wait. Srimati Mausam Noor.
 
 
Demand for Railway Over Bridge at Samsi Railway Crossing, Malda, West Bengal 
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM NOOR (West Bengal): Sir, today I want to raise a crucial 
demand from the people of Malda Uttar, my previous parliamentary constituency.  
During my tenure as the MP of Malda Utta r, I pursued the Railway Ministry multiple 
times to sanction a Railway overbridge at Samsi railway crossing, Malda, West 
Bengal, a long-standing demand of the regi on. This project was sanctioned in the 
2012 Railway Budget. 
The people of Malda Uttar have been waiting for this overbridge for a long time. 
Samsi is a significant business hub in U ttar Malda, connecting Malda North to Malda 
South and linking North Malda to Bihar, S iliguri, and the entire Northern part of 
Bengal. It also connects North Malda to Kolkata and the Southern part of Bengal. 
Every day, thousands of people, includin g daily commuters, businessmen, students, 
patients, farmers, and traders get stuck for hours at the Samsi railway crossing, 
causing significant stress and loss of time.  
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

Given the importance of this project and the prolonged wait, I urge the Railway 
Department that the demands of the people of Malda Uttar will be fulfilled, and this 
issue resolved at the earliest. Thank you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  Please maintain peace. There is a 
lot of disturbance. 
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention 
made by the hon. Member, Shrimati Mausam  Noor: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).                                                                                            
Shri Raghav Chadha; he is also not pr esent. Dr. Bhagwat Karad; he is here. 
Dr. Bhagwat Karad. 
 
Demand for Mental Health Helpline to Reduce Farmer Suicide 
 
DR. BHAGWAT KARAD (Maharashtra): Sir, farmers’ suicides in the Marathwada 
region of Maharashtra have become a tragic  and pressing issue. This region, plagued 
by drought, debt, and economic instability, has witnessed a disturbingly high number 
of farmer suicides. In Indi a, over 10,000 farmers die by suicide each year, with 
Marathwada contributing significantly to this  grim statistic. In the first half of 2023 
alone, over 500 farmers in Marathwada t ook their own lives, highlighting the acute 
distress in the farming community.  
Depression and financial despair are the primary drivers behind these suicides. 
Farmers, trapped in a cycle of debt due to crop failures and fluctuating market prices, 
often find no way out. The lack of adequa te mental health support exacerbates their 
plight.  
In response to this crisis, it is impera tive for the Government to take immediate 
and robust action. Establishing a special fa rmer helpline under the National Mental 
Health Mission would provide much needed  psychological support and counselling. 
This helpline could serve as a lifeline for distressed farmers, farmers' families, offering 
them a platform to share their struggles and receive professional help.  
I urge the Government to look into it. Thank you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Thank you.  
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
119

The following hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention 
made by the hon. Member, Dr. Bhagwat Karad: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik, (Maharashtra),  Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab) and 
Dr. Sikander Kumar (Himachal Pradesh).                                                                            
Demand for restoration and support for Khazan Land in Goa 
 
SHRI SADANAND MHALU SHET TANAVADE (Goa): Sir, my Special Mention is about 
demand for restoration and support for Khaz an land in Goa. I rise to draw the 
attention of the august House to a signif icant issue concerning  the Khazan land 
system in Goa. The Khazan Land System , an engineering marvel crafted by our 
ancestors centuries ago, cons ists of reclaimed wetlands and low-lying lands located 
in the inter-tidal zones of estuaries  and tidal-affected ri vers. These lands are 
protected and regulated by Marginal Mari ne Clay Bunds and a Sluice Gate System 
(MANAS) located near the mouths of rivers . The Khazan land system is a perfect 
model of an ecosystem with an excellent blen d of men, marine life, flora, fauna, land, 
agriculture, water bodies, migratory bird habitats, mangrove forests, and beautiful 
backwaters.  
  However, these lands are now facing  threats from extreme weather events 
driven by climate change, including changes in rainfall patterns, flooding, and rising 
sea levels. These factors are leading to permanent loss of land, erosion of riverbanks, 
pollution of groundwater due to salinity ingress, and flooding of nearby villages. 
  I urge the Government to provide th e necessary assistance in terms of Special 
Grants, technical expertise and a robust po licy framework to revitalize Khazan lands 
and ensure their sustainable management, which will help bring back thousands of 
hectares of land under cultivation, stop  the permanent loss of land, and make the 
State more resilient to the challenges of climate change, sea level rise, and changes 
in rainfall patterns. Restoring Khazan lands w ill not only preserve our cultural heritage 
but also enhance environmental sustainability.                 
                                
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special  Mention made by hon. Member, Shri 
Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade:  Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

Demand to give benefit to villagers by putting closed and abandoned coal mines in 
use 
 
Ǜीमती महुआ माजी ( झारखंड): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, झारखंड मȂ रामगढ़, क ु जू, भुरकुं डा व 
अन्य इलाकȗ मȂ ऐसे ओपेन काÎट माइंस हȅ, जहां से कोयला िनकाला जा चुका है और खनन की 
Ģिकर्या बंद होने क े बाद वे खदान पिरत्यƪ होक र वषș से बेकार पड़े हȅ। इससे सरकार की सैकड़ȗ 
एकड़ बहुमूÊय ज़मीन बबार्द हो रही है। वे पिरत्यƪ खदान बािरश क े पानी से तालाब बन जाते हȅ। 
अक्सर उनमȂ नहाते वƪ गहराई का पता न लगने से ड ू ब कर गांव वालȗ की मौत होती है। खुले 
पिरत्यƪ खदान ÎवाÎथ्य और सुरक्षा की दृिÍट से अत्यंत खतरनाक होते हȅ। कोयले की धूल से 
पयार्वरण Ģदूिषत होता है,  Ģदूिषत पानी क े इÎतेमाल से पेड़ पौधȗ, जीव-जंतुओं, कीड़े-मकोड़ȗ, 
मछली आिद को नुकसान पहुंचता है। पीने या खेती मȂ इÎतेमाल करने पर लोग बीमार पड़ते हȅ। बंद 
हो चुक े खदानȗ क े इलाके  मȂ वैसे भी बेरोज़गारी ज्यादा होती है। 
            क Ȃ दर् सरकार चाहे तो इन पिरत्यƪ खदानȗ का इÎतेमाल इलाके  की अथर्ËयवÎथा को सुदृढ़ 
करने मȂ कर सकती है। चूंिक ये अबैन्डेन्ड ओपेन काÎट माइंस सȂटर्ल कोलफीÊड्स िलिमटेड क े 
अधीन आते हȅ, इसिलए क ंपनी वॉटर टर्ीटमȂट Ãलांट लगाकर गर्ामीणȗ को वहां से शुǉ पेयजल 
उपलÅध करा सकती है। उसका उपयोग िंसचाई क े िलए भी िकया जा सकता है। 
 
       Fisheries Department मछली पालन ǎारा रोज़गार सृजन कर सकती है। नये उǏोग 
लाकर उस जल का उपयोग इंडिÎटर्यल परपज़ मȂ भी िकया जा सकता है। सुरक्षा क े दृिÍटकोण से 
इन खदानȗ की फ Ȃिंसग करनी चािह
ए। वृक्षारोपण ǎारा कोयले क े खतरनाक डÎट से पयार्वरण को 
हो रहे नुकसान को कम िकया जाना चािहए। 
  अत: मेरा सर कार से आगर्ह है िक वह इस पर ध्यान दे।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA ):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by hon. Member, Shrimati 
Mahua Maji: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (K erala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shrimati Phulo 
Devi Netam (Chhatisgarh) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab). 
 
 Request for establishment of Aviation Varsity in Hyderabad 
 
DR. K. LAXMAN (Uttar Pradesh):  Sir, this  is a request for es tablishment of an 
Aviation  Varsity in Hyderabad. Hyderabad is the sixth largest metropolitan in India,  
Known for its rich history, culture, varied heri tage in arts, crafts, and dance, it is also 
known as the 'city of pearls'. Hyderabad has several defence, educational, legal, 
agricultural, training, research and development institutes. The city has 17 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
121

universities, including three Central, six State, two deemed, and six private 
universities. It also has world-class institutes like AIMS, IIT, IIT, ISB, BITS, NALSAR, 
I P  e t c .  T o d a y ,  i t  i s  h o m e  t o  m a n y  m ultinational companies and global majors, 
including Microsoft, Google, Facebook, CA, Oracle, IBM, Dell, TCS, Infosys, Wipro, 
and others. Apart from IT , Hyderabad is also emerging as a leader in 
pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, insurance, and tourism sectors. Hyderabad offers 
good weather all year-long.  In view of th e presence of Air Force Academy, Dundigal, 
Air Force Station, Hakimpet, Central Traini ng Establishment, Balanagar, College of 
Air Warfare at Secunderabad and Internatio nal Airport at Shamsh abad, there is a lot 
of scope for the establishment of an Aviation varsity in Hyderabad.  
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
Sufficient land is available and old airp ort at Begumpet also can be utilized for 
this purpose. Short and long-term diploma courses in training and management can 
be offered if an aviation university is set up . That would be the first of its kind in the 
country. Therefore, I request you to kindly consider the matter and take steps to set 
up an aviation university in Hyderabad. Thank you.                         
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Dr. K. 
Laxman: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu). 
Now, Shri Raghav Chadha, earlier you mi ssed it.  Future onwards, you should 
be in the House. 
 
Demand for structural audit in the country 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab): Thank you, Sir, for permitting me to raise an 
important matter under the Special Mention. महोदय, मȅ इस सदन का ध्यान एक अत्यंत 
महत्वपूणर् िवषय की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ, जो हमारे public transport sites और 
महत्वपूणर् इंģाÎटर्क्चर जैसे bridges, airports और railway stations क े  structural audit क े 
सन्दभर् मȂ है। अभी क ु छ िदन पहले हमने देश क े िविभन्न भागȗ मȂ इंģाÎटर्क्चर को collapse होते 
देखा।  िबहार मȂ ना जाने िकतने पुल िगर गये, िदÊली का टिर्मनल 1 एयरप
ोटर्, िजसकी छत भारी 
बािरश क े कारण िगर गई, िजससे एक Ëयिƪ की मृत्यु हुई और 6 लोग चोिटल हुए। देश क े 
िविभन्न राज्
यȗ से कई ǭदयिवदारक घंटनाएं हमने देखी हȅ, चाहे वो मुंबई मȂ िबलबोडर् िगरने से 
लोगो की मृत्यु हो या गुजरात क े मोरबी मȂ bridge िगरन े से लोगो की मौत। NCRB क े अनुसार 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

भारत मȂ 2018 से 2022 तक 8,756 मृत्यु report हुई हȅ due to collapse of structures । इन सभी 
का िनमार्ण आम आदमी क े मेहनत क े टैक्स से होता है और ये घटनाएँ सरकारी कायș की गुणवǄा 
पर ĢÌन खड़ा करती हȅ। आम जनता अपनी सुरक्षा को लेकर िंचितत है। यह हमारा कतर्Ëय है िक 
हम अपने नागिरकȗ को सुरिक्षत सुिवधाएं Ģदा
न करȂ। इन Îथलȗ की क्वािलटी और सेÄटी 
सुिनिÌचत करना अत्यंत आवÌयक है तािक िकसी भी Ģकार की दुघर्टना से बचा जा सके  और 
जनता की सुरक्षा को Ģाथिमकता दी जा सके । 
 महोदय, मेरी सरकार से मांग है िक सभी सावर्जिनक पिरवहन Îथलȗ का िनयिम
त रूप  से 
ऑिडट िकया जाए। इस ऑिडट मȂ िवशेषज्ञȗ की टीम ǎारा िवÎतृत िनरीक्षण, माप और मूÊयांकन 
शािमल होना चािहए, ताि क िकसी भी संभािवत जोिखम का समय पर पता लगाया जा सके  और 
उसे ठीक िकया जा सके । इसके  अलावा, ऑिडट क े आधार पर आवÌयक िरपेयर और सुधार कायर् 
तुरन्त िकए जाएं। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Raghav Chadha: Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Shrimati Sulata Deo 
(Odisha), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri Sanjeev Arora (P unjab), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla, Shri Ha ris Beeran (Kerala) and Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala). देशभर मȂ िजतने Îटर्
 क्चर हȅ, उन सबका ऑिडट कराया जाए। 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, जहां पर  public transport sites हȅ। अभी आपने िदÊली मȂ देखा, जो 
वारदात हुई। वह िकतनी दुभार्ग्यपूणर् घटना थी। इन सबका रेग्युलर Îटर्क्चरल ऑिडट एक 
िनयिमत तरीके  से होना चािहए, यह मांग की है। 
 
Demand for central as
sistance for the revival of agricultural sector in the state of 
Kerala 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala): Sir, thank you for allowing my Special 
Mention. The State of Kerala is passing through a tough phase consequent to the 
heavy landslides at Wayanad that has deva stated the lives of people. The extreme 
weather conditions are constantly creating ha voc in the State. Agriculture is one of 
the major sectors which bears the brunt of climate change and the subsequent 
weather extremities. The se vere drought in Kerala du ring the summer of 2024 is 
estimated to have caused di rect crop damage to 23,700 hectares across the State 
and a loss of Rs. 260 crore. Indirectly, there is a loss of production in 23,000 hectares 
and the loss is estimated at Rs. 250 crore. More than half a lakh farmers have been 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
123

affected by the drought.Farmers belonging to the major agricultural districts of Idukki, 
Wayanad, Palakkad and Thrissur have suffe red significant losses. The harsh drought 
has resulted in partial or complete losses of both food and cash crops. It is learnt that 
Government of Kerala has approached the Central Government for additional funds to 
address the situation and support the affected farmers.  
In this context, I appeal to the Centra l Government to grant a special financial 
package for the revival of agri cultural sector in the state. It is requested to issue 
directions to Banks to write off the agricult ural loans of the farmers whose crops have 
been destroyed.  I further urge the Governme nt to provide special financial assistance 
to the people of Wayanad for compensating the losses in agriculture and livestock.  
Thank you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham:  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharasht ra), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), Shri Anil Kuma r Yadav Mandali (Telangana), Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Dr. Ka nimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri Muzibulla 
Khan (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala). 
   Dr. Fauzia Khan is not present.  Now, Dr. Sikander Kumar. 
 
Concern over quality of food and hygiene provided by Railways during travel 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार (िहमाचल Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपका ध्यान भारतीय रेलवे, 
िजसको देश की लाइफ लाइन भी कहा जाता है की ओर िदलाना चाहता हूँ । आज भी टर्ेन से सफर 
करना हर भारतीय क े जीवन का िहÎसा है। रेलवे ǎारा सफर क े दौरान बहुत से टर्ेनȗ मे खाने की 
सुिवधा भी दी जाती है। रेलवे ǎारा सफर क े दौरान याितर्
 यȗ को िमलने वाले खाने की गुणवǄा, 
Îवच्छता और साफ-सफाई से लोगȗ को बड़ी िनराशा होती है।  
 मेरा माननीय रेलवे मंतर्ी जी से िवनĦ आगर्ह है िक साफ-सुथरे और पौिÍटक खाने क े िलए 
उिचत नीित तथा टर्ेनȗ एवं Îटेशनȗ पर अनािधकृ त िवकर्े ताओं की मौजूदग ी रोकने क े िलए और 
रेलवे याितर्यȗ की िशकायतȗ का त्विरत िनवारण क े िलए एक मजबूत तंतर् Îथािपत िकया जाए। इस 
सÇबन्ध मȂ भारत क े रेलवे Îटेशनȗ क े आस पास जो भी गांवȗ की Îवयं सेवी मिहलाओं की संÎथा या 
आंगनवाड़ी कायर्कतार्ओं से संपकर् करके , रेलवे मे पौिÍटक घर का खाना उपलÅध कराने की 
योजनाओं की भी समीक्षा की जान
ी चािहए, िजससे Îथानीय बेरोजगारȗ क े िलए रोज़गार क े 
अवसर बढ़Ȃगे और याितर् ओं को पौिÍटक खाना भी िमल सके गा। 
 मȅ रेलवे मंतर्ालय और सरकार से आवÌयक कारर्वाई करने का आगर्ह करता हूं, धन्यवाद। 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): धन्यवाद, डा.िसकं दर क ुमार जी। आपने बहुत महत्वपूणर् मुǈा 
उठाया है। यही संसद की खािसयत होती है। सǄारूढ़ दल भी, अगर कहीं कमजोरी है, तो 
सरकार से कहता है िक क ृपया इसको ठीक करȂ। मȅ Ģहलाद जोशी जी से कहूंगा िक आप माननीय 
रेलवे िमिनÎ
टर को अवगत कराएं िक जो मुǈा डा. िसकं दर क ुमार जी ने उठाया है। उन्हȗने बताया 
है िक रेलवे मȂ खराब खाना िमल रहा है, उसको दुरुÎत करना चािह ए और सुिवधाएं बढ़ानी 
चािहए। बहुत अच्छे, धन्यवाद।   
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention 
made by Dr. Sikander Kumar: Shri Chunni lal Garasiya (Rajasthan), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Naresh Bansal (U ttarakhand), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
(Maharashtra), Shri Sanjay Seth (Uttar Pr adesh), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri 
Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana), Shrima ti Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Maha dik (Maharashtra), Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
(Maharashtra), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha) and Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha).  
 
Demand for establishment of five medical colleges of RAJMES (Rajasthan Medical 
Education Society) and MDRUs of Bharatpur, Bhilwara, Churu, Pali and Dungarpur 
 
नीरज डांगी (राजÎथान): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, राजÎथान मȂ भरतपुर, भीलवाड़ा, चूरू , पाली 
एवं ड ूंगरपुर पांच राजमेस मेिडकल कॉलेजȗ क े Multidisciplinary Research Unit (एमडीआरयू) 
की Îथापना क े ĢÎताव 14.08.2019 को भारत सरकार को Ģेिषत िकये गए।  
 राजÎथान सरकार ǎारा हÎताक्षरयुƪ एमओयू िदनांक 28.11.2019 को Ģेिषत िकया। मेिडकल 
कॉलेजȗ से आए ĢÎतावȗ पर टेक्नीकल कमेटी से भीलवाड़ा तथा ड ूंगरपुर मेिडकल कॉलेज हेतु 
ऑÅजरवेशन्स ĢाÃत हुए हȅ तथा भरतपुर, चूरू  एवं पाली क े िलये ऑÅजरवेशन्स ĢाÃत होने शेष हȅ। 
एमडीआरयू की ड ूंगरपुर मेिडकल कॉलेज हेतु िदनांक 30.09.
2021 को Ģथम िकÎत 1.25 करोड 
रुपय े की Îवीकृ ित, Îथान िचिन्हत व पीडÅÊयूडी को एजȂसी िनयुƪ करने का कायर् पूणर् हो चुका है।  
 भीलवाड़ा हेतु पंजीकरण 21.09.2022 को पूणर् िकया। सीडीएससीओ, जीओएल से भारत 
सरकार क े ĢÌनȗ क े जवाब Ģतीिक्षत है एवं भेजे गए संशोिध त ĢÎतावȗ मȂ भारत सरकार ने तीन 
आपिǄयां उठाई थीं। दो का समाधान हो चुका है और एक पशु आवास क े संबंध मȂ Ģिकर्याधीन है। 
पाली ǎारा 22.11.2022 एवं चूरू  ǎारा 24.11.2022 को संशोिधत ĢÎताव भारत सरकार को Ģेिषत 
िकए गए। एमडीआरयू की पाली मेिडकल कॉलेज हेतु 27.3. 2023 को 1.25 करोड़ रुपय े की Ģथम 
िकÎत की Îवीकृ ित ĢाÃत हुई, साइट िचिÏनत की गई, एनएचएम को एजȂसी िनयुƪ िकया गया व 
उपकरण खरीद भी जÊद ही शुरू  होगी। शेष पर भारत सरकार से Îवीकृ ित अपेिक्ष त है। भारत 
सरकार क े पतर् िदनांक 14.3.2023 क े अनुसार चुरू  क े िलए संशोिधत ĢÎताव अगर्ेिषत िकए जाने 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
125

हȅ, अत: मेरा आपके  माध्यम से भारत सरकार से आगर्ह है िक भरतपुर, भीलवाड़ा, चुरू , पाली एवं 
ड ूंगरपुर मेिडकल कॉलेज मȂ बहुिवषयक अनुसंधान इकाई (एमडीआरयू) क े Ģोजेक्ट की Îवीकृ ित 
एवं धनरािश जÊद जारी की जाए। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मुझे यहाँ पर बोलने का अवस र देने क े 
िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Ment ion made by Shri Neeraj Dangi:  Shri 
Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shrimati Phulo 
Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Shri Madan Rath ore (Rajasthan), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Na du), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
Shri Sant Balbir Singh. Demand for compensation for Horticultural Crops 
damaged due to natural calamities. 
 
Demand for compensation for horticultural crops damaged due to natural calamities 
 
SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH (Punjab): Compensation is provided by the Government 
in cases of loss of crops due to natural calamities. These natural disasters occur 
frequently in the forms of floods and drough ts.  While horticulture also suffers losses 
due to natural calamities, no compensation is provided for them.  Horticulture, which 
is also seen as an alternat ive form of agriculture, conserves groundwater and helps in 
keeping the environment clean.  Orange orch ards have been planted on a large scale 
in Fazilka, Abohar, Hoshiarpur, and other pl aces in Punjab.  After falling prey to the 
natural blight, many horticultural farmers repented of it and were forced to dig up their 
green gardens. Horticulture in this area  is dependent on canal water as their 
groundwater is saline. This is also causing damage to the gardens. 
  During the last two years, 2021-22 and 2022-23, around 40,000 farmers in 
Bathinda, Muktsar, and Fazilka uprooted th eir gardens due to climate change.  Sir, 
climate change is having the worst impact on  horticulture. Therefore, it is our strong 
demand that the interests of horticultu re farmers across the country, including 
Punjab, should be taken care of. 
  Sir, I request Government that in case of loss of their horticulture due to natural 
calamities, they should be compensated like loss of normal crops.  To encourage 
horticulture, maximum subsidies should be gi ven so that farmers turn to horticulture 
and arrange for the marketing of their frui ts.  Loans of horticultural farmers and 
laborers should be waived of. Tools and m achinery used for horticulture should be 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

made cheaper. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Thank you, Balbir Singh ji.   You 
have raised an important issue.   The following hon. Members associated themselves 
with the Special Mention made by Shri Sant Balbir Singh: Shri Sanjeev Arora 
(Punjab), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Na du), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri 
P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu). 
Shrimati Sulata Deo.  Concern over cruelty against animals. 
 
Concern over cruelty against animals 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha): Sir, I wo uld like to bring to the notice of the 
House an important issue of cruelty agains t animals.  Sir, animals cannot express 
their pain in human language, but they have souls and feel suffering just like us. It is 
our duty to understand their problems and protect them. 
 We need strict laws to check cruelty agai nst animals and also to ensure that those 
who harm animals are held accountable.  Prop er measures and monitoring should be 
implemented to prevent abuse and neglect. Additionally, illegal slaughterhouses must 
be banned immediately to stop the inhumane treatment of animals. By taking these 
steps, we can create a society that respects and cares for all living beings. It is time 
to act and ensure that animals are treated  with the compassion and dignity they 
deserve.  I urge the Government to look into it.  Thank you.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shrimati Sulata Deo: 
Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tam il Nadu), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).   
Now, Mr. Sandosh Kumar P.  He w ill speak about ‘Need to Address the 
Problems Faced by Kannur International Airport’. 
 
Need to address the problems faced by the Kannur International Airport 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala):  Sir, the Kannur International Airport is facing a 
serious crisis due to huge financial loss and a lack of sufficient airlines to meet the 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
127

needs of the passengers. The Kannur Airpor t which started operations on December 
9, 2018, handled one million passengers with in the first ten months, operated 50 daily 
services and 65 international services per week and was among the top ten airports in 
India, used by most international passeng ers in August and September, 2021. Yet, 
recently, there has been a sharp decline in  the number of passengers and operating 
airlines. To increase the revenue of the airp ort and make it prof itable, more flight 
services were necessary. As of now, there are few direct airline services from the 
airport. There is not even a single direct flight that connects Kannur Airport with New 
Delhi.  The airport serves 4 districts of Kerala - Kannur, Kasaragod, Wayanad and 
Kozhikode and caters to passengers from Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The 
development of the airport would certainly  contribute to the economic growth and 
industrial development of the region. If the airport gets ‘Point of Call Status’, many 
international airlines can start direct services from Kannur. This will be a huge relief to 
the airport and the needy passengers. The strategic location and state-of-the-art 
infrastructure offer enormous opportunities fo r the airport to act as a vital connectivity 
point. Enhanced connectivity would reflec t in the growth of tourism and related 
industries also. Therefore, I request the co ncerned Minister to address these issues 
and save the airport from an existential crisis.  Thank you.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Sandosh Kumar 
P:  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Si vadasan (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).  
 
Demand for infrastructure development, regular staffing and digitisation of post 
offices in Odisha 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान ( ओिडशा): मȅ ओिडशा मȂ, िवशेष रूप  से गर्ामीण पंचायतȗ मȂ डाकघरȗ क े 
बुिनयादी ढांचे क े िवकास, िनयिमत Îटािंफग और िडिजटलीकरण की तत्काल आवÌयकता को 
संबोिधत करने क े िलए आपका ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ। कई डाकघर वतर्मान मȂ अपयार्Ãत 
सुिवधाओं क े साथ काम कर रहे हȅ। अकसर कमर्चािरयȗ की कमी और पुरानी Ģणाली क े कारण 
सेवा िवतरण Ģभािव
त हो रहा है। बुिनयादी ढांचे को उन्नत करने, लगातार Îटािंफग सुिनिÌचत 
करने और डाक सेवाओं की दक्षता और पहुँच मȂ सुधार क े िलए आधुिनक िडिजटल Ģणािलयȗ को 
लागू करने क े िलए तत्काल कारर्वाई की आवÌयकता है। इसके  अित िरƪ, डाकघर क े संचालन 
को बढ़ाने से Îपीड पोÎट, रिजÎटर्ी, मनीऑडर्र, िटकट िबकर्ी, राजÎव िटकट, सरकारी िवǄीय 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

योजनाएँ और बीमा उत्पादȗ जैसी आवÌयक सेवाओं क े Ģावधान मȂ सुिवधा होगी। इससे न क ेवल 
सेवा पहुँच मȂ सुधार होगा, बिÊक सुकन्या समृिǉ योजना जैसी योजनाओं को भी बढ़ावा िमलेगा, 
िजससे गर्ामीण समुदायȗ को बहुत लाभ होगा। मȅ संबंिधत मंतर्ी क े ध्यान मȂ लाने का आगर्ह करता हूँ 
और अनुरोध करता हूँ िक आवÌयक कारर्वा
ई मȂ तेजी लाने क े िलए इसे अत्यंत तत्परता से 
संबोिधत िकया जाए। आपका त्विरत हÎतक्षेप डाक सेवाओं की गुणवǄा मȂ उÊलेखनीय रूप  से 
सुधार करेगा और गर्ामीण िनवािसयȗ की आिर्थक और सामािजक भलाई का समथर्न करेगा। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon.
 Members 
associated themselves with the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Muzibulla Khan: 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) 
and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri P.  Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Sh ri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha) and Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha).  
Now, Dr. Bhim Singh.  He was not here earlier.  But he has sent a request that 
he is back.   
 
Demand for establishment of Extremely Backward Classes Finance and Development 
Corporation 
 
डा. भीम िंसह (िबहार):  महोदय, िपछड़ा वगर् एक बहुत बड़ा वगर् है, िज सम Ȃ आपसी गैर बराबरी 
भी काफी है। क ु छ जाितयां अत्यंत ही िपछड़ी हुई हȅ।  अत्यंत िपछड़ा वगर् की जनता मȂ अिधकांश 
मूलत: खेितहर मजदूर, काÌतकार, दÎतकार, िशÊपकार, पशुपालक तथा समाज की सेवा करने 
वाले लोग शािमल हȅ।  िव
ज्ञान की Ģगित तथा कल-कारखानȗ की Îथापना से गर्ामȗ क े दÎतकार 
तथा िशÊपकार Ģाय: बेकार हो गये हȅ।  िजन चीजȗ को वे अपनी कला कौशल से बनाते थे, उन्हȂ 
अब मशीनȂ बनाने लगी हȅ।   वे अकु शल मजदूर बन गये हȅ।  क ृिष पर उनकी अिधक आिǛतता बढ़ 
गयी है, साथ ही उनकी बेरोजगारी बढ़ी है। जनसंख्या वृिǉ तथा क ृिष पर अिधक आिǛतता बढ़ने 
से खेती भी अब कम होती जा रही है।  तात्पयर् यह है िक सिदयȗ से चली आ रही कठोर एवं जिटल 
सामािजक ËयवÎथा क े िशकार िपछ
ड़े वगर् क े इन लोगȗ को िवज्ञान की Ģगित तथा कल-कारखानȗ 
की Îथापना ने बेरोजगार बनाकर आिर्थक रूप  से पंगु बना िदया है।    
 अत: सरकार से अनुरोध है िक िपछड़े वगș  क े लोगȗ की हालत सुधारने तथा इनके  गर्ामीण 
तथा क ुटीर उǏोग धन्धȗ क े िवकास क े िलए सरकार राÍटर्ीय िपछड़ा वगर् िवǄ एवं िव
कास िनगम 
को सुदृढ़ करे और एक नए अत्यंत िपछड़ा वगर् िवǄ एवं िवकास िनगम की Îथापना करे, जो अत्यंत 
िपछड़े वगर् क े उत्थान क े काम को अपने हाथ मȂ ले, तािक इस वगर् का आिर्थक िवकास हो सके । 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon.
 Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Dr. Bhim 
Singh: Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana ), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Anil 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
129

Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Shri Chunnilal Garasiya (Rajasthan) and Shri 
Amar Pal Maurya (Uttar Pradesh). 
Now Dr. M. Thambidurai.  ...( Interruptions)... You are right.  His turn should 
have come in the end.  But since he made a request, I acceded to it.    
Concern over drug/alcohol menace 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, I would like to raise a very important 
matter afflicting the country and making lives of the people miserable.  It is drug 
alcohol menace.  Drug/alcohol abuse ha s become a worldwid e menace. This has 
emerged as a serious concern, adversely affecting the physical and socio-economic 
well-being of the country. The epidemic of  drug abuse in younger generation has 
assumed alarming dimensions in India. Addiction to alcohol/drugs not only affects the 
individual involved, but also the family and society at large. 
 India is sandwiched between two larges t opium-producing regi ons of the world, 
that is, the Golden Triangle comprising Thailand, Myanmar and Vietnam on one side, 
and the Golden Crescent comprising Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran on the other. The 
menace of drug/alcohol addiction has spread fast among the youth of India.  
 As far as Tamil Nadu is concerned, th e incidence of sale of ganja and other 
narcotic drugs is increasing and they ar e available very easily near schools and 
colleges. Drug menace is rampant in Tamil Nadu, and every day, there are reports of 
murders, as a result of drugs/alcohol abuse. Drug and alcohol addiction has become 
a menace which threatens public health.  In  Kallakurichi in Tamil Nadu, a month ago, 
more than 65 persons died du e to consumption of illicit and spurious methanol mixed 
liquor.  
 I request the Centre to formulate a pa n-India policy on drug/alcohol abuse and 
send an advisory to the States in order to reduce abuse of all types of drugs. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Dr. M. 
Thambidurai: Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), Shrimati  Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shrimati S. 
Phangnon Konyak (Nagaland), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) 
and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).  
 
 
 
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

Concern over issue of fake caste certificates 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha): This serious problem has far-reaching implications, 
particularly for the Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST), and Other 
Backward Classes (OBC) communities who are entitled to certain reservation 
benefits to uplift their socio-economic stat us in accordance with the provision of the 
Constitution of India. 
The use of fraudulent caste certificates undermines the purpose of these 
reservations, depriving genuine beneficiaries of their rightful opportunities in higher 
education, employment, promotion and elective posts. The spurious Scheduled 
Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates who fals ely claim these benefits by virtue of 
those fake caste certificates  not only snatch away the reservation benefit meant for 
undeveloped, depressed, and suppressed Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe 
communities but also perpetuate  social injustice and inequality; as a result of which, 
the genuine Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates are deprived from their 
constitutional rights.  
The Father of the Constitution of India, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, had made 
provisions of reservation in education, appointment, promotion and in political 
representation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with a view to bringing the 
Scheduled Caste and Schedule d Tribe communities in the mainstream of the nation. 
Immediate action is necessary to address this issue.  
Sir, I urge the Government of India to conduct an investigation and verification 
process to identify and cancel the fake caste certificates. This step will help to protect 
the fundamental rights of Scheduled Ca ste and Scheduled Tribe communities and 
promote a fair and just society. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Thank you, Niranjanji. You raised a 
very important issue, because it has become a usual phenomenon  to produce fake 
caste certificates. I think the Government will take notice of it and will take corrective 
measures.  
 The following hon. Members associated themselves with the Special Mention 
made by the hon. Member, Shri Niranjan Bishi: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Muzibulla Khan  (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasa n (Kerala), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), 
Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Britta s (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha)  and Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala). 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
131

Dumping of cheap Chinese fabrics and Duty-free import of man-made fabrics from 
Bangladesh 
 
SHRI SAJEEV ARORA (Punjab): Mr. Vice Chairman, Sir, I would like to apprise you 
regarding the pressing issue faced by the In dian textile industry due to various issues. 
One of them is influx of cheap imports from China.  
The industry is facing a dual challenge of slowing export demand and a large 
influx of imported fabrics and garments, particularly from China. This massive 
dumping of cheap, low-quality fabrics from China is causing significant harm to the 
Indian textile industry, especially the MS ME sector. The industry seeks an immediate 
ban on the import of low-rate and low-qualit y knitted fabrics from China. It is crucial 
to impose a minimum import price of at least USD 3.50 per kg on all HSN codes under 
Chapter 60 of the Customs Tariff to protect the domestic industry.  
Another pressing issue is the duty-free import of man-made  fabric apparel 
from Bangladesh under the SAARC Agreem ent of 2006. Bangladesh imports cheaper 
fabrics from China, converts them into garments and dumps them into Indian market.  
Garment manufacturing is a labour-i ntensive industry that provides 
employment opportunities, especially for women. The duty-free import should be 
banned immediately to promote the local indu stry and protect jobs. It is crucial to 
address these issues to ensure a level-play ing field for the Indian textile industry. 
Hence, I urge Government to take swif t action to address these concerns and 
safeguard the interest of the Indian textile industry. I look forward to Government's 
response and its plan of action to tackle these challenges. Thank you.          
                              
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Sanjeev Arora: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), 
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Sh ri Niranjan Bishi  (Odisha) , Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu) , Shri  M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) , 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Sh rimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh) , 
Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab). 
 
Demand for special assistance by the Central Government to the public libraries of 
Maharashtra 
 
Ǜी धनंजय भीमराव महािदक (महाराÍटर्): महोदय, महाराÍटर् राज्य मȂ 11,000 से अिधक 
सावर्जिनक पुÎतकालय हȅ, जो टर्Îट और संÎथा
 ओं ǎारा संचािलत हȅ। ये पुÎतकालय लाखȗ पाठकȗ 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

को गुणवǄापूणर् पुÎतकȗ, पितर्काओं और समाचार पतर्ȗ तक पहुंच Ģदान करते हȅ। राज्य सरकार 
इन पुÎतकालयȗ को वािर्षक रख-रखाव अनुदान देती है। िडिजटल युग मȂ बच्चȗ और युवाओं को 
पढ़ने की आदत डालने क े िलए पुÎतकालयȗ मȂ िडिजटल बुिनयादी ढांचा और ई-पुÎतकȂ उपलÅ ध 
कराना आवÌयक है। 
  महाराÍटर् सरकार ने िवǄ मंतर्ालय को डीपीआर क े साथ एक ĢÎताव भेजा है, िजसमȂ 
469.38 करोड़ रुपय े की िवशेष सहायता की मांग की गई है। क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने इस ĢÎताव को िदशा 
िनदȃशȗ क े अनुरूप  नहीं बताया है और सुझाव िदया है िक सहायता क ेवल गर्ाम पंचाय
त और 
नगरपािलका वाडș मȂ नए पुÎतकालय Îथािपत करने क े िलए उपलÅध है। 
  यह ĢÎताव 11,322 मौजूदा सावर्जिनक पुÎतकालयȗ क े िलए है। इसिलए, मȅ सरकार से 
अनुरोध करता हूं िक सहायता की शतș पर पुनिर्वचार करे, क्यȗिक मौजूदा पुÎतकालयȗ को बेहत
र 
सेवाएं Ģदान करने क े िलए सहायता की आवÌयकता है।  राज्य मȂ पहले से ही िवǄ पोिषत 
सावर्जिनक पुÎतकालयȗ का बड़ा नेटवकर् है, इसि लए नए पुÎतकालय Îथािपत करना संभव नहीं 
है।  िवशेष सहायता ĢाÃत करने की समय सीमा िनकट आ रही है।  अत:  मेरी सरकार से यह माँग 
है की इस मुǈे का शीघर् समाधान करके  राज् य  को अथर्-सहाÈय Ģदान की जाए। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik:   Shri Sadana nd Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odi sha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and 
Shri Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra). 
Now, Shri A.D. Singh to speak about "Demand for strict enforcement of ban 
on Single Use Plastic."     
 
Demand for Strict Enforcement of ban on Single use plastic 
 
S H R I  A .  D .  S I N G H  ( B i h a r ) :   S i r ,  o n  1 s t  J u l y ,  2 0 2 2 ,  t h e  G o v e r n m e n t  b a n n e d  t h e  
manufacture, distribution, stocking, sale and use of 19 Single Use Plastic (SUP) 
items by amending the Plastic Waste Ma nagement Rule, 2016. The ban covered 
plastic items like cutlery, straws, sticks, carry bags and banners (with specified 
thickness), ear buds with plastic sticks, pl astic flags, etc.  Special Task Force has 
been constituted in all States/UTs. A National Task Force is constituted in the Ministry 
for coordination purposes. Directions were issued to plastic raw material 
manufactures to stop supplying raw materi al for manufacture of banned SUP.  Within 
months, banned SUP items continued to be sold and used in the country as ever 
before.  The plastic carry bags and other items are littered as plastic straws in streets 
and water bodies which cause plastic pollution and harms terrestrial and aqua eco 
system besides giving shabby look. Surve ys conducted by Centre for Science and 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
133

Environment finds that - En forcement of the ban has been poor and needs to be 
strengthened; there is un-interrupted produc tion of banned items; there is lack of 
awareness; market for plastic alternative is under developed and effective collection 
system and efficient recycling units are required. 
I urge upon the Government that the list of banned items may be reviewed.  
More items should be included in the list such as water bottles and carry bags 
irrespective of thickness. Strict implementa tion of the orders should be ensured by 
fixing the responsibilities.  Thank you very much, Sir.            
                                                            
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Shri A. 
D. Singh:   
 Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri Imra n Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odi sha), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tam il Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).               
                                                                    
Demand for running the KV school JIPMER on fulltime instead of 
shift basis 
 
SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY (Puducherry):   Sir, there are two Kendriya 
Vidhyalayas in Puducherry, one in Jipm er Campus and another in Pondicherry 
University campus, at Kalapet. The one at Jipmer campus is running on shift basis 
due to non-availability of space to run on fulltime basis.  As a result, the children have 
no time to concentrate on sports and ex tracurricular activities.  As per the KV 
guidelines, they have to be trained for yoga, scout, etc. Because of the 
non-availability of time, they are deprived of these necessities.  Many parents have 
approached me to arrange for schooling on fu lltime basis.  If space is the constraint 
for expansion, I have a suggestion.  There are several Jipmer staff quarters around 
the school.  Most of them are more than  forty years old and are in dilapidated 
condition.  Now, they can be demolished and part of the area adjoining the school 
can be given to KV school for expansion.  In the rest of the space, the Jipmer can 
construct multi storeyed or vertical expans ion building for accommodating staff.  This 
will easily solve the problem and it will also allow the children to have sufficient time for 
relaxation and take up sports and extracurricular activities without mental tension. 
 Therefore, I request the hon. Education Minister to advise the JIPMER 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

administration to accept my suggestions or else they may find some other 
alternatives.  But please ensure that the shift system is abolished as early as possible. 
Thank you very much.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the Special Me ntion made by the hon. Member, Shri S. 
Selvaganabathy: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and  Shri 
Niranjan Bishi (Odisha). 
Now, Dr. V. Sivadasan. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Need to Address the issues faced by the people during the construction of National 
Highways 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Sir, National Highways are important for the progress 
of the country and the Government of Kera la has taken all possible steps to ensure 
that the National Highway construction is  completed in the State. The NHAI has 
started the construction and the work is pr ogressing. But, there are several problems 
which the people are suffering.  There is wate r logging in the construction sites. It has 
resulted in accidents and people are not ab le to travel. At some places, the removal 
of soil in unscientific manner has created a dangerous situation.  Some houses have 
been isolated, and they are unable to move freely out of their home. The delay in the 
completion of the National Highways is  resulting in traffic congestion and 
slow-moving traffic.  Traffic has to be diverted which adds to the woes of the people.  
There is a need to build more  underpasses and bridges so that the right of the people 
to move freely is addressed.  
Sir, I urge the Government to take urgent action so that the construction of 
National Highways is completed by the NHAI at the earliest and the right of the people 
to travel freely is guaranteed. Thank you, Sir.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Me mber, Dr. V. Sivadasan: Dr. Kanimozhi 
NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Sh rimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Haris  
Beeran  (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hi sham (Kerala) and Shri P. Wilson (Tamil 
Nadu). 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
135

Shri Imran Pratapgarhi;  
 
Demand for direct regular train service connecting Pratapgarh, U.P. to Mumbai 
 
Ǜी इमरान Ģतापगढ़ी (महाराÍटर्): उपसभापित महोदय, उǄर Ģदेश का Ģतापगढ़ जनपद 
गौरवशाली िजला है, इस िजले से बड़ी संख्या मȂ देश की आिर्थक राजधानी मुÇबई क े िलए लोग 
रेल यातर्ा करते हȅ।  Ëयापार क े िलए, नौकरी क े िलए लाखȗ लोग मुÇबई से जुड़े हुए हȅ। 
  मेरे जनपद Ģतापगढ़ से मुÇबई क े िलए डेली कोई भी टर्ेन नहीं जाती, िसफर् ' साके त 
एक्सĢेस', िजसका नंबर 22184 एवं 22183 है, जो फ ैज़ाबाद(अयोध्या) से सÃताह मȂ दो िदन 
चलती है और Ģतापगढ़ होकर जाती है।  इस कारण से Ģतापगढ़ से मुÇबई यातर्ा करने वालȗ को 
बड़ी किठनाई का सामना करना पड़त
ा है।  माननीय रेलमंतर्ी जी से मेरा अनुरोध है िक Ģतापगढ़ से 
Ģारंभ करके  मुÇबई क े िलए डायरेक्ट डेली टर्ेन चलाई जाये या 'साके त एक्सĢेस' को डेली िकया 
जाए, िजससे िसफर् Ģतापगढ़ ही नहीं, बिÊक अन्य जनपदȗ जैसे सुÊतानपुर और जौनपुर क े 
याितर्
यȗ को भी सुिवधा हो। 
  मȅ ख़ुद Ģतापगढ़ जनपद का हूँ, मȅ महाराÍटर् से राज्यसभा का सांसद हूँ, मुझे भी वहाँ से 
यातर्ा करने क े िलए इलाहाबाद या लखनऊ जाना पड़ता है।  अत: रेलमंतर्ी जी से अनुरोध है िक वे 
अजȄट इस मामले का संज्ञान लȂ और 'साके त एक्सĢेस', 221 84 और 22183 का संचालन Ģितिदन 
कराएँ। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Imran Pratapgarhi: Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Pramod Tiwari  
(Rajasthan), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punj ab),  Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi 
(Telangana), Shri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan),  Shri Niranjan Bish i (Odisha), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Muzi bulla Khan (Odisha), Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr . Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi 
Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh). 
Now, hon. Shri P. Wilson; 'Demand for amendment in Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for State Owned Discoms.' 
 
Demand for amendment in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) for State 
Owned Discoms 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu): Sir, it has become commonplace to see power 
generating companies go into insolvency and liquidation, leaving behind dues of 
hundreds of crores of rupees to State owned DISCOMs. These gencoms are often set 
up as SPVs with group companies taking  up the Engineering Procurement and 
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

Construction (EPC) contract or fuel su pply and thus the parent company has no 
problem with the gencom going under liqui dation because they would have earned 
enough money by then.  
However, the State-owned DISCOMs wh ich would have spent hundreds of 
crores is left in the lurch. In Tamil Nadu, the State-owned DISCOM TANGEDCO has 
faced several such cases wh ere the Gencoms owing hundred s of crores of rupees 
have become insolvent and no recovery is made from the Contract Insolvency 
Resolution Process (CIRP) because du es to DISCOMs are placed at the 6 th place in 
the Waterfall Mechanism under Section 53 of the IBC Code.  TANGEDCO’s losses are 
then absorbed by the State Government . Ultimately, the DISCOM becomes debt 
ridden and customers suffer. Therefore, some relief has to be given to DISCOMs 
when Gencoms undergo insolvency. My suggestion is that State-owned DISCOMs 
must be placed higher and tr eated on par with financial creditors because they have 
ultimately invested in the Gencom to build and operate a power generating station. I, 
therefore, request the hon. Minister of Co rporate Affairs to amend Section 53 of IBC 
Code and place dues, to State owned DISCOM s from generating companies, on par 
with financial debts owed to unsecured creditors, and oblige. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri P. Wilson: Shri Haris  Beeran  
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Shri Niranjan 
Bishi  (Odisha), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).             
Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi; concern over drug menace in the country. 
 
Concern over drug menace in the Country 
 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR YADAV MANDADI (Telan gana): Sir, recently, there were 
instances of seizure of huge haul of narcot ic drugs in the country. In February, 2024, 
NCB has seized 3,300 kg. drugs off Gujarat Coast. In March, 2024, there was a huge 
haul of narcotic drugs from Visakhapatnam Port. The use of charas, ganja, heroine, 
opium, brown sugar and other narcotic drug by youngsters in the country has 
increased manifold.  The Stat es with international borders are easily prone to illegal 
drug trade. Punjab, North Eastern States wi th international border and coastal States 
are main drug trading centres. To some ex tent, the State of Telangana is also 
seriously affected due to drug use. Drug ab use leads to serious health issues – heart 
disease, lung disease, Cancer, etc., The serious issue of drug abuse is to be handled 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
137

seriously.  There is a need for strategic ch ange in policing the drug abuse. Instead of 
focusing on ‘drug abuse’, th e Government has to focus on ‘drug trade’ and take 
effective measures to prevent the smuggl ing/illegal trafficking of drugs into the 
country.  Therefore, I urge upon the Gove rnment to take stern and stringent action 
against the drug traders so that the drugs do not enter the country.                   
                                                
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member, Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi: Shri 
Imran Pratapgarhi (Maharashtra),  Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (O disha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), 
Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Sh ri Neeraj Dangi (Rajasthan), Shrimati 
Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Niranj an Bishi  (Odisha), and Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala).                                                                       
 Now Shri Naresh Bansal; demand to de velop and use local servers and cloud 
systems in the country. 
 
Demand to develop and use local servers and cloud systems in the country 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड): महोदय, माइकर्ोसॉÄट की क्लाउड सिर्वसेज मȂ शुकर्वार 19 जुलाई 
को आई िदक्कत ने दुिनयाभर मȂ इसकी िवÌवसनीयता को लेकर सवाल खड़े कर िदए हȅ। कर्ाउड 
Îटर्ाइक अपडेट की वजह से हुई इस समÎया की वजह से देश मȂ कई संÎथानȗ का काम ठप हो 
गया, एयरलाइंस, टीवी टेिलकाÎट, बȅकȗ, नॉन बȅिंकग फाइनȂिशयल, कॉपȘरेट क ंपिनयȗ क े 
कामकाज पर असर पड़ा।  इसका कारण देश मȂ Îथानीय क्लाउड िसÎटम का न होना और 
भारतीय क ंपिनयȗ का गूगल, माइकर्ोसॉÄट व अमेजन क े क्लाउड िसÎटम पर िनभर्र होना है। 
माइकर्ोसॉÄट क े सवर्र मȂ तकनीकी खामी क े बाद Îथानीय क्लाउड िसÎटम की कमी महसूस की 
गई। िसÎटम क े बंद होने से अरबȗ रुपए  का नुकसा
न हुआ । युǉ या िफर साइबर हमले की िÎथित 
मȂ अगर गूगल, माइकर्ोसॉÄट और अमेजन का िसÎटम का बटन बंद कर िदया जाए तो हमारे देश 
मȂ आपात िÎथित पैदा हो जाएगी। देश की ज्याद ातर क ंपिनयȗ और लोगȗ का िनजी डाटा इन्हीं 
तीनȗ क ंपिनयȗ क े क्लाउड िसÎटम पर उपलÅध है। अगर इन तीनȗ क ंपिनयȗ क े क्लाउड मȂ कोई 
हाडर्वेयर परेशानी हुई या िफर कोई बड़ा साइबर अटैक हुआ तो यहां डाटा सुरिक्षत रखने वाली 
क ंपिनयȗ को डाटा का नुकसान होगा।  
 अपना सवर्र और क्लाउ
ड िसÎटम नहीं होने का नुकसान है िक देश से बहुत पैसा िवदेशी 
क ंपिनयȗ क े सवर्र और क्लाउड िसÎ टम इÎतेमाल करने की एवज़ मȂ उन्हȂ देना पड़ता है। देश मȂ 
Îथानीय सवर्र और क्लाउड िसÎटम िवकिसत कर िलया जाए, तो िवदेशी क ंपिनयȗ पर िनभर्रता 
कम होगी,सारा डाटा सुरिक्षत होगा व आिर्थक फायदा होगा और िकसी भी साइबर हमले से 
िनपटने क े िलए देश आत्मिनभर्र होगा। 
 अत: मȅ सरकार से इस संबंध मȂ उिचत कदम उठाने का अनुरोध करता हूं।  
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Memb er, Shri Naresh Bans al:  Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati 
Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kuma r (Odisha), Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
(Maharashtra), Shri Mahendra Bhatt (Uttarakhand), Shrimati Geeta alias 
Chandraprabha (Uttar Pradesh), Ms. Kavita  Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Sumer 
Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Shrimati  Sumitra Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. 
Kalpana Saini (Uttarakhand), Shri Dhananja y Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri 
Ram Chander Jangra (Haryana) and Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh). 
  Now, hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas on 'Concern over difficulties being faced 
by Kerala candidates for the upcoming NE ET PG Examination by the National Board 
of Examinations in Medical Sciences (NBEMS) owing to the allotment of examination 
centres in Andhra Pradesh'. 
 
Concern over difficulties being faced by Kerala candidates for the upcoming NEET 
PG Examination by the National Board of Examinations in Medical Sciences 
(NBEMS) owing to the allotment of examination centres in Andhra Pradesh 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, NEET-P G examination has undergone multiple 
postponements, with the latest date no w set for 11.08.2024.  In an unprecedented 
move, NBEMS introduced a new requirement compelling applicants to select four 
prospective examination centres, with the fi rst three choices being within Kerala and 
the fourth restricted to An dhra Pradesh. Reluctantly, Kerala candidates opted for 
centres in Andhra Pradesh as their fourth choice, hoping that they would be allotted 
one of their first three pref erred centres within Kerala . However, as per the list 
published by NBEMS on 31.07.2024, majority  of Kerala candid ates were allotted 
examination centres in Andhra Pradesh, a state far away from Kerala. Similar 
challenges are being faced by candidates from other States also, making it a 
pan-India issue. Furthermore, the list on ly indicates the State and area, without 
revealing the exact centre locations until August  8, two days before the examination.  
Sir, I am glad that our representation s have been viewed positively and the 
Government has taken a favourable decision on this.  I thank the Government. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas:  Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), 
Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri  P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
139

(Tamil Nadu), Shri Muzibulla Khan (Odisha) and Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha). 
Thank you.  Now, Ms. Kavita Patidar. 
 
Demand for starting of Mhow-Indore-Manmad Railway Project 
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार ( मध्य Ģदेश):  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, महू, इंदौर-मनमाड़ रेल 
मागर् पिरयोजना कई सालȗ से ĢÎतािवत है, परन्तु ĢÎतािवत समय से यह रेल मागर् अभी तक पूरा 
नहीं हो पाया है। उƪ रेल मागर् का सवȃ भी मई, 2017 मȂ पूणर्  िकया जा चुका है, साथ मȂ 
डी.पी.आर. भी तैयार हȅ। अत: मȅ सर
कार से इस पिरयोजना को शीघर् चालू करने क े आगर्ह करती 
हूं, धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Ms. Kavita Patidar:  Shrimati Sumitra 
Balmik (Madhya Pradesh), Shri M. Moha med Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha) and Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh).                                
Thank you.  Now, Shri Sujeet Kuma r on 'Demand for Increasing Hunar Se 
Rozgar Tak Training Institutes for Tourism in Odisha'. 
 
Demand for Increasing Hunar Se Rozgar Tak Training Institutes for Tourism in 
Odisha 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha):  Sir, Od isha attracts millions of domestic and 
international tourists annually, with a fo otfall of 10,014,175 tourists in 2023-24.
  
Although, this is less compared to the pr e-COVID years as we are still recovering, 
Odisha's rich cultural heritage and natura l beauty continue to draw many visitors, 
making tourism a vital part of our economy.  Tourism is a highly labour-intensive 
sector and approximately, for every 1 million rup ees investment in Tourism Sector, 89 
jobs are created as against 45 jobs in Primary Sector and 13 jobs in Secondary Sector 
in Odisha.  However, the lack of HSRT tr aining centres hampers our ability to train 
and empower our youth, affecting their empl oyment opportunities and the quality of 
services provided to tourists.  While we do  not harbour any envy towards other states 
and are glad to see our fellow states like Uttar Pradesh with around 15 centres, 
Madhya Pradesh with 12, Rajasthan with 15, and Telangana with 7, it is concerning 
that our state, Odisha, which generates 13 pe r cent of its GDP from tourism, has only 
one centre allocated under the Hunar Se Rozgar Tak Training Institute for Tourism.  
More HSRT training centres in Odisha will equip our youth with essential skills, leading 
to higher employment rates and improved  tourist services. This will boost local 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

businesses and contribute to Odisha's economic growth. 
 I urge the Ministry of Tourism to allocat e more HSRT training centers under the 
CBSP Scheme to provide better opportunities  for our youth and maximize our state's 
tourism potential. 
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Me mber, Shri Sujeet Kumar:   Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odi sha), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Muzibulla Khan (Odisha.) 
Thank you, Mr. Sujeet Kumar. Now, again, discussion on the working of the 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF NEW AND RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
- (Contd.) 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE (West Bengal): Ho n. Deputy Chairman , Sir, this is a 
crucial Ministry. It concerns the future of us  and the future of the planet. Sir, for the 
last ten years, this Government  has been playing the role of 'Sapno Ka Saudagar' , 
merchant of dreams. They are showing sapna, which is dreams, that does not match 
with reality, which is the hakikat. Nowhere is this gap between Sapna and Hakikat 
more pronounced than in the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.  
Let me present some facts.  At COP26, that is the 2021 climate conference in 
Glasgow, the Prime Minister said that Indi a will produce capacity of 500 Gigawatts of 
renewable energy capacity by 2030. What has the Government done? The story of 
this Government is missing targets, focusi ng only on big projects and not on small-
scale decentralized renewables. And third, it is actually Bengal, which is a pioneer in 
renewable energy and which is creating small-scale renewables. So, unlike Manu 
Bhaker, who is hitting the target in the Olympics, this Government is continually 
missing targets. The Government's target for installed capacity for renewable energy 
for 2022, (let's forget 2030) for 2022 was 100 Gigawatts of installed capacity for solar 
and 60 Gigawatts of installed capacity for wind. Where are we in 2024? Only 81.6 
Gigawatts for solar and 45.8 Gigawatts fo r wind. These are th e Government's own 
figures of Central Electricity Authority Repo rt. I hope the Ministry will tell us how it 
intends to catch up to 2022 from 2024 becau se its figures, its targets for 2022 have 
not been met, forget 2030.  
Let us now focus on energy because th e Government keeps giving impressive 
figures on installed capacity, but how much  electricity are you actually generating? 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
141

We have to track generation. From Ap ril 2023 to March 2024, total electricity 
generated from solar was only  6.69 per cent of total elect ricity generation of the 
country. Electricity from wind was only 4.71  per cent of total electricity generated in 
the country. If you add all the new renewabl es, that is wind, solar, small hydro and 
biomass, this comes to only 13 per cent of the total electricity generated in the 
country.  
According to the Prime Minister's anno uncement in 2021, the Government is 
aiming for 32 per cent of total electricity ge neration of the country by 2030. This figure 
has been revised upwards to 43 per cent of total electricity from renewables by 2030. 
You are aiming for 32 per cent and 43 per cent, but until now you are generating only 
13 per cent; Sapna- Hakikat. ...(Interruptions)... And you have achieved this 13 per 
cent only after two decades. The program began in 2006 under Dr. Manmohan Singh 
when the Ministry was named New and Renewable energy. ...(Interruptions)... But 
in two decades, from 2006 to 2024, you have only produced 13 per cent of electricity.  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, बैठकर न बोलȂ। 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: They are show ing photographs of giant solar parks, 
giant installed capacity, but not enough a ttention is being paid to custom-made, 
small-scale renewables...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, बैठकर न बोलȂ। 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Which actually meet local demands at the price that 
people can afford solar dryers, small hortic ulture, small refrigerators, streetlights. 
There is not enough focus on decentralized small-scal e renewables and spreading 
awareness and usage of renewables. How ma ny of us are using renewables today? 
The Government is not spreading awareness! The Government is not going to the 
people to find out what people actually need in terms of energy and what price they 
are willing to pay.  Sir, there is also a price to be paid for these huge Solar Parks that 
the Government is setting up. At the  Pavagada Solar Park in Karnataka and the 
Charanaka Solar Park in Gujarat, thousands of farmers have been  displaced and lost 
their livelihoods because of these gigantic solar parks. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आप बैठकर मत बोिलए।  
 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Sir, the Ministry has its own Report - the 
Decentralized Renewable Energy for Rural Livelihoods Report of 2022. But, they are 
ignoring this Report, because they want to  show photographs of big-ticket Gigawatt 
projects for the international audience!  
Sir, it is actually the Bengal Government  which is pioneer in renewable energy 
and creating small -scale renewables. Sir, two lakh families in Bengal use renewable 
energy resources as primary source of el ectricity. More than 11,000 solar street 
lighting systems have been installed in  different parts of the Sundarbans. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will be forced to name you now. 
 
SHRIMATI SAGARIKA GHOSE: Sir, 58 Gove rnment buildings under the Aloshri 
program have been provided with solar power plants. Bengal has established the 
country's first solar housing complex - the Rabir Rashmi housing complex - in 
Newtown.  
So, we cannot afford to dilly-dally on new and renewable energy. India's 70 
per cent of electricity is coming from co al. This is resulting in greenhouse gas 
emissions which is engulfing the planet. The future of our children is at stake, the 
species is at stake. We are in danger. A n d ,  w h a t  i s  t h e  G o v e r n m e n t  d o i n g ?  T h e  
Government is only putting out photograp hs and announcements for international 
audiences, but not doing anything to encourage small-scale renewables, to 
encourage usage of renewables and to encourage small-scale deliverables of 
renewables. 
I  w a n t  t o  s a y ,  S i r ,  i t  i s  t h e  B engal Government which is, actually, 
doing/working for small-scale renewable energy and small-scale renewables. The 
Government is talking about ‘sapna’ and ‘dreams, but it is the Bengal Government 
which is working on ‘haquikat’ or ‘reality’ on new and renewable energy.  Thank you. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  Ǜी मुरली देवड़ा।  
 
Ǜी िमिंलद मुरली देवड़ा ( महाराÍटर्): सर, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मुझे नवीन और नवीकरणीय 
ऊजार् मंतर्ालय को आवंिटत अनुदान पर बोलने का अवसर देने पर आपका आभार Ëयƪ करना 
चाहता हूं। सर, मȅ सागिरका जी क े भाषण क े बाद इस मंतर्ालय क े बारे मȂ दो-तीन बातȂ कहना 
चाहूंगा। This is a Ministry which is
 close to ev eryone’s heart. This  is a Ministry which 
determines the future of our country. And, I would only urge this House one thing.  
We can score political points. That is one thin g.  We all must do it. One State is doing 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
143

better than the other is a good thing.  But, le t us look at the fact s and, although this 
Ministry is called ‘Renewable Energy’, we sh ould be careful not to renew hatred every 
time. That is very important, Sir. 
 Today, if you look at this Budget, I wa nt to, firstly, congratulate the hon. 
Finance Minister that Rs. 19,000 crores ha ve been allotted to this Ministry in this 
Budget. It is double from last year’s Budget for the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy. In fact, Rs. 8,500 crores of Rs. 19,0 00 crores is allotted only for solar energy.  
My esteemed colleague spoke about wholes ale energy and retail energy.  What do 
you and I, the common person, are going  to benefit from this Ministry? सर , मȅ आज 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देना चाहता हूं िक क ु छ िदन पहले मȅने इस इÌयू को लेकर 
सवाल भी पूछा िक Ģाइम िमिनÎटर का जो रूफटॉप  सोलर Ģोजेक्ट है, यह एक बहुत ही अच्छा 
और बहुत ही सुंदर एक्जाÇपल है,  where you an
d I, as individuals, can benefit from this 
Ministry from various schemes at a retail level in our very households. सर, मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान एक इÌयू की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं। महाराÍटर् 
गवनर्मȂट का एक  MSEDCL है, उसने कल ही एक Ģेस िरलीज इÌयू िकया िक Ģाइम िमिनÎटर ने 
इस Îकीम को 5 महीने पहले लांच िकया और 5 महीने क े अंदर ही, Maharashtra is playing a 
very important leadership role with this s
cheme and using hon. Prime Minister’s 
rooftop solar initiative, we have already surpassed 100 MW mark.  
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
You will be very happy to know that. Th ere are many issues.  We can, again, 
talk about political issues here, but it is very important to study what is the progress 
made, and this is not a comparison progre ss to say what the previous Government 
did and what this Government is doing. Is India moving forward in greening our 
economy or not?  That is the moot question before all of us in this House today, and 
that is what we owe to future generations. सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन क े सामने क ु छ 
आंकड़े रखना चाहूंगा, जो 2014 से 2024 क े बीच  renewable energy क्षमता मȂ हुई वृिǉ को 
दशार्ते हȅ। Today, India’s installed non-fossil fuel  capacit
y has surged four hundred per 
cent in the last eight-and-a-half years.  Now, we have reached 203 Gigawatts. The 
installed renewable energy capacity has increased by 128 per cent in the last 10 years.   
महोदय, मȅ तीन बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् उदाहरण सदन क े सामने रखना चाहूंगा। Wind 
energy 2014 मȂ भारत की क ु ल क्षमता 21 हज़ार मेगावाट थी और 2024 मȂ 47 हज़ार मेगावाट हो 
गई, िजसका मतलब है दस वषș मȂ दोगुनी से अिधक वृिǉ होना।   
महोदय, 201
4 मȂ सोलर एनजीर् क ेवल 2,821 मेगावाट थी, लेिकन अब, 2024 मȂ यह क्षमता 
बढ़कर 83 हज़ार  मेगावाट हो गई। नीरज भाई, जो सबसे सुंदर उदाहरण है, वह converting  
waste into energy का है। कचरे से िबजली उत्पादन क्षमता 2014 मȂ 140 मेगावाट से बढ़कर 
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

2024 मȂ 343 मे गावाट हो गई है। Today, we talk of many glob al indexes but it is very 
important to note that across several non-pa rtisan, non-political indexes, today India 
ranks fourth globally for renewable power cap acity additions.  We rank fourth in wind 
power and fifth in solar power. The IRENA दुिनया की सबसे बड़ी एजȂसी है। इस एजȂसी का 
नाम है - International Renewable Energy Agency. IRENA क े अनुसार भारत का renewable 
energy क्षेतर् 2030 तक 30 लाख नए रोजगार create कर सकता है, िजनमȂ से 10 लाख, यानी की 
एक ितहाई से अिधक नौकिरयाँ क ेवल सोलर एनजीर् क्षेतर् मȂ हȗगी। …(Interruptions)… Locally , 
how do you create manufacturing jobs?  One is on the generation side.  But, I, again, 
congratulate this Government for a bold visi on to ensure that th e equipments that are 
used to harness solar energy,-- until recentl y, the  entire supply chain was being 
dominated by China -- everything from the rare earth, the minerals to  the 
photovoltaic cells, are produced here. Today , there is a lot of production happening 
in India. I would urge the hon. Minister an d I would urge the Finance Minister also, we 
must expand the scope of producti on-linked incentives to create more 
manufacturing, especially, of high efficiency  solar PV modules, in India. The Union 
Cabinet chaired by the Prime Minister has made a huge PLI investment in the first 
phase. I think almost three billion US Dollars  in two tranches have been allotted to 
give subsidies for the manufacturing of solar eq uipment right here in India, so that we  
become self-dependent, and we are not dependent on countries that could become 
hostile to us. …(Interruptions)…  Yes it is atmanirbhar.  It is a good thing.  It is creating 
jobs here.  Why should we use our growth  and greening of the economy to subsidise 
the economy of China?  I am sure nobody in this House would want that, regardless 
of their political ideology. The second phase of the Prime Minister’s high-efficiency 
solar PV modules scheme aims to inst all 65 Gigawatts of annual manufacturing 
capacity right here in India. So, I want to co ngratulate this Government.  A lot of work 
has been done to double the Budget allocations for new and renewable energy and to 
reduce our dependence on countries like China.  
मȅ इस मंतर्ालय से थोड़ा दूर हटकर एक बात कहना चाहूँगा िक बजट मȂ देखकर मुझे बहुत 
खुशी हुई थी िक माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने Îम
ॉल मॉǹ ूलर िरएक्टसर् क े िवकास का उÊलेख िकया 
था। This may not pertain directly to this Ministry. But, Sir, today I believe it is very 
important for all of us as Indians to be very open-minded about reforms in nuclear 
energy. This is what, the wo rld over, the developing world, the developed world, 
countries like America, countries in Europe  and China, are moving towards nuclear 
energy to increase the green share of their energy mix. मȅ एक बहुत ही important 
startling statistic सदन क े सामने रखना चाहता हूँ, जो चीन क े बारे मȂ है। 2035 तक चीन अपने 
िबजली उत्पादन मȂ न्यूिक्लयर एनजीर् की िहÎ
सेदारी को दस परसȂट तक दोगुना कर देगा। 
Today, China's share of nuclear energy is only 5 per cent और  2060 तक, they will take 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
145

it to almost 20 per cent. We must ensure, therefore, that we reform the nuclear sector 
and lead in this space and not just follow.  
Sir, with these few words, I want to  congratulate the Government, this 
Ministry, and the Finance Ministry for alloca ting as much money as required to make 
India self-dependence in the renewable space. Thank you.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Milindji.  Now, Dr. Fauzia Khan; not present. 
Shrimati Dharmshila Gupta. यह आपकी मेडन Îपीच है। 
 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा ( िबहार): आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, मुझे नवीन और नवीकरणीय 
ऊजार् क े अहम िवषय पर बोलने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
सवर्Ģथम, मȅ देश की आदरणीय जनता को धन् यवाद देना चाहती हूँ, ǭदय से आभार Ëयƪ 
करना चाहती हूँ, िजन्हȗने आदरणीय Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को लगातार तीसरी बार Ģधान मंतर्ी 
बनाया। इसके  साथ ही, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का Îवागत करती हूँ, अिभनंदन 
करती हूँ। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार ने िजस तरह से हिरत ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् 
मȂ काम िकया है, वह अक
Êपनीय है। उन्हȗने समय से पहले देश मȂ हिरत ऊज ार् कर्ांित की शुरुआत  
कर दी है। बीते दस सालȗ मȂ Ǜी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ गर्ीन एनजीर् क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत दुिनया को राह 
िदखा रहा है। मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, आदरणीय मोदी जी और आदरणीय िवǄ मंतर्ी, Ǜीमती 
िनमर्ला सीतारमण जी का आभार Ëयƪ करना चा
हती हूँ। आज हमारी सरकार का 2024 से 2025 
का बजट गर्ीन एनजीर्, यानी हिरत ऊजार् क े िलए बड़ी संभावनाओं क े ǎार खोलता है। इस बजट मȂ 
हिरत ऊजार् क्षेतर् को नई ऊजार् पिरयोजनाओं क े िलए दस हज ार करोड़ रुपय े, गर्ीन टेक्नोलॉजी 
फ ं ड क े िलए लगभग पाँच हजार करोड़ रुपय े और इलेिक्टर्क वाहनȗ क े Ģोत्साहन क े िलए लगभग 
2,500 करोड़ रुपय े का Ģावधान िकया गया है। महोदय, हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने 
भारत देश को िवकिसत भारत बनाने का संकÊप िलया है। एक िवक
िसत भारत का सपना हम 
िबना समूिचत ऊजार् नीित क े नहीं देख सकते हȅ। साल दर साल सकल घरेलू उत्पाद मȂ हमारी 
उÊलेखनीय बढ़ोतरी का अथर् यह भी है िक आने वाले वषș और महीनȗ मȂ माननीय मोदी जी ने 
अपने औǏोिगकी, वािणिज्यकी और घरेलू गितिविधयȗ क े िल
ए ऊजार् की जरूरत को ज्यादा से 
ज्यादा मातर्ा मȂ पूरा करने क े ठोस कदम उठाए हȅ।  
जलवायु पिरवतर्न क े साथ-साथ आज दुिनया िजस तर ह की अिनिÌचत वैिÌवक 
राजनीितक भंवर मȂ फ ंसती जा रही है, उससे पारंपिरक और जीवाÌम ईंधन पर हमारी िनभर्रता 
को संकटगर्Îत होने से बचाने क े िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने ठोस कदम उठाए हȅ।  भारत की 
नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् नीित क े िलए इस िदशा मȂ लिक्षत रूप  से उन्हȗने कायर् िकया है।  
दूरदशीर् Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ बनी हमारी ऊजार् नी
ित क े तीन मुख्य उǈेÌय 
रहे हȅ। उन्हȗने इन उǈेÌयȗ को भारत क े पटल पर रखा है। पहला - renew
able energy, जैसे सौर 
व पवन ऊजार् क े Ģोडक्शन को बढ़ाना। दूसरा - अपनी आिर्थक गितिविधयȗ मȂ fossil fuel जैसे 
कोयला, पैटर्ोल, डीजल आिद का इÎतेमाल कम करना। तीसरा - घरेलू और लघु वािणिज्यकी 
क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ बायो गैस जैसे ऊजार् क े इÎ
तेमाल पर बल देना।   
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

 क Ȃदर्ीय बजट क े बाद हिरत िवकास िवषय पर हुए वेिबनार मȂ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने दो 
ट ू क शÅदȗ मȂ कहा िक भारत renewable energy resources मȂ िजतनी commanding position 
मȂ होगा, उतना ही बड़ा बदलाव वह पूरे िवÌव मȂ ला सकता है। 2014 क े बाद से ही भारत 
renewable energy cap
acity addition मȂ सबसे आगे रहा है। इस िदशा मȂ हमने अब तक अपने 
िलए िनधार्िरत सारे लÑय समय से पहले पूरे िकए हȅ। माननीय मोदी जी ने installed electricity 
capacity मȂ 40 Ģितशत non-fossil fuel का लÑय रखा था, िजसे उन्हȗने एक साल पहले पूरा कर 
िलया है। यह मोदी है, तो मुमिकन है। 10 Ģितशत Ethanol blending
 क े लÑय को भी भारत ने 5 
महीने पहले पूरा कर िलया है। यह मोदी सरकार की उपलिÅध है। पैटर्ोल मȂ Ethanol blending क े 
20 Ģितशत क े लÑय को 2030 मȂ पूरा करना था, मगर अब हम उसे 2025-26 तक ही पूरा कर 
लȂगे।  मह
ोदय, यह मोदी सरकार की उपलिÅध है। महोदय, मोदी सरकार ने 2030 तक 500 
गीगावॉट non-fossil fuel-based  electricity capacity का नया लÑय िनधार्िरत िकया है। इसमȂ 
कोई संदेह नहीं है िक यह लÑय भी समय से पहले हािसल कर लेने का पूरा संकÊप है।  
 उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हम ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ 
िनरंतर आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ। हमारी सरकार ने हिरत ऊजार् को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए 'Ģधानमंतर्ी सूयȘदय 
योजना' की शुरुआत  की है। हिरत ऊज
ार् की सबसे खास बात यह होती है िक इससे Ģदूषण का 
खतरा नहीं होता है। Ģदूषण और ग्लोबल वॉिमȊग क े क्षेतर् मȂ पहले से ही काम होना चािहए था, 
लेिकन दुभार्ग्य से मो
दी सरकार से पहले यूपीए की दस साल की *, जो वह देश क े भिवÍय की 
जरूरतȗ पर अपना ध्यान देती।   
मान्यवर, मȅ िजस राज्य से आती हूं, वह िबहार राज्य है, वहां भी हमारी एनडीए की 
सरकार हिरत ऊजार् क े क्षेतर् मȂ आगे बढ़ती हुई नजर आ रही है।  िबहार मȂ कई Îथानȗ पर सोलर 
Ãलांट का काम तेजी से चल रहा है। लेिकन मȅ माननीया सदÎया को बताना चाहूँगी, िजन्हȗने क ु छ 
देर पहले कहा िक कोई काम नहीं रहा हो रहा है, उनका कायर् क्षेतर् िबहार था, लेिकन अभी उन्हȗने 
िबहार को छोड़ िदया है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप िवषय पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा: मȅ उनको बताना चाहूँगी िक 2022 मȂ िबहार का पहला Äलोिंटग सोलर 
पावर Ãलांट माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी क े ǎारा लगाया गया था। यह उपलिÅध मोदी जी की है।  
िबहार मȂ 2004 से 2013 तक जो सरकार थी, उसने 'लालटेन की रोशनी मȂ िबता िदए िदन-रात 
और ऊजार् संकट पर कोई नहीं था साथ'।  यह थी अराजकता की सरकार।  मȅ सदन को बताना 
चाहूँगी िक माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ पूरे भारत मȂ 36 करोड़ लोगȗ को िबजली कनेक्शन 
िदया गया है और 2.5 लाख मेगावॉट की ऊजार् उत्पादन क्षमता बढ़ाई गई है। पवन ऊजार् क े माध्यम 
से पवन ऊजार् की Îथािपत क्षमता 2014 मȂ लगभग 21 गीगावॉट थी और आज यह क्षमता बढ़ कर 
42.63 गीगावॉट हो चुकी है। सौर पाकर् योजना क े माध्यम से बड़े पैमाने पर सौर ऊजार् पाक्सर् 
Îथािपत िकए गए हȅ। िबहार मȂ भी सौर ऊजार् पाकș की Îथापना की गई है, िजससे Îथानीय 
                                                           
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
147

रोजगार और िवकास को बढ़ावा िमला है। ...(समय की घंटी)... मान्यवर, मुझे 10 िमनट का टाइम 
िमला था। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीया धमर्शीला जी, आप 10 िमनट बोल चुकी हȅ, अब आप खत्म करȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  आप अपनी Îपीच को conclude करȂ, अब आप समापन करȂ। 
 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा: महोदय, मȅ कहना चाहूँगी िक 2004 से  2014 तक गाँवȗ मȂ िबजली नहीं 
हुआ करती थी, लालटेन और िढबरी जला कर वहाँ की मिहलाएँ और वहाँ क े बच्चे पढ़ाई िकया 
करते थे, कोई रोजगार नहीं कर पाता था, लेिकन आज सौर ऊजार् क े माध्यम से और माननीय 
मोदी जी क े Ģयास से गाँव की झोपड़ी मȂ भी बÊब जले हȅ, एलईडी लाइट लगी है। मोदी जी का यह 
काम िदखता है, ...(समय की घंटी)... और जो िदखता है, वह बोलता है। इसिलए माननीय मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारा भारत समुिचत िवकास की ओर बढ़ा है। इतना कह कर मȅ अपनी बात 
समाÃत करती हूँ।  धन्यवाद।     
 
 Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद।  माननीय Ǜी जावेद अली खान। 
 
Ǜी जावेद अली खान (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित जी, नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् मंतर्ालय पर 
होने वाली चचार् मȂ भाग लेने क े िलए आपने मुझे अनुमित दी, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता 
हूँ।  सर, मेरा समय कम है, इसिलए मȅ बहुत िवÎतार मȂ अपनी बातȂ नहीं कहूँगा, मȅ यहाँ क ु छ 
Ãवाइंट्स की ओर माननीय मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान आकिर्षत करना चाहूँगा। 
 सर, 2030 तक सोलर एनजीर्, जो इस मंतर्ालय का एक Ģमुख िहÎसा है, उसका टारगेट 
रखा गया है - 280 गीगावॉट।  2015 मȂ यह टारगेट रखा गया था - 100 गीगावॉट और 2022 मȂ इस 
100 गीगावॉट क े लÑय को पूरा करना था, लेिकन पता यह चला िक 2022 मȂ 100 गीगावॉट जो 
लÑय पूरा करना था, वह पूरा हुआ िसफर् 63 गीगावॉट। जब लÑय पूरा नहीं हुआ, तो सरकार ने 
बड़ा जोर लगाया, तो 2023 तक हम 73 गीगावॉट पूरा कर पाए। यानी पूरी मशक्कत क े बाद, 1 वषर् 
मȂ हम 10 गीगावॉट  का सौर ऊजार् का लÑय पूरा कर पा रहे हȅ।  अब हमȂ 2030 मȂ सोलर मȂ 280 
गीगावॉट और पूरी क्लीन एनजीर् मȂ 500 गीगावॉट का लÑय पूरा करना है।  तो अगर हमȂ 2030 तक 
280 गीगावॉट का लÑय पूरा करना है, तो 1 वष र् मȂ हमȂ करीब 60 गीगावॉट सोलर एनजीर् का 
उत्पादन करना पड़ेगा।  मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह जानना चा
हूंगा, जब वे िरÃलाई करȂ, िक क्या 
आपका मंतर्ालय इस िÎथित मȂ है िक वह 1 वषर् मȂ, यानी 2030 तक Ģितवषर् 60-61 गीगावॉट सोलर 
िवǏुत का उत्पादन कर सके ।  
 सर,  rooftop solarisation का लÑय यह रखा गया था िक हम 2022 तक 40 गीगावॉट  
पूरा कर लȂगे। जब एनडीए की सरकार बनी थी और मोदी जी Ģधानमंतर्ी बने थे, उसके  बाद यह 
लÑय 2015 मȂ ही रखा गय
ा था, लेिकन  rooftop को solarise करने का यह जो लÑय था, उसमȂ 
िसफर् 7.4 गीगावॉट ही पूरा हुआ।   2023 तक, जब बहुत सारा जोर लगाया गया िक 2022 मȂ लÑय 
पूरा नहीं हुआ, तो 2023 मȂ, चुनाव से पहले क ु छ करके  िदखाओ, तो उन
का यह लÑय आया, जो 
पूरा हुआ, वह 11 गीगावॉट का हुआ।  इसमȂ जो ro oftop का है, आपको जान करके  ताज्जुब होगा 
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

िक जब हम rooftop का िजकर् करते हȅ, तो जनरली हम लोग हाउिंसग की तरफ ध्यान करते हȅ, 
इसमȂ हाउिंसग का शेयर िसफर् 3 गीगावॉट है, बाकी तो इन्हȗने - यूिनविर्सटी पर लगा दो, दÄतर 
पर लगा दो, चाहे वह चले या नहीं चले।  सर, मȅ िपछले टमर् मȂ Îव णर् जयंती सदन मȂ रहता था। तो 
उसके  ऊपर पूरा सोलर पैनल लगा िदया गया।  मȅ जब तक, 2020 तक वहाँ रहा, मुझे एक िदन भी 
गमर् पानी सोलर से नहीं िमला, जबिक वह वहाँ 2015 से लगना शुरू  हो गया था।  तो इसमȂ यह 
िÎथित है।   
 सर, एक संÎथा है - Council of Energy, Environment and Water (CE
EW).  इसका 
यह मानना है िक भारत मȂ rooftop का बहुत potential है। उसने यह बताया है िक 637 गीगावॉट 
िबजली हम rooftop को solarise करके  ले सकते हȅ। सर, हमारे यहाँ जो सोलराइजेशन हो रहा 
है, हमारे यहां यह जो कर रहे हȅ, इस योजना मȂ एक तो rooftop का है और दूसरी एक बड़ी 
महत्वाकांक्षी योजना है, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी िजसका िजकर् कई बार कर चुक े हȅ - ' पीएम क ु सुम 
योजना'। यह िकसानȗ से संबंिधत योजना है।  इस योजना क े तह त यह कहा जा रहा है और कहा 
गया था तथा वाÎतिवकता भी यह है िक िबजली पर िकसानȗ की िनभर्रता कम होगी, लेिकन यह 
योजना बडे मकड़-जाल मȂ फ ंसी हुई है। सर, मȅ जब से एमपी हूं, तब से ऊजार् संबंधी Îथाई सिमित 
का सदÎय हूं। इस पर िजकर् करते वƪ अिध
कारी कतराते हȅ।  इस योजना को तीन 3 
components मȂ बांट िदया गया है। Component 'A', िजससे िकसान Ëयापार शुरू  करȂगे। उसमȂ 
पहली शतर् है िक Component 'A' बंजर भूिम पर वे जो एक solar pa
rk बनाएंगे, वह लगेगा। 
...(समय की घंटी)... सर, बस 1 िमनट लूंगा।  अब हमȂ िबजली क ृिष योग्य भूिम क े अंदर चािहए, 
लेिकन उसमȂ शतर् है िक बंजर भूिम पर लगाओ। जहां क ृिष योग्य भूिम होती है, वहां बीच मȂ 
आमतौर पर कहीं बंजर भूिम नहीं होती है। बंजर भूिम क े िलए बहुत दूर जाना पड़ता है। िफर 
उसका tran
smission वहां से क ै से होगा, उसकी cost बढ़ेगी और िकतन ी? 1 एकड़ मȂ 2 मेगावाट 
का Ãलांट लगाने क े िलए 9 करोड रुपए  की लागत आ रही है। आज कौन सा ऐसे िकसान है, जो 1 
एकड़ भूिम मȂ 9 करोड़ रुपए  लगा करके  अपने इलाके  क े diesel pumps को solarise करेगा या 
नए कनेक्शंस देगा। जो क ृिष अवसंरच
ना कोष है, Agriculture Infrastructure Fund है, उसके  
अंदर इसे शािमल नहीं िकया गया है, इसिलए िवǄीय संÎथान भी इसको मदद नहीं दे रहे हȅ। 
 सर, मȅ आिखरी बात आपसे यह अजर् करना चाहत ा  हूं िक 'पीएम क ु सुम योजना' का जो 
Component 'B' है, वह िनिÌचत रूप  से िकसानȗ क े िलए फायदेमंद सािबत हो सकता है, क्यȗिक 
उसमȂ stand-alone pump लगान े की ËयवÎथा है, िक अपना सोलर िसÎटम लगाइए, दो-चार 
सोलर ÃलेटȂ जो लगȂ, वह लगाइए और अपने pump को चलाइए, लेिकन उसमȂ परेशानी यह है िक 
ये उसके  तहत िकसानȗ को 7.5 हॉसर् पावर से ज्यादा का pum
p लगाने की अनुमित नहीं देते हȅ। 
आज की तारीख मȂ अगर आप एगर्ीकÊचर क े िलए िबजली का कनेक्शन लेने जाएँ, तो आपको 
सात हॉसर् पावर का कनेक्शन नहीं िमलेगा। उन्हȗने साढ़े सात हॉसर् पावर का कनेक्शन देना बंद 
कर िदया है, क्यȗिक वाट
र लेवल बहुत नीचे चला गया है।  अब सोलर क े तहत हम साढ़े सात हॉ स र् 
पावर का कनेक्शन लȂगे, तो वह चलेगा क ै से? जब िबजली वाले ही कह रहे हȅ िक वाटर लेवल 
नीचे है और हम 10 हॉसर् पावर से कम का कनेक्शन नहीं दȂगे, तो इस Ģकार से यह कनेक्शन भी 
फ े ल होगा।   
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
149

सर, इसका जो क ंपोनȂट-सी है, वह पंपȗ को सोलराइज़ कर रहा है, जो पहले से िबजली 
से चल रहे हȅ, उनको सोलराइज़ िकया जा रहा है। इसमȂ परेशानी क्या है?  पहली परेशानी तो यह 
है िक िवǄीय अभाव मȂ क ंपोनȂट-ए नहीं चलता, दूसरा, उसका जो 'बी' क ंपोनȂट है, वह साढ़े सात 
हॉसर् पावर की वजह से चल ही नहीं सकता है और जो ' सी' क ंपोनȂट है, उसको इनकी 
िडÎटर्ीÅयूशन क ंपिनयाँ चलने नहीं दे रही हȅ, क्यȗिक िडÎटर्ीÅयूशन क ंपिनयȗ की आमद नी कम 
होती है।  िडÎटर्ीÅयूशन क ंपिनयाँ िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ पावर क े तहत काम करती है। सर, मेरा अंदाजा 
यह है िक िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ पावर और िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ िरन्युएबल एनजीर् मȂ भी आपस मȂ खींच-तान है। 
नवीकरणीय ऊजार् को िमिनÎटर्ी ऑफ पावर Ģमोट करने क े बहुत पक्ष मȂ नहीं है, हालाँिक उनकी 
क ु छ संÎथाओं नȂ एनटीपीसी, एनएचपीसी वगैरह ने भी सोलर योजनाएं शुरू  की हȅ। मंतर्ी जी को 
इस ओर ध्यान देना चािह
ए।   
मȅ आपसे यही कहना चाहूँगा िक दावे ऐसे िकए जाएँ, जो पूरे हो सकȂ । 'क ु सुम योजना' क े 
तहत 'ए' क ंपोनȂट मȂ 10,
000 मेगावाट का लÑय था, उसमȂ से िसफर् 3 परसȂट पूरा हुआ है। इसके  
'बी' क ंपोनȂट मȂ 14 लाख पंप लगने थे, उसमȂ िसफर् 28 परसȂट लगे हȅ और 'सी' क ंपोनȂट मȂ 35 लाख 
का लÑय था, उसका एक Ģितशत पूरा हुआ। 
सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ आिखरी बात यह कह रहा हूँ िक क ु छ राज्य सरकारȗ ने भी Îटȅड 
अलोन पंप की योजना चलाई है। छǄीसगढ़ मȂ अब बघेल साह
ब की  सरकार नहीं है, उन्हȗने 90 
Ģितशत तक की सिÅसडी Îटȅड अलोन पंपȗ पर दी थी। झारखंड मȂ भी 85 परसȂट से ज्यादा Îटȅड 
अलोन पंप पर राज्
य सरकार सिÅसडी दे रही है। इसकी वजह से छǄीसगढ़ मȂ बहुत पंप लगे थे।   
पूरे भारत मȂ क Ȃदर्ीय योजनाओं क े तहत उतने Îटȅड अलोन लोन पंप नहीं लगे, िजतने अके ले 
छǄीसगढ़ मȂ लग गए थे।  झारखंड का सही आँकड़ा मेरे पास नहीं है। मȅ आपसे यही अजर् करना 
चाहता हूँ िक आपने कहा है िक 30 परसȂट क Ȃ दर् देगा, 30 परसȂट राज्य सरकार देगी, 40 परसȂट 
िकसान देगा - इस Îटȅड अलोन पंप की सिÅसडी का सारा िज Çमा क Ȃ दर् सरकार को लेना चािहए 
और िकसान से कम िहÎसा लेना चािहए, तभी हम सच मȂ िकसान की िबजली क े ऊपर जो 
आत्मिनभर्रता है, उसको कम कर पाएंगे। इन्हीं सुझावȗ और इन्हीं बातȗ क े साथ मȅ अपनी बात 
समाÃत करता हूँ, बहुत-बहुत धन्यव
ाद। 
 
ﺟﻨﺎﺏ ﺟﺎﻭﻳﺪ ﻋﻠﯽ ﺧﺎﻥ)  ﺍﺗﺮﭘﺮﺩﻳﺶ(: ﺍُپ ﺳﺒﻬﺎﭘﺘﯽ ﺟﯽ، ﻧﻮﻳﻦ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻧﻮﻳﮑﺮﻧﯽ ﺍُﺭﺟﺎ ﻣﻨﺘﺮﺍﻟﻴہ ﭘﺮ ﮨﻮﻧﮯ ﻭﺍﻟﯽ ﭼﺮﭼہ †ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﺑﻬﺎگ ﻟﻴﻨﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺍٓپ ﻧﮯ ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﺍﺟﺎﺯﺕ ﺩی، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓپ ﮐﺎ ﺩﻫﻨﻴﻮﺍﺩ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﻮں۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﺮﺍ ﻭﻗﺖ ﮐﻢ ﮨﮯ، 
ﺍﺱ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺗﻔﺼﻴﻞ ﺳﮯ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﺑﺎﺗﻴﮟ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﮩﻮں ﮔﺎ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﻳﮩﺎں ﮐﭽﻬ ﭘﻮﺍﺋﻨﭩﺲ ﮐﯽ ﻁﺮﻑ ﻣﺎﻧﻴﺌﮯ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﺟﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺩﻫﻴﺎﻥ 
ﻣﺒﺬﻭﻝ ﮐﺮﺍﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﻮں ﮔﺎ۔  
  ﺳﺮ،2030  ﺗﮏ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﺍﻳﻨﺮﺟﯽ، ﺟﻮ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻨﺘﺮﺍﻟﻴہ ﮐﺎ ﺍﻳﮏ ﭘﺮﻣُﮑﻬ ﺣﺼہ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎ ﭨﺎﺭﮔﻴﭧ ﺭﮐﻬﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ 
280 ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ۔2015  ﻣﻴﮟ ﻳہ ﭨﺎﺭﮔﻴﭧ ﺭﮐﻬﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ100  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﺍﻭﺭ2022  ﻣﻴﮟ100  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﺟﻮ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ 
ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ، ﻭﻩ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮨﻮﺍ ﺻﺮﻑ63  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ۔  
ﺟﺐ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺍ، ﺗﻮ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﻧﮯ ﺑﮍﺍ ﺯﻭﺭ ﻟﮕﺎﻳﺎ، ﺗﻮ2023  ﺗﮏ ﮨﻢ73  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮐﺮﭘﺎﺋﮯ۔ ﻳﻌﻨﯽ 
ﭘﻮﺭی ﻣﺸﻘﺖ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ، ﺍﻳﮏ ﺳﺎﻝ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮨﻢ ﺩﺱ ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﮐﺎ ﺳﻮﺭ ﺍُﺭﺟﺎ ﮐﺎ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮐﺮﭘﺎﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺍﺏ ﮨﻤﻴﮟ2030  ﻣﻴﮟ 
                                                           
†Transliteration in Urdu Script. 
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ280  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﺍﻭﺭ ﭘﻮﺭی ﮐﻠﻴﻦ ﺍﻳﻨﺮﺟﯽ ﻣﻴﮟ500  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﮐﺎ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺗﻮ ﺍﮔﺮ ﮨﻤﻴﮟ2030   
ﺗﮏ280  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﮐﺎ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺗﻮ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺳﺎﻝ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮨﻤﻴﮟ ﻗﺮﻳﺐ60  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﺍﻳﻨﺮﺟﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺍﺗﭙﺎﺩﻥ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ 
ﭘﮍﻳﮕﺎ۔ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻣﺎﻧﻴﺌﮯ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﺟﯽ ﺳﮯ ﻳہ ﺟﺎﻧﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﻮں ﮔﺎ، ﺟﺐ ﻭﻩ ﺭﻳﭙﻼﺋﯽ ﮐﺮﻳﮟ، ﮐہ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺍٓپ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻨﺘﺮﺍﻟﻴہ ﺍﺱ ﺍﺳﺘﻬﺘﯽ ﻣﻴﮟ 
ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﻭﻩ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺳﺎﻝ ﻣﻴﮟ، ﻳﻌﻨﯽ2030   ﺗﮏ ﮨﺮ ﺳﺎﻝ60-61  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﺍﻧﺮﺟﯽ ﮐﯽ ﭘﻴﺪﺍﻭﺍﺭ ﮐﺮﺳﮑﮯ۔  
  ﺳﺮ،rooftop solarisation ﮐﺎ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﻳہ ﺭﮐﻬﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ ﮐہ ﮨﻢ2022  ﺗﮏ40  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮐﺮﻟﻴﮟ ﮔﮯ۔ 
ﺟﺐ ﺍﻳﻦ ڈی ﺍے ﮐﯽ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﺑﻨﯽ ﺗﻬﯽ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻣﻮﺩی ﺟﯽ ﭘﺮﺩﻫﺎﻥ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﺑﻨﮯ ﺗﻬﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻳہ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ2015  ﻣﻴﮟ ﮨﯽ 
ﺭﮐﻬﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦrooftop ﮐﻮsolarise  ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﻳہ ﺟﻮ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﺗﻬﺎ، ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺻﺮﻑ 7.4  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﮨﯽ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮨﻮﺍ۔ 
2023  ﺗﮏ، ﺟﺐ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺳﺎﺭﺍ ﺯﻭﺭ ﻟﮕﺎﻳﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮐہ2022  ﻣﻴﮟ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺍ، ﺗﻮ2023   ﻣﻴﮟ، ﭼﻨﺎﺅ ﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ 
ﮐﭽﻬ ﮐﺮﮐﮯ ﺩﮐﻬﺎﺅ، ﺗﻮ ﺍﻥ ﮐﺎ ﻳہ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﺍٓﻳﺎ، ﺟﻮ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮨﻮﺍ، ﻭﻩ ﮔﻴﺎﺭﻩ ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﮐﺎ ﮨﻮﺍ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺟﻮrooftop ﮐﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺍٓپ 
ﮐﻮ ﺟﺎﻥ ﮐﺮﮐﮯ ﺗﻌﺠﺐ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ ﮐہ ﺟﺐ ﮨﻢrooftop ﮐﺎ ﺫﮐﺮ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺗﻮ ﺟﻨﺮﻟﯽ ﮨﻢ ﻟﻮگ ﮨﺎﺅﺳﻨﮓ ﮐﯽ ﻁﺮﻑ ﺩﻫﻴﺎﻥ 
ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮨﺎﺅﺳﻨﮓ ﮐﺎ ﺷﻴﺌﺮ ﺻﺮﻑ ﺗﻴﻦ ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﮨﮯ، ﺑﺎﻗﯽ ﺗﻮ ﺍﻧﮩﻮں ﻧﮯ ﻳﻮﻧﻴﻮﺭﺳﭩﯽ ﭘﺮﻟﮕﺎﺩﻭ، ﺩﻓﺘﺮﭘﺮ ﻟﮕﺎ ﻭ،
ﺩ 
ﭼﺎﮨﮯ ﻭﻩ ﭼﻠﮯ ﻳﺎ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﭼﻠﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﭽﻬﻠﮯ ﭨﺮﻡ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﻮﺭﻥ ﺟﻴﻨﺘﯽ ﺳﺪﻥ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺭﮨﺘﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ۔ ﺗﻮ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻭﭘﺮ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ  
ﭘﻴﻨﻞ ﻟﮕﺎﺩﻳﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ۔ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺟﺐ ﺗﮏ،2020  ﺗﮏ ﻭﮨﺎں ﺭﮨﺎ، ﻣﺠﻬﮯ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺩﻥ ﺑﻬﯽ ﮔﺮﻡ ﭘﺎﻧﯽ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﺳﮯ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻣﻼ، ﺟﺐ ﮐہ ﻭﻩ 
ﻭﮨﺎں2015  ﺳﮯ ﻟﮕﻨﺎ ﺷﺮﻭﻉ ﮨﻮﮔﻴﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ۔ ﺗﻮ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻳہ ﺣﺎﻟﺖ ﮨﮯ۔  
  ﺳﺮ، ﺍﻳﮏ ﺳﻨﺴﺘﻬﺎ ﮨﮯ،Council of Energ
y, Environment and Water (CEEW).  ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎ ﻳہ 
ﻣﺎﻧﻨﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺕ ﻣﻴﮟrooftop ﮐﺎ  ﺑﮩﺖ ﭘﻮﭨﻴﻨﺸﻴﻞ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻧﮯ ﻳہ ﺑﺘﺎﻳﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ637  ﮔﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﺑﺠﻠﯽ ﮨﻢ ﺭﻭﻑ ﭨﺎپ 
ﮐﻮsolarise  ﮐﺮﮐﮯ ﻟﮯ ﺳﮑﺘﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔   
ﺳﺮ، ﮨﻤﺎﺭے ﻳﮩﺎں ﺟﻮ ﺳﻮﻟﺮﺍﺋﺰﻳﺸﻦ ﮨﻮﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﮨﻤﺎﺭے ﻳﮩﺎں  ﻳہ ﺟﻮ ﮐﺮﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺍﺱ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺗﻮ ﺭﻭﻑ 
ﭨﺎپ ﮐﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺩﻭﺳﺮی ﺍﻳﮏ ﺑﮍی ﻣﮩﺘﻮﺍﮐﺎﻧﮑﺸﯽ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﭘﺮﺩﻫﺎﻥ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﺟﯽ ﺟﺲ ﮐﺎ ﺫﮐﺮ ﮐﺌﯽ ﺑﺎﺭ ﮐﺮﭼﮑﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﭘﻢ 
ﺍﻳﻢ ﮐُﺴﻢ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ۔ ﻳہ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﺳﮯ ﻣﺘﻌﻠﻖ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ ﻳہ ﮐﮩﺎ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﮩﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﺗﻬﺎ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺣﻘﻴﻘﺖ  ﺑﻬﯽ 
ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺑﺠﻠﯽ ﭘﺮ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺍﻧﺤﺼﺎﺭ ﮐﻢ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ۔ ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﻳہ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﺑﮍے ﻣﮑﮍ ﺟﺎﻝ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﻬﻨﺴﯽ ﮨﻮﺋﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﺟﺐ 
ﺳﮯ ﺍﻳﻢ ﭘﯽ ﮨﻮں، ﺗﺐ ﺳﮯ ﺍُﻭﺭﺟﺎ ﺳﻤﺒﻨﺪﻫﯽ ﺍﺳﺘﻬﺎﺋﯽ ﺳﻤﻴﺘﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺭﮐﻦ ﮨﻮں۔ ﺍﺱ ﭘﺮ ﺫﮐﺮ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﻭﻗﺖ ﺍﺩﻫﻴﮑﺎﺭی ﮐﺘﺮﺍﺗﮯ 
ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺍﺱ ﺍﺳﮑﻴﻢ ﮐﻮ ﺗﻴﻦ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭩﺲ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﺎﻧﭧ ﺩﻳﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﺍے ﺟﺲ ﺳﮯ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﮐﺎﺭﻭﺑﺎﺭ ﺷﺮﻭﻉ ﮐﺮﻳﻨﮕﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ 
ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﮩﻠﯽ ﺮﻁ
ﺷ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﺍے ﺑﻨﺠﺮ ﺯﻣﻴﻦ ﭘﺮ ﻭﻩ ﺟﻮ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺳﺎﻟﺮ ﭘﺎﺭک ﺑﻨﺎﺋﻴﮟ ﮔﮯ۔ ﻭﻩ ﻟﮕﮯ ﮔﺎ۔ ۔۔۔)ﻭﻗﺖ ﮐﯽ 
ﮔﻬﻨﭩﯽ( ۔۔۔ ﺳﺮ ﺑﺲ ﺍﻳﮏ ﻣﻨﭧ ﻟﻮﻧﮕﺎ۔ ﺍﺏ ﮨﻤﻴﮟ ﺑﺠﻠﯽ ﮐﺮﺷﯽ ﻳﻮﮔﻴﮯ ﺯﻣﻴﻦ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻧﺪﺭ ﭼﺎﮨﺌﻴﮯ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺷﺮﻁ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ 
ﺑﻨﺠﺮ ﺯﻣﻴﻦ ﭘﺮ ﻟﮕﺎﺅ۔ ﺟﮩﺎں ﮐﺮﺷﯽ ﻳﻮﮔﻴہ ﺯﻣﻴﻦ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﻭﮨﺎں ﺑﻴﭻ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻋﺎﻡ ﻁﻮﺭ ﭘﺮ ﮐﮩﻴﮟ ﺠﺮ
ﺑﻨ ﺯﻣﻴﻦ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ 
ﺑﻨﺠﺮ ﺯﻣﻴﻦ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺩﻭﺭ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ ﭘﮍﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﭘﻬﺮ ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎ ﭨﺮﺍﻧﺴﻤﻴﺸﻦ ﻭﮨﺎں ﺳﮯ ﮐﻴﺴﮯ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﯽ ﻗﻴﻤﺖ ﺑﮍﻫﮯ ﮔﯽ 
ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﺘﻨﯽ؟ ﺍﻳﮏ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺩﻭ ﻣﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ  ﮐﺎ ﭘﻼﻧﭧ ﻟﮕﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻧﻮ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﮐﯽ ﻻﮔﺖ ﮨﯽ
ﺍٓﺭ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﻮﻥ ﺳﺎ ﺍﻳﺴﮯ 
ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻮ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺍﻳﮑﮍ ﺯﻣﻴﻦ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﻮ ﮐﺮﻭڑ ﺭﻭﭘﮯ ﻟﮕﺎﮐﺮﮐﮯ ﺍﭘﻨﮯ ﻋﻼﻗﮯ ﮐﮯ ڈﻳﺰﻝ ﭘﻤﭗ ﮐﻮ ﺳﻮﻟﺮﺍﺋﺰ ﮐﺮﻳﮕﺎ ﻳﺎ ﻧﺌﮯ  
ﮐﻨﮑﺸﻦ ﺩﻳﮕﺎ۔ ﺟﻮ ﮐﺮﺷﯽ ﺍﻭﺳﻨﺮﭼﻨﺎ ﮐﻮﺵ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﻳﮕﺮی ﮐﻠﭽﺮ ﺍﻧﻔﺮﺍﺳﭩﺮﮐﭽﺮ ﻓﻨﮉ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻧﺪﺭ ﺍﺳﮯ ﺷﺎﻣﻞ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮔﻴﺎ 
ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻭِﺗّﻴﺌﮯ ﺳﻨﺴﺘﻬﺎﻥ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍﺱ ﮐﻮ ﻣﺪﺩ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺩے ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔  
  ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓﺧﺮی ﺑﺎﺕ ﺍٓپ ﺳﮯ ﻳہ ﻋﺮﺽ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﺎ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ ﭘﯽ ﺍﻳﻢ ﮐُﺴﻢ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ  ﮐﺎ ﺟﻮ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﺑﯽ ﮨﮯ ﻭﻩ 
ﻧِﺸﭽِﺖ  ﻭﺍﺿﺢ ﻁﻮﺭ ﭘﺮ ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﻓﺎﺋﺪﻩ ﻣﻨﺪ ﺛﺎﺑﺖ ﮨﻮﺳﮑﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﮐﻴﻮں ﮐہ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺳﭩﻴﻨﮉ ﺍﻟﻮﻥ ﭘﻤﭗ ﻟﮕﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ 
ﻭﻳﻮﺳﺘﻬﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﮐہ ﺍﭘﻨﺎ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﺳﺴﭩﻢ ﻟﮕﺎﺋﻴﮯ، ﺩﻭ ﭼﺎﺭ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﭘﻠﻴﭩﻴﮟ ﺟﻮ ﻟﮕﻴﮟ، ﻭﻩ ﻟﮕﺎﺋﻴﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﭘﻨﺎ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﺳﺴﭩﻢ ﻟﮕﺎﺋﻴﮯ، ﺩﻭ 
ﭼﺎﺭ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﭘﻠﻴﭩﻴﮟ ﺟﻮ ﻟﮕﻴﮟ، ﻭﻩ ﻟﮕﺎﺋﻴﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﭘﻨﮯ ﭘﻤﭗ ﮐﻮ ﭼﻼﺋﻴﮯ، ﻟﻴﮑﻦ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﺮﻳﺸﺎﻧﯽ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﻳہ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ 
ﮐﺴﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺳﺎڑے ﺳﺎﺕ ﮨﺎﺭﺯ ﺎﻭﺭ
ﭘ  ﺳﮯ ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﮐﺎ ﭘﻤﭗ ﻟﮕﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺍﺟﺎﺯﺕ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺩے ﮨﻴﮟ۔ 
ﺍٓﺝ ﮐﯽ ﺗﺎﺭﻳﺦ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﮔﺮ ﺍٓپ  ﺯﺭﺍﻋﺖ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﺑﺠﻠﯽ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻨﻴﮑﺸﻦ ﻟﻴﻨﮯ ﺟﺎﺋﻴﮟ،  ﺗﻮ ﺍٓپ ﮐﻮ ﺳﺎﺕ ﮨﺎﺭﺯﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﮐﺎ 
ﮐﻨﮑﺸﻦ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻣﻠﮯ ﮔﺎ۔ ﺍﻧﮩﻮں ﻧﮯ ﺳﺎڑﻫﮯ ﺳﺎﺕ ﮨﺎﺭﺯﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻨﮑﺸﻦ ﺩﻳﻨﺎ ﺑﻨﺪ ﮐﺮﺩﻳﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﮐﻴﻮں ﮐہ ﻭﺍﭨﺮ ﻟﻴﻮﻝ ﺑﮩﺖ ﻧﻴﭽﮯ 
ﭼﻼﮔﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺏ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ ﮨﻢ ﺳﺎڑﻫﮯ ﺳﺎﺕ ﮨﺎﺭﺯﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻨﮑﺸﻦ ﻟﻴﮟ ﮔﮯ، ﺗﻮ ﻭﻩ ﭼﻠﮯ ﮔﺎ ﮐﻴﺴﮯ؟ ﺟﺐ ﺑﺠﻠﯽ ﻭﺍﻟﮯ 
ﮨﯽ ﮐﮩہ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﮐہ ﻭﺍﭨﺮ ﻮﻝ
ﻟﻴ ﻧﻴﭽﮯ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺩﺱ ﮨﺎﺭﺯﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﺳﮯ ﮐﻢ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻨﮑﺶ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺩﻳﮟ ﮔﮯ، ﺗﻮ ﺍﺱ ﻁﺮﺡ ﺳﮯ ﻳہ 
ﮐﻨﮑﺸﻦ ﺑﻬﯽ ﻓﻴﻞ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ۔  
  ﺳﺮ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎ ﺟﻮ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﺳﯽ ﮨﮯ، ﻭﻩ ﭘﻤﭙﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺳﻮﻟﺮﺍﺋﺰ ﮐﺮﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻮ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﺳﮯ ﺑﺠﻠﯽ ﺳﮯ ﭼﻞ ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ،  
ﺍﻥ ﮐﻮ ﺳﻮﻟﺮﺍﺋﺰ ﮐﻴﺎ ﺟﺎﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﭘﺮﻳﺸﺎﻧﯽ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮨﮯ؟ ﭘﮩﻠﯽ ﭘﺮﻳﺸﺎﻧﯽ ﺗﻮ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﻭِﺗّﻴﮯ ﺍﺑﻬﺎﺅ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﺍے ﻧﮩﻴﮟ 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
151

ﭼﻠﺘﺎ، ﺩﻭﺳﺮﺍ ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎ ﺟﻮ ﺑﯽ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﮨﮯ، ﻭﻩ ﺳﺎڑﻫﮯ ﺳﺎﺕ ﮨﺎﺭﺯﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﮐﯽ ﻭﺟہ ﺳﮯ ﭼﻞ ﮨﯽ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺳﮑﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺟﻮ ﺳﯽ 
ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﻮ ﺍﻥ ﮐﯽ ڈﺳﭩﺮی ﺑﻴﻮﺷﻦ ﮐﻤﭙﻨﻴﺎں ﭼﻠﻨﮯ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺩے ﺭﮨﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﮐﻴﻮں ﮐہ ڈﺳﭩﺮی ﺑﻴﻮﺷﻦ ﮐﻤﭙﻨﻴﻮں ﮐﯽ 
ﺍٓﻣﺪﻧﯽ ﮐﻢ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ڈﺳﭩﺮی ﺑﻴﻮﺷﻦ ﮐﻤﭙﻨﻴﺎں ﻣﻨﺴﭩﺮی ﺍٓﻑ ﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ ﮐﺎﻡ ﮐﺮﺗﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﺳﺮ، ﻣﻴﺮﺍ ﺍﻧﺪﺍﺯﻩ ﻳہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ  
ﻣﻨﺴﭩﺮی ﺍٓﻑ ﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﺍﻭﺭ ﻣﻨﺴﭩﺮی ﺍٓﻑ ﺭﻳﻨﻴﻮﻳﺒﻞ ﺍﻳﻨﺮﺟﯽ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍٓپ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﻬﻴﻨﭻ ﺗﺎﻥ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻧﻮﻳﮑﺮﻧﻴﺌﮯ ﺍُﺭﺟﺎ ﮐﻮ ﻣﻨﺴﭩﺮی ﺍٓﻑ 
ﭘﺎﻭﺭ ﭘﺮﻣﻮٹ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺑﮩﺖ ﭘﮑﺶ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ، ﺣﺎﻻﻧﮑہ ﺍﻥ ﮐﯽ ﮐﭽﻬ ﺳﻨﺴﺘﻬﺎﺅ ﻧﮯ ﺍﻳﻦ ﭨﯽ ﭘﯽ ﺳﯽ، ﺍﻳﻦ ﺍﻳﭻ ﭘﯽ ﺳﯽ 
ﻭﻏﻴﺮﻩ ﻧﮯ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺳﻮﻟﺮ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎﺋﻴﮟ ﺷﺮﻭﻉ ﮐﯽ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﺟﯽ ﮐﻮ ﺍﺱ ﻁﺮﻑ ﺩﻫﻴﺎﻥ ﺩﻳﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﺌﻴﮯ۔ 
 ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓپ ﺳﮯ ﮩﯽ
ﻳ ﮐﮩﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﻮﻧﮕﺎ ﮐہ ﺩﻋﻮے ﺍﻳﺴﮯ ﮐﻴﮯ ﺟﺎﺋﻴﮟ، ﺟﻮ ﭘﻮﺭے ﮨﻮﺳﮑﻴﮟ۔ ﮐُﺴُﻢ ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ ﺍی 
ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺩﺱ ﮨﺰﺍﺭ ﻣﻴﮕﺎﻭﺍٹ ﮐﺎ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﺎ،
ﺗﻬ ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺳﮯ ﺻﺮﻑ ﺗﻴﻦ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﭘﺮ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮨﻮﺍ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﺑﯽ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ 
ﻣﻴﮟ14  ﻻﮐﻬ ﭘﻤﭗ ﻟﮕﻨﮯ ﺗﻬﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺻﺮﻑ28  ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﻟﮕﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺳﯽ ﮐﻤﭙﻮﻧﻴﻨﭧ ﻣﻴﮟ35  ﻻﮐﻬ ﮐﺎ ﻟﮑﺸﮯ ﺗﻬﺎ، 
ﺍﺱ ﮐﺎ ﺍﻳﮏ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﭘﻮﺭﺍ ﮨﻮﺍ۔  
  ﺳﺮ، ﻴﮟ
ﻣ ﺍﻳﮏ ﻣﻨﭧ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓﺧﺮی ﺑﺎﺕ ﻳہ ﮐﮩہ ﺭﮨﺎ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ ﮐﭽﻬ ﺭﻳﺎﺳﺘﯽ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭﻭں ﻧﮯ ﺑﻬﯽ ﺍﺳﭩﻴﻨﮉ ﺍﻟﻮﻥ ﭘﻤﭗ ﮐﯽ 
ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎ ﭼﻼﺋﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﭼﻬﺘﻴﺲ ﮔﮍﻫ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺏ ﺑﮕﻬﻴﻞ ﺻﺎﺣﺐ ﮐﯽ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﻧﮩﻮں ﻧﮯ ﻧﻮّے  ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﺗﮏ ﮐﯽ ﺳﺒﺴﮉی 
ﺍﺳﭩﻴﻨﮉ ﺍﻟﻮﻥ ﭘﻤﭙﻮں ﭘﺮ ﺩی ﺗﻬﯽ۔ ﺟﻬﺎﺭﮐﻬﻨﮉ ﻣﻴﮟ  ﺑﻬﯽ85  ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﺳﮯ ﺯﻳﺎﺩﻩ ﺍﺳﭩﻴﻨﮉ ﺍﻟﻮﻥ ﭘﻤﭗ ﭘﺮ ﺭﻳﺎﺳﺘﯽ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﺳﺒﺴﮉی 
ﺩے ﺭﮨﮯ ﮨﯽ۔ ﺍﺱ ﮐﯽ ﻭﺟہ ﮨﮯ ﭼﻬﺘﻴﺲ ﮔﮍﻫ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺑﮩﺖ ﭘﻤﭗ ﻟﮕﮯ ﺗﻬﮯ۔ ﭘﻮﺭے ﺑﻬﺎﺭﺕ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﻴﻨﺪﺭی ﻳﻮﺟﻨﺎﺅں ﮐﮯ ﺗﺤﺖ 
ﺍﺗﻨﮯ ﺍﺳﭩﻴﻨﮉ ﺍﻟﻮﻥ ﻟﻮﻥ ﭘﻤﭗ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﻟﮕﮯ، ﺟﺘﻨﮯ ﺍﮐﻴﻠﮯ ﭼﻬﺘﻴﺲ ﮔﮍﻫ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻟﮓ ﮔﺌﮯ ﺗﻬﮯ۔ ﺟﻬﺎﺭﮐﻬﻨﮉ ﮐﺎ ﺻﺤﻴﺢ  ﺍٓﻧﮑﮍﺍ ﻣﻴﺮے 
ﭘﺎﺱ ﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﮨﮯ۔ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍٓپ ﺳﮯ ﻳﮩﯽ ﻋﺮﺽ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﺎ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ ﺍٓپ ﻧﮯ ﮐﮩﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺗﻴﺲ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﮐﻴﻨﺪﺭ ﺩﻳﮕﺎ، ﺗﻴﺲ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ 
ﺭﻳﺎﺳﺘﯽ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﺩﻳﮕﯽ، ﭼﺎﻟﻴﺲ ﻓﻴﺼﺪ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺩﻳﮕﺎ۔ ﺍﺱ ﺍﺳﭩﻴﻨﮉ ﺍﻟﻮﻥ ﭘﻤﭗ ﮐﯽ ﺳﺒﺴﮉی ﮐﺎ ﺳﺎﺭﺍ ﺫﻣہ ﮐﻴﻨﺪﺭ ﺳﺮﮐﺎﺭ ﮐﻮ ﻟﻴﻨﺎ 
ﭼﺎﮨﻴﺌﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﺳﮯ ﮐﻢ ﺣﺼہ ﻟﻴﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﻴﺌﮯ،  ﺗﺒﻬﯽ ﮨﻢ ﺳﭻ ﻣﻴﮟ ﮐﺴﺎﻥ ﮐﺎ ﺑﺠﻠﯽ ﮐﮯ ﺍﻭﭘﺮ ﺟﻮ ﺍﻧﺤﺼﺎﺭ ﮨﮯ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﻮ ﮐﻢ 
ﮐﺮ ﭘﺎﺋﻴﮟ ﮔﮯ۔ ﺍﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺳﺠﻬﺎﺅں ﺍﻭﺭ ﺍﻧﮩﻴﮟ ﺑﺎﺗﻮں ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﻬ  ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﭘﻨﯽ ﺑﺎﺕ ﺧﺘﻢ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﻮں۔ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺷﮑﺮﻳہ۔  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय अमर पाल मौयर् जी।  आपका मेडन Îपीच है। मेडन Îपीच का काफी 
महत्व है और उसके  िलए आपको समय भी चािहए। आप शुरू  करȂ। 
 
Ǜी अमर पाल मौयर् (उǄर Ģदेश): उ
पसभापित महोदय, आज मुझे नवीन और नवीकरणीय ऊजार् 
क े संबंध मȂ चचार् क े िलए अवसर ĢाÃत हुआ है, मȅ इसके  िलए अपनी पाटीर् और आपका बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद ज्ञा
िपत करता हूँ।  
महोदय, देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का देश क े सवार्ंगीण 
िवकास का संकÊप है।  हमारी सरकार इस संकÊप क े Ģित Ģयास कर रही है।  मोदी सरकार एक 
तरफ Ģकृ ित क Ȃिदर्त िवकास की अव
धारणा का भाव रखती है, तो दूसरी तरफ िवरासत की भी 
अवधारणा को बढ़ाने का भाव रखती है।  महोदय, आज िवÌव भर मȂ हिरत ऊजार् को लेकर क े 
जागरूकता  बढ़ी है। आज पूरे िवÌव मȂ जलवायु पिरवतर्न एक बहुत बड़ा मुǈा बना हुआ है। इसके  
Ģित माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी और मान
नीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने देश क े Ģित अपनी जो भावनाएं Ģकट 
की हȅ, उसके  िलए मȅ देश क े यश Îवी Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को पुनः एक बार बधाई देता हूँ। माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी वषर् 2014, जब से वे सरकार मȂ आए हȅ, तब से उन्हȗने हमेशा छोटी-छोटी चीजȗ से 
शुरुआत  की है और देश मȂ सुदूर बैठे लोगȗ क े Ģित भी ध्यान देना शुरू  िक या है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय अमर पाल मौयर् जी, चूंिक मȅने कहा िक यह आपकी पहली मेडन Îपीच 
है और आपका समय पयार्Ãत है, तो आप अपनी Îपीच को कल क ं टीन्यू करȂगे। 
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

Hon. Members, the Discussion on the Working of New and Renewable Energy 
will resume tomorrow. The House is adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. tomorrow, that 
is, Tuesday, the 6th August, 2024.   
 
The House then adjourned at thirty one minutes past five of the clock till eleven 
of the clock on Tuesday, the 6th August, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 5 August, 2024 ]
153

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 