Vol. 267 Wednesday, 
No. 24 2 April, 2025 
 12 Chaitra, 1947 (S aka) 
PARLI
AMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENT
S 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1-12) 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports - Presented (pages 12-13) 
Statement by Minister- 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs - Laid on the Table (page -13) 
Reference by the Chair 
World Autism Awareness Day (pages 13-15) 
Matters raised with Permission- 
Concern over alleged threat to freedom of  expression by deliberate and malicious 
attack on the movie ‘L2: Empuraan’ (pages 16-17) 
Demand to confer Bharat Ratna to Indian origin astronaut Sunita 
Williams (pages 17-19) 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Demand for removal of 18 %GST on  insurance policies for senior  
citizens (pages 19-20) 
Need to promote Indian art, literature and cinema in order to  nurture creative  
expressions (pages 20-22) 
Unregulated growth of e-Rickshaws in Indian cities (pages 22-23) 
Concern over the destruction of forest at Hyderabad University (pages 23-24) 
Demand for protection of GI-Tagged Alphonso mango  of Konkan region of  
Maharashtra (pages 24-25) 
Demand for strict action against Provident Fund defaulters (pages 25-27) 
Demand for mandatory provisions of First Aid training for teachers and  students in 
the schools (pages 27-28) 
Demand to address the problems  faced by workers of National  Health Mission 
(NHM) (pages 28-29) 
Need to take measures to resolve farmers’ problems (pages 29-30) 
Demand to start Mehsana-Mumbai flights under Regional Connectivity  Scheme 
(RCS)-UDAN (Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik) (page- 31) 
Concern over the increasing pollution in the major rivers of  
the country (pages 32-33) 
Demand to include languages spoken by Tribal Communities  in the 8th Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution (pages 33-34) 
Delay in disbursement of pensio nary benefits to Government  
employees (pages 35-36) 
Demand to enforce stricter laws to  protect animals, wildlife and  
nature (pages 36-37) 
 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 37-66) 
[Answers to Starred and Un -starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to th is Debate, published electro nically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
 
Government Bills- 
The Boilers Bill, 2024- Amendments made by Lok Sabha-Agreed (pages 66) 
The Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025- passed (pages  67-145) 
 
Website :  http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
   https://sansad.in/rs  
E-mail:      rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in  

Special Mentions- 
Demand for a Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) in Mattannur, Kannur,  
Kerala (pages 145-146) 
Demand for construction of elevated doub le rail line from Haridwar to Dehradun 
and construction of over bridge at open railway crossing (pages 146) 
Demand for reservation counter and stoppage of trains at Kharar Railway Station in 
Punjab (page 146-147) 
Need to establish a Millet Board in Bhubaneswar (page -147) 
Demand for survey for railway line to Yamuna valley from Dehradun via  
Chakrata (page -148) 
Demand for underpasses and overbridge s along National Highway in Kannur, 
Kerala (page- 148) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
Wednesday, the 2nd April, 2025/12 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Papers to be laid on the Table. 
 
I. Notification of the Ministry of Education 
II. Report and Accounts (2023-24) of the NCTE, New Delhi and related papers 
III. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of Sam agra Shiksha, Bihar, Karnataka and 
Lakshadweep; NCERT, New Delhi and related papers  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION (SHRI JAYANT 
CHAUDHARY): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
I.    
A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mini stry of Education (Department of School 
Education and Literacy) Notification No. G.S.R. 777(E)., dated the 21 st December, 
2024, publishing the Right of Childre n to Free and Compulsory Education 
(Amendment) Rules, 2024, under sub-sectio n (3) of Section 38 of the Right of 
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009, along with delay statement. 
                                                              [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2293/18/25] 
 
II.   (1)   A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under Section 25 
and sub-section (4) of Section 26 of the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 
1993: - 
(a) Twenty-ninth Annual Report of the Nati onal Council for Teacher Education, 
(NCTE), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
(b) Annual Accounts of the National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), 
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.     
(c) Review by Government on the working of the above Council. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                            [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2625/18/25] 

 
III.     A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report of the Samagra Shiksha, Bihar, for the year   2023-24. 
 (b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Programme.     
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above.  
                                     [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2626/18/25] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report of the Samagra Shiksha, Karnataka, for the year   2023-
24. 
 (b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Programme.     
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the paper mentioned at 
(a) above.  
                                    [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2627/18/25] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Samagra Shiksha, Lakshadweep, 
for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor’s Report on the 
Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Programme.     
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
                                     [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2628/18/25] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report of the National Counc il of Educational Research and 
Training (NCERT), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the National Counc il of Educational Research and 
Training (NCERT), New Delhi, fo r the year 2023-24, and the Audit 
Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above Council. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
                                  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2629/18/25] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूं :- 
   (i)    
A copy (in English only) of the Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No.  
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
G.S.R. 133(E)., dated the 13 th February, 2025, publishi ng a Corrigendum to the 
English Version of Notification No. G.S.R. 856(E), dated the 21st November, 2023. 
                                                            [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2452/18/25] 
 
   (ii)      A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Home Affairs Notification No. 
G.S.R. 171(E)., dated 11 th March, 2025, publishing th e Indo-Tibetan Border Police 
Force, General Duty Cadre (Group ‘C’ Posts) Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 
2025, under sub-section (3) of  Section 156 of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force 
Act, 1992. 
                                                          [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2512/18/25] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
 
सड़क पिरवहन और राजमागर् मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी अजय टÇटा): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :-
 
(i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Road Transport and Highways 
Notification No. S.O.1083(E)., dated the 4 th March, 2025, levying user fee for the 
project of four or more lane section of Kanpur-Kabrai section on NH-86 in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh, under Section 37 of the National Highways Authority of India Act, 
1988. 
[Placed in Library.  See No. L. T. 2524A/18/25] 
 
  (ii)    
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways, under Sect ion 10 of the National Highways Act, 
1956: - 
 (1) S.O.1084(E)., dated the 4 th March, 2025, levying user fee for the 
project of two lane with paved shoulders of Seetharamapuram to 
Duttalur section of NH-167BG in the State of Andhra Pradesh. 
 (2) S.O. 1132(E)., dated the 11 th March, 2025, levying user fee for the 
project of two lane to four lane of Gondal-Ribda section and 
Porbandar-Rajkot-Bamanbore section on NH-8B in the State of 
Gujarat on BOT (Toll) basis. 
 (3) S.O.1133(E)., dated the 11
th March, 2025, levying  user fee for the 
project of four or more lane sectio n of Mathura to Devinagar Bypass of 
NH-530B in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
 (4) S.O. 1179(E)., dated the 13 th March, 2025, levying user fee for the 
project of four or more lane of Jind-Gohana section of NH-352A in the 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
3

 
State of Haryana. 
 (5) S.O.1180(E)., dated the 13 th March, 2025, levying  user fee for the 
project of four or more lane section of AlandiPalkhi Marg section of 
NH-965 in the State of Maharashtra. 
 (6) S.O.1181(E)., dated the 13 th March, 2025, levying  user fee for the 
project of two lane with paved shoulder of Jhalmala-Sherpur section of 
NH-930 in the state of Chhattisgarh on EPC mode. 
 (7) S.O.1242(E)., dated the 18 th March, 2025, levying user fee for the 
project of four or more lane of Hyderabad – Vijayawada section of 
NH-65 in the State of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. 
 (8) S.O. 1243(E)., dated the 18 th March, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No. S.O. 5415(E), dated the      27th December, 2021. 
 (9) S.O. 1313(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2025, levying user fee for the 
project of four lanes of Raebareli to Prayagraj of NH-24B and link road 
of NH2 (New NH-19) of NH-30 in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
 (10) S.O.1314(E)., dated the 19
th March, 2025, levying user fee for the 
project of two/four lane with pave d shoulder of Raebareli-Jagdishpur 
section of NH-330A in the State of Uttar Pradesh 
                               [Placed in Library. For (1) to (10), see No. L. T. 2524/18/25] 
 
I. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of AMU, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh; SPA, 
Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh;  SLBSNSU, New Delhi; NITSER, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala    and related papers 
II. Reports and Accounts (2022-23 and 2023-24) of the  Central University of South 
Bihar, Gaya, Bihar; the Dr. Harisingh Go ur Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar, Madhya 
Pradesh;  the Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delh i;  the Mizoram University, Aizawl;  
the NEHU, Shillong, Meghalaya    and related papers 
III. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of IIM,  Indore;  IIM, Nagpur; IIM, Ranchi; IIM, 
Sirmaur and related papers 
IV. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of the Au roville Foundation, Villupuram, Tamil 
Nadu; IGNOU, New Delhi; University of Delhi and related papers 
V. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of various Councils, Institutes, Board, University 
and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS
 ( D R .  L .  M U R U G A N ) :  S i r ,  o n  b e h a l f  o f  m y  c o l l e a g u e ,   
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Shri Sukanta Majumdar, I to lay on the Table— 
I. (A) (1) A copy each (in English and Hi ndi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 34 and sub-section (4) of Section 35 of the Aligarh Muslim 
University Act, 1920: - 
 (a) Annual Report of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon.   
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                    [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2630/18/25] 
 
(B) (1) A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following papers, under sub-
section (5) of Section 25 of the School of Planning and Architecture Act, 2014: - 
 (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the School of Planning and Architecture 
(SPA), Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh,  for the year 2023-24, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above School. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                          [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2631/18/25] 
 
(C) (1) A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Sections 31 and sub-section (4) of Section 32 of the Central Sanskrit 
Universities Act, 2020: - 
 (a) 
Annual Report of the Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit 
University (SLBSNSU), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit 
University (SLBSNSU), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit 
Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                          [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2632/18/25] 
 
  (D)  (1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
5

 
section (4) of Section 22 of the National Institute of Technology, Science Education 
& Research (NITSER) Act, 2007: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Institute of Science 
Education and Research (NITSER), Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, for 
the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b)   Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                           [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2633/18/25] 
 
II. (A) (1) A copy each (in English and Hi ndi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) Section 30 and sub-section (4) of  Section 31 of the Central Universities 
Act, 2009: - 
(i) (a) 
Annual Report of the Central University  of South Bihar, Gaya, Bihar, for 
the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Central Universi ty of South Bihar, Gaya, Bihar, 
for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
                                       [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2634/18/25] 
 
(ii) (a) Fifteenth Annual Report of th e Dr. Harisingh Gour  Vishwavidyalaya, 
Sagar, Madhya Pradesh, for the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Dr. Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar, 
Madhya Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on the wo rking of the above Vishwavidyalaya. 
                                       [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2635/18/25] 
 
(iii) (a) Sixteenth Annual Report of the Dr. Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, 
Sagar, Madhya Pradesh, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Vishwavidyalaya. 
(2) Statements (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                             [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2636/18/25] 
 
(B) (1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 27 and sub-sectio n (4) of Section 28 of the Jamia Millia 
Islamia, Act, 1988: - 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 (a) Annual Report of the Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, for the year 2023-
24. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above University.   
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                           [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2637/18/25] 
 
(C) (1)  A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 30 and sub-section (4) of Section 31 of the Mizoram University 
Act, 2000: - 
 (a) Annual Report of the Mizoram University, Aizawl, for the year 2022-23. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Mizoram Univ ersity, Aizawl, for the year 2022-
23, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on the working of the above University.   
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                          [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2437/18/25] 
 
 (D) (1) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Annual Accounts of the North-Eastern 
Hill University (NEHU), Shillong, Meghalaya, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit 
Report thereon, under sub-section (4) of Section 29 of the Central Universities Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2008.  
    (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                          
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2428/18/25] 
 
III. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(4) of Section 28 and sub-section (5) of Section 23 of the Indian Institute of 
Management Act, 2017: - 
(i) (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Institute of Management 
(IIM), Indore, Madhya Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b)   Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
                                     [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2638/18/25] 
 
(ii) (a)   Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Institute of Management 
(IIM) Nagpur, Maharashtra, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
7

 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b)   Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
                                       [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2639/18/25] 
 
 (iii) (a)   Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Institute of Management 
(IIM) Ranchi, Jharkhand, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b)   Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
                                      [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2640/18/25] 
 
(iv) (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the Indian Institute of Management 
(IIM) Sirmaur, Himachal Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b)   Review by Government on the working of the above Institute. 
(2) Statements (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                            [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2641/18/25] 
 
IV. (A) (1) A copy each (in English and Hi ndi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 24 and sub-sect ion (4) of Section 26 of the Auroville 
Foundation Act, 1988: - 
 (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the Auroville Foundation, Villupuram, 
Tamil Nadu, for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
 (b)   Review by Government on the working of the above Foundation. 
  (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) gi ving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                        [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2642/18/25] 
 
(B) (1) A copy each (in English and Hind i) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 28 and sub-section (4) of Section 29 of the Indira Gandhi 
National Open University Act, 1985: - 
 (a)  
Annual Report of the Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), 
New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b)   Annual Accounts of the Indira Gandhi National Open University 
(IGNOU), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report 
thereon. 
 (c)  Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
                                       [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2643/18/25] 
 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (1) above. 
 
(C) (1) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Annual Accounts of the University of 
Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Re port thereon, under sub-section (3) of 
Section 39 of the Delhi University Act, 1922. 
  (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) gi ving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
                                                           [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2644/18/25] 
 
V. (1)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report of the National Council for Promotion of Sindhi Language 
(NCPSL), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the National Council for Promotion of Sindhi 
Language (NCPSL), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit 
Report thereon. 
 (c) Statement by Government accepting the above Report. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
                                      [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2645/18/25] 
 
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Institute of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology (NIAMT), Ranchi, Jharkhand, for the year 
2023-24, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts.    
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statementgiving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
                                         [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2646/18/25] 
 
(iii) (a) Annual Report of the National Council for Promotion of Urdu Language 
(NCPUL), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the National Council for Promotion of Urdu 
Language (NCPUL), New Delhi, fo r the year 2023-24, and the Audit 
Report thereon. 
 (c) Statement by Government accepting the above Report. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
9

 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
                                         [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2647/18/25] 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Bo ard of Apprenticeship Training 
(BOAT), (Southern Region), Chennai, Tamil Nadu for the year 2023-
24, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Board. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above.  
                                        [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2648/18/25] 
 
(v) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Na tional Institute of Educational 
Planning and Administration (NIEPA), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24, 
together with the Auditor’s Report on the Account. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
                                       [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2649/18/25] 
 
(vi) (a) Annual Report of the Dayalbagh Edu cational Institute, Agra, Uttar 
Pradesh, for the year 2023-24. 
 (b) Annual Accounts of the Dayalbagh Edu cational Institute, Agra, Uttar 
Pradesh, for the year 2023-24, and the Audit Report thereon. 
 (c) Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
 (d) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
                                        [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2650/18/25] 
 
(vii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24 together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
                                         [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2651/18/25] 
 
 
 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Notifications of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS (SHRI HARSH MALHOTRA): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
     (A)    
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, un der Section 10 of the National Highways 
Act, 1956: - 
 (1) S.O. 5320(E)., dated the 10 th December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 689(E), dated the 4 th April, 2011, along with 
delay statement. 
 (2) S.O. 5420(E)., dated the 13 th December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 1096(E), dated the 4 th August, 2005, along with 
delay statement. 
 (3) S.O. 5422(E)., dated the 13 th December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 1096(E), dated the 4 th August, 2005, along with 
delay statement. 
 (4) S.O. 5531(E)., dated the 23 rd December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 689(E), dated the 4th April, 2011. 
 (5) S.O. 5582(E)., dated the 27 th December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 1096(E), dated the 4th August, 2005. 
 (6) S.O. 1278(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 689(E), dated the 4th April, 2011. 
 (7) S.O. 1279(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 689(E), dated the 4th April, 2011. 
 (8) S.O. 1282(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 1096(E), dated the 4th August, 2005. 
                                        [Placed in Library. For (1) to (8), see No. L. T. 2652/18/25] 
 
(B)    A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways, under Section 37 of the National Highways 
Authority of India Act, 1988: - 
 (1) S.O. 5419(E)., dated the 13 th December, 2024, entrusting the stretch 
of National Highways, as mentioned therein, to the National Highways 
Authority of India, along with delay statement. 
 (2) S.O. 5421(E)., dated the 13 th December, 2024, entrusting the stretch 
of National Highways, as mentioned therein, to the National Highways 
Authority of India, along with delay statement. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
11

 
 (3) S.O. 5577(E)., dated the 27 th December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 1670(E), dated the 26th May, 2020. 
 (4) S.O. 5578(E)., dated the 27 th December, 2024, entrusting the stretch 
of National Highways, as mentioned therein, to the National Highways 
Authority of India. 
 (5) S.O. 5579(E)., dated the 27 th December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 910(E), dated the 21st April, 2010. 
 (6) S.O. 5580(E)., dated the 27 th December, 2024, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 3140(E), dated the 8th July, 2022. 
 (7) S.O. 5581(E)., dated the 27 th December, 2024, entrusting the stretch 
of National Highways, as mentioned therein, to the National Highways 
Authority of India. 
 (8) S.O. 1280(E)., dated the 19
th March, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 978(E), dated the 1st March, 2023. 
 (9) S.O. 1281(E)., dated the 19 th March, 2025, amending the Principal 
Notification No.  S.O. 386(E), dated the 16th February, 2010. 
                                       [Placed in Library.  For (1) to (9), see No. L. T. 2653/18/25] 
 
Report and Accounts (2022-23) of the  NFDB and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND DAIRYING
 (SHRI GEORGE KURIAN) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in 
English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Fisheries Development 
Board (NFDB), for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts. 
 (b) 
 
(c) 
Review by Government on the working of the above Board. 
Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
                                         [Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 2513/18/25] 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV (West Bengal): Sir, I lay the 366th Report (in English and Hindi) 
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Children, Youth and Sports on 'Demands for Grants (2 025-26)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER  
 
 Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ी ( Ǜी मनोहर लाल): महोदय, मȅ आवासन और शहरी कायर् 
मंतर्ालय की  ‘पीएम Îटर्ीट वȂडसर् आत्मिनभर्र िनिध (पीएम Îविनिध)’ क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित क े दसवȂ Ģितवेदन (सतर्हवीं लोक सभा) 
मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ क
े  कायार्न्वयन की िÎथित क े संबंध मȂ एक वƪËय सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
 
 
REFERENCE BY THE CHAIR 
 
World Autism Awareness Day 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, today, April 2, is recognised by the United Nations 
as World Autism Awareness Day. This Hous e, I strongly feel, would reaffirm its 
commitment to promoting the rights and well- being of individuals with autism. This 
year's theme, ‘Advancing Neurodiversi ty and the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals’, highlights neurodiversity and su stainable development. Yesterday, a 
distinguished hon. Member of this House, Shri Sujeet Kumar, emphasised the need 
for autism awareness with a special focu s on facilitation for a unique disability 
identification card and advocated holding of camps and supporting families for the 
same. India's legislative framework, includin g the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act 2016 and National Trust Act, 1999, ha s established crucial entitlements and 
support programmes. Entitlements have mean ing only when they reach the intended 
persons. Our inclusive education and vocational training initiatives are creating 
meaningful opportunities for autistic indivi duals, but more is required to be done. 
Moving forward, we must prioritize awareness early in time. 
Unique disability ID certification camps and inclusive policies to ensure proper 
support and opportunities, aligning thes e efforts with Sustainable Development 
Goals, particularly quality education, decent work and reduced inequality, will 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
13

 
strengthen our commitment to inclusivity. Indi a stands firmly for creating an equitable 
world for individuals with autism. 
I had yesterday requested the Leader of the House, who is also the concerned 
Minister, to take proactive initiatives by way of holding camps in institutions that help 
children suffering with autism. And, I am sure, he would come out during this Session 
with the steps that can possibly be taken as awareness will continue as per United 
Nations for the entire month of April.  
Hon. Members, let us collectively resolve to build a society where individuals 
with autism are empowered to lead fulfilling lives with dignity and equal opportunities. 
A challenged human resource is not challenged the way we think. Every 
challenged human resource is a reservoir of  talent and we need to harness it by 
allowing the concerned to unleash that en ergy for self-development and societal 
development.                           
Hon. Members, four notices have been received under Rule 267. The notice of 
Shrimati Sagarika Ghose de mands discussion over the alleged lapse of Election 
Commission in issuance of multiple duplicate Electors Photo Identity Cards across the 
States. The notice of Dr. John Brittas demand s discussion over the alleged threat to 
freedom of expression by deliberate an d malicious attack on the movie L2: 
Empuraan.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, it is Empuraan. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yesterday also you said so. Sometimes, it is difficult to pick up the 
accent. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, you allow me to speak.  I will clear it...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The notice of Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury demand discussion over 
the adverse impact of unilateral tariff war de clared by the United States of America on 
Indian economy. The notice of Shri Samik Bhattacharya demand discussion over 
alleged incidents of arson and vandalis m and attacks on Hindu-owned shops and 
properties in Motabari, West Bengal. Hon. Me mbers, first, my request is, if an hon. 
Member comes with a request/notice under Rule 267, minimal requirement is physical 
presence of the Member in the House. Absence of the Member does not send a good 
signal.  I would not like to reiterate, whic h I have done on umpteen occasions, these 
notices do not merit admittance and are so declined. 
 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, please allow me thirty seconds...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, you promised me yesterday.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This practice of allowing is never ending. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir you said that you would allow me. You allowed Prof. Ram 
Gopal Yadavji. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I allowed because Prof. Ra m Gopal Yadav has spent time manifold 
than you have done. John Brittas, by the time  you reach his level, and if I am in the 
Chair, trust me, you will get the same accommodation. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, please allow me fo r 30 seconds. I will just make my point 
very clear.    Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Did I say, ‘yes’? 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, I was reading your face.  Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We have distinguished Memb ers in the House on both sides. We 
have distinguished Members here. I al ways ensure that these Members get 
precedence. The hon. former Prime Minister , Shri H.D. Devegowda, was not present 
when I indicated to the Hous e that after talking to everyone concerned, we have 
devised a mechanism that when ever the former Prime Minister would like to make an 
input, it will be for minimum 10 minutes, ev en if his party does not have that much 
time.  And, I am grateful to the Leader of  the House and the Leader of the Opposition 
for so appreciating...  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Sir, the issue also needs... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Let me give him 30 seconds. So, we take up the listed matters 
raised with permission - Dr. John Bittas; 30 seconds.  
 
 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
15

 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION 
  
Concern over alleged threat to freedom of expression by deliberate and  
malicious attack on the movie ‘L2: Empuraan’ 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, unfortuna te incidents are happening in this 
country. There is an assault on freedom of speech and expression, which is enshrined 
in the Indian Constitution. I would just say that a movie, which was censored and 
released in the theatre, was asked to go b ack to the Censor Board again and there 
have been 24 cuts resorted to because of the threats, and even the protagonists of 
the movies were depicted as anti-nationals. If this is the situation in this country, I fear 
that the freedom of speech and expression, wh ich is granted to the people, will be in 
peril. So, I urge upon this House to see that such incidents do not happen.  Even 
trolls and comedies are being despised.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : One minute; sit down. ...( Interruptions)... Vaikoji, you are a 
senior…  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, our country is fast becoming the paradise of wounded 
people.  Anybody and everyb ody is getting wounded.  ...( Interruptions)... Sir, you 
need to give a mark to the creativity an d freedom of speech and expression, It is 
sacrosanct.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Okay; excellent. ...( Interruptions)... Nothing will go on record 
now.  ...(Interruptions)...  Shri George Kurian now.  I have given him time.  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS
; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
DAIRYING (SHRI GEORGE KURIAN):  Sir, this film is against the Christian faith. It is 
about the sentiments of the Christian fait h and the Cross and all the Christians in 
India. It opposes KCBC and CBCI. The comm unists want to insult  the Christians in 
this country.  That is what they are telling. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Nothing else will go on record.  
 
SHRI GEORGE KURIAN: Today, you can s ee that the CBCI and the KCBC have 
passed the resolutions against this film.  I am a Christian.  Do not insult me. These 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
communists want to insult every religion. ...( Interruptions)...  Why are they insisting 
on this film?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The hon. Member, Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) 
associated himself with the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr. John Brittas.    
Now, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque - De mand to confer Bharat Ratna to 
Indian origin astronaut, Sunita Williams. ...( Interruptions)... Only what Shri 
Mohammed Nadimul Haque says will go on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Demand to confer Bharat Ratna to Indian origin astronaut Sunita Williams 
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE (West Bengal): Sir, let us all welcome the safe 
return of Crew-9 to Earth after 286 days.  They landed back on Earth on March 18 th. 
Let me quote what the hon. C.M., Ms. Mamata Banerjee, said. I quote, “Welcome 
Sunita Williams and Butch Wilmore back to Ea rth, finally and safely after so many 
days.  Our daughter of India returns to us and we are deeply, deeply happy and 
elated.  We are profoundly happy for Butch Wilmore also. Hail their courage, hail their 
return, hail human glory! I congratulate the rescue team for their overwhelming 
support and success.”   
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
A few days after she made this statement, the hon. Chief Minister of West Bengal 
spoke at the State Assembly where she de manded that Sunita Williams should be 
conferred with the Bharat Ratna, India's high est civilian award. This would be a fitting 
tribute to her remarkable achievement. Look ing at India from space, Sunita Williams 
highlighted the Himalayas’ ripple effect, the fishing fleet near Mumbai and Gujarat and 
the network of lights visible across the co untry. The achievement of Sunita Williams 
would also make ISRO proud,  which was established in 1 969. Yes; Great institutions 
were built before 2014. The success of Sunita Williams has always been celebrated in 
India. Giving her Bharat Ratna would be the ultimate celebration.  Sir, let me remind 
my fellow Parliamentarians th at Sunita Williams was honoured on her visit to India in 
2007. Among the many accolades she received, she was also conferred Padma 
Bhushan. I do recall the words of Sunita Williams, and, I quote, “There is one lady, I 
admire a lot. ”  In fact, that lady is now with us in Rajya Sabha.  Sunita Williams was 
referring to Shrimati Sonia Gandhi. Despite all accolades showered on Sunita Williams 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
17

 
from across the world and the UPA Government in Delhi, *. A few days ago, she has 
expressed her desire to visit her father’s home country and their ancestral village. She 
comes from Mehsana District, the same Di strict where hon. Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modi, hails from. Let me ask you: …( Interruptions)… Now, in 2025, we 
demand Bharat Ratna for a super achiever with strong Indian and Gujarati roots.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
'िसतारȗ से आगे जहाँ और भी हȅ, 
सुनीता तेरे इिÇतहान और भी हȅ।' 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Finance Minister. …(Interruptions)…   
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE
; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, it is one thing to ask for Bharat Ratna for 
someone as meritorious as Sunita Williams. But, in the process, casting aspersions, 
bringing into the picture people unrelated to  the context, and also bringing into the 
picture people who, unfortunately, are no longer with us, or who have passed away, 
are, absolutely, uncalled for, if I can say in the minimum of words. I think, that portion 
of the hon. Member’s speech should be completely taken out of records.   
…(Interruptions)…  All of us will be ha ppy to consider Bharat Ratna and other things.   
…(Interruptions)…  But, there is no way that re ference to any persons, who are no 
longer alive, and casting aspersions on the hon. Prime Minster, should be entertained 
here.  …( Interruptions)… Those comments must be expunged. जो भी अĢासंिगक चीजȂ 
हȅ, we will take them into account and वे हटा दी जाएँगी।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN: Sir, this is not…  …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI MOHAMED NADIMUL HAQUE: No, Sir.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. जो अĢासंिगक तथ्य हȅ, वे नहीं जाएँगे।...(Ëयवधान)...   
The following hon. Members associated th emselves with the matter raised by the 
hon. Member, Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque: Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), 
Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P.  Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), 
Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri Ritabrata 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Banerjee  (West Bengal), ), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), 
Shri P. P. Suneer  (Kerala), Smt. Maus am B Noor (West Bengal), Smt. Sagarika 
Ghose (West Bengal), Shri A. A. Rahim (K erala), Ms. Dola Sen  (West Bengal),  
Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), ), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Moha med Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Ramji 
(Uttar Pradesh). 
N o w ,  S h r i  N e e r a j  D a n g i  -  D e m a n d  f o r  R e m o v a l  o f  1 8  p e r  c e n t  G S T  o n  
insurance policies for senior citizens. …(Interruptions)…   
 
Demand for removal of 18 % GST on insurance policies for senior citizens 
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी (राजÎथान): माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपका हािर्दक आभार िक  आपने मुझे 
इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने का अवसर िदया।  जैसा िक सवर्िविदत है िक वृǉावÎथा मȂ उĦ 
बढ़ाने क े साथ-साथ आय कम हो जाती है और ÎवाÎथ्य संबंधी समÎयाएँ बढ़ जाती हȅ, िजससे 
दवाओं की अिधक आवÌयकता होती है और िचिकत्सा खचर् भी बढ़ जाता है। इन कारणȗ से 
ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा पॉिलसी का Ģीिमयम भी बढ़ जाता है। ऐसे मȂ वृǉजनȗ क े िलए ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा 
Ģीिमयम का भुगतान करना मुिÌकल हो जाता है। बढ़ती उĦ क े साथ बढ़ती हुई इस गंभीर समÎया 
क े समाधान क े िलए सरकार को कोई ठोस कदम उठाना चािहए। विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को ÎवाÎथ्य 
बीमा, हेÊथ Ģीिमयम पर भुगतान िकए जाने वाले मौजूदा 18 Ģितशत जीएसटी से छू ट दी जानी 
चािहए। यिद यह कदम उठाया जाता ह
ै, तो ÎवाÎथ्य देखभाल सÎती हो सकती और वृǉ 
पॉिलसीधारकȗ क े िलए बीमा की लागत कम हो सकती है, जो समावेशी ÎवाÎथ्य देखभाल, हेÊथ 
क ेयर को बढ़ावा देने क े सरकार क े Ëयापक एजȂडा का िहÎसा बन सकता  है।   
भारत सरकार विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा पॉिलिसयȗ का Ģीिमयम कम करने क े 
िलए कई तरीकȗ से आवÌयक कदम उठा सकती है, जैसे एक दृिÍटकोण मȂ विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े 
िलए Ģीिमयम मȂ सिÅसडी देना, जो विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को िरयायती Ģीिमयम की पेशकश करने 
वाली बीमा क ंपिनयȗ को ट
ैक्स देकर ĢाÃत िकया जा सकता है, िजससे ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा अिधक 
िकफायती और सुलभ हो सके । इसी Ģकार एक अन्य रणनीित क े तहत बीमा क्षेतर् मȂ एफडीआई 
यानी Ģत्यक्ष िवदेशी िनवेश को बढ़ाना, िजससे ĢितÎपधार् बढ़ सकती ह
ै और Ģीिमयम कम हो 
सकता है।  िफलहाल बीमा क्षेतर् मȂ एफडीआई की सीमा 74 फीसदी है, हालाँिक इस बजट मȂ इसे 
100 Ģितशत िकए जाने का ऐलान है।  
आमजन को इसका लाभ कब िमलेगा, यह एक अन्य ĢÌन है।  भारत सरकार ǎारा लागू 
आयुÍमान भारत योजना, जो 70 वष र् और उससे अिधक की आयु क े सभी विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को 5 
लाख रुपए  तक का ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा कवर Ģदान करने का दावा करती है, इस योजना का और 
िवÎतार कर इसमȂ 70 
वषर् से घटाकर 60 वषर् से अिध
क विरÍठ नागिरकȗ को शािमल िकया जाना 
चािहए। इन उपायȗ को लागू करके  भारत सरकार विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े िलए ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा को 
अिधक िकफायती और सुलभ बनाने मȂ मदद कर सकती है, यह सुिनिÌचत करते हुए िक उन्हȂ 
िचिकत्सा देखभाल व िचिकत्सा सुिव
धा िबना िकसी िवǄीय बोझ क े ĢाÃत हो सके ।   
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
19

 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सरकार से यह अपेक्षा करता हूँ िक 
विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े साथ-साथ 5 लाख रुपय े तक की कवरेज वाले गैर विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े िलए 
भी ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा Ģीिमयम पर जीएसटी को हटाया जाना चािहए और लाख रुपए  से अिधक क े 
ÎवाÎथ्य कवर पर Ģीिमयम क े मौजूदा 18 
Ģितशत क े मुकाबले 5 Ģितशत जीएसटी िकया जाना 
चािहए, तािक विरÍठ नागिरकȗ क े िलए भी यह ÎवाÎथ्य बीमा Ģीिमयम अफॉडȃबल बन सके ।  
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद, जय िंहद! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Neeraj Dangi: Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), 
Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri R. Gi rirajan  (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Ramji (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala),
 Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri P. P. Suneer  (Kerala), Shri Sant Balbir 
Singh (Punjab), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Shri 
Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri M.  Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri G.C. 
Chandrashekhar (Karnataka), Shrimati Raja ni Ashokrao Patil (Maharashtra), Smt. 
Phulo Devi Netam, (Chhattisgarh), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Ms. 
Sushmita Dev (West Bengal) and Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan (Chhattisgarh). Now, 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham; ‘Need to prom ote Indian art, literature and cinema in 
order to nurture creative expressions’.  Mr. A.A. Rahim and Dr. John Brittas are 
associating.  
 
Need to promote Indian art, literature and cinema in order to nurture creative 
expressions 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala): Sir,  as I rise to talk about the need to 
promote Indian art, literature and cinema in  order to nurture crea tive expressions, I 
wish to draw the attention of this Hous e to a 2019 Malayalam movie, Lucifer, a 
political thriller, which was a blockbuster hi t. As a sequel to Lucifer, Empuraan was 
released. Empuraan is an epic Malayala m cinematic creation in terms of its 
impeccable standard in its making powerful message. ..(Interruptions).. It carries the 
spine and the courage the maker himself shows.  ..(Interruptions).. 
* 
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seats.   
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM : Both Lucifer and Empuraan stars the legendary 
actor, Mohanlal, Manju Warrier, Prithviraj; a fearless Director, Murali Gopy, a born 
script writer. They all stan d as beacons of resilience. ..(Interruptions).. Empuraan 
has captivated audience with every frame.  It is, undoubtedly, a super hit movie on 
day one itself.  ..(Interruptions
).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Jebi Mather Hisham ji, you have given notice for some 
other subject. You are talking… ..(Interruptions).. No, no, आप जो भी बोल रही हȅ, it will 
not go on record now.  ..(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM: 
* 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : No, it will not go on record. ..(Interruptions)..  आपने 
नोिटस क ु छ और िदया है और िकसी और िवषय पर बोल रही हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...आपने सÅजेक्ट 
क ु छ और िदया है और बोल क ु छ और रही हȅ। It will not go on record.  ..(Interruptions).. 
The following hon. Members associated th emselves with the matter raised by the 
hon. Member, Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Ker ala), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri 
Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Ker ala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri 
P. P. Suneer  (Kerala), Smt. Phulo Devi Netam, (Chhattisgarh), Shri Haris Beeran 
(Kerala) and Shrimati Priyanka Chatu rvedi (Maharashtra). Ms. Swati Maliwal. 
‘Concern over unregulated growth of  e-rickshaws in Indian cities’...( Interruptions)..  
Maliwal ji, please speak.  ..(Interruptions).. Maliwal ji, only what you speak will go on 
record.  ..( Interruptions).. Please, please.  Maliwal ji is speaking.  You take your 
seat.  ..(Interruptions).. 
 
Ms. SWATI MALIWAL:  Thank you, Sir.  सर, पहले… ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seats.   
 
Ms. SWATI MALIWAL: Sir, please resta
rt my time.   
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
21

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It will start now.  You please speak.   
 
Unregulated growth of e-Rickshaws in Indian cities 
 
सुǛी Îवाित मािलवाल (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): सर पहले ई-िरक्शा एक िकफायती और 
इको ģ Ȃडली पिरवहन का माध्यम माना जाता था, लेिकन आज िबना िनगरानी क े चलते ये 
ज्यादातर िदÊली और देश की सड़कȗ पर अराजकता फ ैलाते हुए नजर आते हȅ। सर, जहाँ और 
ऑटोज़ और टैक्सीज़ को लेकर बहुत सख्त िनयम हȅ, वहीं ई-िरक्शा धड़Êले से, िबना िकसी 
िनयंतर्ण क े, िबना िकसी जवाबदेही क
े  चले जा रहे हȅ। सर, आप िदÊली क े िकसी भी मेटर्ो Îटेशन 
क े बाहर देख लीिजए, िदÊली क े िकसी भी माकȃ ट क े बाहर देख लीिजए, स
ȅकड़ȗ की संख्या मȂ ई-
िरक्शा सड़कȗ क े ऊपर खड़े होकर जाम लगाते हुए िदखȂगे। सर, हम यहां यह नहीं कह रहे हȅ िक 
सारे ई-िरक्शा चालक गलत हȅ, पर सच यह है िक बहुत अिधक ओवरलोिंडग होती है। एक-एक 
ई-िरक्शा म
Ȃ, जहां तीन से चार लोग बैठ सकते हȅ, वहीं 8 से 10 लोग िबठा िदए जाते हȅ। 
सर, इन ई-िरक्शा क े Îटर्क्चसर् ऐसे होते हȅ िक यिद थोड़ा सा भी बैलȂस िबगड़ जाए, तो 
पूरा िरक्शा पलट जाता है। यह भी देखने मȂ आता है िक बहुत सारे ई-िरक्शा चालकȗ क े पास न तो 
कोई लाइसȂस होता है और न ही िकसी Ģकार की टर्ेिंनग। वे रॉन्ग साइड पर चलते हȅ, 
ओवरÎपीिंडग करते हȅ, रेड लाइट तोड़ते हȅ - यह सब आम हो
ता जा रहा है। 
सर, राज्य सरकारȗ क े पास इनके  कोई सटीक आंकड़े भी नहीं हȅ। िदÊली मȂ ही बताया 
जाता है िक करीब ढाई लाख से ज्यादा ई-िरक्शा सड़कȗ पर चल रहे हȅ, पर िकतनȗ क े पास 
रिजÎटर्ेशन ह
ै, िकतनȗ क े पास लाइसȂस है - यह िकसी को नहीं पता। 
सर, एक महीने पहले िदÊली मȂ एक 10 साल की बच्ची की मौत हो गई, क्यȗिक एक तेज़ 
रÄतार
 ई-िरक्शा उससे टकरा गया। क ु छ समय पहले िदÊली मȂ ही एक 7 साल क े बच्चे की भी 
मौत हुई, क्यȗिक उसे एक ई-िरक्शा क े अवैध चािजȊग पॉइंट से करंट लग गया। इस तरह की 
घटनाएं बढ़ती जा रही हȅ। 
राज्य सरकारȗ को चािहए िक सबसे पहले ई-िरक्शा की संख्या को सीिमत
 करȂ। ई-िरक्शा 
और उनके  चालकȗ की लाइसȂिंसग अिनवायर् होनी चािहए। रूट  और Îटȅड िनधार्िरत होने चािहए। 
िजतने भी अवैध चािजȊग पॉइंट्स चल रहे हȅ, उन्हȂ तुरंत बंद िकया जाना चािहए। 
सबसे जरूरी बात यह है िक यिद कोई िनयम तोड़े, तो
 उसके  िखलाफ सख्त से सख्त 
कारर्वाई होनी चािहए। क Ȃ दर् सरकार को चािहए िक वह इस मुǈे पर राज्य सरकारȗ की जवाबदेही 
तय करे। 
महोदय, हमȂ सुिवधा चािहए, लेिकन िसÎटम क े साथ। हमȂ रÄतार चािहए, लेिकन 
िजÇमेदारी क े साथ। और सबसे बड़ी बात, हमȂ Ģगित चािहए, लेिकन िकसी की िंजदग
ी की कीमत 
पर नहीं। 
जय िंहद! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Ms. Swati Maliwal: Shri Haris Beeran 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Na du), Shri R. Girirajan  (Tamil Nadu), 
Dr. Sasmit Patra  (Odisha), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Sh ri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri Sanjay 
Seth (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Deepak Prakas h, (Jharkhand), Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao 
Mahadik (Maharashtra),  Dr. Bhim Singh (B ihar), Shri Samik Bhattacharya  (West 
Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Sh. Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh) and Dr. Laxmikant 
Bajpayee (Uttar Pradesh). माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ अगले वƪा को बुलाऊं , इससे पहले मȅ 
आप सबसे एक िनवेदन करना चाहूंगा िक मेरे सामने वे दो िवषय हȅ, जो जीरो आवर क े िलए िदए 
गए थे। इसके  पहले िजन दो वƪाओं ने िवषय ĢÎतुत िकए थे, उन्हȗने उनसे हटकर िबÊकु ल अलग 
िवषय उठाए हȅ। आप सभी जानते हȅ िक अलग िवषय नहीं उठाया जा सकता, इसिलए वे बातȂ 
िरकॉडर् म
Ȃ नहीं जाएंगी। क ृपया िनयमȗ का पालन करȂ। माननीय Ǜी क े. आर. सुरेश रेƿी। Concern 
over destruction of forest at Hyderabad University.   
  
Concern over the destruction of forest at Hyderabad University 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY (Telangana): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I want to raise 
an important issue concerning the University of Hyderabad where land crisis threatens 
education, environment and justice. The Telangana St
ate Government has initiated 
the process of selling 400 acres of Univer sity of Hyderabad’s land at Kancha 
Gachibowli for commercial purposes. This decision directly contradicts the 
university’s founding principles.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Jairam ji, please take your seat.  
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY : The University of Hyderaba d was established in 1974 
through the 32
nd Constitution Amendment under Article 371(d)(e) to promote 
education and research for the Telangana re gion, which historically faced educational 
neglect. The move to sell this land is not just  a breach of public tr ust, but a threat to 
students’ future and a serious environmen tal hazard. Our Party Working President, 
Shri K.T. Rama Rao, has vowed full support  to the agitating university students. The 
students expressed anguish over this betrayal, highlighting how it jeopardises the 
university’s future expansion and comp romises higher education access for 
marginalised communities.   
 Environmental catastrophe is in the maki ng. The land in ques tion is a critical 
natural sanctuary in Hyderabad’s shrinkin g urban ecosystem. It is home to 237 
species of birds and endangered wildlife, in cluding the Indian star tortoise, spotted 
deer, Indian rock python, monitor lizards and so on. It also has two crucial water 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
23

 
bodies – Peacock Lake and Buffalo Lake – serving as vital breeding grounds for 
birds and migratory birds. Selling this land would destroy biodiversity, damage natural 
water systems and disturb the city’s fragil e ecological balance. Our party has raised 
concerns that the State Government’s plan to  commercialise this parcel of land will 
eliminate green cover and threaten Hyderabad’s environmental sustainability. 
 There are violations of key environmen tal laws. These laws include the Wildlife 
Protection Act, 1972; the Forest Conserva tion Act; and the Environment Protection 
Act. The University of Hyderabad educates over 5,400 students mostly belonging to 
Schedules Castes, Scheduled Tribes, OBCs , Economically Weaker Sections and a 
sizeable number of disabled students who avail education here. Now, for the first 
time, the students have come and protested.  The protest of the students is not for 
any increase in mess charges; it is not for better faculty. The students are fighting for 
the voiceless flora and fauna there; and these students are being brutally taken away 
by police, lathicharged and entire bulldozing is being done . It is for the first time in the 
country that the students are fighting for th e environment and the State is oppressing 
them. ...(Time-bell rings.)...    
                             
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member,  Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy: Shri Sadanand 
Mhalu Shet Tanavade (Goa), Shri Neeraj  Shekhar  (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Aditya 
Prasad (Jharkhand), Ms. Indu Bala Gosw ami (Himachal Pradesh), Dr. Sumer Singh 
Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), Shri Naresh Bansal (Uttarakhand), Shri Dhananjay 
Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), Shri Mada n Rathore (Rajasthan), Smt. Ramilaben 
Becharbhai Bara (Gujarat), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini 
(Uttarakhand), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bond e  (Maharashtra), Shri Ram Chander 
Jangra  (Haryana), Dr. John Brittas (K erala), Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
(Telangana), Shri Ravi Chandra Vaddiraju  (Telangana), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr . Sasmit Patra  (Odisha) and Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala).  
Now, Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil; Demand for Protection of GI-Tagged 
Alphonso Mango of Konkan Region of Maharashtra.  
 
Demand for protection of GI-Tagged Alphonso mango of Konkan region of 
Maharashtra 
 
Ǜी धैयर्शील मोहन पािटल (महाराÍटर्): उपसभापित महोदय, महाराÍटर् राज्य क े कȗकण क्षेतर् क े 
जगत Ģिसǉ हापुस आम को ĢाÃत िजयोलॉिजकल इंिडके टर टैग िनयम क े उÊलंघन क े बारे मȂ मȅ 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
बोलने वाला हूं। महोदय, कȗकण  क्षेतर् मȂ उत्पािदत होने वाला हापुस आम, मतलब अÊफांसो मȅगो 
अपने मधुर रस, उǄम Îवाद, सुनहरे रंग और तंतु िवरत पÊप क े कारण िवÌव भर मȂ Ģिसǉ है।  
हापुस आम की यह गुणवǄा िवशेष कȗकण की रासायिनक और भौितक गुणवǄापूणर्  माटी, पानी 
और हवा क
े  कारण आती है। इसका मतलब यह है िक अगर यही हापुस क े पेड़ कȗकण Ëयितिरƪ 
अन्य क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ लगाए जाएं, तो उसमȂ आने वाला फल इतना  गुणवǄापूणर् नहीं रहेगा।  इसिलए कई 
िरसचर् और इंवेÎटीगेशन क े बाद िजयोलॉिजकल इंिडके टर अिधिनयम, 1999 ǎारा जीआई 
रिजÎटर्ी चेन्नई ǎारा महाराÍटर् कȗकण क े पांच िजले, िजनमȂ रायगढ़, रत्नािगरी, िंसधुद
ुगर्, थाना 
और पालघर मȂ पैदा होने वाला या इसमȂ हापुस क े पेड़ को लगने वाला फल, मतलब आम ही हापुस 
माना जाएगा, ऐसा माना जाता है। इसका मतलब  यह है िक अन्य क्ष
ेतर् मȂ लगाये गये हापुस जैसे 
पेड़ से आने वाला आम हापुस नहीं माना जाएगा।   
 सर, जैसे  लंगड़ा आम उǄर Ģदेश का रहता है, उसे  जीआई मानक िमला है। मालदा,  
पिÌचम बंगाल का होता है। इसका मतलब  यह ह
ै िक अगर महाराÍटर् मȂ या कȗकण मȂ लंगड़ा आम 
का पेड़ लगाया जाए या मालदा आम का पेड़ लगाया जाए, तो उससे होने वाला फल मालदा या 
लंगड़ा नहीं माना जाएगा। जीआई authentication क
े  कई फायदे हȅ। गर्ाहक को गुणवǄापूणर् 
authentic उत्पाद िमलता है। िकसानȗ को आिर्थक फायदा होता है, पारंपिरक िवरासत का संरक्षण 
होता है और अंतरराÍटर्ीय बाजार मȂ अपने माल की पहचान रहती है। सर, अभी आम का सीजन 
चालू ह
ै। बाजार मȂ कȗकण का हापुस िजतना आता है, उससे तीन गुना हापुस बताकर मािर्कट मȂ 
बेचा जाता है। एक हापुस क े पीछे दो आम बनावट हापुस बेचे जाते हȅ।  इससे गर्ाहक को नुकसान 
होता है, िकसानȗ को नुकसान होता है और Ĥȅिंडग नहीं हो पाती है।  अगर ऐसे ही चलता रहेगा, तो 
हापुस की गुणवǄा की क ु छ ही िदनȗ मȂ, क ु छ ही सालȗ मȂ यह िवरासत  नÍट हो जाएगी।   
 महोदय, मेरी यह मांग है िक कȗकण क े बाहर से आने वाला हापुस आम कई एपीएमसी 
और Ëयापािरयȗ ǎारा खरीदा और बेचा जाता है। इस तरीके  का Ëयवहार, जीआई टैग अिधिनयम, 
1999 ǎारा गैर-कानूनी मांग क े गैर-Ëयवहार करने वालȗ को दंिडत  िकया जाए और कȗकण की 
इस िवरासत को संरिक्षत िकया जाए।                                                                                     
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri Dhairyashil Mohan Patil: Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chh attisgarh), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
(Maharashtra), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Be ngal), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Samik Bhattacharya (West Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri 
Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra),  Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan) and 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha).                   
Shri Ritabrata Banerjee; Demand for Strict Action against Provident Fund 
defaulters. 
 
Demand for strict action against Provident Fund defaulters 
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE (West Bengal): Sir, the Employees Provident Funds 
 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
25

 
 
 and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, is one of the most important social security 
schemes for the benefit of the working people  of our country.  This Act provides for 
the institution of provident funds, pensio n funds and deposit-linked insurance funds 
for employees in factories and other establishments.  
 Provident Fund is a Central Government-managed retirement savings scheme 
where both employees and employers contribute a portion of the employee’s salary to 
create a fund for retirement or emergenc ies, managed by organisations like the 
Employees Provident Fund Organisation.  Sir, unfortunately enou gh, defaults under 
the EPFO has reached a record high of al most Rs. 26,000 crore at the end of 2023-
24, marking an increase of 69.3 per cent fr om Rs. 15,254 crore the previous year, 
according to official data. The private sector’s default on provident fund deposits with 
EPFO has been constantly on the rise in the la st five years in an alarming rate.  In the 
private sector particularly, a large number of employers not only are not depositing 
their contributions but are also not depositing the contribution of the employee which 
the employers are deducting from salaries. This is a dangerous and alarming trend. In 
order to ensure stringent measures against the PF defaulters, the concerned State 
Government must have the concrete PF data from the PF offices which are not 
happening in reality.   
The Labour Department of the Gove rnment of West Bengal has been 
repeatedly requesting the Addi tional Central PF Commissioner, in-charge of West 
Bengal, Sikkim and Andaman & Nicobar Islands to share the list of defaulters of jute 
mills since 2024. The concerned Addition al Central PF Commissioner has not 
bothered to give any details till date. There was a written complaint to the Labour 
Minister, West Bengal against a private co ntractor agency, working at Haldia Dock 
Complex, by nearly 1,000 contractual empl oyees of Haldia port regarding huge PF 
default. The Labour Depart ment has been sending formal letters to the same 
Additional Central PF Commissioner since August 2023 but till date no concrete reply 
has been received.  Naturally, a suspicion of  an unholy nexus between the said office 
and the contractor arises. The question is wh ether this particular office situated in DK 
B l o c k ,  S e c t o r  I I ,  S a l t  L a k e ,  W e s t  B e n g a l ,  i s  t r y i n g  t o  p r o t e c t  t h a t  p a r t i c u l a r  P F  
defaulter at any cost.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please take your seat.  
  
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE: Similarly, since 2024, the West Bengal Labour 
Department has been writing to the Re gional Provident Fund Commissioners of 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Jalpaiguri, Siliguri and Darjeeling requesting  for the garden-wise PF dues under their 
jurisdiction.  Unfortunately enough, no concrete reply has been received from them.   
 In order to ensure stringent action agai nst PF defaulters, through you, I would 
request you……(Time-bell rings.)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Your time is over. The following hon. Members associated 
themselves with the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shri Ritabrata Banerjee: Shri 
Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
(West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) , Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal), Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri Saket Go khale (West Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia 
Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
          Shrimati Darshana Singh, “Demand for mandatory provisions of First Aid 
training for teachers and students in the schools.”      
 
Demand for mandatory provisions of First Aid training for teachers and 
 students in the schools 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। मȅ आज 
शून्य काल मȂ िवǏालयȗ मȂ Ģाथिमक उपचार, यानी िक फÎटर् एड का Ģिशक्षण देने हेतु िवषय पर 
अपनी बात रखना चाहती हूं। 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से आपका ध्यान िवǏालयȗ मȂ 
Ģाथिमक उपचार, यान
ी िक फÎटर् एड की िशक्षा Ģदान करने की आवÌयकता की ओर आकिर्षत 
कराना चाहती हूं। Îकू लȗ मȂ अक़सर बच्चȗ क े साथ कई Ģकार की दुघर्टनाएं होती रहती हȅ, िजनमȂ 
चोट लगना, जलना, साँप या अन्य जीव जंतुओं क
े  काटने की घटनाएं Ģमुख हȅ। इन आपातकालीन 
िÎथितयȗ मȂ सही समय पर िदया गया Ģाथिमक उपचार जीवन को बचा सकता है। अतः इस तरह  
की दुघर्टना
ओं से जान-माल की रक्षा करने क े िलए Îकू लȗ मȂ िशक्षकȗ एवं बच्चȗ, दोनȗ क े िलए 
Ģाथिमक उपचार क े Ģिशक्षण की ËयवÎथा होनी चािहए, िजससे ऐसी दुघर्टनाओं से होने वाली 
जान-माल की हािन को कम िकया जा सके ।  
महोदय, इस Ģिशक्षण मȂ उन्हȂ दुघर्टनाओं से बचाव क े तरीके , Ģाथिमक उपचार से स
ंबंिधत 
सभी तकनीकी जानकािरयाँ, जैसे जानवरȗ क े काटने पर उपचार, सीपीआर और अन्य जीवन 
रक्षक तकनीकȂ िसखाई जाएं। यह Ģिशक्षण िशक्षकȗ  और बच्चȗ को न क ेवल Îकू ल पिरसर क े अंदर 
आपातकालीन िÎथितयȗ मȂ मददगार बनाएगा, बिÊक इस Ģिशक्षण क े माध्यम से िशक्षक और बच्चे 
Îकू ल क े बाहर भी पिरवार और आस-पड़ोस मȂ होने वाली घटनाओं मȂ मदद कर पाएंगे।  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
27

 
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से सरकार से अनुरोध करती हȅ िक 
िवǏालयȗ मȂ Ģाथिमक उपचार Ģिशक्षण को अिनवायर् िकया जाए और सभी िशक्षकȗ व छातर्ȗ को 
इसका Ģिशक्षण िदया जाए। Ģत्येक िवǏालय मȂ Ģाथिमक उपचार िकट अिनवायर् रूप  से रखी जाए 
तथा समय-समय पर डॉक्टसर् और ÎवाÎथ्य िवशेषज्ञȗ ǎारा कायर्शालाएं भी आयोिजत की जाए
ं।  
उपसभापित महोदय, मुझे सदन मȂ अपनी बात रखने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Shrimati Darsha na Singh: Shrimati Priyanka 
Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri R. Gi rirajan (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) , Shri Dhananjay Bhimrao Mahadik 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharas htra), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil 
N a d u ) ,  S h r i  J o s e  K .  M a n i  ( K e r a l a ) ,  M s. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), Dr. 
Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh) , Shrimati Sumitra Balmik (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Mithlesh Kumar (Uttar Pr adesh), Shrimati Seema Dwivedi (Uttar 
Pradesh), Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde (Maharashtra), Shri mati S. Phangnon Konyak
 
(Nagaland), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Kalpana Saini 
(Uttarakhand), Shri Samik Bhattacharya (W est Bengal) and Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
(Punjab).  
        Dr. V. Sivadasan, “Demand to address the problems faced by workers of 
National Health Mission.”      
 
Demand to address the problems faced by workers of National Health  
Mission (NHM) 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Respected Chair, the health workers of various 
projects of NHM are working under great occupational risk. They have no job 
security. They are facing huge crisis. Doctor s are getting very low salary.  The salary 
of the nurses and the salary of workers are also very low. That is very meagre 
compared to the salaries of the permanent staff. Despite the Supreme Court mandate 
on equal pay for equal work, this principle is not applied for them. They are forced to 
toil for a minimal pay. Despite years of servi ce, their positions are not regularized and 
they remain temporary. There is a need for regularization of their jobs, implementation 
of proper bylaws, addressing  disparities in pay among paramedics, establishing a 
clear transfer policy, extending EPF benefits  to all categories and ensuring the timely 
payment of salaries. They should be paid adequate salaries to do their job with 
dignity.   
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Sir, ‘Health’ is in the State List. But, for grabbing the power of the States, THE 
Union Government is making a lot of regu lations for the schemes. Disbursement of 
money under the schemes is used as a tool for destroying the development of the 
concerned States.  In 2005, when NRHM wa s started, the Government said that the 
Union Government will provide accessible, a ffordable and quality healthcare for rural 
population, especially the vu lnerable groups. Now, the name has been changed to 
NHM. But the scheme is running in the opposite direction! For extending the 
availability of better healthcare, the Union Government should provide money to the 
States.  
The States have made huge investme nt in health sector. The Union 
Government is telling that they do not have enough money for health sector. The 
Union Government is spending a very less amount. It is only 0.27 per cent of the 
GDP! There is a lot of space for improvement.  Strengthening the States is one of the 
solutions for providing better healthcare f acilities; not bypassing the right of the 
States. That is against the spirit of the Constitution. That will destroy the entire 
healthcare system, not only in rural India, but also in urban areas.  
Now, here, in the House, Karnataka is requesting for its share in the health 
sector; West Bengal is requesting for its share; Tamil Nadu is requesting, Telangana 
is requesting and Kerala also requesting for their share.  All across India, interests of 
the States are trampled upon by the Union Government. So, I request the intervention 
of the Union Government for protecting the healthcare system of our nation. …(Time-
bell rings.)… Thank you, Sir.                                        
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Dr. V. Sivadasan: Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri 
Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri P. P. Sun eer (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sant Balbir Singh 
(Punjab), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharas htra), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu) and Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala).                          
Now, Shri Ramji Lal Suman: Need to take measures to resolve farmers' 
problems. 
 
Need to take measures to resolve farmers’ problems 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभापित जी, पूरा देश जानता है िक एक लंबे समय से 
िकसानȗ का आंदोलन हमारे देश मȂ चल रहा ह
ै। यȗ तो उनकी कई मांगȂ हȅ, लेिकन सबसे महत्वपूणर् 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
29

 
मांग यह है िक फसलȗ का जो न्यूनतम समथर्न मूÊय घोिषत िकया जाता है, एमएसपी घोिषत 
िकया जाता है, उसको कानूनी गारंटी िमलनी चािहए। उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ देश क े िकसानȗ क े 
Ǜम को Ģणाम करता हूं िक उन्हȗने अथक Ģयास करने क े बाद इस देश को अन्न क े क्षेतर् मȂ 
आत्मिनभर्र बनाया है।  िकसान खुद भूखा रहा, लेिकन उसने देश की आवÌयकताओं को पूरा 
िकया।   
उपसभापित महोदय, सबसे ज्यादा तकलीफदेह यह है िक इस आंदोलन को खत्म करने 
क े िलए सरकार की ओर से जो Ģभावी पहल की जानी चािहए, वह Ģभावी पहल नहीं की गई
।  
महोदय, आप जानते हȅ िक िकसान नेता जगजीत िंसह डÊलेवाल एक लंबे समय से अभी भूख 
हड़ताल पर हȅ।  17 माच र् से सरकार ने घोिषत िकया है िक वह िकसानȗ क े गेहूं की खरीद करेगी।  
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ दावे क े साथ कह सकता ह
ूं िक िपछली बार भी िकसान खुले बाजार मȂ 
ज्यादा गया और सरकारी खरीद क Ȃदर्ȗ पर कम गया।  िÎथित यह है िक एमएसपी की कानूनी 
गारंटी िमलने क े कारण िकसान की Ģाथिमकता खुला बाजार होती
 है। मȅ दावे क े साथ कह सकता 
हूं िक सरकार ने जो गेहूं खरीद का लÑय तय िकया है, सरकार िकसी भी कीमत पर उस लÑय को 
ĢाÃत नहीं कर सकती है। 
उपसभापित महोदय, लोग खेती करना छोड़ रहे हȅ। क ृिष क
े  Ģित लोगȗ का आकषर्ण खत्म 
हो रहा है। आप सब जानते हȅ िक इससे पहले जो आंदोलन हुआ, उसमȂ तमाम िकसान शहीद हुए 
और िकसानȗ पर असत्य मुकदमे लगे।  वे असत्य मुकदमे आज तक वापस नहीं हुए।   
उपसभापित महोदय, सबसे ज्यादा तकलीफदेह यह है िक यह जो न्यूनतम समथर्न मूÊय 
तय करने वाली किमटी है, क ृिष म
ंतर्ालय क े अधीन संयुƪ सिचव इसका अध्यक्ष होता है। न तो 
उसमȂ िकसानȗ क े नुमाइंदे होते हȅ, न ही क ृिष िवशेषज्ञ होते हȅ। यह एक बहुत गंभीर मामला है। 
 उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माफर् त यह आगर्ह करना चाहूँगा िक िकसानȗ की 
समÎयाओं का हल तब तक नहीं होगा, जब तक एमएसपी को कानूनी गारंटी नहीं िमल
 जाती।  
इसिलए मȅ आपके  माफर् त िनवेदन करना चाहूँगा िक सरकार िकसानȗ की पीड़ा को समझे और 
तत्काल इस देश मȂ घोिषत करे िक िकसानȗ को न्यूनतम समथर्न मूÊय िमलेगा। ...(समय की 
घंट
ी)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Ramji Lal Suman: Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. P. Suneer 
(Kerala), Shri Ritabrata Banerjee (West Bengal), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), 
Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Ms. Dola  Sen (West Bengal), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha) and Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala).  
Shri Mayankkumar Nayak; Demand to start Mehsana-Mumbai flights under 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)-UDAN (Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik). 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Demand to start Mehsana-Mumbai flights under Regional Connectivity 
 Scheme (RCS)-UDAN (Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik) 
 
Ǜी मयंकक ुमार नायक (गुजरात): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से नागिरक 
उƿयन मंतर्ालय का ध्यान उǄर गुजरात क े महत्वपूणर् औǏोिगक एवं Ëयापािरक क ेन्दर्, मेहसाणा 
की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूँ। इस क्षेतर् मȂ हवाई सेवा की अत्यंत आवÌयकता ह ै, िजससे क्षेतर् 
क े िवकास को गित िमल सकती है। मेहसाणा Îवयं न क ेवल एक औǏोिगक और शैक्षिणक क ेन्दर् है, 
बिÊक इससे िनकटवतीर् िजले पाटन, बनासकांठा और राजÎथान से सटे िजले हȅ। इससे ये सभी 
Ģत्यक्ष रूप  से लाभािन्वत हȗगे। इन िजलȗ से नागिरकȗ को िचिकत्सा, िशक्षा, Ëयापार एवं रोजगार 
हेतु मुÇबई जाना होता है। उड़ान, ' उड़े देश का आम नागिरक' योजना क े अंतगर्त मेहसाणा से 
मुÇबई और मुÇबई से मेहसाणा की एक Äलाइट शुरू  की जाने से इस क्ष ेतर् का जो development है, 
वह development तेजी से होगा। हमारे यहाँ ONGC है, यहाँ मारुित  का Ãलांट लगा हुआ है, हȗडा 
का Ãलांट लगा हुआ है।  माननीय मोदी जी जब गुजरात क े मुख्यमंतर्ी थे और अभी Ģधान मंतर्ी क े 
तौर पर, उनके  न
ेतृत्व मȂ यहाँ industrial development और agricultural development भी 
ज्यादा हुआ है।  पूरे नॉथर् गुजरात क े अंदर tourism circuit भी develop िकया जा रहा है। जैसे 
पाटन मȂ हमारी रानी की वाव है, माननीय मोदी जी न े उसकी Ģितकृ ित 100 रुपए  क े नोट पर भी 
रखी है। उस Îथल को देखने क े िलए भी पूरे देश से लोग आ रहे हȅ।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, मेहसाणा मȂ अभी हवाई पƺी भी मौजूद है। उस हवाई पƺी पर 
पायलट टर्ेिंनग Îकू ल भी चलता है। पायलट टर्ेिंनग Îकू ल चलने की वजह से हमारे यहाँ से गुजरात 
और देश को नए-नए पायलट्स भी िमलते ह
ȅ।  आपके  माध्यम से मेरा यही िनवेदन है िक अभी 
मेहसाणा भी महानगर बन गया है। अगर इसको मुÇबई क े साथ air connectivity िमल जाए, तो 
इसके  कारण हमारे यहाँ जो Ëयापारी हȅ, हमारे यहाँ जो industrialists हȅ, हमारी जो जनता
 है, 
उनको बड़ी सुिवधा होगी। यहाँ पूरा tourism development हो रहा है। मेहसाणा माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी का िजला है। यहाँ भगवान बुǉ क े पुराताित्वक साÑय भी िनकले हȅ। यहाँ archeology का 
museum भी है। देश और दुिनया से भी लोग यहाँ आ रहे हȅ।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, मेरा आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी से यही िनवेदन है िक जÊद से 
जÊद उड़ान योजना क े अंतगर्त मेहसाणा से मुÇबई और मुÇबई से मेहसाणा की connectivity करते 
हुए एक हवाई सेवा शुरू  की जाए। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यही request करता 
हूँ।  धन्यवाद। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Mayankkumar Nayak: Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil 
Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (T
amil Nadu), Shri Dh ananjay Bhimrao Mahadik (Maharashtra), 
Shri Mahendra Bhatt (Uttarakhand) and Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan). 
Shri Sant Balbir Singh; Concern over the increasing pollution in the major rivers 
of the country. He will speak in Punjabi.  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
31

 
Concern over the increasing pollution in the major rivers of the country 
 
SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH (PUNJABI) : &Honorable Deputy Chairman and 
respected members, Sat Shri Akaal to all.  Sahib Shri Guru Nanak Dev Ji stated: 
"Pavan Guru, Pani Pita, Mata Dharat Mahat"  This means that air is our teacher, 
water is our father, and the earth is our gr eat mother who nurtures us. Pure air, pure 
water, and pure food are our fundamental rights, as enshrined in our Constitution. 
Water is not just essential for human surviva l but also for the sustenance of flora and 
fauna. 
However, our rivers, which are the lifelin es of our nation, are being polluted at 
an alarming rate. Villages, cities, and industries are the pr imary contributors, 
releasing untreated wastewater into rivers and drains. The departments responsible 
for pollution control—the Drainage Department, Municipal Corporations, and State 
Pollution Boards—are failing in their duty . The so-called watchdogs, the State and 
Central Pollution Control Boards, have become mere white elephants, taking no 
concrete action to curb this crisis. 
Rivers are like the blood flowing through th e veins of our land. If this lifeline is 
poisoned, survival becomes impossible. The Water Act of 1974 had strict penal 
provisions that deterred industries fr om polluting water bodies. However, 
amendments have diluted these penalties, em boldening industries that earn in crores 
but now fear no consequences, as the penalties in lakhs have been removed. This 
dilution of the law must be reversed. 
In our ancient traditions, rivers like the Ganga, Kaveri, Godavari, Ghaggar, and 
Buddha river were revered and worshipped. Even the sacred Kali Bein River, which 
was blessed by Guru Nanak Dev Ji, ha d become heavily polluted due to the 
wastewater discharge from eight cities an d 45 villages. However, through collective 
efforts of the sangat over 25 years, the Kali Bein was successfully cleaned. This 
proves that with strong will power and public participation, we can restore our rivers. 
Therefore, I urge the Government to reinstate the strict penal provisions of the 
Water Act, 1974, to act as a deterrent agai nst polluters. Ensure strict enforcement of 
pollution control laws to protect our air, water, and land.Hold municipal bodies and 
industries accountable for their role in pollu tion and compel them to install proper 
treatment plants.Direct the State and Centra l Pollution Control Boards to fulfill their 
responsibilities honestly and effectively.     
          
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Punjabi. 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Shri Sant Balbir Singh: Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (T amil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Smt. Ranjeet 
Ranjan (Chhattisgarh), Shri A. A. Rahim (Kerala), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan 
(Uttar Pradesh) and Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal). धन्यवाद।  
Now, Dr. Sasmit Patra on ‘Demand to include languages spoken by Tribal 
Communities in the 8
th Schedule to the Indian Constitution.’ 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सर, मेरा भी एक Zero Hour subject था।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़।  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: सर, एक िमनट।  मेरी बात सुन लीिजए।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: यहाँ पर जो सूची मȂ है, मȅ वैसे ही नाम पढ़ रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: मेरा Zero Hour subject 15वȂ नÇबर पर था।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: मȅ इस सूची क े अनुसार जा रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... संजय जी, आप बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... पातर्ा जी, Ãलीज़ आप बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधा
न)... मȅ इस सूची क े अनुसार ही नाम पढ़ 
रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, आप बैठȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... म ȅ इस सूची क े अनुसार ही नाम पढ़ 
रहा हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा जी, आप बोलȂ।  
 
Demand to include languages spoken by Tribal Communities in the 8th Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha): Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, I rise today to draw the 
kind attention of this august House to a long pending and deeply felt demand -- 
inclusion of Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Kui and Saora languages  in the 8 th Schedule to the 
Indian Constitution. These languages are no t just modes of communication, they are 
lifeblood of millions of tribal people acr oss multiple States. Their recognition is 
essential for preserving India's linguistic and cultural diversity and upholding the 
constitutional commitment to protect the rights of Schedule Tribes. Sir, these 
languages have a rich, oral and literary tradition and are spoken by large tribal 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
33

 
population across multiple States. ‘Ho’ la nguage is spoken primarily in Odisha, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal and Chhattisgarh. ‘Mundari’ language is  spoken mainly in 
Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Assam. ‘Bhumij’ language is spoken 
predominantly in Odisha, Jh arkhand and West Bengal. ‘K ui’ language is spoken 
mainly in Odisha and some parts of Andhra Pradesh. ‘Saora’ language is spoken 
mainly in Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. While Odisha is home to the largest number of 
speakers of these languages, their influen ce extends beyond State borders.  These 
languages are spoken in Jharkhand, West  Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Assam, Andhra 
Pradesh and even parts of Bihar, forming an integral part of the linguistic heritage of 
Eastern and Central India. Their exclusion from the 8 th Schedule denies recognition, 
development support and constitutional prot ection to millions of indigenous people 
across multiple States. Odisha has been at  the forefront of championing this cause 
under the leadership of former  Odisha Chief Minister and Biju Janata Dal President, 
Shri Naveen Patnaik. The Odisha Cabinet fo rmally approved this demand through its 
resolution, making it a clear policy commitm ent.  The then Odisha Government, led  
by Shri Naveen Patnaik, had written multiple  letters to the Government of India urging 
immediate action on this matter.  Therefore,  I strongly urge the Union Government to 
honour the demand of the Odisha Cabine t of the then Odisha Government and 
millions of tribal people across multiple Stat es by including  Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Kui 
and Saora languages  in the 8 th Schedule to the Constituti on.  I conclude by saying 
that it is not a linguistic issue alone.  It is a matter of justice, dignity, and 
Constitutional equality for millions of tribal brothers and sisters of India. I thank you, 
Sir. Jai Hind.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the matter raised  by hon. Member, Dr. Sasmit Patra: Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Subhas 
Chandra Bose Pilli (Andhra Pradesh), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati 
Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Sh ri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A.  Rahim (Kerala) and Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal).  
Now, Ms. Sushmita Dev - Concern ov er the delay in disbursement of 
pensionary benefits to Government employees.  
 
 
 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Delay in disbursement of pensionary benefits to Government employees 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV (West Bengal): Thank you, Sir, for having given me the 
opportunity. Sir, pensioners have serve d the country with dedication and denying 
them fair and timely pensions is unjustified. The Supreme Court has repeatedly stated 
that the right to receive pension is equi valent to right to property under the 
Constitution. I quote: “Pension is neither a bounty nor a matter of grace." It is a social 
welfare measure rendering socio-economic ju stice to those who in the heydays of 
their life ceaselessly toiled for the employer on an assurance that in their old age they 
would not be left in the lurch. Sir, the re cent amendments to the Central Civil Service 
(Pension) Rules have given rise to some concern and I demand that the Government 
relooks at it. Sir, the concern is spr eading fast among the State Government 
employees as well as the Central Governme nt employees. The changes suggest that 
pensioners who retire before January 2026 may be deprived of the benefit of the 
Eighth Pay Commission creating an unfair dist inction between retirees. This is unjust, 
Sir. The Employees’ Associations and Unions have strongly criticized this. According 
to the changes to the Civil Service (Pension) Rules, the Government has given itself a 
power to classify pensioners at its discre tion. Such arbitrary policy-making violates 
the principles of fairness and transparency.  Sir, as a good example, I look at the 
Seventh Pay Commission implemented in 2016, which ensured that pensioners, 
whether retired before or after 2016, recei ved equal pensions. The principle of no 
discrimination between old and new pensione rs has been repeatedly upheld by the 
Supreme Court. The Government is now atte mpting to reverse this. Sir, according to 
Government data, by 1st March 2025, near ly 36.57 lakh Government employees and 
33.91 lakh pensioners will be  affected by these changes. The Central Government 
employees and pensioners are expecting a salary and a pension hike under the Eighth 
Pay Commission, which is also likely to be delayed. Reports suggest that the 
Government has also given itself the powe r to decide when to  implement the Pay 
Commission's recommendation and who should  qualify for pension benefits, leaving 
lakhs of pensioners in a state of uncertainty.  These pensioners have served the 
country with dedication and denying or delayi ng their fair pension is unjustified. 
Therefore, I urge the Government to ensure  that all pensioners, no matter when they 
retire, receive their rightful benefits an d enjoy parity  under the Pay Commission. 
Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by hon. Member, Ms. Su shmita Dev: Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
35

 
Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri R. Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wilson 
(Tamil Nadu), Shri A. A. Rahim (Keral a), Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque (West 
Bengal), Shri Ritabrata Banerjee (West Be ngal), Ms. Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. V. Siva dasan (Kerala), Shrimati Mausam B Noor 
(West Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
(Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri  Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu). 
Now, Shrimati Sulata Deo - Demand to  enforce stricter laws to protect 
animals, wildlife and nature. 
 
Demand to enforce stricter laws to protect animals, wildlife and nature 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha) : Thank you, Sir, for having given me the 
opportunity. सर, इंसान अपने-अपने Ģावधान क े िलए बोलते हȅ, लेिकन मȅ आज, जो बोल नहीं 
सकते हȅ, which cannot speak,  उनके  बारे मȂ बोलना चाहती हूँ। Mythology भी हमȂ animals 
and birds को बचा कर रखने की सीख देती है और उनको बचाने क े िलए ही बहुत सारे देवी-
देवताओं क े वाहन animals and birds हȅ। मगर आज हम एक ऐसी सोसाइटी म
Ȃ रहते हȅ, जहाँ 
animals cruelty िदन-Ģितिदन बढ़ती जा रही है, चाहे वह pregnant dog हो, cat हो, elephant 
हो या कोई भी animal हो, उसके  ऊपर िदन-Ģितिदन cruelty होती रहती है।  आप देख Ȃगे, तो 
पाएँगे िक आज open slaughter house सारी जगहȗ पर मौजूद हȅ। इसके  चलते बच्चȗ क े िदमाग 
पर भी बहुत खराब Ģभाव पड़ रहा है।  
 जब टर्ेन से बहुत सारे एलीफȂट्स की कट कर मौत होती है, िकतने गाय तथा अन्य 
जानवरȗ की कट कर मौत होती है और उसके  िलए जब बोला जाता
 है, तो रेलवे वाले फॉरेÎट वाले 
को दोष देते हȅ और फॉरेÎट वाले रेलवे वाले को दोष देते हȅ। इसमȂ िकसी क े ऊपर दोष देने से क ु छ 
नहीं होता है। जब बीएनएस लागू हुआ था, तब भी मȅ बोली थी िक एिनमल क े ऊपर जो cruelty हो 
रही है, उसके  िलए कड़ी-से-कड़ी सजा क े िलए िनयम बनाना चािहए।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
मगर, animal क े ऊपर जो  day-by-day cruelty हो रही है, उसके  िलए ऐसा कोई Ģावधान नहीं 
ह
ै, िजससे उन पर cruelty करने वालȗ को कड़ी से कड़ी सज़ा दी जा सके । अभी ओिडशा क े 
ĤǨपुर मȂ एक dog को तीन-चार बार चाकू  से काट िदया  गया। ऐसे बहुत सारे मामले हुए हȅ।  
इसीिलए, मȅ यह कह रही हूँ िक animal-cruelty क े ऊपर ऐसा आईन आना चािहए, िजससे इस 
तरह की cruelty करने वालȗ को कड़ी से कड़ी सज़ा िमल सके ।                                  
 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter 
raised by hon. Member, Shrimati Sulata De o: Shrimati Mausam B Noor (West 
Bengal), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati 
Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shri  Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri R. 
Girirajan (Tamil Nadu), Shri Neeraj Shekhar (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
(Tamil Nadu).     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Now, Question Hour. 
                               
 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
 
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PMKVY) 
 
*331. SHRI SANDEEP  KUMAR PATHAK: Will the Minister of SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether there is any specific course or  training program on entrepreneurship 
and business management under PMKVY, if so, the details thereof;  
(b) the number of youth  skilled in such course during the last three years and have 
startedbusiness/start-up after this co urse, the State-wise/UT-wise details 
thereof; 
(c) whether there is any provision for a star t-up fund after such a course, if so, the 
details thereof; and  
(d) the number of youths who received such  a start up fund each year during the 
last three years, the minimum, maximu m and average funds provided to youth 
each year, the State-wise/UT-wise details thereof? 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP (SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY): (a) to (d)  A Statement is laid 
on the Table of the House. 
 
 
 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
37

 
 
Statement 
 
(a)     Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is implementing 
its flagship Scheme Pradhan MantriKausha lVikasYojana (PMKVY) since 2015. Under 
PMKVY, skill training is imparted through Short Term Training (STT) and Re-skilling 
and Up-skilling through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) to youth across the 
country.  
There are several courses under PMKV Y focusingon entrepreneurship. The 
details are as follows: 
Sl. 
 No. Name of Courses 
i. Dairy Farmer/ Entrepreneur 
ii. Dairy Farmer/ Entrepreneur Level 4 
iii. Dairy Farmer/Entrepreneur 
iv. Green Hydrogen Plant Entrepreneur 
v. Handloom Entrepreneur 
vi. Processed Food Entrepreneur 
vii. Self Employed Tailor 
viii. Self Employed Woman-Tailoring 
ix. Self-employed e-tailer 
x. Self-employed Retailer/Individual Sales Professional 
xi. Solar EV Charging Entrepreneur 
xii. Solar Photovoltaic Entrepreneur 
 
  Additionally, under PMKVY 4.0, speci fic modules have been included that 
focus on entrepreneurship. These modules emphasize on equipping candidates with 
financial and legal literacy skills such as entrepreneurial mindset, market analysis, 
business planning, marketing strategies , and basic legal compliance for small 
businesses. These components are delivered  as part of the ‘Employability Skills’ 
curriculum embedded in PMKVY 4.0 training programs.  
 
   (b)    Placements/Self-employment we re tracked in the Short-Term Training 
(STT) component in the first three versions of the PMKVY Scheme i.e. PMKVY 1.0, 
PMKVY 2.0 and PMKVY 3.0 implemented from FY 2015-16 to FY 2021-22. Under 
PMKVY 4.0 which is currently under implem entation from FY 2022-23 onwards, the 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
focus is to empower our trained candidate s to choose their varied career path and 
they are suitably oriented for the same.  
State-wise/UT-wise number of youths skilled  in abovementioned courses during 
the last three years under PMKVY 4.0 is given in Annexure. 
 
   (c) and (d) There is no such provis ion under PMKVY 4.0 for a start-up fund 
after completing the course.   
 
Annexure  
State-wise/UT-wise number of candidates skilled in courses focusing 
entrepreneurship during the last three years under PMKVY 4.0 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT FY 22-23 FY 23-24 FY 24-25 
(as on 
31.12.24) 
1.  Andaman And Nicobar Islands 34 26 35 
2.  Andhra Pradesh 196 637 1,240 
3.  Arunachal Pradesh - 210 157 
4.  Assam 365 2,005 6,684 
5.  Bihar 460 665 1,107 
6.  Chandigarh  - - - 
7.  Chhattisgarh 80 656 667 
8.  Delhi 88 127 687 
9.  Goa - - - 
10.  Gujarat 145 358 1,244 
11.  Haryana 76 722 707 
12.  Himachal Pradesh 51 119 121 
13.  Jammu and Kashmir 192 1,219 1,424 
14.  Jharkhand 400 1,211 638 
15.  Karnataka 180 293 366 
16.  Kerala 226 32 17 
17.  Ladakh 30 - - 
18.  Lakshadweep - - - 
19.  Madhya Pradesh 1,023 592 2,115 
20.  Maharashtra 453 751 491 
21.  Manipur 58 93 588 
22.  Meghalaya - 120 351 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
39

 
23.  Mizoram 100 165 473 
24.  Nagaland - 129 165 
25.  Odisha 195 450 30 
26.  Puducherry - 190 48 
27.  Punjab 269 484 1,443 
28.  Rajasthan 318 1,184 2,723 
29.  Sikkim  25 - 
30.  Tamil Nadu 681 1,195 1,565 
31.  Telangana 94 337 228 
32.  Dadra and Nagar Haveli & 
Daman and Diu 
- - - 
33.  Tripura 20 258 398 
34.  Uttar Pradesh 739 1,421 9,248 
35.  Uttarakhand 503 123 173 
36.  West Bengal 240 551 295 
Grand Total 7,216 16,348 35,428 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 1. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak.  
 
SHRI SANDEEP KUMAR PATHAK: Sir, as all of  us know that in 1950s, both India and 
China were doing equally in terms of econo mic growth. There it is a matter of all 
investigation and study as to what happened that made China what it is now and 
what happened to India's story. All of us understand that the industrialisation was the 
key, and behind this industrialization, there was the vocational and skill development 
training. So, first of all, I would like to high light the fact that the Ministry that the hon. 
Minister is heading is one of the most im portant Ministries. Under this Ministry, the 
answer we have received is that in 2022-23, there were  7,000 trainees who were 
trained. In 2023-24, 16,000 trainees were trained, and, in 2024-25, 35,000 trainees 
were trained.  So, my question to hon. Minister, through you, is, whether in a country 
of 1.4 billion people, this ‘35,000-people training ’ in a year is sufficient, and if it is not 
sufficient, what is it that the Ministry is trying to work upon?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY: Sir, through you, I would like to place on record that the 
question is focussed on entr epreneurship training, a particular skill under PMKVY, 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
which is a Scheme. That is why the number th at is being reflected in the answer is 
low. Otherwise, the reach of PMKVY is, up till now, 1.6 crore beneficiaries have been 
there.  Sir, in the answer , we only spoke about the pa rticular courses that offer 
entrepreneurship development specifically under PMKVY. Apart from this Scheme 
which is a flagship Scheme, there are vari ous other programmes also that target the 
development of entrepreneurial-thinking, out- of-box thinking, critical thinking in our 
student days. Sir, for instance, we have  two institutions which are autonomous 
bodies working under the Ministry. One is, In dian Institute of Entrepreneurship which 
works out of Guwahati. Second is, NISBAD , which is National Institute of Small 
Business Development, which is stationed in Noida. Sir, in these two organisations, 
we do a number of programmes working wi th other Departments and Ministries. The 
total number of programmes, for instance, let me tell you: In IIE, from Financial Year, 
2013-14 to 15th March, 2025, 10,765 programmes were conducted in 3,52,552 
participants. In NISBAD, 35,689 programme s have been conducted from Financial 
Year, 2015 till November, 2024; and, in th ese programmes, 9,22,961 participants 
were there. Again, I reiterate, this is only  for the EAP, which is  the Entrepreneurship 
Awareness Programme; the EDP, whic h is Entrepreneurship Development 
Programme; and ESDP, which is Entrepre neurship Skill Development Programme. 
Under these particular programmes, these are the numbers that reflect under these 
Schemes. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak.  
 
Ǜी संदीप क ुमार पाठक: सर, िमिनÎटर्ी ने अपने response मȂ यह कहा है िक इस टर्ेिंनग क े बाद 
िकसी भी फ ंिंडग का कोई Ģावधान नहीं है।  ऑनरेबल चेयरमैन सर, आÌचयर्जनक बात यह है िक 
इसका नाम ही Skill Development and Entrepreneurship Programme है। आप imagine 
कीिजए िक अगर एक मिहला, कोई माता या बहन Beautician की training लेती है या tailoring 
की training लेती है, तो उस टर्ेिंनग क े बाद यह Îवाभािवक-सी बात है िक उसको खुद का 
Ëयवसाय कर
ना होगा।  आप टर्ेिंनग द
ेने की बात कह रहे हȅ, लेिकन आपकी जो मुदर्ा योजना है, 
Îटȅड अप इंिडया है, Îटाटर् अप इंिडया है, उसमȂ आप जो फ ंिंडग दे रहे हȅ, जब आप उसको इससे 
associate नहीं कर रहे हȅ, तो एक तरीके  से आप job-seeker create कर रहे हȅ।  आप self-
employability create नहीं कर रहे हȅ और न ही आप job-creator create
 कर रहे हȅ, बिÊक आप 
job-seeker create कर रहे हȅ। इसका जो overall purpose है, जो मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े भाषण से 
और सरकार क े िवज़न से समझा हूं, उसमȂ मुझे लगता है िक यहां major design fault है और 
design fault िकसी भी skill development क
े  Ģोगर्ाम मȂ self-employability and job creation 
can be the only basis.  There is no other way out. 
 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
41

 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY : Sir, a large of our benefi ciaries under the Flagship 
scheme of PMKVY have reported to be self-employed. There is another scheme that 
we have.  It is not directly under PMKVY; it is a new initiative. It has been launched in 
coordination with the NITI Aayog and the Women Entrepreneurship Platform. We have 
just launched it in February-March across a number of States and also working with 
higher educational institutions. A total number of 1,200 girl students have been 
selected for development of entrepreneur ship, their abilities and competencies, and 
seed funding for girl students , who qualify for the last ro und, is also provided under 
the Scheme. Hon.  Member said that there is  no funding as part of PMKVY. That is a 
fact. But, as we all know, the Government is taking immense strides forward in our 
StartUp ecosystem. More than 1.5 lakh Star tUps are registered and recognised. We 
are world beaters in innovation. He spoke about MUDRA. If I just give the numbers on 
MUDRA, more than Rs.51 crore MUDRA loan s have been provided. 50 per cent of 
those beneficiaries come from marginalised sections like OBCs, SCs and STs.  68 per 
cent of those Rs.51 crore loans has been gi ven to women. That is just one scheme 
that I place before the House.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member wanted to know precisely that these schemes 
favour job seekers and he wants the pr emise of the scheme should be self-
employability. Am I right? So, on that, if not at the moment, you may interact with the 
hon. Member. 
  
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY: Sir, I will provide the information. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay; good enough.   
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY: Sir, under PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, for the 
tenure of 2024-25, 138 enterp rises have been started. Under our Entrepreneurial 
Climate through Training of Trainer Programme and EDP in Jan Shikshan Sansthan, 
1,463 enterprises have started. In our pilo t project for Entrepreneurship Development 
Programme, in financial year 2022-23, mo re than 2,000 enterprises have been 
started. If you do a summation of these, you will find that more than 25,000 
enterprises have started directly because of the skill training that the beneficiaries got.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : But, I am sure, you will also  keep the suggestion in mind. 
Supplementary No.3;  Shrimati Dharamshila Gupta. 
 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜीमती धमर्शीला गुǔा: माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से यह 
जानना चाहती हूं िक क्या िबहार मȂ Ģिशिक्षत युवाओं को Îटाटर्अप शुरू  करने क े िलए िकसी Ģकार 
की िवǄीय सहायता या Îटाटर्अप िनिध का Ģावधान िकया गया है? यिद हां, तो ÎपÍट करȂ।  
 
Ǜी जयंत चौ
धरी: महोदय, अभी जैसा मȅने बताया िक सवाल PMKVY क े entrepreneurship 
development, उǏिमता िवकास क े कायर्कर्म से संबंिधत था, उसके  जवाब मȂ भी हमने ÎपÍट 
िलखा है - जो अभी हमारे सांसद संदीप पाठक जी भी कह रहे थे – उस योजना मȂ Îटाटर्अप क े 
िलए फ ंिंडग का कोई Ģावधान नहीं ह
ै। लेिकन िफर भी, क्यȗिक माननीय सदÎया ने िबहार क े बारे 
मȂ सवाल पूछा है, तो मȅ उनको बताना चाहूंगा िक हम जो िविभन्न कायर्कर्म चलाते हȅ, दूसरे 
मंतर्ालयȗ क े साथ समन्वय बनाकर भी जो कयर्कर्म हो रहे हȅ,  जहां भी अगर िकसी Ģकार क े लोन 
का या गर्ान्ट का Ģावधान है, वह स
ूची मȅ उनको उपलÅध करा दूंगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No.4; Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala. 
 
SHRI RANDEEP SINGH SURJEWALA: Sir, nobody can dispute that skill t
raining is 
one of the most essential requisites in today's world. Sir, I would like to know from the 
hon. Minister: Since the start of the Prim e Minister Kaushal Vikas Yojana, how many 
are the total number of people  who trained have actually been placed or given jobs 
anywhere? Now, I come to the second facet of the question.  The hon. Minister may 
answer them together. In the last six years, the Expenditure Budget reflects, on the 
scheme, that while the total money to be spent was about Rs.12,000 crores allocated 
by the Government, only Rs.4,905 crores ha ve actually been spent. The last year 
being the worst in 2023-24, only Rs.502 cr ore was the actual expenditure.  And, the 
hon. Minister answered to my friend, Mr. Pathak's question and he had asked only 
one facet.  I looked at the cumulative traini ng even for the last three years.  As per 
your Press Release of 29 th July, 2024, the cumulative training data is only 13,70,000.  
How are we going to train crores and crores  of young people in this fashion? So, 
these are three related facets that I would like the hon. Minister to answer. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Minister.   
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY : Sir, the question posed is  on the placement record.  
We are currently implementing the fourth phase of PMKVY. The hon. Member is also 
aware that in the first three phases, some  of the payment outgo to our training 
partners was linked to them, tracking the candidate and reporting their placement.  
Accordingly, some placement figures are available with us. Under PMKVY-1, 2 and 3, 
in those phases, out of a total trained of 71  lakhs, the placement r ecord is of 43 per 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
43

 
cent of 24,37,000. Post that, in phase 4.0,  our entire focus has been to shift our 
training towards more recognised educatio nal institutions, as per the mandate given 
to us by the NEP. Accordingly, even in schools, there is PMKVY training that our 
students are undergoing.  It is very evident that the school children will never be 
reported placed, which is why the placement figure today in PMKVY-4 does not fully 
capture the data.  Our approach now is to  completely link our skilling programmes in 
a transparent manner and bring it in a flex i model as much as possible. The entire 
training life cycle is now put on the Skill In dia Digital Hub, which is OTP-enabled and 
Aadhaar-linked. And, we encourage our st udent base to continuously invest in 
themselves, continuously look at the skillin g, re-skilling and up-skilling. The entire 
ecosystem is completely transparently put on  that portal, which is now also a DPI.  
Therefore, regarding the pointed question on  placements, what we have on record is 
what I have informed the Members. 
Regarding his third question, I could no t really understand because 1.6 crore 
beneficiaries are under PMKVY. That is the total number that we have trained over the 
years. Regarding the fund flow, the hon. Memb er is not really wrong, but we have to 
understand that during COVID, like in th e education system, even in the vocational 
training system, there was a lot of disrup tion. Subsequent to that, recently, the 
Cabinet has given approval to our scheme  from 2022 to 2026.  Therefore, there was 
some lag in the approval of the appropriate authority, which is why the spend was not 
matching the requirement. But, I assure  the hon. Member, and through him the 
House, that now our pace of progress has gone up.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 5 - Sri Kartikeya Sharma. 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:  Sir, the main reason why these skill development 
programmes sometimes do not reach a conclusion, a logical conclusion, is because 
of  the mismatch of the demand and supply, the demand of jobs and the supply that 
is being created through skilling. Through yo u, Sir, I would like to ask of the hon. 
Minister whether there is any proposal or provision under the Ministry to create a data 
bank or a grid which will match the dema nd and supply gap between job seekers and 
the job opportunities that seek. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It was a pointed question. The hon. Minister.  
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY: Sir, it is a very good question. Under our Ministry, there 
are 36 Sector Councils. The governance stru cture of all of these Sector Councils, 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
which are working as verticals, is that th ey are manned by leaders of industry. And, 
these are the same people who are going to be hiring people and giving jobs. 
Therefore, they have understanding of what the future direction is, where the skill 
gaps are. The mandate given to each one of these Sector Councils is to conduct skill 
gap surveys on a regular basis. In fact, the NSDC has also organised this international 
skill gap survey across countries, also look ing at outward migration and where the 
possibilities are. But, I take the pointed sugg estion also that we need to integrate our 
entire skill programming. Instead of being prescriptive project-oriented basis, it 
should be based on actual skill gaps, and it should be dynamic. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question No. 332. 
 
Draft UGC Guidelines 
 
*332.  SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Will the Minister of EDUCATION be pleased to state: 
 
(a)    whether the Ministry has taken note of the widespread concerns regarding the 
draftUGC guidelines, particularly their impact on the autonomy of the State 
Universities; 
(b)  whether the Ministry acknowledges that the uniform imposition of qualifications 
such asNET/SET fails to account for the unique academic and cultural 
contributions of educators; 
(c)   whether the Ministry has reviewed th e objections raised regarding the growing 
role ofthe Governor as Chancellor; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof, and whether any consultations with the State 
Governmentsand academic institutions have been conducted? 
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN): (a) to (d) A 
statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement  
 
   (a) to (d)  Education is a subject in the Concurrent List and both the Parliament 
and the State legislatures have powers to legi slate. As per Entry 66, List I of Schedule 
VII to the Constitution of India, the power to legislate for “Co-ordination and 
determination of standards in institutions  for higher education or research and 
scientific and technical institutions ”, vests in the Central Government.  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
45

 
Section 26 (1) (e) of Univer sity Grants Commission (UGC) Act 1956 empowers UGC 
to make Regulations regarding ‘defining the qualifications that should ordinarily be 
required of any person to be appointed to the teaching staff of the University, having 
regard to the branch of education in which he is expected to give instruction’.Section 
26 (1) (g) of UGC Act 1956 empowers UGC to make regulations ‘regulating the 
maintenance of standards and the co-ordination of work or facilities in Universities’. 
 
The draft regulations have set either NET/SET or PhD as the minimum 
qualification for the post of Assistant Prof essor, to balance national standards and 
state autonomy in higher education. Further, these regulations are designed to ensure 
academic excellence while respecting the diverse educationa l frameworks of different 
states. Moreover, the UGC draft regulation s 2025 aim to create more inclusive and 
multidisciplinary higher education ecosyst em, in line with the National Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020, by allowing professionals with diverse expertise, including those 
with NET/SET qualification, with the obj ective to bring fresh perspectives, industry 
experience, and research excellence into academia. While NET/SET is an important 
eligibility criterion, faculty selection will continue to be rigorous, ensuring that 
candidates possess the necessary subject knowledge, research aptitude, and 
teaching skills. Moreover, Universities will have the autonomy to assess a candidate’s 
suitability through interviews, research contributions, and other academic credentials. 
As part of consultation processon the Draft UGC Regulations 2025, Vice 
Chancellors of Central universities from all States were consultedandit was also 
shared with all the Principal Secretaries (Higher Education) of all States, Chairmen of 
all State Higher Education Councils, IITs, IIMs NITs, and Industry bodies.  Further, 
UGC uploaded the Draft UGC (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment and 
Promotion of Teachers and Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures 
for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations, 2025 on the UGC 
website on 6th January 2025 for feedback. UGC has received feedback on the draft 
regulations many of which has appreciated  it. However, some of the feedback 
received has suggested improvements on the pr ovisions relating to role of Chancellor 
and constitution of the selection committee for appointment of Vice Chancellor. These 
feedbacks are at different stages of analysis and deliberations. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: First Supplementary, Shri Tiruchi Siva. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, it is a very important question. 
 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: All questions are important. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : That is true, Sir. Actually , we sought a Short Duration 
Discussion on this subject but we could not get it. Anyway, it is okay.   
 Sir, in reply to part (d) of my ques tion, ‘whether any consultations with the 
State Governments and academic institutio ns have been conducted’, the hon. 
Minister has replied, “As part of consultation process on the Draft UGC Regulations, 
2025, Vice-Chancellors of Central Universities  from all States were consulted and it 
was also shared with all the Principal Secr etaries (Higher Education) of all States, 
Chairmen of all State Higher Education Councils, IITs… ”  So, they had consultations 
only with the Vice-Chancellors of the Cent ral Universities, while it has only been 
shared with the State Government’s Principal Secretaries. I think, the hon. Minister is 
very much aware that  lot  of  apprehensions  and  concerns  have  been raised by 
various stakeholders, namely, educator s, students and State Governments, 
especially, with regard to appointment of the Vice-Chancellors.  How are Vice-
Chancellors appointed? Now,  of course, the UGC has po wers to draft rules for 
appointment of Staff and other things.  Th e Union Government has a target of 50 per 
cent Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in higher education by 2035.  But in 2025 itself, 
Tamil Nadu has already reached 48 per cent. Many State Governments are 
performing very well.  With regard to the appointment of Vice-Chancellors, now the 
Chancellor, who is the Governor, and, an eminent person appointed by the UGC will 
be there in the Selection Committee, whic h will select the Vice-Chancellor.  
Moreover, the Vice-Chancellor need not be… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Siva, what is your supplementary? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, this is necessary for th e question. The Vice-Chancellors 
need not have academic b ackground. The State Governments have no role in the 
appointment of Vice-Chancellors. The colleges  are situated in the jurisdiction of the 
State Governments. They construct infrastr ucture, they pay staff members, they pay 
scholarships but they have no role in appointment of Vice-Chancellors! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, please put your supplementary. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, my question is: Why has the State Government not been 
given any role and how can a person of  non-academic background become Vice-
Chancellor of a University and lead the colleges? 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
47

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister. 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Sir, hon. Member has put three questions and I will 
try to answer all the three supplementaries. With regard to the first question whether 
we have consulted with the State Governme nts or other stakeholders, I would submit 
with utmost politeness that the UGC has all the authority to come out with reformist 
regulations from time to time. It is a proposed Draft Regulation envisioned by UGC, 
which is a statutory autonomous body.  They put it in public  domain and it is open to 
everybody, to all stakeholders.  Rightl y, hon. Member has mentioned, UGC has 
communicated this to respective State Governments through Principal Secretaries 
(Higher Education), through Chief Secretar ies and also to the Vice-Chancellors of 
the Central Universities ment ioned as nodal persons to coordinate these things.  
Beyond that, more than 10 State Governments participated and gave their 
suggestions. More than 52 universities, cutting across all kinds of universities - 
Central Universities, State Universities, Priv ate Universities, Deemed Universities and 
other kinds of universities - have given their valuable suggestions either way. Some of 
them have appreciated it, so me of them have given sugge stions while some of them 
have shown disagreement. We accept everythi ng as suggestion and all these things 
are under consideration.  So, first part is consultation. We have taken a widely-
consultative approach, and, now, the UGC has already put the Draft Regulations, 
and, anybody can give suggestions with regard  t o  t h a t .   I t  i s  a  r e g u l a r  a f f a i r  o f  t h e  
UGC.  Sir, the second supplementary of hon. Member was: ho w do you select a 
Vice-Chancellor?  There is nothing new.               
          Since we got Independence, even before Independence also, what is the role of 
the Governor of a State, how to select a Vice-Chancellor, what is the role of the UGC, 
all these issues have been deliberated, ha ve been discussed in a detailed manner. 
Sometimes, some State Governments differed with the approach. They went to the 
courts, High Courts and the Supreme Co urt. On all the occasions, the Supreme 
Court gave a blanket direction that the su ggestions of the UGC would prevail upon 
everything. Number two, in the recent past, due to the nature of our federal structure, 
due to the nature of our democracy, unfort unately, in a few States, two-three States, 
a new debate has started over  who will select the panel of experts.  Will the hon. 
Governor, being the Chancellor of  the University, select it on his own or will he take 
help from the State Government? Let me info rm this august House, through you, Sir, 
that the Secretary to the Governor is a representati ve of the respective State 
Governments. He is quite eligible. He has al l the authority    with him to coordinate 
between the Governor’s office, the Chancellor’s office and the State Government. We 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
cannot say that there is no coordination  between the respective State Governments 
and the Chancellor’s office. This is an old practice.  This is number two. Number 
three, how do you select an eminent pers on as a Vice-Chancello r? Sir, let me put 
forth one point of view.  Within this augu st House, a lot of Members are there who 
may be in the public life, who may be in th e politics.  My dear friend, Pathak, is a 
Professor of IIT. Coincidentally, he is a Member of Parliament here. After his 
r e t i r e m e n t  f r o m  t h i s  H o u s e  - -  m y  w i s h  i s  that he should not re tire; he should be 
elected regularly -- if he desires to go back  to academics, what is wrong in that?  
..(Interruptions)..  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: He is not…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. John Brittas, this is inappropriate.  ..(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN:  Dr. Brittas, you are a good friend.  
..(Interruptions)..  I am not going to embarrass you.  Some time, truth is a little bit 
bitter.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, one minute.  Dr. John Brittas, not only is this 
inappropriate; you are a very senior Member.  Let the Minister complete his reply.  I 
have still to give opportunity to three Memb ers to ask supplementary questions.  But, 
this time, you will not be given this opportunity. ..(Interruptions).. Hon. Minister.   
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Sir, the ti me is changing. In the new era of 
technology, innovation and ne w order of economy, who the leader of a university will 
be! In a university’s functions, there are tw o sets of roles.  One is academic and the 
other is administrative. Now, the time has co me to blend both of them.  Looking into 
the emerging trend of the globe, this is the need of the time. So, I think, UGC has 
rightly envisioned that eminen t persons from different walk s of life should lead the 
universities. These are the three polite answ ers of my understanding, through you, to 
the House.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Minister, your replies are always polite. Now when you are 
saying ‘polite’, it means it is more polit e than earlier. Second  supplementary,   
Shri Tiruchi Siva.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, the Minister has rightly given the example of Mr. Pathak. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
49

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, an eminent person. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: He was a Professor in IIT, and after his tenure in Rajya Sabha is 
over, he can go back. That is what we say, Sir, that he has an academic background.       
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon.  Minister has also wished him to continue here as much as 
he can and then go back. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: I too wish that, Sir.  But the thing is, he has got academic 
background.  He has been an  IIT Professor. So, when he goes back, he has an 
academic background, whereas what we poin t out is, a person who has been a PSU 
person, who has been in public administra tion, such a person could also become 
Vice-Chancellor. That was my concern becau se to become an Assistant Professor, 
14 years have to be put in service. Then, they become the Associate Professor. Then, 
after research and experience, they will be  elevated to Professor, and they are 
elevated to Vice-Chancellor.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, please.  
  
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: As he has said, I think,  we are not yet mentally settled that non-
academic persons are appointed.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister was very exp licit. He has elaborately responded to 
the issue. You may have a different point of view.   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Yes, Sir.  Only non-academic persons becoming Vice-
Chancellors will not suit future education. That is our stand. That is my point. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: That is your point of view. Second supplementary. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: As the hon. Minister said, the UGC Act of 1956 gives the UGC all 
the power. I agree with that.  But it is only with regard to the ground reality. As per the 
education system, schooling is up to 12
th standard. Then graduation is for three 
years. Then you have PG for two years. And then you have two years for PhD or NET. 
Now it has been changed entirely. Now it is eleven years plus four  years. If a student 
leaves it after one year, he will get a certifi cate If he leaves after second year, he will 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
get a diploma. If he leaves after third year, he will be given a degree.  And if he leaves 
after four years, he will get the honours degree. Now there are multiple entries and 
multiple exits. A student who has got a cer tificate and left the institution can come 
back and join after two years. Poor back ground students, that too teenagers are 
tempted to take decisions out of emotion for many reasons.   
The target is 50 per cent GER in 2037.  Bu t this system will totally make the way for 
many dropouts. Why didn’t the UGC take a ll these things into account? The future 
will be very, very alarming. This involves students who are the future generation.  How 
will it serve the purpose? This system will not help our higher education in competing 
with multinationals. 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Sir, I can appreciate the concern of hon. Member 
as a parent, as a guardian of the youngsters of our country. I can appreciate that.  
Whenever you adopt a new method, this deba te is eternal. This was there when you 
were a young person. Today it is there when we are discussing it. The very premise of 
this question will remain in the next century also when you are in a transition phase or 
when you are going to approach a new model.  We have to look at the present need, 
present trend and also emerging future trends. The Chairman of the National 
Education Policy Committee was none other than Dr. Kasturirangan. He is an eminent 
scientist and futuristic leader who can envisi on future for all of us. The hon. Member 
rightly said about multiple exits and multiple  entries. Degree is important. But Prime 
Minister Modi always says that competency  is also important being a young country, 
being a country of young people and being a country which is a skill hub.   
Sir, just now you permitted my co lleague, Mr. Chaudhary, to answer 
elaborately.  If I blend both the things, we have to prepare ourselves for our country 
and we have to prepare ourselves for the need of the entire globe as a skill hub, as a 
knowledge hub and as a place of competen t people. Looking into that, we have 
envisioned nothing related to the UGC. The hon. Member is mentioning the new 
approach of National Education Policy.I ap preciate his concern. But I am confident 
that the new generation of this country will take up this challenge and come out with 
flying colours.   
 
SHRI RYAGA KRISHNAIAH: Sir, earlier PhDs  were one of the qualifications for 
teaching faculty. Now it has been removed. There is a demand to restore PhD as one 
of the qualifications. Is there any proposal to restore the same?  PhD is an important 
degree for research orientation. In different  fields, so many scientists and research 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
51

 
scholars are coming up with innovative ideas. They are finding out so many new 
outcomes. Is there any proposal for imposition of PhD for recruiting teaching faculty?   
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Sir, I appreciate the question of my dear colleague, 
Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah. I know that he is  a great advocate of social justice. One 
situation arises when we go for massive recruitment for the post of Assistant 
Professors. What we have found is, in the constitutionally protected groups like SCs, 
STs and OBCs, we did not find sufficient nu mber of candidates in those categories 
due to this precondition of PhD. A poor stud ent from this background will not wait for 
the job of Assistant Professor, to comp lete his PhD and join. Meritorious and 
competent people will not wait for that due to socio-economic conditions. To take 
care of all these sections only, the Gove rnment of India advised UGC and UGC has 
taken this rightful stand that let us withdr aw the condition of Ph D at the entry level. 
But when the person will go up in his career  and appear for the post of Associate 
Professor or Professor, by that time, he has to complete PhD.  PhD should not be a 
precondition for entry level. In that way, it became restrictive to the people in 
constitutionally protected groups like SCs,  STs and OBCs. That is why, now, UGC 
has come out with this new approach.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 4; Shri Ramji Lal Suman.  
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सभापित जी, िवÌविवǏालय अनुदान आयोग का जो एक्ट है, वह एक्ट 
1956 का है। उस एक्ट क े मुतािबक, अगर कोई फजीर् युिनविर्सटी पकड़ी जाती है, तो उसमȂ 
अिधकतम जुमार्ना 1,000 रुपय े है। िवÌविवǏालय अनुदान आयोग भारत सरकार से, िशक्षा 
म
ंतर्ालय से िनरंतर यह आगर्ह करता रहा है िक मेहरबानी करके  यह जो 1,000 रुपय े का जुमार्ना 
है, इसको Ëयावहािरक बनाइए। इसमȂ कम से कम 5 करोड़ रुपए  का जुमार्ना और 5 साल की सजा 
हो। महोदय, मȅ आपके  माफर् त एक तो यह िनवेदन करना चाहूँगा िक हमȂ Ëयावहािरक बनना 
चािहए।  यह दंड तो
 नहीं क े बराबर है। 
सभापित जी, मȅ दूसरा िनवेदन यह करना चाहूँगा िक 1956 का यह जो एक्ट है, उस एक्ट 
क े मुतािबक आप िकसी भी कीमत पर िवदेशी िवÌविवǏालय को िंहदुÎतान मȂ आमंितर्
त नहीं कर 
सकते। इस समय 2 िवदेशी िवÌविवǏालय हमारे देश मȂ काम कर रहे हȅ। महोदय, मȅ िशक्षा मंतर्ी 
जी से यह जानना चाहूँगा िक िवÌविवǏालय अनुदान आयोग का 1956 का जो एक्ट ह
ै, क्या उसमȂ 
पिरवतर्न करȂगे और िकस हैिसयत से ये िवदेशी िवÌविवǏालय हमारे देश मȂ आ गये, क्या ये 
इसकी जानकारी दȂगे? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  
 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान: सभापित महोदय, 1956 का यूिनविर्सटी एक्ट यह कहता है िक समय क े अनुसार 
यूजीसी अपनी िनयमावली मȂ सुधार कर सकता है। उसी Ǜेणी मȂ सुधार करते हुए, अनेक बार यह 
ĢÌन आया है िक कम गुणवǄा वाले िवÌविवǏालय क े ऊपर जुमार्ना िकस हद तक होना चािहए। 
यह एक िववा
द चला है। सर, देश मȂ हम एक समय मȂ शैक्षिणक Îवतंतर्ता क े बारे मȂ, academic 
autonomy क े बारे मȂ, governance autonomy क े बारे मȂ पक्ष रखते हȅ और दूसरी ओर क्या एक 
डंडा लेकर चलने वाली सरकार चािहए? यह अंतǎȊǎ शैक्षिण
क पिरवार मȂ, शैक्षिणक जगत मȂ 
िनरंतर चल रहा है, लेिकन शंका सही है। अगर हम उस मानक मȂ उसकी िनगरानी करȂगे, तो 
शायद राज्य सरकारȗ क े ǎारा चलने वाले अनेक िवÌविवǏालय कटघरे मȂ आ जाएंगे। इसमȂ बीचȗ-
बीच क े राÎतȗ, जैसे NAAC, NRF, इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा को बढ़ावा िदया जा रहा ह
ै। बाकी अभी 
जो नया Higher Education Commission का HECI Bill िबल आएगा, तो इस िवषय मȂ भी शायद 
कोई राÎता िनकाला जाएगा। बाकी जैसे मȅने कहा िक यूजीसी क े 1956 क े एक्ट ने बार-बार खुद 
को सुधारा ही है, reformist राÎते पर लेकर गया है। यह आज की आवÌयकता है और हमारी 
सरकार न
े बहुत िजÇमेदारी क े साथ जब NEP मȂ कहा है, हम internationalization ही करȂगे।  
सर, इस बात को हम अÎवीकार नहीं करते िक इस देश
 क े 14 लाख से 15 लाख िवǏाथीर् िवदेश मȂ 
पढ़ते हȅ और िवदेशी ितजोरी मȂ हमारा अच्छा खासा संसाधन जाता है।  धीरे-धीरे हमȂ उस िवषय 
को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए, देश मȂ higher research क े system को develop करने क े िलए foreign 
universities को भारत मȂ ले आना उिचत होगा, यह सोचकर य
ूजीसी ने अपने रेगुलेशन मȂ िरफॉमर् 
िकया। अभी तक भारत देश मȂ 2 नहीं, बिÊक 3 foreign universities काम कर रही हȅ और 50 से 
ज्यादा वैिÌवक qualitative, गु णवǄा वाले foreign universities द
ेश क े िविभन्न राज्यȗ क े साथ 
चचार् करके  यूजीसी क े दÄतर तक पहुंचे हȅ।  हमने जो मानक रखा है, उसको evaluate करते हुए, 
हम लोग आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ उनको अनुमित भी देने वाले हȅ और यह िवǏािर्थयȗ क े िहत मȂ है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary question number five.  …(Interruptions)…
   
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन: सभापित जी, यह पूरा जवाब नहीं  है। िवÌविवǏालय अनुदान आयोग का 
जो एक्ट है, क्या माननीय मंतर्ी जी उस एक्ट मȂ पिरवतर्न करके  कठोर दंड का Ģावधान करȂगे? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: सुिनए, सुिनए। माननीय रामजी लाल सुमन, माननीय मंतर्ी जी न
े कहा िक 
अिधिनयम मȂ Ģावधान है िक यूजीसी तरीकȗ से समय-समय पर संशोधन कर सकती है।  आप 
िवधाियका से सतत जुड़े ह
ुए हȅ, एक तरीके  से सबसे अनुभवी सदÎय हȅ।  मȅ एक तरीके  से सबसे 
अनुभवी इसिलए कह रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक मेरी नजर वाइको जी पर पड़ गई।  वे 1974 क े हȅ। One 
minute. This is not the practice please. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Member, the hon. 
Minister has very exhaustively a
nswered your question and sometimes we need to 
appreciate exhaustive answers. Supplementary number five, Dr. John Brittas.    
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, let me just say that I have huge respect for the hon. 
Minister.  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
53

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  All of us have.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Yes, Sir. I intervened becau se of the agony of my State, that is, 
Kerala. Governors as Chancellors have always been contentious and controversial.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Governors have always!   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, Governors as Chan cellors have always been contentious 
and controversial precisely because there has been... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One minute. You can be ki nd to your Chairman. I have been a 
Governor for three years.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, except people like you.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, my question is ve ry simple. The UGC draft guidelines give 
overriding powers to the Governor for sear ch and selection committee. That is why 
the whole concern has been expressed here. Since Tiruchi Siva ji has asked the 
question, my question would be on a diffe rent level. The draft UGC Regulations, 
2025, proposed the removal of 10 per cen t cap on contractual appointments, which 
threatens the academic job security.  Simultaneously, another issue, which I flagged 
earlier, is the introduction of Professors  of Practice who are exempt from search 
credentials. My question is this. These two segments are exempt from the reservation 
policy.  Will it not affect the social justi ce which we adore? Is the Minister concerned 
about this?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.   
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Sir, with two questions, let me try to answer part 
one.  What we found with this great deba te of authority of Chancellor -- again I am 
little bit frank -- who the Secretary of the Chancellor/Governor is. He is a senior 
officer of the respective State Government . I think, there should be a cordial 
communication between them and there is! There is cordial communication between 
the Chancellor's Office and Governor's Office and hon. State Government's Office.   
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
But what is happening, -- I do not want  to name the State -- in few places,  
influential  person  of the Chief Minister’s  Office tried to appoint their own wife, own 
cronies, as a Vice-Chancellor, as a lect urer. How does hon. Governor or hon. 
Chancellor keep quiet?  He will be certain that the hon. authority and office will raise 
questions on that. That is the pinching.  Th at exactly is pinching. Then, there is the 
question of interference. The great word of “ democratic interference”. All these lofty 
words are coming up. This is unfortunate. An d this is the usual practice. Many States 
are going to Supreme Court.  Finally, Supreme Court, categorically time and again, 
has re-emphasized the authority of UGC.  In a healthy democracy, we know what the 
problem is and especially, I have a good understanding with  my dear friend Dr. John 
Brittas. Some of these are sensitive issues. I respect his sentiment also, but he knows 
what I want to say, Sir, through you. Numb er two, regarding social justice issue, the 
less said will be okay for my dear Opposition friends. Sir, till 2018, in appointments of 
Assistant and Associate Professor’s posts in universities, there is no mandatory rule 
for constitutional protection to SCs, STs and OBCs. For the first time, hon. Prime 
Minister Modi ji enacted a visionary policy—a visionary Act—through an Act and 
enacted regulations. There can not be a category of ‘Not Found Suitable’ candidate. 
And, in an academic era, the kind of appo intment we have for a temporary period, if 
some Ad hoc  appointments are there for one or two years, we have to realize the 
situation because many more universities  are coming up and many more quality 
institutions are coming up. Our talented  people are findin g their own choices 
according to their career plan. To continue  the academic atmosphere in the campus, 
institutes have to be given some kind of a temporary arrangement with which they can 
maintain the constitutional roster. In that al so, we can plan and all these things are at 
the draft level.  It is a suggestion. I will inform UGC to look into that. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question No. 333. 
  
Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adiwasi Nyaya Maha Abhiyan (PM JANMAN) 
  
*333. DR. ANIL SUKHDEORAO BONDE: will the minister of TRIBAL AFFAIRS be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the number of Particularly Vulnerable  Tribal Groups (PVTGs) covered under the 
Pradhan Mantri JanjatiAdiwasi Nyaya MahaAbhiyaN (PM JANMAN); 
(b)  the funds allocated by the Ministry for the same ; 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
55

 
(c) whether the Ministry has launched any information or awareness campaign to 
enhance the effectiveness of the scheme; and 
(d) if so, the details thereof? 
  
THE MINISTER OF TRIBAL AFFAIR S (SHRI JUAL ORAM) (a) to (d):  A statement is 
laid on the table of the House. 
  
 
Statement 
(a) and (b)  On 15th November 2023, Hon'ble Prime Minister launched Pradhan 
Mantri Janjati Adivasi Nyaya MahaAbhi yaN (PM JANMAN) for socio-economic 
development of 75 PVTG communities resi ding in 18 states and one UT. The 
objectives of the abhiyan are being met through 11 interventions implemented by 9-
line Ministries. PM JANMAN has total budg etary outlay of Rs.24,104 Cr (Central 
share: ₹15336 Cr and State share: ₹8768 Cr). 
 
    (c) and (d) The Ministry of Tribal Af fairs has consistently been conducting IEC 
campaigns in collaboration with State/UT Governments to enhance the effectiveness 
of the abhiyan. Two major nation-wide Information, Ed ucation, and Communication 
(IEC) campaigns under PM-JANMAN were held to raise awareness about the 
initiative. The campaigns took place from  15 December 2023 to 15 January 2024, and 
from 23 August 2024 to 02 October 2024. A range of national, state, and district-level 
events and activities were organized duri ng these campaigns. Financial assistance 
was also provided to the relevant St ate/UT Governments under the Centrally 
Sponsored scheme 'Support to Tribal Res earch Institutes (TRI)' to facilitate the 
organization of state/district-level even ts and carry out activit ies such as Aadhar 
camps during the campaign period. Additi onally, the Ministry has been regularly 
conducting Manthan Shivirs at the nation al level in collaboration with partner 
ministries, State Tribal Welfare Departments,  and District Collectors. Regular reviews 
and stakeholder consultations are also held to ensure the effectiv e implementation of 
the Abhiyan. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 1; Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde. 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे : सभापित महोदय, आज़ादी क े बाद भी ऐसी िविभन्न जनजाितयाँ 
थीं, िजन तक िवकास नहीं पहुँचा था।  2023 मȂ हमारे द
ूरदशीर् Ģधान मंतर्ी ने PVTGs, जो 
primitive जनजाित हȅ, उनके  िलए पीएम जनमन योजना शुरू  की।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से एक 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
सवाल यह पूछना चाहता हूँ िक महाराÍटर् मȂ जो जनजाितयाँ हȅ, िवशेषत: मेलघाट, गढ़िचरौली, 
पालघर, ठाणे और नंदुरबार एिरयाज़ मȂ पीएम जनमन योजना क े माध्यम से इन जनजाितयȗ क े 
आिर्थक, शैक्षिणक और मिहला सशिƪकरण की कौन-कौन सी योजनाएँ चलाई जा रही हȅ, उनमȂ 
िकतना Ëयय हुआ है और उनसे उनके  जीवन मȂ क्या पिरवतर्न आए हȅ? 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय म
ंतर्ी जी।  
 
Ǜी जुएल ओराम : सर, जो पीएम जनमन योजना है, यह PVTGs क े डेवलपमȂट क े िलए एक नये 
Îवरूप मȂ लागू हो रहा है।  Ģधान मंतर्ी, माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िनदȃश िदया है िक इस देश मȂ 
जो 75 PVTGs हȅ, िजनका फ ैलाव 217 Åलॉक्स म
Ȃ है, उनका पूरा saturation हो, उनका संपूणर् 
िवकास हो, इसके  िलए िजस गांव मȂ काम शुरू  होगा, वहाँ आवास सबको िमलना चािहए, वहाँ 
रोड होनी चािहए, िबजली होनी चािहए, अगर वहाँ िबजली डायरेक्ट नहीं जा रही ह
ै, तो वहाँ 
सोलर िसÎटम होना चािहए और पेयजल होना चािहए।  इस तरह क े 11 interventions इसमȂ होने 
हȅ और इसके  िलए 9 मंतर्ालय converge करȂगे, इस पर िमलकर काम करȂगे।  गढ़िचरौली मȂ 
PVTGs क े बारे म
Ȃ exactly क्या हुआ है, इसके  बारे मȂ अभी मेरे पास तथ्य नहीं है, लेिकन मȅ 
माननीय सदÎय को िलिखत मȂ इसकी िडटेल भेज दूँगा। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप माननीय सदÎय को भेज दीिजएगा। 
 
Ǜी जुएल ओराम : सर, म
ȅ भेज दूँगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 2; Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde. 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे : सभापित महोदय, इसी से जुड़ा हुआ मेरा अगला ĢÌन है।  
आिदवासी जनजाितयȗ क े िलए राÍटर्ीय अनुसूिचत जनजाित िवǄ एवं िवकास िनगम ह
 ै।  इसके  
ǎारा जनजाितयȗ की आय बढ़ाने और उनके  Îवरोजगार की योजनाएँ कायार्िन्वत  होती हȅ तथा 
आिदवासी मिहला सशिƪकरण योजना की भी कारर्वाई होती है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी जी से 
यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक इसके  बारे मȂ कौन-कौन सी योजनाएँ हȅ, क ृपया इसका Åयोरा दȂ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी जुएल ओराम : जनजातीय मिहला क े सशिƪकरण मȂ जो Self-Hel
p Groups काम करȂगे, 
उनके  िलए soft loan है, यानी वह कम Åयाज दर पर उनको िदया जाएगा। एक वन धन क Ȃ दर् है, 
िजसके  िलए वहाँ का इंģाÎटर्क्चर बनाकर, वहाँ क े Ģोडक्ट को तैयार करके  अगर इसकी 
माकȃिंटग करȂगे, तो इसकी माकȃिंटग करने की िजÇमेदारी TRIFED 
संÎथा लेती है। मिहला 
सशिƪकरण क े िलए सभी कायर् हो रहे हȅ। उसके  साथ-साथ वे bamboo craft का काम भी कर 
सकते हȅ, टेक्सटाइल का काम भी कर सकते ह
ȅ। बाकी जो भी काम करना चाहते हȅ, उसके  िलए 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
57

 
फाइनȂस और soft finance की सुिवधाएँ हȅ, िजनके  जिरए उन्हȂ लोन िदया जाता है। यिद वे उस 
गर्ुप क े िहसाब से काम करȂगे, तो उन्हȂ इंģाÎटर्क्चर भी उपलÅध कराया जाता है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary No.3. Shrimati Mausam B Noor. 
 
SHRIMATI MAUSAM B NOOR: Sir, through you, I would like to ask the hon. Minister 
whether it is a fact that under PM-JANMA N, till November, 2024, only 12 per cent of 
the houses sanctioned have been comple ted and only 0.14 per cent of the roads 
s a n c t i o n e d  h a v e  b e e n  c o m p l e t e d .  I f  s o ,  what other sanctioned mission’s targets 
remain incomplete and under-achieved?  
Ǜी जुएल ओराम : आपने जो आंकड़े बताए हȅ, वे सही नहीं हȅ। मȅ आपको हाउसहोÊड क े बारे मȂ 
सही आंकड़े बता रहा हूं। हम लोगȗ ने अब तक हाउसहोÊड का क ु ल अचीवमȂट 11,48,118 ĢाÃत 
कर िलया है, िजसमȂ से 2,911 habitation मȂ काम चल रहा है। बाकी अन्
य हैिबटेशन मȂ कायर् श ेष 
है। हालांिक, इसकी percentage-wise गणना नहीं हुई है, लेिकन मेरे अनुमान से यह 60-70 
परसȂट तक आता है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary no. 4; Shri Neeraj Da ngi; not present. Shri A. A. 
Rahim. 
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM: Sir, I thank you for this opportunity.  Sir, as we know that this is a 
technological era, the digital divide poses a significant barrier to the overall socio-
economic well-being of Particularly Vulnerab le Tribal Groups. What infrastructure 
developments have been undertaken under th is Scheme to bridge the digital divide 
among the PVTGs? Additionally, the Kerala  Government has launched its flagship 
project ‘K-FON’ to ensure universal internet access. Will the Union Government 
provide financial and technological assist ance for the implementa tion of the K-FON 
Project in PVTG inhabited areas? 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM: Sir, technology up-gradation करने क े िलए फाइबर क ेबल नेटवकर् 
Ģत्येक पंचायत मȂ िदया जा रहा है। माननीय सदÎय ने िकसी नई टेक्नोलॉजी क े बारे मȂ सवाल 
पूछा है, तो मȅ उन्हȂ इसका िवÎतृत िलिखत उǄर भेजूंगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplemnetary no.5. Shri Sanjay Singh. 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: मान्यवर, माननीय म
ंतर्ी जी ने जो जवाब िदया है, उसमȂ उन्हȗने िलखा है िक 
15,000 करोड़ रुपय े अलग-अलग िवभागȗ क े माध्य
म से आिदवासी समाज क े उत्थान और िवकास 
क े िलए खचर् िकए जाएंगे। लेिकन इसका कोई िवÎतृत आंकड़ा उपलÅध नहीं कराया गया है, न ही 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
यह बताया गया है िक िकन िवभागȗ ने िकतनी धनरािश आवंिटत की है और िकतनी खचर् की है। 
इसकी वतर्मान िÎथित क्या है, यह मȅ आपके  माध्यम से जानना चाहता हूं। 
 
Ǜी जुएल ओराम : सर, माननीय सदÎय मȂ थोड़ा रॉन्ग बताया। यह 24,000 करोड़  रुपए  का 
Ģोजेक्ट है, िजसमȂ 15,000 करोड़ रुपए  का सȂटर्ल शेयर है और 7,000 करोड़  रुपए  का शेयर 
राज्य सरकार का है। सर, Îकीम-वाइज िकतना पैसा खचर् होगा, यह मȅ बताता हूं:  Ģधानमंतर्ी 
आवास योजना मȂ सȂटर्ल शेयर
 7,378 करोड़ रुपए  होगा और राज्यȗ का 4,334 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् 
होगा।  रोड कनेिक्टिवटी क े िलए भारत सरकार 5,040 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करेगी और राज्य 
सरकार 2,907 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करेगी। जल जीवन िमशन मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार 792 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् 
करेगी और राज्य सरकार 703 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करेगी।  नेशनल हेÊथ िमशन क े तहत मोबाइल 
मेिडकल यूिनट क े िलए भारत सरकार 427 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करेगी, वहीं राज्य सरकार 251 
करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करेगी।  सवर् िशक्षा
 अिभयान (एजुक ेशन Ģोजेक्ट) मȂ भारत सरकार 885 करोड़ 
रुपए  खचर् करेगी, जबिक राज्य सरका र 520 करोड़  रुपए  खचर् करेगी।  आंगनवाड़ी सȂटर मȂ 
मिहला और िशशु िवकास क े िलए भारत सरकार 300 करोड़ रुपए  खचर् करेगी और राज्य सरकार 
क ु छ खचर् नहीं करेगी। यह पूरा भारत सरकार करेगी।   New solar power और habitation area 
मȂ electrification क े िलए भारत सरकार 515 करोड़ रुपय े खचर् करेगी और राज्य सरकार इसमȂ 
कोई खचार् नहीं करेगी।  ऐसा MoT मȂ अभी तक जो expenditure हुआ ह
ै, उसमȂ राज्य सरकार 
और क ेन्दर् सरकार का िमलाकर 8,768 करोड़ रुपय े ऑलरेडी खचर् हुए हȅ, बाकी जो पैसे खचर् होने 
वाले हȅ- यह तीन साल की Îकीम थी। इस साल का year ending का पैसा िमला नहीं है।  हमारा 
जो targ
et है, उस Ģोजेक्ट को हम 2026 तक saturate करके  िदखाएंगे।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : संजय जी, आप संतुÍट हȅ।  मंतर्ी जी बहुत अनुभवी हȅ।   
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह : सर, मंतर्ी जी ने यह तो बता िदया िक 24 हजार करोड़ रुपय े का जो  allotment 
हुई थी, उसमȂ से िसफर् आठ हजार करोड़ रुपय े खचर् हुए ह
ȅ।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: संजय जी, transparently सब क ु छ आपके  समक्ष रख िदया और आपका चेहरा बता 
रहा है िक मंतर्ी जी ने िबÊकु ल सही जवाब सटीक तरीके  से िदया है।  संजय िंसह को संतुÍट करना 
आसान नहीं है।  यह फामूर्ला मंतर्ी जी क े पास है।  इनसे फामूर्ला िलया जा  सकता है। 
 
        Now, Q. No. 334, Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh. 
 
 
National
 Education Policy (NEP), 2020 
 
*334. SHRI AKHILESH PRASAD SINGH: Will the Minister of EDUCATION be pleased 
to state:  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
59

 
 
(a)     the progress made in the implementation of the National Education Policy 
(NEP), 2020 across school and higher education institutions; 
(b)     the funds allocated and utilised for NEP implementation in 2024-25; and 
(c)     the challenges faced in rolling out key reforms under NEP and the manner in 
which Government plans to address them? 
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN): (a) to (c) A 
statement is laid on the table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
   (a)    A number of transformative ch anges have taken place both in school and 
higher education after announcement of National Education Policy (NEP 2020). In 
School Education  several initiatives have been taken such as PM SHRI (PM Schools 
for Rising India) for upgradation of sch ools; SamagraShiksha for providing quality 
education with an inclusive andequitable  classroom environment for all children; 
National Initiative for Proficiency in Reading with Understanding and Numeracy 
(NIPUN Bharat) for ensuring foundational literacy and numeracy by the end of Grade 
3; Vidya-Pravesh–Guidelines for Three-month Play-based School Preparation 
Module; PM e-VIDYA to unify all efforts rela ted to digital/online/on-air education to 
enable coherent multi-mode access to education;DIKSHA (Digital Infrastructure for 
Knowledge Sharing) as One Nation One Digital Platform having e-Books and e-
Contents;  launch of National Curriculu m Framework for Foundational Stage (NCF 
FS) and JaduiPitara for play-based learning  teaching material tailored for children 
between the age group of 3 to 8 years; PARAKH (Performance Assessment, Review, 
and Analysis of Knowledge for Holistic Development); NISHTHA (National Initiative 
for School Heads' and Teachers' Holistic Advancement) 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0; Vidya 
Samiksha Kendra; Integrated Teacher Edu cation Programme; National Professional 
Standards for Teachers (NPST); National Digital Education Architecture (NDEAR) for 
creating a unifying national digital infrastructure to energise and catalyse the 
education ecosystem, implementation of a scheme “New India Literacy Programme 
or ULLAS” targeting all non-literates age 15 years and above, etc. 
 In Higher Education,various initiatives / reforms have been carried out such as 
National Credit Framework (NCrF); Nati onal Higher Education Qualification 
Framework (NHEQF); Curriculum and Cr edit Framework for Undergraduate 
Programme; Multiple Entry and Exit in Academic Programme offered by Higher 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Education Institutions; Transforming HEIs in to multi-disciplinary Institutions; pursuing 
two Academic Programme simultaneously; Automated Permanent Academic Account 
Registry (APAAR ID)  of individu al student which will act as lifelong identity to track 
their educational journey and achievements from, pre-primary to higher education; 
introduction of PM-Vidyalaxmi scheme to provide financial support to meritorious 
students inter-alia enabling collate ral free, guarantor free  loan through a simple, 
transparent, student-friendly and entire ly digital application process; revised 
regulation of ODL / Online Education; permitting up to 40% credits in regular courses 
using SWAYAM platform;  launch of new SW AYAM Plus portal with aim to enhance 
skill and upskilling and reskilling of existing ma npower employed in different sectors; 
Integration of technology in administration of HEIs from admission to grant of degree 
through SAMARTH; guidelines on Professor of Practice to enable HEIs to work with 
industry experts; guidelines for supernum erary seats for admitting students from 
abroad in Indian HEIs; Academic collaboration between Indian and Foreign HEIs to 
offer Twinning, Joint Degree and Dual Degr ee Programmes; Regulation for permitting 
Foreign HEIs to setup campuses in India; e nhanced reputation of the Indian HEIs in 
international ranking; embedding of Indian Knowledge system in the education etc.  
  Implementation of NEP 2020 is a co ntinuous process and there has been a 
definite and smooth progression in this regard. 
 
    (b)   Various schemes/projects/progr ammes run by Ministry of Education have 
been aligned with NEP 2020. As far as Mini stry of Education is concerned, the details 
of Revised estimates and Actual expendit ure for the financial year 2024-25 is as 
below:-  
 
Department RE (in Cr.) Actual Exp. (in 
Cr.) 
D/o Higher Education 45,537.35 43,696.08 
D/o School Education & Literacy 67,571.20 55,305.18 
Total 1,13,108.55 99,001.26 
 
     (c)    Education being in the concurre nt list of Constitution, Centre and States are 
equally responsible for providing quality education to all.Accordingly, Ministry of 
Education, State Governments, educatio n-related Ministries, the regulatory and 
implementing bodies of school and higher  education such as University Grants 
Commission, All India Council for Technical Education, National Council for Teacher 
Education, National Council of Educational Research and Training, Central Board of 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
61

 
Secondary Education, Universities/Colle ges/Schools etc. have started taking 
initiatives for implementation of NEP 2020. 
          To create awar eness and discuss ideas for NEP implementation, a series of 
workshops / consultation-cum-review meetin gs have been held with States/UTs, 
Educational Institutions, other stakeholders  from time to time; such as National 
Education Ministers' Conference held in Gu jarat in June 2022; National Conference of 
Chief Secretaries held  in June 2022; 7 th and 9 thGoverning Council Meeting of NITI 
Aayog held in August 2022 and July 2024 ; Akhil Bharatiya Shiksha Samagam 2022, 
2023 and 2024; Two-day National Workshop on Higher and Technical Education with 
Secretaries of States/UTs on 12th& 13thNovember 2024. 
          Further, for Ou treach and Awareness of Implemen tation of National Education 
Policy 2020, a program is being run with 84 Centrally Funded Institutions which have 
been mapped with around 400 State Universi ties. These CFIs in collaboration with 
State Universities have been identified for organising outreach, seminars, conferences 
or conclaves on National Education Policy 2020 regularly. So far, 3 Workshops for 
CFIs for Northern Zone, North Eastern & Eastern Zone, South & West Zone have 
been held on 28.11.2024, 05.12.2024 and 19.12.2024 respectively.   
 
       NEP 2020 provides different timelin es as well as principles and methodology for 
its implementation.  
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : सभापित महोदय, हमने जो ĢÌन पूछा था, उसके  भाग ग मȂ 
specifically यह पूछा गया है िक न्यू एजुक ेशन पॉिलसी को लागू करने मȂ सरकार को िकन 
चुनौितयȗ का सामना करना पड़ रहा है।  इसके  उǄर मȂ मंतर्ी जी ने जो Åयूरोकर्े िटक जवाब िदया 
है, उसमȂ इस बात का कहीं भी िजकर् नहीं है िक देश क े तीन राज्यȗ का समगर् िशक्षा अिभयान क े 
तहत लगभग चार हजार करोड़ रुपय े का बकाया क ेन्दर् सरकार िसफर् इसिलए रोके  ह ुए है िक इन 
राज्यȗ मȂ पीएम Ǜी क े Îकू ल मॉडल को नहीं अपनाया गया है।  मेरे िवचार मȂ यह कतई उिचत नहीं 
है और आपके  माध्यम से हम मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहȂगे िक तिमलनाडु, क ेरल और पिÌचम बंगाल 
का सवर् िशक्षा अिभयान क
े  तहत बकाया कब तक जारी कर िदया जाएगा?  
 
 Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : महोदय, अभी नया िवǄ वषर् शुरू  हो गया है।  आज 2 अĢैल है, इसिलए हम 25-
26 की बात करȂगे।  िनिÌचत रूप  मȂ आदरणीय सदÎय जी न े जो ĢÌन पूछा है, उसमȂ उन्हȗने तीन 
राज्यȗ क े बारे मȂ उÊलेख िकया।  अभी इस सदन मȂ मȅ उÊलेख कर सकता हूं िक वे तीन राज्य भी 
नहीं रहȂगे।  धीरे-धीरे उनमȂ से भी मन पिरवतर्न हो रहा है।  उनमȂ से एक  राज्य जÊद ही राÍटर्ीय 
िशक्षा नीित क े ģ ेमवकर् मȂ ज्वाइन करेगा। अभी क ु छ आने वाले िदनȗ मȂ क ु छ राज्यȗ मȂ चुनाव हȅ।  
इसको ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए क ु छ पोिजशिंनग हो रही है।  महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम
 से इस हाउस 
को राÍटर्ीय िशक्षा नीित क े बारे मȂ अवगत कराना चाहता हूं। संिवधान सभा क े उपरांत िजस Ģकार 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
क े Ëयापक िवमशर् क े साथ एक राÍटर्ीय मसौदा हमारे संिवधान क े रूप  मȂ बाबा साहेब अÇबेडकर जी 
क े नेतृत्व मȂ बना, वैसे ही डा. कÎतूरी रंगन जी ने 21वीं सदी की आवÌयकता को ध्यान मȂ रखते 
हुए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े िवजन को राÍटर्ीय िशक्षा नीित मȂ पिरविर्तत िकया।  
आज सभी राज्य, भले ही िजन राज्यȗ का उन्हȗने नाम िलया, जैसा मȅन
े कहा िक वह राजनीितक 
पोिजशिंनग है, उन राज्यȗ मȂ धरातल मȂ राÍटर्ीय िशक्षा नीित का implementation हो रहा है।  
राज्यȗ क े ǎारा implementation 
हो रहा है।  िपछले िदनȗ मȂ इस पिवतर् गृह मȂ जब बजट पर 
िडÎकशन हो रहा था, उसके  तथ्य मȅने सामने रखे थे।  मेरे दृिÍट से राÍटर्ीय िशक्षा नीित को लेकर 
भारत मȂ सरकारȗ क े अंदर, समाज क े अंदर, िवशेषकर नई पीढ़ी क े अंदर एक अत्यंत उत्साह का  
वातावरण है।  तेजी से उसकी Îवीकृ ित िदन पर िदन बढ़ती जा रही है।  
  
Ǜी सभापित : सÃलीमȂटरी न
ंबर 2, Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : सर, मेरा जवाब तो नहीं आया।  आप हम लोगȗ क े Ģोटेक्टर हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : मेरा
 अनुभव यह है िक जवाब आता है, तब भी यह कहा जाता है िक जवाब नहीं 
आया।   
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह :  सर, मȅने Ãवाइंटेड सवाल पूछा था िक कब तक िदया जाएगा? अगर 
आपको िमला है, तो उसके  बारे म
Ȃ हमȂ बताया जाए। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : मंतर्ी जी ने बताया  है।  
 
 Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह : मȅ कमजोर िवǏाथीर् हो सकता हूं।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक एक िवǄीय वषर् तो समाÃत हो गया और यह भी कहा 
िक आज 2 अĢैल है, तो जवाब आ गया।  माननीय सदÎय सेक Ȃ ड सÃलीमȂटरी पूिछए। 
 
Ǜी अिखलेश Ģसाद िंसह: सर, 1 अĢैल को यह आंसर होता, तो समझ सकता  था। आज 2 अĢैल 
है। सभापित महोदय, उच्च िशक्षा क े क्षेतर् मȂ फायनȂिंसग आज भी एक बड़ी समÎया है और इसी को 
ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए सरकार ने 2016 मȂ हायर
 एजुक ेशन फायनȂिंसग एजȂसी की Îथापना की थी। 
महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूं िक हेफा का वतर्मान मȂ क्या 
Îटेटस है और यह िकस तरह से हायर एजुक ेशन मȂ फायनȂिंसग कर रहा है।  
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान: सभापित महोदय, यह एक अलग ĢÌन है। मȅ उसकी सिर्वसेज़ का Åयोरा और नेफा 
का आज का क्या Îटेटस है, उसके  बारे म
Ȃ माननीय सदÎय को जÊदी ही   आपके  माध्यम   से 
अवगत   कराऊं गा। महोदय, मȅ अभी इतना ही कहूंगा िक हेफा, 2016 मȂ Îथािपत हुआ था और 
भारत सरकार क े हायर एजुक ेशन इंÎटीǷूशन्स की जो िरक्वायरमȂट्स हȅ, जैस
े हॉÎटÊस बनाना, 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
63

 
नया एडिमिनÎटर्ेिटव Åलॉक बनाना, नए क्लास रूÇस बनाना, ऑिडटोिरयम बनाना, Ãले गर्ाउंड 
बनाना आिद सभी चीज़ȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए एक इस Ģकार का एक न्यू फायनȂिशयल 
आिर्कटेक्चर बनाया गया है, िजसको भारत सरकार क े लगभग सभी फ ंिंडड इंÎटीǷूशन्स लेते हȅ। 
महोदय, हमारा यह अनुभव है। मȅ इसका बाकी Åयोरा डेटा सिहत आपके  माध्यम क े माननीय 
सदÎय को बता दूंगा।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, माननीय सदÎय को अवग
त कराने की समय अविध बता दीिजए।  
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : मȅ माननीय सदÎय को परसȗ तक बता दूंगा।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : ठीक है।  
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, the Nati onal Testing Agency was 
given a huge responsibility of conducting nationwide entrance tests like NEET,
 CUET, 
and UGC. This has created dismay and a complete loss of trust because this is a very 
lean agency that cannot take up that much responsibility. My question is:  Why can't 
the Government restrict testing for entry to its own institutions and decentralize it to 
where States fill up their own seats base d on the marks obtained in State board 
examinations? 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN: Mr. Chairman, Sir, my esteemed colleague, dear 
sister Kanimozhi, is a very intelligent person. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: That, I think, no one will disagree. The entire House will agree to 
this. 
 
SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN:  Sir, the basi c point of the question, the core of the 
question, is: Why don't you dismantle the N EET and give the authority to the State 
Government? This is the base and core of the question. Sir, this Government is not 
responsible for this kind of model. The ho n. Supreme Court had given a direction that 
the Medical Entrance Test will be centraliz ed. And, the previous UPA Government 
had started this model.  We have to carry it forward. She was very much a part of that 
Government and could have prevailed upon the leadership of their ruling alliance to 
prevent it. But, we have to carry it forward.  The NTA is doing a tremendous   job    
with    our   experience. Yes,  there   have  been  certain challenges in previous years, 
but we are improving every ye ar. It will be a very robust entrance testing mechanism 
for the country. 
 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Minister, can th e Government part with its Executive 
authority to a court? This is an issue I have indicated to the House several times. 
Governance in a democracy has to be only by the Executive, because the Executive is 
accountable to Parliament and to the pe ople in elections. How can Executive 
governance be done by any other agency ? And, therefore, even if something 
significant has come from any other instit ution, this is an area exclusive to the 
Executive because the Executive  is elected by the people to govern the nation. And, 
therefore, give attention to this also. It is a larger issue beyond your Ministry. But we 
cannot have, in the country, executive governance beyond the Government. The 
Government is the ultimate authority.  Supplementary number four, Prof. Manoj 
Kumar Jha. And, now you know why I gave preference to Dr. John Brittas. 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: माननीय सभापित महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या। मȅ सबसे पहले तो 
आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े Ģित संवेदना Ëयƪ करना चाहता हूं, माता-िपता क े न होने 
पर आदमी अचानक बड़ा हो जाता है, क्यȗिक जब वे होते हȅ, वह तब तक बच्चा ही रहता है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: मनोज जी, आपने िबÊकु ल ठीक कहा है, आपके  िपताजी का मुझे बहुत आशीवार्द 
िमला है।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा : जी, मȅ इसीिलए कह रहा हूं। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : इस  वजह से आपकी अनुपिÎथित हम सभी को बहुत खल रही थी।  आपने ऐसा 
कहकर बहुत संवेदनशीलता िदखाई है।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा :  माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहूंगा िक 
एनईपी मȂ िडिजटल एक्सेस पर बहुत जोर है, लेिकन हम सब यह हकीकत भी जानते हȅ और 
इसके  आंकड़े हȅ िक सामािजक, आिर्थक रूप  से िपछड़े जो लोग हȅ या गर्ामीण इलाकȗ मȂ जो बच्चे 
ह
ȅ, क्या सरकार इनके  िलए क ु छ अितिरƪ कर रही है, तािक िडिजटल िडवाइड की यह जो कर्ूर 
हकीकत है, उसको address िकया जा सके ?  
 
Ǜी धमȄदर् Ģधान : महोदय, इसी साल बजट मȂ भारत
 सरकार ने घोषणा की है िक भारत क े सभी 
सरकारी हाई Îकू लȗ मȂ Ĥॉडबȅड कनेिक्टिवटी क े िलए Ģचुर मातर्ा मȂ िवǄीय अनुदान की ËयवÎथा 
की गई ह
ै। 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
65

 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Question Hour is over. 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
  ] 
 
1.00 P.M. 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, the Boilers Bill, 2024. Shri Piyush Goyal to move that 
the Amendments made by Lok Sabha in the Boilers Bill, 2024, be taken into 
consideration.  
 
The Boilers Bill, 2024 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE AND INDUST RY (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL): Sir, I 
move:  
 That the following amendments made by Lok Sabha in the Boilers                    
Bill, 2024, be taken into consideration, namely:- 
 
ENACTING FORMULA
 
 
1. That at page 1, line 1, for the words, Seventy-fifth , the words, Seventy-
sixth be substituted. 
 
CLAUSE 1 
 
2. That at page 1, line 5, for the figure, 2024, the figure 2025 be substituted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, I move: 
 
       That the amendments made by the Lok Sabha in the Bill be agreed to. 
  
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I have a point of order. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me first take it up. Now, the Immigration and 
Foreigners Bill, 2025,  Shri Nityanand Rai to  move that the motion for consideration of 
the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025,  as passed by Lok Sabha be taken into 
consideration. 
 
The Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय):  महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूं : 
 
 िक भारत मȂ Ģवेश करने वाले और उससे िनकास करने वाले Ëयिƪयȗ की बाबत पासपोटर् 
या अन्य यातर्ा दÎतावेजȗ की अपेक्षा का उपबंध करने क े िलए क Ȃदर्ीय सरकार को कितपय शिƪयां 
Ģदान करने और वीजा तथा रिजÎटर्ीकरण की अपेक्षा सिहत िवदेिशयȗ स
े संबंिधत मामलȗ को 
िविनयिमत करने क े िलए तथा उनसे संसƪ या उनके  आनुषंिगक िवषयȗ का उपबंध करने वाले 
िवधेयक पर, लोक सभा ǎारा पािरत रूप  मȂ, िवचार िकया जाए। 
 
The question was proposed. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  म
ंतर्ी जी, क्या आप इस पर क ु छ बोलना चाहȂगे? 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ अंत मȂ उǄर क े समय अपनी बात रखूंगा।    
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपका Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र क्या है? 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal): Sir, it  is under Rule 29 wh ich relates to List 
of Business.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, tell me. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Sir, the List of Business has been circulated. We have two 
days of the Session left. The BAC has allocated t
hree hours for the Statutory 
Resolution on the Proclamation of Presiden t’s Rule in Manipur and eight hours for the 
Waqf Bill.  Sir, we do not know from the List of Business when the Manipur issue is 
going to be taken up. It is a very sensitive issue. This is number one. Give me just 30 
seconds, Sir.  Secondly, Sir, we have also been assured.. 
 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
67

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Saketji, I have got it.  Please take your seat. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE:  Sir, give me 10 seconds to finish my point of order. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have got your point. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Let me say this so that you can give your ruling. I will take 10 
more seconds, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Also, we have been assured by the Government about a 
Short Duration Discussion on the duplicate EPI Card matter. We only have two days 
left in the Session, Sir. We would like to be enlightened on when it will be taken up. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Chairman pr esided over the BAC meeting and he 
has informed the House already. Thank you. Now, I will call from the list of speakers. 
Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi. 
 
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI (Telangana ): Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, and 
distinguished Members of this august Hous e, I rise to oppose this Bill and seek 
substantial changes in its pe rnicious character. It is clearly designed for ulterior 
motives by a control-freak sarkar bent upon sending out a message of fear through 
the architecture of omniscient, Orwellian surv eillance for foreigners. As I will presently 
demonstrate, Sir, this Bill is a true work  of art -- a work of art for excessive, un-
canalized discretion, for overboard delegation, for delightfully-vague phraseology, for 
deliberate omission of any al ternative, efficacious oversi ght mechanism, for elevation 
of a constable to the level of a  super- commissioner,  a license for harassment, and 
all based on the fundamentally-false assumpti on that foreigners have no rights under 
the Indian Constitution, as al so the decimation of all notions of privacy and autonomy 
of an individual.  
Sir, Members of this august House, from dreams of being a Vishwa Guru and 
enveloping the world in India's embrace of soft-power, from talking of Atithi Devo 
Bhava, this Bill sends a message that all fore igners are potential criminals, to be 
viewed with serious suspicion by India where India is to act as an unwelcome-fortress 
for its unwanted non-guests.  Sir, if these words seem too harsh, let me try to make 
each word good in a moment. Sir, let us look  at ‘excessive delegation.’  Excessive 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
delegation to lowly officials with a humongous breath of discretion on those officials is 
the visiting card of this Bill.  
Start with the heart and soul of the Bill,  Clause 3, which, by the way, has no 
predecessor in any of the earlier four en actments which this Bill pretends to 
consolidate. In 1920, 1939, 1946 and 2000, no predecessor is found of this Section, 
Clause 3. The first proviso to this Clause  3 has a big non-obstante override to the 
whole clause by empowering the Central Gove rnment to refuse entry to or deport any 
foreigner on grounds of national security, sovereignty, integrity of India, foreign 
relations and, curiously, public health. So, so far so good! We understand these 
grounds. They are serious, and foreigners attaching to these gr ounds must be dealt 
with.  It then adds, after these grounds, the universe of delegation. It says, Or on 
such other grounds as the Central Govern ment may specify. In other words, it 
means that the Central Government, as if it  is this legislature itself, can add any 
number of grounds in the years to come, by notifications and Government orders to 
deny entry to foreigners or to deport them. By a process of executive extension, 
theoretically, grounds can be added to deny entry or stay  in India, none of these 
grounds having been seen or approved by  this august House,  which is the whole 
purpose of legislation. That is why I said ‘excessive delegation.’  
Then, secondly, Sir, comes the killer. The second proviso to the same 
Section, Clause 3, reads, Provided further that the decision of the immigration officer 
in this regard shall be final and binding. सर, अमेिरका मȂ Immigration Judge, कनाडा मȂ 
Appeal Board, जबिक भारत मȂ यहाँ एक Immigration Officer का संदेह ही अंितम फ ैसला है।  
कोई अपील नहीं, कोई सुनवाई नहीं, िसफर् एक अफसर की नजर और आपका पासपोटर्, आपकी 
पहचान, सब खत्म।  सर, यहाँ शÅदावली ÎपÍट है और सǄा असीिमत है।  यह न्याय नहीं, यह 
िनरंक ु श
 राज है, एक अफसर का हुक्म अब आिखरी आवाज है।   
 सर, तीसरा िंबदु, पुनिर्नरीक्षण करने की कोई भी oversight संÎथा कम से कम Ģथम Îतर 
पर तो देनी चािहए, जब आपने इसमȂ सरकार को,
 executive को, कायर्पािलका को इतने Ëयापक 
अिधकार क्षेतर् िदए हȅ। मȅने बहुत कम ऐसे कानून देखे हȅ, जहाँ ऐसी संÎथाएँ न िमलȂ, कम से कम 
Ģथम Îतर पर, खास तौर पर जहाँ िकसी Ëयिƪ क े आने-जाने और भारत मȂ रहने पर इतना कड़ा 
Ģितबंध लगाने का अिधकार क्षेतर् है, जो िसफर् इस बा
र Immigration Officer को िदया जा रहा है।  
इसके  ऊपर कोई ऐसा oversight mechanism नहीं है। 
ऑनरेबल गृह म
ंतर्ी जी ने लोक सभा मȂ जवाब िदया था और उन्हȗने immigration officer 
क े powers यह कह कर उड़ा िदए थे िक immigration officer क े िवरुǉ पहले भी Appeal नहीं 
होती थी और immigration officer 24 कसौिटयȗ मȂ, criteria मȂ िनणर्य लेता है। इस वƪËय मȂ 
गलती है, जो माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी ने लोक सभा मȂ इसी िबल पर दी, क्यȗिक यह बात सही है िक 
पहले Appeal नहीं होती थी, लेिकन पहले Section 3 भी  नहीं था; ये अिधकार
 क्षेतर् नहीं थे, जो 
अब आपके  पास आए हȅ और इसमȂ इतने Ëयापक िबन्दु हȅ, जो पहले कभी नहीं थे।  जब आपने 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
69

 
अिधकार क्षेतर्, powers, coercive power and intrusion बढ़ा िदये, तो संÎथा भी आवÌयक है।  
इसिलए माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी ने लोक सभा मȂ जो तुलना दी है, वह गलत है।   
माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी ने अमेिरका की तरफ भी संक े त िकया। अमेिरकी क े Office of 
Immigration की जो website है, वह बड़े ÎपÍट रूप  से बताती है िक वहाँ लगभग 700 
immigration Judges हȅ और उनके  ऊपर एक
 Board of Immigration Appeals भी है, जो इन 
immigration Judges का पुनिर्नरीक्षण करता है। मȅ यह बहुत िवनĦता से कहना चाहूँगा िक अगर 
आप 'िवकिसत भारत'  बनना चाहते हȅ, तो हमȂ िवÌव क े उन सभी िवकिसत वगș से, उन सबक ी 
उǄीणर् चीजȂ लेनी चािहए, न िक उनके  िपछड़े कानून की आदतȂ।   
चौथा िबन्दु, इसमȂ जो final and binding डाला गया है, कानून मȂ इसको ‘Ouster 
Clause’ कहते हȅ। यह 200 वषș से मशहूर है।  इसे कई कानूनȗ मȂ डालते हȅ। न्यायपािलका ने जब-
जब इसे डाला है, तो
 कहा है िक कायर्पािलका क े पास final क ु छ नहीं होता और final हमारा, 
न्यायपािलका का शÅद होता है, न िक immigration officer का। लेिकन मुǈा क्या है, मुǈा यह है 
िक हमारी सरकार जानती ह
ै िक हमारी कचहरी िकतनी चींटी की चाल से िनणर्य देती है।  वह यह 
भी जानती है िक इस कानून क े अन्तगर्त अनेक ऐसे याचक हȗगे, जो या तो कोटर्-कचहरी तक 
पहुँचने का सामथ्यर् ही नहीं रखते या िजनके  मामले अिधकतम िवलÇब से वैसे ही िनÍफल हो जाते 
हȅ,  infructuous हो जाते हȅ। इसिलए यह oversight mechanism आवÌयक था।   
पाँचवाँ िबन्दु, अनुच्छेद 3(2) क
े  अन्तगर्त भारत से कोई बाहर भी जाना चाहता हो, गौर 
करȂ िक कोई बाहर जाना चाहत
ा हो, और यǏिप उसके  िवरुǉ कोई FIR नहीं, कोई complaint 
नहीं, कोई charge sheet नहीं हो, वह अिभयुƪ भी नहीं हो, तब भी वह बाहर नहीं जा सकता, 
क्यȗिक उसका Visa खत्म हो गया है। जैसा अभी एक भारतीय मिहला िवǏाथीर् ने USA म Ȃ self-
deportation िकया, वह अनुच्छेद 3(2) क े अन्तगर्त असÇभव है।   
छठा िबन्दु, यह तो Visa खत्म होने की बात हुई, लेिकन अब Visa खत्म नहीं हुआ हो, 
उसके  अितिरƪ, िकसी का भी भारत से बाहर जाना immigration officer क े आदेश ǎारा रोका 
जा सकता है। यह मȅ बाहर जाने की बात कर रहा हूँ, अन्दर आने की बात नहीं कर रहा ह
ूँ।  इस 
िबल मȂ इसके  कारण नहीं िदए गए हȅ िक िकन कारणȗ से वह कायर्पािलका, वह immigration 
officer यह आदेश दे सकता है। यह कहा गया है - delightfully vague phraseology, over-
breadth of delegation, वही जो मȅने अपनी speech 
की opening मȂ कहा था। अनुच्छेद 3(2) क े 
शÅद हȅ –"…or on such grounds that the Central Government may, by order, specify." 
उसके  साथ यह proviso लगाया  है – "That the decision of the Immigration Officer shall 
be final and binding."  
Sir, seventhly, George Orwell, in his worst Orwellian nightmare, would not 
have paid so much attention to foreigners , tourists, students and so on, coming to 
visit the ancient land of India with all its di versity. Our own big brother, however, does 
more with a further delightfully vague and blanket language of Clause 3(iii). I quote, 
"The Immigration Officer may examine the passport or other travel document and visa 
of a foreigner during his entry into, transit through, stay in, movement within India and 
also require him to furnish such information as may be necessary and appropriate." Is 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
this not the worst kind of licence for arbi trariness, for harassment, for fear and 
intrusive behaviour by a bureaucracy alre ady known for its excessives and already 
functioning under a control-freak sarkar. What is necessary and appropriate 
information is left to this officer because  he can ask anybody tr avelling from Goa to 
Bombay or from Khajuraho to Kashmir. What is necessary and appropriate 
information is left to this officer not mere ly at the entry point, but right through the 
entire movement of the foreigner in India.  
Sir, it is not as bad as Indians and Pakistanis being subjected to reporting 
restrictions in each other’s countries. And, certainly, personally, I do not care if you 
subject Pakistani visitors to it. But should  w e  b e  e v e n  r e m o t e l y  m o v i n g  i n  t h a t  
direction for all other countries?   
 Eighth, with no appeal, no oversight,  no accountability, just raw, unchecked 
power in the hands of a few, who will ensure that no foreigner is unjustly detained 
weeks after lawfully entering India, and no family will be torn apart by bureaucratic 
overreach? Let us take an example of an over-enthusiastic bunch of teenage foreign 
tourists getting into a heated political  debate and vigorously criticising this 
Government, -- God forbid the thought -- yo u do not need to make out a separate 
penal offence under our Sanhitas.  You can put the fear of God in those teenagers 
holidaying in Goa or Khajuraho through the Immigration Officer, and, more 
importantly, in all the friends of these teenagers and the future travellers, by 
selectively harassing, detaining and possibly deporting them on such vague 
phraseology.  Mere suspicion can thus lead to all kinds of action with no adjudication 
because इसमȂ जज है ही नहीं, इसिलए आप हाई कोटर् जाइए या सुĢीम कोटर् जाइए। इसमȂ कोई 
अपील बोडर्, कोई संÎथा नहीं है।  
 
ताƵुब है मेरे इस सैफ़-ए-हयात पर, 
जहाँ फ ैसले होने थे, वहाँ सजाएँ िमलीं। 
 
 Ninth, Clause 7 is one of the mo st egregious examples of excessive 
delegation, coupled with over-b re
ath.  It says, By any order, direction or instruction 
to prohibit, regulate or restrict the entry or departure of foreigners into or from India.  
There are no guidelines, no limitations for su ch instructions, orders or directions.   
And, they are certainly not limited to the specific tests of national security, 
sovereignty, integrity, foreign relations, with which I am not quarrelling. These are 
untrammeled, uncircumscribed and unfettere d language phraseology and clauses.  
The opening part of the Clause is without boundaries and even the particularised sub-
clauses in Clause 7 seek to control the very facet of existence of their poor foreigner. I 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
71

 
will give a few examples. It can require the specification of times and routes by which 
a foreigner can enter. That is Clause 7(2)(a ).  Then, it can prohibit his departure as 
per Clause 7(2)(b), as I have already discu ssed.  It can stipulate that he can be in 
India only at places specified as per Clause  7(2)(e). Clause 7(2)(f) requires him to 
present himself for examination anytime an ywhere. Clause 7(2)(f)(iv) asks him to 
report to authorities at specified times and days. Clause 7(2)(f)(v) requires biometric 
information. All these are mandatory with  heavy penalties and prosecution. Clause 
7(2)(f)(vi) requires subjecting himself to medical examination. And, this is delightful.  
The last one prohibits him from associating with persons of a ‘specified description’. 
The word is ‘specified description’.   Immigration Officer वैसे कह सकता है िक िकसी 
काँगर्ेस मैन से बात नहीं करनी है। यह भी कह सकता है। ...( Ëयवधान)...  As may be 
specified, unspecified... 
Tenth, was I wrong to call this a ‘control freak sarkaar’ ? Are these not 
mechanisms...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, माननीय  सदÎया ने कहा िक मंतर्ी महोदय सुिनए।  मȅ दोनȗ आँखȗ 
को खुली रख कर दोनȗ कानȗ से िÎथर मन से सुन रहा हूँ। मȅ आपको आÌवÎत करता हूँ। 
 
डा. अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी: आपको अभी जवाब नहीं देना ह
 ै, आपको बाद मȂ जवाब देना 
है।...(Ëयवधान)...     
  
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आप बोलȂ। 
 
डा. अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी: मȅ अभी नहीं कह रहा हूँ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आप बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... रेणुका जी, आपसे आगर्ह है िक आप सीट पर 
बैठ कर न बोलȂ। आप बड़ी विरÍठ म
ेÇबर हȅ। ...( Ëयवधान)... No comments 
...(Interruptions)...  आपस मȂ comment नहीं। 
 
डा. अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी: मेरा सौभाग्य है िक आप इतने ध्यान से सुन रहे हȅ। Tenth, was I 
wrong to call this a ‘control freak sarkaa r’? Look at the thinking behind this Bill.  Does 
this think of foreigners as cattle, or, as en masse  criminal gangsters? Is it so insecure 
that it wants this kind of disgusting suraksha chakra all around itself?  Where are the 
standards, the boundaries, the tests for exercise of this mammoth power? Should we 
all rely on the good sense either of the sarkaar, or of the constable, or of the 
Immigration Officer, that none of these open-ended words and clauses will be 
abused?  Sir, eleventh is th e trinity of clauses, in particular, 8(3), 9 and 10. It is 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
subcontract, big brother, 24x7 surveillance of  the foreigner to interesting entities. 
They subcontract surveillance 24x7, beyond  Orwell, to the landlord of premises, 
where the foreigner stays, कभी  गलती से भी foreigner को घर मȂ मत रिखएगा, to the 
educational institution where he studies, to every hospital, medical institution and 
sleeping facility where he seeks medical he lp. Any and every information unspecified 
and unparticularized in the Act is left for the future discretion of the officer and it must 
be furnished by service providers like landlo rds, hospitals, colleges, universities on 
strong pain of penalty, prosecution. Large sli ces of civil society friends are, therefore, 
mandatorily, by law, co-opted as snooping pa rtners with big brother on an all-India 
24x7 snooping exercise for all foreign visitors to India. 
 Twelfth is, in this all draftsmen arch itecture, the draftsmen seems to have 
forgotten that we have a small little book ca lled the Constitution of India and some of 
its core provisions. This is very important point.  India is not developed in many ways 
but, in these manners, it is more developed than other countries. The draftsmen 
forgot that, unlike several developed nations,  we hold our head proud and high as a 
democracy because we guarantee several ri ghts to non-citizens as much as to 
citizens by the Constitution.  Many other countries limit to citizen only.  
Babasaheb, when he was asked about th e heart and soul of our Constitution, 
identified two Articles of the Constitution -- Article 14 and Article 21; these are the first 
few things which anybody is taught about ou r Constitution. He said that these are the 
heart and soul. Both Article 14 and 21 appl y to the non-citizens as much as to the 
citizens. Article 14 guarantees equality,  non-arbitrariness and substantive due 
process while the other, Article 21, Right to  life and liberty, is now non-suspendable 
even in a declared national emergency.  Frie nds, I do not want to digress, as I do not 
have time, but the jurisprudential journey of Article 14 is fascinating. I won’t take much 
time.  Just give me a minute. Originally, it was the Equality Doctrine, that is, don’t 
treat equals unequally and unequals equa lly. From Royappa onwards in 1976, by 
court interpretation, Article 14 includes non- arbitrariness, what no reasonable person 
will do. Apart from discrimination, separate from discrimination, non-arbitrariness is 
second facet of Article 14.  Thirdly, from late 1980s, Maneka Gandhi's case added 
procedural due process. You must have due process of procedural kind in all laws, in 
all activities, and, finally for the last fi ve-seven years, we have substantive due 
process, precisely what Sir Benegal Narsin g Rau, when he went and met Frankfurter 
in USA had omitted from our Constitution, which has been brought in by judicial 
interpretation. So, all these are available not just to the citizens but also to the non-
citizens.  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
73

 
I come to the thirteenth point. Let me caution the hon. Minister if any of his 
eminent advisors are wrongly advising him to refer to apex court judgments like 
Mohammad Salimullah, Sarbananda Sonowal I,  Sarbananda Sonowal II etc. They are 
judgments which are in favour of the Gove rnment and the Executive for one and one 
purpose alone, and, not one of the 20 issues , I am raising here, are discussed there. 
They are for detection of foreigners. The mechanism to detect foreigners has been 
upheld in these judgments and some Acts, which were found insufficient to detect 
foreigners, have been struck down. So, before you start quoting passages from these 
judgments out of context, I am giving an advance warning that none of them deal with 
clauses like 3, 4, 5 etc., in this current Bill.  
Fourteenth point is that privacy an d autonomy has now been judicially 
embedded in Article 21 by our Supreme Court and I just told you that Article 21 applies 
to non-citizens as much as to citizens. Now, this Bill blows concepts like privacy and 
autonomy to smithereens. I, therefore, beseech you not to be obstinate in not 
referring it to  Parliamentary Standing Committee because I have no doubt, and I 
hope my words prove prophetic if you don't refer it, that in its current form, this Bill 
will face judicial invalidation in the next few years, if passed.   
Fifteenth, Sir, the catalogue of fore igners guaranteed with the same 
constitutional rights doesn't end with Ar ticles 14 and 21. You have Article 20 
guaranteeing three very vital rights to foreig ners and citizens alike. The right against 
retroactive offenses, -- not that it applie s in this case but you must know that -- 
against double jeopardy, against self-incrimination, and then, all the safeguards in 
detention available to a citizen under Arti cle 22 apply to non-citizens also. Did you 
know that all the rights to freely practise,  profess and propagate religion under Article 
25 apply equally to non-citizens? These are the backdrops of the omniscient 
character of our Constitution , far ahead of the US Consti tution, far ahead of other 
countries’, which in this Bill, as I said, th e draftsman forgot while drafting that we 
have a book called the Constitution. He believes that foreigners are here at the 
sufferance and the discretion of the Executive or its factotums to be governed by a 
lawless regime with no safeguards.  
Sixteenth, Sir, vagueness and arbitrarin ess multiplies. There is a Clause 14 
which exercises control over third parties, not the foreigners, directing them to 
altogether close such premises owned by third parties on frequented by the 
foreigner. So, if a foreigner likes to go to a Khan market shop and if the immigration 
officer doesn't like him very much, he can give a direction.  Not that it will be upheld, 
but I am just giving an example.  None of  these vast powers need probable cause.  
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
They don't need an FIR, no charge sheet ag ainst that foreigner. It is the immigration 
officer, who is the big boss.  
Seventeenth, Sir, in these days of in creasing dual citizenship, increasing 
countries have dual citizenship. There is a Clause 15 which may well be an 
anachronism. It gives the Indian Central Gove rnment powers to decide that out of the 
two foreign citizenships of a foreigner co ming here, we will deem one to be the 
correct citizenship. Read the clause. उसको A और B से citizenship िमली है, लेिकन भारत 
सरकार िनणर्य करेगी िक उसके  ऊपर दोनȗ मȂ से कौन सी citizenship लागू होती है।  We are 
not synced with the international global trend of dual citizenship.  
Eighteenth, Sir, there is a Clause 17 which runs into 13 sub-clauses. Clause 17 
is almost a page and a half. It has 13 sub-clauses. It puts one of the biggest 
bureaucratic loads on all, land, sea and air carriers transporting any foreigner. Most 
airlines should now only fly non-foreigners. The entire transportation industry must be 
having nightmares on seeing Clause 17 be cause if you default in the smallest form, 
comma, full stop, which you have to fill up  for every foreign pa ssenger, you are liable 
to severe penalties and prosecution. Compliance cost is one inevitable consequence. 
Bureaucratic harassment is another inevitable consequence.  
I am ending in 3 or 4 minutes, Sir, well before my time. Today, I seem to have 
ample time. Nineteenth, Sir, is Clause 26. Every head constable in this country would 
love to have Clause 26. They should frame it  up in their house and keep it. Clause 26 
elevates the head constable as the suprem e coercive officer. Supreme! You are all 
lawmakers. You have seen hundreds of Acts  where there is ‘not below the rank of 
Superintendent’, ‘not below the rank of  Commissioner’. You have so many Acts. 
Excise, this, that. यहां उÊटा कहा गया है िक अंतत: कॉन्Îटेबल का अिधकार क्षेतर् होगा, of 
course, कोटर् का Îतर उससे ऊपर होता है। जो Ëयिƪ कोटर् जा सकता ह
ै और िजसका सामथ्यर् 
है, वह वहां अपील कर सकता है। लेिकन जहां तक अिधिनयम (एक्ट) का सवाल है, मामला हेड 
कॉन्Îटेबल क े Îतर पर ही समाÃत हो जाता है। The enormity of the executive power and the 
great potentiality of its misuse as reflected in the Bill is in inverse proportions. Power is 
that high, which is in invers e proportion to the status given to the person who is the 
wielder of t
hat power. The higher the power, the higher should be the status. It is an 
inverse proportion here. Even lesser acts ha ve higher and greater authority specified. 
This approach can only be ascribed to a mi ndset treating foreigners not as individuals 
with dignity and respect, with identity, but as objects of our contempt and disgust.  
  Sir, in the end, you will be surprised that I have found something in the Bill 
worth retaining.  Clauses 21 , 23, 24 and 25 mitigate some of these draconian facets 
by mercifully providing -- thank God fo r small mercies -- for compounding of 
offences. These must be retained. Of cour se, the whole Bill must be referred to a 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
75

 
Standing Committee. I hope the hon. Home Minister will heed some of our advice and 
refer this unconstitutional Bill to the approp riate Standing Committee.  Otherwise, we 
will all have to say: 
 
‘Guilty till proven, jailed on a guess 
justice here is a game of chess’. 
 
Injustice dressed as immigrat ion law is still injustice. It is a Bill supposedly in 
the name of law and order but it is actually in the service of chaos.  न्याय नहीं, यह तो 
िनरंक ु श राज है। एक अफसर का हुक ु म है, आिखरी आवाज़ है। जब कानून की पिरभाषा अफसर 
की मजीर् बनेगी, तो लोकतंतर् की सांसȂ घुटने लगȂगी।  यह िबल सुरक्षा क े नाम पर नागिरक 
Îवतंतर्ता की हत्या का पहला कदम है। कोई पारदिर्शता नहीं, कोई जवाबदेही नहीं, िसफर् सरकार 
और अिधकािरयȗ की मजीर् स
े तय होगा िक िकसको देश मȂ रहने का हक है और िकसको नहीं है। 
क्या यही नए भारत की सोच है? यह िवदेश नीित का मामला नहीं है, यह भारत क े लोकतांितर्क 
मूÊयȗ पर हमला है। यह िबल िवदेशी नागिरकȗ क
े   िलए बना है।  मȅ मानता हूं िक यह हमारे 
नागिरकȗ क े िलए नहीं बना है, िवदेशी नागिरकȗ क े िलए बना है, लेिकन इसकी छाया भारतीयȗ 
तक पहुंचने मȂ देर नहीं लगेगी। आज यह संदेहाÎपद िवदेशी को िनशाना बनाता है, तो
 कल यही 
तंतर् भारतीयȗ को िनशाना क्यȗ नहीं बना सकता? इस Ģकार की िनयंतर्ण सनकी सरकार, 
क ंटर्ोलģीक सरकार एक Îतर पर अपनी सुरक्षा का मानिसकता दशार् रही है। शायद आप सोच रहे 
हȅ:  
बुलंदी देर तक िकस शख्स क े िहÎसे मȂ रहती है, 
बहुत ऊ ंची इमारत हर घड़ी खतरे मȂ रहती है। 
 
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA (Haryana): Mr
. Deputy Chairman, Sir, thank you for 
giving me the opportunity to speak on this very important Bill. I stand before you in the 
support of a landmark Bill – the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025. It is a bold and 
necessary step towards securing our borders, protecting our economy and 
preserving the rich cultural fabric that makes India truly unique. For too long, outdated 
immigration laws have left us vulnerable – vulnerable to securi ty threats, economic 
strain and administrative chaos.  Under th e decisive leadership of the hon. Prime 
Minister, Shri Narendra Modi ji, we recognise that a modern, fair and well-regulated 
immigration system is not just a necessity, but it is our duty. This Bill is a testament to 
our unwavering commitment to national securi ty, lawful immigration and protection of 
our citizens’ rights.  Let us be clear. Illegal immigration is not just a policy failure; it is a 
betrayal of those who abide by the law.   
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 India has always been a land of comp assion. We have given refuge to the 
Hindus from Pakistan, Afghanistan and ot her neighbouring countries where their 
human rights were under threat because of their religion. But we cannot extend 
generosity to all as it must not come at the cost of national integrity. A nation without 
secure borders is a nation at risk.   
 Immigration laws under Congress rule we re often lenient, unstructured, and in 
many cases, driven more by political cons iderations than national security or 
demographic balance. This made India vuln erable in several ways. In Congress raj, 
Congress Governments turned a blind ey e to large-scale illegal immigration, 
particularly from Bangladesh. Weak border security, lack of strict visa regulations and 
poor enforcement mechanisms allowed millions to enter India unlawfully.   
The 175 th Law Commission Report of 2000 sounded the alarm over illegal 
immigration but since then the crisis has on ly deepened.  At the time, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs estimated that 15 to 18 m illion Bangladeshis were residing in India 
illegally. In West Bengal alone, the nu mbers were staggering – 5.4 million!  
...(Interruptions)... I will do that.   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया आपस मȂ बातचीत मत कीिजए।  
 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA: By now, they must have increased manifold. This 
created demographic imbalance in the State. Instead of addressing illegal immigration 
as a security threat, successive Congress-le d Governments used it as an opportunity 
to expand their voter base. This led to policies that either granted legal status to illegal 
immigrants or ignored their presence.  
 The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983, made it nearly 
impossible to deport illegal immigrants from Assam, burdening the State with 
unchecked demographic shifts. The Supreme Court later struck it down in 2005 
calling it unconstitutional. Lack of stringent immigration laws allowed foreign 
elements, including terrorists and anti-national groups, to exploit India’s porous 
borders. Over the years, Pakistan’s ISI an d radical elements found it easy to smuggle 
people, arms and fake curren cy into India. Bangladesh takes advantage of minority 
appeasement politics of West Bengal and pu shes its illegal migrants to the State.  
...(Interruptions)... Weak immigration laws also enabled terror operatives to enter 
the country, leading to attacks like the 2008 Mumbai attacks and other cross-border 
terror incidents. ...( Interruptions)... Congress-era policies also failed to create a 
robust refugee policy, leading to haphaz ard decisions on asylum seekers.  The 
Rohingya crisis is one example where weak immigration control allowed thousands of 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
77

 
Rohingyas to settle in India. Many of them were later found involved in criminal and 
extremist activities. Instead of securing borders, Congress leaders often advocated 
for their rehabilitation, ignoring national security concerns. They are not restricted 
now in other States but are all over India and creating problems for the Indian citizens.  
 Illegal immigration under weak laws also put a massive burden on India’s 
resources. The influx of illegal migrants  led to increased pressure on jobs, 
infrastructure and social welfare scheme s. In State like Assam and West Bengal, 
locals suffered from reduced employment opportunities and land encroachments, 
leading to resentment and unrest. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, this is not about the Bill.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seat.  
 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA: Congress failed to implement a robust identification 
system for immigrants. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया सीट पर बैठकर मत बोिलए, आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही 
है। …(Ëयवधान)… Let her speak.  
 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA : The absence of mechanisms like the National Register 
of Citizens (NRC) allowed illegal immigrants to blend into the population, obtain fake 
documents and enjoy Government bene fits meant for India citizens.  
...(Interruptions)... It also made easier for anti-n ational elements to hide within 
Indian society.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: जब आपका बोलने का अवसर आएगा, आप उस समय बोिलएगा। 
  
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA: As our hon. Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah, rightly said, 
India is not a Dharamshala. Our kindne ss must ne
ver be mistaken for weakness, 
and our sovereignty must never be compromi sed in the name of misplaced leniency.  
With this Bill, we reinforce our hon. Prime Mi nister Modi’s vision of Viksit Bharat – a 
strong, self-reliant and just India, an In dia that welcomes those who follow the law 
and stands resolute against those who violate it. Today, we take a step toward a 
future where justice prevails, security is not compromised and the spirit of our great 
nation remains unshaken.  
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
From 2018 to 2023, the Bo rder Security Force (BSF ) intercepted over 17,432 
Bangladeshis attempting illegal entry. But how many more slipped through 
undetected? How much longer will we allow this unchecked infiltration to threaten our 
national integrity? India, already facing  population pressures, cannot afford the 
burden of illegal migration. This strains ou r job market, infrastructure, and distorts 
electoral rolls.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Saket ji, please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)… आप 
बोिलये Ãलीज।   
 
SHRIMATI REKHA SHARMA: Indigenous communi ties in the North East fear losing 
their identity, sparking protests to defend their land and culture. …(Interruptions)…   
The 175
th Law Commission Report (2000) highlighted the need for stronger 
immigration laws, proposing tribunals and special courts for swift deportations.  
These recommendations formed the basis fo r the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 
2025, stressing the importance of controlle d immigration for national security and 
stability.   
Countries with open immigration polic ies often experience economic strain, 
social tensions, and security risks due to the unchecked influx of foreign nationals.  A 
prime example is the European migrant crisis of 2015, where nations like Germany and 
Sweden initially welcomed la rge numbers of refugees, on ly to later face rising 
unemployment, difficulties in integration, and an increase in crime rates.  The Bill is 
also in compliance with India’s obligations  under the General Agreement on Trade in 
Services (GATS), as it allows professi onals to enter through a merit-based and 
legally compliant process.  
Some of the key provisions of the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025 are:  
First is, stricter penalties for violations. The Bill proposes hefty fines and stricter 
enforcement mechanisms for violations of immigration laws. Then, clearer regulations 
for universities and medical institutions, revised visa and passport rules, more power 
to immigration officers and liability of carriers and transport operators like airlines and 
shipping agencies.   
  To those opposing this Bill for political  reasons, I say that this is not about 
politics; this is about patriotism. Immigratio n is not a party issue; it is a national 
imperative. Every delay weakens us. Every unchecked loophole is a risk to our 
sovereignty. Let us be clear, India will remain open to talent, to merit, and to those 
who contribute to our growth. But we will not be open to lawlessness. We will not be 
open to those who disregard our borders,  undermine our security, or exploit our 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
79

 
system. As Swami Vivekananda said: Arise , awake, and stop not till the goal is 
reached.  And today, our goal is very clear: a secure Bharat, a prosperous Bharat, a 
Bharat that leads the world.     
 [THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA) in the Chair.] 
 
Let us be bold. Let us be decisive. Le t us pass this Bill with an unwavering 
commitment to India’s future. To those, who say India must remain open, we say:  
Our hospitality must never come at the cost of our citizens’ rights. We will protect our 
borders, our people, and our future as our hon. Prime Minister, Narendra Modi ji is 
committed to make Bharat safe and secure.  I urge every Member of this House – 
stand for the nation, stand for security and stand for the people of India. Thank you 
for giving me this opportunity.   
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Thank you hon. Member.  
The next speaker is Ms. Sushmita Dev.  You have seven minutes. 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV (West Bengal) : Sir, I thank my party for this opportunity and 
also to the Chair. The Immigration and Fore igners Bill, 2025 is a consolidation of the 
laws that impact the passport, visas, foreig ners, etc.  But there is some confusion in 
the narrative of the Government, if I may say so. If it is a mere consolidation, then, 
they should not thump their chest about the paradigm shift that they claim they are 
bringing through this Bill. And, if they do feel it is a paradigm shift, िक यह देश धमर्शाला 
नहीं है, जो कहा जा रहा है, अगर आप उस पर िवÌवास रखते िक आप बहुत बड़ा और ठोस कदम 
उठा रहे हȅ, if it is a huge policy push, then, we have every
  reason, as Parliamentarians, 
to ask this Bill be sent for legislative scrutiny to Committee.   
 Sir, let me start by saying that this Bill is repealing four Acts which are the 
areas of law! It is illegal migration, citizenship, deportation, detention camp,  borders, 
de-voters,  Aadhaar  Card, all of which are Centra l subjects governed under various 
subordinate legislations under these four Ac ts. This was a Bill that should have gone 
to some committee for scrutiny, and to make it look like a consolidation exercise is a 
disservice to parliamentary democracy. I lodge a strong protest from All India 
Trinamool Congress here. सर, इनको जब भी मौका िमलता है, ये पिÌचमी बंगाल की बात 
करते हȅ िक पिÌचमी बंगाल का बॉडर्र porous है, पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ जमीन नहीं िमलती। इस देश 
मȂ अगर ऐसा कोई राज्य है, if there is any State in this  country  in which the issue of 
migration, the issue of citizenship, the issu e of foreigners
, the issue of pushback, the 
issue of international border is a burning is sue, it is Assam. And, let me say that 
Assam is a State with ‘double-engine’ sarkar. It is a double-engine sarkar . This 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Government came to power in the Center in 2014. The way they have played 
politically, िजस तरह से राजनीितकरण हुआ of immigration and of citizenship, Assam is a 
laboratory for their twisted ideology. Sir, on 31 st July, when the final list of NRC came 
up, the hon. Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah, over here, had told to this side of the 
House, the Opposition, िक आप लोगȗ को Assam Accord की आत्मा क े बारे मȂ नहीं मालूम।  
सर, अगर Assam Accord की धिज्जयाँ िकसी ने उड़ाई है, तो भारतीय जनता पाटीर् ने उड़ाई है। 
सर, जो माचर्, 1971 की cut-off date थी, इन्हȗने बदली, ये CAA लाए और िहन्दुओं को कहा िक 
हम आपको citizenship दȂगे। सर, CAA आने क े बाद आज तक barely 350 people have been 
given citizenship under the CAA.   …(Interruptions)…  When the entire nation was 
saying that CAA is unconstitutional, it violates the Right to Equality.  …(Interruptions)… 
Sir, now, I come to NRC. NRC मȂ जब पहला draft िलखा गया, at that point of
 
time, 40 lakh people were outside the NR C and the hon. Home Minister, Shri Amit 
Shah, said, हमने 40 लाख घुसपैिठयȗ को िनकाला। When the final list came out, this 
number of 40 lakhs came down to 19 lakhs.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Please.  
  
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: That is the one single reason that after spending Rs. 1,800 
crores of public funding, 6 साल बीत गए, NRC का क ु छ पता ही नहीं है। …(Interruptions)… 
Sir, the people ran from pillar to post, sold  their house, sold their vehicles to show 
papers under NRC in Assam. Today, they do  not know whether they are citizens of 
this country or not. Till today, the Registra r General of India has not notified the NRC 
after spending Rs. 1,800 crores .  And what have they done? ये  आधार काडर् की बात 
करते हȅ। The NRC that has not been notified on that pretext, for more than
 two years, 
this Government stopped the Aadhaar C a r d s  o f  2 6  l a k h  p e o p l e  i n  A s s a m .  
…(Interruptions)… They could not get jobs and they  could not apply for any of the 
Government benefits till the Supreme Court intervenes. …(Interruptions)… Last, but 
not the least, आप illegal migration की  बात करते हȅ। मȅ आज गृह मंतर्ी जी से पूछती हूँ, आप 
अपने जवाब मȂ बताइएगा िक 1997 से असम मȂ जो ‘D-voter’, ‘D-voter’ चल रहा है, तो यह ‘D-
voter’ क्या है, यह बताइएगा। मȅ यह भी कह दूँ िक in the Assembly, the Government o
f 
Assam has given a data that 1,19,570 people  have been declared D-voters. 54,411 is 
the number of people that have been declared foreigners. आप तैयार रिहए, जो national 
integrity की बात करते हȅ, जो internal security की  बात करते हȅ, only 26 have been 
deported since 2017. जब -जब आप लोग बंगाल का नाम लेते हȅ, मȅ इनको याद िदला दूँ िक 
आप ममता बनजीर् जी की िहÎटर्ी पढ़ कर आइए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... क्या आप लोग जानते हȅ िक 21 
ज
ुलाई, 1993, िजसे आज तक All India Trinamool Congress धरमतला मȂ celebrate करती  
रही है, उसका क्या इितहास है? वह पढ़ कर आइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... ममता दीदी ने voter list 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
81

 
क े िलए क्या आंदोलन िकया था, उसमȂ िकतने लोग शहीद हुए थे, वह पढ़ने क े बाद, हमारी नेता 
ममता दीदी क े बारे मȂ बोिलए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Please sit down.  
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Sir, this Government has not just …(Interruptions)… This 
Government has not just  the Bengali Hindus of Assa m, this Government has the 
indigenous people of Assam , …( Time-bell rings. )… the Assamese Hindus of 
Assam…(Time-bell rings. )… Sir, I just need one more minute, And I challenge the 
Home Minister िक आप NRC notify किरए और िफर उसके  बाद पािर्लयामȂट मȂ हमȂ भाषण 
दीिजए। Sir, they have consistently used the issue of citizenship. …(Interruptions)… 
They have consistently used the issue of NRC. …(Interruptions)… They have 
consistently used the issue of immigration, time and again, for polarisation and 
dividing the society. …(Interruptions)…  झारखंड की जनता ने आप लोगȗ को इसका मुंहतोड़ 
जवाब िदया। आप ' घुसपैिठए', 'घु सपैिठए' बोलते रहे और वहाँ मुँह की खा कर आए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA) : Kindly sum up.
 
…(Interruptions)… Kindly conclude, hon. Member. Yo ur time is up. Hon. Member, 
your time is up. Kindly conclude. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Do not divide the society. Do not polarise the society. 
…(Interruptions)… We all love our country and we all want our borders to be safe, but 
do not polarise the nation. Thank you, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Thank you, hon. Member. 
The next speaker is Shri N.R. Elango. You have twelve minutes.  
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO (Tamil Nadu): Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir. This Bill aims 
to consolidate four different enactments. While the Bill is welcomed for its efforts to 
modernize, streamline the existing laws, incl uding the introduction of universal visa 
system, it is important to note that it is  not addressing the issues of refugees and 
asylum seekers. Without safeguards at ent ry points to assess international protection 
needs, the Bill conflicts with the principles  of non-refoulement. The principle of non-
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
refoulement broadly protects individuals …(Interruptions)… Sir, the House is not in 
order. …(Interruptions)… 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Please.  
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO: The principle of non-refoulement broadly protects individuals 
from being removed from countries where they face risk of torture, inhuman treatment 
or threat to their lives or freedom. As a core norm of customary international law, 
non-refoulement is a binding obligation of a ll States. Sir, as far as the legal aspects 
are concerned, second proviso to sub-Clauses 1 and 2 of Clause 3 gives an unbridled 
power to the officers. It says that the decisi on of the immigration officer in this regard 
shall be final and binding. This unbridled and unguided power entrusted to an 
Executive Officer, which is not appealable, w ill, definitely, invite a lot of judicial 
proceedings which will, definitely, put the in tention of this Bill in question. When you 
are giving a right to appeal to the decision s made under Clauses 15 and 17, an appeal 
should be provided for the orders passe d under Clause 3 as well. Number two, 
Clause 3, sub-Clause 2 says that the Ce ntral Government by such grounds may by 
order pass orders against the foreigners. The word ‘such grounds’ is so broader and 
need to be narrowed down. The Executive shall not have such a broader discretion 
and these orders/grounds it says, ‘It has to be notified in  an order which will not pass 
through the consideration of this House.’ So, this power should be included under the 
rules, not in the orders.   
Then, Clause 16 speaks about burden of proof. Sir, it is known very well that 
we are following a custodial system of criminal jurisprudence. We are not following in 
custodial system. So, a foreigner, if he is alleged to have committed some violation of 
law, it is the burden of that foreigner to prov e that he is not violating law.  Sir, this is 
not agreeable to the Indian standards of ju risprudence, so it has to be definitely 
addressed. As pointed out by Dr. Singhv i, the foreigners are having certain 
Fundamental Rights under Article 14 and 21 and they are having basic human rights.  
These stringent Clauses shall not be there in this Bill. Sir, then, Clause 25 Sub-Clause 
5 says, ‘The person will be discharged if he  is compounding the o ffenses.’  But, the 
procedural law says, ‘If the charge is framed, then, thereafter compounding happens, 
it should amount to acquittal not to discharge.’  Sir, coming to the political aspect of 
the matter, especially Sri Lankan Tamil issu es, this Bill has totally forgotten about the 
Sri Lankan refugees. Following the outbreak, ethnical riots and internal conflicts in Sri 
Lanka in 1983, a total of 3,04,269 refugees  from Sri Lanka arrived in Tamil Nadu. 
During that period, responsibility of prov iding relief and rehabilitation measures to 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
83

 
those refugees was entrusted to the St ate Department. Over the decades, the 
Government of Tamil Nadu, with the support  of the Union Government, has extended 
comprehensive humanitarian support. As of March 1, 2025, there are 19,949 families, 
comprising 57,285 individuals, residing in 103 rehabilitation camps, spread across 29 
districts of Tamil Nadu. Now, these camps function under the norms laid down by 
both the Union and State Governments.  Wh ile the sustained effort reflects Tamil 
Nadu's strong humanitarian commitment, it is important to highlight that most of 
these refugees continue to remain Stateles s, without any legal status, citizenship or 
pathway to permanent settlement. Many of th em were born and rais ed entirely within 
India, speak Indian languages, have stud ied in Indian school s and are culturally 
indistinguishable from the local population. Ye t, they live in a legal vacuum, unable to 
own property, vote or access many of the rights available to citizens. The Bill, in its 
current form, does not distinguish betw een undocumented migrants and refugees 
who have arrived due to war, persecution an d ethnic conflict, such as the Sri Lankan 
Tamils. It centralizes the control with the Union Government, prescribes penal 
provisions for undocumented stay and lacks any provision for recognizing long-term 
refugee population or providing legal pathwa y for regularization of citizenship. India 
voted affirmatively to adopt Universal De claration of Human Rights, which affirms 
rights to all persons, citizens and non-citize ns alike. India voted affirmatively to adopt 
UN Declaration of Territorial Asylum in 1967 , ratified International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights, as well as Internat ional Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights. India ratified UN Convention  on the Rights of the Child in 1989. Now, 
in 1974, Article 1 imposes legal binding ob ligation.  India accepted the principles of 
non-refoulement as envisaged in Bangkok Pr inciples, which were formulated for the 
guidance of Member States in respect of ma tters concerning status and treatment for 
refugees.  Sir, now, when CIA was introduced, Shri Tiruchi Siva introduced an 
Amendment saying that Hindus from Pakist an, Afghanistan, etc., also to include 
Hindus from Sri Lanka. All these Sri Lankan  refugees, Sir, are Hindus. Why they were 
not added in CIA is not known. When he moved an Amendment, unfortunately, 
certain vested interests not supported that Amendment, so it was defeated. 
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
The Sri Lankan Tamils are also Hindus. Wh ile you are recognising Hindus from other 
countries and giving them citizenship, why are you excluding Hindus from Sri Lanka? 
Is it because they are Tamils, or, because they are Dravidians, or, because they are 
untouchables? This issue needs to be necessarily addressed by the Government. Sir, 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
while speaking in Lok Sabha, the hon. Home  Minister said that the DMK MPs, when 
they met him, did not raise this issue. Si r, I have to say this: From 2009, the DMK 
Members of Parliament have been raising this issue on every available platform. 
However, the Union Government is not listeni ng to us. Since 2014, a partisan attitude 
has been shown to us. Now, let me, for the purpose of argument, assume that we 
have not raised this issue with you. Is it not the Government's duty to look into the 
troubles of persons who are coming here , seeking asylum, and are refugees here, 
and to address their concerns? Sir, I want to quote Thiruvalluvar for one minute: & "A 
king should examine the conduct of his officers regularly. If the officers act honestly, 
the world also will act honestly." In othe r words, the country of the king, who does 
not examine every day the wrongs done, will  ruin every day. Th is Government needs 
to see what wrongs have been done by them every day and address them. Also, the 
hon. Home Minister said, वसुधैव क ु ट ुÇबकç, while speaking on this Bill. We Tamils 
proudly claim,  "Anywhere in the world is my hometown. And all human beings are 
my relatives." There is no differ ence between thes e two concepts. 
...(Interruptions)... Sir, do you want to reply to me? ...(Interruptions)... Thank you 
for your concern.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA) : Are you yielding? 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO: No, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED AB DULLA): Alright, please continue.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO: I request the Union Government to consider giving citizenship to 
the Sri Lankan Tamilian refugees. I also request that this Bill has necessarily be sent to 
a select committee because very, very wide  unbridled and unguided powers have 
been given to the Executive. Number two, as rightly pointe d out by Dr.  Singhvi, the 
person who decides this is a Head Constabl e. We are not undermining the status of 
Head Constables.  But, their understanding of law is questionable. A Head Constable 
can say to a foreigner that he has violated the law and that he can detain him. A Head 
Constable, in such a situation, can do anything he likes. Sir, this position will keep 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Tamil.  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
85

 
away foreigners from visiting India, ther eby slowing down the tourism industry. This 
needs to be considered by the Union Government.  
So, I request that this Bill be referred to a select committee. Alternatively, 
please amend Clause F, Sub-Clause 2, the de finition of a foreigner, to exclude Sri 
Lankan Tamil refugees. A Sri Lankan Tam il refugee should be excluded from the 
definition of a foreigner. Or, at the very least, I request the Union Government to notify 
through a Gazette Notification that this Act will not apply to Sri Lankan Tamil refugees, 
as per Clause 33.  
Sir, while we say that we are complying with all international conventions, we 
must also consider the plight of Sri Lankan Tamils and protect them. Thank you very 
much.                                 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Thank you, hon. Member. 
The next speaker is Shrimati Sulata Deo.  You have eight minutes, Madam.  
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO (Odisha): Thank you very much, Vice-Chairman Sir. First of 
all, I congratulate you on being selected to the panel of Vice-Chairmen. As you Chair 
this session, I am honoured to speak. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Thank you. 
 
SHRIMATI SULATA DEO: And, thanks to my Leader, Shri Naveen Patnaik िक मȅ उनकी 
तरफ से इस सदन को represent कर रही हूं। आज हम िजस िबल की आलोचना कर रहे हȅ, यह 
बहुत important है। देश की आंतिरक सुरक्षा, खाǏ सुरक्षा जैसी सभी सुरक्षा इससे जुड़ी हुई हȅ। 
यह देश क े िलए एक महत्वपूणर् मुǈा है। मȅ आज संसद मȂ यह बात कह रही हूं, और यह चचार् पÊली 
तक पहुंचेगी। हमȂ Îवीकार करना होगा िक illegal immigrants, जो घुसपैिठए हȅ,  वे हमारे देश को 
भीतर से खोखला कर रहे हȅ। I am sorry to say, क
Ȃ दर् सरकार illegal immigrants क े issue को 
ठीक से संभाल नहीं पा रही है। मेरे पूवर्वƪा बांग्लादेश क े संदभर् मȂ चचार् कर रहे थे - क्या 
बांग्लादेश इन घुसपैिठयȗ को धके ल रहा है? मȅ एक बात पूछना चाहती हूं िक जब हमारे Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी बांग्लादेश जाकर वहां क े Ģधान मंतर्ी से मुलाकात करते हȅ, तो क्या इस issue को solve 
करने क
े  िलए बातचीत नहीं हो सकती? 
जब भारत बांग्लादेश को डॉलर मȂ लोन देता है, तब क्या इस issue को solve नहीं िकया 
जा सकता? इस िवषय पर क Ȃ दर् सरकार को ÎपÍट जवाब देना चािहए। देश की सुरक्षा, हमारे बच्चȗ 
क े भिवÍय की सुरक्षा
 और खाǏ सुरक्षा जैसे मुǈे एक-दूसरे पर िनभर्र करते हȅ। 
टर्Çप सरकार ने अमेिरका मȂ जो कदम उठाए, वह हमȂ पसन्द नहीं आए और कोई भी इससे 
सहमत नहीं होगा। िफर भी मȅ यह कहना चाहूंगी िक जो टर्Çप ने करवाया, आजकल European 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
countries भी वही कर रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक जॉिर्जया एक ऐसा देश है, जहां illegal immigrant को एक 
िदन भी रहने नहीं िदया जाता, िफर हम भारत मȂ इसे रोकने मȂ िवफल क्यȗ हो रहे हȅ? 
संसद मȂ िकरण िरिजजू जी ने एक ĢÌन का उǄर देते हुए बताया था िक बांग्लादेश से 
लगभग दो करोड़ illegal immigrants भारत मȂ घुस चुक े हȅ। वे क ेवल ओिडशा ही नहीं, बिÊक सभी 
राज्यȗ मȂ फ ै ले हुए हȅ। क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने इनके  िखलाफ क्या कदम उठाए हȅ? यह क Ȃ दर्
 का िवषय है, 
लेिकन इसे राज्य सरकारȗ पर छोड़ा जा रहा है। 
यहां illegal घुसपैिठयȗ की बात कर रहे ह
ȅ। ये घुसपैिठये यहां िसफर् काम कर रहे हȅ और ये 
क ु छ Îटेट्स की population बढ़ा रहे हȅ, ऐसा नहीं है, बिÊक वे प ूरे भारत मȂ फ ै ल चुक े हȅ। 2016 मȂ 
इनकी संख्या दो करोड़ थी, लेिकन आज की वाÎतिवक िÎथित क्या है, इसका कोई सटीक 
आंकड़ा उपलÅध नहीं है, क्यȗिक इस सरकार मȂ संबंिधत statistics िवभाग िनिÍकर्य पड़ा है। 
सर, घुसपैिठयȗ की वजह से कई गÇभीर समÎयाएं उत्पन्न हो रही ह
ȅ। हमारे बच्चȗ का 
भिवÍय अंधकार मȂ जा रहा है। वे illegal immigrants पािकÎतान, बांग्लादेश, Çयांमार और अन्य 
पड़ोसी देशȗ से आ रहे हȅ, िजससे देश की सुरक्षा को खतरा बढ़ रहा है। इसमȂ सबसे गÇभीर िवषय 
drug peddlin
g का है, जो white poison होता है, उसकी तÎकरी करते हȅ। ये लोग डर्ग्स क े 
काटȃल को आगे बढ़ा रहे हȅ। यह इतना बड़ा नेटवकर् बन चुका है िक इसे िनयंितर्त करना किठन हो 
गया है। मȅन
े खुद देखा है िक जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी Ģवासी भारतीय सÇमेलन क े उǇाटन क े िलए 
ओिडशा आए थे, उसी दौरान drug cartel की वजह से एक पुिलस informer, सहदेव नायक, की 
िदनदहाड़े हत्या कर दी गई थी। उनके  िसर को धड़ से अलग कर िदया गया। 
ओिडशा क े मुख्य मंतर्ी नवीन पटनायक जी न
े राज्य मȂ एक Îपेशल टाÎक फोसर् (STF) 
बनाई थी, िजसका नेतृत्व एक सेवािनवृǄ डीजी कर रहे थे। उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ drug cartel पर  
िनगरानी रखी जाती थी, उनको क
ं टर्ोल मȂ रखा जाता था। जो डर्ग्स काटȃल को क ंटर्ोल करते थे, 
िनगरानी मȂ रखते थे।  यिद कहीं िकसी को भी पकड़ते थे, तो पहले उसका घर तोड़ते थे।  पहले 
उसका घर िमƺी मȂ िमलाते थे और उसको जेल मȂ डालते थे। मगर  जब यह नई सरकार आई, तो 
जो पहले Îटेट टैक्स फोसर् होती थी, उसको बंद कर िदया।  अब क्या करȂगे? इसिलए मȅ एक बात 
और बोलना चाहती हूं। आप देिखए जो डर्ग्स काटȃल होते हȅ, जैसेिक कोलंिबया मȂ देिखए िक 
कोलंिबया मȂ क्या हालत है? एÎकोबार ने कोलंिबया पािर्लयामȂट क े ऊपर भी अटैक िकया।  उनकी 
मानिसकता ऐसी होती है। जो डर्ग्स पैडलर होते हȅ, वे िकसी की नहीं सुनते हȅ। वे जब क ु छ कर्ाइम 
करने क े िलए तैयार होते हȅ, तो व
े लोगȗ को मार भी देते हȅ। इससे हम लोग अपने बच्चȗ को क ै से 
बचाएं, इसिलए हम बोल रहे हȅ िक जो घुसपैिठए हȅ, उन पर ध्यान रखना चािहए िक कौन-कौन 
आ रहा है, क ै से आ रहा ह
ै और िकस राÎते से आ रहा है? मȅ एक बात संसद को भी बोलूंगी िक हमȂ 
बीसीसीआई क े चेयरमैन जय शाह से भी क ु छ सीखना चािहए। बीसीसीआई मȂ जब िखलािड़यȗ की 
ऑक्शन करते हȅ, तो जय शाह उस ऑक्शन मȂ बांग्लादेश और पािकÎतान को नहीं ले रहे हȅ। इनसे 
हमȂ यह सीखना चािहए िक अगर ये बांग्लादेश को और पािकÎतान को ऑक्शन मȂ नहीं ल े रहे हȅ, 
तो िफर हम लोग क ै से देख नहीं पा रहे हȅ, िनगरानी नहीं कर पा रहे हȅ िक क ै से घुसपैिठए अंदर आ 
रहे हȅ। इसको देखना चािहए, क्यȗिक िखलािड़यȗ क े पास पासपोटर् होता है, वीजा  होता ह ै, तो यह 
सब होने क े बाद भी हम लोग नहीं बुला रहे हȅ। यह सही बात है।  मगर जब घुसपैिठए की बात आती 
है, तो िफर क्या होता है? जैसा मȅने कहा िक जो इलीगल इिमगर्Ȃट्स होते हȅ, ये सब जगहȗ पर होते 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
87

 
हȅ। ऐसा नहीं है िक सरकार को मालूम नहीं है िक ये घुसपैिठए क ै से आते हȅ, कहां से आते हȅ, क्या 
करते हȅ, मगर सरकार आंख होते हुए भी सोने की  एिंक्टग करेगी, तो क्या होगा? क ु छ नहीं हो 
सकता है। अभी सरकार नया एक्ट ला रही है।  एक्ट लाने से क्या होगा? आप िकतने भी एक्ट 
लाए, अगर काम करने की मानिसकता न हो, तो िफर ĢॉÅलम हो जाती है। इसिलए मȅ एक और 
बात बोलूंगी  …( समय की घंट
ी)… सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ कन्क्लूड कर रही हूं। सरकार इÊलीगली 
इिमगर्Ȃट्स क े बारे मȂ कह रही है। आपके  हाथ मȂ छ ुरी है, आपके  हाथ मȂ तरबूज है, िफर िकसको 
द
ेख रहे हȅ। छ ुरी है, तरबूज है, कािटए, खाइए। आप कािटए, खाइए और िखलाइए, लेिकन आप 
तरबूज हाथ मȂ पकड़ कर रखा है और तरबूज कहां है, तरबूज कहां है, देख रहे हȅ। ऐसा करने से 
नहीं चलेगा। आपको देखना पड़ेगा िक क्या हो रहा है और िकसको रोकना  चािहए? मȅ एक बात 
कहकर अपनी बात कन्क्लूड करती हूं
। मेरा एक सजेशन है िक जैसे अमरीका मȂ डर्ग्स एन्फोसर्मȂट 
एजȂसी (DEA) है, वैसे ही हम लोग जो एक्ट ला रहे हȅ, इसके  िलए एक Ģावधान होना चािहए … 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Madam, please conclude.  
 
Ǜीमती सुलता द
ेव: यह एन्फोसर्मȂट ऐसी हो, जो सबके  िलए काम करे, और सारे होम और फॉरेन 
अफे यसर् को लेकर काम करे। मȅ चाहती हूं िक एक बार scrutinize करन े क े िलए इसको िसलेक्ट 
कमेटी को  भेजा जाए, धन्यवाद। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA) : Thank you. Now the next 
speaker is, Dr. M. Thambidurai. You have four minutes.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil
 Nadu): Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, for giving 
me this opportunity. First of all, I want to say, regarding immigration, Countries are 
obliged to open their border s to refugees escaping death in a neighbouring country. 
Sir, this is one of the impo rtant things which we have to consider. We have to look 
into it.  
Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, on behalf of AIADMK Party and also on behalf of our 
leader, Shri Edappadi Palaniswami, I rise to participate in th e discussion on the 
Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025. As the hon. Member from DMK spoke, I also 
join him in supporting that. The Immigratio n and Foreigners Bill aims to strengthen 
immigration regulations. I would like to high light the plight of the Sri Lankan Tamils. I 
want to add that point while supporting this. I wish to bring it to the attention of the 
hon. Home Minister. At the time of Sr i Lankan Independence in 1948, ‘Tamils’ 
comprised minority with nearly 20 per cen t of the population of Sri Lanka. But 
because of the Civil War that took place be tween majority ‘Sinhalese’ and minority 
‘Tamils’, as one hon. Member said, nearly 3 lakh people migrated to India. 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Sir, as I told in the beginning itself, when there is some problem in some 
countries and they are facing death, they come to other country  and that country has 
to open the door and allow them to stay. That is one stage. The Parliament passed 
the Citizenship Amendment Act in 2019. It provided Indian citizenship to persecuted 
religious minorities, that is, Hindus, Sikhs,  Buddhists, Jains, Parsis, and Christians 
from Bangladesh, Afghanistan and Pakistan, who entered the country before 31st 
December, 2024. Unfortunately, this Act excluded Sri Lankan Tamils.  But our DMK 
Member said, Sri Lankan Tamils are Hindus . How can you say this?  Christians are 
also there; Muslims also come over from there. They are staying here.  Why is the 
DMK Party adopting double standard? When you are saying that Sri Lankan Tamils 
must be given the citizenship, what about others? There must be equality. Therefore, 
our DMK Party is concerned. We are for Sr i Lankan Tamils who have suffered. They 
have come over here. Muslims must be in cluded because they have suffered and 
have been staying here. Immigrants mean re fugees. When they have come over here 
and have been living for long time, they ha ve to accept the cult ure of this country. 
That is more important. It is the duty of the Government to give them citizenship. In 
that respect, I am requesting the hon. Ho me Minister and the present Government to 
solve the Sri Lankan problems. First of all, you see that for nearly 60 years they have 
been staying here. They are suffering a lot. They do not have their citizenship in Sri 
Lankan. Here also, they do not have it. How can human beings live like that without 
any citizenship? Therefore, it is the bounden duty of Indi a to protect the Sri Lankan 
Tamils and give them citizenship. This is my request.  …(Time-bell rings.) … And also, 
to solve the Sri Lankan problem, Modiji has made some effort.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAME D ABDULLA): Please conclude. Your 
time is up.  
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI: I think, recently, Shri S. Jaisan kar also went to Sri Lanka and 
came back. He also promised to give equal rights to the Tamil people. He also 
insisted that kind of federalism. Therefor e, I am, once again, requesting the Home 
Ministry and India to give them equal ri ghts and solve the Sr i Lankan problem. 
…(Time-bell rings. ) … Tamil Nadu fishermen are also  suffering because of these 
issues. Therefore, refugees who have come  as immigrants to India, including Sri 
Lankan Tamils, must be given citizenship. That is my request. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA) : The next speaker is Shri 
Vaiko.  You have three minutes.  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
89

 
 
SHRI VAIKO (Tamil Nadu) : Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, thank you for giving me an 
opportunity to speak on this important Bill. This legislation is attempting to replace 
four earlier Acts relating to immigration,  but it has been loaded with overriding 
powers. If you see Clause (3) of the Bill, it  gives unbridled powers to the Immigration 
Officer. In that, some kind of equilibrium should be maintained because, if it goes 
one-sided or lop-sided, it may affect bilateral ties with foreign countries. The 
Immigration Officer has the authority and an officer of Head Constable level has also 
been given the power to search and ex amine documents and conduct raid. This 
Clause needs to be revisited or review should be taken. This Bill empowers the 
Immigration Officers to arrest individuals wi thout a warrant, if suspected, of violating 
immigration laws. This provision raises si gnificant concerns about potential misuse, 
arbitrary detentions and infringements on individual freedoms. At the international 
stage, we are seeing how our citizens are be ing deported back to India from the U.S. 
in handcuffs, in chains, without human treatment or dignity.     
            Since Janua ry 2025, 636 Indian nationals ha ve been deported from USA to 
India.  But, ill-treatment was meted out to the deportees by handcuffing them. The 
Sikh deportees were even asked to remove  their turbans. Women and children were 
also not spared while deporting from USA to India. During transit, for taking food and 
other necessities, like going to toilets, the deportees had to face untold misery.  They 
were treated inhumanely violating the Inte rnational Convention for deporting illegal 
immigrants from one country to another.  
 In the first week of February 2025, when the Indian Prime Minister, Mr. 
Narendra Modi, was doing handshake with the U.S. President, Mr. Donald Trump, 
our Indian national deportees’ hands were  in shackles, and there was not even a 
word of condemnation uttered by Mr. Modi ei ther during the U.S. visit or after that.  
We strongly condemn this sort of attitude  by the Union Government, when our Indian 
nationals were treated so inhumanely, agai nst all basic norms of natural justice and 
international conventions.  
 When the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) was enacted, we insisted that 
a provision should be made for conferring citizenship to immigrants from Sri Lanka 
who are people of Indian origin. The presen t Bill also does not address the regulation 
of Tamil refugees in India, who had come from Eelam, Sri Lanka, during the ethnic 
civil war. There are about 90,000 Sri Lankan Tamil refugees who are put up in 
Mandapam and other refugee camps, rehabilitation camps and are languishing for 
more than 40 years. There is a dire n eed to have compassionate and practical 
approach for grant of Long Term Visa (LTV ) to them because it is established that 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
they meet all the criteria laid down for LTV, as they had fled due to violence and ethnic 
persecution in their country, arrived without passports and were treated as refugees 
in India. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA): Please conclude.  
 
SHRI VAIKO: Sir, I will take only one minute. They should not be  branded as illegal 
immigrants. Hence, the MHA order issued on 23
rd September, 1986, should be 
reviewed and rescinded. Before I conclude, I would urge upon the hon. Home 
Minister that they may be allowed to apply for the Indian citizenship or the LTV status, 
based on the provisions of the Citizenship Act to resolve their cu rrent challenges, as 
they are languishing in the camps and outside for more than 40 years.                                                  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA) : The next speaker is Shri 
Ram Chander Jangra.   You have fifteen minutes.  
 
Ǜी रामचंदर् जांगड़ा (हिरयाणा): मान्यवर, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे आज भारत क े 
आĨजन कानूनȗ क े आधुिनकीकरण क े ऊपर इिमगर्ेशन एंड फॉरेनसर् िबल, 2025 पर बोलने का 
मौका िदया है। सबसे पहले यह बात आती है िक आज इस िबल की जरूरत  क्यȗ है। भारत दुिनया 
की उभरती हुई अथर्ËयवÎथा है। 2047 मȂ भारत क े माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी
 जी ने भारत को 
िवÌव क े Ģमुख राÍटर् क े रूप  मȂ िवकिसत करने का संकÊप िलया है। ऐसी हालत मȂ भारत की तरफ 
प
ूरी दुिनया का आकषर्ण बढ़ा है, लेिकन पुराने आĨजन कानूनȗ क े तहत देश की सीमाओं की रक्षा 
करने मȂ, देश मȂ घुसपैठ को रोकने मȂ काफी बाधाएं आती थीं, इसीिलए देश  की सुरक्षा से कोई 
समझौता नहीं िकया जा सकता था।   
 मान्यवर, यह जो िवधेयक है, इसमȂ Ģमुख रूप  से भारत मȂ Ģवेश, Ģवास क े िलए वैध यातर्ा 
दÎतावेजȗ, वैध वीजा की अिनवायर् आवÌयकता, Ģवेश से इंकार, भारत मȂ लाए गए याितर्यȗ क े 
िलए वाहकȗ पर देयता आिद Ģयुƪ द
ेशȗ ǎारा अपनाई गई आĨजन और वीजा नीितयȗ का एक 
िहÎसा है। मȅ इस संबंध मȂ क ु छ अन्य देशȗ का भी उÊलेख करना चाहूंगा, जैसे बेिÊजयम, डेनमाकर्, 
इटली, नीदरलȅड, यूक े, कनाडा आिद मȂ Ģवेश से वंिचत िकए लोगȗ क े िलए अपील त
ंतर् है। वहीं 
क ु छ अन्य देशȗ मȂ जैसे जमर्नी, अमेिरका आिद मȂ ऐसा कोई अपील तंतर् नहीं है।  मान्यवर, 
उÊलेखनीय है िक दुिनया भर मȂ िविभन्न देश अपनी अĢवास वीजा नीितयȗ को त
ैयार करते समय 
राÍटर्ीय िहतȗ को, िवशेषकर उसकी सुरक्षा को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए िनयमȗ का िनधार्रण करते हȅ। 
मान्यवर, लोगȗ क े बीच मȂ पारÎपिरक संबंध बढ़ाने, Ëयावसाियक संबंध बनाने, भारत को 
िचिकत्सा, शैक्षिणक, िविनमार्ण गितिविधयȗ का क Ȃ दर् बनाने और सरकार क े Ģमुख कायर्कर्मȗ क े 
अनुरूप  िविभन्न गितिविधयȗ को बढ़ावा देन
े हेतु सही उǈेÌयȗ क े िलए िवदेिशयȗ की भारत यातर्ा को 
Ģोत्सािहत करने की आवÌयकता है, लेिकन राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा क े िहतȗ को भी ध्यान मȂ रखना 
आवÌयक है। भारत की वीजा और आĨजन नीितयȗ ǎारा उपयुƪ और सही मानदंड क े ऊपर देश
 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
91

 
की सुरक्षा हो सके , उसके  िलए भी इसे बनाना आवÌयक था। इसिलए सरकार ने 2025 क े इस 
िवधेयक का Ģावधान िकया है।   
 मान्यवर, भारत ने बड़े पैमाने पर ई-वीजा जारी करने की Ģिकर्या शुरू  की है।  यह सुिवधा 
पयर्टन, Ëयापार, सÇमेलन, िचिकत्सा और अध्ययन क े उǈेÌयȗ क े िलए 169 देशȗ क े नागिरकȗ क े 
िलए उपलÅध है। इस संदभर् मȂ आवÌयक है िक आĢवास अिध
कारी को िवदेिशयȗ क े दÎतावेज की 
जाँच करने और उन लोगȗ को Ģवेश से वंिचत करने का अिधका र िदया जाए। अगर राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा, 
भारत की संĢभुता और अखंडता, िकसी िवदेशी राज्य या सावर्जिनक ÎवाÎथ्य आिद क े िलए कोई 
खतरा है, तो इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से हमारे आĢवास अिधकारी को यह अिधकार देने का भी 
Ģावधान िकया गया है।   
 मान्यवर, म
ȅ इस संबंध मȂ Ģमुख रूप  से ज्यादा देशȗ की नहीं, लेिकन अमेिरका की वीजा 
Ģणाली का उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा। संयुƪ राज्य अमेिरका ने लंबे समय से अपने वािणिज्यक 
दूतावास संचालन मȂ एक Îवचािलत लुकआउट Ģणाली का उपयोग िकया है, ता
िक बिहÍकृ त 
Ëयिƪयȗ की पहचान की जा सके । जब कोई आवेदक वीजा क े िलए अनुरोध करता है, तो वािणज्य 
दूतावास अिधकारी को िवभाग क े Îवचािलत क ंÃयूटर क े जिरए वािणज्य दूतावास लुकआउट और 
सहायता Ģणाली क
े  िवरुǉ आवेदक क े नाम की जाँच करनी होती है।  िवशेष रूप  से वािणज्य 
दूतावास अिधकारी ज्ञात अपरािधयȗ और आतंकवािदयȗ की भी तलाश मȂ रहते हȅ।  इसिलए उन्हȗने 
बहुत ही उन्नत Ģणाली, अपने देश की वीजा Ģणाली को िवकिसत िक या है।  1996 मȂ अमेिरकी 
कांगर्ेस ने एक त्विरत बिहÍकृ त Ģणाली भी शुरू  की थी, जो िनरीक्षकȗ को उन सभी िवदेिशयȗ को 
बिहÍकृ त करने का आदेश जारी करने की अनुमित देती है, जो िबना िकसी दÎतावेज, नकली या 
धोखाधड़ी से ĢाÃत अवैध दÎतावेजȗ क े साथ Ģवेश
 करते हȅ। यिद उन्हȂ इन Ģावधानȗ क े अंतगर्त 
बिहÍकृ त िकया जाता है, तो िवदेशी नागिरक 5 वषș तक संयुƪ राज्य अमेिरका मȂ पुन: Ģवेश  नहीं 
कर पाएगा। उनके  वीजा क े िनयमȗ क े अंदर इस िकÎम का भी Ģावधान है।   
 मान्यवर, क ु छ ऐसे िनयमȗ मȂ ढील क े कारण हमारे देश मȂ घुसपैठ की जो समÎया बढ़ी, मȅ 
उसमȂ िवशेष तौर पर रोिंहग्याओं का उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा। Çयांमार से अÊपसंख्यक समुदाय, 
रोिंहग्या का भारत मȂ अवैध Ģवास लगभग 25 
साल पहले शुरू  हुआ था। 2016-17 क े दौरान 
Çयांमार मȂ रोिंहग्याओं क े िखलाफ िंहसा क े बाद यह अनुमान लगाया गया िक लगभग 40 हजार  
रोिंहग्या भारत मȂ Ģवेश कर चुक े हȅ। रोिंहग्या आबादी का अिधकांश िहÎसा तेल
ंगाना, जÇमू-
कÌमीर, िदÊली, हिरयाणा, पंजाब, उǄर Ģदेश, राजÎथान आिद राज्यȗ मȂ रहता है। अवैध 
Ģवािसयȗ का पता लगाना, उनकी राÍटर्ीयता क े सत्यापन क े बाद उन्हȂ िनवार्िसत करना एक सतत 
Ģिकर्या ह
ै। लेिकन अगर कानूनȗ मȂ ऐसे Ģावधान हȅ, जो कमजोर हȅ, तो उनके  कारण कई बार 
उनका िनवार्सन नहीं हो पाता।  इसिलए इस िवधेयक क े अंदर क ु छ िवशेष Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ।   
 मान्यवर, इस स
ंबंध मȂ मȅ मिणपुर और िमजोरम का भी उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा।  मिणपुर मȂ 
भी अवैध Ģवास एक गंभीर समÎया क े रूप  मȂ उभरा है। इससे जातीय तनाव तो बढ़ता ही है, 
संसाधनȗ पर भी दबाव बढ़ता है। Çयांमार क े साथ राज्य की 398 िकलोमीटर  लंबी सीमा पर 
अिनयंितर्
त घुसपैठ होती है।  खास तौर पर िचन-क ुकी समुदाय क े लोग, जो 2021 क े Çयांमार 
तख्तापलट जैसी अशांित से भाग रहे हȅ, अनुमान है िक 2023 क े मध्य तक 40 हजार  से ज्यादा 
Çयांमार क े नागिरक मिणपुर और िमजोरम मȂ Ģवेश कर चुक े हȅ, िजनमȂ से अके ले मिणपुर म
Ȃ 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
लगभग 5,801 अवैध Ģवासी हȅ। इस घुसपैठ से जनसंख्या संतुलन को तो खतरा होता ही है, इससे 
देश की सुरक्षा को भी खतरा होता है। इसिलए मान्यवर, सरकार िनवार्सन क े िलए सख्त िनयम 
और िनयंतर्ण की वकालत करती है। इसीिलए इस िवधेयक क े अंदर क ु छ िवशेष Ģावधान िकए गए 
हȅ।  
मȅ इस संबंध मȂ िमजोरम का भी उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा।  मान्यवर, िमजोरम अवैध Ģवासन 
की महत्वपूणर् चुनौितयȗ का सामना करता ह
ै, जो Çयांमार क े साथ इसकी 510 िकलोमीटर की 
िछदर्पूणर् सीमा और बांग्लादेश से िनकटता क े कारण है। वषर् 2021 मȂ Çयांमार मȂ तख्तापल
ट क े बाद 
से 34,000 से ज्यादा Çयांमार क े नागिरक, िजनमȂ से अिधकांश िचन-क ुकी जनजाितयȗ क े हȅ, 
उन्हȗने संघषर् से भागकर बांग्लादेश क े चटगांव िहल टर्ैक से आकर िमजोरम मȂ शरण ली।  मुƪ 
आवागमन ËयवÎथा और िमजो क े साथ जातीय संबंधȗ ǎारा सुगम बनाए गए इस Ģवाह ने 
जनसांिख्यकीय बदलाव, संसाधन तनाव और सुरक्षा को लेकर िंचता एं पैदा की हȅ। इसिलए इससे 
और भी कई समÎयाएँ आई हȅ। इससे जुड़ी हुई नशीली दवाओं और हिथयारȗ की तÎकरी क े भी 
क ु छ मामले उजागर हुए हȅ। इसके  साथ ही भाड़े क े िवदेशी सैिनकȗ ǎारा Çयांमार मȂ पारागमन क े  
माध्यम रूप  मȂ िमजोरम का उपयोग करने की आशंकाओं को भी उजागर िकया गया है। इसिलए 
मान्यवर, हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी क े दूरदशीर् नेतृत्व मȂ, मोदी सरकार ने इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से 
िवशेष Ģावधान िकए हȅ। 1946 का जो िवदेशी अिधिनयम था और 1920 का जो पासपोटर् अिधिनयम 
था, इनमȂ कांगर्ेस क े शासन मȂ क
ु छ Îवतंतर् बातȂ छोड़ दी गई थीं, िजनके  कारण गैरकानूनी Ģवासी 
यहां देश क े अंदर आते रहे और उनको रोकने क े िलए कोई िवशेष कदम नहीं उठाए गए।  
इसीिलए हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर्
 मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ, गृह मंतर्ी अिमत शाह जी की दृढ़ 
Ģितबǉता क े अंतगर्त सरकार ने इन पुराने कानूनȗ को सशƪ और आधुिनक कानूनी ढांचा देने क े 
िलए य
े िवशेष Ģावधान िकए हȅ। 
मान्यवर, जैसा सबको पता है िक 2014 क े बाद से देश मȂ 1,500 ऐसे कानून, िजनकी देश 
मȂ कोई आवÌयकता नहीं थी, उनको िनरÎत िकया गया है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम स े सदन को यह भी 
जानकारी दे दूँ िक आजादी क े बाद 64 वषș मȂ क ेवल 1,301 कानून िनरÎत िकए गए थे, जो अंगर्ेजȗ 
क े काल क े थे और िजनकी देश मȂ कोई आवÌयकता नहीं थी। लेिकन 2014 क े बाद, Ģधान मंतर्ी 
नरेन्दर्
 मोदी जी क े दूरदशीर् नेतृत्व मȂ, हमारी सरकार ने, एनडीए सरकार ने 1,500 से अिधक 
अĢासंिगक कानूनȗ को िनरÎत िकया, िजससे देश की सुरक्षा मȂ एक बहुत बड़ा इजाफा हुआ है। 
मान्यवर, इसमȂ भारत सरकार ǎारा भारत क े सुरक्षा क े िलए जो कदम उठाए गए हȅ, 
उनका भी क ु छ उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा।  सीमाओं की स
ुरक्षा क े िलए, कांगर्ेस शासन क े दौरान 
भारत और बांग्लादेश सीमा पर 17 महीनȗ मȂ क ेवल 21 िकलोमीटर  की बाड़बंदी पूरी हुई थी और 
1999 मȂ Îवीकृ त भारत-चीन सीमा सड़क, आईसीबीआर पिरयोजना वषș तक अटकी रही, जबिक 
इसके  िवपरीत मोदी सरकार न
े मजबूत सीमा िनयंतर्ण को Ģाथिमकता दी और पूरे 1,643 
िकलोमीटर लंबे भारत-Çयांमार सीमा क्षेतर् की बाड़बंदी क
े  िलए जो 3,000 करोड़  रुपए  की 
पिरयोजना अभी चल रही है, वह देश की सुरक्षा क े िलए बहुत बड़ा कदम उठाया गया है।  इसमȂ 
मिणपुर क े मोरेह मȂ 10 िकलोमीटर की बाड़बंदी पूरी हो चुकी है और 20 िकलोमीटर की अितिरƪ 
बाड़बंदी को मंजूरी भी िमल चुकी है। पािकÎतान और बांग्लादेश की संवेदनशील सीमाओं पर 
नवीनतम ĢौǏोिगकी से युƪ समगर् एकीकृ त सीमा Ģबंधन Ģणाली भी लागू की गई है। 2018 से 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
93

 
2023 क े बीच भारत-चीन सीमा पर 2,088 िकलोमीटर से अिधक सड़कȗ का िनमार्ण िकया गया 
और इस िनमार्ण क े िलए सरकार ǎारा 15,470 करोड़ रुपय े आबंिटत िकए गए।  आज जैसे ही देश 
की सीमा क े ऊपर कोई घटना होती है, तो भारत क े हर बॉडर्र तक माननीय Ģधान म ंतर्ी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ, उनकी दूरदिर्शतापूणर् सोच क े कारण हमारी सरकार ǎारा ऐसी 4-लेन शानदार सड़कȂ 
सैिनकȗ क े िलए बना दी गई हȅ, िजनसे देश की सुरक्षा को कहीं भी अगर कोई खतरा होता है, तो 
एक िमनट मȂ वहां पर सेना पहुंच जाती है।  इसिलए इस एक्ट मȂ जो Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ, उन्हीं क े 
अंदर मȅ यह उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा िक कांगर्ेस की जो सुिनयोिजत जनसंख्या नीित थी, िजसके  
कारण एक वोट बȅक को बढ़ावा देने क े िलए ये अवैध घुसपैठ को इजाफा
 देते थे और उसको 
Îवतंतर्ता देते थे, उन चीजȗ क े ऊपर बहुत बड़ी रोक लगाई गई है, क्यȗिक यही िवधेयक 
नागिरकता सािबत करने क े दाियत्व को भी fix करता है।  
सर, जनसंख्या
 मȂ जो फकर् आया है, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ बताना चाहता हूँ और मȅ िवशेष तौर 
पर असम का उÊलेख करना चाहूँगा। भारत मȂ Ģवासी कानूनȗ मȂ जो ढील रही, उसके  कारण 1951 
मȂ असम म
Ȃ मुिÎलम जनसंख्या जहाँ 24.68 Ģितशत थी, वह 2011 मȂ बढ़ कर 34.22 Ģितशत हो 
गई। चार मुिÎलम बहुल िजले बन गए और लाखȗ संिदग्ध अवैध Ģवािसयȗ क े बावजूद IMDT क े 
तहत 20 वषș मȂ क ेवल 1,517 लोगȗ को िनवार्िसत िकया जा सका है। कांगर् ेस ने जो 'अली-क ुली-
बंगाली' का एक नारा लगाया था, उसके  कारण आिदवासी चाय बागान मजदूरȗ और बंगािलयȗ को 
संगिठत कर असम की 126 िवधान सभा सीटȗ मȂ से 90 िवधान  सभा सीटȗ पर ऐसी पिरिÎथितयाँ 
पैदा कर दी गईं। वहाँ पर एक िवशेष वगर् का बहुमत बनाने क े िलए एक षǹ ंतर्पूण
र् योजना से काम 
िकया गया। इसके  बाद एनआरसी लागू हुआ और Ģवतर्न एजȂिसयȗ को सशƪ बनाया गया, िवदेशी 
नागिरक कानून संशोधन िवधेयक आया और आवजर्न अिधकािरयȗ को जो िबना वारंट िगरÄतार 
करने की शि
ƪ Ģदान की गई, उसके  बाद से 2014 से अब तक सीमा सुरक्षा बल ǎारा अवैध 
घुसपैठ की घटनाओं मȂ जो भारी वृिǉ दजर् की गई थी, उसमȂ 2018-23 क े बीच 17,432 बंगाली 
घ
ुसपैिठयȗ को रोक िदया गया। पहले इस जिटल कानूनी Ģिकर्या क े तहत वे गायब हो जाते थे और 
िफर पता ही नहीं चलता था िक वे कहाँ गए। कांगर्ेसनीत यूपीए सरकार ने वोट बȅक की राजनीित 
क े िलए Ģवतर्न एजȂिसयȗ को कमजोर िकया, वहीं मोदी सरकार न
े उन्हȂ राजनीितक हÎतक्षेप से 
मुƪ करते हुए सीमा सुरक्षा सुिनिÌचत करने क े िलए कानूनȗ को सशƪ बनाया है और आĢवासन 
बुिनयादी ढांचे का आधुिनकीकरण िकया ह ै। मोदी सरकार ने भारत क े आĢवासन बुिनयादी ढांचे मȂ 
कर्ांितकारी Ģवतर्न िकया है, िजसके  तहत 2014 मȂ जो 77 पासपोटर् सेवा क Ȃ दर् थे, वे आज बढ़ कर 
500 से अिधक हो गए हȅ और पासवडर् जारी करने की Ģिकर्या को भी 45 िदनȗ स े घटा कर 5 िदनȗ 
मȂ पूरा करने की Ģिकर्या कर दी गई।...(समय की घंटी)... सर, मȅ एक िमनट मȂ समअप कर देता 
हूँ।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से कहना चाहता हूँ िक यह िवधेयक पासपोटर् और वीजा सेवाओं को 
अंतरार्Íटर्ीय मानकȗ क े अनुरूप  बनाता है, ज
ैसा हाल ही मȂ अमेिरका ǎारा भारतीय आवेदकȗ क े 
िलए वीजा ĢसंÎकरण मȂ तेजी लाने क े Ģयासȗ से ÎपÍट है।  यह िवधायक 'आĢवासन वीजा िवदेशी 
नागिरक पंजीकरण अिधिनयम' क े तह त देश की सुरक्षा को सुदृढ़ और सशƪ बनाता है।  आपका 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA) : The next speaker is  Shri 
Ritabrata Banerjee.   He will speak in his mother tongue – Bengali. 
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE (West Bengal) : & Sir, speaking on behalf of the All 
Indian Trinamool Congress on the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025, the first that I 
would like to state is that this Bill requires elaborate parliamentary deliberations and 
without such detailed deliberations, it would not be prudent for the Bill to be passed. 
Sir, in the Immigration and Foreigners B ill that is being deliberated upon today, 
we can see a trend of excessive centralisation of power and the purpose behind this is 
to single out critics of all so rts. We believe that this Bill could be misused fortargeting 
critics. Also, the question of violation of international human rights also arises here. 
There is also a need for discussion as to  how this Bill would determine the subtle 
difference between an intruder  and a refugee who is seekin g refuge fearing for his life 
and for whom returning back possess a signif icant threat to his life. Questions have 
also arisen as to how this Bill would harm onize with the provisions contained in the 
Refugee Convention of the United Nations as it concerns the rights of those refugees, 
who faces the threats of being attacked upon, whose lives would be at risk if they are 
forced to return back. Further concerns ha ve arisen as we have seen in the last 
couple of years multiple incidents of can cellations of visas. Whose visas are being 
cancelled? Of those who are criticising the Government. Visas are being cancelled for 
OCI card holders. The visas and OCI cards ha ve been turned into  a political weapon 
against the critics. These are not being cancelled on some legal grounds. These are 
being cancelled owing to the Government’s apathy to any kind of criticism. The critics 
would not be allowed to enter. It can also be seen that different foreign journalists 
who otherwise have problems with the Cent ral Government, their visas too are being 
cancelled. Now, I would like to ask the Go vernment through you that supposing in 
Bangladesh, a student studying in the Dhaka university while sitting at the Madhur’s 
canteen decides that he wants to come to India to do his research on the 
‘Kanyashree’ scheme introduced by Ms. Ma mata Banerjee, while the United Nations 
too has recognised this scheme and has te rmed it as a model for the world. Mrs. 
Sagarika Ghosh, the Deputy Leader of ou r party in the Rajya Sabha who is sitting 
here, many got irked as soon as she mentioned the name of Pandit Nehru yesterday. 
  
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) in the Chair.] 
 
                                                            
& English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali.  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
95

 
 Now, I would like to state that there is a famous picture where Pandit Nehru could be 
seen sitting at the feet of Gurudev Rabindra nath Tagore. Now, I want to state that I 
am a son of a refugee family. I am a third ge neration refugee. I am the proud son of a 
refugee family. I am a third generation refu gee. I consider my refugee ancestors as 
one of the greatest badges of my honour. To  give uniformity to the jurisdiction across 
the States, you cannot straight-jacket this country. This transnational migration, 
people have been forced to migrate. The year 1947 witnessed that largest migration in 
the world. If someone wants to come to do research on the matter, a question is 
coming up as to whether that person woul d be granted a student visa. What is more 
important is that, suppose, like I was saying that Pandit Nehru, the reason for which 
the issue of Pandit Nehru came up, I would like to say in this regard, especially we are 
witnessing that this Bill which the Go vernment wants to pass bypassing any 
parliamentary deliberations. We have seen that it is being discussed inside the 
parliament that 24 parganas districts of West Bengal, there are two 24 parganas – 
North 24 parganas and South 24 parganas, it  is being insinuated that incursions are 
happening from those districts and the intr uders are obtaining Aadhar and Voter ID 
card from there. Now, I was not aware, Sir,  that Aadhar comes under the control of 
Ms. Mamata Banerjee. I was completely unaware about it. UIDAI authority, a 
statutory authority, regulates Aadhar. It is unfathomable as to how West Bengal 
comes into the scene.  Election Commission is an autonomous, constitutional body. 
This EPIC and Voter ID card issue pertaining to this autonomous and constitutional 
body, which has now become a contentious one, our leader and hon. Chief Minister 
of West Bengal Ms. Mamata  Bandyopadhyay, on the 27
th February had raised the 
matter in Kolkata. The issue of duplicat e EPIC cards meant for doing fraudulent 
activities in elections has now come to the fore in front of the nation. Many names 
from the States of Gujarat and Haryana have  been included in the EPIC card numbers 
for West Bengal. Will these people from Gu jarat and Haryana come to West Bengal 
with their Bengal voter cards to cast their vo te?  We categorically state that it is the 
responsibility of the Election Commission of India to conduct free and fair elections.  
What has happened in Maharashtra and Delhi won’t be repeated in West Bengal as 
Mamata Bandyopadhyay is our leader’s name, Abhishek Bandyopadhyay is our 
leader’s name. We won’t let this happen in Bengal. I would like to state here that the 
hon. Chief Minister of West Bengal has mentioned that the Association of Billion 
Minds, whose name has now b een altered to Nation with NaMo, this organization is 
sending people over to West Bengal thro ugh another such group which is India 360’s 
subsidiary. They are eyeing to control the electoral outcome in West Bengal by 
pushing in outsiders. This will not be allo wed to happen. You will not succeed in this 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
effort. We want to mention he re that West Bengal is having the longest international 
border. It shares border with three neighbouring countries. In 2021, all of a sudden, 
the area of operation of BSF was increa sed to 50 kilometre inside our border 
compared to the earlier limit of 15 kilometre to our surprise. The rationale given for 
such a step was to give uniformity in jurisdiction across the States. You cannot 
straight jacket this country. Unity in diversity – different languages, different attires, 
different food habits, "Differe nt languages, different opin ions, different attires, yet 
amidst this diversity, behold the great unity"- this is our tradition. You cannot straight 
jacket although you may try to do so. You will never able to impose one nation, one 
vote, one language and one leader on us. R ecall that Pandit Nehru was sitting at the 
feet of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore, who was mentioning to him about the ‘Indian 
pilgrimage’. ‘Indian pilgrima ge’ is a famous poem which I would not recite in its 
entirety. Gurudev Tagore had shown the way to Pandit Nehru, the then future Prime 
Minister of this country. 
 
“Singing victory songs with the fervor of battle cries, 
Piercing through desert paths and mountain ranges, 
Those who came, all of them, 
Reside within me, none are far away, 
In my blood echoes the varied tunes of their voices.” 
“Here, one day, in ceaseless rhythm, 
A great Omkar resounded. 
In the heart’s chords, with the mantra of One, 
A war cry arose, unbounded. 
Through penance’s fire, in the One’s pyre, 
The many were sacrificed whole. 
Division faded, awakening created 
A vast and unified soul.” 
“Will the unbearable pain ever end, 
Giving birth to a mighty soul? 
The night fades, the mother awakens 
In her vast nest, 
On the ocean shores of India's great being.” 
 
Lastly, I would like to state that pluralism and federal structure are our 
strength. The State of West Bengal was no t consulted while draf ting this Bill. A 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
97

 
minimum respect should to be accorded to pluralism and federal structure. Let this 
Bill be sent to a select committee for a detailed deliberation.  
 
“In the rhythm of Odissi, in the gestures of Bharatanatyam, 
In the beats of the Santhali drum and the fervor of Bhangra, 
The night of a grand festival will awaken. 
On that night, 
On that starry, bursting Mehfil of a night, 
Do not forget me— 
The one with torn hands, an empty stomach, an uprooted heart, 
With drops of tears, blood, and sweat, 
Miles and miles of sorrow and love— 
A name whispered in pain and pride: 
Motherland, 
Freedom, 
India.” 
 
Thank You Sir.  Jai Hind! Jai Bangla 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRAS AD BAISHYA): Next speaker is hon. 
Member, Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan.  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन ( उǄर Ģदेश): सर, आप मेरे इतने पुराने साथी हȅ, अब आपको मȅ 
क्या बताऊँ ? कोई बात नहीं, कभी आप हमारे साथ होते थे, आज इनके  साथ हȅ, इसिलए मुझे 
"जया अिमताभ बच्चन" बोल रहे ह
ȅ। इतने सालȗ तक तो आप मुझे " जया जी" बोलते थे। 
Anyways, हाउस मȂ रीताĤता जी को सुनने क े बाद मेरा भी मन करता है िक मȅ बंगाली मȂ बात 
करू ँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... नहीं बोलूँगी, क्यȗिक आप लोगȗ को समझ मȂ नहीं आएगी। यह बहुत उच्च 
भाषा ह
ै, इसका translation इतनी आसानी से नहीं हो सकता। ...(Ëयवधान)... नहीं, मȅ – इन्हȗने 
इतनी बिढ़या किवता पढ़ दी, समझ मȂ आया? नहीं आया? 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Yes, hon. Minister.  
  
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: मȅ आगर्ह क े साथ कह रहा हूँ िक अब भारत की 15 भाषाओं मȂ यहां अनुवाद 
होता है, इसिलए आप बंगाली मȂ ज़रूर  बोिलए। हम लोग Îवागत भी करȂग
े और सुनȂगे। 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, िवषय बहुत गÇभीर है। हाउस की िÎथित को देखकर लगता है 
िक इस िवषय को बहुत हÊके  तरीके  से िलया जा रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... हाउस का मतलब िसफर् 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
‘हम’ नहीं होता, बिÊक ‘हम सब’ होता है और इस िबल मȂ उसकी कमी है। इस Bill को Standing 
Committee मȂ िदया जाना चािहए। This needs to be discussed very, very seriously 
because it is a very, very important Bill acco rding to us, the peop le who are present 
here. सर, मȅ įयादा क ु छ नहीं बोलूंगी। मȅ िसफर् दो-तीन बातȂ बोलना चाहती हूं। एक तो, I want to 
know the actual definition and the present definition of ‘ घुसपैिठया और शरणाथीर्’। पहले 
हम कहते थे िक अफगािनÎतान, पािकÎतान और बंगलादेश से जो आए हȅ, वे हमारे शरणाथीर् हȅ। 
Are you still standing on those lines or have you changed it?  …(Interruptions)… There 
is a change. I do not want to make a provocativ
e ……(Interruptions)…  I will just give a 
few suggestions if I may.  …(Interruptions)…  सर, जब बीच मȂ बोलते हȅ, तो I get very 
disturbed. It is because I have to think in so many languages, then I have to translate 
and speak in one language.  
Sir, there are terms such as ‘Damage’, ‘Threat to National Security’, and an 
‘Inadmissible  Foreigner’. I do not know  िजसने भी यह िलखा है, तो क्या उसने िंहदी मȂ 
सोचकर अंगर्ेजी मȂ िलखा है या अंगर्ेजी मȂ सोचकर क्या िलखा, मुझे समझ नहीं आ रहा है। It is 
because this is not translating into action. These are just mere words. These must be 
clearly defi
ned to reduce ambiguity and ensure uniform application of the law.  We 
must create a dedicated Immigration Appeals Board or Tribunal where individuals can 
challenge decisions, which is very difficult , keeping the present Government in mind. 
They do not like challenges. The decisions made by Immigration Officers, before 
resorting to High Courts, would make justice more accessible; if it is possible during 
your regime. I would like to suggest to amen d Clause 16 to shift the burden of proof 
from individuals to authorities. This en sures fairness while maintaining accountability 
in enforcement, which you do not believe in. I would like to suggest adding provisions 
for processing asylum claims in compliance with international conventions, such as 
the UN Refugee Convention. This would uphold India's humanitarian commitments 
while distinguishing refugees from illegal immigrants, घुसपैिठया और शरणाथीर्। I would 
like to suggest to amend Clause 26, as everyone else have said to restrict warrantless 
arrests by officers of higher  ranks, for example, Inspector s. Ensuring proper checks 
against misuse of power. …(Time-bell rings.)… Can I say the last line, Sir? 
  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Okay.  
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN : Streamline reportin
g requirements for 
universities, hospitals and hotels through a centralized digital system rather than 
imposing manual bureaucratic process. Introduce a graded penalty system based on 
the severity of the violations rather than  blanket punishments that deter legitimate 
carriers and travellers. सर, यह िबल जो है, हमारी पाटीर् की तरफ से, हमारी तरफ से औरI 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
99

 
hope, a lot of the people sitting here. ऐसा लगता है िक हम लोग सǄा पक्ष क े हो गए और 
आप लोग अपोिजशन क े हो गए, because this is really ridi culous. It has been solely… 
…(Interruptions)… I cannot ignore them.  It is because, if I ignore them, they will pass 
anything that they want.  …(Interruptions)… वे कहते हȅ िक आंख, कान, नाक सबको कवर 
करके  मॉइनॉिरटीज़ को टारगेट करने क े िलए बनाया जा रहा है।  
Sir, I request to please send this Bill to a select committee. Let the committee 
review it seriously because it will be going to have very, very se rious repercussions. 
We will get ashamed internationally. We will be ashamed by the international 
community. Thank you. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): The next speaker is 
Shri Haris Beeran.  Y
ou have three minutes’ time. 
 
SHRI HARIS BERRAN (Kerala) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, this is a legislative process 
by which four laws have been repealed and put into one.  Sir, we are known to be a 
very welcoming country. This law will ha ve an impact and repercussion at the 
international level. It is because this impacts the foreign citizens who want to travel to 
our country. We all know that people come  to India for various purposes. Now, for 
medical purposes, medical tourism is there. There are a lot of good hospitals and 
there are a lot of pharmaceutical companie s over here. So, people come here for 
medical purposes.       
In my State, people come over for ay urvedic treatment in Kottakkal. There are 
people who come for education as there ar e very fine universities. There are people 
who come for religious tourism. So these kind of huge influxes of foreign travellers are 
there to India. This particular law, actually, impacts the foreigners who come to India. 
We will have to examine this law in this context. Sir, when you examine this law, there 
can only be one term which can be used to describe this particular law, which is, ‘this 
is a snooper’s paradise’. The moment a person lands in India and till the time he goes 
back to his own country, he is being snooped  everywhere. We know that getting visa 
or going to a foreign country is very cumbersome. But when you are inside the 
country, then you are free to move about in the country. Here, you are inside the 
country, even inside the country, you will be snooped and you will be tracked 
everywhere. With regard to Clauses 7, 8, 9 an d 10 of this particular Bill, the Clause 7 
says that the Central Government has got th e power to restrict foreigners, their entry 
and movement. This is a very broad thing. They have not specified as to what they 
want to do. These are broad powers, restricting the movement an d imposing medical 
exams which will violate privacy. This violates  privacy and liberty. This is violation of 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Article 21. This particular Clause is, actually, unconstitutional because Article 21 
applies to foreign citizens also. There ar e burdensome compliances which everyone 
has to do. If a person is going to the ho spital, then the hospit al authority has to 
report. If a person is going to hotel, then the hotel has to report. So, all these 
cumbersome procedures are there in this particular Bill. There are six-seven small 
points.  Now, denial of entry can be on  very, very vague ground. Huge powers are 
given to the Immigration Officer. Uncanalised  and unbridled powers are given to the 
Immigration Officer. Once the Immigration Officer takes a particular stand or a 
decision, there is no appellate power,  there is no appellate body. As Jaya ji rightly 
mentioned, there has to be a tribunal, there has to be an appellate body against the 
orders of the Immigration Officer. There is no warrant required for arresting a foreigner 
who is in India. On what ground? It is on  very, very vague grounds. Then, I come to 
reporting obligation.  There is another Cl ause which is very, very strange, the 
association clause …(Time-bill rings .)… Just half a minute, Sir. If a foreigner is 
associated with a particular association, then, he can be deport ed on that ground. 
The Bill violates all the fundamental rights by saying that they can be deported without 
following the due process of law. They can  just be caught and deported. It lacks a 
judicial oversight and it lacks transparency. There is an overreach of executive power. 
This executive power overreach is going to kill this particular Bill and this is going to be 
tested in the court of law. Once it is tested in the court of law, I am sure that there is 
violation of Articles 14 and 21 which are directly applicable to foreign citizens. 
Therefore, these suggestions should be incorporated and this  should be referred to a 
select committee or a Standing Committee. That is all I have to say, Sir. Thank you.    
                                                                                
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA) : Next speaker is Shri 
Lahar Singh Siroya. You have fifteen minutes.  
 
3.00 P.M. 
 
Ǜी लहर िंसह िसरोया (कणार्टक): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ आपका और मेरी पाटीर् क े नेतृत्व का 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद करता हूं िक मुझ
े इस महत्वपूणर् िबल पर बोलने का मौका िदया गया है। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मेरे िलए यह और भी संतोष का िवषय है िक आप यहाँ पर िवराजमान हȅ। 
महोदय, असम क े संदभर् मȂ कहूं, तो ये िजसको पिरभािषत करने की बात कर रहे हȅ िक घुसपैिठया 
क्या होता है और शरणाथीर् क्या होता ह
ै, तो मȅ इन्हȂ बताना चाहता हूं िक आपने घुसपैिठयȗ का 
आतंक खूब भुगता है। असम वषș तक घुसपैिठयȗ क े दबाव मȂ, उनके  असामािजक कायș क े दबाव 
मȂ रहा है। आपने उन
 घुसपैिठयȗ क े िखलाफ कई वषș पहले आंदोलन िकया था। घुसपैिठया क्या 
होता है, शरणाथीर् क्या होता है, आप इस बात को अच्छी तरह से महसूस कर सकते हȅ।  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
101

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ आपको सभापित ही कहूंगा, क्यȗिक इस वƪ आप चेयरमैन साहब ही 
हȅ। महोदय, इंडी गठबंधन और कांगर्ेस ने अपने चिरतर् क े अनुसार, अपनी सोच क े अनुसार हमारे 
एक आदरणीय नेता को वहाँ से इिनिशएट करने क े िलए कहा था। उन्हȗने काफी िवÎत ार से बातȂ 
कही हȅ। मȅने भी इसे बहुत िवÎतार से पूरा पढ़ा है। उनकी बातȗ का जवाब हमारे आदरणीय मंतर्ी जी 
दȂगे, यह उनका अिधकार है, लेिकन एक बात उन्हȗने कही िक क्या इिमगर्Ȃट्स जानवर हȅ!  इस 
तरह की बात उन्हȗने कही और उनकी त
ुलना जानवरȗ से की। आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ 
आपके  माध्यम से सदन को बताना चाहूंगा और देश को भी बताना चाहूंगा िक जानवर और 
घुसपैिठयȗ मȂ बहुत फकर् है। जानवर आपको दूध देता ह ै, आपके  िलए कई काम करता है और िफर 
आपके  िलए भोजन भी बन जाता है।  घुसपैिठए आकर आतंकवाद फ ैलाते हȅ, डर्ग का Ëयापार करते 
हȅ, बलात्कार जैसी घटनाओं मȂ संिलÃत होते हȅ और सैफ अली खान जैसे अिभनेता क े घर मȂ 
घुसकर उसको मारने की कोिशश करते हȅ। यहां बॉलीवुड से ज
ुड़े हुए लोग भी बैठे हȅ। मȅ उनको 
बताना चाहूंगा, आप समझ लȂ िक ये वे घुसपैिठए हȅ, िजनके  आधार काडर् होते हȅ।   
 आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, कनार्टक म
Ȃ हमने भुगता है िक वहां पर इिÊलगल इिमगर्Ȃट्स 
आकर आधार काडर् बना लेते हȅ, िकराये पर मकान ले लेते हȅ, Ëयापार करने लगते हȅ, जीएसटी 
चोरी करते हȅ और अनेक
 तरह क े असामािजक कायर् मȂ भी संिलÃत रहते हȅ। मȅ इस सरकार को 
बहुत-बहुत बधाई देना चाहता हूं िक यह िबल जो बहुत पहले आ जाना चािहए था, वह इस िबल 
को आज लाई है और चार कोलोिनयल जमाने क े जो कानून चलते आ रहे ह
ȅ, उनका एकीकरण 
करके  एक कानून बनाया गया है। देश की सुरक्षा हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े िलए हमेशा 
Ģाइम िवषय रहा है। कांगर्ेस और उनके  साथी हमेशा वोट बȅक
 की राजनीित ही करते रहे हȅ।  ये हर 
िकसी को मुिÎलम की दृिÍट से ही देखते रहे हȅ। मȅ आपको बताना चाहूंगा िक जब 1970 की वॉर हुई 
थी, उसमȂ कई बंगलादेशी आकर अस
म और बंगाल मȂ बस गए थे। हम बार-बार जो डीिलिमटेशन 
की बात करते हȅ - तो असम मȂ इन घुसपैिठयȗ की वजह से सारा मामला गड़बड़ाया हुआ है - इस 
कानून क े अंतगर्त जब नई िलÎट बनेगी, तो कांगर्ेस और उनके  साथी देखते ही जाएंगे। उस िलÎट 
को पढ़ने मȂ उनको वषș लग जाए
ंगे िक अब यह िकस तरह की िलÎट बन रही है और क ै से राÍटर्ीय 
सुरक्षा क े अनुसार यह िबल लाया जा रहा है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान म
ंतर्ी जी पड़ोसी देशȗ की बात करते हȅ और 
कÇयुिनटी की बात करते हȅ, इसिलए जहां कोई भी तूफान आया हो या कोई भूकÇप आया हो, तो 
हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी तुरंत हमारे पड़ोसी देशȗ की सहायता क े िलए आगे बढ़ते हȅ। हमारे साथ क्या हो 
रहा है िक पड़ोसी देशȗ म
Ȃ जब सब िवफल हो चुक े हȅ, चाहे वह पािकÎतान हो, बंगलादेश हो, 
Çयांमार हो, नेपाल हो, Ǜीलंका हो, वहां की अथर्ËयवÎथाएं चरमरा रही हȅ, तो वहां क
े  लोग हमारे 
यहां आकर आधार काडर् बनाकर नौकरी कर लेते हȅ और अनेक तरह का अपराध करते हȅ।  वे 
मेनली डर्ग का Ëयापार करते हȅ और हमारे बच्चȗ क े भिवÍय को खराब करते हȅ। ऐसे लोग यहां आ 
रहे हȅ।  ये जो फ ेÊड Îटेट हȅ, उनका ही असर भुगतना पड़ रहा है। जब इमीगर्ेशन का यह कानून 
बनेगा, तो इस तरह क े अपराधȗ पर रोक लगेगी। यह कानून बनाकर हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी ने िदखा िदया है िक हम सावर्भौम राÍटर् हȅ और हम िकसी भी बड़े देश की तरह अपना कानून 
बना सकते हȅ। मȅ िजन इिÊलगल इमीगर्Ȃट्स की बात कर रहा ह
ूं, जो घुसपैिठए आते हȅ, आतंकवाद 
फ ैलाते हȅ, उन लोगȗ को मसीर्लेÎली भेजना पड़ेगा।  कनार्टक की सरकार इस मामले मȂ बहुत 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
ज्यादा िवफल रही है। वहां बहुत बंगलादेशी लोग भर गए हȅ और बंगाल क े नाम पर, ओिडशा क े 
नाम पर, असम क े नाम पर बंगलादेश क े लोग आ गए हȅ। वे जाली आधार काडर् बनाकर Ëयापार 
करने लग गए हȅ। इस तरह की कई बातȂ वहां हो रही हȅ। मȅ समझता हूं िक यह हमारी राÍटर्ीय 
सुरक्षा क े िलए बहुत बड़ा कदम है। ये जो कानून बनाए
 गए हȅ, इसमȂ उन्हȗने हर चीज़ को बहुत 
िवÎतार से देखा है।   
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, जैसा मȅने बताया है िक हम िकसी समुदाय क े िखलाफ नहीं हȅ।  
आज बंगलादेश मȂ जो क ु छ हुआ है, वहां कई िंहदू लोगȗ को शरणाथीर् बनना पड़ा है, उनके  
िखलाफ नहीं, बिÊक हम उन्हीं क े िलए एनआरसी लाए हȅ। इसीिलए हमारे ये कानून आ रहे हȅ।  
उन लोगȗ को जरूर  डर लग रहा है, जो कई वषș से अनैितक काम करते हुए िवदेशȗ से आकर 
यहां बस गए हȅ। उन लोगȗ को इमीगर्ेशन ऑिफसर से डर लगता है। उनकी अपील नहीं होगी और 
उनकी अपील होनी भी नहीं चािहए, क्यȗिक सरकार न
े जो कानून बनाए हȅ - यह तीसरी बार चुनी 
हुई सरकार है और इस सरकार क े अिधकािरयȗ ने और सरकार ने पूरी चचार् करके , पूरा अपना 
िदमाग लगाकर राÍटर्ीय स
ुरक्षा और मानवता क े दृिÍटकोण को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए कानून बनाए हȅ।                          
मानवीय दृिÍटकोण क े बारे मȂ हमारे ऊपर कोई आरोप नहीं लगाया जा सकता। हमारे 
आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ, जब भी कहीं कोई िवपदा आई, तो उसमȂ हमने आगे बढ़ 
कर सहायता की है। इसिलए हमारे ऊपर यह आरोप नहीं लगाया जा सकता।   
 महोदय, उन
 लोगȗ को जरूर  डरने की बात है, िजनकी मानिसकता भी िवदेशी हो गई है; 
जो बैठते यहाँ हȅ, लेिकन बात वहाँ की करते हȅ। मुझे तो लगता है िक सोरोस क े पैसे क े बलबूते पर 
पलते हȅ और उनके  अनुसार राजनीित करते हȅ। पढ़ाई-िलखाई क
े  नाम पर, हम तो अनपढ़ अच्छे 
हȅ। अगर पढ़-िलख कर ऐसा ही बनना है, ऐसे ही अबर्न नक्सलवाद को बढ़ावा देना है, तो ऐसे 
लोगȗ से तो हम समझते हȅ िक हमारी अनपढ़ जनता अच्छी है, िजसने समय-समय पर आपको 
िदखाया है। इमरजȂसी म
Ȃ उसने िदखाया। इमरजȂसी आप लोगȗ ने लागू िकया, लेिकन िजस जनता 
न
े आपको सबक िसखा कर घर िबठाया था, वह अनपढ़ जनता थी। मȅ समझता हूँ, लानत है ऐसे 
पढ़े-िलखे लोगȗ पर, जो वहाँ से ऐसे arguments कर रहे थे, कानून क े बारे मȂ क्या-क्या बातȂ कर 
रहे थे। राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा क े िलए इसका जो हर क्लॉज़ है, वह बहुत महत्वपूणर् है। उस Ģावधान को ये 
असत्य ठहरा रहे थे। मȅ इन लोगȗ क े बारे मȂ समझता हूँ िक जब ये कोटर् मȂ खड़े होते हȅ, तो इनका 
यह compulsion हो जाता है िक मडर्र करने वालȗ को भी, रेप करने वालȗ को भी क ै से बचाया 
जाए, उसके  िलए िकतना-िकतना बिढ़या कानून बताया जा
ए, िकतने तकर् िदए जाएँ।  लेिकन 
आज देश
 की सुरक्षा क े िलए, देश की सुरक्षा क े नाम पर जो िबल लाया जा रहा है, उसमȂ  इन 
कानूनȗ की बारीकी  को  पकड़-पकड़ कर वे आलोचना करने का काम कर रहे हȅ। यह कोई कोटर् 
नहीं है, यह देश की स
ुरक्षा का सवाल है। मुझे बड़ा दुख होता है िक ऐसे लोग हȅ। मेरी कमर्भूिम 
कणार्टक है, राजÎथान मेरी जन्मभूिम है। मȅ तो कणार्टक से आया हूँ। लोग राजÎथान से ह ȅ, कहाँ-
कहाँ से हȅ, िदÊली कमर्भूिम  है। िहमाचल Ģदेश, तेलंगाना, कहाँ-कहाँ से आकर, यहाँ बैठ कर 
ज्ञान बाँटते हȅ और ऐसी बातȂ करते हȅ, जो हमारी िनÍठा पर आरोप लगाते हȅ, हमारी सरकार की 
िनÍठा पर आरोप लगाते हȅ। ये इस तरह की बात करते हȅ, देश की एकता की बात करते हȅ। मȅ 
समझता हूँ िक पूरा देश आज देख रहा है। यह जो िबल आ रहा है, मȅ समझता हूँ िक अगर इन 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
103

 
सबको अपना पाप धोना है, तो इस िबल का पूरा समथर्न करना चािहए। आप सवर्सÇमित से इसको 
पास करके  कम से कम अपने इस कलंक को िमटा दȂ, नहीं तो यह देश आपको माफ नहीं करेगा।   
 महोदय, मȅ हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को और उनकी सरकार को पुन: बधाई देता हूँ िक वे 
िकतना महत्वपूणर् िबल लाए हȅ। उन्हȗने यह िदखा िदया है िक आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, मोदी जी क े 
िलए देश
 की सुरक्षा ही सवȘपिर है, देश क े नागिरकȗ की सुरक्षा सवȘपिर है और साथ ही  साथ देश 
को िवकिसत करना ही उनकी भावना है, संकÊप है। इसके  िलए यह िबल आया है। मȅ समझता हूँ 
िक इससे इन घुसपैिठयȗ का आतंक खत्म होगा और इन illegal दोिषयȗ को िनकाला जाएगा।   
देश की सुरक्षा का सवाल है, अन्यथा देश की जनता आपको माफ नहीं करेगी। अगर आपका ऐसा 
ही आचरण रहा, तो मȅ कहूँगा िक आपकी जो संख्या अभी घटती जा रही है, अभी हमारी बहन जो 
कह रही थीं िक यहाँ लोग िदखाई नहीं दे रहे हȅ, वे और भी नहीं िदखाई दȂगे।  इसिलए मेरा यह 
कहना है। इसी बात क े साथ, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                                                                                 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी
: सर, मȅ Ģतीक्षा कर रहा था िक माननीय सदÎय का भाषण समाÃत हो जाए, तब 
मȅ बोलूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅ दो-तीन बातȂ कहना चाहत
ा हूँ। माननीय सदÎय ने यह कह कर इस 
सदन का अपमान िकया है  नाम उन्हȗने िकसी का ...(Ëयवधान)... मेरी बात, ...(Ëयवधान)... हम तो 
बैठे थे।  हम िफर बैठ जाते हȅ, आप अपनी बात कह लȂ।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA):  It will be reviewed. If it is 
not permissible under rule, appropriate action will be taken.  
  
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI: Thank you, Sir. My second point is that he has directly 
accused the educated community. As an educated individual, I feel offended. I 
request that he refrai
ns from making su ch generalizations ab out educated people. 
Although he is a very senior Member, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi holds a very 
prestigious position. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALI TA): Next speaker is Shri Praful 
Patel. Hon. Member not present. Then, Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala.                                                           
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला (गुजरात): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका धन्यवाद िक आपने इस बहुत 
महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर बोलने का आज थोड़ा जÊदी मौका िदया। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी बीरेन्दर् Ģसाद बैÌय): लहर िंसह जी ने आपको यह मौका िदया है। 
 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: जी महोदय, धन्यवाद। महोदय, 2014 मȂ जब मोदी साहब ने इस देश का 
नेतृत्व संभाला, तब उन्हȗने इस देश क े अंदर इतने सालȗ से ऐसे जो िनयम थे, कायदे-कानून थे, 
जो समय क े साथ बदले नहीं गए थे, उनको बदलने का उन्हȗने िनणर्य िलया और उन्हȗने इस द ेश 
क े गरीबȗ क े िलए Ģाथिमक सुिवधाओं से लेकर infrastructure development की तरफ एक 
कर्ांितकारी योजना, जैसे िजतनी हमारी Direct Benefit Transfer Schemes हȅ, उनके  माध्यम से 
उन्हȗने इस देश का िवकास Ãलान िकया।  इस माध्यम  से इस देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा, जो एक समय 
पर 11वȂ Îथान पर थी, वह आज 5वȂ Îथान पर आकर खड़ी हुई है और यह सरकार इस िवÌवास क े 
साथ अपना काम आगे बढ़ा रही है िक तीसरे टमर् मȂ हमारी economy पूरे िवÌव क े अंदर तीसरे 
Îथान पर आक
र खड़ी होगी। जब हम इस िवÌवास क े साथ आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ, तब देश की कोई भी 
economic पिरिÎथित, चाहे वह िकसी भी देश की हो, उस economy को आगे बढ़ाने क े िलए देश 
क े अंदर सुरक्षा एक बहुत महत्वपूणर् मुǈा है।   
महोदय, हमारे देश क े अ
ंदर हमारी सरकार क े नेतृत्व मȂ, मोदी साहब क े नेतृत्व मȂ और 
हमारे गृह Ģधान Ǜी अिमत शाह जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ, सुरक्षा का एक महत्वपूणर् िवषय देश क े अंदर 
एक-एक मुǈे क े साथ आगे बढ़ा है। 2023 मȂ Border Area Development Programme क े माध्यम 
से इस देश क े अंदर 2,900 से ज्यादा गांवȗ मȂ और 19 से ज्यादा िजलȗ मȂ, अरुणाचल  Ģदेश, 
िहमाचल Ģदेश, िसिक्कम, उǄराखंड, जैसे राज्यȗ मȂ और लǈाख मȂ एक Vibrant Village 
Programme चालू िकया गया। उसके  िलए 4,800 करोड़ से ज्यादा का बजट रखा गया, िजससे 
अगले साल 2024 
तक 1,500 गांवȗ क े अंदर रोड, राÎते, high speed BharatNet, Internet जैसी 
सुिवधाएँ उपलÅध हुईं। Ǜीनगर-लेह क
े  बीच मȂ 220 क ेवी की जो लाइन लगाई गई, उसके  माध्यम 
से लǈाख क े एंड तक क े जो िवÎतार थे, उनके  अंदर भी िबजली पहुंची।  सरकार ने बॉडर्र 
िसक्योिरटी क े िलए इन सारी चीजȗ की जो ËयवÎथा की, उनके  अंतगर्त Border Infrastructure 
and Management  की जो Îकीम है, इसमȂ 2021 से  2026 
क े बीच क े काम क े िलए 13,020 
करोड़ रुपय े का बजट िदया गया। हम लोगȗ ने बांग्लादेश क े बॉडर्र पर 4,210 िकलोमीटर क े राÎते 
मȂ से 2,963 िकलोमीटर मȂ फ Ȃिंसग की। Floodlights से लेकर drones, इन सबका उपयोग करके  
हमने अपने बॉडर्सर् को सुरिक्षत िकया। 15,106 िकलोमीटर land borders और 7,506 िकलोमीटर 
की हमारी जो coastline है, इनको आज हमारी सरकार ने बड़ी मजबूती से secure  िकया है। 
अगर हम BRO की  बात करȂ, तो 2019 से 2024 क े  बीच मȂ किठन जगहȗ पर 7,000 
िकलोमीटर राÎते बनाए गए और 7,000 उन गांवȗ को, जो बॉडर्र क े गांव हȅ, उनको जोड़ा गया।  
जब हमारे बॉडर्सर् पर इस Ģकार का Infrastructure आया, तब हमारे बॉडर्सर् स
ुरिक्षत होते गए और 
देश सुरिक्षत होता गया। अभी भी Comprehensive Integrated Border Management System 
क े माध्यम से जो बाकी की जगहȂ रह गई हȅ, वहां पर drone sensors, lasers और जो unfenced 
rivers तथा desert िवÎतार ह
ȅ, उनके  अंदर टेक्नोलॉजी का पूरा उपयोग करके  हमारी बॉडर्सर् को 
मजबूत िकया जा रहा है। 
महोदय, अगर हम अपनी internal security की बात करȂ, तो जÇमू-कÌमीर, जो इतने 
सालȗ से मुख्य धारा से वंिचत था और आिर्टकल 370 जैसी पिरिÎथितयȗ क े बीच मȂ वहां पर ट
ूिरज्म 
नहीं हो रहा था, वहां पर इंडÎटर्ीज़ नहीं आ रही थीं, लेिकन आज वहाँ से 370 को revoke करने से 
जÇमू-कÌमीर को एक industrial area और एक
 उभरती हुई economy क े रूप  मȂ हम लोग देख 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
105

 
रहे हȅ। उसी तरीके  से हम नॉथर्-ईÎट क े िवÎतार की बात करȂ, तो वहाँ भी जो infrastructure 
development हुआ है, उसकी वजह से न िसफर् हमारी सीमाएँ मजबूत हुई हȅ, बिÊक उन िवÎतारȗ 
क े माध्यम से उसको देश क े मध्य रेखा से जोड़ने का मजबूत कायर् हुआ है।   
महोदय,  इस  िबल को क्यȗ लाया जा रहा है - ऐसा ĢÌन आज हमारे िवपक्ष क े िमतर् पूछ 
रहे हȅ। महोदय, इस िबल क े पहले क े जो िबÊस हȅ, अगर हम उनके  ऊपर नजर डालȂ, तो िपछली 
सरकारȗ ने उसमȂ कोई भी clear legislative procedure कभी नहीं की थी।  जो चार प
ुराने laws 
हȅ, उनमȂ  Foreigners Act, 1946; Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920; Registration of 
Foreigners Act, 1939 और Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act, 2000 हȅ। उन 4 कान ूनȗ मȂ 
से 3 कानून तो देश आजाद होने क े पहले क े हȅ,  संिवधान आने क े पहले क े हȅ, लेिकन इतने सालȗ 
मȂ कांगर्ेस की सरकार ने कभी भी उन कानूनȗ को अपडेट करने की कोई कारर्वाई नहीं की। 
आधुिनक पिरिÎथित क े िहसाब से, जैसे दुिनया आगे बढ़ रही है, देश आगे बढ़ रहा है, उस िहसाब 
से उन्हȗने कभी कोई कारर्वाई नहीं की। इसिलए इन चार कानूनȗ का एकीकरण करके  आज क े 
इस िबल मȂ immigration laws को streamline िकया
 गया, जहाँ पर Ģावधानȗ मȂ overlapping हो 
रहा है, उस overlapping को िनकाला गया है और एक िंसगल कानूनी ढांचा बनाया गया है, 
िजसके  माध्यम स
े इस िवषय मȂ जो िविभन्न Ģकार की एजȂिसयाँ काम कर रही हȅ, उनका एक 
‘collaborative workstream’ हो - इन सब पर िवचार करके  मोदी सरकार ने यह िबल लाने का 
कायर् िकया है।  उसके  साथ-साथ मȅ यह भी कहूँगा िक अगर इसको कांगर्ेस क े जमाने से 
comparison िकया जाए, तो 1983 मȂ कांगर्ेस ने राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा को साइड मȂ रख कर एक Illegal 
Migrants (Determination of Tr ibunals) Act, 1983, IMDT Act का िनमार्ण िकया था।  इस 
एक्ट क े माध्यम स
े जब कोई कानूनी कारर्वाई होने जा रही हो, तब ‘burden to prove’ non-
citizenship मतलब अगर बाहर क े कोई घुसपैिठए अंदर आए और उनको कोई पकड़ा हो, तो  
उसको पर्ूव करने का burden Îटेट क े ऊपर रहा करता था या िफर जो आक्षेप करने वाला Ëयिƪ 
है, यानी ‘accuser’ ह
ै, उसके  ऊपर रहा करता था। इस पिरिÎथित मȂ litigation लंबा चलता रहता 
था। इसके  कारण घुसपैिठए क
े  हाथ मजबूत हो रहे थे और जो Îटेट की मशीनरी कानूनी कारर्वाई 
कर रही थी, उनके  हाथ बंधे हुए थे। मȅ उसके  दो-तीन byelaws क े बारे म Ȃ बताना चाहता हूँ। 
उन्हȗने उसके  अंदर इस Ģकार क े चार मुǈे रखे थ। जो ‘accuser’ है और जो ‘accused’ है, वे 
दोनȗ तीन िकलोमीटर क े अंदर रहने चािहए। अब आप समझ सकते हȅ िक इसमȂ तीन िकलोमीटर 
का क्या लेना-देना है।  अगर कोई लंबे िडÎटȂस पर रह रहा हो, तो उससे उसमȂ क्या फकर् पड़ता 
है? कोई एक Ëयिƪ या कोई एक संÎथा maximum ten complaints द
े सकते थे और उसके  
अंदर फीस भर कर complaint register करने का Ģावधान रखा गया था। इसके  साथ ही, िजसके  
ऊपर accusation हो रहा है, वह अपना िसटीजनिशप प
र्ूव करने क े िलए मातर् राशन काडर् िदखा 
दे, तो उसका िसटीजनिशप पर्ूव हो जाता था। इस Ģकार से, खास करके  असम क े अंदर कांगर्ेस 
की पूवर् सरकारȗ ने 1983 मȂ एक्ट लाकर जो कायर् िकया है, उसके  कारण इस द
ेश क े अंदर इतने 
सालȗ क े बाद भी litigation पर litigation होते रहे और उसकी कारर्वाई अंत तक नहीं पहुँचती थी। 
अंत मȂ, 2005 मȂ सुĢीम कोटर् ने एक damaging order िदया और सुĢीम कोटर् ने IMDT Act को  
unconstituti
onal मान कर इस एक्ट को wholly arbitrary, unreasonable िदखा कर यह कहा 
िक illegal migrants को shelter देना इस rule-regulation का almost एक मकसद बन गया है, 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
इसिलए इस कानून को उन्हȗने strike down िकया। इसको क ेवल असम मȂ लगाया गया और हम 
सब असम की िÎथित जानते हȅ। तब बाहर क े िवÎतार से घुसपैिठए असम क े अंदर घुसे थे और 
असम क े अंदर का लॉ एंड ऑडर्र का िसचुएशन िकतना खराब हुआ था। इस मुǈे को, IMDT  को 
सुĢीम कोटर् ने Îटर्ाइक डाउन करके  यह भी कहा िक यह कॉिन्ÎटǷूशन क े आिर्टकल 14 क े 
िवरुǉ है। महोदय, इस Ģकार क े कायर् पूवर् सरकारȂ करती थीं।  आज जो यह नया िबल आया है, 
यह बहुत लंबा िवचार करके  लाया गया ह
ै। जब यह िबल बहुत समय तक मंथन करके  आया है, 
तब इसके  माध्यम से institutional framework को मजबूत करने क े िलए और Bureau of 
Immigration का मजबूती से िनराकरण करने का िनणर्य िलया गया है।  क Ȃ दर् सरकार शािसत जो 
भी कोऑिर्डनेशन होगी,  इमीगर्ेशन क े अलग-अलग ऑपरेश
ंस, जो पूरे देश क े अंदर चल रहे हȅ, 
इसके  माध्यम से Bureau of Immigration को उनको मजबूती से कोऑिर्डनेट करने का मौका 
िमलेगा। िवदेश से िजतने फॉरेनसर् आते हȅ, इस िबल म
Ȃ उनका रिजÎटर्ेशन और उनका tracking 
mechanism का भी एक Ģावधान रखा गया है। अब जो भी बाहर से फॉरेनसर् आएँगे, उनके  ऊपर 
सरकारी तंतर् इसके  माध्यम से नजर रख पाएगा और उनकी क्या कारर्वाई है, वे क्या कर रहे हȅ,  
इसके  ऊपर भी उनकी नजर रहेगी।  ...(
समय की घंटी)... सर, दो िमनट। अगर आप मेरे Îटाटर् क े 
2 िमनट ऐड कर लȂ, तो मȅ अपनी बात पूरी कर लूँगा।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Try to conclude in one 
minute. 
 
Ǜी क
े सरीदेविंसह झाला: सर, एक िमनट।  इस िबल क े माध्यम से पेनÊटी बढ़ाई गई है, carrier 
accountability का Ģावधान लाया गया है। जो भी क ैिरयसर्, चाहे एयर हो, sea हो  या लȅड हो, 
टर्ांसपोटर् क े जो भी माध्यम उनको ला रहे हȅ, उनके  ऊपर भी accountability set की जा रही है। 
महोदय, आपने मुझे ज्यादा समय नहीं िदया ह
ै, इसिलए मȅ अपनी बात िसफर् यह कहकर 
खत्म करू ँगा िक यह जो िबल लाया गया है, इससे िकसी भी तरीके  से उन ट ूिरÎट्स पर आपिǄ 
नहीं आएगी, जो हमारे देश क े अ
ंदर लीगली एंटर्ी से आ रहे हȅ। जो लोग इÊलीगली और गलत 
काम क े िलए आ रहे हȅ, उनके  िलए ही यह मजबूत लॉ बनाया गया है। जो घुसपैिठए देश क े अंदर 
घुसकर देश की िरसोसȃज़ क े ऊपर इतना बड़ा बोझ बनकर बैठ गए हȅ, जो हमारे लॉ एंड ऑडर्र 
िसचुएशन को खराब करके  बैठे हȅ और जो हमारे देश की पूरी अथर्ËयवÎथा क े ऊपर drain बनकर 
बैठ गए हȅ, िसफर् उन जैसे इÊलीगल घुसपैिठयȗ क े िलए यह िबल लाया गया है।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Please conclu
de.  
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: सर, िवपक्ष क े हमारे िमतर् जो यह कह रहे हȅ िक धमर्, जाित, इस Ģकार 
का इसमȂ inclination है, तो मȅ उनसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक इस िबल क े अंदर िकसी भी देश, कोई 
भी धमर् या िकसी भी जाित का कहीं पर उÊलेख नहीं है। जो लोग राÍटर्िहत क े िलए और देश को 
मजबूत करने की एि
क्टिवटीज़ क े िलए यहाँ आ रहे हȗगे, उन्हीं को आने िदया जाएगा। ...(समय 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
107

 
की घंटी)...  सर,  मȅ अपनी बात को इस बात पर खत्म करू ँगा िक पहले की सरकारȗ ने क ु छ िकया 
नहीं है, तो आप भी इस िबल का समथर्न करȂ। 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Please conclude.  
 
Ǜी क ेसरीदेविंसह झाला: सर, अगर यहाँ पर तृणमूल कांगर्ेस क े मेरे साथीगण मौजूद हȅ, तो उनसे 
भी मेरी िसफािरश है िक एक िदन ऐसा भी था
 िक जब आपकी मुख्य मंतर्ी इसी टेबल क े पास 
इमीगर्ेशन की वजह से, घुसपैिठयȗ की वजह से कागज फ Ȃका करती थीं। आज आप भी आइए, 
देशिहत मȂ जुिड़ए और इस िबल का समथर्न कीिजए।  इतनी बात क े साथ, मȅ अपनी बात 
को िवराम द
ेता हूँ। 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत ( महाराÍटर्): सर, जब यह इमीगर्ेशन एंड फॉरेनसर् िबल टेबल िकया गया, तो 
हमारे गृह मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक यह देश धमर्शाला नहीं है और हम इसको धमर्शाला नहीं बनने दȂगे। 
इस देश को धमर्शाला बनाना िकसी का मकसद भी नहीं है और कोई बनने भी नहीं देगा, लेिकन 
यह देश जेल भी नहीं है। अगर यह देश धमर्शाला नहीं है, तो यह देश जेल भी नहीं है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... कौन बोल रहा है, बालासाहेब ठाकर
े?  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Please. 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत: सर, वहाँ से क ु छ भी कमȂट करते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... हम सुनते रहते हȅ, आप 
बोलते रहते ह
ȅ, क्या है? आपको क्या मालूम है?...(Ëयवधान)...  क्या हमने आपको इंटरÃट िकया 
है? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): Please. 
 
Ǜी संजय राउत: सर, आप यह कमȂटर्ी रोिकए। मेरा टाइम अब शुरू  हुआ है। इस देश क े लोगȗ को 
10 साल से एक तरह से जेल मȂ रखा गया है। लेिकन अब जो िवदेश से लोग आएंगे, वैिलड 
पासपोटर् पर, वैिलड वीज़ा पर, उनको भी शायद यह कानून जेल मȂ रखना चाहता है। िजस तरह 
से क ंिडशंस लगा दी गई हȅ, िजस तरह से उनके  ऊपर जबरन कई एक्ट थोप िदए गए हȅ, उससे 
धीरे-धीरे ट
ूिरÎट भी आना बंद कर दȂगे। इस Ģकार क े कठोर कानून यहां लागू िकए गए हȅ। 
ĢेिसडȂट टर्Çप ने ...(Ëयवधान)... हमȂ यह कानून चािहए। हम नहीं चाहते िक द
ेश मȂ कोई 
अवैध रूप  से रहे, चाहे वह बांग्लादेशी हो, रोिंहग्या हो, अमेिरकन हो या यूरोिपयन हो। ĢेिसडȂट 
टर्Çप ने हमारे भारतीय लोगȗ को, जो वहां अवैध थे, उन्हȂ हाथ-पांव मȂ जंजीरȂ बांधकर अमानवी
य 
तरीके  से आमीर् क े Ãलेन मȂ यहां भेज िदया। 
यह कानून पास होने क े बाद, अगर इस द ेश मȂ कोई अमेिरकन अवैध रूप  से रहता है, तो 
उसी तरह उसे हाथ-पांव मȂ जंजीरȂ बांधकर वािंशगटन भेज िदया जाए। यह आपका कानून रहेगा 
और इसे लागू करना जरूरी  होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... पूर े देश मȂ तीन करोड़ से अिधक रोिंहग्या और 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
बांग्लादेशी हȅ, उन्हȂ िनकालना आवÌयक है। यह मूवमȂट सबसे पहले हमने मुंबई मȂ शुरू  िकया था। 
आपको मालूम होगा िक सबसे पहले बाला साहब ठाकरे ने आवाज़ उठाई थी िक यहां एक भी 
बांग्लादेशी नहीं रहेगा। 
सर, िबल क े सेक्शन 7 मȂ कहा गया है िक जो भी िवदेशी यहां आएगा, उसके  ठहरने की 
जगह क Ȃ दर् सरकार तय करेगी। उसकी मूवमȂट को control िकया  जाएगा, वह िकस होटल
 मȂ 
ठहरेगा, कहां घूमेगा, कहां जाएगा - यह सब सरकार तय करेगी। यिद कोई Çयूिज़िशयन, 
आिर्टÎट, सोशल एिक्टिवÎट या िडÃलोमैट है, तो भी सरकार तय करेगी। यिद कोई िडÃलोमैट, 
Îटू डȂट डेलीगेशन या जनर्िलÎट द
ेश मȂ आता है और िकसी Ģमुख नेता से िमलना चाहता है - चाहे 
वह सोिनया गांधी जी से िमलना चाहता हो, चाहे Leader of the Opposition से िमलना चाहता 
हो, चाहे राहुल गांधी जी स
े िमलना चाहता हो और चाहे वह उǉव ठाकरे साहब से िमलना चाहता 
हो - तो पहले सरकार से अनुमित लेनी होगी। यिद सरकार अनुमित देती है, तो वे िमल सकते हȅ, 
अन्यथा नहीं। 
इस कानून मȂ कई ऐसे Ģावधान हȅ, इसिलए म
ȅ कहता हूं िक आप उसको जेल बनाना चाहते 
हȅ। इस देश मȂ जो आतंकी आए हȅ ...(समय की घंटी)... जो illegal तरीके  से आए हȅ, व े वैिलड 
पासपोटर् पर नहीं आए थे। कसाब जैसे लोग यहां पासपोटर् लेकर नहीं आए। कसाब और उसके  
साथ आए आतंकी समुदर् मागर् से अवैध तरीके  से घुसे और हमला करके  चले गए। सरकार को पता 
भी नहीं चला। इसिलए, इस तरह की घटनाओं को रोकने क े िलए कानून की ज़रूरत  है। पहले भी 
कानून थे, ल
ेिकन यिद अब हम इसे और मज़बूत बनाना चाहते हȅ, तो बनाइए।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRAS AD BAISHYA): Your time is over.  
Please conclude.  
 
Ǜी संजय राउत: लेिकन इस कानून म
Ȃ जो Ģावधान हȅ, उन्हȂ दोबारा समीक्षा क े िलए Îटȅिंडग 
कमेटी क े पास भेजा जाना चािहए, तािक इस पर िफर से चचार् हो सके , धन्यवाद।                                                 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA): The next speaker is 
Shri Mission Ranjan Das.  This is your maiden speech. You are allowed to speak for 
ten minutes. 
   
Ǜी िमशन रंजन दास (असम): माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मुझे समय देने क े िलए मȅ आपका 
आभारी हूँ। The Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025, भारत क े िबखरे हुए इमीगर्ेशन कानूनȗ 
और उनकी कानूनी दशा को एकितर्त करने का Ģयास करता ह
ै। यह िवधेयक चार पुराने कानूनȗ - 
पासपोटर् ( भारत मȂ Ģवेश) अिधिनयम, 1920; िवद ेिश
यȗ का पंजीकरण अिधिनयम, 1939; 
िवदेिशयȗ का अिधिनयम, 1946; और इमीगर्ेशन पिरवाहक दाियत्व अिधिनयम, 2000 - को समाÃत 
कर एक Ëयापक कानून ĢÎतुत करता है। यह िवधेयक मोदी सरकार की Ģितबǉता को दशार्ता है। 
िजसके  तहत क ेन्दर् सरकार को िवदेिशयȗ क े Ģवेश, िनवेश और िनकास को िनयिमत करने क े 
ÎपÍट अिधकार िमलते हȅ। इसके  साथ ही राÍटर्ीय स
ुरक्षा क े कड़े  Ģोटोकॉल Îथािपत िकए जाते हȅ। 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
109

 
यह िवधेयक इमीगर्ेशन Åयूरो की Îथापना, िवदेिशयȗ का अिनवायर् पंजीकरण, शैक्षिणक संÎथानȗ 
और अÎपतालȗ क े िलए िवदेशी नागिरकȗ की उपिÎथित की िरपोिटȊग का दाियत्व, संरिक्षत क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
आवागमन पर Ģितबंध और उÊलंघन करने पर कड़े दंड का Ģावधान करता है। िवशेष रूप  से यह 
कानूनी िÎथित सािबत करने का भार Ëयिƪयȗ पर डालता है, न िक राज्यȗ पर। इस Ģकार पहले 
की सरकारȗ ǎारा िकए गए अन्याय को सुधारने का Ģयास करता है। इसके  अलावा अवैध िवदेशी 
नागिरकȗ को लाने वाले पिरवहन साधनȗ क े िलए कठोर दंड िनधार्िरत करता है और इमीगर्ेशन 
अिधकािरयȗ को अवतर्न संबंधी िवÎतृत शिƪयां Ģदान करता है। यह ĢÎतािवत िवधेयक 
शरणािर्थयȗ और घुसपैिठयȗ क े बीच ÎपÍट अ
ंतर Îथािपत करने की िदशा मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् कदम 
है। इसमȂ कड़े दंड Ģावधान िकए गए हȅ, िजससे इमीगर्ेशन उÊलंघनȗ क े Ģित एक सख्त रुख  
अपनाया गया है, जो अवैध Ģवेश या जाली दÎतावेजȗ क े उपयोग को रोकने मȂ सहायक हो सकता 
है। इसमȂ उÊलंघनकतार्ओं क े िलए भारी जुमार्ने और कारावास की सख्त सजा का Ģावधान िकया 
गया है, िजससे यह ÎपÍट होता है िक इमीगर्ेशन अपराधȗ को राज्यȗ क े िहत से जुड़ा गंभीर मामला 
माना जाता है। हम सभी जानते हȅ िक असम अवैध घुसपैठ रोकने क े िलए एक कानून लाग ू था।  यह 
कानून The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act of 1950,  इस कानून की धारा 2 क े 
तहत घुसपैिठए को असम से िनÍकािसत करने और पािकÎतान से धािर्मक उत्पीड़न क े कारण 
असम मȂ आए शरणाथीर् को संरक्षण देने का Ģावधान था।  1980 क े दशक की शुरुआत  मȂ असम मȂ 
अवैध घुसपैिठयȗ क े िखलाफ एक बड़ा छातर् आ ंदोलन शुरू  हुआ।  इसे शांत करने और छातर्ȗ को 
समझाने क े उǈेÌय से The Illegal Migrants (Determi nation by Tribunals) Act, 1983 तथा 
IMDT असम मȂ लागू िकया गया। इसके  कारण The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) 
Act, 1950 को िनरÎत कर िदया गया और IMDT क े सामने अवैध घुसपैिठयȗ और शरणािर्थयȗ को 
बराबर कर िदया गया।  IMDT अिधिनयम मȂ ऐसी Ģिकर्या और सख्ती जोड़ी गई, िजससे अवैध 
घुसपैिठयȗ को िनÍकािसत करना लगभग असंभव हो गया। इस अिधिनयम क े तहत िकसी Ëयिƪ 
को घुसपैिठए घोिषत करने की िजÇमेदारी िशकायतकतार् पर डाल दी गई, िजससे घुसपैठ रोकना 
और बाहर िनकालना किठन हो गया।  असम क े पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी और हमारे वतर्मान क ेन्दर्ीय मंतर्ी 
सबार्नंद सोनोवाल जी ने इस असंवैधािनक IMDT अिधिनयम क े िखलाफ सुĢीम  कोटर् मȂ मामला 
दायर िकया।  सुĢीम कोटर् ने इसे असंवैधािनक करार देते हुए IMDT एक्ट, 1983 को रǈ कर िदया। 
हमारी बीजेपी नेतृत्वाधीन एनडीए सरकार हमेशा बांग्लादेश, पािकÎतान और अफगािनÎतान मȂ 
धािर्मक उत्पीड़न क े िशकार लोगȗ को भारत मȂ शरण देने क े पक्ष मȂ रही है। महोदय, इसी कारण स े 
2019 मȂ Citizenship Act, 1955 मȂ संशोधन कर इन तीनȗ देशȗ से आए शरणािर्थयȗ को भारतीय 
नागिरकता देने क े िलए  Citizenship (Ame ndment) Act, 2019 पास िकया था। मȅ उस समय 
की सरकार क े Ģित अपना आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं, िजन्हȗने धािर्मक रूप  स
े Ģतािड़त लोगȗ को 
भारतीय नागिरकता Ģदान करने का साहिसक कदम उठाया। मȅ वतर्मान सरकार का भी धन्यवाद 
करता हूं, जो Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025 को संसद मȂ पािरत करने हेतु लेकर आई 
है। मȅ ऐसा मानता ह
ूं िक यह अिधिनयम पािरत होने क े बाद असम तथा पूरा देश सुरिक्षत रहेगा। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, सदन मȂ अपनी बात रखने का अवसर देने क े िलए आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।                        
 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA):  The next speaker is 
hon. Member Shri Sandosh Kumar P. 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala) : Sir, this is a draconian  Bill. A group of people 
who are sitting with a kind of manufactur ed feelings can support this. Hence, I 
oppose this Bill. I heard most of the sp eakers from the Treasury Benches. It seems 
they were talking about the NRC. NRC and this Immigration and Foreigners Bill are 
entirely different things. Th ey think the foreigners ar e like illegal immigrants.  
Foreigners are not illegal immigrants. So, we  have to differentiate between them.  
Foreigners are foreigners only. This Bill is applicable to all the foreigners, but they 
think that this is applicable to Bangladeshis, Pakistanis and people who are residing in 
nearby countries. The point is that this draconian Bill will definitely tarnish the image of 
our country. There is no doubt at all. This will have adve rse impact on our education, 
medical, tourism and almost all other sect ors. On one side, we are talking about 
bringing foreign universities, attracting mo re students from foreign countries, and we 
ourselves claim as Vishwaguru, and on the ot her side, we are bringing such a kind of 
legislation. Most of them are in a way influenced by the concep t of Islamophobia. I 
don’t know whether the Minister will accept this  or not, but the point is that they are 
deeply saddened or crippled or influenced by the fake concept of Islamophobia. This 
is the crux of this whole legislation. India was always a land which welcomed 
foreigners. We were the home of thou sands of foreigners  and we accepted 
everything. That way, we were Vishwaguru . Many points were covered by my fellow 
speakers. So, due to paucity of time, I don’t want to expand much on that.  There is 
no provision for stateless people and immi grants. We should make a provision for 
them also. Then, immigration officers became omnipotent.  How can it be? What 
more procedure do you require from a person coming to India with valid passport and 
visa? How many more procedures are required? One must have a valid passport, the 
reason must be valid and there must be a valid visa.  Everywhere, there is police raj. I 
sincerely fear that this is only the begi nning.  Tomorrow, they may come up with a 
legislation with more stringent provisions, and in future, this may be applicable to 
Indian citizens also. Today, this is for foreigners. State-to-State transportation takes 
place. For example, someone is travelling from Goa to Kerala or Kerala to Gujarat. If 
we engage police officers or immigration officers everywhere to check the people, this 
will definitely be reduced to police raj.    The people who support authoritarian rulers 
can support this Bill. They are actually  programmed like that. They are always 
supporting their own authoritarian leader, so they can support this Bill also. …( Time-
bell rings. )… This Bill must be sent to a select committee. This is an insult to our 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
111

 
national prestige. India was never such a co untry.  These people want to tarnish the 
image of this country. That is why this Bill must be sent to a Select Committee. Thank 
you, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI BIRENDRA PRA SAD BAISHYA): Next speaker is Shri 
Bhubaneswar Kalita. 
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA (Assam): Sir, it is good to see you in the Chair, a very 
senior Member from Assam, presiding over the Session today.   
Sir, I rise to support this Bill which is one of the very revolutionary Bills. I can say 
that because it has consolidated four separa te Bills which were colonial laws. As we 
all know, the NDA Government is for ch ange. The NDA Government is bringing 
revolutionary changes not only to the economy but also to the judicial system of this 
country. The obsolete laws are being rep ealed now and new Bills have come. Under 
the visionary leadership of the hon. Prim e Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, and the 
unwavering dedication of the Home Minister, Shri Amit Shah, the NDA Government 
has taken bold steps to consolidate and mode rnise archaic laws into a single, robust 
framework.   A lot of points have been rais ed not only by the ru ling party but also by 
the opposition parties.  It has gone to the ex tent of talking about judicial scrutiny and 
parliamentary scrutiny.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON (SHRIMATI MAYA NAROLIYA) in the Chair.]  
 
The Parliament is discussing the Bill today. With that end in view, the BJP-led 
NDA Government has repealed over 1,500 obsolete laws compared to just 1,301 
repealed in the last 64 years of independence. Independent India was going on with 
the colonial laws and never thought to change those laws for modern India.  
The Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2 025 is a revolutionary agenda. It is 
replacing four archaic pre-Constitution laws dating back to 1920, 1939 and 1946.  The 
Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025 replaces four obsolete laws like the Foreigners 
Act, 1946; the Passport Act, 1920; the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939; and the 
Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Act, 2000. With a unified legislative framework, this 
consolidation removes the overlapping prov isions and redundancies, significantly 
simplifying the immigration process. Take an y country in the world.  It will always be 
serious about immigration. India being co nsiderate to the neighbouring countries 
earlier may have committed some blunders or mistakes. But there is always scope to 
correct those mistakes and blunders committed earlier.  
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 Madam, modernizing India’s immigratio n laws like Immigration and Foreigners 
Bill, 2025, is a testament to Modi Government’s commitment to modernizing India’s 
outdated legal framework which the prev ious Congress Government neglected for 
decades.  Reforming Colonial era immigrat ion framework, hon. Narendra Modi led 
Government has consistently delivered on its promise to dismantle Colonial era 
legislations which have shackled India for decades.   
Madam, the Bill aims at security and border control, including fencing to 
secure the borders. The Immigration and Fore igners Bill, 2025 is hon. Narendra Modi 
Government’s comprehensive strategy to secure India’s border s and address illegal 
immigration. It is in stark contrast to the earlier Government’s neglect. Under previous 
Governments, the border infrastructure remained under-developed and only 21 
kilometres of fencing along the India-Ba ngladesh border was completed in 17 
months. Critical projects like India-China Border Roads Phase-1 languished for years 
after being conceived in 1999. The Modi Go vernment has prioritized robust border 
control and there is Rs. 31,000 crore project to fence the entire 1,643 kilometres of 
India-Myanmar border which is underway with  10 kilometres already fenced at Moreh 
in Manipur and another 20 kilometres ar e approved. CIBMS is implemented along 
sensitive borders with Pakistan and Bangla desh to integrate manpower with cutting-
edge surveillance technologies. Between 2018 and 2023, an amount of Rs. 154.7 
billion was allocated for constructing over 2,088 kilometres of roads along India-China 
border and this was coupled with 49 per cent increase in border in frastructure funding 
in the Union Budget of 2025-26, which is Rs. 5,597 crore compared to last year.   
Madam, we remember those days wh en after many demands from the 
Members of the North-Eastern Region, hardly an amount of Rs. 500 crore was 
allocated for development of border and bord er roads.  But, today, you can see the 
difference. It is a significant difference  which has come; border development and 
border area development has been given prio rities. We all see today that tunnels are 
built; highways are built; bridges, which were  nowhere, are being built to secure the 
border and the movement of our Arme d Forces. Then, there was deliberate 
demographic engineering, which many of our hon. Members have mentioned about. 
It is IMDT Act which uniquely required the State to prove foreigner’s illegal status in 
Assam, making deportation virtually impo ssible. One of our Members has mentioned 
that a very less number of fo reigners were deported. The reason for less number of 
foreigners being deported was that the law itself protected them. The IMDT Act 
protected those people. Although they were foreigners, although they were detected, 
but they were protected by that Act. The Supreme Court very rightly struck down that 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
113

 
law calling it as unconstitutional. This meant the demographic invasion, which the 
country has seen in that part of the country and many parts of the country.   
Then, enhance enforcement of powers of swift action. Madam, since 2014, 
BSF interception of illegal crossings ha s increased significantly with 17,432 of 
Bangladeshis intercepted during 2018 and 2023. 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): अब आप complete कीिजए। आपका समय पूरा हो  
गया है।  
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: Madam, I would take only two minutes more 
because our hon. Member has mentioned about the NRC and another hon. Member, 
a renowned lawyer, has mentioned about th e judicial scrutiny and about NRC. The 
NRC has been prepared and the NRC work has been complete.  But she mentioned 
about the delay. The delay is because of the judiciary. You talk about judicial scrutiny, 
you talk about judiciary.  …(Time-bell rings.)…  But if it is delayed due to judiciary, you 
cannot blame.   
 Madam, I would take one more minute.  The carrier accountability for closing 
all entry roads; as we all know, entry and exit o f  t h e  f o r e i g n e r s  i s  t o  b e  r e g u l a t e d .   
That is the need and that is  the reason the Bill is here.  I would only read two-three 
lines on how this Bill has come. You talk ab out judicial scrutiny. This Bill has come 
due to judicial judgment only. This landmark legislation is built upon the recent 
Supreme Court ruling upholding the constitu tional validity of Section 6A of the 
Citizenship Act wherein the court reinforced  a legislative framework that balances 
humanitarian concerns with the protection of Assam’s indigenous population.   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): आपका समय पूरा हो गया है।  
 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA: So, this legislation is the outcome of a judgment of 
the Supreme Court. The judicial scrutiny is do ne
 already.  It is due to the judgment of 
the Supreme Court that this Bill has come . With this, I conclude and I thank you very 
much.                                      
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): अगली वƪा हȅ- डा. फौिजया खान। आपका समय 3 
िमनट है।  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Madam, this Bill represents a crossroad for our 
country. While it consolidates fragmented laws, it does little to innovate but has much 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
to repress. While we agree that there need s to be strong measures to prevent illegal 
migration, the Bill ignores the subtle difference between illegal migrants and refugees, 
between those who constitute a threat an d those who seek asylum. There should 
have been clear legal definitions of who qualifies as a fore igner, an illegal immigrant, a 
refugee, or a stateless person. For a Government that promotes  Vasudhaiva 
Kutumbakam, the absence of a streamlined framework for refugees and asylum 
seekers is questionable.  In 2024, the Su preme Court has noted the poor conditions 
in detention centres, especially inadequate water, sanitation, toilet facilities and all 
this is inhuman.  
Another glaring omission is the absen ce of a special immigration tribunal as 
recommended by the 175 th R e p o r t  o f  t h e  L a w  C o m m ission. Instead the new Bill 
delegates this power entirely  to executive immigration of ficers. This heavy executive 
power is a recipe for misuse  and overreach by the Govern ment. Without an appellate 
judicial recourse and the burden of proof on the individual, the system is skewed 
against vulnerable individuals facing depo rtation. How will people, who do not have 
documents, prove their citizenship or nati onality? How many of  us here, in this 
House, possess Birth Certificates? I would lik e to bring the case of a retired Indian 
Army official who was declared a foreigne r by the Foreigners Tribunal in Assam and 
sent to one of the Assam's detention centres on May 29. In an interview to the media, 
he had stated, ‘People have been lodged inside camps for years and they are genuine 
citizens, not foreigners.  Most are inside mainly due to technical errors in the official 
documents.’ Another man from the State, following a 12-year legal battle and his 
citizenship restored just last year, died af ter two years. While the burden of proof is 
disproportionately placed on the individual, the State has been given overarching 
powers to prosecute with even a Head Constable being allowed to arrest somebody 
without a warrant!  I think, this is outrageous.  
Madam, as I conclude, in the Government 's typical fashion that ‘any foreigner 
posing a threat to India's integrity will be denied entry into the country or permission 
to stay.’ What kind of threat? Threat to the nation or threat to the Government! I'm 
afraid this Clause will be us ed to cancel visas of people critical of the regime. For 
example, foreign journalists, academics, other professionals.  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): आप complete कीिजए, आपका समय हो गया है। 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN : Madam, I am concluding. In our pursuit of national security and 
sovereignty, we must not sacrifice the very principles that define us as a nation.  While 
dealing with potential threats, we must not lose sight of due process and basic 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
115

 
human values and basic human rights. Let us not forget that culturally, for us Indians, 
these values hold immense importance. Let the sentiment of hatred not blind us to the 
point of insanity. …(Time-bell rings.)…  I urge this Bill to be sent to a joint committee. 
Thank you.   
                                                                                             
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): अगले वƪा क े रूप  मȂ माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी संजय िंसह 
जी हȅ। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): महोदया, आपने मुझे इस अित महत्वपूणर् िबल 
पर अपनी बात कहने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए आपको धन्यवाद। मȅ सरकार का पक्ष सुन रहा 
था, उनकी िंचताओं को सुन रहा था और उन्हȗने इस िबल का जो मकसद बताया, वह सुन रहा 
था। महोदया, भारत की सुरक्षा िनिÌचत रूप  से सवȘपिर है।  राÍटर् की सुरक्षा से िकसी भी Ģकार का 
कोई समझौता नहीं होना चािहए। द
ेश क े अंदर िकसी को भी अवैध तरीके  से घुसपैठ करने की 
इजाजत नहीं होनी चािहए। देश क े अंदर कहीं भी अवैध घुसपैिठया नहीं होना चािहए, लेिकन 
िपछले 11 साल  से इस देश क े अंदर आपकी सरकार है, ज्यादातर राज्यȗ मȂ डबल इंजन की 
सरकार ह
ै।...(Ëयवधान)... ऊपर भी मोदी जी, नीचे भी मोदी जी, ऊपर भी मोदी जी, नीचे भी 
योगी जी, ऊपर भी मोदी जी, नीचे भी िहमंत िबÎवा सरमा जी ...( Ëयवधान)... महोदया, चारȗ 
तरफ महामानव की सरकार, व
े तो अपने आपको अवतार भी कहते हȅ और उस अवतार की 
सरकार मȂ घुसपैठ हो जा रही है! 11 साल से अगर िंहदुÎतान क े िकसी कोने मȂ अवैध घुसपैिठया 
है, अवैध रूप  से कोई नागिरक रह रहा है, तो उसके  िलए सीधे तौर पर भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की 
सरकार और Ģधान म
ंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी िजÇमेदार हȅ, कोई दूसरा िजÇमेदार नहीं है।  
महोदया, बॉडर्र की सुरक्षा िकसके  पास है? बॉडर्र की सुरक्षा गृह मंतर्ालय क े पास है।  वहाँ 
पर बीएसएफ लगी हुई है। चीन घुसपैठ कर रहा है। हम लोग िचÊलाते हȅ, बोलते हȅ, आपको उसके  
बारे मȂ बोलने की फ ु सर्त नहीं है। गलवान घाटी मȂ हमारे 20 जवान शहीद हो गए, ल ेिकन शमर् आती 
है, उस चीन क े साथ आपने अपना Ëयापार बढ़ाने का काम िकया है, िंहदुÎतान का रुपया उन तक 
पहुँचाने का काम िकया है।   
 
4.00 P.M. 
 
देश क े बॉडर्र की सुरक्षा आपके  िजÇमे है। मȅ बड़ा हाÎयाÎपद तकर् सुन रहा था, बहुत ही हाÎयाÎपद 
तकर्! यहां टी
एमसी क े हमारे िमतर् बैठे हुए हȅ। वे कह रहे थे, बॉडर्र लगा हुआ है बंगाल क े साथ, 
बॉडर्र लगा हुआ है असम क े साथ, ितर्पुरा क े साथ, उस समय कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, टीएमसी 
की सरकार थी, फलां थी, िढमक
ा थी। आधार काडर् बन गया, इसिलए उसी आधार काडर् ने सब 
गड़बड़ कर िदया और उसी आधार काडर् की वजह से एक बंगलादेशी घुसपैिठया बंगाल से चला, 
असम से चला, ितर्पुरा से चला, झारखंड पार िकया, िबहार पार िकया, यूपी पार िकया, िदÊली आ 
गया और ये बेचारे देखते रहे, इन्हȗने क ु छ नहीं िकया। यहां माननीय एलओपी साहब, मिÊलकाजुर्न 
खरगे जी भी ब
ैठे हȅ, ये भी राज्य मȂ मंतर्ी रहे हȅ, Ģमोद ितवारी जी भी राज्य मȂ मंतर्ी रहे हȅ। इन दोनȗ 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
से भी सरकार क े लोग पूछ लȂ, ये भी आपकी मदद कर दȂगे।  िकसी राज्य क े अंदर कोई Ëयिƪ आ 
गया, तब उस राज्य सरकार की िजÇमेदारी होती है, लेिकन मुझे लगता है, आजकल पूरा का पूरा 
गृह मंतर्ालय सुपरमैन की िपक्चर देख रहा है, पूरे भाजपाई सुपरमैन की िपक्चर देख रहे हȅ और 
क
ै से देख रहे हȅ? बंगाल मȂ 50 िकलोमीटर की सुरक्षा बीएसएफ क े पास है। एक बंगलादेशी खड़ा 
होता है, उस बॉडर्र पर खड़ा होता है, जहां बीएसएफ होती है, जहां गृह मंतर्ालय होता है, वह 
Ëयिƪ छलांग लगाता है और 50 िकलोमीटर छलांग मारकर सीधे ममता जी क े पास पहुंच जाता है 
और कहता है, ममता जी, आधार काडर् दे दीिजए। यह हो रहा है, क्या? 50 िकलोमीटर आप नहीं 
रोक पा रहे हȅ, अपनी नाकामी आप नहीं बता रहे हȅ।  असम क े अंदर, ितर्पुरा क े अंदर, बंगाल क े 
अंदर जो बॉडर्र है, वह आपके  िजÇमे है और उसकी सुरक्षा क े साथ िखलवाड़ आपने िकया है, गृह 
मंतर्ालय ने िकया है, भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार ने िकया है। आप अपने दोष राज्य सरकारȗ 
क े ऊपर मढ़ते हȅ! आधार काडर् तो आदमी तब मांगेगा, जब राज्य की सीमा मȂ घुसेगा। जब 50 
िकलोमीटर सीमा की सुरक्षा आपके  िजÇमे है, तो आप क्या कर रहे थे, आपकी सरकार क्या कर 
रही थी? क्या वह बंगलादेशी सुपरमैन ह
ै, जो सीधे 50 िकलोमीटर  फांदकर आएगा और 50 
िकलोमीटर क े बाद सीधे ममता जी क े पास पहुंच जाएगा और कहेगा, हमȂ आधार काडर् दो?  यह 
क ैसा तकर् है? 
 आपने कहा, भारत क े अंदर कोई भी नागिरक अवैध पासपोटर्, अवैध वीजा लेकर नहीं रह 
सकता, लेिकन म
ȅ दूसरी बात आपसे पूछना चाहता हूँ। इस बात का म ȅ समथर्न करता हूँ िक वह 
िबÊकु ल नहीं रह सकता, लेिकन जो  िंहदुÎतान क े डकै त आज िवदेशȗ मȂ बैठकर हमको िचढ़ाने 
का काम कर रहे हȅ, िजन्हȗने हमारी बȅकȗ को लूटा है, िजन्हȗने आम आदमी का पैसा लूटा है और 
20,000 करोड़ की लूट करने वाले नीरव मोदी और मेह
ुल चोकसी कई वषș से िंहदुÎतान छोड़कर 
बाहर बैठे हुए हȅ और इस देश को  िचढ़ा रहे हȅ।   वह  िंहदुÎतान की बȅकȗ  का 3,000 करोड़  
लूटकर िवदेशȗ मȂ बैठा हुआ है। आप उसको आज तक वापस क्यȗ नहीं ला पाए? िवजय माÊया, 
िंहदुÎतान का 9,000 करोड़  रुपय े लूटकर, िंहदुÎतान क े बȅकȗ का लूटकर, िंहदुÎतान क े आम 
आदमी का पैसा लूटकर िवदेशȗ मȂ बैठा हुआ है।  वह आपको िचढ़ाता रहता है। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): माननीय सदÎय, क ृपया िवधेयक पर ही अपनी बात रखȂ।  
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: महोदया, मȅ िवषय पर ही बोल रहा हूँ
।  इन्हीं लोगȗ से सीखा है।  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदया, ...(Ëयवधान)...
 
 
SHRI SANJAY SINGH: Madam, I am not yielding. …(Interruptions)… I am not yielding. 
मंतर्ी जी को तब बोलने िदया जाए, जब मȅ yield करू ँ।  I am not yielding. 
 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
117

 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदया, मȅ आपका संरक्षण चाहता हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... जब आप िबल से बाहर 
बोल रहे हȅ, तो आप िबल से बाहर सुनने क े िलए भी तैयार रहȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: एकदम ठीक है।  जब आपका मौका आएगा, आप बोिलएगा। महोदया, हम लोगȗ 
ने टीवी चैनल पर खबर देखी, िवजय माÊया आएगा, ितहाड़ की बैरक मȂ रहेगा, यहां पर उसको 
रोका जाएग
ा, यहां उसको सजा दी जाएगी। टीवी चैनल वाले यह खबर चला रहे थे और ये लोग 
भी बोल रहे थे िक िवजय माÊया को लाएंगे।  9,000 करोड़ की लूट करने वाला िवज
य माÊया आज 
िवदेशȗ मȂ बैठकर िचढ़ा रहा है। एक लिलत मोदी है, िजसने कौन-से देश की नागिरकता ले ली है, 
संजय राउत जी? मȅ तो वह नाम ही भूल गया! ...(Ëयवधान)... Vanuatu. उसन े वानूआतू की 
नागिरकता ले ली। उसने कहा, "एक करोड़ जमा करो।" वानूआतू चलो। वह वानूआतू चला गया। 
िनितन संदेसरा िंहदुÎतान क े 6 हजार करोड़ रुपय े लूटकर िवदेशȗ मȂ बैठा हुआ है और 
आपको िचढ़ा रहा है। महोदया, मȅ इस सदन का सÇमािनत सदÎय हूं, देश क े सवȘच्च सदन का 
सदÎय हूं। बड़े दुख और पीड़ा क े साथ कह रहा हूं  ...(Ëयवधान)... मेरा पासपोटर् जÅत है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... क्या मȅ िंहदुÎतान का नागिरक नहीं हूं? क्या मȅ इस सवȘच्च सदन का सदÎय नहीं 
हूं? मȅ मेÇबर ऑफ पािर्लयामȂट हूं, लेिकन मेरा पासपोटर् जÅत है। मȅ कहना चाहता हूं, अगर वाÎतव 
मȂ तुÇहारी नीयत साफ है, तो आज िंहदुÎतान क े अंदर िजन-िजन लोगȗ का 50 करोड़  रुपय े से 
ज्यादा बकाया है, सबका पासपोटर् जÅत करो। कोई िंहदुÎतान छोड़कर भागने न पाए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... आप अनावÌयक बातȂ करते हȅ! 11 साल से आपकी राज्यȗ मȂ सरकार है, 11 साल से 
आपकी क Ȃ दर् मȂ सरकार है। िफर भी बंगलादेशी घुसपैिठयȗ की सही संख्या नहीं बता पाते िक आपने 
िकतने भगाए? आज बताइए, आपने िकतने लोगȗ को भगाया? 11 साल क े अंदर आपने िकतने 
बंगलादेशी घुसपैिठयȗ को भगाया? क ेवल राजनीित करते हȅ। जब बंगाल का चुनाव आता है, तब 
राजनीित शुरू ! जब िबहार का चुनाव आता है, तब राजनीित शुरू ! लेिकन इससे ऊपर भी सोचो। 
इन्हȗने िकतना बड़ा पाप िकया, पूरे देश को सुनना चािहए! पंजाब मȂ बीएसएफ की देखरेख की 
सीमा को बढ़ाकर 50 िकमी तक कर िदया। इसके  साथ-साथ,  आप वही लोग हȅ, िजन्हȗने हमारे 
भारत क े नागिरकȗ का अपमान िकया। 144 करोड़ की आबादी वाला िंहदुÎतान, दुिनया का सबसे 
बड़ा लोकतंतर् िंहदुÎतान, दुिनया मȂ भारत की बात जब आती है, तब राÍटर्िपता महात्मा गांधी से 
हमारी पहचान, भारत की बात जब आती है, तब गौतम बुǉ से हमारी पहचान, बाबा साहेब डा. 
भीमराव अÇबेडकर से हमारी पहचान। लेिकन मुझे शमर् आती है िक अमेिरका ने 144 करोड़ की 
आबादी वाले िंहदुÎतान क े नागिरकȗ को हथकड़ी पहनाकर, पैरȗ मȂ बेिड़यां डालकर िंहदुÎतान की 
धरती पर भेजा, और आपको शमर् नहीं आई? आप हंस रहे थे, मज़ाक उड़ा रहे थे! अमृतसर मȂ 
जब हमारे नागिरकȗ को हथकिड़यȗ मȂ उतारा गया, तब Ģधान मंतर्ी वहां उस वƪ थे, लेिकन 
उन्हȗने कोई सवाल नहीं उठाया। िफर उन नागिरकȗ को क ैिदयȗ की वैन मȂ बैठाकर हिरयाणा भेज 
िदया गया। आपको बोलने का कोई अिधकार नहीं है।  
 
                                                            
£ Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): माननीय सदÎय, आपका बोलने का समय समाÃत हो 
गया। हम राÍटर् भƪ थे, हȅ और रहȂगे।  आपसे िकसी भी Ģमाण-पतर् की जरूरत नहीं है। …(समय की 
घंटी)…  …(Ëयवधान)… माननीय सदÎय, आपका समय हो गया। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह:  आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): अगले वƪा Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल। आपका समय दस 
िमनट का है।  
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल (िबहार): जी मैडम, मȅ दस
 िमनट मȂ ही बोलूंगा। उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, आपने मुझे 
एक महत्वपूणर् िबल अĢवास और िवदेिशयȗ िवषयक िवधेयक, 2025 पर बोलने का मौका िदया है, 
इसके  िलए मȅ आपका ǭदय से आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं। महोदया, इस िबल का उǈेÌय भारत मȂ 
िवदेिशयȗ
 अĢवास, Ģवेश और Ģवास को िविनयिमत करना है।  1975 मȂ एक िफÊम शोले आई थी, 
िजसमȂ एक मशहूर डॉयलॉग था, असरानी जी ने कहा था िक मȅ अंगर्ेज क े जमाने का जेलर हूं। 
उसी तरह से अभी हमारे Îवतंतर्  भारत मȂ भी अंगर्ेज़ क े जमाने क े बनाए गए कानून चले आ रहे थे, 
िजसका  अवलोकन करने क े बाद माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व वाली सरकार 
ने बहुत से गैर-जरूरी कानून को िनरÎत िकया और क ु छ कानूनȗ को संशोिधत कर उसे आजाद 
भारत का कानून बनाया है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, अभी भारत मȂ Ģवासी िवदेशी नागिरकȗ को भारत
 मȂ Ģवेश हेतु चार 
कानूनȗ का Ģावधान है। िजसमȂ पासपोटर् ( भारत मȂ Ģवेश) अिधिनयम, 1920, िवदेिशयȗ का 
पंजीकरण अिधिनयम, 1939, िवदेशी नागिरक  अिधिनयम, 1946 और अĢवास (वाहक दाियत्व) 
अिधिनयम, 2000 हȅ। ज
ैसा मȅने पूवर् मȂ कहा िक उपरोƪ चार कानूनȗ मȂ से तीन कानून आजादी क े 
पहले क े हȅ, िजन्हȂ िनरÎत कर Îवतंतर् भारत का कानून बनाना जरूरी  था। अĢवास और िवदेिशयȗ 
िवधेयक, 2025 पािरत हो जाने क े बाद अब नया अĢवासन कानून बनेगा, िजससे भारत की सुरक्षा 
मजबूत होगी और भारत मȂ अवैध घुसपैठ पर लगाम लगेगी। हमारा देश भारत …(Ëयवधान)… मेरा 
टाइम पॉज िकया जाए। …(Ëयवधान)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): आप बोिलए। श
ंभू जी, आप बोिलए, बाकी सब बैठ 
जाइए।  आप बोिलए। …(Ëयवधान)… शंभू जी, आप बोिलए। …( Ëयवधान)… आप सब बैठ जाइए। 
…(Ëयवधान)… यह कौन-सा रूल  है। शंभू जी, आप
को समय िदया जा रहा है। 
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: महोदया, 2014 क े पहले भारत क े नेतृत्वकतार् क े नेतृत्व मȂ सभी िडपाटर्मȂट्स 
मȂ घोटाले और ĥÍटाचार ËयाÃत था। 2014 क े बाद जब माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने देश की गǈी को 
संभाला, तो उस समय भारत की अथर्ËयवÎथा, दुिनया की दसवीं सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा थी।  
उसके  बाद 2014 से लेकर अभी 2025 जो चल रहा है, उसमȂ भारत दुिनया की पांचवीं सबसे बड़ी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा बन गई है और इसको कहने मȂ कोई अित
Ìयोिƪ नहीं है िक 2027 तक भारत दुिनया 
की तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन जाएगी।  भारत मȂ अब Ëयापार करना आसान हो गया है।  
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
119

 
भारत मȂ िशक्षा ĢाÃत करना, अÎपतालȗ मȂ सÎते और अच्छे इलाज की वजह से मेिडकल ट ूिरज्म 
की संख्या बढ़ी है। महोदया, ईज़ ऑफ ड ू इंग िबज़नेस होने की वजह से भारत मȂ िवदेश से आने 
वाले लोगȗ की संख्या बढ़ी है। महोदया, हमारा भारत देश ‘ अितिथ देवो भव:’ और ‘ वसुधैव 
क ु ट ुÇबकç’ पर िवÌवास रखता है। हम वैध रूप  स
े आने वाले लोगȗ का िदल खोलकर Îवागत करते 
हȅ, उनका सत्कार करते हȅ, लेिकन जो अवैध रूप  से आएंगे और जो आए हȅ, उन्हȂ उसी तरह से 
उनके  देश मȂ वापस भेज िदया जाएगा।  
 महोदया, अभी हमारे आप पाटीर् क े सदÎय बंगाल सरकार क े Ģवƪा क े रूप  म
Ȃ बोल रहे थे, 
मȅ उनकी बातȗ का भी जवाब दूंगा। हमारे िवपक्षी दल क े  क ु छ सदÎय फ ेडरल Îटर्क्चर की बात 
करते हȅ, Ģांतȗ क े आंतिरक मामलȗ मȂ क Ȃ दर् सरकार पर हÎतक्षेप करने का आरोप लगाते हȅ, मȅ 
आपके  माध्यम से एक बात बताना चाहता हूं िक भारत एक Îवतंतर् राÍटर् है और संसद म Ȃ क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार ǎारा बनाया गया कानून भारत क े सभी Ģांतȗ पर लागू होता है और खास कर देश की 
सुरक्षा और नागिरकता क े सवाल पर िसफर् भारत सरकार का कानून ही अंितम रूप  से मान्य माना 
जाता है।  
महोदया, हमारे देश मȂ एक Ģांत है – पिÌचमी बंगाल। वह भारत का एकमातर् ऐसा Ģांत है, 
जहाँ पर अवैध रूप  से सबसे ज्यादा बंगलादेशी मुसलमान और रोिंहग्या रहते हȅ। उन लोगȗ को 
नागिरकता देने क े िलए, वहाँ की सरकार क े संरक्षण मȂ उनके  अवैध रूप  से आधार काड्सर्, अवैध 
रूप  से राशन काड्सर्, अवैध रूप  से पासपोटर् बनाये जाते हȅ, उन्हȂ द
ेश का वोटर बनाया जाता है। 
उनसे देश क े िखलाफ पूरे िंहदुÎतान मȂ घूम-घूमकर दंगे कराए जाते हȅ। आज उन्हीं रोिंहग्या और 
बंगलादेिशयȗ की वजह से बंगाल की यह िÎथित हो गई है िक वहाँ क े बहुत सारे िजलȗ मȂ िंहदुओं 
की संख्या घट गई है, वे अÊपसंख्यक हो गए हȅ। वहाँ की बहन-बेिटयȗ क े साथ बंगलादेशी और 
रोिंहग्या जो अत्याचार कर रहे हȅ, उसको बोलने मȂ भी शमर् आती ह
ै।  
महोदया, संजय जी बंगाल क े Ģवƪा बनकर बोल रहे थे, मȅ उनके  िलए यह कहूंगा िक वे 
बंगाल की हालत जाकर देख
Ȃ। वे उǄर िदनाजपुर मȂ देखȂ, मालदा मȂ देखȂ, कािलयाचक मȂ देखȂ, 
नॉथर् चौबीस परगना मȂ जाकर देखȂ िक िंहदुओं क े साथ िकस तरह से गलत Ëयवहार िकया जाता 
है। महोदया, ऐसे रोिंहग्याओं को, ऐसे ब
ंगलादेिशयȗ को वापस भेजने क े िलए और उन्हȂ 
आइडȂिटफाई करने क े िलए अगर भारत सरकार कोई भी कानून लाती है, तो देश िहत मȂ लाती है। 
हमारी सरकार हमेशा से राÍटर् िहत की भावना से काम करती है, न िक उनकी तरह तुिÍटकरण 
नीित
 क े जैसे िकसी एक धमर् और एक मज़हब क े िलए काम करती है। हमारी सरकार का कहना 
है, ‘सबका साथ-सबका िवकास-सबका िवÌवास और सबका Ģयास।’ महोदया, आज तक िजतना 
भी हुआ ह
ै, उसी आधार पर हुआ है। 2014 क े बाद 2025 तक हमारी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार 
जो भी कानून लाई है, वह सभी क े िलए लाई है और देश को सुरिक्षत करने क े िलए लाई है, देश क े 
िवकास क े िलए लाई है, न िक िकसी धमर् और मज़हब क े िखलाफ लाई है।  
महोदया, आज मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से देश क े माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी और गृह मंतर्ी जी से 
आगर्ह करना चाहूंगा िक जो बंगलादेशी और रोिंहग्या अवैध रुप  से पिÌचमी ब
ंगाल और झारखंड 
क े क ु छ एिरयाज़ मȂ रह रहे हȅ, उनकी जांच एनआईए को दȂ और उसके  िलए एक कमेटी भी बनाएं। 
महोदया, ऐसे जो लोग अवैध रूप  से रह रहे हȅ, उन्हȂ देश से अिवलंब िडपोटर् िकया जाए। महोदया, 
‘आĢवास और िवदेिशयȗ िवषयक िवधेयक, 2025’ का म
ुख्य उǈेÌय देश मȂ अवैध अĢवासन को 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
रोकना, देश की आंतिरक सुरक्षा को सुदृढ़ करना और िवदेशी घुसपैिठयȗ को रोकना है। महोदया, 
संजय जी राज्य की सरकार कह रहे थे, वहाँ तो क Ȃ दर् की सरकार है, बीएसएफ क े िजÇमे सुरक्षा है, 
तो मȅ इस पर उनसे यह कहना चाहूंगा िक आप 2014 से पहले िजतनी घुसपैठ हुई ह ै, उसका और 
जो अभी तक की घुसपैठ है, उसका डेटा िमला लीिजए, आपको पता चल जाएगा।  
महोदया, पहले बंगलादेश की पूरी सीमा, जो लगभग 2,000 िकलोमीटर से ऊपर की है, 
वह पूरी तरह से खुली हुई थी, ल
ेिकन आज हमारे माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ लगभग 85 
परसȂट सीमा मȂ बाड़ लगाने का काम हो चुका है। माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी ने कहा था िक बहुत सारी 
ऐसी जगहȂ हȅ, जहाँ पर फ Ȃिंसग नहीं हो सकती है, क्यȗिक वहाँ पर नदी है, नाला है तथा और भी 
क ु छ है, इसिलए इन्हȂ इस बात को समझना चािहए। िजन संजय जी ने आरोप लगाया ह
ै, िजनके  
िखलाफ पिरवारवाद की बात करके  सǄा मȂ आए – वे कहते थ
े इंिदरा का पुतर् कौन - राजीव, 
राजीव का पुतर् कौन, राजीव की पत्नी कौन – सोिनया, सोिनया का बेटा कौन – राह ुल। 
महोदया, वे डीएमके  पर बोले – अभी राम गोपाल जी मौजूद नहीं हȅ, वे उनकी पूरी फ ैिमली पर भी 
बोले, लेिकन उन्हȗने उन्हीं क े साथ जाकर सरकार बनाई, लेिकन हमारी सरकार पर दोष
ारोपण 
करने का काम करते हȅ।  
महोदया, इस कानून क े आने क े बाद देश मȂ जो िवदेशी लोग आते हȅ, चाहे वे मेिडकल 
ट ूिरज्म क े नाम पर आएं या एजुक ेशन क े िलए आएं या िफर घूमने क े िलए आएं, वे िजस अÎपताल 
मȂ, िजस यूिनविर्सटी मȂ रहȂग
े, िजस होटल मȂ रहȂगे, उनको उसकी ऑनलाइन इंफॉमȃशन सरकार 
को देनी होगी। इसमȂ गल
त क्या है? संजय राउत जी चले गए, वे कह रहे थे िक ये देश को जेल 
बनाना चाहते हȅ। यह देश जेल नहीं है। यह देश ‘अितिथ देवो भव:’ क े िसǉांत पर चलता है। उनके  
कायर्काल मȂ, यूपीए क े कायर्काल मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): कÇÃलीट किरए, आपको एक िमन
ट का समय और...   
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: मैडम, मुझे एक िमनट और दे दीिजए। अभी मेरा टाइम बाकी है।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): अभी आपके  पास समय है।    
 
Ǜी शंभू शरण पटेल: यूपीए क े कायर्काल मȂ िसफर् 10 द
ेशȗ क े िलए ऑनलाइन वीजा का Ģावधान 
था। हमारी सरकार ने बढ़ाकर 169 देशȗ क े िलए ऑनलाइन वीजा का Ģावधा न िकया है। आप 
बताएं िक हम लोग िवदेिशयȗ या अितिथयȗ को बुलाने का काम कर रहे हȅ या उनको भगाने का 
काम कर रहे हȅ? ये उनको िडसाइड करना है। िकसी पर आरोप लगा देना, िमथ्या आरोप लगा 
देना, इसके  अलावा िवपक्ष क े पास तो क ु छ नहीं है। गांधी जी ने 1948 मȂ ही कह िदया था िक िजस 
वजह से कांगर्ेस बनी, वह उǈेÌय पूरा हो गया है और कांगर्ेस को समाÃत हो जाना चािहए। देश की 
जनता कांगर्
ेस को समाÃत कर रही है और हमारी सरकार अंगर्ेजȗ ǎारा बनाए गए गलत कानूनȗ को 
संशोिधत कर रही है और समाÃत कर रही है। हमारी सरकार का एक ही उǈेÌय है और वह है देश 
को िवकिसत राÍटर् बनाना। नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का लÑय है िक 2047 तक भारत िवकिसत राÍटर् बनेगा। 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
121

 
इसमȂ कहीं कोई दो राय नहीं है। मैडम, जो भी आरोप-Ģत्यारोप लगाते हȅ, उनका काम ही है, 
उनकी नौकरी ही आरोप-Ģत्यारोप लगाना है।   
मैडम, यह देश को मजबूत करने वाला कानून है। यह राÍटर् Ģथम की भावना से ओत-Ģोत 
कानून है। इसिलए मȅ काकोरी कांड क े बाद जब राम Ģसाद िबिÎमल जी की अंितम इच्छा पूछी गई 
थी, तो उन्हȗने राÍटर् क े िलए एक
 पंिƪ कही था। मȅ उस पंिƪ को बोलते हुए अपनी वाणी को िवराम 
दूंगा।  उन्हȗने कहा था : 
 
जीवन पुÍप चढ़ा चरणȗ मȂ, मांगे मातृभूिम से यह वर, 
तेरा वैभव अमर रहे मां, हम िदन चार रहȂ न रहȂ। 
 
जय िंहद! जय भारत! वंदे मातरम! 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): धन्यवाद। अगले वƪा क े रूप  मȂ माननीय सदÎय Ǜी 
रामजी।  माननीय सदÎय Ǜी रामजी अनुपिÎथत हȅ। अगले वƪा क े रूप  म
Ȃ माननीय सदÎय डा. 
अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े। 
 
डा. अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े (महाराÍटर्): सभापित महोदया, The Immigration and 
Foreigners Bill, 2025, यह िवधेयक हमारे िंहदुÎतान की सुरक्षा, अखंडता एकात्मता क े िलए 
बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् ह
ै। इसिलए मȅ माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी, माननीय अिमत शाह जी और 
माननीय िनत्यानन्द राय जी का तन-मन से अिभनंदन करता हूं और धन्यवाद Ëयƪ करना चाहता 
हूं। यह िवधेयक क्यȗ आवÌयक है, मȅ यह बताना चाहता ह ूं। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, िंहदुÎतान मȂ 
बहुत सारी ऐसी जगह हȅ, बहुत सारे ऐसे शहर हȅ - हैदराबाद है, मालेगांव है, िभवंडी है - ऐसे कई 
शहरȗ मȂ अवैध घुसपैिठयȗ क े माध्यम से, मृत Ëयिƪ की बोगस वोिंटग होती  है। यह बोगस वोिंटग 
का बहुत बड़ा षǹ ंतर् है।  हमारे देश मȂ इन अवैध घुसपैिठयȗ क े माध्यम देश िवरोधी ताकतȂ बड़ी 
मातर्ा मȂ मृत Ëयिƪ की बोगस वोिंटग करती हȅ और घर जाकर सो जाती हȅ। मृत Ëयिƪयȗ की बोगस 
वोिंटग क े षǹ ंतर् क े माध्
यम से, ये अवैध घुसपैिठए बहुत बड़ी मातर्ा मȂ करते हȅ, इनमȂ रोिंहग्या है, 
बंगलादेशी है और बहुत सारे अन्य भी हȅ। मȅ गृह राज्य मंतर्ी Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय जी का अिभनंदन 
करना चाहता हूं। बहुत सारे असामािज
क तत्व, राÍटर् िवरोधी ताकतȂ ऐसी हȅ, जो अपने माता-िपता 
का नाम भी वोटर िलÎट मȂ नहीं िलखते हȅ। इनमȂ ज्यादा से ज्यादा बंगलादेशी और रोिंहग्या 
घुसपैिठए बहुत बड़े Ģमाण मȂ िमल गए हȅ। एक आदमी सरकार की अनेक योजनाओं का लाभ ले 
रहा है।  वे बोगस वोिंटग तो कर ही रहे हȅ, लेिकन हमारी सरकार की योजनाओं का लाभ भी उठा 
रहे हȅ। अवैध तरीके  से रहने वाले ये बंगलादेशी और रोिंहग्या हजारȗ की संख्या मȂ हȅ। ये हमारी 
लोकतांितर्क Ģणाली क े िलए बहुत बड़ा खतरा हȅ। िंहदुÎतान की अथर्ËयवÎथा पर ये घुसपैिठए एक 
बहुत बड़ा बोझ बन चुक े हȅ। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, िंहदुÎतान क े सरकारी अÎपताल, िंहदुÎतान क े 
सरकारी Îकू ल, मनोरंजन की जगह, िंहदुÎतान की सरकारी राशन की दुकानȂ, इनका मुÄत मȂ 
इÎतेमाल ये सारे अवैध घुसपैिठए कर रहे हȅ। वे इन चीजȗ का लाभ ले रहे ह ȅ। इन अवैध घुसपैिठयȗ 
की वजह से, हजारȗ अवैध घुसपैिठए सरकार की सारी योजनाओं का लाभ ले रहे हȅ। इसकी वजह 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
से यह हमारी अथर्ËयवÎथा क े ऊपर बहुत बड़ा बोझ बन चुका है। इसके  माध्यम से इन लोगȗ क े 
ǎारा अनैितक गितिविधयाँ की जा रही हȅ और राÍटर् िवरोधी षǹ ंतर् भी रचे जा रहे हȅ। यह हमारे 
िहन्दुÎतान की आिर्थक सुरक्षा क े िलए बड़ा खतरा बन चुका ह ै।   
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, Tata Institute of Social Sciences और JNU क े ǎारा 
ĢÎतुत एक िरपोटर् भी आ गई है। उसमȂ एक उÊलेख िकया गया है िक बंगलादेशी एवं Çयांमार से 
आए घुसपैिठयȗ की वजह से िहन्दुÎतान मȂ िदÊली, मुÇबई कोलकाता, बȂगलुरु , मदर्ास, इन जगहȗ 
पर, इन मेटर्ो िसटीज़ की स
ुरक्षा क े िलए ये खतरा बन चुक े हȅ। अभी जांगड़ा जी ने इसके  बारे मȂ 
बोला था, यह बहुत अच्छा है, मȅ उनका अिभनंदन करता हूँ।  िमजोरम और मिणपुर क े  बारे मȂ 
उन्हȗने कहा है िक यह समÎया देश क े िलए क्यȗ गंभीर खतरा बन चुकी है। ये लोग, ये बंगलादेशी, 
रोिंहग्या Çयांमार की बाउंडर्ी से, बंगलादेश की बाउंडर्ी से यहाँ आकर तÎकरी, दÎतावेज मȂ 
जालसाजी, मानव तÎकरी मȂ िलÃत हȅ। ये सारे लोग
 ऐसे आपरािधक नेटवकर् बना कर अवैध 
गितिविधयȗ को बढ़ावा दे रहे हȅ। मȅ िफर से हमारे सांसद, जांगड़ा जी का अिभनंदन करना चाहता 
हूँ िक उन्हȗने मिणपुर क े बारे मȂ बोला है। म
ȅ इस कड़ी को आगे बढ़ाना चाहता हूँ। ये रोिंहग्या और 
बंगलादेशी, जो दूसरे देशȗ से इस मिणपुर मȂ आए हȅ, उन्हȗने अवैध घुसपैिठयȗ क े माध्यम से वहाँ 
पर अवैध दृिÍट स
े नशीली चीजȗ की खेती करने का काम चालू िकया है। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष 
महोदया, वे इन नशीली दवाओं और इन नशीली चीजȗ क े माध्यम से अवैध रूप  मȂ पैसा भी ला रहे 
हȅ, अवैध रूप  मȂ अत्याधुिनक हिथयार भी ला रहे हȅ, हमारे सामान्य नागिरकȗ क े बीच मȂ दहशत भी 
प
ैदा कर रहे हȅ और एक अलग Ģशासन, एक अलग राज्य की माँग करना, यहाँ तक वे गए हȅ।  
इतनी मयार्दा भंग करके  ये लोग हमारे ही द
ेश मȂ रहते हुए यहाँ आकर अलग से राज्य माँग रहे हȅ! 
यह शमर् की बात है। गृह मंतर्ी जी यह जो िवधेयक लाए हȅ, इसके  िलए मȅ उनका अिभनंदन करना 
चाहता हूँ िक उन दहशतगदș को, उन अवैध घुसपैिठयȗ को यह सबसे बड़ा करारा जवाब है। यह 
मोदी जी का करारा जव
ाब है, यह माननीय अिमत शाह जी का करारा जवाब है।  हमारे देश मȂ रह 
कर हमारे िखलाफ, हमारे िहन्दुÎतान क े िखलाफ अलग राज्य की माँग करना, यह िकस दृिÍट स े 
शोभा देता है!   
 माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, हमारी एक सांसद बहन ने अभी एक ĢÌन पूछा िक उन्हȂ 
confusion है िक घुसपैिठया क्या है और शरणाथीर् क्या है। मȅ बहन जी को समझाना चाहता हूँ िक 
घुसपैिठए
 की जो Ëयाख्या है, इस Ëयाख्या क े अनुसार िहन्दुÎतान की सरकार की permission क े 
िबना, हमारे देश मȂ घुस कर, अवैध तरीके  से रह कर राÍटर् िवरोधी कायर् मȂ सिÇमिलत होना, 
इसको घुसपैिठया बोलते हȅ और शरणाथीर् िकसको कहा जाता है, तो शरणा
थीर् उसको कहा जाता 
है, जो हमारी सरकार को हाथ जोड़ कर, िवनती करके  िक हमȂ आपकी पनाह दो, ऐसा बोल कर 
जो यहाँ आकर, हमारे आǛय मȂ आकर शांित से और ईमानदारी से हमारी इस भारत माता की, 
इस द
ेश की सेवा मȂ समिर्पत होता है, उसको हम शरणाथीर् कहते हȅ। मȅ अपनी बहन को यह कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक यह िहन्दुÎतान है, यह बदला हुआ िहन्दुÎतान है। 2014 क े पहले जो भी कानून थे, मȅ 
गृह राज्य मंतर्ी, िनत्यानन्द राय जी को बहुत धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ िक व
े सारे कानून, The 
Foreigners Act, 1946; The Pa ssport Act, 1920; The Registra tion of Foreigners Act, 
1939; िĤिटश शासन क े दौरान क े औपिनवेिशक कानून; The Immigration (Carriers' Liability) 
कानून, वषर् 2000, ये सारे कानून आपने खत्म कर िदए, इसिलए मȅ आपका अिभनंदन करता  हूँ। 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
123

 
इन सबको एक करके , इनको एकीकृ त करके  आप जो नया िबल लाए हȅ, इसके  जिरए िहन्दुÎतान 
की Ģगित क े िलए, िहन्दुÎतान की सुरक्षा क े िलए आपने एक बहुत बड़ी पहल की है।  
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, अभी क ु छ लोगȗ ने proof माँगे थे। मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक 
मदर्ास उच्च न्यायालय ने गृह मंतर्ालय को भी यह कहा है िक यह अिधकृ त मामला है। बहुत सारे 
अवैध Ģवासी हमारे देश मȂ आकर, यहाँ रह कर छोटे-छोटे अपराध करके , एक नेटवकर् बना कर, 
नशीली दवाइयȗ और मानव तÎकरी का काम कर रहे हȅ और ये द
ेश िवरोधी ताकतȗ क े साथ रह 
रहे हȅ। उच्च न्यायालय ने भी हमȂ इसके  ऊपर उपयुƪ कानून बनाने की सलाह दी है। हमȂ उस 
उच्च न्यायालय का भी सÇमान करना चािहए। बȂगलुरु  मȂ, 2024 म
Ȃ बȂगलुरु  पुिलस ने 93 बांग्लादेशी 
Ģवािसयȗ को िहरासत मȂ िलया। उसमȂ यह पाया गया िक ये सारे लोग आपरािधक गितिविधयȗ मȂ 
संिलÃत थे।  इससे बड़ा पर्ूफ क्या चािहए?   
महोदया, यह जो िवधेयक आया है, यह हमारे देश की सुरक्षा, हमारी उन्नित, हमारी 
समृिǉ और शांित क े िलए हमारी सरक
ार की िजÇमेदारी है। हम िकसी को रोकने क े िलए यह 
िवधेयक नहीं ला रहे हȅ, बिÊक हम यह चाहते हȅ िक यहाँ जो भी लोग आएँ, वे हमारे देश क े कानूनȗ 
का पालन करȂ। अभी हमारे िमतर् ने बताया िक अÎपतालȗ और शैक्षिणक संÎथाओं को िवदेिशयȗ की 
उपिÎथित की सूचना देना बहुत ही अिनवायर् है। यह कानूनी रूप  से बनाया जाने वाला एक सबसे 
बड़ा िवधेयक है। इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी का मन से अिभनंदन करना चाहता हूँ। माननीय 
म
ंतर्ी जी, आप यह जो िवधेयक लाये हȅ, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका अिभनंदन इसिलए करना चाहता हूँ, 
क्यȗिक यह िवधेयक क ेवल राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा को ही मजबूत नहीं करेगा, बिÊक इससे हमारी िशक्षा, 
िरसचर्, संशोधन, हमारे िवदेशी Ëयापारी, हमारे िचिकत्सा यातर्ी, यानी म
ेिडकल ट ूिरज्म और 
िवदेशी पयर्टन की वजह से हमारे देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा को मजबूत करने का, हमारे राÍटर् को 
समृǉ करने का भी काम होगा।  िंहदुÎतान वैिÌवक Îतर पर आगे जा रहा है। हमारा जो अथर् 
संकÊप ह
ै, िजस अथर् संकÊप क े िलए माननीय मोदी जी ने महासǄा का जो सपना देखा ह ै, उसमȂ 
हम इस िवधेयक क े माध्यम से वैिÌवक Îतर तक जाने की बात कर रहे हȅ।   
महोदया, यहां पर बहुत सारी चीजȂ बताई गई हȅ।  इसमȂ अवैध Ģवेश पर कठोर दंड देना, 
िबना वैध पासपोटर् या वीजा क े भारत मȂ Ģवेश करने पर 5 साल की क ै द और 5 लाख तक का 
जुमार्ना ह
ै। जाली दÎतावेजȗ का उपयोग और वीजा शतș का उÊलंघन भी होता है। पिरवहन 
क ंपिनयȗ क े मामले मȂ देिखए, तो उनके  ǎारा याितर्यȗ को िबना दÎतावेजȗ क े ले जाने पर उनके  
ऊपर भी सजा और जुमार्ना लगाना ह
ै। इसमȂ आĨजन अिधकािरयȗ को िबना वारंट क े िकसी को 
िगरÄतार करने का अिधकार भी Ģदान करना है। इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी का और 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का मन से अिभनंदन करना चाहता हूँ।   
महोदया, यह िवधेयक क ेवल एक कानूनी सुधार ही नहीं है, बिÊक यह भारत की सुरक्षा 
और भारत क े भिवÍय क े िलए एक महत्वपूणर् कदम है। म
ȅ िवपक्ष से भी आगर्ह करना चाहता हूँ िक 
वह इस िवधेयक को राजनीितक चÌमे से नहीं देखे, बिÊक इसे राÍटर्िहत क े चÌमे से देखे, इसे 
राÍटर्ीय िवचारधारा क े माध्यम से देख े। इस राÍटर् क े संरक्षण क े िलए, राÍटर् की Ģगित क े िलए, 
भारत माता की Ģगित क े िलए हमȂ महासǄा बनाने क े िलए, आइए, हम सब जन िमलकर, िवपक्षी 
और हम सǄाधारी, सभी िमलकर इस िवधेयक का समथर्न करȂ, िजसकी वजह से हमारे देश की 
सुरक्षा को बहुत बड़ी मदद होगी, हमारा देश स
ुरिक्षत होगा। जो बाहरी आतंकवादी हमारे देश मȂ 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
आकर रहने की क ु चेÍटा कर रहे हȅ, उनको क ुचलने का समय आ गया है। मȅ चाहता हूँ िक आप सब 
लोग, इस सदन क े हम सारे लोग, एक साथ िमलकर भारत माता की सेवा क े िलए, इस सुरक्षा से 
संबंिधत िवधेयक का समथर्न करȂ। मȅ आपसे िवनती करते हुए, यही Ģाथर्ना करता हूँ, धन्यवाद, 
नमÎकार। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): अगले वƪा क
े  रूप  मȂ - माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी मÎतान राव 
यादव बीडा। आपका 3 िमनट का समय है। 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh): Madam, I rise to support 
the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025, on behalf of our Telugu Desam Party and 
our leader, the hon. Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, Shri Nara Chandrababu Naidu. 
This Bill will replace the old laws, namely, the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920; 
the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1 939; the Foreigners Act, 1946; and, the 
Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Act, 2000. In 2023-24, one crore individuals visited 
our country from various countries and this number is only going to grow as we head 
towards the Aatmanirbhar and Viksit Bharat 2047. I congratulate the hon. Home 
Minister, Shri Amit Shah, for giving us a comprehensive legislation. I would like to 
speak on three important poin ts. One is about the educat ional institutions. As our 
country emerges as a global education de stination, the requirement, under the 
proposed Bill, for maintain ing accurate and secured reco rds of students becomes 
very essential. Second is medical tourism. Over the last decade or so, we have seen 
an impressive growth in the medical touris m. In 2023, India has welcomed seven lakh 
medical tourists, contributing approximately US$ 9 billion to our economy.  
 Additionally, our Government has introduced Ayush Visa for foreign nationals 
to increase awareness and benefits of our traditional medical treatment methods. In 
the light of the above, there is a need to maintain comprehensive record of patients so 
that they can easily travel back and forth between India and their country. This Bill will 
help develop proper policy regarding medi cal tourism. The proposed Bill addresses 
this concern in Clause 10. 
 Third is Bureau of Immigration. Cl ause 5 of the Bill puts forward the 
establishment of Bureau of Immigration. Th is will help in modernizing the existing 
Bureau, which was established in 1971. Just as this Bill proposes to establish Bureau 
of Immigration, I would like the hon. Home  Minister to consider setting up of a 
centralized authority for the welfare and safe ty of our Indian citizens, especially the 
migrant workers in foreign countries. In r ecent times, we are witnessing increasing 
incidents where Indian citizens are being ta rgeted around the wo rld and their families 
spent sleepless nights worrying about their welfare. Therefore, to help the families of 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
125

 
our citizens abroad and to facilitate their safety, I would like to urge the Government 
to take my proposal into the consideration.   
 Madam, Vice-Chairman, as India marches towards its goal of becoming the 
third-largest economy by 2027 and a fu lly developed nation by 2047 under the 
leadership of hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, this modern and robust 
immigration policy will undoubtedly play a crucial role in rea lizing these aspirations.  I, 
therefore, support this Bill. I thank the Go vernment for putting forward this important 
piece of legislation.  Thank you, Madam.     
                                                                                       
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): धन्यवाद। अगले वƪा क े रूप  मȂ माननीय सदÎय, Ǜी 
महȂदर् भƺ जी हȅ। आपका समय 10 िमनट है।  
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ (उǄराखंड): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपका ǭदय से आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ िक 
आपने मुझे देश की आंतिरक सुरक्षा क े िलए िजस िवधेयक पर आज चचार्
 हो रही है, उस पर 
अपनी बात रखने का मौका िदया।   
महोदया, देश क े अंदर घुसपैठ को रोकने क े िलए यह कड़ा कानून है। पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ 
िजस Ģकार से घुसपैठ हो रही है, वह एक बहुत ही िंचतनीय िवषय है। उस पर िकस Ģकार से 
अंक ु श लगे - इस कानून मȂ उसका उÊलेख है।  भारत म
Ȃ आने वाले वैध वीजा और वैध पासपोटर् की 
अत्यंत आवÌयकता है - इस पर िव
Îतृत रूप  से इस िवधेयक मȂ चचार् है। जाली दÎतावेजȗ क े 
िखलाफ कड़ा कानून इसके  अंतगर्त है। वीजा अविध क े बाद भी भारत मȂ रहने वालȗ पर कड़ी 
कारर्वाई हो - यह भी इसमȂ उÊलेिखत है। कब Ëयिƪ आता है, िकत
नी अविध तक रहता है, िकससे 
पूछ कर रहता है - इन सब िवषयȗ पर इस िवधेयक मȂ िवÎतार से उÊलेख िकया गया है।  भारत मȂ 
रुकन े और आने-जाने का क्या उǈेÌय है - इसका भी उÊलेख िवधेयक क े अंदर है।   
आज भी पिÌचमी बंगाल की 450 िकलोमीटर की सीमा सुरक्षा क े क्षेतर् मȂ नहीं है। गृह 
मंतर्ालय ǎारा घुसपैठ को रोकने क े िलए पिÌचमी बंगाल सरकार को 10 बार पतर् िदए जाते हȅ, पर, 
एक Ģकार से वहाँ की Îथानीय सरकार आँख म
ूंदे हुए है। रोिंहग्या और बांग्लादेशी घुसपैिठयȗ क े 
Ģित वहाँ की सरकार की सहानुभूित का ही पिरणाम है िक आज पिÌचमी बंगाल ब ंगलादेश और 
पािकÎतान बनने की िÎथित मȂ आ रहा है। अगर मȅ पूरे िवÌव की चचार् करूं , तो अÊपसंख्यक लोग 
भारतवषर् क े अंदर सबसे सुरिक्षत रहते हȅ।  हमने अनेकȗ लोगȗ को शरण भी दी है, चाहे उसमȂ 
पारसी समुदाय का क्षेतर् हो या ितÅबती समुदाय क
े  लोगȗ को शरण देने का िवषय हो,  हम हर क्षेतर् 
मȂ इस िदशा मȂ सबका सहयोग करते हȅ। अगर मȅ घुसपैठ की चचार् करू ँ, तो यह मुख्य रूप  से 
भारत- बंगलादेश सीमा क े पास आने वाले राज्यȗ, पिÌचमी बंगाल, असम, मेघालय मȂ काफी देखा 
गया है, लेिकन अब झारखंड मȂ भी यह समÎया बढ़ रही है। बंगलादेश से सटे हुए पिÌचमी बंगाल 
क
े  ऐसे अनेकȗ इलाके  हȅ, िजनके  कारण यह घुसपैठ लगातार बढ़ रही है। 
 महोदया, पिÌचमी बंगाल क े तीन िजले खास तौर पर मुिर्शदाबाद, मालवा और उǄर 
िदनाजपुर पूरी तरह मुिÎलम बहुसंख्यक क्षेतर् बन चुक े हȅ। सीमा सुरक्षा बल अनेकȗ बार इनसे 
लड़ता है, घुसपैिठयȗ को भगाता है, लेिकन घुसपैठ लगातार जारी है। पिÌचमी बंगाल क े दीनापुर 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
मȂ तो हाल ही मȂ घुसपैठ को रोकने क े िलए हुई मुठभेड़ मȂ बीएसएफ क े जवान घायल हुए। वहाँ पर 
घुसपैिठए  हिथयार लेकर देश क े अंदर घुस रहे थे। बंगलादेश का ही एक नागिरक, िजसका नाम 
नूरुल
 हक है, वह अपना नाम बदलकर अिधकारी तक बन गया।  उसका फजीर् पहचान पतर् और 
उसकी फजीर् वोटर आईडी बनी। उसने अपना फजीर् आधार काडर् और पैन काडर् बनाकर वहां पर 
अपना Îथान बनाया। ...(Ëयवधान)... उसने फजीर् बनाया है। वह फजीर् है, पूरी तरह से फजीर् है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): आप बैठ जाइए।...(Ëयवधान)... आप ब
ैठ जाइए, इनको 
बोलने दीिजए।  आप बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ: फरवरी, 2025 मȂ सात बंगलादेशी घुसपैिठए िगरÄतार हुए। ...(Ëयवधान)... उनको 
वहां पर 7,000 करोड़ रुपय े लेकर बॉडर्र पार करते ह
ुए पकड़ा गया। बंगाल की सरकार ने वहां पर 
इस Ģकार क े लोग रखे हȅ, जो सात-सात हजार रुपय े लेकर वहां से लोगȗ को जबरदÎती घुसपैठ 
करा रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): िजन्हȂ बोलने की अनुमित ह
ै, क ृपया वे ही बोलȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... आप लोग बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... इनको बोलने दीिजए। 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ: जनवरी, 2025 मȂ बीएसएफ ने 24 से ज्यादा घुसपैिठयȗ को बॉडर्र से खदेड़ने का 
काम िकया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... हर वषर्, हर समय वहां इस Ģकार की िÎथित बनी ह
ुई है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... महोदया, लोक सभा मȂ 27 तारीख को ही यह िवधेयक पािरत हुआ। मȅ कह सकता 
हूँ िक इसका उǈेÌय चार मौजूदा कानूनȗ को बदलना है, साथ ही, यह फजीर् पासपोटर् क े इÎ तेमाल 
जैसे उÊलंघनȗ क े िलए सख्त दंड पेश करता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव: 
* 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): यह बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। क ृपया िजनको 
अनुमित हो, वे ही बोलȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ: इससे िवदेिशयȗ क े मामलȗ को अिधक ÎपÍट और ËयविÎथत रूप  से ĢÎतुत करना 
है। यह नया कानून न क ेवल Ģवास संबंधी िनयमȗ को एक साथ लाएगा, बिÊक िवदेशी नागिरकȗ क े 
अिधकारȗ और कतर्Ëयȗ को भी ÎपÍट रूप  से पिरभािषत करेगा। यह िवधेयक न क ेवल Ģवासी 
समुदाय क े िलए, बिÊक देश क े समगर् सामािजक और आिर्थक िवकास क े िलए भी बहुत महत्वपूणर् 
सािबत होने वाला है। 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
127

 
  महोदया, िवदेिशयȗ तथा अĢवासन क े मामलȗ की चचार् बार-बार हो चुकी है, इसिलए मȅ 
उसकी चचार् नहीं करू ँगा।  ये मामले तीन िवधेयकȗ क े अधीन थे और अब इन तीनȗ िवधेयकȗ को 
िमलाकर इसके  िवरुǉ एक बड़ा िवधेयक इस सदन क े अंदर लाया गया है। इन कानूनȗ को िनरÎत 
करने तथा Ëयापक िहतȗ
 मȂ नया कानून बनाने क े िलए यह िवधेयक ĢÎतुत िकया गया है।  इस 
अिधिनयम को बनाने का उǈेÌय अलग-अलग कानूनȗ की बहुलता को कम करना है।  उǄराखंड 
क े अंदर भी बड़ी संख्या मȂ बंगलादेशी घुस रहे हȅ। इसका दूसरा उǈेÌय िवदेिशयȗ से संबंिधत 
मामलȗ को िविनयिमत करना, जैसे वीज
ा की आवÌयकता, पंजीकरण, पासपोटर् को पारदशीर् 
बनाना है। इसका तीसरा उǈेÌय भारत मȂ Ģवेश करने तथा भारत से बाहर जाने वाले Ë यिƪयȗ क े 
िलए भी Ģिकर्याओं को ËयविÎथत करना है। यह िवधेयक िवदेशȗ से आने वालȗ क े िलए अिनवायर् 
पंजीकरण को बाध्य करता है।  Ģितबंिधत क्षेतर् मȂ आवागमन, नाम पिरवतर्न करके  रहना, इसको 
भी यह Ģितबंिधत करता है। यह कानून इतना कड़
ा है िक उसे ही िसǉ करना होगा िक वह िवदेशी 
नागिरक है। अब िबना वैध पासपोटर्-वीजा क े भारत मȂ Ģवेश करना अपराध हो गया है और इसके  
िलए 5 वषर् की जेल, 5 लाख का जुमार्ने का Ģावधान िकया गया है। जाली दÎतावेजȗ पर ठहरन
े या 
Ģवेश करने क े िलए 2 से 7 वषर् तक की जेल का Ģावधान िकया गया है और इसके  िलए इसमȂ 1 
लाख से 10 लाख तक का जुमार्ना तय िकया गया है। तय समय से अिधक समय तक ठहरना, 
वीजा की शतș का उÊलंघन करने पर 3 वषर् की जेल, 3 ला
ख का जुमार्ना िनिÌचत िकया गया है। 
अब िरपोिटȊग अिनवायर् हो गई है। चाहे कोई िवदेशी िशक्षण संÎथान मȂ पढ़ रहा हो, िवÌविवǏालय 
मȂ पढ़ रहा हो या जो िवदेशी अÎपतालȗ और निसȊग होÇस मȂ आते ह
ȅ, उनके  िलए यह आवÌयक हो 
गया है िक वे िनिÌचत रूप  से पंजीकरण करȂगे और उस पंजीकरण का पूरा िरकॉडर् सरकार क े 
अधीन रहेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...इसमȂ वाहनȗ की जवाबदेही भी तय की गई ह
ै। अगर कोई Ëयिƪ या 
संÎथा िकसी िवदेशी को कोई वाहन मȂ लेकर आता है, तो ऐसे वाहनȗ पर भी दंड लगाने की 
ËयवÎथा की गई है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): क ृपया िजनको अनुमित हो, व
े ही बोलȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
िकसी और की बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगी।  िबना अनुमित क े कोई न बोलȂ।  
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ: अगर िकसी िवदेशी क े िलए Ģवेश की मनाही है, तो वही Ëयिƪ, जो उसको लेकर 
यहां आया है, उसको ससÇमान उसके  देश पहुंचाएगा। अगर ऐसा नहीं होता है, तो उस Ëयिƪ की 
भी िबना वारंट क े िगरÄतारी होगी। इससे ÎपÍट है िक जो लोग िवदेश से इस Ģकार स
े देश क े 
अंदर लोगȗ को लाते हȅ, उन पर एक Ģकार से अंक ु श लगे और वे ऐसे लोगȗ को लेकर न आएँ, 
क्यȗिक इसमȂ उन पर भी कड़ी कारर्वाई करने की बात कही गई है। यह िवधेयक क Ȃ दर् को िवदेिश यȗ 
की आवाजाही को िनयंितर्त करने का भी अिधकार देता है। अब िवदेिशयȗ को अपने Ëयय पर ही 
भारत से बाहर िनकलना होगा। पहले हमारी सरकार को इस बात क े िलए बाध्य होना पड़ता था िक 
जो िवदेशी यहां पकड़ा जाता था, उसको भारत सरकार भ
ेजती थी, लेिकन अब उसको अपने खचȃ 
पर ही इस देश से बाहर िनकलना होगा। अĢवासन और िवदेशी अिधिनयम, 2025 भारत मȂ 
अĢवास ढांचे को आधुिनक बनाने का भी एक बहुत बड़ा Ģयास है। ÎपÍट कानूनी उपाय और 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
न्याियक िनगरानी क े Ģावधान से राÍटर्ीय सुरक्षा की िंचता से मुिƪ िमलेगी, यह मȅ िवÌवासपूवर्क 
कह सकता हूँ।   
महोदया, अभी हमारे कई साथी अनेक Ģकार की चचार्एँ कर रहे थे।  अगर िकसी देश को 
शारीिरक रूप  से तो नहीं, लेिकन अगर उसे मानिसक रूप  से भी िदवािलयेपन की ओर ले जाना 
होता है, तो
 उसके  मानिसक संतुलन को िबगाड़ने का काम िवदेशी लोग आकर करते हȅ और 
उससे एक Ģकार की मानिसक गुलामी खड़ी होती है। हम इसके  भुƪभोगी हȅ। हमने 100 सालȗ तक 
अंगर्
ेजȗ की गुलामी की है। उससे पहले भी हमने अनेक आकर्ांताओं की गुलामी की है।  मȅ मोदी जी 
और गृह मंतर्ी जी का आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ। देश क े अंदर ऐसा कानून पहली बार आया है िक देश 
मȂ आने वाला एक-एक घुसपैिठया, एक-एक Ëयिƪ की पहचान होगी। यह पहली बार इस देश मȂ 
होगा। अभी तक ऐसा माहौल बना हुआ है िक देश मȂ कौन, कहां से घुस रहा है, कोई पूछताछ नहीं 
होती। िकस Ģकार से अपने राज्यȗ क े अंदर लाने क े िलए लोगȗ को िदहाड़ी पर लगाया जाता
 है - 
इतनी संख्या मȂ इतने लोगȗ को लाइए, इस वाडर् मȂ, इस बूथ पर वोट कम है, इतने रोिंहग्या 
मुसलमानȗ को भारत मȂ लाइए - इस Ģकार का काम भी इस देश मȂ हो रहा ह
ै। राज्य सरकारȂ इसे 
करा रही हȅ। 
इस कानून क े बनने क े बाद भारतवषर् मȂ वही Ëयिƪ रहेगा, िजसकी पहचान भारतीय होगी। 
जो भी Ëयिƪ यहां रहेगा, हम उसका Îवागत करȂग
े। हम हर Ëयिƪ का Îवागत करते हȅ 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): क ृपया आप बैठ जाइए। चेयर की अनुमित क े िबना कोई 
खड़ा नहीं होगा। आप बैठ जाइए। आपकी बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ: हमने भारत को बंधुत्व क े भाव से देखा है, हम ‘ वसुधैव क ु ट ुÇबकम’ को मानते हȅ। 
लेिकन भारत मȂ रहकर, भारतीय नागिरकता न होने बावजूद भी एक Ëयिƪ इस देश क े अंदर 
िकस Ģकार क े हथकं डे अपनाता है - वह हम सबने देखा है। 
आज देश क े अंदर जो बम ÅलाÎट हो रहे हȅ। देश मȂ िजस Ģकार क े धमर् पिरवतर्न क े मामले 
चल रहे हȅ, ये सारी घटनाएं उन लोगȗ ǎारा की जा रही ह
ȅ, जो इस भूिम को मातृभूिम नहीं मानते, 
माता की भूिम नहीं मानते। ऐसे लोगȗ को अब िकसी भी हालत मȂ सहन नहीं िकया जाएगा।  
मȅ तो कहता हूं िक मोदी जी अपने कायर्काल म
Ȃ ऐसे-ऐसे कानून लेकर आए हȅ, जो देश की 
समृिǉ और सुरक्षा क े िलए बहुत महत्वपूणर् हȅ। मȅ आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं, धन्यवाद करता हूं और 
अपनी वाणी को िवराम देता हूं
। 
जय भारत! बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद! 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): मȅ अगले वƪा क े रूप  मȂ माननीय सदÎय रवंगवरा  
नारजारी जी को बोलने की अनुमित देती हूं। आपके  पास बोलने क े िलए तीन िमनट का समय है।  
 
Ǜी रवंगवरा नारजारी ( असम): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आपने मुझे the Immigration and 
Foreigners Bill, 2025 पर बोलने का मौका िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूं। The 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
129

 
Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025 reflects the commitment of Modi Government to 
streamline immigration policies, strengthen  national security  ensuring economic 
stability of the country. It is a landmark legislative union that replaces four outdated 
laws: The Foreigners Act, 1946; the Pass port (Entry into India) Act, 1920; the 
Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939; and the Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Act, 
2000, creating a unified legal framework strengthening immigration laws. 
 The proposed Bill is a part of continua tion of Modi Government to dismantle 
colonial-era legislations. The Immigratio n and Foreigners Bill, 2025 continues this 
revolutionary agenda. Since 2014, the BJP-led NDA Government has repealed over 
1,500 obsolete laws compared to just 1,301  repealed in the previous 64 years of 
independence. With a valid travel document  such as passports and visas for entry 
into India, the proposed Bill applies to a ll foreigners, irrespective of religion. The 
Bureau of Immigration is created to manage immigration matters under the 
supervision of the Central Government whic h will be supported by regional and local 
officers responsible for registering and managing foreigners. The Bill introduced 
provisions for limiting foreign movements, monitoring locations frequented by 
foreigners and founding carrier accountability with stringent penalties which could be 
fined with an amount not less than Rs.2 lakh  and can go up to Rs.5 lakh. Even failure 
to pay the fine will attract seizure or dete ntion of the transport vehicle, which could 
include aircraft, ships or other modes of transport.  A robust punishment mechanism 
for violation of this proposed law has been established with a power to remove 
foreigners. The penalty charges have been enhanced significantly in this proposed Bill 
up to seven years jail term along with a fine up to Rs.10 la kh, which have been 
extended to any individual using forged or fraudulently obtained travel documents. 
Security of India’s borders and prot ection of illegal immigration is the 
comprehensive strategy of the Modi Government prioritising robust border control.   
Border fencing projects of Rs.31,000 cror e to fence the entire 1,643 km Indo-
Myanmar border are under way. The Compre hensive Integrated Border Management 
Systems have been positioned along sensitive borders with Pakistan and Bangladesh 
to integrate manpower with cutting-edge surveillance technologies. 
Madam, 154.7 billion rupees were allocated  for constructing 2,088 km of road 
along the India-China border between 201 8 and 2023. The Modi Government has 
simplified India’s immigration infrastructu re, increasing Passport Seva Kendras from 
77 in 2014 to over 500 today, while reducing  passport issuance time  from 45 days to 
just 5 days. Under the decisive political leadership of hon. Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modi, the Government has significantly modernized India’s immigration and 
visa services by integrating stricter enforcement measures.  
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): आपका समय समाÃत हुआ।  
 
SHRI RWNGWRA NARZARY : Madam, just 30 seconds! The Immigration, Visa and 
Foreigners’ Registration and Tracking Sche me, extended till 2026, with a financial 
outlay of Rs. 1,364.88 crore, exemplifies this commitment. Madam, with these few 
words, I conclude my speech. Thank you.                               
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया): अगले माननीय सदÎय  Ǜी एस. िनरंजन रेƿी।  
 
SHRI S NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Prades h): Hon. Vice-Chairperson Madam, my 
Party rises to support the Bill. This Bill repl aces some of the old enactments. So, I am 
looking at the Bill as something that is going to serve the country for the next 80 years 
in place of old Acts. There are some clause s which may be capable of abuse but, I 
think, the intent of the Bill seems to facilitat e registration and have everything done in 
an organized manner. While some fears have been expressed by some of my friends, 
and some of them may be well-grounded, I don’t share those suspicions because I 
find that this Bill broadly aligns with the Acts which are there in some of the developed 
countries. When we travel abroad, we regi ster with hotels; wherever we go, the 
carrier registers our names. So, broadly, th is aligns with the be st practices of the 
developed countries. But, I have one concern. 
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
 Sir, my concern is that the timing of th e introduction of the Bill coincides with a 
slight reduction in the foreign tourist arrivals  in India. This is a well-meaning Bill, but 
this needs to be implemented in a slightly careful and gradual manner because the 
Immigration Officers, who have been give n vast powers under this enactment, may 
also need to be prepared and counseled with  regard to how they may need to have a 
friendly face when it comes to dealing wi th the foreigner-related aspects.  Because 
the Bill lacks a provision in relation to having a Grievance Cell or a Facilitation Desk or 
a Help Desk, this could be provided by wa y of instructions, which could be given by 
the Central Government. Any foreigner enteri ng India, having a problem with any of 
these aspects, should have an easy mechanism of expr essing his grievance which 
needs to be addressed. That may help tour ist arrivals into India and take away the 
difficulties for well-meaning foreigners who ar e coming in. As I see, this Bill is aimed 
at one or two per cent of mischief-mongers  who may be coming into India and the 
country seeks to avert it with a well-intended  plan. But this should not inconvenience 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
131

 
the 98 per cent. Clause 3(2) of the Bill provides that an Immigration Officer can stop 
any person when the person is going outside India. I have one area of concern which I 
would highlight to the Government and see how they will be able to address it. Mr. 
Chairman, Sir, Proviso to Clause 3, Sub-Clause (2), says, “Provided that 
notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, no person shall be allowed to 
depart or exit from India, if his presence is required in India by any authorised agency 
or on such grounds as the Central Government  may, by order, specify in this behalf.”  
This ‘authorised agency’ is not defined. So , it could be any agency writing to an 
Immigration Officer that a pers on should not be allowed to travel and the ground that 
the Central Government may specify in the orde r seems to lack a little bit of direction. 
But, I am trusting that these small areas which may give rise to  problem areas would 
be addressed by the Government when they are issuing appropriate orders.   
 Sir, I find that the Bill leaves a lot of responsibility with the Immigration Officer.  
There is no oversight. Since there is an  Immigration Bureau, I would recommend to 
the Government to consider whether it would want to bring in a provision that any 
decision of the Immigration Officer should be made appealable to the Immigration 
Bureau or any other authority so that some of the erratic decisions can be corrected.  
Then, I find it good that the Government has retained the power under Clause 33 to 
grant exemption to certain categories of tour ists or certain classes of persons from 
the operation of the Act. This is a uni versal phenomenon; many countries have 
different mechanisms for people arriving  from different countries. Some of the 
countries that we do not have a problem with, the Government may have to actively 
exercise its power under Clause 33, for providing exemption for such category of 
persons in relation to certain aspects that can be avoided.  While the Bill, at present, 
does not provide for this, the penalties and the clauses would mean that all of these 
would go before the regular courts. In the longer run, the Government may consider 
whether they may want to designate some  special courts, including bringing an 
amendment into this Bill, wh ich will deal with these cases  and some of the regular 
courts can be designated as special courts.  
Lastly, the aspect of privacy, -- since data collection is being done at various 
levels -- the Government may have to fo cus on the aspects of  privacy because the 
Supreme Court has said, Fundamental Rights would apply to the foreigners as well 
and the Right of Privacy has been read into  Article 21. So there could be a possible 
challenge on the Act saying that this woul d invade the privacy of a person unless you 
make an adequate provision. 
In conclusion, I would recommend that while the Bill seems to achieve an 
object, it can go a little further. I would look  at it as a work in progress. We support 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
the Bill, but we would request the Government to look into it for any further 
clarifications or directions it can issue und er the Act. And, I think, this Act can be 
improved by one or two other provisions th a t  m a y  h a v e  t o  b e  b r o u g h t  i n  a t  s o m e  
subsequent point of time. Thank you so much Mr. Chairman, Sir, for this opportunity. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Well, Dr. V. Sivadasan wanted to speak after 5 p.m.  But since you 
are here, your time starts now.     
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Respected Ch air and the august House, the hon. 
Home Minister is saying that the nation cannot be a dharmashala. That means they 
are going to make the great nation into a dharmashala. What we call India today, is 
the product of centuries of accumulation of culture, language and knowledge from all 
over the world. It is the great strength  of our nation, the power to assimilate, 
accommodate and cooperate. Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam was our ideal. The world 
is our family. I think, this Bill is against the spirit of the nation. This Bill gives arbitrary 
powers to the executive. This is completely  unacceptable. The provisions of the Bill 
give arbitrary powers to the Government to exempt certain persons from the law.  The 
decision of an immigration officer has been made final and binding!  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
This is against the principle of natural justic e. The Executive is taking all powers into 
their own hands. India has one of the la rgest diaspora in the world. They are 
prospering in various parts of the world. We should lead the world by the example. 
But this Government is not setting a good example before the world. This 
Government is blindly following what the far-right in every country practices,  
‘parochialism’. This is not the way forward. Prosperi ty of the nation will be created by 
the masses, especially the workers of the country, the downtrodden of the society. 
The Union Government is not bothered ab out them. That is why a huge number of 
Indian citizens are in foreign jails, includ ing the fishermen in Tamil Nadu. But this 
Government has failed to address their problems. The integrity and the strength of the 
nation depends upon the peoples’ will, not the will of the corporates.  Many clauses in 
this Bill are violative of the Supreme Cour t’s guidelines. Giving final and binding 
authority to the immigration officer is agains t the rule of law. Th is means there will be 
no appeal, no argument and no lawyer. This  provision should be changed. The Bill 
has a lot of vagueness. One example of vagueness is about the damaged passports. 
What are the criteria to decide whether the purpose is damaged? It is largely left to 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
133

 
the discretion of the immigration officer and his decision will be final. There should be 
provision for immigration judges to ensure that the people are given natural justice. 
The people should have the ri ght to be heard.  Under this  Bill, any foreigner, who is 
suspected of wrongdoing, can be arrested by any head constable and can be jailed 
for two to seven years.  
 
5.00 P.M. 
 
This kind of power should  not be given to anybody . I am sorry to say that this 
Government has an infamous history of sending back academics and activists from 
foreign countries. They were given all perm ission. Yet, they were sent back from 
airports in an extremely humiliating manner.  Why were they sent back? They were 
speaking against the politics of hatred which the ruling classes are using to divide the 
people. 
 The legislation states that any foreigner posing‘threat’ to India’s integrity will be 
denied entry into the country or permission to  stay. However, there is lack of clarity 
about what kind of a ‘threat’ the Bill is refe rring to. Thus, the ruling party will decide 
what the threat is. There are several foreig n journalists and academicians in India.  
They have worked freely for years. This Bill will create concern in their mind as any 
Head Constable can arrest them over mere suspicion.   
In our nation, citizens of India are facing  various kinds of discrimination due to 
the politics of hatred. We should remember the words of Martin Luther King. He is not 
from India, he is from America. He told us, I have a dream, I have a dream that one 
day my four little children will live in a nati on, where they will not be judged by the 
colour of their skin, but they will be judg ed by the content of their character.  We 
have differences in religion, language, ideas and identity. But, above all these 
differences, we have deep commitment to the values of humanity, मानवता। 
 I urge this Government to uphold the pr inciple of democracy and send this Bill 
to a JPC. This is my humble request. That  is why I request the Government to rethink 
about the Bill and support the democratic right of the people. Thank you, Sir.                                      
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mananiya Nityanand Rai to reply to the discussion.  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, आĢवास और िवदेिशयȗ िवषयक िवधेयक, 2025 लाना आवÌयक 
क्यȗ हो गया था, इसके  बारे मȂ मȅ बताऊं गा। इस िबल क े संबंध मȂ मान्यवर जॉन िĤटास जी और 
मान्यवर संदोष क ुमार जी क े ǎारा
 क ु छ संशोधन िदए गए थे।  साथ-साथ बहुत ही सीिनयर मȂबर 
माननीय अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी जी से लेकर वी. िशवादासन जी तक 26 माननीय सांसदȗ ने और 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
सीिनयर नेताओं ने इस पर अपने िवचार रखे हȅ। मȅ उनके  सुझाव, िवचार और उनकी जो Ģितिकर्या 
है, उसके  संबंध मȂ बताऊं गा। पहले मȅ िबल की आवÌयकता पर जरूर  Ģकाश डालना चाहूंगा।   
महोदय, देश की सुरक्षा, देश क े अथर्तंतर् को मजबूत करने क े िलए, मुनाफा और Ëयापार 
क
े  दृिÍटकोण से देश की िशक्षा Ģणाली को पूरी दुिनया मȂ Îवीकृ ित िदलाने क े िलए, हमारी 
यूिनविर्सटीज़ को वैिÌवक बनाने हेतु देश मȂ िरसचर् एंड डेवलपमȂट क े िलए एक मजबूत नींव डालने 
क े िलए और इस देश को माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े संकÊप क े अनुसार 2047 तक 
दुिनया मȂ सवȘच्च बनाने क े िलए यह िबल आवÌयक हो गया था। महोदय, हम इसके  माध्यम से 
देश का िवकास भी सुिनिÌचत करȂगे। चार
 मȂ से तीन अिधिनयम आजादी क े पूवर् क े हȅ।  तीन 
अिधिनयम, यानी 1920 1939 और 1946 क े अिधिनयम न क ेवल संिवधान पूवर् काल क े हȅ, बिÊक वे 
Ģथम और िǎतीय िवÌव युǉ क े असाधारण समय की िवशेष िÎथित
यȗ क े अनुरूप  लाए गए थे। मेरे 
कहने का मतलब ÎपÍट हो रहा होगा, जबिक चारȗ अिधिनयम मȂ अंतिर्निहत िनरंतरता और उǈेÌय 
की समानता है, उƪ अिधिनयमȗ मȂ क ु छ अितËयापी Ģावधान भी हȅ। यह कानून िबखरे Îवरूप मȂ 
था। इस कानून क े िबखरे Îवरूप को एकरूपता दी गई है। इस िवधेयक क े पास होने से भारत मȂ 
आने वाले हर िवदेशी नागिरक का संपूण
र्, ËयविÎथत, एकीकृ त और up-to-date लेखा-जोखा 
रखने का काम देश
 मȂ होगा। ढेर सारी overlapping कम हो जाएँगी; एजȂिसयȗ क े बीच समन्वय 
बढ़ेगा; डाटा Ģबंधन और सत्यापन, दोनȗ की जिटलता समाÃत होगी।   
 महोदय, क ु छ माननीय सांसदȗ ने यह सलाह दी है िक इसे सिमित को refer कर िदया 
जाए।  लेिकन मȅ ÎपÍट रूप  से बताना चाहता हूँ िक तीन साल क
े  गहन िवचार क े बाद गृह मंतर्ालय 
ने इस िवधेयक को design िकया है और बहुत सोच-समझ कर िकया है, देश की आवÌयकता क े 
अनुरूप  िकया है। महोदय, इसके  जो मुख्य Ģावधान हȅ, उनके  अनुसार यह Ëयापक कानून 
अनुपालन क े बोझ को बहुत हÊका करेगा। इस िबल क े म
ुख्य Ģावधानȗ मȂ भारत मȂ Ģवेश, ठहरने 
और बाहर जाने क े िलए वैध यातर्ा दÎतावेजȗ की अिनवायर्ता कर दी गई है। सभी दृिÍटकोण से यह 
िबल एक
 Ģकार से हमारे सभी उǈेÌयȗ की पिरपूिर्त करने वाला िबल है।  आĢवास और िवदेिशयȗ 
िवषयक िवधेयक, 2025 भारत मȂ िवदेिशयȗ क े Ģवेश, Ģवास, देश से िनÍकासन और आĢवास से 
संबंिधत सभी मामलȗ क े िविनयमन क े िलए ĢÎतािवत है।   
 महोदय, आĢवास Åयूरो पहले से ही अिÎतत्व मȂ है, िजस पर सवाल उठाया गया।  आĢवास 
Åयूरो, जो immigration क े अिधकारी हȅ, उसके  संबंध मȂ तो मȅ ÎपÍट बताना चाहूँगा िक गृह 
मंतर्ालय क े तहत आĢवास Åयूरो पहले से ही काम कर रहा है। इस िवधेयक मȂ देश क े िलए 
आĢवास Åयूरो को िचिÏनत िकया गया है, जो िवदेिशयȗ और आĢवास क
े  मामले क े िलए एकमातर् 
एजȂसी होगी।  यह कोई भारत
 मȂ ही इस Ģकार की ËयवÎथा नहीं की गई है, यह कई देशȗ ǎारा 
अपनाई गई Ģथा क े अनुरूप  है। इससे िवदेिशयȗ को क ेवल एक ही एजȂसी से Ëयवहार करना होगा, 
िजससे उनके  िलए देश मȂ आĢवास की सुिवधा बढ़ेगी।  जब उनका एक एजȂसी से सरोकार
 होगा, 
तो Îवाभािवक है िक जिटलता समाÃत होगी। हम कहाँ िकसी को रोक रहे हȅ! हम िनगरानी करने 
की बात कर रहे हȅ, हम उनका डाटा रखने की बात कर रहे हȅ।  महोदय, हम रोकने की बात नहीं 
कर रहे हȅ। ल
ेिकन हमारे िवपक्ष क े माननीय सांसद यह कह रहे हȅ िक जो िवदेशी मेधावी लोग हȅ, 
expert लोग हȅ, वैसे लोगȗ को भारत मȂ आने से रोका जा रहा है। महोदय, अब भारत को अपने देश 
क े वैसे लोगȗ पर गवर् है, िजन्हȗने research and development, ज्ञान-िवज्ञान क े माध्यम से अपनी 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
135

 
मेधा को ĢाÃत िकया है और भारत क े िनमार्ण मȂ लगे हȅ। हम िकसी भी वैसे िवदेशी, वैसे expert 
लोगȗ का िवरोध नहीं कर रहे हȅ, लेिकन भारत की क्षमता पर, उसकी बुिǉमǄा पर, उसकी 
योग्यता पर भारत को गवर् है। इसिलए हम अपने पर भी गवर् कर रहे हȅ और िवदेश से वैसे लोग, जो 
देश मȂ आकर भारत क े िवकास मȂ, उसके  research centre मȂ, उसके  पयर्टन को बढ़ावा देने क े 
ख्याल से, िशक्षा ĢाÃत करने क े ख्याल से आएँगे, उनका Îवागत है।  इसका िवरोध नहीं होना 
चािहए।   
 महोदय, िगरÄतार करने, हटाने एवं track
 करने की शिƪयाँ भी इसमȂ ÎपÍट रूप  से 
पिरभािषत की गई हȅ। भारत मȂ Ģवेश और ठहरने की अिनवायर्ता की आवÌयकता का उÊलंघन 
करने वाले िकसी भी Ëयिƪ को िगरÄतार करने की शिƪयाँ भी इस कानून मȂ दी गई हȅ, जो स ुरक्षा 
क े दृिÍटकोण से बहुत आवÌयक हȅ। भारत से िकसी िवदेशी को हटाने की भी शिƪयाँ दी गई हȅ।  
महोदय, अब वैसे िवदेशी, जो यहाँ आकर हमारे देश मȂ, हमारे ही देश क े  िखलाफ अगर देश 
िवरोधी गितिविधयȗ मȂ शािमल होते हȅ, तो क्या उनको हटाया नहीं जाएगा! मȅ इनसे यह पूछना 
चाहता हूँ। जैसा ये पहले करते थे, वैसा ही हम करȂ, यह नहीं होगा। यह मोदी की सरकार है।  
अगर कोई िवदेशी यहां पढ़ता है या अÎपताल मȂ दािखल होता है, तो इसकी सूचना ऑनलाइन ही 
देनी है।  उसकी सूचना तो देनी पड़ेगी। कोई कहां रह रहा है, इसका टर्ैक तो रहना ही चािहए।  
पहले पता ही नहीं चलता था िक लोग आए, तो िकस उǈेÌय से आए, कहां गए, क्या कर रहे हȅ, 
क्यȗ कर रहे हȅ, उनके  करने का क्या क ुĢभाव पड़ रहा है, वे देश को क्या नुकसान पहुंचा रहे हȅ।  
इसका कोई लेखा-जोखा आपके  जमाने मȂ नहीं था। मोदी क े जमाने मȂ इसका ल
ेखा-जोखा होगा।  
अगर जरूरत  पड़ने पर वे अच्छे मन से आएँगे, तो उनका Îवागत भी होगा, लेिकन अगर भारत क े 
िवरुǉ सािजश करने क े िलए आएँगे, तो उनको इस देश म
Ȃ ठहरने नहीं िदया जाएगा।  
...(Ëयवधान)... अभी बता रहा हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, बैठ कर बात नहीं करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: मैडम, ...(Ëयवधान)... आप इस Ģकार से  असत्य आंकड़ा देकर, िकसके  
कहने पर सदन को और देश को ऐसा कर रही हȗगी, िकसको सुनाने क े िलए कर रही हȗगी, 
िकसको खुश करने क े िलए कर रही हȗगी, यह तो मȅ नहीं जानता ह
ूँ, लेिकन आपने गुमराह िकया 
है। मȅ आपकी गुमराही का पदार्फाश करने वाला ह
ूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
महोदय, क ु छ अन्य मुख्य धाराओं का भी Ģावधान िकया गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: िजनमȂ पंजीकरण की बात कही गई है। ...( Ëयवधान)...  िवÌविवǏालयȗ, 
श
ैक्षिणक संÎथानȗ और अÎपतालȗ की िजÇमेवारी धारा 9 और 10 मȂ तय की गई है। धारा 11 मȂ 
संरिक्षत या Ģितबंिधत क्षेतर्ȗ क े िनिषǉ Îथानȗ का दौरा भी रोका गया है। धारा 7 मȂ बायोमेिटर्क 
जानकारी लेने क
े  िलए कानून बनाया गया है। तो  एक Ģकार से पूरी ËयवÎथा को वैज्ञािनक तरीके  
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
से एक कानून मȂ बांधने का काम िकया गया है। ...( Ëयवधान)... क्या कह रही हȅ? 
...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप चेयर को एडर्ेस करȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय मंतर्ी जी, Ãलीज़ आप चेयर 
को एडर्ेस करȂ। ...( Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, आप बैिठए। ...( Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, आप सभी बैिठए। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  सुिÍमता जी, please tak
e your seat. …( Interruptions)… आप सीट पर बैठ 
कर कमȂट नहीं कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: उपसभापित महोदय, क ु छ लोगȗ ने कहा ...( Ëयवधान)... हमारे क ु छ 
माननीय सदÎयȗ ने कहा िक  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आपस मȂ बात नहीं कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, अपनी सीट पर बैिठए।  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, म
ȅ उंगली उधर नहीं करूं गा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  बोलने क े समय हाथ 
ऐसे ही उठ जाता है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: नहीं, आप इधर देख कर बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, मȅ आगे से सावधान रहूँगा। मȅ उधर उंगली नहीं उठाऊं गा और 
आपको ही देखकर बोलूंगा। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: िबÊकु ल। 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, क ु छ लोगȗ न
े शंका Ëयƪ की है िक भारत मȂ िवदेिशयȗ क े आने-जाने 
पर रोक क े िलए ËयवÎथा की गई है। हम तो भारत की परंपरा पर िवÌवास करने वाले लोग हȅ, हम 
िवदेिशयȗ को क्यȗ रोकȂ गे? द
ुिनया भर क े नागिरक अपने देश से दूसरे देशȗ मȂ आते हȅ, जाते हȅ। 
भारत मȂ भी बाहर से लोग आते हȅ और भारत क े लोग
 भी बाहर गए हȅ। हमारे महापुरुष तो भारत की 
संÎकृ ित और परंपरा को लेकर िवदेशȗ तक गये हȅ। िववेकानंद जी से लेकर गांधी जी तक बाहर 
गए हȅ और वहां से जो आए हȅ, उनकी अच्छी बातȗ को भी भारत ने हमेशा आत्मसात िकया है। 
 महोदय, माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी लोक सभा मȂ बोल रहे थे। लोग लोक सभा मȂ उनके  िदए 
गए एक-एक भाषण की चचार् कर रहे थे, तो मुझे बहुत खुशी हो रही थी िक लोग उनको गौर से 
सुन रहे थे। व
े समझ भी रहे हȗगे, लेिकन वे सत्य को बोलने से परहेज कर रहे थे। इसका तो दुख 
जरूर  होगा। 6वीं शताÅदी से 17वीं शताÅदी तक िवदेशȗ से भारत म
Ȃ आए कई िवǎानȗ ने भारत क े 
Ëयापार, संÎकृ ित और सामािजक Ģथाओं आिद क े बारे मȂ पूरी दुिनया को पिरिचत कराया। आज तो 
हम चाहते हȅ िक िवदेशȗ से लोग यहाँ आएँ, भारत की इस संÎकृ ित को देखȂ, मोदी जी क े ǎारा 11 
वषș तक िकए गए सफल कायș से पिरिचत हȗ और वापस जाकर अपने देश और द
ुिनया को 
बताएँ।  हम यह चाहते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...महोदय, आज हमारे देश मȂ लगभ ग 1 करोड़ 72 लाख 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
137

 
एनआरआईज़ हȅ। इतना बड़ा diaspora और िकसी देश का नहीं है। उन सबके  सुचारू  रूप  से 
आने-जाने...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ तो िवदेिशयȗ की बात क्या, अपने diaspora क े आने-जाने की बात 
कर रहा हूँ।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please sit down.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, उनके  सुचारू  रूप  से आने-जाने और उनकी सारी िंचताओं क े 
िनराकरण क े िलए यह िबल मोदी सरकार लेकर आई है।...(Ëयवधान)...  महोदय, माननीय 
अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी जी जब बोल रहे थे, तब उन्हȗने यह कहा िक मोदी सरकार लोगȗ को डराना 
चाहती है। मोदी सरकार लोगȗ को डराना नहीं चाहती है, डर उनको होना चािहए, जो भारत
 मȂ 
आकर, अगर भारत क े िखलाफ सािजश करना चाहते हȅ, तो उनमȂ यह डर पैदा होनी ही 
चािहए।...(Ëयवधान)...  महोदय, अिभषेक मनु िंसघवी जी हमारे बड़े भाई हȅ, आदरणीय सांसद 
हȅ, इतने सीिनयर हȅ, बड़े नेता हȅ, भले कांगर्ेस की पिरवारवादी ËयवÎथा मȂ दबे हुए हȅ, यह अलग 
बात है। महोदय, इन्हȗने कहा िक पािकÎतान से जो लोग आ रहे हȅ, उनके  Ģित सरकार 
स
ंवेदनशील है और पािकÎतान से आने वालȗ पर जो कारवाई होती है, उससे भी ज्यादा कठोर 
कारवाई दूसरे देशȗ से आने वालȗ पर होती है।  महोदय, माननीय गृह मंतर्ी जी कहे थे, जब देश 
का िवभाजन हो गया, उसके  बाद जब वहाँ धमर् क े आधार पर लोग Ģतािड़त िकए जा रहे थे, तो 
उन्हȂ तब आगर्ह िकया था िक अभी यहाँ िÎथित ठीक नहीं ह
ै, इसिलए बाद मȂ जो पािकÎतान से 
यहाँ आना चाहȂगे, उनको यहाँ Îवीकार िकया जाएगा। गांधी जी भी बोले थे, जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी 
भी बोले थे, सरदार पटेल साहब भी बोले थे।  कांगर्ेस भूल गई, लेिकन गांधी को मानने वाले मोदी 
को याद है और उन्हȗने पािकÎतान, अफगािनÎतान और बंगलादेश से आने वाले वैसे Ģतािड़त, जो 
धमर् क े आधार पर Ģतािड़त हुए, िजनकी संपिǄ लूट ली गई, िजनको बेघर िकया गया, जो अपने 
बहू-बेिटयȗ की इज्जत बचाने क
े  िलए पािकÎतान छोड़ कर िंहदुÎतान मȂ आने को मजबूर हुए, वैसे 
लोगȗ क े Ģित तो संवेदनशीलता होनी ही चािहए और जो है।  
महोदय, मȅ एक
 चीज जरूर  कहना चाहूँगा िक 'पािकÎतान' शÅद तो आज दुिनया मȂ होना  
ही नहीं चािहए था। भारत का बँटवारा होना ही नहीं चािहए था। मȅ इस संदभर् मȂ कह रहा 
हूँ।...(Ëयवधान)...  महोदय, मȅ कहना चाह रहा हूँ िक िजस समय मुिÎलम लीग
 ने 1930 मȂ, मȅ जो 
बता रहा हूँ, वह िरकॉडर् की बात है, दो राÍटर् की पिरकÊपना कर िदया था। लाहौर क े अिधवेशन मȂ 
िबÊकु ल एक अलग राÍटर् की मांग कर दी गई थी। उसी समय उसको रोक देना चािहए था, लेिकन 
एक Ëयिƪ की िजद, Ģधान मंतर्ी पद की लालच और िजन्ना क े िजन्न ने देश का बँटवारा कर 
िदया, जो नहीं होना चािहए था।  महोदय, मȅ यह इितहास की बात कर रहा हूँ ।...(Ëयवधान)...   
सुिÍमता सेन जी क ु छ बातȂ कह रही थीं।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव: सुिÍमता सेन नहीं, सुिÍमता देव।...(Ëयवधान)...     
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़।...(Ëयवधान)... आपस  मȂ बात नहीं करȂ।...(Ëयवधान)...  
माननीय मंतर्ी जी, क ृपया आप बोलȂ।...(Ëयवधान)...    
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सुिÍमता देव जी, उसके  िलए मȅ आपसे क्षमा याचना करता हूँ।  
महोदय, इन्हȗने कहा िक सीएए कानून अिधसूिचत नहीं हुआ है। ये सदन और देश को 
गुमराह कर रही थीं। ...( Ëयवधान)... यह सीएए कानून अिधसूिचत कर िदया गया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: सुिÍमता जी, क ृपया आप बैठ
Ȃ।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, 11 माचर्, 2024 को  सीएए को अिधसूिचत कर िदया गया 
था।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: आप सबकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है, only his speech is going 
on the record. ...(Interruptions)...  क ृपया आप बैठ जाएँ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, इन्हȗने सवाल उठाया था, इसिल
ए मȅ बोल रहा हूँ।...(Ëयवधान)... 
इनको पता ही नहीं है िक इसको अिधसूिचत कर िदया गया है।...(Ëयवधान)...  इन्हȗने कहा िक 
300 क े आसपास, ये 300 क े क ु छ आगे-पीछे का आंकड़ा दे रही थीं िक इतने लोगȗ ने नागिरकता 
ली है।  महोदय, लोगȗ ने हजारȗ की स
ंख्या मȂ नागिरकता ली है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seats.  … (Interruptions)… Nothing is 
going on record, Sushmitaji.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, इन्हȗने कहा था िक अब तक 26 घुसपैिठयȗ को वापस िकया गया।  
महोदय, 3600 घुसपैिठयȗ को यहां से बाहर िकया गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, डा. अिभषेक 
मनु िंसघवी साहब, Ǜी एन.आर. इलांगो जी, Ǜीमती जया बच्चन जी और हािरस बीरान साहब ने 
यह िवषय उठाया िक इस िवधेयक म
Ȃ अपील का कोई Ģावधान नहीं है। अĢवासन अिधकारी on 
the spot  िनणर्य लेते हȅ। िकसी देश मȂ अĢवासन अिधकारी क े आदेश लागू होने से पहले अपील 
का Ģावधान नहीं है। जहां अपील तंतर् उपलÅध है, वहां भी अपील तभी दायर की जा सकती
 है, जब 
Ëयिƪ उस देश मȂ वापस लौट गया हो, जहां से वह आया था। महोदय, इस तरह से इसमȂ कहा 
गया है।  
महोदय, संजय िंसह जी ने एक िवषय उठाया। उन्हȗने नीरव मोदी, लिलत मोदी और 
िवजय माÊया का नाम िलया। उनको कांगर्ेस क
े  लोग सुन रहे थे। बीच मȂ, जब कांगर्ेस क े लोग जाने 
लगे, तो हमको लगा िक संजय जी क े भाषण क े बीच मȂ ये क्यȗ जा रहे हȅ? तब मुझे पता चल गया 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
139

 
िक जरूर  यह कांगर्ेस क े जमाने की बात है। नीरव मोदी ने पहला गलत LoU March, 2011 मȂ 
PNB की Brady House शाखा से हािसल िकया था। वे अगले 74 महीने मȂ 1,212 और ऐसी गारंटी 
ĢाÃत करने मȂ कामयाब रहे। लिलत मोदी िवदेशी मुदर्ा क े किथत उÊलंघन और 2009, मȅ िफर बोल 
रहा हूँ, वषर् 2009 मȂ World Sports Group क े साथ 425 करोड़ रुपय े क े IPL Ģसारण अिधकार 
सौदे क े दोषी हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... अच्छा ह
ुआ, इनकी सरकार चली गई, नहीं तो और न जाने और 
क्या-क्या अनथर् होता।  िवजय माÊया ने 2012 तक िंकगिफशर एयरलाइंस का संचालन बंद कर 
िदया और बȅकȗ और लेनदारȗ क े बढ़ते ऋणȗ को छोड़ िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)...  महोदय, जब उसने 
ब
ȅक का संचालन बंद िकया, तो उस समय कारवाई होनी चािहए थी िक नहीं? िबÊकु ल होनी 
चािहए थी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क ृपया सीट पर बैठकर न बोलȂ। ...(
Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, अब आप भी बैठȂ।  
...(Ëयवधान)... दोला जी, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA: Sir, I have a point of order. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, माननीय सदÎय Ãवाइंट ऑफ आडर्र पर हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
मनोज जी, यह कौन-से रूल  क े अंतगर्त है?  
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA: Sir, it is under Rule 240 - Irrelevance or repetition- The 
Chairman, after having called the attention of the Council to the conduct of a Member 
who persists in irrelevance or in tedious re petition either of his own arguments or of
 
the arguments used by other ….  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I have read it.  
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA: Sir, history is being butchered. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The point of order is not relevant. 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: 
* 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is applicable to all of you.  …(Interruptions)…   There is 
no point of order.  Please sit down. …(Interruptions)…  माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  Nothing is 
going on record.  …(Interruptions).. Please take your seats. …(Interruptions)..   
 
                                                            
* Not recorded. 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, आप पाटीर् क े नेता, संजय जी आजकल ज्यादा ही दुखी चल रहे हȅ, 
जब से उनकी सरकार गई है। वे जानते हȅ िक आगे उनकी सरकार आने वाली नहीं है। उन्हȗने जो 
िवषय उठाया था, उसी िवषय पर मȅ बोल रहा था। उसी को आगे बढ़ाते हुए मȅ बोल रहा हूँ िक इसी 
संदभर् मȂ सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ भारत सरकार का हलफनाम
ा है। अपराध की आय क े समय मȂ अटैचमȂट ने 
- तीन भगोड़े अपरािधयȗ, िवजय माÊया, नीरव मोदी और मेहुल चौकसी ǎारा 22, 500 करोड़ 
रुपय े से अिधक की क ु ल धोखाधड़ी मȂ से 19,000 करोड़ रुपय े से अिधक की संपिǄ को अटैच 
िकया गया है। इन आंकड़ȗ का उÊलेख एपेक्स कोटर् मȂ सॉिलिसटर जनरल तुषार मेहता साहब 
ǎारा ĢÎतुत नोट मȂ िकया गया था, जो पीएमएलए की रोकथाम क े क ु छ Ģावधानȗ की Ëयाख्या से 
संबंिधत यािचकाओं की एक बȂच पर तकर् सुन रहे थ
े। 
सर, कारर्वाई हम क ै से नहीं कर रहे हȅ? घोटाला इन्हȗने करवाया, भागने का मौका इन्हȗने 
िदया और हम तो सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ उसे ÎपÍट कर च
ुक े हȅ। महोदय, अभी हमारे क ु छ माननीय 
सदÎयȗ ने अलग-अलग बातȂ कहीं। कहा गया िक देश की छिव िबगड़ रही है। एक माननीय 
सदÎय, हािरस बीरान साहब ǎारा यह कहा गया िक देश की छिव िबगड़ रही है। महोदय, देश की 
छिव कब िबगड़ती है? जब देश की आ
ंतिरक सुरक्षा खतरे मȂ होती है, जब अशांित का माहौल 
होता है। मोदी सरकार आने क े बाद िंहटरलȅड मȂ एक भी बम ÅलाÎट नहीं हुआ है। महोदय, 25 
करोड़ लोगȗ की गरीबी िमट गई, यह देश की छिव बनाता ह
ै, िबगाड़ता नहीं। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज 
हमारे पास राफे ल है, कोई हमारी ओर देखने की िहÇमत नहीं कर सकता। हमारी इस शिƪ से 
छिव बनी है। इस देश मȂ इतना इंģाÎटर्क्चर बढ़ा है, गरीबȗ क े घर बने हȅ, शौचालय बने हȅ और 
भारत अपनी सांÎकृ ितक िवरासत पर गवर् कर रहा है। भगवान Ǜीराम का मंिदर बना है, िजससे 
भारत का Î
वािभमान और छिव बढ़ी है। भारत अपनी िवरासत पर गवर् करने लगा ह
ै। महोदय, 
भारत की छिव िबगड़ी नहीं, बनी है। आप सोिचए और देिखए।  
जब रूस  और यूकर् े न का युǉ हो रहा था, तब भारत क े छातर् और नागिरक ही नहीं, बिÊक 
िवदेशी नागिरकȗ और वहां क े छातर्ȗ ने भी अपने गवर् से ितरंगा थामकर खुद को स
ुरिक्षत िकया। 
महोदय, यहां पर सवाल उठाया गया िक घुसपैठ हो रही है। मȅ दावे क े साथ इस सदन और 
देश को बता रहा हूं िक घुसपैठ मȂ काफी कमी आई है। घुसपैिठयȗ को लाने की कोिशश सबसे 
ज्यादा वहीं हुई है या अभी हो रही है, जहां कभी कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी या अब पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ 
टीएमसी की सरकार है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, आप बैिठए। 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: सर, घ
ुसपैिठयȗ को रोकने क े िलए कारर्वाई हो रही है। बीएसएफ की तैनाती 
बढ़ाई गई है। जहां हम सीमा पर बाड़ नहीं लगा पा रहे हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: Ãलीज़, अपनी सीट पर ब
ैिठए। 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: वहां Ģाकृ ितक और भौगोिलक असुिवधाओं क े बावजूद तकनीक का सहारा 
लेकर हम भारत की सीमा को सुरिक्षत कर रहे हȅ। मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
141

 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, माननीय िदिग्वजय िंसह जी Ãवाइट ऑफ ऑडर्र रेज़ करना 
चाहते हȅ। 
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने जो आरोप लगाया है, हम 
उसकी िंनदा करते हȅ और उनसे authenticate करने की मांग करते हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: यह Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र नहीं है। No; no. ...( Interruptions)... माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी। No point of order. ...( Interruptions)... No point of order. ...( Interruptions)... 
Ģमोद जी, बैिठए।        
 
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय:
 पिÌचम बंगाल की सरकार, जहां भारत सरकार क ंटीले, मजबूत तार, जो न 
कट सकती  है, िजसमȂ न जंग लग सकता है, ऐसे तार लगाने क े िलए तैयार ह ै।   …( Ëयवधान)… 
महोदय, दस बार मीिंटग हो गई। भारत सरकार ने सीमा पर तार लगाने क े िलए पैसे दे िदए।  
…(Ëयवधान)… जमीन अिधगर्हण का मामला है। …( Ëयवधान)… टीएमसी की सरकार हमȂ जमीन 
नहीं दे रही है। …(Ëयवधा
न)… आज जमीन दे दे, तो उसके  24 घंटे  क े भीतर मोदी सरकार बाड़ 
लगाना शुरू  कर देगी।  …( Ëयवधान)… सर, क ु छ लोग बोलते हȅ िक छलांग लगाकर आ जाते हȅ। 
िकतनी घटनाएं हुई हȅ, जब हम सीमा पर घुसपैिठयȗ को रोकते हȅ…(Ëयवधान)…  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He has a point of order. ...( Interruptions)... Under which 
rule are you raising it? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI RITABRATA BANERJEE: Sir, it is 
under Rule 239. The hon. Minister is 
misleading the House. ...(Interruptions )... As far as West Bengal is concerned, the 
land procurement... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR.  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is not a point of order. ...(Interruptions )... I have 
heard it. There is no point of order in it. ...(Interruptions)..  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, मȅ कह रहा था िक जब हमȂ वहां जमीन िमल जाएगी, तो हम बचे हुए 
बांग्लादेश और भारत की सीमा पर फ ȅिंसग भी करȂगे, तार लगाएंगे।  मȅ कह रहा ह
 ूं िक िवदेशी 
घुसपैिठए अब घुसपैठ करने मȂ नाकाम हो रहे हȅ। …(Ëयवधान)… उन्हȂ वहीं कामयाबी िमल रही है, 
जहां भाजपा की सरकार नहीं है।  असम मȂ भाजपा की सरकार है, तो आज वहां घुसपैिठयȗ को 
रोक िदया गया।   
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: हम लोग वॉकआउट कर रहे हȅ।  …(Ëयवधान)… 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 (At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप continue कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: उपसभापित महोदय, अभी अिभषेक िंसघवी साहब ने हमारे गृह मंतर्ी जी क े 
वƪËय पर सवाल उठाए थे। उन्हȗने कहा िक गृह मंतर्ी जी ने अपने उस अिभभाषण क े कर्म मȂ इस 
Ģकार से बोला है। मȅ कह रहा हूं िक गृह मंतर्ी जी ने Ģारंभ क े शÅद से लेकर अंितम शÅद तक जो 
बोला है, वह यथाथर् और सत्य क े धरातल पर खड़ा है।  उन्हȗने कहीं क ु छ नहीं कहा है। उन्हȗने वही 
कहा है, जो कहना चािहए था और जो देशिहत मȂ ह
ै या इस िवधेयक मȂ है।   
 महोदय, जो सवाल उठाए जा रहे थे, मȅ उनकी चचार् करके  समाÃत करूं गा और आगे 
बढ़ूंगा। एक बात जरूर  कहना चाहूंगा िक ये लोग िकस Ģकार से बीएसएफ को िडÎटबर् करते हȅ।  
जब कोई भी घुसपैिठया आने की कोिशश करता है, वहां  िकसी भी िवषय पर अवैध रूप  से कोई 
कायर् करता है, जो देश क े िलए नुकसानदेह है, तो वहां पर टीएमसी पाटीर् क े लोग, िजनको 
उन्हȗने अवैध रूप  से आधार काडर् दे िदया है एवं उनका नाम वोटर िलÎट मȂ समािहत कर 
नागिरकता दे दी है, वे इकƻे हो जाते हȅ और इकƻे होकर सरकारी कामȗ मȂ दखल देते हȅ। जब 
बीएसएफ कारर्वाई करना चाहती है, तो दुहाई देत
े हȅ िक यह राज्य की िविध ËयवÎथा का ĢÌन है।  
50 िकलोमीटर तक िनिÌचत रूप  से बीएसएफ क े अंतगर्त लाया गया है, लेिकन उस दायरे मȂ भी 
बीएसएफ को जो िचिन्हत कायर् है, उस पर िनगरानी, कारर्वाई क े अिधकार िदए गए हȅ, ल
ेिकन लॉ 
एंड ऑडर्र सीमा पार करते ही भारत की भूिम मȂ आते हȅ, िजस राज्य की सीमा पड़ती है, उनका 
िवषय हो जाता है। वहाँ पर िडÎटबर् करते हȅ, काम नहीं करने देते हȅ, लेिकन उस पिरिÎथित मȂ भी 
बहुत सफलता िमली है और मȅ िफर से दोहरा रहा हूं िक हाँ, घुसपैिठयȗ को रोका गया है, घुसपैठ 
मȂ काफी कमी आई है, इसमȂ आगे और कमी आएगी, लेिकन हमȂ राज्य सरकार भी उस कायर् मȂ 
सहयोग दे।  
 महोदय, मȅ अंत मȂ यहाँ पर यह जरूर  कहना चाहूंगा िक यह िवधेयक बहुत जरूरी  था। इस 
िवधेयक से हमारे यहाँ पर आĢवासन और िवदेिशयȗ से संब ंिधत जो Ģावधान है, उस Ģावधान को 
सरल बनाने क े िलए, उसमȂ कोऑिर्डनेशन बढ़ाने क े िलए, देश की सुरक्षा से संबंिधत िवषयȗ क े 
िलए, िशक्षा, ÎवाÎथ्य या पयर्टन से संबंिधत िवषयȗ पर िनयमȗ मȂ सरलता लाकर, देश क े अिहत क े 
बारे मȂ सोचने वालȗ पर कठोर कारर्वाई करने का Ģावधान कर इस कानून को संपूण
र् बनाया गया 
है। हम माननीय सदन से आगर्ह करते हȅ िक इस िवधेयक को पािरत करे। उपसभापित जी, आपका  
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, the question is: 
 
“That the Bill to confer upon the Central Government certain powers to provide 
for requirement of passports or other travel  documents in respect of persons entering
 
into and exiting from India and for regulati ng matters related to foreigners including 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
143

 
requirement of visa and registration and fo r matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration.” 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of 
the Bill.  
Clause 2 was added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 3, there are three Amendments (Nos.3 to 5) by 
Dr. John Brittas.  He is not present.  So, the Amendments are not moved. 
 
Clause 3 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 4 to 6 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 7, ther e is one Amendment (No.6) by Dr. John 
Brittas. He is not present.  
  
Clause 7 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 8 to 13 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  In Clause 14, th ere is one Amendment (No.1) by Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P.  Are you moving the Amendment?  
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P. (Kerala): Sir, it is a very important Amendment. 
 I move: 
 
    1. That at page 6, line 39, after the words, any foreigner, the words, who has 
contravened or against whom there is a reasonable suspicion that he has 
contravened section 3 of this Act or any rule made thereunder, be inserted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
Clause 14 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 15 to 25 were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Clause 26, th ere is one Amendment (No.2) by Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P. Are you moving the Amendment?  
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala):  Yes, Sir.  I move: 
 
    2. That at page 11, line 1, for the words, Head Constable, the  
 words, Sub-Inspector, be substituted. 
 
The question was put and the motion was negatived. 
 
Clause 26 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 27 to 36 were added to the Bill. 
 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Minister, Shri Nityanand Rai, to move that the 
Bill be passed.  
 
Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय: महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करता हूं : 
 
   िक िवधेयक को पािरत िकया जाए। 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, th ere are ten permitted Special Mentions 
for today.  Special Mentions of those hon.  Members, who are pr esent now, shall be 
deemed to be laid on the Table.  
 
 
€ SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
Demand for a Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) in Mattannur, Kannur, Kerala 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Sir, I de mand from the Government to sanction 
a new Kendriya Vidyalaya (KV) in Mattannur,  near the Kannur International Airport in 
Kerala. As of now, there is no KV that can benefit the aspiring students who belong to 
the hilly region of North Malabar. The nearest KV is in Kannur, which is 25 kilometres 
                                                            
€ Laid on the table. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
145

 
away from Mattannur. Due to the lack of opportunities, for affordable education under 
the CBSE Board, the parents from the hilly  region of Kannur send their children to 
private schools. Since there are many Ce ntral Government and State Government 
offices near the area, a KV would be immens ely helpful to a large number of aspiring 
students. This would provid e affordable education for the children of inter-State 
migrant workers as well. There is adequate land available for setting up a Kendriya 
Vidyalaya in Mattannur. Keeping in view th e urgency and importance of the matter, I 
humbly request the Union Government to ta ke necessary steps to open a Kendriya 
Vidyalaya in Mattannur.     
 
Demand for construction of elevated double rail line from Haridwar to Dehradun and 
construction of over bridge at open railway crossing 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड): महोदय, देश मे रेलवे का बहुत बड़ा नेटवकर् है। इसके  िनरंतर 
सुधार, सुदृढ़ीकरण व आधुिनकीकरण का कायर् चल रहा है, जो Ģसंशनीय है। 
 पूरे देश मȂ, िवशेषकर उǄराखंड क े देहरादून व हिरǎार िजले से बहुत सी रेल िनकलती 
हȅ, जो लोगȗ को उनके  गंतËय तक पहुंचाने का कायर् करती हȅ। उǄराखंड क े हिरǎार – देहरादून 
क े मध्य जंगल क्षेतर् से िंसगल लाइन आती है, िजसकी Îपीड भी वन्य जीव क्षेतर् की वजह से बहुत 
कम ह
ै। ऐसे मे उस पर ऐलीवेटेड डबल बड़ी रेल लाइन की बहुत ज़रूरत है, िजससे ज्यादातर टर्ेन 
हिरǎार से देहरादून पहुंच सकȂ व उसमȂ समय भी कम लगे। 
 बहुत सी रेलवे कर्ािंसग्स हȅ, जो आज भी खुली हȅ, जहां आम राÎता है। इनमȂ से कई पर 
बैिरयर सुिवधा है, कई मानव रिहत हȅ, यहां पर द
ुघर्टनाओं की संभावनाएं िनरंतर बनी रहती हȅ व 
समय-समय पर दुघ
र्टनाएं हुई भी हȅ, िजसमȂ लोगȗ की जानमाल की हािन हुई है। 
 मै सरकार से मांग करता हूं िक उǄराखंड क े हिरǎार व देहरादून क े  मध्य एक बड़ी 
ऐलीवेटेड रेलवे लाइन का िनमार्ण हो व ऐसे रेलवे कर्ािंसग्स, जहां अंडरपास नहीं है, वहां एक 
अंडरपास या आरओबी बनाया जाए, िजससे लोगȗ को सुिवधा हो व भिवÍय मȂ होने वाली 
दुघर्टनाओं को टाला जा सके । 
 
Demand for reservation counter and stoppage of trains at Kharar Railway  
Station in Punjab 
 
Ǜी सतनाम िंसह संधू (नामिनद
ȃिशत): महोदय, ऐितहािसक खरड़ शहर पंजाब का एक महत्वपूणर् 
gateway है। क ु छ समय मȂ इसकी आबादी तेज़ी से बढ़ी है और यह एक बड़े educational और 
economic hub क े रूप  मȂ उभरा है। खरड़ और आसपास की आबादी 10 लाख से अिधक है।  
इसके  बावजूद, ल
ंबी दूरी की कई टर्ेनȂ यहां नहीं रुकती हȅ।  
        महोदय, नागिरकȗ की मांग है िक खरड़ रेलवे Îटेशन पर क ु छ महत्वपूणर् टर्ेनȗ का ठहराव 
िकया जाए और एक आरक्षण काउंटर Îथािपत िकया जाए। िनवािसयȗ ǎारा इन टर्ेनȗ को रोकने की 
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
मांग है। खरड़ रेलवे Îटेशन पर Up and Down क े कर्म मȂ नांदेड़-अंबाला छावनी; बांदर्ा 
टिर्मनस-अमृतसर; वैÍणोदेवी-ऋिषके श; कालका-वैÍणोदेवी; देहरादून-अमृतसर और 
सहरसा-अमृतसर का ठहराव िकया जाए।   
       महोदय, खरड़ की पिवतर् भूिम पर Ģभु Ǜी राम क े चरणȗ की धूल बसी हुई है। उनके  दादा जी 
राजा अज्ज क े नाम पर मंिदर और सरोवर की वजह से खरड़ Ǜǉालुओं की आÎथा का बड़ा क Ȃ दर् 
है। साथ ही, महाभारत मȂ भीम क े पुतर् घटोत्कच का भी जन्म यहीं घरुआन  गाँव मȂ हुआ था। बाबा 
बंदा िंसह बहादुर ने गुरु  गोिंबद िंसह जी क े सािहबज़ादȗ की शहादत का बदला भी यहीं िलया था। 
खरड़ िसखȗ क े सातवȂ और नौवȂ गुरु  सािहबान की चरण छोह ĢाÃत धरती भी ह
ै। इन टर्ेनȗ को 
खरड़ मȂ रुकवाना  न क ेवल धािर्मक दृिÍटकोण से लाभकारी होगा, बिÊक यह अमृतसर से लेकर 
खरड़ तक की यातर्ा को pilgrimage circuit मȂ बदल सकता है। इससे न िसफर् खरड़ का िवकास 
होगा, बिÊक पूर
े पंजाब मȂ economic और tourist activ ities मȂ तेज़ी आ सके गी। अत: मेरी 
सरकार से यह माँग है की इस पर ध्यान िदया जाए। 
 
Need to establish a Millet Board in Bhubaneswar 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha): Sir, I rise to  bring to the attention, the urgent need 
to establish a Millet Board in Bhubaneswa r, Odisha. As the world’s largest millet 
producer, India contributed 38.4 per cent of  global production, totalling 17.32 million 
tonnes in 2022-23. Odisha has seen a 125.7 per cent production surge since 
launching the Odisha Millets Mission (now Shree Anna Abhi yan) in 2017, with output 
projected to reach 226,972 tonnes in 2024. Despite this remarkable progress, our 
country still lacks an institutional framework to support farmers, drive research, and 
strengthen market linkages. 
 Establishing a dedicated Millet Board, on the lines of Tea Board or Coffee 
Board, is essential to boost production, processing and farmer support through 
financial aid, quality seeds, and advanced  techniques.  This board would bolster 
R&D, value addition, and supply chains, ensuring fair pricing and sustainable market 
growth. With rising national and global dema nd for millets due to their nutritional and 
environmental benefits, such an institut ion would play a crucial role in policy 
coordination, export promotion, and the overall growth of the millet economy. 
 Given Odisha’s success in millet production and its commitment to agricultural 
innovation, Bhubaneswar stands as the ideal location for this initiative. A Millet Board 
would reinforce India’s global leadership in millet cultivation while significantly 
benefiting farmers and rural communities.    
 I urge upon the Government to take immediate steps to establish a Millet Board 
in Bhubaneswar, ensuring that this resilie nt and climate-friend ly crop receives the 
institutional support it truly deserves. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
147

 
Demand for survey for railway line to Yamuna valley from Dehradun via Chakrata 
 
Ǜी महȂदर् भƺ ( उǄराखंड): महोदय, मȅ सरकार का ध्यान उǄराखंड क े यमुनोतर्ी क्षेतर् मȂ लÇबे 
समय से चली आ रही रेल मागर् की माँग की ओर िदलाना चाहता हूँ। 
 यह क्षेतर् िहमाचल से जुड़ा हुआ क्षेतर् है तथा सेब एवं अनेक बे-मौसमी सÅज़ी की उपज का 
क्षेतर् भी है। महोदय, यहाँ पर जहाँ चकराता
 एक सुन्दर पयर्टन Îथल हȅ, वहीं माँ यमुना क े उद्गम 
Îथान से जुड़ा हुआ क्षेतर् भी है। यहाँ Ģितवषर् लाखȗ यातर्ी यातर्ा क े िलए आते है। 
 महोदय, यहाँ की जनता लÇबे समय से रेल मागर् की माँग कर रही है, परन्तु अभी तक इस 
क्षेतर् का रेल सवȃ भी नहीं हो पाया है, अत: मȅ इस महत्वपूणर् िवषय पर सरकार का ध्यान आकिर्षत 
करते हुए उƪ क्षेतर् को रेल मागर् से जोड़ने क े िलए सवȃ कराने की मांग करता हूं। 
 
Demand for underpasses and ov
erbridges along National Highway in Kannur, Kerala 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) : Sir, Kannur District urgently  requires intervention from 
the National Highways Authority of India to address the growing need for underpasses 
and over-bridges along its national highwa ys. With increasing traffic congestion, the 
lack of proper road infrastructure poses serious risks to commuters, pedestrians and 
businesses. NHAI must prioritize the constr uction of underpasses and overbridges at 
critical junctions such as Nadal, Velapu ram and Edakkad, where traffic bottlenecks 
and unsafe crossings are frequent. One of th e most pressing concerns is pedestrian 
safety. In the absence of de dicated crossings, schoolchildren, senior citizens and 
daily commuters are to navigate high-speed  roads, leading to fatal accidents. Many 
areas in Kannur lack safe access to essential services such as schools, hospitals, and 
Government offices due to highway expansions. The lack of underpasses along 
national high
way routes in Kannur cause prolonged delays, impacting both passenger 
and commercial transport. A well develo ped highway network is essential for 
economic growth, improving connectivit y between urban and rural areas and 
facilitating the smooth transport of goods. Action from NHAI in the form of policy 
decisions, financial allocations and fast  track approvals is necessary to make 
Kannur’s highways safer and more efficient. Investment in modern road infrastructure 
will not only reduce accidents but also impr ove access to schools, hospitals, offices 
and other essential services, enhancing the quality of life for the region’s residents. 
Hence, I request the Government to look into it. Thank you.                     
 
 
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on 
Thursday, the 3rd April, 2025. 
 
The House then adjourned at forty-one minutes past five of the clock till eleven of  
the clock on Thursday, the 3rd April, 2025. 
[ 2 April, 2025 ]
149

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 