Vol. 265         Friday, 
No. 10  2nd August, 2024 
11 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II)
CO
NTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (page 1) 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 2-9) 
Clarification by the Chair (page 9) 
Motion for Election to the Rubber Board (page 9) 
Motion for Election to the Joint Committee on Offices of Profit (page 10) 
Statement regarding Government Business (page 10) 
Matters Raised with Permission- 
Incidents of  multiple cloud bursts in Shimla, Mandi and Kullu Districts of Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttrakhand (pages 12-13) 
Demand to Safeguard Gig and Online Platform Workers from exploitative practices 
(pages 13-14) 
Representation of India by 117 Athletes in the Olympic Games (pages 14-16) 
Demand to set up a Super Speciality Medical Centre in each District of Haryana 
(pages 16-17) 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Demand for regulation of sale of pesticides for its optimum utilization and better 
agricultural production (pages 17-18) 
Demand to start direct flights from Delhi to Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh (pages 18-19) 
Demand to s tart commercial air services from Andhau Airstrip in Ghazipur, Uttar 
Pradesh (pages 19-20) 
Construction of a New Railway Line from Bolangir to Nuapara via Patnagarh -
Khaprakhol-Lakhna for Cultural and Socio-Economic Development (pages 20-21) 
Demand to allocate more funds for development of Railways in Kerala (pages 21-22) 
Demand to re- examine the special category state status of Assam according to the 
current economic situation of the State (pages 22-23) 
Demand to expedite the ongoing infrastructural work for National Sports University in 
Manipur (pages 23-24) 
Demand to Establish a Public Private Partnership (PPP) Model for Accurate Weather 
Forecasting in the Country (pages 24-25) 
Demand to Construct a Multipurpose Hall in Kondagaon District of Chhattisgarh for the 
players of the State and to include Archery in the s cheme for promotion of rural, 
indigenous and tribal sports (page 25) 
Demand for a special package for North Bengal (pages 26-27) 
Demand for 'Green Bonus' and special package for the State of Uttarakhand 
(pages 27-29) 
Supply of SPF P. monodon brood stock to the registered shrimp hatcheries 
(pages 29-30) 
Demand to abolish tax on manufacturing of shoes as well as simplification of rules for  
Shoe Industries (pages 30-31) 
We
bsite : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
https://sansad.in/rs 
E-m
ail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in

Oral Answers to Questions (pages 31-70) 
 [Answers to Starred and Un -starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials] 
Statutory Resolution — Adopted (page 71) 
Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare - Reply not 
concluded (pages 71-84) 
Announcements by the Chair (page 84 and page 131) 
Private Members' Resolution 
Regarding bringing a legislation to remove education from concurrent list and move it to 
state list in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and other matters  - Discussion 
not concluded (page 85 and page 111) 
Observations by the Chair (pages 108-111) 

RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 2nd August, 2024 / 11 Sravana, 1946 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I take the opportunity to wish Birthday Greetings to 
hon. Member of Parliament, Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde.  आपके  नाम मȂ सुख भी है और 
देव भी है।  His birthday is tomorrow on 3rd August. This is being done as per practice. 
A Member of this august House since July, 2022, Shri Sukhdeorao Bonde has been a 
Minister in Maharashtra Government an d Member of Maharashtra Legislative 
Assembly for two terms in the past. He is the National General Secretary of BJP Kisan 
Morcha. He is a medical practitioner and also a farmer. He owns high-tech multi-
specialty hospital and research center, a hospital in Amravati, Maharashtra, and is a 
member of Indian Medical Association and th e Association of Physicians of India. He 
runs a school and is associated with a skilling center and an old-age home in 
Amravati.  He is married to Dr. Vasudha Bo nde, and together they are blessed with 
son, Kunal and daughter, Manali. Hon. Member s, on behalf of this House, I wish him 
a long, healthy and happy life and extend greetings to family members and also on my 
own. 
Hon. Members, I take the opportunity to extend birthday greetings to hon. 
Member of Parliament, Shri Mahendra Bhatt, whose birthday is on 4th of August. A 
two-time Member of the Legislative Assemb ly of Uttarakhand, 2002 to 2007 and 2017 
to 2022, Shri Bhatt has recently been elected as a Member of this august House in 
April, 2024.  He was also the Vice-Pres ident of Minor Irrigation Department, 
Government of Uttarakhand 2010 to 20 12. Hailing from Chamoli district of 
Uttarakhand, he has been an active leader since his youth and held several key 
positions at the State level. In the BJP,  he also played active role during the 
Uttarakhand Rajya Andolan. He is married to Shrimati Muni Devi and the couple is 
blessed with son, Abhishek and daughter, Vashnavi. Hon. Members, on behalf of this 
House and on my own, I wish him a long, healthy and happy life and extend greetings 
to family members.   

 PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
                                                                                      
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Papers to be laid on the Table of the House. 
 
I.   Notifications of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
II.  Reports and Accounts (2022- 23) of various Special Economic Zone Authorities 
and other related papers 
III. Report and Accounts (2022-23) of  FDDI , Noida, Uttar Pra desh and other related 
papers  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA): Sir, I lay on the Table:  
 
I. (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, under Section 55 of the Aadhaar (Targeted 
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,  Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, along 
with delay statement:- 
(1) HQ-16016/1/2023-EU-I-HQ(E)., dated the 16th Janua ry, 2024, publishing the 
Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Amendment Regulations, 2024.  
(2) A-12013/13/RR/2016-UIDAI(E)., dated the 25th January, 2024, publishing the 
Unique Identification Authority of India (Appointment of Officers and 
Employees) Amendment Regulations, 2024.  
(3) HQ-16016/1/2023-EU-I-HQ(E)., dated the 27th January, 2024, publishing the 
Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Second Amendment Regulations, 2024.  
(4) HQ-13073/1/2024-AUTH-II-HQ/C-1375 1(E)., dated the 27th January, 2024 
publishing the Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Amendment Regulations, 
2024.  
(5) HQ-13073/1/2020-AUTH.II(E)., dated th e 31st January, 2024, publishing the 
Aadhaar (Payment of Fees for Perfor mance of Authentication) Amendment 
Regulations, 2024.  
(6) HQ-13073/1/2020-AUTH.II(E)., dated th e 31st January, 2024, publishing the 
Aadhaar (Authentication and Offline Ve rification) Amendment Regulations, 
2024. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) to (6) See No. L. T. 364/18/24] 
 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology Notification No. HQ-13073/1/2020-AUTH. II(E)., dated the 9th February, 
2024, publishing a Corrigendum to the Hindi version of the Notification No. HQ-
13073/1/2020-AUTH. II(E)., dated the 31 st January, 2024, along with delay 
statement. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 364/18/24] 
 
II.   (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following papers, under sub-section 
(4) of Section 37 and sub-section (3) of Section 39 of the Special Economic Zones 
Act, 2005:- 
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Noida Special Economic Zone Authority 
(NSEZ), Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2022- 23, together with the Auditor’s 
Report on the Accounts.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 288/18/24] 
 
(b) Annual Report and Accounts of the Falta Special Economic Zone Authority 
(FSEZ), West Bengal, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s 
Report on the Accounts.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 289/18/24] 
 
(c) Annual Report and Accounts of the S EEPZ SEZ Authority, Mumbai, for the 
year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 290/18/24] 
 
(d) Annual Administrative Report and Accounts of the Visakhapatnam Special 
Economic Zone Authority (VSEZA), An dhra Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 291/18/24] 
 
(e) Annual Report and Accounts of the Kand la SEZ Authority, Gujarat, for the 
year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 292/18/24] 
 
(f) Annual Report and Accounts of the Ma dras Special Econom ic Zone Authority 
(MEPZ), Tamil Nadu, for the year 2022-23,  together with the Auditor’s Report 
on the Accounts. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
3

(ii) Statement by Government accepting the above Reports.  
(iii) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers 
mentioned at (i) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 293/18/24] 
 
 
III. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (4) 
of Section 23 of the FDDI Act, 2017:-  
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e Footwear Design and Development 
Institute (FDDI), Noida, Uttar Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Institute.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 499/18/24] 
 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of  Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
II. Reports and Accounts of various State Agro Industries Development Corporations 
Limited for various years and other related papers 
III. Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of the Coconut Development Board, Kochi, 
Kerala; and the NHB, Gurugram, Haryana and other related papers  
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:- 
  
I. (i) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following Notifications of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare), 
issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 
1914:- 
(1) S.O. 94(E)., dated the 9th January, 2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (First Amendment) Order, 2024.  
(2) S.O. 400(E)., dated the 1st February,  2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (Second Amendment) Order, 2023.  
(3) S.O. 1591(E)., dated the 1st April, 2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (Third Amendment) Order, 2024.  
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

(4) S.O. 1593(E)., dated the 2nd April, 2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (Fourth Amendment) Order, 2024.  
(5) S.O. 1601(E)., dated the 3rd April, 2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (Sixth Amendment) Order, 2024.  
(6) S.O. 1602(E)., dated the 3rd April, 2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (Fifth Amendment) Order, 2024.  
(7) S.O. 2195(E)., dated the 5th June, 2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (Seventh Amendment) Order, 2024.  
(8) S.O. 2477(E)., dated the 27th June, 2024, publishing the Plant Quarantine 
(Regulation of Import into India) (Nineth Amendment) Order, 2024. 
[Placed in Library.  For (1) to (8) See No. L. T. 303/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers We lfare) Notification No. S.O. 1590(E)., 
dated the 1st April, 2024, notifying the es tablishment of a new Plant Quarantine 
Station (PQS) at Bhubaneswar, Odisha.  
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 303/18/24] 
 
(iii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers We lfare) Notification No. G.S.R. 408(E)., 
dated the 16th July, 2024, publishing th e Ghee Grading and Marking Rules, 2024, 
under sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Agricultural Produce (Grading and 
Marking) Act, 1937. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 634/18/24] 
 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1) 
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:- 
 
(i)    (a) Fifty-fifth Annual Report and Ac counts of the Bihar State Agro Industries 
 Development Corporation Limited, Pa tna, Bihar, for the year 2020-21, 
 together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
 the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
5

(ii)   (a)  Fifty-sixth Annual Report and Accounts of the Bihar State Agro Industries 
Development Corporation Limited, Patna, Bihar, for the year 2021-22, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) and (ii) See No. L. T. 508/18/24] 
 
(iii)   (a) Forty-ninth Annual Report and Accounts of the Kerala Agro Industries 
Corporation Limited, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, for the year 2016-17, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
 
(iv)  (a) Fifty-first Annual Report and Accounts of the Kerala Agro Industries 
Corporation Limited, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, for the year 2018-19, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
 
(v)  (a) Fifty-second Annual Report and Accounts of the Kerala Agro Industries 
Corporation Limited, Thiruvananthap uram, Kerala, for the year 2019-20, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. For (iii) to (v) See No. L. T. 507/18/24] 
 
 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

(vi) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e Haryana Agro Industries Corporation 
Limited, Panchkula, Haryana for the year 2020-21, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
 
(vii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of th e Haryana Agro Industries Corporation 
Limited, Panchkula, Haryana, for th e year 2021-22, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Corporation.  
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. For (vi) and (vii) See No. L. T. 509/18/24] 
 
 
III.   (i)  A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following papers, under sub-
section (4) of Section 15 and sub-section (4) of Section 17 of the Coconut 
Development Board Act, 1979:- 
(a) Annual Report of the Coconut Developm ent Board, Kochi, Kerala, for the year 
2022-23.  
(b) Annual Accounts of the Coconut Develo pment Board, Kochi, Kerala, for the 
year 2022-23, and the Audit Report thereon.  
(c) Review by Government on the working the above Board.  
(d) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
and (b) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 510/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -  
(a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Horticulture Board (NHB), 
Gurugram, Haryana, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report 
on the Accounts.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Board.  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
7

(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 635/18/24] 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel; not present. Dr. L. Murugan. 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING (DR. L. MURUGAN): Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
  
(i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of  the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting Notification No. G.S.R. 151(E)., dated the 1st March, 
2024, publishing the Press and Regist ration of Periodicals Rules, 2024, 
under Section 21 of the Press and Registration of Periodicals Act, 2023. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 636/18/24] 
 
(ii) A copy (in English and Hindi) of th e Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
Notification No. G.S.R. 364(E)., dated the 4th July, 2024, publishing the 
Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporat ion of India) Deputy Director of 
Administration (Amendment) Recruitment Rules, 2024, under Section 34 of 
the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L. T. 637/18/24] 
 
Reports and Accounts (2021-22 and 2022-23) of the BJEL, Kolkata, West Bengal and 
other related papers  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES (SHRI PABITRA 
MARGHERITA):  Sir, I lay on the Table, und er sub-section (1)(b) of Section 394 of 
the Companies Act, 2013, a copy each (i n English and Hindi) of the following 
papers:-  
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Birds Jute and Exports Limited (BJEL), 
Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2021- 22, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comme nts of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon. 
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Company. 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers   mentioned at (a) 
above.  
(ii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Birds Jute and Exports Limited (BJEL), 
Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts and the comme nts of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India thereon.  
(b) Review by Government on the working of the above Company. 
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. For (i) and (ii) See No. L. T. 336/18/24] 
 
 
CLARIFICATION BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I was involved with the Governors’ Conference.  
There was a late night communication to me with respect to Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
that someone else was to do the job. So, it may not be taken against him. There was 
a communication to me in writing late night that instead of Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel, 
someone else would be doing it. Since it came very late in the night, and I went to 
Rashtrapati Bhawan to attend the Governors’ Conference, I could not put it in order.   
So, I am making that clarification.  
 
 
MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE RUBBER BOARD 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY; AND 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (SHRI JITIN PRASADA):  Sir, I move:  
“That in pursuance of clause (e) of su b-section (3) of the Section (4) of the 
Rubber Act, 1947 read with Rule 4( 2) of the Rubber Rules, 1955, this 
House do proceed to elect, in such manner as directed by the Chairman, 
one Member from amongst the Members of the House to be a member of 
the Rubber Board in the vacancy cause d due to the retirement of Shri 
Vinay Dinu Tendulkar from the memb ership of Rajya Sabha on the 28
th 
July, 2023.” 
 
The question was put and the Motion was adopted. 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
9

MOTION FOR ELECTION TO THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON OFFICES OF PROFIT 
THE MINISTER OF STATE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY  OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI 
ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL):  Sir, I move:  
"That this House concurs in the recommendation of the Lok Sabha that a Joint 
Committee on Offices of Profit be cons tituted for the purposes set out in 
the Motion adopted by the Lok Sabha at its sitting held on the 26 th July, 
2024 and communicated to this House, and resolves that this House do 
join in the said Committee and pro ceed to elect, in ac cordance with the 
system of proportional representation  by means of single transferable 
vote, five Members from amongst the Members of the House to serve on 
the said Joint Committee." 
The question was put and the Motion was adopted. 
STATEMENT REGARDING GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  
THE MINISTER OF STATE
 IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS  ( DR. L. MURUGAN):  Sir, I rise to announce that 
Government Business during th e remaining part of the 265 th Session of Rajya Sabha 
will consist of: 
(i) Consideration of any items of Government Business carried over from today’s
order paper.  It contains (i) Further Discussion on the Working of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare; (ii)  and Discussion on the Working of the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
(ii) Consideration and return of Jammu and Kashmir Appropriation (No.3) Bill,
2024, as passed by Lok Sabha.
(iii) Consideration and return of the following Bills after they are passed by Lok
Sabha:-
(a) The Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2024.
(b) The Finance (No.2) Bill, 2024.
(iv) Consideration and passing of the following Bills after they are passed by the
Lok Sabha:-
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 (a)  The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024. 
 (b)  The Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024. 
(v) Consideration and passing of the Oilfields (Regulation and  
Development) Amendment Bill, 2024, after its introduction.  
(vi) Consideration and passing of the Readjustment of Representation of 
Scheduled Tribes in Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 
2024, after it is introduced, considered and passed by the Lok Sabha. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Derek O’Brien. 
 
SHRI DEREK O’BRIEN (West Bengal) :  Sir, my point of orde r is under Rule 29(3).  
The House is running very smoothly with the co-operation from both sides.  But, on 
Friday afternoon, normally, the practice is th at we end it after the Private Members’ 
Resolutions.  So, to take up any Legislativ e Business or any Discussion of a Ministry, 
-- even though we wanted a discussion on the Home Ministry, but that is another 
issue -- if this can be taken up afresh on Monday at one o'clock or two o'clock 
because we want to be more participative.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I would take it into consid eration and come back to the House at 
2.00 p.m. 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh) : Sir, I wrote a letter to you requesting 
you to grant me an opportunity. …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Let me respond.  Hon. Members write a letter and I respond to 
them.  After I have responded to them, if th ere is an issue and rules permit, then, it 
can be raised.  I will have a word with yo u.  It is under my consideration, serious 
consideration.   
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: It is a serious issue, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is under very serious consideration. 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: Sir, if possible, please call me today itself.   
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
11

MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as announced in the House yesterday, there will no 
lunch recess today.  ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, I have received notices 
under Rule 267... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, what Business will be transacted at 1 o'clock?  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It has already been communicated. Hon. Minister will reply. I had 
indicated it in detail yesterday. I am only reiterating it for the benefit of Members.  
Hon. Members, the notice received under  Rule 267 is not in accord and hence 
declined.  Now, Shri Pramod Tiwari to raise the issue of flood situation in the State of 
Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh. 
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
Incidents of multiple cloud bursts in Shimla, Mandi and Kullu districts of Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttrakhand 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान):  सभापित महोदय, बािरश ने िहमाचल Ģदेश क े िशमला, मंडी 
और क ुÊलू िजले मȂ जमकर कहर बरपाया है, िजससे 6 लोगȗ की मौत हो गई है और करीब 50 
लोग लापता हȅ। महोदय, Ǜीखंड महादेव मागर् पर भीमडवारी मȂ करीब 250 लोग अभी भी फ ं से हुए 
हȅ तथा एक Îकू ल, ÎवाÎथ्य क Ȃ दर् तथा दो िवǏुत प
िरयोजनाएँ भी क्षितगर्Îत हो गई हȅ। इस तरह से 
उǄराखंड क े हिरǎार, देहरादून, चमोली और िटहरी मȂ बादल फटने से तबाही हुई है, िजसमȂ 
करीब 16
 लोगȗ की मौत हो गई है और कई लोगȗ क े लापता होने की भी सूचना िमली है। गौरीकुं ड 
से क ेदारनाथ जाने वाला पैदल राÎता बह जाने से Ģशासन ने िफलहाल यातर्ा रोक दी है। िहमाचल 
व उǄराखंड मȂ बादल फटने की अनेक घटनाओं की वजह से लगभग 22 लोगȗ की मौत हो गई है, 
करीब 60 लोग लापता हȅ और लगभग 50 घर  बह गए हȅ। एन
डीआरएफ, एसडीआरएफ, पुिलस 
होम गाडर् और फायर सिर्वसेज की टीमȂ राहत, खोज और बचाव कायर् मȂ जुटी हȅ। 
 
( उपसभापि
त महोदयपीठासीन हुए।) 
 
महोदय, Ģकृ ित से बार-बार छेड़छाड़ करने क े कारण बादल फटने की घटनाओं मȂ 
लगातार बढ़ोतरी हो रही है। िहमालय क्षेतर् मȂ बादल फटने की सबसे अिधक घटनाएं देखी जा रह ी 
हȅ, क्यȗिक िहमालय क्षेतर् मȂ दसकीय तापमान वृिǉ, वैिÌवक तापमान वृिǉ की दर से अिधक है। 
बादल फटने क े कारण Äलैश Äलड, लȅडÎलाइड और लȅडके िंवग की घटनाएं हो जाती हȅ। बादल 
फटने की संभावनाओं का पता करने क े िलए अ त्याधुिनक राडार क े एक बेहतर नेटवकर् की 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

आवÌयकता होती है, जो िक अपेक्षाकृ त काफी महंगा है। सरकार को इस िसलिसले मȂ ठोस कदम 
उठाने की जरूरत है। भारत मȂ यǏिप Ģाकृ ितक घटनाएं अिधक घिटत होती हȅ, तथािप देश मȂ 
संरचना योजना, Ģबोधन बचाव कायर्, आपदा क े पÌचात िवकास कायर् और आपदा क े पूवर् तैयारी 
इत्यािद क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सामान्यत: कमी पाई जाती है। अत: मȅ सदन क े माध्यम से क Ȃ दर् सरकार से यह 
आगर्ह करता हूं िक इन पहलुओं को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए एक रचनात्मक कायर्कर्म बनाए तथा दोनȗ 
राज्य सरकारȗ को इस िÎथित से िन
पटने क े िलए पयार्Ãत धन उपलÅध कराए। चूँिक िपछली बार 
िहमाचल मȂ जो  िवनाश लीला हुई थी, उस पर क Ȃ दर् सरकार ने यथोिचत धनरािश आज तक नहीं 
दी है। महोदय, मेरा कह ना  है िक राजनीितक आधार पर नहीं, बिÊक क्षित क े आधार पर क्षितपूिर्त 
की जाए और िहमाचल Ģदेश क े िलए एक पैक े ज की ËयवÎथा की जाए - यह मेरा आपसे आगर्ह है।    
                         
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you. The following hon. Members associated 
themselves with the matter raised by Shri Pramod Tiwari: Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), 
Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu).  
         Now, Shri Tiruchi Siva.  Demand to save gig and online platform workers from 
exploitative practices. 
 
Demand to safeguard Gig and Online Platform Workers from exploitative practices 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, I would like to draw the attention of the 
Government towards the need to evolve solutions to safeguard the gig and online 
platform workers from exploitative practices by some private companies.  Sir, it is a 
very important issue.   
 Gig economy offers flexibility and inco me opportunities to nearly 80 lakh 
workers as of now, and, it is exp
ected to rise up to 2.3 crore by 2030 as per the NITI 
Aayog Report. But these workers are vulnerable to unfair treatment and insufficient 
protection.  The pandemic has revealed a ve ry significant role of the gig workers.  
They played a role in the economy by virtue  of their roles as drivers, delivery persons 
and agents.  Who are gig workers is the qu estion. They comprise of those who are 
working in Swiggy, Zomato, Dunzo, Ola, Ub er, etc. Around 80 lakh such workers are 
there. They ensured the basic necessity of the people when the whole world was 
locked inside. They played a very great ro le at that time.  But the recent reports 
highlight the precarious conditions faced by these workers. For instance, delivery 
persons failing to meet certain targets have  seen their health insurance coverage 
reduced or even revoked, placing them and their families at significant risk in the 
event of medical emergencies. This is at odds with global stan dards. For instance, 
food delivery platforms around the globe offer accident coverage to gig workers 
without any gratiification. Insecurity of employment is an impediment for these 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
13

workers in unionizing and engaging in collective bargaining.  Gig workers are 
frequently classified as independent contra ctors rather than service sector employees 
in the organized sector, thereby excluding them from traditional labour protections 
and benefits. They are often termed as part ners or agents instead of workmen.  The 
Supreme Court has also held very well to  support this view admitting pleas for 
extending social security benefits to gi g workers including he alth insurance and 
maternity benefits. Promising legislative efforts at various State levels have also aimed 
at addressing these concerns. It is impe rative that we take immediate steps to 
remedy this and ensure that gig workers are as well compensated and protected as 
any other worker in the organized sector . I urge the Government to establish a 
national framework for the regulation of the gig economy and ensure uniform 
standards for all workers across the service sector.  Thank you. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you, Tiruchi Siva ji.  The following hon. Members 
associated themselves with the matter raised by hon. Memb er, Shri Tiruchi Siva: Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri  N.R. Elango (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri Prakash Chik Ba raik (West Bengal), Ms. Dola Sen (West 
Bengal), Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), 
Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Ker ala), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. Fa uzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Niranjan 
Bishi (Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri 
Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shrimati  Renuka Chawdhury (Telangana), Shri 
Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shrimati Ma hua Maji (Jharkhand) and Shri Ramji (Uttar 
Pradesh).                                                                    
  Now, Shri Kartikeya Sharma; not present.  Shrimati Mamata Thakur, regarding 
representation of India by 117 athletes in Olympic Games. 
 
Representation of India by 117 athletes in the Olympic Games 
 
SHRIMATI MAMATA THAKUR (WEST BENGAL): 
*"Respected Deputy Chairman Sir, 
thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak in Zero Hour. Sir, I want to speak in 
my mother tongue Bengali. The Olympics  are still underway in France, where 117 
athletes from India have participated, of  them, 70 are men and 47 women athletes. 
                   
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali.  
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

No one has raised any question about thei r caste, caste, religion, language. They all 
play and are playing for the country. And,  every Indian, every countryman is also a 
passionate supporter of their sport.  This is the specialty of our country of special 
heritage, where we all stand by each other, be it sports, literature, art, science or 
whatever. In all fields of art-religion-lang uage, 'unity in diversity' enriches and 
advances us.  Therefore, the attempt to divide the common people of our country on 
the basis of religion, language, ethnicity, caste  is never correct. It is not advisable to 
ask any of the citizens of the country to show proof of that identity on the basis of any 
condition. No condition should be imposed on any citizen to live peacefully in this 
country.  We are, therefore, in favour of natural unconditional citizenship. We are not 
in favour of asking citizens to show an y illusory, unreal paper for no reason. Those 
who already vote, who have some valid iden tity card, by showing which we vote and 
at times elect the Prime Minister of th e country and the Chief Minister or the 
Government of different states, asking them to show a new paper or making them say 
'I am not a citizen, I want to become a ci tizen' and making them apply for citizenship 
is very disrespectful. In the name of giving citizenship, imposing conditions on it, 
asking to submit various documents of ancestors and if they cannot submit, not 
granting citizenship, creating such situatio n and sending them to detention camps is 
terribly dishonorable. If you want to give any citizenship card to the citizens of the 
country, it must be given unconditionally. Aski ng for a paper, forcing them to fill out a 
form with wrong credentials is condemna ble. I condemn the game that has been 
started with the issuance of that citizenship card by imposing conditions. 
The diversity of our country India is ou r pride. We should not impose any 
conditions or dishonour its people. The tradit ion of 'unity in diversity' of our country, 
India will be celebrated.  No ne of us has the right to disrespect our brothers and 
sisters by asking them to show papers if they cannot give unconditional citizenship. 
Let us all live together and move forward.  
 Jai Jai Sri Sri Harichand Guruchand Thakur's Jai!  Jai Bangla! 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Mamata Thakur : Shri Prakash Chik 
Baraik (West Bengal), Shri Samirul Islam (West Bengal), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Dr. Kani mozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Ms. Dola Sen 
(West Bengal), Shrimati Sagarika Ghose (West Bengal),  Shri Mohammed Nadimul 
Haque (West Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
15

Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal) and  Ms. Sushmita Dev (West Bengal). 
 
Demand to set up a Super Speciality Medical Centre in each district of Haryana 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA (Haryana):  Sir, I rise to bring this issue to the attention 
of this esteemed House. There is an urgent need to upgrade our healthcare 
infrastructure at the district level in Harya na.  Currently, the district-level health  
facilities in our State, while   serving  ba sic   healthcare needs, often lack advanced 
medical services required for treating complex diseases.  Many residents, when faced 
with severe health issues such as liver and biliary conditions, kidney ailments, heart 
diseases, cancer and other orthopedic proble ms, are forced to seek treatment in far-
off metropolitan cities.  This not only puts significant financial and emotional strain on 
families but also leads to delays in receivi ng critical medical care.  Our existing 
Government hospitals, although staffed with dedicated healthcare professionals, 
need substantial upgrades to meet the growing and diverse medical needs of our 
population at the local levels. 
 In response to this pressing issue, I propose that we declare or upgrade one of 
the Government hospitals in every district as a super speciality centre for integrated 
medicines.  These centres will be equipped with specialized wings dedicated to liver 
and biliary care, nephrology, cardiology, pe diatrics, orthopedics, cancer care and 
general medicine.  By leveraging a Public -Private-Partnership (PPP) model, we can 
ensure that these centres are built with state-of-the-art facilities and technology.  The 
Central Government can provide one-time financial assistance and support for the 
establishment of these centr es while the State Governme nt will bear the recurring 
expenses. Additionally, the revenue generated from the services and the 
contributions through CSR initiatives from private enterprises will help sustain these 
centres.  This strategic upgr ade will transform our district hospitals into hubs of 
advanced medical care, providing timely and quality treatment to our citizens. 
 Integrative medicine, which combines  traditional medical practices with 
modern treatment methods, will bring numerou s benefits to the citizens of Haryana.  
It is important to understand that a patien t who is suffering from  cancer or a patient 
who has a kidney ailment needs particular type  o f  t r e a t m e n t .   I t  i s  v e r y  d i f f i c u l t  f o r  
people from faraway places to come to th e metropolitan or big cities to get the 
treatment on a regular basis.  We can have cancer care centres to administer 
chemotherapy for instance or a centre where kidney ailments can be treated.  These 
are the kind of models that are required in the rural and sub-district level areas. 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 My honest and sincere suggestion is that if the Government proposes that the 
Central Government can give one-time assistance to them through a Public-Private 
Parternship, the State Governments can pr ovide land and the Central Government 
can provide the funds.  Then it can become  a tertiary care centre in the districts for 
the people.  Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Kartikeya Sharma: Dr. V. Sivadasan 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odish a), Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra). 
 
Demand for regulation of sale of pesticides for its optimum utilization and better 
agricultural production 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, it is about sale of banned pesticides and 
hence strict monitoring of the sale of pesticides.  According to the Expert Committee 
Report, 66 pesticides are eith er banned or restricted in other countries but they are 
continued to be registered in India for us e.  Even Endosulfan, which was banned by 
the Supreme Court, is being used in agricult ure.  Fertilizer and pesticide distributors 
and agents are selling these banned items and the poor farmers do not know their 
consequence and effect of using these ha rmful pesticides and hence the farmers 
continue to use these pesticides unknowingly. 
 There should be periodical review of these pesticides and harmful chemical 
insecticides by the Expert Committee to ensu re that they are not sold in the Indian 
markets and poor farmers are not taken fo r a ride.  Sometimes farmers are issued 
outdated and expired fertilizers and pesticides which have no effect on the agricultural 
production and it causes loss to the farmers. I would urge upon the Government to 
promote use of bio-pesticides which are largely safer than chemical fertilizers. 
Awareness campaigns should be launched among farmers to spread message of 
optimum use of fertilizers and pesticides so th at there is no harm to farm produce. I 
would demand that there should be pesticide control mechanism to monitor use of 
optimum and select pesticides for better agricultural production. Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shri M. Shanmugam: Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sant Balbir Singh (Punjab), Shri Sanjeev Arora 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
17

(Punjab), Shrimati Jaya Amitabh Bachchan (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Renuka 
Chowdhury (Telangana), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. 
V. Sivadasan (Kerala), Shrimati Jebi Ma ther Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN 
Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Sulata De o (Odisha), Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra ), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha) and Shri 
Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal). 
 
Demand to start direct flights from Delhi to Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh 
 
Ǜी मुजीबुƥा खान (ओिडशा): उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ जगदलपुर शहर, जो छǄीसगढ़ क े बÎतर 
िजला मȂ है, बहुत अच्छा और खूबसूरत शहर है।  उस शहर की िदÊली से डायरेक्ट कनेिक्टिवटी 
नहीं है।  अगर िदÊली से वहाँ की डायरेक्ट कनेिक्टिवटी हो, तो इससे लोगȗ को, खासकर 
ट ूिरÎट्स को, बहुत सहूिलयत होगी। वहाँ पर जगदलपुर क े आसपास िकरंदुल आयरन ओर माइंस 
है, बैलाडीला माइंस है और ट ूिरÎट Ãलेस क े िह
साब  से िचतर्कू ट वॉटरफॉल है, तीरथगढ़ है और 
इंडÎटर्ीज़ क े िहसाब से अभी NMDC का Îटील Ãलांट Îथािपत हुआ है।    
 इसके  साथ-साथ सबसे बड़ी बात यह है िक जगदलपुर शहर ओिडशा से लगा हुआ है।  
वहाँ से 14-15 िकलोमीटर जाने क े बाद ओिडशा आता है। ओिडशा मȂ भी क ु छ ऐसे Ģमुख Îथान हȅ, 
जो िदÊली से डायरेक्टली कनेक्ट हो सकते हȅ। ओिडशा क े क
ोरापुट िडिÎटर्क्ट मȂ गुÃतेÌवर टेÇपल 
है, जो िक भगवान िशव का बहुत अच् छा मिन्दर है, जहाँ लोग देश क े अन्दर से तो आते ही हȅ, 
बाहर से, देश-िवदेश से भी आते हȅ।  इसके  होने से वहाँ जाने क े िलए भी एक बहुत बड़ी सुिवधा 
Îथािपत हो सकती है।   
 वहाँ सुनाबेड़ा मȂ िहन्दुÎतान ऐरोनॉिट
क्स िलिमटेड ( एचएएल) है, जो हमारा िमग का 
कारखाना है। वहाँ जाने क े िलए भी जो ऑिफससर् िदÊली से डायरेक्ट जाना चाहते हȅ, अगर वे 
जगदलपुर मȂ उतरȂगे, तो वह पास मȂ ही होगा।  नवरत्न कÇपिनयȗ मȂ से एक नेÊको भी वहीं 
आसपास मȂ दामनजोड़ी मȂ है।  इसी Ģकार से, 120 िकलोमीटर क े रेिड
यस मȂ छǄीसगढ़ और 
ओिडशा, दोनȗ को इससे बेिनिफट हो सकता है, अगर वहाँ क े िलए िदÊली से डायरेक्ट Äलाइट 
हो।  इससे ट ूिरÎट्स क े िलए भी सुिव
धा हो सकती है, ऑिफिशयÊस क े िलए भी सुिवधा हो सकती 
है और छǄीसगढ़ तथा ओिडशा क े जो Îटू डȂट्स यहाँ िदÊली मȂ पढ़ते हȅ, उनके  िलए भी सुिवधा हो 
सकती है िक वे ठीक वƪ पर अपने गंतËय तक पहुँच सकȂ गे। 
 मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क ेन्दर् सरकार से अनुरोध करू ँगा िक at least हÄते मȂ दो िदन िदÊली 
से जगदलपुर, छǄीसगढ़ क े िलए डायरेक्ट Äलाइट होनी चाि
हए, तािक अभी जो हैदराबाद से या 
रायपुर से घूम कर जाना पड़ता है, इससे ट ूिरÎट्स को, लोगȗ को बहुत तकलीफ होती है।  तो 
क ेन्दर् सरकार से मेरी गुजािरश है िक सबको नजर मȂ रख
ते हुए, दो Îटेट्स को नजर मȂ रखते हुए, 
छǄीसगढ़ और ओिडशा को नजर मȂ रखते हुए, सबकी सुिवधा क े िलए, अगर इसे हÄते मȂ दो िदन 
क े िलए शुरू  िकया जा
ए, तो बहुत सुिवधा होगी।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon.  Member, Shri Muzibulla Khan: Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Siva dasan (Kerala), Shri Subhasish Khuntia 
(Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati  Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam (Chhattisgarh), 
Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Sujeet Kumar (Odisha), Sh ri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh) 
and Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha). 
 
Demand to start commercial air services from Andhau airstrip in Ghazipur, Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
डा. संगीता बलवन्त ( उǄर Ģदेश): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपने मुझे एक 
जनकÊयाणकारी िवषय पर बोलने का जो सुअवसर Ģदान िकया है, इसके  िलए मȅ आभार Ëयƪ 
करती हूँ।   
 आज़ादी क े 67 साल बाद 2014 से पहले सÇपूणर् भारतवषर् मȂ मातर् 74 एयरपोट्सर् थे।  201
 4 
क े बाद यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, माननीय Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व वाली सरकार मȂ िपछले 10 वषș 
मȂ एयरपोट्सर् की संख्या मȂ दोगुनी वृिǉ हुई और एयरपोट्सर् की संख्या बढ़ कर 148 हो गई है।  
महोदय, इसी कर्म मȂ, मȅ उǄर Ģदेश क े अपने गृह जनपद गाजीपुर की तरफ क ेन्दर् सर
कार का 
ध्यान आकृ Íट कराते हुए कहना चाहूँगी िक उǄर Ģदेश क े गाजीपुर से 5 िकलोमीटर की दूरी पर, 
गाजीपुर-मऊ मागर् पर अंधऊ मȂ िǎतीय िवÌव युǉ क े दौरान 63 एकड़  मȂ फ ैली हुई हवाई पƺी 
बनाई गई थी। आज भी यह अंधऊ हवाई पƺी सिकर्य है, िजस पर आए िदन चाटर्डर् Ãलेन्स उतरते 
रहते हȅ।   
माननीय उ
पसभापित महोदय, मȅ गाजीपुर अंधऊ हवाई पƺी को क ेन्दर् सरकार की 
महत्वाकांक्षी ' उड़ान योजना' क े तहत Ëयावसाियक िवमान सेवा हेतु Îथािपत कराने की माँग 
करती हूँ, क्यȗिक गाजीपुर जनपद क े साथ-साथ मऊ, बिलया, आजमगढ़, चंदौली जनपदȗ क े 
साथ-साथ सीमावतीर् िब
हार Ģांत क े कई िजलȗ क े लोगȗ क े आवागमन क े िलए सुगमता Ģदान 
करेगा। यह इन जगहȗ क े लोगȗ क े िलए लाभकारी िसǉ होगा, क्यȗिक इन जनपदȗ क े नागिरकȗ 
को हवाई यातर्ा हेतु 50 से  150 िकलोमीटर तक का सफर तय करके  वाराणसी या गोरखपुर 
एयरपोटर् जाना पड़ता है।   
 माननीय उप
सभापित महोदय, मȅ दो पंिƪयाँ कह कर अपनी वाणी को िवराम दूँगी।  ये 
पंिƪयाँ मेरी Îवरिचत हȅ।   मȅ कहना चाहूँगी : 
'ताज पहनने की चाहत तो सबको है, 
पर आदमी उस लायक होना चा
िहए। 
तकदीर जो देश की बदल दे, मोदी जैसा नायक होना चािहए।' 
 बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
19

 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद, डा. संगीता जी। The following hon. Members associated 
themselves with the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shrimati Sangeeta Balwant:  
Shri Neeraj Shekhar (Uttar Pr adesh), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Mahendra Bhatt (Uttarakhand), Shri Madan Rathore (Rajasthan), 
Shrimati Sadhna Singh (Uttar Pradesh), Shri Mayankbhai Jaydevbhai Nayak 
(Gujarat), Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala (Gujar at), Dr. Parmar Jasvantsinh Salamsinh 
(Gujarat) and Shri Samik Bhattacharya (West Bengal) .       
 माननीय Ǜी िनरंजन िबशी जी,  'Construction of a new railway line from Bolangir to 
Nuapara via Patnagarh - Khaprakhol - La khna for cultural and socio-economic 
development.'    
 
Construction of a New Railway Line from Bolangir to Nuapara 
via Patnagarh-
Khaprakhol-Lakhna for cultural and socio-economic development 
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI (Odisha):  Thank you, hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for giving 
permission to raise a matter of urgent public importance on the issue of construction 
of new railway line from Bolangir to Nuapara via Patanagarh - Khaprakhol - Lakhna 
for cultural development and socio-economi c development of Western Odisha and in 
general, Odisha State.  
The final location survey for construction of new railway line from Bolangir to 
Nuapada via Dhulusar-Chudapali-Bhainsa-Patnagarh-Gambhari-Khaprakhol-Lakhna 
has already been completed.  The distance of new railway line is 100 kilometers. 
Approximate estimated cost for the final location survey of the new railway line was 
Rs.4.35 crore. The proposed new railway lin e will fulfill the demand of tourists and 
cultural development of Harishankar temple an d also the biodiversity heritage site of 
Gandhamardan Hill Range, as well as th e socio-economic development of Western 
Odisha. With regard to Harishankar temple , it is believed that, according to epic 
Ramayan, Lord Hanuman lifting  of Gandhamardan, to save the life of Lakshman in 
search of the rarest medicinal plant Sanjeevani, left some parts of Gandhamardan Hill 
at Harishankar. Presently, the site is worshipped as the abode of Lord Shiva at 
Harishankar. Lakhs of devotees visit the Gandhamardan Parvat where Lord Shiva is 
being worshipped. On the other side of the Gandhamardan Hills, Lord 
Nrusinghanath, incarnation of Lord Vishnu, is worshipped there. So, lakhs of 
devotees, lakhs of tourists and nature lovers  go to that place. But there is no railway 
communication, no flight communication, and also no road communication. So, the 
East Coast Railway, Ministry of Railways, Government of India will be benefited owing 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

to the commercial viability of the proposed new railway line from Bolangir to Nuapada 
via Khaprakhol. Therefore, Sir, I would like to seek your kind intervention... (Time-
bell rings.)      
                                                 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you Niranjan Bishi ji, time is over. …(Interruptions)…  
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by the 
hon. Member, Shri Niranjan Bishi:   Shri Subhasish Khuntia (Odisha), Shrimati Sulata 
Deo (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit (Odisha) Patra, Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu),  Dr. V. Si vadasan (Kerala) and Shri Sujeet Kumar 
(Odisha). 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham, 'D emand to allocate more funds for 
development of railways in Kerala'.  
 
Demand to allocate more funds for development of Railways in Kerala 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala) : Sir, I would like to draw the attention to 
the neglect of the State of Kerala regardin g the Railway development of the State.  
Despite Kerala being the key generator for revenue for Railways with eleven railway 
stations being in the top 25 railway stations of the Southern Railw ay, with the highest 
revenue generation in the Fiscal Year 2023- 24, the allocation in the Union Budget is 
very, very disproportionate for Kerala with Kerala ranking third lowest among the 
Indian States.  I repeat, Kerala ranks third lo west in Railway allocation as far as Union 
Budget is concerned.  Some of the im portant projects such as the Angamaly-
Sabari Railway Line which is the connecting lin e to the Sabarimala Shrine remains a 
distant dream with no sufficient allocation for it.  Sabari Railway Line is the priority for 
Kerala and all the MPs from Kerala, across pa rty lines, have been requesting for it but 
stands ignored. The Kochuveli  Master Plan, for the Fourth Stage, there is no 
allocation for it. The Ernakulam-Kayamkulam  Doubling has no fund allocation.  The 
Trivandrum-Kanyakumari Doubling has less allocation when compared to previous 
Budgets. The location survey of the Ernakula m to Shoranur, the third track is still not 
completed. Kerala has only two Vande Bhar at Services where other States have five 
to six services and the temporary Ernaku lam to Bengaluru Vande Bharat may be 
made permanent and should be made perman ent with services making it regular.  
Also, Sir, the trains are jam-packed with  over-crowding and, recently, the social 
media is flooded with pictures of over-crowd ed trains. Eighteen ladies fainted in the 
train due to over-crowding. There is a sign ificant shortage of Super-fast Express and 
Passenger and MEMU services. The urgent requirement is to have services originating 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
21

from Trivandrum-  Kottayam and Ernakulum. I am privileged that both the Union 
Minister of Railways and the Finance Minister are here.   
 I urge the Central Government to addre ss these disparities and also to allocate 
sufficient and additional funds so that these issues can be addressed and also 
prioritise passing of the projects which ar e already announced. It is important to 
ensure adequate and sufficient funds across In dia, it should be made so that India 
progresses. Thank you very much.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh rimati Jebi Mather Hisham: Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi  (Odisha), Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Shri Haris  
Beeran  (Kerala), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shri Neeraj Dangi  (Rajasthan), Shri Ashok Singh (Madhya 
Pradesh), Shri Saket Gokhale (West Bengal)  and Shri Sant Balbir Singh.                                    
Now, hon. Shri Ajit Kumar Bhuyan, 'Demand to re-examine the Special 
Category State status of Assam according to  the current economic situation of the 
State'. 
 
Demand to re-examine the Special Category State status of Assam according to 
current economic situation of the State 
 
SHRI AJIT KUMAR BHUYAN (Assam) : Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, for 
allowing me to raise an important issue ab out Assam.  The Special Category States 
came into being in 1969 upon the recomm endations of the National Development 
Council which made the provisions of allocating 30 per cent of the total fund available 
under the head of normal plan assistance to  State plans of three States, viz., Assam, 
Nagaland and Jammu & Kashmir.  It may be  noted that normal plan assistances to 
the Special Category States (that is, 30 per cent of the total fund  set aside for three 
States) were provided through 'negot iations' between the concerned State 
Government and the Planning Commission  while the remaining 70 per cent was 
divided among the other 'general category' States using an objective criterion known 
as Gadgil-Mukherjee formula.  Now, the qu estion is, why should Assam continue to 
be a Special Category State?  There are three fundamental reason s for this and they 
are the following.   Assam is one of the three States to be ac corded as a Special 
Category State in 1969 upon the recomme ndation of the National Development 
Council. The 14
th Finance Commission did not and cannot revoke the status simply 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

because this is not within th eir jurisdiction. As such, th e status of Special Category 
State continues for the State of Assam. The 14 th Finance Commission has not come 
up with a specific recommend ation regarding discontinuation of the Special Category 
State in their report in deciding the transfer of resources to States from the Union. The 
Commission, thus, did not make a distinct ion between Special and General Category 
States in determining the norms and recomme ndations. Therefore, in essence, there 
is no reason to believe that the 'Special Category State' status of Assam has come to 
end. Most importantly, 'Special Category St ate' Status is specifi cally related to the 
provisions of the grants made by the Union Government out of the Consolidated Fund 
of the Government of India and how the gr ants are to be made is governed by the 
provisions of the Article 275 of the Constitution...      
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Ajit Kumar Bhuyan:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Na du), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), and 
Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra).       
Now Shri Maharaja Sanaja oba Leishemba; demand for expediting ongoing 
infrastructural work for National Sports University in Manipur. 
 
Demand to expedite the ongoing infrastructural work for National Sports University in 
Manipur 
 
SHRI MAHARAJA SANAJA OBA LEISHEMBA (MANIPUR ): Sir, I thank you for giving 
me this opportunity. The subject of my Zero  Hour notice is the demand for expediting 
ongoing infrastructural work for National Spor ts University in Manipur.  In recognition 
of Manipur's contribution in games and sp orts, the Government of India has taken a 
historic decision for the establishment of a National Sports University at world-class 
standard in Manipur. Sir, this will be the first of its kind in the nation.  For this, the 
people of Manipur are very grateful to our hon. Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modiji  
for introducing a Bill for National Sports University in 2017 and then, passed the Bill as 
an Act in 2018 in the Parliament. Howe ver, after getting adequate land for 
construction at Koutruk, a village in Imphal, West District Manipur, the progress of 
infrastructural construction and other rela ted works are very slow. Sir, there may be 
many reasons for this delay, but it should be  expedited at any cost in the interest of 
our sportspersons across the nation.  So I humbly urge upon the Union Government 
and the concerned ministry to expedite the ongoing infrastructural work of National 
Sports University so that it may be fully functional at the earliest. Thank you, Sir. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
23

 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Maharaja Sanajaob a Leishemba:  Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shrimati Sudha Murthy 
(Nominated), Shrimati Darshana Singh (Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
(Uttar Pradesh), Shri Rambhai Harjibha i Mokariya (Gujarat), and Shrimati 
Dharmshila Gupta (Bihar).  
Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu; demand to establish a public-private partnership 
model for accurate weather forecasting in the country. 
 
Demand to establish a Public Private Partnership (PPP) model for accurate weather 
forecasting in the country   
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU  (Tamil Nadu) : Sir, in India, extremely harsh weather 
conditions like heat waves, bitter cold, unprecedented heavy rainfalls cause heavy 
loss of life and damage to property an d paralyse the normal life and hence 
productivity.  The Indian Meteorological  Department, the National Disaster 
Management Authority, and the Indian Sp ace Research Organization are responsible 
for weather predictions and early warnings. To achieve such a high  level of accuracy, 
the Indian Meteorological Department re quires investments totalling several billion 
dollars. A public-private partnership model is more suitable for India.  Leveraging the 
expertise, the global private sector player s, in accurate weather forecasting well in 
advance, will be the game-changer in years ahead.  Private entities having proprietary 
sensors for weather data collection run sophisticated models and utilize 
supercomputing resources to analyze va st amounts of global data. By trans-
positioning to a PPP model, as recomme nded by the World Bank, the World 
Meteorological Organisation, India can be tter prepare for future extreme weather 
events and reduce losses. There are numerous well-known companies that utilize 
artificial intelligence, machine learning, big data analysis, and proprietary models with 
their own sensor networks. Sir, therefore, I urge upon the Government to establish 
PPP model for weather forecasting, which is  very essential for India's progress in 
coming decades and must take place immediately. 
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Dr . Kanimozhi NVN Somu:  Shrimati Sulata 
Deo (Odisha), Shri Tiruchi Siva (Tam il Nadu), Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam 
(Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hish am (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

Shri N.R. Elango (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri M. 
Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Shrimati Mahua Maji 
(Jharkhand), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odish a), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shri 
Saket Gokhale (West Bengal), Shri Jawhar  Sircar (West Bengal), and Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha).  
Now, Shrimati Phulo Devi Netam on 'Demand to construct a multipurpose hall 
in Kondagaon district of Chhattisgarh for the players of the State and to include 
Archery in the scheme for promotion of rural, indigenous and tribal sports'. 
 
Demand to construct a Multipurpose Hall in Kondagaon district of Chhattisgarh for the 
players of the State and to include Archery in the scheme for promotion of rural, 
indigenous and tribal sports 
 
Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम (छǄीसगढ़): धन्यवाद महोदय, छǄीसगढ़ ने कई ऐसे िखलाड़ी िदए हȅ, 
िजन्हȗने देश और दुिनया मȂ भारत का नाम रौशन िकया है। हमारे छǄीसगढ़ क े िखलाड़ी 
िवशेषकर आिदवासी और मिहला िखलाड़ी भी िक
 सी मायने मȂ कम नहीं हȅ। आिदवािसयȗ का खेल 
क े Ģित Ģेम ही है िक सुिवधाओं क े अभाव मȂ भी बच्चे अपना बेहतरीन Ģदशर्न दे रहे हȅ। जून, 2023 
को आयोिजत Ģथम राÍटर्ीय जनजाित खेल Ģितयोिगता मȂ छǄी सगढ़ क े िखलािड़यȗ ने 15 पदक  
अपने नाम िकए थे। फ ुटबाल बािलका टीम की लड़िकयȗ ने Îवणर् पदक जीतकर अपना लोहा 
मनवाया। तीरंदाजी मȂ भी इनका उत्कृ Íट Ģदशर्न रहा है।  
 महोदय, छǄीसगढ़ मȂ िवशेषकर आिदवासी बाहुÊय बÎतर संभाग मȂ िखलाड़ी तो बहुत 
अच्छे हȅ, लेिकन खेल अवसंरचनाओं का अभाव होने क े कारण अंतरर
ाÍटर्ीय Îतर पर आगे नहीं बढ़ 
पा रहे हȅ। अतः मेरा आपके  माध्यम से िनवेदन है िक छǄीसगढ़ क े कȗडागांव िजले क े फरसगांव मȂ 
एक मÊटी परपज हॉल बनाया जाए तथा गर्ामीण Îवदेशी जनजाित खेलȗ को बढ़ावा देने की 
योजना मȂ ती
रंदाजी को भी जोड़ा जाए, धन्यवाद।           
                                                                               
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri mati Phulo Devi Netam:  Shri Pramod 
Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shri Devendra Pratap Singh (Chhattisgarh), Shrimati Jebi Mather 
Hisham (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri Haris Beeran (Kerala), Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) and 
Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana).                                                          
धन्यवाद Ǜीमती फ ूलो देवी नेतम जी।  Now, Shr i Samirul Islam on 'Demand for a 
special package for North Bengal'. 
 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
25

Demand for a special package for North Bengal 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM (West Bengal) :  Sir, I would like to speak on that topic in my 
mother-tongue, Bengali. *"Respected Deputy Chairman Sir, @. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् (पिÌचमी बंगाल): @ 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  This will not go on record. ...(Interruptions)...    Please 
speak on the subject.  
 
SHRI SAMIRUL ISLAM :  "Respected Sir, Bengal compri ses of Darjeeling Hills in the 
north and Bay of Bengal in the south, th is is my Bengal, our Bengal. Hon. Chief 
Minister, Mamata  Bandyopadh yay, after assuming office, tried her best to usher in 
development in North Bengal and will continue to do so. However, the Central Budget 
clearly shows, leave aside development of north Bengal, that no allocation has been 
made in the General Budget for the devastating Ganga erosion of Malda, flood control 
of Teesta, or the development of Darjeelin g Hills and tea gardens. Had the Central 
Government been really sincere about the prospects and development of North 
Bengal, it would have given a special package to the state for North Bengal. Sir, there 
is something wrong at the very inception.  
 The Central Government which is not releasing the poor tax payers’ money 
amounting to Rs. 1,71,000 crores due to the State Government, what has it to do with 
North Bengal or South Bengal. This Govern ment, after being defeated by the people 
o f  B e n g a l  t i m e  a n d  a g a i n ,  i s  n o w  t r y i n g  t o  t a k e  r e v e n g e  o n  t h e m .  S o  i t  i s  t r y i n g  t o  
create an atmosphere of un certainty in the state. 
@ W e  h a v e  t o  k e e p  i n  m i n d  t h a t  
divisive politics can never succeed in making a nation or its people prosperous. 
Through you Sir, I demand an exclusive Special Package for the people of 
North Bengal. @ The Prime Minister of India had visited Bengal on the eve of the 
election and he had said that he loves Bengal  deeply and he wishes to take birth in 
Bengal in his next life. Through you Sir, I would like to know from the Prime Minister 
that if he really loves Bengal so much, why isn’t he releasing the dues of the State at 
                   
* English translation of the original speech delivered in Bengali.   
@ Not recorded. 
 
 
 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

the earliest.  In conclusion, let me say that even with all your might... 
...(Interruptions)...         
                                    
Ǜी सािमक भƺाचायर् :  सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, please.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे)  सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  ...( Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record.  
Please sit down.  Yes, hon. Leader of the Opposition.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  उपसभापित महोदय, हम इस सदन मȂ  सभी मैÇबसर् का आदर करते हȅ 
और आप हमȂ बार-बार यह कहते हȅ िक सभी लोग रूÊस क े मुतािबक बात करȂ, अपनी बात रखȂ। 
यिद कोई एक मैÇबर क ु छ बात कहता है, तो उसको interrupt करना - एक बार नहीं, बिÊक बार-
बार करते हȅ, हर वƪ कर
ते हȅ। यिद कोई Ëयिƪ उधर से उठ ता  है, अपनी बात रखता है, तो एक 
माननीय सदÎय हर वƪ वहाँ से उठकर हाउस को हमेशा िडÎटबर् करते हȅ। आप उन्हȂ expel 
कीिजए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... You expel him. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  माननीय सदÎयगण, माननीय एलओपी का सुझाव अच्छा है और  सभी सदÎय, 
सभी पक्ष क े लोग इसका पालन करȂ। ...(Ëयव
 धान)...आप सही कह रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...आप बैठ 
जाइए। Shri Naresh Bansal; demand for 'Gr een Bonus' and special package for the 
State of Uttarakhand. सभी माननीय सदÎय इसका पालन करȂ, एक-दूसरे क े बारे मȂ टोका-
टाकी न करȂ। ...(Interruptions)... Nothing is going on record.  
The following hon. Members associated themselves with the matter raised by 
the hon. Member, Shri Samirul Islam:  Ms. Sushmita Dev, (West Bengal), Shri 
Prakash Chik Baraik (West Bengal), Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu (Tamil Nadu), Shri 
Pramod Tiwari (Rajasthan), Shrimati Mahua Maji (Jharkhand), Shri M. Mohamed 
Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha),  Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Ms. 
Dola Sen (West Bengal), Dr. Sarfraz Ahmad (Jharkhand), Shri Saket Gokhale (West 
Bengal), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Sh ri Ramji (Uttar Pradesh) Shri Mohammed 
Nadimul Haque (West Bengal) and Shri Anil Kumar Yadav Mandadi (Telangana).                              
Now, Shri Naresh Bansal.  
 
Demand for 'Green Bonus' and special package for the State of Uttarakhand 
 
Ǜी नरेश बं
सल  (उǄराखंड) : उपसभापित जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
27

महोदय, मȅ उǄराखंड से आता हूं, जो िक एक िहमालयी राज्य है। उǄराखंड आदरणीय 
अटल जी ने िदया था और माननीय नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े क ुशल नेतृत्व मȂ डबल इंजन की सरकार 
ǎारा उसे सँवारने का काम िनरंतर ज ारी है। मोदी जी क े कायर्काल मȂ हर क्षेतर् मȂ, चाहे वह क ृिष 
हो, बागवानी हो, िशक्षा हो, मेिडकल हो, चारधाम पुनिर्नमार्ण हो, ऑल वैदर रोड, एयर 
कनेिक्टवटी रोड हो, रेल कनेिक्टिवटी हो, हर क्षेतर् मȂ पूरे सहयोग क े साथ बहुत-सी योजनाओं 
का लाभ उǄराखंडवािस
यȗ को िमल रहा है।  
महोदय, उǄराखंड समेत िहमालयी राज्यȗ की भौगोिलक पिरिÎथित देश क े बाकी राज्यȗ 
क े अलग है। यहाँ, जहाँ एक ओर Ģाकृ ितक सȚदयर् एवं संपदा की बहुतायत है व पयार्वरण Îवच्छ 
है, वहीं दूसरी तरफ एक िवषम समÎया भी है। िहमालयी राज्यȗ क े सतत िवकास क े िलए एक 
Îवतंतर् नीित बनाने की मांग एक लंबे समय से चल रही है, क्यȗिक िहमालयी राज्यȗ की भ
ौगोिलक 
पिरिÎथितयाँ देश क े अन्य िहÎसȗ से अलग हȅ।  
महोदय, िव
षम भौगोिलक हालत की वजह से यहाँ पर िवकास कायर् काफी Ģभािवत होता 
है और योजनाओं क े पूरा होने मȂ समय लगता है। कई पिरयोजनाएं लंबे समय से इसी कारण से 
लटकी पड़ी हȅ। महोदय, जो कायर् मैदानी राज् यȗ मȂ सहजता से हो जाता है, वह काम पवर्तीय 
राज्यȗ मȂ Ǜम व आिर्थक िलहाज से काफी मुिÌकल हो जाता है। पवर्तीय राज्यȗ की भौगोिलक और 
सामािजक संरचना क े अनुसार िवकास की पृथक्क नीित बनानी अित आवÌयक है। उǄराखंड इस 
मुǈे को शुरू  से ही उठाता रहा है।  
महोदय, उǄराखंड राज्य की सामान्य आबादी 1.20 करोड़ है, लेिकन यिद पयर्टन, 
िविभन्न ध
ािर्मक यातर्ाओं, पवș एवं त्योहारȗ पर आने वाले Ǜǉालुओं की संख्या को जो ड़ा जाए, तो 
यह 8 करोड़ से भी ज्यादा हो जाती है। राज्य की इतनी बड़ी आबादी क े िलए बुिनयादी सुिवधाओं 
की ËयवÎथा करनी पड़ती है।  
महोदय, दूसरी ओर, उǄराखंड िपछले एक दशक से ज्यादा समय से देश क े िलए दे रहा 
अपनी पयार्व
रणीय सेवाओं क े िलए क Ȃ दर् सरकार से िवशेष पैक े ज व गर्ीन बोनस की मांग करता रहा 
है। उǄराखंड का वनाच्छािदत क्षेतर्, ग्लेिशयर, सदानीरा निदयाँ उǄराखंड से ज्यादा लाभ देश क े 
अन्य भागȗ को देती हȅ। वैिÌवक पयार्वरण पर भी इसका असर पड़ता है। एक आकलन क े अनुसार 
उǄराखंड हर वषर् अपनी जैव िविवधता क े ज़िरये देश को 95 हज़ार, 112 करोड़ रुपय े की सेवाएं 
देता है। जहाँ उǄराखंड क े पास इतन ी  Ģाकृ ितक संपदा है, वहीं िवकास की राह मȂ वह िपछड़ रहा 
है, अत: इसकी भरपाई गर्ीन बोनस से ही बनती है। 
महोदय, उǄराखंड का िवशेष पैक े ज, जो अटल जी ने िदया था, वह तत्कालीन कांगर्ेस 
सरकार ने बंद कर िदया था। अगर यह Ģोत्साहन िमले तो उǄ राखंड मȂ तेजी से औǏोिगकीकरण 
हो सकता है।  महोदय, उǄर-पूवीर् राज्यȗ की तरह ही...(समय की घंटी)...     
                                                                                          
उपसभापित:  धन्यवाद Ǜी नरेश बंसल जी। The following hon. Members associated 
themselves with the matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Naresh Bansal:   Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri Maya nkbhai Jaydevbhai 
Nayak (Gujarat), Dr. Sikander Kumar (Him achal Pradesh), Shri Devendra Pratap 
Singh (Chhattisgarh), Dr. Kalpana Saina (Uttrakhand), Shri Brij Lal (Uttar Pradesh), 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ms. Indu Bala Goswami (Himachal Pradesh), Ms. Kavita Patidar (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shri Ram Chander Jangra (Rajasthan), Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki (Madhya Pradesh), 
Shrimati Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara (Gujar at), Shrimati Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
(Uttar Pradesh), Dorjee Tshering Lepcha (Sikkim), Dr. Sangeeta Balwant (Uttar 
Pradesh) and Shrimati Sadhna Singh (Uttar Pradesh).                 
 Shri Beedha Masthan Rao Yadav; rega rding supply of SPF P. monodon brood 
stock to the registered Shrimp hatcheries. 
 
Supply of SPF P. monodon brood stock to the registered Shrimp hatcheries 
 
SHRI BEEDHA MASTHAN RAO YADAV (Andhra Pradesh):  Thank you, Sir, for giving 
me the opportunity. This is regarding supp ly of monodon brood stock to our Indian 
aqua farmers. Government of India through Coastal Aquaculture Authority of India 
approved the supply of brood stock of monodon by the following two empanelled 
suppliers vide dated 17.02. 2020. And, th e second one is M/s Aquaculture De La 
Mahajamba, Madagascar. This empanelmen t is for continued supply of SPF brood-
stock of Monodon to demanding Indian shri mp hatcheries and, in turn, they will 
produce seed and supply to the Indian aqua f a r m e r s .  I n  v i e w  o f  t h e  d e m a n d  o f  
Monodon post-larvae i.e., seed by ou r shrimp farmers, hatchery operators 
approached these SPF brood-stock suppliers  for their specific quotation and terms 
and conditions for supply of SPF brood-stock.  But, there has been no response from 
the concerned suppliers. They were empanelle d by the Ministry after their Expression 
of Interest and personal presentation as indicated in the order. 
 Both these firms are supplying brood-st ock to only one hatchery under each of 
them which, essentially, leads to monopoly in sale of post-larvae.  It means, instead 
of 50 paisa per PPL, these monopoly compan ies are supplying at Rs. 1.50 to aqua 
farmers in India which we believe that th e concerned authority or the Ministry will 
never permit. 
 Sir, monopoly is being established by the firm which was permitted by the 
Government of India for establishment of Brood-stock Multiplication Centre of SPF 
Monodon by procuring parent post-lar vae from the empanelled overseas SPF 
producer. That is the reason why they pr event direct supply of SPF brood-stock by 
the overseas SPF producer empanelled by the Government to Indian hatcheries.  
Since there is no response for our supply re quest to both empanelled overseas firms, 
we would request your kindself to do the n eedful, so that they will confirm supply of 
SPF brood-stock to all the Indian registered hatcheries.  An early action in this regard 
will help shrimp production levels in the country. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
29

 Sir, for your kind information, sitting ne xt to me was Minister of Fisheries of the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh, Shri Mopidevi Venkataramana Rao, we also 
personally wrote to the concerned authorities at the Centre and State to take 
immediate action. But, so far, nothing ha s happened. So, I request the Government 
to kindly look into it.  And, Sir, all YSRCP Members of Rajya Sabha associate 
themselves with this issue.  Thank you.            
                                                                              
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Whoever is associating with the issue may kindly send 
their names on a slip. 
 The following hon. Members associated with the issue raised by hon. Member, 
Shri Beedha Masthan Rao Yadav: Shri S. Niranjan Reddy (Andhra Pradesh), Shri 
Meda Raghunadha Reddy (Andhra Prades h), Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah (Andhra 
Pradesh), Shri Golla Baburao, Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi (Andhra Pradesh), 
Shri Subhas Chandra Bose Pilli (Andhra Prad esh), Shri Niranjan Bishi (Odisha), Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasm it Patra (Odisha), Shri Sant Balbir 
Singh (Punjab), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala) and Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra).                       
Now, Shri Ramji Lal Suman. 
 
Demand to abolish tax on manufacturing of shoes as well as simplification of rules for 
shoe industries 
 
Ǜी रामजी लाल सुमन (उǄर Ģदेश) : उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपका आभार Ģकट करता हूँ। आगरा 
मȂ लगभग 300 वषर् पुराना, मुगलȗ क े जमाने से जूता उǏोग है, जो एक Ģकार से क ुटीर उǏोग है। 
अपने ही घर पर ही रहकर बच्चे, बुजुगर्, मिहला और पुरुष काम करते हȅ। महो
दय, गरीबी का 
आलम यह है िक िजन बच्चȗ को Îकू ल जाना चािहए था, वे जूता बनाने क े काम मȂ लगे रहते हȅ। 
उपसभापित महोदय, सबसे बड़ा सवाल यह है िक अगर वे बच्चे काम नहीं करȂगे, तो घर मȂ चूÊहा 
नहीं जलेगा। 1974 मȂ उǄर Ģदेश की राज्य सरकार ने जूता उǏोग को टैक्स ģी कर िदया था। 
जूता कारीग
रȗ की हालत ठीक करने क े उǈेÌय से एक जूता मंडी भी बनी, िजसका नाम शू Ãलाजा 
था। राज्य सरकार ने जूता Ģदशर्नी एवं Ģिशक्षण क Ȃ दर् भी बनाया, िजसके  मुतािबक मुÄत मȂ जमीन 
दी और यह कहा गया िक आगरा िवकास Ģािध
करण दुकानȂ बनाएगा और सÎती दरȗ पर इन 
कारीगरȗ को दुकानȂ दी जाएंगी। यह कारीगरȗ को आत्मिनभर्र बनाने का Ģयास था, लेिकन िवकास 
Ģािधकरण ने जो दुकाने बनाईं, वे इतनी महंगी थीं िक जूता कारीगर इन दुकानȗ को खरीद ही 
नहीं सकते थे, वे उनकी क्षमता से बाहर थीं।  
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

कारीगर चाहते थे िक लागत मूÊय पर दुकानȂ आवंिटत की जाएं और नो Ģॉिफट और नो 
लॉस पर कारीगरȗ को दुकानȂ िमलȂ। भारत सरकार ने जूता कारीगरȗ क े कÊयाण हेतु भारत लेदर 
कॉरपोरेशन बनाया था, जो 2002 मȂ बंद हो गया। जूता क ुटी र पर 12 परसȂट जीएसटी है। 
उपसभापित महोदय, भारतीय खादी एवं गर्ामोǏोग की सबसे बड़ी इकाई भारतीय चरमोǏोग संघ 
है, िजसे राज्य सरकार एवं भारत सरकार ǎारा सरकारी कमर्चािरयȗ क े िलए जूता आपूिर्त क े 
ऑडर्र िदए जाते थे। 2008 से  सरकार ने जूता खरीदना भी बंद कर िदया है। सरकारी संरक्षण न 
िमलने क े कारण तमाम छो
टी-मोटी इकाइयाँ बंद हो गई हȅ। मेरी आपके  माफर् त सरकार से माँग है 
िक इंडिÎटर्यल इलाके  मȂ कारीगरȗ को जगह दी जा ए, िनयमȗ का सरलीकरण िकया जाए, सÎती 
Åयाज दर पर कारीगरȗ को ऋण िदया जाए, कारीगरȗ को बाजार उपलÅध कराया जाए और कोई 
ऐसा िचÏन या काडर् िदया जाए, िजससे कारीगर अपना उत्पाद कहीं भी बेच सकȂ । सभापित 
महोदय, मȅ आपसे िवनĦता से कहना चाहूँगा िक यह िकतनी िवडंबना है िक जो जूता बनाता है, 
उसे लाभ नहीं िमलता है। जो िमिडएटर है, िबचौिलया है, िज
सका जूता बनाने से कोई संबंध नहीं 
है, वह जूता कारीगरȗ से सÎती दर पर जूता खरीदता है। अच् छा िडÅबा लगाया, अपना टर्ेड माकर् 
लगाया, िफर वही जूता, िजसे कारीगर ने ढाई सौ रुपय े मȂ बेचा है, बंबई और कोलकाता क े बाजार 
मȂ वह तीन-चार हजार रुपय े मȂ िबकता है। सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माफर् त सरकार से माँग 
करू ँगा िक सरकार इस क ुटीर उǏोग को संरक्ष
ण दे, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।      
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The following hon. Members associated themselves with the Zero 
Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Sh ri Ramjilal Suman:  Shri Niranjan Bishi 
(Odisha) Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).   
 
 
12.00 Noon 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Question Hour.  
 
Functioning of PIB, Kolkata 
 
*121. SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA:  W ill the Minister of INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING   be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the current number of permanent and contractual employees working at 
Press Information Bureau (PIB), Kolkata; 
(b) the reasons for the delay in the availabilit y of press releases in Bengali at PIB, 
Kolkata, and the steps being taken to  ensure timely dissemination of 
information in the regional language; 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
31

(c) whether PIB Kolkata is planning to set up a dedicated fact-checking unit to 
combat the spread of fake news in West Bengal; and  
(d) the initiatives being undertaken by PI B Kolkata to enhance its outreach and 
engagement with the local media and the public in West Bengal? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING (DR. L. MURUGAN) (a) to (d): A statement is laid on the Table of 
the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) The Press Information Bureau (PIB ) under Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting has its headquarter at Ne w Delhi and has 5 zones comprising 19 
regional offices in various states. Regional  office at Kolkata comes under East Zone 
and at present has 18 permanent employees and 1 contractual employee. 
 
(b) The Press Releases, which are issued by  the PIB, Headquarte r, are released in 
Bengali language by PIB Kolkata after tran slation of the same. Press Releases in 
regional language are shared with media and uploaded on the website immediately for 
timely dissemination. 
 
(c) A Fact Check Unit (FCU) has been set up under Press Information Bureau, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in November, 2019 to counter fake news 
relating to the Central Government. After verifying the authenti city of news from 
authorised sources in Ministries/ Departme nts, FCU posts correct information on its 
social media platforms. 
 
(d) The content on developmental and welfar e activities of Government, as received 
from PIB Headquarters, are shared th rough social media such as Facebook, 
Instagram, Twitter to enhance PIB's outr each with media and local people. Press 
Releases, Photos, Graphics, etc. are also regularly shared on social media. Media 
workshop ‘Vartalap’ is being organised on  regular basis for creating awareness for 
media about different Government programmes.   
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA:   Mr. Chairman, Sir, my qu estion is regarding PIB – 
the Press Information Bureau.  The PIB Fact-Checking is doing a great job since 
2019.  However, fact checking of fake news  is only in Hindi and English languages.  
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

Given that the fake news against the Central Government is the highest in West 
Bengal, is the Ministry planning to establish a dedicated fact-checking unit under PIB, 
Kolkata to specifically address this issue in the State?   
 
DR. L. MURUGAN:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, the hon. Member has put a very specific 
question.  Before answering his question, I would like to take two minutes. Sir, you 
had also expressed concern about menace of fake news. In a function you had said, I 
quote, “Unregulated information and fake news create a disaster of unimaginable 
proportions”.   
 ‘Fake news’ is a social menace. We ha ve to control fake news and misleading 
information. I agree with the hon. Member that fake news and misleading information 
are the highest in the State of West Bengal. We all know that last week also the Chief 
Minister of West Bengal, who had come to Delhi to attend a meeting of the Niti Aayog, 
alleged that during the meeting, her mike  was  switched  off.  But, it was found that 
her statement was misleading. Like that, in West Bengal ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you cannot take the name of the hon. Chief Minister.  
We will delete her name.  
 
DR. L. MURUGAN: Sir, I have not taken her name.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. Please go ahead.  
 
DR. L. MURUGAN: So, Sir, I was saying th at her statement was misleading.  As far 
as question of establishing a fact-check  unit in the State of West Bengal is 
concerned, as of now, we do not have an y plan to establish fact-check units at 
regional levels. The fact-check unit is in Delhi. We have a very good system here.  We 
established this fact-check unit in 2019.  In almost 47,562 cases we took action. Out 
of that, in 4,800 cases we did fact-checks an d 9,922 cases were found to be of fake 
news. Thus, we are working at all India level.     
 
SHRI SAMIK BHATTACHARYA: Sir, district journalists are underpaid. They also lack 
proper training.  In West Bengal, no Vartalaap programme has taken place. Will PIB, 
Kolkata, organize to extend the Vartalaap Scheme for district  journalists  to  improve  
communication between the Government and the regional media in West Bengal as 
well as in other States?    
          
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
33

DR. L. MURUGAN: Sir, the question is very particular. ‘VARTALAP” is a workshop or 
conference held for the journalists and media people. This year itself, 72  
‘VARTALAPs” have been conducted and 27 Press Tours have been conducted by the 
PIB for their journalists. In West Bengal itself, last year, on 25.8.23, Durgapur 
conducted one ‘VARTALAP’. On 18.7.23, Midnapur conducted one VARTALAP.  On 
16.12.23, in Balakat, three VARTALAPs were conducted and before 2022, four 
VARTALAAPs were conducted. It is a continuous process. Every year, in every State, 
the VARTALAAP programme is held for the trai ning and welfare of the journalists and 
also for the advancement of their knowledge.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Third supplementary, Ms. Dola Sen.  
 
MS. DOLA SEN:  S i r ,  t h o u g h  w e  k n o w  t h a t  T r e a s u r y  B e n c h e s  h a v e  a n  a g e n d a  o f  
political revenge, still, we are bound to ob ey the Supreme Court verdict.  I would like 
to know from the Minister, through you, Sir,:  Is it true that the Supreme Court of India 
has ordered a stay on the creation  of a F act-Check unit in West Bengal by the Press 
Information Bureau (PIB) this year in Marc h, 2024?  If yes, please state the reasons 
behind it. Why was the creation of a Fact-C heck Unit stayed by the hon. Supreme 
Court and Bombay High Court too? And, then even after the stay, what we are 
discussing here? 
 
DR. L. MURUGAN: Sir, this matter is sub judice.  The case is pending with...  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Don’t rise. The hon. Minister is on his legs.  
 
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING (SHRI ASHWINI 
VAISHNAW): Hon. Chairman, Sir, the point is, as  regards the fact-check related to 
the Government of India, all the Ministries , all the Departments of the Government of 
India are the right authority to say whethe r a data or an information related to a 
particular Ministry or a particular Departme nt should not be given by anybody other 
than the Ministry or Department. That is  the fundamental point which is under 
contention. The amendment in the IT, Interm ediary Rules, which has been stayed by 
the hon. Supreme Court, is still under cont est, but the fundamental principle is, our 
point is; anything related to the Government  of India, only the Government of India 
can say whether it is a correct fact or a wrong fact. That is our stand. 
 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No. 4, Shri Saket Gokhale. Ask pointedly. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE:  Sir, I have a very specific ques tion.  The hon. Minister in his 
response to the first supplementary said t h a t  t h e  p r o b l e m  o f  f a k e  n e w s  i s  m o s t  
rampant in the State of West Bengal. I wo uld like to ask if the hon. Minister can 
authenticate this with data. Thank you. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Any other supplementary? 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE : Sir, my supplementary is:  Can you authenticate this with 
concrete data and lay it on the Table of the House?  
 
DR. L. MURUGAN : Sir, I am ready to lay it on th e Table of the House. The Member 
himself tweeted  a misleading information.  The hon. Member himself tweeted: “The 
RTI reveals that Modi’s visit to Morbi for a few hours cost Rs.30 crores.” We checked 
that. That message was verified. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. 
 
DR. L. MURUGAN:  I will submit this.  …(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister has agreed to authenticate. …(Interruptions).. 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: शुिकर्या, सभापित महोदय।  मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी जी से एक सवाल है।  जब 
राजनीित िवभािजत होती है, तो पतर्कारȗ का काम बड़ा मुिÌकल हो जाता है। Is the Government 
planning to bring in any kind of legislative initiative with regard to protection of 
journalists as well as their social security mechanism? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, does it relate to the question? 
 
SHRI MANOJ KUMAR JHA: Yes, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay. I hope it doesn’t. 
 
DR. L. MURUGAN: Sir, you have rightly mentioned that this is related to the question.  
We are concerned about the journalists’ we lfare. The Journalists’ welfare schemes 
are there. If any journalist meets with an  accident, our PIB supports them with the 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
35

medical aid. If the journalist, unfortunately, looses his or her life, some assistance is 
also given. During pandemic time also, we supported more than hundred journalists.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Yes, you are right because Media is fourth pillar of democracy. 
And, by media, I mean a Media that is  well-informed, believes on sanctified 
platforms, and it is a necessary asset of democracy.  
Question Number 122, Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj.  
 
   * Q. No. 122. [The questioner was absent.]  
 
Digital Piracy on OTT Platforms 
 
*122. SHRI MANAS RANJAN MANGARAJ: Will the Minister of INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government is planning to take any action to address issues related to 
digital piracy and unauthorized distribution of content on Over-The-Top (OTT) 
platforms; 
(b) if so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor; 
(c) whether Government is taking any steps to promote digital literacy and 
consumer awareness regarding safe and responsible usage of OTT platforms, 
particularly among vulnerable or younger audience; and  
(d) if so, the details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND 
BROADCASTING (DR. L. MURUGAN):  (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of 
the House.  
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) The content of publishers of news  and current affairs on digital media and  
the content of publishers of online curate d content (OTT Platforms)  is regulated 
under the provisions of Information Techno logy (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media, Ethics Code) Rules, 2021  notified  on 25.02.2021 under IT Act, 2000. The 
Part-III of the rules, administered by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
provides for a Code of Ethics for such publishers. The Code of Ethics for OTT, inter-
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

alia, prohibits them to transmit any content which is prohibited by any law for the time 
being in force, including Copyright Act, 1957. 
 The Code also provides that the OTT platforms will undertake age-based self 
classification of content, based on general gu idelines provided in the Schedule to the 
Rules, along with adequate safeguards fo r restricting age-inappropriate content for 
children with adequate access control measures.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj; no t present. Honourable Minister. 
Third supplementary; Shri Sujeet Kumar. 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR:  S i r ,  t h o u g h  w e  h a v e  a  C o d e  o f  E t h i c s  f o r  O T T  2 0 2 1  i n  o u r  
country which mandates that OTT platforms will undertake adequate safeguards for 
restricting age-appropriate content, I woul d like to know from the Government that 
apart from this, whether th ere are any specific programmes which will educate our 
younger audience and vulnerable population  under 18 about the ill-effects of OTT 
platform.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
DR. L. MURUGAN : Sir, the hon. Member has raised a valid question. I have to give 
this answer elaborately. Our Prime Minister  believes that there should be no control 
and no authentication. So, for that, our Prime Minister removed the attestation. When 
I was a student, I went to apply for the la w college. I went on the last day. So I 
wanted to get an attestation. I asked some  Professors. I didn’t know how to get it 
attested. So, our Prime Minister removed this attestation to help the students and the 
citizens. We are trusting the students and the citizens.  
Similarly, our Prime Minister is trusting the industry. For th at, we brought up 
self-certification. In OTT, self-certificat ion has been brought up for the content 
classification. UA, Unrestricted Access, re gardless of age and family-friendly; UA+7, 
aged above seven years and above; and can be viewed by the person under the age 
of seven years with parental guidance. Th e third classification is, UA13+, 13 years 
and above; and can be viewed by a person under the age of 13 years with parental 
guidance. UA16+, 16 years and above; and can be viewed by a person under the age 
of 16 years with parental guidance. So, the parental guidance is already there in our 
provision. The Member’s particular questi on is whether we ar e going to have any 
seminar. We are already conducting se minars and conferences for education 
purposes to educate the society. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
37

 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary No. 4; Shri Neeraj Dangi.  
 
Ǜी नीरज डांगी: सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी महोदय से यह जानना चाहूँगा िक 
OTT platform पर िदखाए जाने वाले contents को लेकर कई िशकायतȂ िमल रही हȅ और इस 
संबंध मȂ सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ भी दलील दी गई है, िज समȂ कहा गया है िक टीवी से ज्यादा online 
platforms पर िनगरानी रखने की आवÌयकता है, तो मȅ यह जानना चाहता हूँ िक क्या सरकार 
इसे ध्यान मȂ रख कर guidelines तैयार करने और online contents को sensor करने पर िवचार 
कर रही है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister.  
 
DR. L. MURGAN: Sir,
 just now I explained about the self-certification. As per the 
existing laws, the certification scheme is th ere. For the OTT, the provision is already 
there. Under Section 79, Sub Clause 3(b) of Information Act, the Government is 
taking action. Recently also, we took action against 18 OTT platforms. We have taken 
action against them. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Raghav Chadha; fifth supplementary.  
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA: Sir, as we all know  that piracy is a plague that is all 
pervasive, not just in the cinema industry to day but also in the OTT platform world.  
Sir, piracy and unauthorized reproduction of copyrighted content has led to an annual 
loss of Rs. 20,000 crores for the film in dustry and the OTT industry, and there has 
been an increase of 62 per cent of piracy in cidents during the pandemic alone. Sir, 
through you, I would like to ask the hon. Minister about the Cinematography Bill that 
was passed in this House last year, which la rgely deals with anti-camera recording of 
films, etc. in theaters. Is the Government  of India planning to either amend the 
Cinematography Bill or come out with a sepa rate mechanism to deal with piracy in 
OTT platforms that is also becoming widespread? Because of this unauthorized 
reproduction, years and years worth of hard work and effort of artists goes down the 
drain. So, I would really urge, through you, the Minster to come up with an 
institutional mechanism to deal with this piracy. 
 
M R .  C H A I R M A N :   H e  k n o w s  m u c h  a b o u t  t h e  f i l m  i n d u s t r y .   O f  l a t e  h e  h a s  g a i n e d  
experience.  Hon. Minister. 
 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN:  Sir, he knows.... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Oh, yes!  I know Jayaji has been a legend ever since she first 
appeared on the celluloid screen.  So, I am quite sure from what she has said that it is 
because of her that the question has been rationally worded. 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA:  Sir, I would clarify.  I get more information about piracy 
through Jayaji. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Raghav, never clarify when you get endorsement from a legend.   
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA:  I welcome the endorsement, Sir. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No, I will not allow!  Yes, hon. Minister.  
 
DR. L. MURUGAN: Sir, the hon. Member  mentioned the Cinematography Bill.  
Recently, the Cinematography (Amendment ) Act, 2023 was passed after a detailed 
discussion by this House and the other House, the Lok Sabha. We discussed and 
passed this Amendment Act to protect the producers from piracy. So we brought this 
Amendment recently and notified it in the Gazette too.  Now, we have appointed a 
nodal officer in every Central Film Certif ication Board office.  If they have any 
grievances, they can approach the nodal offi cers. As for the concern about piracy in 
OTT, the IT Rules, 2021 deals with infrin gement of copyright, trademark and other 
properties.  Thus, a three-tier mechanism is already in place under the Ethics Code. 
They have to approach the publisher or th e self-regulating body.  Beyond that, there 
is an oversight mechanism. So, the mechanism is already there.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Minister has done very good homework. Question No. 
123.  
 
Food Processing Industry in Punjab 
 
*123. SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH: Will the MINISTER OF FOOD PROCESSING 
INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether there is any plan to boost food  processing industry in Punjab, if so the 
details thereof, if not, the reasons therefor;  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
39

(b) the list of major food processing units  established by Government in Punjab, 
which is a major grain producing State; and  
(c)  whether there is any policy to open other industries in the future?  
 
THE MINISTER OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES (SHRI CHIRAG PASWAN): 
(a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) does not set up food 
processing units on its own. However, it is incentivizing setting up of food processing 
units and creation of food value chain in frastructure through its Central Sector 
Schemes named Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sa mpada Yojna (PMKSY) and Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processi ng Industries (PLISFPI) and a Centrally 
Sponsored scheme named Pradhan Mantri Formalization of Micro-food processing 
Enterprises (PMFME), across the country (including Punjab).  
These schemes are demand driven in na ture, under which financial support is 
extended to selected entrepre neurs/entities for setting up of different kinds of food 
processing industries, as per the guidelines of respective schemes.   
The details of food processing units sa nctioned by the MoFPI under the said 
three scheme in the State of Punjab is given at Annexure.   
Annexure 
 
A. Details of Projects sanctioned under s ub-schemes of PMKSY in the State of 
Punjab (as on 30.06.2024) 
SN Project Name District 
Date of 
Approva
l 
Project 
Cost (₹ 
Crore) 
Approved 
Grant-in-aid 
(₹ Crore) 
Mega Food Park Scheme (MFP) 
1 International Mega Food Park Ltd.  Fazilka 25.05.2
011 130.38 50.00 
2 Punjab Agro Industries Corporation 
Ltd., (PAIC)  Ludhiana 27.11.20
15 112.87 37.73 
3 Sukhjit Mega Food Park & Infra Ltd.  Kapurthala 06.11.20
15 107.83 48.7 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme (Cold Chain) 
4 B.D. Agro Kapurthala 25.05.2
011 
22.64 9.84 
5 Alchemist Foods Ltd Ropar 27.02.2
012 
40.71 3.05 
6 International Fresh Farm Products 
(India) Ltd. Sangrur 20.07.2
012 
28.81 7.26 
7 Kool Tech Infra & Logistics Kapurthala 04.10.2
013 
24.90 9.38 
8 Pagro Frozen Foods Pvt. Ltd. Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
04.10.2
013 
40.00 10.00 
9 Supreme Agro Foods Pvt. Ltd. Ludhiana 04.10.2
013 
31.17 8.07 
10 Resource Foods Pvt Ltd Patiala 06.12.20
13 
21.56 7.30 
11 Chanakya Dairy Products Limited Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
22.05.2
015 
31.00 10.00 
12 K.F. Milk Foods Jalandhar 22.05.2
015 
26.83 3.83 
13 Sangha Refrigeration Jalandhar 22.05.2
015 
26.21 10.00 
14 Goyal Farm Fresh Mohali 11.04.20
17 
26.20 9.5 
15 Asianlak Health Foods Ltd. Ludhiana 17.04.2
017 
22.77 7.59 
16 Kathpal Dairies Unit-II  Moga 19.04.2
017 
11.31 3.56 
17 Siberian Tiger Foods Amritsar 25.04.2
017 
12.96 4.66 
18 Pagro Frozen Foods Pvt. Ltd. Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
02.05.2
017 
12.00 3.98 
19 Hargur Milk Products Private Limited Patiala 09.03.2
018 
10.94 2.62 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
41

20 A.S.Frozen Foods Nawanshe
r 
29.10.20
18 
17.31 6.35 
21 PRS Milk Products Pvt Ltd Fatehgarh 
Sahib 
05.11.20
18 
3.90 0.91 
22 Native Farm Food Fazilka 19.07.20
19 1.47 0.71 
23 P. Star Agro Products Hoshiarpur 23.11.20
20 
16.12 5.24 
24 Gurdev Agro Farm Fresh Muktsar 
Sahib 
31.03.20
21 17.43 10.00 
25 Arrk Enterprises Mohali 25.05.2
022 
26.31 8.46 
26 MC Foods Patiala 08.12.20
22 46.51 7.08 
27 GOLDEN Food Specialities Pvt. Ltd.  S.A.S 
Nagar 
29.02.2
024 
33.73 4.16 
Infrastructure for Agro-Processing Clusters Scheme (APC) 
28 M/s SMS Food Park Jalandhar 15.03.20
19 15.197 4.6877 
29 M/s Big Belly Broth ers Gourmet 
Grounds Muktsar 08.06.2
018 27.86 8.66828 
30 M/s T R Mega Foods and Beverages 
LLP Firozpur 03.07.2
019 27.44 7.111384 
Creation / Expansion of F ood Processing & Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) 
Scheme 
31 M/s Godrej Tyson Foods Ltd Ludhiana 19.02.20
18 
69.98 5.00 
32 M/s Schreiber Dyna mix Diaries Pvt 
Ltd 
Fazilka 19.02.20
18 
30.67 5.00 
33 M/s Meat Masters Ludhiana 19.02.20
18 
8.76 1.99 
34 M/s Iscon Balaji Foods Pvt Ltd Ludhiana 08.06.2
018 
25.33 5.00 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

35 M/s Sharman Jain Sweets Ludhiana 22.08.2
019 
15.42 4.01 
36 M/s Delmonte Foods India (North) 
Pvt. Ltd.     
Ludhiana 16.03.20
20 
54.00 5.00 
37 
M/s Big Belly Brothers Gourmet 
Grounds  
Sri 
Muktsar 
Sahib 
16.03.20
20 
8.82 3.05 
38 
M/s Big Belly Brothers Gourmet 
Grounds (60) 
Sri 
Muktsar 
Sahib 
23.05.2
022 
9.7632 3.19 
39 
M/s Big Belly Brothers Gourmet 
Grounds (57) 
Sri 
Muktsar 
Sahib 
23.05.2
022 
8.7138 2.64 
40 
M/s Big Belly Brothers Gourmet 
Grounds (58) 
Sri 
Muktsar 
Sahib 
23.05.2
022 
3.9942 1.36 
41 M/s SMS Food Park Unit III (Fruit 
Juices and Puree in Tetra Pack) 
Jalandhar 21.07.20
20 
9.45 3.09 
42 M/s SMS Food Park Unit - II  Jalandhar 23.05.2
022 
9.31 2.65 
43 M/s Anandkartar Foods LLP Ludhiana 05.12.20
22 
14.27 3.47 
44 M/s T.R. Agro Producer LLP Firozpur 05.12.20
22 
6.32 1.64 
45 M/s Archian Foods Private Limited S.A.S 
Nagar 
05.01.20
23 
21.60 5.00 
46 M/s Mrs. Bectors Food Specialties 
Limited  
Patiala 05.01.20
23 
72.99 5.00 
47 M/s Bonn Nutrients Private Limited Ludhiana 24.01.2
023 
19.04 5.00 
48 M/s SMP Group of Industries Gurdaspur 08.07.2
023 
17.00 5.00 
49 M/s Star Foods  Ludhiana 29.02.2
024 64.58 5.00 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
43

Scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages (BFL) 
50 M/s Goverdhan Industries Fazilka 10/4/20
18 4.09 1.26 
51 M/s Rai Poultries Amritsar 13-09-
2018 22.76 4.91 
52 M/s Balaji Multipurpose Cold 
Storage Patiala 28-09-
2018 9.49 4.02 
53 M/s Perfect Poultry Products Private 
Limited Amritsar 02.12.20
20 15.91 2.6 
Operation Greens (OG) 
54 Royale Agro Processing Industries Mohali 09-11-
2022 45.29 9.84 
Food Safety & Quality Assurance Infrastructure 
55 
Punjab State Co-Operative Supply 
Marketing Federation Ltd. Markfed 
House Chandigarh 
Chandigar
h 
11-11-
2005 
1.7 1.43 
56 Central Institute of Post-Harvest 
Engineering & Technology 
Ludhiana 16-11-
2010 
2.6 1.81 
57 Punjab Biotechnology Incubator SAS Nagar 
(Mohali) 
17-11-
2011 
3.2 2.02 
58 Shakti Api foods, Malerkotla Sangrur 01-04-
2015 
8.3 0.94 
59 
Punjab Agricultural University, 
(Regional Research Station, 
Bhatinda) 
Bhatinda 09-10-
2015 
1.3 0.78 
60 Central University of Punjab Bhatinda 24-11-
2017 
5.5 4.87 
61 Sabiha Research & Development 
LLP, SAS Nagar, Punjab 
SAS Nagar 
(Mohali) 
19-09-
2018 
4 1.2 
62 Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab 
Technical University, 
Bhatinda 23-08-
2019 
2.9 2.53 
63 Punjab Biotechnology Incubator SAS Nagar 
(Mohali) 
19-03-
2021 
8 4.97 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

64 Emminent Analytics SAS Nagar 2/13/20
24 10.8427 4.555 
 
B. Details of Projects sanctioned under PLISFPI Scheme in the State of Punjab 
(as on 30.06.2024) 
 
SN Beneficiary Name District Project Cost 
(₹ Crore) 
1 Del Monte Foods Pvt Ltd Ludhiana 49.550 
2 Hindustan Unilever Ltd Patiala 52.03 
3 Iscon Balaji Foods Pvt Ltd Ludhiana 3.37 
4 Tata Consumer Products Ltd Ludhiana 15.13 
5 Varun Beverages Ltd Pathankot 2.48 
6 Gujarat Co-Operative Milk 
Marketing Federation Ltd 
Ludhiana 3.75 
   126.31 
  
 
C. Details of sanctions under PMFME Scheme in the State of Punjab (as on 
30.06.2024) 
 Individual Applications:    2253      [approved subsidy – Rs.197.97 crore] 
 
SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH: *"Sir, Punjab has contributed immensely in Agriculture 
and Industry. Thus, the Food Processing plants are very important and play an 
important role in the state as there is production of potatoes, tomatoes, carrots, 
cauliflower etc. in the state. If these prod ucts get suitable price, then, they are 
immediately sold; otherwise, they rot on the roads. The farmers thus face losses 
which cannot be defined and he is financially ruined due to non purchase of his crops.  
So I wish to ask whether a provision has been made to encourage the food 
processing industry in the state of Punjab, if so the details thereof. 
 
S H R I  C H I R A G  P A S W A N :   S i r ,  i n  o u r  M i n i s t r y ,  t h i s  h a s  b e e n  o n e  o f  o u r  p r i m e  
concerns िक जो वेÎटेज होता है, उसको िकस तरीके  से कम िकया जा सके ।  हम लोगȗ ने 
                   
*English translation of the supplementary put in Punjabi. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
45

िविभन्न योजनाओं क े तहत एक चैन बनाने का Ģयास िकया, िजसके  तहत जब तक वह पदाथर् 
फामर्र से लेकर consumer क ंज्युमर तक पहुँचता नहीं है, तब तक न िसफर् उसकी वेÎटेज को 
िनयंितर्त िकया जाए, बिÊक उसमȂ value addition भी  िकया जाए। क ेन्दर् सरकार की िविभन्न 
योजनाओं, जैसे - "Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान संपदा योजना", PMFME या PLI Scheme क े माध्यम से 
हम लोग इस बात का Ģयास करते हȅ िक ज्याद
ा से ज्यादा उत्पादन की फ ू ड Ģोसेिंसग हो और 
वेÎटेज को िमिनमाइज िकया जा सके ।  इस बार क े बजट मȂ भी कई ऐसी ÎकीÇस की अनाउंसमȂट 
की गई है।  इस बार क े बजट मȂ 50 irradiation u
nits की घोषणा की गई है।  इस बार क े बजट मȂ 
Food Testing Labs का भी Ģबंध िकया गया है।  सर, अंततोगत्वा ये तमाम िवषय Îटेट क े ǎारा 
ही demand-driven होते हȅ। अगर ऐसी और कोई जानकारी राज्यȗ क े मा
ध्यम से हम लोगȗ क े 
पास आएगी तो क Ȃ दर् सरकार उसके  ऊपर जरूर  िवचार करेगी। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary. 
SHRI SANT BALBIR SINGH : *"Sir, in the published report of the Central Institute of 
Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, it  is stated that in the year  2023, Rs. 
92,600 crores worth of losses were incurred, th is is a big loss !  So , in future, is there 
any plan/policy to encourage this industry;  if so, the details thereof and also the 
duration within which this policy/plan will be implemented?  
 
Ǜी िचराग पासवान : सर, यह सवाल पहले सवाल से ही जुड़ा हुआ है।  जैसा मȅने कहा िक वेÎटेज 
को क ै से िमिनमाइज िकया जा सके  और कम से कम नुकसान हो, इस बात क े िलए सरक ार  पहले 
से ही काफी गंभीर है।  इसके  िलए हम लोगȗ ने िनरंतर Ģयास िकया है।  कम ही सही, पर आंकड़े 
भी इस बात को दशार्ते हȅ िक िपछले क ु छ वषș  मȂ हम लोग वेÎटेज को काफी कम करने मȂ सफल 
रहे हȅ।  इसी िदशा मȂ, जो मȅने जानकारी दी िक इस बार क े क Ȃदर्ीय बजट मȂ 50 नए  irradiation
 
units लगाने का ĢÎताव िकया गया है।  ये तमाम ऐसे ही ÎटेÃस और माध्यम हȅ, िजनके  तहत इस 
बात को सुिनिÌचत िकया जा रहा है िक िकसान िजत ना उत्पादन करते हȅ, उसका कम से कम 
नुकसान हो और बिÊक उसमȂ वैÊयू ऐड करके  हम लोग उसे गर्ाहकȗ तक पहुंचा सकȂ ।  
धन्यवाद,सर। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary No.3; Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil. 
 
SHRIMATI RAJANI ASHOKRAO PATIL: Sir, Food Processing Ministry सबसे इÇपोटȄट है, 
ऐसा मेरा मानना है। हम िकसान अनाज उगाते हȅ, हम माल तैयार करते हȅ, लेिकन जब तक वह 
माकȃ ट मȂ नहीं जाता है, तब तक बीच का जो सम
य है, उसमȂ हमȂ बहुत िदक्कत आती है। I just 
would like to ask the hon. Minister as to what steps are being taken by the 
                   
*English translation of the supplementary put in Punjabi. 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

Government to improve the transportation  and infrastructure to reduce the post-
harvest losses? 
 
SHRI CHIRAG PASWAN: It is a serious concern and you have rightly said िक यह हम 
सबकी िंचता मȂ से है। मैडम, हमारा क ृिष Ģधान देश है और हमारे देश क े  अिधकांश राज्य क ृिष पर 
ही आधािरत होते हȅ।  मȅ भी िजस िबहार राज्य से आता हूँ, वहां पर भी क ृिष का बहुत बड़ा महत्व है। 
 ऐसे मȂ हम लोग एक Ģॉपर चेन िकर्एट करने का Ģयास करते हȅ। उस
के  माध्यम से हम लोग फामर्र 
से लेकर folk तक इस बात को सुिनिÌचत करने का Ģयास कर त े हȅ िक कहीं पर भी िकसी तरीके  
से गुणवǄा क े साथ समझौता न हो और वेÎटेज को भी हम लोग कम से कम कर सकȂ, चाहे यह 
कोÊड Îटोरेज क े माध्यम से हो या complete cold chain क े माध्यम से हो।  िपछली बार मैडम ने 
ही APC units का सवाल पूछा था। हम लोग ऐसे क्लÎटसर् भी िकर्एट करने का काम कर रहे हȅ, 
तािक वहीं पर फ ू ड का value addition हो सके , उसको Ģोसेस करके  आगे बढ़ाया जा सके ।   
जैसा िक मȅने अपने जवाब मȂ इससे पहले भी कहा िक ये तमाम िवषय demand-driven भी 
होते हȅ, तो ऐसे मȂ जो ज
ानकािरयां या सुझाव राज्यȗ क े माध्यम से आते  हȅ, उन पर भी सरकार 
अध्ययन करती है।  मȅ पुनः उसी बात को दोहरा रहा हूँ िक चाहे irradiation units  हȗ या Food 
Testing Labs हȗ,  ये तमाम ऐसे कदम हȅ, जो सरकार ने इस बात को सुिनिÌचत कर
ने क े िलए 
Îवतः अपनी तरफ से उठाए हȅ िक farmer to folk, यह जो चेन है, इसको खूबसूरती से बरकरार 
रखा जाए,  थȅक यू।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Su
pplementary No.4; Dr. Bhagwat Karad. 
 
डा. भागवत कराड़: सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से ऑनरेबल मंतर्ी जी से यह पूछना चाहता हूँ िक हमारे 
देश मȂ िकतने Food Processing Parks सȅक्शन हुए थे और िकतने क ंÃलीट हो चुक े हȅ?  क ु छ जो 
इनकं Ãलीट हȅ, तो what problems are the Go vernment facing to complete the Food 
Processing Parks? 
 
Ǜी िचराग पासवान: सर, माननीय सदÎय का जो फ ू ड Ģोसेिंसग पाकर् से संबंिधत सवाल है, मेरी 
जानकारी क े अनुसार वे मेगा फ ू ड पाक्सर् का िज़कर् कर रहे हȅ। सर, 41 मेगा फ ू ड पाक्सर् सȅक्शन हुए 
थे और इनमȂ अिधकांश, लगभग सारे ही कायर् कर रहे हȅ, उनमȂ कोई िदक्कत नहीं है, लेिकन एक 
मȂ ज़रूर  हम लोगȗ को किठनाई आई थी। वह भी यह िक जो उǏमी थे, उनका पसर्नल एक कारण 
था - उनकी मृत्यु हो गई थी, जो main थे , उसकी वजह से उसमȂ बाधा आई। बाकी जो 41 मे गा 
फ ू ड पाक्सर् हȅ, वे कायर् कर रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक मेगा फ ू ड पाक्सर् मȂ जगह की ज्यादा ज़रूरत  होती है, 
इस योजना को िफलहाल क े िलए हम लोगȗ ने disc ontinue िकया है और इसकी जगह पर APCs 
हम लेकर आए हȅ, processing clusters लेकर आए हȅ। इससे पहले 50 एकड़ ज़मीन की इसमȂ 
ज़रूरत होती थी, अलग-अलग यूिनट्स को लगाने की ज़रूरत होती थी। कई बार राज्यȗ मȂ एक 
साथ 50 एक ड़  की ज़मीन िमलना किठन होता था। साथ ही मȂ जो land use क े िलए जो laws हȅ, वे 
भी इसमȂ बाधा बनते थे, तो ऐसे मȂ िफलहाल क े िलए इस योजना को discontinue िकया गया है 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
47

और APCs क े माध्यम से हम लोग यह end-to-end solution provide करने का Ģयास कर रहे 
हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary No.5 - Dr. Sikander Kumar.  
 
DR. SIKANDER KUMAR:  Sir, I would like to know from the hon. Minister as to what 
steps the Government has taken to boost the food processing industries in Punjab 
and how many food processing industries are running currently in Punjab.   
 
Ǜी िचराग पासवान: सर, माननीय सदÎय ने पंजाब Îपेिसिफक सवाल पूछा है, िजसका जवाब 
सवाल मȂ भी िदया जा चुका है, हम लोग इसका जवाब िलिखत मȂ भी दे चुक े हȅ। जैसा मȅने बताया 
िक Ģमुखता से तीन योज
नाएं हȅ, िजनके  तहत हमारी सरकार Ģोसेिंसग यूिनट्स को धरातल पर 
उतारती है। ' Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान संपदा योजना' (PMFME) क े माध्यम से, दूसरा PLI Îकीम क े 
माध्यम से जो बड़े यूिनट्स हȅ, हम लो
ग उनकी मदद करने का Ģयास करते हȅ। सर, इसमȂ पंजाब 
क े बारे मȂ इन्हȗने पूछा है िक ' Ģधानमंतर्ी िकसान संपदा योजना' क े तहत 64 फ ू ड Ģोसेिंसग 
Ģोजेक्ट्स को अपर्ूवल िदया जा चुका है, सर, यह 1,594.75 करोड़ की लागत से िकया गया है। 
PMFME क े तहत 2,
253 माइकर्ो Ģोसेिंसग यूिनट्स को सȅक्शन िकया गया है और इसकी लागत 
197.97 करोड़ रुपय े रही है। सर, PLIs क े तहत 6 Ģोसेिंसग Ģोजेक्ट्स को अपर्ूवल िमला है और 
इसकी लागत 126.31 करोड़ रही है। ये वे यूिनट्स हȅ, जो िफलहाल पंजाब मȂ कायर् कर रहे हȅ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: यहां माननीय मंतर्ी जी भी हȅ और क ृिष मंतर्ी जी भी हȅ, तो मेरा सुझाव रहेगा िक 
value addit
ion agriculture produce का खेत मȂ हो जाए, relaxation rules का हो जाए, 
cluster क े माध्यम से हो जाए, और सहकािरता िवभाग जो मदद करता है, तो उसका फायदा यह 
होगा िक वेÎटेज भी कम होगा और उस इलाके  क े आसपास उस Ģोǹूस की खपत भी हो जाएगी। 
इस पर को
ई नीित बनेगी, तो िकसान को बहुत लÇबा फायदा होगा और िकसान को अपने Ģोǹूस 
का पूरा फायदा िमल पाएगा। यहां माननीय िशवराज िंसह चौहान भी हȅ, वे इस ओर ध्यान दȂगे।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now. Q.No.124 - Shri Sudhanshu Trivedi.   
 
Initiatives for improving agricultural productivity 
 
*124. SHRI SUDHANSHU TRIVEDI:
 Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the measures that have been taken for promoting organic farming for improving 
soil health and water retention, making farms more resilient to droughts; 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

(b) the initiatives taken for providing real time data to farmers, enabling them to 
make informed decisions about crop selection, sowing schedules and irrigation 
practices;  
(c) the measures being taken to have  a data-driven approach to improve 
agricultural productivity and mitigate the impact of climate change; and 
(d) the steps being taken for improving effici ency in water use for agriculture, that 
is critical amid the looming water crisis  and for the promotion of water-efficient 
technologies? 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SHRI RAM NATH THAKUR): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of 
the House. 
 
Statement 
 (a) Government is promoting organic farming on priority in the country since 2015-16 
for improving soil health and water retention through the scheme s of Paramparagat 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in all the States other-than North Eastern States and 
Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER). 
Both the schemes stresses on end-to-end support to farmers engaged in organic 
farming i.e. from production to processing, certification & marketing and post-
harvest management training and Capacity Building and also focus on sustainable 
agriculture.  
 Indian Council of Agricultural Resear ch operates All India Network Programme 
on Organic Farming (AINP-OF) with 20 coop erating centers covering 16 States and 
developed organic package of practices for 76 cropping systems.  The results also 
showed improvement of soil physical, chemi cal and biological properties resulting in 
better micro environment for cr op growth and productivity compared to conventional 
farming. Better resilience of crops to w eather extremes have also been observed 
under organic farming. Continuous practice of raising the crops organically has good 
potential to sequester the C with higher  soil organic carbon (22 % increase in 6 
years), reduction in energy requirement (by about 10-15 %) and increase in water 
holding capacity (by 15-20 %), thereby promoting climate resilience in farming.  
 
(b) and (c) Ministry of Agriculture and Farm ers Welfare has taken various initiatives 
to build Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI ) for agriculture as an open source, open 
standard and interoperable public good. This will enable the development of 
innovative farmer-centric digital services  and make available timely and reliable 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
49

agricultural information. These initiatives intend to provide access to technology and 
information to the farmers across the country to address the farmer-centric solutions, 
through various digital initiatives, such as: 
 AgriStack: Under the Agristack initiative, the Government has initiated the 
development of three core registries , viz. Farmers Registry (Registry of 
Farmers), Geo-Referenced Village maps (of the Farmland plots) and Crop 
Sown Registry through the Digital Crop Survey.  
 The Digital Crop Survey establishes a clea r picture of crop being sown across all 
the farmlands in the country during the different agriculture seasons. With the 
implementation of AgriStack, farmer can digitally identi fy and authenticate 
himself/herself to access benefits and services, obviating cumbersome 
paperwork and with little or no need to ph ysically visit various offices or service 
providers. Some examples include av ailing Government schemes and crop 
loans, connecting to agri-input suppliers  and buyers of agricultural produce, 
accessing personalized advisories in real time, etc. Further, this data is also 
helpful for Government agencies in accurate production estimation, crop 
diversification and making schemes and se rvices more efficient and transparent, 
such as paperless MSP-based procuremen t, crop insurance, and Credit card-
linked crop loans, and develop systems for balanced use of fertilizers, etc.  
 Krishi- Decision Support System (DSS) integrates and standardizes geospatial 
and non-geospatial data, including sate llite, weather, soil, crop signatures, 
reservoir, and groundwater data. Kris hi-DSS offers crop maps, soil maps, 
drought/flood monitoring systems, etc, which support evidence-based 
decision-making by the government and facilitate innovative solutions by 
research institutions and the agritech industry. 
 Comprehensive Soil Fertility and Profile  Maps: A Nationwide Soil Resource 
Mapping project has been initiated by the Soil and Land Use Survey of India 
(SLUSI), which is making an inventory of  soils at a village level on a finer and 
more detailed 1:10,000 scale using high-resolution satellite and ground data. 
Under this project, a detaile d soil profile study is bein g carried out to create 
standardized soil maps for rational land  use and crop planning, thus promoting 
sustainable agriculture.  
 
A data driven approach, is being followe d to improve agricultural productivity 
and mitigate climate change. In this regard  risk and vulnerability assessment of Indian 
Agriculture to climate change was underta ken by Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR), under National Innova tions in Climate Resilient Agriculture 
(NICRA).   
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

The project aims to study the impact of climate change on agriculture including 
crops, livestock, horticulture and fisher ies and to develop and promote climate 
resilient technologies in agriculture which will address vulnerable areas of the country 
and the outputs of the project will help th e districts and regions prone to extreme 
weather conditions like droughts, floods, fros t, heat waves, etc. to cope with such 
extremes. The salient achievements under ICAR are as follows:   
 During last 10 years (2014-2024), a tota l of 2593 varieties have been released 
by ICAR, out of these 2177 varieties have  been found tolerant to one or more 
biotic and/or abiotic stresses.   
 District Agriculture Contingency Plans (DACPs) for 651 districts have been 
prepared based on occurrence of dr ought, floods, unseasonal rains and 
extreme weather events such as heat  wave, cold wave, frost, hailstorm, 
cyclone etc. which include problem an d location specific technologies. These 
DACP are sent to different stakeholders including state agricultural department 
and need based sensitization programmes are conducted. 
 To enhance the resilience and adaptive  capacity of farmers to climate 
variability, 448 Climate Resilient Villages has been established in 151 climatically 
vulnerable districts under NICRA progr amme. In addition, capacity building 
programmes are being conducted to all th e stakeholders on various aspects of 
climate change. 
 
(d) Government of India through the DA&F W is implementing a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme (CSS) called Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) in the Country from the year 
2015-16. During 2015-16 to 2021-22, the P DMC was implemented as a component of 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY).  
 PDMC scheme focuses on enhancing water use efficiency at farm level through 
Micro Irrigation, namely, Drip and Sprinkler Irrigation systems. The Micro Irrigation 
helps in water saving as well as reduced fe rtilizer usage through fertigation, labour 
expenses, other input costs and overall income enhancement of farmers. 
 Financial Assistance @ 55% for Small & Marginal farmers and @ 45% for 
other farmers is provided by the Government for installation of Micro Irrigation under 
the Scheme. In addition, some States provide additional incentives/top up subsidy for 
encouraging farmers to adopt Micro Irrigation.  
 Further, 25% higher unit cost is taken into consideration for calculation of 
subsidy for the North Eastern and Himalayan states and 15% higher for States with 
low penetration of Micro Irrigation for larger adoption of Micro Irrigation systems by 
the farmers under the PDMC scheme.  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
51

 Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, also implements 
PMKSY with an aim to enhance physical  access of water on farm and expand 
cultivable area under assured irrigation , improve on-farm water use efficiency, 
introduce sustainable water conservation  practices, etc. Under PMKSY, various 
measures for creation of assured irrigation source, construction of diversion canals, 
field channels, water diversion/lift irri gation, including development of water 
distribution systems are undertaken.  
Command Area Development and Wate r Management (CADWM) Programme 
has been brought under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) - Har 
Khet Ko Pani from 2015-16 onwards. Wit h the new Scheme of prioritized AIBP 
(Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Program) pr ojects approved by Cabinet on 27th July 
2016, CADWM works got restricted to only 99 prioritized AIBP projects from 2016-17 
onwards. During FY 2016-17 to FY 2023-24 , the CA amounting to  Rs 3129 crore was 
released under CADWM component of PMKS Y-HKKP with CCA coverage of 2347.06 
Th. Ha.  
ICAR-Indian Institute of Water manage ment operates AICRP on Irrigation 
Water Management in 26 cen tres pan-India disseminating water management 
technologies viz., drip and sprinkler syst ems and surface irrigation scheduling for 
different crops for improving water use efficiency under diverse soil and agro-climatic 
regions. Research showed th at under drip irrigation, Wa ter Use Efficiency (kg yield 
/m 3 water; m 3 = 1000 liters of water) in aerobic rice (0.76), capsicum (8.5), baby 
corn (0.8) and banana (7.3) were 52%, 21%, 33% and 117% higher, respectively 
compared with surface irrigation. Water Use Efficiency in maize (1.91), brinjal (8.3), 
potato (6.4), tomato (9.3) and sugarcan e (10.0) were 45%, 110%, 48%, 165% 
and 74% higher, respectively compared with surface irrigation. Research findings 
were disseminated to the stake holders pertai ning to different irrigation methods and 
crops for enhancing agricultural water produc tivity through pilot scale demonstration, 
capacity building under different outreach programmes. The study showed that out of 
573 districts analyzed, 109 were falling unde r very high risk prone and 201 are highly 
prone is given at Annexure-I.   
Annexure-I 
 
List of districts that are at risk due to climate change   
 
S. No. State High risk districts Very-high risk districts 
1. Andhra Pradesh                  3 1 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 6 1 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

3. Assam 5 2 
4. Bihar 13 10 
5. Chhattisgarh 6 0 
6. Dadra & Nagar H aveli 0 0 
7. D aman &Diu 0 0 
8. Goa 0 0 
9. Gujarat 6 2 
10. Haryana 8 3 
11. Himachal Pradesh 6 2 
12. Jammu & Kashmir 7 3 
13. Jharkhand 6 0 
14. Karnataka 12 3 
15. Kerala 5 8 
16. Madhya Pradesh 14 2 
17. Maharashtra 11 2 
18. Manipur 6 0 
19. Meghalaya 1 6 
20. Mizoram 5 2 
21. Nagaland 5 1 
22. Odisha 13 6 
23. Pondicherry 0 0 
24. Punjab 4 5 
25. Rajasthan 10 17 
26. Sikkim 3 1 
27. Tamil Nadu 5 0 
28. Telangana 2 0 
29. Tripura 0 0 
30. Uttar Pradesh 26 22 
31. Uttarakhand 2 7 
32. West Bengal 11 3 
 Total 201 109 
 
 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
53

डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहूंगा 
िक जैिवक और Ģाकृ ितक खेती, जो इस समय बहुत महत्वपूणर् बनकर उभरी है और आने वाले 
समय मȂ उǄरोǄर उसकी आवÌयकता बढ़ने जा रही है, तो क्या सरकार इस के  िलए कोई Ëयापक 
या ËयविÎथत योजना पर िवचार कर रही है? यह मȅ जानना चाहता हूं।   
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र: सभापित महोदय, माननीय सांसद जी ने बहुत ही अच्छा ĢÌन रखा है। 10 वषर् 
पहले, बिÊक उससे भी पहले िकसान और सरकार क े ǎ ारा खेत मȂ जो रासायिनक खाद डाला जा 
रहा था, उससे खेत का और ज़मीन का भी ÎवाÎथ्य खराब हो रहा है। िकसानȗ का भी ÎवाÎथ्य 
खराब हो रहा है।  अनेक तरह की बीमािरयां फ ै ल रही हȅ, इसिलए 2015-16 मȂ जो नई सरकार 
आई थी, उस सरकार ने जैिवक खेती क े बारे मȂ सोचा और तब से उस पर कारर्वा
ई कर रही है। 
आपको बताते हुए मुझे खुशी हो रही है िक अभी तक 48 लाख  30 हजार  िकसान 59 लाख 74 
हजार हेक्टेयर जमीन पर जैिवक खेती कर रहे हȅ, िजससे उनको फायदे भी हो रहे हȅ और बीमारी 
मȂ कमी भी आ रही है। जैिवक खाद क े िलए जमीन पर जो Ģयोग िकया जा रहा है, उससे चार 
साल तक तो हमको नुकसान हो रहा है, लेिकन इसके  बाद जैिवक खेती क े करने क े कारण जमीन 
भी उपजाऊ हो रही है और िकसान भी उसमȂ interest ले रहे हȅ।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: सेक Ȃ ड सÃली
मȂटरी, डा. सुधांशु ितर् वेदी।  
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी:  महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहूंगा िक जैसे 
एक दौर मȂ जब क ृिष क े िलए नए उपकरणȗ और मशीन ट ूÊस का Ģयोग होता था, तो आने वाले 
समय मȂ जैिवक व Ģाकृ ित
क खेती क े िलए भी क्या क ु छ िवशेष Ģकार क े उपकरण, मशीन और 
ट ूÊस क े बारे मȂ उनकी जानकारी और उनकी उपलÅधता क े बारे मȂ सरकार ने कोई योजना बनाई 
है?  
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र: जैिवक खेती क े िलए रासायिनक खाद को हटाया जा रहा है, उसी तरह 
टर्ैक्टर, बीज लगाने की मशीन, िविभन्
न तरह क े उपकरण सरकार क े ǎारा मुहैया कराये जा रहे हȅ 
और उससे अच्छी खेती, कटाई मȂ, जुताई मȂ, बीज बोने मȂ उसे लगा रहे हȅ।   महोदय, मȅ आपसे 
िनवेदन करना चाहता हूं िक ज्यादा से ज्यादा िकस
ान जैिवक खेती का उपयोग करȂ और खेत को 
उपजाऊ बनाएं, खेत की रक्षा भी करȂ और अपने ÎवाÎथ्य पर भी ध्यान दȂ।  यही कहकर मȅ अपनी 
बात समाÃत करता हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: थडर् सÃलीमȂटरी, Ǜी संजय िंसह। 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह: महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने अभी सदन मȂ बताया िक 48 लाख िक
सान देश मȂ 
जैिवक खेती करते हȅ, यह उनका अनुमान है।  िकसानȗ की बड़ी संख्या  ऐसी है, जो रासायिनक 
खाद का इÎ
तेमाल अपनी खेती क े िलए करती है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से बड़ी िवनĦतापूवर्क माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहता हूं िक 50 िकलो की बोरी, जो िकस ानȗ को िमलती थी, क्या उसमȂ पांच 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

िकलो रासायिनक खाद कम कर दी गई है? अगर कर दी गई है, तो क्यȗ  की गई है और िकसानȗ 
को मूÊय उतना ही देना पड़ता है, तो यह एक Ģकार से उनके  साथ पक्षपात है।   
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र: महोदय, 50 िकलो बोरी क े बदले 40 िकया गया है और उसमȂ दाम भी घटाया 
गया है, लेिकन उस जैिवक खेती क े बारे मȂ अभी तक कोई िश
कायत नहीं आई है िक इस खाद मȂ 
कोई खराबी है और िकसान ने कोई िशकायत भी नहीं की है। अगर माननीय सदÎय को यह मालूम 
है िक यिद जैिवक खाद मȂ कोई िश
कायत है, तो उसको मुझे बताने का काम करȂ, इसके  बारे मȂ 
हम िनिÌचत रूप  से उनको जवाब दȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी (Ǜी िशवराज िंस
 ह चौहान): महोदय, ĢÌन जैिवक और Ģाकृ ितक 
खेती से संबंिधत था, िजसका माननीय मंतर्ी जी िवǎतापूवर्क उǄर दे रहे थे, तो संजय िंसह जी 
आप सीधे उससे रासायिनक खेती पर पहुंच गए, क ैिमकल और फिर्टलाइजर की खेती पर पहुंच 
गए, लेिकन उन्हȗने सवाल पूछा है, तो मȅ उनसे कह
ना चाहता हूं िक खाद की मातर्ा, जैसे वे बता 
रहे थे, लेिकन उसके  अनुपात मȂ कीमत भी कम कर दी गई है, तो िकसान को कोई घाटा नहीं है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित: मंतर्ी जी ने बहुत Ģभावी तरीके  से बात कही है।   
 
Ǜी सुभाष बर
ाला: धन्यवाद सभापित महोदय। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से कहना 
चाहूंगा िक रासायिनक खादȗ क े अित उपयोग क े कारण से आम आदमी की भी सेहत खराब हुई 
और धरती मा
ता की भी सेहत खराब हुई, िजसके  कारण से दोबारा से हमȂ अपनी परÇपरागत खेती 
क े ऊपर आना पड़ रहा है। मेरा इसके  संबंध मȂ यह कहना है िक हिरयाणा Ģदेश खाǏान्न क े भंडार 
भरने मȂ अपना Ģमुख Îथा
न रखता है, लेिकन रासायिनक खाद क े अित उपयोग क े कारण से 
हिरयाणा Ģदेश की लाखȗ एकड़ जमीन सेमगर्Îत हुई यानी िक वाटर लॉग्ड हुई। मेरा माननीय मंतर्ी 
जी से सवाल है िक वतर्मान मȂ हमारे साढ़े 9 लाख एकड़ जमीन सेमगर्Îत है, वाट
र लॉग्ड है, 
हिरयाणा सरकार इसको ठीक करने मȂ अपने सारे संसाधन लगाए हुए है..   
 
Ǜी सभापित:  आपका ĢÌन क्या है? 
 
Ǜी सुभाष बराला: लेिकन सीिमत संसाधन होने क े कारण से उसमȂ गित बहुत कम है। क्या क ेन्दर् 
सरकार की कोई ऐस
ी योजना है िक सेमगर्Îत जमीन को ठीक करने मȂ वह अपनी भूिमका िनभा 
सके । 
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र: सभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय सदÎय को बताना चा
हता हूं िक परÇपरागत 
क ृिष िवकास योजना मȂ Ģित हैक्टेयर 31,500 रुपय े िदए जाते हȅ,जबिक िमशन ऑगȃिनक मȂ 
46,500 रुपय े की रािश Ģित हैक्टेयर Ģदान की जाती है। माननीय सदÎय से हम िन वेदन करना 
चाहते हȅ िक आप पहले हिरयाणा मȂ पता लगा लȂ िक इसका उपयोग हो रहा है या नहीं, पैसे िदए 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
55

जा रहे हȅ या नहीं। अगर पैसे नहीं िदए जा रहे हȅ, तो यहां से िनिÌचत रूप  से वहां पर िनदȃश 
जाएगा िक इसका उपयोग करȂ। 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  सÃलीमȂटरी नÇबर 5, Ǜीमती रंजीत रंजन। 
 
Ǜीमती रं जीत रंजन: सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से पूछना चाहत ी हूं िक आप 
जैिवक खेती की बात कर रहे हȅ। सर, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मंतर्ी जी से पूछू ंगी िक जैिवक खेती मȂ, 
अगर हम खेती करते हȅ, तो कम खेती होती है कÇपेयडर् ट ू पेिÎटसाइड वाली खेती से। आप राइस 
मȂ, गेहूं मȂ जो एमएसपी है,जो िकसान खेती कर रहा है, क्या उसक
ो बढ़ाने क े बारे मȂ सरकार सोच 
रही है?  
 दूसरा, जो क ेवीके  है, मȅ भी क ृिष िवज्ञान क ेन्दर् मȂ बहुत बार जाती हूं। अभी उनकी संख्या 
करीब 720 है , िजनको आप 20 है क्टेयर जमीन देते हȅ, जो िकसानȗ को जैिवक खेती क े िलए 
Ģोत्सािहत करती हȅ, सुखाड़ है, बाढ़ है, तो कौन सी खेती करनी है, क ैसी खेती करनी है, यह 
बताती है। सर, आज की तार
ीख मȂ आप उनको 20 एकड़ जमीन देते हȅ, लगभग मातर् 7 लाख, 6 
हजार क े करीब ही िकसान उसमȂ रिजÎटडर् हȅ। इस म Ȃ करीब 20 कमर्चारी और साइंिटÎट होते थे, 
िजनकी संख्या घटकर 16 रह गई है। अभी इसमȂ से लगभग 2.8 करोड़, जो क ृिष Ǜिमक थे, वे चले 
गए हȅ। सर, ऐसा क्यȗ हो रहा है? मȅ चाहती हूं िक क ृिष िवज्ञान क ेन्दर् जो िकसानȗ को Ģोत्सािहत 
और अवेयर करने क े िलए बड़ी भूिम
का िनभाता है, तो इसको आने वाले Ãलान मȂ डबल िकया जा 
सकता है। क्या सरकार की Ģत्येक िडÎटर्क्ट मȂ दो क ेवीके  करने की योजना है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी।  
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र: मान
नीय सभापित जी, माननीय सदÎया ने बहुत ही अच्छा ĢÌन िकया है। हम 
उनकी सलाह को मानते हȅ और हम िनिÌचत रूप  से उनकी सलाह को आगे बढ़ाने का काम करȂगे।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, मȅ सलाह तो नहीं दूंगा, एक सुझाव दूंगा। क ृिष मȂ तकनीक का 
बहुत बड़ा योगदान है। िकसान क े पास क ृिष उपकरण िजतने तकनीकी रूप  से सवर्ǛेÍठ हȗगे, 
उससे खेती पर अच्छा Ģभा
व पड़ेगा। अक्सर यह देखा गया है, खास कर टर्ेक्टर क े मामले मȂ िक 
िकसान यह भावना रख
ता हȅ िक मȅ उस टर्ेक्टर को तब तक चलाता रहूं जब तक वह चल रहा है। 
चाहे कानून मȂ उसकी समय अविध 10 वष र् की है। िकसान को इस बात क े िलए जा गरूक  िकया 
जाए िक क ृिष उपकरण मȂ सरकार सबसे ज्यादा सिÅसडी देती है और जो नया टर्ेक्टर आता है, वह 
Äयूल क ंजÇपशन मȂ ठीक है। और बाकी उपकरण भी अच्छी तरह से लग सकते हȅ। मुझे लगता है 
िक इसके  िलए एक भावन
ा फ ैलाने की आवÌयकता है, क्यȗिक क ु छ लोग यह धारणा लेकर बैठे हȅ 
िक हमारे टर्ैक्टर को कानून की तरह जो रुकना  चािहए, अगर उसको रोकोगे, तो हम टर्ैक्टर को 
सड़क पर ले आएंगे। बजाए इसके  िक यह मामला गलत िदशा मȂ जाए, उन्हȂ सही ज्ञान दीिजए
। 
इस बात को Ģसािरत कीिजए िक अगर आप नया टर्ैक्टर लेते हȅ, नया उपकरण लेते हȅ, तो आपको 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

सिÅसडी का बहुत फायदा िमलता है और आपके  खेत मȂ नई तकनीक आती है। मȅने यह अखबारȗ मȂ 
देखा है, इसिलए इस ओर क ु छ करना चािहए।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: ĢÌन संख्या 125, Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद।  
 
Status of Bullet Train Project 
 
†*125. SHRI BABURAM NISHAD: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the present status of implementation of bullet train project; 
(b) the details of the proposed projects, timeline and actual status; 
(c) the expected timeline by when Governme nt intends to run bullet trains in the 
country along with its coverage network; and 
(d) the number of Vande Bharat trains that are operational and number thereof 
under development, State-wise and region-wise? 
 
THE MINISTER OF RAILWAYS (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW): (a) to (d) A Statement 
is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) Presently construction is goi ng on the Mumbai-Ahm edabad High Speed 
Rail (MAHSR) Project.  The MAHSR Project is passing through the States of Gujarat, 
Maharashtra and Union Territory  of Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The length of the project 
is 508 Km with 12 stations planned at Mumbai, Thane, Virar, Boisar, Vapi, Billimora, 
Surat, Bhaurach, Vadodara, Anand, Ahmedabad and Sabarmati.  
 Entire land (1389.5 Ha) has been acqui red for the project. Till now, 350 km of 
Pier Foundation, 316 km of Pier Construction, 221 km of Girder Casting and 190 km of 
Girder Launching have been completed. The work of undersea tunnel (approx. 21 
Km) has also started. 
 Bullet train project is a very comp lex and technology intensive project. 
Considering the highest level of safety an d associated maintenance protocols, Bullet 
train project has been designed with th e support of Japanese railway. It is 
customised for Indian requirements and climatic conditions.  
                   
†Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
57

 Timelines for the completion of the proj ect can be reasonably ascertained after 
the completion of all associated works of Civil Structures, Track, Electrical, Signalling 
& Telecommunication and supply of Trainset s. The execution of MAHSR Project is 
monitored/reviewed regularly. 
 
(d) As the Railway network straddles acro ss State boundaries, train services are 
introduced, as per network requirement, across such boundaries. At present 102 
Vande Bharat train services are operational on the Indian Railways network. These are 
operational on the following sectors: Varanasi - New Delhi, New Delhi - Shri Mata 
Vaishno Devi Katra, Mumbai Central - Gandhinagar Capital, New Delhi – Amb 
Andaura , MGR Chennai Central - Mysuru  , Bilaspur - Nagpur, Howrah - New 
Jalpaiguri, Visakhapatnam - Secunderabad, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus - 
Sainagar Shirdi, Chhatrapati Shivaji Mahara j Terminus - Solapur , Rani Kamalapati - 
Hazrat  Nizamuddin ,  MGR  Chennai  Central - Coimbato re ,  Secunderabad -  
Tirupati ,  Ajmer -  Chandigarh, Manglore  Central - Thiruvananthapuram Central, 
Howrah - Puri, Anand Vihar (T) - Dehrad un, New Jalpaiguri - Guwahati, Rani 
Kamalapati - Rewa, KSR Bengaluru - Dhar wad, Indore - Nagpur, Patna - Ranchi, 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj (T) - Madgaon, Jodhpur - Sabarmati, Gorakhpur - 
Prayagraj, Kasargod - Thiruvananthapur am Central, Ahmedabad - Okha, Chennai 
Egmore - Tirunelveli, MGR Chennai Centra l - Vijayawada, Kacheguda - Yesvantpur, 
Udaipur City - Jaipur, Howrah - Patna, Ro urkela - Puri, Howrah - Ranchi, Banglore 
Cantt - Coimbatore, Mangalore - Madgaon,  Jalna - CSMT Mumbai, Banaras - New 
Delhi, Anand Vihar (T) - Ayodhya Cantt., Sh ri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra - New Delhi, 
Amritsar - Delhi, Mysore - Chennai Ce ntral, Secunderabad - Visakhapatnam, 
Bhubaneswar - Visakhapatnam, Ranchi - Banaras, Kalaburagi  - SMV Bengaluru, 
New Jalpaiguri - Patna, Patna - Gomtinagar, Khajuraho - Hazrat Nizamuddin, 
Lucknow Jn - Dehradun, Mumbai Central - Ahmedabad. Besides, introduction of 
new train services including Vande Bharat se rvices, is an ongoing process on Indian 
Railways subject to traffic justification, op erational feasibility, resource constraints, 
etc. 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद: उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय मंतर्ी जी पूछना चाहता हूं िक 
क्या बुलेट टर्ेन चलाने क े िलए रेलवे टर्ैक तैयार है या ऐसी िक
सी पिरयोजना पर काम चल रहा है? 
अगर काम चल रहा है, वे कौन-कौन से टर्ैक हȅ और ये टर्ैक कब तक बनकर तैयार हो जाएंगे? 
 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय सांसद महोदय ने बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् ĢÌन पूछा 
है। महोदय, दुिनया की िजतनी भी बड़ी इकोनॉमीज़ हȅ, करीब-करीब सभी ने जो उनके  बड़े शहर 
हȅ, उन बड़े शहरȗ को जोड़ने क े िलए बुलेट टर्ेन जैसी - यिद generic शÅदावली मȂ कहȂ, तो हाई 
Îपीड रेल की ËयवÎथा की है। इनमȂ चा
हे चीन हो, जापान हो, साउथ कोिरया हो, ताइवान हो इन 
सभी क ंटर्ीज़ ने करीब-करीब ऐसी ËयवÎथा की है।  
मान्यवर, यह बहुत ही कॉÇÃलेक्स टैक्नोल ॉजी होती है। क्यȗिक जैसा हम जानते हȅ और हम 
अपने पसर्नल अनुभव से भी देखȂ, तो जैसे-जैसे िकसी भी वाहन की Îपीड बढ़ती है, उसे क ंटर्ोल 
करना, उस िËहकल की जो vibrations होती हȅ, उसका जो aer odynamics होता है, उन सभी 
का ध्यान रखने की बहुत जरूरत होती है। इसीिलए भारत मȂ बुलेट टर्ेन का जो पहला Ģोजेक्ट 
िलया गया, वह मुंबई से अहमदाबाद क े बीच है और इसमȂ जापान क े साथ सहयोग िकया गया है। 
जापान बुलेट टर्ेन की टैक्नोलॉजी मȂ pioneer है। उन्हȗने 1964 मȂ यह काम चालू िकया था और 
उनके  सहयोग क े साथ यह काम चालू हुआ है।  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  साथ बहुत हषर् क े साथ यह बात शेयर करना 
चाहूंगा िक भ
ारत मȂ इस Ģोजेक्ट क े साथ काम करने क े तरीके  मȂ टैक्नोलॉजी को बहुत अच्छी तरह 
से आत्मसात िकया गया है। इसमȂ टैक्नोलॉजी को इस तरह से आत्मसात िकया गया है िक जो 
earthquake proof viaduct  हȅ, यानी  elevated track होता है, उसकी  earthquake proofing 
क ै से की जाए, एक सा
थ 40 मीटर का लंबा girder, जो 1,100 टन का होता है, उसको क ै से एक 
तरीके  से Ãलेस िकया जाए।  महोदय, कई जो बड़ी-बड़ी कर् ेन्स हȅ और girder को cast करने वाले 
जो mould होते हȅ, उनकी टैक्नोलॉजी भारत मȂ िव किसत होने लगी है।  
उपसभापित महोदय, इसके  साथ ही साथ मȅ यह भी कहूंगा िक हमȂ इस Ģोजेक्ट को क ेवल 
एक transportation project की तरह भी नहीं देखना चािहए। हमȂ इस बात को समझना चािहए 
िक जब भी बुलेट टर्ेन का कोई Ģोजेक्ट आता है, तो वह Ģोजेक्ट चार, पाँच शहर ȗ की अथर्ËयवÎथा 
को जोड़कर एक अथर्ËयवÎथा बनाता है। मȅ इसका उदाहरण जापान की अथर्ËयवÎथा से देता हूं, 
जहाँ सबसे पहली बुलेट टर्ेन लगी थी, तो  टोक्यो, नागोया, कोबे, ओसाका और क्योटो - इन पाँचȗ 
शहरȗ की अथर्ËयवÎथा एक हो जाती है, यानी 100-150 िकलोमीटर की जनीर् 15-20 िमनट या 30 
िमनट की जनीर् हो जा
ती है। इससे लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ बहुत बड़ा पिरवतर्न आता है। एक Ëयिƪ एक 
शहर मȂ रह रहा है, तो वह दूसरे शह र मȂ काम करके  शाम को वापस अपने घर आ सकता है। 
उसका एक बहुत बड़ा इÇपैक्ट आता है।  
माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस Ģोजेक्ट पर बहुत तेजी से काम चल रहा है। करीब 320 
िकलोमीटर का िपलसर् का काम कÇÃलीट हुआ है, viaduct बनाने का काम कÇÃलीट हुआ है। एक 
under sea tunnel in Thane Creek जमीन से क
रीब 30 मीटर  गहरी है, समुदर् क े नीचे से उस 
टनल का काम भी चालू हुआ है। आठ निदयȗ पर िĤज का काम बहुत अच्छी एडवांस Îटेज पर है। 
Îटेशन्स का काम भी बहुत अच्छी एड
वांस Îटेज मȂ है और करीब-करीब सारी दुिनया मȂ इस बात 
की चचार् भी है िक भारत मȂ यह काम बहुत अच्छा और तेजी से चल रहा है और इसमȂ कई नए 
इन्नोवेशन्स भी हुए हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: माननीय बाबू राम िनषाद जी, आप अपना सेक ं ड सÃलीमȂटरी ĢÌन पूिछए।      
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
59

         
Ǜी बाबू राम िनषाद: माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी से पूछना चाहता हूँ िक मुंबई से 
अहमदाबाद तक चलने वाली बुलेट टर्ेन मȂ िकतनी Ǜेिणयाँ हȗगी एवं इनका अनुमािनत िकराया 
िकतना-िकतना होगा? 
 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: उपसभापित महोदय, अगर हम थोड़ा सा इि
 तहास मȂ पीछे जाएं, तो डा. ई 
Ǜीधरन साहब, जो िक रेलवे क े सेक्टर मȂ one of the finest authority माने जाते हȅ, उन्हȗने एक 
बहुत अच्छी ËयवÎथा की थी िक मेटर्ो क े अंदर क्लास का कोई िडफरȂस नहीं होना चािहए ।  मȅ तब 
तत्कालीन Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜǉेय अटल जी क े कायार्लय मȂ काम करता था। मुझे उस समय का भी 
अनुमान है, ध्यान है। इसी बात को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए, बुलेट टर्ेन मȂ भी क ेवल दो Ǜेिणयाँ रहȂगी - 
एक नॉमर्ल चेयर कार की और दूसरी एक्जीक्यूिटव क्लास की। वंदे भारत मȂ भी इसी
िलए क ेवल दो 
Ǜेिणयाँ रखी गई थीं। एक्चुअली, ĢेफरȂस तो यही है िक क ेवल एक Ǜेणी रहे, कोई भी Ëयिƪ कहीं 
भी आकर बैठे। हम िजस तरह क े सम
रस समाज की ËयवÎथा करना चाहते हȅ, उस िवचार क े 
अनुसार उसमȂ Ǜेिणयाँ नहीं आती हȅ, उसमȂ हम अलग-अलग Ǜेिणयाँ नहीं देखते हȅ।       
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE : Sir, I have a very pointed question. Is it true 
that the deadline for the completion of the first Bullet Train project has been extended 
several times from the initially stated deadline of 2022 to the current deadline of 2027? 
If yes, please state the number of times the deadlines for completion of the first Bullet 
Train has been extended and the reasons for missing the deadlines.  
 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: उपसभापित महोदय, जैसा िक मȅने कहा िक बुलेट टर्ेन बहुत ही कॉÇÃलेक्स 
Ģोजेक्ट है और हर देश की पिरिÎथ
ितयȗ क े िहसाब से उसका िडजाइन बनाना जरूरी  होता है। 
उसका िडजाइन भी अपने आप मȂ एक बहुत ही Îपेिशयलाइज्ड िडजाइन होता है। अगर मȅ 
उदाहरण दूँ, तो कई देश ऐसे हȅ, िजन्हȂ बुलेट टर्ेन क े Ģोजेक्ट को करने मȂ 20-20 वष र् लगे हȅ। 
इतनी कॉÇÃलेिक्सटी और कोिवड क े दो वषș क े बावजूद भी, इतने कम समय मȂ 320 िकलोमीटर  
बन पाना, यह भी अपने आप मȂ एक बहुत अच्छी उपलिÅध है और बहुत बड़ी िरकॉडर् उपलि
Åध है। 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा: महोदय, सरकार का तीसरा टमर् है, लेिकन 2014 मȂ घोिषत बुलेट टर्ेन मुंबई से 
अहमदाबाद चलेगी, यह अभी भी शुरू  नहीं हो पाई है। मȅ समझता हूँ िक उसमȂ िदक्कतȂ हȅ। मȅ भी 
जापान मȂ बुलेट टर्ेन मȂ गय
ा हूँ। वे िंसगल टर्ेक रूट  बनाते हȅ और उसके  ऊपर टर्ेन चलती है, तो इस 
पर अलग टर्ेक िबछाना पड़ता है। आप
की बात सही है। मेरा अपना मानना है िक what are the 
major impediments in delay of this project? Secondly, if Ahmedabad-Mumbai route is 
difficult and you need to build a tunnel be neath the ocean, then, why don't you pick 
up another project also simultaneously wh ere this can be made easily and where the 
surface is plain?  
 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: इस Ģोजेक्ट मȂ इस तरह का कोई impediment नहीं है। Ģोजेक्ट कॉÇÃलेक्स है। 
उसे िडजाइन करने क े टाइम मȂ सावधािनयाँ बरतनी पड़ती हȅ और उन सावधािनयȗ को बरत 
करके , उसके  िडजाइन को Ģॉपलीर् करके  काम बहुत तेजी से आगे चल रहा है। 
 
डा. सरफराज़ अहमद: उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने हम लोगȗ को बुलेट टर्ेन की 
बड़ी िवÎतृत जानकारी दी है। मȅ इनसे क ेवल यह पूछना चा
हता हूँ िक जो हमारे देश क े िपछड़े 
राज्य हȅ, िब
हार, झारखंड, बंगाल, ओिडशा, क्या सरकार की यह Ãलािंनग है िक आने वाले िदनȗ 
मȂ इन राज्यȗ मȂ भी बुलेट टर्ेन चलाई जाएगी? अगर है, तो यह कब तक हो सकता है? 
 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इस कॉÇÃलेक्स और एडवांस टेक्नोलॉजी को 
अभी आत्मसात करने पर, समझकर अपने इंजीिनयसर् को टर्ेन करने पर और अपने पूरे देश मȂ 
इसका इंडिÎटर्अल ईको-िसÎटम बनाने पर फोकस है। जो बड़ी वाली कर् Ȃ स होती हȅ, िजनसे गडर्र 
उठाकर वाया डक्ट क े ऊप
र रखना होता है। मȅ बहुत हषर् क े साथ आपके  साथ यह शेयर भी करना 
चाहूँगा िक शूरू -शुरू  मȂ कर् े न को लाने क े बाद, आगे सारी की सारी कर् Ȃ स क े िडजाइ न भारत मȂ बनीं। 
वैसे ही, जो मोÊड होता है, उस मोÊड की initial टे क्नोलॉजी बाहर से आई, लेिकन उसके  बाद 
भारत मȂ ही बनने लगीं। कोयÇबटू र, तिमलनाडु मȂ बहुत अच्छी फोिजȊग और फाउंडर्ी वाली इंडÎटर्ी 
है, उस इंडÎटर्ी का इसमȂ अच्छा उपयोग हुआ।  अभी सारा फोकस इस बात पर है िक िकस तरह 
से इस टेक्नोलॉजी को सम
झȂ और आत्मसात करȂ।  माननीय उपसभापित जी, िजतनी भारत की 
जनसंख्या है और िजस तरह से हमारी इकोनॉमी गर्ो हो रही है, उसके  िह साब से आगे भिवÍय मȂ 
हमȂ इस तरह क े बहुत सारे elevated corridors बनाने ही पड़Ȃगे।  जब surface पर कोई भी टर्ेन 
चलती है, तो उसके  सामने बहुत सारे challenges होते हȅ, कभी cattle आता है, आसपास क े गांव 
क े लोगȗ की भी तकलीफ होती है, तो हमारी िजतनी जनसंख्या क े समकक्ष देशȗ ने यही strategy 
अपनाई िक elevat
ed passenger corridors बनाए जाएं।  यह पहला अच्छा Ģयोग है और इसमȂ 
देश को अच्छा सीखने को िमला है।  भिवÍय मȂ जो जनसंख्या बाहुÊय क्षेतर् हȅ, उन मȂ elevated 
passenger corridors, जो िक हाई Îपीड पर ऑपरेट करȂगे, ऐसा देश को िनणर्य लेना होगा।     
                    
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Q.No. 126, Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai.   
 
Modernisation of Signaling System 
 
*126. SHRI BABUBHAI JESANGBHAI DESAI:  Will the Minister of RAILWAYS   be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a) the steps taken by Government to enhance railway safety, including track 
maintenance and modernisation of signaling systems; and   
(b)  whether Government is planning to install a high sensitive signaling system to 
avoid accidents, if so, the details thereof? 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
61

 
THE MINISTER OF RAILWAYS (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW): (a) and (b) A 
Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) As a consequence of various safety measures taken over the years, there 
has been a steep decline in the number of accidents. Consequential Train Accidents 
have reduced from 473 in 2000-01 to 40 in 2023-24 as shown in the graph below. 
It may be noted that the consequentia l train accidents during the period 2004-
14 was 1711 (average 171 per annum), which has declined to 678 during the period 
2014-24 (average 68 per annum).   
Another important index showing improv ed safety in train operations is 
Accidents Per Million Train Kilometer (APM TKM) which has reduced from 0.65 in 
2000-01 to 0.03 in 2023-24, indicating an improvement of more than 95% during the 
said period.  
 
 
Safety is accorded the highest priority on  Indian Railways.  The various safety 
measures including track maintenance and modernization of signalling systems taken 
to enhance safety in train operations are as under:- 
 
1. On Indian Railways, the expenditure on Safety related works has increased over 
the years as under: 
                                                       Expenditure on Safety                    (Rs in 
Cr)  
 2022-23 (Act) 2023-24(Act) BE 2024-25 
473
415
351
325
234 234
195 194 177 165 141 131 122 118 135
107 104 73 59 55
22 35 48 40
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Consequential Train Accidents
Covid years
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

Maintenance of Permanent Way 
& Works 
18,115 20,322 21,386 
Maintenance of Motive Power 
and Rolling Stock 
27,086 30,864 31,494 
Maintenance of Machines 9,828 10,772 11,864 
Road Safety LCs and ROBs/ 
RUBs 
5,347 6,662 9,980 
Track Renewals 
 
16,326 17,850 17,652 
Bridge Works 
 
1,050 1,907 2,137 
Signal & Telecom Works 
 
 
2,456 3,751 4,647 
Workshops Incl. PUs and Misc. 
expenditure on Safety 
 
7,128 9,534 9,634 
Total 87,336 1,01,662 1,08,795 
2. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points and 
signals have been provided at 6,589 st ations up to 30.06.2024 to eliminate 
accident due to human failure. 
3. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) Ga tes has been provided at 11,048 level 
Crossing Gates up to 30.06.2024 for enhancing safety at LC gates. 
4. Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety by verification of track 
occupancy by electrical means has been provided at 6,609 stations up to 
30.06.2024.  
5. Axle counters for Automatic clearance of  Block Section, BPAC (Block Proving 
Axle Counter) are provided to ensure co mplete arrival of train without manual 
intervention before granting line clear to  receive next train and to reduce human 
element.  These systems have been pr ovided on 6079 Block Sections upto 
30.06.2024. 
6. A project for provision of Long Term Ev olution (LTE) based Mobile Train Radio 
Communication system has been approved for 34,803 Rkms over Indian 
Railways. 
7. The project for provision of Tunnel Communication has been taken up in various 
zonal Railways. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
63

8. Emergency talk-back system and Emergency Alarm Syst ems have been provided 
in Vande Bharat Train sets. 
9. CCTVs have been provided in all Vande Bharat Express coaches.  Till date more 
than 9572 coaches are equipped with CCTV. 
10. Detailed instructions on issues related wi th safety of Signalling e.g. mandatory 
correspondence check, alteration work protocol, preparation of completion 
drawing, etc. have been issued. 
11. System of disconnection and reconnectio n for S&T equipment as per protocol 
has been re-emphasized. 
12. All locomotives are equipped with Vigilance Control Devices (VCD) to improve 
alertness of Loco Pilots. 
13. Retro-reflective sigma boards are provided on the mast which is located two OHE 
masts prior to the signals in electrified terri tories to alert the crew about the signal 
ahead when visibility is low due to foggy weather. 
14. A GPS based Fog Safety Device (FSD) is prov ided to loco pilots in fog affected 
areas which enables loco pilots to know the distance of the approaching 
landmarks like signals, level crossing gates etc. 
15. Modern track structure consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) 
rails, Prestressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC) Normal/Wide base sleepers with 
elastic fastening, fanshaped layout turnout on PSC sleepers, Steel Channel/H-
beam Sleepers on girder bridges is used while carrying out primary track 
renewals. 
16. Mechanisation of track laying activity th rough use of track machines like PQRS, 
TRT, T-28 etc to reduce human errors. 
17. Maximizing supply of 130m/260m long rail panels for increasin g progress of rail 
renewal and avoiding welding of joints, thereby improving safety. 
18. Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) testin g of rails to detect flaws and timely 
removal of defective rails. 
19. Laying of longer rails, minimizing the use of Alumino Thermic Welding and 
adoption of better welding technology for rails i.e. Flash Butt Welding. 
20. Monitoring of track geometry by OMS (O scillation Monitoring System) and TRC 
(Track Recording Cars). 
21. Patrolling of railway tracks to look out for weld/rail fractures. 
22. The use of Thick Web Switches and Weld able CMS Crossing in turnout renewal 
works. 
23. Inspections at regular intervals are carri ed out to monitor and educate staff for 
observance of safe practices. 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

24. Web based online monitoring system of track assets viz. Track database and 
decision support system has been adopte d to decide rationalized maintenance 
requirement and optimize inputs.  
25. Detailed instructions on issues related with  safety of Track e.g. integrated block, 
corridor block, worksite safety, monsoon precautions etc. have been issued. 
26. Preventive maintenance of railway assets (Coaches & Wagons) is undertaken to 
ensure safe train operations. 
27. Replacement of conventional ICF design coaches with LHB design coaches is 
being done. 
28. All unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on  Broad Gauge (BG) route have been 
eliminated by January 2019. 
29. Safety of Railway Bridges is ensured th rough regular inspection of Bridges. The 
requirement of repair/rehabilitation of Bridges is taken up based upon the 
conditions assessed during these inspections. 
30. Indian Railways has displayed Statutory “Fire Notices” for widespread passenger 
information in all coaches. Fire posters are provided in every coach so as to 
educate and alert passengers regarding vari ous Do’s and Don’ts to prevent fire. 
These include messages regarding no t carrying any inflammable material, 
explosives, prohibition of smoking inside the coaches, penalties etc. 
31. Production Units are providing Fire dete ction and suppression system in newly 
manufactured Power Cars and Pantry Cars, Fire and Smoke detection system in 
newly manufactured coaches. Progressive fitment of the same in existing 
coaches is also underway by Zonal Railways in a phased manner. 
32. Regular counselling and training of staff is undertaken.  
33. Concept of Rolling Block introduced in Indian Railways (Open Lines) General 
Rules vide Gazette  notification dated 30.11.2023, wherein work of integrated 
maintenance/ repair/ replacement of a ssets is planned up to 52 weeks in 
advance on rolling basis and executed as per plan. 
The details of Safety related works undertaken by Railways are tabulated below: 
SN Item 2004-05 to 
2013-14 
2014-15 to 
2023-24 
2014-24 vs 
2004-14 
 Track Maintenance  
1. Expenditure on Track Renewal (Rs. 
In Cr.) 
47,018 1,09,659 2.33 times 
2. Rail Renewal Primary (Track Km) 32,260 43,335 1.34 times 
3. Use of high-quality rails (60 Kg) 57,450 1,23,717 2.15 times 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
65

(Km) 
4. Longer Rail Panels (260m) (Km) 9,917 68,233 6.88 times 
5. USFD (Ultra Sonic Flaw detection) 
Testing of Rails (Track km) 
20,19,630 26,52,291 1.31 times 
6. USFD (Ultra Sonic Flaw detection) 
Testing of Welds (Nos.) 
79,43,940 1,73,06,046 2.17 times 
7. New Track KM added (Track km) 14,985 31,180 2.08 times 
8. Weld failures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
3699 
In 2023-24: 
481 
87% 
reduction 
9. Rail fractures (Nos.) In 2013-14: 
2548 
In 2023-24: 
383 
85% 
reduction 
10 Thick Web Switches (Nos.) Nil 21,127  
11 Track Machines (Nos.) As on 
31.03.14 = 
748 
As on 
31.03.24 = 
1,661 
122% 
increase 
 Level Crossing Gate Elimination  
1. Elimination of Unmanned Level 
Crossing Gates (Nos.) 
As on 
31.03.14: 
8948 
As on 
31.03.24: Nil   
(All 
eliminated by 
31.01.19) 
100% 
reduction 
2. Elimination of Manned Level 
Crossing Gates (Nos.) 
1,137 7,075 6.21 Times 
3. Road over Bridges (RoBs)/ Road 
under Bridges (RUBs) (Nos.) 
4,148 11,945 2.88 Times 
4. Expenditure on LC Elimin ation 5,726 36,699 6.40 Times 
 Bridge Rehabilitation  
1. Expenditure on Bridge Rehabilitation 
(Rs. In Cr.) 
3,919 8,008 2 Times 
 Signalling Works  
1. Electronic Interlocking (Stations) 837 2,964 3.52 times 
2. Automatic Block Signaling (Km) 1,486 2,497 1.67 times 
3. Fog Pass Safety Devices (Nos.) As on 
31.03.14: 90 
As on 
31.03.24: 
19,742 
219 times 
 Rolling Stock  
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

Further following safety measures have also been taken over IR: 
1. IR is installing KAVACH which is an in digenously developed Automatic Train 
Protection (ATP) system. Ka vach is a highly technology intensive system, which 
requires safety certification of highest order. 
2. Kavach aids the loco pilot in train r unning within specified speed limits by 
automatic application of brakes in case Loco Pilot fails to do so and also helps the 
train to run safely during inclement weather. 
3. Implementation of Kavach involves execution of many activities, such as:  
a. Installation of Station Kavach at each and every station. 
b. Installation of RFID tags throughout the track length. 
c. Installation of Telecom Towers throughout the section. 
d. Laying of optical Fibre cable along the track. 
e. Provision of Loco Kavach on each and every Locomotive running on Indian 
Railways. 
4. Kavach has so far been deployed on 1465 Route km and 144 locomotives on 
South Central Railway. 
5. Presently, the progress of main items re lated to Kavach on Delhi– Mumbai & 
Delhi– Howrah corridors (approximately 3000 Route km) is as under: 
(i) Laying of Optical Fibre Cable: 4275 Km 
(ii) Installation of Telecom Towers: 364 Nos. 
(iii) Provision of equipment at Stations: 285 Nos. 
(iv) Provision of equipment in Loco: 319 Locos 
1. Manufacture of LHB Coaches 
(Nos.) 
2,337 36,933 15.80 times 
2. Provision of Fire and Smoke 
Detection System in AC coaches 
(Nos. Of Coaches) 
0 19,271  
3. Provision of Fire Detection and 
Suppression System in Pantry and 
Power Cars (Nos. Of Coaches) 
0 2,991  
4. Provision of Fire Extinguishers in Non 
–AC coaches (Nos. Of Coaches) 
0 66,840  
 Budget allocation 
1 Gross Budgetary Support for 
Railway Investment (Rs. In Cr.) 
1,56,739 8,25,967 5.3 times 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
67

(v) Installation of Track side equipments: 1384 RKm. 
6. Indian Railways has also prepared De tailed Project Report (DPR) and Detailed 
Estimate on another 6000 RKm. 
7. On 16.07.2024, Kavach 4.0 specification  has been approved by RDSO. This 
version covers all the major features requir ed for the diverse railway network. This 
is a significant milestone in safety for Indian Railways. Within a short period, IR 
has developed, tested and started deploying Automatic Train Protection System. 
8. Kavach is provided progressively in phased manner. 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई:  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  जिरए माननीय मंतर्ी जी 
से यह जानना चाहता हूं िक सरकार ǎारा रेल पटिरयȗ क े रखरखाव और िसग्नल Ģणाली क े 
आधुिनकीकरण सिहत रेल सुरक्षा बढ़ाने क े िलए क्य ा कदम उठाए गए हȅ? 
 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: उपसभापित महोदय, रेल पटिरयां और उनका रखरखाव, उसमȂ नई 
टेक्नोलॉजी लाना, उसमȂ नए processes लाना और maintenance क े नए तरीके  लाना, इनके  
ऊपर बहुत ही focused way मȂ काम िकया गय ा  है।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से क ु छ आंकड़े इस महान 
सदन क े समक्ष रखना चाहता हूं।  मान्यवर, जो टर्ैक्स की maintenance होती है, उसमȂ total rail 
renewal, जो एक बहुत ही primary काम होता है, क्यȗिक पटरी Îटील की बनी है और जो टर्ेन है, 
वह जब चलती है, पटरी का continuously wear and tear होता है, उसमȂ िपछले 10 वषș मȂ 
43,000 kilo
metres की rail renewal की गई है, िजसको अगर उसके  पहले क े 10 वषș मȂ लȂ, तो 
वह उससे करीब डेढ़ गुना ज्यादा है।  High quality rails, यानी 60 िकलो  की जो रेल होती है, 
िजसकी strength ज्यादा होती, अगर 2004-201
4 वाला  पीिरयड लȂ, तो उसमȂ करीब 57,000 
kilometres लगी थीं और 2014-2024 वाला पीिरयड लȂ, तो उसमȂ 1,23,000 kilometres लगी है, 
यानी करीब दो गुने से ज्यादा है।  Longer rail panels - क्यȗिक टर्ैक मȂ िजतनी ज्यादा fish plates 
लगȂगी, उतनी ही उसकी सेÄटी कम होती है।  इसिलए दुिनया भर मȂ िज तना हो सकता है, लंबे 
रेल पैनÊस  लगाए  जाते  हȅ।   अगर  लंबे  रेल  पैनÊस  को  देखȂ, तो 2004-2014 मȂ मातर् 9,917 
kilometres लगे थे और 2014-2024 मȂ 68,000 kilometres लगे, यानी करीब 7 गुना ज्यादा।  इसी 
तरह से िक सी  भी parameter पर लȂ, जैसे टर्ैक्स की क ंडीशन क ैसी है, यह देखने क े िलए एक 
ultrasound flaw detection technology होती है, उसमȂ भी एक पुरानी पǉित चलती थी िक 
Ëयिƪ ultrasound machine को लेकर चलता था और track क े ऊपर चलते-चलते test करने 
की पǉित थी।  उसमȂ यह होता था िक अगर मशीन ढंग से नहीं रखी हुई है - मान लो यह टर्ैक है, 
इस टर्ैक क े ऊपर अगर मशीन ढंग से नहीं रखी है, तो उसमȂ flaw का Ģॉप
र िडटेक्शन नहीं होगा।  
इसीिलए जो दुिनया भर मȂ आज Ģचिलत है - phased array ult rasound machines, यानी चार-
पांच अलग-अलग waves उसमȂ डालते हȅ, मान लो िक यह टर्ैक है, तो इस टर्ैक मȂ अगर ऊपर भी 
देख पाए, साइड मȂ भी देख पाए और इस साइड भी देख पाए, यह ËयवÎथा करने क े िलए नई 
मशीनȂ, नए equipments भी लाए गए हȅ और लोगȗ की टर्ेिंनग भी, track
 maintenance क े जो 
Îटाफ हȅ, उनकी टर्ेिंनग मȂ भी बहुत ध्यान िदया गया है।  
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

उपसभापित महोदय, हम सबने देखा िक 1920 से 1930 से जो टेक्नोलॉजी है, जो रेलवे क े 
fasteners होते हȅ, यानी Îलीपर और टर्ैक को जो बांधने वाला िक्लप होता है, उस िक्लप मȂ सुबह 
से एक Ëयिƪ, जो हमारे key man होते हȅ, वे हथोड़ा लेकर जाते हȅ और जहां-जहां loose हो 
जाता है, उसको हथोड़े से िफट करते हȅ।  इस देश मȂ कई-कई वषș तक  टेक्नोलॉजी चȂज नहीं की 
गई थी।  यह ऐसी चीज़ है, िजसमȂ 1940-1950 क े दशकȗ मȂ दुिनया मȂ बदलाव लाया गया था, 
लेिकन वह बदलाव भारत मȂ अब ल
ाया जा रहा है, जो लेटेÎट टेक्नोलॉजी होती है - िजसमȂ 
screw होता, िजससे िक वह पूरी तरह से torque करके  फ ु ल फोसर् क े साथ Îलीपर और टर्ैक 
दोनȗ क े दोनȗ अच्छे से िफट हो जाएं।  इस तरह की टेक्नोलॉजी है। इसिलए track  की 
maintenance क े िलए कई तरह क े जो innovations हȅ, वे लाए गए और कायर्पǉित मȂ एक बहुत 
ही महत्वपूणर् पिरवतर्न लाया गया, िजसे आपके  माध्यम से मȅ इस पूरे महान सदन क े सामने रखना 
चाहूँगा।  माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, इतने बड़े railway network को maintain करने क े िलए 
processes मȂ क्या improvement िकया जाए, इसके  िलए आज करीब-करीब हरेक जोन मȂ, हर 
िडवीजन मȂ हर Friday को अगले 26 हÄते का maintenance plan बनता है।  हम उसको लगातार 
refine करते हȅ, िजससे िक maintenance िजतनी हो सके , advance हो जाए।  माननीय 
उपसभापित जी, इसीिलए जो maintenance क े arrears होते थे, अगर हम 10 साल  पहले की 
पिरिÎथितयाँ देखȂ, तो बहुत high quantity of arrears होते थे, अब वे significantly reduce 
होकर आज on-time maintenance वाली पǉित पर आए हȅ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: सेक ं ड सÃलीमȂटरी। 
 
Ǜी बाबूभाई जेसंगभाई देसाई: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी से जानना चाहता 
हूँ िक क्या सरकार दुघर्टनाओं से बचने क े िलए अत्यंत तीĨ िसग्नल Ģणाली Îथािपत करने की 
योजना बना रही है?  यिद हाँ, तो तत्संबंधी Åयोरा क्या है? 
 
Ǜी अिǚनी वैÍणव: उपसभापित महोदय, signaling रेलवे का सबसे महत्वपूणर् िडपाटर्मȂट है।  
इसीिलए इस पर एकदम फोकस करके  बहुत ही systematic way मȂ काम िकया गया है।  दुिनया 
भर मȂ 1930-40 मȂ टर्ेन्स की Îपीड बढ़ने लगी।  जब टर्ेन की Îपीड बढ़ने लगी, तो दुिनया भर मȂ यह 
समÎया सामने आई िक लोको पायलट को, जो बाहर physical signal होता है, उसे देखने क े 
िलए बहुत कम समय िमलता है।  इसीिलए सारी दुिनया मȂ cab signaling और cab signalling क े 
बाद Automatic Train Protection (ATP) की टेक्नोलॉजी आने लगी।  करीब-करीब सारी 
दुिनया मȂ अगर हम देखȂ, तो िजतनी भी बड़ी रेलवेज़ हȅ, उनमȂ हम यूरोप को देखȂ, तो यूरोप मȂ 
ETCS, जापान मȂ देखȂ, तो DATC, USA मȂ देखȂ, तो PTC, रूस  मȂ देखȂ, तो ALSN, इस तरह से 
करके  Automatic Train Protection (ATP) की टेक्नोलॉजी सारी दुिनया मȂ 80 और 90 क े दशक 
मȂ करीब-करीब सबने अपने-अपने देशȗ मȂ Automatic Train Protection की टेक्नोलॉजी लगाई।  
Unfortunately, भारत मȂ लंबे टाइम तक ATP टेक्नोलॉजी पर िकसी सरकार ने ध्यान नहीं िदया 
था।  2016 मȂ पहली बार कवच क े development का  काम हुआ, 2016 से 2019 मȂ उसका 
certification हुआ।  उपसभापित महोदय, इसका certification भी  बहुत ही complex होता है।  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
69

Industry मȂ SIL-1, SIL-2, SIL-3 और SIL-4, ऐसे चार levels of   certification   होते   हȅ।   SIL   
यानी   Safety  Integrity  Level.   SIL4 का सिर्टिफके ट िमलने मȂ 3-3, 4-4 वषș का process 
लगता है। 2019 मȂ वह certificate complete हुआ, 2022 मȂ सबसे पहले इसका 3 हजार 
िकलोमीटर का बड़ा टȂडर िनकला।  साथ ही साथ, 3 हजार  िकलोमीटर क े टȂडर क े 
implementation क े दौरान जो-जो अनुभव आया, उस अनुभव से कवच 4.0, यानी final version 
तैयार हुआ।  चूँिक हमारा देश बहुत ही िविवधता भरा है, जो समÎयाएँ, जो situations hilly areas 
मȂ होती हȅ, वैसी desert मȂ नहीं होतीं और coastal मȂ जो होती हȅ, वे normal plain मȂ नहीं होतीं।  
इसिलए इन सब चीजȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते हुए कवच 4.0 इस 16 जुलाई को, finally, RDSO ने 
approve िकया है।  अब इसका large scale पर implementation होगा।  कई माननीय सदÎयȗ ने 
बीच-बीच मȂ कई बार यह ĢÌन रखा है िक Anti-Collision Devices का क्या हुआ, जो hon. 
Chief Minister of West Bengal जब रेलवे िमिनÎटर थीं, तब उन्हȗने लगाई थीं। मȅ उसका जवाब 
भी ÎपÍट रूप  से रखना चाहूँगा िक 2006 मȂ Anti-Collision Devices लगानी  चालू हुई थीं, ये 
करीब-करीब डेढ़ हजार िकलोमीटर पर लगी भी थीं, लेिकन उसमȂ बहुत सारे issues थे, बहुत 
सारे flaws थे, उसकी िडजाइन मȂ ध्यान नहीं रखा गया था, उसका कोई SIL Certification नहीं 
था।  इसीिलए 2012 मȂ उसको fail करार करके  हटा भी िदया गया था। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mananiya Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvediji.  
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Sir, I would request the hon. Minister to be brief 
in his response and I am asking a pointed question.  There have been frequent cases 
of train derailments over the last year cau sing loss of lives. Currently, Kavach which 
he has been speaking about ha s only been deployed on tw o per cent, that is, 1,465 
Kilometres of the country's Railway networ k since 2020. Out of 15,200 diesel and 
electrical locos, only 139 are equipped with Kavach, which is less than one per cent. 
At this rate, how does the Government plan to achiev e its goal of implementing 
Kavach... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Priyankaji, the Question Hour is over.  
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Sir, at least, allow me to complete the question.  
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Questions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part -I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
 ] 
 
 
 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

1.00 P.M. 
STATUTORY RESOLUTION 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now the Statutory Resolution.  Shri Pankaj Chaudhary to  
move a Resolution regarding approval of Notification No. 15/2024-Customs, dated, 
12th March, 2024. 
 
िवǄ मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी पंकज चौधरी) : महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत संकÊप उपिÎथत करता 
हूँ: 
 
 " सीमा शुÊक टैिरफ अिधिनयम 1975 की धारा 8क क े अनुसरण मȂ, यह सभा एतà ǎारा 
अिधसूचना संख्या 15/2024- सीमा शुÊक, िदनांक 12 माच र्, 2024 [सा.का.िन. 182( अ) िदनांक 
12 माचर्, 2024] को अनुमोिदत करती है, िजसका उǈेÌय कर्मश: टैिरफ मद 9022 30 00 क े 
अंतगर्त आने वाले एक्स -रे ǷूÅस और टैिरफ मद 9022 90 90 क े अंतगर्त आने वाले Äलैट पैनल 
िडटेक्टज़र् (िंसिटलेटर सिह
त) पर आयात शुÊक बढ़ाने क े  िलए सीमा शुÊक टैिरफ अिधिनयम की 
पहली अनुसूची मȂ संशोधन करना है।" 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Resolution move
d. If any Member wants to speak anything 
on this, he can speak.  I shall put the Statutory Resolution moved by the hon. Minister 
to vote.  
The question is:  
"In pursuance of Section 8A of the Customs Tariff Act 1975, this House 
hereby approves of notification No. 15/2024-Customs, dated 12th 
March, 2024[G.S.R. 182(E) dated 12 th March, 2024], which seeks to 
amend the First Schedule of the Customs Tariff Act, in order to increase 
the import duty on X-ray Tubes, fa lling under tariff items 9022 30 00, 
and Flat Panel Detectors (including Scintillators), falling under tariff item 
9022 90 90, respectively."  
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE WORKING OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS WELFARE 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now discussion on the working of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  Hon. Members, all the Me mbers who had given 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
71

their names to participate in the discu ssion on the working of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare have alread y participated. Now the hon. Minister of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare will reply to the discussion.   
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी (Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, सबसे 
पहले तो मȅ अपने देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜीमाâ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का ǭदय से आभार Ģकट करना 
चाहता हूं।  उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ मुझे िकसानȗ की सेवा और क ृिष की सेवा का दाियत्व सȚपा गया है और 
मȅ इस दाियत्व को पूरे पिरǛम, ईमान
दारी, िज़द, जुनून और जįबे क े साथ िनभाने का Ģयत्न 
करूं गा। 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ का आभारी हूं।  माननीय देवेगौड़ा जी 
जैसे एक्स Ģाइम िमिनÎट
र ने अपने िवचार Ģकट िकये तथा पक्ष क े और िवपक्ष क े सभी माननीय 
सदÎयȗ ने अपने िवचार Ģकट िकये हȅ।  चचार् सारगिर्भत थी।  मȅ माननीय सदÎयȗ को िवÌवास 
िदलाना चाहता हूं िक इस चचार् मȂ आप ने जो सकारात्मक सुझाव िदए हȅ, उन पर सरकार गंभीरता 
क े साथ िवचार करेगी और उनमȂ से जो Ëयावहािरक हȗगे, िनिÌचत तौर पर िकसानȗ क े िहत मȂ उन 
पर सरकार सकारात्मक कदम उठाएगी, उठाने का Ģयत्न करेगी। 
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, भारत अत्यंत Ģाचीन और महान राÍ
टर् है।  हमारा 5,000 साल से 
तो ज्यादा ज्ञात इितहास है, जब दुिनया क े िवकिसत राÍटर्ȗ मȂ सÆयता क े सूयर् का उदय नहीं हुआ 
था, तब हमारे यहां वेदȗ की ऋचाएँ रच दी गई थीं।  हमारे यहाँ ऋिषयȗ ने कहा -"एकम सÞ, िवĢा 
बहुधा वदिन्त।" यानी सत्य एक है, िवǎान उसको अलग-अलग तर
ीकȗ से कहते हȅ।  इस चचार् को 
मȅने इसी रूप  मȂ िलया है िक लÑय एक है - िकसानȗ का कÊयाण।  इसके  तरीके  अलग-अलग हो 
सकते हȅ, राÎते अलग-अलग हो सकते हȅ।   हम Ģय
त्न करȂगे क े सारे सुझावȗ को समािहत करते 
हुए आगे बढ़Ȃ। 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, िजतना हमारा राÍटर् Ģाचीन है, उतनी हमारी खेती भी Ģाचीन है।  
हजारȗ साल पहले से भारत मȂ क ृिष होती रही है।  हमने बचपन मȂ कई पौरािणक संदभर् पढ़े हȅ।  जब 
ऋिष भी गुरुकु ल मȂ बच्च
ȗ को िशक्षा देते थे, तब भी उनके  पास खेती होती थी और हमारे उस 
समय क े बच्चे सीखते भी थे, पढ़ते भी थे और खेती करते भी थे।  इस क ृिष को इसी भा
व से लेकर 
हम क ै से िकसानȗ क े िलए बेहतर काम कर सकते हȅ, उसका हम Ģयत्न करȂगे।   
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ तो सीधे-सीधे अपनी बात कहना चाहता था, लेिकन जब चचार् 
का Ģारंभ हमारे िवǎ
ान िमतर् रणदीप िंसह सुरजेवाला जी ने िकया, तब उन्हȗने थोड़ा छेड़ िदया।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी,  हम िकसी को छेड़ते नहीं हȅ, लेिकन अगर कोई छेड़ दे, तो िफर छोड़ते 
भी नहीं हȅ और इसिलए मȅ वहीं से आरंभ करना चाहता हूँ।  बेहतर होता, वे आज यह
ाँ उपिÎथत 
होते।   
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, उनको याद भी आए, तो शकु िन याद आए।  शकु िन, चौपड़ और 
चकर्Ëयूह -  इन सारे शÅदȗ का संबंध अध
मर् से है।   
 
'जाकी रही भावना जैसी, Ģभु मुरत देखी ितन तैसी।' 
 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

शकु िन छल, धोखा और कपट क े Ģतीक थे। चौपड़ मȂ तो धोखे से ही हराया गया था।  
चकर्Ëयूह मतलब फ ेरवार नहीं, घेर कर मारना है।  अब काँगर्ेस को चकर्Ëयूह, शकु िन, चौपड़ ही क्यȗ 
याद आते हȅ?  
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, जब हम महाभारत का ल मȂ जाते हȅ, तो हमȂ तो भगवान Ǜीकृ Íण 
याद आते हȅ। 
 
'यदा यदा िह धमर्Îय Ɲािनभर्वित भारत।  अÆयुत्थानमधमर्Îय तदात्मानं सृजाÇयहç। 
पिरतर्ाणाय साधूनां िवनाशाय च दुÍकृ ताç।  धमर्संÎथापनाथार्य सÇभवािम युगे युगे।।' 
 
हमको तो कन्हैया याद आते हȅ।  जब-जब धमर् की हािन होगी, अधमर् बढ़ेगा, पाप बढ़ेगा, अत्याचार, 
अनाचार बढ़ेगा, तब-तब धमर् की रक्ष
ा और अधमर् क े नाश क े िलए मȅ बार-बार आऊँ गा - यह 
भगवान Ǜीकृ Íण ने कहा था।  लेिकन अ नीित और अधमर् िकसने िकया?  ठगी िकसने की?  
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, काँगर्ेस क े डीएनए मȂ ही िकसान िवरोध है - मȅ यह कहना 
चाहता हूँ।  यह आज से नहीं, बिÊक Ģारंभ से ही काँगर्ेस की Ģाथिमकताएँ गलत रही हȅ।  हमा रे 
Ģथम Ģधान मंतर्ी Îवगीर्य पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी, मȅ उनका आदर करता हूँ, लेिकन खेती क े 
बारे मȂ जो भारतीय परंपरा थी, उसका उन्हȗने िनवार्ह नहीं िकया।  वे रूस  गए, वहाँ एक मॉडल 
देख कर आए और कहा िक रूस  का मॉडल लागू करो।  इस पर 'भारत रत्
न' चौधरी चरण िंसह जी 
ने कहा िक यह नहीं हो सकता, क्यȗिक भारत की क ृिष की पिरिÎथितयाँ िबÊकु ल अलग हȅ।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी,  उनकी Ģाथिमकताएँ गलत थीं।  उन्हȗने 17 वषर् तक Ģधान मंतर्ी पद को 
सुशोिभत िक
या, लेिकन तब क्या होता था?  अमेिरका से पीएल-480, सड़ा हुआ लाल गेहूँ भारत 
क े नागिरकȗ को खाने पर िववश और मजबूर होना पड़ता था।   
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, Îवगीर्य इंिदरा जी क े समय, मुझे अच्छी तरह याद है, उस 
समय मȅ छोटा था, उस समय िकसानȗ से जबदर्Îती लेवी वसूली का काम होता था।  उस समय 
जबदर्Îती लेवी वसूली जा
ती थी।  अगर दो िंक्वटल है, तो एक िंक्वटल देकर जाओ।  िंभडे खोद 
िदए जाते थे, रखा हुआ अनाज उठा िलया जाता था। भारत आत्मिनभर्र नहीं हुआ।  Îवगीर्य राजीव 
जी ने भी बात जरूर  की, उन्हȗने agri
culture price policy की बात अवÌय की, लेिकन िकसानȗ 
की आय बढ़ाने क े िलए कोई साथर्क कदम नहीं उठाया।  यहां तक िक मानन ीय  उपसभापित जी, 
उदारीकरण का Ģारंभ हुआ, Îवगीर्य नरिंसह राव जी, मनमोहन िंसह जी उस समय िवǄ मंतर्ी थे, 
लेिकन उस समय भी क ृिष से जुड़े उǏोगȗ की delicensing नहीं की गई, क्यȗिक Ģाथिमकता 
गलत थी।  
माननीय उपसभापित जी, 2004 से  2014 क े बीच की मȅ क्या बात कहूँ?  उस समय यह 
भारत, जो Ģा
चीन और महान राÍटर् है, िजसने दुिनया को ज्ञान का Ģकाश िदया था, उस समय 
घोटालȗ क े देश क े रूप  मȂ दुिनया मȂ जाना जाने लगा था।  2G, 3G 4G, ...(Ëयवधान)... और तब 
भारत की राजनीित मȂ, भारत क े राजनैितक िक्षितज पर एक दैदीÃयमान सूयर् का उदय हुआ, 
िजसने सारे देश को आश
ा और िवÌवास से भर िदया।  उनका नाम था, नरेन्दर् मोदी।  कांगर्ेस की 
Ģाथिमकताएं गलत थीं।  मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ Ģाथिमकताएं बदलने का काम हुआ और खेती क े 
िलए हमारी 6 Ģाथिमकताएं हȅ, िजन
के  बारे मȂ मȅ आपके  सामने िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ।   नंबर 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
73

एक उत्पादन बढ़ाना, नंबर दो उत्पादन की लागत घटाना, नंबर तीन उत्पादन क े ठीक दाम देना, 
नंबर चार, Ģाकृ ितक आपदा मȂ राहत की ठीक रािश देना, नंबर पांच क ृिष का िविवधीकरण, खेती 
मȂ value addition और आने वाली पीिढ़यȗ क े िलए भी धरती सुरिक्षत रहे, इसिलए Ģाकृ ितक खेती 
को बढ़ावा देने का Ģयास।  यह भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार, एनडीए की सरकार सुिवचािरत 
ढंग से खेती का रोडमैप बनाकर काम कर रही है।   
माननीय उपसभापित जी, कल हमारे िमतर् बजट का िजकर् कर रहे थे और कह रहे थे िक 
बजट कम कर िदया गया। मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूँ िक क ृिष क े िलए बजटीय आवंटन 2013-14 मȂ 
क ेवल 27,663 करोड़ रुपय े था, जो 2024-25 मȂ बढ़कर 1,32,470 करोड़ रुपय े हो गया।  यह 
आंकड़ा क ेवल क ृिष िवभाग का है।  अगर इसमȂ agriculture and allied sector, फिर्टलाइजर की 
सिÅसडी, सहकािरता, पशुपालन, Dairy, Food Processing, Fisheries, इन सबको जोड़ िदया 
जाए तो यह बजट बहुत अिधक बढ़ जाता है। मȅने 1,32,000 तो क ेवल क ृिष का बताया, अगर इसमȂ 
करोड़ और जुड़ जाएंगे।  आपके  समय मȂ तो ये िडपामȄट्स एक थे, आप िकतना देते थे? माननीय 
उपसभापित जी, बजट का पयार्Ãत Ģावधान है और इसमȂ हमने िंसचाई तो जोड़ा ही नहीं है।  जल 
शिƪ मंतर्ालय अलग है, वह िंसचाई क े Ģबंध क े काम मȂ लगा है।  अगर हमको उत्पादन बढ़ाना है, 
तो हमारी पहली Ģाथिमकता िकसानȗ क े सूखे खेतȗ मȂ पानी पहुंचाने की होगी।  यह हमको करना 
पड़ेगा, िबना पानी क े खेती नहीं होती।  आज मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक िंसचाई की ËयवÎथाओं मȂ 
बरसȗ तक कांगर्ेस की सरकार रही, लेिकन कभी इस ओर गंभीरता से ध्यान नहीं िदया गया।  मȅ 
यहां एक नहीं, बिÊक अनेकȗ उदाहरण दे सकता हूं। मध्य Ģदेश मȂ ही अगर देखȂ तो कांगर्ेस राज, 
नवाब या अंगर्ेज़ हȗ, सबने िमलकर िंसचाई की ËयवÎथा क ेवल साढ़े सात लाख हैक्टेयर मȂ की थी, 
जब हमारी सरकार आयी, तो हमने उसको बढ़ा कर साढ़े सȅतालीस लाख हैक्टेयर कर िदया था 
और उसको बढ़ा कर 65 लाख हैक्टेयर करने पर लगातार हमारा काम चल रहा है। 
महोदय, िरवर िंलिंकग की बात अटल िबहारी वाजपेयी जी ने की थी और िरवर िंलिंकग क े 
Ģोजेक्ट को अगर सबसे पहले िकसी ने साकार िकया, तो वह गुजरात मȂ मुख्य मंतर्ी रहते हुए 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िकया था। नमर्दा नदी क े पानी को कई निदयȗ मȂ Ģवािहत करके , जो निदयां 
समाÃत हो गई थीं, उन्हȂ पुन: जीिवत करने का काम िकया। भाजपा शािसत राज्यȗ ने कई जगह 
काम िकया। मध्य Ģदेश मȂ भी िकया है। आदरणीय िदिग्वजय िंसह जी पूवर् मुख्य मंतर्ी रहे हȅ, मȅ 
उनका बहुत आदर करता हूं, वे यहां बैठे हȅ। जब िरवर िंलिंकग की बात आयी और यह कहा गया 
िक क्या नमर्दी नदी को िशĢा नदी से जोड़ा जा सकता है, तब उधर से उǄर था िक नहीं हो 
सकता है, यह impossible है। ...(Ëयवधान)... हमने कहा िक हमारे शÅदकोश मȂ असंभव शÅद नहीं 
है। हमने तय िकया िक नमर्दा नदी क े पानी को िशĢा नदी मȂ ले जाएंगे और उसे ले जाकर िदखा 
िदया। नमर्दा-िशĢा, नमर्दा-गंभीर, नमर्दा-पावर्ती, नमर्दा-कालीिंसध, सबको जोड़ने का काम हुआ 
और आज नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ क े न और बेतवा को जोड़ने क े Ģोजेक्ट को भी Îवीकृ ित दे दी 
गई है। 20 लाख एकड़ ज़मीन मȂ िंसचाई हो, िंसचाई पहली Ģातिमकता होनी चािहए थी। बाणसागर 
जैसे बांध, एक नहीं, बिÊक अनेकȗ बांध बरसȗ तक पूरे नहीं हुए, क्यȗिक खेती और िकसान 
Ģाथिमकता नहीं था। आज मुझे यह कहते हुए गवर् महसूस हो रहा है िक Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]
152 allied sector और fertilizer subsidy वगैरह सब जोड़ दी जाए, तो इसमȂ 1,75,446.55 

जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ 'Ģधान मंतर्ी िंसचाई योजना' पर भी काम चल रहा है, उसके  साथ अनेकȗ िंसचाई 
योजनाएं हȅ, िजन पर हम काम कर रहे हȅ। हमारा काम सूÑम िंसचाई की योजनाओं पर चल रहा है। 
 
(सभापित महोदयपीठासीन हुए।) 
 
 माननीय सभ
ापित महोदय, यह मेरा सौभाग्य है िक आपके  सामने मुझे क ृिष पर बोलने का 
अवसर िमल रहा है। मȅ िनवेदन कर रहा था िक पुरानी सरकारȗ की, कांगर्ेस का सरकार की 
Ģाथिमकताएं गलत थीं। यह सरकार भारतीय जन ता पाटीर्, एनडीए की है। हमने लगाता Ģयत्न 
िकए। यहां उत्पादन की बात हो रही थी। आज मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक िंसचाई क े अच्छे Ģयत्नȗ क े 
कारण ICR ने उǄम बीज बनाए, अभी भी हम 109 नए बीज की क्वािलटी जारी करने वाले हȅ। 
क्यȗिक अगर उपज को बढ़
ाना है, तो अच्छे बीज चािहए, जलवायु अनुक ू ल बीज चािहए, बेहतर 
िंसचाई चािहए, अच्छा आदान चािहए और यह 10 साल से मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हो रहा है।  
माननीय सभापित महोदय, वषर् 2023-24 मȂ खाǏान का उत्पादन 329 िमिलयन टन तक 
पहुंच गया है। हॉिर्टकÊचर की बात करȂ तो वषर् 2023-24 मȂ बागवानी का उत्पादन 352 िमिलयन 
टन तक पहुंच गया है। हम यहां रुकȂ गे नहीं, आगे बढ़Ȃगे। कल दल
हन और ितलहन की बात हो रही 
थी। जब उधर की सरकार थी, तब दलहन और ितलहन क े उत्पादन की Ģाथिमकता नहीं थी, वह 
लगातार घट रहा था, लेिकन मुझे कहते हुए गवर् महसूस हो रहा है िक दलहन और ितलहन क े 
क्षेतर् मȂ भी तेजी से काम हो रहा है और उत्पादन लगातार बढ़ रहा है, उत्पादकता बढ़ रही है। 
महोदय, कल फिर्टलाइज़र सिÅसडी की बात की गई। आज मȅ आपके  सामने आंकड़े रखना चाहता 
हूं।  जब उधर की सरकार थी, तब 201
3-14 मȂ फिर्टलाइजर सिÅसडी 71 हजार, 280 करोड़ रुपय े 
थी, लेिकन िपछली साल 2023-24 मȂ फिर्टलाइजर सिÅसडी 1 लाख, 95 हजार, 420 करोड़ रुपय े 
थी।  मȅ वषर्वार बता सकता हूं।  2018-19 मȂ 73 हजार,435 करोड़ रुपय े थी, और इस साल कह रहे 
थे, मेरे पास वषर्वार आंकड़े हȅ िक घटा दी गई है।  आज मȅ कह
ना चाहता हूं िक फिर्टलाइजर की 
सिÅसडी मȂ िजत
ना पैसा लगता है, सरकार ËयवÎथा करती है।  बजट क े Ģावधान क े अलावा 
अितिरƪ रािश देनी पड़ती है, तो दी जाती है।  अभी अंतरार्Íटर्ीय पिरिÎथितयȗ क े कारण डीएपी क े 
जहाज घूम कर आए, लंबा मागर् तय करना पड़ा, समय ज्यादा लगा और इसिलए कीमत बढ़ रही 
थी।  हमने उस बढ़ी हुई कीमत का भार िकसान पर नहीं डाला और 2,625 करोड़ रुपय े का Îपेशल 
पैक े ज िदया, तािक सÎता फिर्टलाइजर िकसान को िमलता रहे।   
महोदय, हम
ारे िवǎान िमतर् संजय जी बात कर रहे थे िक मातर्ा कम हो गई है।  मȅ आपके  
माध्यम से बताना चाहता हूं िक यूिरया क े एक बैग पर 45 िक
लोगर्ाम, 50 से  45 हुआ  है, लेिकन 
लागत भी कम कर दी है।  अब 45 िकलोगर्ाम पर सरकार 2,100 रुपय े सिÅसडी देती है।  यह मोदी 
जी की सरकार देती है।  िकसानȗ क े िलए क ेवल 266 रुप
ये मȂ िमलता है। मोदी जी की सरकार, 
भारतीय जनता पाटीर्  2,366 रुपय े का यूिरया िकसान को 266 रुपय े मȂ देती है।  महोदय, डीएपी 
का एक बैग 50 िकलोगर्ाम का, िजस पर सरकार 1,083 रुपय े सिÅसडी देती है और क ु ल कीमत 
2,433 रुपय े है, लेिकन िकसान को 1,350 रुप
ये मȂ िमलता है।  हमने इस कीमत को कभी बढ़ने 
नहीं िदया।  िकसान को सÎती खाद िमले, वह फायदे की खेती कर पाए, इसके  िलए एक नहीं, 
बिÊक अनेकȗ कदम उठाए गए हȅ।  मह
ोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूं िक देश 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
75

करोड़ȗ िकसान भाइयȗ और बहनȗ को िक यह सÎती खाद मोदी जी की भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की 
सरकार देती रहेगी।  मȅ पानी की बात कर रहा था।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने Per drop, more crop का 
मंतर् िदया। पानी की कमी पर कई माननीय सदÎयȗ ने िंचता जािहर की थी।  अंडरगर्ाउंड वाटर 
नीचे जा रहा है, कई जगह सूखे का संकट है, इसिलए पानी की एक-एक बूंद हमȂ बचानी पड़ेगी। 
इसिलए ' सूÑम िंसचाई योजना' लाई गई।  िडर्प क े माध्यम से, sprinkler क े माध्यम, Ģैशराइज़ 
पाइप क े माध्यम से नहर मȂ बहता हुआ पानी सीपेज भी होता है, वाÍपीकरण भी हो जाता है, लेिकन 
सूÑम िंसचाई योजना ऐसी है, िजसे एक-एक बूंद पानी सीधे िक
सान क े खेत मȂ पहुंचता है।  िपछली 
सरकार को पानी का महत्व मालूम नहीं था।  अब सूÑम िंसचाई योजना मȂ आप देखȂगे, तो इस 
सरकार ने 2014-15 से 21,312 करोड़ रुपय े खचर् िकए हȅ और हमने तेजी से क्षेतर्फल को बढ़ाने का 
काम िकया है। माननीय सभापित महोदय, कल क ृिष क े मशीनीकरण की बात हो रही थी।  
माननीय सदÎय सुझाव दे रहे थे िक छोटे िकसान
ȗ को भी क ृिष यंतर् चािहए।  कांगर्ेस ने इस पर 
कभी ध्यान नहीं िदया।  वे ध्यान कहां से देते, क्यȗिक िकसान आपकी Ģाथिमकता कभी नहीं रहा।  
आप मेिनफे Îट ो मȂ बात जरूर  करते रहे, लेिकन िकसान की तरफ कभी नहीं देखा।  सर, वे 
मेिनफे Îटो मȂ कहते थे िक क ृिष की लागत की समीक्षा करȂगे। जहां आवÌयक हुआ सिÅसडी दȂगे, 
मशीनरी िकराये पर लेने की सुिवधा Îथािपत करȂगे, लेिकन कांगर्ेस ने ऐसा क ु छ नहीं िकया। ये 
िकया तो नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िकया। क ृिष मशीनीकरण क े िलए उप-िमश
न Îथािपत 
िकया और उसमȂ छोटे और सीमांत िकसान, िजनकी संख्या 85 परस Ȃट तक है, उनक ी क ृिष की 
मशीनȗ तक पहुंच बने, इसिलए मशीनरी की खरीद, Custom Hiring Centre Îथािपत करना, 
उनके  िलए िवǄीय सहायता दी जाती है। उच्चतम तकनीक तथा क ुशल उपकरणȗ क े उपयोग  को 
बढ़ावा िदया जाता है। मुझे बताते हुए Ģसन् नता  है िक 2014 से 2024 क े दौरान सिÅसडी क े तहत 18 
लाख, 25 हजार  से अिधक मशीनȂ िवतिरत की गईं और 49,921 से ज्यादा Custom Hiring 
Centres Îथािपत िकए गए। वहां पर छोटे िकसान भी जाएंगे, छोटे िकसान भी िकराये पर मशीन 
लȂगे और अपने खेतȗ मȂ खेती करने का काम करȂगे। अनेकȗ नवाचार हुए हȅ।  
माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ हिरयाणा, पंजाब क े िकसानȗ को Ģणाम करता हूं। उन्
हȗने देश मȂ 
अन्न क े भंडार भरने का काम िकया है। लेिकन पराली एक समÎया थी, इस सरकार ने वायु Ģदूषण 
की रोकथाम क े िलए भी पराली की समÎया से िनपटने क े ले 2018 मȂ एक नई योज
ना बनाई। 
पंजाब, हिरयाणा, उǄर Ģदेश, मध्य Ģदेश और िदÊली मȂ फसल अवशेष Ģबंधन योजना शुरू  की, 
िजसके  पिरणामÎवरूप पराली की घटनाओं मȂ और उससे होने वाले Ģदूषण मȂ कमी आई है। उसमȂ 
3,540 करोड़ रूपया ज्यादा खचर् िकया गया है, िजससे िक िकसान को भी िदक्कत न हो। जो 
फसलȗ का अवशेष है, वह उनके  िलए लाभ सौदा बन जाये और वायु का Ģदूषण भी न हो, इसकी 
िंचता अगर िकसी ने की है, तो भारत
ीय जनता पाटीर्, एनडीए की और मोदी सरकार ने की है।  
 माननीय सभापित जी, नमो डर्ोन दीदी की बात आई थी। पहले िकसान हाथ से कीटनाशक 
िछड़कता था। कई बार की
टनाशकȗ क े दुÍĢभाव क े कारण उसके  ÎवाÎथ्य पर बड़ा िवपरीत असर 
पड़ता था और इसीिलए डर्ोन का उपयोग िकया। हम Ģयास कर रहे हȅ िक ये ज्यादा से ज्यादा 
Ģचिलत हो। इसके  िलए सेÊफ हेÊप गर्ुप की दीिदयां टर्Ȃन की गईं। मुझे यह बताते हुए Ģसन् नता है 
िक 14,500 डर्ोन चयिनत सेÊफ हेÊप गर्ुÃस को Ģदान िकए जा रहे हȅ और ये 80 Ģितशत क ेन्दर्ीय 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

सहायता क े साथ िदए जा रहे हȅ। इससे उनको रोजगार िमलेगा और मिहला सशिƪकरण का काम 
भी होगा। मिहला सशिƪकरण क े काम क े साथ-साथ िकसान भी जोिखम से बचेगा।  
 अभी फसलȗ की खरीद की बात आई। मȅ बहुत िजÇमेदारी क े साथ कहना चाहता हूं िक 
इसके  बारे मȂ कई बार चचार् हुई। कांगर्ेस भी बहुत कहती है िक Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िरपोटर् लागू 
की जाए। माननीय सभापित महोदय, Îवामीनाथन की िरपोटर् कब आई थी, यह िरपोटर् 2006 मȂ 
आई थी, तब तो इनकी सरकार थी, उस समय सरकार हमारी नहीं थी, सरकार कांगर्ेस की थी, 
डा. मनमोहन िंसह Ģधान मंतर्ी थे, आज मȅ आपके  माध्यम से पूछना चा
हता हूं िक कांगर्ेस ने 
Îवामीनाथन आयोग की िरपोटर् लागू क्यȗ नहीं की? एक नहीं, अनेकȗ अनुशंसाएं थीं, माननीय 
सभापित महोदय, मȅ इन
को पटल पर रख चुका हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record. …(Interruptions)…   No; I will not accept 
this.  Anyone speaking from this side or that side should not be interrupted.   No one 
should be interrupted.   Please. 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: तत्कालीन मंितर्यȗ ने अलग-अलग समय पर कहा, उसको मȅ ĢÌनोǄर 
काल मȂ क्वोट कर चुका हूं। मȅ सदन का समय नह
 ीं लूंगा, इन्हȗने कहा िक यह नहीं की जा सकती, 
इससे  बाजार मȂ िवकृ ित आ जाएगी।  मȅने क ैिबनेट नोट िलखा है िक यह नहीं िकया जा सकता है। 
हाथी क े दाँत हȅ, खाने क े और हȅ, िदखाने क े और हȅ। जब सǄा मȂ थे, तब क ु छ नहीं 
िकया।..(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ho
n. Minister, put these documents on the Table of the House.  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: जी।  
 
 MR.CHAIRMAN: You can do it during the course of the day.  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, अगर िकसी सरकार ने Îवामीनाथन आयोग 
की िरपोटर् पर अमल िकया भी है, तो वह नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िक
 या है। जब क ृिष लागत 
और मूÊय आयोग िमिनमम सपोटर् Ģाइस तय करता है, तो लागत पर 50 परस Ȃट मुनाफा लाभ 
देकर तय करता है और उसी क े अनुसार एमएसपी तय की जाती है। हुƿा जी मुख्य मंतर्ी थे और 
मुख्य मंितर्यȗ की एक कमेटी बनी थी। महोदय, तब उस समय क े तत्कालीन मुख्यमंितर्यȗ की एक 
कमेटी बनी थी। उसमȂ हुƿा जी ने भी िसफािरश की थी, लेिकन वह भी नहीं मानी गई। कौ न मानता 
है? आज मुझे यह कहते हुए गवर् हो रहा है िक Îवामीनाथन आयोग की 50 परसȂट मुनाफा देकर, 
लाभकारी मूÊय देकर एमएसपी तय होनी चािहए वाली बात को कांगर्ेस ने कभी नहीं लागू िकया, 
लेिकन अगर कोई सरकार इसको लागू कर रही है, तो वह मो दी जी की सरकार कर रही है, 
भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार कर रही है।  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
77

माननीय सभापित महोदय, क्यȗिक देश को जानना चािहए और िकसान जानता है, 
इसिलए हम फसलवार देखȂ।  महोदय, जो वृिǉ की है, मȅ क ेवल वही बताऊं गा। हमने बाजरा मȂ 
2014 क े बाद 1,375 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल वृिǉ की, जब आप थे, तो 1,250 रुपय े Ģित िंक्व टल पर 
खरीदते थे, जौ मȂ 750 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल वृिǉ की, ज्वार संकर मȂ 1,500 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल से 
बढ़ाकर 1,871 की वृिǉ हो गई, ज्वार मालडंडी 1,520 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल से बढ़ाकर 2,421 रुपय े 
Ģित िंक्वटल हो गई, यानी 901 रुपय े बढ़े, धान पर 975 रुपय े बढ़े हȅ। यह 1,345 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल 
से 2,320 रुप
ये Ģित िंक्वटल हो गया है, रागी 1,500 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल थी, अब बढ़कर 4,290 
रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल हो गई, यानी इसमȂ 2,790 रुपय े बढ़े। आपके  समय मȂ गेहूं 1,400 रुपय े Ģित 
िंक्वटल एमएमपी पर िबकता था, हमने इसको बढ़ाकर 2,275 रुपय े Ģित िंक् वटल िकया, यानी इस 
पर 875 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल बढ़ाए हȅ। माननीय सभापित महोदय, चना हो, मसूर हो, मूंग हो, तुहर 
हो, उड़द हो, मूंगफली हो, सोयाबीन हो, जूट हो - मेरे पास इसकी सूची है। महोदय, जो दाम बढ़े 
हȅ, वे अपने आप मȂ एक सच्चाई बयान करते हȅ िक आप चना 3,100 रुप
ये Ģित िंक्वटल पर खरीदते 
थे, लेिकन हम 5,440 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल खरीदते हȅ। आप मसूर 2,950 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल 
खरीदते थे, लेिकन हम 6,425 रुपय े Ģित िंक्व टल खरीदते हȅ, आप तुहर 4,300 रुपय े Ģित 
िंक्वटल खरीदते थे, लेिकन हम 7,550 खरीदते हȅ, आप उड़द 4,300 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल खरीदते 
थे, लेिकन हम 7,400 रुपय े Ģित िंक्वटल खरीदते हȅ। महोदय, मȅने एक-एक फसल क े रेट बताए 
हȅ।  
सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से देश क े िक
सानȗ  से एक और बात कहना चाहता हूं 
िक दलहन मȂ देश को आत्मिनभर्र बनाना है, आयात पर िनभर्रता समाÃत करनी है, इसिलए 
सरकार ने फ ैसला िकया है िक चाहे अर हर हो, मसूर हो, उड़द हो, िकसान िजतनी भी फसल पैदा 
करȂगे, वे पोटर्ल पर उसका रिजÎटर्ेशन करवाएं, उनकी पूरी की पूरी फसल एमएसपी पर खरीदी 
जाएगी।  
सभापित महोदय, कल बात कही जा रही थी, हमारे िवǎान िमतर् सुरजेवाला जी कह रहे थे 
- वे अभी यहाँ नहीं हȅ, मेरा तो सÅजेक्ट ही खत्म हो गया है, वे बोलकर चले जाते हȅ - वे कह रहे थे 
िक पैदा इतना हुआ और इतन
ी खरीदी हुई। सभापित जी, एमएसपी िकसिलए होती है? अगर 
िकसान को एमएसपी क े नीचे दाम िम
ले, तो वह एमएसपी पर बेचेगा, लेिकन अगर फसल क े ठीक 
दाम िमले, तो एमएसपी पर बेचने क े िलए नहीं आएगा।   
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, आप जानते हȅ िक मध्य Ģदेश मȂ सरबती गेहूँ पैदा होता है।    
शरबती गेहूं क े रेट चार-पाँच हजार रुपया िंक्वट
ल हȅ। क्या उसे भी एमएसपी पर िबकवाना चाहते 
हȅ। हिरयाणा, पंजाब, मध्य Ģदेश मȂ बासमती राइस होता है, अच्छे दाम िमलते हȅ। कनाडा, 
अमेिरका मȂ आज भारत का बासमती राइस धूम मच
ा रहा है। महोदय, हमने 40 हजार करोड़ रुपय े 
का िनयार्त िकया है। अच्छे दाम िमलȂगे, तो जबरन बेचने आएंगे िक तुम तो एमएसपी पर ही 
खरीदो! दालȗ क े कई बार अच्छे दाम िमलते हȅ और जब अच्छे दाम िमलȂगे, तो एमएसपी पर 
खरीद क ै से होगी? इसके  अलावा, सारे िकसान पूरा बेचते ही नहीं हȅ। उन्हȂ पता ही नहीं है िक 
अपने खाने क े िलए भी रखते हȅ। गाँव मȂ कई बार परंपरा है िक िकसान क ृिष मजदूरȗ को पैसे नहीं 
देते हȅ, अनाज ही देते हȅ। हमने आंकड़े पढ़ िदए। अब मुझे पता नहीं िक खेती से मतलब है या नहीं? 
 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, सभी को यह जानने की बहुत आवÌयकता है। अकसर हम मुǈा 
उठाते हȅ िक एमएसपी पर िकतनी खरीद हो रही है। एमएसपी पर कम खरीद का मतलब है िक 
िकसान की िÎथित ठीक है और उसे कीमत कहीं और िमल रही है। आज क े िदन सदन की... 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... मेरी बात सुिनए। आज क े िदन आवÌयकता है िक हम िकसान की समÎया को सही 
दृिÍट मȂ समझȂ। िकसान एमएसपी का फायदा उठाना चाहता है। जब वह जानता है िक मȅ माकȃ ट मȂ 
जाता हूँ, तो मुझे वह कीमत नहीं िम
ल रही है। यह जो आग्यूर्मȂट हुआ, मȅ भी इस बात को लेकर 
बड़ा आहत हुआ और तब मुझे िववशता मȂ कहना पड़ा िक िकसान का ‘ क’ समझने की 
आवÌयकता है। एमएसपी का मतलब - िकसान क े पास माकȃ ट मȂ कीमत उप
लÅध नहीं है, इसिलए 
िववशता मȂ िकसान को एमएसपी पर बेचना पड़ेगा। अच्छी ËयवÎथा यह है िक िकसान को वािजब 
दाम माकȃ ट क े िहसाब से िमले और जब उसे माकȃ ट सपोटर् नहीं करती है, तो एमएसपी आती है। 
एमएसपी मȂ खरीद कम होती है, इस
का संक े त है िक िकसान की हालत ठीक है, पर एमएसपी का 
िनधार्रण लगातार ऊपर चढ़ना चािहए और उसकी ओर आप कायर्रत रहȂगे, मȅ यह मानकर चलता 
हूँ। वह बढ़ना चािहए, क्यȗिक एमएसपी तय करȂगे, तो माकȃ ट फो
सȃज़ भी क ंटर्ोल हȗगी।  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान : माननीय सभापित जी, सरकार इस पर िनरंतर ध्यान देकर काम 
करेगी, क्यȗिक िकसान हमारे िलए क ेवल इंसान नहीं है, बिÊक अन्नदाता है, मतलब जीवनदाता 
है। क ृिष भारतीय अथर्ËवÎथा की रीढ़ है और िकसान उसके  Ģाण हȅ। माननीय सभापित जी, िकसान 
हमारा वो
ट बȅक नहीं है, हमारे िलए तो िकसान भगवान है। हमारे िलए िकसान की सेवा भगवान की 
पूजा है और यह मानकर ही हम आगे Ëय वहार करȂगे, लेिकन इसके  बावजूद, धान की खरीद हो या 
गेहूं की खरीद हो, जब-जब आवÌयकता हुई, सरकार ने ĢयाÃत खरीदी है। धान की खरीद 2015-
16 मȂ 78,31,000 िकसानȗ से हुई थी। मेरे पास आंकड़े हȅ, मȅ एक-एक आंकड़ा रख सकता हूँ। जब 
तत्कालीन सरकार से जरूर
त पड़ी, तो अगर कई गुना ज्यादा खरीद की, तो मोदी जी की सरकार 
ने की, भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार ने की। मȅ एक-एक आंकड़े नहीं रखना चाहता, सदन का 
समय नहीं लेना चाहता, लेिकन माननीय सभापित जी, अग
र आप देखȂगे, तो ये तो खरीदते ही 
नहीं थे। 2004-05 से 2013-14 तक िकतना दलहन खरीदा गया - दलहन क ेवल 6,29,000 
मीिटर्क टन खरीदा गया, लेिकन यह सरकार है, िजसने 2014-15 से 2023-24 तक 1,70,00,000 
मीिटर्क टन दलहन खरीदा। जब िकसान को जरूर
त पड़ी, हम पीछे नहीं हटे। हम न तो पीछे हटे 
हȅ और न िकसान कÊयाण मȂ पीछे हटȂगे। माननीय सभापित जी, आज मȅ आपके  माध्यम से 
आÌवÎत करना चाहता हूँ िक यह सर कार  िकसानȗ को िनरंतर समथर्न देना जारी रखेगी। मूÊय 
ठीक िमले, इसके  िलए मोदी सरकार संकÊपबǉ है।  माननीय सभापित जी, कर् ेिडट, कजर् की बात 
हो रही थी।  मȅ Ģारंभ मȂ बात कर रहा था - शकु नी, चौपड़, *।  ये कजर् की बात करते हȅ।  क Ȃ दर् और 
राज्य क े अपने घोषणापतर्ȗ मȂ एक बार नहीं अनेकȗ बार कहा िक जैसे ही हम सरकार मȂ आएंगे, 
सारे कजȃ माफ कर िदए जाएंगे।  मध्य Ģदेश, छǄीसगढ़, राजÎथान इनके  नेता गए थे।  सभाओं मȂ 
िगनती िगन
ते थे, दस िदन क े अंदर दो लाख तक क े कजȃ माफ। बोलते थे एक, दो, तीन, चार, 
पांच, छह, सात, आठ, नौ, दस - दस िदन मȂ कजार् माफ, नहीं तो 11वȂ िदन मुख्य मंतर्ी हटा िदया 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
79

जाएगा। लोगȗ ने एक बार 2018 मȂ िजता िदया।  वे इंतजार करते रहे, दस िदन हो गए, एक महीना 
हो गया, एक साल हो गया, कजार् माफ नहीं हुआ तो सवा साल मȂ िफर मध्य Ģदेश मȂ कांगर्ेस की 
सरकार ही चली गई।  माननीय सभापित महोदय, वहां दोबारा सरकारȂ लौट कर नहीं आईं, क्यȗ 
यह * िकसान क े साथ कोई करता है, तो वह कांगर्ेस करती है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: ये तीन शÅद िडलीट हȗगे। * 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ क्षमा चाहता हूं। अब मȅ कर् ेिडट और कजार् 
माफी की बात करना चाहता हूं। माननीय सभापित जी, अगर हम कर् ेिडट की बात देखȂ िक िकसानȗ 
को कजार् िकतना िमलता था।  जब कांगर्ेस की सरकारȂ थीं, तब िकसानȗ क े िलए कर् ेिडट काडर् की 
ËयवÎथा नहीं थी।  मȅ आज Îवगीर्य पंिडत अटल िबहारी वा
जपेयी जी को Ģणाम करना चाहता हूं।  
उन्हȗने िकसानȗ की उस तकलीफ को समझा और िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् की ËयवÎथा क े अंतगर्त 
कम ऋण पर िकसानȗ को कजार् िमलना Ģारंभ हुआ।  माननीय स
भापित जी, आज मुझे यह कहते 
हुए Ģसन्नता है िक हमारे छोटे िकसान, िजनको ऊ ंची Åयाज की दरȗ पर साहूकर से कजार् लेना 
पड़ता था और उसका भारी Åयाज चुकाना पड़ता था, आज ऐसे िकस ानȗ को कर् ेिडट काडर् क े 
माध्यम से 7 परसȂट पर और अगर वह समय पर चुकाए, तो 3 परसȂट और कम िकया जाता है और 
क ेवल 4 परसȂट Åयाज की दरȗ पर कजार् िदया जा रहा है।   
माननीय सभापित जी, बज ट  मȂ भी Åयाज सिÅसडी मȂ 3.6 गु ना वृिǉ हुई है।  2014-15 मȂ 
क ेवल 6,000 करोड़ थी, 2024-25 मȂ यह बढ़कर 22,600 करोड़ रुपय े हो गई है।  िपछले 10 सालȗ 
मȂ 1,44,000 करोड़ से अिधक की Åयाज सिÅसडी ...     
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Is this amount interest subsidy? 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान:  सर, यह इंटरेÎट सिÅसडी है।  अगर आप कर् ेिड
 ट देखȂ, तो जब इनकी 
सरकार थी, तब क ेवल 7 लाख करोड़ का कर् ेिडट िमलता था।  यह नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार है, 
इसमȂ 25 लाख करोड़ का कर् ेिडट िमलता है और अभी िवकिसत भारत संकÊप यातर् ा मȂ अिभयान 
चल रहा है। जो छू ट गया, तो आओ, िकसान कर् ेिडट काडर् बनवाओ और 3-4 परसȂट Åयाज की दर 
पर कजार् ले जाओ।  यह कांगर्ेस क े जमाने मȂ कब होता था!   
 माननीय सभापित जी, क ेवल 10 सालȗ मȂ जो Åयाज की सिÅसडी है, वह 1,44,000 करोड़ 
रुपय े से ज्यादा है।  एक बार छोटी-मोटी कजार् माफी हो गई, तो उसके  बड़े गुण गाते हȅ, लेिकन 
इनसे ज्यादा तो हम Åयाज मȂ चुकाते हȅ।  यह भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की मोदी जी की सर कार  है।  
...(Ëयवधान)...  नई बात यह है िक आप 7 लाख करोड़ देते थे और हम 25 लाख करोड़ देते हȅ।  
िकसानȗ की बात आप क्या जानो!  सभापित जी, कभी भी कांगर्ेस ने फसल बीमा योजना पर ध्यान 
नहीं िदया।  पहले जब मȅ सांसद था, िकसान की फसलȂ खराब हो जाती थीं, तो हम गेहूँ की खराब 
फसल क े पूले तत्कालीन मुख्यमंतर्ी जी क े पास ले जाते थे और उÇमीद करते थे िक क ु छ राहत 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.  
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

िमलेगी।  लेिकन इनके  समय ऐसी फसल बीमा योजना थी िक उसकी यूिनट तहसील हुआ करती 
थी।  मतलब एक िकसान की फसल खराब होगी, तो राहत नहीं िमलेगी, क्लेम नहीं िमलेगा; एक 
गाँव की खराब होगी, तो क्लेम नहीं िमलेगा; 10 गाँव की खराब होगी, तो क्लेम नहीं िमलेगा।  अगर 
िकसी एक गाँव की फसल खराब हो जाए, तो वह भगवान से Ģाथर्ना करे िक पूरी तहसील की 
फसलȂ खराब हो जाएँ, िनपट जाएँ, तब हमȂ क्लेम िमलेगा।  ये यह फसल बीमा योजना चलाते थे।  
यह फसल बीमा योजना चलती थी, िजसमȂ तहसील यूिनट होती थी।  मोदी जी क े आने क े बाद 
Ģधानमंतर्ी फसल बीमा योजना बनी।  माननीय सभापित जी, मुझे कहते हुए Ģसन्नता है, आज मȅ 
बताना चाहता हूँ िक इस फसल बीमा योजना ने पूरे पिरदृÌय को बदल कर रख िदया है।  माननीय 
सभापित जी, आप तुलना करके  देख लीिजए।  जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, इनके  समय NAIS 
नाम की फसल बीमा योजना चलती थी।  उसमȂ ऋण क े आवेदन थे क ेवल 3 करोड़ 51 लाख और 
2023-24 मȂ आए 8 करोड़ 69 लाख।  जो नॉन-लोनी थे, अऋणी िकसान आते ही नहीं थे, क्यȗिक 
ये क ेवल बȅकȗ क े कजर् का बीमा करते थे।  अगर * से क्लेम िमल गया, तो उसमȂ भी बȅक वाले अपना 
कजर् काट लȂगे।  िकसान क े पास क्या आता था, िकसान को क ु छ नहीं िमलता था।  बȅक क े लोन का 
बीमा होता था, िकसान देखता रह जाता था।  अऋणी क े साथ, नॉन-लोनी क े साथ इनके  समय 
बीमा क े आवेदन आते थे क ेवल 20 लाख और अब आए हȅ 5 करोड़ 48 लाख।   यह 27 गु ना से 
ज्यादा है।  माननीय सभापित जी, बीिमत क्षेतर् अब 5 करोड़ 98 लाख हेक्टेयर हो गया है।  क ु ल 
बीिमत रािश इनके  समय 82,000 करोड़ हुआ करती थी, अब बढ़ कर 2,71,295 करोड़ हो गई है।  
आप फसल बीमा की आलोचना करते हȅ!  िकसानȗ क े Ģीिमयम को देिखए।  इनके  समय िकसान 
Ģीिमयम देता था 16,442 करोड़, दावȗ मȂ 63,617 करोड़ िमले और अब 32,440 करोड़ Ģीिमयम 
और 1,64,000 करोड़ रुपए  का क्लेम िकसान को िमला है।  यह अपने आप मȂ दशार्ता है िक 
िकसान को अगर नुकसान होता है, तो क्लेम िदया जाता है।  यह दुिनया की सबसे बड़ी फसल 
बीमा योजना है, जो Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ चल रही है।  माननीय सभापित जी, 
आजकल कई देश इस योजना का अध्ययन करने आ रहे हȅ, िजनको अपने यहाँ फसल बीमा 
योजना लागू करनी है।   
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, मȅ आपसे िनवेदन करना चाहता हूँ िक जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार 
थी, एक समÎया और थी।  िकसानȗ ने तो देश क े अन्न क े भंडार भर िदए, उत्पादन बढ़ा, बढ़ा हुआ 
उत्पादन फसल क े उपरांत वह बेचने मȂ अगर समय चािहए, तो उसे रखȂ कहाँ?  रखने की जगह 
नहीं थी।  माननीय सभापित जी, मुझे याद है, एक बार जब शरद जी क ृिष मंतर्ी थे, उस समय मȅ 
मध्य Ģदेश का मुख्यमंतर्ी था।  मȅ उनके  पास आया िक हमȂ पीडीएस क े िलए क ु छ अितिरƪ आवंटन 
दे दȂ।  उन्हȗने कहा िक कहाँ से दȂ, िफर पूछा िक तुम Ģोक्योरमȂट िकतना करते हो, तब मध्य Ģदेश 
से ज्यादा Ģोक्योरमȂट नहीं होता था, लेिकन हमने संकÊप िलया और मुझे कहते हुए गवर् है िक मध्य 
Ģदेश मȂ क ृिष का उत्पादन 2004-05 मȂ जब कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, वह लगभग 1 करोड़ 19 लाख 
मीिटर्क टन था, वह बढ़ कर, मȅ उस समय की बात बता रहा हूँ, 6 करोड़ 19 लाख मीिटर्क टन हो 
गया था।  अब हमारे सामने समÎया आई िक रखȂ कहाँ!  खेत मȂ गेहूँ, खिलहान मȂ गेहूँ, रखने की 
जगह नहीं, क्यȗिक कांगर्ेस क े जमाने मȂ वेयरहाउसेज़ तो कभी बने नहीं, तो रखे कहाँ! जब उनको 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
81

 
रखने की ËयवÎथा नहीं थी, तो उनको औने-पौने दामȗ पर बेचना पड़ता था।  न cold-storages 
थे, न warehouses थे, न ripening chambers थे और न ही grading and sorting की ËयवÎथा 
थी।  उसके  कारण कई बार औने-पौने दामȗ पर िकसान को अपने उत्पादȗ को बेचना पड़ता था 
और उसमȂ लॉसेज़ भी बहुत होते थे।  मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜीमाâ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को धन्यवाद देना 
चाहूँगा िक उन्
हȗने Agriculture Infrastructure Fund की योजना बनाई और योजनाबǉ तरीके  से 
तय िकया िक िकसान का उत्पाद रखने क े िलए बेहतर इंģाÎटर्क्चर बनाएँगे।   माननीय सभापित 
जी, मुझे यह कहते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक बढ़ते हुए उत्पादन को देखते हुए इस Ag
riculture 
Infrastructure Fund - कल सुरजेवाला जी कह रहे थे िक इतना Ģावधान था, इतना ही हुआ।  
अब पता नहीं िक वे कौन से साल क े आंकड़े पढ़ लेते हȅ।  मुझे यह कहते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक 2020 
मȂ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 1 लाख करोड़ रुपय े क े Agriculture Infrastructure Fund की घोषणा की थी 
और 26 जु लाई, 2024 तक  - मȅ जानकारी अपडेट करना चा
हता हूँ - 72,222 क ृिष इंģाÎटर्क्चर 
पिरयोजनाओं क े िलए 46,080 करोड़ रुपय े Îवीकृ त हो गए।  इसमȂ िनजी िनवेश िमलाकर, क्यȗिक 
िजसने बनाया, उसने खुद का भी लगाया, तो 76,306 करोड़ रुपय े का investment हो  चुका है।  
13,569 warehouses
, 13,469 गोदाम, 15,443 Ģाथिमक ĢसंÎकरण क ेन्दर्, 17,899 कÎटम 
हायिंरग क Ȃ दर्, 3,021 छंटाई और गर्ेिंडग इका इया ँ, 1,892 cold-storages, cold-chain और 
20,338 अन्य Ģकार की फसलोपरांत Ģबंधन पिरयोजनाएँ और सामुदाियक क ृिष पिरसंपिǄयाँ बनी 
हȅ।  यह भी अगर िकसी ने िकया, तो Ǜीमाâ नरेन्दर् मोदी जी की सरकार ने िकया, भारतीय जनता 
पाटीर् की सरकार ने िकया।   
 माननीय सभापित जी, िकसान को ठीक दाम िमले, इसके  िलए नवाचारȗ की भी जरूर त 
थी।  इसिलए Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ राÍटर्ीय क ृिष मंडी, eNAM की ËयवÎथा को बनाया गया।  
eNAM एक अिखल भारतीय electronic trading portal है, जो एगर्ीकÊचर जींस क े िलए  
पंजीकृ त राÍटर्ीय बाजार क े िलए एक virtual platform क े माध्यम से re al APMC क े network को 
तैयार करने का Ģयास करता है।  यह बताते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक 23 राज्यȗ और 4 क Ȃदर्ȗ मȂ 1,389 
मंिडयȗ को eNAM जारी िकया गया है।  28 जुलाई, 2024 तक  eNAM portal पर 1 करोड़, 77 
लाख िकसान और 2 लाख, 61 हजार Ëयापारी पंजीकृ त हो गए हȅ।  eNAM platform पर क ु ल 10 
करोड़, 3 हजार टन अनाज और इसके  अलावा बांस, पान, नािरयल, नींबू, िमठाई इस
मȂ शािमल 
करके  लगभग 3.63 लाख करोड़ रुपए  का Ëयापार दजर् िकया गया है।  अगर दूसरी मंडी मȂ कहीं 
अच्छे दाम िमल रहे हȅ, तो िकसान क े पास उसकी कोई ËयवÎथा नहीं थी िक वह बेहतर दाम पर 
बेच सके ।  eNAM क े कारण अब यह धीरे-धीरे सÇभव हो चला है।  इससे िकसान को बहुत लाभ 
हुआ है।   
 माननीय सभापित जी, हम जानते हȅ िक हमारे यहाँ खेत की जोत का आक ार छोटा है।   
हमारे 85 परस Ȃट िकसान लघु हȅ, सीमांत हȅ।  उनके  पास खेती मȂ लगाने क े िलए ज्यादा पैसे नहीं 
होते हȅ।  अगर खाद खरीदना है, बीज खरीदना है, तो वह individually जाता है, तो ज्यादा समय 
लगता है, पैसा लगता है।  अगर उत्पादन हो गया और अके ले को बेचना है, तो उतना हुआ ही 
नहीं, तो transportation मȂ खचार् लग जाता है।   इसिलए उसको इसकी जरुर
त थी िक कोई ऐसी 
ËयवÎथा बनाई जाए, जहाँ छो टे-छोटे िकसान एक होकर अपना समूह बनाएँ, सामूिहक रूप  से 
अनाज खरीदȂ, अपने उत्पाद को सामूिहक रूप  से बेचȂ और अगर जरूरत  पड़े, तो ĢसंÎकरण क े 
काम मȂ भी उतर जाएँ।  पहले ËयवÎथा नहीं थी, लेिकन एफपीओज़ की भी ËयवÎथा को कोई 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
सरकार ने खड़ा िकया, तो Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह एनडीए और भारतीय 
जनता पाटीर् की सरकार ने िकया।   आज 8,875 एफपीओज़ पूरे देश मȂ काम कर रहे हȅ।  कहा 
आपने भी था िक हम ऐसे आयात और िनयार्त की न ीित बनाएँगे, जो उत्पादक समूहȗ और क ंपिनयȗ 
की आय वृिǉ मȂ सहायता करेगी, लेिकन इनको तो िकसान चुनाव क े समय याद आता है, बाकी 
भूल जाते हȅ।  माननीय सभापित जी, िकसान वोट बȅक नहीं, इंसान है।  काँगर्ेस की Ģाथिमकता 
कभी िकसान नहीं रहे, जबिक हमने इंसान मान कर काम िकया। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, we have today about four-and-a-half minutes. 
 Would 
you like to conclude today or continue tomorrow?  
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित जी, मेरी िवनĦतापूवर्क Ģाथर्ना है िक देश क े िकसान 
और क ृिष की िजÇमेदारी मुझे िमली है, तो मȅ क ु छ बुिनयादी चीजȂ सदन क े माध्यम से रखना चाहता 
हूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You may continue. 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित जी, अगर आप मुझे अनुमित दȂगे और अग
ले िदन भी 
बोलने क े िलए कहȂगे, तो मुझे इसमȂ को ई आपिǄ नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित:  यह िनणर्य आप कीिजए। 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ यही कह रहा था िक भारत सरकार ने 2020 
मȂ 6,865 करोड़ रुपए  क े क ु ल बजट क े साथ 10,000 क ृषक उत्
पादक  संगठन, मतलब एफपीओज़ 
क े संवधर्न और गठन की योजना Ģारंभ की थी और मुझे खुशी है िक 8,875 एफपीओज़ बन गए।  
िजनमȂ से 4,165 एफपीओज़ को 210 करोड़ रुपए  की मैिंचग इिक्वटी भी जारी की गई है और उनमȂ 
से कई एफपीओज़ बड़ी सफलता क े साथ चल रहे हȅ।  मȅ कई सफलता की कहािनयाँ रख सकता 
हूँ, पर आज वƪ मुझे इजाज़त नहीं दे रहा, लेिकन मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक इस एफपी
ओज़ क े 
िकसानȗ क े संगठन को हम आंदोलन का रूप  देकर छोटे और सीमांत िकसानȗ को ठीक दाम िमले 
और वह फ ू ड Ģोसेिंसग क े क्षेतर् मȂ भी उतर जाए, इसमȂ कोई कसर नहीं छोडȂगे।  यह गरीब िकसानȗ 
की िंजदगी बदलने का काम करेगी।  कभी ये नवाचार नहीं हुए, इसके  पहले कभी नवाचार नहीं 
हुए।   
माननीय सभ
ापित जी, मȅने कहा था िक उत्पादन की लागत घटाना है, उसके  िलए मोदी 
जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ एक नहीं, अनेकȗ Ģयास िकए गए।  आप क ेवल कहते रहे, मȅ काँगर्ेस क े घोषणा पतर् 
उठाकर बता सकता हूँ।  कई बार कहा, 2004 मȂ कहा, 2009 मȂ कहा िक हम क ु छ Ģत्यक्ष सहायता 
क ु छ िकसान को देने की योजना पर गंभीरता से िव
चार कर रहे हȅ।  आपने कभी डायरेक्ट एक पैसा 
नहीं िदया।  मुझे आज कहते हुए खुशी है, छोटे-छो टे िकसान, लघु, सीमांत िकसान को कई बार 
खाद क े िलए पैसे की जरूरत  पड़ती है, कई बार बीज क े िलए पैसे की जरूरत  पड़ती है, तो 
उनको इसके  िलए सूद पर पैसा देने वालȗ क े पास जाना पड़ता है।  लेिक न इस तकलीफ को भी 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
83

 
कभी काँगर्ेस ने नहीं पहचाना, क्यȗिक िकसान कांगर्ेस की Ģाथिमकता नहीं रहे।  पहचाना, तो 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने पहचाना।  इसके  िलए 'Ģधान मंतर्ी िकसान सÇमान िनिध योजना' बनाई गई, जो 
वाÎतव मȂ िकसानȗ का सÇमान है, उनके  भाव का सÇमान है।  वे क ृिष और खेती क े काम मȂ िटक 
सकȂ, इसिलए इस योजन
ा को बनाया गया।  2004 मȂ आपने कहा, लेिकन आपने नहीं िकया, 2009 
मȂ आपने कहा, लेिकन नहीं िकया, लेिकन आज मुझे कहते हुए खुशी है िक मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व 
वाली सरकार तीन िकÎतȗ मȂ 6,000 रुपए  हर साल िकसान को देने का काम कर रही है और ऐसे 
नहीं, डीबीट
ी क े माध्यम से देने का काम िकया जा रहा है।  इसमȂ बीच मȂ कोई िबचौिलया नहीं है।  
इस देश मȂ एक Ģधान मंतर्ी जी हुए थे, जो कहते थे िक यहाँ से एक रुपया देते हȅ, तो नीचे तक 
िसफर् 15 पैसे पहुँचता है, लेिकन मोदी जी ने कह िदया िक ना खाऊँ गा, ना खाने दूँगा, इसिलए एक 
रुपया डालते हȅ, तो सीधा एक रुपया ही पहुंचता है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you, hon. Ministe
r.   
 
2.00 P.M. 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान: माननीय सभापित महोदय, जब गरीब िकसान क े पास दो-दो हजार 
रुपय े तीन िकÎतȗ मȂ पहुंचता है, तो वह अपनी तात्कािलक आवÌयकताओं की पूिर्त करता है और 
यह पैसा उसके  िलए वरदान बन जाता है।  मुझे यह कहते हुए खुशी है िक इस योजना क े अंतगर्त 
िकसानȗ क े खाते मȂ अब तक 3,24,000 करोड़ रुपय े डाले जा चुक े हȅ। माननीय सभ ापित जी, 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The Leader of the House. 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI JAGAT PRAKASH NADDA):  Sir, I think now we 
have to take up Private Members' Business.  I would request the Minister to continue 
on Monday.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister will continue on Monday at 1.00 p.m. 
 
Ǜी िशवराज िंसह चौहान : माननीय सभापित जी, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, a suggest ion came from Shri Derek O'Brien.  
 The suggestion was that every debate shou ld have wider participation.  Having 
discussion today after the Private Members'  Resolutions would not get that kind of 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
participation by Members because of their earlier planned situations. Having taken 
note of that and also of the sentiments  of many hon. Members who came to my 
Chamber, the Discussion on the Working of the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy, which is listed in today's revised Li st of Business after the Private Members' 
Resolutions, will now be taken up on Monday, the 5th August 2024 at 1.00 p.m.   
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka):  Sir, yo u have just said that the Minister will 
continue at 1.00 p.m. on Monday.    
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh):  Sir, after that reply, you can take it up. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Yes, I stand corrected.  It is a timely correction by a senior Member 
who shares with Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan the distinction of being Chief Minister of 
Madhya Pradesh for two terms. He has rightly said that after the address of Shri 
Shivraj Singh Chouhan will be over, the discussion will take place on this demand. But 
he will resume his reply at 1.00 p.m. Accordingly, the House...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, he has sa id something about me.  Give me an 
opportunity on Monday to reply.  
 
SHRI SANJAY SINGH (National Capital Territory of Delhi):  Sir, give me an 
opportunity. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Sanjay Singh also.  I have taken note of it. Accordingly, hon. 
Members, the House will be adjourned for the day after the time allotted for the 
Private Members' Resolution is over.  
 
 
PRIVATE MEMBERS' RESOLUTION 
 
Regarding bringing a legislation to remove Education from Concurrent List and move 
it to State List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and other matters 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Private Members' Resolutions. Time allotted for Resolution number  
 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
85

 
one is two hours.  
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Shri M. Moha med Abdulla to move a resolution inter alia, 
urging the Government to bring a legislatio n to move education from the Concurrent 
List to the State List in the Seventh Schedu le to the Constitution and to allow medical 
admission based on the criteria of the State Government by repealing NEET and NTA.  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu):   Thank you, hon. Deputy Chairman, 
Sir. 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION  (SHRI JAYANT 
CHAUDHARY):   Sir, may I say something here?   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: एक िमनट।  माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY:  Sir, the Private Member's Resolution brought by the 
hon. Member goes against several precedents and parliamentary norms and practice. 
Hon. Supreme Court had given directions in  2018.  After those directions and that 
judgment, NEET examination had been conducted by the NTA.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please let him speak.  
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY:  Sir, the Government is seized of the issue.  This has 
been discussed in Parliament many time s. The recent Supreme Court judgment is 
also on record.  The Government has in stituted a High-Powered Committee headed 
by eminent personalities to look into the whole reform of examination process, to 
review the functioning of NTA and to look at data security protocols.  If this august 
House is going to discuss scrapping of the NTA and NEET, it will go against the spirit 
of Supreme Court judgment. Therefore, I w ill urge the hon. Member to withdraw the 
Resolution.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, I have a point of order. Sir, the Minister has 
misrepresented the facts on the floor of the House. Actually, it was the decision of the 
  
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

Government to bring NEET. In 2013, the Su preme Court disallowed or scuttled NEET. 
Thereafter, on appeal in 2016, Supreme Cour t, on a review, agreed with that. It was 
not the order of the Supreme Court to brin g NEET. It just concurred with the Union 
Government's view. Further, there have been many instances with this Government of 
bringing forward Bills to circumvent the decision of the Supreme Court. That was 
seen in the case of th e Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election 
Commissioners Bill.  So, taking alibi on a Supreme Court verdict is wrong. And also, 
it is gross injustice to the House to scuttl e the Private Members' Business, as we had 
seen last Friday, when my Bill was disallowe d at the introduction stage. So, I would 
say that the hoax has to be called off, and the Member  should be allowed to have full 
say in the Private Members' Business. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Now....(Interruptions)...  
  
SHRI N.R. ELANGO (Tamil Nadu): May I add only one thing? ...(Interruptions)...    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Jayantji, one minute, please.   
 
SHRI N.R. ELANGO : Sir, I placed before this au gust House the judgments which 
came much later, in 2016 and in 2021; it is a five-Judge bench. What they are talking 
about is a judgment of a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court, which considered 
the scope of NEET. Thereafter, how the States are empowered to consider and 
conduct these examinations is there. So, we will place all those Constitution Bench 
judgments. Let the minister consider that.  
 
SHRI JAYANT CHAUDHARY : Sir, hon. Member has stated that the Supreme Court 
did not give directions to the Central Go vernment to institute and conduct NEET 
examination. Actually, in 2018, in Civ il Appeal No.11230, CBSC versus T.K. 
Rangarajan judgment clearly laid that o u t .  A n d  t h a t  i s  w h y ,  N E E T  e x a m  w a s  
conducted by NTA. And also in 2020, in the hon. Supreme Court, there was 
Transferred Case No.98 of 201 2, CMC Vellore Association versus Union of India. The 
judgment came on 24.4.2020. The Supreme Court upheld the constitutional validity of 
this examination process. NTA is a very robust and independent organization. 240 
exams have been conducted; more than 5.4 crore students have undergone those 
examinations. Now, we must not debate this issue any further. 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
87

Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी ...(Ëयवधान)... No, no. I have already 
allowed you.  Please.  
 
Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी ( राजÎथान): माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, रंगराजन क े क े स मȂ सुĢीम 
कोटर् ने कहा िक there shall be a uniform national eligibility cum entrance test for 
admission to undergraduate and postgraduate courses. रंगराजन क े क े स मȂ ये सारा है। 
माननीय सवȘच्च न्यायालय ने भारत सरकार को िनदȃश िदया, उसके  बाद नीट की व अन्य सारी 
परीक्षाएं होती हȅ। इसिलए इस संबंध मȂ अगर हम चचार् करȂगे, तो यह सवȘच्च न्यायालय की 
अवहेलना भी होगी और इतने सारे जजमȂट क े  बाद ...(Ëय
वधान)... उपसभापित महोदय, इस 
िवषय पर क ेवल एक बार ही नहीं, बि Êक 5 बार सवȘच्च न्यायालय मȂ गए हȅ और 5 बार क े िनणर्य 
क े बाद मȂ ÎपÍट रूप  से अंत मȂ यह िनदȃश िदया गया है, उसके  कारण से यह बनी है, नीट की 
परीक्षाएं व अन्य सारी परीक्षाएं हो रही हȅ। अब सुĢीम कोटर् क े फ ैसले क े समय राधाकृ Íण की 
अध्यक्षता मȂ एक किमटी बना दी गई है, जो किमटी इन सब बातȗ का अध्
ययन कर रही है। ऐसी 
पिरिÎथित मȂ इस पर सदन मȂ चचार् होना उिचत नहीं है, मȅ सम झता  हूं िक अगर ऐसा होता है, तो 
हम division claim  करȂगे।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी। ...(Ëयवधान)... I will come. ...(Interruptions)...   
Please. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
संसदीय कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा अÊपसंख्यक कायर् मंतर्ी (Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु) : उपसभापित महोदय, जो 
hon. Member concerned, जो इस Resolution को पेश कर रहे थे, उन्हȗने अपनी बात कही है।  
माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने Supreme Court क े recen
t three-member Bench ने जो ruling दी, 
उसको भी quote िकया और सरकार की position भी सदन मȂ रखी है।  हमारे दूसरे सदÎय Ǜी 
घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी जी ने भी इसको और elaborate करके  बताया।  अगर मेÇबर proceed करना 
चाहते हȅ, तो आप divisio
n रिखए, क्यȗिक इसको oppose िकया है और वह भी valid ground मȂ 
है, क्यȗिक हम लोग Judiciary और Legislature एक-दूसरे को challenge नहीं  करते हȅ, हम 
एक-दूसरे को इज्जत देते हȅ। Supreme Court की ruling law of the land होती है और यह 
संसद भी देश क े िलए का न ून बनाती है। अभी की पिरिÎथित मȂ जब Supreme Court क े order को 
Government ने मानकर आगे implementation का process भी शुरू  कर चुक े हȅ, ऐसे समय मȂ 
इस िवषय पर िफर से चचार् करना वह हमारी परंपरा क े अनुसार ठीक नहीं रहेगा।  इसिलए जो 
Member ने oppose
 िकया है, तो आप division पर इसको डाल दीिजए।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  Shri Shaktisinh ji.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल (गुजरात): उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने जो बात रखी है, उसी 
को आगे ले जाते हुए मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक एक बात तो यह है िक क्या यह matter sub judice
  
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

है, no. यह  matter अभी sub judice नहीं है और final order Supreme Court का आ गया है।  
Number two, Private Members' Resolution, सभापित महोदय की मंजूरी क े बाद order of 
the day, List of Business मȂ एक बार आ जाने क े बाद उसको रोकना िकसी तरह से वािजब 
नहीं होगा।…(Ëयवधान)...  मंतर्ी जी की बात सही है, अगर Member चाहते हȅ िक remove  नहीं 
करना है, that is fine.  But Member चाहते हȅ िक मȅ move करना चाहता हूं और चेयरमैन साहब 
जब इसको   approve िकया हुआ है, तब इसको रोका नहीं जा सकता है।  Number three, हमारे 
चेयरमैन साहब क े orders हȅ िक judiciary मȂ क ु छ भी बात हो, तो भी judiciary से ऊपर यह सदन 
है और सदन की बात है, उसको िबÊकु ल उसके  अिधकार को रोक
ा नहीं जा सकता है। 
…(Ëयवधान)...   यह हमारे चेयरमैन साहब की, खुद की judgments हȅ।  Number four, इसमȂ जो 
धांधिलयां हुई हȅ, उसकी चचार् करने से आगे सर कार जो कर रही है, उसमȂ भी आपको  h e l p  
िमलेगी।  सरकार को मदद िमलेगी िक कहां-कहां क्या धांधली हुई है?  उस पर Members बोलȂगे 
और यह सदन चचार् करेगा, तो आगे committee सरकार का काम NEET मȂ क्या करन ा , उसमȂ 
इनको मदद िमल सके गी और इसिलए मेरी गुजािरश है िक यह मेÇबर क े अिधकार क े ऊपर रोक 
नहीं लगनी चािहए। …(Ëयवधान)...    
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Dr. V. Sivadasan.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala):  Sir, here, we see the injustice because a Member has 
the right to make a Resolution in this Hous e.  Here, nothing is against the court.  
…(Interruptions)…  NEET; earlier because of the Government decision, it was 
implemented.  So, here, this House has the right to discuss this matter, the NEET 
examination system.  We are discussing it  everywhere.  So, the Parliament has the 
right to express their view to the people.  So, the Government should not deny the 
right of the Member. The Member clearly ment ioned his views in this Resolution.  So, 
the Government should protect the right of the Member.  The Treasury Benches and 
the Minister have tried to stall the democratic right of the Member. …(Interruptions)…  
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Thank you Dr. V. Sivadasan.  Now, Shri Raghav Chadha, 
but briefly please.   
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA (Punjab):  I would be very brief.  I am only referring to the 
Rule book.  I am not going beyond it.  Firs t of all, as several Members have pointed 
out that when the Members file their Private Members' Resolution… 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Which Rule are you quoting? 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
89

SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA:  Sir, it is Rule 238.  I have three points.  I will start with 
something and I will end with the Rule Book.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please be brief. 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA:  Sir, I will be brief.  At least, permit me to speak.  Let me 
finish my point.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Yes, finish it. 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA:  The Private Members'  Resolution is a Resolution filed by 
the Members and selected by the hon. Ch airman. The Chairman of this House is 
supreme. He selected this Private Member s' Resolution. Therefore, it must be 
discussed. This is one. Number two, Rule  238 of the Rule book says and I quote.  
"Rules to be observed while speaking.  A Me mber while speaking shall not— (i) refer 
to any matter of fact on which a judicial decision is pending." Pending is the operative  
word.  In this regard, no judi cial decision is pending.  Second, we are not discussing 
the conduct of judiciary.  Three, we are not commenting on the merits of the Supreme 
Court Judgement.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you, Raghavji.  Please take your seat. 
...(Interruptions)...    
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA: We are only referring...  ...(Interruptions)... Sir, I am just 
finishing.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I t  i s  o v e r  n o w .  ...(Interruptions)... Please. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, एक आिखरी Ãवाइंट है। सर, एक आिखरी िवनती है। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : You have already explained. ...(Interruptions)... Please 
take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, आप सुिनए तो सही।  
 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : No. ...(Interruptions)...  Please. ...(Interruptions)...  I 
am not permitting now. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, मȅ खत्म कर रहा हूं। सर, 10 सȂकड मȂ खत्म कर रहा हूं। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : No; it is over . ...(Interruptions)... Please.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA : I am not making a political speech.  ...(Interruptions)... 
सर, आप खत्म करने दीिजए। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please be brief. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: सर, इस सदन मȂ िपछले एक साल क े भीतर ही, मȅ तो अभी सदÎय बना हूं। सर, 
िपछले एक साल क े भीतर भी कई ऐसे िनणर्य, चाहे सुĢीम कोटर् ने िदए, चा
हे वह िदÊली का सेवा 
िबल हो, चाहे वह इलेक्शन कमीशन हो... ...(Ëयवधान).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please be brief, I told you. ...(Interruptions)... Thank 
you.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा: उस पर इस सदन मȂ चचार् हुई। उसके  आिर्डनȂसेज़ लाए गए। ...(Ëयव
धान).. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir,... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)... 
Mananiya Tiruchi Siva is the last speaker on this . ...(Interruptions)... Please. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, rule book... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : You have already spoken, Dr. John Brittas. 
...(Interruptions)... Mananiya Tiruchi Siva.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, the normal convention is that only after a 
Private Members' Bill or Resolution is deba ted, the Minister will reply and request to 
withdraw.  A Bill or resolution can be objected only at the stage of introduction, now it 
has come for consideration.  Moreover, no  one has the right to  interrupt a Private 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
91

Members' Resolution and whatever the Minist er said, may be in the court, anything, 
we will deliberate here.  The attempt to stalemate or not allowing the Member to 
speak is allowing a Member not to deliberate his rights, his views in the Parliament as 
per the convention and as per the rules.  The PMR has been admitted.  It has come 
under ballot.  Now, he has got every right to initiate, and not allowing it and scuttling it 
will amount to a Privilege Motion.   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय सदÎयगण, please. 
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, पिरिÎथित का थोड़ा सा िमस-िरĢेजȂटेशन हो रहा है। Nobody is 
denying the right of the hon. Member of this House.  We are just following the 
process and the procedures.  As per the convention and the rules, we are not 
preventing the hon. Member from moving his Resolution.  That is his right.  He can 
move it. The only thing stated by the hon. Minister and some of the Members is that 
the Government's position is very clear after the decision given by the Supreme 
Court.  So, now, let the hon. Member move the Resolution and, also, he has the right 
to speak out some of his points to justif y the Resolution and then, if we will not 
agree....  ...(Interruptions)...   If the majority of the sense of the House is not 
agreeing, we will always put to vote. ...(Interruptions)... It is...  ...(Interruptions)... 
We are not denying the right.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please take your seats.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI KIREN RIJIJU : We are not denying. ...(Interruptions)...  He can speak.    
...(Interruptions)... We will...  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please take your seats.  ...(Interruptions)...  No. 
...(Interruptions)...  I am not allowing anybody.  माननीय सदÎयगण, please take your 
seats. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : They cannot... ...(Interruptions)...   It c
annot be put to... 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Tiruchi Sivaji, please take your seat . ...(Interruptions)... I 
will go by the Rules and Procedures of the book. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, they are afraid. ...(Interruptions)... 
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please.  ...(Interruptions)... It is not going on record 
now. ...(Interruptions)...  Mr. Tiruchi Siva, it is not going on record. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: * 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: 
* 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I will go by rules and procedure. 
...(Interruptions)...Please.  ...(Interruptions)... I will go by rules and procedure. 
...(Interruptions)... I will go by rules and procedure. ...(Interruptions)... Please. 
...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)... No.   ...(Interruptions)... No. माननीय 
सदÎयगण,  I will follow the rules. ...(Interruptions)... I will follow the...  
...(Interruptions)... Please.  ...(Interruptions)...  Tiruchi Siva, it is not going on 
record. ...(Interruptions)... Dr. John Brittas, it is not going on record. 
...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)...  It is not going 
on record. ...(Interruptions)... Please take your seats.  ...(Interruptions)... Please 
take your seats. ...(Interruptions)... I will follow the rules and procedure now.  
...(Interruptions)... Please.  ...(Interruptions)... Please.  ...(Interruptions)...I will 
follow the rules and procedure.  ...(Interruptions)... Tiruchiji, please take your seats.  
...(Interruptions)... He has  to move a Resolution as per rules and procedure.  वे 
Resolution move करȂगे and rules of procedure क े अनुसार, he will speak something very 
briefly and if others differ from that, at th at stage only, voting or division can take 
place. This is the rule.  Mohamed Abdulla ji, please. ...(Interruptions)... You speak 
briefly on this and then we will take the opinion of the House. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Kerala):  What is brief, Sir? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please speak briefly on this subject. ...(Interruptions)... 
He will speak briefly, Tiruchi ji. ...(Interruptions)...  H
e  h a s  t o  m o v e .   
...(Interruptions)... Yes, he will speak...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL(Gujarat): Sir, two hours is given for 
this...(Interruptions)... 
 
                   
* Not recorded.  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
93

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : He has to move. Please take your seat, Tiruchi ji. 
...(Interruptions)... आप रूÊस जानते हȅ िक introduction क े level पर ही there is a 
different opinion.  He has the right to intr oduce the Bill. First he will speak and then 
the opinion of the House will be taken. ...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)... 
You speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA: Sir, I need fifteen minutes. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, you speak.  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I move the following resolution:- 
"Having regard to the fact that:- 
(i)  certain States are opposed to the National Eligibility cum Entrance 
(NEET) Exam due to the perceived injustice to the domiciled students 
of the State; 
(ii) the NEET exam needs review in  the way of selection of eligible 
candidates; 
(iii) the NEET Question Paper leaks, the award of grace marks etc., have 
indicated the need to examine the ability of NTA to successfully conduct 
examinations without prejudice to students; and 
(iv) the NEET exam is also affecting the poorest of the poor, who are unable 
to fulfil their dreams and aspirations of becoming doctors to serve the 
people 
the House urges upon the Government to:- 
(a) bring a legislation to remove Edu cation from the Concurrent List and 
move it to the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 
(b) repeal NEET and NTA and revert to medical admissions based on the 
criteria of State Governments, which are uniquely tailored to the 
requirements of particular States; and 
(c) provide a compensation of Rupees One Crore to the families of victims 
affected by the NEET exam." 
 
Sir, I rise to introduce my Private Me mber Resolution to remove Education 
from the Concurrent List and move it to  the State List, repeal NEET and NTA and 
revert to medical admissions based on the criteria of State Government which are 
uniquely tailored to the requirements of particular States, provide a compensation of 
Rs.1 crore to the families of victims affect ed by the NEET exams.  Having regard to 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

the facts that certain States are opposed to the National Eligibility cum Entrance 
Exams due to the injustice inflicted to the domiciled students of the State and 
infringement upon the autonomy of the St ate Government in the field of medical 
education. The NEET exam is flawed in the way of selection of eligible candidates.  
We are all aware about the present NEET question paper leaks, the irresponsible 
award of grace marks and the inability of NT A to successfully conduct examinations 
without prejudice to students. The award of  marks such as 718 or 719 out of 720, 
which is impossible with the negative mark ing scheme of the NEET exam has been 
indirectly achieved by the way of wilful ma nipulation of grace marks.  The NEET exam 
is also affecting the poorest of the poor, who are unable to fulfil their dreams and 
aspirations of becoming doctors to serve the people, driving young students into 
suicide. The NEET exam is directly against the principles of social justice extolled by 
the stalwarts of the Dravidian Movement and the Dravidian model of governance of 
the Tamil Nadu Government.  
 Sir, the National Eligibility cum Entran ce Test UG 2024 was supposed to be a 
vital examination for medical aspirants in India. However, this year, the NEET 
examination was surrounded by controversies, including allegations of question paper 
leaks, the awarding of grace marks and othe r systematic issues, which led to a series 
of legal battles that lasted for around two months. The latest instance of NEET 
controversy is the culmination of a situatio n brewing over years. Papers have been 
routinely leaked; the release of incorrect results has b een connected to aspirant 
suicides. The Government has cancelled the NET examination conducted by NTA, 
compounding doubts about its institutional in tegrity. What is important to understand 
is that cheating or fraud in NEET or NET or other such highly competitive 
examinations is only a consequence of bad policy. The NEET-UG controversy has 
spotlighted the widespread issue of paper le aks, a malpractice that has plagued India 
for years.  In the past se ven years, there have been 70 confirmed exam leaks across 
15 States, casting serious doubts on the in tegrity of the nation's examinations. In 
2021, the Government of Tamil Nadu formed  a panel to study the impact of NEET-
based admission process. The Tamil Nadu Government then released a 165-page 
report of a nine-member committee headed by retired High Court Judge, A.K. Rajan, 
that has made a case against entrance te sts such as NEET.  The ruling DMK had 
piloted a legislation in the Legislative Assembly to scrap NEET. 
Justice Rajan pointed out that the existing law itself are adequate to eliminate 
NEET for admissions to Government-run medi cal colleges.  Consequently, only the 
State Government institution has the rights to decide on matters related to admission, 
and the Union Government cannot make any law on this. Therefore, NEET is not 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
95

applicable at all in so far as the Gove rnment medical colleges in the State are 
concerned. The Government of Tamil Nadu has taken a number of steps to ensure a 
level playing field for students from rural areas and deprived backgrounds.  Following 
up these initiatives, after careful consideration, the entrance examination for 
professional Undergraduate courses was subsequently abolished.  The common 
entrance examinations, by design, favour thos e from the elite, influential and affluent 
backgrounds.  But students  from poorer socio-economic backgrounds are unable to 
compete with students from such elite, affluent, influential background in common 
entrance exams.  For postgraduate medica l course, the Government of Tamil Nadu 
gives preference to those who have served in rural areas with additional special 
weightage to those who work in hilly and trib al areas.  This has significantly improved 
the availability of doctors at remote locat ion and also strengthened the quality of 
primary health care in Tamil Nadu as the State Government has successfully obtained 
and enforced bonds from those completing Postgraduate examination in Government 
medical colleges to serve the State Govern ment for a minimum period.  This has 
helped us to meet the need for specialist medical manpower in Government hospitals.  
Sir, the conducting of NEET or an y common entrance test would nullify the 
implementation of such progressive policy initiatives and prevent furthering of the 
socio-economic objective of States.  Tamil Nadu strongly objects the conducting of 
NEET or introducing any other national e ligibility entrance test like NEXT as they 
infringe upon the constitutional rights of the States and admission policies to medical 
education and medical service in Tamil Nadu .  Further, the Tamil Nadu Admission in 
Professional Educational Institution Act which abolished the Common Entrance Test 
and made 12th standard marks, the criterio n for admission to professional courses is 
still valid for medical college run by the State Government.  If the Government was not 
willing to take this advice, Justice Rajan, in  his report pointed out that a separate law 
can be enacted similar to 2007 Act in wh ich both Government and self-financed 
medical colleges can be brought under the purview.  The then Chief Minister of Tamil 
Nadu, Dr. Kalaignar, in 2 007, removed entrance examination for both medical and 
engineering courses, which immensely bene fited rural students, especially first-
generation graduates.  Dr. Kalaignar's DMK Government abolished the entrance 
examination system to bridge the gap between poor rural students from lower middle 
income families and well-off urban students. The decision was also motivated by the 
fact that the entrance examination system  did not accommodate reservation policies 
and was seen as interfering with the State autonomy.  This legacy of a visionary leader 
is what the State Government has followe d in the latest resolution anonymously 
passed by the Tamil Nadu Legisl ative Assembly.  It is important to recall that in the 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

Supreme Court judgment, the Medical Council of India has no authority to introduce 
such an examination at the All India level.  Each state has its own syllabus.  There are 
different ways of teaching. Therefore, All India examination for all students will greatly 
affect the rural students.  In the session chaired by the Chief Ju stice of the Supreme 
Court,  on 18.7.2013, quashed the NEET Examination Notice Order, citing the basic 
reasons that rural students cannot comple te equally with the urban students and 
attend the entrance examination. On 23.7.2013, welcoming the decision, Dr. 
Kalaignar said, as far as DMK is concerned, no matter what form the entrance 
examinations come in, I want to make it clear  that I will oppose it.  In 2015, the then 
BJP-led Union Government appealed agains t the NEET ban and the NEET exam was 
reintroduced in India from 11 April 2016.  On e of the primary concerns of NEET is its 
impact on State autonomy.  In India's federal structure, States have significant 
authority over educational policies and regu lations.  Before NEET, States had the 
power to set admission criteria for medical  colleges within their jurisdiction. This 
system allowed States to tailor their admi ssion processes to reflect local needs, 
socio-economic conditions and educational standard.  The imposition of NEET, a 
centralized exam, administered by National  Testing Agency, has been perceived as 
an infringement of this autonomy.  For St ates with a diverse educational background 
and the varying standards of preparation. …(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित:  Ãलीज़, आप अपनी-अपनी सीट्स पर बैठȂ।  
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA : A one-size-fits-all approach may not accurately 
reflect the capabilities of students and entr ench educational inequalities. We Tamils 
protested against the imposition of Hindi. At  that time, you argued that we needed a 
common language for our diverse country, stating that India has many languages. We 
responded by asking, "if English is alread y serving as a link language, why do we 
need Hindi"? You argued back that Engl ish is the language of those who once 
enslaved us, so why should we adopt it as our connecting language? 
Sir, I can communicate with you in Eng lish, you are communicating with me in 
English, we both can underst and. Sir, can we both go to England and compete with 
them by any case?  Never. The outcome would be similar for all non-Hindi speaking 
States if Hindi will be imposed as our comm on language. This is why we opposed the 
imposition of Hindi. By objecting Hindi impo sition, you portrayed us as anti-national. 
But the fact is to save the unity, we have do ne that. This is what is happening in the 
case of NEET imposition also.  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
97

The DMK has long opposed NEET, having  secured a stay from the Madras 
High Court on its implementation when it was first introduced in 2010 through 
regulations. Also, in a letter addressed to hon. Prime Minister regarding exemption of 
NEET for the State, hon. Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu Thalapathy M.K. Stalin stated 
that "we had passed a Bill unanimously in ou r Legislative Assembly to exempt Tamil 
Nadu from NEET and to provid e medical admissions based on 12 th standard marks. 
This has been sent for Presidential assent, but the assent is still pending." 
The Dravidian Movement is founded on th e belief that education is a powerful 
tool for cultural transformation, shaping public opinion and advancing social progress. 
The commitment to social justice driven by this movement remains strong today. I just 
want to remind this House a significant mo ment in the struggle occurred in 1921 when 
Tamil Nadu's education policies underwent  a major shift due to the Dravidian 
movement's advocacy. At that time, kn owledge of Sanskrit was a mandatory 
requirement for admission to medical colleges.  But, it was taken out. Justice Party's 
Leader-Panagal Arasar in 1921 abolished the scheme after the continuous protests.   
The purpose of education should be to examine all aspects of society 
impartially, eradicate social justice and tran sform the unequal distribution of wealth 
experienced by a few into something beneficial for everyone in the world. This was the 
vision of Dr. Kalaignar.  In  Indian politics, the DMK saw education as the only way for 
all communities to advance towards empowerm ent, and it worked tirelessly to bring 
education to the people. Dr. Kalaignar, a tireless advocate for social justice, 
dedicated himself to this cause until the end of his journey. 
With the emergence of national-level co mmon entrance examinations for every 
professional course or university course, school-leaving examinations have become 
pointless and coaching centres have mushroom ed with the sole purpose of preparing 
students for these entrance examinations  showing very little respect to School 
Education system and board exams.  
Sir, at this time, I would like to remi nd the words of an important leader. 
Around 37 years ago, an august Member of this House, in 1987, said in this House, 
"This country will grow if the party in power takes the view of the Members of the 
Opposition."  I repeat, this country will grow if the party in power takes the view of the 
Members of the Opposition. Although ar e Members are small, our arguments are 
powerful. The Government only takes our numbers into account and does not take 
our arguments into account."  These words we re said by none other than the former 
Prime Minister of India, Shri Atal Bihari Va jpayee, in 1987, in th e Rajya Sabha. I want 
to remind this to the Treasury Benches. I would like to remind this Union Government 
of this and call upon them to repeal  NEET and protect State autonomy, as 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

championed by our hon. Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Thiru. M.K. Stalin. Therefore, I 
urge this House to pass my resolution to disband conducting of NEET exams and opt 
for the decentralised examination system, thereby upholding state autonomy and 
safeguarding the future of the millions of students across the country. Thank you, Sir. 
 
The question was proposed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the Resolution has been moved.  Now, I call upon the 
Members whose names have been received for participation in the discussion.   
 
Ǜी िकरेन िरिजजु: सर, हम लोग Private Members' Resolution को honour करते हȅ। गवनर्मȂट 
की position को मंतर्ी जी ने भी थोड़ा बताया, िफर भी अगर चचार् करनी है, तो जो आपका Private 
Members' Resolution का defined time है, उसमȂ हम लोग चचार् क े िलए तैयार हȅ।  हम सबको 
सुनना चाहते हȅ, उसके  बाद जो भी position हो, हमȂ टाइम से चलना है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित: डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे(महाराÍटर्): उपसभापित महोदय, Ǜी एम. मोहÇमद अÅदुÊला जो 
Private Members' Resolution लाए हȅ, इस Resolution का मȅ िवरोध करता हूँ और इसिलए 
िवरोध कर
ता हूँ िक हमारा संघीय राज्य है।  यहाँ जो भी मेिडकल कॉलेज मȂ admission लेगा, 
उसके  िलए throughout the country, uniform examination होनी चािहए, यह सबकी भावना 
थी।  उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ खुद डॉक्टर हूँ।  1977 मȂ उस वƪ NEET नहीं थी, उस वƪ exam 
नहीं थी, 12वीं क े माक्सर् क े ऊपर हम लोगȗ ने admission िलया था।  लेिकन उसके  बा
द ऐसा देखा 
गया िक private medical colleges आ गए, deemed universities आ गईं, नए-नए मेिडकल 
कॉलेजेज खुलने लगे।  उसके  बाद उनमȂ admission क े िलए एक examination रहनी चािहए, 
ऐसी सबकी भावनाएँ थीं।  उस वƪ 2009 मȂ कांगर्ेस की सरकार क े वƪ ही यह भावना शुरू  हुई िक 
uniform ex
amination रहनी चािहए, लेिकन उस वƪ कांगर्ेस की सरकार वह कर नहीं सकी।  
ऐसी बहुत सारी चीजȂ हȅ, कांगर्ेस की सरकार क े मन मȂ बहुत सारी भावनाएँ रहती थीं, लेिकन वह 
कर नहीं सकती थी।  मो
दी जी की सरकार आने क े बाद ही वे सब चीजȂ होने लगी हȅ।  चाहे यह 
central examination हो; examination मȂ जो unfair means होती हȅ, उसका law हो; women 
reservation
 हो; Îवामीनाथन आयोग हो; कालेलकर कमीशन को टेबल करना हो; ओबीसी क े 
िलए मंडल आयोग को include करना हो या ओबीसी क े बोडर् को संवैधािनक दजार् देना हो; या 
MSP देने की भावना हो; ये सब चीजȂ, जो उनको करनी चािहए थी, लेिकन वे कर नहीं सकी ।  
2015 क े पहले ऐसी पिरिÎथित का िनमार्ण हो गया िक Îटेट मȂ Government medical colleges 
रहते थे, उसके  िलए अलग exam रहती थी; private medical colleges रहते थे, उन्हȗने 
association बना िलया था, उस association की exam रहती थी; िफर जो deemed 
universities रहती थीं, अलग-अलग deemed universities अपनी अलग-अलग exams लेती 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
99

थीं।  इसके  अलावा, All India Pre-Medical Test भी  होती थी।  इसके  माध्यम से मौलाना अबुल 
कलाम आजाद कॉलेज हो या Armed Forces का कॉलेज हो या सȂटर्ल गवनर्मȂट ǎारा चलने वाले 
एÇस मȂ admission हो, उनके  िलए All India PMT रहती थी।  एक गर्ामीण इलाके  मȂ रहने वाला 
लड़का, जो गर्ामीण इला क े  से आता है, गरीब घर का है, वह इतने exam क े forms क ै से भरेगा!  
यानी उसको राज्य मȂ गवनर्मȂट की exam का form भरना  पड़ता था, Associate क े exam का 
form भरना पड़ता था; िजतनी भी deemed universities रहती थीं, उनका form भरना पड़ता था।  
हरेक form क े िलए अलग पैसा रहता था, हरेक कॉलेज की अलग exam रहती थी।  अगर उसको 
All India क े िलए form भरना होता था, तो AIPMT का form भरना पड़ता था।  उसमȂ जो गरीब 
लड़के  थे, जो दूरदराज एिरया क े लड़के  थे, जो गर्ामीण इलाके  से आने वाले लड़के  थे, वे इस 
competition मȂ उतर नहीं सकते थे।  मȅने देखा है िक Associate की जो exam रहती थी, वह 
Associate की exam was the mockery.
  यानी पूरे private medical colleges पहले decide 
कर लेते थे िक लड़का िकतनी फीस देने वाला है, िकतने पैसे देने वाला है।  वे उसकी िलÎट बनाते 
थे, उसके  बाद exam लेते थे।Exam लेने क े बाद, जो िक िस
फर् नाम क े िलए exam होता था, 
उसकी एक मेिरट िलÎट बनती थी।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, डीÇड युिनविर्सटी मȂ तो उससे भी बिढ़या था।  उसमȂ तो हम बोलते थे 
िक डायरेक्ट टȂडर ही िनकलता था।  उसमȂ तो हर रास होता था, उसमȂ तो लीला होती थी िक जो 
ज्यादा पैसे देगा, वह  exam मȂ पास हो जाएगा।  अब ये सब चीजȂ हȅ, तो इसके  िलए एक ही exam 
हो, चाहे कोई भी गाँव का लड़का हो, कोई भी गरीब घर का लड़क ा हो या दूर-दराज का लड़का 
हो, उसको ज्यादा फॉÇसर् भरने की जरूरत नहीं रहनी चािहए, इसके  पीछे यह सबसे महत्वपूणर् 
भावना थी।  उच्चतर िशक्षण संÎथानȗ मȂ Ģवेश लेने क े िलए परीक्षा आयोिजत करने क े िलए एक 
Îटेचुटरी बॉडी का िनमार्ण करना बहुत जरूरी था।  उच्चतर िशक्ष
ा िवभाग, िशक्षा मंतर्ालय ने 
राÍटर्ीय परीक्षा एजȂसी की Îथापना इसीिलए की।  एक Îवतंतर्, एक ÎवायǄ और एक आत्मिनभर्र 
Ģमुख संगठन क े रूप  मȂ 15 मई, 2018 को एक सोसाइटी का पंजीकरण िकया गया और उसका 
नाम रखा गया - राÍटर्ीय परीक्षा एजȂसी।  इस राÍटर्ीय परीक्षा एजȂसी को सवȘच्च न्यायालय ने - 
अगर आप संिवधान को मानते हȅ, तो हमारा एक ÎतÇभ न्यायालय भी है।  आप
को पता है िक 
एनटीए िसिव ल  अपील संख्या 11230/2018 सीबीएसई बनाम टी.क े. रंगराजन मȂ 22 नवÇबर, 2018 
को माननीय सवȘच्च न्यायालय ने िनदȃश िदए थे।  उन िनदȃशȗ क े ऊपर NEET-Under Graduate 
की परीक्षा आयोिजत की गई है।  वे िनदȃश क्या थे?  NEET-UG Examination is being 
conducted on behalf of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  2019 से NEET-UG 
राÍटर्ीय िचिकत्सा आयोग, अिधिनयम, 2019 की धारा 14 क े अनुसार यह परीक्षा क ंडक्ट की जाती 
है।  देश भर क े सभी िचिकत्सा संÎथानȗ मȂ पूवर्-Îनातक िचिक
त्सा िशक्षा मȂ Ģवेश क े िलए समान 
Ģवेश-सह-पातर्ता परीक्षा रहे, यह इसका उǈेÌय है।  सेक्शन 14(1) क्या कहता है?  यह कहता है 
िक there shall be a u
niform National-Eligib ility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to 
undergraduate and post-graduate super speci ality medical education in all medical 
institutions which are governed by the provis ion of this Act.  चाहे वह एÇस हो, डीÇड 
युिनविर्सटी हो, Ģाइवेट मेिडकल कॉलेज हो या Îटेट का मेिडकल कॉलेज हो - Provided that 
the uniform National-Eligibility-cum-En trance Test, for admission to the 
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

undergraduate medical examination, shall be  applicable to all medical institutions 
governed under any other law, for the time being,  in force.  It is further stated that the 
constitutional validity NEET-UG 2024 Exam ination has been upheld by the hon. 
Supreme Court in the case No. 98 of 2012, CMC Vellore Association versus Union of 
India. And, in the judgement, dated 29 th April, 2020, the hon. court said that uniform 
entrance test qualifies the test of proporti onality and is reasonable and the same is 
intended to check several mala fide  interests which crept into the medical education.  
मेिडकल एजुक ेशन मȂ पैसे का अन्तभार्व बहुत बड़े पैमाने पर हो गया, क्यȗिक डीÇड युिनविर्सटी जो 
है, उसमȂ Ģाइवेट मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ हȅ।  अब ये जो Ģाइवेट मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ हȅ, उनको खचार् 
लगता है, because I was also a Professor in a medical college, t
hat too in a private 
medical college.  There were only two-three medical colleges throughout the country, 
लेिकन इसमȂ ĢॉÅलम यह थी िक exploitation होता  था।  इसमȂ उसका minimum standard भी 
नहीं रहता था।  सर, same pattern US मȂ भी शुरू  है।   वहाँ CMAT – Common Medical 
Admission Test का जो examination है, यह under graduation क े िलए िलया जाता है।  तो 
यह अमेिरका मȂ भी होता है। यूएसए मȂ यह एग्ज़ाम ली जाती है, वह तो इंटर नेशनल है।   हमारे 
यहाँ क े भी लड़के  उस एग्ज़ाम क े िलए बैठ सकते हȅ।  वह िंसगल एग्ज़ािमनेशन है।  मȅ तिमलनाडु 
क े सांसद महोदय से िवनती करना चाहता हूँ िक हमारा फ ेडरल Îटेट है, संघीय राज्य है और 
यूएसए भी संघीय राज्य है, वहाँ पर एक एग्ज़ाम, minimum qualification,
 minimum eligibility 
for the entrance of the medical colleges should be decided.  उसके  िलए यह entrance 
examination ली गई है।  मȅ तो बोलता हूँ िक NTA क े ǎारा जो एग्ज़ाÇस ली जाती है, उनमȂ से 
NEET-UG और NEET-PG क े िलए िलए जा रहे एग्ज़ाम को रǈ करने का कोई भी ĢÎताव नहीं 
रहना चा
िहए।  यह हमारे िवǏािर्थयȗ क े िलए, गर्ामीण क्षेतर् क े िवǏािर्थयȗ क े िलए बहुत महत्वपूणर् है।  
वषर् 2018 मȂ Îथापना क े बाद एनटीए ने 5.5 करोड़ छातर्ȗ को 240 से अिधक िविभन्न परीक्षाओं क े 
माध्यम से सिर्वस दी।  इसके  अलावा एनटीए क े ǎारा जो परीक्ष
ाएँ ली जाती हȅ, उनमȂ पारदिर्शता, 
सुचारू  और िनÍपक्ष संचालन क े िलए िनिÌचत ही सुझाव िदया जा सकता है।  मȅ तो माननीय मंतर्ी 
महोदय का अिभनंदन करता हूँ िक इस परीक्षा तंतर् मȂ सुधार क े िलए डेटा सुरक्षा Ģो
टोकॉल मȂ 
सुधार िकया गया है।  उन्हȗने एनटीए की संवरचना और कायर्Ģणाली पर िसफािरश क े िलए एक 
उच्च Îतरीय कमेटी गिठत की है।  इस सिमित क े सदÎय क े रूप  मȂ आईआईटी कान पुर क े अध्यक्ष, 
सेन्टर्ल यूिनविर्सटी ऑफ हैदराबाद क े वाइस चांसलर, आईआईटी मदर्ास क े Ģोफे सर और सदÎय 
सिचव क े रूप  मȂ ज्वाइंट सेकर् ेटरी, िशक्षा मंतर्ालय हȅ।  इसमȂ co mputer और इंजीिनयिंरग क्षेतर् क े 
सदÎय को भी िलया गया है।  इसके  माध्यम से नीट का एग्ज़ाम और ज्यादा पारदशीर् तरीके  से हो 
सकती है।  इस वƪ 24 लाख लड़के  एक लाख सीटȗ क े िलए बैठे थे।  इस एग्ज़ाम मȂ िनिÌचत ही 
क ु छ miscreants हȅ और जब उन miscreants
 क े बारे मȂ पता चला, तो गवनर्मȂट और िमिनÎटर्ी ने 
उसके  ऊपर immediate action िलया है।  उसके  िलए मȅ उनका अिभनंदन करता हूँ।  जब पेपर 
लीक क े बारे मȂ संज्ञान हुआ, तो उसके  ऊपर जो इन् वेिÎटगेशन चला, उन सभी को Central 
Bureau of Investigation को सȚपा गया और दो महीने क े अंदर उस पर पूरा संज्ञान लेने का 
आÌवासन मंतर्ालय ने िदया।        
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
101

[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (DR. DINESH SHARMA) in the Chair.] 
 
  सबसे महत्वपूणर् बात यह है िक जब scattered leaks होते हȅ, तो क्या उससे पूरी परीक्षा 
रǈ कर देनी चािहए?  क्या पूरे देश मȂ इस तरह का वातावरण का िनमार्ण करना चािहए?  उसका 
संज्ञान सुĢीम कोटर् क े न्यायाधीशȗ ने िलया।  सुĢी म कोटर् ने कल-परसȗ ही उस पर जो िनणर्य 
िदया, उसमȂ उन्हȗने कहा िक इस परीक्षा को रǈ करने की कोई जरूरत नहीं है और गवनर्मȂट को 
काउंसिंलग शुरू  कर देनी चािहए।  इसके  साथ ही सुĢीम कोटर् क े न्यायाधीशȗ ने यह भी कहा है िक 
सरकार को इसमȂ सुधार करने की जो-जो संभावन
ाएँ िदखती हȅ, उनके  िलए िनिÌचत कदम उठाने 
चािहए।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, एजुक ेशन कॉन्करȂट िलÎट मȂ है।  इसको कॉन्करȂट िलÎट 
मȂ अभी नहीं िलया गया, बिÊक जब यूपीए की, कांगर्ेस की सरकार थी, उस वƪ ही इसको इस 
िलÎट मȂ िलया गया था और यह बहुत अच्छी बात है, क्यȗिक पूरे इंिडया मȂ डेिफनेटली भौगोिलक 
वेिरएशन रह सकता है, कÊचरल वेिरएशन रह सकता है, लेिकन इंजीिनयिंरग फ ैकÊटी, 
मेिडकल फ ैकÊटी ऐसी फ ैकÊटी है िक उसका एक ग्लोबल इंपैक्ट है।  इस ग्लोबल इंपैक्ट मȂ पूरा 
एजुक ेशन सभी राज्यȗ मȂ एकसमान रहना चािहए।  वह एजुक ेशन या क्वालीफाइंग एग्जािमनेशन 
बाकी भाषाओं मȂ भी देने की ËयवÎथा करनी चािहए।  नीट क े माध्यम से   यह परीक्षा 13 भाषाओं मȂ 
देने का Ģावधान  भी  िकया गया।  उसका पिरणाम यह हुआ िक तिमलनाडु का लड़का अपनी भाषा 
मȂ परीक्षा दे सकता है, क्यȗिक उसमȂ 13 लȅग्वेजेज़ इंक्लूड की गई हȅ।  यानी, िसफर् िंहदी और 
अंगर्ेजी क े ऊपर िडपȂडȂट न रहते हुए, वह लड़का भाषा मȂ एक्सपटर् नहीं होगा, लेिकन मेिडकल क े 
िलए उसका एÃटीǷूड अच्छा हो, उसकी इच्छा उसके  िलए अच्छी हो, वह िफिजक्स, क ेिमÎटर्ी 
और बायोलॉजी मȂ अच्छे माक्सर् भी ला सकता हो, तो वह डेिफनेटली एिलिजबल हो सकता है।  
उसके  डेिफनेटली एिलिजबल होने की संभावना इस टेÎट ने पैदा की है। अनफॉचुर्नेटली, मोहÇमद 
अÅदुÊला जी ने जैसा सजेÎट िकया है िक हर एक Îटेट को नीट लेने का अिधकार दो, अगर ऐसा 
हुआ तो तिमलनाडु का लड़का िसफर् तिमलनाडु मȂ ही सीखेगा, महाराÍटर् का लड़का महाराÍटर् मȂ 
ही सीखेगा।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्): अब आप समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  आज इस एग्जाम क े माध्यम से तिमलनाडु का लड़का महाराÍटर् मȂ 
सीखने को आ रहा है, महाराÍटर् का लड़का कनार्टक मȂ सीखने को आ रहा है, यानी पूरा इंिडया 
एक हो रहा है, यह भी इÇपॉटȄट है।  चाहे आईआईटी का एग्जाम हो या AIEEE का एग्जाम हो, 
उसकी वजह से एक्सचȂज ऑफ़ द यूथ, एक्सचȂज ऑफ़ द Îटू डȂट, यह भी बहुत अच्छी तरह से हो 
रहा है।  Îटेट को यह एग्जाम देने क े बाद, इसकी िजÇमेदारी देने क े बाद क्या कोई गारंटी दे 
सकता है िक पेपसर् लीक नहीं हȗगे? क्या कोई गारंटी दे सकता है िक एग्जाम मȂ गड़बड़ी नहीं 
होगी?  मȅ यह उदाहरण इसिलए दे रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक राज्यȗ मȂ जो परीक्षाएं हुई हȅ, उनमȂ भी इतनी 
गड़बड़ी हुई है िक उनको क ȅिसल करने की नौबत आई है।  हर एक राज्य मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्) : आप अच्छा बोल रहे हȅ, लेिकन अब आप जÊदी समाÃत 
कीिजए।...(Ëयवधान)...अभी इनकी पाटीर् का समय है। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: जो Îटेट लेवल की परीक्षाएं थीं, उनको एग्जाम क ंडिंक्टग बॉडीज़ 
आयोिजत करती थी। उनमȂ पेपर लीक और मैलĢैिक्टस क े इशूज़ इतनी बार सामने आए िक इसके  
पिरणाम मȂ सब परीक्षाएं क ȅिसल कर देनी पड़ीं, उनको रीशेǹूल  कर देना पड़ा, एग्जाम होने क े 
बाद एग्जाम क ȅिसल करनी पड़ी।  अब यहां पर भी नेशनल टेिंÎटग एजȂसी क े माध्यम से जो नीट 
की परीक्षा होनी थी या नीट पीजी की परीक्षा होनी थी, उस परीक्षा क े होने क े पहले उसको 
रीशेǹूल  िकया गया,  क्यȗिक उनको यह आहट हुई िक क ु छ लीक्स की ĢॉÅलÇस हȅ।  लेिकन, 
2010 मȂ उǄर Ģदेश मȂ बीएड एंटर्Ȃस एग्जािमनेशन, 2010 की परीक्षा होने क े बाद भी जनरल 
अवेयरनेस का पेपर लीक हुआ था।  उǄर Ģदेश मȂ क ंबाइंड Ģी मेिडकल टेÎट, 2014 मȂ मेिडकल 
कोसȃज क े िलए एंटर्Ȃस एग्जाम ली गई थी, उसका पेपर लीक हो गया था, तत्पÌचाÞ, परीक्षा 
क ȅिसल करनी पड़ी थी।  उǄर Ģदेश मȂ उǄर Ģदेश Ģोिंविशयल िसिवल सिर्वसेज एग्जािमनेशन 
2015 मȂ हुई थी, उसका पेपर भी लीक हो गया था, िजसके  कारण यूपीएसएससी की वह परीक्षा 
क ȅिसल करनी पड़ी।  तिमलनाडु मȂ तिमलनाडु पिÅलक सिर्वस किमशन की गर्ुप 2 की परीक्षा 2012 
मȂ हुई थी।  उस परीक्षा क े दौरान क्वेÌचन पेपर लीक हो गया था, इसिलए उसके  पिरणामÎवरूप 
जो परीक्षा हुई है, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : माननीय सदÎय, अब आप समाÃत कीिजए, समय काफी हो गया 
है।   
                                                              
डा .अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: सर, राज्यȗ मȂ जो परीक्षाएं होती हȅ, उनका हाल क्या है, वह बताना 
बहुत ज़रूरी  है, क्यȗिक अÅदुÊला जी जो चाहते हȅ, वह possible नहीं  है, उससे पिरणाम बहुत 
खराब होने वाले हȅ। इसि लए  आपको अपना ĢÎताव Îवयं ही वापस लेना चािहए। इसीिलए मȅ बता 
रहा हूं िक आपने अगर इसे वापस ले िलया, तो कोई ĢॉÅलम ही नहीं होगी।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : अिनल जी, आप पीठ की तरफ देिखए।  
 
डा .अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: अÅदुÊला जी, यह ĢÎताव संघीय राज्य क े िवरोध मȂ है, यह सुĢीम 
कोटर् क े िवरोध मȂ है, यह भारत देश की जनता की भावना क े िवरोध मȂ है, गरीब िवǏाथीर् को जो 
एक परीक्षा मȂ बैठने की opportunity
 िमल रही है, उसके  िवरोध मȂ है। यह मुƻी भर पूंजीपित, जो 
मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ चला रहे हȅ, उनके  फायदे क े िलए आप बत
ा रहे हȅ। इसिलए यह ĢÎताव वापस 
लेना बहुत ज़रूरी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िद
न ेश शमार्): आप िकसी का Ëयिƪगत नाम नहीं लȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ëयिƪगत 
नाम हट जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप अपनी बात शुरू  करȂ। 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
103

डा . अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: जो पूंजीपित मेिडकल कॉलेज चला रहे हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... आपको 
पता है िक पहले क े मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ िकसने बांटे। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्): Ëयिƪगत नाम नहीं आएगा ...(Ëयवधान)... आप अपनी बात शुरू  
करȂ। 
 
डा .अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: इंजीिन
यिंरग कॉलेजेज़ िकसने बांटे, यह भी आपको पता है और जो 
लोग उसके  ऊपर पूरी िजन्दगी पॉिलिटक्स करते आए हȅ। 
 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्) : जो Ëयिƪगत नाम है, वह िरकॉडर् पर नहीं आएगा। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... उनको अपनी बात कहने दीिजए। 
 
डा .अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: िजन्हȗने exams क े माध्यम से िजन्दगी भर पैसा कमाया है, उनको 
ही लगता है िक वह राज्य मȂ रहे, associate की परीक्षा रहे। अलग परीक्षा रहे, deemed 
university की परीक्षा रहे। ऐसे लोगȗ का भला न हो, गरीब िव Ǐाथीर् का भला हो, इसिलए ĢÎताव 
वापस लेना जरूरी है। ...(Ëयवधान)... तिमलनाडु मȂ वषर् 2012 मȂ Tamil Nadu Public Service 
Commission मȂ एक question paper leak हुआ था, पिरणामÎवरूप परीक्षा क ȅिसल कर दी थी। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्): Ëयिƪगत आरोप Ģ
 ोसीिंडग का िहÎसा नहीं हȗगे। 
 
डा . अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: पिÌचमी बंगाल मȂ Joint Entrance Examination (WBJEE) 
Board मȂ िफिज़क्स, क ेिमÎटर्ी और बायलॉजी की परीक्षा मȂ क्वेÌचन पेपर लीक हुआ था। उसके  
बाद परीक्षा क ȅिसल करनी पड़ी, उसके  बाद परीक्षा हो सकी।  
 राजÎथान मȂ बीते 5 सालȗ मȂ पेपर लीक क े इतने मामले सामने आए िक राजÎथान पेपर 
लीक का एक मॉडल बन गया था। ...(Ëयव
धान)... मȅ बताने वाला हूं िक महािवकास अगाड़ी की 
सरकार मȂ ढाई साल मȂ ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharasht ra):  Sir, he cannot take the name 
of... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्): सरकार का नाम ले सकते हȅ, Ëयिƪगत नाम नहीं ले सकते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... सरकार का नाम िलया है, Ëयिƪगत नहीं िलया है।  
 
डा .अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: राजÎथान मȂ पेपर लीक क े इतने मामले सामने आए, वषर् 2021 मȂ 5 
बड़े मामले सामने आए, वषर् 2022 मȂ 10 मामले सामने आए, 2023 मȂ 5 मामले शािम
ल हुए। इन 
पेपसर् लीक क े क ु छ उदाहरण मȂ Rajasthan Eligibility Examination for Teachers, 2021, SI. 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

Recruitment Examination, 2021 , RPSC School Lecturer, 2022 शािमल हȅ। ओिडशा मȂ भी 
वषर् 2019 मȂ सोशल मीिडया पर question paper लीक होने क े बाद मȂ ओिडशा का Teachers 
Eligibility Test क ȅिसल कर िदया गया था। Odisha Staff Selectio n Board, 2023, Junior 
Engineer (Civil) की भतीर् मȂ परीक्षा लीक हुई थी।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : आप जो बोल रहे हȅ, वह पाटीर् क े समय मȂ से जा रहा है, allow  
है। 
 
डा . अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: पेपर लीक हो जाने की वजह से वह परीक्षा भी क ȅिसल हो गई। 
महाराÍटर् मȂ तो ढाई साल तक महािवकास अगाड़ी की सरकार थी। आरोग्य की परीक्षा मȂ ही पेपर 
लीक हो गया, धांधली हो गई, वह परीक्षा भी क ȅिस
ल करनी पड़ी। एक अन्य परीक्षा मȂ पेपर लीक हो 
गया, वह परीक्षा भी क ȅिसल हो गई। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Sir, it is an absolute... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्) : जब आपका नÇबर आएगा, तब आप अपनी बात रिखएगा। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)...  
 
डा .अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, महाराÍटर् मȂ तो ऐसा था िक दुकान लगी थी। 
माकȃ ट लग गया था िक इतने पैसे दो और एग्ज़ाम मȂ पास हो जाओ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्): उन्हȗने सामान्य बात कही है।       
 
3.00 P.M. 
  
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: इसिलए मेरा कहन
ा यह है िक NEET एग्जािमनेशन throughout 
India सभी भाषाओं, जो सरकार ले रही है...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) : आप संिक्षÃत कीिजए। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे: उसका िनÌचय ही अिभनंदन करना चािहए।  ...(Ëयव
धान )... मȅ यह 
मानता हूं िक क ु छ सुधारȗ क े िलए, क्यȗिक टेक्नीकल कमेटी, जो सलाहकार कमेटी रखी है, 
उन्हȗने बहुत अच्छा काम िकया है।  डॉक्टर होने क े नाते मȅ भी सजेशन देना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक  
USMLE होती है,
 CMAT होती है।  यह  CMAT और USMLE एक िदन नहीं होती है।  24 लाख 
लड़के  एक िदन बैठȂ, ऐसा नहीं है।  We can designate more centres. अभी  भी सबसे ज्यादा 
centres designate िकए गए हȅ, क्यȗिक वह क ंÃयूटर पर ही एग्ज़ाम हो सकता है।  मÊटीपल 
च्वाइस कवेÌचन हȅ और मÊ टीपल  च्वाइस क्वेÌचन का क्वेÌचन बȅक बड़ा बन सकता है... 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
105

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्):  धन्यवाद, आपका समय समाÃत हुआ। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  और throughout महीना एग्ज़ाम चल सकता है।  उसके  बाद जब 
िरजÊट लगना है, तो वह िरजÊट भी लग सकता है।  उसकी वजह से पेपर लीक की ĢॉÅलम नहीं 
आएगी।...(Ëय
वधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्):  उनकी पाटीर् एलाउ कर रही है। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  तो क्वेÌचन बȅक क े माध्यम से आजकल आिर्टिफिशयल इंटेिलजȂस 
से ...(Ëयवधान)... क्वािलटी ऑफ पेपसर् चैक हो सकते हȅ। ...(Ëयव धान )...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्):   माननीय सदÎय, अपनी बात समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  महोदय, मȅ कन्क्लूड कर रहा हूं।  मेरी यही भावना है िक गरीब 
िवǏाथीर् को न्याय िमले।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) :   धन्यवाद,  नेक्Îट... 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  िकसानȗ क े लड़क
ȗ को न्याय िमले...(Ëयवधान)... िरक्शा वाले क े 
लड़कȗ को न्याय िमले।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) :   आप अपनी बात समाÃत कीिजए। 
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  और दूरदराज का आिदवासी, दिलत, िपछड़ा जो है, 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्):   नेक्Îट Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल। बȗडे जी, अपनी बात समाÃत 
कीिजए।  
 
डा. अिनल सुखदेवराव बȗडे:  महोदय, एक िमनट ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्):  आपकी बात िरकॉडर् नहीं हो रही है। आपकी बात अब िरकॉडर् 
नहीं होगी। Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल। 
 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ मोहÇमद अÅदुÊला जी को धन्यवाद करना चाहता 
हूं िक वे हाउस मȂ एक resolution लेकर आए हȅ। *  
 
Ǜी िगिरराज िंसह :जज ने कहा है, उसके  बाद भी ये ऐसी बात कर रहे हȅ!  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्) :  देिखए, माननीय सुĢीम कोटर् का जो िनणर्य आया है, उससे 
अलग हटकर नहीं बोलȂगे।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल : 
*...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( डा. िदनेश शमार्) : माननीय न्यायालय क े िनणर्य क े संदभर् मȂ आप िटÃपणी नहीं 
करȂगे। 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल : 
*...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्) :  आप सभापीठ की तरफ देिखए।  सभापीठ को संबोिधत कीिजए।   
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल : 
* 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (डा. िदनेश शमार्):  ये जो आप आरोप लगा रहे हȅ, आपको डाक्युमȂट्स देने हȗगे। 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल: 
* 
 
(MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Take your seat.  Nothing is going on record .  Take your seat.  The 
hon. Member referred to my name. I listen to the debates while I am in my Chamber.  
I have not approved anything you have give n to me.  If a Member thinks something 
has been given to me and that is approved , I am sure that is not the right logical 
approach. All that you have spoken on this issue for the last four minutes will be 
deleted. I will not allow it.   
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL:  Sir... 
 
                   
* Not recorded.   
 
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
107

MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have not concluded yet.   
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL:  Sir, this is an affidavit.  
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Please, don’t show it.  एक बार बैिठए।  Hon. Members, many 
Members write communications to me, and before even the communication reaches 
me, they tweet about it.  I privately call a Member.  Please don’t do it because if you 
want to get traction in public domain and write it to the Chai rman, give Chairman 
some time.  I am available here as much ti me as I can make available.  So, I will not 
appreciate, and the House will approve it, th at we must not engage into a situation 
where you write something to the Chairman, go public with it and... 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL: Sir, I will authenticate it.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Would you sit down?  I got your communication and I found that 
this approach has to be absolutely discounted.  
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL:  On what count? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Because this is not a House where a Member can suo motu say 
that he wants to authenticate.  And, I declined such a request from the Treasury 
Bench.  I said, "A Member cannot say that  he authenticates."  You will authenticate 
only that which the Chair says that you do. If a Member suo motu  starts 
authenticating, how can that be done?   
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL : I am saying that I will au thenticate it.  Whatever I am 
saying here, or, whatever you say to me, I will authenticate.  What other way do I 
have?  If I have to authenticate a document, I am mentioning it in the House.   Will I 
be deprived of my right?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   Take your seat.  An issue was ra ised and it was raised impactfully, 
and the issue was raised that a matter of th e State cannot be agitated in the House.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL:  It is not a matter of the State. 
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I know.  Just have some patience.  And, Shri Jairam Ramesh had 
taken that matter in a very serious mode, having written three communications to me 
signed by three hon. Members - Shri Jair am Ramesh, Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
and Shri G.C. Chandrashekhar.  If the House would recollect, a day before, I had 
afforded them time that since what you ha ve said is serious enough, and the issue 
requires my attention, if you have to a dd anything further, you may do that.  The 
matter is receiving my consideration.  Till  then, I would urge the hon. Member to 
make a point without referring to this.  Go ahead.  Once I do it, then, you will be the 
first person whom I will give the opportunity.  
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL:  I appreciate.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल:
*                                       
        
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shaktisinh ji, what you have said ju st now, I am deleting that part.   
Suppose, I say from the Chair, when the hon. Prime Minister was the Chief Minister of 
Gujarat, at that time, the th en Leader of the Opposition... ...(Interruptions)... Listen 
to me, Shaktisinh ji.  ...(Interruptions)... If I say, when the present Prime Minister, 
who is in his third term, was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, at that time, the then 
Leader of the Opposition, who is now in Rajya Sabha, and, who was the Education 
Minister in that State, then, I have named yo u.  That is what you have done.  I am not 
taking the name of Shaktisinh Gohil.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL: Sir, I bow down. सर, आपका आदेश िसर आँखȗ पर।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : You were the Leader of the Op position there, you were the 
Education Minister.  So, that will not go on record. 
 
Ǜी शिƪिंसह गोिहल:  सर, आपका आदेश िसर आँखȗ पर। 
* 
 
                   
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
109

 
 MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, all of us are seriously concerned with the purity of 
examination system.  We are seriously concerned and we want NEET also to be very 
neat.  But I will suggest, anyone who commits  a culpable act is condemnable.  Then, 
we will not look at whether he belongs to this side or  that side.                       
The House has to show objectivity. Therefore, this is not an occasion to take political 
mileage. Our education system, our comp etitive examination system, we had the 
occasion, the Education Minister saying in  the House the matter having been fully 
examined by the Supreme Court. Therefore,  let all of us in the House and outside 
promote a mechanism so that talent does  not get backseat. We must stand for 
meritocracy and not patronage. Now, Shri Jawahar Sircar. Sir, you have seven 
minutes.   
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN (Uttar Pradesh) :  Sir, I just want to say one 
thing on a lighter note.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, Madam. 
 
SHRIMATI JAYA AMITABH BACHCHAN :  On a very lighter note, did you get a lunch 
break today?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Let me be serious at your lighter note, and let me be very serious at 
your very lighter note.  
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, मȅ जया अिमताभ बच्चन आपसे पूछ रही हूँ, आपको आज लंच 
Ĥेक िमला है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं। 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: तभी आप बार-बार जयराम जी का नाम ले रहे हȅ। उनका नाम िलए 
बगैर आपका खाना हजम ही नहीं होता है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: अब आपको लाइटर नोट पर एक बात बताता हूँ। मȅने लंच िरसेस मȂ लंच नह
ीं िलया, 
तो उसके  बाद मȅने जयराम जी क े साथ लंच िलया। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... और आज ही िलया। And let 
me tell the distinguished hon. Member, शायद यह पहला मौका है िक मȅ आपका भी फ ै न हूँ 
और अिमताभ जी का भी हूं।  
 
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: सर, पहला मौका क्यȗ है? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: नहीं, ऐसा कोई और कपल मुझे िमला नहीं। 
 
Ǜीमती जया अिमताभ बƳन: हाँ, तभी मेरा नाम ऐसा था।  Thank you, Sir.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Otherwise, on a lighter note, on a very serious issue, I am a 
consistent person, and my past is proof of it.   
 
 
PRIVATE MEMBERS' RESOLUTION 
 
Regarding bringing a legislation to remove Education from Concurrent List and move 
it to State List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and other matters - Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Jawhar Sircar.   
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR (West Bengal):  Thank you, Sir, for permitting me to stand in 
support of the Resolution for the dissolution of NEET by Mr. Abdullah. Sir, we support 
this Resolution not because we are in th e opposition. We support this Resolution 
because we sincerely believe in the federa l system of the Government.  This over-
centralization that is being undertaken on a daily basis on every subject is anti-
federal. And anti-federalism is not just a political word. Sir, आप िहन्दुÎतान का िदन 
समझते नहीं है। We are a regionally-diverse and different people. We have, in each 
region and in each state, certain cultural tr aits that do not match with others. But we 
are all Hindustanis at heart. We don't need to be given lessons in nationalism. So, it is 
anti-federal and, therefore, we oppose it.   
 
[THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) in the Chair.] 
 
We believe in the autonomy of every State.  Sir, this exam is in favour of only one 
Board, and that has been proven again and again, the CBSE.  It is a CBSE-oriented 
examination that favours CBSC candidates. Sir, I am not against CBSE. It is an 
excellent Board. But what I am saying is th at other Boards that teach equally well are 
not given a fair chance under an over centralizing move.  
 When I talk of this, I have empirical pr oof of studies made by scholars where, 
for instance, they have said that the larg est Board in India is not CBSE. It is the 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
111

Maharashtra Board that is the largest. Wh en they say that where examinations are 
concerned objectively, the students of Be ngal have done very well in Physics, 
Chemistry, Mathematics, Biology.  But th ey can’t fare well in this NEET exam. यह भी 
आपको समझना चािहए, these expert studies. To me, it does not matter whether it was 
brought in by the Congress or by the NDA.  What matters is that the experience with 
NTA has proved to be bad. Let us take cognisance of the experience that we have 
gone through and let us try to come acros s a better system than what we already 
have inherited from this Gove rnment or that Government.  जो हमारे पास है, उस पर let 
us start functioning.  
 Another objection that I would like to put here is this quick computer marking 
system which is this OCR िक िटक करो और िमल जाए। This does not test the knowledge 
of a student.  It does not test the aptitude o f  a  s t u d e n t .   I t  o n l y  e a t s .  I t  i s  o n l y  
consumed by the computer. You do it because it is convenient. I do it in my state also 
because it is convenient. It is time for us  to harp back to knowledge through small 
questions in narrative form and take away  this computer-ticking multiple choice 
system which is the breeding room of corruption everywhere, सब जगह।  And this one 
is what we want to go in for. Test the knowledge.    
 This NTA system has given way to a lo t of coaching centres. You have CBSE.  
You have coaching.  Put them together and you have an advantage. And that 
advantage has been empirically proved to be one of caste, class, and money power 
whether it is NEET or NET. 
 We talk about the lack of  accountability. A society, a registered society like one 
of those mohallah societies is running the nation. Why? Why can't it be under an Act 
of Parliament? Why can't it be accounted fo r by the CAG?  Why can't its Report be 
discussed in Parliament?  It is about acc ountability.  I stand in support of Mr. 
Abdulla's Resolution on one ground -- accountability. Then we have corruption 
problems. As I said, corruption is there. Can the NTA prevent corruption? Can NEET 
results prevent corruption? The number given in NEET is sold and you get a seat 
elsewhere against that number and not because you have exceedingly passed it.  
 Sir, when you talk of these things, let us understand that it is a question of 
supply, demand and quality.  Our studen ts are going to Uzbekistan to study 
medicine.  उनके  बारे मȂ क्या होगा?
    They are going to Slovenia and Ukraine to study 
medicine. उनके  बारे मȂ क्या होगा?  We are in a position wher e we really need to rethink 
our medical education because that is the topic today. 
 In the end, I will appeal to both the si des.  Let us face one fact.  Let us touch 
our hearts and face one fact. You are going in for over-centralisation because you are 
fighting an elite that was brought up in En glish. You are fighting an English-speaking 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

elite.  आप िदल से नहीं बोलते हȅ, मȅ जुबान से बोल देता हूं।  But you are replacing that with a 
Hindi-speaking elite. That is the point. Yo u are destroying an English-speaking elite 
with a Hindi-speaking elite. You know the difference.  मȅ तीन भाषाएं जानता हूं। मȅ तीन 
भाषाओं मȂ िलख सकता हूं, पढ़ सकता हूं, लेिकन जो संकीणर् हȅ, चाहे वे कहीं क े भी संकीणर् हȗ, वे 
एक ही भाषा जानते हȅ और उस भाषा क े िसवाय िंचतन भी नहीं कर सकते हȅ, सोच भी नहीं सकते 
हȅ, दूसरȗ की संÎकृ ित नहीं समझ
ते, दूसरȗ क े भाव नहीं समझते।  This exactly is the 
difference.  ...(Interruptions)...  I know three languages and three sanskritis.   And I 
am proud to be an Indian.  ...( Interruptions)...  I am proud to be an India
n. If the 
others who are opposed to the system can think in three 
languages...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा):  देिखए, ऐसा है ...(Ëयवधान)... जवाहर जी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR :  Sir, let him speak after I have spoken. ...( Interruptions)... 
आप मेरे समय पर आप न बोलȂ ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): सुिनए, Îपेिसिफक एिलगेशन िकसी क े िखलाफ नहीं है।  संकीणर् 
जनरल टमर् मȂ बोल रहे हȅ।   
 
Ǜी जवाहर सरकार: मȅ जो कहना चाहता हूं िक ...( Ëयवधान)... एिलिटज्म की बात करनी 
चािहए, अगर्
गित की बात करनी चािहए, Ģगित की बात करनी चािहए...(Ëयवधान).... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (S HRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):   The objection is ruled out, क्यȗिक 
संकीणर् िकसी पिर्टकु लर Ëयिƪ क े िलए नहीं बोल रहे हȅ।   
 
SHRI JAW
HAR SIRCAR: We must all learn three languages to survive in India.  Do not 
try to learn only one language and demean two others.  (Time-bell rings.)  Regional 
language and English. We must learn th ree languages.  We swear by a three-
language formula, but actually practice only one language और वे संकीणर्, चाहे वे कहीं क े 
भी संकीणर् हȅ, that narrowness, that thing you try to  impose on others.  That is the sum 
and substance of our obsession with NTA, NEET and 'One nation, one examination'.  
हमȂ िकसी क े कोई सुझाव की जरूरत  नहीं हȅ। We are all nationalists even if you speak in 
three languages or even if we speak one. Thank you, Sir.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) : Next speaker is Shri N.R. Elango; 
you have got five minutes.  
 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
113

SHRI N.R. ELANGO (Tamil Nadu) : Mr. Vice-Chairman, Sir, I request this august 
House to approach this issue beyond politic s, a complete apolitical approach. While 
defending NEET, what the Government says is  that it is defending on three grounds. 
Number one, it is because of  the judgments of the Supreme Court. Number two, it is 
to standardize medical education. Number three, it was brought by the earlier regime. 
As far as judgments of the Supreme Court are concerned, everybody knows that the 
Supreme Court never ever say as to wh at should be the law. Supreme Court 
interprets the law, and in these judgment s, the Supreme Court first said NEET is 
unconstitutional. On a review petition, it said it is constitutional. The review petition is 
now put against us, while we are opposing NEET saying that the Supreme Court 
upheld NEET examination. But if anybody goes and reads that review order of the 
Supreme Court, the three-Judge Bench had followed the five-Judge Bench judgment 
of the Supreme Court in Modern Medical  College case. In that, one important 
observation of one of the hon. Judges is th at the field of higher education being one 
such field which directly affects the growth  and development of the State, it becomes 
prerogative of the State to take such steps which further the welfare of the people and 
in particular, pursuing higher education. In  fact, the State Government should be the 
sole entity to lay down the procedure for admission, fees, etc., governing the 
institution running in that particular State except the Centrally-funded institutions like 
IIT, NIT, etc. This is upholding the fede ralism of the country. It is upholding the 
approach by the Supreme Court in which th e exams are to be conducted. When you 
are quoting the review order, you are conven iently forgetting this five-Judge Bench 
judgment of the Supreme Court. That is num ber one. Number two is, what you say is 
that you want to standardize education th rough NEET examination. But in the first 
judgment, when the Supreme Court said that  this NEET examination is bad and it 
should be scrapped, you must  go and read that judgment. I will read again. I will 
quote only one sentence. The practice of me dicine entails something more than the 
brilliance in academics. It requires a certai n commitment to serve humanity. India has 
brilliant doctors of great merit who are lo cated mostly in urban areas and whose 
availability in crisis is quite uncertain. While the country certainly needs brilliant 
doctors and surgeons, and specialists and others connected with healthcare, who 
are equal to any other in other parts of the world, considering the ground realities, the 
country also has need for barefoot doctors. Sir, the persons passing through NEET 
exam never ever go to rural areas to serve  the rural population. Only the persons who 
come without NEET and who pass through plus two examination are willing and ready 
to go and serve the rural people. The gro und reality is that to clear the NEET 
examination, you have to go and join a coaching centre, which charges you more 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

than five lakh or ten lakh of rupees. Thes e coaching centres are not available in rural 
areas. That is number one.  
Number two, the rural people are not able to afford such kind of fee. A person 
studies for 12 years and studies biology, chemistry and physics for two years and 
writes examination by giving reasons, an swering the questions with reasoning but 
these marks are not taken into consideration. The answers given to multiple choice 
questions within three hours are taken as merit? Sir, please consider this whether 
answers given by reasoning are better or multiple choice question answers are better. 
...(Interruptions)...   Reasoning is better, but reason ing is not deciding the merits of 
the people. Plus two examination conducte d by the State Governments should be 
used for deciding the merits of the students, and that should alone be the criteria. 
Number three, we do not have doctor s who can serve in the rural areas, 
doctors to serve the rural population.  Th e people from the lower strata of the 
community, who are studying well in the +2  examination, securing good marks in the 
examination, have to be given a chance to study medical education and not through 
this NEET examination.   
Number four, one of the most defense poin t, they say that this was brought by 
the earlier regime.  Please go and see, the earlier regime brought it by way of a 
direction, by way of an office Memorand um.  When it was scrapped by the Supreme 
Court, this Government brought it by way of a legislation in 2019.  It has introduced 
National Medical Council Act.  Only in th at, the NEET examination, much worse the 
EXIT examination also has been included.  Sir, NEET, approaching in any form, in any 
view, is against the students ' interest, States' interest and against the federalism of 
this country.  So, I would request this augu st House to consider this and come to a 
conclusion to abolish NEET.  Thank you.                             
                                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) :  N o w ,  S h r i  R a g h a v  C h a d h a ,  y o u  
have got five minutes.   
 
Ǜी राघव चǀा (पंजाब):  सर, जब आप वहाँ बैठे हȅ, तो थोड़ा सा बढ़ा ही दȂगे। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा):  वह सब क ु छ नहीं। ...(Ëयवधा
न)... 
 
SHRI RAGHAV CHADHA:  Sir, I stand before you today to address a crisis that strikes 
at the very heart of our nation, which is our deteriorating education system.  This 
system, which was once the pride of our nation, has become a battle field where our 
children fight a neck tight competition.  Not for knowledge, not for entitlement but 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
115

merely for survival.  From a very young age,  our students are thrust into a relentless 
never ending race.  The joy of learning  is overshadowed by the pressure to 
outperform our peers.  Instead of nurturing curiosity, our education system drills into 
them the notion that their worth would solely be measured by the marks or the grades 
or the ranks that they would get.  …(Interruptions)…  This fierce competition is not just 
robbing our children of their childhood but is also driving them into despair and 
hopelessness.  We must understand the flaws in our education system and the fact 
that they need urgent rectification.  The intense pressure of competition is causing our 
children to suffer.  The passion and zeal th ey need to achieve their dreams is turning 
into fear, anxiety and uncertainty.  Not just this, we must also acknowledge that there 
is a huge gap between education and employment.  As a result, I have no hesitation 
in saying today that we are pushing our students, the future of this country, into a trap 
of joblessness. This will rema in until we address this gulf  of difference between what 
the market demands and what our education system imparts.  सर, देश मȂ यह जो रƺा 
िसÎटम चलता है, िजसके  तहत क ेवल रƺा लगा-लगा कर नÇबर लाकर बच्चे पास िकए जाते हȅ, 
इससे Ģितभा की हत्या होती है। We are killing the talent of th is country.  In their quest for 
a better future, many of our brightest minds are forced to leave the country.  सर, मȅ 
एक ऐसे सूबे से आता हूँ, पंजाब से, जहाँ हजारȗ-लाखȗ की तादाद मȂ युवा अपना सूबा छोड़ कर 
िवदेशȗ मȂ जा-जाकर छोटी-छोटी न
ौकिरयाँ कर रहे हȅ।  वे ऐसा क्यȗ कर रहे हȅ? It is because 
they seek s
olace in foreign lands.  Not because they want to but because they have 
to, they are compelled to.  India, a land th at has given the world some of its greatest 
minds, now sees its youth risking their lives  to take the dangerous dunki route to the 
U.S., U.K., Canada and beyond.  These young  souls, which are full of potential and 
dreams, face unimaginable dangers just to escape a system that offers them no 
hope.  The lack of opportunities here is heart-wrenching.  Our education system does 
not align with the needs of the modern world.  While we produce millions of graduates 
every year, the job market remains stagnant, unable to absorb this vast talent pool.   
Sir, as a result, our youth burdened  with degrees and diplomas wander 
aimlessly in search of employment, often se ttling for jobs far below their qualification 
and aspirations.   What about those who da re to dream differently, those who wish to 
innovate, start their own businesses, wish  to become employment-givers and not 
employment-seekers? Our system offers them also, no support. Aspiring 
entrepreneurs and start-ups f ace insurmountable challeng es from bureaucratic red-
tape to lack of funding.  Their dreams are crushed under the weight of an indifferent 
system and many give up disheartened and def eated.  Sir, this is not just a failure of 
our education system.  It is a failure of our society that we have let-down our children, 
our youth and in doing so, our future.  Let us not forget the countless lives that have 
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

been lost on this treacherous journey in search  of a better future.  In addition to this, I 
would also like to highlight that today this House carries the voice of millions of NEET 
aspirants who have been left heartbroken and disheartened by the recent NEET 
irregularities.  This is not just about an examination.  It is about their hard work, the 
dream of the students which was dedicated towards building a better India.  It is a 
great irony that our children who dream of serving the country are falling victim to the 
flaws and corruption within the education system.  The very system that was 
designed to encourage and shape their future is now shattering their labour, their hard 
work and their hope.  The irregularities in  the NEET examination paper are not only a 
failure of our education system but also a blow to the dreams of  those who prepared 
day and night for the exam.  Can we leave them abandoned?  Can we leave them 
helpless?  Do their dreams not matter?    
 And, Sir, in conclusion, through this House, I would urge the Government to 
conduct a thorough investigation into this  paper leak and other irregularities and 
punish those who are responsible.  (Time-bell rings.) Sir, in conclusion, अंत मȂ, बस 
इतना ही कहूँगा िक नीट िवषय पर चचार् हुई और अभी हमारे काँगर्ेस क े साथी भी बात कर रहे थे 
और उन्हȗने भी एक बड़ी महत्वपूणर् बात कही िक डॉक्टरी का एग्ज़
 ाम, यानी िजस परीक्षा मȂ 
िवǏाथीर् डॉक्टर बनने क े िलए बैठता है, अगर उस परीक्षा को rig करके , पैसे देकर manipulate 
िकया जाता है, तो हम इस देश मȂ िकस Ģकार क े डॉक्टर पैदा कर रहे हȅ?  इस तरह क े डॉक्टर 
िकस तरह से लोगȗ की जान बचाएँगे?  आज  हमȂ यह कहने मȂ कोई गुरेज़ नहीं होना चािहए िक 
अगर यही िसÎटम चलता रहा, तो हमारे कॉलेजȗ मȂ मुन्नाभाई एमबीबीएस जैसे डॉक्टर बनȂगे और 
मुन्नाभाई एमबीबीएस जैसे डॉक्टसर् ही हमारे अÎपतालȗ मȂ काम करȂगे, बहुत-बहुत शुिकर् या। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): यही चेयरमैन साहब ने कहा िक यह जो चचार् है, इस चचार् मȂ 
िवषय महत्वपूणर् है, इसिलए उसकी गिरमा रहे।  इसमȂ कोई राजनीितक फायदे की बात नहीं है।  
यह एक ऐसा िवषय है, िजसमȂ लोगȗ क े भिवÍय का सवाल है। Ģो. मनोज क ुमार झा जी। 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िब
हार):  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, ĢÎताव अÅदुÊला साहब का है और यह 
बेगानी शादी भी नहीं है, तो उनकी िदव
ानगी मुǈे क े िलए है, बेगानी शादी मȂ अÅदुÊला दीवाना नहीं 
है।  
 माननीय वाइस चेयरमैन साहब, तिमलनाडु गवनर्मȂट ने ए. क े. राजन कमेटी फॉमर् की थी।  
मȅ उस कमेटी क े बारे मȂ बाद मȂ बोलूँगा। उस कमेटी ने उसमȂ एक तÎव ीर रखी थी। वह तÎवीर बड़ी 
Ãयारी है। वह तÎवीर एक अफसाना देती है।  िजसमȂ एक हाथी, एक िचिड़या और एक बंदर है तथा 
तीनȗ को पेड़ पर चढ़ने क े competition क े िलए कहा जा रहा है। यह मेरा नहीं है, बिÊक यह 
कमेटी का है।  मȅ उस संदभर् मȂ एक बा
त कहूँगा।  पहले तो अËवल एजुक ेशन Îटेट िलÎट मȂ होता 
था, 42 वाँ संिवधान संशोधन मȂ यह Concurrent List मȂ आया। 42 वां संिव धान संशोधन क े बाद 
काफी चीजȂ हुईं, लेिकन यह Îटेट क े हाथ से लगभग िनकल गया।  हमारे देश मȂ एक obsession 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
117

भी है, बीते क ु छ वषș मȂ एक, एक, एक..... अरे, यह देश ही अनेक है, अनेकता मȂ एकता।  यहाँ 
भोजन की िविवधता है, वÎतर् की िविवधता है, क्षेतर्ȗ की िविवधता है, धमर् की िविवधता है और भाषा 
की िविवधता है। इन िविव धताओ ं क े मध्य हमारे approach मȂ िविवधता का सÇमान होना चािहए 
था, लेिकन मȅ समझता हूँ िक NEET जैसी संकÊपना, NTA जैसी संÎथा उस संकÊपना क े साथ 
उिचत न्याय नहीं करती है।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅने सदन मȂ पहले भी कहा है, मȅ उसे दोबारा दोहरा रहा 
हूँ। हमारे यहां Delhi University मȂ undergraduate admission मȂ क ु छ िदक्कतȂ थीं।  पहले 
सीबीएसई और अलग-अलग बोड्सर् मȂ ĢाÃत माक्
सर् पर वहां एडिमशन होता था, लेिकन हम एक 
अǌुत मुÊक हȅ, we throw the baby out with the bathwater. अब हुआ यूं िक हमने उसके  
बदले CUET की ËयवÎथा की।  मȅने कभी कÊपना नहीं की थी िक Political Science मȂ 
undergrad मȂ एडिमशन लेने क े िलए बच्चा कोिंचग इंिÎटǷूट मȂ जाएगा।  CUET का मत
लब हो 
गया, कोिंचग क े िपतामह, कोिंचग का जन्म!  आप देख लीिजए, ये कोिंच ग्स मशरूम  की तरह आ 
गए हȅ।  हमȂ ये चीजȂ सोचनी हȗगी।  हाल ही मȂ, इसी सदन ने कोिंचग इंिÎटǷूट्स पर िवÎतृत चचार् 
की है।  अगर हम NEET को भी देखȂ तो जैसा मȅने कहा, diversity का सवाल है।  सर, एक दूसरा 
सवाल भी बहुत महत्वपूणर् है। अगर आप fee structure  देखȂ, ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, क्या मेरे तीन ही 
िमनट्स थे?  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): आपके  पांच िमनट्स हȅ। 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: सर, मȅ बस खत्म कर दूंगा।  इस वƪ का भी बड़ा िविचतर् मामला है! 
 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): आपके  तीन िमनट्स ही थे, आप जÊदी wrap up कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: सर, अगर आप wrap up करने क े िलए किहएगा, तो मȅ यूं ही बैठ जाऊं गा।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): आप Ãवाइंट्स बोलते रिहए।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: सर, मȅ िसफर् इतना कहना चाहता हूँ िक आप NEET का fee structure 
देखȂ।  बाकी जगह का तो हुआ नहीं है और आज तो मȅ एक पीिड़त पक्ष भी हूँ।  जाितगत जनगणना 
पर मेरा िरजॉÊयूशन भी नंबर दो पर था, उसे हव
ा खा गई।  मȅ िसफर् इतना कहना चाहता हूँ िक 
आप िबहार क े जाितगत सवȃक्षण का आंकड़ा देखȂ, वहां तकरीबन 35 Ģितशत लोगȗ की आमदनी 
6,000 रुपय े या उससे कम है।  अब आप यह बताइए िक उसमȂ यह fee structure कहां िफट 
बैठता है? सर, जो दूसरी बात है, उस पर हम लोग अकसर ध्यान नहीं देते हȅ िक यह पूरी की पूरी 
एग्जाम पǉित CBSE को tilted है। Îटेट बोड्सर् की जो अपनी Ģाथिमकताएं हȅ, उनका सÇमान इस 
तरह की परीक्षाएं नहीं िक
या करती हȅ।   
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

सर, मȅ आिखर मȂ कहूंगा िक हम सबको इस िवषय पर सोचना होगा।  *...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): अब आप खत्म कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: सर, बस एक चीज। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ बड़ा सÇमान करता हूँ, आपको पता 
नहीं है।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): Ģोफे सर साहब, मंतर्ी जी पर िटÃपणी मत कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा: * 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी राजीव शुƛा): नहीं, नहीं।  िफर भी, आप िटÃपणी मत कीिजए।  आप अपनी बात 
बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा:  सर, मȅ आिखरी िटÃपणी कर रहा हूँ।  मुझे आिखरी िटÃपणी करने दीिजए।  
मȅ यह कह रहा था िक इन िवषयȗ पर आज सुĢीम कोटर् का हवाला िदया जा रहा था। सनद रहे, 
सुĢीम कोटर् ने बहुत बातȂ कही हȅ, आप cherry picking मत कीिजए।  इतने बड़े पैमाने पर परीक्षा 
दोबारा न हो, लेिकन पट
ना और हजारीबाग क े बारे मȂ भी कहा है, गोधरा क े बारे मȂ भी चचार् हुई है।  
मेरा िसफर् यह कहना है िक माननीय सवȘच्च न् यायालय क े समक्ष यह मामला है।  मȅ सÇमान सिहत 
इतना जरूर  कहूंगा िक आज क े िदन मȂ जो टेक्नोलोजी है, उसमȂ अगर पटना मȂ पेपर का कोई 
leakage होगा, तो उसको हवाई जहाज का िटकट लेकर गुजरात नहीं पहुंचना होगा, बिÊक वह 
seconds मȂ पहुंचेगा।  इसिलए, यह पूरी परीक्ष
ा एक level पर compromised थी।  मेरा मानना है 
और मȅने मंतर्ी जी से भी Ëयिƪगत आगर्ह िकया है िक NTA को अरब महासागर या बंगाल की 
खाड़ी मȂ फ Ȃिकए; choice is yours. 
                                                                        
THE VICE CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Now Dr. John Brittas. You have got 
five minutes to speak.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala ): Thank yo
u, Sir, for the opportunity. Sir, it was 
distressing that my hon. friend and Minist er, Mr. Jayant Chaudhary, initially got up 
saying that we should not proceed with this Resolution. My impression was that this is 
a bipartisan issue.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (S HRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) : Hon. Minister, Shri Jayant 
Chaudhary. 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair.  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
119

  
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  Hon. Minister, I am talking about you. You have to reply.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) : Hon. Minister, Mr. Jayant 
Chaudhary, he is saying something about you. So, you should pay attention to 
Members also.   
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: 
* 
 
 THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA):  No, no personal comment. 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF EDUCATION (SHRI JAYANT 
CHAUDHARY):  Sir, I object to that statement.  Sir, he is John Brittas; he should not 
be brittle in his comments.  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA ):  Don't make personal comment. 
…(Interruptions)… Neerajji, I can handle it.  Don't make personal comment.  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS :   Okay.  Sir, you won't allow me to pass a compliment with a 
retrospective effect also?  Sir, this is a bipartisan issue. My friends in the Treasury 
Benches should think that. This affects the future of millions of students. In every 
mature democracy, there is something called parliamentary outreach. The Parliament 
has to debate, analyze, and understand wher e the things have gone wrong.  I won't 
fault the intent of the NEET.  The intentio n would have been good.  But the content, 
the process, of course, there could have been a lot of flaws, and, we have been 
witness in a lot of flaws now.  So, it is up  to the Parliament to analyze and understand 
how to go about.  My friends in the Treas ury Benches always say that the education 
was brought into the Concurrent List because of the 42
nd Amendment as part of 
Emergency.  My request to you is that, see, this 42 nd Amendment was a byproduct of 
Emergency for which you brought a Resoluti on.  Bring a Resolution.  Whatever may 
be the byproducts of the emergency woul d be taken back.  Restore this issue, 
restore this sector to States. The Foundin g Fathers were resolute to keep that 
education to the domain of States, considering the rich diversity of this nation. Please 
appreciate that.  Sir, there has been a tend ency, a centralized tendency. For the last 
10 years, how many competitiv e exams have come?  Manoj Jha ji was telling about 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

CUET, the fallout of that, NEET and NET.  You know what is the status of the NET, 
the National Eligibility Test, and also the ND A, National Testing Agency.  I understand 
that.  Hardly, 25 permanent employees are there in NTA. These 25 permanent 
employees are conducting test for 25 very important exams which affects the future of 
millions of students.  Don't you think that we Parliament arians need to analyze, to 
understand where we have gone wrong?  Shou ld not we correct th at? That is why I 
support the resolution of Mr. Abdulla that  this House has the bounden responsibility 
to understand where we have gone wrong.  Si r, I have three, four points to say.  
What are the key issues with regard to the NEET? It obliterates the rights of the States 
to regulate medical education. That is the first point. The second point is that it 
disproportionately favours CBSE students and disadvantaged to those from the State 
Boards and economically weaker sections . I would call the Government to come 
forward.  Let us analyze.  Let us entrus t a body to understand the anatomy of the 
people who have passed the NEET exams.  Where are the flaws?  And the third 
aspect, it necessitates costly extra coaching beyond ordinary school education, 
which is not affordable to the ordinary students.  And, the fourth point, Sir, which has 
come to the fore, the transparency and security of the Centralized examination 
process have been repeatedly called into qu estion. Sir, there is a series, web series 
with regard to the Kota, so-called coaching centers. It is on OTT platform. I would 
request the hon. Minister that he should watch that web series. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA): Together with the Cabinet Minister. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Together with the Cabinet Minist er, who is absent.  I do not 
know why he is absent!  Sir,  there is an alibi that is being brought forward. How can 
you speak against the Supreme Court verdict? Sir,that  is the first problem. You know 
why? The NEET was brought in the year 2013 as Advocate Elango said there was a 
verdict. Then further, there was another ve rdict in 2016. The Supreme Court said the 
Government and the Medical Council can go ahead. It was not the decision of the 
Supreme Court. It merely upheld the decision of the Executive. Then what happened, 
Sir? After the verdict of the Supreme Court in 2016, you slep t over it for years. Only 
after an NGO went to the Supreme Court, Supreme Court again took up the matter. 
So, were you indulging contempt of court for these years then, after the verdict of 
2016? Again Sir, if at all the Ruling part y had agreed to hold the verdict of the 
Supreme Court, I would have naturally cons ented to their argument. But, think about 
the verdict that came with regard to the Election Commissioners and the Chief 
Election Commissioners. They quickly brought forward and able to circumvent the 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
121

verdict of the Supreme Court. ...(Time Bell rings)... Conveniently, they take alibi on 
the Supreme Court verdict. Sir, I feel this is  the right time for us, for this platform, to 
contemplate in a bipartisan matter. This is not a Congress; this is not an Opposition 
or Treasury Bench issue. This issue concerns the future of millions of students, crores 
of people. Let us put together our own th oughts, let us contemplate and understand 
what could be the way out of this crisis. Th ere is a serious crisis of credibility. To 
retrieve the situation the Parliament has to exercise its right of Parliamentary outreach, 
understand the issue. So, I would earnestly request my friend and hon. Minister to 
look at these issues dispassionately. Do no t think that you are now on the other side; 
so, you should look down this side. Let us sit together and understand how we can 
go ahead. I would earnestly support the Re solution moved by Mr. Abdulla. Thank 
you, Sir. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) : Thank you Dr. John Brittas. The 
next speaker is Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade. 
 
Ǜी अिजत माधवराव गोपछड़े (महाराÍटर्): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ माननीय सासंद Ǜी एम. 
मोहÇमद अÅदुÊला ǎारा राज्य सभा मȂ उन्हȗने जो ĢÎताव रखा है, उसके  िवरोध मȂ मȅ बात कर रहा 
हूं।  मȅ MBBS, MD हूं।  महोदय, िव
 Ǐाथीर् दशा मȂ दो Ģकार क े युग देख रहा हूं।  ये 2014 क े बाद 
देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी क े माध्यम से जो यहां देश मȂ आज NEET का िवषय आया है,  
इस पर िनÍप
क्षता, पारदिर्शता, समान अवसर और गुणवǄा को हम इस युग मȂ देख रहे हȅ। सर, 
2014 से पहले सब examination मȂ चाहे CBSE हो, IIT हो, AICTE हो , सभी इसमȂ सब 
fragmented examination system था।  छातर्ȗ को अलग-अलग परीक्षा schedule मȂ 
coordinate करना पड़ता था, अलग-अलग चुनौितयां पैदा होती थीं, logistics की चुनौितयां होती 
थीं, अपनी-अपनी परीक्षाओं का अलग-अलग syllabus  होता था, अलग-अलग pattern
 होता था।  
छातर्ȗ को अपनी-अपनी परीक्षाओं की अलग-अलग तैयारी करनी पड़ती थी, उससे financial 
stress बढ़ता था, उसको अलग-अलग जगह पर जाना पड़ता था।  िविभन्न राज्यȗ, िविभन्न क ेन्दर्ȗ 
तक यातर्
ा करने क े िलए  logistic और financial burden भी बढ़ता था।  हम भाषा, Ģांतवार रचना 
और एकात्मकता की बात करते हȅ और हमȂ इस एकात्मकता की दृिÍट से यह NEET सारे देश क े 
सारे Ģांतȗ को इकƻा लाने मȂ कामयाब होता है।  महोदय, मȅ आपको एक बात बताना चाहता हूं।  
हमारे जमाने मȂ अग
र वह Anatomy मȂ merit मȂ आया, तो उसको  Anatomy PG  िमलता था।  
अगर Surgery मȂ होगा, उसको गुणवǄा िमलती, तो उसको  S u r g e r y  का  PG िमलता था, 
लेिकन यह NEET की PG मȂ हमारा जो छातर् पढ़ता है, उसको Anatomy, Physiology, Bio 
Chemistry, Pharmacology, Microbiology , Forensic medicine and Toxicology, 
Medicine, Surgery, Gynaecology, ENT, Op hthalmology, Orthopaedics, Dermatology,  
Psychiatry, Preventive Social Medicine, Embryology, िफर इन सारȗ का अध्ययन करना 
पड़ता है। उसके  बाद ही हमारा जो छातर् है, वह अंतरराÍटर्ीय दजȃ का कीिर्तवंत, िदग-िदगंत 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

हमारा डाक्टर बनता है। इसका असर हमने कोरोना मȂ देखा है, इसका असर हमने  Corona 
vaccine क े समय मȂ देखा है। इसके  माध्यम से जो डाक्टर, जो हमारे अंतरराÍटर्ीय Îतर की 
गुणवǄा का हमारे यहां िनमार्ण होने जा रहा है, यह  NEET क े कारण है। इसमȂ पारदिर्शता है, 
इसमȂ िनÍपक्षता है, इसमȂ सब समान हȅ। कोई िनचला नहीं, कोई ऊपर का नहीं, कोई ग
रीब नहीं, 
कोई Ǜीमंत नहीं है।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, सरकार का छातर् कÊयाण पर फोकस है। यहां पर उसने 
13 भाषाओं मȂ परीक्षा आयोिजत की है। यहां पर हमने देखा है िक गत 5 वषș मȂ NTA ने 
engineering, medical, pharmacy, re search, fellowship, management अन्य क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 234 
परीक्षाएं आ
योिजत की हȅ। मȅ अपने एक सदÎय जी को बताना चाहता हूं िक यह जो एक्जाम है, यह 
रƺा िसÎटम का एक्जाम नहीं है। माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, यह रƺा िसÎटम का एक्जाम नहीं 
है, यह  negative
 marking system है, अगर उसका ऑन्सर गलत आता है, तो उसके  negative 
marks होते हȅ। इसिलए अंधेरे मȂ गोली मारने का कोई चान्स नहीं है। यह मोदी जी का जमाना है। 
कांगर्ेस का जमाना चल
ा गया, अंधेरे मȂ गोली मारने का। मȅ यह भी बताना चाहता हूं िक  
management क े माध्यम से, हमारे सदÎय ने जो बोला था, माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, 
बाजार होता था, िबकर्ी होती थी, हमारे कई छातर् बड़े-बड़े संÎथानȗ मȂ जा रहे हȅ। हमारे ग रीब, 
पीिड़त, वंिचत छातर् AIIMS मȂ िशक्षा ले रहे हȅ। इसका कारण NEET है। हमारे जो आिदवासी, 
हमारे जो वनवासी छातर् हȅ, वे छातर् नीट की वजह से अच्छे संÎथानȗ मȂ जा रहे है। इस नीट की 
वजह से इस देश मȂ गुणव
Ǆा आई है। हम लोग अंतरराÍटर्ीय Îतर क े मूÊय मापन पर, गुणवǄा क े 
आधार पर हम िसǉ हो चुक े हȅ और यह नीट की वजह से हुआ है।  
सर, मȅ सदन को यह भी बताना चा
हता हूं िक िपछले 5 वषș मȂ मिहला परीक्षािर्थयȗ की 
संख्या  मȂ वृिǉ देखने को िमली है। मिहला परीक्षािर्थयȗ की संख्या मȂ 71 परस Ȃट की वृिǉ हुई है। 
पास होने वाली मिहलाओं की संख्या मȂ 72 परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई है। मȅ एक बात और बोलना चाहता 
हूं, िजसे आप सब लोग सुिनए, social-weaker section क े क Ȃिडडेट्स परीक्षा मȂ पास होने वाले 
उÇमीदवारȗ मȂ भी का
फी वृिǉ हुई है। EWS category  क े क Ȃिडडेट्स मȂ 102 परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई 
है, शैǹूÊड टर्ाइÅस क े क Ȃिडडेट्स मȂ 93 परस Ȃट की वृिǉ हुई है, हमा
रे शैǹूÊड काÎट क े 
क Ȃिडडेट्स मȂ 78 परसȂट की वृिǉ हुई है और ओबीसी क े क Ȃिडडेट्स मȂ लग भग 62 परसȂट की वृिǉ 
हुई है।  
माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, िपछले 5 वषș मȂ मिहलाओं का, एस.सी./एस.टी., ओबीसी 
क े लोगȗ का,  EWS क े लोगȗ की यहां पर, जो संख्या बढ़ रही है, इसकी यशिÎवता िस फर् नीट क े 
माध्यम से हो रही है। मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सारे सदन को बताना चाहता हूं िक  2004 से लेकर 2014 
क े बीच मȂ, जो Central level की परीक्षाएं हुई थीं, वे क Ȃिसल और पोÎटपȗड हो गई थीं। उनके  
पेपसर् लीक हो गए थे, एंटर्ेस एक्जाम मȂ गड़बड़ी हुई थी, मȅ उसके  क ु छ उÊलेखनीय उदाहरण 
बताना चाहत
ा हूं।  ...(समय की घंटी)...  AIIMS मȂ PG का 2006 मȂ Paper लीक, ICAI 2007 का  
Common Proficiency Test का पेपर लीक, CLAT 2009 का, suspected question paper, 
पेपर लीक,  Railway Recruitment Board का पेपर लीक,  AIA 2011 का पेपर लीक, मȅ ऐसे कई 
उदाहरण बता सकता हूं। हमारे साथी सांसद जी ने उǄर Ģदेश क े बारे मȂ बताया, तिम
लनाडु क े 
बारे मȂ बताया, वेÎट बंगाल क े बारे मȂ बताया, राजÎथान क े बारे मȂ बताया, ओिडशा क े बारे मȂ 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
123

बताया, लेिकन मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं िक माननीय मोदी जी की सरकार जो काम कर रही है 
...(समय की घंटी)...  वह  NEET की शुǉता को बढ़ा रही है। नीट क े माध्यम से िदन-ब-िदन 
हमारी अंतरराÍटर्ीय गुणवǄा बढ़ती जा रही है। हमारे MBBS क े छातर्ȗ,  हमारे MD क े छातर्ȗ की 
मांग देश, िव
देश मȂ बहुत ज्यादा होती जा रही है। मȅ Super Speciality क े बारे मȂ भी बताना चाहता 
हूं,  Super Speciality मȂ हमारा देश आगे बढ़ रहा है। हम global leader बनते जा रहे हȅ। हमारी 
मांग हर क्षेतर् मȂ, िचिक
त्सा क े हर क्षेतर् मȂ बढ़ती जा रही है, चाहे plastic surgery हो, चाहे  
neurosurgery हो। हम transplant मȂ आगे जा रहे हȅ, हम organ transplant मȂ भी आगे जा रहे हȅ। 
हम  मेिलग्नȂसी, जो क ȅसर का िवषय है, उस िवषय मȂ आगे जा रहे हȅ। महोद य, इस िवषय का 
कारण यह है िक नीट की परीक्षा की जो शुǉता है, हमारी जो मेिरट है, हमारा जो छातर् है, वह 
तकरीबन 25-30 सÅजैक्ट्स का अध्ययन करने क े बाद ही देश मȂ गुणवǄापूवर्क िसǉ हो रहा है।  
..(समय की घं
टी)..  मȅ यह चाहता हूं िक एक संधीय राज्य का ढाँचा बनाने क े िलए, हमारे देश का 
नाम उज्ज्वल करने क े िलए माननीय मोहÇमद एम. अÅदुÊला जी इस ĢÎताव को वापस ले लȂ। यह 
देश की गुणवǄ
ा क े िलए है, यह देश क े छातर्ȗ की भलाई क े िलए है, यह देश क े डॉक्टरȗ की 
भलाई क े िलए है, यह देश की वैǏकीय सेवा िचिकत्सा क्षेतर् का नाम बढ़ाने क े िलए है।  
महोदय, अंतरार्Íटर्ीय क्षेतर् मȂ, इस देश का नाम िच
िकत्सा क्षेतर् मȂ ग्लोबल लीडर बनाने क े 
िलए यह नीट होना बहुत जरूरी है। यह नीट हमारी शुǉता है। नीट जैसे पिवतर् कायर् क े माध्यम से 
हमने पूरे देश का नाम उज्ज्वल िक
या है और माननीय मोदी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह काम होने जा रहा 
है। यह एक सेवा कायर् है। हमारे सभी छातर्ȗ का इस Ģकार की शुǉता और पिवतर् कायर् मȂ सहभाग ी 
होना बहुत जरूरी है। महोदय, देश क े उज्ज्वल भिवÍय क े िलए यह हमारा Ģमुख काम है, इसिलए 
हम सभी लोगȗ को िमलकर इस ĢÎताव का िवरोध करना चािहए।  
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI RAJEEV SHUKLA) : Hon. Members, the Leader of the 
House wants to intervene in this debate. I request him to make his observations.  
 
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा):  माननीय उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मȅ इस िडबेट से थो
 ड़ा Ģेिरत 
हुआ हूं िक मȅ भी क ु छ िवषय लोगȗ और हाउस क े ध्यान मȂ ला सकूं । क्यȗिक 2018-19 मȂ यह नीट 
(नेशनल एिलिजिबलटी एंटर्Ȃस टैÎट)  आया है, तो उस समय माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी 
क े नेतृत्व मȂ यह इिनिश
एिटव िलया गया था। मुझे इस बात का गौरव भी है िक मȅ उस समय 
ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी क े रूप  मȂ इस िवभाग को देख रहा था। महोदय, जब हम नीट ( नेशनल 
एिलिजिबलटी एंटर्Ȃस टैÎट)  की बात करते हȅ, तो this relates to admissions in the medical
 
discipline, that is, MBBS, BDS primarily और BMS. यह इस क्षेतर् को देखता है। आज एम .
मोहÇमद अÅदुÊला साहब जो Ģाइवेट मैÇबर िबल लाए हȅ और उस पर चचार् चल रही है, उसमȂ इस 
तरीके  का एक वातावरण बनाने का मा हौल बन रहा है िक जैसे हमने Îटेट क े राइट्स का हनन 
िकया है, जैसे िवǏािर्थयȗ क े साथ बहुत बड़ा अन्याय हो रहा हो, जैसे इस तरीके  की पिरिÎथित हो 
गई है िक क ु छ िवशेष वगर् क े लोग मेिडकल एजुक ेशन मȂ आ रहे हȅ और Ģा इमरली एक ही Îटेट क े 
अिधकारȗ का हनन हुआ है - इसमȂ से एक ऐसी ध्विन िनकलकर आती है। मȅ िरकॉड्सर् को Îटर्ेट 
इसिलए करना चाहता हूं, क्यȗिक हम सभी लोग, जो यहाँ बैठे हȅ, उन्हȂ बहुत िजÇमेवारी क े साथ 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

देश की आवÌयकताओं को िरÎपाँड करना पड़ता है। महोदय, हमारी जो मेमोरी है, वह बहुत शॉटर् 
होती है, हमारी याददाÌत बहुत शॉटर् होती है, हम भूल जाते हȅ िक सही मȂ मेिडकल एजुक ेशन की 
िÎथित क्या थी, अब मȅ ये शÅद नहीं बोलूंगा िक दुगर्ित क्या थी। मेिडकल एजुक ेशन िबजनेस का 
एक अƿा बन गया था।  
 
( सभापित मह
ोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
मुझे बहुत दुख क े साथ बोलना पड़ता है िक जब मȅ ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी था और नीट ला रहा था, 
तो उस समय इस बात की चचार् होती थी।  
 सभापित जी, आप आÌचयर् करȂगे िक पोÎट गर्ेज्युएट की एक सी
ट 8 करोड़ मȂ िबकती थी। 
इस हाउस मȂ कोई मेरी बात को झुठलाकर बता दे िक मȅ गलत बोल रहा हूं? महोदय, 8, 8 करोड़! 
और अगर आपने रेिडयोलॉजी जैसे िडपाटर्मȂट और िडिसिÃ
लन मȂ जाना है, तो 12 से 13 करोड़  
रुपय े लेते थे। It had become an open business)...Ëयवधान...(आप मेरी बात सुन लीिजए, मȅ 
ऐसे ही थोड़े नहीं बोल रहा हूं। मȅ क ु छ तथ्यȗ क े आध ार पर बोल रहा हूँ। It had become an open 
business. बच्चȗ का क्या हाल होता होगा? आज हम लोग बच्चȗ क े रहनुमा हȅ और रहना भी 
चािहए, बोलना भी चािहए। माँ-बाप क े साथ एक एग्ज़ाम देने क े िलए वे भुवनेÌवर जाते थे, एक 
एग्ज़ाम देने क े िलए वे चेन्नई जाते थे, एक एग्ज़ाम देने क े िलए वे ित
रुवनन्तपुरम जाते थे, एक 
एग्ज़ाम देने क े िलए वे मुंबई जाते थे। वे कहाँ-कहाँ चक्कर नहीं लगाते थे? The amount of  
money spent, the amount of time spent, the amount of situation और भयंकर करÃशन 
था। आप ही बताइए, आपको िकसी एक Îटेट मȂ भेज दȂ, िजसके  आप राÎते तक नहीं जानते हȅ, 
उस मेिडकल एजुक ेशन मȂ अंदर क्या चल रहा है, उसके  बारे मȂ वह बेचारा क्या जानेगा, कब 
जाकर देखेगा िक मेरी िलÎट लगी है िक नहीं? यह मेिडकल एजुक ेशन क े िसÎटम की दुगर्ित थी। 
वह कहाँ जाकर देखेगा? सभापित जी, मȅ बताना चाहता हूँ लोग क ै से करते थे। एडिमशन िलÎट 
आधे घंटे से 45 िमनट क े िलए लगाई जाती थी, हटाई जाती थी और बाद मȂ कहा जाता था िक  
Students di
d not come, इसिलए हम इन सीट्स का अब अपने discretion पर उपयोग कर रहे 
हȅ। यह एक धंधा बन गया है और एक बड़ा veste d interest है। लंबे समय से यह सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ 
लंिबत था। आपसे बेहतर कौन जानता होगा िक यह वहाँ पर लंबे समय से लंिबत रहा। Ģधान मंतर्ी 
मोदी जी ने इसमȂ इिनिशएट िकया िक we should go forward and सुĢीम कोटर् ने उसमȂ विर्डक्ट 
िदया। यह िवषय नहीं है िक सुĢीम कोटर् का फ ैसला हो गया, इसिलए हम िडÎकशन नहीं कर 
सकते हȅ, करȂ, जरूर  करȂ, लेिकन पिरिÎथित को समझकर करȂ िक हम कहाँ से िकतनी लंबी यातर्ा 
करके  आए हȅ। आज मुझे आपको बताते हुए खुशी होती है िक हमारे नीट क े 154 िसटीज़ मȂ एग्ज़ाम 
होते थे, आज वे 571 िसटीज़ मȂ होते हȅ। There is an increase of 270 per cent. उसी तरीके  से, 
एक ही शहर मȂ जो सȂटसर् होते हȅ, उन सȂटसर् मȂ हम ने पहले 2019 मȂ 2,546 से यातर्ा शुरू  की थी। 
And, today, the number of centres has incr eased to 4,750,  which comes to 86.6 per 
cent. नीट क े इÇपैक्ट क े कारण आज बच्चȗ को इसमȂ से उपयोिगता िमलने का काम हुआ है। 
दूसरी बात, हमारे तिमलनाडु मȂ लोग कहते हȅ िक हमारे गाँव क े Îटू डȂट्स छू ट गए हȗगे, 
हमारे गरीब पिरवार क े लो
ग छू ट गए हȗगे। यह सब alibi है। मुझे मालूम है िक िकन-िकन चीज़ȗ का 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
125

उपयोग िकया गया होगा। बड़ा भारी अन्याय हो रहा है। अगर हम सोशल क े टेगरी की दृिÍट से 
देखȂ, तो 2019 से 2024 तक सोशल क े टेगरीज़ मȂ क्वािलफाइंग मȂ लगभग 65 परसȂट इनकर्ीज़ हुआ 
है, यानी सोशल क े टेगरी क े वे लोग, जो िविभन्न वगș से आते हȅ। इकोनॉिम कली वीकर सेक्शन की 
क े टेगरी मȂ 102 परस Ȃट का इनकर्ीज़ हुआ है, जो इकोनॉिमकली वीकर सेक्शन क े ÎटूडȂट्स आज 
नेशनल इिलजीिबिलटी एंटरȂस टेÎट क े माध्यम से आ रहे हȅ। एसटीज़ मȂ 93. 05 परसȂट का 
इनकर्ीज़ हुआ है। एससीज़ मȂ 78.08 परस Ȃट का इनकर्ीज़ हुआ है। मुझे करेक्ट कर दीिजएगा, 
ओबीसी क े टेगरी को हमारी सरकार क े दौरान जोड़ा गया था। Am I correct?  As regards the 
OBC, again, people claim to be the champi ons of OBC, but the r eal champion is the 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra  Modi who has taken care. ओबीसीज़ का 65 परस Ȃट 
िरĢेज़Ȃटेशन बढ़ा है। मȅ यह ाँ यह भी बताना चाहूँगा, जो हमको समझ लेना चािहए, मȅ ÎवाÎथ्य मंतर्ी 
था, Ģधान मंतर्ी मोदी जी ने कहा िक आप regional aspirations को एडर्ेस करȂ। हम लोगȗ ने पहली 
बार National Eligibility cum Entrance Test मलयालम , तेलुगु, तिमल और कन्नड़ मȂ शुरू  
िकया।  होड़ मच गई और सभी Îटेट्स से िडमांड आई, हमने िक
सी को मना नहीं िकया और हमने 
कहा िक कोई और भी करना चाहे, तो वह भी करे।  आज यह test 13 languages मȂ होता है।  
इसका फायदा यह हुआ है िक गवनर्मȂट Îकू ल का पढ़ा हुआ बच् चा आज मेिडकल एजुक ेशन मȂ आ 
रहा है।  यह इसका फकर् पड़ा है।  Medical education ha d become a privilege.  मेिडकल 
एजुक ेशन मȂ जाने का मतलब, डॉक्टर बनने का मतलब तो यह है िक या तो आप िकसी इंिग्लश 
िमशनरी Îकू ल से पढ़कर आओ या आप पिÅलक Îकू ल क े पढ़े हुए Ģोडक्ट हो और तब जाकर उन 
biological names मȂ इंिग्
लश मȂ एग्जाम होता था, one language मȂ एग्जाम होता था और अगर 
आप भगवान की दया से कोई बहुत ही मेधावी िवǏाथीर् हुए, तो आप कहीं कÇ पीट कर गए, तो कर 
गए, नहीं तो यह एक ही section of the society को represent करता था।  13 languages मȂ 
Medical Eligibility cum Entrance Test क े कारण आज क ेरल का, तिमलनाडु का, हमारे 
ओिडशा का आिदवासी बच्चा, हमारे गुजरात का कोई आिदवासी बच्चा, हमारे दूर-दूराज क े 
इलाके  महाराÍटर् क े गढ़िचरौली का बच्चा आज मेिडकल एजुक ेशन मȂ इसिलए आ रहा है िक 
अपनी ही भाषा मȂ वह मेिडकल का एग्जािमनेशन दे रहा है।  इसने regional aspirations को कवर 
करने का पूरा Ģयास िकया है।  यह भी हमȂ ध्यान मȂ रखना चा िहए।   
मȅ यहां एक िंबदु और बताना चाहूंगा िक आज NEET UG मȂ जो 17 perfect scorers हȅ, वे 
क ेरल से आते हȅ, वे उǄर Ģदेश से आते हȅ, वे िबहार से आते हȅ, वे राजÎथान से आते हȅ, वे 
तिमलनाडु से आते हȅ, वे महाराÍटर् से आते हȅ, वे ममत
ा दीदी क े राज्य West Bengal से आते हȅ, वे 
पंजाब से आते हȅ और चंडीगढ़ और िदÊली से आते हȅ।  मȅ यह सारा क ु छ आपको इसिलए बताने की 
कोिशश कर रहा हूं - देिखए, हमेशा हम अपने कÇफटर् जोन मȂ चले जा
ते हȅ और कÇफटर् जोन मȂ 
ऐसी पिरिÎथित पैदा हो जाती है िक अगर वैसे ही रहते तो अच्छा था।  हम मोदी जी क े राज मȂ हȅ - 
‘Reform, Transform and Perform
’ - इसिलए हम िरफॉÇसर् ला रहे हȅ और वे िरफॉÇसर् िकसी 
Ëयिƪ क े िलए नहीं, बिÊक पूरे समाज क े िलए, पूरे देश क े िलए हȅ।  आज हमारा बच्चा साउथ मȂ 
दौड़कर कोई capitation fees देकर वहां पढ़ने नहीं जा रहा है।  आज सारी की सारी काउंसिंलग 
Director General for H
ealth Services क े माध्यम से यहां से होती है और हम तय करते हȅ िक 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

िकस सीट पर जाकर िकस गरीब का बच्चा कहां पढ़ेगा।  यह इतना बड़ा िरफॉमर्, इतना बड़ा 
पिरवतर्न है, िजससे लाखȗ बच्चȗ का फायदा हो रहा है।   
मȅ एक बात जरूर  करना चाहूंगा, क्यȗिक मȅ हेÊथ िमिनÎटर्ी मȂ हूं।  शरीर क े अंदर कई 
िकÎम की बीमािरयां गाहे-बगाहे लग
ती हȅ, it is also an ongoing process. कभी हम antibiotic 
ले लेते हȅ, कभी हम injection लगा लेते हȅ, कभी हम छोटा सा ऑपरेशन करा लेते हȅ, लेिकन 
शरीर को ही नहीं मार देते हȅ।  बीमारी क े कारण शरीर नहीं म ारा जाता है। इसिलए नीट क े अंदर 
और नीट क े माध्यम से चलने वाले processes मȂ एनटीए क े माध्यम से क ु छ चीज़ आई है और 
सुĢीम कोटर् ने भी कहा है िक we would like to know the extent, जो इसमȂ तकलीफ आई है, 
लेिकन मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूं िक यह बहुत बड़ा robust system है।   यह robust system 
भारत क े नौज
वानȗ को मेिडकल एजुक ेशन मȂ लाने क े िलए बहुत ही तरीके  से तय िकया गया 
िसÎटम है।  मȅ इसके  बारे मȂ ही नहीं बोलना चाहता हूं।  मȅ ऐसी ही एक जनरल एक बात कहना 
चाहता हूं।  पता नहीं क्यȗ हम लोगȗ की एक आदत हो गई है िक हम अपने ǎा
रा िकए गए कायș क े 
बारे मȂ हमेशा ऐसा समझते हȅ िक यह second-grade है।  और अमेिरका कोई काम कर दे, 
ऑÎटर्ेिलया कोई काम कर दे, तो वह बड़ा first grade का हो जाता है।  मȅ पूरे दावे क े साथ कहना 
चाहता हूँ िक भारत क े अंदर िजतने भी systems prevail कर रहे हȅ, वे बड़े robust systems हȅ।  
140 करोड़ की जनता को systematically चलाना, यह आसान काम नहीं है।  मुझे कोई देश बता 
दीिजए, िजसका 70 Ģितशत से ज्यादा कोरोना का वैक्सीनेशन हुआ हो!  यह भारत देश है, 
िजसने 220 करोड़ डबल डोज़ लगा कर बच्चȗ को बचाया।  यह क ै से हुआ?  कहा ँ गढ़िचरौली, 
कहाँ छǄीसगढ़ का बÎतर, कहाँ लेह-लǈाख, कहाँ कारिगल, कहाँ दर्ास!  सभापित जी, क ै से-
क ै से करके  एक-एक इंजेक्शन एक particular temperature मȂ पहुँचा करके  vaccinate िकया 
गया है।  उसी तरीके  से NEET को हम undermine न  करȂ।  यह बड़ा robust system है, बहुत 
अच्छा िसÎटम है, गाँव क े लोगȗ को मेिडकल एजुक ेशन मȂ लाने का बहुत बड़ा माध्यम है।  इसिलए 
इस robust system क े बारे मȂ जब हम चचार् करȂ, तो इसकी जो बुिनयादी spirit थी और है, 
उसको हम damage न पहुँचाएँ, यह मेरा िनवेदन है।  यही मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ।  मȅने intervene 
िकया, क्षमा करȂ, लेिकन मुझे लगा िक मȅ facts को, िरकॉडर् को straight कर दूँ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. Syed Naseer Hussain; seven minutes. 
 
DR. SYED NASEER HUSSAIN (Karnataka): Th ank you, Sir, for giving me this 
opportunity.Sir, I rise to support the Reso lution moved by Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
on the issue of NEET examinations in our country.  पहले भी इसके  ऊपर काफी 
discussion हुआ।  जब कोिंचग सȂटसर् क े बारे मȂ बात हो रही थी, तो भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े कई 
एमपीज़ बार-बार यह कह रहे थे िक यूपीए क े टाइम पर इसको recommend िकया गया था, 
कांगर्ेस ǎारा recommend िकया गया था।  सर, यह सही बात है िक कांगर्ेस गवनर्मȂट और कांगर्ेस 
क े एमपीज़ ने इसको recommend िकया था।  मȅ कणार्टक से आता हूँ, मेरे ख्याल से Karnataka 
is one of the first few States which allo wed technical and professional colleges to 
mushroom.  वहाँ पर इतने ज्यादा इंजीिनयिंरग और मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ हो गए थे िक गवनर्मȂट 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
127

क े सपोटर् से ज्यादा से ज्यादा बच्चे इंजीिनयिंरग और मेिडकल कॉलेजेज़ मȂ पढ़ने लगे थे।  लेिकन 
हम लोगȗ ने वहाँ पर realize िकया, -- का ंगर्ेस की सरकार थी, वीरÃपा मोइली साहब चीफ 
िमिनÎटर थे, -- हम लोगȗ ने realize िकया िक 25 परसȂट Îटू डȂट्स government quota मȂ जाते 
हȅ, िजनकी फीस कम होती है और 75 परस Ȃट Îटू डȂट्स से वे बहुत ज्यादा पैसा िलया करते थे।  
Management fees, capitation fees क े नाम पर वहाँ पर बहुत ज्यादा donation िदया जाता 
था।  जैसा अभी हमारे लीडर ऑफ द हाउस बता रहे थे, उस टाइम पर तो लाखȗ रुपए  िलए जाते 
थे।  Fees structure को rationalize करन े क े िलए, ज्यादा से ज्यादा बच्चे entrance 
examination क े through आन े क े िलए Common Entrance Test for the first time हमारी 
Îटेट मȂ 90s मȂ कांगर्ेस गवनर्मȂट क े ǎारा start िकया गया, िजसकी वजह से 75 परसȂट Îटू डȂट्स 
government quota मȂ जाने लगे और 25 परस Ȃट Îटू डȂट्स donation, िजसको  donation या 
capitation fees बोिलए, नहीं तो management fees बोिलए, उसमȂ जाने लगे।  उसको भी 
सरकार ने fix िकया था, िजसकी वजह से ज्यादा से ज्यादा ÎटूडȂट्स इंजीिनयिंरग और मेिडकल 
कॉलेज मȂ जाने भी लगे, कम fees मȂ जाने लगे, deprived sections से जाने लगे, rural areas से 
जाने लगे, जो गवनर्मȂट Îकू ल से पढ़ कर आते थे, वे लोग जाने लगे।   यह जो हमारा experience 
था, professional colleges मȂ ज्यादा से ज्यादा deprived sections से बच्चȗ क े जाने का जो 
experience था, Common Entrance Test का जो experience था, उस experience क े तहत 
हम लोगȗ ने कहा िक पूरे देश मȂ एक exam होना चािहए, पूरे देश मȂ rationalization होना चािहए, 
पूरे देश मȂ equality in education होनी चािहए।  ऐसा हम लोगȗ ने recommend िकया।  लेिकन 
आज क्या हो रहा है?  अभी लीडर ऑफ द हाउस कह रहे थे िक इसमȂ यह हो गया, deprived 
sections आ गए, rural areas से आ गए, बहुत क ु छ कह रहे थे, लेिकन जो कह नहीं रहे थे, 
उसको तमाम ऑपोिज़शन क ȅ प ने बार-बार उठाने की कोिशश की।  आज पूरे देश को, पूरी दुिनया 
को पता है िक क्या हो रहा है।  आज करोड़ȗ बच्चे, जो entrance examination मȂ participate 
करना चाह रहे हȅ, जो माँ-बाप अपनी पूरी िंजदगी की पूँजी को सँभाल कर अपने बच्चȗ को 
डॉक्टर-इंजीिनयर बनाना चाह रहे हȅ, उनके  साथ क्या हो रहा है, आज देश क े सामने है।                       
आज क्यȗ हम अपोिजशन क े एमपीज़ बार-बार यह कह रहे हȅ िक नीट Îकर्ै प होना चािहए, एनटीए 
Îकर्ै प होना चािहए, यह आपके  सामने है।  इसमȂ मȅ िकतना भी बोलूँ, वह कम है।  इसमȂ िज स तरह 
से papers leak हुए हȅ, सǄर पेपसर् लीक हुए हȅ सात एग्जाÇस मȂ।  यह बात सारा िंहदुÎतान मान 
रहा है, सारे लोग मान रहे हȅ, मीिडया मȂ आया है, लेिकन इसको अगर कोई नहीं मान रहा है, तो 
इनके  मंतर्ी नहीं मान रहे हȅ, इनकी सरकार नहीं मा
न रही है।   
 सर, हर चीज मȂ लीक - यहाँ पेपर लीक हो रहा है, *  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय सदÎय, आप क्या बोल गए?  ...( Ëयवधान)... माननीय सदÎय, 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
  
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन: इसमȂ grace marks का difference क्या है, पता नहीं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित:  नहीं, आप सुिनए।  आप भावना मȂ क्या-क्या बोल गए?  ...(Ëयवधान)... That part 
is deleted.  आप बहुत क ु छ बोल गए िक कहाँ-कहाँ लीक हो गया।  ...(Ëयवधान)... ऐसा नहीं 
कहते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान).. .  That is deleted.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन: यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूँ।  वहाँ पर भारतीय जनता पाटीर् की सरकार है।  
उनके  Economic Offences Wing वाले ने investigation िकया, उन्हȗने बोला िक 30 लाख रुपय े 
पेपर लेने क े िलए - क्वेÌचन पेपर पाने क े िलए 30-30 लाख रुपय े िदये जा रहे हȅ।  गुजरात मȂ 
लोगȗ को अरेÎट िकया गया।  मुझे यह समझ मȂ नहीं आता िक िंहदुÎत
ान क े कोने-कोने से, 
महाराÍटर् से, हिरयाणा से, िबहार से, वेÎट बंगाल से बच्चे,  इतनी दूर-दूर से क ै से एक 
एग्जािमनेशन सȂटर पर, गोधरा मȂ एक एग्जािमनेशन सȂटर पर िलखने जाते हȅ।  इसमȂ ल
गातार जो 
बात सामने आ रही है, उसमȂ एकदम साफ है िक नीट का जो पूरा िसÎटम है, एनटीए का जो पूरा 
िसÎटम है, इसमȂ करÃशन है और इसमȂ क ु छ लोगȗ को, क ु छ िवचारधारा से जुड़े हुए बच्चȗ को 
फ ैिसिलटेट करने क े िलए पूरा नीट का एग्जाम यूज़ िकया जा रहा है।  एनटीए क ैसा है?  यह जो 
National Testing Agen
cy है, यह Îवयं कोई exam conduct नहीं करती है।  यह outsource 
करती है।  यह िकसको outsource कर रही है - उन लोगȗ को, जो   ...(Ëयवधान)... उससे जुड़े 
हुए लोगȗ को contract दे रही है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Member, rather than leve lling allegations baselessly, why 
don't you make a suggestion? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन: सर, मȅ उस पर लाÎट मȂ आता हूँ।  ...( Ëयवधान)..
 . पहले क्या हो रहा 
है, वह बोल लूँ।   ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ उस पर लाÎट मȂ आता हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Criticism is allowed if it is constructive. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन: सर,  िकस-िकस इंÎटीǷूट को यह िदया गया है, यह सब को पता है 
और ये contracts िकसको िदए जा रहे हȅ, यह सबको पता है।  यहाँ तक िक question papers ले 
जाने वाली जो एजȂसी है, ...(Ëयवधान)... जो question papers को एक शहर से दूसरे शहर मȂ 
पहुँचाने वाली एजȂसी है, examination centres तक उसे पहुँचाने वाली एजȂसी भी एक Ģाइवेट 
एजȂसी है।  वे िकसको पेपर दे रहे हȅ, कहाँ गाड़ी खड़ी कर रहे हȅ, िकसको पेपर लीक कर रहे हȅ, 
वह िकसी को भी पता नहीं है।  तो यह जो एनटीए और नीट मȂ लगातार जो धांधली हो रही है, 
इसके  बारे मȂ हम लोग यह
ी कह रहे हȅ।  आपके  पास आप क्यȗ exam conduct कर रहे हȅ?  अभी 
लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस कह रहे थे िक एससी-एसटी क े बच्चे आ गए, इतने बढ़ गए, रूरल  
एिरयाज़ से बढ़ गए।  Ac
tually, Sir, pre-NEET मȂ 38 परसȂट urban areas से पास होते थे, आज 
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
129

post-NEET मȂ 60 परसȂट क े करीब मेटर्ोपॉिलटन और urban areas से पास हो रहे हȅ, 35 परसȂट 
रूरल  एिरयाज़ से पास हो रहे हȅ।  सर, आिखरकर ऐसा क्यȗ हो रहा है?   
 इसमȂ कोिंचग सȂटसर् क े िबजनेस को बढ़ावा िमला है।  कोिंचग सȂटसर् का िबजनेस, 65,000 
करोड़ का िबजनेस है।  अभी यह बोला जा रहा है िक 2028 तक यह 1 लाख, 38 हजार क
रोड़ का 
िबजनेस हो जाएगा।  सर, कौन से बच्चे वहाँ जाकर कोिंचग ले सकते हȅ?  वहाँ जाकर जो लोग 5 
लाख, 10 लाख, 15 लाख रुपए  देकर कोिंचग ले सकते हȅ, वही इसमȂ पास होते हȅ।   क्वेÌचन पेपर 
क ैसा िĢपेयर िकया जा रहा है? कोिंचग सȂटर मȂ जो पढ़ाया जाता है, उसके  तहत, उस िसलेबस 
क े तहत क्वेÌचन पेपर िĢपेयर िकया जा रहा है।  क्वेÌचन पेपर का िडजाइन उस तरह से तैयार 
िकया जा रहा है।  तो मेरा यह मानना है िक ...(Ëयवधान)... मेरा यह मानना है िक कोई भी 
entrance t
est, कोई भी education का system egalitarian होना  चािहए।  ...( समय की 
घंटी)... उसमȂ equality होनी चािहए।  सर, मȅ JNU से आता हूँ। मȅ मंतर्ी जी को बोलूँगा िक वे JNU  
का entrance examination क े system और  वहाँ की admission policy पढ़Ȃ िक वहाँ पर िकस 
तरह से deprivation points िदए जाते हȅ।  वहाँ grace marks नहीं देते, deprivation points िदए 
जाते हȅ। ...( समय की घंटी)... आप एससी-एसटी हȅ, तो िकतने deprivation points िमलȂगे? 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, nothing is going on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
डा. सैयद नािसर हुसैन: सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... तो िक
तने deprivation points िमलȂगे? 
...(Ëयवधान)... सर, दो िमनट।   . . . (Ëयवधान)... सर, बीच मȂ ...( Ëयवधान)... दो िमनट।   
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please, please.  ...(Interruptions)... L i s t e n  t o  m e .  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी सैयद नािसर हुसैन: सर, अगर आप backward region से आते हȅ, तो िकतने deprivation 
points
, अगर एससी लड़का हो, तो िकतने deprivation points,  एससी लड़की हो, तो िकतने 
deprivation points और economically weaker section से  हो, तो िकतने deprivation points 
िमलȂगे?  सर, यह जो deprivation points वाली पॉिलसी है, जो JNU की admission policy है, 
मȅ बोलूँगा िक वे जाकर उसको पढ़ लȂ और उसके  तहत इसे बनाएँ। हम यह कह रहे हȅ िक नीट 
अच्छी मंशा से बनाई गई होगी, लेिक
न उसमȂ loopholes िनकल कर सामने आए और यह सरकार 
नीट examination conduct करने मȂ िवफल रही।  इसिलए मȅ सजेÎट करू ँगा िक दोनȗ हाउसेज़ 
की एक कमेटी बने और उसमȂ इस पर िडटेल मȂ िडÎकशन हो।  हम यह सोचȂ िक क ै से नए तरीके  
से National Entrance E
xams conduct िकया जाए और examination pattern को  िकस तरह 
से design िकया जाए िक उसमȂ deprived section और rural background क े ज्यादा-से-ज्यादा 
Îटू डȂट्स participate कर सकȂ और सीट पा सकȂ ।  
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

सर, मȅ एक ही चीज बोलूँगा िक हमारे लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस बोल रहे थे िक इतने बड़े-बड़े 
डॉक्टसर् हो गए, इतने लोगȗ को सुिवधा िमल गई, लेिकन एक चीज यह भी है िक 5.8 million 
malpractices cases by doctors have come to the fore.  ये उन्हीं डॉक्टसर् क े हȅ, जो * तरीके  
से नीट क े माध्यम से डॉक्टसर् बने हȅ।  धन्यवाद, चेयरमैन सर।     
       
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, the Reso lution moved by the hon. Member, Shri 
M. Mohamed Abdulla, has remained inconclusive. ...(Interruptions)...  So, his 
presence and absence...(Interruptions)... It has remained inconclusive.   
 
 
ANNOUNCEMENTS BY THE CHAIR - Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, the Cons titution was amended and Part-IX(B) 
was inserted in the Constitution as a consequence of the Constitution (Ninety-
seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, in the year 2012.  That pertains to the co-operative 
societies.  Earlier, similar Amendment was made in the Constitution for Panchayats 
and Municipalities. The Discussion on th e Ministry of Co-operation has not taken 
place in either of the Houses thus far. This being a very important sector for our social 
development, the fourth Ministry for discussi on will be the Ministry of Co-operation.  
The Discussion will be initiated by the DMK Member, Shri Tiruchi Siva. The House 
stands adjourned to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Monday, the 5th August, 2024.  
 
The House then adjourned at twenty-seven minutes past four of the clock  
till eleven of the clock on Monday, the 5th August, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
* Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
  
[ 2 August, 2024 ]
131

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 
