Vol. 260          Friday,  
No. 17 11 th August, 2023 
                          20 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Felicitations to the Honourable Chairman on  completing one year in the office and 
other issues (pages 1 - 5) 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 5 - 14) 
 
Statement by Minister correcting answer to question (page 14) 
 
Statement by Minister- 
Status of implementation of recommendat ions/observations contained in the 171
st 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Commerce (pages 14 - 15) 
 
Farewell to the retiring Members (pages 15 - 37) 
 
[P.T.O 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 


Oral Answers to Questions (pages 37 -  72) 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise
] 
 
Messages from Lok Sabha-Reported 
The Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023- Laid on the 
Table (pages 72 - 73) 
The Integrated Goods and Servi ces Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023-  Laid on the 
Table (pages 72 - 73) 
 
Government Bills-Returned 
The Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (pages 73 - 75) 
The Integrated Goods and Services  Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023  
(pages 73 - 75) 
 
Observation by the Chair (page 76) 
 
Suspension of Members-Adopted (pages 76 -83) 
 
Valedictory Remarks (pages 83 -86) 
 
National Song (page 87) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
  
      http://parliamentofindia.nic.in  
E-mail   : rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 11th August, 2023/20 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
FELICITATIONS TO THE HONOURABLE CHAIRMAN ON COMPLETING ONE 
 YEAR IN THE OFFICE AND OTHER ISSUES 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL):  Hon. Chairman, Sir, 
...(Interruptions)...   Hon. Chairman, Sir, on behalf  of the entire House, I would like 
to compliment you on completing one year as the Vice-President of India and for the 
astute leadership that you have given to our House, to Parliament. You have brought 
dignity and grace to the second highest constitutional position in this country and truly 
helped bring about a lot of improvements, a lot of changes with your legal acumen on 
the conduct and proceedings of the House. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. ... (Interruptions)... Leader of the House, please... 
...(Interruptions)...  
  
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: This is something in which we are all one. ...(Interruptions)...  
I speak on behalf of all sides.  ... (Interruptions)...  I am sure all of us will agree with 
that.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... Please.  ...(Interruptions)... 
   
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL : Sir, I just want a minute more.  ... (Interruptions)...  Sir, you 
come from a farmer's family.  ... (Interruptions)...  सर, आपने िकसान पिरवार से आकर 
एक धरती पुतर् के  नाते अपनी humility से, अपने सरल Îवभाव के  Ëयिƪत्व
 और कायर्शैली से 
हमारा मागर्दशर्न िकया।  साथ ही साथ, आपकी कानून के  ऊपर जो पकड़ है, उस कानून की 
समझ को आपने हम सबको िसखाया और हम सबको भी आगे समझने का मौका िदया।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am humbled.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please.  ...(Interruptions)...  
  
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: इसके
 िलए मȅ आपको बधाई देता हूँ और इस हाउस की ओर से धन्यवाद देता हूँ। 
 

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Papers to be  laid on the Table. Sh ri V. Muraleedharan.  
...(Interruptions)...  One Second.   
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सर, लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस ने आपका एक साल कÇपलीट 
होने क े िलए आपको बधाई दी।  वे अगर हम सबको भी कह देते तो हम सभी िमलकर इस पर चार 
बातȂ कर सकते थे।  लेिक न  यही बहुत बड़ी मुिÌकल है, बगैर बात िकए ये सब वन-वे करते हȅ, तो 
करने दȂ, हम भी उसमȂ शरीक होते हȅ और जुड़ते हȅ। यह एक बात है। 
 सर, दूसरी बात यह िक मेरी आपसे िवनती है िक आप मेरा माइक जÊदी बन्द मत कीिजए, 
क्यȗिक आज लाÎट डे है।  इस सदन से छ: लोगȗ को सÎपȂड िकया गया और िĢिवलेज किमटी को 
रेफर िकया गया *...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी हरनाथ िंसह यादव (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please.  ...(Interruptions)...  Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: संिवधान मȂ दोनȗ हाउस हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... एक हाउस नहीं है, दोनȗ हाउस 
हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: At least on the last day...(Interruptions) ...  Let us listen to the 
Leader of the Opposition.  ... (Interruptions)...  Please.  ... (Interruptions)...  I can 
tell you this. During this one year, if I have learnt maximum, I have learnt it from the 
Leader of the Opposition and the senior le aders. In my Chamber, they have been a 
source of enlightenment. I plead with you. It is a very embarrassing moment for me.  
As Governor also, for three years, I ne ver came out with any document for six 
months, one   year, two years, etc.  I don't   comment whether it is advisable or not.  
I feel humbled and embarrassed. But please listen to the Leader of the Opposition 
with full attention.  Let us set a good example.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी हरनाथ िंसह यादव: सर, ...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No.  ... (Interruptions)...  Harnath ji.  ...(Interruptions)...  Anyone 
out of track may be named by me. ... (Interruptions)... I may have to 
name...(Interruptions)... The Leader of the House, I may have to name your 
Member.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
                   
*Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी हरनाथ िंसह यादव: सर, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I may have to name the Member. ...(Interruptions) .. No.  
...(Interruptions)... We will hear the Leader of the Opposition irrespective of the 
situation that what he says may not be generally palatable to all. Please, I am sure you 
would bear this in mind that it is the last day. Help me that we all part way with a good 
resolution.    
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सभापित महोदय, हम इस बात मȂ िवÌवास करते हȅ िक  
 
"काल करे सो आज कर, आज करे सो अब। 
पल मȂ परलय होएगी, बहुिर करेगा कब।" 
 
हमारी नीित यह है िक सब जÊदी और टाइम  पर होना चािहए। सर, लोकतंतर् मȂ िडबेट क े 
दौरान छो
टे-मोटे िवषय आते हȅ, मेÇबसर् एक-दूसरे क े बारे मȂ क ु छ कहते हȅ, अगर वह बहुत 
unparliamentary है और वह िकसी को बहुत दुखी करता है, तो उस वƪ आप कह सकते हȅ िक 
यह unparliamentary है, यह ठीक नहीं है। *...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It happened there, Sir. . …(Interruptions)…  It happened in the other 
House.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Other House!  …(Interruptions)… Sir, I am pleading 
with you, as Vice President of India and Chai rman of this House, you have to protect 
the democracy.  …(Interruptions)…   
   
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will react.  …(Interruptions)…  I will react. …(Interruptions)…  
Please.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: You have to.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: 
* ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Thank you.  …(Interruptions)… 
                   
*Expunged as ordered by the Chair.  
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
3

 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. …(Interruptions)… ठीक है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... Papers to be 
laid on the Table. …(Interruptions)…  
  
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Sir, …(Interruptions)…  It is  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Muraleedharan.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Sir, this House unanimously …(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI BINOY VISWAM (Kerala): Sir, please let him complete.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Sir, we ask you to send the message 
…(Interruptions)…    
   
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri V. Muraleedharan.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI V. 
MURALEEDHARAN):  Sir, can I have one mi nute before the Papers are laid on the 
Table? …(Interruptions)… 
 
पयार्वरण, वन और जलवायु पिरवतर्न मंतर्ी; तथा Ǜम और रोजगार मंतर्ी (Ǜी भूपेन्दर् यादव): सर, 
यह कहना जरूरी है।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have called for Papers to be laid on the Table.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI V. MURALEEDHARAN: That is correct and I agree with that, Sir.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: But you have to delete.. …(Interruptions)…  You have to 
expunge these remark
s.   …(Interruptions)…  These remarks are..…(Interruptions)… 
 
                   
*Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
  
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI V. MURALEEDHARAN: Sir, it is not the convention of this House.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will look into it.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, please examine th e record and delete these remarks.  
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will look into it.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI V. MURALEEDHARAN: The convention of this House is that the conduct of the 
other House is not at all discussed in this House. …(Interruptions)… So, the 
comments made by the Leader of the O pposition have to be examined and 
expunged.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please.  …(Interruptions)…Okay. …(Interruptions)…  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: And it should be censored also.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri V. Muraleedharan.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka): Sir, no rule... …(Interruptions)… 
 
SHRI BHUPENDER YADAV: Yes, rule is there. …(Interruptions)…   
 
 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of NMPPB, New Delhi and related Papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI V. 
MURALEEDHARAN): Sir, on behalf of my colleague, Shri Prahalad Singh Patel, I lay 
on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 
(a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the National Meat and Poultry Processing 
Board (NMPPB), New Delhi, for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
5

 
 
Report on the Accounts.   
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Board. 
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9978/17/23] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी अिǚनी क ुमार 
चौबे): महोदय, मȅ आवÌयक वÎतु अिधिनयम, 1955 की धारा 3 की उप -धारा (6) क े अधीन 
िविशÍट खाǏ पदाथș पर लाइसȂसी अपेक्षाएं, Îटॉक सीमाएं और संचलन Ģितबंध हटाना 
(संशोधन) आदेश, 2023 को Ģकािशत करने वा ली उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक 
िवतरण मंतर्ालय (उपभोƪा मामले िवभाग) की अिधसूचना सं. का.आ. 2423 (अ) िदनांक 2 जून, 
2023 की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 9950/17/23] 
 
 
I. MoUs (2023-24 and 2024-25) between the Government of India and AYCL 
II. MoU (2023-24) between the Government of India and BHEL, New Delhi 
 
भारी उǏोग मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी क ृÍण पाल):  महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा पटल पर 
रखता हूं :- 
 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
(i)  Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India (Ministry of 
Heavy Industries) and the Andrew Yule  & Company Limited (AYCL), for the 
year 2023-24. 
(ii)  Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India (Ministry of 
Heavy Industries) and the Andrew Yule  & Company Limited (AYCL), for the 
year 2024-25. 
 
II. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Memorandum of Understanding between 
the Government of India (Ministry of Heavy Industries) and the Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited  (BHEL), New Delhi, for the year 2023-24. 
[Placed  in Library. For I and II, See No. L.T. 9922/17/23] 
 
 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution 
 
उपभोƪा मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (साध्वी िनरंजन ज्योित): 
महोदय, मȅ खाǏ िनगम अिधिनयम,1964 की धारा 45 की उप-धारा (5) क े अधीन उपभोƪा 
मामले, खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण मंतर्ालय (खाǏ और सावर्जिनक िवतरण िवभाग) की 
िनÇनिलिखत अिधसूचनाओं की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूं :- 
 
(1) No. E.P.1(7)/2015,
 dated the 3 rd June, 2022, publishing the Food 
Corporation of India (Staff) (..........Ame ndment) Regulations, 2022, along 
with delay statement. 
(2) No. 1(7)/2015, dated the 3 rd August, 2022, publishing a Corrigendum to the 
Notification No. E.P.1(7)/2015, dated the 3 rd June, 2022, along with delay 
statement. 
(3) No. 1(7)/2015, dated the 20 th December, 2022, publishing a Corrigendum (in 
Hindi only) to the Notification No.  1(7)/2015, dated the 3 rd August, 2022, 
along with delay statement. 
(4) E.P.1(7)/2015, dated the 26 th May, 2023, publishing the Food Corporation of 
India (Staff) (First Amendment) Regulations, 2023. 
[Placed  in Library. For (1) to (4) See No. L.T. 10056/17/23] 
 
Notification of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 
मत्Îयपालन, पशुपालन और डेयरी मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी
 (डा. संजीव क ुमार बािलयान): 
महोदय, मȅ पशुओं क े Ģित कर्ूरता का िनवारण अिधिनयम, 1960 की धारा 38क क े अधीन पशु जन्म 
िनयंतर्ण िनयम, 2023 को Ģकािशत करने वाली मत्Îयपालन, पशुपालन और डेयरी मंतर्ालय 
(पशुपालन और डेयरी िवभाग) की अिधसूचना सं. सा.का.िन. 193 ( अ), िदनांक 16 माच र्, 2023 
की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 10057/17/23] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Home Affairs
 
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी ( Ǜी िनत्यानन्द राय): महोदय, मȅ भारतीय भूिम पǄन Ģािधकरण 
अिधिनयम, 2010 की धारा 36 क े अधीन गृह मंतर्ालय की िनÇनिलिखत अिधसूचनाओं की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं :- 
 
(1) S.O. 2409 (E), dated the 2 nd June, 2023, constituting the Land Ports 
Authority of India. 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
7

 
 
(2) S.O. 2410 (E), dated the 2 nd June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Rupaidiha, District Bahraich, Uttar Pradesh, as Integrated Check Post.   
(3) S.O. 2695 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Sutarkandi, District Karimganj, Assam, as integrated check post. 
(4) S.O. 2696 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Srimantapur, District Sepahijala, Tripura, as integrated check post. 
(5) S.O. 2697 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Sabroom,  District South Tripura, as integrated check post. 
(6) S.O. 2698 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Raxaul, District East Champaran, Bihar, as integrated check post. 
(7) S.O. 2699 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Petrapole,  District 24 Parganas, West Bengal, as integrated check post.    
(8) S.O. 2700 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Jogbani,  District Araria, Bihar, as integrated check post.    
(9) S.O. 2701 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Moreh,  District Tengnoupal, Manipur, as integrated check post. 
(10) S.O. 2702 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifying the Land Port at 
Dera Baba Nanak, District Gurdaspur, Punjab, as integrated check post. 
(11) S.O. 2703 (E), dated the 20th June, 2 023, specifying the Land Port at  
Agartala, District West Tripura, Tripura, as integrated check post.    
(12) S.O. 2704 (E), dated the 20 th June, 2023, specifyin g the Land Port at 
Attari, District Amritsar, Punjab, as integrated check post. 
[Placed  in Library. For (1) to (12) See No. L.T. 9951/17/23] 
 
Reports and Accounts (2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22) of the Jammu and Kashmir 
State Agro Industries Corporation Ltd., Srinagar and Odisha Agro Industries 
Corporation Ltd., Bhubaneswar and related papers  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SUSHRI SHOBHA KARANDLAJE): Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
 
(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi)  of the following papers, under sub-
section (1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013:- 
 
 (i) (a)  Fiftieth  Annual Report and Accounts of the Jammu and Kashmir State 
Agro Industries Corporation Ltd., Srinagar, Kashmir, for the year 2019-20, 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
together with   the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
     (b)  Review by Government on  the working of the above Corporation. 
 
 (ii) (a) Fifty-first  Annual Report and Accounts of the Jammu and Kashmir 
State Agro Industries Corporation Lt d., Srinagar, Kashmir, for the year 
2020-21, together with   the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the 
comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
     (b)  Review by Government on  the working of the above Corporation. 
[Placed  in Library. For (i) and (ii) See No. L.T. 9935/17/23] 
 
(iii)  (a) Sixtieth Annual Report and Accounts of the Odisha Agro Industries 
Corporation Ltd., Bhubaneswar, Odis ha for the year 2021-22, together 
w i t h    t h e  A u d i t o r ' s  R e p o r t  o n  the Accounts and the comments of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
     (b)  Review by Government on  the working of the above Corporation. 
 
      (2) Statements (in English and Hindi)  giving reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (i) (a), (ii) (a) and (iii) (a) above. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9934/17/23] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (SHRI 
SOM PARKASH): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the 
following Notifications of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department for 
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade), issued under Section 16 read with sub-
section (3) of Section 25 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016:- 
 
(1)  S.O. 1431 (E), dated the 27
th March, 2023, publishing the Safety Glass 
(Quality Control) Amendment Order, 2023. 
(2)  S.O. 2986 (E), dated the 6 th July, 2023, publishing the Flame- Producing 
Lighters (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(3)  S.O. 2988 (E), dated the 6 th July, 2023, publishing the Potable Water 
Bottles (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(4)  S.O. 3139 (E), dated the 14 th July, 2023, publishi ng the Resin treated 
compressed wood laminates (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
9

 
 
(5)  S.O. 3140 (E), dated the 14 th July, 2023, publishing the Insulated Flask, 
Bottles and Containers for Domestic Use (Quality Control) Order, 2023. 
(6)  S.O. 5850 (E), dated the 14 th December, 2022, publishing the 
Refrigerating Appliances (Quality Control) Amendment Order, 2022, 
along with Delay Statement. 
(7)  S.O. 5972 (E), dated the 21 st December, 2022, publishing the  Air 
Conditioner and its related Parts, Hermetic Compressors and 
Temperature Sensing Controls (Qua lity Control) Amendment Order, 
2022, along with Delay Statement. 
[Placed  in Library. For (1) to (7) See No. L.T. 9955/17/23] 
 
Report (2021-22) of the Central Agricultural University, Imphal and related papers 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत 
पतर् सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:— 
 
      (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section 
(3) of Section 29 of the Central Agricultural University Act, 1992:— 
 
 (a) 
Annual Report of the Central Agricultural University, Imphal,  
Manipur, for the year 2021-22. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above University. 
 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving  reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9936/17/23] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs  
 
आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय  मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी कौशल िकशोर): महोदय, मȅ िदÊली नागरी 
कला आयोग अिधिनयम, 1973 की धारा 27 की उप-धारा (2) क े अधीन आवासन और शहरी कायर् 
मंतर्ालय की िनÇनिलिखत अिधसूचनाओं तथा िवलंब संबंधी िववरण की एक-एक Ģित ( अंगर्ेज़ी 
तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
(1)     No. 
1(1)/76-DUAC, dated the 19 th July, 1986, publishing the Delhi Urban 
Art Commission Employees Contributory Provident Fund (Amendment) 
Regulations, 1986. 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(2) No. 3(8)/86-DUAC, dated the 15 th April, 1989, publishing the Delhi Urban 
Art Commission Senior Personal A ssistant (Recruitment) (Amendment) 
Regulations, 1989. 
(3) No. 3(8)/86-DUAC, dated the 15 th April, 1989, publishing the Delhi Urban 
Art Commission (Ministerial and Non-Ministerial posts) Recruitment 
(Amendment) Regulations, 1989. 
(4) No. 3(8)/90-DUAC, dated the 3 rd August, 1991, publishing the Delhi 
Urban Art Commission Assistant Se cretary (Technical) Recruitment 
Regulations, 1991. 
(5) No. 1(1)/87-DUAC, dated the 23 rd October, 1993, publishing the Delhi 
Urban Art Commission (Terms and Cond itions of Service) Regulations, 
1993. 
(6) No. 3(8)/86-DUAC, dated the 23 rd October, 1993, publishing the Delhi 
Urban Art Commission (Ministerial  and Non-Ministerial posts) 
Recruitment (Amendment) Regulations, 1993. 
(7) No. 1(1)/87-DUAC, dated the 14 th March, 1998, publishing the Delhi 
Urban Art Commission (Terms and Co nditions of Service) Amendment 
Regulations, 1998. 
(8) No. 1(1)/87-DUAC, publishing the Delhi Urban Art Commission (Terms 
and Conditions of Service) Amendment Regulations, 2013, in the weekly 
Gazette dated the 10th August - 16th August, 2013. 
(9) No. 9(2)/2019-DUAC, publishing the Delhi Urban Art Commission 
Employee's (Group Pension Scheme) Regulations, 2020, in the weekly 
Gazette dated the 28
th March - 3rd April, 2020. 
(10) No. 9(1)/2020-DUAC, publishing the Delhi Urban Art Commission 
Employee's Provident Fund Regulation s, 2020, in the weekly Gazette 
dated the 28th March - 3rd April, 2020. 
[Placed  in Library. For (1) to (10) See No. L.T. 9972/17/23] 
 
Report and Accounts (2021-22) of NCUI, New Delhi and related papers 
 
सहकािरता मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी बी .एल .वमार्): महोदय, मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर्ȗ की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेज़ी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
 
  (a)   Annual Report of the National C ooperative Union of India (NCUI), New Delhi, 
for the year 2021-22.     
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
11

 
 
 (b)  Annual Accounts of the National Coop erative Union of India (NCUI), New Delhi, 
for the year 2021-22, and the Audit Report thereon. 
   (c)  Review by Government on the working of the above Cooperative Union. 
 (d) Statement  giving  reasons  for  the  delay  in  laying  the  papers  mentioned at 
(a) and (b) above. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9991/17/23] 
 
 Notification of the Ministry of Communications 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (SHRI 
DEVUSINH CHAUHAN): Sir, I  lay on the Table, under Section 37 of the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) Notification No. 
RP-4/16/(24)/2021-QoS., dated the 25th July, 2023, publishing the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India Repealing Regulations, 2023. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9958/17/23] 
 
Notifications of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
 
SHRI V. MURALEEDHARAN: Sir, on behalf  of my colleague, Dr. Bharati Pravin 
Pawar, I lay on the Table, a copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following 
Notifications of the Ministry of Health an d Family Welfare, under Section 58 of the 
National Medical Commission Act, 2019:- 
 
(1) No. U-11022/4/2022-UGMEB, dated the 14
th December, 2022,  publishing 
the Establishment of Medical College Regulations, (Amendment), 2022 
along with Delay Statement. 
(2) No. C-19011/06/2022/NMC/Coord., dated the 3
rd April, 2023, publishing the 
Teachers Eligibility Qualifications in Medical Institutions Regulations, 
(Amendment), 2023. 
(3) No. R.15021/04/2022-EMRB-Reg., dated the 12 th May, 2023, publishing the 
Registration of Medical Practitioners  and Licence to Practice Medicine 
Regulations, 2023. 
(4) No. M-27011/01/2023-MARB, dated the 2 nd June, 2023 publishing the 
Establishment of New Medical Institutions, Starting of New Medical Courses, 
Increase of Seats for Existing Courses and Assessment and Rating 
Regulations, 2023. 
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(5) No. U-14021-8-2023-UGMEB, dated the 2 nd June, 2023, publishing the 
Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 2023. 
(6) No.U.14021-8-2023-UGMEB, dated the 19 th June, 2023 publishing a 
Corrigendum to the Notification No. U-14021-8-2023-UGMEB, dated the 2 nd 
June, 2023. 
(7) No. CDN-19012/15/2022/Coord NMC, dated the 28 th June, 2023, publishing 
the NMC, National Exit Test Regulations, 2023. 
[Placed  in Library. For (1) to (7) See No. L.T. 9990/17/23] 
 
I. Notification of the Ministry of Ayush 
II. Reports and Accounts (2021-22) of NCISM, New Delhi and NCW, New Delhi and 
related papers 
III. Report and Accounts (2021-22) of the C entral Social Welfare Board, New Delhi 
and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD 
DEVELOPMENT; AND THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH (DR. 
MUNJAPARA MAHENDRABHAI),: Sir, I lay on the Table:- 
 
I. A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Ministry of Ayush Notification No. G.S.R. 561 
(E), dated the 27
th July, 2023, publishing the National Commission for Homoeopathy 
(Submission of  List of  the Homoeopa thy Practioners) Amendment Rules, 2023, 
under Section 56 of the National Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9975 /17/23] 
 
II. (i)(1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-
section (3) of Section 42 and sub-sectio n  (4) of Section 41 of the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act (NCISM), 2020:- 
 
  (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Commission for Indian 
System of Medicine (NCISM), New Delhi,  for the year 2021-22, together with 
the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Commission. 
 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving  reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above.   
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9976 /17/23] 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
13

 
 
 
(ii) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under Section 14 
of the National Commission for Women Act, 1990:— 
 
      (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Commission for Women 
(NCW), New Delhi, for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on 
the Accounts. 
    (b) Review by Government on  the working of the above Commission. 
 
(2) Statement (in English and Hindi) giving  reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) (a) above. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9973 /17/23] 
 
III. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers— 
     
  (a)  Annual Report and Accounts of the Central Social Welfare Board,  New 
Delhi, for the year 2021-22, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
            (b)  Review by Gove rnment on the working of the above Board. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for delay in laying the papers mentioned   at (a) 
above. 
[Placed  in Library. See No. L.T. 9974 /17/23] 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER CORRECTING ANSWER TO QUESTION 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी ( Ǜी नरेन्दर् िंसह तोमर): महोदय, मȅ ' एनआईसीआरए की मुख्य 
िवशेषताएं' क े संबंध मȂ 5 अगÎत, 2022 को राज्य सभा मȂ तारांिकत ĢÌन सं. 221 क े िदए गए उǄर 
क े संशोधनाथर् एक वƪËय (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूं। 
 
 
STATEMENT BY MINISTER 
 
Status of implementation of recommendations/observations contained in the 171st 
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Commerce 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE (SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SINGH PATEL):  Sir, I  make a statement regarding St atus of implementation of 
recommendations/observations contained in the 171 st Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Commerce on "Issue Affecting the 
Indian Tea Industry especially in Darjeelin g Region" pertaining to the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry.  
 
 
FAREWELL TO THE RETIRING MEMBERS 
    
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir,... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Farewell Address to Retiring Members ... ...(Interruptions)... Hon. 
Members, as you may be aware,.... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Sir, before that, ...(Interruptions)...   That is a very emotional 
one... ...(Interruptions)... Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: After the farewell address, please.. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, that is very emotional one and everyone wants... 
...(Interruptions)... Before that, kindly give me... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Okay, I give the floor to Shri Tiruchi Siva.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is the issue? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: I would just like to mention thr ee bullet points and nothing much 
to elaborate. ...(Interruptions)... On the point of order rais ed by the Leader of the 
Opposition in March, you gave a ruling in April in the last Session that anything can be 
discussed and any person can be refe rred to on the floor of the House. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am fully alive to it.   
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
15

 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: So, Sir, when Shri Muraleedharan mentioned LoP's observation 
* ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will give my ruling. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Number two, Sir, is... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay, one second. ...(Interruptions)... You have raised a point of 
order and I will give my ruling. ...(Interruptions)...  Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Number two, Sir, is... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No.  ...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Sir, yesterday .... ...(Interruptions)... Sir, it is very, very 
important. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Tiruchi Siva, farewell to hon. Members... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Being the last day,.... ...(Interruptions)... Yes, we are here...  
...(Interruptions)... We have got your point. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I have reserved my ruling. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: Sir, I know the importance of this.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No.  ...(Interruptions)... I have reserved my ruling. 
...(Interruptions)...  On a point of order which the hon. LoP raised and  which you 
have reiterated, you will get my ruling. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  Sir, pertaining to that, it has to be transparent.  
...(Interruptions)... We shall take it with emotions. ...(Interruptions)... 
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: What is it? 
 
                   
*Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA:  We will join with them . ...(Interruptions)... Sir, number two is, 
yesterday, my notice under Rule 167,... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will come to that later on. ...(Interruptions)...  It is the next one. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: One moment,... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: After this, it is coming. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : You can read with Rule 168. ...(Interruptions)... I gave it in 
writing because otherwise you may find fault with that. Now that, yesterday, ... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No, please . ...(Interruptions)... Thank you, Mr. Tiruchi Siva. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, we waited all day yesterda y but till morning, we didn't 
receive any communication from the Government's side. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you Tiruchi ji. ...(Interruptions)... Thank you. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : So, we are prepared for a discussion and they are not. 
...(Interruptions)...Number three is about privilege motion.  ...(Interruptions)...  I 
have my experience of four terms here. ...(Interruptions)...  
† 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please. ...(Interruptions)... I have understood.  
...(Interruptions)... Mr. Tiruchi Siva, now, it is unfair on your part. 
...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA: 
† 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO (Uttar Pradesh): Sir,... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
                   
† Not recorded. 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
17

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No; declined. ...(Interruptions)...  
Hon. Members, as you may be aware, ni ne of our colleagues, who have been 
our part... ...(Interruptions)... Please, Jairam ji. ...(Interruptions)...  Nine of our 
colleagues from the States of Gujarat and West Bengal, namely, Shri Dineshchandra 
Jemalbhai Anavadiya, Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandw ala, Shri S. Jaishankar, Shri Derek O' 
Brien, Ms. Dola Sen, Shri P. Bha ttacharya, Shrimati Shanta Chhetri, Shri Sukhendu 
Sekhar Ray and Ms. Sushmita De v, will be retiring on the 18 th of August, 2023, on 
completion of their term of office.  
 Four of the retiring Members, Shri S. Jaishankar, Shri Derek O' Brien, Ms. 
Dola Sen and Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, have been re-elected.  Our congratulations 
to them on being re-elected. With their ex perience, they will bring on the table a 
greater commitment and direction. We will have continued contribution of their 
experience, talent, intellect and sagacity in the House. 
 The House may be missing other five re tiring Members, who have made rich 
and significant contributions to the procee dings of the House during the course of 
their tenure. I am sure, they would cherish the unique honour of their association with 
this House and would continue with their cont ribution to the nation at large. I will, 
personally, urge the retiring Members to maintain live contact with Members, with 
whom they have spent major part in the House.   
 Shrimati Shanta Chhetri became a Memb er of Rajya Sabha in 2017 by getting 
elected unopposed from the State of West Be ngal. She also served as a Member of 
West Bengal Legislative Assembly for th ree terms. A post-graduate in Commerce 
from North Bengal University, she is an  ardent advocate of women empowerment 
both inside and outside the House. She has raised the issues affecting the gender 
divide and development of North-Easter n region on numerous occasions in the 
House. Her absence would be felt by us all. 
 Shri P. Bhattacharya, a distinguished personality in Indian politics, became a 
Member of Rajya Sabha in 2011. An edu cationist by passion and profession, he 
brought with him vast legislative experien ce into the House.  He has served as a 
Member of Legislative Assembly of West  Bengal from 1972-1977 and that of the 
Eleventh Lok Sabha from 1996-97. The presen t term is his second term in the Rajya 
Sabha.  He has also served as the Chairman of the Committee on Home Affairs. He is 
actively engaged in various intellectual pursuits outside the House and also inside, 
including being a part of Asia tic Society. Asiatic Society, hon. Members, is a mother 
institution. There is no institution in th e country older than th at. His wise counsel 
would surely be missed by all of us, but we are confident that he will continue to 
impart it through the hon. Members. 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiy a has been a Member of this august 
House since February, 2021. He has made significant contributions to the 
deliberations of the House by raising issues  of regional and national importance from 
t i m e  t o  t i m e .  H e  a l s o  t a k e s  k e e n  i n t e r e s t  i n  K a b a d d i ,  - - s u r e l y ,  w e  s h o u l d  k e e p  
Kabaddi out of the House--gardening and Navratri celebrations. He was also the 
Director, Gujarat State Road Transport Co rporation. He is a committed and public 
spirited citizen. 
 Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala was elected to this august House in July, 2019.  
During his tenure, he brought attention on various crucial issues concerning cultural 
heritage, digitization of manuscripts, a ve ry important aspect, h ealth awareness and 
promotion of sports in the country. 
An avid social worker himself, he ca rried forward the comme ndable initiatives 
initiated by his late father, Shri Mathurji Lokhandwala. He  was also the Director of 
Gujarat State Civil Supplies Corporation Limi ted. He takes keen interest in tennis, 
badminton and singing.   
Ms. Sushmita Dev, Barrister by profession, is an alumna of Delhi University, 
Thames Valley University, London and Ki ng's College, one of the most reputed 
institutions in the world. Ms. Sushmita  Dev was elected unopposed to the Upper 
House in September, 2021. Prior to this, she was a Member of 16
th Lok Sabha (2014-
2019) from Silchar, Assam. She had also  been a former Member of the Assam 
Legislative Assembly. Coming from a polit ical background, her father, late Shri 
Santosh Mohan Dev, had served the count ry as Cabinet Minister and Lok Sabha 
Member for seven terms including the 9 th Lok Sabha.  I make pa rticular reference to 
9th Lok Sabha because during this period, I had the occasion, as a Member of the 9 th 
Lok Sabha, of sharing the floor with him, getting his guidance, and he was a strict 
disciplinarian. He would walk up to me and tell me that scrupulous adherence to 
conduct in the House is non-compromising, th at as junior Minister, I have to be in 
obedience of one and all. I was junior Parliamentary Affairs Minister then. Her 
grandfather, Shri Satindra Mohan Dev, was a renowned freedom fighter.   
Hon. Members, retirement from the Rajya Sabha is just a transitory phase, and 
I can tell you that. I came to this House abou t 30 years ago as a Minister; I am back.  
So, it is transitory. While it is painful to say goodbye, we must also celebrate the 
impact these Members have had through thei r effective participat ion in debates and 
discussions on the floor of the House. Ma y their journey ahead be as fulfilling and 
impressive as their time in Parliament! To our retiring Members, I thank you for being 
an integral part of the journey of Bharat 's democracy. Your presence will surely be 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
19

 
 
missed, but your impact will forever be felt. I wish you good health, happiness and 
fruitful years in the service of the nation.   
Hon. Members, in nation-building, fo rmer Members of Parliament, indeed, 
have a significant role to play. They consti tute experienced think-tank and, I am sure, 
they will continue to be so engaged to serve the nation in their capacity as well. Now, 
the Leader of the Opposition, on this point; on farewell to retiring Members.  
                                                          
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सभापित महोदय, आज जो मेÇबसर् िरटायर हो रहे हȅ, वे 
हमसे दूर नहीं रहȂगे, क्यȗिक पॉिलिटक्स मȂ ऐसा होता है िक थोड़े िदन क े िलए यिद वे हमसे अलग 
भी रहȂ, हम
से दूर भी रहȂ, तो दूसरी दफा िफर से िमलने का चांस रहता है। लेिकन आपको और 
मुझे उनसे िमलने का चांस िमलेगा या नहीं - यह सोचने वाली बात है। ...(Ëयवधान). .. 
 
Ǜी सभापित: यह नहीं पता है।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: क्यȗिक उĦ क े िलहाज़ से हमȂ सोचना चािहए। जो मेÇबसर् यहाँ आते हȅ, वे 
अपने िवचार और अपनी एक िवचारधारा को लेकर इस सदन मȂ आते हȅ। लेिक
न  अगर उन्हȂ अपनी 
बात रखने क े िलए समय नहीं िमल सकता, अपने िदल की बात या अपने एिरया की बात या िजस 
Îटेट से वे आते हȅ  ..(Ëयवधान).. 
 
Ǜी सभापित: एक िदल की बात होती है और दूसरी मन की बात होती है, लेिकन दोनȗ बातȂ कहने 
का अवसर िमलना चािह
ए। 
  
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: मन की बात तो मोदी साहब करते हȅ, मȅ िदल की बात करता हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: 'मन की बात िदल से' -  यह मीिंटग गर्ाउंड है।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर नहीं, 'मन' अलग है और 'िदल' अलग है।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: कभी तो आप मुझे Ãवाइंट Îकोर कर
ने का मौका दȂ। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: नहीं, आप हमेशा Ãवाइंट Îकोर करते हȅ, लेिकन कभी-कभी ऐसा होता है 
िक जब मिण
पुर जैसा इÌयू आता है, तो वह हमȂ और आपको ज़रा अलग कर देता है।  आप उधर 
ज्यादा देखते हȅ, इधर नहीं देखते हȅ, वही मुिÌकल होती है। ठीक है, लेिकन जो मेÇबसर् िरटायर 
होते हȅ, वे थोड़े समय क े िलए िरटायर होते हȅ।  वे वापस जाकर िफर से सामािजक का
यर् करते हȅ।  
बहुत से मेÇबसर् बहुत पढ़े-िलखे हȅ, कोई ऑक्सफोडर् यूिनविर्सटी मȂ पढ़ा है, कोई बैिरÎट र  है, कोई 
अपने Îपोट्सर् मȂ एक्सपटर् है - ऐसे सभी लोग यहाँ पर आए हȅ। उनमȂ से बहुत से यंग लोग भी हȅ।  
इसिलए मȅ यही अपेक्षा करता हूँ िक वे समाज की सेवा करȂ और वे िजन िवच ारधारा  पर िवÌवास 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
रखते हȅ, उस िवचारधारा पर चलने की पूरी कोिशश करȂ, तभी देश को भी क ु छ लाभ होगा।  हम 
यह अपेक्षा करते हȅ िक वे िजस सामािजक कायर् मȂ जुटे हुए हȅ, वे हमेशा उस मागर् पर चलते रहȂगे 
और िफर इस सदन मȂ आकर, चाहे यह सदन हो या वह सदन हो, अगर वे िफर यहाँ आ गए, तो 
िनिÌचत रूप  से इससे सम
ाज को भी एक बहुत बड़ा फायदा होगा और उनकी वजह से समाज मȂ 
एक अच्छा वातावरण भी पैदा होगा। 
 इसिलए मȅ अपनी तरफ से, अपनी पा
टीर् की तरफ से और अपने नेताओं की तरफ से यही 
कहूँगा िक जो लोग िरटायर हो रहे हȅ, वे परमानȂटली िरटायर नहीं हो रहे हȅ। वे गवनर्मȂट सवȄट 
नहीं हȅ।  मुझे कभी-कभी अजीब लगता है िक कई लोग कहते हȅ िक हम िरटायर हो गए।  क्या आप 
पॉिलिटक्स मȂ िरटायर होने क े िलए आए हȅ? पॉिलिटक्स मȂ तो आप अपने उसूलȗ को, अपनी 
आइिडयोलॉजी को सतत जीिव
त रखने क े िलए आते हȅ। लेिक न मȅ बहुत से नेताओं को यह कहते 
हुए सुनता हूँ िक नहीं भाई, अब हम िरटायर हो गए हȅ। िफर क्या आप यहाँ सिर्वस करने आए थे?  
क्या यह गवनर्मȂट सिर्वस थी? यह तो आपकी लाइफलाँग सिर्वस है। इसिलए मȅ यही अपेक्षा करता 
हूँ िक वे अच्छे लोग हȅ तथ
ा वे आगे और भी काम करके  िदखाएँगे और देश का मागर्दशर्न करते 
रहȂगे। यह मेरी िवनती है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: अब लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस। 
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी पी
यूष गोयल): माननीय सभापित महोदय, जुदाई हो, िवदाई हो, उसमȂ िकसी 
को भी अच्छा नहीं लगता है, लेिकन साथ ही साथ यह एक सेिलĤेशन का भी मौका है। हम अपने 
कायर्काल को िरÄलेक्ट करते हȅ। अलग-अलग माननीय सदÎयȗ ने बहुत सारा योगदान िदया है।  
उन्हȗने कई िडबेट्स मȂ पािर्टिसपेट िकया है, कई भाषण िदए हȅ, कई ĢÌन, कई ज्वलंत िवषय 
उठाए हȅ।  अलग-अलग िरÄलेक्शन देकर सदÎय यहाँ से िनवृǄ होते हȅ, लेिकन मȅ समझता हूँ िक 
सभी राजनीितक Ëयिƪ हȅ और सबको उनकी प
ािर्टयाँ अलग-अलग िजÇमेदािरयाँ देती हȅ। हमारे 
यहाँ पर भी लगातार यह चिनȊग Ģोसेस रहता है िक Ëयिƪ कभी सरकार मȂ आता है, कभी सदन मȂ 
आता है, कभी पाटीर् की िरÎपाँिसिÅल
टी लेता है। इस Ģकार से Ëयिƪ का भी िनमार्ण होता है और 
साथ ही साथ देश की सेवा क े िलए अन्य-अन्य तरीकȗ से राजनीितक कायर्कतार्ओं को मौका 
िमलता है।   
 मȅ सभी माननीय सांसदȗ को बधाई देना चाहूँगा, िजन्हȗने इतने वषर् देश की सेवा मȂ सदन मȂ 
योगदान िदया। मȅ Ǜी एस. जयशंकर जी का िवशेष आभार Ëयƪ करना चाहूँगा, वैसे तो वे व
ािपस 
चुन कर आ भी गए हȅ, लेिकन इतने छो टे कायर्काल मȂ, उनका जो 4 साल का कायर्काल रहा, उस 
4 साल मȂ माननीय जयशंकर जी ने िसफर् सदन की ही गिरमा नहीं बढ़ाई, बिÊक आज पूरे िवÌव मȂ 
िजस Ģकार से भारत का नाम और सÇमान बना है, िजस Ģकार से वे तीĨता से भारत की बात 
रखते हȅ, ...(Ëयवधान)..
.  
िजस Ģकार से पूरे िवÌव मȂ आज भारत क े िवदेश मंतर्ी की एक अलग ही Ģकार की पहचान 
बनी है ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश (कनार्टक): सर, ये यहां भी राजनीित कर रहे हȅ, यह क्या है! 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
21

 
 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: मȅ समझता हूं िक वे संसद मȂ एक ...(Ëयवधान)... I am coming to others. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, और लोगȗ को भी सदन मȂ चचार् करने का मौका...(Ëयवधान)... यह दुभार्ग्य 
है िक 'celebrating somebody's contribution to the country' की बात पर इनको दुख हो रहा 
है।...(Ëयवध
ान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, while the Leader of the House has reflected on a 
particular Member, I share your sentimen ts. Every Member in the House, who is 
retiring and who could have retired but is  continuing because of re-election, has 
made significant contributions, and those wh o get the opportunity of being a Minister 
have a different kind of performance; we  are proud of them. But, we are equally 
proud of the Members who didn’t have the occasion because their party is not in 
power. So, the implication of the Leader of  the House is not a reflection on other 
Members. For example, there are many heated moments; there are many moments 
where from the Chair, I reflect differently. But, I know that the Members before me are 
very, very talented. Take the case of Sushmi ta Dev; I have highest respects for her. 
So, I would not look at a particular moment  but I would see her credentials in King’s 
College, the kind of contributions she has made, the kind of lin eage she has for three 
generations! If you look at Mr. N.D. Gupt a, he had been the President of Chartered 
Accountants’ Association. His son has been the President. If I look at Mr. Pathak, 
Jairam Ramesh, everyone, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL : How are they assuming that I was not making a mention of 
contribution of other Members? It is so sad! ...(Interruptions)... It is so sad that they 
are assuming that I would not mention about the other Members.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: All I can say is that the Leader of the House, over a period of one 
year that I have interacted with him, as a matter of fact, he can suffer an allegation 
that he is more in connect with the Me mbers of Parliament to my right side 
...(Interruptions)... So, please conclude.  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL : Dr. Jaishankar has truly made  the country proud across the 
world, particularly in the very trying circ umstances during the Ukraine crisis, the way 
he brought back our students, which all of  us, the Members, have witnessed. Derek 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
has been a friend; we came into Parliament  around the same time, if I remember 
correctly, or a year or two apart. Over the years, we worked together; we both, in the 
Opposition, worked for different parties, but with a lot of floor coordination as 
Opposition Members. Despite some of his ve ry different views, I think, the national 
spirit that all the retiring Members have reflected at different points of time, the ‘nation 
first’ philosophy, which all the Members will agree with me, is important. It has been 
the overarching framework in which Members of Parliament have worked. सुिÍमता बहन 
ने लोक सभा मȂ भी काम िकया था और यहां भी काम िकया है। Ǜी राय जी ने उपसभाध्यक्ष क े तौर 
पर, आसन से पूरे सैशन की Ģोसीिंडग्स को क ंडक्ट िकया। हमारे गुजरात क े दो एम पीज़ और 
पिÌचमी बंगाल क े माननीय सदÎय, इन सभी ने राजनीितक जीवन मȂ भी अपना Ģभाव रखा है और 
सामािजक जीवन मȂ भी इन सबका बड़ा योगदान रहा है। बहन दोला सेन और मेरा Ëयिƪगत 
सÇबन्ध इसिलए भी है, क्यȗिक वे टेक्सटा इÊस किमटी मȂ मुझे बहुत अच्छे सुझाव भी देती हȅ और 
चेÇबर क े अंदर आने से भी रोकती हȅ। हाउस मȂ हर Ģकार क े अनुभव और हर Ģकार क े िवषय होते 
हȅ, लेिकन िमतर्ता कभ ी  खराब नहीं होनी चािहए, सÇबन्ध कभी िबगड़ने नहीं चािहए। हममȂ आपस 
मȂ मतभेद हो सकता है पर मȅ समझता हूं िक इस सदन मȂ, िकसी क े साथ िकसी का भी 'मनभेद' 
नहीं होना चािहए, यही इस सदन और पािर्लयामȂट की गिरमा का सबसे अच्छ ा उदाहरण है, सबसे 
बड़ी उपलिÅध है। जो माननीय सदÎय िरटायर होने जा रहे हȅ, उन सभी को मेरी बहुत 
शुभकामनाएं। 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सर, यह बड़ा ही गÇभीर मूमȂट है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please take your seats. I have ta ken note of it. I will indicate who 
has to speak. I missed a point, let me say it . Hon. Members, I recollect
  one particular 
instance with Ms. Dola Sen, I recollect a pa rticular moment as the Governor of West 
Bengal. I got a request that a delegation of Members of Parliament, including Ms. 
Dola Sen, wanted an audience with me.  
I immediately granted audience. We ha d a very frank discussion. And, when 
things get very frank, the vo cal cord gets more active. So, my security outside was 
equally worried as to what was happening inside. My ADC came to the room and 
asked me whether everything was alright. That scene in the Ra j Bhawan was a minor 
incident, but this one, I have seen! But, contributions have been immense 
intellectually.   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मेरा एक Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आपका Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र क्या है? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
23

 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर (उǄर Ģदेश): सर ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, आपने मेरा Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र परिमट िकया था। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Neeraj ji, I first saw Mr. Pramod Tiwari . He caught the eyes of the 
Chairman before anyone else could.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: सर, मȅ आपसे बहुत िवनĦता से कहना चाहता हूँ िक सदन परÇपराओं से चलता 
है, िनयमाव
ली क े तहत हम कारर्वाई करते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, यह पुरानी परÇपरा रही है 
...(Ëयवधान)... यह पुरानी परÇपरा रही है िक जब कभी सÇमािनत सदÎयȗ की िवदाई होती है - 
आपने बड़े अच्छे शÅद बोले, बड़े चुन-चुन कर शÅ द बोले, परन्तु यह परÇपरा रही है िक माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी सदÎयȗ की िवदाई क े समय मौजूद रहते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... यह कई बार की 
परÇपरा है और यह पुराने समय से चली आ रही है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसिलए आज तो उनक ो बुला 
लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज तो उनको बुला लीिजए।  इस तरह राज्य सभा का अपमान नहीं 
करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena, what is your point of order? 
 
डा. िकरोड़ी लाल मीणा (राजÎथान): सभापित महोदय, मेरा Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र यह है * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The point of order is declined.  ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go 
on record.  ...(Interruptions)... No; no, Mr. Derek, don’t do it.  ...(Interruptions)... 
Nothing will go on record.  ...(Interruptions)... I will allow leaders of other parties to 
speak on retiring Members. ...(Interruptions)... Shri Tiruchi Siva.    
...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seat.  ...(Interruptions)...  No; no, nothing will 
go on record.  ...(Interruptions)...  Mr. Piyush Goyal, ...(Interruptions)... Only Mr. 
Tiruchi Siva.  ...(Interruptions)...  Mr. Siva, Please speak only on retiring Members.  
...(Interruptions)... We are required to express ou r sentiments only on retiring 
Members. Trust me, hon. Members, when you express sentiments for Members who 
are retiring, you are addressing a very large segment of retiring Members.  
...(Interruptions)... Mr. Tiruchi Siva.   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
                   
* Not recorded. 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA  (Tamil Nadu) : Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Sir.  
...(Interruptions)...     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please listen to Mr. Tiruchi Siva.  ...(Interruptions)... आप बोिलए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : I am speaking on 'farewell to retiring Members.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... बैिठए, बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)... Ǜी ितरुची  िशवा, आप 
बोिलए। ...( Ëयवधान)... Mr. Tiruchi Siva. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Tiruchi Siva.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : I am speaking on 'Farewell to retiring Members'.  
...(Interruptions)... What is this?  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Mr. Tiruchi Siva, please address the Chair if you want to speak.  
Otherwise, I will call the next speaker. ...(Interruptions)... Address the Chair.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 The House is adjourned to meet at 12 noon today.   
 
The House then adjourned at forty minutes past eleven of the clock.  
 
The House reassembled at twelve of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I will give opportunity to the floor leaders to reflect 
on the retiring Members, and then give some  time to the retiring Members to express 
their sentiments.  After that, we will take up the Business of the House. Now, Shri 
Tiruchi Siva.  
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA : Sir, parting is always painful. W
 e  d o  n o t  w a n t  s o m e  t h i n g s  t o  
happen, but they happen b ecause of some circumstances; farewell is one such 
occasion. Out of the Members who are retiri ng today, my dear friends, Shri Derek 
O’Brien, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, Ms. Do la Sen, and the hon. Minister, Shri S. 
Jaishankar, will return to the House and work with us. Then, we have Ms. Sushmita 
Dev, whom you have appreciated very much -- of course, she deserves that --   I am 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
25

 
 
very happy to say that when her father, Shri Santosh Mohan Dev, was the 
Parliamentary Affairs Minister , I was in the Lok Sabha, and I had a very great time 
working with him. She reflects his character  in many ways, the way she articulates, 
the depth of her speech, and, of course , the other things which we need as 
Opposition; everything she qualifies. So, sh e will return to the Lok Sabha. So also 
Shrimati Shanta Chhetri; she has a remarkable track record. She is very cool and 
silent but she makes very important and appreciable deliberations in the House.   
Also, Shri P. Bhattacharya, whom we can not forget. He had been the Chairman of 
Parliamentary Standing Committees; he is al so a silent person. Sometimes, he would 
be a real Bengali  here, when he expre sses his inner mood, which is created at that 
moment of time. So also, Mr. Jugalsinh Lo khandwala, from the other side, who is 
retiring. We all bid them a farewell, but as you and the Leader of the Opposition said, 
it is not   permanent. I would like to say on ly one thing. This Hous e is a real reflection 
of unity in diversity; whether it is this part y or that party, we are all together. We are 
from various States, speaking various langua ges and having various cultures, but we 
are all one here. Our differences, because of the ideologies, may reflect on the floor of 
the House, but the moment we go out, we are together. So, the integrity of the nation 
is reflected here. The Council of States an d Parliament are a very good example of 
integrity. Sir, we are very proud to be Me mbers of this House. We should appreciate 
that they had the privilege of being one am ong the 800 persons in 140 crore people of 
the country. They have made their contributi on. On behalf of the DMK Party, I extend 
my heartiest wishes to them. Thank you very much, Sir. 
 
Ǜी नारायण दास गुǔा (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): चेयरमैन साहब, आज हमारे बीच से क ु छ 
साथी िरटायर हो रहे हȅ। ये िरटायर तो हो रहे हȅ, लेिकन ये tired नहीं हȅ। ये लोग इस हाउस मȂ 
िजस सेवा भाव से आए, उसको ये िक
सी न िकसी रूप  मȂ continue रखȂगे। मȅ अपनी तरफ से और 
अपनी पाटीर् की ओर से इनके  भिवÍय क े िलए मंगलकामना करता हूँ और यह उÇमीद करता हूँ िक 
िजस लगन से यहाँ इस हाउस मȂ इन
का योगदान रहा है - हालाँिक उसको भुलाया नहीं जाएगा, 
सदन उस चीज़ क े िलए आभारी रहेगा - आने वाले समय मȂ ये उसी लगन से काम करते रहȂगे। 
इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ, मȅ िफर से इनके  भिवÍय क े िल
ए मंगलकामना करता हूँ, धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. K. Keshava Rao. 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana) : Sir, I share the sentiments of all my colleagues 
in extending them farewell and, at the same time, wishing them a better life ahead. 
But I hope we have learnt much from th ese Members and that they will have much 
more time to spend in the service of the people. I wish all of them best in their lives.  
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shri Derek O’Brien. Shri Derek O’Brien is a connecting factor.  
He is retiring and would also continue to be the leader of the party. 
  
SHRI DEREK O'BRIEN (West Bengal):  Sir, while bidding farewell to those Members 
who are retiring, I don't want to give a long speech, I wish them well. All the Members 
who are retiring from the Rajya Sabha, I mu st apologize to them, that in their last 
twenty-three days in Rajya Sabha while th ey were serving, they didn't have the 
privilege. We would have all been very happy if our hon. much-respected Prime 
Minister had spent a little time here. That would have been a beautiful farewell gift.  
Thank you. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Sasmit Patra.  
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha) : Hon. Chairman, Sir, on behalf of my Party, the Biju 
Janata Dal, we extend our warm felicitatio ns and our best wishes to all the hon. 
Members who are retiring. Sir, I will request you to indulge me just for two minutes. I 
would like to specifically speak one sentence on each of them.   
 Hon. Anavadiyaji has always touched us  by his simplicity, his warm smile and 
his contribution in the House. Whenever he stood up, he was very meaningful. 
 Shri Pradip Bhattacharya; as I know a bit of Bengali, I had the privilege of 
sharing a bit of Bengali and perfecting it with him; and dada was always very 
forthcoming in terms of his contributions.  
 Shri Jugulsinh Lokhandwalaji; we became friends on the very first day that he 
came to the House; and he is like Lokhandwala, strong and steel, and that is how his 
contributions have been in the House; truly remarkable.   
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: And very well dressed; always very well dressed. 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  Always very strong.  
 Shanta Chhetriji, as a sister, her pres ence in the House has always enlightened 
us, especially, being from the North-Easter n part, Darjeeling and all those areas; and 
the issues that she raised were very meaningful.  
 We have Ms. Sushmita Devji,  and she was tremendously .... 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव (पिÌचमी बंगाल): आज तो सेन मत बोिलए। 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
27

 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  No, no, आज देव। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am so glad. It doesn't go further. It ends here.  
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  But she has been like a true frie nd, and, many a time, we have 
had conversations, and she understands various aspects that we have shared 
together. It stays between both of us. But, I am sure, her presence helped us and her 
absence will surely be felt.  
 For all the four Members whom we ar e privileged to have with us back, 
namely, Dr. Jaishankar, Derek da, Dolaji and Sukhendu da, it is going to be a truly 
remarkable journey with them in the next few years that we work together. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Rajeev Shukla.  
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा (छǄीसगढ़): चेयरमैन सर, यह सदन तो ऐसा है िक इसमȂ एक-न-एक िदन 
सबको िरटायर होना है। इन दीवारȗ मȂ, इन छतȗ क े नीचे िकतने ही आए और िकतने ही चले गए -
- एक-से-एक बड़े लोग आए, एक-से-एक छो
टे लोग आए -- इसिलए इसका कोई अिभमान नहीं 
है। मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक जो माननीय सदÎय यहाँ से िरटायर हो रहे हȅ, उनमȂ से जो बोलना 
चाहते हȅ, उनक
ी भावनाएं भी सुन ली जानी चािहए, those who are actually retiring. वे नहीं, 
जो वापस लौटकर आ जाएंगे। ऐसे मुिÌकल से तीन-चार हȅ, जैसे िप. भƺाचायर् जी हȅ, ये बोलना 
चाहते हȅ, तो इन्हȂ भी मौका िदया जाए । Äलोर लीडसर् तो बोलते रहते हȅ, लेिकन इन्हȂ भी मौका 
िदया जाएगा, तो बहुत अच्छा होगा। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Thank you. ...(Interruptions)... It will be given. It is there. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा: उनकी भावनाएं भी सुन ली जाएं, तो बहुत अच्छा होगा। 
 
Ǜी राम नाथ ठाकु र (िबहार): सभापित महोदय, आज नौ माननीय सदÎय िरट
 ायर हो रहे हȅ। वे 
सावर्जिनक जीवन मȂ Îवेच्छा से आए हȅ। अब पाटीर् क े बंधन से उनका टमर् पूरा हो गया है, तो वे जा 
रहे हȅ। मȅ अपनी और अपने दल की तरफ से ही नहीं, बिÊक इस सदन क े सभी माननीय सदÎयȗ 
की तरफ से भी इन्हȂ बधाई देता हूँ और कहना चा
हता हूँ िक 
 
"नजरȂ बता रही हȅ तुम दूर जा रहे हो, 
पर िदल कह रहा है 
 तुम पास आ रहे हो।" 
 जय िंहद! 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shrimati P.T. Usha.  
 
SHRIMATI P.T. USHA (Nominated): Sir, my best wishes to all the hon. M.Ps who are 
going to retire today. Thank you.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. V. Sivadasan.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala) : Sir, the contributions of th e retiring Members are very 
great. They have made immense contri butions for the im provement of our 
parliamentary activities. Sush mita Dev and others have ac tively participated in the 
parliamentary procedures and they have also raised the issues of common people in 
this House.  
All of us would support them in future al so. I believe they would raise issues of 
the common people wherever they get an opportunity, as they did here. I salute 
them. I wholeheartedly wish Ms. Sushmita De v and others that they would continue 
to actively participate in the democratic processes of the country. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, now, I have the privilege and honour to call upon 
those who are retiring from this House to share their experience and sentiments with 
us. Shri Dineshchandra Jemalbhai Anavadiya. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH : Sir, the Leader of the House is always present when such 
speeches are made. ...(Interruptions)...  Sir, the Leader of the House is always 
present. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: On this occasion... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH : Sir, this is the first time that  the Leader of the House is not 
there. This is not the parliamentary practice. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Let me tell you. Take your seat. ...(Interruptions)... जयराम जी, 
नज़ाकत समिझए। हम िरटायिंरग मेÇबसर् की बात सुन रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅने खुद कह
 ा है िक 
यह मेरा honour and privilege  है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
   
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस को यहाँ होना चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
29

 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... मुझे समझ मȂ नहीं आता, आपका 
लीडर ऑफ िद हाउस से िकतना strong connect है िक आपने बात की और वे आ गए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... अब आप हमारे माध्यम से बात क्यȗ करते हȅ, सीधे कर िलया कीिजए। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल : सर, मुझे यहाँ आने मȂ इसिलए देर हुई, क्यȗिक इन्हीं क े िमतर् पक्ष क े एक 
सीिनयर लीडर ने मुझे बाहर पकड़ िलया, यह समझाने क े िलए...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: पकड़ िलया? आप इसको क्लैिरफाई कीिजए। पकड़ िलया, मतलब? 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: पकड़ िलया, मतलब मुझसे कहा िक हम भी आपके  ...(Ëय
 वधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित: िफिज़कली तो नहीं पकड़ा न? ...(Ëयवधान)... Hon. Members, let us now hear 
Shri Anavadiya.  
 
Ǜी िदनेशचंदर् जेमलभाई अनावाडीया (गुजरात): सभापित महोदय, आज पािर्लयामȂट मȂ हमारा 
लाÎट डे है। मुझे पािर्लयामȂट मȂ भेजने क े िलए हमारी पाटीर्, इस देश और समगर् िवÌव क े नेता और 
हमारे देश क े सÇमाननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी आदरणीय Ǜी नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी साह
ब का, हमारे गृह मंतर्ी 
आदरणीय Ǜी अिमत भाई शाह साहब का, हमारे राÍटर्ीय अध् यक्ष  आदरणीय नƿा साहब, हमारे 
Ģदेश क े अध्यक्ष आदरणीय सी.आर. पािटल साहब और हमारे मुख्य मंतर्ी आदरणीय Ǜी 
भूपेन्दर्भाई पटेल साहब का मȅ बहुत-बहुत आभारी हूँ िक उन्हȗने मेरे जैसे एक छोटे कायर्कतार् को 
एक बड़े सदन मȂ आने का मौका िदया।   
सर, मȅ गुजरा
त क े क ुÇहार, Ģजापित समाज से आता हूँ। गुजरात क ुÇहार Ģजापित समाज 
से 75 साल  मȂ पहली बार Ģजापित समाज, क ुÇहार समाज को राज्य सभा मȂ लाने का मौका 
सÇमाननीय मोदी साहब ने िदया है, इसके  िलए मȅ उनका दोबारा बहुत-बहुत आभार Ģक
ट करता 
हूँ। मेरा समाज िमƺी से जुड़ा हुआ समाज है और मȅ िकसान पुतर् हूँ। मȅ एक कायर्कतार् क े रूप  मȂ 
काम करता था। मȅ सâ 1981 से भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े एक कायर्कत
ार् क े रूप  मȂ काम करते-
करते संगठन मȂ काम करने लगा और उन्हȗने मुझे सीधे इतने बड़े सदन मȂ िबठाने का मौका िदया।  
इसके  िलए मȅ अपनी ओर से, मेरे पिरवार की ओर से और पूरे गुजरात एवं िहन्दुÎतान क े Ģजापित 
क ुÇहार समाज की ओर से आदरणीय Ǜी नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी साहब, आदरणीय अिमत भाई शाह 
साहब, आदरणीय नƿा साहब और हमारे Ģदेश अध्य
क्ष जी का बहुत-बहुत आभार मानता हूँ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Thank you. 
 
Ǜी िदनेशच
ंदर् जेमलभाई अनावाडीया: सर, एक िमनट। मȅ सदन क े माननीय सभापित आदरणीय 
धनखड़ साहब का आभार Ģकट करता हूँ िक हमȂ आपका भी मागर्दशर्न िमला है। मȅ लीडर ऑफ िद 
हाउस, आदरणीय Ǜी पीयूष गो
यल सर का भी आभार Ģकट करता हूँ। मȅ सभी माननीय 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
सदÎयगण और सभी पािर्टयȗ क े लीडसर् का भी आभार Ģकट करता हूँ। आप सबसे मुझे बहुत क ु छ 
सीखने को िमला है और इस सदन मȂ मुझे आप सबका मागर्दशर्न भी िमला है। यिद मेरे Ëयवहार, 
वाणी और वतर्न क े का रण  मुझसे जाने-अनजाने कोई गलती हुई हो तो उसके  िलए मȅ आप सबसे 
क्षमा चाहता हूँ। मȅ लीडर ऑफ अपोिजशन सर का भी बहुत-बहुत आभार मानता हूँ िक हमने उनसे 
भी बहुत क ु छ सीखा है। मȅ इस सदन की सभी पािर्टयȗ क े सभी सदÎयȗ का आभार मा नता हूँ िक 
आप सबसे मुझे बहुत क ु छ सीखने को िमला है। आभार, अÎतु। भारत माता की जय! वन्दे मातरç! 
 
SHRI P. BHATTACHARYA  (West Bengal): Sir, I am very happy that you have given 
me the opportunity to spell out.. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: To retire! I have not given anybody the opportunity to retire. 
   
SHRI P. B
HATTACHARYA: Sir, you have given me the chance to say a few words.  
As you recall, when I met you in your Chambe r, I told you very frankly, "Sir, I don't 
believe in this type of drama.  So, kindly don't allow me to say something."  In spite 
of that, you are kind enough that you have again called me to say something.   
First of all, I give my good wishes to all my colleagues, no matter they are on 
this side or that side, and I am sure that they will be able to run this House properly 
and smoothly so that the people of the country will understand th at Rajya Sabha is 
alive and they are doing something good. With my long experience in politics, at least 
for 50 years, I had the opportunity  to work with Indira Gandhiji, Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji 
and Narasimha Raoji. Now, I am working with our Leader of the Opposition, Khargeji, 
and so many of my colleagues from this side  and that side. Whenever I meet some of 
our hon. Ministers, they listen to me and try their level best to help me so that I can 
serve the people of the country. I had the impr ession that, at least, this august House 
would come out with a resolution with  regard to the Manipur issue. But, 
unfortunately, it did not happen. ...(Interruptions) ... Just for a moment. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Listen to him.  
 
SHRI P. BHATTACHARYA : I was a teacher of a college for 29 years or 30 years. My 
two students have been working in Mani pur and they are in Central Government 
service. They rang me a few days back and asked me why Rajya Sabha is not coming 
out of something about Manipur.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Point noted. ...(Interruptions)...  
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
31

 
 
 
SHRI P. BHATTACHARYA: It is that hard feeling that I would like to impress upon this 
House. Lastly, if I have done somethin g wrong, kindly excuse me and I wish 
everybody good health and good life ahead. Thank you. 
 
Ǜी जुगलिंसह लोखंडवाला (गुजरात): सभापित महोदय, मȅ सबसे पहले माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी 
नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का तहेिदल से आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं। इसके  साथ ही मȅ माननीय Ǜी अिमत शाह 
जी का भी आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं। हमारी भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े अध्यक्ष माननीय जे.पी. नƿा जी, 
गुजरात क े चीफ िमिनÎ
टर Ǜी भूपेन्दर्भाई पटेल, हमारे संगठन क े Ģदेश अध्यक्ष Ǜी सी.आर. 
पािटल, हमारे सदन क े नेता Ǜी पीयूष गोयल जी और सदन क े सभी सािथयȗ का आभ ार Ëयƪ 
करता हूं। हमारे सामने बैठे अपोिज़शन लीडर Ǜी मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे जी और माननीय 
उपसभापित Ǜी हिरवंश जी का आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं। मेरे माता-िपता और मेरे पिरवार क े सभी 
सदÎयȗ ने आशीवार्द िदया, तब मȅ यहां तक पहुंचा हूं। आज मेरे का यर्काल का चार साल एक 
महीना पूरा हुआ। उसमȂ डेढ़-दो साल हम सबने कोिवड महामारी को फ े स िकया। उसमȂ दो-तीन 
चीज़ȗ मȂ मेरे साइन रहे। ध ारा 370 और 35ए, जो राÍटर् को जोड़ने क े िलए, जÇमू-कÌमीर को भारत 
का अिभन्न अंग बनाने क े िलए था, उसमȂ मेरे साइन रहे। सर, तीन तलाक, सीएए और ऐसे कई 
कानून बनाने मȂ मेरा सहयोग रहा।   
मȅ मानता हूं िक मȅ शायद ऐसा खुशनसीब हूं िक जो संकÊप हमारे भारतीय जनता पाटीर् क े 
Ìयामा Ģसाद मुखजीर् ने िलया था, उस संकÊप क े अंदर हम
ारे साइन थे। सर, मȅ दो-तीन बातȂ 
कहकर अपनी बात खत्म करूं गा। सर, यहां बहुत सारे िमतर् बैठे हȅ - मुझे सेन्टर्ल हॉल की कमी 
महसूस होगी, जब मȅ गुजरात रहूंगा, तब सभी लोगȗ को िमस करूं गा। सदन क े सामने वाले 
माननीय सदÎयȗ से भी मुझे बहुत अच्छा सीखने को िमला है। कहीं न कहीं जब कोई बात रहती 
थी, तो सेन्टर्ल हॉल क े अंदर हम लोग एक-दूसरे क े साथ वातार्लाप करते थे और वह वातार्लाप 
मुझे आने वाले वƪ मȂ काम आने वाला है - ऐसा मनोज जी कह रहे थे और … (Ëयवधान)…  
  
डा. जॉन िĤटास (क ेरल): नई पािर्लयामȂट मȂ सेन्टर्
ल हॉल नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जुगलिंसह लोखंडवाला: जॉन जी, इसके  साथ बहुत सारे कमेटी क े मेÇबसर् ...(Ëयवधान)... 
जॉन जी, मुझे आपका सहयोग चा
 िहए।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. John Brittas, you must stop  the habit of interrupting every time.  
...(Interruptions)...  I caution you.  Don't do it. There is a procedure to be followed. 
  
Ǜी जुगलिंसह लोखंडवाला: मȅ तो चाहूंगा िक हम हर एक बात को पॉिलिटकली न कहȂ, क्यȗिक 
आने वाले सदन क े अंदर शायद आप हमारे पास रहने वाले हȅ। ऐसा मुझे सौ Ģितशत िवÌवास है।   
सर, मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहता हूं।  िवÌव जानता है िक एक ऐसा िवराट Ëयिƪत्व, माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी, जो डेढ़ घंटे तक Îपीच दे रहे थे, लेिकन सामने से उन्हȂ बोलने नहीं 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िदया जा रहा था, यह अच्छी बात नहीं है। मȅ मानता हूं िक हर एक का िवचार होना चािहए और वह 
जो क ु छ कहना चाहता हो, कह सकता है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
सर, मȅ आपका भी आभार Ëयƪ करता हूं और वȂक ैया नायडू जी का भी आभार Ëयƪ करता 
हूं, िजन्हȗने मुझे यहां पर बोलने का मौका िदया था। यहां क े हमारे िजतने भी Åयूरोकर्ै ट्स हȅ, िजतने 
भी माशर्Êस हȅ, वे हमसे हंस कर िमलते हȅ।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We will communicate you
r greetings to Venkaiah Naiduji.  
 
Ǜी जुगलिंसह लोख ंडवाला : मȅ जब गुजरात मȂ रहूंगा, तो यह सब िमस करूं गा। सर, मȅ आपको भी 
िमस करूं गा। आप जब भी िमलते हȅ, तो हंस कर िमलते हȅ। धन्यवाद, जय िंहद! वन्दे मातरç! 
भारत माता की जय! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Shrimati Shanta Chhetri; we will miss you. Your presence has 
been impactful; your absence will be felt.   
 
SHRIMATI SHANTA CHHETRI  (West Bengal): Thank you, Sir. सर, आज 11 अगÎत, 
Îवतंतर्त
ा सेनानी खुदीराम बोस की डेथ एिनवसर्री है। आज बिलदान िदवस क े उपलÑय मȂ मȅ 
उनके  Ģित Ǜǉांजिल अिर्पत करते हुए अपना फ ेयरवेल भाषण देना चाहती हूं।  
On the 18th of August, my term as Rajya Sabh a Member will come to an end. I 
am eternally thankful to our supreme leader, hon. Mamata Banerjee, for giving me this 
opportunity. It is due to her trust in me that  today, I can proudly say that my body of 
work is in Parliament records for eternity . This opportunity has fulfilled my greatest 
dreams. I am a contended person now, happy with a lifetime spent well.  What more 
can one ask for than contentment and joy,  which my heart is filled with? I thank 
Mamata Didi. I also take this opportunity to thank you, hon. Chairman, Sir, and the 
hon. Members of this House for all the support and exchange of knowledge.   
 In these six years, I have worked tirelessly to represent the Gorkha people of 
Darjeeling Hills as well as the State of West Bengal. I did not waste a single 
opportunity to take up matters concerning our Darjeeling Hills as well as my State of 
West Bengal. I have spoken for the 11 communi ties' tribal status, inclusion of Lepcha 
language in the Eighth Schedule; I also ta lked about tea workers,  problems on roads 
and National Highways during monsoon, the Kurseong TV tower, not to relocate the 
Army Hospital, matters concerning Himala yan Railways, etc. The list goes on. More 
than 400 Questions given by me have been  admitted in the Parliament. In all the 11 
Private Member Bills introduced  by me, I took up issues re lated to my State of West 
Bengal as well as the Darjeeling Hills. I spok e on the Bill relating to the third gender 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
33

 
 
and presented my valued opinion and sugges tions, which have been satisfying, as 
this gender deserves a lot more. 
Sir, I made innumerable Special Mentions and Zero Hour submissions. I 
attended regularly all the Committee meetings  and tours. The six years that I spent 
were full of hard work and learning.   
 Sir, today, as I move on from this place,  I would like to say that I will be grateful 
to you for the trust that you placed in me an d for the invaluable lessons I learnt from 
my fellow Parliamentarians. I would also like to thank the Members of my Party, TMC, 
who have been my strength and support all along this fantastic journey. 
 As I bid farewell to the Rajya Sa bha, I carry with me a sense of 
accomplishment, a deep appreciation for th e democratic process and a commitment 
to continue contributing for the betterment of society. I will cherish the memories of 
this place as also the lessons learnt here, and I will forever hold in my heart the 
privilege of having served alongside some of the brightest minds and most dedicated 
individuals in our nation.   
I thank all the hon. Members and all th e employees of Rajya Sabha for this 
incredible journey, for the opportunities and for unwavering support. May this House 
continue to be a beacon of democracy an d a forum where the collective wisdom of 
diverse voices shapes the destiny of India!   
 Finally, I wish and pray, as the Sun rise s over the majestic Tiger Hills and turns 
it into gold, our I.N.D.I.A. party rises with the same glow in May, 2024 and bring forth 
the beginning of a golden era for India. Jai Hind, Jai Bangla, Jai Gorkha! 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ms. Sushmita Dev. 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: First of all, Sir, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to 
speak. Today is the Martyr's Day and I would like to start by paying my tribute to 
Khudiram Bose ji. Sir, incidentally, on a lighter note, my division number is 144, which 
represents 'partial curfew', as you know. I have waited fo r very long for my turn to 
speak. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: And, you took it so literally! 
 
सुǛी सुिÍमता देव: सर, मेरा िडवीजन नÇबर ही 144 है, मȅ क्या करू ँ? Sir, I am extremely 
grateful for your kind words. I am also grat eful to the floor leaders of various parties 
who have spoken. I come from North East, from the State of Assam and, I think, ऐसे 
बहुत कम उ
दाहरण  हȅ िक जब िकसी बाहर क े Ģदेश का Ëयिƪ नॉथर्-ईÎट क े िकसी Ģदेश से, 
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
िकसी हाउस मȂ मेÇबर बनकर आये।  As you know, my late father won two elections from 
Tripura. Secondly -- Kalita ji would know  it -- Professor B.B. Dutta was once 
nominated. I think, I am th e third such Member, coming from a State in the North 
East, but I am honoured that my leader, Ms. Mamata Banerjee, gave me a seat in 
Rajya Sabha from the State of West Bengal . When I won in the Sixteenth Lok Sabha, 
very often, I used to come to these galleries in Rajya Sabha to watch what the Upper 
House was saying. I used to watch very keenly how Mr. Jaitley used to speak or how 
Mr. Chidambaram debated on GST. I wa tched Shri Derek O'Brien, Sukhendu da, 
Prof. Yadav and other leaders, and I used to tr uly feel what a privilege it was to be in 
this House. Contrary to popular belief, I ne ver expected that I will come to the Upper 
House. लोग कहते हȅ िक इनको तो पता था िक ये राज्य सभा मȂ आयȂगी, मुझे पता नहीं था।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I was the first one to congratulate you. I was the Governor then. 
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: Right, Sir. As the Governor of West Bengal, you called me and 
congratulated me. हम एक-दूसरे क े बारे मȂ बोलते हȅ, but I would like to mention here tha
 t 
the integral part of this House is not ju st the Members but it is the marshalls, the 
officials who sit here, and the Secretar y General who guides us through many 
moments. I would like to thank them also.  
Sir, coming from the North-East -- I am  not going to make a political speech 
at all -- I will say one thing. Keeping the States of North-East stitched together is a 
herculean task.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Is it not political? Whenever so meone says, "I am not going to 
make a political speech", I am sure it will be a hundred per cent political speech.   
 
MS. SUSHMITA DEV: I will not criticize anybody today, but I feel that the way peace in 
North-East has been stitched together, it is a very delicate process. Different ethnic 
groups have different aspirations. I will not use the word 'conflict'; today is not that 
day. There are different linguistic groups. I myself am a linguistic minority from 
Assam. It is a very fine balance that we should  all strive to maintain even in the future.  
That is all I seek. मȅ एक बात और कहना चाहती हूं िक 16
th लोक सभा मȂ एक ऐसी ख़ािसयत थी 
िक after many decades, a Government came to power with absolute majority, and in 
that, I think, was a golden opportunity to  do policy reforms and many other good 
things for the country. Whether that has b een done or not done, I am no one to 
comment on that. But I hope that the effect s of this majority will be judged by the 
people.   
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
35

 
 
Sir, I hate good-byes. I am very bad at  saying good-bye. So, I will tell all my 
colleagues on my right and on my left that, I am sure, we will meet again, whether 
inside the House or outside th e House. I would like to than k my leader, Shri Derek O' 
Brien, Sukehndu da and Khargeji, who guided me in the 16 th Lok Sabha. He is today 
here in the Rajya Sabha. I would like to thank the Leader of the House, Piyush Goyalji.  
I would end my speech with one story. Si r, in Lok Sabha, once a very complicated 
and technical Bill came up. It was about payment gatewa ys on credit cards, and 
Jaitleyji was the Finance Minister then. अचानक खरगे जी ने बोला, "Sushmita, this is 
coming up and you will have to speak on it because the person who was supposed to 
speak on it is not here today."  I just could not decipher that Bill. I was struggling with 
it. I remember going to Digvijaya Singh ji and asking about it. I went to Arun Jaitley ji 
and said, "Sir, you are moving this Bill.  I am not able to follow it and, in the next ten 
minutes, I have to speak." He told me  how to debate that Bill against the 
Government. So, Sir, how much we may fi ght, I feel those back-room channels 
...(Interruptions)... I am just saying that that is  the beauty of Parliament, of 
democracy, and I hope to see that in the future in this House and in the other House.  
Thank you very much, Sir. I hope to see you soon again.   
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  When the hon. Member, Ms. Sushmita, was saying 'people on my 
right and left', I was wonderin g that people who are on your right are on my left.  So, 
we will have to reconcile. 
 Hon. Members, the sentiments expressed by the retiring Members and by the 
leaders of various political parties indicate th at our bond will continue to flourish and 
everyone leaving this House w ill be an integral part of th is House. I had indicated on 
an earlier occasion that whenever hon. Me mbers visit Delhi, as Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, we will look after and make arrang ements for their stay. We have devised a 
mechanism that hon. Members in this House need not get in touch with the 
Secretariat. They need to get in touch wi th Secretary, Rajya Sabha, a very senior 
official, so that the Members have least inconvenience. As regards certain issues of 
retiring Members, like pension issues, all are settled before the last day of retirement.  
This enlightenment I got after a situation on 8
th August, 2022. After my election was 
declared, but I had not taken oath, a former Member of Rajya Sabha thought it fit to 
write to me as Vice-President. Venkaiah Naiduji was the Vice-President then.  
He said that his pension issues are pe nding with the Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
on one ground. And that ground is that th e Rajya Sabha Secretar iat was insisting on 
an affidavit that must be sanctified by a Gazetted Officer. After taking oath of office on 
11th August, after one hour at Up-Rashtrapati Niwas, I came to the Rajya Sabha and I 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
asked the Secretary-General, "Why are we delaying it? The hon. Member retired in 
April.  We know his bank account.  We kn ow his details." I was surprised. The Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat said that there is an Act. That Act has been passed by the 
Parliament. That Act is in pursuance of th e recommendations of a Joint Parliamentary 
Committee. And that Act makes a provision that  such a form should be there. I said 
that the hon. Member has already indicated that he will go to a court of law. With your 
strength, I directed the Secretary-General then and there that all these provisions are 
not mandatory; they are direct ory. I ensured it on the same day. The proceedings at 
the Rajya Sabha Secretariat were convened  on that count. But sometimes when we 
engage in legislation, we create a mechanis m that puts the executing authorities in 
problem. And that indicates that everythi ng which is passed by this House as a 
legislation must be fully scrutinized. We, in this House, and the Joint Parliamentary 
Committee sanctified that a retiring Member would have to give an affidavit duly 
signed by a Gazetted Officer, and the Secretaria t was bound by it. I have held it to be 
directory. But if we had been more alert at that point in time and cared for the dignity 
of a retiring Member, perhaps, that situatio n would not have arisen. I have made it a 
condition here that before a Member retires, everything must be formalized.  
Whenever an ex-Member comes to Delhi, and if he has any problem of 
accommodation, we will try to accommodate him in Western Court.   
 Hon. Members, I now take up Question Hour. ... (Interruptions)...  This was 
already there. It was done as a special circumstance.  ... (Interruptions)...  Yes, Dr. 
Meena.   
 
डा. िकरोड़ी लाल मीणा (राजÎथान): सभापित महोदय, राजÎथान क े हालात बहुत िबगड़े हुए हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
 
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.241. 
 
Promotion of manufacture and sale of electric vehicles 
 
*241. SHRI HARNATH SINGH YADAV:  Will the Minister of HEAVY INDUSTRIES be 
pleased to state: 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
37

 
 
(a) whether Government has taken any steps to promote manufacturing of electric 
vehicles to reduce the increasing pollution; 
(b) if so, the details thereof; 
(c) whether Government has formulated any scheme to provide subsidy or loan at 
low-interest rate on electric vehicles to promote their sale; 
(d) if so, the details thereof; and 
(e) the ratio of manufacturing and sale of these vehicles during the last three 
years? 
 
THE MINISTER OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES (DR. MAHENDRA NATH PANDEY): (a) to 
(e) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Yes sir, the Ministry of Heavy Indu stries has launched three schemes 
with an objective to boost demand of El ectric Vehicles (EVs) and to incentivise 
manufacturing of EVs and Advanced Automotive Components. Their details are as 
under. 
i. The Government notified Faster Adoption  and Manufacturing of Electric Vehicles in 
India Phase II (FAME India Phase II) Scheme with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 10,000 
crore for a period of five years commencing from 1 st April, 2019 to promote 
hybrid/electric technology in transportation so as to reduce dependency on fossil 
fuels and to address issues of vehicular emi ssions.  As far as e-Buses, electric three 
wheelers (e-3W) and electric four wheeler s (e-4W) are concerned, the scheme 
provides subsidy to those vehicles which are used in public transportation or for 
commercial use.  For electric two wheelers (e-2W), privately owned vehicles are also 
provided with subsidy. 
FAME II intends to support 7,090 e-Buses, 5 lakh e-3 Wheelers, 55,000 e-4 
Wheeler Passenger Cars (including Strong  Hybrid) and 10 lakh e-2 Wheelers.  
Further details about the FAME II India scheme can be seen on the website at 
https://heavyindustries.gov.in/UserView/index?mid=1378
 . 
 
ii. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Sche me for Automobile and Auto component 
industry with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 25,938 crore, provides financial incentives to 
boost domestic manufacturing of Advan ced Automotive Technology products 
including electric vehicles and their comp onents. Further details about the scheme 
can be seen at https://heavyindustries.gov.in/UserView/index?mid=2482 . 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
iii. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Sche me for Advanced Chemistry Cell (ACC): 
The Government has approved  PLI Scheme for manufacturing of ACC in the country 
with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 18,100  crore. The scheme incentivises the 
establishment of Giga scale ACC manufactur ing facilities in the country for 50 Giga 
Watt hour (GWh). These ACCs will be used in batteries which are aimed to promote 
the widespread adoption of EVs. Further details may be seen at 
https://heavyindustries.gov.in/UserView/ index?mid=2487 . 
 
(c) and (d)  No such scheme has been formulated by the Ministry of Heavy 
Industries and as per information provided by NITI Aayog no such scheme has also 
been formulated by them. 
 
(e) Sir, the information regarding manufacture of electric vehicles  is not maintained 
by the Ministry. The data regarding the numbe r of electric vehicles sold in India (as 
per information from Ministry of Road Tran sport and Highways, MoRTH), is attached 
as per ANNEXURE. 
Annexure 
(Units in Number) 
 
Category Fuel Types 
Domestic Sales (MoRTH*) 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Passenger Vehicles (e-4W) EVs 5,000 19,000 47,581 
Three Wheelers (e-3W) EVs 88,000 1,78,000 4,02,106 
Two Wheelers (e-2W) EVs 41,000 2,31,000 7,28,027 
* MoRTH: Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
 
Ǜी हरनाथ िंसह यादव: सर, ĢÌन संख्या 241. ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
डा. महेन्दर् नाथ पाण्डेय: सर, उǄर सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 242.  Shri Vaiko.  
 
*Q. No. 242. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
39

 
 
Recommendation on duty hours of railway staff 
 
*242. SHRI VAIKO: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
 (a)  whether the High Power Committee (HPC) recommended reducing duty hours 
of Running staff to 10  hours by 2020, considering the va st infrastructure development 
in Railways and also International Labour Organisation (ILO) Convention; 
(b)  if so, the reasons as to why the recommendation is not being implemented; 
(c) whether HPC also recommended for periodical rest for 40 hours for running staff 
as granted to other employees, and stayin g away from Headquarters for 48 hours ; 
and  
(d)  if so, the reasons as to why they are not being implemented keeping  in 
view the safety in Railways and keeping the staff in alert mode? 
 
THE MINISTER OF RAILWAYS (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW): (a) to (d) A Statement 
is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) Indian Railways has been continuously working for improving the working 
conditions of running staff. Some of the interventions made/measures taken, which 
have made the job of running staff less stressful are as follows: - 
 
1. Improvement in running Rooms / lobbies: - 
 
i. Air conditioning of Running Rooms:  All running rooms over Indian Railways are 
being air-conditioned for providing sound outstation rest to the running staff 
ii. Separate rooms for female crew are being provided in the running rooms. 
iii. Running rooms are being progressively pr ovided with cubicles / rooms with 
two beds so that crew does not get disturbed during  rest.  47% of the 
running rooms have so far been covered. 
iv. Good quality subsidized meals are provided to the crew at running rooms.  
Crew also has the option to get meal s prepared of his choice by providing 
ingredients. 
v. Quality of drinking water has been improv ed by provision of RO in all running 
rooms. 
vi. Yoga room,  meditation  rooms,  reading  rooms  with  newspapers  and  
magazine  are  being  provided  for   th e  convenience  of  the  crew  during  
rest. 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
vii. Facilities like foot massager etc.  are also being provided progressively. 
viii. Over the last five years more than 45  numbers of Running Rooms have been 
constructed which has help ed in designing appropriate running links for the 
running staff and also arranging comfor table stay for them  away from their 
homes.  
 
2. Improvement in locomotives: 
 
i. Most new locomotives are being manufactured/acquired with cab air 
conditioning. Cab Air conditioning is progressively being done on existing 
locomotives also. 
ii. Locomotive cabs have  been  modified  with  ergonomic  crew  friendly features 
like  better  seats  and  more  space. 
iii. Waterless urinal has been provided on trial basis. 
 
3. Fogsafe Device: It is an aid  to Loco  P ilots  for  locating   the  approaching  
signals  and  important  landmarks  during  foggy  weather conditions  for reducing 
stress on the crew.   
 
4. Sigma Board: The retro-reflective strip  in  sigma  shape  for  easy identification 
of stop  signal  during  foggy  weather  has  been  provided  two  masts  prior to stop 
signal  on all  the  Zonal  Railways  as  an  aid  and  for  reducing  stress.  
 
5. Mobile Application named ‘Chalak Dal’ has been developed for the facilitation 
of crew.  Through  the  App, crew  can  access  all  his  details  related  to  running  
duties, sign on/ sign  off,  loco  trouble  shooting  directory  and  other  documents 
required   during  train  operation  which  otherwise  were  required  to  be  carried   in  
hard  copy.  
          The working hours of running st aff is constantly monitored and worked upon to 
ensure that they are deployed for running du ty as per the laid down limits. 87.6% of 
the actual running duties of running staff (wheel move to wheel stop) is performed 
within 9 hours and 83.6% of the complete duty of running staff (sign on to sign off) is 
done within prescribed 11 hours. 
        For filling up vacancies of running  staff, massive recruitm ent exercise has been 
concluded recently, as a result of which more than 34000 running staff have been 
inducted which helped in ensuring running du ties within prescribed limit, to the extent 
possible.   
          
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
41

 
 
The High-Power Committee which had been constituted to review the duty hours of 
running and other safety cat egories of staff submitted its report in August, 2013 
making 89 recommendations, many of wh ich have been implemented, bringing 
substantial improvement in the working condition of the running staff.   
         As regards the recommendation for Stay away from Headquarter to be restricted 
to 48 hours it is stated that about 96.00 % running staff are within 48 hours of Stay 
away from Headquarters, even though the present provisio n allows for upto 72 hours 
stay away from Headquarters. Further, rega rding periodic rest it was decided to 
follow with existing pattern of 5 rests of 22 hours or 4 rests of 30 consecutive hours.  
  The above measures have contribute d towards safety in train operations. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Vaiko.  ... (Interruptions)...  Hon. Member is not present.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW: Sir, the statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.243. Shri Harbhajan Singh.  
 
*Q. No. 243. [The questioner was absent.] 
 
Settlement of claims under PMFBY  
 
*243. SHRI HARBHAJAN SINGH: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether Government is aware of the instances of farmers being harassed by 
insurance companies for settlement of claims under PM Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY); 
(b)  if so, whether Government has received any complaints in this regard; and 
(c)   the action taken for further streamlining PMFBY so that the intended beneficiaries 
are benefited ? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SHRI KAILASH CHOUDHARY): (a) to (c) A Statement is laid on the 
Table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yo jana (PMFBY) has been operational since 
Kharif 2016 and till 2022-23 (a s on 30.06.2023), 4846 lakh farmer applications have 
been enrolled over an area of about 3497 lakh hectare insuring a sum of Rs. 14,45,978  
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
crore.  Against premium of Rs. 29,123 crore paid by farmers, claims of Rs. 1,40,599 
crore have been paid to about 1457 lakh farmer applications. 
 The admissible claims under the Prad han Mantri Fasal Bi ma Yojana (PMFBY) 
are generally paid by the concerned insu rance companies within two months of 
completion of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs)/harvesting period and one month of 
notification for invoking the risks/perils of prevented sowing, mid-season adversity 
and post harvest losses subject to receipt  of total share of premium subsidy from 
concerned Government within time.  Howe ver, settlement of few claims in some 
States got delayed due to reasons like delayed transmission of yield data; late release 
of their share in premium subsidy, yi eld related disputes between insurance 
companies and States, non-receipt of account details of some farmers for transfer of 
claims to the bank account of eligible farmers and National Electronic Fund Transfer 
(NEFT) related issues, erroneous/incomplete  entry of individual farmers data on 
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP), delay in remittance of farmers share of 
premium/non-remittance of farmers shar e of premium to concerned insurance 
company etc.    
  All major works relating to the a ssessment of crop yield/crop loss for 
calculation of admissible claims are being performed by the concerned State 
Government or Joint Committee of Stat e Government officials and concerned 
insurance company. However, during implementation of the PMFBY, some 
complaints against insurance companies about non-payment and delayed payment of 
claims; under payment of claims on account  of incorrect/delayed submission of 
insurance proposals by banks; discrepanc y in yield data & consequent disputes 
between State Government and insurance companies, delay in providing State 
Government share of funds, non-deployment of sufficient personnel by insurance 
companies etc., have been received in th e past in the country. Most of the 
complaints have been suitably addressed.    
 Further, the PMFBY operational guidelin es provide for stratified grievance 
redressal mechanism. At the initial leve l, for grievance redressal, each block & 
district have designated block/district leve l grievance redressal officer to respond to 
the grievances of Farmers, Banks, Insuran ce Companies etc. within 7 days of receipt 
of grievance. In case of dissatisfaction at block level the matter can be brought before 
District Level Grievance Redressal Committee (DGRC) headed by the District 
Magistrate/Collector. In case of disagreem ent with the decision by any party at 
district level; the same is represente d to the State Level Grievance Redressal 
Committee (SGRC) within 15 days from the decision of DGRC. SGRC is headed by 
Principal Secretary/Secretary of Nodal De partment. The SGRC has to dispose the 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
43

 
 
grievance within 15 days time of receipt of grievance. The deci sion of the Committee 
shall be accepted by all the parties.  
 In addition the PMFBY guidelines also provide for the resolution of yield 
disputes, between Insurance Companies and States through State Level Technical 
Advisory Committee (STAC) and in case it is unresolved at State level further 
escalation can be made before the Techni cal Advisory Committee (TAC) at Centre 
Level. Accordingly, yield disputes were referred by the Karnataka, Gujarat, Odisha 
(Kharif 2018), Maharashtra, Rajasthan (Kharif 2017 & Kharif 2018), Jammu & 
Kashmir (for yield calculation methodology for coverage of apple and saffron crop) 
Haryana (Kharif 2017), Chhatisgarh (Khari f 2017 – paddy/rice issue), Haryana for 
Cotton (Kharif-19 & 20), Odisha (Khari f-21) to the TAC and the matter was 
examined and resolved by using satellite data, yield data, weather data and other 
proxy data/indicators in consultation of Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre 
(MNCFC) and the claims have been settled as per the decision of TAC.   
 The Department has taken various steps for further streamlining PMFBY. 
National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) has been developed for ensuring auto-
administration, subsidy payment, co-ordin ation, transparency, dissemination of 
information and delivery of services includ ing direct online enro llment of framers, 
uploading/obtaining individual insured famer’s details for better monitoring and to 
ensure transfer of claim amount electronically to the individual farmer’s Bank Account 
through Digiclaim module.      
 The scheme envisages use of improved technology in implementation of the 
scheme. Accordingly, various steps like capturing of yield data/Crop Cutting 
Experiments (CCEs) data through CCE-A gri App & uploading it on the NCIP, 
allowing insurance companies to witness th e conduct of CCEs, integration of State 
land records with NCIP etc. have already b een taken to improve timely settlement of 
the claims to farmers.   Following technologies for Objective Crop Damage & Loss 
Assessment and transparency have recently been approved for implementation w.e.f. 
2023-24:  
 YES-TECH (Yield Estimation System Based on Technology) for gradual 
migration to Remote-Sensing based yield esti mation to help assess yields as well as 
fair and accurate Crop Yield Estimation . This initiative has been launched for paddy 
& wheat crops from Kharif 2023 wherein 30% weightage to yield estimation will 
mandatorily be assigned to YES-TECH derived yield.  
 WINDS (Weather Information Network and Data System) for Network of 
Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) & Auto matic Rain-Gauges (ARG) for collecting 
hyper-local weather data at GP & Block level.  This will be fed into a National unified 
network of AWS & ARG with interoperability & sharing of data in coordination with 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
India Meteorological Department (IMD).  WI NDS will provide data not only for YES-
TECH but also for effective drought & disaster management , accurate weather 
prediction and offering better parametric insurance products.  
 
 CROPIC (Collection of Real-time photos and Observations of Crops) for Geo-
tagged photographs for validation of sown Crop with Insured Crop and use of pictorial 
analytics for Objective Crop Damage Assessment & Crop Yield Estimation. 
 Department has been regularly moni toring the functioning of insurance 
companies, including timely settlement of claims through weekly video conferences of 
all stakeholders, one to one meeting as well as National Review Conferences. In order 
to rigorously monitor claim disbursal proce ss an end to end module by the name of 
‘Digiclaim Module’ has been operationalized  for payment of claims from Kharif 2022 
onwards.  It involves integration of Nation al Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) with PFMS 
and accounting system of Insurance Compan ies to provide timely & transparent 
processing of all claims. Various innovative technologies are also adopted to increase 
the timeliness for flow of requisite information/data amongst stakeholders.   
 Started in 2020, Integration of Land Record with NCIP is now complete for 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra  Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Karnataka, Odisha - 90% of the insured ar ea is now being validated through e-land 
records of the states through land record integration. 
 Based on the experience gained, views of  various stakeholders and with a view 
to ensure better transparency, accountability, timely payment of claims to the farmers 
and to make the scheme more farmer friendly, Government has periodically 
comprehensively revised the Operational Guid elines of the PMFBY to ensure that the 
eligible benefits under the scheme reach the farmers timely and transparently.   
  
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Harbhajan Singh.  ...( Interruptions)...  Hon. Member is not 
present.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी : सर, उǄर सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.244.  ...(Interruptions)...  Shri Kapil Sibal.  
 
*Q. No. 244. [The questioner was absent.]  
  
Coverage under PDS 
 
*244.   S H R I KAPIL SIBAL: Will the Minister of CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND  
 
 
[11 August, 2023]
45

 
 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that National F ood Security Act (NFSA) beneficiaries are 
decided on the basis of 2011 census data;  
(b) if so, considering the fact that the cen sus has been delayed, steps taken to 
ensure that there  are  no exclusions  and  the beneficiaries get their due under Public 
Distribution System (PDS); 
(c) whether it is also a fact that intra Stat e transactions under One Nation One Ration 
Card (ONORC) are much larger than inter-State transactions, if so, the reasons 
therefor; and 
(d) the steps taken by Government to spread awareness an d information about 
ration card portability, especially among migrants? 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (SADHVI NIRANJAN JY OTI): (a) to (d) A statement is laid 
on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) Section 9 of the National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) provides that the 
percentage coverage under the Targeted Public Distribution System in rural and urban 
areas for each State shall be  determined by the Central Government and the total 
number of persons to be covered in the Stat e shall be calculated on the basis of the 
population estimates as per the census of  which the relevant figures have been 
published. At the time of implementation of NFSA, the latest published figures of 
Census pertaining to the year 2011was used to determine the coverage of all 
States/Union Territories (UTs). 
(b) The National Food Security Act, 2013 provides for coverage of upto 75% of the 
rural population and upto 50% of the urba n population, which at Census 2011 comes 
to 81.35 crore persons. Intent of the Go vernment for conducti ng Census 2021 was 
notified in Gazette of India on 28th Marc h, 2019. Due to outbreak of COVID-19 
pandemic, the Census 2021 and the related field activities could not be undertaken. 
At present, against the intended coverage of 81.35 crore, 80.24 crore 
beneficiaries are identified by the States/U Ts under the Act. Still, there is scope for 
identification of 1.11 crore additional be neficiaries under the Act by the State 
Governments. The Coverage under the Act is  sufficient high to ensure that all the 
vulnerable and needy sections of the society get its benefit. 
 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(c) The main objective of One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC) is to empower all 
beneficiaries including migrant beneficiaries to access their NFSA foodgrains from any 
Fair Price Shop (FPS) of their choice, anyw here in the country, by using their same 
existing ration card with biometric authen tication on an electronic Point of Sale 
(ePoS) device. 
Under Intra-State portability, NFSA benefi ciaries are allowed to avail ration 
from any FPS within the State including nearby FPSs to avoid travel to tagged 
(original) FPS whereas Inter-State portability is being used by migrant NFSA 
beneficiaries outside their native/home State. Since, number of beneficiaries visiting 
near by FPSs are more than  the beneficiaries who working outside their home State, 
therefore, Intra-State Portability transactions are comparatively more.  
While, the Inter-State portability gives flexibility to migrant beneficiaries to be 
self-reliant for their food s ecurity and ease of living with livelihood anywhere in the 
country, at the same time it also allows their family members back in the village/home 
(if any) to also draw the part/balance food grains on the same ration card for their 
food security. 
 
(d) A nationwide campaign has been carri ed out to create awareness among the 
NFSA beneficiaries about ONORC in diff erent modes viz. FM/Radio channels, 
displaying audio visual spots at railway stations, banners, posters at outdoors and 
Fair Price Shops (FPSs), bus wraps etc. Ap art from this States/UTs employed their 
own means for these campaigns. 
Recently, this Department has launched an awareness generation campaign of 
ONORC on 168 FM channels and 45 TV Ch annels across the country for which a 30 
second radio spot and a 30 second Tele Vision Commercials (TVCs) have been 
developed in 12 different languages viz. Hi ndi, Assamese, Bengali, English, Gujarati, 
Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri Kapil Sibal.  ... (Interruptions)...  Hon. Member is not 
present.    ...(Interruptions)... 
 
साध्वी िनरंजन ज्योित: माननीय सभापित महोदय, िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.245. ... (Interruptions)... Dr. Sasmit Patra.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
47

 
 
Restarting PMGKAY 
 
*245.  DR. SASMIT PATRA: Will the Minister of CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC  DISTRIBUTION  be pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether Government is  considering  re starting  Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan 
Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) and will provide additi onal 5 kg rice apart from the 5 kg rice 
provided earlier under National Food Security Act (NFSA); 
(b) the reasons for renaming NFSA programme as new PMGKAY instead of restarting
 the earlier PMGKAY which was discontinued; and  
(c) by when would Government restart providing additional 5 kg rice under PMGKAY 
as it was done since 2020? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND 
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION (SADHVI NIRANJAN JYOTI): (a) to (c) A statement is laid 
on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) The Pradhan Mantri Garib Ka lyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) had been 
launched with the specific purpose of amelio rating the hardships faced by the poor 
and needy due to economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 outbreak in the 
country.  The allocation of free foodgrains, under PMGKAY was in addition to normal 
allocation done under the National Food Se curity Act (NFSA), 2013. A total quantity 
of approx. 1118 LMT foodgrains had been a llocated under PMGKAY (Phase I-VII) for 
the period of 28 months with a planned financ ial outlay of about Rs. 1.13 lakh crores 
for FY 2020-21, Rs. 1.47 lakh crores for FY  2021-22 and Rs. 1.31 Lakh crores for FY 
2022-23. 
The National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) being implemented in all the 
States/UTs, on an all-India basis, aims to  supplement the food requirements of upto 
75% of the rural and upto 50% of the urban population. While Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana (AAY) households, which constitute p oorest of the poor are entitled to 35 kg 
of foodgrains, per family per month. Priority Households (PHH) are entitled to 5 kg of 
foodgrains per person per month at uniform subsidized prices specified in Schedule-I 
prices of the Act.  
The Government has decided to distri bute free of cost foodgrains to 
beneficiaries as per their entitlements for a period of one year from 1st January, 2023 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
under the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan  Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) with the 
approximate expenditure of nearly Rs. 2 lakh crores annually. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr. Sasmit Patra.  ...(Interruptions)...   
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  Sir, Q. No. 245. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
साध्वी िनरंजन ज्योित: माननीय सभापित महोदय, िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 246. ... (Interruptions)... Shri Jose K. Mani.  
...(Interruptions)...    
 
Angamaly-Erumeli railway line project 
 
*246. SHRI JOSE K. MANI: Will the Minister  of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Railway Board has considered  the Revised Estimate (RE) submitted 
by the Kerala Rail Development Corporation Limited for the Angamaly-Erumeli railway 
line project; 
(b) if so, the details thereof;  
(c) whether Government has any plan to de freeze the Angamaly-Erumeli project, 
sanction the RE and proceed with the execution works; and  
(d) if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF RAILWAYS (SHRI ASHWI NI VAISHNAW): (a) to (d) A statement 
is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) Angamali-Sabarimala via Erume li new line project was sanctioned in 1997-
98. Work on Angamali-Kaladi (7 Km) and long lead works on Kaladi-Perumbavoor 
(10 Km) have been taken up. However, furt her works on this project could not be 
taken forward due to protests by local people against land acquisition and fixing of 
alignment of the line, court cases filed ag ainst the project and inadequate support 
from the State Government of Kerala.  
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
49

 
 
Due to the alignment being in thick fore st area and issues of survey, it was 
decided to terminate the alignment at Erume li, which is about 35 KM from Sabarimala 
shrine. Accordingly, Detailed Project Report  (DPR) of the project from Angamali up 
to Erumeli (111 Km) has been prepared by M/s KRDCL. The Estimated cost of the 
project has been updated by M/s KRDCL at Rs. 3726.95 crore.  
 Meanwhile, demand has been received for exploring new railway line from 
Chengannur to Pamba which is a shorter ro ute for Sabarimala Shrine.  Pamba is 
situated about 4 Km away from Sabarimala shrine.   Final Location Survey for 
Chengannur - Pamba (75 Km) new line has been sanction ed.  The survey of said 
work has been taken up for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR). 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Jose K. Mani. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW : Sir, the statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
…(Interruptions)… 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 247. …(Interruptions)… Shri C. Ve. Shanmugam.   
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Shortage of water for irrigation due to climate change 
 
*247. SHRI C. VE. SHANMUGAM: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS’ WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that due to climate change it is estimated that there is going 
to be a shortage of water for agriculture in future; 
(b) if so, the details thereof in cluding the action plan for this; 
(c) whether there will be a ma jor problem of irrigation in agriculture sector due to 
shortage of water; 
(d) if so, the details thereof ; 
(e) whether Government has any policy for management of agriculture sector in 
future; and 
(f) if so, the details thereof an d if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SHRI KAILASH CHOUDHARY): (a) to (f) A statement is laid on the 
Table of the House.  
Statement 
 
(a) to (f) Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change conducted 
studies on impact of climate change in India as part of the Second National 
Communication to the United Nations Fram e Work Convention on Climate Change. 
The studies revealed that impact of climate change and climate variability on the water 
resources is likely to affect irrigation in agriculture. However, the impact of climate 
change has been dealt with effectivel y through various interventions of the 
Government. 
The Government is implementing Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(PMKSY) with an aim to enhance physical  access of water on  farm and expand 
cultivable area under assured irrigation an d introduce sustainable water conservation 
practices. The components of PMKSY are as under: 
i)  Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Pr ogramme (AIBP) and Har Khet Ko Pani 
(HKKP) components of PMKSY are being implemented by Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD&GR). AIBP 
focuses on faster completion of ongoing 99 nos. of Major and Medium Irrigation 
projects, prioritized during 2016-17, along with their Command Area Development & 
Water Management (CADWM) works under HKKP in Mission Mode. Out of these 
projects, 53 projects have been complete d so far. The PMKSY was approved for 
continuation from 2021-22 to 2025-26. In addition, 6 new projects have been included 
under PMKSY-AIBP after 2021-22.  
ii)  Watershed Development Component (WDC-PMKSY): Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP) amalgama ted as one of the components of 
PMKSY in 2015-16 and named as the Wa tershed Development Component (WDC-
PMKSY) is being implemented by Depa rtment of Land Resources. Under WDC-
PMKSY 1.0, Central assistance was prov ided for 8214 watershed development 
projects in 28 States and an amount of Rs. 8894.46 crore was released. The 
extended project period of WDC-PMKSY 1.0 got over on 31.03.2022. From the year 
2014-15 to 2021-22, approximately 7.64 lakh  water harvesting structures have been 
created / rejuvenated and an additional area of about 16.41 lakh ha has been brought 
under protective irrigation.  The WDC was a pproved for continuation from 2021-22 to 
2025-26 as WDC-PMKSY 2.0 and   an area of 50.55 lakh ha of  watershed projects 
has been sanctioned to 28 States and UTs of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. So far, 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
51

 
 
an amount of Rs. 2288.34 crore as Central share has been released to States/UTs 
and approximately 0.38 lakh water harvesting structures have been created / 
rejuvenated having an additional area brough t under protective irrigation of 0.44 lakh 
ha. 
iii) DoWR, RD & GR has set up Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (BWUE) for 
promotion, regulation and control of efficient use of water in irrigation, industrial and 
domestic sector. The Bureau facilitates pr omotion of improving water use efficiency 
across various sectors namely irrigation, drinking water supply, power generation, 
industries etc. in the country. National  Water Mission (NWM) launched the ‘Sahi 
Fasal’ campaign to farmers in water stressed areas to grow crops which are not water 
intensive but use water efficiently and ar e economically remunerative, healthy and 
nutritious and suited to the agro-climatic-hydro characteristics. 
iv)   Further, Government supports construction of water harvesting and conservation 
works primarily through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (MGNREGS). Mission Amrit Sarovar launched as a part of celebration of 
Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav with an objective to conserve water for future. The Mission is 
aimed at developing and rejuvenating 75 wate r bodies in each district of the country. 
As on date, 111406 sites have been identified and work has commenced on 80428 
sites. The work has been completed on 64967 sites. In addition, large number of 
water bodies such as farm ponds, dug wells, checkdams and community ponds 
(water harvesting & Fishery) have been  created under the MGNREGS Scheme. Till 
February, 2023, 64,09,852 number of water harvesting struct ures have been created 
under the scheme.   
Besides, to meet the challenges of Agricu lture in the face of changing climate, 
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) under Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare has launched a flagship network project namely National Innovations 
in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). The project aims to study the impact of 
climate change on agriculture including crops, livestock, horticulture and fisheries and 
to develop and promote climate resilient te chnologies in agriculture including water 
productivity. Besides, ICAR  has developed cost effective, location specific scientific 
technologies viz.  rainwater harvesting & recycling, precision technologies for 
irrigation and farming practices, adoption of modern agronomic practices, diversifying 
cropping pattern from water guzzling crops like low land rice, sugarcane to pulses, 
oilseeds, maize and agro-forestry etc. It al so imparts training and organizes field 
demonstrations to educate farmers in this regard.  
Other major initiatives taken by ICAR to  address the impact of climate change 
in agriculture are as under:- 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
i. ICAR has developed resilient varieties in  different crops tolerant to climatic 
stresses to improve the food grain production  in the face of changing climate. Since 
2014, a total of 2279 varieties have been  released out of which 1888 are climate 
resilient varieties which include 407 abiotic stress tolerant varieties and 1481 biotic 
stress tolerant. 
ii. Sixty eight location-specific climate resilient technologies have been developed 
and popularized for wider adoption among the farming communities. 
iii. District level risk and vulnerability asse ssment of Indian agri culture to climate 
change has been prepared which is useful  for several Ministries/ Departments for 
prioritizing resources towards developmental programs. 
iv. Based on vulnerability assessment, clim ate resilient technologies are being 
demonstrated on farmer’s fields in 151 clusters covering 446 villages. 
v. Agricultural contingency plans for 650 di stricts have been prepared and State 
officials have been sensitized for prepared ness. Agricultural contingency plans have 
been made available online for policy makers to take decisions in the event of delayed 
monsoons and other extreme weather events. 
vi. ICAR in collaboration with India Meteorological Department (IMD) is issuing 
Agromet advisories twice a week (Tuesday and Friday) to around 6 crore farmers of 
the country through Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva Program. The advisories are 
reaching the farmers through m-KISAN portal, WhatsApp groups, SMS services etc. 
vii. During the past decade, 19,564 capaci ty building programs were conducted 
throughout the country under NICRA projec t to educate stakeholders on various 
aspects of climate change and resilient technologies, covering 5,60,016 different 
stakeholders including farmers so as to enable wider adoption of climate resilient 
technologies. 
viii. ICAR has made efforts to improve the nutritional quality in high yielding 
varieties of cereals, pulses, oilseeds, vege tables and fruits using breeding methods 
and developed 87 varieties under special project on Consortium Research Platform on 
Biofortification.  
ix. System of Rice Intensification/ Direct Seeded Rice (SRI/ DSR) are also being 
promoted under National Food Security Missi on (NFSM) for reducing use of water in 
agriculture sector. 
 This Ministry is also implementing  several programmes/ schemes under the 
National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) to transform Indian agriculture 
into sustainable production system. Th ey include Rainfed Area Development 
Programme, Soil Health & Fertility, Per Drop  More Crop, Agro-forestry, National 
Bamboo Mission, Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana, Sub Mission on Agricultural 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
53

 
 
Mechanization, Crop Residue Management, Crop Diversification Program, National 
Bamboo Mission, National Mission for Integr ated Development Horticulture (MIDH), 
National Food Security and Nutrition Mi ssion, Mission on Organic Value Chain 
Development for North East Region etc. Besi des, in order to promote climate friendly 
and water use efficient crops, the Governme nt has taken up various initiatives to 
increase the cultivation of millets. Per Dr op More Crop (PDMC) scheme promotes 
water use efficiency at the farm level throug h Micro Irrigation technologies i.e. drip 
and sprinkler irrigation systems. Till date an area of 79.15 lakh hectare has been 
covered under Micro irrigation through th e PDMC scheme from the year 2015-16. 
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) scheme is being implemented as a component 
under National Mission for Sustainable Ag riculture (NMSA) from 2014-15 in the 
country. RAD focuses on Integrated Farming System (IFS) for enhancing productivity 
and minimizing risks associated with climatic  variability. Till date an area of 7.11 lakh 
hectares has been covered under RAD programme from the year 2014-15. Soil Health 
Card (SHC) / Soil Health Management (SHM) scheme is operational through the 
State Governments under National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility. 
Now, this scheme has been merged as Soil Health Management Component of 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) from  the year 2022-23. The main objective of 
the scheme is to assist states in promot ing Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) 
through judicious use of chemical fertilizers including secondary and micro nutrients in 
conjunction with organic manures & bio-fe rtilizers for improving soil health and its 
productivity. Soil Health Card provides information to farmers on soil nutrient status of 
their soil and recommendation on appropriate dosage of nutrients to be applied for 
improving soil health and its fe rtility. So far 22.71 crore grid based soil health cards 
have been distributed to fa rmers under the scheme. For promoting organic farming, 
under Mission Organic Value Chain De velopment in North East Region 
(MOVCDNER), 379 Farmer Producer Compan ies have been formed comprising of 
1.89 lakh farmers and covering an area of  1.73 lakh ha. The restructured National 
Bamboo Mission (NBM) was launched during  2018-19 as a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme (CSS). During the year 2022-23 the NBM has been merged with Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) scheme. MIDH is being implemented 
in which an area of 11.26 la kh ha have been covered. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (PKVY) was initiated to promote organic farming in the country and so far 
11.80 lakh ha area has been covered. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri C. Ve. Shanmugam.   …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी: महोदय, िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.248. …(Interruptions)… Shrimati Darshana Singh.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Reforms in telecom sector 
 
†*248. SHRIMATI DARSHANA SINGH: Will the Minister of COMMUNICATIONS be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a)  whether it is a fact that Government is considering further reforms in the telecom 
sector; 
(b)   whether it is also a fact that Government is inviting recommendations from 
industry on various issues including improv ing quality of services, bridging digital 
divide and ensuring security of telecom networks; 
(c)  whether telecommunication facilities ar e not available in some villages of the 
country, especially in remote areas; and 
(d)  if so, the steps being taken by Govern ment to provide tel ecom facilities in all 
villages of the country as well as the steps proposed to be taken for improvement in 
quality of telecom services? 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) : (a) to (d) A 
statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b)  Government is committed to bring reforms in telecom sector and has 
brought various reforms in past 9 years.  
(1) These telecom reforms have led to exponential growth of telecom sector, 
improved quality of services, bridging of digital divide, safety of the users and security 
of the telecommunication networks in past 9 years as indicated below:  
S.No. Parameters  
As on 31.03.2014 As on  
31.03.2023 
(i) Mobile Subscribers (in crores) 90.45 114.39 
                   
† Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
55

 
 
(ii) Mobile Broadband Subscribers  
(in crores) 
4.56 81.20 
(iii) No of Mobile towers (in lakhs) 4.0 9.9 
(iv) Number of Base Transreceiver 
Stations (BTS) [in lakhs] 
6.49 25.42 
(v) Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) laid  
[in lakh kms] 
11.05 38.06 
(vi) Mobile Data Tariff (in ₹/ GB) 269 10.1 
(vii) Data Usage per mobile subscriber 
per month (in GB) 
0.27 17.11 
  
(2)   Further, the Government has si mplified Standing Advisory Committee on 
Frequency Allocation (SACFA) clearance for telecom towers which has resulted in 
instantaneous SACFA clearances in 85% applications. 
 (3) The Government has also released National Frequency Allocation Plan 2022, 
which will guide the users of the spectrum to plan their networks in accordance with 
relevant frequency and parameters provided therein. 
(4) Exemplifying the Hon’ble Prime Minister ’s vision of integrated planning and 
coordinated implementation of infrastruc ture connectivity projects under PM Gati 
Shakti, the Call Before You Dig (CBuD)  app was launched on 22.03.2023 for 
preventing damage to underly ing assets like optical fibre cables, through a ‘Whole-
of-Government approach’ benefitting all st akeholders by improving ease of doing 
business and minimizing discomfort to the citizens. 
( 5 )  W i t h  a n  a i m  t o  a c h i e v e  E a s e  o f  L i v i n g  a n d  E a s e  o f  D o i n g  B u s i n e s s ,  
Government has removed or reduced 107-compliance burden as on date by 
simplifying Government to Citizen and Government to Business interface.  
(6) Gati Shakti Sanchar portal launched on 14.05.2022 to st reamline the process 
of Right of Way (RoW) applications an d permissions of establishing telecom 
infrastructure across the country. This has resulted in the fastest 5G rollout in the 
world covering 717 districts with installa t i o n  o f  m o r e  t h a n  3 . 1 5  l a k h s  5 G  B a s e  
Transreceiver Stations (BTS) in just 10 months. 
(7) The Government has launched Sanchar Saathi portal on 16.05.2023, a major 
reform towards the safety and security of  users, which includes Central Equipment 
Identity Register (CEIR) module for traci ng, blocking stolen/lost mobiles, Telecom 
Analytics for Fraud Management and Consum er Protection (TAFCOP) module which 
enables subscriber to know mobile connectio ns registered in his/her name, Artificial 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Intelligence and Facial Recognition powere d Solution for Telecom SIM Subscriber 
Verification (ASTR) module to identify fraudulent subscribers. By using Sanchar 
Saathi portal, more than 50 Lakh fraudulent  connections have been disconnected so 
far. 
(8) To improve the mobile coverage in bo rder villages, the RoW permissions for 
the installation of Base Transreceiver stations (BTSs) have been facilitated in border 
area.  
 Further, the Government is regularly co nsulting with all the stakeholders 
including different industry associations, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) 
etc. to bring and implement the reforms in telecom sector for overall growth of sector.  
 
(c) and (d)   Government is implementing various schemes to provide the telecom 
coverage to all uncovered 38,901 villa ges at an outlay of more than ₹ 41000 crores. 
Bharat Net scope recently expa nded to cover all the inhabite d villages at an outlay of 
₹ 1.39 lakhs crores.  
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) monitors the performance of 
service providers against the benchmark for various Quality of Service (QoS) 
parameters by way of Quality of Service re gulations issued from time to time. The 
Government has also requested the TRAI to review the existing  QoS Regulations and 
incorporate more stringent parameters/b enchmarks to improve the present QoS 
significantly.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Darshana Singh. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW: Sir, the statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह: धन्यवाद, माननीय सभापित महोदय ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.249.  …(Interruptions)…  S h r i  N a r a i n  D a s s  G u p t a .   
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Effects of Radio Frequency radiation 
 
*249.  SHRI NARAIN DASS GUPTA: Will the Minister of COMMUNICATIONS be 
pleased to state: 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
57

 
 
 
(a)  whether Government has taken note of  the ill-effects of uncontrolled radiation 
of Radio Frequency (RF) affecting pre-adolescent children, pregnant women, elderly 
people, patients with pace makers, birds, flora and fauna, insects etc.; and 
(b)  steps taken by Government to control ill-effects of RF near cellular towers in 
residential areas? 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW) : (a) to (b) A 
statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b)  World Health Organization (WHO) in its Fact Sheet No. 304, May 2006 
on Electromagnetic Fields and Public  Health (Base Stations and Wireless 
Technologies) has concluded that "conside ring the very low exposure levels and 
research results collected to date, there is no convincing scientific evidence that the 
weak RF Signals from base stations an d wireless networks caused adverse health 
effects. From all evidence accumulated so fa r, no adverse short or  long term health 
effects have been shown to occur from the RF Signals produced by base stations. " 
 In August 2016, drawing conclusion from scientific research, WHO has 
recorded on its website that “In the area of biological effects and medical applications 
of non-ionizing radiation approximately 25, 000 articles have been published over the 
past 30 years. Despite the feeling of some people that more research needs to be 
done, scientific knowledge in this area is now more extensive than for most 
chemicals. Based on a recent in-depth revi ew of the scientific literature, the WHO 
concluded that current evidence does no t confirm the existence of any health 
consequences from exposure to low level electromagnetic fields.  
 In February, 2020, WHO has again clar ified, in Question & Answer (Q&A) 
published on its website on 5G  mobile networks and health” , that To date, and after 
much research performed, no adverse heal th effect has been causally linked with 
exposure to wireless technologies. 
 International Telecommunication Union (I TU) in its Guide on electromagnetic 
fields and health of 2020 has referred to WHO note, in terms of EMF and health as "All 
reviews conducted so far have indicat ed that exposures below the limits 
recommended in the International Commissio n for Non Ionizing Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP) 1998 EMF guidelines, covering the full frequency range from 0-300 GHz, do 
not produce any known adverse health effect . Studies and further research in this 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
area for better health risk  assessments and knowledge about biological effects are 
ongoing process. 
 Government is following relevant International agencies/ organizations such as 
World Health Organization (WHO), International Commission on Non Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP), International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) 
and International Telecommunication Unio n (ITU) for possible effects of radio 
radiation on humans, flora and fauna. 
 ICNIRP have issued guidelines for limit ing exposure to time-varying electric, 
magnetic and electromagnetic fields (up to 300 ghz). ICNIRP has prescribed its 
norms for general public exposure as under:      
    
(f is frequency in MHz) 
Both WHO and ITU recommend to adopt ICNIRP guidelines for EMF exposure. 
137 countries have already adopted ICNIRP  norms. ITU in 2019 has noted that 
“Because disparities in standards around the world have caused increasing public 
anxiety about exposure from the introd uction of new technologies, WHO has 
commenced a process of harmonization of EMF standards worldwide.” 
The Government of India has adopted ex tremely strict norms for EMF radiation 
which is 10 times more stringent than th e safe limits prescribed by ICNIRP. The 
present EMF exposure limits laid down for Ba se Transceiver Stations (BTSs) in India 
are as follows: 
(f is frequency in MHz) 
Telecom Service Providers have complain ed that such stringent norms have 
adverse impact on quality of service.  
Government of India has put in place a well-structured process and 
mechanism so that Telecommunications Serv ice Providers (TSPs) strictly adhere to 
these prescribed norms including submissi on of certificate by Telecom Service 
Frequency 
Range 
E-Field Strength 
(Volt/Meter) 
H-Field Strength 
(Amp/Meter) 
Power Density 
(Watt/Sq.Meter) 
400MHz  to 2000MHz 1.375f ½ 0.0037f ½ f/200 
2GHz to 300GHz 61 0.16 10 
Frequency 
Range 
E-Field Strength 
(Volt/Meter) 
H-Field Strength 
(Amp/Meter) 
Power Density 
(Watt/Sq.Meter) 
400MHz  to 2000MHz 0.434f ½ 0.0011f ½ f/2000 
2GHz to 300GHz 19.29 0.05 1 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
59

 
 
Providers before commercial start of BTS site and extensive audit of compliance. DoT 
has provisioned to impose financial penalty on defaulting TSPs whose BTSs are found 
exceeding the prescribed EMF emission limits and closure of BTSs as per procedure if 
they are not brought within prescribed emission limits. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Narain Dass Gupta. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW: Sir, the statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 250. …(Interruptions)… Shri S. Selvaganabathy.  
…(Interruptions)…    
 
Production of exotic fruits in Puducherry 
 
*250. SHRI S. SELVAGANABATHY: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) the details of production of exotic fr uits in Puducherry during the last three 
years and the current year, year-wise, variety-wise and district-wise; 
(b) the extent to which farmers have bene fitted from production of exotic fruits; 
and 
(c) whether Government is helping the States  to grow exotic fruits and, if so, the 
details of schemes/ programmes under whic h Government is helping Puducherry for 
the same? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SHRI KAILASH CHOUDHARY): (a) to  (c) A statement is laid on the 
Table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) to (c) Ministry of Agriculture and Fa rmers Welfare (MoA&FW) promotes holistic 
development of horticulture including exotic  crops through regionally differentiated 
programmes like Mission for Integrated Deve lopment of Horticulture (MIDH) with an 
end to end approach encompassing compon ents for planting material production, 
new plantation, horticulture mechanizatio n, rejuvenation, protected cultivation, 
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
training of farmers, post harvest management and creation of marketing infrastructure 
etc. The Ministry has identified globally po pular fruits namely Avocado (Butter fruit), 
Blue berry, Dragon fruit (Kamalam), Kiwi , Mangosteen, Persimmon, Passion fruit, 
Rambutan and Strawberry for promotion an d scale up of production under MIDH 
scheme in all States and Union Territories  (UTs) including Pudu cherry. The support 
has been provided under MIDH to promot e exotic fruits specially dragon fruit 
(Kamalam) in Puducherry. Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) – Indian 
Institute of Horticultural Research (IIH R) has conducted various programmes like 
trainings, demonstrations and farm fest for promotion of exotic fruit crops in 
Puducherry.  MoA&FW has also sanctioned  Centre of Excellence (CoE) on Dragon 
Fruit (Kamalam) at IIHR, Bangalore to prov ide quality planting material, technical 
knowledge through trainings and demonstrat ions to the farmers of all States/ UTs 
including Puducherry. 
Horticulture crops are also covered un der Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
(PMFBY) to provide safeguards to farmers. The assistance is also available for 
creation of infrastructure in Horticulture sector under Agricultur e Infrastructure Fund 
( A I F )  s c h e m e  o f  G o v e r n m e n t  o f  I n d i a .  N ational Horticulture Board (NHB) is also 
providing support for development of commer cial horticulture, protected cultivation 
and post harvest infrastructure includin g cold storages, pack-houses, primary 
processing etc. The support is also available to promote micro irrigation in horticulture 
crops through Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sichai  Yojana (PMKSY). Plantation of Dragon 
fruit (Kamalam) under horticulture planta tion has been permitted under Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guar antee Act (MGNREGA). Puducherry has 
reported area and production of horticulture  crops including exotic fruits like Dragon 
fruit (Kamalam) as 8150 ha and 27810 MT resp ectively, as per first advance estimate 
of 2022-23. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Shri S. Selvaganabathy. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी: महोदय, िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Q.No.251.  …(Interruptions)…  Ms. Dola Sen. …(Interruptions)…   
 
Declining Textile and Apparel Exports 
 
*251.  MS. DOLA SEN: Will the Minister of TE
XTILES be pleased to state:  
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
61

 
 
 
(a)  whether Government is taking any steps to address the challenges faced by the 
textile and apparel industry due to declin e in the exports and the lack of cost 
competitiveness; 
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor;  
(c) whether Government is considering removal of 11 per cent import duty on cotton 
to alleviate the  financial burden on textile manufacturers and exporters; and  
(d) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES (SHRIMATI DARSHANA 
VIKRAM JARDOSH): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) Government is implementing various schemes viz, Pradhan Mantri Mega 
Integrated Textile Region and Appa rel (PM MITRA), SAMARTH (Scheme for 
Capacity Building in Textile Sector), Silk  Samagra, National Handloom Development 
Programme, National Handicraft Development Programme, Integrated Wool 
Development Programme (IWDP), National  Technical Textile Mission (NTTM), 
Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) etc. catering exclusively for development 
of textile sector in the country.  Further, Government is promoting production of MMF 
Apparel, MMF Fabrics and Products of Technical Textiles in the country through 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Textiles.  
India has so far signed 13 Free Trade Agreements including recently concluded 
agreements with UAE and Australia; and 6 Preferential Trade Agreements with various 
trading partners. In order to boost expo rt and to make these products cost 
competitive, Government extended continuation of Rebate of State and Central Taxes 
and Levies (RoSCTL) on exports of A pparel/Garments and Made-ups. Further, 
textiles products not covered under the RoSCTL are covered under Remissions of
 
Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) along with other products. 
Government also provides financial support to various Export Promotion 
Councils and Trade Bodies engaged in prom otion of textiles and garments exports, 
for organising and participating in trade fairs, exhibitions, buyer-seller meets etc. 
 
(c) and (d) The proposal to reduce Ba sic Customs Duty on Raw Cotton was 
examined as part of Budget exercise 2023-24 and the request was not acceded to. 
 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Ms. Dola Sen. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Minister.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िवकर्म जरदोश : महोदय,  िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.252. …(Interruptions)… Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla. 
…(Interruptions)…     
 
Lack of adequate food processing units 
 
*252. SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA : Will the Minister of FOOD PROCESSING 
INDUSTRIES be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether it is a fact that about 40 per cen t of perishable food is wasted in the 
country due to lack of adequate food pr ocessing units, cold chain and storage 
despite significant growth in the sector; and 
(b) if so, the steps taken by Government to resolve it? 
 
THE MINISTER OF FOOD PROCESSING  INDUSTRIES (SHRI PASHUPATI KUMAR 
PARAS): (a) and (b) A statement is laid on the table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b) As per studies conducted by In dian Council for Agricultural Research – 
Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engin eering & Technology (ICAR-CIPHET), 2015 
and NABARD Consultancy Service Pvt. Ltd (NABCONS), 2022, the estimated 
percentage of Harvest and Post Harvest loss of perishable food is as follows: 
 
Commodities 
(Perishables) 
Estimated Percentage Loss  
As per ICAR-CIPHET study 
(2015) 
As per NABCONS 
study (2022) 
Fruits  6.70-15.88 6.02-15.05 
Vegetables 4.58-12.44 4.87-11.61 
Milk 0.92 0.87 
Fisheries(Marine) 10.52 8.76 
Fisheries(Inland) 5.23 4.86 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
63

 
 
The Ministry of Food Processing Indust ries (MoFPI) supports the creation and 
expansion of the processing/preservation ca pacity through implementation of various 
schemes to reduce post-harvest losses and create higher value-addition. The 
schemes are as follows: 
 
(i)  Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY)  
(ii)  PM-Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PM-FME)  
(iii)         Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी पशुपित क ुमार पारस: महोदय,  िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.253. …(Interruptions)…  Dr. Amar Patnaik.  …(Interruptions)…  
 
Inclusion of crop loss due to attacks by wild animal under PMBFY 
 
*253.   DR. AMAR PATNAIK: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE be pleased to state:  
 
(a) whether Government has considered the request from Government of Odisha 
for inclusion of crop damage due to inunda tion and attacks by wild animals under the 
localised calamity peril category under the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
(PMFBY); 
(b)
 if so, by   when  Government  plans  to  bring  the  provisions  for  this,  if  not,  
the  reasons therefor; 
(c) whether Government will consider shar ing the premium subsidy for coverage of 
crop loss due to attacks by wild animals, between the Centre and State in the ratio 
80:20, instead of 50:20 ratio under PMFBY; and 
d) if  not, the reasons therefor? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SHRI KAILASH CHOUDHARY): (a) to (d) A statement is laid on the 
Table of the House. 
 
 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yo jana (PMFBY) has been operational since 
Kharif 2016 and till 2022-23 (a s on 30.06.2023), 4846 lakh farmer applications have 
been enrolled over an area of about 3497 lakh hectare insuring a sum of Rs. 14,45,978 
crore.  Against premium of Rs. 29,123 crore paid by farmers, claims of Rs. 1,40,599 
crore have been paid to about 1457 lakh farmer applications. 
The PMFBY provides for comprehensive risk insurance against crop damage 
due to non-preventable natural risks from  pre-sowing to post-harvest for the 
crops/areas notified by the concerned Stat e Government. The losses to crops due to 
wild animals being preventable in nature were therefore, not covered. However, at the 
request of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and State 
Governments, States have been allowed to  notify the losses by wild animals on 
individual assessment as add on cover keep ing in view requirem ent of the State at 
their own cost. Detailed protocol for cove rage has been given in the Operational 
Guidelines of the scheme. 
Inundation as a risk cover is available to all notifi ed crops. The hydrophilic 
crops like paddy, jute, mesta etc. are eligible  for claims against the risks/provisions 
including damage of crop reported in th e yield estimation through Crop Cutting 
Experiments (CCEs), except for localized risk  as because of the physiology of these 
hydrophilic crops, stagnation of water is generally beneficial for growth of these 
crops.   
 The review/revisions/rationalisation/ improvements in th e crop insurance 
schemes is a continuous process and d ecision on suggestion/representations/ 
recommendations of the stakeholders/studies are taken from time to time after 
consultation with various stakeholders. Accordingly, Government has revised the 
premium subsidy sharing pattern 50 : 50 to 90 : 10 between Central and State 
Government in North Eastern States (f rom Kharif 2020 season) and for Himalayan 
States (from Kharif 2023 season). The premium sharing pattern of remaining 
States/UTs is 50:50 subject to certain condit ions. At present, no proposal to revise 
the subsidy sharing pattern between Centre and State in respect of attacks by wild 
animals is under consideration before the Government. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Dr. Amar Patnaik. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी: महोदय,  िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है।  
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
65

 
 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q.No.254. …(Interruptions)… Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Quality checks and practices under ATMA Scheme 
 
*254. SHRI ABIR RANJAN BISWAS: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND 
FARMERS WELFARE be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether Government has any mechanism or  criteria to assess the quality and 
relevance of technologies and practi ces disseminated through Agricultural 
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) Scheme; 
(b) if so, the details thereof and if not, the reasons therefor; 
(c) whether Government has received any feedback from farmers or other 
stakeholders for improving the quality and relevance of technologies and practices 
disseminated through the Scheme; and  
(d) if so, the details thereof and the action taken by Government on such feedback 
or suggestions? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SHRI KAILASH CHOUDHARY): (a) to  (d) A statement is laid on the 
Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) and (b)  Government of India launche d a Centrally Sponsored Scheme ‘Support 
to State Extension Programme for Extens ion Reforms’ popularly known as ATMA 
Scheme in 2005-06 aimed at providing t echnical knowledge to farmers on a broad 
scale to improvise their various skills and tr ansfer of new technologies not only in 
Agricultural field but also in other allied sectors like Animal Husbandry, Horticulture, 
Fisheries and Sericulture for increasing their farm income. Presently, Scheme is being 
implemented in 704 districts of 28 states  & 5 UTs in the country. The scheme 
promotes decentralized farmer-friendly extension system  in the country. Under the 
scheme, Grants-in-Aid is released to the State Governments with an objective to 
support State Government’s efforts to ma ke available the latest agricultural 
technologies and good agricultural practices in different thematic areas of agriculture 
and allied sector to farmers through diffe rent extension activities viz; Farmers 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Training, Demonstrations, Exposure Visi ts, Kisan Mela, Mobilization of Farmers 
Groups and organizing Farm Schools etc.  Till 7th August, 2023 , over 653.59 lakh 
farmers have been benefited under the sche me through different extension activities 
since its inception. 
While the concept of district level Agricultural Technology Management Agency 
(ATMA) has been promoted with an idea to provide a platform for integrated 
extension delivery involving all the Stakeh olders, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
operating at the same level act as an outreach arm of NARS facilitating validation and 
adopting of new technologies through front line demonstrations & awareness 
programs and other initiatives. KVK at dist rict level provides knowledge and validate 
new technology for dissemination among farmers through ATMA network. Thus, a 
mechanism is in place to develop and valid ate new agricultural technologies by the 
NARS system at various levels before its dissemination among large number of 
farmers through ATMA network. 
  
(c) and (d)  Activities of the scheme are monitored and evaluated at periodic 
intervals through a specific mechanism genera ted at different levels (Block, District, 
State and National level). At National le vel, 4 evaluation studies through outside 
agencies have been carried out so far during 2009-10, 2017-18, 2019-20 and 2020-21 
by Agricultural Finance Corporation Ltd., Cr eative Agri Solutions, Indian Society of 
Agri-business Professionals and DMEO, NITI  Aayog respectively. The gist of these 
evaluation studies is as under:- 
 ATMA has a strong institutional presence on the ground, the activities 
conducted have enabled farmers to lear n about new technologies and have the 
opportunities to interact with scientists to enable them to increase their knowledge.  
 Seed Replacement Ratio (SRR) of th e certified seeds has increased 
significantly through ATMA intervention. 
 Farmers admitted that after adopting new technologies, not only yield of crops 
but milk production has also increased. 
 Farm demonstrations and Farm School s have a good learning impact on 
farmers and the production is also increasing. 
 Mobilization of Farmer Interest Groups  (FIGs)/Commodity Interest Groups 
(CIGs)/ Food Security Groups (FSGs) un der ATMA scheme are integrating with 
Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs). 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Minister.  
…(Interruptions)…   
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
67

 
 
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी: महोदय,  िववरण सभा पटल पर रख िदया गया है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Q. No. 255. …(Interruptions)… Shri Jawhar Sircar. 
…(Interruptions)…    
 
Suburban railways services of Howrah and Sealdah railway stations 
 
*255.  SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state:  
 
(a) the details of projects to improve passe nger travel in the suburban railway 
services of Howrah and Sealdah Railway stations during the last three years 
and the current year; 
(b) whether frequencies and speeds can be increased and if not,  
the reasons therefor; 
(c) the new projects that are being envisaged for these suburban rail services; 
(d) the annual capital and revenue expenditure for these suburban rail services as 
percentage of total railway budget; and 
(e) the measures taken to improve and increase the metro rail services
 in Kolkata 
and by when will the current extension projects be completed? 
 
THE MINISTER OF RAILWAYS (SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW): (a) to (e) A statement 
is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) to (e) Suburban services and long distance services use the same railway 
network in Howrah & Sealdah and improvement in railway network improves the  
suburban services as well. Railways ha ve taken up/commissioned 08 Railway 
projects (06 Doubling, 01 Gauge Conversion  and 01 New Line) costing Rs. 4,118 Cr. 
to improve passenger travel for suburban railway services for Howrah and Sealdah 
Railway stations in the last 3 years and th e current Financial Year 2023-24 as detailed 
below:- 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Project Cost 
( Rs. in Cr.)
Status 
1 Sondalia – Champapukur 279 Commissioned  
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(23.64 Km) Doubling 
2 Dankuni – Chandanpur 
(25.41 Km) 4th line 
697 Commissioned 
3 Boinchi – Shaktigarh (25.83 
Km) 3rd line 
517 Commissioned 
4 Bandel – Boinchi (30.53 Km) 
3rd line 
595 Commissioned 
5 Bhattanagar – Baltikuri (2.70 
Km) 
77 Commissioned 
6 Naihati-Ranaghat (36 Km) 3rd 
line 
 
284 Naihati – Kalyani (10.37 Km) 
3rd line section commissioned. 
 
Kalyani – Ranaghat (25.17 
Km) 3rd line section taken up. 
7 Krishnanagar – Amghata 
(8.30 Km) Gauge Conversion 
50 Work taken up 
8 Tarkeshwar-Bishnupur New 
Line Project (82 Km) 
1619  Tarakeshwar -Goghat (33.93 
Km) & Mayonapur - 
Bishnupur (22.68  km) 
sections have been 
commissioned. 
 Goghat- Kamarpukur (5.5 
Km): Work has been stopped 
by local villagers at Bhabadighi 
Tank. 
 Kamarpukur- Mayonapur 
(20.35 Km) : Work taken up. 
Work on remaining section 
kept in abeyance due to land 
acquisition issue in West 
Bengal. 
 
 Also 05 Metro projects covering 98 Kms le ngth under Kolkata Metro rail has been 
taken up out of which approximately 20 Km sections have been commissioned.  
During last 3 years, an expenditure of Rs. 8,289 Cr. has been incurred on Metro 
projects in Kolkata. 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
69

 
 
Increase in frequency and speeding up of existing services is an ongoing 
process over Indian Railways subject to oper ational feasibility, traffic justification, 
resources availability, etc.  
Upgradation/modernization of stations on Indian Railways is also a continuous 
and on-going process. As per Minimum E ssential Amenities norms, all passenger 
amenities/facilities are provided as per the respective category of the station. Further, 
enhanced/desirable amenities are provid ed depending upon need, volume of 
passenger traffic and inter-se priority and also subject to availability of funds. 
Recently, the Amrit Bharat Station Scheme has been launched for 
development of Railway stations on In dian Railways. This scheme envisages 
development of stations on a continuous ba sis with a long-term approach. It involves 
preparation of Master Plans and their im plementation in phas es to improve the 
amenities at the stations like improvement of station access, circulating areas, waiting 
halls, toilets, lift/escalators as necessary, cleanliness, free Wi-Fi, kiosks for local 
products through schemes like “ One Station One Product ”, better passenger 
information systems, executive lounges, nominated spaces for business meetings, 
landscaping etc. keeping in view the necessity at each such station. 
The scheme also envisages improvement of building, integrating the station 
with both sides of the city, multimodal integration, amenities for Divyangjans, 
sustainable and environment friendly solution s, provision of balla st less tracks, Roof 
Plazas as per necessity, phasing and feasib ility and creation of city centres at the 
station in the long term. 
So far, 1,309 Stations including Howrah and Sealdah Railway Stations have 
been identified under this scheme over Indian Railways. 
Speed upgradation is a continuous pr ocess in Indian Railways. Sectional 
speed of most of the suburban sections of  Howrah and Sealdah divisions in Eastern 
R a i l w a y  i s  v a r y i n g  b e t w e e n  1 0 0  k m p h  t o  1 1 0 kmph. During last 2 years, sectional 
speed has been raised to 100/110 kmph in 599 km of above suburban sections. 
Further raising of sectional speed will not be of much use as Tr ains stop at every 
station in suburban sections.  
In Accounting and Budgeting Heads of the Railway Budget, Budget provision 
is made under the relevant heads meant for different activities under Revenue and 
Capital grants.   
Suburban services in Kolkata area are being run on Eastern Railway (ER), 
South Eastern Railway (SER) and Metro services on Metro Railway Kolkata. 
Provision of funds is made as per requir ement and overall availability of resources. 
Expenditure under these Railways in Revenue  and Capital grants in the last three 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
years and provision for the current year is shown in the following table. Besides, funds 
are also provided to Kolkat a Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (KMRCL) for execution of 
East-West Corridor of Kolkata Metro. Expend iture and outlay for the same is also 
shown in the table. 
 
Capital Segment 
(₹ in crore) 
  Actual 
2020-21 
% 
of 
total 
Actual 
2021-
22 
% 
of 
total 
Actual 
2022-
23 
(Prov.) 
% 
of 
total 
Budget 
Estimate 
2023-24 
% 
of total 
Eastern 4745 3.1% 5356 2.8% 5269 2.6% 4516 1.7% 
South 
Eastern 6441 4.2% 8990 4.7% 9106 4.5% 7017 2.7% 
Metro Rly  1174 0.8% 2512 1.3% 3188 1.6% 3467 1.3% 
KMRCL 800 0.5% 300 0.2% 300 0.1% 500 0.2% 
 
Revenue Segment 
(₹ in crore) 
  
Actual 
2020-21 
% 
of 
total 
Actual 
2021-
22 
% 
of 
total 
Actual 
2022-23 
(Prov.) 
% 
of 
total 
Budget 
Estimate 
2023-24 
% 
of total 
Eastern 9564 7.0% 10626 6.8% 11451 6.4% 12357 6.6% 
South 
Eastern 8200 6.0% 8972 5.7% 9690 5.4% 10628 5.6% 
Metro Rly  438 0.3% 473 0.3% 529 0.3% 597 0.3% 
 
Completion of any railway project depe nds on various factors like quick land 
acquisition by State Government, forest clea rance by officials of forest department, 
shifting of infringing utilities, statutory clearances from various authorities, geological 
and topographical condition of area, law and order situation in the area of the project 
site, number of working months in a year for particular site due to climatic conditions, 
etc. and all these factors affect the completion time of the project.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shri Jawhar Sircar. …(Interruptions)…  Shri Jawhar Sircar, go to 
your seat and raise the question. …(Interruptions)…  Hon. Minister. …(Interruptions)…   
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
71

 
 
SHRI ASHWINI VAISHNAW: Sir, the statement is laid on the Table of the House.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप बैिठए।...(Ëयवधान)... I am in the Chair. …(Interruptions)…  Please.    
…(Interruptions)… Take your seat. …(Interruptions)…  Ms. Dola Sen, take your seat.  
…(Interruptions)…  P l e a s e  t a k e  y o u r  s e a t .  …(Interruptions)… Ms. Sushmita, please 
take your seat. …(Interruptions)…  Please take your seat. …(Interruptions)…  T a k e  
your seat. …(Interruptions)… Ms. Sushmita, please take your seat.  …(Interruptions)… 
Take your seat. …(Interruptions)… Hon. Members.  …(Interruptions)…  One second.  
…(Interruptions)…  One second, listen to me and take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  I 
am addressing that. …(Interruptions)…  I am addressing the issue.  …(Interruptions)…  
I am addressing the issue, take your seat. …(Interruptions)… T a k e  y o u r  s e a t .   
…(Interruptions)…  माननीय सदÎयगण, आज हमारे िलए बहुत सोचने और िंचतन करने का 
मौका है। आज Ģात: ही मुझे अटल जी की एक किवता का ध् यान आया - "क्या खोया, क्या पाया" 
...(Ëयवधान)... 20 तारीख को अगर आप चेयर की बात मानते, तो कल जो लोक सभा मȂ हुआ है, 
िजस तरह से लोक सभा मȂ Ëयापक Îतर पर मिणपुर क े ऊपर चचार् हुई है, गृह मंतर्ी जी ने चचार् की 
है, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने चचार् की है...(Ëयव
धान)... लेिकन आप यह मौका चूक गए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
No.  …(Interruptions)…  Are we.. …(Interruptions)…  The House is adjourned to meet 
at 2.00 p.m.  …(Interruptions)…  The House is adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. today.     
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://rajyasabha.nic.in/Debates/OfficialDebatesDateWise] 
 
The House then adjourned at forty-three minutes past twelve of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
MESSAGES FROM LOK SABHA 
 
(I) The Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
(II) The Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Messages from Lok Sabha; Secretary-General.  
 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, I have to report to the House the following messages 
received from the Lok Sabha, signed by the Secretary-General of the Lok Sabha:- 
 
(I) 
  "In accordance with the provisions of rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha, I am directed  to enclose the Central Goods and Services 
Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023, as passed by Lok Sabha at its sitting held on the 11 th 
August, 2023. 
 
The Speaker has certified that  this Bill is a Money Bill within the meaning of article 
110 of the Constitution of India." 
 (II) 
      "In accordance with the provisions of rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha, I am directed to enclose the Integrated Goods and 
Services Tax (Amendment) Bill,  2023, as passed by Lok Sabh a at its sitting held on 
the 11th August, 2023. 
 
      The Speaker has certified that this Bill is a Money B ill within the meaning of article 
110 of the Constitution of India." 
 
Sir, I lay a copy each of the Bills on the Table.  
 
 
GOVERNMENT BILLS 
 
£The Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
&  
£The Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Bills for consideration and return. The Central Goods and 
Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 and the Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 to be discussed together. ...(Interruptions)...  
  
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana) : Sir, what about Private Members' Business?  It 
is a Private Members' day.  
                   
£ Discussed together. 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
73

 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to mo ve a motion for consideration of 
the following Bills: - The Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
and the Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023.   
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, I move: 
 
"That the Bill further to amend the Centra l Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, as 
passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration. 
 
Sir, I also move: 
"That the Bill further to amend the Integr ated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, 
as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration. 
          
The questions were proposed.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The motion for consideration of the Central Goods and Services Tax 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 and the Integrat ed Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) 
Bill, 2023 are now open for discussion. ...(Interruptions)...  I now call upon Members 
whose names have been received for participation in the discussion.  
...(Interruptions)... Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to reply to the discussion. 
...(Interruptions)...  Leader of the House, what is this? ...(Interruptions)...   Y o u  
are dealing directly with the Member. ...(Interruptions)... T a k e  y o u r  s e a t s .  
...(Interruptions)... Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to reply to the debate. 
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN (West Bengal): Sir, LoP. ...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I shall first put the motion regarding consideration of the Central 
Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 to vote.  The question is:  
 
     "That the Bill further to amend the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, as 
passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration. 
         
The motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN: Sir, we walk out... ...(Interruptions)...  
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Now, Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill be 
returned.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, I move: 
 
That the Bill be returned. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I shall now put the motion regarding consideration of the The 
Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023 to vote.  The question is:  
 
     " That the Bill further to amend the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, 
as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into consideration." 
 
The motion was adopted. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: We shall now take up Clause-by-Clause consideration of the Bill. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 were added to the Bill. 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman to move that the Bill be returned.  
 
SHRIMATI NIRAMLA SITHARAMAN: Sir, I move: 
 
                That the Bill be returned. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
75

 
 
OBSERVATION BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, sitting in this chair, I am obligated to observe 
scrupulous adherence to rules and past precedents. The issue that was raised was 
not worthy of attention for the reason th at due diligence had not been engaged. The 
premise is that the BAC did not allocate time for it. In the past, many Bills had been 
taken for consideration when BAC had no t allocated the time; the South Asian 
University Bill, 2008, the Information Tec hnology (Amendment) Bi ll, 2008, the AIIMS 
(Amendment) Bill, 2008, the Sikh Gurdwa ras (Amendment) Bill, 2016, just to 
illustrate a few instances. In this House,  we have to follow a practice that we 
contribute in a substantive manner. Procedural wrangling does not give impactful 
response to the job we are required to do. Yes, the Leader of the House.  
 
  
SUSPENSION OF MEMBERS 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL): Hon. Chairman, Sir, it is with 
a deep sense of anguish that I have risen to raise a very pertinent issue related to hon. 
Member, Shri Raghav Chadha, who has re peatedly indulged himself in gross 
impropriety and misconduct that is une xpected and unbecoming of a Member of 
Parliament. His conduct is far distant from the ethical standard expected of a Member 
of this august House. On 7
th of August, 2023, he moved an amendment under 
relevant rules for referring the Government  of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023, to a Select Committee consisting of 19 Members including 
hon. Members, Shri Narhari Amin, Shrimati  S. Phangnon Konyak, Dr. Sasmit Patra, 
Dr. M. Thambidurai and Dr. Sudhanshu Trived i. It also included Shri S Niranjan 
Reddy, who did not realise his name has been included and, therefore, at that point 
of time, did not raise an objection, but, subsequently informed us that he had also not 
given his consent. When the motion came up for consideration before the Council on 
7
th August, 2023, at about 9.35 p.m., some Members, whose names figured in the 
list, took severe exception for being included for the proposed Select Committee 
moved by Shri Raghav Chadha. The Member s who objected in the House that day 
included (i) Dr. Sasmit Patra, who stated, and I quote, "As per Rule 72 (2), no such 
discussion has been done by me. My name has been taken without my permission. 
This is a matter of privilege. This is completely wrong." (ii) Dr. M. Thambidurai stated 
and I quote, "I did not sign anywhere. It is a misuse. It is a privilege issue.  Somebody 
has misused my name. Action should be taken against him." (iii) Shrimati S. 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Phangnon Konyak stated and I quote, "Sir , I wish to say something. Under Rule 
72(2), I object to it. I also understand that t h e  h o n .  M e m b e r  t h i n k s  h e  i s  s m a r t .   I  
accept that but I would appreciate if he would not undermine another Member by 
mentioning her name without her consent. I object to it."  (iv) Shri Narhari Amin 
stated and I quote, "My name has been includ ed fraudulently."  Sir, I have translated 
that from the Hindi remarks he made. 
Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi also objected to the proposal, even though, he did not 
get a chance to state his views on the mi ke because his mike was not on. Shri S 
Niranjan Reddy mentioned to us, after the House was adjourned, that he had also not 
given his consent. Hon. Chairman, Sir, Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in the Council of Stat es, explicitly states that the mover shall 
ascertain whether a Member, proposed to be named by him, is willing to serve on the 
Committee. The purposeful intent of this pr ovision is that in the Parliament of the 
largest democracy, the mother of democracie s, home to one-sixth of humanity, hon. 
Members enjoy constitutionally-ordained privileges. The view s expressed by the 
Members on the floor of the House left no doubt that there was an outrage of privilege 
of these Members by hon. Member, Shri Raghav Chadha, by including their names in 
the motion without securing their willingness. This is contrary to the provisions of Rule 
72(2) as stated before. Hon. Chairman, Sir, whips had been issued on that day.  All 
of us were bound to be present and vote as  per our respective party decisions, on an 
important matter, a matter which affected the lives of crores of people living in the 
NCT area.  Now, this could jolly well  lead to a situation wh ere a very eminent hon. 
Member of Parliament would be subject to scrutiny by his constituents, by his party 
and his very conduct, by having accepted a motion which opposed the Bill, which his 
party was supporting, could have invited severe consequences on the hon. 
Members. It could go as far as losing their membership of the House. That is the level 
of breach of privilege that hon. Member, Shri Raghav Chadha has done. Tomorrow, 
God forbid, if a party was to start suspect ing, -- I am taking your name, with due 
apology, Dr. Sasmit Patra -- that Dr. Sasm it Patra was disobeying the party whip, 
was going along with the other side and breaking the whip of  the party, it could have 
severe consequences that his very membersh ip was at risk and,  so was the case for 
the other five Members.  And, all these si x Members are extremely disturbed.  They 
are extremely hurt and they are looking forwar d to the Chair and to  all of us, as the 
Members of this august House, to provid e protection to them, to provide protection 
to their rights and give them due justice. Unfortunately, Sir, rather than remorsefully 
expressing regret for his unethical conduc t, outrageous disregard of the rules, 
unacceptable arrogation of privileges of other senior Members, Shri Raghav Chadha 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
77

 
 
in his interaction with the Press, outside th e House, ridiculed the objections raised by 
his fellow colleagues for including their names in the proposed Select Committee 
without their consent. His tweets on 10 th of August, 2023 at about 1.58 p.m., which I 
saw, on the same issue, are highly unbecomi ng of an hon. Member of Parliament.  
Regrettably, he went to equate inclusion of names of the Member s in the motion to 
that of a birthday invitation card. Hon. Chairman, Sir, even ea rlier, Shri Raghav 
Chadha made misleading statements before the Press by stating that his fellow 
colleague, Shri Sanjay Singh, wa s suspended from the Council on 24 th July, 2023 for 
raising questions. He knew fully well that the suspension of Shri Sanjay Singh from the 
House was due to his unruly behaviour incl uding repeated violations of rules and 
directives of the Chair. In utter defiance to the rules, provisions and directions of the 
hon. Chair, Shri Raghav Chadha in his Pr ess interviews justified the misconduct of 
Shri Sanjay Singh's refusal to leave th e precincts of the Council even after his 
suspension on 24th July, 2023, after due process. 
Such blatant defiance, forged action an d disrespectful conduct of Shri Raghav 
Chadha seriously compromise the dignity of  the Members of Parliament, as also the 
august position of the House. By his conduct, he has brought the institution of 
Parliament in severe disrepute.  Sir, his latest misconduct is also to be viewed in the 
context of two breach of privileges, that ar e pending already before the Committee of 
Privileges. To overlook such repeated acts of misdemeanour, speci ally viewed in the 
context of the prestige of Parliament, of the largest democracy on earth, and from the 
status of Members of such an august Parliament would, certainly, be very 
inappropriate.  
Hon. Chairman, Sir, it is very painful for me to initiate an action against a fellow 
Member of the House. However, it will be an abdication of constitutional responsibility 
and obligations to shun from such a responsibility as well. In view of the severe 
misdemeanour, outrageous disregard of ru les and trampling of privileges of other 
hon. Members, with utmost constraint, I move the following Resolution: 
"That  the Council disapproves gross vi olation of rules, defiant attitude, 
mischievous and contemptuous conduct of  hon. Member, Shri Raghav Chadha 
resulting in lowering the dignity of the Co uncil and blatant disregard to the framework 
of Code of Conduct for Memb ers of Rajya Sabha as pres cribed by the Committee on 
Ethics and thus, approves Suspension of Shri Raghav Chadha from the Council till the 
Committee of Privileges submits its findings  on cases of breach of Privilege pending 
against him". 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL : Sir, I have two submissions. Firstly, I would suggest that we 
may note that it was adopted unanimously. This has become a regular practice of 
disrespect to the Chair and the House of no t participating in the proceedings or when 
participating, disturbing the House. So, it is a unanimous approval of the House. Sir, I 
have one more submission to make.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, taking a holistic view on the gravity of his 
misdemeanour, violation of Rules, defiant atti tude and inappropriate conduct, I find it 
expedient, invoking Rule 266, read with Rule  256 and suspend Shri Raghav Chadha, 
Member, from the service of the Council, till the Council has the benefit of the Report 
by the Committee of Privileges.  
 
Ǜी सुशील क ुमार गुǔा (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): महोदय, इस मैटर को एक बार िरËयू 
कर लȂ।  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, I have one more submission. Hon. Member, Shri Sanjay 
Singh who is under suspension, for the rema ining period of the current session, with 
effect from 24
th July, 2023, has been a habitual viol ator of rules and directives of the 
hon. Chair. Shri Sanjay Singh, on a Motion approved by the Council, on 24 th July, 
2023, was suspended from the service of th e Council for the remaining period of the 
current session of Rajya Sabha. This was on account of his repeated violation of 
rules, disregard to the directives of the Chair and his highly disrespectful conduct 
which the entire nation and this august House and our hon. Members saw on that 
eventful day. The way he came into the Well of the House, almost threateningly, 
reminding us of an earlier incident, where he had attacked the Chair, he had thrown 
articles on the Chair, and very clearly, we were all very worried, at what could happen 
on that eventful day, and to what extent, hon. Member, Shri Sanjay Singh could have 
gone on that day. Therefore, I had moved the Motion for his suspension which the 
House had adopted.  
Hon. Chairman, Sir, as per Rule 256(3 ), once a Member gets suspended, he 
or she should leave the precincts of the Council forthwith without any delay 
whatsoever. 
However, Shri Sanjay Singh, in defi ance to the rules, did not leave the 
Chamber. Despite repeated requests by th e hon. Deputy Chairman, Shri Singh did 
not leave the Chamber and forced the Chair to adjourn the sitting twice on that day,, 
at 2.00 p.m. and at 3.00 p.m. Ultimately, it resulted in the Council not transacting any 
business on that day. This is showing gr oss disrespect to the Chair and a shocking 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
79

 
 
behaviour. The world today, country toda y, every countryman, the children in our 
schools, etc. are asking us this question that taxpayers' money, crores of rupees, is 
spent. We have been elected to both Houses, by the honour able people of India, to 
work for the future of India, to make India a developed nation, to make India a 
prosperous nation, to take the fruits of de velopment to every part of India, to every 
citizen of India, and that is what we are all t rying to do here. Just in the garb that this 
type of situation has happened in the past, therefore, we have a right to do this again, 
and not allow the House to transact any Business, is becoming misuse of 
precedents. Now this has to stop some day.  The House will have to start working in 
an orderly fashion, will have to start serious dialogue, debate and discussion, as you 
have been urging from the Chair very often.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, this behaviour did not 
stop here.  After his behaviour, which itself  is unbecoming of a parliamentarian, Shri 
Sanjay Singh did not express any remors e or any regret whatsoever for his 
misconduct. Instead, he continued to justif y his unruly behaviour at various forums 
often by taking recourse to misleading information, which is also very much evident in 
his interactions with the Press. We have observed his Press statements made outside 
the House, at formal Press conferences. We  saw that he did no t leave the precincts 
of the Parliament for several days after. That can make, in a way, a visual which was 
very demeaning of the entire Parliament and for all of us Members. We all felt 
ashamed at this kind of behaviour of a colleague as Member of Parliament. Hon. 
Chairman, Sir, it is also pertinent and very, very important for the House and the 
nation to know, through you, that the hon. Member, Shri Sanjay Singh, who has 
been in this House for about five years and a few months, had entered into the Well of 
the House on 56 previous occasions in the last 12 Sessions of the Rajya Sabha. 56 
occasions! I can understand, once or twice they are agitated, they disturb the House, 
they disturb the proceedings on the issue they are very emotiona l about. This is a 
deliberate attempt to undermine the procee dings and orderly conduct of Parliament 
and directly has an impact on the privileges of every other Member of this House, 
whether on that side or on this side. On  56 previous occasions, he has entered into 
the Well of the House and was named in the Bulletins of Parliament. Hon. Chairman, 
Sir, he has also been suspended from the services of the Council twice before during 
the 252
nd and the 257 th Sessions. This repeated and deliberate misconduct deserves 
to be noted by the House, deserves to be recognized by the people of India and, 
therefore, it is important to note that a Member of Parliament repeatedly committing 
the same act of disobedience, repeatedly disturbing the orderly proceedings of the 
House, repeatedly not allowing the House to transact its Business and, in addition to 
that, already having three cases of breach  of privilege and contempt of the House 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
pending against him before the Committee of  Privileges, deserves exemplary action.  
Therefore, with your permission, Sir, I would like to move a motion for the 
consideration of this august House. 
Sir, I move: 
     “That the Council disapproves the repeated violation of rules, directives of the 
Chair and unruly conduct of hon. Member, Shri  Sanjay Singh, as the same are not in 
conformity with the rules to be observed by  the Members of the Council, as the same 
lowers the dignity of the Council, and as the same are in violation of the framework of 
code of conduct for Members of Rajya Sa bha, as prescribed by the Committee on 
Ethics and thus approves the continuation of suspension of Shri Sanjay Singh till the 
Committee of Privileges submits its findings on cases of breach of privilege pending 
against him.”  
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, this too is a unanimous decision of the House. 
 
Ǜी सुशील क ुमार गुǔा: सर, मेरा िनवेदन है िक मुझे दो िमनट बोलने का समय िदया जाए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I will come to you. Taking conspectus of his continued misconduct, 
violation of directions and blatant disregar d of the rules of the House, I find it 
expedient to refer the matter, as indicated earlier, to the Committee of Privileges. 
Further, I invoke Rule 266 read with Rule  256 that the Suspension Order dated 24
th 
July, 2023, in respect of Shri  Sanjay Singh may continue beyond the current Session 
till the Council has the benefit of recommendation by the Committee of Privileges.  
 
Ǜी सुशील क ुमार गुǔा: सर, मेरा िनवेदन है िक मुझे दो िमनट बोलने का समय िदया जाए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, when someone gets into Parliament, it is a 
historical achievement. When someone ge ts into the Upper House, the Council of 
States, the House of Elders, as compared to  Lok Sabha, where the term is six years 
and the House is ever in continuity unlike Lok Sabha, then, it is a privilege, an honour 
to be ever remembered. If, in this House, we fail to live up to the highest expectations 
of the people and framers of the Cons titution, then, we are abdicating our 
constitutional obligations. Let me invite th e attention of the hon. Members that the 
Constituent Assembly met for three years; it had 18 sessions; some of the most 
divisive, difficult issues, contentious issu es came up for deliberations. They engaged 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
81

 
 
in dialogue, discussion, debate, deliberation and had behind-the-scene negotiations. 
But, there was not a single instance of disruption or disturbance, much less Members 
getting into the Well of the House!  
The hon. Leader of the House spoke of ‘one or two instances of coming into 
the Well to be condoned’; but, in this Ch air, I would not agree to that. Even one 
misdemeanour of a Member coming into the Well is painful. The Member is not aware 
that his conduct will find disapproval by more than 1.3 billion people. How can a 
Member come into the Well, get away from his seat and still try to make a 
contribution? Disorder can’t be allowed to be the order of the House. This has been 
weaponised as a political strategy. And that is anti-democratic, anti-constitutional. It 
will be very difficult for me, sitting in th is chair, to overlook such kind of 
transgressions.  
Let me invite your attention to the fact  that this country came to have Ethics 
Committee in the late 90’s. The first Chairm an of the Ethics Committee was a veteran 
parliamentarian, a man who held high po sitions in the Government, both in the 
Ministries of Home and Finance, Shri S.B.  Chavan. He rendered a report to this 
House on 1
st December, 1998 and he indicated fr amework of code of conduct for 
Members of Rajya Sabha:  
 “Members should acknowledge the responsi bility to maintain the public trust 
reposed in them and should work diligently to discharge their mandate for the 
common good of the people. They must hold in high esteem the Constitution, the law 
and parliamentary institutions and, above all, general public. They should, constantly, 
strive to translate the ideals laid down in  the Preamble to the Constitution into a 
reality. The following are the principles whic h they should abide by  their dealings – I 
will refer to only two of the principles – (I ) Members must not do anything that brings 
disrepute to the Parliament and affects their credibility." I will pause here for a 
moment. Coming into the Well; rising from their seats; shouting slogans; coming with 
a garland of tomatoes – where are we heading to? Forget about the people at large, 
even your blood relations, your  near and dear ones will no t approve of it. It is now 25 
years since this Report was put before th is House. The second one is, Members are 
expected to maintain high standards of morality, dignity, decency, and values in 
public life. Each word is getting outraged . I must share my concern with the hon. 
Members, what I saw in the last few da ys, -- challenging manners with physical 
dimensions, and daring the Chair virtually -- what can the Chair do? I have been 
extremely indulgent. But thos e of the Members who have come in utter disregard, it 
has pained me. It was no rejoicing for me  that even a Senior Advocate, Mr. Vivek 
Tankha, came into the Well. A man, holding a high position in the legal fraternity, 
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
engages in such kinds of tran sgressions! Imagine if it happens in a court of law, what 
the consequences will be! Ours is a much elevated institution. We have to decide the 
fate of every other institution in the country.  We are the repository of power to ensure 
that constitutional institutions continue to be within their bounds. I, therefore, 
earnestly appeal to you and plead with you, please informally reach out to your friends 
on the other side and discuss with them; ot herwise, the consequences for us will be 
that we will surge into irrelevance. And, that being the situation, the point is very 
clear. It is, perhaps, towards the end of th e road that we must awaken ourselves and 
do our duties.   
Now, I will take up the next item. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Gupta, are you on 
your seat? Just imagine. How can I give you a chance? I don’t have to tutor you 
every day. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी सुशील क ुमार गुǔा: मȅ अब अपनी सीट पर हूं।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No, you were not on your seat. Th at is why I did not hear you.  
...(Interruptions)...  You may have a grievance ...(Interruptions)...  You may have a 
grievance, but I did not hear y o u .  W h y ?  I t  i s  t h a t  I  a m  a l s o  b o u n d  b y  r u l e s .  I  w a s  
telling you at that point of time. Quite a number of times, the rule has been read out in 
the House that you can speak only from your seat. This can’t be our norm. We have 
to exemplify our conduct by our actions so that people, at large, emulate us. They 
t a k e  u s  a s  r o l e  m o d e l s .  B u t ,  i f  t h e y  t a k e  u s  a s  r o l e  m o d e l s ,  r i g h t  n o w ,  w h a t  w i l l  
happen to the nation at large?  ...(Interruptions)... Now, valedictory remarks. 
 
 
VALEDICTORY REMARKS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Members, we have come to the conclusion of the 260 th 
Session of the Rajya Sabha. Let us make an assessment of the ground we have 
covered in our journey towards meaningful governance and legislative action. Let me 
tell you, in Lok Sabha, the hon. Home Minist er, for more than an hour, reflected only 
on Manipur. The hon. Prime Minister, in  his discourse, focussed on Manipur, 
indicated to the nation a soothing and healing touch. अब सोिचए, हमने क्या खोया, क्या 
पाया। On 20 th of July, on the very first day,  when the matter came up for 
consideration, the Government had imme diately agreed after I had accepted the 
notice. It was my discretion, my judgement to accept the notice that this House must 
debate Manipur. The debate did not take place. It was listed in the Supplementary 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
83

 
 
List of Business. I had indicated to the entire House saying, "The Short Duration 
Discussion is limited to tw o-and-a-half hours, but I invoke my authority under the 
rules and I will keep it open-ended." Me mbers of this Hous e are extremely and 
enormously talented. We have Padma awardees of the highest category here, three 
of them. This House, on account of unruly conduct and indecorous behaviour, could 
not avail of the historic opportunity of guiding the Lok Sabha on Manipur, and that 
was on account of our actions. This was very painful. Once again, we yielded to the 
allure of narrow interests and allowed disorder to be  the new normal in the 
proceedings of the House. It appears that  my appeals have no t resonated well with 
our Members. The frequent, unwholesome spect acle of disruptions only indicate that 
my message has not found the attentive audi ence it deserves. I would be open to any 
kind of idea. I have interacted with the hon. Members, the floor leaders, in my 
Chamber, and they agreed wi th me. And, once they come to the House, things were 
otherwise. It is a worrisome, alarming scenario. A total of 44 hours and 58 minutes, 
during the 17 sittings of the House, were lo st due to avoidable disruptions, adversely 
impinging on our overall productivity of this Session. The people, at large, are in pain.   
They have got us elected here. They are sust aining us by their fiscal power. It is a 
heavy drain on exchequer. Our accountability and transparency has nosedived. Can 
we allow such a scenario to continue?    
Hon. Members, we have been able to pa ss a few Bills during the Session that 
witnessed some lively and animated debate . We could take up questions on a few 
occasions, but I feel the productivity of the Question Hour could have been much 
better. I will make an appeal to the media also. It pains me when the media carries a 
news report, "Rajya Sabha passes Bills in absence of Opposition." It is factually 
wrong. The media is required to be on tenable factual ground. The Members chose 
not to perform their constitutional duty by  being present. They walked out not from 
the House but from their solemn duty, their constitutional obligations. Therefore, such 
kind of reporting by media, I appeal to  the media to be more sensitive to the 
sentiments of the people at large and proper ly and fairly report the proceedings of the 
House. The Rajya Sabha also witnessed a positive development while giving fair 
representation to our dynamic women Memb ers to be part of the Panel of Vice-
Chairmen.    
I wish to utilize their innate manageri al skills for the smooth conduct of the 
proceedings of the House, and friends, this decision was taken after careful 
deliberation; and I get a feel that Women Chairpersons have performed from this  
 
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
Chair in a manner which is of the highest st andards. When, for the first time, Shrimati 
P.T. Usha, who got a Padma Award in 80s, sa t on this Chair, I got messages from all 
over the globe that she has glorified this posi tion. This gave me the spinal strength to 
put more hon. Women Members of this Ho use in the Chair. The first Member of 
Parliament from Nagaland, Sh rimati Konyak, gave remark able performance, and the 
same applies to others. I think they have vindicated the role and made us proud.  
In a similar vein, the Secretariat, in a laudable move, undertook a progressive 
initiative to empower its women employees by affording them the opportunity to 
attend to the significant Table duties within the hallowed Chamber. Right now, you 
will see; all four are women. And there was a time when for the first time, -- I could 
see in the media later on -- in the Chair was a lady Member of this House, the 
speaker was a lady Member and the Table was occupied by lady employees; that 
photograph has been appreciated all around.  
 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION; AND TH E MINISTER OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT 
AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP (SHRI DHARMENDRA PRADHAN) : Sir, though our 
colleague, Mrs. Sulata Deo is not from a Hindi-speaking area, but during her 
conduct, she speaks good Hindi. You should acknowledge that also.  
 
Ǜी सभापित: माननीय मंतर्ी जी, मȅ आपको बताऊँ , I have had involved interaction with all of 
them at Up-rashtrapati Niwas, and I ha ve come to know about her outstanding 
contributions.  She is a leader in her own right; I wouldn't say, a potential challenge to 
the hon. Minister!  
 As a matter of fact, let me report to th is House that in the next Session, I will 
be having another team because many have interacted with me and they have a huge 
commitment to their duty, huge experience; some of them have come from Sarpanch 
to this level. They have led empowerment of women programmes extensively with 
attendance of thousands. But your point is well taken.  
 Hon. Members, the Secretariat, in an other commendable endeavour, started a 
two-week Rajya Sabha Internship Programme with inaugural batch of 20 interns from 
North-Eastern States. I had the occasion to be with them along with the hon. 
Minister, Sonowalji. I had dinner with them ye sterday. Look at the brightness in their 
eyes, the kind of experience they had, and, at the highest level, attention was paid to 
their internship, a 1991 batch IAS Officer, Secretary to Rajya Sa bha, was overlooking 
everything; and they will carry our message in the entire region. This Programme, we 
will continue. I have no doubt, our young interns gained better understanding and 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
85

 
 
insights; had this House been in a function al mode, it would have  been much better. 
One of the interns told me, 'We have been to the Convention Centre'; the second one 
said, 'We have been to Prime Minister Museum'; and the description was so vivid as if 
I was in the Museum. So, that is a great achievement. We will take it further.  
 Hon. Members, I have given certai n rulings and made some observations 
keeping in mind the expectations of the peop le from this august House. I know some 
of them may have been bitter, but I have  suffered many such observations, as a 
Senior Advocate, from the courts. The court is never ill-motivated against any lawyer.  
They make observations only to ensure that we rise up in our contributory mechanism 
in a positive manner. I have made that. I ha ve taken a very few pa inful decisions, and 
that was in deference to my constitutional  obligation and the respect I have for this 
esteemed office.  
If I had not taken those unpalatable decisions, then, your respect for me would 
have gone down. 
I must express my deep sense of gratitude to the hon. Deputy Chairperson, a 
man of enormous patience, gifted with intellect, who always gave me sagacious 
advice. We interacted every day of the Se ssion. Though I am always careful when 
dealing with journalists and he is one, hi s disarming approach brought us together.  
But for him, things would not have been as  productive from our perspective as they 
have been. 
 Hon. Members, to have an experi enced and talented man as Secretary-
General is a great asset. Ha ving discussed the matter with him on two occasions, 
everything about the Secretariat, the buck st ops on his table. I ha ve enough time to 
deal with my other duties. He has creat ed a new and energetic mechanism for the 
employees and in togetherness we are all de termined that our Se cretariat employees 
are the best we can have and we are determined to empower them. As for 
digitization, we are not making formal most things by declarations as to what we have 
accomplished. Our paper consumption has been reduced to 50 per cent. The 
Secretary-General, a former Chairman of CBDT, knows that the enforcement is that 
we buy only 50 per cent. So, you cannot co nsume more than you buy. So, buy only 
50 per cent. 
 Hon. Members, to conclude, our greetings for the 77
th Independence Day and 
a vast array of festivals that await all of us. Thank you. Jai Hind! 
 
 
 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
NATIONAL SONG 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, the National Song. 
 
(The National Song, "Vande Mataram", was then played.) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned sine die. 
 
The House then adjourned sine die at forty-nine minutes past two of the clock. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ 11 August, 2023 ]
87

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 