Vol. 263         Friday , 
No. 3  2 nd February, 2024 
13 Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
CONTENTS 
Birthday Greetings (page 1) 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 2 - 10) 
 
Statements by Ministers -
 Laid on the Table 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 45 th Report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Communications 
and Information Technology (page 10) 
Status of implementation of recommendations contained in the 182
nd Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Commerce  
(pages 10 -11) 
 
Recommendation of the Business Advisory Committee (pages 11 - 12) 
 
Statement regarding Government Business (pages 12 - 13) 
    
  
    
  [P.T.O. 
©  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Regarding a statement made by a Member of other House and other issues  
(pages  13 - 21 and pages 22 - 26)  
 
Rulings by the Chair (pages 21 - 22 and pages 93 - 94) 
 
Matters raised with Permission- 
Shortage of Pilots/Crew in Indian Aviation Sector (pages 26 -27) 
Need to address alarming rise in su icides by students in the Country  
(pages 27 - 28) 
Creation of separate All India Service Ca dres of IAS, IPS an d IFS for Arunachal 
Pradesh (pages 28 -29) 
Demand for amendments/simplification of pr ovisions with respect to FIR, Arrest 
and Bail (pages 29-30) 
Concern over various problems faced by Railway passengers in Kerala  
(pages 30 -31) 
Need to construct laying overland brid ge between Dhanushkodi, Tamil Nadu and 
Talaimannar in Sri Lanka (pages 31 -33) 
 
Oral Answers to Questions (pages 33 - 70) 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
] 
 
Motion of Thanks on the President's Address - Discussion not concluded   
(pages 70 - 93  and pages 94 -119) 
 
Private Members' Bills — Introduced/Withdrawn 
The Right of Children to Free and Comp ulsory Education (Amendment) Bill, 2022 
(page 120) 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (amendment of article 371A)  
(page 120-121) 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
      http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
E-mail: rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 
 

The Securitisation and Reconstruction of  Financial Assets and Enforcement of 
Security Interest (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (page 121) 
The Kashmiri Pandits (Recourse, Restitut ion, Rehabilitation and Resettlement) 
Bill, 2022 (page 121) 
The Witness Protection Bill, 2023 (pages 121 -122) 
The Maternity Benefit for Women in the Unorganised Sector Bill, 2023 (page 122) 
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (page 122) 
The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (page 123) 
The Public Service Integrity Bill, 2023 (page 123) 
The Elder Persons (Care and Protection) Bill, 2024 (page 123) 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (sub stitution of article 155, insertion of 
new article 156A and substitution of articles 200 and 201) (page 124) 
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Wo rkplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal ) Amendment Bill, 2024 (page 124) 
The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (page 124) 
The Representation of the People (Ame ndment) Bill, 2024 (insertion of new 
sections 127B to 127D) (page 124-125) 
The Indian Media Services (Regulation and Licensing) Bill, 2024(page 125) 
The National Commission for Protection from Honour Crime Bill, 2024 (page 125) 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment of article 361) (page 125) 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment of articles 15 and 16) 
(pages 125 -126) 
The National Food Security (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (page 126) 
The Protection of Children from Sexu al Offences (Amendment) Bill, 2024  
(pages 126) 
The Prevention of Fraudulent Calls Bill, 2024 (page 126) 
The Representation of the People (A mendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment of 
sections 86 and 116A) (page 126) 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2022 (amendment of article 153 and 
substitution of articles 155 and 156) - Withdrawn (pages 127 - 146) 
The Sal Leaves Collectors and Traders’ Welfare Bill, 2022 -  Withdrawn   
(pages 146 -157) 
 
Special Mentions- 
Demand to start direct train between Mumbai and Amb Andura/Una (page 158) 
Demand for inclusion of Ho, Mundari, B humij, Kui and Saroa la nguages in the 8th 
Schedule of the Indian Constitution (pages 158 - 159) 

Demand to expedite Chenna i Metro Rail Phase-II project  and release of matching 
funds (pages 159- 160) 
Concern over WHO's proposed Global Pand emic Treaty with the Amendments to 
the International Health Regulations 2005 (page 160) 
Urgent need for regulating finance-influencers (page 161) 
Demand for construction of Railway line from Korba to Lohardagga via Jaspur 
Gumla under Janjatiya Gaurav Corridor (pages 161 - 162) 
Demand to set up Modern Doppler rada rs in Kerala for the proper weather 
forecasting (pages 162 - 163) 
Lack of funds for research in Higher  Education Institutions in Bihar  
(pages 163 -164) 
Demand for new nursing colleges in Kerala (pages 164- 165) 
Demand for mandatory functioning of Virt ual courts along with Physical Courts 
across country (page 165) 
Need to extend the salary ceiling limit  beyond Rs.21,000 for ESI coverage  
(pages 166) 
Issues faced by IT and ITES Sector employees (pages 166 - 167) 
Demand for a comprehensive National Program on Cancers affecting Women 
(pages 167 -168) 
 
 
 
 
  
 

RAJYA SABHA 
Friday, the 2nd February, 2024 /13 Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
 
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS 
 
MR.CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I am extrem ely pleased to extend my greetings to 
hon. Members of Parliament, Shri Sant Balbir Singh, Shri Prem Chand Gupta and Shri 
Naresh Bansal on their birthdays. Shri Sant  Balbir Singh’s birthday is today and, of 
the other two, it is tomorrow, the 3rd February. For them, advance birthday greetings!   
Shri Sant Balbir Singh has been a Memb er of this august House since July, 
2022, representing the State of Punjab. He  is a renowned environmentalist, social 
reformer and a spiritual leader.  He has also been Sarpanch of his native village, 
Seechewal, twice and has won the Nirmal Gram Award for his village in 2008.  He has 
been honoured with several prestigious aw ards including Padma Shri in 2017 for his 
pivotal role in conserving holy rivulet Kali Bein. 
 Shri Prem Chand Gupta, cu rrently a Member of this House since April, 2020, is 
in his fifth term in the House of Elders. He is a former Union Minister also. He is also 
the Leader of the Rashtriya Janata Dal in Rajya Sabha, a former  Union Minister, and 
Shri Gupta is a trained pilot.  Am I right?   
 
SHRI PREM CHAND GUPTA (Bihar): Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He is married to Shrimati Sarla Gupta and is blessed with two sons, 
Mayur Gupta and Gaurav Gupta and one daughter, Shalini Aggarwal.   
 Shri Naresh Bansal has been a Me mber of Rajya Sabh a since November, 
2020.  Shri Bansal had served in various capacities in Uttarakhand before entering 
political life.  He is married to Shrimati Akshma Bansal and is blessed with two sons, 
Kunal Bansal and Siddharth Bansal and one daughter, Megha Bansal.   
 Hon. Members, on behalf of this Hous e, I wish them a long, healthy and happy 
life and extend greetings to their family members.  
 
 
 
 

PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Papers to be laid on the Table. 
 
I. Report (2022-23) on the progress made in the intake of SCs and STs against 
vacancies reserved for them in the Railways and related paper 
II. MoUs between GoI and various organizations 
 
रेल मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव):  महोदय,  मȅ िनÇनिलिखत पतर् सभा 
पटल पर रखता हूं:- 
I.  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 (a) Report on the Progress made in the intake of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes against vacancies reserved for them in recruitment 
and promotion categories in the Railways, for the year 2022-23 (for the 
year ending 31st March, 2023). 
 (b) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the paper mentioned at 
(a) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11256/17/24] 
 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers:- 
 (i) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Ministry of   Railways) and the Indian Railway Finance Corporation 
Limited (IRFCL), for the year 2023-2024. 
 (ii) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of   Railways) and the Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation 
Limited (MRVCL), for the year 2023-2024. 
 (iii) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of   Railways) and the RailT el Corporation of India Limited, for 
the year 2023-2024. 
 (iv) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the IRCON International Limited, for the year 
2023-2024. 
 (v) Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Konkan Railway Corporation Limited 
(KRCL), for the year 2023-2024. 
 (vi) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Indi an Railway Catering and Tourism 
2
[RAJYA SABHA]

Corporation Limited (IRCTCL), for the year 2023-2024. 
 (vii) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of   Railways) and the Braithwaite & Company Limited, for 
the year 2023-2024. 
 (viii) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the Cont ainer Corporation of India Limited 
(CONCOR), for the year 2023-2024 and 2024-2025. 
 (ix) Memorandum of Understandin g between the Government of India 
(Ministry of Railways) and the RITES Limited, for the year 2023-2024. 
   [Placed in Library.For (i) to (ix) See No. L.T. 12257/17/24] 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
II. Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of various organizations and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL): Sir, I  lay on the Table— 
 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry (Department of Comme rce), issued under Sections 3 and 5 
of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992:- 
 (1) S.O. 4990(E)., dated the 20 th November, 2023, amending import 
policy condition of Gold under HS Code 71081200 under Chapter 71 of 
Schedule –I (Import Policy) of ITC (HS) 2022. 
 (2) S.O. 5031(E)., dated the 23 rd November, 2023, notifying imposition of 
Minimum Export Price on export of Onions. 
 (3) S.O.  5115(E)., dated the 30 th November, 2023, notifying export of 
certain food commodities, as mentioned therein, through National 
Cooperative Exports Limited (NCEL). 
 (4) S.O. 5182(E)., dated the 7 th December, 2023, incorporating Policy 
condition for export of Non-basmati Rice under HS Code 10063090. 
 (5) S.O.  5183(E)., dated the 7 th December, 2023, notifying export of Non-
basmati White Rice (under HS  Code 10063090) to Comoros, 
Madagascar, Equatorial Guinea, Egypt and Kenya through National 
Cooperative Exports Limited (NCEL). 
 (6) S.O.  5201(E)., dated the 8
th December, 2023, amending Export Policy 
of Onions. 
 (7) S.O.  5222(E)., dated the 8 th December, 2023, amending export policy 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
3

of De-Oiled Rice Bran. 
 (8) S.O. 5226(E)., dated the 8 th December, 2023, amending Import Policy 
and Policy Conditions for Yellow Peas  under ITC(HS) Code 07131010 of 
Chapter 07 of ITC(HS), 2022, Schedule –I (Import Policy). 
 (9) S.O.  5317(E)., dated the 12 th December, 2023, amending policy 
condition of Sl. No. 55 & 57, Chapter 10 Schedule-2, ITC (HS) Export 
Policy, 2018. 
 (10) S.O. 5351(E)., dated the 15 th December, 2023, amending Export Policy 
of Food Supplements containing botanicals. 
 (11) S.O. 5478(E), dated the 28 th December, 2023, extending 'Free' Import 
Policy of Urad [Beans of the SPP Vigna Mungo (L.) Hepper] [ITC 
(HS) 0713 31 10] and Tur/Pigeon Peas (Cajanus Cajan) [ITC (HS) 
0713 60 00] under ITC (H S) 2022, Schedule – I (Import Policy) till 
31.03.2025. 
 (12) S.O. 22(E), dated the 1
st January, 2024, amending  Para 2.31 of the 
Foreign Trade Policy, 2023. 
 (13) S.O. 55(E)., dated the 3 rd January, 2024, amending Import Policy and 
Policy condition of Screws covered under HS code 7318 of Chapter 73 
of Schedule –I (Import Policy) of ITC (HS) 2022. 
 (14) S.O. 175(E)., dated the 15
th January, 2024, amending policy condition 
of silver covered under Chapter 71 of Schedule –I (Import Policy) of 
ITC (HS) 2022. 
   [Placed in Library.For (1) to (14) See No. L.T. 11261/17/24] 
 
II. (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-section 
(1) (b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
 (a) Fortieth Annual Report and Accounts of the STCL Limited, Bengaluru, 
for the year 2022-23, together with  the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts and the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India thereon. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above company. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11406/17/24] 
 
(2)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Thirty-ninth Annual Report and Accounts of the Council for Leather 
4
[RAJYA SABHA]

Exports (CLE), Chennai, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts.   
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11407/17/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Sixty-fifth Annual Report and Accounts of the Sports Goods Export 
Promotion Council (SGEPC), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11408/17/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Fifty-ninth Annual Report and Acco unts of the Indian Institute of Foreign 
Trade (IIFT), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11409/17/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Indi an Institute of Packaging (IIP), 
Mumbai, for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts.   
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11410/17/24] 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Textiles 
II. Report and Accounts (2022-23) of CCIC, New Delhi and related papers 
III. Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of various Association, Councils and Institute and 
related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINIST RY OF TEXTILES (SHRIMATI DARSHANA 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
5

VIKRAM JARDOSH):  Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
I. (i) A copy (in English and Hindi) of the Mi nistry of Textiles Notification No. S.O. 
5459(E)., dated the 26th December, 2023, directing that the commodities specified in 
the Table mentioned therein, shall be packed in jute packaging material for supply or 
distribution, in such minimum percentage as  specified therein, with effect from the 
date of publication of this notification in the Official Gazette, upto the 30 th June, 2024, 
under sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use 
in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11276/17/24] 
 
(ii) 
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Textiles, issued under sub-section 4(b) of Section 3 of the National Jute Board Act, 
2008: - 
 (1) S.O. 3839 (E), dated the 31 st August, 2023, nominating Ms. Saroj 
Pandey, Member of Rajya Sabha to serve as member on the Board of 
National Jute Board for a period of  two years from the date of the 
Notification. 
 (2) S.O. 152 (E), dated the 11 th January, 2024, nominating Shri Pradan 
Baruah and Shri KhagenMurmu, Memb ers of Lok Sabha, to serve as 
member in the National Jute Board for a period of two years from the 
date of the Notification. 
   [Placed in Library.For (1) and (2) See No. L.T. 11277/17/24] 
 
(iii)  A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Textiles, under Section 13B of the Central Silk Board Act, 1948: - 
 (1) G.S.R. 02(E)., dated the 2 nd January, 2023, notifying the nomination of 
certain Officer, specified therein, to serve as Member of the Central Silk 
Board for a period of three years, along with Delay Statement. 
 (2) S.O. 3381(E)., dated the 28
th July, 2023, notifying the nomination of 
certain Members of Lok Sabha, specified therein, to serve as Member 
of the Central Silk Board for a period  of three years, along with Delay 
Statement. 
 (3) S.O. 3860(E)., dated the 1 st September, 2023, notifying the nomination 
of certain Member of Rajya Sabha,  specified therein, to serve as 
Member of the Central Silk Board for a period of three years, along with 
Delay Statement. 
6
[RAJYA SABHA]

 (4) S.O. 4878(E)., dated the 9 th November, 2023, notifying the nomination 
of certain person, specified therein, to serve as Member of the Central 
Silk Board for a period of three years, along with Delay Statement. 
 (5) S.O. 5001(E)., dated the 22 nd November, 2023, notifying the 
nomination of certain person, specified  therein, to serve as Member of 
the Central Silk Board for a period of three years, along with Delay 
Statement. 
   [Placed in Library.For (1) to (5) See No. L.T. 11411/17/24] 
 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers, under sub-section (1) 
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
 (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of th e Central Cottage Industries 
Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIC),  New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts and the comments 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Company. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11273/17/24] 
 
III. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Seventy-third Annual Report and Accounts of the Synthetic and Art Silk 
Mills’ Research Association (SASMIRA), Mumbai, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on the working of the above Association. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11412/17/24] 
 
(ii) (a) Fortieth Annual Report and A ccounts of the Carpet Export Promotion 
Council (CEPC), New Delhi, for the year 2022-23, together with the 
Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11413/17/24] 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
7

(iii) (a) Sixty-ninth Annual Report and Accounts of the Cotton Textiles Export 
Promotion Council (TEXPROCIL), Mumbai, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11268/17/24] 
 
(iv) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Wool Industry Export Promotion 
Council (WOOLTEXPRO), Mumbai, for the year 2022-23, together with 
the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11414/17/24] 
 
(v) (a) Sixty-ninth Annual Report and Accounts of the Synthetic and Rayon 
Textiles Export Promotion Council (SRTEPC), Mumbai, for the year 
2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11415/17/24] 
 
(vi) (a) Fifty-fourth Annual Report and Accounts ofthe Handloom Export 
Promotion Council (HEPC), Chennai, for the year 2022-23, together 
with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11416/17/24] 
 
(vii) (a) Fortieth Annual Report and Accounts of the National Handloom 
Development Corporation Limited ( NHDC), New Delhi, for the year 
2022-23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
8
[RAJYA SABHA]

(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11417/17/24] 
 
(viii) (a) Fifty-eighth Annual Report and Accounts of the Wool &Woollens 
Export Promotion Council (W&WEPC), New Delhi, for the year 2022-
23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Council. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11418/17/24] 
 
Reports and Accounts (2022-23) of JKDFC, Jammu; CPPRI, Saharanpur; NCCBM, 
Ballabgarh; and IRMRA, Thane and related papers 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(SHRI SOM PARKASH):   Sir, I lay on the Table— 
(A) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers under sub-section (1) 
(b) of Section 394 of the Companies Act, 2013: - 
 (a) Eighteenth Annual Report and Accounts of the Jammu and Kashmir 
Development Finance Corporation Limited (JKDFC), Jammu, for the 
year 2022-23, together with the Audi tor's Report on the Accounts and 
the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India thereon.     
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers   mentioned 
at (a) above. 
   
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11419/17/24] 
  
(B) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Ce ntral Pulp and Paper Research 
Institute (CPPRI), Saharanpur, Utta r Pradesh, for the year 2022-23, 
together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts.     
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers   mentioned 
at (a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11283/17/24] 
  
(ii) (a) 
Annual Report and Accounts of the National Council for Cement and 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
9

Building Materials (NCCBM), Ballabg arh, Haryana, for the year 2022-
23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers   mentioned 
at (a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11282/17/24] 
 
(iii) (a) Sixty-fourth Annual Report  and Accounts of the Indian Rubber 
Manufacturers Research Association (IRMRA), Thane, Maharashtra, 
for the year 2022-23, together with the Auditor’s Report on the 
Account. 
 (b) Statement by Government  accepting the above Report. 
 (c) Statement giving reasons for the de lay in laying the papers mentioned at 
(a) above. 
   [Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 11420/17/24] 
 
                                                          
STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS 
 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth report of 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF SKILL DEVELOPMENT AND 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP; THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF 
ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TEC HNOLOGY; AND THE MINISTER OF 
STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI (SHRI RAJEEV CHANDRASEKHAR) : 
Sir, I lay the Statement regarding status of implementation of the recommendations 
contained in the 45
th Report of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Communications and Information Technology on Demands for 
Grants 2023-24 pertaining to Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.  
 
Status of implementation of the recommendations contained in the 182
nd report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Commerce 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (SHRI 
SOM PARKASH) : Sir, I lay the Statement regardin g status of implementation of 
10
[RAJYA SABHA]

recommendations contained in the 182 nd Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Commerce on "Ecosystem of Start-ups to 
benefit India". 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION OF THE BUSINESS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : I have to inform hon. Memb ers that the Business Advisory 
Committee in its meeting held on 1st February, 2024, has allotted time for 
Government Business as follows:— 
 
            BUSINESS   TIME 
ALLOTTE
D 
 
1. 
Discussion on the Motion of Thanks on the President's 
Address. 
 
Fourteen 
Hours 
 
2. 
General Discussion on the Interim Union Budget for 2024-25. 
Eight 
Hours 
(to be 
discussed 
together) 
 
3. 
Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bills relating to 
the following Demands, after they are passed by Lok Sabha:–  
(i) Demands for Grants on Account for 2024-25 
(ii) Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2023-24 
 
4. 
Consideration and return of the Finance Bill, 2024, after it is 
introduced, considered and passed by Lok Sabha. 
 
5. 
General Discussion on the Interim Budget for Union Territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir for 2024-25. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
11

 
6. 
 
Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bills relating to 
the following Demands, after they are passed by Lok Sabha:–  
(i) Demands for Grants on Account of Union Territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir for 2024-25 
(ii) Supplementary Demands for Grants of Union Territory 
of Jammu and Kashmir for 2023-24 
 
7. 
 
Consideration and passing of the following Bills after their introduction:– 
(i) The Water (Prevention an d Control of Pollution) 
Amendment Bill, 2024 
Two Hours 
(ii) The Public Examination (Pre vention of Unfair Means) 
Bill, 2024  
Two Hours 
(iii) The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order 
(Amendment) Bill, 2024 
  
Two Hours 
(to be 
discussed 
together) 
(iv) The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
  The Committee also recommended that th e lunch hour may be skipped on the 
remaining sittings of the House during this Session in order to dispose of the Business 
before the House.                                    
 
 
STATEMENT REGARDING GOVERMENT BUSINESS 
 
MR. CHIARMAN : Now, Statement regarding Government Business, Shri V. 
Muraleedharan.  
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI V. 
MURALEEDHARAN): Sir, with your permission, I rise to announce that Government 
Business for the remaining part of the 263rd Session of Rajya Sabha will consist of:-  
12
[RAJYA SABHA]

1.Consideration of any item of Government Business carried over from today's order 
paper which contains discussion on the Motion of Thanks on the President's 
Address.  
 2. General Discussion on Interim Union Budget 2024-25.  
3.Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bills relating to:  
a) Demands for Grants on Account 2024-25; and  
b) Supplementary Demands for Grants 2023-24.  
4. Consideration and return of the Finance Bill, 2024, after it is passed by Lok Sabha.  
5. General Discussion on Interim Budget for Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
2024-25.  
6. Consideration and return of the Appropriation Bills relating to:  
a) Demands for Grants on Account of Un ion Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 2024-
25; and  
b) Supplementary Demands for Grants of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
2023-24.  
7. Consideration and passing of the following Bills, after their introduction:  
a) The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Bill, 2024;  
b) The Public Examination (Prevention of Unfair Means) Bill, 2024;  
c) The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill, 2024;  
d) The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) 
Bill, 2024; and  
e) The Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024. 
 
 
REGARDING A STATEMENT MADE BY A MEMBER OF OTHER HOUSE AND 
OTHER ISSUES  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Leader  of the House and the Leader of the 
Opposition have conveyed to me that they  have matters of urge nt importance which, 
in their wisdom, need to be raised in the House. I would appeal to both the Leader of 
the House and the Leader of the Opposition  that we in this House must follow the 
rules and maintain absolute discipline and decorum.  Now, the Leader of the House 
and then the Leader of the Opposition.  Hear both of them peacefully, please. 
 
सभा क े नेता (Ǜी पीयूष गोयल):  माननीय सभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन का ध्यान एक 
बहुत ही गंभीर घटना जो कल घटी है, उसकी तरफ आकिर्षत करना चाहता हूं।  एक बहुत ही 
दुभार्ग्यपूणर् और आपिǄजनक वƪËय िंĢिसपल अपोिज़शन पाटीर्, कांगर्ेस क े विरÍठ नेता, जो कोई 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
13

साधारण कायर्कतार् नहीं हȅ, लेिकन कांगर्ेस क े एक उप मुख्यमंतर्ी क े भाई हȅ और वे मेÇबर ऑफ 
पािर्लयामȂट भी हȅ, संसद सदÎय भी हȅ...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  What is your point? 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल:  उन्हȗने कल एक वƪËय िदया, "We will be forced to demand a separate 
country."...(Interruptions)... िफर वे कहते हȅ, "There was no
  other choice... " 
...(Interruptions)... िफर वे आगे कहते हȅ "There was no other choice but to ask for a 
separate country. All southern States have to raise their voices demanding a separate 
nation." ...(Interruptions)...  
माननीय सभापित जी, यह कांगर्ेस की जो िवभाजनकारी सोच है, िजस Ģकार से शुरू  से 
इितहास मȂ हमने कांगर्ेस का Ëयवहार, उनके  काम करने की पǉित और देश को बांटने का काम 
कांगर्ेस ने समय-समय पर िकया है, यह इसका एक और उदाहरण है।  मा
ननीय सभापित जी, जब 
हम सदन मȂ आते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... तो आज क े िदन तो चुनाव लड़ने क े िलए भी एक शपथ लेनी 
पड़ती है।  क
ॉिन्ÎटǷूशन ऑफ इंिडया भी कहता है िक जब हम सदन क े सदÎय बनते हȅ, तो हम 
शपथ लेते हȅ, "I do swear in the name of God/ sole mnly affirm that I will bear true faith 
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as  by law established, that I will uphold the 
sovereignty and integrity of India and faithfully discharge my duties..."  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, he is not a Member of this House. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SYED NASIR HUSSAIN (Karnataka):  Sir,  he is not a Member of this House. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल:  माननीय सभापित जी, हम इसको छोटी-मोटी घटना क े रूप  मȂ नजरअंदाज 
नहीं कर सकते हȅ।  ...( Ëयवधान)..
. मȅ समझता हूं िक यह देश को बांटने की सोच है।  िजस 
Ģकार से देश क े संिवधान क े ऊपर यह आघात है ...(Ëयवधान)... देश क े संिवधान का अपमान 
है, िजस Ģकार से देश की एकता और अखंडता का यह अपमान िकया गया है ...(Ëयवधान)...  
हम जब शपथ लेते हȅ, तो देश की sovereignty, देश की integrity सवȘपिर होती है, यह सवर्Ģथम 
रहती है।  माननीय सभापित जी, यह िकस िदन उठाया जाता है ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  W
hat is your point? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI L. HANUMANTHAIAH (Karnataka):  Sir, it cannot be discussed here. 
...(Interruptions)... 
14
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल :  जब माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी देश क े सामने िवकिसत भारत की कÊपना कर रही हȅ 
...(Ëयवधान)... अमृत काल मȂ क ै से देश आगे जाएगा, यह पूरा िवÌव कल देख रहा था िक यह 
देश िकस Ģकार का मैसेज पूरे िवÌव मȂ लेकर जा रहा है।  ...(Ëयवधा न)... उसी िदन ऐसी 
िवभाजनकारी सोच, देश को तोड़ने वाली सोच, मȅ समझता हूं िक कांगर्ेस क े अध्यक्ष को इस पर 
ÎपÍटीकरण देना चािहए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... क्या यह कांगर्ेस पाटीर् इस वƪ Ëय क े साथ अपने आप 
को जोड़ती है?  क्या कांगर्ेस की सोच मȂ देश की एकता और अखंडता या देश का संिवधान कोई 
मायने रखता या नहीं?  ...(Ëयवधान)... क्या वे देश को उǄर और दिक्षण भारत मȂ बांटना चाहते 
हȅ? ...(Ëयवधान)... कांगर्ेस की सोच क े बारे मȂ मȅ िडमांड करता हूं िक कांगर्ेस क े अध्यक्ष संसद मȂ 
और पूरे देश क े सामने Î
पÍटीकरण दȂ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... कांगर्ेस की इस िवभाजनकारी सोच को 
देश कदािप Îवीकार नहीं करेगा।  मȅ कांगर्ेस पाटीर्, कांगर्ेस पाटीर् क े नेता
ओं और उनकी सोच की 
घोर िंनदा करता हूं।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  कांगर्ेस पाटीर् इस वƪËय क े िलए ÎपÍटीकरण देकर माफी 
मांगे और उनके  सदÎय से भी यह ÎपÍटीकरण आए िक देश की एकता और अखंडता क े िलए जो 
हमने शपथ ली है, वे उससे सहमत हȅ या नहीं ...(Ëयवधान)...  वे भारत क े संिवध
ान मȂ िवÌवास 
रखते हȅ या नहीं रखते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... और उनकी कांगर्ेस पाटीर् की ÎपÍट नीित क्या है, 
...(Ëयवध
ान)...  वह देश क े सामने आनी चािहए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, the Leader of the Opposition ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सर, एलओपी की पूरी बात सुनने क े बाद आप अपनी ऑÅज़वȃशन 
दीिजएगा।  सर, एलओपी को पूरा सुिनए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Leader of the Opposition ...(Interruptions)...  
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥ
काजुर्न खरगे): सर, इस वƪËय क े बारे मȂ मȅ इतना ही कहूँगा िक वे इस 
सदन क े सदÎय नहीं हȅ।  वे इस सदन क े सदÎय नहीं हȅ, वे लोअर हाउस, यानी लोक सभा क े 
सदÎय हȅ।  रूÊस मȂ ऐसा कहीं नहीं है िक ... 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  एक सेक ं ड, एक सेक ंड। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  यह सुिनए। ...(Ëय
वधान)...  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी :  कम से कम एलओपी को तो बोलने दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयव
 धान)...  
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
15

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : तुम से भी ज्यादा ...(Ëयवधान)... बैठो। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, आप उनकी 
उतनी बात सुनने क े बाद मेरी बात तो नहीं सुनते!  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  O n  t h i s  p o i n t ,  h o n .  L e a d e r  o f  the Opposition, you had raised a 
point of order when an issue about Rahul Gandhi ji was raised by Shri Piyush Goyal.  I 
had given my ruling on that. My ruling was ve ry categorical that our rules provide that 
this House is well within the rights to di scuss the conduct even of a Member of Lok 
Sabha.  If there are allegations to be leve lled against a Member of Lok Sabha, then a 
notice is required to be given to the Ch airman. I had given my  ruling. When Shri 
Piyush Goyal, the Leader of the House,  raised that issue, Mallikarjun Kharge ji took 
exception.  Please go through that ruling of the Chair.  The ruling is very categorical.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE : Sir, anything said agai nst the law, which is 
established in this House and which is en acted under the business rules, cannot be 
allowed.  The Prime Minister is the Leader of  that Hous e.  Let him raise it.  Ask them 
to bring the video ...(Interruptions)... It is simple.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : The Leader of the Opposition is on his legs. ...(Interruptions)... 
आप बैिठए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: देश को आप अके ले ...(Ëयवधान)... देश की एकता क े िलए तो हमारे लोग, 
दो हज़ार लोगȗ ने जानȂ दीं।  तुम क्या बोलते हो? ...(Ëयवधान)... देश क े िलए हमारे कांगर्ेस क े 
लोगȗ ने अपनी क ुबार्नी दी है। ...(Ëयवधान).
.. तुम क्या हो? ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. 
Members, please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी नीरज शेखर (उǄर Ģदेश): सर, उन्हȗने क्या बोला? ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सैयद नािसर हुसैन : क्या बोला, सही बोला। ...(Ëयवधान)..
 .  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I will look into it. ...(Interruptions)...  I will look into it. 
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, let the tempers c ool.  We all have taken an oath 
under the Constitution and any outrage of th at oath is a serious matter raising serious 
consequences.  Coming to what the Leader of the Opposition has said, my ruling was 
very categorical. I had taken recourse to th e rules. The rules of this House provide 
that if an issue regarding a Member of the other House is to be raised here, it can be 
16
[RAJYA SABHA]

done.  But if any allegation is levelled against that particular Member, then, a notice is 
required to be given to the Chair.  In that specific case, when the hon. Member of the 
Lok Sabha and the leader of the Congress Party had made observations outside the 
country, I had held, firstly, that his conduct can be debated, discussed and 
deliberated in this House and, secondly, after going through the record forcing the 
Leader of the House to put everything on  the Table of the House, I had concluded 
that the Leader of the House had only quoted the observations imparted by the leader 
of the Congress Party outside the country. Th at was my ruling. I decided that very 
categorically.  From that perspective, Kh argeji's observation that the gentleman who 
happens to be a Member of the Lok Sabha and who, accord ing to the Leader of the 
House, has made an observation, which, I th ink, is unprecedented, too severe to be 
countenanced, contrary to the oath, contrary to the spirit and essence of the 
Constitution.  And I am sure the entire Hous e will be one, and it is for all of us in 
togetherness to see that such kind of tendencies do not get into a groove.  They need 
to be nipped in the bud.  I am on that point.    
 So, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, if you are taking a technical plea that 
has been determined by the House,... ...(Interruptions)... Only the Leader of the 
Opposition...(Interruptions)...  Everyone will observe silence.   This is a very, very 
serious matter.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर , मȅने दो ही बातȂ बोलीं।  एक तो यह िक वे यहाँ क े सदÎय नहीं हȅ। 
दूसरा, मȅने सुना िक आज टीवी पर उन्हȗने कहा िक मȅने यह नहीं कहा है।  अगर उन्हȗने ऐसा 
िकया है, तो वहाँ पर उसे िĢिवलेज कमेटी मȂ भेजने दीिजए, उसक
ो काम करने दीिजए।   
 सर, मȅ तीसरी बात बोलता हूँ िक अगर कोई भी देश को तोड़ने की बात करेगा, तो हम उसे 
कभी सहन नह
ीं करȂगे, चाहे वह िकसी भी पाटीर् का हो, चाहे वह मेरी पाटीर् का हो, उनकी पाटीर् का 
हो या अन्य िकसी पाटीर् का हो।  ...(Ëयवधान)... इस देश को एक रखने क े िलए कोई यह कहे या 
नहीं कहे, मȅ खुद, मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे खड़े होकर यह कहूँगा िक कन्याकु मारी से लेकर कÌमीर 
तक हम एक हȅ, एक रहȂगे, एक देश रहȂगे।  इसीिलए इंिदरा गांधी जी ने अपनी जान दी और 
राजीव गांधी जी ने भी अपनी जान दी। ...( Ëयवधान)... क्या ऐसी पाटीर् कभी इस तरह से देश 
तोड़ने की बात कर सकती है और अल
ग देश बनाने की बात कर सकती है? ...(Ëयवधान)... हम 
कभी इसको सहन नहीं करȂगे, लेिकन जो चीज़ उन्हȗने नहीं बोली, नहीं कही, उसको यहाँ पर 
दोहराना ठीक नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, making a statemen
t is fine. The fact of the situation 
is that nationally and globally, a message has emanated in public domain that a 
Member of Parliament had categorically said  so. I direct, invoking my authority, the 
Leader of the House, Shri Piyush Goyal, to  put it on the Table of the House. These 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
17

issues cannot be taken lightly.  It is not an  issue which is in the domain of the other 
House only. It is equally our prerogative, our constitutional ordainment, and such a 
person is required to be visited with exemplary consequences. I will look into it.  The 
Leader of the House will put it on the Table of the House and I direct my Secretariat to 
share it immediately with the Leader of the Opposition.   
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  Yes, Sir, I will place it. This recording is in Kannada.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Put it on the Table of the House.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Sir, I have one more point.  I have already written a 
letter to you.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I have not received your letter, but I have received your message.   
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  I have given in writing.  Okay, whatever it is. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Your deputy leader was good enough to see me. 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:   Okay, thank you, Sir.  In Jharkhand, one issue has 
arisen. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please listen to him.   
  
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  झारखंड क े चीफ िमिनÎटर ने जो िरजाइन िकया, िरजाइन करने क े बाद 
इमीिडएटली उन्हȗने अपने सक्सेसर का नाम िदया और सपोटर्सर् की िलÎट दी।  उसमȂ nearly 43 
लोगȗ क े signatures थे और चा
र लोग अभी बाहर थे, यानी 47 लोग उनके  साथ थे। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:   What is your point, Sir?  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: 47 लोग गए थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, उन्हȗने ...( Ëयवधान)... सर, 
उन्हȗने उसके  बारे मȂ कोई अगली ËयवÎथा नहीं बनायी।  सर, हम भी पॉिलिटक्स मȂ हȅ और आप भी 
जानते हȅ िक  immediately क्या होता है, till alternate arrangement, he may be continued. 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... पहले आप सुन तो लीिजए, िफर क ु छ बोिलएगा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I am here to take a call. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
18
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :    ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : 
* 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल : सर , मुझे आÌचयर् होता है िक झारखंड मȂ इतना बड़ा कांड हुआ हो, इतना 
ज्यादा ĥÍटाचार सािबत हो, इस Ģकार से मुख्य मंतर्ी ने जमीन का घोटाला िकया हो, इन सबके  
बावजूद कांगर्ेस पाटीर् अभी भी उस मुख्य मंतर्ी को िडफȂ ड कर रही है। उस मुख्य मंतर्ी क े कांड क े 
बारे मȂ क ु छ ÎपÍटीकरण नहीं दे रही है। ĥÍटाचार क े िव
रोध मȂ कोई बात नहीं कर रही है। यह 
पुनÎथार्िपत करता है िक ĥÍटाचार कांगर्ेस क े डीएनए मȂ है।...(Ëय वधान)... कांगर्ेस ĥÍटाचार को 
Îवीकार करती है।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 माननीय सभापित महोदय, जहाँ तक गवनर्र की बात है, तो गवनर्र का क ंडक्ट कोई इस 
हाउस मȂ तो नहीं िडÎकस होता है।...(Ëयव धान )... 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Mr. Chairman, Sir... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI ELAMARAM KAREEM (Kerala): Mr. Chairman, Sir... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Mr. Elamaram Kareem, please.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, हम इसके  ĢोटेÎट मȂ वॉकआउट करते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
(At this stage, some hon. Members left the Chamber) 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, इतने सारे कोटर् क े क े सेज़ हुए हȅ, िजनमȂ यह कहा गया है िक गवनर्सर् पूरी 
तरह से अप
ने आप को सैिटÎफाई कर रहे हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)...   सर, कांगर्ेस ने तो पहले भी िलÎट्स 
दी हȅ, िजनके  बारे मȂ बाद मȂ पता चला िक उनमȂ िसग्नेचर ही िकसी और क े हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान). .. िबना 
पूछे भी िसग्नेचर दे देते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)... कांगर्ेस का जो Ëयवहार है, ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One second, please.  Now, Dr. Keshava Rao.  
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana) : Sir, I also raised this issue in the morning.  
...(Interruptions)... This morning, I raised this issu e and the hon. Chairman was so 
                   
 Not recorded. 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
19

kind that he called me and said that he  had with him the papers and documents 
which showed that the Chief Minister was as ked to continue till the next man. I said, 
unless the notification is showed to us, we will not agree, because this country cannot 
be run without a Constitution. Constitution says that there has to be a Government 
and the Government has to be run by a Ch ief Minister. We are not bothered whether 
the Chief Minister is this man or that man or  whether Nitish goes within five minutes or 
ten minutes.  The point is that we have not seen the notification. There was no need 
for them to walk out if you have to only te ll us that there was a notification, that there 
was a nod that that particular Chief Minister , who had resigned, were to continue till 
the next arrangement is made. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I did not say that. I said, we need to look at the notification.  
 
DR.  K.  KESHAVA RAO: You said that you had the notification.  If it is not there, then 
my point still remains that this country ha s to be run through a Constitution.   
...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN):  Sir, I am sorry to say that when there is a 
Member of the other House talking about breaking the country, we are being told, on 
technical grounds, that we cannot discuss that but we are happily discussing the 
conduct of a Governor, who knows his position...  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO : We are not discussing the conduct of the Governor.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN : Sir, the walk-out is in favour of corruption.   
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members.. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Rather than getting up and speaking in between 
with such protest, senior Member, Dr. Keshava Rao, should listen to what I am 
saying just as I have listened to him.  The entire Opposition has walked out in favour 
of corruption.  We are talking about eliminat ing corruption and they want to walk out 
and they are doing this.  We  are reminded that we canno t speak about a Member of 
the other House even if he is planning to  break this country!  But here they are, 
20
[RAJYA SABHA]

questioning the functioning of the Governor!  Doesn’t the Governor know what to do?  
And this kind of a conduct against a constitutional authority by a party which has been 
in power for more than 45-50 years is desp icable.  And hon. Member, Keshav Rao ji, 
please do listen to what I am saying ra ther than getting up to disrupt me.  
..(Interruptions)..  You may be a senior Member, but I am sorry to 
say...(Interruptions)..  I am sorry to say that the questioning of a Governor’s conduct 
by the Congress Party, particularly when the issue pertains to stopping corruption in a 
State, is astonishing as it is also astonishing to walk out on that, Sir.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Hon. Members, one minute, please. . ..(Interruptions)... One 
second, please.  ..(Interruptions).. 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  Sir, I have got one thing to say.  ..(Interruptions).. 
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, I have a point of order.  
..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, ..(Interruptions)..  I will give you the floor.  
..(Interruptions)..  Take your seat.  ..(Interruptions)..  
 
 
RULINGS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, on 5 th April, 2023, I had imparted a ruling and I 
was called upon because the hon. Leader of  the Opposition, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, 
wanted a ruling on that.  I quote: “ ‘On March 13, 2023, the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge, responding to the assertions of the Leader of the 
House, Shri Piyush Goyal, who demanded  apology for shameless way by which a 
senior leader of Opposition in a foreign country had attacked the democracy of India, 
insulted Parliament of India, raised a point of order that there could be no discussion, 
reflection in the Rajya Sabha, on or abou t a Member of the Lok Sabha or anyone who 
is not a Member of the Rajya Sabha’. I concluded, after bestowing earnest 
consideration on this momentous aspect, sayi ng, I am of the firm view that there can 
be no issue or individual beyond the purview of discussion in the Rajya Sabha and the 
same is exclusively subject to regulation  by the House and the Chairman.  The two 
precedents relied upon by the hon. Leader of  the Opposition have no bearing on the 
issue being determined herein.  I further took  note of the situation that notice had to 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
21

be given to me if you level allegations against a Member of Lok Sabha and further, the 
authenticated record made available by the Leader of the House, Shri Piyush Goyal, 
bears out that his demand of apology on th e overseas statements made by a senior 
leader of Opposition is factually prem ised and does not graduate to making 
allegations of a defamatory or incriminato ry in nature.  The documentation submitted 
by the Leader of the House as per directiv e bears out his assertio n imparted in Rajya 
Sabha on March 13, 2023, the same being in consonance with facts and situation.  In 
view of categorical and firm constitutional prescriptions, I cannot persuade myself to 
sustain the point of order raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, Shri Mallikarjun 
Kharge, and the same is hereby declined.   
 Now, what is really worrisome is that if a senior person and the Leader of the 
Opposition rakes up the same issue on th e same premise that we can’t discuss it, 
whether we discuss it or not is prerogative  of the House.  But we can discuss, and 
hon. Members, the issue raised by the Leader of the House is existential one.  It is 
very serious.  ..(Interruptions)..  I will give you the floor.  ..(Interruptions).. 
 
 
REGARDING A STATEMENT MADE BY A MEMBER OF OTHER HOUSE AND 
OTHER ISSUES - Contd. 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO (Telangana): Sir, the House stands by you. What we said is 
..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  And, in that perspective, I dir ected the Leader of  the House to put 
on the Table of the House th e document that bears out th e statement of the Member 
of Parliament concerned.   
 
 THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL) :  Sir, I immediately placed on 
record the clipping of the statement which the hon. MP had made. It is in the same 
language that the hon. Leader of the Opposi tion also knows very well.  I am sure he 
will be able to understand what he said in that. Sir, it is an outrage of the Constitution 
and outrage of the oath that we all have taken to become Members of Parliament and 
to become public servants. It is to be noted that the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
has not condemned the statement made by his senior colleague. He has not 
condemned the statement by a Member of Parliament of his party despite him being 
the brother of the Deputy Chief Minister of  their State. It clearly shows that the 
Congress Party is not entirely against the views of the hon. Member of Parliament 
22
[RAJYA SABHA]

from Karnataka. In some sense, it is important that the hon. Leader of the 
Opposition, who is also the Leader of the Congress Party, the President of the 
Congress Party, should not only apologise to  the nation but should also condemn the 
views of his Member of Par liament. He should apologise to the people of India.  
Today, 140 crore people are feeling outraged by the comments and the divisionary 
thinking of the Congress Party.  And I thin k the other issue that was raised was only 
as a response, again as a diversionary tactic, by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I must first...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  Sir, I...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  I must put on record that  Dr. K. Keshava Rao had seen me in my 
Chamber and had raised an issue of constituti onal situation.  I confronted him asking 
whether he had seen the notification. Neither had he seen it nor have I seen it. He was 
good enough to say that without notificat ion, we cannot proceed further. We will 
gather the notification.  But that would ag ain leave an issue open to us whether we 
can discuss the conduct of a constitutional functionary in this House where provisions 
are made.  So lay your hands on the no tification, and after going through the 
notification, if you feel the rules permit, th en, you may raise it.  If the rules do not 
permit...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: Sir, rules are subservient to the law, the Constitution.  What I 
am saying is about a situation where the Constitution is silent.  It is Article 74.  When a 
Chief Minister resigns, there cannot be a va cuum in governance.  In a parliamentary 
democracy, there cannot be a vacuum.  Once you resign, the authorities have to ask 
him to continue till alternative arrangements are made or immediately take it up as we 
have done in other States.  That is what I said.  You said that notification has already 
come. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No.  I said, 'It has come.  I am not aware of the contents'.   
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  Yes, you don't know the contents. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I am not aware of the contents.   
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
23

DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  Yes.  So, the question I am raising today before you, from 
the Council of States, is this. The question before the Chairman, who is a known legal 
luminary of this country, is this.  When a thing like this happened, what had happened 
in the last 20 hours?  Were we without a Government?  Can there be a State without 
a Government?  If the Constitution is wrong,  t h i s  H o us e s h o u l d  tak e n o t e o f i t  an d  
pass an amendment or pass some kind of a provision which fills in the vacuum.   
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  Sir, I think these ar e just diversionary tactics that different 
Members of the Opposition are raising.  Firs t it was the Leader of the Opposition and 
now it is the Leader of another party.  I don't know what the connection between the 
two is.  They are trying to divert the issu e from very, very big co rruption and scandal 
in the State of Jharkhand.  The important issue is the corruption in Jharkhand.  The 
important issue is the outrage of India's Constitution.  ...(Interruptions )...  They are 
just trying to divert the issue to try and defend a corrupt Chief Minister of Jharkhand.   
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO:  Corruption is only  a passing matter.  Do you understand 
that?  The Constitution talks about the Government.  ...( Interruptions)..  I am not 
talking about how...( Interruptions)...  What Piyush ji does in his Ministry, I am not 
concerned.  ...( Interruptions) . . .   Y o u  m u s t  k n o w  t h e  l a w .   L a w  i s  o n e  t h i n g .   
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Finance Minister wants to say something. 
   
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND THE MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, ther e are two issues on  our table now.  
One is about a Member of Parliament, belong ing to the party to which the Leader of 
the Opposition belongs and of which he is the President, talking about dividing this 
country. The Member is a sitting Member of the House, the Lok Sabha. And here, we 
have been lectured on technicalities that you cannot speak about that.  Your ruling, 
which you have taken all care to read out in full, says that this is not beyond this 
House to talk if it is matter of such a seri ous concern and it is very well established in 
your order. Now, instead of going by the precedent of that order,  the Leader of the 
Opposition and his entire party has chosen  to walk out on a matter which is on 
dividing this country by a sitting Member of  their own party in Lok Sabha, and on an 
issue like this where the Leader  of the Opposition claims that they have given lives for 
the country.  
 
24
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Not the entire party.  
  
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: No, no; it is all right.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: One hon. Member is here.   
 
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: You may correct me on th at ground but the fact 
remains that he represents that party sitting here as a leader. My concern is regarding 
the major issue of separatist language by a Member of Lok Sabha of that party.  And 
instead of outrightly condemning it and saying that nothing can be before us when we 
talk about the integrity and sovereignty of this country, we have been lectured on 
technicalities!  Your ruling has not even been heard. Your ruling, which is a precedent 
and which you yourself sitting in the Chair are quoting, is not even  being heard by the 
Members of the Opposition and they chose to  walk out on an issue which is on unity 
of this country. Whether you are in Rajya Sabha or Lok Sabha, what more can be 
important than the unity of this country? At that time, we have learned senior Member 
from another party in the Opposition talking to us about the role...( Interruptions)...  
This is diversionary. ...(Interruptions)... This is diversionary. ...(Interruptions)...  We 
need to address this question of whether this country can be divided even as a wishful 
thinking by a Member in the Lok Sabha.  Ca n any Member here talk of anything else 
more important than that?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, one minute, please. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
DR. K. KESHAVA RAO: *  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Nothing will go on record. ...( Interruptions)...   Hon. Members, 
please take your seats. ...(Interruptions)...   Nothing will go on record unless I allow.  
...(Interruptions)...   झारखंड का नहीं है। Hon. Members, any challenge to the integrity 
to this nation...(Interruptions )...  One minute, please. ...( Interruptions)...   Please 
listen to me. ...(Interruptions)...    
Dr. Keshava Rao, nothing will go on record. ...( Interruptions)...   No, no. 
...(Interruptions)... Hon. Members, I have no doubt. ...( Interruptions) . . .    W e  
represent 1.4 billion people and it is  our constitutional obligation. ...( Interruptions)...   
I am making a general preposition and no  one should disagree with that.  Any 
challenge to the sovereignty and integrity of th is nation has to be resisted with the full 
might of every institution. ...( Interruptions)...  And this House is seized of the matter 
                   
* Not recorded.  
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
25

and I would greatly appreciate that the Hous e, in one voice, reflects the mindset of 
1.4 billion people that such an attempt from any quarter, within or outside, has to be 
met with unitedly and effectively, and has to be neutralized.  
 Now, matters to be raised with permi ssion.  Shri A.D. Singh; not present.  
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Sir, I am here.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I should have noticed your presence. ...(Interruptions)...   
  
SHRI A.D. SINGH: Sir, could I start or will he speak?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: He has a point of order.  Under which rule, are you raising a point of 
order?  
 
SHRI G.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO (Uttar pradesh):  Sir, it is rule 238(v):  "A Member 
while speaking shall not reflect upon the co nduct of persons in high authority unless 
the discussion is based on a substantive motion drawn in proper terms."   
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
So, hon. Leader of the Opposition referred to a constitutional authority without 
having submitted a motion and without the motion having been accepted by the hon. 
Chairman. Therefore, whatever he said mu st be expunged from  the record because 
this pertains to a very high constitutional authority.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, Narasimha Raoji.  We would look into this.   
Now, Mr. A.D. Singh, please.   
 
 
MATTERS RAISED WITH PERMISSION  
 
 Shortage of Pilots/Crew in Indian Aviation Sector 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar):  Sir, India is no w the third-largest aviation market in the 
world and various airlines are increasing the number of aircrafts that  they are buying.  
The Government is also expanding the av iation network around the country but, 
unfortunately, with the kind of place that the Indian aviation industry has ascended, 
26
[RAJYA SABHA]

correspondingly, we do not have that much  of pilots who can do their job because 
there is a lack of availability of pilots and particularly for that CAT-III landing, training is 
also not there.  As of now, 34 DGCA appr oved flying training organizations are there 
in the country. Some training centres operate simulators. Private flying academies are 
also getting license. Airlines are also going  ahead with their own training programme 
but all this is not sufficient. The training facilities in India are gr ossly inadequate. There 
is an urgent need for more pilot training and flying institutes.  DGCA should play a 
decisive role in coordinating flying training organizations, pilot training in airlines and 
various examinations, etc., connected with  the training of pilots. I urge the 
Government to take urgent steps so that th ere is no shortage of pilots in the country 
in the future.  Thank you. 
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following ho n. Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shri A.D. Singh:  Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odi sha), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri 
Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham 
(Kerala), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha) and Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
(Maharashtra). 
Thank you, Shri A.D. Singh. Now, Sh ri Rajeev Shukla, 'Need to address 
alarming rise in students suicides in the country.' 
 
Need to address alarming rise in students suicides in the Country 
 
Ǜी राजीव शुƛा (छǄीसगढ़) : उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आज सदन मȂ अित महत्व क े ĢÌन पर 
बोलने क े िलए खड़ा हुआ हूं। िजस तरह से छातर्
ȗ क े ǎारा आत्महत्या की घटनाएं हो रही हȅ, िजस  
तरह से कोटा या अन्य जगहȗ पर छातर् आत्महत्या कर रहे हȅ, यह एक गंभीर िवषय है। इस पर पूरे 
समाज को सोचने की जरूरत  है। इसमȂ िकसी सरकार को दोष देने की बात नहीं है, िक सी राज्य 
सरकार को दोष देने की बात नहीं है।  यह एक बड़ी िवकराल समÎया आ खड़ी हुई है।  करीब 35 
हजार छातर्ȗ ने सुसाइड कर िलया, क्यȗिक कोई िकसी एग्जाम मȂ फ े ल हो गया, कोई आशा क े 
अनुरूप   माक्
सर् नहीं ला पा रहा है। इसिलए  यह एक बड़ा गंभीर िवषय है और मȅ चाहूंगा िक पूरा 
समाज इस तरफ ध्यान दे। 
अभी उस िदन Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का परीक्षा पर चचार् मȂ संबोधन था, उसमȂ भी उन्हȗने इस 
बात का िज
कर् िकया है िक माता-िपता छातर्ȗ पर बहुत दबाव डाल देते हȅ,  उसस े भी छातर्ȗ क े 
अंदर बहुत बड़ा मानिसक संकट पैदा हो जाता है।  सीएसडीएस ने एक हजार Îटू डȂट्स का सवȃ 
िकया था - उनके  िहसाब से जो 35 हजार छातर् आए, उनकी मुख्य रूप  से वजह यह थी िक 
'Several factors contributing to this di stressing trend include academic pressure, 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
27

mental health issues, isolation, financial concerns, lack of support and the stigma 
surrounding failure in competitive exams.'  अगर बच्चे को इस बात क े िलए Ģोत्सािहत िकया 
जाए िक अगर आप फ े ल हो जाते हȅ, तो ऐसा नहीं है िक आपकी िजदंगी खत्म हो गई, आपका सब 
क ु छ खत्म हो गया।  इस तरह क े जो कोिंचग सȂटसर् हȅ या एजुक ेशनल सȂटसर् हȅ, उनको  मोिटवेट 
करने क े िल
ए भी लोग रखने चािहए।  वहां पर मȂटल हेÊथ मैनेजमȂट क े सȂटसर् भी खुलने चािहए, 
जो उनकी इस तरह से सहायता कर सकȂ और financial problem भी दूर करȂ, क्यȗिक मां-बा प 
पेट काटकर बच्चȗ को भेजते हȅ, तो वे उस पर दबाव डालते हȅ िक तुम हर हालत मȂ क्वािलफाई 
करो। अगर तुमने क्वािलफाई नहीं िकया, क ु छ नहीं बना, तो हमारे िलए बहुत मुिÌकल हो जाएगी।  
उस दबाव मȂ बच्चे आत्महत्या कर रहे हȅ।  यह बहुत गंभीर िवषय है।  यह िक सी एक क े िवरुǉ नहीं 
है, बिÊक सारे लोगȗ को इसके  बारे मȂ िमलकर सोचना पड़ेगा।  मेरे पांच सुझाव हȅ – एक तो मȂटल 
हेÊथ सिर्वसेज़ इंÎटीǷूट्स मȂ िकर्एट करनी चाि हए।  There should be  mandatory training 
programmes for teachers.  टीचसर् Îटाफ को इसकी टर्ेिंनग देनी चािहए िक क ै से ऐसे छातर्ȗ का 
उत्साहवधर्न करȂ, क ै से उन्हȂ िनराशा क े दौर से िनकालȂ और इसके  बाद जो एजुक ेशनल 
इंÎटीǷूशन्स हȅ, उनमȂ फÎटर् एड का भी इंतज ाम होना चािहए। वहां पर अवेयरनेस क ैÇपेन लाँच 
होने चािहए। यह काम गवनर्मȂट को और तमाम एनजीओज़ को करना चािहए। यह जो stigma है 
िक हम फ े ल हो गए, तो सब खत्म हो गया, इसको दूर करने का Ģयास करना चा िहए। मȅ सरकार 
से यही िनवेदन करूं गा िक वह इसके  बारे मȂ पूरे देश मȂ एक जन-जागरण अिभयान चलाए, तािक 
छातर् इस तरह का काम न करȂ।  सर, * 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद।  …(Interruptions)…  No.  …(Interruptions)…  You are not going 
on record now.  …(Interruptions)…  You are not going on record.  …(Interruptions)…   
The following hon. Members associated themse lves with the issue raised by the hon. 
Member, Shri Rajeev Shukla:   
Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Shrimati Vandana 
Chavan (Maharashtra), Dr. John Brittas (K erala), Shrimati Sulata Deo (Odisha), 
Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri Sand osh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Shri Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar (Andhra Pradesh), Shri Sujeet Kumar 
(Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Beng al), Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agrawal (Uttar 
Pradesh), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala) and Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), 
Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi (Maharashtra).  
                   Now, Shri Nabam Rebia, 'Creation of separate All India Service cadres of 
IAS, IPS and IFS for Arunachal Pradesh.'  
 
Creation of separate All India Service Cadres of IAS, IPS and IFS for Arunachal 
Pradesh 
                   
* Not recorded. 
28
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी नबाम रेिबआ (अरुणाचल  Ģदेश) :   माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
यह मेरे राज्य अरुणाचल  Ģदेश क े िलए एक बहुत ही महत्वपूणर् िवषय है। मȅ इस िवषय को पहले भी 
इस सदन मȂ रख चुका हूं। भौगोिलक दृि Íट से अरुणाचल  Ģदेश नॉथर् ईÎट का सबसे बड़ा राज्य है, 
लेिकन अभी तक भी वहाँ पर उसका अपना सैपरेट ऑल इंिडया ऑिफससर् सिर्वस क ैडर नहीं है,  
like IAS, IPS and IFS, क्यȗिक ये जो ऑिफससर् आते हȅ, ये दो-तीन साल बैठकर चले जाते हȅ।  
यह चीज़ ह
मारी डेवलपमȂटल एिक्टिवटीज़ को हैÇपर करती है। अरुणाचल  Ģदेश सरकार ने भी 
यह मांग कई बार क Ȃ दर् मȂ रखी है और अरुणाचल  Ģदेश िवधान सभा मȂ भी बहुत बार इसका 
रेज़ोÊयूशन पास हुआ है। मȅ चाहूंगा िक अगर अरुणाचल  Ģदेश का डेवलपमȂट होना है और इसकी 
भलाई क े िलए काम करना है तो वे ऑिफससर् कम से कम पाँच-दस साल क े िलए यह
ाँ बैठȂ। तभी 
अरुणाचल  Ģदेश क े िवकास का काम होगा, वरना वे दो-तीन साल मȂ क्या काम करȂगे? मȅ क Ȃ दर् 
सरकार से दोबारा अनुरोध करता हूं िक अरुणाचल  Ģदेश क े िलए सैपरेट क ैडर ऑफ ऑल इंिडया 
सिर्वसेज़--
 IAS, IPS and IFS which means Indian Forest  Service का सेपरेशन जÊदी िकया 
जाए। माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपने मुझे सदन मȂ बोलने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए आपक
ा 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
 
 MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Shri  Nebam Rabia: Shri Pabitra Margherita 
(Assam), Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishe mba (Manipur), Shri Baburam Nishad 
(Uttar Pradesh), Shrimati S. Phangnon Ko nyak (Nagaland), Shri Kamakhya Prasad 
Tasa, (Assam), Shri Rwngwra Narzary, (Assa m), Shri Sujeet Kumar, (Odisha), Dr. 
Amar Patnaik (Odisha) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).          
Now, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal; Demand  for amendments/simplification of 
provisions with respect to FIR, Arrest and Bail. 
 
Demand for amendments/simplification of provisions  
with respect to FIR, Arrest and Bail 
 
डा. अशोक क ुमार िमǄल (पंजाब) :  माननीय उपसभापित जी, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्
 यवाद। मȅ 
आज सदन मȂ सरकार क े समक्ष एक ऐसा मुǈा रखना चाहूंगा, जो कानूनी है, लेिकन उसका Ģभाव 
पूरे समाज पर पड़ता है। महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी ने अपनी बजट Îपीच क े दौरान एक बात कही - 
'Justice First' और देश मȂ जो नए िकर्िमनल लॉज़ आ रहे हȅ, उनके  बारे मȂ भी कहा। महोदय, 
हमारे देश मȂ जो अंडरटर्ायÊस हȅ, जब हम उनकी पिरिÎथित देखते हȅ, तो मुझे लगता है िक उन्
हȂ 
न्याय नहीं िमल रहा है। हमारे िकर्िम नल  लॉज़ मȂ एफआईआर, अरेÎट और बेल क े Ģोिवज़न्स मȂ 
क्लैिरटी न होने क े कारण पुिलस Ģशासन क े िलए यह कमाई का एक माध्यम बन गया है। ऐसे 
बहुत सारे क े स भी सामने आए हȅ, िजनमȂ माइनर ऑफे न्सेज़ क े िलए लोगȗ को जेल मȂ डाल िदया 
जाता है, जो िक हमारे संिवधान क े आिर्
टकल 14 और  आिर्टकल 21 का ÎपÍट उÊलंघन है। हमारे 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
29

देश की कानून ËयवÎथा की िजÇमेदारी पुिलस और Ģशासन पर है और ĥÍटाचार की शुरुआत  भी 
यहीं से होती है, िजसका सबसे साधारण तरीका एफआईआर की धमकी देना है। कानूनी Ģावधानȗ 
का गलत इÎतेमाल करके  पुिलस शोषण करने क े िलए िकसी भी कानून क े िकसी भी सैक्शन को 
एÃलाई करके  लोगȗ को जेल मȂ डाल देती है। पीएसआई िरपोटर् क े मुतािब
क िदसÇबर 2022 तक 5 
लाख, 70 हज़ार क ैदी थे। इसमȂ 75 Ģितशत यानी 4 लाख, 30 हज़ार क ैदी अंडरटर्ायल हȅ। हमारी 
जेÊस ओवरकर्ाउिडड हȅ और काफी क े सेज़ मȂ युवा, बुजुगर्, मिहलाओं को भी पुिल
स गलत 
एफआईआर करके  जेल मȂ डाल देती है। कानून मȂ ÎपÍट रूप  से कहा गया है िक 'Bail is a matter 
of right and jail is an exception.' ऐसे भी कई क े सेज़ हȅ, जह ा ँ हमारे माननीय िडिÎटर्क्ट जज, 
हाई कोटर् जज बेल नहीं देते, लेिकन सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ बेल हो जाती है। इसका कारण है judicial 
discrimination in granting bail.  िजसम Ȃ हर जज अपने िववेक क े िहसाब से बेल की क ंडीशन 
िनधार्िरत करता है।  मȅ इस सदन क े सामने एक इंटेरेिंÎट ग क े स लाना चाहूंगा। मध्य Ģदेश हाई 
कोटर् ने एक क े स मȂ बेल देते वƪ यह क ं डीशन लगाई थी िक मुज़िरम िकसी हॉिÎपटल को 25 
हज़ार रुपय े का एलईडी टीवी दान मȂ देगा। एक अन्य क े स मȂ यह कहा गया िक मुलिज़म दो महीने 
तक सोशल मीिडया का Ģयोग नहीं करेगा। मȅ सरकार को बध
ाई देना चाहूंगा िक उन्हȗने िĤिटश 
काल क े िकर्िमनल लॉज़ को िरपील िकया और भारतीय न्याय संिहता, भारतीय न्याय सुरक्षा 
संिहता तथा भारतीय साÑय अिधिनयम लाया गया, िजसमȂ एफआईआर, बेल और अरेÎट क े बारे मȂ 
थोड़ी सी क्लैिरटी दी गई है। 
 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following ho n. Members associated themselves with 
the issue raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal:  Shri Saket Gokhale 
(West Bengal), Shri Sanjeev Arora (Punjab), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Dr. 
Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Ker ala), Shri Jose K. Mani (Kerala), Shri 
Kanakamedala Ravindra Kumar (Andhra Pr adesh), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha) and Shrimati 
Vandana Chavan (Maharashtra). 
Please conclude. ...(Interruptions)...  T h e  t i m e  i s  o v e r.  Please . (Time-bell 
rings.)  Shri Abdul Wahab. Shri A.A. Rahim is associating.  Concern over various 
problems faced by Railway passengers in Kerala. 
 
Concern over various problems faced by Railway passengers in Kerala. 
 
SHRI ABDUL WAHAB (Kerala):   Sir, in Kerala , as usual, we don't have any special 
zone. The passengers are facing huge difficultie s.  All railway stati
 ons are crowded.  
Keralites are the most respectful and respon sible passengers of th e Indian Railways. 
There are less defaulters, I mean, those who travel without tickets.  Ninety-nine per 
cent Keralites travel with tickets. I request our Ministry to specifically consider one or 
two items.  Nilambur is the station where the railway ends.  It was started by 
30
[RAJYA SABHA]

Britishers not for the development of Malaba r or Kerala.  It was developed to get the 
forces to suppress the rebellions against th e British and take out the Nilambur teak 
from there to the U.K.  That is why they started it.  But now, after Independence, the 
Nilambur-Shoranur Express is connecting different places. Nilambur Road Station 
has now been identified under  the Amrut Bharat Station Scheme.  The hon. Minister 
has included it and the work is going on . The problem is with the speed and the 
electric connection and all. So, I request the ho n. Minister to look into that one. The 
long-pending Bathery-Nanjangud-Nilambur to  Bangalore, there is an easy road, so 
that Keralites can save, at least, 150 km s. So, for Nilambur-Nanjangud projects and 
all, the PPR is already done and I wish the next Minister will be looking into that. The 
General-Manager of Southern  Railways agreed for A.C. coaches from Nilambur to 
Ernakulam-Kottayam. But, so far, it is not there.  MEMU train is not there and it is 
very difficult for us to travel. So, I request the Government of India, through you, that 
immediate action should be taken for Nilambur-Shoranur-Cochin and Kottayam 
routes. We have already got the Rajya Rani Express from Nilambur to Kochuveli, but it 
is very difficult for the cancer patients, as 90 per cent of the cancer patients are going 
to RCC, Trivandrum because the train stops at Kochuveli; and again, from there to 
Trivandrum, they have to take auto ricksh aws, taxis which are fleeing the people by 
charging Rs.300, Rs.400 for five kilometres.  So, I request, through you, not to 
extend, but to make the Nilambur Road Ra jya Rani Express to Trivandrum Central 
which is our most important demand. Thank you very much. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri Abdul Wahab: Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Jawhar Sircar (West Bengal), Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Mahar ashtra), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), 
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham (Kerala), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), and Shri Jose K. 
Mani (Kerala). 
Shri M. Shanmugam; need for construc ting laying overland bridge between 
Dhanushkodi, Tamil Nadu and Talaimannar in Sri Lanka. ...(Interruptions)...  His 
name was for association.  He has associated. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Need to construct laying overland bridge between Dhanushkodi, Tamil Nadu and 
Talaimannar in Sri Lanka 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, for the last two centuries, efforts are 
being made to provide sea communication between Sri Lanka and Indian mainland 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
31

and many surveys and projects were prepared. Recently also, Sethusamudram Canal 
Project that would connect the Gulf of Ma nnar and the Palk Strait was conceived and 
all feasibility reports were prepared and dr edging work was also started during the 
UPA regime. Unfortunately, when the BJP Government came to power, it was 
discontinued and ultimately, it was abandoned. 
 Our hon. Chief Minister, Mr. M.K. Stalin , last year moved a resolution in the 
Tamil Nadu State Assembly seeking the re vival of the Sehtusamudram Project, but 
the Union Government did not give any response. 
 From the Indian coastal corner at Dhanus hkodi to Sri Lanka's Talaimannar, it is 
only 25 kms., and it can be easily connected with a bridge. It will improve the port 
connectivity and also the movement of the people. Dr. A. Ramasamy Mudaliar 
Committee which was engaged by the Union Government in 1955, examined the 
desirability of the project and found the pr oject feasible and viable. However, it 
strongly recommended an overland passage instead of a channel cutting through the 
sea. 
 I would, therefore, urge upon the Union Government, especially, the hon. 
Minister of External Affairs and the Minist er of Road Transport to consider laying 
overland bridge or under-sea bridge between Dhanushkodi and Talaimannar to 
improve economic and trade relations and pe ople to people movement between India 
and Sri Lanka at the earliest. Thank you, Sir.      
                                                                                                 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Zero Hour matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri M. Shanmugam: Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha), Shrimati Jebi Mather Hish am (Kerala), Dr. Amar Patnaik (Odisha), 
and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).  
Thank you.  Hon. Member, Shrimati Priy anka Chaturvedi on 'Need to include 
HPV vaccines in the Universal Immunization Programme (UIP)'. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharashtra) :   Sir, thank you so much for the 
time for this important topic to be discussed, पर उससे पहले मȅ 30 सेक ं ड लेना चाहूँगी।   
* 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. You are not speaking on the subject. 
...(Interruptions)... No, this is not going on record. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI: Sir, I will speak on this. ...(Interruptions)... 
                   
* Not recorded. 
32
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
Ǜी उपसभापित : अगर आप सÅजेक्ट पर नहीं बोलȂगी तो I will proceed further.   
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Sir, please listen to me.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I am not allowing. The Chair is not allowing. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI :  It has nothing to do with the allegations, Sir. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, you have to speak on the subject.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRIMATI  PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:   It has nothing to do with the allegations.  All I 
want to know is, ... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Priyankaji, you have to speak on the subject.  Otherwise, 
I am calling the other Member.  Shri K.R.N. Rajeshkumar.   
 
SHRI K.R.N. RAJESHKUMAR (Tamil Nadu):   Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, today, I 
rise to bring to your notice. ...(Interruptions)...    
               
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Time is over.  No w, Question Hour.  ...( Interruptions)... 
Nothing is going on record, Madam.  Now, Question Hour. 
 
 
12.00 Noon 
        ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS 
 
Irrigation system in Jharkhand 
 
†*1. SHRI DEEPAK PRAKASH: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
Welfare be pleased to state:   
                   
† Original notice of the question was received in Hindi. 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
33

(a) whether Government has conducted any survey in Jharkhand regarding percent
age of agricultural land that does not have irrigation system as paddy is the main crop 
of the State and there is no adequate water system for it; 
(b) if so, the details thereof and the manner in which the dependence on rain could 
be reduced; and  
(c) Government's response to the damage caused due to monsoon based farming in 
Jharkhand? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINI STRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE (SHRI KAILALSH CHOUDHARY): (a) to (c): A statement is laid on the 
table of the House. 
Statement 
                                              
(a) & (b) As per Land Use Statistics at a Glance 2012-13 to 2021-22 (latest), during 
the year 2021-22, out of net ar ea sown of 13.8 lakh hectar es in Jharkhand, 2.8 lakh 
hectares was irrigated area and 11 lakh hectares was unirrigated area.  
Government of India is implementing Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(PMKSY) since 2015-16 in the country, incl uding Jharkhand with an aim to enhance 
physical access of water on farm and expand  cultivable area under assured irrigation 
and introduce sustainable water conservation practices. The co mponents of PMKSY 
are as under: 
(i) Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP):   This programme is being 
implemented by the Department of Water Resources River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD&GR) with an aim to focus on faster 
completion of ongoing major and medium irrigation projects including National 
Projects in the country.  
During 2016-17, ninet
y-nine (99) on-going major/medium irrigation 
projects were identified as priority projects to be taken up under PMKSY-AIBP. 
Assured financial assistance was provis ioned for these projects under Long 
Term Irrigation Fund, with borrowings from NABARD. Out of these projects, 
AIBP works of 54 prioritized projects have been completed and remaining 45 
projects are at different stages of implementation. 
Subarnarekha Multipurpose Project in Jharkhand is covered under 
PMKSY-AIBP which is planned to be completed by March 2026. This project is 
benefitting East Singhbhum, West  Singhbhum & Saraikela Kharsawan 
districts. The target irrigation potential under this project is 2.37 lakh hectares 
out of which 1.43 lakh hectares has been created up to December, 2023.  
34
[RAJYA SABHA]

Further, after approval of implementation of PMKSY during 2021-2026, 
eight additional irrigation projects ha ve been included under PMKSY-AIBP 
from 2021-22 onwards, which are presently under implementation.  
(ii) Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP):  This scheme is being implemented by the 
Department of Water Resources River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
(DoWR, RD&GR). HKKP consists of four sub-components, being Command 
Area Development & Water Manage ment (CAD&WM), Surface Minor 
Irrigation (SMI), Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies 
(WBs), and Ground Water (GW) Deve lopment component. The activities 
undertaken, inter alia, include creatio n of new water sources through minor 
irrigation, repair, restoration and reno vation of water bodies; strengthening 
carrying capacity of traditional water sources, construction of rain water 
harvesting structures etc.    
The continuation of PMKSY-HKKP  for the FY 2021-22 to FY 2025-26 
has been approved by Union Cabinet in December 2021 with a budget outlay of 
Rs. 4580 crores and targeted irrigation  potential of 4.50 lakh-ha for Surface 
Minor Irrigation(SMI) and Repair, Reno vation and Restoration (RRR) of WBs 
schemes. The Central Assistance (CA) under both the schemes (SMI and 
RRR of WBs) is provided in the form of grant which is 100% of the project cost 
for UTs without legislature. Central Assistance is 90% of the project cost for 
UTs with legislature and 7 North-Eastern states and Sikkim & Hilly States 
(Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand).  
A cluster of 82 number of Surface Mi nor Irrigation Schemes having 
estimated cost of Rs. 75.32 crores of Jharkhand were included for Central 
Assistance in financial year 2014-15. An amount of Rs. 19.38 crore have been 
released as Central Assistance to the Go vt. of Jharkhand. All such irrigation 
schemes have been completed as reported by the State and an additional area 
of 8730 hectares has been brought under irrigation.  
(iii) Watershed Development Component (WDC): This component is being 
implemented by the Department of Land Resources (DoLR) for development 
of rainfed/degraded lands in the country.  The activities undertaken, inter alia, 
include ridge area treatment, drainage line treatment, soil and moisture 
conservation, rainwater harvesting, nur sery raising, pasture development, 
livelihoods for asset-less persons etc. 
Under WDC 1.0, out of the 6382 project s, a total of 6372 projects in 27 
States and UTs of J&K and Ladakh have been reported to be completed, as 
on 20.12.2022. The period of WDC-PMKSY 1.0 projects got over in March, 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
35

2022. Government of India approved continuation of programme as WDC-
PMKSY 2.0 for the period 2021-22 to 2025-26 with a physical target of 49.5 
lakh ha and financial outlay of Rs. 8,13 4 crore, as the Central share. DoLR has 
till date sanctioned 1149 projects to 28 States and 2 UTs of J&K and Ladakh, 
including 30 projects in Jharkhand. Under WDC-PMKSY 2.0, during 2022-23 
to 2023-24(Q 1), 75023 Water Harvesting Structure (WHS) have been created 
/ rejuvenated, including 477 in Jharkh and and 57255 hectar e area have been 
brought under protective irrigation, including 739 hectare in Jharkhand. 
(iv) Per Drop More Crop (PDMC): This scheme  is being implemented by the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfar e. The PDMC scheme mainly focuses 
on enhancing water use efficiency at farm level through Micro Irrigation viz. 
Drip and Sprinkler irrigation systems. From the year 2015-16 to 2021-22, the 
PDMC was implemented as a  component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee 
Yojana (PMKSY). During the year 2022-23, the PDMC is being implemented 
under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). 
Under the scheme, government provid es financial assistance of 55% 
for small and marginal farmers and 45% for other farmers for installation of 
Drip and Sprinkler systems under the PDMC. The assistance for installation of 
Micro Irrigation systems is limited to 5 hectares for beneficiary.   
Since launch of PDMC in 2015-16, Central Assistance of Rs. 19351.23 
crore has been released and 82.57 lakh hectare has been covered under Micro 
Irrigation in the country. For Jharkhand central assistance of Rs. 200.64 crore 
has been released and an  area of 34675 hectare has been covered since 
launch of the scheme.  
Further, as a part of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, the Mission Amrit Sarovar has 
been launched on 24
th April, 2022 with an objective to harvest and conserve water for 
future generations. Under the Mission, eve ry district of the country has been targeted 
to construct or rejuvenate at least 75 Am rit Sarovars. Under this Mission, 4160 sites 
have been identified for Jharkhand. The works have completed on 2088 sites out of 
2608 sites on which works have commenced.  
 
(c) The State Government is primarily re sponsible for providing necessary relief 
measures in the wake of natural calamities. For undertaking relief measures, funds are 
available with the State Government in the form of the State Disaster Response Fund 
(SDRF). Additional financial assistance, ov er and above SDRF, is considered from 
the National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF)  for natural calamities of severe nature 
36
[RAJYA SABHA]

and is approved on the basis of Memora ndum received from the State Government, 
in accordance with established procedures. 
The Department of Agriculture and Fa rmers Welfare (DA&FW) provides relief 
under NDRF to farmers who have lost their crops due to drought, hailstorm, pest 
attack and cold wave/frost. The financial assistance approved by the Government of 
India from NDRF to the State Government of  Jharkhand in respect of the above said 
calamities, since 2015-16 is as under: 
 
Financial Year Calamity Amount approved by the Government 
of India (Rs. in crore) 
2015-16 Drought (Kharif) 336.94 
2018-19 Drought (Kharif) 272.42 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश: सर, सबसे पहले मȅ आपके  माध्यम से देश क े यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी, नरेन्दर् मोदी 
जी और क ृिष मंतर्ालय का अिभनंदन करना चाहता हूँ और बधाई देना चाहता हूँ।  उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ 
लगातार  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : आप सवाल पूछȂ। 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश : सर, मȅ सवाल पूछ रहा हूँ।  मेरा सवाल है िक क्या क ेन्दर् सरकार ने झारखंड मȂ 
ऐसी क ृिष भूिम, िजस पर िंसचाई की ËयवÎथा नहीं है, उसकी Ģितशतता क े संबंध मȂ कोई सवȃक्षण 
िकया है, क्यȗिक झ
ारखंड मȂ मुख्य रूप  से धान की पैदावार की जाती है, िजसके  िलए यहाँ पानी 
की पयार्Ãत ËयवÎथा नहीं है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी। 
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी : माननीय  उपसभापित महोदय, जैसा िक झारखंड और पूरे देश क े बारे मȂ 
हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी िंचता करते हȅ िक िंसचाई क े क्षेतर् मȂ िकस तरह से आगे बढ़ा जाए, मुझे बताते 
हुए खुशी है िक 2016 मȂ एक Îकीम बनाई गई, िजस
 के  अंदर तीन मंतर्ालयȗ - क ृिष मंतर्ालय, जल 
शिƪ मंतर्ालय और गर्ामीण िवकास मंतर्ालय - क े ǎारा योजना बना कर काम ĢारÇभ िकया गया, 
िजसके  तहत Ģधान मंतर्ी क ृिष िंसचाई योजना बनाई गई।  मुझे बताते हुए Ģसन्नता है िक उस 
योजना क े मा
ध्यम से लगातार उसके  अंदर  काम  हुआ  और  अलग-अलग  मंतर्ालयȗ  ने  काम  
िकया।  जैसे क ृिष मंतर्ालय क े अंदर 'per drop more crop' पर काम िकया गया, जल शिƪ 
मंतर्ालय ǎारा 'हर खेत मȂ पानी' और 'एआईबीपी' योजना क े तहत काम िक या गया और वाटरशेड 
िवकास घटक  क े ऊपर भू-संसाधन िवभाग ǎारा काम िकया गया।  उसी का पिरणाम रहा िक पूरे 
देश क े अंदर लगातार ये जो क्षेतर् हȅ, उनका क्षेतर्फल भी बढ़ा है।  अगर हम इिरगेटेड खेती की बात 
करते हȅ, तो इसके  अंदर लगभग 77.9 िमिलयन हेक्टेयर एिरया कवर िक
या गया है।  इसके  अंदर 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
37

झारखंड मȂ भी लगातार इसका क्षेतर्फल बढ़ा है।  मुझे लगता है िक झारखंड क े अंदर भी अभी जो 
1.43 लाख हेक्टेयर है, आने वाले समय मȂ बढ़ कर 2.37 लाख हेक्टेयर हो जाएगा।  इसके  ऊपर 
सरकार लगातार Ģयास कर रही है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : दूसरा सÃलीमȂटरी। 
 
Ǜी दीपक Ģकाश : बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद, सÇमािनत मंतर्ी जी।  झारखंड को 2015-16 और 2018-
19 मȂ एनडीआरएफ से सहायता दी गई थी।  उसके  बाद राज्य को सहायता क्यȗ नहीं िमली है, 
जबिक राज्य मȂ कई िजले सूखे से Ģभािवत हȅ, िजस
 के  चलते झारखंड आज परेशान िदख रहा है? 
 
Ǜी क ैलाश चौधरी : माननीय  उपसभापित महोदय, जब भी कोई सूखा पड़ता है या िकसान पर 
आपदा आती है, तो उसके  िलए एसडीआरएफ फ ं ड का Ģावधान िकया हुआ है।  सरकार Ģत्येक 
साल क े ĢारÇभ मȂ हर Îटेट को Îटेट िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड क े तौ
र पर फ ं ड उपलÅध करवाती है।  इस 
Ģकार से जब उनका वह फ ं ड पूरा हो जाता है और अगर उसके   बाद  और  आवÌयकता  होती  है, 
तो  Îटेट  नेशनल  िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड की िडमांड करता है और उसके  आधार पर नेशनल िडज़ाÎट
र 
फ ं ड क े तहत उसको फ ं ड उपलÅध करवाया जाता है, तािक िकसान को राहत िमल सके ।  इस 
संबंध मȂ मȅ आपसे कहना चाहता हूँ िक झारखंड क े अंदर भी समय-समय पर Îटेट िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड 
िदया ग
या।  उसने अभी तक हमसे नेशनल िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड की कोई िडमांड नहीं की।  मुझे आपको 
यह भी बताना है िक 2015-16 क े अंदर नेशनल िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड क े तौर पर जो 273 करोड़  रुपए  
थे, वे अभी बढ़ कर 637 करोड़ रुपए  हो चुक े हȅ।  भारत सरकार की ओर से लगातार झारखंड क े 
अंदर भी Îटेट िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड बढ़ाया गया है।  झारखंड की राज्य सरकार की ओर से हमारे पास 
कोई ऐसा Ģपो
ज़ल ĢाÃत नहीं हुआ है, िजसमȂ उसको नेशनल िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड की आवÌयकता हो।  
Îटेट िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड की गाइडलाइन है।  अगर वह उस गाइडलाइन को फॉलो करती और उसकी 
आवÌयकता क े मापदंडȗ को पूरा करती, तो उसको तुरंत ही Îटेट िडज़ाÎटर फ ं ड उपलÅध करवा 
िदया जा
ता है।  झारखंड की सरकार की तरफ से बीच मȂ ऐसा Ģपोज़ल नहीं आया है।  उसके  जो 
मापदंड पूरे होने चािहए थे, वे मापदंड पूरे नहीं िकए गए, इस की वजह से यह िÎथित आई है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : धन्यवाद।  क्वेÌचन नं. 2, डा. सी.एम. रमेश। 
 
Decline in export of pharmaceutical products 
 
*2. DR. C.M. RAMESH: Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be pleased 
to state: 
(a)  whether exports of pharmaceutical produc ts have declined in recent years, if so, 
the details thereof during the last three years; 
(b) the details of pharma companies wh ich have contributed towards pharma 
exports, during the last two years, company-wise; and 
38
[RAJYA SABHA]

(c) whether Government proposes to ex plore new markets for exporting pharma 
products, if so, the details thereof? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MI NISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
(SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL):  (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table 
of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) India’s exports of pharmaceutical products have been consistently growing in the 
last few years. Exports have grown from USD 24.44 Bn in 2020-21 to USD 25.39 Bn in 
2022-23. Pharma exports during the last three years are as under: 
 
(Values in USD Million) 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
24,444.03 24,594.27 25,392.99 
(Source: DGCIS) 
 
(b) Over 6000 companies contributed towards pharma exports in 2021-22 as well as 
in 2022-23.  
 
(c) It is the continuous endeavor of Go vernment of India to expand its export 
presence in the existing markets as well as  exploring emerging new markets. Under 
the Market Access Initiative (MAI), which is an export promotion scheme of GoI, 
export promotional activities are supported with focus country approach. Some of the 
activities supported under the MAI sche me include market studies/survey, 
exhibitions, capacity building, organi zing buyer-seller meetings, statutory 
compliances in the export market and mounting business delegations.  There is also a 
dedicated Export Promotion Council for Pharmaceutical exports to support and 
expand India’s presence in overseas markets.  
Further, the potential for generic drug ex port is increasing with improvement in 
access to health care and as a result, countri es pursue for affordable import sources. 
Accordingly, the Government consistently and regularly engages with our Indian 
missions abroad and the potential foreign trade partners through various institutional 
dialogue and cooperation mechanisms to id entify the emerging health care demands 
in these markets for timely penetration. 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
39

DR. C.M. RAMESH:  Sir, I have gone through the answer provided by the Minister. I 
want to ask as to how the PLI Scheme ha s helped improving the tech capabilities, 
capacity utilisation and competitiveness in the pharma sector, especially, in MSME 
Sector.  
 
SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL:  Hon. Deputy Chairman, Sir, there are two PLI 
schemes in the pharma sector which have been introduced by the Government and 
they have three different objectives. On e is to boost the domestic manufacturing 
capacity in pharmaceuticals and drugs. The other is to reduce our import 
dependence and third is to encourage produc t diversification in the pharma sector so 
that our industry can attain a dominant position in the global landscape.  
The first PLI Scheme is aimed at boos ting the domestic manufacturing for the 
KSM, the Key Starting Materials, the APIs as well as the drug intermediates. 
Regarding this scheme, Sir, 48 projects for 33 bulk drugs have be en approved with a 
total committed investment of Rs. 3,938.57 crores, manufacturing of 22 bulk drugs  
has  already  been approved and the prod uction capacity of 89000 plus million tonnes 
has been committed. So, the manufacturing capacity has been attained.  
The second PLI Scheme is for the pharmaceuticals and this is broadly aimed at 
creating global champions so far as the product diversification is concerned. Here, 
Sir, there have been 55 selected applicant s  w h o  h a v e  m a d e  a n  i n v e s t m e n t  o f  R s .  
25,813 crores against the committed investme nt of Rs. 17,275 crores and that has 
been the progress of the two PLI Schemes so  far. Overall, we have been able to 
move rightly in the direction of attaining the objectives of these two PLI schemes.  
 
DR. C.M. RAMESH:  Sir, I would like to know whether the Government may like to 
adopt holistic approach that involves co llaboration between industry stakeholders, 
Government and regulatory bodies which can  enhance our position as global leaders 
in pharma sector.  
 
SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL: Sir, any kind of cooperation between 
Government of India, pharma industries or  the other Statutory Government regulatory 
bodies goes to foster more and more of regulatory compliance and convergences. In 
this regard, Sir, the CDSCO coordinates the activities of the State Drug Control  
Organisations  and  provides  expert  ad vices through statutory bodies like the Drugs 
Consultative Committee along with the Drug s Technical Advisory Board. The Drugs 
Technical Advisory Board is also a multi- stakeholder body which includes experts 
from the pharmaceutical industry. Moreov er, Sir, a two-day 'Chintan Shivir'  was 
40
[RAJYA SABHA]

organised last year in the month of Fe bruary on 'Drugs: Quality regulation and 
Enforcement'. This was primarily aimed at reviewing the im plementation and 
processes of the policies and programme and, in this event, State Government 
regulators, the representative s from the State Governments,  from the industry, they 
deliberated at large on the transparen cy and compliance of the Indian drug 
standards, the regulatory capacities acro ss States and Centre, the global best 
practices, also the introduction of newer inte rventions like digital tools, clinical trial 
standards, etc., to create a multi-stakeh older approach for the benefit of the 
common citizens.  
 
SHRI JAWHAR SIRCAR:  Sir, I would like to ask what actions have been taken to 
recoup the reputation of Indian pharmaceuticals that went for  a six in Africa and in 
Central Asia, after several deaths took pl ace because of exports of faulty medicines 
and pharmaceuticals products.  
 
SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL:  Sir, it is important to record first that the Indian 
pharmaceutical industry enjoys a very good repu tation in the global landscape.  India 
is popularly known as the pharmacy of the world.  In terms of volume, we are the third 
largest in the world and in terms of value we are the fourteenth largest, currently 
valued at 55 billion dollars and aim to reach 130 billion dollars by 2030.  So, we enjoy a 
very good reputation and, especially duri ng the Covid-19 pandemic, our industry, 
despite the nation-wide lockdown, was able to maintain a steady supply of Covid 
vaccines and other Covid-related medicines to more than 100 countries across the 
world under India's very, very unique Vaccine Maitri initiative. Our exports have also 
been consistently growing in  the past one decade.  However, I would agree with the 
hon. Members that even if there are some isolated cases of sub-standard products, 
then, we need to take some proactive me asures and that Government of India is 
committed to it.  The issue actually pertains to the Ministry of Health and the Ministry 
of Health has, along with the CDSCO, taken appropriate measures.  They have 
looked into the specific issues   also   which   they   have quoted.  It is under active 
examination but broadly, Government of India is committed to ensuring the safety and 
quality of medicines and I repeat that the brand image of the India pharma industry 
remains intact which is evident from the fact that our exports are consistently 
growing.  Between April to December, 2023 our growth rate has been 8.19 per cent. 
 
SHRI G. V. L. NARASIMHA RAO:   First of all, I would like to congratulate the hon. 
Prime Minister and the Government for th e market access initiatives through which 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
41

several export promotion initiatives have been taken for the export of 
pharmaceuticals.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Please put your question. 
 
SHRI G. V. L. NARASIMHA RAO:    My question is about th e remission of duties and 
taxes on export products, the RoDTEP sc heme.  The pharmaceutical products are 
not included, as per my knowledge, in the list of eligible products for the RoDTEP 
scheme.  I would like to know from the hon. Minister what is the actual position on 
this and whether pharmaceutical  products also will be co nsidered for the benefits 
under the RoDTEP Scheme.   
 
SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL:  Sir, we keep reviewing the products which are 
to be remitted under the RoDTEP scheme.  I will collect the necessary details and will 
inform the hon. Member. 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:  I would like to ask the hon. Minister, what is the Ministry 
doing in respect of exploring new markets, especially in manufacturing?  I want to 
congratulate you for you have allowed manu facturing of medicine s which have rare 
genetic disorder. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please put your question. 
 
SHRI KARTIKEYA SHARMA:   What is the Ministry looking at?  How is it looking at 
these opportunities? 
 
SHRIMATI ANUPRIYA SINGH PATEL:   It is the constant endeavour of our Ministry to 
not just expand our export presence in the existing markets, but also keep exploring 
the new emerging markets and, which is wh y, today the Indian pharma industry has 
its presence in over 200 destinations.  We are trying to make use of our market 
access initiative particularly, which has a focus-country approach and we are making 
inroads into the Latin American and Caribbean Region, the Asia-Pacific region.  Right 
now, we are focusing on certain specific countries under the Latin American region 
which is Argentina, Brazil and Chile and also in the Africa, in South Africa, in Nigeria, 
in Kenya.  So, we are making these init iatives under the MAI Scheme.  Apart from 
that, we have a dedicated EPC, the Phar mexcil which also makes effort to make 
inroads into the markets which have an untapped potential and,  lately, we have 
42
[RAJYA SABHA]

concluded the very important Free Trad e Agreements, the CE PA with UAE and the 
ECTA with Australia.  Those are also opport unities available to our exporters in the 
pharma industry to explore these newer markets and, on the other FTAs which we are 
negotiating, once concluded, will also prov ide better access to our exporters in the 
pharma sector.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Q.No.3 
 
Railway infrastructure in Tamil Nadu 
 
*3. SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased to state: 
 
(a) whether income through Southern Railway is being pooled back to Railway 
projects in Tamil Nadu and if so, the details thereof; 
(b) whether Government plans for constructi on of new Road Over Bridges (ROB), 
Rail Under-Bridges (RUB), Foot Over Bridges (FOB), Escalators and other 
infrastructure facilities like installation of CCTVs and Digital Rail Information 
displays, Multi-level Parking facilities in Tamil Nadu and if so, details thereof and 
the total amount allocated and disbursed for the same; 
(c) whether Government has identified railway  infrastructure needs of Tamil Nadu, 
and if so details thereof, Railway Division-wise; and 
(d) the total funds earmarked for the same? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (SHRI DANVE 
RAOSAHEB DADARAO): (a) to (d) A Statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) In 2022-23, total revenue generate d by Southern Railway (SR) was ₹9,966.69 
cr. against expenditure of ₹15,345.69 cr., implying thereb y that Ministry of Railways 
has supported SR’s additional expenditure over its revenue by ₹5,379 cr. Additionally, 
SR’s net Capital expenditur e in 2022-23 from Gross Bu dgetary Support etc. for 
creation of assets like New lines, Doubling, Electrification, Station Development, 
Customer Amenities and other developmental works was ₹7,526.84 cr.  
 
(b) to (d) Railway Infrastructure Pr ojects are taken up on the basis of 
remunerativeness, last mile connectivit y, missing links and alternate routes, 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
43

augmentation of congested/saturated lines , socio-economic considerations etc. 
depending upon liabilities of ongoing proj ects, overall availability of funds and 
competing demands. Sanction of Railway in frastructure projects in areas which are 
not connected by Railway network including coal connectivity projects is a continuous 
and ongoing process of Indian Railways. The Railway Infrastructure projects are 
sanctioned Zonal Railway wise and not State wise/UT wise as the Railways’ projects 
may span across various state boundaries.  
Budget allocation for Infrastructure and safety works, falling fully/partly in the 
State of Tamil Nadu has been increased to ₹6,080 crore this year which is nearly 
seven times of the average budget allocation of ₹879 crore from 2009-14. 
Tamil Nadu state is covered by Southe rn Railway (SR), South Central Railway 
(SCR) and South Western Railway (SWR). As on 01.04.23, 23 projects (09 new line, 
03 Gauge conversion and 11 doubling) of total length of 2,848 Km and costing 
₹35,580 crore falling fully/partly in the State of Tamil Nadu are at 
planning/approval/construction stage. These include: - 
 
I. 9 New Line projects covering total length of 871 km at a cost of ₹14,682 crore. 
II. 3 Gauge Conversion projects covering total length of 748 km at a cost of                 
₹5,224crore 
III. 11 Doubling projects covering total length of 1,229 km at a cost of ₹15,674 
crore. 
Though fund allocation has increased mani fold but pace of execution of project 
is dependent on expeditious land acquisi tion. Railway acquires the land through 
State Government. State Government   assesses   the compensation   amount   and   
advises to Railway. On receipt of demand from State Government, Railway deposits 
compensation amount with concerned District Land Acquisition Authority. Execution 
of important infrastructure projects falling fully/partly in the State of Tamil Nadu is 
held up due to delay in land acquisition  and only about 624 Ha land has been 
acquired out of total requirement of about 1832 Ha. Railway had initiated efforts for 
acquisition of land but could not succeed in acquiring land for projects.  
Augmentation of Passenger Amenities at Railway stations is a continuous 
process. Ministry of Railways has launche d ‘Amrit Bharat Station scheme’ for 
development of Stations on Indian Railways. So far, 1318 number of railway stations 
including 77 railway stations in the State of Tamil Nadu have been identified for 
development/redevelopment under this scheme. 
This scheme envisages development of st ations on a continuous basis with a 
long term approach. It involves preparatio n of Master Plans and their implementation 
44
[RAJYA SABHA]

in phases to improve the amenities at the stations like improvement of station 
access, circulating areas, waiting halls, toilets, lift/escalators as necessary, 
cleanliness, free Wi-Fi, kiosks for local pr oducts through schemes like ‘One Station 
One Product’, better passenger informatio n systems, executive lounges, nominated 
spaces for business meetings, landscaping et c. keeping in view the necessity at 
each such station. 
The scheme also envisages improvement of building, integrating the station 
with both sides of the city, multimodal  integration, amenities for Divyangjans, 
sustainable and environment friendly solutions, provision of ballast less tracks, ‘Roof 
Plazas’ as per necessity, phasing and feasib ility and creation of city centres at the 
station in the long term. In addition to the above, since 01.04.2014 (till December 
2023), 542 Road Under Bridges (RUBs) an d 134 Road Over Bridges (ROBs) have 
been completed in Tamil Nadu. Further, a total of 129 ROBs and 100 RUBs are under 
planning/execution stage. 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: Sir, I thank the hon. Minister for his reply. 
 Sir, the budgeted allocation for the So uthern Railway, partic ularly for railway 
projects and passenger amenities in Tamil Nadu is very much wanting for more than 
ten years.  In his reply, the hon. Minist er himself has confirmed that the Railways 
sanctioned an amount of Rs. 879 crores between 2009 and 2014. 
 So, I would like to know from the hon. Minister the amount allocated to railway 
projects in Tamil Nadu from 2014 to 2022,  income generated through passengers, 
freight traffic and other source during the la st ten years i.e., since 2014, steps to be 
taken by the Government to complete seve ral railway projects in Tamil Nadu pending 
since 2008 and the list of projects, actually, pending. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, be brief in your supplementary. 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN: I would like to know the exact status of long-pending railway 
projects from the hon. Minister. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.  Be brief in your question.  I expect reply will 
also be brief. 
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव: उपसभापित महोदय, रेल पिरयोजनाएँ राज्यवार नहीं ज़ोनवार 
होती हȅ।  तिमलनाडु राज्य दिक्षण, दिक्षण-मध्य और दिक्षण-पिÌचम, इन तीन ज़ोन्स को कवर 
करता है।  ये पिरयोजनाएँ क ेवल तिमलनाडु क े िलए नहीं हȅ, बिÊक ये ज़ोनवार चलती हȅ, लेिकन 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
45

तिमलनाडु मȂ अभी काफी इन्ģाÎटर्क्चसर् Îथािपत िकए जा रहे हȅ।  वहाँ पर ढांचागत पिरयोजनाओं 
और संरक्षा क े िलए वषर् 2009 से लेकर 2014 तक औसतन 879 करोड़  Ģित वषर् बजट िदया गया 
था, लेिकन अब वषर् 2023-24 मȂ वषर् 2009-14 से लगभग सात गुना ज्यादा, यानी 6,080 करोड़ 
रुपय े का बजट िदया गय
ा है।  यानी, वषर् 2009-14 मȂ तिमलनाडु का जो बजट औसतन 879 
करोड़ Ģित वषर् का था, वह आज वषर् 2023-24  मȂ 6,080 करोड़  रुपय े का हो गया है।  वहाँ पर 
अभी जो पिरयोजनाएँ चल रही हȅ, उनमȂ नौ पिरयोजनाएँ नई लाइंस की हȅ,  ग्यारह दोहरीकरण 
और तीन गेज पिरवतर्न क े िलए चल रही हȅ।  महोदय, वहाँ जो नई लाइंस क े Ģोजेक्ट्स हȅ, उनक
ी 
क ु ल लÇबाई 871 िकलोमीटसर् की है और उनकी लागत 14,682 करोड़ रुपय े की है।  इसी तरह, 
तिमलनाडु मȂ अभी रेलवे लाइंस का गेज पिरव
तर्न 748 िकलोमीटसर् और दोहरीकरण 1,229 
िकलोमीटसर् का चल रहा है। 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN:   Sir, under Amrit Bharat Station Scheme, Southern Railway 
plans to complete upgradation of 90 railway stations this year and 15 stations in 
Chennai region. There is an urgent need for fourth terminal in Chennai.  There is a 
plenty of vacant land belonging to Railway s available around Perambur where the ICF 
is located. Sir, my supplementary to the ho n. Minister is whether the Railways would 
come forward to utilize available vacant land  belonging to Railways around Perambur 
to establish a much needed fo urth railway terminal in Che nnai to avoid congestion at 
Chennai Central and Chennai Egmore. Thank you. 
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव: उपसभापित महोदय, रेल िवभाग की दृिÍट से तिमलनाडु एक बहुत 
ही महत्वपूणर् Îटेट है।  वहाँ लगभग 77 Îटेशंस 'अमृत भारत Îटेशन Îकीम' क े अतंगर्त िलए गए हȅ।  
मुझे ऐसा लगता है िक जो खाली पड़ी जमीनȂ हȅ, उनका उपयोग हो रहा है।  क्षमता की दृिÍट से 
आज सबसे बड़ी coach facto
 ry ICF  पेरÇबुर, तिमलनाडु मȂ है, जहां वषर् 1955 मȂ उत्पादन शुरू  
हुआ था , जब वहाँ 1,000  से भी  कम िडÅबे Ģित वषर् बनते थे।  वषर् 2019-20 मȂ हमने वहाँ की ICF 
मȂ 4,166 िडÅबे बनाए, वषर् 2022-2023 मȂ 2,702 बनाए और वषर् 2023-24 मȂ 3,241 िडÅबे बनाने 
का हमारा लÑय है।  मुझे ऐसा लगता है िक वहाँ पर िजतनी जगह है, उसका हम पूरा उपयोग कर 
रहे हȅ। 
 
DR. M. T
HAMBIDURAI:   Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, through you, I would like to 
know from the hon. Minister the present status of the long-pending railway project for 
laying new railway line between Jolarpettai and Bengaluru via Krishnagiri and Hosur.  
The Ministry of Defence has declared Hosu r and Krishnagiri as ‘defence corridor’.  
Therefore, this line is very, very important.  Discussion on this line has been going on 
for thirty-five years.  What is the present position of connecting this line? 
 
46
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव: उपसभापित महोदय, वहां 4 पिरयोजनाए ं चल रही हȅ।  मदुरई-
बोिडनायक्कनूर, रामेÌवरम-धनुषकोडी पिरयोजना, िंतडीवनम-िंजजी-ितरुवन्नामलई, मोरापुर 
धमार्पुरी रेल पिरयोजनाएं चल रही हȅ, लेिकन मदुरई-वेडासंदूर कमीशन हो गया है और उसकी 
लागत 593 करोड़ रुपय े है।...(Ëयवध ान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Please let him reply.   ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव: महोदय, तिमलनाडु सरकार ने रामेÌवरम धनुषकोडी पिरयोजना 
हटाने का आगर्ह िकया है।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी,  डा. मु. तंबी दुरै जी िजस ĢÌन क े बारे मȂ जानना चाहते हȅ, 
यिद आपके  पास अभी उǄर न हो तो आप बाद मȂ भी बता सकते हȅ। Dr. John Brittas, you have 
a question.  Please go to your seat.  ...(Interruptions)... Next, Dr. Fauzia Khan.  
  
डा. फौिजया खान: सर, मȅ मिहला होने क े नाते माननीय मंतर्ी जी से एक ĢÌन पूछना चाहती हूं िक 
जब हम रेल Ģवास करते हȅ, तो टॉयलेट्स की बहुत तकलीफ होती है। टर्ेन्स मȂ इतने गंदे 
टॉयलेट्स होते हȅ िक जो most modern toilets हȅ, वे भी पूरे फ ु ल हो कर खराब हो जाते हȅ। 
मिहलाओं को टर्ेन्स मȂ अच्छे और साफ-सुथरे टॉयलेट्स िमलȂ, इसके  िलए हम क्या कर सकते हȅ? 
ڈﺍﮐﭩﺮ ﻓﻮﺯﻳہ ﺧﺎﻥ: ﺳﺮ ﻣﻴﮟ ﻣﮩﻴﻼ ﮨﻮﻧﮯ ے ﻧﺎﺗﮯ ﻣﺎﻧﻴﺌﮯ ﻣﻨﺘﺮی ﺟﯽ ﺳﮯ ﺍﻳﮏ ﺳﻮﺍﻝ ﭘﻮﭼﻬﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﯽ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ ﺟﺐ ﮨﻢ ﺭﻳﻞ 
ﭘﺮﻭﺍﺱ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ، ﺗﻮ ﭨﺎﺋﻠﻴﭧ ﮐﯽ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺗﮑﻠﻴﻒ ﮨﻮﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ ﭨﺮﻳﻨﺲ ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﺗﻨﮯ ﮔﻨﺪے ﭨﺎﺋﻠﻴﭩﺲ ﮨﻮﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ ﮐہ ﺟﻮmost 
modern toilets ﮨﻴﮟ، ﻭﻩ ﺑﻬﯽ ﭘﻮﺭے ﻓﻞ ﮨﻮﮐﺮ ﺧﺮﺍﺏ ﮨﻮﺟﺎﺗﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ۔ ﻣﮩﻴﻼﺅں ﮐﻮ ﭨﺮﻳﻨﺲ  ﻣﻴﮟ ﺍﭼﻬﮯ ﺍﻭﺭ ﺻﺎﻑ 
ﺳﺘﻬﺮے ﭨﺎﺋﻠﻴﭩﺲ ﻣﻠﻴﮟ، ﺍﺱ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻴﮯ ﮨﻢ ﮐﻴﺎ ﮐﺮﺳﮑﺘﮯ ﮨﻴﮟ؟  
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव: आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, रेल मȂ जो टॉयलेट्स बनाए हȅ, 
उनको साफ-सुथरा रखने क े िलए सरकार पूरी कोिशश करती है। अगर हमारे पास ऐसी कोई 
िशकायत आत
ी है, तो मȅ उसको दूर करूं गा। 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Mr. Deputy Chairman, Sir, the hon. Minister has spoken about 
the investment that is being done in the Southern Railway.  As you would appreciate, 
Kerala is also a part of the Southern Ra ilway.  And, Vande Bharat trains, which are 
plying in Kerala have the highest occupancy rate in the country.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Put your question, please.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  It has justified the demand for a semi-high-speed railway 
because of the enhanced demand.  So, in this context, I would specifically ask the 
                   
† Transliteration in Urdu script.  
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
47

hon. Minister whether he will consider th e K-Rail Project, submi tted by the Kerala 
Government to the Railway Minister.   
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव: आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, अपने देश मȂ अभी वंदे भारत टर्ेन्स 
शुरू  की गई हȅ, हर ज़ोन मȂ उसकी मांग बढ़ती जा रही है। आज हम 41 टर्ेन्स चला रहे हȅ और 
जैसे-जैसे टर्ेन्स की उपलÅधता होगी, वैसे-वैसे हम दȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान). .. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  There are other methods also ...(Interruptions)...  
माननीय सदÎय का जो सवाल है, माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप उसका उǄर पता करके  माननीय 
सदÎय को बुलाकर उन्हȂ बता दȂ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: ĢÌन संख्या-4, Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी 
 
Establishment of post offices for implementation of communication systems 
 
*4. SHRI I
RANNA KADADI : Will the Minister of COMMUNICATIONS be pleased to 
state: 
 
(a) the number of post offices across the country, along with the total number of 
savings accounts in these post offices an d the facilities provided to the account 
holders; 
(b) whether post offices have been established in all the major villages in the country 
to ensure the smooth implementation of communication systems; 
(c) if so, the details thereof; 
(d) whether all post offices in the co untry have been equipped with modern 
technology; and 
(e) if so, the specifics of these modernisation efforts? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS (SHRI 
DEVUSINH CHAUHAN): (a) to (e) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a)  Postal Circle-wise details (including States and Union Territories) of the number 
of Post offices along with the total numbe r of savings accounts as  on 31.03.2023 are 
given at Annexure-I. 
48
[RAJYA SABHA]

The savings account holders have the fac ility of availing the Automated Teller 
Machine (ATM), Issuance of Cheque book, Internet Banking, Mobile Banking, 
various types of SMS alerts, e-Passbook  for viewing the balance and account 
statement, Funds transfer from bank acco unts to post office accounts and vice versa 
through National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT) and Real Time Gross Settlement 
(RTGS), Electronic Clearing Services (ECS) facility for crediting the interest and 
maturity amount in bank accounts, Interact ive Voice Response System (IVRS) facility 
under Core Banking System (CBS). 
 
(b) & (c) There are 1,49,478 post offices (including Head Post Offices, Sub-Post 
Offices and Branch Post Offices) in rural areas of the country. These post offices 
provide access to postal facilities and other services to ensure smooth 
implementation of communication systems. Postal Circle-wise details (including 
States and Union Territories) of number of po st offices in rural areas in the country as 
on 31.03.2023 are given in Annexure-II. 
 
(d) & (e) All Departmental Post Offices in  the country have been computerized and 
networked under the Information Technology  (IT) Modernization Project.  Branch 
post offices functioning in rural areas of the country have been provided with mobile 
devices for carrying out online postal, financial and insurance transactions. 
 
Annexure-I 
Data as on 31.03.2023 
Sl 
No. 
Name of the Postal Circle Total Number of Post 
Offices  (Head Post 
Offices, Sub-Post 
Offices, Branch Post 
Offices) 
Total 
number of 
Savings 
Accounts  
1 Andhra Pradesh 10668 4420563 
2 Assam 4062 1851107 
3 Bihar 9342 3356810 
4 Chhattisgarh 4468 956480 
5 Delhi 509 1047885 
6 Gujarat (including Union Territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
& Diu) 
8887 4151730 
7 Haryana 2699 1647645 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
49

8 Himachal Pradesh 2807 2262886 
9 Jammu and Kashmir (including Union 
Territory of  Jammu & Kashmir and 
Union Territory of Ladakh) 
1735 555628 
10 Jharkhand 4580 1233100 
11 Karnataka 9658 7811891 
12 Kerala (including Union Territory  of 
Lakshadweep) 
5063 2937250 
13 Madhya Pradesh 10271 2289463 
14 Maharashtra (includi ng Goa) 14032 5593422 
15 North-East (including Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Tripura, Mizoram and Nagaland) 
4478 662152 
16 Odisha 8907 3272252 
17 Punjab (including Union Territory  of 
Chandigarh) 
3842 1830135 
18 Rajasthan 11047 2270573 
19 Tamil Nadu (including Union Territory 
of Puducherry) 
11866 7233125 
20 Telangana 6267 3801964 
21 Uttar Pradesh 17953 6498134 
22 Uttarakhand 2736 1434021 
23 West Bengal (including Sikkim and 
Union Territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands) 
9095 8106264 
  Total 164972 75224480 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
Data as on 31.03.2023 
Sl 
No. Name of the Postal Circle Total Number of  Rural Post 
Offices 
1 Andhra Pradesh 9928 
2 Assam 3762 
50
[RAJYA SABHA]

3 Bihar 8889 
4 Chhattisgarh 4171 
5 Delhi 80 
6 Gujarat (including Union Territory of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu) 8141 
7 Haryana 2335 
8 Himachal Pradesh 2684 
9 
Jammu and Kashmir (including Union 
Territory of  Jammu & Kashmir and Union 
Territory of Ladakh) 
1534 
10 Jharkhand 4321 
11 Karnataka 8607 
12 Kerala (including Union Territory  of 
Lakshadweep) 4163 
13 Madhya Pradesh 9466 
14 Maharashtra (including Goa) 12731 
15 
North-East (including Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram and 
Nagaland) 
4217 
16 Odisha 8309 
17 Punjab (including Union Territory  of 
Chandigarh) 3420 
18 Rajasthan 10397 
19 Tamil Nadu (including Union Territory of 
Puducherry) 10274 
20 Telangana 5724 
21 Uttar Pradesh 16055 
22 Uttarakhand 2440 
23 West Bengal (including Sikkim and Union 
Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands) 7830 
  Total 149478 
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, पोÎट ऑिफस और डाक सेवाओं क े संचालन 
मȂ सबसे महत्वपूणर् भूिमका गर्ामीण डाक सेवकȗ की होती है। गर्ामीण डाक सेवकȗ की बहुत वषर् से 
मांग है िक उन्हȂ िवभाग ǎारा िदए जा रहे लाभ जैसे एचआरए, टीए, डीए, पȂशन और ÎवाÎथ्य 
सुिवधा इत्यािद दी जाए, िजसकी िस
फािरश वषर् 2015 मȂ कमलेशचंदर् ǎारा की गई थी। मेरा मंतर्ी 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
51

जी से ĢÌन है िक सरकार ǎारा गर्ामीण डाक सेवकȗ की मांगȗ पर अभी तक क्या कायर्वाही की गई 
है? 
 
Ǜी देवुिंसह चौहान: उपसभापित महोदय, गर्ामीण डाक सेवक हमारे िवभाग क े अित महत्वपूणर् 
भाग हȅ।  एक Government employee को जो बेिनिफट्स िमलते हȅ, वैसे कई बेिनिफट्स हम 
गर्ामीण डाक सेवकȗ को देते हȅ।  हालांिक उनके  duty hours 4 to 5 hours
 रहते हȅ और ये 4 to 5 
hours मȂ भी करीब-करीब 10 हजार से लेकर 35 हजार तक क े भǄे DA, GDS मȂ Government 
employees को जो बेिनिफट्स िमलते हȅ, जैसे gra tuity, group insurance,  service discharge 
benefits, एक तरीके  से जो new   benefits,  वे सारे बेिनिफट्स हम डाक सेवकȗ को देते हȅ।   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Second supplementary, Shri Iranna Kadadi. 
 
Ǜी ईरण्ण कडाडी : मेरा मंतर्ी जी से यह ĢÌन है िक वतर्मान मȂ पोÎट ऑिफस मȂ िकतने िनिÍकर्य 
खाते और अदािवत रािश है?  क्या सरकार इन िनिÍकर्य खातȗ मȂ जमा रािश का Ģय
 ोग गर्ामीण 
इलाकȗ मȂ पोÎट ऑिफस क े आधुिनकीकरण हेतु करेगी? 
 
Ǜी देवुिंसह चौहान : उपसभापित  महोदय, वतर्मान मȂ जो unclaimed amount है, वह करीब 
25,480 करोड़ रुपय े क े आस-पास है।  जो unclaimed amount हȅ, उसको veri
 fy करके  उसके  
पिरवार मȂ जो लोग हȅ, उनको identify करते हȅ।  मȅ आपको माचर् और िदसÇबर, 2023 की िफगर 
देता हूं।  Unclaimed amount - हमने माचर्, 2023 तक 21 लाख अकाउंट्स मȂ 1,240 करोड़ रुपय े 
क े आस-पास उनको वािपस िकया है।  िदसÇबर, 2023 तक 33.35 लाख अकाउंट्स मȂ 1,319.67 
करोड़ रुपय े जो unclaimed acco
unt holders हȅ, उनका वैिरिफके शन करने क े बाद हमने 
उनको वािपस िदया है।   
 
Ǜी िदिग्वजय िंसह : उपसभापित महोदय, पूरे देश मȂ पोÎट ऑिफस मȂ लगभग साढ़े सात करोड़ 
अकाउंट्स हȅ।  इन साढ़े सात करोड़ अकाउंट्स मȂ िकतनी रािश जमा है?  
 
Ǜी देवुिंसह चौहान : महोदय , हमारे यहां टोटल 1,64,000 से अिधक पोÎट ऑिफस मȂ जो क ु ल 
अकाउंट्स हȅ, उन अकाउंट्स मȂ अभी तक अलग-अलग ÎकीÇस मȂ चाहे वे IPPB क े अकाउंट्स हȅ, 
उनमȂ आठ करोड़ से अिधक अक
 ाउंट्स हȅ।  उसके  बारे मȂ मुझे कहते  हुए  गवर्  महसूस  होता  है 
िक 47 per cent women’s accounts हȅ। मȅ आपको क ेवल IPPB क े बारे मȂ बताता हूं।  उसमȂ 
30,181 करोड़ रुपय े रािश क े AePS transaction िकये गये हȅ।  यह क ेवल IPPB account की 
बात कर रहा हूं।  जो पोÎटल अकाउंट्स हȅ, उनमȂ लगभग 18 लाख करोड़ िडपॉिजट है। 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR: S
ir, today, post offices in ou r country are providing not just 
postal services but also many additional services like passport sewa, banking facilities 
and other citizen-centric services.  Sir, I would like to know from the hon. Minister 
52
[RAJYA SABHA]

whether there has been any impact assessment study done to measure the economic 
impact, particularly, the economic impact of  these new services in the post offices 
and the adjoining areas in the rural India.  
 
Ǜी देवुिंसह चौहान : उपसभापित महोदय, आज पूरे वÊडर् मȂ अगर कहीं largest postal network 
है, तो वह भारत मȂ है।  आज हमारे देश मȂ 1,49,000 से अिधक पोÎट ऑिफस रूरल  एिरयाज़ मȂ हȅ 
और करीब 15,000 से अिधक urban मȂ हȅ।  यह पोÎटल नेटवकर् सबसे trustworthy network है।  
पहले डािकया क ेवल डाक लाने का काम करता था,  लेिकन ऑनरेबल Ģाइम िम
िनÎटर क े नेतृत्व 
मȂ यह डािकया अब िडिजटल डािकया हो गया है। यह डािकया अब क ेवल मेल और पासर्ल नहीं 
देता है, बिÊक आज वह बȅिंकग सिर्वस देता है, इंÌयोरȂस सिर्वस देता है,  जो  बेिनिफिशयरी 
िसटीजन्स हȅ, उनका जो डायरेक्ट टर्ांजैक्शन रूरल  मȂ होता है, चाहे वह woman का  हो, चाहे 
एगर्ीकÊचर क े िलए िकस
ान का हो या कोई भी भारत सरकार की सोशल सिर्वस की Îकीम हो, वह 
सारा टर्ांजैक्शन rural-end पर, डोर Îटेप पर  देता है,  अगर भारत सरकार का कोई िवभाग 
सिर्वस देता है, तो हमारा पोÎटल िवभाग देता है। आज पोÎटल िडपाटर्मȂट मॉडर्न टेक्नोलाजी को 
Îवीकार करके  ‘Minimum Government Maxi
mum Governance’, िजसको हमारे आदरणीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी जी चाहते हȅ, वह सारी सिर्वसेज़ देता है।  
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी : माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को  और 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी को धन्
 यवाद देना चाहती हूं।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप सवाल पूिछए।  
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी :  संचार Ģणािलयȗ क े कायार्न्वयन मȂ ... 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आप सवाल पूिछए।  आपका सवाल क्या है?  
 
Ǜीमती सीमा िǎवेदी :  महोदय, मȅ आपकी अनुमित से माननीय मंतर्ी जी से कहना चाहती हूं िक 
देश का सबसे बड़ा Ģदेश उǄर Ģदेश है और उǄर Ģदेश मȂ गर्ामीण डाकघरȗ की संख्या 16,055 
 
है। क्या गर्ामीणȗ की सुिवधा बढ़ाने क े िलए इन डाकघरȗ की संख्या को बढ़ाने पर सरकार िव चार 
करेगी? 
 
Ǜी देवुिंसह चौहान:  उपसभापित महोदय, हाल ही मȂ हमारी सरकार ने brick and mortar क े बेस 
पर हर पांच िकलोमीटसर् पर – जैसे िहली एिरया है, डैज़टर् एिरया है या जो फॉरेÎट एिरया 
इत्यािद है, वहां पर हमने नॉÇसर् मȂ िरलैक्स देने क े बाद every citi
 zen को टच करने क े िलए every 
five kilometre पर नया पोÎट ऑिफस खोला है। अगर उǄर Ģदेश मȂ भी पोÎट ऑिफस की 
आवÌयकता होगी तो हम खोल दȂगे। सर, मȅ आपको बताना चाहता हूं िक पहले की कांगर्ेस की 
सरकार क े समय मȂ करीब 634 पोÎट ऑिफस बंद हो गए थे। अभी-अभी हमने 5,
746 नये पोÎट 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
53

ऑिफस खोले हȅ। इसके  अलावा और नये  लगभग 5,000 पोÎट ऑिफस LWE Ģभािवत क्षेतर् मȂ भी  
खोले हȅ। दस हजार नये पोÎट ऑिफस खोलने क े बाद अगर उǄर Ģदेश मȂ भी कहीं पर पोÎट 
ऑिफस खोलने की आवÌयकता होगी, तो हम जरूर  खोलȂगे। हम हर िसटीजन तक पहुंचना 
चाहते हȅ और traditionally बȅक जहां पर नहीं जाता है, क्यȗिक वह unsustainability क े कारण 
नहीं जाता है, लेिकन पोÎट ऑिफस बȅिंक
ग सिर्वस देने क े िलए तैयार है, जो भी unbank areas हȅ, 
उन सारे unbank areas को हम कवर करȂगे।  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : क्वेÌचन नÇबर पांच। Ǜी मोहÇमद नदीमुल हक जी।  
 
Installation of Kavach safety system 
 
*5. SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE: Will the Minister of RAILWAYS be pleased 
to state: 
 
(a) whether Government has achieved its targ et of installing 637 km railways lines 
with Kavach safety system till Octobe r 31, 2023 and the details of new lines 
commissioned with Kavach system in 2023; 
(b) the total number of railways accidents in the last three years; and 
(c) whether derailments due to improper maintenance are a major cause of railway 
accidents, if so, the steps taken by Government to fully mechanize track 
maintenance activities? 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (SHRI DANVE 
RAOSAHEB DADARAO):  (a) to (c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) Presently, Kavach has so  far been deployed on 1465 Route Km and 139 
Locomotives including (Electric Multiple Unit rakes) on South Central Railway. 
Kavach tenders have been awarded for Delhi-Mumbai and Delhi-Howrah 
corridors (approximately 3000 Route Km) and work is in progress on these 
routes. The progress of main items related to Kavach is as under: 
(i) Laying of Optical Fibre Cable : 3040 Km 
(ii) Installation of Telecom Towers : 269 Nos. 
(iii) Provision of equipment at Stations : 186 Nos. 
(iv) Provision of equipment in Loco : 170 Locos 
(v) Installation of Track side equipments : 827 Route Km. 
54
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
(b) During the last 03 years i.e. from 2020- 21 to 2022-23, total 105 consequential 
train accidents took place over Indian Ra ilways. There has been a significant 
improvement in the safety performance of  Indian Railways ov er the years, as 
shown below. 
 
 
 
(c) The major causes of Consequential Train Accidents broadly include asset failure, 
environmental factors, human errors etc. Indian Railway have taken a number of 
steps to enhance the level of safety, some of which are given below: 
1. Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh (RRSK) has been introduced in 2017-18 for 
Replacement/renewal/upgradation of critical safety assets, with a corpus of Rs. 
1 lakh crore for five years. From 2017- 18 till 2021-22 a Gross expenditure of Rs. 
1.08 lakh crore was incurred on RRSK works. In 2022-23, the Government 
extended the currency of RRSK for anot her period of five years with Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) of Rs. 45,000 crores. 
2. Modern track structure consisting of 60kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) 
rails, Pre-stressed Concrete Sleeper (PSC) Normal/Wide base sleepers with 
elastic fastening, fanshaped layout turnout on PSC sleepers, Steel Channel/H-
beam Sleepers on girder bridge s is used while carrying out 
primary track renewals. 
3. Mechanisation of track laying activity th rough use of track machines like PQRS, 
TRT, T-28 etc to reduce human errors. 
4. Maximizing supply of 130m/260m long rail panels for increasing progress of rail 
renewal and avoiding welding of joints, thereby ensuring safety. 
473
415
351 325
234 234
195 194 177 165 141 131
122 118
135
107 104 73 59 55
22 35 48
0
100
200
300
400
500
Consequential Train Accidents Covid  years
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
55

5. Laying of longer rails, minimizing th e use of Alumino Thermic Welding and 
adoption of better welding technology for rails i.e. Flash Butt Welding. 
6. Monitoring of track geometry by OMS (O scillation Monitoring System) and TRC 
(Track Recording Cars). 
7. Patrolling of railway tracks to look out for weld/rail fractures. 
8. The use of Thick Web Switches and Weldable Cast Manganese Steel (CMS) 
Crossing in turnout renewal works. 
9. Inspections at regular inte rvals are carried out to monitor and educate staff for 
observance of safe practices. 
10. Web based online monitoring system of track assets viz. Track database and 
decision support system has been adopte d to decide rationalized maintenance 
requirement and optimize inputs. 
11. Detailed instructions on issues related with safety of Track e.g. integrated block, 
corridor block, worksite safety, monsoon precautions etc. have been issued. 
12. Preventive maintenance of railway asse ts (Coaches & Wagons) is undertaken 
to ensure safe train operations and to keep a check on Rail Accidents across the 
country. 
13. Replacement of conventional Integral Coach Factory (ICF) design coaches with 
Linke Hofmann Busch (LHB) design coaches is being done. 
14. All unmanned level crossings (UMLCs) on  Broad Gauge (BG) route have been 
eliminated by January 2019. 
15. Safety of Railway Bridges is ensured th rough regular inspection of Bridges. The 
requirement of repair/rehabilitation of Bridges is taken up based upon the 
conditions assessed during these inspections. 
16. Indian Railways has displayed Statutory "Fire Notices" for widespread 
passenger information in all coaches. Fire posters are provided in every coach so 
as to inform and alert passengers regard ing various Do's and Don’ts to prevent 
fire. These include messages regarding not carrying any inflammable material, 
explosives, prohibition of smoking inside the coaches, penalties etc. 
17. Production Units are providing Fire dete ction and suppression system in newly 
manufactured Power Cars and Pantry Ca rs and Fire and Smoke detection 
system in newly manufactured coaches. Progressive fitment of the same in 
existing coaches is also underway by Zonal Railways in a phased manner. 
18. Electrical/Electronic Interlocking Systems with centralized operation of points 
and signals have been provided at 6521 stations upto 31.12.2023. 
19. Interlocking of Level Crossing (LC) Ga tes has been provided at 11143 level 
Crossing Gates upto 31.12.2023. 
56
[RAJYA SABHA]

20. Complete Track Circuiting of stations to enhance safety for verification of track 
occupancy by electrical means has been  provided at 6558 stations upto 
31.12.2023.  
21. Locomotives are equipped with Vigilan ce Control Devices (VCD) to ensure 
alertness of Loco Pilots. 
22. Retro-reflective sigma boards are provided on the mast which is located 
between two OHE masts prior to the signals in electrified territories to warn the 
crew about the signal ahead when visibility is low due to foggy weather. 
23. A Global Positioning System (GPS) base d Fog Safety Device (FSD) is provided 
to loco pilots in fog affected areas which enables loco pilots to know the 
distance of the approaching landmarks like signals, level crossing gates etc. 
24. Concept of Rolling Block introduced in Indian Railways (Ope n Lines) General 
Rules vide Gazette notification dtd. 30.11.2023, wherein work of 
maintenance/repair/replacement is pla nned in advance on rolling basis and 
executed as per plan. 
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE: Sir, I would like to ask the hon. Minister 
whether it is a fact that between 2017 and 2021, 217 consequential accidents and 
1,800 other accidents took place and that dera ilments were the cause of majority of 
the accidents. If so, the details and the actions taken thereof. 
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव : उपसभापित महोदय, िपछले तीन वषर् क े दौरान जो रेल दुघर्टनाएं 
हुई हȅ, भारतीय रेल िवभाग िनरंतर रेल दुघर्टनाएं रोकने का Ģय
 त्न करता है। महोदय, 2020-21 
से 2022-2023 क े बीच मȂ क ु ल 105 रेल दुघर्टनाएं हुई हȅ।  रेल दुघर्टना होने का कोई एक कारण 
नहीं होता है। रेल टर्ैक मȂ खराबी, रेल इंजन मȂ खराबी, इिक् वपमȂट मȂ खराबी आिद दुघर्टना क े 
कारण होते हȅ। मुझे ऐसा लगता है िक जब कोहरा होता है, उस समय दुघर्टना की संभावना ज्यादा 
होती है। अभी जो उन्हȗने आंकड़े बताये हȅ - लेिकन मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक 2001- 2002 मȂ 415,  
2011-2012 मȂ 131 और  2012-2013 मȂ 122 एक्सीडȂट्स हुए हȅ।  वषर् 2016-17 मȂ 104, 2017-18 मȂ 
73, 2018-19 मȂ 59 और 2019-20 मȂ क ेवल 55 एक्सीडȂट्स हुए हȅ। इसके  अलावा वषर् 2021-22 मȂ 
35 और 2022-23 मȂ 48 एक्सीडȂट्स हुए हȅ।  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : सेक ं ड सÃलीमȂटरी।  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE:  Sir, last year, the Railways spent Rs. 15,378 
crores on its budget; Rs. 65,000 crore were spent from  Government's budgetary 
support and Rs. 40,000 crores from internal revenue.  My question is: how much money 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
57

has been spent on the warning system, that is, the kavach system, and how much has 
been spent on track upgradation? 
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव :  उपसभापित जी, कवच एक नई Îवदेशी टेक्नोलॉजी है और आज 
की तारीख मȂ 1,465 िकलोमीटर दिक्षण मध्य रेल पर कवच लग चुका है। लगभग 3,000 
िकलोमीटर, जो अभी िदया गया है, उसका काम अभी िदÊली-मुंबई, िदÊली-हावड़ा मा ग र् पर चल 
रहा है। इसमȂ ऑिÃटकल फाइबर क ेबल िबछाना, दूरसंचार टॉवसर् की Îथापना करना, Îटेशन्स पर 
उपकरणȗ का Ģावधान करना, लोकȗ मȂ उपकरणȗ का Ģावधान और टर्ैक साइड उपकरणȗ की 
Îथापना क े काम अभी चल रहे हȅ।  
 
SHRI MOHAMMED NADIMUL HAQUE:  Sir, how much money has been spent? 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय राके श िसन्हा जी, आप बोिलए।  
 
Ǜी राके श िसन्हा :  माननीय उपसभापित जी , आपका बहुत -बहुत धन्यवाद। जब से माननीय 
Ģधान मंतर्ी  नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने िमलेट्स, Ǜी अन्न की बात यूनाइटेड नेशन्स मȂ  रखी है और 
अंतरराÍटर्ीय Îतर पर इसे Îवीकृ ित िम
 ली है, तब से िमलेट्स का उत्पादन और उपभोग दोनȗ बढ़ा 
है। मȅ माननीय रेल मंतर्ी जी से जानना चाहता हूं िक क्या रेलवे Ãलैटफॉमर् पर जंक फ ूड्स को 
िवÎथािपत करके  िमलेट्स, यानी Ǜी अन्न को Ģमोट करने का कोई का यर्कर्म रेल मंतर्ालय क े पास 
है और रेल मȂ भी जो भोजन िदया जा रहा है, क्या उसमȂ िमलेट्स को देने का Ģावधान कर रहे हȅ? 
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव :  आप सभी जानते हȅ िक मोदी जी ने िमलेट्स को Ģोत्साहन िदया 
है। माननीय सदÎय की जो सूचना और ĢÌन है, मȅ उनसे िमलकर इसके  बारे मȂ चचार् करूं गा।  
 
SHRI NIRANJAN BISHI: Sir, a coach wa shing plant at Kant abanji and a railway 
underbridge have been sanctioned by the Ea st Coast Railways in the last two years, 
but work has not started yet.  S
o, I would like to know from the hon. Minister when 
the work would be started. 
 
Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव :  माननीय उपसभापित जी, यह ĢÌन कवच क े बारे मȂ पूछा गय
 ा है, 
लेिकन माननीय सदÎय को जो जानकारी चािहए, उसके  िलए मȅ उन्हȂ समय दूंगा और चचार् भी 
करूं गा।  
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM:  Sir, every life is precious.  In th e past few years, many lives have 
been lost on the tracks, including that of track-men and track-women.  About 361 
workers died on railway tracks in the last five years.  My question is this.  In how many 
railway divisions, has the rakshak device been fully implemented? 
58
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी दानवे रावसाहेब दादाराव :  माननीय उपसभापित जी, जो मृत्यु हुई हȅ, मȅने आपको उनके  
आंकड़े बता िदए हȅ, लेिकन िजन कमर्चािरयȗ की मृत्यु हुई है, उनके  आंकड़े आज की तारीख मȂ 
मेरे पास नहीं हȅ, मȅ उन्हȂ बाद मȂ सभा पटल पर रख दूंगा।       
                                                                                                            
SHRI A.A. RAHIM:  Si
r, my question was about the rakshak device. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, Q. No. 6; Dr. Amar Patnaik. 
 
Greenhouse gas emission by cement industry 
 
*6. DR. AMAR PATNAIK : Will the Minister of COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY be 
pleased to state: 
 
(a)  the data regarding the current gr eenhouse gas emissions from the cement 
industry, broken down by individual companies, production unit-wise; 
 
(b)  whether Government is planning to allocate funds or incentives to support the 
cement sector in transitioning towards a lower carbon footprint, if so, the 
proposed budget and mechanism; and 
 
(c)  whether Government has taken measures to promote the utilization of alternate 
materials and waste streams in the cem ent industry, the contribution to 
emission reduction in terms of percentage? 
 
THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL):  
(a) to 
(c) A statement is laid on the Table of the House. 
 
Statement 
 
(a) The data pertaining to current greenhouse gas emission from cement 
industry broken down by individual companies is not maintained              centrally. 
 
(b) The Government has not earmarked any budget speciﬁcally to support 
the cement sector in transitioning towards a lower carbon footprint. 
However, multiple initiatives have been undertaken by the Government to 
encourage and promote environmen t consciousness, research and 
responsibility in the cement industry. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
59

The Government constitutes the Development Council for Cement 
Industry (DCCI) under which partial fund ing is provided to research projects 
of National Council for Cement and Building Materials (NCCBM), which 
conducts research in areas such as reduction in carbon  footprint, reduction in 
thermal energy consumption, increase in utilization of alternate fuels and raw 
materials and utilization of renewabl e energy in Indian cement plants. 
The NCCBM has also instituted the Na tional Awards in Indian Cement 
Industry which includes ca tegories, such as, Energy Excellence, Environment 
Excellence, Achieving Circular Economy and Total Quality Excellence.  
Further, the Ministry of Power has noti ﬁed India’s Carbon Credit 
Trading Scheme, 2023 under the Energy Conservation Act, 2001 for setting up 
of the Indian Carbon Market (ICM) to enable the cement industry to adopt 
low-cost options by attracting technology and ﬁnance towards sustainable 
projects that generate carbon credits. 
 
(c) The Government has taken several m easures to promote the utilization 
of alternate materials and waste streams in the cement industry. 
The Central Pollution Control Boar d has brought out guidelines to 
facilitate    State    Pollution    Control    Board    (SPCBs)/Pollution  Control 
Committees (PCCs) to grant authorization for utilization of different kinds of 
wastes, including Hazardous and other wa stes, without carrying out trial runs. 
Further, the Bureau of Indian Standards has formulated st andards to enable 
t h e  I n d i a n  C e m e n t  I n d u s t r y  t o  u t i l i z e  v a r i o u s  industrial wastes/by-products   
viz.   Flyash   based   Portland   Pozzolana Cement (PPC) and slag-based 
Portland Slag Cement (PSC). 
In terms of percentage, the usage of  waste derived alternative fuels in 
cement industry has increased to 7%  in 2023 from 0.6% in 2010. 
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK:  Sir, greenhouse gas emissions are at the core of the discourse 
on adverse climate effects.  In the reply, th e Ministry has said that they are monitoring 
industry-wise, or even company-wise, any data on greenhouse emissions made by 
each of the industries.  Can I make a suggestion to the hon. Minister, since the 
Minister is here? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, put your question. 
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK:  Sir, the question is the suggestion.  
60
[RAJYA SABHA]

 (MR. CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
It is by way of a suggestion that you could have a portal, just like the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs has a CSR portal, wher e companies upload whatever is the 
greenhouse emission made by them, which is  available to public and other industry 
competitors, so that a fair amount of environment ecosystem is developed for 
controlling greenhouse emissions company-wise , because that is what is ultimately 
going to matter. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister. 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, 'the Government should not be interfering in every aspect 
of every industry' is a principle that we uphold  because making such data in the 
public domain could also harm the interest of India's export competitiveness or export 
performance.  Therefore, individual comp any-wise data is not something that the 
Government would like to interfere in.  Ho wever, this is one Government which has 
always been very conscious of our global re sponsibility and it has been part of the 
solution across the world.  Ever since Paris Agreement in 2015 at COP21, India, led by 
Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, has b een at the forefront of forging consensus 
and ensuring that the world wakes up to this  climate crisis.  We are, in fact, very 
proud that India, as a nation , is one of the few countries  which regularly submits our 
biannual UNFCCC Report about our performa nce against the nationally-determined 
contributions of 2015.  We are the best performing countries amongst all the G-20 
countries when they were ranked by an independent agency and, therefore, the 
Government is focussing its attention at th e macro level whereas industries, on their 
own, thanks to the consciousness that has been generated in the country, are looking 
at their own processes, looking at improving their own processes and playing an 
important positive role in addressing this problem of climate change.   
 
DR. AMAR PATNAIK : May I suggest to the hon. Minist er that in the reply they have 
mentioned that India's Carbon Credit Trading Scheme 2023 has been put in 
operation?  It cannot be put under operation unless you have separate company-wise 
data of green house emissions and car bon emissions. However, the second 
supplementary is whether the de-carbonisa tion pathway has been proscribed for 
each industry or company by way of a notificat ion, that is being reviewed so that we 
achieve the targets which you have mentioned of the hon. Prime Minister to make net 
zero by 2050 or even earlier. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
61

SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, as regards the Carbon Cred it Trading scheme, the benefit 
will be taken by those who prepare the data  and who are able to demonstrate that 
they are eligible for ca rbon credits.  In a way, it is Government's efforts to encourage 
more and more companies to come within th e ambit of the scheme to take benefit of 
this trading scheme.  Therefore, we believe that a persuasive approach and taking   
industry together is the right way to achieve these goals. As regards the overall India's 
contribution to greenhouse gas emission reduction or to address the challenge of 
climate change, extensive data is being co llected by the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change and extensive res earch is being done in different sectors 
on our ability to bring down the carbon emission and to create carbon sink. As 
regards both adaptation and mitigations meas ures, India is at the forefront of these 
measures.  I can assure the hon. Member, through you, that India will relentlessly 
pursue the path both of inclusive growth and sustainable growth.  
  
DR. AMEE YAJNIK : Thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity.  I have seen the 
reply given by the hon. Minister.  It is very clearly said that there is no database which 
has been formed for the cemen t industry.  So, there is no greenhouse gas emissions 
database.  You do not have a special budget also for this particular industry which is 
carved out for treating the greenhouse gas emi ssions.  Given this situation, you talk 
about inclusive and sustainable growth.  You have committed net zero emissions at 
the international level, but you do not have  a roadmap or a budget or a plan, either 
shorter or longer, for the cement industry, which is one of the largest sectors and 
which contributes to the construction industry as well.  So, when you do not have 
this, how would you go for emission trading or carbon credit trading without having 
anything or a roadmap in place? So, all these hollow statements do not give concrete 
examples of how you are going to bring zero net emissions at the international level. 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL: Sir, I think, the sa me issue was agitated by the earlier 
speaker, but I would like to repeat... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It was with more force this time.  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  Yes, Sir.  The question was regarding the current greenhouse 
gas emissions from the cement industry, broken down by individual companies and 
production unit wise.  So, my reply relates to the question that we don't have every 
production unit's data for every industry running the cement plants.  The country is 
collecting data for different sectors which are recognised as contributing to the 
62
[RAJYA SABHA]

greenhouse gas emissions at the aggregate le vel.  The industry bodies are working in 
consultation   and   collaboration   with   the  Government to  address these issues.  
The cement industry is a very important sector of the economy.  They are suo motu 
recognising the global problem and are taki ng necessary steps for mitigation of the 
greenhouse gas emissions.  I think, the Indi an industry today is self-reliant and I am 
proud to say this on behalf of the Indi an industry as the Industry Minister.  The 
industry in India is Atma Nirbhar.  They are not looking for cl utches for everything that 
has to be done.  They don't look at the Go vernment for every sma ll thing.  They are 
not looking at Government subsidies and it is  not that only after those subsidies that 
they will act in the interest of the country or the nation.  So, I think, the important 
thing to be noted is that industry is conscious of their obligations.  
 As regards the Carbon Credits Trad ing Scheme, the Bureau of Energy 
Efficiency is, as per this scheme, if you w ill care to go into the details of the scheme, 
already undertaking studies for the sectors which are obligated to be covered under 
this scheme and, accordingly, they will wo rk out the targets and will work out the 
incentives or credits which should be given to each industry for improvement.  Those 
targets, in due course after this study, will be notified by the Ministry of Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change, and it is only af ter that that they will be able to start 
giving the carbon credits.  The Scheme ha s been notified.  The trading process has 
been brought to fore.  The auctioning of the scheme is under process.   Thank you.  
 
DR. AMEE YAJNIK: Regarding the carbon credits trading, it was already there in 
place.  It is not a new thing that has come and Gujarat had one of the industries which 
was topping the list in chlorofluorocarbons.  This is not a new thing.  You already have 
a roadmap.  So, how are you going to implement this?  That is the question. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I did not hear.  What did you say about Gujarat? 
 
DR. AMEE YAJNIK :  In Gujarat, there is an indust ry which is already dealing in this 
emission trading.  So, it was already there,  brought during the UPA years.  So, there 
is already a roadmap.  They just have to follow it, but I think they are perplexed and 
not sure how to go about it.  
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL:  Sir, I would like to... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  She is appreciating you. 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
63

SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL :  Yes, Sir.  I would like to thank the hon. Member for having 
highlighted how the hon. Prime Minister, when  he was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, 
was at the forefront of the fight against climate change.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. AMEE YAJNIK:  The UPA Government was at the forefront. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PIYUSH GOYAL :  The important point to be note d is that when the world was 
waking up to the challenge of the climat e change, the Vice-Pres ident of one of the 
world's global super powers, the world' s largest economy, came out with a book 
called 'An Inconvenient Truth'.  But, our hon. Prime Minister, in response to that, said 
as the Chief Minister of Gujarat that for us in India, we knew this 'inconvenient truth' 
for generations and centuries because Indi a consciously respects nature and every 
aspect of nature.  He came out with the book ' Convenient Action - Continuity for 
Change'.  That was the book that our hon.  Prime Minister Modi wrote.  He 
consistently worked as the Chief Minister.  Whether it was the first solar power unit in 
India or whether it was the first wind po wer unit along the canals, I think, he has 
demonstrated, through actions right for the last 23 years where he has led the country 
in one form or the other in different initiatives, his sensitivity to the environment and his 
commitment to make India a global play er when it comes to addressing the 
challenges of climate change.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Question No. 07 - Shri Anil Desai.  
      
Production of wheat, rice and pulses 
 
*7. SHRI ANIL DESAI: Will the Minister of AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS 
WELFARE be pleased to state: 
(a) the total production of wheat, rice an d pulses in the country during last 
three years, year-wise; 
(b) the total domestic demand of the same during last three years, and whether 
demand is more than production in the country; 
(c) the quantity of the same being imported; and 
(d) the total demand and production of the same in the country after Covid 
pandemic? 
 
64
[RAJYA SABHA]

THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND 
F A R M E R S  W E L F A R E            ( S U S H R I  S H O BHA KARANDLAJE):  (a) to (d) A statement is 
laid on the Table of the House. 
Statement 
 
(a) to (d) The country witnessed a record  foodgrain production of 3296.87 Lakh 
Metric Tonnes (LMT) during the agricultur al year 2022-23 registering an increase of 
30.82% as compared to 2520.25 Lakh Metr ic Tonnes (LMT) in 2014-15. Further, 
during 2022-23 the production of rice, wheat and pulses stood at 1357.55 LMT, 
1105.54 LMT and 260.58 LMT respectively registering an increase of 28.7%, 27.77% 
and 51.90% over their respective production  of 1054.82 LMT, 865.27 LMT and 171.54 
LMT during 2014-15. The growing foodgrains  production in the country is due to 
higher budget allocation to agriculture sector and successful implementation of 
various scheme and programmes by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  
The budget allocated for Agriculture during the FY 2022-23 stood at Rs. 
1,24,000.00 crore as compared to Rs. 22, 652.25 crore in FY 2014-15, recording an 
increase of 447.41%. 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM)  aims to increase the production of 
rice, wheat and pulses through area expa nsion and productivity enhancement; 
restoring soil fertility and productivity; and enhancing farm level economy. During the 
year 2022-23, Rs. 1395.00 crores was alloca ted under NFSM. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana – Remunerative Approaches for Ag riculture and Allied Sector Rejuvenation 
(RKVY-RAFTAAR) targets at broad objectives of making farming a remunerative 
economic activity through strengthening the farm er’s effort, risk mitigation with major 
focus on pre & post-harvest infrastruc ture. During the year 2022-23, Rs. 3005.08 
crore was allocated for RKVY.  
Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay Sanrak sHan Abhiyan’ (PM-AASHA), is an 
umbrella scheme comprising Price Support  Scheme (PSS) which is implemented for 
procurement of notified pulses, oilseeds and copra of Fair Average Quality (FAQ) at 
Minimum Support Price (MSP), Price Defi ciency Payment Scheme (PDPS) and 
Private Procurement & Stockist Scheme (PPSS). Further, Government announces 
Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) for twenty-t wo (22) mandated crops. Government 
has increased the MSPs for all mandated Kharif, Rabi and other commercial crops 
with a return of at least 50 per cent over a ll India weighted average cost of production 
from the agricultural year 2018-19. 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMF BY) was launched in 2016 in order to 
provide a simple and affordable crop insura nce product to ensure comprehensive risk 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
65

cover for crops to farmers against all non-preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to 
post-harvest and to provide adequate cl aim amount. During the year 2022-23 under 
PMFBY, 1174.7 lakh farmers applications we re enrolled and the funds allocated stood 
at Rs. 15500 crores. Pradhan Mantri Ki san Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) is a central 
sector scheme under which financial benefit of Rs. 6000/- per year is transferred in 
three equal four-monthly instalments into  the bank accounts of eligible farmers’ 
families across the country, through Dire ct Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode. The 
Government of India has disbursed over Rs . 2.81 lakh Crore to more than 11 Crore 
farmers.  
The details of production of rice, wheat  and various pulses during last three 
years are given as under: 
 
Crop Production (lakh tonnes) 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
Rice 1243.68 1294.71 1357.55 
Wheat 1095.86 1077.42 1105.54 
Pulses 254.63 273.02 260.58 
Total Foodgrains 3107.42 3156.16 3296.87 
 
India, in recent years, has emerged as net exporters of agricultural products. It 
is the major rice exporting country in the Wo rld. During 2022-23, the export of rice 
stood at 223.47 lakh tonnes witnessing an  increase of 86% in comparison to rice 
export of 120.01 lakh tonnes during 2014- 15. Further, the import of pulses in the 
country witnessed a decrease by 46% in comp arison to pulses import in 2014-15. 
During the year 2022-23, pulses import stood at 24.96 lakh tonnes, as against 45.85 
lakh tonnes in the year 2014- 15, depicting less reliance on imports due to increased 
domestic production. 
The details of import of wheat, rice and pulses during last three years are as 
under: 
 
Crop Import (in thousand tons) 
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23  
Rice 4.76 10.58 6.71 
Wheat 0.00 0.05 13.57 
Pulses 2466.16 2699.69 2469.17 
 
66
[RAJYA SABHA]

The Working Group constituted by Nation al Institution for Transforming India 
(NITI) Aayog on Crop Husbandry, Ag ricultural Inputs, Demand and Supply 
Projections in its report “Demand & Supply Projections towards 2033 Crops, 
Livestock, Fisheries and Agricultural Inputs ” published in Fe bruary, 2018 had 
projected the demand for terminal years 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2021-22.  
The details of production and projected  demand for aforesaid years are as 
under: 
(in lakh tonnes) 
Crop 
2016-17 2017-18 2021-22 
Demand Production Demand Production Demand Production 
Rice 1035.90 1096.98 1081.60 1127.58 1092.80 1294.71 
Wheat 901.80 985.10 957.10 998.70 971.20 1077.42 
Pulses 236.10 231.31 260.50 254.16 267.20 273.02 
 
SHRI ANIL DESAI: Sir, the Minister of Agriculture has given a very elaborate reply.  In 
fact, I had asked very specific question s but going beyond the scope of the 
questions, the Minister has given a very elaborate reply.  
 In the answer which has been given, the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana 
(PMFBY) has been emphasized.  During the year 2022-23, 11.75 lakh farmers' 
applications were enrolled and the funds allocat ed -- in a sense, it is taken as claims 
w h i c h  w e r e  p a i d  - -  w e r e  t o  t h e  t u n e  o f  R s .  1 5 , 5 0 0  c r o r e s .   I f  w e  g o  b y  t h i s ,  t h e  
PMFBY, which was introduced in 2016, it needed desperate improvement every year 
because the farmers' woes on the ground were  never heard.  If we go by the figure of 
15,500 crore of rupees by way of claims given to the farmers, average farmer gets 
around Rs. 1,320.  The amount which the fa rmer pays by way of premium comes to 2 
per cent of the Kharif crop and 1.5 per cent of the Rabi crop.  On an average, an 
amount of more than 5,000 rupees is paid  by the farmer.  The Government's answer 
talks about PMFBY on which a lot of emphas is has been made.  Sir, the Government 
has been saying it with pride that over the years, it has been very beneficial for the  
farmers but it is not a fact.  On the  
ground, farmers are crying and you can veri fy the facts from the insurance companies 
and the Government department, and mo re than anything, from the farmers 
themselves.  
  
MR. CHAIRMAN: Supplementary, please. 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
67

SHRI ANIL DESAI : May I know from the hon. Minister as to what improvements are 
being made or have already been done so that the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bimal Yojana 
(PMFBY) becomes an effective instrument in  the hands of the Government to give 
benefits to the farmers? 
 
सुǛी शोभा कारान्दलाजे : सभापित  जी, भारत की फसल बीमा योजना 2016 मȂ नयी पॉिलसी क े 
तहत शुरू  हुई।  This is the largest crop insurance scheme in the world in terms of 
farmers' registration.  Also, this is the th ird largest scheme in the world in terms of 
insurance premiums.  हमारे देश मȂ 7 सालȗ मȂ 49.44 करोड़ िकसानȗ ने application enroll की 
है और इस साल 14.06 करोड़ applications आयी हȅ।  इसमȂ 7 सालȗ मȂ िक
सानȗ  ने 29,183 करोड़ 
रुपय े का Ģीिमयम भरा है।  Claims received - Rs. 1,46,664 crore, यानी claims िमलने मȂ 
बहुत ज्यादा गुना बढ़ोतरी हुई है।  हर साल यिद िकसी िकसान ने 100 रुपय े भरे, तो Government 
of India Îटेट को मदद देती है।  इसमȂ तो पूरी की पूरी Îटेट ही इसकी implementing agency  
है।   भारत  सरकार  अपना  िहÎसा  Îटेट को  देती है।   Îटेट टȂडर मँगाती है, Îटेट ही इसका 
implementation करती है और भारत सरकार का िहÎसा उसको िमलता है।  इस Ģकार यिद 
िकसानȗ ने 100 रुपय े pay िकये तो  अभी तक 502 रुपय े िकसानȗ को िम ले हȅ, इसीिलए 29,000 
करोड़ क े िलए 1,46,000 करोड़, they got the claims under Fasal Bima Yojana.  सभापित  
जी, हम इसमȂ नयी फसल बीमा योजना की नीित लाये हȅ।  इसमȂ अगर िकसी को 33 Ģितशत से 
अिधक का नुकसान होता है, तो उसको क्लेम देने क े िलए हमने एक नयी पॉिलसी बनायी है।  
हमने टȂडर Ģिकर्या को तीन साल क े िलए बढ़ाया है। ऐसे ही जो Îवेच्छा से खुद Ģीिमयम भरना 
चाहते हȅ, वे भर सकते हȅ। यह कÇपÊसरी नहीं है, बिÊक Îवैिच्छ
क है। इसके  िलए हमने टेक्नोलॉजी 
का उपयोग िकया है, िडिजटल टेक्नोलॉजी का उपयोग िकया है, सॉÄट
वेयर का यूज़ िकया है। 
इस संबंध मȂ राज्य सरकार जो करना चाहती है, उसके  िहसाब से वह कर सकती है और भारत 
सरकार इस मद मȂ अपना िहÎसा देती है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Se
cond supplementary, Shri Anil Desai.   
 
SHRI ANIL DESAI:  Sir, for my first supplementary, I would request the hon. Minister 
to go through the answer and please answer correctly because the answer which  has  
been given  is completely  wrong.  The ex planation given by the hon. Minister does 
not satisfy me or my expectations because I have different figures with me.  
 
सुǛी शोभा कारान्दलाजे: सर, वह गलत नहीं है, बिÊक सही है। 
 
SHRI ANIL DESAI :  Sir, any way, my second suppl ementary is with respect to the 
figures regarding pulses which I asked in my question.  In 2 021-22, the projected 
demand in pulses was 267 lakh tonnes wh ereas the production during the same 
68
[RAJYA SABHA]

period was 273 lakh tonnes and the import s during the same time, which has been 
shown on the earlier page, were around 269 9 thousand tonnes.  May I know from the 
hon. Minister, through you, why has this anomaly or mistake taken place?  Is it a 
mistake in the answer or when the production is higher than the demand, where is the 
question of importing pulses in that very year?  How do you justify the need to go for 
import of pulses during 2021-22 when the pr oduction of pulses was much higher than 
the demand? 
 
सुǛी शोभा कारान्दलाजे: सर, हमारे देश मȂ ितलहन और दलहन की िजतनी माँग है, उतनी 
पैदावार नहीं है, इसिलए हमȂ बाहर क े देशȗ से इनका इÇपोटर् करना पड़ता है। ितलहन और दलहन 
क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत को आत्मिनभर्र बनाने क े िलए भारत सरकार लगातार का
 म कर रही है। इसके  
िलए िकसानȗ को मदद भी दे रही है। हमȂ ितलहन और दलहन का एिरया बढ़ाना है, इसिलए हम 
उत्पादन और उत्पादकता, दोनȗ को बढ़ाने क े िलए काम कर रहे हȅ। हम हर साल दलहन की कमी 
का सामना कर रहे हȅ, तुअर दाल की ज्यादा कमी का सामना कर रहे हȅ। तुअर दाल की ज्यादा 
उपज कणार्टक और महाराÍटर् मȂ होती है।...(Ëयवधान)...दलहन क े संबंध मȂ पूछा गया 
है।...(Ëयवध
ान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please, please.  ..(Interruptions).. Yes, hon. Minister. 
 
सुǛी शोभा कारान्दलाजे: सर, हम ितलहन और दलहन क े क्षेतर् मȂ भारत को आत्मिनभर्र बनाने क े 
िलए काम कर रहे हȅ। हमने इसके  िलए दलहन क े 250 हÅस बनाये हȅ। हम इसकी नई वैरायटीज़ 
क े िलए अनुसंधान कर रहे हȅ। हम क्ल
ाइमेट रेिसिलएंट वैरायटीज़ क े िलए अनुसंधान कर रहे हȅ। 
आईसीएमआर इसके  िलए िरसचर् कर रही है। हमने इसके  िलए एमएसपी को बढ़ाया है। हम 
एमएसपी पर िकसानȗ से इसको खरीदते हȅ।...(Ëय वधान)... एमएसपी देने से िकसानȗ को लगता है 
िक हम जो फसल उगाते हȅ, उसको सरकार एमएसपी पर खरीदती है।...(Ëयवधान)... इसिलए हम 
एमएसपी को समय-समय पर बढ़ाते रहते हȅ। इस तरह से हम दलहन की पैदावार को बढ़ाने का 
काम करते हȅ। हम इसका एिरया बढ़ाने, उत्पादन और उत्पादकता बढ़ाने की िदशा मȂ काम कर 
रहे हȅ। तुअर दाल की पैदावार मȂ कम
ी है, क्यȗिक कणार्टक और महाराÍटर् मȂ इसकी पैदावार ज्यादा 
होती है, लेिकन इन राज्यȗ मȂ सूखा पड़ा हुआ है। इसके  कारण तुअर दाल की पैदावार मȂ कमी हुई 
है। हम तुअर दाल का इÇपोटर् कर
के  देश की माँग को पूरा करने क े बारे मȂ सोच रहे 
हȅ।...(Ëयवध ान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Supplementary number three, Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal.  
 
डा .अशोक क ुमार िमǄल : सर, माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने अपने बजट भाषण मȂ कहा िक िकसानȗ 
को िदया जाने वाला िमिनमम सपोटर् Ģाइस दोगुना कर िदया गया है, जो िक सराहनीय है।  मेरा 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
69

माननीय मंतर्ी जी से ĢÌन है िक क्या भारत सरकार एमएसपी को कानूनी गारंटी देने क े िलए कोई 
कानून लाने पर िवचार कर रही है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister. 
 
क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी ( Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा): माननीय सभापित महोदय, दलहन की कई 
िकÎमȗ मȂ से क ु छ की पैदावार अिधक होती है, क ु छ की कम होती है, िजस
मȂ से तूर दाल क े बारे मȂ 
कहा गया है।  यह सबकी जानकारी मȂ है िक िपछली बार कणार्टक मȂ सूखे क े कारण अच्छी फसल 
नहीं हो पाई और जो तूर दाल होती है, उसके  उत्पादन मȂ बहुत अिधक समय लगता है।  चना दाल 
का उत्पादन अिधक है।  देश मȂ क ु ल दालȗ का जो उत्पादन हुआ है, उसके  अनुसार वह सरÃलस 
है, लेिकन तूर दल की िज तनी आवÌयकता है, उसमȂ कमी आई है। 
 सर, माननीय सदÎय ने जो दूसरी बात कही, उसके  बारे मȂ मȅ उनको बताना चाहता हूँ िक 
एमएसपी क े बारे मȂ माननीय मोदी जी की गारंटी है।  िकसानȗ की आय दोगुनी हो, उनकी लागत 
का लाभ अच्
छे ढंग से िमले, यह अपने आपमȂ मोदी जी की गारंटी है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Question Hour is over. 
 
[Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part – I to this Debate, pu blished electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials
 ] 
 
 
MOTION OF THANKS ON THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member Kavita Patidar to move that an Address be Presented 
to the President in the following terms: 
  "That the Members of the Rajya Sa bha assembled in this session are 
deeply grateful to the President for the Address which she has been pleased to deliver 
to both Houses of Parliament assembled together on January 31, 2024." 
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार (मध्य Ģदेश) : माननीय  सभापित महोदय, मȅ ĢÎताव करती हूँ िक 
राÍटर्पित क े Ģित िनÇनिलिखत रूप  मȂ क ृतज्ञता ज्ञािपत की जाए:-  
      "िक राÍटर्पित ने 31 जनवरी, 2024 को संसद की दोनȗ सभाओं की सिÇमिलत बैठक मȂ जो 
अिभभाषण िदया है उसके  िलए राज्
य सभा क े सदÎय, जो सभा क े वतर्मान सतर् मȂ उपिÎथत हȅ, 
राÍटर्पित क े Ģित अपनी हािर्दक क ृतज्ञता ज्ञािपत करते हȅ।" 
 सभापित महोदय, ' अमृत काल' की शुरुआत  मȂ बने नये संसद भवन मȂ अपने जीवन को 
कमर् से गढ़ने वाली न
ारी-शिƪ की पिरचाियका, आदरणीय राÍटर्पित जी ने 500 साल क े इंतजार 
70
[RAJYA SABHA]

क े बाद बने भËय अयोध्या मंिदर एवं रामलला की Ģाण-ĢितÍठा क े मनोभावȗ क े साथ ही रामराज्य 
की Îथापना की ओर कदम उठाते हुए िवकिसत भारत क े संकÊप क े साथ हमारी सरकार की 
उपलिÅधयȗ को भी जनता क े सामने रखा है।  संÎकृ ित और सÆयता का Ģतीक नये भवन की भËयत ा 
को तो उन्हȗने दशार्या ही है, साथ मȂ िवÌवास भी जताया है िक िवकिसत भारत क े िवकास को 
आकार देने वाली नीित क े रचनात्मक संवाद इस नई िबिंÊडग क े गवाह बनȂगे। 
 माननीय सभ ापित महोदय, जैसा हम जानते हȅ िक हमारी सरकार और माननीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ मिहलाओं क े सशिƪकरण मȂ उठाए गए कदम हर Îतर पर िकए गए संभव 
Ģयास हȅ।  उǏिमता, सुगम जीवन, मिहलाओं क े िलए सÇमान क े माध्यम से उनके  सशिƪकरण 
को इन 10 वषș मȂ जो गित िमली है, वह हम सबके  सामने है।  "यतर् नायर्Îतु पूज्यन्ते, रमन्ते ततर् 
देवता:", इस मूलमंतर् पर क ेिन्दर्त होकर माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार ने 
मिहला सशिƪकरण सुिनिÌच
त करने क े िलए िनणार्यक एजȂडा भी िनधार्िरत िकया और उसको 
वाÎतिवकता का Îवरूप भी Ģदान िकया।  इसके  साथ-साथ, उसने िविभन्न योजनाओं क े माध्यम 
से मिहलाओं की तकदीर सँवारने का भी काम िकया, चाहे वह 'Ģधानमंतर्ी मातृत्व वंदना योजना' 
से तीन करोड़ से अिधक बहनȗ क े पोष
ण की िचन्ता का िवषय हो या िफर बहनȗ क े सÇमान से जुड़ा 
11 करोड़ से अिधक शौचालयȗ का िनमार्ण कर बुिनयादी जरूरत  को पूरा करने का Ģण हो।  आज 
हमारी सरकार ने हर उस माता की िचन्ता समझी, िजनकी आँखȗ की रोशनी घर की रसोई मȂ 
चूÊहा जलाते हुए धूिमल हो गई थी।  मुझे Ģसन्नता है िक 'Ģधानमंतर्ी उज्ज्वला योजना' क े तहत 
10 करोड़ से अिधक मिह
लाओं को उस धुएँ से आज़ ादी  िमली, िजसने उनकी साँसȗ को दमा जैसी 
बीमािरयȗ से जकड़ रखा था।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े Ģयासȗ से करोड़ȗ बहनȗ ने बȅक की 
दहलीज तब लांघी, जब उनके  जन-धन खाते खोले गए। आज हमारी सरकार क े ǎारा 27 करोड़ 
से अिधक मिहलाओं क े जनधन खाते खोले गए हȅ। आज हमारी सरकार ने जल, थल, नभ और 
अंतिर
क्ष, हर तरफ बेिटयȗ की भूिमका का िवÎतार िकया है। हमारी बेिटयȗ क े सामथ्यर् की झलक 
िदखाती गणतंतर् िदवस की परेड भी नारी शि ƪ  को समिर्पत की गई थी। माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
मिहलाओं की आिर्थक भागीदािरता को बढ़ाने क े िलए िनरंतर Ģयास िकए। उसी का पिरणाम है िक 
आज लगभग 10 करोड़ मिहलाएं Îवयं सहायता समूह से जुड़ चुकी हȅ, िजन्हȂ 8 लाख करोड़ रुपय े 
बȅक लोन और 40 हज़ार करोड़ रुपय े की आिर्थक सहायता िम
ल रही है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Hon. Member, one minute.  Yes, Digvijaya Singhji, under which 
rule, are you raising a point of order? 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, Rule 258.  The point of order is this.  
The procedure here is this.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Would you kindly look at Rule 258? ...( Interruptions)...   Is it Rule 
238? Please make up your mind.  Is it Rule 238 or Rule 258? You will have to decide 
under which rule you are raising it. 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
71

SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  Sir, the point is of procedure.   When is the amendment to 
be moved?   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Under which rule so that I may also have the benefit of it?  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: It is Rule 258 -- Points of order and decisions thereon.   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I gave no decision. I will read it.  Rule 258 refers to points of order 
and decisions thereon. It says that any me mber may at any time submit a point of 
order for the decision of the Chairman, but in doing so, shall confine himself to stating 
the point. 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : Yes.  Sir, the point is simp le. The amendments are moved 
after the mover has moved the motion and seconded by the seconder and then come 
the amendments.  After that, her speech will start.  That is the procedure.  
...(Interruptions)...   That has been the procedure.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Can you indicate this procedure in the rule?  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : Sir, it is the procedure. This has been done over the 
precedents. This is the first time that  she has started the speech without the 
amendments being moved.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Digvijaya Singhji, many things are happening for the first time. 
  
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:  
* ...(Interruptions)...     
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Nothing will go on record, Digvijaya Singhji.  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: 
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Sir, I am very mindful of history and that is why I seek everybody's 
assistance.   
 
                   
* Not recorded. 
 
72
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH : Sir, I have sought the advice of  the officers here and they 
confirmed that usually the amendments are moved before her speech starts.  
...(Interruptions)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: There is no such provision of seconding. ...(Interruptions)...   Take 
your seat.  ...( Interruptions)...   You are a very experienced Member. 
...(Interruptions)...   As a matter of fact, I am going by the Listed Business.  
...(Interruptions)...   Hon. Member may continue her address.  
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार: माननीय सभापित महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी 
सरकार 2 करोड़ लखपित दीदी बनाने का महत्वपूणर् अिभयान चला रही है। ' नमो डर्ोन दीदी 
योजना' क े तहत समूह को 15 हज़ार डर्ोन उपलÅ ध करवाए जा रहे हȅ। मातृत्व अवकाश 12 सÃताह 
से बढ़ा कर 26 सÃताह करना मिहला सÇमान का एक सटीक उदाहरण है। सशÎतर् बलȗ मȂ 
मिहलाओं को पहली बार परमानȂट कमीशन देने का िनणर्य हो या सैिनक Îकू लȗ और राÍटर्ीय रक्षा 
अकादमी मȂ मिहला क ै डेट्स को पहली बार Ģवेश देने की बात हो - हमारी सरकार ǎारा िदए गए 
अवसर आज हमारी बहन
ȗ क े िवकास और सÇमान क े राÎते खोल रहे हȅ। आज मिहलाएं फाइटर 
पायलट भी हȅ और नौसेना क े जहाज़ को भी कमांड कर रही हȅ। वे चंदर्यान-3 की सफलत ा मȂ भी 
भूिमका िनभा रही हȅ और कोिवड जैसे संकट क े समय अपने धैयर् और मनोबल को ऊ ंचा करते हुए 
वैक्सीन िनमार्ण मȂ भी सहभागी बनी हȅ। हमारी सरकार की मुदर्ा योजना क े तहत करीब 31 करोड़ 
से ज्यादा लोन मिहलाओं को िमले हȅ, िजससे Îवरोजगार शुरू  कर बहनȂ आिर्थ
क रूप  से सशƪ 
बनी हȅ।  पहली बार भारत क े िंलग अनुपात मȂ 1,000 पुरुषȗ पर 1,020 मिहलाएं तक सुधार आज 
हम देख रहे हȅ।   
महोदय, िटर्पल तलाक को गैर-कानूनी बनाकर एक तरफ बहनȗ क े सÇमान की रक्ष
ा करने 
से लेकर इितहास को बदलते हुए राजनीित क े साथ सामािजक और आिर्थक सशƪीकरण का 
मागर् ĢशÎत करता हुआ 'नारी शिƪ वंदन अिधिन यम' क े सफर तक, 'पीएम आवास योजना' क े 
तहत मिहलाओं को मािलकाना हक देते हुए 70 Ģितशत से अिधक घर देने क े साथ ही नाबािलगȗ 
से बलात्कार क े िलए मृत्यु दंड और न्यूनतम सजा को बढ़ाकर बीस साल तक िकया गया। ये 
माननीय Ģधा
न मंतर्ी जी क े वो संकÊप थे, िजनके  ǎारा नारी क े अिधकारȗ मȂ वृिǉ कर उनके  
सÇमान की रक्षा करने का काम हमारी सरकार ने िकया है।  िजस Ģदेश से मȅ आती हूं मध्य Ģदेश, 
जहां मां नमर्दा और मां शारदा का आशीवार्द पग-पग पर िमलता है, उस Ģदेश मȂ बेिटयȗ क े जन्म 
से लेकर उनक
ी िशक्षा, िववाह और उनको आत्मिनभर्र बनाने तक की सभी योजनाओं क े साथ 
क ेन्दर् की योजना का लाभ लेकर मिहला कर्ांित का सामािजक Ģभाव आज हमȂ देखने को िमल रहा 
है।    
'घर-घर आंगन देखो खुशहाली आई है, 
                               सब
का मान बढ़ाने घर मȂ बेटी आई है।' 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
73

यह सुअवसर िमला है, क्यȗिक आज बेिटयȗ का जन्म उत्सव बना है।  हमारी सरकार ने 
बहन-बेिटयȗ क े जीवन-चकर् से जुड़ी हर समÎया पर ध्यान देकर उसका समाधान िकया है।  
मिहला शिƪ क े साथ ही युवा शिƪ, िकसान और गरीब-इन चार Îतंभȗ को सशƪ करने क े िलए 
हमारी सरकार िनरंतर का
म कर रही है।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत और 
िवकिसत भारत क े दृिÍटकोण को साकार करने क े िलए हमारी सरकार  दृढ़संकिÊपत है।  राÍटर् क े 
िवकास क े उǈेÌय से अनेकȗ योजन ाओं और नीितयȗ क े माध्यम से हमारी सरकार िवकास रथ पर 
आगे बढ़ रही है।  सफल चन्दर्यान िमशन से लेकर हाल ही मȂ जी20 िशखर सÇमेलन की मेजबानी 
ने देश क े सÇमान को बढ़ाया है।   
महोदय, राÍ
टर्पित महोदया ने उपलिÅधयȗ क े बारे मȂ बताते हुए कहा है िक बीते दस वषर् की 
साधना का यह िवÎतार है।  जÇमू-कÌमीर से आिर्टकल 370 हटाने को लेकर जो संशाएं थीं, आज 
वे इितहास बन चुकी हȅ।  धारा 370 हटने क े बाद जÇमू-कÌमीर मȂ आतंकी हमलȗ मȂ भी बहुत कमी 
आई है।  शरणािर्थयȗ को नागिरकता देने क े िलए नए कानून बनाए गए हȅ।  सरकार ने 'One Rank
 
One Pension' को भी लागू िकया है, िजसका इंतजार काफी समय से था।  देश सही िद शा मȂ सही 
िनणर्य लेते हुए आगे बढ़ रहा है।  भारत सबसे तेज गित से िवकिसत होती बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा बन 
गया है।  आज 'Top Five Economies' मȂ हमारा भारत पहुंच चुका है।  हमȂ गवर् होना चािहए िक 
भारत चंदर्मा क े दिक्षण धर्ुव पर झंडा फहराने वाल
ा पहला देश बना। इसके  साथ ही सफलता क े 
साथ ' आिदत्य िमशन' को भी लॉन्च िकया।  िदÊली-मुंबई एक्ÎĢेस क े साथ भारत क े सबसे लंबे 
समुदर्ी ' अटल सेतु' क े रूप  मȂ िवकास क े नए आयाम Îथािपत िकए हȅ।  भारत को अपनी पहली 
'अमृत भारत टर्ेन' िमली।  िमशन मोड मȂ लाखȗ युवाओं को  सरकारी नौकरी दी गई।  भारत का 
िनयार्त 450 िबिलयन डॉलर  से बढ़कर 775 िबिलयन  डॉलर से अिधक हो गया है।  पहले की 
तुलना मȂ FDI दुगना हुआ है।  खादी गर्ामोǏोग क े उत्पादनȗ की िबकर्ी मȂ चार गुना बढ़ोतरी हुई है। 
Start
 ups बढ़कर  1 lakh से अिधक हो गए हȅ।  GST देने वालȗ की संख्या बढ़कर 1 करोड़ , 40 
लाख हो गई है।  2023-24 मȂ 12 lakh electric वाहन िबके  हȅ, जो एक नई कर्ांित का आÏ वान है।  
'Make in India' और 'आत्मिनभर्र भारत' हमारी ताकत बन चुक े हȅ।  आज भारत दुिनया का दूसरा 
सबसे बड़ा मोबाइल फोन िनयार्त देश बन चुका है।  हम बचपन से गरीबी हटाओ, गरीबी हटाओ 
का नारा सुनते आ रहे थे, लेिकन आज हमारी सरकार क े एक दशक क े कायर्काल मȂ बड़े पैमाने 
पर 25 करोड़  देशवासी गरीबी से बाहर िनकले हȅ।  िडिजटल टर्ांजैक्शन मȂ हमारा देश आगे 
िनकला है। आज दुिनया क े क ु ल िरयल टाइम िडिजटल लेन-देन का 46 Ģि तशत भारत मȂ होता है। 
आज गांव मȂ चार लाख िकलोमीटर नई सड़कȗ का िनमार्ण हो या नेशनल हाईवे की बात हो, 
एयरपोटर् की संख्या दोगुना बढ़ाने क े साथ ही 10 हजार िकलोमीटर गैस पाइपलाइन िब छाना हो, 
हमारा देश तेज़ी से िवकास क े पथ पर आगे बढ़ रहा है। 
 पांच शहरȗ तक सीिमत मेटर्ो की सुिवधा आज 20 शहरȗ मȂ है। 25 हजार िकलोमीटर से 
ज्यादा रेलवे टर्ैक िबछाये गये हȅ। आज 49 से  ज् यादा रूट  पर वंदे भारत टर्ेन्स चल रही हȅ। यह 
िवकिसत भारत क े संकÊप की यातर्ा का िवकास रूपी  Ģितिंबब है।  
 सभापित महोदय, मȅ अन्य िपछड़ा वगर् क े कÊयाण क े िलए हमारी सरकार की Ģितबǉता 
को उजागर करने क े िलए माननीय राÍटर्पित जी की सराहना करती हूं। मुझे यह बताते हुए बहुत 
गवर् हो रहा है िक हमारे माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने ओबीसी समुदाय क े कÊयाण को आगे बढ़ाने क े 
74
[RAJYA SABHA]

िलए कई पहल की हȅ। उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ ओबीसी आयोग को संवैधािनक दजार् िदया गया है। उससे 
सामािजक और शैक्षिणक रूप  से िपछड़े वगर् क े अिधकारȗ की रक्षा करने की शिƪयां िमलती हȅ। 
यह मुझे उपलिÅध की भावना से भर देता है जब मȅ यह उÊ लेख करती हूं िक हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
Îवयं ओबीसी Ǜेणी से हȅ, उनके  मंितर्मंडल मȂ कई मंतर्ी ओबीसी हȅ, साथ ही मेरे Ģदेश क े मुख्य 
मंतर्ी भी ओबीसी Ǜेणी से आते हȅ। ऐसे कई िनणर्य यह Ģदिर्शत करते हȅ िक ह
मारी सरकार ओबीसी 
िहतैषी है और उसकी कथनी और करनी मȂ कोई अंतर नहीं है।   
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती रिमलाबेन बेचारभाई बारा) पीठासीन हुईं।] 
 
सुǛी किवता पाटीदार: उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, भËय अयोध्या मंिदर और Ǜीराम लला की Ģाण 
ĢितÍठा हमारे गौरव का Ģतीक है। यह ऐितहािसक पल एक Ģकाश पुंज है, जो हमȂ एक
ता, नैितक 
मूÊयȗ और हमारे महान राÍटर् की भावना से मेल खा न े वाले िसǉांतȗ की ओर मागर् दिर्शत करते हȅ। 
इस मागर् पर चलते हुए, आइये, हम सबका साथ, सबका िवकास क े Ģित अपनी Ģितबǉता की 
पुिÍट करȂ, यह मानते हुए िक िवकिसत भारत की यातर्ा मȂ कोई भी नागिरक पीछे नहीं रहेगा, 
क्यȗिक हमारा मानना है, 
  ‘सूरज जैसा बनना है, तो सूरज िजतन
ा जलना होगा, 
निदयȗ सा आदर पाना है, तो पवर्त छोड़ िनकलना होगा, 
हम इस सदी क े लोग हȅ, तो क्यȗ सोचȂ िक राह सरल होगी, 
अगर मोदी की गारंटी है, तो हर मुिÌ कल अब हल होगी।’  
 
 इस भाव क े साथ एक भारत, ǛेÍठ भारत की कÊपना, उसके  भाव हम सब क े िदलȗ मȂ गूंजȂ 
और उसकी सफलता क े सामूिहक Ģयास क े आÏवान हेतु पुनः माननीय राÍटर्पित महोदया जी को 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद देते हुए, मȅ अपनी वाणी को िव
राम देती हूं। जय िंहद, जय भारत !  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती रिमलाबेन बेचारभाई बारा) : धन्यवाद। Ǜी िववेक ठाकु र जी। 
 
Ǜी िववेक ठाकु र (िबहार):  आदरणीय  उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ आपको धन्यवाद देना चाहूंगा 
िक आपने नये संसद भव
न मȂ ĢÎतुत राÍटर्पित क े Ģथम अिभभाषण पर अपने िवचार ĢÎतुत करने 
का अवसर मुझे अवसर Ģदान िकया।  महोदया, आज भले ही हम नये संसद भवन मȂ Ģवेश कर 
चुक े हȗ, परंतु पुराने सदन की एक Îमृित संÎकृ त क े एक Ìलोक क े माध्यम से आपके  समक्ष ĢÎतुत 
करना चाहूंगा - 
‘सवर्दा ÎयाƐ
प: Ģाज्ञ, 
Îवमते न कदाचन। 
सÇयािधकार Ģकृ ित, 
सभासत्सुमते िÎथत: ।।’ 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
75

यह Ìलोक िलÄट नÇबर चार क े पास िÎथत गुÇबद पर अंिकत है। पǍ पुराण मȂ इसे सवर्लोक सुख 
Ģदç कहा गया है, सांख्य दशर्न मȂ इसे अत्यंत लोकिहतç सत्यç कहा गया है। इस Ìलोक का अथर् 
है िक राजा को हमेशा बुिǉमान रहना चािहए। बुिǉमǄा और समपर्ण की भावना से िन णर्य लेने की 
क्षमता Ģामािणक होती है। उन्हȂ यह सुनना चािहए िक सदन मȂ अन्य लोग क्या कहते हȅ, क्यȗिक 
उसे सभी की भलाई क े िलए कायर् करना है। उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, आप सोच रही हȗगी िक मȅने 
उपरोƪ Ìलोक की चचार् क्यȗ की? वह इसिलए की क्यȗिक उपरोƪ Ìलोक मȂ Ģधान सेवक से जो 
अपेक्षा की गई है, उन सभी की पूिर्त हमारे आदर
णीय Ģधान मंतर्ी ने िपछले दस वषș मȂ की है। यह 
बजट देखक
र यही Ģतीत होता है िक हमारे आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी बुिǉमǄा और समपर्ण की 
भावना से िजस Ģकार कायर् कर रहे हȅ, वह साफ-साफ पिरलिक्षत होता है, वरना हमने िकतने 
चुनावी वषर् क े बजट देखे, िजनमȂ freebies की भरमार होती थी, परंतु यह बजट भारत क े 
अमृतकाल का बजट है, िजसमȂ 2047 मȂ िवकिस
त भारत क े roadmap को जुलाई मȂ ĢÎतुत करने 
की बात कही गई है। यह एक दूरदशीर् सोच क े बजट की झलक है, क्यȗिक यह interim bu dget 
है। जब दूरदिर्शता की बात आती है, तो पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी मनमोहन िंसह जी ǎारा इस सदन मȂ 
demonetisation पर िदया गया बयान याद आता है, िजसमȂ उन्हȗने क ेन्स, जो एक बहुत ही 
नामी-िगरामी इकोनॉिमÎ ट थे, उन्हȂ  क्वोट िकया था और कहा था िक वतर्मान सरकार जो नीित 
लेकर आई है, उससे वह दूरदशीर् लाभ की अपेक्षा कर रही है, पर क ेन्स का कहना है, "In the 
long-run, we are all dead." अथार्Þ हमȂ िनकट भिवÍय की िंचता पर ध्यान देना चा िहए , न िक 
भिवÍय की दूरदशीर् योजनाओं पर। िवचार कीिजए िक ऐसे िवचार वाली सरकार ने देश पर दशकȗ 
तक राज िकया और इसी दूरदिर्शता का अभाव था िक जब 2014 मȂ हम सǄा मȂ आए, तो 
अथर्ËयवÎथा पूरी तरह से तबाह िÎथित मȂ थी। अगर मȅ उन्हीं पूवर् Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े उस समय क े 
एक और बयान का िजकर् करूं , जब उन्हȗने demonetisation को organis
ed loot and legalised 
plunder कहा था, तो मȅ आपके  माध्यम से सदन को बताना चाहूंगा िक organised loot and 
legalised plunder उसे कहते हȅ जब देश मȂ oil bonds क े माध्यम से तेल खरीदा जा रहा था 
तािक भुगतान मौजूदा िवǄीय वषर् मȂ न करना पड़े और current acco
unt deficit कम िदखे। 
महोदय, organised loot and legalised plunder तब होता है, जब बजट मȂ loss or 
borrowings को carry forward करके  fiscal deficit को paper पर limit मȂ रखने का Ģयास 
िकया जाता था, लेिकन वह वाÎतव मȂ अपनी िलिमट से कहीं ज्यादा होता था। महोदय, 
organised loot and legalised plunder तब होता है, जब 2G घोटाला  होता है, कोल घोटाला 
होता है, कॉमनवैÊथ गेÇस घोटाला होता है,  अगÎटा
वैÎटलȅड घोटाला होता है। यह सब एक 
अथर्शाÎतर्ी Ģधान मंतर्ी और अथर्शाÎतर्ी िवǄ मंतर्ी की नाक क े नीचे होता था और वे दोन ȗ अभी भी 
इस सदन क े सदÎय हȅ। जनता से खुलेआम ऐसी  की गई थी िक आदमी िजसका कम वणर्न करे, 
वही उिचत है। वह िसफर् इसिलए हुआ, क्यȗिक दूरदिर्शता का अभाव था और राÍटर् क े Ģित समपर्ण 
नगण्य था, भाव एक जमींदार और जागीर का था और एक चरमराई अथर्ËयवÎथा क े साथ हमारा 
सरकार मȂ गृह Ģवेश हुआ था।  
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
76
[RAJYA SABHA]

 सभापित महोदय, जब हम 2014 मȂ आए और इकोनॉमी की समीक्षा की तो हालात भयावह 
थे। एक जोरदार बहस िछड़ी िक state of economy पर  White Paper लाया जाए और देश और 
दुिनया जाने िक िकस अवÎथा मȂ देश आकर खड़ा है। ऐसा बोला ही जाता था     िक      भारत    
fragile    five    मȂ    है,  policy  paralysis   से   गर्िसत   है,   banks  bad shape मȂ हȅ और 
borrowings fiscal mis
management का अहम िहÎसा बन गया था।  मȅने पहले भी िजकर् िकया 
है। 
 महोदय, inflation out of control था, लेिकन उस  White Paper को तब लाने पर हालात 
ऐसे बन जाते िक सारे investors भाग जाते और  India investment story तहस-नहस होनी तय 
थी। वहाँ से Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े क ुशल नेतृत्व मȂ दस साल क े आिर्थक सशिƪकरण और समृǉ 
भारत की िजस यातर्ा पर हम चले, उससे आज fragil
e five से िवÌव की पाँचवीं सबसे बड़ी 
इकोनॉमी तो बने ही, साथ ही fastest growing economy का सेहरा पह नकर हम जÊद ही 
तीसरी सबसे बड़ी अथर्ËयवÎथा भी बनने जा रहे हȅ। महोदय, बाधाएं तो ऐसी आईं िक िवÌव िहल 
गया, कोिवड जैसी महामारी ने world economy को िहला िदया और geopolitical हालात, युǉ 
आिद सभी क ु छ एक साथ होकर एक नए world order को  भी Îवरूप देने लगे, लेिकन हमारा 
भारत अगर्णी होकर इन सबके  बीच से एक bright spot बन
कर िनकला। आज मȅ माननीय िवǄ 
मंतर्ी जी से आगर्ह करना चाहूंगा िक वे इसी सतर् मȂ  सदन मȂ वह  White Paper जरूर  लाएं, तािक 
देश यह जाने िक इन्हȗने हमȂ कहाँ लाकर खड़ा िकया था और आज हम देश को दस वषș मȂ क ै से-
क ै से िनकालते हुए भारत को bright spot बना बैठे हȅ। एक चम
कता हुआ िसतारा, िजसको िवÌव 
अब हर समÎया क े िनदान क े िलए आशाभरी िनगाह से देखता है। आप जान लȂ िक िबना भारत क े 
पोिज़शन तय िकए,
 global opinion अब  shape up नहीं  करती है।  इसके  साथ-साथ मेरा ÎपÍट 
मानना है िक भारत की foreign policy का transformation िजसमȂ इंिडया फÎटर् आया, वह एक 
क े स Îटडी बन चुका है।  आज क े इस भारत पर हमको नाज़ है और गवर् भी है।  2014 क े पूवर् 
महंगाई की क्या िÎथित थी, inflation rate out of control था।  उस समय की िÎथित को देखकर 
एक German economist, Dr. Karl Pohl का इन्Äलेशन क े संबंध मȂ एक क्वोट याद आता है।  
"Inflation is like toothpaste.  Once it's out, you can hardly get it back in again."  इसी 
Ģकार से अमेिरका क े पूवर् राÍटर्पित Harry Truman ने कहा था िक a recession is when your 
neighbor is out of work, a depressi on is when you are out of work. आदरणीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी ने economic recession और economic depression दोनȗ से हम भारतीयȗ को बचाया 
है।   
आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, देश को बांटने का हाल िफलहाल एक जबदर्Îती का 
िववाद खड़ा िकया गय ा  और पुरजोर कोिशश हुई, लेिकन भारत की जनता ने इतना बुरे तरीके  से 
बीते चुनाव मȂ इनके  इरादȗ पर पानी फ े र िदया िक ये समझ ही नहीं पाए।  हमारी सरकार ने चार 
जाितयȗ को िवकास क े िलए बȂचमाकर् बनाया है और यह सÇ पूणर् सच है - गरीब, िकसान, मिहला 
और युवा।  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का तो यह ÎपÍट मानना है िक यिद हम इन चार जाितयȗ का उत्थान 
करते हȅ, तो देश का उत्थान Îवत: हो जाएगा और यह सही भी है।  इसिलए पीएम आवास 
योजना-गर्ामीण क े तहत 4 करोड़, 10
 लाख लाभािर्थयȗ को आवास उपलÅध कराए गए।  अगले 
पांच वषș मȂ 2 करोड़ अितिरƪ आवास बनाए जाएंगे।  करीब 80 करोड़ लाभािर्थयȗ को Ģधान मंतर्ी 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
77

गरीब कÊयाण अन्न योजना क े तहत ģी राशन Ģदान िकया जा रहा है।  5 1 . 5  करोड़ पीएम 
जनधन अकाउंट खोले गए और यह financial inclusion का िवÌव मȂ एक अदभुत उदाहरण बना।  
पीएम Îविनिध क े तहत 78 लाख रेहड़ी पटरी वालȗ को लोन िवतिरत िकए गए।  पहली बार 
आज़ाद भारत मȂ िकसी सरकार ने सम ाज क े इस वगर् की भी िंचता की है।  यह एक अदभुत िमसाल 
कायम हुई है।  हमारी इन्हीं जन कÊयाणकारी नीितयȗ का नतीजा था िक िपछले दस वषș मȂ हमारी 
सरकार ने 25 करोड़ लोगȗ को multi-dimensional poverty index से बाहर िनकाला है।  इसिलए 
कहा जाता है िक सपने नहीं हकीकत बुनते हȅ, तभी तो लोग मोदी को चुनते हȅ।   
आदरणीय उ
पसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ अगली जाित - िकसानȗ पर आता हूं।  देश क े Ģमुख 
क ृिष वैज्ञािनक और शोधक, Îवगीर्य एम. एस. Îवामीनाथन ने कहा था िक if ag riculture goes 
wrong, nothing else will have a chance to go right.  यह सच भी है।  आज हमारी 
अथर्ËयवÎथा क े अन्नदाता क े िबना कÊपना भी नहीं की जा सकती है।  कोिवड क े समय हमारे 
अन्नदाता ही थे, िजन्हȗने अथर्ËयवÎथा क े इंजन को गित Ģदान की।  इसिलए Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े 
नेतृत्व मȂ हमारे अन्नदाताओं को सहायता Ģदान करने हेतु, Ģध
ान मंतर्ी िकसान सÇमान िनिध की 
शुरुआत  हुई और आज लगभग 11.8 करोड़ िकसानȗ को 2.8 लाख करोड़ से ज्यादा की धनरािश 
िवतिरत की जा चुकी है।  4 करोड़ से अिधक िकसानȗ को फस ल  बीमा Ģदान िकया जा चुका है।  
अब तो डर्ोन दीदी क े माध्यम से आज मिहला समूह को डर्ोन क े माध्यम से िकसानी की टर्ेिंनग भी दी 
जा रही है।  यूिरया क े बढ़ते उपयोग को सीिमत करने हेतु नैनो यूिरया क े बाद अब नैनो डीएपी क े 
Ģयोग को भी बढ़ावा िदया जा रहा है, िजसका िजकर् इस इंटेिरम बजट मȂ भी िकया गया है।   
आदरणीय उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदया, मȅ िजस Ģदेश से आता हूं, वहां जल मȂ arsenic की 
समÎया बहुत अिधक है।  क ेवल िबहार ही नहीं, पिÌचम बंगाल, पूवीर् उǄर Ģदेश मȂ भी यह समÎया 
अित गंभीर है।  इस योजना से करोड़ȗ लोगȗ को फायदा पहुंचने जा रहा है।  Soil or ground 
water management improvement की िदशा मȂ यह बहुत बड़ी पहल है।  आज 1361 मंिडयȗ को 
eNAM
 क े तहत िडिजटल रूप  मȂ जोड़कर ऑनलाइन टर्ेिंडग की सुिवधा भी शुरू  कर दी गई है।  
अब मȅ अगली जाित - मिहला पर आना चाहता हूं।  कौिटÊय ने कहा था -  
"न Îतर्ीरǽसमं रǽç"। 
अथार्Þ Îतर्ी क े समान कोई रत्न नहीं है।  मिहलाओं का सवार्ंगीण िवक ास हो, यह आदरणीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी का लÑय रहा है और उसी िदशा मȂ यह सरकार िनरंतर काम कर रही है।  इसिलए पीएम 
मुदर्ा योजना क े तहत 25.86 लाख करोड़ रुपय े 44.16 करोड़ लाभािर्थयȗ को िवतिरत िकए गए, 
िजसमȂ से 30 करोड़  लाभाथीर् िसफर् मिहलाएं थीं । आज एक करोड़ मिहलाओं को लखपित दीदी 
बनाया गया है।  इस बज
ट क े माध्यम से 3 करोड़ मिहलाओं को लखपित दीदी बनाने का लÑय तय 
हुआ है।  हायर एजुक ेशन मȂ िपछले 10 वषș मȂ फी म ेल एनरॉलमȂट मȂ 28 Ģितशत की वृिǉ हुई है।  
उसी Ģकार से मिहला लेबर फोसर् पािर्टिसपेशन रेट आज 37 Ģितशत तक जा पहुँचा है।  मȅ 
माननीय िवǄ मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा िक उन्हȗने इस बजट मȂ आशा और आँगनवाड़ी 
वकर् सर् को आयुÍमान भारत क े तहत कव
र करने की जो घोषणा की है, इससे इन ģ ंटलाइन वकर् सर् 
को एक बहुत ही बड़ा सुरक्षा कवच ĢाÃत होगा।  कोिवड काल मȂ गाँव-गाँव, कÎबे-कÎबे घुस कर 
िजस तरह से इन्हȗने टीकाकरण कराया और देश को बचाया, यह एक उिचत सÇमान देने वाला 
78
[RAJYA SABHA]

कदम है।  इसी संसद भवन ने मिहला शिƪ वंदन अिधिनयम पािरत कर मिहलाओं को समान 
भागीदारी िदलाने का ऐितहािसक कदम भी उठाया।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, मȅ अब अगली जाित, यानी युवा शिƪ की बात करना चाहूँगा।  कहते 
हȅ न िक Europe has aged, China is aging and India is young.  हमारी सरकार ने 1.4  करोड़ 
युवाओं को िपछले 10 वषș मȂ िÎकल टर्ेिंनग Ģदान की है।  2014 मȂ जहाँ 16 आईआईटीज़ थे, वहीं 
आज 23 आईआईटीज़  हȅ; 2014 मȂ जहाँ 7 एÇस थे, वहीं आज 22 एÇस हो चुक े हȅ; 2014 मȂ जहाँ 
723 यूिनविर्सटीज़ थीं, वहीं आज 1,113 नई यूिनविर्सटीज़ हȅ।  पीएम-Ǜी Îकू Êस क े माध्यम से 
Îकू ल को न्यू एजुक ेशन पॉिलसी क े अनुरूप  तैयार िकया जा रहा है और इस बजट मȂ धनरािश को 
4,000 करोड़ से बढ़ा कर 6,050 करोड़ कर िदया गया है।  अन
एÇÃलॉयमȂट रेट 6.1 Ģितशत से घट 
कर 3.2 Ģितशत हो चुका है।  खेलȗ मȂ िवÌव Îतर पर भारत क े युवा िखलािड़यȗ ने इि
तहास रचा है 
और 100 से ज्यादा पदक जीते हȅ।  Îटाटर्-अÃस की संख्या बढ़ कर एक लाख हो चुकी है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, िकसी भी बजट की सफलता का मापन इससे होता है िक क ैिपटल 
एक्सपȂिडचर मȂ िक
तनी बढ़ोतरी हुई है।  िपछले 10 वषș मȂ यह 5 गुना बढ़ कर इस साल 11.11 लाख 
करोड़ हो गया है, जो जीडीपी का 3.4 Ģितशत है।  यह तब संभव हो पाता है, जब आप ģीबीज़ की 
राजनीित को छोड़ कर देश क े दीघर्कािलक िवकास क े बारे मȂ सोचते हȅ।  जब आदरणीय Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ हमारी सरकार बनी, तब "सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका िवÌवास" क े 
तहत राज् य सरकारȗ को भी क ै पेक्स मȂ बढ़ोतरी करने हेतु 50 वषș का Åयाज मुƪ लोन िदया गया 
और हम पर आरोप लगता है िक हम राज्यȗ क े साथ भेदभाव करते हȅ!  इसिलए उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, 
मȅ अपने उधर क े गठबंधन क े िमतर्ȗ क े िलए एक शेर पढ़ना चा हूँगा। 
  "तू इधर उधर की न बात कर ये बता िक क़ािफ़ला क्यूँ लुटा 
   मुझे रहज़नȗ से िगला नहीं ितरी रहबरी का सवाल है ।" 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, क ै पेक्स मȂ बढ़ोतरी का ही पिरणाम था िक आज देश मȂ गाँवȗ मȂ 
लगभग 3.75 लाख िकलोमीटर नई सड़कȗ का िनमार्ण हो चुका है; राÍटर्ीय राजमागș की लंबाई 90 
हजार िकलोमीटर से बढ़ कर 1 लाख, 46 हजार  िकलोमीटर हो गई है; चार लेन वाले राÍटर्ीय 
राजमागर् की लंबाई ढाई गुणा हो गई है; हाई Îपी ड कॉिरडोर का 500 िकलोमीटर  से 4,000 
िकलोमीटर तक िवÎतार हो चुका है; हवाई अƿȗ की संख्या 74 से दोगुनी 149 हो चुकी है।  मतलब 
अनिगनत ऐसे काम हुए हȅ, जो भूतो न भिवÍयित की ही क ै टेगरी मȂ आते हȅ।  हाल मȂ जो अटल सेतु 
क े िवक
ास ने भारत को वÊडर् क्लास इंģाÎटर्क्चर बनाने वाले देशȗ की पंिƪ मȂ लाकर खड़ा कर 
िदया, यह भी एक अǌुत िमसाल है, जो पूरी दुिनया देख रही है।   
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, इस बजट क े माध्यम से, पीएम गित शिƪ क े मा
ध्यम से तीन बड़े 
रेल कॉिरडोसर् की संकÊपना की गई है, जो एनजीर्, िमनरल और सीमȂट कॉिरडोर; दूसरा, पोटर् 
कनेिक्टिवटी कॉिरडोर और तीसरा, हाई टर्ैिफक डȂिसटी कॉिरडोर है।  जैसे मान िलया जाए िक 
िदÊली और पटना का रूट  है, िजसमȂ बहुत बड़ी संख्या मȂ यातर्ी सफर कर
ते हȅ, तो इससे यातर्ी 
सेÄटी भी बढ़ेगी, टाइम मȂ भी कमी आएगी और यह एक बहुत ही जरूरी पहल है। 
 उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, हमारे देश मȂ हर Ģकार क े रॉ मैटीिरयÊस उपलÅध हȅ, लेिक
न 
एफोडȃबल टर्ांसपोटȃशन और सÃलाई मैनेजमȂट का बड़ा इÌयू रहता है।  जहाँ िडमांड है, वहाँ तुरंत 
सÃलाई हो, ऐसी योजनाएँ हमारे िव किसत भारत की पिरकÊपना को साकार करने मȂ महत्वपूणर् 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
79

भूिमका िनभाएँगी।  िजस Ģकार दिक्षण मȂ सीमȂट पयार्Ãत मातर्ा मȂ उपलÅध है, जबिक आवÌयकता 
पूवर् मȂ है, लेिकन यह क ै से तुरंत पहुँचे, यह सब क ु छ यह योजना साकार करेगी और भारत एक 
िवकिसत राÍटर् बनने की ओर बहुत तेजी से अगर्स र होगा, जब इन सबका Îवरूप खड़ा होगा। 
महोदया, आम रेल याितर्यȗ की सुिवधा क े िलए वंदे भारत क े समान 40,000 बोगीज़ बनȂगी और 
आम याितर्यȗ को भी बेहतर यातर्ा कराने का एक बȂचमाकर् तय हो चुका है। 
 महोदया, आधारभूत अवसंरचना की बात हो रही है, तो साथ ही साथ मȅ इस सदन का 
ध्यान िपछले 10 वषș की अंतिरक्ष क्षेतर् मȂ उपलिÅधयȗ की ओर आकिर्षत करना चाहूँगा।  हमने 
चंदर्यान-2 की िवफलता देखी, लेिकन जैसा िक सािहर लुिध यानवी कहते हȅ िक : 
"हज़ार बकर् िगरे लाख आँिधयाँ उƻȂ, 
वो फ ू ल िखल क े रहȂगे जो िखलने वाले हȅ।" 
 
 और हुआ भी ऐसा।  आज हम चंदर्यान-3 क े माध्यम से और आिदत्य-एल1 क े माध्यम से 
सूयर् और चंदर्मा तक पहुँच गये हȅ।  
 हमारे जो िवपक्ष क े साथी हȅ, वे जीएसटी का िव
रोध करते हȅ।  उन्हȂ मȅ कहना चाहता हूँ िक 
"हाथ क ंगन को आरसी क्या, पढ़े-िलखे को फारसी क्या।" अथार्Þ सारे Ģमाण आपके  समक्ष हȅ।  
हमारी सरकार ǎारा टैक्स संरचना मȂ जो आमूलचूल पिरवतर्न िकये गये, उनका नतीजा है िक 
जीएसटी आने क े बाद 2018 मȂ month
ly GST collection 90,000 करोड़ से बढ़ कर अब average 
1.7 लाख करोड़ Ģित माह हो चुका है।  टैक्स संरचना मȂ एक महत्वपूणर् सुधार की घोषणा 
आदरणीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी ने की है, िजसमȂ िवǄीय वषर् 2010 क े 25,000 तक क े और िवǄीय वषर् 
2011 से 2015 क े 10,000 तक क े tax dispute को सरकार पूरी तरह wit
hdraw करेगी, िजससे 
लगभग 1 करोड़  टैक्सपेयसर् को लाभ होगा।  इसके  िलए मȅ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी और िवǄ 
मंतर्ी जी को भी धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा।   
 महोदया, आज अथर्ËयवÎथा क े क्षेतर् मȂ यिद हम देखȂ, तो भारत का िनयार्त 450 िबिलयन 
डॉलर से बढ़ कर 775 िबिलयन डॉलर हो चुका है, forex res erve आज 600 अरब डॉलर हो चुका 
है, mobile manufacturing मȂ हम 5 गुना बढ़ोतरी कर चुक े हȅ और आज DBT क े माध्यम से हम 
लगभग 2.25 लाख करोड़ की बचत कर चुक े हȅ।  इन सबका Ǜेय क ेवल एक Ëयिƪ को जाता है, 
जो वैिÌ
वक आिर्थक चुनौितयȗ क े समक्ष खड़ा रहा और वे हȅ - आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी नरेन्दर् 
मोदी जी।  इसिलए आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी पर िसखȗ क े महान गुरु , गुरु  गोिबन्द िंसह जी, 
िजनका क ेन्दर् हमारा पटना सािहब रहा, उनकी एक पंिƪ है, जो बड़ी सटीक बैठती है, मȅ उसका 
िजकर् करना चाहूँगा :  
"देह िशवा बर मोहे ईहे, 
शुभ कमर्न ते कभुं न टरूं  
न डरȚ अिर सȚ जब जाय लड़Ț, 
िनǙय कर अपनी जीत करȚ। 
जब आव की अउध िनदान बनै, 
अित ही रन मȅ तब जूझ म
रȗ।" 
 
80
[RAJYA SABHA]

 िजसका अथर् है - हे िशवा (िशव की शिƪ), मुझे यह वर दे िक मȅ शुभ कमș को करने से 
कभी भी पीछे न हटूँ।  जब मȅ युǉ करने जाऊँ , तो शतर्ु से न डरू ँ और युǉ मȂ अपनी जीत पक्की 
करू ँ।  हम िफर जुलाई मȂ आ रहे हȅ। 
 महोदया, धमर् और अथर् का बड़ा मजबूत सÇबन्ध होता है।  धािर्मक और आध्याित्मक पयर्टन 
एक ऐसा क्षेतर् है, िजसमȂ भारतवषर् मȂ बहुत सÇभाव
नाएँ अभी िछपी हुई हȅ।   अभी हाल मȂ रामलला 
क े भËय मि
न्दर की Ģाण-ĢितÍठा Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा की गयी।  उसने अयोध्या की सूरत ही बदल 
दी।  आज अयोध्या मȂ एयरपोटर्, वÊडर् क्लास Îटेशन, होटÊस बन रहे हȅ।  आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी ने िजस Ģकार काशी िवÌवन ाथ  कॉिरडोर, चार धाम कॉिरडोर और क ेदारनाथ का िवकास 
िकया, उससे लोकल अथर्ËयवÎथा का बहुत अिधक िवकास हुआ है।  मȅ हाल ही मȂ तिमलनाडु गया 
था।  वहाँ ऐसी पांडुिलिपयाँ रखी हुई हȅ, िजन्हȂ आज तक कोई नहीं पढ़ सका है।   हमारे मिन्दरȗ मȂ 
बहुत पोटȂिशयल है।  तो मȅ सरकार से यही आगर्ह करू ँगा िक आज भी कई ऐसे मिन्दर हȅ, िजनके  
िवकास से अथर्ËयवÎथा को बल िमल सकता है।   
 िÎपिरचुअल ट ूिरज्म क े Ģम
ोशन हेतु इस इंटेिरम बजट मȂ चचार् की गई है, िजसकी Ģितभा 
as a secto
r - अभी देश मȂ harness नहीं हुआ है और इसको बढ़ावा देना बहुत ही सकारात्मक 
कदम है, जो आने वाले समय मȂ रोजगार क े दृिÍटकोण से अपार opportunities को एक बहुत ही 
बड़ा Îवरूप दे सकता है।  Ģभु Ǜीराम की बात तो पूरा देश कर ही रहा है, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने Ģा ण-
ĢितÍठा क े बाद नयी सोलर पॉिलसी क े तहत सौर ऊजार् से जुड़ी अत्यिधक दूरदशीर् Rooftop 
Solarization योजना का शुभारÇभ िकया, िजसमȂ 1 करोड़  उपभोƪा 300 यु िनट िबजली मुÄत मȂ 
ĢाÃत कर सक
ते हȅ और सरकार को उसकी िबकर्ी भी कर सकते हȅ।  यह एक ऐितहािसक कदम है, 
जो एक सूयर्वंशी की Ģाण-ĢितÍठा क े बाद उस िदन की एक अǌुत घोषणा रही।   
 मȅ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी का और माननीया िवǄ मंतर्ी जी का आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ िक 
इस इंटेिरम बजट मȂ एक अǌुत घोषणा की है।  एक पॉिलसी िडसीज़न इस बजट क े तहत िकया 
गया है िक भारत सरकार आने वाले समय मȂ "िव किसत  भारत" क े लÑय की ĢािÃत हेतु पूवȘǄर 
क्षेतर् को क ेन्दर् िबन्दु बना कर इंिडया की growth story तय करने जा रही है। पूवȘǄर का एक वासी 
होने क े नाते इसके  िलए मȅ ǭदय से आभार Ëयƪ करता हूँ।  
 महोदया, इस बजट की कई कर्ांितकारी घोषणाएँ हȅ - मत्Îय पालन की दुिनया मȂ 'Blue
 
Economy-2' का आरंभ होना, देश मȂ हर िजला Îतर पर हॉिÎपटल सेटअप करना, 9 से 14 वष र् 
की बिच्चयȗ का सवार्इकल क ȅसर रोधी टीकाकरण की शुरुआत  करना - यह िनणर्य हमारी 
सरकार की संवेदनशीलता का अǌुत पिरचायक है। 
 सब बात हो और िडिजट
ल कर्ांित की बात न हो, जो िवÌव मȂ एक िमसाल बन चुका है। 
आज दुिनया क े क ु ल रीयल टाइम िडिजटल लेनदेन का 46 Ģितशत भारत मȂ ही होता है। िपछले 
महीने यूपीआई से िरकॉडर् 1,200 करोड़ िडिजटल लेनदेन हुए हȅ, िजनके  तहत 18 लाख करोड़ 
रुपए  का लेनदेन हुआ है। जनधन, आधार और मोबाइल की ितर्शिƪ, िज
सको हम 'जैम िटर्िनटी' 
भी कहते हȅ, इनसे ĥÍटाचार पर अǌुत लगाम लगी है। यह सरक ार अब तक डीबीटी क े माध्यम से 
34 लाख करोड़ रुपए  टर्ांसफर भी कर चुकी है। 'जैम िटर्िनटी' क े कारण 10 करोड़ फजीर् लाभाथीर् 
तंतर् से बाहर िकए गए हȅ। इस सरकार क े इनिबÊट मेक ेिनįम मȂ करÃट Ģैिक्टस और करÃशन क े 
िखलाफ की लड़ाई लड़न
ी है। चाहे जो भी शोर मचा ले, लेिकन यह लड़ाई िनरंतर चलती रहेगी। 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
81

 महोदया, अनुच्छेद 370 हटाकर, अंगर्ेजȗ क े कानून समाÃत कर, भारतीय न्याय Ģणाली क े 
िरफॉÇसर् लाकर, लीगल िसÎटम मȂ गुणात्मक सुधार लाकर भारत को दशकȗ क े िलए कानून से 
सुदृढ़ करने का जो ऐितहािसक िनणर्य िलया गया है, उसको आने वाला समय याद करेगा। 
आंतिरक सुरक्षा तंतर् को इतना सुदृढ़ िकया गया िक आम नागिरक ने देश मȂ इतना सुरिक्षत पहले 
कभी नहीं महसूस िकया होगा। नक्सलवाद क े िख
लाफ लड़ाई अपने अंितम दौर मȂ Ģवेश कर गयी 
है और सीिम त क्षेतर् मȂ Ģभाव मातर् रह गया है। 
 महोदया, जब हमारी सरकार बनी, तब हमने 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास' मंतर् क े साथ 
शुरुआत  की। आज हम इससे भी आगे बढ़ कर 'सबका साथ, सबका िवकास, सबका िवÌवास' की 
ओर अगर्सर हȅ। िजस Ģकार 'जैम िटर्िनटी' ने इस देश क े सामािजक और आिर्थक क्षेतर् मȂ आमूल-
चूल पिरवतर्न िकए, उसी Ģकार trinity of demography, democrac
y and diversity क े साथ 
सबके  Ģयास क े ǎारा हम 2047 क े िवकिसत भारत की ओर अगर्सर होने जा रहे हȅ।  
 अंत मȂ, मȅ बश ीर  भदर् क े शÅदȗ मȂ आदरणीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े िलए यही कहना चाहूँगा :- 
   
"िजस िदन से चला हूँ िमरी मंिज़ल पे नज़र है, 
आँखȗ ने कभी मील का पत्थर नहीं देखा।" 
 
(सभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
Ǜी िववेक ठाकु र: सभापि
त महोदय, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी की 2014 से शुरू  हुई यातर्ा ने कई मील क े 
पत्थर देखे, पर कभी रुके  नहीं, क्यȗिक उनकी मंिज़ल यही है िक 2047 तक भारत को िवकिसत 
भारत बनाना है। महोदय, मȅ राÍटर्पित क े धन्यवाद ĢÎताव का पूणर्तः समथर्न करता हूँ, बहुत-बहुत 
धन्यवाद।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Motion that has been moved and seconded is:  
That an Ad
dress be presented to the President in the following terms:  
"That the Members of the Rajya Sabha a ssembled in this Session are deeply 
grateful to the President for the Address which she has been pleased to deliver to 
both Houses of Parliament assembled together on January 31st, 2024."  
There are 102 Amendments to the Motion which may be moved at this stage. 
Amendments (Nos. 1 to 4) by Shri Tiruchi Siva.  Are you moving? 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu):   Sir, I move:  
1. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
 
“ but regret that the Address does not mention about the exponential rise in inflation 
and the prices of essential commodities which have been affecting the poor and the 
middle-class sections of society detrimentally.”  
82
[RAJYA SABHA]

  2. That at the end of the Motion , the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does no t mention about the privatization and 
disinvestment of profitable PSUs  which have a devastating impact on the common 
man by way of taxes levied on them. ” 
3.  That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about the Government’s plan to 
revamp health and education by increasing funding. ” 
4. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“ but regret that the Address does not mention about falling allocations for MNREGA 
and the increasing demand for MNREGA work. ” 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Amendments (Nos. 5 to 7) by Shri Vaiko and Shri M. Shanmugam.  
Are you moving? 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, I move: 
5. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret to say that the Address does not mention about the need to review the 
provisions of the Constitution dealing with Ro le of Governors, since it is the colonial 
legacy. ” 
6. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about extending ESI benefits to 
workers in the unorganized sector and to extend EPF scheme to them." 
7.  That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
"but regret to say that the Address does not mention about eradicating poverty and 
unemployment and generating more job opportunities."  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Amendments (Nos. 8 to 13) by Sh ri Vaiko; not present.  Not 
moved.  Amendment (No. 14) by Shri Elamaram Kareem and Dr. V. Sivadasan.  Are 
you moving? 
 
SHRI ELAMARAM KAREEM (Kerala):  Sir, I move: 
14. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion the need to extend the benefit of 
MGNREGA to every individual jobseeker." 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Amendments (Nos. 15 and 16) by Shri Elamaram Kareem, Shri A. 
A. Rahim and Dr. V. Sivadasan.  Are you moving? 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
83

SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala):   Sir, I move: 
15. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention the need to Address the burning issue 
of price rise and particularly the price of petrol and diesel." 
16. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does no t mention the shrinkage and deepening 
recessionary tendencies in the core sectors of the economy." 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Amendment (No. 17) by Shri Elamaram Kareem, Shri A. A. Rahim.  
Are you moving? 
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala):   Sir, I move: 
17. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention the issues of growing unemployment, 
loss of lakhs of jobs because of the privatization and disinvestment of public sectors, 
etc. " 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, Amendments (Nos. 18 to 23) by Shri M. Shanmugam. Are 
you moving it? 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I move: 
18. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret to say that the Address does not mention about the need to apportion 
certain percentage of GST collections to the funding of various Labour Welfare Boards 
which were getting cess funding through th e respective Labour Welfare Acts which 
were subsumed in the GST Act after the introduction of GST, with the result no funds 
are provided for their schemes.  
19. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret to say that the Address does not mention about the need to revive and 
expedite the Sethusamudram Ship canal project which would benefit the economy 
and increase maritime trade for the country.”  
20. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret to say that the Address does not mention about the need to increase the 
EPF minimum monthly Pension to Rs.75 00 along with dearness allowance, as 
demanded by various trade union organisations."  
21. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
84
[RAJYA SABHA]

"but regret to say that the Address does not mention the need to hold bipartisan 
meetings with the trade unions on all important matters relating to labour issues. " 
22. That at the end of the Motion, th e following be added, namely:—   
"but regret to say that the Address does not mention about the need to provide all 
basic facilities like fixed wages, insurance,  risk allowance to ASHA and Anganwadi 
workers immediately. " 
23. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret to say that the Address does  not mention about giving preferential 
employment to health workers, nurses and para medical staff who were engaged for 
health emergency during the Covid pandemic, but retrenched later on."  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Amendment (No.  24) by Dr. V. Sivadasan, not present. Not 
moved.  Amendments (Nos. 25 to 34) by Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal. Are you moving it? 
 
DR. ASHOK KUMAR MITTAL (Punjab): Sir, I move: 
25. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the need for focus on learning 
outcomes in education and the need to calculate and qualitatively assess the same." 
26. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about the growing unemployment and 
the jobless growth phenomenon in the country."  
27. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the effective steps proposed to 
be taken to control rising inflation in the country."  
28. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about fixing the minimum support 
price of various agricultural products and also to provide legislative backing to 
minimum support price mechanism."  
29. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the need to increase budgetary 
allocation for the health sector so as to achieve the target of allocating 2.5 percent of 
GDP for health."  
30. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion aboutthe need to  provide a Special 
Financial Package for the State of Punjab."  
31. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about the need to constitute a National 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
85

Commission for Farmers with a constitution al status for the development of our 
farmers." 
32. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion about any programme for the welfare 
of shopkeepers in the country. " 
33. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about bringing appropriate reforms in 
the present education system to make it employment oriented.v 
34. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about measures being taken to control 
the steep fall in ground water level and to  encourage rain wate r harvesting in the 
country. " 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Amendments (Nos. 35 to 41) by Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha, not 
present.  Not moved.  Amendments (Nos. 42 to 46) by Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham. 
Are you moving it? 
 
SHRIMATI JEBI MATHER HISHAM (Kerala): Sir, I move: 
42. That at the end of the Motion, th e following be added, namely:—   
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the measures taken to prevent 
train derailments through the adoption of fully mechanized methods of track 
maintenance, as recommended by the CAG." 
43. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the concrete measures to bring 
price rise under control." 
44. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the measures taken to control 
5.69% retail inflation in the country and 10.4% food inflation in urban India." 
45. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about bringing Petrol and Diesel within 
the ambit of GST." 
46. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the conduct of Census without 
further delay. " 
 
86
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: Amendments (Nos. 47 to 54) by Shri Raghav Chadha, not present.  
Not moved. Amendments (Nos. 55 to 63) by Shri Sandosh Kumar P. Are you moving 
it? 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Sir, I move: 
55. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not expr ess its concern over the fact that the New 
Education Policy will result in increasing commercializati on of education sector 
making it impossible to get quality education to the children belonged to the poor." 
56. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not express its concern over the increasing 
incidents of crime against women and children in the country." 
57. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about the need  to recognize the 
"scheme workers" numbering a crore in the country mostly women working under 
various schemes of the government of India,  as workers as per the recommendations 
of the 45
th Indian Labour Conference making them eligible for PF, ESI and other social 
security benefits." 
58. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about the need to expand the 
workdays to minimum 200 days in a year an d to increase the remuneration of the 
workers under the MGNREG Scheme and implement similar scheme in urban areas 
also to solve the urban unemployment problem." 
59. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not ex press its concern over the ongoing mass 
scale contractorization and casualization of regular and perennial work in industries 
and the need to ensure same wages and benefits for contract/casual/outsourced 
workers doing the same work as regular workers." 
60. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:— 
"but regret that the Address does not express its concern over the large-scale 
privatization of production units of Railways and outsourc ing of more than 60 % of 
the regular activities of routine nature in Railways." 
61. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mentio n of the fact that the four labour codes 
enacted, amalgamating various labour laws will take away almost 90 per cent of the 
existing workforce out of the purview of the labour legislations and the need to scrap 
the four labour codes restoring the old labour laws." 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
87

 62. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the fact that the commitment 
given to the farmers on MSP and procurement has not been implemented as yet." 
 63. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
"but regret that the Address does not mention that despite the claim of the fast-
growing economy, what we experience is jobless growth and the inequality in the 
economy is widening." 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Amendments (Nos. 64 to 70) by Dr. John Brittas. Are you moving 
it? 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, I move: 
64. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about the concern over the freedom of 
Press in the country as evident from th e World Press Freedom Index 2023, published 
by Reporters without Borders, where India plummeted to its lowest-ever ranking of 
161
st out of 180 countries, consistently declining since 2016 when it held the 133rd 
position." 
65. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about the growing inequality in the 
country in the distribution of wealth between rich and poor, with the richest 1 per cent 
own more than 40 per cent of the country's total wealth, while the bottom 50% of the 
population share just 3% of wealth." 
66. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
"but regret that the Address does not mention about meeting the demands of the 
state governments to extend the GST Compensation for anot her five years as well as 
to exclude state public account balances and borrowings of state government entities 
in the computation of the net borrowing ceiling of the States." 
67. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely-: 
"but regret that there is no mention in the Address about the growing attacks against 
minority communities, specifically Muslims and Christians." 
68. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely-: 
"but regret that there is no mention in  the Address about th e need to curb the 
inflation and the price rise of the essential commodities in the country as well as to 
bring legal guarantee by way of MSP for all agricultural produces". 
69. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely-: 
88
[RAJYA SABHA]

"but regret that there is no mention in  the Address about th e adverse impact of 
demonetisation on economic growth and the deepening recessionary conditions in 
the Indian economy." 
70. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely-: 
"but regret that there is no mention in the Address about the need to extend the 
benefits of MGNREGS to every individual job seeker."  
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे):  सर, आप उनके  नाम पर इतना Îटर्ेस क्यȗ कर रहे हȅ? 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  He is enormously talented, और उनके  वकील भी तो आप हȅ! 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  मȅ देश का वकील हूँ, सर।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Th
is will not go on record. Othe rwise, many people may come to 
you.  Amendments (Nos. 71 to 77) by Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu. Are you moving it? 
 
DR. KANIMOZHI NVN SOMU (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, I move: 
71. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about the steps to curb the 
unprecedented rise in prices of all essential commodities.” 
72. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the loss of jobs and the 
proactive measures taken to tackle the huge unemployment problem in the country.” 
73. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the measures to allocate 6% 
GDP in Health care and development of health infrastructure.” 
74. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the need to provide adequate 
financial support to the state like Tamil Nadu affected badly due to heavy rains and 
floods.” 
75. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the measures taken by the 
Government to stop the crimes against women children and elderly persons.” 
76. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about the steps taken by the 
Government to achieve its goal to double the income of farmers in the country.” 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
89

77. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the various steps taken by the 
Government to expedite the Station redevelopment works at Chennai Egmore Railway 
Station and Chennai Central Railway Station.” 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Amendments (Nos. 78 to 84) by Sh ri R. Girirajan. Are you moving 
it? 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I move: 
78. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about the steps taken by the 
Government to provide adequate financia l support to Government of Tamil Nadu 
which was affected very badly due to heavy rains and inundation.” 
79. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the various remedial steps taken 
by the Government to stop the farmers suicid es during last few years in various parts 
of the country.” 
80. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not me ntion about need to provide adequate 
matching funds for the construction of Chennai Metro Rail Project — Phase —Il and 
for the implementation of various Railway projects in Tamil Nadu.” 
81. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does no t mention about the construction of 
Sethusamudram Ship CanalProject which is  very important for maritime trade and 
commerce in India and several Port development projects in Tamil Nadu as well as the 
development of Cruise Services in Tamil Nadu.” 
82. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about the effective measures and 
welfare schemes by the Government to double the income of farmers in the country.” 
83. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the steps being taken for the 
construction of Green Field Airport at Para ndur in Tamil Nadu and the expansion of 
Madurai Airport as well as the establishment of Airports at Vellore, Neyveli.” 
84. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not mentio n about the universal social security for 
the unorganized sector workers and creation of a National Social Security Fund with 
90
[RAJYA SABHA]

adequate resources as per the commendations  of the National Social Security Board 
for unorganized Workers.” 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Amendments (Nos. 85 to 92) by  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil. Are you 
moving it? 
 
SHRI SHAKTISINH GOHIL (Gujarat):  Sir, I move: 
85. That at the end of th e Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the huge increase in deaths due 
to heart attack after the corona vaccination.” 
86. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely: —  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about the unemployment.” 
87. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:- 
“but regret that the address does not me ntion about the amount of black money 
deposited in foreign countries and the am ount which has been got backfrom there 
during the last ten years.” 
88. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:- 
“but regret that the address does not ment ion about our fishermen who were picked 
up by the Pakistani Marines from the shores of Gujarat and many fishermen who are in 
Pakistan's captivity.” 
89. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:- 
“but regret that the address does not ment ion about resuming the special subsidy in 
the railways' journey for the elderly, jour nalists and special category people, which 
has been discontinued by the government since the Corona period.” 
90. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:- 
“but regret that the address does not me ntion about the vacant posts in government 
jobs and how to fill them.” 
91. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:- 
“but regret that the address does not me ntion about the numerous vacant posts of 
professors in the central universities and how to fill them.” 
92. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:- 
“but regret that the address does not ment ion about the considerable increase in the 
prices of petrol, diesel and cooking ga s and the people of the country are very 
troubled by inflation.” 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Amendments (Nos. 93 to 94) by  Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla.  Are 
you moving it? 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
91

SHRI M. MOHAMED ABDULLA (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, I move: 
93. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:-  
“but regret that there is no mention in  the Address about the need to provide 
adequate financial support to the state lik e Tamil Nadu which are affected badly due 
to heavy rains and floods.”  
 94. That at the end of the Motion , the following be added, namely:- 
“but regret that there is no mention in the Address about the steps being taken for the 
construction of AIIMS at Madurai in Tamil Nadu.” 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Amendments (Nos. 95 to 101) by Shri A.D. Singh.  Are you moving 
it? 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Sir, I move: 
95. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about granting Special Category 
Status to the State of Bihar.”  
96. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the granting special financial 
assistance to the tune of Rs. 2.5 Lakhs crores  to the State of Bihar as desired by the 
State Government to undertake developm ental work and welfare schemes in the 
State for removing the backwardness of the State nor it envisages any list of 
developmental works to be done by Central Government akin to the one prescribed in 
Schedule 13 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2014.” 
97. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the conducting a nationwide 
Caste Survey to know the exact percenta ge of Other Backward Classes in the 
country.” 
98. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does not mention about the about increasing the 
retirement age and salaries of the scientis ts engaged in the various departments of 
the Government.”  
99. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does not mentio n about any concrete plan to protect the 
Himalayan Glaciers by regulating the indiscreet development activities jeopardizing the 
lives of people living in Himalayan States.” 
100. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
92
[RAJYA SABHA]

“but regret that the Address does not mentio n about the need to regulate the use of 
AI techniques in various fields.”  
101. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—  
“but regret that the Address does not me ntion about the stand of the Government 
towards the Houthis attacks on merchant ships plying through Suez Canal.” 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Amendment (No. 102) by Shri Digvijaya Singh.  Are you moving it? 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, I move: 
102. That at the end of the Motion, the following be added, namely:—   
“but regret that the Address does not ment ion about the growing disparity in income 
of the poor and the rich.” 
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH:    But, at the same time, Sir, 
* 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Shri Digvijaya Singh, you can  move an Amendment which I 
authorize. ...(Interruptions)... Nothing will go on record. The Motion and the 
Amendments moved thereto are now open for discussion. 
 
The questions were proposed. 
 
 
RULINGS BY THE CHAIR - Contd. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, before I go to the list of speakers, hon. Member, 
Shri Digvijaya Singh, had raised a point of order.   
As per practice, after the Motion of Thanks on the President’s Address is 
moved by a Member and seconded by another Member, the Members who have 
given notice for Amendments thereto are called to move their Amendments.  It has 
been categorically said so. In this regard, the practice is regulated by Rule 242 of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) 
regarding, inter alia, order of speeches.  Accordingly, the mover of a motion has the 
right to speak thereon immediately after mo ving the Motion.  And, similarly, the 
seconder would also speak after second ing the Motion. Thereafter, the Motion 
becomes the property of the House and Amendments may be moved thereto by other 
                   
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
93

Members.  Therefore, that is the stage, when Members who have given Amendments 
are called to move their Amendments, if they so desire.  The sequence followed by 
the House today is, therefore, in order. The issue raised by Shri Digvijaya Singh Ji is 
not tenable.  In case, ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seat.  In case, hon. 
Member, Shri Digvijaya Singh ji, needs further clarification, he may kindly refer to the 
proceedings of the House, dated 07 th February 2023, when the Motion of Thanks on 
the President’s Address was taken up by the House last year; and, also peruse the 
practice detailed in the publication ‘Rajya Sabha at Work’ at pages 233 and 235.  So, 
as per rule, as per practice, and as per pract ice during my tenure, the point raised by 
you was an intervention, not very wholesome.  Thank you.    
 
 
MOTION OF THANKS ON THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS- Contd. 
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu): Sir, just one point.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : No, Mr. Tiruchi Siva.  No more discussion on that.  I have 
concluded that issue.  Nothing more on what I have ruled.  ...(Interruptions)...  
Now, the Leader of the Opposition, Shri Mallikarjun Kharge.   
 
 िवपक्ष क े नेता (Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सभापित महोदय, मȅ महामिहम राÍटर्पित क े अिभभाषण 
पर अपने चार शÅद रखना चाहता हूं। पहली बार उन्हȗने इस सदन मȂ आकर ज्वाइंट सेशन को 
एडर्ेस िकया और चुनाव से पहले उन्हȗने सारी बातȂ कहीं। मȅ उन
 के  अिभभाषण का Îवागत करता हूं 
और उसमȂ जो किमयां हȅ, उन्हȂ आपके  सामने बोलने की कोिशश करता हूं। आप और बीजेपी 
सरकार मुझे संयम से सुनेगी, यह मेरी आशा है।  
 महोदय, मोदी जी क े 10
 वष र् क े कायर्काल मȂ उनके  क ु छ सवाल भी थे िक िकस तरह से 
पहले की सरकार ने काम नहीं िकया, इस अथर् मȂ भी उनके  शÅद थे। यह सरकार इतना अच्छा 
काम कर रही है, इसका भी Åयौरा उन्हȗने िदया।  
 महोदय, िहमांशु बाजपेयी एक किव हȅ, उन्हȗने क ु छ कहा था, मȅ उनकी पंिƪ
यां पढ़ता हूं।  
"न खाता, न बही है, जो तुम बोले वही सही है।  
न्यूज़ ये छप रही है, सब क ु छ िबÊकु ल सही है। 
सच पर एफआईआर क्यȗ, रासुका की मार क्यȗ, 
झूठ की जय-जयकार क्य
ȗ, िनǞुर है सरकार क्यȗ? 
मेरे शहर क े लोग, देश क े लोग यह सवाल मुझसे पूछ रहे हȅ।" 
 
 मȅ यही पूछन
ा चाहता हूं। एक तरफ तो आप अपनी बातȗ को बहुत से adjectives लगा कर 
यहां बोले। यह सही है िक हर सरकार अपनी बात को राÍटर्पित जी क े माध्यम से कहलाती है, 
94
[RAJYA SABHA]

लेिकन इस राÍटर् क े जो िनमार्ता हȅ, हमȂ उन्हȂ कभी नहीं भूलना चािहए और समृिǉ की इस राह पर 
जाने क े िलए सबको िमलकर काम करना है। महोदय, जब लोग देश क े लोगȗ को ऊपर लाने की 
कोिशश करते हȅ, तो उसमȂ सबसे मह त्वपूणर् िशक्षा है। जब तक लोग िशिक्षत नहीं हȗगे और अपने 
हकȗ को नहीं जानȂगे, संिवधान की रक्षा नहीं करȂगे...। तब तक गरीबȗ को इसका फल नहीं 
िमलेगा,  को नहीं िमलेगा, िनचले वगș को नहीं िमलेगा और कमजोर तबके  क े लोगȗ को नहीं 
िमलेगा।  इसिलए आजादी क े बाद पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने यही काम िकया। उन्हȗने िशक्षा 
क े िलए Ģथम Îथान िदया।  उन्हȗने अपनी योजनाओं मȂ primary schools से लेकर hig h 
schools, colleges, IIT institutions खोल े और ये institutions देश क े vision बने।  जब हम देश 
क े िलए एक vision बनाकर  चलते हȅ, तो वह बहुत िदन चलता है, लेिकन जब उसको छोड़कर 
िसफर् अपने ही काम पर लग जाते हȅ, तो बहुत मुिÌकल हो जाता है और देश पीछे जाता है।  चाहे 
education हो, technical educatio
n हो, medical college हो, engineering college हो या 
AIIMS हो, इनका लाभ सबको िमलना चािहए।  संिवधान मȂ  Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes  और   OBCs क े िलए भी reservation बनाया गया है। आज OBC  क े बच्चȗ को 27 per 
cent reservation िमलना चािहए, लेिकन वह नहीं िमल रहा है।  िकसी कारणवश वे घट जाते हȅ।  
SCs/STs क े िलए भी ऐसे ही होता है।  कई जगह reservation को घटाने को कोिशश चल रही है, 
जैसेिक qualification
 बढ़ाना, experience बढ़ाना या age को बढ़ाना।  इन सारी चीजȗ को लाकर 
SC/ST/OBC क े बच्चȗ को क ै से काटा जाए, यह चंद लोग सो चते हȅ और कोई भी सरकार इसकी 
जांच नहीं करती है।  उनके  िलए कोिशश नहीं करती है, तो यह हमारे देश क े िलए बहुत बड़ा 
नुकसान है।  खासकर scholarship मȂ - जो scholarship उनको  regularly Social Justice 
Department से िमलनी चािहए, वह भी नहीं िमल रही है।  वे देरी से जाते हȅ, तो वे बोलते हȅ िक 
जब तक यहां आपके  पैसे भरे नहीं जाते, तब तक हम आपको एडिमशन नहीं दे सकते हȅ या एक-
दो महीने होने क े बाद आपक
ी scholarship नहीं आई, इसिल ए  यहां पर जगह नहीं है।  ये जो चीज़Ȃ 
हȅ, इन चीजȗ को मȅ आपके  सामने लाना चाहता हूं।  पहले से ही समाज मȂ यह मानिसकता है, मोदी 
जी आए, इसिलए ऐसा हुआ, यह नहीं बोलता हूं।  यह समाज की एक मानिसकता है, चाहे धािर्मक 
मानिसकता बोलो या ऊपर-नीचे का बोलो, यह सब मȂ है, लेिकन मुझे सम
झ मȂ नहीं आ रहा िक 
एक आदमी, जो पहले कांगर्ेस मȂ थे, अब चीफ िमिनÎटर बने, आजकल वे आपके  बहुत लाड़ले बन 
रहे हȅ। उनका कहना है - मȅ यह दावे से कहता हूं िक उन्हȗने बाद मȂ उसको िकस ढंग से समाज मȂ 
कहा, मालूम नहीं।  मेरे उच्चारण मȂ कम-ज्यादा हो सकता है। िजतना मोदी जी संÎकृ त मȂ बोलते 
हȅ, उसमȂ बोलने मȂ मुझे थोड़ी तकली
फ होगी, लेिकन िफर भी आपको और जनता को समझाने क े 
िलए...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Khargeji, you are aware that when we refe r to a constitutional office 
in this House, you will keep that rule in mind also.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: What, Sir? 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
95

 MR. CHAIRMAN: You will keep in mind the rule how and under what circumstances, 
we raise issues about a constitutional office order. Bear that in mind.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, मुझे िसखाने की जरूरत  नहीं है, मȅ 11 साल िकया हूं। सर, ठीक है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please bear that in mind.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  
"क ृिषगौरÑयवािणज्यं वैÌयकमर् Îवभावजç।  
पिरचयार्त्मकं  कमर् शूदर्Îयािप Îवभावजç।।" 
  
इसका मतलब है िक खेती, गाय पाल
 न और Ëयापार करना, यह वैÌयȗ का दाियत्व है। * 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
 MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Khargeji, I take exception to this. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, मȅ िकसी का नाम नहीं ले रहा हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This will not go on record. 
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Why?...(Interruptions)... Why? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Because you are not following the rules. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: This is said  by Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar in the 
Samvidhan. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Rules do not allow you unless you authenticate it.  
...(Interruptions)... No. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN  KHARGE: You can read it. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I request you ... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, यह क्यȗ नहीं जाएगा? ... (Ëयवधान)... 
                   
* Not recorded. 
96
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. CHAIRMAN: How can it be done? It is contrary to the rules. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, ... (Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  There is no notice to me. ...(Interruptions)...   You have to give 
notice to me. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: It is in public domain. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  No, no. ...(Interruptions)...  Please take your seat. 
...(Interruptions)... I again appeal to you, follow the rules. You have a great  
 experience. ...(Interruptions)... I acknowledge your experience.  
...(Interruptions)... Please. Please.  ...(Interruptions)... Don’t get into that mode. 
...(Interruptions)... Don’t get into that mode. ...(Interruptions)... Please. Please.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: I have not named.  I have not said anything. 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please. Please.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: I am appealing to the Prime Minister:  * 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  This will not go on record. ...(Interruptions)... This will not go on 
record.  
 
Ǜी मिÊलकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, ... (Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  This will not go on record.  Go ahead. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Why?  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE: Why? Tell me why, Sir? ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Yes, it is a good question. It is a good question. I will respond. 
Rules do not permit it.  As simple as that. ...(Interruptions)... Please continue. 
...(Interruptions)... 
                   
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
97

SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK (Rajasthan):  Which  rule has been violated, 
Sir? He is talking about the condition of ... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Does he need your support? ...(Interruptions)...  He is Leader of 
the Opposition. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK: He is talking about someone ... 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  He doesn’t need your support. ...(Interruptions)... Come on.  
...(Interruptions)... Khargeji, keep your flock in order.  Let them take their seat and 
you speak. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI MUKUL BALKRISHNA WASNIK : Sir, which rule has been violated? 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI (West Bengal):  Sir, Mr. Kharge needs nobody’s 
support.  But I want to say a sentence here. . ..(Interruptions)... He has not named 
anybody. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Dr., most of the time when legal issues are there, you are absent.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
DR. ABHISHEK MANU SINGHVI : And the person concerned is  not... 
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  You are absent whenever we need you. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI DIGVIJAYA SINGH: And it attrac ts the SC/ST Atrocities Act also.  
...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Khargeji, have you finished?  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KARGE: Finished!   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Then continue, please. Then, please continue.   
 
98
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, अगर आप यही चाहते हȅ, तो खत्म करो। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  No, no, please continue. Please continue.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मȅ मन की बात इसिलए बोल रहा हूं, क्यȗिक हमको ददर् होता है। जब 
ऐसे लोग सरकार मȂ होते हȅ, क ुसीर् पर बैठकर ऐसी बात करते हȅ। आज भी संिवधान लागू होने क े 
बाद, आजादी िमलने क े बाद और आजादी िमलने क े 78 साल होने क े बाद और संिवधान लागू हो
ने 
क े 75 साल क े बाद भी, अगर इस तरह की मानिसकता लोगȗ मȂ है, तो शूदर् लोग क ै से आगे आएंगे, 
आप बता दीिजए।  आप बता दीिजए। ऐसा ही यूिनविर्सटीज़ मȂ होता है, ऐसा ही हाई Ģोफाइल 
Îकू ल-कॉलेजेज़ मȂ होता है। वहां पर उनको एडिमशन क्यȗ नहीं देते हȅ? क्यȗिक उनके  पास पैसा 
नहीं होता है। आप बड़े-बड़े Îकू ल-कॉलेज खोलते जा रहे हȅ। आप Îकू ल खोिलए, यह अच्छी बात 
है, लेिकन इन
को भी एडिमशन दीिजए। आप उनको यह मत बोिलए िक आपका काम िसफर् सेवा 
करना है, आपका काम दूसरा नहीं है। आप पढ़ नहीं सकते, िलख नहीं सकते, देश क े िलए लड़ 
नहीं सकते। आपने कांटर्ैक्ट िलया है, तो दूसरȗ को भी उसमȂ शािमल कीिजए
।  आज मȅ आपसे यही 
पूछने क े िलए यहाँ खड़ा हुआ हूं, क्यȗिक आज Ģधान मंतर्ी जी भी यहाँ हȅ, वे इसके  बारे मȂ सोचȂगे, 
कम से कम बाद मȂ अपने चीफ िमिनÎ
टसर् को बुलाकर यह कहȂगे िक ऐसी बात मत करो, इससे 
मेरी बदनामी तो होगी ही होगी, लेिकन तुम भी जनता की आँखȗ से िगर जाओगे।  
महोदय, दूसरी बात िÎकल डेवलेपमȂट गर्ेजुएट्स की है। 2022 क े सरकारी आंकड़ȗ क े 
िहसाब से बेरोज़गारी 13.04 परसȂट और फीमेल गर्ेजुएट्स की संख्या 20. 06 परसȂट है। अगर 
एजȂिसयȗ क े आंकड़े देखȂ, तो िÎथित और भी खतरनाक है। इस बेरोज़गारी क े कारण चाहे लोग 
िलखे-पढ़े भी हȗ, तब भी आज युवाओं को नौकरी नहीं िमल रही है।  
महोदय, अनएÇÃलॉयमȂट का एक बहुत बड़ा मुǈा है, इसकी तरफ आपको ध्यान देना 
चािहए था, आपने उस पर क्या िक
या, इसको बताइए। आपने उसके  िवषय मȂ क ु छ नहीं कहा है। 
आप युवाओं को अपने भाषणȗ से आकिर्षत करते हȅ िक यहाँ जाओ, फॉरेन जाओ। आप कहीं-कहीं 
जाते हȅ, हर जगह जाते हȅ, इसिलए अपने भाषणȗ से उनको आकिर्षत करते हȅ, लेिकन वह बेचारा 
भूखे पेट आपका भाषण क्या सुनेगा! उसका पेट भूखा है, बेरोज़गारी है, वह आपका भाषण क्या 
सुनेगा! इस बेरोजगारी क े िलए आपने क्या िकया - यह हमारा सवाल है, लेिकन इसमȂ उसका 
कोई िजकर् नहीं है। मȅ एक उदारहण देता हूं िक महाराÍटर् मȂ, जहाँ से हमारे लीडर ऑफ िद हाउ
स 
आते हȅ, वहाँ 4500 वैक Ȃसीज़ क े िलए 10 लाख एिÃलके शन्स आईं और उसमȂ एमबीए, इंजीिनयिंरग 
क े लोग शािमल हȅ। आप देिखए िक हम रोज-ब-रोज िकतने कमज़ोर बनते जा रहे हȅ।  
महोदय, दूसरी बात यह है - आपने देखा होगा, Ģाइम िमिनÎटर ने भी  
देखा होगा - खास कर हमारे बीजेपी Ģेिज़डȂट क े Îटेट से, िहमाचल Ģदेश से, हिरयाण
ा से, यूपी 
क े बॉडर्र से बहुत लोग िमिलटर्ी फौज़ मȂ जाते हȅ। इज़रायल की एक एजȂसी ने जब एिÃलके शन्स 
मंगाई, तो हमारा युवा कहता है िक यहाँ बेरोज़गार रहने से अच्छा तो मȅ इज़रायल नȂ काम करते 
हुए मरना पसंद करूं गा। यहाँ का यूथ ऐसा बोलता है और जहाँ बमबारी हो रही है, वहाँ पर जाने 
क े िलए तैयार है। यूपी का यूथ यह कहता है िक अगर मुझे यहाँ अच्छी तनख्वाह वाली नौकरी िमल 
जाए, तो कभी इज़रायल नहीं जाऊं गा। यह मȅ नहीं कह रहा हूं, यह जनता कह रही है, युवा कह 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
99

रहे हȅ।  आप जो इनकी बात करते हȅ, उस पर मȅ कहना चाहता हूं िक आप Public sectors भी 
खत्म कर रहे हȅ, जबिक  Public sectors are most important for the reserved classes.  वह 
एससी हो, एसटी हो, ओबीसी हो या economically weaker sections हȗ, आप जो इन  Public 
sectors को एक क े बाद एक खत्म कर रहे हȅ, उससे नौकिरयाँ भी खत्म हो रही हȅ। मȅ सभी क ु छ 
िमलाकर बोलता हूं िक चाहे रेलवे हो, चाहे पोÎट ऑिफस हो, चाहे पुिलस हो, चाहे क Ȃदर्ीय 
िवǏालय हो, चाहे सȅटर्ल यूिनविर्स
टीज़ हȗ, चाहे aided institutions plus Government 
institutions हȗ, यिद इन सभी को िमलाएं, तो इन मȂ आज करीब 30 लाख वैक Ȃसीज़ हȅ। आप 10-12 
हज़ार लोगȗ को िरकर्ूट करते हȅ और उनकी िनयुिƪ हमारे Ģाइम िमिनÎटर क े हाथ से िदलाते हȅ। 
यह एक रुटीन  कोसर् है, इसको कोई अंडर सेकर् ेटरी या कोई िडÃटी सेकर् ेटरी भी दे सकता है, 
लेिकन मȅने दो-चा
र दफा देखा है िक वे नौकिरयȗ को हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी क े हाथ से दे रहे हȅ। 
नौकिरयां देनी हȅ, तो एक बार इसकी मुिहम करो, 30 लाख लोगȗ को भत ीर् करो, िजतने चाहे उतने 
सिर्टिफके ट बांटो, हम कहȂगे िक यह ठीक है।  लेिकन 30-30 लाख वेक ेन्सीज़ खाली हȅ और हम 
उसको नज़रअंदाज कर रहे हȅ।  दूसरी चीज़, एÇस मȂ भी बहुत सी वेक ेन्सीज़ खाली हȅ।  मȅ इसके  
बारे मȂ पूरा बोलते जाऊं , तो भाषण बहुत लंबा हो जाएगा।  इसीिलए मȅ इसकी परसȂटेज बोलूंगा
।  
आज एÇस का वेक ेन्सी रेट 41 परसȂट है।  बीस मȂ से सात अÎपतालȗ मȂ Îटाफ की कमी है।  आपने 
कहा िक हमने एÇस खोले, दूसरे इंिÎटǷूशन्स, हॉिÎपटÊस आिद बनाए।  उन्
हȗने अपने भाषण मȂ 
बहुत लंबी-चौड़ी बातȂ कहीं।   लेिकन मȅ पूछना चाहता हूं िक जहां जरूरी  है, वहां आप क्यȗ नहीं 
देते हȅ?  मȅने कहा िक आिर् टकल 371जे, यह Îपेशल आिर्टकल िसफर् हैदराबाद, कणार्टक क े िलए 
लागू है।  वह आिखरी अमȂडमȂट हम लाए थे।  जब हमने कोिशश की और सब लोगȗ ने सपोटर् िकया 
था।  उसमȂ जेटली जी भी थे, बीएसपी आिद सभी पाटीर् क े लोगȗ ने unani mously उस अमȂडमȂट 
को सपोटर् िकया।  मȅ उसको यहां पर याद करता हूं।  मȅने आपसे दो बार पूछा।  नहीं-नहीं... वह 
जमीन नहीं...  नहीं साहब, वह जमीन तो ईएसआई की है, गवनर्मȂट की है और अगर वहां एÇस 
खोलȂगे, तो entire back
ward-class area कवर हो जाएगा, लेिकन आपने उसमȂ इंटरेÎट नहीं 
िलया।  आपने ऊपर से देखा होगा, क्यȗिक आपका िवमान एक-दो बार वहीं से गुजरा था और 15 
िदन पहले भी आप गुलबगार् मȂ अपनी कांिÎटǷूएंसी मȂ उतरे।  खैर, अभी वह मेरी कांिÎटǷूएंसी 
नहीं रही, वह आपकी कांिÎटǷूएंसी है।  आप वह
ां उतरे, लेिकन कोई फायदा नहीं है।  उसमȂ 
रेलवे क े काम भी रुक  गए, एÇस बनाने क े काम रुक  गए।  बातȂ तो बहुत से भाषणȗ मȂ होती हȅ, 
लेिकन ये कायर् नहीं हो रहे हȅ।  मȅ इसके  िलए भी आपसे िनवेदन करता हूं िक इधर देख लीिजए।  
अब आिखरी Îटेज मȂ िनवेदन करके  भी क्या फायद ा है, कल देखȂगे िक क्या होगा और उसके  बाद 
बात करȂगे।  लेिकन मȅ आपको यह याद िदला रहा हूं, पहले की बातȂ भी याद िदला रहा हूं और आगे 
आने वाली सरकार, चाहे कोई भी आए, हम आएं या आप आएं, उनके  िलए भी सोचने का यह एक 
राÎता है िक बैकवडर् एिरया मȂ िकन-िकन चीज़ȗ को आज ...( Ëयवधान)... क्या 
कहा...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please continue. ...(Interruptions)... 
  
100
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  ऐसा होता है िक जब मोदी साहब आते हȅ, ये बहुत एिक्टव हो जाते हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी सभापित :  खरगे जी ... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  मोदी साहब आते हȅ, तो उनके  साथ ही पीछे आते हȅ।  को ई  बैठता नहीं है।  
आप पािर्लयामȂट मȂ देिखए, यहां भी देिखए... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Kharge ji, everyone is listening to you. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  आप चले जाएं, तो दो िमनट मȂ पूरा खाली...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please continue. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  साहब, आप मत जाओ।  उनके  मेÇबसर् जाएंगे, लेिकन मेरी Îपीच पूरी होने 
तक आप मत जाओ।   
सर, मȅ Ģाइवेट सेक्टर की बात भी कह
ता हूं।  यह एक बहुत बड़ी चोट गरीबȗ को लग रही 
है।  Ģाइवेट सेक्टर मȂ क्या होता है - जो Ģाइवेट सेक्टसर् बनाते हȅ, उनके  िलए सरकार की हर 
मदद होती है।  सरकार उनक
ो जमीन देती है, लाइट देती है, पानी देती है, लेिकन वे हमारे रूÊस 
और रेगुलेशन्स को नहीं मानते हȅ, क्यȗिक अब Ģाइवेट सेक्टर से ही देश बना है, ऐसी कÊपना चंद 
लोगȗ की है।  पिÅलक सेक्टर पहले आया, तभी देश का सुधार हुआ।  आज Ģाइवेट सेक्टर हमारे 
बȅक्स से पैसा लेते हȅ, हमारी इलेिक्टर्िसटी यूज़ करते हȅ और हमारी जम ीन लेकर भी ये गरीबȗ को 
नहीं लेते हȅ।  िसफर् अपने िरÌतेदारȗ और अपनी कÇयुिनटी क े लोगȗ को लेते हȅ।  बाकी क े लोगȗ को 
डेली वेजेज़ पर, कॉन्टर्ेक्ट बेिसस पर लेते हȅ। उनको एक िदन की रोट ी भी नहीं िमलती है।  यह 
Ģाइवेट सेक्टर का हाल है।  हमने माना है िक इस देश की एक नीित बनी हुई थी - Ģाइवेट सेक्टर, 
पिÅलक सेक्टर, ज्वाइंट सेक्टर और को-ऑपरेिटव सेक्टर।  सभी सेक्टसर् हȅ, लेिकन इस सेक्टर मȂ 
ज्यादा फायदेमंद यह पिÅ
लक सेक्टर है।  आज पिÅलक सेक्टर धड़ाधड़ बंद हो रहा है।  कोई पूछने 
वाला नहीं है।  पहले टर्ेड यूिनयन वा ल े भी बड़े एिक्टव रहते थे।  हमारे जमाने मȂ थोड़ा क ु छ हुआ, 
तो सब लोग झंडा लेकर आ जाते थे।  अब वे भी िकधर गए, मालूम नहीं हो रहा है।  इसिलए आप 
Ģाइवेट सेक्टर क े ऊपर यह जो ज्यादा जोर दे रहे हȅ, उसके  बजाय आप पिÅलक सेक्ट र पर जोर 
दीिजए, पिÅलक सेक्टर की मदद कीिजए, उसको िंजदा कीिजए, िरज्यूवेनेट कीिजए।  अगर 
उसमȂ क ु छ किमयाँ हȅ, तो आप इंटेिलजȂट लोगȗ को डाल कर उसको बढ़ाइए।  उसके  बजाय आप 
उसको खत्म मत किरए।  सर, अगर मुझे खाँसी आई, जुकाम आया या क ु छ आया, तो जुकाम 
आया, इसि
लए नाक काट लो, क्या ऐसा होता है?  आप  उसकी दवा ढ ूँिढ़ए।  पिÅलक सेक्टर 
गरीबȗ क े िलए और देश क े िलए भी अच्छा है।  मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक उसके  बारे मȂ भी क ु छ 
नहीं बताया गया।   
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
101

अिग्नपथ योजना - यह आपकी एक बहुत िĢय योजना है।  आपने यह योजना 4 साल  क े 
िलए की है, लेिकन लोग यह समझे िक जैसे िक हर जगह ÎटाइपȂडरी क े बाद वे परमानȂट हो जाते 
हȅ, वैसे ही यह जो अिग्नवीर योजना है, इस 4 साल की नौकरी क े बाद हम िमिलटर्ी मȂ जाएँगे।  वे 
भरी जवानी मȂ जाते हȅ।  पहले कह
ा गया, एक बात आ गई िक 100 लोगȗ मȂ से 25 लोगȗ को डर्ॉप 
िकया जाएगा और 75 लोगȗ को उसमȂ शािमल िकया जाएगा, लेिकन आज िÎथित यह है िक आप 
75 लोगȗ को डर्ॉप कर रहे हȅ और 25 लोगȗ को ले रहे हȅ।  मȅ ऑथȂिटक बोल रहा हूँ, चाहे यह 
ÎटेटमȂट अभी बाहर आया िक नहीं, हाल ही मȂ जनरल एम.एम. नरवणे ने बताया िक अिग्नवी र 
Îकीम िसफर् आमीर् क े िलए आनी थी तथा उसमȂ 75 परसȂट िरटȂशन और 25 परसȂट िरलीज़ पॉिलसी 
का Ãलान था, लेिकन िबना िकसी से बात िकए, सलाह िकए मोदी जी ने एक Îकीम एयर फोसर् 
और नेवी पर लागू की तथा इसमȂ 25 परस Ȃट िरटȂशन और 75 परस Ȃट िरलीज़ पॉिलसी का रूल  
बना।  अब आप बोिलए, यह तो मेरी ÎटेटमȂट नह
ीं है।  वहाँ जो काम करते थे, वहाँ जो जनरल थे, 
वैसे लोग बोल रहे हȅ।  यह जो आप कह रहे हȅ, इससे अिग्नवीर क े लोग परेशान हȅ।  वे यह कह रहे 
हȅ िक बेहतर िदनȗ की आस लगाते हुए, यानी आपने जो अच्छे िदन बोला, जैसा Ģाइम िमिनÎट
र 
साहब बोलते थे - अच्छे िदन, ये अच्छे िदन!   
"बेहतर िदनȗ की आस लग ात े हुए 'हबीब', 
हम बेहतरीन िदन भी गँवाते चले गए।" 
 
यानी उनके  जो बेहतरीन िदन थे, जो जवानी थी, वह भी लुट गई, खराब हो गई।  उनको 4 साल 
बाद जाना पड़ा।   
 यह एक तरफ है और दूसरी तरफ महँगाई है।  महँगाई की मार तो आप जानते हȅ, क्यȗिक 
आप िकसान हȅ, वकील हȅ, घर भी देखते हȅ, आपको तो बहुत मालूम है, लेिकन आप मुझे थोड़ा सा 
समय दे दीिजए।  देिखए, छोटी-छोटी चीजȂ हȅ।  आप बोलȂगे िक यह क्या है?  टमाटर, Ãयाज, दूध, 
गर्ाउंडनट, ऑयल, आटा, चावल क े दाम दोगुने हो गए। घटा नहीं, डबल हो गया।  अरहर 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: It is on a point of fact. ...(
Interruptions)... 
 
THE LEADER OF THE HOUSE (SHRI PIYUSH  GOYAL): Sir, kindly ask him to 
authenticate and table the comment and st atement which he has made about all 
these products.  It is completely baseless.   इसका कोई आधार नहीं है।  िनराधार ÎटेटमȂट 
क े ऊपर आप न बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: ठीक है।  जब आपकी बारी बाती है, तो..  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Kharge ji, since the Leader of the H
ouse has raised a point, I would 
urge you to kindly authenticate the assertio n that you have made.  There should not 
be any difficulty. 
102
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: अगर आप बाजार मȂ गए होते, तो मालूम होता।  एक बार तो िदÊली की 
सरकार को Ãयाज क े िलए खींचा गया, उसको हराया गया।  मȅ आपके  सामने यह ला रहा हूँ िक.. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Kharge ji, please authenticate the assertions that you are making 
with respect to the issues raised by the Le ader of the House.  There should not be 
any difficulty. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, मȅ और गोयल साहब बाजार मȂ जाएँगे और वहाँ से हम दोनȗ 
authenticate करके  लाएँगे।  ठीक है।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: This may be d
one during the course of the day. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : नहीं, नहीं।   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: During the course of the day, authentication may take place. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: नहीं।  मȅ जब चाहूँगा, तब हम जाएँगे।  अरहर दाल, जो पहले 70 रुपय े की 
थी, आज 150 रुपय े की हो गयी है।  क्या इसे भी authenticate करना है?  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Obviously. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: चना दाल का दाम 49 रुपय े से 85 रुपय े हो गया।  वनÎपित का दाम 75 था, 
अब 125 हो गया।  सरकार बोलती है, मगर महँगाई पर कहीं नहीं बोले।  राÍटर्पित जी क े 
अिभभाषण मȂ भी नहीं बो
ले।  इधर िंसगल िडिजट मȂ गर्ोथ हो रही है, लेिकन डबल िडिजट मȂ 
महँगाई हो रही है, तो यह क ै से चलेगा?   ...( Ëयवधान)... क्या आपको ģी िमल रहा है? 
...(Ëयवधान)... ठीक है, उनको सरकार सÃलाई करती होगी।  हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी उन
को कोई 
Îपेशल सिÅसडी देते हȗगे, तो उनको ģी िमल रहा है।   
 अब िकसानȗ की बात है।  िकसानȗ की आिर्थक िÎथित क े बारे मȂ आपने कहा। िकसानȗ ने 
आन्दोलन िकया।  आन्दोलन क े बाद आप क ु छ कानून लाये थे।  आप जो कानून लाये थे, िकसानȗ 
ने उनका िव
रोध िकया और तीनȗ काले कानूनȗ को आपको वापस लेना पड़ा।  आपने उनकी 
इनकम डबल करने का वायदा िकया था।  उसको डबल करने क े साथ ही आपने एमएसपी बढ़ाने 
का भी व
ायदा िकया था।  आज िकसानȗ की आमदनी मȂ, रीयल इनकम मȂ सालाना 1.5 परसȂट की 
िगरावट है, इंकर्ीज नहीं है।  अब हकीकत मȂ अनुमान देखȂ, तो 2016-17 और 2020-21 क े बीच की 
Ģित िकसान रीयल इनक म  मȂ सालाना 1.5 परसȂट की िगरावट आयी है।  सरकार का कहना है िक 
िकसान बहुत सुखी है, लेिकन सच्चाई यह है िक िपछले 5 वषș मȂ क ृिष क े बजट मȂ 1 लाख करोड़ 
से भी अिधक का बजट सरȂडर िकया गया है। ...(Ëयवधान)... पीएम साहब बोले िक िक सानȗ क े 
कायाकÊप की गारंटी है, उसमȂ माल की िकतनी ढ ुलाई हुई, वे लेकर गए, तो िकतना फायदा 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
103

िमला, ये सब बातȂ वे करते हȅ।  वे सब कौन हȅ?  ये बीच मȂ जो िबचौिलये हȅ, एजȂट्स हȅ, उनका माल 
गया, िकसानȗ का माल नहीं गया।  उन्हȗने जो खरीदा, वही भेजा।  जब वह माल गया, तब फायदा 
तो उनको हुआ।  छोटे-मोटे लोगȗ को, पैसȂजर टर्ेनȗ मȂ या Îलो पैसȂजर टर्ेनȗ मȂ डाल कर एक माकȃ ट 
से दूसरे माकȃ ट मȂ अगर िकसानȗ को माल ले जाने की इजा
जत देते, तब हम कहते िक उनका 
फायदा हुआ।  लेिकन एक दूसरी योज ना भी फ े ल हुई।   आपकी दूसरी एक योजना, 'पीएम फसल 
बीमा योजना' है। वह भी फ े ल हो गई।  ' पीएम फसल बीमा योजना' मȂ 2021-22 तक क ु ल 2,761 
करोड़ रुपए  पȂिंडग क्लेÇस मȂ बकाया हȅ। हमारे पास भी पहले यह था। आप देखȂगे, तो पाएँगे िक 
इससे िसफर् एजȂट्स को फायदा होता है। बीमा योजना क े जो एजेन्ट्स हȅ, ये लोग उसमȂ सौ 
क ंडीशन्स डाल देते हȅ, तािक उसको क ु छ िमले ही नहीं। वह इंÎटॉलमȂट भर देता है और बाद मȂ 
जब क्लेम करने जाता है, तो उसको यह बोला जात
ा है िक इसमȂ ये-ये किमयाँ हȅ। एजȂट्स उसको 
कांट-छांट कर देने की कोिशश करते हȅ। सर, क्या यह भी आपको लाइक नहीं है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  All I am telling is, the time wa s 27 minutes, and now it has been 36 
minutes.
 
 
SHRI PRAMOD TIWARI (Rajasthan):  Sir, it is one hour and 42 minutes. अगर  एलओपी 
बोल रहे हȅ, तो 1.42 ऑवसर् क े अंदर ही बोल रहे हȅ। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay, fine.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, इतना गुÎसा क्यȗ? 
 
Ǜी सभापित: मȅ कहाँ गुÎसा कर रहा हूँ, देिखए।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  योजना शुरू  होने क े बाद 2 करोड़, 33 लाख िकसानȗ को इस योजना से 
िनकाल िदया गया। वे इस योजना से िनकल गए। सरकार ने िकसानȗ को 6 हजार रुपए  सालाना 
देना शुरू  िक
या, यानी 16 रुपए  Ģित पिरवार Ģित िदन, जबिक ढाबे मȂ 16 रुपए  मȂ दो कप चाय भी 
नहीं िमलती है। ऐसी योजना बनाई जाती है, िजसका लाभ िजनको अच्छे तरीके  से िमलना चािहए, 
उनको वह लाभ नहीं िमलता है। इस तरह से यह भी फ ेÊयोर है। 
 आप देखȂगे, तो पाएँगे िक 40 परसȂट से अिधक िकस ानȗ को 'पीएम फसल बीमा योजना' से 
बाहर िनकलना पड़ा और सबका साथ, सबका िवकास और क्या? इस तरह से उनके  दो-चार 
कोटेशन्स हȅ। क्या िवÌवास है, क्या  है - यह मालूम नहीं है। साथ क े Ģयास अच्छे रहते हȅ, 
कोटेशन्स ठीक हȅ।  
 सभापित महोदय, सामािजक न्याय क े तहत हमारी माँग जाित जनगणना की है। इसमȂ 
कोई पॉिलिटक्स नहीं है। हम इसकी माँग इसिलए कर रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक अग र जाित जनगणना कराई 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
104
[RAJYA SABHA]

जाए, तो उससे ये सब क ु छ पता चल जाएगा िक िकस-िकस कÇयुिनटी, िकस-िकस जाित मȂ 
िकतने गर्ैजुएट हȅ, नौकरी मȂ िकतने हȅ, जमीन िकतनी है, कौन क्या काम करता है, कौन िकतनी 
गायȂ पालते हȅ, एजुक ेशन िकतनी हुई है - यह सब क ु छ पता चल जाएग ा। आप उसके  आधार पर 
Îकीम बना सकते हȅ। उनके  िलए आप आिर्थक योजना बना सकते हȅ। हमारी जाित जनगणना की 
जो माँग है, वह कोई पॉिलिटक्स करने क े िलए नहीं है। आप इस पर िफर से सोच लीिजए। अगर 
आप इसको नहीं करȂगे, तो हम आने क े बाद इसको जरूर  करȂगे, पक्का           
करȂगे।...(Ëयव
धान)...  सर,  मȅ यह बोल रहा हूँ िक उनको इसके  बारे मȂ सोचना चािहए और जÊदी 
ही इसके  बारे मȂ िनणर्य लेना चािहए। जातीय जनगणना की माँग हर Îटेट मȂ है, हर बैकवडर् की यह 
माँग है, हर गरीब की यह माँग है, िनचले तबके  की माँग है, देश की जनता की यह माँग है। जो 
सामािजक न्
याय मȂ िवÌवास रखते हȅ, वे जरूर  इसको मानȂगे। इससे इकोनॉिमक एक्स-रे िमलता 
है। हम तो इनकम बढ़ाने क े िलए, वेलफे यर क े िलए इतना क ु छ कर रहे हȅ। ये सारी चीजȂ कर रहे 
हȅ। जाित जन गणना  का लाभ सबको होगा और सभी लोग इससे फायदे मȂ रहȂगे।  
 दूसरी बात यह है िक शेǹूÊड काÎट क े ऊपर इतना अन्याय होता है। मुझे यह भी मालूम 
है, मȅ conscious हूँ। 10-20 साल क े आँकड़े िनकाल कर ये कहते हȅ िक तुÇहारी सरकार ने क्या 
िकया, 70 साल मȂ क्या हुआ, तुम कहाँ थे? यही सब बातȂ आएँगी, लेिकन िफर भी मȅ बोलन
ा 
चाहता हूँ। 
सर, इस देश मȂ हर दो घंटे मȂ एससी-एसटी समुदाय क े पाँच लोग अपराध का िशक ार क्यȗ होते 
हȅ?  दो  घंटे मȂ पाँच लोग!  वषर् 2022 मȂ मिहलाओं की लेबर फोसर् मȂ भागीदारी 23.7 परसȂट थी, 
जबिक मिहलाओं की देश मȂ भागीदारी 50 परसȂट है, इसिलए हम चाहते हȅ िक उन्हȂ लेबर फोसर् मȂ 
भी 50 परसȂट िहÎसा िम
लना चािहए और उसके  िलए पूरी कोिशश करनी चािहए।  िविभन्न क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ 
मिहलाओं क े ऊपर अत्याचार होते हȅ।  आपको तो मालूम है िक जो लोग ओलिÇपक मȂ क ुÌती 
खेलकर मेडÊस जीतकर आए थे, उनको न्याय नहीं िमला और जो अपराधी था, उसको सभी लोग 
Ģोटेक्ट करते रहे।  उस वƪ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने भी बात नहीं की, वे अपना मुँह बंद करके  बैठे रहे।  
वे ऐसे वƪ ही बात नहीं करते हȅ।  जब शेǹूÊड काÎट क े ऊपर अन्याय होता है, ओबीसी क े ऊपर 
अन्याय होता है, मिहला
ओं क े ऊपर अत्याचार होता है, तब उन पर वे क ु छ बात नहीं करते हȅ।  
उनके  बाकी क े जो िवशेष िवषय हȅ, िजन पर वे बोलना चाहते हȅ, उन पर घंटȗ बोलते हȅ, लेिकन 
जब मिणपुर मȂ दंगा होता है, तो उसके  बारे मȂ वे एक लÄज़ भी नहीं बोलते हȅ।  जब वे दूसरे-दूसरे 
िवषय पर इतनी अच्छ
ी बातȂ करते हȅ, तो मिणपुर पर क्यȗ नहीं?  वे वहाँ जाते क्यȗ नहीं हȅ?  यह 
मेरा सवाल है।  यह तो आप नहीं पूछ सकते हȅ, वे लोग पूछ नहीं सकते हȅ, िफर मुझे तो पूछना 
चािहए न!   
 सर, मȅ आपको भी बताना चाहूँगा िक िबलिकस बा
नो क े मामले मȂ दोिषयȗ को माला क्यȗ 
पहनाई गई?  अब बोिलए, ऐसा हो सकता है?  गु जरात मȂ सबको माला पहनाई, सबको Îवीट्स 
िखलाई, जÌन मनाया, जबिक झगड़ा िबलिकस बानो और बीजेपी का था।  यह भी कोई बात है!  
ऐसे इÌयूज़ पर Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को condemn करना चा
िहए, वह भी तब, जब यह इÌयू उनकी 
Îटेट का है।  अगर वे condemn नहीं करȂ तो कौन कर सकते हȅ?  आपके  पास तो िकसी और की 
बात चलती ही नहीं!  आप ही सरदार हो,  दूसरे लोग आपको क्या कह सकते हȅ, फॉलो नहीं करȂगे 
तो सीधा घर जाएँगे।  यह तो आपने कई लोगȗ को बता िदया है, तो वे लोग गुपचुप चले जाते हȅ।  
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
105

सर, उनको यह भी मालूम है, चाहे वह बनारस िहन्दू यूिनविर्सटी मȂ आईटी सेल क े बलात्कार का 
क े स हो और सरकार को उन 34 लाख मिहलाओं को भी जवाब देना है, िजनके  ऊपर आज इतने 
अत्याचार हुए।  यह भी आपको बताना चािहए।   
 सर, एक और बात है।  मȅ यह बार-बार इसिलए कह रहा हूँ, क्यȗिक उनको इÇĢेस कर
ने 
क े िलए उनकी पाटीर् मȂ क ै से-क ै से लोग हȅ और आप उनको Ģोटेक्शन क ै से देते हȅ।  वे तो Ģमुख हȅ।  
मȅने देखा िक Ģधान मंतर्ी जी जब राम मंिदर मȂ पूजा कर रहे थे या ĢितÍठान कर रहे थे तो उस वƪ 
आपकी बाजू मȂ आरएसएस क े Ģमुख मोहन भागवत बैठे थे।  वे भी साधु हȅ, संत हȅ, मुझे मालूम है।  
वे वहाँ बैठे थे।  वषर् 2019 क े चुनावȗ क े बाद उन्हȗने कहा िक एससी, एसटी, ओबीसी को िदए गए 
आरक्षण पर बहस होनी चािहए, समीक्षा होनी च
ािहए।  क्या आप यह चाहते हȅ?  ऐसे लो ग  आपके  
साथ बैठकर जब ऐसा करते हȅ ...(Ëयवधान)... वे झारखंड मȂ बोले थे।  ...(Ëयवधान)... उन्हȗने 2015 
मȂ ऐसा ही बयान िदया।  िफर भारी िवरोध क े बाद वे पलट गए, Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस पर एक शÅद 
नहीं बोला, उन्हȗने मौन Ĩत रखा, जैसे उन्हȗने राम लला की Ģाण ĢितÍठ ा क े वƪ मौन Ĩत रखा 
था। बीजेपी ने उसके  ऊपर बताया िक सरकार क े एक्शंस साफ बताते हȅ िक वे आरक्षण को खत्म 
करना चाहते हȅ, लेिकन इसमȂ immediately सरकार का िरए क्शन होना चािहए था। यूजीसी ने 
हाल ही मȂ एक गाइडलाइन िनकाली, िफर वह पलट गई। यूजीसी ने हाल मȂ एक डर्ाÄट 
गाइडलाइंस िनकाली, िजसमȂ हायर एजुक ेशनल इंÎटीǷूशन मȂ िरज़Ëडर् क ै टेगरी क े उÇमीदवारȗ 
की वैक Ȃसी मȂ डीिरज़वȃशन और आरिक्षत उÇमीदवार उपलÅध नहीं होने पर जनरल क ै टेगरी से 
उÇमीदवार भरे जा रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवध
ान)... आप बैिठए। आपको तो सब क ु छ िमलता है, िजनको क ु छ 
नहीं िमलता मȅ उनकी बात कर रहा हूं। Please don't interfere. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Khargeji, please control.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, वे आरक्षण से वंिचत हȅ। आप यूजीसी से किहए। दूसरी जगह तो 
temporary भर रहे हȅ। अगर कोई िरज़वर् क ȅिडडेट नहीं िमलता है, तब तक backlog को 
complete डीिरज़वर् कर
ने की बजाय थोड़े िदन क े िलए ÎटाइपȂड पर लैक्चरसर् को काम चलाने क े 
िलए temporary ले सकते हȅ, लेिकन वह नहीं है, बस िनकालो - इनके  िसर काटो, इनको 
दबाओ। यही इनका उसूल है, इसी क े िलए ये काम करते हȅ।  
 महोदय, ये िवमेन िरज़ व ȃशन का  दावा करते हȅ। हमेशा िवमेन को 50 परस Ȃट िरज़वȃशन 
देने की बात कहते हȅ। अगर आप दȂगे, तो जब सुĢीम कोटर् मȂ एक पीआईएल दािखल हुई थी और 
सुĢीम कोटर् ने एक आदेश िदया था िक जÊद से जÊद यह होना चािहए, िफर क्यȗ आपने उसका 
काउन्टर एिफडेिवट डाला? आपको उन्हȂ लेना था। आपके  पास तो इत
ना बहुमत है। पहले 330-
334 सीट्स थीं, अब तो दावा 400 पार का हो रहा है। ...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मेरा दावा है, इनको 
चुनकर आने दीिजए, तब पता चलेगा। ये सब मोदी की क ृपा से आए हȅ और तािलयां बजा रहे हȅ। 
हमने एमएलए का चुनाव लड़ा, एमपी का लड़ा  और  अंत   मȂ   राज्य  सभा   मȂ   चुन   कर   आए 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
106
[RAJYA SABHA]

हȅ। यहां क े लोग तो मोदी जी क े आशीवार्द से आए हȅ और आने क े बाद उनका काम है, सीट को 
थप-थप बजाना।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: The Leader of the House wants to make a lighter observation.  
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: महोदय, माननीय खरगे जी ने आज वाकई मȂ सत्य कहा और सत्य क े अलावा 
क ु छ नहीं कहा, उसको prove कर िद
या।    
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think never has a Leader of Oppositi on been so applauded.  It is a 
record.  आपके  बयान की इतनी तारीफ की जा रही है।    
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, मेरे बयान की तारीफ है, मȅ वह भी समझता हूं। ये अपने िलए ढोल 
बजा रहे हȅ। 400 आएंगे, 500 आएंगे। अगर इतने मेÇबसर् आने हȅ, तो ये सब काम क्यȗ नहीं कर रहे 
हȅ? इस बार आप 100 भी पार नहीं कर सकȂ गे। इंिडया Îटर्ॉन्
ग है। ...(Ëयवधान)... िफर से बोलो, 
इंिडया कमज़ोर है। सर, क्या इंिडया कमज़ोर है? मȅ आपसे पूछता हूं िक क्या इंिडया कम ज़ोर है? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now, The Leader of the House.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  हर बात को compound करना, I don't like this.  …(Interruptions)…  I 
don't like this. …(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  The Leader of the House.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, रोज एक-एक साथी I.N.D.I. Alliance छोड़कर जा रहा है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
मुझे यह पता भी नहीं है िक I.N.D.I. Alliance है या नहीं है।  िकस रूप  मȂ है, जरा वह भी बताएं।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  आप बैिठए और बार-बार उिठए मत। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: खरगे जी, वे मेरी इजाज़त से उठते हȅ।  W
h e n  I  p e r m i t  h i m ,  h e  r i s e s .   
…(Interruptions)…  When I permit, he rises.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  Sir, he rises there, ले िकन मुझे मालूम है िक जब मोदी 
साहब present रहते हȅ, तो सभी आगे बढ़कर मदद करने क े िलए तैयार रहते हȅ,  मȅ उसको 
मानता हूं। इसिलए मेरी आदत है और Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को भी मालूम है िक मȅ एक बार House मȂ 
आता हूं और बैठा रहता हूं और सबकी बात सुनता हूं। इस बार थोड़ा कम बैठा, लेिकन alway
s मȅ 
House मȂ जब तक पािर्लयामȂट मȂ था, तब भी बैठता था और अभी भी बैठता हूं।  ये लोग जो बार-
बार उठते हȅ, तो उनकी क ुसीर् पर sti
cker लगाइए।  वे बार-बार उठते रहते हȅ।  उन्हȂ spring वाली 
क ुसीर् दे दीिजए।    
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
107

Ǜी सभापित:  मेरे िलए समÎया हो जाएगी। मुझे कई लोगȗ की क ुसीर् पर लगाना पड़ेगा।  मेरे िलए 
बहुत बड़ी समÎया हो जाएगी।   
  
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  नहीं, नहीं। यह एक experiment कीिजए, उसके  बाद देखȂगे।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please continue.   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  देिखए, यह जो women's rese
 rvation है, उसको भी लाने से आप डर 
गए।  क्यȗ डर गए, अब मुझे मालूम हुआ, क्यȗिक आपकी नीित ही ऐसी है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Khargeji, this will not go on record.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  ये मेरे नहीं, नर-नारी ये सब...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  One second.  …(Interruptions)…  One second.  …(Interruptions)…  
The Leader of the House.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, हमने बहुत tolerate िकया।   ये बार-बार भारत का अपमान कर रहे हȅ, 
मिहलाओं का अपमान कर रहे हȅ और यहां तक िक इनकी शÅदा
 वली भी ठीक नहीं है।  िफर भी 
हमने tolerate िकया।  जब इन्हȗने  जैसा शÅद इÎतेमाल िकया, हमȂ लगा िक हम अभी disturb न 
करȂ, लेिकन ये बार-बार इस Ģकार का बयान देकर िफर वही मानिसकता िदखा रहे हȅ, िजसकी 
आज सुबह भी चचार् हुई।  इनकी divisive tendencies िजस Ģकार से समाज को बांटना चाहती हȅ, 
ये देश को बांटना चाहते हȅ, ये बार-बार इसका साइन देते हȅ।...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Pl
ease.  …(Interruptions)…  I urge you to……(Interruptions)…    
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  No, no.  …(Interruptions)…  Sir, I am here.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: आप यह तो जानते हȗगे िक "ढोर, गंवार, शूदर्, पशु नारी, ये सब  ताड़ना 
क े अिधक
ारी" हȅ।  इनके  बारे मȂ तो सुना होगा।  आपके  पास ऐसे-ऐसे शÅद हȅ। इस समाज को 
क ुचलने की, इस समाज को तोड़ने की, इस समाज को िशक्षा से वंिचत करने की, इस समाज को 
                   
 Not recorded. 
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
108
[RAJYA SABHA]

शाÎतर् से वंिचत करने की आपकी tendency है, हमारी नहीं है।  यिद हमȂ क ु छ नहीं िमला, तो भी 
इस देश क े साथ हȅ, क ु छ िमला, तो भी इस देश क े साथ हȅ।  आप हमȂ िकतनी भी तकलीफ दȂ,  हम 
कभी अलग जाने क े बारे मȂ नहीं सोचȂगे और न ही जाएंगे।  आप सब लोग खाकर पेट भर कर बैठे 
हȅ, िफर भी इनके  बारे मȂ नहीं सोचते हȅ, यही बहुत बड़ा दुख है।   
सर, मȅ एक बात और कहूंगा िक यह चुनावी Ģि कर्या है।  िजस तरह  सरकार CEC की 
िनयुिƪ िनयंितर्त कर रही है, उससे चुनाव आयोग की Îवतंतर्ता खतरे मȂ है।  Model Code of 
Conduct ये सब जो आते हȅ, तो समय पर जो होना है, वह नहीं हो रहा है।  इसिलए नहीं होता है, 
क्यȗिक अल
ग-अलग ढंग से अलग-अलग राज्यȗ मȂ चुनाव हो जाते हȅ। मȅने हाल ही मȂ सुना है िक 
एक Returning Officer ने चंडीगढ़ मȂ आठ मेÇबसर् क े वोट िरजेक्ट कर िदए।  सर, eight 
members, ऐसे क ै से हो सकता है?  35 लोगȗ मȂ से आठ मेÇबसर् का िरजेक्ट हो गया। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: िकतनȗ का होना चा
िहए? 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : सर, rules क े मुतािबक होना चािहए। 
 
Ǜी सभापित : रूÊस क े मुतािबक होना चािहए।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : यह न हो िक बीजेपी को इलेक्ट करने क े िलए सभी को िनकाल दो। 
जैसे िक िबल पास कर
ने क े िलए 147 लोगȗ को बाहर िनकाल िदया और िबल पास हो गए।  
...(Ëयवधान)... सर, मȅ बताना चाहता हूं िक बीईएल मȂ चार Ģाइ व ेट मेÇबसर् डायरेक्टर बनाये हȅ। 
बीईएल मȂ ईवीएम की मैन्युफ ैक्चिंरग होती है, उसमȂ चार Ģाइवेट मेÇबसर् डायरेक्टर बनाये हȅ, 
िजनके  पास कारखाने का कोई एक्सपीिरयȂस नहीं है। ऐसे लोग उसमȂ घुस गये हȅ और उसमȂ घुस 
जाने क े बाद ये लोग क्या-क्या करते हȅ, यह मा
लूम नहीं है, सरकार ने क ै से उनको वहां पर 
डायरेक्टर बनाया है?  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
THE MINISTER OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS; THE MINISTER OF COAL; AND 
THE MINISTER OF MINES  (SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI ):  Sir, it has not been...  
...(Interruptions)... Everywhere, there is an Independent Director.  
...(Interruptions)... Sir, what is.... ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Come on . ...(Interruptions)... What do you have to say?  
...(Interruptions)... Now, the Parliamentary Affairs Minister. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI: Sir, according to the company law.... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Please. ...(Interruptions)... Mr. Javadekar. ...(Interruptions)... 
Yes, Mr. Joshi.  
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
109

 
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI: Sir, Khargeji is a very senior Member. मȅ आपसे इतना ही िनवेदन 
करता हूं िक पूरे देश मȂ एक कानून है, उस कानून क े िहसाब से हरेक कÇपनी मȂ, िलिमटेड कÇपनी 
मȂ Independent Directors nominate होता  है, उसका appointment होता है, यह simple 
procedure है। यह procedural aspect है। खरगे साहब, ऐसा हरेक कÇपनी मȂ होता है। क ृपया 
आप िबना basis क े allegations नहीं लगाइए।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Now,  hon. Le
ader of the Opposition.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर, िबना  basis क े उनको डाला है, नॉन ऑिफिशयल को डाला है। ऐसा 
होता है, यह ठीक है। लेिकन एक ही पाटीर् क े, उनकी कोई  qualificatio n appropriate नहीं है, 
ऐसे लोगȗ को, आर.एस.एस. क े लोगȗ को चुन-चुनकर डालना जरूरी है क्या? ...(Ëयवधान)... 
देिखए, जोशी साहब, आप बात मत करो, मुझे सब मालूम है। आपके  सब ज्वाइंट सेकर् ेटरी यहां पर 
बैठे हȅ।  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN : Khargeji. ...(Interruptions)... Hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
through me. ...(Interruptions)...  I am looking at you and you are loo
king at him.  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर,  आप ज्यादा उधर देखते हȅ, इधर नहीं देखते हȅ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित: आज तो मȅ पूरा आपको ही देख रहा हूं।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  नहीं सर। आपके  नहीं देखने की वज
 ह से मेरी यह हालत हो गई है। सर, 
एक बात और कहनी है। यहां पर चीन क े बारे मȂ क ु छ नहीं कहा गया। राÍटर्पित जी क े अिभभाषण मȂ 
कहा गया है िक हमारी सेनाएं जैसे को तैसा की नीित क े साथ जव ाब दे रही हȅ। सच्चाई यह है िक 
हम अपनी ज़मीन चीन क े कÅजे मȂ छोड़ते जा रहे हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)...  यह सब अभी एक वीिडयो मȂ 
सामने आया है। इसी महीने चीन क े  PLA सैिनकȗ ने पेटर्ोिंलग Ãव ाइंट 35 एंड 36 क े पास चारागाह 
क्षेतर् मȂ एक भारतीय चरवाहे को जाने से रोका। अभी बॉडर्र पर ऐसी िÎथित है। अगर इसको नहीं 
रोक पाए, तो वे और अंदर आते जाएंगे, िजसके  कारण बहुत बड़ ा झगड़ा होता  रहता है और वहां 
पर शांित नहीं रहेगी। हमारे ǎारा िवÌव की रक्षा करने की बात हो रही है और हम लोग िवÌव गुरु  
बनने जा रहे हȅ। यह कब होगा, क ै से होगा, उसको देखȂगे।  हम कब िवÌव गुरु  हो रहे हȅ?  आप  
िवÌव गुरु  हो जाओ, लेिकन पहले ची
न को अपनी सीमा क े अंदर मत घुसने दो, पहले पािकÎतान 
को आने मत दो। पहले तो भारत मȂ गुरु  बनो, िफर िव Ìव  गुरु  बनने क े बारे मȂ सोचो। अब तो राम 
टैÇपल क े पुजारी बने हȅ।  Thank you very much.  आप क े दशर्न िकए तो राम क े दशर्न हो गए।  
राम क े पुजारी तो पहले आप बने हȅ, ठीक है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  आप हमको तो अंदर भी नहीं आने 
देते हो, पुजारी क्या बनाओगे?  चलो छोड़ो, इस बा
त को मत करो।  
110
[RAJYA SABHA]

सर, मिणपुर मȂ जो घटना घटी, अब तक आप वहां पर िविजट क्यȗ नहीं कर रहे हȅ, क्या 
secret है?  ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी सभापित: सर, वह  तो आप कह चुक े हȅ। यह पेपर हो गया है। आप कह चुक े हȅ। आप मिणपुर 
को cover कर चुक े हȅ।   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर,  वह खत्म हो गया।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप मिणपुर को cover कर चुक े हȅ।   
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  सर,  मȅ अभी मिणपुर पर आया हूं।  यह बीस है या इक्कीस है, मȅ अपने 
पेपर क े बारे मȂ अच्छी तर
ह से जानता हूं।  
 
Ǜी सभापित :  वह कवर हो गया है।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  क्या आप चाहते हȅ िक मȅ एक बार िफर उनको पुजारी बनाऊं ? छोिड़ए।  
..(Ëयवधान).. सर, मेरा एक और िनवेदन है िक इतने महीनȗ क े बाद भी आप मिणपुर visit नहीं कर 
रहे हȅ। इसका क्या secr
et है?  वहाँ पर लोग तबाह हो रहे हȅ, वे तंग हȅ, बरबाद हो रहे हȅ, उनके  
घर जल रहे हȅ, उनकी मोटर साइिकÊस जल रही हȅ और वे एक-दूसरे को मार रहे हȅ, लेिकन 
आप कहते हȅ िक शांित है। वहाँ पर परसȗ ही दो लोग मारे गए हȅ। नैक्सि
लज्म खत्म हो गया है, 
जबिक दूसरी ओर तीन िदन पहले छǄीसगढ़ मȂ दो लोग मारे गए हȅ। आप बोलते हȅ एक। होता है 
एक, लेिकन उसको इतनी जोर से िडफȂ ड करते हȅ िक मȅ आपसे क्या बोलूं िक  ...(Ëयवधान).. सर, 
िपछले दस सालȗ मȂ एक-एक करके   फ ेडरल Îटर्क्चर को ..(Ëयवधान)..  
 
Ǜी सभापित :  एक िमनट खरगे जी।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: ठीक है - असत्य। वे असत्य को सत्य करने मȂ Ģवीण हȅ। अब हो गया? जो 
िंहदी मुझे आती है, मȅ उसमȂ बदला
 व कर रहा हूं। सर, फ ेडरल Îटर्क्चर पर कहूं तो िजस-िजस 
Îटेट मȂ बाढ़ आई, आपने वहाँ पैसे िरलीज़ नहीं िकए, कणार्टक क े आधे भाग मȂ जहाँ डर्ाउट है, 
आपने वहाँ पर भी पैसे नहीं िदए, आप बंगाल मȂ नरेगा का पैसा िरलीज़ नहीं कर हȅ, आंधर् Ģदेश मȂ 
दस साल से Îपेशल क ै टेिगरी की मांग हो रही है, आप उस पर क ु छ नहीं कर रहे हȅ। आंधर् Ģदेश क े 
लोग िवशाख
ापƺनम Îटील Ãलांट का Ģाइवेटाइजेशन मत करो, इसको पिÅलक सैक्टर मȂ रखो की 
बात कह रहे हȅ, क्यȗिक इससे देश का बहुत बड़ा नुकसान होगा। अगर आप इसको पिÅलक सैक्टर 
रखȂगे, तो इससे गरीबȗ का फायदा होगा, लेिकन अगर िक सी Ģाइवेट हाथȗ मȂ दे िदया, तो उन्हȂ 
वहाँ नौकरी भी नहीं िमलेगी, िसफर् Ģाइवेट लोगȗ को फायदा होगा और दिलत, एससी, एसटी 
                   
 Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
111

आिद सब मर जाएंगे। इनमȂ कम से कम िरज़वȃशन तो है, ऐसी जगह पर उन्हȂ क ु छ न क ु छ िमलता 
है, लेिकन यिद आपकी ऐसी इच्छा है िक एससी, एसटी, बैकवडर् क्लास को मर जाने दो, क ु छ भी 
होने दो, तो एक न एक िदन ' इंकलाब िंज़दाबाद' आएगा, क्यȗिक एक िदन लोगȗ की टौलरȂस 
खत्म होती है। वे देखते है और देख-देख कर एकदम उठते हȅ।  
महोदय, नीित आयोग क े एक सीईओ हȅ, उनके  वƪ मȂ ही उनका एपोइंटमȂट हुआ था। 
उन्हȗने भी यही कहा था, उन्हȗने भी भाजपा सरकार क े एंटी फ ेडरल तर
ीकȗ का सच बताया था। 
फाइनȂस कमीशन का िहÎसा कम करने का िकस ढंग से दबाव आता है, उसके  बारे मȂ भी परसȗ क े 
पेपर मȂ आया है, आपने पढ़ा होगा, क्यȗिक आप हर चीज़ बहुत बारीकी से देखते हȅ, इसिलए मȅ 
समझता हूं िक आपने इसको भी अवÌ
य देखा होगा।  
 महोदय, मोदी जी ǎारा दस सालȗ मȂ 142 योजनाएं शुरू  की गईं। मȅ Annexure-II मȂ देखता 
हूं।  
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल :  शायद Îपीच राइट
र अटैच करना भूल गया होगा। ... ..(Ëयवधान)..  
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे:  Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा िपछले दस वषș मȂ लगभग 142 योजनाएं शुरू  की गई 
हȅ।  इनमȂ से लगभग 20 योजनाएं पीएम िĢिफक्स क े साथ हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... उस वƪ बोलने मȂ 
क्या आप सो गए थे?  मȅ अब जाग रह
ा हूं,  मȅ बोल रहा हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप चुप बैिठए।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : Ãलीज़... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :   Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ǎारा िपछले दस वषș मȂ लग भग 142 योजनाओं की 
शुरुआत  की गई।  इनमȂ से लगभग 20 योजनाएं पीएम िĢिफक्स क े साथ हȅ, जैसे िक पीएम िकसान 
योजना, पीएम आवास योजना, पीएम फसल बीमा योजना और भी पीएम, पीएम, पीएम 
है...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
MR. CHAIRMAN :  Please. ...( Interruptions)... The Parliamentary Affairs Minister 
wants to say something. ...(Interruptions)...  Yes, Prahlad Joshi. 
 
Ǜी Ģहलाद जोशी: सर, इनकी Ģॉ
 Åलम क्या है? ...(Ëयवधान)... इनके  दस वषर् मȂ पीएम शÅद से 
इनकी सारी पाटीर् और इनके  मुिखया को भी एलजीर् थी।  They were allergic to the word 'PM'.  
That is why they never used to keep the name of the PM.  Only one family का नाम 
रखते थे ...(Ëयवधान)... अब हम पीएम नाम रख रहे हȅ, तो क्या आपको पीएम शÅद से एलजीर् 
है?   ...(Ëय
वधान)...  इनको इतना तो जानना चािहए िक पीएम तो देश क े हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  It is a good point. 
 
112
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :   वे Ģाइम िमिनÎटर को legal aid दे रहे हȅ, उनको देने दो।  सर, ये 
िवकिसत भारत की बात करते हȅ, लेिकन अगर समाज िवकिसत होगा, तभी भारत िवकिसत 
होगा।  यह मȅ इसिलए बोल रहा हूं, क्यȗिक मȅ-मȅ बोलना बड़ा मुिÌकल है, यह अच् छा भी नहीं 
लगता।  अब 10 साल हो गए हȅ।   सर, आप और हम यहीं राज्य सभा मȂ रहȂगे, क्यȗिक बाकी लोगȗ 
को तो इधर-उधर जाना पड़ता है।  1,500 specially equipped vehicles को देश क े लगभग 2 
लाख, 50 हज़ार िवलेजेज़ मȂ भेजा जा रहा है, िजन पर िलखा गया है - मोदी सरकार की गारंटी।  
आप पीएम की गारंटी बोिलए, इसमȂ मोदी की गारंटी क्यȗ िल
खा है, क्यȗिक वे इलेक्शन क े िलए 
जा रहे हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप और भी सुनते जाओ।  ये जो गािड़यां जा रही हȅ, उनके  अलावा 
मोदी जी ने अपनी गारंटी क े बारे मȂ बहुत कहा।  आज तो न्यूज़पेपर मȂ आता है, आप कोई सा भी 
न्यूज़पेपर िनकािलए - मȅ भी 8-10 पे पर देखता हूं, उसमȂ खास तौर से एिड टोिरयल  और बीच मȂ 
जो िलखा होता है, उतना देखता हूं और बाकी क े झंझट मȂ नहीं जाता हूं - लेिकन मȅ देखता हूं िक 
ऊपर िलखा हुआ होता है, मोदी जी की यह गारंटी, गैस की गारंटी, उस की  गारंटी, ऐसा उसमȂ 
रोज आता है और हम रोज देखते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आपके  पास खूब पैसे हȅ, िजतना करना है, 
आप किरए, लेिकन क ु छ होने वाला नहीं है, इंिडया जीतेगा।  सर, मेरी गारंटी ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आप सुिनए, मोदी साहब क्या कहते हȅ, वह तो सुनो।   
 
Ǜी सभापित :  Ãलीज़, खरगे जी... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे :  सर, मोदी जी क्या कहते हȅ, वह तो आप सुिनए।  मेरी गारंटी मेरी कड़ी 
मेहनत है -  इनकी नहीं है, इनकी है - और दृढ़ता का Ģि
 तिंबब है।  मोदी जी खुद क े बारे मȂ बताते 
हȅ।  यह उन्हȗने कहा है, यह सभी पेपसर् मȂ भी है।  मोदी जी कहते हȅ - जब भी उÇमीद खत्म होती 
है, मोदी की गारंटी शुरू  हो जाती है।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप सुन लो।  मोदी जी ने कहा िक उनकी 
गारंटी का मत
लब है िक वे अके ले ही उन्हȂ पूरा कर सकते हȅ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... आप लोग हे - हे 
क्या कर रहे हो, आप डेमोकर्े सी मȂ हो।  एक अके ला इंसान Ģधान मंतर्ी मȅ-मȅ कह रहा है और तुम 
ढोल बजा रहे हो। ...( Ëयवधान)...मोदी जी ने वाराणसी मȂ कहा िक मोदी की गा
रंटी सुपरिहट 
होगी। ...(Ëयवधान)... और इसी तरीके  से ...(Ëयवधान)... देिखए, ये लोग गड़बड़ कर रहे हȅ, 
लेिकन Ģाइम िमिनÎटर क े भा
षण करते वƪ जब हम करȂगे, तो आप हमȂ रोकना नहीं। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी सभापित: एक सेक ंड।  खरगे जी, आपके  भाषण को इतना शांत रूप  से सुना गया है और अभी 
से आप कह रहे हȅ िक यह मत करना। ...(Ëयवधान).
..  This is unfortunate, 
...(Interruptions)...  This is unfortunate. The Leader of the Opposition 
...(Interruptions)... one second,  Shaktisinh ji, do not shout, take your seat.  
Khargeji, you have been h eard in rapt attention.  आपने थोड़ा Ģोवोक िकया, तो उन्हȗने 
क ु छ िरएक्ट िकया। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप थोड़ा मािनए।  आप मेरी बात कभी माना किरए, Ãलीज़।  
मुझे तो डर यह लग रहा है िक आप एनेक्सचर-2 तो पढ़ रहे हȅ, लेिकन एनेक्सचर-1 भूल गए।  वह 
आएगा, तो िफर और लंबा हो जाएग
ा। 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
113

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: नहीं, नहीं, मेरे पास पूरे पेपसर् हȅ, भूलने का सवाल ही नहीं है।   
 
Ǜी सभापित : आपने एनेक्सचर-2, एनेक्सचर-1 कह िदया। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: मȅ खुद ही मेहनत करता हूँ, मȅ देखता हूँ और रखता हूँ।  अगर आपको नहीं 
िमलता है, तो वह बात अलग है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Please conclude now.
 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे : आप क्या बोल रहे हȅ?  बोिलए। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Khargeji, you have taken one hour and five minutes.  
 
SHRI MALLIKARJUN KHARGE:  I have got one hour and forty minutes. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: Yes, you have. You can take the entire time, no issues. 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, मȅने फ ैक्ट्स चेक िकए िक Ģेिस
 डȂट क े एडर्ेस मȂ उन्हȗने क्या कहा, 
उसको मȅ थोड़ा आपके  सामने रखूँगा।  अिभभाषण मȂ कहा गया िक 2014 क े मुकाबले मȂ एयरपोट्सर् 
डबल हुए, 74 से बढ़ कर 149 हुए। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप सुिनए।  ...(Ëय वधान )... आप आगे सुिनए।  
अब इसमȂ दो चीजȂ हȅ।  पहला, 2014 मȂ क ु ल 94 ऑपर ेशनल एयरपोट्सर् थे, लोक सभा Îटाडर् 
क्वेÌचन नं. 113 मȂ 12 िदसंबर, 2014 -- 149 बताए जा रहे हȅ -- इसमȂ 9 हेिलपोट्सर् और 2 वाटर 
एयरोडर्ोÇस हȅ और राज्य सभा क े अनÎटाडर् क्वेÌचन मȂ भी यही कहा गया।  आपने यह क्या मुǈा 
रखा है िक 14
9 हुए, यह सत्य से दूर है।  यह आपने ही िदया है।  अगर यह असत्य है, तो आपके  
ऑिफस की गलती है, आप ठीक किरए और अगर यह सही है, जो मȅ मान रहा हूँ, तो ठीक बोिलए।   
 एक और बात है।  मȅ एÇस क े बारे मȂ बार-बार नहीं बोलूँगा, यह आप सब
को मालूम है।  िफर 
मȅने उसका िज़कर् भी िकया, कम से कम Ģाइम िम िनÎटर ने सुना होगा, क्यȗिक वे बार-बार गुलबगार् 
आते हȅ।  वे वहाँ पर उतरते भी हȅ, जाते भी हȅ, घूमते-िफरते भी हȅ, हर कॉिन्ÎटǷुएंसी मȂ जाते हȅ।  
उनको वहाँ से बहुत Ģेम है।   
 दूसरी चीज, 1949 से लेकर अब मȅ आपको तीन कॉलम मȂ बताऊँ गा िक आपने कांगर्ेस पाटीर् 
को नीचा िद
खाने क े िलए, नेहरू  जी को बार-बार नीचा िदखाने क े िलए बहुत सी बातȂ बोलीं और 
नेहरू  जी ने जो काम िक या, उसके  बारे मȂ आपने कभी Ģशंसा नहीं की, जो देश क े िलए जेल गए, 
देश क े िलए लड़े, आजादी क े िलए लड़े और िजन्हȗने पंचवषीर्य योजना की नींव डाली, डेमोकर्े सी 
क े िलए िजन्हȗने अपना सवर्Îव न् योछावर िकया।  अगर कोई अपोिज़शन का भी था, तो वे उनको 
इज्जत देते थे, लेिकन आप क्या कर रहे हȅ, आप उनकी सत्यता को िछपाने की बात करते हȅ। सर,  
1951 मȂ literacy rate 18.3 per cent था , जो 2013-14 मȂ 74 परसȂट हुआ।  यह आज िकतना है - 
77 परसȂट।  ...(Ëयवधान)... नहीं, नहीं।  अगर टीका भी करना है, तो आप हमारे भी statistics 
114
[RAJYA SABHA]

पढ़ते जाइए।  आप ऐसा कीिजए।  यह डेमोकर्े सी है, आप हमारी भी किमयाँ िनकािलए, लेिकन 
िसफर् जेलसी से बात मत कीिजए।  बगैर सोचे-समझे टीका मत कीिजए।  नेहरू  जी क े बारे मȂ - यह 
नेहरू  जी क े जमाने की बात है।  आप life expect ancy की बात देिखए।  सर, अगर हम उस वƪ 
पैदा होते, तो हमारी और आपकी life expectancy िसफर् 32 years होती,  आपकी एज 70 क े 
ऊपर नहीं बढ़ती, मेरी 80 क े ऊपर नहीं बढ़ती।  उनकी भी 71 तक आयी है।  यह नहीं बढ़ती।  यह 
70 साल तक बढ़ी।  यह life expectancy 32 years से बढ़ कर 70 years हुई।  अब आपके  जमाने 
मȂ life expectancy 69.27 years
 हो गई।  आप बताइए।  यह 9 महीने कम हो गई।  दूसरी चीज़ 
infant mortality की है।  1951 क े पहले यह 165 deaths per thousand थी।  2013-14 मȂ 38 
deaths per thousand हो गयी, तो यह घटी या बढ़ी?  आपके  जमाने मȂ यह rate 29 तक आया।  
इसे 38 तक  लाने क े बाद भी कहा जाता है िक उस सरकार ने क्या िकया!  ये सब क ु छ िकया।   
Ģाइमरी Îकू Êस 1951 से पहले 2 ला
ख 9 हजार थे और 2013-14 तक 7 लाख 90 हजार  Îकू Êस 
बने।  आपके  जमाने मȂ Îकू Êस कम हो गए, इसिलए क्यȗिक आपने Ģाइवेट को ज्यादा Ģोत्साहन 
िदया और 2021 मȂ ये 7.6 लाख हो गए
।  Upper primary schools पहले 13,600 थे, 2013-14 मȂ 
ये 4 लाख हुए और 2023 मȂ 4 लाख 35 हजार  हुए।  Secondary higher inter junior colleges 
पहले 7,400 थे, हमारे जमाने मȂ 2014 मȂ 2 लाख 34 हजार  हुए, अब 2 लाख 92 हजार हुए।  
Before 1950, 630 कॉलेजेज़ थे और 2014 तक 36,639 कॉलेजेज़ हुए।  ये बढ़े या घटे?  आप सब 
लोग जानते हȅ।  आप मैथेमेिटक्स मȂ भी बहुत होिशयार हȅ।  उसके  बाद अब ये 43,000 हो गए
।  
Sub centres, primary health centres पहले 725 थे, 2014 तक 1 लाख 77 हजार  हुए और अब 
1 लाख 94 हज ार  हुए।  ...(Ëयवधान)... पहले 1 लाख 77 हजार थे।  2024 मȂ 1 लाख 94 हजार हो 
गए।  यानी ये लगभग डेढ़-दो हजार बढ़ गए।  Net irrigated area - यह िकसानȗ से सÇबिन्धत 
बात है।  पहले यह 210 लाख हेक्टेयर था और हमारे जमाने मȂ 2013-14 मȂ 680 लाख  हेक्टेयर 
हुआ।  यह बढ़ा या घटा?  िफर आपके  जमाने मȂ यह 715 लाख हेक्टेयर हो ग
या।  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आपने क ु छ नहीं िकया -  हमने ये काम िकये, वह मȅ बता रहा हूँ और आपने क्या िकया, वह भी 
बता रहा हूँ।  Percentage of rural households - यह पहले 2.2 परस Ȃट था, 2014 मȂ यह 83 
परसȂट था।  अब आपने 12 परसȂट बढ़ाया। 2019 मȂ, 99 परस Ȃट, figure as it is है।  यह अपनी 
अचीवमȂट है, क्या आप इसको भी क ं डेम करते हȅ? ये आँकड़े हȅ। इनको आप िमटा नहीं सकते 
हȅ।...(Ëयवध
ान)... आप दूसरी चीजȗ को िमटा सकते हȅ, लेिकन इन चीजȗ को नहीं िमटा सकते हȅ। 
आप 2021 का सȂसस क्यȗ नहीं करवा रहे हȅ? अभी 2011 क े सȂसस का डेटा है। आप 2021 का 
सȂसस करवा कर उसका डेटा क्यȗ नहीं ला रहे हȅ? अगर आप इसको लाएँगे, तो आपको मालूम 
हो जाएगा िक िकतने लोग िलटरेट हȅ, हम िकतना आगे आए हȅ, िकतनी गर्ोथ है? आप
को इससे ये 
सारी चीजȂ मालूम हो जाएँगी। आप इसको 10 साल मȂ क्यȗ नहीं कर रहे हȅ? आप बाकी सारी चीजȂ 
करते हȅ, लेिकन यह इसिलए नहीं करते हȅ, क्यȗिक इससे आप
की पोल खुल जाएगी। अगर 2021 
का सȂसस होगा और उसका डेटा आएगा, तो सारी सच्चाई सामने आ जाएगी। जब सारी सच्चाई 
सामने आएगी, तो इससे आपकी पोल खुल जाएगी। महोदय, मȅ यह बात इसिलए रख रहा हूँ िक 
क ु छ नहीं िकया - आप यह मत बोिलए। हमने इतना क ु छ िकया है, इसिलए डेमोकर्सी आज देश मȂ 
िंजदा है और आप भी हȅ, नहीं तो आपके  पास डेमोकर्सी को बरबाद करने वाले बहुत लोग थे। वे 
सब िĤिटशसर् क े पास नौकरी क े िलए चले गए थे।...(Ëय
वधान)...  
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
115

 सर, अब मȅ इन्वेÎटमȂट की बात करता हूँ। यूपीए क े जमाने मȂ नेट फॉरेन डायरेक्ट 
इन्वेÎटमȂट 1,087.6 परसȂट था और इस सरकार क े काल मȂ यह 426.2 परसȂट है।...(Ëयवधान)... 
क ृपया पहले आप सुन लीिजए, उसके  बाद बोिलएगा।...(Ëयवधा न)...     
      
Ǜी सभापित : खरगे जी, क ृपया आप जरा फॉरेन इन्वेÎटमȂट क े बारे मȂ िफगर बताइए। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकजुर्न खरगे : सर, नेट फॉरेन डायरेक्ट इन्वेÎटमȂट, यानी बाहर का जो इन्वेÎटमȂट आता 
है। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: आप यह बताइए िक यह पहले िकतना था और अब िकतना है? 
 
Ǜी मिƥकजुर्न खरगे: सर, मȅ वही बता रहा हूँ। यूपीए काल मȂ यह 1087.6 परसȂट था और अब यह 
426 परसȂट है।...(Ëयवध
ान)... आप यह कह दीिजए िक यह गलत है।...(Ëय वधान)... दूसरा, गर्ॉस 
डोमेिÎटक Ģोडक्ट 302.3 परस Ȃट था और अब यह 142 परसȂट है। पर क ैिपटा जीडीपी 244.7 
परसȂट था और वह अब 119 परस Ȃट है। ये जो आँकड़े हȅ, इसको आप देख सकते हȅ। मȅ इसको 
आपके  सामने रख रहा हूँ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : आप इसको रख दीिजए
गा। यह ठीक रहेगा।  
 
Ǜी मिƥकजुर्न खरगे : सर, मȅ यही नहीं, बिÊक सारी चीजȗ को रख देता हूँ।  
 
Ǜी सभापित : िबÊकु ल ठीक है। 
 
Ǜी मिƥकजुर्न खरगे : सर, यह कायर्वाही का िहÎ
 सा बन जाएगा। 
 सर, दूसरी बात यह है िक मȅने मोदी साहब की गारंटी को पढ़ा और मȅने उन सारी चीजȗ क े 
बारे मȂ बताया िक उसमȂ िकस ढंग से काम चल रहा है। मȅ आिखर मȂ दो चीजȂ बताऊँ गा। पहले मȅ 
पॉिलिटकल अपोिजशन क े बारे मȂ बताता हूँ। अब अपोिजशन पाटीर् से इस सरकार को एलजीर् है। 
िजसको देखो, उसको अंदर डालो। ईडी, इनकम टैक्स... िजसको अंदर लाओ, उसको वािंशग 
मशीन मȂ डालो। उसके  बाद वह क्लीन हो जाता है और उस को राज्य सभा मȂ लाया जाता है। दस 
साल मȂ तोड़-फोड़ क े माध्यम से 411 एमएलएज़ इधर से उधर हो गए। सरकारȂ िगराई गईं, 
सरकारȂ बनाई गईं। क्या आपकी यह नीित ठीक है? क्या आप इसको ठीक मानते हȅ? 
...(Ëयवधान)... जो हमारी पाटीर् मȂ रहत
ा है, वह करÃट है और जब वही आपकी पाटीर् मȂ जाता है, 
तो दूसरे ही िदन वह अच्छा बन जाता है।...(Ëयवधान)... उसका क े स रुक  जाता है, िनकाला 
जाता है और उसको Ģोटेक्शन िमलती है। जो आपकी बात नहीं सुनता है, उसको आप जेल भेज 
देते हȅ और जो आपकी बात सुनता है, उसको अपनी पाटीर् मȂ िमला लेते हȅ - यह आप
की नीित है 
और आप हमको बोल रहे हȅ िक पाठ िसखाते हȅ िक डेमोकर्सी को यह करȂ, वह करȂ।  देिखए, आप 
सबको पाठ पढ़ाते हȅ, लेिकन यह नीि
त आप ही की है।  हम यहाँ पर क ु छ बोलते हȅ तो उसके  
116
[RAJYA SABHA]

िखलाफ िहन्दू-मुसलमान लाते हȅ।  आज़ादी से पहले तो आपकी पाटीर् ने, जनसंघ ने मुिÎलम लीग 
क े साथ तीन Îटेट्स मȂ गवनर्मȂट बनाई थी। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी पीयूष गोयल: सर, जनसंघ का गठन 1951 मȂ हुआ था। ...(Ëयवधान)...  इनको क ु छ जानकारी 
नहीं है। ...(Ëयव
धान)... 
  
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: आप अÇबेडकर की 'Thoughts on Pakistan' पिढ़ए और उनकी जो दूसरी 
िकताबȂ हȅ, वे भी पिढ़ए, आपको मालूम हो जाएगा। 
 
Ǜी सभापित: खरगे जी, Ãलीज़। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: सर, हमारा इतना बड़ा शरीर है, मगर मȅ देख रहा हूँ िक जो मुझसे पतले 
हȅ, आप उनको देख रहे हȅ।  नेहरू  जी क े संगर्हालय का नाम बदलने की क्या जरूर
त थी?  
वाजपेयी जी, जो िवपक्ष क े नेता थे, जब वे Ģाइम िमिनÎटर बने और शायद क ैिबनेट रूम मȂ या 
कहीं और गए, तो उन्हȗने फौरन Îटाफ को बुलव
ाया और पूछा िक यहाँ तो नेहरू  जी की फोटो 
लगी हुई थी, वह कहाँ है?  तब िकसी ने कहा िक सर, अब गवनर्मȂट बदल गई है।  इस पर उन्हȗने 
कहा िक गवनर्मȂट बदल गई है तो क्या हुआ, वे तो पहले Ģधान मंतर्ी हȅ, उनकी फोटो लेकर आइए 
और यहाँ लगाइए।  आप कम से कम अटल िबहारी जी की तो सुिनए! ...(Ëयव धान)... यह बीजेपी 
नहीं है।  बीजेपी है, तोड़-फोड़ सरकार।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
सर, मȅ आपको बताता हूँ िक कई बार जब इलेक्शन क े वƪ आडवाणी साहब और अटल 
िबहारी साहब गुलबगार् आते थे, तो हम अपना रूम छोड़कर, उसको वैक े ट करके  उनको देते थे, 
हालांिक तब हम िमिन
िÎटर थे।  चूंिक उनमȂ हमारे थोड़े दोÎत थे, जो िक हमारे पहले क े 
क्लासमेट्स थे और वे हमारे पास आकर िरक्वेÎट करते थे िक आपका तो यहाँ घर है, आप घर 
जाइए और यह ऐवानशाही छोड़ दीिजए।  इसी तरह, चन्दर्शेखर जी की भी क ु छ यादȂ हȅ।  यहाँ पर 
उनके  बेटे नीरज जी हȅ, जो रूठकर  बहुत बातȂ करते हȅ।  उनके  िपताजी और मुझे सâ 1970 मȂ 
अरेÎट िक या  गया था।  वीरेन्दर् पािटल जी, जो िक हमारे घर क े बाजू मȂ ही रहते थे, उन्हȗने हमȂ 
अरेÎट करवाया था।  चन्दर्शेखर जी हमारे यहाँ चार बार आए हȅ।  तब चन्दर्शेखर, मोहन धािरया, 
क ृÍणकांत और अजुर्न अरोड़ा, ये सब लोग Ģचार क े िलए िनकले थे।  हम लोग िमल-जुल कर बहुत 
से काम करते थे, जबिक यहां सब दुÌमनी से, हर चीज़ दुÌम
नी से -- अगर देश ऐसे चलाने की 
कोिशश की जाए तो यह really देश और डेमोकर्े सी क े िलए ठी क नहीं है। 
 दूसरी चीज़, आप इस सदन को Ģोटेक्ट करने मȂ भी फ े ल हो गए।  यह तो लोकशाही का 
टेÇपल है, इसको Ģोटेक्ट करने मȂ भी आप फ े ल हो गए।  सर, मȅ आपको बताता हूँ िक हमको जो 
इन्फॉमȃशन िमली है, उसके  अनुसार जो लोग पकड़े गए हȅ, उन्हȗने एिफडेिवट िदया िक हमȂ 
इलेिक्टर्क करंट लगाकर, मारक
र, धमकाकर हमसे कह रहे हȅ िक फलां-फलां पाटीर् का नाम लो।  
मȅ उन लोगȗ क े बारे मȂ बता रहा हूँ, जो सदन मȂ क ू दे थे और उन्हȗने यह एिफडेिवट िदया है।  तो 
यह है सदन की सुरक्षा!  जो लोग जन
ता से चुनकर आते हȅ, जब उनकी सुरक्षा क े िलए ऐसा होता 
है, तो आप याद रिखए िक आप िकस-िकसको बिल का बक
रा बनाना चाहते हȅ?  दू सरी चीज़, 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
117

अब मȅ ज्यादा क ु छ नहीं कहना चाहता, बिÊक मȅने जो क ु छ कहा है, उसका उǄर हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी 
जी दȂगे। खासकर मेरे िपछले पन्नȗ से जो हमने िलया, िरज़वȃशन क े बारे मȂ, िकसानȗ क े बारे मȂ, 
िफर inflation, unemplo
yment क े बारे मȂ िलया, इनके  बारे मȂ वे ज़रूर  बोलȂगे। मȅ अंत मȂ यह भी 
कहता हूं िक झारखंड की िÎथित क्या है। झारखंड मȂ आपने एक को ईडी क े क े स मȂ बुलाकर 
अरेÎट कर िलया, अरेÎट करने क े बाद उन्हȗने िरज़ाइन िक या, गवनर्र क े पास गए, गवनर्र क े 
पास जाकर अपना राज़ीनामा िदया, जो एक्सेÃट हुआ। राज़ीनामा एक्सेÃट होने क े बाद वहां 43 
लोग बस मȂ बैठे हुए थे, उनके  िसगनेचर लेकर िदये गये। तब उन्हȗने यह भी नामांिकत िकया िक 
चंपई सोरेन को पाटीर् की तरफ से लीडर बनाएंगे। आिदवासी नेता देने क े बाद भी वहां क े गवनर्र 
बोले िक मȅ इस पर सोचता हूं, आपके  पास संख्या बल नह ीं है। महोदय, वे लोग वहां बस मȂ संख्या 
बल लेकर बैठे हुए थे। दूसरे िदन िफर वे जाकर िमले और बोले िक हमारे पास पयार्Ãत संख्या है। 
तब उनको बोला गया िक कल आप साढ़े बारह बजे ओथ ले लीिजएगा। िफर बोले िक मȅ आपको 
िवÌव
ास मत सािबत करने क े िलए 8-10 िदन क े बाद की डेट देता हूं। सर, यह अपोिज़शन क े िलए 
है और आप क्या कर रहे हȅ? नीतीश क ुमार जी ने िबहार मȂ राज़ीनाम ा िदया, जो 15 िमनट मȂ 
Îवीकार हुआ, उनको शपथ लेने का समय भी िदया गया, उन्हȗने उसी वƪ अपना क ैिबनेट भी 
फॉमर् िकया। सर, एक का सब काम आधे घंटे मȂ होता है और यहां एक ही पाटीर् का बहुमत होते 
हुए, एक ही महागठबंधन का बहुमत होते हुए उनके  साथ ऐसा होता है। Is this democracy?  Is 
this democracy? यह भी टर्ाइबल का आदमी है। िरज़ाइन कर
ने वाला भी टर्ाइबल है, शपथ लेने 
वाला भी टर्ाइबल है। यिद आप इस तरह से टर्ीट करȂगे, तो डेमोकर्े सी क े ऊपर से लोगȗ का िवÌवास 
उठ जाएगा। आप बुरा न मानȂ, तो मȅ िनिÌचत रूप  से कहूंगा िक Ģधान मंतर्ी जी इसे आिखरी 
इलैक्शन डेक्लेयर करते हȅ। इसके  बाद इलैक्शन नहीं हȗगे। वे बोलȂगे िक मȅ इतना popular हो 
गया हूं, डेमोकर्े सी की ज़रूर
त ही नहीं है। इससे यह िदखाई दे रहा है। सर, जो 16 घंटे  मȂ पलट 
मारते हȅ, आप लोग उस पलटू राम को सपोटर् करते हȅ। जो सीधे-सीधे आपके  पास आता है, 
उसको आप नकारते हȅ, यह ठीक नहीं है। लाÎट मȂ मȅ यही कहूंगा िक ईडी, इनकम टैक्स बोल-
बोल कर थक गए, वे इसको मानते नहीं हȅ, क्यȗ
िक उनके  पास डराना ही एकमातर् उपा य है, 
दूसरा उपाय नहीं है। हम देश का िवकास चाहते हȅ, उनका ऐसा कहना है। हम भी देश का िवकास 
चाहते हȅ। मȅ कभी िवकास क े िलए िकसी को discriminate नहीं करता हूं। मȅ समझता हूं िक जोशी 
साहब भी यह मानते हȅ। िकसी को पूछो या न पूछो, हम हर एक की मदद करते थे। हमारा एम यह 
है िक अग
र डेवलपमȂट हुआ, सड़क बड़ी हुई, तो क्या मेरे ही लोग उस पर चलȂगे? रेल चली, तो 
क्या मेरे ही लोग उस पर सफर करȂगे, कोई हॉिÎपटल बना तो क्या मेरे ही घर क े पेशȂट जाएंगे। 
अगर यह सोच होगी, तो देश िवकिस
त होगा, नहीं तो मेरा, मेरे िलए और हमारे िलए, इतना ही 
बोल कर चलȂगे तो सवर्जन-सुखाय कहां होगा? मȅ तो यह बोलता हूं िक बहुजन-सुखाय, बहुजन-
िहताय की बा
त करो। 
यह तो बुǉ का कहना है और बुǉ को ही राम का आठवां अवतार मा नत े हȅ।  मुझे सही से मालूम 
नहीं है। िवÍणु का  नौवां अवतार मानते हȅ। उसका भी कहीं पर नामो-िनशान नहीं है।  उनका कहीं 
पर Îतूप नहीं बन रहा है।   
 
डा. सुधांशु ितर्वेदी (उǄर Ģदेश ): राम मूिर्त की Ģा ण ĢितÍठा...(Ëयवधान)...  
118
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: इसिलए ही बोला।  आप नौवȂ अवतार की पूजा करो। अगर नौवȂ अवतार की 
पूजा करȂगे, तो आपके  िदमाग मȂ scientific thinking आ जाएगी।  मȅ कोई टीका-िटÃपणी नहीं कर 
रहा हूं।  आप ठीक बोल रहे हȅ। अगर ऐसे लोग ज्यादा बढ़ जाएंगे, तो बीजेपी ठीक हो जाएगी।   
सर, मȅ आिखरी बात कहना चाहता हूं िक गरीब और कमजोर तबकȗ को न्याय िमले, यह हमारी 
नीित है, िज
स पर हम चलते रहȂगे।  आप िकतनी भी उपेक्षा करȂ, हम यह सवाल उठाते रहȂगे।  
आिखर मȂ मȅ यह कहूंगा  - 
'मेरा हर लÄज है अमन क े िलए 
मेरी हर सांस बंदगी क े िलए 
मȅ हवा क े िख
लाफ चलता हूं 
िसफर् इंसान की खुशी क े िलए।' 
 
 मȅ आपका बहुत-बहुत धन् यवाद  करता हूं, क्यȗिक आपने इस बार मुझे शांित से सुना। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Ray. 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY (West Bengal):  Sir, as per the List of Business, at 
3.30 p.m., the Private Members’ Legislative Business will be taken up.  So, only three 
minutes are left.  My Party has allotted me 24 minutes. So, kindly allow me to speak 
on Monday. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: I think it is fair enough. 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY: Sir, it cannot be a truncated speech.  
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: No, no; it is fair enough, very reas onable.   As usual, you are very 
reasonable.  I was thin king that if Khargeji could have taken another few minutes, the 
time of his Party would have been over.  But he has left about seven-eight minutes for 
others.  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी: एलओपी क े बोलने का टाइम अलग है और पाटीर् का टाइम अलग है।  आप 
एलओपी क े टाइम को पाटीर् क े टाइम से अलग करȂ।  एलओपी को बोलने का अिधक
ार है, लीडर 
को बोलने का अिधकार है। 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  How many times will I have to decide?  
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी : सर, इसको पाटीर् टाइम से बाहर रिखए। 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
119

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILLS 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, Private Members’  Business Bills for introduction. 
मुझे लगातार डर लग रहा था िक कहीं आप Annexure 1 पर न आ जाएं। 
 
(MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair.) 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Private Members’ Business Bills for introduction.  
The Representation of the People (A mendment) Bill, 2022 (amendment of 
section 62);   Shri Iranna Kadadi to move fo r leave to introduce the Bill.  Shri Iranna 
Kadadi; not present. The Constitution (A mendment) Bill, 2022 (insertion of new 
article 21B); Shri Iranna Kadadi to move fo r leave to introduce the Bill. Shri Iranna 
Kadadi; not  present.Then, the Right of Children to Free, Compulsory and Quality 
Education (Amendment) Bill, 2023; Shri Iranna Kadadi to move for leave to introduce 
the Bill.   Shri Iranna Kadadi; not presen t. The Prevention and Eradication of Human 
Sacrifice and Other Superstitious Practices Bill, 2022. Shri Binoy Viswam; not 
present. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (amendment of articles 58, 66, 72 
etc.).  Shri Binoy Viswam; not present. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
(amendment of Eighth Schedule).  Shri Binoy Viswam;  not present.  
 
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
 (Amendment) Bill, 2022 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education 
(Amendment) Bill, 2022.  Shri A.A. Rahim. 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala):  Sir, I move fo r leave to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI A.A RAHIM: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (amendment of article 371A) 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala):  Sir, I move fo r leave to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Constitution of India. 
        
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
120
[RAJYA SABHA]

SHRI A.A RAHIM: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of 
Security Interest (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
 
SHRI A. A. RAHIM (Kerala): Sir, I move fo r leave to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security 
Interest Act, 2002. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI A.A RAHIM: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Kashmiri Pandits (Recourse, Restitution, Rehabilitation and Resettlement) Bill, 
2022 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA (Madhya Pradesh): Si r, I move for leave to introduce a Bill 
to provide for social, political and economi c rehabilitation of Kashmiri Pandits, 
protection of their property, restoration of th eir cultural heritage, ensuring their safety 
and security, provision of rehabilitation and resettlement package to them and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI VIVEK K. TANKHA:  Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Witness Protection Bill, 2023 
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, I move for le ave to introduce a 
Bill to provide adequate protection and assistance to witnesses in criminal cases and 
to establish a procedure and mechanism to  provide such protection and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI S. NIRANJAN REDDY: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
121

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The National Commission for Fishermen (Welfare and 
Support) Bill, 2023. Shri Beedha Masthan Rao Yadav; not present.  
 
The Maternity Benefit for Women in the Unorganised Sector Bill, 2023 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, the Maternit y Benefit for Women in the Unorganised 
Sector Bill, 2023. Shri K.R. Suresh Reddy.  
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY (Telangana):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
provide state-sponsored maternity benefits to women working in the unorganized 
sector by establishing a National Maternity Benefit Welfare Board, Maternity Benefit 
Fund etc., and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI K.R. SURESH REDDY: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE (West Bengal): Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill 
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI SAKET GOKHALE: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The National Committee for Protection of Media Persons 
Bill, 2023.  Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque; not present. The Surrogacy Laws 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023; Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque -- not present. The Indian 
Standard Time (Adoption and Regulation of  Dual Time Zones) Bill, 2023; Dr. Amar 
Patnaik -- not present. The National Em issions Trading System (Reduction and 
Prevention of Greenhouse Gas Emissions)  Bill, 2024; Dr. Amar Patnaik -- not 
present.  The National Carbon Accounting Bill, 2024; Dr. Amar Patnaik -- not 
present. The Artificial Inte lligence (Protection of Rights of Employees) Bill, 2023; 
Shrimati Mausam Noor -- not present.    The Deepfake Prevention and Criminalisation 
Bill, 2023; Shrimati Mausam Noor -- not present.   
 
122
[RAJYA SABHA]

The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Information Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2023; 
Shri Derek O'Brien. 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN (West Bengal):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further 
to amend the Information Technology Act, 2000. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
The Public Service Integrity Bill, 2023 
 
SHRI DEREK O’ BRIEN (West Bengal):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
provide for regulation of appointments of  retired persons in various Government, 
Constitutional, Statutory bodies, etc., by adhering to the mandatory cooling off 
period post-retirement and for the esta blishment of a Regulatory Authority and 
Review and Exemption Committee for granting exemptions in certain cases and for 
matters connected and incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
The Elder Persons (Care and Protection) Bill, 2024 
 
SHRI DEREK O’ BRIEN (West Bengal):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
provide for the protection of rights of elder persons to lead a life with dignity and 
financial autonomy, free from abuse, negl ect and exploitation and provision of 
specialized care to them by framing a ho listic national policy for their welfare, 
development and protection and those of their caregivers and establishing a National 
Commission and State Commissions for Elder Care at the National and State levels 
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
123

SHRI DEREK O' BRIEN:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (substitution of article 155, insertion of new 
article 156A and substitution of articles 200 and 201) 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI (Maharas htra):  Sir, I move for leave to 
introduce a Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRIMATI PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Amendment Bill, 2024 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and 
Redressal) Act, 2013. 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
The Indian Contract (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Indian Contract Act, 1872. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
The Representation of People (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (insertion of new sections 
127B to 127D) 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
124
[RAJYA SABHA]

DR. SASMIT PATRA: Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
The Indian Media Services (Regulation and Licensing) Bill, 2024 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for the 
regulation and licensing of media services  and facilitate development of free and 
independent media services in the country by establishing an independent authority to 
be known as the Indian Board of Media Services and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The National Commission for Protection from Honour Crime Bill, 2024 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala): Sir, I move fo r leave to introduce a Bill to provide for 
protection from honour crime by establishing a National Commission for Protection 
from Honour Crime and prescribing punishments for honour crime and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment of article 361) 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Constitution of India. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment of articles 15 and 16) 
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
125

SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu): Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Constitution of India. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI P. WILSON: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
        
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The Special Marriage (Amendme nt) Bill, 2024.  Shri V. 
Vijayasai Reddy to move for leave to introduce the Bill; not present. 
 
The National Food Security (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the National Food Security Act, 2013. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (Amendment) Bill, 2024 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra): Sir, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to 
amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN: Sir, I introduce the Bill.  
 
The Prevention of Fraudulent Calls Bill, 2024 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra):  Sir, I to move for leave to introduce a Bill to 
amend certain enactments to prevent fraudu lent calls in the country and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN:  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
126
[RAJYA SABHA]

The Representation of the People (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (amendment 
of sections 86 and 116A) 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar):  Si r, I move for leave to introduce a Bill further to amend 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH :  Sir, I introduce the Bill. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, Shri R. Girirajan to move for leave to introduce the 
Hindu Marriage (Amendment) Bill, 2024.  He is not present.  
 
The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2022 (amendment of article 153 and  
substitution of articles 155 and 156)  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now, we will take up the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 
2022 (amendment of article 153 and substitution of articles 155 and 156).    
 We shall take up further consideration of the following motion moved by Dr. V. 
Sivadasan on 9th December, 2022:- 
"That the Bill further to amend the Co nstitution of India, be taken into
 consideration." 
 On 8
th December, 2023, Shri Naresh Ba nsal had not concluded his speech 
while participating in the discussion on this Bill.  Shri Naresh Bansal - not present.  
Dr. M. Thambidurai - not present.   Now, the hon. Minister.  
 
गृह मंतर्ालय मȂ राज्य मंतर्ी (Ǜी अजय क ुमार): आदरणीय उपसभापित महोदय, माननीय सदÎय 
राज्यपाल की िनयुिƪयȗ क े संबंध मȂ संिवधान मȂ संशोधन करने क े िलए इस िबल को Ģाइवेट 
मेÇबसर् िबल क े रूप  मȂ लेकर आए थे।  मȅ आपके  माध्यम से माननीय सांसद और सदन को यह 
कहना चाहता हूँ िक जब देश आजाद हुआ, उस समय हमारे देश की संिव
धान सभा ने इस देश का 
संचालन क ै से हो, हर दृिÍट से Ģत्येक ऐसी बात पर जो हमारी संघीय ËयवÎथा को मज बूत करे, 
उस पर चचार् की और उसी चचार् क े दौरान यह बात भी बहुत Ģमुखता से आई थी िक राज्यपाल 
िनवार्िचत Ëयिƪ होना चािहए या राÍटर्पित ǎारा िनयुƪ होना चािहए।  इस पर बहुत िवÎतार से 
चचार् की गई थी।  इसमȂ अंत मȂ संिव
धान सभा ने यह Îवीकार िकया था िक इस पद पर भारत 
सरकार ǎारा चुने गए Ëयिƪ ǎारा भरा जाना बेहतर होगा।  राÍटर्पित ǎारा िनयुƪ राज्यपाल, क ेन्दर् 
                   
 Further consideration continued on a motion moved on 9th December, 2022. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
127

और Ģान्तȗ क े बीच जो संबंध है, उसमȂ एक मजबूत कड़ी है।  राज्यपाल क े माध्यम से हमारी जो 
राÍटर्ीय सरकार है, वह Ģान्तȗ क े िहतȗ क े संबंध मȂ अच्छी तरह से ËयवÎथाएँ कर सकती है। आम 
तौर पर यह माना जाता है िक िजस तरह से राÍटर्पित देश क े संवैधािनक मुिखया क े रूप  मȂ काम 
करते हȅ और जैसी हम सब
को जानकारी है िक पािर्लयामȂट का रूप  ही लोक सभा, राज्य सभा और 
राÍटर्पित को िमलाकर पूरा होता है, उसी दृिÍट से जहाँ राÍटर्पित की बहुत Ģमुख भूिमक ा होती है, 
वैसे ही राज्यपालȗ की भी Ģदेशȗ क े िलए Ģमुख भूिमका होती है।  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please let him speak.  ... 
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार: आप जो भी ĢÌन पूछȂगे, मȅ आपको उसका उǄर दूँगा।  
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप चेयर को सÇबोिधत करȂ।  आपस मȂ बात नहीं करȂ।   
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार: माननीय उपसभापित जी,  ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, he is ready to yield. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Let him reply. ...(Interruptions)... John Brittas ji, please 
take your seat.  Let him reply. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार: माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यही कहना चाहूँगा िक मȅ अपनी 
Îपीच पूरी कर लूँ, उसके  बाद अगर आप अनुमित दȂगे, पीठ का जैसा आदेश होगा, Ģत्
येक ĢÌन 
का उǄर देने क े िलए मȅ सक्षम हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Thank you very much, Sir.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी उपसभाप
ित : माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार : महोदय, जैसा मȅने कहा  ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : आपके  बोलने क े बाद इस िबल क े mover, डा. वी. िशवादासन बोलȂगे।   
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार : महोदय, आप जैसी भी ËयवÎथा दȂगे, मȅ वैसा करू ँगा।  
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित :  रूÊस बने हुए हȅ। ...(Interruptions)...  Dr. Brittas, it is not going on 
record. ...(Interruptions)...  
 
128
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी अजय क ुमार : मȅ आपको नहीं कह रहा हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ पीठ से कह रहा हूँ िक पीठ की 
जैसी ËयवÎथा होगी - मȅ पीठ से कह रहा हूँ, मȅ सीधे आपसे नहीं बोल रहा हूँ। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, rules and procedure are very clear.  We will 
follow it.   
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार : माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह अनुरोध कर
 ना चाहूँगा िक 
माननीय सदÎय ने अपने िबल क े माध्यम से संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 153, 155 और 156 मȂ संशोधन 
क े िलए अनुरोध िकया है।  वाÎतव मȂ यह हमारे संघीय ढाँचे क े िखलाफ है।  अगर इस तरह क े 
संशोधनȗ को Îवीकार िक
या जाता है, तो संिवधान सभा क े ǎारा जो ËयवÎथा बनायी गयी थी, उस 
ËयवÎथा पर Ģितकू ल असर पड़ने की संभावनाएँ बनती हȅ।  इस दृिÍट से वे यह जो िबल लाये हȅ, मȅ 
यह समझता हूँ िक यह सदन बहुमत क े साथ उस
को अÎवीकृ त करेगा।  लेिकन उसके  साथ ही 
साथ मȅ आपसे यह कहना चाहता हूँ िक जब हमारा देश आज़ाद हुआ, उस समय संÎथाओं क े िलए 
जो ËयवÎथाएँ बनायी गय
ी थीं, उसी दृिÍट से पािर्लयामȂट का एक रूप  िदया गया िक पािर्लयामȂट 
का पूरा Îवरूप यह होगा िक लोक सभा, राज्य सभा और राÍटर्पित, इन तीनȗ को िमलाकर 
पािर्लयामȂट होता है।  जब उसमȂ यह िवषय आया िक लोक सभा क े माध्यम से लोगȗ की भावनाओं 
क े िवषय मȂ उनकी जो आकांक्षाएँ हȅ, वे राÍटर्ीय Îतर पर उठ
ायी जा सकȂ, उनकी Ģितपूिर्त की जा 
सके  और लोगȗ की इच्छाओं क े अनुरूप  शासन चल सके , तो उस दृिÍट से जहाँ लोक सभा की बड़ी 
भूिमका होती है, वहीं राज्
य सभा राज्यȗ की सभा होती है।  राज्यȗ मȂ जो जनĢितिनिध हȅ, वे राज्य 
सभा क े सदÎयȗ को इसीिलए वहाँ से चुन कर राज्य सभा मȂ भेजते हȅ।  अभी जैसी ËयवÎथा है, 
उसके  िलए मȅ नहीं कहता, लेिकन आम तौर पर संिवधान की जो मंशा थी, वह मंशा यह थी िक 
राज्य सभा मȂ िजन राज्
यȗ से चुन कर सदÎय आयȂ, वे हमारे लोकतंतर् क े जो Ģहरी हȅ, हमारे जो 
लोग लोक सभा मȂ हȅ, वे जनाकांक्षाओं क े अनुरूप  जो िबÊस लायȂ, उनकी समीक्षा उन को करनी 
चािहए िक अपने राज्यȗ क े िहत मȂ वे क ै से हȅ।  उनकी पाटीर्गत जो भी Ģितबǉताएँ हȗ, उनसे ऊपर 
उठ कर उन्हȂ राज्य क े िलए सोच कर काम करना चािहए।  इसि लए राज्य सभा क े सदन क े बारे मȂ 
यह कहा जाता है िक लोक सभा से िबल क े पािरत होने क े बाद उसे राज्य सभा मȂ आना चािहए।  
उसके  बाद वह िबल जब राÍटर्पित क े पास जाता है, तो वह इसी दृिÍट से जाता है िक राÍटर्पित 
उसमȂ यह देखते हȅ िक वह हमारे देश क े Ģितकू ल तो नहीं है।  इस तरह क ु ल िमलाकर पािर्लयामȂट 
की जो भावना होती है, वह यह होती है िक लोगȗ क े साथ-साथ संघ मȂ शािमल हमारे Ģदेशȗ और 
राÍटर् - इन सारे लोगȗ क े िहत मȂ ही कोई िबल हमारी पािर्लयामȂट से पास हो और लोगȗ क े िहतȗ क े 
अनुरूप  वह काम करे।  उसी दृिÍट से संिवधान सभा मȂ, हमारा जो संघीय ढाँचा है, उसमȂ राज्यȗ क े 
संवैधािनक Ģमुखȗ क े रूप  मȂ राज्यपालȗ की िनयुिƪ क े िवषय मȂ जब यह बात कही गयी, तो यह 
बात उभर कर आयी िक राज्यपालȗ को क ै से िनयुƪ िकया जाए।  कई लोगȗ ने संिवधान सभा मȂ 
इस बात को कहा था िक राज्यपाल
ȗ का जो चुनाव हो, उनको िनवार्िचत िकया जाए, लेिकन 
संिवधान सभा मȂ सारे िवǎानȗ ने बहुत लÇबी चचार् करने क े बाद एकमत होकर यह तय िकया िक 
चुने हुए Ëयिƪ से - अगर हम उसको चुनते हȅ, तो राज्य और क ेन्दर् सरकार, दोनȗ क े बीच न क ेवल 
ĢितÎपधार्त्मक सÇबन्ध हȗगे, बिÊक वह Ëयिƪ िक
सी न िकसी दल क े Ģित समिर्पत हो जाएगा, 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
129

जबिक संिवधान ने यह अपेक्षा की थी िक राज्यपाल की, जो पाटीर्गत Ģितबǉताएँ हȗ, उनसे ऊपर 
उठ कर वह िनÍपक्ष रूप  से यह देखे िक उस राज्य क े िहत मȂ क्या है और राज्य से क ेन्दर् क े सÇबन्ध 
िकस तरह क े हȗ।  उस दृिÍट से राज् यपाल एक संवैधािनक मुिखया क े तौर पर चुने जाते हȅ।  उन्हȗने 
अपने संिवधान संशोधन िबल मȂ अनुच्छेद 153 मȂ यह कहा है िक जनĢितिनिधयȗ क े माध्यम से 
राज्यपाल का चुनाव िकया जाए। यह िनिÌच त  रूप  हमारे संघीय ढांचे क े Ģितकू ल होगा। अगर इस 
तरह से Ëयिƪ को चुना जाता है, तो वह अपनी Ģितबǉताओं क े कारण, जहाँ से वे चुनाव जीत कर 
आते हȅ, उस दृिÍट से वे अपने िनणर्य लȂगे। राÍटर्पित क े ǎारा राज्यपाल को िनयुƪ िक ए जाने से 
सीधे-सीधे Ģदेश सरकार और संघीय सरकार क े बीच मȂ एक बेहतर संवाद Îथािपत होता है, 
बेहतर संबंध Îथािपत होता है और राज्यȗ की िÎथितयाँ जो हȅ, उन राज्यȗ क े िहतȗ मȂ राज्यपाल 
िनÍपक्ष रूप  से पाटीर् से ऊपर उठ कर अपना िनणर्य लेते हȅ, िजससे राज्य और राज्य क े लोगȗ को 
फायदा होता है। उस दृिÍ
ट से उस समय की संिवधान सभा ने यह तय िकया था िक Ģत् य ेक राज्य 
क े िलए एक राज्यपाल होगा। उसके  बाद 1956 मȂ एक संिवधान संशोधन आया था। सातवाँ 
संिवधान संशोधन 1956 मȂ आया था। पहले संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 153 मȂ यह था िक Ģत्येक राज्य क े 
िलए एक राज्यपाल होगा। उन्हȗने इसमȂ भी कहा िक ' परन्तुक' हटा िदया जाए। 1956 मȂ सातवȂ 
संिवधान संशोधन क े ǎारा यह लाया गया था और इस अनुच्छेद मȂ यही बात कही गई है िक यह 
एक ही Ëयिƪ को दो या दो से अिधक राज्यȗ क े राज्यपाल क े रूप  मȂ िन युƪ िकए जाने से नहीं 
रोके गी। मेरे ख्याल से उस समय इस तरह की कोई समÎया आई होगी िक िकसी राज्य मȂ िकसी 
कारण से राज्यपाल नहीं हȗगे और राज्यपाल की िनयुिƪ नहीं हुई होगी, इसिलए उस दृिÍट से 
1956 मȂ संिवधान मȂ इस तरह का संशोधन लाया गया होगा िक एक ही Ëयिƪ को दो राज्यȗ या दो 
से अिधक राज्यȗ मȂ राज्
यपाल क े तौर पर िनयुƪ िकया जा सके । यह संघीय ढाँचे को बनाने क े 
िलए और एक सुिवध ाजनक ËयवÎथा बनी रहे, उस दृिÍट से 1956 मȂ यह 'परन्तुक' जोड़ा गया था। 
वे इसके  लोप की बात कह रहे हȅ, लेिकन इसका कोई औिचत्य नहीं है और उससे कोई लाभ भी 
नहीं होने वाला है। 
 महोदय, उन्हȗने संिवधान क े अनुच्छेद 155 मȂ संिवधान संशोध न क े िलए कहा है। इसके  
तहत यह है िक राज्य क े राज्यपाल की िनयुिƪ राÍटर्पित क े ǎारा अपने हÎताक्षर और मोहर क े 
साथ की जाती है, जैसा िक मȅने शुरुआत  मȂ कहा। उन्हȗने इसके  िलए कहा है िक राज्यपाल को 
राÍटर्पित क े ǎारा िनयुƪ नहीं िकया जाए, बिÊक इनका चुनाव हो। उन्हȗने कहा है िक राज्यपाल 
का चुनाव राज्य िव
धान सभा क े िनवार्िचत सदÎय और गर्ाम पंचायतȗ क े सदÎयȗ क े ǎारा िकया 
जाए। यह तो एक तरह से जैसे सरकार चुनकर आत
ी है, िवधायक का चुनाव होता है, मुख्य मंतर्ी 
चुने जाते हȅ, वहाँ क े मंतर्ी चुने जाते हȅ, Ģदेश की सरकार चुनी जाती है, वैसे ही हो गया। अगर 
ऐसा होगा, तो इसका Ģित
कू ल असर पड़ेगा। अगर इस तरह का कोई चुना हुआ मुिखया होगा, तो 
उसको तो हम ऐसी ही दृिÍट से देखȂगे, जैसे अमेिरका मȂ राÍटर्पित है। इस तरह से वह उस सरकार 
क े ऊपर बड़ा पद हो जाएगा और यह हमारे संघीय ढाँचे क े िलए ठीक नहीं है। माननीय सदÎय 
Ģितिनिधत्व Ģणाली क े मा
ध्यम से राज्यपाल का चुनाव कराना चाह रहे हȅ, जो िकसी भी दृिÍट से 
हमारे संिवधान क े िलए भी ठीक नहीं है और संघीय ढाँचे क े िलए भी ठीक नहीं है।  
 उन्हȗने तीसरा जो संशोधन िदया है, वह अनुच्छेद 156 मȂ संशोधन क े िलए िदया है। इस 
संबंध मȂ संिवधान मȂ यह ËयवÎथा है िक राज्यपाल, राÍटर्पित क े ǎारा जो कहा जाएग ा, उसके  
130
[RAJYA SABHA]

अनुसार वे अपने पद को गर्हण करȂगे। अगर राÍटर्पित उनको िनयुƪ करते हȅ और उसके  बाद अगर 
वे बीच मȂ जाना चाहते हȅ, तो उसके  िलए यह ËयवÎथा है िक राज्यपाल राÍटर्पित को संबोिधत 
अपने हÎताक्षर क े तहत िलिखत रूप  से अपने पद से त्याग पतर् भी दे सकते हȅ।  
 इस अनुच्छेद का तीसर
ा भाग यह है िक इस अनुच्छेद क े पूवर्गामी Ģावधानȗ क े अधीन 
राज्यपाल उस तारीख से पाँच साल की अविध क े िलए पद धारण करेगा, िजस िदन वह अपना पद 
गर्हण करता है, बशतȃ िक राज्यपाल अपने कायर्काल की समािÃत क े बावजूद तब तक पद पर बना 
रहता है, जब तक िक उसका कोई उǄ
रािधकारी नहीं आता है। यह एक समुिचत और सुËयविÎथत 
तरीका है। लेिकन, अभी उन्हȗने संिवधान मȂ संशोधन क े संबंध मȂ कहा है िक राज्यपाल पद गर्ह ण 
की तारीख क े पाँच साल की अविध क े िलए तब तक पद धारण करेगा, जब तक उसका 
उǄरािधकारी पद गर्हण नहीं कर लेता। उसके  सापेक्ष इन्हȗने कहा है िक राÍ टर्पित की इच्छानुसार ,
राÍटर्पित क े कहने क े अनुसार ,राÍटर्पित क े आदेशानुसार ,राज्यपाल अपने पद को धारण करेगा ,
तो यह पूरी तरह से अनुच्छेद 156 क े िखलाफ भी है और हमारे संघीय ढांचे क े अनुक ू ल भी नहीं है।  
दूसरा, हमने कहा है िक राज्यपाल अगर चाहȂ तो वे अपने पद को छोड़ सकते हȅ। उसके  
िलए उन्हȗने कहा है िक राज्यपाल राज्य िवधान सभा क े अध्
यक्ष को संबोिधत अपने हÎताक्षर से 
युƪ पतर् क े माध्यम से िलिखत रूप  मȂ अपना पद त्याग कर सकता है।  राज्यपाल संवैधािनक रूप  
से Ģदेश का मुिखया होता है।  यिद वह िव
धान सभा अध्यक्ष को अपना त्यागपतर् देगा तो उसका 
कोई औिचत्य नहीं है और यह बहुत हाÎयाÎपद भी है िक कोई राज्यपाल िवधान सभा क े अध्यक्ष 
को अपना इÎतीफा दे। िवधान सभा क े अध्यक्ष को तो इÎत
ीफा चुनी हुई सरकार क े लोग दे सकते 
हȅ, क्यȗिक उसके  जो िवधायक होते हȅ या जो दूसरे दल क े होते हȅ, वही देते हȅ, बाकी उनका  
मुिखया अप
ना त्यागपतर् राज्यपाल को जाकर देता है। जो मुख्य मंतर्ी होता है, उसको अपना 
त्यागपतर् राज्यपाल को देना होता है।  यिद उसे अपने िकसी मंतर्ी को हटाना है या िकसी मंतर्ी को 
शपथ गर्हण कराना है, तो इसके  िलए भी वह राज्यपाल क े पास जाता है।  उस दृिÍ
ट से इस 
अनुच्छेद मȂ वे जो ËयवÎथा चाह रहे हȅ, वह पूरी तरह से Ģितकू ल है। 
 उन्हȗने संिवधान मȂ संशोधन क े िवष य मȂ तीसरी बात यह कही है िक अगर िवधान सभा 
चाहे, तो वह दो-ितहाई बहुमत से राज्यपाल को उसके  पद से हटा दे।  यह भी एक तरीके  से हमारे 
संिवधान क े एकदम िखलाफ है।  माननीय राÍटर्पित जी का जो आदेश होता है --  सॉरी सर,  बीच 
मȂ Äलो िडÎटबर् हो जाता है।  उन्हȗने यह बोला है िक  माननीय राज्यपाल क े िखलाफ अगर वे चाहȂ 
तो राज्
य िवधान सभा मȂ दो-ितहाई बहुमत से उनको उनके  पद से हटा सकते हȅ।  यह अनुच्छेद 
153 का सीधा उÊलंघन हो जाएगा, िज
समȂ हमारे संिवधान मȂ यह ËयवÎथा की गई है िक राÍटर्पित 
क े ǎारा राज्यपाल की िनयुिƪ की जाएगी।  अब राज्यपाल की िनयुिƪ उनके  ǎारा की जाए और 
156(2) मȂ, जैसा िक उन् हȗने कहा िक माननीय राÍटर्पित जी ǎारा िनयुƪ Ëयिƪ को अपना 
त्यागपतर् माननीय िवधान सभा अध्यक्ष को देना चािहए, तो उन्हȗने क्या सोचकर यह कहा है, मȅ 
उस बात की Ëयाख्या मȂ नहीं जाऊं गा।  इसी से संबंिधत उन्हȗने दूसरी बात यह कही िक दो-ितहाई 
बहुमत क े माध्यम से हम इस तरह से इसको लेकर आए हȅ।   
 माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ समझता हूं िक उन्हȗने जो ये तीनȗ संिवधान संशोधन िदए हȅ, 
ये वाÎ
तव मȂ हमारी सोच क े भी िखलाफ हȅ तथा हमारी जो संघीय ËयवÎथा है, संघीय ढांचा है और 
हमारा जो एक बहुत खूबसूरत संिव
धान बनाया गया था, ये उसके  िखलाफ भी हȅ।  जब 1950 मȂ 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
131

हमारे देश का संिवधान लागू हुआ था, उससे पहले 11 सतर्ȗ मȂ 165 िदन तक इस पर लगभग 400 
िवǎानȗ ने िनरंतर चचार् की थी और चचार् करने क े बाद एक-एक अनुच्छेद की Ëयाख्या करते हुए 
बताया था िक यह हमारे देश क े िलए िकस तर ह से उिचत होगा और उस तरह से उन्हȗने इस 
संिवधान की ËयवÎथा की थी।  26 जनवरी, 1950 को यह संिवधान हमारे देश मȂ जैसे ही लागू हुआ, 
पूरी दुिनया क े लोगȗ ने इस संिवधान की बहुत Ģशंसा की और Ģशंसा करते हुए यह कहा िक भारत 
क े संिवधान मȂ वाÎतव मȂ लचीलापन भी है और लचीलेपन क े साथ-साथ ऐसी ËयवÎथाएं भी हȅ, 
िजनके  माध्यम से यह देश अपनी िवदेश नीित, रक्षा नीित, आिर् थक  नीित, इन सभी क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ आगे 
बढ़ सकता है।  उन्हȗने िजस तरह से ये ËयवÎथाएं  की थीं, उनमȂ आपने देखा होगा िक अनुच्छेद 
36 से 51 क े बीच जो नीित िनदȃशक तत्व शािमल िकए गए हȅ, उनमȂ भी ÎपÍट रूप  से यह ËयवÎथा 
की गई है िक हमारे अंतरराÍटर्ीय संबंध अनुच्छेद 51 क े माध्यम से तय हȗगे और अनुच्छेद 37 से 50 
क े माध्यम से यह तय होगा िक हमारे देश मȂ क ैसी ËयवÎथाएं हȗ
।  इन सब बातȗ को ध्यान मȂ रखते 
हुए नीित िन
दȃशक तत्व भी िलखे गए हȅ।  हमारे संिवधान का जो चौथा अध्याय है, िजसमȂ अनुच्छेद 
51 क े माध्यम से अंतरराÍटर्ीय संबंधȗ क े बारे मȂ चचार् की गई है, उसमȂ भी िवÎतार से यह बताया 
गया है िक सरकार और माननीय राÍटर्पित जी की क्या भूिम
का है और साथ ही, अन्य देशȗ क े 
साथ हमारे संबंध क ै से हȗ, इसके  बारे मȂ भी बताया गया है।  अत: हम कह सकते हȅ िक हमारा 
संिवधान इस तरह से पूरा ËयविÎथत है, िजसमȂ बहुत ज्यादा संशोधनȗ की आवÌयकता नहीं है।  
यह बात अलग है िक हमारे देश की जो लोक सभ
ा और राज्य सभा है, चूंिक उनको इसमȂ ऐसा 
अिधकार ĢाÃत है, इसिलए कई मौकȗ पर संिवधान संशोधन भी हुए हȅ। माननीय उपसभापित 
महोदय, कई बार तो बड़े आÌजयर्जनक संशोधन हुए हȅ। अगर हम लोग बात करȂ तो देश मȂ जब 
वषर् 1950 मȂ संिवधान बना, उसी दौरान हमारे देश मȂ एक वैकि Êपक सरकार बनी थी, िजसमȂ 
पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी इस देश क े Ģधान मंतर्ी बने थे, उस दौरान दो अखबारȗ ने, एक 
ऑगर्नाइज़र था, दूसरा हमारा crossroad अखबार था। उन दोनȗ अखबारȗ मȂ आलोचना होने क े 
कारण पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ने वषर् 1951  मȂ उन अखबारȗ को Ģितबंिधत िकया था। वे 
अखबार कोटर् मȂ चले गए और हाई कोटर् ने उनके  Ģितबंध को समाÃत कर िदया। माननीय 
उपसभापित महोदय, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से यह खेद Ëयƪ करना चाहूंगा िक पहले आम चुनाव से 
पहले ही हमारे देश मȂ संिवधान संशोधन तत्कालीन सरकार क े ǎारा लाया गय
ा था, िसफर् इसिलए 
लाया गया था िक लोगȗ क े बोलने की Îवतंतर्ता पर रोक लगाई जा सके  या उसको Ģितबंिधत 
िकया जा सके । ऐसे अनेक संशोधन हुए हȅ। हम लोगȗ को वह काल भी याद है, जब इस देश मȂ 
39वां संिवध
ान संशोधन हुआ था। वह संिवधान संशोधन क ेवल उस समय की Ģधान मंतर्ी की क ुसीर् 
को बचाने क े िलए हुआ था। 12 जून, 1975 को Ģयागराज हाई कोटर् का एक िनणर्य आया था, उस 
िनणर्य क े ǎारा रायबरेली का चुनाव अवैध घोिषत िकया गया था, चुनाव को अवैध घोिषत करने क े 
माननीय उच्
च न्यायालय क े आदेश को बदलने क े िलए 7 अगÎत, 1975 को लोक सभा मȂ एक िबल 
पािरत िकया गया और उसके  ǎारा Ģध
ान मंतर्ी की जांच नहीं हो सकती, Ģधान मंतर्ी क े पद को 
न्याियक समीक्षा मȂ नहीं लाया जा सकता, ऐसा िबल पास िकया गया और 8 अगÎ त, 1975 को 
राज्य सभा मȂ वही िबल दोबारा पािरत करके  Ģदेशȗ क े िलए भेजा गया। 9 अगÎत को इस देश की 
17 िवधान सभाओं मȂ उस िबल को पािरत िकया गया, उनकी सहमित ली गई और 10 अगÎत को 
रिववार क े िदन राÍटर्पित जी क े हÎताक्षर िलए गए और 10 अग Îत को ही वह गजट भी कर िदया 
132
[RAJYA SABHA]

गया था। इस तरह से भी इस देश मȂ संिवधान संशोधन हुए हȅ। एक मिहला को गुज़ारा भǄा न देना 
पडे़, इसके  िलए भी इस देश की लोक सभा और राज्य सभा ने संिवधान संशोधन िकए हȅ, लेिकन 
वहीं पर लगातार संिवधान संशोधन होते जाएं, इसका कोई औिचत्य नहीं होता है। हमारे Ģध
ान 
मंतर्ी जी ने भी संिवधान संशोधन िकए हȅ, लेिकन हमने क ेवल 8 संिवधान संशोधन िकए हȅ, उन 8 
संिवधान संशोधनȗ को आपकी अनुमित से मȅ यहां बहुत संक्षेप मȂ रखना चाहता हूं। हमारे Ģधान 
मंतर्ी जी ने जो पहला संिवधान संशोधन िकया, वह न्याियक सेवाओं मȂ एक आयोग क े गठन क े 
िलए िकया था - न्याियक सेवाओं मȂ िन य ुिƪयȗ क े िलए एक आयोग बने, उसके  गठन क े िलए हमने 
पहला संिवधान संशोधन िकया था। िफर हमने दूसरा संिवधान संशोधन िकया। हमने बंगलादेश की 
सीमाओं क े साथ 40 वष र् से अिधक समय से जो िववािदत क्षेतर् था, उस क्षेतर् क े गावȗ का पिरवतर्न 
एक-दूसरे से हो सके , उनके  नागिरक िकसी एक देश क े न
ागिरक बन सकȂ, उनको नागिरकता 
Ģदान की जा सके , उस दृिÍट से हमारी सरकार ने दूसरा संिवधान संशोधन िकया था। हमारी 
सरकार ने जो तीसरा संिवधान संशोधन िकया, वह देश मȂ एक टैक्स, एक देश बनाने क े िलए, 
जीएसटी लागू हो, उसके  िलए हमारी सरकार ने तीसरा संिव
धान संशोधन िकया था। हमने िपछड़ा 
वगर् आयोग को संवैधािनक दजार् देने क े िलए चौथ ा संिवधान संशोधन िकया था। पहले यहां िपछड़ा 
वगर् की बहुत बातȂ होती थीं, बहुत सारे लोग चचार् भी करते थे, लेिकन इससे पहले िकसी भी 
सरकार ने यह िंचता नहीं की थी िक िपछड़ा वगर् को संवैधािनक दज ार् िदया जाए। हमारी सरकार ने 
िपछड़ा वगर् आयोग को संवैधािनक दजार् देने क े िलए चौथा संिवधान संशोधन िकया था। महोदय, 
गरीब तबके  क े वे लोग िजनकी आिर्थक िÎथित ठीक नहीं थी, उन लोगȗ को आिर्थक आधार पर 
Îकू ली िशक्षा से लेकर नौकिरयȗ तक मȂ 10 परस Ȃट िरज़वȃशन िदया जा
ए, इसके  िलए हम 5 वां 
संिवधान संशोधन लेकर आए थे। छठा संिवधान संशोधन इसिलए लेकर आए थे िक राज्यȗ मȂ और 
लोक सभा मȂ जो हमारी िरज़Ëडर् सीट् स होती हȅ। उन िरजËडर् सीट्स का कायर्काल 25 January, 
2020 को खत्म हो रहा था।  25 जनवरी, 2020 को उनकी reserved seat का जो quota होता है, 
वह समाÃत होने वाला था।  हमारा जो छठा संिवधान संशोधन था, उसको हम इसिलए लेकर आए 
थे िक राज्यȗ मȂ और लोक सभा मȂ rese rved सीटȂ, आरिक्षत सीटȂ अनुसूिचत जाित और अनुसूिचत 
जनजाित क े िलए आरिक्षत बनी रहȂ। हमने उसमȂ Anglo Indian का लोप कर िदया था।  Anglo 
Indian क े िलए जो सुरिक्षत सीटȂ थीं, उनको हटा िदया था, लेिकन अनुसूिचत जाित और 
अनुसूिचत ज
नजाित की सीट्स का reservation 10 साल  तक वैसे ही बरकरार रहे, उसके  िलए 
हम छठा संिवधान संशोधन लेकर आए थे।  हम सातवां संिवधान संशोधन इसिलए लेकर आए थे, 
क्यȗिक राज्यȗ को हमने एक अलग से अिधकार िदया था।  राज्यȗ को उन के  अिधकार को बहाल 
करने क े िलए िक वे अपने Ģदेश मȂ शैिक्षक, आिर्थक, सामािजक और राजनैितक रूप  से िपछड़े हुए 
लोगȗ को िचिन्हत कर सकȂ और उनके  िलए उनके  जीवन मȂ एक अच्छा बदलाव आए, उस दृिÍट से 
Ëयापक पिरवतर्न कर सकȂ, उसके  िलए उनके  अिधकार को बहाल करने क े िलए हमने सातवां 
संिवधान संशोधन िक
या था।  आठवां संिवधान संशोधन, जो वाÎतव मȂ आज नहीं, इस देश क े आने 
वाले भिवÍय पर भी बड़ा Ģभाव डालने वाला है, तो हम मिहला ओं को देश की िवधान सभाओं और 
लोक सभा मȂ आरक्षण देने क े िलए नारी वंदन अिधिनयम, 2023 क े िलए लेकर आए थे।  हमने ये 
आठ संिवधान संशोधन िकए हȅ।  नारी वंदन अिधिनयम लेकर आए हȅ, उसके  ǎारा न क ेवल 
मिहलाओं को Ģदेश की िवधान सभाओं और लोक सभा मȂ आरक्षण िमलने जा रहा है, वहीं यह बात 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
133

भी हम लोग िनिÌचत रूप  से जानते हȅ िक इसका Ëयापक Ģभाव होगा।  अभी िजस तरह से दस वषș 
मȂ हमारी सरकार ने, मोदी जी की सरकार ने िजस तरह से काम िकया है, मिहलाओं क े 
सशƪीकरण क े िलए हमने एक आयाम पर ही काम नहीं िकया है,  हमारे Ģधान मंतर्ी जी कहते हȅ 
िक हम मिहलाओं का सशƪीकरण नहीं कर रहे, मिहलाओं का िवक
ास नहीं कर रहे हȅ, मिहलाओं 
क े नेतृत्व मȂ राÍटर् का िवकास कर रहे हȅ। 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार : उस दृिÍट से जो आठवां संिव धान संशोधन िकया है, मȅ उसके  बारे मȂ बोल रहा 
हूं। ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : मंतर्ी जी, आप बोिलए। Please.  …(Interruptions)…  Please.  
…(Interruptions)…   आपस मȂ बात मत कीिजए। Please.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार: ये िवǎान आदमी हȅ, बता सकते हȅ।  हम तो सबसे सीखते हȅ।...(Ëयवधा
 न)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Mananiya Members, take your seat.  …(Interruptions)…  
        
Ǜी अजय क ुमार : उपसभापित जी, संिवधान मȂ संशोधन क्यȗ होना चािहए,  पहला िवषय यह है।  
पहला िवषय यह है िक संिवधान मȂ संशोधन क्यȗ होना चािहए? संिवधान मȂ यही ËयवÎथा है िक 
अगर लोकिहत मȂ, देशि
हत मȂ, राÍटर्िहत मȂ और लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ अच्छा पिरवतर्न लाने क े िलए 
आवÌयक हो, तो संिवधान मȂ संशोधन होना चािहए, लेिकन बेमतलब संिवधान संशोधनȗ का 
औिचत्य क्या है? इसिलए मȅ आपको बता रहा हूं िक हमने जो आठ क े आठ संिवधान संशोधन िकए 
हȅ, उसमȂ एक भी संिव
धान संशोधन, जो हमने िकया है...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No talk, please.  …(Interruptions)…  D r .  J o h n  B r i t t a s ,  
please, nothing is going on record.  …(Interruptions)…   Please.  …(Interruptions)…  
आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है। . ..(Ëयवध ान)...   Please take your seat.  
…(Interruptions)…   
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार: महोदय, मȅ इन लोगȗ की पीड़ा समझता हूं।  मेरी सहानुभूित इनके  साथ है।  मȅ 
Îवाभािवक रूप  से पूरी सहानुभूित इनके  साथ रखता हूं।  इनकी हताशा और िनराशा है, िजसके  
कारण ये कहते हȅ, लेिकन मȅ उसका बुरा नहीं मानता हूं।  ये हम ारे आदरणीय साथी हȅ, इसिलए मȅ 
उनका सÇमान करता हूं।  यह बात अलग है िक वे इस समय िजन िÎथितयȗ मȂ हȅ, हमारी 
सहानुभूित उनके  साथ है।  मȅ िनरंतर उनके  साथ सहानुभूित रखूंगा।...(Ëयवधा न)...     
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please.  …(Interruptions)…   
 
134
[RAJYA SABHA]

Ǜी अजय क ुमार : मȅ क ेवल संिवधान संशोधन क े िवषय मȂ ही आपको बोल रहा हूं।   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : Ãलीज़, माननीय जॉन िĤटास, आपकी कोई बात िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जा रही है।  
माननीय मंतर्ी जी की बात ही िरकॉडर् पर जा रही है।   
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार: उपसभापित जी, यह देश की पहली सरकार है, िजसने सभी संवैधािनक 
संÎथाओं का सÇमान िकया है।  हमने िकसी भी संÎथा क े काम मȂ कोई हÎतक्षेप नहीं िकया है।  
राज्यपाल क े अपने अिधकार होते हȅ।  राज्यपालȗ को ये लोग जरूर  आदेश देते थे और वे काम 
करते भी हȗगे।  मȅ उसके  ऊपर कोई आरोप नहीं लगा रहा हूं। यह इनका Îवभाव है। ये अपने 
Îवभावगत कारणȗ से हम लोगȗ क े ऊपर भी आक्षेप लगाते हȅ। ये कई बार कहते हȅ िक ईडी है, 
सीबीआई है। हमारे यहां पर ईडी और सीबीआई सभी Îवतंतर् संÎथाएं हȅ। अगर िकसी क े ऊपर कोई 
आरोप लग जाता है, तो कहते हȅ िक Ģधान मंतर्ी ने करवा िदया, िकसी की जांच होती है, तो कहते 
हȅ िक Ģधान मंतर्ी ने करा िदया, िकस
ी की जांच होकर चाजर्शीट लग जाती है, तो कहते हȅ िक 
Ģधान मंतर्ी ने करा दी। जब जेल चले जाते हȅ, तो कहते हȅ िक Ģधान मंतर्ी ने भेज िदया, अदालत 
जमानत नहीं देती है, तो Ģधान मंतर्ी जमानत नहीं देते हȅ। पह
ले तो कह रहे थे िक मोदी जी, 
िहÇमत है तो हमको भेजो। अब जब जेल चले गये, जमानत नहीं हो रही है,  तो हम लोग उसमȂ क्या 
करȂ?  अब  यह सत्यनारायण भगवान का Ģसाद तो नहीं है िक एक तर
फ से सबको बांट िदया 
जाए।  िजसके  ऊपर आरोप होगा, उसकी जांच भी होगी। अगर जांच क े साथ-साथ आरोप िसǉ 
पाए गए, तो चाजर्शीट भी होगी और चाजर्शीट मȂ अगर साÑय भी हȗगे, तो उसको सजा भी होगी। 
यह हमारे देश की ËयवÎथा है।  माननीय उपसभापित जी, उन्हȗने मेरा ध्यान दूसरी तर
फ भटका 
िदया।  ...(Ëयवधान)...   
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  आप िवषय पर बोिलए। 
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार:  सर, मȅ िवषय पर ही हूं िक संिवधान संशोधन क्यȗ होना चािहए। मȅने उनके  
संिवधान संशोधन, चाहे वह पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी ǎारा िक
या गया पहला संिवधान 
संशोधन हो। इस देश मȂ िजस संिवधान की बहुत Ģशंसा हो रही थी, क ेवल 18 महीने से कम समय 
मȂ ही, 18 मा
चर्, 1951 को पहला संिवधान संशोधन पहले आम चुनाव से पहले िजस सरकार ने 
िकया हो, उसने संिवधान क े साथ क ैसा न्याय िकया होगा, इसे मȅ आप सबके  िवचार क े िलए 
छोड़ता हूं और मȅ उस पर कोई िटÃपणी नहीं करता हूं, लेिकन िजस तरह से आपातकाल मȂ  
संिवधान संशोधन हुआ था, उसको देश ने देखा है िक िकस तरह से संिवधान का ढांचा उलट-
पुलट कर िदया गया था।  जैसा िक मȅने अभी पूवर् मȂ कहा िक क ेवल 7,8,
9, 10 अगÎत को रिववार 
क े िदन राÍटर्पित जी का हÎताक्षर िलया जाता है और उसी िदन गज़ट होता है और यह क ेवल 
इसीिलए होता है िक उच् च न्यायालय क े अिधकार को रोका जा सके । उसको रोक कर क े वे ही 
Ģधान मंतर्ी बने रहȂ, इसिलए आपातकाल लेकर आया गया था। जो संिवधान संशोधन हमने िकए 
हȅ, हम उनके  बारे मȂ बता रहे हȅ। अगर हम पूरी कहानी बताएंगे, तो वह बहुत लÇ बी है। कई लोगȗ 
का Îवभाव होता है और यह Îवभावगत होता है। कई लोग िकसी चीज़ को बदार्Ìत नहीं कर पाते 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
135

हȅ, इसिलए वे संिवधान मȂ संशोधन लेकर आते हȅ। उनको आलोचना बदार्Ìत नहीं थी, इसिलए 
संिवधान संशोधन लेकर आए। न्यायालय का आदेश उनके  पक्ष मȂ नहीं था, इसिलए वे संिवधान मȂ 
संशोधन लाए। न्यायालय मȂ वोट बȅक की राजनीित थी, इसि लए संिवधान मȂ संशोधन लाए और 
कई लोग तो ऐसे थे, िजनके  हाथ मȂ संिवधान संशोधन नहीं था, तो उन्हȗने पािर्लयामȂट से लाया 
हुआ िबल Ģेस क े सामने फाड़ िदया था। ये इन लोगȗ का Îवभाव है। वे Îवभावगत कारणȗ से इसको 
बदार्Ìत नहीं कर पाते हȅ। यह देश संिवधान से चले, ËयवÎथाएं  संिवधान से चलȂ और इसी कारण  
वे इस तरह क े संिवधान संशोधन करते हȅ, लेिकन हम ऐसे संिवधान संशोधनȗ मȂ न तो िवÌव ास 
रखते हȅ, न ऐसे संिवधान संशोधन हमारी सरकार ने िकए हȅ। मोदी जी की सरकार ने जो आठ 
संिवधान संशोधन िकए हȅ, मȅने उनके  कारणȗ क े बारे मȂ बहुत संक्षेप मȂ आपको बताया है। मȅ इस 
सदन मȂ सभ
ी को चैलȂज करता हूं िक इन आठ संिवधान संशोधनȗ मȂ कौन सा ऐसा संिवधान 
संशोधन था, जो नहीं होना चािहए था, िजसके  ǎारा इस देश क े लोगȗ का और इस राÍ टर्  का िहत 
नहीं हुआ है, ऐसा कोई भी संिवधान संशोधन मोदी जी की सरकार ने नहीं िकया है। इसिलए मȅने 
इस बात को कहा है । मȅने यह बात भी कही है िक संिवधान संशोधन क े साथ-साथ संिवधान का 
सÇमान करना जरूरी  है। संिव
धान का सÇमान भी हमारी सरकार ने िकया है । संिवधान क े चौथे 
अध्याय मȂ अनुच्छेद 36 से अनुच्छेद 51 तक जो ËयवÎथाएं दी गई हȅ। माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ 
आपसे अनुमित लेकर 2 िमनट इस िव षय क े बारे मȂ बोलना चाहता हूं। िजस तरह से मोदी जी ने 
संिवधान क े संशोधन को  िकया है और संिवधान का उपयोग क ै से लोगȗ क े िलए िकया जाए, वह 
िकया है । हमारे जो नीित िनदȃशक िसǉांत हȅ, वे अध्याय 4 मȂ िदए गए हȅ, जहां अनुच्छेद 36 मȂ 
पिरभाषा है और अनुच्छेद 37 से 50 तक इस देश क े लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ सकारात्मक पिरवतर्न क ै से 
आए, उस दृिÍट से नीितयां बनाई गई हȅ और उसमȂ िनदȃश िदए गए हȅ िक अगर चुनी हुई सरकार 
इन पर चलेगी तो राÍटर् क े लोगȗ का भी  िहत होगा और राÍटर्  क े लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ अच्छा 
पिरवतर्न आए
गा और मोदी जी ने उन सारी चीजȗ को िकया है,  चाह े वह ÎवाÎथ्य हो, चाहे वह 
िशक्षा हो।  अगर हम इस
के  िडटेल मȂ जाएंगे तो कहȂगे िक मोदी सरकार की ये उपलिÅधयां बता रहे 
हȅ, इसिलए मȅ ज्यादा क ु छ नहीं बताऊं गा ।  हम संक्षेप मȂ यह जरूर  कहȂगे िक हमने चाहे िशक्षा हो, 
चाहे ÎवाÎथ्
य हो, लोगȗ को घर देना हो,  घरȗ मȂ शौचालय बनवाना हो, पीने का साफ पानी 
उपलÅध करवाना हो, गांव-गांव तक िबजली पहुंचाना हो और लगभग चार लाख िकलोमीटर  
पक्की सड़कȂ बनाकर गांवȗ को जो ड़ना हो , इसके  साथ-साथ लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ सुिवधाएं बढ़ाने 
का काम भी हमने िकया है। हवाई जहाज हो, रेल हो,  नेशनल हाइवे हो, पिरवहन क े अन्य साधन 
हȗ, इनके  साथ-साथ िबजली की पूरी आपूिर्त हो, लोगȗ को समय पर पानी िमलना हो। सर, आज 
जब लोग जा
ते हȅ, तो मोबाइल पर boarding pass िनकाल लेते हȅ, िबजली का िबल जमा करा 
देते हȅ, फोन का िबल जमा करा देते हȅ। 2014 से पहले क ैसी पिरिÎथितयाँ हुआ करती थीं? आज 
बȅक जाने क े िलए बȅक की लाइन मȂ खड़े होने की जरूरत  नहीं पड़ती  है। ..(Ëयवधान)
...जहाँ हमने 
लोगȗ की जरूरत Ȃ पूरी की हȅ, वहीं पर जीवन जीने की सुिवधाएं भी बढ़ाई हȅ। उसके  साथ-साथ देश 
का  infrastructure भी बड़ा हो, उस दृिÍट से भी हमारी सरकार ने काम िकया है। माननीय 
उपसभापित जी, उस दृिÍ
ट से भी ..(Ëयवधान)... 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS:  What is the relevance?...(Interruptions)...  
136
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please.  ...(Interruptions)... Please. ...(Interruptions)... 
Please speak on the subject, we have to ...(Interruptions)... Please. 
...(Interruptions)...  Yes. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार:  मȅ उसी पर बोल रहा हूं, मȅ संिवधान पर ही कह रहा हूं। संिवधान संशोधन क्यȗ 
होना चािहए, मȅ उस पर बोल रहा हूं।  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  क ृपया, आपस मȂ बात मत कीिजए। माननीय मंतर्ी जी, आप अपना जवाब 
दीिजए।  
 
Ǜी अजय क ुमार: आप मेरे बहुत अच्छे िमतर् हȅ, अभी बाहर चलȂगे, कॉफी िपएंगे। माननी
य 
उपसभापित  जी, मȅ यह िसफर् इसिलए कह रहा हूं, क्यȗिक यह संिवधान बहुत सुंदर है। इस देश 
क े िवǎानȗ ने जब इस संिवधान को बनाया, तो पूरी दुिनया मȂ इसकी Ģशंसा हुई और यह वाÎतव मȂ 
देश मȂ लोकतंतर् को कायम करने मȂ खरा उतरा है। आज जो संिवधान है, उसी क े कारण आज पूरी 
दुिनया मȂ लोग कहते हȅ िक पूरी दुिनया का सबसे लोकतांितर्क और सबसे बड़ा देश, िजसने 
लोकतंतर् को अच्छी तरह से पाला-पोसा है और जहाँ पर पूरी तरह से लोकतंतर् है, वह क ेवल 
भारत देश है। उन्हȗने उस दृिÍट से कहा है।   ...(Ëयवधान)...  हाँ, इमरजȂसी को छोड़कर बता रहे 
हȅ, लेिकन वह इनका िवषय है, कानून क े बारे मȂ ये बताएंगे। माननीय उपसभापित जी, मȅ यही कह 
रहा था और अब मȅ उस पर बहुत िवÎ
तार से नहीं बताऊं गा।   ...(Ëयवधान)...   मȅ बस खत्म कर 
रहा हूं। सर, जो 36 से 50 था, उसमȂ जहाँ हमने ये जो दो काम िकए, वहीं पर देश मȂ इंģाÎटर्क्चर 
खड़ा हो - इसके  िलए भी  सरकार ने काम िकया है। संिवधान क े अध्याय चार मȂ जो ËयवÎथा दी 
गई थी, उसके  िलए िकसी भी सरकार पर ऐसा दबाव नहीं था िक इसे करना जरूरी  है, यह 
सरकार की Îवेच्छा पर था िक वह इन नीित िनदȃशक िसǉांतȗ का पालन करती है या नहीं करती 
है, लेिकन हमारी सरकार ने उन नीित िनदȃशक िसǉांतȗ का पालन करके  िपछले दस वषș मȂ जहाँ 
लोगȗ की जरूरत Ȃ पूरी कीं, उनके  िलए सुिवधाएँ बढ़ाईं, वहीं लोगȗ क े जीवन मȂ एक सकारात्मक 
पिरवतर्न लाने का काम भी िकया है।  
महोदय, उसी का अनुच्छेद 51 अंतरराÍटर्ीय संबंधȗ पर था।  उसमȂ ये चार बातȂ  Ģमुख रूप  
से कही गई थीं, इन पर मȅ बहुत िवÎतार से नहीं कहूंगा, लेिकन मȅ इसके  साथ यह कह ना चाहता 
हूं िक जो ये चार बातȂ कही गई थीं, इनमȂ इस Ģकार से था िक हमारे देश का पूरी दुिनया क े साथ 
इस तरह से संबंध होगा िक हम दुिनया मȂ, दुिनया क े देशȗ क े साथ अपने िवÌवास और सुरक्षा की 
सहमित रखȂ। दूसरा, अगर कोई िवव
ाद होता है, तो उसे पंचायत क े ǎारा िनपटाएं। हम दूसरे देशȗ 
क े साथ सÇमान क े आधार पर संबंध िनिÌचत करȂगे और अंतरर ाÍटर्ीय कानून और संिधयȗ का 
पालन करȂगे। मȅ यह कहना चाहता हूं िक िपछले दस वषș मȂ मोदी सरकार ने िजस तरह से 
अंतरराÍटर्ीय Îतर पर Ëयावहािरक िवदेश नीित को अपनाकर काम िकया है, उससे हमने न क ेवल 
दूसरे देशȗ क े साथ अच्छे संबंध बनाए हȅ, बिÊक दूसरे देशȗ मȂ, जहाँ लोगȗ को जरूरत Ȃ थीं, उन 
लोगȗ की जरूरत Ȃ पूरी की हȅ, उनके  साथ सÇमान रखा गया। हमने अंतरर
ाÍटर्ीय कानूनȗ और 
संिधयȗ का पालन भी िक या है। उस दृिÍट से आज जो दुिनया मȂ भारत की छिव एक अलग तरह क े 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
137

देश की बनी है, वह हमारे देश क े संिवधान क े कारण ही बनी है। यह संिवधान इतना सुंदर है िक 
इस संिवधान का पालन करने क े कारण आज ऐसी िÎथित बनी है िक आज भारत दुिनया क े 
आकषर्ण का क Ȃ दर् बन गया है। यह िसफर् इसिलए बन गया है, क्यȗिक हमारे संिवध ान मȂ न तो यह 
कहा गया है िक आिर्थक रूप  से ताकतवर होकर हमȂ आिर्थक ताकत बनना है और न ही यह कहा 
गया है िक दूसरȗ का िहÎसा लेकर भौगोिलक ताक त बनना है। हमारे देश मȂ मानव क Ȃिदर्त िवकास 
को Ģाथिमकता दी गई है और वह हमारे भारत की संÎकृ ित है। मानव क Ȃिदर्त िवकास को पूरी तरह 
से मोदी सरकार ने अपनाया है और वह भारत की संÎकृ ित मȂ था, कहीं से कोई नया िव चार नहीं 
आया था। पं0 दीनदयाल उपाध्याय जी ने जब भारतीय जनसंघ की Îथापना की थी,  तब उन्हȗने 
जो िफलॉÎफी दी थी, जो दशर्न िदया था, वह एकात्म मानव दशर्न का िदया था। मानव क े ǎारा, 
मानव क े िवकास क े ǎारा समाज का िवकास और समाज क े िव
कास क े ǎारा राÍटर् का िवकास और 
राÍटर्  क े िवकास क े साथ सवȃ भवन्तु सुिखनः सवȃ सन्तु िनरामया: और वसुधैव क ु ट ुÇबकç की 
भावना क े साथ हमारा यह Ģयास रहेगा, हम लोगȗ की कोिशश रहेगी िक हमारे देश की संÎकृ ित 
क े अनुरूप  हम पूरे िवÌव का कÊयाण भी कर सकȂ । उस दृिÍट से अगर कहीं आवÌयक होता है, तो 
संिवधान मȂ संशोधन जरूर  करना चािहए, लेिकन उन्हȗने जो संिवधान संशोधन यहाँ सुझाए हȅ, 
माननीय उपसभापित जी, उन्हȗने जो आिर्टकल 153 कहा है, उसका कोई औिचत्य नहीं है। जैसे 
मȅने िवÎतार से आिर्टकल 153 की Ëयाख्या की है।  उसके  संबंध मȂ मȅने कहा िक उसके  िलए िकसी 
ऐसे परंतुक क े लोप करने की आवÌयकता नहीं है, वह सामान्य सा था और कांगर्ेस की सरकार क े 
ǎारा पंिडत जवाहरलाल नेहरू  जी क े ǎारा 7वȂ संिवधान संशोधन मȂ यह परंतुक लागू िकया गया 
था और सुिवधा क े िलए िकया गया था िक अगर कहीं कोई इस Ģकार से राज्
यपाल है, तो वह ऐसे 
राज्यपाल क े संबंध मȂ था। ...( Ëयवधा न)... दूसरा उन्हȗने, जो कहा है िक चुनाव क े ǎारा होना 
चािहए, तो चुनाव क े ǎारा होने से जो राÍटर्पित िनयुƪ करते हȅ, तो उससे एक ĢितÎपधार् भी बढ़ेगी 
और राज्यपाल क े माध्यम से देश और Ģदेश की सरकार क े बीच मȂ संबंध भी असाम ान्य हो सकते 
हȅ।  इस दृिÍट से उसका भी औिचत्य नहीं है।  तीसरा, जो उन्हȗने कहा िक िवधान सभा अध्यक्ष को 
इÎतीफा देना चािहए या िवधान सभा को यह अिधकार होना चािहए, मȅ समझता हूं िक यह तो 
संिवधान का पूरी तरह से उÊलंघन होगा।  मȅ उपहास नहीं कहूंगा, हालांिक उन्हȗने उपहास करने 
की कोिशश की है, लेिक
न मȅ उपहास नहीं कहूंगा।  मȅ उनका सÇमान करते हुए कहूंगा िक 
संिवधान की दृिÍट से यह संभव नहीं है और उसके  साथ-साथ मȅ उनसे यह भी अनुरोध करूं गा िक 
भारत की सर
कार बहुत अच्छे तरीके  से संघीय संबंधȗ को िनभा रही है।  सारे Ģदेश अच्छी तरह से 
भारत सरकार से जुड़े हȅ।  सभी का िव
कास हो रहा है।  सबका साथ, सबका िवकास और सबका 
िवÌवास अिर्जत करते हुए सरकार काम कर रही है।   
मȅ माननीय सदÎय से यह अनुरोध करूं गा िक वे अपने इस संिवधान संशोधन िवधेयक को 
वापस ले लȂ।  सरकार उनक
ी बात को सुनेगी।  अगर उनके  कोई सुझाव हȗगे, उन पर भी आगे 
िजस तरह से सारी ËयवÎथाएं हो रही हȅ, मेरा एक बार िफर अनुरोध है िक आप इस िवधेयक को 
वािपस ले लीिजए।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।   
 
Ǜी उपसभा
पित:  धन्यवाद।  माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ आपको सूिचत करना चाहूंगा िक माननीय 
मंतर्ी जी क े बोलने क े बाद और लोगȗ क े क ु छेक आगर्ह आए िक हम बोलना चाहते हȅ, पर िनयमत: 
138
[RAJYA SABHA]

माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े बोलने क े बाद जो मूवर हȅ, Dr. V. Sivadasan will reply to the 
discussion.  Please. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala):  Sir, I am ve ry thankful to my colleagues who have 
raised valuable points on the subject.  One of  the points they have raised is that the 
election of the Governors will create two powe r centres in the State and they also told 
that it will disrupt the administrative structure of the State Government.  I would like to 
invite their attention to the election of the President of the Union of India.  Has it 
created any parallel power structure in the Unio n?  So, the election in itself is not a 
reason for the emergence of parallel power st ructure.  A lot of Members raised this 
issue.  In our Constituent Assembly, Dr. Ambedkar has opined that the election of the 
Governor will not lead to a rivalry between  the elected Head of the State and the 
Governor. It was mentioned by Dr. Ambedkar .  Sir, look at the States. Even the 
elected Chief Ministers are not getting the power because of the nominated 
Governors.  Hence, I believe the argument that the election  of Governor is leading to 
parallel power structure in the State is not very valid argument.  Sir, we should not 
forget that India has an elected Head of th e State, our hon. Pres ident.  The question 
is whether the Governor is ready to protect th e interests of the State.   If he or she is 
not ready, then we will witness the clas h between the State and the Governor.  We 
have a lot of experience.  In 2011 in * 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please.  No comment on any Governor.  For that, there 
are other provisions and rules.  So, be spec ific on the principles and theory of your 
subject. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Okay, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN :  Please, no comment on any Governor will go on the 
record. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN :  I am only mentioning the inci dents.  What was happened in 
Gujarat? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No. 
 
                   
*Not recorded. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
139

DR. V. SIVADASAN:   Okay, because of your advice, I will not do that.  So, what 
happened there is that the then Governor appointed the Lokayukta Judge.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please do not mention the name of any Governor.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: No, Sir, I am not mentioning the name. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Not even the incident. There should be no mention about 
any conduct or any incidence about any Governor.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: 
*  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it will not go on record. अगर आप िकसी भी गवनर्र क े बारे 
मȂ िकसी इंिसडȂट का उÊलेख करना चाहते हȅ, तो उसके  िलए सÅसटांिटव मोशन चािहए।  इसिलए 
Ãलीज़, आपने जो िबल िदया है, आप उसके  औिचत्य पर बोलȂ, उसके  पक्ष मȂ बोलȂ, उसके  जो भी 
रीज़ंस हȗ, बताएँ, but, there should be no mention about any incidence relat
ed to any 
Governor or anything. It should not be quoted here. It will not go on record.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, we could observe similar developments in various States. 
*A 
lot of incidents had happened.  The Members of Parliament had raised a lot of issues 
inside the Parliament. They have requested the President of the nation for the removal 
of the Governor. The Tamil Nadu Government  has registered their opposition on NEP 
in various forums. They have strongly opposed the centralisation and 
communalisation of education by the Union Government. 
*Is it a mark of respect to 
our great federal structure of our nation?  Si r, NEET is another issue in the State of 
Tamil Nadu. The people of the State had st rongly opposed NEET. The spirit of the 
people was upheld by the Assembly and they have passed the Resolution against 
NEET. The Governor had publicly...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS; AND THE 
MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (SHRI V. 
MURALEEDHARAN): Sir, I have a point of order under Rule 238(v), "a Member 
while speaking shall not reflect upon the conduct of persons in high authority unless 
                   
 
* Not recorded. 
 
 
140
[RAJYA SABHA]

the discussion is based on a Substantive Motion drawn in proper terms. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, I have already mentioned it. It is not going on record.  
 
SHRI V. MURALEEDHARAN: It should be removed. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please confine yourself to the Bill. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY (West Bengal):  It is a very established rule that 
nothing can be mentioned in regard to Gove rnor unless there is a substantive motion. 
The rule is very clear. But, here the hon. Member is mentioning about the institution of 
Governor in general, not against a particular Governor. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : He is mentioning incidents about particular Governors.  
That will not go on record. ...(Interruptions)... It will not go on record. If you are 
mentioning about incidents regarding any particular Governor, it will not go on record. 
...(Interruptions)...  I am again reminding you; confine yourself to the subject only. 
Yes, Dr. John Brittas, are you on a point of order, under which rule? 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, Rule 258, since... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: One minute, let me see. 
 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, since the Bill is based primarily on Governor, he has to 
respond to the activities of the Governors, without naming. It is his authority, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I t  i s  n o t  u n d e r  R u l e  2 5 8 .  D r .  V .  S i v a d a s a n ,  p l e a s e  
continue. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Regarding the institution of the Governor, we have been facing a 
lot of issues from the office of the Governor.  Members of Rajya Sabha, the Council of 
States, I think, have a lot of experi ence related to Governor's office. In 
* , a lot of 
issues are there. 
 
                   
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
141

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Again, talk about the principles and not about any 
Governor.  It will not go on record.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  I am not mentioning the name of the Governor of any State. 
..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Be it any State. ..(Interruptions).. Please.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: I am following the rules. ..(Interruptions).. Here about  
the issue of NEET, everywhere the State Go vernment has raised a lot of issues. But 
what was the position of the Governors in  various States? We need to discuss and 
address it also in our Parliament. We should discuss it here.  In our Constituent 
Assembly, it was discussed very thoroughly. Dr. Ambedkar had replied there in a very 
clear manner.  Sir, incidents in 
*  ...(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Again you are mentioning.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: I am not mentioning. ..(Interruptions).. I am not mentioning the 
name of the Governor. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Not even of any State; It indicates that. ..(Interruptions).. 
It will not go on record. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, if we are discussing the is sues of the office of the Governor 
or the functioning of the Legislative Assembly, we should mention the name. 
..(Interruptions).. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : उसके  िलए िनयम हȅ।  Follow the rules. 
  
DR. V. SIVADASAN: I am following the rules. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: उसके  िलए आप अलग से substantive motion लाइए।  जब माननीय चेयरमैन 
उसको accept करȂगे, तब आप उस पर discuss कर सकते हȅ।  अगर आप उस पर अभी d
 iscuss 
करȂगे, तो कोई चीज़ िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगी।  अगर आपने िकसी गवनर्र या िकसी Îटेट का नाम 
िलया अथवा िकसी incident का िजकर् िकया, that will not go on record. 
                   
* Not recorded. 
142
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
डा. वी. िशवादासन: ठीक है, सर।  I am not mentioning, Sir. ..(Interruptions).. I am not 
mentioning. ..(Interruptions).. देश क े अन्दर अलग-अलग Îटेट्स हȅ, इसिलए मȅ उनका नाम 
mention कर रहा हूँ।   I am mentioning State's name.  In * हम सबको  incident पता है।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not going on record. ..(Interruptions).. 
  
DR. V. SIVADASAN : I am not mentioning the name; I am not mentioning the 
Governor's office.  I am using only the name of the State. How can we avoid the 
name of 
* delete the name of * ? 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : You bring a substantive motion on that and then you 
discuss.  Otherwise, it w ill not go on record; even the name of State will not go on 
record. ..(Interruptions).. Even the name of any State will not go on record.  
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Experience from different States, including
*.. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Again you are doing it. ..(Interruptions).. I have to stop 
you. ..(Interruptions).. Otherwise, I will move further. ..(Interruptions).. You are not 
interested in debating it. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: I am not mentioning any name. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are repeating it time and again. ..(Interruptions).. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  Sir, I come from the State of Kerala. I am proudly representing 
the State of Kerala. We have a lot of ex perience there regarding the autonomy of 
different universities, autonomy of different institutions. So, here I am mentioning that 
in this Council of States we should discuss the issues regarding different 
constitutional measures and mechanisms an d how we can improve the office of the 
Governor and the functioning of the States. In Kerala, the workers and peasant fought 
and forced the King to join the Indian Unio n. Thousands of people  gave their lives for 
the unity of the nation and hundreds of wo rkers were martyred for the unity of the 
nation. The successors of the King are receivi ng awards just for being the successors 
of King today.  The voice of the workers is being suppressed by appointing Governor. 
                   
* Not recorded. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
143

There is a famous song of the great nation al poet, Vallathol Narayana Menon, which 
means that our hearts should swell with pride when we hear the name of Bharat. 
Blood should boil in our veins when we hear the name of Keralam. Sir, you know what 
has happened there.  Because of your direction, I am unable to..(Interruptions).. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I t  i s  n o t  m y  d i r e c t i o n .   I t  i s  t h e  r u l e .  ..(Interruptions).. 
माननीय सदÎयȗ ने जो रूÊस तय िकये हȅ, जो 1952 से चले आ रहे हȅ, उन रूÊस क े तहत मȅ 
आगर्ह करता हूँ।  अगर आप क ेरल क े भी िकसी incident की बात करȂगे, that will not go on 
record. That will not go on record.  You know, Dr. Sivadasan. 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN:  In 1959, Kerala had an experience of the dismissal of the elected 
Government.  The democratically elected Government was dismissed by the Union 
Government.  ... (Int
erruptions)...  Yes, now you are doing the same thing.  
...(Interruptions)...    The      Governor      is         the        only               constitutional         
authority who takes oath to protect the inte rests of the State.  I am repeating the 
words, 'Governor is the only constitutional  authority who takes oath to protect the 
interests of the people of the State.'  But the role is never performed by the 
Governors.  I, especially, am not going to  add the sentence.  Anyway the Governors 
are not ready to protect the interests of the Stat e.  It is the reality which is in front of 
us.  It should be discussed and the Parliament should make a mechanism for a proper 
functioning of the office of the Governor.  Before concluding, I would like to add some 
other points also.  Legal and administrative measures are very much necessary to 
strengthen the federal structure of our nation.  Articles 355 and 356 of the Constitution 
should be amended in order to incorporate safeguards to prevent misuse.  The State 
Government should have a greater role in the administration of the rules and 
regulations of All India services.  The Governor, that means the nominee of the Union 
Government, and the person from the Central services is playing a major role in the 
administration of the State.  If not, then , federalism will be meaningless.  The pocket 
veto of the Governors is creating various problems in front of the States.  Some 
serious and urgent legislation of the States are kept in the Raj Bhawans without timely 
reply or communication. It is a serious thing.  It should be discussed.  That means the 
Governors are creating hurdles in the promotion or development of the society. Then 
how can the State make legislations?  If a proper development measure is necessary, 
then, it should be addressed.  The first Article of the Constitution  clearly says, 'India, 
that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States .'  The mutual resp ect between the Union 
                   
 Not recorded. 
144
[RAJYA SABHA]

Government and the State Government is very much necessary.  The Governor is a 
mere titular head of the State Government .  A cordial and democratic relationship 
between the Governor and the State Govern ment is inevitable.  So, the Governors 
should be democratic and sh ould respect and accept the di versity of the nation. The 
great principle of our nation is unity in di versity - diversity in culture, diversity in 
language, diversity in food.  Diversity is the strength of our nation.  Now, the people in 
the State are not able to consider the Governor as part of their society.  A huge gap is 
there. I am sad to say that corporate # is continuing with the support of the legislations 
by the Union Government. Sir, for continuing this exploitation, they are trying to bring  
a  division  between   the people.     For    this   purpose, the   Office   of the Governor 
is being utilized.  I am sure, in India, pe ople will unite for asserting their federal and 
democratic rights.  And, people will creat e a new India without discrimination. So, I 
am sure, we will reach our destination.  Pe ople will protect the unity of this country 
against policies of the Indian ruling class which the Governors are promoting.   
 Sir, wherever we are in the country, we are able to hear the strongest words 
against injustice and discrimination towards the States and also towards the people.  
That is why I suggest a fixed tenure for Governors. It is very necessary that the State 
Assembly should have the right to recall him in extraordinary situ ation. The Governor 
himself has no constitutional protection now. He can be changed at mere instruction 
from the hon. President; it means, at the instruction of the Union Government!  Sir, 
there is a need to change this situation.   
 So, I request this august House to acc ept the Bill and abolish the existing 
system of appointment of Governors.  Th e system should be abolished and a new 
system will have to be introduced by this august House. 
 With these words, I once again request the hon. Members of this House to 
support this Bill.        
                                                            
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY : Sir, I wish to seek a clarification from the hon. 
Minister. 
 
MR.  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no. We are at the third reading of the Bill. 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY (West Bengal):  Sir, it is only clarification.  We have 
enough time.  I will take only a few minut es without casting any aspersion on any 
Government. 
                   
# Expunged as ordered by the Chair. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
145

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : No. अब  इसके  बाद माननीय मंतर्ी को िरÃलाई भी नहीं करना है, 
तो क्लैिरिफके शन की गुंजाइश नहीं बनती है।  दादा, आप जानते हȅ िक इसके  बाद I have to 
follow the procedure.  Please understand. 
 
SHRI SUKHENDU SEKHAR RAY: I am only requesting the Chair. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित :  इसके  बाद हमȂ सीधे वोिंटग Ģोसेस पर जाना है, हाउस को िडसाइड कर
 ना है। 
 
Ǜी सुखȂदु शेखर रॉय : सर, आप वोिंटग कराइए।  मुझे िसफर् एक क्लैिरिफके शन लेना है। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: अगर आपके  बाद माननीय मंतर्ी जी बोलने वाले होते तो आप जरूर  
क्लैिरिफके शन लेते।  Now, Dr. V. Sivadasan, are you withdrawing the Bill?  Or, should 
 I 
put the motion to vote? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I would like the Bill to be voted. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am asking again.  Dr. V. Sivadasan, are you withdrawing 
the Bill?  Or, should I put the motion to vote? 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN: Sir, I withdraw the Bill.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member has withdrawn the Bill.  I will follow the 
procedure. Does the Member have the leave of the House to withdraw the Bill? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Yes, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Bill is withdrawn. 
 
The Bill was, by leave, withdrawn.  
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Now, we will move to the next Bill.  It is the Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill, 2020 (insertion of new article 47A).  Shri Anil Desai, not present.  
 
The Sal Leaves Collectors and Traders Welfare Bill, 2022 
   
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We will move to the next Bill. It is the Sal Leaves Collectors 
and Traders Welfare Bill, 2022.  Dr. Sasmit Patra. 
146
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):   Sir, I move: 
That the Bill to provide for setting up of Sal Leaves Collectors and Traders' Welfare 
Fund and a Board that shall administer the Fund for the welfare of Sal leaves 
collectors and traders and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, be 
taken into consideration. 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: क्या आप इस पर क ु छ बोलना चाहȂगे? 
 
डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा: माननीय उपसभापित महोदय, आपने आज इस अवसर पर मुझे इस िबल पर 
अपने क ु छ वƪËय रखने का अवसर िदया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका शुकर्गुज़ार हूं। आज हालांिक 
Ģाइवेट मेÇबसर् िबल का समय है, इसके  बावजूद कई सारे माननीय सदÎय इस िबल क े समय 
सदन मȂ मौजूद हȅ, इसिलए मȅ तहे िद
ल से उनका भी शुिकर्या अदा करता हूं।  
महोदय, The Sal Leaves Collectors and Traders’ Welfare Bill,  2022.  उिड़या मȂ 
इसको सॉलो पतर् (साल का पǄा) कहा जाता है। मȅ बचपन की एक याद से शुरू  करना चाहता हूं। 
बचपन मȂ जब हम शादी मȂ या िकसी फ ंक्शन मȂ जाते थे - आजकल तो बूफ े का ज़माना है, Ãलेट 
लेकर घूमते रिहए, थोड़ा-थोड़ा लेते रिहए, लेिकन तब लÇबी कतार मȂ िबठाया जाता था और साल 
क े पǄे सामने रखे जा
ते थे - ओिडशा मȂ तो होता था, दूसरे राज्यȗ क े  बारे मȂ मुझे नहीं पता - तो 
साल क े पǄे रखे जा
ते थे और कई बार जब वह चूता था, तो उसके  ऊपर एक पǄल और रख 
िदया जाता था। बचपन की बात यह थी िक उस साल क े पǄे क े सȗधेपन मȂ गरम-गरम दाल-
चावल खाने का मज़ा ही क ु छ अलग था। धीरे-धीरे समय बीतता गया, धीरे-धीरे साल क े पǄे गुम 
होते गए, धीरे-धीरे थमार्कोल और ÃलािÎटक की Ãलेट्स आने लगीं, क ु छ समय बाद बूफ े का 
ज़माना आ गया और लोग ÃलािÎटक मȂ, melanmine  मȂ या शीशे की Ãलेट्स मȂ खाना खाने लगे हȅ। 
बैठकर जो खाना खाते थे, उिड़या मȂ िजसे पंगत बोलते थे, वह भी खत्म हो गया। मेरे ज़ेहन मȂ 
आया िक ये साल क े पǄे गुम क्यȗ हो गए! यह बड़े अचÇभे की बात है। अच ानक यह ख्याल मुझे तब 
आया जब क ु छ समय पहले मȅ एमेज़ॉन क े ई-Îटोर मȂ जा रहा था और मȅने देखा िक अमेिरका क े 
न्यूयॉकर् शहर मȂ एक कÇपनी साल क े पǄȗ की Ãलेट्स बेच रही है। मȅने वे साल क े पǄे बचपन मȂ 
देखे थे, िजस पर मȅने कभी खाना खाया था, आज वे साल क े पǄे ईको-फ ȅड्ली हȅ, ऑगȃिनक हȅ 
और आज न्यूयॉकर् की बड़ी-बड़ी कÇपिनयां उसकी Ãलेट्स बना रही हȅ। कहने का उǈेÌय यह है िक 
हमारी संÎकृ ित, सÆयता और परÇपरा इतनी िवÎ
तृत है, इतनी बड़ी है, इतनी महान है िक कई बार 
हम ÃलािÎटक, Îटील और ग्लास क े चक्कर मȂ साल क े पǄ ȗ को भूल गए हȅ। वे पाÌचात्य देश याद 
रखना शुरू  कर चुक े हȅ, लेिकन हम भूल गए हȅ। इसिलए उन साल क े पǄȗ को याद रखना थोड़ा 
ज़रूरी है। आज वे साल क े पǄे क ै से ला ए जाते हȅ, कौन उन साल क े पǄȗ को आज भी संभाल कर 
रखता है?  
 मान्यवर, मुझे ओिडशा क े मेरे क्षेतर् मȂ कई बार दौरा करने का मौका िमला, कई ऐसे 
इलाको मȂ जाने का मौका िमला, जहां आज भी साल क े पǄे िम लते हȅ, आज भी उनको कलेक्ट 
िकया जाता है, रखा जाता है। सबसे बड़ी बात है िक आज भी लगभग ढाई करोड़ आिदवासी भाई-
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
147

बहन इस देश मȂ हȅ। उनमȂ कई ऐसे हȅ, जो PVTGs हȅ, particularly vulnerable tribal groups को 
belong करते हȅ, ऐसे PVT groups मȂ कई लोग हȅ, जो आज भी साल क े पǄȗ से अपनी जीिवका 
िनवार्ह करते हȅ। तब एक सोच आई िक जो लोग साल क े पǄȗ को कलेक्ट करते हȅ, उसके  बा द 
टर्ेिंडग करके  उनको आगे ले जाते हȅ, क्या उनके  Ģोत्साहन मȂ हम क ु छ न करȂ! मȅ यह नहीं कह रहा 
िक सरकार उनके  Ģोत्साहन मȂ क ु छ नहीं कर रही। इस िबल की सोच यह नहीं है िक इसमȂ कोई 
राजनीितक वाद-िववाद खड़ा िकया जाए, न ही इस िबल की यह मानिस
कता है िक क Ȃ दर् या राज्य 
की मȅ कहीं न कहीं टीका-िटÃपणी करूं ।   
बात यह है िक आज जब हम sustainability की बात करते हȅ, आज जब हम eco -friendly की 
बात करते हȅ, तो आज हमȂ िफर से साल क े पǄȗ को याद करना पड़ेगा, because if anything is 
organic, if anything is eco-friendly, it is साल क े पǄे।  आप कहीं भी िपकिनक पर चले जाइए, 
वहां पर ÃलािÎटक क े पǄे पहाड़ȗ से लेकर, बड़े-बड़े जंगलȗ से लेकर हर जगह से िवÎतृत पड़े 
रहȂगे।  हजारȗ सालȗ तक वह ÃलािÎट
क  degrade नहीं होगा, वह वहीं पर बैठा रहेगा।  मगर िजन 
साल क े पǄȗ पर हम खाना खाते थे, अगर उसको दो-तीन महीने तक छोड़ दȂगे, तो वह िमƺी मȂ 
िमल जाते थे, िफर वे साल क े पǄे आते थे।  ये organic हȅ।  कहीं न कहीं हमȂ यह सोचना पड़ेगा िक 
साल क े पǄȗ क े मा
ध्यम से क ै से हम िफर से sustainability का  दौर वापस लाएं, organic living 
का दौर वापस लाएं।  िवशेषकर ढा ई  करोड़ से ज्यादा आबादी मȂ कई सारे राज्यȗ मȂ चाहे ओिडशा 
हो, पिÌचमी बंगाल हो, झारखंड हो, छǄीसगढ़ हो, कई सारे राज्यȗ मȂ जो साल क े पǄȗ को 
collect करते हȅ, संगर्ह करते हȅ, उनके  जीवन-जीिवकाओं को और बेहतर करȂगे।  मान्यवर, मȅ 
थोड़ा साल क े पǄȗ क े बारे मȂ चचार् करूं गा और उसके  बाद िफर िबल पर जाऊं गा।  इस िबल की 
जरूरत क्य
ȗ पड़ी?  मुझे यह क्यȗ महसूस हुआ िक इस िबल की आवÌयकता है।  साल क े पǄȗ क े    
collections होते हȅ, वे एक साल क े दरिमयान दो बार कलेक्ट िकए जा
ते हȅ।  पहला नवंबर से 
माचर् और दूसरा जून-जुलाई मȂ िकए जाते हȅ।  िफर इन पǄȗ को आगे traders ले जाते हȅ, इनसे 
तरह-तरह क े products बनते हȅ।  खासकर जून-जुलाई का जो समय होता है, इसमȂ जब साल क े 
पǄे आते हȅ, उनको रख िदया जा
ता है, तो एक fungal infection होता  है, िजससे साल क े पǄे 
खराब हो जाते हȅ।  दूसरा, seasonal rainfall  होती है, unpredictable rainfall होती है, िजसकी 
वजह से साल क े पǄे खराब हो जाते हȅ। कई बार लोग उन पǄȗ को लाकर अपने घर मȂ रखते हȅ, 
तो उनमȂ कीड़े लग जाते हȅ, िजससे वे खराब हो जाते हȅ।  कई बार जंगलȗ मȂ आग लगती है, उसमȂ 
भी खराब हो जाते हȅ। जो लोग अपने जीवन-जीिव
काओं क े िलए साल क े पǄȗ पर िनभर्रशील हȅ, 
उनके  जीवन और जीिवकाओं को कहीं न कहीं  से यह Ģभािवत करता है।  मान्यवर, अगर एक 
िदनचयार् सोचा जाए िक हमारे राÍटर् की एक आिदवासी मां सवेरे उठती है और उसके  बाद कई 
बार चाहे वह चÃपल पहने हो या नंगे पांव हो, वह जंगल क े अंदर जाती है और सवेरे से शाम तक 
लगभग हजार से बारह सौ साल क े पǄे संगर्ह करके  घर लाती है।  जब वह पूरे िदन भर घूमती 
रहती है, तो कई बार उसकी पीठ मȂ ददर् हो जाता है, कभी कीड़े काट लेते हȅ, कहीं पर क ु छ चुभ 
जाता है, सांप का डर रहत ा है और भी कई परेशािनयां रहती हȅ।  इसिलए जब इस तरह की 
पिरिÎथित मȂ सवेरे से शाम तक हमारा एक आिदवासी भाई या आिदवासी मां जाती है, तो उनको 
कई सारी परेशािनयȗ का सामना करना पड़ता है।  वे वा पस  आते हȅ और अपने घरȗ मȂ साल क े पǄȗ 
को रखते हȅ।  मȅ कई बार दौरा करता हूं और देखता हूं िक घर मȂ लोगȗ को रहने क े िलए जगह कम 
148
[RAJYA SABHA]

है, मगर ढेर सारी जगहȗ पर साल क े पǄे रखे हुए हȅ।  मȅने उनसे पूछा क्यȗ, तो उन्हȗने बोला िक 
यह हमारे िलए सोना है।  कभी जरूरत  पड़ गई, तो हम इसको बेच लȂगे, िजससे हमारी दुिवधा दूर 
हो जाएगी, इसिलए हम साल क े पǄȗ को लाकर रखते हȅ िक जब-जब जरूरत पड़ेगी, इसको हम 
खचर्ते हȅ,  यह हमारे िलए घर का सोना है।  महोदय, कहने का उǈेÌय यह है िक इन साल क े पǄȗ 
क े माध्यम से उनकी िंजदगी और िदनचयार् चल रही है और उनकी जीिवक ा आगे बढ़ रही है, तो 
उनकी िंजदिगयȗ को और उनकी जीिवका को क ै से हम Ģोत्सािहत कर सकते हȅ, क ै से उनकी 
िंजदिगयȗ को और बेहतर कर सकते हȅ।  ये जो ढाई करोड़ हमारे आिदव ारी भाई-बहन हȅ, उनमȂ से 
कई सारे हȅ, जैसे ओिडशा से मȅ आता हूं - ओिडशा भारतवषर् मȂ सबसे ज्यादा PVTGs क े िलए 
जाना जाता है।   PVTGs क्या है - Particularly Vunler able Tribal Groups.  वे Tribal Groups 
हȅ, िजनकी संख्या काफी हद तक घट रही है और िजसकी वजह से उनको particularly 
Vunlerable Tribal Groups  की Ǜेणी मȂ रख
ा गया है।  मȅ सरकार को धन्यवाद देता हूं।  हमारे बड़े 
भाई अजुर्न मुंडा जी बैठे हुए हȅ, वीरȂदर् जी बैठे हुए हȅ।  सरकार क े कई काम िकए हȅ।  अभी 
महामिहम राÍटर्पित जी, जो हमारे ओि
डशा की बेटी हȅ Ǜीमती दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी ने अपने अिभभाषण 
मȂ  PVTGs  क े बारे मȂ कहा है।  ऐसा नहीं है िक काम नहीं हो रहा है।  काम हो रहा है और काम 
करने की आव
Ìयकता है, मगर साल क े पǄȗ को लेकर हमȂ िवशेषकर एक specific मुिहम छेड़नी 
पड़ेगी। इसिलए मȅ यह िबल लेकर आया हूं। मान्यवर , मȅ ज्यादा लंबा नहीं बोलूंगा , क्यȗिक मȅ 
चाहता हूं िक दूसरे माननीय सांसद इस पर ज्यादा बोलȂ। मȅ बस िबल क े क ु छ Îपेिसिफक मुǈȗ पर  
अपना  वƪËय रखूंगा। मȅ ज्यादा से ज्यादा और 5-7 िमनट का समय  लूंगा।  यह िबल क्या कहना 
चाहता है ,यह िबल क्या करना चाहता है और मȅ डायरेक्टली  इस िबल क े सैक्शन तीन पर आता 
हूं। इस िबल का सैक्शन 3 कहता है ,Section 3 Section 3 The Central Government shall by 
notification in the Official Gazett
e set up a Fund to be known as the Sal Leaves 
Collectors and Traders' Welfare Fund. Sect ion 5  Section 5, sub-section (2), sub-
clause (1), एक फ ं ड का गठन होगा। इस फ ं ड से क्या फायदा होगा  , इस फ ं ड से कई सारे 
िवषयȗ को िकया जा सक ता  है ,िजसके  बारे मȂ सैक्शन 5 मȂ िलखा गया है। सैक्शन 5 सब सेक्शन 
2, सब क्लॉज़ वन - उस फ ं ड से पहले िवषय क्या होगा और उस फ ं ड क े िवषय पर जाने से पहले 
मȅ यह बताना चाहता हूं  िक इस फ ं ड की शुरुआत  मȂ िकतन ी रािश होनी चािहए । मȅ यह भी बताना 
चाहता हूं िक फाइनȂिशयल मेमोरȂडम की शुरुआत  मȂ मȅने इनीिशयली 300 करोड रुपए  की रािश 
रखी है।  Financial Memorandum initially Rs. 300 crores Consolidated Fund of India 
non-recurring expenditure Rs. 200 crore a llocation certain proportionate certain 
sharing pattern allocations .उसका भी वणर्न है जब इसका िरÃलाई आएगा तब मȅ इसके  बारे मȂ 
बोलूंगा । इस
मȂ यह भी नहीं है िक  सारा  िजÇमा क Ȃ दर् सरकार का है, राज्यȗ मȂ ज्यादातर कक्यȗिक 
◌ै  , इसिलए  क Ȃ दर् सरकार और राज्य सरकार दोनȗ िमलकर एक सटȃन Ģपोशर्न से ,एक सटȃन 
शेयिंरग पैटनर् से इस फ ं ड मȂ अपने एल
ोके शन्स करȂ ,इस फ ं ड मȂ अपना आिर्थक सहयोग दȂ ,िजससे 
िक यह फ ं ड और मजबूत हो। यह 300 करोड़ का फ ं ड शुरुआत  क े िलए है ,लेिकन यह पयार्Ãत नहीं 
है  ,इसको और बढ़ाने की आवÌयकता पड़ेगी।  
सर, मȅ िफर से सैक्शन 5 पर आता हूं िक इस फ ं ड क े माध्यम से फायदा क्या होगा ? 
 
इसका पहला फायदा यह होगा इस फ ं ड क े माध्यम से "Payment of old-age pension at the 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
149

rate of rupees five thousand per month af ter the sal leaves collector or trader has 
attained the age of sixty years and is incap able of performing his job on account of 
physical illness, infirmity or incapacity."10 साल, 15 साल, 20 साल,  25 साल, 30 साल, 40 
साल ये लोग जंगलȗ मȂ भटक कर जब साल क े पǄे इकƻा कर लेते हȅ, जब इनको 60 साल  हो 
जाते हȅ या इनको कोई  और परेशानी आ जाती है तथा ये अपने आप को सक्षम महसूस नहीं करते 
हȅ या उसके  िलए सक्षम नह
ीं होते हȅ, तो क्या हम उनको भूल जाएं,  क्या हम उनको अपने हाल पर 
छोड़ दȂ?  
 मान्यवर,  पȂशन देने क े िलए एक फ ं ड क े गठन करने की आवÌयकता है।  उनके  िल ए  
5,000 रुपए  पर मंथ की पȂशन िमलती रहे। दूसरा, Free healthcare facilities for the sal leaves 
collectors and traders and their dependen t family members at the designated 
Government and other hospitals." जो मेिडकल फ ैिसिलटीज हȅ, जो िचिकत्सा है, उसको 
उनको मुहैया कराने की आवÌयकता पड़ती है, क्यȗिक 99 Ģितशत नहीं, 100 Ģितशत लोग जंगलȗ 
मȂ जाकर ही ये सब कलेक्ट करके  लाते हȅ।  जब कोई 20 साल, 25 साल, 30 साल , 40 साल 
अपनी िंजद
गी मȂ साल क े पǄȗ का संगर्ह करता है, उसमȂ उनकी जो physical state  है, उनका 
जो शरीर है, उस पर िकतनी मातर्ा मȂ हाडर्िशÃस आई हȗगी, इसिलए उनके  हेÊथ क ेयर की 
आवÌयकता पड़ती है। And there is
 a need for free h ealthcare facilities. Number three, 
Free insurance cover to sal leaves collectors and traders." कोई अिĢय घटना घट जाती 
है, उसके  िलए हमȂ कहीं न कहीं से इंÌयोरȂस Ģोवाइड करनी है।   चौथा,  "Free housing 
facilities for sal leaves collectors and traders."  
 अंत मȂ, मȅ इतना ही कहूंगा िक इसको monitor  करने क े िलए इस तमाम चीज़ को, इस 
फ ं ड को operate करने क े िलए एक  ‘Sal Leaves Collectors and Traders' Welfare Board’  
की आवÌयकता है। यह जो फ ं ड है, यह  Sal Leaves Collectors and Traders' Welfare Board 
क े माध्यम क े कायर्रत िकया जाएगा, in collaboration between th e Centre and the States.  
इसमȂ कौन रहȂगे, क Ȃ दर् सरकार क े ǎारा िनयुƪ एक Chairperson रहȂगे। जहां पर यह साल लीËस 
कलेक्शन होता है और यह एक  major occupation  है, वहां से एक राज् य क े एक 
representative रहȂगे। दो representatives  रहȂगे, जो िक Sal Leaves Collectors और Sal 
Leaves Traders  हȅ, जो िक नॉिमनेट हो सकते हȅ, in a way prescribed by the rules और 
इनके   salary and allowances an d other terms and conditions can be provided as per 
the rules framing going forward.  इसको िवधेयक मȂ लाने की िफलहाल कोई आवÌयकता नहीं 
है।  
एक अहम िवषय इस िब
ल मȂ है, ‘a minimum wage.’  कई बार ऐसा होता है िक िकसी 
दुिवधा क े कारण, िजनके  बारे मȂ मȅने बताया है िक कई बार जंगल मȂ आग लग जाती है, कई 
महीनȗ तक लोग जा नहीं पाते हȅ। कई बार बािरश होती है, लोग जा नहीं पाते हȅ, कई बार कोई 
और समÎया आती है। अगर उन्हȗने जाकर अपना काम नहीं िकया है, तो आज उन्हȂ भूखे रहना 
पड़ेगा। उन्हȂ भूखे रहना पड़
ता है, not necessarily in terms of  िक दाल-चावल की आवÌयकता 
है - मȅ िबलकु ल समझता हूँ िक यह  PMGKY  है, दूसरी ची जȂ हȅ, लेिकन उनकी जो आिर्थक 
िÎथित है, वह इससे चरमरा जाती है, इसिलए इसकी आवÌयकता है। मȅने सैक्शन िसक्स मȂ िदया 
150
[RAJYA SABHA]

है, collectors and traders to be assured minimum wage.  वे िजतना कलेक्ट कर सकȂ या 
नहीं कर सकȂ, आप उन्हȂ एक िमिनमम वेज दीिजए, तािक उनकी जो िÎथित है, उनके  survival  
का जो basic existential question है, उस पर वे हमेशा िंचितत न रहȂ, परेशान न रहȂ। उसके  
िलए, Every Sal leaf collector and trader shou ld be entitled to an assured minimum 
wage as may be fixed by the appropriate Government irrespective of the number of 
leaves collected or traded by him. आप उसके  ऊपर रूÊस ģ े म कर सक ते हȅ, अगर आप चाहȂ 
तो minimum numbers भी रख सकते हȅ। आप बोलȂगे िक यिद कल कोई आकर रिजÎटडर् हो 
जाता है और कोई काम नहीं करता है, तो क्या हमȂ उसको भी  पेमȂट करनी  चािहए?  मȅ उस पर 
नहीं कहना चाहता हूं, मȅ यह नहीं कहता हूं िक िसफर् नाम िलखवाकर वह घर पर जाकर सो जाए 
- ऐसा भी नहीं है, आप उसके  िलए रूÊस ģ े म कीिजए, minimum requirement रिखए, मगर 
एक minimum wage fix कीिजए, ता
िक कल अगर िकसी कारणवश उसकी इन्कम एक महीने, 
दो  महीने क े िलए रुक  जाती है, तो उसके  घर की जो आिर्थक िÎथित है, वह चरमर
ा न जाए। 
 मान्यवर, मȅने Ģॉिमस िकया था िक मȅ बहुत लंबा नहीं बोलूंगा, मȅने लगभग सोलह िमनट 
बोला है, लेिकन मȅ एक चीज़ की गुज़ािरश करूं गा िक आज कई िवषयȗ मȂ और कई पैमानȗ पर 
साल लीफ क े िलए कई कायर् िकए जा रहे हȅ। ऐसा नहीं है िक यह देश भर मȂ या राज्
यȗ मȂ नहीं हो 
रहा है, अगर मȅ Îपेिसिफकली बताऊं , तो ओिडशा राज् य मȂ हमारे नेता माननीय मुख्य मंतर्ी Ǜी 
नवीन पटनायक जी क े नेतृत्व मȂ वहाँ पर कई बहुत अच्छे काम भी हो रहे हȅ। इन्फै क्ट अगर आप 
देखȂ,  तो वहाँ पर साल लीफ और साल Ģोटेक्शन क े िलए अभी the hon. Chief Minis ter has 
taken various measures to uplift the livelihood of Sal leaf collectors and traders, 
starting from providing financial assistance for creating infrastructure for the storage 
of collected Sal leaves and the production of  leaf plates and other products to waving 
of royalty on Sal leaves. इस तरह से ऐसे कई काम क Ȃ दर् सरकार भी कर रही है, राज्य सरकारȂ 
भी कर रही हȅ, लेिकन मुझे लगता हȅ िक कहीं न कहीं एक ऐसे बोडर् और फ ं ड की आवÌयकता है, 
जो उसको centrally monitor कर े। क्यȗिक यह economy एक organi
c economy है, यह 
economy एक  tribal economy है, यह economy एक sustainable economy है,  यह  
economy एक forest economy है, यह economy एक women's empowerment की है, 
क्यȗिक ज्यादातर कलेक्टसर्, जो िक 90 परसȂट तक होती हȅ, वे हमारी आिदवासी बहनȂ होती हȅ। 
इसिलए मȅ आशा करता हूं िक माननीय सांसदग ण यहाँ पर अपने-अपने वƪËय रखȂ। मȅ चाहता हूं 
िक हम इस पर राजनीित से ऊपर उठकर सोचȂ, क्यȗिक इसमȂ कोई राजनीित नहीं है, इसमȂ िसफर् 
िवकास की सोच है, इसमȂ िसफर् लोगȗ की भलाई की सोच है, यहाँ पर कोई तू-तू, मȅ-मȅ की बात 
नहीं है, बिÊक यहाँ पर यह बात हमारे आिदवासी भाई-बहनȗ क े िवकास और िवशेषकर साल पतर् 
को कलेक्ट करके  उसक
ा आगे टर्ेड करने वाले लोगȗ क े िवकास क े बारे मȂ है, इसिलए मȅ आशा 
करता हूं िक हरेक सदÎय, जो इस पर बोले, वह इसी मंशा क े साथ बोले िक आज जो इनकी 
आिर्थक और सामािजक िÎथित िकसी एक Îतर पर है, उनकी वह आिर्थक और सामािज
क िÎथित 
और िकतनी ऊपर जा सके । मȅ इसी क े साथ आपको धन्यवाद देता हूं, माननीय मंतर्ीगण को 
धन्यवाद देता हूं, माननीय सदÎयȗ को धन्यव
ाद देता हूं और अपने वƪËय को िवराम देता हूं, 
आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।    
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
151

                                                                          
Ǜी उपसभापित:  Motion moved.  यह िबल साल पतर् एकतर् करने वाले और इसके  कामकाज मȂ 
लगे लोगȗ क े कÊयाण क े िलए है। अभी तक िकसी वƪा का नाम नहीं आया है।  ऐसी िÎथित मȂ अब 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी को ही जवाब देना पड़ेगा। साल पǄȗ क े बारे मȂ माननीय मंतर्ी जी बहुत अच्छी 
तरह से बताएंगे, क्यȗिक वे उस इला
के  से आते हȅ।  
 
The question was proposed. 
 
जनजातीय कायर् मंतर्ी; तथा क ृिष एवं िकसान कÊयाण मंतर्ी ( Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा): माननीय 
उपसभापित महोदय, आज माननीय सदÎय डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा जी ने जो The Sal Leaves  
Collectors and Traders' Welfare Bill, 2022 मूव  िकया है, उसकी इन्टȂशन अच्छी है।  वे चाहते 
हȅ िक देशभर मȂ जो जनजाितयां इस कायर् से जुड़ी हुई हȅ, उनको क ै से और अिधक बेहतर लाभ 
पहुंचाया जाए।  मȅ उनकी इन भावन ाओं का आदर करता हूं।   
 उपसभापित महोदय, सरकार आदरणीय नरेन्दर् भाई मोदी क े नेतृत्व मȂ देश क े िवकास क े 
िलए Ģितबǉ है।  देश क े िवकास की पहली पंिƪ पर आज़ादी क े लंबे कालखंड मȂ आगे की ओर 
हम क ै से बढ़Ȃ और क ै से िदखाई दȂ, उनके  जीवन मȂ Ëयापक सुधार क ै से हो, उनके  भिवÍय को हम 
क ै से बेहतर बनाएं, हम यह सुिनिÌचत करȂ।  वाÎ
तिवक रूप  से िजन बातȗ की आकांक्षा रखते हुए 
देश क े ऐसे सुदूरवतीर् क्षेतर् मȂ रहने वाले जनजाित समाज ने हमेशा उन ची
ज़ȗ का Ģितवाद िकया, 
िजससे उन्हȂ ऐसा लगा िक यह हमारे िहत मȂ नहीं है।  िविभन्न कालखंडȗ मȂ, चाहे वह िĤिटश रूल  
मȂ हो या उसके  पहले क े शासन कालȗ क े दौर मȂ हो, इस बात को हम सब इस समय िनिÌचत रूप  
से महसूस करते हȅ।  जब Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने सावर्जिनक तौ
र से कहा िक हमारे देश की िमƺी की 
सुगंध को बरकरार रख
ने क े िलए िजन लोगȗ ने आहुित दी है; उन लोगȗ क े िलए, जो अनसंग 
हीरोज़ हȅ, उनकी खोज की जाए, उन पर शोध िकया जाए, वैसे लोगȗ को सामने लाकर हमȂ देश 
को बताना चािहए िक जो आज िदख रहे हȅ, वे तो वा Îतिवक रूप  से ठीक हȅ, उनके  इितहास िलखे 
गए हȅ, संघषș मȂ उनका बड़ा योगदान है, लेिकन िजनकी बातȗ को िलखा नहीं गया है, जो क ु छ 
पंिƪयȗ या कथाओं मȂ सीिमत रह गए, क्यȗिक जहां पर घटना घटी, वहां क े लोग तो हमेशा Îमरण 
रखते हȅ, लेिकन इि
तहास क े आईने मȂ वह Ģितिंबिबत नहीं हुआ।  इसिलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी 
ने इस देश मȂ कहा िक ऐसे सुदूरवतीर् क्षेतर् मȂ हमȂ ऐसे संगर्हालयȗ, ÇयूिजयÇ स की Îथापना करनी 
चािहए, िजनसे Ëयापक रूप  से उन लोगȗ को Ģितिंबिबत िकया जा सके , िदखाया जा सके , िजन 
लोगȗ ने वाÎतिवक रूप  से अपने Îथान मȂ रहकर संघषर् क े बल पर उस िमƺी की महक को 
बरकरार रखने मȂ भूिमका अदा की है।  इसिलए 10 से अिधक संगर्हालय बनाने की घो षणा करते 
हुए यह कायर् Ģारंभ हुआ।  कई Îथानȗ पर संगर्हालय का उǇाटन हुआ।  ऐसे महान Îवतंतर्ता 
सेनानी, जो जनजाित समाज से आए, उनको सÇमान देने का कायर् हुआ।  इससे आप इस बात का 
अंदाजा लगा सकते हȅ िक िकसी भी समाज, िकसी भी राÍटर् का Îवािभमान सबसे महत्वपूणर् होता 
है।  िकसी भी समाज क े Îवािभमान को यिद आप नज़रअंदाज करते हȅ, तो वह समाज और वह 
राÍटर् कभी Ģगि
त नहीं कर सकता है।  माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने इस बात को आगे बढ़ाते हुए यहां 
से कहानी शुरू  की िक हमȂ उन लोगȗ क े सÇमान का ध्यान रखते हुए आगे बढ़ने का कायर् Ģारंभ 
152
[RAJYA SABHA]

करना चािहए।  इसके  बाद इस देश मȂ एक Ģबंधन की, एक ËयवÎथा की, एक शासन की शुरुआत  
की गई, िजससे हमारा शासन, हमारी ËयवÎथा सही हो और हमारा िवकास सुिनिÌचत हो, 
िजसको माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा - " सबका साथ, सबका िवकास"।  इस बात को 
वाÎतिवक रूप  मȂ िचिÏनत करते हुए उन्हȗने कहा िक वैसे िजलȗ का, वैसे क्षेतर्ȗ का, वैसे सुदूरवतीर् 
गाँवȗ का िव
शेष तौर से आकलन करते हुए हमȂ यह सुिनिÌचत करना चािहए िक आधारभूत 
संरचना मȂ जो कमी है, िजन चीजȗ की कम
ी है, उन्हȂ आकांक्षी िजला क े रूप  मȂ, ऐिÎपरेशनल 
िडिÎटर्क्ट्स क े रूप  मȂ ĢितÎपधार् क े साथ िवकास की िदशा मȂ आगे बढ़ाएँ तथा यह कायर् और 
इसकी गुणवǄा गवनȄस का एक नया मॉडल बने।  उसी तरीके  से माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने 
उसकी छोटी यूिनट, Åलॉक को ऐिÎपरेशनल Åलॉक, आकांक्षी Ģखंड क े रूप  मȂ लेते हुए, 50
0 
आकांक्षी Ģखंड क े रूप  मȂ यह सुिनिÌचत िकया िक उसमȂ ĢितÎपधार् हो।  उससे हम यह सुिनिÌचत 
करȂ िक क ै से एक छोटी इकाई, गाँव मȂ सहजता क े साथ िवकास क े कायș को जनता को क ेन्दर् मȂ 
रख कर, वैसे लोगȗ को क ेन्दर् मȂ रख कर करȂ, जो वाÎतिवक रूप  से ऐिÎप
रेशनल हȅ, आकांक्षी हȅ।  
यह कायर् Ģार
Çभ हुआ।   
 
[उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती रिमलाबेन बेचारभाई बारा) पीठासीन हुईं]  
 
Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा: इसिलए इसके  साथ-साथ ही, जब यह कायर् ĢारÇभ हुआ, इसके  बाद हमारे सामने 
पुन: एक नया मॉडल आया, िजस की िंचता माननीय सदÎय ने की है, वह है - Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG).  पीवीटीजी क्या होते थे?  वे सुदूरवतीर् क्षेतर् मȂ रहने वाले 
होते थे।  वे अपनी आजीिवका क े िलए वनोपज क े साथ उनके  सामने जो ऐसे संसाधन हȅ, उनका 
उपयोग करते हुए रहते थे, लेिकन आधारभूत संरचना की दृिÍट वे हमेशा उपेिक्षत रह
ते थे।  वे 
इसिलए उपेिक्षत रहते थे, क्यȗिक वे सुदूरवतीर् क्षेतर् मȂ, दुरूह  क्षेतर् मȂ रहते थे।  उनकी जीवन-पǉित 
अपने आप मȂ इक
ोलॉिजकल है, पर वे िपछड़े हȅ, िडमांिंडग नहीं हȅ।  इस वजह से वे िकसी भी ऐसे 
मापदंड मȂ नहीं आ पाते थे।  जैसे िकसी भी सड़क का िनमार्ण होता है, कोई भी आधारभूत संरचन ा 
होती है, तो उसमȂ यह कहा जाता है िक इतनी आबादी होगी, तो यह सुिवधा ĢाÃत होगी; इतनी 
जनसंख्या होगी, तो यह गाँव टेक-अप होगा िक इस योजना क े तहत यहाँ की यह सड़क बन 
सके गी।  आप देखȂगे िक ऐसी बहुत सारी योजनाओं मȂ एक मापदंड तय िकया गया है िक इतन ी 
संख्या मȂ सब-सȂटसर् बनȂगे, इतनी संख्या मȂ हेÊथ सȂटसर् बनȂगे, इतनी संख्या मȂ आंगनवाड़ी क ेन्दर् 
बनȂगे।  वे इन सारी चीजȗ मȂ पीछे रह जाते थे, क्य ȗिक इसके  िलए आबादी का मापदंड सही नहीं हो 
पाता था, क्यȗिक वे जहाँ पर हȅ, वहाँ पर कहीं 10 घर हȅ, कहीं 5 घर हȅ, कहीं 8 घर हȅ और उनकी 
आबादी बहुत सीिमत है।  इस तरह से देश मȂ 75 साल  तक इन मापदंडȗ क े कारण वे सारे लोग 
िवकास की उन चीजȗ से अछू ते रहे, िजनको बहुत जरूरत  थी, सबसे पहले जरूरत  थी, सबसे 
अिधक जरू
रत थी।  तब माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने भगवान िबरसा मुंडा की जन्मभूिम, खूँटी से 
संकÊप लेते हुए एक कायर्कर्म शुरू  िकया।  उन्हȗने इस योजना का नाम ही िलया - ' Ģधानमंतर्ी 
जनजाित आिदवासी न्य
ाय महाअिभयान'।  'पीएम-जनमन' क े रूप  मȂ देश भर क े 75 ऐसे समूहȗ क े 
िलए इस योजना का शुभारंभ िक
या गया।  इस योजना क े तहत, ' पीएम-जनमन' क े माध्यम से 
जनजातीय कायर् मंतर्ालय कई मंतर्ालयȗ क े साथ िमल कर लगातार मॉिनटिंरग का कायर् कर रहा 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
153

है।  अभी माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने Îपेिशयली उन लोगȗ क े िलए एक लाख आवास की योजना 
शुरू  की है और उसका कायर् ĢारÇभ हो जाए, यह सुिनिÌचत िकया है।  1,200 िकलोमीटर सड़क 
िनमार्ण का कायर् ĢारÇभ हो रहा है।   
 उसी तरीके  से दुरूह  क्षेतर् मȂ, जहाँ िव Ǐुतीकरण नहीं है, कई बार उन गाँवȗ मȂ इस तरह की 
अड़चनȂ आती हȅ, क्यȗिक वे तो छोटी-छोटी झȗपड़ी, टोले, इस तरीके  से रहते हȅ।  वहाँ तक 
िबजली ले जाने मȂ कई तरह की अड़च नȂ हȅ, क्यȗिक वहाँ तक जाने क े िलए कई िकलोमीटर दूर 
पोल गाड़ते हुए वहाँ तक िबजली पहुँचानी है।  वहाँ सोलर लाइट की ËयवÎथा की जा रही है।  
माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने कहा िक ऐसे गाँवȗ मȂ, ऐसे टोले, ऐसे मोहÊले मȂ िबजली पहुँचाने क े 
िलए उन औपचािरक
ताओं को, िजनसे इसे पहुँचाने मȂ अड़चन होती है, उनको िशिथल करते हुए 
हमȂ इस कायर् को पूरा करना है, तािक उनके  घर मȂ भी िबजली जाए।   उन्हȗ ने यह सुिनिÌचत करने 
का काम िकया।  इसके  साथ ही साथ िÎकल डेवलपमȂट िमिनÎटर्ी का - िजस साल पतर् क े मामले मȂ 
कह रहे हȅ, वह साल पतर् वाÎतिवक रूप  से न क ेवल जनजाितयȗ मȂ, बिÊक गर्ामीण क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ सभ ी  
लोगȗ मȂ पिवतर्ता का एक Ģतीक है।  यिद पयार्वरण की दृिÍट से और इकोलॉिजकल तरीके  से देखा 
जाए, तो पिवतर्ता की दृिÍट से यह अपने Îथान पर है।  इसिलए संÎकृ त Îलोगन मȂ झारखंड क े 
पिरĢेÑय मȂ कहा जाता है िक - " अय: पतर्े पय: पानं साल पतर्े भोजनं, झ ारखंडे िविधयते।"  यह 
परÇपरागत ढंग से मान्यता क े साथ िकया जाता है।  इसीिलए भारत सरकार का यह मंतर्ालय FRA 
क े माध्यम से, कÇयुिनटी फॉरेÎट राइट्स क े माध्यम से  उन सारे गाँवȗ मȂ एक तरफ िÎकल 
डेवलपमȂट का कायर्कर्म चला रहा है, उसके  साथ ही साथ फॉरेÎट राइट्स एक्ट क े माध्यम से - 
यह भी आजीिवका का एक साधन है, तो उसमȂ रोजगार बेहतर ढंग से हȗ, उसके  जीवन की सुरक्ष ा  
की दृिÍट से भी यह आवÌयक है।  इसके  अलावा भी 85 से  अिधक ऐसी वनोपज हȅ, िजनका 
एमएसपी हम टर्ाइबल अफे यसर् िमिनÎटर्ी क े माध्यम से सुिनिÌचत करते हȅ।  ऐसी बहुत सारी उपज 
हȅ, िजनकी बाजारȗ मȂ बहुत अिधक कीमत भी है, परन्तु वहाँ उन्हȂ वह कीमत नहीं िमलती है।  
इसिलए उसमȂ एमएसपी तय करते हुए हमने यह सुिनिÌचत िकया िक वन
ोपज हमारे टर्ाइफे ड क े 
माध्यम से कर्य िकया जाएगा।  यिद उससे अिधक कीमत पर बाजार मȂ उसकी माँग होगी, तो वे 
वहाँ भी बेच सकते हȅ, लेिकन िमिनम
म Ģाइस उन्हȂ इस रूप  मȂ िमलना चािहए, तािक उनकी जो 
मेहनत है, उनकी जो सÇपदा है, उसका उिचत मूÊय उन्हȂ िमले। कÇयुिनटी फॉरेÎट राइट्स क े 
माध्यम से पूरे गाँव को यह अिधक ार है िक वनोपज का, पूरे संसाधनȗ का उपयोग वे अपने जीवन 
क े िलए, अपनȗ क े िलए और अपने गाँव क े िलए कर सकते हȅ।  वह उसका उपयोग कर सकता है।  
इसी तरीके  से बंधन क ेन्दर् का क ं सेÃट लेकर माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी जी ने Ģबंधन की एक ËयवÎथा 
कायम की और लगातार उसमȂ जो Îवयं सहायता समूह, Îव
यं सहायता संगठन और Îवयंसेवी 
संगठन हȅ, सबके  साथ िमल कर इस तरह का कायर् हो रहा है। 
 माननीय सद
Îय की भावना बहुत अच्छी है, परन्तु इन कायș को हम और गित क ै से दȂ, हम 
लगातार उस पर ज़ोर दे रहे हȅ।  हम उसके  िलए Ģितबǉ हȅ और 'पीएम-जनमन' उसका उदाहरण 
है।  इस तरह की योजनाओं क े साथ और बेहतर क्या हो सकता है, इसके  िलए हम उन के  सुझाव 
जरूर  लȂगे, लेिकन अलग-अलग चीजȗ क े िलए अलग-अलग ऐक्ट्स बनाना शायद उतना सÇभव 
और सही ढंग से क ेिन्दर्त करके  नहीं हो पाएगा, क्यȗिक हमने 80 से अिधक उपजȗ का एमएसपी 
तय िक
या है।  इसके  िलए मȅ माननीय सदÎय क े साथ बैठ ूँगा िक इसमȂ और बेहतर क ै से हो सकता 
154
[RAJYA SABHA]

है, क ै से हम और बेहतर तरीके  से इसमȂ काम कर सकते हȅ, क्यȗिक उस Ëयिƪ को, जो जंगलȗ क े 
बीच रहता है, दुरूह  क्षेतर् मȂ रहता है, उसके  िवकास से ही देश का िवकास जुड़ा हुआ है, उसके  
भिवÍय से देश का भिवÍय जुड़ा हुआ है, उसकी Ģगित से ही देश की Ģगित जुड़ी हुई है, िजसके  
बल पर हम यह कह सकते हȅ िक हम ' आत्मिन
भर्र भारत' बनाने की िदशा मȂ आगे बढ़ रहे हȅ।  
इसिलए मȅ माननीय सदÎय से कहूँगा िक आपने जो िबल मूव िक
या है, उसको वापस लीिजए।  हम 
साथ बैठ कर, िमल कर यह सोचȂगे िक इसमȂ और बेहतर क्या हो सकता है, क्यȗिक हम सभी वैसे 
तबकȗ, वैसे लोगȗ, वैसे सुदूरवतीर् क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ रहने वा ले हमारे भाई-बहनȗ क े Ģित िजÇमेदार हȅ िक हम 
क ै से उनके  िलए और बेहतर से बेहतर कर सकȂ ।  बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।  
      
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜीमती रिमलाबेन बेचा रभाई  बारा) : धन्यवाद, माननीय मंतर्ी जी। सिÎमत पातर्ा 
जी, क्या आप क ु छ कहना चाहȂगे? 
 
डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा: महोदया, मȅ बहुत संिक्षÃत मȂ अपना िरÃलाई रखूँगा।  सबसे पहले मȅ माननीया 
वाइस चेयरपसर्न मैडम को धन्यवाद देना चाहता हूँ। आज पैनल मȂ आपका पहला िदन है, इसिलए 
आपको बहुत-बहुत शुभकामनाएँ, आपका बहुत-बहुत अिभनंदन। 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜीमती रिमल
ाबेन बेचारभाई बारा) : धन्यवाद।  
 
डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा : महोदया, यह मेरे िलए गौरव का िवषय है िक मुझे आज Private Members’ 
Bill मȂ िरÃलाई करने का मौका आपकी चेयरमैनिशप क े समय िमल रहा है। मȅ िवशेषकर माननीय 
मंतर्ी, हमारे बड़े भाई, हमारे पड़ोसी, झारखंड से आने वाले Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा जी को धन्यवाद देना 
चाहूँगा, क्यȗिक अजुर्न जी का जो Îनेह है, वह चाहे ओिडशा क े िलए हो, चाहे झारखंड क े िलए हो 
या चाहे भारत क े सारे राज्यȗ क े िलए हो, वह बहुत ही Îपेशल है।  यह जािहर सी बात है िक उनके  
मागर्दशर्न मȂ टर्ाइबल अफे यसर् को िक
 स तरह से आगे लाया गया है।  यह एक बहुत ही सराहनीय 
िवषय है।  
महोदया, मȅ अपने संिक्षÃत िरÃलाई मȂ दो-तीन िबन्दुओं को टच करते हुए अपना वƪËय 
रखूँगा। पहला िवषय यह है िक माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने इस िवषय को बहुत गंभ ीरता से िलया है और मȅ 
उसके  िलए माननीय मंतर्ी जी को धन्यवाद देता हूँ।  वे हमेशा इन िवषयȗ को गंभीरता से लेते हȅ।  
ऐसा नहीं है िक उन्हȗने िसफर् आज ही इसे गंभीरता से िलया है, बिÊक वे हमेशा इसी गंभीरता से 
काम करते हȅ।  वे एक आिदवासी बेटे हȅ, एक आिदवासी भाई हȅ और इसिलए वे जानते हȅ िक 
आिदवासी भाई-बहनȗ की िंजदिगयȗ मȂ िकस तरह की जिटलताएँ आती हȅ और िकस तरह से उन 
जिटताओं को दूर करते हुए हम आगे िनकल सकते हȅ।  
माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने specifically skill development क े बारे मȂ िज
कर् िकया था। मȅ 
माननीय मंतर्ी जी को इसके  िलए धन्यवाद देना चा हता हूँ।  मेरी एक-दो छोटी-छोटी िरक्वेÎट्स हȅ।  
चूँिक मȅ ओिडशा राज्य से आता हूँ, उस राज्य का बेटा हूँ और मȅ उनको थोड़ा-सा और भी 
influence कर सकता हूँ, क्यȗिक महामिहम राÍटर्पित, Ǜीमती दर्ौपदी मुमूर् जी भी मेरे राज्य से 
आती हȅ, हालाँिक वे पूरे राÍटर् की बेटी हȅ, मगर मȅ उनसे थोड़ी-सी यह गुजा
िरश कर सकता हूँ िक 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
155

िÎकल डेवलपमȂट मȂ, िवशेषकर साल लीËस को लेकर जो Îपेिसिफक िडिÎटर्क्ट्स हȅ, उन 
िडिÎटर्क्ट्स मȂ िÎकल डेवलपमȂट क े और सȂटसर् खोले जाएँ, तािक साल लीËस क े जो कलेक्टसर् हȅ, 
उनको वैÊयू एिडशन करने का और मौका िमले सके ।  
 
(उपसभापित महोदय पीठासीन हुए।) 
 
डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा : उन्हȗ
ने एक को-ऑपरेिटव क े माध्यम से उसका संगर्ह िकया और उसी को-
ऑपरेिटव क े माध्यम से, उस िÎकल डेवलपमȂट क े माध्यम से, एमएसएमई क े माध्यम से उन्हȗने 
उसका वैÊयू एिडशन िक
या।  इस तरह से िसफर् साल पतर् कलेक्ट करके  देने से उनकी आमदनी 
कई गुना और बढ़ सकती है।  
दूसरा िवषय है, Community Rights Act. यह बहुत अहम िवषय है। मȅ इस वƪ मेरे नेता, 
माननीय मुख्य मंतर्ी, Ǜी नवीन पटनायक जी को धन्यवाद दूँगा िक ओिडशा एकमातर् ऐसा राज् य 
है, िजसने Forest Rights Act मȂ सबसे ज्यादा पƺे, यानी लȅड राइट्स िदए हȅ।  ओिडशा मȂ लगभग 
चार लाख से ज्यादा पƺे िदए गए हȅ और इसमȂ माननीय मंतर्ी जी का बहुत बड़ा सहयोग रहा है।  
हम फॉरेÎट राइट्स क े माध्यम से आिदवासी भाई-बहनȗ एवं वहाँ पर फॉरेÎट मȂ रहने वाले 
indigenous लोगȗ क े जीवन और जीिवका को और तेजी से आगे ले जा सकते हȅ।  
माननीय मंतर्ी जी ने एमएसपी क े बारे मȂ बोला, जो िक एक बहुत ही अहम िवषय है।  इस 
पर मȅ अभी बोलना चाहूँगा।  हाल ही मȂ ओिडशा राज्य ने एक नयी योजना लाँच की है, िजसका 
नाम 'लाभ', यानी LABHA है।  चूँिक अभी समय नहीं है, इसिलए मȅ इसकी िडटेल मȂ नहीं जाऊँ गा।  
उस योजना मȂ अभी एमएसपी क े िलए 100 करोड़ का एक फ ं ड एलोके ट िकया गया है।  हम यह 
देख रहे हȅ िक basically tamarind, जो िक इमली होती है, उसके  साथ यह साल पतर् और जो 
दूसरी चीजȂ होती हȅ, उनके  िलए हम अपनी तरफ से एमएसपी क ै से िनधार्िरत कर सकते हȅ और 
उनको और आगे ले जा सकते हȅ।  हम लोग इस
के  िलए भी कोिशश कर रहे हȅ। मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी 
से 'लाभ योजना' क े बारे मȂ भी चचार् करू ँगा।  हम यह क
ोिशश करȂगे िक इसको राÍटर्ीय Îतर पर 
लाया जा सके ।  
आिखर मȂ, मȅ िसफर् यह बोलूँगा िक मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी की बात से िबÊकु ल सहमत हूँ, 
क्यȗिक अगर हम हर minor produce, हर forest
 produce क े िलए लॉ लाएँ, तो हो सकता है िक 
ढेर सारे कानून बन जाएँगे और िफर हर एक कानून की ËयवÎथा को लेकर मुिÌकलाÞ और भी बढ़ 
सकती हȅ। मȅ उनकी बात से एकमत हूँ, उनकी बात से सहमत हूँ, क्यȗिक उन्हȗने यह assurance 
भी िदया है िक इसको आगे ले जाने मȂ वे पूरी तत्पर
ता क े साथ काम करȂगे।  मुझे लगता है िक आने 
वाले िदनȗ मȂ साल पतर्, िजसको ओिड़या मȂ साड़ पतर् बोलते हȅ, उससे िजन लोगȗ की आजीिवका 
जुड़ी हुई है, उन लोगȗ की िंजदिगयाँ और बेहतर हȗगी। िव
शेषकर, हमारे करीब ढाई करोड़ 
आिदवासी भाई-बहन, िजनकी आजीिवका इसके  ऊपर िनभर्र है, उनकी िंजदिगयाँ और बेहतर 
हȗगी।  इसी क े साथ, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी, Ǜी अजुर्न मुंडा जी को धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा।  इसके  सा थ 
ही, मȅ तमाम सदÎयȗ को भी धन्यवाद देना चाहूँगा। भले ही उनका पािर्टिसपेशन इसमȂ न रहा हो, 
156
[RAJYA SABHA]

लेिकन उन्हȗने ģाइडे इविंनग मȂ इतनी संख्या मȂ यहाँ पर उपिÎथत रहे, िजसके  कारण at least 
हम इस िबल को आगे ले जा सके ।  इसके  िलए बहुत-बहुत शुिकर्या, बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: माननीय डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा जी, क्या आप िबल िवदडर्ॉ करȂगे? 
 
डा. सिÎमत पातर्ा: सर, मȅ माननीय मंतर्ी जी क े एÌ
योरȂस से संतुÍट हूँ।  मȅ िबल िवदडर्ॉ कर रहा हूँ। 
 
Ǜी उपसभापित: धन्यवाद।  Hon. Members, does he have the leave of the House to 
withdraw the Bill?   
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:  Yes, Sir. 
 
The Bill was, by leave, withdrawn. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now we move to the next Bill. The Mental Healthcare 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023.  The Bill was listed for consideration subject to receiving of 
hon. President's recommendation under Article 117(3) of the Constitution. The 
recommendation of the hon. President for consideration of the Bill has been received.  
Shri Surendra Singh Nagar to move the motion for consideration of the House.   The 
Mental Healthcare (Amendment) Bill, 2023.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar. Not present.   
We now move to another Bill.  The Guaranteed Delivery of Public Services and 
Accountability Bill, 2022.  Hon. President's recommendation has not been received.  
Hence, the Bill cannot be taken up for co nsideration.  We are waiting for hon. 
President's recommendation.   
We now move to another Bill. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2022 
(amendment of article 16).  Shri Javed Ali Khan to move the motion for consideration 
of the House.  The Constitution (Amendme nt) Bill, 2022(amendment of article 16).  
Shri Javed Ali Khan.  Not present.   
 
Now we move to Special Mentions.   
 
 
SPECIAL MENTIONS 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Dr. Sikander Kumar. Demand to start direct train between 
Mumbai and Amb Andura/Una.  आप क ेवल approved text ही पढ़Ȃगे।  
 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
157

Demand to start direct train between Mumbai and Amb Andura/Una 
 
डा. िसकंद र क ुमार ( िहमाचल Ģदेश) : माननीय  उपसभापित जी, मȅ आपके  माध्यम से मुंबई से 
अÇब अंदोरा/ऊना तक सीधी टर्ेन शुरू  करने की मांग क े संबंध मȂ सरकार का ध्यान आकिर्षत 
करना चाहता हूं।  मुंबई से अÇब अंदोरा/ऊना क े िलए सीधी टर्ेन न होने क े क ारण कई याितर्यȗ को 
चंडीगढ़ उतरना पड़ता है और िफर 25 घंटे  टर्ेन मȂ सफर करने क े बाद चंडीगढ़ रेलवे Îटेशन से 
इंटरÎटेट बस Îटȅड, चंडीगढ़ पर बच्चȗ, मिहलाओं और सामान क े साथ जाना पड़ता है।  उनके  
िलए िहमाचल Ģदेश क े िलए आगे की 9 घंटे बस की यातर्ा कर
ना बहुत मुिÌकल होता है, िजसके  
कारण कई अिĢय घटनाएं घिटत होती रहती है।  मुंबई से अÇब अंदोरा/ऊना क े िलए सीधी टर्ेन 
चलने से मुंबई, सूरत, वडोदरा, रतलाम, इंदौर, कोटा, मथुरा, नई िदÊ
ली, हिरयाणा, इत्यािद 
िविभन्न Îथानȗ से िहमाचल Ģदेश जाने वाले याितर्यȗ क े िलए बहुत सुिवधा हो जाएगी। सीधी टर्ेन 
शुरू  होने से ट ूिरज्म, िशक्षा, िचिक त्सा, रोजगार तथा अन्य बहुत से क्षेतर्ȗ मȂ भी इसका लाभ 
िमलेगा। 
अतः मȅ आपके  माध्यम से एक बार िफर सरकार से अनुरोध करना चाहता हूँ िक वह मुंबई 
से अÇब अंदोरा/ऊना तक सीधी टर्ेन शुरू  करने की अनुमित देने की मांग पर िवचार करे, तािक 
मुंबई से िहमाचल Ģदेश आने वाले लोगȗ को राहत िमल सके । 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special
 Mention raised by the hon. Member, Dr. Sikander kumar:  Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odish a), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra).   
Dr. Sasmit Patra.  Demand for Inclusion of Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Kui and 
Saora Languages in Eighth Schedule of Indian Constitution.    
 
Demand for inclusion of Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Kui and Saora languages in 8th 
Schedule of the Indian Constitution 
 
DR. SASMIT PATRA (Odisha):  Language is extremely important as an ethnic identity 
and with a Scheduled Tribe population of over 22.85 per cent, Odisha is home to 62 
tribal communities, including 13 Particular ly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs).  
Inclusion of Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Kui an d Saora languages will go a long way in 
fulfilling the long-standing demands and aspira tion of the tribal communities speaking 
these five languages. The Government of Odisha has written in this regard to the hon. 
Union Minister of Home Affairs earlier and requested the inclusion of Ho, Mundari and 
Bhumij languages in the Eighth Schedule to  the Constitution. Inclusion of Kui and 
Saora languages has been reiterated throug h unanimous resolutions from the Odisha 
State Cabinet. Recently, the Odisha State Cabinet has again reiterated through 
158
[RAJYA SABHA]

unanimous Cabinet resolution to include the tribal languages in the Eighth Schedule to 
the Indian Constitution. The Odisha Government has initiated several steps for giving 
recognition to the tribal languages. The Special Development Councils (SDCs) 
across 23 districts in Odisha have tremendo usly helped the protection, preservation 
and conservation of tribal culture and he ritage. However, there are some tribal 
languages in Odisha which highly deserve to be included in the Eighth Schedule to the 
Constitution. I strongly demand that the Union Government should take necessary 
steps for including Ho, Mundari, Bhumij, Kui and Saora languages in the Eighth 
Schedule to the Indian Constitution. Thank you. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Me mber, Dr. Sasmit Patra:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala). 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur; not present. Now, Shri R. Girirajan.  
 
Demand to expedite Chennai Metro Rail Phase-II 
project and release of matching funds 
 
SHRI R. GIRIRAJAN (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, the Chennai Metro Ra il Phase-II project is an 
important transport infrastructure initiative to facilitate the public  transport in Greater 
Chennai region. It is envisaged to build thr ee corridors of a length of 118.9 kilometres 
with 128 stations to ease the traffic and to cater to the needs of large population.  The 
Union Government permitted the Governme nt of Tamil Nadu to proceed with 
Rs.61,843 crore Chennai Metro Rail Phase-II project in Chennai two years ago.  
 The Government of Tamil Nadu has been  funding the project expecting that the 
Centre would approve it soon. The Union Go vernment is yet to allocate funds since 
the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs is pending. The Tamil 
Nadu Government has allocated Rs.10,000 cr ore for the said project in this year's 
State Budget. The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) has offered loan 
assistance of Rs.20,196 crore for building 52. 01 kilometres of Phase-II and the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) has approved in-p rinciple for funding of the remaining 
66.89 kilometres stretch. The Government of Tamil Nadu is steadfast and is on target 
in executing the project. The Centre should release the matching funds and the loan 
assistance from bilateral/multilateral agencies should also be released on time.  
 I urge the Union Government to take necessary steps to expedite the approval 
by the CCEA and release matching funds fr om the Government of India and also the 
loan assistance from JICA and ADB on time. Thank you. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
159

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members a ssociated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Memb er, Shri R. Girirajan:  Shri A.A. Rahim 
(Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri  M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala) and Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala). 
Shri Lahar Singh Siroya; not present. Now, Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde.  
 
Concern over WHO's proposed Global PandemicTreaty with the Amendments to the 
International Health Regulations 2005 
 
SHRI ANEEL PRASAD HEGDE (Bihar):  Sir, the World Health Organisation's 
proposed Global Pandemic Treaty with th e Amendments to the International Health 
Regulations 2005 presents a profound threat to our national interest.  European and 
the UK Parliament have also raised concern regarding them.  
 WHO's proposed treaty hopes to become the ultimate authorit y on health, in a 
One Health Approach, which would grant unch ecked powers to the organisation that 
extend far beyond the realm of health, encroaching upon areas of food economy, 
environment and individual liberties. Its prov isions enable WHO to unilaterally declare 
pandemics, assume control over nati onal Governments, mandate medical 
procedures and impose restrictions that vi olate citizens' constitutional rights. The 
amendments to the IHR 2005 deepen our concerns.  They could lead to draconian 
measures undermining our national interests, if  accepted.  It is important to note that 
W.H.O., an external and unelected body, f unded by private interests and companies 
will take over policy-making in the health sector and the achievements of our 
Government will come to a naught while putting the health of our citizens at risk. 
 It is important that such far-reachin g decisions concerning the health and 
liberties of our people undergo a rigorous process of parliamentary scrutiny and 
approval.  Therefore, I urge the Government to ensure that no treaty, especially the 
Pandemic Treaty or any amen dments to the IHR, that are against our national 
interests, may be approved.  Thank you. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Member , Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde:  Shri A.A. 
Rahim (Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Ker ala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
Shri Sujeet Kuma, not present.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain, not present.  Dr. 
Fauzia Khan, 'Urgent need for regulating finance-influencers.' 
160
[RAJYA SABHA]

Urgent need for regulating finance-influencers  
 
DR. FAUZIA KHAN (Maharashtra):  Sir, th e proliferation of finance influencers has 
transformed the financial landscape, prov iding users with unprecedented access to 
advice and recommendations. However, th is burgeoning sector is now facing 
significant challenges as the Securities and Exchange Boar d of India, that is, SEBI, 
reports a surge in unregulated financial advice disseminated through social media 
channels.  The unchecked influence of fina nce influencers poses a clear and present 
danger, exposing users to misinforma tion, fraudulent schemes and market 
manipulation.  In response, regulatory in tervention becomes imperative to curb 
malpractices and protect investors.  Effect ive regulation would establish a framework 
to monitor them, ensuring adherence to et hical standards and legal obligations.  By 
introducing accountability measures for mi sleading information and fraudulent 
practices, regulations can act as a deterr ent, safeguarding users from potential 
financial pitfalls.  Moreover, regulatory guid elines can enhance transparency and trust 
in the financial ecosystem.  Mandating infl uencers to disclose co nflicts of interest, 
transparently communicate risks and verify  their financial expertise can bolster 
credibility and shield users from falling prey to deceptive schemes.   
 In conclusion, with the escalating cha llenges posed by fraud in the finance-
influencer sphere, regulatory measures ar e urgently needed.  Hence, I urge the 
Government to undertake collaborative effo rts between regulatory bodies, such as 
SEBI, and industry stakeholders to formulat e and enforce guidelines that strike a 
balance between innovation and investor protection.  Thank you. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Me mber, Dr. Fauzia Khan:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Shri Sujeet Kumar 
(Odisha) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) 
Shri Samir Oraon, 'Demand for construc tion of railway line from Korba to 
Lohardagga via Jaspur Gumla under Janjatiya Gaurav Corridor.'     
 
Demand for construction of Railway line from Korba to Lohardagga via Jaspur Gumla 
under Janjatiya Gaurav Corridor. 
 
Ǜी समीर उरांव (झारखंड) : महोदय, मȅ इस सदन क े माध्यम से माननीय रेल मंतर्ी जी का ध्यान 
झारखंड राज्
य की िचरĢतीिक्षत लोहरदगा-गुमला-कोरबा रेल लाइन की ओर िदलाना चाहता हूँ 
िजसका सवȃक्षण कायर् दिक्षण पूवर् मध्य रेलवे िबलासपुर मंडल ǎारा ĢारÇभ भी हो चुका है। इन 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
161

जनजातीय बहुल क्षेतर्ȗ क े समिन्वत िवकास क े Ëयापक दृिÍटकोण से उठाये गए इस कदम हेतु रेल 
मंतर्ालय को ǭदय से धन्यवाद करता हूं। 
इस Ģयास से इस जनजातीय बहुल क्षेतर् की जनता काफी उत्सािहत है। परमवीर लांस 
नायक अÊब
टर् एक्का Îवयं इसी गुमला िज़ले की पावन धरती से थे, तथा आज भी भारतीय सेना मȂ 
इसी क्षेतर् से हमारे कई सैिनक भाई-बंधु सेवा दे रहे हȅ। इन सभी जनजातीय समाज को राÍटर् की 
मुख्यधारा से जोड़ने व उनके  आिर्थक-सामािजक िवकास हेतु कोरबा से लोहरदगा (वाया जशपुर 
गुमला) तक रेल लाइन का यथाशीघर् िनमार्ण िकया जाना अत्यावÌयक है।  
अत: मेरी सरकार से माँग है िक उपयुर्ƪ रेल लाइन को भारतीय रेल की जनजातीय 
पिरयोजना मȂ जोड़कर गित Ģदान की जाए। यह हमारी मांग है।  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special
 Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri Samir Oraon:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu) and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha).  
Now, hon. Member, Shri A.A. Rahim; Demand to set up Modern Doppler 
Radars in Kerala for Proper Weather Forecasting.  
 
Demand to set up Modern Doppler radars in Kerala for the  
proper weather forecasting 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM (Kerala):  Sir, Kerala has been facing natural calamities and 
extremely heavy rainfalls for the past few y ears.  Cyclone Okhi in 2017 has killed 91 
people and the homes of 150 families have been destroyed.   More than 450 people 
have died and there have been damages of around 44 th ousand crore rupees in the 
2018 flood which was declared as a level 3 calamity by the Central Government.  
Similarly, in the flood of 2019, more than 121 people died.  The main challenge faced 
by Kerala is that the weather monitoring and forecasting system is inadequate.  Kerala 
does not have even a properly functionin g advanced radar for weather forecasting.  
The radar in Kochi is not properly functionin g most of the time and is an old system 
that does not provide data in digital format  for use in decision support systems.  The 
radar at Thiruvananthapuram is under IS RO and cannot be used all the time for 
meteorological purposes.  In Northern Kerala, there is not even a single radar.  Kerala 
has been demanding modern Doppler Radars since 2013 but the Union 
Government.... ...(Interruptions)...  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have to read only the approved text.  
  
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Yes, Sir. 
162
[RAJYA SABHA]

MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, only that will go. 
   
SHRI A.A. RAHIM: Yes, Sir, correct.  You can follow it.   
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You continue with last para, 'Kerala has been demanding 
modern Doppler Radars since 2013.' 
 
SHRI A.A. RAHIM : Kerala has been demanding mo dern Doppler Radars since 2013 
and Modern Doppler Radars should be allowed for the Northern, Southern, and 
Central regions of Kerala. I also urge the Government th at an X-band Mini Doppler 
Radar should be allotted to the Idukki region which is a highly ecologically fragile area. 
  
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention made by the hon. Memb er, Shri A.A. Rahim:  Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Sh ri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Sasmit 
Patra (Odisha) and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).   
Now, Shri A.D. Singh; Concern over l ack of funds for re search in higher 
educational institutions in Bihar. 
 
 Lack of funds for research in Higher Educational Institutions in Bihar 
 
SHRI A.D. SINGH (Bihar): Sir, the funds allocated for rese arch in Higher Educational 
Institutions in Bihar are much lower than th e national average.  The research projects 
submitted by the institutions to the national  funding agencies are not receiving funds.  
As a result, Bihar's research and development activities are lagging behind even 
though the best talent is av ailable in the State.  Recent ly, the Department of Science 
and Technology invited proposals for Re search and Development Infrastructure 
Allocation Fund, IIT, Patna-le d Consortium comprising of the Central University of 
South Bihar, Gaya; Mahatma Gandhi Centra l University, Motihari and Aryabhatta 
Knowledge University, Patna submitted a pr oposal for funding support on sharing 
basis.  The proposal was rejected stating reasons that the proposal is not focussed 
and the research outcome is not impressive .  I want to apprise the House that IIT, 
Patna, alone has contributed more than 2,00 0 research papers and 35 patents in the 
duration specified for consideration of the proposal.  The overall contribution by the 
Consortium to the field of research is mu ch more and commendable.  I, therefore, 
request the Ministry that the recommendation denying the infrastructure funds to the 
Consortium for the growth of R&D culture in Bihar may be reviewed so that an 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
163

appropriate nurturing and support system  can be developed for start-ups and 
MSMEs in the State. Further, more funds may be allocated for research infrastructure 
i n  B i h a r .                  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri A.D. Singh: Shri Sandosh 
Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), and Shri P. 
Wilson (Tamil Nadu).  
Shri Sandosh Kumar P; demand for new nursing colleges in Kerala. 
 
Demand for new nursing colleges in Kerala 
 
SHRI SANDOSH KUMAR P (Kerala): Sir, I request the Central Government to open 
more nursing colleges in Kerala considering the huge demand for nursing education in 
the State. As you are aware, nurses from Kerala were pioneers in opening up a new 
avenue of employment for migrants in Eu rope, the U.S. and the GCC countries since 
the 1960s. The nursing profession has a pr edominant role in th e State's economic 
development, contributing a significant share of the remittance inflow. Besides, 
Kerala is known for offering the finest professional training to nurses. Therefore, 
globally, there is an unparalleled demand for Malayali nurses. However, the number of 
nursing colleges in the State is relatively le ss. The total number of nursing seats in the 
State is around 7,300 which is far below th e demand from prospective students. Due 
to the lack of sufficient seats, many aspiring students currently depend on Karnataka, 
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu to pursue nursing education, spending more money. 
This can be avoided if there are more nur sing seats in accordance with the rising 
demand. Another rationale for the need for new nursing colleges is the acute shortage 
of nurses in hospitals. Although Kerala ha s 90 per cent of India's registered nurses—
18 lakh out of 20 lakh, their large-scale migration has caused a crisis in the State's 
hospitals, most of which have 50 per cent vacancies for graduate and trained staff 
nurses. Hence, there is a huge domestic demand for nursing professionals. In this 
context, we strongly feel that Kerala needs more nursing colleges to meet the huge 
demand. I urge the Government to look into it.  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sandosh Kumar P: Dr. John 
Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Na du), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), and Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha). 
164
[RAJYA SABHA]

Shri P. Wilson; demand for mandatory functioning of virtual courts along with 
physical courts across country.  
 
Demand for mandatory functioning of Virtual courts along with Physical Courts across 
country 
 
SHRI P. WILSON (Tamil Nadu): Sir, the advent of COVID had forced us to conduct 
court proceedings virtually. Virtual courts had enabled participation from remote areas 
irrespective of geographical or economic constraints, eliminating the need for 
individuals to bear significant financial burdens in physical court sessions. 
 However, just as the COVID times are be hind us, the virtual courts are slowly 
becoming a thing of the past in some  tribunals such as CERC, TDSAT, NCLAT, 
APTEL, etc.  The hon. CJI has appealed to High Courts and Tribunals for utilizing the 
virtual court infrastructure for which the Government had invested a huge amount of 
public money. 
 Denying a virtual hearing to a litigant wo uld not just increase litigation cost, but 
also convert the court proceedings from accessible and convenient to complex and 
time-consuming ones.  A litigant would have to bear the cost of travel, lodging and 
extra fees of the lawyer since most of the Tribunals are situated at Delhi. 
 The concept of access to justice has b een etched in our Constitution. Through 
virtual courts, the legal process could be  streamlined by reducing paperwork and 
automating administrative tasks. This can lead to faster case resolution and reduce 
backlog of cases. 
 Therefore, I demand from the Governme nt to bring a comprehensive legislation 
mandating virtual court hearings along with ph ysical courts in all High Courts, District 
judiciary and all tribunals across country which includes a code of conduct for 
Judges, lawyers, litigants and other stakehol ders along with penal provisions for any 
misconduct.  Thank you, Sir. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri P. Wilson: Dr. John Brittas 
(Kerala), Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha), Shri Sujeet 
Kumar (Odisha), Dr. Fauzia Khan (Mahar ashtra), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil 
Nadu), Shri A.A. Rahim (Kerala), and Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala).  
Shrimati Jebi Mather Hisham; need to regulate digital education apps. Not 
present. Shri M. Shanmugam; need to extend the salary ceiling limit beyond 
Rs.21,000 for ESI coverage. 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
165

Need to extend the salary ceiling limit beyond Rs.21,000 
 for ESI coverage 
 
SHRI M. SHANMUGAM (Tamil Nadu):  Sir, at present, ESI scheme is restricted to 
employees whose salary is up to Rs.21,000.  Now-a-days, reaching Rs.21,000 level is 
not a difficult thing, given the cost of livin g and, therefore, most of the people are 
suddenly going out of the ESI coverage.  Th e system should be devised on par with 
EPF Pension scheme.  Even though the salary may increase, still they should be able 
to continue in the ESI Scheme, by giving th em the option to continue.  In that way, 
the entire working class will get the ESI benefit and there will be more number of 
insured persons.  Monetary benefit will also increase.  Rule 52 of the Employees State 
Insurance (Central) Rules, 1950 gives exemption from payment of employee's 
contribution under section 42 of ESI Ac t, and therefore the employees in the 
unorganised sector need not pay contribu tion and they can be given universal 
coverage.  I understand, ther e is a proposal to cover th e unorganised workers under 
the provisions of ESI for which the scheme is proposed to be framed by the Union 
Government.  I would, theref ore, demand that the Govern ment should come forward 
to do this at the earliest possible period so that all the workers in the unorganised 
sector are covered under the ESI scheme for availing benefits. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention matter raised by the hon. Member, Shri M. Shanmugam: Dr. V. 
Sivadasan (Kerala), Shri A. A. Rahim (K erala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. 
Fauzia Khan (Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit  Patra (Odisha), Shri Sandosh Kumar P 
(Kerala) and Dr. John Brittas (Kerala).  
Now, Dr. V. Sivadasan on 'Concern over issues faced by IT and ITES sector 
employees.' 
 
 Issues faced by IT and ITES Sector employees 
 
DR. V. SIVADASAN (Kerala):  Sir, the IT  and ITES workers are facing increasing 
exploitation with adverse effects on health  and well-being.  They are made to work 
much more than eight hours, and this dest roys their psychological and physical well-
being.  Erratic patterns of shift in work affects the sleeping patterns of the workers 
and causes irreparable damage to their health.  The companies do not provide proper 
paid holidays.  Adhocism and arbitrariness reign supreme.  Unrealistic targets are set 
before the workers, and they have no control over the conditions of work.  In the BPO 
166
[RAJYA SABHA]

jobs, even washroom visits are fixed and controlled.  Washrooms are segregated by 
seniority.  Some washrooms are even pa ssword protected.  It is reported that 
performance metrics are designed in such a way that targets are almost impossible to 
achieve, and this creates hostile relations at work.  The superiors often forced the 
junior staff to make them toil for long hours.  Employees are made to compete with 
one another for retaining their jobs.  The privacy of the employees is not respected, 
and they are under constant surveillance.  Verbal and physical abuse at some 
workplaces is rampant.  There are no safegu ards for the people wi th disabilities and 
the workers point out that the culture of abuse results in strengthening the 
discrimination based on caste, religion, ge nder and sexuality.  Workers are reduced 
to mere machines.  There is an urgent n eed to address these problems faced by the 
IT, ITES and BPO workers.  I urge the Government to look into it. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : The following hon. Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention matter raised by the ho n. Member, Dr. V. Sivadasan:  Shri M. 
Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu), Shri P. Wils on (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Dr. Sasmit Patra (Odisha) , Shri Sandosh Kumar P (Kerala) and Dr. 
John Brittas (Kerala).  
Shri Sanjeev Arora; not present.  No w, Shri Sujeet Kumar on 'Demand for 
Comprehensive National Programme on Cancers affecting women.' 
 
Demand for a comprehensive National Programme on Cancers affecting Women 
 
SHRI SUJEET KUMAR (Odisha):  Sir, I seek to draw your attention to rising incidence 
of cervical and breast cancers among wo men, emphasizing the need for a 
comprehensive national programme to increase testing and awareness.  According to 
the latest data from the WHO, cervical ca ncer ranks as the fourth most prevalent 
cancer in women globally, and the second most common in India.  Notably, breast 
cancer has surpassed cervical cancer, emerging as the most frequent cancer in India, 
with approximately 1,78,000 new cases diag nosed annually.  Shoc kingly, a woman is 
diagnosed with breast cancer every four minut es, and a life is lost to it every eight 
minutes in our country. Despite the alarmi ng prevalence of cases, the testing rates 
are abysmal, with only 1 per cent of Indi an women undergoing screening for cervical 
and breast cancer, in stark contrast to th e WHO recommendation of at least 70 per 
cent. As of 2019-21, the screening rates fo r cervical and breast cancer in India stand 
at a mere 1.2 per cent and 0.6 per cent resp ectively. This is in sharp contrast to 
[ 2 February, 2024 ]
167

advanced economies like Sweden, Ireland, U.S., and U.K., where over 70 per cent of 
women undergo cervical cancer screening.  
Sir, while the Government's announcem ent of cervical cancer vaccination for 
girls aged 9-14 in the interim Budget is  commendable, the effectiveness of this 
initiative hinges on the establishment of a robust testing ecosystem.  
I, therefore, earnestly urge the Gove rnment to institute a comprehensive 
national programme on cancers affecting wo men, to enhance testing across all age 
groups, to facilitate early detection and treatment, and prevent the loss of precious 
lives. 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The following hon.  Members associated themselves with 
the Special Mention raised by the hon. Member, Shri Sujeet Kumar:  Dr. Sasmit Patra 
(Odisha), Dr. John Brittas (Kerala), Shri P. Wilson (Tamil Nadu), Dr. Fauzia Khan 
(Maharashtra), Shri A.A. Rahim (Keral a), Shri M. Shanmugam (Tamil Nadu) and 
Dr. V. Sivadasan (Kerala). 
Hon. Members, the House stands adjour ned to meet at 11 a.m. on Monday, 
the 5th February, 2024.  
 
The House then adjourned at one minute past six of the clock till eleven of the clock 
on Monday, the 5th February, 2024. 
  
168
[RAJYA SABHA]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 