Vol. 268      Thursday , 
No. 14                                                                                             07 August, 2025 
                          16 Sravana,1947 (Saka) 
 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
OFFICIAL REPORT (FLOOR VERSION) 
(PART-II) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Papers Laid on the Table (pages 1 - 5) 
 
Message from Lok Sabha - Reported and Government Bill Laid on the Table 
The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2025, (page 5)
  
 
Reports of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on  
Defence- Laid on the Table (pages 5 - 6) 
 
Statements of the Department-related  Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Defence- Laid on the Table (pages 6 - 8) 
 
Report of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on External 
Affairs- Laid on the Table (pages 8 - 9) 
 
Statement of the Department -related Parliamentary Stan ding Committee on Housing 
and Urban Affairs- Laid on the Table (page 9) 
 
Reports of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Rural 
Development and Panchayati Raj- Laid on the Table (page 9) 
 
© 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


Reports of the Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes- Laid on the Table (page 9 - 10) 
Observation by the Chair- (page 10 - 11) 
Government Bill-  
The Coastal Shipping Bill, 2025- Passed (pages 11 - 24) 
 [Answers to Starred and Un-starred Ques tions (Both in English and Hindi) are 
available as Part - I to this Debate, published electronically on the Rajya Sabha 
website under the link https://sansad.in/rs/debates/officials ] 
Website :  http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
     https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:  rsedit-e@sansad.nic.in 

RAJYA SABHA 
Thursday, the 7th August, 2025/16 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
The House met at eleven of the clock, 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN in the Chair. 
PAPERS LAID ON THE TABLE 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Now, Papers to be laid on the Table. 
I. Bye-laws of various monuments
II. Report and Accounts (2022-23  and 2023-24 ) of the DPL, Delhi; Ramakrishna
Mission Institute of Culture, Kolkata;  and RRRLF, Kolkata , West  Bengal  and
related papers
THE MINISTER OF CULTURE (SHRI GAJENDRA SINGH SHEKHAWAT): Sir, I lay on 
the Table— 
I. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of th e following Heritage Bye-laws of the
Ministry of Culture, under sub-section (6) of Section 20E of the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 for:-
(1) Small gateway of Fort, Bishnup ur, District–Bankura, West Bengal.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3079/18/25] 
(2) Dalmadal gun and the platform on wh ich it is mounted, Bishnupur, District –
Bankura, West Bengal.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3077/18/25] 
(3) Hamsesvari and Vasudeva temples t ogether with adjacent land comprised in
survey plot Nos. 1733, 1734 and part  of survey plot Nos. 1732 a
nd 1735,
Bansberia, District - Hooghly, West Bengal.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3076/18/25] 
(4) Gurhgaon Raja’s Palace, District-Sivasagar, Assam.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3078/18/25] 
(5) Gate of Old Fort, Bishnupur, District – Bankura, West Bengal.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3076/18/25] 

(6) The fort with walls and ruins of dwelling ho
uses inside it and with flights of
steps, Chandpur Fort in pargana Chandpur, Chamoli, Uttarakhand.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3078/18/25] 
(7) Dandeswar Temple, Kotli and Gand hakGunth (Chandhok), Tehsil Bhanoli,
District Alm
ora, Uttarakhand.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3076/18/25] 
(8) Awantiswami temple together with ad jacent land comprised in survey plot
Nos. 2800 and 2804, Locality-Awanti pura, Tehsil-Pulwama, District-
Anantnag, Jammu and Kashmir.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3079/18/25] 
(9) Amleshwar alias Mamleshwar group of temples including Kaleshwar temple
together with adjacent land comprise d in part of survey plot No. 19/I,
Godadpura, District - Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3079/18/25] 
(10) The Nadan Mahal and The Tomb known as Ibrahim Chishti’s Tomb situated
in the immediate neighbourhood of th e Nadan Mahal at Yahyaganj, Tahsil
and District-Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3076/18/25] 
(11) Town Hall alias Gandhi Bhawan, Shivpuri, District - Shivpuri, Madhya
Pradesh.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3077/18/25] 
(12) The Ruins of a large Chandella Temple, the Sanctum is gone entirely, but the
Mandapa remains and a Priest’s Hous e, close to the Temple No-238,
Ramnagar, Tehsil – Mau, District – Chitrakut, Uttar Pradesh.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3076/18/25] 
(13) Remains of Sixteen Temples, Adbadr i, District-Garhwal (now in Chamoli),
Uttarakhand.
(14)
Rashamancha, Bishnupur, District – Bankura, West Bengal.
[Placed in Library. For (13) and (14), See No.L.T.3078/18/25] 
2
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

(15) Ancient Remains Rock Engravings and Sa ivite Temple at Bhojpur, District
Raisen, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3077/18/25] 
(16) Radhashyam Temple, Bishnupur, District– Bankura, West Bengal.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3079/18/25] 
(17)
Old Mughal Kos Minars adjoining the NorthWestern Railway in the Sonepat
Tahsil (now known as Sonipat), Haryana.
(18) Madanmohan (Temple), Bishnupur , District – Bankura, West Bengal.
(19) Jore-Bungla (Temple), Bishnupur , District – Bankura, West Benga.
[Placed in Library. For (17) to  (19), See No.L.T.3077/18/25] 
(20) Nanda Lal Temple, Jora Mandir , Radhagobinda Temple, Radhamadhab
Temple and Kala Chand Temple, Bishnupur, District – Bankura, West
Bengal.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3079/18/25] 
II. A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: -
(i) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Delh i Public Library (DPL), Delhi,
for the year 2023-24, together with  the Auditor's Report on the 
Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Library.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3081/18/25] 
(ii)
(a) Fifty-First Annual Report an d Accounts of the Raja Rammohun Roy
Library Foundation (RRRLF), Kolkata, West Bengal, for the year 2022-
23, together with the Auditor's Report on the Accounts. 
(b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Foundation.
(c) Statement giving reasons for the delay in laying the papers mentioned
at (a) above.
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3082/18/25] 
(iii) (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Ramakrishna Mission Institute of
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
3

Culture, Gol Park, Kolkata, for the year 2023-24, together with the 
Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3075/18/25] 
 
I. Notifications of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
II. Reports and Accounts (2023-24) of Nation al CAMPA, New Delhi; the Wildlife 
Institute of India (WII), Dehradun, Uttarakhand and related papers 
  
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE (SHRI KIRTIVARDHAN SINGH): Sir, I lay on the Table— 
 
I.  
A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following Notifications of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change , under Section 26 of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986: - 
 (1) G.S.R. 194(E)., dated the 26 th March, 2025, publishing the Environment 
(Protection) Second Amendment Rules, 2025. 
 (2) G.S.R. 446(E)., dated the 3 rd July, 2025, publishing the Environment 
(Protection) Third Amendment Rules, 2025. 
 (3) G.S.R. 465(E)., dated the 11 th July, 2025, publishing the Environment 
(Protection) Fourth Amendment Rules, 2025. 
 (4) G.S.R. 482(E)., dated the 21 st July, 2025, publishing the Environment 
(Protection) Fifth Amendment Rules, 2025. 
 (5) G.S.R. 487(E)., dated the 22 nd July, 2025, publishing the Environment 
(Protection) SixthAmendment Rules, 2025. 
[Placed in Library. For (1) and (5), see No.L.T.3015/18/25] 
 
II.  (i) (1) A copy each (in English and Hindi) of  the following papers, under Section 
24 of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the National Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund Management and Planning Author ity (National CAMPA), New Delhi, 
for the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor’s Report on the Accounts. 
 (b) Review by Government on th e working of the above Authority. 
 (2) Statement (in English and Hindi) givi ng reasons for the delay in laying the 
papers mentioned at (1) above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3016/18/25] 
 
4
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

MESSAGE FROM LOK SABHA 
 
The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2025 
 
SECRETARY-GENERAL: Sir, with your kind permission, I rise to report that the Lok 
Sabha, at its sitting held on 6th August, 2025, passed the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2025. 
            I lay a copy of the said Bill on the Table.  
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड):  महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत रक्षा संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित के  
िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ: - 
(i) Eleventh  Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘General Defenc e Budget, Border Roads 
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-S ervicemen and Defence Pension (Demand 
Nos. 19 And 22)’; 
 (ii)  Twelfth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Action      Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants pertaining to 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘Army, Navy,  Air Force, Joint Staff 
and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iii) Thirteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third 
   (ii)    A copy each (in English and Hindi) of the following papers: - 
 (a) Annual Report and Accounts of the Wil dlife Institute of India (WII), 
Dehradun, Uttarakhand, fo r the year 2023-24, together with the Auditor's 
Report on the Accounts. 
 (b)  Review by Government on th e working of the above Institute. 
 (c)  Statement giving reasons for the dela y in laying the papers mentioned at (a) 
above. 
[Placed in Library. See No. L.T. 3098/18/25] 
 
 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
5

Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2024-25 on ‘C apital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; and 
(iv) Fourteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observation s/Recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)  on Demands for Grants pertaining to the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2024 -25 on ‘Directorate of Ordnance 
(Coordination and Services) – New DPSUs and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (Demand Nos.20 and 21)’.                                               
 
 
STATEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
 
Ǜी नरेश बंसल (उǄराखंड):  महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत रक्षा संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित के  
िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ क े अध्याय I और V मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ पर सरकार ǎारा की गई अंितम 
कारर्वाई संबंधी िववरणȗ की एक-एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िहन्दी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखता हूँ:-  
(i) Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of th e Committee  (2020-21) on 
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
(2019-20) on Demands for Grants pertaini ng to the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2019-20 on ‘Ordnance Factories,  Defence Research and Development 
Organisation, Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet 
Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’; 
(ii) Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabh a) of the Committee  (2020-21)  on  
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the  Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
(2019-20) on Demands for Grants pertaini ng to the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2020-21 on ‘Ordnance Factories,  Defence Research  and Development 
Organisation, Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet 
Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’; 
(iii) Thirty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2022-23) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-seventh Repo rt (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee (2021-22) on Demands for Gran ts pertaining to the Ministry of 
Defence for the year  2022-23 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force, Joint Staff, Military 
Engineer Services, Ex-Servicemen Cont ributory Health Scheme and Sainik 
6
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Schools (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(iv) Thirty-Third Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sa bha) of the Committee (2022-23) on 
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on (2021-22) on Demands for Gr ants pertaining to the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘Cap ital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Procurement Policy, Defence Planning  and Married Accommodation Project 
(Demand No. 21)’;  
(v) Thirty-fourth Report (Seventeenth  Lo k Sabha) of the Committee (2022-23) on 
Action Taken by the Government  on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-ninth Report  (Seventeenth Lo k Sabha) of the 
Committee (2021-22) on Demands for Gran ts pertaining to the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2022-23 on ‘Direct orate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services)-New DPSUs, Defence Resear ch and Development Organisation 
(DRDO), Directorate General of Qualit y Assurance (DGQA) and National Cadet 
Corps (NCC) (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(vi) Fortieth Report  (Seventeenth   Lok Sa bha)  of the  Committee (2022-23) on  
Action Taken by the Government  on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-sixth Report  (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Defence (2021-22) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2022-23 on  ‘Gen eral Defence Budget, Border Roads 
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen 
and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’; 
(vii)  Forty-first Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2022-23) on 
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-first Report (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
(2022-23) on ‘Assessment of Welf are Measures available to war 
widows/Families in Armed Forces’; 
(viii)  Forty-third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2023-24) on 
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-fifth Report (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
(2022-23) on Demands for Gr ants pertaining to the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2023-24 on  ‘General Defence Budg et, Border Roads Organisation, Indian 
Coast Guard, Defence Estates Orga nisation, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 
and 22)’; 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
7

(ix)   Forty-fourth Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2023-24) on 
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-sixth Report (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
(2022-23) on Demands for Gr ants pertaining to the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2023-24 on  ‘Army,  Navy, Air Force, Join t Staff, Ex-Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme and Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(x)  Forty-fifth Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2023-24) on  
Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty-seventh Repo rt (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee (2022-23) on Demands for Gran ts pertaining to the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2023-24 on ‘Cap ital Outlay on Defence Services, 
Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)’; 
(xi)  Forty-sixth Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2023-24) on 
Action Taken by the Government  on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-eighth Report  (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee (2022-23) on Demands for Gran ts pertaining to the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2023-24 on  ‘Dir ectorate of Ordnance (Coordination and 
Services)–New DPSUs, Defence Research  and Development Organisation and 
National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 20 and 21)’; 
(xii) Fifth Report (Eighteenth  Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2024-25) on Action  
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2023-24) 
on 'A review of the Working of th e Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO)'; and 
(xiii) Sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2024-25) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee (2023-24) 
on ‘A Review of Functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the Country’. 
 
 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 DR. JOHN BRITTAS (Kerala): Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy (in English and Hindi) of 
the Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
External Affairs (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on  Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Fourth Report on 
8
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

‘Demands for Grants pertaining to the Mini stry of External Affairs for the year 2024-
2025’.            
 
                                       
STATEMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Ǜीमती माया नारोिलया (मध्य Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ आवासन और शहरी कायर् मंतर्ालय की 'अनुदान 
मांगȗ (2024-25)' क े संबंध मȂ िवभाग-संबंिधत आवासन और शहरी कायर् संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी 
सिमित क े पहले Ģितवेदन (अठारहवीं लोक सभा) मȂ अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ/समुिƪयȗ पर सरकार 
ǎारा की गई कारर्वाई संबंधी सिमित क े चौथे Ģितवेदन ( अठारहवीं लोक सभा) क े अध् याय 1 मȂ 
अंतिर्वÍट िसफािरशȗ/समुिƪयȗ पर सरकार ǎारा की गई कारर्वाई संबंधी िववरण की एक Ģित 
(अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ। 
 
 
REPORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYATI RAJ 
 
Ǜीमती गीता उफर् चन्दर्Ģभा (उǄर Ģदेश): महोदय, मȅ िवभाग-संबंिधत गर्ामीण िवकास और 
पंचायती राज संबंधी संसदीय Îथायी सिमित (2024-25) क े िनÇनिलिखत Ģितवेदनȗ की एक-एक 
Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ:-  
(i) Sixteenth Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in its Sixth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-
26)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Ru ral Development (Department of Land 
Resources); and 
 
(ii) Seventeenth Report of the Committee on ‘Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural 
Development). 
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE WELFARE OF SCHEDULED CASTES  
AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
Ǜीमती सुिमतर्ा बाÊमीक(मध्य Ģदेश) : महोदय, मȅ अनुसूिचत जाितयȗ तथा अनुसूिचत जनजाितयȗ 
क े कÊयाण संबंधी सिमित क े 5 जून, 2025 से 11 जून, 2025 तक धमर्शाला, िशमला और चंडीगढ़ 
क े अध्ययन दौरे क े संबंध मȂ Ģितवेदन की एक Ģित (अंगर्ेजी तथा िंहदी मȂ) सभा पटल पर रखती हूँ।   
 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
9

 
REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE WELFARE OF SCHEDULED CASTES 
AND SCHEDULED TRIBES 
 
SHRI DEVENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Chhattisgarh) : Sir, I lay on the Table, a copy 
each (in English and Hindi) of the following  Reports of the Commi ttee on the Welfare 
of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (2025-26):- 
 
(i) Fourth  Report on the subject “Reservation for Scheduled    Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in the services an d in the allotment of commercial and 
residential accommodation of Delhi Development Authority (DDA). ” 
pertaining to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs; and 
 
(ii) Fifth Report on ‘Role of autonomous bodies/educational Institutions like 
Central Universities, Engineering College s, IIMs, IITs, Medical Institutes in 
socio-economic development and implementation of reservation policy for 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tr ibes with specific reference to 
University of Delhi’ pertaining to th e Ministry of Education (Department of 
Higher Education). 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS BY THE CHAIR 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, twenty-five notices have been received 
today under Rule 267.  In view of my observations dated 5 th August, 2025, and since 
none of these notices are in adherence to the requirement of rules as enunciated in 
past, I am not admitting any of the notices. ...(Interruptions)... I am not admitting 
any of the notices. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
Ǜी संजय िंसह (राÍटर्ीय राजधानी क्षेतर्, िदÊली): सर, सÅजेक्ट तो पढ़ दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
Ǜी उपसभापित : माननीय सदÎयगण, मȅ आपको 2021 मȂ the then Chairman की एक रूिंलग  
का अंश सुना रहा हूँ, “Only one of the 17 notices is on the situation caused by the 
Covid-19 pandemic. You cannot discuss 17 issues simultaneously.  Nobody can 
dicate to the Chair; I am sorry to say this.” ...(Interruptions)... This is the ruling of the 
then Chairman. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
10
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA (Tamil Nadu):  Is this the only reason?  
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : Please, I am going as per rules, Tiruchiji. 
...(Interruptions)... I am going as per rules.  ...(Interruptions)...  
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH (Karnataka):  Sir, from the previous Chairman’s ruling, what 
do you want to say? ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN : I am talking about this now. ...(Interruptions)... Please 
allow me. ...(Interruptions)... िजन माननीय सदÎयȗ क े ज़ीरो आवर नोिटसेज़ Îवीकृ त हȅ, मȅ 
उनका नाम बुला रहा हूँ। Please help me.  ज़ीरो आवर मेÇबसर् का आवर है, Question Hour 
मेÇबसर् का आवर है। ...( Ëयवधान)... मȅ िरक्वेÎट करू ँगा िक आप अपनी सीट पर रहȂ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...  मȅ पुनः आपसे िनवेदन करू ँगा ...( Ëयवधान)... माननीय सदÎयगण, वतर्मान 
सतर् मȂ अब तक िविभन्न महत्वपूणर् िव
षयȗ पर हमारे पास 180 Starred Questions, 180 ज़ीरो 
आवर सिÅमशन्स, 180 Îपेशल मȂशन्स रेज़ करने का मौका था, लेिकन लगातार Ëयवधान क े कारण 
हम क ेवल 13 Starred Questions, 5 ज़ीरो आवर सिÅमशन्स और 17 Îपेशल मȂशन्स ही ले पाए । 
...(Ëयवधान)...  Ëयवधान क े कारण इस सतर् मȂ अब तक हम 51 घंटे  30 िमनट गंवा चुक े हȅ। 
...(Ëयवधान)... हमारी िजÇमेदारी देश की जनता क े Ģित है। ...( Ëयवधान)... Ãलीज़, Ãलीज़ 
...(Ëयवधान)... आप हाउस मȂ ऑडर्र बनाए रखȂ, मȅ आपको बो लने का मौका दूँगा। 
...(Ëयवधान)...Please maintain order. मȅ disorder मȂ  मौका नहीं दे सकता हूँ। 
...(Ëयवधान)...Please go back to your seats. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
SHRI JAIRAM RAMESH: Sir, allow the LoP to speak. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
MR. DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The House stands adjourned to meet at 2.00 p.m. 
 
The House then adjourned at nine minutes past eleven of the clock. 
 
 
The House reassembled at two of the clock, 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) in the Chair. 
 
GOVERNMENT BILL 
 
The Coastal Shipping Bill, 2025 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWA RI):  Shri Sarbananda Sonowal to 
move a motion for consideration of the Coastal Shipping Bill, 2025. …(Interruptions)… 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
11

 
THE MINISTER OF PORTS, SHIPPING  AND WATERWAYS (SHRI SARBANANDA 
SONOWAL):  Sir, I move:  
 
“That the Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to regulation of coastal 
shipping, promote coastal trade and encour age domestic participation therein, to 
ensure that India is equipped with a coastal fleet,  owned and operated by the citizens 
of India for its national security and commercial needs, and for matter connected 
therewith or incidental  thereto, as  passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into 
consideration.” 
The question was proposed. 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :  I now call upon Members 
whose names have been received for part icipation in the discussion. Shrimati 
Darshana Singh. …(Interruptions)… 
 
Ǜीमती दशर्ना िंसह (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपने मुझे इस सदन मȂ तटीय पोत 
पिरवहन िवधेयक, 2025 पर  अपने िवचार रखने का अवसर Ģदान िकया, इसके  िलए मȅ आपका 
आभार Ģकट करती हूँ। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, मुझे गवर् है िक आज मȅ इस सदन मȂ एक ऐसे 
िवधेयक पर बोल रही हूँ, जो न क ेवल भारत की समुदर्ी क्षमताओं को मजबूती Ģदान करेगा, बिÊक 
देश को आत्मिनभर्रता, सुरक्षा और समावेशी िव
 कास की ओर भी अगर्सर करेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
यह िवधेयक नीितगत बदलावȗ से कहीं अिधक एक राÍटर्ीय संकÊप है। ...( Ëयवधान)... एक ऐसा 
संकÊप, जो हमारे तटीय क्षेतर्ȗ को सशƪ करने, हमारे नागिरकȗ को Ģाथिमकता देने और 
भारतीय नौवहन क्षेतर् को संगिठत एवं समिर्पत Îवरूप देने क े िलए उठाया गया है।  
महोदय, माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी ने हमेशा यह िवÌव
ास जताया है िक 
समुदर् भारत की समृिǉ क े ǎार हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... आज यह िवधेयक उन्हीं िव चारȗ को ठोस 
धरातल पर उतारने की िदशा मȂ एक ऐितहािसक Ģयास है। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
महोदय, हमारा देश एक िवशाल समुदर्ी तट रेखा से िघरा हुआ है, लेिकन इसकी क्षमता 
का लाभ देश की अथर्ËयवÎथा को िजतना िमलना चािहए था, उतना अभी तक नहीं िम ल पाया है। 
...(Ëयवधान)... आज भी हमारे देश मȂ तटीय नौवहन का िहÎसा क ु ल लॉिजिÎटक टर्ैिफक मȂ मातर् 6 
से 7 Ģितशत है, जबिक कोÎटल िशिंपग न क ेवल सÎता है, बिÊक पयार्वरण क े अनुक ू ल और 
अिधक िटकाऊ भी है, लेिकन िफर भी इसका उपयोग सीिमत है। ...( Ëय वधान)... यह िवधेयक इसी 
िÎथित को बदलने का कायर् करेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)...  महोदय, मȅ इस िवधेयक का पूरा समथर्न 
करती हूँ और इस दूरदशीर् पहल क े िलए माननीय Ģधान मंतर्ी, Ǜी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी तथा माननीय 
पǄन, पोत पिरवहन और जलमागर् मंतर्ी, Ǜी सबार्नंद सोनो
वाल जी को हािर्दक बधाई देती हूँ, 
बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद। ...(Ëयवधान)...                                                                                      
 
12
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): धन्यवाद।  Ǜी गोला बाबूराव। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी जयराम रमेश: सर, एलओपी क ु छ बोलना चाहते हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): ठीक है, मȅ उनको समय दूँगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO:  Sir, thank you for giving the opportunity …(Interruptions)…  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप अपने Îथान पर बैठ जाइए। ...( Ëयव
 धान)... Now, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
िवपक्ष क े नेता ( Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे): सर, मȅ आपका धन्यवाद करता हूँ िक आपने मुझे बोलने 
का मौका िदया। ...(Ëयवधान)... मȅ देश की बात कर रहा हूँ।  ...(Ëयवधान)...सर, मेरा यह कहना है 
िक आज देश बड़ी खतरनाक िÎथित से गुजर रहा है। ...(Ëयव
धान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप पहले ËयवÎथा का ĢÌन बताइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: इसीिलए हम सबको िमल-जुलकर काम करना है। ...(Ëयवधान)... जब हमȂ 
िमल-जुलकर काम करना है, तो उसके  िलए आप इस चचार् की अनुमित दȂ, िफ
 र हम सभी 
िमलकर देश क े िहत मȂ जो भी चीज़ होती है, वह सभी करने क े िलए हम तैयार हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी) : आप बैिठए, यह ËयवÎथा का ĢÌन नहीं है। ...(Ëय
 वधान)... 
 
Ǜी मिƥकाजुर्न खरगे: यह काम आप पहले कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): सदन क े नेता बोलȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
सभा क े नेता ( Ǜी जगत Ģकाश नƿा): सर, अभी िबल समय सारणी पर िलÎटेड है, इसिलए समय 
सारणी क े अनुसार हाउस चले, ऐसा मेरा िन
वेदन है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): Ǜी गोला बाबूराव। ...(Ëयवधान)... क ेवल िबल क े संबंध मȂ 
अंिकत होगा, बाकी अंिकत नहीं होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO (Andhra Pradesh) :  Sir, at the outset, I congratulate the 
Government for introducing this Coasta l Shipping Bill. ...(Interruptions)... The 
Coastal Shipping Bill is very importan t to regulate the shipping trade. 
...(Interruptions)... What is this? At least, I have an opportunity …(Interruptions)… 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
13

 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎयगण, क ृपया माननीय सदÎय को बोलने 
दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... िडÎटबर् नहीं कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO : Sir, I really thank the Governme nt for introducing this Bill 
because this is very important to regulate  the shipping transpor t and shipping trade 
not only in India but also in other countri es. ...(Interruptions)...  Now, I have three-
four points.  The first point I wish to make is that the Bill, under Clause 3, removes 
license for vessels owned by Indians doing trade in our territorial waters, including 
maritime zones.  ...(Interruptions)...  Our YSR Congress Party welcomes this Bill, as 
it removes the bureaucratic hurdles and gives better operational environment for 
Indian-flagged vessels engaged in coastal trade.  ...(Interruptions)... The second 
point I wish to make relates to Clause 8 of  the Bill, which deals with creation of the 
National Coastal and Inland Shipping Stra tegic Plan; new coastal shipping routes; 
improvement of coastal shipping operatio ns; and assessment of traffic on coastal 
shipping. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎया, यह िबÊकु ल गलत है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
आप इसको नीचे कीिजए। यह गलत है। 
  
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO :  Here, I wish to make a point that Inland Waterways 
Authority o
f India recently found that only 20 National Waterways are feasible for cargo 
transportation. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎया, यह िबÊकु ल गलत है। ...( Ëयवधान)... 
Ǜीमती ममता ठाकु र जी, मुझे आपको नाम से पुकारना पड़ेगा। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप इसको नीचे 
कर लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह गलत है। ...(Ëयवधान)
...   
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO :  And, there are three Wate rways in Andhra Pradesh, 
including Buckingham Canal from Kakinada  to Puducherry. ...(Interruptions)...  I 
would like to know from the hon. Minister wh at his Ministry is doing to optimally utilize 
Inland Waterways for goods and passenger transportation.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी):  गोला बाबूराव जी, आप conclude कीिजए। ...( Ëयवधान)...  
यह सरासर गलत है। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप सदन की मयार्दा का हनन कर रही हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
इसे नीचे कर लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
14
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI GOLLA BABURAO:  Sir, it is important because transportation of 1 ton of cargo 
for 1 kilometre comes to Rs.2.60 by road and Rs.1.45 by rail and less than one rupee 
by waterways.   That is why it is very useful.  ...(Interruptions)...  The second point is 
about coastal shipping operations and one of  the important parts of the operations is 
the turnaround time. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :  No posters are allowed.  It 
has already been indicated. ...(Interruptions)...  आप ऐसा मत कीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
इसकी फोटो नहीं ली जाएगी। ...(Ëयवधान)...  
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO:  If you look at the turnaround time at Visakhapatnam Port, it 
is not so encouraging. ...(Interruptions)...  It has gone up from 58 hours in 2019-20 
to 66 hours in 2023-24. ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎया, आप अिधकारȗ का पूरा उÊलंघन कर रही 
हȅ। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह िĢिवलेज है। ...(Ëयवधान)... आप इस बात को समझ लीिजए। ...(Ëयव
 धान)... 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO:  This is the status in spite of  taking up many projects under 
Sagarmala.  ...(Interruptions)...  So, I would like to know from the hon. Minister 
what additional steps the Ministry is propos ing to take to improve the situation.  
...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): यह ठीक नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... इसको नीचे कीिजए। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI GOLLA BABURAO:  Sir, I have one more important point.  This is about one of 
the core objectives of this legislation. I am saying this because it aligns with our 
country’s broader goal of strengthening domestic shipbuilding industry. 
...(Interruptions)...                                         
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपके  बोलने का समय समाÃत हो गया,  धन्यवाद। 
...(Ëयवधान)... Ǜी देबाशीष सामंतराय ...( Ëय
वधान)... Not present. Dr. M. Thambidurai. 
...(Interruptions)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI (Tamil Nadu) :  S i r ,  o n  b e h a l f  o f  t h e  l e a d e r  o f  m y  A I A D M K  
Party, Thiru Edappadi Palaniswami, I rise to participate in the discussion on the 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
15

Coastal Shipping Bill and to put forth a few points for the consideration of the 
Government, while supporting the Bill.  ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आपको मȅने बार-बार कह िदया है। ...( Ëयवधान)... आप 
आसन को बाध्य न करȂ। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI :  While supporting the Bill and welcoming its provisions, I 
would like to point out the issues being face d by the Tamil Nadu fishermen while they 
fish in the Indian territorial waters and the Indian Maritime Zone. ...(Interruptions)...  
As we all know, fishermen issue is a pere nnial issue, as far as Tamil Nadu is 
concerned.  The Sri Lankan Navy captures,  arrests and tortures Tamilian fishermen 
whenever they go out for fishin g in the Indian territorial wa ters.  Therefore, I request 
the hon. Minister to look into this. ...(Interruptions)... There is a need for permanent 
solution to this issue.  The root cause of the problem is ceding the Kachchatheevu 
Islet, unconstitutionally, by the two agreements signed in  
1972 and 1974. ...(Interruptions)... 
£  Therefore, I request the Government to look into 
this, as late Shri Vajpayee had already prom ised, that we are going to get back this 
Island.  ...(Interruptions)...  £ I request the hon. Minister to take necessary action 
and safeguard our Indian territory £ and save the Tamil Nadu fishermen. 
…(Interruptions)… I am supporting the Bill.  Thank you.          
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): ितरुची  िशवा जी Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र उठा  
रहे हȅ। …( Ëयवधान)… आप सब अपनी सीट पर बैठ जाइए।  हाउस को ऑडर्र मȂ लाने  
दीिजए।  …(Ëयवधान)…  माननीय ितरुची  िशवा जी Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र उठा रहे हȅ।  आप कौन-सा 
Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र उठा रहे हȅ? …(Ëय
वधान)…   
 
SHRI TIRUCHI SIVA :  Thank you very much, Sir, for accommodating my point of 
order. Sir, you have been directing othe rs -- even yesterday, when they were 
speaking about SIR during another Bill – to speak on the subject connected with the 
Bill.  …(Interruptions)… What he has spoken is totally out of the context of the Bill. 
…(Interruptions)… I request you, Sir, to expunge whatever is out of context.  
…(Interruptions)… It is under Rule 240. …( Interruptions)…  Under Rule 240, whatever 
has been spoken, irrelevant or not connect ed with the Bill, has to be expunged.  
…(Interruptions)… Sir, we expect you to be impartial and judicious.   
…(Interruptions)… They are going beyond the Bill. …(Interruptions)…  When we speak, 
                                                            
£ Exupnged as ordered by the Chair. 
16
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

you do not allow. …(Interruptions)… You do not even let it go on record.  
…(Interruptions)… But now everything that he has spoken …(Interruptions)…  
Whatever he has spoken out of the contex t of the Bill must be expunged.  It is 
irrelevant.  …(Interruptions)…  Sir, you are the custodian of the House and the rules.  
…(Interruptions)…  Please take note of it.  That is my point.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
DR. M. THAMBIDURAI:  Sir, I want to clarify it.  …(Interruptions)… 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप बैठ जाइए।  N o .  आपका अंिकत हो गया है। 
…(Ëयवधान)…  Shri Debashish Samantaray. …(Interruptions)…  
Shri Praful  Patel.  He is 
not present.  Dr. Kalpana Saini. 
 
डा. कÊपना सैनी (उǄराखंड): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, तटीय पोत पिरवहन िवधेयक, 2025 का 
उǈेÌय तटीय Ëयापार को आसान, अिधक ĢितÎपधीर् और Ģधान मंतर्ी Ǜी  नरेन्दर् मोदी सरकार क े 
दूरदशीर् दृिÍटकोण क े साथ बेहतर बनाना है। …( Ëयवधान)… अपने बहुआयामी Ģावधानȗ क े साथ 
यह िव
धयेक मचȄट िशिंपग अिधिनयम, 1958 जैसे पुराने कानूनȗ क े पुराने Ģावधानȗ को उन्नत 
करते हुए भिवÍय क े िलए तैयार कानूनी ढांचा Ģदान करता है। ĢÎतािवत िवधयेक, भारत क े तटीय 
Ëयापार मȂ िवदेशी जहाजȗ क े लाइसȂस और िविनयम क े िलए Ģमुख Ģावधान ĢÎतुत करता  
है।  …
(Ëयवधान)…  यह  एक राÍटर्ीय तटीय और अंतदȃशीय नौवहन रणनीित की योजना तैयार 
करने और  तटीय नौवहन क े िलए एक राÍटर्ीय डेटा बेस Îथािपत करने  का आदेश देता 
 है।  …(Ëयवधान)…  सर, मȅ इस िबल का समथर्न करती हूं।   
 
SHRI MILIND MURLI DEORA (
Maharashtra):  Sir, on behalf of my party, I stand to 
support the Coastal Shipping Bill, 2025.  …(In terruptions)…  I have had the privilege of 
being a Minister in the Ministry of Shipping.   …(Interruptions)…  I know how important 
this Bill is to encourage Make in India, to grow our economy.  …(Interruptions)… मȅ 
क ु छ आंकड़े सदन क े सामने रखना चाहता हूं।  …( Ëयवधान)… One litre of fuel moves 24 
t o n n e  o f  c a r g o  p e r  k m  b y  r o a d .   I t  m oves 95 tonne of cargo per km by rail.  
…(Interruptions)…  But it moves 215 tonne of cargo per km by water.  
…(Interruptions)…  सड़क से एक टन कागȘ को एक िकलोमीटर तक ले जाने  मȂ 3 रुपय े खचार् 
आता है। …(Ëयवधान)…   रेल से डेढ़ रुपय े आता है और वॉटर वेज़ से क ेवल 20 पैसे खचार् आता है।  
…(Ëयवध
ान)…  इसिलए जब हम टर्क्स या रेल से कागȘ को िशÃस मȂ डायवटर् कर रहे हȅ।  ऐसा 
करने से हम क ेवल पैसे नहीं बचा रहे हȅ, बिÊक पयार्व रण को भी बचा रहे हȅ।  …( Ëयवधान)…  मȅ 
सरकार को और हमारे आदरणीय यशÎवी Ģधान मंतर्ी नरेन्दर् मोदी जी को इसके  िलए बहुत-बहुत 
बधाई देता हूं िक हमारी coastal shipping and inland waterways िपछले दस वषș मȂ 
…(Ëयवध
ान)… We have seen a sea-change in  the growth of this sector.  
…(Interruptions)… Ten years ago, there we re only five national waterways.  
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
17

…(Interruptions)… Today, there are 26 national waterways.  …(Interruptions)… Ten 
years ago, only 18 million tonne of cargo were being moved on national waterways.  
…(Interruptions)… Today, a decade later, 133 million tonne of cargo are being moved 
on the national waterways. …(Interruptions)… मȅ मंतर्ी जी को इसिलए भी बधाई देना चाहूंगा 
िक today waterways alone constitute two per cent of our tr ansport mix.                       
मंतर्ी जी का जो िवज़न है, क Ȃ दर् सरकार और नरेन्दर् मोदी जी का जो िवज़न है, वह यह है िक हमारे 
Inland Waterways, as per Maritime India Vi sion 2030, to take our waterways mix to 
five per cent of our total tran sportation mix. This will impr ove Make in India, will make 
cost cheaper, will benefit our farmers and will allow us to grow our manufacturing 
base. With these words, once again, मȅ पाटीर् की तरफ से इस िबल का समथर्न करता हूँ और 
मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूँ।  
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी):   धन्यवाद िमिंलद मुरली देवरा जी। Ǜी मोकिरया रामभाई, 
आप अपना भाषण आरंभ कीिजए।  
 
Ǜी मोकिरया रामभाई (गुजरात):  महोदय, यहाँ पर बहुत Ëयवधान है। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, मȅ 
इस िबल का समथर्न करता हूँ।  मȅ ईÌ
वर से Ģाथर्ना करता हूँ िक भगवान इन्हȂ सǊुिǉ दे,  ये मुझे 
काम नहीं करने दे रहे हȅ। मȅ ईÌ वर से Ģाथर्ना करता हूँ िक इन्हȂ काम करने की सǊुिǉ दे, वरना जो 
भी हȅ, वे भी यहाँ से चले जाएँगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... महोदय, हमȂ िवरोधी पक्ष चािहए, लेिकन वे यह 
बात नहीं समझते हȅ ...(Ëयव धान)... ये सरकार का कीमती समय बरबाद कर रहे हȅ। वे यह नहीं 
समझते हȅ िक जनता ने उन्हȂ यहाँ अपना पक्ष रखने क े िलए भेजा है। मेरी िरक्वेÎट है िक इन्हȂ क्षमा 
कर दीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
                                                      
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI):  Dr. Fauzia Khan; not present. 
...(Interruptions)...  Now, Shri Brij Lal.  
 
Ǜी बृज लाल (उǄर Ģदेश): उपसभाध्यक्ष महोद
य, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद िक आपने मुझे 
the Coastal Shipping Bill, 2025  पर हो रही चचार् पर बोलने का मौका िदया है। ...(Ëयवधान)… 
महोदय, हमारी कोÎटल लाइन 7,516.6 िकलोमीटर है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): हाथ नीचे कर लीिजए,  इन पोÎटसर् को नीचे कर लीिजए। 
...(Ëय
वधान)... 
 
Ǜी बृज लाल: हमारा 95 परसȂट टर्ेड िशप से होता है। ...(Ëयवधान)... By volume, it is 95 per 
cent and by value, it is 77 per cent. महोदय, मȅ Ģधान मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूं 
िक उनके  नेतृत्व मȂ नए-नए पोट्सर् बन रहे हȅ और यह िबल, जो सदन मȂ ला या गया है, यह िशिंपग 
18
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

मȂ बहुत कारगर िसǉ होगा। मȅ इन्हीं शÅदȗ क े साथ मंतर्ी जी को बहुत-बहुत बधाई देता हूं। 
उपसभाध्यक्ष महोदय, आपका बहुत-बहुत धन्यवाद।    
                                                                                          
Ǜी  Ģमोद ितवारी : उपसभाध्यक्ष जी, मेरा Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): ितवारी जी, जब हाउस ऑडर्र मȂ नहीं है, तब Ãवाइंट ऑफ 
ऑडर्र क ै से होगा? ...(Ëयवधान)... The House is not in order. ...(Interruptions)...  आप बैठ 
जाइए। जब हाउस ऑडर्र मȂ होगा, मȅ तब आपको एलाऊ करूं गा।  ...(Ëयवधान)... माननीय ितवारी 
जी, वैसे तो इसमȂ Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र होता नहीं है, लेिकन आप विरÍठ सदÎय हȅ और आप Ãवाइंट 
ऑफ ऑडर्र उठा रहे हȅ,  इसिलए उठा लीिजए। ...(Ëयवधान).
.. 
 
Ǜी मनोज क ुमार झा (िबहार): सर, जब िबल पास हो सकता है, तो Ãवाइंट ऑफ ऑडर्र क्यȗ नहीं 
उठा सकते हȅ? ...(Ëयव
धान)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष (Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप बैठ जाइए। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
Ǜी Ģमोद ितवारी (राजÎथान): सर, मेरा रूल  258 क े अंतगर्त औिचत्य का ĢÌन है।  सर, यह 
सदन, राज्य सभा, िजसका गठन हुआ है, मȅ यहाँ पर औिचत्य का ĢÌन उठाते हुए यह सवाल 
उठाना चाह
ता हूं िक आप वहाँ बैठे हȅ, हम यहाँ बैठे हȅ और अगर यह सदन चल रहा है, तो 
िनयमावली से चल रहा है। * 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :  No; not allowed. ËयवÎथा का 
कोई ĢÌन नहीं है। ...(Ëयवधान)... ËयवÎथा का कोई ĢÌन अंिकत नहीं होगा। . ..(Ëयवधान)... 
ËयवÎथा का कोई ĢÌन अंिकत नहीं होगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Placards are prohibited inside the 
House. ...(Interruptions)... No point of order in this.  क ृपया बैठ जाइए। Ãवाइंट ऑफ 
ऑडर्र िरकॉडर् पर नहीं जाएगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... Now, Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha.  
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA (Andhra Pradesh): Sir, I thank you for giving 
me this opportunity. I rise today on behalf of Telugu Desam Party and our leader, Shri 
Nara Chandrababu Naidu Garu, to express my whole-hearted support to the Coastal 
Shipping Bi
ll, 2025. ...(Interruptions)...  I begin by commending the hon. Minister of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Shri Sarban anda Sonowal, for bringing forward this 
landmark legislation... 
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :  Placards are not allowed in 
the House. ...(Interruptions)... 
                                                            
* Not recorded 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
19

 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA : Sir, as someone who hails from a coastal 
region of Andhra Pradesh and having spent decades working for the development of 
our port infrastructure and fishing communities, ...(Interruptions)... 
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): आप गलत कर रहे हȅ। इस सदन मȂ आपके  ǎारा  तिख्तयाँ 
लाना िबÊकु ल विर्जत है। आप ऐसा नहीं करȂगे। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA : I know how deeply maritime connectivity 
shapes the destiny of our economy, livelihoods and logistics. ...(Interruptions)...    
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): माननीय सदÎया, मȅ आपसे बार-बार कह रहा हूं।  
...(Ëय
वधान)... माननीय सदÎया, ममता ठाकु र जी, मȅ आपको बार-बार मना कर रहा हूं। 
...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
SHRI MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA :  This Bill, for the firs t time in independent 
India’s legislative history, offers coastal sh ipping its own legal identity, liberating it 
from the outdated confines of the Merchant Shipping Act of 1958. ...(Interruptions)... 
and in doing so, it sends a strong message th at India’s maritime future will not just be 
deep-sea and global, it will also be local, coastal and regional.  …(Interruptions)…  
Sir, why this Bill matters?  …(Interruptions)…  First, it is a dedicated law for domestic 
maritime growth. …(Interruptions)… Th en, ease of doing co astal business and 
empowering Indian vessels and workers and maritime security and oversight.  
…(Interruptions)…  Sir, with these words, I support this Bill wholeheartedly on behalf 
of Telugu Desam Party and our leader, Shri Nara Chandrababu Naidu Garu.                                        
 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI):  Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya. 
…(Interruptions)…   
 
SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA (Assam):   Sir, I rise here today to speak on the 
Coastal Shipping Bill, 2025 on behalf of Asom Gana Pari shad and my Party President 
Shri Atul Bora.  …(Interruptions)…  I rise here to support the Bill. …(Interruptions)…   
 
उपसभाध्यक्ष ( Ǜी घनÌयाम ितवाड़ी): Ǜीमती ममता ठाकु र जी, आप गलत कर रही हȅ। 
...(Ëयवध
ान)... यह पोÎटर िदखाना नहीं चलेगा। ...(Ëयवधान)... यह गलत है। ...(Ëयवधान)... 
 
20
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

SHRI BIRENDRA PRASAD BAISHYA :  This Bill is …(Interruptions)… अब मȅ Ģोटेक्शन क े 
िलए बोलता हूँ। ...( Ëयवधान)... This Bill is for protection of commerce. This Bill is an 
environment-friendly Bill. …(Interruptions)…  So, I totally support the Bill.
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Shri Sarbananda Sonowal to 
reply to the discussion. …(Interruptions)…   
THE MINISTER OF PORTS, SHIPPING  AND WATERWAYS (SHRI SARBANANDA 
SONOWAL): Respected Vice-Chairman, Sir, I am sincerely grateful to hon. 
Members, Shrimati Darshana Singh, Shri Golla Baburao, Dr. M. Thambidurai, Dr. 
Kalpana Saini, Shri Milind Mu rli Deora, Shri Mokariya Ra mbhai, Shri Brij Lal, Shri 
Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha and Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya for their kind support 
to this Bill.  …(Interruptions)…  As you kn ow, this is a very, very significant reform 
initiative under the dynamic leadership of hon. Prime Minister Narendra Modiji which 
would particularly unlock the full potential of India’s vast and strategic coastline, 
which stretches over 11,098 k ilometres across nine coasta l States and four Union 
Territories.  …(Interruptions)…  To support  the goal of growing India’s coastal cargo 
share to 230 million metric tonnes by 2030, we need a framework that minimises 
regulation while maximising facilitation of growth opportunities in coastal trade. 
…(Interruptions)…  The Coastal Shipping B ill, 2025 is designed to make coastal trade 
easier, more competitive, and better integrat ed with India’s overall transport vision. 
…(Interruptions)… 
Sir, presently, regulation and licensing of coastal shipping is governed by Part 
XIV of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  …(Interruptions)…  The current Bill provides 
a holistic, forward-looking and progressi ve legal framework suited to today’s 
commercial realities in line with glob ally prevalent cabotage practices. 
…(Interruptions)… This Bill is part of the larger vision of our hon. Prime Minister 
Narendra Modiji to undertake a series of legal reforms which in the past eleven years 
have led to increased growth and developmen t for the maritime and shipping sector. 
…(Interruptions)… 
  Hon. Vice-Chairman, Sir, this Bill contains 6 Chapters and 42 Clauses that 
mainly consist of provisions on licensing an d regulation of foreign vessels in coasting 
trade, formulation of the National Coastal and Inland Shipping Strategic Plan, and 
creation of a National Database for Coastal Shipping.  …(Interruptions)…  This Bill will 
reduce the compliance burden for Indian ship s in line with the mission of Ease of 
Doing Business.  …(Interruptions)…  If great er number of Indian ships handle coastal 
cargo, it will ensure – this is very signifi cant -- supply-chain security for the country, 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
21

prevent escapement of country’s foreign exchange by reduced dependence on 
foreign ships; and enable creation of a blooming local economy with versatile 
employment opportunities. …(Interruptions)…   Easy accessibility to authentic and 
periodically updated data through the Na tional Database on Coastal Shipping, 
alongside information on the Strategic Plan  for development of infrastructure on 
coastal and inland routes, will keep potential investors better informed about the 
development plans and policy priorities of the Government in the sector. 
…(Interruptions)… 
Sir, this Bill is a very significant Bill.  It is a very, very reformative kind of 
initiative and I believe, the hon. Members of the House would definitely help in passing 
this Bill.  …(Interruptions)…   Thank you, Sir.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI):  The question is:  
“  “That the Bill to consolidate and amen d the law relating to regulation of 
coastal shipping, promote coasting trade and encourage domestic participation 
therein, to ensure that India is equipped with a coastal fl eet, owned and operated by 
the citizens of India for its national secu rity and commercial ne eds, and for matter 
connected therewith or incidental thereto, as passed by Lok Sabha, be taken into 
consideration.” 
The motion was adopted. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): We shall now take up Clause-
by-Clause consideration of the Bill.  ...(Inte rruptions)...  In Clause 2, there is one 
Amendment (No. 4) by Dr. John Brittas.   Are you moving? ...(Interruptions)... 
Amendment not moved.  ...(Interruptions)...    
Clause 2 was added to the Bill.  
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : In Clause 3, there is one 
Amendment (No. 5) by Dr. John Brittas.  Are you moving? ...(Interruptions)...   
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, allow discussion on ...(Inte rruptions)...  Then, I will move. 
...(Interruptions)...   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Amendment not moved.  I 
shall now put Clause 3 to vote. ...(Interruptions)...    
22
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

Clause 3 was added to the Bill.
 
Clauses 4 and 5 were added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : In Clause 6, there is one 
Amendment (No. 1) by Dr. Fauzia Khan– hon. Member not present.  Amendment 
not moved.  
Clause 6 was added to the Bill. 
Clause 7 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : In Clause 8, there are two 
Amendments (Nos. 6 and 7) by Dr. John Brittas. …(Interruptions)…  Are you 
moving? ...(Interruptions)...   
DR. JOHN BRITTAS : Sir, allow discussion on …(In terruptions)…  Then, I will move. 
...(Interruptions)...    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Amendments not moved.  I 
shall now put clause 8 to vote. ...(Interruptions)...   
Clause 8 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : In Clause 9, there are two 
Amendments (Nos. 2 and 3) by Dr. Fauz ia Khan– hon. Member not present. 
Amendments not moved. 
Clause 9 was added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : In Clause 10, there are two 
Amendments (Nos. 8 and 9) by Dr. John Brittas. …(Interruptions)…  Are you 
moving? ...(Interruptions)...   
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, allow discussion on ...(Interruptions)...    
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Amendments not moved.  I 
shall now put clause 10 to vote. ...(Interruptions)...  
Clause 10 was added to the Bill. 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
23

THE VICE-
CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :   I n  C l au s e 11,  t h ere i s  o n e 
Amendment (No. 10) by Dr. John Brittas.  Are you moving? ...(Interruptions)...    
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, you allow me to ...(Interruptions)... Allow discussion on... 
...(Interruptions)...   Then, I will move. ...(Interruptions)...   
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) :   Amendment not moved.  I 
shall now put Clause 11 to vote. ...(Interruptions)... 
Clause 11 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 12 to 36 were added to the Bill. 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : In Clause 37, there is one 
Amendment (No.9) by Dr. John Brittas. …(Interruptions)... Not moving! 
…(Interruptions)... 
DR. JOHN BRITTAS: Sir, allow a discussion on …(In terruptions)... Then, I will move.  
…(Interruptions)... 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI): Amendment not moved. I shall 
now put Clause 37 to vote.  
Clause 37 was added to the Bill. 
Clauses 38 to 42 were added to the Bill.  
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were added to the Bill. 
…(Interruptions)... 
THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : Shri Sarbananda Sonowal to 
move that the Bill be passed. …(Interruptions)... 
SHRI SARBANANDA SONOWAL: Sir, I move:  
“That the Bill be passed.” 
The question was put and the motion was adopted. 
24
[ RAJYA SABHA ]

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN (SHRI GHANSHYAM TIWARI) : The Hou
se stands adjourned 
to meet at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 8th August, 2025.  
The House then adjourned at thirty-two minutes past two of the clock till eleven  
of the clock on Friday, the 8th August, 2025. 
[ 07 August, 2025 ]
25

PUBLISHED UNDER RULE 260 OF RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT
 OF 
BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 